ii.(iiii  jijiliiiiuiiiuijiMmiijuiii 


!!!  M!!!  !Mi"!!"""i' 


ttiuii 
1  hH! 


!!!!!( !!  'iH'f'I'i'-'itH  W- 


{fill  ij  ituujiiiilii  iSuiii 


!!l 


;t«m»fmth|ituU 


Mm. 


mi 

it'* 


frnir 

lillUtlL 


li 


(111  till 


lit' in 

i 


iii 


1  uituii 
+  I«I«lI 


-  «  «j  lii  ,.. 

iff  1 
ill 

ill 

mm 


iiKifUitiiirMuiiiu  11   iiiUla 

ItlMItiJM  ((U  UtlUMItl^initr 

'■■'  ■  (nuuii  li  iKifHiii'Jiil 

IllttUUlllUlilUllhllU^ 

ll4H([|.(t(tM|_ 

ItlHHllHmtH 

t  ujifWiUHum 

'Mill{i"t!fti« 

"(()« 


til  iiliiri!.* 

s^ 


iiHt^jjlilH^tia|p«Iiiili^iil^4LuiI  in   itii^uiiiw 

^imitiii .. 

itiittHiHijiiqimnt'iii 


iiiilii 


..„„„,iMt 


)!l|IIllH!i|!al!l!ll!ll!!ili|illl» 


nm. 
mm 


i«ipli.,,„ 


m 


.lilllHu  liHHUIt 

\\\  liiiJifni 

MHOtlll 


.Ulit 

J?  Ill 


.fhniuuiiiiiiiiiji 

•-•'■■■•^■■■■Mjiirt 

-HHt 


lilHH 
llUltl 


mm 


attt 


ilftMiiimtiijiffl 


Km- 


UUBNELL    UNIVEBSITr     LiBRARy 


3   1924   101    104   630 


\ww  ... 

'""  f-(tu(i4(:mrtttrrtir*si 


,!ll!lli 


mivA^ 


n 


'""lis 

■UHiWHW* 

:i«*Rf4«^aiiuik«H-[tH{HfIf(MiG(m  irmw/\^.vix  >  t^-nciv  vni   v  ^ 


.tip 


«t 


a 


'fIBL. 


-'m 


mi|iL„  .^,„„„„,.„.. 

'Uuiiut^tHuft-tvti'cut-Ltaitii.i'i'fi' 

4-lllti  til 
■\lUi<iUHi'Hmi\mMUn-<  -miH-*  UiH+ti-.  -'- 


U( 


■-UK' 


..-  ....Mumf-'^ 


4H^'^'tt^-4■fiP■4£■fi^-l■tt^Jt■t«'-f  hv 


jlpi 


:MitimMtttn-H%im'ttW«-t-'t-E"l  Ij-  H    I  -'■'1-  1  ' 
iili-HLii-l-tlf  iiWiiWtii  fcH:«<^U*-(     -r       ^     ' 


uLU-UutiitiiltimiUtHCitl-tHi-ttii-ttttin 
U  .JtpiifiitU-uitUil<ptit'uiati«|-t>^UJ:ti 

I'l^  utvttutiumiiUtuiHi-ttu.tit'ttwi  <UH 


.Hi  [<  imiiKii-UiiUim-Ltuui 


L-UlHi 


HitiH-U-f-U 


■-Hti-'-t+H-'U-'*-'  ■'-•i.  •  Hr 
■tC-rtlv'+^+'-'+'-tf-f  1-' 


;t;t,r 


('ItLftft/itt   <■    tItU 


ittSi  luif  t-miatmtuimiy-tttuitu-tiiiHUiiuwwMiiiiiu-  ■  - 


')' 


f^,,„     ,„...„,r-r,- -,      r — ,r---     - -r— ---'<    'V<Hi^'ini.    tU'    Ht'iU 
nUt-tliwIt[tiUm<,ltitUHiU-[ltj.lUdUittUi-W  d.'  -itritKmcH  I,  -'lit  '■[  u-'-'fi- 
[i+iii3im*tlUI-i-i.il-UHUUHt«-tIl  LlRii  t  itUU  itit-if-Lill'^H  tl-|LH'Ut  M    iU 
[(PiUmUtUUiilutlUiliii-liriiHllUt  HI     4  tHi-fUlH-ttUi    f4i-Ht*twm  Kt. 

.iwftujt-iiitLutt-i-fmmu  L-uiiiUiitifUf  luuuuui'niaittt  tu  uu  'l  UHUtii  tuuiUdN    »■  iwiuimh  ituu 
I-i(ipuimi«t&--imiiUi«iia  it-i.u-i.iiH-i-L'iiKL  nitH«wt(-t'i-m  at  -r 

MmiiiuStimmuxii  umtifiuiiiiiiuui-itiui  tUHuiuiiU  mnai-ni!,-an_n>,t«.[ttiut«  HHL-c^^^ti  -i 


j«  [uimita-Ktt — -- „,„,_..,_,.., — ,  ..„-, ,,, 

lit!    t(t4iu±iuiimiiKt«ti«uu<iq«m[Lti«uu'iiiiHu«^tmaHHt^      ..- 

jiiiiiiulL-utilnil — 


HmiUitHiittHtmi  ^LlMltduf)tuUuiUt^iHlUtUi^tn«liu^^iH^^f-in"j^KUl^+ii'^'tt 


m 


Mtimuitt-H-iinii-fnutmutiW^i  i 


, ^,-.-„r-„jiifujumumi-iitUitiiiui-ttitita«iWiuuHWJ-tiLUiuftu+ti(ntiitui  au-i lu^n 

"■  ■' l-tiKiitiitmtttitiitHltiUUiliUUiUHLI  liUUtliiitittiHIltt't-lUiU+l  lt^^tN^!^_tl  HHUliUI'm  u-n 

.mtiijTuHtmtuiiumiuttmHa.utiiifUHLiuuttnmtMtuHuuimuti  tin.iUiH-i^ni  n  i  nn 
.vrfn-u,..  ...  .luUummiuuttm-UH-muttti-ttiuuiiiiiJtHL.iiuitiittnHtm'iitiuiiiu  itiuunHtuHMittii        n 

h  itiawHUiHRuJuitiJiimijti'.utiihiiiMiuimmauiiiuniiiiiiuu.ii-it-tttH^HWMUHHnuuuti  mum  w  >■■    ■■ 

-UiiumH)  M^l^.^i^^^l!WIlm^tillu^ll^u{:^u..«lm^llt^Hl:i!m«^l-ilmtm1Hutun^^l  n  nnu      

iL  (U(imtMmii»titmiLnm(uuiitnmiiiuimimi-itti«i-iit '■■■ 

,.,   ...t..,..^,^^^  ..,.......,..., .,...„.  .......  ..,^,.. ,,,, 


ifi tit  till 


±[ut.mt-ttmtm.utttLiimHmii;immi.mft-tir  ^ 


iHi-11  L  H^  i 


'  ftii 


i-tUMt< 

, ,- - „ .-  .      wi  m  i-*rfii-^/{ 'i,'ii  ■ 

.tttttmil-t«ii«H\ttmiIlii111iil1iiUlllitmil  iil1li-;iH      1  (llll  tU^n  i^  +-'■  (   It")! 

.tt«HiwtHlttmt-wtiutunH'-iitw{y+\mitutt'it.iti  uiL-tttn  di    c'ii'  t 


I  tiiiiiHilntijm  Hi,t«»«ti-ttitttwt«mt3>uniui«'UiiHi-tiijiinm(tmuiii 

,Hmuiiur(uinuttitmitH«t(t!ittitiititi«niiH-t  miiiumuii  (tintti  unu 

-_.__!(  iillKKllltlllJimimiilttH-ittiHiim-iiilimu-t  i  tutiii-ctUjI  tu    utiitrih  H 

.HtmiiM-tfrntiviuH-HttttttMutuHMiiuttmumuii  ii  ii-nuHii-ii,f  Ht  (iunv.T,t 


Ll+M-ll     Uittttlttll 

i'  -ivf  '-t-t-tti  tt-ni-ii  1 
Iti.-tH  Hutwi  imi 
■  '  ,-rlUimt-l  -(Mtl  iifU 


;ll«IHmM  i ,......, , - - _ 

rmntljntill^m^itl^Hl^^iit^'itttttli;ultuHtltl^i^^!■n  iHit<^HtrtmtimtHtUii{i-t'r 


CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104630 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY   THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 
AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S  E. 

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A. 

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D, 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yoke  and  Toronto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  JIEV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 


AND   BY  THE 


IIEV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


II.  KINGS. 

(S^)]ositiou  arib  ^omiletice : 
By  rev.   Gt.   EAWLINSON,  M.A., 

CANON  OF  CANTERBURY. 

fomilies  bg  tlarious  ^ntljors: 

REV.   C.   H.   IRWIN,   M.A.  REV.   J.   ORR,   D.D. 

REV.    D.   THOMAS,   D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPAQ  T 
Nkw  Yobk  and  Toronto. 


THE    SECOND 

BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Though  tbe  two  Books  of  the  Eanga  "  were  originally  and  are  really  but 
one  work,  bj  one  writer  or  compiler,"  and  though  most  of  the  point* 
which  need  to  be  touched  on  in  an  "  Introduction,"  being  common  to  both 
books,  hare  been  already  treated  in  the  Introductory  section  prefixed  to  the 
Commentary  on  1  Kings,  still  there  seem  to  be  certain  subjects  more 
particularly  connected  with  the  Second  Book,  which  require  a  more  general 
and  consecntiye  treatment  than  is  possible  in  a  running  commentary  on 
the  text ;  and  the  consideration  of  these  will  form,  it  is  hoped,  a  not  super- 
fluous or  onwelcome  "  Introduction  "  to  the  present  volume.  These  subjects 
are,  especially,  (1)  "the  difficulties  in  the  Chronology,"  and  (2)  "the 
interconnection  between  sacred  and  profane  history  during  the  period  of 
the  Israelite  monarchy." 

I.  Difficulties  in  the  Chronoloot. 

The  difficulties  in  the  chronology  attach  almost  exclusively  to  the  Second 
Book.  In  the  First  Book  we  find,  indeed,  that  portions  of  years  are  counted 
for  years  in  the  estimates  given  of  the  length  of  kings'  reigns,  and  that 
thus  there  is  a  tendency  in  the  chronology  to  exaggerate  itself — a  tendency 
which  is  most  marked  where  the  reigns  are  shortest.  But  the  synchronisms 
which  enable  us  to  detect  this  peculiarity  are  a  sufficient  safeguard  from 
serious  error;  and  it  is  not  difficult  to  arrange  in  parallel  columns  the 
Jewish  and  the  Israelite  lists  in  such  a  way  that  all  or  almost  all  the  state- 
ments made  in  the  book  are  brought  into  harmony ;  e.g.  Behoboam  reigned 
seventeen  full  years  (oh.  xir.  21),  when  he  was  succeeded  by  Abijom,  whose 
first  year  was  parallel  with  the  eighteenth  of  Jeroboam  (A,  xv.  1),  and 
n.  Knos.  h 


INTEODUOTION  TO 


who  reigned  three  full  years  (oh.  xt.  2),  dying  and  being  succeeded  by  Asa 
in  Jeroboam's  twentieth  year  (ch.  xv.  9).  Jeroboam,  having  reigned 
twenty-two  years  incomplete  (oh.  xiv.  20),  died  in  Asa's  second  year,  and 
was  succeeded  by  Nadab  (ch.  xiv.  25),  who  reigned  parts  of  two  years, 
being  slain  by  Baasha,  in  Asa's  third  year  (ch.  xv.  28).  Baasha  held  the 
throne  for  twenty-four  incomplete  years,  his  accession  falling  in  Asa's  third, 
and  his  death  in  Asa's  twenty-sixth  year  (ch.  xvi.  8).  Elah's  "  two  years  " 
(ch.  xvL  8)  were,  like  Nadab's  and  Baasba's,  incomplete,  since  he  ascended 
the  throne  in  Asa's  twenty-sixth,  and  was  killed  by  Zimri  in  Asa's  twenty, 
seventh  year  (ch.  xvi.  15).  At  the  end  of  a  week  Zimri  was  slain  by  Omri, 
and  a  straggle  followed  between  Omri  and  Tibni,  which  lasted  four  years 
— ^from  Asa's  twenty-seventh  year  to  his  thirty-first  (ch.  xvi.  23),  Omri's 
reign  was  reckoned  by  some  to  begin  at  this  time,  by  others  to  have  begun 
npon  the  death  of  ZimrL  It  is  from  this  earlier  event  that  hia  "  twelve 
years "  are  to  be  dated,  and  those  years  are  again  incomplete,  since  they 
oommenced  in  Asa's  twenty-seventh,  and  terminated  in  his  thirty-eighth 
year  (ch.  xvi.  29).  Ahab's  "twenty-two  years"  (ch.  xvL  29)  ahonld, 
apparently,  be  twenty-o«0,  since  they  ran  parallel  with  the  last  fonr  years 
of  Asa  and  with  the  first  seventeen  of  Jehoshaphat.  The  entire  period 
from  the  accession  of  Behoboam  and  Jeroboam  to  the  death  of  Ahab  and 
accession  of  Ahaziah  in  the  seventeenth  year  of  Jehoshaphat  was  seventy' 
eight  years. 

Tabulab  Ynw  or  thi  Ohbonoloot  or  1  KniGi, 


baton 

CbiUt. 

Tetrofthe 
Davldlo 
klDgdom. 

Kliic«r*IlbrML 

loia 

41 

81 
98 
101 
102 
103 
126 

127 

ISl 
1S8 
142 
158 

SoMXON,  40  years  (1  Kingi  xL  42) 

KlnpofJolih. 

KingaofbneL 

972 
955 
952 
951 
950 
927 

926 

922 
915 
911 
895 

Behoboam,  17  yeBTs  (1  Kings  ziT.21) 
Abijam,  3  years  (1  Kings  xt.  2) 
Asa,  41  years  (1  Kings  xv.  10) 
2nd  year  of  Asa  (1  Kings  XT.  25) 
3rd  year  of  Asa  (1  Kings  XT.  28) 
26th  year  of  Asa  (1  Kings  xvi.  8) 

27th  year  of  Asa  (1  Kings  xtL 
10.  21) 

3lBt  year  of  Asa  (1  Kings  XTi.  23) 
S8th  year  of  Am  (1  Kings  XTi.  29) 
Jehoshaphat  (1  Kings  xxii.  41) 
17th  year  of  Jehoshaphat 

Jeroboam,  22  years  (1  Kings  xiv.  20) 
18th  year  of  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xv.  1) 
20th  year  of  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xv.  9) 
Nadab,  2  years  (1  Kings  xv.  25) 
Baaaha,  24  years  (1  Kings  xv.  33) 
Elah.  2  years  (1  Kings  xvi.  8) 
Zimri  (1  Kings  xvi.  10) 
Tibni  (1  Kings  xvi.  21) 
Omri  (1  Kings  xvi.  21),  12  years  (1 

Kings  xvi.  23) 
Omri  alone  (1  Kings  xvi.  23) 
Ahab,  22  (21  ?)  years  (1  Kings  xtI.  29) 
4th  year  of  Ahab  (1  Kings  XTii  41) 
Ahaziah  (1  Kings  xxii.  51) 

The  chronology  of  the  Second  Book  of  Kings  is  far  more  complicated. 
The  following  are  some  of  its  difficulties.  1.  Two  dates  are  given  for  the 
acoesnon  of  Jehoram  of  Israel,  viz.  the  second  year  of  Jehoram  of  Jadah 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP    THE  KINGS.  W 

(oh.  1. 17),  and  the  eighteenth  year  of  Jehoshaphat  (ch.  iii.  1).  2.  Jehoram 
of  Judah  is  said  to  have  begun  to  reign  in  the  fifth  year  pf  his  father 
Jehoshaphat  (ch.  Tiii.  16),  and  also  in  the  fifth  year  of  Jehoram  of  Israel, 
which  was  the  twenty-second  year  of  Jehoshaphat.  3.  Jehoahaz,  son  of 
John,  is  said  (oh.  xiii.  1)  to  have  ascended  the  throne  in  the  twenty-third 
year  of  Joash  of  Jndah ;  bnt  as  Joash  ascended  the  throne  in  the  seventh 
of  Jehn  (oh.  xii.  1),  and  Jehu  reigned  no  more  than  twenty-eight  years 
(ch.  X.  36),  the  true  year  of  the  accession  of  Jehoahaz  must  have  been  (as 
Josephns  says  it  was)  Joash's  twenty-first.  4.  Amaziah's  first  year  is  made 
to  run  parallel  with  the  second  year  of  Joash  of  Israel  (ch.  xiv.  1) ;  but  if 
the  reign  of  this  Joash  began  in  the  thirty-seventh  year  of  his  namesake  of 
Judah  (oh.  xiii.  10),  and  if  this  monarch  reigned  altogether  forty  years 
(ch.  xii.  1),  Amaziah  cannot  have  succeeded  him  till  Joash  of  Israel's  fourth 
year.  5.  Azariah  is  said  to  have  begnn  to  reign  in  the  twenty-seventh  year 
of  Jeroboam  11.  (ch.  xv.  1)  ;  but  if  Amaziah  lived  fifteen  years  only  after 
the  death  of  Joash  of  Israel  (oh.  xiv.  17),  Azariah  should  have  succeeded 
him  in  Jeroboam's  sixteenth  year.  6.  Zachariah's  accession,  which  seems 
(ch.  xiv.  29)  to  be  placed  directly  after  his  father's  death,  should  have  fallen 
in  Azariah'a  twenty-fifth  or  twenty-sixth  year ;  bat  it  is  placed  in  his  thirty- 
eighth  (ch.  XV.  8) ;  so  that  an  interregnum  of  eleven  or  twelve  years,  whereof 
Scripture  gives  no  hint,  and  which  is  very  unlikely,  has  to  be  interpolated 
(Clinton,  '  Fasti  Hellenici,'  vol.  i.  p.  325)  between  the  son's  reign  and  the 
father's.  7.  Jothamisgiveninoneplaceareignof  sixteen  years  (ch.xv.  33), 
whUe  in  another  (ch.  xv.  30)  his  twentieth  year  is  spoken  of.  8.  Hoshea's 
accession  is  placed  (ch.  xv.  30)  in  the  twentieth  year  of  Jotham — ^regarded 
by  some  as  the  fourth  year  of  Ahaz,  and  again  (ch.  xvii.  1)  in  the  twelfth 
year  of  Ahaz.  9.  Hezekiah's  first  year  is  said  to  have  been  the  third  of 
Hoshea  (ch.  xviii.  1),  bnt  his  fourth  year  is  made  Hoshea's  seventh  instead 
of  his  sixth,  and  his  sixth  year  Hoshea's  ninth  (ch.  xviii.  9, 10)  instead  of 
his  eighth.  10.  Altogether,  the  years  of  the  Israelite  monarchy,  from  the 
accession  of  Ahaziah  to  the  captivity  of  Hoshea,  are  made  to  amount  to  a 
hundred  and  fifty-nine,  while  those  of  the  Jndean  monarchy  for  the  same 
period  amount  to  a  hundred  and  eighty-three,  or  an  addition  of  twenty- 
four. 

The  difficulties  are  increased  if  we  compare  the  sacred  chronology  for  the 
period  with  the  profane.  The  Assyrian  annals  place  an  interval  of  a 
hundred  and  thirty-two  years  only  between  the  taking  of  Samaria  and  a 
year  in  the  reign  of  Ahab,  while  the  scriptural  numbers  make  the  interval, 
at  the  lowest  computation,  a  hundred  and  sixty  years,  and  at  the  highest 
a  hundred  and  eighty-four.  By  the  Assyrian  annals  Hezekiah's  expedi- 
tion against  Sennacherib  took  place  in  the  twenty-first  year  after  the  fall 
of  Samaria;  by  the  present  scriptural  numbers  (oh.  xviii.  10,  13)  it  took 
place  in  the  eighth  year  afterwards. 

It  is  evident  that  any  attempt  to  restore  the  true  chronology  must  be  to 
a  large  extent  conjectural,  and  almost  arbitrary.      Some  of  the  scriptural 


INTBODUCITION  TO 


nnmbera  must  be  altered,  or  else  suppositions  mnst  be  made  for  whioi 
there  is  no  warranty.  Still,  a  commentator  is  almost  forced  to  take  some 
definite  view,  and,  so  long  as  he  allows  that  his  view  is  merely  put  forward 
tentatively  and  provisionally,  he  is  not  open  to  censure.  No  apology  woald 
therefore  seem  to  be  needed  for  the  following  tabular  conspectus  of  the 
probable  chronology  of  the  period  between  the  accession  of  Ahaziah  of  Israel 
and  the  fall  of  Samaria: — 


Tur 

lutfAT* 

Yuroftha 

Kings  of  Jndah. 

Kings  of  lartd. 

Contempor«i7  kings. 

CtarlBt. 

uariaic 
monarchy. 

Egypt. 

AniTrlA. 

Babyha. 

895 

158 

17th  year  of  Jeho- 
Bhaphat 

Ahaziah,  2  yean 

Asshur- 
nazir- 

894 

159 

18th  year  of  Jeho- 
shaphat 

Jehoram,  12  years 
(2  Kings  iii.  1) 

Kings 

pal 

890 

163 

Jkhobau,  8  years 

5th  year  of  Jeho- 
ram of  Israel  (2 
Kings  viii.  16) 

of 

the 

883 

170 

Ahaziah,  1  year 

12th  year  of  Jelio- 
ram  of  Israel  (2 
Kings  viii.  25) 

Jkhu,  28  years 

twenty- 
second 

882 

171 

Athaliah,  usurper, 
6  years 

dynasty 

876 

177 

JOASH,  40  years 

7th  year  of  Jehu 
(2  Kings  xii.  1) 

8»6 

197 

21st  year  of  Joash 
(JosephuSj'Ant. 
Jud.,'  ix.  8.  §  5) 

jEH0AHAZ,17years 

Sbalman- 
eserll. 

840 

213 

37th  year  of  Joash 
of     Judah     (2 
Kings  xiii.  10) 

JoASU,  16  years 

Kings 
of 

Babylon 

837 

216 

Amaziah,  29  years 

4th  (not  2nd)  year 
of      Joash     (2 
Kings  xiv.  1) 

the 

generally 
nnder 
Assyria 

824 

229 

15th    (or    rather 
14th)    year    of 
Amaziah        (2 
Kings  xiv.  23) 

Jeroboam  II.,  41 
years  (more  pro- 
bably 53  years) 

twenty- 
third 

Shamas- 
Vnl 

809 

244 

AzABiAH,  52  years 

27th  (really  16th) 
year    of    Jero- 
boam    II.     (2 
Kings  XV.  1) 

dynasty 

Vnl- 

niiari 

771 

282 

38th  year  of  Aza- 
riah    (2    Kings 

Z  AOUABIAH,  2  years 

770 

283 

XV.  8) 
39th  year  of  Aza- 

MENAHEM.lOyeari 

Later 
kings 

Pnl(?) 

riah    (2    Kings 
XV.  17) 
50  th  year  of  Aza- 

(perhaps  11) 

759 

294 

Pbkamah,  2  years 

the 

tweuty- 

tliird 

dynasty 

758 

295 

riah    (2    Kings 
XV.  23) 
52nd  year  of  Aza- 

Pbkah,  20  (rather 

Tlglath- 

liah    (2    Kings 

27)     years     (2 

pileser  TL 

IV.  27) 

"Kings  XT.  27) 

787 

296 

JoTHAM,  16  years 

2nd  year  of  Pekah 
(2  Kings  XV.  32) 

Pian- 
khi(?) 

Nabonas- 
lar, 

71S 

811 

Ahaz,  16  yean 

17thyearofPekah 
(2  Kings  XTi.  1) 

BocchoriB 

Nadiua, 

Ohimxinu, 

THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


Tear  Tear  of  the 

Kings  of  Jndah. 

EingaoflsraaL 

Contempoiary  klnga. 

Chriit. 

monarchy. 

Egypt. 

Auyria. 

Babylon. 

730 

323 

12th  year  of  Ahaz 
(2Eing8XTii.l) 

HosHEA,  9  year« 

So,  or 
Sabaco 

Tiglath- 
pileser 
(Porui) 

727 

826 

Hezeki  AH,  29  years 

3rd    (really    4th) 
year  of  Hoshea 
(2  Kings  xviii.  1) 

Shalma- 
neser  IV. 

Shalman- 

eser  IV. 

(ElulieuE) 

724 

829 

4th  year  of  Heze- 
kiah   (2  Kings 
xviii.  9) 

7th  yearof  Hoshea: 
Samaria  besieged 
(2  Kings  xviii.  9) 

Sibaohe, 

or  Seve- 

ohus 

722 

831 

6th  year  of  Heze- 
kiah   (2  Kings 

9thyearofHoahea: 
Samaria  taken  (2 

Sargon 

SargoB 
(Arkea- 

xviii.  10) 

Kings  xviii.  10) 

nus) 

After  the  termination  of  the  Israelite  monarchy  by  the  capture  of  Samaria 
in  B.C.  722,  the  difficulties  of  the  chronology  become  much  less,  chiefly  from 
the  absence  of  those  exact  synchronisms  which  have  constituted  the  main 
difficulty  in  the  period  between  the  accession  of  Ahaziah  and  the  Israelite 
captivity.  Such  exact  synchronisms  as  occur  (ch.  xxiv.  12 ;  xxv.  2,  8, 
and  27)  show  in  general  a  remarkable  agreement  between  sacred  history 
and  profane,  while  the  vaguer  ones  (ch.  xx.  12 ;  xxiii.  29 ;  xxiv.  1)  are  also 
quite  consonant  with  the  accounts  given  to  us  by  secular  historians.  Th« 
only  serious  difficulty  which  meets  us  is  the  date  in  ch.  xviii.  14,  which 
assigns  the  first  expedition  of  Sennacherib  against  Jerusalem  to  Hezekiah'i 
fourteenth  year,  or  B.O.  714,  whereas  the  Assyrian  annals  place  it  im 
Sennacherib's  fourth  year,  which  was  B.C.  701,  or  thirteen  years  later.  Thia 
date  is  best  regarded  as  an  interpolation — a  marginal  gloss  which  has  crept 
into  the  text,  and  which  was  the  mere  conjecture  of  a  commentator.  Th« 
event  itself  probably  occurred  in  the  twenty-seventh  year  of  Hezelnah't 
reign. 

The  subjoined  table  wiU  complete  the  chronology  of  the  Davidic  monarchy, 
and  may  be  regarded  as  scarcely  presenting  any  doubtful  points  or 
uncertainties— 


Tear 

Turoftha 

DaTidle 
monarchy. 

Kings  of  iTfuinh. 

Contemponiy  Unga. 

Christ. 

ISgypt. 

Assyria. 

Babylu. 

722 
714 

831 
8S9 

6tbyeM0fHezeki»h 

14th  ditto:  Hezekiah's 
iIlneu(2Kiiigaxx. 

«) 

Sargon      (b.o. 
722-705) 

6emnaoh«rib 
fB.c.    705— 
dtl) 

MerodaoK-B«- 
ladan     (•.& 
722— 71») 

Bel-lbnl    (M 
704-7«i) 

INTRODUCTION  TO 


Tnr 

before 
Cbitet. 

Teuofth* 

D«Tldio 

monarchy, 

^Ft^  .^^^        M    T_  ^  ^  L 

ConteDoponry  kings 

Klnga  of  JiuulL 

Egypt. 

Asayrl*. 

BAbjloL 

701 

352 

27th    year   of  Heze- 
kiah:  Uezekiah  at- 
tacked  by   Senna- 
cberib    (2     Kings 
xviii.  13— six.  36), 

Tirhakah  (b.o. 
701—667) 

Asshnr-nadln* 
sum  (B.a  700 
—681) 

698 

855 

Manassbh,  55  years 

(2  Kings  Txi,  1) 

Mi-ammon-nnt 
Psamatik  I. 
(about     B.O. 
650—610) 

Esarbaddon 

(B.O.    681— 

668) 
Agshnr  -  bani- 

pal  (B.a  668 

—626) 

Esarbaddon 
(B.O.    681— 
668) 

Saul-Mngina 
(B.O.    668— 
648) 

ChinUadanna, 
or    Asshnr- 
bani-pal  (7) 
(B.O.    648— 
626) 

643 

410 

Amow,    S    years    (2 

Kings  iii.  19) 

641 

412 

JosiAH,  31  years  (2 
Kings  xzii.  1) 

Nabopolassai 
(B.O.    626— 
605) 

623 

430 

18th  year  of  Josiah : 

celebration  of  Pass- 

over (2  Kings  xziii. 

23) 

Assyrian    em- 
pue       ends 
about  B.a  617 

610 

448 

Battle  of  Megiddo  (2 

Kings  zxiii.  29) 
Jehoahaz,  3  months 

Neco  (ii.a  610 
—695) 

609 

444 

Jehoiakui,  11   years 
(2  Kings  xiiii.  36) 

Nebnchadnei- 
zar  (B.a  60S 
—562) 

698 

455 

Jehoiachin,  3  months 
(2  Kings  xxiv.  8) 

697 

456 

Zedxkiah,    11    years 
(2  Kings  xxiT.  18) 

Psamatik    IL 
(B.O.    595— 
590) 

Hophra     (B.a. 
590—665) 

886 

467 

Bnd  of  reign. 

Evil-Merodnob 
(B.O.    562— 
560) 

n.  Intbeoonnection  between  Saobbd  and  Pbofane  Histobt  dueing 

THE  PeEIOD  op  the   ISRAELITE   MONABOHT. 

At  th«  commencement  of  the  monarchy,  dnring  tte  reigns  of  David  and 
Sulomon,  the  great  world-power  was  Egypt.    Assyria,  which  had  exercised 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KlTSOtS.  *U 

an  ezten8iv6  dwaj  in  Western  Asia  from  abont  B.C.  1300  to  B.C.  1070,  in  the 
latter  part  of  tbe  eleVenth  century  b.o.  passed  nnder  a  cloud,  and  did  not 
emerge  from  it  nntil  abont  B.o.  900.  Egypt,  on  the  other  hand,  abont 
B.o.  1100,  began  to  increase  in  strength,  and  soon  after  b.o.  1000,  resumed 
her  role  of  Asiatic  conqueror  nnder  the  Sheshonks  and  Osarkons.  It  is 
quite  in  accordance  with  these  &ots  that,  in  the  first  period  of  the  Israelite 
monarchy,  from  the  accession  of  David  to  the  usurpations  of  Jehu  and 
Atbaliab,  the  historical  Scriptures  contain  no  mention  at  all  of  Assyria,* 
which  lay  entirely  without  the  sphere  of  Hebrew  influence,  having  lost  all 
its  authority  over  any  part  of  the  tract  west  of  the  Euphrates.  Egypt,  on 
tbe  contrary,  comes  once  more  to  the  front.  Unmentioned  in  the  history 
from  the  date  of  the  Exodus  to  the  accession  of  Solomon,  she  then  reap- 
pears as  a  power  friendly  to  Israel,  and  anxious  to  make  alliance  with 
the  new  kingdom  which  has  been  established  at  no  great  distance  from  her 
borders.  Who  the  Pharaoh  was  who  gave  his  daughter  to  Solomon  (1  Kings 
iii.  1),  and  with  her  tbe  city  of  Gezer  as  a  dowry  (1  Bangs  ix.  16),  is 
uncertain;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  was  one  of  the  kings  of 
Manetho's  twenty-first  dynasty,  and  it  is  probable  that  he  was  one  of  the 
later  kings,  either  Pinetem  11.,  the  last  but  one,  or  Hor-Pasebensha,  the  last. 
The  union  of  the  two  royal  houses  led  to  much  intercourse  between  the  two 
peoples,  and  a  brisk  trade  was  established  between  Palestine  and  the  valley 
of  the  Nile,  which  included  a  large  importation  of  Egyptian  horses  and 
ehariots  into  Palestine,  and  even  into  Syria  (1  Kings  x.  28,  29),  where  the 
Hittite  kings  purchased  them.  Political  refugees  passed  from  one  conntiy 
to  the  other  without  question  (ch.  xi.  17 — 19),  and  sometimes  those  from 
Asia  obtained  considerable  influence  at  the  Egyptian  court. 

The  twenty-first  Egyptian  dynasty  was  succeeded  by  the  twenty-second, 
probably  somewhat  late  in  the  reign  of  Solomon.  The  new  dynasty  con- 
tinued the  policy'of  receiving  Asiatic  refugees,  and  Sheshonk  (or  Shishak),  iks 
first  monarch,  gave  an  asylum  to  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xi.  40)  not  many  yean 
before  Solomon's  death.  There  was  nothing  in  this  to  disturb  the  relations 
between  the  two  countries ;  but  when  Jeroboam,  after  the  death  of  Solomon, 
returned  to  Palestine,  and  the  two  rival  kingdoms  of  Jndah  and  Israel  wers 
established  side  by  side  in  a  relation  of  mutual  hostUity,  Egypt  oonld  not 
well  remain  friendly  to  both.  Not  unnaturally  she  leant  to  the  state  which 
was  the  larger,  and  appeared  to  be  tbe  more  powerful  of  the  two,  and 
which  bad,  moreover,  been  founded  by  the  Israelite  refugee  to  whom  she 
had  given  an  asylum,  and  who  had  probably  lived  in  Egypt  on  terms  of 
personal  intimacy  with  the  reigning  monarch.*  Accordingly,  the  greai 
expedition  of  Shishak  into  Asia  (2  Ghron.  xii.  2—4)  in  Behoboam's  fifth 

'  In  the  Fialms  there  li  one  mention  of  ABsyria  (Asbut)  which  may  belong  to  this  time 
(lee  Ps.  Ixzziii.  8).  David'i  Syrian  conqneBts,  perhapi,  brought  him  on  one  oocaaioB  lale 
eontaot  with  the  AsByriaoi  (2  Bam.  z.  15 — 18). 

*  The  Septuagint '  Additions  to  Kings'  have  not  the  anthority  of  history,  bat  fhey  show 
what  the  Alexandrian  Jews  believed  to  have  been  Jeroboam's  position  at  tha  oowi  of 
Shishak  (see  the  additioDS  to  1  Kings  xii  after  ver.  24). 


riii  KTBODUOnON  TO 


rear,  which  u  recorded  on  the  \ralls  of  the  temple  »t  Eamak,*  appear*  to 
have  been  nndertaken,  in  great  part,  in  the  interest  of  Jeroboam,  whose 
hands  were  thereby  greatly  strengthened  against  his  adversary.  Behohoam 
became  for  a  time  an  Egyptian  tributary  (2  Ohron.  xii.  8) ;  and  thongh  the 
Tuteh  malk  of  the  Karnak  inscription  may  not  especially  designate  him,* 
yet  the  war  was  certainly  directed  mainly  against  the  Jadesan  kingdom,  and 
resulted  in  its  degradation.  Sheshonk  had  probably  entertained  designs 
of  wider  conquest,  and  he  actually  subjected  many  of  the  Arab  tribes  in 
the  trans- Jordanio  region,  and  in  the  tract  between  Egypt  and  Palestine ; 
but  his  military  ardour  was  not  sufficient  to  urge  him  to  further  efforts, 
and  it  was  left  for  one  of  his  successors  to  invade  Asia  with  a  greater  force 
(comp.  2  Chron.  xiv.  9  with  xii.  3)  in  the  hope  of  sweeping  all  before  him. 

Zerach  the  Ethiopian,  who  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Asa  (2  Ohron.  ziv.  1, 9) 
made  an  expedition  into  Palestine  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  a  million  men, 
is  probably  identical  with  Osarkon*  (J7a-sar-ken)  II.,  the  great-grandson  of 
Sheshonk  I.,  and  the  fourth  king  of  the  twenty-second  Manethonian 
dynasty.  Zerach's  army  consisted  of  Oushites  and  Lubim  (2  Chron.  xvi.  8), 
as  Sheshonk' s  (Shishak's)  did  of  Gushites,  Lubim,  and  Sukkyim  (2  Chron. 
xii.  3).  He  invaded  Judaea  in  the  south,  and  marched  upon  Jerusalem  by 
the  way  of  Mareshah.  Here,  however,  Asa  met  him,  with  forces  not  much 
exceeding  half  the  number  of  his  adversary's,  and  defeated  him  in  a  pitched 
battle — one  of  the  most  glorious  in  all  Hebrew  history — entirely  dis- 
comfiting his  host  and  pursuing  it  to  Gerar,  on  the  extreme  south  of 
Palestine,  and  returning  with  an  immense  spoil  to  Jerusalem.  The 
Egyptian  aspirations  after  Asiatic  conquests  were  crushed  by  this  terrible 
blow ;  and  it  was  not  till  the  advance  of  Assyria  menaced  Egypt  herself  with 
conquest  that  the  soil  of  Palestine  was  again  trodden  by  an  Egyptian  army. 

Assyria's  advance  to  greatness,  which  commenced  about  B.C.  900,  upon 
Egypt's  decline,  is  not  noticed  so  early  in  the  scriptural  narrative  as  might 
have  been  expected.  We  find  by  the  Assyrian  annals  that  the  contact  of 
Assyria  with  the  northern  kingdom  began  as  early  as  the  reign  of  Jehu, 
if  not  even  in  that  of  Ahab.  An  "  Ahab,"  described  as  "  Ahab  of  Samhala  " 
or  "  Sirhala,"  is  engaged  in  battle  with  Shalmaneser  11.  about  B.C.  854,  and 
suffers  defeat.*  But  chronological  considerations  render  it  extremely 
doubtful  whether  the  person  thus  designated  can  have  been  the  son  of 
Omri.  Jehu,  however,  seems  certainly  to  have  come  within  the  sphere  of 
Shalmaneser's  influence,  and  to  have  been  induced  to  send  him  presents, 
which  Shalmaneser  regarded  as  a  tribute,'  not  later  than  the  year  B.C.  842, 

'  See  Mr.  Beginald  Stuart  Poole's  article  on  "  Shishak  "  in  Smith's  ■  Dictionary  of  the 
Bible."  vol.  iU.  pp.  1293, 1294. 

»  Max  MOller,  in  the  *  Proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archeology '  for  December  6_ 
1««7,  pp.  81— «8. 

•  Bwald,  •  History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  51,  Bng.  trans. 

•  O.  Smith, '  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  108;  Eawlinson,  'Ancient  Monarohiei,'  ToL  iLf.  lOS, 
2nd  edit. 

•  •  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  114. 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


acoording  to  the  Assyrian  chronology.  Assyria  was  at  this  time  pressing 
especially  apon  the  Syrian  states,  the  Hamathites,  Hittites,  Syrians  of 
Damascus,  and  Phoenicians.  Shalmaneser  contended  successively  with  the 
Benhadad  who  preceded  Hazael  on  the  Damascene  throne,  and  with  Hazael 
himself;  his  reign,  according  to  the  Assyrian  reckoning,  extended  from 
B.O.  860  to  B.C.  825.'  His  attacks,  and  those  of  his  successor,  Shamas-Vul 
(B.C.  825 — 810),  may  have  advantaged  the  Israelites  by  weakening  the 
Damascene  kingdom,  which  was  at  this  time  their  principal  adversary  (see 
ch.  X.  32,  33;  xii.  17,^8;  xiii.  17—25). 

The  advance  of  Assyria,  thongh  not  nncheokered  by  defeats,  continued, 
without  serious  interruption,  until,  in  the  reign  of  Menahem  (b.c.  770 — 760), 
an  actual  invasion  of  the  northern  kingdom  took  place  under  a  monarch 
called  Pul  (oh.  xv.  19;  1  Chron.  v.  26),  who  put  the  land  to  a  tribute  of 
a  thousand  talents  of  silver.  The  native  monuments  make  no  mention 
of  this  Pul,  for  he  can  scarcely  be  Tiglath-pileser,  who  took  the  name  and 
reigned  as  Pnlu  (Pul  or  Porus)  in  Babylon  for  two  years  (b.o.  729 — 728) 
before  his  decease  in  B.O.  727 ;  since  Pul  is  distinguished  from  Tiglath-pileser 
both  in  Kings  (ch.  xv.  19,  29)  and  in  Chronicles  (1  Chron.  v.  26),  and 
moreover  Tiglath-pileser's  first  year  was  B.O.  745.  It  seems  most  probable 
that  the  Pul  who  attacked  Menahem  was  a  pretender  to  the  throne  of 
Assyria,  contemporary  with  Asshur-dayan  III.  (b.o.  771 — 753),  in  whose 
time  we  hear  of  several  revolts,  and  midway  in  whose  reign  three  copies  of 
the  Eponym  Canon  draw  a  line,  the  usual  sign  of  the  commencement  of  a 
new  reign.*  Pul  may  have  been  acknowledged  as  King  of  Assyria  by  a 
portion  of  the  nation  from  B.o.  763,  where  the  line  is  drawn,  to  B.C.  758, 
when  peace  is  said  to  have  been  restored  to  the  land;  and  during  this 
interval  may  have  made  the  expedition  mentioned  in  ch.  xv.  19. 

Of  the  expedition  of  Tiglath-pileser  against  Pekah  King  of  Israel,  which 
resulted  in  the  conquest  of  the  trans- Jordanic  territory,  and  the  captivity  of 
ide  Reubenites,  the  Gadites,  and  the  half -tribe  of  Manasseh  (1  Chron.  v.  26 ; 
comp.  ch.  XV.  19),  the  Assyrian  annals  contain  a  fragmentary  account,  as 
well  as  of  the  war  betwequ  the  same  monarch  and  Bezin  King  of  Damascus, 
mentioned  in  ch.  xvi.  9.  Tiglath-pileser  appears  in  his  inscriptions  as  a 
great  and  warlike  monarch,  who  re-established  the  military  supremacy  of 
Assyria  over  Western  Asia  after  a  period  of  depression.  He  seems  to 
have  ascended  the  throne  in  the  year  B.o.  745,  and  to  have  reigned  from 
that-date  until  B.O.  727 — a  space  of  eighteen  years.  In  the  earlier  part  of 
his  reign  he  seems  to  have  invaded  Judaea,  probably  from  the  Philistine 
plain,  and  to  have  been  engaged  for  some  time  in  a  war  with  a  king  of 
Judah  whom  he  calls  Azariah,  but  who  must  apparently  have  been  either 
Jotham  or  Ahaz.  This  war,  which  is  not  mentioned  in  Scripture,  had  no 
important  result;  but  in  a  little  time  it  was  followed  by  another  which 
greatly  increased  the  influence  of  Assyria  in  the  Palestinian  region.  Ahaa 
now  certainly  occupied  the  Judaean  throne,  while  that  of  Samaria  was  held 

*  '  EpaHyia  Canon,'  EC-  5S.  f"^  '  Ibid.,  pp.  48,  62. 


INTBODUOTION  TO 


by  Feksh,  and  that  of  Damascas  by  Rezin.  The  northern  tings  were 
anxious  to  form  a  Syrian  confederacy  against  Assyrian  aggression,  and 
invited  Ahaz  to  join  them ;  bnt,  that  monarch  declining,  they  resolved  to 
put  him  down,  and  give  his  kingdom  to  a  creature  of  their  own,  a  certain 
Ben-Tabeal  (Isa.  vii.  6),  who  is  thonght  to  have  been  a  Damascene.*  Under 
these  circumstances,  Ahaz  invoked  the  aid  of  Tiglath-pileser  against  their 
common  enemies  (ch.  xvi.  7),  and  a  war  followed,  which  lasted  apparently 
three  years  (b.o.  734 — 732).  Tiglath-pileser's  first  efforts  were  against 
Rezin.  After  several  battles  in  the  open  field,  wherein  the  Assyrian  arms 
were  successful,  he  forced  the  Syrian  king  to  take  refuge  within  the  walls 
of  Damascus,  which  he  then  besieged  and  took.'  Rezin  fell  into  his  hands, 
and  was  slain  (ch.  xvi.  9)  ;  several  of  his  generals  were  impaled  on  crosses ; 
the  country  was  ravaged;  the  unarmed  inhabitants  seized,  and  the  mass 
of  them  carried  away  as  captives.*  The  war  was  then  carried  from  the 
Damascene  territory  into  that  of  Samaria,  which  was  entered  upon  the 
north  and  upon  the  east,  and  treated  much  as  the  Damascene  had  been. 
The  captivity  of  Israel  commenced.  Assyria  extended  her  territory  from 
the  Lebanon  and  the  Hamathites'  country,  to  the  hills  of  Galilee  and  the 
coast  of  the  Dead  Sea.  Jndeea,  under  Ahaz,  became  her  tributary,'  as  did 
Moab,  Edom,  and  Ammon.*  In  Samaria  a  new  king  was  set  up  in  the 
person  of  Hoshea,  who  murdered  Pekah,  with  the  connivance  of  the 
Assyrian  monarch.* 

The  Assyrian  records  agree  with  Scripture  in  making  a  Shalmaneser 
(Shalmaneser  FV.)  the  successor  of  Tiglath-pileser,'  though  they  do  not 
represent  Shalmaneser  (as  Scripture  has  generally  been  supposed  to  do)  as 
the  conqueror  of  Samaria.  They  give  to  this  king  a  reign  of  five  years  only, 
from  B.C.  727  to  b.o.  723,  and  represent  him  as  a  warlike  monarch,  engaged 
in  a  series  of  military  expeditions;  bnt  the  notices  of  him  which  have 
come  down  to  us  are  extremely  scanty  and  fragmentary,  and  throw  little 
light  on  the  biblical  narrative.  We  learn,  however,  from  Phoenician  sources,' 
that  Shalmaneser 's  wars  were  at  any  rate  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Palestine, 
since  we  are  told  that  he  overran  all  Phoenicia,  took  Sidon,  the  continental 
Tyre,  and  Akko,  and  even  attacked  the  island  Tyre  with  a  fleet  manned 
chiefly  by  Phoenician  sailors.  His  enterprises  seem  to  have  been  cut  short 
by  a  domestic  revolution,  headed  by  the  great  Sargon,  who  drove  Shalma- 
neser from  the  throne,  probably  put  him  to  death,  and  mutilated  bis  annals. 

>  Ewald,  <  Histoiy  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  158, 

*  G.  Smith,  •  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  121.  •  Ibid. ;  eomp.  oh.  xvi.  9. 

'  Ch.  xvi.  8 ;  comp.  oh.  xviiL  7  and  '  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  121,  where  Ahas  seeina  to  be 
mentioned  as  a  tributary  under  the  name  of"  Jehoabai.'' 

*  *  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  121,  linei  60,  61. 

*  In  oh.  XT.  SO,  the  murder  of  Pekah  is  assigned  to  Hoshea ;  bnt  in  the  annals  of  Tlglath- 
pileier  (<  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  123,  line  17)  that  monaioh  appears  to  have  represented  it  as  his 
•wn  aot.    He  certainly  made  Hoshea  Ung. 

*  Sea  the '  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  65. 

*  Mnand.  Bph.  ajf.  Joseph.  'Ant  Jnd.,'  ix.  14 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS, 


Sargon  olaJms  as  his  first  act  the  conqaest  of  Samaria,  from  whioh  h« 
■ays  that  he  carried  oS  27,290  captives.'  He  is,  perhaps,  the  king  intended 
in  ch.  xyii.  6  and  xviii.  11 ;  and  he  obtains  distinct  mention  in  Isa.  xz.  1. 
Hezekiah  seems  to  haye  revolted  from  him  (oh.  xviii.  7) ;  bat  he  was 
snccessfal  in  most  other  quarters.  He  put  down  a  rebellion  in  which 
Hamath,  Arpad,  Zimirra,  Damascus,  and  Samaria  were  combined,  aboat 
B.C.  720,  defeated  an  Egyptian  army,  and  took  Baphia  and  Gaza  in  the 
same  year,  conqnered  Ashdod  in  b.o.  711,  and  Babylon  in  b.o.  710 ;  invaded 
Edom  in  B.o.  707,  and  established  his  authority  over  Gypms  and  over  some 
of  the  islands  of  the  Persian  Gulf  about  the  same  time.*  In  his  reign  the 
Assyrian  empire  advanced  itself  to  the  borders  of  Egypt,  and  from  thence- 
forth nntil  about  B.O.  650  the  two  countries  were  engaged  in  almost 
perpetual  hostilities,  Jndsea  and  Syria  famishing  for  the  most  part  the 
battle-ground  between  the  contending  forces.  Sargon's  first  adversary  was 
•  certain  Sibache,*  who  is  prohably  identical  with  the  Shabak  or  Shabatok 
of  the  hieroglyphics,  the  Sabaco  of  Herodotus,*  and  the  So  or  Seveh* 
of  Scripture  (ch.  xvii.  4).  He  afterwards  contended  with  a  monarch  whom 
he  calls  the  King  of  Meroe,*  who  is  perhaps  Tirhakah,  perhaps  Shabatok. 
After  reigning  seventeen  years,  Sargon  died,  and  was  succeeded  on  the 
Assyrian  throne  by  the  world-famous  Sennacherib,  the  most  widely  known, 
if  not  really  the  greatest,  of  Assyrian  monarchs. 

It  was  in  the  middle  of  the  reign  of  Sargon — about  b.o.  714  or  713 — that 
the  first  contact  occurred  between  Judgea  and  Babylon.  A  native  prince, 
named  Merodach-Baladan,  rose  in  insurrection  against  the  Assyrians  on 
the  death  of  Shalmaneser,  and  succeeded  in  re-establishing  Babylonian 
independence  for  a  short  space.'  Threatened  by  Sargon,' and  anxious  to 
strengthen  himself  by  alliances,  this  king  sent,  about  b.o.  714,  an  embassy 
into  Palestine,  under  the  pretence  of  congratalating  Hezekiah  on  his 
recovery  from  his  severe  illness  (ch.  xx.  12).  The  ambassadors  were 
received  with  favour,  and  shown  all  HezeMah's  treasures  (ch.  xx.  13) ;  and 
it  is  most  likely  that  an  alliance  was  concluded;  but  a  few  years  later, 
B.O.  710,  Sargon  marched  an  army  into  Babylonia,  defeated  Merodach- 
Baladan,  and  expelled  him  from  the  country,  took  Babylon,  and,  following 
the  examples  of  Tiglath-pileser  and  Shalmaneser,  established  himself  as 
king.  The  Canon  of  Ptolemy  calls  him  Arkeanos  (equivalent  to  Sarkina), 
and  assigns  him  the  space  from  b.o.  710  to  B.O.  705.  It  was  in  this  latter 
year  that  Sargon  died. 

The  death  of  Sargon  and  the  accession  of  the  untried  Sennacherib  gave  the 

*  '  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  125,  line  24. 

*  See  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  141 — 147. 

*  'Eponym  Canon,'  pp.  125,  126;  Oppeit,  'Insoriptions  des  Sargonldei,'  p.  33;  Sir  H. 
Bawlinion,  Afhetuaim,  No.  1869,  p.  534. 

*  Hend.,  fi.  137. 

■  The  proper  p<^ting  of  the  word  mo  in  oh.  xvii.  4  is  probably  k;^  and  not  mo. 
'  <  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  128,  line  61 ;  p.  130,  line  36. 
'  Oppert, '  Inaoriptionf  dea  Sargonides,'  p.  38. 


xU  INTRODUOTION  TO 


rignal  for  a  leries  of  revolts.  In  Babylonia  several  pretenders  arose,'  and 
after  a  time  Merodach-Baladan  re-established  himself  as  king ;  bat  he  only 
wore  the  crown  for  six  months.  In  B.O.  702  Sennacherib  drove  him  out, 
recovered  the  country  to  Assyria,  and  placed  a  viceroy  apon  the  Babylonian 
throne."  The  next  year  he  made  his  great  expedition  into  Syria,  Phcenicia, 
and  Palestine,  chastised  Sidon  and  other  Phoenician  towns  which  had 
thrown  off  the  Assyrian  yoke,  took  Ascalon  and  Ekron,  defeating  a  force 
of  Egyptians  and  Ethiopians,  which  had  come  to  help  the  people  of  the 
latter  city,  and  then  overran  Judaea,  and  attacked  Jerusalem.  "  Because 
Hezekiah  King  of  Judah,"  he  says,  "  would  not  submit  to  my  yoke,  I  came 
up  against  him,  and  by  force  of  arms  and  by  the  might  of  my  power  I  took 
forty-six  of  his  strong-fenced  cities,  and  of  the  smaller  towns  which  were 
scattered  about  I  took  and  plundered  a  countless  number.  And  from  these 
places  I  captured  and  carried  ofE  as  spoil  200,150  people,  old  and  young, 
male  and  female,  together  with  horses  and  mares,  asses  and  camels,  oxen 
and  sheep,  a  countless  multitude.  And  Hezekiah  himself  I  shut  up  in 
Jerusalem,  his  capital,  like  a  bird  in  a  cage,  building  towers  round  about 
the  city  to  hem  bim  in,  and  raising  banks  of  earth  against  the  gates,  so  aa 
to  prevent  escape.  .  .  .  Then  upon  this  Hezekiah  there  fell  the  fear  of  the 
power  of  my  arms,  and  he  sent  out  to  me  the  chiefs  and  the  elders  of 
Jerusalem,  with  thirty  talents  of  gold,  and  eight  hundred  talents  of  silver, 
and  divers  treasures,  a  rich  and  immense  booty.  .  .  .  All  these  things  were 
brought  to  me  at  I^ineveh,  the  seat  of  my  government,  Hezekiah  having 
sent  them  by  way  of  tribute,  and  as  a  token  of  submission  to  my  power."  * 
The  close  accord  of  this  entire  account  with  the  notice  contained  in  the 
Second  Book  of  Kings  (eh.  xviii.  13 — 16)  is  very  striking.  The  "  fenced 
cities  "  are  the  first  object  of  attack ;  then  Jerusalem  is  threatened ;  Heze- 
kiah is  shut  up  in  the  place  (comp.  2  Ghron.  xxxii.  2 — 8) ;  then  submission 
is  made ;  a  sum  of  money  in  gold  and  silver  is  paid  for  a  ransom ;  even  the 
number  of  the  talents  of  gold  is  the  same  in  both  narratives.  The  only  dis- 
crepancy is  with  respect  to  the  silver,  in  which  Sennacherib  may  include  all 
that  he  carried  ofE  from  the  country.  Finally,  the  invading  host  retires,  the 
siege  is  broken  up,  and  peace  restored  between  the  countries.  One  serious 
difficulty  alone  presents  itself — ^viz.  the  date  of  the  expedition  in  the  present 
Hebrew  text.  This  is  given  as  "  tla&  fotirteenth  year  of  Hezekiah,"  or  eight 
years  only  after  the  capture  of  Samaria.  But  in  the  fourteenth  year  of 
Hezekiah,  B.C.  714,  Sargon  was  still  upon  the  throne ;  the  Assyrian  arms 
were  engaged  in  Media  and  Armenia ;  and  there  was  no  Assyrian  expedition 
into  Palestine.^  Sennacherib's  invasion  cannot  possibly  have  taken  place 
antil  B.C.  705,  nine  years  later,  for  not  till  then  did  he  ascend  the  throne  ;  • 
and  by  his  annals  *  it  appears  not  to  have  actually  taken  place  tiU  his  fourth 

>  Polyhistor.  sp.  Enaeb.,  'Ohron.  Can.,'  L  S.  {  1. 

*  *  Ancient  Monaichies,'  vol.  it.  p.  157. 

'  8ii  H.  BawllDson,  in  '  Ancient  Monarohles,*  toL  iL  pp.  ISl,  IBX 

*  See  •  Bponjm  Canon,'  p.  66.  •  Ibid.,  p.  87. 

*  Old.,  pp.  ISl— IW ;  eomp.  'Ancient  Monaichiea.'  vd.  iL  p.  1S8. 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINQS.  zffl 

year,  b.o.  701.  The  date,  therefore,  in  ch.  zviii.  13  must  be  an  error ;  and 
the  choiee  wonld  seem  to  lie  betvreen  regarding  it  as  a  cormption — "  four' 
teenth  "  for  "  twenty-seventh  " — and  viewing  it  as  the  marginal  note  of  a 
commentator  which  has  crept  into  the  text. 

After  an  interval  (2  Chron.  zxzii.  9),  which  may  not  have  exceeded 
a  few  months,  and  which  certainly  cannot  have  exceeded  a  year  or  two, 
Sennacherib  attacked  Hezekiah  for  the  second  time.  It  probably  vexed 
him  that  he  had  not  insisted  on  occupying  Jerusalem  with  a  garrison,  and 
he  may  also  have  received  fresh  provocation  from  Hezekiah,  if  that  monarch 
had  made  an  application  to  Egypt  for  aid,  as  he  seems  to  have  done 
(ch.  xviii.  24  ;  Isa.  xxx.  1 — i).  At  any  rate,  Sennacherib  proceeded  once 
more  to  threaten  Jerusalem,  sent  a  force  against  it  under  three  of  his  chief 
officials  (cli.  xviii.  17),  attempted  to  stir  up  disaffection  among  the  soldiers 
of  the  garrison  (ch.  xviii.  17 — 36),  and  annoonced  his  intention  of  coming 
against  the  eity  in  person  and  "  destroying  it  utterly"  (ch.  xix.  10 — 13).  At 
the  same  time,  he  laid  siege  to  various  towns  in  Southern  Palestine,  and 
contemplated  invading  Egypt,  where  Tirhakah  was  collecting  an  army  to 
oppose  him  (ch.  xix.  9).  But  at  this  point  of  his  career  his  ambition 
received  a  signal  check.  In  a  single  night,  silently  and  suddenly — as 
the  Jews  believed,  by  the  direct  action  of  the  Almighty'  (ch.  xix.  35; 
2  Chron.  xxxii.  21;  Isa.  xxxvii.  36) — almost  his  whole  army  was  destroyed ; 
and  nothing  remained  for  him  but  to  relinquish  his  hopes  of  further  con- 
quest in  the  south-west,  and  to  make  a  hurried  retreat  to  his  capital 
(ch.  xix.  36). 

The  later  years  of  Sennacherib  were  inglorious.  In  B.C.  694  Babylonia 
revolted  from  him,  and  succeeded  in  re-establishing  its  independence. 
Between  this  date  and  his  death  the  Only  expeditions  which  can  be  probably 
assigned  to  him  are  one  into  Cilicia  and  another  into  Edom.'  He  certainly 
made  no  attempt  to  recover  the  laurels  which  he  had  lost  in  Palestine  and 
on  the  borders  of  Egypt,  bat  allowed  Manaaseh  in  Judaea,  and  Tirhakah  in 
the  valley  of  the  Nile,  to  remain  unmolested.  Domestic  troubles  probably 
occupied  the  later  portion  of  his  reign,  which  was  terminated  by  his  murder 
in  681  B.C.  (ch.  xix.  37),  after  he  had  held  the  Assyrian  throne  for  the 
space  of  twenty-four  years. 

Sennacherib's  murder  is  not  distinctly  mentioned  in  the  Assyrian  records, 
but  Esarhaddon  appears  as  his  son  and  successor,  and  there  are  traces '  of 
this  prince  having  had  at  first  to  contend  for  the  crowit  with  his  half- 
brothers,  Adrammeleoh  and  Sharezer  (ch.  xix.  37).  The  scene-  of  the 
conflict  was  Armenia ;  and  after  it  was  over,  Esarhaddon  appears  to  have 

*  The  catastrophe  has  been  attributed  to  the  simoom  (Milman,  <  History  of  the  Jews,' 
vol.  i.  p.  307),  to  a  plague  (Oeseniue,  'Winer,  etc.),  to  a  sudden  storm  (Yitringa,  Stanley), 
and  even  to  a  night  attack  of  the  enemy  (Michaelis) ;  but  the  words  of  the  narrative  dis- 
tinctly point  to  that  silent,  sudden  extinction  which  English  law  calls  "  the  visitation  of 
God." 

•  •  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol  ii.  pp.  175—177.         *  '  Ibid.,  p.  188. 


xlT  INTRODUCTION  TO 

made  an  expedition  into  Syria,  where  Sidon  had  revolted,*  and,  after 
crnshino'  the  revolt,  to  have  established  his  anthority  over  the  whole  of 
Phoenicia,  Palestine,  and  the  adjacent  countries.  Manasseh,  the  weak  son 
of  Hezekiah,  was  at  this  time  forced  to  become  a  tributary  and  subject- 
monarch,  as  were  also  the  kings  of  Edom,  Moab,  and  Ammon,  of  Tyre, 
Gebal,  and  Arvad,  of  Gaza,  Ekron,  Ascalon,  and  Ashdod.*  Assyria's 
dominion  was  at  once  extended  and  consolidated,  and  the  way  was  paved 
for  aggressions  upon  Egypt,  which  began  about  B.C.  672,  in  Esarhaddon's 
ninth  year.' 

The  offence  given  by  Manasseh  to  his  sovereign,  on  acconnt  of  whicli  he 
was  arrested  and  carried  captive  to  Babylon  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11),  may  be 
probably  assigned  to  the  reign  of  Esarhaddon,  who  alone  of  all  the  Assyrian 
kings  maintained  a  residence  in  that  city.  And  we  may  conjecture  that 
his  restoration  to  his  kingdom  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  13)  had  a  connection  with 
Esarhaddon's  Egyptian  projects,  since  it  would  hare  been  only  prudent  to 
secure  the  fidelity  of  Jerusalem  before  the  perils  of  an  Egyptian  campaign 
were  affronted.  Esarhaddon  carried  on  war  with  Tirhakah  successfully 
between  B.C.  673  and  b.o.  670 ;  but  in  B.C.  669  or  668  the  fortune  of  war 
turned  against  him,  and  Tirhakah  once  more  established  his  authority  over 
the  whole  of  Egypt.* 

It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  Scripture  makes  no  mention  of  Esar- 
haddon's son  and  successor,  Asshur-hani-pal,  who  mounted  the  Assyrian 
throne  in  B.C.  668,  and  reigned  till  B.O.  626.  This  prince  must  have  been 
contemporary  with  Manasseh  for  twenty-five  years,  with  Amon,  and  with 
Josiah.  In  the  early  part  of  his  reign  he  made  at  least  two  expeditions 
against  Egypt,  and  must  have  repeatedly  passed  through  Palestine  at  the 
head  of  powei-ful  armies.'  In  his  later  years  he  warred  successfully  with 
Elam,  Babylon,  Armenia,  Phoenicia,  and  Arabia.  It  was  about  the  middle 
of  his  reign  that  the  decline  of  Assyria  began.  A  great  Scythic  invasion 
swept  over  Western  Asia,  and  spread  everywhere  min  and  desolation.* 
Assyria's  distant  dependencies,  Egypt,  Palestine,  Lydia,  detached  them* 
selves.  Before  she  had  tim*  to  recover  from  her  depressed  condition,  her 
conquest  was  taken  in  hand  by  the  combined  Medes  and  Babylonians.* 
Nineveh  fell  about  B.C.  616,  or  a  little  earlier,'  and  Western  Asia  became 
a  field  wherein  rival  ambitions  met  and  collided.  Media,  Babylonia,  Lydia, 
and  Egypt,  all  of  them  sought  to  profit  by  the  downfall  of  the  great 
power  so  long  dominant  over  the  Oriental  world,  while  even  such  petty 
states  as  Judasa  took  the  opportunity  to  aggrandize  themselves  (ch.  xxiii. 
15—20;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  6). 

So  far  as  Judaaa  was  concerned,  the  world-powers  whiob  took  the  plact 

»  •  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  137.  '  Ibid.,  p.  139,  lines  13—18.  •  Ibid.,  p.  69. 

*  Ibid.,  p.  202.  •  •  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  H.  pp.  201 — 20a. 

*  Herod.,  i.  103—106 ;  comp.  •  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  221 — 228. 

'  Herod.,  i.  106 ;  Abyilenus  ap.  Euseb., '  Chron.  Can.,'  i.  9 ;  Polyhistor.  ap.  ennd.,  L  8. 

*  The  Assyrian  Eponym  list  oontinues  down  to  B.a  (il7  ('  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  71), 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KING&  xt 

of  AsBjria,  and  Btrove  to  establish  their  domination  in  the  place  of  hers, 
mere  Babylon  and  Egypt.  Egypt  appears  to  have  anticipated  her  rival. 
As  early  as  the  reign  of  Psamatik  I.  she  recommenced  aggressions  npon 
Asia  by  persistent  attacks  npon  the  strongest  of  the  Philistine  cities,  the 
famous  Ashdod,*  and  ahont  B.o.  610,  nnder  TSeoo,  the  son  and  successor  of 
Psamatik,  she  invaded  Syria  in  force,  defeated  Josiah  at  Megiddo,*  over- 
ran Jnd89a,  Phoenicia,  and  Syria  as  far  as  Tanms  and  the  middle  Euphrates, 
and  made  herself  mistress  of  the  entire  region  between  the  borders  of 
Egypt  and  the  great  city  of  Garchemish.  Neco  held  possession  for  some 
years  of  this  rich  and  interesting  region,  recovering  thus  the  hold  upon 
Asia  which  had  been  possessed  a  thousand  years  earlier  by  the  great 
monarcbs  of  the  eighteenth  dynasty — the  Thothmeses  and  Amenhoteps. 
Then,  however,  Babylon  bestirred  herself,  Nabopolassar,  the  prince  who, 
in  conjunction  with  the  Median  monarch  Gyaxares,  had  attacked  and 
destroyed  Nineveh,  became  independent  King  of  Babylon  from  the  moment 
of  Assyria's  downfall ;  but  it  took  him  some  time  to  establish  his  authority 
over  the  tract  lying  between  Babylon  and  Garchemish,  though  probably 
he  claimed  a  dominion  over  all  the  western  provinces  of  the  Assyrian 
empire  from  the  first.  Neco's  conquest  he  viewed  as  a  rebellion  which 
must  be  crushed;*  but  it  was  not  till  the  year  b.o.  605,  when  he  was 
already  becoming  enfeebled  by  old  age,  that  he  found  himself  in  a  position 
to  carry  the  Babylonian  arms  into  the  far  West,  and  attempt  the  chastise- 
ment of  the  "  rebel."  Even  then  he  had  to  give  up  the  notion  of  pro- 
ceeding against  his  enemy  in  person,  and  to  depute  the  task  of  subjugation 
to  his  eldest  son,  the  crown  prince,  Nebuchadnezzar.  Nebuchadnezzar,  in 
B.O.  605,  led  the  Babylonian  forces  from  the  capital  to  Garchemish  (now 
Jerabus),  and  there  engaged  the  troops  of  Neco  in  the  great  battle  *  which 
destroyed  Egypt's  last  hope  of  maintaining  her  Asiatic  supremacy,  and 
installed  Babylon  in  the  position  of  the  dominant  power  of  South- Western 
Asia.  From  her  defeat  at  Garchemish  Egypt  never  recovered.  She  made 
some  feeble  efforts  under  Apries  (Pharaoh-Hophra)  and  Amasis  to  effect 
Phoenician  and  Gyprian  conquests ;  *  but  the  results  were  trivial,  and  in 
a  short  time  she  collapsed  utterly.  Babylon,  on  the  other  hand,  carried 
all  before  her.  Nebuchadnezzar  conquered  Elam,  Syria,  Phoenicia,  Judssa, 
Edom,  Ammon,  Moab,  Egypt.  In  his  long  reign  of  forty-three  years 
(b.O.  605—562)  he  seems  not  to  have  met  with  a  reverse.  The  Babylonian 
gmpire  under  his  sway  attained  to  an  extraordinary  degree  of  prosperity. 
JehoiaMm,  having  " become  his  servant"  in  B.C.  605  (ch.  xxiv.  1),  revolted 
from  him  in  B.O.  602,  and  was  deposed  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  6)  and  probably 
put  to  death  by  him  (Jer.  xxii.  19 ;  xxxvi.  30)  in  B.O.  598.  Jehoiachin,  his 
son,  was  then  set  up  as  king,  but  within  three  months  (ch.  xxiv.  8)  dis- 
pleased his  lord  paramount,  who  deprived  him  of  his  throne,  and  carried 

«  Herod.,  iL  157.  *  ^b.  xxlii.  29 ;  comp.  Herod.,  ii.  159. 

•  BeroBui,  •  Pr,*  14.  *  See  Jer.  xlvi.  8—17 :  wd  Beroiun,  I. «.  «i 

•  BeroOn  ii- 161.  l«9- 


iTl       mTBODTTOTION  TO  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 

him  captiTO  to  Babylon  id  b.o.  597  (oh.  xxiy.  10—15).  Stm,  Jndsea  wm 
allowed  to  maintain  its  semi-independence.  Zedeldah,  nncle  to  Jehoiachin, 
received  the  crown  at  tto  hands  of  Nebnchadnezzar  (ch.  xxiv.  17),  and 
swore  fealty  to  Win  (2  Ohron.  xxxvi.  13) ;  bnt  after  a  short  time  he  too 
began  to  contemplate  revolt,  made  an  alliance  with  Egypt  (Ezek.  xvii.  16), 
and  in  B.C.  588  openly  declared  himself  independent  of  his  snzerain  (ch. 
xxiv.  20).  Nebaohadnezzar  was  not  slow  to  accept  the  challenge.  He  at 
once  marched  against  Jerusalem,  and  laid  siege  to  it.  Apries  '(Hophra), 
the  Egyptian  monarch,  made  one  attempt  to  come  to  the  assistance  of  his 
ally  ( Jer.  xxxvii.  5)  ;  bnt  the  attempt  failed,  either  through  the  defeat  of  his 
army  or  through  his  own  want  of  resolution.^  In  B.C.  586,  after  a  siege 
of  eighteen  months,  the  end  came.  A  breach  was  made  in  the  northern 
wall  of  the  town,  and  a  lodgment  effected  within  the  defences  (Jer.  xxxix. 
2,  3).  Zedekiah  fled,  but  was  pursued  and  made  a  prisoner,  blinded,  and 
carried  to  Babylon  (Jer.  xxxix.  4 — 7).  Jernsalem  surrendered  itself ;  tlie 
temple,  palace,  and  chief  houses  were  burnt  (ch.  xxv.  9)  ;  and  the  bulk  of 
the  population,  all  except  the  very  poor,  were  carried  off  into  Babylonia 
as  captives.  The  history  of  the  entire  Israelite  monarchy  thns  ends.  From 
the  accession  of  Saul  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar 
was  a  period  of  five  hundred  and  seven  years,  which  was  divisible  into 
three  portions  :  (1)  from  the  accession  of  Saul  to  that  of  Hehoboam — the 
period  of  the  undivided  monarchy — a  space  of  a  hundred  and  twenty  years, 
from  B.C.  1092  to  B.O.  972 ;  (2)  from  the  accession  of  Behoboam  in  Judah 
and  of  Jeroboam  in  Israel  to  the  fall  of  Samaria — ^the  period  of  the  two 
parallel  kingdoms — a  space  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  years,  from  B.C.  972  to 
B.C.  722 ;  and  (3)  from  the  destruction  of  the  Israelite  kingdom  to  the  final 
captivity  of  Judah,  a  period  of  a  hundred  and  thirty-seven  years,  from 
B.C.  722  to  B.C.  586  inclusive.  During  the  first  period  Israel's  fortunes  were 
connected  with  those  of  Egypt ;  during  the  second,  partly  with  Egypt  but 
mainly  with  Assyria ;  during  the  third,  to  some  extent  with  both  Egypt  and 
Assyria,  but  mainly  with  Babylon.  Most,  if  not  all,  of  the  points  of  contact 
between  Israel  and  these  nations  during  the  period  treated  of  have  been 
touched  on  in  these  pages,  and  the  result  would  seem  to  be  a  remarkable 
general  harmony  and  agreement  between  the  sacred  records  and  the  profane, 
together  with  a  certain  residnnm  of  difficulties,  for  the  most  part  connected 
with  the  chronology.  On  these  it  is  not  improbable  that  fnture  discoveries 
may  throw  farther  light ;  though  it  is,  perhaps,  too  much  to  expect  that 
all  difficulties  will  be  ultimately  swept  away.  It  does  not  seem  to  be  the 
general  way  of  God's  providence  to  make  everything  plain  to  us.  "  The 
trying  of  faith  worketh  patience,"  and  without  it  patience  would  never 
"have  her  perfect  work,"  nor  would  faith  itself  be  deserving  of  those 
encomiums  and  that  "good  report"  which  it  obtains  thronghont  the 
Christian  Scriptures. 

■  Josephui  aayi  that  he  was  defeated  (*  Ant.  JndV  x.  7.  f  8>    Jenmish'i  words  (Jer. 
xxxriL  7)  seem  rather  to  imply  •  retreat  without  a  battle. 


THE    SECOND 

BOOK   OF  THE   KINGS. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAFTBB  L 


Yen.  I — 18.— Thi  Bstolt  of  Moab. 
Tbb  iLiJtESi,  Imfiitt,  and  Death  or 
Ahaziah.  The  nuiatire  of  the  Second 
Book  of  Kings  foUowa  on  that  of  the  First 
Book  in  the  closest  possible  sequence.  The 
history  of  Ahaziah's  reign  begins  in  1  Kings 
xxiL  51,  and  ie  carried  on,  without  any  real 
break  or  pause  in  the  sense,  to  ch.  i.  18. 
How  the  two  books  came  to  be  divided  at 
this  point  is  quite  inexplicable.  The  divi- 
sion it  most  unhappy.  Not  only  does  it, 
withont  apparent  reason,  draw  a  strong  line 
of  demarcation  in  the  middle  of  a  reign ;  but 
it  leparates  what  it  was  evidently  the  in- 
tention of  the  writer  most  closely  to  connect 
— viz.  the  sins  of  the  monarch  and  their 
punishment.  Ahaziah  began  his  reign  by 
openly  showing  himself  a  devotee  of  Baal — 
by  "  walking  in  the  way  of  his  father  and 
in  the  way  of  hi$  mother,"  the  wicked  Jeze- 
bel: therefore  calamity  immediately  smote 
him — first  Moab  rebelled,  threw  off  the 
Israelite  yoke,  and  re-established  its  inde- 
pendence; and  then,  within  a  short  space, 
Ahaziah  himself  met  with  an  accident  which 
produced  a  dangerous  illness.  The  writer 
relates  barely  the  former  fact,  but  enlarges 
on  the  latter,  which  gave  occasion  for  one 
of  the  most  remarkable  of  the  miiaoles  of 
Elijah. 

Yer.  1.— Then  Moab  rebelled;  literally, 
and  Modb  rebelled,  but  with  an  idea,  not 
merely  of  seqnenoa,  but  of  consequence. 
The"Moabite  Stone"  discovered  in  1869, 
throws  oousiderable  ligfnt  on  the  character 
n.  KiNoa. 


and  eiiQumstances  of  this  rebellion.  Moab 
had,  we  know,  been  subjected  by  David 
(2  Sam.  viil,  2),  and  had  been  very  severely 
treated.  Either  in  the  reign  of  Solomon,  or 
more  probably  at  his  death,  and  the  dis- 
ruption of  his  kingdom,  the  Moabites  had 
revolted,  and  resumed  an  independent  posi- 
tion, which  they  had  maintained  until  the 
reign  of  Oiuri.  Omri,  who  was  a  warlike 
monarch,  the  greatest  of  the  Israelite 
monarchs  after  Jeroboam,  after  settling 
himself  firmly  upon  the  throne  of  Israel 
attacked  the  Moabite  territory,  and  in  a 
short  time  reduced  it,  making  the  native 
king,  Ohemosh-gad,  his  tributary.  At  the 
deaSx  of  Omii,  Abab  succeeded  to  the 
suzerainty,  and  maintained  it  during  his 
lifetime,  exacting  a  tribute  that  was  felt 
as  a  severe  "oppression"  (Moabite  Stone, 
line  6;  oomp.  oh.  iii.  4).  The  death  of 
Ahab  in  battle  and  the  defeat  of  bis  army 
encouraged  Mesha,  who  bad  succeeded  his 
father,  Chemosh-gad,  to  raise  the  standard 
of  revolt  once  more,  and  to  emancipate  his 
country  after  a  period  of  subjection  which 
he  estimates  roughly  at  "  forty  years."  The 
"  Stone  "  is  chiefly  occupied  with  an  account 
of  the  steps  by  which  he  recovered  his 
territory.  After  the  death  of  Ahab.  Pro- 
bably, as  soon  as  he  heard  of  it.  In  Oriental 
empires  the  death  of  a  brave  and  energetic 
monarch  is  constantly  the  signal  for  a 
general  revolt  of  the  subject  peoples.  They 
entertain  a  hope  that  his  successor  will  not 
inherit  his  vigour  and  capacity. 

Yer.  2. — Ahawah  fell  down  through  a 
lattice;  rather,  through  fhe  lattiea.  It  is 
implied  that  the  upper  chamber  had  a  single 
window,  which  was  closed  by  •  single  lattiee, 
or  shutter  of  interlaced  woodwork.  The 
shutter  may  have  been  insufficiently  secured ; 
or  the  woodwork  may  have  been  too  weak 
to  beer  his  weight.  Compare  the  fall  of 
Butychus  (Acts  xz.  9),  where,  however,  there 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  [ctulI— 1& 


is  no  mention  of  a  "  lattice."  Was  siok ;  It. 
"  was  80  injured  that  he  had  to  take  to  his 
bed."  Inquire  of  Baal-zebnb  the  god  of 
Skron.  Aa  a  worshipper  of  Baal,  bent  on 
walking  in  the  evil  way  of  his  father  and  of 
his  mother  (1  Kings  ixii.  52),  Ahaziah 
would  naturally  inquire  of  some  form  of  the 
Baal  divinity.  Why  he  chose  "  Baal-zebub 
the  god  of  Ekron,"  it  is  impossible  to  say. 
Perhaps  Baal-zebub  had  at  the  time  a 
special  reputation  for  giving  oracular  re- 
sponses. Perhaps  the  Ekron  temple  was, 
of  all  the  ancient  sites  of  the  Baal-worship, 
the  one  with  which  he  could  most  readily 
communicate.  Philistia  lay  nearer  to  Samaria 
than  Phoenicia  did,  and  of  the  Philistine 
towns  Ekron  (now  Ahir)  was  the  most 
northern,  and  so  the  nearest.  "  Baal-zebub  " 
has  been  thought  by  some  to  be  equivalent 
to  " Beel-samen,"  "the  lord  of  heaven"— a 
divine  title  well  known  to  the  Phoenicians; 
but  this  view  is  etymologically  unsound, 
since  zebub  cannot  possibly  mean  "  heaven." 
"  Baal-zebub  "  is  "  the  lord  of  flies  " — either 
the  god  who  sends  them  as  a  plague  on  any 
nation  that  offends  him  (comp.  Exod.  vilL 
21 — 31),  or  the  god  who  averts  them  from 
his  votaries  and  favourites,  an  equivalent  of 
the  Greek  Zeiis  i.ir6fivios,  or  the  Roman 
"Jupiter  Myiagrus,"  flies  being  in  the  East 
not  nnfrequently  a  terrible  plague.  The 
Beptuagint  translation,  Bda\-ij.vtav,  though 
inaoeurate,.8hows  an  appreciation  of  the  true 
etymology.  Of  this  disease;  rather,  of  thii 
illneai  (Ik  T^t  h^jiuaTias  /xov  Twlnris,  LXX.). 
Yer.  3. — ^The  angel  of  the  Lord.  It  would 
be  better  to  translate,  with  the  LXX.,  an 
angel  (477^X01,  not  i  &yy(\os).  An  angel 
had  appeared  to  Elijah  on  a  previous  occa- 
sion  (1  Kings  xix.  5, 7).  Elijah  the  Tishbite 
(comp.  1  Kings  xvii.  1 ;  xxi.  17,  28 ;  oh.  i.  8; 
and  for  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  hat- 
Tiishbi,  see  the  oomment  on  1  Kings  xvii.  1). 
Arise,  go  up.  Elijah  was,  apparently,  in 
the  low  tract  of  the  Shefelah,  or  in  Sharon, 
when  the  messengers  started,  and  was  thus 
commanded  to  "  go  up  "  and  meet  them,  or 
intercept  tliem  on  their  journey  before  they 
descended  into  the  plain.  God  would  not 
have  the  insult  to  his  majesty  carried  out. 
Is  it  not  because  there  is  not  a  Qod  in  Israeli 
rather.  Is  it  that  there  is  no  God  at  all  in 
Israel  1  The  double  negative  is  intensitive, 
and  implies  that  the  king's  consultation  of 
Baal-zebub,  god  of  Ekron,  is  a  complete  and 
absolute  denial  of  the  Divinity  of  Jehovah. 
To  consult  a  foreign  oracle  is  equivalent  to 
saying  that  the  voice  of  God  is  wholly  silent 
in  one's  own  land.  This  was  going  further 
in  apostasy  than  Ahab  had  gone  (see  1  Kings 
xxii.  6—9). 

'  Ver.  4.— Now  therefore.  The  word  trans- 
lated "therefore"  (p^)  is  emphatic,  and 
I  **  for  this  reason,"  "  on  thiB  account." 


Because  Ahaziah  had  apostatized  from  God, 
God  sentenced  him  to  die  from  the  effects  of 
his  fall,  and  not  to  recover.  It  is  implied 
that  he  might  have  recovered  if  he  had 
acted  otherwise.  And  Elijah  departed;  i.e. 
quitted  the  messengers,  showing  that  his 
errand  was  accomplished — he  had  said  all 
that  he  was  commissioned  to  say. 

Ver.  8. — And  when  the  messengers  turned 
haok;  rather,  when  the  messengers  returned  ; 
i.e.  when  they  reached  the  presence  of 
Ahaziah,  he  perceived  at  onoe  that  they 
could  not  have  been  to  Ekron  and  come 
back  in  the  time.  He  therefore  inquired  of 
them,  Why  are  ye  now  turned  back  1  "  Why 
have  ye  not  completed  your  journey?" 

Yer.  6. — There  came  a  man.  It  is  not 
likely  that  the  messengers  did  not  know 
Elijah  by  sight.  He  was  too  prominent  a 
person  in  the  history  of  the  time,  and  too 
remarkable  in  his  appearance,  not  to  have 
been  recognized,  at  any  rate  by  some  of 
them.  But  they  thought  it  best  to  keep 
back  the  prophet's  name,  and  to  call  him 
simply  "a  man"  ('isft)— perhaps  actuated 
by  good  ^ill  towards  Elijah,  perhaps  by  a 
fear  for  their  own  safety,  such  as  had  been 
felt  by  Obadiah  (1  Kings  xviii.  8—14). 

Yer.  7. — What  manner  of  man  was  he? 
literally,  what  was  the  manner  of  the  man  t 
What  was  his  appearance?  Were  there  any 
marks  about  him  by  which  he  might  be 
recognized  and  known?  Ahaziah  may  have 
already  suspected  that  the  man  who  had 
denounced  woe  on  him  would  be  the  same 
who  had  denounced  woe  on  his  father  (see 
1  Kings  xxi.  20—22). 

Yer.  8. — A  hairy  man;  literally,  a  lord 
of  hair  (l^t?  ^J)a).  Some  take  the  meaning 
to  be  that  he  was  rough  and  unkempt,  with 
his  hair  and  beard  long ;  and  so  the  LXX., 
who  give  dv^p  Sacris.  But  the  more  usual 
explunation  is  that  he  wore  a  shaggy  coat 
of  untanned  skin,  with  the  hair  outward. 
Such  a  garment  seems  certainly  to  have 
been  worn  by  the  later  prophets  (Zech.  xiii. 
4 ;  Matt.  iiL  4),  and  to  have  been  regarded 
as  a  sign  of  tlieir  profession.  But  there  is 
no  positive  evidence  tliat  the  dress  had  been 
adopted  by  Isaiah's  time.  Girt  with  a  girdle 
of  leather.  Genemlly  the  Israelites  wore 
girdles  of  a  soft  material,  as  linoi>  or  cotton. 
The  "curious  gil:dle"  of  the  high  priest's 
ephod  was  of  "fine  twined  linen,"  em- 
broidered with  gold,  and  blue,  and  purple, 
and  scarlet  (Exod.  xxviii.  8).  Girdles  of 
leather,  rough  and  uncomfortable,  would 
only  be  worn  by  the  very  poor  and  by  the 
ascetic.  Elijah  may  have  adopted  his  rough 
and  coarse  costume,  either  to  show  contempt 
for  things  earthly,  as  Hen^stenberg  thinks ; 
or  as  a  penitential  garb  indicating  sorrow 
for  the  sins  of  the  people,  as  Keil  supposes; 
or  simple  to  ohastise  and  rabdue  the  flesh, 


«a,i.l— 18.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGa 


•s  other  ascetics-  It  is  Elijah  the  Tishbite. 
The  description  giren  is  enough.  The  king 
has  no  longer  any  doubt.  His  suspicion  is 
turned  into  ceitainty.  There  Is  no  living 
person  but  Elijah  who  would  at  once  have 
the  boldness  to  prophesy  the  death  of  the 
king,  and  would  wear  such  a  costume  as 
described.  Elijah  is,  of  course,  bis  enemy, 
as  he  had  been  bis  father's  "enemy" 
(1  Kings  xxi.  20),  and  will  wish  hira  ill,  and 
prophesy  accordingly,  the  wish  being  "father 
to  the  thought."  It  is  not  improbable  that 
Elijah  had  withdrawn  himself  into  obscurity 
on  the  accession  of  Ahaziah,  or  at  any  rate 
on  his  exhibition  of  strong  idolatrous  pro- 
clivities (Ewald),  as  he  had  done  on  more 
than  one  occasion  from  Ahab  (1  Kings  xvii. 
10;  xix.  3 — 8).  Ahaziah  may  have  been 
long  wishing  to  arrest  and  imprison  him, 
and  now  thought  he  saw  his  opportunity. 

Yer.  9. — ^Ihe  king  sent  nnto  him  a  captain 
of  fifty.  "  Captains  of  fifties  "  were  first  in 
stituted  in  the  wilderness  by  the  advice  of 
Jetbro  (Exod.  xviii.  21 — 25).  Though  not 
expressly  mentioned  in  the  military  organi- 
lation  of  David,  they  probably  formed  a  part 
of  it,  and  so  passed  into  the  institutions  of 
the  kingdom  of  Israel.  With  his  fifty. 
Some  recognition  of  Elijah's  superhuman 
power  would  seem  to  have  led  Ahaziah  to 
send  so  large  a  body.  His  doing  so  was  a 
sort  of  challenge  to  the  prophet  to  show 
whether  Ahaziah  or  the  God  whom  he 
represented  was  the  stronger.  The  circum- 
stances recall  those  of  the  "band  of  men 
and  officers  from  the  chief  priests  and 
Pharisees"  (John  xviii.  3),  which  was  sent, 
"  with  swords  and  staves,"  to  arrest  another 
righteous  Person.  He  sat  on  the  top  of  a 
hill;  literally,  on  the  top  of  the  hill  (iirl 
r^s  Kopv<j)7}s  TOW  ipovs,  LXX.).  The  high 
ground  where  Elijah  hfid  met  the  messengers 
(ver.  3)  seems  to  be  intended.  When  they 
were  gone,  the  prophet  took  his  seat  on  the 
highest  point,  conspicuous  on  all  sides,  so 
avoiding  any  attempt  at  concealment,  and 
awaiting  the  next  step  that  the  king  would 
take,  calmly  and  quietly.  He  spake  unto 
him,  Then  man  of  God.  The  captain  is 
thought  by  some  to  have  spoken  ironically; 
but  there  is  no  evidence  of  this.  The 
address  is  respectful,  submissive.  The  mi- 
raculous powers  of  Elijah  (1  Kings  xvii.  22 ; 
xviii.  38)  were  probably  known  to  the  officer, 
who  hoped  by  the  tone  of  his  address  to 
escape  the  prophet's  nnpier.  In  the  same 
spirit  he  avoids  issuing  any  command  of  hia 
own,  and  prefers  simply  to  deliver  the 
king's  command — ^Ihe  kug  hath  said,  Come 
down. 

Ver.  10. — And  Elijah  answered  ...  let 
fire  come  down.  The  LXX.  render,  Kwra- 
fiifffiTai  irSp — ^"flre  will  come  down;"  and 
10  some  modems,  who  are  anxious  to  clear 


the  prophet  of  the  charges  of  omelty  and 
bloodtbirstiness  which  have  been  brought 
against  him.  But  there  is  no  need  of  alter- 
ing the  translation.  Elijah  undoubtedly 
"  commanded  fire  to  come  down  from 
heaven "  (Luke  ix.  54),  or,  in  other  words, 
prayed  to  God  that  it  might  come  down, 
and  in  answer  to  his  prayer  the  fire  fell. 
The  narrative  may  be  set  aside  as  an 
embellishment  of  later  times,  having  no 
historical  foundation,  by  those  who  (like 
Ewald)  deny  that  miracles  are  possible ; 
but,  if  it  be  accepted,  it  must  be  accepted  as 
it  stands,  and  Elijah  must  be  regarded,  not 
as  having  merely  prophesied  a  result,  but 
as  having  been  instrumental  in  producing 
it.  We  must  judge  Elijah,  not  by  the  ideas 
of  our  own  day,  but  by  those  of  the  age 
wherein  he  lived.  He  was  raised  up  to 
vindicate  God's  honour,  to  check  and  punish 
idolatry,  to  keep  alive  a  faithful  remnant  in 
Israel,  when  all  the  powers  of  the  earth 
were  leagued  together  to  destroy  and  smother 
true  religion.  He  was  an  embodiment  of 
the  Law— of  absolute,  strict,  severe  justice. 
The  fiiir  face  of  mercy  was  not  revealed  to 
him.  Already,  at  Carmel,  he  had  executed 
tlie  Divine  vengeance  on  idolaters  after  an 
exemplary  fashion  (1  Kings  xviii.  40).  Now, 
Aliaziali,  the  son  of  the  wicked  Jezebel,  had 
challenged  Jehovah  to  a  trial  of  strength  by 
first  ignoring  him,  and  then  sending  a  troop 
of  soldiers  to  arrest  his  prophet.  Was  Elijah 
to  succumb  without  an  effort,  or  was  he  to 
vindicate  the  majesty  and  honour  of  Jeho- 
vah ?  He  had  no  power  of  himself  to  do 
either  good  or  harm.  He  could  but  pray  to 
Jehovah,  and  Jehovah,  in  his  wisdom  and 
perfect  goodness,  would  either  grant  or  refuse 
his  prayer.  If  he  granted  it,  the  punish- 
ment inflicted  would  not  be  Elijah's  work, 
but  his.  To  tax  Elijah  with  cruelty  is  to 
involve  God  in  the  charge.  God  regarded 
it  as  a  fitting  time  for  making  a  signal 
example,  and,  so  regarding  it,  he  inspired  a 
spirit  of  indignation  in  the  breast  of  his 
prophet,  who  thereupon  made  the  prayer 
which  he  saw  fit  to  answer.  The  judgment 
was  in  accordance  with  the  general  tone 
and  tenor  of  the  Law,  which  assigns  "  tribu- 
lation and  anguish  to  every  soul  of  man  that 
doeth  evil"  (Eom.  ii.  9),  and  visits  with 
death  every  act  of  reliellion  against  God. 
There  came  down  fire.  Josephns  says  that 
the  "  fire  "  was  a  flash  of  lightning  (TrpriaTijp), 
and  so  the  commentators  generally. 

Ver.  11. — Again  also ;  rather,  and  again 
(see  the  Bevised  Version).  He  answered 
and  said ;  rather,  he  epohe  and  said  Ci\d\ji<re 
Kol  eTire,  LXX.).  Como  down  quickly.  _  Tho 
king  hais  grown  impatient.  It  is  conceivable 
that  the  death  of  the  flrst  captain  with  his 
band  of  fifty  had  been  kept  from  him, 
and  that  he  was  only  awafe  it  an  tmao- 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGa  [oh.  1. 1—18 


•onntable  dal^.  H«  Aerefeie  ahanges  his 
erdar  fiwm  "Osiim  down"  to  **Ooma  down 
futob^" 

Yer.  18.— A  oaptein  of  fha  third  fifty; 
mtfaer,  the  mptain  of  a  third,  fifty  (SM  tho 
Bevised  Yenion).  ThU  captain  went  vf— 
i.a.  aseended  tba  hill  on  which  Elijah  waa 
still  seated,  and  there  fell  on  hia  knees,  or 
bowed  himself  down,  before  the  prophet,  as 
suppliants  were  wont  to  do,  beseeching  his 
oompasBion.  The  fate  of  the  two  former 
captains  had  become  known  to  him  by  some 
means  or  other,  and  this  induced  him  to 
assume  an  attitude,  not  of  command,  but  of 
submission.  He  acknowledged  that  the 
prophet  held  his  life  and  the  lives  of  his 
fifty  men  at  his  free  disposal,  and  begged 
that  they  might  be  preoioos  in  his  sight,  or, 
in  other  words,  that  he  would  spare  them. 
What  response  Elijah  would  have  made,  had 
he  been  left  to  hmiself,  is  uncertain.  But 
ha  was  not  left  to  himself.  An  angel  of 
God  again  appealed  to  him,  and  directed  his 
course  of  action. 

Yer.  15. — Go  down  with  him:  be  not  afraid 
of  him;  t'.«.  "descend  the  hill  with  him — 
have  no  fear  of  him,  accompany  him  to  the 
presenee  of  the  king;  do  my  will,  and  there 
shall  no  harm  happen  unto  thee."  And  he 
arose,  and  went  down.  Elijah  showed  no 
hesitation,  no  fear,  no  undue  regard  for  his 
own  pergonal  safety.  He  had  b^n  contend- 
ing for  God's  honour,  not  for  his  own  ad- 
vantage. Now  that  God  bade  him  contend 
no  more,  but  yield,  he  complied  promptly, 
and  ceased  all  resistance. 

Yer.  16. — He  said  nnto  him ;  t.*.  Elijah 
said  to  the  king.  Introduced  into  the  royal 
presence,  as  a  prisoner,  perhaps  fettered  and 
eiiained,  the  prophet  in  no  way  lowered  his 
tone  or  abated  &om  the  sererity  of  his 
speech.  Distinctly,  in  the  plainest  possible 
words,  he  warned  the  monarch  that  his  end 
approached — he  would  never  quit  the  bed 
whereon  he  lay,  but,  because  he  had  insulted 
Jehovah  by  sending  to  consult  the  god  of 
Ekron,  would  surely  die.  Apparently  the 
king,  abashed  and  confounded,  released  the 

?rophet,  and  allowed  him  to  go  his  way. 
has  saith  the  Lord,  Elijah  rehearses  the 
words  of  the  message  which  he  had  sent  by 
the  first  of  the  three  captains  (see  ver.  6}—- 
Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Forasmnoh  as  thov 
hast  sent  messengers  to  inquire  of  Baal- 
zebnb  the  god  of  Ekron,  is  it  not  because 
there  is  no  Ood  in  Israel  to  inquire  of  his 
word !  Therefore  thou  shalt  not  come  down 
off  that  bed  on  which  thou  art  gone  np,  but 
Shalt  surely  die.  Gtod's  determinations  are 
nnaltorabl*. 

Yer.  Via. — So  he  died  according  to  the 
word  of  the  lord  which  El^ah  had  spoken. 
N«t  only  did  b*  4i«  ia  aonseanence  of  his 
&U  witlumt  ooM  quitting  id*  D«d,  but  his 


death  was,  as  BUjah  had  sdd,  •  Jndgment 
on  his  sin  in  sendiag  to  consult  Baal-cebab. 

Bbiqn  of  Jehobam. 

Ver,  176. —  And  Jehoram  —  or,  Joram, 
LXX.,  "whom  Jehovah  exalts;"  another 
evidence  that  Ahab  did  not  regard  himself 
as  having  abandoned  altogether  the  worship 
of  Jehovah  (see  the  comment  on  1  Kings  xxii. 

40) reigned  in  his  stead  ("his  brother," 

rns,  has  probably  fallen  out  after  "Jeho- 
ram," and  requires  to  be  inserted  in  order 
to  give  force  to  the  last  clause  of  the  verse) 
in  the  second  year  of  Jehoram  the  son  of 
Jehoshaphat  King  of  Judah.  In  ch.  iii.  1  it 
is  said  that  Jehoram,  the  sou  of  Ahab  and 
brother  of  Ahaziah,  began  to  reign  over 
Israel  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  Jehoshaphat 
himself.  The  apparent  discrepancy  is  recon- 
ciled by  supposing  that  Jehoshaphat  asso- 
ciated his  son  Jehoram  in  the  kmgdom  in 
his  seventeenth  year,  when  he  was  about  to 
enter  upon  the  Syrian  war,  so  that  the 
eighteenth  year  m  Jehoshaphat  was  also 
the  second  year  of  Jehoram.  It  is  certain 
that  assoeiation  was  largely  piaotiaed  in 
Egypt  at  a  date  long  anterior  to  Jehosha- 
phat, and  David's  preclamation  of  Solomon 
as  king  was  an  association,  so  that  the  expla- 
nation is  not  untenable.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  difSonlties  of  the  chronology  of  2  Kings 
are  so  nnmerous  and  so  great  as  to  defy  com- 
plete reconciliation,  and  to  lead  to  a  suspicion 
that  the  numbers  have  either  suffered  ex- 
tensive oomiption,  or  have  been  manipulated 
by  an  nnskUful  reviser  (see  Introduction, 
p.  iii.).  Because  he  had  n«  son;  t'.e.  becansa 
he,  Ahaziah,  had  no  son,  he  was  snooeeded 
by  his  younger  brother,  Jehoram. 

Yer.  18.— Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Ahaziah  which  ha  did.  These  may  have 
included  some  months  of  warfare  against 
Mesha,  King  of  Moab,  who  seems  to  have 
rebelled  at  the  very  beginning  of  Ahaziah's 
reign  (ver.  1  and  oh.  iii.  0).  Masha's  war 
of  independence  consisted  of  a  succession  of 
sieves,  whereby  he  recovered  one  by  one  the 
various  strongholds  in  his  territory,  which 
were  occupied  by  the  Israelites— Medeba, 
Ataroth,  Kobe,  Jahaz,  Horonaim,  and  others 
— expelling  the  foreign  garrisons,  rebuild- 
ing or  strengthening  the  fortifications,  and 
occupying  the  cities  by  garrisons  of  his  own. 
On  one  oceasion,  at  the  siege  of  Nebo,  he 
declares  that  he  killed  seven  thousand  men. 
He  found  in  the  town  a  place  of  worship 
oontaining  vessels,  which  he  rvcarded  as 
"  vessels  of  Jehovah"  (Moabite  Stone,  line 
18);  these  he  took,  kdA  dedieated  them  to 
Ohemosh,  the  speoial  god  of  Moab.  How 
much  of  the  war  fell  into  the  reign  of  Aha- 
ziah, and  how  mack  isio  that  of  Jehoram 
his  brothar,  is   nnaaitaia.    An  they  sat 


.1.1—18.]  THB  SS(X)liID  BOOK  OF  THE  UNGB, 


wiitton  in  the  book  of  the  ehionielei  of  tha 
Idngf  of  Israel  t  Mesha'e  stone  is  •  striking 
testimony  to  the  eontcmponiry  teeord  of 


hlstorioal  eyente  hj  tke  Falestiiiiaa  moBarohi 
of  the  timet  whieh  has  sometiaei  bees 
doubted. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 18. — 3%«  i^ort  reign  of  Ahaziah  t  hit  titu,  and  their  punithmmtt.  Vm 
homiletic  purposes  we  must  attach  to  this  chapter  the  last  three  verses  of  the  First 
Book  of  the  Kings.  We  find  in  that  passage  a  short  but  very  complete  account  of  the 
general  character  of  Ahaziah's  sins ;  we  find  in  this  chapter  a  tolerably  full  account  of 
one  great  act  of  nn,  and  a  clear  declaration  of  the  manner  in  which  that  act  and  his 
other  sins  were  punished.  It  will  he  weU  to  consider  separately  (1)  the  sins;  (2) 
their  aggravations;  and  (3)  their  punishment. 

L  T^K  BINS.  These  were  three  in  number :  (1)  walking  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam 
the  son  of  Nebat  (1  Kings  xxiL  62),  or  maintaining  the  c^-worship — the  hereditary 
will-worship  of  the  northern  kingdom,  introduced  by  Jeroboam,  the  first  non-DaTidic 
king,  and  thenceforth  continued  uninterruptedly  by  each  successive  Israelite  monarch ; 
(2)  walking  in  the  way  of  his  father — neglecting  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  persecuting 
his  prophets,  practically  proscribing  the  old  religion,  and  probably  ruling  with  harsh- 
ness and  cruelty ;  and  (3)  walking  in  the  way  of  his  mother — "  serving  Baal  and 
worshipping  him  "  (1  Kings  xxii.  63),  maintaining  the  Fhcenician  sensualistio  cult, 
which  Jezebel  had  introduced  from  Zidon  (1  Kings  xvi.  31),  and  which  was  of  a  most 
demoralizing  and  debasing  character.  It  was,  primarily,  under  this  third  head  that 
the  special  act  of  sin  fell  which  forms  the  main  subject  of  ch.  i. 

n.  Tbeib  agobayaticns.  Ahaziah  might  have  been  expected  to  have  learnt 
wisdom  by  experience,  to  have  taken  to  heart  the  warning  fiunished  by  his  father's 
life  and  death,  and  at  least  to  have  avoided  the  sins  which  had  brought  down  upon  the 
king  and  upon  the  kingdom  so  terrible  a  blow,  so  signal  and  severe  a  punishment. 
But,  on  the  contrary,  he  went  beyond  his  father  in  the  great  sin  for  which  his  father 
was  punished,  viz.  apostasy  from  Jehovah  to  BaaL  Ahab  had  always  been  half-hearted 
in  his  irreligion — he  would,  and  he  would  not ;  he  strove  to  combine  an  acknowledg- 
ment of  Jehovah  with  a  practical  devotion  to  his  rival ;  he  gave  both  his  sons  names 
which  placed  them  under  the  protection  of  Israel's  true  God ;  he  at  one  time  "  humbled 
himself  before  Jehovah,"  and  "  fasted,  and  lay  in  sackcloth,  and  went  softly  "  (1  Kings 
zxi.  27,  29);  be  consented  to  inquire  of  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  at  the  request  of 
Jehoshaphat  (1  Kings  xxii.  9) ;  he  had  no  dealings,  that  we  know  of,  with  the  foreign 
Baalistic  temples  or  oracles  which  abounded  in  Phoenicia  and  Philistia,  and  thus  did 
not,  at  any  rate,  parade  his  contempt  of  Jehovah  in  the  eyes  of  the  adjoining  nations. 
Ahaziah  acted  differently.  He  was  a  consistent,  thorough-faced,  out-and-out  idolater. 
Jehovah  was  nothing  to  him ;  Baal  was  everything.  We  ought,  perhaps,  to  view  it  as 
some  extenuation  of  his  sin  that  he  would  naturally  be  influenced  to  some  extent  by 
his  mother,  whatever  her  character,  and  that  the  strong,  firm,  and  fierce  character  of 
Jezebel  would  naturally  influence  him  to  a  large  extent.  But  men  are  not  mere 
creatures  of  circumstances ;  they  have  the  power  to  resist  influences  no  less  than  to 
yield  to  them,  and  are  bound  to  consider  the  nature  of  the  influences  surrounding 
them,  and  to  resist  such  as  they  perceive  to  be  bad.  There  is  no  evidence  that 
Ahaziah  offered  any  resistance  at  all  to  Jezebel's  influences.  He  was  the  weak  son  of 
a  wicked  mother,  and  simply  "  walked  in  her  way."  As  Ewald  says,  he  "  exhibited 
a  far  more  decided  inclination  than  Ahab  had  done  to  all  sorts  of  heathenish  super- 
stitions "  ('  History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  77,  Eng.  trans.).  He  made  a  parade  of  his 
Baalistic  leanings.  He  was  obdurate  and  persistent,  and  despised  warning  after  warn- 
ing. A  cruel  hardness  of  heart,  quite  equal  to  his  mother's,  is  shown  in  his  exposing 
to  probable  death  a  second  and  a  third  body  of  fifty  men,  rather  than  submit  to  Elijah, 
and  own  himself  in  the  wrong.  Thus  he  would  appear  to  have  reached,  in  his  com- 
paratively short  life,  a  deeper  depth  of  moral  evil  than  his  father  in  his  longer  one. 

IIL  Thbib  fosibhmbnt.  The  revolt  of  the  subject  kingdom  of  Moab  was  the  first 
punishment  which  befell  the  apostate  king.  He  had  to  determine,  on  ascendii^  the 
throne,  what  line  he  would  take  in  religious  matters — whether  he  would  maintain  or 
kbolish  the  Batd-wordbip,  whether  he  would  maintain  or  abolish  the  worship  of  the 


tHE  SECOND  BOOK  OS"  THE  KINGS.  [oh.lI— la 


calveB,  whether  he  would  persecute  or  protect  the  adherents  of  the  Jeh?^"**"  ^^'S^"": 
He  decided  to  «  walk  m  the  way  of  his^father  and  of  his  mother,"  and  »*  o°?! J^e  fost 
blow  fell  Moab  revolted,  and  was  successful.  The  mere  attempt  at  revolt  might  have 
happened  in  any  case,  fo^  Mesha  would  naturally  have  seized  such  an  opportmiit^  as 
the  death  of  Ahab  under  such  circumstances  offered.  But  the  God  of  battles  detenmnes 
success  or  failure,  and  Mesha's  unbroken  series  of  victories  (Moabite  Stone,  lines 
9—33)  were  the  consequence  of  Ahaziah's  guilt.  As  usual,  «  for  the  king's  offence  the 
people  bled."  Seven  thousand  Israelite  warriors  were  destroyed  in  one  siege;  tUe 
women  and  children  were  taken  prisoners,  and  "devoted  to  Ashtar-Chemosh.  There 
was  widespread  and  extreme  suffering.  This  should  not  surprise  us.  IhereU  a 
solidarity  between  a  king  and  his  people,  which  unites  them  almost  indissolubly  in 
their  fortunes  and  in  their  sins.  The  people  follow  the  king's  example,  and,  partaking 
in  his  guilt,  naturally  and  justly  partake  in  his  punishment  (see  the  homiletics  on 
1  Kings  xxii.,  pp.  642,  543).  The  king's  second  punishment  was  personal  It  was 
permitted  that  an  accident  should  befall  him.  Sitting  in  an  upper  chamber,  t.e.  in  one 
not  upon  the  ground  floor,  which  had  a  latticed  window,  opening  out  probably  on  a 
garden,  he  rashly  leant  against  it,  when  the  fastenings  or  the  woodwork  gave  way,  and 
he  was  precipitated  to  the  ground.  The  hurt  received  was  serious,  and  forced  him  to 
take  to  his  bed,  where  he  lay  probably  in  much  pain  and  discomfort.  Here  was  an 
op]  ortunity  for  considering  his  ways,  for  asking  himself  what  was  amiss  in  them,  for 
mourning  over  the  sins  which  he  had  committed  (1  Kings  xxiL  52,  53),  and  renouncing 
them  and  turning  away  from  them.  God's  judgments  are  sent  to  lead  men  to  repent- 
ance. Prolonged  lying  on  a  sick-bed  is  especially  favourable  to  meditation,  self- 
examination,  self-condemnation,  penitence.  But  Ahaziah  was  obdurate.  He  thought 
nothing  of  the  goodness  of  God  in  sparing  his  life,  for. the  faU  might  well  have  been 
instantaneously  fatal ;  he  thought  nothing  of  God's  mercy  in  giving  him  a  time  for 
reflection  and  amendment.  He  was  merely  impatient  of  bis  affliction,  and  anxious  to 
have  done  with  it.  And  in  his  impatience  and  obduracy  he  added  sin  to  sin.  Ignoring 
Jehovah  and  his  prophets,  through  whom  it  was  always  possible  to  "  inquire  of  the 
Lord  "  (1  Kings  xxii.  5 — 28),  he  makes  his  appeal  to  Baal.  It  is  an  ostentatious  appeal. 
He  sends  a  public  embassy  to  consult  the  Baal  of  a  foreign  town.  Then  his  final 
punishment  is  decreed.  Hitherto  bis  life  had  hung  in  the  balance — ^his  fate  had  been 
in  the  hands  of  him  with  whom  are  the  issues  of  life  and  death.  Now  his  own  act 
had  shut  the  gate  of  mercy.  The  sentence  went  forth  from  the  mouth  of  God's  prophet, 
"  Thou  shalt  not  come  down  off  that  bed  on  which  thou  art  gone  up,  but  shalt  surely 
die."  Cut  off  in  his  youth,  childless  (ver.  17),  he  pays  the  fitting  penalty  of  obstinate 
persistence  in  sin,  and,  after  weeks  or  months  of  suffering,  "  goes  to  hia  own  place." 
He  "  whom  Jehovah  upholds  "  becomes  "  he  whom  Jehovah  destroys  "—destroys  after 
a  short  reign  of  little  more  than  a  year — a  reign  disgraceful  to  himself  and  disastrous 
to  his  country. 

Vers.  9 — 16. — The  "spirit  we  are  of"— the  old  dispensation  and  the  new.  L 
The  spirit  op  the  old  dispensation.  The  spirit  of  the  Law  was  strict,  stern, 
inexorable  justice.  "Cursed  be  the  man  that  maketh  any  graven  or  molten  image. 
.  .  .  Cursed  be  he  that  setteth  light  by  his  father  or  his  mother.  .  .  .  Cursed  be  he  that 
removeth  his  neighbour's  landmark,"  etc.  (Deut.  xxvii.  15—26);  "He  that  curseth 
father  or  mother,  let  him  die  the  death  "  (Bxod.  xxi.  17) ;  "  Eye  for  eye,  tooth  for 
tooth,  hand  lor  hand,  foot  for  foot,  burning  for  burning,  wound  for  woupd,  stripe  for 
stripe"  (Exod.  xxi.  24,  25);  "He  that  smiteth  a  man,  so  that  he  die,  shall  surely  be 
put  to  death "  (Exod.  xxi.  12) ;  "  He  that  smiteth  his  father  or  his  mother,  shall 
surely  be  put  to  death"  (Exod.  xxi.  15);  "He  that  stealeth  a  man,  and  selleth  him, 
shall  surely  be  put  to  death"  (Exod.  xxi.  16);  "Thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  witch  to 
hve  "  (Exod.  xxii.  18) ;  "  Whosoever  lieth  with  a  beast  shall  surely  be  put  to  death  " 
(Exod.  xxii.  19) ;  "  He  that  sacrificeth  unto  any  god,  save  unto  the  Lord  only,  he 
•hall  be  utterly  destroyed  "  (Exod.  xxii.  20),  etc.  Man  was  so  far  gone  from  original 
righteousness,  had  so  corrupted  and  depraved  himself,  that  only  by  the  strictest  possible 
system,  by  the  most  solemn  warnings,  the  most  awful  threats,  and  the  sternest  possible 
execution  of  the  threats  when  the  occasion  came,  could  wickedness  be  repressed  crim* 
jwevented  from  becoming  rampant,  mankind  be  reclaimed,  society  saved.    H«ne«  th« 


flat  1—18.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


severity  of  the  Mosaic  code,  the  frequency  of  the  penalty  of  death,  and  the  ■trictneis 
with  which  the  penalty  was  in  almost  every  case  exacted.  The  first  idolatry  was 
punished  by  the  death 'of  three  thousand  by  the  sword  (Exod.  xxxii.  28).  Nadab  and 
Abihu,  for  offering  strange  fire,  were  destroyed  by  fire  from  heaven  (Lev.  x.  1,  2). 
When  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  rebelled  against  Moses,  the  earth  gaped  and 
swallowed  them  up  (Numb.  xvi.  32).  The  iniquity  of  Peor  was  avenged  by  the 
slaughter  of  all  the  heads  of  the  people  (Numb.  xxv.  4,  5).  The  sin  of  Gibeah  cost 
the  lives  of  twenty-five  thousand  Benjamites  (Judg.  xx.  46).  Elijah,  in  calling  down 
fire  from  heaven  upon  the  minions  of  an  idolatrous  tyrant  sent  to  arrest  him  for 
declaring  to  their  master  the  sentence  of  Jehovah,  was  but  acting  in  the  general  spirit 
of  the  Law,  which  regarded  all  opposition  to  Jehovah  as  deserving  of  death,  and  looked 
upon  the  inspired  prophets  of  God  as  the  ministers  of  an  avenging  righteuusness. 
From  time  to  time  some  signal  display  of  Jehovah's  anger  against  rebels  and  his  power 
to  punish  them  was  requisite  to  preserve  among  the  people  any  respect  or  reverence  at 
all  for  true  religion ;  and  Elijah  deemed  that  the  time  for  such  a  display  was  now  come. 
That  the  fire  fell  at  his  word  showed  that  he  had  judged  aright,  and  that  his  will 
reflected  the  Divine  will  and  was  in  unison  with  it. 

n.  The  spirit  of  the  new  dispensation.  The  new  dispensation  opened  with  the 
proclamation  of  "  peace  on  earth,  good  will  toward  men  "  (Luke  ii.  14).  The  curses 
of  the  Law  were  replaced  by  the  Beatitudes"  (Matt.  v.  3—10).  The  gentle  and  tender 
Jesus  destroyed  nothing  but  a  single  senseless  tree  (Matt.  xxi.  19).  He  went  about 
doing  good.  He  was  "^ent  to  heal  the  broken-hearted,  to  preach  deliverance  to  the 
captives,  and'  recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind,  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  were  braised, 
to  preach  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  "  (Luke  iv.  18,  19).  When  men  rose  up 
against  him,  when  hia  life  was  attempted,  before  his  hour  was  come,  he  wat  content 
by  an  exertion  of  his  miraculous  power  to  withdraw  himself,  to  pass  through  their 
midst,  and  go  his  way.  On  one  occasion  he  himself  pointed  tiie  contrast  between  the 
two  dispensations  in  the  mobt  distinct  and  remarkable  manner.  It  was  when  he  and 
his  disciples  were  proceeding  on  a  journey  through  this  very  district  of  Samarin,  where 
P^lijah  had  shown  forth  the  justice  of  God,  that  his  disciples,  James  and  John,  the 
"  Sons  of  Thunder,"  as  they  were  called,  desired  to  repeat  the  Tishbite's  act  for  the 
punishment  of  some  Samaritans  who  would  not  permit  him  to  enter  their  village. 
"  Lord,"  they  said,  "  wilt  thou  that  we  command  fire  to  come  down  firom  heaven,  and 
consume  them,  even  as  Elias  did  ?  "  But  they  little  knew  the  Master  they  addressed. 
Jesus  "  turned  and  rebuked  them,  and  said.  Ye  know  not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye  are 
of.  For  the  Son  of  man  is  not  come  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them.  And 
they  went  to  another  village  "  (Luke  ix.  51 — 56).  "  It  was,"  remarks  Archbishop 
Trench,  "  as  if  he  had  said,  '  Te  are  mistaking  and  confounding  the  different  standing- 
points  of  the  old  and  new  covenants,  taking  your  stand  upon  the  old — ^that  of  an 
avenging  righteousness,  when  you  should  rejoice  to  take  it  upon  the  new — that  of  a 
forgiving  love ' "  ('  Notes  on  the  Miracles,'  ch.  iv.  p.  36,  note).  The  spirit  of  the 
Christian  dispensation  is  seen  especially  in  such  commands  as  the  following :  "  Resiit 
not  evil  but  whosoever  shall  smite  thee  on  thy  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  othar 
also  "  (Matt.  v.  39) ;  "  Love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse  you,  do  good  to  them 
that  hate  yon,  and  pray  for  them  which  despitefuUy  use  you  and  persecute  you" 
(Matt.  V.  44) ;  "  Be  kin(Uy  afiectioned  one  to  another  with  brotherly  love ;  in  honour 
preferring  one  another "  (Rom.  xii.  10) ;  "  Becompense  to  no  man  evil  for  evil " 
(Rom.  xii.  17);  "Avenge  not  yourselves,  but  rather  give  place  unto  wrath:  for  it 
is  written ;  Vengeance  is  mine ;  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord.  Therefore  if  thine  enemy 
hunger,  feed  him ;  if  he  thirst,  give  him  drink :  for  in  so  doing  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of 
fire  upon  his  head.  Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with  good  "  (Rom.  xii. 
1»-21). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOSa 

Veri.  1—4. — Seeking  after  strange  gods  :  its  cause  and  consequence.  We  an  here 
introduced  to  a  kingly  home.  All  the  pomp  of  royalty  is  there.  But  it  is  not  a  happy 
home.    To  begin  with,  there  is  sickneti  in  that  home.    Royalty,  or  rank,  or  richea 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGa  [oh.i.1— W. 


cnnot  keep  sickness  out.  Ahaziah  had  W  looking  tl»!0"?li  ^J'*  T^W.h  r^ 
chamber,  or,  as  some  think,  leaning  over  the  frail  ba  uster  of  wicker-work  which  ran 
round  the  roof  on  the  inner  or  courtyard  side,  when  the  lattice-work  gav.  way,  Md  he 
was  precipitated  into  the  court  beneath  and  seriously  injured.  But  there  are  homes 
of  sickness  that  are  neyertheless  happy  homes.  The  sufferer  w  happy;  the  other 
members  of  the  family  are  happy.  Why?  Because  they  »U  know  that  Jesus  « 
there.  They  hear  his  voice  saying,  "  It  is  I :  be  not  afraid."  They  took  Christ  mto 
their  house  when  all  was  going  well  with  them,  and  they  find  that  he  does  not  leave 
them  when  sickness  comes.  But  it  was  not  so  with  Ahaziah.  How  a  man  will  bear 
sickness  depends  a  good  deal  on  what  his  life  and  character  have  been  when  he  was  m 
health.  This  is  true  physically.  It  is  true  also  in  a  moral  and  spiritual  sense.  The 
bad  man  is  generally  afrwd  of  sickness.  Yes ;  for  he  is  afraid  of  death.  What  about 
Ahaziah's  previous  history  ?  We  have  it  summed  up  in  the  closing  verses  of  1  Kings. 
"  He  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  walked  in  the  way  of  his  father,  and  in  the 
way  of  his  mother,  and  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to 
sin :  for  he  served  Baal,  and  worshipped  him,  and  provoked  to  anger  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel,  according  to  all  that  his  father  had  done."  I  Oh  I  the  tremendous  influence 
of  a  bad  example.  Ahaziah  was  in  alarm  about  this  illness.  He  wanted  to  know  if 
he  was  to  recover.  He  had  forsaken  God  when  in  health  j  perhaps  he  does  not  think 
that  God  would  hear  him  now.  Or  perhaps  he  has  been  so  hardened  in  sin  that  he 
really  believes  his  heathen  god  can  help  him.  So  he  sends  messengers  to  inquire  of 
Baal-zebub  at  Ekron,  whether  he  would  recover  of  his  disease. 

I.  The  cause  of  seeeing  avteb  stbanqe  oods.  What  is  the  secret  of  that  idolatry 
which  in  all  ages  has  taken  such  a  hold  of  the  human  heart?  Why  is  it  that  such  a 
people  as  the  Hebrews,  descended  from  one  who  lived  so  entirely  under  the  power  of 
the  invisible  God  as  Abraham  did — they  who  in  their  Passover  had  a  constant  reminder 
of  God's  existence  and  power,  and  in  their  ten  commandments  a  constant  reminder  ol 
his  mind  and  will, — why  is  it  that  they  so  far  forgot  God  as  to  sink  into  the  degrading, 
worship  of  the  heathen  deities  ?  Or,  to  bring  it  more  home  to  ourselves  and  our  own 
surroundings,  why  is  it  that  men  and  women  who  know  that  Christ  died  for  them,  who 
therefore  know  the  priceless  worth  of  their  immoital  souls,  who  bear  in  the  very  name 
of  Christian  a  constant  reminder  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  who  have  in  the  precepts  of  the 
gospel  the  highest  code  of  morality  ever  taught  to  man, — why  is  it  that  they  too  forget 
God,  reject  his  mercy,  set  at  nought  his  counsels,  and  will  have  none  of  his  reproof? 
Why  is  it  that  in  our  Christian  land  so  many  are  living  in  practical  heathenism? 
Why  are  they  so  few  who  read  the  Bible,  and,  of  those  who  do  read  it,  so  few  who 
obey  its  teachings?  Why  so  many  thousands  who  never  enter  ib.e  house  of  God? 
Why  is  it  that  a  really  religious  daily  newspaper  it  is  almost  impossible  to  find,  while 
nearly  all  our  daily  newspapers  largely  devote  themselves  to  advance  the  interests  of 
the  theatre,  the  race-course,  and  the  betting-ring?  Truly  it  may  be  said  that  our 
nation  has  gone  after  strange  gods.  What  is  the  secret  of  it  all  ?  Largely  this,  the 
love  of  what  is  seen,  more  than  of  what  is  unseen.  This  is  at  the  root  of  all  idolatry.  It 
is  tliis  that  makes  men  such  an  easy  prey  to  sin.  They  are  absorbed  in  the  interests 
and  pleasures  of  the  body  only.  They  forget  the  interests  of  the  immortal  soul.  They 
live  for  the  present,  but  neglect  the  future.  They  live  for  self,  but  neglect  (Jod. 
They  lay  up  treasure  on  earth,  but  have  no  treasure  in  heaven.  We  see  this  love  of 
what  is  seen — this  going  after  strange  gods — in  much  of  the  philosophy  of  the  present 
day.  Men  deny  God,  the  God  of  the  Bible,  the  intelligent,  wise,  powerful,  provident, 
holy,  loving  Creator  of  the  universe.  And  what  do  they  substitute  for  him  ?  A  mere 
negation.  At  best  matter  or  force.  Here  plainly  they  are  absorbed  in  what  is  seen. 
They  make  a  god  of  matter.  They  forget  that  only  mind  could  produce  mind,  only 
soul  could  produce  soul,  that  only  an  intelligent  Being  could  produce  the  order  and 
control  the  workings  of  the  universe.  Strange  gods,  indeed— gods  of  which  they  have 
no  certainty— they  set  up  in  place  of  the  God  of  our  Christian  faith.  We  see  this  lova 
of  what  is  seen  ofwratihg  also  in  the  case  of  the  money-lover.  It  is  not  wrong  to  acquii« 
wealth,  provided  it  is  rightly  won  and  rightly  used.  But  there  are  many  who  make  a 
god  of  money.  It  occupies  all  their  thoughts  while  they  are  awake.  When  they  are 
asleep,  they  dream  of  it.  Even  the  sabbath,  supposed  to  be  devoted  to  the  worship 
of  Qod,  is  often  devoted  to  meditations  on  monuy  and  how  to  get  it.    Yet  even  iai 


OH.  1. 1—18.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  I 

the  present  life  there  are  things  mora  precious  than  money.  Men  who  sacrifice  every- 
thing  for  money  wxmi  find  that  they  have  lost  things  which  money  cannot  buy. 

"  The  world  with  stones  instead  of  bread 
My  hungry  soul  has  always  fed  : 
It  promised  heatth ;  in  one  short  hour 
Perished  the  fair  but  fragile  flower. 
It  promised  richei;  in  a  day 
They  made  them  wings  and  flew  away. 
It  promised /rt'etui* ;  all  sought  their  own« 
And  left  my  widowed  heart  alone." 

Aad  then  what  shall  we  say  of  the  folly  of  those  who,  while  makinp;  ample  proTislon 
for  this  short  life,  have  made  none  for  the  life  that  is  to  come?  "What  shall  it  profit 
a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?"  Let  us  beware  of 
making  a  god  of  money.  We  see  the  same  love  of  what  is  seen  entering  even  into  th« 
Church  of  Ood.  There  is  too  much  tendency,  even  in  the  Christian  Church,  to  worship 
earthly  rank,  to  attend  to  the  rich  and  neglect  the  poor.  How  often  have  our  Churches 
made  a  god  of  custom,  of  the  traditions  of  men,  of  public  opinion,  of  expediency  and 
worldly  policy  I  Images  and  pictures  are  set  up  to  aid  in  the  worship  of  him  of  whom 
it  is  said  that  "  God  is  a  Spirit :  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit 
and  in  truth." 

II.  The  oonbkquenob  or  seekino  afteb  btbanob  oods.  "But  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  said  to  Elijah  the  Tishbite,  Arise,  go  up  to  meet  the  messengers  of  the  King  of 
Samaria,  and  say  unto  them.  Is  it.  not  because  there  is  not  a  God  in  Israel,  that  ye  go 
to  inquire  of  Baal-zebub  the  god  of  Ekron  ?  Now  therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord,  Thou 
shalt  not  come  down  from  that  bed  on  which  thou  art  gone  up,  but  shalt  surely  die." 
The  strange  deity  that  Ahaziah  sought  after  had  not  served  him  much.  Strange  gods 
have  never  been  much  help  to  those  who  seek  after  them.  They  have  not  helped  the 
heathen  nations,  but  their  degrading  and  demoralizing  worship  has  always  been  a  source 
of  weakness  and  decay.  It  is  the  same  with  all  the  strange  gods  that  men  serve 
everywhere — with  all  the  passions  and  desires  to  gratify  which  they  spend  their  energies 
and  time.  We  read  of  King  Ahaz  that  he  turned  away  from  the  true  God  to  serve 
the  gods  of  Damascus,  because  Syria  enjoyed  prosperity.  He  said,  "  Because  the  gods 
of  the  kings  of  Syria  help'them,  therefore  will  I  sacrifice  to  them,  that  they  may  help 
me."  "  But,"  says  the  Bible  narrative,  "  they  were  the  ruin  of  him,  and  of  all  Israel " 
(2  Ohron.  xzviii.  23).  How  many  a  man  has  done  like  Ahaz — turned  his  back  upon 
God,  and  found  that  the  strange  gods  whom  he  served  proved  to  be  his  ruin  1  Many 
a  man  has  lived  without  God  when  in  health,  who  was  very  glad  to  seek  him  when 
sickness  came  and  death  was  drawing  nigh.  It  is  told  of  a  sceptic  called  Saunderson, 
who  was  a  great  admirer  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  talents,  but  who  made  light  of  his 
religion  when  in  health,  that  when  on  his  death-bed  he  was  heard  to  say,  in  mournful 
entreaty,  "  God  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  have  mercy  on  me  I "  But,  as  many  a  one  has 
found,  it  may  be  too  late  then  to  seek  the  Lord.  Such  are  the  consequences  of  seeking 
after  strange  gods.  The  same  message  which  was  sent  to  Ahaziah  will  one  day  be  sent 
to  us — this  part  at  least :  "  Thou  shalt  not  come  down  from  that  bed  on  which  thou 
art  gone  up,  but  shalt  surely  die."  The  way  to  prepare  fur  that  message  is  to  accept 
the  messages  of  life.  The  way  to  prepare  for  sickness  is  to  serve  God  while  in  health. 
—0.  H.  L 

Yers.  6—16. — Fire  from  heaven.  Ahaziah's  messengers  were  intercepted  by  Elijah. 
They  brought  back  to  Ahaziah  the  fearless  prophet's  announcement  of  his  doom.  Elijah's 
message  was  God's  message.  He  began  it  by  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  The  statement 
that  Ahaziah  would  surely  die  was  in  reality  the  sentence  of  him  who  knows  the 
future  of  every  life,  and  in  whose  hand  is  the  breath  of  every  human  being,  be  he 
peasant  or  be  be  king.  But  such  a  terrible  sentence  had  not  brought  Ahaziah  to  bis 
senses.  He  does  not  begin  to  set  his  house  in  order.  He  does  not  prepare  to  meet  his 
God  as  a  guilty  but  penitent  sinner.  No ;  but  when  the  messengers  tell  him  of  the 
strange  interruption  they  had  met  with,  recognizing  at  once  from  their  description  that 
it  was  Elijah  the  Tishbite  who  had  stopped  them,  he  is  filled  with  anger  and  defiance. 
He  has  defied  God  when  in  health ;  now  he  defies  him  firom  k  bed  of  sickness.    He 


10  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  ion.  L  1—18. 


Bends  forth  a  captain  with  a  company  of  fifty  men  to  lay  hold  upon  the  prophet.  It 
was  not  the  first  time  Elijah's  life  had  heen  threatened  hy  royal  sinners.  When  a  man 
is  fearless  in  rehuking  sin,  he  must  expect  the  hatred  of  impenitent  pmners.  Smooth 
words  may  win  a  fleeting  popukrity,  hut  the  friendship  of  this  world  is  enmity  against 
God.  Popularity  is  dearly  hought  that  is  ohtained  at  the  sacrifice  of  truth,  of  con- 
science, and  of  duty  But  Elijah's  life  is  safe  in  the  hands  of  the  Master  whom  he 
serves.  Once  hefore  God  had  vindicated  his  own  honour  and  Elijah's  faithfulness  hy 
sending  fire  from  heaven  to  consume  his  sacrifice.  In  a  similar  manner  now  he  defends 
Elijah  and  punishes  his  enemies.  The  incident  is  one  which  presents  some  difficulties. 
The  study  of  it  suggests  many  useful  lessons. 

I.  FiEE  FROM  HiAVEN  IS  AN  ACT  OP  JUBTIOK.  It  may  appear  to  some  that  these 
first  two  captains  and  their  fifties  were  hardly  dealt  with.  Some  one  may  say,  "  It 
was  their  duty  to  ohey.  They  were  only  executing  the  king's  orders.  They  were  not 
responsible  for  the  message  which  they  brought  from  the  king  to  Elijah.  It  was  hard, 
then,  that  they  should  suffer  for  doing  that  which  it  was  their  duty  to  do."  These 
are  very  plausible  statements.  Let  us  examine  them  a  little  more  closely.  Let  us 
remember  that  man  is  not  a  mere  machine.  Every  man  has  an  immortal  soul,  coming 
from  God,  going  back  to  God,  and  accountable  to  God  for  its  actions.  There  is  such 
a  thing  as  mdividual  personal  responsibility.  No  external  circumstances,  no  position 
in  life,  can  ever  take  away  that  responsibility.  These  captains  and  their  men  were 
bound  to  do  their  duty  to  their  king.  Yes ;  but  not  in  defiance  of  the  Law  and  power 
of  God.  Where  the  will  of  man  or  the  word  of  man  comes  into  conflict  with  the  will 
or  Word  of  God,  then  it  is  the  duty  of  every  human  being  to  say,  "  We  ought  to  obey 
God  rather  than  men."  These  officers  and  soldiers  were  really  encouraging  Ahaziah 
in  his  guilt.  They  knew  that  he  was  an  idolater.  They  knew  that  he  was  a  worshipper 
of  Baal.  They  knew  that  the  man  whom  he  was  sending  them  to  arrest  was  a  servant 
of  the  most  high  God,  and  his  foremost  living  prophet.  They  knew  of  the  sentence 
which  bad  already  been  pronoutaced  against  Ahaziah.  Yet  here,  at  his  bidding,  they 
go  forth  as  the  instruments  of  his  defiance  against  the  living  God.  They  were  sharers 
in  his  guilt — -partidpes  criminii.  They  were  personally  guilty  before  God.  We  can 
never  shift  our  own  responsibility  on  to  the  shoulders  of  others.  It  did  not  make 
Adam's  guilt  less  that  he  accused  Eve,  or  Eve's  guilt  less  that  she  accused  the  serpent. 
They  were  intelligent  beings,  with  the  power  of  free  choice.  Our  plain  duty  is,  if  we 
are  in  any  position  or  business  which  requires  us  to  violate  the  Law  of  God,  at  once  to 
give  it  up.  God  says,  "  Them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour."  Moreover,  they  had 
already  Seen  warned  of  the  sin  and  dagger  of  resisting  Ood.  They  knew  how  the 
prophets  of  Baal  had  Toeea  slain.  They  knew  how  Elijah's  prophecy — in  other  words, 
God's  sentence — against  Ahab  had  come  true,  that  where  the  dogs  licked  the  blood  of 
Nahoth,  there  they  would  lick  the  blood  of  Ahab,  and  they  knew  that  a  similar  doom 
was  foretold  against  Jezebel.  Yet  in  spite  of  all  these  warnings  they  went  forth 
against  the  prophet  of  God.  So  the  sinner  has  many  warnings.  How  oftai  God's 
Word  and  God's  messenger  have  called  him  to  repentance!  Perhaps  by  sickness  and 
suffering  he  has  had  reminders  of  approaching  death.  By  sudden  bereavement  he  has 
been  reminded  that  « in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  man  cometh."  Let 
him  beware  of  turning  a  deaf  ear  to  the  warning  voice.  "  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him 
that  speaketh."  Further,  when  we  are  considering  the  justice  of  this  fire  firom  heaven, 
let  us  remember  that  the  life  of  Oca's  most  useful  servant  was  at  stake.  It  is  pretty 
certain  that  Ahaziah,  when  he  sent  for  Elijah,  wanted  to  take  his  life.  It  is 
pretty  certain  also  that,  had  Elijah  gone  with  either  of  the  first  two  captains,  his 
hfe  would  have  been  in  danger.  It  was  only  after  the  third  time  of  sendmg  that  God 
said  to  Elijah,  "Be  not  afraid  of  him."  It  was  only  then,  perhaps,  that  Ahaziah 
realized  the  uselessness  of  fighting  against  God.  We  hold  by  the  principle  that  life 
should  not  he  recklessly  sacrificed.  But  if  we  are  disposed  to  speak  of  this  incident 
as  reckless  sacrifice  of  life,  let  us  remember  what  hundreds  of  lives  have  been  imperilled 
and  sacrificed  more  than  once,  even  for  the  sake  of  a  single  British  subject.  No  right- 
nunded  person  would  condemn  the  sending  forth  of  soldiers— many  of  them  to  certain 
death— in  such  a  rase  as  that  of  Abyssinia,  where  the  lives  of  British  Babjects  were 
in  danger,  or  that  of  the  attempted  rescue  of  General  Gordon.  Before  we  cwi  cherish 
a  soipioioB  of  injustice  against  the  dealings  of  God,  let  u?  be  sure  that  we  have  right 


OH.  1. 1—18.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  11 

and  reason  on  our  side.  A  full  examination  of  all  the  circumstances  will  generally 
banish  even  such  a  suggestion  from  our  minds.  But,  then,  there  are  many  cases  where 
we  cannot  possibly  understand  or  Itnow  all  the  circumstances.  In  such  a  case,  is  it 
not  the  only  course  we  can  take  to  bow  in  submission  to  the  all-wise  will  of  God? 
"  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  "  For  all  these  reasons  I  conclude 
that  the  fire  which  came  down  from  heaven  upon  these  soldiers  was  an  act  of  justice. 

II.  Fire  from  heaven  is  an  act  of  neoesbitt.  More  than  one  reason  has  already 
been  suggested  why  this  fire  from  heaven  was  necessary.  It  may  have  been  necessary 
in  defence  of  the  prophet's  life.  It  may  have  been  necessary  in  vindication  of  the 
power  and  honour  of  God ;  for  it  took  place  at  a  time  of  almost  universal  idolatry  and 
Baal-worship  on  the  part  of  Israel.  This,  however,  we  may  be  sure  of,  that,  whether 
we  can  see  the  necessity  for  it  or  not,  firt  from  'heaven  is  necessary,  or  Ood  would  not 
tend  it.  There  are  three  uses  which  fire  serves  in  the  natural  world,  for  which 
analogies  may  be  found  in  the  spiritual  world.  These  are  purifying,  destroying,  and 
testing.  We  need  the  cleansing  fires  to  purify  us  in  the  spiritual  life.  Perhaps  w« 
are  becoming  too  worldly,  too  much  engrossed  with  the  things  of  this  life,  laying  up 
for  ourselves  treasures  upon  earth.  Perhaps  we  are  making  an  idol  of  some  earthly 
object  of  our  affection.  Perhaps  we  are  becoming  spiritually  proud.  Perhaps  we 
compare  ourselves  favourably  with  others,  and  think  how  much  better  we  are  than 
they.  Then  our  heavenly  Father  may  think  it  wise  to  purify  us  from  such  dross  as 
this.  And  so  he  calls  us  to  pass  through  the  furnace  of  affliction,  or  adversity,  or 
sickness.  Thus  he  humbles  us.  Thus  he  keeps  us  mindful  that  we  are  but  dust. 
Thus  he  keeps  us  mindful  of  our  dependence  upon  him.  Then  the  destroying  fire  is 
needed  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  world,  as  well  as  in  the  natural  world.  It  was  a 
necessary  part  of  the  Divine  government  that  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  should  be 
destroyed.  They  were  a  moral  plague-spot.  The  festering  limb  must  be  cut  off  if 
the  body  is  to  be  saved.  So  also  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii  were  destroyed  when  they 
too  became  a  centre  of  moral  degradation  and  corruption.  Would  it  he  any  wonder, 
wovdd  it  be  any  injustice,  if  the  fire  of  God  would  come  down  from  heaven  and  burn 
up  some  of  the  moral  plague-spots  of  modern  times?  Would  not  the  world  be  vastly 
the  better  if  the  gambling-hells  and  drinking-hells  and  hells  of  immorality  were  btunt 
up  in  one  vast  conflagration?  And  if  they  are  spared,  and  if  the  moral  corrupters  of 
others  are  spared,  will  it  be  any  better  for  them  in  that  day  when  "  the  fearful,  and 
unbelieving,  and  the  abominable,  and  murderers,  and  whoremongers,  and  sorcerers, 
and  idolaters,  and  all  liars,  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake  which  bumeth  with  fire  and 
brimstone :  which  is  the  second  death  "  ?  Then  there  is  the  testing  fire.  This  also  is 
necessary  in  the  spiritual  world.  "Wherein  ye  greatly  rejoice,"  says  the  Apostle 
Peter,  "  though  now  for  a  season,  if  need  be,  ye  are  in  heaviness  through  manifold 
temptations,  that  the  trial  of  your  faith,  being  much  more  precious  than  of  gold  that 
perisheth,  though  it  be  tried  with  fire,  might  be  found  unto  praise  and  honour  and 
glory  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ "  (1  Pet.  i.  6,  7).  If  there  were  no  trials  and 
difficulties,  there  would  be  no  test,  no  proof  of  our  faith.  And  then  the  time  is  coming 
when  the  fire — the  searching,  testing  fire  of  God's  judgment — shall  try  every  man's 
work  of  what  sort  it  is.  If  our  life  is  built  up  on  Christ,  then  out  of  the  pwrifying 
fire  it  will  come  clearer  and  brighter,  from  the  destroying  fire  it  will  suffer  no  harm, 
and  from  the  testing  fire  it  will  come  forth  to  honour  and  glory.  "  Then  shall  the 
righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father"  (Matt.  xiii.  43). 

III.  Fibb  from  heaven  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  Divine  mbeot.  Here  we 
may  consider  a  difiSculty  which  some  have  raised.  When  Jesus,  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem, 
passed  through  a  village  of  the  Samaritans,  the  people  there  would  not  receive  him, 
"  because  his  face  was  as  though  he  would  go  to  Jerusalem."  The  disciples,  in  anger, 
asked  him  if  they  should  command  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven,  as  Elijah  did, 
and  consume  them.  The  answer  of  our  Saviour  was,  "  Te  know  not  what  manner  of 
spirit  ye  are  of.  For  the  Son  of  man  is  not  come  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save 
them  "  (Luke  ix.  61^56).  Now,  the  question  which  some  have  asked  is  this — Doet 
not  Christ  here  condemn  the  action  of  Elijah  ?  A  careful  study  of  the  narrative  before 
HI  would  at  once  dispose  of  such  8  question  as  that.  It  is  said  here,  "  Thefi/re  of  CM 
came  down  from  heaven."  Even  if  this  were  not  stated,  it  is  obvious  that  Elijah  •( 
hinuelf  hsd  no  power  to  bring  down  fire  from  heaven,  unless  with  God's  BWiction  wai 


12 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KIXGS.  [OH.I.1— 1* 


assistance.  But  •  great  many  commentators  and  preachers,  who  would  not  go  th« 
length  of  saying  that  Christ  condemned  Elijah,  seem  to  suggest  that  he  condemned 
his  spirit,  as  unsuited  to  gospel  times.  Even  for  this  suggestion  I  do  not  think  there 
is  any  warrant.  Our  Saviour  condemned  the  disciples  for  a  spirit^/ vindictiveness  and 
revenge,  which  probably  was  intensified  by  the  feeling  of  prejudice  and  animosity 
which  existed  against  the  Samaritans.  He  also  stated  that  he  was  not  come  to  destroy 
men's  lives,  but  to  save  them.  His  work,  then,  was  one  of  salvation.  But  those  who 
rejected  his  salvation  were  certainly  to  perish.  More  than  once  Christ  in  the  clearest 
manner  teaches  this.  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish."  He  foretells 
the  doom  of  Jerusalem.  He  foretells  the  terrible  agony  of  lost  souls,  who  shall  go  away 
into  everlasting  fire;  "there  shall  be  the  wailing  and  the  gnashing  of  teeth."  The 
action  of  retributive  justice,  therefore,  is  perfectly  consistent  with  mercy  toward  the 
sinner.  The  consuming  fire  may  be  part  of  a  merciful  and  loving  purpose  toward 
the  world  at  large.  In  the  particular  case  ie/ore  us,  toe  see  that  mercy  was  exhibited 
as  well  as  justice.  The  third  captain,  who  showed  a  humble  spirit,  and  apparently 
some  regret  at  the  work  he  had  to  do,  was  mercifully  spared  the  fate  which  had  fallen 
upon  the  other  two.  "While  we  speak  of  the  consuming  fire  of  God's  justice,  we  would 
speak  also  of  mercy  for  the  penitent,  of  forgiveness,  full  and  free,  for  every  anxious 
soul,  for  every  returning  wanderer.  "Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou 
sbalt  be  saved."— 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Worldly  royalty  a/nd  personal  godliness.  "  Then  Moab  rebelled  against 
Israel,"  etc.  The  two  Books  of  Kings,  which  form  but  one  in  the  most  correct  and 
ancient  edition  of  the  Hebrews,  whilst  they  constitute  a  very  strange  and  significant 
history,  are  fraught  with  much  moral  and  practical  suggestion,  ^ese  verses  bring 
under  our  notice  two  subjects  of  thought — ^worldly  royalty  in  a  humiliating  condition, 
and  personal  godliness  truly  majestic. 

I.  WoBLDLT  KOTALTT  IN  A  HuuiLiATiNa  CONDITION.  1.  Here  is  a  king  in  mortal 
suffering.  "  And  Ahaziah  fell  down  through  a  lattice  in  his  upper  chamber  that  was 
in  Samaria,  and  was  sick."  Nature  has  no  more  respect  for  kings  than  for  beggars ; 
her  laws  treat  them  as  ordinary  mortals.  2.  Here  is  a  king  in  mental  distress.  On 
his  bed  of  sufiering  the  king's  mind  was  most  painfully  exercised  as  to  what  would  be 
the  issue  of  his  bodily  suffering.  He  sends  messengers  to  the  idols  in  order  to  ask 
whether  "  I  shall  recover  of  this  disease."  No  doubt  the  fear  of  death  distressed  him, 
as  indeed  it  distresses  most.  3.  Here  is  a  king  in  superstitious  darkness.  He  had  no 
knowledge  of  the  true  God,  no  enlightened  religious  feeling,  and  he  sent  his  messengers 
to  an  idol — the  god  of  flies — to  know  whether  he  should  recover  or  not.  What  a 
humiliating  condition  for  royalty  to  be  in  I  And  yet  it  is  a  condition  in  which  kings 
and  princes  are  often  found.     The  other  subject  of  thought  here  is-^ 

II.  Pebsonal  godliness  TB0LT  MAJESTIC.  Elijah  is  an  example  of  personal  godli- 
ness, though,  in  a  worldly  sense,  he  was  very  poor,  and  his  costume  seemed  to  be 
almost  the  meanest  of  the  mean.  "  He  was  a  hairy  man,  and  girt  with  a  girdle  of 
leather  about  his  loins."  But  see  the  majesty  of  this  man  in  two  things.  1.  In 
receiving  communication  from  heaven.  "But  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  to  Elijah  the 
Tishbite."  A  truly  godly  man  is  ever  in  correspondence  with  Heaven ;  his  "  conversation 
is  in  heaven."  2.  In  reproving  the  Icing.  "  Is  it  not  because  there  is  not  a  God  in 
Israel,  that  thou  sendest  to  inquire  of  Baal-zebub  the  god  of  Ekron  ? "  The  thing 
called  religion  in  many  countries  is  just  strong  enough  to  reprove  the  poor,  but  too  weak 
to  thunder  reproof  into  the  ear  of  the  corrupt  and  pleasure-seeking  monarchs.  In  his 
reproof  he  pronounces  on  him  the  Divine  judgment,  "Thou  shalt  not  come  down  off 
that  bed  on  which  thou  art  gone  up,  but  shalt  surely  die." 

Conclusion.  Which  is  the  better,  do  you  think— a  throne  or  a  godly  character? 
Fools  only  prefer  the  former ;  the  man  of  sense,  thoughtfulness,  and  reflection  would 
say  the  latter. — D.  T. 

Vers.  9— 18.— Man  in  three  aspects.  "Then  the  king  sent  nnto  him  a  captain  of 
fifty,    etc    In  this  paragraph  we  have  man  in  three  aspects. 

L  Man  buined  through  the  conduct  of  others.  The  messengers  which  the  kins 
sent  to  Elyah— fifty  each  time  on  three  different  occasions— were  all,  except  the  but 


OB.  1. 1—18.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  13 

fifty,  destroyed  by  liglitninpt.  This  awfiil  Judgment  came  npon  them,  not  merely  on 
their  own  account — although,  like  all  sinnere,  they  had  forfeited  their  lives  to  eternal 
justice — but  as  messengers  of  the  king.  Throughout  the  human  race,  in  all  races  and 
timesi  there  are  found  millions  groaning  under  the  trials  and  sufferings  brought  on 
them  by  the  conduct  of  others.  In  this  world  the  innocent  suffer  for  the  guilty;  the 
"  fathers  eat  sour  grapes,  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge." 

II.  Man  employed  as  the  execotob  op  Divine  justice.  These  hundred  men, 
messengers  from  the  king,  were  struck  down  by  Elijah  at  the  command  of  God.  There 
was  no  personal  vengeance  in  the  act.  Elijah  was  used  as  the  organ  of  Heaven.  God's 
plan  in  this  world  is  to  punish  as  well  as  to  save  man  by  man.  How  was  Pharaoh 
punished,  and  the  Canaanites,  etc.  ?  By  man.  Sinful  nations  are  punished,  often  by 
worthless  kings  and  ruthless  despots. 

III.  Man  8TEPP1N0  INTO  THE  PLACE  OP  THE  DEAD.  The  King  Ahaziah  dies;  Jehoram 
steps  into  his  place.  "  So  he  died  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  Elijah  had 
spoken.  And  Jehoram  reigned  in  his  stead."  "  One  generation  cometh,  and  another 
passeth  away."  Places,  position^,  and  the  various  offices  of  life  are  no  sooner  vacated 
by  d^ath  than  they  are  stepped  into  by  others.  Thus  the  world  goes  on,  and  the  dead 
are  soon  forgotten.  The  greatest  man  on  earth  to-day  is  but  a  mere  bubble  on  the 
great  river  of  human  life;  he  sparkles  for  a  moment,  and  is  lost  for  ever  in  the 
kbyss.— D.  T. 

Ver.  1. — The  revolt  of  Moab.  (On  this  cf.  oh.  iii.)  Moah,  one  of  the  conquests  of 
David  (2  Sam.  viii.  2),  perhaps  regained  its  independence  after  the  death  of  Solo- 
mon, and,  if  the  Moabite  Stone  can  be  trusted,  was  again  subdued  by  Omri,  Ahab's 
father.  Now,  on  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  Ahab,  it  renewed  the  attempt  to  throw 
off  the  Israelitish  yoke.  1.  The  original  conquest  had  been  not  unstained  by  cruelty. 
These  things  burn  into  the  memory  of  peoples.  2.  The  rule  of  Omri  and  Ahab  had 
been  most  oppressive  (ch.  iiL  4).  Nothing  else  could  be  expected  from  these  god- 
less Dionarchs.  "  The  tender  mercies  of  tlie  wicked  are  cruel "  (Prov.  xii.  10).  Half 
the  rebellions  and  revolutions  in  the  world  have  their  origin  in  oppression  and  mis- 
govcrnmenfc.  3.  Ahab  and  Israel  had  just  sustained  a  severe  defeat,  that  viz.  at  the 
hands  of  the  Syrians  (1  Kings  xxii.).  This  weakened  the  Israelitish  power,  and  gave 
a  favourable  opportunity  for  revolt.  Those  whom  we  hold  in  subjection  by  foice,  not 
love,  cannot  be  blamed  if  they  take  the  earliest  opportimity  to  get  rid  of  our  yoke.  4. 
Israel  and  Moab  were  divided  by  religion.  This  is  the  deepest  ground  of  severance 
among  peoples.  Nationalities  based  on  different  religious  faiths  constantly  tend  to  fall 
asunder.  Any  unity  in  which  they  are  held  can  be  only  external.  The  federation 
of  the  race  can  only  be  accomplished  on  the  basis  of  the  worship  of  the  One  Jehovah, 
and  the  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  5.  God  used  these  revolts  as  a  means  of  chastisement 
(cf.  1  Kings  xi.  23).  Under  David,  the  greatest  theocratic  ruler,  the  kinjtdora  was 
built  up,  consolidated,  extended.  The  revolt  from  Gud,  both  in  Judah  and  Israel,  was 
signalized  by  the  revolt  of  dependencies.  Will  our  own  Britain  hold  its  foremost 
position  among  the  nations,  or  will  its  greatness  too  decay,  and  its  power  be  shorn  by 
successive  breaking  off  of  its  colonies?  The  answer,  we  believe,  will  depend  very 
much  on  its  fidelity  to  God. — J.  0. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — AhaziaVs  sickness.  Son  of  a  doomed  house  (1  Kings  xxi.  29),  Ahab's 
successor  on  the  throne  reigned  for  two  inglorious  years.  His  evil  character  is  described 
in  the  worcis,  "  He  walked  in  the  way  of  his  father,  and  in  the  way  of  his  mother,  and 
in  the  way  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin  "  (1  Kings  xxii.  52). 
A  weak  ruler,  he  was  probably  the  mere  tool  of  his  mother  Jezebel,  whose  worst  qualities 
he  inhedted.  In  deiermined  idolatry,  open  defiance  of  Jehovah,  and  vindictive  perse- 
cution of  God's  servants,  as  shown  by  his  attempt  on  the  life  of  Elijah,  he  is  the  true 
child  of  the  "  cursed  woman  "  (ch.  ix.  34).  Even  on  his  death-bed  he  shows  no  such 
compunction  as  occasionally  visited  his  father  Ahab  (1  Kings  xxi.  27).  Undeterred 
by  examples  and  warnings,  he  "hardened  his  neck"  in  a  way  which  led  to  his  being 
"  suddenly  destroyed  "  (Prov.  xxix.  1). 

I.  The  patal  palu  The  faineant  king  came  to  his  end  in  •  manner;  1.  SufGl- 
iiantly  simple.    Idly  lounging  at  the  projecting  lattice- window  of  his  palac*  in  Samaria 


14  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  [ob.1.1— 18. 


-perhaps  leaning  against  it,  and  gazing  from  his  elevated  position  on  the  fee  prospect 
thlTsprids  itsJ  aTound-his  support  suddenly  gave  way.  and  he  was  precipiteted  to 
tlie  ground,  or  courtyard,  below.  He  is  picked  up,  stunned,  but  not  dead,  and  earned  to 
hU  couch.  It  is,  in  common  speech,  an  accident-fiome  trivial  neglect  of  a  fastening— 
but  it  terminated  this  royal  career.  On  such  slight  contmgencies  doeshnman  life,  the 
change  of  rulers,  and  often  the  course  of  events  in  history,  depend.  Wo  cannot  suffi- 
ciently ponder  that  our  existence  hangs  by  the  finest  thread,  and  that  any  trivial  cause 
may  at  any  moment  cut  it  short  (Jas.  iv.  14).  2.  Yet  promdentuO.  QoA  s  providence 
is  to  be  recognized  in  the  time  and  manner  of  this  king's  removal  He  had  "  provoked 
to  anger  the  Lord  God  of  Israel "  (1  Kings  xxii.  53),  and  God  in  this  sudden  way  cut  him 
off.  This  is  the  only  rational  view  of  the  providence  of  God,  since,  as  we  have  seen,  it 
is  from  the  most  trivial  events  that  the  greatest  results  often  spring.  The  whole  can 
be  controlled  only  by  the  power  that  concerns  itself  with  the  details.  A  remarkable 
illustration  is  afforded  by  the  death  of  Ahaziah's  own  father.  Fearing  Micaiah's  pro- 
phecy, Ahah  had  disguised  himself  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  was  not  known  as  the 
King  of  Israel.  But  he  was  not,  therefore,  to  escape.  A  man  in  the  opposing  ranks 
"  drew  a  bow  at  a  venture,"  and  the  arrow,  winged  with  a  Divine  mission,  smote  the 
king  between  the  joints  of  his  armour,  and  slew  him  (1  Kings  xxii.  34).  The  same 
minute  providence  which  guided  that  arrow  now  presided  over  the  circumstances  of 
Ahaziah's  fall.  There  is  in  thi«  doctrine,  which  is  also  Christ's  (Matt.  x.  29, 30),  comfort 
for  the  good,  and  warning  for  the  wicked.  The  good  man  acknowledges,  "  My  times 
are  in  thy  hand  "  (Ps.  xxxi.  15),  and  the  wicked  man  should  pause  when  he  reflects 
that  he  cannot  take  his  out  of  that  hand.  3.  Irremediable.  From  the  bed  to  which  he 
had  been  carried  up,  the  king  was  never  to  rise.  The  injury  he  had  received  was  fatal 
Yet  a  little  space  was  given  him — even  him — for  repentance.  His  fall  might  have 
produced  immediate  death.  These  few  remaining  days,  when  the  sands  were  running 
out,  were,  however,  only  to  demonstrate  further  his  incorrigibility  of  nature. 

II.  The  message  to  Ekbon.  A  sick-bed,  with  the  possibility  of  the  sickness  proving 
fatal,  tests  most  men.  It  tested  Ahaziah.  We  note  in  his  behaviour  the  following 
instructive  facts :  1.  Be  was  moved  to  apply  to  some  god.  Not,  indeed,  in  hope  of  a  cure, 
but  only  to  obtain  information  as  to  the  issue  of  his  illness.  He  sent  to  consult  on 
oracle,  not  to  ask  a  blessing.  But  even  in  this  there  is  seen  the  desire  for  supernatural 
help,  for  direct  intercourse  with  the  invisible,  which  men  so  often  feel  in  their  hour  of 
trouble.  It  was  a  dark  hour  for  Ahaziah.  Life  hung  in  the  balance,  and  he  shrank 
from  death  with  a  great  dread.  He  could  not  wait  for  the  verdict  of  events,  but  would 
fain  wrest  the  secret  from  a  heathen  shrine.  Piety  can  afford  to  leave  the  issue  in  Giod's 
hands.  Impiety  dare  not  do  this,  and  can  find  no  comfort  save  in  the  assurance  of 
recovery.  2.  He  did  not  apply  to  Jehovah.  Was  there  not  a  God  in  Israel  to  inquire 
of?  Ahaziah  knew  very  well  that  there  was,  and  that  there  were  prophets,  like 
Micaiah  and  Elijah,  who  would  tell  him  the  truth.  It  need  not  be  questioned  that  it 
was  an  evil  conscience,  and  that  only,  which  kept  him  from  applying  to  Jehovah.  He 
knew  how  impiously  he  had  behaved  towards  Jehovah.  He  perfectly  well  understood 
what  kind  of  reception  he  would  receive  from  the  prophets,  and  in  what  language  they 
would  address  him.  He  anticipated  the  nature  of  the  sentence  they  would  pronounce. 
He  dared  not,  therefore,  inquire  of  the  Lord.  So  when  men,  in  their  distress,  feel 
impelled  to  go  to  God,  they  are  often  held  back  by  the  remembrance  of  past  wicked- 
ness. They  know,  if  they  come,  it  must  be  with  changed  hearts  and  the  renouncing 
of  evil  deeds,  and  for  this  they  are  not  prepared.  3.  He  applied  to  the  god  of  Ekrm. 
Baal-zebub — "  lord  of  flies,"  as  the  word  means.  The  oracle  of  this  god  had  probably 
some  local  repute,  which  led  him  to  select  it.  Here  comes  in  the  element  of  supei> 
stition.  The  craving  after  the  supernatural  in  human  nature  is  not  to  be  stilled,  and, 
if  it  cannot  be  gratified  in  a  lawful,  it  will  seek  gratification  in  some  unlawfvj  way. 
Saul,  forsaken  of  God,  turned  to  the  witch  of  Endor  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  6,  7).  "  A  noto- 
riou»  infidel  hke  Philippe  Egalit6,  though  in  other  respects  a  man  of  ability,  could  yet 
try  to  presage  his  fate  by  the  sort  of  cup-augury  involved  in  examining  the  grounds  of 
co«f«e."  The  Soman  world,  in  the  time  of  the  apostles,  was  not  more  characterized  by 
its  educated  scepticism  than  by  the  influx  into  it  of  every  kind  of  superstition  (of 
Farrar's  '  St.  Paul,'  ch.  xix. ;  Conybeare  and  Howson,  ch.  v.).  In  our  own  day,  multi- 
tudei  professing  disbelief  in  God's  revelation  turn  with  eager  credulity  to  the  delusioni 


ooi.1.1— 1&]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OV  THE  EINGa  15 

of  gpiritualism.    It  was  to  supersede  unlawful  modes  of  consulting  the  invisible  world 
that  God  gave  "the  sure  word  of  prophecy  "  (Deut.  xviii  9 — 22). 

III.  Thb  usexfected  ueetino.  The  messengers  speed  on  their  way  to  the  shrine 
of  Baal-zebub  at  Ekron,  but  their  steps  are  soon  to  be  arrested.  Here  we  notice :  1%  A 
new  task  for  Elijah.  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord  said  to  Elijah  the  Tishbite,  Arise,  go  up  tc 
meet  the  messengers  of  the  King  of  Samaria."  The  medium  of  communication  is,  perhaps, 
the  historical  angel  of  the  covenant — he  of  whom  God  had  said,  "  Provoke  him  not,  for 
he  will  not  pardon  your  transgressions,  for  my  Name  is  in  him  "  (Exod.  xxiii.  21).  The 
Divine  side  of  the  calamity  which  had  befallen  Ahaziah  comes  to  light  in  this  message 
by  the  prophet.  Ahaziah  had  forgotten  God,  but  God  had  not  forgotten  him.  He  is 
the  "jealous  God"  (Exod.  xx.  5),  who  takes  the  vindication  of  his  honour  into  his  own 
hands.  2.  A  surprise  for  the  messengers.  Elijah's  appearances  partake  everywhere  of 
the  nature  of  a  dramatic  surprise.  He  comes  no  one  knows  whence ;  he  deimrts  no  one 
knows  whither.  His  personality  was  impressive — "a  hairy  man,  and  girt  with  a  girdle 
of  leather  about  his  loins  "  (ver.  8).  Suddenly  he  confronts  the  messengers,  and  puts 
to  them  the  ironic  question,  "  Is  it  not  because  there  is  not  a  God  in  Israel  that  ye  go  to 
inquire  of  Baal-zebub  the  god  of  Ekron  ?  "  It  is  rare  that,  in  fleeing  from  the  path  of 
duty,  we  do  not  meet  God  in  the  way  in  some  form.  Balaam  on  his  journey  to  the  King 
of  Moab ;  Jonah  fleeing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  to  Tarshish ;  Elijah  himself  when 
he  fled  to  Horeb,  hearing  the  voice  of  the  Lord, "  What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah  ?  "  (Numb, 
xxii.  22 ;  Jonah  i. ;  1  Kings  xix.  9).  3.  EvU  tidings  for  Ahaziah.  The  messengers 
need  go  no  further.  The  iufornnation  they  sought  at  Ekron  was  given  them,  unasked, 
from  a  surer  source.  An  oracle  had  spoken,  but  not  the  one  to  which  they  were  sent. 
Ekron's  reply  was  anticipated  by  Jehovah's :  "  Now  therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord,  Thou 
shalt  not  come  down  from  that  bed  on  which  thou  art  gone  up,  but  shalt  surely  die." 
Unhappy  monarch  I     God  hath  spoken,  and  no  other  can  reverse  it  (Numb,  xxiii.  20). 

IV.  The  betubn  to  the  kino.  There  was  that  in  the  appearance,  manner,  and 
language  of  this  man  who  had  crossed  their  path  like  an  apparition  which  convinced 
the  messengers  that  God  had  spoken  through  him.  They  accordingly  returned  at 
once  to  the  sick  king.  A  few  words  of  explanation  sufficed  to  put  him  in  possession  of 
the  circumstances.  A  guilty  conscience  is  swift  to  comprehend  in  such  matters.  With 
unerring  precision  the  king's  thoughts  interpreted  the  riddle  of  the  mysterious  prophet. 
"  What  manner  of  man  was  he  which  came  up  to  meet  you,  and  told  you  these  words  ?  " 
"  It  is  Elijah  the  Tishbite."  Ahaziah  knew  what  that  meant.  His  feelings  would  be 
those  of  his  father  Ahab  when  he  exclaimed,  "  Hast  thou  found  me,  0  mine  enemy  ?  " 
(1  Kings  xxi.  20).  The  appearance  of  Banquo's  ghost  at  the  banquet  was  not  more 
ierrible  to  Macbeth  than  this  crossing  of  his  path  by  Elijah  was  to  Ahaziah  at  that 
moment.  His  sins  had  found  him  out.  However  long  the  lane  of  wickedness  may  be, 
we  misy  be  sure  the  Avenger  stands  at  the  end  of  it. — J.  0. 

Vers.  9 — 16. — The  prophet  of  fire.  The  act  of  Elijah,  in  calling  down  fire  from 
heaven  on  his  enemies,  is  thus  remarked  upon  by  Dean  Stanley,  with  reference  to 
Christ's  allusion  to  it  in  the  gospel  (Luke  ix.  51 — 56).  "  When  the  two  apostles 
appealed  to  the  example  of  Elijah  '  to  call  down  fire  from  heaven,'  he  to  whom  they 
spoke  turned  away  with  indignation  from  the  remembrance  of  this  act,  even  of  the 
greatest  of  his  prophetic  predecessors  "  ('  Jewish  Church,*  vol.  ii.  p.  258).  We  cannot 
endorse  this  remark.  Jesus,  indeed,  gently  rebuked  his  disciples,  telling  them  they 
did  not  know  what  manner  of  spirit  they  were  of,  and  reminding  them  that  the  Son 
of  man  was  not  come  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them.  But  he  did  not  mean 
to  imply  that  the  spirit  which  Elijah  showed  was,  in  its  own  time  and  place,  wrong. 
It  was  a  pure  and  holy  zeal  for  God's  honour,  and  God  sanctioned  it  by  sending  the 
fire.  Only  there  was  a  better  and  higher  spirit — the  spirit  of  love  and  grace  in  Christ; 
and  it  was  by  this  the  disciples  of  Christ  ought  to  have  been  actuated.  What  was 
congruous  with  the  old  dispensation  was  not  necessarily  congruous  with  the  higher 
spirit  of  the  new.  Christ  may  have  intended  to  suggest  also  that  the  disciples  were 
mistaken  in  thinking  that  their  spirit  was  exactly  that  of  the  Old  Testament  man  of 
God.  He  was  moved  solely  by  regard  for  God's  honour ;  in  their  case  personal  angar 
and  resentment  probably  gave  an  impure  tinge  to  their  passion. 

I.  Bkdchaiibeb  BKVENaK.    It  is  pitiable  to  see  this  sick  king,  within  a  few  hoon 


It  TH«  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  loH.  1. 1— 18 


of  liU  dMtli,  taBtesd  of  hmnWing  himself  In  wp««t»n'=«./^««^'»g  ""*  ^''''.P™^  ,'^ 
to  do  battle  With  God  in  the  person  of  his  messenger  If  he  must  die.  he  is  resolved 
that  Elijah  shall  die  also.  This  resolve  Is:  1.  A  ngn  of  Om-cKUr.  It  shows  the 
thoroughly  hardened  and  irreligious  nature  of  the  man.  There  are  no  limits  to  a 
Biniei'g  madness  in  warring  against  God.  2.  An  act  of  infatvatwn.  Knowing  what 
he  did  of  the  prophet's  history,  he  might  have  understood  that  his  enterprise  was 
hopeless.  He  may  have  reasoned  that,  as  the  blood  of  prophets  had  been  spilt  before 
(1  Kings  xviii.  4),  so  it  might  be  spilt  again.  But  he  was  now  crossing  a  prophet  m 
the  direct  discharge  of  his  duty,  and  was  thus,  in  a  sense,  giving  a  direct  challenge  tt 
God.  "  Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker  1  Let  the  potsherd  strive  with 
the  potsherds  of  the  earth  "  (Isa.  xlv.  9).  A  knowledge  of  the  perilousness  of  the  task 
in  which  he  was  embarking  is  shown  in  the  fact  that  a  band  of  fifty  men  is  sent  to 
arrest  one  prophet  (of.  John  xviii.  3).  If  a  band  was  necessary,  it  could  only  be  because 
Elijah  had  supernatural  aid  to  rely  on ;  and,  if  he  had  that  aid,  no  amount  of  force 
could  overcome  him.  3.  A  trace  of  evil  influence.  It  is  the  spirit  of  Jezebel  which 
breathes  in  this  Heaven-defying  resolution.  The  queen-mother  had  not  forgotten  her 
yet  unfulfilled  threat,  "So  let  the  gods  do  to  me,  and  more  also,  if  I  make  not  thy  life 
as  the  hfe  of  one  of  them  by  to-morrow  about  this  time  "  (1  Kings  xix.  2).  There  were 
old  scores  to  pay  off  against  Elijah,  and  this  wicked  woman  was  no  doubt  there  to 
strengthen  her  son  in  his  resolution  to  pay  them. 

II.  Elijah  on  the  hill.  The  band  that  was  sent  to  apprehend  Elijah  found  him 
seated  on  the  top  of  a  hill.  Observe :  1.  Tlie  solitary  grandeur  of  his  situation.  The 
situation  was  characteristic.  We  may  say  of  Elijah  what  Wordsworth  says  of  Milton, 
his  "soul  was  like  a  star,  and  dwelt  apart."  He  is  a  strange,  solitary  figure  frum 
first  to  last — stern,  rugged,  unconquerable.  2.  Sis  moral  fearlessness.  The  appearance 
of  Abaziah's  soldiers  inspired  him  with  no  terror.  He  had  apparently  waited  in  the 
neighbourhood  where  he  met  the  messengers,  and  did  not  now  retreat.  Strong  in  his 
sense  that  God  was  on  his  side,  he  did  not  fear  what  man  could  do  to  him  (Pa.  cxviii.  6). 
3.  Eis  invisible  protection.  The  result  showed  how  entirely  Elijah  was  justified  in  his 
confidence.  "The  angel  of  the  Lord,"  who  had  sent  him  on  bis  mission,  "encamped 
around  him  *  (Ps.  xxxiv.  7),  and  kept  him  from  all  evil.  Those  who  are  engaged  in 
Divine  work  can  confidently  rely  on  Divine  protection.  Not  till  they  had  "finished 
their  testimony "  was  the  beast  allowed  to  kill  the  witnesses  (Rev.  xi.  7).  The 
mountain  on  which  Elijah  sat  was  no  doubt  as  "  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  "  as 
the  hill  of  Samaria  was  in  after-days  for  the  protection  of  Elisha  (ch.  vi.  17).  AVhat 
could  bands  of  fifties  avail  against  one  thus  defended  ? 

III.  The  captains  and  their  fifties.  1.  The  first  captain.  Clothed  with  a  little 
brief  autliority,  this  first  captain,  accompanied  by  his  fifty  men,  approaches  Elijah,  and 
orders  him  to  surrender.  (1)  The  terms  of  his  summons :  "  Thou  man  of  God,  the  king 
nath  said,  Come  down."  In  the  same  breath  in  which  he  acknowledges  him  to  be  a 
servant  of  Jehovah,  he  demands  his  submission  to  the  wicked  King  of  Israel.  Le  roy 
le  veult — the  king  wills  it.  Thus  poor,  paltry,  human  authority  ventm-es  to  assert 
itself  against  the  authority  of  the  King  of  kings.  No  uncommon  thins,  it  must  be 
said,  in  history.  In  the  extravagance  of  its  conceit,  too  often  has  royal  authority 
presumed  to  set  itself  above  the  law  of  heaven,  and  to  dragoon,  imprison,  and  coerce 
those  who  chose  to  obey  God  rather  than  man.  Nor  have  tools  ever  been  wanting  to 
carry  out  these  infamous  behests.  (2)  A  lurking  fear.  Notwithstanding  his  bravado, 
the  officer  was  not  without  his  own  fear  of  El  jab.  He  does  not  boldly  mount  the  hill 
to  secure  his  prisoner,  but  stands  at  a  re.«pectful  distance,  and  summons  him  to  "come 
down."  Tlie  wicked  often  inwardly  fear  the  righteous  at  the  very  time  when  they 
boast  most  loudly  of  having  them  in  their  power.  (3)  The  answer  of  fire.  This 
insolent  summons  to  Elijah,  in  his  character  of  "  man  of  God."  was  a  direct  challenge 
to  Jehovah  to  vindicate  his  own  honour,  and  that  of  his  insulted  servant.  The  insult 
was  wanton  and  public,  and  must  be  as  publicly  met.  Elijah  met  it  by  invoking  God, 
if  he  was  truly  his  servant,  to  send  do«n  fiie  from  heaven  to  consume  this  blustering 
captain  and  his  myrmidons.  As  before,  in  the  contest  with  Baal's  prophets,  his  prayer 
was  granted,  and  the  answer  came  by  fire  (1  Kiu^^s  xviii.  21—39).  "Elijah  will  let 
him  know  that  the  God  of  Israel  is  superior  to  the  King  of  Israel,  and  has  a  ereatei 
power  to  enforce  his  commands  »  (Matthew  Henry).    Thus  at  length,  gospel  dispensation 


•H.n.1— 26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINOS.  17 

though  it  is,  will  fire  descend  from  heaven  to  consume  the  hoats  of  the  ungodly  (Bev 
XX.  9).  2.  The  second  captain.  One  example  of  this  kind  should  have  been  enough. 
But  when  men  are  inspired  by  fury  and  hate  of  God,  above  all,  when  it  is  not  their 
own  lives  they  are  risking,  they  are  not  easily  deterred.  As  if  this  first  defeat  but 
added  fuel  to  the  king's  anger,  the  order  goes  forth  for  another  band  to  be  equipped, 
and  sent  to  take  the  prophet  The  captain  who  received  the  mandate  had  no  choice 
but  to  obey,  and  military  pride  may  have  led  him  to  suppress  any  outward  show  of 
misgiving.  But  it  must  have  been  with  no  small  quaking  of  heart  that  he  set  out  on 
this  now  doubly  perilous  service.  Still  Elijah  sits  on  his  hill,  and,  putting  as  bold  a 
front  on  matters  as  he  can,  the  second  captain,  in  the  king's  name,  repeats  the  summons 
to  come  down.  "  O  man  of  God,  thus  hath  the  king  said,  Gome  down  quickly."  Elijah 
from  his  height  returns  the  former  answer ;  and  once  again  the  thunderbolt  descends, 
and  scatters  the  bodies  of  this  second  fifty  at  the  hill's  foot  beside  the  first.  3.  The 
third  captain.  Not  even  yet  will  the  king  own  the  folly  of  resistance.  Like  Pharaoh 
in  conflict  with  Moses,  each  new  calamity  but  seems  to  harden  him  the  more.  A  third 
captain  is  despatched  with  the  same  peremptory  orders  to  seize  the  recalcitrant  prophet. 
(1)  But  this  captain  is  wiser  than  his  predecessors.  He  does  what  few  in  his  position 
could  help  doing — accepts  a  lesson  from  experience.  He  abandons  the  insolent  tone 
of  previous  captains,  and,  falling  on  his  knees  before  Elijah,  sues  for  peace.  "  0  man 
of  God,  I  pray  thee,  let  my  life,  and  the  life  of  these  fifty  thy  servants,  be  precious  in 
thy  sight."  He  sees  the  folly  of  flinging  away  his  life,  and  the  lives  of  his  men,  to 
please  a  foolish  king  in  a  contest  as  wicked  as  it  was  vain.  (2)  This  prayer  robs  his 
mission  of  its  offensiveness,  acknowledges  God's  supremacy,  and  shows  that  Elijah's 
life  is  io  no  danger.  The  angel  of  the  Lord  accordingly  says  to  Elijah,  "  Go  down 
with  him:  be  not  afraid  of  him."  By  this  timely  humbling  of  himself,  the  third 
captain  (a)  saved  the  lives  of  himself  and  his  men ;  (6)  obtained  what  the  former 
captains  could  not  obtain  by  their  bullying,  viz.  that  Elijah  should  go  with  him.  No 
fire  descended  from  heaven  upon  him,  for  God  takes  no  pleasure  in  the  wanton  destruc- 
tion of  human  life.  And  not  only  was  his  life  spared,  but  he  was  saved  from  the 
king's  anger,  by  Elijah  consenting  to  accompany  him.  He  was  a  living  example  of 
the  truth,  "  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble  "  (Jas.  iv.  6). 

IV.  The  word  of  doom  confirmed.  Brought,  not  as  a  prisoner,  but  as  a  conqueror, 
to  Ahaziah's  bedchamber,  Elijah  repeated  in  person  the  terrible  message  he  had 
formerly  sent  by  the  messengers.  "Thou  shalt  not  come  down  off  that  bed  on  which 
thou  art  gone  up,  but  sbalt  surely  die."  It  is  the  word  of  doom,  and  as  such  Ahaziah 
cannot  but  hear  it.  This  is  all  he  has  made  of  his  futile  attempts  to  fight  against 
God — to  hear  that  doom  confirmed  by  the  very  prophet  whose  head  he  had  vowed  to 
bring  to  the  dust.  The  couasel  of  the  Lord,  it  alone  stands ;  the  imagination  of  the 
sinner  perishes.  It  is  from  Christ's  own  lips  that  those  who  now  fight  against  him 
and  despise  his  gospel  will  hear  their  final  sentence. — J.  0. 

Vers.  17, 18. — Unwritten  history.  Ahaziah  died,  and  Jehoram  his  brother  succeeded 
him.  "  The  rest  of  his  acts  "  were  written  "  ia  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  Kings 
of  Israel; "  but  Scripture  has  not  preserved  them.  Why  should  it?  What  was  there 
in  the  records  of  that  brief  and  evil  existenc*  to  entitle  the  memory  of  it  to  live? 
"  The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed ;  but  the  name  of  the  wicked  shall  rof  "  (Prov.  x.  7). 
Enough  is  written  to  hold  him  up  to  after-ages  as  an  example  of  the  certainty  of 
retribution.  Then  Scripture  buries  him  with  the  epitaph,  "  So  he  died  according  to 
the  word  of  the  Lord  which  Rlijah  had  spoken." — J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 
CHAPTER  n. 


Vers.  1 — ^25. — The  Removal  of  Eujab 

moM  Eabth,  akd  some  Eablt  Mibaoles  of 

Elisba.    The  great  prophet  of  Israel  was 

to  have  a  departure  from  earth  as  marvellous 

n.  KQias. 


as  his  life  had  been.  Ewald's  words,  though 
not  intended  in  an  historical,  but  only  in  a 
literary  sense,  embody  very  forcibly  what 
the  humble  believer  may  accept  as  the 
actual  rationale  of  the  occurrence  related 
in  vers.  1 — 12 :  "  An  earthly  career  whioh 


18 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  [OH.  n.  1-26. 


bad  no  eqnal  ta  the  purity  of  its  derotion 
to  the  service  of  Jehovah,  and  was  at  the 
same  time  consummated  by  such  powerful 
efforts  to  promote  the  kingdom    of   God, 
could  only  have  a  corresponding  close.    It 
ceases  before  the  very  eyes  of  men,  only  to 
be  taken  up  into  the  realm  of  pure  spirit, 
that  is,  to   heaven,  there  to  carry  on  its 
work  with  leas  disturbance,  and  with  greater 
power;    and  at  that  moment  heaven  itself 
descends  to   earth,  to  take  to  itself  that 
spirit  which  is  already   entirely  its  own. 
And  so  H  flory  chariot  with  fiery  horses 
comes  down  from  heaven  and  bears  Elijah 
in  the  tempest  up  to  heaven "  ('  History  of 
Israel,'   vol.  It.  pp.  109,  110,  Eng.  trans.). 
In   Ewiild's  view,  the    narrative    is    pure 
imagination,  the  beautiful  conception  of  one 
who  greatly  admired  the  Tislibite,  and  in- 
vented for  him  an  end  in  ideal  harmony 
with  his  life.     But  may  not  Omnipotence 
sometimes  work  out  ideal  harmonies  in  the 
actual  matter-of-fact  universe?    And  ia  it 
"  advanced  criticism,"  or  sound  criticism  at 
all,  to  take  a  professed  history,  and  pick  and 
cull  from   it  certain   portions  as   absolute 
facts,  quite  indubitable  (see  p.  107,  note  2, 
ad  fin.),   while    rejecting    other    portions, 
which  have  exactly  the  same  external  testi- 
mony, as  pure  fictions  absolutely  devoid  of 
the  slightest  historical  foundation? 

The  record  of  Elisha's  early  miracles 
(vers.  13 — 24)  prepares  the  way  for  the 
position  wliioh  Elisha  is  to  occupy  in  the 
next  section  of  the  history,  under  the  Is- 
raeUte  m'onarchs,  Jehoram,  Jehu,  Jehoabaz, 
and  Jehoash.  Ou  Elisha  falls  the  mantle 
of  Elijah  (ver.  13),  and  with  it  a  portion  of 
his  spirit,  suflHcient  to  enable  him  to  carry 
on  the  prophetic  office  with  vigour  and 
steadfastness. 

Ver.  1. — And  it  oame  to  pass,  when  the 
Lord  would  take  up  Elijah  into  heaven. 
The  subject  is  introduced  as  one  of  general 
notoriety,  the  writer  professing  rather  to 
give  the  exact  details  of  a  well-known  fact, 
than  to  relate  a  new  fact  unknown  to  his 
readers.  "  When  the  time  came,"  he  means 
to  say,  **  for  Elijah's  translation,  of  which 
you,  my  readers,  all  know,  the  following 
were  the  circumstances  under  which  it  took 
place."  The  fact  itself  was  deeply  impressed 
on  the  Jewish  consciousness.  "  Elias,"  says 
the  Son  of  Sirach, "  was  taken  up  in  a  whirl- 
wind  of  fire^  and  in  a  chariot  of  fiery  horses  " 


(Boclns.  xlvia.  9).    He  was   mnked  with 
Enoch,  as  not  having  seen  death  (Josephus, 
'  Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  2.  §  2),  and  was  viewed  as 
"continuing  in  heaven  a  mysterious  life, 
which  no  death  had  ever  interrupted,  whence 
lie  was  ready  at  any  time  to  return  to  earth  " 
(Ewald,  'History  of  Israel,'  vol  iv.  p.  113). 
The  scribes  thought  that  he  was  beyond  all 
doubt   to  make  his  appearance  upon  the 
earth  in  person,  before  the  coming  of  the 
Messiah  (Matt.  xvi.  10>    By  a  whirlwind. 
Sa'arah  is  not  so  much  an  actual  "whirl- 
wind" as  a  storm  or  atmospheric  disturbance 
l(ru(r(retffiJ.6s,  LXX.).   It  is  a  word  which  only 
occurs  here  in  the    historical    Scriptures. 
That  Elijah  went  with  Elisha  from  QilgaL 
Elisha  bad  become  to  Elijah  what  Joshua 
was  to  Moses  (Exod.  ixiv.  13) — ^his  •'  mini- 
ster," or  regular  attendant,  from  the  time  of 
his  call  at  Abel-meholah  (1  Kings  xix.  21). 
Elijah  bad  no  fixed  residence,  but  moved 
from  place  to  place  as  the  Spirit,  of  Ood 
suggested.       His    wanderings    had    now 
brought  him  to  Gilgal  (probably  Jiljilieh, 
near  Nablous),   one   of  the  most  ancient 
sanctuaries  of  the  land  (1  Sam.  x.  8;  xi. 
15,  etc.),  celebrated  in  the  history  of  Saul 
and  Samuel 

Ver.  2. — And  Elijah  said  unto  Elisha, 
Tarry  here,  I  pray  thee ;  for  the  Lord  hath 
sent  me.  Elijah  makes  three  efforts  to  lid 
himself  of  the  presence  of  his  faithful  attend- 
ant (see  vers.  4  and  6),  either  really  desirous 
to  pass  in  solitude  the  few  remaining  hours 
of  his  earthly  life,  for  he  knows  that  his  end 
is  approaching  <[ver8.  9,  10),  or  for  the 
purpose  of  testing  his  fidelity  and  affection. 
Under  ordinary  circumstances,  the  servant 
would  naturally  have  obeyed  his  lord,  and 
submitted  to  a  temporary  separation;  but 
Elisha  has  a  presentiment,  or  something 
stronger  than  a  presentiment,  of  what  is 
impending  (vers.  3,  5),  and  will  not  be  in- 
duced to  accelerate  by  a  single  moment  the 
time  of  the  last  parting.  He  will  remain 
with  his  master,  ready  to  do  him  all  needful 
service,  until  the  end.  To  Bethel  Bethel 
was  the  spiritual  centre  of  the  kingdom  ot 
the  ten  tribes.  There  may  have  been  many 
reasons  why  Elijah  should  visit  it  once  more 
before  he  quitted  the  earth.  He  may  have 
had  directions  to  leave,  consolation  to  give, 
words  of  wai'uing  to  speak.  We  must  not 
suppose  that  the  narrative  before  ns  is 
complete.  And  Elisha  said  unto  him,  As  the 
Lord  liveth,  and  as  thy  soul  liveth.  These 
were  ordinary  forms  of  earnest  asseveration 
with  the  Israelites,  generally  used  separately 
(Judg.  viii.  19;  Ruth  iii.  13;  1  Sam.  i.  26; 
xiv.  39;  xvii.  55;  xix.  6;  xx.  21;  2  Sam.  iv. 
9;  xi.  11,  etc.);  but  on  occasions  of  special 
solemnity  united,  as  here  and  in  1  Sam.  xz. 
8;  xxY.  26;  oh.  iv.  30).  Tlje  prophet  is 
not  to  oe  blamed  for  uaii^g  them,  since  th« 


cti.n.1— 25.]  tHE  SECOirD  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


19 


comnumd,  "  Swear  not  at  all,"  had  not  yet 
been  given.  I  will  not  leave  thee.  The 
resolve  indicates  strong  attachment,  deep 
fidelity,  oombioed,  perhaps,  with  a  reason- 
able curiosity  to  see  how  the  end  would  be 
brought  about.  So  they  went  down  to 
Bethel.  The  expression,"  went  dojon,"  shows 
that  the  Gilgal  of  ver.  1  is  not  that  of  the 
Jordan  valley,  but  the  mountain-city  between 
Sichem  and  Bethel. 

Ver,  3.— The  sons  of  the  prophets  that 
were  at  Bethel.  (On  the  expression,  "  sons 
of  the  prophets,"  see  the  comment  upon 
1  Kings  XX,  35.)  The  institution  of  the 
"schools  of  the  prophets,"  or  theological 
college!  where  young  prophets  were  brought 
up,  is  usually  assigned  to  Samuel,  one  of 
whose  habitual  residences  for  a  part  of  the 
year  was  Bethel  (1  Sam.  vii.  16).  Probably 
he  had  established  a  "  school"  there  which 
continued  to  this  time.  Came  forth  to 
Elisha,  and  said  nnto  him.  The  student! 
did  not  venture  to  addresi  the  master  him- 
self, who  was  a  person  of  too  much  dignity 
to  be  intruded  on ;  but  sought  out  the  ser- 
vant, to  give  him  a  warning  of  what  their 
prophetic  instinct  assured  them  was  about 
to  happen.  Enowest  thou  that  the  Lord 
will  take  away  thy  master  from  thy  head 
(•'.£.  from  his  position  as  teacher  and  master) 
to-day !  There  was,  perhaps,  something  a 
little  ofBcions  and  self-assertive  in  this 
question.  They  might  have  felt  sure,  if 
they  had  been  properly  modest,  that  Elisha 
would  have  at  least  as  much  prophetic  in- 
stinct and  foresight  as  themselves.  Hence 
he  answers  them  with  something  of  rebuke : 
And  he  said.  Yea,  I  know.it — literally,  1  too 
knou)  it — hold  ye  your  peaoe ;  or, "  Hush — do 
not  chatter  about  what  is  so  sacred ;  do  not 
suppose  that  you  are  wiser  than  any  one 
else ;  be  a  little  modest  and  a  little  reticent." 

Ver.  4. — And  Elijah  said  nnto  him.  Tarry 
here,  I  pray  thee.  The  first  trial  of  Elista's 
fidelity  is  followed  by  a  second.  Vlie 
master  suggests  hia  tarrying  at  Bethel,  the 
saored  centre,  where  he  will  have  the  com- 
pany of  the  "  sons  of  the  prophets,"  and  will 
not  be  oompanionless,  as  perhaps  he  would 
have  been  at  Gilgal.  He  himself  is  ordered 
to  take  a  second  journey,  longer  and  rougher 
than  the  first.  For  the  Lord  hath  sent  me 
to  Jerioho.  Will  it  not  be  better  that  Elisha 
shall  spare  himself  the  long  and  rugged 
descent  from  the  high-land  of  Ephraim  to 
the  deep  guUey  of  Jordan,  and  remain  with 
the  frien(£  who  have  sought  him  out,  while 
his  master  accomplishes  the  remainder  of 
his  journey  alone?  And  he  said,  As  the 
Lord  Uveth,  and  as  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will 
not  leave  thee.  Absolute  unohangeableness 
of  resolution  is  best  shown  by  absolute  un- 
changingness  of  speech.  Elisha,  therefore, 
limply  repeats  his  previous  words.    And 


the  master  onoe  more  yields.    8o  they  eami 
to  Jericho. 

Ver.  !). — ^And  the  sons  of  the  prophets 
that  were  at  Jerioho  came  to  Elisha,  and 
said  unto  him,  Enowest  thou  that  the  Lord 
will  take  away  thy  master  from  thy  head 
to-day  t  And  he  answered,  Yea,  I  know  it : 
hold  ye  your  peace.  At  Jericho,  too,  as  well 
as  at  Bethel,  there  was  a  school  of  the 
prophets,  though  the  two  places  were  not 
more  than  about  twenty  miles  apart.  This 
would  seem  to  imply  the  existence  of  a  large 
number  of  such  seminaries  at  this  period. 
Xo  doubt,  when  the  secular  power  was  most 
strongly  opposed  to  true  religion,  the  pro- 
phetical order  had  to  make  increased  efforts 
to  raise  its  numbers  and  multiply  its  schools. 
The  prophets  of  Israel,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered, were,  after  the  withdrawid  of  the 
priests  and  Levites  (2  Ghron.  xi  13,  14), 
the  sole  teachers  of  the  people  in  true 
religion. 

Ver.  6. — And  Elijah  said  unto  him,  Tairy, 
I  pray  thee,  here ;  for  the  Lord  hath  sent  me 
to  Jordan.  Elijah  makes  a  third  effort  to 
detach  his  follower  from  him,  or  a  third 
trial  of  his  fidelity.  He  is  ordered,  not  to 
a  town,  where  his  follower  might  find 
lodging  and  refreshment  and  companion- 
ship, but  into  the  open  country — to  the 
Jordan.  And  then,  who  can  say  whither? 
Will  it  not  be  best  for  Elisha  to  leave  him 
now,  and  not  continue  a  wandering  which 
threatens  to  be  endless  ?  But  the  follower 
is  staunch;  nothing  daunts  him;  and  he 
makes  the  same  reply  as  before.  And  he 
said,  As  the  Lord  liveth,  and  as  thy  soul 
liveth,  I  will  not  leave  tliee.  And  they  two 
went  on. 

Yer.  7. — And  fifty  men  of  the  sons  of  the 
prophets  went,  and' stood  to  view.  It  is  a 
harsh  judgment  to  blame  the  "  sons  of  the 
prophets  "  for  an  idle  and  shallow  curiosity 
in  merely  "standing"  at  a  distance  "to 
view"  the  wonderful  event,  which  Elisha 
was  determined  to  witness  as  closely,  and 
associate  himself  with  as  intimately,  as 
possible.  For  the  sons  of  the  prophets  to 
have  approached  nearer,  and  hung  on  the 
sliirts  of  Elijah,  would  have  been  an  imper- 
tinence. Elisha's  persistence  is  only  justi- 
fied by  his  strong  affection,  and  the  special 
office  which  he  held,  of  attendant  minister. 
The  fifty  students  showed  a  courteous  sense 
of  what  was  due  to  the  prophet's  desire  of 
seclusion  by  not  pressing  on  his  footsteps, 
and  at  the  same  time  a  real  interest  in  him, 
and  a  reasonable  curiosity,  by  quitting  their 
college  and  "standing  to  view"  on  somt 
eminence  which  commanded  a  prospect  of 
the  lower  Jordan  valley.  There  were  many 
such  eminences  within  a  short  distance  of 
Jericho.  And  they  two  stood  by  Jordan.  At 
length  all  other  human  companionship  was 


20 


THE  8ECX)ND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  [oh.  n.  1—25. 


■haken  off—"  the]/  two"  itood,  aide  by  Bids, 
on  the  banks  of  the  Baored  stream,  -whioh 
had  played  bo  important  a  part,  and  was 
Btill  to  play  so  far  more  important  a  part,  in 
the  theocratic  history.  All  tlie  world,  ex- 
cept their  two  selves,  was  remote — was  be- 
yond their  ken ;  the  master  and  the  servant, 
the  prophet  of  the  past  and  the  prophet 
of  the  coming  generation,  were  tugether, 
with  none  to  disturb  them,  or  interfere  be- 
tween them,  or  separate  them.  Jordan  rolled 
its  wiitors  before  their  eyes,  a  seeming  barrier 
to  further  advance;  and  Elisha  may  natu- 
rally have  looked  to  see  the  final  scene 
transacted  in  that  "plain  below  a  plain," 
the  Jordan  bed,  sunk  beneath  the  general 
level  of  the  Ghor,  green  with  lubh  grass 
and  aquatic  plants,  and  with  beds  of  reeds 
and  osiers,  but  squalid  with  long  stretches 
of  mud  and  masses  of  decaying  vegetation, 
brought  down  from  the  upper  river,  and  with 
rotting  trunks  of  trees  torn  from  the  banks 
higher  up.  But  the  end  was  not  yet.  Jor- 
dan was  to  be  crossed,  and  the  ascension  to 
take  place  from  the  plain  whence  Moses, 
when  about  to  quit  earth,  had  made  bis 
ascent  to  Fisgah. 

Ver.  8.— And  Elijah  took  his  mantle  (the 
LXX.  have  rhv  /iiiKtarlii');  the  sheep-skin 
cape  or  capote,  which  covered  his  shoulders. 
And  wrapped  it  together;  rather,  and  rolled 
it  up  (_et\nae,  LXX.);  so  that  it  resembled 
in  some  degree  a  rod  or  staff.  And  [with 
this  he]  smote  the  waters ;  consciously  imi- 
tating the  act  of  Moses  when  he  "  stretched 
out  his  hand  over  the  Bed  Sea"  (Exod.  xiv. 
21),  and  divided  its  waters  asunder.  And 
they  were  divided  hither  and  thither,  so  that 
they  two  went  over  on  dry  pronnd.  The 
parallelism  wii^  the  miiaoulons  acts  of 
Moses  and  Joshua  (Josh.  iii.  13)  is  obvious, 
«iud  allowed  even  by  those  who  view  the  acts 
themselves  as  having  no  historical  founda- 
tion (Ewald,  'History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv. 
p.  Ill,  note,  Eng.  trans.).  It  was  intended 
that  Israel  should  regard  Elijah  and  Elisha 
as  a  second  Moses  and  Joshua,  and  should 
therefore  yield  them  a  ready  obedience.  If 
mirucles  are  impossible,  eadit  quasstio ;  exe- 
gesis of  Scripture,  and  even  reading  of 
Scripture,  may  as  well  be  put  aside.  But  if 
they  are  possible,  and  have  a  place  in  the 
Divine  economy,  here  was  a  worthy  occasion 
for  them.  The  powers  of  the  world  were 
arrayed  against  the  oauBe  of  true  religion 
and  so  against  God;  the  cause  was  about  to 
lose  its  great  chumpion  and  assertor,  Elijah ; 
a  weaker  successor  was  about  to  take  his 
place; — without  some  manifest  display  of 
supenwtural  might  the  cause  of  religion 
would  evidently  iiave  lost  ground,  perhaps 
have  been  ruined  altogether.  It  pleased 
God,  therefore,  just  at  this  time,  to  grant 
that  signs  and  wonders  of  an  extraordinary 


eharaoter  should  be  done  by  the  hands  of  hii 
serrants  Elijah  and  Elisha,  that  a  halo  of 
mystic  glory  should  encircle  them,  for  thft 
better  sustentation  of  his  own  cause  againit 
his  adversaries,  for  the  exaltation  and  glori- 
fication of  his  faithfnl  ones,  and  for  tlv* 
confusion  and  dismay  of  tliose  who  wer» 
opposed  to  them.  Now,  surely,  if  ever,  was 
there  a  dignns  vindiee  nodas,  justifying  a 
miraculous  interposition. 

Yer.  9. — ^And  it  oame  to  pass,  when  they 
were  gone  over,  that  El^ah  said  nnto  Elisha, 
Ask  what  I  shall  do  for  thee,  before  I  be 
taken  away  from  thee.  Elijah  knows  tha^. 
the  time  is  growing  now  very  short.  Ha 
will  soon  have  left  the  earth.  A  yearning 
comes  over  iiim,  before  he  goes,  to  leave  his 
faithful  follower,  his  trusty,  persevering 
adherent,  some  parting  gift,  some  token  of 
his  appreciation,  some  sign  of  his  love. 
What  does  his  "  minister"  desire?  Let  him 
ask  what  he  will,  and  his  master  will,  if  it 
be  possible,  grant  it.  And  Elisha  said,  I 
pray  thee,  let  a  double  portion  of  thy  spirit 
he  upon  me.  Elisha's  request  has  been 
Tarlously  explained.  The  older  commenta- 
tors regarded  him  as  having  asked  for  twice 
•B  much  spiritual  and  prophetical  power  as 
Elijah  had  possessed;  and  this  interpreta- 
tion is  certainly  favoured  by  the  reply  of 
Elijah,  as  recorded  in  the  next  versei  But 
it  is  objected  (1)  that  Elisha's  modesty 
would  prevent  him  from  asking  so  much; 
and  (2)  that  double  the  spirit  and  power 
of  Elijah  certainly  did  not  rest  upon  him. 
This  Uitter  fact  is  quite  undeniable.  As 
KeU  says,  "  It  is  only  a  quite  external  and 
superficial  view  of  the  career  of  Elisha  that 
can  see  in  it  a  proof  that  double  the  spirit 
of  Elijah  rested  upon  him  "  ('  Commentary 
on  Kings,'  cul  ho.").  To  one  who  looks  be- 
neath the  surface,  and  regards  something 
besides  length  of  life  and  number  of  miracles, 
Elisha  is  a  very  faint  and  feeble  replica  of 
Elijah.  Ewald's  judgment  is  here  correct: 
« Elisha  is  great  only  so  far  as  he  con- 
tinues and  carries  out  with  more  force  than 
any  other  man  of  his  time  the  work  wbich 
El^ah  had  begun  with  new  and  wonderful 
power  ...  he  did  not  possess  any  such 
intensity  of  inward  power  as  his  master" 
('History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  82,  Eng. 
trans.).  Accordingly,  Ewald,  rejecting  the 
old  explanation,  suggests  one  of  Ids  own — 
that  Elisha  asked  for  "  two-thirds  of  Elijah's 
spirit "  (ibid.,  p.  81) ;  but  this  would  be  a 
rery  strange  and  unusual  request,  even  if 
the  Hebrew  could  be  made  to  mean  it.  Who 
ever  aaka  for  two-thirds  of  a  thing?  The 
third  explanHtion,  to  which  most  modem 
commentators  incline  (Keil,  Thenius,  Patrick, 
Clarke,  Pool,  Bottcher),  is  that  Elisha 
merely  requested  that  he  might  receive 
twice  as  much  of  El^ah'*  apirit  as  should 


CH.  1.1—25.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


21 


be  received  by  any  other  of  the  "eons  of 
the  prophets,"  He  made  a  reference  to 
Dent.  zxi.  17,  and  asked  for  the  "double 
portion"  (literally,  "double  mouthful") 
which  was  the  right  of  an  eldest  son.  The 
only  objection  to  this  view  is  Elijah's  answer 
^see  the  next  verse). 

Ver.  10. — And  he  said,  Thon  hast  asked  a 
hard  thing;  literally,  thon  hast  been  hard 
in  ashing  {itrKXiipvvas  toO  airiiffaaBat,  LXX.). 
Perhaps  the  " hardness  "  of  the  request  was 
in  the  thing  asked,  not  in  the  quantity  of 
the  thing.  Had  Glislia  asked  for  anything 
that  Elijah  hail  it  directly  in  his  power  to 
give,  as  for  his  mantle,  or  his  blessing,  or 
his  prayers  in  the  other  world,  to  grant  the 
reqmst  would  have  been  easy.  But  he  had 
asked  for  something  that  was  not  Elijah's 
to  give,  but  only  God's.  Elijah  could  not 
bequeath  his  spirit,  as  a  man  bequeaths  his 
property;  he  could  only  pray  God  that 
Elisha's  piou*  request  might  be  granted. 
Nevertheless,  if  thon  see  me  when  I  am 
taken  from  thee,  it  shall  be  so  unto  thee ; 
but  if  not,  it  shall  not  be  so.  Our  trans- 
lators have  thought  to  clear  the  sense  by 
inserting  "nevertheless"  and  "when  I  am." 
But  the  inserted  words  would  be  better  away. 
As  Elijah  cannot  either  grant  or  refuse  a 
request  for  a  spiritual  gift,  which  it  is  not 
in  his  power  to  bestow,  he  is  divinely  in- 
structed to  give  Blisha  a  sign,  by  which  he 
sliall  know  whether  God  grants  his  prayer 
or  not.  The  sign  of  acceptance  is  to  be 
his  actually  seeing  his  master's  translation. 
Probably  the  chariot  and  horses  were  not 
visible  to  the  natural  human  eye,  any  more 
than  the  angelic  hosts  were  who  compassed 
Elisha  himself  about  at  Dothan  (oh.  vi. 
17). 

Yer.  11. — And  it  came  to  pass,  as  thty  still 
went  on,  and  talked  (comp.  Luke  zxiv.  50, 
51).  The  antitype  answers  to  the  type  in 
little  details  as  well  as  in  the  general  out- 
line. That  behold,  there  appeared  a  chariot 
of  fire,  and  horses  of  fire.  God's  "angels 
are  spirits,  and  his  ministers  a  flaming  fire" 
(Ps.  civ.  4).  When  the  eyes  of  Elisha's 
servant  were  opened,  and  he  saw  the  angelio 
host  that  protected  his  master,  it  appeared 
to  him  that  "the  mountain  was  full  of 
horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about 
Elisha"  (ch.  vi.  17).  Material  fire  is,  of 
course,  not  to  be  thought  of.  But  the  glory 
and  brightness  of  celestial  beings,  when 
made  visible  to  man,  has  some  analogy  with 
lire,  or  at  any  rate  brings  the  conception  of 
fire  before  the  mind.  The  historian  doubt- 
less reports  the  account  which  Elisha  g&ve 
of  what  he  saw  un  this  memorable  occasion. 
And  parted  them  both  asunder;  and  Elijah 
went  up  by  a  whirlwind  into  heaven ;  lite- 
rally, and  Elijah  teent  up  in  a  itorm  into 
Ae  heaven*.     There  U  no  mention  of  • 


"  whirlwind ; "  and  "  the  heavens"  are  pri- 
marily the  visible  firmament  or  sky  which 
overhangs  the  earth.  Elijah,  like  our  Lord, 
rose  bodily  from  the  earth  into  the  npper 
region  of  the  air,  and  was  there  lost  to 
sight.  Three  only  of  the  seed  of  Adam — 
Enoch,  Elijah,  Jesus — have  passed  from 
earth  to  heaven  without  dying. 

Ver.  12. — And  Elisha  saw  it  (comp.  ver. 
10).  The  coniiition  was  fulfilled  which 
Elijah  had  lad  down,  and  Elisha  knew 
that  his  request  for  a  "  double  portion  "  of 
his  master's  spirit  was  granted.  And  he 
cried,  My  father !  my  father !  It  was  usual 
for  servants  thus  to  address  their  mastej-s 
(oh.  V.  13),  and  younger  men  would,  out  of 
respect,  almost  always  thus  address  an  aged 
prophet  (ch.  vi.  21 ;  xiii.  14,  etc.).  But 
Elisha  probably  meant  something  more  than 
to  show  respect.  He  regarded  him.^elf  as 
Elijah's  specially  adopted.son,  and  hence 
bad  claimed  the  "double  portion"  of  the 
firstborn.  That  his  request  was  granted 
showed  that  the  relationship  was  acknow- 
ledged. The  chariot  of  Israel,  and  the  horse- 
men thereof;  i.e.  the  best  earthly  defence 
of  Israel.  "  In  losing  thee,"  he  means,  "  we 
lose  our  great  protector— him  that  is  more  lo 
us  than  chariots  and  horsemen — the  strength 
of  Israel,  against  both  domestic  and  foreign 
foes."  The  sight  of  the  fiery  chariot  ai:d 
horses  may  have  determined  the  imagery, 
but  they  are  not  spoken  of.  Note  the  sub- 
stitution of  "  horsemen  "  for  "  horses,"  and 
comp.  ch.  xiii.  10,  where  the  same  expres- 
sion is  used  in  reference  to  Elisha.  And  he 
saw  him  no  more.  Elijah  passed  beyond 
Elisha's  ken.  So  far  as  we  can  gather  from 
the  expressions  employed,  no  cloud  received 
him  (Acts  i.  9),  but  he  gradually  vanished 
from  sight.  And  he  took  hold  of  his  own 
clothes,  and  rent  them  in  two  pieces;  an 
action  marking  extreme  horror  or  extreme 
grief — here  the  latter  (eomo.  Oen.  xxxviL 
29 ;  2  Sam.  xiii.  19 ;  Job  i.  20 ;  ii.  12,  etc.). 

Yer.  13. — He  took  np  also  the  mantle  of 
Elijah  that  fell  from  him,  and  went  back, 
and  stood  by  the  bank  of  Jordan ;  literally, 
the  lip  of  the  Jordan;  that  is,  the  brink  of 
the  stream,  at  the  point,  probably,  where  be 
and  his  master  had  crossed  it. 

Yer.  14. — And  he  took  the  mantle  of 
Elijah  that  fell  ficom  him,  and  smote  the 
waters  -imitated,  t'.e.,  the  action  of  Elijah 
(ver.  8),  as  Elijah  bad  imitated  the  action  of 
Moses  at  the  passage  of  the  Bed  Sea — and 
said,  Where  is  the  Lord  Ood  of  Elijah? 
The  present  Hebrew  text  reads,  "  Where  is 
the  Lord  God  of  Elijah,  even  hel"  the  last 
two  words  being  emphatic ;  but  the  emphasis 
scarcely  appears  to  be  needed.  Hence  the 
translators  have  very  generally  detached  the 
two  words  bom  Eluha's  question,  and,  at- 
twdiing  them  to  the  sncoeeding  okuie,  have 


22 


THE  SECOND  BOO]t  OF  THE  KINGS.  [<«•  n.  1— 26. 


rendered  it,  And  wben'  he  also  had  smitten 
the  waters ;  but  the  position  of  the  vau  coa- 
junctive,  after  Nin-i:]i<  and  before  na*,  makes 
this  division  of  the  clauses  impossible. 
It  has  therefore  been  proposed  by  some  to 
rtad  N1SN,  "now,"  for  Nin-PjS,  "even  he" 
(Houbigant,  Thenius,  Schultz,  Bottoher, 
Uathe),  and  to  translate,  "  Where  now  is  the 
Lord  God  of  Elijah  ?  "  Is  he  still  here,  with 
me,  or  has  he  withdrawn  himself  from  earth 
with  his  prophet,  and  left  me  alone  to  my  own 
unaided  strength  ?  This  gives  a  good  mean- 
ing, but  is  perhaps  too  bold  a  change.  The 
LXX.  had  evidently  our  present  Hebrew 
text  befure  them,  and,  as  they  could  make 
nothing  of  it,  transcribed  it  into  Greek  cha- 
racters, noD  d  ®ehs  'H\iob  lutxpdi ;  they  parted 
hither  and  thither:  and  Elisha  went  over. 
God  showed,  i.e.,  that  he  was  still  with 
Elisha  by  enabling  him  to  repeat  Elijah'! 
last  miracle,  and  thus  gave  him  an  assurance 
that  he  would  be  with  him  thenceforth  in 
his  prophetic  ministry. 

Yer.  15. — And  when  the  sons  of  the 
prophets,  which  were  to  view  at  Jericho 
(see  ver.  7),  saw  him,  they  said,  The  spirit 
of  Elijah  doth  rest  on  I^sha.  It  is  not 
quite  clear  upon  what  grounds  the  sons  of 
the  prophets  came  to  this  conclusion.  Pro- 
bably they  had  seen  the  passage  of  the 
Jordan  by  the  two  prophets,  the  disappear- 
ance of  Elijah,  and  the  return  of  Elisha 
across  the  stream  in  a  way  which  they  may 
have  suspected  to  be  miraculous.  But  the 
Jordan  is  four  or  five  miles  distant  from  the 
city  of  Jericho,  and  their  apprehension  of 
the  various  circumstances  would  be  incom- 
plete, and  more  or  less  vague.  Perhaps 
there  was  something  in  Elisha's  appearance 
And  expression  of  countenance  which  im- 
pressed them,  and  appeared  to  them  to 
mark  his  exitltation  to  a  higher  dignity  and 
spiritual  position.  And  they  came  to  meet 
him,  and  bowed  themselves  to  the  ground 
before  Mm;  thus  acknowledging  him  for 
their  master,  as  they  had  been  wont  to 
acknowledge  Elijah. 

Yer.  16. — And  they  said  nnto  him.  The- 
nius suggests  that  Elisha  first  related  to 
them  what  had  befallen  his  master;  but 
the  impression  left  by  the  narrative  is  rather 
that  they  began  the  conversation,  being 
aware  of  Elijah's  disappearance,  which  in 
that  clear  atmosphere  they  may  have  dis- 
tinctly perceived,  though  the  ascension  may 
not  have  been  visible  to  them.  Keil  thinks 
that  they  Saw  the  ascension,  but  supposed 
that  the  body,  after  being  taken  up  a  certain 
height  into  the  air,  would  necessarily  tall  to 
earth,  and  that  they  wished  to  find  it  and 
bury  it.  But  the  natural  interpretation  is 
that  they  thought  the  prophet  had  been 
"  caught  away  "  by  a  Divine  influence,  as 
Philip  the  evangelist  was  in  later  times 


(Acts  viii.  39),  and  wcnld  be  fonnd  some- 
where alive,  as  Philip  "was  fonnd  at 
Azotus."  Behold  now,  there  be  with  thy 
servants  fifty  strong  men ;  literally,  soni  of 
strength;  i.e.  stout,  active  persons,  capable 
of  climbing  the  rough  and  precipitous  rocks 
among  which  they  thought  that  Elijah 
might  be  cast.  Let  them  go,  we  pray  thee, 
and  seek  thy  master :  lest  peradventure  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  hath  taken  him  up, 
and  cast  Vi'Tn  upon  some  mountain,  or  into 
some  valley.  On  either  side  of  the  eiccar, 
or  Jordan  plain,  are  rugged  districts,  con- 
sisting of  alternate  roc^  mountain  slopes 
and  narrow  gulleys,  or  water-courses,  dry 
during  the  greater  part  of  the  year.  The 
sons  of  the  prophets  think  that  Elijah  has 
been  carried  by  the  Spirit  of  God  into  one 
or  other  of  these  mountain  tracts,  and  wish 
to  search  them.  And  he  said,  Te  shall  not 
send ;  or,  do  not  eend ;  meaning,  "  it  will  be 
useless — yon  vrill  find  nothing — it  is  not  as 
you  suppose." 

Yer.  17. — And  when  they  urged  him,  till 
he  was  ashamed,  he  said.  Send;  literally, 
when  they  urged  him  until  shame  ;  which  some 
expound  to  mean,  "  until  they  were  ashamed . 
to  press  him  any  more "  (desenius,  Winer, 
Keil) ;  but  others,  with  more  reason,  "  until 
he  was  ashamed  to  persist  in  his  refusal " 
{ki>i  ov  ^(Tx^fETo,  LXX.).  It  is  always  • 
hard  thing  for  one  man  to  refuse  the  re- 
peated and  earnest  request  of  a  multitude. 
When  Elisha  said,  "  Send,"  he  had  not  in 
the  least  changed  his  mind ;  he  only  meant 
to  say,  "  Send,  then,  if  you  insist  upon  it, 
to  satisfy  younelvet,  not  me.  There  is  no 
harm  in  your  sending."  They  sent  therefore 
fifty  men ;  and  they  sought  three  days,  but 
fonnd  him  not.  The  result  bore  out  the 
advice  and  anticipations  of  the  prophet 
It  was  simply  nil.  No  trace  was  found  of 
the  aged  seer  who  had  been  translated  from 
earth  to  heaven. 

Yer.  18. — ^And  when  they  oame  again  to 
him,  (for  he  tarried  at  Jericho,)  he  said  unto 
them,  Sid  I  not  say  nnto  you,  Oo  not  1  The 
prophet  was  not  above  vindicating  the  pro- 
priety of  his  past  conduct.  He  waited  at 
Jericho  until  the  fifty  men  returned  from 
their  vain  search,  and  then  reminded  ihem 
that  his  advice  to  them  had  been  not  to 
start  on  a  useless  errand.  The  ministers  of 
God  have  to  vindicate  themselves,  because 
God's  honour  is  concerned  in  their  being 
without  reproach. 

Yers.  19—25. — ^The  historian  passes  to 
the  record  of  some  of  Elisha's  minor  mi- 
racles, belonging  to  the  time  whereof  he  li 
writing,  and  helping  to  explain  the  position 
of  dignity  and  respect  which  he  is  found  to 
occupy  in  the  next  chapter  (vera.  11 — 14) 


OH.  n.  1 — ^25.] 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


23 


The  miraclea  Bhowed  bis  twofold  power, 
both  to  confer  benefits  and  to  punish. 

Yer.  19. — And  the  men  of  the  city — f«. 
the  inhabitants  of  Jeiicho ;  probably  the 
civio  authorities,  having  heard  of  the  recent 
miracle — said  unto  Diisha,  Behold,  I  pray 
thee,  the  situation  of  this  city  is  pleasant, 
as  my  lord  seeth.  According  to  the  unani- 
mous voice  of  travellers,  the  situation  of 
Jericho  (now  Erilia)  is  chaiming.  Lying 
on  a  broad  plain  which  is  traversed  by  an 
abundant  river,  at  the  point  where  one  of 
the  main  wadys  debouched  from  the  Judsean 
upland  upon  the  low  country,  shaded  by 
groves  of  palm  trees  (Deut.  xxxiv.  3)  and 
tig-mulberries  (Luke'  xix.  4),  the  air  scented 
with  aromatic  shrubs,  opobalsam,  myroba- 
lanum,  and  the  like,  facing  the  Orient  sun, 
and  commanding  a  wide  prospect  both 
across  and  also  up  and  down  the  Ghor, 
with  the  mountains  of  Moab  in  the  distance, 
Jericho  was,  no  doubt,  even  before  the  mi- 
racle of  Elisha,  a  «  pleasant "  place.  But — 
there  was  one  drawback — the  water  .  is 
naught,  and  the  ground  barren.  Bitter  and 
brackish  springs,  of  which  there  are  many 
in  the  Jordan  valley,  gushed  forth  from  the 
foot  of  the  mountains,  and  formed  rivulets, 
which  ran  across  the  plain  towards  the 
Jordan,  not  diffusing  health  and  fertility, 
but  rather  disease  and  barrenness.  Un- 
timely births,  abortions,  and  the  like  pre- 
vailed among  the  cattle  which  were  fed  iu 
the  neighbourhood,  perhaps  even  among  the 
inhabitants  of  the  lociility,  and  were  attri- 
buted to  the  bitter  springs,  which  made  the 
land  "miscarrying"  (dreicrau/ieVr),  LXX.). 
It  was  the  prayer  of  the  men  of  Jericho 
that  Elisha  would  remove  this  inconvenience. 

Yer.  20. — And  he  said,  Bring  me  a  new 
cmse.  Impurity  must  be  cleaused  by  means 
that  are  wholly  clean  and  pure.  The 
prophet  called  for  an  absolutely  new  cruse, 
one  that  had  been  put  to  no  use  at  all,  and 
therefore  could  not  have  been  defiled.  And 
put  salt  therein.  Salt,  which  physically 
would  be  most  unapt  to  heal  an  unwhole- 
some stream  already  holding  too  much  salt 
in  solution,  is  selected  doubtless  as  em- 
blematic of  purity,  being  that  by  which 
corruption  is  ordinarily  prevented  or  stayed. 
Under  the  Law  every  offering  was  to  be 
purified  by  salt  (Lev.  it.  13).  The  same 
symbolism  is  BtUl  employed  under  the 
gospel  (see  Matt.  v.  13;  Mark  ix.  49; 
Luke  xiv.  34).    And  they  brought  it  to  him. 

Yer.  21.— And  he  went  forth  unto  the 
spring  of  the  waters,  and  cast  the  salt  in 
there.  The  " spring"  intended  is  supposed 
to  be  that  now  called  Ain-es-Sultan,  "the 
spring  of  the  Sultan,"  which  is  the  only 
eopious  source  near  the  site  of  the  ancient 
Jericho.  The  modem  town  lies  at  a  distance 


of  two  miles  from  it.  Ain-es-Snltftn  is  de- 
scribed as  "  a  large  and  beautiful  fountain 
of  sweet  and  pleasant  water"  (Bobinson, 
'  Besearches,'  voL  ii.  p.  384),  and  as  "  scat- 
tering, even  at  the  hottest  season,  the  richest 
and  most  grateful  vegetation  over  what 
would  otherwise  be  a  bare  tract  of  sandy 
soil."  The  other  springs  of  the  neighbour- 
hood are  mostly  brackish.  And  said,  Thus 
saith  the  Lord,  I  have  healed  these  waters ; 
there  shall  not  be  from  thenoe — i.e.  from  the 
waters — any  more  death  or  barren  land; 
rather,  or  mucarrying. 

Yer.  22. — So  the  waters  were  healed  unto 
this  day,  according  to  the  saying  of  Elisha 
which  he  spake.  It  was  not  a  mere  tempo- 
rary, but  a  permanent,  benefit  which  Elisha 
bestowed  upon  the  town. 

Yer.  23. — And  he  went  np  from  thenoe 
unto  Bethel.  The  ascent  is  steep  and  long 
from  the  Jordan  valley  to  the  highlands  of 
Benjamin,  on  which  Bethel  stood,  probably 
one  of  not  less  than  three  thousand  feet.  The 
object  of  Elisha's  visit  may  have  been  to 
inform  the  "  sous  of  the  prophets  "  at  Bethel 
(ver.  3)  of  the  events  that  had  befallen 
Elijah.  And  as  he  was  going  up  by  the 
way — i.e.  by  the  usual  road  or  pathway,  for, 
in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  roads  did 
not  exist  in  Palestine — there  came  forth 
little  children  out  of  the  city.  "Little 
children"  is  an  unfortunate  translation, 
raising  quite  a  wrong  idea  of  the  tender  age 
of  the  persons  spoken  of.  On  the  otlier 
hand,  Bishop  Patrick's  assertion  that  the 
words  are  to  be  "understood  of  adult 
persons,  who  had  a  hatred  to  the  prophet," 
is  quite  untenable.  Na&rim  ketanaim  would 
be  best  translated  (as  by  our  Revisers  in  the 
margin)  "  young  lads  " — ^boys,  that  is,  from 
twelve  to  fifteen.  Such  mischievous  youths 
are  among  the  chief  nuisances  of  Oriental 
towns;  they  waylay  the  traveller,  deride 
him,  jeer  him — are  keen  to  remark  any 
personal  defect  that  he  may  have,  and  mer- 
ciless in  flouting  it;  they  dog  his  steps, 
shout  out  their  rude  remarks,  and  sometimes 
proceed  from  abusive  words  to  violent  acts, 
as  the  throwing  of  sticks,  or  stones,  or  mud. 
On  this  occasion  they  only  got  as  far  as 
rude  words.  And  mocked  hiju,  and  said  onto 
him,  Go  up,  thou  bald  head!  go  up,  thon 
bald  head !  It  has  been  maintained  that  the 
scoff  of  the  lads  contained  an  allusion  to  the 
ascension  of  Elijah  (Patrick,  Pool,  Clarke), 
of  which  tliey  had  heard,  and  was  a  call 
upon  Elisha  to  follow  his  master's  example 
iu  quitting  the  world,  that  they  might  be 
no  longer  troubled  with  him.  But  it  is  not 
at  all  apparent  that  the  lads  even  knew 
who  Elisha  was — they  would  probably  have 
jeered  at  any  aged  person  with  whom  they 
had  fallen  in ;  and  by  "  Go  up  "  they  merely 
meant  "  Oo  on  thy  way ; "  the  foree  of  tbeii 


24 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  [oh.  n.  1-25. 


jeer  wm  not  in  the  word  'aUh,  but  in  the 
word  kiriach,  "  bald  head."    Baldness  was 
sometimeB  produced  by  leprosy,  and  then 
made  a  man  unclean  (Lev.  xiii.  42 — 44) ; 
but  the  boys  probably  flouted   the  mere 
natural  defect,  in  which  there  was  no  "  un- 
cleanness"  (Lev.  xiii.  40,  41),  but  which 
they  regarded  as  a  fit  subject  for  ridicule. 
Their  sin  was  disrespect  towards  old  age, 
combined,  perhaps,  with  disrespect  for  the 
prophetical  order,  to  which  they  may  have 
known  from  liis  dress  that  Elisha  belonged. 
Ver.  24. — ^And  he  turned  back,  and  looked 
on  them ;  rather,  and  he  looked  behind  him, 
and  saw  them,  as  iu  the  Kevised  Version. 
The  boys,  after  the  manner  of  boys,  were 
foUiiwing  hioi,  hanging  upon  him,  not  daring 
to  draw  too  near,  hooting  him  from  behind, 
as  ill-bred  and  ill-iivteiitioned  youths  are 
apt  to  do.    And  cursed  them  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord.    The  action  cannot  be  defended 
from  a  Christian  point  of  view — Christians 
have  no  right   to  curse  any  one.     But  we 
can  well   understand  that,  under  the  old 
covenant,    a    prophet    newly   installed    in 
office,  and  commencing  his  ministry,  might 
deem  it  right  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  his 
ofBce  by  visiting  such   conduct  as  that  of 
these  misguided  youths  with  a  malediction. 
Under  the  Law  God's  ministers  were  re- 
quired to  curse  the  disobedient  (Deut.  xxvii. 
14 — 26).    Elisha  could  not  tell  what  would 
be  the  effect  of  his  curse.    It  could  have  no 
effect  at  all  excepting  through  the  wiU  and 
by  the  action  of  God.    And  there  came  forth 
two  she-bears  out  of  the  wood;  or,  the 
forett;  i.e.  the  forest,  which,  as  all  knew,  lay 
within  a  short  distance  of  Bethel,  and  was 
the  haunt  of  wild  beasts  (see  1  Kings  iii. 
24).    And  tare  forty  and  two  children  of 
them.    It  is  not  said  how  far  the  lads  were 
injured,  whether  fatally  or  not.    But  the 
punishment,  whatever  its   severity,  came 
from  God,  not  from  the  prophet,  and  we 


may  be  sure  wa«  just.  For  "  shall  not  the 
Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?"  A  severe 
example  may  have  been  needed  under  the 
circumstances  of  the  time,  when  a  new 
generation  was  growing  up  in  contempt  of 
God  and  of  religion ;  and  the  sin  of  the  lads 
was  not  a  small  one,  but  indicated  that 
determined  bent  of  the  will  against  good, 
and  preference  of  evil,  which  is  often  de- 
veloped early,  and  generally  goes  on  from 
bad  to  worse. 

Ver.  25. — And  he  went  from  thence  to 
Mount  Carmel.  Ewald  thinks  that  Carmel 
was,  on  the  whole,  the  main  residence  of 
Elijah,  and  "  through  him  became  a  special 
prophetic  locality  "  ('  History  of  Israel,' 
vol.  iv.  p.  68).  If  BO,  we  may  account  for 
llllisha's  visiting  it  on  this  occasion  by  his 
desire  to  communicate  the  facts  of  Elijah's 
removal  from  earth  to  those  who  had  been 
his  intimates  in  that  quarter.  And  from 
thence  he  returned  to  Samaria.  Elisha  does 
not  imitate  the  wild,  half-savage  life  and 
almost  constant  seclusion  of  liis  master.  He 
"prefers  from  the  first  the  companionship 
of  men,"  fixes  his  home  in  the  capital  of  his 
country,  Samaria  (ch.  v.  9;  vi.  32);  is  a 
friendly  counsellor  of  the  king  (ch.  vi.  9), 
and  highly  honoured  by  him  (ch.  viii.  4); 
his  whole  life,  indeed,  is,  compared  with  that 
of  Elijah,  one  of  aase  and  tranquillity.  But, 
though  living  "in  the  world,"  he  is  not  "of 
the  world."  As  Ewald  says,  "In  spite  of 
all  the  seductions  to  which  he  was  abun- 
dantly exposed  through  the  great  consider- 
ation in  which  he  was  held,  he  retained  at 
every  period  of  his  life  the  true  prophetic 
simplicity  and  purity,  and  contempt  for 
worldly  wealth  and  advantages"  ('History 
of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  83).  He  is  thus,  far 
more  than  Elijah,  a  pattern  for  Christian 
ministers,  especially  for  such  as  are  highly 
placed,  who  will  do  well  to  follow  hia 
ezunple. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Preparation  for  our  departure  from  earfk.  Abnormal  as  was  the 
mode  of  Elijah's  departure  from  the  earth,  his  conduct  In  prospect  of  departure  may 
be  to  some  extent  a  lesson  to  Christians.    Note — 

I.  His  besionation.  No  murmur  escapes  him;  he  shows  no  unwillingness  to 
depart,  no  clinging  to  earth,  no  fear  of  removal,  no  shrinking  from  entrance  on  the 
unseen  world.  When  God  determines  that  the  objects  with  which  he  has  been  placed 
upon  the  earth  are  accomplished,  and  that  the  Divine  purposes  will  now  be  best  carried 
out  by  other  agents,  he  is  quite  ready  to  go,  satisfied  to  depart,  content  that  God 
should  do  with  him  as  seemeth  him  good.  Occupied  with  listening  intently  to  the 
Divine  voice  which  speaks  within  him,  and  executing  its  mandates,  he  moves  from 
place  to  place,  as  ordered,  indifferent  where  he  is  or  what  toils  he  undergoes,  so  that  to 
the  last  he  may  faithfully  perform  the  Divine  will. 

II.  His  absobftion  in  Divine  contemplation  and  ueditatioii.  The  tUngs  of 
earth  concera  him  no  mor«.    He  moves  on  in  a  holy  calm,  wrapt  in  pious  thought,  no# 


OH.  n.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  25 

even  Bpeaking,  except  in  rare  snatches,  to  his  attached  follower.  The  unseen  world, 
the  coming  change,  the  things  of  heaven,  occupy  him.  He  does  not  address,  -perhaps 
he  scarcely  sees,  the  "  sons  of  the  prophets,"  who  come  forth  to  take  their  last  look  on 
the  great  teacher  of  the  day.  The  time  is  too  solemn  a  one  for  greetings,  or  conver- 
sations, or  even  exhortations.  He  does  not  seek  to  "  improve  the  occasion,"  as 
shallower  spirits  might  have  done.  In  silence  he  goes  his  way,  his  mind  fixed  on  God 
and  the  things  of  God — things  ineffable,  inexpressible — which  "  eye  hath  not  seen, 
nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  "  to  conceive,  but  which  are 
revealed  in  flashes  to  the  soul  about  to  depart,  and  give  it  a  foretaste  of  the  final  "  joy 
of  the  Lord." 

III.  His  considbbation,  despite  his  absorption,  fob  his  attached  followbb. 
Nothing  is  more  common  than  for  persons,  in  the  near  prospect  of  death,  to  be  wholly 
occupied  with  themselves,  and  to  have  no  consideration  at  all  for  others — to  lose  them 
out  of  sight,  to  forget  them.  Elijah,  thoi^h  wrapt  in  holy  contemplation,  is  con- 
stantly mindful  of  his  follower.  Three  times  he  suggests  that  his  attendance  is  not 
necessary,  and  that  he  should  spare  himself  the  toil  and  trouble  of  tedious  journeys 
(vers.  2,  4,  6).  Finally,  he  invites  him  to  ask  whatever  boon  he  pleases,  with  an 
implied  pledge  that,  if  it  be  within  his  power,  he  will  grant  it.  The  boon  asked  is  one 
not  directly  in  his  power  to  grant ;  but  he  does  not  refuse  it  on  that  account.  He 
consults  God  secretly  as  to  the  Divine  will  with  respect  to  it,  and  obtains  an  answer 
which  sustains  the  spirit  of  his  follower,  and  makes  the  moment  of  his  bereavement 
one  also  of  comfort  and  triumph  to  him. 

Vers.  2 — 12. — Faithful  friendship.  Though  Elisha  is  said  to  have  "  ministered  "  to 
Elijah  (1  Rings  xix.  21),  and  to  have  "  poured  water  on  his  hands  "  (ch.  iii.  H),  yet 
he  was  far  more  Elijah's  friend  than  his  servant.  There  was  no  broad  difference  of 
lank  between  the  two  to  hinder  this.  Bather  Elisha  was,  in  original  worldly  position, 
the  higher  of  the  two.  The  glimpse  we  get  of  his  early  home  in  1  Kings  xix.  19 — 21 
is  indicative  of  comfort  and  wealth.  In  education  and  manners  he  must  have  been 
quite  Elijah's  equal.  A  friendship,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term,  was  thus  possible 
between  them,  and  seems  to  have  existed,  and  to  have  been  warm  and  true.  It  was 
a  friendship,  however,  in  which  a  certain  disparity  was  recognized  on  either  side — the 
ipiKia  KaB'  iTrepoxh"  of  Aristotle.  Elijah  was  the  elder  man  of  the  two ;  he  had,  when 
the  two  became  acquainted,  the  higher  sociid  position,  being  familiar  with  the  court  at 
the  time  when  Elisha  was  a  mere  well-to-do  farmer ;  and,  as  the  recognized  head  of 
the  prophetical  order,  he  had  a  jwotsj-ecclesiastical  position  far  higher  than  that  which 
Elisha  occupied  during  his  lifetime.  The  French  proverb  says,  "  Dans  les  amitids  il 
y  a  toujours  un  qui  aime,  et  I'autre  qui  est  aim^ ; "  and,  under  the  circumstances,  it  was 
natural  that  the  attachment  should  be  warmest  on  Elisha's  side.  1.  Elisha  shows  his 
attachment  by  that  continuous  ministry  which  caused  him  to  be  designated  as 
"  Elisha,  which  poured  water  on  the  hands  of  Elijah  "  (oh.  iii.  11) — that  constant  waiting 
upon  the  great  prophet,  and  unceasing  service,  which  lasted  from  the  casting  of  the 
mantle  at  Abel-Meholah  to  the  ascent  in  the  chariot  and  horses  of  fire.  2.  He  shows 
it  by  his  determination  to  see  the  last  of  his  friend,  to  remain  in  his  company  as  long 
as  he  possibly  can.  3.  He  shows  it  very  remarkably  by  the  sympathy  which  he 
displays  with  Elijah's  mood  on  the  journey  from  Gilgal  to  the  plain  east  of  Jordan,  the 
silence  which  he  keeps,  the  brief  replies  which  he  makes,  the  care  which  he  takes  that 
his  master's  meditations  shall  be  kept  free  from  disturbance.  4.  Finally,  he  shows  it 
by  his  deep  grief  when  the  hour  of  parting  comes ;  the  exclamation  forced  from  him. 
"My  father!  my  father! "  and  the  violent  rending  of  his  clothes  into  two  pieces,  whicli 
was  something  very  different  from  the  conventional  rending  of  ordinary  mourners. 
As  David  and  Jonathan  furnish  the  scriptural  model  for  a  friendship  between  equals, 
so  Elijah  and  Elisha  may  properly  be  regarded  as  the  model  for  a  friendship  between 
unequals,  both  equally  constant,  but  perhaps  not  both  equally  loving — one  the  pro- 
tector, the  director,  the  benefactor,  the  teacher,  the  master,  the  guide ;  the  other  the 
dependent,  the  scholar,  the  servant,  the  faithful  devotedly  attached  follower,  admirer, 
almost  slave ;  hound  together  in  a  lifelong  bond  always  becoming  more  and  more  close, 
and  presented  to  us,  not  merely  to  awaken  in  us  a  passing  interest,  but  to  stir  us  imder 
luitaole  oiroumstances  to  imitation. 


«•  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  [oh.  n,  1— 2S. 

Vor.fl.-DmV«/or  spiritual  exaltation.  The  Apostle  Paul  exhorts  his  converts  to 
•'  covet  earnestly  the  bist  gifts  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  31).  Selfishness  can  intrude  everywhere ; 
and  no  doubt  there  may  be  a  selfish  desire  for  high  spiritual  gifts  and  powers,  merely 
to  promote  our  individual  glorification.  We  must  be  on  our  guard,  not  only  against 
the  more  vulgar  forms  of  selfishness,  but  also  against  those  rarer  and  more  recondite 
forms  of  it  which  constitute  the  specUl  temptations  of  minds  not  accessible  to  low 
motives  of  the  ordinary  kind.  It  is,  perhaps,  difficult  for  us,  in  all  cases,  to  discern  our 
own  motives ;  but  an  honest  wish  to  discern  them  will  go  a  long  way  towards  enabling 
us  to  arrive  at  the  truth.    Desire  for  spiritual  exaltation  is  noble,  pure,  and  right— 

T.  "When  oub  mottvb  is  to  be  of  oreatee  use  to  others.  In  this  case  our 
wish  will  be  for  the  gifts  which  tend  most  to  the  good  of  others— for  the  power  to 
edify,  for  the  power  to  console,  for  the  power  to  convert  the  wicked,  for  the  power  to 
strengthen  the  upright.  We  shall  not  desire  to  be  clever,  or  eloquent,  or  logica),  or 
deeply  learned ;  but  to  be  able  to  win  souls  to  Christ.  We  shall  not  be  concerned 
about  other  persons'  estimates  of  us;  we  shall  not  want  their  admiration,  or  their 
praise,  or  even  their  good  opinion ;  but  we  shall  want  to  see  some  fruit  of  our  minis- 
terial labours,  some  increase  of  earnestness  and  spiritual-raindedness  amongst  those  who 
are  committed  to  our  charge,  some  improvement  in  their  habits,  some  greater  seal, 
some  wanner  devotion,  some  higher  spirit  of  self-sacrifice. 

II.  When  our  motive  is  the  gebateb  glory  of  God.  God  is  glorified  in  the 
perfection  of  his  creatures ;  and  desire  of  spiritual  exaltation  is  right  when  we  really 
and  truly  desire  it  for  this  end.  But  it  is  hard  to  know  when  this  is  the  case.  Great 
saints,  no  doubt,  have  attained  to  such  a  condition,  and  have  longed  to  reach  nearer  and 
nearer  to  spiritual  perfectness,  not  from  any  selfish  motive,  but  purely  to  do  more 
honour  to  God,  to  glorify  him  in  their  souls  and  spirits,  which  are  God's.  But  so  few 
attain  to  this  spiritual  height,  that  a  man  can  scarcely  be  justi6ed  in  assuming  to  him- 
self that  he  has  reached  it.  We  shall  do  well  to  suspect  our  own  motives ;  to  keep 
strict  watch  upon  ourselves,  to  be  on  our  guard  against  the  insidiousness  of  self-seeking. 
Ascetics  in  all  ages,  and  some  in  the  present  age  who  do  not  affect  any  remarkable 
strictness  or  severity  of  life,  but  call  themselves  searchers  after  occult  science,  or  after 
the  higher  wisdom,  or  esoteric  Buddhists,  or  by  some  other  similar  outlandish  name,  and 
profess  to  be  seeking  high  spiritual  perfection  as  their  own  highest  good,  do  not  for  the 
most  part  seek  to  conceal  the  selfishness  of  their  aims,  or  pretend  to  be  actuated  either 
by  the  wish  to  benefit  others  or  the  desire  to  promote  the  glory  of  God.  Their  self- 
training  and  self-culture  begin  and  end  in  self,  and  have  nothing  noble,  or  grand,  or 
admirable  about  them ;  but,  if  they  are  insincere,  are  a  cloak  for  ordinary  vulgar  self- 
seeking,  and,  if  they  are  sincere,  are  the  result  of  a  delusion  cast  on  them  by  Satan. 

Vera.  14 — 24. — The  signs  of  a  teacher  sent  from  God.  No  man  is  entitled  to  assume 
the  position  of  a  teacher  sent  from  God  of  his  own  mere  motion,  or  without  some 
external  authorization.  "  How  can  men  preach,  except  they  he  sent  t "  (Rom.  x.  15). 
Where  an  organization  has  been  established  by  Divine  agency,  human  authorization, 
the  mission  of  those  to  whom  the  power  of  mission  has  been  assigned,  is  sufficient. 
But  where  there  is  no  such  established  Church  system,  the  commission  has  to  be  given 
directly  by  God,  and  can  only  be  attested  to  man  by  the  accompaniment  of  miracu- 
lous powers.  Miraculous  operations  may  be  of  three  kinds  :  (1)  ripara,  mere  "  wonders," 
suspensions  of  or  departures  from  the  ordinary  course  of  nature;  (2)  icE/taTo,  "cures," 
works  of  mercy,  miraculous  interpositions  for  the  benefit  of  mankind  at  large,  or  of 
certain  persons;  and  (3)  ipSopat,  "destructions,"  miraculous  hurts  to  persons  or  things, 
withering  up  of  limbs,  smitings  with  leprosy,  or  with  palsy,  or  with  death  itself.  It 
has  often  been  remarked  that  our  Lord's  miracles  were  predominantly  of  the  second 
kind.  The  same  may  be  said  of  Elisha's.  But  as,  in  the  providence  of  God,  it  was 
thought  fitting  that  our  Lord,  besides  his  numerous  miracles  of  mercy,  should  work 
some  mere  wonders,  as  walking  on  the  sea,  passing  through  closed  doors  (John  xx.  19), 
ascending  up  in  his  human  body  to  heaven ;  and  should  also  work  at  least  one  miracle 
of  destruction,  the  withering  up  of  the  barren  fig  tree  through  his  curse;  so  also 
Elisha's  mission  was  attested  by  miracles  of  all  three  kinds.  First  of  all,  he  exhibits 
a  "wonder"  by  dividing  Jordan;  then  he  works  a  miracle  of  mercy,  by  healing  the 
Utter  waters;  thirdly,  by  his  cutae,  he  brings  about  a  miracle  of  destruction,  or  tt 


OH.  n.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  27 

leut  of  serious  injury,  through  the  she-hears  tearing  the  children.  He  is  thus 
shown  forth  to  his  nation  as  God's  accredited  messenger,  endowed  with  miraculous 
power  of  each  kind,  and  theiefore  entitled  to  speak  to  them  with  full  and  complete 
authority. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Parting  visits.  Here,  through  the  telescope  of  Scripture  story,  we  are 
permitted  to  witness  the  closing  scene  of  a  great  lite.  Let  us  draw  near  and  look 
carefully  at  what  happens  there,  for  the  like  of  it  only  happened  once  hefore — and  of 
that  we  have  little  record — and  it  has  never  happened  since.  Only  two  men,  Encch 
and  Elijah,  went  straight  from  earth  to  heaven  without  passing  through  the  valley  ut' 
death.  It  was  true  of  Elijah  as  well  as  of  Enoch,  that  "  he  walked  with  God."  It  is  a 
solemn  time,  surely,  in  a  man's  life  when  he  knows  that  his  earthly  journey  is  drawin'^ 
to  a  close,  that  the  shadows  of  death  are  closing  iu  upon  bim,  a^d  that:  eternity  is 
opening  up  before  him.  It  is  well  for  those  who,  like  Elijah,  are  ready  to  depart. 
"  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the 
things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him."  It  is  a  solemn  time,  too, /or 
those  who  are  left  hehind.  What  anxious  questioning !  What  possible  doubts  about 
the  future!  What  eagerness  to  look  behind  the  veil  and  penetrate  the  darkness  which 
hides  the  loved  one  from  our  view  1  How  happy  those  who  by  the  eye  of  faith  can 
see  their  departed  ones  entering  through  the  gates  into  the  city,  to  be  for  ever  with  the 
Lordl  It  is  quite  evident  that  God  had  conveyed  to  Elijah  some  intimation  of  the 
fact  that  he  was  so  soon  to  be  taken  away  from  earth.  The  sons  of  the  prophets  were 
aware  of  it,  and  Elisha  knew  it  also.  But  Elijah  seems  to  have  felt  no  personal  anxiety 
at  the  thought.  Many  hundred  years  after  this,  when  John  Enox — the  Elijah  of 
Scotland — was  on  his  death-bed,  he  said  to  those  who  stood  around  him,  "  Oh,  serve 
the  Lord  in  fear,  and  death  shall  not  be  terrible  unto  youl"  Something  like  this  was 
Elijah's  experience.  He  had  been  faithful  to  God's  cause  and  commands  during  his 
life,  and  now  he  was  not  afraid  that  God  would  forsake  him  at  its  close.  How,  then, 
did  Elijah  spend  the  few  hours  that  remained  to  him  hefore  he  entered  into  the  presence 
of  his  Maker  t  Some  there  are  who  would  like  to  spend  those  hours  in  peaceful 
contemplation  alone  with  God.  Elijah  was  himself  a  man  of  contemplative  disposition. 
He  loved  to  be  alone  with  God.  His  "  soul  was  like  a  star,  and  dwelt  apart."  And 
yet,  with  all  this,  the  active  was  stronger  in  him  than  the  contemplative ;  or  rather, 
the  two  were  so  well  balanced  that  the  one  was  a  help  to  the  other.  From  his  hours 
of  solitude  and  communion  with  God  he  drew  inspiration  and  strength  for  his  stem 
conflicts  with  men  and  sin.  If  he  was  a  man  of  contemplation,  he  was  also  a  man  of 
action.  And  so  we  find  him  spending  the  greater  part  of  his  closing  hours  in  busy 
activity  cmd  usefulness — visiting  the  schools  of  the  prophets.  Is  there  not  a  lesson  here  ? 
Ought  we  not  to  imitate  Elijah  in  redeeming  the  time,  in  working  while  it  is  day  ?  Do 
you  want  to  spend  your  last  hours  well  f  If  so,  you  should  spend  every  day  as  you 
would  like  to  spend  your  last.  One  day  a  lady  asked  John  Wesley  how  he  would 
spend  that  day  if  he  knew  it  was  to  be  his  last.  She  doubtless  expected  some  rules 
for  pious  meditation  and  seclusion.  His  answer  was,  "  Just,  madam,  as  I  intend  to 
spend  it;"  and  then  he  proceeded  to  tell  her  what  his  busy  programme  of  work 
was  for  the  day.  Oh,  that  we  could  all  say  that  every  day,  that  if  it  was  to  be  our 
last  we  would  spend  it  just  as  *e  intend  to  spend,  it  1  We  ought  to  be  able  to  say  it, 
for  any  day  may  be  our  last.  No  doubt  there  are  many  whom  God  lays  aside  by  age, 
or  infirmity,  or  suffering  for  weeks,  or  months,  or  years  before  he  calls  them  home.  They 
cannot  spend  their  closing  hours  in  what  is  usually  called  work  for  Christ,  though  they 
may  be  really  working  for  him  by  their  patience  iu  suffering,  by  their  faith  and  hope, 
by  their  words  of  counsel  to  others.  But  so  long  as  God  gives  us  health  and  strength' 
to  work  for  him,  then  it  is  best  to  do  as  Elijah  did — to  live  in  harness  to  the  last. 
Notice  the  scene  of  Elijah's  closing  labours.  He  visited  the  schools  of  the  prophets, 
the  colleges  or  institutions  where  young  men  were  trained  for  their  future  work  of 
teaching  others  the  truths  of  religion.  It  was  amongst  the  young  bis  last  hours  were 
spent.    Elijah  felt  the  importance  of  these  colleges.    He  realized  that  the  young  were 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         [ch.  ii.  1—25 


the  hope  of  the  Church.  Hence  he  would  devote  to  them  his  last,  and  probably  his 
best,  hours.  He  would  give  them  words  of  counsel  and  exhortation — words  that,  under 
such  circumstances,  few  of  them  would  ever  forget.  There  is  a  lesson  here  for  us  all. 
Parents  need  to  realize  more  the  importance  of  personally  instructing  their  children. 
They  need  to  take  more  interest  in  the  kind  of  eJucatiou  they  receive.  They  need  to 
be  more  careful  about  the  companions  with  whom  they  permit  their  children  to  assoiiate. 
Not  merely  parents,  but  all  members  of  the  Christian  Church,  should  take  a  deeper 
Interest  in  the  education  of  the  young.  How  little  our  people  know,  as  a  rule,  about 
our  theological  colleges !  and  how  little  encouragement  do  those  labouring  in  them 
reciive  from  the  Church  as  a  whole !  Elijah's  closing  hours  were  spent  in  active  work, 
and  that  active  work  consisted  in  visiting  among  the  young.  Such  were  his  parting 
visits. — 0.  H.  L 

Ver.  9. — A  parting  request.  After  visiting  the  schools  of  the  prophets  at  Bethel 
and  Jericho,  which  were  both  on  the  west  side  of  Jordan — the  side  nearest  Jerusalem, 
the  side  nearest  Enrope — Elijah,  accompanied  by  Elisha,  crossed  over  to  the  other  side, 
that  is,  the  east  side  of  Jordan,  the  side  nearest  the  centre  of  Asia.  Why  was  this? 
Elijah  was  a  Tishbite,  of  the  inhabitants  of  Gilead,  on  this  east  side  of  Jordan.  Like 
the  mountaineer  of  Switzerland,  or  the  Highlander  of  Scotland,  he  was  brought  up  amid 
the  mountains  of  Gilead.  Like  them,  he  was  fearless  and  brave.  And  he  would  seem 
also  to  have  had  all  the  love  of  the  Swiss  or  the  Highlander  for  his  native  hills.  He 
wishes  to  end  his  earthly  life  where  it  had  first  begun.  Perhaps  in  the  dim  distance 
he  can  see  the  spot  where  nestles  the  home  of  his  childhood.  His  life  has  been  a 
stormy  one,  and  now,  ere  he  leaves  it  for  the  peaceful  life  of  heaven,  he  takes  one  last 
fond,  lingering  look  at  the  quiet  home  of  earth.  The  friends  of  his  youth  are  gone. 
Those  whom  he  knew  in  childhood  have  forgotten  him.  But  by  his  side  there  is  a 
faithful  friend  who  forsook  home  and  friends  for  his  sake  and  the  sake  of  the  truth  of 
God.  Elijah  was  not  a  rich  man.  Silver  and  gold  he  had  none.  But  he  was  one 
of  those  who  could  say,  "As  sorrowful,  yet  alway  rejoicing;  as  poor,  yet  making 
many  rich."  Such  as  he  had,  he  wanted  to  give  to  his  friend.  "  And  it  came  to  pass, 
when  they  were  gone  over,  that  Elijah  said  to  Elisha,  Ask  what  I  shall  do  for  thee, 
before  I  be  taken  away  from  thee.  And  Elisha  said,  I  pray  thee,  let  a  double  portion 
of  thy  spirit  be  upon  me."  As  Solomon,  when  he  came  to  the  throne,  asked  not  for 
riches,  or  honour,  or  long  life,  but  for  a  wise  and  understanding  heart,  so  Elisha  also 
realized  what  was  of,  most  importance  for  a  minister  of  God,  for  a  teacher  of  others. 
Character  is  the  hest  gift.  You  may  give  your  children  a  good  education,  you  may 
store  up  a  fortune  for  them,  but  if  they  have  not  a  good  character,  all  else  is  useless 
and  worse  than  useless.  The  spirit  of  Elijah — ^that  was  just  what  a  minister  of  God 
needed  then,  and  what  the  minister  of  the  gospel  needs  still.  The  spirit  of  Elijah  was 
a  spirit  of  fidelity  to  duty,  a  spirit  of  faithfulness  in  rebuking  sin,  a  spirit  of  fearlessness 
and  courage  in  the  presence  of  opposition  and  danger,  and  at  the  same  time  also  a 
spirit  of  tenderness  and  love.  Such  a  spirit  every  Christian  worker  should  seek  to 
possess.  And  just  as  Elisha  sought  to  obtain  a  double  portion  of  it  to  qualify  him  for 
his  responsible  and  prominent  position,  so  also,  the  minister  of  Christ  needs  to  be 
doubly  endowed  with  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  who  would  lead  and  teach  others  must 
be  doubly  spiritual,  doubly  wise,  doubly  careful,  doubly  holy,  doubly  zealous  and 
scrupulous  for  the  honour  and  cause  of  Christ.  ITie  spirit  of  Elijah  was  needed  then, 
and  it  is  needed  still.  The  sins  of  his  time  are  the  sins  of  our  own  time.  There  are  the 
same  immorality,  the  same  covetousness,  the  same  forgetfulness  of  God,  the  same 
absorption  in  the  concerns  and  pleasures  of  the  present  world.  We  need  more  men 
with  the  spirit  of  Elijah,  who  will  be  faithful  to  God  and  conscience  at  any  cost,  who 
will  rebuke  sin  in  high  places  and  in  any  place — the  sins  of  royalty  and  rank  as  weU 
as  the  sins  of  the  poor.  How  much  indecision  and  worldliness  and  timidity  and  time- 
serving there  are  on  the  part  of  many  professing  Christians  1  We  need  more  men  with  • 
the  spirit  of  Elijah,  to  ask,  "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  ?  "  and  to  cry  aloud  to  the 
faltering,  weak-kneed,  half-hearted  Christians,  "  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  o[>inions  ? 
If  the  Lord  be  God,  follow  him ;  but  if  the  world  be  your  god,  follow  it."  El'sha's 
parting  request  is  a  request  which  we  might  all  appropriately  make  in  prayer  to  Qod, 
that  a  double  portion  of  Elijah's  spirit  may  rest  upon  us.— 0.  H.  I. 


CM,  n.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  29 

Vers.  11, 12. — Parted  friends.  Elijah  geems  to  have  had  a  desire  to  avoid  a  final 
parting.  Either  for  that  reason,  or  to  try  Elisha's  devotion,  he  urged  him  to  tarry  firat 
at  Oilgal,  and  afterwards  at  Bethel.  But  in  vain.  Elisha  remained  with  him  to  the 
last.  What  hours  of  emotion  those  must  have  been  for  Elisha  I  How  he  put  away 
from  him  the  very  mention  of  his  friend's  departure  1  When  the  sons  of  the  prophets 
asked  him  if  he  knew  tliat  Ood  was  going  to  take  away  his  master  from  bis  head  that 
day,  he  answered,  in  words  of  natural  impatience,  "  Yes,  I  know  it ;  hold  ye  yonr  peace." 
Their  words  were  a  thoughtless  intrusion  on  his  grief,  an  unintentional  probing  of  his 
keen  emotions.  And  so  it  was  as  if  he  said,  "  Don't  talk  to  me  about  it."  "  Talking 
of  trouble  makes  it  double."  And  when  they  had  passed  over  Jordan,  and  stiU  walked 
on,  what  a  talk  that  was  /  Those  who  have  ever  sat  by  the  bedside  of  a  dying  friend 
know  what  such  moments  are.  The  time  seems  all  too  short.  So  much  is  to  be  said. 
So  many  questions  to  ask.  So  many  counsels  to  be  given.  So  many  wonderinga  aa 
to  what  it  will  all  be  like  when  next  we  meet.  But  the  sharp,  decisive  moment  comea 
at  last.  Strange  forms  fill  the  sky.  They  draw  near  to  the  earth.  They  are  chariots 
and  horses  of  fire.  They  touch  the  earth.  Elijah  enters,  and  suddenly,  in  a  whirlwind, 
is  lost  to  mortal  sight.  Elisha  stands  a  moment  like  one  in  a  dream.  Then,  recovering 
himself,  and  gazing  after  his  beloved  leader's  vanishing  form,  he  cries,  "  My  father  1 
my  fether  1  the  chariot  of  Israel,  and  the  horsemen  thereof  I "  He  felt,  in  the  poignancy 
of  his  grief,  as  if  the  strength  of  Israel  had  been  that  day  taken  from  it.  But  he  soon 
resigns  himself,  and  passes  on,  to  carry  on  Elijah'a  work.  So,  too,  will  the  Ohristiaa 
think  of  hii  departing  friend. 

*  Bleep  on,  beloved,  sleep,  and  take  thy  res^ 
Lay  down  thy  head  upon  thy  Saviours  brea«t{ 
We  love  thee  well,  but  Jesus  loves  thee  best : 
Good  night  t" 

When  Mends  are  parted  by  death,  perhaps  the  one  who  remains  wonders  why  one  wtu 
taken,  and  the  other  left.  Perhaps  you  were  not  prepared  to  die.  Perhaps  yon  had 
done  but  little  for  your  Master,  and  he  wanted  yon  to  do  some  more  for  him.  He 
gave  you  another  chance.  If  Gbd  spares  our  lives,  if  he  raises  us  up  again  from  a  bed 
of  sickness,  we  may  be  assured  that  there  is  a  gracious  purpose  in  it  aU.  But  Elijah 
not  only  passed  out  of  mortal  sight.  It  is  recorded  that  he  went  up  into  heaven. 
There  is  no  word  of  an  intermediate  state.  On  through  the  pearly  gates,  on  through 
the  strains  of  heavenly  music,  on  into  the  presence  of  the  King.  "  Let  me  die  the 
death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like  his."  Let  me  live  as  Elijah  lived, 
and  I  shall — even  though  I  pass  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death — enter  as 
Elijah  entered  into  that  house  of  many  mansions,  that  home  eternal  in  the  heavens, 
that  "  city  that  hath  foimdations,  whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  Qod." — 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  13— 18. — The  beginning  of  Elisha'*  work.  I.  Divine  foweb  tested.  Elisha 
wanted  a  token  that  God's  presence  and  power  were  with  him.  To  obtain  this  he  used 
Elijah's  mantle  as  he  had  seen  Elijah  use  it.  He  smote  the  waters,  and  said,  "  Where 
is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  ?  "  We  learn  from  this  a  twofold  lesson.  1.  The  best  way 
to  prove  the  power  of  Divine  gra«e  it  to  exercise  the  gifts  we  have.  "Neglect  not  the 
gift  that  is  in  thee."  We  shall  not  accomplish  much  in  the  world  if  we  stand  gazing 
up  into  heaven. 

"We  may  not  make  this  world  a  paradise 
By  walking  it  together  with  clasped  hands." 

2.  AU  effort  thovild  he  aeeompanied  hy  prayer,  Elisha  knew  that  the  mantle  of  Elijah 
was  of  little  use,  unless  the  Lord  Gk)d  of  Elijah  was  with  him.  "  Apostolical  succession  " 
profits  little  if  there  be  not  also  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  If  we  would  succeed 
in  our  business,  we  must  look  for  the  Divine  guidance,  help,  and  blessing.  "  Except 
the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  bmld  it." 

IL  The  Divihb  fbesencb  manifested.  "  When  he  had  smitten  the  waters,  they 
parted  hither  and  thither :  and  Elisha  went  over."  If  we  had  faith  to  undertake  great 
things  for  God,  then  we  might  expect  great  things  from  Qod.  Are  we  attempting  as 
much  as  we  might  for  our  Lord  ?    Are  we  putting  his  Divine  promises  and  power  to 


30  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [ch.  n.  1— 26. 


the  test?  Have  we  not  Ui  own  assurance,  "Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  to  the 
end  of  the  world"?  Why  should  oiir  efforts  be  so  feeble,  when  we  have  all  tha 
resources  of  Divine  grace  at  our  disposal  ?  The  Divine  presence  was  manifest  not  only 
to  Elisha  himself,  but  to  the  sons  of  the  prophets  also.  When  they  saw  him,  they 
said,  "The  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  rest  on  Elisha."  If  we  are  walking  with  God,  abiding 
in  Christ,  the  evidence  of  it  will  soon  be-manifest  in  our  lives. 

III.  Divine  purposes  doubted.  Althoufch,  as  we  have  seen  above,  the  sons  of  the 
prophets  knew  that  Elijah  was  to  be  taken  from  them,  yet  they  were  slow  to  believe 
in  his  actual  removal  They  asked  Eiisha's  permission  to  send  fifty  strong  men  to 
seek  for  Elijah,  "lest  peradventure  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  hath  taken  him  up,  and  cast 
him  upon  some  mountain,  or  into  some  valley."  Elisha  knew  how  vain  it  was,  and 
forbade  an  expedition  so  futile.  But  in  response  to  their  urgent  and  repeated  entreaties 
he  gave  them  permission  to  send.  After  the  exploring  party  had  been  searching  for 
Elijah  for  three  days  in  vain,  they  at  length  gave  up  the  quest  and  returned  to  Jericho. 
So  the  human  heart  is  ever  reluctant  to  submit  to  God's  purposes.  Because  we  cannot 
see  the  meaning  of  some  good  man's  removal,  we  think  it  was  ill-timed.  Yet  God's 
work  does  not  depend  upon  the  human  instruments  whom  he  uses.  No  doubt  there 
is  something  beautiful  and  pathetic  about  this  affection  of  these  young  men  for  their 
old  teacher.  But  when  he  was  gone,  why  spend  their  time  in  profitless  brooding  over 
his  loss,  instead  of  showing  his  spirit,  and  fi^filling  his  desires  by  throwing  themselves 
heartily  into  their  work  under  Elisha?  The  Church  of  Christ  best  shows  its  regard 
for  the  workers  of  the  past  and  for  their  work,  not  by  standing  still  where  they  have 
left  off,  but  by  carrying  forward  and  improving  the  work  they  have  begun.  There  are 
erer  new  conditions  of  life  opening  up,  and  tiiese  must  be  considered  as  well  as  the 
memories  of  the  past. — 0.  H.  L 

Vera.  19 — ^22. — Ute  waten  heahd,  A  beautifid  city  wa»  Jericho.  li  stood  in  the 
midst  of  a  small  but  luxuriant  plain.  Fig.  trees  and  palm  trees,  and  wheat,  aromatic 
flowers  and  plants,  grew  there  in  great  profusion.  A  few  miles  distant  rolled  the 
river  Jordan,  "the  most  interesting  river  on  earth,"  and  in  the  background  lay  the 
rugged  hills  of  Qnarantana.  Jericho,  too,  had  a  famous  history.  It  was  the  first 
city  to  which  the  Israelitish  spies  came  when  they  set  out  to  view  the  land  of  promise. 
It  was  the  first  city  taken  by  the  Israelites,  when  its  walls  fell  down  as  they  were 
compassed  about  by  the  priests  and  people  of  IsraeL  Five  hundred  years  after  that 
its  walls  were  rebuilt,  in  the  days  of  Ahab,  by  Hiel  the  Bethelite,  who  suffered  the 
judgment  pronounced  by  God  against  the  man  that  would  rebuild  them  (1  Kings  zvL 
84).  Yet  despite  their  history  and  their  beautiful  surroundings,  the  inhabitants  of  , 
Jericho  were  not  happy.  The  city,  rich  in  so  many  natural  advantages,  lacked  one  of 
the  most  important  of  all  necessities  of  a  large  town — pure  water.  The  water  too* 
diseased  or  bad,  and  its  badness  seems  to  have  affected  even  the  fertile  land.  The  men 
of  the  city  tell  Elisha  that  the  water  is  bad  and  the  ground  barren.  (The  word  trans- 
lated "  barren  "  really  means  in  the  original  that  the  ground  cast  its  fruit  or  did  not 
bring  its  fruit-to  perfection.)  Beautiful  Jericho  with  its  bad  water  is  like  many  another 
place  on  earth.  Many  a  city  is  fair  irithout,  but  all  corrupt  within.  Many  a  mansion, 
outwardly  gorgeous,  is  full  of  wretchedness  within.  Many  a  man  who  presents  a 
smiling  face  to  the  world  has  the  canker  of  a  guilty  conscience  gnawing  at  his  heart. 
Those  who  are  wrong  and  want  to  get  set  right  may  find  some  thoughts  of  comfort 
and  hope  in  the  passage  before  us.  It  points  us  to  Jesus,  the  only  One  who  can  aet  all 
right  and  keep  all  right.    "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  healed  these  waters." 

Notice  here  some  watsbs  that  need  hsalino,  and  Christ's  foweb  to  ekal 
THEU.  1.  There  art  waten  of  sin.  Men  may  dispute  about  the  universality  of  the 
Deluge  in  the  days  of  Noah.  Bat  here  is  a  flood  about  whose  universality  there 
is  no  doubt.  The  Gulf-stream  has  a  well-defined  course.  But  the  stream  of  sin 
is  everywhere.  Certain  forms  of  disease  are  peculiar  to  certain  countries.  But 
the  disease  of  sin  is  found  in  every  land.  (1)  There  are  corrvpt  currents  in  our 
national  life.  Our  political  parties  are  far  from  being  what  they  ought  to  be.  Com- 
pared with  those  concerned  in  the  government  of  other  countries,  perhaps  our 
statesmen  may  stand  high.  But  compared  with  the  requirements  of  God's  Law, 
compared  with  the  standard  which  ought  to  be  required  of  ^oie  who  would  lerislat* 


OH.  n.  1—25.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  81 

for  a  Christian  nation,  how  far  short  they  come  I  We  may  thank  God  for  a  Christian 
queen,  but  who  will  say  we  have  a  Christian  legislature  ?  There  are  Christian  men  in 
it,  no  doubt.  But,  alas  I  what  an  absence  of  Christian  principle  in  many  of  the  repre- 
sentatives of  our  people  I  Some  of  them  notorious  atheists.  Some  of  them  trampling 
on  the  most  sacred  laws  of  God  and  man ;  and  yet — what  a  mockery ! — the  professed  law^ 
makers  of  the  nation.  What  laws  in  the  interests  of  the  Sunday  observance,  in  the 
interests  of  morality,  in  the  interests  of  sobriety  and  temperance,  could  we  expect  from 
lawgivers  who  care  for  none  of  these  things  ?  Truly  our  political  life  needs  to  he  purified. 
We  need  a  reformed  parliament  in  the  highest  and  best  sense.  (2)  There  are  corrupt 
currents  in  our  social  life.  Perhaps,  after  all,  our  legislature  is  but  a  fair  reflection  of 
our  national  life.  No  community  that  was  decidedly  Christian  would  return  aa  avowed 
atheist  as  its  representative.  No  community  that  had  a  high  standard  of  morality 
would  return  men  notorious  for  their  wickedness.  And  then  the  condition  of  the  press 
also  affords  an  index  to  the  state  of  public  religion  and  morality.  What  vile  rubbish 
is  circulated  in  the  form  of  the  novel  I  What  corrupting  abominations  in  the  shape  of 
newspapers  issue  from  the  London  press  I  The  same  demoralization  and  degradation 
which  in  heathen  lands  and  in  ancient  Israel  were  wrought  by  the  worship  of  idols, 
are  now  being  wrought  by  the  circulation  of  bad  literature.  The  immense  circulation 
which  some  of  the  worst  of  these  publications  have  reached  affords  an  unhappy  indication 
of  a  low  standard  of  public  morality.  (3)  There  are  corrvpt  currents  in  our  commercial 
life.  Those  who  are  engaged  in  business  know  well  that  it  is  so.  Customers  too  often 
attempting  to  defraud  those  who  supply  them  with  what  they  need.  Sellers  too  often 
attempting  to  defraud  those  who  buy  their  goods.  Those  who  are  in  the  employment 
of  others  robbing  them  with  one  hand  while  they  take  their  pay  with  the  other. 
There  is  a  curse  upon  all  ill-gotten  gain,  that  all  the  excuses  of  the  world,  all  the 
benedictions  of  the  wicked,  never  can  undo.  Wealth  gotten  by  dishonesty  or  fraud, 
wealth  gotten  at  the  temporal,  moral,  or  spiritual  expense  of  others,  is  a  foul  stream, 
that  will  bring  its  blight  upon  the  whole  life,  and  leave  it  smeared  with  slime.  2. 
Sow  are  these  corrupt  currents  to  be  cleansed  .♦  How  is  this  foul  stream  to  he  purified  f 
Ah !  there  is  only  One  who  can  do  it.  Laws  will  not  do  it.  .  Good  resolutions  will  not 
do  it.  Jesus  is  the  great  Healer.  He  pours  in  the  fresh  stream  of  water  of  life  upon 
the  diseased  currents  of  the  world.  (1)  He  works  through  his  Word.  As  Elisha  cast 
the  salt  into  the  bad  water  of  Jericho,  bo  Jesus  casts  the  purifying  influence  of  the 
gospel  into  the  polluted  stream  of  human  life.  He  brings  its  influence  to  bear  upon 
the  conscience  and  the  heart,  alarming  men  by  the  fear  of  death  and  the  terrors  of  the 
judgment,  and  winning  them  by  the  still  small  voice  of  kindness  and  of  love.  (2)  He 
works  also  through  his  people^  Christians  are  to  exercise  a  purifying  influence  upon 
the  world's  life.  "  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,"  are  the  words  of  Jesus.  The  full 
force  of  this  statement  is  only  realized  when  we  remember  that  in  the  natural  world 
salt  is  the  great  antidote  against  corruption.  To  withhold  salt  from  a  prisoner  used  to 
be,  in  the  dark  ages,  the  most  cruel  way  of  bringing  about  a  slow  and  gradual  death, 
and  that  under  its  most  loathsome  form.  Hence  it  is  that  the  ocean  is,  as  it  has  been 
called,  "  the  chemical  bath  of  the  world."  It  is  the  salt  that  is  in  it  which  is  its  chief 
preservative  against  corruption,  and  not  only  so,  but  which  renders  it  such  a  source  of 
life  and  health.  Now,  just  what  the  salt  is  to  the  sea,  and  what  the  salt  was  to  the 
waters  of  Jericho,  Christians  are  to  he  to  the  life  of  the  world.  They  are  not  to  lose 
their  savour  by  not  exercising  an  influence  upon  the  world.  TTien  the  world  is  pretty 
sure  to  exercise  an  influence  upon  them.  No ;  but  they  are  to  carry  with  them  into  all 
the  relationships  of  life  the  teachings  of  the  gospel  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  Here  is 
the  practical  work  which  Christians  have  to  do  in  reference  to  the  corrupt  currents  of 
which  we  have  been  speaking.  Every  grain  of  salt  exercises  an  influence,  small  though 
it  may  be.  Exercise  what  influence  you  have  as  citizens  to  secure  that  public  positions 
shall  be  filled  with  Christian  men.  Besist  the  spread  of  impure  and  vicious  literature, 
and  counteract  it  so  far  as  you  can  by  helping  to  circulate  books  and  newspapers  and 
magazines  of  a  healthy  and  moral  tone.  Let  your  influence  in  business  and  in  social 
relationship  be  on  the  side  of  Christ  and  purity  and  truth.  3.  Is  there  one  in  whose 
heart  and  life  the  ttrea/m  of  sin  is  still  flowing  unchecked  and  unchanged  t  What 
have  those  waters  of  sin  done  for  you  that  you  thought  so  pleasant  to  the  taste  ?  Have 
they  never  been  bitter  waters  ?    Have  ^ou  never  suffered  the  |ienalt^  of  sin's  Qops^- 


89  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGa         [oh.  11.1—28. 


quencesT  Have  yoa  never  itertled  at  the  whisper  of  an  accusing  conscience  ?  Hai 
not  sin  left  its  blight  upon  your  life  ?  Have  you  not  found,  like  the  men  of  Jencho, 
that  though  the  outward  surroundings  of  your  life  are  pleasant,  yet  the  current  of  your 
desires  and  pleasures  is  only  bringing  evil  with  it,  and  your  life  is  barren  of  any  good 
6r  useful  fruit  ?  If  you  think,  as  some  do,  that  you  can  yet  make  it  all  right  by  your 
own  exertions,  you  are  making  a  great  mistake.  You  can  never  undo  the  past.  Christ 
alone  can  give  you  forgiveness  through  his  blood.  Go  to  him  and  ask  his  mercy.  Go 
to  him  and  ask  his  ,help  to  overcome  temptation,  to  conquer  old  habits,  to  get  rid  of 
old  associates.  How  happy  the  moment  when  you  hear  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  the 
Son  of  God,  your  future  Judge,  saying  to  you,  "  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee ;  go  in 
peace  "  1  What  moment  in  the  sinner's  experience  on  earth  can  compare  with  that 
when  he  hears  a  voice  from  heaven  saying,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  1  have  healed  the 
waters"  t  4.  But  even  OocFs people  sometimes  need  a  healing  of  the  waters  too.  The 
Christian,  too,  needs  a  purifying  from  sin's  corrupting  influence.  Let  the  salt  of  the 
Divine  Word  be  freely  used  by  God's  children,  that  it  may  exercise  its  purifying,  pre- 
serving influence  upon  their  spiritual  life.  Our  lives  would  be  far  holier,  far  purer,  far 
happier,  far  more  fruitful  than  they  are,  if  we  kept  our  minds  more  in  contact  with 
the  influence  of  the  Word  of  God.  5.  And  then  there  are  the  hitter  waters  of  sorrow. 
Trial  and  suffering  will  always  be  bitter  to  the  taste.  But  he  who  is  the  "Man  of 
sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief"  knows  how  to  sweeten  the  bitter. cnp.  Many  a 
tried  and  troubled  Christian  has  experienced  that,  "  though  no  chastisement  for  the 
present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but  grievous,  nevertheless  afterward  it  yieldeth  the  . 
peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  to  them  that  are  exercised  thereby."  Many  a  time 
our  most  bitter  trial  proves  to  be  our  sweetest  blessing.  We  fear  as  we  enter  into  the 
cloud,  but  we  see  a  new  vision  of  Jesus  there,  and  before  all  is  over  we  learn  to  say, 
"  Master,  it  is  good  for  ns  to  be  here."  The  salt  of  God's  Word,  here  also,  has  power 
te  purify  the  diseased  waters  of  nnbelief  and  to  sweeten  the  bitter  waters  of  affliction. 
In  all  onr  troubles  we  may  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus  saying, "  I  have  healed  the  waters." 
6.  To  every  one  who  has  experienced  the  healing  power  of  Jesus  the  exhortation  may 
be  given — £e  a  sweetener  of  life  for  others.  Is  there  strife  between  neighbours,  between 
brethren,  between  fellow-Christians  ?  Don't  do  anything  to  embitter  it.  Bather  seek 
to  be  at  peace  and  to  cultivate  peace  with  all  men.  "  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers :  for 
they  shall  be  called  the  children  o^  God."  Are  there  persons  known  to  you  in  poverty  t 
Try  to  sweeten  life  for  them  by  giving  them  a  little  of  your  comforts.  Are  there  young 
pen»ni,  lonely,  and  far  from  home  and  friends  ?  Try  to  sweeten  life  for  them  by  a 
tittle  kindness  and  attention.  Are  there  some  known  to  you  who  are  going  down  the 
brood  way  to  destruction  t  Give  them  some  message  from  God's  Word,  spoken  in 
kindness,  that  may  help,  as  the  salt  at  Jericho,  to  purify  the  muddy  current  of  their 
life.  Learn  of  Jesus  how  to  do  good  to  others.  And  though  you  may  but  cast  in  the 
salt  into  life's  bitter  waters,  he  will  bless  your  efforts,  and  you  will  hear  him  say, "  Thus 
nith  the  Lord,  /  have  healed  the  waters." — C.  H.  L 

Vera.  1 — 14. — 2^  dtparture  of  good  men.  "And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  Lord 
wonld  take  up  Elijah  into  heaven."    Two  subjects  are  here  presented  for  notice — 

L  The  depabtube  of  a  good  man  fbom  the  bakth.  Death  is  a  departure  from  the 
world ;  it  is  not  an  extinction  of  being,  but  a  mere  change  in  its  mode.  There  are  two 
facts  concerning  Elijah's  departure  which  mark  the  departure  of  all  men.  1.  The  time 
is  of  God.  "  It  came  to  pass,  when  the  Lord  would  take  up  Elijah."  There  is  an 
appointed  time  for  man  on  the  earth ;  when  the  hour  is  up,  he  must  go,  not  before  or 
after.  Elijah's  time  had  come.  There  are  no  accidental  deaths,  no  premature  graves. 
"  ITiou  turnest  man  to  destruction ;  "  "  Thou  takest  away  his  breath."  2.  The  manner 
Is  of  God.  Elijah  was  to  be  taken  away  by  a  "  whirlwind."  That  was  the  method 
God  appointed  for  him.  He  takes  men  away  by  various  methods,  sometimes  by  devas- 
tating winds,  sometimes  by  scathing  lightnings,  sometimes  by  boisterous  billows, 
sometimes  by  accident  or  starvation,  sometimes  by  prolonged  disease,  etc.  All  that  is 
with  him.     We  are  not  the  creatures  of  chance.     He  "  careth  for  us ; "  for  each,  for  all. 

n.  The  foweb  of  ooodnebb  w  a  oood  man's  depabtube.  See  what  a  grand  spirit 
Elijah  displays  in  the  immediate  prospect  of  his  exit.  1.  A  spirit  of  ceUm  self-posset- 
Mon.    When  Eiyah  knew  of  the  solemn  event  awaiting  him,  how  calmly  he  talked  t« 


OB.  11.1— 28.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  tS 

Elisba,  and  wended  his  way  to  Bethel,  according  to  the  Divine  commandment!  There 
was  no  excitement  or  perturbation.  He  moves  and  talks  with  a  majestic  calmness. 
Beligion  alone  can  give  this  peace.  "  He  will  keep  him  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind 
is  stayed  on  him."  .2.  A  spirit  of  strong  social  interest.  See  how  it  affected  Elisha. 
How  tenderly  and  strongly  he  felt  bound  to  him  I  Elisha  says,  "As  the  Lord  liveth, 
and  as  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will  not  leave  thee."  He  repeated  this  thrice.  And  when 
the  sons  of  the  prophets  spoke  to  him  about  it  he  said,  "  Hold  ye  your  peace."  As  if 
he  had  said,  "  I  cannot  bear  to  hear  it."  No  doubt  these  sons  of  the  prophets  and  all 
who  came  under  the  godly  influence  of  Elijah  felt  thus  bound  to  him.  There  is  no 
power  by  which  one  man  can  link  another  so  closely  and  mightily  to  him  as  the  power 
of  goodness.  Goodness  is  a  mighty  magnet.  3,  A  epint  of  far-reaching  philanthropy. 
Elijah  goes  to  Bethel,  but  wherefore?  Probably  to  deliver  a  valedictory  address  to  the 
"  sons  of  the  prophets."  They  were  in  college  there,  in  the  college,  perhaps,  which 
Elijah  himself  had  founded.  Would  that  his  address  had  been  reported  I  His  great 
solicitude  was  that  these  young  men  should  hand  down  the  religion  of  God  to  the  men 
of  comiog  times.  The  spirit  of  genuine  religion  is  not  a  narrow  spirit,  a  spirit  confined 
to  a  Chnrch,  a  country,  or  a  period,  but  a  spirit  that  embraces  in  its  loving  sympathies 
the  spiritual  interests  of  the  race. — D.  T. 

Vers.  15 — 22. — Tht  proper  spirit  for  theological  students.  "  And  when  the  sons  of 
the  prophets  which  were  to  view  at  Jericho,"  etc.  The  "  sons  of  the  prophets  "  were 
theological  students,  and  they  here  manifest  a  spirit  which  may  be  considered  alike 
becoming  and  necessary  in  all  those  who  are  set  apart  to  study  the  revelations  of  God. 

L  Here  is  a  spirit  op  bbverbkob.  "  And  when  the  sons  of  the  prophets  which  were 
to  view  at  Jericho  saw  him,  they  said,  The  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  rest  on  Elisha.  And 
they  came  to  meet  him,  and  bowed  themselves  to  the  ground  before  him."  Being 
convinced  by  the  fact  that  Elisha  had  performed  the  same  marvel  that  Elijah  had— 
divided  the  waters  of  Jordan — that  he  was  a  Divine  prophet,  they  bowed  in  reverence 
before  him.  Though,  perhaps,  they  knew  that  Elisha  was  taken  from  the  plough,  the 
mnnifestation  of  the  Divine  in  him  inspired  them  with  solemn  awe.  He  who  has  in 
him  most  of  the  Divine  should  be  the  most  reverenced.  Reverence  is  an  essential 
qualification  for  a  student.  The  volatile  and  the  frivolous,  however  superior  in 
intellect,  and  however  persistent  their  investigations,  will  never  reach  a  true  know- 
ledge of  God.  Nothing  is  more  incongruous,  nothing  more  distressing  to  the  eye  x>{ 
earnest  men,  than  the  spirit  of  irreverence  in  theological  halls.  Biblical  students  should 
see  in  their  tutors  so  much  of  the  Divine  as  to  cause  them  to  bow  in  reverence  before 
them.    True  reverence  is  neither  superstition  nor  sadness. 

II.  Here  is  a  bfirit  of  inquirt.  These  students  earnestly  desired  to  know  what  had 
become  of  Elijah,  and  they  urged  Elisha  to  send  out  fifty  strong  men  in  quest  of  him. 
No  man  will  ever  get  true  knowledge  unless  he  has  in  him  the  spirit  of  earnest  inquiry. 
The  deepest  cry  of  the  student's  soul  should  be,  "  Where  shall  wisdom  be  found  ?  and 
where  is  the  place  of  understanding?"  This  spirit  was  strong  in  these  "sons  of  the 
prophets  "  on  this  occasion.  They  so  "  urged  "  Elisha  to  send  forth  in  quest  of  Elijah 
that,  we  are  told,  Elisha  was  "  ashamed  "  to  refuse  them.  But  although  the  spirit  of 
inquiry  is  essential  to  a  student,  and  its  earnestness  is  to  be  commended,  it  is  often, 
alasl  defective.  It  was  so  now.  1.  It  was  wrongly  directed.  They  had  a  wrong 
apprehension ;  they  imagined  that  the  body  of  Elijah  had  been  borne  up  to  "  some 
mountain,"  or  "  cast  into  some  valley."  Perhaps  all  science  begins  with  an  hypothesis, 
but  the  hypothesis  is  vain  unless  it  have  some  foundation.  There  was  no  foundation  for 
the  supposition  of  these  "  sons  of  the  prophets."  Inquiry  should  start  from  facts.  2.  It 
was  unsuccessful.  The  fifty  men  went  forth  according  to  the  students'  request,  and 
searched  for  "  three  days,  but  found  him  not."  It  is  useless  to  search  for  subjects 
beyond  our  reach.  You  cannot  find  in  the  Bible  what  is  not  there,  such  as  scientific 
iystema. — ^D.  T. 

Vers.  23 — 25. — Bidicule.  "And  he  went  up  from  thence  unto  Bethel:  and  as  he 
was  going,"  eta    These  verses  lead  us  to  consider  ridicule  in  three  aspects. 

I.  Ab  infamouslt  direotsd.  1.  Directed  against  an  old  man  on  account  of  hii 
lU2>posei  personal  defects.    "  Go  up,  thou  bald  head  I "    This  meant,  perhapi,  **  Ok  n|^ 


8t  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         [cb.  n.  1— 2l 


M  Elijah  has  gone,  if  thou  canst;  we  want  to  get  rid  of  thee."  Though  baldness  of 
the  head  is  not  always  a  sign  of  agp,  Elisha  was  undoubtedly  far  advanced  m  years. 
Nothing  is  more  contemptible  or  absurd  than  to  ridicule  people  on  account  of  con- 
stitutional defects,  whether  of  body  or  mind.  Direct  the  shafts  of  ridicule,  if  you  hke, 
against  defects  of  moral  character,  against  vanity  and  pride,  sensuality,  but  never 
against  constitutional  defects, — that  is  impious;  for  no  man  can  make  one  hair  white 
or  black,  or  add  a  cubit  to  his  stature.  2.  Directed  against  an  old  man  of  most 
distinguished  excellence.  Elisha  was  a  man  of  God,  and  everything  concerning  him 
shows  manifestations  of  a  godly  character.  To  ridicule  a  good  man  is  not  only  more 
impious,  but  more  absurd,  than  to  laugh  to  scorn  the  very  sun  in  its  brightness.  3. 
Directed  against  a  man  engaged  in  a  mission  of  mercy.  He  was  Heaven's  messenger 
of  mercy  to  his  country.  He  came  to  Bethel  to  bestow  wise  counsels  on  the  sons  oi 
the  prophets  in  their  seminary,  and  to  bless  all  who  would  listen  to  his  counsels. 
How  often  has  ridicule  been  thus  infamously  directed  I  Christ  himself  was  once  its 
victim;  ay,  its  chief  victim.  "They  that  passed  by  wagged  their  heads."  They  put 
on  him  a  "  crown  of  thorns." 

II.  Malevolently  inspired.  The  animus  in  this  ridicule  was  that  of  an  intolerant 
religion.  There  were  two  schools  of  religion  in  Bethel,  two  rival  sects ;  one  was  the 
religion  of  the  true  Gud,  and  the  other  that  of  idolatry.  One  of  Jeroboam's  calves  was 
there  established  as  the  object  of  worship.  There  is  no  malevolence  so  inveterate  and 
ruthless  as  that  inspired  by  false  religion  and  rival  sects.  Perhaps  these  children 
hpd  not  this  infernal  passion  to  any  extent,  but  were  the  mere  instruments  of  their 
intolerant  parents.  Probably  their  parents  sent  them  out  now  to  meet  the  prophet, 
and  put  the  very  words  into  their  mouths,  taught  them  by  what  notes,  grimaces,  and 
attitude  they  should  ring  them  out.  This  ridiculing  the  men  of  God  was  one  of  the 
crying  sins  of  Israel.  "  They  mocked  the  messengers  of  God,  and  despised  his  words, 
and  misused  his  prophets."  These  children  were  but  the  echoes  and  the  instruments 
of  their  parents*  religions  malignant  intolerance. 

III.  Terbiblt  punished.  "  And  he  turned  back,  and  looked  on  them,  and  cureed 
them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  And  there  came  forth  two  she-bears  out  of  the  wood, 
and  tare  forty  and  two  children  of  them."  1.  They  were  punished  by  the  vAll  of  the 
prophet.  He  "  cursed  them."  Perhaps  there  is  no  arrow  more  poignant  than  that  of 
ridicule.     One  might  have  thought,  however,  that  one  of  Elisha's  moral  strength  and 

.  stature  would  not  have  felt  it  at  all,  especially  when  directed  by  children.  But  he 
knew  their  ridicule  was  but  the  ridicule  of  their  mothers  and  fathers,  and  perhaps  ol 
the  townspeople  in  general,  who  were  all  about  him ;  and  his  riiihteous  indignation 
was  kindled.  The  more  loving  a  man  is  the  more  fierce  his  wrath  rages  when  set 
on  fire.  The  "  wrath  of  the  Lamb  "  is  the  most  tremendous  wrath  in  the  universe. 
2.  They  were  punished  by  the  justice  of  Ood.  The  prophet's  indignation  was  righteous, 
and,  because  it  was  righteous,  the  justice  of  God  sanctioned  it  by  causing  "two  she 
bears  out  of  the  wood  to  tear  forty  and  two  children  of  them."  This  was  a  tremendous 
homily  of  Divine  justice  to  the  whole  population — a  sermon  that  would  thunder  in  the 
hearts  of  the  fathers,  the  mothers,  and  the  neighbours. 

CoNOLUSiON.  Take  care  how  you  use  your  faculty  of  ridicule.  It  is  a  useful  faculty 
in  its  place.  Satire  is  the  east  vnnd  of  thought.  Scorching  sarcasm  has  withered  to 
the  roots  many  a  noxious  weed ;  satire  has  humbled  to  the  dust,  has  struck  to  the 
earth,  many  a  proud  and  haughty  soul.  Elijah  used  it  on  Carmel's  brow,  Job  used  it 
to  his  arrogant  friends,  and  Paul  to  the  conceited  members  of  the  Corinthian  @burch. 
Ridicule,  rightly  inspired  and  directed,  is 

"  A  whip  of  steel,  thnt  can  as  with  a  lash 
Imprint  the  character  of  shame  so  deep^ 
.    Ev'n  in  the  brazen  forehead  of  proud  sin. 
That  not  eternity  shall  wear  it  out." 

(Bandolph.) 

D.T. 

Vers.  1— •. — Preparative  to  translation.  The  time  had  come  when  the  Lord  would 
take  Elijah  up  in  a  whirlwind  into  heaven.  It  was  a  singular  honour  to  be  put  upon 
a  singularly  great  and  good  man.    No  case  had  happened  like  it  since  the  days  o{ 


ok  n.  1—26.]  THt!  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  W 

Enoch — that  other  great  prophet,  who  maintained  •  witnesa  for  God  amidst  the  all 
but  universal  wickedness  of  antediluvian  times  (Jude  14),  No  other  would  happen 
till  the  ascension  of  Christ.    We  observe — 

I.  The  pbofhet's  hovements.  It  is  to  be  remarked  concerning  these  that  they 
were :  II.  Directed  hy  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  "  The  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  Bethel ; " 
"  The  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  Jericho ; "  "  The  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  Jordan."  But  this 
was  true  of  Elijah's  life  throughout.  "  He  was  as  if  constantly  in  the  hand  of  God. 
'  As  the  Lord  liveth,  before  whom  I  stand,'  was  his  habitual  expression — a  slave 
constantly  waiting  to  do  his  master's  bidding  "  (Stanley).  He  had  grown  so  entirely 
into  the  habit  of  taking  his  direction  from  God,  that  his  life  was  already  half  unearthly. 
The  invisible  world  was  more  real  to  him  than  the  visible.  Thus  he  was  inwardly 
prepared  for  translation.  To  merge  one's  will  in  God's  is  already  to  be  living  a  heavenly 
life  on  earth.  Elijah  was  in  this  a  forerunner  of  Christ  (John  v,  19).  2.  Directed  to 
the  schools  of  the  prophets.  From  Gilgal  Elijah  was  sent  first  to  Bethel,  then  to  Jericho, 
then  to  Jordan,  at  two  of  which  places  were  seminaries  or  communities  of  "the  sons 
of  the  prophets."  His  last  movements  thus  took  the  form  of  a  farewell  visit  to  these 
seats  of  prophetic  instruction.  It  was  these  schools  of  the  prophets,  with  Elisha  at 
the  head  of  them,  that  were  to  retain  and  perpetuate  his  influence  after  he  was  gone. 
He  had  doubtless  had  much  to  do  with  the  organisation  and  fostering  of  them,  and  he 
appears  amongst  his  disciples  once  more,  in  their  various  centres,  ere  he  departs.  If 
he  did  no  more,  he  would  leave  with  each,  at  least,  a  parting  blessing.  The  blessing 
of  a  dying  believer  is  ever  to  be  valued  (Gen.  xlviii.,  xlix. ;  Deut.  xxxiii.).  It  was 
in  the  act  of  blessing  his  disciples  that  Jesus  "  was  parted  from  them,  and  carried  up 
to  heaven"  (Luke  xxiv.  51).  3.  A  sign  of  approaching  removal.  The  prophetic 
atmosphere  is  electric.  Elijah  knows  that  he  is  to  be  removed ;  Elisha  knows  it 
(vers.  3,  5) ;  the  sons  of  the  prophets  have  some  intimations  of  it.  These  rapid,  yet 
purposeful,  movements  from  place  to  place  portend  the  coming  change.  Like  the 
restlessness  of  birds  on  the  eve  of  migration,  they  tell  that  Elijah  is  not  long  to  be 
on  earth. 

II.  Elijah  and  Elisha.  Elisha  stands  nearer  to  Elijah  than  any  other  (ch.  iii.  11). 
He  is  found  here  in  his  company  at  Gilgal.  A  study  of  the  relations  between  the 
prophet  and  his  destined  successor,  in  view  of  the  approaching  departure  of  the  former, 
is  full  of  interest.  1.  Elijah's  desire  for  solitude.  Once,  twice,  and  a  third  time 
Elijah  requested  Elisha  to  tarry  behind,  and  leave  him  to  go  whither  he  was  sent  alone. 

(1)  In  the  expression  of  this  desire  we  can  trace  a  very  natural  craving  of  a  man  in  his 
liosition.  The  sense  of  awe  in  connection  with  what  was  about  to  take  place,  which 
made  Elisha  himself  desire  not  to  talk  of  it  (vers.  3,  5),  would,  in  a  far  intenser 
measure,  indispose  Elijah  to  have  his  private  thoughts  disturbed.  (2)  But  the  request 
was  of  the  nature  of  a  test  to  Elisha.  It  gave  him  the  opportunity  of  saying  whether 
he  would  go  or  stay.  It  drew  out  the  qualities  of  his  nature,  which  showed  that  he 
■was  fit  for  such  a  privilege  as  that  of  seeing  Elijah  taken  up.  It  is  not  every  one  who 
has  the  spiritual  meetness  for  being  a  witness  of  sacred  scenes.  Jesus  took  only  Peter, 
Jnmes,  and  John  with  him  to  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  into  the  house  of  Jairus, 
and  into  the  recesses  of  Gethsemane.  2.  Elisha's  determination  to  follow  Elijah. 
Elisha  was  not  to  be  baulked  of  his  determination  to  see  the  last  of  what  should  befall 
ills  beloved  master.  "As  the  Lord  liveth,  and  as  thy  soul  liveth,"  was  his  reply  on 
each  occason,  " I  will  not  leave  thee,"  In  this  speaks :  (1)  Affection  for  Elijah.  The 
nearer  came  the  hour  for  parting  with  him,  the  more  precious  was  his  society.  He 
could  not  bear  the  thought  of  losing  one  moment  of  the  time  that  yet  remained  for 
converse.  It  is  only  when  dear  friends  are  either  actually  taken  away  or  on  the  point 
of  being  taken  from  us,  that  we  realize  how  invaluable  is  the  boon  of  their  presence. 

(2)  A  desire  to  see  the  wonders  of  God's  working.  It  was  no  vain  cnriosity  which 
prompted  Elisha  to  go  with  Elijah,  but  a  rational  wish  to  see  the  crown  of  glory  put 
on  a  career  that  had  already  received  so  much  honour.  He  wished  to  see  the  completion 
of  one  of  God's  great  works.  He  felt  that  it  could  not  but  teach  him  more  of  God, 
thrill  and  inspire  liim  with  more  zeal  for  service,  fix  past  impressions  of  Elijah  on  hii 
soul,  and  altogether  leave  lasting  results  in  his  nature,  to  witness  this  "  great  sight." 
Thenfore  he  would  not  miss  it.  (3)  A  hope  of  blessing.  Could  he  but  see  Elijah  as 
h«  was  taken  from  him,  something  whispered  that  he  could  not  fail  to  bring  away 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOa         [oh.  n.  1—25. 


•  WeBsing  from  the  dght.  And  so  it  happened  (vers.  10,  16).  8.  Peneveranet 
rewarded.  Elisha's  importunity  prevailed.  He  and  Elijah  went  on  together.  Mostly 
perhaps  in  sUence,  but  latterly,  at  least,  in  converse  (ver.  11).  There  is  a  holy  bold- 
ness in  seeking  »  blessing— the  spirit  of  Jacob,  "I  wiU  not  let  thee  go  except  thou 
bless  me  "  (Gen.  xixii.  26),  which  never  fails  of  its  reward. 

IIL  Blisha  AMD  THB  SONS  OF  THE  FBOFBBTS.  At  each  new  centre,  as  the  travellers 
went  on,  bands  of  "  the  sons  of  the  prophets  "  came  forth  to  Blisha,  and  said,  "  Knowest 
thou  that  the  Lord  will  take  away  thy  master  from  thy  head  to-day?"  His  answer, 
•8  befitted  one  who  felt  the  unspeakable  sacredness  of  the  event  in  prospect,  was, 
•Yea,  I  know  it;  hold  ye  your  peace."  There  is  »  time  to  speak,  and  a  time  to  be 
silent  (Eccles.  iiL  7),  and  this  was  the  hour  for  silence.  Speech  would  jar  on  the 
solemnity  of  the  occasion.  The  deeper  experiences  of  life  are  to  be  meditated  upon, 
rather  than  much  spoken  about.  The  tongue  has  great  power  over  the  heart.  The 
effects  of  many  a  solemn  hour  have  been  dissipated  by  unseasonabls  talk  about 
them.— J.  0. 

Vers.  8,  6,  7.—"  The  lont  of  the  prophetB."  It  is  surely  instructive  to  find,  even  In 
godless  Israel,  these  numerous  bands  of  young  men,  congregated  under  prophetic 
oversight,  and  receiving  sacred  instruction.  The  origin  of  "  schools  of  the  prophets" 
seems  traceable  to  Samuel  (1  Sam.  xix.  20).  But  the  order  took  a  new  impulse  under 
Elijah.  "The  companies  of  the  prophets  now  reappear,  bound  by  a  still  closer 
connection  with  Elijah  than  they  had  been  with  Samuel.  Then  they  were  '  companies, 
bands,  of  prophets; '  now  they  are  'sons,  children,  of  the  prophets ; '  and  Elijah  first, 
and  Elisha  afterwards,  appeared  as  the  'father,'  the  'abbot,'  the  'father  ia  God,'  of 
the  whole  community "  (Stanley).  In  the  development  and  fostering  of  these 
communities,  we  see  Elijah  working  with  an  eye  to  the  future.  He  takes  care  that  the 
fruits  of  his  reforming  labours  shall  not  be  lost,  but  shall  be  handed  down  to  after- 
generations.  He  provides  for  the  preservation  and  propagation  of  bis  influence.  We 
do  well  to  take  a  leaf  out  of  his  book,  and  study  like  means  for  the  creation  and 
consecration  of  godly  influence.  Wherever  men  have  desired  to  perpetuate  their 
principles  they  have  formed  schools,  clubs,  guilds,  associations,  colleges,  and  by 
means  of  these  their  teachings  have  be^n  spread  abroad.  The  infidel  clubs  of  the  last 
century,  e.g.,  spread  the  principles  which  led  to  the  French  Bevolution.  The  prophetic 
schools  seem  to  have  devoted  themselves  largely  to  sacred  history,  poetry,  and  music ; 
but  taught  the  pupils  also  to  labour  in  honest  occupations  for  self-support.  Any  mode 
ot  binding  together  and  instructing  the  youth  of  our  time,  which  shall  combine  religious 
training  and  sound  education  with  an  inculcation  of  the  principles  of  honest  indepen- 
dence, deserves  every  support.— J.  O. 

Vers.  7 — 15. — Elijah  taken  vp.  The  translation  was  to  take  place  on  the  eastern 
side  of  Jordan.  Dean  Stanley  quotes  the  remark,  "The  aged  Gileadite  cannot  rest 
till  he  again  sets  foot  on  bis  own  side  of  the  river." 

I.  Crossino  Jobdan.  1.  The  fifty  disciples.  "  On  the  upper  terraces,  or  on  the 
mountain  heights  behind  the  city,  stood  'afar  oflF,'  in  awe,  fifty  of  the  young  disciples; 
'and  they  two  stood  by  Jordan'"  (Stanley).  Of  all  the  prophetic  company,  Elisha 
alone  was  permitted  to  accompany  the  master.  The  others  do  not  seem  to  have 
ventured  to  ask.  But  they  did  not  feel  themselves  precluded  from  reverentially 
standing  at  a  distance,  to  observe  what  might  take  place.  They  did  not  witness  the 
translation,  but  they  saw  thS  waters  divided.  There  may  be  neophytes  in  spiritual 
experience,  who  are  unqualified  for  the  reception  of  God's  grander  revelations,  but 
even  to  these,  "  standing  to  view,"  God  will  reveal  his  power  in  some  measure.  2.  The 
itream  divided.  The  river  flows  between  the  travellers  and  the  further  bank,  but 
Elijah  hesitates  not  a  moment.  As  if  his  conscious  nearness  to  eternity  had  already 
raised  him  above  natural  conditions— had  given  him  the  faith  and  power  before  which 
natural  obstacles  are  non-existent — he  rolled  his  mantle  together,  and  "smote  the 
waters,  and  they  were  divided  hither  and  thither,  so  that  they  two  went  over  on  dry 
ground.'  A  miracle  I  Truly,  but  there  are  situations  in  which  miracles  seem  almost 
natural  When  men  are  on  the  point  of  being  taken  up  bodily  to  heaven,  we  need 
not  wonder  if  "therefore  mighty  works  do  show  forth  themselves "  in  them  (Mark 


OB.  n.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THB  EINaS.  tT 

tL  14).  Natiinl  laws  are  fixed  <m\y  till.  In  the  grasp  of  a  higher  influence,  they 
hecome  flexible,  and  1>eud  and  yield.  This  miracle  is  a  repetition  of  an  earlier  on* 
(Josh.  iii.  14 — 16),  and,  on  a  lesser  scale,  of  an  earlier  still  (Ezod.  ziv.  21,  22). 

II.  Elibha'b  bequest.  1.  Encouragement  to  ask.  Elisha  had  "  stood  the  trial  of 
his  unchangeable  fidelity  and  perseverance,"  and  Elijah  now  said  to  him,  when  they 
bad  gone  over  Jordan,  "  Ask  what  I  shall  do  for  thee,  before  I  be  taken  away  from 
thee."  Elijah  did  not  put  himself  in  place  of  God.  He  probably  expected  Elisha  to 
ask  for  a  parting  blessing,  or  for  some  other  favour  which  it  was  in  his  own  power  to 
gi  ant — at  most  to  prefer  a  request  which  God  might  grant  through  him.  A  greater 
than  Elijah  said  to  his  disciples,  when  he  was  about  to  be  taken  from  them,  "  Hitherto 
have  ye  asked  nothing  in  my  Name :  ask,  and  ye  shall  receive  "  (John  xvL  24).  2. 
A  bold  petition.  Elisha  was  not  slow  to  avail  himself  of  the  opportunity  given.  He 
had  in  view  the  position  he  would  be  called  to  occupy  as  the  successor  of  Elijah,  and 
his  request  took'  the  form  of  a  prayer  for  a  double  portion  of  Elijah's  spirit.  He 
"coveted  earnestly  the  best  gifts"  (1  Cor.  xiL  31).  He  asked,  like  Solomon,  not  for 
any  earthly  good  or  glory,  but  for  spiritual  endowment  for  his  great  ofiice  (1  Kings  iiL 
6 — 14).  Or  rather,  he  asked  for  the  office  itself,  with  the  spiritual  endowment  which 
accompanied  it — for  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  hitherto  Elisha  was  a  prophet, 
or  more  than  the  servant  of  a  prophet.  The  "double  portion,"  by  general  consent,  is 
to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  Deut.  xxi.  17 ;  i.e.  the  two  portions  of  a  firstborn  son,  in 
comparison  with  the  portions  received  by  the  other  sons.  Viewing  certain  features  of 
the  ministry  of  Elisha — its  longer  duration,  the  number  and  character  of  its  miracles, 
etc. — we  might  almost  think  that  Elisha  had  received  literally  "  a  double  portion  "  of 
the  spirit  of  Elijah,  i.e.  as  some  have  held,  twice  as  much.  But  this  is  not  the  meaning, 
and  reflection  will  convince  us  that,  with  all  his  eminence,  Elisha  is  a  lessee  prophet 
than  Elijah — ^less  forceful,  original,  creative.  8.  The  decisive  sign.  Elijah  replied  that 
Elisha  had  asked  "a  hard  thing  " — one  which  there  might  he  a  difficulty  in  granting. 
To  designate  a  prophet,  and  bestow  ou  him  the  prophetic  spirit — especially  in  excep- 
tional measure — ^belongs  only  to  God ;  and  the  grounds  of  his  action  in  such  high 
matters  are  not  for  man  to  prejudge.  There  was,  however,  a  natural  probability  that 
it  would  be  God's  will  to  designate  Elisha  as  heir  of  the  prophetic  gift,  and  a  sign  was 
given  by  which  it  might  be  known  whether  it  was  or  not.  If  Elisha  saw  Elijah  when 
he  was  taken  from  him,  he  might  conclude  that  his  prayer  was  answered — possibly 
because  it  was  only  in  an  exalted,  that  is  prophetic,  state  of  mind  that  the  vision 
could  be  had  (etch.  vi.  16);  if  he  saw  nothing,  God  had  not  answered  it.  There  is  "  a 
vision  and  a  faculty  Divine,"  which  is  the  surest  token  of  answer  to  a  prayer  for  God's 
Spirit.  Christ's  parting  legacy  to  his  disciples  was  his  Spirit ;  and  in  this,  not  one, 
but  all,  may  richly  share  (John  xiv.  16,  17;  xv.  26;  xvi.  13—15).  We  do  well  to 
realize,  like  Elisha,  that  it  is  not  by  might  nor  power  of  our  own,  but  only  by  God's 
Spirit,  that  we  ai-e  fitted  for  ftay  great  work  in  his  service. 

III.  Chariots  op  fiee.  1,  The  media  of  translation.  As  the  two  went  on,  and 
talked,  suddenly  there  appeared  a  chariot  of  fire,  and  horses  of  fire,  and  Elijah  was 
parted  from  Elisha,  and  went  up  by  a  whirlwind  into,  or  towards,  heaven.  (1)  There 
was  an  actual  appearance  to  Blisha's  vision  of  fiery  chariot  and  horse.  It  is  wholly 
against  the  text  to  explain  this,  as  Bahr  does,  by  mere  figure  of  speech,  even  though 
Elisha  afterwards  uses  this  metaphor  of  Elijah  (ver.  12).  (2)  It  remains  doubtful 
whether  the  representation  is  that  of  a  chariot  which  conveys  Elijah  to  heaven,  or  of 
a  host  of  chariots  and  horses  which  surrounds  him  as  he  ascends.  The  word  is 
commonly  used  as  a  collective  (cf.  ch.  vL  17),  and  probably  denotes  "chariots." 
In  this  case,  the  heavenly  chariots  appear,  hut  the  actual  mode  of  Elijah's  ascent 
is  by  the  whirlwind.  (3)  At  most,  Elisha's  vision  could  only  follow  Elijah's  ascent 
for  some  little  way  upwards,  till,  perhaps,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Saviour,  "a  cloud 
received  him  out  of  his  sight"  (Actsi  9).  The  realm  to  which  Elijah  was  taken 
is  not  situated  in  the  material  heavens,  so  that,  by  traversing  so  much  space,  he  could 
•rrive  at  it.  The  change  that  passed  over  him,  which  culminated  in  his  reception 
into  the  invisible  world,  was  after  a  fashion  unknown — possibly  at  present  incompre- 
hensible— to  tu.  (4)  We  must  hold,  however,  that  Elijah  was  really  taken  in  the 
body  to  heaven.  Bahr's  supposition  that  he  was  simply  whirled  away,  and  disappeared 
fenn  earth,  perhapi  undergoing  some  Mcret  death  and  burial  •»  Moses  did  (for  thia 


is  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINQS.         [oh.  n.  l—Hi 


leems  to  be  his  Idea),  is  too  much  akin  to  the  error  of  the  diacipleB  who  wnt  <nit  fifty 
strong  men  to  seek  for  him  among  the  hills  (vers.  16, 17).  It  was  not  Bhshaa  Tiew, 
and  has  no  support  in  the  narrative.  2.  The  lesson*  of  the  translation.  Besides  bemg 
a  signal  honour  put  upon  a  great  servant  of  God,  and  a  striking  Old  Testament  anticiija- 
tion  of  the  ascension  of  Christ,  it  gave  to  the  Israelites,  in  midtime  of  their  history, 
a  powerful  confirmation  of  the  fact  of  immortality.  "The  impression  made  by  the 
history  of  Enoch,  that  'God  took  him,'  is  marked  by  the  repetition  of  the  word  as  to 
the  ascension  of  Elijah  "  (Pusey).  It  is  noteworthy,  also,  that  the  immortality  typified 
by  these  cases  is  an  immortality  in  the  body.  We  believe,  if  careful  examination 
of  passages  is  made,  it  will  be  found  that  it  was  in  this  form,  that  is,  as  connected  with 
a  resurrection,  and  not  as  an  abstract  immortality  of  the  soul  in  Sheol,  which  had 
no  attractions  for  the  Hebrew  mind,  that  the  hope  of  immortality  was  entertained  by 
believing  Hebrews  (cf.  Job  xiv.  12—15;  xix.  25—27;  Pa.  xvi.  10;  xvii.  15; 
xlix.  14,  15;  Matt.  xxii.  31,  32;  Heb.  xi.  13—22.  See  also  the  able  discussion  of 
this  subject  in  Fairbair'n's  '  Typology  of  Scripture,'  vol.  i.  pp.  352—361,  3rd  edit.^ 
3.  Eliska's  lament.  As  Elijah  was  parted  from  him,  and  taken  up,  Elisha  broke  out 
into  loud  lament :  "  My  father,  my  father  I  the  chariot  of  Israel,  and  the  horsemen 
thereof."  This  no  more  implies  that  Elisha  did  not  believe  that  his  master  was  being 
taken  up  to  heaven,  than  the  mourning  of  Christians  for  the  loss  of  some  revered 
teacher  or  guide  implies  doubt  as  to  his  eternal  happiness.  It  is  the  sense  of  personal 
loss,  and  of  loss  to  the  world,  which  prevails  on  these  occasions.  Elisha  did  not  over- 
estimate the  value  of  Elijah  to  Israel — more  than  chariots  and  horsemen — and  we 
cannot  overestimate  the  worth  to  a  nation  of  the  presence  and  labours  of  the  servants 
of  God  in  it.  The  religion  of  a  nation  is  its  best  bulwark,  and  those  who  do  most  for 
religion  are  those  who  serve  their  country  best.  Armaments  without  Grod  in  the 
midst  are  of  poor  avail. 

IV.  The  fallen  mantle.  Elisha  had  seen  the  prophet  ascend,  and  he  knew  that 
His  request  was  granted.  He  accordingly  picked  up  the  mantle  of  Elijah,  which  had 
fallen  from  him,  and  which  he  rightly  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  the  new  spirit  with 
which  he  was  to  be  endowed.  Popular  speech  embodies  the  thought  of  this  passage  when 
it  figures  succession  to  greatness  as  the  descent  of  the  mantle  of  the  great  man  upon 
hi«  successor.  1.  Test  of  the  new  power.-  Elisha's  possession  of  the  "  spirit  and  power 
of  Elias  "  was  soon  to  be  tested.  The  Jordan  waters  again  rolled  between  him  and  his 
destination,  but,  invoking  Divine  power  in  the  words,  "  Where  is  the  Lord,  the  God 
of  Elijah,  even  he?"  he  smote  the  waters  with  the  wonder-working  mantle,  and,  as 
before,  they  divided  apart.  2.  Acknowledgment  (^' the  new  power.  The  "sons  of  the 
prophets"  still  "  stood  to  view  "  at  Jericho,  and  when  they  saw  the  prophet's  deed,  and 
stiil  more,  perhaps,  when  they  looked  on  his  person,  to  which  inspiration  lent  a  new 
grandeur  and  dignity,  they  said,  "The  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  rest  on  Elisha."  Then 
they  bowed  to  the  ground  before  him,  and  acknowledged  him  master.  (1)  The  Spirit 
of  God  in  a  man  readily  betrays  its  presence.  (2)  Where  the  Spirit  of  God  manirestly 
]iossesses  a  man,  others  will  not  be  slow  to  make  acknowledgment  of  the  fact,  and 
to  yield  him  appropriate  honour.  (3)  It  is  mainly  the  possession  of  this  Spirit  which 
entitles  a  man  to  obedience  in  the  house  of  God. — J.  0. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — Stehing  the  tra/nslated.  It  is  plain  from  this  passage  that,  while  the 
jiropheta  of  Jericho  knew  from  Divine  intimations  that  Elijah  was  to  be  parted  from 
1  hem,  they  did  not  understand  the  full  meaning  of  their  own  revelations.  They  still 
clung  to  the  belief  that  the  parting  might  only  be  temporary — that,  as  on  other 
occasions,  the  Spirit  of  God  had  caught  him  up,  and  carried  him  away  to  some 
place,  where,  by  searching,  he  might  be  found  (cf.  1  Kings  xviiL  10 — 12).  They 
desired,  therefore,  permission  to  send  out  fifty  strong  men  to  look  for  him  among  the 
mountains  and  valleys.  Elisha  knew  better,  but,  as  they  persisted,  he  allowed  them, 
for  the  satisfaction  of  their  minds,  to  send.  When  they  had  sought  for  three  days, 
and  found  him  not,  they  returned,  and  EUsha  said,  "  Did  I  not  say  unto  you,  Qo  not  ?" 
One  result  of  the  search,  in  any  case,  would  be  to  set  doubts  at  rest  and  confirm 
Elisha  in  his  position  of  authority. 

I.    It  is   the   mark  or  a  gbeat   mind  that  it  distwoit.ehn  between  thi 

TEMPOBABT   AND   ACCIDENTAL,    AND    THE    PERMANENT    AHD    FINA^        In    this   Elisha'f 


<mjXi.  1— 25.J  THE  SECOln)  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  39 

miperiority  is  seen  to  the  "  sons  of  the  prophets.*'  He  took  in  at  once  the  essence 
of  the  situation.  He  knew  that  it  was  useless  to  seek  further  for  Elijah — that  he 
was  parted  from  them  for  ever.  They  dwelt  on  formal  resemblances  to  previous  dis- 
appearances— on  the  accidents  of  the  event ;  Elisha  penetrated  to  its  real  meaning. 
The  same  mark  of  distinction  between  superior  and  inferior  minds  appears  in  all 
departments.  Paul  was  a  notable  example  of  this  power  to  distinguish  between 
•ubstanoe  and  accident — between  what  was  temporary  and  what  was  final ;  while  his 
opponents  in  the  Christian  Church  exhibited  the  opposite  defect.  Apply  to  creed, 
ritual,  Church-government,  etc. 

II.  This  defect  in  insight  often  leads  to  much  needless  trouble.  It 
caused,  in  this  case,  three  days  of  needless  search.  It  is  often  the  occasion  of  dispute, 
division,  delay  in  executing  reforms,  fruitless  experiments  to  attain  impossible  ends. 
All  are  not  like  the  children  of  Issaohar,  "men  of  understanding  of  the  times,  to  know 
what  Israel  ought  to  do"  (1  Chron.  xii.  32).  Men  go  about,  holding  on  by,  or  seeking 
the  revival  of,  that  which  has  served  its  day,  and  is  being  left  behind. 

ill.  A  CIRCUITOUS    WAT  OF  ATTAINING    TO    CERTAINTT  IB    BETTEB    THAN    NO  WAT 

AT  ALL.  These  sons  of  the  prophets  satisfied  themselves  at  length,  though  after  much 
useless  trouble.  It  was  well  they  did  so,  since  they  could  not  otherwise  be  assured. 
There  are  direct  ways  to  certainty  which  the  better  class  of  minds  perceive,  but  which 
are  like  roads  shut  to  others.  These  must  take  a  more  laborious  and  circuitous  route. 
We  see  this,  e.y.,  in  Christian  evidences.  The  other  apostles  were  satisfied,  but 
Thomas  had  to  put  his  fingers  in  the  print  of  the  nails,  etc.  (John  xx.  24 — 29).  The 
n«ed  of  bearing  with  man's  weaknesses  and  imperfections,  and  of  allowing  him  to  reach 
conviction  by  the  way  he  is  capable  of,  explains  much  that  seems  circuitous  in  God's 
government  of  the  world. — J.  O. 

Vers.  19 — 22. — The  healing  of  the  spring.  This  first  miracle  is  a  fitting  introduction 
to — in  some  respects  a  symbol  of — the  whole  ministry  of  Elisha.  In  contrast  with  his 
predecessor,  Elisha  was  a  gentle,  beneficent  power  in  Israel.  His  miracles,  like  those 
of  Christ,  were,  with  two  exceptions  only  (in  this  like  Cbrist  also),  miracles  of  mercy, 
not  of  judgment.  He  is  the  "  still  small  voice  "  coming  after  the  whirlwind,  the  earth- 
quake, and  the  fire  (1  Kings  xix.  11, 12).  He  is  as  Melancthon  to  Elijah's  Luther; 
we  may  even  say,  with  reverence,  as  the  "  Son  of  man  "  to  Elijah's  John  the  Baptist. 
Unlike  Elijah,  he  is  not  a  child  of  the  desert,  but  a  man  of  the  city.  He  came  "eating 
and  drinking  "  (Matt.  xi.  19).  He  mixed  with  the  people ;  lived  a  homely  life ;  was 
the  friend  and  counsellor  of  kings.    Of  all  this,  his  first  deed  of  mercy  is  the  image. 

I.  The  rebuilt  citt  and  the  unhealed  spring.  1.  The  city  and  its  curse. 
The  city  was  Jericho.  After  the  curse  pronounced  on  it  by  Joshua  (Josh.  vL  26), 
it  had  lain  in  ruins  till  the  reign  of  Ahab,  when  it  was  rebuilt  by  Hiel  the  Bethelite, 
at  the  cost  of  his  eldest  and  youngest  sons'  lives  (1  Kings  xvi.  34).  2.  The  unhealed 
ipring.  The  city  was  rebuilt,  but  tne  spring  on  which  its  prosperity  then,  as  ever 
since,  depended,  remained  unhealed.  The  situatioa  of  the  city  was  pleasant,  but  the 
water  was  bad,  and  the  land  "  miscarried,"  i.e.  the  water  had  a  deleterious  eflect  on 
those  with  child.  3.  The  heart  and  its  issues.  How  striking  an  image  is  this  rebuilt 
city,  with  its  unhealed  spring,  of  godless  civilizations,  founded  on  self-will  and  defiance 
of  God's  counsel  (Gen.  iv.  17),  often  stately  and  imposing,  yet  ending  in  vanity, 
because  no  means  exist  to  cure  the  spring  of  tlie  corrupt  human  heart!  "  Of  republican 
Athens,  of  imperial  Rome,  it  might  well  be  said, '  The  city' was  pleasant.'  In  both  there 
was  learning,  genius,  high  civilization,  the  cultivation  of  the  fine  arts  to  an  extent  that 
has  made  the  Elgin  marbles,  for  example,  the  wonder  of  the  world.  But '  the  water 
was  naught,  and  the  ground  was  barren,'  because  there  was  the  absence  of  true 
religion.  No  country  whatever  can  in  the  highest  sense  prosper  without  it "  (Rev. 
T.  H.  Howat).  Politics,  literature,  art,  science,  material  civilization,  will  dwindle  and 
decay  imless  a  pure  stream  can  be  made  to  flow  from  the  people'  a  heart ;  for  "  out 
of  it  are  the  issues  of  life  "  (Prov.  iv.  23). 

IL  The  prophet's  hbalino  of  the  spring.  The  case  of  the  city  of  Jericho  wag 
brought  under  the  notice  of  Elisha  by  the  men  of  the  city — a  lesson  to  lu  not  to  fail 
to  improve  our  spiritual  opportunities.  1.  The  means  of  cure.  The  means  by  whicb 
Elisha  effected  the  oure  of  the  unwholesome  waters  were  exceedingly  simple.    Be 


46  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOa         [oh.  n.  1— 2i 

obtained  "  a  new  erase  " — ^new,  and  therefore  free  from  all  defilement,  and  in  tLis  was 
put  some  salt.  The  salt  appears  here  as  the  symbol  of  what  is  uncorrupt  and  purifying. 
There  lay  in  it  no  natur^  virtue  to  heal  the  water — a  circumstance  which  made  the 
miracle  more  conspicuous.  2.  Tht  Agent  in  the  cure.  In  casting  the  salt  into  the 
■pring,  Elisha  spoke  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  attributed,  as  was  right,  aU  the  power 
to  him.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  healed  these  waters."  The  miracle  looks  back 
to  an  earlier  wonder — that  of  the  healing  of  the  bitter  waters  at  Marah,  where  God 
declared,  "  I  am  the  Lord  that  healeth  thee"  (Bxod.  xv.  26).  One  act  of  mercy  layg 
the  foundation  for  expecting  a  second.  3.  The  effect  of  the  cure.  There  was  not  to  be 
from  thence  (the  spring)  any  more  death  or  barrenness.  The  result  of  Elisha's  word 
was  that "  the  wafers  were  healed  unto  this  day."  "  Down  to  the  present  hour  all 
travellers  to  Palestine — ^Bobinson,  Dean  Stanley,  Professor  Porter — speak  in  glowing 
terms  of  the  cool,  sweet,  and  pleasant  waters  of  the  'Fountain  of  Elisha.'  The  soil  is 
extensively  cultivated.  Sugar-yielding  canes  are  plentiful.  Pig  trees  abound  on  all 
sides  "  (Howat).  All  which  things  may  again  be  interpreted  as  a  parable.  The  gospel 
is  the  new  cruse,  and  in  it  is  the  healing  salt — the  word  of  truth — which,  cast  into 
the  diseased  spring  of  the  human  heart,  heals  and  purifies  its  waters ;  yet  is  the  effect 
not  wrought  by  the  natural  action  of  the  truth,  apart  from  the  Divine  and  omnipotent 
operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  works  through  human  means,  yet  is  himself  the 
efficient  Agent  in  all  conversion.  The  work  is  of  God,  and  the  effects  are  incalculable. 
"  Old  things  are  passed  away ;  behold,  all  things  are  become  new "  (2  Cor.  v.  17). 
The  most  marvellous  influence  is  exerted  by  Christianity  on  the  spring,  not  only 
of  private,  but  of  public  and  social  life;  and  State  as  well  as  Church  is  blessed. 
Christianity  is  the  salvation  of  peoples — the  source  of  true  national  as  well  as  of 
individual  well-being. — J.  0. 

Vers.  23 — 25. — The  mockers  at  Bethel.  This  miracle,  in  contrast  with  the  preceding, 
is  one  of  judgment.  Its  apparent  severity  has  made  it  a  stumbling-block  to  many. 
The  deed  is  one  in  "  the  spirit  of  Elias  "  in  the  harsher  sense,  and  leaves  a  painful 
impression.  But  the  painful  aspect  of  the  mhacle  need  not  be  made  greater  than  it  is, 
nor  must  it  be  overlooked  that  the  occasion  was  one  when  some  display  of  the  "  severity 
of  God  "  was  necessary. 

I.  Natueb  of  the  sin.  Elisha,  going  up  to  Bethel,  was  assailed  by  a  band  of 
young  people  from  the  city,  who  mocked  him,  and  said  to  him,  "  Go  up,  thou  bald 
head ! "  1.  The  moclcers.  These  were  not,  as  the  text  might  lead  us  to  infer,  "  little 
children"  of  six  or  seven  years  of  age,  but  "young  lads,"  boys  and  young  men,  who 
had  come  to  the  age  of  responsibility.  They  came  out  of  Bethel — once  a  patriarchal 
sanctuary,  but  now  a  focus  of  Israelitish  idolatry — and  had  evidently  been  trained  in 
utter  ungodliness.  2.  The  mocking.  Either  Elisha  was  actually  bald— in  which  case 
there  was  added  to  profanity  the  ridiculing,  so  common  to  boys,  of  a  physical  defect- 
or, as  some  have  thought,  "bald  head"  is  a  synonym  for  "leper,"  this  being  one  of  the 
signs  of  that  disease.  In  either  case  there  was  manifested  a  spirit,  contracted 
probably  from  their  elders,  of  bitter  hatred  of  the  pure  religion  of  Jehovah,  and 
revihng  of  its  prophets  and  professors.  Levity,  ridicule,  and  profane  reviling  of  the 
pious  and  their  ways  is  something  on  which  God  must  always  put  the  brand  of  his  stem 
disapprobation. 

II.  Aggravations  of  thb  bin.  These  must  be  considered  in  forming  a  fair 
judgment  on  the  case.  They  enable  us  also  better  to  draw  out  the  lessons  of  the 
offence.  There  was :  1.  Dishonour  to  a  sacred  place.  Bethel  means  "  the  house  of 
God,"  It  was  one  of  the  places  where  God  had  recorded  his  name  (Gen.  zxviii. 
16 — 19).  Now  it  was  Beth-aven,  "  the  house  of  the  idol "  (Hos.  x.  5),  The  jeering 
outburst  of  impiety  of  these  young  men  of  the  city  was  only  a  symptom  of  the  iniquity 
which  abounded  in  it.  God  was  dishonoured  in  a  holy  place.  2.  DisJionoUr  to  a  sacred 
person.  Elisha  was  God's  prophet,  and,  in  some  sense,  the  living  representative  at  that 
time  of  the  prophetic  order.  In  him,  mockery  was  heaped  on  all  God's  servants,  and 
on  true  religion  in  general.  He  was  known  and  eminent  as  the  successor  of  Elijah, 
and  probably  it  was  on  this  account  that  he  was  singled  out  for  these  hostile  manifesta- 
tions. 3.  Dishonow  to  a  sacred  subject.  It  is  not  certain,  but  it  is  the  view  of  someu 
that  ia  the  words,  "  Go  up^  thou  bald  head  I "  there  is  allusion  to  the  recent  translation 


OH. ml— 27.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  fl 

of  Elijah.    Sacred  places,  sacred  persons,  and  sacred  things  are  all  to  lie  honoured,  and 
contempt  poured  on  any  of  them  is  insult  done  to  God. 

III.  Punish  UEKT  of  the  snr.  After  bearing  the  contumely  for  a  time,  Elisha, 
doubtless  by  God's  inward  direction,  turned  round,  and  pronounced  a  curse  on  these 
youthful  mockers.  The  curse  was  God's,  not  his,  as  shown  by  the  effect  immediately 
given  to  it.  "There  came  forth  two  she-bears  out  of  the  wood,  and  tare  forty 
and  two  of  them."  How  many  escaped  we  are  not  told,  nor  whether  all  these 
forty-two  were  actually  killed.  But  as  connected  with  EHsha's  curse,  the  event  was 
an  awful  and  unmistakable  warning,  both  to  those  who  escaped  and  to  the  population 
of  the  city.  Had  these  she-bears  issued  from  the  wood  without  the  previous  word  of 
Klisha,  no  one  would  have  wondered  at  forty-two  of  this  band  of  youths  being  attacked 
and  slain.  It  would  have  been  a  "  calamity."  Here  the  event  is  the  same,  and  it  is 
the  same  Providence  which  is  concerned,  only  the  hidden  reason  of  the  dispensation 
comes  to  light.  The  whole  incident  teaches  in  a  very  emphatic  manner  the  responsi- 
bility of  youth.  "  I  take  this  story  as  teaching  us  what  I  think  we  very  much  need 
to  be  taught,  namely,  that  the  faults  of  our  youth,  and  those  which  are  most  natural  to 
us  at  that  age,  are  not  considered  by  God  as  trifling.  .  .  .  You  may  hear  grown-up 
people  talk  in  a  laughing  manner  of  the  faults  which  they  committed  at  school,  of  their 
idleness,  and  their  various  acts  of  mischief,  and  worse  than  mischief.  And  when  boys 
hear  this,  it  naturally  makes  them  think  it  really  does  not  matter  much  whether  they 
behave  well  or  ill — they  are  just  as  likely  to  be  respectable  and  amiable  men  hereafter. 
I  would  beg  those  who  think  so  to  attend  a  little  to  the  story  in  the  text "  (Dr.  Arnold, 
quoted  by  Eev.  T.  H.  Howat).— J.  0. 

Ver.  25. — Carmd.  Elisha,  after  his  endowment  with  the  prophet  ofBoe,  retired  for  a 
time  to  his  master's  old  haunt  at  Carmel,  and  then  returned  to  Samaria.  So  Paul,  after 
his  conversion  and  call  to  the  apostolic  office,  retired  to  Arabia  (Gal.  i.  17).  1.  Uetirement 
as  a  means  of  preparation  for  active  duty.  The  need  of  retreat,  of  private  communion 
with  God,  of  time  to  digest  the  lessons  of  the  past,  of  reflection  and  meditation. 
2.  Active  work  as  the  fruit  of  retirement.  Retirement  is  not  to  degenerate  into 
monkery.— J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  in. 


Vers.  1 — 27.— The  Gh'Nkbal  Chabagteb 

OF     jEHnBAM's    KeION    OVER    ISBAEL.       HiS 

Was  with  Moab. 

Ver.  1. — Now  Jehoram  the  son  of  Ahab 
began  to  reign  over  Israel  in  Samaria  the 
eighteenth  year  of  Jehoshaphat  King  of 
Jndah.  This  note  of  time  is  not  quite  in 
accordance  with  the  chronology  of  1  Kings, 
which  gives  Jehoshaphat  a  reign  of  twenty- 
five  years  (1  Kings  xxii.  42),  Ahab  one  of 
twenty-two  years  (1  Kings  xvi.  29),  and 
Ahaziah  one  of  two  years  (1  Kings  xxii.  51), 
and  makes  Jehoshaphat's  first  year  run 
parallel  with  Ahab's  fourth  (1  Kings  xxii. 
41),  since  thus  Ahab's  death-year  would  be 
Jehoshaphat's  nineteenth,  and  Jehoram'g 
accession-year,  at  the  earliest,  Jehoshaphat's 
twentieth.  The  difficulty  may  be  removed 
by  assigning  to  Ahab  a  reign  of  twenty 
instead  of  twenty-two  years.  On  the  mode 
of  reconciling  the  statement  of  this  place 
with  that  of  oh.  i.  17,  that  Jehoram  of  Israel 
began  to  reign  in  the  second  year  of  Jelioram 
of  Jndah,  see  the  comment  upon  that  passage. 
Aad  raiyned  twelve  yean. 


Ver.  2. — ^And  he  wrought  evil  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord — as  did  every  other  king  of 
Israel  both  before  hira  (1  Kings  xiv.  16 ;  iv. 
25,  34;  xvi.  13,  19,  25,  30;  xxii.  52)  and 
after  him  (oh.  viii.  27;  x.  31;  xiii.  2,  11 ; 
xiv.  24;  XV.  9,  18,  24,  28;  xvii.  2)— but  not 
like  his  father,  and  like  his  mother — i.e. 
Ahab  and  Jezebel,  the  introducers  of  the 
Baal-worship  into  Israel— for  he  put  away 
the  image  of  Baal  that  his  father  had  made. 
It  had  not  been  said  previously  that  Ahab 
had  actually  set  up  an  image  of  Banl,  but 
only  that  he  had  "built  him  a  hnuse  in 
Samaria,  and  reared  him  up-  an  altar,"  and 
that  he  "  served'  him  and  worshipped  liina  " 
(1  Kings  xvi.  81,  82).  But  an  image  of  the 
god  for  whom  a  "  house "  was  built  was  so 
much  a  matter  of  course  in  the  idolatrous 
systems  of  the  East,  that  it  might  have 
seemed  superfluous  to  mention  it.  The  actual 
existence  of  the  image  appears  later,  when  its 
destruction  is  recorded  (ch.  x.  27).  It  seems 
that  Jehoram,  at  the  commencement  of  his 
reign,  took  warning  by  the  fates  of  his 
father  and  brother,  so  far  as  to  abolish  the 
state  worship  of  Baal,  which  his  father  had 
introdooed,  and  to  remove  the  image  of  Baal 


42 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [ch.  in.  1  — 27. 


ftom  the  temple  where  It  had  been  set  np. 
The  image,  howeyer,  was  not  destroyed — it 
waa  only  "put  away." 

Ver.  8. — NevertheleBB  he  cleaved  onto  the 
lins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  which 
made  Israel  to  sin ;  he  departed  not  there- 
from. The  maintenance  of  the  calf-worship 
was,  no  doubt,  viewed  aa  a  political  necessity. 
If  the  two  sanctnariee  at  Dan  and  Bethel 
had  been  shut  up,  the  images  broken,  and 
the  calf-worship  brought  to  an  end,  there 
would,  as  a  matter  of  course,  have  been  a 
general  flocking  o(  the  more  religious  among 
tiie  people  to  the  great  sanctuary  of  Jehovah 
at  Jerusalem;  and  this  adoption  of  Jerusalem 
as  a  spiritual  centre  would  natumlly  have 
led  on  to  its  acceptance  as  the  general 
political  centre  of  the  whole  Israelite  people. 
Israel,  as  a  separate  kingdom,  a  distinct 
political  entity,  would  have  disappeared. 
Hence  every  Israelite  monarch,  even  the 
Jehovistio  Jehu,  felt  himself  bound,  by  the 
political  exigencies  of  his  position,  to  keep 
up  the  calf-worship,  and  maintain  the  re- 
ligious system  of  Jeroboam  the  sou  of 
Nebat. 

Vers.  4— 27.— The  War  with  Moab.  The 
historian  goes  back  t»  the  origin  of  the  war. 
He  had  already,  in  ch.  i.  1,  mentioned  the 
revolt  of  Moab  at  the  death  of  Ahab ;  but 
he  now  recalls  his  readers*  attention  to  the 
fact,  and  to  some  extent  explains  it  and 
accounts  for  it.  Moab  had  been  treated 
oppressively — ^had  been  forced  to  pay  an 
extraoidiuarily  heavy  tribute— and  was  in  a 
certain  sense  driven  into  rebellion  (vers.  4, 
5).  Jehoram,  when  he  came  to  the  kingdom, 
determined  to  make  a  great  effort  to  put 
the  rebellion  down,  and  to  re-establish  the 
authority  of  Israel  over  the  revolted  people. 
His  relations  with  Jehoshaphat  of  Israel 
were  so  close  that  he  had  no  difficulty  in 
persuading  him  to  join  in  the  war.  He  was 
also  able  to  obtain  the  alliauce  of  the  Kia<>' 
of  Edom.  Thus  strengthened,  he  made  no 
doubt  of  being  successful,  and  confidently 
invaded  the  country  (vers.  6—9).  Tlie 
course  of  the  war  i»  the&  related  (vers. 
10  -27). 

Ver.  6. — And  King  Jehoram  went  out  of 
Samaria  the  same  time— literally,  the  same 
day — and  numbered  all  Israel ;  rather, 
muttered  or  reviewed  (JircaKt'^aTa,  IiXX.) 
all  Israel.  "Numbering"  was  forbidden 
(1  Sam.  xxiT.  1),  and  is  not  here  intended, 
the  verb  used  being  ipo,  and  not  ruD. 

Ver.  7.— And  he  went  and  lent  to  Je- 
koshaphat  the  Kin|  of  Judah,  saying.    Je- 


hoshaphat had  originally  allied  himself  with 
Ahab,  and  had  cemented  the  alliance  by  ■ 
marriage  between  his  eldest  son,  JAoram, 
and  Athaliah,  Ahab's  daughter  (ch,  viii.  18 ; 
2  Ghron.  xviii.  1).  He  had  joined  Ahab  in 
his  attack  on  the  Syrians  at  Ramoth-Gilead 
(1  Kings  xxii.  4—36),  and  had  thereby 
incurred  the  rebuke  of  Jehu  the  son  of 
Hanani  (2  Ghron.  xix.  2).  This,  however, 
had  not  prevented  him  from  continuing  his 
friendship  with  the  Israelite  royal  house; 
he  "joined  himself  with  Ahaziah  "  (2  Ohron. 
XX.  35),  Ahab's  successor,  and  though  their 
combined  naval  expedition  met  with  disaster 
(1  Kings  xxii.  48),  yet  he  still  maintained 
amicable  relations  with  the  Israelite  couru 
Jehoram,  therefore,  confidently  sought  his 
active  help  when  he  made  up  his  mind  to 
engage  in  a  war  with  Moab.  The  king  ol 
Uoab  hath  rebelled  agxinst  me:  wilt  thou 
go  with  me  against  Ucab  to  battle  ?  And 
he  said,  I  will  go  np :  I  am  as  than  art,  my 
people  as  thy  people,  and  my  horses  as  thy 
horses.  Compare  the  answer  which  the 
same  king  had  maJe  to  Ahub,  when  requested 
to  join  him  in  his  attack  on  the  Syrians 
(I  Kings  xxii.  4).  The  words  were  probably 
a  common  formula  expressive  of  willingness 
to  enter  into  the  closes-t  possible  alliance. 
Jehoshaphat,  it  appears  from  2  Giro  i.  xx. 
1 — 35,  had,  a  little  before  this,  been  h.mself 
attacked  by  the  united  forces  of  Moab  and 
Ammon,  and  brought  into  a  peril  from  which 
he  was  only  delivered  by  miracle.  It  was, 
therefore,  much  to  his  advantage  th  it  Moab 
should  be  weakened. 

Ver.  8. — And  he  said,  Which  way  shall 
we  go  npl  Jehoram  asked  Jehoshaphat's 
advice  as  to  the  plan  of  campaign.  There 
were  two  ways  in  which  M'  ab  might  be 
approached — the  direct  one  across  the  Jordan 
and  then  southward  through  the  country 
east  of  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  Armm,  which 
was  the  boundary  between  Moab  and  Israel ; 
and  a  circuitous  one  through  the  desert 
west  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  across  the  Arabah 
south  of  it,  then  northwards  throu  ^h  Northern 
Edom,  to  the  brook  Zered,  or  Waily-el- 
Ahsy,  which  was  the  boundary  between 
Moab  and  Edom.  If  the  former  route  were 
pursued,  Moab  would  be  entered  on  the 
north;  if  the  latter,  she  would  be  attacked 
on  the  south.  Jehoshaphat  recommended 
the  circuitous  route.  And  he  answered,  The 
way  through  the  wilderness  of  Edom; 
probably  for  two  reasons :  Edom,  though 
under  a  native  king,  was  a  dependency  of 
Jndali  (1  K.nga  xxii.  47),  and  on  passing 
through  the  Edomite  country,  an  Edomite 
contingejit  might  be  added  to  the  invading 
force;  Moab,  moreover,  was  more  likely  to 
be  surprised  by  an  attack  on  this  quarter, 
which  was  unusual,  and  from  whiob  she 
would  not  anticipate  danger. 


m.  m.  1—27.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


4S 


Ver.  9. — So  the  King  of  Israel  went— as 
leader  of  the  expedition,  he  is  placed  first — 
and  the  King  of  Jndah — the  eecond  in  im- 
portance, therefore  placed  second— and  the 
King  of  Edom — the  third  in  importance, 
therefore  placed  last.  It  is  to  be  remarked 
that,  when  Edom  was  last  mentioned,  she 
was  ruled  by  a  "  deputy,"  who  received  his 
appointment  from  the  King  of  Judah  (IKings 
xzii.  47).  Now,  apparently,  she  has  her 
own  native  "  king."  The  change  is,  perhaps, 
to  be  connected  with  the  temporary  revolt 
of  Edom  hinted  at  in  2  Ghron.  xx.  22.  And 
they  fetched  a  compass  of  seven  days'  jonmey. 
The  distance  from  Jerusalem,  where  the 
forces  of  Israel  and  Jndah  probably  united, 
to  the  southern  borders  of  Moab  by  way  of 
Hebron,  Malatha,  and  Thamara,  which  is 
the  best-watered  route,  and  would  probably 
be  the  route  taken,  does  not  much  exceed  a 
hundred  niiles ;  but  its  difficulties  are  great, 
and  it  is  quite  probable  that  the  march  of 
an  army  along  it  would  not  average  more 
than  fifteen  miles  a  day.  And  there  was  no 
water  for  the  host.  The  confederate  army 
had  reached  the  border  of  Moab,  where  they 
had  probably  expected  to  find  water  in  the 
Wady-el-Ahsy,  which  is  reckoned  a  perennial 
stream  (Bobinson,  'Besearches,'  vol.  il  p. 
188) ;  but  it  was  dry  at  the  time.  All  the 
streams  of  these  parts  fail  occasionally,  when 
there  has  been  no  rain  for  a  long  time.  And 
for  the  cattle  that  followed  them;  rather, 
/or  Sie  beasts  that  followed  them  (see  the 
Bevised  Version),  The  baggage-animals  are 
intended  (see  ver.  17), 

Ver.  10. — And  the  King  of  Israel  said, 
Alas !  that  the  Lord  hath  called  these  three 
kings  together,  to  deliver  them  into  the 
hind  of  Hoab !  Jehoram  first  assumes,  with- 
out warrant,  that  the  expedition  is  one  which 
Jehovah  has  sanctioned,  and  then  complains 
that  it  is  about  to  fail  utterly.  As  he  had 
made  no  attempt  to  leam  God's  will  on  the 
subject  at  the  moutli  of  any  prophet,  he  had 
no  ground  for  surprise  or  complaint,  even 
had  the  peril  been  as  great  as  he  supposed. 
God  had  not  "called  the  three  kings  to- 
gether;" they  had  come  together  of  their 
own  accord,  guided  1^  their  own  views  of 
earthly  policy.  Yet  God  was  not  about  to 
"deliver  them  into  the  hands  of  Moab,"  as 
in  strict  justice  he  might  have  done.  He 
was  about  to  deliver  the  three  kings  from 
their  peril. 

Ver.  11,— But  Jehoshaphat  said,  Is  there 
not  here  a  prophet  of  the  lord,  that  we 
may  inquire  of  the  Lord  by  Mm?  The 
Israelite  monarch  despairs  at  once ;  the 
Jewish  monarch  retains  faith  and  hope. 
Undoubtedly  he  ought  to  have  had  inquiry 
made  of  the  Lord  before  he  consented  to 
•ocompany  Jehoram  on  the  expedition.  But 
one  negleot  of  dnty  does  not  justify  persist- 


ence in  neglect.  This  he  sees,  and  therefore 
suggests  that  even  now,  at  the  eleventh 
hour,  the  right  course  shall  be  taken.  It 
may  not  even  yet  be  too  late.  And  one  of 
the  King  of  Israel's  servants — t.e.  one  of  the 
officers  in  attendance  on  him — answered  and 
said,  Here  is  Elisha.  Apparently,  Jehoram 
was  not  aware  of  Elisha's  presence  with 
the  army.  Ho  had  to  be  enlightened  by 
one  of  his  attendants,  who  happened  to  lie 
acquainted  with  the  fact.  We  may  suppose 
that  Elisha  had  joined  the  army  "at  the 
instigation  of  the  Spirit  of  God"  (Eeil), 
God  having  resolved  to  rescue  the  Israelites 
&om  theu  peril  by  his  instrumentality,  and 
at  the  same  time  to  show  forth  his  glory  be- 
fore the  people  of  Moab.  The  son  of  Shaphat 
(comp.  1  Kings  six,  16,  19),  which  poured 
water  on  the  hands  of  Illij^ ;  i.e.  who  was 
accustomed  to  minister  to  Elijah's  wunts, 
and  to  attend  upon  him. 

Ver.  12. — And  Jehoshaphat  said,  The  word 
of  the  Lord  is  with  him;  that  is,  "he  is  a 
true  prophet ;  he  can  tell  us  the  will  of  God." 
It  is  impossible  to  say  how  Jehoshaphat  had 
acquired  this  conviction.  Elijah's  selection 
of  Elisha  to  be  his  special  attendant  (1  Kings 
xix.  19 — 21)  was  no  doubt  generally  known, 
and  may  have  raised  expectations  that 
Elisha  would  be  the  next  great  prophet. 
Jehoshaphat  may  have  heard  of  the  miracles 
reoprded  in  oh.  ii.  At  any  rate,  he  appears 
to  have  been  firmly  convinced  of  Elisha's 
prophetic  mission,  and  to  have  accepted 
him  as  the  authorized  exponent  of  God's 
will  at  the  time.  So  the  King  of  Israel  and 
Jehoshaphat  and  the  King  of  Sdom  went 
down  to  him.  Prophets  were  commonly 
summoned  into  the  king's  presence,  or,  if 
they  had  a  message  to  him,  contrived  a 
meeting  in  some  place  where  they  knew  he 
would  be.  Tliat  the  kings  should  seek 
Elisha  out  and  visit  him  was  a  great  sign 
both  of  the  honour  in  which  he  was  held, 
and  also  of  the  extent  to  which  they  were 
humbled  by  the  danger  wliich  threatened 
tliem. 

Ver,  13.— And  Elisha  said  nnto  the  King 
of  Israel,  What  have  I  to  do  with  theel  get 
thee  to  the  prophets  of  thy  father,  and  to  the 
prophets  of  thy  mother.  Despite  Jehoram's 
self-humiliation,  Elisha  regards  it  as  incum- 
bent on  him  to  rebuke  the  monarch,  who, 
though  he  had  "put  away  the  image  of 
Baal  which  his  father  had  made,"  still 
"wrought  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord," 
and  "  cleaved  to  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the 
son  of  Nebat"  (ch.  ii.  2,  3).  Jehoram  must 
not  be  allowed  to  suppose  that  he  has  done 
enough  by.  his  half-repentance  and  partial 
reformation ;  he  must  be  rebuked  and  shamed, 
that  he  may,  if  possible,  be  led  on  to  • 
better  frame  of  mind.  "What,"  says  the 
prophet, "have  I  to  do  with  thee?    Wh^f 


u 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  in.  1— 2T. 


comiiMB  gionnd  do  we  oeonpyf  What  is 
there  that  JnstifleB  thee  in  appealing  to  me 
for  aidT  Get  thee  to  the  prophets  of  thy 
father" — the  four  hnndred  whom  Ahab 
gathered  together  st  Samaria,  to  advise 
him  u  to  going  np  against  Bamoth-QUead 
(1  Kings  xxii.  6) — "and  the  prophets  of  thy 
mother,"  the  Baal-prophets,  whom  Jezebel, 
v»ho  was  still  alive,  and  held  the  position  of 
queen-mother,  ttill  maintained  (ch.  z.  19) — 
"  get  thee  to  {hem,  and  consult  them.  On  them 
thou  hast  some  claim ;  on  me,  none."  And 
the  King  of  Israel  said  unto  him,  Nay:  for 
the  Lord  hath  called  these  three  kings  to- 
gether, to  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of 
Uoab.  A  most  soft  and  meek  answer — one 
well  calculated  to  "turn  away  wrath." 
"Nay,"  says  the  king;  "say  not  so.  Let 
not  that  be  thy  final  answer.  For  it  is  not 
I  alone  who  am  in  danger.  We  are  three 
kings  who  have  oome  down  to  thee  to  ask  thy 
aid ;  we  are  all  in  equal  danger ;  have  respect 
onto  them,  if  thoa  wilt  not  have  respect 
onto  me;  and  show  them  a  way  of  deliver- 
ance." 

Ver.  14. — ^ind  Elisha  laid,  As  the  Lord 
of  hosts  liveth,  before  whom  I  stand,  surely, 
were  it  not  that  I  regard  the  presence  of 
Jehcshaphat,  the  King  of  Jndah,  I  would  not 
look  toward  thse,  nor  see  thee.  Jehosha- 
phat's  conduct  had  not  been  blameless ;  he 
had  twice  incurred  the  rebuke  of  a  prophet 
for  departures  from  the  line  of  strict  duty — 
once  for  "helping  the  ungodly"  Ahab  at 
Bamoth-Gilead  (2  Chron.  ziz.  2);  and  a 
second  time  for  "joining  himself  with  Aha- 
Eiah  to  make  ships  to  go  to  Ophir"  (2 
Chron.  «.  36;  comp.  1  Kings  xxii.  48). 
Even  now  he  was  engaged  in  an  expedition 
which  had  received  no  Divine  sanction,  and 
was  allied  with  two  idolatrous  monarchs. 
But  Elisha  condones  these  derelictions  of 
duty  ill  consideration  of  the  king's  honesty 
of  purpose  and  steady  attachment  to  Je- 
hovah, which  is  witnessed  to  by  the  authors 
both  of  Kings  (1  Kings  xxii.  4:3 ;  ch.  iii.  11) 
•nd  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xvii.  3—6;  xix. 
4—11 ;  XX.  6—21,  etc.).  He  "  regards  the 
presence  of  Jehoshapliat,"  and  therefore 
consents  to  return  an  answer  to  the  three 
kings,  and  announce  to  them  the  mode  of 
their  deliverance.  The  adjuration  where- 
with he  opens  his  speech  is  one  of  great 
solemnity,  only  used  upon  very  special  occa- 
sions (see  1  Kings  xvii.  1 ;  ch.  v.  16),  and 
adds  great  force  to  his  declaration. 

Ver.  15. — But  now  bring  me  a  minstreL 
A  player  on  the  harp  seems  to  be  intended. 
Music  was  cultivated  in  the  schools  of  the 
prophets  (1  Sam.  x.  5;  1  Chron.  xxv.  1—3), 
and  was  employed  to  soothe  and  quiet  the 
soul,  to  help  it  to  forgot  things  earthly  and 
external,  and  bring  it  into  that  ecstatic  con- 
dition in  which  it  was  most  open  to  th« 


reception  of  Divine  influences.  As  David's 
harping  refreshed  Saul,  and  ttanqnillized 
his  spirit  (1  Sam.  zvi.  23),  so  the  playing  of 
any  skilled  minstrel  had  a  soothing  effect 
on  those  possessing  the  prophetic  gift  gene- 
rally, and  enabled  them  to  ehnt  ont  the 
outer  world,  and  concentrate  their  whole 
attention  on  the  inward  voice  which  com- 
municated to  them  the  Divine  messages. 
And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  minstrel 
played,  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  came  upon 
him.  By  "  the  hand  of  the  Lord  "  is  meant 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  Ood,  the  Divine 
effluence,  whatever  it  was,  which  acqnainted 
the  prophets  with  the  Divine  will,  and 
enabled  them  to  ntter  it. 

Yer.  16. — And  he  said,  Thns  saith  the 
Lord,  Make  this  valley  foil  of  ditches; 
rather,  full  of  pits  (fioBiemis,  LXX.).  The 
object  was  to  detain  the  water  which  wonid 
otherwise  have  all  rnn  off  down  the  torrent- 
course  in  a  very  little  time. 

Yer.  17. — For  thns  saith  the  Lord,  Y« 
shall  not  see — i.e.  perceive— wind,  neither 
shall  ye  see  rain.  Wind  and  rain  usually 
go  together  in  the  East,  especially  when 
there  is  sudden  heavy  rain  after  a  time  of 
drought.  What  Elisha  promises  is  a  heavy 
storm  of  wind  accompanied  by  violent  rain, 
which,  however,  will  be  at  such  a  distance 
that  the  Israelites  will  see  nothing  cf  it, 
but  whereof  they  will  experience  the  effects 
when  the  torrent-course  that  separates  them 
from  the  Hoabite  country  suddenly  becomes 
a  rushing  stream  as  the  rain  flows  off  down 
it.  Their  "pits,"  or  trenches,  will  retain  a 
portion  of  the  water,  and  furnish  them  with 
s  sufiBcient  snpply  for  their  wants.  It  was 
necessary  that  the  storm  shonld  be  distant, 
that  the  Moabites  might  know  nothing  of 
it,  and  so  fall  under  the  delusion  (ver.  28) 
which  led  to  their  complete  defeat  Yet 
that  valley  shall  be  filled  with  water.  Tra- 
vellers tell  us  that,  in  certain  circumstances, 
it  takes  but  ten  minutes  or  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  for  a  dry  water-course  in  the  East  to 
become  a  raging  torrent  quite  impassable. 
That  ye  may  drink,  both  ye,  and  yonr 
cattle— 4.a.  the  animals  which  you  have 
brought  vrith  you  for  food — and  yonr  beasts ; 
i.t.  your  beasts  of  burden,  or  baggage-ani- 
mals. Animals,  except  camels,  suffer  from 
drought  even  more  than  men,  and  die  sooner. 
The  Israelites  do  not  appear  to  have  ever 
employed  camels. 

Ver.  18. — And  this  is  bnt  a  light  thing  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord.  God,  the  Author  of 
nature,  has  full  control  over  nature,  and  it 
is  an  easy  matter  for  him  to  produce  at  will 
any  natural  phenomena.  It  is  otherwise 
when  the  stubborn  element  of  the  human 
will  is  brought  into  play.  Then  diffioulty 
may  arise.  He  will  deliver  the  Hoabitei 
also  int*  jvax  hand.    It  wonld  be  batter  im 


•H.  in.  1—27.]         THB  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THK  KINGS. 


46 


translate,  he  wtU  aho  deliver  (lee  the  Bo- 
viBed  VeTBion). 

Ver.  19. — And  ye  shall  smite  eveiy  fenced 
olty,  and  every  ohoioe  city.  The  LXX.  omit 
the  second  clause,  perhaps  because  they 
oould  not  reproduce  in  Greek  the  assonance 
of  the  Hebrew,  where  the  words  for  "  fenced  " 
and  "choice  "  Ox^o  and  ninan)  have  nearly 
the  same  sound.  '  And  shall  fell  every  good 
tree.  It  has  been  said  that  the  Law  forbade 
this,  and  argued  (1)  that  Elisha  did  not  here 
utter  a  command,  but  only  a  prediction 
(Fool),  not  bidding  the  Israelites  to  out 
down  the  trees,  but  only  telling  them  they 
would  do  so;  (2)  that  Elisha  intention- 
ally excepted  the  Moabites  from  the  mer- 
ciful provision  of  the  Law  (Dent.  zx.  19, 
20),  having  authority  to  do  so,  and  regard- 
ing the  MoabiteB  as  exceptionally  wicked 
(Keil);  and  (3)  that  the  Mosaic  Law  was 
not  observed  under  the  kings,  and  that 
Elisha  himself  had  forgotten  the  provision 
about  fruit  trees  (Geddes).  But  a  careful 
examination  of  the  passage  in  Deuteronomy 
will  show  (1)  that  there  is  no  general 
prohibition  of  the  cutting  down  of  &uit 
trees,  but  only  a  prohibition  of  their  being 
cut  down/or  eiege  worke;  (2)  that  the  pro- 
hibition restB  on  prudential,  not  on  moral, 
grounds,  and  is  thug  practically  limited  to 
cases  where  the  conquest  of  the  country 
attacked,  and  its  occupation  by  the  con- 
querors, are  looked  forward  to.  The  words 
are,  "  When  thou  shalt  besiege  a  city, ,  .  . 
thou  shalt  not  destroy  the  trees  thereof  by 
forcing  an  axe  against  them :  for  thou  mayest 
eat  of  them."  The  destruction  of  the  fruit 
trees  in  an  enemy's  country  was  a  common 
feature  of  tlie  wars  of  the  period,  and  was 
largely  practised,  both  by  the  Assyrians  and 
the  Egyptians  (see  Layard's '  Monuments  of 
Nineveh,'  first  series,  pi.  73 ;  second  series, 
pi.  10 ;  '  Nineveh  and  Babylon,'  p.  588 ;  and 
'  Records  of  the  Fust,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  5,  51, 
etc.).  And  stop  all  wells  of  water.  The 
stoppage  of  springs  and  wells  was  another 
common  practice  in  ancient  times,  often  em- 
ployed against  encrai(S  and  aliens.  The 
FhiliBtines  stopped  the  Hebrew  wells  ui 
the  days  of  Isaac  (Gen.  xxvi.  18).  Heze- 
kiah  stopped  the  springs  of  water  outside 
Jerusalem,  when  he  expected  to  be  besieged 
by  the  Assyrians  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  3,  4). 
The  Scylliiaus,  when  Darius  invaded  tlieir 
country,  stopped  all  their  own  wells  as  they 
retired  before  him  (Herod.,  iv.  120).  Ar- 
saces  III.  partly  stopped,  and  partly  poi- 
soned, the  Persian  wells  in  his  war  with 
Antiochus  the  Great  (Folyb.,  x.  28.  §  5). 
The  practice  was  regarded  as  quite  legiti- 
mate. And  mar  every  good  piece  of  land 
with  stones;  literally,  grieve  every  goodpieee 
0/  land.  To  clear  the  stones  off  a  piece  of 
gionnd  was  the  first  step  towards  preparing 


It  for  cultivation  In  the  etony  regioni  oa 
either  side  of  the  ilordan.  The  clearance 
waa  generally  effected  by  collecting  the 
stones  into  heaps.  When  it  was  wished  to 
"  mar  the  land,"  the  stonea  were  there  to  be 
spread  over  it  afresh. 

Ver.  20. — ^Andit  came  to  pass  in  the  morn- 
ing, when  the  meat  offering  was  offered — 
i.e.  about  sunrise,  which  was  the  time  of  the 
morning  sacrifice— that,  behold,  there  came 
water  by  the  way  of  Edom.  The  Wady-el- 
Ahay  drains  a  portion  of  Southern  Moab, 
and  also  a  considerable  tract  of  Northern 
Edom.  The  nocturnal  storm  had  burst, 
not  in  the  Moabite  country,  where  it  would 
have  attracted  the  attention  of  the  Moabites, 
but  in  some  comparatively  distant  part  of 
the  Idumsean  territory,  so  that  the  Moabites 
were  not  aware  of  it.  Josephus  says  that 
the  storm  burst  at  a  distance  of  three  days' 
journey  from  the  Israelite  camp  (*  Ant.  Jud.,' 
ix.  8.  §  2);  but  this  can  only  be  his  con- 
jecture. And  the  oonntry  was  filled  with 
water.  By  "  the  country  "  (ha-arets)  must 
be  meant  here  the  bed  or  channel  of  the 
water-course.  This  waa  suddenly  filled 
with  a  rushing  stream,  which,  however, 
lapidly  ran  off,  leaving  tlie  water-course 
dry,  excepting  where  the  pits  had  been 
made  by  the  Israelites.  But  this  supply 
was  ample  for  the  army. 

Ver.  21.— And  when  all  the  Koabitei 
heard  that  the  kings  were  come  np  to  fight 
against  them.  The  Hebrew  has  no  plu- 
perfect tense;  but  the  verbs  have  here  a 
pluperfect  force.  Translate,  When  all  the 
Modbitee  Jiad  heard  that  the  kings  were 
eome  up  to  fight  ayainet  them,  they  had 
gathered  aU  that  were  ahle,  etc.  The 
muster  of  the  troops  had  long  preceded  the 
storm.  They  'gathered  all  tiiat  were  able 
to  put  on  armour ;  literally,  there  had  been 
gathered  together  aU  that  girded  themeelve* 
uith  girdles;  i.e.  all  the  male  population  of 
full  age.  And  upward — i.e.  and  all  above 
the  age  when  the  girdle  was  first  assumed — 
and  stood  in  the  border ;  took  up  a  position 
near  the  extreme  border  of  their  territory, 
on  the  northern  bank  of  the  Wady-el-Ahsy. 

Ver.  22. — ^And  they  rose  np  early  in  tho 
morning,  and  the  ann  shone  upon  the  water, 
and  the  Moabites  saw  the  water  on  the  other 
side  as  red  as  blood.  The  red  hue  of  the  water 
is  ascribed  by  Ewald  to  "  the  red  tinge  of 
the  soil "  in  the  part  of  Edom  where  the 
rain  had  fallen  ('  History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv. 
p.  88) ;  by  Keil,  to  "  the  reddish  earth  of 
the  freshly  dug  trenches,"  or  pits  ('  Com- 
mentary on  2  Kings,'  p.  805) ;  but  the  only 
cause  of  the  redness  mentioned  either  in 
Kings  or  in  Josephna  ia  the  ruddy  hoe  of 
the  sunrise.  A  mddy  sunrise  ia  common 
in  the  East,  more  espeoially  in  stormy 
weather  (see  Matt.  xn.  8);  and  the  red 


46 


THE  SECOND  BOOB.  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  ni.  1—27. 


light,  falling  upon  the  water  in  the  pits, 
and  reflected  thence  to  the  opposite  side  of 
the  wady,  would  quite  sufficiently  account 
for  the  mistake  of  the  Moabites,  without 
supposing  that  the  water  was  actually 
stained  and  discoloured.  The  Moabites  con- 
cluded that  the  red-looking  liquid  was 
blood,  from  knowing  that  the  wady  was  dry 
the  day  before,  and  from  not  suspecting 
that  there  had  been  any  change  in  the 
night,  as  the  storm  which  had  caused  the 
change  was  at  such  a  distance. 

Yer.  23. — ^And  they  said,  This  is  blood. 
Eren  Bwald  recognizes  here  "  a  historical 
background  for  the  narrative."  The  idea 
of  such  a  mistake  could  scarcely  have  oc- 
curred to  a  romancer.  The  kings  are  surely 
slain,  and  they  have  smitten  one  another. 
There  were  rivalries  and  jealousies  subsist- 
ing between  Judah,  Israel,  and  Edom,  which 
made  it  quite  possible  that  at  any  time 
open  quarrel  miglit  break  out  among  them. 
Edom  especially  was,  it  is  probable,  a  re- 
luctant member  of  the  confederacy,  forced 
to  take  lier  part  in  it  by  her  suzerain,  Je- 
hoshaphat.  The  Moabites,  moreover,  had 
recently  had  personal  experience  how  easily 
the  swords  of  confederates  might  be  turned 
against  each  other,  siace  their  last  expedi- 
tion against  Judah  (2  Chron.  xx.  1 — 25)  had 
completely  failed  through  such  a  sudden 
disagreement  and  contention.  Now  there- 
fore, Hoab,  to  the  spoil.  If  their  supposi- 
tion were  correct,  and  the  kings  had  come 
to  blows,  and  the  hosts  destroyed  each 
other,  Moab  would  have  nothing  to  do  but 
to  fly  upon  the  spoil,  to  strip  the  slain,  and 
plunder  the  camp  of  the  confederates.  A 
disorderly  rush  teok  place  for  this  purpose 
(see  JosephuB, '  Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  3.  §  2). 

Yer.  24. — And  when  they  came  to  the 
camp  of  Israel,  the  Israelites  rose  up.  The 
first  rush  of  the  main  body  would  be  upon 
the  camp,  where  they  would  expect  to  find 
the  richest  spoil.  It  was  near  at  hand; 
and  the  occupants  kept  themselves  con- 
cealed in  it,  expecting  the  disorderly  attack 
which  actually  took  place.  They  then 
"  rose  up,"  and  fell  upon  the  crowd  of  assail- 
ants, who  were  off  their  guard,  and  expect- 
ing nothing  less.  A  confused  rout  followed. 
And  smote  the  Moabites,  so  that  they  fled 
before  them.  Josephus  says,  "  Some  of  the 
Moabites  were  out  to  pieces ;  the  others  fled, 
and  dispersed  themselves  over  tlieir  coun- 
tiy."  But  they  went  forward,  smiting  the 
Uoahites  even  in  their  country.  There  are 
two  readings  here,  in'i  and  is'i.  The  former 
is  to  be  preferred,  and  is  to  be  pointed  ^z^^ 
(for  s'flM,  as  in  1  Kings  xii.  12).  This  gives 
the  meaning  of  the  text.  The  margioal 
tmnslation  follows  the  Keri  u>i ,  which  ia 
(as  Keil  says)  "  a  bad  emendation." 

Yer.  2S.— And  they  beat  down  the  cities 


— i.».  destroyed  them,  levelled  them  with 
the  ground — and  on  every  good  piece  of 
land  oast  every  man  his  stone  (see  ver.  19 
and  the  comment  ad  he.),  and  filled  it 
[with  stones].  And  they  stopped  all  the 
wells  of  water,  and  felled  all  the  good  trees 
— 1.0.  the  fruit  trees,  SevSpa  ^fiepa  (Jose- 
phus)— only  in  Eir-haraseth  left  they  the 
stones  thereof;  literally,  until  in  Kir-hara- 
seth—i.e.  in  Kir-haraseth  only — left  he  the 
stones  thereof.  He  (i.e.  the  commander,  or 
the  army)  went  on  destroying  and  levelling 
the  cities,  until  he  came  to  Kir-haraseth, 
which  proved  too  strong  for  him.  There 
he  was  obliged  to  leave  the  stones  un- 
touched. Kir-haraseth,  which  is  not  men- 
tioned among  the  early  Moabite  towns,  nor 
even  upon  the  Moabite  Stone,  and  which 
is  therefore  thought  to  have  been  a  newly 
constructed  fortress  (Ewald),  was,  in  the 
later  times,  one  of  the  most  important  of 
the  strongholds  of  Moab  (see  Isa.  xv.  1; 
xvi.  7,  11 ;  Jer.  xlviii.  36).  It  was  some- 
times called  Kir-Moab,  "the  fortress  of 
Moab."  At  what  time  it  got  the  name  of 
Kerak  is  uncertein ;  but  we  find  it  spoken 
of  as  Kerak-Moab  by  Ptolemy  (about  a.d. 
150),  and  by  Stephen  of  Byzantium  (about 
A.D.  S30).  It  was  a  place  of  much  impor- 
tance ia  the  time  of  the  Crusades.  The 
situation  is  one  of  great  strength.  The  for- 
tress is  built  upon  the  top  of  a  steep  hill, 
surrounded  on  all  sides  by  a  deep  and  nar- 
row valley,  which  again  is  completely  en- 
closed by  mountains,  rising  higher  than  the 
fort  itself.  It  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the 
strongest  positions  within  the  territory  an- 
ciently possessed  by  the  Moabites.  Howbeit 
the  Blingers  went  about  it,  and  smote  it. 
Ewald  thinks  that  by  "  slingers  "  are  meant, 
nn'  mere  ordinary  slingers,  but  persons  who 
work  i  1  more  elaborate  engines,  as  catapults 
aiiu  tlie  like  ('  History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p. 
8a,  note,  Eng.  trans.).  He  is  undoubtedly 
correct  in  saying  that  "  all  sorts  of  elaborate 
modes  of  attacking  fortifications  were  very 
early  known  in  Asia;"  but  it  is  very  ques- 
tionable whether  the  Hebrew  word  used 
(D'y'jgn)  oan  mean  anything  but  "  slingers  " 
in  the  usual  sense.  The  LXX.  translate  by 
a-^evSovrJTat.  The  situation  is  one  which 
would  allow  of  "  slingers,"  in  the  ordinary 
sense,  sending  their  missiles  into  the  place, 
and  grievously  harassing  it. 

Yer.  26. — ^And  when  the  King  of  Uoab  saw 
that  the  battle  was  too  sore  for  him — i.e. 
that  he  could  not  hope  to  maintain  the  de- 
fence much  longer,  but  would  be  forced  to 
surrender  the  fortress — ^he  took  with  him 
seven  hundred  men  that  drew  swords,  to 
break  through  even  unto  the  King  of  £dom. 
Perhaps  he  regarded  t^e  King  of  Edom  as 
the  weakest  of  the  three  oontederates,  and 
the  least  likely  to  offer  effectual  resistance,- 


cam.  1—27.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINQS. 


4T 


perhaps  he  viewed  him  as  a  traitor,  since 
Edom  had  been  his  ally  a  little  earlier  (2 
Ohron.  zz.  10,  22),  and  wished  to  wreak  bis 
Tengeance  on  him.  But  they  conld  not. 
The  attempt  failed ;  Edom  was  too  strong, 
and  he  was  forced  to  throw  himself  once 
more  into  the  beleaguered  town. 

Yer.  27. — ^Ihen  he  took  his  eldest  son, 
that  should  have  reigned  in  his  stead—  the 
throne  of  Moab  beinjj  hereditary,  and  pri- 
mogeniture the  established  law  (of.  Moab- 
ite  Stone,  lines  2  and  3,  "  My  father  reigned 
over  Moab  thirty  years,  and  I  reigned  after 
my  father") — and  offered  him  fur  a  burnt 
offering.  Human  sacrifice  was  widely  prac- 
tised by  the  idolatrous  nations  who  bor- 
dered on  Palestine,  and  by  none  more  than 
by  the  Moabites.  A  former  King  of  Moab, 
when  in  a  sore  strait,  had  asked,  "  Shall  I 
give  my  firstborn  for  my  transgression,  the 
fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of  my  soul  ?  " 
(Mioah  vi.  7) ;  and  there  is  reason  to  believe 
th*t  a  chief  element  in  the  worship  of  Che  ■ 
mash  was  the  sacrifice  of  young  children 
b/  their  unnatural  parents.  The  practice 
rested  on  the  idea  that  God  was  best  pleased 
when  men  offered  to  him  what  was  dearest 
and  most  precious  to  them ;  but  it  was  in 
glaring  contradiction  to  the  charaeter  of 
God  as  revealed  by  his  prophets,  and  it  did 
violence  to  the  best  and  holiest  instincts  of 
human  nature.  The  Law  condemned  it  in 
the  strongest  terms  as  a  profanation  of  the 
Divine  Name  (Lev.  xviii.  21 ;  xx.  1 — 5), 
and  neither  Jeroboam  nor  Ahab  ventured 
to  introduce  it  when  they  established  their 
idolatrous  systems.  The  King  of  Moab,  un- 
doubtedly, offered  the  sacrifice  to  his  god 
Chemosh  (see  Moabite  Stone,  lines  3,  4,  8, 
12,  etc.),  hoping  to  propitiate  him,  and  by 
his  aid  to  escape  from  the  peril  in  which  he 
found  himself  placed.    His  motive  for  offer- 


ing the  sacrifice  upon  the  wall  is  not  m 
clear.  It  was  evidently  done  to  attract  the 
notice  of  the  besiegers,  but  with  what  fur- 
ther object  is  uncertain.  Bwald  thinks  the 
king's  intention  was  to  "  confound  the  enemy 
by  the  spectacle  of  the  frightful  deed  to 
which  they  had  forced  him,"  and  thus  to 
"  effect  a  change  in  their  purposes  "  ('  His- 
tory of  Ifrael,'  vol.  iv.  p.  90) ;  but  perhaps 
it  is  as  likely  that  he  hoped  to  work  upon 
their  fears,  and  induce  them  to  retire  under 
the  notion  tliat,  if  they  did  not,  Chemosh 
would  do  them  some  terrible  injury.  And 
there  was  great  indignation  against  Israel  : 
and  they  departed.  It  seems  necessary  to 
connect  these  clauses,  and  to  regard  them  as 
assigning  cause  and  effect.  The  deed  dono 
aroused  an  indignation  against  Israel,  which 
led  to  the  siege  being  raised.  But  an  in- 
dignation on  whose  part?  Keil  thinks,  on 
God's.  But  could  God  be  angry  with  Is- 
rael for  an  act  of  the  King  of  Moab,  which 
they  had  no  ground  for  anticipating,  and 
which  they  could  not  possibly  have  pre- 
vented ?  especially  when  the  Israelites  had 
done  nothing  to  cause  the  act,  except  by 
carrying  out  God's  own  command  to  them 
through  his  prophet,  to  "  smite  every  fenced 
city  and  every  choice  city  "  (ver.  19).  The  in- 
dignation, therefore,  must  have  been  human. 
But  who  felt  it?  Probably  the  Moabites. 
The  terrible  act  of  their  king,  to  which  they 
considered  that  Israel  had  driven  him,  stirred 
up  such  a  feeling  of  fury  among  the  residue 
of  the  Moabite  nation,  that  the  confederates 
quailed  before  it,  and  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  they  had  best  give  up  the  siege  and 
retire.  They  therefore  departed  from  Tiim — 
4.6.  the  King  of  Moab — and  returned  to  their 
own  land;  severally  to  Edom,  Judsea,  and 
Samaria. 


HOMILETICS. 

Veri.  1 — 3. — Half-repentances  not  accepted  hy  God.  Jehoram  was  better  than  his 
father  and  his  mother,  very  considerably  better  thirn  his  brother  (1  Kings  xxii.  52,  53). 
He  "  put  away  the  Image  of  Baal  that  his  father  had  made,"  lowered  the  Baal -worship 
from  the  position  of  the  Btate  religion  to  that  of  (at  the  most)  a  tolerated  cult,  and 
professed  himself  a  worshipper  of  Jehovah.  But  his  heart  waa  not  whole  with  Grod. 
He  "cleaved  unto  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  and  departed  not  therefrom." 
At  Dan  and  Bethel  the  golden  calves  still  received  the  homage  of  both  king  and  people ; 
priests,  not  of  the  blood  of  Aaron,  offered  the  sacrifices  of  imrighteousneas  before  the 
insensible  images ;  and  ritual  practices  were  maintained  which  had  no  Divine  sanction. 
Jehoram's  reformation  stopped  half-way.  He  repented  of  what  Ahab  and  Jezebel  and 
Ahaziah  had  done,  but  not  of  what  Jeroboam  had  done.  His  was  a  half-hearted 
repentance. 

I.  Half-heartednbss  is  from  fikst  to  last  condemned  by  SoBrPTUBE.  "  How 
long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions?  if  the  Lord  be  God,  follow  him:  but  if  Baal, 
then  follow  him "  (1  Kings  xviii.  21) ;  "  Oh  that  there  were  such  an  heart  in  them, 
that  they  would  fear  me,  and  keep  eUl  my  commandments  always  I "  (Deut.  v.  29) ; 
"I  caU  heaven  and  earth  to  record  this  day  against  you,  th«t  I  have  let  be&>ra 


4g  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.       [ch.  hi.  1—27. 


vou  life  and  death,  blessing  and  cursiag;  therefore  choose  life  (Deut.  xxx.  19); 
"No  man  can  serve  two  masteri,  ...  ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon"  (Matt, 
vi.  24);  '•  Whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  Law,  and  yet  offend  in  one  point,  he  is 
guilty  of  all"  (Jas.  iL  10) ;  "  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot :  I 
would  that  thou  wert  cold  or  hot.  So  then  because  thou  art  lukewarm,  and  neither 
cold  nor  hot,  I  wiU  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth  "  (Rev.  iii.  15, 16).  God's  true  servant* 
are  those  whose  heart  is  whole  with  him  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  37),  who  are  "  faithful  in  all  his 
house  "  (Numb.  xii.  7),  who  "  fear  him,  and  walk  in  all  his  ways,  and  love  him,  and 
serve  him  with  all  their  heart  and  all  their  soul"  (Deut.  x.  12). 

IL    HALr-HEAETEDNESS    CONTAINS    WITHIN    ITSELF    THB    GEBM8   OP  WEAKNESS  _  ANB 

OF  FAILURE.  "A  douhlc-minded  mun  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways"  (Jas.  1.  8). 
Changefulness,  vacillation,  infirmity  of  purpose,  ineonsistenoy,  half-repentances,_  half- 
resolves,  are  sure  to  result  in  failure  and  inability  to  effect  anything.  No  policy  is 
successful  unless  it  is  thorough.  No  character  is  calculated  to  impress  others,  or  carry 
through  any  important  work,  or  leave  its  mark  on  the  world,  but  one  that  is  firm, 
strong,  sincere,  consistent,  thorough-going.  Half-measures  are  of  little  service.  Half- 
resolves  are  almost  worse  than  absence  of  all  resolve.  Half-repentances  stand  in  the 
way  of  real  change  of  heart  and  amendment  of  life.  Half-hearted  rulers  are  apt  to 
"  oidain  something  good  here  and  there,  or  abolish  something  bad,  while  they  perceive 
still  more  which  their  duty  would  require  them  to  remove,  but  they  cannot  bring 
themselves  to  do  it,  from  motives  of  policy  which  are  not  pure,  or  pleasing  to  God" 
(Lange).  Such  hall-heartedness,  while  it  angers  God,  is  not  even  expedient,  with 
respect  to  men,  in  the  long  run. 

Vera.  4,  6. — SeheUiott  not  to  be  entered  upon  with  a  light  heart.  We  are  not 
sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  position  of  Mnab  under  Israel,  or  with  the  extent  of 
the  Moabite  resources,  or  with  the  grounds  of  just  complaint  which  they  may  have 
hail,  to  determine  whether  this  particular  rebellion  was  justifiable  or  no.  But  we  cau 
clearly  see  from  the  narrative  that  rebellion  is  a  very  grave  matter,  one  to  be  very 
carefully  consideied,  and  only  to  be  adventured  upon  under  a  combination  of  circum- 
stances that  very  rarely  occurs. 

I.  Thebb  must  be  cheat  and  serious  grievances.  Whether  the  tribute  exacted 
by  Israel  from  Moab  was  excessive  and  unduly  burdensome,  or  even  absolutely 
intiilerable,  depends  on  the  actual  wealth  of  the  country  in  flocks  and  herds,  which 
is  a  point  whereon  we  have  no  su£Scient  information.  But  it  is  clear  that  a  tribute 
may  be  excessive ;  nay,  may  be  so  oppressive  as  to  justify  revolt.  There  is  a  point 
beyond  which  a  country's  resources  cannot  bo  strained,  and  no  subject  people  is  bound 
to  wait  until  the  last  straw  has  broken  its  back.  Systematic  insult  and  injury, 
determined  misgovemment  without  prospect  of  alleviation,  severe  oppression,  absolutely 
exhaustive  taxation,  are  grievances  against  which  h  subject  people  may  fairly  rebel, 
anil  appeal  to  the  arbitrament  of  arms.  But  the  weight  of  the  grievances  endured  is 
not  the  only  factor  in  the  equation. 

II.  There  must  also  be  a  bbasonablb  prospect  of  success.  Probably  ten 
rebellions  have  been  crushed  for  one  that  has  succeeded.  It  is  difficult  to  calculate 
chances  beforehand ;  and  hope  is  apt  to  "  tell  a  flattering  tale."  To  have  a  good  cause 
is  certainly  not  enough,  fortune  being  too  often  oa  the  side,  not  of  justice  and  righ^ 
but  of  "  big  battalions."  No  cause  could  be  much  better  than  that  of  the  gladiators 
who  revolted  under  Spartacus ;  but  Rome  crushed  them,  and  quenched  the  flames  of 
their  rebellion  in  blood,  within  the  spice  of  two  years  from  the  time  of  its  breaking 
out.  'J'he  war  of  the  Fronde  was  equally  justifiable  from  a  moral  point  of  view ;  but  it 
was  hopeless  from  the  first,  and  ought  never  to  have  been  adventured  on.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  rebellion  of  the  Jews  against  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  and  that  of  the 
Swiss  against  Gessler,  which  might  well  have  seemed  hopeless  to  those  who  initiated 
them,  succeeded.  The  issue  in  every  case  is  in  the  hand  of  God,  with  whom,  as  Judas 
Maccabeus  said,  "  it  is  all  one  to  deliver  with  a  great  multitude  or  a  small  company  j 
for  the  victory  of  battle  standeth  not  in  the  multitude  of  an  host,  but  strength  cometh 
from  heaven "  (1  Mace.  iii.  18,  19).  Still,  in  every  case,  probabilities  ought  to  be 
seriously  weighed,  consequences  thoughtfully  considered.  In  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  il 
is  better  to  "  bear  the  ills  we  have  than  fly  to  others  that  we  know  not  of    War  if  such 


<n.m.l— 27.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  49 

•  terrible  evil,  tlie  source  of  snch  incalculable  mischief  and  wretchedneM,  that  almost 
everything  should  be  borne  before  the  appeal  is  made  to  it. 
III.  There    SHonLO    be  a  beasonablb  oonviotioh  that  tee  AOVAMTAaES  of 

SnCOESS    WILL    OnTWEIQH    THE    KVILB    OV    THE   8TB0aOLE    NB0E8SART    FOB    AOHIEVINQ 

IT.  An  oppressed  nationality  will,  perhaps,  always  expect  this  to  be  the  case,  and 
will  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  those  who  urge  the  prudential  consideration.  But  it  may  be 
worth  attending  to  nevertheless.  It  will  be  too  late,  if  the  discovery  be  made  after  the 
struggle  is  over,  that "  le  jeu  ne  valait  pas  la  chandelle."  A  nation  may,  after  long 
years  of  bitter  conflict,  shake  off  a  foreign  yoke,  but  may  emerge  from  the  strife  so 
weakened,  so  exhausted,  so  impoverished,  that  its  new  life  is  not  worth  living.  The 
evils  of  the  struggle  are  certain;  the  benefits  of  independence  are  problematical. 
Subject  nationalities  should  consider  well,  before  they  break  into  revolt,  not  only  the 
chances  of  success,  but  the  probable  balance  of  loss  and  gain  supposing  that  ultimately 
success  is  achieved. 

Vers.  6^12. — Faith  and  un/aith  tested  by  danger  and  diffknlly.  Jehoshaphat  and 
Jehoram  are  associates,  allies,  brothers-in-arins.  They  are  united  in  one  cause,  have 
one  object,  one  aim.  And  they  fall  into  one  and  the  same  danger  and  difficulty.  A 
failure  of  water  at  the  spot  where  they  had  fully  expected  to  find  it  brings  them  aud 
their  armies  into  peril  of  almost  instant  destruction.  But  how  differently  are  they 
affected  under  the  same  circumstances!  Jehoram  at  once  despairs,  sees  no  way  out  of 
the  difficulty,  has  no  plan,  no  counsel,  to  suggest.  Far  from  flying  to  God  for  succour, 
he  only  thinks  of  him  to  reproach  him.  Jehovah,  he  says,  has  called  three  kings 
together,  only  to  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  Moab.  The  reproach  is  as  unfounded 
as  it  is  useless.  Jehovah  had  not  called  the  three  kings  together.  He  had  not  been 
consulted  on  the  subject  of  the  expedition,  and  he  had  not  spoken.  The  three  kings 
had  come  together  of  their  own  free  will,  and  of  their  own  mere  motion.  And  Jehovah 
was  not  about  to  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  Moab,  but  was  about  to  give  them  a 
great  victory  over  Moab — a  victory  which  would  prevent  Moab  from  causing  any 
further  trouble  for  half  a  century  (ch.  xiii.  20).  But  Jehoram,  being  the  embodiment 
of  unfaith,  is  blind,  hopeless,  and  helpless.  It  is  otherwise  with  Jehoshaphat,  who 
all  his  life  "has  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  God"  (2  Chron.  zix.  3).  Danger  and 
difficulty  draw  forth  what  is  best  in  him,  rouse  him  out  of  a  sort  of  trance  of  religious 
indifference  into  which  he  had  fallen,  and  cause  him  to  fall  back  upon  Jehovah  as  the 
only  sure  Befuge  in  time  of  trouble,  and  to  ask,  "  Is  there  not  here  a  prophet  of  the 
Lord,  that  we  may  inquire  of  the  Lord  by  him  ?  "  Jehoshaphat's  faith  makes  him 
both  hopeful  and  helpful.  He  suggests  a  course  which  leads  to  a  happy  result.  But 
for  him,  so  far  as  appears,  the  danger  might  have  terminated  in  disaster. 

Vers.  13 — 19. — The  servant  of  Ood  in  the  presence  of  the  great  of  the  earth.  Three 
lessons  may  be  learnt  from  the  conduct  of  Elisha  before  the  confederate  kings. 

I.  A  LESSON  OF  ZEAL  FOB  G«D.  Elisha  does  not  allow  himself  to  be  abashed  by 
the  earthly  grandeur  and  dignity  of  his  visitors,  or  to  be  rendered  yielding  and  com- 
plaisant by  the  complinient  which  they  have  paid  him  in  seeking  him  out,  instead  of 
summoning  him  to  their  presence.  As  the  servant  and  minister  of  Gkid,  he  is  always  in 
a  grander  presence  than  theirs,("  As  tiie  Lord  Gud  liveth,  hefore  whom  I  stand"  ver.  14) ; 
and  as  God's  mouthpiece  he  is  entitled  to  be  approached,  even  by  the  most  exalted  of 
human  dignitaries,  as  a  superior.  Out  of  zeal  for  God  he  asserts  himself,  and  adopts 
a  tone  of  rebuke,  remonstrance,  and  almost  contempt,  which  would  have  ill  befitted  a 
subject,  had  he  not  been  acting  in  the  capacity  of  God's  prophet  and  representative. 

II.  A  LESSON  OF  FEAELBSSNEss.  Oriental  kings  are  not  accustomed  to  rebuke,  and 
are  apt  to  resent  it.  They  have  despotic,  or  jMosf-despotic  power,  and  can  visit  with 
very  severe  pains  and  penalties  those  who  provoke  them.  Ahab  imprisoned  Micaiah 
the  son  of  Imlah,  and  fed  him  with  "  the  bread  of  affliction  and  the  water  of  affliction  " 
(1  Kings  xxii.  27) ;  Jezebel  sought  Elijah's  life  (1  Kings  xix.  2) ;  Joash  was  privy  to 
the  murder  of  Zechariah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  20).  In  openly  rebuking 
Jehoram,  li's  sovereign,  on  account  of  his  idolatry,  Elisha  showed  a  boldness  and  a 
fearlessness  that  were  at  once  surprising  and  admirable.  He  evidently  "  did  not  fear 
what  flesh  could  do  unto  him"  (Pi.  Iri.  4). 

u.  UNat. 


BO  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  m  1— 27. 

IIL   A     LES80M     or     PBEPABEDNESS      FOB      DlVINlS      EFrLDENOBB.         Elishft,     harlTlg 

exhibited  his  zeal  for  Gbd  and  his  fearlessness  of  man,  had  finally  to  address  himself 
to  the  special  needs  of  the  occasion.  Three  kings  had  applied  to  him  to  know  the  will 
of  God  with  respect  to  a  certain  difficult  conjuncture.  He  did  not  yet  know  it.  How 
could  he  bring  himself  into  the  frame  of  mind  best  fitted  to  receive  an  efSuence  from 
on  high  ?  He  regarded  music  as,  under  the  circumstances,  the  best  preparatiou.  His 
example  teaches  us  (1)  that  music  has  religious  uses;  (2)  that  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  prepare  ourselves,  if  we  would  have  the  Divine  Spirit  speak  to  our  owu 
spirits.  Men  often  complain  that  they  derive  no  benefit  from  sacramental  and  other 
ordinances.  May  not  the  reason  be  that  they  do  not  prepare  themselves  aright  ?  The 
Holy  Spirit  will  not  enter  into  our  hearts  unless  they  are  made  ready  for  hia  august 
presence. 

Vers.  21 — 25. — OocCs  enemies  rewarded  after  their  deserving.  Whether  or  no  the 
Moabites  were,  hiunanly  speaking,  justified  in  their  attempt  to  shake  off  the  Israelitisb 
yoke,  and  re-establish  their  independence,  at  any  rate  they  were,  as  a  nation,  distinctly 
hostile  to  Jehovah  and  his  laws,  and  must  be  counted  as  among  God's  enemies.  Their 
Chemosh  cannot  be  reckoned  as  an  adumbration  of  the  true  God;  he  is  rather  an 
adumbration  of  the  evil  and  malisnant  spirit.  A  people  that  delights  in  human 
sacrifice,  and  offers  to  its  deities  tender  and  innocent  children,  drowning  their  cries  with 
the  loud  din  of  dnmts  and  tom-toms,  must  have  depraved  its  conscience  by  long 
persistence  in  evil,  and  departed  very  far  indeed  from  original  righteousness.  Moab, 
moreover,  had,  from  the  time  of  Balak,  determinately  set  itself  at  once  to  oppose  the 
Israelites,  whenever  opportvmity  offered,  by  armed  force,  and  also  to  corrupt  and 
deprave  them  morally  and  religiously.  The  Moabites  had  recently  made  what  seems 
to  have  been  an  entirely  unprovoked  attack  upon  Jehoshaphat,  and  had  stirred  up  the 
Ammonites  and  Edomites  to  do  the  same  (2  Chron.  zx.  1 — 18).  They  had  already 
suffered  one  chastisement  for  this  wrong-doing,  at  the  hand  of  God  (2  Chron.  xx. 
22 — 24} ;  but  God's  anger  against  them  was  not  yet  fiilly  appeased.  The  rebellion  on 
which  Mesha  had  adventured  led  now  to  a  further  chastisement — Moab  was  ravaged 
from  one  end  of  the  coimtry  to  the  other,  the  towns  were  taken  and  demolished,  the 
fruit  trees  cut  down,  the  good  land  "  marred,"  only  Eir-haraseth  was  left  unharmed  : 
and  even  there  the  inhabitants  suffered  greatly.  Moab  was  severely  ptmished ;  but,  as 
nsually,  God's  justice  was  tempered  with  mercy.  She  was  not  cru^ed  ;  she  was  not 
destroyed.  If  we  may  believe  Mesha,  she  gradually  recovered  and  rebuilt  her  towns. 
After  fifty  years  of  depression  she  was  able  to  resume  her  raids  into  the  land  of  Israel 
^h.  xiii  20),  and  it  was  not  till  the  establishment  of  the  Roman  supremacy  over  th« 
East  that,  having  filled  up  the  measure  of  her  iniquitiei,  she  ceased  to  exist  as  a  nation. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3.— 3%«  continuity  of  evil.  How  hard  it  is  to  get  rid  of  the  power  of  evil  I 
Ahaziah  had  sought  after  strange  gods.  He  had  served  Baal  with  all  his  corruptions. 
Jehoram  his  brother,  who  succeeds  him,  is  a  little  better.  "  He  put  away  the  image 
of  Baal  which  his  father  had  made."  Perhaps  he  was  frightened  by  Ahaziah's  fate  as 
the  consequence  of  his  sin,  and  by  the  fire  from  heaven  which  had  consumed  the  two 
captains  and  their  fifties  for  their  defiance  of  the  Most  High.  But  still  "he  cleaved 
unto  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin."  Both  Ahaziah 
and  Jehoram  had  been  trained  in  evil  by  their  father  and  mother.  The  whole  land 
had  been  rontaminated  by  the  influence  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel.  How  true  are  the  poet's 
words,  "  The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them  "I  Beware  of  leaving  evU  inflitenei$ 
behind  you. — 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  4: — 12. — Forgetting  Ood,  and  its  results.  We  see  from  these  verses  how  very 
partial  was  Jehoram's  reformation.  He  put  away  the  image  of  Baal,  but  he  experienced 
BO  change  of  heart.  Outward  observances  of  religion,  outward  conformity  to  God's  Law, 
are  of  little  use,  if  the  heart  is  not  right  within.  Observe  how  Jehoram  shows  his 
entirs  forgetfulness  or  disregard  of  God. 


«&.in.l— 2t.]         tEt  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  SINQS.  61 

L  Bt  his  MX78TEBINO  OF  THB  PEOPLE.  The  King  of  Moab  had  risen  in  rebellion 
against  him.  What  is  Jehoram's  first  act  ?  Is  it  to  seek  help  or  guidance  from  Qod? 
No ;  ha  goes  forth  and  musters  all  Israel.  He  relied  for  safety  upon  the  strength  of 
his  army.  He  forgot  "  the  chariots  of  Israel,  and  the  horsemen  thereof."  He  forgot 
the  judgments  that  had  come  upon  Ahazlah  for  his  disregard  of  God. 

11.  Bt  seekino  EnMAN  help  and  guidange.  He  goes  and  seeks  the  help  of 
Jehoshaphat  King  of  Judah.  "  Wilt  thou  go  up  with  me  to  battle  ?  "  Prom  him  also 
he  seeks  guidance.  "  Which  way  shall  we  go  up  ?  "  There  is  no  word  of  turning  to 
Ood  for  direction.  How  very  like  the  manner  in  which  we  act  still  I  We  seek  guidance 
anywhere  hut  from  Qod.  We  ask  of  public  opinion,  of  men  of  the  world,  of  godless 
neighbours,  "Which  way  shall  we  go  up?"  No  wonder  that  our  plans  are  so  often 
failures,  and  that  anxiety  and  trouble  Mi.  our  hearts.  Far  better  that  we  should  turn 
to  the  Lord,  as  Moses  did,  and  say,  "  If  thy  presence  go  not  with  us,  carry  us  not  up 
hence."  Where  God's  guidance  i$  not  tought,  God's  blessing  cannot  le  expected.  So 
Jehoram  found.  He  and  Jehoshaphat  were  joined  by  the  King  of  Edom,  and,  as  the 
three  kings  and  their  armies  journeyed  through  the  wilderness,  there  was  no  water  for 
the  host  and  for  the  cattle  that  followed  them.  Jehoram  thinks  of  God  then.  He 
remembers  there  is  such  a  thing  as  an  oyerruling  providence.  Bat  how  does  he  think 
of  him  ?  Only  to  throw  upon  God  the  blame  of  his  own  actions.  He  says,  "  Alas  I 
that  the  Lord  hath  called  these  three  kings  together,  to  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of 
Moab  1 "  So  we  have  heard  men  blame  God  for  the  consequences  of  their  own  acts. 
Like  Jehoram,  they  will  have  none  of  God's  counsel,  they  follow  their  own  way, 
and  then  they  grumble  at  God  because  he  lets  them  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own 
way,  and  be  filled  with  their  own  devices.  Then,  in  their  trouble  and  difiBculty, 
Jehoshaphat  inquires  for  a  prophet  of  the  Lord.  Jehoram  never  thought  of  it.  Elisha 
is  discovered,  and  the  three  kings  do  not  wait  to  send  for  him,  but  go  down  in  person, 
and  together,  to  consult  with  him.  What  a  beautiful  testimony  that  is  which 
Jehoshaphat  bears  to  Elisha,  "The  word  of  the  Lord  is  with  him"l  That  was  the 
secret  of  Elisha's  power. — G.  H.  L 

Vers.  13 — 15. — Elisha  and  the  minstrel.  When  the  kings  come  down  to  see  him, 
st  first  Elisha  is  filled  with  just  indignation.  He  rebukes  the  King  of  Israel  for  his 
godlessness,  and  says,  "  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  get  thee  to  the  prophets  of  thy 
father,  and  to  the  prophets  of  thy  mother."  And  then,  when  Jehoram  repeats  his 
profanity  of  throwing  the  blame  upon  God,  Elisha  protests  that,  but  for  the  presence 
of  Jehoshaphat  King  of  Judah,  he  would  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  him.  But  he 
has  God's  people  to  think  of,  and  God's  message,  and  so,  in  order  to  calm  his  mind  and 
bring  him  into  a  fit  state  to  deliver  God's  message,  he  says,  "  Bring  me  a  minstrel " 
(the  Hebrew  word  means  one  who  played  upon  the  harp).  "  And  it  came  to  pass,  when 
the  minstrel  played,  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him."  And  then  Elisha 
delivers  to  them  that  command  of  God  by  obeying  which  the  armies  obtained  at  once 
refreshing  and  safety,  strength  and  victory.    We  learn  here— 

I.  The  use  of  ueans  in  general.  The  kings  had  not  taken  the  right  way  to 
obtain  success.  In  setting  out  on  their  expedition  they  had  used  no  means  to  obtain 
God's  guidance.  They  trusted  in  the  arm  of  flesh,  and  leaned  to  their  own  understanding. 
Then  at  last,  when  in  a  difficulty,  in  distress  for  want  of  water,  and  in  danger  of  being 
defeated  by  their  enemies,  they  think  then  of  some  means  of  obtaining  God's  help. 
It  was  no  harm  for  them  to  look  to  the  state  of  their  armies,  and  to  take  the  host 
military  advice  they  could  get,  provided  they  had  first  of  all  sought  direction  from  Gud. 
But  this  they  had  not  done.  Elisha  acts  very  differently.  He  seeks  to  put  his  mind 
into  a  fit  state  to  receive  and  deliver  God's  message.  1.  We  ought  to  ase  means  to  bring 
our  souls  into  fellowship  with  Ood.  There  are  few  persons,  no  matter  how  godless,  no 
matter  how  worldly,  who  do  not  cherish  the  hope  of  getting  to  heaven  and  beinii  with 
Qod  hereafter.  But  when  are  they  going  to  prepare  for  heaven?  Many  professing 
Christians  lead  practically  godless  lives.  They  seldom  or  never  read  the  Word  pf  God. 
They  never  pray  to  God — ^in  any  real  sense  of  the  word,  at  least.  Are  they  in  a  fit 
state  to  enter  God's  heaven  ?  When,  then,  is  the  preparation  to  be  made  ?  Death-bed 
preparation  is  a  rare  thing,  and  at  best  a  very  mean  thing,  though  one  would  rather 
lee  A  poor  sinner  turning  to  his  God  at  the  eleventh  hour  than  not  at  alL    Unless 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINQS.        [oh.  ni.  1—27. 


you  are  converted,  yon  are  never  fit  to  enter  heaven.  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God." 
Use  the  means  which  God  has  jiiven  you  to  obtain  the  salvation  of  your  soul.  Strive 
to  enter  in  at  the  narrow  door.  Look  to  Jesus  as  your  Saviour.  Search  the  Scripturea, 
for  in  them  eternal  life  is  to  be  found.  They  are  able  to  make  you  wise  unto  salvation. 
Oo  where  you  will  get  Messing.  Here  is  one  means  which  Christ  himself  recommends 
to  every  sinner,  "  GoTne  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will 
give  you  rest."  T/ie  same  exhortation  is  applicable  to  Christian  people.  Use  the  means 
to  bring  your  souls  into  fellowship  with  God,  to  obtain  the  touch  of  God's  hand.  Use 
every  means  to  promote  the  spiritual  life  of  yourselves  and  others.  How  important 
for  parents  and  children  is  the  observance  of  family  prayer!  Many  a  conversion,  many 
»  consecration  of  a  young  life  to  God,  can  be  traced  to  the  words  read,  to  the  earnest 
pleadings  offered  up,  at  the  family  aliar.  Happy  that  home  where  God  fparing  parents 
"  .  ,  .  their  secret  homage  pay, 
And  proffer  up  to  heaven  the  warm  request 
That  he  who  stills  the  raven's  clam'rous  nest, 

And  decks  the  lily  fair  in  flow'ry  pride, 
Would  in  the  way  his  wisdom  sees  the  best 
For  them  and  tor  their  little  ones  provide; 
But  chiefiy  in  their  heart*  with  grace  Divine  preside." 

2.  We  ought  to  iise  also  the  best  means  for  carrying  on  Ood's  work.  The  Church 
must  not  despise  the  use  of  means.  What  progress  is  made  in  facilities  for  carrying 
on  the  business  of  the  world  1  What  rapid  communication  1  What  gigantic  efforts 
made  to  push  commercial  enterprises  1  And  is  the  Church  of  Christ  to  be  the  only 
body  that  is  asleep?  Is  there  no  need  for  activity,  for  earnestness,  for  push,  in  the 
concerns  of  eternity  ?  While  immortal  souls  are  perishing,  while  so  many  fields  are 
white  to  harvest,  ou°;ht  we  not  to  be  up  and  doing  ?  There  are  methods  that  it  is  no 
advantage  for  the  Church  to  adopt.  But  the  Church  of  Christ  should  avail  itself  of 
every  lawful  means  to  advance  the  Bedeemer's  kingdom.  It  should  use  the  press  far 
more  than  it  does.  It  should  advertise  far  more  than  it  does.  It  should  do  anything 
and  everything  in  the  way  of  enterprise  that  will  bring  the  gospel  to  the  people,  aiid 
that  will  bring  the  people  to  the  gospel.  It  must  go  out  into  the  streets  and  lanes  of 
the  city,  to  the  highways  and  hedges  of  the  country,  and  compel  the  people  to  come  in. 
The  Church  that  knows  best  how  to  vme  the  means  which  modem  civilization  has 
placed  at  its  disposal,  is  the  Church  that  will  do  most,  with  QoA'a  blessing  and  the 
presence  of  his  Spirit,  to  advance  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  We  must  seek  to  use  every- 
thing and  win  everything  for  Jesus.  Some  persons  say  that  ministers  are  so  often 
talking  about  money.  There  is  so  much  money  devoted  to  the  service  of  the  devil 
and  of  sin  and  of  pleasure  every  week,  that  it  is  the  minister's  duty  to  try  to  win  a 
Lttle  of  it  for  Christ.  If  he  spoke  about  it  every  Sunday  it  would  not  be  one  whit  too 
often.  Let  us  use  the  means  if  we  want  to  win  the  world  for  Jesus.  Let  us  not  think 
that  anything  will  do  for  him.  Let  us  not  give  to  the  Lord  that  which  costs  us 
nothing. 

II.  "The  dsk  of  husio  in  fabtioulab.  When  Elisha  said,  "  Bring  me  •  minstrel," 
it  was  because  he  believed  the  harper's  music  would  be  a  real  help  to  him  in  experiencing 
God's  presence  and  in  doing  God's  work.  And  he  was  right.  For  "  it  came  to  pass, 
when  the  minstrel  played,  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him."  There  are  many 
uses  of  music  in  the  Christian  life.  1.  Music  it  an  inspiration  for  work  and  warfare. 
Why  is  it  that  our  regiments  go  f  >rth  to  battle  accompanied  by  their  bauds  of  music  ? 
Is  it  not  that  they  may  be  inspirited  and  cheered  by  martial  and  triumphant  strains  ? 
Is  there  no  place,  then,  f(ir  inspiring  music  in  the  Christian  life  ?  Are  there  not  times 
when  our  spirits  flag,  and  we  are  easily  discouraged?  At  such  times  how  inspiriting 
is  a  joyful  song  of  praise  I  2.  Musie  is  also  a  soother  of  the  spirit.  So  it  was  here  in 
Elisha's  case.  So  it  was  in  the  case  of  King  Saul.  When  David  played  before  him 
on  his  harp,  the  evil  spirit  went  from  him,  and  the  troubled  mind  became  at  peace. 
We  read  also  in  the  account  of  the  Last  Supper  of  our  Lord,  just  before  his  agony  at 
Gtethsemane  and  on  the  cross,  that  "  when  they  had  sung  an  hymn,  they  went  out  to 
the  Mount  of  Olives."  Who  can  doubt  that  the  spirits  both  of  Master  and  disciples 
were  soothed  and  tranquillized  as  their  hearts  and  voices  joined  together  in  the  hymn 
of  praise?     3.  Mutie  is  largely  the  oeeupation  <(fth$  reamed  in  heaven,     St.  Job  a 


OH.  ml— 27.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  S» 

tells  OS  iQ  the  Bevelation,  "  And  I  heard  the  Toice  of  harpen  harping  with  their  harps : 
and  they  sung  as  it  were  a  new  song  before  the  throne,  and  the  four  lirlng  creatures, 
and  the  elders :  and  no  man  could  learn  that  song  but  the  hundred  and  forty  and  four 
thousand,  which  were  redeemed  from  the  earth."  The  sweetest  earthly  music  we  have 
ever  heard,  the  largest  and  best-trained  chorus  of  human  voices,  will  give  us  but  a 
f-iint  conception  of  the  sweetness. and  grandeur  of  the  heavenly  music.  Mozart  ot 
Iilendeksohn,  Handel  or  Beethoven,  never  in  their  loftiest  flights  conceived  a  strain 
BO  thrilling  as  the  song  around  the  throne  of  God.  Considering,  therefore,  the  power 
of  music,  considering  the  uses  to  which  it  may  be  put  on  earth  and  the  help  it  renders 
to  true  devotion,  considering  the  place  assigned  to  it  in  heaven, — ^it  may  fairly  be  claimed 
that  music  should  be  more  cultivated  by  the  Christian  Church.  While  we  do  not  go  to 
church  for  a  musical  performance,  we  should  have  in  our  churches  the  very  best  music 
it  is  possible  to  have.  It  is  often  the  very  worst.  The  best  music  ought  not  to  be 
left  to  the  service  of  the  devil  and  of  the  world.  To  preach  the  gospel  is  our  great 
work.  Yes ;  but  there  is  no  special  merit  in  preaching  the  gospel  unless  you  try  to 
get  the  people  to  come  and  hear  it.  There  is  really  no  reason  why  we  should  not 
preach  the  gospel,  and  have  attractive  services  and  bright  music  at  the  same  time. 
Martin. Luther  said,  "One  of  the  finest  and  noblest  gifts  of  God  is  music.  This  is 
very  hateful  to  the  devil,  and  with  it  we  may  drive  off  temptations  and  evil  thoughts. 
After  theology,  I  give  the  next  and  highest  place  to  musie.  It  has  often  aroused  and 
moved  me  so  that  I  have  won  a  desire  to  preach.  We  onght  not  to  ordain  young  men 
to  the  office  of  preacher,  if  they  have  not  trained  themselves  and  practised  singing  in 
the  schools."  Luther  was  not  far  wrong.  Our  congregations  should  devote  mora 
time  to  the  practice  and  preparation  of  congregational  psalmody.  Toung  ladies,  young 
men,  with  musical  gifts  and  accomplishments — why  not  consecrate  them  to  the  service 
of  Jesua? 

*■  Sing  at  the  cottage  bedside; 
They  have  no  music  there. 
And  the  voice  of  praise  is  silent 
After  the  voice  of  prayer. 

"Sing  of  the  gentle  Saviour 

In  tlie  simplest  hymns  yoo  know, 
And  the  pain-dimmed  eye  will  brightea 
As  the  soothing  verses  flow. 

"  Sino;  I  that  your  song  may  silence 
The  folly  and  the  jest, 
And  the  'idle  word '  be  banished 
As  an  unwelcome  guest. 

*  Sing  to  the  tired  and  anxious — 

It  is  yours  to  fling  a  ray. 

Passing  indeed,  but  cheering. 

Across  the  rugged  way. 

"  77iu>,  aided  by  hit  Uesting, 
The  long  may  win  its  way 
Wliere  speech  had  no  admittanee. 
And  chaitge  the  night  to  day," 

O.H.I. 

Vers.  16 — 26. — The  valley  fuU  of  ditchet.  Two  troubles  had  come  upon  Israel  at 
this  time.  The  kings  of  Israel,  Judah,  and  Edom  were  gone  forth  to  battle  against 
the  King  of  Moab.  Strife  is  an  evil  between  nations  or  individuals.  It  takes  years 
for  a  nation  to  recover  from  the  devastating  effects  of  war.  Terrible  is  the  destruction 
of  life  and  property  which  war  causes.  '  To  the  horrors  and  perils  of  war  in  this  case 
was  added  a  fresh  difficulty.  Their  armies,  passing  through  the  desert,  had  no  water  to 
drink.  Under  the  burning  heat  they  suffered  fearfully  from  thirst.  We  know  how  greatly 
our  own  troops  suffered  from  lack  of  water  in  Egypt  and  the  Soudan.  Dr.  Livingstone, 
in  his  travels,  has  given  us  an  idea  of  what  it  is  to  be  without  water  in  the  desert. 
When  he  saw  his  children  almost  perishing  of  thirst  before  his  eyes,  he  had  a  new  idea 
of  the  value  of  water.    It  was  no  wonder,  then,  that,  with  ue  soldiers  weak  and 


M  THE  StedONt)  SOOK  OtT  THt!  KlNdS.        foa.  ili.  1— 2t. 

languishing  from  tbirst,  with  no  water  either  for  them  or  for  their  horses  and  cattle, 
they  began  to  despair  and  regard  defeat  as  certain.  But  the  Prophet  Elisha  was  sent 
for,  as  we  have  seen,  and,  on  being  consulted  by  the  kings  of  Israel  and  Judah,  he  said, 
"  Make  this  valley  full  of  ditches.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord,  Ye  shall  not  see  wind, 
neither  shall  ye  see  rain ;  yet  that  valley  shall  be  filled  with  water,  that  ye  may  drink, 
both  ye,  and  your  cattle,  and  your  beasts.  And  this  is  but  a  light  thing  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord :  he  will  deliver  the  Moabites  also  into  your  hand."    We  have  here — 

L  A  STRANGE  COMMAND.  "  Make  this  valley  full  of  ditches."  1.  It  was  a  ttrange 
command  that  ditches  should  be  dug  in  a  desert  place.  But  so  it  is  also  in  the  Spiritual 
kingdom.  God  often  chooses  the  most  unlikely  places  and  the  most  imlikely  persons 
for  the  operations  of  his  grace.  Is  it  not  a  fact  that,  in  thinking  of  the  spread  of  the 
gospel,  and  in  engaging  in  Christian  work,  we  are  too  much  guided  by  human 
calculations  ?  We  judge  too  much  by  outward  appearances.  We  forget  that  God's 
ways  are  not  as  our  ways,  nor  his  thoughts  as  our  thoughts.  People  have  sometimes 
refused  to  give  to  certain  missions  because  they  did  not  think  there  was  any  vae  in 
sending  the  gospel  to  the  particular  people  for  whom  the  mission  was  intended.  Is 
God's  arm  shortened  that  it  cannot  save  ?  It  is  time  for  us  as  Christian  Churches  and 
as  Christian  people  to  work  wherever  God  gives  us  the  opportunity,  even  though  it 
should  be  in  the  most  unlikely  and  unpromising  sphere.  God  calls  us,  wherever  we 
are,  to  dig  up  wells  in  the  valley.  2.  Further,  it  was  a  strange  command,  because  there 
was  no  appearance  of  rain  at  the  time,  and  there  was  no  river  at  hand  from  which  the 
wells  could  be  supplied.  Why  dig  wells  when  you  don't  know  where  the  water  is  to 
come  from?  We  live  in  a  utilitarian  age.  Men  like  to  have  a  reason  for  everything. 
They  like  to  be  assured  of  a  return  for  their  labour.  Consequently,  even  professedly 
Christian  men  are  disposed  to  question  the  utility  of  many  of  God's  commands.  Why 
rest  on  the  sabbath  more  than  on  any  other  day  ?  Why  attach  any  peculiar  sanctity 
to  the  sabbath  ?  Why  not  worship  God  at  home,  or  walk  in  the  fields,  instead  of  going 
to  church  ?  We  might  show  the  benefit  to  the  nation  of  religious  observances  and  of 
religious  teaching.  We  might  show  the  benefit  to  the  individual  of  assembling  with 
others  for  devotional  exercises  instead  of  merely  worshipping  God  in  private  or  eren 
in  the  home.  But  it  is  enough  here  to  notice  that  God  has  commanded  these  duties. 
That  ought  to  be  enough  to  convince  any  intelligent  being,  any  religious  bekig.  God 
gives  no  command  for  which  there  is  not  a  good  reason.  I  may  not  see  the  reason. 
I  may  not  see  the  benefit  that  will  result  from  it.  But  I  am  convinced  by  reason,''by 
conscience,  by  history,  by  human  experience,  that  whatever  the  command  may  be, 
a  real  benefit  follows  the  obedience  of  it,  and  real  unhappiness  and  suffering  the 
disobedience  of  it.  3.  One  other  thought  this  strange  command  of  God  suggests — Ood 
wants  us  to  be  fellow-workers  with  him.  God  could  have  sent  the  water  and  provided 
a  place  of  storage  for  it  without  the  assistance  of  the  Israelites  here.  But  he  does  not 
choose  to  do  so.  He  says,  "  Make  the  valley  full  of  ditches."  When  modem  missions 
to  the  heathen  first  began  to  be  spoken  of  about  a  century  ago,  those  who  advocated 
them  were  met  on  every  side,  and  in  many  a  church,  from  pulpit  and  from  pew,  from 
prelate  and  from  presbyter,  with  the  objection  that  God  could  save  the  heathen  without 
their  instrumentality.  It  is  obvious  that  those  who  reasoned  thus  about  God's  method 
of  converting  the  world  had  read  their  Bible  to  very  little  purpose.  We  find  human 
agency,  as  a  rule,  accompanying  Divine  grace.  Christ's  own  command  is  clear,  "  Go 
ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations,  •  .  .  and,  lo  I  I  am  with  you  al  way."  How  do  we  stand 
in  regard  to  the  commands  of  God?  Is  there  any  command  that  we  are  deliberately 
and  constantly  disobeymg?  It  ought  to  be  the  daily  prayer  of  every  Christian, 
"  Make  me  to  go  in  the  path  of  thy  commandments ;  for  therein  do  I  delight." 

II.  Submissive  faith.  It  is  clear  from  the  narrative  that  the  men'  of  Judah  did  as 
God  had  commanded  them,  and  made  the  valley  full  of  ditches.  These  Hebrew  soldiers 
gave  a  good  example  of  submissive  practical  faith.  1.  'They  might  have  reasoned — 
Better  to  be  going  forth  against  our  enemies  than  to  be  wasting  our  time  digging  these 
trenches.  So  men  reason  when  they  hurry  forth  to  their  work  in  the  morning  without 
waiting  to  give  God  thanks  for  the  rest  of  the  night,  and  to  ask  his  blessing  upon 
the  work  of  the  day.  Is  it  any  wonder  that  the  life  is  so  dry,  and  that  things  so  often 
seem  to  go  wrong,  when  we  do  not  take  time  to  dig  up  wells  for  God's  blessing?  !• 
it  any  wonder  that  the  Churches  are  so  unfruitful,  that  conversions  are  so  infrequent 


CH.  111.  1—27.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  66 

that  reyivals  are  so  rare,  that  there  is  not  more  spiritual  power  in  the  preaching  of 
the  Word,  that  the  inSueuce  exercised  upon  the  world  around  us  is  so  slight,  when, 
with  all  the  attention  to  congregational  machinery  and  church  order,  there  is  so  little 
attention  to  congregational  prayer  ?  It  is  a  fine  sight  to  look  at  the  great  engines  of 
a  steamer  when  in  motion,  and  admire  the  beautiful  mechanism  of  cylinder  and  crank 
and  piston.  But  all  that  elaborate  and  powerful  machinery  would  be  utterly  useless 
unless  the  steam  was  there  to  set  it  in  motion.  Let  us  have  our  church  machinery 
and  organization  as  perfect  as  may  be,  but  let  us  remember  that  the  secret  of  power  is 
behind  and  beyond  it  all.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the 
Lord."  The  Hebrew  soldiers  did  not  think  the  time  lost  which  they  spent  in  preparing 
the  way  for  God's  blessing.  2.  They  might  have  reasoned — Better  to  move  further  on 
where  we  shall  have  water  than  to  spend  our  labour  in  this  desert  place.  So  Christians 
are  sometimes  disposed  to  reason.  Ministers  grow  weary  of  seeing  no  fruit  of  their 
labours.  Sunday-school  teachers  grow  weary  of  their  class.  But  if  all  the  workers  in 
God's  vineyard  had  reasoned  in  that  way,  and  abandoned  any  sphere  of  labour  because 
it  seemed  unfruitful  or  because  they  were  weary  of  waiting,  the  gospel  would  have 
made  very  little  progress  in  the  world.  3.  They  might  have  reasoned — If  w^re  to  be 
saved,  we  shall  be  saved-.  It  is  not  likely  that  digging  up  trenches  in  the  valley  will  deliver 
us  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Moabites.  So  the  sinner  reasons  when  he  is  urged  to  believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Satan,  for  his  soul's  destruction,  prompts  him  with  objections 
to  the  plan  of  salvation.  But  objections  to  the  plan  of  salvation  can  no  more  alter  it 
than  any  suggestions  which  a  man  of  science  might  make  could  alter  the  course  of 
nature.  The  way  of  salvation  is  clear.  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved."  Is  it  not  better  for  us,  as  these  soldiers  did,  to  take  God's  plan,  to 
believe  that  whatever  he  commands  is  for  our  good,  to  accept  his  loving  offers  of 
salvation  purchased  for  us  by  the  precious  blood  of  his  beloved  Son,  and  to  yield  our- 
selves to  him  as  willing  servants,  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart  ? 

IIL  Streams  of  befrgshino  and  safety.  "  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  morning, 
when  the  meat  offering  was  offered,  that,  behold,  there  came  water  by  the  way  of 
Bdom,  and  the  country  was  filled  with  water."  Not  more  eagerly  do  the  weary  watchers 
watch  for  morning  than  those  languid  soldiers  watched  for  the  coming  of  the  water. 
It  was  a  welcome  sight.  So  it  is  with  the  blessings  of  the  gospel.  "  Blessed  are  they 
that  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness :  for  they  shall  be  filled." 

"  As  dew  apon  the  tender  herb^ 

Diffiising  fragrance  round. 
As  showers  that  usher  in  the  spring 

And  cheer  the  thirsty  ground, — 
Bo  shall  his  presence  bless  onr  souls. 

And  shed  a  joyful  light, 
That  hallowed  morn  shall  chase  away 

The  sorrows  of  the  night." 

And  then  also  the  streams  that  filled  the  trenches  proved  to  be  streams  of  safety. 
When  the  Moabites  arose  rn  the  morning,  and  looked  over  to  the  place  where  the 
Israelites  were  encamped,  they  only  saw  the  glare  of  the  sun  upon  the  water  as  red  as 
blood.  They  had  probably  no  idea  that  water  could  be  there.  And  so  they  said,  "  This 
is  blood;  the  kings  are  surely  slain,  and  they  have  smitten  one  another."  They 
thought  they  had  nothing  to  do  but  plunder  the  deserted  camp  of  the  Israelites,  and 
the  result  was  that  the  Israelites  gained  an  easy  victory,  and  were  delivered  out  of  the 
hand  of  their  enemies.  It  is  the  same  with  the  blessings  of  the  gospel.  Tht  gospel 
which  satisfies  also  saves  the  soul.  And  it  satisSes  because  it  saves.  Herein  all  human 
religion  and  philosophies  fail.  They  may  point  out  a  high  ideal,  but  they  give  us  little 
help  to  attain  it.  They  may  point  out  the  evil  of  sin,  but  they  cannot  strengthen  us 
to  overcome  it  or  deliver  us  from  its  power.  And  all  they  can  offer  us  is  only  for  the 
present  life.  But  the  gospel  not  only  puts  before  us  the  high  ideal,  but  enables  us 
through  Divine  grace  to  attain  to  it.  It  not  only  shows  us  the  guilt  of  sin,  but  it 
points  us  to  the  cleansing  blood.  It  not  only  shows  us  the  evil  of  sin,  but  gives  us  the 
victory  over  it  through  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  It  not  only  gives  us  blessings  for  the 
present  life,  but  secures  to  all  who  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  life  of  heaven, 
life  with  God,  life  ihat  shall  never  end-    Make  the  vallet/  full  of  ditches.    Open  you- 


66  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  m.  1—27. 


heart  to  receive  this  satisfying,  eaving  gospel.  Children  of  God,  if  you  want  God's 
blessing  to  flow  in  upon  you  in  reviving,  refreshing  streams,  prepare  the  way  for  it 
Dig  up  wdh  in  the  desert.  Value  your  Sundays,  your  opportunities  for  private  prayer, 
the  house  of  God,  the  prayer-meeting.  You  need  them  all  to  refresh  your  souls  and 
to  revive  your  spiritual  life  amid  the  parching,  chilling  influences  of  the  world.  And 
then  in  your  short  life  do  what  you  can  to  make  channels  through  which  blessings  may 
flow  to  others.  In  this  aspect,  what  a  privilege  it  becomes  to  help  missions,  to  build 
churches  and  schools,  and  to  take  part  in  every  effort  for  the  benefit  and  enlightenment 
of  others!  You  may  never  see  the  streams  of  blessing  flow,  but  at  any  rate  you  will 
have  dug  the  channels  for  them.    Such  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord.— C.  H.  L 

Vers.  26,  27. — 2%e  heartlessness  of  heathenism,  1.  Heathenism  Wights  the  natural 
affections.  Christianity  honours  and  sanctifies  them.  2.  Heathenism  disregards  human 
life.  What  sacrifice  of  life  by  cannibalism,  under  the  car  of  Juggernaut,  in  the  suttees 
of  India !  What  disregard  of  human  life  in  the  exposure  of  Chinese  infants,  in  the  aged 
and  the  sick  left  alone  to  die  on  the  banks  of  the  Indian  rivers  I  Christianity  has 
changed  all  this.  It  takes  high  views  of  human  life.  The  body  is  the  dwelling-place  of 
an  immortal  souL  Care  for  the  sick  and  for  the  dying  is  due  to  the  influences  of  the  gospeL 
Where  are  the  hospitals,  the  philanthropic  movements,  of  heathenism  or  of  agnosticism? 
Even  for  the  comforts  of  the  present  life  we  owe  much  to  Christianity. — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Evil — the  same  in  principle,  though  not  inform.  "  Now  Jehoram  the 
son  of  Ahab  began  to  reign  over  Israel,"  etc.    Two  subjects  are  here  illustrated. 

I.  That,  whilst  the  fobms  of  evil  mat  change,  the  pbinciplb  mat  contikub 
RAMPANT.  "  And  he  [that  is,  Jehoram]  wrought  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord ;  but  not 
like  his  father,  and  like  his  mother."  His  father  and  mother  worshipped  Baal,  but  the 
very  "  image  "  of  the  idol  "  that  his  father  had  made  he  put  away."  But  notwithstand- 
ing that  "  he  cleaved  unto  the  sins  of  Jeroboam."  Observe :  1.  Though  the  existing 
generation  sins  not  in  the  form  of  the  preceding,  their  sin  is  not  less  sin  on  that  account. 
The  forms  in  which  barbarians  and  our  uncivilized  ancestors  sinned  appear  gross  and 
revolting  to  us ;  nevertheless,  our  sins  are  not  the  less  real  and  heinous  in  the  sight  of 
God.  Our  civilization  hides  the  revolting  hideousness,  but  leaves  its  spirit  perhaps  more 
active  than  ever.  Your  father's  prominent  sin,  perhaps,  was  that  of  drunkenness,  but 
though  you  touch  not  the  inebriating  cup,  you  sin  in  other  forms — the  forms,  perhaps, 
of  vanity,  avarice,  ambition,  etc.  2.  That  mere  external  reformations  may  leave  the 
spirit  of  evil  as  rampant  as  ever.  Jehoram  "put  away  the  image  of  Baal,"  but  the 
spirit  of  idolatry  remained  in  him  in  all  its  wonted  force.  "He  cleaved  imto  the  sins 
of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  which  made  Israel  to  sin ;  he  departed  not  therefrom." 
This  is  ever  true.  Beligiously,  you  may  destroy  a  superstitious  organization,  and  yet 
leave  the  spirit  of  religious  superstition,  intolerance,  and  pride,  even  more  vigorous  than 
ever,  to  assume  other  forms.  So  of  political  institutions.  You  may  destroy  this  form 
of  government  or  that,  monarchical  or  democratic,  and  yet  leave  the  spirit  in  which 
these  forms  work,  vital  and  vigorous  to  manifest  itself  in  other  forms. 

II.  That  whilst  bin  mat  onlt  be  in  the  form  op  neglect  op  dutt,  it  mat  in 

THE  CASE   OP  ONE   MAN   ENTAIL  SERIOUS  EVILS  ON   POSTBRITT.      "And   Mcsha  King  of 

Moab  was  a  sheepmaster,  and  rendered  unto  the  King  of  Israel  a  hundred  tbous^and 
lambs,  and  a  hundred  thousand  rams,  with  the  wool.  But  it  came  to  pass,  when  Ahab 
was  dead,  that  the  King  of  Moab  rebelled  against  the  King  of  Israel."  Moab  was  a 
tributary  to  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  and  contributed  largely  to  its  revenue,  not  in  cash, 
but  in  cattle,  or  in  wool,  but  not  the  less  valuable  on  that  account.  But  now  a  rebellion 
had  broken  out,  and  a  serious  revolt  was  threatened.  Why  was  this?  Matthew  Henry 
ascribes  it  to  the  neglect  of  Ahaziah,  the  former  king,  the  brother  of  Jehoram.  lie 
made  no  attempt  to  avoid  such  a  catastrophe.  Ah !  sins  of  omission  entail  serious  evils. 
The  neglect  of  one  generation  brings  miseries  on  another.  The  neglect  of  parents  often 
brings  ruin  on  the  children.  Negative  sins  are  curses.  "  We  have  left  undone  the 
things  we  ought  to  have  done ; "  and  who  shall  tell  the  result  on  all  future  times  ? — D.  T. 

Vers.  6 — 12. — Worldly  rulers — men  in  trial  seeking  JuHp  from  a  godly  man.  "  And 
Ring  Jehoram  went  out  of  Samaria  the  same  time,  and  numbered  aU  Israel,"  etc. 


m.  m.  1—27.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KIKaS.  67 

I.  Here  we  hare  itobldlt  buIiEBS  nr  gbeat  tbiaij.  "And  King  Jehoramwent 
out  of  Samaria  the  same  time,  and  numbered  all  IsraeL  And  he  went  and  sent  to 
Jehoshaphat  the  King  of  Judah,  saying,  The  King  of  Moab  hath  rebelled  against  me." 
The  revolt  of  Moab  threatened  the  ruin  of  Jehoram  and  his  empire,  and  he,  smitten  with 
alaim,  numbers,  or  rather,  musters,  all  Israel,  and  hurries  to  Jehoshaphat  to  seek  his  aid. 
They,  with  their  armies,  go  forth  to  meet  in  battle  their  enemy  on  a  seven  days'  jourBey, 
enduring  the  privation  of  water  for  themselves  and  their  cattle.  At  the  end  of  their 
journey,  disheartened  and  exhausted,  they  reached  a  crisis  of  terrible  anxiety  and  danger. 
Worldly  rulers  have  their  trials.  "  Uneasy  lies  the  head  that  wears  a  crown."  What 
terrible  ends  in  past  ages  kings  have  come  tol  and  to-day  all  the  thrones  of  Europe 
seem  to  be  tottering  to  their  fall.  Providence  destines  that  a  man  who  aspires  to  the 
highest  office  must  pay  a  terrible  price  for  it.  The  trials  of  high  office,  added  to  the 
natural  trials  of  man  as  man,  are  often  overwhelming.  Here  we  hare  worldly  rulers 
in  great  trial — 

II.  Seeeino  help  from  a  qodly  man.  "  But  Jehoshaphat  said.  Is  there  not  here 
a  prophet  of  the  Lord,  that  we  may  inquire  of  the  Lord  by  him  ?  And  one  of  the  King 
of  Israel's  servants  answered  and  said.  Here  is  Blisha,"  etc.  Marie  the  cry,  "  Is  there 
not  here  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  ?  "  The  question  is  answered,  and  the  three  kings — those 
of  Israel,  of  Judah,  and  of  Edom — go  in  earnest  quest  of  him.  They  "  went  down  to 
him."  This :  1.  Proved  their  msiincUve  helief  in  the  existence  of  one  Ood,  the  Maker 
and  Manager  of  worlds.  Man  always,  in  overwhelming  distress,  turns  away  from  his 
systems  and  theories,  and  looks  up  to  the  Everlasting  One.  2.  Proved  their  faith  in 
the  power  of  a  truly  good  man  with  that  Ood.  This  is  common ;  sceptics  and  worldlings 
on  their  death-beds  are  continually  sending  for  those  to  visit  them  whom  they  believe 
to  be  men  of  God.  The  evil  must  ever  bow  before  the  good.  What  an  illustration  we 
have  of  this  in  the  case  of  the  two  hundred  and  seventy-five  men  on  board  the  ship 
tossed  in  the  dangerous  tempest  on  her  way  from  Csesarea  to  Rome,  with  the  Apostle 
Paul  on  Iioard  1  Paul  was  a  poor  prisoner  in  chains,  and  the  passengers  were  maide  up 
of  soldiers  and  merchants  and  men  of  science ;  but  to  whom  did  they  look  in  the 
turmoil?  Paul,  who  at  the  outset,  when  "the  south  wind  blew  softly,"  was  nothing 
in  that  vessel,  became  the  moral  commander  during  the  tempest.  Amidst  the  wild 
roaring  of  the  elements,  the  cries  of  his  feUow-voyagers,  the  crashes  of  the  plunging 
ship,  the  awful  howl  of  death;  in  all  he  walked  upon  the  creaking  deck  with  a  morsJ 
maje.ity,  before  which  captain,  merchant,  soldier,  and  centurion  bowed  with  loyal  awe. 
So  it  has  ever  been ;  so  it  must  ever  be.  The  good  show  their  greatness  in  trials,  and  in 
their  trials,  the  evil,  however  exalted  their  worldly  position,  are  compelled  to  appreciate 
them.  How  often  do  the  world's  great  men  on  death-beds  seek  the  attendance, 
sympathies,  counsel,  and  prayers  of  those  godly  ones  whom  they  despised  in  health  ! 
—D.  T. 

Vers.  13 — ^27. — Aspects  of  a  godly  man.  "  And  Elisha  said  unto  the  King  of  Israel, 
What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  "  etc.  Elisha  was  confessedly  a  godly  man  of  a  high 
type,  and  these  verses  reveal  him  to  us  in  three  aspects. 

I.  As  EI8IN0  SUPERIOR  TO  KINGS.  When  these  three  kings — Jehoshaphat  the  King 
of  Judah,  Jehoram  the  King  of  Israel,  and  the  King  of  Edom — approached  Elisha,  was 
he  overawed  by  their  splendour?  or  was  he  elated  by  their  visit?  No.  He  was  no 
flunleey ;  no  true  man  ever  is.  Here  are  his  sublimely  manly  words,  "  What  have  I 
to  do  with  thee  ?  "  1.  He  rebukes  Jehoram  for  his  idolatry.  "  Get  thee  to  the  prophets 
of  thy  father,  and  to  the  prophets  of  thy  mother."  "In  your  prosperity  you  Israelite 
kings  have  been  serving  these  false  gods,  and  you  have  despised  me  as  the  servant  ef 
the  true  God.  Why  come  to  me  now  in  your  distress  ?  Go  and  try  what  they  can  do 
for  you."  What  courage  in  this  poor  lonely  man,  thus  calmly  to  confront  and  honestly 
to  rebuke  a  monarch!  Ah  me!  where  is  this  courage  now?  The  loudest  professors 
of  our  religion  in  these  times  will  too  often  crouch  before  kings,  and  address  them  in 
teiTQS  of  fawning  flattery.  2.  Ee  yields  to  their  urgency  out  of  respect  to  the  true 
religion.  "And  Elisha  said,  As  the  Lord  of  hosts  liveth,  before  whom  I  stand,  surely, 
were  it  not  that  I  regard  the  presence  of  Jehoshaphat  the  King  of  Judah,  I  would  not 
look  toward  thee,  nor  see  thee."  -  Jehoshaphat  was  pre-eminently  a  godly  man  (2  Ghron. 
xvii.  6, 6),  and  that  influenced  the  great  Elisha  to  interpose  on  his  behalf.    "  Them  that 


68  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  in.  1—27. 

honour  me  I  will  honour,"  saith  the  Lord.  A  godly  man  is  the  only  true  independent 
man  on  this  earth ;  he  can  "  stand  before  kings  "  and  not  be  ashamed,  and  rebuke 
princes  as  well  as  paupers  for  their  sins.  Whither  has  this  spirit  fled  ?  We  are  a 
nation  of  sycophants.     Heaven  send  us  men ! 

n.  As  PKBPARINO  FOB  INTERCESSION  WITH  Hbatbn.  What  these  kings  wanted  was 
the  interposition  of  Heaven  on  their  behalf,  and  they  here  apply  to  Elisha  to  obtain 
this ;  and  after  the  prophet  had  acceded  to  their  request,  he  seeks  to  put  himself  in 
the  right  moral  mood  to  appeal  to  Heaven,  and  what  does  he  do?  "But  now  bring  me 
a  minstrel.  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  minstrel  played,  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
came  upon  him."  Probably  his  mind  had  been  somewhat  ruffli  d  by  the  presence  of 
these  kings,  especially  at  the  sight  of  Jehoram,  the  wicked  and  idolatrous  king,  and 
before  venturing  an  appeal  to  Heaven  he  felt  the  need  of  a  devout  calmness.  Hence 
he  called  for  music,  and  as  the  devout  musician  sounded  out  sweet  psalmody  on  his  ear, 
he  became  soothed  and  spiritualized  in  soul.  The  power  of  music,  especially  the  music 
which  is  the  organ  of  Divine  ideas,  has  in  every  age  exerted  a  soothing  and  elevating 
influence  on  the  human  soul.  By  the  harp  David  expelled  the  evil  spirit  from  the 
heart  of  Saul.  "  Buretti  declares  music  to  have  the  power  of  so  affecting  the  whole 
nervous  system  as  to  give  sensible  ease  in  a  large  variety  of  disorders,  and  in  some 
cases  to  effect  a  radical  cure :  particularly  he  instances  sciatica  as  capable  of  being 
relieved  by  this  agency.  Theophrastus  is  mentioned  by  Plity  as  recommending  it  for 
the  hip  gout;  and  there  are  references  on  record  by  old  Cato  and  Varro  to  the  same 
effect,     ^sculapius  figures  in  Pindar  as  healing  acute  disorders  with  soothing  songs." 

"  Music  exalts  each  joy,  allays  each  grief, 
Kxpels  diseases,  softens  every  pain, 
Subdues  the  rage  of  poison  and  of  plague. 
And  hence  the  wise  of  ancient  days  adored 
One  power  of  physic,  melody,  and  song." 

Luther  taught  that  the  "spirit  of  darkness  abhorred  sweet  sounds."*  There  is  a 
spiritual  mood  necessary  in  order  to  have  intercourse  with  Heaven,  and  this  mood  it  is 
incumbent  on  every  man  to  seek  and  retain. 

in.  As  BECOMING  THE  OEGAN  OF  THE  SUPERNATURAL.  (1)  Through  him  Qod  made 
a  promise  of  deliverance.  "  For  thus  saith  the  Lord,  Te  shall  nor,  see  wind,  neither 
shall  ye  see  rain,"  etc.  (vers.  17 — 19).  (2)  Through  him  Ood  effected  their  deliverance. 
"And  when  they  came  to  the  camp  of  Israel,  the  Israelites  rose  up  and  smote  the 
Moabites,"  etc.  (vers.  24,  25).  Thus  the  Almighty  made  this  godly  man  both  to  fore- 
tell &rA  fulfil  his  plans.  We  would  remind  those  who  are  sceptical  of  this,  and  whc 
perhaps  riicule  the  idea  of  man  becoming  the  organ  of  Divine  power  :  1.  That  there 
is  nothing  antecedently  improhahle  in  this.  God  works  through  his  creatures ;  since 
he  created  the  universe  he  employs  it  as  his  agent.  What  wonders  he  works  through 
the  svm,  the  atmosphere,  etc.  I  Science  teaches  that  even  through  worms  he  prepares 
the  soil  of  this  earth  to  produce  food  for  man  and  beast.*  But  inasmuch  as  man  is 
confessedly  greater  than  the  material  universe — for  he  is  the  offspring  of  the  Infinite, 
and  participates  in  the  Divine  nature — it  cannot  be  absurd  to  regard  him  in  a  pre- 
eminent sense  as  an  organ  of  the  supernatural.  2.  Biblical  history  attests  tins. 
Moses,  Christ,  and  the  apostles  performed  deeds  that  seem  to  us  to  have  transcended 
the  natural.  A  morally  great  man  becomes  "  mighty  through  God."  God  has  ever 
worked  wonders  through  godly  men,  and  ever  will. — D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Jehoram ;  or,  qualified  evil.  The  successor  of  Ahaziah  was  Jehoram, 
another  son  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel.  It  is  said,  however,  concerning  him.  that,  though 
he  did  evil,  it  was  not  like  his  father  and  mother,  for  he  removed  from  its  place  the 
image  of  Baal  which  they  had  impiously  set  up.  Nevertheless,  he  upheld  the  worship 
of  the  calves — the  distinguishing  sin  of  the  northern  kingdom. 

I.  There  are  degrees  in  sin.  Some  go  greater  lengths  in  transgression  than 
others.  It  is  right  and  dutiful  to  note  even  distinctions  of  this  kind,  and  give  every 
one  his  due.     We  may  be  thankful  when  even  a  less  form  of  evil  is  substituted  for  a 

'  See  JtMiox's  '  Secular  Annotations '  on  Medioamental  Music. 
•  See  Darwin's  '  Vegetable-  Mould  and  Earth-Worma.' 


CH.  iiLl— 27.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  69 

worse  one.    The  impartiaUty  and  discrimination  of  the  Bible,  even  among  those  whose 
actions  it  must  condemn,  is  a  proof  of  its  fidelity. 

II.  Partial  refobms  are  possible  which  do  not  touch  the  root  of  sin.  Jehoram 
so  far  profited  by  the  experience  of  his  predecessors  that  be  withdrew  his  countenance 
from  the  Baal-worship.  This  was  a  real  reform,  and  he  gets  credit  for  it.  So,  many 
men  take  certain  steps  in  the  direction  of  reform — ^breaking  off  particular  evil  habits, 
intemperance,  perhaps,  or  profane  swearing — who  yet  get  no  further.  I'hey  are  able 
to  do  this.  It  is  gratifying  to  see  them  do  it.  But  it  leaves  the  root  of  the  matter 
untouched. 

III.  Qualified  evil  is  evil  still.  The  foundation  of  Jehoram's  character  was 
still  evil — "  he  wrought  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  This  is  the  great  fact  which  God 
looks  at,  and  in  the  light  of  which  he  judges  us.  Herod  "did  many  things"  to  please 
John  the  Baptist,  but  his  bad  heart  remained  unchanged  ;(Mark  v.  20).  The  cardinal 
necessity  of  the  heart  is  renewal — regeneration — the  founding  of  the  life  on  a  spiritual 
basis, — J.  0. 

Vers.  4,  B. — King  MesJia's  rebellion.  The  general  causes  of  this  rebellion  are 
considered  on  ch.  j.  1.  The  victories  recorded  on  the  Moabite  Stone  as  achieved  by  the 
favour  of  Chemosh  belong  probably  to  the  earlier  stages  of  the  revolt.  They  can 
hardly  have  followed  the  crushing  destruction  of  vers.  24,  25.  Prior,  also,  to  the 
expedition  of  this  chapter,  must  be  placed  the  attempt  to  overwhelm  Jehoshaphat  by 
the  combined  forces  of  the  Moabites,  Ammonites,  Bdomites,  etc.  (2  Chron.  xx.),  which 
seems  to  be  the  invasion  described  in  Ps^  Ixxxiii.  The  langua'^e  alike  of  the  history 
and  of  the  psalm  in  the  description  of  that  invasion — which,  like  the  present  struggle, 
ended  in  supernatural  defeat — shows  how  dangerous  an  enemy  an  independent  kingdom 
of  Moab  would  have  been  to  Judah,  and  how  necessary  it  was,  in  the  interests  of  the 
covenant  nation,  that  this  rival  power  should,  on  its  first  npspringing,  be  effectually 
broken.  Jehoram's  action  was  overruled  to  bring  about  this  effectual  humbling  of 
Moab,  though,  for  his  own  huMiliation,  Moab  does  not  seem  ever  to  have  been  brought 
again  under  the  yoke  of  Israel.  Great  as  were  the  severities  of  the  war,  they  were  not 
greater  than  Moab,  as  a  conquering  power,  meted  out  to  others  (see  Moabite  Stone), 
and  would  still  have  meted  out  had  she  been  victor. — J.  0. 

Vers.  6 — 8.^-2%e  alliance  of  the  three  kings.  No  time  was  to  be  lost,  if  the  King  of 
Israel  was  to  clieck  the  progress  of  this  formidable  rebel,  who,  from  the  inscription. on 
his  stone,  appears  to  have  had  some  remarkable  successes. 

I.  Jehoram's  proposal.  1.  Jehoram's  first  step  was  to  muster  for  the  expedition 
the  whole  army  of  Israel.  His  trust  was  in  chariots  and  horses.  How  little  they 
could  do  for  him,  apart  from  God's  help,  was  soon  to  be  made  manifest.  2.  He  next 
sent  a  message  to  Jehoshaphat,  inviting  him  to  accompany  him.  This  shows,  at  least, 
that  he  took  a  sufficiently  serious  view  of  the  difficulty  of  his  enterprise.  He  did  not 
enter  on  it  lightly.  Perhaps  also  he  had  the  inward  feeling  that  it  would  be  Ukelier  to 
go  well  with  him  if  this  godly  kins  were  on  his  side.  A  wicked  man  is  always  glad 
when  he  can  get  a  good  one  to  lend  his  countenance  to  any  of  his  doings. 

II.  Jehoshaphat's  consent.  This  was  at  once  and  freely  given.  Jehoshaphat  had 
refused  partnership  with  Ahaziah  (1  Kings  xxii.  49).  But :  1.  Jehoram  was  a  man  of 
less  impious  character.  2.  The  war  seemed  just.  3.  He  had  to  secure  the  safety 
of  his  own  kingdom.  This  had  already  been  menaced,  and  would  no  doubt  be  menaced 
again,  if  Mesha  continued  his  victorious  career.  4.  There  was  further  the  unfortunate 
bond  of  kinship — Jehoram's  sister  Athaliah  being  married  to  Jehoshaphat's  son. 
Entanglements  with  the  wicked  lead  into  many  a  snare.  Jehoshaphat's  chief  error 
was  in  deciding  on  his  own  responsibility,  and  not  doing  first  what  he  was  glad  enough 
to  do  after — "  inquire  of  the  Lord."  How  many  troubles  we  often  get  into  through 
simply  neglecting  to  seek  Divine  guidance  I  Secular  things  ought  to  be  made  the' 
subjects  of  prayer  as  much  as  spiritual  things.  "  In  everything  by  prayer  and  suppli- 
cation," etc.  (Phil.  iv.  6). 

in.  The  WAT  BT  Bdom.  Which  way  would  they  take?  Jehoshaphat  urged  that 
they  should  go  by  the  wilderness  of  Edom,  that  is,  round  the  foot  of  the  Dead  Sea.  This 
route  would  be  the  longer,  but  it  onabled  Moab  to  be  attacked  from  a  safer  side,  and 


«0  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  ni.  1—27. 


bad  the  further  advantage  that  it  would  secure  to  the  allies  the  services  of  the  deputy- 
king  of  Edom,  who,  as  a  vassal  of  Jehoshaphat,  could  not  refuse  to  accompany  them 
(1  Kings  xxiL  47 ;  ch.  viiL  20).  The  Edomites  had,  indeed,  but  lately  joined  in  the 
eonfederacy  against  JvMt,  but  they  were  now  probably  burning  to  be  avenged  on  the 
Moabites,  who,  'n  that  expedition,  had  proved  to  be  their  worst  enemies  (2  Chron.  xx. 
23).    Thus  1  rovi^lencc  overrules  the  passions  of  men  to  work  out  its  own  ends.— J.  O, 

Vers.  9—17,  20.—Man'i  extremity  is  OocPs  opporUmity.  This  expedition,  begun 
without  consulting  God,  soon  landed  the  allies  in  dire  straits. 

I.  The  straits  of  thb  army.  1.  The  failure  of  water.  The  host  must  have  been 
a  large  one,  and  they  had  much  cattle  with  them  for  sustenance.  For  some  reason, 
the  journey  occupied  seven  days,  and  the  desert  was  waterless.  ITiey  were  in  the 
same  distress  that  the  Israelites  were  in  centuries  before  under  Moses  (Exod.  xvii.  1 — 3; 
Nurab.  XX.  1 — 5);  but  they  had  not  the  same  right  to  rely  on  Divine  help.  When,  at 
the  end  of  seven  days,  they  arrived  at  a  valley  where  water  might  be  looked  for — 
probably  "the  brook  Zered"  (Deut.ii.  13) — their  condition  became  desperate.  2.  GocPe 
hand  recognized.  Jehoram  recognized,  when  it  was  too  late,  that  it  was  not  Moab  who 
was  fighting  against  him  in  this  expedition,  but  God.  "Alas!  that  the  Lord  hath 
called  these  three  kings  together,  to  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  Moab! "  (1)  How 
readily  God  can  humble  man's  pride,  and  bring  to  nothing  his  best-laid  schemes !  We 
are  reminded  of  Napoleon's  march  against  Moscow,  and  of  the  annihilation  of  his  army 
by  the  severities  of  a  Russian  winter.  (2)  God's  hand  is  often  recognized  in  trouble, 
when  it  is  not  in  prosperity.  (3)  God  frequently  leads  men  into  distress,  that  they 
may  be  convinced  of  tiieir  folly  in  neglecting  him,  and  may  be  led  to  seek  his  help 
(Ps.  cvii.). 

II.  The  appeal  to  Elisha.  1.  Jehoshaphafs  inquiry.  The  King  of  Israel  aban- 
doned himself  to  despair,  but  Jehoshaphat  asked,  "  Is  there  not  here  a  prophet  of  the 
Lord,  that  we  may  inquire  of  the  Lord  by  him  ?  "  Had  he  inquired  of  the  Lord  at 
the  beginning,  he  would  not  now  have  been  in  this  difBculty.  But :  (1)  It  was  better 
to  inquire  late — if  haply  it  might  not  be  too  late — than  not  to  inquire  at  all.  A  good 
man  only  needs  to  be  convinced  of  bis  errors  to  endeavour  to  repair  them.  A  touch 
of  the  rod  of  chastisement  txirns  back  his  heart  to  Gdd,  whom  he  may  have  been  for- 
getting. To  whom  else  shall  he  go  ?  God  alone  can  help.  (2)  Even  the  sinner,  if 
convinced  that  God  is  contending  with  him,  should  not  delay  repentance  through 
remembrance  of  past  sins.  If  he  has  never  prayed  before,  let  him  do  it  now.  But, 
alas !  repentances  of  this  kind  are  too  often  insincere — the  mere  fruit  of  present  fear — 
and  are  not  followed  up  by  change  of  life.  2.  The  three  kings  and  the  prophet.  (1) 
Jehoshaphat's  question  elicited  the  fact  that  Elisha  the  son  of  Shaphat  was  in  the 
camp  or  near  it.  It  was  a  servant  of  the  King  of  Israel  that  gave  this  information, 
so  that  even  in  this  ungodly  king's  household  there  were  some  true  worshippers 
(cf.  1  Kings  xviii.  3,  4).  This  servant,  though  in  a  humble  position,  did  the  greatest 
service  possible  to  his  king  and  nation.  But  for  his  information,  the  armies  of  three 
kingdoms  might  have  been  annihilated.  In  like  manner,  it  was  "a  little  captive 
maid "  who  directed  Naaman  to  the  prophet  (ch.  v.  2,  3).  (2)  Jehoshaphat  felt  at 
once  they  had  the  right  man — "The  word  of  the  Lord  is  with  him."  Pretenders, 
false  prophets,  hypocrites,  are  of  no  avail  when  real  trouble  comes.  It  is  the  genuine 
prophet  that  is  needed  then.  Elisha  must  have  followed  the  camp  by  Divine  direction, 
to  give  this  aid  in  the  hour  of  extremity — another  evidence  that  the  events  of  this 
expedition,  Uke  all  other  events,  were  being  shaped  by  an  overruling  Providence.  (3) 
The  kings  at  once  repair  to  Elisha.  They  did  not  ask  him  to  come  to  them,  but,  as 
sujipliants,  "went  down"  to  him.  It  was  a  strange  sight — the  three  kings  standing 
before  this  prophet  of  the  Lord,  whom,  at  other  times,  two  of  them  at  least  woald 
have  dis'lained  to  consult.  But  it  was  now  felt  that  Elisha  alone  stood  between  them 
and  death.  He,  the  man  of  God,  was,  like  his  master  before  him — "  the  chariot  of 
Israel,  and  the  horsemen  thereof" — under  God,  the  protector  and  salvation  of  the 
nation.  There  come  seasons  when  religion  gets  the  homage  paid  to  it  which  its  impor- 
tance at  all  times  deserves.  3.  Jlelp  only  for  the  sake  of  Jf^oshaphat.  Elisha's 
spirit  seems  to  have  been  strangely  perturbed  by  the  visit  of  these  three  kings.  He 
was  roused  in  part  by  scorn  at  a  king  like  Jehoram,  wlio  ordinarily  paid  no  respect  to 


OH.  m.  1—27.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,  « 

religion,  coming  to  uk  his  aid  in  the  pinch  of  physical  distress.  It  is  Elijah's  lira 
which  glows  in  him  for  the  moment,  as  ho  stenily  asks,  "  What  have  I  to  do  with 
thee  ? "  and  hids  the  humhled  monarch  get  him  to  the  prophets  of  his  father  (the 
calves'-prophets)  and  the  prophets  of  his  mother  (the  Baal-prophets),  to  see  what 
they  could  do  for  him.  But  Jehoram  knew  that  the  prophets  of  the  calves  or  of  Baal 
could  in  that  extremity  give  him  little  help.  He  deprecates  Elisha's  anger,  only  to  be 
told  that,  but  for  the  sake  of  Jehoshaphat,  the  prophet  would  neither  look  towards  him 
nor  see  him.  (1)  It  is  character,  not  rank,  which  God  regards.  Jehoram  harps  upon 
the  string  that,  if  nothing  is  done,  "  three  kings  "  will  perish.  He  seems  to  fancy,  with 
the  French  lady,  that  God  will  think  twice  before  casting  off  persons  of  that  quality. 
But  Elisha  undeceives  him.  Only  because  the  good  Jehoshaphat  is  in  the  company 
will  God  show  any  mercy  to  him.  (2)  The  imgodly  often  reap  great  benefits  from 
association  with  the  good.  Jehoram  now  found  this  to  his  advantage.  (3)  There  will 
come  a  time  of  exposure  for  all  "  refuges  of  lies."  Elisha  laid  bare  the  folly  of  trust- 
ing to  the  idol-prophets,  and  Jehoram  felt  the  truth  of  his  rebuke.  So  wUl  it  be  with 
•11  vain  imaginations  (Isa.  zzviii.  14 — 18). 

III.  Tee  Divine  deliverance.  1.  Eoly  minttrehg.  The  discomposed  state  of 
Elisha's  mind  was  not  fitted  for  the  reception  of  "  revelations  of  the  Lord."  If  God 
would  speak,  passion  must  be  stilled.  To  this  end,  he  called  for  a  minstrel,  that  by 
the  soothing,  subduing  effect  of  sacred  melody,  his  soul  might  be  restored  to  a  calm 
condition.  It  is  a  wonderful  power  that  resides  in  music ;  we  do  well  in  God's  service 
to  take  advantage  of  it.  "  The  noblest  passages  in  '  Paradise  Lost'  were  composed  as 
Milton's  daughter  played  to  her  father  on  the  organ."  Music  gives  wings  to  the  soul, 
reveals  to  it  the  existence  of  a  world  of  harmony,  touches  and  harmonizes  it  to  like 
"fine  issues."  2.  A  labour  of  faith.  As  the  minstrel  played,  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
came  upon  Elisha,  and  he  gave  directions  to  make  the  vidley  full  of  trenches.  As  yet 
there  was  not  the  slightest  sign  of  water,  nor  would  there  he  any.  The  work  was  to 
be  done  in  entire  dependence  on  the  word  of  God  that  water  would  be  sent.  This  is 
faith — acting  on  God's  bare  word  of  promise.  All  that  night  the  labourers  toiled,  and 
when  the  morning  came,  the  valley  was  seamed  with  trenches,  and  studded  with  pits, 
to  hold  the  yet  invisible  supply  of  the  life-giving  water.  3.  Streams  from  Edom.  In 
the  morning,  true  to  the  Divine  promise,  the  wished-for  water  came.  (1)  It  came 
without  visible  sign.  The  people  who  looked  for  it  saw  neither  wind  nor  rain,  but 
simply  "  there  came  water  by  the  way  of  Edom,  and  the  country  was  filled  with  water." 
Yet  there  is  no  necessity  for  supposing  a  supernatural  creation  of  water,  for  God  does 
not  work  without  means,  when  means  are  available.  The  bursting  of  a  waterspout, 
or  heavy  rains,  at  some  distance,  would  give  rise  to  the  phenomenon.  There  was 
doubtless  a  providential  preparation  for  the  deliverance,  as  there  was  a  providential 
design  in  the  distress.  (2)  It  came  at  the  time  of  the  morning  oblation.  The  deliver- 
ance was  thus  connected  with  the  service  in  the  temple — Jehovah's  true  sanctuary. 
As  it  was  for  Jehoshaphat's  sake  the  deliverance  was  granted,  so  a  token  was  now 
given  that  it  was  the  religion  of  Judah  to  which  God  had  respect.  The  hours  of 
prayer  are  fit  seasons  for  the  conferring  of  blessing  (cf.  Dan.  ix.  21).  (3)  It  came  in 
great  abundance.  When  God  gives  he  gives  plentifully.  "  The  country  was  fUei  • 
with  water."  It  is  so  with  the  supply  God  has  given  for  the  thirst  of  the  world — those 
living  waters  of  which  we  do  so  wisely  to  drink  (John  vii.  37,  38).  Such  events  as 
these  pledge  to  us  the  fulfilment  of  Divine  promises  (Isa.  zliv.  3).  The  psalmist  says, 
••The  rain  also  filletb  the  pools"  (Fs.  Ixzziv.  6).— J.  0. 

Ver.  10. — An  evU  conscience.  '•And  the  Eing  of  Israel  said,  Alas  I  that  the  Lord 
hath  called  these  three  kings,"  etc.  I  1.  Trouble  awakens  the  evil  conscience.  2.  The 
evil  conscience  takes  the  darkest  view  of  the  actions  of  God.  3,  The  evil  conscience  is 
glad  to  shelter  itself  by  associating  with  others.  (See  excellent  remarks  in  Erum- 
macher.) — J.  0. 

Vers.  18—27. — The  defeat  of  Moah.  This  also  was  foretold  by  Elisha  as  a  mercy 
from  the  Lordi,  in  comparison  with  which  the  supply  of  water  was  "  a  light  thing."  M 
these  are  God's  "  light  things,"  surely  we  need  not  fear  to  ask  from  him  all  that 
we  requit«.    Our  rin  is,  not  in  asking  too  much,  but  in  asking  too  little  (John  xtL 


62  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         [ch.  hi.  1—27. 

24)<  "He  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think" 
(Eph.  iii.  20). 

I.  Lost  thko0oh  illusion.  The  manner  in  which  the  defeat  of  the  Moabites  was 
brought  about  is  very  remarkable.  The  defeat  was  caused ;  1.  Throv^h,  illusion.  Their 
forces — "all  that  were  able  to  put  on  armour,  and  upward" — were  mustered  on  the 
mountains  opposite,  ready  for  battle  on  the  morrow.  As  the  morning  sim  rose,  its  red 
beams,  falling  on  the  pools  of  water  in  the  valley,  gave  the  water  the  appearance  of 
blood — an  eiiect  to  which  the  red  soil  may  have  contributed.  This  startling  appearance 
the  Moabites — who  knew  nothing  of  the  unlooked-for  supply  of  water — interpreted  in 
their  own  way.  They  said,  "  This  is  blood,"  and  concluded — remembering  a  recent 
experience  of  their  own  (2  Chron.  zs.) — that  the  attacking  forces  had  fallen  out,  and 
destroyed  each  other.  2.  Through  over-haste  and  over-confidence.  The  cry  was  at  once 
raised,  "  Moab,  to  the  spoil  1 "  and,  casting  aside  all  precautions,  the  people  flew  down,  to 
find  themselves  in  the  power  of  their  enemies.  How  many  defeats  are  sustained  in  life 
from  the  same  causes  1  We  eagerly  snatch  at  first  appearances,  which  are  often  so  decep- 
tive; we  hurry  to  the  fray,  without  taking  due  precautions  or  counting  the  cost;  we 
are  confident  in  our  strength  or  numbers  as  sufficient  to  bear  down  all  opposition,  if  by 
chance  we  should  be  surprised.  Therefore  we  faiL  God  often  snares  men  through 
their  own  illusions.  Haman  went  to  Esther's  banquet  under  the  illusion  that  it  was 
the  road  to  highest  honour,  and  found  it  the  way  to  death  (Esth,  v.  11,  12 ;  viL).  Uf 
the  wicked  it  is  said,  "  For  this  cause  God  shall  send  them  strong  delusion,  that  they 
should  beUeve  a  lie"  (2  Thess.  iL  11). 

II.  Tee  merciless  pubbuit.  The  passage  describing  this  pursuit  is  a  terrible  illus- 
tration of  the  severities  of  war.  They  were,  perhaps,  under  the  circumstances,  not 
needless  severities,  but  they  are  none  the  less  extreme  and  painful  to  think  of.  (1) 
The  Moabites  were  pursued  into  their  own  country,  and  cut  down  in  the  pursuit.  (2) 
The  cities  were  levelled  to  the  ground.  (3)  The  good  land  was  made  useless  by  every 
man  casting  on  it  a  stone,  till  it  was  covered  with  stones.  (4)  Even  fruit  trees  were  cut 
down,  and  wells  stopped.  (5)  There  remained  only  the  city  of  Eir-haraseth,  which,  on 
its  elevated  plateau,  defied  direct  assault ;  but  it  they  besieged,  while  the  slingers,  taking 
their  station  on  the  surrounding  eminences,  galled  it  with  their  missiles.  The  words  of 
the  prophet  in  ver.  19  are  perhaps  prediction,  not  command,  but  it  may  be  inferred 
that  he  gave  the  policy  pursued  his  sanction.  The  object  was  so  effectually  to  cripple 
the  power  of  Moab  that  it  would  not  be  able  to  lift  up  the  head  for  many  a  day  to  come. 

1.  The  most  direct  lesson  we  can  learn  from  the  passage  is  the  dreadfulness  of  war. 
Wherever  or  however  waged,  wars  are  a  source  of  incalculable  misery.  Even  just  wars 
entail  a  loss  of  life,  a  destruction  of  wealth,  and  a  waste  of  the  means  of  production  and 
of  human  happiness,  which  may  well  make  the  heart  of  the  lover  of  his  species  sicken. 

2.  An  indirect  lesson  to  be  gleaned  from  ver.  25  is  the  power  of  little  things — "  every 
man  his  stone."  By  each  man  bringing  but  a  single  stone,  the  ground  was  covered,  and 
the  end  aimed  at  attained.  The  power  was  wielded  here  for  destruction,  but  it  may  be 
wielded  as  well  for  good.  Each  doing  his  individual  part — though  that  in  itself  is  little 
— great  results  will  be  achieved.  3.  We  do  well  to  carry  into  moral  warfare  the  same 
thoroughness  as  is  here  displayed  in  physical  warfare.  Not  content  with  operating 
on  individuals,  let  us  strike  at  causes  and  sources — stopping  the  wells  of  poisonous 
influence,  etc. 

III.  The  last  tbaoio  act.  The  war  was  brought  to  a  sudden  and  unlooked-for  ter- 
mination. 1.  The  fearful  sacrifice.  Beaten  into  his  last  stronghold,  driven  to  despera- 
tion, the  King  of  Moab,  having  made  an  unsuccessful  sortie  with  seven  hundred  men, 
resolved  on  an  act  which,  he  rightly  judged,  would  strike  horror  into  the  hearts  of  his 
enemies,  while  it  might  also  propitiate  his  god.  He  took  his  eldest  son,  the  heir  to  his 
throne,  and  offered  him  up  for  a  burnt  offering  on  the  wall.  (1)  The  fact  that  he  per- 
formed the  sacrifice  upon  the  wall  would  seem  to  show  that  he  had  in  view  as  much 
the  effect  to  be  produced  on  the  spectators  as  the  possible  effect  to  be  produced  on 
Chemosh.  (2)  The  deed  was  awful  and  inhuman — perhaps,  from  Mesha's  point  of  view, 
not  without  its  nobler  and  patriotic  side — ^but  in  itself  most  detestable.  We  have  need 
to  be  thankful  for  a  purer  religious  faith,  which  teaches  us  that  God  does  not  delight  in 
such  unnatural  and  cruel  acts  (Micah  vi.  6 — 9).  2.  Repulsed  by  horror.  "  There  was," 
we  read,  "  great  indignation  against  [or, '  upon  *]  Israel :  and  they  departed  bovo.  him, 


OH.  IT.  I — 44.] 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KmOS. 


M 


and  returned  to  their  own  land."  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  the  ghastly  act  pro- 
duced •  unirersal  horror,  which  turned  into  indignation  against  Israel  as  the  original 
authors  of  the  expedition  which  had  so  dreadful  an  end.  There  is  an  element  of  super- 
stition in  all  men,  and  sudden  revulsions  of  feeling,  caused  by  an  act  that  powerfully 
impresses  the  imagination,  are  not  uncommon.  The  Israelites  themselves  so  far  sym- 
pathized with  the  emotion  of  horror  which  brought  upon  them  the  indignation  of  the 
Moabites,  of  neighbouring  tribes,  perhaps  also  of  the  Edomites  and  others  among  theii 
own  allies,  that  they  gave  up  the  thought  of  proceeding  further.  This  seems  a  more 
natural  explanation  than  either  (1)  that  the  indignation  meant  is  that  of  Jehovah ;  or 
(2)  that  it  is  the  wrath  of  Cbemosh  (!) ;  or  (3)  the  subjective  horror  of  the  IsraeUtea 
thenuelTei.— J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  IV. 


Vers.  1 — 44. — ^Typical  Miracles  wbought 
BY  Elisha.  General  introduclion.  The  mi- 
racles of  this  chapter  are  all  of  them  miracles 
'  of  mercy.  The  first  and  last  consist  in  the 
multiplying  of  food,  and  thus  belong  to  the 
same  class  as  our  Lord's  feeding  the  four 
and  the  five  thousands,  and  Elijah's  in- 
creasing the  meal  and  oil  of  the  widow  of 
Zarephath  (1  Kings  xvii.  10 — 16).  It  serves 
no  useful  purpose  to  ask  how  miracles  of 
this  class  were  wrought  The  inspired 
writers  have  not  told  us;  and  our. own 
thoughts  upon  the  subject  can  at  the  best 
be  mere  unfounded  conjectures.  The  ra- 
tionalistic attempts  which  have  been  made 
to  solve  the  mystery  exhibit  a  weakness 
and  feebleness  that  are  absolutely  puerile 
(see  Bahr,  'Commentary  on  Kings,'  voL  ii, 
p.  46,  Eug.  trans.).  The  second  miracle  is 
the  resuscitation  of  a  dead  person,  and  be- 
longs, consequently,  to  the  very  narrow  class 
of  such  recoveries — of  which  in  the  Old 
Testament  there  are  three  only  (see  1  Kings 
xviL  17—23 ;  here ;  and  ch.  xiii.  21).  The 
third  miracle  consists  in  rendering  fit  for 
man's  nee  that  which  was  previously  unfit,  not 
by  human  skill  or  science,  but  by  miracle; 
and  is  analogous  to  the  act  of  Moses  where- 
by the  waters  of  Marah  ceased  to  be  bitter 
(Exod.  XV.  25),  and  to  that  other  act  of 
Elisha  himself,  whereby  the  waters  of 
Jericho  were  healed  (ch.  ii.  19 — 22).  It 
is  evidently  the  object  of  the  writer  or 
compiler  of  2  Kings  to  collect  in  this  place 
the  principal,  or  at  any  rate  the  most  noted, 
of  the  miraculous  acts  of  the  great  prophet 
who  iuoceeded  Elijah,  and  so  to  preserve 
them  from  oblivion.  This  object,  which  he 
began  to  set  before  himself  in  oh.  ii.  13, 


continnes  to  be  ptirsoed,  and  forms  a  link 
uniting  the  various  narratives  together,  up 
to  ch.  viii.  6. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — 1.  The  muUipliealion  of  (h» 
viidauft  oil. 

Yer.  1. — Now  there  cried  a  certain  woman 
of  the  wives  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  nnto 
Xlisha,  saying.  We  learn  from  this  that 
the  "  sons  of  the  prophets  "  were  not  merely, 
all  of  them,  college  students,  but  included 
fathers  of  families,  who  cannot  have  lived  a 
cloistered  life,  but  must  have  had  separate 
homes  for  themselves  and  their  families. 
Such  persons  may  still  have  taught  in  the 
prophetical  schools,  as  do  the  married  tutors 
and  professors  of  modern  universities.  Thy 
servant  my  husband  is  dead.  Elisha  liad, 
it  seems,  known  her  husband,  who  had  been 
his  "  servant,"  not  literally  and  in  deed,  but 
in  will  and  heart,  i.e.  always  ready  to  serve 
him.  She  recalls  this  fact  to  his*  memory, 
to  predispose  him  in  her  favoiur.  And  thou 
knowest  that  thy  servant  did  fear  the  Lord. 
Here  was  a  second  ground  for  Elisha's  in- 
terference— ^the  woman's  husband  had  been 
a  God-fearing  man,  one  who  not  only 
acknowledged  Jehovah,  but  worshipped  him 
in  spirit  and  in  truth.  There  is  a  Jewish 
tradition,  or  legend,  that  the  woman's 
husband  was  the  Obadiah  of  1  Kings  xviii. 
3 — 16,  but  no  dependence  can  be  placed 
on  it.  Obadiah,  the  "governor  of  Ahab's 
house,"  can  scarcely  have  been  one  of  the 
"sons  of  the  prophets."  And  the  creditor 
is  come  to  take  nnto  him  my  two  sons  to  be 
bondmen.  In  primitive  communities,  men 
borrowed  upon  their  personal  credit,  and 
the  primary  security  for  debt  was  regarded 
as  being  their  own  persons,  the  value  of 
their  labour,  and  that  of  those  dependent 
on  them.  In  Greece  and  Borne,  originally, 
as  in  the  Hebrew  community,  borrowers 
ordinarily  raised  money  by  pledging  theii 
persons,  and,  if  they  could  not  pay  when  the 
debt  became  due,  went  into  servitude  with 
their  children.  The  Mosaio  Law  presup- 
poses this  ftete  of  things,  and  permits  it« 


M 


THB  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  w,  1—44. 


wnttnnanM,  bnt  in  two  respects  interfere* 
to  modify  it:  (1)  by  requiring  that  the 
service  exacted  shall  not  be  severe  (Lev. 
XXV.  43,  46),  bnt  such  as  was  commonly 
Tendered  by  hired  servants  (Lev.  xzv.  39, 
40) ;  and  (2)  by  limiting  the  period  of  ser- 
vice to  the  date  of  the  next  jubilee  year 
(Lev.  XXV.  40,  41).  In  the  instance  brought 
here  under  our  notice,  it  would  seem  that 
the  creditor  had  not  proceeded  to  claim  his 
rights  until  the  debtor  died,  when  he  en- 
forced them  against  the  man'i  children 
(comp.  Neh.  v.  1 — 8). 

Yer.  2. — And  £lisha  said  unto  her.  What 
shall  I  do  for  thee  1  Elisha  acknowledges 
at  once  the  call  upon  him  to  do  something 
for  the  woman.  This  is,  no  doubt,  in  part, 
b«»tase  she  is  a  widow.  Widows  were,  in 
the  Law,  especially  commended  to  the 
attention  and  care  of  the  faithful.  As  Bahr 
says,  "It  is  •  well-known  feature  of  the 
Mosaic  Law,  one  which  is  distinctly  promi- 
nent, that  it  often  and  urgently  commands 
to  succour  the  widows  and  the  fatherless, 
and  to  care  for  them  (Exod.  xxii.  22 — 24 ; 
Dent  xIt.  29 ;  xxiv.  17,  19 ;  xxvl.  12 ;  xxvii. 
19).  They  are  mentioned  as  representatives 
of  the  forsaken,  the  oppressed,  and  the 
necessitous  as  a  class  (Isa.  x.  2  ;  Jer.  vi.  6 ; 
xxii.  3 ;  Zeoh.  vii.  10 ;  Mai.  iii.  5 ;  Baruch 
vi.  37).  It  is  especially  emphasized  and 
praised  in  Jehovah,  that  he  is  the  Father 
and  Judge  (i.e.  Protector  of  the  rights)  of 
the  widows  and  the  fatherless  (Deut.  x.  18 ; 
Ps.  Ixviii.  5;  cxlvi.  9;  Isa.  ix.  17,  etc.). 
Neglect  and  contempt  of  them  are  counted 
among  the  heaviest  offences  (Fs.  xciv.  6; 
Job  xxii.  9;  Ezek.  xxii.  7);  just  as,  on  the 
other  hand,  compassion  and  care  for  them 
is  •  sign  of  the  true  fear  of  God,  and  of  true 
piety  (Job  xxix.  12;  xxxi.  16;  Tobit  i.  7; 
Jos.  L  27)."  Elisha  could  also  gather  from 
the  tone  of  the  woman's  address  that  she, 
like  her  late  husband,  was  God-fearing. 
Tell  me,  what  hast  thou  in  the  house  1  Hast 
thou  anything,  that  is,  which  thou  canst 
sell,  and  so  pay  the  debt?  And  she  said. 
Thine  handmaid  hath  not  anything  in  the 
house,  save  a  pot  of  oil ;  literally,  tave  an 
anointing  of  oil;  i.e.  so  much  oil  as  will 
suffice  for  one  anointing  of  my  person. 

Yer.  3. — ^Then  he  said,  6a,  borrow  thee 
vessels  abroad  of  all  thy  neighbours,  even 
empty  vessels;  borrow  not  a  few.  God 
stints  not  in  his  gifts  (Isa.  Iv.  1).  When  he 
offers  them,  men  should  take  advantage  of 
the  offer  largely,  in  the  same  spirit  in  which 
it  is  made  (see  below,  oh.  xiii.  19). 

Yer.  4. — And  when  then  art  come  in,  than 
■halt  shut  the  door  upon  thee  and  upon  thy 
ions.  The  miracle  was  to  be  performed  se- 
cretly. Attention  was  not  to  be  called  to  it — 
perhaps  because  otherwise  the  prophet  would 
■•▼•  >een  overwhelmed  with  appUaatioof 


from  others ;  perhaps  beoanse  the  su;t  was  not 
a  mere  mechanical  one,  bnt  required  that, 
during  its  performanoe,*'the  hearts  of  the 
woman  and  of  her  sons  should  be  lifted  up 
in  prayer  and  adoration  and  thankfulness  to 
God  for  the  mercy  which  he  was  bestowing. 
Interruption  from  without  would  have  inter- 
fered with  the  frame  of  mind  which  was 
befitting  the  occasion.  Compare  our  Lord's 
secret  performance  of  many  miracles.  And 
Shalt  ponr  out  into  all  those  vesseli— i.«. 
those  which  thou  shalt  have  borrowed — and 
thon  shalt  set  aside  that  which  is  full;  t.e. 
as  each  vessel  is  filled,  it  shall  be  removed 
and  set  aside,  and  one  of  the  empty  vessels 
substituted— that  the  pouring  might  be 
continuous. 

Yer.  5. — So  she  vent  from  him,  and  shut 
the  door  upon  her  and  upon  her  sons — i.e. 
obeyed  exactly  the  prophet's  orders — who 
brought  the  vessels  to  her;  and  she  poured 
out;  literally,  tJiey  bringing  the  veetelt  to 
%er,  and  she  pouring  oat.  The  modue  ope- 
randi had  been  left  to  the  woman  and  her 
sons,  and  was  thus  arranged  and  ordered, 
so  that  there  was  no  confusion  nor  hurry. 

Yer.  6. — ^And  it  came  to  pass,  when  tha 
vessels  were  full,  that  she  said  unto  her 
son,  Bring  me  yet  a  vessel.  It  did  not 
occur  to  her  that  all  the  vessels  had  been 
already  filled;  so  she  asked  her  son  for 
another,  that  she  might  fill  it.  And  he  said 
unto  her.  There  is  not  a  vessel  more;  t.e. 
all  the  vessels  that  we  have  in  the  house 
are  full ;  there  remains  no  empty  one.  And 
the  oil  stayed.  God  will  not  have  waste. 
If  the  oil  bad  continued  to  flow,  it  would 
have  fallen  on  the  floor  of  the  house,  and 
have  been  of  no  service  to  any  one.  There- 
fore, when  all  the  vessels  were  full,  thera 
was  a  sudden  stoppage. 

Yer.  7. — Then  she  came  and  told  the  man 
of  God ;  i'.e.  Elisha  (comp.  vera.  9, 10, 21,  22, 
etc.).  She  did  not  feel  entitled  to  make  use 
of  the  oil  which  she  had  got  by  his  instru- 
mentality without  first  telling  him  and 
receiving  his  directions  respecting  it.  The 
prophet  gave  them  with  all  plainness  and 
brevity.  And  he  said,  Go,  sell  the  oil,  and 
pay  thy  debt,  and  live  thou  and  thy  children 
of  the  rest.  The  oil  in  the  vessels  was  more 
than  sufiScient  for  the  discharge  of  the  debt. 
The  prophet  directs  the  woman  to  sell  the 
whole,  and,  after  satisfying  the  claim  of  her 
creditor  with  part  of  the  money,  to  support 
herself  and  her  ohililren  on  the  remainder. 

Yers.  8 — 37. — 2.  The  promite  of  a  ehUd  to 
the  Shanammite  moman,  and  the  rsftorattoa 
of  the  child  to  life. 

Yer.  8.— And'  it  fell  on  a  day,  that  The 
expression  seems  to  be  archaic.  It  occurs 
only  here  and  in  the  opening  chapters  of 
the  Book  of  Job  (L  6,  18;   U.   1>     Tbt 


0H.IT.1— 44.J         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS, 


68 


most  literal  Tendering  would  be,  and  the 
day  came  when.  Elislia  passed  to  Shnnem. 
Shunem  was  a  village  of  Galilee,  situnted 
in  the  territory  assigned  to  Issachar  (Josh. 
xix.  18).  It  is  reasonably  identified  with 
the  modern  Solam,  at  the  south-eastern  foot 
of  the  Gebel  Duliy,  or  "  Little  Hermon,"  a 
"flourishing  village  ennorapassed  by  gar- 
dens" (Porter),  and  "in  the  midst  of  the 
finest  corn-fields  in  the  world  "  (Grove),  on 
the  edge  of  the  Plain  of  Esdraelon.  Elisha, 
in  his  progression  to  different  parti  of  the 
northern  kingdom,  happened  to  come  on 
one  occasion  to  Shunem.  Where  was  a 
great  woman.  Houbigant  strangely  trans- 
lates, "a  tall  woman,"  maintaining  that  a 
woman  would  not  be  called  "  great "  in  the 
sense  of  "  wealthy  "  during  her  husband's 
lifetime;  but  no  other  commentator  has 
accepted  his  view.  The  meaning  seems  to 
be  that  she  was  a  woman  of  substance,  one 
well-to-do,  perhaps  one  that  had  brought 
her  husband  the  bulk  of  his  wealth.  And 
she  constrained  him  to  eat  bread;  t.«.  she 
invited  him  in  as  he  passed  her  house,  and 
would  take  no  denial.  Compare  Lot's 
pressing  hospitality,  as  related  in  Gen.  xix. 
1 — 3.  And  so  it  was,  that  as  oft  as  he 
passed  b,7,  he  turned  in  thither  to  eat  bread. 
Elisha,  it  appears,  had  frequent  occasion  to 
pass  through  Shunem  on  his  way  from 
Carmel  to  visit  the  cities  of  Galilee,  or  viae 
tend.  It  became  his  habit,  on  these  journeys, 
to  eat  his  meals  at  the  house  of  the  rich 
Shunaramite.  Hence  arose  a  kindly  feeling 
on  both  sides  and  a  close  intimacy. 

Ter.  9. — ^And  she  said  unto  her  husband, 
Behold  now,  I  perceive  that  this  is  an  holy 
man  of  God.  Not  all  the  soi-disant  men  of 
God  were  truly  religious  and  God-fearing. 
In  Elisha's  time,  as  in  all  others,  there  were 
among  the  teachers  of  religion  some  who 
were  "wolves  in  sheep's  clothing."  The 
Shunammite  woman,  after  a  certain  length 
of  acquaintance,  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  Elisha  deserved  the  title  which  he 
commonly  bore,  was  truly  a  "  man  of  God," 
a  real  devoted  servant  of  Jehovah.  She 
therefore  wished  to  do  more  for  him  than 
she.had  hitherto  done.  Which  passeth  by  us 
continually;  i.«.  who  passes  through  out 
village,  and  has  hia  meals  with  us  so 
frequently. 

Ver.  10. — Let  ns  make  A  little  chamlMr, 
I  pray  thee,  on  the  wall.  Thenius  under- 
stands "a  walled  chamber,"  which  he 
supposes  to  have  been  "built  upon  the  flat 
roof  of  the  house ; "  but  it  is  more  probable 
that  a  small  addition  to  the  existing  upper 
chamber  of  the  bouse  is  meant — a  tiny  room 
resting  partly  upon  the  wall  of  the  house, 
partly  projecting  beyond  it,  balcony  fashion. 
Such  sleeping-chambers  are  common  in 
Oriental  dwellings.  And  lat  as  Mt  for  him 
o.sum. 


there  a  bed,  and  a  table,  and  a  stool,  and  a 
candlestick ;  rather,  a  bed,  and  a  table,  and 
a  chair,  and  a  lamp— the  necessary  furniture 
of  an  apartment  which  was  to  be  used,  not 
only  as  a  siccping-chamber,  but  also  for 
retirement,  for  study,  and  perhaps  for  literary 
composition.  And  it  shall  be,  when  he  cometh 
to  us,  that  he  shall  turn  in  thither.  In  tlie 
intei-vals  between  his  active  ministrations, 
a  prophet  would  naturally  desire  quiet 
retirement,  security  from  interruption.  He 
would  need  to  reflect,  to  meditate,  to  pray, 
perhaps  to  write.  The  Shunammite's  pro- 
posal shows,  not  only  kindness,  but  thought- 
fulness  and  appreciation. 

Ver.  11. — And  it  fell  on  a  day,  that  he 
came  thither,  and  he  turned  into  the  chamber, 
and  lay  there;  t.e.  slept  there,  passed  the 
night  there. 

Yer.  12. — ^And  he  said  to  Gehazi  his 
servant.  Gehazi  is  here  mentioned  for  the 
first  time.  He  seems  to  have  been  Elisha's 
"  servant "  in  a  lower  sense  than  Elisha  liad 
been  Elijah's.  BtiU,  his  position  was  such 
that  on  one  occasion  (oil.  viii.  4,  5)  a  king 
of  Israel  did  not  disdain  to  hold  a  conversa- 
tion with  him.  Call  this  Shunammite.  And 
wheii  he  had  called  her,  she  stood  before  him ; 
i.e.  before  Gehazi.  Elisha  communicates 
with  the  woman  through  his  servant,  or  at 
any  rate  in  his  presence,  probably  to  prevent 
any  suspicion  of  impropriety  arising  in  the 
mind  of  any  one.  The  prophet  of  the  Lord 
must  not  be  evil  spoken  of. 

Ver.  13. — ^And  he  said  nuto  him.  Say  now 
unto  her.  Behold,  thou  hast  been  oarefol 
— literally,  anxious — ^for  us  with  aU  this 
care — or,  anxiety;  i.e.  thou  hast  taken  all 
this  trouble  in  lodging  both  me  and  my 
servant,  and  in  attending  on  us — ^what  is  to 
be  done  for  theel  or,  What  i$  there  that 
thou  wouldest  luive  done  for  thee  t  Is  there 
anything  that  we  can  do  for  thee  in  return  7 
Wouldest  thou  be  spoken  for  to  the  king! 
Elisha  assumes  that  he  has  credit  at  court, 
and  offers  to  use  it  in  the  Shunammite's 
favour,  if  she  has  any  request  to  prefer. 
We  see  something  of  his  influence  in  ch. 
vi.  9—12,  21—23;  viii.  4—6.  Or  to  the 
oaptain  of  the  host?  i.e,  the  person  wliosa 
authority  and  influence  was  next  to  that  of 
the  king.  And  she  answered,  I  dwell  among 
mine  own  people;  *.«.  "  The  court  is  nothing 
to  me.  I  want  nothing  from  it.  I  have  no 
wrong  to  complain  of,  no  quarrel  with  any 
of  my  neighbours,  so  as  to  need  the  help  of 
one  in  power.  I  dwell  peaceably  among 
them.  They  are '  ray  own  people ' — firiends 
or  dependents."  The  reply  is  that  of  one 
perfectly  content  with  her  position.  Perhaps 
she  aims  at  impressing  on  Elisha  that  she 
has  had  no  selfish  motive  in  what  iha  has 
done  for  him,  bnt  haa  merely  wished  to 
honour  Qoi  in  hi*  piophat. 


6ft 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  0*  THE  KINGS.         (cb.  iv.  1—44 


Ver.  14.- And  ha  said— he,  Elisha,  said  to 
Gehazi— What  then  is  to  be  done  for  herl 
If  the  woman  will  suggest  nothing  herself, 
can  Gehazi  suggest  anything?  Has  he 
heard  her  express  any  wish?  Does  he  know 
of  any  boon  that  would  be  welcome  to  her? 
Evidently  the  woman's  disinterestedness 
has  increased  the  prophet's  desire  to  do 
something  for  ber.  And  Gehazi  answered, 
Verily  she  hath  no  child,  and  her  husband 
is  old.  It  does  not  appear  that  the  woman 
had  made  any  complaint  or  exhibited  any 
special  anxiety  on  the  subject  of  offspring. 
But  Gehazi  knows  that  to  be  barren  ia 
regarded  by  all  Hebrew  women  as  a  re- 
proach, that  it  exposes  them  to  scorn  and 
contumely  (1  Sara.  i.  6,  7),  and  that  offspring 
is  universally,  or  all  but  universally,  desired. 
He  therefore  assumes  that  the  Shunamiriite 
must  wish  for  it.  And  Elisha  accepts  his 
suggestion  without  a  moment's  hesitation. 

Ver.  15. — And  he  said,  Call  her.  And 
when  he  had  called  her,  she  stood  in  the 
door ;  rather,  the  dooricay.  The  same  word 
in  Hebrew  stands  both  for  "  doorway  "  and 
for  "  door."  It  would  seem  that  the  woman 
came  at  once  on  being  called,  but,  out  of 
modesty  and  respect,  would  not  advance 
beyond  the  entrance  of  the  apartment. 

Ver.  16. — And  he  —  i.e.  Elisha  —  said, 
About  this  season,  according  to  the  time  of 
life— rather,  when  the  time  comes  round} 
literally,  reviofs;  i.e.  about  this  time  next 
year— thou  shalt  embrace  a  son  ;  i.e.  "a  son 
shall  be  born  to  thee,  whom  thou  wilt 
embrace,  as  mothers  are  wont  to  do."  And 
she  said.  Nay,  my  lord,  thou  man  of  Ood,  do 
not  lie  unto  thine  handmaid.  Like  Sarah, 
the  woman  was  incredulous ;  she  could  not 
believe  the  good  tiJinga,  and  thought  the 
prophet  was  only  raising  hopes  to  disappoint 
them.  Her  words,  "Do  not  lie  unto  thy 
servant,"  are  less  harijh  in  the  original,  being 
merely  equivalent  to  the  "Do  not  deceive 
me  "  of  ver.  28. 

Ver.  17. — And  the  woman  conceived,  and 
hare  a  son  at  that  season  that  Elisha  had 
said  unto  her,  according  to  the  time  of  life ; 
rather,  as  the  Revised  Version  gives  the 
passage,  the  woman  conceived,  and  hare  a 
eon  at  that  season,  when  the  time  came  round, 
as  Elisha  had  said  unto  her.  The  event  was 
exactly  as  predicted ;  the  child  was  born  at 
the  same  season  of  the  ensuing  year. 

Ver.  18. — ^And  when  the  child  was  grown 
— not  grown  up,  for  he  was  still  a  "  child  " 
(vers.  30,  81,  i!5,  etc.),  but  grown  to  be  a 
boy,  perhaps  four  or  five  years  old — it  fell 
en  a  day,  that  he  went  out  to  his  father  to 
the  reapers.  The  com-flelds  about  Shunem 
attract  the  admiration  of  travellers.  The 
husband  of  the  Shunammite,,the  owner  of 
B(^vefiil,  was  in  one  of  them,  superintending 
tiie  cutting  of  hi*  corn  by  the  reapers ;  aud  | 


the  boy  joined  him  there,  as  he  had  probably 
often  done  before.  Country  children  delight 
in  watching  the  T&rioua  operations  of  the 
farmstead. 

Ver.  19. — ^And  he  said  vnto  his  father.  My 
head,  my  head.  Sunstroke  was  common  ia 
Palestine  (Ps.  oxzi.  6;  Isa.  xlix.  10;  Judith 
viii.  2,  3),  and  would  be  most  frequeut  -.ml 
most  fatal  at  the  time  of  harvest.  The  cry 
of  the  child  is  at  once  most  touching  imd 
most  natural.  And  he  said  to  a  lad ;  literally, 
to  the  lad — probably  the  lad  who  had 
attended  the  "  young  master"  to  the  fit  Id. 
Carry  him  to  his  mother;  i.e.  take  him 
indoors,  and  let  his  mother  see  to  him.  No 
wiser  directions  conld  have  been  given. 

Ver.  20. — And  when  he  had  taken  him, 
and  brought  him  to  his  mother,  he  sat  on 
her  knees  till  noon.  It  was  in  the  morning, 
therefore,  that  the  child  received  his  sun- 
stroke— an  unusual,  but  not  an  unknown, 
occurrence.  In  the  East  the  sun  often  be- 
comes intensely  hot  by  ten  o'clock.  And 
then  died.  'J'here  is  no  ambiguity  here,  no 
room  for  doubt ;  the  child  not  only  became 
insensible,  but  died.  The  historian  could 
not  possibly  have  expressed  himself  more 
plainly. 

Ver.  21. — And  she  went  up,  and  laid  him 
on  the  bed  of  the  man  of  God.  One  cannot 
be  certain  what  thoughts  were  working  in 
the  poor  bereaved  mother's  heart;  Lut 
probably  she  entertained  some  vague  notinn 
that  the  prophet  might  be  able  to  resusci- 
tate her  chill,  and  thought  that,  until  his 
presence  could  be  obtained,  the  next  best 
thing  was  to  place  the  child  where  the  pro- 
phet's presence  had  lately  been.  Elijah 
had  placed  on  his  own  bed  the  child  whom 
he  restored  to  life  (1  Kings  xvii.  19) ;  aud 
the  fact  may  have  been  known  to  the  Shu- 
namniite.  She  certainly  did  not  expect 
mere  contact  with  the  bed  to  resuscitate  her 
child.  And  shut  the  door  upon  him.  Either 
that  the  body  should  not  be  disturbed,  or 
rather  that  th^  death  should  not  be  known. 
It  is  clear  thSt,  from  whatever  motive,  the 
woman  wished  to  conceal  the  death  of  the 
child  until  she  had  seen  what  Eliiiha  conld 
do  for  her.'  She  neither  told  her  husband 
nor  the  servant  who  accompanied  her.  And 
went  out ;  t.e.  quitted  the  prophet's  apart- 
ment, closing  the  door  as  she  quitted  it. 

Ver.  22. — And  she  called  unto  her  hus- 
band, and  said.  Send  me,  I  pray  thee,  one  of 
the  young  men,  and  one  of  the  asses.  She 
"  called  to  her  husband  "  from  the  house^ 
without  calling  him  into  the  house,  express- 
ing her  desire  to  visit  Elisha,  without  stating 
tlie  object  of  her  visit,  and  asked  for  the 
necessiiry  riding-animal  and  escort  The 
nearest  part  of  Carmel  was  at  least  fourteen 
or  fifteen  miles  from  Shunem,  so  that  she 
could  not  walk.    That  I  may  run — 1,«.  hasten 


BH.  IV.  1— *4.i         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


67 


—to  the  man  of  Ood.  "  Maa  of  Gh>d  "  wag 
evidently  the  designation  by  which  Elisha 
was  known  in  the  house  (vers.  16,  21,  25). 
And  come  again;  iji.  return  home  before 
nightfall. 

Ver.  23. — And  he  laid.  Wherefore  wilt 
thou  go  to  him  to-day  1  it  is  neither  jiew 
moon  nor  sahbath.  The  hasband  demurred ; 
he  saw  no  ocoasion  for  the  journey.  It 
was  not  either  **  new  moon  "  or  "  sabbath  " 
— times  when  evidently  the  prophets  con- 
ducted services,  which  wore  attended  by 
pious  persons  from  the  neighbourhood : 
what  could  she  want  of  Elisha?  He  had 
evidently  no  idea  that  the  child  was  dead. 
Probably  be  had  not  realized  to  iiimself 
that  he  was  in  any  danger.  And  she  said, 
It  shall  be  well,  She  uttered  tlie  single 
word  ehaldm,  literally,  "peace,"  but  used, 
like  the  German  gut,  or  the  English  "all 
right,"  to  content  an  inquirer  without  giving 
him  a  definite  answer.  And  the  husband 
accepted  her  assurance,  and  did  not  press 
for  an  explanation.  The  ass  and  the  ser- 
vant were  placed  at  her  disposal  without 
more  words. 

Ver.  24. — ^Ihenshe  saddled  an  ass;  rather, 
then  the  saddled  (i.e. "  caused  to  be  saddled  ") 
the  asi — the  particular  animal  which  her  hus- 
band had  placed  at  her  disposal.  And  said 
to  her  servant,  Drive,  and  go  forward ;  t.e. 
"set  the  a«s  in  motion,  and  then  proceed 
steadily  forward."  In  the  East,  each  donkey 
has  its  driver,  who  sets  it  in  motion,  and 
regulates  its  pace.  The  rider  leaves  all  to 
him.  Slack  not  thy  riding  for  me— rather, 
$lacle^i  me  not  the  riding  (Bevised  Version), 
or,  thicken  not  my  riding  ;  i.e. "  do  not  lessen 
the  pace  of  my  riding  " — except  I  bid  thee. 

Ver.  25.— So  she  went  and  oame  unto  the 
man  of  God  to  Mount  Canuel.  Carmel  was 
to  Elisha  what  Gilead  had  been  to  Elijah 
in  his  early  days — a  place  for  solitary  retire- 
ment and  meditation,  where,  free  from  dis- 
turbance, he  might  hold  communion  with 
nature  and  with  God.  It  was  not  usual  for 
his  disciples  to  intrude  upon  him  there,  ex- 
cept at  stated  times,  when  gatheiings  were 
held  at  his  residence  for  edification  and  for 
worship.  And  it  oame  to  pass,  when  the 
man  of  God  saw  her  afar  off — literally,  over 
against  him;  i.e.  coming  towards  him  (^ip- 
xo/ifiniv,  LXX.)— that  he  said  to  Gehazi  his 
servant,  Behold,  yonder  is  that  Shunammite. 
The  prophet  knew  her  at  a  distance,  pro- 
bably by  her  attire  and  carriage.  We  may 
gather,  from  her  husband's  words  in  ver.  23, 
that  she  was  one  of  those  who  had  been  ac- 
eostomed  to  attend  the  gatherings  on  new 
moons  and  sabbaths. 

Yer.  26.— Knn  now,  I  pray  thee,  to  meet 
her,  and  say  onto  her,  Is  it  well  with  thee  1 
is  it  well  with  thy  husband  1  is  it  well  with 
the  child  i     Elisha  feels  that  there  must 


be  something  the  matter,  to  account  for  the 
Shunammite's  coming  to  him  so  unexpect- 
edly. His  anxiety  is  aroused,  and,  in  his 
impatience  to  know  what  has  happened,  in- 
stead of  waiting  for  the  woman's  arrival, 
he  bids  his  servant  run,  and  ask  what  is  the 
matter.  Some  misfortune,  he  supposes, 
must  have  happened  either  to  her,  or  to  her 
husband,  or  to  the  child.  And  she  an- 
swered, It  is  welL  She  gave,  as  before  to 
her  husband  (ver.  23),  the  ambiguous  an- 
swer, "  Peace,"  intending  thereby  merely  to 
put  off  Gehazi,  and  not  explain  herself  to 
any  one  but  his  master. 

Yer.  27.— And  when  she  oame  to  the  man 
of  God  to  the  hUl— rather,  the  mountain ; 
i.e.  Carmel,  where  Elisha's  residence  was — 
she  caught  him  by  the  feet  (comp.  Matt, 
xviii.  29 ;  Mark  v.  22 ;  vii.  25 ;  Luke  viii. 
41 ;  John  xi.  32).  It  has  always  been  usual 
in  the  East  to  embrace  the  feet  or  the 
knees,  in  order  to  add  force  to  supplication. 
But  Gehazi  oame  near  to  thrust  her  away. 
He  regarded  the  act  as  one  unduly  familiar 
or  unduly  importunate,  and  interfered  to 
protect  and  release  his  master.  And  the 
man  of  Ood  said,  Let  her  alone;  for  her 
sonl  is  vexed  within  her.  Elisha  would  not 
have  the  woman  disturbed,  tie  saw  that 
she  was  in  deep  distress,  and,  if  there  was 
anything  unseemly  in  her  action  according 
to  the  etiquette  of  the  time,  excused  it  to 
her  profound  grief  and  distraction.  The 
ordinary  mind  is  a  slave  to  conventionalities ; 
the  superior  mind  knows  when  to  be  above 
them.  And  the  Lord  hath  hid  it  from  me, 
and  hath  not  told  me.  God  hail  not  in- 
formed Elisha,  by  inward  miraculous  illu- 
mination, of  the  illness  of  the  child,  or  iti 
death,  or  the  wild  hopes  stirring  in  the 
afflicted  mother's  mind,  which  induced  her 
to  make  her  long  and  troublesome  journey. 
We  need  not  feel  surprised  at  this.  There 
is  always  a  limit  to  the  miraculous;  and 
facts  that  may  be  learnt  by  a  little  inquiry 
are  but  rarely  communicated  supematurally, 

Yer.  28. — Then  she  said,  Sid  I  desire  a 
son  of  my  lord?  did  I  not  say.  So  not  deceive 
me  f  The  woman  does  not  directly  reveal 
her  grief.  Great  sorrow  is  reticent,  cannot 
endure  to  put  itself  into  words.  But  she 
sufficiently  indicates  the  nature  of  her 
trouble  by  the  form  of  her  reproach.  "  Did 
I  ask  for  a  son?  Did  I  make  complaint  of 
my  childlessness  ?  Had  I  been  importunate, 
and  obtained  my  son  of  thee  by  much  ask- 
ing, I  would  not  have  complained.  But  I  did 
not  ask.  I  did  not  even  snatch  greedily  at  the 
offer.  I  demurred.  I  said, '  Do  not  deceiva 
me.'  But  now  thou  hast  done  worse  than 
deceive  me.  Thou  hast  kept  the  word  of 
promise  to  the  ear,  and  broken  it  to  the 
hope.  It  is  greater  misery  to  have  a  child 
and  lose  him,  than  never  to  have  had  om 


•8 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  Ema&         [oa.iT.1— 44. 


at  klL"  All  this,  and  more,  Mems  to  be 
involTed  in  the  woman's  words.  And  the 
prophet  fiilly  nndeistood  their  meaning. 

Yer.  29. — ^Then  he  said  to  Gehazi,  Qird  np 
thy  loins,  and  take  my  staff  in  thine  hand, 
and  go  thy  way:  if  thon  meet  any  man, 
salute  him  not;  and  if  any  salute  thee, 
answer  him  not  again.  The  object  of  ail 
these  injunctions  is  baste.  Lose  not  a  mo- 
ment Go  as  qnickly  as  thon  canst  to  the 
honse  where  the  ohild  lies.  Spend  no  time 
in  greetings  on  the  way.  Slack  not  Tarry 
not  And  lay  my  staff  npon  the  face  of  th« 
child.  What  effect  the  prophet  expected 
from  this  act,  we  are  not  told.  Gehazi 
appears  to  hare  expected  that  it  would  at 
once  cause  a  resuscitation  (ver.  31);  but 
there  is  no  evidence  that  the  prophet  par- 
ticipated in  the  expectation.  He  may  have 
done  BO,  for  prophets  are  not  infallible  be- 
yond the  sphere  of  the  revelations  made  to 
them ;  but  he  may  only  have  intended  to 
comfort  and  eheer  the  mother,  and  to  raise 
in  her  an  expectation  of  the  resuscitation 
which  he  trusted  it  would  be  allowed  him 
to  effect 

Yer.  80. — And  the  mother  of  the  ohild 
said,  As  the  Lord  liveth,  and  as  thy  soul 
liveth  (comp.  ch.  ii  2, 4,  6),  I  will  not  leave 
thee.  Apparently,  the  woman  supposed 
that  Elisha  intended  to  do  nothing  more, 
but  trust  the  child's  recovery  to  such  virtue 
as  might  inhere  in  his  staff.  But  her  own 
resolution  was  long  ago  taken — she  would 
be  content  with  nothing  less  than  brin°^ng 
the  prophet  face  to  face  with  her  dead  child. 
She  "  will  not  leave "  him  till  he  conseiits 
to  accompany  her  to  her  home.  And  he 
arose,  and  followed  her;  as,  no  doubt,  he 
had  intended  from  the  first. 

Yer.  31. — And  Gehazi  passed  on  before 
them,  and  laid  the  staff  on  the  face  of  the 
child;  but  there  was  neither  voice,  nor  hear- 
ing. Gehazi  did  as  he  had  been  told,  exe- 
cuted his  mission  faithfully ;  but  there  was 
no  apparent  result.  The  child  was  not 
roused  by  the  staff  being  placed  across  liis 
face.  All  remained  still  and  silent  as 
before.  Although  on  some  occasions  it 
has  pleased  God  to  allow  miracles  to  be 
wrought  by  the  instrumentality  of  lifeless 
objects,  as  when  Elisba's  bones  resuscitated 
a  dead  man  (ch.  xiii.  .21),  and  when  virtue 
went  out  from  the  hem  of  our  Lord's 
garment  (Mark  v.  25 — 34),  and  still  more 
remarkably,  when  "  handkerchiefs  or  aprons 
from  the  body  of  Paul  were  brought  unto 
the  sick,  and  the  diseases  departed  from 
them,  and  the  evil  spirits  were  cast  out  of 
them"  (Actsxiz.  12);  yet  the  instances  are, 
eomparatively  spealang,  rare,  and  form  ex- 
ceptions to  what  may  be  called  the  usual 
Divine  economy  of  miracles.  Miracles  ua, 
M  a  feneral  rule,  attached   in  Scripture 


to  intense  unwavering  faith — ^&ith,  som*- 
times,  in  those  that  are  the  objects  of  them, 
almost  always  in  those  that  are  the  workers 
of  them.  The  present  case  was  not  to  be 
an  exception  to  the  general  mle,  the  circum- 
stances not  calling  for  an  exception.  The 
power  of  faith  was  to  be  shown  forth  once 
more  in  Elisha,  as  not  long  previously  in 
Klijah  (1  Kings  xvii.  19—23);  and  Israel 
was  to  be  taught,  by  a  second  marvellous 
example,  how  much  the  effectual  fervent 
prayer  of  a  faithful  and  righteous  man 
avails  with  the  Most  High.  The  lesson 
would  have  been  lost  had  the  staff  been 
allowed  to  effect  the  resuscitation.  Where- 
fore he — i.e.  Gehazi — went  again  to  meet 
him — i.e.  Elisha — and  told  him,  saying,  The 
ohild  is  not  waked.  It  is  dear  from  this, 
that  Gehasi  had  expected  an  awakening; 
but  there  is  nothing  to  show  what  the 
prophet  himself  had  expected.  We  are  cer- 
tainly not  entitled  to  conclude,  with  Peter 
Martyr,  that  "  Elisha  did  wrong  in  attempt- 
ing to  delegate  his  power  of  working 
miraoles  to  another; "  or  even,  with  Starke, 
that "  Elisha  gave  the  command  to  Geban 
from  overhaste,  without  having  any  Divine 
incentive  to  it." 

Yer.  32. — And  when  Elisha  was  eome  into 
the  house,  behold,  the  child  was  dead,  and 
laid  upon  his  bed  (comp.  ver.  21).  The 
child  remained  where  his  mother  had  Uud 
him. 

Yer.  S3. — He  went  in  therefore,  and  shut 
the  door  upon  them  twain — ^that  he  might 
not  be  interrupted  during  his  efforts  to 
restore  the  child's  life  (comp.  ver.  4:)^8nd 
prayed  unto  the  lord.  Probably  his  heart 
had  been  lifted  up  in  inarticulate  prayer 
from  the  time  that  he  realized  the  calamity 
which  had  befallen  the  Shunammite;  but 
now  he  went  down  on  his  knees,  and  lifted 
up  his  voice  in  outspoken  words  of  prayer. 

Yer.  34. — ^And  he  went  np,  and  lay  npon 
the  child,  and  put  his  mouth  upon  Ms 
mouth,  and  his  eyes  upon  his  eyes,  and  his 
hands  upon  his  hands;  following  the 
example  set  him  by  his  master  and  prede- 
cessor, Elijah  (I  Kings  xvii.  21).  The  idea 
may  in  both  cases  have  been  to  fit  the  body 
for  reinhabitation  by  the  soul  (see  ver.  22), 
through  the  restoration  of  warmth  to  it. 
And  he  stretched  himself  npon  the  ohild; 
i.e.  brought  his  flesh  as  close  as  he  could  to 
the  flesh  of  the  child,  covering  the  body 
and  pressing  on  it,  to  force  his  own  bodily 
warmth  to  pass  into  it.  The  word  used, 
iriji<,  is  different  from  that  in  1  Kings 
xvii.  21,  which  is  iibrv, and  implies  a  closer 
contact  And  the  fledi  of  the  ohild  waxed 
warm.  Elisha's  efforia  had  an  effect;  the 
child's  body  was  actually  warmed  by  them. 

Yer.  35.— Then  he  returned,  and  walked 
in  the  house  to  and  fro ;  literally,  M«e  (» 


OL  IT.  1-44.]         THE  SBCOND  BOOK  OF  TH£  KING& 


8» 


and  oneefro;  took,  <a,  a  lin^le  tun  np  and 
down  the  large  room  adjoining  his  bed- 
oliamber — scarcely  with  any  remedial  objeot, 
bnt  ae  men  do  when  they  are  in  distresB 
and  doubt.  And  went  np,  and  stretched 
himself  npon  him — i'.e.  repeated  his  former 
act,  laying  himself  npon  the  child,  and 
warming  it — and  the  child  sneezed  seven 
times — showing  the  recovery  of  suspended 
respiration — and  the  child  opened  his  eyes  ; 
«.e.  came  to  himself. 

Ver.  36. — And  he  called  Oehazi,  and  said, 
Call  this  Shouammite ;  t.e.  tell  her  to  come 
here,  No  time  was  to  be  lost  in  restoring 
the  child  to  his  mother,  now  that  he  was 
alive  again.  And  when  she  was  come  in 
nnto  him,  hesaid,  Take  up  thy  son ;  t.e.  lift 
him  up,  take  him  in  thine  arms,  feel  him  to 
be  all  thine  own  once  more. 

Yer.  37. — Then  she  went  in,  and  fell  at 
his  feet,  and  bowed  herself  to  the  ground ; 
in  acknowledgment  of  the  boon  conferred 
on  her.  In  the  East  such  prostrations  are 
comluon,  and  denote  at  once  gratitude  and 
humility.  And  took  up  her  son,  and  went 
out.  (On  some  later  circumstances  in  the 
life  of  the  woman,  see  ch.  viii.  1 — 6.) 

Vers.  38— 41.— 3.  The  healing  of  th»  tm- 
uhoUsome  pottagp. 

Yer.  38. — And  Elisha  came  again  to 
OUgal ;  i.e.  revisited  Gilgal,  where  he  had 
been  previously  with  his  master  (ch.  ii.  I), 
either  casually,  or  perhaps  on  one  of  bis 
regular  circuits  (Keil)  to  visit  the  schools 
of  the  prophets.  And  there  was  a  dearth 
in  the  land — probably  the  dearth  again 
mentioned  in  ch.  viii.  1 — and  the  sons  of 
the  prophets  were  sitting  before  him.  Some 
translate  "the  sons  of  the  prophets  dwelt 
with  him "  (Yulgate,  Luther,  Bishop  Hors- 
ley) ;  but  our  version  is  probably  correct. 
The  LXX.  give  ixijBrivTo ;  and  Ezek.  viii.  1 ; 
xvi.  1 ;  zzxiii.  31 ;  with  Zech.  iiL  8,  show  that 
»3B^  D'ae''  may  have  the  meaning  of  "  sit- 
ting in  the  presence  of  a  person."  And  he 
•aid  nnto  bis  servant.  Set  on  the  great  pot — 
t.a.  the  one  great  pot  that  there  would  be 
in  the  house — and  seethe  pottage  for  the 
sons  of  the  prophets.  Even  in  a  famine 
there  would  be  some  vegetables  produced 
on  which  life  might  be  sustained. 

Yer.  39. — ^And  one  went  out  into  the  field 
to  gather  herbs.  One  of  the  sons  of  the 
prophets,  probably,  went  out  into  the  neigh- 
bouring country,  and  looked  about  for  any 
wild  fruits  or  vegetables  that  he  could  see 
anywhere.  And  folmd  a  wild  vine.  Not  a 
wild  grape  vine  (Vitis  labntsed),  the  fruit 
of  which  would  b£ive  been  harmless,  but 
fome  cucurbitaoeons  plant,  with  tendrils, 
tad  a  growth  like  that  of  the  vine.    And 

Sthered  thereof  wild  gourds.    The  exact 
id  of  gourd  ia  uncertain.    Beoent  oritioa 


have  mostly  eome  to  the  oonolusion  that  the 
vegetable  intended  ia  the  Oueumw  agreilis 
or  Eebalium  daterium,  the  "squirting  cu- 
cumber"  of  English  naturalists.  This  is  a 
kind  of  gourd,  the  fruit  of  whioh  is  egg- 
shaped,  mis  a  bitter  taste,  and  bursts  when 
ripe  at  a  slight  touch,  squirting  out  sap  and 
seeds.  The  main  ground  for  this  oonclusisn 
is  etymological,  njrp.s  being  derived  from  ppa, 
"to  crack"  or  "split"  Another  theory, 
and  one  which  has  the  ancient  versions  in 
its  favour,  identifies  the  "  gourd  "  in  ques- 
tion with  the  fruit  of  the  colooynth,  which 
is  a  gourd-like  plant  that  creeps  along  tha 
ground,  and  has  a  round  yellow  fruit  of  the 
size  of  a  large  orange.  This  ftuit  is  exceed- 
ingly bitter,  produces  colic,  and  affects  the 
nerves.  His  lap  full ;  as  many  as  he  could 
carry  in  the  ttniM,  or  large  fold,  of  his  heged,  ■ 
or  shawl.  And  oame  and  shred  them  into 
the  pot  of  pottage:  for  they  knew  them 
not ;  i.e.  the  sons  of  the  prophets,  who  stood 
by  and  saw  them  shred  into  the  pot,  did 
not  recognize  them,  or  did  not  know  that 
they  were  unwholesome. 

Yer.  40. — So  they  poured  out  for  the  men 
to  eat.  And  it  oame  to  pass,  as  they  were 
eating  of  the  pottage,  that  they  cried  out 
and  said,  0  thou  man  of  God,  there  is  death 
in  the  pot.  Either  the  bitter  flavour  alarmed 
them,  or  they  began  to  feel  ill  effects  from- 
what  they  had  swallowed,  whioh,  if  it  was 
colocynth,  might  very  soon  have  produced 
stomach-ache  or  nausea.  Bushing,  therefore, 
at  once  to  the  worst  possible  supposition, 
they  concluded  that  they  were  poisoned, 
and  exclaimed,  "O  man  of  GSod,  there  is 
death  in  the  pot  I "  "If  eaten  in  any  large 
quantity,"  says  Keil,  "colocynths  might 
really  produce  death."  And  they  ooold  not 
eat  thereof;  t.e.  they  could  not  continue  to 
eat  the  pottege— all  stopped  eating. 

Yer.  41. — But  he  said.  Then  bring  meal. 
Elisha  seems  not  to  have  hesitated  for  a 
moment.  Prompt  measures  must  be  taken, 
if  poisoning  is  even  suspected.  He  baa 
meal  brought — not  that  meal  has  any  virtue 
in  itself  against  colocynth,  or  against  any 
other  deleterious  drug.  But  he  acts,  now 
as  always,  under  Divine  direction,  and  is 
instructed  to  use  meal  on  this  occasion,  as 
he  used  salt  in  healing  the  waters  of  Jericho. 
The  meal,  as  Keil  observes,  "  might  some- 
what modify  the  bitterness  and  injurious 
qualities  of  the  vegetable,"  whatever  it  was, 
but  '*  could  not  possibly  take  them  entirely 
away.  .  .  .  The  meal,  the  most  wholesome 
food  of  man,  was  only  the  earthly  substratum 
for  the  workibg  of  the  Divine  effluence 
which  proceeded  from  Elisha,  and  made 
the  noxious  food  perfectly  wholesome."  And 
he  oast  it  into  the  pot ;  and  he  said.  Four 
out  now  for  the  people — {.e.  the  asseabled 
company  of  wna  of  the  piopheti — ^tiiat  they 


76 


THE  SEOOiJD  bOOK  OF  THE  fclNGS.         [oh,  it.  1—44. 


may  eat.  And  theie  wai  no  barm  in  the 
pot.  Such  ae  had  faith  in  Elisha,  and 
continued  to  eat  of  the  pottage,  found  no 
ill  result.  What  they  ate  did  them  no 
harm. 

Vers.  42—44.-4.  The  feeding  of  a 
hundred  men  on  twenty  loaves. 

Yer.  42. — And  there  came  a  man  from 
Baal-shalisha.  "  Baal-shalisha  "  is  reason- 
ably identified  with  the  "  Beth-shalisha  " 
of  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  which  they  place 
twelve  Boman  mllea  north  of  Dlospolis,  or 
Lydda  (now  Lndd).  By  "  north  "  we  must 
probably  understand  "  north-east,"  since  the 
"  land  of  Shalisha "  lay  between  the  terri- 
tories of  Ephraim  and  Benjamin  (1  Sam. 
ix.  4).  The  position  thus  indicated  would 
not  be  veiy  far  from  the  Gilgal  {JUjUieh)  of 
ch.  ii.  and  iv.  38.  And  brought  the  man 
of  Ood  bread  of  the  firstfimits.  It  is  clear 
that  the  more  pious  among  the  Israelites 
not  only  looked  to  the  prophets  for  religions 
instruction  (ver.  23),  but  regarded  them 
as  having  inherited  the  position  of  the 
Levitical  priests  whom  Jeroboam's  inno- 
vations had  driven  from  the  country.  The 
firstfruits  of  corn,  wine,  and  oil  were  as- 
•igned  by  the  Law  (Numb,  xviii.  13  ;  Deut. 
xviii.  4,  5)  to  the  priests.  Twenty  loaves 
of  barley.  The  "  loaves  "  of  the  Israelites 
were  cakes  or  rolls,  rather  than  "loaves" 
in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word.  Each 
partaker  of  a  meal  usually  had  one  for  him- 
self. Naturally,  twenty  "  loaves  "  would  be 
barely  sulBcient  for  twenty  men.  And  full 
ears  of  corn;  i.e.  a  few  ripe  ears  of  the 
same  corn  as  that  whereof  the  bread  was 
made.  Ears  of  com  were  offered  as  first- 
fruits  at  the  Passover  (Lev.  xxiii.  10),  and 
were  regarded  as  the  most  natural  and 
becoming   tokens  of    gratitude    for  God's 


harvest  mercies.  In  the  husk  tbAreof; 
rather,  in  hit  hag,  or  in  hi$  tack  (see  the 
Bevised  Version).  And  he  laid,  Give  nnto 
the  people— I.e.  to  the  sons  of  the  prophet* 
who  dwelt  at  Gilgal— that  they  may  eat. 

Yer.  43. — And  his  servitor  said.  What, 
should  X  set  this  before  an  hundred  ment 
The  servant  felt  that  the  quantity  was  quite 
insufficient,  and  thought  it  absurd  to  invite 
a  hundred  men  to  sit  down  to  s  meal  which 
would  not  satisfy  a  fifth  of  the  number; 
but  Elisha  repeated  his  command.  He  said 
again.  Give  the  people,  that  they  may  eat. 
This  time,  however,  he  added  an  expla- 
nation of  the  proceeding:  for  thus  saith 
the  lord,  They  shall  eat,  and  shall  leave 
thereof.  God  had  snpematnrally  intimated 
to  liim  that  the  quantity  of  food  would 
prove  ample  for  the  hundred  men;  they 
would  show  that  they  had  had  enongb  by 
leaving  some  of  it.  And  the  result  waa  aa 
predicted. 

Yer.  44. — So  he  set  it  before  them,  and 
they  did  eat,  and  left  thereof,  aooordillg  to 
the  word  of  the  Lord.  We  are  not  expressly 
told  how  the  miracle  was  wrought,  whether 
by  an  augmentation  of  the  quantity  of  the 
food  Bupernaturally  produced,  or  by  a  les- 
sening of  the  appetites  of  the  men,  as  Bahr 
supposes.  But  the  analogy  of  our  Lord's 
miracles  of  feeding  the  multitudes,  whereof 
this  is  a  manifest  type,  makes  it  probable 
that  in  this  case  also  there  was  a  miraculous 
increase  of  the  food.  The  object  of  the 
writer  in  communicating  the  account  is 
certainly  not  merely  to  show  how  the  Lord 
cared  for  his  servants,  but  to  relate  another 
miracle  wrought  by  Elisha,  of  a  different 
kind  from  those  previously  related.  He  is 
occupied  with  Elisha's  miracles  through 
this  entire  ohaoter  and  through  the  three 
next. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — 7%e  seed  of  the  righteous  never  forsaken  by  Ood.  The  whole  ground  of 
appeal  on  which  the  poor  widow  relies,  and  which  proves  so  entirely  adequate,  is  the 
fidelity  to  God  of  her  deceased  husband.  "  Thy  servant  my  husband  is  dead ;  and  thou 
knowest  that  thy  servant  did  fear  the  Lord  "  (ver.  1).  She  assumes  that  Elisha  is  on 
this  account  almost  bound  to  interfere  on  behalf  of  the  man's  two  sons,  who  are  in 
danjer  of  being  carried  into  slavery.  And  Elisha  allows  the  validity  of  her  claim,  and 
itraightway  comes  to  their  relief.  The  example  may  well  recall  the  emphatic  words  of 
the  psalmist,  which  the  minister  and  director  cannot  too  strongly  impress  on  anxious 
and  doubting  mothers,  "  I  have  been  young,  and  now  am  old ;  and  yet  saw  I  never  the 
righteous  forsaken,  nor  his  seed  begging  their  bread"  (Ps.  xxxvii.  25).  A  blessing  rests 
upon  the  seed  of  the  righteous — 

I.  By  Divinb  promise.  "  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  QtA,  visiting  the  ini- 
quity of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them 
that  hate  me ;  and  shewing  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that  love  me,  and  keep  my 
commandments  "  (Bxod.  xx.  5,  6)  j  "  The  raercy  of  the  Lord  is  from  everlasting  to  ever- 
lasting upon  them  that  fear  him,  and  his  righteousness  unto  <shildren'$  dkildren "  (F4 


OH.  IV,  1—44.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINQa  71 

ciii.  17) ;  "  The  cUldrea  of  tby  servants  shall  continue,  and  their  seed  shall  be  ettab' 
liahed  before  thee"  (Ps.  cii.  28). 

II.  Bt  the  sympathy  involved  in  God's  Fathebhooo.  After  God  all  fatherhood 
(irStra  itarpla)  in  heaveu  and  earth  is  named  (Eph.  iii.  15).  As  a  Father,  he  sympa- 
thizes with  all  fathers,  knows  their  hearts,  understands  their  longings,  is  tender  towards 
their  tenderness.  Them  that  love  him  he  will  love,  and  will  reward  them  where  they 
would  most  wish  to  be  rewarded,  in  their  children.  The  seed  of  the  righteous  may 
often,  does  often,  wander  into  devious  ways,  depart  from  righteousness,  provoke  God, 
draw  down  upon  himself  God's  chastisements;  but  in  the  end  how  seldom  does  he 
wholly  fall  away,  completely  forget  the  lessons  of  his  youth,  the  example  of  godly 
parents,  the  precepts  so  carefully  instilled  into  his  mind  in  early  life,  day  by  day  and 
year  by  year !  how  seldom  does  he  become  a  blasphemer,  or  an  unbeliever,  or  an  utterly 
hardened  reprobate  I  How  often,  on  the  other  hand,  does  he  recover  from  grievous  falls, 
returns  to  God,  repent,  amend,  and  "  do  the  first  works  "  !  God's  tender  care  not  only 
saves  the  children  of  the  righteous  from  begging  their  bread,  or  falling  into  utter  desti- 
tution, but  watches  over  their  spiritual  welfare,  and  in  a  thousand  ways  checks  their 
wanderings,  weans  them  from  their  evil  courses,  and  at  last  brings  them  to  himsel£ 

Vers.  8 — 37. — Oodliness  has,  to  a  large  extent,  the  promise  of  this  lift,  as  retHl  as  t^ 
the  life  to  come.  The  "  good  Shunammite  "  and  her  husband  are  examples  of  the  union, 
which  is  more  common  than  men  are  apt  to  allow,  between  piety  and  prosperity.  They 
have  nothing  heroic  about  them,  nothing  out  of  the  common.  They  are  substantial 
middle-class  people,  dwelling  in  a  quiet  country-side,  farming  on  a  moderate  scale,  with 
a  comfortable  house  of  their  own,  dwelling  contentedly  amid  their  labourers  and  their 
country  neighbours.  But  they  are  not  rendered  selfish  or  worldly  minded  by  their 
prosperity.  They  feel  and  admit  the  claims  of  religion  upon  them.  In  Elisha  they 
recognize  a  "  man  of  God ; "  first,  it  would  seem,  ofBcially.  As  the  ofScial  repre- 
sentative to  them  of  the  Most  High,  they  regard  him  as  entitled  to  kindness  and  hospi- 
tality. They  press  upon  him  their  good  offices,  insist  on  his  taking  his  meals  with 
them,  "constrain  him  to  eat  bread"  (ver.  8).  When  by  degrees  they  have  become 
acquainted  with  his  character,  they  recognize  in  him  something  more — they  "  perceive 
that  he  is  a  holy  man  of  God"  (ver.  9).  Like  is  perceived  by  like.  It  takes  some  holi- 
ness to  perceive  and  recognize  holiness.  And  the  perception  raises  a  desire  for  greater 
intimacy.  Like  desires  like.  It  will  be  a  blessed  thing  if  they  can  persuade  the  pro- 
phet, not  merely  to  take  an  occasional  meal  in  their  house,  but  to  be  an  occasional 
inmate — to  rest  there,  to  sleep  there.  So  the  woman  proposes  to  her  husband  to  build 
the  prophet  a  sleeping-chamber ;  and  he  readily  consents,  apparently  without  a  murmur 
(ver,  10),  He  is  neither  jealous,  nor  stingy,  nor  ill-natured.  The  woman  has  her  way, 
and  her  kindly  nature  is  gratified  by  the  frequent  presence  of  the  godly  man,  whose 
ministrations  she  attends  on  sabbaths  and  holy  days  (ver,  23),  And  now  her  piety, 
which  has  been  wholly  disinterested,  receives  an  earthly  reward.  The  disgrace  of 
barrenness  is,  at  the  prophet's  intercession,  removed  from  her,  and  she  obtains  the  bless- 
ing of  offspring.  Nay,  more.  Though  death  removes  her  offspring,  he  is  restored  to 
her,  rendered  doubly  precious  by  having  seemed  to  be  for  ever  lost.  The  well-deserved 
prosperity  of  herself  and  btisband  culminates  in  this  happy  restoration,  which  puts  the 
finishing  touch  to  the  earthly  bliss  that  had  lacked  only  this  crowning  joy.  And  so  it 
is  in  life  generally.  Not  only  the  proud  and  ungodly,  but  the  godly  also,  are  "  rewarded 
after  their  deserving  "  (Ps,  xciv,  2).  Many  virtues,  e.g.  honesty,  sobriety,  industry, 
prudence,  have  a  natural  tendency  to  draw  to  their  possessor  a  considerable  share  oi 
this  world's  goods ;  as  the  opposite  vices,  dishonesty,  drunkenness,  idleness,  imprudence, 
have  a  natural  tendency  to  disperse  such  goods  when  possessed  and  prevent  their  accu- 
mulation. Goodness,  on  the  whole,  secures  the  respect  and  esteem  of  other  men ;  and 
the  respect  and  esteem  of  our  fellows  tends  in  various  ways  to  our  worldly  advantage. 
Men  place  more  trust  in  the  godly  than  in  the  ungodly,  and  situations  of  trust  are,  for 
the  most  part,  situations  of  profit.  Nor  must  we  omit  the  consideration  of  the  Divine 
blessing,  which  always  rests  upon  the  godly,  in  fact,  and  is  sometimes  openly  mani- 
fested. "  The  eyes  of  i  the  Lord  are  upon  the  righteous,  and  his  ears  are  open  unto 
their  cry :  but  the  foce  of  the  Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil"  (Ps.  xxxiv.  16, 16); 
"  No  good  thing  will  God  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly  "  (Pa.  Ixxxiv.  11^ 


72  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KIKG8.         ton.  nr.  1—44 

And  the  entire  retnilt  u  that,  upon  the  whole,  even  in  this  life,  right  conduct,  goodneBSi 
piety,  have  the  advantage  over  their  opposites,  and  that  happiness  and  misery  are  dis- 
tributed, even  here,  very  much  "  according  to  men's  deserving  " — not,  of  couise,  with- 
out exceptions,  even  numerous  exceptions — but  still  predominantly,  so  that  the  law 
holds  good  as  a  general  one,  that  "  godliness  hath  the  promise  of  this  life."  Our  blessed 
Lord  went  so  far  as  to  say,  "  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or  brethren,  or 
sisters,  or  father,  or  mother,  or  wife,  or  children,  or  lands,  for  my  sake,  and  the  gospel's, 
but  he  shall  receive  an  hundredfold  now  in  this  time,  houses,  and  brethren,  and  sisters, 
and  mothers,  and  children,  and  lands,  with  persecutions;  and  in  the  world  to  come 
eternal  life  "  (Mark  x.  29,  30). 

Vers.  27 — 31. — Limits  to  inspiration.  Many  men  seem  to  suppose  that  the  pro. 
phetical  inspiration,  the  Divine  afflatus,  whatever  it  was,  which  God  vouchsafed  it 
times  past  to  his  prophets,  apostles,  and  evangelists,  was  absolutely  unlimited — a  sort  of 
omniscience,  at  any  rate  omniscience  on  all  those  subjects  on  which  they  spoke  or  wrote. 
But  Scripture  lends  no  sanction  to  this  supposition.  "  Let  her  alone,"  says  Elisha  to 
Gehazi ;  "  for  her  soul  is  vexed  within  her :  und  the  Lord  hath  hid  it  from  me,  and  hath 
not  told  me"  (ver.  27).  Ignorance  of  the  future  would  also  seem  to  underlie  the  instruc- 
tions given  to  Gehazi  in  ver.  29.  And  there  are,  in  point  of  fact,  limitations  to  every 
prophet's  knowledge  even  with  respect  to  the  things  concerning  which  he  writes  or 
speaks.  "  Now,  behold,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  I  go  bound  in  the  spirit  unto  Jerusalem,  not 
mowing  the  things  that  shall  befall  me  there  "  (Acts  xx.  22).  And  again,  "  Now  con- 
cerning virgins  I  have  no  eommundment  of  the  Lord:  yet  I  give  my  judgment,  as  one 
that  hath  obtained  mercy  of  the  Lord  to  be  faithful "  (1  Cor.  vii.  25).  The  apostles 
spoke  much  of  the  coming  of  Christ  to  judgment,  but  "of  that  day  and  of  that  hour 
knoweth  no  man  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  36).  Prophetic  knowledge  was  always  partial,  limited. 
To  Isaiah  the  return  from  Babylon,  the  establishment  of  Christ's  kingdom  upon  earth, 
and  the  final  triumph  of  Christianity,  were  blended  together  into  a  single  vision  of  glory 
from  which  the  chronological  idea  was  absent.  Ezekiel  probably  did  not  know  whether 
the  temple  which  he  described  (xl. — xliv.)  was  to  be  spiritual  or  material.  Zechariah 
knew  that  a  day  would  come  when  there  would  be  "  a  fountain  opened  to  the  house  of 
David  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness ; "  but  the  nature 
of  the  fountain  was,  apparently,  not  revealed  to  him.  The  prophets  always  "  saw 
through  a  glass  darkly,"  "  knew  in  part "  and  prophesied  in  part ;  had  not  even  a  full 
knowledge  of  the  meaning  of  their  own  words.  We  must  therefore  not  look  in  the 
inspired  writings  for  an  exactness  and  accuracy  and  completeness  to  which  they  makb 
no  pretence ;  we  must  not  claim  infallibility  for  the  obiter  dicta  of  apostles  or  evange- 
lists; we  must  not  be  surprised  at  occasional  slips  of  memory,  as  the  quotation  of 
"  Jeremy  "  for  "  Zachary  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  9),  or  at  little  discrejancies,  as  the  various  read- 
ings of  the  title  on  the  cross,  or  at  other  similar  imperfections.  The  Divine  element  in 
Scripture  does  not  exclude  the  presence  also  of  a  human  element ;  and  the  human  ele- 
ment cannot  but  show  traces  of  human  weakness,  human  ignorance,  human  frailty. 
The  trifling  errors  that  a  microscopic  criticism  points  out  in  the  sacred  volume  no  more 
interfere  with  its  illuminating  power,  than  do  the  spots  seen  by  astronomers  on  its  sur- 
face interfere  with  the  light  of  the  sun,  or  slight  flaws  with  the  magnificence  and 
splendour  of  a  unique  diamond.  The  Biljle  is  God's  Word,  the  most  precious  treasure 
that  man  possesses,  even  although  it  be  true  that  "  we  have  this  treasure  in  earthen 
vessels"(2Cor.  iv.  7). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOB&. 

Vers.  1—7. — The  widow^s  oU  increased.  This  simple  and  touching  story  Is  one  of 
those  many  narratives  which  make  the  Bible  a  book  for  every  one,  and  a  book  for 
•Veryday  life.  The  individual  is  never  lost  in  the  nation  or  the  race.  It  is  so  in 
■{Htual  fact.  Our  own  personal  needs  and  struggles  and  anxieties  are  of  more  impor- 
tftnce  and  interest  to  us  than  the  struggles  of  a  nation  or  the  general  well-being  of  the 
huokaa  race.  It  ii  the  same  in  the  Bible.  The  Bible  is  partly  a  history  of  nations, 
■ad  partteularly  of  the  Jewish  nation.    But  it  U  much  mon  a  history  of  iadividualik 


«■.  IT.  1—44.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  73 

— ^^— — ^^^— ^— — ^^— — ^— ^— ^^— — ^^-^^-^— — — ^^^-^-^— ^■^— — ^^■^»— ^»  I 

It  is  this  that  makes  it  meh  a  book  of  nniTersal  comfort  and  instruction.  We  can  all 
find  something  in  it  that  suits  ourselves.  As  we  read  of  the  men  and  women  whose 
lives  are  recorded  in  it,  we  learn  more  from  their  faith  and  their  failings,  from  their 
temptations  and  their  victories,  than  we  could  from  any  abstract  discourses  about  the 
benefit  of  virtue  and  the  evil  of  vice.  We  learn  that  they  were  men  and  women  of 
like  passions  with  ourselves.  We  learn  that  the  temptations  they  conquered  we  can 
conquer  by  the  help  of  the  same  Spirit ;  that  the  trials  they  endured  we  can  endure ; 
and  that  the  faith  and  holiness  to  which  they  attained  are  within  our  reach  also.  And 
then  how  homely  and  how  practical  the  Bible  is  I  Its  heroes  and  heroines  do  not  live 
in  a  Utopia.  It  shows  them  to  us  under  very  much  the  same  conditions  as  we  live 
under  still.  It  shows  them  to  us  in  their  homes  and  at  their  business,  in  their  loves 
and  in  their  married  life,  at  the  plough  and  in  the  fishing-boat,  at  the  marriage-feast 
•nd  at  the  funeral.  Perhaps  we  think  it  hard  to  be  religious  in  our  business,  in 
society,  or  amid  the  petty  cares  and  worries  of  our  daily  life.  The  Bible  shows  us 
men  and  women  living  under  the  same  conditions,  and  yet  living  so  much  in  the  fear 
of  Grod  and  the  presence  of  eternity  that  they  triumphed  over  their  distractions,  and, 
whilst  in  the  world,  were  not  of  it.  Such  a  glimpse  of  everyday  life  we  obtain  in  the 
narrative  before  us.  We  learned  some  valuable  lessons  from  the  palace  of  King 
Ahaziah ;  we  may  learn  quite  as  important  ones  from  the  humble  home  of  a  prophet's 
widow. 

I.  IimooENT  BUFFEiinra.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  suffering  in  the  world.  Many 
suffer  innocently.  But  not  all  those  who  think  they  suffer  innocently  are  really 
innocent.  Here,  however,  there  appears  to  be  a  case  of  really  innocent  suffering.  It 
is  a  poor  widow  who  comes  to  tell  Elisha  ber  tale  of  want  and  woe.  Her  husband 
had  been  one  of  "  the  sons  of  the  prophets" — a  word  that  was  used  in  a  general  sense 
to  signify  those  who  were  pupils  of  the  prophets,  trained  by  the  prophets.  He  had 
unfortunately  got  into  debt.  How  he  was  led  into  it  we  are  not  told.  He  was  a  God- 
fearing man.  It  was  not,  therefore,  through  dissipation  or  sin.  But  it  may  have  been 
through  his  own  imprudence  or  improvidence.  Or  it  may  have  been  through  some 
unexpected  loss,  or  through  failure  on  the  part  of  others  to  meet  their  liabilities  to 
him.  At  any  rate,  he  died  in  debt,  and  his  poor  widow  is  the  sufferer.  1.  This  inci- 
dent, and  there  are  many  like  it  happening  every  day,  shows  us  the/oUy  and  danger 
of  getting  into  debt.  One  of  the  worst  features  of  it  is  that  so  often  the  innocent — ^the 
wife  or  children  who  perhaps  know  nothing  at  all  of  the  debt — have  to  suffer  for  the 
folly  or  the  dishonesty  of  others.  We  need  to  have  a  more  awakened  conscience  on 
this  subject  of  using  money  which  really  is  not  our  own.  As  a  matter  of  worldly 
policy  and  prudence,  it  is  a  great  mistake.  As  a  matter  of  morality,  it  is  very  doubtful 
indeed.  How  many  of  the  tremendous  crashes  which  have  takea  place  in  the  com- 
mercial world  are  the  result  of  men  living  beyond  their  means  I  They  made  too  large 
demands  upon  the  future.  They  incurred  liabilities  which  they  had  no  means  of 
meeting.  And  in  many  cases  debt  proves  to  be  a  temptation  to  dishonesty.  I  have 
yet  to  learn  the  difference  between  the  dishonesty  of  the  man  who  gets  a'  month's 
imprisonment  for  a  petty  theft,  and  the  dishonesty  of  many  who  are  legally  protected 
in  their  crime  by  the  strange  device  of  the  bankruptcy  court.  Not  that  every  bankrupt 
is  dishonest.  But  many  who  are  thus  protected  are.  We  want  a  clearer  and  a  cleaner 
public  conscience  on  this  question  of  debt.  2.  There  is  a  word  here  also  for  creditors. 
The  creditor  in  this  story  was  a  regular  Shylock.  He  wanted  his  pound  of  flesh.  He 
would  be  satisfied  with  nothing  less.  Mark  the  utter  heartlessness  and  cruelty  of  the 
man.  He  knew  the  poor  widow  was  unable  to  pay.  There  were  no  goods  and  chattels 
that  he  could  seize,  or  none  worth  seizing,  so  he  actually  came  to  make  her  two  sons  his 
slaves.  Even  the  slightest  touch  of  humanity  might  have  led  him  to  content  himself 
with  one  of  the  sons.  He  might  have  left  the  other  to  be  the  solace  and  support  of 
his  widowed  mother.  But  no.  There  is  no  mercy,  no  pity,  in  his  hard  and  selfish  heart. 
He  must  have  the  two  sons  to  satisfy  his  claim.  Now,  the  Scripture,  while  it  counten- 
ances lending  to  those  who  are  in  want,  and  while  it  commands  the  payment  of  debts, 
recommends  the  exercise  of  mercy  and  humanity  in  exacting  this  payment.  For 
instance,  in  Exodus  it  is  said,  "  Ye  shall  not  afSict  any  widow,  or  fatherless  child.  If 
thou  afflict  them  in  any  wise,  and  they  cry  at  all  unto  me,  I  will  surely  hear  their  cry ; 
and  my  wrath  shall  wax  hot,  and  I  will  kill  you  with  the  sword ;  and  your  wives  shall 


U  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  it.  1-44. 

be  \ndowi,  and  your  children  fatherless  "  (Ezod.  xxii.  22 — 24).  And  in  Deut.  xxiv.  17 
we  have  a  similar  command.  We  learn  here  in  all  the  relationships  of  life  to  mingle 
mercy  with  justice.  Too  often  in  the  keen  competition  of  life,  and  in  tte  race  for 
wealth,  the  finer  feelings  hecome  blunted.  If  you  are  a  Christian,  it  is  your  duty  to 
imitate  the  spirit  and  precepts  of  Jesus.  Whether  you  are  a  Christian  or  not,  you  are 
responsible  to  God  for  the  way  you  act  towards  your  fellow-men.  Always  consider  the 
circumstances  of  the  case.  Where  it  is  possible,  be  specially  careful  of  the  widow  and 
the  fatherless  and  the  orphan.  God  has  a  special  care  for  them,  and  he  will  aveuge 
their  cause  on  the  persecutor  and  the  oppressor. 

II.  Active  faith.  The  poor  widow  had  nothing  in  her  house  save  a  pot  of  oiL 
She  was  not  as  well  off  as  the  widow  of  Zarephath,  to  whom  Elijah  came ;  she  had  not 
even  a  handful  of  meal  in  the  barrel.  The  olive  oil  was  used  as  butter  with  the  flour 
or  meal.  Dr.  Kitto  says  it  is  indeed  a  remarkable  fact  that  poor  peoiile  in  Israel,  who 
are  reduced  to  the  last  extremity,  have  generally  a  little  oil  left.  Yet  in  this  extremity, 
with  this  jar  of  oil  as  her  sole  possession,  what  does  the  prophet  tell  her  to  do  ?  To 
go  and  borrow  empty  vessels  of  all  her  neighbours,  and  to  borrow  just  as  many  as 
she  could  get.  Was  it  not  a  strange  command  ?  Empty  vessels !  Why  not  borrow 
vessels  with  somrthing  in  them  t  No ;  for  that  would  have  been  to  get  deeper  into 
debt.  Empty  vessels.  The  fact  of  bringing  empty  vessels  into  her  house  imjilied 
that  she  had  something  to  fill  them  with.  This  just  shows  the  greatness  of  the  woman's 
faith.  She  trusted  God's  prophet.  She  knew  that  he  would  not  deceive  her  or  bid  her 
do  anything  for  which  there  was  not  a  good  reason.  She  trusted  God's  power.  She 
knew  that  God  was  able,  in  his  own  way  and  in  his  own  time,  to  supply  all  her  need. 
We  need  to  learn  a  similar  faith.  We  need  it  for  our  temporal  affairs.  We  need  to 
trust  God  that  he  can  and  will  and  does  supply  the  daily  wants  of  his  people.  What 
though  the  purse  is  empty  ?    God  can  send  the  means  to  fill  it. 

"  It  may  not  be  my  time; 
It  may  not  be  thy  time ; 
Bat  yet  in  his  own  time  the  Lord  will  provide." 

We  need  to  learn  similar  faith — a  faith  that  shows  itself  not  in  idleness  but  in  action — in 
regard  to  spiritual  things.  We  may  see  but  empty  vessels  before  us.  God  is  able  to  fill 
them.  He  does  it  very  often  by  making  us  labourers  together  with  him,  as  he  did  in  this 
case  of  the  widow  and  her  sons.  A  respected  Sunday-school  teacher  tells  that  when  he 
first  went  to  teach  in  a  mission  Sunday  school  in  one  of  our  large  cities,  he  said  to  the 
■uperintendent,  "Where  is  my  class?  "  He  could  see  no  class  for  him  to  teach.  The 
superintendent's  answer  was,  "  You'll  have  to  go  out  and  gather  a  class."  He  did  so, 
and  soon  had  a  large  and  attentive  class  of  lads  gathered  in  by  his  own  exertions  from 
the  streets.  Don't  you  know  of  any  empty  vessels  that  would  be  better  if  they  were 
filled  with  the  love  of  Christ  and  the  grace  of  God  ?  Are  there  no  empty  vessels  in 
your  own  homes?  Are  there  no  empty  vessels  round  about  you  where  you  live — 
hearts  that  are  without  God  and  without  iope,  lives  that  are  utterly  destitute  of  any 
aims  or  usefulness  ?  If  you  know  of  such,  will  you  not  try  to  bring  them  under  the 
influence  of  the  gospel?  This  woman  showed  a  strong  faith,  f err  she  had  doubtless  to 
face  the  ridicule  and  difficulties  and  questionings  of  her  neighbours.  They  probably 
laughed  at  a  woman  borrowing  vessels  when  she  had  nothing  to  fill  them  with.  We 
must  learn  not  to  mind  what  people  will  say  of  us  when  we  are  doing  God's  work. 
There  are  some  people  who  object  to  everything.  There  are  some  people  who  are 
always  raising  difficulties.  Those  who  raise  the  difficulties  and  make  the  objections 
are  generally  those  who  do  the  least  and  give  the  least.  Never  mind  them.  Make 
sure  thai  your  work  is  God's  work.  Consider  it  prayerfidly  and  carefully  before  you 
undertake  it.  And  then,  having  made  sure  that  it  is  God's  work,  so  far  as  you  can  get 
light  upon  your  path,  ttrrn  not  aside  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.  Trust  in  God  to 
carry  you  and  your  work  safely  through,  and  to  crown  your  labours  with  success. 
"The  fear  of  man  bringeth  a  snare;  but  he  that  putteth  his  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be 
safe." 

III.  Abundant  blgsbino.  The  woman  was  weD  rewarded  for  her  unquestioning 
faith.  So  long  as  she  continued  pouring  from  her  little  jar  of  oil,  so  long  the  oil  con- 
tinued to  flow  until  all  the  vessels  were  full.    She  could  have  filled  more  veBsels  if  she 


011.17,1—44.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  75 

had  had  them.  But  when  there  were  no  more  yessels  to  he  filled,  the  oil  oeaaed  to 
flow.  At  any  rate  she  had  enough  to  sell  for  the  payment  of  her  debt,  and  to  provide 
herself  and  her  sons  with  a  temporary  support.  We  learn  here  that  our  blessings  may 
he  limited  by  our  capacity  to  receive.  There  is  no  limit  to  God's  love.  There  is  no 
limit  to  his  power  to  bless.  He  gives  in  overflowing  measure,  far  beyond  our  expec- 
tations, far  beyond  our  deservings.  But  then  we  may  stint  the  blessing  for  ourselves 
by  not  being  in  a  fit  state  to  receive  it.  We  see  constantly  in  Scripture  and  in  the 
history  of  the  Christian  Chiuch  that  there  are  certain  conditions  under  which  larger 
spiritual  blessings  may  be  expected,  and  certain  conditions  which  may  hinder  these 
blessings.  1.  We  may  hinder  ow  blessings  by  want  of  faith  and  expectation.  Had 
Abraham  persevered  in  prayer,  he  might  have  won  the  salvation  of  Sodom  even  on 
account  of  righteous  Lot  alone.  On  a  later  occasion  Elisha  was  displeased  with  King 
Joash  for  his  want  of  faith  in  shooting  the  arrows.  The  king  only  smote  thrice  upon 
the  ground,  and  Elisha  said,  "  Thou  shouldest  have  smitten  five  or  six  times ;  then 
hadst  thou  smitten  Syria  till  thou  hadst  consumed  it :  whereas  now  thou  shalt  smite 
Syria  but  thrice."  How  often  we  hinder  our  blessings  because  we  do  not  persevere  in 
prayer  I  2.  We  may  hinder  owr  blessings  by  not  making  a  right  use  of  those  we  have  got. 
"  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  from  him  that  faath  not  shall  be  taken  away 
even  that  which  he  seemeth  to  have."  There  is  no  waste  in  Gk)d's  kingdom.  He  will 
not  give  further  blessings  to  those  who  are  neglecting  or  misusing  the  privileges  they 
have  got.  .  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  are  in  a  fit  state  to  receive  God's  blessing.  "  If  we 
regard  iniquity  in  our  hearts,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  us."  Let  us  empty  oiirselves  of 
worldliness  and  selfishness  and  sin,  if  we  are  to  expect  God  to  fill  us  with  his  Spirit 
A  word  to  Christians.  Search  your  heart,  examine  your  own  life,  and  see  if  there  ii 
anything  that  hinders  the  Divine  blessing.  Give  up  that  besetting  sin;  give  up  that 
godless  society ;  put  away  that  pride,  or  hatred;  or  love  of  the  world,  or  evil  temper, 
out  of  your  heart,  and  then  you  may  expect  God  to  bless  you  and  make  you  a  blessing. 
Then  you  will  be  a  vessel  meet  for  the  Master's  use.  A  word  to  the  vmrepenting. 
Why  go  away  once  more  without  Christ?  Why  go  away  empty  from  the  house  of 
Grod  ?  All  fidnesg  dwells  in  Christ — ^fulness  of  pardon,  fulness  of  grace  and  strength. 
Thirsty,  unsatisfied  soul,  draw  near  to  the  feet  of  Jesus.  Bepent,  and  ask  of  him,  and 
he  wiU  give  you  the  living  water. — 0.  H.  L 

Ven.  8 — 17. — Kindness  requited.  I.  Goos  men  oarbt  theik  qoodness  whebkter 
THBT  00.  The  Shunammite's  words  are  a  testimony  to  the  character  of  Elisha.  "  I 
perceive  that  this  is  a  holy  man  of  God,  which  passeth  by  us  continually."  Elisha'i 
conduct  and  conversation  showed  him  to  be  a  holy  man  of  God.  It  was  evident  that 
God  was  with  him,  and  that  he  lived  near  to  God.  He  did  not  leave  his  religion  behind 
him  at  home.  Wherever  he  was,  he  took  his  religion  with  him.  A  lesson  for  modem 
Christians.  There  is  not  much  reality  in  our  religion  if  we  do  not  confess  it  amongst 
strangers  just  as  much  as  where  we  are  known.  The  inward  character  is  shown  by  the 
outward  acts.  "  Caelum,  non  animum,  mutant,  qui  trans  mare  currunt."  It  is  evident 
that  Elisha  was  a  man  of  studious  habits.  The  furniture  which  the  Shunammito 
placed  in  his  room  shows  this.  The  stool  or  chair  and  the  table  were  intended  to  afford 
him  facilities  for  study.  He  who  will  teach  others  must  store  his  own  mind  with 
knowledge.  Paul  exhorted  Timothy  to  give  attention  to  reading.  The  minister  and 
the  Sunday-school  teacher  need  constant  study  to  equip  themselves  for  their  important 
work. 

n.  Good  hen  oabrt  a  blessing  evebtwhere.  Their  goodness  benefits  others 
as  well  as  themselves.  "  The  holy  seed  shall  be  the  substance  thereof."  Some  there 
are  who  bring  evil  wherever  they  go.  One  bad  man,  one  wicked  woman,  may  corrupt 
a  whole  community.  Some  are  the  perpetual  occasions  of  strife,  discord,  unpleasant- 
ness, nnhappiness.  What  an  unenviable  character  1  Oh  to  be  like  him  who  "  went 
about  every  day  doing  good  "  1 

III.  Kindness  to  good  hen  ib  never  lost.  This  Shunammite  treated  Elisha 
kindly  because  he  was  a  servant  of  God,  and  the  God  whom  he  served  rewarded  her  for 
her  kindness  to  his  servant.  "  Give,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you."  She  lost 
nothing,  but  gained  much,  by  her  generosity  and  hospitality,  by  the  trouble  she  took 
to  jHOvide  a  resting-place  for  the  prophet.    "  He  that  receiveth  a  prophet  in  the  name 


TO  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [ch.  iv,  1—44. 

of  a  propliet  shall  receive  s  prophet's  reward ;  and  he  that  receireth  m  righteous  man 
in  the  name  of  a  righteous  man  shall  receive  a  righteous  man's  reward." — 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  18 — 37. — Death  and  restoration.  This  is  a  touching  story.  It  is  a  story  for 
children.  It  is  a  story  for  parents.  It  is  a  story  for  every  one.  The  circumstances  of 
this  little  hoy's  death  were  peculiarly  sad.  He  had  heen  an  unexpected  gift  of  God  to 
his  parents.  His  mother  had  not  sought  for  him ;  hut  God  sent  her  a  son  as  a  reward 
for  her  kindness  to  his  servant,  and  in  answer  to  the  prophet's  prayer.  Perhaps  when 
this  sudden  stroke  came  upon  her,  and  she  watched  the  little  fellow  pine  away  and  die 
in  her  arms,  the  poor  mother  felt  a  little  disposed  to  muriuur'at  the  strange  providence. 
She  no  doubt  wondered  why  God  had  tried  her  thus,  to  send  her  a  child  entirely  unex- 
pected and  unasked  hy  her,  and  then — when  he  had  reached  that  most  interesting  age, 
when  he  was  able  to  run  merrily  to  and  fro,  when  his  childish  prattle  filled  the  house 
with  gladness,  and  when  his  parents'  affections  had  begun  to  twine  themselves  about 
him — then  to  take  him  from  her !  She  may  not,  perhaps,  have  had  hard  thoughts  of 
Ood,  but,  with  all  the  faith  and  patience  which  she  afterwards  showed,  she  certainly 
was  a  little  disposed  to  blame  Elisha.  For  we  find  her  saying  to  him,  when  she  went 
to  tell  him  of  her  trouble,  "Did  I  desire  a  son  of  my  lord?  did  I  not  say.  Do  not 
deceive  me?  "  But  God's  hand  was  in  it  ^11,  as  she  soon  learned.  Perhaps  she  was 
beginning  to  make  an  idol  of  this  child,  and  God  took  this  way  of  reminding  her  that 
the  chUd  was  his,  that  on  earth  there  is  none  abiding,  and  that  he  himself  should  have 
the  supreme  homage  of  the  human  heart.  Ah  yes,  she  knew  something  of  God's  love 
before,  but  she  never  would  have  known  half  so  much  of  it  hut  for  this  trial.  The 
sunshine  is  beautiful ;  but  sometimes  in  a  time  of  continued  drought  we  learn  that  the 
world  would  not  get  on  with  perpetual  sunshine.  We  are  positively  glad  to  see  the 
clouds  and  the  rain.  If  we  could  only  learn  the  same  lesson  for  our  spiritual  life  I 
The  sunshine  is  sweet,  but  the  clouds  have  their  uses  too. 

*  No  shattered  box  of  ointment 
We  ever  need  regret, 
For  out  of  disappointment 
Flow  sweetest  odours  yet. 

•The  discord  that  involveth 

Some  startling  change  of  key. 
The  Master's  hand  resolveth 
In  richest  harmony." 

We  have  here— 

I.  A  BELIEVING  MOTHBB.  We  scc  her  strong  faith  in  God  in  that  answer  which  she 
gave  to  Gehazi.  At  Elisha's  command  he  asked  her,  "Is  it  well  with  thee?  is  it 
well  with  thy  husband  ?  is  it  well  with  the  child  ?  "  And  she  answered,  "  It  is  wdl." 
Not  a  woman  of  many  words,  this.  But  a  woman  of  great  thoughts,  of  practical  faith, 
of  heroic  patience.  1.  It  was  well  with  the  chUd.  She  had  no  doubt  of  that.  She 
knew  less  about  the  hereafter  than  we  do.  She  did  not  know  what  we  know  about 
}iim  who  is  the  Besurrection  and  the  Life,  who  was  himself  dead  and  is  alive  again. 
She  did  not  know  what  we  know  about  heaven— about  the  angels'  song  and  the  pearly 
gates  and  the  golden  streits.  But  this  she  felt  assured  of,  that  there  was  a  hereafter  j 
that,  though  the  body  died,  the  soul  still  lived ;  that  her  child  was  with  God,  and  that, 
therefore,  it  was  well  with  him.  2.  /(  was  well  with  her  husband.  It  was  well  with 
he.rf.elf.  Yes,  although  sorrow  had  entered  their  home,  still  she  could  feel  and  say  that 
it  was  well  all  round.  She  could  have  anticipated  Paul  in  his  unfaltering  assertion, 
fur  "  we  know  that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God,  to  them 
who  are  the  called  according  to  his  purpose."  Calmly  and  confidently,  even  though 
perhaps  her  tears  were  falling  while  she  spoke,  she  uttered  the  single  Hebrew  word  which 
means  "  It  is  wdl."  Thanh  Ood  for  believing  mothers.  A  mother's  faith  in  God  has 
rescued  many  a  son  from  the  very  grasp  of  hell  itself.  How  many  an  eminent  servant  of 
God  has  owed  his  conversion  to  the  prayers  of  a  believing  mother  I  St.  Augustine  and 
John  Newton  are  well-known  instances.  A  word  here  to  bereaved  parents.  You  too 
inny  have  watched  a  dear  child  droop  and  die.  Perhaps  you  murmured  rehellionsly 
under  ;our  afHictioD.    Learn  to  look  eway  behind  the  veil,  into  that  happy  l<u»d  of 


OH.rr.  1— 44.]         THE  8E00ND  BOOK  OF  THB  KINa&  TT 

which  perhaps  your  darling  Bang— and  as  joa  look  there  snrely  yoa  oannat  but  say, 
"  It  is  well — it  is  well  with  the  child."  A  word  hen  to  att  parents.  Oan  you  sa>y,  aa 
you  tliink  of  your  children  one  by  one,  "  It  is  well  with  the  child  "  ?  If  they  lihould 
iie  in  infancy,  it  certainly  is  well  with  them.  But  your  children  of  maturer  year*, 
who  are  growing  up  into  manhood  and  womanhood — how  is  it  with  them  t  Are  there 
QOt  some  in  your  household  that  you  know  are  still  unsaved?  0  parents,  oan  you  rest 
antil  >'oa  win  them  for  Christ  ?  It  is  right  to  gire  them  a  good  education.  But  the 
most  important  concern  of  all  is  the  salvation  of  their  immortal  souls. 

U.  A  DEAD  CHILD  BROOOBT  TO  LIFE.  All  dead  children  will  be  brought  hack  to  life. 
The  body  only  dies ;  the  soul  lives  for  ever.  This  little  one,  however,  was  brought 
back  to  the  life  of  earth.  Perhaps  God  thought  that  this  poor  mother  had  been 
sufficiently  tried.  Perhaps  he  wanted  to  give  even  then  some  proofs  of  the  possibility 
of  a  resurrection.  It  was  an  exceptional  act  then.  It  is  not  to  be  expected  by  bere&ved 
parents  now.  They  can  only  say  with  David,  "  I  shall  go  to  him,  but  he  shall  not 
return  to  me."  Is  it,  not  better  so  t  Could  we  wish  them  back  again  ?  Look  upon 
them  in  that  bright  land  where  Jesus  is,  and  where  the  angels  are,  where  th^  little 
feet  are  never  weary,  where  their  little  faces  are  always  bright  and  happy,  where  their 
little  bodies  shall  nevermore  be  racked  by  pain  or  enfeebled  by  sickness,  where  their 
minds  shall  never  know  another  thought  of  sin,  And  tell  me  if  you  would  bring  them 
back  to  this  wor'd  of  wickedness,  of  temptation,  of  sickness,  and  ei  sorrow  ?  Surely 
not.  Surely  they  were  taken  away  from  the  evil  that  is  to  come.  To  depart  and  be 
with  Christ  is  far  better.  1.  Notice  the  means  of  this  child's  revival.  (1)  First  of  all, 
there  was  prayer.  "  And  when  Elisha  was  come  into  the  house,  behold,  the  ohOd  was 
dead,  and  laid  upon  his  bed.  He  went  in  therefore,  and  shut  the  door  upon  them  twain, 
and  prayed  unto  the  Lord."  So  it  must  be  in  all  efforts  for  the  revival  of  dead  souls. 
Parents  must  have  recourse  to  prayer  if  they  would  see  their  children  converted.  We 
want  more  praying  families ;  we  want  more  praying  Churches.  Nothing  but  the  Spirit 
of  God  can  make  the  dry  bones  to  live.  If  our  work  is  to  last,  it  must  be  done  in 
prayer.  (2)  Then,  again,  observe  that  Elisha  used  the  meant  to  bring  ahout  an  answer 
to  his  prayers.  He  asked  for  a  certain  blessing,  and  he  showed  that  he  expected  an 
answer.  lie  stretched  himself  upon  the  4hUd,  that  his  body  might  communicate  heat 
to  that  of  the  child,  and  his  breath  upon  the  child's  mouth  encouraged  the  returning 
vitality.  It  is  God's  method  of  converting  the  world,  of  quickening  dead  souls.  It  is 
the  Spirit  of  God  that  alone  can  quicken  a  dead  soul.  But  he  uses  human  instru- 
mentality. Be  uses  living  Christians.  The  apostles  were  men  on  fire  with  the  Hely 
Ghost  and  with  zeal  for  souls,  and  therefore  their  labours  were  blessed.  The  reason 
there  are  so  few  conversions,  the  reason  the  Church  has  so  little  influence  upon  the  world 
compared  to  what  it  might  have,  is  that  too  often  the  Church  itself  is  worldly,  seeking 
for  teraporal  position  and  worldly  gain,  and  that  Christians  show  too  little  of  the  spirit 
of  their  Master.  They  have  a  name  to  live,  but  are  dead.  But  it  is  wonderful  what 
one  or  two  living  Christians,  can  effect  io  a  congregation,  in  a  community,  even  through- 
out the  world.  2.  Notice  also  the  signs  of  this  child's  revival.  "The  child  sneezed 
seven  times,  and  the  child  opened  his  eyes."  It  was  enough.  Elisha  did  not  wait  for 
the  child  to  speak.  lie  did  not  wait  for  him  to  walk.  He  recognized  the  unmistakable 
signs  of  life,  and  at  once  he  restored  the  child  to  his  sorrowing  mother.  Christians 
ought  to  watch  for  signs  of  spiritual  life  as  the  result  of  their  labours  and  their  prayers. 
They  should  not  be  discouraged  if  there  seems  but  little  fruit.  Do  not  discourage  the 
slightest  indication  of  a  desire  on  the  part  of  any  one  to  turn  from  sin  and  come  to 
Christ.  Eooourage  those  who  may  be  seekers  after  God,  groping  feebly  after  the  truth, 
strugglina;,  perhaps,  with  their  difficulties  and  doubts.  What  souli  have  you  been  the 
means  of  bringing  from  death  into  life  ? — C  II.  L 

Vers.  38 — 41. — Death  in  the  pot :  a  sermon  to  young  men.  These  young  men  were 
very  nearly  being  poisoned.  There  was  a  famine  in  the  land.  Elisha  came  to  Gilgal, 
where  there  was  a  school  or  college  of  young  men  in  training  for  the  sacred  office  of 
teaching  others.  Perhaps  they  were  not  skilled  in  the  art  of  making  the  most  of  the 
vegetables  which  grew  round  about  them,  and  were  badly  off  for  food.  Elisha  ordered 
bis  servant  to  put  on  the  great  pot,  and  make  some  pottage,  or  thick  broth,  for  the 
hungry  students.     One  of  Ikbe  young  men  went  out  to  gather  herbs  for  the  purpose. 


78  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  it.  1—44. 

There  is  a-  species  of  wild  gourd  or  melon,  called  CucumU  prophetarum,  which  is 
common  in  the  hill  country,  and  which,  when  green,  is  sliced  and  hoiled  a«  a  regetable. 
But  in  the  plains  near  Qilgal  there  is  a  plant  extremely  similar  in  appearance,  but  Tery 
different  in  its  qualities.  It  was  probably  this — the  eolocynthut,  or  squirting  cucumber 
— that  is  called  the  "  wfld  gourd"  in  this  chapter,  and  that  the  young  men  gathered 
and  sliced  down  into  the  large  pot  of  broth  (see  Thomson, '  The  Land  and  the  Book'). 
When  the  pottage  had  been  poured  out,  the  young  men  began  to  eat  of  it,  but,  alarmed 
by  its  bitter  txste,  and  probably  suspecting  then  that  poisonous  herbs  had  been  put 
into  it,  they  cried  out  to  Elisha,  "  0  thou  man  of  Qod,  there  is  death  in  the  pot  1 " 
From  this  incident  we  may  show  that,  while  there  is  many  an  enjoyment,  many  a 
course  of  conduct,  as  pleasant  to  the  eye  and  apparently  as  safe  as  those  poisonous 
herbs  appeared  to  be,  yet  there  is  need  for  caution.  "There  is  death  in  the  pot." 
"  There  is  a  way  that  teemeth  right  imto  a  man,  but  the  end  thereof  are  <A«  tuay$ 
of  death." 

I.  This  may  be  said  of  fraudulbnt  fbactioes.  "There  is  death  in  the  pot."  They 
nearly  always  begin  in  ways  that  seem  perfectly  safe  and  harmless.  A  man  takes  a 
little  from  his  employer's  desk,  intending  to  return  it  again.  But  in  nine  cases  out  of 
ten  he  never  returns  it.  He  has  touched  what  is  not  his  own.  The  brand  of  the 
thief  is  on  his  brow  and  the  curse  of  the  thief  is  on  his  life.  A  young  man  who  had 
been  well  brought  up  went  from  home  to  enter  a  bank  in  a  large  city.  It  was  noticed, 
when  he  returned  home,  that  he  was  beginning  to  dress  very  extravagantly.  Each 
time  he  returned,  some  fresh  extravagance  was  noted.  He  had  already  begun  to  spend 
money  faster  than  he  made  it,  for  his  salary  was  but  smalL  He  was  a  smart  young 
man,  and  would  soon  have  got  on  well  in  his  business,  for  he  was  a  general  favourite. 
But  in  a  foolish  hour  he  began  to  abstract  some  of  the  bank  money.  Little  by  little 
it  went  on,  until  his  defalcations  were  very  considerable.  At  last  he  was  discovered, 
dismissed  in  disgrace  from  the  bank,  and  it  was  only  the  intervention  of  an  influential 
iMend  of  his  family  that  prevented  his  arrest.  He  broke  his  mother's  heart,  and 
brought  down  his  father's  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave.  Fraudulent  practices 
may  be  very  often  traced  to  the  habit  of  gamlling  or  letting.  This  was  testified  once 
more  quite  recently  in  London  by  Mr.  Vaughan,  the  Bow  Street  magistrate,  on  a 
charge  which  came  before  him.  There  was  a  cashier  in  the  receipt  of  a  salary  of  £160 
a  year,  with  prospects  of  advance.  For  eight  or  nine  years  he  had  filled  his  post 
creditably ;  but  having  got  behind  in  his  home  expenses,  he  took  a  few  shillings,  and 
invested  them  in  betting.  As  he  was  lucky,  from  taking  shillings  he  preceded  to 
pounds ;  and  having  once  started,  he  found  tiiat  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  stop.  He 
had  always  the  hope  of  winning  some  day  by  a  stroke  of  luck,  and  of  thus  being  able 
to  pay  back  again  the  sums  which  he  had  embezzled.  But  the  "  luck  "  never  came, 
and  he  had  at  last  to  confess  to  his  employers  that  he  had  defrauded  them  to  the 
extent  of  £250.  "  I  wish,"  said  Mr.  Vaughan,  "  that  the  clerks  in  mercantile  houses 
would  come  to  this  court,  and  see  what  I  see,  and  hear  what  I  hear.  This  is  only  one 
of  a  multitude  of  cases  in  which  prisoners  have  confessed  that  their  robberies  are 
entirely  due  to  betting.  /  regard  it  as  a  curse  to  the  country."  Beware  of  dishonesty 
in  any  form.  *'  There  is  death  in  the  pot."  It  means  death  to  a  man's  reputation, 
death  to  his  worldly  prospects,  death  to  his  peace  of  mind,  for  he  must  live  in  constant 
terror  of  discovery ;  and  if  he  should  escape  discovery  and  judgment  upon  earth,  how 
can  he  endure  the  thought  of  that  day  when  the  secrets  of  every  life  shall  be  disclosed, 
and  when  he  shall  stand  condemned  at  the  judgment-seat  of  Ghxl? 

II.  This  may  be  said  also  or  fbactioes  of  ihpubitt.  "Thtre  is  death  tn  the  pot." 
Temptations  to  it  abound  on  every  side.  A  corrupt  press  sows  broadcast  its  demoralizing 
stories,  with  its  suggestive  pictures.  The  theatre,  with  its  brilliant  lights  and  strains 
of  sweetest  music — so  often  dedicated  to  the  service  of  the  devU — ^lures  men  into  the 
way  of  the  tempter,  and  into  the  den  of  the  destroyer.  It  appears  an  innocent,  harm- 
less amusement.  But  "  there  is  death  in  the  pot.  For  one  who  comes  unscathed  and 
safe  out  of  the  theatre,  there  are  scores  who  come  out  of  it  morally  and  spiritually  the 
worse  for  its  influence.  Let  men  say  what  they  like  about  the  influence  of  the  ^ama 
as  a  teacher  of  morals — and  there  is  nothing  to  be  sud  against  the  drama  in  itself — ^is 
there  a  single  case  of  a  man  made  better  by  going  to  the  theatre?  Where  ithtt  Let 
IUm  bf  prodwtd.    And  avan  If  one  or  two  ocnild  be  produced,  what  would  they  h«  as 


OH.  IT.  1—44.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINOS.  70 

»  teBtimony  in  farour  of  the  theatre,  compared  to  the  testimony  againft  it  of  the 
thousands  it  has  ruined  ?  "  It  might  do  good,  but  never  did."  Beware  of  impurity  in 
any  form,  Bew.ire  of  impure  books,  impure  songs,  the  impure  jest,  impure  companions. 
"There  is  death  in  the  pot."  There  is  no  sin  that  brings  a  more  speedy  or  more 
terrible  retribution  in  this  life,  than  impurity  of  thought  or  deed.  In  a  diseased  body 
and  a  diseased  mind  it  leaves  its  deadly  marks.  The  impure  man  is  a  walking 
sepulchre.  He  is  digging  his  own  grave.  Above  all,  he  is  destroying  all  hope  of 
entering  that  pure  and  holy  heaven  where  God  is,  and  into  which  there  shall  in  no 
wise  enter  anything  that  defileth. 

III.  This  mat  be  said  also  of  habits  of  intempbranoe.  "There  is  death  in  the  pot." 
We  need  not  take  an  extreme  position  on  the  subject  of  alcohol  any  more  than  on  any 
other  subject.  But  it  is  right  that,  as  intelligent  beings,  with  a  reason  and  a  conscience, 
as  Christian  men  and  women  with  God's  Word  to  guide  us,  we  should  look  facts  in  the 
face.  Mi'dical  opinion  is  often  resorted  to  by  those  who  make  too  free  in  their  use  of 
alcohol.  Let  us  hear  the  latest  and  best  medical  opinion  on  the  subject.  At  the  last 
meeting  of  the  British  Me<'ical  Association  (Dublin,  1887),  one  of  the  most  interesting 
papers  was  the  report  of  a  special  committee  which  had  been  appointed  by  the 
association  to  inquire  into  the  connection  of  disease  with  habits  of  intemperance. 
Here  are  some  of  the  conclusions  which  the  committee,  after  most  careful  investigation, 
arrived  at:  "(1)  That  habitual  indulgence  in  alcohol  beyond  the  most  moderate 
amounts  has  a  distinct  tendency  to  shorten  life,  the  shoitening  being  on  the  average 
fairly  proportional  to  the  degree  of  indulgence;  (2)  that  the  strictly  temperate  wlio 
have  passed  the  age  of  tWenty-five  live  on  the  average  at  least  fen  years  longer  than 
the  intemperate."  Is  not  this  an  important  proof  of  our  statement?  "Habitual 
indulgence  in  alcohol  beyond  the  most  moderate  amounts  has  a  distinct  tendency  to 
shorten  life."  The  man  who  drinks  alcohol  to  any  considerable  extent  is  slowly 
killing  himself.  "There  is  death  in  the  pot."  If  we  turn  from  the  assembly  of 
doctors  to  the  experience  of  everyday  life,  we  get  similar  proofs.  What  terrible 
madness  and  infatuation  drink  causes!  What  fearful  havoc  it  has  madel  What 
hopes  it  has  blighted!  What  homes  it  has  wrecked!  What  lives  it  has  ruined! 
There  is  death  in  the  cup  of  intoxicating  drink,  as  many  a  man  has  proved  when  it  has 
been  too  late.  But  absence  of  wrong-doing  will  never  make  you  right.  As  Elisha 
cast  the  meal  into  the  pot,  wholesome  and  nourishing  food  in  place  of  the  deadly  poison, 
so  be  it  yours  to  fill  your  mind  with  the  teaching  of  God's  Woid,  and  your  lile  with 
holy  and  useful  deeds.  The  great  Teacher  is  Jeaus  Christ.  Ask  him  to  enter  into  your 
life,  to  purify  your  heart  and  your  desires.  Ask  him  for  time  and  for  eternity  to  save 
your  soul. — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  42 — 44. — The  loaves  muHiplied.  L  The  prophet  provided  fob.  It  was  a 
time  of  famine.  "  But  they  that  fear  the  Lord  shall  not  want  any  good  thing." 
Elisha  received  a  thank  offering  from  the  people — "bread  of  the  firstfruits,  twenty 
loaves  of  barley,  and  full  ears  of  corn."  The  objection  to  a  paid  ministry  has  no  war- 
rant in  the  Word  of  Oid.  Old  Testament  and  New  alike  encourage  provision  for  the 
wants  of  Gud's  mini.'iters.  Jesus  said,  "  The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire."  Paul 
said,  "  They  that  preach  the  gospel  should  live  of  the  gospel."  It  is  impracticaMe  and 
inconvenient  that  men  should  be  preachers  of  the  gospel,  with  all  the  preparation 
which  that  work  requires,  and  pastors  of  the  flock,  with  all  the  attention  which  this 
requires,  and  at  the  same  time  be  burdened  with  the  toil  and  anxiety  of  providing  for 
their  own  temporal  support  and  that  of  their  families,  if  they  have  them. 

II.  The  people  fed.  We  see  here :  1.  Mishaps  unselfishness.  He  had  freely 
received;  now  he  freely  gives.  In  that  time  of  famine  he  might  have  thought  it 
prudent  to  store  up  for  himself  the  supply  of  food  he  had  received.  But  no.  He  trusts 
God  for  the  future.  His  first  thought  is  of  others  who  were  hungry  round  about  hini. 
"Give  unto  the  people,  that  they  may  eat."  There  is  need  for  more  of  this  unselfish- 
ness, considerateiiess,  thoughtfulness.  How  many  of  those  who  have  abundance 
forget  to  think  of  those  who  are  in  want !  2.  'Ihe  Divine  power  exercised.  God  owns 
his  servnnts,  not  only  by  supplying  their  warns,  but  by  giving  power  to  their  word. 
Oh  that  every  minister  of  Christ  would  realize  this!  What  a  new  power  it  would 
live  to  his  work !  what  a  new  stimulus  to  his  earnestness  t    When  we  think  of  the 


80  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [ch.  it.  1—44. 

greatness  and  responsibility  of  our  work,  we  may  well  ask,  "  Who  is  sufficient  for  these 
things  ?  "  But  when,  on  the  other  hand,  we  think  of  the  Divine  power  which  works 
along  with  the  faithfiil  minister,  we  may  well  say,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ 
which  strengtheneth  me."  He  can  help  us  to  break  among  our  people  the  bread  of 
life,  and  bless  it  abundantly  in  the  breaking. — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — ^7. — A  prophe^$  widow  and  a  propkefs  kindness.  "  Now  there  cried  a 
certtdn  woman  of  the  wives  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  unto  Blisha,"  etc.  There  are 
two  subjects  of  thought  in  these  verses. 

L  A  prophet's  widow  in  disteess.  "Now  there  cried  a  certain  woman  of  the 
wives  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  unto  Elisha,  saying,  Thy  servant  my  husband  is 
dead ;  and  thou  knowest  that  thy  servant  did  fear  the  Lord :  and  the  creditor  is  come 
to  take  unto  him  my  two  sons  to  be  bondmen."  This  poor  woman  had  not  only  lost  her 
husband,  and  was  left  with  a  bleeding  heart — left  lonely  and  desolate  in  a  cold  world,  but 
was  left  in  great  poverty.  Her  husband  was  not  only  a  good  man,  one  "  who  did  fear  the 
Lord,"  but  a  "prophet,"  a  religious  teacher,  one  engaged  in  disseminating  Divine  ideas 
amongst  men.  It  seems  that  he  not  only  died  poor,  but  died  in  debt.  Even  now  a  large 
number  of  ministers  are  unable  to  make  provision  for  their  wives  and  children  in  case 
of  their  death.  Some  of  the  most  enlightened,  thoughtful,  and  really  useful  ministers 
are  amongst  the  poorest.  Observe ;  1.  That  poverty  is  not  necessarily  a  disgrace.  It 
is  sometimes  the  result  of  inflexible  honesty  and  moral  nobility.  2.  That  the  test 
lives  here  a/re  subject  to  trials.  It  is  reasonable  to  infer  that  this  widow  was  a  good 
woman — one  who,  like  her  departed  husband,  "  did  fear  the  Lord ; "  and  yet  see  her 
distress  1  The  afdictions  of  the  good  are  not  penal,  but  disciplinary.  3.  That  avarioe 
feeds  cruelty.  "  The  creditor  is  come  to  take  unto  him  my  two  sons  to  be  bondsmen." 
The  debt  she  owed,  which,  we  may  imagine,  could  not  have  been  very  large,  her 
heartless  creditor  insisted  on  being  discharged  at  once,  and  demanded  her  two  sons  to 
become  slaves  to  him  in  order  to  work  out  the  debt.  The  avaricious  world  is  heartless ; 
even  in  London  hundreds  are  dying  on  every  side  of  starvation.  4.  That  provision 
should  be  made  for  the  widows  of  ministers.  The  incomes  of  very  many  ministers  in 
England  to-day  are  not  sufficient  to  enable  them  to  make  provision  for  their  wives  and 
children  in  case  of  their  death.  Churches  which  have  committees  for  sending  out 
missionaries,  for  distributing  Bibles  (which  are  cheap  enough  now),  and  for  distributing 
tracts,  which  are  often  calumnies  on  Christianity,  ought  certainly  to  see  that  provision 
is  made  tor  the  future  of  their  ministers'  families. 

II.  A  PBOPHBT  AT  WORK  TO  BELIEVE  A  BROTHERS*  WIDOW.  In  her  distress  instinct 
tells  her  where  to  go,  and  she  goes  to  Elisha,  not  only  a  man  who  knew  her  husband, 
but  one  of  kindred  experiences  and  sympathies.  To  him  she  "  cried."  Her  appeal  was 
really  an  unintentional  compliment  to  Elisha.  The  greatest  compliment  a  man  can 
offer  is  an  opportunity  for  contributing  to  a  truly  deserving  object.  When  a  man's 
compeers  rank  him  amongst  those  whose  meanness  has  become  patent.  Charity  ignores 
him.  In  her  benign  mission  she  marches  by  him  in  stately  silence,  as  one  whom  society 
lias  placed  in  the  branded  category  of  sordid  souls.  See  how  Elisha  helps  this  widow. 
1.  Promptly.  "  And  Elisha  said  unto  her,  What  shall  I  do  for  thee  ?  tell  me,  what 
hast  thou  in  the  house  ?  "  He  did  not  want  arguments  or  testimonials,  etc.,  but  with 
a  beaming  generosity  he  virtually  said,  "  Tell  me  your  condition,  and  I  will  do  my 
utmost  to  serve  you."  He  set  to  work  at  once.  Having  told  him  she  had  nothing  in 
her  house  but  one  "  pot  of  oil,"  he  says  to  her,  "  Go,  borrow  thee  vessels  abroad  of  all 
thy  neighbours,  even  empty  vessels ;  borrow  not  a  few."  She  obeys  his  behest,  goes 
amongst  her  neighbours,  and  borrows  all  the  vessels,  and  then,  according  to  his  direc- 
tions, she  closes  the  door  upon  herself,  and  upon  her  sons,  and  begins  to  pour  out  into 
each  vessel  a  part  of  the  little  pot  of  oil  which  she  had,  and  as  she  poured  every  vessel 
she  had  collected  became  full  to  the  brim.  The  more  she  poured  the  more  came,  until 
she  lacked  vessels  to  hold  it.  A  symbol  this  of  all  benevolent  virtues — the  more  they 
are  used  the  more  they  grow.  So,  indeed,  with  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul  under 
the  influence  of  true  generosity ;  right  giving  is  the  way  to  the  most  precious  getting. 
All  this,  of  course,  indicates  on  Elisha's  part  supernatural  assistance.  2.  Effectively. 
"  ni«B  sk*  came  and  told  the  man  of  God  [Elisha].  And  he  said,  Go,  sell  the  oil,  and 
pay  thy  dnbt,  tad  Ut«  thou  and  thy  children  of  t£«  rest."    Oil  waa  one  of  th«  com- 


<«.IT.  1— 44.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  81 


modities  Judssa  traded  in  (Ezek.  xxyiL  17)!  She  would,  therefore,  have  little  difficulty 
in  disposing  of  this  oil,  which  no  doubt  was  of  the  best  description.  The  prooeedg 
were  to  go  first  to  the  satisfaction  of  her  heartless  creditor,  and  then  to  the  permanent 
relief  of  herself  and  family. 

CoMOLVBiON.  Matthew  Henry's  remarks  are  good:  "  Let  those  who  are  poor  and  la 
distress  he  encouraged  to  trust  God  for  supply  in  the  way  of  duty.  '  Verily  thou  shalt 
be  fed,'  but  not  feasted.  It  is  true  we  cannot  now  expect  miracles,  yet  we  may  expect 
mercies  if  we  wait  on  God  and  seek  him.  Let  widows  partioularly,  and  prophets' 
widows  in  a  special  manner,  depend  upon  him  to  preserve  them  and  their  fatherless 
children  alive ;  for  to  them  he  will  be  a  Husband  ank^  Father.  Let  those  whom  God 
bath  blessed  witb  plenty  use  it  for  the  glory  of  GcBtnd  under  the  direction  of  his 
Word;  let  them  do  justly  with  it,  as  this  widow  di^and  serve  God  cheerfully  in  the 
use  of  it ;  and,  as  Elisha,  be  ready  to  do  good  to  those  that  need  them — be  eyes  to  th« 
blind,  and  feet  to  the  lame."— D.  T. 

Vers.  8—17. — Hospittdity.  "And  it  fell  on  a  day,  that  Elisha  passed  to  Shunem," 
etc.    In  these  verses  there  are  two  very  interesting  subjects  of  a  practical  character. 

I.  Hospitality  eightfdlly  employed.  The  object  of  the  hospitality  was  Elisha 
the  prophet,  and  the  author  of  it  is  called  here  "  a  great  woman."  i  The  account  given  is 
very  clear  and  sententious,  "And  it  fell  on  a  day,  that  Elisha  passed  to  Shunem, 
where  was  a  great  woman;  and  she  constrained  him  to  eat  bread.  And  so  it  was,  that 
as  oft  as  he  passed  by,  he  turned  in  thitherto  eat  bread."  Observe :  1.  The  hospitality 
was  very  hearty.  "  She  constrained  him  to  eat  bread."  She  did  not  give  Elisha  a  mere 
formal  invitation,  nor  was  she  urged  to  it  by  pleadings  on  his  behalf,  either  by  himself 
or  others.  It  was  spontaneous  and  hearty,  worthy  of  "  a  great  woman."  It  was  so 
hearty  that  Elisha  felt  authorized,  "  as  oft  as  he  passed  by,"  to  enter  and  "  eat  breal." 
On  his  prophetic  mission  he  would  be  constantly  journeying,  and  often  passing  the 
house,  and  as  often  as  he  did  so  he  felt  there  was  a  hearty  welcome  for  him  inside,  and 
entered.  2.  The  hospitality  was  shown  to  a  poor  hut  godly  Tnan.  The  woman  "said  unto 
her  husband.  Behold  now,  I  perceive  that  this  is  a  holy  man  of  God,  which  passeth  by 
us  continually."  Conventional  hospitality  welcomes  to  its  table  the  respectable  only, 
and  the  more  respectable  in  a  worldly  sense  the  more  welcome.  But  genuine  hospitality, 
as  in  the  case  before  us,  looks  out  for  the  poor  and  deserving,  and  constrains  them  to 
enter  and  be  fed.  "  When  thou  makes,t  a  feast,  call  not  thy  brethren,  nor  thy  kinsmen, 
nor  thy  rich  neighbours;  lest  they  also  bid  thee  again,  and  a  recompense  be  made  thee. 
But  when  thou  makest  a  feast,  call  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the  lame,  and  the  blind." 
3.  The  hospitality  involved  considerable  trouble  and  expense.  This  "great  woman" 
said  to  her  husband,  "  Let  us  make  a  little  chamber,  I  pray  thee,  on  the  wall ;  and  let 
us  set  for  him  there  a  bed,  and  a  table,  and  a  stool,  and  a  candlestick."  She  did  not 
say  to  her  husband,  "  Entertaining  him  will  put  us  to  no  inconvenience  or  expense, 
therefore  let  us  invite  him."  No,  she  calculated  upon  some  inconvenience  and  cost ; 
a  little  chamber  would  have  to  be  built,  quiet  and  suitable  for  a  man  of  spiritual 
thoughtfulness  and  devotion.  And  then  some  furniture,  too,  would  have  to  be  procured — 
"  a  bed,  and  a  table,  and  a  stool,  and  a  candlestick."  The  hospitality  that  involves  no 
outlay  is  common,  but  is  a  counterfeit,  nay,  a  misnomer.  The  accommodation  this  woman 
•ffered  to  Elisha,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  included  that  of  his  servant  Gehazi — he 
shared  the  provisions  and  the  apartments  of  his  master. 

IL  Hospitality  nobly  rbwabded.  Elisha,  instead  of  being  insensible  to  the  great 
generosity  of  his  hostess,  glowed  with  gratitude  that  prompted  a  strong  desire  to  make 
some  return,  and  "  said  to  Gehazi  his  servant,  Call  this  Shunammite.  .  .  .  And  he  said 
unto  him.  Say  now  unto  her,  Behold,  thou  hast  been  careful  for  us  with  all  this  care ; 
what  is  to  be  done  for  thee  ?  "  His  offer :  1.  Implies  his  consciousness  of  great  power 
with  man.  "  Wouldest  thou  be  spoken  for  to  the  king,  or  to  the  captain  of  the  host  ?  " 
Though  poor  himself,  he  had  inSaence  with  the  rich ;  and  though  too  independent  in 
soul  to  ask  of  them  a  favour  for  himself,  he  could  do  it  for  others.  Her  answer  to  his 
generous  offer  is  expressive  of  the  calm  self-respect,  unmercenariness,  and  dignity  of 
a  "great  woman.^^  She  answered,  "  I  dwell  among  mine  own  people."  As  if  she  had 
said,  '•  We  are  provided  for ;  we  neither  aim  at  nor  need  preferment."  2.  JmpUtt  his 
*  See  Homilia,  vol.  xxzviii.  p.  289. 
■.  Kisaa.  • 


ea  lUE  SECOND  BOOH  01'  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  iv.  1—44. 


eonteioutneu  of  hit  power  with  Ood.  He  finds  out,  through  his  servant  Gehazi,  that 
the  one  great  thing  on  earth  that  they  desired  most,  and  would  most  appreciate,  was  a 
family;  a  child  would  bnghten  their  hearth  atd  gladden  their  hearts.  This,  through 
his  wonderful  power  with  Heaven,  Elisha  obtains  for  them.  Thus  the  Almighty  him- 
self acknowledged  the  hospitality  which  this  woman  had  shown  to  his  faithful  prophet. 
"  Be  not  forgelful  to  entertain  strangers :  for  thereby  some  have  entertained  angeli 
unawares." 

CoNCLnsiON,  Dinings  out  and  social  banquets  are  common  enough  amongst  ns,  but 
hospitality  of  the  trOe  sort  is,  it  may  be  feared,  somewhat  rare — the  hospitality  described 
by  Washingtoii  Irving,  which  "  breaks  through  the  chill  of  ceremonies,  and  throws 
every  heart  into  a  glow."  There  is  an  emanation  from  the  heart  in  genuine  hospitality 
that  cannot  be  described. — D.  T. 

Vers.  18 — 31. — Oreat  trials.  "  And  when  the  child  was  grown,"  eto.  This  paragraph 
suggests  three  general  observations. 

L  That  great  trials  often  sfbino  fkom  obsat  meboies.  With  what  rapture  we 
may  suppose  did  this  woman  welcome  her  only  child  into  the  world,  and  with  what 
care  and  affection  did  she  minister  to  his  health  and  enjoyments  I  It  was  her  greatest 
earthly  prize.  She  would  sooner  have  parted  with  all  her  property,  and  even,  perhaps, 
with  her  husband,  for  he  was  an  old  man,  than  lose  this  dear  boy  of  hers.  Yet  she 
does ;  death  snatches  him  from  her  embrace.  "  And  when  the  child  was  grown,  it  fell 
on  a  day,  that  he  went  out  to  his  father  to  the  reapers.  And  he  said  unto  his  father, 
My  head,  my  head.  And  he  said  to  a  lad.  Carry  him  to  his  mother.  And  when  fa« 
had  taken  him,  and  brought  him  to  his  mother,  he  sat  on  her  knees  till  noon,  and  then 
died."  Though  the  boy  was  dead,  the  woman  did  not  seem  to  lose  hope ;  her  maternal 
love  would  not  allow  her  to  realize  the  terrible  fact  at  once.  She  first  lays  him  on  the 
bed  in  the  chamber  which  she  had  built  for  the  prophet ;  then  she  calls  to  her  hiisband, 
and  entieats  him  to  send  a  servant  with  one  of  the  asses,  that  she  might  fly  with  swift- 
ness to  Elisha.  When  her  husband  suggested  some  difSculty  about  her  going  just  at 
that  time,  she  replied,  "It  shall  be  well."  "  Then  she  saddled  an  ass,  and  .«aid  to  her 
servant,  Drive,  and  go  forward ;  slack  not  thy  riding  for  me,  except  I  bid  thee.  So  she 
went  and  came  unto  the  man  of  Crod  to  Mount  Carmel."  This  was  a  journey  of  about 
five  or  six  hours.  Distance  is  nothing  when  the  traveller's  heart  overflows  with  emotion. 
How  frequently  it  happens  that  from  our  greatest  blessings  our  greatest  trials  spring  I 
1.  Friendship  is  a  great  blessing.  One  tru^  friend,  whose  soul  lives  in  ours  and  ours 
in  him  or  her,  is  of  priceless  worth.  Yet  the  disruption  of  that  friendship  may  strike 
a  wound  into  the  heart  that  no  time  can  heal.  2.  A  sanguine  temperament  is  a  great 
blessing.  It  drinks  in  largely  of  the  beauties  of  nature ;  it  paints  the  fiiture  with  the 
brightest  hopes,  and  stimulates  the  energies  to  the  greatest  enterprises.  All  the  best 
productions  of  the  human  species  have  sprung  from  such  temperaments.  But  what 
trials  it  brings,  in  frustrated  plans,  blighted  purposes,  and  extinguished  hopes!  But 
life  abounds  with  illustrations  of  the  fact — the  greater  the  blessings  we  enjoy,  the  greater 
agony  felt  in  their  loss. 

II.  That  great  trials  bhottld  be  fatiektlt  endubed.  In  this  great  trial  this 
woman  seems  wonderfully  resigned.  In  reply  to  a  difBculty  which  her  husband 
suggested  in  setting  out  for  the  journey,  she  said,  "  It  shall  be  well."  And  when 
Gehazi,  the  servant  of  Elisha,  on  her  approach  to  the  prophet,  asked  her,  "  Is  it  well 
with  thee?  Is  it  well  with  thy  husband?  Is  it  well  with  the  child?"  she  answered, 
"  It  is  welL"  "  Though  I  left  my  dear  boy  a  corpse  at  home,  and  my  heart  bleeds, 
I  feel  it  is  all '  well ; '  it  is  the  dispensation  of  a  Father  all-wise  and  all-loving.  I  bow  to 
his  will."  A  state  of  mind  so  magnanimous  as  this  under  great  tiial  is  the  duty  of  aH, 
and  the  sublime  privilege  of  the  holy  and  the  good.  Thus  Job  felt,  "  The  Lord  gave, 
and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;  blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Lord."  Thus  our  great 
Example  felt  when  overwhelmed  with  immeasurable  distiess  he  said,  "Not  my  will 
but  tlune  be  done." 

"  Thy  way,  not  mine,  O  Loid, 
However  dark  it  be ; 
Lead  me  by  thine  own  hand, 
Ohoose  out  th«  path  for  ma. 


OH.iy.  1— 44.]    THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


•Smooth  let  it  be  or  rough, 
It  will  be  still  the  best ; 
Winding  or  straight  it  matters  not. 
It  leads  me  to  thy  rest." 

m.  That  great  trials  may  have  a  blessed  end.  The  end  of  this  woman's  great 
trial  was  the  restoration  of  her  dead  child  to  life.  This  was  brought  about :  1.  In  con- 
nection with  her  own  efforts.  If  she  had  remained  at  home,  and  not  sped  her  way  to 
the  prophet  at  Carmel,  her  boy  in  all  probability  would,  it  would  seem,  have  remained 
a  corpse,  and  would  have  had  to  be  buried  for  ever  out  of  her  sight.  When  she 
reached  him,  see  how  earnestly  she  pleads:  "And  when  she  came  to°the  man  of  God 
to  the  hill,  she  caught  him  by  the  feet,"  etc.  2.  By  the  power  of  God  through  Elisha. 
In  the  following  verses  we  have  a  representation  of  the  way  in  which  this  was  brought 
about.  God  helps  man  by  man.  All  our  trials  might  have  a  blessed  end.  "  Our  light 
affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
weight  of  glory."  Yes ;  whilst  "  we  look  not  at  the  things  that  are  seeu,"  the  result, 
under  God,  depends  upon  ourselves. — D,  T. 

Vert.  32 — 37. — The  relation  of  prayer  to  secondary  causes.  "  And  when  Elisha  was 
come  into  the  house,  behold,  the  child  was  dead,"  etc.  The  death  of  the  Shunam- 
mite'g  Bon,  ai  we_  have  seen  in  the  preceding  verses,  was  in  many  senses  to  her  a  very 
severe  trial — a  trial  from  which  we  have  inferred  that  great  triads  often  spring  from 
great  mercies ;  that  great  trials  should  be  patiently  endured ;  and  that  great  trials 
might  have  a  Messed  end.  By  prayer  Elislm  now  raised  the  woman's  dead  boy  to  life. 
See  what  Elisha  did  here. 

L  He  pbayed  to  the  Lord.    "Let  this  child's  soul  come  into  him  again." 

II.  He  put  himself  into  direct  contact  with  the  child.  Mouth  to  the  child'i 
mouth,  eyes  to  the  child's  eyes,  hands  to  the  child's  hands,  as  if  he  transfused  all  the 
vital  magnetism  of  his  own  nature  into  the  person  of  the  dead  child. 

III.  He  peesevebbd  with  the  effobt.  Until  the  child's  flesh  waxed  warm,  tod 
the  child  sneezed  with  the  breath  of  new  life. — D.  T. 

Vers.  38 — 44. — Ministries  to  man,  good  and  bad.  "And  Elisha  came  again  to 
Gilgal :  and  there  was  a  dearth  in  the  laind,"  etc.  Elisha  had  returned  to  Gilgal,  the 
seat  of  a  school  of  the  prophets ;  he  had  come  thither  once  more  on  his  yearly  circuit, 
and  during  the  famine  which  prevailed  in  the  land.  As  the  students  sat  before  their 
master,  he  discerned  in  their  emaciated  forms  the  terrible  effects  upon  them  of  the 
famine.  In  the  narrative  we  discover  the  action  of  several  ministries,  or  events  with 
which  men  are  visited  more  or  less  in  passing  through  this  sublunary  state. 

I.  Here  is  the  ministry  of  sevbeb  tbial.  "  There  was  a  dearth  in  the  land."  To  be 
destitute  of  those  provisions  which  are  essential  to  the  appeasement  of  hunger  and  the 
sustentation  of  life  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  greatest  trials.  Such  destitution  is 
of  two  kinds — the  avoidable  and  the  unavoidable.  The  former  is  common.  Tens 
of  thousands  of  people  in  this  country,  which  so  abounds  with  wealth,  are,  alas  I  suhject 
to  the  trial  of  this  destitution  every  day.  But  men  bring  this  destitution  on  them- 
selves. To  the  heartless  cupidity  of  one  class  of  men,  and  the  indolence,  extravagance, 
and  intemperance  of  another,  the  poverty  which  is  rampant  in  England  to-day  must 
be  ascribed.  The  latter  kind  of  destitution,  viz.  the  inevitable,  is  that  recorded  in  these 
verses ;  it  arose  out  of  the  sterile  condition  into  which  the  land  was  thrown.  This  was 
the  destitution  which  now  prevailed  in  Israel ;  it  afflicted  all,  the  good  and  the  bad. 
In  truth,  Nature  knows  of  no  moral  distinctions;  she  treats  kings  and  paupers,  the 
righteous  and  the  wicked,  alike. 

n.  Here  ia  the  ministry  of  gross  ionobanoe.  In  order  to  allay  the  ravenous 
hunger  of  hii  pupils,  Elisha  said  to  his  servant,  "  Sot  on  the  great  pot,  and  seethe 
pottage  for  the  sons  of  the  prophets.  And  one  went  out  into  the  field  to  gather  herbs, 
and  found  a  wild  vine,  and  gathered  thereof  wild  gourds,  his  lap  fiill,  and  came  and 
shred  them  into  the  pot  of  pottage :  for  they  knew  them  not.  So  they  poured  out  for 
the  men  to  eat.  And  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  were  eating  of  the  pottage,  that  they 
cried  out,  and  said,  0  thoii  man  of  God,  there  is  death  in  the  pot.  And  they  could  not 
eat  thereof."    Whatever  were  the  herbi  which  the  servants  gathered  it  matters  not; 


84  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINQS.         [oh.  iv.  1— 4^ 

they  were  nauseons  and  pernicious.  "The  sons  of  the  prophets,"  says  Matthew  Henry, 
"it  wovild  seem,  were  better  skilled  in  divinity  than  philosophy,  and  read  their  Bibles 
more  than  their  herbals."  Wliat  they  put  into  the  pot  tended  to  produce  death  rather 
than  to  strengthen  life.  Every  day  men  are  afflicted  through  the  gross  ignorance  of 
themselves  and  others.  Through  ignorance  men  are  everywhere  putting  "death  in  the 
pot,"  in  a  material  sense.  The  cook,  the  doctor,  the  brewer,  the  distiller,  how  much 
death  do  they  bring  into  the  "pot"  of  human  life  I  Through  ignorance,  too,  men 
are  everywhere  putting  "death  in  the  pot"  in  a  spiritual  sense.  Calvinistio  dogmas, 
unauthorized  priestly  assumptions,  etc.,  how  much  death  do  they  bring  into  the  spiritual 
"pot"  of  lifel  Man's  ignorance  of  God  and  his  claims  on  the  soul,  its  nature,  its  laws, 
•nd  the  necessary  conditions  of  true  spiritual  progress,  is  the  minister  of  death. 

III.  Here  is  the  ministry  of  human  kindness.  "  And  there  came  a  man  from  Baal- 
•balisha,  and  brought  the  man  of  God  bread  of  the  firstfruits,  twenty  loaves  of  bread, 
and  full  ears  of  com  in  the  husk  thereof."  Whoever  this  man  was  (for  no  description 
is  given  of  him  save  the  place  of  his  residence),  he  was  a  Heaven-inspired  philan- 
thropist. Mercy,  the  highest  attribute  of  heaven,  was  in  him,  and  he  left  his  hoiije 
and  came  forth  to  minister  to  the  needs  of  his  suffering  race.  Thank  God  for  that 
kindness  which  has  survived  the  Fall,  and  still  lives  in  human  hearts.  The  most 
precious  ministry  on  earth  is  this :  it  feeds  the  hungry,  clothes  the  naked,  heals  the 
diseased,  wipes  away  the  tears  of  human  sorrow ;  it  is,  indeed,  Christ  in  human  flesh. 
For  he  was  then  in  the  world,  though  the  world  knew  it  not. 

IV.  Here  is  the  ministry  of  supernatural  power.  Supernatural  power  through 
Blisha  comes  to  the  relief  of  these  sufferers.  The  supernatural  was  manifested  in 
two  ways.  1.  In  counteracting  the  death-tendency  of  what  was  in  the  pot.  "But 
he  said.  Then  bring  meal.  And  he  cast  it  into  the  pot ;  and  he  said.  Pour  out  for  tlie 
people,  that  they  may  eat.  And  there  was  no  harm  in  the  pot."  A  supernatural 
power  is  required  to  counteract  the  pernicious  in  life.  If  the  Almighty  allowed  evil 
to  take  its  course  freely  and  fully,  death  would  run  riot  and  reduce  the  whole  race 
to  extinction.  The  supernatural-  was  manifested  also :  2.  In  increasing  the  supplies 
of  life.  Elisha  commanded  his  servant  to  distribute  amongst  his  starving  pupils  the 
provisions  which  the  man  that  came  from  Baal-shalisha  had  brought.  To  this  the 
servant  replied,  "  What,  should  I  set  this  before  a  hundred  men?  He  said  again,  Give 
the  people,  that  they  may  eat :  for  thus  saith  the  Loid,  They  shall  eat,  and  shall  leave 
thereof.  So  he  set  it  before  them,  and  they  did  eat,  and  left  thereof,  according  to  the 
word  of  the  Lord."  As  the  pot  of  oil  increased  in  the  pouring,  so  the  provisions 
increased  in  the  eating.  Jt  has  been  said  of  old  of  God,  that  he  will  abundantly  bless 
the  "provisions  of  his  people,  and  satisfy  the  poor  with  bread."  It  is  true  that 
moral  goodness,  truth,  and  justice,  skill,  prudence,  and  diligence,  have  a  tendency 
to  increase  everywhere  the  provisions  of  human  life,  and  they  are  doing  so  every  day. 
But  in  this  case  there  seems  to  be  the  exertion  of  a  power  transcending  the  human. 
However  this  may  be,  that  which  we  call  the  supernatural  is  nothing  more  than  the 
natural.  As  Nature  herself  is  immeasurably  beyond  our  comprehension,  transcends  our 
conceptions,  for  us  to  speak  of  the  supernatural  implies  the  arrogation  of  an  intelligence 
which  we  do  not  possess. — D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  miracles  of  Elisha :  the  pot  of  oU,  The  next  few  chapters  relate 
•  number  of  the  miracles  of  Elisha — all  of  them  works  of  mercy. 

I.  The  widow's  trouble.  The  story  told  in  these  verses  is  one  of  sore  distress.  It 
is  a  story :  1.  0/  bereavement.  A  poor  woman,  widow  of  one  of  "  the  sons  of  the 
prophets,"  cried  to  Elisha,  "Thy  servant  my  husband  is  dead."  We  learn  from 
this  that  the  prophetic  communities  were  not  monastic.  Marriage  was  permitted, 
and  members  of  the  fraternity  had  houses  and  families  of  their  own.  But  this 
poor  woman's  husband  had  recently  died.  She  had  to  face  the  difficulties  and  fight 
the  battles  of  life  alone.  We  are  in  presence  of  one  of  the  minor  tragedies  of  life 
—little  thought  of,  because  not  uncommon.  2.  0/  debt.  Her  husband  had  been 
nious — "  Thou  knowest  that  thy  servant  did  fear  the  Lord  " — but  his  affairs  had  been 
left  in  confusion  at  his  death,  or,  having  no  means  of  subsistence,  the  family  bad  sunk 
Into  dependence  on  •  creditor  since  his  decease.  A  man  may  be  good,  and  yet 
knprudeut.    On  the  other  hand,  misfortunes  may  overtake  the  best-intentioned,  and 


oh.it.  1—44.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOa  85 

reduce  them  from  affluence  to  poverty.  It  is,  however,  a  sad  thing  when  the  head 
of  a  household  dies,  and  leaves  to  his  struggling  family  an  inheritance  of  deht.  This 
is  a  contingency  to  be  by  every  legitimate  means  guarded  against.  The  Bev.  0.  H. 
Spurgeon,  commenting  on  the  text,  "  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,"  etc.  (Matt.  vi. 
34),  began  by  announcing,  "  I  insured  my  own  life  last  week,  and  have  thus  been  able 
to  carry  out  the  injunction  of  the  text,  and  not  to  be  over-anxious  for  the  morrow,  for 
much  undue  care  and  anxiety  that  I  had  is  now  laid  aside,  secure  in  the  knowledge 
that  my  forethought  has  provided  for  my  loved  ones."  3.  Of  bonda;je.  The  creditor 
to  whom  the  debt  was  due  showed  himself  merciless,  and,  as  the  law  permitted,  was 
about  to  take  as  slaves  the  two  sons  of  the  woman  (Lev.  xxv.  39).  It  mattered  little  to  the 
hard-hearted  creditor  that  his  debtor  had  "feared  the  Lord;"  that  the  two  sons  were 
the  only  remaining  comforts  of  the.  widow,  and  that,  with  "patience,"  they  miaht  have 
"paid  him  all"  (Matt,  xviii.  29).  He  must  have  his  own.  It  was  forbidden  to  a 
creditor,  to  whom  a  fellow-Israelite  was  sold,  to  "compel  him  to  serve  as  a  bond- 
servant," and  to  "rule  over  him  with  rigour  "  (Lev.  xxv.  39,  43).  But  an  unscrupulous 
man  would  pay  little  heed  to  these  injunctions.  Altogether,  the  picture  is  a  sad  one. 
Happily,  the  poor  woman  knew  where  to  come  with  her  tale  of  grief.  She  remembered 
the  "  Father  of  the  fatherless "  and  the  "  Judge  of  the  widow"  (Ps.  Ixviii.  5),  and,  when 
every  earthly  avenue  of  help  was  closed,  poured  her  sorrows  into  the  ear  of  God's 
prophet. 

II.  The  DIBECTI0K8  OF  Elisha.  As  the  representative  of  One  who  had  specially 
declared  himself  the  Friend  of  "the  fatherless  and  widow"  (Deut.  x.  18),  Elisha 
could  not  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  widow's  plaint.  A  sympathetic  interest  in  the  bereaved 
and  distressed  is  at  all  times  a  duty  of  God's  ministers.  1.  He  inquired  as  to  her 
possessions.  "  Tell  me,  what  hast  thou  in  the  house  ?  "  God's  help  takes  its  starting- 
point  from  what  we  already  have.  The  widow  had  but  "one  pot  of  oil" — oil  for 
anointing ;  but  this  was  made  the  basis  of  what  was  to  be  done.  So  Elijah  founded 
his  miracle  on  the  widow  of  Zarephath's  "handful  of  meal  in  a  barrel,  and  a  little  oil 
in  a  cruse"  (1  Kings  xvii.  12),  and  Christ  his  on  the  lad's  "five  barley  loaves,  and  two 
small  fishes  "  (John  vi.  9).  The  lesson  is  that  what  means  of  help  we  have  are  to  be 
made  use  of  to  the  utmost  before  supernatural  aid  is  invoked.  2.  Se  hade  her  prepare 
for  a  liberal  experience  of  God's  goodness.  "  Go,  borrow  thee  vessels  abroad  of  aU  thy 
neighbours,  even  empty  vessels ;  borrow  not  a  few."  She  was  to  expect  large  things 
of  the  Lord.  Her  task  in  collecting  the  vessels  was,  like  the  digging  of  the  trenches 
in  the  last  chapter,  emphatically  a  work  of  faith  (ch.  iii.  16,  17).  God  does  not 
stint  us  in  answer  to  our  prayers.  His  word  rather  is,  "  Open  thy  mouth,  wide,  and 
I  will  fill  it "  (Ps.  Ixxxi.  10).  If  our  faith  will  but  trust  him,  he  wUl  astonish  us  with 
his  liberality.  3.  Ee  enjoined  seoreoy.  "  When  thou  art  come  in,  thou  ahalt  shut  the 
door  upon  thee  and  upon  thy  sons,  and  shalt  pour  out,"  etc.  This  was  too  sacred  a 
work  to  be  made  a  vulgar  wonder.  To  receive  the  full  benefit  of  the  blessing,  the 
inmates  of  the  house  were  to  be  alone,  in  privacy,  their  thoughts  and  spirits  undis- 
turbed. Jesus  enjoins  the  cultivation  of  secrecy  in  religion  (Matt.  vi.  1 — 18).  He  often 
forbade  the  blazoning  abroad  of  his  miracles  (Matt.  viiL  4,  etc.).  The  parading  of 
religioxis  experiences  takes  the  bloom  off  them. 

in.  The  multiplying  op  the  oil.  1,  The  oil  multiplied.  The  widow  and  her 
sons  did  as  directed,  and,  as  they  poured  the  oil  into  the  borrowed  vessels,  it  still 
increased  till  the  vessels  were  full.  The  element  of  miracle  here  is  very  aotabie,  but 
we  are  not  entitled  to  expect  such  miracles  at  the  present  day.  But  the  pledge  of 
Divine  help  in  distress  implied  in  such  a  miracle  remains  to  us,  and  God  will  honour 
every  draft  on  his  promises  made  by  faith,  basing  itself  on  such  deeds  as  this.  A  singular 
incident  in  proof  is  recorded  by  Krummacher  in  his  remarks  on  this  miracle  ('  Elisha,' 
lect.  v.).  It  might  almost  be  said  that  there  is  a  multiplying  power  in  the  Divine 
blessing,  apart  from  miracle  (Ps.  xxxvii.  16).  2.  The  ml  stayed.  When  the  vessels 
were  full,  the  widow  said  to  her  son,  "  Bring  me  yet  a  vessel."  There  was  not,  how- 
ever, a  vessel  more.  Then  the  oil  stayed.  Had  there  been  more  vessels,  it  would 
have  flowed  on.  The  sole  limit  of  the  supply  was  the  limit  of  their  capacity  to  receive. 
We  are  not  straitened  in  God;  we  are  straitened  only  in  ourselves.  3.  The  oU  *M. 
The  news  being  brought  to  Elisha,  he  ordered  the  grateful  woman — {  oor  no  mot«— to 
•ell  the  oil,  and  pay  her  debt,  and  live,  she  and  her  children,  of  the  reit.    The  d«bt 


M  THE  SKOOKS  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  it.  1—4^ 

WM  not  repudiated;  it  was  paid.  God  would  put  the  itamp  of  his  approTal  on 
honesty.  The  whole  incident  teaches  us  the  lesson  of  trusting  God  in  every  time  of 
need.     When  have  the  righteous  been  forsaken,  or  their  seed  seen  begging  bread 

iPs.  zxxTii.  25)  ?    If  we  can  trust  in  Qoi  for  temporal  supplies,  much  more  samy  w< 
or  our  spiritual  supplies  (PhiL  iv.  19).--J.  0. 

Vers.  8 — 17. — 77ie  lady  of  Shunem  t  1.  A  ton  given.  The  scene  of  this  exquisite 
itory  is  the  town  of  Shunem,  on  the  slope  of  Little  Hermon,  one  of  the  eminences 
loukin^  down  on  the  rich  and  extensive  plain  of  Jezreel. 

I.  Eeoeivino  a  prophet  m  the  namk  of  a  pbofhet.  In  this  town  dwelt  a 
wealthy  lady,  wife  of  a  man  who  had  large  possessions  in  land — the  Boas  of  that 
district.  The  first  part  of  the  story  is  a  beautiful  instance  of  the  consecrated  use  of 
wealth.  1.  Elisha  observed.  Shunem  lay  in  Elisha's  route  in  passing  to  and  fro, 
probably  on  his  visits  to  the  schools  of  the  prophets.  The  lady  of  Shunem  did  not  at 
first  know  him,  but  his  appearance,  as  he  passed  and  repassed,  attracted  her  attention. 
She  saw,  from  the  gravity,  benevolence,  and  distinction  of  his  aspect,  that  he  was  "  • 
holy  man  of  God."  She  felt  an  interest  in  him,  first  as  %  wayfarer,  then  as  •  man 
of  piety.  It  is  well  when  even  our  outward  deportment  is  such  that  others  are  com- 
pelled to  take  knowledge  of  us  that  we  have  been  with  Jesus  (Acts  iv.  13).  2.  Elisha 
welcomed.  The  immediate  impulse  of  the  pious  lady  was  to  show  hospitality  to  the 
traveller.  (1)  This  illustrates  her  own  piety.  It  was  because  she  feared  God  that  she 
was  moved  to  show  this  kindness  to  his  servant.  Piety  often  lingers  in  rural  districts 
when  wickedness  is  rampant  in  the  qities.  One  mRrked  manifestation  of  pietj  is 
reverence  for,  and  hospitable  treatment  of,  God's  saints  (Matt.  x.  40 — 42 ;  xxv.  34—46). 
Elisha  was  received  "  in  the  name  of  a  prophet "  (Matt.  x.  41).  (2)  It  illustrates  also 
her  natural  benevolence  of  heart.  Had  this  lady  not  been  naturally  of  a  benevolent 
disposition,  accustomed  to  act  hospitably  and  generously,  she  would  not  so  readily 
have  thought  of  constraining  Elisha  "  to  eat  bread."  St.  Paul  notes  it  as  the  mark  of  a 
godly  woman,  "  if  she  have  lodged  strangers"  (1  Tim.  v.  10).  3.  Elisha  a  customary 
gue^.  When  once  Elisha  had  found  his  way  to  this  good  lady's  house,  it  would  be  aliks 
a  pleasure  to  him  and  a  satisfaction  to  his  hostess  "  to  turn  in  thither  "  every  time  he 
passed  through  Shunem.  The  more  the  Shunammite  saw  of  the  prophet,  the  more 
she  reverenced  and  desired  to  serve  him.  With  the  inventiveness  of  a  mind  that 
"deviseth  liberal  things"  (Isa.  xxxii.  8),  it  soon  occurred  to  her  to  make  permanent 
arrangements  for  his  comfortable  reception.  Her  husband,  to  whom  she  proposed  her 
plans,  entered  heartily  into  them.  Unlike  the  churlish  Nabal  (1  Sam.  xxv.),  he  was 
willing  to  give  of  his  wealth  for  a  prophet's  entertainment.  A  chamber,  accordingly, 
was  fitted  up  on  the  wall  for  Elisha's  private  use,  and  there  he  abode,  and  could 
feel  at  home,  whenever  he  passed  that  way.  How  beautiful  the  large  and  unstinted 
generosity,  the  wise  forethought,  the  warm  consideration  for  another's  comfort,  dis- 
played in  this  incident  I  This  wise  and  unselfish  use  of  wealth  is  the  true  secret  of 
obtaining  enjoyment  out  of  it. 

II,  A  prophet's  reward.  We  are  called  to  notice:  1.  The  prophefs  latitude. 
it  was  not  with  hope  of  reward  that  the  Shunammite  had  done  her  acts  of  kindness, 
but  Elisha  was  none  the  less  anxious  to  show  his  sense  of  her  generosity  by  doing  her 
some  service  in  return.  He  bade  Gehazi  his  servant  call  her,  and  say  to  her,  •'  Thou 
hast  been  careful  for  us  with  all  this  care ;  what  is  to  be  done  for  thee  ?  "  A  grateful 
spirit  well  becomes  a  servant  of  God  (2  Tim.  i.  16—18).  There  is  none  whose 
gratitude  we  should  so  much  desire  to  have  as  that  of  "righteous  men."  They  may 
not,  like  Elisha,  have  interest  with  kings  and  courts,  but  they  have  interest  with 
Heaven.  God  rewards  for  their  sake.  Their  prayers  and  intercessions  are  worth  more 
than  silver  and  gold.  2.  The  Shunammite's  humility.  (1)  Elisha's  first  proposal  was, 
"  Wouldst  thou  be  spoken  for  to  the  king,  or  to  the  captain  of  the  host?"  His 
inQuence  at  court,  since  the  victory  over  the  Moabites,  was  probably  very  great.  It  is 
not  clear  what  exactly  he  supposed  the  king  could  do  for  her  that  the  Shunammite 
was  likely  to  desire ;  for  it  could  not  be  thought,  least  of  all  by  Elisha,  that  life  in 
Samaria,  and  a  position  in  Jehoram's  court,  even  though  attended  by  wealth  and 
honour,  was  an  advantageous  exchange  for  her  present  rural  felicity.  A  case  did 
arise,  however,  later  on,  in  which  it  was  of  benefit  to  bar  to  "  be  spoken  for  to  tha 


oa.  IT.  1—44]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGa  W 

king  "  (ch.  viii.  1 — 6).  To  many  minds  such  a  proposal  as  Elisha's  would  have  had 
supreme  attractions.  To  be  "presented  at  court  is,  in  many  circles  of  fashion,  the 
acme  of  ambition — to  gain  titles,  honours,  royal  recognitions,  the  summura  bonum 
of  exidtencu.  (2)  It  was  different  with  this  Shunammite.  Her  wise  and  beautiful 
and  unambitious  answer  was, "  I  dwell  among  mine  own  people."  She  had  no  desire  to 
exchange  her  simple  country  life  at  Shunem,  surrounded  by  those  who  knew  and  lored 
her,  for  any  grander  station  king  or  captain  could  give  her.  In  this  she  judged 
rightly.  The  elements  of  happiness  are  probably  found  in  their  greatest  perfection  in 
such  a  quiet  country  existence,  with  tiie  means  of  doing  good  to  others,  as  this  lady 
enjoyed.  They  are  emphatically  not  to  be  found  in  the  sphere  of  court-favour  and 
court-patronage — too  often  the  sphere  of  sycophancy,  intrigue,  faction,  backstairs 
influence,  miserable  jealousies  and  spites,  which  reduce  life  to  the  emptiest,  vainest 
show.  3.  TTie  prophet's  reward.  What,  then,  was  to  be  done  for  the  Shunammite  ? 
(1)  Gehaai,  with  the  shrewdness  of  a  man  of  the  world,  strack  on  the  right  idea. 
"  Verily  she  hath  no  child,  and  her  husband  is  old."  Perhaps  he  had  ere  this  heard 
the  lady  lament  her  want  of  offspring.  It  was  the  one  cross  of  her  otherwise  contented 
and  happy  life.  Her  husband,  like  Elkanah,  might  console  her  with  the  words,  "  Am 
not  I  better  to  thee  than  ten  sons?"  but  her  warm,  motherly  heart,  overflowing  asit 
was  with  kindness  to  others,  yearned  for  a  child  of  her  own  on  whom  to  lavish  its 
riches.  Without  this  boon,  however  she  might  feel  the  duty  of  resignation,  existence 
remained  incomplete.  It  is  rare  but  that  some  cross,  if  it  be  but  one,  is  mingled  with 
our  blessings,  if  only  to  teach  us  that  existence  here  is  not  the  be-all  and  end-all.  (2) 
Elisha  saw  at  once  the  propriety  of  Gehazi's  suggestion,  and  oonfldent  in  the  Divine 
readiness  to  give  effect  to  his  word,  he  called  the  Shunammite,  and  announced  to  her 
the  joyful  fact  that,  with  the  revolving  months,  she  should  embrace  a  son.  The 
intimation  astounded  her,  as  well  it  might.  It  so  entirely  transcended  her  hopes  and 
expectations,  that  she  could  hardly  believe  in  its  realization.  "  Nay, .  .  .  thou  man  of 
God,"  she  said,  "do  not  lie  unto  thine  handmaid;"  as  if  she  was  afraid  he  was  trifling 
with  her,  trying  some  experiment  upon  her  feelings,  or  otherwise  deluding  her.  Her 
words  were  not  really  those  of  unbelief,  but  of  laith  asking  lor  greater  assurance. 
When  her  mind  had  time  to  take  in  the  full  extent  of  Elisha's  promise,  inexpressible 
joy  would  chase  the  last  trace  of  doubt  from  her  soul.  (3)  The  event  liappened  as 
predicted,  and  a  son  was  born.  We  learn  that  those  who  show  kindness  to  God's 
people  shall  not  go  without  their  reward  (Matt.  x.  41,  42).  The  reward  may  not  come 
in  the  form  they  anticipate,  but  it  will  come  in  the  way  that  is  best  for  them,  and  will 
generally  be  above  all  that  they  ask  or  think  (Eph.  iii.  20).  God's  power,  "  which 
calleth  those  things  which  be  not  as  though  they  were  "  (Rom.  It.  17),  will  do  marvels 
for  us,  if  only  we  have  faith  to  receive  his  promise. — J.  0. 

Vers.  18 Bl.—The  lady  of  Shvmm :  2.  The  son  taken  and  restored.    A  lapse  of 

several  years  occurs  in  the  story,  during  which  time  the  child  had  grown,  till  he  was 
able  to  go  out  to  his  father  to  the  harvest-field.  v    j  * 

I  The  tnraixPEOTED  stroke.  1.  A  boyhood  of  promise.  Everythmg  combmed  to 
invest  this  Shunammite's  son  with  interest,  and  to  make  hhn  the  idol  of  his  parents 
heart.  He  was  an  only  son,  the  son  of  his  father's  old  age,  a  child  of  promise-^most 
of  miracle.  He  would  be  the  joy  and  delight  of  his  home,  a  constant  wonder,  an 
unceasing  study.  He  was  his  father's,  not  less  than  his  mother's,  favourite,  as  seen  by 
the  wav  m  which  the  child  runs  out  to  him  in  the  field.  Great  hopes  would  be  built 
on  him",  and  it  might  be  thought  that  these  could  hardly  fail  to  be  realized.^  From  the 
manner  in  which  he  had  been  given,  God  might  seem  pledged  to  preserve  hini  from  the 
ordinary  dangers  of  childhood.  He  Uved— so  it  might  be  fancied— a  charmed  hfe,  and 
could  not  fall  a  victim  to  disease  and  trouble  as  other  children  did.  Alas!  the  contrary 
was  soon  to  be  shown.  2.  The  child  smitten.  The  manner  of  the  playful  child  s  seizure 
is  simply  and  naturaUy  told.  The  boy  is  sporting  among  the  reapers,  when  suddenly 
he  exclrims,  «  My  heaS,  my  head  I "  The  father  is  by  his  side,  and  orders  him  tobe 
carried  home  to  his  mother.  He  thinks,  apparently,  only  of  some  passing  ilhiess.  l^e 
heat  has  proved  too  much  for  him.  The  mother's  instinct  more  surely  divines  the  fatal 
charwterV  the  stroke.  She  does  not  even  hiy  him  on  his  bed,  but,  tekmg  him  on  hat 
knejrholSi  him  there  to  an  agony  of  terror  and  affection,  boding  the  worst.    How 


IBS  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [o&  it.  1— 4i 

i  •  niotkw'i  l«r«  I  The  father  is  sought  in  the  hour  of  play ;  the  mother's  knee 
fi  tke  place  in  Bicknoss.  At  noon  the  child  dies.  3.  The  child  dead,  (1)  It  is  not 
an  unexampled  thing  for  children  to  he  taken  away  as  suddenly  and  pathetically  as  this 
Shunammite's  son  was.  Many  a  parent's  bleeding  heart  can  tell  of  similar  wounds. 
The  suffering  and  death  of  little  children  is  one  of  the  "  dark  things  "  of  Providence. 
Often  it  is  the  brightest  and  most  promising  that  is  taken,  and  the  removal  is  sometimes 
as  sharp,  startling,  and  unlooked-for  as  in  the  case  here  described.  Yesterday,  nay,  at 
morn,  the  mother  had  her  child  by  her,  happy,  winsome,  full  of  mirth  and  frolic ;  at 
noon  he  is  snatched  from  her  embrace  for  ever.  (2)  The  special  mystery  in  the  case 
of  this  Shunammite's  son  is  that  he  was  a  child  of  promise.  Had  not  God  given  her 
this  son — given  him  without  her  seeking — and  how  could  he  now,  without  manifest 
injustice,  snatch  him  away  from  her  again  in  this  ruthless  manner?  Was  there  not, 
in  this  way  of  dealing,  a  breaking  of  promise  with  her,  something  arbitrary,  capricious, 
unfair?  So  to  her  wild,  whirling  thoughts,  it  may  have  seemed.  God's  witys are,  in 
truth,  often  very  mysterious.  Tet  in  the  present  instance  may  not  the  very  fondness 
of  these  doting  parents  for  their  child  help  to  explain  something  of  the  darkness  of  God's 
dealing  with  them  ?  God  never  binds  himself  to  an  unconditional  continuance  of  our 
blessings.  There  was  danger,  just  because  this  child  was  held  so  dear,  of  the  parents' 
centring  all  in  it — forgetting,  in  their  feeling  of  the  security  of  their  possession,  that 
tlie  gift  still  hung  on  the  will  of  the  Giver.  To  recall  them  to  a  sense  of  their 
dependence,  or,  if  this  is  rejected,  then,  as  in  Abraham's  case,  to  perfect  the  faith  of 
this  Shunammite  through  trial,  the  gift  is  for  the  time  withdrawn.  (3)  The  child  is 
dead,  and  with  almost  unnatural  composure,  the  stricken  mother  rises  from  her  seat, 
bears  the  child's  body  aloft  to  the  prophet's  chamber,  lays  it  on  the  bed,  and  goes  out, 
locking  the  door  behind  her.  She  tells  neither  servants,  husband,  nor  any  one  else,  of 
what  has  happened.  Her  husband  was  still  in  the  field,  and  she  must  have  put  off  any 
inquiries  he  made  with  evasive  answers.  A  great  mystery  hung  over  this  unlooked-for 
bereavement,  and  as  only  the  prophet  can  solve  that  mystery,  to  the  prophet  she  will  go. 
II.  The  joubney  to  Cabmel.  1.  On  the  way.  (1)  The  lady  sends  to  her  husband 
fur  an  ass,  and  a  young  man  to  accompany  her,  that  she  may  "run"  to  the  prophet, 
and  come  aG;ain.  She  gives  no  explanation,  for  in  her  heart  she  no  doubt  cherished  hope 
t'  at  her  mission  would  not  be  in  vain.  She  clung  to  the  promise  of  God  (cf.  Heb. 
xi.  17 — 19).  In  the  hour  of  trouble,  nothing  lightens  the  gloom  like  a  promise  to 
hold  by.  (2)  The  husband's  surprised  question,  "  Wherefore  wilt  thou  go  to  him 
to-day?  it  is  neither  new  moon,  nor  sabbath,"  shows  that  it  was  Ellsha's  custom  to 
hold  religious  assemblies  on  the  sabbath  days,  to  which  the  godly  in  Israel  resorted. 
This  is  an  interesting  side  light  on  the  practice  of  the  time.  Weekly  assemblies  were 
not  provided  for  in  the  Law,  but  where  love  to  God  is  in  the  heart,  it  needs  no  law  to 
bring  believers  together  (Mai.  iii.  16).  (3)  The  journey  was  made  in  haste.  "  Slacken 
not  the  riding."  Such  errands  brooked  no  delay.  When  one  is  earnest  in  pressing  for 
a  blessing,  no  obstacles  will  be  allowed  to  stand  in  the  way.  Neither  in  service  of  God,  in 
seeking  blessing  from  God,  nor  in  pursuit  of  holiness,  should  we  be  tempted  to  "slacken" 
our  endeavours  (Phil.  iii.  13, 14).  2.  Meeting  Gehazi.  Prom  afar,  from  his  dwelling 
on  Ciirmel,  Elisha  saw  the  hard  riding  of  the  lady  whom  he  recognized  as  the  Shunam- 
mite. With  an  instant  presentiment  that  something  was  wrong — though  nothing  had 
been  revealed  to  him  (ver.  27) — he  bade  Gehazi  hasten,  and  inquire  concerning  herself, 
her  husband,  and  her  child,  if  it  were  "  peace."  To  him,  however,  she  was  in  no  wise 
minded  to  open  up  her  heart.  She  but  curtly  replied,  as  she  had  before  done  to  her 
husband  (ver.  23),  "  It  is  peace."  With  all  her  deep  affliction,  she  had  not  surrendered 
faith.  She  felt  that  God  was  trying  her,  but  though  "  faith  and  form  "  were  sundered 
in  the  night  of  fear,  she  had  courage  to  believe  that  it  would  yet  be  "  well."  Her 
comfort  was  not  in  the  well-being  of  her  child  with  God,  but  in  the  hope  that  he  would 
he  restored  to  her.  With  the  new  light  the  gospel  has  given,  Christians  can  say  of 
their  dear  lost  children, "  It  is  well,"  though  they  have  no  hope  of  beholding  them 
again  on  earth  (see  sermons  and  pieces  in  Logan's  '  Words  of  Comfort ; '  especially 
sermon  by  0.  H.  Spurgeon  on  this  text,  'Infant  Salvation,'  p.  117,  9th  edit.). 
3.  At  Elitha't  /eet.  (1)  Arrived  in  the  prophet's  presence,  the  bereaved  mother  cast 
henelf  in  mut*  gii«f  and  Mpplication  at  his  feet.  With  singular  inappreciation  of 
the  delicacy  of  tba  tttoatiim,  Oehazi  approached  to  thrust  her  away.     But  Eliiha 


CH.tv.  1— 44.]         THE  BEOOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGa 


89 


perceived  how  deeply  her_  ronl  wm"  vexed"  within  her,  though  as  yet  he  could  not 
divine  the  cause.  There  is  a  silence  which  is  often  more  eloquent  than  speech.  God 
does  not  need  our  words  to  tell  him  what  we  want;  he  can  read  even  the  "groanings 
that  cannot  be  uttered"  (Rom.  viii.  26).  This  mourner  took  her  trouble  to  the  right 
place.  (2)  By-and-by  she  found  words,  which  in  form  were  words  of  expostulation 
'•  Did  I  desire  a  son  of  my  lord  ?  did  I  not  say,  Do  not  deceive  me  ?"  In  reality  she 
w.is  recalling  to  the  prophet  that  it  was  his  own  word  which  had  promised  her  tliis 
child.  She  was  telling  him  in  effect  that  the  child  was  dead,  and  supplicating  his  help 
to  prevent  his  original  promise  being  completely  cancelled.  God  is  pleased  that  we 
should  plead  his  promises  with  him.  He  bids  us  "  put  him  in  remembrance  "  (Isa.  xliii 
26) ;  like  Job,  "  fill  our  mouth  with  arguments  "  (Job  xxiii.  4).  He  will  honour 
his  own  word,  for  "his  gifts  and  calling  are  without  repentance  "  (Eom.  xi.  29). 

HI.  The  child  bestokbd.  1.  Gehazi's  failure.  Anxious  to  lose  no  time  in  doin^ 
what  he  was  confident  it  was  the  will  of  God  should  be  done,  Blisha  directed  his  servant" 
who  could  go  much  more  quickly  than  himself,  to  speed  forward,  and  lay  his  staff  ni  on 
the  face  of  the  child.  He  was  neither  to  allow  time  to  be  wasted,  nor  his  thoughts  to  be 
distracted,  by  saluting  any  one  on  the  way.  ("The  King's  business  required  haste;" 
1  Sara.  xxi.  8;  cf.  Luke  x.  4.)  Gehazi  did  as  he  was  commanded,  but  "there  was 
neither  voice  nor  hearing."  The  staff  did  not  work  the  wonder — was  never  intended 
to  do  so ;  it  was  only  a  symbol  of  the  prophetic  authority  under  sanction  of  which  the 
deed  was  to  be  wrought.  There  have  been  many  speculations  as  to  the  cause  of 
Gehazi's  failure,  some  supposing  that  Elisha  had  stepped  beyond  his  province  in 
presuming  to  delegate  this  power  to  another;  others,  that  the  failure  was  a  designed 
rebuke  to  Gehazi;  others,  that  this  was  a  new  tiial  of  the  Shunam mite's  faith.  But 
surely  the  simplest  explanation  is  also  the  most  probable.  Gehazi  was  sent  in  good 
faith,  but  the  deed  was  not  one  to  he  wrought  by  magic,  but  by  the  concurrence  of 
faith  and  prayer.  Elisha's  prayers  accompanied  his  messenger,  but  the  defects  in 
Gehazi's  own  spiritual  nature  proved  too  serious  for  the  work  he  had  to  do.  God  would 
not  act  through  such  an  instrument.  Even  when  Elisha  came  upon  the  scene,  it  wag 
not  without  difSculty  that  he  accomplished  the  miracle.  His  foresight  in  this  was 
limited,  even  as  in  the  matter  of  the  child's  death  the  fact  was  "  hid "  fiom  him. 
2.  Elisha's  success.  The  Shunammite  had  refused  to  leave  Elisha,  and  now,  as  they 
journeyed  onward,  Gehazi  met  them,  announcing,  "  The  child  is  not  awaked."  Elisha 
liimself  now  took  in  hand  the  task  in  which  Gehazi  had  failed.  (1)  He  went  into  the 
room  where  the  child  was,  shut  the  door  "  upon  them  twain,"  and  prayed.  The  prophet 
and  the  dead  are  alone  together,  but  God  is  there  too.  Elisha  attacked  the  problem 
from  its  spiritual  side.  His  first  object  was  to  get  his  own  soul  into  a  spiritual  frame, 
and  to  secure  God's  approval  of  his  eftbrts.  He  believed,  like  his  master  Elijah,  in 
the  virtue  of  "effectual  fervent  prayer"  (Jas.  v.  16).  Such  preparations  are 
necessary  if  we  would  accomplish  the  greater  miracle  of  raising  the  spiritually  dead. 
Prayer  attains  its  highest  power  when  "secret"  (Matt.  vi.  6).  (2)  Divinely  directed 
in  answer  to  his  prayer,  Elisha  now  stretched  himself  upon  the.  body  of  the  child, 
placing  his  mouth  on  his  mouth,  his  eyes  on  his  eyes,  his  hands  on  his  hands,  etc. 
(cf.  1  Kings  xviii.  21),  and  a  first  stage  in  restoration  was  accomplished — "  the  flesh  of 
the  child  waxed  warm."  We  can  give  no  explanation  whatever  of  the  rationale  of  this 
procednie,  which  yet  in  some  way  unknown  may  have  made  Elisha  a  co-agent  in  the 
work  of  restoration.  If  life  was  not  absolutely  extinct — a  supposition  countenanced  by 
the  fact  that  decomposition  does  not  seem,  even  at  the  distance  of  many  hours,  to  have 
set  in  (Bahr) — some  reason  might  be  seen  for  it.  (3)  Elisha  now  arose,  walked  for  a 
time  to  and  fro,  perhaps  to  increase  animal  heat,  more  probably  in  an  energetic  bracing 
of  mind  and  spirit  to  overcome  remaining  obstacles  to  the  power  of  faith,  then  renewed 
his  former  position  of  contact  with  the  child.  Life  gradually  reasserted  its  power ;  the 
child  sneezed  once,  again,  seven  times ;  then  opened  his  eyes,  and  was  restored  to  his 
parent.  The  lessons  from  this  concluding  part  of  the  story  are :  (1)  Prayer  conjoined 
with  appropriate  action  does  not-  fail  of  its  reward.  (2)  The  duty  of  perseverance. 
(3)  Some  spiritual  tasks  are  more  difficult  than  others  (Mark  ix.  29).  (4)  In  the  case 
of  the  Shunammite,  the  victory  of  faith.  (5)  The  ease  with  which  Christ  wrought  hit 
miracles  as  compared  with  these  laborious  exertions  of  Elisha—*  proof  of  the  superlot 
ereatness  of  his  power. — J.  0. 


00  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  rv.  1—44. 

Vers.  38 — il.— The  deadly  pottage.  Two  other  remarkable,  thangh  more  briefly 
related,  works  of  Elisha  are  narrated  in  the  closing  verses  of  this  chapter.  Both  have 
to  do  with  "  the  sons  of  the  prophets"  at  Gilgal ;  both  relate  to  a  time  of  famine ;  an(' 
one  is  an  Old  Testament  anticipation  of  a  signal  miracle  of  Christ.  The  first  is  th« 
healing  of  the  deadly  pottage. 

I.  The  prophktio  collbgb.  We  are  transported  to  Gilgal,  and  gain  a  glimpse  into 
the  interior  of  the  prophetic  Bchool.  1.  Religious  instruction.  Elisha  is  there,  and 
"the  sons  of  the  prophets"  are  "sitting  before  him,"  receiving  his  instructions.  There 
is  dearth  of  temporal  provision,  but  none  of  spiritual.  The  usual  exercises  of  instruction 
and  devotion  go  on,  as  if  plenty  reigned.  2.  Religious  fellowship.  The  famine  has 
not  sufficed  to  break  up  the  little  community,  but  has  drawn  the  members  of  it — as 
trial  should  always  do — closer  together.  They  have  a  common  table.  They  "dwell 
together  in  unity  "  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  1).  Elisha,  like  a  good  captain,  shares  the  hardships 
of  his  army.  God's  people  are  sometimes  brought  into  difficulty  enough,  but  the  effect 
should  only  be  to  strengthen  the  bonds  of  brotherly  love.  3.  Religious  order.  There 
are  orderly  arrangements.  Elisha  is  not  only  preceptor,  but  dinctor  of  the  temporal 
affairs  of  the  community.  All  obey  him,  as  all  appeal  to  him  when  trouble  arises. 
The  invisible  Head  of  the  community  is  Jehovah.  On  him  they  rely  with  confidence, 
when  every  other  source  of  help  fails. 

II.  Death  in  the  pot.  The  great  pot  is  set  on  to  seethe  pottage  in,  and  one  goes  out  to 
gather  herbs  to  eke  out  the  scanty  supply.  1.  The  poisonous  gourd.  Attracted  by  some 
wildoreepers,  the  messenger  gathers  therefrom  a  lapful  of  gourds,  which  he  mistakes  for 
gourds  of  a  similar  appearance  that  are  edible.  The  plants  he  had  gathered  were  in  reality 
poisonous.  He  brought  them  home,  and  they  were  shred  into  the  pottage.  We  may 
learn  two  lessons.  (1)  The  danger  of  being  deceived  by  appearances.  Things  often  are 
not  what  they  seem.  The  most  plausible  errors  are  those  which  bear  a  superficial  resem- 
blance to  great  truths.  We  need  to  have  our  "  senses  exercised  to  discern  ix)th  good  and 
evil"  (Heb.  v.  14).  To  the  true  vine  there  correspond  many  wild  vines;  to  the  gourds 
that  nourish  and  satisfy,  many  fair  but  poisonous  imitations.  (2)  The  best  intentions 
may  lead  to  sad  mistakes.  The  important  point  to  be  noticed  here  is  that  our  inten- 
tions, however  good,  cannot  prevent  things  from  acting  according  to  their  real  nature. 
The  person  who  gathered  the  gourds  thought  them  innocuous,  but  they  produced  their 
poisonous  effects  all  the  same.  "  Sincerity  "  does  not  exonerate  ns  from  the  con- 
sequences of  our  actions;  at  least  it  cannot  prevent  these  consequences  following. 
Poisonous  principles  are  as  harmful  in  their  influence  when  promxilgated  in  ignorance, 
as  when  diffused  with  the  fullest  knowledge  of  their  deadly  character.  "  They  knew  it 
not "  does  not  sufBce  to  alter  the  nature  of  facts.  2.  The  timely  discovery.  The  pottage 
was  no  sooner  tasted  than  the  peculiar  flavour  and  felt  effects  discovered  to  those  eating 
it  that  there  was  something  amiss.  The  cry  was  raised,  "  0  thou  man  of  God,  there 
is  death  in  the  pot  I "  (1)  One  poisonous  ingredient  had  destroyed  the  value  of  much 
wholesome  food.  It  did  not  require  that  all  the  elements  in  the  pottage  should  be 
unwholesome ;  it  was  enough  that  this  one  was.  Through  it  the  whole  mixture  was 
rendered  deadly.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  defend  a  system  by  pointing  to  the  numerous 
truths  which  it  contains.  But  one  vital  error  blended  with  these  truths  may  give 
the  whole  a  fatal  quality.  The  gospel  itself  may  be  adulterated  with  specious  lies 
which  destroy  its  power  for  good.  (2)  It  is  well  when  there  is  timely  discovery 
of  evil.  It  is  better  when,  as  here,  those  who  have  made  the  discovery  resolve  to 
partake  no  more  of  the  poisoned  dish.  "  They  could  not  eat  thereof."  But  many,  in 
moral  things,  who  know,  who  at  least  have  been  warned,  that  there  is  "  death  in  the 
pot,"  go  on  eating  of  it.  There  is  death  in  the  intoxicating  pot,  yet  many  will  not 
refrain. 

III.  The  pottaok  healed.  Elisha  had  within  himself  a  monition  what  to  do.  He 
said,  "  Bring  meal."  The  meal  was  brought,  and  cast  into  the  pottage,  and  the  evil 
was  at  once  cured.  There  seems  no  reason  for  using  the  meal  except  that  it  was 
enitomary  to  accompany  these  prophetic  miracles  with  an  outward  symbolical  act;  and 
tha  meal,  as  a  symbol  of  what  was  wholesome  and  nutritious  in  food,  was  as  appropriate 
a  medium  as  any  to  be  used.  We  get  this  idea — that  the  unwholesome  is  to  be  displaced 
by  the  wholesome.  If  the  bane  is  to  be  destroyed,  we  must  use  as  antidote  that  which 
is  of  oppoute  character.    As  a  work  of  God's  power,  the  miracle  was  a  pledge  to  tht 


OH.  T.  1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  91 


prophets  of  God's  ability  and  readiness  to  help  them  in  every  time  of  need.    The 
simplest  means  can  be  made  effectual  if  God  blesses  it. — J.  O. 

Vers.  42 — i4. — 2%«  twenty  barley  loaves.  This  miracle  foreshadows  Christ's  acts  of 
multiplying  the  loaves  (Matt.  xiv.  15 — 21 ;  xv.  32 — 39,  etc.). 

I.  The  gift  of  loaves.  In  a  time  of  great  need  in  the  little  society,  there  came 
a  man  from  Baal-shalisha,  bringing  with  him  twenty  barley  loaves  and  a  quantity  of 
fresh  com.  This  welcome  gift  was :  1.  Prompted  hy  a  religious  motive.  It  was  "  bread 
of  the  firstfruits."  The  religious  dues  were  ordinarily  paid  to  priests  and  Levites,  but 
in  the  state  of  religion  in  Israel,  this  good  man  thought  that  he  kept  the  spirit  of  the 
Law  best  by  bringing  his  loaves  and  corn  to  Blisba  and  his  pupils.  The  act  is  proof 
(1)  of  his  genuine  piety;  (2)  of  his- religious  good  sense;  (3)  of  his  habitual  con- 
scientiousness in  discharge  of  duty.  He  did  not  conceive  that  "  dearth  in  the  land  " 
freed  him  from  the  obligation  of  the  firstfruits.  Would  that  every  Christian  had  as 
high  and  conscientious  a  standard  in  religious  giving  I  We  may  suppose  that  the  man 
was  further  moved  in  part  by  a  benevolent  desire  to  be  of  service  to  Elisha  and  the 
prophets.  In  that  case  he  would  be  no  loser  by  his  kindness.  2.  Providentially  timed 
to  meet  a  prtstivg  necessity.  Prom  the  point  of  view  of  Elisha  and  his  friends,  the  visit 
of  the  man  of  Baal-shalisha  was  a  signal  interposition  of  Providence  for  their  relief. 
Their  supplies  were  exhausted,  and  they  had  been  praying  and  hoping  for  a  door  of 
help  to  be  opened  to  them.  Just  then  this  anonymous  donor  from  Baal-shalisha  comes 
in  with  his  bread.  It  was  as  direct  a  case  of  Divine  provision  as  when  the  ravens 
bronght  bread  and  flesh,  to  Elijah  at  the  brook  Cherith  (1  Kings  xvii.  6).  God's  ways 
of  providing  for  his  people  are  endless  in  their  variety.  Many  instances  are  on  record 
of  help  sent  in  just  as  wonderful  a  way  to  those  in  need  as  this  passage  exhibits. 

II.  The  uibaculous  inorbasb.  Precious  as  these  twenty  barley  loaves  were,  they 
formed,  after  all,  but  scant  provision  for  a  hundred  hungry  men.  The  prophet  had, 
however,  warrant  from  God  to  convert  them  into  the  sufficiency  required.  1.  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord."  "  Give  unto  the  people,"  said  Elisha,  "  that  they  may  eat."  When 
Gehazi  objected  that  there  was  not  enough  for  all  the  company,  the  prophet  repeated 
his  command,  adding,  "  For  thus  saith  the  Lord,  They  shall  eat,  and  shall  leave  thereof." 
A  "thus  saith  the  Lord"  suffices  to  overcome  all  objections.  What  can  it  not 
accomplish  ?  It  made  the  worlds  at  first ;  it  gave  the  Israelites  manna  in  the  wilder- 
ness ;  it  brought  water  from  the  rock ;  it  had  but  a  little  before  multiplied  the  widow's 
oil.  If  we  have  this  warrant  for  anything  we  are  told  to  do,  we  need  not  hesitate  to 
attempt  it.  2.  The  people  fed.  Accordingly,  when  the  bread  was  served  out,  it  was 
found  to  be  sufficient  for  alL  It  is  curiously  supposed  by  some  that  the  miracle  was 
not  in  the  multiplication  of  the  bread,  but  in  causing  the  portions  received  to  satisfy 
hunger.  The  analogy  of  the  other  miracles  by  multiplication,  not  in  the  Gospels  alone, 
but  in  these  very  histories  (1  Kings  xvii.  12 — ^16 ;  oh.  iv.  1 — 7),  is  against  this. 
We  see  in  the  provision  made  (1)  a  blending  of  providence  and  miracle.  An  appreci- 
able quantity  of  the  bread  provided  was  furnished  by  the  man  of  Baal-shalisha ;  God 
made  this  sufficient  by  a  direct  act  of  power.  Another  illustration  of  the  variety  of 
the  Divine  methods.  The  one  thing  certain  is  that  those  who  trust  him  vnll  be 
provided  for  (Ps.  xxxiv.  9, 10).  We  do  well  to  see  in  it  also  (2)  an  image  of  the  true, 
God-given,  spiritual  bread,  which  God  brings  to  us  in  our  spiritual  need,  and  by  which 
he  satisfies  our  spiritual  hunger  (John  vi.  26 — 58). — J.  0. 


EXPOSITION, 
CHAPTER  V. 


Vers.  1 — 27.— The  Curb  of  Naaman's 
Leprosy.  HisGratitcde;  andthe  Sin  of 
Gehazi.  The  historian  continues  his  nar- 
rative of  Elisha's  miracles,  commenced  in 
eh.  ii.,  and  gives  in  the  present  chapter  a 
very  graphic  and  complete  acooimt  of  two 


which  were  especially  remarkable,  and 
which  stood  in  a  peculiar  relation  the  one 
towards  the  other.  One  was  the  removal  of 
leprosy ;  the  other,  its  infliction.  One  was 
wrought  on  a  foreigner  and  •>  man  of 
eminence;  the  other,  on  a  Hebrew  and  a 
servant.  The  second  was  altogether  conse- 
q<uutial  upon  the  first,  without  wliioh  the 


THE  SECOND  BOOK   OF  THE  KINGS.  [ch.  v.  1-M 


oooasion  for  it  would  not  hare  arisen.  The 
two  together  mnst  hare  greatly  raised  the 
reputation  of  the  prophet,  and  have  given 
him  an  influence  beyond  the  borders  of  the 
land  of  Israel ;  at  the  same  time  extending 
the  reputation  of  Jehovah  as  a  great  6od 
through  many  of  the  surrounding  nations. 

Yer.  1. — Now  ITaaman,  captain  of  the  host 
of  the  King  of  Syria.  The  name" Naaman" 
is  here  found  for  the  first  time.  It  is 
thought  to  be  derived  from  that  of  an 
Ararasean  god  (Ewald),  and  appears  in  the 
later  Arabic  under  the  form  of  Noman,  in 
which  shape  it  is  familiar  to  the  students 
of  Arabian  history.  Benhadad,  who  had 
been  wont  in  his  youth  and  middle  age  to 
lead  his  armies  into  the  field  in  person 
(1  Kings  XX.  1 — 20;  xxii.  31;  'Ancient 
Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.  103),  seems  now  in 
his  old  age  to  have  found  it  necessary  to 
entrust  the  command  to  a  general,  and  to 
have  made  Naaman  captain  of  his  host. 
Compare  the  similar  practice  (ibid,,  p.  101) 
of  the  Assyrian  monarchs.  Was  a  great 
man  with  his  master,  and  honourable — 
rather,  honoured,  or  held  in  esteem  (reBav/jLaff- 
/ieVos.LXX.) — because  by  him  the  lord  had 
given  deliverance — ^literally,  salvation,  or 
safety  {(rarnplai/,  LXX.) — ^nnto  Syria.  Pro- 
bably he  haid  commanded  the  Syrian  army 
in  some  of  its  encounters  with  the  Assyrians, 
who  at  this  time,  under  Shalmaneser  II., 
were  threatening  the  independence  of  Syria, 
but  did  not  succeed  in  subjecting  it.  He 
was  also  a  mighty  man  in  valour — gibb&r 
hail,  commonly  translated  in  our  version  by 
"mighty  man  of  valour,"  does  not  mean 
much  more  than  "  a  good  soldier" — but  he 
was  a  leper.  Leprosy  had  many  degrees. 
Some  of  the  lighter  Muds  did  not  incapaci- 
tate a  man  for  military  service,  or  unfit  him 
for  the  discharge  of  court  duties  (ver.  18). 
But  there  was  always  a  danger  that  the 
lighter  forms  might  develop  into  the  severer 
ones. 

Yer;  2. — ^And  the  Syrians  had  gone  out  by 
companies;  or,  t'n  marauding  hands.  No 
peace  had  been  made  after  Ahab's  expedition 
against  Bamoth-Gilead.  Hostilities,  there- 
fore, still  continued  upon  the  borders,  where 
raids  were  frequent,  as  upon  our  own 
northern  border  in  mediaeval  times.  And 
had  brought  away  captive  out  of  the  land  of 
Israel  a  little  maid.  The  marauding  ex- 
peditions of  ancient  times  had  for  one  of 
their  main  objects  the  capture  of  slaves. 
In  Africa  \(ars  are  still  carried  on  chiefly 
for  this  purpose.  And  she  waited  on  N^aaman's 
wife.  Either  Naaman  had  led  the  expidi- 
tion,  and  this  particular  captive  had  been 
assigned  to  him  in  the  division  of  the  booty, 


or  she  had  merely  passec  into  his  possession 
by  purchase,  and  thus  become  one  of  hii 
wife's  attendants. 

Yer.  3. — And  she  said  unto  her  mistress, 
Would  Sod  my  lord  were  with  the  prophet 
that  is  in  Samaria !  literally.  Oh  that  my  lord 
were  before  the  prophet  who  is  in  Samaria  I 
Elisha  had  a  house  in  Samaria  (ch.  vi.  32), 
where  he  resided  occasionally.  Tor  he 
would  recover  him  of  his  leprosy.  The 
"little  maid"  con^udes    from   her  small 

experience  that,  i£ I  master  and  the  great 

miracle-working  prophet  of  her  own  land 
could  be  brought  together,  the  result  would 
be  his  cure.  She  has,  in  her  servile  con- 
dition, contracted  an  affection  buth  for  her 
master  and  her  mistress,  and  her  sympathies 
are  strongly  with  them.  Perliaps  she  had 
no  serious  purpose  in  spealiing  as  slie  did. 
The  words  burst  from  her  as  a  mere  ex- 
pression of  good  will.  She  did  not  contem- 
plate any  action  resulting  from  them. 
"  Oh  that  things  could  be  otherwise  than 
as  they  are !  Had  I  my  dear  master  in  my 
own  country,  it  would  be  easy  to  accomplish 
his  cure.  The  prophet  is  so  powerful  and 
BO  kind.  He  both  could  and  would  recover 
him."  Any  notion  of  her  vague  wish  being 
carried  out,  being  made  the  ground  of  a 
serious  embassy,  was  probably  fer  from  the 
girl's  thought.  But  the  "bread  cast  upon 
the  waters  returns  after  many  days."  There 
is  no  kind  wish  or  kind  utterance  that 
may  not  have  a  result  far  beyond  anything 
that  the  wisher  or  utterer  contemplated. 
Good  wishes  are  seeds  that  ofttimes  take 
root,  and  gi'ow,  and  blossom,  and  bear  fruit 
beyond  the  uttermost  oonception  of  liose 
who  low  them. 

Yer.  4. — And  one  went  in,  and  told  hii 
lord,  saying.  "  One  went  in  "  is  a  possible 
translation;  but  it  is  simpler  and  more 
natural  to  translate  "he  went  in,"  t.e. 
Naaman  went  in,  and  told  his  lord,  Ben- 
hadad, the  King  of  Syria.  Thus  and  thut 
said  the  maid  that  is  of  the  land  of  Israel. 
Being  "of  the  land  of  Israel,"  her  words 
had  a  certain  weight — she  hadjneani  of 
knowing — she  ought  to  know  whether  tuoh 
a  thing  as  the  cure  of  leprosy  by  the  inter- 
vention of  a  prophet  was  a  possible  occurrence 
in  her  country. 

Yer.  5. — And  the  King  of  Syria  said,  Go 
to,  go;  rather.  Go,  depart;  i.e.  lose  no 
time;  go  at  once,  if  there  is  any  sucl: 
possibility  as  the  maiden  has  indicated 
"  We  see,"  B'ahr  says,  "  from  the  king't 
readiness,  how  anxious  he  was  for  the 
restoration  of  Naaman."  And  I  will  send  a 
letter  unto  the  Sing  of  Israel.  Letters  ha<1 
been  interchanged  between  Solomon  anrl 
Hiram,  King  of  Tyre  (2  Chron.  ii.  3 — 11),  a 
century  earlier;  and  the  communications  of 
king  with  king  in  the<  East  though  some 


0H.y.  1— 27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINQa. 


93 


time*  eanied  on  orally  by  ambasaadoTB, 
probably  took  place  to  a  large  extent  by 
means  of  letters  from  •  very  early  date. 
Wiitten  communications  seem  to  bave  led 
to  the  outbreak  of  the  war  by  which  the 
foreign  dynasty  of  the  Hyksoe  was  driven 
out  of  Egypt,  and  the  native  supremacy  re- 
established ('History  of  Ancient  Egypt,' 
vol.  iL  pp.  199,  200).  Written  engagements 
were  certainly  entered  into  between  the 
Egyptian  kings  and  the  Hittites  at  a  date 
earlier  than  the  Exodus  (ibid.,  pp.  291,  SIC). 
Benhadad  evidently  regards  the  sending  of 
a  letter  to  s  neighbouring  monarch  as  a 
natural  and  ordinary  occurrence.  And  he — 
i.«.  Naaman — departed,  and  took  with  him 
ten  talents  of  silver — reckoned  by  Kail  as 
equal  to'25,000  thalers,  or  £3750;  by  Thenius 
as  equal  to  20,000  thalers,  or  £3000— and 
six  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  "Pieces  of 
gold"  did  not  yet  exist,  since  coin  had  not 
been  invented.  Six  thousand  shekels'  weight 
of  gold  is  probably  intended.  This  would 
equal,  according  to  Keil,  50,000  thalers 
(£7500);  according  to  Thenius,  60,000  thalers 
(£9000).  Such  sums  are  quite  within  the 
probable  means  of  a  rich  Syrian  nobleman 
of  the  time,  a  favourite  at  court,  and  the 
generalissimo  of  the  Syrian  army,  Naaman 
evidently  supposed  that  he  would  have, 
directly  or  indirectly,  to  purchase  his  cure. 
And  ten  changes  of  raiment  (comp.  Gen. 
xlv.  22 ;  Horn., '  Od.,'  xiii.  67 ;  Xen., '  Oyrop.,' 
viii.  2.  §  8;  •Anab.,'i.  2.  §  29;  etc.).  The 
practice  of  giving  dresses  of  honour  as 
presents  continues  in  the  East  to  this  day. 

Ver.  6. — And  he  brought  the  letter  to  the 
King  of  Israel,  saying.  The  hostile  relation! 
between  Syria  and  Israel  would  not  interfere 
with  the  coming  and  going  of  a  messenger 
from  either  king  to  the  other,  who  would  be 
invested  with  an  ambassadorial  character. 
Now  when  this  letter  is  come  unto  thee. 
We  must  not  suppose  that  we  have  here  the 
whole  letter,  which,  no  doubt,  began  with 
the  customary  Eastern  formalities  and 
elaborate  compliments.  The  historian  omils 
these,  and  hastens  to  communicate  to  ns  the 
main  point  of  the  epistle,  or  rather,  perhaps, 
its  main  drift,  which  he  states  somewhat 
baldly  and  bluntly.  Behold,  I  have  there- 
with sent  Naaman  my  servant  to  thee,  that 
thou  mayest  recover  him— literally,  and  thou 
shall  recover  him — of  his  leprosy.  The 
letter  made  no  mention  of  Elisha.  Ben- 
hadad assumed  that,  if  the  King  of  Israel 
had  in  his  dominions  a  person  able  to  cure 
leprosy,  he  would  be  fully  cognizant  of  the 
fact,  and  would  at  once  send  for  him,  and 
call  upon  him  for  an  exertion  of  his  gift  or 
art.  He  is  not  likely  to  have  comprehended 
the  relations  in  which  Kings  of  Israel  stood 
towards  the  Jehovistio  prophets,  but  may 
probably  have  thought  of  Elisha  "  as  a  sort 


of  chief  magus,  or  as  the  Israelitish  high 
priest"  (Menken),  whom  the  king  would 
have  at  his  beck  and  call,  and  whose  services 
would  be  completely  at  his  disposaL 

Ver.  7.— And  it  came  to  pan,  when  the 
King  of  Israel  had  read  the  letter,  that  he 
rent  his  clothes.  In  horror  and  alarm 
(comp.  2  Sam.  xiii.  19 ;  2  Ohron.  xxxiv.  27 ; 
Ezra  ix.  3 ;  Jer.  xxxvi.  24).  He  concluded 
that  once  more  (see  1  Kings  xx.  7)  the 
Syrian  monarch  was  determined  to  find  a 
ground  of  quarrel,  and  had  therefore  sent 
to  him  an  impossible  request.  And  said,  Am 
I  God,  to  kill  and  to  make  alive  ?  To  "  kill " 
and  to  "make  alive"  were  familiar  expres- 
sions in  the  mouth  of  the  Israelites  to 
designate  omnipotence  (see  Dent,  xxxii.  39; 
1  Sam.  ii.  6).  Becovering  trom  leprosy  was 
equivalent  to  making  alive,  for  a  leprous 
person  was  "as  one  dead"  (Numb.  xii.  12) 
according  to  Hebrew  notions.  That  this 
man  doth  send  unto  me  to  recover  a  man  of 
his  leprosy.  The  king  evidently  does  not 
bethink  himself  of  Elisha,  of  whose  great 
miracle  of  raising  the  dead  to  life  (oh.  iv. 
84—36)  he  may  not  up  to  this  time  have 
heard.  Elisha's  early  miracles  were  mostly 
wrought  with  a  certain  amount  of  seoreoy. 
Wherefore  consider,  I  pray  you,  and  see  how 
he  seeketh  a  quarrel  againjt  me.  The  king 
misjudged  Benhadad,  but  not  without  some 
grounds  of  reason,  if  he  was  ignorant  of 
Elisha's  miraculous  gifts.  Benhadad,  when 
seeking  a  ground  of  quarrel  with  Ahab, 
had  made  extravagant  requests  (see  1 
Kings  XX.  3—6). 

Ver.  8.— And  it  was  so— or,  tt  came  to 
pass — when  Elisha  the  man  of  Ood  (see 
ch.  iv.  7,  16,  etc.)  had  heard  that  the  King 
of  Israel  had  rent  his  clothes,  that  he  sent 
to  the  king,  saying,  Wherefore  hast  thou 
rent  thy  clothes  1  The  king's  act  was 
public ;  his  complaint  was  public ;  he  wished 
his  subjects  to  know  the  outrageous  con- 
duct, as  he  Tiewed  it,  of  the  Syrian  king 
(comp.  1  Kings  xx.  7,  where  Ahab  similarly 
calls  attention  to  the  strait  in  which  he  is 
placed).  Thus  the  rumour  went  through 
the  town,  and  reached  the  ears  of  the  pro- 
phet, who  therefore  sent  a  message  to  the 
king.  Let  him  come  now  to  me ;  i.e.  let  Naa- 
man, instead  of  applying  to  thee,  the  earthly 
head  of  the  state,  the  source  of  all  human 
power,  which  is  utterly  unavailing  in  such 
a  case,  apply  to  me,  the  source  of  spiritual 
power,  the  commissioned  minister  of  Jeho- 
vah, who  alone  can  help  him  under  the 
circumstances.  And  [then]  he  shall  know 
that  there  is  a  prophet  in  Israel;  {.e.  he 
shall  have  swift  and  sure  demonstration, 
that  God  "has  not  left  himself  without 
witness,"  that,  "  in  spite  of  the  apostasy  of 
king  and  people,  the  God  who  can  kill  and 
make  alive  yet  makes  himself  known  in 


M 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE   RINGS.  [ch.  T.  1— 27. 


Israel  in  his  saving  might  through  his 
servants  the  prophets"  (Bahr),  of  whom  I 
am  one. 

Ver.  9. — 8o  I7aaman  came  with  his  horses 
and  with  his  chariot.  The  Syrians  had 
had  chariots,  and  used  horses  to  draw  them, 
from  a  remote  date.  The  Hyksos,  who  in- 
troduced horses  and  chariots  into  Egypt, 
though  not  exactly  a  Syrian  people,  entered 
Egypt  from  Syria;  and  in  all  the  Syrian 
wars  of  the  Egyptians,  which  began  about 
B.O.  1600,  we  find  their  adversaries  employ- 
ing a  chariot  force.  In  one  representation  of 
a  fight  between  the  Egyptians  and  a  people 
iuTading  Egypt  from  Syria,  the  war-chariots 
of  the  latter  are  drawn  by  four  oxen ;  but 
generally  the  horse  was  used  on  both  sides. 
Syria  imported  her  horses  and  chariots  from 
Egypt  (1  Kings  X.  29),  and,  as  appears  from 
this  passage,  employed  them  for  peaceful  as 
well  as  for  warlike  purposes.  There  was  a 
similar  employment  of  them  from  a  very 
early  time  lu  Egypt  (see  Gen.  xli.  43 ;  1. 9). 
And  stood  at  the  door  of  the  honse  of  Elisha 
Elisha  was  at  this  time  residing  in  Samaria, 
whether  in  hia  own  house  or  not  we  cannot 
say.  His  abode  was  probably  a  humble 
one;  and  when  the  great  general,  accom- 
panied by  his  cavalcade  of  followers,  drew 
up  before  it,  he4iad,  we  may  be  sure,  no  in- 
tention of  dismounting  and  entering.  What 
lie  expected  he  tells  us  himself  in  ver.  11. 
The  prophet  regarded  his  pride  and  self- 
conceit  as  deserving  of  a  rebuke. 

Yer.  10.— And  Elisha  sent  a  messenger 
unto  him.  Elisha  asserted  the  dignity  of 
hia  o£Sce.  Naaman  was  "a  great  man" 
(ver.  1),  with  a  high  sense  of  his  own  im- 
portance, and  regarded  the  prophet  as  Tery 
much  inferior  to  himself.  He  expected  to 
be  waited  on,  courted,  to  receive  every 
possible  attention.  Elisha  no  doubt  in- 
tended very  pointedly  to  rebuke  him  by 
remaining  in  his  house,  and  communicating 
with  the  great  man  by  a  messenger.  But 
there  is  no  ground  for  taxing  him  with 
"priestly  pride,"  or  even  with  "impolite- 
ness "  on  this  account.  He  had  to  impress 
upon  the  Syrian  noble  the  nothingness  of 
wealth  and  earthly  grandeur,  and  the 
dignity  of  the  prophetic  ofiSce.  He  did  not 
do  more  than  was  requisite  for  these  pur- 
poses. Saying,  Go  and  wash  in  Jordan 
seven  times.  Elisha  speaks,  no  doubt,  '■  by 
the  word  of  the  Lord.  He  is  directed  to 
require  of  Naaman  a  compliance  with  a 
somewhat  burdensome  order.  The  nearest 
point  on  the  course  of  Jordan  was  above 
twenty  miles  distant  from  Samaria.  Kaa- 
man  is  to  go  thither,  to  strip  lilmself,  and 
to  plunge  into  the  stream  seven  times.  The 
directions  seem  given  to  test  his  faith.  They 
may  be  compared  with  that  of  our  Lord  to 
the  blind  man,  "Go^  wash  in  the  pool  of 


Siloam,"  and,  in  another  point  of  view,  with 
that  given  to  Joshua  (Josh.  vi.  3—5),  and 
that  of  Elijah  to  his  servant  (1  Kings  xvlii. 
43).  To  repeat  a  formal  act  six  times  with- 
out perceiving  any  result,  and  yet  to  per- 
severe and  repeat  it  a  seventh  time,  requires 
a  degree  of  faith  and  trust  that  men  do  not 
often  possess.  And  thy  flesh  shall  eome 
again  to  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  olean.  The 
scaly  leprous  scurf  shall  fall  off  and  reveal 
clean  flesh  underneath.  Thy  body  shall  be 
manifestly  freed  from  all  defUement. 

Ter.  11. — Bat  Naaman  was  wroth, .  .  , 
and  said.  Not  unnaturally.  As  a  "  great 
man,"  the  lord  on  whose  arm  the  king  leant, 
and  the  captain  of  the  host  of  Syria.  Naa- 
man was  accustomed  to  extreme  deference, 
and  all  the  outward  tokens  of  respect  and 
reverence.  He  had,  moreover,  come  with  a 
goodly  train,  carrying  gold  and  silver  and 
rich  stuffs,  manifestly  prepared  to  pay 
largely  for  whatever  benefit  he  might 
receive.  To  be  curtly  told,  "  Go,  wash  in 
Jordan,"  by  the  prophet's  servant,  without 
the  prophet  himself  condescending  to  make 
himself  visible,  would  have  been  trying  to 
any  OrieDtal's  temper,  and  to  one  of  Naa- 
man's  rank  and  position  might  well  seem  an 
insult.  The  Syrian  general  bad  pictured 
to  himself  a  very  different  scene.  Behold, 
I  thought,  He  will  surely  come  out  to  me, 
and  stand,  and  call  on  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
his  Ood,  and  strike  his  hand  over  the  place, 
and  recover  the  leper;  rather,  take  away 
the  leprosy  (,iiro<rvviifi  rh  \eirp6y,  LXX.). 
Naaman  had  imagined  a  striking  scene, 
whereof  he  was  to  be  the  central  figure, 
the  prophet  descending,  with  perhaps  a 
wand  of  ofSce,  the  attendants  drawn  up  on 
either  side,  the  passers-by  standing  to  gaze 
— a  solemn  invocation  of  the  Deity,  a 
waving  to  and  fro  of  the  wand  in  the  pro- 
phet's hand,  and  a  sudden  manifest  cure, 
wrought  in  the  open  streef  of  the  city, 
before  the  eyes  of  men,  and  at  once  noised 
abroad  through  the  capital,  so  as  to  make 
him  "  the  observed  of  all  observers,"  "  the 
cynosure  of  all  neighbouring  eyes."  Instead 
of  this,  he  is  bidden  to  go  as  he  came,  to 
ride  twenty  miles  to  the  stream  ofthe  Jordan, 
generally  muddy,  or  at  least  discoloured, 
and  there  to  wash  himself,  with  none  to 
look  on  but  his  own  attendants,  with  no 
fclat,  no  pomp  or  circumstance,  no  glory  of 
surroundings.  It  is  not  surprising  that  he 
was  disappointed  and  vexed. 

Ver.  12. — ^Are  not  Abana  and  Fhaipar, 
rivers  of  Damasons,  better  than  all  the 
waters  of  Israeli  may  I  not  wash  in  them, 
and  be  clean  1  The  "  rivers  of  Damas- 
cus" are  streams  of  great  freshness  and 
beauty.  The  principal  one  is  the  Barada, 
probably  the  Abana  of  the  present  passage, 
which,  rising  in  the  Antilibanus  range,  and 


OH.  T.  1—27.] 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGa 


06 


flowing  through  a  Beries  of  romantic  glens, 
bnrsts  finally  from  the  mountains  through  a 
deep  gorge  and  scatters  itself  over  the  plain. 
One  branch  passes  ri^ht  through  the  city  of 
Damascus,  cutting  it  in  half.  Others  flow 
past  the  city  both  on  the  north  and  on  the 
south,  irrigating  the  gardens  and  orchards, 
and  spreading  fertility  far  and  wide  over 
the  Merj.  A  small  stream,  the  Fidjeh, 
flows  into  the  Barada  irom  the  north. 
Another  quite  independent  river,  the  Awaaj, 
watersthe  southern  portion  of  the  Damascene 
plain,  but  does  not  approach  within  several 
miles  of  the  city.  Most  geographers  regard 
this  as  the  "Pharpar;"  out  the  identifica- 
tion is  uncertain,  since  the  name  may  very 
possibly  have  attached  to  one  of  the  branches 
of  the  Barada.  The  Barada  is  limpid,  cool, 
gushing,  the  perfection  of  a  river  I  It  was 
known  to  the  Greeks  and  Bomans  as  the 
Ohrysorrhoas,  or  "  river  of  gold."  We  can 
well  understand  that  Naaman  would  esteem 
the  streams  of  his  own  city  as  infinitely 
superior  to  the  turbid,  often  sluggish, 
sometimes  "  clay-ooloured  "  (Bobinson, '  Ke- 
searohes,'  vol.  ii  p.  256)  Jordan.  If  leprosy 
was  to  be  washed  away,  it  might  naturally 
have  appeared  to  him  that  the  pure  Barada 
would  have  more  cleansing  power  than  the 
muddy  liver  recommended  to  him  by  the 
prophet  8o  he  tuned  and  went  away  in  a 
lage. 

Ver.  13. — And  hit  lervants  came  near, 
and  spake  nnto  him,  and  said,  Uy  father. 
Naaman's  attendants  did  not  share  his  in- 
dignation, or,  if  they  did,  since  servants  in 
the  East  are  apt  to  be  jealous  of  their 
masters'  honour,  had  their  feelings  more 
under  control;  and  they  therefore  inter- 
fered with  mUd  words,  anxious  to  pacify 
him,  and  persuade  him  to  follow  the  pro- 
phet's advice.  "  My  father  "  is  a  deferential 
and,  at  the  same  time,  an  affectionate  ad- 
dress, not  unnatural  in  the  mouth  of  a  con- 
fidential servant  (comp.  ch.  ii.  12).  There 
is  thus  no  need  of  any  alteration  of  the 
text,  such  as  Ewald  (H^  to'^  '?k)  or  Thenius 
(D^t  for  ok)  proposes.  It  must  be  admitted, 
however,  that  the  LXX.  seem  to  have  had 
1^  in  their  copies.  If  the  prophet  had  bid 
thee  do  some  great  thing — "  had  set  thee," 
i.e.,  "some  dilScult  tapk" — ^wonldest  thou 
not  have  done  it  ?  how  much  rather  then, 
[shouldest  thou  perform  his  behest]  when 
he  saith  to  thee,  Wash,  and  be  clean  1  The 
reasoning  was  unanswerable,  and  took  effect. 
Naaman  was  persuaded. 

Ver.  14. — Then  went  he  down;  i.e.  de- 
scended into  the  deep  Jordan  valley  from  the 
highland  of  Samaria — a  descent  of  above 
a  thousand  feet.  The  nearest  route  would 
involve  a  journey  of  about  twenty-five  miles. 
And  dipped  himself  seven  times  in  Jordan — 


f.e.  followed  exactly  the  prophet's  directions 
in  rer.  10 — according  to  the  saying  of  the 
man  of  God :  and  his  flesh  came  again  like 
onto  the  flesh  of  a  little  child — literally, o/ 
a  Utile  lad — and  he  was  clean,  Not  only 
was  the  leprosy  removed,  but  the  flesh  was 
more  soft  and  tender  than  that  of  a  grown 
man  commonly  is.  It  was  like  the  flesh  of 
ahoy. 

Ver.  15. — And  he  returned  to  the  man  of 
Ood,  he  and  all  his  company.  It  is  not 
always  seen  what  this  involved.  It  involved 
going  out  of  his  way  at  least  fifty  miles. 
At  the  Jordan,  Naaman  was  on  his  way 
home,  had  accomplished  a  fourth  part  of  his 
return  journey ;  in  three  more  days  he  would 
be  in  Damascus,  in  his  own  palace.  But  he 
feels  that  it  would  be  an  unworthy  act  to 
accept  his  cure  andmake  no  acknowledgment 
of  it,  having  turned  away  from  the  prophet 
"in  a  rage"  (ver.  12),  now,  without  apo- 
logy, or  retractation,  or  expression  of  regret 
or  gratitude,  to  return  into  his  own  country 
under  the  obligation  of  an  inestimable 
benefit.  His  cure  has  wrought  in  him,  not 
merely  a  revulsion  of  feeling  from  rage  and 
fury  to  thankfulness,  but  a  change  oi  belief. 
It  has  convinced  him  that  the  Ood  of  Elisha 
is  the  God  of  the  whole  earth.  It  has 
turned  him  from  a  worshipper  of  Bimmon 
into  a  worshipper  of  Jehovah.  He  must 
proclaim  this.  He  must  let  the  prophet 
know  what  is  in  his  heart.  He  must,  if 
possible,  induce  him  to  accept  a  recompense. 
Therefore  he  thinks  nothing  of  an  outlay 
of  time  and  trouble,  but  retraces  his  steps 
to  the  Israelite  capital,  taking  with  him  all 
his  company,  his  horses  and  his  chariots, 
his  gold  and  silver  and  bales  of  clothing, 
and  numerous  train  of  attendants.  And 
came,  and  stood  before  him ;  i.e.  descended 
from  his  chariot,  and  asked  admittance  into 
the  prophet's  house,  and  was  received  and 
allowed  an  audience — a  striking  contrast 
with  his  previous  appearance  before  the 
house,  in  expectation  that  the  prophet  would 
come  down  and  wait  upon  him.  And  he 
said,  Behold,  now  I  know  that  there  is  no 
God  in  all  the  earth,  bat  in  Israel.  This  is 
an  acknowledgment  of  the  sole  supremacy 
of  Jehovah  on  the  part  of  a  heathen,  such 
as  we  scarcely  find  elsewhere.  The  general 
belief  of  the  time,  and  indeed  of  antiquity, 
was  that  every  land  had  its  own  god,  who 
was  supreme  in  it — Baal  in  Phoenicia,  Che- 
mosh  in  Moab,  Moloch  in  Ammon,  Bimmon 
in  Syria,  Bel  or  Bel-Merodach  in  Babylon, 
Amun-Ea  in  Egypt,  etc. ;  and  when  there  is 
an  acknowledgment  of  Jehovah  on  the  part 
of  heathens  in  Scripture,  it  is  almost  always 
the  recognition  of  him  as  a  god — the  God  of 
the  Jews  or  of  the  Israelites,  one  among 
many  (see  Exod.  x.  16,  17;  ch.  xvii.  26; 
xviii.  33—35;  2  Chron.  ii.  U;  Dan.  ii.  47j 


M 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KmOtS.  [oh.  ▼.1—27, 


Hi.  29 ;  yi.  20,  etc.).  But  here  we  have  a 
plain  and  distinct  recognition  of  him  as  the 
one  and  only  Ood  that  is  in  all  the  earth. 
Naaman  thus  shows  a  greater  docility,  a 
readier  receptivity,  than  almost  any  of  the 
other  pious  heathens  who  are  brought  before 
us  in  Scripture.  Balaam  and  Cyrus  alone 
equal  him.  Now  therefore,  I  pray  thee, 
tEike  a  blessing — i.e.  "a  present" — of  thy 
servant.  Heathens  were  accustomed  to 
carry  presents  to  the  oracles  which  they 
consulted,  and  to  reward  those  from  which 
they  received  favourable  responses  with  gifts 
of  enormous  value  (see  Herod.,  i.  14, 50,  etc.). 
The  Jewish  prophets  did  not  generally 
object  to  such  free-will  offerings,  Naaman 
therefore  quite  naturally  and  reasonably 
made  the  offer.  He  would  have  contravened 
mage  had  he  not  done  so. 

Ver.  16. — But  he  said,  As  the  lord  liveth, 
before  whom  I  stand,  I  ivill  receive  none. 
Blisha  regards  it  as  best,  under;  the  circum- 
stances, to  refuse  the  offered  recompense. 
It  was  not  compulsory  on  him  so  to  act ;  for 
the  precept,  "  Freely  ye  liave  received, 
freely  give "  (Matt.  x.  8),  had  not  been  yet 
uttered.  Pious  Israelites  commonly  brouglit 
gifts  to  the  prophets  whom  they  consulted 
(1  Sam.  ix.  7,  8 ;  1  Kings  xiv.  3).  But,  iu 
the  case  of  a  foreigner,  ignorant  hitherto  of 
true  religion,  whom  it  was  important  to  im- 
press favourably,  and,  if  possible,  win  over 
to  the  faith,  Blisha  deemed  it  advisable  to 
take  no  reward.  Naaman  was  thus  taught 
that  Jehovah  was  his  true  Healer,  the  pro- 
phet the  mere  instrument,  and  that  it  was 
to  Jehovah  that  his  gratitude,  his  thanks, 
and  his  offerings  were  due.  And  he  urged 
him  to  take  it;  hut  he  refused.  Contests  of 
politeness  are  common  in  the  East,  where 
the  one  party  offers  to  give  and  even  insists 
on  giving,  while  the  other  makes  a  pretence 
of  declining;  but  here  both  parties  were 
in  earnest,  and  the  gift  was  absolutely 
declined. 

Ver.  17.^-Alld  Naaman  said,  Shall  therenot 
then,  I  pray  thee,  be  given  to  thy  servant 
two  mules'  burden  of  earth  1  Naaman  does 
not  state  what  he  intends  to  do  with  the 
earth ;  and  the  critics  have  consequently 
suggested  two  uses.  Some  suppose  that  he 
intended  to  make  the  earth  into  an  altar 
upon  which  he  might  offer  his  sacrifices; 
comp.  Exod.  XX.  24,  where  an  altar  of  earth 
is  spoken  of  (Bahr  and  others).  But  tlie 
more  general  opinion  (Tlienius,  Von  Ger» 
lach,  etc.)  is  that  he  wished  to  spread  the 
earth  over  a  piece  of  Syrian  ground,  and 
thereby  to  hallow  the  ground  for  purposes 
of  worship.  The  Jews  themselves  are  known 
to  have  acted  similarly,  transferring  earth 
from  Jerusalem  to  Babylonia,  to  build  a 
temple  on  it ;  and  the  idea  is  not  an  unna- 
tntiil  one.     It  doe*  not  necessarily  imply 


the  "pol^theistio  superstition  "  that  every 
god  has  his  own  land,  where  alone  he  can  lis 
properly  worshipped.  It  rests  simply  on 
the  notion  of  there  being  such  a  thing  as 
"  holy  ground  "  (Gxod.  iii.  5) — ground  more 
suited  for  the  worship  of  God  than  ordinary 
common  soil,  which  therefore  it  is  worth 
while  to  transfer  from  place  to  place  for  a 
religious  purpose.  For  thy  servant  will 
henceforth  offer  neither  burnt  offering  nor 
sacriflce  [as  meat  offerings  or  firstfruits] 
onto  other  gods,  but  nnto  the  lord.  It  is 
implied  that  Naaman  had  been  hitherto  a 
polytheist.  Not  much  is  known  of  the 
Syrian  religion,  but,  so  far  as  can  be 
gathered,  it  would  seem  to  have  been  a 
somewhat  narrow  polytheism.  The  sun  was 
the  supreme  god,  and  was  worshipped 
ordinarily  under  the  name  of  Hadad  (Ma- 
crob.,  'Sat.,'  i  23).  There  was  also,  cer- 
tainly, a  great  goddess,  the  "Dea  Syra" 
of  the  Eoraans,  whom  they  identified  with 
Cybele  and  with  their  own  "  Bona  Dea,"  a 
divinity  parallel  with  the  Ashtoreth  of  the 
Phoenicians,  and  the  Ishtar  of  the  Assyrians 
and  Babylonians.  Whether  there  were  any 
other  distinct  deities  may  be  doubted,  since 
Rimmon  is  possibly  only  another  name  of 
Hadad  (see  the  commeut  on  ver.  18).  Adonis 
is  simply  "Adonai,"  i.e.  "my  Lord,"  an 
epithet  of  the  Supreme  Being. 

Ver.  18. — In  this  thing  the  Lord  pardon 
thy  servant.  Naaman  is  not  prepared  to  be 
a  martyr  for  his  religion.  On  returning  to 
Damascus,  it  will  be  among  his  civil  duties 
to  accompany  his  master  to  the  national 
temples,  and  to  prostrate  himself  before  the 
images  of  the  national  deities.  If  he  declines, 
if  (like  an  early  Christian)  he  will  not  enter 
"  the  house  of  devils,"  much  less  bow  down 
before  the  graven  image  of  a  false  god,  it 
may  cost  him  his  life;  it  will  certainly  cost 
him  his  court -favour.  For  such  a  sacrifice 
he  is  not  prepared.  Yet  his  conscience  tells 
him  that  he  will  be  acting  wrongly.  He 
therefore  expresses  a  hope,  or  a  prayer,  that 
his  fault,  for  a  fault  he  feels  that  it  will  be, 
may  be  forgiven  him — ^that  Jehovah  will 
not  be  "  extreme  to  mark  what  is  done 
amiss,"  but  will  excuse  his  outward  con- 
formity to  his  inward  faith  and  zeal.  Tliat 
when  my  master  goeth  into  the  house  of 
Bimmon.  Eimmon  is  probably  derived  from 
rum  (on),  "to  be  high,"  and  means  "the 
exalted  god,"  according  to  the  gloss  of  He- 
sychius — 'Poftas,  Syfiurros  Biis.  It  is  wrongly 
connected  with  jitST,  "  a  pomegranate,"  and 
should  rather  be  compared  with  the  Arabia 
.Er  BAaman,  "  the  Most  High."  The  royal 
name,  "Tab-Rimmon"  (1  Kings  xv.  18), 
contains  the  root,  as  does  also  the  local  name 
(Zech.  xii.  11),  "Hadad-Eimmon."  This 
last  word  gives  rise  to  the  suspicion  that 
Hadad  and  Eimmon  are  merely  two  namet 


OH.  T.  1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


«7 


of  the  same  deity,  who  was  called  "  Hadad  " 
or  "Hadar"  as  bright  and  gloiiom,  "Bim- 
mon"  as  lofty  and  exalted.  To  worship 
there,  and  he  leaneth  on  my  hand.  Either 
Naaman's  leprosy  must  have  been  recent, 
and  he  refers  to  &e  king's  practice  in  former 
times,  or  there  must  have  been  far  less 
horror  of  leprosy  among  the  Syrians  than 
there  was  among  the  Hebrews.  And  I  bow 
myself  in  the  house  of  Bimmon — before  the 
image,  or  at  any  rate  before  the  supposed 
presence  of  the  god — when  I  bow  down 
myself  in  the  honse  of  Bimmon,  the  Lord 
pardon  thy  servant  in  this  thing.  The 
repetition  of  the  clause  indicates  Naaman's 
anxiety  on  the  subject. 

Yer.  19.— And  he  said  nnto  him,  Oo  in 
peace.  Elisha  declared  neither  that  God 
would  nor  that  he  would  not  forgive 
Naaman  his  departure  from  the  path  of 
strict  right.  He  was  not  called  upon  to 
give  an  answer,  since  Naaman  had  not  put 
a  qnestion,  but  had  only  expressed  a  wish. 
His  "Go  in  peace"  is  to  be. taken  simply  as 
"  wishing  the  departing  Syrian  the  peace 
of  God  upon  the  road."  So  Keil,  rightly. 
So  he  departed  from  him  a  little  way. 
Naaman  left  the  presence  of  Elisha,  quitted 
Samaria,  and  had  gone  a  short  way  on  his 
homeward  journey  when  Gehazi  overtook 
him.  Ver.  19  is  closely  connected  with 
ver.  20. 

Ver.  20. — But  Gehazi,  the  servant  of 
Elisha  the  man  of  Ood,  said  (see  ch.iv.  12 — 
36  for  the  position  held  towards  Elisha  by 
Geliazi),  Behold,  my  master  has  spared 
Naaman  this  Syrian.  Gehazi  either  honestly 
thinks,  or  at  least  persuades  himself,  that  a 
Syrian  ought  to  be,  not  spared,  but  spoiled, 
as  being  a  foreigner  and  an  enemy.  In  not 
receiving  at  his  hands  that  which  he 
brought  (see  ver.  5).  Gehazi  may  not  hiive 
known  how  much  it  was,  but  he  had  seen 
the  laden  animals,  and  rightly  concluded 
that  the  value  was  great.  But,  as  the  Lord 
liveth,  I  will  run  after  him,  and  take  some- 
what of  him.  "  As  tire  Lord  liveth"  seems 
a  strange  phrase  in  tlie  mouth  of  one  who 
is  bent  on  lying  and  on  stealing.  But 
experience  tea(^hes  us  that  religious  formulss 
do  drop  from  the  lips  of  persons  engaged  in 
equally  indefensible  proceedings.  This  is 
partly  because  formula  by  frequent  use 
become  mere  forms,  to  which  the  utterer 
attaches  no  meaning;  partly  because  men 
blind  themselves  to  the  wrongfulness  of 
their  actions,  and  find  some  excuse  or  other 
for  any  course  of  conduct  by  which  they 
hope  to  profit. 

Ver.  21. — So  Oehazi  followed  after  Naaman, 
A  company  of  travellers  in  the  East,  even 
though  it  consist  of  the  retinue  of  a  single 
great  man,  will  always  contain  footmen,  as 
veil  as  those  who  ride  on  horses  or   in 


chariots,  and  will  not  travel  at  a  faster  pace 
than  about  three  miles  an  hour.  Thus 
Gehazi,  if  he  went  at  his  best  speed,  could 
expect  to  overtake,  and  did  actually  over- 
take, the  cavalcade  of  Naaman.  He  pro- 
bably overtook  them  at  a  very  short  distance 
from  Samaria.  And  when  Naaman  saw  him 
running  after  him.  Gehazi  was  pressed  tor 
time.  He  could  not  start  at  once,  lest  he 
should  make  it  too  plain  that  he  was  going 
in  pursuit  of  Naaman;  and  he  could  not 
absent  himself  from  the  house  too  long,  lest 
his  master  should  call  for  him.  He  had, 
therefore,  at  whatever  loss  of  dignity,  to 
hurry  himself,  and  actually  "run  after" 
the  Syrian.  Naaman,  either  accidentally 
looking  back,  or  warned  by  some  of  his 
train,  sees  him,  recognizes  him,  and  is  only 
too  glad  to  respond  to  his  wishes.  He  lighted 
down  from  the  chariot  to  meet  him.  Au  act 
of  great  ooudeaoeusion.  As  Balir  notes, 
"  Descent  from  a  vehicle  is,  in  the  East,  a  sign 
of  respect  from  the  inferior  to  the  superior;" 
and  Naaioan,  in  lighting  down  from  hii 
chariot,  must  have  intended  to  "  honour  the 
prophet  in  his  servant "  ('  Comment  iry  on 
Kings,'  vol.  ii.  p.  55).  But  such  honour  is 
not  commonly  paid,  and  thus  the  act  of 
Naaman  was  abnormal.  And  said,  Is  all 
Weill  The  words  aimit  of  no  better  trans- 
lation. Seeing  Gehazi's  haste  and  anxious 
looks,  Naaman  suspects  that  all  is  not  well, 
that  something  has  happened  since  he  left 
the  prophet's  honse,  and  accordingly  puts 
his  question,  DiWri — Seetene  iunt  omnial 
(Vulgate). 

Ver.  22.— And  he  said,  All  is  well.    Ge- 
hazi's reply  was,  "  AU  is  well."    There  has 
been  no  accident,  no  calamity — only  a  casual 
circumstance  has  caused  a  change  in  my 
master's  wishes,  which    I  -  am   sent    thus 
hurrieJly    to    communicate    to    thee.    My 
master  hath  sent  me,  saying,  Bshold,  even 
now  (i.e.  just  at  this  time)  there  be  come  to 
me  from  Mount  Ephraim  two  young  men  of 
the  sons  of  the  prophets.     The  details  are 
added  to  give  a  greater  air  of  trutlifnlness 
to  the  story.    Give  them,  I  pray  thee,  a 
talent  of  silver,  and  two  changes  of  garments; 
i.e.  a  change  apiece,  and  a  talent  between 
them — rather  a  large  sum  in  respect  of  the 
pretended  occasion,  but  a  trifle  compared 
with  the  amount  which  Naaman  had  ex- 
pected to  expend  (ver.  5),  and  probably  very 
much  less  than  he  had  reoe  itly    pressed 
upon  the  prophet  (ver.  16).     Gehazi  had  to 
balance    between    his   own    greed  on   the 
one  hand,  and  the  fear  of  raising  suspicion 
on  the  other.    His  story  was   altogether 
most  plausible,  and  his  demand  prudently 
moderate. 

Ver.  23. — And  Naaman  said,  Be  oontsnt, 
take  two  talents;  rather,  consent,  tak»  two 
talenti.  Do  not  oppose  thyself  to  my  wishes 

H 


98 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE   KINGS. 


[CH.  T.  1—27. 


— consent  to  receive  double  what  thon  hast 
asked,  Naaman  is  anxious  to  show  his 
gratitude  by  giving  as  much  as  he  can 
induce  the  other  side  to  accept.  He  sug- 
gests two  talents,  probably  because  the 
itrangers  who  are  said  to  have  arrived  are 
two.  And  he  urged  him.  Gehazi  must  have 
made  some  show  of  declining  the  offer.  And 
bound  two  talents  of  silver  in  two  bags — 
i.e.  put  up  two  talents  separately  in  two 
bags,  closing  the  mouth  of  the  bag  in  each 
case  by  "  binding"  it  round  with  a  string — 
with  two  changes  of  garments — as  asked 
for  (ver.  22) — and  laid  them  upon  two  of  his 
servants.  If  the  Hebrew  silver  talent  was 
worth  £375  as  Keil  supposes,  or  even  £300 
aa  Thenius  reckons,  it  would  be  pretty  well 
as  much  as  an  ordinary  slave  could  carry, 
being  somewhat  over  a  hundredweight.  And 
they  bare  them  before  him ;  i.e.  they — the 
servants — ^bare  the  two  sacks  of  money 
before  him — Gehazi. 

Ver.  24. — And  when  he  came  to  the  tower ; 
rather,  to  the  hill  (Bevised  Version).  Some 
well-known  eminence  at  a  little  distance 
from  the  Damascus  gate  of  Bamaria  must 
be  intended.  Here  Gehazi  stopped  the 
slaves,  and  took  the  money  from  them.  It 
was  important  for  his  purpose  that  they 
should  not  be  seen  re-entering  the  city,  as 
that  would  have  occasioned  remark,  and 
might  naturally  have  led  to  inquiry.  He 
took  tliem — i.e.  the  bags — from  their  hand 
— I.e.  from  the  hands  of  Naamau's  servants 
— and  bestowed  them  in  the  house ;  i.e.  by 
hanwelf  or  deputy  brought  them  to  Elisha's 
henise,  and  there  bid  them  away.  And  he 
let  the  men — ^Naaman's  servants — ^go,  and 
they  departed.  They  hastened,  no  doubt, 
to  rejoin  their  mtater. 

Ver.  25. — But  he  went  in,  and  stood  before 
his  master.  Gehazi,  lest  his  absence  should 
be  noticed,  as  soon  as  he  had  put  away  the 
money,  sought  his  master's  presence,  enter- 
ing the  room  casually,  as  if  he  had  been 
busied  about  the  house.  He  was  met  at 
once,  however,  by  the  plain  and  stern  ques- 
tion which  follows.  And  £lisha  said  unto 
him,  Whence  comest  thon,  Gehasdl  literally. 
Whence,  Gehazi  t  A  short,  stern,  abrupt 
question.  And  he  said,  Thy  servant  went 
no  whither.  There  was  no  help  for  it.  One 
lie  necessitates  another.  Once  enter  on  the 
devious  path,  and  you  cannot  say  whither 
it  will  conduct  you.  To  deceive  and  plunder 
•  foreigner  of  a  hostile  nation  probably 
seemed  to  Gehazi  a  trifle,  either  no  sin  at 
all,  or  a  very  venial  sin.  But  now  he  finds 
himself  led  on  to  telling  a  direct  lie  to  his 
master,  which  even  he  could  not  have  justi- 
fied to  himself. 

Ver.  26. — And  he  laid  nnto  him,  Went 
BOt  mine  heart  with  thee?  There  is  no 
**witb  thee"  in  the  original;  and  the  wordi 


have  been  taken  in  quite  s  different  sense. 
Ewald  regards  <3^,  "my  heart,"  aa  desig- 
nating Gehazi,  and  meaning  "  my  loved  one, 
my  favourite  disciple."  "  Thou  hast  denied 
that  thou  wentest  any  whither;  but  did  not 
my  favourite  disciple  in  truth  go  forth,  when 
the  man  turned  again  from  his  chariot,  as 
Naaman  did?"  (ver.  21).  But  no  parallel 
instance  cau  be  adduced  of  any  such  use  of 

^sh,  which  is  altogether  too  strong  a  term 
to' be  applied  to  a  mere  favourite  servant. 
The  irony,  moreover,  of  the  term  under  the 
circumstances  would  be  too  great.  Maurer's 
interpretation  of  *3^  by  "  my  prophetic 
power"  (my  prophetio  power  had  not  de- 
parted £K>m  me)  is  no  better,  since  it  re- 
quires n]^n  to  be  taken  in  two  different 
senses  in  the  two  most  closely  connected 
clauses  of  vers.  25  and  26.  Altogether,  our 
version  would  seem  to  be  the  best  rendering 
that  has  been  suggested.  It  accords  with 
the  Septuagint,  with  Theodoret,  and  with 
the  Vulgate;  and  it  gives  a  satisfactory 
sense:  "Did  not  my  spirit  go  forth  with 
thee  when  thon  wentest  forth,  etc.  7  Was  I 
not  present  in  spirit  during  the  whole  trans- 
action ?  "  When  the  man  turned  again  from 
his  chariot  to  meet  thee  1  (see  ver.  21).  Is  it 
a  time  to  receive  money,  and  to  receive 
garments,  and  oliTeyards,  and  vineyards, 
and  sheep,  and  ozen,  and  manservants,  and 
maidservants?  The  prophet  follows  Ge- 
liazi's  thoughts,  which  had  been  to  purchase, 
with  the  money  obtained  from  Naaman, 
olive  yards,  and  vineyards,  and  sheep,  aud 
oxen>  etc. ;  and  asks — Was  this  a  time  for 
such  proceedings  ?  Keil  well  explains, 
"  Was  this  the  time,  when  so  many  liypo- 
orites  pretend  to  be  prophets  from  selfish- 
ness and  avarice,  and  bring  the  prophetio 
office  into  contempt  with  unbelievers,  for 
a  servant  of  the  true  God  to  take  money 
and  goods  tlom  a  non-Israelite  .  .  .  that  he 
might  acquire  property  and  luxury  for  him- 
self? "  It  was  evident^  a  most  unfit  time. 
As  Thenius  says,  "  In  any  other  case  better 
than  in  this  mightest  thou  have  yielded  to 
thy  desire  for  gold  and  goods." 

Ver.  27. — ^The  leprosy  therefore  of  Naaman 
shall  cleave  unto  thee ;  t.e.  "  As  thou  hast 
taken  his  goods,  thou  shalt  also  take  his 
leprosy,  which  goes  with  them."  A  just 
Nemesis.  And  unto  thy  seed  for  ever.  The 
iniquity  of  the  fathers  is  visited  upon  the 
children,  Gehazi,  however,  could  avoid  this 
part  of  the  curse  by  not  marrying.  And  ii 
went  out  fi:om  his  presence  a  leper  as  white 
as  snow.  There  were  many  forma  and 
degrees  of  leprosy  (Lev.  xiii.  2—46),  Ge- 
hazi's  was  of  the  most  pronounced  kind. 
And  it  fell  on  him  suddenly,  as  her  leprosy 
fell  upon  Miriam  (Numb.  xii.  10),  oomplet* 


oft.  T.  1—27.]  TflB  sfeCOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  99 

•t  onoe,  10  that  there  eonid  be  no  farther  I  to  hb,  both  against   lying   and   agaiiut 
aggravation  of  it.    The  lesion  shoald  be  I  oovetoiuneM. 
taken  to  lieart,  and  ilionld  be  a  warning  I 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1—19.— The  leuont  taught  Jy  the  story  o/Naaman.  "The  story  of  Naaman," 
aayi  Menken,  "  is  a  worthy  part  of  the  history  of  those  revelations  and  manifestations 
of  the  living  God  which,  in  their  connection  and  continuation  through  many  centuries, 
and  in  their  tendency  towards  one  goal  and  object,  were  designed  to  plant  upon  earth 
the  knowledge  and  the  worship  of  the  true  God  1  But  it  offers  besides  to  our  considera- 
tion a  rich  store  of  reflections,  in  which  neither  heart  nor  understanding  can  refuse 
a  willing  participation."  Among  the  lessons,  or  "  reflections,"  would  seem  to  be  the 
following. 

I.  No  EABTHLT  HAPPINESS  WITHOUT  ALLOT.  Naaman,  as  far  as  external  prosperity 
went,  had  all  that  he  could  desire.  1.  He  was  "  captain  of  the  host  of  the  King  of 
Syria,"  commander-in-chief,  i.e.,  of  all  the  national  forces.  He  held  a  great  position, 
involving  high  rank,  vast  patronage,  considerable  emolument,  and  a  place  in  the  thoughts 
of  men  next  to  that  of  the  king.  2.  He  was  "  a  great  man  with  his  master  " — high  in 
the  royal  favour — able  to  obtain  any  boon  that  he  desired,  and  advance  all  whom  he 
cared  to  patronize.  3.  He  was  also  "  a  mighty  man  of  valour,"  or  rather  "  a  good  tried 
■oldier,"  approved  by  deeds  of  arms  to  the  nation,  and  enjoying  his  own  confidence  and 
self-respect.  But  on  all  this  there  was  one  drawback.  Naaman  "  was  a  leper."  And 
so  it  is  generally.  "  Everywhere,  where  there  is  or  seems  to  be  something  great  and 
fortiraate,  there  is  also  some  discordant '  but,'  which,  like  a  false  note  in  a  melody,  mars 
the  perfeotness  of  the  good  fortune.  A  worm  gnaws  at  the  root  of  eveiything  pertain- 
ing to  this  world;  and  everything  here  below  contains  the  germs  of  death  in  itself" 
(Menken).  Life  is  full  of  compensations.  There  is  no  misery  without  alleviation; 
no  low  estate  without  some  gleam  of  joy  or  hope  to  brighten  and  glorify  it;  and  also 
no  happiness  without  some  concomitant  annoyance  or  discomfort.  Now  it  is  domestic 
trouble,  now  au  unhappy  turn  of  mind,  now  a  recollection  of  some  sin  in  the  past,  now 
an  anticipation  of  some  calamity  in  the  future.  But,  perhaps  most  frequently,  it  is  ill 
health,  some  form  of  bodily  suffering.  Naaman's  af&iction  was  of  the  most  grievous 
kind — leprosy  1  a  disease  at  once  painful,  unsightly,  disgusting,  and  regarded  as  a 
disgrace. 

II.  SOLAOK    AKD   HELP    COMB   TO    US  I«OM    THB    MOST  TJNBXPEOTED    QUAETEB8.      A 

"  little  maid,"  a  foreigner,  a  captive,  a  slave,  accidentally  introduced  into  his  house- 
hold, and  occupying  a  very  humble  place  in  it,  perhaps  almost  unknown  by  sight  to  the 
great  lord  of  the  mansion,  who  has  something  better  to  do  than  to  take  notice  of  bis 
wife's  attendants, — this  Uttle  maid,  humble  as  she  is,  and  apparently  of  the  least 
possible  consequence,  initiates  the  entire  series  of  events  which  form  the  substance  of 
the  narrative.  She  sees  her  master's  sufferings;  she  is  touched  by  them;  she  longs  to 
have  them  assuaged ;  and  she  bethinks  herself  of  a  possible  cure  of  them.  "  Would 
God  my  lord  were  with  the  prophet  that  is  in  Samaria!"  Perhaps  it  was  a  mere 
vague  wish,  a  thought  that  rose  in  the  mind,  and  was  uttered  without  the  slightest  idea 
that  action  would  be  based  on  it.  But  our  lightest  words  may  have  effects  of  which 
we  never  thought.  The  "  little  maid's  "  gentle  aspiration  fell  on  some  ear  which  took 
note  of  it ;  inquiry  was  made ;  hope  was  aroused ;  and  finally  action  followed.  ITie 
small  accident  of  an  Israelite  maid,  who  knew  of  Elisha's  power  to  work  miracles,  being 
a  member  of  his  wife's  household,  and  giving  utterance  to  her  feelings  of  compassion, 
led  on  to  the  great  general's  cure,  and  to  the  glorification  of  the  Name  of  Jehovah 
throughout  the  Syrian  nation.  The  mouse  in  the  fable  gave  aid  which  was  of  the  most 
vital  importance  to  the  lion.  We  can  never  tell  from  what  humble  friend  or  dependant 
we  may  not  receive  help  in  trouble,  by  precious  hints  or  suggestions,  or  by  effectual 
fervent  prayers,  which  may  be  of  inestimable  service  to  us. 

III.  The  GREAT  OF  THE  BABTH  A  pooB  STAY  AND  suppoBT.  Neither  Beuhadad 
King  of  Syria,  nor  Joram  King  of  Israel,  were  really  of  any  help  to  Naaman  in  his 
trouble.    Benhadad  meant  well ;  but  his  letter  to  the  King,  of  Israel  confused  th«  plain 


100  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  [oh.  v.  1—27. 

iMue,  and  wu  not  of  the  8UgIit«8t  practical  Berriee.  Joram  had  to  acknowledge  himself 
utterly  powerless  (ver.  7),  and,  but  for  the  prophet's  interference,  would  probably  have 
represented  to  the  King  of  Syria  that  there  was  no  more  help  to  be  obtained  for 
Kaaman  in  Israel  than  in  his  own  country.  Great  cItU  personages  are  rarely  fit  to 
take  the  lead  in  matters  which  even  touch  upon  religion.  They  place  far  too  much 
trust  in  the  cunniog  devices  of  mere  human  policy,  and  far  too  little  in  the  force  of 
religious  principle  and  the  overniling  providence  of  God.  The  Magi  did  not  help 
Christ  by  bringing  him  their  gifts  of  gold  and  frankincense  and  myrrh.  They  did  but 
draw  Herod's  attention  to  him,  and  bring  his  infant  life  into  periL  Herod  Antipas  did 
not  help  John  the  Baptist.  He  "  heard  him  gladly  "  (Mark  vi.  20),  but  imprisoned 
him,  and  ultimately  put  him  to  death.  The  advice  of  the  psalmist  is  excellent,  "  Put 
not  your  trust  in  princes ;  ...  for  there  is  no  help  in  them  "  (Fs.  czlyi.  3). 

lY.  OnB  BEST  HELP  FBOM  RELIGION  AND  ITS  MINISTERS.  Naaman  might  have 
returned  to  Damascus  in  the  same  condition  in  which  he  left  it,  unhelped,  unaided, 
uncured,  but  for  the  existence,  and  for  the  action  taken  by,  a  minister  of  God.  Men 
often  jeer  at  ministers,  deride  them,  deny  the  use  of  them,  call  them  idlers  and  super- 
numeraries, and  declare  their  belief  that  the  world  would  get  on  quite  as  well,  or  much 
better,  without  them ;  but  in  times  of  difficulty  and  danger,  and  especially  in  the  time 
of  sickness,  they  are  apt  to  have  recourse  to  them.  A  Belshazzar  in  difficulty  seeks  to 
Daniel  (Dan.  y.  13),  a  Naaman  to  Elisha,  a  Theodosius  to  Ambrose,  a  guilty  sinner  to 
his  parish  priest  or  to  the  nearest  godly  minister  of  his  acquaintance.  Ministers,  it  is 
true,  do  not  now  heal  diseases ;  and  it  is  fitting  that  in  sickness  the  physician  should  be 
called  in,  to  begin  with.  But  when  the  physician  can  do  no  more,  when  he  declares  the 
resources  of  his  art  exhausted,  when  death  draws  near  us,  then  there  are  but  few  whe 
despise  the  aid  of  the  previously  contemned  servant  of  God,  but  few  who  are  not  glad  to 
have  a  minister  of  God  at  their  bedside,  and  to  receive  from  his  hands  the  last  consolations 
of  religion.  How  many  have  been  brought  by  ministerial  aid  to  die  in  peace  and  joy, 
who  without  it  would  have  lain  for  days  tortured  with  doubts  and  fears  and  misgivings! 
How  many  have  even  been  snatched  at  the  last  moment  like  brands  from  the  burning, 
brought  through  ministerial  influence,  even  on  their  death-beds,  to  a  repentance  not 
to  be  repented  of  I  It  is  well  not  to  trust  beforehand  to  a  death-bed  repentance,  but 
to  set  our  house  in  order  while  we  are  still  in  health.  But  the  example  of  the  thief  on 
the  cross  shows  that,  even  under  the  very  shadow  of  death,  the  mercy  of  God  is  not 
exhausted.  A  death -bed  repentance  is  always  possible;  and  in  bringing  it  about  the 
assistance  to  be  derived  from  an  experienced  minister  can  scarcely  be  over-estimated. 

V.  Thk  natural  man  a  poob  judob  of  God'b  methods  of  salvation.  "1 
thought,"  said  Kaaman,  "he  will  surely  come  out  to  me,"  etc.  Naaman  had  made  up 
his  mind  what  the  prophet'i  method  would  be.  He  had  his  own  notions  concerning 
the  fitness  of  things,  and  the  mode  in  which  Divine  help,  if  it  came  at  all,  would  come 
to  him.  When  his  expectations  were  disappointed,  as  human  expectations  on  such  • 
subject  are  likely  to  be,  he  was  ofiended,  and  "  turned  and  went  away  in  a  rage " 
(ver.  12).  Do  not  many  turn  from  religion  altogether  on  similar  utterly  insufficient 
grounds?  They  "thought,"  if  God  gave  a  revelation  at  all,  he  would  give  it  in  this 
or  that  way — by  a  voice  from  heaven  speaking  with  equal  force  to  all,  with  the  accom- 
paniment of  a  continuous  display  of  miracles,  by  the  mouth  of  an  immaculate  priesthood, 
or  in  some  way  quite  different  from  that  in  which  it  has  pleased  God  to  give  it ;  and, 
being  disappointed  in  their  expectation,  they  reject  the  whole  matter,  refuse  to  have 
anything  to  do  with  it,  "turn  and  go  away  in  a  rage."  "  I  thought"  is  all-powerful 
with  them.  Well  does  Menken  observe,  "  This  '  I  thought '  is  the  most  mighty  of  all 
mighty-things  upon  earth,  and  even  if  it  is  not  the  most  ruinous  of  all  ruinous  things, 
it  is  yet  certainly  the  most  unfortunate  of  all  unfortunate  ones.  This  •!  thought' 
brought  sin  and  misery  and  death  into  the  world  ;  and  it  prevents  redemption  from  sin 
•nd  death  in  the  case  of  thousands  t  These  thousands,  if  they  perish  in  their  opinion, 
will  begin  the  next  life  with  '  I  thought.' " 

VI.  Second  thouohts  often  the  best.  It  is  never  too  late  to  amend.  To  pride 
9iie's  self  on  absolute  consistency  and  unchangingness  is  the  height  of  folly  in  a  being 
who  is  Bot,  and  knows  he  is  not,  omniscient.  Our  first  thoughts  must  often  be  mis- 
taken ones,  and  in  such  cases  it  is  at  least  possible  that  our  second  thoughts  may  be 
beMei;    Moreover,  seccad  thoughts  may  be  suggested  from  without,  and  may  come 


OH,  ♦.1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOa  101 

from  those  who  are  far  wiser  than  ourselves.  Naanian  showed  his  good  sense  in  giving 
up  his  original  Intention  and  adopting  the  advice  of  his  servants.  To  have  persisted 
for  consistency's  sake  would  have  heen  foolish  ohstinacy,  and  would  have  resulted  in 
his  remaining  a  leper  and  an  idolater  to  the  day  of  his  death. 

VII.  A    TIME   rOR    ALL  THINGS — A    TIME    TO    GET,    AND  A  TIMB    TO    LOSE.      "The 

labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire."  Ministeis  cannot  live  on  air  any  more  than  other  people. 
There  is  a  time  when,  and  there  are  circumstances  under  which,  it  is  lawful  for  them 
to  receive  such  an  amount  of  this  world's  goods  as  they  need,  or  even  such  an  amount  aa 
is  offered  to  them.  For  any  surplus  which  they  receive  beyond  their  needs  they  are 
trustees,  bound  to  expend  such  surplus  as  they  deem  best  for  the  honour  of  God  and 
the  benefit  of  man.  Prophets  were  entitled  to  accept  gifts  of  those  who  consulted 
them  (1  Sam.  ix.  7,  8),  and  Elisha  himself  took  without  hesitation  the  twenty  loaves 
from  the  man  of  Baal-shalisha.  But  when  Naaman  made  his  offer,  Elisha  felt  that  it 
was  "a  time  to  lose."  He  had  to  show  that  "the  gift  of  God  could  not  be  purchased 
with  money ; "  he  had  to  impress  it  on  an  ignorant  but  intelligent  heathen,  that 
Jehovah  was  a  God  not  like  other  gods,  and  that  his  prophets  were  men  not  like  other 
men.  He  had  to  teach  the  doctrine  of  free  grace.  His  example  should  be  a  lesson  to 
ministers,  that  not  every  gift,  even  though  it  be  offered  by  a  willing  heart,  ought  to 
be  accepted.  There  are  times  when  a  minister  should  decline  a  testimonial,  an 
augmentation  of  stipend,  the  donation  of  a  new  pulpit,  or  a  new  organ,  and  when  he 
ahould  be  glad  to  "  lose"  them  for  the  furtherance  of  higher  objects. 

VIII.  Gratitude  for  temporal  blessings  best  shown  bt  our  tubning  *o  God. 
When  Naaman  found  that  the  prophet  would  receive  no  gift  at  his  hand,  he  acquiesced, 
and  resolved  to  show  his  gratitude  for  the  great  blessing  which  he  had  received  in  another 
way.  He  would  thenceforth  offer  neither  burnt  offering  nor  sacrifice  unto  any  other 
god,  but  only  unto  the  Lord  (ver.  17).  It  was  a  noble  resolve.  It  might  offend  his 
sovereign,  it  might  hamper  his  promotion,  it  might  deprive  him  of  court  favour.  Still, 
he  did  not  hesitate ;  he  made  the  resolution,  and  he  proclaimed  it.  Whether  he  kept 
It  faithfully  or  no,  we  are  not  told;  we  know  nothing  of  his  after-life;  the  curtain 
drops  on  him  as  he  departs  to  his  own  country.  But,  so  far  as  the  history  is  carried, 
it  shows  him  faithful  and  true.  He  bears  off  his  two  mules'  burden  of  earth.  He 
means  no  more  to  worship  Rimmon.  He  will  acknowledge  and  worship  one  God  only, 
Jehovah.  There  may  be  weakness  in  the  compromise  with  conscience  which  he  pro- 
poses in  ver.  18 ;  but  it  is  a  pardonable  weakness  in  one  bred  np  a  heathen.  At  any 
rate,  he  does  right,  and  sets  us  a  good  example,  in  his  resolute  turning  to  Jehovah,  as 
the  true  Source  of  the  blessing  which  he  has  received,  and  as  therefore  deserving  hence- 
forth of  all  bis  worship  and  all  his  gratitude. 

Vers.  20—27. — The  lessons  taught  hy  the  sin  and  punishment  of  Oehazi.  Gehazi's  is 
•  sad  case,  but  a  not  unusual  one';  the  case  of  a  person  brought  into  close  contact  with 
a  high  form  of  moral  excellence  and  spirituality,  who,  instead  of  profiting  by  the 
example,  wilfully  casts  it  aside,  and  adopts  a  low  standard  of  life  and  conduct— a 
standard  which  al  ways  tends  to  become  lower.  The  first  lesson  to  be  learnt  from  his 
case  is  this — 

I.  Ip  contact  with  excellence  fail  to  raise  us,  it  will  sink  us,  in  the  moral 
scale.  The  two  disciples  closest  to  our  Lord  seem  to  have  been  St.  John  and  Judas 
Iscariot.  The  one  leant  upon  Jesus'  breast;  the  other  dipped  with  him  habitually  (Tbi- 
edwrovra  /.er'  iiioS  iv  t^  rpv$\i<f)  in  the  dish  (Mark  xiv.  20).  The  one  was  exalted  to 
a  spirituality  rarely  attained  by  man ;  the  other  sank  to  such  a  condition  that  his  Lord 
said  of  him,  he  "  is  a  devil"  (John  vi.  70).  Both  elevation  and  degradation  are  equally 
natural.  The  one  comes  from  the  imitation  of  the  high  example  before  us ;  the  other 
from  resisting  the  impulse  to  such  imitation.  If  we  resist  impulses  to  good,  we  do 
ourselves  irreparable  harm;  we  blunt  our  consciences,  harden  our  hearfb,  render  our- 
selves less  sensitive  to  good  Influences  for  ever  after.  And  the  longer  the  contact  with 
goodness  continues,  the  higher  the  exaltation,  or  the  lower  the  deterioration,  of  our 
nature.  Gehazi  had  been  for  years  Elisha's  servant.  He  had  been  on  the  closest  terms  ol 
intimacy  with  him.  He  had  witnessed  his  patience,  his  self-denial,  his  gentleness,  his 
kindness,  his  zeal  for  Jehovah.  But  the  only  eflect  had  been  to  harden  him  in  eviL 
B«  had  grown  proud  and  contemptuous,  as  shown  by  hu  oalhng  Naaman     tku 


Id3  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  TfiE  KINGflw         [ot.t.I— 47. 

Syrian  "  (rer.  20),  a  swearer  (ver.  20),  covetous,  nntrathfu],  earelem  of  his  master*! 
honour,  secretive  (ver.  24),  shameless.  He  had  no  sense  of  Good's  watchiiil  eye  and 
continual  presence,  no  respect  or  love  for  his  master,  no  care  for  what  Naaman  mi  the 
other  Syrians  would  think  of  him.  He  thus  did  as  much  as  in  him  lay  to  ruin  hia 
master's  projects,  and  to  lower  him  in  the  esteem  of  those  whose  good  opinion  he 
knew  his  master  valued.  Another  lesson  to  be  drawn  from  the  namtira  ii  the 
following : — 

II.  One  Bin  LEAos  on  to  anotheb  bt  a  sgqitenok  which  n  aucost  inetitablb. 
Gehazi  begins  with  covetousness.  He  cannot  see  the  great  wealth  of  Kaaman,  the 
wedges  of  silver  and  gold,  and  the  large  bales  of  rich  stuffs,  without  a  keen  desire  to 
obtain  possession  of  a  portion.  He  hopes  that  his  master  will  spoil  the  Syrian,  and  not 
spare  him ;  in  that  case  he  may  contrive  to  get  a  share  in  the  advantage.  His  master's 
refusal,  no  doubt,  seems  to  him  mere  folly,  quixotism — ^almost  madness.  He  sets  liis 
clever  wits  to  work,  and  soon  frames  a  scheme  by  which  his  master's  intentions  shall  be 
frustrated.  The  scheme,  as  any  scheme  must  under  such  circumstances,  involves  him 
in  lying ;  nay,  in  a  whole  heap  of  lies.  He  tells  a  circumstantial  tale  in  which  there 
is  not  a  single  word  of  truth.  The  tale  runs  glibly  off  his  tongue,  and  easily  deceives 
the  foreigner,  who  is  not  of  a  suspicious  temper.  Gehazi  is  completely  succeaiful, 
obtains  even  more  than  he  had  ventured  to  ask ;  hides  it  away  without  any  difSculty, 
and  thinks  that  all  is  over.  But  all  is  not  over.  "  Whence  comest  thou,  Gehazi  ?  " 
sounds  in  his  ears ;  and  he  must  either  confess  all  or,  directly  and  unmistakably,  lie 
to  his  master.  0/  course,  the  lie  is  resolved  upon ;  bis  previous  conduct  has  so  demora- 
lized him,  that  we  cannot  even  imagine  him  to  have  hesitated.  The  direct  falsehood 
to  his  master,  which  he  would  fain  hare  avoided,  has  to  be  uttered :  "  Thy  servant  went 
no  whither."  Facilis  descensus  Averni.  The  only  security  against  a  moral  decline  as 
grievous  as  Gebazi's  is  not  to  enter  upon  it,  not  to  take  the  first  step.  Principii§ 
ohsta.  Check  evil  tendencies  at  once,  and  the  fatal  sequence  need  never  be  entered 
upon.  Gebazi's  punishment  has  also  its  lesson.  He  had  gained  his  coveted  wealth; 
the  prophet  could  not  take  it  from  him.  He  was  a  rich  man,  and  might  carry  out  all 
his  far-reaching  schemes  of  proprietorship,  and  lordship  over  others.  But  what  will  it 
all  profit  him,  if  he  is  to  be,  to  the  end  of  his  days,  a  leper  ?  The  apples  of  Sodom,  so 
"  fair  to  view,"  are  felt  and  known  to  be  worthless,  when  they  "  turn  to  ashes  on  the 
lips."  So  was  it  with  him ;  and  so  is  it,  commonly,  with  those  who  pursue  a  course 
similar  to  his.  The  prosperity  acquired  by  fraud  has  within  it  a  taint  of  rottenness. 
There  is  "a  little  rift  within  the  lute" — a  drawback  of  some  kind  or  other,  which 
deprives  the  prosperity  of  all  its  value,  and  makes  the  wealthy  prosperous  man  a 
miserable  wretch.  If  he  escape  external  calamity,  he  will,  at  any  rate,  not  escape  the 
worm  of  remorse,  which  will  eat  into  his  heart,  and  poison  his  cup  of  pleasure* 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOB». 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  captive  Israelitish  maid.  There  are  four  personages  that  stand  oui 
with  special  prominence  in  this  chapter,  from  each  of  which  important  lessons  may  he 
learned.  These  are — the  little  Hebrew  maid ;  Naaman,  the  commander-in-chief  of  the 
Syrian  army ;  the  Prophet  Elisha ;  and  Gehazi,  the  prophet's  servant.  We  shall  speak 
first  of  the  little  maid. 

I.  This  little  maid  did  not  fobget  her  bkligion  when  shb  went  fkom  bomb. 
We  see  that,  though  in  a  foreign  land,  she  still  thought  of  her  fathers'  God  and  of  his 
prophet.  That  is  an  important  lesson  in  these  days,  when  travelling  has  become  so 
common.  The  motto  with  a  great  many  professing  Christians  seems  to  be  that  when 
they  are  at  Eome,  they  must  do  as  Eome  does.  When  they  travel  on  the  continent, 
they  keep  the  eontinental  Sunday,  just  as  if  the  same  God  was  not  looking  down  upon 
them  there  as  at  home,  just  as  if  the  Lord's  day  was  not  the  Lord's  day  everywhere, 
and  as  if  there  were  not  good  Christian  people  on  the  continent  who  valued  the  day  ae 
a  day  of  rest  and  worship.  Mr.  Buskin  wrote  some  pointed  words  lately  in  reference 
to  the  way  Christian  people  seem  to  forget  their  religion  when  they  go  abroad.  He 
asked  them  to  count  up  their  expenditure  on  railway  fares  and  sight-seeing,  on  guides 
and  guide-books,  on  luxuries  and  photographs ;  and  then  to  ask  themeelves  how  much 


IH.  ▼.  1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  lOS 

they  had  spent  in  donations  to  the  poor  Churches  of  France  and  Belgium,  or  of  the 
Waldenses  in  Italy.  Happily,  all  travellers  are  not  like  this.  Many  Christian  touristi 
like  to  find  a  Sunday  hkssing,  and  to  hear  a  word  of  refreshing,  in  some  little  country 
church  among  the  hills  of  Scotland  or  of  Switzerland,  or  in  the  quiet  chapel  amid  the 
pleasure-seeking  crowds'  of  Paris.  But  how  many  there  are  who  lock  up  their  religion 
when  they  turn  the  key  in  their  house-door,  and,  however  careful  they  may  he  of  taking 
guide-hooks  and  other  provisions  for  the  journey,  never  dream  of  putting  a  Bihle  in  the 
trunk  1  No  matter  where  we  go,  let  us  take  our  religion  with  us,  as  Joseph  took 
his  into  Egypt,  as  Daniel  took  his  into  Babylon,  as  this  little  Hebrew  maid  took  hers 
into  Syria.  This  liW,e  maid  had  strong  inducements  to  give  up  her  religion.  No  doubt 
it  would  have  pleased  her  master  and  mistress  if  she  had  worshipped  their  gods.  They 
might  have  said  that  her  worship  of  any  other  God  was  an  impertinence,  a  sort  of  sug- 
gestion that  they  were  doing  wrong.  But  she  listens  to  the  voice  of  conscience  and  of 
duty  rather  than  to  the  voice  of  worldly  policy  and  expediency.  It  is  a  messagt  to  mU 
wJw  are  in  the  employment  of  others.  Never  sacrifice  principle  for  placa.  Never  sacrifice 
the  favour  of  God  for  the  favour  of  man.  Tour  employer  pays  for  your  labour;  Vie 
does  not  buy  your  conscience.  If  ever  attempts  are  made  to  tamper  with  your  con- 
science, be  it  yours  to  answer,  "  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  man."  Trust  God 
for  the  consequences.  Trust  him  to  provide  for  you.  "  In  all  thy  ways  acknowlc4g« 
him,  and  he  shall  direct  thy  paths." 

II.  This  little  maid  did  not  bender  evil  for  evil.  She  had  been  torn  from  Iim- 
home  and  from  her  native  land  by  the  rude  hands  of  Syrian  soldiers.  Perhaps  her 
father  had  fallen  beneath  the  enemy's  sword.  Yet  we  do  not  find  her  cherishing  • 
spirit  of  vindictiveness  or  revenge.  Instead  of  rejoicing  to  see  her  captor  suffer,  she 
pities  him.  She  longs  that  he  may  be  healed  of  that  terrible  and  loathsome  disease. 
Have  we  never  exulted  in  the  sufferings  of  others  ?  Have  we  never  felt  a  secret  thrill 
of  gratification  when  some  misfortune  has  befallen  one  with  whom  we  were  at  variance  ? 
Such  a  spirit,  the  spirit  of  revenge,  however  natural  it  may  be,  is  not  the  spirit  of 
Christ.  He  bids  us  do  unto  others  as  we  would  wish  them  to  do  unto  us.  The 
Christ-like  spirit  is  to  love  our  enemies,  to  bless  them  that  curse  us,  to  do  good  to  them 
tliat  hate  us,  and  to  pray  for  them  that  despitefuUy  use  us  and  persecute  us. 

III.  This  little  haid  was  but  touno;  yet,  by  doikg  what  bhk  could,  she 
BECAME  A  BLESSING  TO  OTHERS.  She  did  not  say  to  herself,  "  I  am  but  young ;  there 
is  nothing  Jean  do."  She  did  not  wait  for  some  great  thing  to  do.  But  she  just  did 
the  work  that  lay  nearest  her.  She  saw  a  way  in  which  she  might  be  useful,  and  she 
took  the  opportunity  at  once.  She  said  to  her  mistress,  "  Would  God  my  lord  were 
with  the  prophet  that  is  in  Samaria  I  for  he  would  recover  him  of  his  leprosy."  That 
was  all.  She  just  told  of  where  the  blessing  of  health  was  likely  to  be  found.  1.  2%m 
ii  a  lesson  for  young  people,  for  the  children.  None  of  you  is  too  young  to  do  some- 
thing for  Jesus.  Jesus  has  some  work  for  every  one  of  you  to  do.  It  may  he  his  work 
for  you  that  you  should  conquer  some  sinful  passion,  some  evil  habit.  It  may  be  his 
work  for  you  that  you  should  stand  up  for  him  and  his  Word  among  bad  companionB ; 
or  that  by  your  own  quiet  and  gentle  life,  and  loving  disposition  and  kind  deeds,  you 
should  show  how  good  it  is  to  be  a  Christian.  Do  the  work  that  lies  nearest.  If  you 
are  at  school  or  college,  and  find  your  studies  irksome,  and  long  to  get  free  to  work  at 
your  own  will  and  pleasure ;  if  you  are  learning  your  business,  and  find  it  a  drudgery  ;— 
remember  that  just  here  Christ  has  a  work  for  you  to  do.  These  difficulties  have  to 
te  mastered.  Master  them,  and  then  you  will  show  your  fitness  for  mastering  far 
greater  difficulties.  "He  that  is  faithful  in  that  which  is  least  is  faithful  also  in 
much."  2.  Jt  is  a  lesson  for  young  and  old.  What  are  you  doing  to  be  a  blessing  to 
others  ?  Is  there  not  some  sick  person  to  whom  you  might  read,  some  poor  family 
that  you  might  visit  occasionally  with  some  of  the  comforts  of  life,  some  tempted  one 
to  whom  you  might  speak  a  word  of  help  and  encouragement,  some  backslider  to  whom 
you  micrht  speak  a  word  of  kindly  warning,  some  careless,  godless  one  whom  you 
might  u^ge  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come?  And  if  you  can  do  but  little  for  the  siMer 
and  the  godless  yourself,  perhaps  you  can  do  as  the  little  maid  did— feB  Vtrnn  vUr* 
hlesnng  is  to  he  fmmd,  and  invite  them  to  come  to  the  house  of  God.  Th*r«  it  M> 
need  for  rivaby  between  different  Christian  communities.  There  are  godless  p«q>le 
enough  to  fiU  aU  the  places  of  worship,  if  only  Christian  people  would  stir  tkMDMlTW  and 


104  THE  SBOOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  [«».  t.  1— 27. 


go  out  into  the#tre«ti  and  lanes,  into  the  highways  and^edges,  andj'by  the  power  of  iire- 
sistlble  persaasion,  compel  them  t»  come  in.  Don't  trouble  yourself  by  thinking  of  your 
own  fitness  or  unfitness.  Are  you  willing  to  be  of  use  in  Christ's  work?  Are  you 
anxious  to  be  a  blessing  to  others?  That  is  the  great  question.  If  so,  Jesus  will  do 
the  rest.  He  will  make  you  a  vessel  unto  honour,  sanctified,  meet  for  the  Master's  use. 
IV.  The  secebt  of  this  little  maid's  faithfulness  and  usefulness  was  heb 
BTBONO  AND  SIMPLE  FAITH.  She  could  be  faithful  to  God,  because  she  believed  in  God. 
She  believed  that  God  would  take  care  of  her  when  she  was  faithfully  serving  him. 
She  could  be  useful  to  others  because,  though  she  was  a  captive  and  had  no  means  to 
help  them,  she  knew  of  One  who  had.  She  had  fmth  in  Ood.  She  knew  that  God 
was  with  Elishn,  and  tlierefoie  she  had  no  doubt  about  Elisha's  success.  Yes ;  it  is 
faith  we  want,  it  we  are  to  be  useful.  We  lay  we  believe  a  great  many  things.  But 
how  do  we  believe  them  ?  Where  is  our  faith  in  God's  promises  shown  in  our  patience 
under  difficulties  and  trials  and  discouragements  ?  Where  is  our  faith  in  God's  pro- 
mises shown  by  our  liberality  to  his  cause?  Wh°re  is  our  faith  in  God's  promises 
shown  by  our  work  done  for  Chiist?  If  our  faith  in  God  is  real,  it  will  show  itself  in 
every  detail  of  our  daily  life ;  it  will  overflow  in  acts  of  usefulness  and  love. — 0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  4 — ^19. — Naaman  the  Syrian.  This  case  of  Naaman  is  an  illustration  of  the 
imperfection  that  there  is  in  all  things  human.  Naaman  was  commander-in-chief  of 
the  Syrian  army.  Not  only  so,  but  he  had  seen  service.  He  had  won  his  spurs  in 
active  warfare.  He  had  led  his  troops  to  victory.  "  By  him  the  Lord  had  given  deliver- 
ance to  Syria."  Hence,  as  we  read,  "  he  was  a  great  man  with  his  master,  and  honour- 
able." No  doubt  he  had  been  greeted  on  his  return  from  battle,  as  victorious  generals 
were  greeted  then  and  are  greeted  still,  with  the  triumphant  shouts  of  a  joyful  and 
exultant  multitude.  His  cup  of  happiness  was  almost  full.  But  there  was  one  element 
of  trouble  that  mingled  with  his  joy.  "  But  he  was  a  leper."  That  little  word  "  but," 
how  significant  it  isl  We  should  all  be  happy,  but  for  something.  Our  plans  would 
all  be  successful,  but  for  something.  We  should  all  be  very  good,  but  for  some  incon- 
sistency, some  failing,  some  besetting  sin.  Here  is  a  very  good  man,  but  he  has  such 
a  bad  temper.  There  is  a  very  kind  woman,  but  she  has  such  a  bitter  tongue.  Heie 
is  a  very  good  man,  but  he  is  so  stingy  and  so  selfish.  Here  is  a  man  who  would  be 
very  useful  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  but  he  is  so  worldly  minded.  Here  is  a  good 
preacher,  but  he  doesn't  just  practise  what  he  preaches.  These  little  "  huts "  have 
their  uses.  They  keep  us,  or  they  ought  to  keep  us,  humble.  We  ought  not  to  be 
very  proud  of  ourselves,  we  ought  not  to  be  very  hard  on  others,  when  we  think  of  that 
ugly  sin  of  our  own.  But  most  of  all,  these  "  buts"  ought  to  be  the  means  of  driving 
us,  as  Naaman's  leprosy  was  the  means  of  driving  him,  nearer  to  God.  That  almighty 
hand  can  alone  weed  the  evil  forces  out  of  our  nature,  and  bring  us  into  conformity  to 
his  own  heavenly  likeness. 

I.  Naaman's  fbide.  Kings  sometimes,  like  other  people,  do  stupid  things.  The 
Hebrew  maid  had  spoken  of  the  prophet  that  was  in  Israel,  as  being  able  to  cure  her 
master  of  his  leprosy.  But  the  King  of  Syria  sends  a  letter  to  the  King  of  Israel,  saying, 
"  I  have  sent  Naaman  my  servant  unto  thee,  that  thou  mayest  recover  him  of  his 
leprosy."  The  King  of  Syria  may  have  meant  nothing  more  than  this,  that  the  King 
of  Israel  might  bring  about  Naaman's  recovery  by  sending  him  to  the  prophet ;  but 
the  King  of  Israel  took  the  words  as  an  attempt  to  pick  a  quarrel  with  him,  and  rent 
his  clothes  in  anger  and  passion.  Very  often  great  and  destructive  wars  have  arisen 
from  much  more  trifling  causes — from  the  folly  or  incaiiat  ity,  the  rashness  or  stubborn- 
ness, the  pride  or  the  passion,  of  rulers.  How  thankful  we  should  be  for  a  wise  and 
prudent  sovereign,  when  we  think  how  much  harm  a  foolish  sovereign  can  do  1  After 
Elisha  heard  of  the  King  of  Israel's  absurd  and  childish  display  of  anger  and  dismay, 
he  sent  to  him,  saying,  "  Wherefore  hast  thou  rent  thy  clothes  ?  let  him  come  now 
to  me,  and  he  shall  know  that  there  is  a  prophet  in  Israel."  So  Naaman  came  with 
all  the  pomp  and  grandeur  of  a  great  Oriental  general,  and  stood  at  the  door  of  Elisha's 
house.  Elisha  it  not  overawed  by  this  display  of  magnificence.  He  does  not  hoEtan 
forth  »nd  make  a  humble  obeisance  to  the  man  of  rank.  He  knew  what  respect  was 
due  to  authority  and  station ;  but  just  then  he  had  to  do  with  Naaman  the  man,  with 
Naaman  the  leper,  and  not  with  Naaman  the  general.    At  the  lerrant  of  God,  it  U  hif 


OB.  T.  1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  106 

duty  to  benefit  Naaman'i  aonl  as  well  as  his  body,  and  the  fint  thing  U  mutt  do  U 
to  hwnbh  him,  Naaman's  leprosy  was  an  enemy  to  his  happiness.  But  he  had  a  far 
worse  enemy  jn  his  own  heart.  That  was  pride.  How  hard  it  was  to  expel  it  we 
shall  see.  Elisha  did  not  go  himself  to  speak  to  Naaman,  but  sent  a  messenger.  That 
was  bad  enough  for  Naaman's  pride.  And  this  was  the  message  that  he  sent :  "  Go 
and  wash  in  Jordan  seven  times,  and  thy  flesh  shall  come  again  to  thee,  and  thou 
shalt  be  clean."  That  was  worse.  How  keenly  Naaman  felt  it  we  see  in  his  action 
and  his  words.  He  turned  away  from  the  place  in  a  rage,  perhaps  swearing  at 
his  servants  to  get  out  of  his  way,  and  said,  "Behold,  I  thought,  He  will  surely  come 
out  to  me,  and  stand,  and  call  on  the  Name  of  the  Lord  his  God,  and  strike  his  hand 
over  the  place,  and  recover  the  leper."  His  leprosy  had  not  humbled  his  pride. 
Here  he  was — come  all  the  way  from  Syria  just  for  the  one  purpose  of  getting 
cured ;  and  yet  he  turns  away  from  the  only  person  who  could  cure  him,  because 
he  does  not  pay  him  sufficient  court,  and  does  not  flatter  his  vanity.  How  unreason- 
able was  Naaman's  pride  !  How  unreasonable  is  pride  in  any  one  I  And  yet  it  is  a 
common  failing.  There  are  very  few  of  us  without  a  little  of  it.  Bishop  Hooker  says, 
"  Pride  is  a  vice  which  cleaveth  so  fast  unto  the  hearts  of  men,  that  if  we  were  to 
strip  ourselves  of  all  faults,  one  by  one,  we  should  undoubtedly  find  it  the  very  last 
and  hardest  to  put  off."  What  have  any  of  us  to  he. proud  ofl  Has  the  sinner  any 
reason  to  be  proud?  He  is  walking  on  the  broad  way  that  leadeth  to  destruction. 
Not  a  journey,  not  a  prospect,  to  be  proud  of,  certainly!  Has  the  saint  any  reason  to 
be  proud?  Surely  not.  It  is  by  the  grace  of  God  he  is  what  he  is.  " Not  of  works, 
lest  any  man  should  boast."  No  true  child  of  God  has  ever  had  a  proud  heart.  Look 
at  the  humUity  of  the  Apostle  Paul.  Early  in  his  Epistles  he  speaks  of  himself  as 
"the  least  of  the  apostles;"  later  on  he  calls  himself  "less  than  the  least  of  all 
saints ; "  while  the  latest  description  he  gives  of  himself  is  "  the  chief  of  sinners." 
Such  was  Paul's  estimate  of  his  own  character,  the  more  he  looked  at  it  in  the  light  of 
God's  holy  Law,  and  in  the  light  of  the  cross  of  Jesus.  The  longer  he  lived,  the  more 
humble  he  became.  "  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  to  the  humble." 
Away,  then,  with  pride !  Away  with  pride  of  riches !  away  with  pride  of  rank  I 
away  with  pride  of  learning !  away  with  pride  of  beauty  in  the  face  that  is  made  of 
clay !  away  with  pride  from  every  Chiistiau  heart !  away  with  pride  from  the  house 
of  God!  away  with  pride  fiom  all  departments  of  Christian  work!  away  with  pride 
towards  our  fellow-men  1  Let  us  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  him  who  was  meek  and 
lowly  in  heart. 

II.  Naaman's  ctjbb.  Observe  the  simplicity  of  the  cure.  "  Go  and  wash  in  Jordan 
seven  times,  and  thy  flesh  shall  come  again  to  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  clean."  It  was 
the  very  simplicity  of  the  cure  that  was  the  stumbling-block  to  Naaman.  So  it  is  with 
the  sinner  still.  The  simplicity  of  the  gospel  offer  prevents  many  a  one  from  accept- 
ing it.  The  servants  of  Naaman  expressed  this  weakness  of  the  human  heart  when 
they  said,  "  My  father,  if  the  propliet  had  bid  thee  do  some  great  thing,  wouldest  thou 
not  have  done  it?"  The  simple  thing,  strange  though  it  may  seem,  is  often  the 
hardest  to  do.  The  great  thing,  the  thing  which  costs  most  labour,  in  which  there  is 
most  room  for  our  own  effort,  is  the  thing  which  many  find  it  easiest  to  do.  This  is 
one  of  the  reasons  why  the  heathen  religions,  and  the  Soman  Catholic  religion,  have 
•o  strong  a  hold  upon  the  human  heart.  Their  religion  is  justification  by  works.  They 
afford  large  scope  for  human  exertions,  for  penances,  for  pilgrimages.  There  is  scope 
for  good  works  in  Protestantism  too,  in  true  Christianity,  "fie  careful  to  maintain 
good  works,"  says  the  aposile.  "  We  are  his  workmanship,  created  in  Christ  Jesus 
unto  good  works."  But  good  works  are  the  result,  and  not  the  cause,  of  our  justification. 
We  can  never  by  any  pilgrimages,  by  any  penances,  by  any  fastings,  work  out  a  salva- 
tion, a  righteousness,  for  ourselves.  "  Not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have 
done,  but  according  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us,  by  the  washing  of  regeneration  and 
renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Saviour."  Was  it  not  a  foolish  thing  for  Naaman,  a  poor,  miserable  leper,  with  hia 
life  a  burden  to  him,  to  be  questioning  the  method  of  his  cure  ?  Is  it  not  a  foolish 
thing  foi  any  linner,  with  death  at  every  moment  staring  him  in  the  face,  and  a  dark 
and  hopeicss  eternity  yawning  before  him,  to  question  God's  plan  of  salvation  ?  A  man 
who  b  seized  with  *  dangerous  Ulness  does  not  spend  *  whole  day  in  discussing  what 


lOe  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  ▼.  1—27 

remediei  the  physician  has  ordered,  but,  if  he  h»s  common  sense,  he  uses  the  remediea 
at  once.  Sinner,  the  curefm-  your  disease  is  a  simple  one.  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  JesuB 
Christ,  and  thou  slialt  be  saved."  It  is  the  only  one.  "  There  is  none  other  Name 
under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we  can  be  saved,"  except  the  Name  of  Jesus. 
Naaman,  at  Isust,  persuaded  by  his  servants'  entreaty,  believed  the  prophet's  promise, 
and  acted  in  obedience  to  his  instructions.  He  went  and  washed  in  Jordan,  and,  as  the 
prophet  said,  he  was  made  whole.  God  promises  to  every  sinner  that  if  you  believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  you  shall  receive  everlasting  life.  Did  you  ever  know  God's 
promise  to  fail?  Why,  then,  should  yon  hesitate,  as  a  lost  soul,  to  take  the  way  of 
MlTatioa  provided  for  you  through  the  mercy  of  God  and  the  infinite  love  of  3h;ist? 

"  There  is  a  fountain  filled  with  blood 
Drawn  from  Immanuel's  veins; 
And  sinners,  plunged  beneath  that  flood. 
Lose  all  their  guilty  stains. 

"The  dying  thief  rejoiced  to  sea 
That  fountain  in  his  day ; 
And  there  may  I,  though  vile  as  he^ 
Wash  all  my  sins  away." 

in.  Naahak'8  sbatttude.  Naaman's  marvellous  cure  made  him  a  believer  in  the 
God  of  Israel.  He  returned  to  Blisha  with  gratitude  in  his  heart.  How  different  the 
spirit  in  which  he  now  approaches  the  prophet!  No  longer  proud  and  haughty, 
waiting  at  the  door  for  Blisha  to  come  out  to  him,  he  enters  the  prophet's  house,  and 
humbly  stands  before  him.  He  shows  a  spirit  of  gratitude  to  God  and  to  his  prophet. 
He  asks  Elisha  to  give  him  a  quantity  of  earth,  that  he  may  raise  an  altar  unto  the 
God  of  Israel,  saying  that  he  will  henceforth  sacrifice  to  no  other  god.  You  whom 
God  has  raised  up  again  from  beds  of  sickness — have  you  shown  in  any  practical  way 
your  gratitude  to  him  ?  Do  you  ever  count  up  your  mercies  when  you  calculate  how 
much  you  will  subscribe  to  some  religious  object?  If  you  did,  there  would  not  be 
much  difficulty  in  clearing  oflf  church  debts.  We  are,  all  of  us,  every  day  we  live, 
dependent  on  God's  mercy  and  bounty.  In  his  hand  our  breath  is.  "  In  him  we  live, 
and  move,  and  have  our  being."  Many  of  us  are  saved  sinners,  redeemed  through  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ.  What  have  we  done  to  show  our  thankfulness  to  God,  who 
called  ua  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light?  Naaman,  though  a  clia-ged  man 
and  no  longer  an  idolater,  was  still  wantingjn  decision.  He  asked  to  be  pardoned  for 
bowiug  in  the  temple  of  the  god  Bimmon,  when  his  master,  the  king,  went  in  to  worship 
there.  Some  have  thought  that  Elisha's  answer,  "  ffo  in  peace,'"  gave  permission  to 
Naaman  to  go  through  this  outward  form  of  idolatry.  But  the  prophet  did  not  mean 
this  at  all.  Hia  words  were  but  the  Eastern  form  of  saying  "  good-bye."  He  neither 
condemned  nor  approved  Naaman's  action.  He  left  it  as  a  matter  for  his  own  conscience. 
And  so  it  must  be  in  many  things.  We  cannot  lay  down  hard-and-fast  lines  for  others. 
Beginners  in  the  Christian  life,  especially,  should  be  tenderly  dealt  with.  But  while 
we  make  every  allowance  for  Naaman,  who  had  spent  all  his  life  in  heathenism,  let  us 
not  imitate  him  in  his  want  of  decision.  He  owed  allegiance  to  a  higher  King  than  to 
the  King  of  Syria.  In  matters  of  conscience,  let  no  man  be  our  master  but  Christ. 
Let  UB  never  sacrifice  principle  for  expediency,  or  obey  the  call  of  popularity  rather 
than  the  call  of  duty.  A  far  higher  example  is  that  of  John  Knox,  who,  when  rebuked 
for  his  outspoken  words  before  Queen  Mary  and  her  council,  said,  "  I  am  in  the  place 
where  I  am  demanded  of  conscience  to  ipeak  the  truth ;  and  therefore  the  truth  I 
■pei^,  impugn  it  whoso  list." — 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  20 — 27. — Elisha  and  Oehazi.  We  shall,  perhaps,  derive  most  profit  from  the 
■tudy  of  these  two  characters  if  we  look  at  them  together,  as  they  are  here  set  before 
ni,  in  sharp  and  striking  contrast. 

1.  CONTBAST  THE    COVETOUSNESS  OF    THE    ONE  WITH    THE    UNSBLFISHNESB  OF    THE 

OTBEB,  1.  Look,  first  of  all,  at  Elisha's  unselfishness.  It  is  a  sublime  picture.  We 
hardly  know  which  to  admire  most — Elijah  as  he  stands  forth  alone  in  rugged  grandeur 
to  confront  the  prophets  of  Baal;  or  Elisha,  as  in  quiet  simplicity  and  sincere  foiget- 
fulnew  of  itlf  £•  stands  there  before  Naaman,  and  gently  puts  away  from  him  the 


OH.  T.  1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  107 


general'i  temptmg  i^ft.  Of  the  two,  I  think  Elisha's  was  the  harder  and  therefore  mors 
heroic  deed.  Look  at  the  temptations  which  he  must  have  felt.  The  fame  of  him 
had  apread  into  Syria,  so  much  so  that  this  haughty  general,  the  foremost  man  in  all 
Syria  except  its  king,  comes  to  him  to  he  healed  of  his  leprosy.  The  King  of  Syria 
himself  sends  a  letter  with  his  general.  And  now,  when,  at  Elisha's  bidding,  Naaman 
has  washed  in  Jordan,  and  become  cured,  was  it  not  a  strong  temptation  to  the  prophet 
to  take  glory  and  honour  and  reward  for  himself?  Naaman  wanted  to  give  him  rich 
remuneration.  He  presses  it  upon  him.  "  Now  therefore,  I  pray  thee,  take  a  blessing 
of  thy  servant."  Listen  to  the  answer :  "  As  the  Lord  liveth,  before  whom  I  stand,  I 
will  receive  none."  Again  Naaman  urges  him  to  lake  the  gift,  and  once  more  and 
finally  the  prophet  refuses.  And  why?  Did  he  think  there  was  any  harm  in  taking 
•  gift  ?  Not  at  all.  At  other  times  he  was  quite  content  to  he  dependent  on  the 
bounty  of  others.  St.  Paul  tells  us  that "  even  so  hath  the  Lord  ordained  that  they  which 
preach  the  gospel  should  live  of  the  gospel."  Elisha  had  no  objection  to  the  gift  as 
such,  and  even  if  he  did  not  want  it  for  himself  he  could  have  made  good  use  of  it. 
Why,  then,  did  he  refute  it  t  (1)  In  the  first  place,  he  thought  of  the  honour  of  his  God. 
Elisha  knew  well  that  it  was  not  by  his  word  or  by  his  power  that  Naaman  had  been 
healed,  but  by  the  power  of  the  living  God.  He  wanted  Naaman  to  think,  not  of  the 
prophet,  but  of  the  prophet's  God.  So  St.  Peter  acted  when  he  and  St.  John  had  healed 
the  lame  man  at  the  Beautiful  gate  of  the  temple.  He  said  to  the  people, "  Why  look  ye 
so  earnestly  on  us,  as  though  by  our  own  power  or  holiness  we  had  made  this  man  to 
walk  ?  "  and  then  proceeded  to  point  out  to  the  people  the  benefit  of  faith  in  Christ. 
So  it  will  be  with  every  true  servant  of  Christ.  He  will  seek  to  point  men  to  his 
Master,  and  not  to  himself.  (2)  Again,  he  thought  of  the  honour  of  his  religion.  Ha 
doubtless  felt  that  if  he  had  taken  Naaman's  gift,  Naaman  might  afterwards  have  said, 
"  Well,  these  prophets  of  Israel,  who  call  themselves  followers  of  the  true  God,  are  no 
better  than  our  own  heathen  priests.  They  follow  their  calling  just  for  the  money  that 
it  brings."  Elisha  knew  that  that  was  not  true.  He  knew  that  he  might  lawfully  take 
the  gift,  and  yet  be  influenced  by  far  higher  motives,  in  the  service  of  God.  But  he 
felt  that,  though  all  things  are  lawful,  all  things  are  not  expedient.  Oh  that  all  God's 
people  were  equally  solicitous  about  the  honour  of  Christ's  cause  a»d  kingdom !  How 
careful  we  should  be  lest  by  our  worldliness,  our  inconsistencies,  our  thoughtlessness, 
we  bring  reproach  upon  the  religion  we  profess!  (3)  Further,  Elisha  thought  of  the 
honour  of  his  country.  Israel  had,  at  that  time,  been  defeated  by  Syria.  Elisha  felt 
that  it  would  be  an  humiliating  thing  for  him — a  Hebrew— to  take  a  gift  from  one  of 
the  conquering  nation,  and  especially  from  him  who  had  perhaps  been  the  leadimg  general 
in  the  war  against  the  Jewish  people.  Evidently  that  was  what  he  meant  when  he  said 
to  Gehazi  afterwards,  "  Is  it  a  time  to  receive  money,  and  to  receive  garments,  and 
oliveyards, and  vineyards,  and  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  menservants,  and  maidservants?" 
The  time  of  his  country's  disgrace  and  defeat  was  not  a  time  for  him  to  indulge  in 
luxury  and  display.  There  is  room  for  more  Christian  patriotism  in  the  present  day — 
a  patriotism  that  shall  rest  the  honour  of  its  country  on  the  industry,  morality,  and 
uprightness  of  its  people,  and  that  shall  see  in  every  departure  from  these  virtues  a 
cause  of  humiliation  and  shame.  (4)  Finally,  Elisha  thought  also  of  the  good  of 
Naaman.  He  wanted  not  only  to  benefit  his  body,  but  his  soul  also.  Theref(jre  he 
avoided  everything  that  might  put  a  stumbling-block  in  his  way.  And  we  see  how 
well  he  succeeded.  Naaman,  from  what  he  had  seen  of  Elisha,  the  prophet  of  the  true 
God,  and  from  what  he  had  seen  of  God's  power,  resolved  that  he  would  never  sacrifice 
to  any  other  god  but  to  the  God  of  Israel.  If  we  would  benefit  others,  our  own  hearts 
roust  be  right  with  God.  There  must  be  no  doubt  about  our  sincerity,  no  uncertainty 
about  our  motives.  We  see  in  all  this  how  little  Elisha  thought  of  self.  He  had 
a  great  opportunity,  and  he  used  it  well.  He  had  a  strong  temptation  presented  to 
him,  and  he  resisted  it.  It  is  a  splendid  instance  of  unselfishness,  a  splendid  illus- 
tration of  the  power  of  Divine  grace.  2.  How  different  from  all  this  the  covetoitsness, 
the  selfishness,  of  Qehazil  The  honour  of  his  God,  the  honour  of  his  religion,  the 
honour  of  his  country,  the  good  of  Naaman— none  of  these  things  ever  cost  him  a 
thought.  In  his  mind  self  is  the  one  all-absorbing,  overmastering  consideration.  Even 
his  master's  honour  is  of  little  value  in  his  eyes.  Elisha  had  refused  to  take  Naaman's 
gift,  yet  Gehazi  runs  after  him,  and  says  that  his  roaster  has  sent  him  to  ask  for 


lOe  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  [ch.  t.  1—27. 

money  and  clotlieg,  just  as  if  he  was  so  GuTsle  as  not  to  know  his  own  mind,  and  so 
mean  as  now  to  send  and  beg  that  which  but  a  little  time  before  he  had  sturdily 
declined.  Gehazi's  greed  for  money  bad  blunted  all  the  finer  feelings  of  his  nature. 
No  wonder  that  our  Saviour  said,  "  Take  heed  and  beware  of  covetousness."  No 
wonder  that  Paul  said,  "  The  love  of  money  is  a  root  of  all  evil."  All  kinds  of 
sins  result  from  the  love  of  money.  We  have  an  illustration  of  it  in  Gehazi's  case.' 
We  have  illustrations  of  it  every  day.  How  often  men  grow  rich,  but  do  not 
grow  better!  Sometimes  increasing  wealth  has  the  strange  effect  of  decreasing 
liberality.  Sometimes  increasing  wealth  brings  with  it  increase  of  pride.  Some- 
times increasing  wealth  has  made  men  more  worldly.  Instead  of  seeking  to  serve 
Christ  more  with  their  increased  opportunities  and  increased  influence,  tht^y  serve  him 
lets.  Thank  God  if  with  increasing  wealth  he  has  given  you  increasing  grace.  Thank 
God  if  he  has  enabled  you  to  yive  the  more,  the  more  you  got.  Thank  God  if  with 
increasing  wealth  you  have  kept  a  cool  head,  a  warm  heart,  a  steady  hand,  a  clear 
conscience,  and  the  friends  of  your  youth.  To  those  who  are  beginning  life  we  would 
earnestly  say.  Beware  of  covetousness.  Don't  imagine  that  to  be  rich  is  the  be-all  and 
end-all  of  life.  There  are  some  things  which  money  cannot  buy.  There  are  soma 
things  which  money  cannot  do.  Money  can't  keep  death  away  from  the  door.  Money 
cannot  purchase  the  pardon  of  sin,  or  obtain  for  a  single  soul  admission  into  heaven. 
"  We  brought  nothing  into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  we  can  carry  nothing  out." 
But  we  are  not  therefore  to  despise  money.  Get  all  the  money  you  can,  provided  you 
get  it  honestly,  provided  you  do  not  sacrifice  your  soul's  interests  because  of  it,  and 
provided  that,  when  you  have  it,  you  spend  it  well.  Make  a  good  use  of  your  money 
in  your  lifetime.  "  Make  to  yourselves  friends  of  the  mammon  which  the  unrighteous 
worship,  that,  when  ye  fail,  they  may  receive  you  into  everlasting  habitations." 

II.   CONTBAST    THB    DEOEITFULNESS     OP    THE    ONB    WITH     THE    STBAIGHTFORWABB 

HONESTY  OP  THB  OTHBB.  There  was  nothing  two-faced  about  Elisha.  He  did  not 
say  one  thing  with  his  lips,  and  think  the  very  opposite  in  his  heart.  When  Jehoram, 
King  of  Israel,  after  his  idolatry  and  his  sins,  got  into  difficulties  at  the  time  that  he 
and  the  other  two  kings  went  forth  against  the  King  of  Moab,  he  then  sent  for  Elisha. 
But  Elisha  does  not  meet  him  in  any  fawning,  flattering  spirit.  He  at  once  rebukes 
him  for  his  sins.  He  says,  "  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  get  thee  to  the  prophets 
of  thy  father,  and  to  the  prophets  of  thy  mother."  In  the  same  way  he  treats  Naaman 
as  one  whose  pride  needs  to  be  humbled.  Though  he  might  have  offended  Naaman  by 
refusing  to  take  his  gift,  he  plainly  tells  him,  "  As  the  Lord  liveth,  before  whom  I 
stand,  I  will  receive  none."  What  a  contrast  to  this  blunt,  straightforward  honesty  is 
the  two-faced  deceitfulness  of  Gehazi!  Observe  how  one  sin  brings  another  with  it. 
He  first  of  all  coveted  the  money  and  the  raiment,  when  he  heard  Elisha  refuse  Naaman'a 
present.  Then  covetousness  leads  to  deception  and  lying.  He  ran  after  Naaman's 
chariot,  and  invented  a  false  story  that  some  young  men  had  come  to  Elisha,  and  that ' 
he  wanted  money  and  clothing  for  them.  His  guilt  was  doubly  great,  because  he  was 
Elisha's  trusted  servant  or  steward,  and  because  he  probably  had  other  servants  under  him. 
And  then  he  lies,  not  only  to  Naaman,  but  to  his  master,  when  he  says, "  Thy  servant 
M  ent  no  whither."  Oh,  the  baseness,  the  wickedness,  of  deceit !  And  yet  how  much  of 
it  is  practised  in  the  world  1  Sow  much  of  it  in  the  social  relationships  of  life  I  What 
•ham  friendships  1  What  hollow  civilities!  Whited  sepulchres  and  social  shams! 
How  much  of  it  mi  the  commercial  world!  What  barefaced  adulteration!  What 
cheating  of  customers!  What  false  statements — known  to  be  false — about  the  value 
of  goods  1  Sometimes  there  are  revelations — great  failures,  gross  frauds.  But  what  an 
immense  amount  of  deceit  goes  on  that  is  never  heard  of!  Many  deceive  or  act  dis- 
honestly just  up  to  the  limit  of  detection,  just  as  if  God's  eye  was  not  on  them  all  the 
time.  To  say,  "  Every  one  does  it,"  as  an  excuse  for  deceit  or  dishonesty  in  a  business, 
is  no  reason  why  a  Christian  man  should  do  it,  why  any  man  should  do  it.  God's  eye 
sees.  His  command  is  clear,  "Thou  shalt  not  steal."  Thou  shalt  not  put  forth  thine 
hand  to  take  what  is  not  thine  own.  The  man  who  robs  his  customers,  the  man  who 
plunders  or  purloins  from  his  employers,  even  though  ho  may  be  respectable  in  the 
eyes  of  the  world,  is  as  much  a  thief  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  perhaps  far  more  guilty, 
than  the  poor  boy  who  steals  a  loaf  in  his  hunger  and  want.  Deceit  and  dishonesty 
never  can  bring  a  blessing.    "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."-  We  have  many 


OH.T.  1— 27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KIKGa  109 

instances  in  history  of  the  fearful  consequences  of  even  s  gingle  act  of  deceit.  The 
cue  great  stain  upon  the  memory  of  Lord  Olive,  the  hero  of  Flassey,  and  one  of  the 
greatest  men  who  ever  administered  British  rule  in  India,  is  his  single  act  of  deception 
practised  on  an  Indian  prince.  The  words  which  Lord  Macaulay  has  written  on  this 
subject  are  so  important  and  so  true,  that  they  are  well  worth  repeating:  "Olive's 
breach  of  faith,"  he  says,  "  was  not  merely  a  crime,  but  a  blunder.  We  don't  know 
whether  it  be  possible  to  mention  a  state  which  has  on  the  whole  been  a  gainer  by  a 
breach  of  public  faith.  The  entire  history  of  British  India  is  an  illustration  of  this 
great  truth,  that  it  is  not  prudent  to  oppose  perfidy  to  perfidy — that  the  most  efficient 
weapon  with  which  men  can  encounter  falsehood  is  truth.  During  a  long  series  of 
years,  the  English  rulers  of  India,  surrounded  by  allies  and  enemies  whom  no  engage^ 
ment  could  bind,  have  generally  acted  with  sincerity  and  uprightness,  and  the  event 
has  proved  that  sincerity  and  uprightness  are  wisdom.  English  valour  and  English 
intelligence  have  done  less  to  extend  and  preserve  our  Oriental  empire  than  English 
veracity.  All  that  we  could  have  gained  by  imitating  the  doublings,  the  evasions,  the 
fictions,  the  perjuries,  which  have  been  employed  against  us,  is  as  nothing  compared 
with  what  we  have  gained  by  being  the  one  power  in  India  on  whose  word  reliance  can 
he  placed."  Covetousness  and  deceit  are  injurious  to  personal  happiness,  to  the  order 
and  peace  of  society,  and  to  the  welfare  and  prosperity  of  the  nation.  It  is  the  gospel 
of  Christ  that  alone  has  proved  itself  capable  of  grappling  with  these  evils,  and 
banishing  these  vices  from  the  human  heart.  It  teaches  us  not  to  think  of  self  merely, 
but  of  othes-s  also.  It  teaches  us  to  "  put  away  lying,  and  to  speak  every  man  truth 
with  his  neighbour."  To  spread  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  the  best  way  to  promote  social 
and  commercial  morality,  to  promote  confidence  between  man  and  man,  und  to  hasten 
the  coming  of  that  time  when  there  shall  be  peace  on  earth  and  good  will  to  men.  Let 
the  love  of  Jesus  fill  your  heart,  and  flow  out  into  your  life,  and  then  you  will  not 
intentionally  do  a  wrong  to  any  one,  in  thought,  in  word,  or  in  deed. — 0.  H.  L 

Vera.  1 — 27. — History  of  Naaman's  disease  and  cure,  illustrative  of  certain  forou  in 
the  life  of  man.  "  Now  Naaman,  captain  of  the  host  of  the  King  of  Syria,  was  a  great 
man  with  his  master,"  etc.  Naaman,  in  a  worldly  point  of  view,  was  a  great  man — 
one  of  the  magnates  of  his  age.  But  he  was  the  victim  of  a  terrible  disease.  "  He 
was  a  leper."  Leprosy  was  a  terrible  disease — hereditary,  painful,  conteigious,  loath- 
some, and  fatal.  In  all  these  respects  it  resembled  sin.  Naaman's  disease  and  Ids  cure, 
as  here  sketched,  manifest  certain  fm'ces  which  have  ever  been  and  stiU  are  at  work 
in  society,  and  which  play  no  feeble  part  in  the  formation  of  character  and  the  regu- 
lation of  destiny.    Notice — 

I.  The  force  of  wobldly  position.  Why  all  the  interest  displayed  in  his  own 
country,  and  in  Israel,  concerning  Naaman's  disease?  The  first  verse  of  this  chapter 
explains  it.  "  Now  Naaman,  captain  of  the  host  of  the  King  of  Syria,  was  a  great 
man."  Perhaps  there  were  many  men  in  his  own  district  who  were  suffering  from 
leprosy,  yet  little  interest  was  felt  in  them.  They  would  groan  under  their  sufferings, 
and  die  unsympathized  with  and  unhelped.  But  because  this  man's  worldly  position  was 
high,  kings  worked,  prophets  were  engaged,  nations  were  excited,  for  his  cure.  It  has 
ever  been  a  sad  fact  in  human  history  that  men  magnify  both  the  trials  and  the  virtues 
of  grandees,  and  think  but  little  of  the  griefs  and  graces  of  the  lowly.  If  a  man  in 
high  position  is  under  trial,  it  is  always  "  a  great  trial,"  of  which  people  talk,  and  which 
the  press  will  record.  If  he  does  a  good  work,  it  is  always  "a  great  work,"  and  is 
trumpeted  half  the  world  over.  This  fafct  indicates :  1.  The  lack  of  intdligence  iu 
popular  sympathy.  Reason  teaches  that  the  calamities  of  the  wealthy  have  many 
mitigating  circumstances,  and  therefore  the  greater  sympathy  should  be  toward  the 
poor.  2.  The  lack  of  manliness  in  popular  sympathy.  There  is  a  fawning  servility, 
most  dishonourable  to  human  nature,  in  showing  more  sympathy  with  the  rich  than 
with  the  poor  in  suffering. 

II.  The  force  of  ihdividdal  infutbno*.  "And  the  Syrian*  had  gone  out  by 
companies,  and  had  brought  away  captive  out  of  the  land  of  Israel  a  little  maid ; 
and  she  waited  on  Naaman's  wife.  And  she  said  unto  her  mistress,  Would  God  my 
lord  were  with  the  prophet  that  is  in  Samaria  I  for  he  would  recover  him  of  his  leprosy. 
And  one  went  in,  and  told  his  lord,  saying.  Thus  and  thus  said  the  maid  that  is  of  ths 


110  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  ▼.  1—27 

land  of  Israel."  This  little  girl,  who  had  been  torn  from  her  native  conntrjr,  and 
carried  into  the  land  of  strangers  by  the  ruthless  hand  of  war,  told  her  mistress  of  ■ 
prophet  in  Israel  who  had  the  power  to  heal  lepers.  This  led  the  King  of  Syria  to 
persuade  Naaman  to  visit  Judgea,  and  to  give  the  leprous  captain  an  introduction  to  the 
king,  who,  in  his  turn,  introduced  him  to  the  prophet,  who  effected  his  healing.  The 
influence  of  this  little  slave-girl  should  teach  us  three  things.  1.  The  magriammify  of 
young  natures.  Though  she  was  an  exile  in  the  land  of  her  oppressors,  instead  of  having 
that  revenge  which  would  have  led  her  to  rejoice  in  the  sufferings  of  her  captors,  her 
young  heart  yearned  with  sympathy  for  one  of  the  ruthless  conquerors.  A  poor  child, 
a  humble  servant,  a  despised  slave,  may  have  a  royal  soul.  2.  2%«  power  of  the 
humblest  individual.  This  poor  girl,  with  her  simple  intelligence,  moved  her  mistress ; 
her  mistress,  the  mighty  warrior ;  then  Syria's  king  was  moved ;  by  him  the  King  of 
Israel  is  interested ;  and  then  the  prophet  of  the  Lord.  Thus  the  little  maid  may  have 
been  said  to  have  stirred  kingdoms.  No  one,  not  even  a  child,  "  liveth  to  himself." 
Each  is  a  fountain  of  influence.  3.  The  dependence  of  the  great  upon  the  small.  The 
recovery  of  this  warrior  resulted  from  the  word  of  this  captive  mud.  Some  persons 
admit  the  hand  of  Grod  only  in  what  they  call  great  events  I  But  what  are  the  great 
events  ?  "  Great "  and  "  small "  are  but  relative  terms.  And  even  what  we  call 
"  small "  often  sways  and  shapes  the  "  great."  One  spark  of  fire  may  burn  down  all 
London. 

III.  The  force  of  self-pbebebvation.  "  And  the  King  of  Syria  said,  Gk>  to,  go,  and 
I  will  send  a  letter  unto  the  King  of  Israel.  And  he  departed,  and  took  with  him  ten 
talents  of  silver,  and  six  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  ten  changes  of  raiment.  And  he 
brought  the  letter  to  the  King  of  Israel,  saying,  Now  when  this  letter  is  come  unto  thee, 
behold,  I  have  therewith  sent  Naaman  my  servant  to  thee,  that  thou  majest  recover 
him  of  his  leprosy."  It  would  seem  that  Naaman  at  once  consulted  Benhadad,  King  of 
Syria,  on  the  subject  suggested  by  the  captive  maid,  and,  having  obtained  an  introduc- 
tion to  the  King  of  Israel,  hurried  off,  taking  with  him  "  ten  talents  of  silver,"  ete. — great 
wealth — which  he  was  prepared  to  sacrifice  in  the  recovery  of  his  health.  The  instinct 
of  self-preservation  is  one  of  the  strongest  in  human  nature.  "  Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all 
that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life."  Men  will  spend  fortuaes  and  traverse 
continents  in  order  to  rid  themselves  of  disease,  and  prolong  life.  This  strenuous  effort 
for  recovery  from  disease  reminds  us  of:  1,  The  value  of  physical  health.  This  man 
had  lost  it,  and  what  was  the  world  to  him  without  it  ?  Bishop  Hall  truly  says  of 
him,  "  The  basest  slave  in  Syria  would  not  change  skins  with  him."  Health — this 
precious  blessing — is  so  lavishly  given,  that  men  seldom  appreciate  it  till  it  is  lost. 
2.  The  neglect  <f  spiritual  health.  This  man  was  evidently  morally  diseased — that  is, 
he  neither  knew  of  the  true  God  nor  had  sympathy  with  him.  He  was  a  moral  invalid. 
A  worse  disease  than  leprosy  infected  his  manhood  and  threatened  the  ruin  of  his  being. 
Yet  there  is  no  struggling  here  after  spiritual  recovery.     This  is  a  general  eviL 

IV.  The  force  of  caste  feeling.  "  And  the  King  of  Syria  said.  Go  to,  go,  and  I 
will  send  aletter  unto  the  King  of  Israel."  Why  did  the  King  of  Syria  send  Naaman  with 
the  letter  to  the  monarch  of  Israel  ?  Was  it  because  he  was  given  to  understand  that 
the  king  would  work  the  cure  ?  No ;  for  mention  was  made  by  the  captive  girl  of  no 
one  who  could  effect  the  cure  but  "  the  prophet  that  is  in  Samaria."  Or  was  it  because 
he  thought  that  Israel's  monarch  would  discover  the  prophet,  and  influence  him  on 
behalf  of  the  afflicted  officer  ?  No  ;  for  in  his  royal  letter  he  says,  "  Behold,  I  have  .  .  . 
sent  Naaman  my  servant  to  thee,  that  thou  mayest  recover  him  of  his  leprosy."  Why, 
then  ?  Simply  because  of  caste  feeling.  He,  forsooth,  was  too  great  to  know  a  prophet — 
too  great  to  correspond  with  any  one  but  a  king.  What  was  a  prophet,  though  full 
of  Divine  intelligence,  and  nerved  with  Divine  energy,  compared  even  to  a  soulle« 
man  if  a  crown  encircled  his  brow  ?  1.  Caste  feeling  sinks  the  real  in  the  adventitious. 
The  man  who  is  ruled  by  it  so  exaggerates  external  things  as  to  lose  sight  of  those  elements 
of  moral  character  which  constitute  the  dignity  and  determine  the  destiny  of  man.  H' 
lives  in  bubbles.  2.  Caste  feeling  curtails  the  region  of  human  sympathies.  He  who 
is  controlled  by  this  feeling  has  the  circle  of  his  sympathies  limited  not  only  to  what 
is  outward  in  man,  but  to  what  is  outward  in  those  only  in  his  own  sphere.  All  out- 
lying his  grmde  and  class  are  nothing  to  him.  3.  Caste  feiling  is  antagonistic  to  the 
gosftL    Christ  came  to  destroy  that  middle  wall  of  partition  ^at  divides  men  iuta 


OH.  T.  1—27.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KING3.  Ill 


classeg.  The  gospel  overtops  all  adTentitious  distinctions,  and  directs  ita  doctrines 
and  o£fer8  ita  provisions  to  man  as  man. 

V.  The  force  of  quiltt  bubficion.  "  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  King  of  Israel 
had  read  the  letter,  that  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  said.  Am  I  God,  to  kill  and  to  make 
alive,  that  this  man  doth  send  unto  me  to  recover  a  man  of  his  leprosy  ?  Wherefore 
consider,  I  pray  you,  and  see  how  he  seeketh  a  quarrel  against  me."  The  construction 
that  the  monarch  put  upon  the  message  of  bis  royal  brother  was,  instead  of  being  true 
and  liberal,  false  and  ungenerous.  He  ascribed  evil  motives  where  there  were  none, 
and  saw  malignant  intejitions  where  there  was  nothing  but  a  good-natured  purpose. 
All  this  springs  from  that  suspicion  which  is  a  prevalent  and  disastrous  evil  in  the  social 
life  of  this  world.  Where  this  suspicion  exists,  one  of  the  two,  if  not  the  two,  following 
things  are  always  found.  1.  A  knowledge  of  the  depravity  of  society.  The  suspicious 
man  has  •  frequently  learnt,  either  from  observation,  testimony,  or  experience,  or 
from  all  these  together,  that  there  is  such  an  amount  of  falsehood  and  dishonesty  in 
society  as  will  lead  one  man  to  take  an  undue  advantage  of  another.  However,  whether 
lie  has  learnt  this  or  not,  it  is  a  lamentable  fact,  patent  to  all  observant  eyes.  2,  The 
existence  of  evil  in  himsdf.  The  suspicious  man  knows  that  he  is  selfish,  false, 
dishonest,  unchaste,  and  he  believes  that  all  men  are  the  same.  If  he  were  not  evil, 
he  would  not  be  suspicious  of  others,  even  though  he  knew  that  all  about  him  were 
bad.  An  innocent  being,  I  trow,  would  move  amongst  a  corrupt  age  without  any 
suspicion  whatever.  Being  destitute  of  all  bad  motives  himself,  he  would  not  be  able 
to  understand  the  corrupt  motives  of  others.  On  the  other  hand,  were  society  ever 
so  holy,  a  bad  man  would  still  be  suspecting  all.  An  unchaste,  selfish,  fraudulent  man 
would  suspect  the  purity,  the  benevolence,  and  the  integrity  of  angels,  if  he  lived 
amongst  them.  The  greatest  rogues  are  always  the  most  suspicious ;  the  most  lustful 
husbands  are  always  the  most  jealous  of  their  wives,  and  the  reverse.  Well  has  our 
great  dramatist  said,  "Suspicion  haunts  the  guilty  soul."  A  miserable  thing  truly  is 
this  suspicion.  Heaven  deliver  us  from  suspicious  people  1  Suspicion  is  the  poison 
of  all  true  friendship ;  it  is  that  which  makes  kings  tyrants,  merchants  exactors, 
masters  rigorous,  and  the  base-natured  of  both  sexes  diseased  with  a  jealousy  that 
shatters  connubial  confidence,  and  quenches  all  the  lights  of  connubial  life. 

YI.  The  force  of  bemgdial  goodness.  Though  the  kiog  could  not  cure,  there  wag 
a  remedial  power  in  Israel  equal  to  this  emergency.  That  power  Infinite  Goodness 
delegated  to  Elisha.  God  makes  man  the  organ  of  his  restorative  powers.  It  was  so 
now  with  Elisha.  '  It  was  pre-eminently  so  with  Christ.  It  was  so  with  the  apostles. 
The  redemptive  treasure  is  in  "  earthly  vessels."  The  passage  suggests  several  points 
concerning  this  remedial  power.  1.  It  transcends  natural  power.  "  When  Elisha  the 
man  of  God,"  etc.  The  monarch  felt  his  utter  inBufBciency  to  effect  the  cure.  Natural 
science  knew  nothing  of  means  to  heal  tlie  leper.  Supernatural  revelation  reveals  the 
remedy  through  Elisha.  Herein  is  an  illustration  of  Christianity.  No  natural  science 
can  cure  the  leprosy  of  sin ;  it  tried  for  ages,  but  failed.  2.  It  offends  human  pride. 
"  So  Naaman  came  with  his  horses,"  etc.  Naaman  came  in  all  the  pomp  of  wealth  aud 
station  to  the  prophet's  door,  expecting,  no  doubt,  that  Elisha  would  hurry  out  to  do 
him  honour.  But  a  true  man  is  never  moved  by  glitter.  He  did  not  even  go  out  to 
meet  the  illustiious  visitor,  but  sent  a  messenger  to  bid  liim  go  to  the  Jordan,  and  there 
wash.  But  both  the  unbending  independency  of  the  prophet,  and  the  simple  method 
he  prescribed,  so  galled  the  proud  heart  of  the  Syrian  warrior,  that  he  "  was  wroth,  and 
went  away,  and  said.  Behold,  I  thought.  He  will  surely  come  out  to  me,"  etc.  Herein 
is  an  illustration  of  Christianity.  It  strikes  at  the  root  of  pride,  and  requires  us  to 
become  as  "little  children."  3.  It  clashes  with  popular  prejudices.  "Are  not  Abana 
and  Pharpar,  rivers  of  Damascus,  better  than  all  the  waters  of  Israel?  may  I  not  wash 
in  them,  and  be  clean  ?"  It  is  common  for  men  to  regard  that  which  belongs  to 
themselves  and  to  their  country  as  the  "  better  " — our  children,  our  family,  our  sect, 
our  class,  our  nation,  are  "better."  This  man's  prejudice  said,  "Abana  and  Pharpar;" 
the  prophet  said,  "Jordan;  "  and  this  offended  him.  "And  he  went  away  in  a  rage." 
Herein,  again,  is  an  illustration  of  Christianity.  Human  prejudices  prescribe  this  river 
and  that  river  for  cleansing,  but  the  gospel  says,  "  Jordan."  4,  It  works  hy  simple  means. 
"  And  his  servants  came  near,  and  spake  unto  him,  and  said.  My  father,  if  the  prophet 
had  bid  tiiee  do  some  great  thing,  wouldest  thou  not  have  done  it  ?  how  much  rather  then 


Ill  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  l*""  ▼•  1— 27. 

wk«a  he  adth  to  thee,  Wash,  and  be  clean?"  The  means  to  Naaman  seemed  to  be  too 
simple  to  answer  the  end  he  sought.  Had  there  been  some  severe  regimen,  or  some 
painful  operation,  or  some  costly  expenditure,  he  would  have  accepted  it  more  readily  j 
but  "  to  wash,"  seemed  too  simple.  The  means  of  spiritual  recovery  are  very  simple. 
But  men  desire  tliem  otherwise.  Hence  vain  ceremonies,  pilgrimages,  penances,  pro- 
longed fastings,  and  the  like.  "  Believe,  .  .  .  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  says  Ood ; 
man  wants  to  do  something  more.  6.  It  demands  individual  effort.  "  Then  went 
he  down,  and  dipped  himself  seven  times  in  Jordan  according  to  the  saying  of  the 
man  of  God."  Naaman  had  to  go  down  himael/  to  the  river,  and  to  dip  himself  seves 
times  in  its  waters.  His  restoration  depended  upon  his  individual  effort.  And  so 
it  is  in  spiritual  matters.  Each  man  must  believe,  repent,  and  pray,  for  himself. 
There  is  no  substitution.  6.  It  is  completely  efficacious,  "  His  flesh  came  again  like 
unto  the  flesh  of  a  little  child."  The  means  employed  for  this  leper's  cure  fully 
answered  the  end.  Every  vestige  of  the  disease  was  gone,  and  he  was  restored  to  more 
than  the  vigour  of  his  former  manhood.  Herein  once  more,  "  Believe, .  .  .  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved." 

VII,  The  force  of  a  new  conviotion.  "  And  he  returned  to  the  man  of  God,"  ete. 
Observe :  1.  The  suifeet  of  this  new  conviction.  What  was  the  subject  ?  That  the 
God  of  Israel  was  the  only  God.  This  new  conviction  reversed  his  old  prejudices  and 
the  religious  creed  of  his  country.  It  was  not  reasoning.  It  was  not  teaching;  experienot 
had  wrought  this  conviction  into  his  soul.  He  felt  that  it  was  God's  hand  that  healed 
him.  2.  The  developments  of  this  new  conviction.  A  conviction  like  this  must  prove 
influential  in  some  way  or  other.  Abstract  ideas  may  lie  dormant  in  the  mind,  but 
convictions  are  ever  operative.  What  did  it  do  in  Naaman  ?  (1)  It  evoked  gratitude. 
Standing  with  all  his  company  before  the  prophet,  be  avowed  his  gratitude.  "  Now 
therefore,  I  pray  thee,  take  a  blessing  of  thy  servant."  Just  before  his  cure  he  had 
anything  but  kindly  feelings  towards  the  prophet.  He  was  full  of  "  rage."  New 
convictions  about  God  will  generate  new  feelings  toward  man.  (2)  It  annihilated  an 
old  prejudice.  Just  before  his  cure  he  despised  Israel.  Jordan  was  contemptible  as 
compared  with  the  rivers  of  Damascus.  But  now  the  very  ground  seems  holy.  Ho 
asks  of  the  prophet  liberty  to  take  away  a  portion  of  the  earth.  "  Shall  there  not  then, 
I  pray  thee,  be  given  to  thy  servant  two  mules'  burden  of  earcb  7  "  A  new  conviction 
about  God  widens  the  soul's  sympathies,  raises  it  above  all  those  nationalities  of  heart 
that  characterize  little  souls.  (3)  It  inspired  worship.  "  Thy  servant  will  henceforth 
offer  neither  burnt  offering  nor  sacrifice  .  .  .  but  unto  the  Lord."  His  whole  nature  was 
so  flooded  with  gratitude  to  God  who  had  healed  him,  that  his  soul  went  forth  in  holy 
worship.  Through  the  force  of  this  new  conviction,  he  felt  as  St.  Peul  did  when  he 
sud,  "  What  things  were  gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss." 

'VIII.  The  force  of  associates.  Naaman  had  been  in  the  habit  of  worshipping  "  in 
the  house  of  Bimmon,"  with  bis  master  the  king.  This,  probably,  he  had  done  for  years 
with  other  officers  of  the  state.  The  influence  of  this  he  now  felt  counteracting  the 
new  conviction  of  duty.  He  felt  that,  whilst  it  would  be  wrong  for  him  to  go  there  any 
more,  yet  he  could  not  but  go.  "  In  this  thing  the  Lord  pardon  thy  servant,"  etc. 
Loyalty  and  gratitude  towards  the  king  contributed  much  to  prevent  him  renouncing 
all  connection  with  the  house  of  Rimmon.  How  often  do  our  associations  prevent  us 
from  the  full  carrying  out  of  our  convictions !  It  ought  not  to  be  so.  "  He  that  loveth 
father  or  mother,"  etc.  It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  the  Prophet  Elisba,  instead 
of  exhorting  Naaman  to  avoid  every  appearance  of  idolatry,  said  to  him,  "  Go  in  peace." 
The  prophet,  perhaps,  had  faith  in  the  power  of  Naaman's  conviction  to  guard  him 
from  any  moral  mischief. 

IX.  The  force  of  bobdid  avarice.  Gehazi  is  the  illustration  of  this.  In  his  case 
we  have :  1.  Avarice  eager  in  its  pursuits.  "  But  Gehazi,  the  servant  of  Elisha,"  etc. 
He  saw,  as  he  thought,  a  fine  opportunity  for  his  greed,  and  he  eagerly  seized  it.  "  I 
will  run  after  him."  Avarice  is  one  of  the  most  hungry  passions  of  the  soul.  It  is 
never  satisfied.  Had  the  avaricious  man,  like  the  fabled  Bi  iareus,  a  hur.dred  hands,  be 
would  employ  them  all  in  ministering  to  himself — Dryden  calls  it 

**  A  onrsed  hunger  of  pernicious  gold." 

It  ii  that  passion  that  makes  all  men  like  Gehazi  "run.''    Men  are  everywhere  out  of 


OH.  V.  1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  113 

breath  in  their  lace  for  wealth.  2.  T^is  avarice  it  in  one  associated  tiHth  the  most 
generous  of  men.  He  was  the  servant  of  Elisha,  who,  when  Naaman  offered  some 
acknowledgment  of  his  gratitude  to  him,  exclaimed,  in  the  most  solemn  way,  "  As 
the  Lord  liveth,  before  whom  I  stand,  I  will  receive  none."  One  would  have  thought 
that  association  with  a  generous  soul  Uke  this  would  have  banished  every  base  sentiment 
from  Gehazi's  heart.  But  when  it  once  roots  itself  in  the  soul,  it  is  the  most  inveterate 
of  lusts.  The  history  of  modern  enterprises  shows  us  numerous  examples  of  men  who, 
from  early  life,  have  been  in  association  with  ministers,  churches,  religious  institutions, 
and  in  some  cases  have  themselves  been  deacons,  chairmen  of  religious  societies,  and 
the  like,  whose  avarice  has  so  grown,  in  spite  of  all  those  influences,  as  to  make  them 
swindlers  on  a  gigantic  scale.  3.  This  avarice  sought  its  end  hy  means  of  falsehood. 
"  My  master  hath  sent  me,"  etc.  This  was  a  flagrant  falsehood.  Avarice  is  alwa^-s 
fidse.  Its  trades  are  full  of  tricks ;  its  shops  of  sophistries.  All  its  enterprises  employ 
the  tongue  of  falsehood  and  the  hand  of  deceit. 

X.  The  force  of  distributive  justice.  There  is  justice  on  this  earth  as  well  as 
remedial  goodness,  and  Heaven  often  makes  men  the  organ  as  well  as  the  subject  of 
both.  Elisha,  who  had  the  remedial  power,  had  also  the  retributive.  Here  we  see 
retributive  justice :  1.  Detecting  the  wrong-doer.  "  And  Elisha  said  unto  him,  Whence 
comest  thou,  Gehazi  ?  "  etc.  Justice  has  the  eyes  of  Argus ;  has  more  than  the  eyes  of 
Argus — it  sees  io  the  dark.  It  penetrates  through  all  fallacies.  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord 
run  to  and  fro,  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good."  2.  Reproving  the  wrong-doer.  "  Is  it 
a  time  to  receive  money,"  etc.  ?  An  old  expositor  has  quaintly  put  It,  "  Couldest  thou 
And  no  better  way  of  getting  money  than  by  belying  thy  master,  and  laying  a  stumbling- 
block  before  a  young  convert?"  His  avarice  was  a  thing  bad  in  itself,  and  bad  also  in 
seizing  an  opportunity  which  should  have  been  employed  for  other  and  higher  ends. 
3.  Punishing  the  wrong-doer.  "  The  leprosy  therefore  of  Naaman  shall  cleave  unto 
thee,"  etc.  He  had  money  of  the  leper,  but  he  had  his  disease  too.  In  getting  what 
be  considered  a  blessing,  he  got  a  curse  as  well.  Wealth  avariciously  gotten  never  fails 
to  bring  a  curse  in  some  form  or  other.  If  it  does  not  bring  leprosy  to  the  body,  it 
brings  what  is  infinitely  worse,  the  most  deadly  leprosy  into  the  soul,  and  often  entails 
injuries  on  posterity. — ^D.  T. 

Vers,  1 — 7. — The  itory  of  Naaman  ;  1.  The  disinterested  maiden.  The  story  of  the 
great  Syrian  captain,  who  was  healed  of  his  leprosy  and  brought  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  true  God  through  the  instrumentality  of  a  captive  Hebrew  maid  directing  him  to 
Elisha,  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful,  as  it  is  one  of  the  richest  in  gospel  suggestion,  of 
the  narratives  of  the  Old  Testament.  Our  Lord  refers  to  it  in  his  discourse-at  Nazareth, 
as  showing  that  it  is  not  always  the  direct  possessors  of  privileges  who  know  best  how 
to  take  advantage  of  them.,  "Many  lepers  were  in  Israel,"  etc.  (Luke  It.  27X 

I.  The  great  uan's  leprosy.  The  story  opens  by  introducing  us  to  Naaman,  the 
captain  of  the  host  of  the  King  of  Syria.  1.  Bo  much,  and  yet  a  cross.  On  this  dis- 
tinguished man  Fortune  seemed  to  have  lavished  her  utmost  favours.  He  was  (1)  high 
in  rank,  "  captain  of  the  host  ; "  (2)  great  in  honour, "  a  great  man  with  his  master ; " 
(3)  successful  in  war, "  honourable,  because  by  him  the  Lord  had  given  deliverance  unto 
Syria;"  (4)  distinguished  for  personal  bravery,  "a  mighty  man  of  valour."  The 
expression  quoted  above,  "The  Lord  had  given  deliverance,"  etc.,  shows  how  far  the 
Hebrews  were  from  regarding  Jehovah  as  a  merely  national  Deity.  His  providence 
extended  to  other  nations  as  well.  It  was  he,  not  Himmon,  who  had  given  Syria  her 
victories.  Naansan  had  thus  wealth,  honour,  the  favour  of  bis  sovereign,  the  admira- 
tion of  the  people — everything  that  men  commonly  covet.  Yet  (5)  "  he  was  a  leper." 
This  spoiled  alL  It  was  the  cross  in  his  lot ;  the  drop  of  gall  in  his  cup ;  the  worm  at 
the  root  of  his  prosperity.  It  made  him  such  that,  as  has  been  said,  the  humblest 
soldier  in  his  ranks  would  not  have  exchanged  places  with  him.  Few  lives,  even  those 
which  seem  most  enviable,  are  without  their  cross.  The  lady  of  Shunem  has  wealth, 
comforts,  a  loving  husband ;  but  she  is  childless.  It  does  not  take  much  sometimes 
to  dash  our  earthly  happiness,  to  take  the  golden  light  out  of  life.  Because  it  is  so, 
we  should  seek  our  happiness  in  things  that  are  enduring.  "  He  builds  too  low  who 
builds  beneath  the  skies."  2.  The  cross  a  nxrey  m  disguise.  As  it  proved,  this  grief 
of  Naaman's  became  his  salvation.    It  brought  him  under  the  notice  of  th«  uttle 

XL  KXNOf.  I 


114  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  TflE  KINGS.  {cB.T.l—2t 

Hebrew  maid,  led  to  his  vidt  to  Elislia,  ended  in  bis  cure  and  his  conversion  to  tht 
faith  of  the  God  of  Israel.  He  was  one  who  could  say,  "  It  is  good  for  me  that  1  hare 
been  afflicted  **  (Fs.  cxix.  71).  How  often  are  seeming  crosses  and  trials  thus  over- 
ruled for  good  I  "  Men  see  not  the  bright  light  which  is  in  the  clouds :  but  the  wind 
passeth,  and  cleanseth  them "  (Job  zzxvii.  21).  The  evangelical  application  of  the 
story  is  aided  by  the  fact  that  leprosy  is  so  impressive  a  type  of  sin — insidious,  pro- 
gressive, corrupting,  fatal. 

II.  Ths  blate-oibl's  advioe.  It  was  God's  design  to  show  mercy  to  Naamao,  for 
his  own  glory,  as  well  as  for  a  testimony  that  the  Gentiles  were  not  outside  the  scope 
of  his  grace.  The  instrument  in  accomplishing  that  design  was  a  little  Hebrew  maid. 
1.  Ser  presence  in  Naaman's  house.  She  had  been  taken  in  a  marauding  expedition, 
and  brought  to  Syria  as  a  captive.  Sold,  perhaps,  like  Joseph,  in  the  slave-market,  she 
had  been  purchased  as  an  attendant  for  Naaman's  wife.  Her  presence  in  the  great 
captain's  household  was  thus :  (1)  providential,  even  as  was  Joseph's  residence  in  the 
house  of  Fotiphar ;  (2)  sad,  for  she  was  torn  from  her  own  land  and  friends,  and  the 
thought  of  their  sorrow  at  her  loss  would  add  to  hers ;  yet  (3)  designed  for  blessing. 
It  not  only  gave  her  the  opportunity  of  doing  good  to  her  master,  but  no  doubt  idti- 
mately  turned  to  her  own  great  advantage.  Another  example  of  how  the  things  which 
seem  all  "  against  us"  (Gen.  xlii.  36)  are  often  for  our  good  (comp.  Gen.l.  20).  2.  Her 
helpful  suggestion.  Slave  though  she  was,  the  little  maid  was  in  possession  of  a  secret 
which  the  great  Kaaman  did  not  know,  and  which  was  worth  "  thousands  of  gold  and 
silver "  (Ps.  cxix.  72)  to  him.  She  dropped  a  hint  to  her  mistress,  "  Would  God  my 
lord  were  with  the  prophet  that  is  in  Samarial "  etc.  Her  suggestion  was  indicative  of: 
(1)  Pity.  Though  a  slave,  her  heart  was  tender,  even  towards  her  master.  She  was 
grieved  for  his  affliction.  She  yearned  to  see  him  recovered.  Her  "  would  God !  " 
is  almost  a  prayer  for  his  recovery.  (2)  Fidelity.  It  is  told  of  Joseph  that  be  was 
faithful  as  a  servant  in  the  house  of  his  master  the  Egj'ptian  (Gen.  ttyjt,  2 — 6). 
This  little  maid,  though  a  "  servant  under  the  yoke  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  1),  yet  "  counted  her 
master  worthy  of  all  honour"  (1  Tim.  vi.  1).  She  served,  "  not  with  eye-service,  as 
men-pleasers,"  but  "  in  singleness  of  heart,"  "  with  good  will  doing  service  "  (Eph.  vi. 
6 — 7),  though  her  lord  was  an  alien,  and  might  seem  to  have  little  claim  upon  her 
gratitude.  As  a  good  servant  should,  she  desired  his  prosperity  ia  mind,  body,  and 
estate.  In  this  was  shown  (3)  her  disinterestedness.  In  her  position  it  need  not  have 
been  wondered  at  if  she  had  secretly  rejoiced  at  her  master's  affliction.  But  her  heart 
rherished  no  resentment.  Anticipating  the  gospel,  she  sought  to  return  good  for  evil 
(Matt.  v.  44).  We  learn  from  this  part  of  the  story  (1)  that  even  the  humblest  may 
be  of  essential  service  to  those  above  them.  Most  of  all  is  this  the  case  when  they 
possess  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God.  A  hint  dropped  may  guide  the  spiritual  lepec 
to  the  fountain  of  healing.  (2)  The  young,  too,  should  take  eucouragement.  In  their 
several  stations  they  may  be  greatly  used  for  good.  (3)  We  should  do  to  others  th« 
utmost  good  we  can,  even  though  they  are  our  enemies. 

III.  The  ARBOQAiiiT  kino's  epistle.  The  news  of  what  the  little  maid  had  laid  soon 
spread  abroad,  and  came  first  to  the  ears  of  Naaman,  then  to  the  ears  of  the  King  of 
Syria  (Benhadad  ?).  1.  The  King  of  Syria's  epistle.  The  monarch  rained  his  general, 
and  was  ready  to  take  any  steps  to  further  bis  cure.  Accordingly,  he  indited  a  letter, 
and  sent  Naaman  with  it,  with  much  pomp  and  state,  to  the  King  of  Israel  (Jehoram?).' 
He  sends :  (1)  With  the  arrogance  of  a  victor.  The  tone  of  his  communication  to  the 
monarch  at  Samaria  was  unmistakably  of  the  nature  of  command.  It  haughtily 
announces  that  he  has  sent  Naaman  to  him,  and  requires  that  he  shall  recover  him 
from  his  disease.  There  lurks  in  the  letter  a  reminder  of  the  defeat  at  Bamoth-Gilead 
(1  Kings  xxiL).  (2)  With  the  ignorance  of  a  heathen.  He  writes  to  the  rival  ruler  as 
if  it  lay  in  his  power  to  kill  and  to  make  alive.  He  probably  thought  that  the  king 
ha<i  ouly  to  command,  to  compel  Elisha  to  serve  him  in  any  way  he  pleased.  Hence, 
without  mentioning  Elisha,  he  lays  the  whole  responsibility  of  seeing  that  his  captain 
is  cured  on  the  shoulders  of  Jehoram.  He  has  the  notion— common  enough  to 
monarcbs — that  kings  should  be  supreme  in  religion  as  in  everything  else.  He  thinks 
that  God's  prophets  must  take  their  commands  from  whoever  chances  to  occupy  the 
throne.  (3)  With  the  munificence  of  a  sovereign.  If  there  was  haughtiness  in  the 
tone  of  his  letter,  he  did  not  at  least  send  his  officer  without  abundant  lewanla.    H* 


<a.ir.l— 2?.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  116 

bore  with  him  ten  talents  of  silver,  six  thousand  shekels  of  gold,  and  ten  changes  of 
raiment.  These  enormous  sums  were,  no  doubt,  thought  certain  to  purchase  the  cure. 
Another  heathenish  idea,  akin  to  the  modem  notion  that  anything  can  be  bought  with 
money.  Elisha  taught  him  differently  when  the  cure  was  accomplished  (ver.  16). 
Simon  Magus  would  have  bought  even  the  power  to  communicate  the  Holy  Ghost  with 
gold  (Acts  yiii.  18, 19).  There  are  blessings  which  are  beyond  the  reach  of  money, 
and  yet  can  be  had  "  without  money  and  without  price  "  (Isa.  Iv.  1).  2.  The  King  of 
IsraiCt  distress.  When  the  King  of  Israel  read  the  communication,  he  was  both  indig- 
nant and  distressed.  As  he  viewed  the  letter,  it  was :  (1)  A  request  for  the  impossible. 
"Am  I  God,  to  kill  and  to  make  alive,  that  this  man  doth  send  unto  me  to  recover  a  man 
of  his  leprosy  ?  "  This  was,  at  any  rate,  a  frank  acknowledgment  of  his  own  helpless- 
ness. It  lets  in  a  stronger  light  the  Divine  character  of  the  cure  by  Elisha.  (2)  An 
attempt  to  force  upon  him  a  quarrel.  His  interpretation  of  the  letter  was  not  unnatural. 
Yet  it  was  mistaken.'  We  do  well  to  be  careful  in  forming  judgments  and  imputing 
motives.  (3)  An  attack  upon  his  weakness.  It  was  this  that  distressed  him  so  much. 
He  did  not  feel  able  to  make  war  against  the  King  of  Syria,  and  therefore  he  resented 
the  more  keenly  this  attempt  (as  he  conceived  it)  to  drive  birn  into  a  comer.— ^I.  0. 

Vers.  8 — ^19. — The  story  of  Naaman:  2.  The  suggestive  »ure.  The  cure  which 
Naaman  came  to  seek  was,  nevertheless,  obtained  by  him.    We  have  here — 

I.  The  interposition  of  Elisha.  Naaman  was  on  the  point  of  being  sent  away, 
when  Elisha  interposed.  God's  prophet  vindicates  God's  honour.  1.  Miska  tends  to 
the  king.  "He  sent  to  the  king,  saying.  Wherefore  hast  thou  rent  thy  clothes?"  etc. 
His  words  were :  (1)  A  rebuke  of  faithlessness.  The  king  was  not  God,  to  kill  and  to 
make  alive;  but  was  there  not  a  God  in  Israel  who  could?  Had  he  already  received 
no  proofs  of  this  God's  power  ?  Wherefore,  then,  had  he  rent  his  clothes  ?  How  much 
of  our  despondency,  fear,  despair,  arises  from  want  of  faith  in  a  living  Gud !  (2)  An 
invitation  to  seek  help  in  the  right  quarter.  "  Let  him  come  now  to  me."  The  proof 
that  there  was  a  prophet,  and  behind  the  prophet  a  living,  wonder-working  God,  in 
Israel,  would  be  seen  in  deeds.  Why  does  the  sinner  rend  his  clothes,  and  despair  of 
help  ?  Is  Christ  not  able  to  save  ?  Does  he  not  invite  him  to  come  ?  2.  Naaman 
comes  to  Elisha.  (1)  He  seeks  cleansing.  (2)  Yet  with  unhumbled  heart.  His  horses 
and  chariot  drive  up  to  Elisha's  door.  The  great  man  has  no  thought  of  descending  to 
ask  the  prophet's  blessing.  He  waits  tUl  he  comes  out  to  him.  He  is  the  man  of  rank 
and  wealth,  whom  Elisha  should  feel  honoured  in  serving.  But  Elisha  does  not  come 
out.  Not  in  this  spirit  are  cures  obtained  at  the  hand  of  God.  Naaman  must  be  taught 
that  gold,  silver,  horses,  chariots,  rank,  avail  nothing  here.  To  be  saved  the  highest 
must  become  as  the  humblest.     Pride  must  be  expelled  (Phil.  iii.  7,  8). 

II.  The  uods  of  curie.  1.  Elisha's  direction.  Instead  of  himself  appearing,  Elisha 
sent  a  messenger  to  Naaman,  directing  him  to  wash  seven  times  in  Jordan,  and  he 
would  be  clean.  The  means  of  cure  was :  (1)  Simplicity  itself.  Nothing  could  be 
simpler  or  more  easy  than  to  bathe  seven  times  in  Jordan.  Any  leper  might  he  glad  to 
purchase  cleansing  by  plunging  in  a  river.  God's  way  of  salvation  by  Christ  is  cha- 
racteristically simple.  It  involves  no  toilsome  pilgrimages,  no  laborious  works,  no 
protracted  ceremonies.  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved  " 
(Acts  xvi.  31).  (2)  Symbolical.  Jordan  was  the  sacred  stream  of  Israel ;  bathing  was 
the  Levitical  mode  of  the  purification  of  a  leper  (Lev.  xiv.  8,  9) ;  seven  was  the  sacred 
number.  Leprosy,  as  the  type  of  sin,  was  fitly  cleansed  by  these  purificatory  rites. 
That  which  answers  to  the  bathing  in  the  spiritual  sphere  is  "  the  washing  of  regenera- 
tion, and  of  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Titus  iii.  5).  (3)  In  its  very  simplicity, 
fitted  to  humble  the  proud  heart.  As  we  are  immediately  to  see,  it  humbled  Naaman. 
It  did  not  strike  him  as  a  sufficiently  great  thing  to  do.  Thus  many  are  offended  by 
the  very  simplicity  of  the  gospel.  It  seems  treating  them  too  much  like  children 
to  ask  them  simply  to  believe  in  the  crucified  and  risen  Savionr.  Their  intellectual 
eminence,  their  social  greatness,  their  pride  of  character,  are  insulted  by  the  proposal  to 
efface  themselves  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  2.  Naaman's  anger.  "  Naaman  was  wroth, 
and  went  away."  The  causes  of  his  anger  were:  (1)  His  expectations  were  disappointed. 
He  thought  the  prophet  would  have  shown  him  more  respect ;  would  have  employed 
impressive  words  and  gestures  ;  would  have  given  the  cure  more  iclat.    Instead  of  this. 


118  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  [OH.  V.  1— 21. 


tbere  was  the  simple  command  to  wash  in  Jordan.  What  a  down-come  from  the 
imposing  ceremonial  he  expected !  Men  have  their  preconceived  ideas  ahout  religion, 
about  salvation,  about  the  methods  of  spiritual  cure,  which  they  oppose  to  Qod's  ways. 
They  say  with  Naaman,  "  Behold,  I  thought.  He  will  surely  "  do  thi»  or  that.  The 
Jews  rejected  their  Messiah  because  he  was  "  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground  "  (Isa.  liii.  2) ; 
they  rejected  Christianity  because  its  spiritual,  unceremonial  worship  did  not  accord 
with  their  sensuous  ideas.  Others  reject  the  gospel  because  it  does  not  accord  with  the 
spirit  of  the  age,  is  not  suGBciently  intellectual,  philosophical,  or  sesthetical.  God 
reminds  us,  "  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,"  etc.  (Isa.  Iv.  8).  (2)  He  wai 
required  to  submit  to  what  seemed  to  him  a  humiliation.  He  was  told  to  bathe  in  the 
waters  of  Jordan,  a  stream  of  Israel,  when  there  were  rivers  as  good,  nay,  better,  in  his 
own  country,  to  which,  if  bathing  was  essential,  he  might  have  been  sent.  "  Are  not 
Abana  and  Pharpar,  rivers  of  Damascus,"  etc.?  It  seemed  like  a  studied  slight  put  upon 
his  native  rivers,  an  intentional  humiliation  put  upon  himself,  to  require  him  to  go  and 
bathe  in  this  local  stream.  How  often  does  wounded  pride  rebel  at  the  simple  pro- 
visions of  the  gospel,  because  they  involve  nothing  that  is  our  own,  that  reflects  glory 
on  self,  or  allows  glory  to  self  I  This  is  the  very  purpose  of  the  gospeL  "  Where  is 
boasting,  then  ?  It  is  excluded  "  (Bom.  iii.  27).  Things  are  as  they  are,  "  that  no  flesh 
should  glory  in  his  presence  "  (1  Cor.  1.  29).  When  Christ's  atonement  is  extolled,  the 
cry  is,  "  Have  we  not  rivers,  Abanas  and  Pharpars,  of  our  own  ?  "  "  Naaman  came 
with  his  mind  all  made  up  as  to  how  he  was  to  be  healed,  and  be  turned  away  in  anger 
and  disgust  from  the  course  which  the  prophet  prescribed.  He  was  a  type  of  the 
rationalist,  whose  philosophy  provides  him  with  h  priori  dogmas,  by  which  he  measures 
everything  which  is  proposed  to  his  faith.  He  turns  away  in  contempt  where  faith 
would  heal  him"  (Sumner).  3.  Naaman't  ohedienee.  Thus  a  second  time  the  blessing 
was  nearly  missed — this  time  through  his  own  folly  and  obstinacy.  But,  fortunately, 
a  remonstrance  was  addressed  to  him,  and  he  proved  amenable  to  reason.  (1)  The 
remonstrance  of  his  servants.  They,  looking  at  things  through  a  calmer  medium,  and 
with  less  of  personal  pique,  saw  the  situation  with  clearer  eyes.  They  addressed  him 
soothingly  and  affectionately.  They  touched  the  core  of  the  matter  when  they  said, 
"  My  father,  if  the  prophet  had  bid  thee  do  some  great  thing,  wouldest  thou  not  have 
done  it  ?  "  It  was  Naaman's  pride  that  had  been  offended.  But  they  pointed  out  to 
him,  in  very  plain  terms,  the  folly  of  his  conduct.  Was  it  not  a  cure  he  wanted  ?  And 
if  it 'was,  then,  surely,  the  simpler  the  means  prescribed  the  better.  Why  quarrel  with 
the  conditions  of  cure  because  they  were  so  simple?  The  same  reasoning  may  be 
applied  to  the  gospel.  It  is  the  simplicity  of  its  arrangements  which  is  the  beauty  of 
it.  If  men  really  wish  to  be  saved,  why  quarrel  with  this  simplicity?  Surely  the 
simpler  the  better.  Would  men  not  be  willing  to  do  "some  great  thing"  to  obtain 
peace  with  God,  pardon  of  sin,  renewal  and  purity  of  heart  ?  How  much  more,  then, 
when  it  is  said,  «  Wash,  and  be  clean  "  ?  (2)  The  washing  in  Jordan.  Naaman's  ire 
had  cooled.  He  felt  the  force  of  what  his  servants  urged.  He  might  prefer  Abana 
and  Pharpar,  if  he  liked;  but  it  was  Jordan  the  prophet  had  named.  If  he  did  not 
choose  to  submit  to  bathe  in  this  river,  he  must  go  without  the  cure  altogether. 
"  Neither  was  there  salvation"  (Acts  iv.  12)  in  any  other  river  than  this  one.  This 
decided  him.  He  went  down  without  further  parley,  bathed  seven  times  in  Jordan  as 
directed  and,  marvel  of  marvels,  "  his  flesh  came  again  like  unto  the  flesh  of  a  little 
child  and  he  was  clean."  So  speedy,  sure,  and  complete  was  the  reward  of  his 
obedience.  As  effectual  to  procure  salvation  and  spiritual  healing  is  the  look  of  faith 
to  Jesns,  the  appropriation  of  the  merit  of  his  blood,  the  spiritual  baptism  of  the  Holy 

III.  Naaman's  oeatitude  akd  piett.  What  joy  now  filled  the  heart  of  the  newly 
cleansed  Naaman  I  How  clearly  he  saw  his  former  folly  I  How  glad  he  was  that  he 
had  not  allowed  his  anger  to  prevail  against  the  advice  of  his  servants  and  his  own 
better  reason  I  At  once  he  returned  to  Blisha ;  and  it  was  very  evident  that  his  heart 
wae  overflowing  with  gratitude,  and  that  he  was  a  changed  man.  Like  the  leper  in 
the  Oospal,  he  returned  "  to  give  glory  to  (Jod"  (Luke  xvii.  17, 18).  Gratitude  is  most 
becoming  in  those  who  have  received  great  mercies  from  God.  Salvation  awaken»  joy ; 
iratftude  prompts  to  consecration— not  in  order  to  salvation,  but  as  the  result  of  it, 
fuan  bwwmes  "»  new  creature "  (2  Cor.  v,  17).    We  observ* :  L  Ei*  acknowledgment 


OH.  T,  1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  117 

of  Ood.  "  Behold,  now  I  know  that  there  ii  no  God  in  all  the  earth,  but  !n  Israel." 
This  is  not  a  comparative  statement,  hut  an  ahsolute  one.  Naaman  it  convinced  that 
the  gods  of  the  heathen  are  nullities,  and  that  the  Ch3d  of  Israel  is  the  only  true  God. 
He  was  brought  to  this  ackuowledgment  through  the  great  miracle  God  had  wrought 
upon  him.  It  is  God's  mighty  acts  in  and  for  men  which  give  the  best  evidence  ofnis 
existence.  2.  His  offer  of  reward.  It  was  no  longer  the  heathenish  notion  of  pur- 
chase, but  a  pure  motive  of  gratitude,  which  led  Naaman  to  press  the  wealth  he  had 
brought  upon  Elisha.  The  prophet,  however,  had  no  desire  for  his  goods.  With  an 
emphatic  asseveration,  he  declared  that  he  would  accept  nothing.  (1)  He  must  keep 
his  act  free  from  the  possibility  of  misconception.  (2)  A  miracle  of  God  must  not  be 
vulgarized  by  being  made  the  occasion  of  money  presents.  (3)  Naaman's  instruction 
must  be  completed  by  teaching  him  that  money  gifts  do  not  pay  for  spiritual  blessings. 
Yet  Naaman's  motive  was  a  risht  one.  It  is  right  also  that,  from  the  motive  of  grati- 
tude, we  should  consecrate  our  wealth  to  the  Lord's  service.  3.  His  determination  to 
worship.  If  he  cannot  persuade  Elisha  to  accept  gifts,  he  himself  will  become  a  sup- 
pliant, and  ask  a  favour  from  the  prophet.  He  entreats  that  he  may  be  permitted  to 
take  with  him  two  mules'  burden  of  earth  of  the  Holy  Lan<l,  that  he  may  form  an 
altar  for  the  worship  of  Jehovah  ;  for  he  is  resolved  henceforth  to  worship  him  only. 
This  was  granted.  His  altar  would  connect  his  sacrifices  with  the  land  which  God  had 
chosen  as  the  place  of  his  special  habitation.  Seal  religion  will  express  itself  in  acts  of 
worship.  It  will  not  content  itself  with  cold  recognition  of  God.  It  will  build  its 
altars  to  Jehovah,  in  the  home,  in  the  closet,  in  the  church,  and  in  the  chief  places  of 
concourse.  4.  Sis  religious  scruple.  One  point  alone  troubled  him.  In  attending  his 
royal  master,  it  would  be  his  duty  to  wait  on  him  in  his  state  visits  to  the  temple  of 
Rimmon,  and,  as  his  master  leaned  on  his  hand  in  bending  before  that  idol,  he  would 
be  under  the  necessity  of  seeming  to  bend  before  it,  and  yield  it  obeisance  also.  He 
asked  that  the  Lord  might  panion  him  in  this  thing.  Elisha  bade  him  go  in  peace. 
(1)  His  act  was  not  really  worship,  nor  did  he  mean  it  to  pass  for  such  either  before 
the  king  or  the  other  worshippers.  (2)  "  An  idol  is.  nothing,"  and,  if  he  understood 
that  cleaily,  his  conscience  would  not  be  "  defiled  "  (1  Cor.  viii.  4 — 7).  There  is  need 
for  great  care,  even  in  outward  acts,  lest  they  expose  the  doer  to  misconception,  or  hurt 
the  consciences  of  others.  Lil'e,  however,  is  woven  of  intricate  threads,  and  it  is  impos- 
sible but  that  in  public,  social,  and  official  positions  the  Christian  will  sometimes  find 
himself  in  situations  of  all  the  concomitants  of  which  he  can  by  no  means  approve.  It 
will  not  do  to  say  of  these  that  it  is  his  duty  at  all  hazards  to  come  out  of  them  j  for  it 
is  frequently  through  his  duty  that  he  is  brought  into  them,  and  to  escape  them  entirely 
he  would  require  to  "  go  out  of  the  world  "  (1  Cor.  v.  10).  If  active  participation  in 
anything  sinful  is  sought  to  be  forced  on  him — as  if  Naaman  were  required  actually  to 
bow  the  knee  in  worship  to  Rimmon — then  he  must  refuse  (Dan.  iii.). — J.  O. 

Vers.  20 — 27. — The  story  of  Naaman :  3.  Oehazi's  falsehood.  In  Elisha's  company 
we  might  have  expected  only  honour,  integrity,  truthfulness.  But  the  society  of  the 
good  will  not  of  itself  make  another  good.  Hypocrisy  can  cover  a  foul  interior.  A 
fair  outward  seeming  can  cloke  a  heart  ruled  by  very  evil  principles.  In  the  first 
apostolic  band  there  was  a  Judas.  In  Elisha's  service  there  was  a  Gehazi.  The  sin  of 
both  was  covetousness.  The  offspring  of  covetousness  in  Gehazi's  case  was  hyjiocrisy 
and  falsehood. 

I.  Covetousness  PROMPriNa  falsehood.  1.  Sis  reproach  of  his  master.  When 
Naaman  was  gone,  Gehazi  indulged  in  reflections  on  his  master's  conduct.  It  did  not 
at  all  commend  itself  to  him.  "  Behold,  my  master  has  spared  Naaman  this  Syrian, 
in  not  receiving  at  his  hands  that  which  he  brought,"  etc.  Such  generosity  seemed 
absurd.  It  was  a  chance  missed  which  might  never  come  again.  Fantastic  scruples 
were  all  very  well,  but  when  they  led  to  the  loss  of  a  fortune,  they  were  greatly  to  be 
reprobated.  What  scruple  need  there  have  been  in  any  case  about  spoiling  a  foreigner? 
Covetousness  generally  sees  only  the  money  consideration.  When  great  gain  is  at 
stake,  the  man  is  held  to  be  a  fool  who  allows  religious  or  sentimental  considerations,  or 
even  ordinary  moral  scruples,  to  stand  in  the  way.  2.  Eis  covetous  determination.  U 
his  master  has  acted  foolishly,  he  will  not  imitate  his  example.  It  is  not  yet  too  late, 
with  a  little  art,  to  repair  the  damage.    He  will  hurry  after  the  Syrian,  and  obtain 


118  THE  SECOND  BOOK  Of  THE'  KINGS.  {aa.  v.  1— 2t. 

something  from  him.  "  As  the  Lord  liveth  " — mark  the  profane  inizing  up  of  religion 
and  impiety — "  I  will  run  after  him,  and  take  soniewhat  of  him."  Morality  goes  down 
before  the  greed  of  gain.  3.  Bis  unblushing  falsehood.  (1)  Kaamaa  beheld  Qehazi 
running  after  him,  and  was  delighted  to  think  that  he  might,  after  all,  have  the  oppor* 
dunity  of  serving  Elisha.  He  alights  from  his  chariot — a  different  man  now  than  when 
his  stately  equipage  "'stood"  at  Elisha's  door — and  asks  eagerly,  "  Is  all  well?"  (2) 
Gehazi,  in  reply,  tells  him  an  unblushingly  invented  falsehood.  There  had  come  two 
young  men  of  the  sons  of  the  piophets  from  Mount  Ephraim,  and  Elisha  had  sent  to 
entreat  for  them  a  talent  of  silver  and  two  changes  of  raiment.  The  finish  of  this  style 
of  falsehood,  and  Gehazi'g  subsequent  hypocrisy,  speak  to  considerable  practice  in  th« 
art  of  deceit.  Such  ready  audacity,  so  great  perfection  in  the  arts  of  lying  and  con- 
cealment, are  not  attaint  at  the  first  attempt.  No  man  becomes  a  rogue  quite  sud- 
denly. Elisha  was  probably  no  more  deceived  in  the  character  of  Gehazi  than  Jesus 
was  in  the  character  of  Judas,  who  was  secretly  "  a  thief,"  and  "  had  the  bag,  and  bare 
what  was  put  therein  "  (John  xii.  6). 

II.  Gratitude  dictatino  libebalitt.  The  willing  response  made  by  Naaman  to 
what  he  took  to  be  Elisha's  request  is  the  bright  side  of  this  otherwise  discreditable 
incident.  1.  He  doubled  what  was  asked.  "  Be  content,  take  two  talents."  He  was 
glad  to  get  an  opening  for  forcing  some  acknowledgment  of  his  gratitude  on  Elisha. 
2.  He  sent  two  of  his  servants  back  with  the  sacks  of  silver  and  the  raiment  What 
he  did,  he  did  handsomely.  He  gave  every  token  he  could  of  his  desire  to  oblige 
Elisha.  3.  Gehazi  relieved  the  servants  when  they  came  near  the  house,  and  had  the 
tre.i8ure  smuggled  into  the  house,  and  safely  hid.  This  was  the  part  of  the  business  in 
which  there  lay  some  risk  of  detection ;  but  it  was  securely  managed,  and  Gehazi  nc 
doubt  breathed  a  sigh  of  relief  when  he  saw  the  valuables  carefully  stowed  away.  His 
treasure  was  as  safely  concealed  as  Achan's  wedge  of  gold,  and  two  hundred  shekels  of 
silver,  and  goodly  Babylonish  garment  (Josh.  vii.  21).  But  it  was  to  prove  as  great  a 
curse.  Meanwhile,  light  in  conscience,  glad  in  heart,  and  pleased  at  having  been  per- 
mitted to  bestow  even  this  small  gift  (comparatively)  on  Elisha,  Naaman  sped  on  hii 
way  home.     He  probably  never  knew  how  he  had  been  deceived. 

III.  Justice  decbeeins  penalty.  Gehazi's  act,  however,  skilfully  concealed  as  it 
was  from  human  view,  was  not  to  remain  unpunished.  God  knew  it.  Gehazi  had 
forgotten  this.  God  is  the  one  factor  which  the  wicked  leave  out  of  their  calculations, 
and  he  is  the  most  important  of  all.  David  was  careful  to  conceal  his  crime  with  Bath- 
she  ba;  but  it  is  written,  "The  thing  that  David  had  done  displeased  the  Lord"  (2  Sam. 
xi.  27).  1.  OehazCs  hypocrisy.  He  went  calmly  in,  and  stood  before  his  master,  as  if 
nothing  had  happened.  There  is,  as  above  stated,  a  perfection  in  this  viUainy  which 
shows  that  it  was  not  a  first  offence.  But  there  comes  a  point  when  men's  sins  find  them 
out.  They  gain  courage  by  repeated  attempts,  and  by-and-by  take  a  step  too  far. 
What  they  think  is  their  master-stroke  proves  their  ruin.  2.  Elisha's  challenge.  What 
had  happened  bad  not  been  "  bid  "  from  Elisha.  The  Lord  had  showed  it  to  him.  His 
heart  bad  gone  with  Gehazi,  and  be  had  seen  Naaman  turning  from  his  chariot  to  meet 
him.  He  now  challenged  him  with  his  conduct.  He:  (1)  Exposed  his  falsehood.  Gehazi 
answered  boldly  to  the  question,  "  Whence  comest  thou  'i "  "  Thy  servant  went  no 
whither."  Then  Elisha  told  him  what  he  knew.  We  can  imagine  the  servant's  con- 
science-stricken look  and  speechless  confusion  at  this  discovery.  Let  sinners  consider 
how  they  will  face  the  disclosures  of  the  judgment-day,  and  what  they  will  answer 
(Eccles.  xii.  14 ;  Bom.  ii.  16 ;  CoL  iii.  26).  We  have  a  parallel  instance  of  exposure, 
with  an  even  severer  punishment,  in  the  case  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  (Acts  v.  1 — 11). 
(2)  Unveiled  his  inmost  motives.  "  Is  it  a  time  " — in  connection  with  a  work  of  Goid 
so  great — "  to  receive  money,  and  to  receive  garments,  and  oliveyards,  and  vineyards," 
etc.  These  were  the  things  Gehazi  intended  to  purchase  with  his  money.  His  mind 
was  running  out  in  grand  plans  of  what  he  would  do  with  his  treasures.  A  miracle 
such  as  had  been  wrought  should  have  filled  him  with  very  different  thoughts.  Elisha 
lays  bare  the  covetous  root  of  his  disposition.  God  reads  to  the  bottom  of  our  hearti 
(Heb.  iv.  12 ;  Rev.  ii.  23).  Gold  is  valued  by  covetous  men  for  what  it  will  bring.  It 
is  a  further  development  of  avarice  when  it  comes  to  be  loved  for  its  own  sake.  3.  !Z%« 
judgment  of  leprosy.  By  a  just  retribution,  the  leprosy  of  Naaman,  which  had  been 
taken  from  him  from  miracle,  is  now  by  miracle  put  on  Gehazi  and  his  seed  for  ever  (of. 


ea.  VI.  1—33.]         THE  SECOND  BOOS  Of  TflS  KQIGS. 


119 


Exod.  XX.  6).  There  ia  a  symmetry-^-a  relation  of  fitneaa — often  observable  in  God'i 
retributions  (Gen.  ix.  6;  Judg.  i.  7;  Bsth.  viL  9,  10;  Matt.  vii.  2j  xxvi.  52,  etc.). 
Little  would  Gehazi's  wealth  delight  him  with  this  loathsome  and  accursed  disease 
upon  him.  Men  make  a  wretched  bargain  who  for  wealth's  sake  barter  away  peace 
with  God,  purity  of  conscience,  inward  integrity,  and  their  soul's  honour.  They  may 
obtain  gain,  but  they  are  smitten  with  a  leprosy  of  spirit  which  is  their  ruin.  Covetous- 
ness  in  the  heart  is  already  a  leprosy.  The  outward  leprosy,  in  Gehazi'a  case,  was  but 
the  external  sign  of  what  internally  already  existed. — J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  VL 


Ver.  1— oh.  vii.  20.— Further  Miracles 
WROUGHT  BT  Elisha.  The  historian  relates 
first  a  (comparatively)  private  miracle 
wrought  by  Elisha  in  the  vicinity  of  Je- 
richo, for  the  benefit  of  one  of  the  "sons  of 
the  prophets"  (vers.  1 — 8).  He  then  tells 
us  briefly  of  a  series  of  public  miracles 
which  brought  Elisha  into  much  note  and 
prominence.  War,  it  appears,  had  again 
broken  out  in  a  pronounced  form  between 
Israel  and  Syria,  Syria  being  the  aggressor. 
The  Syrian  monarch  prepared  traps  for  hia 
adversary,  encamping  in  places  where  he 
hoped  to  take  bim  at  a  disadvantage.  But 
Blisha  frustrated  these  plans,  by  address- 
ing warnings  to  the  King  of  Israel,  and 
pointing  out  to  him  the  various  positions 
occupied  (vers.  8 — 12),  which  he  conse- 
quently avoided.  When  this  came  to  the 
ears  of  the  King  of  Syria,  he  made  an  at- 
tempt to  obtain  possession  of  Elisha's  person 
— an  attempt  wliioh  failed  signally  (vers. 
13 — 23),  owing  to  the  miraculous  powers  of 
the  prophet.  Benhadad,  some  time  after 
this,  made  a  great  expedition  into  the  land 
of  Israel,  penetrating  to  the  capital,  and 
laying  siege  to  it.  The  circumstances  of 
the  siege,  and  the  escape  of  the  city  when 
at  the  last  gasp,  are  related  partly  in  the 
present  chapter  (vers.  21 — 33),  partly  in  the 
next. 

Yer.  1. — And  the  sons  of  the  prophets 
said  unto  £Usha,  Behold  now,  the  place 
where  we  dwell  with  thee — literally,  before 
thee — u  too  strait  for  us.  The  scene  of  this 
miraclo  is  probably  the  vicinity  of  Jericho, 
since  both  Gilgal  and  Bethel  were  remote 
from  the  Jordan.  The  "  school  of  the  pro- 
phets "  at  Jericho,  whereof  we  heard  in  ch. 
ii.  5,  19,  had  increased  so  much,  that  the 
buildings  which  hitherto  had  accommodated 
it  were  no    longer   sufficient.     A  larger 


dwelling,  or  set  of  dwellings,  was  thought 
to  be  necessary;  but  the  scholars  would 
make  no  change  without  the  sanction  of 
their  master.  When  he  comes  on  one  of 
his  circuits,  they  make  appeal  to  him. 

Yer.  2. — Let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  onto 
Jordan.  Jericho  was  situated  at  some  little 
distance  from  the  Jordan,  on  the  banks  of 
a  small  stream,  which  ran  into  it.  Along 
the  course  of  the  Jordan  trees  and  shrubs 
were  abundant,  chiefly  willows,  poplars,  and 
tamarisks  (see  Josephus, '  Bell.  Jud.,'  iv.  8. 
§  3;  Strabo,  xvi.  2.  §  41).  It  would  seem 
that  the  Jordan  thickets  were  unappro- 
priated,, and  that  any  one  might  cut  timber 
in  them.  And  take  thence  every  man  a 
beam.  The  meaning  is,  "  Let  us  all  join  in 
the  work,  each  cutting  beams  and  carrying 
them ;  and  the  work  will  soon  be  accom- 
plished." And  let  us  make  us  a  place  there. 
They  propose  to  build  the  new  dwelling  on 
the  banks  of  Jordan,  to  save  the  trouble  of 
conveying  the  materials  any  long  distance. 
Where  we  may  dwell.  And  he  answered, 
6o  ye.  Elisha,  t.«.,  approved  the  proposal, 
gave  it  his  sanction  and  encouragement 

Yer.  3. — And  one  said,  Be  content,  I  pray 
thee,  and  go  with  thy  servants.  One  of  the 
number  was  not  satisfied  with  the  prophet's 
mere  approval  of  the  enterprise,  but  wished 
for  his  actual  presence,  probably  as  securing 
a  blessing  upon  the  work.  And  he  answered, 
X  will  go.  Elisha  approved  the  man's  idea, 
as  springing  from  piety  and  faith  in  God. 
He,  therefore,  raised  no  difSculty,  but  at 
once,  in  the  simplest  manner,  acceded  to 
the  request.  There  is  a  remarkable  direct- 
ness, simplicity,  and  absence  of  fuss  in  all 
that  Elisha  says  and  does. 

Yer.  1. — So  he  went  with  them.  And 
when  they  came  to  Jordan — i.e.  to  the  river- 
bank— they  out  down  wood.  They  set  to 
work,  each  felling  his  tree,  and  fashioning 
it  into  a  rough  beam. 

Yer.  5. — But  as  one  was  felling  a  beam— 
i.e.  a  tree,  to  make  it  into  a  t)eam — the 
axe-head;  literally,  (he  iron.  We  see  from 
Dent.  xix.  5  that  the  Hebrews  made  theii 
axe-heads  of  iron  as  early  as  the  time  ol 
Moses.  They  probably  leamt  to  smelt  and 
work  iron  in  Egypt    Tell  into  the  water. 


120 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         \at.  vi.  1— Si 


The  tree  must  have  been  one  that  grew 
close  to  the  river'l  edge.  As  the  man 
hewed  away  at  the  stem  a  little  above  the 
root,  the  axe-head  flew  from  the  haft,  into 
which  it  wai  ineeonrely  fitted,  and  fell  into 
the  water.  The  slipping  of  an  axe-head 
was  a  very  common  occurrence  (Deut.  xix. 
5),  and  ordinarily  was  of  little  consequence, 
since  it  was  easily  restored  to  its  place. 
But  now  the  head  had  disappeared.  And 
he  cried,  and  said,  Alas,  master! — rather, 
Ala$,  my  matter  I  or,  Alas,  my  lord  I — ^for 
it  was  borrowed ;  rather,  and  it  was  a  bor- 
rowed one.  The  words  are  ptot  of  the  man's 
address  to  Elisba.  He  means  to  say,  "  It 
is  no  common  misfortune ;  it  is  not  as  if  it 
had  been  my  own  axe.  I  had  borrowed  it, 
and  now  what  shall  I  say  to  the  owner?" 
There  is  no  direct  request  for  help,  but  the 
tone  of  the  complaint  constitutes  a  sort  of 
silent  appeal. 

Yer.  6. — ^And  the  man  of  God  said,  Where 
fell  iti  And  he  showed  him  the  place. 
And  he  out  down  a  stick,  and  cast  it  in 
thither ;  and  the  iron  did  swim.  Two  na- 
tural explanations  of  this  miracle  have  been 
attempted :  (1)  that  Elisha  passed  a  piece 
of  wood  underneath  the  axe-bead,  which  he 
could  see  lying  at  the  bottom  of  the  river, 
and  then  lifted  it  lip  to  the  surface  (Von 
Gerlach) ;  (2)  that  ho  thrust  a  stick  or  bar 
of  wood  through  the  hole  in  the  axe-head, 
made  to  receive  the  haft,  and  so  pulled  it 
out  (Tbenius).  But  both  explanations  do 
violence  to  the  text ;  and  we  may  be  sure 
that,  had  either  been  true,  the  occurrence 
would  not  have  been  recorded.  The  sacred 
writers  are  not  concerned  to  put  on  record 
mere  acts  of  manual  dexterity. 

Yer.  7. — Therefore  said  he,  Take  it  np  to 
thee.  And  he  put  out  his  hand,  and  took  it. 
Elisha  does  not  take  the  axe-head  out  of  the 
water  himself,  but  requires  the  scholar  to 
do  it,  in  order  to  test  his  faith.  He  must 
show  that  he  believes  the  miracle,  and  re- 
gards the  iron  as  really  floating  on  the  top 
of  the  water,  not  as  merely  appearing  to 
do  so. 

Yer.  8 — ch.  vii.  20. — Pdblio  Mibaoleb  of 
Elisha  resumed. 

Yer.  8. — Then  the  King  of  Syria  warred 
against  Israel.  It  may  seem  strange  that, 
so  goon  after  sending  an  embassy  to  the 
court  of  Samaria,  and  asking  a  favour  (ch. 
V.  5,  6),  Benhadad  should  resume  hostilities, 
especially  as  tlie  iavour  had  been  obtained 
(ch.  V.  14);  but  the  normal  relations  be- 
tween the  two  countries  were  those  of 
enmity  (ch.  v.  2),  and  a  few  years  would 
eufiice  to  dim  the  memory  of  what  had  hap- 
pened. Tho  gratitude  of  kings  is  prover- 
bially short-lived.  And  took  counsel  with 
bis  servants — i.e.  his  chief  officers — saying, 
Is  such  and  sn/sh  a  place  (comp.  1  Sam.  xxi. 


2)  shall  be  my  camp;  or,  my  encampment 
niinn  appears  to  be  "a  noun  in  the  form 
of  the  infinitive."  It  does  not  occur  else- 
where. 

Yer.  9. — And  the  man  of  God — t.e.  Elisha 
who  at  the  time  was  "  the  man  of  God  "  (war' 
i^oxiiy) — sent  unto  the  King  of  Israel — Je- 
boram,  undoubtedly  (see  ver.  32) — saying, 
Beware  that  thou  pass  not  such  a  place; 
for  thither  the  Syrians  are  come  down. 
Some  translate,  "  Beware  that  thou  neglect 
not  such  a  place,  for  thither  the  Syrians 
are  coming  down ;  "  but  our  version  is  prob- 
ably correct,  and  is  approved  by  Bahr  and 
Thenius.  Elisha  did  not  suffer  his  hostile 
feeling  towards  Jehoram  personally  (oh.  iii. 
13 ;  V.  8 ;  vi.  82)  to  interfere  with  his  pa- 
triotism. When  disaster  threatened  his 
country,  he  felt  it  incumbent  on  him  to 
warn  even  an  ungodly  king. 

Yer.  10. — And  the  King  of  Israel  sent  to 
the  place.  Becent  commentators  (Eeil,  The- 
nius, Bahr)  mostly  suppose  this  to  mean  that 
Jehoram  sent  troops  to  the  place  pointed 
out  by  the  prophet,  and  anticipated  the 
Syrians  by  occupying  it  But  it  agrees 
better  with  the  prophet's  injunction,  "  Be- 
ware that  thou  paxi  not  such  a  place,"  to 
suppose  that  he  merely  sent  out  scouts  to 
see  if  the  place  were  occupied  or  no,  and 
flnding,  in  each  case,  Elisha's  warning 
true,  he  avoided  the  locality.  Which  the  man 
of  Ood  told  him  and  warned  him  o^  and 
saved  himself  there,  not  once  nor  twice ;  i.e. 
repeatedly;  at  least  three  several  times, 
perhaps  more. 

Yer.  11. — Therefore  the  heart  of  the  King 
of  Syria  was  sore  troubled  for  this  thing. 
Keil  says,  "  The  King  of  the  Syrians  was 
enraged  at  this;"  but  npp exactly  expresses 
•'  trouble,"  "  disturbance,"  not  "  rage,"  being 
used  of  the  tossing  of  the  sea,  in  Jonah  i. 
II.  And  he  called  his  servants,  and  said 
onto  them.  Will  ye  not  show  me  which  of 
us  is  for  the  King  of  Israeli  £enhadad 
not  unnaturally  suspected  treachery  among 
his  own  subjects.  How  otherwise  could 
the  King  of  Israel  become,  over  and  over 
again,  aware  of  his  intentions?  Some  one 
or  other  of  his  officers  must,  he  thought, 
betray  his  plans  to  the  enemy.  Cannot  the 
others  point  out  the  traitor? 

Yer.  12. — And  one  of  his  servants  said — 
i.e.  one  of  those  interrogated,  answered — 
None,  my  lord,  0  king  ;  literally.  Nay,  my 
lord,  the  hing — meaning,  "Think  not  so; 
it  is  not  as  thou  supposest;  there  is  no 
traitor  in  thy  camp  or  in  thy  court;  we 
are  all  true  men.  The  explanation  of  the 
circumstances  that  surprise  thee  is  quite 
different."  But  Elisha,  the  prophet  that  is 
in  Israel—  compare  "  the  man  of  God  "  (ver. 
9);  so  much  above  the  others,  that  he  is 
spoken  of  as  if  there  were  no  other — telleth 


OH.  Yi.  1—33.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


121 


the  King  of  Israel  the  worda  that  thoa 
speakest  in  thy  bedchamber;  literally,  in 
Oie  secret  plaee  of  thy  bedchamber.  How  the 
Syrian  lord  knew  this,  or  whether  he  merely 
made  a  shrewd  gaesa,  we  cannot  Bay.  Eli- 
sha'a  miraculous  gifts  had,  no  doubt,  be- 
come widely  known  to  the  Syrians  through 
the  cure  of  Naaman's  leprosy ;  and  the  lord, 
who  may  possibly  hare  been  Naaman  him- 
self, concluded  that  a  man  wlio  could  cure 
a  leper  could  also  read  a  king's  secret 
thoughts  without  difSoulty. 

Ver.  13. — And  he — i.e.  Benhadad — said, 
6o  and  spy  where  he  is,  that  I  may  send 
and  fetch  Urn;  ('.«.  "  Send  out  spies  to  learn 
where  Elisha  is  at  present  residing,  that  I 
may  despatch  a  force  to  the  place,  and  get 
him  into  my  power."  The  object  was 
scarcely  "  to  find  out,  through  Elisha,  what 
the  King  of  Israel  and  other  princes  were 
plotting  against  him  in  their  secret  coun- 
sels "  (Cassel),  but  simply  to  put  a  stop  to 
Elisha's  betrayal  of  his  own  plans  to  Jeho- 
ram.  And  it  was  told  him,  saying.  Behold, 
he  is  in  Sothan.  The  spies  were  sent,  and 
brought  back  word  that,  at  the  tinfe,  Elisha 
was  residing  in  Dothan.  Dothan,  the  place 
A\here  Joseph  was  sold  by  his  brethren  to 
the  Ishmaelites  (Gen.  xxxvii.  17),  lay  evi- 
dently not  very  far  from  Bheehem  (Gen. 
xxxvii.  14),  aud  is  placed  by  Eusebius 
about  twelve  miles  north  of  Samaria.  In 
the  Book  of  Judith  (iv.  6;  vii.  3)  it  is 
mentioned  among  the  cities  bordering  the 
snuthern  edge  of  the  Plain  of  Esdraelon. 
Modern  travellers  (Van  de  Velde,  Kobin- 
feon)  have  reasonably  identified  it  with  the 
present  Dotlidn,  a  tel,  or  hill,  of  a  marked 
<liaraoter,  covered  with  ruins,  and  from  the 
foot  of  which  arises  a  copious  spring,  to  the 
south-west  of  Jenin,  between  that  place 
and  Jeba,  a  little  to  the  left  of  the  great 
road  leading  from  Beisan  (Scythopolis)  to 
Eftypt. 

Ver.  14. — Therefore  sent  he  thither  horses, 
and  chariots,  and  a  great  host ;  rather,  and 
a  strong  force.  The  expression,  nns  ^;n,  is 
used  by  the  historical  writers  with  a  good 
deal  of  vagueness — sometimes  of  a  really 
great  army,  sometimes  merely  of  a  large 
retinue  (I  Kings  x.  2)  or  of  a  modirato 
force  (ch.  xviii.  17).  We  must  assign  it  its 
meaning  according  to  the  context.  And 
they  came  by  night,  and  compassed  the  city 
abont,  A  night  march  was  made,  to  take 
the  prophet  by  surprise,  and  the  city  was 
encompassed,  that  it  might  be  impossible 
for  liim  to  escape. 

Ver.  15. — And  when  the  servant  of  the 
man  of  God  was  risen  early— he  had,  per- 
haps, heard  the  arrival  of  the  Syrian  forces 
during  the  night,  and  "  rose  early "  to  re- 
connoitre— and  gone  forth,  behold,  an  host 
compassed  the  city  both  with  horsei  and 


ehariota ;  rather,  an  liost  eompaiied  the  eity, 
and  horsei,  and  ehairiots.  A  force  of  foot- 
men, a  force  of  horsemen,  and  a  chariot 
force,  are  intended  (corap.  ver.  14).  And  his 
servant  said  nnto  him,  Alas,  my  master! 
how  shall  we  dol  Though  the  servant 
could  not  know  that  it  wns  Elisha's  person 
which  was  especially  sought,  yet  ho  was 
naturally  alarmed  at  Steing  the  city  in- 
vested by  a  hostile  force,  and  anticipated 
either  death  or  capture  wliicli  last  would 
involve  the  being  soM  as  a  slave.  Hence 
his  "Alas  I"  and  his  piteous  cry,  "How 
shall  we  do?"  Can  we,  i.e.  in  any  way, 
save  ourselves  ? 

Ver.  16. — And  he — i.e.  Elisha — answered, 
7ear  not :  for  they  that  be  with  us  are  more 
than  they  that  be  with  them.  Elisha  did 
not  need  to  tee  the  forces  arrayed  on  his 
side.  He  knew  that  Ooi  an  1  God's  strength 
was  "  with  him,"  and  cared  not  who,  or  how 
many,  might  be  against  him  (comp.  Ps.  iii. 
6, "  I  will  not  be  afraid  for  ton  thousands  of 
people,  that  have  set  themselves  against  me 
round  about ; "  and  Ps.  xxvii.  3,  "  Though 
an  host  should  encamp  against  me,  my  heart 
shall  not  fear:  though  war  should  rise 
against  me,  in  this  will  I  be  confident"). 
His  confidence  reminds  us  of  that  shown  by 
Hezekiah  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  7)  on  the  invasion 
of  Sennacherib. 

Ver.  17. — And  Elisha  prayed,  and  said, 
Lord,  I  pray  thee,  open  his  eyes,  that  ha 
may  see.  If  the  prophet's  servant  was  to 
be  reassured,  he  must  be  made  to  see  that 
help  was  at  hand ;  he  would  not  have  found 
rest  or  peace  in  the  mere  assurance  that 
God  was  nigh,  and  would  keep  his  prophet 
from  harm.  His  mental  state  required  some- 
thing like  a  material  manifestution ;  and 
hence  Elisha  prays  that  he  may  be  per- 
mitted to  behold  the  angelic  host,  which 
everywhere  throughout  creation  is  employed 
at  all  timps  in  doing  the  will  of  God,  and 
accomplishing  his  ends  (comp.  Gen.  xxviii. 
12  ;  xxxii.  2  ;  Ps.  xxxiv.  7 ;  Ixviii.  17  ;  Dan. 
vii.  10,  etc.).  The  prayer  is  gr.mted.  And 
the  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  the  young  man; 
and  he  saw :  and,  behold,  the  mountain  was 
full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about 
£lisha.  As  the  earthly  force,  which  had 
alarmed  Elisha's  servant,  was  a  force  mainly 
of  horses  and  chariots,  so  the  heavenly  force 
revealed  to  his  eyes  was  made  to  bear  the 
same  appearance.  But  the  heavenly  chaiiots 
and  horses  were  "  of  fire  " — glowed,  i.e.  with 
a  strange  nnearthly  brightness  (see  the  com- 
ment on  ch.  ii.  11). 

Ver.  18. — And  when  they  came  down  to 
him.  Ecil  and  others  suppose  this  to  mean 
that  the  Syrians  "  came  down  "  to  Elisha ; 
but,  if  they  were  in  the  plain  that  surronndj 
the  hill  whereon  Dothan  was  bmlt,  as  ap- 
pears from  ver.  15,  they  woold  have  had  tc 


122 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGa         [oh.  vl  1—33. 


aicend  in  order  to  reacli  Elisha,  not  to  de- 
$eend.  We  must,  therefore,  with  F.  Meyer, 
Thenins,  and  Babr,  translate,  "  When  they 
[EliBha  and  his  servant]  came  down  to  them 
[the  Syrians]" — either  changing  v^N  into 
□n<^K,  as  Thenius  does,  or  understanding 
Y^H  to  refer  to  the  "  host "  (S'n)  of  the 
Syrians.  Elisha  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  and 
said,  Smite  this  people,  I  pray  thee,  with 
blindness.  Not  literal  blindness,  or  they 
could  not  have  followed  Eliaha's  lead,  and 
marched  a  distance  of  twelve  miles  to  Sa- 
maria ;  hut  a  state  of  confusion  and  bewil- 
derment, in  whioli "  seeing  they  saw,  but  did 
not  perceive  "  (comiiaie  the  "  blindness " 
of  the  men  of  Sodom,  in  Gen.  xis.  11).  And 
he  smote  them  with  blindness  according  to 
the  word  of  Elisha. 

Ver.  19. — And  Elisha  said  unto  them. 
This  is  not  the  way,  neither  is  this  the  oity. 
This  was  clearly  "  an  untruthful  statement " 
(Keil),  if  not  in  the  letter,  yet  in  the  intent. 
Elisha  meant  the  Syrians  to  understand  him 
to  say,  "  This  is  not  the  way  which  ye  ought 
to  have  taken  if  ye  wanted  to  capture  the 
Prophet  Elisha,  and  this  is  not  the  oity 
(Dothan)  where  you  were  told  that  he  was 
to  be  fiiund."  And  so  the  Syrians  under- 
stood him.  In  the  morality  of  the  time, 
and,  indeed,  in  the  morality  of  all  times  up 
to  the  present,  it  has  been  held  to  be  justi- 
fiable to  deceive  a  public  enemy.  Follow 
me,  and  I  will  bring  you  to  the  man  whom 
ye  seek.  But  he  led  them  to  Samaria.  It 
could  only  be  through  the  miraculous  de- 
lusion for  which  Elisha  had  prayed,  and 
which  liad  been  sent,  that  the  Syrians  be- 
lieved the  first  comer  in  an  enemy's  country, 
followed  him  to  the  capital  without  hesita- 
tion, and  allowed  him  to  bring  them  inside 
the  walls.  But  for  the  delusion,  they  would 
have  suspected,  made  inquiries  of  others, 
and  retreated  hastily,  as  soon  as  the  walls 
and  towers  of  Samaria  broke  on  their  sight. 

Ver.  20. — ^And  it  came  to  pass,  when  they 
were  come  into  Samaria,  that  Elisha  said, 
Lord,  open  the  eyes  of  these  men,  that  they 
may  see.  And  the  Lord  opened  theii  eyes, 
and  they  saw;  and,  behold,  they  were  in  the 
midst  of  Samaria.  Their  delusion  was  dis- 
pelled— they  returned  to  their  proper  senses, 
and,  seeing  the  size  and  strength  of  the 
town,  recognized  the  fact  that  they  were  in 
Samaria,  their  enemy's  capital,  and  so  were 
helpless. 

Yer.  21. — And  the  King  of  Israel  said 
unto  Elisha,  when  he  saw  them,  My  father. 
In  his  joy  at  the  deliverance  of  so  large  a 
force  of  the  enemy  into  his  hands,  Jehoram 
forgets  the  coldness  and  estrangement  which 
have  hitherto  characterized  the  relations 
between  himself  and  the  prophet  (oh.  iii. 
11—14;    T.  8),  and  salutes  him    by  the 


honourable  title  of  "  father,"  which  implied 
respect,  deference,  submission.  Compare  tlia 
use  of  the  same  expression  by  Joash  (ch. 
xiii.  14),  and  the  employment  of  the  corre- 
lative term  "  son  "  (oh.  yiii.  9)  by  Benha- 
dad.  Shall  I  smite  them?  shall  I  smita 
them  ?  The  repetition  marks  extreme  eager- 
ness, while  the  interrogative  form  shows  a 
certain  amount  of  hesitation.  It  is  certain 
that  the  Israelites  were  in  the  habit  of  put  - 
ting  to  death  their  prisoners  of  war,  not 
only  when  they  were  captured  with  arms  in 
their  hands,  but  even  when  they  surrendered 
themselves.  When  a  city  or  country  was 
coii^erered,  the  whole  male  population  of 
fuU  age  was  commonly  put  to  death  (Kumb. 
xxxi.  7 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  8 ;  1  Kings  xi.  15 ;  1 
Chron.  xx.  3,  etc.).  When  a  third  part  was 
spared,  it  was  from  some  conslileratiou  of 
relationship  (2  Sam.  viii.  2).  The  Law  dis- 
tinctly allowed,  if  it  did  not  even  enjoin, 
the  practice  (Deut.  xx.  13).  Jehoram,  there- 
fore, no  doubt,  put  his  prisoners  of  war  to 
death  under  ordinary  circumstances.  But 
he  hesitates  now.  He  feels  that  the  case  is 
an  extraordinary  one,  and  that  the  prophet, 
who  has  made  the  capture,  is  entitled  to  be 
consuHed  on  the  subject.  Hence  his  ques- 
tion. 

Ver.  22. — And  he  answered,  Thou  shall 
not  smite  them.  The  prophet  has  no  doubt. 
His  prohibition  is  absolute.  These  prisoners, 
at  any  rate,  are  not  to  be  slain.  "  The  ob- 
ject of  the  miracle,"  as  Keil  says,  "  would 
have  been  frustrated,  if  the  Syrians  had 
been  slain.  For  the  intention  was  to  show 
the  Syrians  that  they  had  to  do  with  a 
prophet  of  the  true  God,  against  whom  no 
human  power  could  be  of  any  avail,  that 
they  might  learn  to  fear  the  Almighty  God  " 
('Commentary  on  2  Kings,'  p.  327,  Eng. 
trans.).  There  was  also,  perhaps,  a  further 
political  object.  By  sparing  tlie  prisoners 
and  treating  them  with  kindness,  it  might 
be  possible  to  touch  the  heart  of  the  King 
of  Syria,  and  dispose  him  towards  peace. 
Wonldest  thon  smite  those  whom  thou  hast 
taken  captive  with  thy  sword  and  with  thy 
bow  1  rather,  Wouldett  thou  be  smiting  those, 
etc.  ?  t.e.  "  Wonldest  thon,  in  smiting  these 
persons,  be  smiting  those  whom  thou  hadst 
made  prisoners  in  war,  so  as  to  be  able  to 
justify  thy  conduct  by  Deut.  xx.  13  ?  No  ; 
thou  wouldest  not.  Therefore  thou  shalt 
not  smite  them."  Set  bread  and  water  befora 
them.  "Bread"  and  "water"  stand  for 
meat  and  drink  generally.  Elisha  bids 
Jehoram  entertain  the  captive  Syrians 
hospitably,  and  then  send  them  back  to 
Benhadad.  That  they  may  eat  and  drink, 
and  go  to  their  master. 

Ver.  23. — And  he  prepared  great  provision 
for  them.  Jehoram  followed  the  directions 
of  the  prophet,  carrying  them  out,  not  in  tha 


OH.  VI.  1—33.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


123 


letter  merely,  bat  in  the  spirit.  He  enter- 
tained the  captives  at  a  grand  t>aiiquet 
(JosephuB,  *  Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  4.  §  3),  and  then 
gave  them  leave  to  depart.  And  when  they 
had  eaten  and  dxnnk,  he  sent'  them  away, 
and  they  went  to  their  master.  So  the  bands 
of  Syria  oame  no  more  into  the  land  of 
Israel.  The  Syrian  raids,  which  had  hither- 
to been  frequent,  perhaps  almost  continuous 
(eh.  V.  2),  now  ceased  for  a  time,  and  the 
kingdom  of  Israel  had  a  respite.  Bahr 
supposes  that  the  raids  were  discontinaed 
simply  "  because  the  Syrians  had  found  out 
that  they  could  not  accomplish  anything  by 
these  expeditions,  but  rather  brought  them- 
selves into  circumstances  of  great  peril" 
('Commentary  on  Kings,'  vol.  ii.  p.  69). 
But  the  nexus  of  the  clause, "  So  the  bands," 
etc.,  rather  implies  that  the  cessation  was 
the  consequence  of  Jehoram's  sparing  and 
entertaining  the  captives. 

Ver.  24 — oh.  vii.  20. — The  tiege  of  Samaria 
hy  Benhadad. 

Ver.  24.— And  it  oame  to  pass  after  this — 
probably  some  considerable  time  after,  when 
the  memory  of  Jehuram's  kind  act  had 
passed  away — that  Benhadad  king  of  Syria 
gathered  all  his  host.  A  contrast  is  in- 
tended between  the  inroads  of  small  bodies 
of  plunderers  and  the  invasion  of  the  terri- 
tory by  the  monarch  himself  at  the  head  of 
his  entire  force.  And  went  up.  However 
Samaria  was  approached  from  Syria,  there 
must  always  have  been  a  final  ascent,  either 
from  tlie  Jordan  valley  or  from  the  Plain  of 
Esdraelon.  And  besieged  Samaria.  Jose- 
phus  says  that  Jehorum  was  afraid  to  meet 
Benhadad  in  the  open  field,  since  his  forces 
were  no  match  for  those  of  the  Syrian  king, 
and  therefore  at  once  shut  himself  up  within 
his  capital,  without  risking  a  battle.  The 
walls  of  Samaria  were  very  strong. 

Ver.  25. — And  there  was  a  great  famine 
in  Samaria.  It  was  Benhadad's  design  to 
capture  the  place,  not  by  battering  down  its 
walls  with  military  engines,  but  by  block- 
ading it,  and  cutting  off  all  its  supplies,  as 
Josephus  tells  us  (I.  <.  e.}.  And,  behold,  they 
besieged  it,  until  an  ass's  head  was  sold  for 
fourscore  pieces  of  silver,  and  the  fourth 
part  of  a  cab  of  dove's  dung  for  five  pieces 
of  silver.  The  ass,  being  an  unclean  animal 
(Lev.  xi.  4),  would  not  be  eaten  at  all  ex- 
cept in  the  last  extremity,  and  the  head 
was  the  worst  and  so  the  cheapest  part ;  yet 
it  sold  for  "  eighty  pieces  "  (rather,  shekels) 
of  silver,  or  al>out  £5  of  our  money ; 
as  in  the  Cadusian  famine  mentioned  by 
Plutarch  ('  Vit  Artaxerx.,'  §  24),  where  an 
aas'i  head  was  sold  for  sixty  drachmas 
(about  forty  shillings).  "  Dove's  dung  "  is 
thought  by  some  to  be  the  name  of  a  plant; 
but  it  is  better  to  understand  the  term 


literally.  Both  animal  and  human  excre- 
ment have  been  eaten  in  sieges  (Josephus, 
'Bell.  Jud.,'  V.  13.  §  7;  Gels., ' Hierobot,' 
ii.  p.  2:^3),  when  a  city  was  in  the  last 
extremity. 

Ver.  26. — And  as  the  King  of  Israel  was 
passing  by  upon  the  wall.  The  wall  of 
Babylon  is  said  to  have  been  so  broad  at 
the  top  t^at  a  four-horse  ehariot  could  turn 
round  on  it  (Hurod.,  i.  179).  All  ancient 
cities  had  walls  upon  which  a  great  part  of 
the  garrison  stood,  and  from  which  they 
shot  their  arrows  and  woiked  their  engines 
against  the  assailants.  From  time  to  time 
the  commandant  of  the  place — the  king 
himself,  in  this  instance — would  mount 
upon  the  wall  to  visit  the  posts,  and  inspect 
the  state  of  the  garrison,  or  observe  the 
movements  of  the  enemy.  There  cried  a 
woman  unto  him.  Hi  luses  sometimes  abutted 
on  the  wall  of  a  town  (see  Josh.  ii.  15; 
1  Sam.  xix.  12,  etc.),  and  women  sometimes 
took  part  in  their  defence  (Juds;.  ix.  53), 
so  that  in  visiting  the  posts  a  commandant 
might  be  brought  into  contact  with  women. 
Saying,  Help,  my  lord,  0  king ;  rather,  save, 
i.e.  "  preserve  me  from  perisliing  of  hunger." 

Ver.  27. — And  he  said.  If  the  Lord  do  not 
help  thee.  This  is  probably  the  true  mean- 
ing. The  king  is  not  so  brutal  as  to  "curse" 
the  woman  (^4intp<i<raTo  outiJ  rhv  ®e6if,  Jose- 
phus, 'Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  4.  §  4);  neither  does 
he  take  upon  himself  to  tell  her  that  God 
will  not  save  her  (Maurer).  He  merely 
refers  her  to  God,  as  alone  competent  to  do 
what  she  asks.  Whence  shall  I  help  thee  'i 
Whence,  i.e.,  dost  thou  suppose  that  I  oan 
save  thee  ?  Out  of  the  barnfloor,  or  out  of 
the  winepress  ?  D.ist  thou  suppc.se  that  I 
have  stores  of  food  at  my  disposal?  An 
overflowing  barnfloor,  where  almmlant  cum 
is  garnered,  or  a  winepress  full  of  the  juiee 
of  the  grape  ?  I  have  nothing  of  the  kind ; 
my  stores  are  as  much  e.'diausted  as  those  of 
the  meanest  of  my  subjects.  I  cannot  save 
thee. 

Ver.  28. — And  the  king  said  unto  her, 
What  aileth  thee?  Probably,  as  Bahr  sug- 
gests, the  woman  explained  to  the  king 
that  she  did  not  appear  before  him  to  beg 
food,  but  to  claim  his  interposition  as  judge, 
in  a  case  in  which  she  considered  herself  to 
be  wronged  .Such  an  appeal  the  king  was 
bound  to  hear ;  and  he  therefore  asks, "  What 
aileth  thee?"  i.e.  "What  is  thy  ground  of 
complaint?"  Then  siie  tells  her  story.  And 
she  answered,  This  woman  said  onto  me, 
Give  thy  son,  that  we  may  eat  him' to-day, 
and  we  will  eat  my  son  to-morrow.  Com- 
pare the  prophecy  in  Deuteronomy,  "  The 
tender  and  delicate  woman  among  you, 
which  would  not  adventure  to  set  the  sole 
of  her  foot  upon  the  ground  for  delicatemesi 
and  tenderness,  her  eye  shall  be  evil  towards 


124 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         [ch.  tl  1—33. 


the  hasbsiid  of  her  bosom,  and  toward  her 
■on,  and  toward  her  daughter,  and  toward 
her  yonng  one  that  cometh  out  from  between 
her  feet,  and  toward  her  children  which  she 
Bhall  bear:  for  she  ehall  eat  them  for  want 
of  all  things  secretly  in  the  siege  and  slrait- 
nesB,  wherewith  thine  enemy  shall  distress 
thee  in  thy  gates"  (xxviii.  56,  57).  There 
is  historical  testimony  that  the  prophecy 
was  three  times  fulfilled;  viz.  (1)  in  Samaria 
on  the  present  occasion;  (2)  in  Jerusalem 
during  the  last  siege  by  Nebuchadnezzar 
(Lam.  iv.  10) ;  and  (3)  in  Jerusalem  during 
the  last  siege  by  Titua  (Josephus,  'Bell. 
Jud.,'  tI.  8.  §  4).  In  modern  lieges  sur- 
render is  made  before  the  population  is 
driven  to  such  straits. 

Ver.  29. — ^So  we  boiled  my  son  (comp. 
Lam.  iv.  10,  "The  hands  of  the  pitiful 
woman  have  lodden  their  own  children"), 
and  did  eat  him :  and  I  said  unto  her  on  the 
next  day.  Give  thy  son,  that  we  may  eat  him : 
and  she  hath  hid  her  ion.  Some  have  sup- 
posed that  the  woman  concealed  her  child 
in  order  to  consume  it  alone;  but  it  is  more 
probable  that,  when  the  time  came  for 
carrying  out  her  agreement,  she  found  that 
she  could  not  give  it  up,  and  hid  it  in  order 
to  save  it. 

Ver.  30.— And  It  earns  to  pass,  when  the 
king  heard  the  words  of  the  woman,  that  ha 
rent  his  clotbei.  In  horror  and  consterna- 
tion at  the  terrible  state  of  things  revealed 
by  the  woman's  story  (comp.  ch.  v.  7).  And 
he  passed  by  upon  the  wall,  and  the  people 
looked.  It  is  better  to  translate,  with  our 
licvisers,  (Now  he  wot  poising  by  upon  tAs 
wall/)  and  the  people  looked;  or,  and,  as  he 
ims  passing  by  upon  the  toall,  the  people 
holced.  And,  behold,  he  had  sackcloth  with- 
in upon  his  flesh.  Jehoram  had  secretly 
assumed  the  penitential  garment,  not  a  mere 
sign  of  woe,  but  a  constant  chastisement  of 
the  flesh.  He  wore  sackcloth  next  his  skin, 
DO  one  suspecting  it,  until,  in  the  exaspera- 
tion of  hii  feelings  at  the  woman's  tale,  he 
rent  his  robe^  and  exposed  to  view  the 
sackcloth  which  underlay  it.  We  are 
scarcely  entitled  to  deny  him  any  true 
penitential  feeling,  though  no  doubt  he  was 
far  from  possessing  a  chastened  or  humble 
spirit.  Poor  weak  humanity  has  at  one 
and  the  same  time  good  and  evil  impulses, 
praiseworthy  and  culpable  feelings,  thoughts 
which  come  from  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God, 
and  thought!  which  are  inspired  by  the  evil 
one.     • 

Yer.  31. — Then  he  said,  Ood  do  so  and 
more  also  to  me,  it  the  head  of  £lisha  the 
son  of  Shaphkt  ihaU  Hand  on  him— «.a. 
"continue  on  him" — thii  day.  The  form 
of  oath  wai  a  common  one  (comp.  Butlt  i. 
17;  1  Sam.  iii.  17;  xxv.  22;  2  Bam.  xix. 
13 :  1  Kingi  ii.  23;  xix.  2,  etc.).    It  was  an 


imprecation  of  evil  on  one's  self,  if  one  did,  or 
if  one  failed  to  do,  a  certain  thing.  Why 
Jehoram  should  have  oonsidered  Elisha  as 
responsible  fo^  all  the  horrors  of  the  siege 
is  not  apparent;  but  perhaps  he  supposed 
that  it  was  in  Elisha's  power  to  work  a 
miracle  of  any  kind  at  any  moment  that  he 
liked.  If  so,  he  misunderstood  the  natn  i  e 
of  the  miraculous  gift.  In  threatening  to 
behead  Elisha,  he  is  not  making  himself  aa 
executor  of  the  Law,  which  nowhere  saao< 
tioned  that  mode  of  punishment,  but  assum- 
ing the  arbitrary  power  of  the  other  Oriental 
monarcbs  of  his  time,  who  regarded  them- 
selves as  absolute  masters  of  the  lives  and 
liberties  of  their  subjects.  Beheading  was 
common  in  Egypt,  in  Babylonia,  and  in 
Assyria. 

Yer.  32. — But  Elisha  sat  in  his  honse,  and 
the  elders  sat  with  him ;  and  the  king  sent 
a  man  from  before  him.  It  is  best  to  trans- 
late, Now  Eliiha  was  sitting  in  his  house, 
and  the  elders  were  sitting  with  him,  when 
the  king  sent  a  man  from  before  him.  Elisha 
had  a  house  in  Samaria,  where  he  ordinarily 
resided,  and  from  which  he  made  his  circuits. 
He  happened  to  be  sitting  there,  and  the 
elders  of  the  city  to  be  sitting  with  him, 
when  Jehoram  sent  "a  man  from  before 
him,"  t'.e.  one  of  the  court  officials,  to  put 
him  to  death.  The  "  elders  "  had  probably 
assembled  at  Elisha's  house  to  consult  with 
him  on  the  critical  situation  of  affairs,  and 
(if  possible)  obtain  from  him  some  miracu- 
lous assistance.  Bnt  ere  the  messenger  cami 
to  him,  he  said  to  the  elders,  See  ye  how  thii 
son  of  a  murderer  hath  sent  to  take  away 
niine  head?  Elisha  was  supematurally 
warned  of  what  was  about  to  take  place^ 
that  an  executioner  was  coming  almost 
immediately  to  take  away  his  life,  and  that 
the  king  himself  would  arrive  shortly  after. 
He  calls  the  king  "  this  son  of  a  murderer," 
or  rather  "  this  son  of  the  murderer,"  with 
reference  to  Ahab,  the  great  murderer  of 
the  time,  who  bad  sanctioned  all  Jezebel's 
cruelties — the  general  massacre  of  the  pro- 
phets of  Jehovah  (1  Kings  xviii.  13),  the 
judicial  murder  of  Naboth  (1  Kings  xxi. 
9—13),  the  attempt  to  kill  Elijah  (1  Kings 
xix.  2)— and  had,  by  a  fierce  and  long-con- 
tinued persecution,  reduced  the  worshipper! 
of  Jehovah  in  Israel  to  the  scanty  number 
of  seven  thousand  (1  Kings  xix.  18).  Je- 
horam had  now  shown  that  he  inherited 
the  bloodthirsty  disposition  of  his  father, 
and  had  justly  earned  the  epithet  which 
Elisha  bestowed  on  him.  Look,  when  the 
messenger  cometh,  shut  the  door,  and  hold 
him  fast  at  the  door.  Keil  renders  the  last 
clause,  "  force  him  back  at  the  door ; "  tha 
LXX.  "pnss  upon  him  in  the  doorway" — 
•jrapa&Klf^tire  aurhif  iv  rp  06pcf — they  were  not 
to  allow  him  to  enter  the  apartment.    If 


CH.  VI.  1—33,]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINaS. 


125 


not  tbe  Bonnd  of  his  mastei'i  feet  behind  hlml 
Elisha  adds  thu  as  a  reason  why  the  elderi 
should  stop  the  messenger.  He  oonld  not 
in  a  general  vay  have  expected  them  to 
resist  the  king's  will  as  declared  by  his 
representatire;  but  he  might  reasonably  ask 
a  short  respite,  if  the  king  was  jost  about 
to  arrive  at  the  house,  to  confirm  the  order 
that  he  had  given,  or  to  revoke  it. 

Yer.  S3.— And  while  he  yet  talked  with 
them — i.e.  while  Elisha  yet  talked  with  the 
elders,  endeavouring  probably  to  persuade 
them  to  stop  the  messenger — ^behold,  the 
messenger  came  down  unto  him;  and  he  said. 
The  narrative  is  very  compressed  and  ellip- 
tical.   Some  suppose  words  to  have  fallen 

out  (asnnnx  ij^Bni  after  v^k);  but  this  is 
unnecessary.  The  reader  is  expected  to 
supply  missing  links,  and  to  understand 
that  all  happened  as  Elisha  had  predicted 
and  enjoined — that  the  messenger  came,  that 
the  elders  stopped  him,  and  that  the  king 


shortly  arrived.  The  king  was,  of  course, 
admitted,  and,  being  admitted,  took  the 
word,  and  said,  Behold,  this  evil  is  of  the 
lord;  what — rather,  why — should  I  wait 
for  the  Lord  any  longer?  Jehoram  had, 
apparently,  to  some  extent  repented  of  his 
hasty  message,  and  had  hurried  after  his 
messenger,  to  give  Elisha  one  further 
chance  of  life.  We  must  understand  that 
they  had  been  in  communication  previously 
on  the  subject  of  the  siege,  and  that  Elisha 
had  encouraged  the  king  to  "wait  for"  an 
interposition  of  Jehovah.  The  king  now 
urges  that  the  time  for  waiting  is  over; 
matters  are  at  the  last  gasp ;  "  this  evil " — 
this  terrible  suffering  which  can  no  longer 
be  endured — "is  of  the  Lord,"  has  come 
from  him,  is  continued  by  him,  and  is  not 
relieved.  What  use  is  there  in  his  "  wait- 
ing" any  longer?  Why  should  he  not 
break    with    Jehovah,   behead    the    lying 

grophet,  and  surrender  the  town?    What 
as  Elisha  to  say  in  reply  t 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers,  1 — 7. — Mutual  love  and  hdp  the  hest  bond  of  religious  eommunities.  "  Behold, 
how  good  and  joyful  a  thing  it  is,  brethren,  to  dwell  together  in  unity  I  It  is  like 
the  precious  ointment  upon  the  bead,  that  ran  down  unto  the  beard,  even  unto  Aaron's 
beard,  and  went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  clothinc; ;  like  as  the  dew  of  Hermon,  which 
fell  upon  the  hill  of  Zion  "  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  1 — 3).  In  religious  communities  it  has  been 
too  often  the  practice  to  govern  by  fear.  An  autocratic  authority  has  been  committed 
to,  or  assumed  by,  the  head,  who  has  exacted  from  all  the  other  members  an  entire, 
absolute,  and  unreasoning  obedience.  Vows  of  obedience,  of  the  most  rigid  character, 
have  been  taken ;  and  it  has  been  inculcated  on  all  that  the  sum  total  of  virtue  lay  in 
obeyinpr,  without  a  murmur  or  a  question,  every  order  issued  by  the  superior.  An 
iron  rule  has  characterized  such  institutions,  and  a  cold,  unloving  temper  has  prevailed 
in  them.  How  different  is  the  picture  drawn  in  the  beautiful  passage  before  us! 
How  sweet  and  pleasing  is  the  community-life  of  Elisha  and  his  prophet-disciples  1 
Though  bound  by  no  vow  of  obedience,  they  undertake  nothing  without  their  master 
(vers.  2  and  3).  They  require  an  enlargement  of  their  dwelling-place,  but  they  will 
not  commence  it  without  his  sanction.  Even  his  sanction  is  not  enough ;  they  ask  his 
presence,  his  superintending  eye,  his  guiding  mind.  And  he  complies  willingly,  cheer- 
fully. No  trouble  is  too  much  for  him.  "  Go  f/e,"  he  says ;  but  when  they  object  and 
plead,  "  Be  content,  I  pray  thee,  and  go  with  thy  servants,"  he  at  once  consents,  and 
says,  "  I  will  go."  He  goes,  he  looks  on  with  sympathy,  he  guides,  he  aids.  At  the 
first  touch  of  misfortune,  bis  sympathy  blossoms  into  help.  How  charming  is  the 
childlike  confidence  and  communicativeness  of  the  disciple,  who,  on  losing  his  axe- 
head,  immediately  reveals  his  loss  to  the  master,  and  tells  him  why  it  was  so  especially 
grievous  to  him — "  And  it  a  borrowed  one  1 "  And  how  admirable  the  kindness  and 
fellow-feeling,  which  uttered  no  reproach,  made  no  suggestion  of  carelessness  or  of 
stupidity  in  selecting  a  tree  so  near  the  stream,  but  thought  only  of  finding  a  remedy. 
Natural  means  being  unavailing,  the  prophet  deems  the  occasion  no  unsuitable  one  for 
the  exercise  of  his  miraculous  powers,  which  he  is  as  willing  to  exert  oii  behalf  of  a 
sumble  prophet-student  as.  on  that  of  a  great  Syrian  general.  The  terms  on  which 
Elisha  and  his  disciples  live  are  evidently  those  of  mutual  confidence  and  affection,  of 
protection  and  fatherly  care  on  the  one  hand ;  of  appeal,  regard,  and  childlike  love  on 
the  other ;  and  the  result  is  a  community  which  it  is  delightful  to  contemplate,  and 
which  increases  and  flourishes,  in  spite  Of  the  contempt  and  persecution  of  the  world 
lover,  uo  that  its  place  is  "  too  strait  for  it" 


12«  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,         [en.  vi.  1—33, 

Vers,  8 — 23. —  Wiched  men  vainly  attempt  to  outwit  God.  Benhadad,  after  the 
miracle  wrought  upon  his  favourite  Naaman,  liad  abundant  reason  to  know  that  Israel 
was  the  people  of  God,  and  enjoyed  special  Divine  protection  and  superintendence. 
Had  he  been  truly  wise,  he  would  liave  laid  aside  his  hostile  designs  against  the  nation, 
and  have  made  it  his  endeavour  to  cultivate  friendly  relations  with  them,  and,  if 
po-ssible,  secure  their  alliance.  But  true  wisdom  is  a  plant  of  rare  growth,  while  its 
counterfeit,  cunning,  is  a  weed  tljat  grows  rankly  at  all  times  and  everywhere.  Ben- 
hadad  resulved  to  have  recourse  to  craft  against  the  Israelites,  and  thought  perhaps 
that,  wliile  the  protection  of  their  God  would  not  fail  thorn  in  a  pitched  battle,  he 
might  be  able  in  petty  engagements,  by  means  of  ambushes  and  surprises,  to  snatch 
an  occasional  victory.  But  his  plan  failed  egregiously.  God  enabled  his  prophet  to 
foresee  where  each  ambush  would  be  placed ;  and  each  time  he  warned  Jehoram  of  the 
8nare,  which  was  thereupon  easily  avoided.  Craft  and  cunning  were  of  no  avail 
against  the  wisdom  which  is  from  on  high — the  Divine  foreknowledge,  of  which  the 
prophet  was  made  in  some  measure  partaker.  Benhadad  then  bethought  him  of  a  new 
device.  He  would  capture  the  prophet,  and  thenceforward  his  plans  would  be  unde- 
tected, and  the  success  which  he  had  expected  from  them  would  follow.  How  simple 
and  easy  it  must  have  seemed  1  The  prophet  moved  about  from  city  to  city,  teaching 
the  faithful,  and  was  now  in  one  place,  now  in  another.  What  could  be  easier  than 
to  make  inquiry,  and  learn  where  he  was  residing  at  any  particular  time,  and  then  to 
make  a  sudden  inroad,  surround  the  place,  occupy  it,  and  obtain  possession  of  his 
person  ?  Such  seizures  of  individuals  have  been  planned  many  hundreds  of  times,  and 
have  generally  been  successful.  Had  Benhadad  had  only  human  enemies  to  deal  with, 
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  his  plans  would  have  prospered.  He  would  have  out- 
witted the  prophet,  and  would  have  got  him  into  his  power ;  but  it  was  necessary  that 
he  should  also  outwit  God.  Here  was  a  difficulty  which  had  not  presented  itself  to  his 
mind,  and  which  yet  surely  oughtl  to  have  done  so.  What  had  frustrated  his  efforts 
previously?  Not  human  strength;  not  human  wisdom  or  sagacity;  but  Divine 
omniscience.  God  had  enabled  Elisha  to  show  the  King  of  Israel  the  words  which  he 
spake  in  the  secrecy  of  his  bedchamber.  Why  should  be  not  grant  him  a  foreknow- 
ledge of  the  new  design  ?  Or  why  should  he  not  enable  the  prophet  in  some  other 
way  to  frustrate  it?  There  are  ten  thousand  ways  in  which  God  can  bring  the 
counsels  of  men  to  no  effect,  whenever  he  pleases.  Benhadad  ought  to  have  known 
that  it  was  God,  not  merely  the  prophet,  against  whom  he  was  contending,  and  that 
it  would  be  impossible  to  outwit  the  Source  of  wisdom,  the  Giver  of  all  knowledgo 
and  understanding.  But  men  in  all  ages  have  thought  (and  vainly  thought)  to  hood- 
wink and  outwit  God.  1.  The  first  dwellers  upon  the  earth  after  the  Flood  were 
divinely  commanded  to  spread  themselves  over  its  face  and  "replenish"  it  (Gen.  ix.  1). 
They  disliked  the  idea,  and  thought  to  frustrate  God's  design  by  building  themselves 
a  city  and  a  tower  as  a  focus  of  union  (Gen.  ix.  4).  But  God  "  came  down,"  and 
confounded  their  language ;  and  so  "  scattered  them  abroad  from  thence  upon  the  face 
of  all  the  earth"  (Gen.  ix.  8).  2.  Isaac  sought  to  outwit  God,  and  frustrate  his 
preference  of  Jacob  over  Esau  (Gen.  xxv.  23),  by  giving  his  special  blessing  to  hii 
firstborn  ;  but  God  blinded  him,  and  caused  him  to  be  himself  outwitted  by  Rebekah 
and  Jacob,  so  that  he  gave  the  blessing  where  he  had  not  intended  to  give  it  (Gen. 
xxvii.  27—29).  3.  Pharaoh  King  of  Egypt  at  the  time  of  the  Exodus,  thought  to 
frustrate  God's  designs  respecting  his  people  by  a  long  series  of  delays  and  impediments, 
and  finally  by  shutting  them  up  into  a  comer  of  the  land,  whence  apparently  they  had 
no  escape  unless  by  an  absolute  surrender ;  but  God  gave  them  a  way  of  escape  across 
the  Bed  Sea,  which  removed  them  whoUy  from  his  control.  4.  Jonah  thought  to 
outwit  God,  when  commanded  to  warn  the  Ninevites,  by  flying  from  Asia  to  the 
remotest  comer  of  Europe,  and  there  hiding  himself;  but  God  counteracted  his  schemes 
and  made  them  of  no  avail.  6.  Herod  the  Great  thought  to  outwit  God,  to  preserve 
his  kingdom,  and  to  make  the  advent  of  Christ  upon  earth  unavailing,  by  a  genera] 
massacre  of  all  the  young  children  to  be  found  in  Bethlehem  (Matt.  ii.  16) ;  but  the 
warning  given  by  God  to  Joseph  and  Mary  confounded  his  counsels,  and  made  the 
massacre  futile.  6.  Men  have,  in  all  periods  of  the  world's  history,  endeavoured  to 
hoodwink  God  by  professing  to  serve  him,  while  they  offered  him  a  formal,  outward, 
and  ceremonial  observance,  instead  of  giving  him  the  true  worship  of  the  heart.    But 


CH.T1.1— 33.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  127 

God  has  not  been  deceived ;  he  "  Is  not  mocked ; "  he  reai^ily  discerns  the  counterfeit 
from  the  genuine,  and  rejects  with  abhorrence  all  feigned  and  hypocritical  religiousness. 
Every  attempt  of  man  to  cheat  his  Maker  recoils  on  his  own  head.  "  The  foolishness 
of  Gkid  is  wiser  than  men ;  and  the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men "  (1  Cor.  i. 
25).  We  cannot  deceive  him.  "  All  things  are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of 
him  with  whom  we  have  to  do  "  (Heb^  iv.  13). 

Yen.  16,  17. — 2%0  ^rit-vjorld,  and  the  power  to  discern  it.  The  little  episode  of 
the  alarm  felt  by  Elisha's  servant,  and  the  manner  in  which  Elisha  removed  it,  teaches 
U8  principally  three  things. 

I.  Thb  bealitt,  and  febpbtital  fbesenoe,  abound  us  ahs  about  ub,  or  the 
BPIBIT-WOBLD.  The  existence  of  an  order  of  spirits  intermediate  between  Qod  and 
man,  who  are  closely  connected  with  man,  and  play  an  important  part  in  the  Divine 
government  of  the  world  wherein  we  live,  is  an  essential  part  of  the  scheme  of  things 
set  before  us  in  the  Scriptures.  "  The  doctrine  of  angels,"  as  it  has  been  called,  is 
this:  "That  there  lives  in  the  presence  of  God  a  vast  assembly,  myriads  upon 
myriads  of  spiritual  beings  (Ps.  Ixviii.  17 ;  Dan.  vii.  10),  higher  than  we,  but  infinitely 
removed  from  God,  mighty  in  strength,  doers  of  his  word,  who  ceaselessly  bless  and 
praise  God,  wise  also,  to  whom  he  gives  charge  to  guard  his  own  in  all  their  ways, 
ascending  and  descending  to  and  from  heaven  and  earth  (Gen.  xzviii.  12,  13 ;  John  i. 
61),  and  who  variously  minister  to  men,  most  often  invisibly.  All  these  beings  are 
interested  in  us  and  in  our  well-being.  When  our  earth  was  createdj '  all  the  sons  of 
God  burst  forth  into  jubilee '  (Job  ixxviii.  7)  in  prospect  of  our  birth,  who  were  to  be 
their  care  here,  their  fellow-citizens  hereafter  in  bliss.  At  the  giving  of  tlie  Law  oi\ 
Mount  Sinai,  they  were  present  in  myriads.  When  God  vouchsafed  his  presence  on 
Mount  Zion,  and  the  holy  place  became  a  new  Sinai, '  twice  ten  thousand  augels,  yea, 
thousands  many  times  repeated '  (Ps.  IxviiL  17)  were  there.  They  are  present  with 
God,  witnessing  the  trials  of  our  race  (Job  L  6  ;  ii.  1 ;  1  Kings  xxii.  19).  Their  love 
for  man  is  indicated  by  the  charge  given  to  them  when  they  are  set  to  destroy  the 
guilty  in  Jerusalem,  '  Let  not  your  eye  spare,  neither  have  pity '  (Ezek.  x.  5),  as 
though  they  would  have  pity,  only  that  they  vaast  needs  be  of  the  same  mind  with 
God.  Tliere  is  a  distinction,  or  gradation  of  ranks,  among  the  members  of  the  heavenly 
host — Cherubim,  seraphim,  archatgels,  principalities,  powers  "  (abridged  from  Pusey's 
'  Daniel  the  Prophet,'  pp.  517 — 524).  It  is  irrational  to  explain  away  as  embellishment 
or  poetic  imagery  a  representation  of  the  actual  condition  of  things  in  God's  unive  se, 
which  is  so  frequent,  so  all-pervading,  so  harmonious,  and,  it  may  be  added,  so  con- 
sistent with  what  we  should  have  naturally  expected  apart  from  revelation. 

II.  The  ferfetuai.  bealization  of  this  fbesence  bt  those  possessed  of  faith. 
There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  Elisha  saw  the  angels  that  compassed  him  round 
with  his  bodily  eyes.  But  he  knew  that  they  were  there.  He  was  sure  that  GoJ 
would  not  desert  him  in  his  peril,  and  had  such  a  confident  faith  in  "  the  doctrine  of 
angels,"  that  it  was  as  if  he  could  see  them.  And  so  it  was  with  David.  "  The  angel 
of  the  Lord,"  he  says, "  encampeth  round  about  them  that  fear  him,  and  delivereth 
them  "  (Ps.  zxziv.  7).  So  with  Hezekiah,  who,  when-  Sennacherib  invaded  his  land, 
"  spake  comfortably  to  the  people,  saying,  Be  strong  and  courageous,  be  not  afraid  nor 
dismayed  for  the  King  of  Assyria,  nor  for  all  the  multitude  that  is  with  him :  for 
there  be  more  with  us  than  with  him "  (2  Chron.  zxxii.  7).  Judas  Maccabaeus  had 
probably  the  same  faith  when  he  uttered  the  words,  "  It  is  no  hard  matter  for  many  to 
be  shut  up  in  the  hands  of  s  few ;  and  with  the  God  of  heaven  it  is  all  one,  to  deliver 
with  a  great  multitude,  or  a  small  company ;  for  the  victory  of  battle  standeth  not  in 
the  multitude  of  an  host ;  but  strength  cometh/rom  heaven  "  (1  Mace.  iii.  18,  19).  St. 
Paul  realized  the  continual  angeUo  presence  when  he  declared,  "We  are  made  a 
spectacle  unto  the  world,  and  to  angels,  and  to  men  "  (1  Cor.  iv.  9).  The  author  of 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  realized  it  when  he  told  the  Jewish  converts,  "  Ye  are  come 
unto  Mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  to 
•M  innumerable  company  of  angels"  (Heb.  xii.  22).  St.  John  the  divine  realized  it, 
when  he  gave  the  angels  a  large  share  in  aU.  the  later  judgments  that  should  be&ll 
the  earth,  and  made  them  dispensers  of  the  blessings  and  of  the  wrath  of  God  (Kev. 
rii.  1 — S.J..  3).    If  the  doctrine  has  been  at  any  time  obscured,  it  has  been  when 


12S  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  1       [ch.  vlI— 33. 


faith  wmrered,  and  there  was  a  tendency  to  confine  the  supernatural  with  hi  the 
narrowest  possible  limits.  It  was  easy  to  suggest  that  the  expression,  "  the  angels  of 
QoA,"  was  a  periphrasis  for  God  himself,  and  that  he  had  no  need  to  act,  and  therefore 
probably  did  not  act,  by  intermediaries.  But  the  faith  of  the  Church  has  always  been 
different.  The  festival  of  St.  Michael  and  All  Angels  has  been  generally  celebrated 
from  a  very  ancient  date ;  and  the  Collect  for  that  festival  has  borne  witness  to  the 
perpetual  ministration  of  angels,  not  only  in  heaven,  but  also  upon  earth,  and  to  the 
part  borne  by  them  in  the  succour  and  defence  of  God's  people. 
IIL  The  possibility  of  a  manifestation  of  the  presence  in  question  to  th» 

BODILT  SENSES  OF  THOSE  WHOSE  FAITH  IB  TOO  WEAK  TO  APPREHEND  IT.     Blisha's  Servant 

did  not  see  a  vision.  It  was  not  his  mind  only  that  was  impressed.  His  bodily  eyes 
beheld  an  appearance  as  ot  chariots  and  horses  of  fire  (ver.  17),  which  was  based  on 
the  objective  reality  of  the  actual  presence  of  an  angelic  host  upon  the  hill  whereon 
Dothan  was  situated.  The  prophet  prayed  that  his  eyes  should  be  opened,  and  hii 
piayer  was  granted.  "The  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  the  young  man,  and  he  saw." 
Physicists  are  probably  ris^ht  in  saying  that  what  is  absolutely  immaterial  cannot  be 
seen  by  the  optic  nerve.  But  we  are  nowhere  told  that  angels  are  absolutely  immaterial. 
It  is  the  belief  of  many  philosophers  that  all  finite  spirits  are  attached  to  bodies  of 
some  kind  or  other — bodies  more  or  less  volatile  and  ethereal.  We  can  readily  conceive 
that  the  optic  nerve  may,  by  an  increase  of  its  sensitiveness,  be  made  to  see  these; 
and  in  this  way  we  may  account,  not  only  for  the  wonderful  sight  beheld  on  this 
occasion  by  Elisha's  servant,  but  for  the  many  other  appearances  of  angels  to  men  and 
women  recorded  In  Scripture  (Gen.  iii.  1;  xix,  1 — 15;  xxzii.  24 — 30;  Judg.  vL 
11—22;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  16,  17;  1  Kings  xix.  5—7;  Isa.  vi.  6;  Dan.  vi.  22;  ix.  21 ; 
X.  16—21 ;  Zech.  i.  11—19;  iv.  1,  etc. ;  Luke  i.  11—19,  26—38;  n.  9—13;  John 
XX.  12 ;  Acts  v.  19 ;  viii.  26 ;  xii.  7 — 10;  Revelation,  passim).  Miraculously,  power  is 
given  tu  the  optic  nerve  which  it  does  not  ordinarily  possess,  and  it  is  enabled  to  see 
beings  actually  present,  who  under  ordinary  circumstances  are  invisible  to  it. 

Vers.  24 — 33. — Half-heartednesi.  Jehoram  was  altogether  half-hearted  In  his 
religion.  He  "halted  between  two  opinions."  While  he  paid  a  certain  amount  of 
respect  to  Elislia,  as  the  prophet  of  Jehovah,  he  nevertheless  allowed  the  worship  of 
Baal  to  continue  in  the  capital  (ch.  x.  18 — 28),  if  not  elsewhere,  and  maintained  the 
calf-worshi|i  also  at  Dan  and  Betliel  (oh.  iii.  3).  He  had  suffered  himself  to  be  guided 
by  Elisha  in  respect  of  the  Syrian  prisoners  captured  by  the  prophet  (ver.  23),  and 
Imd  evidently  been  in  communication  with  him  on  the  subject  of  the  present  siege, 
had  probably  been  exhorted  by  Mm  to  repentance,  and  promised  that,  if  he  would 
wait  upon  jfehovah,  in  due  time  there  should  be  deliverance.  The  prophet's  words 
had  made  some  impression  on  him ;  he  had  to  a  curtain  extent  turned  to  God,  had 
put  sackcloth  upon  his  loins,  not  ostentatiously,  but  secretly  (ver.  30),  had  borne  the 
privations  of  the  siege  without  murmuring,  had  refused  to  surrender  the  town,  and 
looked  to  Jehovah  to  deliver  it.  But  there  was  no  depth  in  his  penitence,  no  surrender 
of  the  heart  and  the  will  to  God,  no  firm  and  rooted  faith  in  God's  truthfulness,  anil 
in  the  certain  accomplishment  of  his  promises.  His  repentance  was  but  a  halt 
repentance.  A  single  incident  of  the  siege,  a  horrible  one  certainly,  but  yet  not  with- 
out a  parallel  in  other  sieges  and  in  shipwrecks,  shattered  the  whole  fabric  of  his 
repentance  and  his  resolution,  turned  him  against  the  prophet  and  against  Jehovah, 
caused  him  to  threaten  the  prophet's  life,  and  to  make  up  his  mind  that  he  would 
follow  his  own  course,  and  not  wait  for  the  Lord  any  longer  (ver.  33).  He  thus 
revealed  the  true  state  of  his  heart  and  soul,  showed  his  spiritual  unsoundness,  revealed 
himself  as  one  whose  character  was  rotten  at  the  core,  who  had  never  turned  to  Jehovah 
in  sincerity  and  truth.  What  wonder,  then,  that  God  had  not  granted  the  deliverance 
promised  to  true  faith  and  true  penitence,  that  a  half-repentance  had  not  availed  with 
him?  So  it  had  been  with  Ahab  (1  Kings  xii.  27 ;  xxii.  34);  so  it  would  always  be 
with  all  those  who,  after  Jehoram's  example,  should  be  half-hearted  in  religion,  should 
at  once  "  fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  their  own  gods''  (ch.  xvii.  33) — own  for  masters 
both  God  and  mammon.  A  half-repentance  is  useless.  Nothing  avails  but  to  turn 
to  God  with  all  the  heart  and  all  the  soul  and  all  the  strength.  Otod  hates  waverers. 
To  auch  he  says,  "  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot :  I  would 


en.  VI.  1—83.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  129 

thou  wert  cold  or  hot.    So  then  hecause  thou  art  lakewarm,  and  neithsr  eold  nor  h(  i 
I  will  «ptM  thee  out  of  my  mouth  "  (Hev.  iiL  16, 16). 

Ver.  82. — Princes  may  le  retigted  iohen  they  are  bent  upon  wrong-doing.  There  was 
•  time  when  princes  were  flattered  by  being  told  that  they  "  could  do  no  wrong ; "  that 
"  a  diviriity  hedged  them  in ; "  that  their  subjects  were  bound  to  render  them,  luder  all 
circumstances,  an  absolute  and  unqualified  obedience.  But  this  ia  certainly  not 
scriptural  teaching.  The  higher  powers  are  to  be  obeyed  in  their  lawful  commands, 
but  not  in  their  unlawful  ones.  When  Pharaoh,  King  of  Egypt,  commanded  the 
mid  wives  to  put  to  death  all  the  male  children  borne  by  the  Hebrew  women,  "  the 
mid  wives  feared  God,  and  did  not  as  the  King  of  Egypt  commanded  them,  but  saved 
the  men  children  alive  "  (Exod.  L  17) ;  and  God  rewarded  them  for  so  acting :  "  There- 
fore God  dealt  well  with  the  midwives;  .  .  .  and  because  they  feared  God,  he  made  them 
houses"  (Exod.  i.  20,  21).  So  now  Elisha,  the  prophet  of  God,  bids  the  elders  resist 
the  king's  messenger — ^"hold  him  fast,"  and  not  let  him  execute  the  king's  commands. 
Again,  the  higher  powers,  the  great  council  of  the  Sanhedrin,  commanded  Peter  and 
John,  shortly  after  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  "  not  to  speak  at  all  nor  preach  in  the  Name 
of  Jesus "  (Acts  iv.  18) ;  to  whom  the  apostles  replied,  "  Whether  it  be  right  in  the 
eight  of  God  to  hearken  unto  you  more  than  unto  God,  judge  ye.  For  we  cannot  hut 
speak  the  things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard "  (Acts  iv.  19,  20).  Besistance  to 
lawful  authority,  when  it  commands  unlawful  acts,  is  an  important  part  of  a  Christian 
man's  duty,  and  ought  to  be  inculcated  just  as  much  as  obedience  to  lawful  authority 
when  it  commands  lawful  acta. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOEa. 

Vera.  1 — 7.— ^n  early  theological  college ;  its  life  and  lesions.  Our  theologlaal 
colleges,  where  young  men  are  trained  for  the  office  of  the  Christian  ministry,  do  not 
receive  from  the  Christian  public  that  attention  and  sympathy  which  they  deserve. 
More  interest  ought  to  be  taken  in  education  generally.  The  Church  should  show 
more  interest  in  Sunday-school  work.  If  office-hearers  and  parents  in  every  Christian 
land  would  visit  the  Sunday  school  occasionally,  and  hear  the  children  repeat  their 
lessons  and  sing  their  hymns,  it  would  do  themselves  good,  and  it  would  be  a  great 
encouragement  to  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  important  work  of  Sunday-school 
teaching.  The  work  of  our  theological  colleges  is  to  a  great  extent  different  from  that 
of  other  places  of  education.  The  very  nature  of  the  studies  is  such  that  the  general 
public  could  not  be  expected  to  take  much  interest  in  them.  But  there  are  other  ways 
of  showing  an  interest  in  our  colleges  besides  actually  entering  a  college  class-room,  or 
listening  to  a  professor's  lecture.  Occasionally,  a  rich  member  of  the  Chiu-ch  leaves  a 
considerable  sum  to  found  a  scholarship  or  a  bursary ;  but  how  little  is  done  by  the 
members  of  the  Church  generally  1  Yet  all  the  members  of  the  Church  are  interested 
in  having  not  only  a  godly,  but  also  a  well-educated  ministry. 

L  Thebe  was  industbt  in  that  colleob.  These  students  in  Elisha's  college  knew 
how  to  work,  and  they  were  not  above  doing  their  own  work.  They  had  not  reached 
that  high  state  of  civilization  when  manual  labour  is  considered  a  disgrace.  Their 
house,  which  was  college  and  students'  residence  all  in  one,  had  become  too  small  for 
them.  So  they  said  to  Elisha  one  day,  "Let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  unto  Jordan,  and 
take  thence  every  man  a  beam,  and  let  us  make  us  a  place  there,  where  we  may  dwell." 
It  was  an  enactment  of  the  Jewish  religion  that  every  boy,  no  matter  what  hia 
position,  should  be  taught  some  handicraft.  The  Jewish  Talmud  says,  "What  ia 
commanded  of  a  father  toward  his  son  ?  To  circumcise  him,  to  teach  him  the  Law, 
and  to  teach  him  a  trade."  Thus  we  find  that  the  Apostle  Paul,  who  had  sat  at  the 
feet  of  Gamaliel,  and  was  a  distinguished  scholar,  was  also  a  tentmaker.  Even  when 
»  preacher  of  the  gospel,  he  laboured  with  his  own  hands  for  hii  support.  It  is  not 
generally  the  custom  now  for  ministers  of  the  gospel  to  follow  any  other  calling.  It 
is  found  more  convenient  that  they  should  devote  themselves  entirely  to  the  work  of 
the  miniitiy,  for  all  men  have  not  the  genius  of  the  Apostle  FauL  It  is  true  that 
the  missionaries  of  certain  Missionary  Soisietiea  all  learn  a  trade,  and  most  of  them 

n.  UNOS.  K 


130  THE  SECOND  BOOK  Of  THB  KINGS.         too.  vi.  1—31 

■upport  themselves  by  their  own  exertions  at  farming  or  other  work.  But  this  also 
has  been  found  very  undesirable,  and  it  has  been  under  serious  consideration  to 
abandon  the  custom  altogether.  But  whether  they  engage  in  manual  labour  or  not, 
all  miDisters  and  all  students  for  the  ministry  should  be,  as  these  students  in  Elisba's 
t^me  were,  industrious  in  their  work.  In  whatever  calling  we  are  engaged,  let  ui 
cultivate  habits  of  industry.  Let  us  remember  the  apostle's  injunction  to  be  "  diligen  t 
in  business,  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord." 

II.  There  was  discipline  in  that  collgqi.  These  young  students,  excellent  and 
well-conduced  as  they  no  doubt  were,  did  not  think  they  might  do  as  they  liked 
or  go  where  they  liked.  They  came  to  Elisha,  and  asked  his  consent  to  their  proposal. 
And  so  it  should  be  in  all  the  relationships  of  life.  "  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law." 
There  should  be  discipline  in  the  family,  discipline  in  the  Church,  discipline  in  the 
Sunday  school,  discipline  in  the  nation,  and  regard  for  constituted  authority.  Dr. 
Arnold  of  Bugby  once  said  to  his  assembled  scholars,  when  there  had  been  some  disorder 
in  tlie  school,  and  he  had  expelled  several  boys,  "  It  is  not  necessary  that  this  should 
be  a  school  of  three  hundred,  or  of  one  hundred,  or  of  fifty  boys ;  but  it  is  necessary 
that  it  should  be  a  school  of  Christian  gentlemen."  No  wonder  there  is  disregard  for 
authority  in  the  nation  when  it  is  not  properly  taught  or  insisted  on  in  the  home. 
The  Ghristiaa  Church  should  be  a  model  of  order.  Order  should  characterize 
its  services,  its  management,  its  work.  "Let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in 
order." 

III.  There  was  kindness  in  that  coilegis.  What  pleasant  and  brotherly 
relations  between  the  prophet  and  his  pupils  I  He  could  be  stem  with  the  haughty 
Naaman ;  he  could  severely  rebuke  the  covetous,  lying  Gehazi ;  but  he  knew  how  to 
unbend  among  his  innocent-hearted  students.  He  had  evidently  already  won  their 
affections.  Jt  was  a  good  sign  of  both  him  and  them  that  they  asked  him  to  accompany 
them.  And  now  he  shows  his  kindly  nature  once  more  by  going  with  them  at  their 
request.  So  it  ought  to  be  with  all  Christians.  We  hardly  think  enough  of  Christ's 
command  that  we  should  love  one  another.  What  friendly  relations  there  should  be 
between  professors  and  students,  between  ministers  and  their  people,  between  parents 
and  children,  between  teachers  and  scholars,  between  employers  and  employed,  between 
masters  and  servants  1  Authority  is  never  weakened  by  kindness.  Some  employers, 
some  teachers,  seem  to  think  it  adds  to  their  dignity  and  to  then-  influence  to  be  stern 
to  those  beneath  them.  They  make  a  great  mistake.  The  most  respected  professors 
are  those  who  treat  their  students  as  brothers,  and  not  as  inferiors.  The  most  respected 
employers  are  those  who  are  kind  and  courteous  and  considerate  to  those  in  their 
employment.  Kindness  does  not  weaken  influence ;  it  increases  it.  Oh  1  to  be  filled 
with  the  spirit  of  Christ,  who  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon  himself 
the  form  of  a  servant.    Kindness  and  humility  are  twin  sisters. 

IV.  There  was  growth  in  that  oolleob.  Under  the  influence  of  snch  a  teacher 
as  Elisha,  the  number  of  students  increased  so  much  that  the  place  became  too  small 
for  them,  and  it  was  necessary  for  them  to  build  a  new  school  of  the  prophets.  Let 
me  see  growth  in  a  Church  and  I  shall  believe  in  its  life.  A  stone  does  not  grow, 
because  it  has  no  life.  A  tree  grows,  because  there  is  life  in  it.  If  you  see  that  a  tree 
has  ceased  to  grow,  to  put  forth  new  leaves  in  the  spring-time,  you  know  that  it  is 
dead.  A  Church  that  is  not  growing  must  be  a  lifeless  Church,  If  you  are  a  living 
Christian,  let  the  signs  of  it  be  manifest  in  the  growth  of  your  Christian  graces. 

y.  The  peesenoe  of  God  was  there.  This  was  shown  in  the  miracle  which  Elisha 
wrought  of  causing  the  iron  to  swim.  It  was  not  by  his  own  power.  He  was  only 
the  instrument  in  the  hand  of  God,  and  God  owned  his  efibrts,  for  he  was  engaged  in 
God's  work.  This  last  feature  of  that  theological  college  was  the  best  of  alL  God's 
presence  was  in  the  midst  of  it.  Without  that,  of  what  use  would  have  been  their 
industry  or  their  discipline?  Without  that,  would  there  have  been  such  bonds  of 
kindness  ?  Without  that,  would  there  have  been  such  evidences  of  growth  ?  "  Excspl 
the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it."  Without  that,  what  • 
mockery  it  would  have  been  for  them  to  have  looked  forward  to  be  the  teachers  of 
others  in  the  truths  of  religion !  What  a  mockery  for  any  man  to  enter  a  pulpit  and 
speak  about  the  love  of  Jesus,  who  is  himself  a  stranger  to  that  love!  What  a 
atockery  for  any  man  to  speak  about  the  grace  of  God,  who  has  never  experienced  it 


«k.  n.  1—^.]         THiS  SEOOnD  £00&  Oif  TB]^  KINGS.  13l 

in  Mr  own  heart  and  life!  The  late  Sev.  Dr.  Oooke  of  Belfast  once  said  that  "m 
*duccUed  miniairy  ia  desirable,  but  a  converted  ministry  i»  essential" — 0.  H.  I. 

Yen.  8—16. — OocFa  presence  with  his  people.  There  haa  been  «  sudden  change  in 
the  hoTizon  of  Elisha's  life.  From  the  quiet  work  of  cutting  down  trees  and  build- 
ing a  college,  he  is  suddenly  called  upon  to  stand  a  siege  from  a  Syrian  army. 
These  changes  do  come  in  the  lives  of  most  of  us.  Health  suddenly  changes  into 
•icknesB.  Friendship  suddenly  changes  into  hostility.  Wealth  suddenly  changes  into 
poverty.  Such  changes  will  come  in  the  life  of  the  believer  and  in  the  history  of 
the  Church  of  God.  At  one  time  all  seems  bright ;  the  next  moment  the  prospect 
seems  dark  and  discouraging.  It  is  well  to  be  prepared  tor  such  changes  when 
they  come.  The  true  servant  of  God  will  heed  them  very  little.  He  lives  not  under, 
but  aboTfl^  the  things  of  earth. 

"As  some  tall  cliff  that  lifts  its  awful  foim, 
Swells  from  the  vale,  and  midway  oleavea  the  storm. 
Though  round  its  breast  the  rolling  clouds  are  spread. 
Eternal  sunshine  settles  on  its  head." 

Bo  It  was  with  Elisha.  Wherever  you  iind  him,  he  always  seems  the  same.  On  the 
present  occasion  the  circumstances  were  such  as  to  strike  terror  to  the  stoutest  heart. 
Misha's  servant  trembled  at  the  sight  that  met  him  when  he  rose  that  morning  and 
looked  forth  from  the  city  walls.  A  mighty  host,  with  horses  and  chariots,  encom- 
passed the  city  round  about.  It  was  an  unexpected  attack.  No  forces  were  within 
the  city  to  defend  it  against  such  a  mighty  host.  Elisha  was  the  only  one  whom  the 
besieging  army  wanted.  In  the  desire  for  self-preservation,  it  was  not  unlikely  that 
the  inhabitants  of  Dothan  might  give  him  up  to  the  enemy,  and  thus  turn  away  the 
invader  from  their  gates.  From  a  human  point  of  view  it  was  no  wonder  that  Elisha's 
servant  said, »  Alas,  my  master  1  how  shall  we  do  ?  "  There  was  no  terror  in  Elisha's 
face,  no  panic  in  his  heart,  at  this  startling  news.  What  calmness,  what  courage, 
what  sublime  confidence  there  is  in  that  answer  of  his,  "Fear  not :  for  they  that  be 
with  us  are  more  than  they  that  be  with  them  I "  And  what  was  the  secret  of  his  con- 
fideneet  The  one  reason  of  Elisha's  confidence  and  calm  was  that  God's  presence  was 
with  him.  What  a  beautiful  ful61ment  of  that  promise, "  Thou  shalt  hide  them  in  the 
secret  of  thy  presence  from  the  pride  of  man ;  thou  shalt  keep  them  secretly  in  a 
pavilion  from  the  strife  of  tongues  "J    We  learn  from  this  story — 

I.  God's  pbesbnob  with  his  pboplb  is  hot  gbnebally  realized  by  their  bnemibs. 
It  was  so  on  the  occasion  before  us.  The  King  of  Syria  commenced  another  war  against 
IsraeL  He  held,  as  we  should  say,  a  council  of  war,  and  consulted  with  his  generals 
concerning  the  arrangements  for  the  campaign.  He  thought,  by  skilful  strategy,  to 
take  the  King  of  Israel  unawares.  But  all  his  plans  and  manoeuvres  were  thwarted  in 
some  mysterious  way.  The  King  of  Israel  seemed  to  know  all  his  movements  with 
more  certainty  than  a  clever  player  at  a  game  of  skill  might  anticipate  the  moves  of  his 
opponent.  Several  times  in  this  way  the  King  of  Israel  saved  himself.  At  last  the  King 
of  Syria  began  to  be  suspicious.  There  must  be  a  traitor  in  the  camp.  Some  of  those 
enjoying  the  king's  confidence  must  be  revealing  his  plans  to  the  enemy.  And  so  he 
asks, "  Will  ye  not  show  me  which  of  us  is  for  the  King  of  Israel  ?  "  _  The  King  of  Syria 
was  an  able  general ;  but  like  another  great  general  of  modem  times.  Napoleon  the 
Great,  there  were  some  forces  that  he  did  not  take  sufficient  account  o£  The  race  is  not 
always  to  the  swift,  nor  the  battle  to  the  strong.  There  are  other  things  than  military 
skill  and  big  battalions  to  be  thought  of  in  going  forth  to  battle.  When  Edward,  the 
English  king,  came  forth  to  view  the  Scottish  troops  before  the  battle  of  Bannookburn, 
he  was  astonished  at  the  small  force  waiting  on  foot  to  receive  the  attack  of  his  mighty 
army.  But  they  were  putting  their  trust  in  the  God  of  battles,  and  presently  he  saw 
the  unusual  sight  of  the  whole  Scottish  army,  as  their  custom  was,  kneeling  down  and 
offerin"  a  short  prayer  to  God.  "  Believe  me,"  said  the  general  who  rode  by  his  side, 
"  yon  men  will  win  or  die,"  Of  that  unseen  Power,  in  whose  hands  are  the  issues  of 
battle,  the  Syrian  king  took  no  account.  Ee  did  not  realize  that  God's  presence  wa$ 
tvt'M  hie  feopU.  Is  not  this  the  mistake  which  the  enemies  of  God's  people  have  made 
in  all  ages?     It  was  the  mistake  of  the  persecutors  and  oppressors  of  IsraeL     It  was 


132  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.vi.1-3S 

the  mistake  of  those  who  persecuted  the  Keformers  of  England,  Scotland,  France, 
and  Switzerland.  It  was  the  mistake  which  Pharaoh  made  when  he  refused  to  let  tbe 
children  of  Israel  go.  It  was  the  mistake  which  Herod  made  when  he  thought  to 
crush  the  new  kingdom  that  was  yet  to  arise,  by  slaughtering  the  helpless  babes  in 
Bethlehem  and  its  neighbourhood.  It  was  the  mistake  which  Nero  made  in  his  perse- 
cutions of  the  Christians  at  Borne.  It  was  the  mistake  which  Louis  XIV.  of  France 
made  when  he  revoked  the  famous  Edict  of  Nantes.  It  is  the  mistake  which  the  Boman 
Curia  has  made  in  all  ages,  in  thinking  to  crush  out  civil  and  religious  liberty  by 
the  tortures  of  the  Inquisition,  by  the  martyrdoms  of  the  scaffold  and  the  stake,  by  the 
massacres  in  the  Waldensian  valley,  by  the  autos-dorfe  of  Spain.  The  same  thing  may 
he  said  of  the  unbeliever  and  the  sceptic.  They  have  not  realized  that  the  presence  of 
the  living  God  is  with  his  Church  and  in  the  midst  of  her,  and  that  he^  in  hig  own  way 
and  in  his  own  time,  can  vindicate  his  own  truth.  How  often,  during  these  eighteen 
hundred  years,  has  the  unbeliever  exulted  in  what  he  has  called  the  overthrow  of 
Christianity!  and  yet  how  vain  and  foolish  the  boast  has  proved  to  bel  Voltaire 
boasted  that  with  one  hand  he  would  overthrow  the  Christianity  which  it  had  required 
twelve  apostles  to  build  up.  "  At  this  day,  the  press  which  he  employed  at  Femey  to 
print  his  blasphemies  is  actually  employed  at  Geneva  in  printing  the  Holy  Scriptures." 
May  we  not  still  say,  as  we  think  of  the  enemies  of  the  truth,  the  enemies  of  virtue, 
the  enemies  of  religion,  and  as  we  listen  to  their  audacious  boasts,  "  He  that  sitteth 
in  the  heavens  shall  laugh ;  the  Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision"? 

II.  God's  peesenoe  with  his  people  is  not  realized  by  uakt  amongst  theu- 
SELVES.  Elisha's  servant,  no  doubt,  believed  in  God.  If  any  one  had  denied  God's 
presence  with  his  people,  he  would  doubtless  have  fiim.ly  asserted  it  as  his  belief.  Yet 
when  the  time  came  to  put  his  belief  to  a  practical  test,  we  see  how  slight  a  hold  it 
had  taken  of  him.  When  he  went  forth  in  the  morning  and  saw  the  horses  and 
chariots  and  the  mighty  host  encompassing  the  city  round  about,  he  said  to  Elisha, 
"Alas,  my  master  I  how  shall  we  do?"  Do  you  never  feel  a  sensation  like  Elisha's 
servant  ?  You  believe  you  are  a  child  of  Ghxl,  you  believe  that  God  takes  care  of  his 
people,  yet  perhaps  there  are  times  when  you  are  unduly  anxious  about  your  business, 
and  allow  yourself  to  be  weighed  down  by  foolish  and  causeless  fears.  How  many  are 
alarmed  by  the  thought  of  sickness  in  themselves  or  in  their  families,  and  nervously 
ask,  "  What  shall  we  do  ?  "  Oh  that  we  would  learn  to  realize  God's  presence  with  us  I 
"  My  times  are  in  thy  hand."  In  the  same  way,  how  many  professing  Christians  are 
there  who  do  not  sufficiently  realize  Ood^s  presence  in  his  Church  I  How  much  more 
active  we  should  be,  how  much  more  earnest  in  Christian  work,  if  we  realized  that  God 
is  working  with  us!  With  what  power  a  minister  ought  to  preach  if  he  could  only 
remember  to  say  with  John  the  Baptist,  "  There  cometh  One  mightier  than  I  after 
me  " !  Then  how  many  are  easily  discouraged  hy  difficulties.  Some  are  always  saying 
when  they  see  a  difficulty  in  the  way,  "What  sMl  we  do?"  "Who  will  roll  us 
away  the  stone  ?  "  Some  are  always  imagining  difficulties  and  foreseeing  them  at  the 
very  beginning  of  a  work.  This  spirit  of  timidity,  of  fear,  is  a  great  hindrance  in 
Christian  work.  Half-belief  is  almost  as  bad  as  no  belief,  in  this  respect.  Half-bearted- 
nesB  in  religious  work  is  one  of  the  greatest  hindrances  to  its  success.  In  this,  as  in 
everything  else,  the  maxim  holds  good,  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it 
with  thy  might."  The  half-hearted  ten  out  of  the  twelve  spies  sent  to  view  the 
pi'omised  land  lightened  the  Israelites  from  going  up,  and  nearly  caused  God,  in 
his  righteous  an^er  at  their  unbelief,  to  disinherit  them  altogether.  The  half-hearted 
inhabitants  of  Oalilee  prevented  the  blessing  of  the  Saviour  of  men  resting  upon  them, 
for  we  read  that  "  he  did  not  many  mighty  works  there  because  of  their  unbelief." 
The  half-hearted  followers  of  Christopher  Colurnbus  nearly  prevented  him  from  dis- 
covering America.  There  is  no  room  for  half-heartedness  in  religion.  There  is  a  loud 
call  for  decision  and  firmness  both  in  belief  and  in  conduct. 

III.  God's  pbesbnce  with  hib  people  is  always  bealized  by  hib  tbttb  bbevaiits. 
The  King  of  Syria  did  not  realize  that  God's  presence  was  with  his  people,  and  he  was 
at  his  wits'  end  to  know  how  to  circumvent  them.  Elisha's  servant  did  not  realize 
that  God's  presence  was  with  himself  and  his  master ;  and  how  panic-stricken  he  was  at 
the  danger  that  seemed  to  threaten  them !  But  there  was  one  man  for  whom  the  armies 
of  the  King  of  Syria  had  no  terror,  to  whom  difficulties  brought  no  dismay,  and  thai  wa« 


ca.  TL 1—33.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  133 

the  man  who  lived  near  to  God,  and  realized  that  God  was  near  to  Mm.  Hence  It  li 
that  we  find  Elisba  saying,  "  Fear  not :  for  they  that  be  with  us  are  more  than  they 
that  be  with  them."  So  it  has  been  with  God's  true  servants  ia  all  ages.  They  bare 
realized  that  God's  presence  was  with  them,  and  in  the  strength  of  that  one  idea  they 
have  surmounted  the  greatest  difficulties,  braved  the  most  terrible  dangers,  met  fear- 
lessly the  most  overwhelming  opposition,  and  accomplished  tasks  that  to  the  worldly 
eye  seemed  almost  incredible.  Look  at  Abraham.  He  went  forth  from  hia  native 
land,  "  not  knowing  whither  he  went."  And  why?  Because  he  knew  that  God  was 
with  him.  Look  at  Nehemiah.  An  exile  from  his  native  land,  he  undertook  'the 
wonderful  enterprise  of  rebuilding  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  He  had  plenty  of  opposi- 
tion. But  he  went  on  with  his  work  in  spite  of  the  ridicule  and  attacks  of  Sanballat 
and  his  companions.  And  what  was  the  secret  of  his  determination  and  perseverance  ? 
You  have  it  in  his  answer  to  Sanballat,  "  The  God  of  heaven,  he  will  prosper  us  ; 
therefore  we  his  servants  will  arise  and  build."  This  year  (1888)  is  the  anniversary  of 
two  great  events  in  British  history — two  great  deliverances  which  illustrate  in  a  mar- 
vellous way  God's  presence  with  his  people.  It  is  the  three  hundredth  anniversary  of 
the  dereat  of  the  Spanish  Armada,  which  took  place  in  1588.  Tet  it  was  not  English 
ships  or  English  power  that  really  turned  away  that  invasion  from  our  shores ;  but  the 
winds  and  waves  of  him  who  holdeth  the  sea  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand.  It  is  also  the 
two  hundredth  anniversary  of  the  revolution  of  1688.  And  while  we  should  never  use 
such  anniversaries  as  the  occasion  of  displaying  a  vindictive  or  unchristian  spirit  towards 
those  who  differ  from  us,  yet  in  the  interests  of  truth,  in  the  interests  of  true  Anglicanism, 
in  the  interests  of  civil  and  religious  liberty,  it  is  most  desirable  that  these  two  great 
events  should  be  rightly  and  piously  commemorated.  One  thing  they  illustrate  very 
clearly,  and  that  is,  that  however  dark  the  prospects  of  God's  people  seem  to  be,  and 
however  overwhelming  seem  the  forces  arrayed  against  them,  he  is  able  to  banish  eveiy 
cloud  and  to  give  them  the  victory  over  all  their  enemies. 

**  God  ia  onr  Refuge  and  our  Strength, 
In  straits  a  present  Aid; 
Therefore,  although  the  earth  remove^ 
We  will  not  be  afraid." 

One  or  two  practical  applications.  1.  It  is  well  to  be  on  6o^s  side.  In  a  time  of 
danger  or  of  trouble,  a  great  many  people  expect  God  to  be  on  their  side,  who  have 
never  taken  any  pains  to  show  themselves  on  his  side.  If  you  want  to  have  the 
unspeakable  advantage  of  God's  presence  with  you  in  your  time  of  di£BcuIty  or  danger, 
the  most  important  question  you  could  now  ask  yourself  is,  "Am  I  on  God's  side?" 
2.  A  word  to  those  who  are  God's  people.  Undertake  great  things  for  God.  Bemember 
that  you  have  unlimited  resources  at  your  command.  We  should  be  ashamed  of  how 
little  we  are  attempting  to  do  for  God,  when  we  have  the  inexhaustible  treasury  of 
Divine  grace  to  help  us.  3.  Never  suffer  yowrs^f  to  be  daunted  or  depressed  by  diffi- 
culties.  The  greater  the  difficulties,  the  greater  should  be  the  determination  of  we 
Christian.  "  Let  courage  rise  with  danger. '  Luther  sang  his  most  stirring  songs  of 
praise  and  hope  and  courage  in  the  darkest  moments  of  his  life.  Those  who  have  God 
with  them  can  afford  to  sing  amid  the  darkness.— '0.  H.  L 

Vers.  17 — 23. — Eyes  closed,  and  eyes  opened.  I.  Eyes  closed.  1.  7%e  young  man's 
eyes  were  closed.  He  did  not  see  the  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  that  were  round  about 
Elisha.  He  did  not  realize  that  deliverance  was  at  hand.  How  many  like  him  are 
blind  to  the  power  of  God,  to  the  providences  of  God  I  How  many  are  quick  to  see 
anything  that  concerns  their  temporal  advantage,  but  slow  to  see  that  which  concerns 
their  immortal  souls !  How  many  see  no  beauty  in  Christ  I  2.  2%e  Syrian^  eyes  were 
dosed.  This  was  a  judicial  act  of  God  in  response  to  Elisha's  prayer.  So  there  is  a 
spiritual  judicial  blindness.  "  Seeing  they  diall  see,  but  not  perceive ;  hearing  they 
ehall  hear,  but  shall  not  understand."  It  is  a  spiritual  law  which  has  its  analogies  in 
the  natural  world.  If  we  neglect  to  use  any  of  our  bodily  powers,  the  power  itself  is 
■oon  lost.  Similarly,  mental  or  spiritual  powers,  if  neglected,  will  soon  become  useless. 
Let  ns  be  careful  that  we  use  the  privileges  and  opportunities  and  talents  which  God 
h  as  given  iu,  lest  they  be  taken  from  us  utogether.   "  To  him  that  hath  ihall  be  giTen/* 


lU  tHE  SSOOKO  BOOK  09  THlB  EINaS.        [oh.  vl  t-ti, 

that  is,  to  Mm  that  hath  made  a  good  nse  of  his  talenti ;  "  and  from  him  that  hath  not" 
— ^from  him  that  hag  go  neglectMl  hig  talents  that  they  ara  piactically  not  ki$ — "  tball 
be  taken  away  even  that  wMch  he  bath." 

II.  Eteb  ofbned.  1.  The  Syrians'  eyes  were  opened  to  tee  their  true  eondiHon. 
Instead  of  being  a  victorious  army,  vrith  Klisha  a  captive  in  their  hands,  they  find  that 
he  has  them  in  his  power,  and  has  led  them  into  the  midst  of  Samaria  and  into  the 
presence  of  the  King  of  Israel.  They  then  saw  how  defenceless  and  how  helpless  they 
were.  That  is  the  first  step  in  the  path  of  salvation.  The  first  step  for  a  sinner  is  to 
see  bis  need.  So  with  Bunyan'g  pilgrim.  The  first  thought  that  led  him  to  set  ont 
on  his  journey  was  the  feeling  of  bis  utter  helplessness.  "  Sir,  I  perceive  by  the  book 
in  my  hand  that  I  am  condemned  to  die,  and  after  that  to  come  to  judgment  (Heb. 
ix.  27) ;  and  I  find  that  I  am  not  willing  to  do  the  first  fJob  xvi.  21),  nor  able 
to  do  the  second  (Ezek.  xxii.  14)."  "  Lord,  show  me  myself."  2.  The  young  man's 
eyes  were  opened  to  see  that  deliverance  was  at  hand.  "  The  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of 
the  young  man ;  and  be  saw  :  and,  behold,  the  mountain  was  full  of  horses  and  ehiuiots 
of  fire  round  about  Elisha."  This  is  the  second  step  in  the  sinner's  salvation.  Having 
seen  his  need,  he  next  needs  to  see  the  Saviour.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world! "  Have  you  seen  your  trus  condition,  your  f^tiul 
need?    Have  you  seen  your  need  of  Jesus  as  your  Saviour? 

■*  When  free  grace  awoke  me,  by  light  from  on  high, 
Then  legal  fears  shook  me,  I  trembled  to  die; 
Ko  refage,  no  safety  in  self  could  I  see- 
Jehovah  Tsidkenu  my  Saviour  must  ba 

*  Hy  terrors  all  vanished  before  the  sweet  Name; 
Hy  guilty  fears  banished,  with  boldness  I  cam* 
To  drink  at  the  fountain,  life-giving  and  free — 
Jehovah  Tsidkenu  is  all  things  to  me." 

nL  The  poweb  of  frateb.  Elisha's  prayers  prevailed  three  times  in  this  short 
narrative.  There  may  he  some  one  known  tons  whose  eyes  are  closed,  who  is  spiritually 
blind.  Have  we  brought  the  case  to  God  in  prayer  ?  Is  it  a  wandering  son ?  "Lord, 
I  pray  thee,  open  his  eyes,  that  he  may  see.  Is  it  a  wayward  ^ughter?  a  godless 
friend  ?    We  may  not  reach  them  by  our  words ;  hut  we  can  reach  them  by  our  prayers. 

lY.  The  poweb  of  Divine  obaci;.  Elisha  did  not  exult  in  his  triumph  over  his 
enemies.  He  did  not  take  advantage  of  their  helplessness.  They  had  come  to  take 
him  captive,  perhaps  to  take  away  his  life ;  hut  he  heaps  coals  of  fire  on  their  head. 
The  King  of  Israel  wanted  to  smite  them.  But  Elisha  reminds  him  (according  to  one 
view)  that  it  was  not  customary  to  smito  even  captives  taken  in  war :  how  much  less 
should  he  smite  those  who  had  been  put  within  his  power,  not  by  any  exertions  of  his 
own,  but  by  the  miraculous  interposition  of  God  I  On  the  contrary,  Elisha  recommends 
that  they  should  be  well  treated  and  well  fed.  This  was  done.  And  what  was  the 
consequence?  "So  the  bands  of  Syria  came.no  more  into  the  land  of  Israel."  Uiis 
little  act  of  kindness  had  turned  away  their  wrath.  What  an  example  for  us  to 
imitate  toward  those  who  treat  us  ill  I  "Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  eril 
with  good."— 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  24 — 33. — Samaria  besieged.  L  A  onrr  iir  dibtbess.  Once  more  the  people 
of  Samaria  were  in  great  siraits.  A  besieging  army  was  at  their  gates,  and,  most  terrible 
of  all,  the  horrors  of  famine  were  within  their  walls.  They  were  reduced  to  the  greatest 
extremities.  The  women  were  actually  beginning  to  cook  and  eat  their  own  children. 
Whichever  way  they  looked,  the  prospect  was  dark.  To  open  the  gates  to  the  Syrians 
meant  death  or  captivity.  And  the  longer  they  remained  within  ^eir  walls,  the  more 
certainly  death  and  starvation  stared  them  in  the  face.  See  here  the  evil  result  of 
forsaking  Ood.  To  such  extremities  they  had  brought  themselves  by  their  own  sins. 
They  had  forsaken  the  living  God,  and  now  their  false  gods  were  not  able  to  help  them 
in  the  day  of  their  calaroity.  It  is  an  evil  day  in  a  man's  history  when  he  turns  kis 
back  upon  God's  Word,  upon  God's  commandments,  upon  God's  Son.  As  it  often 
happens,  their  calamities  had  hardened  their  hearts  and  blinded  their  eyes.    There  wa( 


OH.  VI.  1—33.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OE*  THE  SINQS.  136 

one  man  in  their  midst  who  had  often  before  proved  a  wise  counsellor  and  M«uL  Thtif 
had  Elisha,  the  man  of  God,  in  their  city — the  man  who,  by  counselling  them  to  mako 
the  valley  full  of  ditches,  bad  delivered  the  Moabites  into  their  hands ;  the  man,  too^ 
who  had  revealed  Bunhadad's  secrets,  and  smitten  the  Syrian  army  with  blindness. 
But  they  had  forgotten  all  that.  Instead  of  looking  to  Elisha  for  guidance  or  help, 
they  blame  him  for  all  their  troubles.  How  often  does  it  happen  that,  when  people 
get  into  difficulties,  they  throw  the  blame  upon  others  I  When  troubles  and 
difBculties  come  upon  us,  our  first  business  should  be  to  search  our  own  hearts  and 
lives,  and  see  whether  the-trouble  may  not  be  of  our  own  causing. 

II.  A  PBOPHET  IN  DANGKB.  The  king  was  a  partaker  in  the  wickedness  of  the  people. 
He  encouraged  the  prevailing  idolatry.  Now  he  shares  their  suffering.  But  he  never 
thinks  of  looking  to  God  for  deliverance.  He  never  thinks  of  humbling  himself  before 
God,  and  confessing  his  sins.  On  the  contrary,  he  shows  a  disposition  to  cast  the  blame 
both  on  God  and  on  his  prophet.  When  the  poor  woman  in  her  hunger  and  distress 
called  to  him  for  help, he  answered,  "If  the  Lord  do  not  help  thee,  whence  shall  I  help 
thee?  out  of  the  barufioor,  or  out  of  the  winepress?"  Though  he  wore  sackcloth,  the 
outward  sign  of  mourning  or  penitence,  there  was  no  sign  of  inward  penitence  or 
humility  in  his  heart.  How  blind  and  infatuated  he  is  in  his  anger  and  defiance! 
He  threatens  to  take  away  the  prophet's  life.  Jezebel  had  once  said  to  Elijah,  "  So 
let  the  gods  do  to  me  and  more  also,  if  I  make  not  thy  life  as  the  life  of  one  of  them 
[the  prophets  whom  she  had  slain]  by  to-morrow  about  this  time."  So  here  Jehoram 
says,  "  God  do  so  and  more  also  to  me,  if  the  head  of  Elisha  the  son  of  Shaphat  shall 
stand  on  him  this  day."  Even  Jezebel's  threat  had  apparently  more  reason  for  it 
than  Jehoram's.  Elijah  had  undoubtedly  slain  the  prophets  of  Baal.  But  in  this  case 
Elisha  was  innocent  of  any  charge.  Jehoram  quite  gratuitously  holds  him  responsible 
for  the  famine  in  Samaria,  and  threatens  to  take  away  his  life.  But  man  proposes  and 
God  disposes.  Although  Elisha  is  in  danger,  he  is  never  in  dismay.  When  the 
king's  messenger  came  to  take  off  his  head,  Elisha  bade  the  elders  to  hold  the  mes- 
senger fast  at  the  door  till  the  king  himself,  who  was  close  behind,  should  arrive. 
Elisha  had  had  dealings  with  Jehoram  before.  He  would  hear  his  sentence  from  the 
king  himself,  if  at  all.  Well  for  those  who,  like  Elisha,  live  near  to  God.  "  Serve 
the  Lord  in  fear,"  said  John  Knox  on  his  death-bed, "  and  the  flesh  will  not  fear  death." 
Dangers  do  not  distress  them;  death  brings  no  dismay.  "  Yea,  though  I  walk  through 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  evil :  for  thou  art  with  me;  thy  rod 
and  thy  staff  they  comfort  me."— -0.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 7. — A  Ohurchrextension  enterprise.  "And  the  sons  of  the  prophets  said 
unto  Elisha,  Behold  now,  the  place  where  we  dwell  with  thee  is  too  strait  for  us,"  etc. 
If  there  were  a  Church  in  Israel  at  all,  the  schools  of  the  prophets  undoubtedly  con- 
stituted a  part  of  that  Church.  They  were  a  communion  of  godly  men.  The  briof 
narrative,  therefore,  may  fairly  be  regarded  as  a  record  of  a  Church-extension  enterprise, 
and  as  such  four  things  are  observable — things  that  all  who  contemplate  such  enter- 
prises should  ponder  and  imitate. 

I.  This  Church-extension  enterprise  was  stimulated  by  the  fbinoiplk  of  gbowth. 
The  old  sphere  had  become  too  narrow  for  them,  they  had  outgrown  it.  "  And  the 
sons  of  the  prophets  said  unto  Elisha,  Behold  now,  the  place  where  we  dwell  with  thee 
is  too  strait  for  us."  The  numbers  who  came  to  listen  to  Elisha  and  the  increase  of 
students  required  greater  accommodation  than  the  whole  place  could  afford.  This  is  a 
principle  on  which  all  Church-extension,  should  proceed ;  but  in  these  modem  times  it  is 
sometimes  not  only  ignored,  but  outraged.  Although  statistics  show  that  the  churches 
»nd  chapels  in  England  fall  miserably  short  of  the  accommodation  necessary  for  the 
whole  population,  it  is  three  times  greater  than  is  required  for  the  number  of  attendants. 
On  all  sides  empty  churches  and  chapels  abound,  millions  of  money  contributed  for 
religious  purposes  lie  as  the  "one  talent,"  wrapped  in  a  napkin,  unused.  And  yet  still, 
alirost  every  religious  denomination  seems  to  feel  that  the  building  of  new  churches  is 
its  grand  mission.  The  fact  is  that  church-building  has,  in  many  cases,  become  a 
business  8^)eculation.  One  church  should  grow  out  of  another ;  the  gnun  of  mustard 
seed  will  create  its  own  organism,  multiply  its  own  branches,  and  propagate  its  vitality. 

IL  This  Church-extension  enterprise  was  conduoted  in  a  uaklt  kannkb.    1.  Tht 


186  THE  SEGOKB  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [qb.  ti.  1— S3. 

hest  counsel  tnat  tought  he/ore  a  ttep  wot  taken.  These  sons  of  the  prophets  went  to 
Elisha  and  said,  "  Let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  unto  Jordan."  Though  they  were  youn<» 
perhaps  with  all  the  stirring  impulses  of  youth,  they  were  conscious  of  their  need  of 
counsel,  and  they  sought  it.  In  these  modern  times  in  England — we  speak  from  exten- 
sive experience— churches  and  chapels  are  often  huilt  from  ignorant  zeal  and  a  spirit 
of  rivalry.  How  unmanly  is  this!  2.  Each  man  set  to  honest  work  in  the  matter 
"  Let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  unto  Jordan,  and  take  thence  every  man  a  heam  and  let  ui 
make  us  a  place  there,  where  we  may  dweU."  Matthew  Henry  quaintly  says.  «  When 
they  wanted  room  they  did  not  speak  of  sending  for  cedars,  and  maible  stones,  and 
curious  artificers  hut  only  of  getting  every  man  a  beam,  to  run  up  a  plain  hit  or 
cottage  with.  Each  man.  it  would  seem,  felled  his  beam,  carried  and  adjusted  it. 
How  right,  manly,  and  honest  all  thisl  They  never  thought  of  putting  up  a  amnd 
place  at  other  people's  expense.  Ah  me  1  how  far  we  are  fallen  in  spirit  from  them  I 
io  erect  modern  churches  and  chapels,  what  means  do  we  use?  Pawning  entreaties 
addressed  to  moneyed  ignorance  and  stupidity,  bazaars  with  their  questionable  pro- 
ceduies,  their  displays,  their  raffles,  and  their  flirtations. 
«  ¥h  ■^^"  Church-extension  enterprise  kncountebbd  dipfioultibs  unbxpeotbd. 

And  when  they  came  to  Jordan,  they  cut  down  wood.  But  as  one  was  fellin'^  a 
beam,  the  axe-head  fell  into  the  water :  and  he  cried,  and  said,  Alas,  master!  for  it  was 

J  1  V  J  ^^  *'''*  distress  of  the  woodman  ?  Was  it  because  the  axe  was  borrowed 
and  he  had  not  the  wherewith  to  pay,  or  because  he  was  checked  in  his  operation? 
Perhaps  both  were  reasons  for  his  distress.  The  former  I  trow  the  greater.  In  all 
worthy  enterprises  on  this  earth  diflSculties  crop  up  unawares.  Perhaps  the  hest 
enterprises  encounter  the  greatest  difficulties.  "  The  race  is  not  to  the  swift,  nor  the 
battle  to  the  strong."  But  difficulties  are  in  truth  blessings  in  disguise.  They 
challenge  the  courage  and  rouse  the  forces  of  the  worker.  They  bring  out  his  manhood. 
Tbey  are  to  the  true  worker  what  tempests  are  to  young  trees — they  deepen  the  roots 
and  strengthen  the  fibres.  Besides,  there  is  no  consciousness  of  virtue  in  doing  that 
which  involves  no  struggle. 

IV.  This  Church-extension  enterprise  obtained  sdpbbnatukai,  bblp  when  needed. 
When  the  man  who  had  lost  his  axe  was  crying  out  in  distress,  Elisha,  the  "  man  of 
God  said,  Where  fell  it?  And  he  showed  him  the  place.  And  he  cut  down  a  stick, 
and  cast  it  in  thither;  and  the  iron  did  swim.  Therefore  said  he.  Take  it  up  to  thee. 
And  he  put  out  his  hand,  and  took  it."  Elisha  here,  by  raising  the  axe  and  making 
the  iron  swin,  overcame  a  law  of  nature — the  law  of  gravitation.  Up  to  this  point 
in  this  enterprise  there  does  not  seem  to  have  been  any  supernatural  interposition. 
They  prosecuted  their  journeying,  they  cut  down  the  timber,  they  carried  their  beams, 
all  by  their  own  natural  skill  and  force.  They  did  not  require  supernatural  aid.  But 
now  one  of  them  did,  and  it  came.  We  must  not  expect  any  special  power  from  heaven 
to  do  that  which  w  e  have  the  natural  force  to  accomplish  ourselves.  "  As  thy  day,  so 
thy  strength  shall  be."— D.  T. 

Vers.  8—23.— n«  King  of  Syria  and  Elisha.    "Then  the  King  of  Syria  warred 

against  Israel,    etc.     In  these  sixteen  verses  we  have  four  subjects  worth  looking  into 

wickeduess  thwarted,  timidity  dispelled,  supernatural  power  manifested,  and  revenge 

will Y^j'^^^'i'^®.^ ,  THWARTED.  The  King  of  Syria  had  determined  on  an  enterprise  of 
^„?^  ..  T  ^ickeilnesH.  He  had  made  all  arrangements,  fixid  on  the  place  for  his 
nn3'=»  „f  f^  Q  ■  ?.°^  *  P'*<=^  «''""  ^^  ™y  camp-"  But  Elisha  thwarted  the  bloody 
nrZwh«r»  t^  ^q"'"  ''"'!  ¥  informing  the  Israelitish  monarch,  Jehoram,  of  the  very 
thr™««w»  ^,^"T  '"'^  determined  to  encamp.  His  words  are,  "Beware  that 
to  tt-eToZt »  H  ■  "  ?-''"'^ '  .f"""  *>''^«'  *^«  Syrians  aJe  come  down."  The  king  attended 
wa^thldisanLinZn'r.^  ^''''i  ""^^^  ^"^'^^  t''^'^' °°'  "-^"^  ""^  t^i<=«-"  Terrible 
J^re  trouhledTr  tK,-n  '  ''/u  "^  "Jl^ST"^-  "  The  heart  of  the  King  of  Svria  was 
™?  «bow  ^«  „v  1.  .  '■'  ^""^  ¥  """ed  his  servants,  and  said  unto  them.  Will  ye 
N(L  mvCd  Okin°.."b,;/ w  ^''%^'°S°^I^^*«>'  And  one  of  his  servants  said. 
I8?^l'  Z  word,  thit^  V,n,^  .  l''^*^^  P,f°P^'  *'^»*  '»  ^^  I«fa«'.  tolleth  the  King  o\ 
Israel  the  words  that  thou  speakest  in  thy  bedchamber."  Observe  •  1  That  wicked 
m.a  «e  most  secretive  m  their  purposes.  "^It  would  seei  thTZ  i^^^^i^^ 


OH.  yi.  1— 33.J  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  137 

of  Syria's  bloody  enterprise  were  known  only  to  his  most  eonficlential  offieers,  and  that 
they  were  revealed  to  them  in  his  bedchamber.  There,  and  perhaps  there  only,  did  he 
detain  them,  and  perhaps  with  closed  doors  and  soft  whisperings.  Wicked  men,  in  order 
to  get  on  in  the  world,  are  bound  to  be  secretive.  And  the  more  wicked  they  are,  the  more 
necessary  for  them  is  this  secretlreness.  Were  dishonest  doctors,  lawyers,  tradesmen, 
merchants,  statesmen,  to  be  open  and  candid,  revealing  all  that  is  nefarious  in  their 
aims,  they  would  fall  into  poverty  and  universal  contempt.  The  good  alone  can  afibrd 
to  be  open  and  candid;  the  wicked  are  bound  to  be  hypocrites  if  they  would  live. 
2.  That  none  of  their  purposes  are  so  secret  as  to  escape  the  notice  of  Almighty  God. 
How  came  Blisha  to  know  them?  He  was  far  away  from  the  monarch's  bedchamber — 
away  in  Israel.  It  was  Elisha's  God  who  made  the  communication  to  him.  Solemn 
thought.  There  is  One  who  knoweth  what  is  in  man — in  every  man.  He  reads  all 
secrets ;  he  "  imderstandeth  our  thoughts  afar  off."  3.  The  revelations  of  a  wicked 
man's  secrets  will  frustrate  his  designs.    It  did  so  in  the  case  of  this  king. 

II,  TiiUDiTY  DISPELLED.  When  the  Syrian  monarch  learnt  that  Elisha  was  in 
Israel,  he  despatched  a  spy  to  find  him  out ;  and  when  he  discovered  that  he  was  in 
Dothan, "  he  sent  thither  horses,  and  chariots,  and  a  great  host :  and  they  came  by 
night,  and  compassed  the  city  about."  All  this  struck  a  panic  into  the  heart  of  Elisha's 
servant,  and  he  cried  out,  "  Alas,  my  master  1  how  shall  we  do  ?  "  How  did  Elisha 
relieve  his  servant  of  this  terrible  fear  ?  By  assuring  him  that  there  were  more  on 
their  side  than  on  the  side  of  their  enemies.  "  Fear  not :  for  they  that  l>e  with  us  are 
more  than  they  that  be  with  them."  This  assurance  he  gave  not  merely  with  words, 
but  by  ocular  demonstration.  "  And  Elisha  prayed,  and  said.  Lord,  I  pray  thee,  open 
his  "yes,  that  he  may  see.  And  the  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  the  young  man ;  and  he 
saw :  and,  behold,  the  mountain  was  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about 
Elisha."  It  is  generally  supposed  that  the  reference  is  here  to  angels  "that  excel  in 
strength ; "  they  are  in  truth  the  body-guard  of  the  good.  They  are  more  in  their  number 
than  our  foes,  superior  in  their  power,  in  their  invincible  determination,  in  their  authority 
too.^  But  to  see  them  we  must  have  our  spiritual  eyes  open  as  the  prophet's  eyes  were 
now.  Faith  in  the  wonderful  resources  which  Heaven  has  provided  for  the  good  will 
dispel  all  fear. 

IIL  SuPEBKATURAL  FOWEB  MANIFESTED.  Supernatural  power  is  here  manifested: 
1.  In  opening  the  eyes  of  the  prophet's  servant.  2.  In  bringing  under  his  notice  the 
mountain  wluch  was  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire.  3.  In  smiting  with  blindness  the 
army  of  Syria.  "  And  when  they  came  down  to  him  [that  is,  the  Syrian  army],  Elisha 
prayed  unto  the  Lord,  and  said.  Smite  this  people,  I  pray  thee,  with  blindness.  And 
he  smote  them  with  blindness  according  to  the  word  of  Elisha."  These  armed  legions, 
whose  eyes  were  glaring  with  vengeance  before,  were  now  in  midnight  darkness.  In 
this  state  Elisha  becomes  their  guide  and  conducts  them  to  Samaria,  and  when  they 
had  come  there  another  supernatural  act  was  performed  in  the  restoration  of  their  sight, 
and  then  they  beheld  their  terrible  position.  "  Behold,  they  were  in  the  midst  of 
Samaria,"  in  the  hands  of  the  King  of  Israel. 

IV.  Betenoe  ovebcome.  The  King  of  Syria,  hearing  that  Elisha  had  revealed  bis 
murderous  plan  to  the  monarch  of  Israel,  and  had  thus  thwarted  the  purpose  and  the 
plan  of  his  campaign,  waa  fired  with  indignation,  and  sent  to  Dothan  "  horses,  and 
chariots  and  a  great  host:  and  they  came  by  night,  and  compassed  the  city  about." 
How  furiously  we  may  suppose  revenge  flamed  in  every  member  of  the  army, 
as  well  as  in  the  soul  of  their  royal  master,  as  they  "compassed  the  city  about"! 
And  this  feeling  would  no  doubt  be  intensified  when  they  found  that  Elisha  had 
betrayed  them  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies.  They  were  in  the  midst  of  Samaria, 
vrithin  the  very  grasp  of  the  King  of  Israel,  and  at  his  mercy.  How  would  Elisha 
adTise  ihe  King  of  Israel  to  treat  these  revengeful  legions  now  ?  "  And  the  King  of 
Israel  said  unto  Elisha,  when  he  saw  them,  My  father,  shall  I  smite  them?  shall  1 
smite  them  ?  "  What  was  the  prophet's  advice  ?  Did  he  say,  "  Destroy  them  "  ?  No. 
He  answered,  "  Thou  shalt  not  smite  them."  Did  he  say,  "  Spare  their  lives,  but  make 
them  slaves,  take  them  into  captivity  and  make  them  beasts  of  burden  "  ?  Did  he  say, 
"  Deprive  them  of  all  food,  and  starve  them  to  death  "  ?  No ;  he  said,  "  Set  bread  and 
water  before  them,  that  they  may  eat  and  drink,  and  go  to  their  master.  And  he 
prepared  great  provision  for  them  :  and  when  they  had  eaten  and  drunk,  he  sent  them 


138  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  [oh.  vi.  1—33. 

•wity,  and  they  went  to  their  master."  What  was  the  result  of  this  generous  treat- 
ment y  Did  they  go  away  with  the  old  passion  of  TeQ°;eance  burning  in  them  ?  Away 
to  reorganize  themselves  in  greater  numbers  and  with  greater  force  to  make  another 
attack  ?  No.  Here  is  the  result :  "  So  the  bands  of  Syria  came  no  more  into  the  land 
of  IstaeL"  The  magnanimous  kindness  extinguished  the  flames  and  paralyzed  the  arms 
of  revenge,  so  that  they  came  no  more  into  the  land  of  Israel.  This  is  the  Divine  way, 
nay,  the  orUy  way,  of  conquering  our  enemies.  Evil  can  only  be  overcome  by  good. 
The  most  glorioua  victory  over  an  enemy  is  to  turn  him  into  a  friend. — D.  T. 

Vers.  16 — ^17. — Invincibh  hetpers  of  the  good.  "  And  when  the  servs-nt  of  the 
man  of  Ood  was  risen,"  etc.  The  context  illustrates  two  circumstances  too  frequently 
overlooked,  but  ever  demanding  the  recognition  and  study  of  mankind.  1.  The  valut 
of  a  good  man  to  his  country.  The  Syrian  monarch  makes  war  with  Israel ;  his 
counsels  are  formed,  his  arrangements  are  complete,  and  sanguine  are  his  hopes  of 
victory.  But  there  is  a  good  man  in  Israel — Elisha— who  reads  the  hidden  purpose 
of  the  Syrian  despot,  sounds  the  alarm,  puts  his  country  on  its  guard,  invokes  Heaven, 
and  thus  confounds  the  wily  stratagems  and  thwarts  the  murderous  purposes  of  the 
foe.  "So  the  bands  of  Syria  came  no  more  into  the  land  of  Israel."  True  piety 
is  the  source  of  true  patriotism ;  its  prayers  and  prophecies  are  the  sure  "  defences  "  of 
nations.  This  idea  is  dawning  on  the  world  now ;  and  in  coming  periods  will  blaze 
in  broad  daylight  on  mankind.  We  shall  one  day  see  that  the  victories  of  truth  and 
prayer  were  the  only  victories  that  ever  served  the  interest  of  any  nation,  and  that 
many  a  pious  man,  who  lived  in  obscurity  and  died  under  oppression,  conferred  greater 
blessings  on  the  commonwealth  than  those  statesmen  and  warriors  whose  patriotism 
has  been  emblazoned  in  history  and  sung  in  verse.  I'he  context  illustrates :  2.  The 
source  of  a  wicked  man's  weakness.  Why  did  not  this  Syrian  tyrant  succeed  in  his 
plans?  The  words  which  one  of  his  servants  addressed  to  him  explain  the  cause: 
"  Elisha,  the  prophet  that  is  in  Israel,  telleth  the  King  of  Israel  the  words  that  thou 
speakest  in  thy  bedchamber."  His  projects  would  not  bear  the  light.  As  a  principle, 
wicked  men  would  seldom,  if  ever,  realize  their  ends  were  there  a  prophet  to  unveil 
their  hearts,  and  publish  all  the  selfish,  sensual,  dishonest,  and  blasphemous  thoughts 
that  transpire  in  the  hidden  chamber  of  their  souls,  Wicked  tradesmen,  lawyers,  states- 
men, and  others  succeed  only  as  they  conceal  their  hearts  from  public  view.  Let  some 
prophet,  like  Ezekiel  of  old,  break  open  the  barred  door  of  their  "  chamber  of  imagery," 
and  expose  the  hideous  forms  "  portrayed  upon  the  wall,"  the  impious  works  that  are 
wrought  "  in  the  dark,"  and  forthwith  they  will  lose  all  public  sympathy,  patronage, 
and  support.  O  my  soul,  cherish  thou  thoughts  that  shall  bear  a  prophet's  fiery 
glance — principles  that  will  glow,  bloom,  and  look  attractive  in  the  daylight;  and 
purposes  that  will  commend  thee  to  the  Divine  consciousness  of  brother  spirits,  and  to 
the  favour  of  the  Everlasting.  I  proceed  to  state,  with  the  utmost  brevity,  a  lew 
general  truths  suggested  by  the  incident  before  us. 

I.  That  the  good  abe  often  placed  in  ciboumstanoeb  to  bequirb  superhuman 
HBLP.  Elisha  and  his  servant  were,  at  this  time,  at  Dothan.  The  Syrian  king,  enraged 
with  the  prophet  for  frustrating  his  military  designs  on  Israel,  sends  "  horses,  and 
chariots,  and  a  great  host "  in  pursuit  of  him.  The  mighty  army  "  came  by  night,  and 
compassed  the  city  about."  Early  in  the  morning  the  prophet's  servant  beheld  the 
armed  and  ruthless  multitude  drawn  up  around  the  city.  Here  were  enemies 
which  the  prophet  himself  could  not  subdue,  perils  from  which  his  unaided  power 
could  not  extricate  himself.  Faint  symbol  this  of  the  spiritual  enemies  that  surronnd 
our  dwellings  1  True,  in  these  days,  the  antagonists  of  the  good  are  not  so  outwardly 
visible  as  they  were  in  times  that  are  past.  The  great  enemy  does  not  send  forth  his 
host  now  garbed  in  the  attire  of  the  persecutors.  They  appear  not  amongst  us  in  the 
grim  and  savage  forms  of  the  Julians  and  the  Neros,  the  Maximins  and  the  Diocletians ; 
they  assume  an  habiliment  more  consonant  with  the  tastes  of  this  civilized  era.  Their 
forms  fascinate  rather  than  terrify.  'I'hey  seek  to  draw  rather  than  to  drive.  But 
still,  are  they  any  less  deadly  in  their  aim,  or  formidable  in  their  power,  because  they 
ehsBKe  their  garb,  drop  the  sword,  and  stretch  out  the  hand  of  false  friendship?  It  is 
not  the  plimdering  of  our  property  nor  the  wounding  of  our  bodies  that  injures  us  most, 
but  the  eompting  of  our  souls.   The  awakening  within  our  spiritual  natures  of  an  impure 


OH.TLI— 33.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  139 

■jggestion  may  woik  s  for  more  fearful  ruin  than  incarcerating  us  in  dungeons,  or 
sending  na  to  the  martyr's  stake  and  flames.  I  call  those  forces  mine  enemies  that  are 
unfavourable  to  my  spiritual  interests.  Whatever  dims  my  inner  vision,  and  tends  to 
▼eil  from  me  the  sublimities  of  the  "unseen;"  whatever  deadens  my  sensibility 
to  duty,  and  interferes  with  the  free  and  vigorous  play  of  my  faculties ;  whatever  draws 
me  fiom  the  eternal  future,  and  links  me  to  the  transient  present;  whatever  coob, 
materializes,  and  contracts  my  sympathies,  and  keeps  me  more  in  connection  with  the 
contingent  than  the  absolute ;  whatever  depresses  me  in  my  struggles  to  reach  that 
ideal  of  perfection  dimly  portrayed  in  my  soul,  but  drawn  out  in  abiding  loveliness  in 
the  life  of  Jesus;  whatever  forces  act  thus,  I  call,  with  empbasis,  my  foes.  And  do 
not  such  foes  surround  us  ?  Tell  me  of  a  period  when  "  sinful  lusts,"  which  "  war 
against  the  soul,"  were  more  potent  and  active  than  now  7  Our  civilization  is  little 
more  than  a  jwrfection  in  those  arts  that  minister  to  the  senses,  pander  to  the 
appetites,  and  gratify  the  desires  of  the  flesh.  When  did  wurldliness  ever  wield  a  more 
wide  and  mighty  sway?  When  were  the  votaries  of  mammon  so  numerous  and 
enthusiastic  in  their  devotions  ?  The  deepest  cry  of  the  age  seems  to  be,  "  My  soul 
thirsteth  for  gold."  When  did  corrupt  literature  scatter  over  the  social  soil  the  seeds 
of  error,  impiety,  and  licentiousness  to  such  an  extent  as  now?  We  are  as  truly 
hemmed  in  by  antagonistic  forces  as  was  Elisha  by  the  horses  and  chariots  and  hosts 
than  encompassed  him  at  Dothan.  As  we  glance  at  them,  the  impression  of  the 
prophet's  servant  comes  to  us,  "  Alas,  master  I  what  shall  we  do  ?  "  We  require  the 
help  that  Elisha  had — help  from  without — from  Heaven. 

II.  That  Heaven  has  pbovidbd  helpers  fob  men  superior  to  all  antagonists. 
"And  he  answered,  Pear  not:  for  they  that  be  with  us  are  more  than  they  that  be 
with  them."  It  is  generally  supposed  that  the  reference  is  here  to  the  angels  "  that 
excel  in  strength,"  and  that  they  were  the  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  that  came  to  the 
prophet's  help.  Angels  are  the  hosts  of  Q-od,  and  "  the  body-guard  of  the  good  " — 
"  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  unto  the  heirs  of  salvation."  This  doctrine 
ia  so  antecedently  probable,  so  clearly  revealed  in  Scripture,  and  so  generally  believed, 
as  to  require  no  evidence.  It  is  to  their  superiority  that  ovu:  attention  is  now  called. 
1.  They  a/re  "more"  in  number  than  the  foe.  If  we  confine  our  attention  to  merely 
what  we  see  in  this  world,  we  shall  conclude  that  the  agents  of  evil  are  the  more 
numerous.  A  wider  survey  of  the  general  realm  of  spiritual  being,  as  suggested  by 
philosophy,  and  as  revealed  in  the  Bible,  presents  an  opposite  view.  As  malformations 
in  nature  are  few  compared  with  symmetrically  organized  existences,  so  evil  spirits  are 
few  compared  with  the  good.  The  great  cities,  principalities,  and  hierarchies  of  the 
universe  are  loyal  subjects  of  the  great  King,  and  zealous  agents  in  promoting  his 
will;  it  is  but  a  little  province  that  has  here  and  there  thrown  off  its  allegiance.  Hell  is 
but  a  withered  leaf  in  the  waving  forest  of  life — a,  flickering  meteor  in  the  starry  vault  of 
being.  It  is  our  happiness  to  know  that  evil  is  the  exception  in  the  imiverse ;  good  is 
the  rule.  Thus  evil  exists  as  a  contingency — it  might  or  might  not  be ;  but  good  exists 
by  an  absolute  necessity — ^it  is  and  must  be,  because  God  is  and  must  be.  2.  They  are 
"more"  in  the  instrumentalities  they  wield.  The  agents  of  evil  are  not  only  fewer  in 
number,  but  inTerior  also  in  their  armour.  Falsehood,  selfishness,  wrong, — these  are 
their  miserable  weapons ;  and  are  they  not  weakness  compared  with  truth,  love,  right, 
the  weapons  of  the  good  ?  Ay ;  they  can  no  more  stand  before  them  than  "  dry 
stubble"  before  the  raging  fire — the  gloom  of  the  night-heavens  before  the  rising  sun. 
The  history  of  the  world  gives  many  instances  of  one  man,  with  truth  and  right  on  his 
side,  subduing  countries  under  the  reign  of  falsehood  and  wrong.  3.  They  are  "  more  " 
in  their  invincible  determination.  The  power  of  a  moral  intelligence  in  any  operation 
will  not  be  entirely  or  chiefly  determined  by  the  instruments  be  employs,  but  by  the 
strength  of  the  purpose  under  which  he  acts.  A  man  with  a  weak  purpose,  however 
great  his  advantages,  will  not  do  much.  Now,  the  agents  of  evil  can  have  no  invincible 
purpose,  for  the  obvious  reason  that  their  consciences — whose  sanctions  can  alone 
give  invincibility — are  not  on  their  side.  Just  as  far  as  any  being  is  under  the  influence 
of  evil,  he  must  be  fickle  and  fearful.  "  The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth:  but 
the  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion."  4.  They  are  "  more "  in  the  authority  under  which 
they  act.  The  Bible  teaches  that  the  angels  of  evil  are  under  the  control  of  one  master- 
spirit of  darkness — "  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  ai; ;  "  but  those  of  the  good  are 


140  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OV  TEE  KINGS.         [oh.  vi.  1—33. 

ander  the  authority  of  the  Infinite.  His  Spirit  inipires  them,  his  will  they  ohey,  hit 
energy  ia  their  strength.  Satan,  the  master  of  the  evil  spirits,  is  himself  the  creature 
and  slave  of  God.  The  moral  usurper  cannot  move  or  breathe  but  by  the  permission 
of  him  who  "  maketh  his  angels  spirits,  and  his  ministers  a  flame  of  fire."  Truly, 
then,  my  pious  friend,  however  great  the  spiritual  foes,  thy  helpers  are  greater.  To 
the  eye  of  sense,  indeed,  thou  seemest  to  wrestle  against  fearful  odds.  Wealth, 
fashion,  customs,  influence,  worldly  maxims,  habits,  and  even  numbers,  seem  against 
thee ;  ivit "  fear  not :  for  they  that  be  with  us  are  more  than  they  that  be  with  them." 
Open  the  eye  of  faith,  and  loofe  beyond  the  boundary-line  of  sense,  and  thou  shalt  see 
that  the  great  "  mountain "  of  universal  being  is  "  fall  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire 
round  about "  thee. 

III.  That  the  supebiob  eblpebs  or  the  oood  abb  only  seen  bt  bohe.  Elisha 
saw  the  celestial  helpers,  but  his  servant  saw  them  not — saw  nothing  but  the  enemy. 
The  one,  consequently,  stood  calm  amidst  the  gleaming  and  rattling  weapons  of  the 
Syrian  army,  the  other  was  all  perturbation  and  alarm.  Thus  men  under  similar 
circumstances  receive  different  impressions.  The  event  which  overwhelms  one  with 
alarm  inspires  another  with  hope  and  heroism.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  some  have 
eyes  to  see  only  the  evil  in  things,  others  to  see  the  good  as  welL  Why  is  this  ?  Why 
il  it  that  all  men  cannot  see  the  spiritual  helpers  that  surround  them?  Several  reasons 
might  be  assigned.  1.  There  is  the  tendency  to  Judge  after  the  aense$.  The  majority 
of  men,  like  the  servant  of  the  prophet,  see  only  with  the  physical  eye.  Although 
true  philosophy  shows  that  all  things  that  come  within  the  cognizance  of  the  senses 
are  shadows,  not  substances — semblance,  not  essence,,  they  reversely  consider  the 
visible  and  tangible  only  as  real.  Spirits,  therefore,  which  lie  beyond  the  line  of  sense, 
and  which  are  the  living  creatures  in  all  the  "  wheels  "  of  human  events,  and  in  all 
the  forms  of  matter,  are  never  practically  realized,  and  often  theoretically  ignored. 
2.  There  is  the  habit  of  referring  everything  to  secondary  causes.  This  habit  allows 
no  room  for  God,  nor  for  spiritual  interpositions,  but  in  a  miracle.  What  is  regular  it 
calls  natural';  what  is  miraculous  alone  is  Divine.  It  sees  God  in  holding  the  sun 
over  Gibeon,  and  the  moon  in  the  valley  of  Ajalon,  but  sees  nothing  of  him  in  rolling 
these  stupendous  bodies,  age  after  age,  in  their  spheres,  with  an  undeviating  regularity, 
and  a  swiftness  incalculable.  I  say  nothing  of  the  irrationality  of  this  habit,  nor  of  its 
prevalence,  of  which  there  can  he  no  question.  All  I  say  is  that,  since  God  helps  ui 
by  natural  laws,  this  habit  manifestly  prevents  men  from  seeing  the  helpers  he  sends. 
8.  There  is  also  a  gloominess  of  disposition.  This  is  sometimes  a  cause.  There  are 
men  who  will  not  see  good.  They  hear  no  music  in  the  harp  of  love ;  they  see  no 
brightness  in  the  unclouded  sky  of  noon.  On  this  earth,  even  when  robed  in  its 
summer  beauty  or  laden  with  autumnal  wealth,  they  sing,  or  rather  groan — 

"Lord,  what  a  wretched  land  is  this, 
That  yields  us  no  supply ! " 

The  horses  and  chariots  of  mercy  may  move  around  them  as  celestial  goATds,  yet 
they  cry,  "  All  these  things  are  against  me."  4.  There  is  want  of  sympathy  toith  God. 
Strong  and  earnest  sympathy  with  a  being  always  induces  the  mind  to  bring  that  Being 
near — near  to  the  inner  eye  and  heart.  By  this  law  we  bring  the  distant  near — cross  oceans 
and  continents.  Yes ;  from  worlds  beyond  the  grave  the  imagination  wafts  the  loved 
one  home  to  our  inmost  breasts;  and  we  see  the  form  and  hear  the  voice  again.  Had 
we  this  sympathy  with  God  and  holy  spirits,  we  should  set  them  always  before  us. 
Jesus  had  it,  and  he  said,  "Ye  leave  me  alone;  and  yet  I  am  not  alone,  because  the 
Father  is  with  me." 

IV.  That  to  see  these  shpebhuhav  beIiFSBs  omlt  bbquikes  the  ofenino  of  thb 
EYES.  "  Lord,  I  pray  thee,  open  his  eyes."  The  outward  world  is  to  us  according  to 
our  five  senses.  Had  we  fewer,  it  would  be  less  than  it  is ;  or,  if  more,  it  would  he 
greater.  There  are,  probably,  properties  in  the  material  system  which  we  have  at 
present  no  sense  to  discover ;  or,  peradventure,  there  may  be  senses  closed  np  within, 
that  will  one  day  be  developed,  and  make  this  old  world  a  new  thing  to  us.  But, 
likely  as  this  may  be,  the  existence  of  a  sense  in  the  soul  for  seeing  spiritual  existences 
is  more  probable.  I  am  not  disposed  to  pronounce  all  who  have  stated  that  they  have 
Men  such  beings  to  be  uther  fanatics  or  impostors.    The  d  priori  wonder  ia,  not  that 


OB.  TL 1—33.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THS  KOra&  Ul 

they  should  be  seen,  but  that  they  are  not  more  generally  perceived.  We  are  related 
to  the  material  vorld,  and  we  have  lenses  to  discern  material  existences.  We  are, 
confessedly,  more  intimately  and  solemnly  related  to.  the  spiritual ;  and  is  it  not  natural 
to  expect  that  we  should  have  a  sense  to  see  spiritual  beings?  Were  such  a  sense  to 
be  opened  within  us,  as  the  eye  of  the  prophet's  servant  was  now  opened,  what  visions 
would  burst  upon  us !  The  microscope  gives  to  us  a  new  world  of  wonders ;  bnt  were 
God  to  open  the  spiritual  eye,  what  a  multitude  of  worlds  would  be  revealed  I  Ah,  my 
sceptic  brotherl  deniest  thou  a  spiritual  world?  Where  is  thy  reason?  Wilt  thou  plead 
the  fact  that  thou  hast  never  seen  a  spiritual  existence?  This,  assuredly,  will  not  serve 
thee.  Wilt  thou  permit  a  deaf  man  to  deny  that  a  thunderstorm  ever  rent  our  cloudy 
atmosphere,  because  he  has  never  heard  the  terrific  roar;  or  a  blind  man  to  deny  that 
a  rainbow  has  ever  spanned  these  skies,  because  he,  forsooth,  has  never  seen  the 
beauteous  arch  ?  Why,  then,  shouldest  thou  deny  a  spiritual  world?  Before  the  eyes 
of  the  prophet's  servant  were  opened,  he  might  have  denied  the  existence  of  these 
helpers.  When  his  master  spoke  to  him  of  them,  he  might  have  said  within  himself, 
"Has  my  master  lost  his  reason,  or  is  he  dreaming?  I  see  nothing  on  the  mountain 
but  the  Syrian  host."  All  at  once,  however,  his  eyes  were  opened,  and  what  a  scene 
burst  upon  him  1  "  The  mountain  was  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about 
Elisha."  Even  so  it  will  be  with  thee,  my  friend :  ere  many  days  shall  pass,  God  will 
open  thine  eyes;  and  that  spiritual  world  in  which  thou  art  now  living,  and  whose 
existence  thou  deniest,  will  burst  in  awful  sublimity  upon  thine  astonished  soul  I — D.  T. 

Ters.  24 — 33. — St^Jectt  worth  eonrldertng.  "  And  it  came  to  pass  after  this,  that 
Benhadad  king  of  Syria  gathered  all  his  host,  and  went  up,  and  besieged  Samaria," 
etc.  These  verses,  brimful  of  the  wicked  and  the  horrible^  press  the  following  subjects 
on  our  attention. 

I.  The  iNBUHAinTT  of  wab.  "  And  it  came  to  pass  after  this,  that  Benhadad 
king  of  Syria  gathered  all  his  host,  and  went  up,  and  besieged  Samaria.  And  there 
was  a  great  famine  in  Samaria :  and,  behold,  they  besieged  it,  until  an  ass's  head  was 
sold  for  fourscore  pieces  of  silver,  and  the  fourth  part  of  a  cab  of  dove's  dung  for  five 
pieces  of  silver."  The  inhumanity  of  the  Syrian  king  and  his  host  in  invading 
Samaria  is  [seen  in  the  shameful  disregard  of  the  kindness  which  the  Samaritans  had 
previously  shown  them.  In  the  preceding  verses  we  read  that  the  Samaritans  had  not 
only  allowed  them  to  escape  entire  destruction  when  they  were  at  their  mercy,  but, 
at  the  interposition  of  Elisha,  supplied  them  with  abundant  provisions  to  appease 
their  hunger  and  to  invigorate  their  frames.  Notwithstanding  this,  they  now  came  to 
work  ruin  on  their  very  saviours.  War  has  no  gratitude,  no  sense  of  right,  no  senti'- 
ment  of  kindness;  often  it  dehumanizes  human  nature,  transforms  the  man  into  i 
fiend. 

"  How  all  minor  cruelties  of  man 
Are  rammed  in  war,  condusiva  of  all  crimes  I " 

(•  Festns.*) 

IL  Thb  tbrbiblenebs  of  httmobb.  To  such  absolute  destitution  did  these  mthless 
warriors  reduce  the  inhabitants  of  Samaria,  that  not  only  did  the  ravenous  hunger  drive 
them  to  obtain  food  from  the  "ass's  head"  and  from  "dove's  dung,"  but  from  human 
flesh — ^mothers  from  the  children  of  their  womb.  "  And  as  the  King  of  Israel  was  pass- 
ing by  upon  the  wall;  there  cried  a  woman  unto  him,  saying.  Help,  my  lord,  O  king. 
And  he  said.  If  the  Lord  do  not  help  thee,  whence  shall  I  help  thee  ?  out  of  the  bamfloor, 
or  out  of  the  winepress  ?  And  the  king  said  unto  her.  What  aileth  thee  ?  And  she 
answered,  This  woman  said  unto  me,  Give  thy  son,  that  we  may  eat  him  to-day,  and 
we  will  eat  my  son  to-morrow.  So  we  killed  my  son,  and  did  eat  him,"  etc.  Here  is 
a  tragic  tale,  a  tale  that  makes  the  heart  quail,  and  the  nerves  quiver  with  horror. 
Hunger  in  itself  is  a  blessing,  it  implies  health  and  stimulates  to  action ;  it  is  in  truth 
the  mainspring  that  keeps  the  human  machinery  of  the  world  in  action.  But  when  it 
becomes  intense  and  unappeasable,  it  sets  all  moral  commandments  at  defiance,  it  will 
break  through  stone  walls,  shatter  thrones,  and  break  up  empires.    It  is  among  the 

grimary  duties  of  rulers  to  keep  the  hunger  of  the  people  appeased.    Alas  I  everywhere 
1  England  we  hear  its  groane ;  may  not  these  groaninga  be  the  mutteri^p  of  nature 
before  the  volcanic  eruption  ? 


143  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [oH.  tl  1^33. 

in.  The  misdirection  or  pasbioh.  The  tale  of  the  famishing  woman,  mod  the 
nrolting  scenes  he  beheld,  pierced  the  heart  of  the  King  of  Israel.  His  feelings  at  first 
Mem  to  have  been  those  of  great  humiliation  and  deep  sympathy.  "  And  it  came  to 
pass,  when  the  king  heard  the  words  of  the  woman,  that  he  rent  his  clothes."  But 
they  soon  became  those  of  raging  wrath  against  Elisha,  "  Then  he  said,  God  do  so 
and  more  also  to  me,  if  the  head  of  Elisha  the  son  of  Shapbat  shall  stand  on  him  this 
day."  If  Elisha  had,  from  a  malign  spirit,  really  brought  all  this  distress  upon  the 
Samaritan  people,  this  wrath  might  hate  been  justified.  Anger  agftinst  wrong  is 
light.  But  it  was  not  Elisha  that  brought  the  calamities ;  it  was  themselves^their 
idolatries,  their  sins.  Elisha  was  their  greatest  friend.  The  misdirection  of  human 
indignation  is  no  uncommon  eviL  How  Often  men  are  angry  with  one  another  without 
a  cause  I    Passion  misdirected  put  to  death  the  Son  of  God  himself. 

lY.  The  calmness  of  ooodnesb.  Whilst  all  these  revolting  scenes  were  taking 
place,  and  the  king  burning  with  rage  against  Elisha,  was  resolving  on  his  destruction, 
where  was  Elisha?  "But  Elisha  sat  in  his  honse,  and  the  elders  sat  with  him." 
With  his  disciples,  fellow-citizens,  and  "  elders  "  Elisha  sat,  without  anxiety  or  alarm. 
Mark :  1.  It  was  not  the  calmness  of  servile  submission.  Though  he  knew  the  threat 
of  the  king,  he  had  no  idea  of  making  an  apology  or  seeking  to  appease  unreasonable 
indignation,  or  yield  with  stoicism  to  his  fate.  No.  Whilst  he  sat  calmly,  the  pulse 
of  manhood  throbbed  stronger  in  every  vein,  and  when  he  heard  the  king's  messenger 
approach  the  door  of  his  house,  he  said  to  the  elders,  "  See  ye  how  this  son  of  • 
murderer  hath  sent  to  take  away  mine  head  7  "  It  is  grand  to  hear  men  give  otheri 
their  proper  title,  even  though  they  be  kings.  Were  all  men  thus  honest,  many  of 
those  who  are  now  called  "right  honourables"  would  be  "right  abominables."  2. 
It  was  not  the  calmness  of  trresoluUon.  It  was  not  a  state  of  unnerved  indifference ; 
on  the  contrary,  there  was  in  it  a  resolute  power.  "  Look,  when  the  messenger  cometh, 
shut  the  door,  and  hold  him  fast  at  the  door."  For  the  man's  own  sake  hold  him,  do 
not  let  him  contract  crime  by  committing  murder.  Probably  at  this  moment  Elisha 
saw  the  king  himself  hurrying  towards  him,  to  revoke  his  murderous  decree.  Conscious 
goodness  is  always  calm.  He  is  "  kept  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  the 
Lord."  3.  It  was  the  calmness  that  conquers.  The  king  himself,  it  would  seem,  was 
soon  at  the  door.  He  had  relented,  and  hurried  to  prevent  the  execution  of  his 
murderous  command.  "  And  while  he  yet  talked  with  them,  behold,  the  messenger 
came  down  unto  him :  and  he  said.  Behold,  this  evil  ii  of  the  Lord ;  what  should  I 
wait  for  the  Lord  any  longer  ? "  This  utterance  is  that  of  the  king,  and  it  would 
seem  it  was  a  response  to  the  prophet's  exhortation  to  "  wait  for  the  Lord."  And  he 
means  to  say,  "This  evil  is  not  from  thee,  Elisha,  but  from  the  Lord,  and  it  is  hopeless; 
'  what  should  I  wait  for  the  Lord  any  longer  ? ' "  It  is  not  likely  that  such  a  humili- 
ating utterance  as  this  would  have  fallen  from  the  lips  of  the  king,  had  he  met  Elisha 
in  a  state  of  furious  excitement.  No  doubt  it  was  the  moral  majesty  of  calmness  that 
struck  the  heart  of  the  monarch. — D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — 1%«  horrowed  axe.  This  is  another  of  Elisha's  miracles  of  aid.  The 
story  belongs  to  the  same  class  of  acts  as  those  related  in  ch.  iL  ly — 22 ;  It.  1 — 7, 
38—44. 

I.  The  axb-hbad  needed.  The  first  verses  present  us  with  a  picture  of  expansion 
and  extension.  The  place  where  "  the  sons  of  the  prophets  "  dwelt  or  "  sat "  before 
Elisha,  at  Jericho,  had  become  too  strait  for  them.  Elisha's  influence  was  evidently 
telling  on  the  nation.  The  religious  movement  represented  by  the  prophetic  schools 
was  growing  in  force  and  volume.  It  is  encouraging  to  hear  of  growth  and  progress 
in  the  Church.  We  note :  1.  The  prophets  faxed  their  tituation.  "  Behold  now, 
the  place  where  we  dwell  with  thee  is  too  strait  for  us."  They  did  not  stand  still, 
and  endeavour  to  accommodate  their  increased  numbers  to  the  old  conditions.  They 
showed  a  spirit  of  enterprise,  of  advance,  in  correspondence  with  their  altered  needs. 
This  was  true  wisdom.  The  Church  must  adapt  herself  to  new  needs,  to  altered 
circumstances,  to  the  conditions  of  progress,  if  she  is  to  hold  her  ground.  "  Enlarge 
the  place  of  thy  tent,"  etc.  (Isa.  liv.  2).  2.  They  were  willing  to  put  forth  need- 
fiU  efort.  "Let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  unto  Jordan,  and  take  thence  every  man  a 
beam,"  etc.    They  were  prepared  to  do  what  was  necessary  to  bring  about  the  changes 


OL  Ti.  1—33.]  THE  SSCOND  BOOK  OF  THE  £1X03.  143 

required.  Tkey  had  the  two  conditions  of  successful  work — ^unity  of  spirit,  and  indivi- 
dual willingness.  They  were  to  work  together  for  a  common  end,  and  each  man  was  to 
do  his  separate  part.  The  individual  wood-cutter  could  accomplish  little.  Unitedly, 
they  could  easily  make  a  place  for  their  common  accommodation.  3.  I%ev  desired 
Elisha  to  go  with  them.  "  Be  content,  I  pray  thee,  and  go  with  thy  servants.  Elisha 
was  the  hond  of  their  community.  They  desired  neither  to  act  without  his  sanction 
nor  to  go  where  he  could  not  accompany  them.  The  Church,  in  her  changes,  must  abide 
by  fundamental  truth,  and  do  nothing  which  would  exclude  the  Master. 

IL  The  axe-head  lost.  Elisha's  sanction  given,  the  band  of  prophets  was  soon 
busy  at  Jordan,  cutting  down  trees,  and  preparing  for  the  new  building.  Then 
occurred  the  mishap  and  loss  which  gives  its  name  to  the  story.  As  one  was  felling 
a  beam,  the  axe-head  flew  off,  and  ^11  into  the  deep  part  of  the  river.  It  was  a 
borrowed  axe,  and  the  man's  lamentations  were  instant  and  sincere.  Mishaps  will 
occur  in  the  best  undertakings.  1.  Be  had  lost  what  a  neighbour  had  lent  him.  The 
property  was  not  his  own.  It  had  been  lent  him,  probably  at  his  own  request,  and 
in  the  spirit  of  neighbourly  good  will.  Such  neighbourly  acts  are  pleasing  to  think 
of.  But  the  more  willingly  the  axe  had  been  lent  him,  the  more  did  the  loser  now 
regret  the  mishap  which  had  befallen  it.  It  is  well  that  neighbours  should  be  ready 
to  lend ;  but  the  incident  also  shows  the  danger  of  borrowing.  We  should  seek  to 
he  as  independent  of  others  as  we  can ;  then,  if  misfortune  does  befall  us,  what  we 
lose  is  at  least  only  our  own.  2.  Be  could  not  replace  the  loss.  Had  he  been  able 
to  do  so,  he  would  not  have  required  to  borrow.  The  "  sons  of  the  prophets  "  were 
good  men,  but  poor  men.  An  axe-head  was  a  small  thing,  but  it  meant  much  to  the 
user,  and  perhaps  not  less  to  the  original  owner.  It  is  a  spirit  of  conscientiousness 
which  speaks  in  the  man's  lament.  He  held  the  axe  as  a  trust,  and  desired  earnestly 
to  return  it.  It  is  good  to  see  men  "  faithful  in  that  which  is  least "  (Luke  xvi.  10). 
3.  Be  could  no  longer  do  his  part  of  the  work.  The  axe-head  was  indispensable  for 
the  cutting  down  of  his  beam.  He  had  the  handle,  but  it  was  of  no  use  without  the 
iron.  This  also  grieved  him.  Anything  that  incapacitates  a  man  for  bearing  his  part 
in  the  building  work  of  God's  kingdom  will  be  a  sorrow  to  him. 

III.  The  axe-head  recovered.  The  indirect  appeal  made  to  Elisha  in  the  words, 
"  Alas,  master  I  for  it  was  borrowed,"  was  not  in  vain.  It  was  a  case  in  which  Elisha 
might  be  expected  to  help,  and  he  did  so.  In  the  miracle  we  see :  1.  Buman  agency. 
There  is  a  remarkable  blending  of  the  Divine  and  the  human  in  the  whole  transaction. 
Elisha  asked,  "  Where  fell  it  ?  "  It  might  have  been  thought  that  if  he  had  the  power 
to  bring  the  iron  to  the  surface,  he  would  also  be  able  to  tell  where  it  fell.  But  the  man 
had  to  show  him  the  place.  Then,  when  the  iron  swam,  Elisha  said,  "  Take  it  to 
thee."  And  the  man  put  out  his  hand  and  took  it.  2.  Expressive  symbol.  The 
miracle,  as  usual,  was  accompanied  by  a  symbolical  action.  A  stick  was  cut  down, 
and  thrown  into  the  water.  The  act  was  only  an  expressive  way  of  saying,  "  Let  the 
iron  swim  as  this  stick  does."  Its  sole  function  was  to  direct  attention  to  the  super- 
natural result.  3.  Almighty  power,  "  The  iron  did  swim."  There  was  here,  not  the 
alteration  of  the  properties  of  iron  (else  it  would  be  iron  no  longer),  but  the  introduction 
of  a  new  cause,  which  counteracted  the  natural  effect  of  gravity,  and  raised  the  iron 
to  the  surface.  Nature  is  but  an  instrument  in  the  hand  of  Otoi,  and  can  be  bent  by 
him  to  his  own  purposes.  The  lesson  of  the  incident  is  to  trust  God  for  help  even  in 
what  we  might  be  tempted  to  call  the  small  things  of  life.  The  loss  of  an  axe-head 
may  seem  a  trivial  circumstance  to  call  for  an  interference  with  the  laws  of  the  universe. 
But  with  God  there  is  no  great  and  little.  We  can  make  known  tUl  our  wants  to  him, 
with  assurance  of  being  helped. — J.  O. 

Ten,  8 — ^23, — A  bootless  invasion.  The  chroido  hostility  which  subsisted  between 
the  Israelitish  and  the  Syrian  kingdoms  soon  broke  out  again  in  war.  In  this,  as  in 
other  instances,  Syria  was  the  aggressor.  The  invaded  kingdom  was  delivered,  not 
through  "  the  sword  and  the  bow  "  (ver.  22)  of  its  king,  but  once  more  through  the 
Interposition  of  Elisha. 

L  Fbubtbated  pIiANS.  1.  Boyal  strategy.  The  war  which  the  King  of  Syria 
commenced  was  intended  to  be  carried  on,  not  by  battle  in  the  open  field,  but  by  a 
series  of  surprises,  caused  by  the  planting  of  ambuscades  at  convenient  spots.    It  was 


144  THB  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  vi.  1-33. 

cunning  more  than  strength  that  the  king  relied  on.  He  "took  counsel  with  hia 
servants "  as  to  the  best  method  of  carrying  out  his  plans.  Men  are  apt  to  overvalue 
cunning.  It  plays  a  large  part  in  the  conduct  of  worldly,  especially  of  political  and 
military,  affairs.  2.  The  failure  of  plant.  If  the  plotters  were  "  profound  to  make 
slaughter"  (Hos.  ▼.  2),  God  was  deeper  than  the  plotters,  "a  rebutter  of  tliem  all" 
(Hos.  T.  2).  This  was  the  element  Benhadad  left  out  of  his  calculations.  Everything 
that  passed  in  the  king's  council-chamber  was  revealed  by  God  to  Elisha,  who  told  it 
to  the  King  of  Israel.  What  was  spoken  "  in  the  ear"  in  Damascus  was  proclaimed 
"  upon  the  housetops "  in  Samaria  (Luke  xii.  3).  Thus  the  King  of  Israel  saved 
himself  "  not  once  or  twice."  The  wicked  greatly  err  when  they  say,  "  How  doth  God 
know?  and  is  there  knowledge  in  the  Most  High?"  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  11).  Not  one  of  their 
plans  but  is  "  naked  and  opened  "  (Heb.  iv.  13)  to  him.  With  a  knowledge  and  skill 
infinitely  beyond  theirs,  he  can  easily  bring  the  cunningest  of  their  schemes  to  nought. 
This  is  the  comfort  and  safety  of  those  who  trust  God,  and  are  under  his  special  care. 
3.  2%e  secret  discovered.  The  King  of  Syria's  chagrin  at  the  continual  frustration  of 
his  schemes  was  great.  He  could  account  for  it  in  no  other  way  than  that  some  of 
his  own  servants  habitually  betrayed  his  counsels.  They  who  have  God  to  fight  with 
must  lay  the^r  acctiunt  for  many  disappointments  and  troubles.  At  last  the  refil  state 
of  the  case  was  made  known  to  him  by  one  who  had  learned  the  facts  about  Elisha. 
It  was  a  startling  discovery  to  make,  that  the  things  which  he  spoke  in  his  bedchamber 
were  accurately  told  by  Elisha  to  his  enemy,  the  King  of  Israel.  None  of  us  would 
like  to  he  thus  supervised  in  our  secret  doings  by  our  fellow-men.  How  little  wo 
reflect  that,  in  sober  fact,  we  are  being  thus  morally  supervised  by  the  living  God  I 
Elisha's  name  would  be  well  known  in  Syria  since  the  healing  of  the  famous  captain. 

II.  Invisible  defence.  If  Elisha  was  the  medium  of  discovering  big  plans,  ths 
only  practicable  course  for  the  King  of  Syria  to  pursue  was  to  secure  the  person  of  th« 
prophet,  and  so  stop  further  communications  with  the  King  of  IsraeL  Benhadad  might 
have  reflected  that,  if  all  his  plans  were  known  to  Elisha,  this  plan  would  be  known  too, 
ind  Elisha  could  easily  escape.  But  wicked  men  do  not,  as  a  rule,  reflect  on  the  folly 
of  their  opposition  to  God.  The  king,  having  ascertained  that  Elisha  was  at  Dothan, 
sent  an  expedition  to  arrest  him.  1.  2%e  encompassing  host.  The  force  despatched 
against  Elisha  was  "  a  great  host,"  far  exceeding  the  captains  of  fifties  with  their 
flfties  who  were  sent  to  arrest  Elijah  (ch.  i.).  Benhadad  put  trust  in  chariots  and 
horses  (Ps.  xx.  7).  Yet  why  so  great  a  company  to  take  one  prisoner,  if  no  super- 
natural arm  was  there  to  fight  for  him  ?  And  if  God  was  Protector,  what  would  even 
this  great  host  avail  ?  Another  proof  of  the  inward  uncertainty  with  which  this 
enterprise  was  entered  upon  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  the  host  surrounded  the  city  "  by 
n'ght."  Combined  with  the  worldly  man's  belief  that  physical  force  is  irresistible, 
there  is  the  lurking  fear  that  it  may  not  prove  irresistible  after  all.  2.  The  tremlling 
tervant.  Awaking  early  the  next  morning,  and  going  forth,  the  servant  of  Elisha  saw, 
to  his  dismay,  the  city  compassed  about  with  botb  chariot  and  horse.  His  cry,  as  h« 
rushed  back  to  report  the  fact  to  his  master,  was,  "  Alas,  my  master  1  how  shall  we 
do  ? "  Thus  apt  are  men  to  judge  of  a  situation  purely  by  the  standard  of  sense. 
The  material  factors  are  nearly  the  only  ones  looked  at.  Things  are  esteemed  to  go 
well  or  ill  with  us  according  as  the  naturoil  situation  looks  favourable  or  the  reverse. 
It  is  the  constant  aim  of  Bible-teaching  to  lift  us  above  this  point  of  view — to  give  us 
a  higher  one.  3.  The  invisible  protectors.  Elisha  prayed  that  the  young  man's  eyes 
might  be  opened,  and  then  he  saw  the  mistake  he  was  committing.  "  The  mountain 
was  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about  Elisha."  No  wonder  that,  in  this 
moment  of  apparent  danger,  Elisha  was  full  of  calm  trust.  Knowing  Benhadad's 
designs,  he  might  have  escaped  had  he  desired,  hut  with  the  forces  of  the  invisible 
King  interposed  between  him  and  his  enemies,  he  did  not  feel  even  this  to  be  necessary. 
Not  less  confidently,  in  seasons  of  danger  from  ungodly  men,  may  the  believer  commit 
his  way  unto  the  Lord.  It  may  not  be  given  him  to  see  the  symbols  of  invisible 
protection,  but  not  the  less  surely  can  he  depend  that  "the  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth 
round  about  them  that  fear  him,  and  delivereth  them"  (Ps,  xxxiv.  7).  He  can  say 
with  David,  "  I  will  not  be  afraid  of  ten  thousand  of  people  that  have  set  themselves 
against  me  round  about "  (Ps.  iii.  6).  They  can  do  him  no  further  harm  than  God 
■ees  meet  to  allow.    They  that  are  for  him  are  more  than  they  that  be  against  him. 


OH.  VI.  1—33.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  US 

m.  Good  fob  xvHk  1.  The  Bupernatwal  blindness.  Descending  from  the  neigh- 
bouring heights,  on  which  they  had  encamped  during  the  night,  the  Syrians  now 
approached  to  take  Elisha.  He,  on  his  part,  prayed  the  Lord,  "  Smite  this  people,  I 
pray  thee,  with  blindness."  The  prayer  was  granted,  though  the  word  means  rather 
confusion  and  dazedness  of  mind,  than  absolute  deprivation  of  sight  (Gen.  ziz.  11). 
Their  movements  became  aimless,  and  Elisha,  going  np  to  them,  said,  "  This  i»  not 
the  way,  neither  is  this  the  city :  follow  me,  and  I  will  briog  you  to  the  man  whom  ye 
seek."  There  is  the  appearance  of  falsehood  in  this  speech  only  if  we  forget  that  the 
men  were  in  a  mental  maze,  and  probably  were  actually  going  aside  both  from  the 
way  and  the  city  in  their  attempted  search  for  it.  Elisha,  in  promisiog  to  bring  them 
to  the  man  whom  they  wanted,  undertook  no  more  than  he  performed.  Only  when 
the  Lord  opened  their  eyes,  they  found  they  were,  not  in  Dothan,  but  in  Samaria. 
This  is  one  way  in  which  God  frequently  discomfits  wicked  men,  pouring  confusion 
into  their  counsels.  They  "  grope  for  the  wall,  like  the  blind,  and  grope  as  if  (they) 
had  no  eyes :  (they)  stumble  at  noonday  as  in  the  night ;  (they)  are  in  desolate  places 
as  dead  men  "  (Isa.  lix,  10).  They  are  granted  the  desires  of  their  hearts,  but  after 
a  fashion  of  God's  own ;  and  in  such  a  way  as  to  lead  to  their  final  discomfiture  (2  Sam. 
zv.  31).  2.  The  King  of  Israel's  proposal.  It  seemed  at  first  as  if  this  great  multitude 
of  the  Syrians  had  been  led  like  sheep  into  the  slaughter-house.  They  were  now  in 
the  King  of  Israel's  power,  and  for  what  end  could  Elisha  have  brought  them  there 
but  that  the  king  might  smite  them  ?  The  king  himself  was  nothing  loth.  In  eager 
tones,  he  urged  Elisha  to  be  permitted  to  destroy  them.  The  policy  of  slaughter  is 
always  an  easy  one.  If  might  seem  sanctioned  by  Old  Testament  precedents.  Probably, 
however,  even  in  the  Old  Testament,  there  is  no  example  of  the  divinely  sanctioned 
extermination  of  a  multitude  who  were  cot  captives  in  lawful  war.  This  is  the  point 
Elisha  urges  in  reply.  If  the  king  smote  this  multitude,  would  he  be  smiting  those 
whom  he  had  taken  with  his  sword  and  bow?  He  would  not.  God  had  delivered 
these  captives  into  his  hands,  and  with  other  ends  than  that  he  should  destroy  them. 
S.  Misha's  magnanimous  counsel.  Elisha  showed  the  King  of  Israel  "  a  more  excellent 
way  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  31).  Let  him  set  bread  and  water  before  them,  that  they  might  eat 
and  drink,  and  go  to  their  master.  Here,  surely,  in  the  Old  Testament,  breathes  the 
spirit  of  the  New.  It  is  Christ's  precept  of  doing  good  to  enemies,  of  returning  good 
for  evil,  of  seeking  to  overcome  evil  with  good.  The  King  of  Israel  behaved  mors 
nobly  in  this  way  than  if  he  had  shed  the  blood  of  these  captives.  God  has  no  pleasure 
in  the  unnecessary  efiusions  of  blood.  An  instance  of  similar  clemency  to  captives 
took  place  in  the  reign  of  Fekah,  at  the  instigation  of  the  Prophet  Oded  (2  Chron. 
zxviii.  9 — ^15).  The  King  of  Israel  did  as  Elisha  desired,  and  the  captives  were  first 
entertained,  then  sent  back.  So  generous  a  deed  should  have  evoked  a  friendly  spirit 
in  Benhadad,  but  at  most  it  only  did  so  for  a  time.  We  are  not,  however,  to  be 
discouraged  from  acting  rightly,  because  those  to  whom  we  show  kindness  do  not 
appreciate  our  action.--J.  0. 

Vers.  24 — 33. — l%e  tiege  of  Samaria.  Unwarned  by  the  failure  of  previous  attempts, 
Benhadad  was  soon  engaged  in  a  new  war  on  Israel.  The  fresh  invasion  was  made  the 
occasion  of  a  fresh  deliverance,  more  wonderful  than  any  of  the  preceding,  but  not 
before  Samaria  had  been  reduced  to  the  most  desperate  straits. 

L  The  HOBEOBS  OF  A  8IEGB.  1.  The  City  invested.  TheKingof  Syria  advanced  with 
his  army,  and  struck  a  direct  blow  at  the  capital  of  the  country.  Samaria  was  the  key 
of  the  situation.  In  it  was  the  king,  the  court,  the  Prophet  Elisha,  the  whole  state  of 
royalty.  If  it  could  be  forced  to  capitulate,  the  entire  land  would  be  at  the  mercy  of 
the  invader.  Benhadad,  accordingly,  surrounded  the  city,  and,  having  cut  off  all 
supplies,  waited  till  famine  compelled  it  to  surrender.  The  method  of  siege  is  common 
in  warfare.  Nothing  could  more  awfully  illustrate  the  helplessness  of  human  beings 
when  deprived  of  the  use  of  the  ordinary  productions  of  nature.  We  depend  on  God 
for  daily  existence,  and  do  not  realize  it.  2.  The  fearful  famine.  With  no  supplies 
coming  in,  the  stock  of  food  in  Samaria  was  soon  utterly  exhausted.  We  are  reminded 
of  the  terrible  distress  in  such  famous  sieges  as  those  of  Londonderry  in  1689,  and  Paris 
in  1870.  What  in  ordinary  circumstances  would  have  been  deemed  unfit  for  human 
food,  nay,  loathe^  was  eagerlv  seized  upon,  and  famine  prices  were  gladly  paid  for  it. 

ILKISaib  !• 


m 

146  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  vi.  1— 3a. 

"  An  aBs's  head  was  oold  for  fourscore  pieces  of  silTer,"  etc.  Hunger  is  one  of  the  most 
conjmanding  of  appetites.  "  In  every  land  and  in  every  age  the  first  and  most  interest- 
ing question  the  majority  of  men  have  to  practically  solve  is, '  How  are  we  to  get 
bread?'  Man's  social,  moral,  and  spiritual  welfare  turns  to  an  incalculable  extent  on 
that  question.  Throughout  all  history,  sacred  and  profane,  this  great  want  has  been 
swaying  and  moulding  as  a  first  power  the  nations  of  men.  Hence  the  significance  of 
the  petition  in  the  centre  of  the  Lord's  prayer, '  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread.*  •  It 
may  seem  at  first  sight  a  comparatively  small  petition,  overshadowed  and  dwarfed  by 
the  great,  spiritual  petitions  both  before  and  after  it;  but  he  who  knew  what  was  in 
man,  knew  what  a  powerful  influence  the  question  of  daily  bread  had  upon  his  whole 
life  and  welfare ;  and  when  we  ourselves  consider  what  a  power  it  is  in  the  world,  we 
eee  sompihing  of  the  reason  for  placing  such  a  petition  in  the  centre  of  a  model  o 
Tjrayer  "  (F.  Ferguson).  3.  Natural  affection  destroyed.  The  shocking  episode  narrated 
n  vers.  26 — 29  illustrates  the  previous  remarks  (cf.  Deut.  xxviii.  53—57).  The  kin^ 
vas  stopped  when  pasting  by  on  the  wall  by  a  woman  appealing  to  him  for  help.  With 
:  ot  unnatural  bitterness  he  replied,  "  If  the  Lord  do  not  help  thee,  whence  ehall  I  help 
(hee  ?  "  Was  it  out  of  the  empty  barnfloor,  or  the  dry  winepress  ?  He  then  inquired 
into  her  complaint,  and  heard  from  her  her  revolting  tale.  A  woman  had  proposed  to 
her  that  she  shouW  a;ive  her  son  for  food  to  them  both  that  day,  and  she  would  give 
her  son  next  day.  The  complainant  had  (iilfiUed  her  part  of  the  bargain,  and  now  the 
second  woman  had  hidden  her  son.  One  asks — Could  human  nature,  in  its  direst 
extremity,  ever  descend  to  such  revolting  deeds?  Alas  I  the  instances  in  history  are 
not  few.  We  have  reason  to  thank  God  for  his  goodness  In  preserving  us  from  such 
extremity  and  such  temptation. 

n.  Guilt  laid  at  the  wrong  doob.  1.  The  token  ofhum.iliation.  The  woman's 
dreadful  story,  revealing  such  depths  of  horror  in  the  city,  stung  the  king  to  the 
heai-t.  His  first  act  was  to  rend  his  clothes,  and,  as  the  people  looked,  they  saw 
that  secretly  he  had  been  wearing  sackcloth  upon  his  flesh.  The  commentators, 
perhaps,  hardly  do  justice  to  Jehoram  in  this  act.  The  next  verse  shows  that  his 
religion  did  not  go  very  deep ;  but  various  circumstances  suggest  that  there  was  a 
measure  of  sincerity  in  his  penitence.  He  had  evidently  thus  far  listened  to  the 
ciiunscls  of  Elisha,  and  tried  to  "wait  on  the  Lord"  for  deliverance.  He  does  not 
show  badly  in  his  sympathy  with  the  people.  The  very  secrecy  of  his  wearing  of  sack- 
cloth distinguishes  it  from  the  act  of  an  ostentations  formalist.  He  probably,  like  his 
father  Ahab,  really  "  humbled"  himself  for  a  time,  "  and  went  softly"  (1  Kings  xxL 
27,  29).  If,  in  his  outburst  of  passion,  he  uttered  a  threat  of  death  against  Elisha,  it 
appears  to  have  been  no  sooner  spoken  than  it  was  repented  of,  and  he  hastened  after 
his  messenger  to  cotmteract  it.  It  is  good  when  God's  chastisements  lead  to  humiliation 
of  the  soul.  We  can  at  least  make  Jehoram  an  example  in  the  nnostentatiousness  of 
his  exercises  of  penitence  (Matt.  vL  16 — 18).  2.  The  threat  and  Ui  reception.  Carried 
away  by  his  anger  and  his  feeling  of  the  intolerableness  of  the  situation,  the  king  swore 
an  oath  that  that  very  day  the  head  of  Elisha  should  be  taken  from  him.  It  was  a 
wicked  and  inexcusable  utterance.  The  reasons  of  it  may  be  thus  assigned :  (1)  Elisha 
bad  apparently  urged  him  to  patience  and  repentance,  assuring  him  that  help  would 
come.  That  hope  had  been  disajipointed.  (2)  He  fixed  the  responsibility  of  the  delay 
of  help  on  Elisha,  as  one  who  had  power  with  God,  and  had  not  exercised  it.  (3)  He 
was  angry  with  God  himself,  and  was  moved  to  wreak  his  vengeance  on  God's  ministers. 
Had  he  properly  considered  the  matter,  he  would  have  reflected  that  Elisha,  like  him- 
self, could  but  present  his  desires  to  God,  and  wait  God's  time ;  that  the  prophet  had 
unweariedly  been  doing  this,  and  was  the  one  hope  and  saviour  of  the  people;  and 
that,  if  guilt  lay  at  any  one's  door,  it  was  his  own  wickedness,  and  that  of  his  associates, 
'hat  was  bringing  these  calamities  upon  the  nation.  Wicked  men,  however,  are  seldon< 
villing,  except  in  a  very  limited  degree,  to  take  home  guilt  to  themselves.  They  wili 
ilame  Gh)d,  their  fellows,  their  spiritual  counsellors,  any  one  but  themselves,  for  theii 
miseries.  It  is  a  very  different  picture  we  have  of  Elisha.  He  sits  composedly  in  hi 
house,  with  the  elders  of  Samaria  around  him,  no  doubt  exhorting  them  and  strengthen- 
ing them  to  wait  on  God.  By  that  prophetic  clairvoyanee  of  which  we  have  so  many 
instances,  he  knew  of  the  king's  threat  as  soon  as  it  was  uttered,  and  bade  the  aiders 
•but  the  dnor  against  this  measenger  of  "  the  son  of  a  murderer,"  and  detain  him  till  tiic 


OLrtLl—iO.}         TflE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  Kt^dS. 


147 


king  himself  came.  3.  Why  waU  longer  on  the  Lord  t  Jehoram  soon  arrived,  and 
his  first  words  to  Elisha  were,  "  Behold,  this  evil  is  of  the  Lord ;  what  should  I  wait 
for  the  Lord  any  longer?  "  That  he  had  departed  from  his  threat  may  be  presumed 
from  Elisha  answering  him  as  he  did.  But  his  words  show  his  radical  misconception 
of  religion.  To  wait  on  the  Lord  was  not  a  duty  to  be  done  from  regard  to  its  own  right- 
nesB  and  propriety.  It  was,  he  thought,  a  means  to  an  end.  If  benefits  were  to  be  gained 
from  it,  it  was  to  be  done ;  if  not,  it  was  to  be  set  aside.  Service  of  God  which  springs 
from  this  principle  is  not  true  service.  It  is  disguised  self-interest.  It  has  no  real 
spring  of  love,  devotion,  or  worship.  The  spirit  is  kindred  with  that  of  the  fetish- 
worshipper,  wbo  prays  to  his  gods  for  rain,  and  beats  them  if  he  does  not  get  it.  But 
why  blame  Jehoram,  as  if  he  were  specially  impious  ?  Does  not  the  same  spirit  show 
itself  in  multitudes  among  ourselves?  While  the  sun  shines  on  them  they  are  willing 
enough  to  be  religious.  If  adversity  comes,  there  is  unbelief,  murmuring,  impatience, 
rebellion  at  the  Divine  ordering.  "  Shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and 
shall  we  not  receive  evil  ?  "  (Job  ii.  10).  It  is  not  enough  to  acknowledge  that  evil 
is  from  the  Lord,  we  must  humble  ourselves  under  his  hand,  submit  to  him,  own  the 
justice  of  his  dealings,  and  seek  to  profit  by  his  chastisements.  We  must  not  faint, 
or  grow  unbelieving,  but  be  assured  that,  in  protracting  the  hour  of  deliverance,  God  is 
but  waiting  to  make  the  deliverance  more  signal  and  glorious  (Heb.  xii.  6 — 11).^F.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Vn. 


Yen.  1-  -20. — Thk  Siegb  or  Sauabu 
{emtinued) :  th>  DELiVERANoa. 

Ters.  1, 2. — The  separation  of  these  verses 
ham  the  preceding  narrative  is  most  un- 
fortunate. They  are  an  integral  part  of 
it,  and  form  its  olimax.  In  answer  to  the 
king's  attempt  upon  his  life,  and  hasty 
speech  in  which  he  has  threatened  to  re- 
nounce Jehovah,  Blisha  is  commissioned  to 
proclaim  that  the  siege  is  on  the  point  of 
terminating,  the  famine  about  to  be  within 
twenty-four  hours  succeeded  by  a  time  of 
plenty.  There  is  thus  no  reason  for  the 
king's  despair  or  anger. 

Yer.  l.^Then  Elisha  said,  Hear  ye  the 
word  of  the  Lord.  This  was  a  very  solemn 
exordium,  well  calculated  to  arrest  atten- 
tion. It  must  be  remembered  that  the 
prophet's  life  was  trembling  in  the  balance. 
The  executioner  was  present ;  the  king  had 
not  revoked  his  order;  the  elders  would 
probably  have  suffered  the  king  to  work  his 
wilL  All  depended  on  Elisha,  by  half  a 
dozen  words,  changing  the  king's  mind. 
He  therefore  announces  a  Divine  oracle 
(comp.  2  Chron.  xiii.  4 ;  xv.  2 ;  zx.  20 ;  and 
for  the  exact  expression,  see  Isa.  i.  10 ;  xxvili. 
14 ;  xxix.  5,  etc. ;  Jer.  iL  4 ;  vii.  2,  etc.). 
Thus  saith  tiie  Lord,  To-morrow  about  this 
time  shall  a  measure — literally,  a  teah—oi 
flne  flour  be  sold  for  a  shekeL  The  "  seah  " 
was  probably  about  equal  to  a  peck  and  a 
half  English,  the  shekel  of  the  time  to 
about  half  a  oiown.    Thus  no  extraordinary 


cheapness  is  promised,  but  only  an  enormous 
fall  in  prices  from  the  rate  current  at  the 
moment  (oh.  vii.  25).  Such  a  fall  implied, 
almost  necessarily,  the  discontinuance  of  the 
siege.  Jehoram  appears  to  have  accepted 
the  prophet's  solemn  asseveration,  and  on 
the  strength  of  it  to  have  spared  his  life,  at 
any  rate  till  the  result  should  be  seen.  And 
two  measures — ^literally,  $eahi — of  barley  for 
a  shekel,  in  the  gate  of  Samaria.  The  gates, 
or  rather  gateways,  of  Oriental  towns  were 
spacious  places,  where  business  of  various 
kinds  was  transacted.  One  at  Nineveh  had 
an  area  of  above  two  thousand  five  hundred 
square  feet.  Kings  often  held  their  courts 
of  justice  in  the  city  gates.  On  this  occa- 
sion one  of  the  gates  of  Samaria  seems  to 
have  been  used  as  a  corn-market  (comp. 
vers.  17—20). 

Yer.  2. — ^Then  a  lord  on  whose  hand  tht 
king  leaned ;  rather,  the  lord,  or  the  captain, 
as  the  word  vf^e>  is  commonly  translated 
(Exod.  xiv.  7;  xv.  4;  2  Sam.  xiiii.  8; 
1  Kings  ix.  22 ;  ch.  ix.  25;  x.  25  ;  xv.  25 ; 
1  Chron.  xi.  11 ;  xii.  18 ;  2  Chron.  viii. 
9).  (For  the  habit  of  kings  to  lean  on 
the  band  of  an  attendant,  see  above,  ch.  v. 
18.)  Answered  the  man  of  Ood,  and  said, 
Behold,  if  the  Lord  would  make  windows  in 
heaven,  might  this  thing  be  I  The  king 
makes  no  reply;  he  waits  for  the  result. 
But  the  o£Scer  on  whose  arm  he  leans  is 
not  so  reticent.  Utterly  inoredulous,  ha 
expresses  his  incredulity  m  a  scoffing  way : 
**  Could  this  possibly  be,  even  if  Ood  were 
to  '  make  windows  in  heaven,'  as  ha  did  at 
the  time  of  the  Flood  (Gen.  viL  11),  and 
pour  through  them,  instead  of  rain,  as  then, 
a  continual  shower  of  fine  meal  and  com  ?  " 


148 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  vn.  1— 2a 


Disbelief  U  expressed,  not  only  in  the  pn>- 
phetio  veracity  of  Elisha,  but  in  the  power 
of  Ood.  Henoe  EUsha's  stem  reply.  And 
he  said,  Behold,  thou  shalt  see  it  with  thine 
eyes,  but  shalt  not  eat  thereof.  At  once  • 
threat  and  a  warning.  If  the  thing  was  to 
be,  and  the  lurd  to  see  it  and  yet  not  profit 
by  it,  the  only  reasonable  conclusion  was 
that  his  death  was  imminent.  He  was  thus 
warned,  and  given  time  to  **  set  his  house  in 
order,"  and  to  repent  and  make  his  peace 
with  the  Almighty.  Whether  he  took  ad- 
vantage of  the  warning,  or  even  understood 
it.  we  are  not  told. 

Yen.  a— IS.— The  mode  In  which  Eli- 
•hk's  prophecy  of  relief  and  deliverance  was 
fblfllled  is  now  set  forth.  Four  lepers,  ex- 
cluded from  the  city,  and  on  the  point  of 
perishing  of  hunger,  felt  that  they  could  be 
no  worse  off,  and  might  better  their  condi- 
tion, if  they  deserted  to  the  Syrians.  They 
therefore  drew  off  from  the  city  at  nightfall, 
and  made  for  the  Syrian  camp.  On  arriving, 
they  found  it  deserted.  The  entire  host, 
seized  with  a  sudden  panic,  had  fled,  about 
the  time  that  they  began  their  journey. 
The  lepers'  first  thought  was  to  enrich  them- 
selves by  plunder,  but  after  a  while  it  oc- 
curred to  them  that,  unless  they  hastened 
to  carry  the  good  news  to  Samaria,  inquiry 
would  be  made,  their  proceedings  would  be 
found  out,  and  they  would  be  severely 
punished.  So  they  returned  to  the  capital, 
and  reported  what  they  had  discovered. 
Jehoram,  on  receiving  the  news,  feared  that 
the  Syrians  had  prepared  a  trap  for  him, 
and  declined  to  move.  He  consented,  how- 
ever, to  send  out  scouts  to  reconnoitre.  The 
icouta  found  evident  proof  that  the  entire 
umy  had  actually  fled  and  was  gone,  where- 
upon there  was  a  general  raid  upon  the 
camp  and  its  stores,  which  were  so  abundant 
that  Elisha'i  prophecy  was  ftilflUed  ere  the 
day  ended. 

Ver.  3. — And  there  were  four  leprous  men 
at  the  entering  in  of  the  gate ;  or,  at  the 
entrance  to  the  gate-hou»e.  Lepers  were  for- 
bidden by  the  Law  to  reside  within  cities 
(Lev.  xiii.  46;  Numb.  v.  3).  They  were 
thrust  out  when  the  disease  developed 
itself,  and  forced  to  dwell  without  the  walls. 
No  doubt  tbeir  friends  within  the  city  or- 
dinarily supplied  them  with  food;  and 
hence  they  congregated  about  the  city  gates. 
And  they  said  one  to  another,  Why  sit  we 
here  until  we  die  1  In  the  extreme  scarcity, 
tt  is  probable  that  no  food  waa  brought  to 


them,  the  inmates  of  the  city  having  barely 
enough  wherewith  to  sustain  themselves  (ch. 
vi.  25).  Thus  they  were  on  the  point  of 
perishing, 

Ver.  4. — If  we  say,  We  will  enter  into 
the  oity,  then  the  famine  is  in  the  oity,  and 
we  shall  die  there.  The  lepers  were  cer- 
tainly not  at  liberty  to  enter  the  city  when 
they  pleased ;  but  perhaps  they  might  have 
managed,  in  one  way  or  another,  to  return 
within  the  walls.  They  ask  themselves, 
however,  "  Oui  bono  ?  "  What  will  be  the 
use  of  it?  The  famine  is  inside  the  town 
no  less  than  outside.  If  they  entered  the 
city,  by  hook  or  by  crook,  it  would  only  be 
to  "  die  there."  And  if  we  sit  still  here,  we 
die  also ;  rather,  if  toe  remain  here,  or,  if  we 
dweU  here.  Lepers,  excluded  from  a  city, 
are  in  the  habit  of  building  themselves  huts 
near  the  gateways.  "  The  lepers  of  Jeru- 
salem, at  the  present  day,  have  their  tents 
by  the  side  of  the  Zion  gate  "  (Keil,  ad  loe.). 
If  the  leprous  men  remained  where  they 
were,  death  stared  them  in  the  face  equally. 
Kow  therefore  come,  and  let  us  fall  unto 
the  host  of  the  Sjnians.  Let  us,  i.e.,  fall 
away  from  our  own  side,  desert  them,  and 
go  over  to  the  enemy  (comp.  ch.  xxv.  11 ; 
Jer.  xxxvii.  13,  14 ;  xxxix.  9 ;  lii.  15).  If 
they  save  us  alive,  we  shall  live;  and  if 
they  kill  us,  we  shall  but  die ;  i.e.  we  cannot 
be  worse  off  than  we  are,  even  if  they  kill 
us ;  while  it  may  be  that  they  will  be  more 
merciful,  and  let  us  Uv^. 

Ver.  6. — ^And  they  rose  up  in  the  twilight. 
Most  certainly  in  the  evening  twilight,  us 
soon  as  the  sun  was  down  (see  ver.  9).  Had 
they  set  off  in  the  daytime,  the  garrison 
would  have  shot  at  them  from  the  walls. 
To  go  unto  the  oamp  of  the  Syrians:  and 
when  they  were  come  to  the  utteimost  part 
— t'.e.  the  most  advanced  part,  that  which 
was  nearest  to  Samaria — of  the  oamp  of 
Syria,  behold,  there  was  no  man  there.  The 
camp  was  empty,  deserted.  Not  a  soul  was 
anywhere  to  be  seen. 

Ver.  6. — For  the  lord  had  made  the  host 
of  the  Syrians  to  hear  a  noise  of  chariots, 
and  a  noise  of  horses,  even  the  noise  of  a 
great  host,  ^ip,  voice,  is  used  for  noises 
of  any  kind  (see  Exod.  xx.  18 ;  Ps.  xlii.  7; 
xciii.  4;  Jer.  xlvii.  8;  Ezek.  i.  24;  iii.  13; 
Joel  ii.  5;  Nah.  iii.  2),  though  generally 
for  those  in  which  the  human  voice  pre- 
ponderated. A  noise  like  that  of  chariots 
and  of  horses  and  of  a  great  host  (fjna  ^;«n) 
was  borne  in  upon  the  ears  of  the  Syrians 
about  nightfall  of  the  day  on  which  Jehoram 
had  determined  to  put  Eliaha  to  death ;  and, 
as  they  expected  no  reinforcements,  they 
naturally  concluded  that  succour  had  ar- 
rived to  help  their  enemy.  How  the  noise 
was  produced  it  is  impossible  to  say.  Na- 
tural causes  ara  insufficient;  and  the  writer 


OH.  yii,  1— 20.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


U9 


evidently  regards  the  event  as  miraculous : 
"  The  Lord  had  made  the  host  of  the  Syrians 
to  hear  a  noise,"  etc.  Nothing  can  he  more 
weak  and  irrelevant  than  to  remark,  with 
Bahr, "  There  are  instances,  even  nowadays, 
that  people  in  certain  mountainous  regions 
regard  a  rushing  and  roaring  sound,  such  at 
is  sometimes  heard  there,  as  a  sign  of  coming 
war."  The  Syrians  thought  they  heard  the 
actual  arrival  of  a  vast  army.  And  they 
said  one  to  another,  Lo,  the  King  of  Israel 
hath  hired  against  ns  the  kings  of  the  Hit- 
tites.  This  supposition  has  been  thought 
"  strange,"  almost  inexplicable.  "  No  such 
nation  as  the  Hittites  any  longer  existed," 
says  Mr.  Sumner  (•  The  Books  of  the  Kings,' 
vol.  ii.  p.  72,  Eng.  trans.J.  But  the  As- 
syrian records  of  the  ninth  and  eighth  cen- 
turies B.O.  make  it  evident,  not  only  that  the 
Hittites  still  existed  at  that  date,  but  that 
they  were  among  the  most  powerful  enemies 
of  the  Ninevite  kings,  being  located  In 
Northern  Syria,  about  Carchemish  (Jerabus) 
and  the  adjacent  country.  It  is  also  ap- 
parent that  they  did  not  form  a  centralized 
monarchy,  but  were  governed  by  a  number 
of  chiefs,  or  "  kings,"  twelve  of  whom  are 
mentioned  in  one  place  (G.  Smith, '  Eponym 
Canon,'  p.  112).  It  was  no  very  improbable 
J  ipposition  on  the  part  of  the  Syrians  that 
Jehoram  had  called  in  the  aid  of  the  Hit- 
tite  confederacy,  and  that  they  had  marched 
an  army  to  his  assistance.  And  the  kings  of 
the  Egyptians.  "  The  plural,,  kings  of  the 
Egyptians,"  says  Keil,  "  is  not  to  be  pressed. 
It  is  probably  occasioned  only  by  the  pa- 
rallel expression, '  kings  of  the  Hittites.' " 
But  Egyptian  history  shows  us  that  about 
this  date  Egypt  was  becoming  disintegrated, 
and  tliat  two  or  three  distinct  dynasties  were 
sometimes  ruling  at  the  same  time,  in  differ- 
ent parts  of  the  country — one  at  Bubastis, 
another  at  T'hebes,  a  third  at  Tanis,  occa- 
sionally a  fourth  at  Memphis  (see  "An- 
cient Egypt,"  in '  The  Story  of  the  Nations,' 
p.  311).  The  writer  thus  shows  a  know- 
ledge of  the  internal  condition  of  Egypt 
which  we  should  not  have  expected.  To 
come  upon  us ;  i.e.  to  fall  upon  us  from  the 
north  and  from  the  south  at  the  same  time. 
In  their  panic,  the  Syrians  did  not  stop  to 
weigh  probabilities,  or  to  think  how  unlikely 
it  was  that  such  a  simultaneous  attack  could 
have  been  arranged  between  powers  so  re- 
mote one  from  the  other. 

Ver.  7. — Wherefore  they  arose  and  fled 
in  the  twilight.  At  the  very  time  when 
the  lepers  were  drawing  off  from  the  gate 
of  Samaria  to  fall  away  to  them  (see  ver. 
5).  And  left  their  tents,  and  their  horses, 
and  theii  asses,  even  the  camp  as  it  was. 
Partly,  perhaps,  in  mere  panic;  partly  to 
induce  a  belief  on  the  part  of  the  enemy 
that  they  had  not  quitted  their  camp.    So 


Darius  Hystaspit,  when  he  began  his  re- 
treat from  Soythia  (Heiod.,  It.  135),  left  his 
camp  standing,  and  the  camp  fires  lighted, 
and  the  asses  tethered  (see  ver.  10),  that 
the  Scythians,  seeing  the  tents  and  hearing 
the  noise  of  the  animals,  might  be  fully 
persuaded  that  his  troops  were  still  in  the 
same  place.  Asses  were  the  chief  baggage- 
animals  in  many  ancient  armies.  And  fled 
for  their  life.  Thinking  that,  if  they  waited 
till  dawn,  the  Israelite  allies,  Hittites  and 
Egyptians,  would  exterminate  them. 

Ver.  8. — And  when  these  lepers  came  t« 
the  uttermost  part  of  the  camp.  The  nar- 
rative, begun  in  ver.  3,  is  here  taken  up 
from  the  point  where  it  was  broken  off  in 
ver.  5,  and  the  phrase  there  used  is  repeated, 
to  mark  the  connection.  They  went  into 
one  tent,  and  di^  eat  and  drink.  The  first 
necessity  was  to  satisfy  the  cravings  of  their 
appetite,  as  they  were  well-nigh  starving. 
Then  their  covetousness  was  excited  by  the 
riches  exposed  to  view  in  the  tent.  And 
carried  thence  silver,  and  gold,  and  raiment. 
Oriental  armies  carried  with  them  vast  quan- 
tities of  the  precious  metals,  in  the  shape  of 
gold  and  silver  vases,  goblets,  dishes,  as  well 
as  in  collars,  chains,  furniture,  and  trappings. 
Herodotus  says  (ix.  80)  that,  when  the  camp 
of  Mardonius  at  Platcea  fell  into  the  hands 
of  the  Greeks,  there  were  found  in  it "  many 
tents  richly  adorned  with  furniture  of  gold 
and  silver,  many  couches  covered  with  plates 
of  the  same,  and  many  golden  bowls,  goblets, 
and  other  drinking-vessels.  On  tlie  car- 
riages were  bags  containing  gold  and  silver 
kettles;  and  the  bodies  of  the  slain  fur- 
nished bracelets  and  chains,  and  scimitars 
with  golden  ornaments — not  to  mention  em- 
broidered apparel,  of  which  no  one  made 
any  account."  The  camp  of  the  Syrians 
would  scarcely  have  been  so  richly  pro- 
vided ;  but  still  it  contained,  no  doubt,  a 
large  amount  of  very  valuable  plunder.  And 
went  and  hid  it.  •  The  lepers  had  no  right 
to  the  pick  of  the  spoil.  It  belonged  to  the 
nation,  and  it  was  probably  the  king's  right 
to  apportion  it.  The  lepers  had  to  conceal 
what  they  appropriated,  lest  it  should  be 
taken  from  them.  And  came  again,  and  en- 
tered into  another  tent,  and  carried  thence 
also,  and  went  and  hid  it.  Plundering 
thus  probably,  not  two  tents  only,  but 
seventh  At  last,  either  covetousness  was 
satiated  or  conscience  awoke. 

Ver.  9. — ^Then  they  said  one  to  another, 
We  do  not  weU.  It  was  a  tardy  recognition 
of  what  their  duty  required  of  them.  As 
Grotius  says,  "  Ofdoium  oivium  est  ea  indi- 
care,  ques  ad  salutem  publicam  pertinent." 
Their  fellow-countrymen  in  the  city  of  Sa- 
maria were  perishing  of  hunger,  mothers 
eating  their  okildren,  and  the  like,  while 
they  employed  hour  after  hour  in  collecting 


160 


TAB  SfiCOlrt)  BOOK  OJ"  THE  KlKGS.       [oh.  to.  1— Ml 


and  hiding  away  their  booty.  They  ought, 
as  Boon  as  they  had  satisfled  their  hunger, 
to  have  hurried  back  to  the  oity  and  spread 
the  good  news.  This  day  is  a  day  of  good 
tidings,  and  we  hold  our  peace ;  i.e.  we  keep 
silence,  and  do  not  proclaim  them,  aj  we 
ought.  If  we  tarry  till  the  morning  light, 
tome  mischief  will  come  upon  ns;  ratlier, 
punithment  will  fall  onut;  we  shall  suffer 
for  what  we  have  done — a  very  reasonable 
supposition.  Now  therefore  come,  that  we 
may  go  and  tell  the  Mug's  honsehold.  The 
"  king's  household  "  means  the  court,  the 
medium  through  which  the  king  was  ordi- 
narily approached. 

Ver.  10. — So  they  came  and  called  nnto  the 
porter  of  the  oity ;  i.e.  to  the  guard  of  the 
gate  nearest  them.  The  word  ng&, "  porter," 
or  "  gate-man,"  is  used  collectively.  And 
they  told  them,  saying,  We  came  to  the 
camp  of  the  Syrians,  and,  behold,  there  was 
no  man  there,  neither  voice  of  man,  but 
horses  tied,  and  asses  tied,  and  the  tents  as 
they  were.  The  horses  aud  asses  within  a 
camp  were  always  "  tied,"  or  tethered,  as 
we  see  from  the  monumental  representations 
of  Egyptian  camps  (Rawliiison, '  History  of 
Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  i.  p.  476),  and  also 
leam  from  historians  (Herod.,  iv.  135).  It 
is  somewhat  surprising  that  the  horses  were 
left  behind,  as  they  would  haye  expedited 
the  flight  had  they  been  saddled  and 
mounted.  But  this  was,  perhaps,  over- 
looked in  the  panic. 

Ver.  11. — And  he  called  the  porters ;  and 
they  told  it  to  the  Mng's  house  within; 
rather,  and  the  porters  (or,  gate-heeperi) 
tailed  out  and  told  it,  etc.  K^p*  may  be  a 
plural  before  its  subject ;  or  the  true  read- 
ing may  be  ii<?f;',,  which  is  found  in  some 
manuscripts. 

Ver.  12. — ^And  the  king  arose  in  the  night, 
and  said  unto  his  servants,  I  will  now  show 
yon  what  the  Syrians  have  done  to  us.  They 
know  that  we  be  hungry;  therefore  are 
they  gone  out  of  the  camp  to  hide  them- 
selves in  the  field.  Jelioram,  knowing  of 
no  reason  for  the  flight  of  the  Syrians,  sus- 
pected a  not  uncommon  stratagem.  He 
supposed  that  the  enemy  had  merely  gone 
a  little  way  from  their  camp,  and  placed 
themselves  in  ambush,  ready  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  any  rash  movement  which  the 
Israelites  might  make.  So  Gyrus  is  said 
to  have  entrapped  and  slaughtered  Sparga- 
pises,  the  son  of  Tomyris,  together  with  a 
large  detachment,  in  his  last  war  against 
tliu  Massagetffi  (Herod.,  i.  211),  His  sup- 
position was  not  unrcaBonable.  Saying, 
When  they  come  out  of  the  oity,  we  shedl 
catch  them  alive,  and  get  into  the  oity.  A 
double  advantage  might  be  expected  to 
follow — those  who  quitted  the  town  to 
plunder  the  camp  would  be  surrounded  and 


made  prisoners,  while  the  town  itself,  left 
without  defenders,  wonld  be  captured.  C!om- 
pare  the  capture  of  Al  by  Joshua  (Joth.  viiL 
3—19),  when  the  chief  part  of  the  garrison 
had  been  enticed  out  of  it. 

Ver.  13.— And  one  of  his  leiraati  an- 
swered and  said,  Let  some  take,  I  piay  thee, 
five  of  the  horses  that  remain.  One  of  Je- 
horam's  "servants,"  i.e.  of  the  officers  at- 
tached to'  his  person,  suggested  that  a 
small  body  of  horse  (four  or  five)  should  be 
sent  out  to  reconnoitre.  The  besieged  had 
still  some  horses  left,  though  apparently 
not  many.  Note  the  phrase,  "five  of  the 
horses  Omt  remain."  The  majority  had 
died  of  want,  or  been  killed  to  furniui  food 
to  the  garrison.  (Behold,  they  are  as  all  the 
multitude  of  Israel  that  are  left  in  it — i.e. 
in  Samaria— behold,  I  say,  they  are  eTen  as 
all  the  multitude  of  the  Israelites  that  are 
consumed) ;  t.e.  they  will  run  no  more  risk 
than  the  other  troops  who  remain  in  the 
city,  for  these,  too,  "  are  consumed,"  Is.  are 
on  the  point  of  perishing.  Supposing  that 
they  fall  into  the  enemy's  hands,  it  will  go 
no  harder  with  them  than  with  the  "  multi- 
tude "  which  is  on  the  point  of  starvation. 
And  let  ns  send  and  see.  We  can  do  nothing 
until  we  know  whether  the  siege  is  really 
raised,  or  whether  the  pretended  withdrawal 
is  a  mere  ruae.  We  most  send  and  have 
this  matter  made  dear. 

Ver.  14. — They  took  therefore  two  chariot 
horses ;  literally,  two  ekariote  of  horses;  Le. 
two  chariots,  with  the  accustomed  number 
of  horses,  which  (with  the  Israelites)  was  two, 
though  with  the  Assyrians  and  Egyptians 
it  was  frequently  three.  The  employment 
of  chariots  instead  of  horsemen  is  remark- 
able, and  seems  to  indicate  that  with  the 
Israelites,  as  with  the  Egyptians,  the  chariot 
force  was  regarded  as  superior  to  the  cavalry 
for  practical  purposes.  And  the  king  sent 
after  the  host  of  the  Syrians,  saying,  6o  and 
see.  The  advice  of  the  king's  "servant" 
was  taken ;  a  couple  of  chariots  were  sent 
out  to  reconnoitre. 

Ver.  15.— And  they  went  after  them  unto 
Jordan.  The  charioteers,  finding  the  camp 
really  empty,  discovering  no  ambush,  and 
coming  upon  abundant  signs  of  a  hasty  and 
perturbed  flight,  followed  upon  the  track  of 
the  fugitives  until  they  reached  the  Jordan, 
probably  in  the  vicinity  of  Beth-shan,  which 
lay  on  the  ordinary  route  between  Samaria 
and  Damascus.  Convinced  by  what  they 
saw  that  the  Syrians  had  really  withdrawn 
into  their  own  country,  they  panned  no 
further,  but  returned  to  Samaria.  And,  lo, 
all  the  way  was  fuU  of  garments  and  vessels, 
which  the  Syrians  had  oast  away  in  thc^r 
haste.  Cloaks,  shawls,  shields,  and  even 
swords  and  spears,  would  be  oast  away  as 
impedimenta — hindrances  to  a  rapid  flight 


CB.  TIL  1—20.]        THE  8£XX>Ni>  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGSl 


ui 


These  strewed  tbe  line  of  the  retreating 
nrmy's  march.  And  the  messengers  retnmed, 
knd  told  the  Idng.  Oave  a  full  and  complete 
sceonnt  of  what  they  had  seen. 

Yer.  16. — And  the  people  went  out,  and 
•polled  the  tents  of  the  Syrians.  The  whole 
population  of  Samaria,  with  one  accord, 
quitted  the  town,  and  flung  themselves  upon 
the  spoil — the  rich  garments,  the  gold  and 
silver  vessels,  the  horses  and  asses,  of  which 
mention  had  been  made  previously  (vers. 
8 — 10).  At  the  same  time,  no  doubt,  they 
feasted  on  the  abundant  dainties  which 
they  found  in  the  tents.  Having  satisfied 
their  immediate  wants,  they  proceeded  to 
lay  in  a  store  of  corn  for  future  use,  and 
crowded  tnmultuonsly  into  the  gate,  where 
the  corn  found  in  the  camp  was  being  sold. 
So  %  measure  of  fine  flour;  rather,  and  a 
measure,  etc.— was  sold  for  a  shekel,  and 
two  measnres  of  harley  for  a  shekel,  accord- 
ding  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  (see  ver.  1). 

Ver.  17. — And  the  king  appointed  tbe  lord 
•n  whose  hand  he  leaned  to  have  the  charge 
of  the  gate.  Anticipating  disorder,  unless 
■pecial  care  were  taken,  through  the  pro- 
bable eagerness  of  the  people  to  purchase 
the  corn  which  was  offered  to  them  at  so 
m^'  'erate  a  rate,  Jehoram  appointed  the 
oiillcer  on  whose  arm  he  had  leant  when  he 
visited  the  house  of  Elisha  (see  ver.  2),  to 
have  the  charge  of  the  gate,  and  preside 
over  the  sale.  Probably  there  was  no 
thdught  of  the  post  being  one  of  danger. 
And  the  people  trode  npon  him  in  the  gate, 
and  he  died.  It  has  been  qnestiimed  whether 
tiie  death  was  accidental  (B'ahr),  and  sug- 
gested that  the  eager  and  famished  people 
resibted  bis  authoiity,  and  violently  bore 
down  his  attempts  to  control  tliem.  But 
there  is  nothing  in  the  text  that  is  incom- 
patible with  an  accidental  death.  Such 
«leaths  Me  not  uncommon  in  dense  crowds 


of  anxious  and  excited  people.  As  the  man 
of  Ood  had  laid,  who  epake  when  the  king 
oame  down  to  him.  The  Ttoieties  of  reading 
here  do  not  affeot  the  general  sense.  Tb« 
writer's  intention  is  to  lay  special  stresa  on 
the  fulfilment  of  Elisha's  prophecy ;  and  to 
emphasize  the  punishment  that  foUows  on 
a  lack  of  faith.  The  concluding  passage  of 
the  chapter  is,  as  Bahr  says,  "  •  finger  of 
warning  to  unbelievers." 

Yer.  18. — ^And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  man 
of  Ood  had  spoken  to  the  king,  saying,  Two 
measnres  of  barley  for  a  shekel,  and  • 
measure  of  fine  flour  for  a  shekel,  shall  be 
to-morrow  about  this  time  in  the  gate  of 
Samaria.  The  otiose  repetition  of  almost 
the  whole  of  ver.  1  can  only  be  explained 
as  a  mode  of  emphasizing,  and  m  impress- 
ing npon  the  reader  two  main  points :  (1) 
Elisha's  prophetic  powers;  and  (2)  flie 
dreadful  consequences  that  follow  on  aoomful 
rejection  of  a  message  bom  God  (see  the 
comment  on  ver.  2). 

Yer.  19. — And  that  lord  answered  the  man 
of  Ood,  and  said,  Now,  behold,  if  the  Lord 
should  make  windows  in  heaven,  might  such 
a  thing  be  T  And  he  said.  Behold,  thou  shalt 
see  it  with  thine  eyes,  but  shalt  not  eat 
thereof  (see  the  comment  on  the  preceding 
verse). 

Yer.  20.— And  so  It  fell  out  unto  him ;  t.s. 
the  prophecy  was  exactly  fulfilled.  The 
lord,  being  appointed  to  keep  order  in  the 
gate  where  the  com  was  sold,  "  saw  with 
his  eyes"  (ver.  2)  the  wonderful  fall  of 
prices  within  the  short  space  of  twenty-four 
houi'B,  which  Elisha  had  prophesied;  but 
"did  not  eat  thereof" — did  not,  in  his  own 
person,  obtain  any  benefit  from  the  sudden 
plenty,  since  he  perished  before  he  could 
profit  by  it.  For  the  people  trode  npon  him 
in  the  gate,  and  he  died  (see  the  comment 
on  Ter.  17). 


HOMILETlOa 

Vers.  1,2,  and  17 — ^20. — The  sin  of  the  icoffer,  and  iti  puntihmeni,  TTnlwIlef  may 
be  involuntary,  and  so  neither  incur  guilt  nor  deserve  punishment.  St.  Paul  "  obtained 
mercy"  notwithstanding  his  bitter  persecution  of  thei  early  Christians,  "because  he 
did  it  ignorantly  in  unbelief"  (1  Tim.  i.  13).  Modem  sceptics  are,  no  doubt,  in  many 
cases  unable  to  believe,  their  eyes  being  blinded  through  their  education,  through 
ingrained  prejudice  or  invincible  ignorance.  But  to  scoff  at  religion  must  be  at  all  times 
•  voluntary  act ;  and  it  is  an  act  which  Holy  Scripture  views  as  in  the  highest  degree 
blamable.  In  the  instance  here  recorded,  where  Elisha,  rising  ~up  in  all  the  majesty  of 
God's  prophet,  and  addressing  himself  to  king,  nobles,  and  elders,  solemnly  required 
them  to  "hear  the  word  of  Jehovah,"  and  then  proclaimed  with  a  voice  of  authority 
the  raising  of  the  siege  and  the  speedy  conversion  of  the  existing  scarcity  into  abun- 
dance, it  indicated  extreme  effrontery  and  contempt  for  holy  things,  to  take  the  word, 
when  the  king  himself  was  silent,  and  utter  a  scoff,  questioning  the  power  as  well  •■ 
the  truthfulness  of  God.  The  "  lord  "  was  clearly  puffed  up  with  a  hign  opinion  of  hii 
own  wisdom,  enlightenment,  and  knowledge  of  the  world  and  its  ways,  and  perceiving 
so  probability  of  tbe  change  prophesied,  of  which  there  was  indeed  at  the  time  no  ligi^ 


162  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  to.  1—20 

thought  himself  entitled,  not  only  to  disbelieve  the  announcement,  bul  to  pour  contempt 
upon  it.  "  It  is  too  often  the  case  that  Mgh-horn  and  apparently  well-bred  men,  at 
court,  take  pleasure  in  mockeries  of  the  Word  of  God  and  of  its  declarations,  without 
reflecting  that  they  thereby  bear  testimony  to  their  own  inner  rudeness,  vulgarity,  and 
want  of  breeding  "  (Bahr).  They  think  it  a  proof  of  their  own  cleverness  and  supe- 
riority to  superstitious  terrors,  to  mock  and  ridicule  what  they  know  to  be  reverenced 
by  others.  For  the  most  part  God  allows  them  to  escape  punishment  in  this  world, 
but  now  and  then  he  signally  vindicates  his  honour  in  the  sight  of  all,  by  a  manifest 
judgment  upon  the  scoffers.  An  Ely  mas  the  sorcerer  is  struck  blind  (Acts  ziii.  11) 
suddenly,  an  Arius  perishes  in  the  dead  of  night,  or  an  Israelite  "  lord "  suffers  the 
penalty  due  to  his  rash  words  by  being  "  trampled  underfoot."  God  can  at  any  time 
"  arise  to  judgment,"  and  "  reward  the  proud  after  their  deserving."  Let  men  see  to  it 
that  they  provoke  him  not  by  "  speaking  unadvisedly  with  their  lips."  If  they  cannot 
receive  his  Word  and  hold  fast  his  truth,  let  them  at  least  "  keep  still  silence,"  refrain 
themselves,  and  not  draw  down  his  vengeance  upon  them  by  profane  scoffs  and  idle  jesting. 

Vers.  3 — 15. — The  plenitude  of  OocPs  pmver  to  deliver  from  the  extremett  dangeri. 
It  is  impossible  to  conceive  a  peril  greater  than  that  of  Samaria  at  this  time.  The 
Syrians  were  masters  of  all  the  open  country.  They  had  for  months  surrounded  the 
town  and  strictly  blockaded  it.  The  store  of  provisions  within  the  walls  was  almost 
wholly  exhausted,  and  there  was  no  possibility  of  obtaining  a  supply  from  without. 
Jehoram  had  no  ally  who  could  be  expected  to  come  to  his  aid.  Human  wisdom,  as  per- 
sonified in  the  "  lord  on  whose  hand  the  king  leaned,"  might  well  view  the  end  as  certain, 
not  seeing  &om  what  quarter  deliverance  could  possibly  come.  But  man's  extremity  is 
Ghxi's  opportunity.  With  God  nothing  is  impossible.  Nothing  is  even  hard.  He  has 
a  thousand  resources.  He  can  send  forth  his  angel  into  a  camp  at  nightfall,  and  in  the 
morning  they  shall  be  "  aU  dead  men  "  (ch.  xix.  85).  He  can  make  brothers-in-arms 
to  fall  out,  and  turn  their  swords  one  against  another  (2  Chron.  xx.  23).  He  can  send 
a  groundless  panic  upon  the  largest  and  best-appointed  host,  and  cause  them  to  flee 
away  and  disappear,  "like  the  chaff  of  the  summer  threshing-floor."  He  can  make 
two  men,  like  Jonathan  and  his  armour-bearer  (1  Sam.  xiv.  6 — 16),  victorious  over  a 
multitude.  "  A  thousand  shall  flee  at  the  rebuke  of  one,"  if  God  so  wills  it.  Panic  he 
can  cause  in  a  hundred  ways.  "  It  is  only  necessary  that  in  the  darkness  a  wind  should 
blow,  or  that  water  should  splash  in  free  course,  or  that  an  echo  should  resound  from 
the  mountains,  or  that  the  wind  should  rustle  the  dry  leaves,  to  terrify  the  godless,  so 
that  they  flee  as  if  pursued  by  a  sword,  and  fall  though  no  one  pursues  them  "  (Lev. 
xxvi.  36).  In  the  present  case,  the  Syrians  heard  a  sound,  how  caused  we  know  not, 
and  instantly  imagined  that  a  danger  threatened  them,  which  could  only  be  escaped  by 
immediate  flight.  Israel  had  hired  against  them,  they  thought,  two  armies,  one  of 
Egyptians  and  the  other  of  Hittites;  the  armies  had  arrived,  and  would  fall  upon  them 
at  dawn  of  day.  So  they  hastily  fled  in  the  darkness,  casting  away  arms  and  vessels 
and  garments  as  they  went  (ver.  15),  and  leaving  behind  them  their  camp  standing, 
with  all  its  stores  intact,  its  flour  and  barley',  its  gold  and  silver,  its  rich  raiment,  its 
war-horses  and  beasts  of  burden.  The  Samaritans  were  called  upon  to  do  nothing — 
they  had  but  to  "  stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  God  "  (Exod.  xv.  13).  In  one 
day,  without  any  exertion  of  their  own,  their  deliverance  was  complete.  And  so  it  is 
with  God  always. 

I.  Gk)D   HAS   FOWBB  TO  DELIVEB   PBOH   ALL    KABTHLT    FEBILB.       In   an   hoUT,   in   a 

moment,  if  he  pleases,  God  has  power  to  deliver :  1.  From  disease.  He  caa  cleanse  the 
leper;  give  sight  to  the  blind;  heal  malignant  ulcers;  infuse  strength  and  vigour  into  the 
palsied ;  make  plague,  or  fever,  or  any  other  mortal  sickness  to  pass  away.  2.  From 
poverty.  He  can  cause  the  poorest  man  to  find  a  treasure,  or  put  it  into  the  heart  of  a  rich 
man  to  leave  him  one,  or  so  bless  his  little  store  that  it  becomes  abundance  (ch.  iv.  1 — 
7),  or  give  him  favour  in  the  sight  of  a  monarch  (Esth.  vii.  6 — 11),  or  put  the  wealth 
of  thousands  at  his  disposal  (Acts  iv.  34: — 37).  3.  From  oppression.  He  can  destroy  or 
cast  down  the  oppressor,  cut  him  off  suddenly,  release  his  victims,  break  the  chains 
from  off  their  neck,  "  lift  them  up  out  of  the  mire,  and  set  them  with  the  princes  of  his 
people."  4.  From  shame.  He  can  raise  from  the  dungeon  to  the  palace  (Gen.  xlL  14; 
Dan.  vL  23 — 28) ;  can  make  men  ready  to  worship  one  whom  a  momest  before  they 


DH.  vn.  1— 20.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  163 


denounced  as  a  murderer  (Acts  xxviii.  3 — 6);  can  "set  on  thrones"  those  who  have 
been  treated  as  "  the  offscouring  of  all  things  "  (1  Cor.  iv.  14). 

II.  God  has  also  foweb  to  delivbb  fbou  bpirituaIi  pebils.  1.  He  can  preserve 
from  the  power  of  Satan,  "  deliver  from  the  evil  one,"  quench  all  his  fiery  darts,  abate 
his  piide,  rescue  men  from  his  dominion  when  they  seem  on  the  point  of  submitting  tc 
it.  2.  He  can  deliver  from  the  guilt  of  sin ;  can  accept  atonement ;  can  put  away 
men's  sins  from  them,  so  that, "  though  they  were  as  scarlet,  they  shall  become  white  as 
snow ;  though  they  were  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool "  (Isa.  i.  18).  3.  And 
he  can  deliver  from  the  power  of  sin.  He  can  "  strengthen  the  weak  hands,  and  confirm 
the  feeble  knees  "  (Isa.  xxxv.  3),  can  take  away  the  evil  out  of  men's  hearts,  and  put 
his  Holy  Spiiit  within  them ;  can  enable  them  to  resist  the  temptations  of  the  world,  the 
flesh,  and  the  devil ;  can  make  of  them  "  new  creatures."  God,  and  God  alone,  can  do 
this;  and  to  him  we  must  look  for  this  deliverance;  to  him  we  must  pray  for  this 
deliverance ;  to  him,  when  we  have  obtained  it,  we  must  be  eternally  grateful  for  this 
deliverance.    "  Thank*  be  to  God  for  his  unspeakable  Gift  1 " 

Vers.  4—11. — Afflictiont  may  alienate  men/rom  God  instead  of  hinging  them  near 
to  him.  This  truth  is  remarkably  exemplified  in  the  conduct  and  reasoniugs  of  the 
lepers.  Here  are  four  poor  men,  severely  afflicted  by  a  malady  which  was  reckoned  to 
come,  more  directly  than  most  others,  from  God's  hand,  whom  we  should  have  expected 
to  find  humbled  and  softened  by  it,  more  God-fearing,  more  tender  and  compassionate 
towards  their  fellow-men,  than  the  generality.  But  the  reverse  is  the  case  with  them. 
Instead  of  submitting  themselves  to  God  in  their  wretchedness,  and  hanging  upon  him, 
and  looking  to  him  for  succour,  they  are  sunk  in  a  dull  discontent,  well  nigh  reckless 
and  desperate.  It  is  scarcely  possible  that  they  had  not  heard  how  Elisha  preached  a 
miraculous  deliverance,  and  urged  the  king  not  to  surrender  the  city,  but  "  wait  for 
Jehovah "  (ch.  vi.  33).  Tet  of  deliverance  they  have  not  the  slightest  expectation  ; 
they  are  as  unbelieving  as  the  proud  "  lord  "  of  the  court ;  if  they  remain  with  their 
countrymen,  they  hold  that  they  must  certainly  die.  So  they  resolve  not  to  remain, 
but  to  go  over  to  the  enemy.  No  feeling  of  shame  restrains  them — ^it  does  not  seem 
3ven  to  occur  to  them  that  there  is  any  disgrace  in  desertion.  They  are  impelled  by 
motives  which  are  purely  egoistic — what  is  their  best  chance  ?  Whether  their  country- 
men will  be  damaged  by  its  becoming  known  that  they  have  now  no  food  for  their 
lepers,  they  either  do  not  inquire  or  they  do  not  care.  What  weighs  with  them  is 
that,  if  they  go  over,  they  may  possibly  save  their  wretehod  lives ;  if  they  do  not,  they 
Ijave,  they  think,  no  chance  at  all.  It  may  be  said  that  "  self-preservation  is  the  first 
law  of  nature ; "  but  not  self-preservation  at  all  costs.  Death  is  preferable  to  dishonour. 
The  lepers  take  their  departure,  and  reach  the  Syrian  camp.  Here  an  extraordinary 
surpiise  befalls  them ;  the  camp,  which  they  had  expected  to  be  full  of  Syrian  soldiery, 
is  empty — there  is  not  a  man  left  in  it  (ver.  5).  All  its  wealth,  all  its  stores,  are  open 
to  the  first  comer.  How  do  the  lepers  act  under  these  strange  circumstances  ?  Again 
in  a  purely  selfish  spirit.  That  they  should  fall  upon  the  food,  and  "  eat  and  drink  " 
(ver.  8),  was  natural,  and  no  one  will  blame  them  so  far,  though  it  would  have  been 
nobler  to  have  at  once  hurried  back,  and  proclaimed  the  glad  tidings  to  the  famished 
city.  But,  having  satiated  their  appetites,  they  are  not  content.  Covetousness  is 
stirred  up  by  what  meets  their  gaze,  and  they  must  proceed  to  enrich  themselves  by 
carrying  off  and  securing  a  quantity  of  objects  in  silver  and  gold  (ver.  8).  When  doubt 
begins  to  stir  in  their  minds  as  to  the  propriety  of  this  proceeding,  it  is  not  conscience 
that  awakens,  or  regard  for  their  fellow-citizens  that  moves  them,  but  mere  considera- 
tion for  their  own  interests — "  If  we  tarry  till  the  morning  light,  we  shall  find  punish- 
ment" (marginal  rendering).  Thus,  from  first  to  last,  the  lepers  are  an  example  of 
mean  and  grovelling  selfishness — such  selfishness  as  poverty  too  often  engenders,  as 
misFurtune  intensifies,  and  to  which  the  sense  of  belonging  to  a  despised  class  lends  a 
peculiar  bitterness.  Their  calamities  have  in  no  way  brought  the  lepers  near  to  God,  or 
induced  them  to  cast  their  care  upon  him,  but  have  hardened  and  brutalized  them.  We 
mwr  learn  from  this — 

L  That,  though  afflictions  abb  b«nt  fob  cub  oood,  we  shall  get  ko  goob 
FBOM  theh  unless  WE  BECEivE  THEM  IN  A  BiOiiT  BPIBIT ;  <.«.  submissively,  resignedly, 
even  gratefully,  as  intended  to  benefit  us. 


154  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINOa       [«m.  vii.  1—20. 

IL  Teat,  if  we  extbaot  not  fbom  them  the  sweet  uses  fob  which  thet  webb 

MEAHT,  WK  SHALL  BK  AFT  TO  GET  FBOM   THEM   IBBEPABABLE  HABM — the   irreparable 

harm  of*  lowering  of  oar  moral  tone,  and  an  alienation  of  our  souls  from  their  Creator. 

Ters.  12— 15.— Utueasoncible  dktnut.  Hmnanly  speaking,  Jehoram's  d^stmst  of  the 
report  of  the  lepers  was  not  unreasonahle.  Such  a  stratagem  as  that  which  he  sus- 
pected was  often  practised  in  the  wars  of  the  ancient  world,  with  great  advantage  to 
one  side  and  great  loss  to  the  other.  But  his  distrust,  though  not  unreasonable,  was 
unseasonable  from  the  point  of  view  of  faith  and  belief  in  God.  Elisha  having  just 
announced  such  an  inversion  of  the  actual  state  of  things  as  could  only  be  brought  about 
in  an  extraordinary  way,  the  occurrence  of  something  extraordinary  was  to  be  expected. 
Jehoram  ought  to  have  been  on  the  look  out  for  some  strange  intellige:ice ;  and  that 
which  the  lepers  brought  him  was  in  such  complete  accordaace  with  the  tenor  of 
Elisha's  prophecy,  that  a  very  moderate  degree  of  faith  would  have  sufSced  to  make  him 
receive  it  gladly,  joyfully,  and  without  any  mistrust.  He  would  then  have  shortened 
the  sufferings  of  his  people  by  a  day,  which  must  have  been  lost  by  the  despatch  of  the 
two  chariots  to  reconnoitre;  and  he  might,  perhaps,  have  saved  the  life  of  his  "lord," 
whose  dreadful  death  may  have  been  caused  by  the  impatience  of  a  famished  multitude 
too  long  restrained  from  sallying  forth.  Men  are  apt  to  be  mistrustful;  and  it  is 
generally  just  at  the  wrong  time.  They  are  sanguine  and  over-confident  when  it 
would  have  been  well  to  suspect,  suspicious  and  over-circumspect  when  there  is  no 
need  of  doubt  or  circumspection.  God  calls  them  to  the  kingdom  that  he  has  prepared 
for  men,  and  bids  them  "come,  buy  and  eat;  yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk  without 
money  and  without  price  "  (Isa.  Iv.  1) ;  and  they  hang  back,  hesitate,  delay,  as  if  they 
were  about  to  be  entrapped.  A  bold  impostor  invites  them  to  adopt  his  shibboleth, 
and  trust  in  it  for  salvation— they  listen  eagerly,  hang  on  his  words,  are  persuaded 
and  join  the  Mormons  or  the  Peculiar  People.  Bash  youth  boasts  as  it  guds  on  its 
armour,  and  looks  for  an  easy  victory  over  sin  and  Satan,  over  the  world,  the  flesh,  and 
the  devil.  Timid  old  age  faints  and  is  weary,  and  despairs  of  winning  through  and 
"  persevering  to  the  end,"  though  God  has  brought  it  so  far  upon  its  way.  It  is  well 
to  mistrust  one's  self;  it  is  faithless  to  mistrust  God.  He  who  has  borne  us  up  hitherto 
on  eagles'  wings  will  still  bear  us  up.  He  "  Muteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  He  "  wiU 
not  leave  ua,  not  forsake  ua." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Tera.  1,  2,  wltb  12 — 20. — l%e  vnlelieving  lord.  Elisha  interrupts  the  king^a  evil 
design  by  a  prediction  of  plenty  in  Samavia.  His  mention  of  a  fixed  time  doubtless 
iniucei  the  king  to  wait  imtil  he  should  see  if  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled.  "Thus 
saith  the  Lord,  To-morrow  about  this  time  shall  a  measure  of  fine  flour  be  sold  for  a 
shekel,  and  two  measures  of  barley  for  a  shelsel,  in  the  gate  of  Samaria."  It  was  a 
bold  statement  to  make,  for  there  was  no  human  likelihood  of  its  fulfilment.  If  the 
next  day  had  proved  Elisha  to  be  a  deceiver,  no  doubt  he  would  have  been  torn  limb 
from  limb  by  the  infuriated  and  hungry  populace.  But  Elisha  makes  not  the  state- 
ment on  his  own  authority,  but  uses  the  words,  "Thus  saith  the  Lord."  One  of  the 
king's  principal  courtiers,  on  whose  arm  he  leaned,  could  not  conceal  his  scorn  and 
incredulity.  "Behold,  if  the  Lord  would  make  windows  in  heaven,  might  this  thing 
be?"  Obserre,  his  atatement  is  not  "If  the  Lord  would  make  windows  in  heaven, 
this  thing  might  be."  He  doesn't  even  admit  that.  It  is  a  question  expressing  entire 
impossibility.  "Even  if  the  Lord  would  open  windows  in  heaven,  is  it  at  all  likely 
that  such  a  thing  as  this  would  happen?"  But  what  seemed  impossible  to  him  was 
possible  with  God.  The  prophet  warned  him  that  he  would  suffer  for  his  unbelief. 
"Behold,  thou  shalt  see  it  with  thine  eyes,  but  shalt  not  eat  thereof."  As  it  wa!< 
predicted  so  it  came  to  pass.  During  the  night,  the  Lord  caused  the  Syrian  army  to 
hear  a  great  noise,  like  the  noise  of  horses  and  chariots  and  a  mighty  host,  and  they 
fled  in  terror,  leaving  their  camp  with  all  their  possessions  and  provisions  behind  them. 
Four  lepers,  going  out  of  the  city  in  the  evening  twilight,  discovered  the  deserted 
camp.    They  brought  back  the  news  to  the  beleaguered  city.    At  first,  a  stratagem 


OH.  vn.  1—20.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  155 

was  feared ;  but  by-and-by  in  wild  eagerness  for  food  and  plunder,  the  fsraiiked 
citizens  msned  forth.  The  unhappy  lord,  who  had  doubted  the  prophet's  Diesiage 
and  the  promise  of  God  himself,  was  trodden  upon  at  the  gate  and  died.  From  this 
striking  and  tra^c  story  we  may  learn — 

I.  Unbelief  uat  hate  beabon,  appabentlt,  on  its  sisb.  This  courtier  might 
have  given  many  plausible  reasons  for  doubting  the  prophet's  message.  1.  He  might 
have  diluted  the  prophefs  right  to  speak  in  the  name  of  God  at  all.  He  might  have 
said,  "  How  do  I  know  that  this  man  is  speaking  the  truth  ? "  though  even  there 
Elisha  had  already  given  pretty  tangible  proof  of  his  credibility  and  trustworthiness. 
The  faithful  minister  of  Christ  need  not  mind  tjie  sneers  of  men,  provided  Ood  has 
owned  his  work,  and  set  his  heavenly  seal  upon  hb  ministry.  2.  Or  he  might  have 
said, "  The  thing  it  utterly  incredible.  It  is  utterly  impossible.  Where  is  flour  to 
oome  from  in  such  plenty  as  to  supply  this  whole  city  of  Samaria?  There  has  been  a 
besieging  army  around  our  walls  for  many  days.  They  have  desolated  and  plundered 
the  country  round  about.  Where  is  the  food  to  come  from,  even  if  there  was  any.  one 
to  bring  it  to  us?  And  we  know  of  no  friendly  army  that  is  coming  to  raise  the  siege 
or  cut  its  way  through  the  serried  ranks  of  the  Syrians."  All  these  would  have  been 
very  natural  thoughts  to  pass  through  that  courtier's  mind.  Ko  doubt  they  were  the 
very  reasons,  or  some  of  them,  which  led  him  to  disbelieve  Elisha's  message.  Probably, 
if  he  had  stated  his  reasons  to  the  people,  he  would  have  got  a  hundred  to  agree  with 
him  for  every  one  who  believed  Elisha.  No  doubt  they  all  looked  upon  Elisha  as  a 
fanatic  and  an  enthusiast.  2%e^,  to  all  appearance,  had  common  sense,  had  reason  on 
their  side.  And  yet  it  turned  out  to  be  one  of  those  many  cases  in  which  "  God  hath 
chosen  the  foolish  things  of  this  world  to  confound  the  wise,  and  the  weak  things  to 
confound  the  mighty."  Unbelief  can  be  very  plausible.  Unbelief  nearly  always  appears 
to  have  reason  on  its  side.  There  is  not  a  doctrine  of  the  Bible  against  which  the 
most  plausible  arguments  might  not,  and  have  not,  been  advanced.  Even  Scripture 
itself  can  be  quoted  in  support  of  imbelief  and  sin.  "The  devil  can  cite  Scripture  for 
his  purpose."  Oood  argvments  are  not  necessariljf  a  proof  of  the  truth  or  justice  of  a 
cow.  This  needs  to  be  remembered  in  an  age  when  many  arguments  are  urged  against 
the  truth  of  Christianity.  What  plausible  reasons  have  been  urged  against  the  main 
truths  of  the  Christian  religion !  Take  the  Deity  of  Christ,  for  example.  How  plausible 
are  the  arguments  which  human  reason  can  bring  forward  against  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity  and  the  Divinity  of  Christ !  And  yet  of  what  value  are  such  arguments  when 
placed  side  by  side  with  our  Lord's  statement,  "  I  and  my  Father  are  one ; "  with  the 
statement  of  the  Apostle  John,  "  The  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God ; " 
or  with  the  statement  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  that  "  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  bodily  "  ?  In  the  same  way  the  most  plausible  arguments  can  be,  and  are  being, 
brought  a°;ainst  the  atoning  nature  of  Ohrisfi  death,  although  we  have  the  clear  state- 
ments of  God's  Word  that  "  he  bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,"  and  Christ's 
own  statement  that  he  laid  down  his  life  for  the  sheep.  Over  and  over  again  it  has 
been  asserted  that  the  Oospd  rnvradei  are  incredible.  Over  and  over  again  the  most 
plausible  arguments  have  been  brought  against  future  punishment,  although  we  have 
the  clear  and  emphatic  statements  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  on  the  subject. 
Unbelief  may  have  reason,  apparently,  on  its  side. 

II.  Oox  BBASON  18  NO  TEST  oc  FossiBiuTT.  Our  Ideas  are  no  test  as  to  what  is 
possible  or  impossible.  Our  minds  are  limited  in  their  range.  How  often  in  the  march 
of  scientific  discoveiy  and  invention  it  has  happened  that  things  which  seemed 
impossible  in  one  century  were  proved  to  be  possible  in  the  next  1  It  is  not  yet  three 
hundred  years  since  GMileo  was  condenmed  to  imprisonment  by  the  Inquisition  for 
asserting  that  the  earth  moved  round  the  sun.  Even  our  own  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  little 
more  than  two  hundred  years  ago — the  man  who  discovered  the  force  of  gravitation, 
and  invented  the  first  reflecting  telescope — ^was  assailed  with  such  abuse  on  propounding 
his  discoverieg,  that  he  actually  determined  on  suppressing  the  third  book  of  the 
'  Prindpia,'  which  contains  the  theory  of  comets.  And  what  shall  we  say  of  the  invention 
of  the  steam-engine  by  James  Watt,  scarcely  a  hundred  years  ago — an  invention  which 
has  revolutionized  our  mauu£fkctures,  and  made  possible  a  speed  of  locomotion  by  land 
and  sea  that  would  have  been  ridiculed  as  impossible  only  a  few  years  ago  ?  Every 
discovery  of  science,  every  invention  in  thi>  uiwal  arts,  ha«  at  first  been  scorned  u  an 


15«  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  vn.  1—20, 

imposrable  dream,  then  latched  at  as  impracticable,  and  fiually  accepted  when  it  'became 
impossible  to  denjr  the  truth  of  the  one  or  the  usefulness  of  the  other.  TKe  impossi- 
bilities of  to-day  turn  out  to  he  the  possibilities  of  to-morrow.  It  is  well  to  remember 
this,  that,  because  we  are  unable  to  conceive  of  Bomething  taking  place,  it  does  not 
therefore  follow  that  it  is  impossible.  The  fact  is,  that  when  we  say  anything  is 
"impossible,"  we  just  mean  th»t  vce  cannot  conceive  it.  But,  as  has  already  been 
shown,  this  is  no  reason  why  a  doctrine  or  statement  may  not  be  true,  or  why  a  certain 
occurrence  may  not  take  place.  We  may  have  never  known  anything  of  the  kind  to 
occur  before;  but  that  is  no  proof  that  a  thing  is  impossible,  though  in  the  minds  of 
many  people  it  is  the  only  argument.  What  has  never  occurred  before,  may  occur 
yet.  There  are  discoveries  in  science  still  undreamed  of  in  our  advanced  philosophy. 
There  are  inventions  yet  to  be  conceived  which,  if  to-day  we  could  hear  of  them,  we 
might  pronounce  the  wild  ravings  of  a  fanatic.  There  are  infinite  resources  in  the  hand 
of  him  who  rules  the  world.  Who  are  we,  that  we  should  limit  God  ?  Who  are  we, 
that  we  should  set  bounds  to  his  power  ?  Who  are  we,  that  we  should  set  bounds  to 
his  justice  on  the  one  hand,  or  to  his  mercy  on  the  other?  Must  we  not  bow  in  deep 
humility  before  all  the  problems  that  affect  his  dealings  with  men,  and  say,  "  Shall  not 
the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right?"  Must  we  not  reverently  accept  whatever  he 
has  been  pleased  to  reveal  in  his  own  Word  of  his  Divine  purposes  and  2>lans,  no  matter 
what  our  reason  may  say  ? 

ILL  Ths  DANGBROtrs  OHABAOTEB  OF  tTNBELtBP.  We  havc  secu  how  Unreasonable 
this  courtier's  unbelief  was.  Not  only  so,  but  it  was  injurious.  So  unbelief  in  a 
professing  Christian  is  injurious  to  himself  and  to  others.  It  hinders  his  own  useful- 
ness. It  hinders  the  progress  of  the  gospel.  It  hinders  the  success  of  Christian  work. 
It  is  the  Achan  in  the  camp,  the  canker  of  Christiaa  life  and  power,  the  chUliiig  blight 
of  the  Christian  Church,  What  an  age  of  deadness  in  the  Church  of  Christ  in  England, 
Scotland,  and  Ireland,  was  the  eighteenth  century,  the  age  of  moderatism,  the  age  of 
indiflference  and  rationalism  I  What  an  absence  of  missionary  enterprise !  What  an 
absence  of  evangelistic  effort  1  As  Churches  and  as  individuals,  we  should  pray  to  be 
delivered  from  unbelief,  and  to  be  filled  with  living,  working,  all-conquering  faith. 
Mr.  Spurgeon  says,  in  his  remarks  on  this  passage,  that  if  we  are  hindering  God's  work 
by  our  unbelief,  it  may  happen  to  us  as  it  happened  to  this  nobleman,  that  God  may  see 
fit  to  take  us  out  of  the  way.  He  says  that  he  has  remarked,  "  that  when  any  truly 
good  man  has  stood  in  God's  way,  God  has  made  short  work  with  him.  He  has  taken 
liim  home,  or  he  has  laid  him  aside  by  sickness.  If  you  will  not  help  and  will  hinder, 
you  will  be  put  aside,  and  perhaps  your  own  usefulness  will  be  cut  short."  If  you 
have  not  faith  enough  in  the  power  of  the  gospel,  if  you  have  not  faith  enough  in  the 
promises  of  God,  if  you  have  not  faith  enongh  in  the  power  of  prayer,  then  be  in 
earnest  in  asking  for  more  faith — such  faith  as  will  stand  firm  in  the  day  of  temptation, 
of  trial,  of  conflict,  of  opposition.  Never  say  to  yourself  about  any  Christian  work, 
"  If  the  Lord  would  make  windows  in  heaven,  might  such  a  thing  be  ?  "  An  affectionate 
word  to  the  unbeliever,  to  the  sinner.  Unbelief  is  dangerous.  Christ  speaks  of  unbelief 
as  a  tin.  He  says  of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  "  he  will  convince  the  world  of  sin,  because 
they  believed  not  on  me."  Men  may  call  it  a  hard  doctrine,  but  there  it  is.  "  He 
that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already,  because  he  hath  not  believed  in  the  Name  of 
the  only  begotten  Son  of  God."  Is  there  anything  hard  in  that  ?  The  offer  of  salvation 
is  made  to  every  one.  It  is  so  plain  that  there  can  be  no  mistake  about  it.  If  there 
had  been  any  other  way,  any  other  Saviour,  men  might  plead  uncertainty.  But  they 
are  plainly  told,  "neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other."  Those  who  believed  not 
the  warnings  in  the  days  of  Noah,  perished.  Their  day  of  grace  was  long,  but  they 
neglected  it.  So  with  the  Israelites  whose  bones  lay  whitening  in  the  wilderness. 
"They  entered  not  in  because  of  unbelief."  Oh,  how  terrible  that  unbelieving 
courtier's  doom :  "  Thou  shalt  see  it  with  thine  eyes,  but  shalt  not  eat  thereof  "I — C.  H.  I. 

Yen.  1,  2. — A  Divine  teacher  and  a  haughty  sceptic.  "  Then  Blisha  said,  Hear  ye 
the  word  of  the  Lord ;  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  To-morrow,"  etc.  Here  are  two  objects 
not  only  to  be  looked  at,  but  to  be  studied. 

I.  A  DiTiOT  TBAOHEE.  "Then  Blisha  said.  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord;  Thus 
"^'f'h  the  Lord,  To-morrow  about  this  time  shall  a  measure  of  fine  flour  be  sold  for  a 


OH.  vn.  1—20.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KENG&  157 

shekel,  and  two  measures  of  barley  for  a  shekel,  in  the  gate  of  Samaria."  Elisha  was 
inspired  and  commanded  by  the  Almighty  Qod  to  make  a  proclamation  to  a  starring 
population.  The  famine  was  still  prevailing.  The  shadow  of  death  darkened  the  sky, 
and  his  freezing  breath  was  in  the  air,  and  men  were  shivering  on  the  confines  of  the 
grave.  Thus,  when  things  seemed  to  be  at  their  worst,  Elisha  appears  as  a  messenger 
■  of  mercy  from  Heaven,  declaring  that  on  the  next  morning  there  would  be  an  abundance 
of  provision  obtainable  in  the  gate  of  Samaria.  Two  circumstances  connected  with 
this  promise  will  apply  to  the  gospel.  1.  It  was  a  communication  eomctly  suited  to 
the  condition  of  those  to  whom  it  was  addressed.  People  were  starving,  and  the  one 
great  necessity  was  food,  and  here  it  is  promised.  Mankind  are  morally  lost ;  what 
they  want  is  spiritual  restoration,  and  the  gospel  proclaims  it.  2.  It  was  a  com- 
munication made  on  the  authority  of  the  Eternal.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  _  That  the 
gospel  is  a  Divine  message  is  a  truth  too  firmly  established  even  to  justify  debate. 
By  the  gospel,  of  course,  I  do  not  mean  all  the  tracts  of  which  the  book  we  call  the 
Bible  is  composed,  but  the  Divine  biography  of  Christ  as  recorded  by  his  four  biographers. 

II.  A  HAUGHTY  BCEPTic.  "Then  a  lord  on  whose  hand  the. king  leaned  answered 
the  man  of  God,  and  said,  Behold,  if  the  Lord  would  make  windows  in  heaven,  might 
this  thing  be?"  Here  is  one  of  the  most  contemptible  o/  all  classes  of  men — a  cour- 
tier, a  sycophant  in  relation  to  his  king,  a  haughty  despot  in  regard  to  all  beneath 
him.  When  he  heard  the  prophet's  deliverance,  he,  forsooth,  was  too  great  a  man,  and 
thought  himself,  no  doubt,  too  great  a  philosopher,  to  believe  it.  It  was  the  man's  self- 
importance  that  begat  his  incredulity,  and  this,  perhaps,  is  the  parent  of  all  scepticism 
and  unbeUef.— D.  T. 

Vers.  3r-8.— The  force  of  will.  "And  there  were  four  leprous  men  at  the  entering 
in  of  the  gate,"  etc.    Here  we  have — 

I.  Men  involved  in  the  most  wketchbd  condition.  "There  were  four  leprous 
men  at  the  entering  in  of  the  gate."  Of  all  the  diseases  which  afflict  mankind  none  is 
more  painful,  loathsome,  and  disastrous  than  leprosy.  It  was  the  scourge  of  the  Hebrew 
race.  Moses  minutely  describes  the  appearance  of  this  malady,  and  gives  clear  and 
forcible  rules  to  govern  the  medical  treatment  of  it.  Fat  and  blood  and  other  particles 
of  diet  which  excite  or  aggravate  constitutional  tendencies  to  diseases  of  the  skin,  were 
strictly  forbidden  to  the  Jews.    There  are  many  points  of  analogy  between  leprosy 

and  sin.  „_,,  ., 

IL  Men  in  the  most  wretched  condition  fobmino  a  BEsoLtmoN.  ihey  said  one 
to  another,  Why  sit  we  here  until  we  die?  If  we  say.  We  will  enter  into  the  city, 
then  the  famine  is  in  the  city,  and  we  shall  die  there  :  and  if  we  sit  still  here  we  die 
also.  Now  therefore  come,  and  let  us  fall  unto  the  host  of  the  Syrians :  if  they  save 
us  alive,  we  shall  live;  and  If  they  kill  us,  we  shall  but  die."  Emaciated  and  wretched 
as  might  have  been  their  bodily  condition,  their  moral  nature  had  sufficient  stamina 
left  to  make  a  resolution.  Mind  is  often  more  active  in  physical  disease  than  in 
physical  health.  Pain  whips  all  the  faculties  into  action,  marshals  all  the  forces  of  the 
soul.  Truly  wonderful  is  the  power  of  the  human  will.  Let  no  man  justify  mental 
indolence  and  moral  inertia  by  pleading  his  bodily  troubles.  But  how  often  thU  is 
done  I  How  often  do  you  hear  men  say,  "  We  can  do  nothing  because  of  the  circum- 
stances in  which  we  are  placed " !  The  "  cannot "  of  such  U  their  "  will  not,"  and  the 
"will  not"  is  their  own  choice.  . 

III.  Men  ACTINO  our  the  besolutioh  formed  in  the  most  wretched  condition. 
These  fonr  poor  starving  leprous  men  not  only  formed  a  resolution,  but  they  worked 
it  out  "And  they  rose  up  in  the  twilight,  to  go  unto  the  camp  of  the  Syrians." 
In  giving  practical  effect  to  their  resolution,  two  results  followed.  1.  Difficulties 
vanished.  Their  great  dread  was  of  the  Syrians,  but  as  they  approached  the  Syrian 
camp  " Behold,  there  was  no  man  there."  Wherefore  had  they  fled?  Here  is  the 
answer :  "  For  the  Lord  hath  made  the  host  of  the  Syrians  to  hear  a  noise  of  chanots, 
and  a  noise  of  horses,  even  the  noise  of  a  great  host.  And  they  said  one  to  another, 
Lo  the  Eip«  «f  Israel  hath  hired  against  us  the  kings  of  the  Hittites,  and  the  kings  of 
the'  F«yp*;Ui«.  to  come  upon  us.  Wherefore  they  rose  and  fled  in  the  twil.ght,  and 
leJTt.  tWr  Ki»ta.  and  their  horses  and  their  asses,  even  the  camp  as  it  was,  and  fled  for 
f  i»*  life."*    Bj  what  forc«  were  these  Syriani  soared  away  ?    Not  the  force  of  th« 


158  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  yn.  1— 2a 

rough  elements  of  nature,  or  the  force  of  armies,  but  the  force  of  terrfble  Ideas — ideal 
that  made  them  hear  the  noise  of  the  rattling  chariots  and  the  tramping  steeds  of  war, 
that  had  no  existence.  But  these  ideas,  albeit,  were  ideas  from  Qod.  "  The  Lord  had 
made  the  host  of  the  Syrians  to  hear  a  noise."  God  often  frightens  wicked  men  by 
ideas.  "  Qod  can,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "  when  he  pleases,  dispirit  the  boldest  and 
most  brave,  and  make  the  stoutest  heart  to  tremble.  Those  that  will  not  fear  God,  he 
can  make  to  fear  at  the  shaking  of  a  leaf."  Before  a  strong  resolution,  apprehended 
difficulties  frequently  vanish  into  air.  Where  there's  a  will  there's  a  way,  even 
though  it  be  over  rugged  mountains  and  surging  floods.  A  man's  "I  will"  has  a 
power  in  it  mighty  as  the  forces  of  nature,  ay,  mightier,  for  it  can  subordinate  them. 
"  If  thou  hast  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  thou  shalt  say  to  this  mountain.  Be 
thou  removed,"  etc.  2.  The  oibfect  wai  realized.  What  these  poor  starving  leprous  men 
deeply  needed  and  sought  was  provisions  to  appease  the  cravings  of  hunger  and  to 
reinvigorate  their  waning  life.  And  they  got  them.  "And  when  these  lepers  came 
to  the  uttermost  part  of  the  camp,  they  went  into  one  tent,  and  did  eat  and  drink,  and 
carried  thence  silver,  and  gold,  and  raiment,  and  went  and  hid  it,"  etc.  Thus  they 
gained  even  more  than  they  sought ;  they  not  only  gained  food,  but  wealth. 

CoHOLUSiON.  Learn  here  the  wonderful  moral  force  of  the  human  mind.  It  pos- 
sesses a  power  to  make  resolutions  under  the  most  trying  external  conditions,  and  the 
power  to  work  them  out  successfully.  The  fiat  "  I'll  try  "  has  wrought  wonders  in 
human  history,  is  wortiing  wonders  now,  and  so  it  ever  can.  Well  does  Dr.  Tulloch 
say,  "  Everything  yields  before  the  strong  and  earnest  wiU.  It  grows  by  exercise.  It 
excites  confidence  in  others,  while  it  takes  to  itself  the  lead.  Difficulties  before  which 
mere  cleverness  fails,  and  which  leave  the  irresolute  prostrate  and  helpless,  vanish 
before  it.  They  not  only  do  not  impede  its  progress,  but  it  often  makes  of  them  step- 
ping-stones to  a  higher  and  more  enduring  triumph." — ^D.  T. 

Vers.  9 — ^11. — Tki  right  and  the prtident.  "Then  they  said  one  t»  another,  We  do 
not  well,"  etc.  These  verses  record  the  conference  which  these  four  lepers  had  with  one 
another  after  they  had  succeeded  in  working  out  their  resolution  to  go  unto  the  "  host 
of  the  Syrians ; "  and  in  this  conference  we  discover — 

I.  The  biqht.  "  They  said  one  to  another.  We  do  not  well :  this  day  ia  a  day  of 
good  tidings,  and  we  hold  our  peace."  The  rilver  and  the  gold  which  they  had  dis- 
covered they  had  hidden  away ;  and  now,  perhaps,  conscience  told  them  it  was  not 
right.  It  is  not  right  for  us  to  conceal  the  good  we  have  discovered,  or  to  appropriate  it 
entirely  to  our  own  use ;  let  us  communicate  it.  The  distribution  of  good  is  right. 
Every  man  should  be  "  ready  to  communicate."  The  monopoly  of  material  good  is  a 
huge  wrong,  and  the  crying  sin  of  the  age.  Le^slation  will  have  to  deal  with  this 
social  abomination  sooner  or  later ;  it  is  crushing  the  millions  to  the  dust.  Monopolies 
must  be  broken  up ;  the  wants  of  society  and  the  claims  of  eternal  Justice  demand  it. 
What  is  truly  "  glad  tidings  "  to  us  we  shovdd  proclaim  to  others.  The  rays  of  joy 
that  fall  over  our  own  lives  we  should  not  retain,  but  reflect. 

n.  The  fbdsent.  Whether  these  poor  men  felt  it  was  right  to  communicate  to  others 
the  tidings  of  the  good  they  had  received  or  not,  they  certainly  felt  it  was  prudent.  "  If 
we  tarry  till  the  morning  light,  some  mischief  will  come  upon  us :  now  therefore  come, 
that  we  may  go  and  t«U  the  king's  household."  Accordingly  they  acted.  "  So  they 
came  and  called  unto  the  porter  of  the  city :  and  they  told  them,  saying.  We  came  to 
the  camp  of  the  Syrians,  and,  behold,  there  was  no  man  there,  neither  voice  of  man, 
but  horses  tied,  and  asses  tied,  and  the  tents  as  they  were.  And  he  called  to  the 
porters ;  and  they  told  it  to  the  king's  house  within."  Not  to  do  the  right  thing  must 
cause  lome  *  mischief" — mischief  not  only  to  the  body,  but  to  the  soul  as  well,  to  the 
entire  man.  There  is  no  prudence  apart  from  rectitude.  What  ia  wrong  in  moral 
principle  is  mischievous  in  conduct.  He  who  is  in  the  right,  however  outvoted  by  his 
age,  is  always  in  the  majority,  for  he  has  that  vote  which  carries  all  material  universes 
and  spiritual  hierarchies  with  it.    Bight  is  infallible  utilitarianism. — D.  T. 

Yers.  12 — ^16. — Ttie  help  that  com**  to  dieWeseed  men  from  without.  "  And  the  king 
arose  in  the  night,"  etc.  These  verses  inggest  a  few  thoughts  concerning  the  help  that 
sometimes  comes  to  distressed  man  frtm  wUkmri.    The  Iwst  help  that  a  man  can  get 


OH.  viLl— 20.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  U9 

in  any  caso  it  from  within — ^from  a  right  working  of  his  own  faculties,  independence  on 
his  Maker.  Still,  help  from  without  is  often  most  valuable.  There  are  three  kinds  of 
human  helpers  without.  1.  Those  that  help  men  li/  their  will.  These  are  men,  the 
chosen  of  the  race,  who  lay  themselves  out  for  philanthropic  service.  2.  Those  that 
help  men  against  their  will.  It  often  turns  out,  as  in  the  case  of  Joseph's  brethren, 
that  our  enemies  really  serve  as.  3.  Those  that  help  men  irrespective  of  their  will. 
We  are  helped  in  many  ways  by  tliose  who  know  and  care  nothing  about  us.  We 
come  into  possession  of  their  knowledge,  inventions,  property.  The  property  of  the 
men  of  the  last  age  is  ours  to-day.  Such  is  the  kind  of  help  which  the  Syrians  now 
tendered  the  Israelites,  and  we  offer  three  remarks  concerning  this  help. 

I.  It  was  heeded.  The  men  of  Samaria  were  in  the  utmost  distress,  and  the  king 
arose  in  the  night  and  sent  forth  two  of  his  servants  (ver.  12)  in  pursuit  of  the  Syrians 
to  see  what  had  happened.  As  they  approached  the  spot  they  found  that  the  Syrians 
had  departed,  but  had  left  their  property  behind.  "  And  the  way  was  full  of  garments 
and  vessels,  which  the  Syrians  had  cast  away  in  their  haste."  Thiis  in  the  height  of 
their  distress  they  found  relief.  It  is  often  so  in  passing  through  life ;  often  so  in 
individual  as  well  as  in  social  life.  In  the  greatest  extremity  help  appears.  When 
the  cloud  is  darkest  a  beam  of  light  breaks  on  it. 

II.  It  was  undesebved.     Did  these  Samaritans  deserve  help?     By  no  means 
They  were  nearly  all  idolatrous  and  worthless  people.    They  merited  condign  punish 
meht,  everlasting  ruin.    This  is  true  of  all  men  as  sinners.    Whatever  help  we  receive 
is  utterly  undeserved.    "  It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are  not  consumed." 

III.  It  was  unexpected.  They  went  forth  longing  for  food,  but  quite  uncertain 
whether  they  would  find  any.  They  found  that  the  enemy  had  fled,  and  in  their  haste 
had  left  provisions  behind.  "  So  a  measure  of  fine  flour  was  sold  for  a  shekel."  Are 
not  all  men,  in  the  providence  of  God,  constantly  receiving  unexpected  favours?  The 
choicest  blessings  come  when  least  expected. — D.  T. 

Vers.  17 — ^20. — OoeTi  promise  realized  and  his  truth  vindicated.  "  And  the  king 
appointed  the  lord  on  whose  hand  he  leaned  to  have  the  charge  of  the  gate,"  etc.  We 
have  here  an  instance  of  two  things. 

I.  God's  fbohise  bealized.  In  the  first  verse  of  this  chapter  Elisha  had  said, 
"Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lords  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  To-morrow  about  this  time 
shall  a  measure  of  fine  flonr  be  sold  for  a  shekel."  1'he  morrow  had  come,  and  here  is 
the  fine  flour  and  the  barley  being  sold  in  the  gate  of  Samaria.  Here  is  the  Divine  pro- 
mise fulfilled  to  the  letter.  God  is  ever  faithful  who  hath  promised.  If  a  being  makes 
a  promise,  and  it  is  not  fulfilled,  it  must  be  for  one  of  three  reasons— either  because  he 
was  insincere  when  he  made  the  promise,  or  subsequently  changed  his  mind,  or  met 
with  unforeseen  difSculties  which  he  had  not  the  power  to  surmount.  None  of 
these  can  be  applied  to  the  all-truthful,  unchangeable,  all-seeing,  and  almighty  God. 

II.  God's  tbutb  vikdioated.  The  haughty  courtier  said  to  the  prophet  yesterday, 
when  he  was  told  that  a  measure  of  fine  flour  would  be  sold  for  a  shekel,  "  If  the  Lord 
would  make  windows  in  heaven,  might  this  thing  be?"  As  if  he  had  said,  "Do 
not  presume  to  impose  on  me,  a  man  of  my  intelligence  and  importance.  The  intel- 
lectual rabble  may  believe  in  you,  but  I  cannot."  Whereupon  the  prophet  replied, 
"  Thou  shalt  see  it  with  thine  eyes,  but  shalt  not  eat  thereof."  And  so  it  came  to  pass. 
Here  are  the  flour  and  the  barley,  and  there  lies  dead  the  haughty  sceptic.  "  And  so  it 
fell  out  unto  him ;  for  the  people  trode  upon  him  in  the  gate,  and  he  died."  Truth  has 
ever  vindicated  itself,  and  will  ever  do  so.  Men's  unbelief  in  facts  does  not  either 
destroy  or  weaken  facts ;  the  facts  remain.  Though  all  the  world  deny  the  existence  of 
•  God,  moral  obligatiun,  and  future  retribution,  the  &cts  remain. — ^D.  T. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  unbelieving  lord.  The  spirit  of  despair  had  taken  possession  of 
Jehoram.    It  was  at  this  point  that  Elisha  interposed  with  his  promise  of  deliverance. 

I.  Fbedigted  deliverance.  Elisha  made  what  must  have  seemed  an  incredible 
announcement.  1.  The  city  was  at  that  moment  suffering  the  extremest  horrors  of 
fomine.  By  the  same  hour  on  the  morrow  food  would  exist  in  plenty.  2.  Such  food 
as  was  then  obtainable  was  of  the  coarsest,  most  loathsome,  and  most  revolting  nature. 
By  to-morrow  they  would  be  dieting  on  fine  flour  and  barley  in  abundancft    8.  Thei; 


160  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  vn.. 

■ 

disgusting  food  was  only  to  be  had  at  famine  prices.  To-morrow  s  measure  of  fine 
flour  would  be  sold  for  a  shekel,  and  two  measures  of  barley  for  a  shekel.  4.  To-day 
ihey  were  fast  beleaguered.  To-morrow  flour  and  barley  would  be  sold  in  the  open 
gates  of  Samaria.  After  this, "  is  anything  too  bard  for  the  Lord  ?  "  (Gen.  xviii.  14).  If 
Ben  will  not  seek  him,  God  leaves  them  to  feel  the  extremity  of  their  own  helplessness 
iMfoK  he  interposes.  Then  he  shows  himself  •'  plenteous  "  in  mercy  (Ps.  ciii.  8).  Who 
can  doubt  that,  if  king  and  city  had  sought  God  earlier  with  sincere  heartsjthe  deliver- 
ance would  have  come  sooner  ?  Thus  by  his  own  frowardness  does  the  sinner  stand  in 
the  way  of  his  own  good. 

II.  Eationaltstio  doubt.  The  spirit  of  incredulity,  which  must  have  been  In  many 
minds  when  Elisha  made  this  surprising  announcement,  found  expression  in  the  utter- 
ance  of  the  captain  on  whose  hand  the  king  leaned,  "  Behold,  if  the  Lord  would  make 
windows  in  heaven,  might  this  thing  be  ? "  1.  The  author  of  this  sceptical  scoff  was 
a  person  in  high  rank.  The  atmosphere  of  »  court,  and  the  position  of  a  courtier,  are 
not  favourable  to  the  development  of  piety.  They  are  more  apt  to  develop,  as  here, 
a  worldly,  sceptical,  cynical  spirit,  with  small  faith  in  God,  virtue,  and  truth.  Piety 
is  to  be  looked' for  rather  in  the  cottages  than  in  the  palaces  of  a  people,  though  there 
are  notable  exceptions.  "  Not  many  mighty,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  i.  26).  2.  Th^'language  ii 
that  of  scornful  incredulity.  It  is  the  speech  of  a  rationalist.  Judged  by  the  standards 
of  sense  and  of  natural  reason,  the  sudden  access  of  plenty  which  Elisha  predicted  was 
impossible.  If  the  Lord  opened  windows  m  heaven,  it  might  be  looked  for,  but  not- 
otherwise.  And  who  expected  help  from  that  quarter?  Thus  the  worldly  wise  lord 
reasoned,  sneering  at  Elisha's  word  as  the  imagination  of  a  heated  brain.  He  is  the 
type  of  all  rationalists.  Interpositions  from  heaven  are  the  last  things  they  are  dis- 
posed to  believe  in ;  and  in  any  case  they  will  not  believe  God's  Word  unless  they  can 
see  how  it  is  to  be  fulfilled,  and  on  what  natural  principles  the  imusual  event  is  to  be 
explained.  As  in  the  present  case  there  was  no  possibility  of  help  from  within  the 
city,  and  no  prospect  of  the  Syrians  leaving  when  the  city  was  just  about  to  fall  within 
Iheir  power,  and  no  evidence  that  food  in  such  abundance  could  be  obtained  at  a  day's 
potioe  even  if  they  did  leave,  Elisha's  promise  could  only  be  assigned  to  the  category 
f'  delusion.    The  spirit  of  faith  is  the  opposite  of  this.    It  takes  God  at  his  word,  and 

«aves  him  to  find  out  the  means  of  accomplishing  his  own  predictions. 

III.  The  PtJNiSHMENT  OP  DNBELIEP.  Ellsha  entered  into  no  argument.  He  left  his 
word  to  be  proved  or  disproved  by  the  arbitrament  of  time.  But  he  told  the  great 
lord  who — so  much  wiser  than  Elisha — had  scoffed  at  its  fulfilment,  what  the  penalty 
of  his  unbelief  would  be.  He  would  see  the  promised  plenty  indeed,  but  he  would 
not  eat  of  it.  Is  not  this  the  fate  of  every  unbeliever?  God's  word  stands  sure; 
it  comes  to  pass  in  due  time ;  but  the  intellectual! st,  the  scoffer,  the  doubter,  the 
man  who  was  too  wise  to  believe,  finds  himself  shut  out  from  participation  in  the 
blessing. — J.  O. 

Vers.  3 — 11. — The/our  lepers.. 

"  Ood  moves  in  ■  myiterlons  way, 
His  wondeis  to  perform." 

Speculation  might  have  exhausted  itself  in  vain  in  conjecturing  how  Elisha's  pie- 
diction  was  to  be  accomplished.  Nevertheless,  the  wonder  was  performed  by  a  series 
of  events  as  simple  as  it  was  unlocked  for, 

I.  A  POLioT  OF  DE8FAIB.  1.  -The  Upcrs  at  the  gate.  We  are  first  introduced  to  four 
Jepers  at  the  entering  in  of  the  gate.  They  were  outside,  and  had  hitherto  subsisted  by 
food  handed  out  or  thrown  to  them  from  within.  But  now  the  famine  in  the  city  made 
such  assistance  impossible,  and  the  four  men  were  dying  of  hunger.  Poor,  pitiable 
objects,  the  last  persona  to  whom  any  one  would  have  thought  of  looking  for  a  glimpse 
of  hope  on  the  situation  within  the  walls. '  Yet  these  despised  lepers  were  to  be,  in 
a  sense,  the  saviours  of  the  city.  We  cannot  but  reflect  on  the  humble  and  seemingly 
unlikely  instruments  God  often  chooses  to  accomplish  his  ends.  He  puts  the  "treasure- 
in  earthen  vessels  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  7).  As  if  to  abase  human  pride,  he  purposely  selects 
instrumentalities  which  the  wisdom  of  man  would  scorn.  2.  Dire  alternatives. 
Brought  face  to  face  with  death,  the  poor  lepers  are  forced  to  the  earnest  consideration 


•B.  TIL  1—20.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINOS.  161 

of  their  porition.  What  could  they  do  ?  If  they  ttay  where  they  are  they  must  die, 
and  if  they  enter  the  city  they  must  die.  There  remains  the  alternative,  only  to  be 
contemplated  as  a  last  resource,  of  going  over  to  the  camp  of  the  enemy.  This  has 
been  put  off  as  long  as  possible ;  but^  it  appears  now  to  be  the  only  course  which 
affords  them  any  chance  of  life.  Suppose  the  Syrians  kill  them,  they  are  no  worse  off 
than  before ;  if  the  Syrians  take  pity  on  them  and  save  them  alive,  they  shall  live. 
The  chance  of  life  may  be  faint,  but  it  is  the  only  one  left,  and  better  than  none. 
When  men  are  in  earnest,  a  very  slight  probability  suffices  them  to  act  upon.  They 
discover  the  truth  of  Butler's  axiom  that  "  probability  is  the  guide  of  life."  Did  these 
men  not  act  rationally  in  allowing  even  a  slight  probability  to  turn  the  balance  of  their 
action  ?  How  should  it  be  otherwise  v^hen  we  deal  with  spiritual  things  ?  A  man  is 
in  doubt  as  to  the  existence  of  God,  as  to  the  reality  of  a  future  life,  etc.  It  may  seem 
to  him  that  the  evidence  for  these  truths  amounts  to  no  more  than  probability.  He 
perhaps  makes  this  an  excuse  for  dismissing  the  consideration  of  them  from  his  mind. 
But  ought  he  not  to  give  weight  to  this  probability  in  action  ?  In  another  way  the 
doubter  may  take  a  leaf  firom  the  lepers'  book.  If  he  remains  where  he  is,  he  perishes, 
for  atheism  can  hold  out  to  him-  no  other  hope.  But  if,  on  the  ground  even  of  a 
slight  balance  of  probability,  he  acts  on  the  lines  of  Christ's  religion,  he  can  be  no 
worse  than  he  is,  while,  if  that  religion  is  true  (we  speak  only  from  his  standpoint),  ha 
obtains  eternal  advantoge.  Or  is  the  doubter  one  who  does  not  question  the  truth 
of  the  gospel,  but  only  questions  his  own  right  to  appropriate  its  provisions  ?  Let 
such  a  one  imitate  Esther,  who,  with  the  words  on  her  lips,  "If  I  perish,  I  perish" 
(Esth.  iv.  16),  went  in  to  Ahasuerus.  Let  him  cast  himself  on  Christ,  and  leave  him- 
self there.  He  will  find,  like  Esther,  that  he  does  not  perish.  3.  The  Divine  will  and 
tJte  human  will.  In  these  consultations  among  themselves,  the  lepers  were  moved  only 
by  the  consideration  of  their  own  misery.  They  neither  knew  of  Elisha's  prediction, 
nor  had  any  thought  of  aiding  to  fulfil  it,  Tet  all  the  while  they  were  working  out 
Qod's  secret  counsel.  They  were,  while  seeking  their  own  ends,  the  unconscious 
instruments  of  a  higher  will  than  their  own.  Thus  are  we  all.  Man's  passions, 
ambitions,  wants,  follies,  sins  even,  are  subordinated  in  providence  to  the  fulfilling  of 
all-wise,  comprehensive  purposes,  of  which  the  immediate  actors  have  no  glimpse. 
"  The  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  for  ever ;  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  to  all  gene- 
rations "  (Ps.  xxxiii.  11). 

II.  The  deserted  oamp.  1.  An  astonishing  discovery.  At  nightfall,  in  pursuance 
of  their  purpose,  the  lepers  betook  themselves  to  the  camp  of  the  Syrians.  It  was  the 
evening  of  the  day  on  which  Elisha  had  made  his  promise.  Of  the  hope  then  held  out 
they  were  ignorant,  but  they  were  to  be  the  first  to  make  the  discovery  that  deliverance 
had  been  wrought.  It  would  be  with  fear  and  trembling  that  they  approached  the 
well-appointed  tents,  and  the  very  silence  that  evary where  prevailed  would  strike  them 
at  first  with  new  awe.  But  now  an  astonishing  state  of  things  revealed  itself.  The 
camp  was  there — that  camp  so  lately  astir  with  military  life — but  not  a  soul  was  to  be 
seen  in  it.  Absolute  stillness  reigned  throughout  the  tents ;  or,  if  sounds  were  heard, 
they  were  only  those  of  the  horses  and  asses  which  were  left  without  masters.  Thus 
near  may  oiu:  salvation  be  to  us,  and  we  know  it  not.  2.  The  flight  of  the  Syrians. 
The  explanation  of  the  state  of  things  which  the  lepers  discovered  is  given  in  vers.  6,  7. 
The  Syrians  themselves  may  in  later  years  have  told  the  story,  or  it  may  have  been  got 
from  Elisha,  whose  prophetic  gift  gave  him  the  knowledge  of  what  had  taken  place.  The 
Syrians,  it  appears,  had  heard  strange  noises — sounds  as  of  chariots  and  horses  and  of  a 
great  host ;  and,  smitten  with  sudden  panic,  believing  that  the  Hittites  or  Egyptians 
had  brought  help  to  the  Israelites,  they  at  once  abandoned  everything  and  fled.  The 
panic  was  of  supernatural  intensity,  as  the  sounds  were  of  supernatural  origin.  The 
mind  of  man,  no  less  than  external  natural  conditions,  is  in  the  hand  of  God.  He  can 
smite  with  "  madness,  and  blindness,  and  astonishment  of  heart "  (Dent.  xxviiL  28) ; 
can  make  men  the  sport  of  their  own  imaginations  and  delusions.  Such  penalties  are 
threatened  against  the  wicked.  3.  Dividing  tlie  spoU.  The  first  impulse  of  the  lepers, 
when  they  discovered  that  the  camp  was  literally  empty,  was  to  supply  their  own 
wants.  We  can  fancy  them  rubbing  their  eyes,  and  wondering  if  what  they  beheld 
was  not  all  a  dream.  There  around  them,  as  if  in  some  region  of  enchantment,  were 
food  and  drink  in  abundance,  with  gold,  silver,  raiment,  and  valuables  of  every  kind. 
u.  KiNas.  K 


182  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  vn.  1— 2^ 

Thej  wen  stunned  with  thdr  good  fortune,  and  wandered  abont  from  tent  to  tent, 
eating  and  drinking,  and  carrying  out  the  good  things  they  saw,  to  hide  them.  Wo 
om  compare  with  the  surprise  of  these  lepers  the  joy  of  the  soul  on  its  first  discorerj' 
of  "  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ "  (Eph.  iii.  8).  How  infinite,  grand,  and  varied 
the  provision  found  in  him,  the  riches  of  salvation,  the  supply  for  spirituij  wants,  the 
treasures  for  the  enrichment  and  beautiflcation  of  the  soul  I  and  how  wondroiisly  and 
unexpectedly  these  burst  upon  the  view  when  God  "  reveals  his  Son"  in  ua  (Gal.  i.  16). 
At  first  the  absorbing  concern  is  for  one's  self — the  engrossing  thought  is  to  appropriate 
what  is  necessary  for  our  own  life.  But  this  stage,  as  in  the  case  of  the  lepers,  soon 
passes  by,  and  gives  place  to  another  less  selfish. 

III.  The  bbinoers  of  good  tidikgs.  1.  Sdf-rebuke.  Four  leprous  men  alone  in 
that  great  camp,  and  a  city  near  at  hand  perishing  of  hunger :  it  was^  a  strange 
situation.  The  lepers  themselves  began  to  feel  they  were  not  acting  rightly  in  delaying 
to  carry  the  news  of  this  astonishing  plenty  to  their  famine-stricken  brethren.  "  We 
do  not  well,"  they  said ;  "  this  is  a  day  of  good  tidings,  and  we  hold  our  peace."  Does 
not  every  mind  feel  that  their  words  were  just  ?  Would  it  not  have  been  selfishness 
unspeakable  had  they  continued  to  think  only  of  themselves,  and  delayed  to  carry  the 
good  tidings  to  their  friends  in  the  city  ?  Acting  thus  selfishly,  might  they  not  justly 
fear  that  some  "  mischief"  would  come  upon  them?  And  did  they  not  at  length  do 
right  in  saying,  "  Now  therefore  come,  that  we  may  go  and  tell  the  king's  household  "  ? 
The  application  is  obvious  to  our  own  duty  as  those  who  possess  the  saving  knowledge 
of  the  true  God,  and  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son.  "  We  do  not  well,"  if  we  withhold  it 
from  those  who  are  perishing  for  lack  of  this  knowledge  (Hos.  iv.  6).  How  many  are 
in  this  condition  1  The  whole  heathen  world,  and  ignorant  multitudes  are  around  us. 
"  It  is  a  day  of  good  tidings : "  shall  we  not  make  these  good  tidings  known  ?  "  Freely 
ye  have  received,  freely  give  "  (Matt.  x.  8).  "  Shall  we  whose  souls  are  Ughted,"  etc.  ? 
2.  Searing  good  news.  The  lepers  delayed  no  more,  but  hastened  to  the  gate  of  the 
city,  and  told  their  wonderful  story  to  the  porter,  who  told  it  to  others,  who  carried  it 
to  the  king's  house.  Thus,  from  one  to  another,  the  news  spread.  It  was  not  reckoned 
any  drawback  to  it  that  they  were  lepers  who  brought  it. — J.  0. 

Vers.  12 — ^20. — The  good  news  verified.  The  tidings  brought  by  the  lepers  were  so 
astounding  that  it  was  natural  there  should  at  first  be  some  hesitation  in  acting  on  them. 

I.  The  kino's  busficions.  Jehoram  was  roused  in  the  night-time,  but  his  mood 
was  distrustful  and  desponding.  He  was  convinced  that  the  Syrians  were  but  playing 
him  a  trick.  Their  apparent  retreat  was  a  piece  of  strategy  to  get  the  Israelites  out 
into  the  plain.  Then  they  would  fall  on  them  and  destroy  them.  "  I  will  now  show 
you  what  the  Syrians  have  done  to  us,"  etc.  1.  Distrust  of  inan.  The  suspicious 
disposition  of  the  king  accords  with  his  general  character.  It  has  been  noticed  that 
Jehoram  presents  himself  throughout  the  history  as  a  man  of  moody,  changeful, 
unreliable  nature.  "  When  the  prophet  leads  the  enemy  into  his  han^  without  a 
blow,  he  becomes  violent,  and  is  eager  to  slaughter  them  all ;  then,  however,  he  allows 
himself  to  be  soothed,  gives  them  entertainment,  and  permits  them  to  depart  in  safety. 
At  the  siege  of  Samaria,  the  great  distress  of  the  city  touches  his  heart.  He  puts  on 
garments  which  are  significant  of  grief  and  repentance,  but  then  allows  himself  to  be 
so  overpowered  by  anger,  that,  instead  of  seeking  the  cause  of  the  prevailing  misery  in 
his  own  apostasy  and  that  of  the  nation,  he  swears  to  put  to  death,  without  delay,  the 
man  whom  he  had  once  addressed  as  'father.'  Yet  this  anger  also  is  of  short 
duration.  He  does  not  hear  the  promise  of  deliverance  with  scorn,  as  his  officer  does, 
but  with  hope  and  confidence.  Then,  again,  when  the  promised  deliverance  is  anncAuced 
as  actually  present,  he  once  more  becomes  doubtful  and  mistrustful,  and  his  servants 
have  to  encourage  him  and  push  him  on  to  a  decision "  (Bahr).  It  is  shown  by  the 
present  instance  how  a  suspicious,  distrustful  disposition  often  outwits  itselfl  One 
could  not  have  blamed  Jehoram  for  being  cautious ;  but  his  habit  of  mind  led  him  to 
go  beyond  caution,  and  to  conclude  for  certain  that  the  news  brought  was  false,  and 
that  the  Syrians  were  attempting  a  deception.  Had  he  been  left  to  himself,  he  would 
have  rested  in  that  conclusion,  and  inquired  no  further.  Yet  he  was  wrong,  and  the 
Syrians  had  actually  fled.  An  excess  of  scepticism  thus  frequently  leads  those  who 
^dulge  it  astray.    Jehoram  was  so  accustomed  to  diplomacy,  to  intrigue^  to  strategy, 


fik.  VII.  1— 20.J        THE  SECOND  BOOK.  OF  TfiB  KINGS.  16^ 

that  he  thought  of  no  other  explanation  of  the  facts  related  to  him.  By  hii  moody 
unbelief  he  nearly  missed  the  blessing.  2.  Distrust  of  God.  There  was  more  than 
distrust  of  man  in  Jehoram's  suipicions ;  there  was  likewise  distrust  of  Gk)d.  Had  hii 
attitude  to  God's  promise,  as  conveyed  through  Elisha,  been  one  of  faith,  he  would  at 
once  have  recognized  that  this  which  was  told  him  was  its  fulfilment.  He  would 
have  remembered  Elisha's  word;  he  would  have  perceived  how  precisely  this  report 
fitted  into  it ;  he  would  at  least,  before  dismissing  the  lepers'  story,  have  felt  it  his  duty 
to  consult  Elisha,  and  ask  him  for  his  guidance.  It  was  his  unbelief  which  gave  the 
dark  tinge  to  his  reflections.  Are  we  not  often  guilty  of  similar  distrust?  We  offer 
prayers,  and,  when  the  answer  comes,  we  are  astonished,  and  can  hardly  beliere 
(Acts  xiL  16, 16).  Our  unbelief  darkens  God's  provideoce  to  us,  and  prevents  ns  from 
seeing  his  gracious  hand. 

II.  Vebifioation  op  thb  fliort.  1.  The  servants  eounsd.  The  servants  on  this, 
as  on  other  occasions,  showed  themselves  wiser  than  their  lord  (Gxod.  x.  7 ;  ch.  v. 
13).  One  of  them  gave  him  sound  advice.  The  report  they  had  received  was, 
surely,  at  least  worth  inquiring  into.  Let  him  send  some  of  the  chariot- horses  that 
remained  (they  were  very  few,  and,  like  the  remnant  of  the  people  of  Israel,  wasted 
with  starvation,  so  that,  at  the  worst,  no  greater  evU  could  befall  them  than  already 
existed),  and  let  the  charioteers  bring  word  of  the  true  state  of  the  case.  How  many 
rash  criticisms,  hasty  condemnations,  unwise  delays,  would  be  avoided,  if  men  would 
but  act  upon  the  principle  "go  and  see"!  The  practical  instincts  are  often  sounder 
in  the  common  people  than  in  their  lordly  superiors.  2.  The  king's  messengers.  The 
king  did  as  his  servant  suggested,  and  the  chariots,  two  in  number,  were  sent  forth. 
The  camp  was  found  deserted,  as  the  lepers  had  said,  but,  to  make  sure,  the  messengers 
continued  their  tour  of  inspection  along  the  road  leading  to  Jordan.  The  evidences 
of  hasty  flight  were  indubitable.  "AH  the  way  was  full  of  garments  and  vessels, 
which  the  Syrians  had  cast  away  in  their  baste."  There  was  now  no  further  doubt, 
80  "  the  messengers  returned,  and  told  the  king."  They  had  seen,  and  believed :  how 
much  better  had  the  king  trusted  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  believed,  though  he  had 
not  seen  (John  xx.  29)  I  When  men  are  fleeing  for  their  lives,  they  willingly  leave  all 
behind  them.  It  shonld  moderate  our  sense  of  the  value  of  earthly  treasures  when  we 
see  how,  in  an  emergency,  they  are  so  little  recked  o£  A  day  will  come  when  the 
proudest  and  haughtiest  would  gladly  part  with  all  they  have  for  a  single  smile  from 
the  face  of  him  who  sits  upon  the  great  white  throne  (Bev.  vL  15,  16;  xx.  11). 
3.  GocPi  word  fulfilled.  Thus  it  came  about  that,  in  a  manner  wholly  unprecedented 
and  unlocked  for,  the  prediction  of  Elisha  was  fulfilled.  The  starving  people  found 
themselves  set  free  from  theu:  besiegers,  and,  crowding  out  to  the  deserted  tents, 
regaled  themselves  on  the  abundance  of  provision  the  Syrians  had  left.  The  store  of 
the  Syrian  host  was  at  their  disposal,  and  a  measure  of  fine  flour  was  sold  for  a  shekel, 
and  two  measures  of  barley  for  a  shekeL  "  Wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children " 
(Matt.  xi.  19).  Those  are  always  found  right  at  last  who  repose  implicit  trust  in  God's 
Word.  Worldly  men  may  laugh  at  them  ;  rationalists  will  mock  them ;  the  astute  in 
this  world's  afiairs  will  count  them  hare-brained  and  foolish ;  but  the  event  justifies 
them.  The  principle  of  verification  holds  as  true  in  religion  as  in  science.  What  we 
now  accept  in  faith  will  ultimately  be  verified  by  sight.  The  difference  between 
religion  and  science  is  that  the  latter  refuses  to  act  till  it  has  received  the  verification 
(though  even  this  is  subject  to  qualification) ;  the  former  trusts  God,  acts,  and  awaits 
the  verification. 

in.  Fatx  or  THK  HOOKEB.  There  remained  to  he  fulfilled  the  word  which  Elisha 
had  spoken,  that,  though  the  king's  officer  who  had  scoffed  at  the  promise  should  see 
the  predicted  plenty,  he  would  not  eat  thereof.  This  word  also  was  verified  in  a 
remarkable,  but  seemingly  accidental,  way.  This  ofScer  was  appointed  to  superintend 
the  sale  of  provisions  in  the  gateway,  but  the  pressure  of  the  frantic  crowd  was  so 
great  that  he  was.  trodden  underfoot  and  died.  How  simply,  yet  how  accurately,  was 
the  prophet's  forecast  fulfilled !  1.  The  incident  is  another  evidence  that  even  seeming 
"  accidents "  do  not  lie  outside  the  providence  of  QoA.  2.  It  teaches  men  the  folly 
and  danger  of  mocking  at  God's  Word.  3.  It  shows  the  certainty  of  God's  threatanings 
being  fulfilled.  4.  It  illustrates  the  end  of  the  ungodly — seeing  the  fulfilment  of 
God's  promises  of  mercy,  but  not  permitted  to  m^ojf.—J.  0. 


164 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  vm.  1— 2&. 


BXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  vm. 


Yen.  1 — ^29. — Tsm  Bbqvml  ov  thb  Btobt 

OF     THB     ShUNAMHITB.      TBB     EiLUNS    OV 

Beneadad  bt  Hazael  ;  and  thb  Wicked 
Beionc  or  Jehobau  add  Ahaziah  in  Judah. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — Elieha  is  still  the  pnta- 
gtmiitei  of  the  historical  drama.  The  writer 
brings  together  in  the  present  section  two 
more  occasions  of  a  public  character  in 
which  he  was  oonoemed,  and  in  which 
kings  also  bore  a  part  One  of  the  occasions 
is  domestic,  and  shows  the  interest  which 
Jehoram  took  in  the  miracles  of  the  prophet, 
and  in  those  who  were  the  objects  of  them 
(vers.  1—6).  The  other  belongs  to  Syrian, 
rather  than  to  Israelite,  history,  and  proves 
that  the  influence  of  Elisha  was  not  confined 
to  Palestine  (vers.  7 — 15). 

Vers.  l—6.—Tht  $eqiiel  of  Iht  ttory  of  tht 
BhunammiU. 

Ver.  1.— Then  spake  -Xlisha  nnto  the 
woman,  whose  son  he  had  restored  to  life. 
There  is  no"  then  "  in  the  original,  of  which 
the  simplest  rendering  woidd  be,  "  And 
Elisha  spake  nnto  the  woman,"  eto.  The 
true  sense  is,  perhaps,  best  brought  ont  by 
the  Bevised  Version,  which  gives  the  follow- 
ing :  Now  Elieha  had  tpoken  unto  the  umnan, 
etc.  The  reference  is  to  a  time  long  anterior 
to  the  siege  of  Samaria.  Saying,  Arise,  and 
go  thou  and  thine  household,  and  sojourn 
wheresoever  flion  canst  sojourn:  for  the 
Lord  hath  called  for  a  famine.  A  famine  is 
mentioned  in  ch.  iv.  38,  which  must  belong 
to  the  reign  of  Jehoram,  and  which  is 
probably  identified  with  that  here  spoken 
of.  Elisha,  on  its  approach,  recommended 
the  Shunammite,  though  she  was  a  woman  of 
substance  (ch.  iv.  8),  to  quit  her  home  and 
remove  to  some  other  residence,  where  she 
might  escape  the  pressure  of  the  calamity. 
He  left  it  to  her  to  choose  the  place  of  her 
temporary  abode.  The  phrase,  "Ood  hath 
called  for  a  famine,"  means  no  more  and  no 
less  than  "  God  has  determined  that  there 
shall  be  a  famine."  With  God  to  speak  the 
word  is  to  bring  about  the  event.  And  it 
shall  also  come  upon  the  land  seven  years. 
Seven  years  was  Uie  actual  dnration  of  the 
great  famine  which  Joseph  foretold  in  Egypt 
(G«n.  xlL  27),  and  was  the  ideally  perfect 
period  for  a  severe  famine  (2  Chron.  zziv. 
IS).  Many  of  the  best  meteorologists  are 
inclined  to  re^;ard  the  term  of  "  seven  years  " 
as  a  eyoliopenod  in  eonneotion  with  weather 
changes. 


Ver.  S. — ^And  th«  woman  uose,  and  did 
after  the  saying  of  the  man  of  God.  It  is  a 
satisfaction  to  find  that  there  was  yet  faith 
in  IsraeL  There  were  still  those  to  whom 
the  prophet  was  the  mouthpiece  of  God,  who 
waited  on  his  words,  and  accepted  them  as 
Divine  commands  whereto  they  were  ready 
to  render  immediate  and  entire  obedience. 
It  is  conjectured  by  some  that  the  woman 
had  become  a  widow,  and  fallen  into  com- 
parative poverty;  but  the  narrative  gives 
no  indication  of  this.  Even  opulent  persons 
have  to  migrate  in  times  of  severe  dearth. 
And  she  went  with  her  household,  and 
sojourned  in  tiie  land  of  the  Philistines. 
Fhilistia  was  a  great  grain  country  (Judg. 
XV.  5),  and,  though  not  altogether  exempt 
from  famine,  was  less  exposed  to  it  than 
either  Judaa  or  Samaria.  The  soil  was 
exceedingly  fertile,  and  the  vapours  from 
the  Mediterranean  descended  upon  it  in 
dews  and  showers,  when  their  beneficial 
influence  was  not  felt  further  inland.  The 
Shunammite  may  have  had  other  reasons 
for  fixing  her  residence  in  the  Philistine 
country ;  but  probably  she  was  chiefly  deter- 
mined in  her  choice  by  its  proximity  and 
its  productiveness.  Seven  years.  As  long, 
('.«.,  as  the  famine  lasted  (see  the  last 
olanse  of  ver.  1). 

Ver.  8. — And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  seven 
years'  end,  that  the  woman  returned  ont  of 
the  land  of  the  Philistines.  She  stayed  no 
longer  than  she  could  help.  Her  own  land, 
where  she  could  have  the  ministrations  of 
a  "man  of  God"  (ch.  iv.  23),  was  dear  to 
her;  and  no  sooner  had  the  famine  abated 
than  she  returned  to  it.  And  she  went  forth 
to  cry  nnto  the  king  for  her  house  and  for 
her  land.  During  her  prolonged  absence, 
some  grasping  neighbour  had  seized  on  the 
unoccupied  house  and  the  uncultivated 
estate  adjoining  it,  and  now  refused  to 
restore  them  to  the  rightful  owner.  Widows 
were  especially  liable  to  such  treatment  on 
the  part  of  greedy  oppressors,  since  they 
were,  comparatively  speaking,  weak  and 
defenceless  (see  Isa.  x.  2;  Matt,  xxiii.  14) 
Under  such  circumstances  the  injured  party 
would  naturally,  in  an  Oriental  country, 
make  appeal  to  the  king  (comp.  2  Sam. 
xiv.  4;  1  Kings  iii.  16;  ch.  vi.  26,  etc.). 

Ter.  4. — And  the  king  talked  with  Oehaii; 
rather,  now  the  king  was  talking  «>ith 
Oehati,  as  in  the  Bevised  Yersion.  The 
king,  t'.e.,  happened  to  be  talking  with 
Gehazi  at  the  moment  when  the  woman 
came  into  his  presence  and  "  cried  "  to  him. 
It  has  been  reasonably  concluded  &om  this, 
that  chronological  order  is  not  observed  in 
the  portion  of  the  namtive  which  treat*  of 


OB.  vm.  1—29.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


165 


Elisha  and  hla  doings,  since  a  king  of  Israel 
would  scarcely  be  in  familiar  oonveTsation 
with  a  leper  (Keil).  It  may  be  added  tliat 
Gehazi  can  scarcely  have  oontinued  to  be 
the  servant  of  Elisha,  as  he  evidently  now 
was,  after  his  leprosy.  He  must  have  dwelt 
"without  the  gat6."  The  servant  of  the 
man  of  Ood.  That  a  king  should  converse 
with  a  serrant  is,  no  doubt,  somewhat  un- 
usual ;  but,  as  Bahr  notes,  there  is  nothing 
in  the  circumstance  that  need  astonish  us. 
It  is  natural  enough  that,  having  been  him- 
self a  witness  of  so  many  of  the  prophet's 
marvellous  acts  done  in  public,  Jehoram 
should  become  enrious  conc6rning  those 
other  marvellous  acts  which  he  had  per- 
formed in  private,  among  his  personal  friends 
and  associates,  with  respect  to  which  many 
rumours  must  have  got  abroad ;  and  should 
wish  to  obtain  an  account  of  them  from  a 
source  on  which  he  could  rely.  If  he  had 
this  desire,  he  could  scarcely  apply  to  the 
prophet  himself,  with  whom  he  was  at  no 
time  on  familiar  terms,  and  who  would 
shrink  from  enlarging  on  his  own  miraculous 
powers.  "  To  whom,  then,  could  he  apply 
with  more  propriety  for  this  information 
than  to  the  prophet's  familiar  servant" — 
an  eye-witness  of  most  of  them,  and  one 
who  would  have  no  reason  for  reticence? 
Oriental  ideas  would  not  be  shocked  by  the 
king's  sending  for  any  subject  from  whom 
he  desired  information,  and  questioning 
him.  Saying,  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  all  the 
great  thhigs  that  Slisha  hath  done.  Mi- 
racles are  often  called  "gieat  things" 
(n'l^'i:)  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  generally 
in  connection  with  God  as  the  doer  of  them 
(see  Job  T.  9;  ix.  10;  zssviL  5;  Ps.  Ixzi. 
19;  ovl21,  etc.). 

Yer.  5.— And  it  oame  to  pass,  as  he  was 
telling  the  king  how  he — i.e.  Elisha — had 
restored  a  dead  body  to  life.  This  was  un- 
donbtedly  the  greatest  of  all  Elisha's  mi- 
racles, and  Gehazi  naturally  enlarged  upon 
it.  As  an  eye-witness  (oh.  iv.  29—36),  he 
could  give  all  the  details.  That,  behold,  the 
woman,  whose  son  he  had  restored  to  life, 
cried  to  the  king  for  her  house  and  for  her 
land.  The  coincidence  can  scarcely  have 
been  accidental.  Divine  providence  so 
ordered  matters  that,  just  when  the  king's 
interest  in  the  woman  was  most  warm,  she 
should  appear  before  him  to  urge  her  claim. 
At  another  time,  Jehoram  would,  it  is  prob- 
able, have  been  but  slightly  moved  by  her 
complaint.  Under  the  peculiar  circum- 
stances, he  was  deeply  moved,  and  at  once 
granted  the  woman  the  redress  for  which 
she  asked.  And  Gehazi  said,  Uy  lord,  0 
king,  this  is  the  woman,  and  this  is  her  son, 
whom  Elisha  restored  to  life.  The  Sliunam- 
mite  was  accompanied  by  her  son,  now  a 
boy  of  At  leaat  ten  or  eleven  yeua  old — the 


actual  object  of  Elisha's  miracle.  The 
king's  interest  in  the  woman  would  be  still 
more  roused  by  this  circumstance. 

Ver.  6. — And  when  the  king  asked  the 
woman,  she  told  him;  rather,  and  the  king 
made  inquiry  of  the  woman,  and  she  answered 
him.  The  extent  of  the  inquiries  is  not 
indicated.  They  may  have  included  ques- 
tions concerning  the  miracle,  as  well  as 
questions  concerning  the  woman's  claim  to 
the  land  and  house,  and  the  evidence  which 
she  could  produce  of  proprietorship.  So  the 
king  appointed  unto  her  a  certain  officer — 
literally,  a  certain  eunuch,  or  chamberlain — 
an  officer  of  the  court,  who  was  in  his  con- 
fidence, and  would  give  effect  to  his  direc- 
tions— saying,  Bestore  all  that  was  hers,  and 
all  the  fruits  of  the  field  since  the  day  that 
she  left  the  land,  even  until  now.  The  order 
was,  that  not  only  was  the  Shunammite  to 
receive  back  her  house  and  estate,  but  that 
■he  was  also  to  have  "  the  mesne  profits  " — 
V.e.  the  full  value  of  all  that  the  land  had 
produced  beyond  the  expense  of  cultivation 
during  the  seven  years  of  her  absence. 
English  law  lays  down  the  same  rule  in 
cases  of  unlawful  possession  for  which  there 
is  no  valid  excuse. 

Vers.  7 — 15. — Elisha's  visit  to  Damascus, 
and  its  consequences.  It  has  been  usual  to 
connect  this  visit  of  Elisha's  to  Damascus 
with  the  commission  given  to  Elijah  many 
years  previously,  to  anoint  Hazael  to  be 
king  over  Syria  (1  Kings  xix.  16).  But  it 
is  certainly  worthy  of  remark  that  neither 
is  Elijah  authorized  to  devolve  his  com- 
mission on  another,  nor  is  he  said  to  have 
done  so,  nor  is  there  any  statement  in  the 
present  narrative  or  elsewiiere  that  Elisha 
anointed  Hazael.  It  is  therefore  quite 
possible  that  Elisha's  journey  was  wholly 
unconnected  with  the  command  given  to 
Elijah.  It  may,  as  Ewuld  imagines,  have 
been  the  consequence  of  disorders  and 
dangers  in  Samaria,  growing  out  of  tlie 
divergence  of  views  between  Jehoram  and 
the  queen-mother  Jezebel,  who  still  retained 
considerable  influence  over  the  government ; 
and  Elisha  may  liave  taken  his  journey,  not 
so  much  for  the  sake  of  a  visit,  as  of  a  pro- 
longed sojourn.  Tliat  he  attracted  the 
attention  both  of  Benhadad  and  of  his  suc- 
oessur  Hazael  is  not  surprising. 

Yer.  7. — ^And  Elisha  came  to  Samasons. 
It  was  a  bold  step,  whatever  the  circum- 
stances that  led  to  it.  Not  very  long  pre- 
viously the  Syrian  kins;  had  made  extra- 
ordinary efforts  to  capture  Elisha,  intending 


16« 


ih-k  SfeCONt  BOOfc  OP  THE  kmOfi.      [oH.VnLl— 2 


either  to  Idll  Urn  or  to  keep  Mm  eonflned 
u  a  prisoner  (oli.  vi.  18 — 19).  Elisha  had 
■uhseqaently  helped  to  baffle  his  plans  of 
eonqnest,  and  might  he  thought  to  have 
caused  the  disgraceful  retreat  of  the  Syrian 
army  from  the  walls  of  Bamaria,  which  he 
had  certainly  prophesied  (oh.  viL  1).  Bnt 
Elisha  was  not  afraid.  He  was  probably 
commissioned  to  take  his  journey,  whether 
its  purpose  was  the  anointing  of  Hazael  or 
no.  And  Benhadad  the  King  of  Syria  was 
sick.  Ewald  supposes  that  this  "sickness" 
was  the  result  of  the  disgrace  and  discredit 
into  which  he  had  fallen  since  his  ignomi- 
nious retread  without  assignable  reason, 
from  before  the  walls  of  Samaria;  bnt  Ben- 
hadad must  have  been  of  an  age  when  the 
infirmities  of  nature  press  in  upon  a  man, 
and  when  illness  has  to  be  expected.  He 
was  a  contemporary  of  Ahab  (1  Kings  xs. 
1),  who  had  now  been  dead  ten  or  twelve 
years.  And  it  was  told  him,  saying,  The 
man  of  Ood  is  come  hither.  Elisha  seems 
to  have  attempted  no  concealment  of  his 
presence.  No  sooner  was  he  arrived  than 
his  coming  was  reported  to  Benhadad.  The 
Syrians  had  by  this  time  learnt  to  give  him 
the  name  by  which  he  was  commonly  known 
(oh.  iv.  7,  21,  40;  T.  20;  Ti  6, 10;  vii.  2, 
18)  in  Israel. 

Yer.  8.— And  the  king  B^d  unto  BazaeL 
It  is  implied  that  Hazael  was  in  attendance 
on  Benhadad  in  his  sick-room,  either  pei> 
manentljr  as  a  chamberlain,  or  occasionally 
as  a  minister.  According  to  Josephus 
('  Ant  Jud.,'  ix.  4.  §  6),  he  was  "  the  most 
faithful  of  the  king'sdomesticB",(Jn'i(rT(iTaTat 
Tui'  oiKtrap^.  We  cannot  presume  from  ver. 
12  that  he  had  as  yet  distinguished  himself 
as  a  warrior.  Take  a  present  in  thjbie  hand, 
and  go,  meet  the  man  of  Qod.  It  was  usual, 
both  among  the  heathen  and  among  the 
Israelites,  for  those  who  consulted  a  prophet 
to  bring  him  a  present  (see  1  Sam.  ix.  7; 
1  Kings  xiv.  3).  Hence,  mainly,  the  great 
wealth  of  the  Delphio  and  other  oracles. 
Naaman  (ch.  v.  5)  had  brought  with  him  • 
rich  present  when  he  went  to  consult  Elisha 
ill  Samaria.  And  inquire  of  the  Lord  by  him, 
laying,  Shall  I  recover  of  this  disease  t  The 
miracles  of  Elisha  had  had  at  any  rate  this 
eflect — they  had  convinced  the  Syrians  that 
Jehovah  was  a  great  and  powerful  God,  and 
made  them  regard  Elisha  himself  as  a  true 
prophet  Their  faith  in  their  own  super- 
stitions must  have  been  at  least  partially 
shaken  by  these  convictions.  It  was  by 
these  and  similar  weakenings  of  established 
errors  that  the  world  was  gradually  educated, 
and  the  way  prepared  for  the  introduction 
of  Christianity.  There  was  very  early 
among  the  Syrians  a  flourishing  Ohristian 
Ghuroh. 

Yer.  9. — Be  Hazael  went  to  meet  him — 


t.0.  Elisha— and  took  •  praent  with  him; 
literally,  t'n  hit  hand;  bnt  we  must  not 
press  this  expression.  "In  hi«  hand"  meant 
"  under  his  control."  The  present  was  far 
too  large  ito  be  carried  by  an  individual. 
It  consisted  even  of  every  good  thing  of 
Samasons;  i.«.  of  sold  and  silver  and  costly 
raiment,  of  the  lusoioua  wine  of  Helbon, 
which  was  the  drink  of  the  Persian  kings 
(Strab.,  zv.  8.  §  22),  of  the  soft  white  wool  of 
the  Antilibanns  (Ezek.  xxviL  18),  of  damask 
coverings  of  couches  (Amos  iiL  12'),  perhapi 
of  Damascus  blades,  and  of  voriooa  manu- 
factured articles,  the  prodnots  of  Tyre^ 
Egypt,  Nineveh,  and  Babylon,  which  her 
extensive  land  trade  was  always  bringing 
to  the  Syrian  capital.  Forty  oamels'  burden. 
Not  as  much  as  forty  camels  could  carry,  but 
a  gift  of  such  »  size  that  it  was  actually 
placed  on  the  backs  of  forty  camels,  whicn 
paraded  the  town,  and  conveyed  in  a  long 
procession  to  the  prophet's  house  the  king's 
magnificent  offering.  Orientale  are  guilty 
of  extreme  ostentation  with  respect  to  the 
presents  that  they  make.  AsObardinsaya, 
"Fifty  persons  often  cany  what  a  single 
one  could  have  very  well  borne"  (•  Yoya^e 
en  Ferse,'  vol.  iii.  p.  217).  The  practice  is 
illustrated  by  the  bas-reliefs  of  Nineveh  and 
Persepolis^  which  furnish  proofs  of  its 
antiquity.  One  present-bearercarries  a  few 
pomegranates;  another,  kbnnch  of  grapes;  a 
third,  a  string  of  locusts ;  a  fourth,'two  small 
ointment-pots ;  a  fifth,  a  branch  of  an  olive 
tree,  and  the  like  (Layard,  'Monoments  of; 
Nineveh,'  second  leriei,  pli.  8, 9,  etc.).  It 
is  not  unlikely  that  a  single  camel  oonld 
have  carried  the  whole.  And  oame  and 
stood  before  him,  and  said,  Thy  son  Ben- 
hadad King  of  Syria  hath  sent  me  to  the% 
saying— Benhadad  seeks  to  propitiate  Elisha 
by  calling  himself  his  son,  thus  indicating 
the  respect  he  feels  for  him  (comp.  oh.  Ti. 
21 ;  xiii.  14)— Shall  I  recover  of  this  disease  f 
Nothing  was  more  common  in  the  ancient 
world  tiian  the  consultation  of  an  oracle  or 
a  prophet  in  oases  of  disease  or  other  bodily 
afdiction.  Two  questions  were  commonly 
asked,  "Shall  I  recover?"  and  "How  may 
I  recover  7  "  So  Fheron  of  Egypt  is  said  to 
have  consulted  an  oracle  with  respect  to  his 
blindness  (Herod.,  iL  111),  and  Battna  of 
Gyrene  to  have  done  the  same  with  respect 
to  his  stammering  (ibid.,  iv.  ISS).  It  was 
seldom  that  a  clear  and  direct  answer  was 
given. 

Yer.  10.— And  Elisha  said  onto  Um,  Oo, 
say  onto  him,  Thon  mayest  oertainly  x^ 
cover.  The  existing  Masoretio  text  ((kfr*iDj| 
rrrin  rpn)  !■  untranslatable,  since  imir4» 
cannot  mean,  "say  not,"  on  aoconnt  ol 
the  order  of  the  words ;  and  lo  cannot  be 
joined  with  khayih  thikhgah,  first  on  aooonnt 
of  the  makkeph  which  attaches  It  to  tmir, 


oa.  vta.  1— 2d.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OV  TflB  KiNdS. 


w 


and  secondly  because  the  emphatic  infinitire 
is  in  itself  affirmutive,  and  does  not  admit 
of  a  negative  prefix.  The  emendation  in 
the  Hebrew  margin  Qh  for  ^h),  accepted  by 
all  the  versions,  and  by  almost  all  commen- 
tators, is  thus  certain.  Our  translators  are 
therefore,  so  far,  in  the  right ;  but  they  were 
not  entitled  to  tone  down  the  strong  afflrma- 
tive,  hhayih  thikhyah,  "living  thou  shalt 
live,"  or  "  thou  shalt  surely  live,"  into  the 
weak  potential,  "  thou  mayest  certainly  re- 
cover." What  Elisha  says  to  Hazael  is, 
"  Go,  say  unto  him.  Thou  shalt  surely  live ;  *' 
i.e.  "Gki,  say  onto  him,  what  thou  hast 
already  made  up  thy  mind  to  say,  what  a 
courtier  is  sure  to  say.  Thou  shalt  recover." 
Howheit  the  lord  hath  showed  me  that  he 
shall  surely  die.  If  Hazael  had  reported 
the  whole  answer  to  Benhadad,  he  would 
have  told  no  lie,  and  thus  Elisha  is  not 
responsible  for  his  lie. 

Yer.  11.— And  he  settled  his  oountenanca 
steadfastly — ^literally,  and  he  settled  his  emtn- 
tenanee  and  set  it ;  Le.  Elisha  fixed  on  Hazael 
a  long  and  meaning  loolc — ^nntil  he — i.e. 
Hazael — was  ashamed;  {.«.  until  Hazael  felt 
embarrassed,  and  his  eyes  feU.  It  may 
be  gathered  that  the  ambitious  courtier 
had  already  formed  •  murderous  design 
against  his  master,  and  understood  by  the 
peculiar  gaze  which  the  prophet  fixed  upon 
him  that  his  design  was  penetrated.  And 
the  man  of  God  wept.  There  flashed  on 
the  prophet's  mind  all  the  long  series  of 
calamities  which  Israel  would  suffer  at  the 
hands  of  Syria  during  Hazael's  reign,  and 
he  could  not  but  weep  at  the  thought  of 
them  (see  the  next  verse). 

Yer.  12. — And  Hazael  said,  Why  weepeth 
my  lordl  While  inwardly  contemplating 
an  act  of  audacious  wickedness  in  defiance 
of  the  prophet's  implied  rebuke,  Hazael 
preserves  towards  him  outwardly  an  attitude 
of  extreme  deference  and  respect.  "My 
lord "  was  the  phrase  with  which  slaves 
addressed  tlieir  masters,  and  subjects  their 
monai'ohs  (see  oh.  V.  3 ;  vi.  12,  etc.).  <  And  he 
answered,  Because  I  know  the  evil  that  thou 
wilt  do  unto  the  ohildren  of  Israel :  their 
strongholds  wilt  thou  set  on  fire,  and  their 
young  men  wilt  thou  slay  with  the  sword, 
and  wilt  dash  their  children,  and  rip  up  their 
women  with  child.  The  prophet  does  not 
intend  to  tax  Hazael  with  any  special 
cruelty.  He  only  means  to  say,  "Thou 
wilt  wage  long  and  bloody  wars  with  Israel, 
in  which  will  occur  all  those  customary 
horrors  that  make  war  so  terrible — the 
burning  of  cities,  the  slaughter  of  the 
flower  of  the  youth,  the  violent  death  of 
ohildren,  and  even  the  massacre  of  women 
in  a  state  of  pregnancy.  These  horrors 
belonged,  more  or  less,  to  all  Oriental  wars, 
•nd  are  touched  on  in  Ps.  oxxxviL  9 ;  oh. 


XV.  16:  Isa.  xUi.  16.  18;  Hos.  x.  14; 
Nah.  iii.  10 ;  Amos  L  13,  etc.  The  wars  oi 
Haziiel  with  the  Israelites  are  mentioned  in 
ch.  X.  32,  83 ;  xiii.  3—7;  and  Amos  L  3, 4. 

Yer.  13.— And  Hazael  said,  But  what,  is 
thy  servant  a  dog,  that  he  should  do  this 
great  thing  1  This  rendering  is  generally 
allowed  to  be  incorrect.  The  true  sense, 
which  is  well  represented  in  the  Septuagint 
(T^s  iirriv  d  Bov\6s  irov,  6  kvuv  6  redvrjKchSf  HYi 
iroi^irci  T>  ^TJixa  toSto;),  is — "But  whfit  is 
thy  servant,  this  dog,  that  he  should  do  so 
great  a  thing?"  Hazael  does  not  accuse 
Elisha  of  making  him  out  a  dog  in  the 
future,  but  calls  himself  a  dog  in  the 
present.  "Dog"  is  a  word  of  extreme 
contempt — ^"  the  most  contemptuous  epithet 
of  abuse"  (Winer),  as  appears,  among  other 
places,  f^om  1  Sam.  xxiv.  14  and  2  Sam. 
xvi.  9.  Hazael  means  to  say — How  is  it 
possible  that  he,  occupying,  as  he  does,  so 
poor  and  humble  a  position  ns  that  of  a 
mere  courtier  or  domestic  (oiket^j,  Josephus), 
should  ever  wage  war  with  Israel,  and  do 
the  "great  things"  which  Elisha  has  pre- 
dicted of  him?  And  Elisha  answered. 
The  Lord  hath  showed  me  that  thou  shalt 
be  king  over  Syria.  Elisha  explains  how 
it  would  be  possible.  Hazael  would  not 
continue  in  his  poor  and  humble  condition. 
Jehovah  has  revealed  it  to  him  that  the 
mere  courtier  will  shortly  mount  the  Syrian 
throne. 

Yer.  14. — So  he  departed  from  Elisha, 
and  came  to  his  master;  who  said  to  him, 
What  said  Blisha  to  thee  1  And  he  answered, 
He  told  me  that  thou  shouldest  surely 
recover.  This,  as  already  observed,  was 
giving  half  Elisha's  answer,  and  suppress- 
ing £e  other  half.  The  luppressio  veri  is 
a  luggeatio  fahi;  and  the  suppression  was 
Hazael's  act,  not  Elisha's.  Had  Hazael 
repeated  the  whole  of  Elisha's  answer — 
"Say  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  surely  recover; 
howbeit  the  Lord  hath  showed  me  that  he 
shall  surely  die" — Benhadad  might  have 
been  puzzled,  but  he  would  not  have  been 
deceived. 

Yer.  15.— And  it  oame  to  pan  on  the 
morrow,  that  he  took  a  thick  cloth.  Maebir 
is  a  cloth  of  a  coarse  texture — a  mat,  or 
piece  of  carpeting.  It  has  here  the  article 
prefixed  to  it  (Aam-mae&dr),  which  implies 
that  there  was  but  one  in  the  sick-room. 
We  may  conjecture  that  it  was  a  mat  used 
as  a  sort  of  pillow,  and  interposed  between 
the  head-rest  (so  common  in  Egypt  and 
Assyria)  and  the  head  (compare  the  e'bir  of 
1  Sam.  xix.  13).  And  dipped  it  in  water. 
The  water  would  fill  up  the  interstices 
through  which  air  might  otherwise  have 
been  drawn,  and  hasten  the  suffocation.  ▲ 
death  of  the  same  kind  is  recorded  in  the 
Persian  history  entitled  'Eholasat  el  Akh- 


168 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  viil  1— 2a 


bar,'  which  contains  (p.  162)  the  following 
passage:  "The  maUJc  ordered  that  they 
should  place  a  carpet  on  Abdallah'i  mouth, 
so  that  nis  life  was  out  off."  And  spread  it 
on  his  face,  so  that  he  died.  It  has  been 
supposed  by  some  commentators,  as  Luther, 
Schultz,  Geddes,  Boothroyd,  that  Benhadad 
put  the  wet  maeber  on  his  own  face  for 
refreshment,  and  accidentally  suffocated 
himself;  but  this  is  very  unlikely,  and  it 
is  certainly  not  the  natural  sense  of  the 
words.  As  "  Hazael "  is  the  subject  of  "  de- 
parted" and  "came"  and  "answered"  in 
ver.  14,  so  it  is  the  natural  subject  of 
"took"  and  "dipped"  and  "spread"  in 
ver.  15.  Ver.  11  also  would  be  unintelli- 
gible if  Hazael  entertained  no  murderous 
intentions.  Why  Ewald  ('Hi&tory  of  Is- 
rael,' vol.  iv.  p.  93,  Eng.  trans.)  introduces 
•  "bath-seiTaut,"  nnmentioned  in  the  text, 
to  murder  Benhadad  for  no  assignable 
reason,  it  is  difficult  to  conjecture.  And 
Hazael  reigned  in  his  stead.  The  direct 
succession  of  Hazael  to  Benhadad  is  con- 
firmed by  the  inscription  on  the  Black 
Obelisk,  where  he  appears  as  King  of 
Damascus  (line  97)  a  few  years  only  after 
Benhadad  {Bin-itlri)  had  been  mentioned 
as  king. 

Vers.  16—24. — The  Wicked  Eeiqn  o» 
Jehobam  in  Jcdah.  At  this  point  the 
writer,  who  has  been  concerned  with  the 
history  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  hitherto 
in  the  present  book,  takes  up  tlie  story  of 
the  kingdom  of  Judah  from  1  Kings  zxii. 
50,  and  proceeds  to  give  a  very  brief 
account  of  the  reign  of  Jehoshaphat's  eldest 
son,  Jehoram,  or  (by  contraction)  Joram. 
His  narrative  has  to  be  supplemented  from 
2  Chron.  xxL,  which  contains  many  facts 
not  mentioned  by  the  writer  of  Kings. 

Ver.  16.— And  in  the  fifth  year  of  Joram 
the  son  of  Ahab  Sing  of  Israel,  Jehoshaphat 
being  then  King  of  Judah ;  literally,  and  of 
Jehofliaphat  King  of  Judah.  The  words  are 
wanting  in  three  Hebrew  manuscripts,  in 
some  editions  of  the  Septungint,  in  the 
Peahito  Syriac,  in  the  Parisian  Heptaplar 
Syriac,  in  the  Arabic  Version,  and  in  many 
copies  of  the  Vulgate.  They  cannot  pos- 
sibly have  the  sense  assigned  to  them  in 
unr  version,  and  are  most  probably  a  gloss 
which  has  crept  into  the  text  from  the 
margiu.  Jehoram  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat 
King  of  Judah  began  to  reign.  Jehoram's 
reig^  was  sometimes  counted  from  the 
seventeenth  year  of  his  father,  when  he 
wag  given  the  royal  title,  sometime^  from 
liis  father's  twenty-third  year,  when  he  was 
associated,  and  sometimes  from  his  father's 


death  in  Us  twenty-fifth  year,  when  he 
became  sole  king  (see  the  eoinment  on 
eh.  1. 17  and  ch.  iii.  1). 

Ver.  17. — ^Thirty  and  two  years  old  was 
he  when  he  began  to  reign;  and  he  reigned 
eight  years  in  Jerusalem.  The  eight  years 
seem  to  be  counted  &om  his  association  in 
the  kingdom  by  his  father  in  his  twenty- 
third  year.  He  reigned  as  sole  king  only 
sixyears. 

Ver.  18. — And  he  walked  in  the  way  of 
the  kings  of  Israel,  as  did  the  house  of 
Ahab;  t.e.  he  introduced  into  Judah  the 
Baal  and  Astarte  worship,  which  Ahab  had 
introduced  into  Israel  from  Phoenicia.  (On 
the  nature  of  this  worship,  see  the  *  Com- 
mentary on  the  First  Book  of  Kings,'  p. 
374.)  The  "house  of  Ahab"  maintained 
and  spread  the  Baal-worship,  wherever  it 
had  influence.  Ahaziah,  the  son  of  Ahab^ 
championed  it  in  Israel  (i  Kings  xxii.  53) ; 
Jehoram,  his  brother,  allowed  its  continu- 
ance (ch.  X.  18 — 28);  Jehoram  of  Judah 
was  induced  by  his  wife,  Athaliah,  the 
daughter  of  Ahab,  to  countenance  it  in 
Judsea;  Athaliah,  when  she  usurped  the 
throne  upon  the  death  of  her  son  Ahaziah, 
made  it  the  state  religion  in  that  country. 
"  Evil  communications  corrupt  good  man- 
ners." The  alliance  of  the  two  separated 
kingdoms,  concluded  between  Jehoshaphat 
and  Ahab  (1  Kings  zxii.  2 — 4),  had  no 
tangible  result  beyond  the  introduction  into 
Judah  of  the  licentious  and  debasing  super- 
stition which  had  previously  overspread  the 
sister  country.  For  the  daughter  of  Ahab 
was  his  wife.  In  ver.  26  Athaliah,  the 
wife  of  Jehoram,  is  called  "the  daughter 
of  Omri ; "  but  by  "  daughter  "  in  that  place 
must  bo  meant  "descendant"  or  "grand- 
daughter." Athaliah  has  been  well  called 
"  a  second  Jezebel."  And  he  did  evil  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord,  The  wicked  actions  of  Je- 
horam are  recorded  at  some  length  in  Chro- 
nicles (2  Chron.  xxi.  2—4, 11—13).  Shortly 
after  his  accession  he  put  to  death  his  six 
brothers — Azariah,  Jehiel,  Zechariah,  Aha- 
ziah (?),  Michael,  and  Shephatiah— in  order 
to  "strengthen  himself.'*  At  the  same 
time,  he  caused  many  of  the  "princes  of 
Israel"  to  be  executed.  Soon  afterwards 
he  "  made  high  places  in  the  mountains  of 
Judah,  and  caused  the  inhabitants  of  Jeru- 
salem to  commit  fornication  "  (i.e.  to  become 
idolaters),  "  and  compelled  Judah  thereto." 
That  the  idolatry  which  he  introduced  was 
the  Baal-worship  is  clear,  both  from  the 
present  passage  and  from  2  Chron.  xxi.  13. 

Ver.  19. — ^Yet  the  lord  would  not  destroy 
Judah  for  David  his  servant's  sake.  The 
natural  punishment  of  apostasy  was  re- 
jection by  QoA,  and  on  rejection  would,  as 
a  matter  of  course,  follow  destruction  and 
ruin.     Ood  had  declared  by  Moses,  "If 


OH.  Tm.  1—29.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KTSQS. 


169 


tbon  wilt  not  hearken  tmto  the  yoiee  of 
the  Loid  thy  Qod,  to  obserre  to  do  all  hi* 
commandments  and  statutes,  which  I  com- 
mand thee  this  day ;  all  these  corses  shall 
come  npon  thee.  .  .  .  The  Lord  shall  send 
upon  thee  cursing,  vexation,  and  rehire,  in 
all  that  thou  settest  thine  hand  unto  for  to 
do,  until  thou  he  destroyed,  and  until  thou 
perish  quickly;  because  of  the  wickedness 
of  thy  doings,  whereby  thou  hast  forsaken 
me.  The  Lord  shall  make  the  pestilence 
cleave  nnto  thee,  until  he  have  consumed 
thee  from  ciff  the  land,  whither  thou  goest 
to  possess  it.  The  Lord  shall  smite  thee 
with  a  consumption,  and  with  a  fever,  and 
with  an  inflammation,  and  with  an  extreme 
burning,  and  with  the  sword,  and  with 
blasting,  and  with  mildew ;  and  they  shall 
pursue  thee  tiU  thou  perish.  And  thy 
heaven  which  is  over  thy  head  shall  be 
brass,  and  the  earth  that  is  underneath  thee 
shall  be  iron.  .  ,  .  The  Lord  shaU  cause 
thee  to  be  smitten  of  thine  enemies;  thou 
shalt  go  out  one  way  against  them,  and  flee 
seven  ways  before  them :  and  thou  shalt 
be  removed  into  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
earth.  .  .  .  Thou  shalt  become  an  aston- 
ishment, a  proverb,  and  a  byword,  among 
all  nations  whitlier  the  Lord  shall  lead 
thee"  (Dent,  xxviii.  15—37).  The  apos- 
tasy of  Jehoram,  and  of  the  nation  under 
him,  was  calculated  to  bring  about  the 
immediate  fulfilment  of  all  these  threats, 
and  would  have  done  so  but  for  a  restrain- 
ing cause.  God  had  made  promises  to 
David,  and  to  bis  seed  after  him  (2  Sam. 
vii.  13—16;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  29-37,  etc.), 
which  would  be  unfulfilled  if  judah's 
candlestick  were  at  once  removed.  Ue  had 
declared,  "  If  thy  children  forsake  my  Law, 
and  walk  not  in  my  statutes,  ...  I  will 
visit  their  offences  with  the  rod,  and  their 
sin  with  scourges.  Nevertheless  my  loving- 
kindness  will  I  not  utterly  take  away,  nor 
suffer  my  truth  to  fail.  My  covenant  will 
I  not  break,  nor  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone 
out  of  my  lips ;  I  have  sworn  once  by  my 
holiness  that  I  will  not  fail  David."_  If  he 
had  now  swept  away  the  Jewish  kingdom, 
he  would  have  dealt  more  hardly  with  those 
who  clave  to  David  than  with  those  that 
broke  off  from  him.  He  would  not  have 
shown  the  "  faithfulness  "  or  the  "  mercy  " 
which  he  had  promised.  He  would  have 
forgotten  "the  loving-kindnesses  which  he 
■ware  unto  David  in  his  truth"  (Pb.  Ixxxix. 
49).  Therefore  he  would  not — ^he  could  not 
— as  yet  "destroy  Judah,"  with  which,  in 
point  of  fact,  he  bore  for  above  three 
centuries  longer,  until  at  last  the  cup  of 
their  iniquities  was  full,  and  "  there  was  no 
remedy."  As  he  promised  him  to  give  him 
■Iway  a  light,  and  to  his  ohildren.  There 
is  110  "  and  "  in  tUe  original.    Translate — 


A»  he  promised  him  to  give  him  alwayi  a 
light  in  respeet  of  hie  ehildren,  and  compare, 
for  the  promise  of  "  a  light "  (1  Kings  xi 
36 ;  XV.  4 ;  and  Ps.  oxxxii.  17). 

Ver.  20. — In  his  days  Edom  revolted  from 
under  the  hand  of  Judah,  Edom  had  been 
conquered  by  Joab  in  the  time  of  David, 
and  had  been  treated  with  great  severity, 
all  the  males,  or  at  any  rate  all  those  of  full 
age,  having  been  put  to  death  (1  Kings  xi. 
15,  16).  On  the  death  of  David,  Edom 
seems  to  have  revolted  under  a  prince 
named  Hadad,  and  to  have  re-established 
its  independence.  It  had  been  again  sub- 
jected by  the  time  of  Jehoshaphat,  who 
appointed  a  governor  over  it  (1  Kings  xxii. 
47),  and  treated  it  ai  •  portion  of  his  own 
territories  (ch.  iii.  8).  Now  the  yoke  was 
.  finally  thrown  off,  as  had  been  prophesied 
(Gen.  xxvii.  40).  Edom  became  once  mora 
a  separate  kingdom,  and  was  especially 
hostile  to  Judah.  In  the  reign  of  Ahaz  the 
Edomites  "  smote  Judah  "  and  carried  away 
many  captives  (2  Chron.  xxviii  17).  When 
the  Chaldteans  attacked  and  besieged  Jeru- 
salem, they  cried,  "Down  with  it,  down 
with  it,  even  to  the  ground  1 "  (Ps.  cxxxvii 
7).  They  looked  on  with  joy  at  the  capture 
of  the  holy  city  (Obadw  12),  and  "  stood  in 
the  crossway,  to  cut  off  such  as  escaped  " 
(Obad.  14).  After  the  return  from  the 
Captivity,  they  were  still  Judah's  enemies, 
and  are  especially  denounced  as  such  by 
the  Prophet  MaUchi  (i.  3—5).  In  the 
Maccabee  wars,  we  find  them  always  on  the 
Syrian  side  (1  Mace.  iv.  29, 61 ;  v.  3;  vi.  31; 
2  Mace.  X.  15,  etc.),  doing  their  best  to  rivet 
the  hateful  yoke  of  the  heathen  on  their 
suffering  brethren.  As  Idumseans,  the 
Herodian  family  must  have  been  specially 
hateful  to  the  Jews.  And  made  a  king  over 
themselves.  The  king  mentioned  in  ch.  iii. 
9,  26  was  probably  a  mere  vassal  king 
under  Jehoshaphat. 

Yer.  21. — So  Joram  went  over  to  Zair. 
Naturally,  Joram  did  not  allow  Edom  to 
become  independent  without  an  attempt  to 
reduce  it.  He  invaded  the  country  in  full 
force,  taking  up  a  position  at  a  place  called 
Zair,  which  is  not  otherwise  known.  Zair 
(Tjjs)  can  scarcely  be  Zoar  (igix),  which, 
wherever  it  was,  was  certainly  not  in  Edom; 
and  it  is  liardly  likely  to  be  a  corruption  of 
"  Seir"  (iy?),  since  the  utterly  unknown  yyt 
would  scarcely  be  put  by  a  copyist  in  thi 
place  of  the  well-known  Tjife'.  Moreover, 
u  Mount  Seir  were  intended,  it  wonl<l 
probably  have  had  the  prefix  nn,  as  in 
1  Chron.  iv.  42  ;  2  Chron.  xx.  lOi,  22,  23  ; 
Ezek.  XXXV.  2,  8,  7,  15.  "Seir"  alone  ii 
poetical  rather  than  historical,  especially  in 
the  language  of  tlie  later  books  of  the  Old 
Testament.    And  all  the  chariots  with  Um; 


170 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.      [oh.  vin.  1—29. 


or,  M  hU  tiharioU  (Bevised  Venlon).  The 
article  has  the  force  of  the  posseBBive 
piononn.  And  he  rose  by  night,  and  miot* 
the  Edomites  which  compassed  him  aoovt. 
JosephuB  nnderstands  the  writer  to  mean 
that  Joram  made  Iiia  invasion  bj  night,  and 
smote  the  Edomites  on  all  sides  ('Ant. 
Jud.,'  iz.  5.  §  1);  but  it  seems  better  to 
suppose,  mth  most  modem  oommentaton, 
that  the  meaning  ii  the  foUoving:  Soon 
after  Joram  invaded  the  conntry.he  found 
himself  surrounded  and  blocked  in  by  the 
Edomite  troops,  and  could  only  save  himself 
by  a  night  attack,  which  was  so  far  success- 
ful that  he  broke  through  the  enemy's  lines 
and  escaped;  his  army,  however,  was  so 
alarmed  at  Uie  danger  it  had  run,  that  it 
at  once  dispersed  and  returned  home.  And 
ih»  captains  of  the  chariots ;  i.e.  the  captains 
of  the  Edomite  chariots.  They  too  were 
"smitten,"  having  probably  taken  the  chief 
part  in  trying  to  prevent  ue  escape.  And 
the  people  fled  into  their  tents ;  t.e.  dispersed 
to  their  homes.  Compare  the  cry  of  Jero- 
boam (1  Kings  xii.  16),  "  To  your  tents,  O 
Israeli" 

Yer.  22. — Yet  £dom  revolted ;  rather,  and 
Edom  revolted;  or,  so  Edom  revolted.  Joram's 
attempt  having  failed,  the  independence  of 
the  country  was  established.  From  under 
the  hand  of  Judah  unto  this  day.  The 
successes  of  Amaziah  and  Azariah  against 
Edom  (oh.  xlv.  7,  22)  did  not  amount  to 
recouquests.  Edom  continued  a  separate 
country,  not  eubjeot  to  Judraa,  and  fre- 
qnenUy  at  war  with  it,  until  the  time  of 
John  Hyrcanus,  by  whom  it  was  subjugated. 
"  Unto  this  day  "  means,  at  the  most,  until 
the  time  when  the  Books  of  Kings  took 
their  present  shape,  which  was  before  the 
return  from  the  Captivity.  Then  libnah 
revolted  at  the  same  time.  Libnah  was 
situated  on  the  borders  of  Fhiiistia,  in  the 
Shefelah,  or  low  country,  but  towards  its 
eastern  edge.  Its  exact  position  is  un- 
certain; but  it  is  now  generally  thought  to 
be  identical  with  the  modern  Tel-et-8afi, 
between  Gath  and  Ekron,  about  long. 
34°  50'  B.,  lat.  31"  38'  N.  It  had  been  an  in- 
dependent city,  with  a  king  of  its  own,  in 
the  early  Canaanite  time  (Josh.  x.  30 ;  xii. 
IS),  but  had  been  assigned  to  Judah  (Josh. 
XV.  42),  and  had  hitherto  remained,  so  far 
as  appears,  contented  with  its  position.  Its 
people  can  scarcely  have  had  any  sympathy 
witli  the  Edomites,  and  its  revolt  at  this 
time  can  have  had  no  close  connection  with 
the  Edomite  rebellion.  Libnah's  sympathies 
would  be  with  Philistia,  and  the  occasion 
of  the  revolt  may  have  been  the  invasion  of 
JudMk  by  the  Philistines  in  the  reign  of 
Jehoram,  of  which  the  author  of  Chronicles 
speaki  (2  Chron.  zxi.  16),  and  in  which 
Jehoiam'a  ion»  were  carried  oft 


Ver.  23.— And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Joram, 
and  gjl  thAt  he  did,  are  they  not  written  in 
the  book  of  the  chroniolei  of  tb»  kings  ol 
Judah  ?  Some  of  these  acts  are  recorded  in 
our  present  Second  Book  of  Chronicles; 
e.9.  his  execution  of  hia  brothen  and  of 
many  nobles  (2  Chron.  xzi.  4) ;  hia  erection 
of  high  places  (2  Chron.  zxi.  11) ;  his  perse- 
cution of  the  followers  of  Jehovah  (2  Chron. 
xxi.  11);  his  reception  of  a  writing  from 
Elisha,  which,  however,  had  no  effect  upon 
his  conduct  (2  Chron.  xxi.  12 — 15) ;  his  war 
with  the  Philistines  (2  Chron.  xxi.  16)  and 
with  the  Arabs  (2  Chron.  xxi.  16);  his  loss 
of  all  his  sons  but  one  during  his  lifetime ; 
his  long  illness,  and  his  painful  death 
(2  Chron.  xxi.  18,  19).  But  the  'Book  of 
the  Chronicles  of  the  Kings  of  Judah '  was 
a  work  on  a  larger  scale  than  the  extant 
Book  of  Chronicles,  and  probably  went  into 
much  greater  detail. 

Yer.  24.— And  Joram  slept  with  his 
fathers.  Joram  died  after  an  illness,  that 
lasted  two  years,  of  an  incurable  disease  of 
his  bowels.  No  "burning"  was  made  for 
him,  and  there  was  no  regret  at  his  death. 
And  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  city 
of  David;  t.e,  in  the  portion  of  Jerusalem 
which  David  built ;  but,  according  to  Jose- 
phus  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  6.  §  3)  and  the 
author  of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxi.  20),  not 
in  the  sepulchres  of  the  kings.  And  Ahaziah 
bis  son  reigned  in  his  stead.  Aliaziah  is 
called  "  Jehoahaz"  in  2  Chron.  xxi.  17,  by 
an  inversion  of  the  two  elements  of  his 
name,  and  "  Azariah  "  in  2  Chron,  xxii.  6, 
apparently  by  a  slip  of  the  pen, 

Yers.  25 — 29. — The  Wicked  Reign  o» 
Ahaziah  in  Judah,  The  writer  continues 
the  history  of  Judah  through  another  reign 
— a  very  short  one — almost  to  its  close.  He 
describes  the  wickedness  of  Ahaziah,  for  the 
most  part,  in  general  terms,  attributes  it  to 
his  connection  with  the  "  house  of  Ahab," 
and  notes  hia  alliance  with  Joram  of  Israel 
against  the  Syrians,  and  his  visit  to  his 
brother  monarch  at  Samaria,  which  led  on 
to  his  death. 

Yer.  25. — In  the  twelfth  year  of  Joram 
the  son  of  Ahab  King  of  Israel.  In  ch.  ix, 
29  the  year  of  Abaziah's  accession  is  said 
to  have  been  Joram's  eleventh  year.  It  is 
conjectured  that  he  began  to  reign  as  vice- 
roy to  his  father  during  his  severe  illness  in 
Joram's  eleventh  year,  and  became  sole  king 
at  his  father's  death  in  the  year  follewing, 
Sid  Ahaziah  the  son  of  Jehoram  King  of 
Judah  begin  to  reign;  i.e.  begin  to  be  full 
king. 

Yer.  26. — Two  and  twenty  years  old  waa 
Ahadah  when   he  began  to   reign.    The 


OH.  Ym.  1—29.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


171 


writer  of  Ohroniolet  laya,  "two  and  forty" 
(2  Ohion.  zxiL  2),  which  is  absolutely  im- 

gossible,  since  hia  father  was  but  forty  when 
e  died  (see  Ter.  17,  and  comp.  2  Ohron. 
xrL  5, 20).  Even  **  two  and  twenty  "  is  • 
more  advanced  age  than  we  should  have 
expected,  since  Ahaziah  was  the  youngest 
of  Jehoram'e  sons  (2  Ohron.  xxi.  17);  he 
must  therefore  have  been  bom  in  hia  father's 
nineteenth  year.  Yet  he  had  several  elder 
brothers  (2  Ohron.  xxi.  17:  sxii.  1)1  To 
explain  this,  we  have  to  remember  (1)  the 
.  early  age  at  which  marriage  ia  contracted 
in  the  East  (twelve  years);  and  (2)  the  fact 
that  each  prince  had,  besides  bis  wife, 
several  concubines.  That  Joramhad  several 
appears  from  2  Chron.  xxi.  17.  And  he 
reigned  one  year  in  Jemsalem.  And  his 
mother's  name  was  Athaliah,  the  daughter  of 
Omri  Kuig  of  IsraeL  There  is  something  very 
remarkable  in  the  dignity  and  precedence 
attached  to  Omri.  He  was,  no  doubt,  regarded 
of  a  sort  of  second  founder  of  the  kingdom 
of  Israel,  having  been  the  first  monarch  to 
establish  anything  like  a  stable  dynasty. 
His  "statutes"  were  looked  upon  as  the 
fundamental  laws  of  the  kingdom,  and  were 
"kept"  down  to  the  time  of  its  destruction 
(Mioah  Ti.  16).  Foreigners  knew  Samaria 
as  Belh-Khumri,  or  "  the  house  of  Omri." 
He  ia  the  only  Israelite  king  mentioned  by 
name  on  the  Moabite  Stone  (line  5),  and  the 
earliest  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions  of 
Assyria.  Even  Jehu,  who  put  an  end  to 
his  dynasty,  was  regarded  by  the  Assyrians 
as  his  descendant,  and  known  under  the 
designation  of  "  Yahua,  the  son  of  Ehnmri " 
(Black  Obelisk,  epig.  ii.).  Athaliah,  the 
daughter  of  Ahab,  is  called  "the  daughter 
of  Omri,"  not  only  in  the  present  passage, 
but  also  in  2  Chron.  xxii.  2. 

Ter.  27. — ^And  he  walked  in  the  way  of 
the  house  of  Ahah.  Compare  what  is  said 
of  Ahaziah  of  Israel  in  1  Kings  xxii.  52,  53, 
and  of  Jehoram  of  Judah  in  the  present 
chapter  (ver.  18).  What  is  specially  in- 
tended  is  that  Ahaziah  kept  up  the  Baal- 
worship  introduced  by  his  father  into  Judah. 
And  did  evil  in  tiie  sight  of  the  Lord,  as  did 
the  house  of  Ahab :  for  he  was  the  son-in- 
law  of  the  house  of  Ahah ;  literally, /or  he 
was  related  by  marriage  to  the  house  of  Ahab. 
jnn  is  any  relation  by  marriage,  not  "  son- 
in-law  "  in  particular  (see  Exod.  iii.  1,  and 
the  comment  on  the  place). 

Ver.  28.— And  he  went  with  Joram  the 
ion  of  Ahah  to  tiie  war  against  Eazael  King 
of  Syria  in  Bamoth-Oilead.  Some  translate, 
mnd  Joram  himtelf  went ;  but  this  is  a  very 
rare  use  of  DK,  and  one  wbieh  would  be 


nnnatural  in  this  place — for  why  «Jorau 
himself,"  when  "Joram"  alone  wonld  have 
been  quite  sufficient? — and  still  more  un- 
natural in  2  Chron.  xxii.  5,  where  the  same 
phrase  occurs.  It  is  best,  therefore,  to  follow 
our  translators,  who  are  in  accord  both  with 
the  Septuagint  and  with  the  Ynlgate. 
Ahaziah  followed  the  example  of  his  grand- 
father Jeboshaphat,  who  had  accompanied 
Ahab  to  Bamoth-Gilead  (1  Kings  xxii.  29), 
to  fight  against  the  Syrians  in  the  time  of 
Benhadad,  That  the  city  was  still  disputed 
shows  the  importance  which  it  possessed  in 
the  eyes  of  both  parties.  And  the  Syrians 
wounded  Joram.  It  appears  that  Hazael, 
soon  after  his  accession,  with  the  ardour  of 
a  young  prince  anxious  to  distinguish  him- 
self, made  an  expedition  against  Bamoth- 
Gilead,  which  heul  been  recovered  by  the 
Israelites  between  the  death  of  Ahab  and 
the  time  of  which  the  historian  is  now  treat- 
ing. Joram  went  to  the  relief  of  the  town 
with  a  large  force,  and,  being  received  with- 
in the  walls,  maintained  a  gallant  defence 
(ch.  ix.  14),  in  the  course  of  which  he 
was  wounded  severely,  though  not  fatally. 
Thereupon  he  and  bis  brother  king  quitted 
the  town  and  returned  to  their  respective 
capitals,  leaving  a  strong  garrison  in 
Bamoth-Gilead  under  Jehu  and  some  other 
captains.  Joram  needed  rest  and  careful 
nursing  on  account  of  his  wounds,  and 
Ahaziah  would  naturally  withdraw  with 
him,  since  he  could  not  serve  under  a  mere 
general. 

Ver.  29. — ^And  King  Joram  went  hack  to 
he  healed  in  Jezreel.  Jezrcel  was  more 
accessible fromBamoth-Gilead  than  Samaria. 
It  lay  in  the  plain,  and  could  be  reached 
without  travelling  over  any  rough  or  moun- 
tainous country.  It  was  also  the  usual 
place  to  which  the  court  retired  for  rest  and 
refreshment — the  Versailles  or  Windsor  of 
Samnria,  as  it  has  been  called.  Of  the 
wounds  which  the  Syrians  had  given  him 
at  Bamah,  when  he  fought  against  Eazael 
^ng  of  Syria.  "Bamah"  is  another  name 
for  «  Bamoth-Gilead  "  or  "  Eamoth  in 
Gilead,"  which  is  the  full  name  of  the 
place.  The  word  means  "  high,"  "elevated," 
and  is  cognate  to  Aram.  And  Ahaziah  the 
son  of  Jehoram  King  of  Judah  weni  down  to 
see  Joram  the  son  of  Ahah  in  JeireeL  Aha- 
ziah would  probably  take  the  route  by  way 
of  Jericho,  the  Jordan  valley,  and  the  Wata 
el  Jalud,  and  would  consequently  begin  his 
journey  by  the  rapid  descent  from  JerusaleM 
to  Jericho.  Because  he  was  sick ;  iji.  nnweU, 
wounded. 


172  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.      [on.  vra.  1— 2a 


HOMILETIC& 

Vera.  1 — 8. — "  AU  tMngi  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God.'  TOe  piety 
of  the  Shnnammite  had  been  snfficiently  shown  in  the  previous  record  left  ns  of  her 
(oh.  iv.  8—37).  The  sequel  of  her  story  indicates  how,  in  a  wonderful  way,  events  an  i 
circumstances  seemingly  fortuitous  and  unconnected  work  together  for  the  advantage 
and  happiness  of  one  who  lives  virtuously,  and  seeks  in  all  things  to  serve  God  and 
advance  the  cause  of  religion.  "  The  series  of  incidents,"  it  has  been  well  said,  "  forms 
a  marvellous  web  of  Divine  dispensanons  "  (Bahr). 

I.  Thk  famihe.  This  lies  at  the  root  of  the  whole.  If  God  had  not  ordained  a 
famine  upon  the  land — "  called  for  it,"  and  brought  it  about — ^none  of  the  other  incidents 
would  have  been  possible.  The  woman  would  not  have  lost  her  property,  would  have 
had  no  occasion  to  "  cry  "  to  the  king,  and  would  have  come  into  no  personal  contact 
either  with  him  or  with  GehazL 

IL  The  prophet's  wabniko.  The  prophet,  when  ao  terrible  a  calamity  as  a  seven 
years'  famine  impended  over  the  land,  might  well  have  given  all  bis  thoughts  to  the 
general  sufferings  of  the  people,  and  have  forgotten  individuals.  But  God's  providence 
determines  otherwise.  Elisha  bethinks  himself  of  the  Shunanunite,  albeit  she  is  but 
a  unit  in  the  vast  mass  of  suffering  humanity,  and  warns  her  of  the  coming  evil, 
bidding  her  quit  the  land  and  sojourn  elsewhere.  This  advice,  which  she  follows,  ia 
the  second  link  in  the  chain. 

III.  The  coincidenob  of  the  kins's  desire  to  learn  more  about  Elisha  with 
THE  return  of  THE  WOMAN  TO  HER  OWN  LAND.  It  was,  humanly  speaking,  a  pure 
accident  that  the  curiosity  of  the  king  with  respect  to  Elisha  happened  to  be  aroused 
just  as  the  famine  was  over,  and  the  woman,  having  returned  from  Fbilistia  into  the 
land  of  Israel,  found  her  estate  occupied  by  another.  It  was  another  accident  that 
she  bethought  herself  of  appealing  to  the  king,  instead  of  having  recourse  to  any  other 
remedy. 

IV.  The  ooinoidence  of  Gehazi  being  sfeaeing  of  her  case  exactly  as  she 
HADE  heb  appearance.  Gchazi  had  scores  of  miracles  to  relate,  and  might  have  been 
discoursing  of  any  one  of  them ;  but  events  were  so  ordered  that  it  was  of  her  child's 
resurrection  that  he  was  telling  the  king,  and  not  of  any  other  miracle,  when  she  came 
into  the  royal  presence.  This  coincidence  it  was  which  so  interested  the  king  in  her, 
that  he  at  once  gave  the  order  for  restoring  her  estate  to  her. 

We  may  learn  from  the  entire  narrative,  (1)  that  our  lives  are  divinely  ordered ; 
(2)  that  nothing  happens  to  us  by  mere  chance ;  (3)  that  events  which  seem  to  us, 
at  the  time  when  they  happen,  of  the  least  {wssible  importance,  may  be  necessary  links 
in  the  chain  which  Divine  providence  is  forging  for  the  ordering  of  our  lives,  and  for 
the  working  out  through  them  of  the  Divine  purposes. 

Vers.  7—9. — The  power  of  calamity  to  bend  the  spirit  of  the  proud.  Benbadad  had 
hitherto  been  an  enemy  of  Jehovah  and  his  prophets.  He  had  sought  Elisha's  life 
(ch.  vi.  13 — ^20),  and,  when  bafSed  in  his  design  to  seize  his  person,  had  made  a  bold 
attempt  to  crush  and  destroy  the  whole  Israelite  nation.  But  now  God  had  laid  his 
hand  upon  him ;  he  was  prostrated  on  a  sick-bed ;  and  to  1  all  was  altered.  The 
mighty  monarch,  so  lately  glorying  in  his  strength,  and,  in  his  own  opinion,  infinitely 
above  any  soi-disant  prophet,  is  brought  down  so  low  that,  on  hearing  of  Elisha'i 
having  come  voluntarily  to  his  capital,  instead  of  seizing  him,  he  sends  him  a  humble 
embassy.  Eazael,  a  high  officer  of  the  court,  is  bidden  to  "  take  a  present  in  his  hand, 
and  go  meet  the  man  of  Ood,  and  inquire  of  Jehovah  by  him — Will  the  king  recover 
from  his  disease?"  The  present  is  a  rich  one,  made  by  Oriental  ostentation  to  appear 
even  grander  than  it  is  in  reality.  Forty  camels  bear  their  burden  to  the  prophet's 
door,  and  bring  him  "every  good  thing  of  Damascus,"  without  let  or  stint.  The 
ereat  king  calls  himself  Elisha's  son — "Thy  son  Benhadad  has  sent  me  to  thee" 
(T«r.  9).  Never  was  there  a  more  complete  reversal  of  human  conditions.  Hie 
nnnted  enemy  is  now  felt  to  be  the  best  Mend ;  is  courted,  flattered,  propitiated  bott 
by  act  and  word.  The  proud  king  grovels  in  the  dust,  is  content  to  be  the  prophet's 
•on  and  servant,  does  him  obeisance  morally,  and  hangs  upon  his  words  as  those  of 


«H,  vm.  1— 29.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,  173 

one  with  whom  are  the  issues  of  life  and  death  I  And  so  it  is  with  the  proud  and 
mighty  generally.  (1)  A  Pharaoh  despises  Jehovah,  and  asks,  "  Who  is  the  Lord,  that 
I  should  ohey  his  voice  and  let  Israel  go  ?  I  know  not  the  Lord,  neither  will  I  let 
Israel  go"  (Exod.  v.  2);  hut  in  a  little  time  the  same  Pharaoh  has  to  rise  up  in  the 
dead  of  the  night,  and  to  call  for  Jehovah's  servants,  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  to  entreat 
them  to  go  forth  from  among  his  people,  both  they  and  the  children  of  Israel,  and  go, 
serve  Jehovah,  as  they  had  said ;  also  to  take  their  flocks  and  their  herds,  as  they  had 
said,  and  to  he  gone ;  and  to  "  bless  him  also  "  (Exod.  xii.  31,  32).  (2)  An  Ahab  lets 
loose  the  dogs  of  persecution  against  the  people  of  God,  destroys  the  prophets  of 
Jehovah,  and  sells  himself  to  work  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord ;  but,  when  boldly 
rebuked  and  threatened  with  calamity,  all  his  pride  forsakes  him,  and  he  rends  his 
clothes,  and  puts  sackcloth  upon  his  flesh,  and  fasts,  and  lies  in  sackcloth,  and  goes 
softly  (1  Kings  xxi.  27).  (3)  A  Maaasseh  turns  from  Qod  to  worship  Baal,  and  does 
after  all  the  abominations  of  the  heathen,  and  builds  again  the  high  places,  and  rears 
up  altars  for  Baal,  and  uses  witchcraft,  and  sets  up  a  carved  image  in  the  house  of  God, 
and  sheds  innocent  blood  very  much  till  he  fills  Jerusalem  from  one  end  to  another 
(ch.  xxi.  16),  and  does  worse  than  the  heathen  whom  the  Lord  destroyed  before  the 
children  of  Israel,  even  causing  Isaiah  (according  to  the  tradition)  to  be  sawn  asunder ; 
but  calamity  smites  him,  the  captains  of  the  host  of  the  King  of  Assyria  take  him,  and 
put  hooks  in  his  mouth,  and  chains  upon  his  limbs,  and  carry  him  captive  to  Baliylon 
to  the  King  of  Assyria — then  all  his  pride  falls  away  from  him  like  a  cast-off  garment, 
and  in  his  afOiction  he  beseeches  the  Lord  his  God,  and  humbles  himself  greatly  before 
the  God  of  his  fathers,  and  prays  to  him,  and  makes  supplication,  and  is  forgiven,  and 
thenceforth  serves  Jehovah  (2  Chron.  xxxiiL  11 — 16).  The  pastor  who  has  under  his 
charge  proud,  tyrannical,  oppressive  persons,  who  scorn  rebuke,  and  think  to  ride 
roughshod  over  their  fellow-men,  may  wait  with  a  good  hope  for-the  hour  of  sickness 
or  calamity,  which  sooner  or  later,  unless  in  the  case  of  sudden  death,  comes  to  all.  He 
will  find  the  Benhadad  of  the  sick-room  a  very  different  person  from  the  Benhadad  of 
the  camp,  or  of  the  court,  or  of  the  mart,  and  one  much  more  open  to  admonition. 
Hardness,  stubbornness,  self-reliance,  can  scarcely  survive,  when  the  weakness  of  decay 
and  the  helplessness  of  acute  sickness  have  supervened.  He  need  not  despair,  however 
cruel,  oppressive,  and  injurious  to  others  the  man's  earlier  life  may  have  been.  If  a 
Benhadad  could  humble  himself,  if  an  Ahab  could  repent  and  "  go  softly,"  if  a  Manasseh 
could  turn  to  God  and  obtain  pardon,  there  must  be  a  possibility  of  repentance  even  for 
the  most  hardened  sinners. 

Vers.  10 — 15. — Hazael  and  Elisha.  The  contrast  !•  striking  between  the  two 
characters  here  brought  for  the  first  and  last  time  into  contact.     In  Hazael  we  have — 

I.  The  obafty  schembb,  cunning  and  treacherous,  who  sees  in  his  master's  calamity 
his  own  opportunity;  who  feels  no  gratitude  for  past  favours,  no  pity  for  present 
weakness  and  suffering,  no  compunction  at  playing  a  double  part ;  who  has  no  horror 
of  crime,  no  dread  of  the  enduring  infamy  which  attaches  to  the  assassin  and  the 
traitor.  Hazael  is  wise  in  a  certain  sense — ^he  is  clever,  audacious,  skilful  in  devisin<; 
means  to  ends,  secret,  determined,  unscrupulous.  He  contrives  a  mode  of  death  which 
will  leave  no  trace  of  violence,  and  may  appear  accidental,  if  suspicion  arises  that  it 
has  not  happened  in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature. 

II.  The  man  of  blood.  Hazael  is  altogether  cruel  and  unsparing.  He  reaches  the 
throne  through  blood.  As  king,  he  deluges  Israel  in  blood,  "  cutting  the  nation  short, 
and  smiting  them  in  all  their  coasts  "  (ch.  x.  32) ;  "  destroying  them,  and  making  them 
like  the  dust  by  threshing  "  (ch.  xiii.  7).  We  must  view  him  as  a  born  soldier,  never 
so  happy  as  when  engaged  in  a  campaign,  now  resisting  the  attacks  of  Assyria  on  his 
northern  border  ('  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.  364),  now  attacking  the  Philistines 
(ch.  xii.  17),  almost  constantly  warring  with  his  immediate  neighbours  the  kings  of 
Israel,  once  even  threatening  Judah,  and  "getting  his  face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem" 
(ch.  xii.  17)  in  the  hope  of  taking  it. 

IIL  The  bucoessfuii  wabbiob.  Hazael  succeeded  in  repulsing  the  Assyrians,  and 
maintaining  his  independence,  notwithstanding  all  their  efforts  to  conquer  him.  He 
reduced  Israel  to  «  species  of  semi-subjection  (ch.  xiii.  7).  He  compelled  even  Judeea 
to  purchase  peace  at  his  hands  (ch.  xii.  18).    He  was,  on  the  whole,  the  most  warlike 


174=  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  vm.  1—29. 


of  all  the  early  kings  of  Syria ;  and,  though  he  suffered  one  great  defeat  at  the  hands 
of  the  Assyrian  king,  Shalmaneser  IL,  yet  he  issued  from  the  struggle  unsubdued, 
and  left  his  dominions  intact  to  his  son  and  successor,  Benhadad  ILL 
In  Elisha,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have — 

L  ThB    -wise,    CliEAB-SIOHTED,    BINaLE-MINDED,    HOKEST    ADVISEB.      EHsha    hsS    nO 

cimning,  no  art,  no  special  cleverness.  But  he  can  read  character ;  be  can  see  through 
Hazael's  designs.  Whether  king,  or  noble,  or  common  person  applies  to  him  for 
advice,  he  uses  the  same  simplicity,  counsels  each  as  seems  to  him  for  the  best,  and 
seeks  to  gain  nothing  for  himself  by  the  advice  which  he  gives  them.  His  plainness 
offends  Naaman  (ch.  y.  12) ;  his  firmness  enrages  Jehoram  (ch.  tL  31} ;  his  penetration 
disconcerts  Hazael  (ch.  viii.  11);  but  he  cares  nothing  bow  men  may  receive  his 
words.  It  is  a  Divine  message  that  he  delivers,  and  deliver  the  message  he  must  and 
will,  in  simple  plain  language,  whether  men  will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear. 

n.  The  uan  of  peace.  Elisha's  character  is  eminently  peaceful  and  conciliatory. 
He  weeps  at  the  thought  of  those  horrors  which  war  causes  almost  of  necessity  (ch. 
viii.  11).  Once  only  do  his  counsels  lead  on  to  an  engagement  (ch.  iiL  16 — 24); 
mostly  he  contrives  that  perils  shall  be  averted  without  the  shedding  of  blood  (ch.  vL 
18 — 22;  vii.  6 — 15).  He  will  not  allow  the  prisoners  that  he  has  made  to  be  put  to 
death,  or  in  any  way  Ul  treated  (ch.  vL  22,  23).  He  seeks  to  check  Hazael's  murderous 
propensities  by  a  look  which  he  cannot  misunderstand  (ch.  viii,  11). 

ni.  The  pbophbt  and  teacheb.  The  ofBce  of  the  prophet  was  to  rebuke  sin,  as 
Elisha  did  (ch.  iiL  18, 14),  to  sustain  faith,  to  train  up  fresh  prophets,  to  teach  the 
faithful  (ch.  iv.  23),  to  announce  God's  will  to  king  and  people,  and  to  execute 
commissions  with  which  God  specially  entrusted  him.  Elisha  never  failed  in  the 
performance  of  any  of  these  duties.  Cast  upon  a  dark  time,  when  a  debasing  super- 
stition, imported  from  a  foreign  country,  had  full  possession  of  the  court  and  had  laid 
a  strong  hold  upon  the  country,  he  faithfully  upheld  Jehovah  and  Jehovah's  laws 
before  backsliding  kings  and  "a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  people."  To  Elisha 
principally  it  was  owing  that  true  religion  still  maintained  itself  in  the  land  against 
the  persecutions  of  Jezebel  and  her  sons,  and  that,  when  the  dynasty  of  Omri  came 
to  an  end,  there  was  still  a  faithful  remnant  left,  which  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to 
Baal,  but  had  clung  to  Jehovah  imder  all  manner  of  difficulties.  If  Elisha  left  no 
great  prophet  to  succeed  him,  it  was  probably  because  great  men  are  not  made  to 
order,  and  God's  providence  did  not  see  fit  to  continue  the  succession  of  first-rate 
prophetical  teachers,  which  had  been  raised  up  to  meet  the  extreme  danger  of  the  intro- 
duction and  maintenance  of  a  false  state  religion  by  apostate  kings. 

When  two  such  characters  are  brought  into  contact,  the  natural  result  is  mutual 
repulsion.  Hazael  is  ashamed  that  Elisha  should  read  him  so  well ;  and  Elisha  weeps 
when  he  thinks  of  the  woes  that  Hazael  will  inflict  upon  Israel.  Outward  respect  is 
maintained ;  but  the  two  must  have  felt,  when  they  parted,  that  they  were  adversaries 
for  life,  bent  on  opposite  courses,  with  opposed  principles,  aims,  motives;  not  only  the 
servants  of  different  gods,  but  antagonistic  in  their  whole  conception  of  life  and  its 
objects,  sure  to  clash  if  ever  they  should  meet  again,  and,  even  if  they  should  not  meet, 
sure  to  be  ever  working  for  different  ends,  and  engaged  in  thwarting  one  the  other. 

Vers.  16 — 27, — The  power  of  had  women  for  evil.  All  the  evil  wrought,'  all  the 
irreligion,  all  the  licentiousness  and  depravity,  and  almost  all  the  misery  suffered 
during  the  reigns  of  Ahab,  Ahaziah,  and  Jehoram  in  Israel,  and  of  Jehoram  and 
Ahaziah  in  Judah,  were  caused  by  the  machinations  and  influence  of  two  wicked 
women — Jezebel  and  her  daughter  Athaliah.  Jezebel,  a  proud  imperious  woman, 
bom  in  the  purple,  a  "king's  daughter,"  and  extraordinarily  strong-minded  and 
unscrupulous,  obtained  a  complete  ascendancy  over  the  weak  and  unstable  Ahab,  and 
must  be  viewed  as  the  instigator  of  all  his  wicked  actions.  With  Ahab's  connivance, 
she  "  slew  the  prophets  of  the  Lord,"  persecuted  the  faithful,  set  up  tb  I  worship  of 
Baal  and  Ashtoreth  in  Samaria,  introduced  into  Israel  the  unchaste  rites  of  the  Dea 
Syra  and  of  Adonis,  threatened  the  life  of  EUjah  and  drove  him  into  banishment, 
contrived  the  judicial  murder  of  Naboth,  and  imparted  to  Ahab's  reign  that  character  of 
licentiousness  and  bloody  cruelty  which  gives  it  its  sad  pre-eminence  above  all  others 
in  the  black  list  of  Israel's  monaruhs.    Nor  did  Jezebel's  evil  influence  stop  here.    She 


CH.  v:ii.  1—29.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  175 

oatlived  her  husband  by  some  thirteen  years,  and  during  that  period  was  the  evil 
geniua  of  her  two  sons,  Ahaziah  and  Jehoram.  Ahaziah  she  completely  perverted 
(ch.  xziL  62,  53).  Over  Jehoram  she  had  less  influence ;  but  to  her  we  must  ascribe 
it  that  during  his  reign  the  Baal-worship  continued  in  the  capital  (ch.  x.  25 — 27)  and 
in  the  country  districts  (ch.  x.  21),  though  he  himself  took  no  part  in  it  (ch.  iii.  2). 
Athaliah,  though  without  the  strength  of  miad  and  will  which  characterized  her  mother, 
resembled  her,  as  a  faint  replica  resembles  a  strongly  painted  portiait.  Married  to 
Jehoram  of  Israel,  a  weak  prince,  she  had  little  di£Sculty  in  establisliing  her  ascendancy 
over  him,  and  becoming  his  chief  adviser  and  counsellor  (ver.  18).  It  was  under 
her  direction  that  Jehoram  "  made  high  places  in  the  mountains  of  Judah,  and  caused 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  to  commit  fornication,  and  compelled  Judah  thereto" 
(2  Ghron.  zxi.  11),  or,  in  other  words,  established  the  Baal-worship  in  Judah  and 
Jerusalem,  and  forced  the  inhabitants  to  embrace  it.  Over  Ahaziah,  her  son,  who 
was  but  two  and  twenty  at  his  accession,  her  influence  was  naturally  greater.  He 
seems  to  have  been  a  more  puppet  in  her  haniis  (2  Uhron.  xxii.  3 — 5).  With  a  bold- 
ness worthy  of  her  mother,  Athaliah,  on  the  death  of  her  son  Ahaziah,  murdered  all 
his  half-brothers,  and  seized  the  sovereign  power,  which  she  held  for  six  years — a 
unique  feature  in  the  history  of  the  Jews.  The  Baal-worship  was  now  made  to 
supersede  the  worship  of  Jehovah  in  the  temple  on  Mount  Zion,  and  Mattan,  the 
chief  of  Baal,  was  installed  in  the  place  previously  occupied  by  the  Aaronic  high 
priest  (2  Ohron.  xxiii.  17).  Jeho\  ah-worship  was  forbidden,  persecuted,  and  probably 
ceased,  except  in  secret;  and  the  kingdom  of  Judah  was,  so  far  as  appearances  went, 
apostate.  Such  were  the  evils  wrought  by  these  two  ambitious  and  wicked  women. 
The  history  of  the  world,  though  it  can  furnish  no  exact  parallels,  has  many  cases 
more  or  less  similar.  Semiramis  may  be  a  myth,  but  Queen  Uatasu  in  Egypt,  Queens 
Atossa  and  Farysatis  in  Persia,  Olympias  in  Grreece,  Messalina  and  Poppsea  Sabina  in 
Rome,  Catharine  de  Medici,  and  Catherine  Empress  of  Russia,  in  modern  Europe, 
were  women  equally  imperious,  equally  determined,  and  the  prolific  causes  of  equal 
mischief.  It  would  seem  that,  in  the  female  nature,  where  the  natural  impulses  are 
so  largely  towards  good,  if  these  are  perverted  and  Satan  allowed  the  mastery,  there  is 
no  longer  any  let  or  restraint;  the  passions  become  ungovernable,  the  will  as  iron,  the 
heart  hard  and  unrelenting;  evil  has  unresisted  sway,  and  the  result  is  something 
even  more  fearful  and  terrible  than  the  wickedness  of  the  worst  man.  Corruptio 
optimi  pessima.  Woman's  function  in  the  world  is  to  be  soft  and  tender,  to  smooth 
down  man's  roughnesses,  to  pacify  and  soothe  and  mitigate ;  if  she  abnegates  these 
functions,  and  assumes  the  man's  duties  of  ruling  and  repressing  and  bending  to  her 
will  the  stubborn  necks  of  others,  she  runs  counter  to  her  prOpc-r  nature,  and  becomes 
a  monstrosity.  There  is  no  saying  to  what  lengths  of  profligacy,  cruelty,  and  other 
wickedness  she  may  not  go.  She  is  worse  than  a  wild  beast,  and  may  do  infinitely 
more  evil.  She  may  utterly  corrupt  a  society,  or  she  may  deluge  with  blood  a 
continent.  She  may  ruin  the  country  to  which  she  belongs  and  bring  its  fairest 
provinces  to  desolation.  She  may  stir  up  hatreds,  set  class  against  class,  and  cause 
a  civil  war  that  shall  cost  the  lives  of  hundreds  of  thousands.  Tlie  only  security  against 
all  this  mischief  is  for  woman  not  to  desert  her  sphere,  but  to  remain  within  it,  work- 
ing for  God,  and  doing  the  good  which  she  was  designed  to  do. 


HOMILIES  BI  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  1 — 6. — 3%e  Shunammit^s  land  restored.  The  Bible  has  a  good  deal  to  say 
about  the  land  question.  There  is  one  memorable  passage  in  Isaiah  (v.  8) :  "  Woe 
unto  them  that  join  house  to  house,  that  lay  field  to  field,  till  there  be  no  place,  that 
they  may  be  placed  alone  in  the  midst  of  the  earth  1"  There  is  another  memorable 
passage  in  the  Epistle  of  St.  James :  "  Behold,  the  hire  of  the  labourers  who  have  reaped 
down  your  fields,  which  is  of  you  kept  back  by  fraud,  crieth :  and  the  cries  of  them 
whlsh  have  reaped  are  entered  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth."  If  such 
demmciations  of  oppression  and  wrong  had  been  remembered,  we  should  have  had  less 
of  socialistic  combinations  and  less  of  agrarian  crime.     In  this  passage  we  have  — 

L  A  OOVMUSS  OBETED.     Elisha's  command  seemed  a  hard  one.     This  woman  ul 


17*  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  Tin.  1—29. 

Bhunain  was  to  arise  with  her  household,  and  leave  her  home  and  farm  for  sevea  years. 
He  told  her,  indeed,  that  there  was  to  he  a  famine  in  the  land.  But  she  might  have 
wanted  more  proof.  She  might  have  said,  "  Well,  I  shall  wait  till  I  see  some  signs  of 
the  famine.  It  is  a  great  hardship  to  have  to  get  up  in  this  way  and  leave  my  home, 
without  any  immediate  reason.  What  if  Elisha's  fears  should  turn  out  to  be  untrue? 
May  not  the  famine  he  as  bad  anywhere  else  ?  "  So  men  often  reason  when  God  gives 
them  some  command  or  points  out  to  them  the  way  of  salvation.  Lot  lingered,  when 
urged  to  depart  out  of  Sodom,  though  the  very  angels  of  God  had  come  to  warn  him 
of  his  doom.  So  men  linger  still,  when  urged  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  They 
linger,  though  every  day  is  bringing  them  nearer  to  eternity.  They  linger,  though 
they  know  not  the  day  nor  the  hour  when  the  Son  of  man  may  come.  Whether  it  be 
the  path  of  salvation  or  the  path  of  Christian  service  which  God  calls  us  to  tread,  let 
us  not  linger,  let  us  not  hesitate  to  obey,  but,  like  this  woman  of  Shunem,  let  us  do  at 
once  what  God  commands. 

II.  Loss  iNonBBED.  This  woman  actually  did  suflFer  by  her  prompt  obedience.  She 
escaped  the  famine,  indeed,  but  she  lost  her  land.  On  this  subject  Dr.  Thomson  says, 
in  '  The  Land  and  the  Book,'  "  It  is  still  common  for  even  petty  sheikhs  to  confiscate 
the  property  of  any  person  who  is  exiled  for  a  time,  or  who  moves  away  temporarily 
from  his  district.  Especially  is  this  true  of  widows  and  orphans,  and  the  Shunammite 
was  now  a  widow.  And  small  is  the  chance  to  such  of  having  their  property  restored, 
unless  they  can  secure  the  mediation  of  some  one  more  influential  thau  themselves. 
The  conversation  between  the  king  and  Gehazi  about  his  master  is  also  in  perfect 
keeping  with  the  habits  of  Eastern  princes ;  and  the  appearance  of  the  widow  and  her 
son  so  opportunely  would  have  precisely  tlie  same  effect  now  that  it  had  then.  Not 
only  the  land,  but  all  the  fruits  of  it  would  be  restored.  There  is  an  air  of  genuine 
verisimilitude  in  such  simple  narratives  which  it  is  quite  impossible  for  persons  not 
intimately  familiar  with  Oriental  manners  to  appreciate,  but  which  stamps  the  incidents 
with  imdoubted  certainty."  We  may  incur  loss  from  a  worldly  point  of  view  by  obeying 
a  command  of  Qod.  But  which  do  we  prefer — ^worldly  gain  or  a  conscience  at  peace 
with  God?  Which  loss  is  greater — the  loss  of  a  few  pounds,  or  the  loss  of  our  heavenly 
Father's  smile?  Even  if  we  do  lose  by  it — it  is  best  to  do  the  will  of  God,  to  follow  in 
the  footsteps  of  Jesus. 

III.  Questions  askbd.  We  are  not  told  what  led  to  this  remarkable  conversation 
which  Jehoram  had  with  Gehazi.  Perhaps  the  time  of  famine  had  humbled  him. 
Perhaps  he  was  becoming  penitent  for  his  threat  of  taking  Elisha's  life.  Perhaps  it 
was  mere  idle  curiosity.  But  at  any  rate,  here  is  the  King  of  Israel  inquiring  of  Gehazi, 
'•Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  all  the  great  things  that  Khsha  hath  done."  Gehazi,  at 
this  time,  loved  to  think  and  speak  of  EUsha.  He  had  been  a  good  master  to  him. 
His  deeds  were  worth  recording.  And  so  Gehazi  proceeds  to  tell  the  story  of  Elisha's 
mighty  deeds.  1.  We  ought  to  he  ready  to  answer  questions  about  our  Master.  They 
may  proceed  from  curiosity,  from  wrong  motives.  Never  mind.  Our  answer,  given 
in  a  Christian  spirit,  may  be  the  means  of  disarming  ridicule.  It  may  be  an  oppor- 
tunity for  us  to  tell  the  old,  old  story  of  the  cross.  2,  We  ought  not  to  be  ashamed. of  our 
Master.  He  is  "  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand  .  .  .  and  altogether  lovsly."  His 
Name  is  above  every  name.  The  Name,  the  Ufe,  the  works,  the  words,  of  Jesus  ought 
to  be  a  favourite  theme  with  us. 

IV.  Restitution  hade.  When  God's  time  comei,  how  very  easily  he  can  fulfil 
his  purposes  1  Gehazi  had  just  reached  that  part  of  his  story  where  Elisha  restored  the 
Shunammite's  son  to  life,  when,  to  his  astonishment  and  delight,  the  Shunammite  herself 
appeared  on  the  scene.  She  came  with  her  petition  to  the  king  that  he  wovdd  cause 
her  house  and  land  to  he  restored.  Gehazi,  not,  perhaps,  very  regardful  of  courtesy  or 
etiquette,  calls  out  in  the  fulness  of  his  joy,  "  My  lord,  0  king,  this  is  the  woman,  and 
this  is  her  son,  whom  Elisha  restored  to  life."  The  king,  whose  feelings  had  already 
been  touched  by  the  pathetic  narrative  of  the  little  lad  carried  home  from  the  harvest- 
field  to  die,  touched  also  by  the  entreaty  of  the  woman  for  the  restoration  of  her  lost 
property,  and  perhaps  recognizing  the  hand  of  Providence  in  the  remarkable  events  of 
that  day,  gives  orders  that  not  only  her  land,  but  the  fruits  of  it  from  the  day  she  left, 
should  be  restored  to  her.  That  was  wholesale  restoration  and  restitution.  Who  shall 
ny  It  was  unjust?    What  a  disgorging  there  would  be,  if  all  who  have  taken  money 


OH.  Tin.  1—29.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  171 

or  land  from  othen  by  unlawM  means,  all  who  have  extorted  unjust  rents,  were  com- 
pelled to  restore  their  ill-gotten  gains  1  The  Shunammite  had  not  suffered,  after  all,  by 
her  obedience.  "  No  one  hath  forsaken  houses,  or  lands,  or  father,  or  mother,  or  friends^ 
.  .  ..  but  he  shall  receive  an  hundredfold  more  in  thii  life,  and  in  the  world  to  come  life 
arerlasting." — 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  7 — 15. — ElUha,  Hazad,  and  Benhadad.  The  present  interview  between  Elisha 
and  Hazael  arose  out  of  Benhadad's  illness.  Benhadad  heard  that  Elisha  had  come  to 
Damascus,  and  he  sent  Hazael  to  inquire  of  the  Lord  by  him  if  he  would  recover  of 
his  disease.  It  is  wonderful  how  ready  men  are  to  forsake  God  whea  they  are  well, 
and  to  seek  his  help  when  they  are  in  sickness  or  trouble.  When  he  was  well,  the 
King  of  Syria  "bowed  himself  in  the  house  of  Eimmon,"  but  now,  in  his  time  of  weakness 
and  anxiety  about  his  life,  he  sends  to  inquire  of  the  God  of  Israel.  Elisha's  answer 
to  Benhadad's  question  was  evidently  an  enigma.  "  Go,  say  unto  him.  Thou  mayest 
certainly  recover:  howbeit  the  Lord  hath  showed  me  that  he  shall  surely  die" 
Elisha  looked  steadfastly  into  Hazael's  face.  Did  Hazael  understand  the  enigma  or 
not?  Why,  then,  are  such  signs  of  confusion  in  his  face?  Why  does  bis  eye  fail  to 
meet  the  prophet's  gaze  ?  Why  does  his  cheek  grow  pale  ?  Why  that  uneasy  twitching 
of  the  mouth  ?  Yes.  Elisha's  suspicions — and  perhaps  also  the  hints  which  God  had 
given  him — are  confirmed.  It  was  true  that  Benhadad  might  recover.  His  illness 
was  not  mortal  And  yet  his  death  was  certain,  and  Hazael's  conscience  told  him  that 
he  was  already  a  murderer  in  his  heart.  As  Elisha  thinks  of  all  the  trouble  and  suffer- 
ing that  shall  come  upon  Israel  through  Hazael's  instrumentality,  he  can  no  longer 
restrain  his  feelings.  He  bursts  into  tears.  When  Hazael  asks  him  why  he  weeps,  it 
is  then  that  the  prophet  tells  him  all  the  cruelties  which  he  will  perpetrate  upon  God's 
people.  This  tale  of  horrors  called  forth  the  question  from  Hazael,  "What  is  thy 
servant,  this  dog,  that  he  should  do  this  great  thing?"  It  was  only  then  that  Elisha 
showed  him  that  he  knew  that  murder  was  already  in  his  mind.  He  quietly  says, 
**  Behold,  the  Lord  hath  showed  me  that  thou  shalt  be  king  over  Syria."  Hazael  then 
went  back  to  Benhadad,  and  gave  him  an  answer  very  different  from  that  which  Elisha 
had  really  given  to  him.  Instead  of  giving  him  the  whole  message,  he  gives  him 
merely  a  part,  tells  him  that  he  shall  recover,  omits  that  it  has  been  revealed  to  the 
prophet  that  he  shall  surely  die.  2!%«  morrow  came ;  and  on  the  morrow  Hazael  was 
a  murderer.  Despite  aU  bis  protestations  of  weakness  and  inability  to  do  "great 
things,"  he — ^the  king's  trusted  servant — ^betrays  his  master's  confidence  and  takes 
away  his  life.  Taking  a  thick  cloth  and  dipping  it  in  water,  he  spread  it  upon  the 
king's  face,  either  when  he  was  asleep,  or  imder  pretext  of  cooling  and  refre^ing  him, 
so  that  the  breathing  was  stopped  and  the  king  died.  Terrible  succession  of  false- 
hood, treachery,  and  murder.     We  learn  from  this  incident — 

L  The  fossibilities  of  evil  in  tbe  huhas  heabt.  Many  persons  deny  the 
depravity  of  human  nature.  They  deny  the  story  of  the  Fall.  They  object  to  such 
ideas,  and  regard  them  as  theological  dogmas,  and  the  mere  creations  of  narrow,  hard, 
illiberal  minds.  But  these  truths  of  the  lall  of  man  and  the  depravity  of  human  nature 
are  something  more  than  theological  dogmas.  They  are  facts  of  experience — painful, 
indeed,  and  humiliating  to  human  pride,  but  facts  nevertheless.  And  here  it  may  be 
stated  that  to  believe  in  the  fall  of  man  and  the  depravity  of  human  nature  is  quite 
consistent  with  the  deepest  human  sympathy  and  love.  To  believe  in  the  possibilities 
of  evil  that  there  are  in  the  human  heart  is  quite  consistent  with  believing  in  its  great 
possibilities  of  good.  The  Bible,  which  teaches  man's  fall,  teaches  also  that  man  was 
made  in  the  image  of  God,  and  that  it  is  possible  yet  for  that  lost  and  faded  image  to 
be  restored.  The  Bible,  which  tells  man  that  he  is  a  sinner,  helpless,  condemned, 
perishing,  tells  him  also  that,  in  the  infinite  mercy  of  that  God  against  whom  he  has 
sinned,  a  way  of  salvation  has  been  provided ;  that  the  Saviour  is  the  Son  of  God 
himself;  that  we  may  have  "redemption  through  his  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins ; " 
and  that  "  whosoever  believeth  on  him  shall  not  perish,  but  have  nvorlasting  life."  It 
is  for  our  own  good  that  we  should  know  what  possibilities  of  evil  there  are  in  the 
unregenerate  heart.  What  use  is  it  to  say,  "  Peace  1  peace  1 "  when  there  is  no  peace  7 
What  avails  it  for  the  watchman  to  cry, «'  All's  well  1 "  if  the  enemy  are  not  only  at  the 
gates,  but  actually  within  the  city?  He  who  would  help  men  to  do  the  right  and  over* 
n.  KiKoa.  ■ 


178  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OV  THE  KINGS.      [ch.  viir.  1—29 

come  the  wrong  must  faithfully  point  out  to  them  the  possibilities  of  evil  that  are 
within  their  own  heart.  Who  that  knows  human  nature,  that  knows  the  facts  of 
history,  can  doubt  that  such  possibilities  exist  ?  Look  at  Hazael,  hitherto  the  faithful, 
trusted  servant,  stooping  over  the  bedside  of  his  master,  and  calmly  and  deliberately 
taking  away  his  life.  He  had  the  ambition  to  be  King  of  Syria,  aQd  he  wades  to  the 
throne  through  his  master's  blood.  Who  that  knows  what  crimes  men  will  commit 
when  under  the  influence  of  covetousness,  intemperance,  hatred,  or  some  other  passion — 
men  who  otherwise  would  have  shrunk  from  the  very  mention  of  such  acts — can  doubt 
the  possibilities  of  evil  within  the  human  heart  ?  There  are  possibilities  of  evil  even  in 
good  men.  The  old  nature  is  not  taken  away.  "  When  I  would  do  good,"  said  St.  Paul, 
"  evil  is  present  with  me,  so  that  how  to  perform  that  which  is  good  I  find  not."  "  For 
I  see  a  law  in  my  members,  warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  into 
captivity  to  the  law  of  sin."  What,  then,  is  the  difference  between  a  Christian  and  an 
unregenerate  man?  There  are  possibilities  of  evil  in  them  both,  but  the  Christian 
strives  agaiust  the  evil,  whereas  the  unregenerate  man  yields  to  sin  and  loves  it.  The 
Christian  may  fall,  but  if  so,  he  is  filled  with  penitence.  The  Christian  will  have  his 
faults,  but,  if  so,  he  acknowledges  them  and  seeks  help  to  forsake  them.  "  Faults ! " 
says  Thomas  Carlyle,  in  his  lectures  on  '  Hero- Worship,'  "  the  greatest  of  faults  is  to  be 
conscious  of  none."  Yes ;  there  are  possibilities  of  evil,  there  are  actualities  of  evil,  in 
the  best  of  men.  Christ  might  still  say  to  an  assembly  of  even  his  own  discifiles, 
"  Let  him  that  is  without  sin  cast  the  first  stone  at  a  fallen  sister  or  an  erring  brother." 
IL  The  danqee  or  ignoeino  these  possibilities.  Hazael  did  not  become  a 
murderer  all  at  once.  The  old  Latin  saying  is,  Nemo  repentefit  turpissimus — "  No  one 
becomes  suddenly  very  wicked."  It  is  true.  Perhaps  a  few  years  before  this  if  any 
one  had  told  Hazael  that  he  would  be  a  murderer,  he  would  have  been  highly  indignant. 
Even  now  he  asks,  "  What  is  thy  servant,  this  dog,  that  he  should  do  this  great 
thing?"  It  is  uncertain  whether  this  exclamation  of  Hazael  refers  only  to  Elisha's 
prophecy  about  the  cruelties  he  would  perpetrate  on  Israel,  or  whether  it  refers  also  to 
the  suggestion  of  Blisha  that  he  was  to  be  the  murderer  of  Benhadad.  If  it  refers  to 
the  murder  of  the  king,  then  the  exclamation  would  express  surprise  at  the  idea  of  his 
venturing  to  lift  his  hand  against  his  master.  If  it  only  refers  to  the  subsequent 
cruelties  which  he  was  to  commit,  it  shows  in  any  case  that  Haznel  did  not  know  of 
what  he  was  capable.  Shakespeare's  representation  of  Brutus  when  meditating  the 
murder  of  Julius  Cassar,  to  which  he  had  been  incited  by  other  conspirators,  throws 
light  upon  Hazael's  feelings. 

"  Since  Cassius  first  did  whet  me  against  Csbsm 
I  have  not  slept. 

Between  the  acting  of  a  dreadful  thing 
And  the  first  motion,  all  the  interim  is 
Like  a  phantasma,  or  a  hideous  dream : 
The  genius  and  the  mortal  instruments 
Are  then  in  council ;  and  the  state  of  a  man, 
Like  to  a  little  kingdom,  suffers  then 
The  natnre  of  an  insurrection." 

It  is,  indeed,  a  dangerous  thing  to  tamper  with  temptation.  There  is  that  affinity 
between  the  evil  which  is  in  our  own  heart  and  the  temptations  which  are  without, 
that  there  is  between  the  gunpowder  and  the  spark.  It  is  wisdom  to  keep  the  sparks 
away.    It  is  wisdom  to  keep  away  from  the  temptation. 

"Vice  is  a  monster  of  so  hideous  mien. 
As,  to  be  hated,  needs  but  to  be  seen ; 
Yet,  seen  too  oft,  familiar  with  her  face, 
We  first  endure,  then  pity,  then  embrace." 

It  is  "  fools  "  who  make  a  mock  at  sin.  It  is  a  foolish  thing  to  make  light  of  the  guilt 
of  rin  in  God's  sight.  It  is  a  foolish  thing  to  make  light  of  the  power  of  dn  in  our 
own  hearts.    "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation." 

III.  There  is  only  one  bafeguabd  against  these  stil  tendencies  or  oca  own 
HBABTS :  that  bafbouabd  IB  THE  OBACE  OF  GoD.  Of  the  power  of  that  grace  Hazael 
knew  nothing.    Temptation  upon  temptation  came  crowding  into  his  min«L     The  Ant 


OB.  vm,  1—29.]      THE  SfiCOSD  BOOS  OF  THE  KINGS,  1?9 

teas  the  great  amhition  to  he  king.  He  has  yielded  to  that  long  since.  It  has  taken 
complete  possession  of  his  mind.  Then  there  came  the  temptation  to  carry  a  false 
message  to  his  master,  who  had  reposed  such  confidence  in  him.  He  yielded  to  that. 
Then  there  came  the  temptation  to  take  awa/y  his  master's  life.  It  was  a  strong  one, 
no  doubt.  There  was  but  that  weak,  helpless  king,  upon  a  bed  of  sickness,  between 
him  and  the  throne.  One  little  act,  which  no  one  would  suspect,  and  the  object  of  hia 
ambition  would  be  attained.  But  if  he  had  resisted  the  other  temptations,  this  one 
might  never  have  assailed  him  at  all,  or,  if  it  had,  he  would  easily  have  resisted  it. 
The  reason  of  his  fall  was  the  want  of  a  sufficient  force  within.  We  need  something 
more  than  human  to  conquer  the  Satanic  power  of  sin. 

"What  but  thy  grace  can  foil  the  tempter's  power? 

Hacael  had  no  restraining  power  to  check  his  own  evil  tendencies,  no  resisting  power 
to  stop  the  temptation  at  the  door,  ere  it  entered  and  took  possession  of  his  heart.  Be 
seems  to  have  had  a  feeling  of  shame,  as  when  he  became  confused  before  Elisha's 
steady  glance.  But  shame,  by  itself,  with  no  other  superior  influence  to  sustain  it,  is 
easily  vanquished.  Lust,  covetousness,  ambition,  intemperance, — every  one  of  these  is 
able  to  put  shame  to  flight.  The  immoral  man — he  has  long  since  trampled  on  shame. 
The  miser,  the  covetous  man — ^he  will  stop  at  nothing  that  wiU  increase  his  possessions. 
The  amhitious  man — he  will  not  allow  shame  to  hinder  him  in  the  desire  for  power  and 
place.  The  drunkard — shame  has  long  since  ceased  in  his  besotted  mind ;  no  blush 
is  seen  upon  his  bloated  face.  No ;  if  we  are  to  resist  evil,  if  we  are  to  conquer  sin,  it 
must  be  in  some  power  stronger  than  poor  human  nature  can  supply.  Hazael  did  not 
know  that  power.  He  trusted  in  his  own  sense  of  shame,  in  his  own  sense  of  what 
was  right,  and  that  failed  him.  He  who  had  said,  "  What  is  thy  servant,  this  dog, 
that  he  should  do  this  great  thing?"  on  the  morrow  took  his  master's  life.  Contrast 
Hazael's  exclamation  with  Joseph's  when  he  was  tempted :  "  How  can  I  do  this  great 
wickedness,  and  sin  against  Qod  t "  Ah !  there  was  something  there  to  which  Hazael 
was  a  stranger.  There  was  the  personal  presence  of  a  personal  Qod ;  there  was  the 
fear  of  offending  that  holy  Q-od ;  there  was  the  fear  of  grieving  that  loving  heavenly 
Father  who  had  watched  over  Joseph  when  his  brethren  had  forsaken  him,  and  who 
had  provided  for  all  his  wants.  Hazael's  feeling  is  more  like  that  of  Peter,  "  Though 
all  men  forsake  thee,  yet  will  not  I " — the  expression  of  wounded  pride,  of  boastful  self- 
security.  Yet  Peter  fell  into  the  very  sin  of  which  he  had  expressed  such  horror  only 
a  few  hours  before.  It  is  not  such  self-confidence,  but  a  humble  feeling  of  our  own 
weakness  and  an  attitude  of  entire  dependence  upon  God,  that  wiU  really  keep  the  door 
barred  against  temptation. 

One  or  two  practical  applications.  1.  Be  on  your  guard  against  the  beginnings  of 
evU.  If  you  yield  to  one  temptation,  no  matter  how  small  and  insignificant  it  may 
be,  others  are  sure  to  follow  in  its  wake.  2.  Be  charitable  toward  the  faults  and  failings 
of  others.  When  we  know  what  possibilities  of  evil  there  are  in  our  own  hearts,  how 
can  we  have  the  presumption  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  others?  If  others  have  fallen 
and  we  are  secure^  perhaps  it  was  because  we  were  not  exposed  to  the  same  temptations. 
We  are  to  consider  ourselves,  lest  we  also  be  tempted.  3.  If  you  have  not  yet 
experienced  the  forgiveness  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  and  the  power  of  Divine  grace,  seek 
them  nmo  1  Let  it  be  your  earnest  prayer,  "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  0  God,  and 
renew  a  right  spirit  within  me,"  If  you  would  be  safe  from  the  possibilities  of  evil 
that  are  in  your  own  heart,  and  from  the  temptations  of  a  godless  world,  then  your 
prayer  should  be  now  and  always, "  Lead  me  to  the  Rock  that  is  higher  than  L" — 0,  H.  I. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Topics  for  reflection,  "  Then  spake  Elisha  unto  th«  woman,  whose  son 
he  had  restored  to  life,"  etc.  In  these  verses  we  have  an  illustration  of  the  reward  of 
kindness,  the  ignorance  of  royalty,  and  the  influence  of  godliness. 

L  The  bbwabd  of  kindness.  "  Then  spake  Elisha  unto  the  woman,  whose  son  h« 
had  restored  to  life,  saying.  Arise,  and  go  thou  and  thine  household,  and  sojourn  where- 
soever thou  canst  sojourn :  for  the  Lord  hath  called  for  a  famine ;  and  it  shall  also 
come  upon  the  land  seven  years.  And  the  woman  arose,  and  did  after  the  saying  of 
the  man  of  God :  and  she  went  with  her  household,  and  sojourned  in  the  land  of  th« 
Philistines  leven  years."    Through  Elisha  this  Shunammite  womaii  obtained  thre* 


180  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  vin.  1—29. 

great  fevours :  (1)  the  restoration  of  her  son  (ch.  Iv.) ;  (2)  direction  for  herself  and 
family  to  leave  tbeir  old  home  during  the  aeven  years'  famine ;  and  then,  when  she 
returned  from  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  where  she  had  sojourned  sevon  years ;  (3) 
the  restoration  of  her  old  home,  which  had  either  fallen  into  the  hands  of  covetous  persons, 
or  been  confiscated  to  the  crown  (ver.  6).  These  are  confessedly  signal  favours ;  but 
why  were  they  rendered  ?  Undoubtedly  on  account  of  the  kindness  which  this  woman 
had  manifested  to  Elisha,  as  recorded  in  the  fourth  chapter  (vers.  8 — 10).  She  had 
shown  him  great  hospitality,  built  a  chamber  for  him  in  her  own  house,  furnished  it, 
and  boarded  and  lodged  him  for  a  considerable  time.  Here,  then,  is  the  reward  of 
kindness.  Observe :  1.  Kindness  should  always  awaken  gratitude.  The  very  consti- 
tution of  the  human  soul  and  the  moral  laws  of  Ood  as  revealed  in  Christ  show  this. 
Yet,  alas !  so  far  away  has  the  human  soul  gone  from  its  pristine  state  that  real  grati- 
tude for  favours  is  somewhat  rare.  So  much  so,  indeed,  that  it  often  turns  out  that 
the  person  on  whom  you  bestow  the  greatest  favours  turns  out  to  be  your  opponent  and 
foe.  Seneca  has  truly  said  that  "were  ingratitude  actionable,  there  would  not  be 
in  the  whole  world  courts  enough  to  try  the  causes  in."  So  common  is  it  that  it  is 
almost  a  maxim  that,  if  you  would  alienate  a  man  from  you,  you  should  bestow  on  him 
favours.     Shakespeare  has  compared  it  to  the  cuckoo^ 


"  The  hedge-sparrow  fed  the  onokoo  so  lone 
That  it  had  its  head  bit  off  by  its  young.'* 


2.  Oratitude  will  always  requite  favowrs.  The  man  who  receives  favours  without 
some  practical  acknowledgment  is  an  ingrate.  "  A  man,"  says  L'Estrange,  "  may  as 
well  refuse  to  deliver  up  a  sum  of  money  that  is  left  him  in  trust,  without  a  suit,  as 
not  to  return  a  good  office  without  asking." 

"He  that  has  nature  in  him  must  be  grateful ; 
'Tis  the  Creator's  primary  great  law, 
That  links  the  chain  of  beings  to  each  otber. 
Joining  the  greater  to  the  lesser  nature, 
Trying  the  weak  and  strong,  the  poor  and  powerful. 
Subduing  men  to  brutes,  and  even  brutes  to  men." 

(Madaa.) 

n.  The  ignobance  of  botaltt.  When  the  Shunammite  woman  had  returned  from 
the  land  of  the  Philistines,  she  made  application  to  the  king  for  the  restoration  "  of 
her  house  and  for  her  land,"  whereupon  "  the  king  talked  with  Gehazi  the  servant  of 
the  man  of  God,  saying.  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  all  the  great  things  that  Elisha  hath 
done."  Now,  mark  the  ignorance  of  this  King  of  Israel.  He  was  so  ignorant  of 
Elisha — the  man  who  had  been  working  such  wonders  in  hi^  country,  delivering  such 
sublime  truths,  and  rendering  such  high  service  to  the  state,  that  he  here  inquires  of 
the  prophet's  servant  concerning  him.  "It  was  to  his  shame,"  says  Matthew  Henry, 
"  that  he  needed  now  to  be  informed  of  Elisha's  works,  when  he  might  have  aajuainted 
himself  with  them  as  they  were  being  done  by  Elisha  himself."  Shame  I  that  kings 
should  he  ignorant  of  the  morally  best  and  greatest  men  in  their  kingdom !  Yet  they 
have  always  been  so,  especially  if  the  men,  as  in  Elisha's  case,  lived  in  poverty.  They 
know  all  about  the  moral  pigmies  that  live  in  splendid  palaces,  bear  high-sounding 
titles,  are  lords  of  castles,  and  owners  of  broad  acres.  Such,  they  not  only  know,  but 
will  honour  with  their  visits,  consort  with  them,  shoot  with  them,  etc.  But  to  go 
into  the  obscure  home  of  a  truly  great  man  who  blesses  the  country  with  his  soul- 
quickening  thoughts,  and  holds  fellowship  with  Heaven,  they  would  no  more  think 
of  doing,  than  of  travelling  to  the  moon.    Will  it  be  always  thus?    Heaven  forbid  I 

111.  The  iNrLUENOE  of  godliness.  When  the  king  heard  from  Gehazi  what  Elisha 
had  done,  "  his  majesty  "  (as  we  say)  granted  the  woman  her  request.  "  And  when 
the  king  asked  the  woman,  she  told  him.  So  the  king  appointed  unto  her  a  certain 
odicer,  saying,  Restore  all  that  was  hers,  and  all  the  fruits  of  the  field  since  the  day 
that  she  left  the  land,  even  until  now."  It  was  the  involuntary  influence  of  Elisha 
that  disposed  the  monarch  to  do  all  this.  Who  shall  tell  the  good  that  even  the 
involuntary  influence  of  a  godly  man  communicates  to  his  age?  Q'he  voluntary 
influence  of  a  man's  life — ^that  is,  the  influence  he  exerts  by  intention  and  conscious 
efforts — is  truly  insignificant  compared  with  that  stream  of  unconscious  influence 


OH.  vm.  1—29.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  181 

that  goes  forth  from  him,  not  only  at  all  times  through  his  life,  but  even  after  he  has 
quitted  this  mundane  sphere.  "  Though  dead,  he  yet  speaketh."  "  As  a  little  silvery 
lipple,"  says  Elihu  Burritt,  "  set  in  motion  hy  the  falling  pebble,  expands  from  its 
inch  of  radius  to  the  whole  compass  of  the  pool,  so  there  is  not  a  child— not  an 
infant  Moses — placed  however  softly  in  his  bulrush  ark  upon  the  sea  of  time,  whose 
existence  does  not  stir  a  ripple  gyrating  outwards  and  on,  until  it  shall  hare  moved 
across  and  spanned  the  whole  ocean  of  God's  eternity,  Btirring  even  the  river  of  life 
and  the  fountain  at  which  his  angels  drink." — D.  T. 

Vers.  7 — 16. — Striking  eJiaracter$.  "And  Elisha  came  to  Damascus,"  etc.  W» 
have  here — 

I.  A  DYiHa  KINO.  "  Benhadad  the  King  of  Syria  was  sick."  Benhadad,  for  his 
age  and  country,  was  a  great  king,  rich  and  mighty,  hut  now  he  is  on  his  dying-hed. 
Rings  die  as  well  as  others.  Observe :  1.  This  dying  king  was  very  anxious.  What 
was  he  anxious  about?  Not  about  any  great  spiritual  interest  concerning  himself  or 
others,  but  concerning  his  own  physical  condition.  "  Shall  I  recover  of  this  disease? " 
This  was  the  question  he  wanted  Elisha  to  answer.  Not,  you  may  he  sure,  in  the 
negative.  Knowing  some  of  the  wonders  that  Elisha  had  performed,  he  in  all  like- 
lihood imagined  he  would  exert  his  miraculous  power  on  his  behalf,  and  restore  him  to 
life.  All  men  more  or  less  fear  death,  kings  perhaps  more  than  others.  If  ungodly, 
they  have  more  to  lose  and  nothing  to  gain,  2.  His  anxiety  prompted  him  to  do 
strange  things.  (1)  It  was  strange  for  him  to  ask  a  favour  from  the  man  whom  he  had 
so  long  regarded  as  his  enemy.  We  read  (ch.  vi.  14, 16)  that  this  Benhadad  had  sent  to 
Dothan  "  horses,  and  chariots,  and  a  great  host :  and  they  came  by  night,  and  compassed 
the  city  about,"  in  order  to  capture  this  lonely  prophet.  What  a  change  is  this! 
Dying  hours  reverse  our  judgments,  revolutionize  our  feelings,  bring  the  lofty  down. 
(2)  It  was  strange  for  him  to  ask  a  favour  of  a  man  whose  religion  he  hated.  Ben- 
hadad was  an  idolater;  Elisha  was  a  monotheist,  a  worshipper  of  the  one  true  God. 
Now,  in  dying,  all  the  king's  idolatrous  thoughts  have  taken  wing,  and  the  one  God 
appears  as  the  great  reality,  and  to  the  servant  of  that  one  God  he  sends,  urging  a 
favour.  (3)  It  was  strange  for  him  to  make  costly  presents  to  a  poor  lonely  man. 
"The  king  said  unto  Hazael,  Take  a  present  in  thine  hand,  and  go,  meet  the  man  of 
God,  and  inquire  of  the  Lord  by  him,  saying.  Shall  I  recover  of  this  disease?  So 
Hazael  went  to  meet  him,  and  took  a  present  with  him,  even  of  every  good  thing  of 
Damascus,  forty  camels'  burden,  and  came  and  stood  before  him,"  etc.  What  is  the 
wealth,  the  grandeur,  the  crown,  the  sceptre,  of  the  mightiest  monarch  to  him  when 
he  feels  himself  dying  ?    He  will  barter  all  away  for  a  few  short  hours  of  life. 

II.  A  PATRIOTIC  PROPHET.  "  The  man  of  God  wept."  Elisha,  forecasting  the  king's 
death,  and  knowing  the  wickedness  of  this  Hazael  wlio  was  to  succeed  to  the  throne, 
smitten  with  patriotic  tenderness,  looked  so  "  steadfastly  "  into  the  eye  of  Hazael  that  he 
blushed  with  shame,  and  the  prophet  broke  into  tears :  "  The  man  of  God  wept."  But 
why  did  he  weep?  "Why  weepeth  my  lord?"  said  Hazael.  "And  he  answered, 
Because  I  know  the  evil  that  thou  wilt  do  unto  the  children  of  Israel :  their  strong- 
holds wilt  thou  set  on  fire,"  etc.  This  was  the  overwhelming  misery  that  the  prophet 
foresaw  would  befall  Israel,  when  this  wretched  courtier,  his  interrogator,  would  take 
the  throne.  As  Christ  foresaw  the  coming  doom  of  Jerusalem,  and  wept  over  it,  so 
Elisha  saw  the  horrors  approaching  Israel,  and  broke  into  tears.  The  loving  sympathies 
of  a  godly  man  are  not  confined  to  men  or  places,  but  spread  over  the  ages,  and  flow 
down  to  bless  posterity. — D.  T. 

Vers.  17 — 24. — Lessons  from  the  life  of  Jehoram.  "Thirty  and  two  years  old  was 
he  [Jehoram]  when  he  began  to  reign,"  etc.  This  is  a  short  fragment  of  a  king's  history 
—the  history  of  Jehoram.    Brief  as  it  is,  it  contains  many  practical  truths. 

I.  That  piety  is  not  neoessarilt  hebeditabt.  Parents,  as  a  rule,  transmit 
their  physical  and  intellectual  qualities  to  their  children,  but  not  their  moral  cha« 
racters.  Jehoram  was  a  bad  man  and  a  wicked  king,  hut  he  was  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat, 
who  was  a  man  of  distinguished  piety,  and  reigned  wisely  and  beneficently  over  Israel 
for  twenty-five  years.  Of  him  it  was  said  that  "  the  more  his  riches  and  honoui 
increased  the  more  his  heart  was  lifted  up  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord  "  (2  Chron.  xviL 


183  THE 'SECOND  BOOK   OF  THE  KINGS.      [oh.  vin.  1— 2«, 

6,  6).  He  caused  tbe  altars  and  places  of  idolatry  to  be  destroyed,  and  the  knowledgg 
of  the  Lord  to  be  diffused  throughout  the  kingdom,  and  the  places  of  ecclesiastical  and 
judicial  authority  to  be  well  filled  (2  Chron.  xvii.  9).  But  how  different  was  his  son  I 
One  of  the  first  acts  of  his  goTernment  was  to  put  to  death  his  six  brothers,  and  several 
of  the  leading  men  of  the  empire.  It  is  here  said  .that  "he  walked  in  the  way  of  the 
kings  of  Israel,  as  did  the  house  of  Ahab."  He  regulated  his  conduct  by  the  infamous 
"  house' of  Ahab,"  and  not  by  the  religious  house  of  his  father.  He  was  in  truth  a  mur- 
derer, an  idolater,  and  a  persecutor.  But  whilst  piety  is  not  necessarily  hereditary— not 
necessarily,  because  children  are  moral  agents — what  then  ?  Are  parents  to  do  nothing 
to  impart  all  that  is  good  in  their  character  to  their  children  ?  Undoubtedly,  no  1  They 
are  commanded  to  "  train  up  a  child  in  the  way  it  should  go"  when  it  is  young.  And 
where  their  power  is  rightly  employed,  there  is,  if  not  invariable,  yet  general,  success. 
Where  the  children  of  godly  parents  torn  out  to  be  profligate  and  corrupt,  as  a  rule 
some  defect  may  be  found  in  the  parental  conduct.  How  often  eminent  ministers  of  the 
gospel,  and  in  the  main  good  men,  are  guilty  of  neglecting,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent, 
the  parental  oversight  and  religious  training  of  their  children !  Even  in  the  life  of 
Jehoshaphat  we  detect  at  least  two  parental  defects.  1.  In  permitting  his  son  to  form 
unholy  alliances.  This  good  man,  Jehoshaphat,  formed  a  league  with  Ahab  against 
Syria,  contrary  to  the  counsel  of  Micaiah-(2  Chron.  xviii.).  For  this  the  Prophet  Jehu 
censured  him  severely.  In  consequence  of  this  alliance  his  son  married  the  daughter 
of  this  infamous  Ahab,  and  the  matrimonial  connection  with  such  a  woman,  idolatrous, 
corrupt,  and  the  daughter  of  Jezebel,  had,  no  doubt,  a  powerful  influence  in  deterio- 
rating his  moral  character.  2.  In  granting  his  son  too  great  an  indulgence.  He  raised 
him  to  the  throne  during  his  own  lifetime.  He  took  him  into  royal  partnership  too 
soon,  and  thus  supplied  him  with  abundant  means  to  foster  his  vanity  and  ambition. 
All,  mel  how  many  parents  ruin  their  children  forever  by  over-indulgence  I 

II.  That  immobal  kings  are  national  curses.  What  evils  this  man  brought 
upon  his  country  1  It  is  said  that  "  in  his  days  Edom  revolted  from  under  the  hand  of 
Judah,  and  made  a  king  over  themselves.  So  Joram  weut  over  to  Zair,  and  all  the 
chariots  with  him :  and  he  rose  by  night,  and  smote  the  Edomites  which  compassed 
him  about,  and  the  captains  of  the  chariots :  and  the  people  fled  into  their  tents,"  etc. 
Through  him  th6  kingdom  of  Judah  lost  Edom,  which  "revolted"  and  became  the 
determined  enemy  of  Judah  ever  afterwards  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  7).  Libnah,  too,  "  revolted 
at  the  same  time."  This  was  a  city  in  the  south-western  part  of  Judah  assigned  to 
the  priests,  and  a  city  of  refuge.  But  these  revolts  are  but  specimens  of  the  tremendous 
evils  that  this  immoral  man  brought  upon  the  kingdom.  It  has  always  been  so. 
Wicked  kings,  in  all  ages,  have  been  the  greatest  cvurses  that  have  afflicted  the  human 
race.^  God  said  to  Israel  of  old,  "  I  gave  thee  a  king  in  mine  anger"  (Hos.  xiii.  11). 
And  the  gift,  on  the  whole,  it  must  be  confessed,  has  been  a  curse  to  mankind ;  and 
that  because  few  men  who  have  attained  the  position  have  been  divinely  loyal  in 
intellect,  in  heart,  in  thoughts,  in  aims,  in  sympathies.  What  does  Heaven  say  of 
wicked  kings?  "  As  a  roaring  lion,  and  a  raging  bear;  so  is  a  wicked  ruler  over  the 
poor  people."  When  will  the  world  have  true  kings? — such  a  king  as  is  described  in 
the  Book  of  Proverbs,  as  one  "  that  sitteth  in  the  throne  of  judgment,"  and  who 
"  scattereth  away  all  evil  with  bis  eyes  "  ?  He  is  one  who  sees  justice  done.  .He  does 
not  rule  for  the  interest  of  a  class,  but  for  the  good  of  all.  His  laws  are  equitable. 
Partialities  and  predilections  which  govern  plebeian  souls  have  no  sway  over  him. 

"  He's  a  king, 
A  true  right  king,  that  daie  do  aught  save  wrongs 
Fears  nothing  mortal  but  to  be  unjust ; 
Who  is  not  blown  up  with  the  flattering  pufig 
Of  spongy  sycophants ;  who  stands  nnmoved. 
Despite  the  jostliug  of  opinion." 

m.  That  death  is  ho  respecteb  of  pebsoks.    1.  Death  does  not  respect  a  man's 

position,  howevm-  high.    "And  Jehoram   slept  with   his  fathers,  and  was  buried." 

Jehoram  was  a  king,  yet  death  struck  him  down,  and  he  "  was  buried  with  Ms  fathers." 

,  Palaces  are  as  accessible  to  death  as  paupers'  huts.    Attempted  resistance  in  the  former, 

■  Bee  •  New  Book  of  Kings,'  by  Davidson,  M.A.  (Beeves  and  Co.,  Fleet  Street). 


OH.  Tm.  1—29.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KING8.  18S 

■• — —. ^ I       f 

howeyer  skilfully  organized,  would  be  m  futile  M  in  the  latter.  Death  cares  nothing 
for  kings ;  crowns,  diadems,  sceptres,  courtiers,  and  pompous  pageantries  are  only  as 
dust  in  his  icy  glance.  2.  Death  does  not  respect  a  man's  character,  however  vile. 
Jchoram  was  a  bad  man,  and  utterly  unfit  to  die;  but  death  waits  not  for  moral  pre- 
paration. When  we  remember  what  evils  wicked  men,  especially  wicked  kings,  work 
in  the  world,  death  must  be  regarded  as  a  beneScent  messenger.  The  psalmist  saw 
mercy  in  the  destruction  of  despots.  He  "overthrew  Pharaoh  and  his  host  in  the 
Bod  Sea :  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  "  To  him  which  smote  great  kings,  and 
slew  famous  kings  :  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever  "  (Ps.  cxxxvi.).  There  is  mercy 
for  ,the  race  in  their  destruction.  When  such  demons  in  human  flesh  are  cut  down, 
the  world  breathes  more  freely,  a  load  is  rolled  from  its  heart,  obstacles  are  swept  from 
its  path  of  progress.  When  the  Pharaohs  are  overwhelmed,  the  human  Israel  can 
march  on  to  promised  lands. 

GiiKCLUsioN.  Parents,  cultivate  personal  religion,  and  endeavour  with  all  earnest- 
ness to  transmit  it  to  your  children.  Kings,  seek  to  understand  and  to  embody  the 
ideal  of  true  kingship,  be  royal  in  moral  character.  All,  stand  in  readiness  for  the 
approach  of  death. — D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  Shunammite  and  her  lands.  This  narrative  Is  the  leqnel  to  the 
history  of  the  Shunammite  in  ch.  iv.  It  furnishes  another  instance  of  how  God  carei 
for  and  rewards  his  people. 

I.  Elisha's  wasninq.  In  chronological  order  this  narrative  seems  to  precede  the 
cure  of  Naaman,  while  Gehazi  was  still  the  servant  of  the  prophet.  A  famine  «f  fcng 
duration  was  about  to  descend  on  the  land,  and  Elisha  gave  tiihely  warning  to  the 
Sh'nnammite  to  take  refuge  somewhere  else.  1.  The  good  are  qften  sharers  in  the 
calamities  of  the  wicked.  This  famine  was  no  doubt  sent  on  Israel  as  a  punishment 
for  sin.  God's  prophet  foretold  it,  as  Elijah  had  foretold  the  drought  in  the  days  of 
Ahab  (1  Kings  xvii.  1).  Famines  and  similar  calamities  do  not  come  uncalled  for. 
They  are  instruments  used  by  God  in  his  moral  government  (Bzek.  xiv.  21 ;  Amos  iv.). 
And  in  the  distresses  brought  upon  the  world  by  sin  God's  people  are  often  sharers. 
The  innocent  are  involved  in  the  sufierings  of  the  guilty  (Ezek.  xxi.  3,  4).  This  lady 
of  Shunem,  now  probably  a  widow,  is  compelled,  by  the  approach  of  famine,  to  abandon 
home  and  lands  and  rural  comfort  for  a  sojourn  among  idolaters.  2.  T?ie  good, 
notwithstanding,  are  marvellously  protected  amidst  the  calamities  of  the  wicked.  It 
was  God's  mercy  to  this  Shunammite,  who  in  former  days  had  befriended  his  prophet, 
which  now  led  to  her  bein°;  warned  beforehand.  God's  rewards  for  kindness  shown  to 
his  servants  are  not  soon  exhausted.  It  was  sad  to  be  involved  in  the  famine,  but  it 
would  have  been  sadder  had  she  not  received  this  warning  to  withdraw  in  good  time. 
Thug  God,  by  a  special  providence,  cares  for  and  watches  over  the  interests  of  his 
people.  He  guides  their  steps,  and  is  a  Shield  to  them  from  trouble.  3.  The  good  art 
provided  for  amidst  the  calamities  of  the  wicked.  The  Shunammite  was  directed  to 
sojourn  with  her  household  wherever  she  could  find  a  refuge.  She  believed  the  word 
of  the  man  of  God,  obeyed  it,  and  went  to  sojourn  in  the  land  of  the  Philistines. 
There  she  abode  for  the  seven  years  that  the  famine  lasted,  and  during  that  period  wai 
sufficiently  provided  for.  It  was  an  act  of  faith  on  the  part  of  the  Shunammite  to  take 
this  step,  for  she  had  nothing  to  go  upon  in  regard  to  this  famine  but  the  prophet's 
bare  word.  That,  however,  was  held  sufficient,  and  she  left  all  tu  do  as  he  had  bidden 
her.  God's  people  are  always  safe  in  acting  on  his  commands.  When  Elijah  was  sent 
to  hide  by  the  brook  Cheritb,  the  ravens  were  "commanded"  to  feed  him;  and  when 
he  was  told  to  go  from  there  to  Zarephath,  a  widow  woman  was  similarly  "commanded" 
to  sustain  him  (1  Kings  jivii,  4,  8).  As  God  provided  for  Jacob  and  his  household  in 
Egypt  in  a  time  of  famine,  so  he  prepares  a  provision  for  all  his  people  who  humbly 
trust  him.    "  They  that  seek  the  Lord  shall  not  want  any  good  thing  "  (Ps.  ixxiv.  10). 

II.  The  Shdnammite's  betubn.  At  length,  through  the  ceasing  of  the  famine,  the 
way  was  open  for  the  Shunammite  to  come  back.  Her  return  was :  1.  After  long 
exile.  Seven  years  had  she  been  absent  from  the  land  of  Jehovah.  During  that 
period  she  had  lived  amidst  Philistine  surroundings.  Her  spirit  must  often  have  been 
grieved  at  the  idolatrous  and  heathenish  siglits  she  witnessed;  for  what  moral 
communion  could  she  have  with  the  worshippers  of  Dagon  7    Nor  eould  she  now,  m  oi 


184  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  vui.  1—29. 

old,  saddle  ber  ass,  and  repair  to  the  prophet  on  sabbaths  and  new  moons  for  consolation 
and  instruction.  Exile  of  this  sort  would  be  painful  to  her  spirit,  as  it  was  to  that  of 
the  psalmist  (P«.  xlii.  4,  6).  God  in  his  providence  often  thus  deprives  his  people  for 
a  time  of  the  privilege  of  ordinances,  perhaps  through  sickness,  perhaps  through 
removal  to  new  scenes,  perhaps  through  the  interposition  of  direct  obstacles.  There 
was  in  the  Shunammite's  case  a  famine  of  the  Word  as  well  as  of  bread.  These  things 
try  faith,  and  operate  to  the  quickening  of  spiritual  desire.  2.  To  meet  a  new  trial. 
The  Shunammite  came  back  to  her  home,  to  find  that,  in  her  long  absence,  her  house 
and  lands  had  been  alienated  from  her.  Probably,  as  deserted  by  their  owner,  they  had 
become  the  property  of  the  crown  (ver.  6).  Or  some  neighbouring  proprietor  may  hpve 
possessed  himself  of  the  abandoned  fields.  In  any  case,  it  was  a  sore  discovery  for  the 
Shunammite  to  make^  on  her  return,  that  she  could  no  longer  obtain  ber  own.  The 
trial  of  coming  back  seemed  almost  greater  than  that  of  going  away.  Might  not  the 
same  providence  that  had  cared  for  her  in  Fhilistia  have  watched  over  her  possessions 
at  home  ?  It  was  God  who  had  called  her  thence :  might  he  not  have  secured  that, 
when  she  returned,  she  would  get  her  own?  The  issue  of  this  trial  should  encourage 
believers  not  too  readily  to  distrust  the  Almighty.  It  came  to  be  seen  that  God  had 
been  caring  for  her  in  her  absence — had,  so  to  speak,  been  putting  out  ber  lands  at 
interest  for  her,  so  that,  when  they  were  restored,  she  "  received  her  own  with  usury  " 
(Matt.  XXV.  27). 

IIL  The  Shuu-ammitb's  appeal.  The  most  striking  part  of  the  story  is  yet  to 
come.  Having  no  other  remedy,  the  Shunammite  appealed  to  the  king,  as  first 
magistrate,  to  restore  to  her  her  lands.  "  She  went  forth  to  cry  unto  the  king  for  her 
house  and  for  her  land."  We  note  concerning  her  appeal:  1.  Itg  jtistice.  The 
Shunammite  had  a  good  and  just  cause.  Kings  and  magistrates  are  set  to  administer 
justice.  Yet  it  is  possible  that,  but  for  the  circumstances  next  narrated,  the  impo- 
verished lady  might  have  cried  long  enough  before  her  possessions  were  restored 
to  her.  It  is  difficult  to  get  the  holders  of  unlawfully  acquired  property — especially  in 
land — to  yield  up  again  their  title  to  it.  The  cry  of  the  poor  does  not  always  penetrate, 
as  it  should  do,  to  the  ear  of  justice.  2.  Its  providential  opportuneness.  It  is  God's 
prerogative  to  maintain  the  cause  of  the  oppressed  (Ps.  ix.  4,  9,  10),  and  he  was 
preparing  the  way  for  this  cause  being  heard.  The  circumstances  are  remarkable, 
showing  how  entirely  all  events  are  in  the  hand  of  God,  how  what  we  call  accidental 
conjunctures  are  really  providences,  and  how,  without  overriding  human  freedom,  all 
things,  even  the  most  ordinary,  are  working  together  for  good  to  those  who  love  him. 
(1)  It  happened  that,  just  as  the  Shunammite  approached,  her  ion  being  with  her,  to 
present  her  prayer,  the  king  and  Gehazi,  Elisha's  servant,  were  talking  together  of  the 
wonderful  works  of  the  prophet.  "  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,"  said  the  king,  "  all  the  great 
things  that  Elisha  hath  done."  Jehoram,  though  a  wicked  man  (ch.  ix.  22),  had  yet,  as 
we  have  formerly  seen,  a  certain  susceptibility  to  good  in  him.  His  was  a  divided  nature. 
He  had  a  reverence  and  respect  for  Elisha ;  he  knew  the  right ;  he  took  pleasure  in 
hearing  of  Elisha's  wonderful  deeds.  Tet  he  never  took  God's  Law  truly  into  his  heart. 
How  many  are  like  him  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  80 — 33)  I  (2)  In  particular,  Gehazi  was  relating 
to  the  king  how  Elisha  had  restored  the  dead  son  of  the  Shunammite  to  life.  How 
singular,  we  say,  that  this  should  have  been  the  subject  of  conversation  at  that  very 
moment  I  But  it  was  God  who  ordered  that  this  should  come  about.  We  find  a  very 
similar  instance  in  the  case  of  King  Abasuems  in  the  Book  of  Esther.  He  could  not 
sleep,  and  ordered  the  chronicles  of  his  kingdom  to  be  read  before  him.  It  was  the 
night  when  Haman's  plot  was  ripe  for  the  destruction  of  Mordecai,  but  the  passage 
read  was  that  which  told  how  Mordecai  had  made  known  a  conspiracy  against  the 
king's  life.  This  saved  him,  and  led  to  Haman's  own  destruction  (Esth.  vi.).  Tbe 
wheels  within  wheels  in  God's  providence  are  truly  marvellous.  He  lifts  up  one  and 
casts  down  another  by  the  simplest  possible  means.  (3)  As  Gehazi  was  speaking,  tie 
Shunammite  and  her  son  stood  before  them,  and  cri'.d  to  the  king.  No  doubt  in  great 
surprise,  Gehazi  said,  "  My  lord,  0  king,  this  is  the  woman,  and  this  is  her  son,  whom 
Elisha  restored  to  life."  The  ear  of  the  king  was  now  effectually  gained.  3.  Its  success. 
The  woman,  being  asked  to  state  her  plea,  did  so,  and  her  request  was  at  once  granted. 
Not  only  were  her  house  and  land  restored  to  her,  but  recompense  was  made  for  all  the 
fruits  of  the  field  since  the  day  she  had  left  it.    Thus  she  nceived  back  in  •bundanca 


OH.  vra.  1— 29.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KlNOa  188 

all  she  poBsessed.  She  not  only  got  justice,  but  generosity.  How  good  it  is  to  be  a 
friend  of  God]  "If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?"  (Bom.  viiL  31).  With 
him  for  our  Advocate,  what  need  we  fear?  Having  given  this  woman  the  greater  gift, 
in  reward  for  her  kindness  to  his  prophet,  he  does  not  withhold  from  her  any  lesser 
gift.  So  may  the  believer  reason,  if  God  "spared  not  his  own  Son,"  etc.  (Bom.  viii. 
82).-J.  0. 

Vers.  1— IS.— 'Elitha  and  Sazael.  Elisha  had  come  to  Damascus,  probably  sent 
thither  by  God  to  carry  out  in  spirit  the  commission  given  long  before  to  Elijah 
(1  Kings  six.  1 5). 

I.  Bbnhadads  messaob.  1.  Iti  occasion,  "  Benhadad  the  King  of  Syria  was  sick." 
Boyal  rank  affords  no  protection  against  the  invasions  of  disease.  Nor  is  the  thought  of 
death  less  alarming  to  the  monarch  than  to  the  peasant.  Benhadad's  heart  trembled 
as  he  reflected  on  the  possible  issues  of  his  trouble,  and  he  gladly  availed  himself  of  the 
opportunity  of  Elisha's  presence  in  Damascus  to  send  a  messenger  to  him.  His  conduct 
is  in  striking  contrast  with  Ahaziah's  (ch.  i.).  That  Israelitish  king,  forsaking  the  God 
of  Israel,  sent  to  inquire  at  an  idol  shrine  at  Ekron.  Benhadad,  though  a  Syrian  and 
a  worshipper  of  Bimmon,  turns  in  his  sickness  from  Eimmon  to  Jehovah.  2.  The 
messenger.  The  person  sent  was  Hazael,«ne  of  Benhadad's  great  courtiers.  Hazael 
was  a  very  different  kind  of  a  man  from  Naaman.  He  was  a  bold,  bad,  ambitious 
intriguer,  who  was  already  cherishing  deep  thoughts  of  crime  against  his  master.  Yet 
Benhadad  seems  to  have  trusted  him.  How  unreliable  are  the  friendships  of  the 
wicked  I  Men  flatter  with  their  tongue,  but  in  their  hearts  are  malice,  falsehood,  and 
selfish,  ambitious  designs  (Fs.  v.  9).  3.  The  message.  Hazael  came  to  Elisha  with 
great  pomp.  He  brought  a  present  borne  on  forty  camels.  If  lavish  wealth  could  buy 
a  favourable  answer  from  Jehovah,  surely  now  it  would  be  obtained.  But  God  is  no 
respecter  of  persons ;  still  less  does  ho  bestow  favoiu:  for  bribes.  We  may  be  sure  that, 
as  in  a  former  case  (ch.  t.  16),  Elisha  touched  nothing  of  all  this  wealth  that  was 
brought  to  him.  Accompanying  the  present  was  a  message  from  the  king :  "  Thy  son 
Benhadad  hath  sent  me  to  thee,  saying,  Shall  I  recover  from  this  disease?"  For  those 
to  whom  this  world  is  all,  such  a  question  is  of  very  terrible  moment.  Well  may  they 
cling  to  life  who  have  nothing  beyond  to  hope  for. 

II.  Thb  intbbview  witb  Hazael.  1.  Elisha't  exposure  of  HazaePe  motives.  As 
Hazael  stood  before  Elisha,  the  prophet's  clear  vision  read  to  the  depths  of  his  soul, 
ilazael  was  evidently  speculating  on  the  possibilities  of  his  master's  death,  and  had 
private  designs  upon  the  throne.  When  once  the  idea  of  making  himself  king  had  occurred 
to  him,  he  was  not  the  man  to  let  the  ambitious  project  readily  drop  again.  The 
thought  of  removing  the  king  by  violence  had  no  doubt  flashed  upon  him,  bat  he 
wailed-  to  learn  whether  the  sickness  would  prove  fatal  before  he  framed  a  settled 
purpose.  Elisha  showed  by  his  answer  that  he  read  the  whole  character  of  the  man. 
"  Go,  say  unto  him.  Thou  shalt  certainly  recover  " — ^that  was  the  truth  as  regards  the 
sickness;  then  he  added,  "Howbeit  the  Lord  bath  showed  me  that  he  shall  surely  die." 
Hazael's  guilty  thoughts  would  furnish  the  explanation.  We  do  well  to  remember 
that  there  is  nothing  we  can  conceal  from  the  Searcher  of  hearts.  "All  things  are 
naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do"  (Heb.  iv.  13).  Our 
thoughts,  even  in  their  most  inchoate  condition,  are  known  to  him.  He  understandeth 
our  thoughts  "afar  off"  (Ps.  cxxxix.  2).  2.  Elisha's  prophecy  of  HazaeVs  harlariiiet. 
Did  Elisha  approve  of  Hazael's  designs,  and  mean  to  give  them  Divine  sanction  ?  We 
are  able  to  answer  this  by  noting  his  subsequent  conduct.  (1)  He  settled  his  face 
steadfastly,  and  looked  with  a  fixed  gaze  at  Hazael  till  the  latter  was  ashamed.  Then 
Elisha  wept.  Elisha  stood  before  Hazael  as  a  kind  of  outward  conscience.  He  revealed 
Uazael  to  himself,  but  at  the  same  time  condemned  the  thoughts  which  he  saw  in  his 
mind.  It  was  a  holy,  earnest  gaze  which  Elisha  turned  on  Hazael — a  look  of  reproval, 
of  sorrow,  of  holy  pain ;  and  (lazael  felt  that  it  was  so  when  he  blushed  under  it. 
(2)  When  Hazael  asked  concerning  his  weeping,  Elisha  became  more  explicit,  and  told 
him  of  the  awiul  barbarities  he  would  inflict  on  Israel.  The  picture  was  so  dreadful 
that  even  Hazael,  with  apparent  sincerity,  asked, "  Who  is  thy  servant,  this  dog,  that  he 
should  do  this  great  thing  ?  "  Hazael,  like  many  others,  was  not  aware  of  the  possibi- 
Uties  of  h's  own  heart.    A  certain  measure  of  crime  h«  knew  himself  to  be  capable  o^  but 


IM  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  Tin.  1—29. 

ka  thought  that  other  iniquities  were  bdjond  him.  OncA  on  the  downward  grade,  how- 
erer,  there  is  no  point  at  which  a  sinner  can  be  sure  of  stopping.  One  crime  leads  with 
a  fotal  facility  to  a  worse.  The  heart  grows  hardened,  and  things  are  done  which,  at 
an  earlier  stage,  might  have  been  thought  impossible.  It  is  told  of  Bobespierre  that,  in 
the  beginning  of  his  career,  he  was  almost  diiTen  distracted  by  the  thought  of  having 
sentenced  a  man  to  death.  The  greatest  criminals  were  once  innocent  children,  and  at 
one  period  of  their  lives  would  have  shuddered  at  the  deeds  they  afterwards  calmly 
perpetrated.  The  only  safe  course  is  to  resist  the  beginnings  of  evil.  3.  Elisha't 
announcement  of  EazaeFt  greatness.  Elisha's  final  announcement  to  Hazael  was, "  The 
Lord  hath  showed  me  that  thou  shalt  be  king  over  Syria."  The  prophet  announces 
the  fact,  which  indeed  fulfilled  a  Divine  purpose  regarding  Hazael  (1  Kings  xix.  15), 
but  announces  it  without  approval  of  the  particular  means  by  which  that  purpose 
would  be  realized.  Jacob  would  have  received  the  blessing  in  God's  time  and  way, 
though  his  mother  Rebekah  had  not  counselled  deceit  as  a  means  of  obtaining  it ;  and 
the  kingdom  would  have  come  to  Hazael,  also  in  God'a  good  time  «ad  way,  though  he 
had  kept  his  hands  free  from  crime. 

in.  A  PALACE  1I0BDEB.  If  Elisha's  words  did  not  arrest  the  guilty  purpose  which 
was  shaping  itself  in  Hazael's  mind,  they  could  only  have  the  contrary  efiect  of 
inflaming  his  ambition.  Like  Macbeth  with  the  witches'  salutation  ringing  in  his  ears, 
he  felt  himself  a  child  of  destiny,  and  took  speedy  means  to  falRl  his  destiny.  1.  He 
deceived  the  king.  He  repeated,  in  the  letter  of  them,  Elisha's  words,  "  Thou  shalt 
surely  recover ; "  but  said  nothing  of  the  context,  which  gave  the  words  so  terrible  a 
significance.  The  king  was  assured  that  his  disease  was  not  mortal,  which  was  true ; 
but  he  was  left  in  the  dark  as  to  the  declaration  that  he  should  nevertheless  surely  die. 
2.  He  slew  the  king.  Nest  day,  probably  while  Benhadad  slept,  Hazael  took  a  thick 
quilt,  and,  dipping  it  in  water,  spread  it  over  the  king's  face,  and  suffocated  him.  He 
thus  fulfilled  the  prediction  that  be  should  be  Sing  of  Syria.  He  "  had  his  reward." 
But  was  it  worth  the  crime?  What  could  compensate  for  a  soul  stained  with  the  sin 
of  treachery  and  murder?  Of  Banquo  it  was  prophesied  that  he  would  be  lesser  than 
Macbeth,  yet  greater ;  not  so  happy,  yet  happier.  Would  the  same  not  have  been  true 
of  Hazael  had  he  been  content  to  remain  Benhadad's  faithful  oificer,  instead  of  climbing 
to  the  throne  in  this  hateful  fashion?  What,  after  all,  is  there  so  much  to  envy  in  the 
state  of  kings,  that  a  soul's  peace  should  be  bartered  to  acquire  it?  Surrounded  by 
false  friends;  served  by  courtiers  ready  at  any  moment  to  turn  against  him  if  it  serves 
their  interests  better;  envied  even  by  those  wha  flatter  him;  exposed  to  the  peril  of 
assassination, — the  monarch  is  almost  more  to  be  pitied  than  the  humblest  of  his  subjects. 
Hazael  had  but  exchanged  his  own  pillow  for  a  more  thorny  one.  "  Uneasy  lies  the 
head  that  wears  a  crown." — J.  O. 

Vers.  16 — 29. — Two  kings  of  Judah.  (On  the  chronology,  see  Exposition.)  The  reigns 
of  Jehoram  and  Ahaziah  are  black  spots  in  the  history  of  Judah. 

L  Jehobam,  son  of  Jehoshaphat.  We  may  notice  concerning  this  ruler :  1.  Ee 
had  a  pious  father.  We  may  quote  Thomas  Fuller's  quaint  comments  on  this  part 
of  the  Saviour's  genealogy:  "Lord,  I  find  the  genealogy' of  my  Saviour  strangely 
checkered  with  four  remarkable  changes  in  four  immediate  generations.  (1)  '  Behoboam 
begat  Abiam ; '  that  is,  a  bad  father  begat  a  bad  son.  (2)  '  Abiam  begat  Asa ; '  that 
is,  a  bad  father  a  good  son.  (3)  '  Asa  begat  Jehoshaphat ; '  that  is,  a  good  father  a 
good  son.  (4)  'Jehoshaphat  begat  Joram;'  that  is,  a  good  father  a  bad  son.  I  see, 
Lord,  from  hence,  that  my  father's  piety  cannot  be  entailed ;  that  is  bad  news  for  me. 
Bat  I  lee  also  that  actual  impiety  is  not  always  hereditary ;  that  is  good  news  for  my 
son."  2.  Se  made  an  evU  marriage.  "  The  daughter  of  Ahab  " — Athaliah — "  was 
his  wife."  In  sanctioning  this  union  of  his  son  with  the  house  of  Ahab  Jehoshaphat 
grievously  erred.  Jehoshaphat's  whole  policy  of  keeping  up  friendly  relations  with 
Ahab  was  a  mistake,  destined  to  bear  bitter  fruit  in  his  family  and  his  kingdom.  No 
eoniiderations  of  political  expediency  should  have  tempted  him  to  allow  a  marriage  of 
the  heir  of  his  throne  with  a  daughter  of  the  infamous  Jezebel.  Rulers  have  even  yet 
to  leam  that  the  sacrifice  of  religious  and  moral  considerations  to  state  policy  is  in 
the  end  the  greatest  impolicy.  Marriage  is  a  relation  which  cannot  be  too  carefully 
entered  into.     Tet  it  is  often  the  relation  which  is  entered  into  most  thoughtlessly. 


CH.  IX.  1—37,]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  187 

Pecuniary,  social,  or  family  considerations  are  allowed  to  determine  a  step  which 
ought  never  to  be  taken  except  on  grounds  of  real  affection  aud  moral  and  spiritual 
affinity.  Athaliah's  entrance  into  the  royal  household  of  Judah  had  a  disastrous 
effect  on  its  future.  She  was  a  true  child  of  the  Israelitish  Jezehel,  and  reproduced 
her  character  in  all  its  essential  features.  Bold,  bad,  energetic,  unscrupulous, 
ambitious,  her  influence  over  her  husbaAid  was  wholly  for  evil.  And  he  seems  to 
have  yielded  himself  entirely  up  to  it.  3,  He  walked  in  evil  ways.  "  He  walked 
in  the  way  of  theMngs  of  Israel,"  etc.  The  connection  of  this  with  his  marriage  is 
indicated  in  the  words, "  For  the  daughter  of  Ahab  was  his  wife."  To  that  malign 
influence  is  probably  to  be  attributed  the  great  crime  with  which  his  reign  began — the 
slaughter  of  his  six  brethren,  with  many  of  the  princes  (2  Chron.  xxi.  2 — i).  The 
other  evils  of  his  reign  are  indicated  by  the  Chronicles — tempting  and  compelling  the 
iwople  to  idolatry,  et^  (2  Chron.  xxi.  11,  13).  4.  He  was  mercifully  dealt  with  for  the 
sake  of  David.  Grieved  though  God  was  with  his  conduct,  he  would  not  destroy 
Judah,  having  pledged  himself  to  David  to  perpetuate  his  line.  The  descendants  of 
holy  men  and  women  do  not  know  how  much  of  God's  mercy  and  forbearance  they  often 
owe  to  their  ancestral  connection.  God  spares  them  for  their  fathers'  sakes  (Bom.  xi.  28). 
6.  Tei  hi$  tins  brought  heavy  disasters  on  the  kingdom.  God  did  not  destroy  Judah, 
but  he  punished  it.  As  the  wickedness  of  the  Israelitish  kings  was  punished  by  the 
revolt  of  Moab  (ch.  L  1),  so  the  sins  of  Jehoram  were  visited  by  a  series  of  calamities 
which  fell  upon  the  nation.  The  revolt  of  Edom,  of  Libnah,  invasions  of  the  Philistines, 
Arabians,  etc.,  broke  in  upon  and  desolated  the  land  (2  Chron.  zxi.  16,  17).  Only 
when  rulers  and  people  were  fearing  the  Lord  could  it  be  said,  "  Also  in  Judah  things 
went  well"  (2  Chron.  xii.  12).  Things  cannot  go  well  when  men's  hearts  are  bent  on 
wickedness.  God  is  against  us,  and  troubles  rise  thick  on  every  side.  The  revolt  of 
Edom  is  the  only  calamity  referred  to  in  detail  in  the  text.  Jehoram  seems  to  have 
attempted  to  suppress  the  rebellion,  but,  being  encompassed  by  the  enemy,  had  great 
difficiuty  in  cutting  his  way  through,  and  escaping.  The  loss  of  Edom  was  a  permanent 
one.  6.  He  came  to  a  miserable  end.  He  went  down  to  his  death  visibly  under  a 
cloud  of  Divine  wrath,  and  amidst  the  contempt,  if  not  the  execrations,  of  his  people. 
God  smote  him,  the  Chronicler  tells  us,  with  a  painful  and  incurable  disease,  and  he 
died,  despised  and  unlamented  (2  Chron.  xxi.  18,  19).  He  was  buried  in  Jerusalem, 
but  not  in  the  tomb  of  the  kings.  Presumptuous  transgressors  are  rightly  visited 
with  judgments  of  exceptional  severity  (cf.  Acts  lil.  23).  It  is  the  memory  of  the  just 
that  is  blessed,  but  the  name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot  (Prov.  x.  7). 

IL  Ahaziah,  son  of  Jehorau.  1.  A  short  hut  evil  reign.  Ahaziah,  who  reigned 
but  one  year,  was  the  youngest  son  of  Jehoram,  the  elder  having  been  slain  in  the 
wars  with  the  Arabians  (2  Chron,  xxii.  1).  His  reign  was  evil,  like  his  father's.  In 
this  case  it  is  said  expressly  that  Athaliah  and  others  of  her  kindred  were  his 
counsellers  to  do  evil  (2  Chron.  xxii.  3,  4),  A  mother's  influence  is  even  more  potent 
than  a  father's.  But  when  both  parents  go  partners  in  open  wickedness,  it  is  no 
wonder  if  a  son  follows  their  example.  2.  A  fateful  visit.  Ahadah  and  Jehoram  of 
Israel  were  speedily  to  meet  their  end  together.  The  Chronicler  says  "  the  destruction 
of  Ahaziah  was  of  God  by  coming  to  see  Joram  "  (2  Chron.  xsiL  7).  Jehoram  had 
been  wounded  in  a  campaign  against  Hazael  at  Bamoth-Gilead,  and  was  now  at  Jezreel 
to  be  healed  of  his  wounds.  Thither  Ahaziah  repaired  to  visit  him,  and  there  both 
kings  were  slain  by  Jehu.  The  visible  providence  of  God  is  i^ain  seen  in  this  visit. 
His  hook  is  in  the  nose  of  the  sinner;  he  leads  him  wherever  he  will  (2  Kings 
xix.  28).— J.  0. 


KXPOSmON. 
OHAPTEB  IX. 


Vers.  1—37. — Thx  ANoniTiMa  or  Jehu.- 
His  Mcbdkb  of  Jehobau  and  Ahaziah. 
Thi  Death  of  Jizebbl. 

Vers.  1— 10.— Elisha  is  still  the  primary 


figure  in  the  historical  drama;  but  at  tbii 
point  his  personality  merges  in  the  general 
account  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  which  it 
is  one  of  the  objects  of  the  writer  to  trace 
from  beginning  to  end.  Elisha  here  per- 
forms his  last  public  act,  being  eommii- 


IW 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THB  KINGS.         [oh.  ix.  1— ST. 


■ioned,  and  oairying  ont  his  commiedon,  to 
transfer  the  kingdom  of  Israel  from  the 
unworthy  dynasty  of  Omri,  which  on  ac- 
count of  its  persistent  idolatry  has  fallen 
under  DMne  condemnation,  to  a  new 
dynasty,  that  of  Jehu,  which  will,  at  any 
rate,  check  the  worst  ezcesseg  of  the  preTa- 
lent  idolatrous  Bystem,  and  maintain  the 
Jehovah-worship  as  the  religion  of  the 
state.  The  position  recalls  that  of  Saul  and 
David  at  the  original  institution  of  the 
monarchy,  but  has  many  special  points 
which  differentiate  it  from  that  conjuncture. 
The  circumstances  called  on  Jehu  for  prompt 
action;  there  was  no  such  immediate  call 
upon  Cilvid.  Jehu's  public  proclamation 
as  king  laid  him  open  to  a  charge  of  high 
treason;  David's  secret  anointing  placed 
him  in  no  such  danger.  History  never  re> 
peats  itself  exactly,  and  its  events  have 
severally  to  be  judged  by  a  consideration  of 
all  their  circumstances,  without  much  refer- 
ence to  any  former  juast-parallel  historical 


Vers.  1 — 10. — The  anointing  of  Jehu. 

Ter.  1. — ^And  Slisha  the  prophet  called 
one  of  the  children  of  the  prophets ;  i.e.  one 
of  the  students  in  one  of  the  prophetical 
schools  which  he  superintended.  There  is 
no  indication  that  the  individual  chosen  for 
the  mission  stood  to  Elisha  in  any  peculiar 
relation.  A  rabbinical  fancy,  scarcely  to 
be  called  a  tradition,  makes  him  "Jonah, 
the  son  of,  AmittaL"  And  said  unto  him. 
Gird  up  thy  loins,  and  take  this  box  of  oil ; 
rather,  thiiflaik  of  oiU  Oil  and  ointments 
were  commonly  kept  in  open-mouthed  jars, 
vases,  or  bottles,  made  of  stone,  glass,  or 
slabaster,  as  appears  from  the  remains  found 
in  Egypt  and  Assyria.  Many  of  the  bottles 
are  earlier  than  the  time  of  Elisheu  In  thine 
hand,  and  go  to  Bamoth-Gilead.  Bamoth- 
Gilead  lay  across  the  Jordan,  in  the  proper 
territory  of  Gad.  It  had  been  seized  and 
occupied  by  the  Syrians  in  the  reign  of 
Ahab;  and  the  possession  had  been  main- 
tained till  recently.  Joram,  however,  had 
recovered  it  (Josephus,  'Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  6. 
§  1,  "HSi)  yip  oiriic  pp'!"^'  '""'ek  Kpiros),  and 
had  left  a  strong  garrison  in  the  place  when 
he  retired  to  Jezreel. 

Ver.  2. — And  when  than  comest  thither, 
look  ont  there  Jehu  the  son  of  Jehdshaphat 
the  son  of  Nimshi.  Jehu  had  been  in  a 
high  position  under  Ahab  (ver.  25),  and 
had  been  pointed  out  to  Elijah,  by  Divine 
tevelation,  as  the  future  King  of  Israel 
(1  Kings  xix.  16).  Elijah  had  been  bidden 
to  anoint  him  kinj;,  but  apparently  had 


neglected  to  do  so,  or  rather  had  devolved 
the  task  upon  his  successor.  Meantime 
Jehu  served  as  a  soldier  under  Ahaziah  and 
Jehoram,  Ahab's  sons,  and  attained  such 
distinction  that  he  became  one  of  the 
Captains  of  the  host  (infra,  ver.  5),  accord- 
ing to  Josephus  (I.  $.  e.)  the  chief  captain. 
Jehu  was  commonly  known  as  "the  son  of 
Nimshi"  (1  Kings  six.  16;  ch.  ix.  20), 
either  because,  his  father  having  died  young, 
he  was  brought  up  by  his  grandfather,  or 
perhaps  simply  "because  Nimshi  was  a 
person  of  more  importance  than  Jehosha- 
phat."  And  go  in — >'.«.  seek  his  presence, 
go  into  his  quarters,  wherever  they  may  be, 
have  direct  speech  with  him — and  make  him 
arise  up  from  among  his  brethren  (comp. 
vers.  5  and  6),  Jehu's  "  brethren "  are  his 
hrother-oSeerB,  among  whom  Elisha  knows 
that  he  will  be  found  sitting.  And  carry 
him  to  an  inner  chamber.  Persuade  him, 
«.e.,  to  quit  the  place  where  thou  wilt  find 
him  sitting  with  the  other  generals,  and  to 
go  with  thee  into  a  private  apartment  for 
secret  conference.  Secrecy  was  of  extreme 
importance,  lest  Joram  should  get  know- 
ledge of  what  was  happening,  and  prepare 
himself  for  resistance.  Had  he  not  been 
taken  by  surprise,  the  result  might  have 
been  a  long  and  bloody  civil  war. 

Ver.  3. — Then  take— rather,  and  take — 
the  box  of  oil— rather,  the  fiaek  of  oil— ani. 
pour  it  on  his  head.  Compare  the  consecra- 
tion of  Aaron  to  the  high-priestly  (Lev.  viii. 
12),  and  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  x.  1)  and  David 
(1  Sam.  xvi.  12)  to  the  kingly  ofiioe.  The 
oil  used  was  the  holy  anointing  oil  of  the 
sanctuary  (Exod.  ZXX.  25) — t4  Syiov  %\aioy, 
as  Josephus  says.  And  say,  Thus  saith  the 
Iiord,  I  have  anointed  thee  king  over  Israel. 
This  is  an  abbreviated  form  of  the  actual 
message,  which  is  given  in  its  entirety  in 
vers.  7 — 10.  The  writer  of  Kings  avoids 
all  needless  repetitions.  Then  open  the 
door — the  conference  was  to  be  with  closed 
doors,  that  no  one  might  either  hear  or  see 
what  took  place — and  flee,  and  tarry  not. 
The  Divine  message  delivered,  all  would 
have  been  done  that  needed  to  be  done. 
There  would  be  nothing  to  wait  for.  So 
the  young  man  was  to  depart  with  the  same 
haste  with  which  he  had  come. 

Ver,  4. — So  the  yonng  man,  even  the 
young  man  the  prophet — the  repetition  of 
han-na'ar  is  doubtful,  since  it  is  not  found 
either  in  the  Syriac  or  Ux  the  Septuagint— 
went  to  Bamoth-Gilead. 

Ver.  5.— And  when  he  came,  behold,  the 
captains  of  the  host  were  sitting — either 
"  sitting  in  council,"  or,  at  any  rate,  collected 
together  in  one  place,  not  engaged  in  any 
active  work,  but  seated — and  he  said,  I  have 
an  errand — ^literally,  a  word— to  thee,  0 
captain.    Probably  he  knew  Jehu  by  sigh^ 


ciT.  IX.  1— 37.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


189 


•nd  looked  at  h!m  m  he  spoke;  but,  aa  he 
addressed  no  one  by  name,  there  might  be 
a  doubt  who  was  intended.  Jehn,  therefore, 
causes  the  doubt  to  be  resolved  by  bis 
question.  And  Jehn  said,  TTnto  which  of  tdl 
nst  And  he  said — 1.8.  the  young  man  the 
prophet  answered— To  thee,  0  captain.  Jehu 
Yias  thus  singled  out  as  the  object  of  the 
message— the  person  to  whom  alone  it  was 
addressed,  and  whose  special  attention  was, 
consequently,  required  to  it. 

Ver.  6. — And  he  (Jehu)  arose,  and  went 
Into  the  honse.  Jehn  left  his  seat,  rose  up, 
and  led  the  way,  from  the  court,  where  he 
had  probably  been  sitting  with  the  other 
generals,  into  the  house  which  adjoined 
the  coort.  The  messengei  followed;  and 
the  two  were  together,  alone.  And  he — t  A 
the  messenger— ponied  the  oil  on  his  head- 
as  directed  (ver.  3) — and  said  nnto  him,  Thns 
laith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel;  literally,  Thia 
laith  Jehovah,  God  of  Israel.  Jehovah's 
name  is  emphatically  put  forward,  in  con- 
trast with  the  name  of  Baal,  as  that  of  the 
true  God  of  Israel ;  and  appeal  la  made  to 
Jehn,  as  to  one  whose  God  is  Jehovah,  and 
who  will  accept  as  authoritative  a  message 
emanating  frum  him.  I  have  anointed  thee 
king  over  the  people  of  the  Lord,  even  over 
Israel;  literally,  over  the  people  of  Jehovah, 
over  Israel.  Practically,  the  people  is,  in 
tlie  main,  "  the  people  of  Baal  ''(ch.  x.  19 — 
2 1),  but  theoretically  and  by  covenant  it  is 
"the  people  of  Jehovah" — his  "peculiar 
pc^ople"  (Deut.  xiv.  2),  chosen  by  him  out 
of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  to  be  his  own. 

Yer.  7. — And  thon  shalt  smite  the  house 
of  Ahah  thy  master.  This  is  plainly  a  com- 
mand, not  a  propliecy.  Jehu  is  expressly 
ordered  by  God  to  "smite,"  i.e.  destroy 
utterly,  the  whole  honse  of  Ahab.  This 
command  he  earned  out  (vers.  24, 33 ;  oh.  x. 
1 — 11) ;  and  his  obedience  to  it  obtained  for 
him  the  tempraal  reward  that  his  children 
to  the  foui-th  generation  should  sit  on  the 
throne  of  Israel  (ch.  x.  30).  Yet  still  his 
ronduct  in  destroying  the  house  of  Ahab  is 
spoken  of  by  the  Prophet  Hosea  as  a  sin, 
and  God  declares,  by  Hosea's  month,  that  he 
will  "  avenge  the  blood  of  Jezreel  upon  the 
house  of  Jehu"  (Hoa.  i.  4).  It  is  naturally 
asked— "How  could  Jehu's  shedding  this 
blood,  at  God's  command  and  in  fulfilment 
of  his  vrill, be  a  sin?"  And  it  is  rightly 
answered,  "  Because,  if  we  do  what  is  the 
will  of  God  for  any  end  of  our  own,  for  any- 
thing except  God,  we  do  in  fact  our  own 
will,  not  God's.  It  was  not  lawful  for 
Jehu  to  depose  and  slay  the  king  his  master, 
except  at  the  express  command  of  God,  who, 
as  the  supreme  King,  sets  up  and  puts  down 
earthly  rulers  as  he  wills.  For  any  other 
end,  and  done  otherwise  than  at  Crod's  ex- 
press command,  such  an  act  is  sin.    Jehu 


was  rewarded  for  the  measure  In  which  he 
fhlfiiled   God's  commands,  as  Ahab,  'who 
had  sold  himself  to  work  wickedness,'  had 
yet  a  temporal  reward  for  humbling  himself 
publicly,  when  rebuked  by  God  for  his  sin, 
and  so  honouring  God,  amid  an  apostate 
people.    But  Jehn,  by  cleaving,  against  tlie 
will  of  God,  to  Jeroboam's  sin  (ch.  xL  29, 
31),  which  served  his  own  political  ends, 
showed  that,  in  the  slaughter  of  his  master, 
he  acted,  not  as  he  pretended,  out  of  zeal 
for  the  will  of  God  (ch.  x.  16),  bnt  served 
his  own  will  and  his  own  ambition  only. 
By  his  disobedience  to  the  one  command  of 
God,  he  showed  that  he  would  have  equally 
disobeyed  the  other,  had  it  been  contrary 
to  his  own  will  or  interest.     He  had  no 
principle  of  obedience.    And  so  the  blood 
which  was  shed  according  to  the  righteous 
judgment  of  God,  became  sin  to  bun  that 
shed  it  in  order  to  fulfil,  not  the  will  of 
God,  bnt  his  own"  (see  Dr.  Pusey's '  Minor 
Prophets,  with  a  Commentary,'  p.  9,  col.  1). 
That  I  may  avenge  the  blood  of  my  servants 
the  prophets.    Oomp.  1  Kings  xviii.  4  and 
xix.  14.    Elijah  believed  aU  the  prophets  of 
Jehovah,  except  himself,  to  have  been  either 
slain  or  banished  under  Ahab,  as  we  see 
from  1  Kings  xviii.  22  and  xix.  10, 14.    And 
the  blood  of  all  the  servants  of  the  Lord. 
There  had  evidently  been  a  general  perse- 
cution of  the  followers  of  Jehovah,  and  not 
merely  a  persecution  of  the  prophets.   It  was 
only  after  a  number  of  martyrdoms  that  the 
followers  of  Jehovah  in  Israel  were  reduced 
(1  Kings  xix.  18)  to  the  scanty  number  of 
"  seven  thousand."    At  the  hand  of  Jezebel. 
Jezebel  was  at  the  bottom  of  all  the  perse- 
cutions.   Sometimes  she  took  matters  into 
her  own  hands,  gave  her  own  orders,  and 
saw  them  carried  out  (1  Kings  xviii.  13; 
xxi.  8 — 14).    At  other  times  she  was  content 
to  "  stir  her  husband  up  "  (1  Kings  xxi.  25) 
and  incite  him  to  evil  courses. 

Ver.  8. — For  the  whole  house  of  Ahah 
shall  perish :  and  I  will  out  off  from  Ahab 
him  that  pisseth  against  the  wall,  and  him 
that  is  shut  up  and  left  in  Israel  (see  the 
comment  on  1  Kings  xiv.  10),  While  the 
exact  force  of  the  phrases  used  is  doubtful, 
the  general  intention  to  embrace  in  the  sen- 
tence all  Ahab's  posterity  cannot  be  doubted. 

Yer.  9.— And  I  will  make  the  house  of 
Ahah  like  the  honse  of  Jeroboam  the  ion  of 
Nebat,  Jeroboam's  honse  had  been  "  cut 
off,"  smitten,  destroyed,  till  not  one  of  his 
posterity  was  left,  about  seventy  years  pre- 
viously (1  Kings  XT.  29),  by  Baasha,  "  be- 
cause of  his  sins  which  he  sinned,  and  which 
he  made  Israel  sin,  by  his  piDvooation  where- 
with he  provoked  the  Lora  God  of  Israel  to 
anger  "  (1  Kings  xv.  80).  The  far  greater 
sin  of  Ahab  could  not  be  visited  with  less 
severity.    And  like  the  home  of  Baasha  tha 


IW 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOa         [ch.  ix.  1-37. 


■OB  of  Ahljah.  Ai  the  whole  house  of  Jero- 
boam had  been  ont  off  for  its  idolatries,  so 
the  bonte  of  Baasha,  which  succeeded  to 
the  throne,  was  removed  even  more  speedily, 
Baasha  himself  and  all  his  posteri^  being 
swept  from  the  earth  by  Zimri,  who  "  smote 
him  and  killed  him,"  and  succeeded  him 
(1  Kings  zvi.  11).  The  house  of  Ahab  had 
had  a  double  warning  of  the  fate  in  reserve 
for  those  who  deserted  the  religion  of  Je- 
hovali,  but  had  disregarded  both  warnings 
alike,  and  had  provoked  God  yet  more  than 
their  predecessors,  by  introducing  a  novel 
and  degraded  form  of  idolatrous  worship. 

Yer.  10. — ^And  the  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel 
in  the  portion  of  Jezreel.  This  had  been 
previously  prophesied  by  Elijah  (1  Kings 
xxi.  23 ;  ch.  ix.  26, 27).  To  an  Israelite,  and 
even  to  a  FhoBnician,it  was  an  awful  threat ; 
for  both  nations  alike  buried  tbeir  dead  care- 
fully in  deep-dug  graves  or  rocky  leoep- 
tacles,  and  both  regarded  the  desecration 
of  a  corpse  as  a  grievous  calamity  ('  Beoords 
of  the  Past,'  vol.  ix.  pp.  112, 114).  The  dog 
was  to  the  Hebrews,  and  to  the  Orientals 
generally,  an  unclean  animal,  and  to  be 
devoured  by  dogs  would  have  been  viewed 
as  a  fate  which,  for  a  queen,  was  almost 
iuconceirable.  And  there  shall  be  none  to 
bury  her.  Jezebel  had  no  one  sufSciently 
interested  in  her  fate  to  watch  over  her 
remains.  Bizpah,  the  daughter  of  Aiah, 
had  kept  watch  over  the  bodies  of  the  seven 
sons  of  Saul,  and  suffered  neither  the  birils 
of  the  air  to  rest  on  them  by  day,  nor  the 
beasts  of  the  field  by  night  (2  Sam.  xxi.  10) ; 
and  in  Greece,  if  we  may  believe  the  poets, 
life  had  been  risked,  and  actually  forfeited, 
to  save  a  near  relative  from  similar  igno- 
miny (Soph., '  Ant.,'  lines  245—743).  But 
"  Jezebel  had  none  to  bury  her."  'When  she 
was  ejected  from  the  palace  window  (ver. 
S3)  and  fell  to  the  ground,  and  was  trodden 
under  foot  by  Jehu's  chariot-horses,  no  one 
came  forth  from  the  palace  to  give  the 
bruised  and  wounded  corpse  such  tendance 
as  was  possible.  There  was  entire  neglect 
of  the  body  for  (probably)  some  hours ;  and, 
during  these,  the  catastrophe  occurred  which 
Divine  foresight  had  prophesied,  but  which 
human  malice  had  not  intended  (see  vers. 
84—37).  And  he  opened  the  door,  and  fled. 
The  young  man  the  prophet  obeyed  to  the 
letter  the  injunctions  which  Elisha  had 
given  him  (ver.  3).  The  moment  that  he 
had  executed  his  errand,  he  fled. 

Vers.  11 — 22. — Contjnraey  of  Jehu  agaimt 
Jehoram. 

Yer.  11. — ^Then  Jehu  oame  forth  to  the 
Mrvants  of  his  lord.  After  the  young  man 
the  prophet  had  made  his  precipitate  retreat, 
Jehn,  too,  quitted  the  inner  chamber,  and 
"  came  forth  " — returned  to  the  place  where 
he  had  been  sitting  with  *<  the  servanla  of 


his  lord" — the  other  captain*  of  the  host 
(ver.  5) — and  rejoined  their  company.  And 
one  said  nnto  hjm,  Is  all  well!  One  of  the 
other  captains  of  the  host  took  the  word, 
and  asked,  in  the  ordinary  phraseology  of 
the  time,  "  Is  it  peace  ?"  (uomp.  vers.  17, 18, 
19,  22)--or,  in  other  words,  » Is  all  right?" 
"  Is  all  well  ?  "  The  sudden  appearance  and 
disappearance  of  the  messenger  had  evi- 
dently created  an  impression  that  all  was 
not  well.  Wherefore  oame  this  mad  fellow 
to  thee  1  He  did  not  suppose  the  man  to 
be  actually  mad.  He  calls  him  "  this  wild 
fellow  " — "  this  soatterbraia,"  on  account  of 
the  haste  and  strangeness  of  his  conduct; 
but  he  quite  expects  to  hear  that  there  was 
"method  in  the  madness,"  and  that  the 
communication  had  some  serious  import. 
And  he — {.«.  Jehu— said  nnto  them,  Te  know 
the  man,  and  his  oommunication.  Jehu  sus- 
pected that  the  whole  sceue  had  been  ar- 
ranged beforehand;  that  Elisha  and  the 
young  prophet  and  the  captains  of  the  host 
were  in  league,  and  had  concerted  a  way  of 
offering  bim  the  throne.  He  may  have  hnd 
reason  to  regard  the  captains  as  disaffected 
towards  Jehoram,  though  this  does  not  ap- 
pear at  aJl  distinctly  in  the  very  brief  nar- 
rative. 

Yer.  12. — And  they  said.  It  is  false.  There 
was  no  rudeness  in  the  reply.  It  merely 
denied  that  Jehu's  supposition  was  correct. 
There  had  been  no  collusion  between  the 
spiritual  and  temporal  authorities.  Tlie 
captains  had  no  knowledge  of  the  young 
prophet's  errand.  Tell  us  now.  "  Tell  us," 
i.e.,  "  what  the  young  prophet  said,  since  we 
are  completely  in  the  dark  upon  the  subject." 
And  he  said.  Thus  and  thus  spake  he  to  me, 
Baying,  Thus  saiththe  Lord,  I  have  anointed 
thee  king  over  IsraeL  Jehu  declared  to 
them  without  any  reserve  all  that  the  young 
prophet  had  said  to  him.  He  accepted  their 
declaration  that  they  were  not  in  league 
with  him,  and  then  gave  them  an  exact 
account  of  all  that  had  occurred.  He  left 
it  for  them  to  determine  what,  under  the 
oiicumstances,  they  would  do. 

Yer.  13. — Then  they  hasted,  and  took  every 
man  his  garment,  and  put  it  under  him  on 
the  top  of  the  stairs.  Kings  were  honoured 
by  the  spreading  of  garments  in  their  way, 
that  their  feet  might  not  touch  the  dusty 
ground  (Matt.  xx.  8).,  The  captains  of  the 
host,  without  hesitation,  acclaimed  Jehu 
king  on  the  strength  of  the  prophetical 
announcement,  made  his  cause  their  own, 
and  joined  in  his  rebellion.  It  is  reasonably 
conjectured  (Bahr)  that  "  a  deep  dissatisfac- 
tion with  Joram  must  have  prevailed  in  the 
army,"  though  whether  the  dissatisfaction 
arose  from  the  idolatry  of  the  house  of  Ahab, 
or  from  Joram's  withdrawal  from  the  war, 
may  be  doubted.    Jehu,  on  the  other  hand. 


0H.IX.1— S7.1       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


191 


WM  evidently  highly  esteemed.  The 
captains  thiew  themselves  with  ardour  into 
big  cause,  and  extemporized  a  sort  of  en- 
thronement. As  often  in  an  Oriental  house, 
an  external  staircase  led  from  the  court  to 
the  npper  story  or  to  the  roof.  This  they 
carpeted  with  their  begeds,  or  enter  cloaks, 
and,  seating  bim  on  the  top  stair,  saluted 
him  as  actual  king.  The  expression,  el- 
gerem  ham-ma'al6th,  is  not  literally,  <*  on  the 
top  of  the  stairs, "  but  rather  "  on  the  stairs 
themtelves."  Naturally,  however,  the  cap- 
tains would  emplace  him  upon  tlie  topmost 
stair.  And  blew  with  trumpets.  This  was 
■1  recognized  part  of  the  ceremonial  of  a 
coronation  (see  2  Sam.  xv.  10;  1  Kings  L 
89 ;  ch.  xi.  14).     Saving,  Jebu  is  king. 

Ver.  11. — So  Jehu  the  son  of  Jehosbaphat 
the  son  of  Nimsbi  (see  the  comment  on  ver. 
2)  conspired  against  Joram.  It  is  not  meant 
that  there  was  a  secret  conspiracy  previous 
to  tbe  prbpliet's  coming,  but  that,  by  tbe 
OT>en  acts  which  followed  on  his  coming, 
Jfehu  and  the  captains  were  guilty  of  a 
"conspiracy."  How  Joram  bad  kept  Ka- 
motb-Gilead ;  rather,  now  Joram  was  keeping 
Bamoth-  CHlead.  Joram,  in  bis  capacity  of 
chief  ruler,  was  keeping,  j.e.  defending, 
Bamoth-Gilead  against  tbe  Syrians  with  the 
bulk  of  his  forcea.  He  and  .all  Israel,  be- 
oanie  of  Hazael  Sing  of  Syria;  since  Eazael 
wished  to  win  tbe  city  back,  and  would  have 
done  so,  bad  it  not  been  stoutly  defended. 
Tbe  writer  speaks  of  Joram  as  the  defender, 
though  he  was  absent,  because  tbe  defence 
was  made  under  his  orders.  Then,  to  pre- 
vent misunderstanding,  he  repeats  what  he 
bad  already  said  in  ch.  viii.  29  with  respect 
to  Joram's  wounds,  and  his  retirement  to 
Jezreel  to  be  healed  of  tbem. 

Ver.  15. — ^Bnt  King  Joram  was  returned 
to  be  healed  in  Jezreel  of  the  wounds  which 
the  Syrians  had  given  him,  when  he  fonght 
with  Hazael  King  of  Syria  (see  the  comment 
on  oh.  viii.  29).  And  John  said,  If  it  be 
your  minds.  As  soon  as  he  is  proclaimed 
king,  Jehu  addresses  himself  to  tbe  captains, 
and  proposes  a  policy.  He  does  not  venture 
to  assume  a  tone  of  authority,  or  of  im- 
jpsta^e  command,  since  he  is  still  but  a 
pretender  and  not  "established  in  the 
kingdom.'''  "  If  it  be  your  minds,"  he  says ; 
i.e.  "  If  you  agKie  with  me,  and  have  nothing 
to  urge  against  my  proposal.  Then  let  none 
go  forth  nor  escape  from  the  city — literally, 
let  no  escaper  go  forth  from  ihecity — equiva- 
lent to  let  no  one  quit  the  city — to  go  to  tell 
it  in  Jeireel.  This  is  the  important  point. 
Seoreoywas  absolutely  essential.  If  the  revolt 
had  got  wind — and  a  single  messenger  might 
have  carried  tbe  news — ^tbe  whole  attempt 
might  have  failed,  or  only  have  succeeded 
after  a  long  and  bloody  civil  war.  All 
Jehn'i  eSbrtf  were  bent  on  keeping  his 


revolt  secret  until  he  himself  announced  it 
to  tbe  astonished  king  (see  ver.  22). 

Ver.  16. — So  Jehu  rode  in  s  ohariot,  and 
went  to  Jezreel ;  for  Joram  lay  there.  We 
must  understand  that  tbe  captains  came  into 
Jehu's  views,  acknowledged  the  necessity 
of  secrecy,  and  took  precautions  against  tbe 
departure  of  any  one,  openly  or  seoretly,  from 
the  city.  Jehu,  with  a  moderate  troop  or 
company  (n];^^),  sets  out,  perbape  on  tbe 
very  day  of  his  enthronement,  and  hastens 
with  all  speed  to  Jezreel,  bent  on  arriving 
there  before  any  suspicion  has  arisen  of 
revolt  or  rebellion.  His  great  object  was  to 
surprise  Joram,  and  to  kill  or  capture  bim 
before  be  could  take  any  steps  to  organize 
a  defence.  Probably  the  force  which  ac- 
companied bim  was  wholly  a  chariot  force. 
And  Ahaziah  King  of  Jndah  was  come  down 
to  see  Joram  (see  ch.  viii.  29,  and  tbe  com- 
ment ad.  loo.').  Ahaziah,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered, was  Joram's  nephew,  as  well  as  hia 
ally  in  the  war  against  Syria.  It  was 
natural  that  he  should  visit  his  unole  when 
he  was  wounded,  even  if  the  wounds  were 
not  very  serious. 

Yer.  17.— And  there  stood  a  watchman  on 
the  tower  in  Jezreel;  literally,  and  the 
viatchman  $tood  on  the  tower  in  Jezreel.  The 
watch-tower  on  the  south-east,  towards 
Kam'otb-Gilead,  is  intended.  There  were 
probably  others  in  other  directions ;  but  the 
writer  is  not  concerned  with  tbem.  Each 
watch-tower  bad  its  one  watchman,  who  gave 
warning  if  anything  unusual  caught  bis 
attention.  And  he  spied  the  company  of 
Jehu  as  he  came.  Shiph'ah  is  generally 
"abundance,"  "multitude"  (Dent,  xxxiii. 
19;  Job  xxii.  11;  Isa.  Is.  6),  but  seems 
here  to  designate  a  "  band  "  or  "  company  " 
of  moderate  size.  It  is  a  somewhat  raro 
word.  And  said,  I  see  a  company.  The 
watchman  gave  notice  to  those  whose  busi- 
ness it  was  to  inform  the  king,  that  a  band 
or  company  of  men  was  approaching  the 
city.  And  Joram  said,  lake  an  horseman, 
and  send  to  meet  them,  and  let  him  say,  la 
it  peace  1  Joram  apprehended  no  danger. 
If  tbe  "company"  had  been  a  band  of 
Syrians,  or  other  enemies,  coming  in  hostile 
fashion,  tbe  watchman  would  have  worded 
his  warning  differently.  The  king  probably 
concluded  that  he  was  about  to  receive 
tidings  from  the  seat  of  war,  and  meant  to 
ask,  "  Is  the  news  good  or  bad — peacefhl  or 
tbe  contrary  ?  "  No  blame  attaches  to  him 
for  not  taking  alarm  at  once. 

Yer.  18. — So  ibere  went  one  on  horseback 
to  meet  him,  and  said.  Thus  saith  the  king. 
Is  it  peace }  And  Jehu  said,  What  hast  thou 
to  do  with  peace  1  turn  thee  behind  me. 
Jehu  chooses  to  accept  the  mesiengerV 
words  as  if  they  were  his  own,  and  not  thosr 
of  the  king,    "  What  does  it  inattar  tv  sncl 


192 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         [ch.  ix,  1— 37. 


s  one  as  thee,  a  mere  common  man,  whether 
my  tidings  are  peaceful  or  the  contrary  ?  I 
shall  not  tell  thee  my  errand.  Turn  and 
follow  in  my  train."  The  messenger  had 
no  choice  but  to  obey.  An  attempt  at  flight 
would  hare  led  to  his  being  seized  or  slain. 
And  the  watohraan  told,  saying,  The  mei- 
Benger  oame  to  them,  but  he  oometh  not 
again.  The  watchman  evidently  thought 
his  not  returning  suspicious,  and  reported 
it  at  once.  Joram  should  now  have  taken 
alarm,  but  he  did  not.  He  appears  to  have 
had  no  notion  that  any  danger  could  be 
approaching. 

Ver,  19. — Then  he  sent  out  a  second  on 
horsebaclc.  Persistency  in  a  course  shown 
by  experience  to  be  futile  was  characteristic 
of  the  sons  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel  (compare 
the  conduct  of  Abaziah,  as  described  in  ch. 
i.  9, 11, 13),  Which  came  to  them,  and  said, 
Thus  saith  the  king.  Is  it  peace  t  Exactly 
the  same  inquiry  as  before,  and  no  doubt 
iu  the  same  sense  (see  the  comment  on  ver. 
17).  Jehu,  addressed  with  the  same  words, 
thinks  it  sufficient  to  give  the  same  answer. 
His  object  is  to  lose  no  time,  but  to  reach 
the  king  as  quickly  as  possible.  And  Jehu 
answered,  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  peace  1 
turn  thee  behind  me. 

Ver.  20. — And  the  watchman  told,  saying, 
He  came  even  unto  them,  and  oometh  not 
again,  A  still  stranger  circumstance,  and 
one  still  more  suspicious.  The  second  mes- 
senger could  only  have  been  sent  out  be- 
cause the  king  disapproved  the  detention  of 
the  first.  Whoever,  therefore,  had  detained 
the  second  messenger  must  be  consciously 
acting  in  opposition  to  the  wishes  of  the 
king.  And  the  driving  is  like  the  driving 
of  Jehu  the  son  of  Nimshi.  It  is  not  meant 
that  Jehu  was  driving  his  own  chariot 
(which  great  men  never  did,  oh.  xxii.  34), 
and  drove  in  a  furious  manner,  but  that  the 
"  company  "  was  being  urged  forward  at  an 
unusual  pace,  in  a  reckless  and  hot-headed 
way.  The  watchman  conjectured,  therefore, 
that  Jehu  must  be  leading  them,  since  he 
had  a  cliaracter  for  impetuosity.  For  he 
driveth  fnrionsly ;  or,  madly — "  like  a  mad- 
man" (Keil)— "  proBcipitanter  "  (Vatabl.). 
The  LXX.  translate  iv  vapaWayf — which 
has,  perhaps,  the  same  meaniuL!;  (comp. 
Eur., '  Hipp.,'  9H5 ;  Lysias,  Fr,,  58), 

Ver.  21. — And  Joram  said,  Make  ready — 
rather,  harness;  literally,  attach — i,e,  "attach 
the  horses  to  the  chariot— and  his  chariot 
was  made  ready — literally,  and  one  attached, 
or  iMrnesied,  his  chariot — and  Joram  King 
of  Israel  and  Ahaziah  King  of  Jndah  went 
out,  each  in  his  chariot.  The  uncle  and  the 
nephew  went  out  together,  still,  as  it  would 
seem,  unapprehensive  of  any  danger,  though 
the  oircumstances  were  certainly  such  as 
mi|;ht  well  have  aroused  su8{)icioii.    Joram 


wM  probably  •nzions  to  know  the  reasons 
which  had  induced  the  captain  of  his  host 
to  quit  his  post  at  Bamoth-Gilead.  Ahaziah 
probably  accompanied  him  out  of  politeness, 
though  he  too  may  have  been  curious  to 
leam  the  news.  If  any  disaster  had  over- 
taken the  army  of  Israel,  the  safety  of  Judah 
might  also  be  endangered.  "  Tua  res  agitur, 
paries  cum  prozimus  ardet."  And  they  went 
out  against  Jehu — ratlier,  to  meet  Jehu — 
CIS  diravTijv  'loSt  (LXX.) ;  see  the  Bevised 
Version— and  met  him  in  the  portion  of 
ITaboth  the  Jeneelite.  Humanly  speaking, 
this  was  accidental.  The  "portion  of  Na- 
both,"  or  his  plot  of  ground,  lay  outside  the 
south-eastern  gate  of  the  city,  at  no  great 
distance  from  the  walls;  and  it  happened 
that  Joram  and  Jehu  met  within  its  limits. 
Had  the  king  started  a  little  sooner,  or  had 
Jehu  made  less  haste,  the  meeting  would 
have  taken  place  further  from  the  town, 
and  outside  the  "  portion  of  Naboth."  But 
Divine  providence  so  ordered  matters  that 
vengeance  for  the  sin  of  Ahab  was  exacted 
upon  the  very  scene  of  his  guilt,  and  a 
prophecy  made,  probably  by  EHsha,  years 
previously,  and  treasured  up  in  the  memory 
of  Jehu  (ver.  26),  was  fulfilled  to  the  leiter, 
Ver,  22, — And  it  oame  to  pass,  when  Joram 
saw  Jehu,  that  he  said.  Is  it  peace,  Jehnl 
Still  the  same  question  is  asked;  but  we 
cannot  be  sure  that  it  is  asked  in  exactly 
the  same  sense.  Something  in  the  aspect 
of  Jehu,  and  in  his  furious  haste,  may  by 
this  time  have  alarmed  the  king.  Or  pos- 
sibly he  maybe  merely  repeating  the  question 
put  through  his  messengers,  and  still  un- 
answered, "Is  all  well  with  the  army  or 
no?  Has  there  been  any  disaster?"  Jehu, 
at  any  rate,  chooses  to  understand  his  vague 
phrase  in  the  former  sense,  as  if  be  had 
asked,  "Is  it  peace  between  thee  and  me?" 
and  answers  in  the  negative.  And  he 
answered.  What  peace,  so  long  as  the  whore- 
doms of  thy  mother  Jezebel  and  her  witch- 
crafts are  so  many  1  literally,  so  long  as  the 
whoredoms  of  thy  mother  Jezebel  and  those 
many  witchcraftt  of  hers  continue.  By 
"whoredoms"  are  meant  idolatries,  as  so 
frequently  in  Scripture  (Lev,  xix,  29;  xx, 
5;  Jer,  ill,  2,  9;  xiii,  17;  Ezek,  xvi,  17; 
XX.  30 ;  xxiii.  11,  etc. ;  Hos.  ii.  2 ;  iv.  12 ; 
V.  4 ;  Nab.  iii.  4,  etc.) ;  by  "  witchcrafts  "  all 
those  magical  practices  which  were  so 
commou  at  the  time  in  Egypt,  Assyria,  and 
Babylonia,  and  no  doubt  also  in  Phoenicia, 
and  which  were  so  strictly  forbidden  by  the 
Mosaic  Law  (Exod.  xxii.  18 ;  Deut.  xviii. 
10).  Besides  the  Baal-worship,  Jezebel  had 
introduced  these  unhallowed  practices  into 
the  kingdom  of  Israel.  Jehu  reproaches 
Joram  with  allowing  them,  and  dedares 
that  there  can  be  no  peace  between  lum 
and  his  master  under  such  circumstancei. 


OH.  II.  1—37.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KiNas. 


193 


Having  gained  his  object  and  got  within 
bowihot  of  the  unsuspecting  monarch,  he 
tlirowB  olT  the  mask  and  declares  unoom- 
promiring  hostility.  "No  man  could  use 
such  terms  of  the  queen-mother  who  was 
willing  any  longer  to  be  a  subject." 

Ver.  23 — 26.  —Murder  of  Jehoram  by  Jehu. 

Yer.  23. — And  Joram  turned  his  hands, 
and  fled.  Joram  made  his  charioteer  turn 
the  chariot  suddenly  round,  and  fled  by  the 
way  by  which  he  had  come.  "  Turning  the 
hands"  is  turning  the  chariot  round  by 
means  of  the  hands ;  and  Joram  is  said  to 
have  done  that  which  he  caused  to  be  done. 
And  said  to  Ahaziah,  There  is  treachery,  0 
Ahaziah.  Mirmah  is  "  deceit "  or  "  fraud  " 
of  any  kind,  and  here  is  not  ill  rendered  by 
"  treachery."  Jehu's  conduct  was  not  justi- 
fied by  the  mission  given  iiim  (vers.  6 — 10), 
which  certainly  did  not  authorize  him  to 
commit  a  treacherous  murder. 

Ver.  24. — And  Jehu  drew  a  bow  with  his 
full  strength.  This  meaning  is  scarcely 
contained  in  the  Hebrew,  which  merely 
says  that  Jehu  "filled  his  hand  with  his 
bow,"  that  is  to  say,  took  his  bow  into  his 
hands  for  the  purpose  of  using  it.  And 
■mote  Jehoram  between  his  arms;  (.e.  di- 
rected an  arrow  against  Jehoram  with  so 
true  an  aim,  that  it  struck  him  in  the 
middle  of  the  back  between  his  shoulders. 
And  the  arrow  went  out  at  his  heart.  This 
was  quite  possible,  for  the  heart  lies  towards 
the  centre  of  the  chest,  not  wholly  on  the 
left  side.  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  an 
oblique  wound.  And  he  sank  down  in  his 
chariot.  Jehoram  fell  into  the  "well,"  or 
body,  of  the  chariot,  and  there  lay,  the 
chariot  being  brought  to  a  stand. 

Ver.  25. — Then  said  Jehu  to  Bidkar  his 
captain;  literally,  his  thirdsman;  Eeil 
renders  "  his  aide-de-camp,"  probably  one  of 
those  who  was  in  his  chariot  with  him — 
Take  np,  and  oast  him  in  the  portion  of  the 
field  of  Naboth  the  Jezreelite.  "Take  up 
the  body,"  i.e.  "  and  cast  it  into  the  plot  of 
ground  which  once  belonged  to  Naboth  the 
Jezreelite,  and  was  forfeited  to  the  crown  at 
his  death  (1  Kings  xxi.  15),  and  taken  pos- 
session of  by  Ahab  "  (1  Kings  xxi.  16).  The 
reason  for  the  order  follows.  For  remember 
how  that,  when  I  and  thou  rode  together  after 
Ahab.his  father,  the  Lord  laid  this  harden 
upon  him  The  LXX.  have /lyrtfioyeia^"  1 
remember ; "  but  the  Hebrew  text  ia  "Dt,  not 
"Dis  "Remember"  (imperative  mood)  is 
the  correct  translation.  Jehu  recalls  his 
captain's  recollection  to  an  occurrence  which 
was  deeply  impressed  upon  his  own.  "  When 
thou  and  I  rode  together  after  Ahab  "  prob- 
ably means  "when  we  two  stood  behind 
Ahab  in  his  chariot."  The  Assyrian  sculp- 
tures usually  represent  the  monarch  as  at- 
tended by  two  body-guardi,  who  ride  in  the 
ILKIMCn 


same  chariot  with  him,  standing  up  behind 
him,  and  often  interposing  their  shields  to 
protect  his  person.  In  thii  near  proximity 
Jehu  and  Bidkar  would  hear  any  speech 
which  was  addressed  to  Ahab.  By  a 
"  burden "  is  meant  a  sentence  of  punish- 
ment (comp.  Isa.  ziil.  1;  xr.  1;  xvii.  1; 
etc. ;  Nah.  l  1,  eto.). 

Ver.  26. — Sorely  I  have  leen  yesterday 
the  blood  of  Naboth  (comp.  1  Kings  xxi.  19, 
where  the  same  idea  of  retribution  is  ex- 
pieesed,  though  in  different  words).  Jehu, 
after  the  lapse  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  years, 
naturally  bad  forgotten  the  exact  words  used. 
And  the  blood  of  his  sons.  The  execution 
of  Naboth's  sons  liad  not  been  mentioned 
previously;  but,  under  the  riide  jurispru- 
dence of  the  age  (ch.  xiv.  6),  sons  were 
usually  slain  with  their  fathers.  And, 
unless  they  had  been  removed,  Ahab  could 
not  have  inherited  the  vineyard.  Saith  the 
Lord ;  and  I  will  requite  thee  in  this  plat, 
saith  the  Lord.  This  was  tlie  gist  of  the 
prophecy,  which  ran  as  follows:  "in  the 
place  where  doga  licked  the  blood  of  Naboth 
shall  dogs  lick  thy  blood,  even  thine."  Now 
therefore  take  and  cast  him  into  the  plat  of 
ground,  aooording  to  the  word  of  the  Lord. 
The  evil  prophesied  against  Ahab  had  been 
formally  and  expressly  deferred  to  his  son's 
days  on  Ahab's  repentance  (of.  1  Kings 
xxi.  29). 

Vers.  27— 29.— Murder  of  Ahaziah. 

Ver.  27. — Bnt  when  Ahaziah  the  king  of 
Jadah  saw  this,  he  fled  by  the  way  of  the 
garden  house.  As  soon  as  Ahaziah  saw  Jehu 
shoot  his  arrow,  he  too  took  to  flight;  not, 
however,  in  the  same  direction  as  Joram,  but 
southwards,  towards  his  own  laud.  If 
"  garden  house  "  is  the  right  translation  of 
]an  n'5,  we  can  say  no  more  than  that  it  waa 
probably  one  of  the  lodges  of  the  royal 
demesne,  which  lay  south-east  and  south  of 
•Jezreel,  whereof  nothing  more  is  known. 
But  it  is  quite  possible  that  we  ought  to 
translate,  with  the  LXX.,  "  by  the  way  of 
Beth-Gan  " — ^(puyev  6Shv  Baie-ydv.  In  this 
case  "  Beth-Gan "  would  be  a  village  or 
town,  probably  identical  with  En-gannim, 
which  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  bills  bounding 
the  Plain  of  Esdraelon,  nearly  due  south  of 
Jezreel  (Zerin),  and  which  is  now  known  as 
Jenin  (see  the  Map  of  Western  Palestine, 
by  Mr.  Trelawney  Saunders,  compiled  from 
the  surveys  of  the  Palestine  Exploration 
Fund,  where  Ahaziah's  flight  is  well  traced. 
And  Jehn  followed  after  him,  and  laid,  Smite 
him  also  in  the  chariot ;  rather,  tn  hit 
chariot,  not  in  that  of  Jehoram,  since  the  two 
kings  rode  respectively  in  their  own  chariots 
(ver.  21).  It  was  a  bold  step  in  a  pretender 
not  yet  settled  upon  the  throne  to  provoke 
the  hostility  of  a  neighbonring  country  by 
murdering  its  monarch ;  but  Jehn  probabl/ 


194 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [oh,  ix,  1—87. 


thought  be  had  more  to  fear  finm  Ahaziah 
himself,  who  had  heen  on  Bnch  olose  teimi 
of  firiendship  with  Jehoram,  than  from  any 
piobable  successorB.  He,  therefore,  finding 
him  in  his  power,  pursued  after  him  and  slew 
him.  From  a  religious  point  of  view  he  could 
justify  the  act ;  since  the  commission  given 
to  him  (ver.  7)  was  to  smite  all  the  house 
of  Ahab,  and  Ahaziah  was  Ahab's  grand- 
son. And  they  did  so  at  the  going  up  to  Oui, 
which  is  by  Ibleam.  The  "  ascent  of  Gur," 
"iW-nSjffl,  was  probably  the  rising  ground 
between  the  southern  edge  of  the  Plain  of 
Esdraelon  and  the  place  known  as  "  Ibleam," 
or  "Bileam"  (1  Chion.  vi.  70),  which  is 
reasonably  identified  with  the  modern  Bir^ 
el-Belameh,  two  miles  south  of  Jenin. 
ifere  the  steep  ascent  necessarily  delayed 
tlie  chariot,  and  Abaziah's  puiBuers  gained 
upon  him,  approached  him,  and  wounded 
him.  And  he  fled  to  Hegiddo.  Wounded 
at  the  asiient  of  Gur,  and  despairing  of 
making  his  way  through  the  rough  moun- 
tainous country  which  lay  between  him  and 
Jerusalem,  Ahaziah  suddenly  changed  his 
route,  perhaps  thereby  bafSing  his  pursuers, 
and,  skirting  the  hills,  had  himself  conveyed 
to  Megiddo  (Ledjun),  where  he  died,  either 
of  his  wounds,  or  through  some  &esh  violence 
on  the  part  of  Jehu  (see  2  Chron.  xii.  8,  9). 
The  reconciliation  of  2  Ohron,  xii.  8,  9  with 
the  present  passage  is  difficult,  but  not 
wholly  impossible.  Perhaps  the  Chronicler 
means  by  «  Samaria  "  the  kingdom,  not  the 
town. 

Ver.  28. — And  Ms  servants  carried  him  in 
a  chariot  to  Jerasalem.  No  king  of  the 
house  of  David  had  as  yet  been  buried  else- 
where than  in  the  rock-hewn  sepulchre 
which  David  had  constructed  for  himself  and 
family  at  Jerusalem.  As  soon,  therefore,  as 
AbaziEih  was  dead,  his  attendants  conveyed 
his  dead  body  in  a  chariot  to  the  Judsean 
capital.  Jehu  did  not  oppose,  having  no 
quarrel  with  the  dead.  And  buried  him  in 
his  sepnlchre ;  i.e.  in  the  particular  excava- 
tion, or  loculus,  which  he  had  prepared  for 
himselfl  Jewish,  like  Egyptian,  kings  seem 
to  have  made  it  their  business  to  see  to  the 
construction  of  their  tomb  as  soon  as  they 
mounted  the  throne.  Thus  Ahaziah,  though 
he  had  reigned  but  a  year  (oh.  viii.  26),  had 
already  prepared  himself  a  sepulchre.  His 
"servants"  buried  him  in  it.  With  his 
fathers  in  the  city  of  David  (comp.  1  Kings 
xi.  43;  xiT.  37;  xt.  8,  24;  xxu,  50;  eh. 
viii  24). 

Ver.  29. — And  in  the  eleventh  year  of 
jToram  the  son  of  Ahab  began  Ahaziah  to 
leign  over  Israel.  In  ch.  viii.  25  the  acces- 
sion of  Ahaziah  is  placed  in  Joram's  twellth, 
instead  of  his  eleventh,  year.  The  slight 
discrepancy  is  sufficiently  explained  by  the 
double  reckoning  of  a  king's  "  first  year," 


familiar  to  ohronologists,  either  (1)  from  the 
date  of  the  accession  to  the  end  of  tbe  cnirent 
civil  year ;  or  (2)  from  the  date  of  the  acces- 
sion to  the  same  day  in  the  ensuing  year. 
"Vers.  30— 37.— Deoft  of  JtzAeL 
Ver.  SO. — And  when  Jehu  was  come  to 
JezreeL  Some  commentators  suppose  that 
Jehu  did  not  engage  personally  in  the 
pursuit  of  Ahaziah,  but,  leaving  that  to  a 
portion  of  his  retinue,  pushed  on  with  all 
haste  to  Jezreel,  where  Jezebel  was,  "  tlie 
originator  of  all  the  mischief."  But  it  is 
certainly  more  natural  to  understand  (with 
KeU  and  Josephus)  that  Jehu  himself 
pursued.  The  piusuit  to  Ibleam,  where 
Ahaziah  was  mortally  wounded,  and  the 
return  to  Jezreel,  need  not  have  occupied 
more  than  about  three  hours,  Jezebel  heard 
of  it.  She  would  naturally  be  the  first  to 
hear.  On  the  death  of  her  eon,  which  must 
have  been  plainly  seen  from  the  walls  of 
Jezreel,  she  became  practically  the  chief 
authority  in  the  place,  and  indeed  in  the 
kingdom.  Jehoram's  sons  were  probably 
minors.  And  she  painted  her  fitee;  literally, 
and,  she  put  her  eyet  in  antimony ;  i.e,  she 
adorned  her  eyes  with  the  dark  dye  which 
has  always  been  fashionable  in  the  East, 
and  which  is  still  used  at  the  present  day. 
The  dye  is  spread  both  on  the  upper  and 
the  lower  eyelids.  It  at  once  increases  the 
apparent  size  of  the  eye,  and  gives  it  un- 
natural brilliancy.  The  Oriental  nations, 
Babylonians,  Assyrians,  Medes,  Persians, 
were  acquainted  with  the  practice  from  very 
early  times ;  and  it  is  not  surprising  that  it 
was  known  to  Jezebel.  What  was  her  exact 
object  in  applying  it  is  more  doubtful.  The 
older  commentators,  who  are  followed  by 
Ewald,  suppose  that  she  intended  to  "  sum- 
mon np  all  her  seductive  fascinations  in 
order  to  tempt  and  conquer  Jehu;"  but 
.  more  recent  writers  (Bahr,  Keil,  and  others) 
argue  that  her  probable  age  renders  this 
incredible,  since  she  had  already  a  grandson 
who  was  twenty-three  years  of  age  (ch, 
viii.  26),  and  must  therefore  have  been  her- 
self at  least  fifty.  But,  if  we  remember 
that  Cleopatra  was  forty  when  she  held 
Antony  as  her  slave  and  hoped  to  captivate 
Augustus,  it  would  seem  to  be  not  altogether 
beyond  the  bounds  of  possibility  that  a 
Phoenician  princess  of  fifty  m^y  have  thought 
tbai.  by  the  use  of  art,  she  might  render  her- 
smi  a  captivating  personage.  There  is,  at 
any  rate,  no  evidence  that  "putting  the 
eyes  in  antimony"  was  an  ordinary  or  a 
fitting  preparation  for  meeting  death  in  a 
way  worthy  of  a  queen.  Ewald's  view  has, 
therefore  much  to  commend  it  to  our  aecept- 
ance.  Jezebel,  trusting  in  the  charms  and 
the  fascination  which  had  been  so  potent 
over  Ahab,  may  have  imagined  that  she 
had   still  enough  beauty  left  to  oapture 


oi.  IX.  1-47.]         TJBE  BEOOiri)  BOOk  OP  THE  KINGS. 


195 


Jehu,  proTided  the  inoreased  her  natnial 
BttraotionR  by  a  careful  use  of  all  the  re- 
souices  of  art.  And  tixed  her  head.  Fhos- 
nioian  statues  of  goddesses  hare  their  hair 
arranged  in  long  pendent  curls,  and  bear  on 
their  headsa  Bmall  conical  cap  -with  a  ribbon 
wreathed  round  the  baie.  The  artists  prob- 
ably had  queens  and  princesses  as  their 
models.  There  i*  no  evidence  that  false 
hair  was  worn  in  Phoenicia,  cither  by  men 
or  women.  And  looked  ont  at  a  window. 
Windows,  sometimes  open,  sometimes  lat- 
ticed, were  common  in  Oriental  houses  from 
the  earliest  times.  They  mostly  looked  into 
the  oourt  round  whioh  a  house  was  com- 
monly built;  but  some  few  were  in  the 
external  wall  of  the  building ;  and  through 
these  new  arrivals  might  be  reconnoitred. 
Jezebel  "looked  out,"  partly  to  see,  but 
perhaps  still  more  to  be  seen. 

Yei.  31. — ^And  as  Jehn  entered  In  at  the 
gate,  she  said.  Had  Zimri  peace,  who  slew 
his  master  1  This  is  a  possible  meaning  of 
Jezebel's  words,  and  it  has  among  its  advo- 
cates— ^Luther,  De  Wette,  Maurer,  and 
Dathe,  besides  our  own  translators.  But 
BO  defiant  an  utterance  is  quite  incompatible 
with  an  intention  to  captivate  and  conciliate. 
Probably,  therefore,  we  should  understand 
the  queen  either  as  saying  affirmatively, 
"Peace  to  thee,  Zimri  I "  (or,  "Hail,  Zimri  I ") 
"  slayer  of  thy  lord,"  or  dse  as  asking,  "  Is  it 
peace  "  ({.«.  "  Is  it  peace  now  between  thee 
and  me  ?  "), "  Zimri,  slayer  of  thy  lord  ?  "  In 
either  case,  Zimri  is  an  honorific  appellation, 
recalling  the  fact  of  another  Israelite  general, 
who  had  revolted,  slain  his  master,  and 
leigiied  as  king. 

Yer.  32. — And  he  lifted  up  his  face  to  the 
window,  and  said.  Who  is  on  my  side  1  who  1 
Whatever  Jezebel's  intention,  Jehu  yielded 
not  a  jot ;  he  was  deaf  to  her  flatteries,  blind 
to  her  seductions.  He  had  made  up  hia 
mind  for  "  war  to  the  knife  "  before  he  em- 
barked upon  his  enterprise,  and  the  feeble 
attempts  of  a  queen  whose  part  was  played 
out,  whose  age  he  knew,  and  whom  be  no 
doubt  regarded  as  an  old  woman,  had  no 
power  on  him.  Instead  of  responding  to 
her  blandishments,  he  took  a  stem  and  hard 
line.  He  would  not  see  her  privately.  He 
summoned  to  his  aid  the  menials  of  the 

Salace — the  eunuchs — ^those  on  whom  beauty 
as  least  influence.  "  Who  is  on  my  side  ? 
who?"  he  exclaimed  (literally,  "Who  is 
with  me  ?  who  ?  ") ;  thus  calling  on  the  court 
servants  to  desert  their  masters,  the  guards 
to  turn  their  swords  against  their  employers, 
the  menials  to  consummate  an  intra-palatial 
reTolntion.  We  cannot  deny  to  Jehu  the 
•redit  of  vigour,  promptness,  audacity,  the 
talent  to  seize  on  the  opportunity  of 
the  moment,  and  to  make  the  most  of  it ; 
but  he  must  ever  present  himself  to  us  as 


the  rough  soldier,  with  no  eonrteey,  with 
no  chivalry,  bent  on  accomplishing  Ms  own 
ends,  and  shrinking  &om  no  deed  of  blood, 
no  precedent  peuimi  exempli,  if  thereby  his 
ends  might  be  brought  about.  And  there 
looked  out  to  him  two  or  three  ennnchs. 
Eunuchs  had  become  an  integral  part  both 
of  the  Jewish  and  of  the  Israelite  courts 
from  the  time  of  David  (1  Chron.  xzviii.  1). 
They  are  an  institution  which  almost  neces- 
sarily accompanies  polygamy ;  and  they  hiid 
long  held  high  office  in  Egypt,  in  Babylon, 
and  in  Assyria.  A  position  outside  nature, 
at  variance  with  all  men's  natural  feelings 
and  aspirations,  of  necessity  depraves  the 
character,  weakens  the  moral  principle,  and 
ends  by  debasing  the  class.  In  Oriental 
history,  the  lowest,  vilest)  part  is  always 
played  by  the  eunuchs  of  the  palace,  who 
are  ever  ready  to  take  part  in  any  intrigues, 
in  any  conspiracies,  and  who  seem  to  be 
almost  wholly  devoid  of  the  ordinary  feelings 
of  humtmity.  The  eunuchs  who  "  looked 
out"  to  Jehu  were  probably  the  chief 
eunnchs  of  the  palace,  who  had  authority 
over  the  others,  and  indeed  over  the  court 
officials  generally. 

Ver.  33. — And  he  said,  Throw  her  down. 
A  splendid  example  of  the  wicked  man's 
prompt  and  bold  and  unscrupulous  decision. 
A  queen,  a  queen-mother,  always  more 
tenderly  regarded  than  an  ordinary  queen- 
regnant,  a  princess  in  her  own  right  (aee 
ver.  31),  daughter  of  a  neighbouring  and 
powerful  potentate,  settled  in  her  kingdom 
for  over  thirty  years,  the  most  powerful 
person  in  the  state  during  that  entire  period, 
backed  up  by  the  numerous  and  dominant 
party  of  her  co-religionists,  she  is  to  Jehu 
nothing  but  a  wicked  woman  who  is  in  his 
way ;  she  inspires  him  with  no  awe,  she  does 
not  even  touch  him  with  any  feeling  of  respect. 
"Throw  her  down."  History  presents  no 
parallel  to  such  an  indignity.  Kings  and 
queens  had  been,  time  after  time,  removed  by 
violence ;  their  lives  had  been  taken ;  they 
had  been  transplanted  to  another  sphere  of 
.being.  But  the  open  casting  forth  from  a 
window  of  a  crowned  head  by  the  menials 
of  the  court,  at  the  command  of  a  usurper, 
was  a  new  thing,  unprecedented,  unparal- 
leled. It  must  have  been  a  shock  to  all 
established  notions  of  propriety.  In  com- 
manding it  Jehu  showed  his  superiority  to 
existing  prejudice,  his  utter  fearlessness, 
and  his  willingness  to  create  a  new  pre- 
cedent, which  might  seriously  shake  the 
monarchical  principle.  So  they  threw  her 
down.  There  appears  to  have  been  no 
hesitation.  The  boldness  of  Jehu  com- 
municated itself  to  those  whom  he  addressed ; 
and  the  ennnchs  violently  seized  the  person 
of  the  queen,  and  precipitated  her  from  tho 
window  to  tba  ground  below.    She  tell  ou 


196 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         l<^.  ii.  1— 37. 


the  road  by  which  the  palace  was  approached, 
and  lay  there  Ueedlng  and  belplcBB.  And 
some  ol  hei  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  wall. 
As  she  fell,  some  portion  of  her  body  strack 
against  the  wall  of  the  palace,  and  left 
tplashes  of  hloOd  upon  it.  There  were 
probably  some  projections  from  the  wall 
between  the  window  and  the  ground.  And 
OS  the  horses.  As  her  body  struck  the  pro- 
jections, a  bloody  shower  spurted  from  it, 
which  fell  in  pait  upon  the  horses  that  drew 
Jehu's  chariot.  And  he  trode  her  underfoot. 
Like  Ihillia  (IjiT.,i.  48),  Jehu  had  his  chariot 
driven  over  the  prostrate  corpse,  so  that  the 
hoofs  of  his  horses,  and  perhaps  his  own 
person,  were  sprinkled  with  the  royal  blood. 
Compare  the  passage  of  Livy,  "  Ameus,  agi- 
tantibus  furiis,  Tullia  per  patris  corpus  car- 
pen  turn  egisse  fertur,  partismque  sangninig 
ao  csedis  paternsB  cruento  vebiculo,  contami- 
nata  ipsa  reapersaque,  tntisee  ad  penates 
suoB  viiique  sui."  It  is  not  often  that  royal 
corpses,  unless  in  the  heat  of  battle,  have 
received  such  treatment. 

Ver.  34.— And  when  he  was  come  in — 
t.e.  when  Jehu  had  established  himself  in 
the  royal  palace — ho  did  eat  and  drink,  and 
said.  His  first  care  was  to  refresli  himself 
— to  order  a  banquet  to  be  served,  and  to 
satisfy  his  appetite  with  food  and  drink. 
Not  till  afterwards  did  be  bethink  himself 
of  the  bloody  corpse  of  his  late  queen  and 
mistress,  lying  on  the  cold  ground  uncared 
for  and  un  tended,  exposed  to  scorn  and 
Ignominy.  When  the  thought  occurred  to 
him,  it  brought  about  a  certain  amount  of 
relenting.  Go,  see  now  this  cursed  woman. 
He  calls  Jezebel  "a  cursed  woman,"  not 
inappropriately.  She  had  brought  a  curse 
on  her  husband,  on  her  sons,  and  on  her 
grandsons;  she  had  been  the  evil  genius  of 
two  countries,  Israel  and  Judah;  she  had 
been  the  prime  mover  in  a  bloody  pereeon- 
tiou  of  the  worshippers  of  Jehovah ;  and  was 
the  true  original  source  of  the  present  revo- 
lution, whicli  was  to  result  in  the  deaths  of 
so  many  others.  And  bnry  her :  for  she  is 
a  king's  daughter.  As  queen-mother,  Jehu, 
it  seems,  would  not  have  regarded  Jezebel 
as  entitled  to  burial ;  but  as  daughter  of 
Eth-Baal,  King  of  the  Zidonians  (1  Kings 
zvi.  31),  and  so  a  princess  bom,  he  allowed 
her  claim.  Perhaps  he  feared  lest  further 
insult  to  the  corpse  might  provoke  the  re- 
sentment of  the  Phoenician  monarch,  and 
drawdown  upon  him  that  prince's  hostility. 


Ver.  35.— And  they  went  to  bury  her: 
bat  they  fonnd  no  more  of  her  than  the  skull, 
and  the  feet,  and  the  palms  of  her  hands, 
"  The  harder  parts  of  the  human  frame  " 
(Stanley);  perhaps  also  the  less  palatable, 
since  cannibals  say  that  the  palm  of  the 
human  hand  is  excessively  bitter.  Dogs  in 
Oriental  countries  are  ever  prowling  about, 
especially  in  the  vicinity  of  towns,  on  the 
look-out  for  food,  and  wiU  eat  flesh  or  offal 
of  any  kind.  They  have  been  called  "  the 
scavengers  of  the  East,"  and  the  phrase 
well  describes  them.  Dean  Stanley  saw 
"the  wild  dogs  of  Jezreel  prowling  about 
the  mounds  where  the  offal  is  cast  outside 
the  gates  of  the  town  by  the  inhabitants." 

Ver.  36. — Wherefore  they  oame  again,  and 
told  him.  The  men  whom  he  had  sent  to 
bury  Jezebel  returned,  and  told  the  king 
what  they  had  found.  The  narrative  woke 
another  chord  of  memory  which  had  hitherto 
slept.  And  he  said,  This  is  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  which  he  spake  by  his  servant  Elijah 
the  Tishbite.  The  prophecy  referred  to  is 
doubtless  that  recorded  in  1  Kings  xxi.  23. 
It  is,  however,  here  expanded,  either  because 
Jehu's  recollection  was  not  exact,  or  because 
the  record  in  1  Kings  is  abbreviated.  The 
great  point  of  the  prophecy  is  common  to 
both  records,  viz.  that  the  dogs  should  eat 
Jezebel  at  Jezreel,  on  the  scene  of  her 
iniquities.  Saying,  In  the  portion  of  Jezreel 
shall  dogs  eat  the  flesh  of  Jezetei.  It  is 
not  quite  clear  what  is  meant  by  the 
"  portion  "  (p^n)  of  Jezreel.  Probably  there 
is  no  allusion  to  the  "portion"  (njjSn)  of 
Naboth  (vers.  25,  26).  Bather  the  same  is 
meant  as  by  ^n  in  1  Kings  xxi.  23,  viz.  the 
cultivated  space  or  "  portion  "  of  land  outside 
the  wall  of  the  town  (see  the  comment  on 
that  passage). 

Ver.  37. — ^And  the  carcase  of  Jezebel  shall 
be  as  dung  upon  the  face  of  the  field  (comp. 
Ps.  Ixxxiil  10 ;  Zeph.  i.  17 ;  Jer.  ix.  22 ; 
xvi.  4,  etc.).  The  expression  was  proverbial. 
In  the  portion  of  Jezreel  (see  the  comment 
on  the  preceding  verse);  so  that  they  shall 
not  say.  This  is  Jezebel.  The  fragments  of 
the  body  were  so  scattered  that  there  could 
bo  no  collective  tomb,  no  place  whereat 
admirers  could  congregate  and  say,  "  Here 
lies  the  great  queen — here  lies  Jezebel." 
To  rest  in  no  tomb  was  viewed  as  a  shame 
and  a  disgrace. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — ^10. — The  prophet  and  the  prophet-diieiph — the  dutiee  of  direction  and  of 
obedience.  The  time  had  come  for  a  great  chanjje — a  "  great  revolution,"  to  use  the 
words  of  Ewald.  The  first  dynasty  of  Israel  which  had  shown  any  indications  of 
stability  was  to  be  swept  away,  and  another  still  more  stable  dynasty  w»s  to  be  estab- 


OH,  IX,  1—37.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGa  197 

lished.  That  the  will  of  God  might  he  seen  and  recognized  in  the  matter,  its  initiation 
was  entrusted  to  the  regular  expounders  of  the  Divine  will — the  prophets.  Elisha,  we 
may  be  sure,  received  express  directions  how  to  act ;  and  the  directions  included  a 
delegation  of  certain  most  important  duties  to  another.  Thus  two  persons  are  concerned 
in  the  great  initiative  scene  ;  and  the  conduct  of  each  is  worthy  of  attention,  and,  under 
given  circumstances,  of  imitation.    Consider — 

I.  Elisha  as  direotob.  1.  Elisha  has  m^ide  up  his  mind ;  there  is  no  hesitation 
about  him,  no  instability  of  purpose ;  he  knows  what  he  has  to  do,  and  is  wholly  bent 
on  doing  it.  2.  His  directions  are  clear,  deHnite,  unmistakable.  There  is  no  ambiguity 
in  any  of  them.  He  prescribes  a  fixed  and  clearly  defined  line  of  conduct,  which  his 
subordinate  is  to  carry  out.  He  wastes  no  time  on  the  consideration  of  accidents  or 
contingencies.  A  certain  work  is  to  be  done ;  and  his  subordinate  is  to  do  it  in  the 
simplest  and  most  direct  way. 

II.  The  prophet-disciple  ab  subordinate  agent.  1.  The  prophet-disciple 
accepts  the  subordinate  position  readily,  cheerfully,  without  reluctance.  He  is  content 
to  obliterate  himself,  and  to  play  the  part  of  a  tool  or  instrument.  2.  His  obedience  is 
exact,  perfect.  Whatever  he  has  been  ordered  to  do,  he  does ;  and  he  does  no  more. 
He  is  not  officious,  as  so  many  zealous  servants  are ;  he  does  not  seek  to  better  his 
instructions.  3.  His  errand  done,  he  disappears,  sinks  back  into  obscurity.  We  hear 
of  his  making  no  claim  either  on  Elisha  or  on  Jehu.  The  greatest  political  trans- 
action of  the  day  had  proceeded  from  his  initiative ;  but  he  asks  no  reward,  he  makes 
no  boast.    His  work  done,  he  vanishes,  and  we  hear  no  more  of  him. 

God's  work  has  still  to  be  carried  on  in  the  world  by  two  sets  of  persons — directors 
and  executants.  It  will  be  well  or  badly  done,  according  as  the  lines  liere  marked  out 
are  kept  to  or  departed  from.  That  wonderful  efSciency  which  none  can  fail  of 
admiring  in  the  working  of  so  many  institutions  within  the  Roman  communion  is 
traceable  in  a  great  measure  to  the  fact  that  both  directors  and  executants  act  in  the 
spirit  that  animated  Elisha  and  the  prophet-disciple. 

Vers,  11 — 24. — Political  revolutions  justifiable  under  certain  circumstances.  In  a 
general  way,  revolution,  resistance  to  constituted  authority,  rebellions,  risings  against 
the  civil  power,  seem  to  be  condemned,  or  at  any  rate  discountenanced,  by  the 
teaching  of  Scripture,  whether  in  the  Old  Testament  or  the  New.  They  arise,  for  the 
most  part,  from  human  ambitions,  from  lust  of  power,  from  greed,  from  unrestrained 
passions,  from  selfishness;  they  involve  in  their  course  untold  siiflerings  to  large 
numbers  ;.  they  issue  conimonlv  in  a  condition  of  social  and  political  life,  not  better,  but 
worse,  than  that  from  which  they  sprang.  "  Let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the  higher 
powers;"  "Fear  God:  honour  the  king;"  "Ye  must  needs  be  subject,  not  only  for 
wrath,  but  for  conscience'  sake,"  are  precepts  of  wide  application  and  of  great  force, 
deriving  additional  weight  from  the  fact  that,  when  they  were  uttered,  a  Nero  occupied 
the  throne.  Still,  their  force  may  be  overstrained.  Scripture  does  not  require,  under 
all  circumstances,  an  absolute  and  entire  submissinn  to  the  civil  rulers,  but  justifies 
resistance,  and  allows  of  the  resistance  being  push  d,  in  extreme  cases,  to  rebellion. 
Examples  are  :  1.  The  resistance  offered  by  David  first  to  Saul,  and  then  to  Ishbosheth. 
According  to  human  law,  Ishbosheth  was  the  legitimate  ruler,  against  whom  David 
rebelled  (2  Sam.  ii.  1—10).  2.  The  rebellion  of  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xii.  12—20). 
3.  The  present  instance — the  rebellion  of  Jehu.  4.  The  rebellion  of  the  Maccabee 
princes,  related  in  the  first  and  second  Books  of  the  Maccabees,  which  enlist  our 
sympathy  strongly  in  their  behalf,  and  are  set  before  her  members  by  the  Church  "  for 
example  of  life,  and  instruction  in  morals."  If  we  ask,  "  When  is  rebellion  justifiable  ?  " 
the  answer  would  seem  to  be — 

I.  In  the  last  besobt,  when  the  nation  must  othebwisb  bk  ibbbtbievablt 
iNJUBED.  In  Jehu's  case  "  a  family  was  on  the  throne  which  had  introduced  a  licentious 
worship,  had  fostered  it,  and  had  persecuted  the  older  and  purer  religion,  which,  if  it 
had  not  succeeded  in  taking  so  firm  a  hold  upon  th«  people  as  to  bind  them  to  purity 
and  virtue;  at  any  rate  had  not  been  itself  a  deeply  cormpting  influence.  The  mischief 
had  ipread  so  far  that  it  was  time  to  try  the  last  and  severest  measurei,  or  to  give  up 
the  contest  entirely.  The  indictment  was  made  out  against  the  mling  house  _  ot 
corrupting  th«  national  honour,  and  undermining  the  national  exiitenoe,  of  depriving 


198  tHE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oi.  nt.  i-4». 

the  nation  of  a  religion  whose  spirit  was  pure  and  elevating,  and  giving  it  one  whose 
spirit  was  corrupting  and  licentioiis  "  (Bahr).  In  the  case  of  the  Maccabees,  a  foreign 
power,  dominant  over  the  country  by  right  of  conquest,  had  formed  the  design  of 
completely  sweeping  away  the  Jewish  religion  and  substituting  for  it  the  Greek,  or 
rather  the  Syrian,  polytheism  and  idolatry.  The  crisis  was  even  more  terrible  than 
that  in  Jehu  s  time,  the  danger  more  pressing  and  greater.  In  both  these  cases  the 
nation  seems  to  have  waited  with  the  utmost  patience,  until  there  was  no  other  remedy. 
Either  a  convulsion  had  to  be  faced,  or  the  national  religion,  the  national  morality,  and 
the  national  self-respect,  would  have  been  swept  away.  The  nation  in  each  case  pre- 
ferred revolution  to  submission ;  and  the  sympathies  of  the  sacred  writers  evidently  go 
with  them  in  their  choice. 

II.  When  there  is  a  fair  prospect  of  sucoesb  if  a  stand  is  hade.  Nemo 
tenetur  ad  impossibilia.  If  the  force  on  the  side  of  authority  is  overwhelming,  if,  the 
national  spirit  opposed  to  it  is  weak  and  faint,  if  there  is  no  reasonable  hope  that 
resistance  may  be  effectual  and  save  the  nation  from  the  evils  suffered  and  apprehended, 
then,  whatever  their  reluctance,  though  it  be  "  pain  and  grief  to  them,"  patriots  are 
bound  to  restrain  themselves  and  to  remain  quiescent.  As  Plato  says,  they  must 
shelter  themselves  under  a  wall  while  the  storm  rages ;  they  must  be  content  to  keep 
themselves  pure,  as  the  seven  thousand,  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal,  did  in 
Ahab's  reign ;  they  must  wait  for  better  days.  If,  however,  there  be  a  fair  chance  of 
success,  if  it  be  reasonable  to  hope  that  the  yoke  which  is  doing  deadly  hurt  to  the 
nation  may  be  thrown  off,  then  no  considerations  of  their  own  convenience  or  ease,  no 
fear  of  blame,  no  shrinking  from  disturbance,  or  even  bloodshed,  should  deter  patriotio 
souls  from  initiating  the  struggle  by  which  alone  their  country  can  be  saved.  Desperate 
diseases  require  desperate  remedies.  If  Elisha  and  Jehu  had  waited  with  folded  hands 
for  Joram  and  Jezebel  to  work  out  their  wicked  will,  the  Baal-worship  would  have 
been  riveted  upon  the  northern,  perhaps  even  upon  the  southern,  kingdom.  If  the 
Maccabee  family  had  submitted  to  the  agents  of  Antiochus  Ephiphanes,  and  failed  to 
raise  the  standard  of  revolt,  Judaism  would  have  been  merged  in  heathenism,  and  have 
perished  from  the  earth.  It  may  be  added  that  if,  in  our  own  country,  no  resistance 
had  been  offered  to  James  11.,  but  his  commands  had  been  submitted  to  and  carried  out, 
then  Great  Britain  would  have  been  recovered  to  the  Boman  obedience,  and  the  witness 
to  a  purer  Christianity  than  that  of  Bome,  which  has  been  held  up  to  the  world  by  the 
English  Church  during  the  last  two  centuries,  would  have  been  extinguished  and 
crushed,  with  what  loss  to  the  nation,  to  Europe,  and  to  the  world  generally,  it  ia 
impossible  to  estimate. 

Vers.  25 — 37. — Setrilmtion  may  he  long  in  coming,  but  it  comti  at  last.  Even  • 
heathen  could  say,  "  Baro  autecedeatem  scelestum  deseruit  pede  pcena  claudo  "  (Horace, 
'  Od.,'  iii.  2,  lines  31,  32).  Yet  throughout  all  history  evil-disposed  men  have  persisted 
in  wicked  and  cruel  conduct,  just  as  if  it  was  not  only  possible,  but  probable,  that  retri- 
bution would  be  escaped.  The  lesson  thus  needs  continually  to  be  impressed  on  men, 
that,  sooner  or  later,  retribution  must  come — that  there  is  no  escape  from  iu  Betribu- 
tion  must  come — 

I.  Because  Qod  btileb  the  unitebse,  and  God  is  just.  Disbelief  in  retribu* 
tion  is  essentially  atheistic.  It  implies  either  that  there  is  no  God,  or  that  God  is  without 
one  or  more  of  those  attributes  which  make  him  God.  A  just  God  must  have  the  will  to 
punish ;  an  omnipotent  God  must  have  the  power  to  punish.  If  a  so-called  Ck>d  did 
not  punish  sin,  he  must  be  either  not  just,  or  not  omnipotent,  or  not  either ;  but  then 
he  would  not  be  God.  As  Bahr  says,  "  A  God  without  vengeance,  i.e.  who  cannot  and 
will  not  punish,  is  no  God,  but  a  divinity  fashioned  from  one's  thoughts." 

IL  Because  God  has  deolabed  that  it  shall  oome,  and  God  is  true.  God 
has  said  to  each  man,  through  his  conscience,  that  he  will  punish  sin.  Remorse  and 
regret,  the  dissatisfaction  of  a  guilty  conscience,  are  such  punishment  begun.  In  his 
Word  QoA  has  expressly  declared  that  he  "  will  reward  every  man  according  to  hi» 
works"  (Ps.  Ixii.  12;  Prov.  iiiv.  12;  Matt.  xvL  7  ;  Bom.  ii.  6;  2  Tim.  iv.  U);  that 
he  "  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty "  (Exod.  zxxiv.  7) ;  that  "  indignation  «nd 
wrath,  tribulation  and  auguish,  shall  be  on  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evu  "  (Rom.  ii 
8, 9).    Nothing  is  more  plainly  taught  in  the  whole  of  Scripture,  from  the  beginning  t« 


ea.  tt.1— 3?.]         THE  SECONl)  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  199 


the  end,  than  requital,  retribution,  condign  punishment.  Ahab'i  case  is  singular,  not 
in  the  general  principle,  but  only  in  the  exact  correspondence  between  the  sin  and  its 
punishment.  Such  coircspondence  is  rare  and  abnormal ;  but  it  does  occur  from  time 
to  time,  and,  when  it  occurs,  there  is  something  about  it  that  is  most  impressive  and 
striking.  When  the  author  of  proscription,  Marius,  is  himself  proscribed ;  when  the 
dethroner  of  kings,  Napoleon  I.,  is  himself  dethroned ;  when  the  inventor  of  conspiracies, 
Titus  Oates,  falls  a  victim  to  an  invented  conspiracy ;  when  Bobespierre  and  Danton, 
who  have  ruled  by  the  guillotine,  perish  by  the  guillotine; — "poetic  justice,"  as  it  has 
been  called,  is  satisfied,  and  the  world  at  large  is  forced  to  recognize  and  acknowledge 
that  requital  has  taken  place  in  a  signal  way. 

III.  Because  any  neoattve  instance  that  can  be  produobd  will  only  show 
i  DELAY,  NOT  AN  ABRooATioN  OF  THE  SENTBNOE.  Infinite  time  is  at  the  disposal 
of  the  Almighty.  Men  are  impatient,  and,  if  retribution  does  not  overtake  the  sinner 
speedily,  are  apt  to  conclude  that  it  will  never  overtake  him.  But  with  the  Almighty 
"one day  is  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day."  The  important 
thing  to  be  borne  in  mind  is  the  end  ;  and  the  end  will  not  be  reached  till  "  the  judg- 
ment is  set,  and  the  books  are  opened"  (Dan.  vii.  10),  and  men  are  "judged  out  of 
those  things  which  are  written  in  the  books,  according  to  their  works"  (Rev.  xx.  12). 
Punishment  may  be  long  in  coming — the  ungodly  may  continue  during  their  whole 
lifetime  in  prosperity.  But  there  remains  a  fature.  Where  the  heathen  felt  and  said, 
"  Baro,"  the  Christian  will  say, "  Nwiguam  antecedeutem  scelestum  deseruit  pede  poena 
claudo." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

■Vers.  1 — 37. — The  deaths  of  Jehoram  and  Jezebel;  or,  the  Divine  law  of  retribution. 
King  Jehoram  was  lying  sick  at  Jezreel  of  the  wounds  he  had  received  in  battle  lirom 
the  Syrians.  Ahaziah  King  of  Judah  had  come  down  to  visit  him,  and,  as  they 
conversed  together,  the  watchman  upon  the  city  wall  brought  tidings  of  an  armed 
company  approaching.  Jehu,  at  the  head  of  them,  was  by-and-by  recognized  by  his 
furious  driving.  He  had  already  been  proclaimed  king  in  Bamoth-G-ilead,  but  Jehoram 
knew  nothing  of  this.  He  suspected  some  ill  news,  however,  and  he  and  Ahaziah  drove 
out  with  their  two  chariots  to  meet  Jehu.  And  where  was  it  that  they  met  t  Jehu 
had  good  reason  to  know  the  place.  So  had  Jehoram.  About  twenty  years  before, 
another  memorable  meeting  had  taken  place  there.  Jehoram's  father,  Ahab,  had 
coveted  Naboth's  vineyard.  Jehoram's  mother,  Jezebel,  had  brought  about  Naboth's 
death  by  a  process  of  false  swearing  against  him.  Naboth  was  dead,  and  Ahab, 
accompanied  by  his  two  capttuns,  Jehu  and  Bidkar,  rode  out  to  take  possession  of  that 
vineyard  whose  owner  the  queen  had  murdered.  But  his  sin  had  found  him  out. 
Elijah,  the  messenger  of  God,  met  him  there.  And  there,  in  that  vineyard  which  ha 
had  procured  through  covetousness,  envy,  treachery,  and  bloodshed,  Ahab  was  compelled 
to  listen  to  his  doom.  Terrible  words  they  were  indeed  for  a  king  to  hear.  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord,  In  the  place  where  dogs  licked  the  blood  of  Naboth  shall  dogs  lick  thy 
blood,  even  thine."  And  Jezebel,  the  instigator  of  the  crime,  was  not  forgotten.  "  The 
dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  by  the  wall  of  Jezreel."  And  now,  in  that  very  place,  stained 
with  the  blood  of  Naboth,  Jehu  meets  Jehoram,  the  son  of  Ahab  the  murderer  and  the 
king.  The  blood  of  Naboth  cries  to  Heaven  for  vengeance.  Jehoram  was  little  better 
than  his  father.  He  too  "cleaved  unto  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  who 
made  Israel  to  sin."  He  forsook  the  true  God  and  served  other  gods.  No  doubt  his 
conscience  smote  him  and  his  spirit  failed  him,  as  he  asked  of  Jehu,  "Is  it  peace?" 
But  there  was  not  much  time  left  him  to  prepare  to  die.  Jehu's  words  were  few,  and 
his  actions  quick  as  thought.  With  his  full  strength  he  drew  his  bow  and  sent  his 
arrow  straight  to  Jehoram's  heart.  It  was  then  that  the  words  of  Elijah,  spoken 
twenty  years  before  in  that  very  place,  flashed  back  upon  his  mind,  and  he  caused  the 
lifeless  body  of  Jehoram  to  be  cast  into  the  field  of  Naboth  the  Jezreelite.  But  Jehu's 
work  of  vengeance  is  not  yet  done,  Jezebel's  long  career  of  wickedness  had  hardened 
her  heart  and  blinded  her  to  her  danger.  As  Jehu  rode  into  the  city,  she  sat  at  her 
window  in  her  best  attire,  as  if  to  defy  nim  and  greeted  him  with  the  sneering  question, 


200  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         [on.  nc.  1—37 

"Had  Zimri  peace,  who  slew  his  master?"  But  Jthu  is  not  a  man  to  be  trifled  with. 
He  finds  willing  helpers  in  her  own  servants.  At  his  command  they  threw  her  down 
into  the  street,  and  she — the  adulteress  and  the  murderess,  the  woman  whoie  name 
has  become  proverbial  as  a  symbol  of  everything  that  is  bad — is  trampled  under  the 
horses'  feet,  and  once  more  the  doom  of  Heaven  is  fulfilled :  "  In  the  portion  of  Jezreel 
shall  dogs  eat  the  flesh  of  Jezebel."     We  learn  from  this  narrative  some  important 


I.  Sin,  not  repented  of,  must  be  punished.  This  is  a  law  of  nature.  It  is  •  fact 
of  history.  It  is  the  very  essence  of  morality.  It  is  the  yery  essence  of  justice.  It  is 
at  the  t:isis  of  social  order  in  a  nation.  It  is  at  the  basis  of  the  moral  government  of 
the  universe.  Those  who  transgress  the  law  of  nations,  those  who  transgress  the  laws 
of  honesty  or  of  morality,  those  who  take  away  the  life,  or  the  property,  or  the  character 
of  others,  must  be  made  to  suffer  for  it.  This  is  necessary,  that  justice  may  be 
vindicated.  It  is  necessary,  in  order  that  property  and  person  and  character  may  be 
safe.  It  is  necessary,  in  order  that  other  evil-doers  may  be  deterred  from  crime.  Even 
under  our  own  national  law,  we  feel  that  there  is  something  wrong  when  an  evil-doer 
escapes.  We  feel  that  it  has  a  bad  effect  upon  the  community  when  crime  goes 
unpunished.  Now,  what  is  sin  in  the  Bible  sense  ?  Sin  is  t/ie  trainsgression  of  the  Law. 
It  is  a  transgression  of  a  far  higher  law  than  the  law  of  nations,  of  that  law  on  which 
the  well-being  of  all  nations  depi  nds — the  eternal  Law  of  God.  The  Law  of  God  is  at 
the  foundation  of  all  true  well-being  and  happiness  in  every  nation  and  in  every  age. 
"This  do.  and  thnn  shalt  live."  "The  commandment  is  holy ,'and  just, and  goud."  It 
is,  therefore,  in  the  interests  of  every  nation,  it  is  in  the  interests,  not  of  one  generation 
of  men  merely,  but  of  those  who  .shall  come  after  them,  that  those  who  transgress  the 
Divine  Law  should  suffer  for  it.  Every  violation  of  a  Divine  law  must  le  followed  hy 
its  corresponding  punishment.  "Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap." 
Look  at  your  own  lives  in  the  light  of  this  great  truth.  Are  there  any  sins  ia  your 
lives  unrepented  of  V  Then  be  assured  that  the  punishment,  if  it  has  not  yet  come, 
awaits  you.  Sins  against  God,  against  God's  Law,  against  God's  sabbath ;  sins  against 
our  fellow-man — sins  of  unfair  dealing,  sins  of  evil-speaking,  or  other  and  grosser  sins; 
every  one  of  these,  if  not  repented  of,  is  sure  to  bring  its  corresponding  punishment. 
"  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out." 

II.  Punishment  mat  be  delated,  but  it  is  none  the  less  sure.  There  is  an  old 
Irish  pioverb,  "  The  vengeance  of  God  is  slow,  but  sure."  We  have  many  illustrations 
of  that  in  history.  It  was  long  after  Jezebel's  great  crime  before  her  punishment  over- 
took her.  When  the  Israelites  were  journeying  through  the  wilderness,  the  Amalekites 
treated  them  with  great  treachery  and  cruelty,  falling  upon  them_in  the  rear,  and  when 
they  were  faint  and  weary.  It  was  not  until  four  hundred  years  afterwards  that  the 
sentence  against  Amalek  was  executed ;  but  it  was  executed  at  last.  We  may  kill  our 
enemies,  we  may  seek  to  destroy  all  traces  of  our  crime,  but  we  can  never  destroy  the 
memory  and  the  guilt  of  it  hy  any  acts  of  ours.  Charles  IX.  of  France  was  led,  by  the 
importunity  of  another  Jezebel,  Mary  de  Medicis,  to  kiU  Admiral  Coligny,  who  was 
the  great  leader  of  the  French  Protestants.  For  a  long  time  he  refused,  but  at  last  he 
consented  in  the  memorable  words,  "Assassinate  Admiral  Coligny,  but  leave  not  a 
Huguenot  alive  in  France  to  reproach  me."  That  was  the  origin  of  the  Massacre  of 
St.  Bartholomew.  Hav  ing  killed  Coligny,  he  did  not  want  any  of  his  friends  to  remain 
to  bear  witness  against  him.  How  anxious  men  are  to  destroy  all  traces  of  their  crime! 
And  yet  how  vain  all  such  efforts  are!  There  is  One  whose  eye  sees  every  act  of 
human  life.  We  may  escape  the  judgment  of  men,  but  we  cannot  escape  the  judgment 
of  God.  If  not  here,  then  certainly  hereafter,  every  sin,  not  repented  of,  will  receive 
its  due  reward.  "  For  we  must  all  appear  before  the  jndgment-seat  of  Christ;  that 
every  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  his  body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done, 
whether  it  be  good  or  bad." 

III.  There  is  often  a  resemblance  between  the  place  and  manner  of  th«  snr 
AND  the  place  AND  MANNER  OP  THE  PUNISHMENT.  1.  It  was  ot  Naboth's  vineyard 
that  the  great  sin  of  Ahab's  house  had  been  committed.  There,  too,  at  Naboth's  vine- 
yard, Jehoram,  Ahab's  son,  was  slain.  It  was  outside  the  walls  of  Jezreel  that  the 
dogs  licked  the  blood  of  Naboth.  There,  too,  the  dogs  licked  the  blood  and  ate  the 
Qesh  of  Jezebel  his  murderess.    It  would  seem  as  if  tMa  was  part  of  the  Divine  Likw  of 


OH.  IX.  1—87.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOa  201 

retribution.  One  reason  for  it  would  appear  to  be  that  it  fixes  wnmiatakably  the  con- 
nection letween  the  sin  and  its  punishment,  Robespierre,  the  famous  French  revolu- 
tionist, literally  choked  the  river  Seine  with  the  heads  of  tliose  whom  he  sent  to  the 
guillotine.  But  the  day  came  when  the  death-tumbrel  coataiuing  himself  was  trundled 
along  the  streets  of  Paris  to  the  selfsame  fatal  axe,  amid  the  shouts  and  execrations  of 
the  multitude.  Cardinal  Beaton  condemned  to  death  George  Wishart,  one  of  the  first 
of  the  Scottish  Reformers,  and  watched  him  burning  at  the  stake,  while  he  himself 
reclined  on  rich  cushions  on  the  walls  of  his  castle  at  St.  Andrew's.  Three  months 
afterwards  the  cardinal  himself  was  put  to  death,  and  his  de£ul  body  was  hung  by  a 
sheet  from  the  very  battlements  whence  he  had  looked  at  the  execution  of  Wishart. 
There  it  something  more  than  accident  in  such  things.  There  is  the  vivid  impression 
intended  to  be  made  on  people's  minds,  that  "  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he 
also  reap."  2.  The  sa/me  is  true  of  the  resemblance  between  the  manner  of  the  sin  and 
the  manner  of  the  punishment.  Jezebel's  murder  of  Kaboth  was  treacherous  and 
ignominious.  She  herself  was  put  to  death  in  a  treacherous  and  igoominious  way. 
"With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again."  Jacob  cruelly 
deceived  his  aged  father  Isaac  when  he  was  blind  and  feeble.  What  a  pointed  retributioa 
it  was  when  he  was  afterwards  cruelly  deceived  by  his  own  sons  in  their  statements 
about  Joseph!  Haman  was  hanged  on  the  gallows  which  he  had  made  for  Mordecai. 
One  of  the  most  terrible  instances  of  this  truth,  that  as  we  have  treated  others  we  shall 
be  treated  ourselves,  is  the  case  of  Charles  IX.  of  France,  referred  to  above.'  He  con- 
sented to  the  Massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew.  He  caused  the  streets  of  Paris  to  run 
with  the  blood  of  the  Huguenots.  He  died  at  the  age  of  twenty-four :  and  what  a 
death  1  French  historians  of  the  highest  order  say  that  he  was  in  such  agony  of 
remorse  that  he  literally  sweated  blood.  The  blood  that  oozed  from  his  own  body  caused 
him  to  think  of  those  whose  blood  he  had  so  freely  shed,  and  he  cried  out  in  his  last 
hours  about  the  massacre  of  the  Huguenots.  Horrible !  Yes ;  but  there  is  a  deep  and 
solemn  truth  underlying  all  this.  It  is  a  truth  that  should  have  practical  result  upon 
every  life.  "  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again."  If  your 
sin  is  public,  most  likely  your  punishment  will  be  public.  Men  who  commit  commercial 
frauds — that  is,  sins  against  public  confidence  and  trust — they  ought  to  suffer,  and  they 
do  suffer,  public  exposure.  If  yom  sin  is  secret,  your  punishment  will  also  most  likely 
be  secret.  They  who  sin  against  the  laws  of  health  suffer  in  an  impaired  constitution. 
They  who  sin  by  speaking  evil  about  others  most  likely  will  hnve  many  to  speak  evil 
about  themselves.  Standing  there  by  Naboth's  vineyard,  and  thinking  of  the  envy, 
covetousness,  and  murder,  of  which  it  reminds  us,  and  their  teriible  consequences,  let 
us  hear  the  blood  of  Naboth  and  the  blood  of  Naboth's  house  crying  to  us  from  the 
ground, "  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again."  Such,  then, 
is  the  Divine  law  of  retribution.  But  God,  who  is  just,  is  also  merciful.  He  willeth 
not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  should  turn  from  his  wickedness,  and 
live.  We  have  looked  at  the  way  of  his  justice.  Let  us  look  also  at  the  way  of  his 
mercy.  It  is  the  way  of  the  cross.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  be  gave  his  only 
begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everla.sting 
life."  If  you  reject  QocFs  mercy,  there  is  only  the  other  alternative — Ood's  retributive 
justice. — C.  H.  I. 

Ver.  1 — ch.  x.  36. — J%e  history  of  Jehu.  "  Then  Jehu  came  forth  to  the  servants 
of  his  lord,"  etc.  Jehu  was  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat  and  the  grandson  of  Nimshi. 
He  was  one  of  the  monsters  of  history.  The  leading  facts  of  his  revolting  life  will  be 
found  in  this  and  the  following  chapter.     His  history  furnishes — 

I.   A    EEVOLTINO    EXHIBITION    OF     HUMAN     DEPEAVITT.        He    WaS     HlthleSSly    and 

craftily  cruel.  He  shot  Jehoram  dead  in  his  chariot.  "And  Jehu  drew  a  bow  with 
his  full  strength,  and  smote  Jehoram  between  his  arms."  He  commanded  Jezebel, 
who  was  looking  out  of  a  window  as  he  drove  up,  to  be  thrown  down,  and  in  her 
fall  she  was  fatally  injured,  and  her  body  was  trodden  down  by  the  feet  of  horses, 
and  afterwards  consumed  by  dogs  (ver.  36).  He  then  proceeded  to  exterminate  the 
famUy  of  Ahab.  He  addressed  letters  to  those  who  had  the  care  of  his  sons  (no 
less  than  seventy  in  number),  and  proposed  to  them  to  select  the  fittest  of  them,  and 
place  him  on  the  throne  of  his  father.     This  they  declined  to  do  (through  fear  of 


202  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  ix.  I— SI. 

Jehu),  bat  promised  to  do  anything  else  that  might  he  required.  Accordingly  Jehu 
directed  them  to  bring  the  heads  of  Ahab's  sons  the  next  day  to  Jezreel,  and  they  were 
•ent  in  two  baskets.  He  directed  them  to  be  emptied  out  in  two  heaps  at  the  gate  of 
the  city,  and  to  remain  there  over  night.  The  next  morning  he  ordered  a  general 
slaughter  of  all  Ahab's  family  and  adherents  in  the  town  of  Jezreel.  He  then  set  out 
for  Samaria,  and,  meeting  on  his  way  a  party  of  forty-two  persons,  all  of  the  family  of 
Ahaziah,  he  seized  and  slew  them  (ch.  z.  1 — 13).  Pursuing  his  malignant  cruelty,  on 
his  arrival  at  Samaria,  he  cuts  off  every  branch  of  the  house  of  Ahab  that  he  can  find 
(ch.  X.  17).  To  effect  this,  with  an. infernal  craftiness,  he  ordered  all  the  worshippers 
of  Baal  throughout  the  land  to  assemble,  as  if  he  desired  to  join  them  in  united  worship. 
All  having  assembled,  without  the  absence  of  a  single  man,  he  caused  every  one  to  be 
put  to  death  (ch.  x.  20 — 2ti).  Here  is  a  fiend  in  human  form ;  and,  alas  I  he  is  but  a 
specimen  of  those  monsters  in  human  history  who,  in  almost  every  age  and  land,  have 
revelled  in  the  blood  and  slaughter  of  their  fellow-men.  Such  characters  as  these 
declare  in  thunder  that  men  have  fallen  from  their  normal  state.  For  who  can  believe 
that  Infinite  Purity  and  Benevolence  would  create  characters  of  this  class  ?  All  sin  is 
an  apostasy. 

IL    A    DIBTBESStKO    MTSTEBT    IN    THB    GOVERNMENT    OF    GoD.        That    a  jllSt    God 

should  allow  such  men  to  become  kings,  and  should  even  place  them  on  a  throne  over 
the  destinies  of  millions,  is  a  mystery  at  which  we  stand  aghast.  That  the  merciful 
Father  should  permit  men  to  be  murderers  one  of  another  confounds  us  with  amaze- 
ment. Yet  this  has  been  going  on  everywhere  through  the  millenniums  of  human 
history.  Yeiily  "  clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  him."  "  His  way  is  in  the  sea, 
and  bis  path  in  the  great  waters,"  etc. 

in.  A  MIOHTT  ARGUMENT  FOB  FUTUEK  BETRiBUTroN.  Were  we  to  believe  that  this 
state  of  things  is  to  continue  for  ever,  that  there  is  no  retributive  period  before  us, 
when  there  will  be  a  balancing  of  human  accounts  and  a  settling  of  human  affairs, 
religion,  which  is  supreme  love  to  God,  would  be  out  of  the  question.  He  who  could 
prove  to  me  that  there  is  no  future  state  of  retribution  would  destroy  within  me  all 
the  possibilities  of  religion.  But  the  concurrent  belief  of  mankinil,  the  universal  cries 
of  conscience,  and  the  declarations  of  the  gospel  assure  us  that  there  is  a  reckoning 
day  to  come.  "We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ."  "I  saw, 
and  behold  a  great  white  throne,"  etc. 

IV.   A  PBOOF  OF  THE  8DPBBMB  NEED  OF  A  HOBAL  EEOBNERATOB.     What  Can  alter  the 

character  of  luch  men  as  this  Jehu,  and  put  an  end  to  all  the  cruelties,  tyrannies, 
frauds,  and  violence,  that  turn  the  world  into  a  Pandemonium?  Philosophy,  literature, 
civilization,  legislative  enactments,  ceremonial  religions  ?  No ;  nothing  short  of  a  power 
which  can  change  the  moral  heart.  "  Marvel  not  that  I  say  unto  you.  Ye  must  be  bom 
again."  The  gospel  is  this  regenerating  power.  Thank  God,  One  has  come  into  this 
world  who  will  "create  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteous- 
ness."—D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — U.—Jehu  made  king.  The  word  of  the  Lord  to  Elijah,  that  Jehu  should 
be  anointed  king  (1  Kings  xix.  16),  was  now  to  be  fulfilled.  The  delay  in  the  fulfil- 
ment is  perhaps  to  be  attributed  to  Ahab's  repentance  (1  Kings  xxi.  29).  God  bore 
long  with  this  wicked  house,  and  did  not  cut  it  off  till  the  cup  of  its  iniquity  was  full. 
The  execution  of  God's  threatenings  may  be  long  postponed,  but,  like  his  promises, 
bis  threatenings  never  fail  in  the  end  to  be  fulfilled  (2  Pet.  iii.  9). 

I.  The  messekoeb  despatohed.  1.  He  was  sent  by  Elisha.  On  Elisha  had  fallen 
the  mantle  of  Elijah,  and  to  him  belonged  the  task  of  executing  Elijah's  unfulfilled 
commissions.  We  must  distinguish  throughout  this  history  between  the  motives 
which  actuated  Jehu  in  his  conspiracy  against  Ahab,  and  the  providential  purpose 
which,  as  God's  intitrument,  he  was  raised  up  to  fulfil.  That  is  to  be  read  from  the 
standpoint  of  the  prophet.  Israel  was  a  people  called  into  existence  for  the  purpose  of 
being  a  witness  for  the  true  God  amidst  surrounding  heathenism.  It  owed  its  existence 
and  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan  to  Jehovah,  From  him  it  had  received  its  polity ; 
to  him  it  was  bound  is  solemn  covenant ;  the  fundamental  laws  of  its  constitution 
required  undivided  allegiance  to  him.  The  penalties  which  woiild  follow  from  dis- 
obedienee  wt  e  but  a  counterpart  of  the  blessings  which  would  flow  from  obedience. 


•H.  IX.1— 37.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  203 


The  first  great  lin  of  the  nation  was  In  the  setting  up  of  tlie  calves  under  Jeroboam. 
For  adherence  to  this  unlawful  form  of  worship  two  dynasties  had  already  perished 
(rer.  9).  But  with  the  accession  of  the  house  of  Omri  a  new  development  in  evil  took 
place  (1  Kings  xvL  31,  32).  The  worship  of  the  Phcenician  Baal  was  introduced ; 
Qod'i  prophets  were  relentlessly  persecuted,  and,  under  the  influence  of  Jezebel,  the 
moving  spirit  of  three  reigns,  corruption  had  spread  far  and  near  throughout  the  realm, 
and  had  penetrated  even  to  Judah.  Jehoram  at  first  showed  a  better  spirit  (ch.  iii.  2), 
but  he  must  afterwards  have  yielded  to  the  superior  influence  of  his  mother,  for  Baal- 
worship  was  restored,  and  had  the  prestige  of  court  example  (ver.  22;  ch.  z.  21). 
Under  these  circumstances,  it  was  folly  to  hesitate,  if  Israel  was  to  be  saved.  "  Here 
the  question  of  the  justifiableness  of  rebellion  against  a  legitimate  dynasty,  or  of 
revolution  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  cannot  arise.  The  coutse  of  the  house  of 
Ahab  was  a  rebellion  against  all  law,  human  and  Divine,  in  Israel "  (Bahr).  Even  in 
ordinary  earthly  states,  the  right  of  revolution  when  religion,  liberty,  morality,  and 
national  honour  can  be  saved  by  no  other  means,  is  universally  conceded.  But 
revolution  here  was  not  left  to  dubious  human  wisdom.  The  initiative  was  taken  by 
Jehovah  himself,  acting  through  his  prophet,  and  express  Divine  sanction  was  given  to 
the  overthrow  of  Ahab's  house.  2.  His  responsible  commission.  The  person  chosen 
by  Elisha  to  convey  God's  call  to  Jehu,  and  anoint  him  king,  was  one  of  the  sons  of 
the  prophets.  The  anointing  was  to  be  in  secret;  hence  the  choice  of  a  deputy.^  No 
value  attaches  to  the  tradition  that  the  messenger  was  the  future  Prophet  Jonah.  Of 
his  personality  we  know  nothing  more  than  is  here  told.  He  was  an  obscure  individual, 
yet  he  set  in  motion  a  train  of  events  of  the  most  tragic  significance.  A  child's  hand 
may  suffice  to  explode  a  mine.  This  messenger  Elisha  ordered  to  take  a  flask  of  the  holy 
oil,  and  go  to  Bamoth-Gilead,  where  Jehu  was.  When  he  found  the  son  of  Nimshi,  he . 
was  to  retire  with  him  into  the  innermost  apartment,  and  anoint  him  King  of  Israel  in 
the  name  of  Jehovah,  then  he  was  to  "  open  the  door,  and  flee,  and  tarry  not."  3.  The 
tpirit  in  which  he  was  to  execute  it.  It  was  a  clear,  unmistakable,  but  terribly  serious 
and  important  message  this  prophetic  disciple  was  entrusted  with ;  and  it  is  instructive 
to  notice  the  manner  in  which  he  was  durected  to  perform  his  task.  "  Gird  up  thy 
loina,"  etc.,  said  Elisha,  He  was  to  prepare  at  once  for  action ;  he  was  to  make  no 
delay  on  his  errand ;  he  was  faithfully  to  execute  the  commands  given  to  him ;  when 
his  work  was  done,  he  was  directly  to  leave  the  spot.  In  God's  service  there  is  to  be 
no  lingering,  or  looking,  back,  or  turning  from  side  to  side,  or  dallying  on  the  field  of 
duty.  The  powers  of  body  and  soul  are  to  be  braced  up  for  the  doing  of  the  "  one 
thiog"  given  us  to  do.  "Girding  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,"  says  an  apostle  (1  Fet. 
L  13).  Promptitude,  speed,  fidelity,  stopping  where  the  command  of  God  stops, — these 
•re  invaluable  qualities  for  doing  God's  work. 

IL  Jehu  asoihted.  1.  The  messenger's  arrival.  Jehoram  had  returned  to  Jezreel 
to  be  healed  of  wounds  received  from  the  Syrians,  and  Jehu  was  at  this  time  in  com- 
mand of  the  army  at  Bamoth-Gilead.  The  city  itself  had  previously  fallen  into  the 
hands  of  the  Israelites.  When  the  messenger  arrived,  he  found  the  captains  of  the  host 
sitting  together  in  some  house  or  court,  and  ^e  at  once  addressed  Jehu  with  the  words, 
"I  have  an  errand  to  thee,  0  captain."  Jehu  put  the  question,  "Unto  which  of  all 
uiT"  and  the  answer  was,  "To  thee,  0  captain."  The  call  of  God  may  come  to  us  at 
unexpected  times  and  in  surprising  ways.  It  may  come  through  others,  or  its  voice 
may  be  heard  in  providence.  There  are  general  calls  which  God  gives  "  to  us  all," 
and  there  are  special  calls  to  the  individual.  In  whatever  way  the  call  of  God  is  made 
known  to  us,  we  do  well  to  give  attentive  heed  to  it.  2.  The  act  of  anointing.  Jehu's 
anointing  was  to  take  place  secretly.  The  messenger  was  to  take  him  into  an  "  inner 
chamber,"  and  there  make  known  his  errand.  We  are  reminded  that  it  is  generaUy  in 
silence  and  secrecy  that  God  gives  men  their  summons  to  their  peculiar  life-work. 
No  time  was  wasted.  The  young  man,  trembling,  excited,  no  doubt,  at  the  thought 
of  the  perilous  deed  he  was  performing,  and  at  the  awful  nature  of  the  message  he  had 
to  deliver,  had  no  sooner  got  Jehu  in  private  than  he  poured  the  oil  from  his  fiask 
upon  his  head,  and  said,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  I  have  anointed  thee 
king  over  the  people  of  the  Lord,  even  over  Israel."  There  is  involved  in  this  brief 
announcement  the  truths:  (1)  That  royal  authority  is  from  God.  He  sets  up  kings 
and  put*  down  kings  (Dan.  ii.  21).     Tijosti  only  who  rule  by  his  sanction  and  with 


204  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KlivGS,        [oh.  nc.  1—37. 

his  fayour  are  legitimate  ruleri.  (2)  Itrael  was  a  people  of  tlie  Lord.  Only  God, 
therefore,  had  the  right  to  appoint  its  rulers,  and  to  determine  the  limits  within  which 
royal  power  should  be  exercised.  It  was  by  their  setting  at  nought  of  all  the  limits 
of  a  theocratic  constitution  that  Ahab  and  his  house  had  forfeited  the  throne.  (3)  Jehu 
was  made  king  by  the  direct  act  of  God.  God  had  taken  the  kingdom  from  Ahab's  house 
and  given  it  to  him.  It  followed  however,  that  if  he,  in  turn,  departed  from  God's 
commandments,  he  would  incur  the  same  fate.  3.  The  terrible  charge.  The  prophet 
next  declared  to  Jehu  the  terrible  duty  imposed  upon  him  as  the  executor  of  God's 
judgments.  It  was  certainly  work  from  which  any  man  might  shrink,  though  to 
Jehu  it  does  not  seem  to  have  been  repugnant,  as  paving  his  own  way  to  the  throne. 
We  notice:  (1)  The  ground  of  the  judgment:  "That  I  may  avenge  the  blood  of  my 
servants  the  prophets,"  etc.  "  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  his 
saints"  (Ps.  cxvi.  Ij).  Whoso  touches  them,  touches  him  (Acts  ix.  4).  He  will  not 
allow  the  least  injury  done  to  them  to  pass  unavenged  (Matt,  xviii.  6).  (2)  The  range 
of  the  judgment:  "The  whole  house  of  Ahab" — king,  queen-mother,  the  royal 
household,  every  one,  great  and  small,  having  in  him  the  accursed  blood.  It  was  a  root- 
and-branch  extermination  that  was  decreed.  (3)  The  terribleness  of  the  judgment. 
Dreadful  as  this  execution  was,  it  was  in  accordance  with  the  ideas  of  the  time.  In 
some  sense  it  was  a  necessary  concomitant  of  such  a  revolution  as  Jehu  was  about  to 
bring  about.  From  the  Divine  side  it  was  justified  as  an  act  of  vengeance  against  a 
wicked  house.  Ahab's  house  did  not  fall  without  warning,  for  it  had  alreaily  tlie  doom 
of  Jeroboam's  and  Baasha's  dynasties  to  warn  it  from  evil  courses.  Special  signs  of 
the  Divine  wrath  were  to  attend  tlie  end  of  Jezebel,  the  prime  instigator  of  Ahab's 
wickedness.  It  was  foretold  that  the  dogs  would  eat  Jezebel  in  the  portion  of  Jezrecl, 
and  there  would  be  none  to  bury  her.  How  fearful  a  thing  it  is,  as  shown  by  these 
examples,  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  living  God  (Heb.  x.  31)  1  Great  persecutors  have 
often  met  a  terrible  end. 

lU.  Jehu  proclaimed.  1.  Jeliu  and  his  captains.  The  whole  circumstances  of 
the  prophet's  visit  had  been  so  strange,  his  appearance  had  been  so  wild,  and  his  calling 
out  of  Jehu  for  a  private  interview  so  remarkable,  that  the  captains  who  had  witnessed 
the  scene  were  naturally  much  astonished.  Their  first  question,  accordingly,  when 
Jehu  reappeared  among  them,  himself  somewhat  agitated,  and  his  hair  streaming  with 
the  oil  which  had  been  poured  upon  it,  was  "  Is  it  peace  ?  Wherefore  came  this  mad 
fellow  to  thee  ?  "  Men  under  any  spiritual  excitement  seem  "  mad  fellows  "  to  profane 
minds  (Hos.  ix.  7 ;  Acts  xxvi.  24  ;  2  Cor.  v.  13) ;  but  there  may  have  been  something 
iu  this  messengert  dishevelled  appearance — the  result  of  his  haste — ^his  eager,  hasty 
manner,  and  the  strange  fire  that  burned  in  his  eye,  which  gave  them  the  impression 
of  one  not  altogether  accountable  for  his  actions.  His  hasty  flight  at  the  end  of  the 
interview  would  add  to  their  surprise.  Jehu,  in  reply,  sought  to  evade  explanation. 
His  words,  "  Ye  know  the  man,  and  his  communication,"  mean  either,  "  You  have 
taken  a  right  estimate  of  him  as  a  madman,  and  therefore  need  not  concern  yourself 
with  what  lie  said; "  or,  "You  are  yourselves  at  the  bottom  of  this  trick,  and  know 
very  well  wherefore  he  came."  The  latter  is,  perhaps,  the  better  sense,  and  may  indicate 
that  Jehu  wished  to  sound  his  companions  before  going  further.  Their  eager,  "  It  is 
false ;  tell  us  now,"  shows  how  greatly  their  curiosity  was  aroused.  Jehu  thereupon 
told  them  frankly  what  had  happened.  2.  Jehu  proclaimed  king.  The  response  on 
the  part  of  the  captains  was  immediate.  Jehu  must  already  have  been  a  general 
favourite,  or  the  proposal  to  make  him  king  would  not  have  met  with  such  easy 
acceptance.  As  with  one  accord,  tbe  captains  threw  off  their  upper  garments,  spread 
them  on  the  stairs,  made  Jehu  mount  above  them,  and,  blowing  the  trumpets,  forthwith 
proclaimed  him  king.  Would  that  when  God  comes  declaring  to  men  the  anointing 
and  exaltation  of  "  another  King,  even  Jesus,"  his  words  found  as  ready  a  response ! — J.  0. 

Vers.  14 — 37. — Jehu  as  avenger.  No  sooner  is  Jehu  proclaimed  king  than,  irtth 
characteristic  decision,  be  gives  orders  that  no  one  be  permitted  to  leave  the  city  to 
carry  news  to  Jehoram ;  then,  mounting  his  chariot,  he  drives  off  furiously  to  Jezreel. 
Whatever  Jehu  did,  h«  did  <*  with  all  his  might"  (Eccles.  ix.  10).  It  is  this  viguroua 
decision  of  character  which  made  him  so  suitable  an  instrument  in  executing  God's 
rengeance  on  the  house  of  Ahah, 


OH.iz.1-^?.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINO&  20S 

I.  Jehu's  affboaoh  to  Jezbebl  1.  The  umtchman'i  announeunmt  In  the  &r 
distance  the  watchman  on  the  tower  of  Jezreel  beholds  a  company  of  horsemen  rapidly 
approaching.  What  can  it  portend?  The  report  is  brought,  to  the  king,  who 
unsuspiciously  sends  out  a  messenger  on  horseback  to  inquire.  Towers  and  watchmen 
are  for  the  protection  of  a  city  and  its  inhabitants.  But  "  except  the  Lord  keep  the 
dty,  the  watchman  waketh  but  in  vain "  (Fs.  cxxvii.  1).  And  if  the  Lord  decrees 
the  destruction  of  a  city,  or  of  those  in  it,  towers  and  watchmen  will  do  little  to  protect 
them.  2.  Successive  messengers.  These  verses  are  chiefly  interesting  as  illustrating 
the  character  of  Jehu.  The  messenger  sent  by  Jehoram  soon  reaches  the  company, 
and  asks,  "  Is  it  peace  ?  "  The  idea  probably  is, "  What  tidings  from  the  field  of  battle  ?" 
Jehu  does  not  even  answer  him  civilly,  but,  with  a  rude  "  What  hast  thou  to  do  with 
peace  ?  "  he  orders  him  to  turn  behind  him.  A  man  this  who  will  brook  do  delay, 
submit  to  no  curb,  endure  no  check,  in  his  imperious  course.  He  sweeps  obstacles  from 
his  path,  and  bends  them  to  his  wilL  This  messenger  returns  not,  and  a  second,  sent 
out  from  the  king,  meets  a  like  reception,  and  is  also  compelled  to  ride  behind.  3.  Jehu 
recognized.  At  length  the  horsemen  are  near  enough  for  the  watchman  to  get  a  closer 
view,  and  he  has  no  difficulty  in  recognizing  the  furious  driving  of  the  leading  figure 
as  the  driving  of  Jehu,  It  is  familiar  to  all  that  character  imprints  itself  on  manner. 
Fhyuognomy,  walk,  gesture,  handwriting  even,  are  windows  through  which,  to  an 
observant  eye,  the  soul  looks  out.  Hypocrisy  may  create  a  mask  behind  which  the 
real  character  seeks  to  hide  itself.  But  hypocrisy,  too,  has  characteristic  ways  of 
betraying  its  presence,  and  the  mask  cannot  always  be  kept  on.  If  we  wish  habitually 
to  appear  true,  wo  must  be  true. 

n.  Jehobau  and  Ahaziah  slain.  1.  The  fateful  meeting.  On  learning  that  Jehu 
was  approaching.  King  Jehoram,  now  convalescent,  prepared  his  chariot,  and, 
accompanied  by  Ahaziah  of  Judah,  went  out  to  meet  his  captain.  (1)  The  two 
encountered  at  the  portion  of  Naboth  the  Jezreelite.  Strange  coincidence,  only,  as  we 
shall  see  below,  more  than  coincidence.  As  the  chariots  meet,  the  king  puts  the 
anxious  question,  "  Is  it  peace,  Jehu  ?  "  Alas  1  the  day  of  peace  is  over ;  it  is  now 
the  day  of  vengeance.  (2)  Jehu  throws  no  disguise  over  ms  intentions.  With  his 
usual  vehement  abruptness  he  at  once  bursts  forth,  "What  peace,  so  long  as  the 
whoredoms  of  thy  mother  Jezebel  and  her  witchcrafts  are  so  many  ?  "  Jehu  was  right : 
there  can  be  no  peace  in  a  state  when  the  foundations  of  religion  and  morality  are 
everywhere  subverted.  When  fountains  of  immorality  are  opened  at  head-quarters, 
their  poisonous  influence  speedily,  infects  the  whole  nation  (Bos.  iv.  6).  They  who 
are  responsible  for  the  subversion  of  righteousness  in  a  state,  must  bear  the  penalty. 
(3)  Jehoram  needed  to  hear  no  more.  He  saw  at  a  glance  the  situation,  and  with  a 
shout,  "  Treachery,  O  Ahaziah  I "  he  turned  and  fled.  But  there  was  no  grain  of  pity 
in  Jehu,  With  fierce  promptitude  he  seizes  his  bow,  fits  one  arrow  to  the  string,  and, 
taking  sure  aim,  smites  the  flying  king  right  through  the  heart.  Jehoram  falls — is 
dead.  2.  Blood  for  hlood.  The  tragedy  thus  transacted  was  in  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  of  Naboth's  vineyard.  On  that  very  spot,  or  near  it,  Naboth's  own 
blood  had  been  shed  (1  Kings  zzi.  13),  and,  as  this  verse  shows  (ver.  26),  not  his  alone, 
but  the  blood  of  his  sons.  Thither,  after  the  murder,  Ahab  went  down  to  take 
possession  of  the  vineyard,  and  there,  when  he  arrived,  he  found  Elijah  standing, 
waiting  to  denounce  upon  him  the  doom  of  blood.  This  was  not  all,  for  among  those 
who  roAs  with  Ahab  that  day  were  two  of  his  captains,  one  of  them  Bidkar,  the  other 
this  Jehu,  who  heard  the  prophetiu  announcements  against  Ahab  and  his  family 
(1  Kings  xxi.  19 — 24).  Ahab  himself  was  subsequently  spared,  but  the  doom 
predicted  against  him  had  now  fallen  on  his  son :  "  In  the  place  where  dogs  licked  the 
blood  of  Naboth  shall  dogs  lick  thy  blood,  even  thine  "  (1  Kings  xzi.  19).  That 
prophecy,  probably,  had  never  altogether  left  the  mind  of  Jemi,  but  now  it  came  home 
to  him  with  fresh  force  as  he  saw  it  actually  fulfllled  by  his  own  hand.  Bidkar,  too, 
M  it  chanced,  was  there,  and  Jehu  recalled  to  him  the  prophetic  oracle.  Then,  to  give 
it  literal  accomplishment,  he  bade  Bidkar  give  orders  that  the  corpse  of  Jehoram  should 
be  thrown  into  the  plat  of  groimd  which  formerly  belonged  to  Naboth.  Startling 
correspondences  often  thus  occur  between  sin  and  its  mode  of  punishment.  When  they 
occur  in  fiction,  we  speak  of  them  as  instances  of  "  poetic  justice."  But  poetry,  in 
this  as  in  other  cases,  is  "  unconscious  philosophy,"  and  is  not  opposed  to  truth.    Its 


20«  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGa    [oh.  ix.  1—37. 

truth  in  such  repiesentatioDS  lies  rather  in  seizing  and  brining  to  light  actual  lavs  In 
the  moral  government  of  the  world.  There  is  a  singular  tendency  in  eyenti  in  history 
to  fold  back  on  each  other — even  dates  and  places  presenting  a  seriea  of  marvellous 
coincidences.  3.  A  partner  in  doom.  The  King  of  Judah  had,  the  moment  the  alarm 
was  giyen,  sought  his  own  safety.  He  fled  "  by  the  way  of  the  garden  house " — was 
it  the  "  garden  of  herbs,"  into  which  Naboth's  vineyard  had  been  converted  (1  Kings 
xxL  2)?  But  in  vain.  The  peremptory  Jehu  allows  nothing  to  escape  his  vigilance, 
and  immediately  he  is  on  Ahaziah's  track.  His  command  was,  "  Smite  him  also  in 
the  chariot,"  and  this  was  done,  "at  the  going  up  to  Gur,  which  is  by  Ibleam." 
Ahaziah  continued  his  flight  to  Mcgiddo,  where  he  died.  A  slightly  difiercDt  account 
of  the  manner  of  his  death  is  given  in  2  Chron.  xxiL  9.  Whatever  the  precise 
circumstances  of  the  death,  we  cannot  but  see  in  it  (1)  a  righteous  retribution  for  his 
own  sins;  and  (2)  an  example  of  the  end  of  evil  association.  Through  his  mother 
AthAliah,  daughter  of  Jezebel,  he  was  brought  into  close  and  friendly  relations  with 
the  court  of  Samaria,  and,  sharing  in  the  crimes  of  Ahab's  house,  shared  also  in  their 
fate.  It  was  his  visit  to  King  Jehoram  which  immediately  brought  down  this  doom 
upon  him. 

nL  The  tatk  or  Jezebel.  1.  Eer  daring  defianet.  When  Jehoram  had  been 
slain,  the  end  of  Jezebel,  the  prime  mover  and  presiding  spirit  in  all  the  wickedness 
that  had  been  wrought  in  Israel,  could  not  be  far  distant.  Jezebel  perfectly  apprehended  - 
this  herself,  for,  on  hearing  that  Jehu  had  come  to  Jezreel,  she  prepared  to  give  him  a 
defiant  reception.  While  one  loathes  the  character  of  the  woman,  it  is  impossible  not 
to  admire  the  boldness  and  spirit  with  which  she  faces  the  inevitable.  Her  proud, 
imperious  nature  comes  out  in  her  last  actions.  She  paints  her  eyelids  with  antimony, 
tires  her  head,  and  adorns  her  person,  as  if  she  was  preparing  for  some  festal  celebration. 
Then  she  plants  herself  at  the  window,  and,  when  Jehu  appears,  assails  him  with  bitter 
taunting  words.  "  Is  it  peace,  thou  Zimri,  thy  master's  murderer  ?  "  she  mockingly 
asked.  What  a  power  for  evil  this  woman  had  been  in  Israeli  What  a  power,  with 
her  strong  intellect  and  will,  she  might  have  been  for  good !  2.  Her  ghastly  end.  If 
Jezebel  thought,  by  this  show  of  imperious  defiance,  to  produce  any  effect  on  Jehu, 
perhaps  to  disarm  him  by  sheer  admiration  of  her  boldness,  she  had  mistaken  the 
man.  Jehu's  impetuous  nature  was  not  to  be  thus  shaken  from  its  purpose.  He 
quickly  brought  the  scene  to  a  conclusion.  "Who  is  on  my  side?  who?"  he  cried, 
lifting  up  his  eyes  to  the  windows.  Two  or  three  eunuchs,  no  friends  of  Jezebel,  and 
anxious  only  to  please  the  new  ruler,  gave  the  needful  sign.  "  Throw  her  down,"  was 
the  pitiless  order;  and  in  another  instant  the  painted  Jezebel  was  hurled  from  the 
palace  window,  and,  dashed  on  the  ground,  was  being  trodden  by  the  hoofs  of  the 
horses.  Pitiless  herself,  she  now  met  with  no  compassion.  One  who  had  shed  much 
blood,  and  rejoiced  in  it,  her  own  blood  was  now  bespattered  on  the  wall  and  on  the 
horses.  Jehu  had  no  compunctions,  but,  fiesh  from  the  dreadful  spectacle,  entered 
the  palace,  and  sat  down  to  eat  and  drink.  But  the  climax  was  yet  to  come.  As  if 
even  he  felt  that,  vengeance  being  now  sated,  some  respect  was  due  to  one  who  had  so 
long  held  sway  in  Israel,  he  bade  his  servants  "  Go,  see  now  this  cursed  woman,  and 
bury  her :  for,"  he  said,  "  she  is  a  king's  daughter."  The  servants  went,  but  soon 
returned  with  a  shocking  tale.  Attracted  by  the  scent  of  blood,  the  prowling  city  dogs 
had  found  their  way  into  the  enclosure,  and,  short  as  the  time  had  been,  all  that 
remained  of  haughty  Jezebel  was  the  skull,  and  feet,  and  palms  of  the  hands,  strewn 
about  the  court.  3.  A  prophecy  fulfilled.  Such  was  the  dreadful  end  of  this  haughty, 
domineering,  evil  woman.  Possibly  even  Jehu  could  not  restrain  a  shudder  when  he 
heard  of  it.  He  had  not  thought  of  it  before,  but  now  he  recalled  the  close  of  that 
awful  prophecy  of  Elijah  to  Ahab,  "  The  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  by  the  wall  of  Jezreel " 
(1  Kings  xxi.  28),  the  terms  of  which  had  been  repeated  to  him  by  Elisha's  messenger, 
(ver.  10).  That  word  of  God  had  been  fulfilled  with  ghastly  literalness.  Would  that 
men  would  lay  to  heart  the  lesion,  and  believe  that  sJu  God's  threatening!  will  be  ai 
«sertainl7  fulfilled  1-^.  0. 


«■.  X.  1—36.] 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KLNQS. 


207 


EXFOSmOK. 


OHAPl-JfiB  Z. 


Yen.  1 — S6.— Thx  Beion  or  Jkbu  otib 
Israel. 

Vera,  i — 28. — The  reTolntion  initiated 
by  the  destTuction  of  Joram  and  Jezebel  ii 
here  traced  tbrough  its  second  and  its  third 
stages.  The  immediate  question,  after  Jo- 
ram's  death,  was — ^Would  any  member  of 
hia  family  rise  up  as  a  claimant  of  the 
throne,  and  dispute  the  succession  with 
Jehu?  Ahab  had  seTenty  male  descendants, 
■tl  of  them  resident  in  Samaria :  would 
there  be  any  one  among  their  number  bold 
enough  to  come  forward  and  assert  his 
hereditary  right?  Jehu  regarded  this  as 
the  most  pressing  and  imminent  danger, 
wherefore  his  first  step  was  to.  challenge 
Buoh  action,  and  either  precipitate  it  or 
crush  it.  In  yers.  1 — H  is  related  the  action 
taken  by  him,  so  far  as  the  descendants  of 
Ahab  were  concerned,  and  his  success  in 
ridding  himself  of  all  rivals  possessed  of  so 
strong  a  claim.  Vers.  12 — 14  relate  his 
dealings  with  another  body  of  Ahab's  re- 
lations, belonging  to  the  neighbouring  king- 
dom of  Judah.  In  Ters.  15—28  an  account 
is  giren  of  the  still  more  bloody  and  more 
sweeping  measures  by  which  he  cowed  the 
party  opposed  to  him,  and  firmly  established 
his  dynasty  in  the  Israelite  kingdom. 

Yers.  1 — 11. — Th*  destruotion  of  the 
$eventy  sons  of  Ahab. 

Yer.  1. — And  Ahab  had  seventy  sons  in 
Samaria.  By  "  sons  "  we  must  understand 
"  male  descendants."  Most  of  the  "  seventy  " 
were  probably  his  grandsons  (see  Ter.  3); 
some  may  have  been  great-grandsobs.  They 
lived  in  Samaria;  since  Samaria  was  the 
principal  residence  of  the  court,  Jezreel  being 
simply  a  country  palace — ^the  "  Yersailles," 
as  it  has  been  called,  or  "  Windsor"  of  the 
Israelite  kings.  And  Jehu  wrote  letters, 
and  sent  to  Samaria,  unto  tiie  mlers  of  Jez- 
reel. "  Jezreel "  is  almost  certainly  a  oorrupt 
reading.  The  **  rulers  of  Jezreel "  would  be 
at  Jezreel ;  and,  if  Jehu  wished  to  commu- 
nicate with  them,  he  would  not  need  to 
"  write."  Had  any  chance  taken  them  to 
Samaria — a  very  improbable  circumstance 
— they  would  have  had  no  authority  there, 
and  to  adiress  them  would  have  been  use- 
less. Jehu's  letten  were,  no  doubt,  ad- 
dressed to  the  ruUr$  of  Samaria;  and  so 


the  LXX.  ezpreuly  state  (MwctXcr  it 
'Sa/uLpttf  rphs  root  ipxoyrat  7tttp,a- 
pelai);  but  the  reading  "Jezreel"  can 
scarcely  have  arisen  out  of  "Samaria" 
(.hnyif  out  of  jnoeO)  since  the  difference 
of  the  two  words  is  so  great.  Most  probably 
the  original  word  was  "Israel"  (^snl!*'), 
which  is  easily  corrupted  into  "Jezreel" 
(^Np"nO-  The  rulers  of  Samaria,  the  capital, 
might  well  be  called  "  the  rulers  of  Israel." 
To  the  elders ;  rather,  even  the  elderi.  Not 
distinct  persons  from  the  "  rulers,"  but  the 
same  under  another  name  (see  1  Kings  zxi. 
8,  13;  and  compare  the  Bevised  Version). 
And  to  them  that  bronght  up  Ahab's  children 
— t.e.  the  tutors,  or  governors,  under  whose 
charge  they  were  placed— saying — 

Yer.  2. — Now  as  soon  as  this  letter  oometh 
to  yon.  In  the  East  at  this  time,  and  in 
most  parts  of  it  to  the  present  day,  letten 
can  only  be  sent  by  special  messengers. 
There  is  no  public  post.  Kings  and  private 
individuals  must  equally  find  persons  who 
will  undertake  to  carry  and  deliver  their 
despatches.  Even  the  post  organized  by 
Darius  Hyataspis  was  not  one  that  went 
daily,  but  only  one  kept  ready  for  the  king 
to  use  when  he  had  occasion  for  it.  Seeing 
your  master's  sons  are  with  yon.  "Your 
master's  sons "  must  mean  Jotam's  sons ; 
by  which  we  learn  that,  unlike  his  brother 
Ahaziah  (ch.  i  17),  Joram  had  male  offspring 
who  survived  him,  and  were  now  with  the 
rest  of  Ahab's  descendants,  at  Samaria. 
And  there  are  with  yon  chariots  and  horses, 
a  fenced  city  also,  and  armour;  literally, 
the  charioU,  and  the  horsei,  a  fenced  eity 
also,  and  the  armour.  The  main  chariot 
force  of  the  country,  and  the  chief  arsenal, 
containing  both  armour  and  arms,  were 
naturally  at  Samaria,  the  capital,  and  might 
thus  be  regarded  as  at  the  disposition  of 
the  Samaritan  municipality.  Jehu  scorn- 
fully chnllenges  them  to  make  use  of  their 
resources  against  him.  He  is  quite  readv 
for  a  contest.  Let  them  do  their  worsi. 
The  LXX.  have  "fenced  cities"  (iriixeii 
ixvpaC)  instead  of  "  a  fenced  city ; "  but  the 
existing  Hebrew  text  is  probably  right 
Samaria  was  the  only  fortified  town  in  their 
possession. 

Yer.  8. — Look  even  out  the  best  and 
meetest  of  your  master's  sons,  and  set  him 
•u  his  father's  throne.  "Choose,"  *'.«., 
"  among  the  sons  of  Joram  the  strongest,  the 
boldest,  and  the  ablest,  and  make  him  king 
in  his  father's  room ;  take  bim  for  your 
leader  against  me  ;  do  not  hesitate  find  beat 
about  the  hush  ;  but  at  once  make  up  your 
minds,  and  let  me  know  what  I  have  to 


208 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGSb 


[oh.  X.  1—36. 


expeei"  And  flglit  for  yoni  maitei*!  honM. 
There  had  been  •  civil  war  before  the 
dynasty  of  Omri  sncceeded  in  settling  itself 
on  the  throne  (1  Kings  xvi.  21,  22).  Jehn 
belieyesior  affects  to  believe,  that  there  will 
now  be  another.  He  does  not  deprecate  it, 
but  invites  it.  Probably  he  felt  tolerably 
confident  that  the  garrison  of  Samaria,  even 
if  called  upon  by  the  municipality,  would 
not  venture  to  take  up  arms  against  the 
army  of  Kamoth-Gilead,  whiuh  hud  declared 
itself  in  his  favour.  Still,  supposing  that 
it  did,  he  was  not  fearful  of  the  result. 

Ver.  4. — But  they  were  exceedingly  afraid. 
They  were  men  of  peace,  not  men  of  war — 
accustomed  to  discharge  the  duties  of  judges 
and  magistrates,  not  of  commandants  and 
generals.  They  could  not  count  on  the 
obedience  even  of  the  troops  in  Samaria, 
much  less  on  that  of  any  others  who  might 
be  in  garrison  elsewhere.  They  would  natu- 
rally have  been  afraid  of  taking  up  arms 
under  almost  any  circumstances.  What, 
however,  caused  them  now  such  excessive 
fear  was  probably  the  tone  which  Jehu  had 
adopted — his  "  scornful  challerge,"  as  it  hai 
been  called.  He  evidently  entertained  no 
fear  himself.  He  dared  them  to  do  that 
which  hs  pretended  to  recommend  them  to 
do.  They  must  have  felt  that  he  was  laugh- 
ing at  them  in  his  sleeve.  And  said,  Behold, 
two  kings  stood  not  before  him :  how  then 
shall  we  standi  The  kings  intended  are 
Joram  and  Ahaziah,  who  had  confronted 
Jehu,  and  had  met  their  deaths.  What 
were  they  that  they  should  succeed  where 
"  two  kings  "  had  failed  ?  The  argument  was 
fallacious,  and  a  mere  cloak  for  oowardioe. 
The  two  kings  had  been  taken  by  surprise, 
and  treacherously  murdered.  Their  fate 
could  prove  nothing  concerning  the  prob- 
able issue  of  a  civil  war,  had  the  "  princes  " 
ventured  to  commence  it.  It  must  be  ad- 
mitted, however,  that  the  chance  of  success 
was  but  slight. 

Ver.  5. — And  he  that  was  over  the  house 
— i.e.  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  royal 
palace  (comp.  1  Kings  iv.  6) — and  he  that 
was  over  the  city.  There  would  be  a  single 
"  governor  of  the  city" — not  the  command- 
ant of  the  garrison,  but  the  chief  civil  ruler, 
nearly  corresponding  to  a  modern  "  mayor  " 
(see  1  Kings  xxii.  26).  The  elders  also 
(oomp.  ver.  1).  The  "  governor  "  of  a  town 
was  assisted  oy  a  council  of  "elders."  And 
the  bringers  up  of  the  children  (see  the 
comment  on  ver.  1).  Bent  to  Jehn,  saying. 
We  are  thy  servants,  and  will  do  all  that 
thon  shalt  bid  ns;  we  will  not  make  any 
king.  Jehu's  letter  had  the  effect  which 
he  intended,  of  making  the  authorities  of 
Samaria  declare  themselves.  They  might, 
perhaps,  have  temporized,  have  sent  an  am- 
biguoQS  answer,  or  hav«  sent  no  knswei  at 


all,  and  have  let  their  action  be  guided  by 
the  course  of  events.  But,  taken  aback  by 
Jehu's  directness  and  plainness  of  speech, 
it  did  not  occnr  to  them  to  be  diplomatic ; 
they  felt  driven  into  a  comer,  and  com- 
pelled to  make  their  choice  at  once.  Either 
they  must  resist  Jehu  in  arms  or  they  must 
submit  to  him.  If  they  submitted,  they  had 
best  (they  thought)  do  it  with  a  good  grace. 
Accordingly,  his  letter  produced  a  reply, 
more  favourable  than  he  can  possibly  have 
expected — "They  were  his  servants,"  or 
"his  slaves,"  ready  to  do  all  his  pleasure; 
they  would  not  set  up  a  king,  or  in  any 
way  dispute  his  snccession ;  they  submitted 
themselves  wholly  to  his  will.  Bo  thon 
[they  said]  that  which  is  good  in  thine  eyes ; 
t.e.  "  take  what  steps  thou  pleasest  to  con- 
firm thyself  in  the  kingdom." 

Yer.  6. — Then  he  wrote  a  letter  the  sceond 
time  to  them,  saying ;  rather,  a  second  time. 
The  reply  of  the  Samaritan  authorities  gave 
Jehu  an  opportunity,  of  widoh  he  was  not 
slow  to  take  advantage.  They  might  have 
been  contented  with  their  negative  response, 
"  We  will  not  make  any  man  king ; "  but 
they  had  gone  beyond  it — ^they  had  de- 
parted from  the  line  of  neutrality,  and  had 
placed  themselves  unreservedly  on  Jehu's 
side.  "  We  are  thy  servants,"  they  had 
said, "  and  will  do  all  that  thou  shalt  bid 
us."  It  is  always  rash  to  promise  absolute 
obedience  to  a  human  being.  To  volunteer 
such  a  promise,  when  it  is  not  even  asked, 
is  the  height  of  folly.  If  ye  be  mine — 
as  they  had  said  they  were,  when  they 
called  themselves  his  "slaves" — and  if  ye 
will  hearken  nnto  my  voice — i.e.  obey  me, 
do  as  I  require — ^take  ye  the  heads  of  the 
men  your  master's  sOns,  and  come  to  me  to 
Jezreel.  The  Samaritan  authorities  were 
ordered  to  bring  the  heads  with  them,  that 
they  might  be  seen  and  counted.  In  the 
Bast  generally,  the  heads  of  rebels  and  pre- 
tenders, by  whatever  death  they  may  have 
died,  are  cut  off,  brought  to  the  sovereign, 
and  then  exposed  in  some  public  place,  in 
order  that  the  public  at  large  may  be  certi- 
fied that  the  men  are  really  dead  (comp.  1 
Sam.  xxxi.  9).  Sy  to-morrow  this  time.  As 
Jezreel  was  not  more  than  about  twenty 
miles  from  Samaria,  the  order  could  be  exe- 
cuted by  that  time.  It  necessitated,  how- 
ever, very  prompt  measures,  and  gave  tlie 
authorities  but  little  time  for  consideration. 
Kow  the  king's  sons,  being  seventy  persons, 
were  with  the  great  men  of  the  eity,  which 
brought  them  up  (comp.  ver.  1). 

Ver.  7. — ^And  it  came  to  pass,  when  th« 
letter  came  to  them,  that  they  took  the  king's 
sons,  and  slew  seventy  persons.  Having 
committed  themselves  by  their  answer  to 
Jehu's  first  letter,  the  Samaritan  great  men 
■eemed  to  themselves  to  have  no  choice,  on 


OH.  X.  1—36.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


209 


receiving  his  seoond,  bnt  to  allow  themselvei 
to  become  the  tools  and  agents  of  his  policy. 
They  accordingly  put  the  seventy  princes 
to  death  without  any  hesitation,  though  they 
can  scarcely  have  done  so  without  reluo- 
tance.  And  pnt  their  heads  in  baskets. 
Thus  concealing  their  bloody  deed  as  long 
as  they  oould.  In  the  Assyrian  sculptuiea, 
those  who  slay  the  king's  enemies  carry  the 
beads  openly  in  their  hands,  as  though 
glorying  in  what  they  have  done.  And 
sent  him  them  to  Jezreel.  Jehu  had  bidden 
them  to  bring  the  heads  to  him ;  but  this 
was  a  degradation  to  which  they  did  not 
feel  bound  to  submit.  They  therefore  tent 
the  heads  by  trusty  messengers. 

Yer.  8. — And  there  came  a  messenger, 
and  told  him,  saying,  Taby  have  brought  the 
heads  of  the  king's  sons.  And  he  said,  Lay 
ye  them  in  two  heaps  at  the  entering  in  of 
the  gate  nntil  the  morning.  Thus  all  who 
entered  into  the  town  or  quitted  it  would 
see  them,  and,  being  struck  by  the  ghastly 
spectacle,  would  make  inquiry  and  learn 
the  truth.  .  "  The  gate  "  was  also  a  general 
place  of  assembly  fur  the  gossips  of  the 
town  and  others,  who  would  soon  spread 
the  news,  and  bring  together  a  crowd  of 
persons,  curious  to  see  so  unusual  a  sight. 

Yer.  9. — ^And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  morn- 
ing, that  he  went  out,  and  stood,  and  said 
to  all  the  people.  Ye  be  righteons.  Not  an 
ironical  reproach  to  tho.se  who  had  brought 
the  heads — "Ye  consider  yourselves  right- 
eous, yet  this  bloodshed  rests  upon  you;" 
much  less  a  serious  declaration  (Gerlaeh) 
that  now  at  last  the  sins  of  idolatrous  Israel 
were  atoned  for;  but  an  argument  ad  cap- 
tandwm,  addressed  to  the  crowd  of  spectators 
whom  the  unwonted  spectacle  had  brought 
together,  "  Ye  are  just  persons,  and  capable 
of  pronouncing  a  just  judgment;  judge, 
then,  if  I  am  the  wicked  person  which  men 
generally  consider  me."  Behold,  X  conspired 
against  my  master,  and  slew  him :  bnt  who 
slew  all  these  1  I  confess  to  one  murder; 
but  here  are  seventy  murders.  And  who 
is  guilty  of  them?  Not  I,  or  my  party, 
but  the  trusted  adherents  of  the  Ahabite 
dynasty,  the  rulers  placed  by  them  over  the 
capital,  and  the  governors  to  whom  they 
had  entrusted  the  royal  children.  Does  not 
this  show  that  all  parties  are  weary  of  the 
Ahabites  and  of  their  system?  Doea  it 
not  dear  me  of  any  private  or  selfish  motive, 
and  indicate  the  desire  of  the  whole  nation 
for  a  change,  civil  and  religious — a  change 
which  shall  entirely  subvert  the  new  re- 
ligion introduced  by  Jezebel,  and  fall  back 
npon  the  lines  of  that  maintained  by  Elijah 
and  Elisha  7 

Yer.  10. — ^Enow  nov  that  fhera  shall  fall 
vnto   the   earth — t.a.  "perish,"  "come   to 
Bonght  "—nothing  of  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
Q,  Kisas. 


which  the  Lord  spake  oonoeming  the  honsa 
of  Ahab.  As  the  accomplishment  had  gone 
BO  far,  it  was  safe  to  predict,  or  at  any  rate 
Jehu  felt  emboldened  to  predict, .  that  the 
entire  prophecy  of  Elijah  would  be  fulfilled 
to  the  letter.  The  whole  house  of  Ahab 
would  perish — it  would  be  made  like  the 
house  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  and 
Uke  the  house  of  Baasha  the  son  of  Ahijah 
(I  Kings  xxi.  23),  and  its  adherents  would 
share  its  fate.  For  the  Lord  hath  done  that 
which  he  spake  by  his  servant  Elijah;  i.e. 
"  has  requited  Ahab  in  the  portion  of  Jez- 
reel ;  has  caused  dogs  to  eat  the  flesh  of 
Jezebel;  and  has  begun  the  destruction  of 
his  house.  The  inchoate  fulfilment  of  pro- 
phecy was  always  felt  to  be  the  atrongest 
possible  argument  for  its  ultimate  complete 
fulfilment. 

Yer.  11. — So  Jehn  slew  all  that  remained 
of  the  honse  of  Ahab  in  Jezreel,  and  all  his 
great  men,  and  his  kinsfolks ;  rather,  and 
Jehu  dew.  Encouraged  by  his  past  success, 
having  killed  Jehoram,  Ahaziah,  and  Jeze- 
bel, having  secured  the  adhesion  of  the 
chief  men  in  Samaria,  and  effected  the  de- 
struction of  all  those  who  might  naturally 
have  claimed  the  succession  and  involved 
him  in  civil  war,  Jehu  proceeded  to  greater 
lengths.  He  "  slew  all  that  remained  of  the 
house  of  Ahab  in  Jezreel " — the  princesses 
probably,  as  well  as  the  princes — and  further 
put  to  death  all  tlie  leading  partisans  of  the 
dethroned  dynasty,  the  "great  men,"  per- 
haps even  those  who  had  worked  his  bloody 
vrill  at  Samaria,  and  the  intimate  friends 
and  supporters  of  the  house — the  o'];tq,  aa 
they  are  here  called — not  relatives,  but  "  in- 
timate acquaintances."  And  his  priests. 
This  expression  canses  a  difficulty,  since  the 
destruction  of  the  Baal-priests  is  related  sub- 
sequently (vers.  19—2.5).  It  has  been  sug- 
gested  to  understand  by  wjrp,  not "  priests," 
but "  high  state  officers  "  (Bahr)— a  meaning 
which  the  word  is  thought  to  have  in  2 
Sam.  viii.  18  and  1  Kings  iv.  5.  But  this 
signification  of  ]n3  is  scarcely  an  ascertained 
one.  Perhaps  the  same  persons  are  intended 
as  in  Ter.  19,  the  present  notice  of  their 
death  being  a  mere  summary,  and  the  nar- 
rative of  vers.  19 — 25  a  full  statement  of 
the  circumstances.  ITntil  he  left  him  none 
remaining;  i.e.  until  the  entire  Ahabite 
faction  was  blotted  out. 

Yers.  12 — 14. — The  massacre  of  On  brethren 
of  Ahaziah. 

Yer.  12. — And  he  arose  and  departed,  and 
came  to  Samaria;  rather,  went  on  his  may 
to  Samaria  (tropeiOji  eis  2a/t^p«ay,  LXX.). 
Having  arranged  matters  at  Jezreel  as  his 
interests  required,  and  seoured  the  adhesion 
of  the  Samaritan  "great  men,"  Jehu  now 
let  out  for  the  oapitaL    The  nairatiye  £rom 


210 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  0?  THE  KINGS,         [pu.  x.  1—36. 


tbii  point  to  ver.  17  ii  of  eventa  that  hap- 
pened to  him  while  he  was  upon  his  road. 
And  as  he  was  at  the  ghearing-house  in  the 
way.  Between  Jezreol  and  Samaria  was  a 
station  where  the  shepherds  of  the  district 
were  accustomed  to  shear  thoir  flocks.  The 
custom  gare  name  to  the  place,  which  be- 
onme  known  as  Beth-Eked  (fiaidaxiB,  LXX. ; 
Beth-Altad,  Jerome),  "the  house  of  bind- 
ing," from  the  practice  of  tying  the  sheep's 
four  feet  together  before  shearing  them. 
The  situation  has  not  been  identified. 

Ver.  13.— Jehu  met  with  the  brethren 
of  Ahaziah  King  of  Judah.  The  actual 
"  brethren "  of  Aliaziah  had  been  carried 
ofT  and  slain  by  the  Arabians  in  one  of  their 
raids  into  Palestine,  as  we  learn  from  2 
Chron.  xxL  17 ;  xxii.  1 ;  the  youths  here 
mentioned  were  their  sons  (2  Chron.  xxii. 
8),  and  therefore  Ahaziah's  nephews.  And 
said,  Who  are  ye  T  Travellers  in  a  foreign 
country  were  always  liable  to  be  questioned, 
and  were  expected  to  give  an  account  of 
themselves  (see  Gen.  xlii.  7 — 13 ;  Story  of 
Saneha,  line  38;  Herod.,  ii.  159,  etc.).  The 
princes  were  thus  not  surprised  at  the  in- 
quiry, and  readily  answered  it.  And  they 
answered,  We  are  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah ; 
and  we  go  down  to  salute  the  children  of 
the  king.  There  is  something  abnormal 
and  needing  explanation  -in  this  visit. 
Forty-tioo  princes,  with  their  relinues,  do 
not,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  start  off 
on  a  sudden  from  one  capital,  on  a  compli- 
mentary visit  to  their  cousins  at  another. 
Perhaps  Ewald  is  right  in  surmising  that, 
"  at  the  first  report  of  disturbances  in  the 
kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes,  they  bad  been 
sent  off  by  Athaliah  to  render  any  assist- 
ance that  tliey  could  to  the  house  of  Ahab 
in  its  troubles  "  ('  History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv. 
p.  100,  Eng.  trans.).  In  this  case  their 
answer  must  be  regarded  as  insincere.  Fall- 
ing in  with  an  armed  force  stronger  than 
their  own,  they  pretended  ignorance  of  the 
revolution  that  had  taken  place,  and  sought 
to  pass  off  their  hostile  purpose  under  the 
pretence  of  a  visit  of  compliment.  But 
the  pretence  did  not  deceive  Jehu.  And 
the  children  of  the  queen.  The  queen- 
mother,  Jezebel,  is  probably  intended.  Her 
rank  entitled  her  to  special  mention. 

Ver.  14. — And  he  said,  Take  them  alive. 
And  they  took  them  alive,  and  slew  them. 
The  brevity  of  the  narrative  leaves  many 
points  of  it  obscure.  It  is  impossible  to  say 
why  the  order  was  given,  "Take  them 
alive,"  when,  immediately  afterwards,  they 
were  massacred.  Perhaps  Jehu  at  first  in- 
tended to  spare  their  lives,  but  afterwards 
thought  that  it  would  be  safer  to  have  them 
put  out  of  his  way.  It  must  be  borne  in 
mind  that  they  were  descendants  of  Ahab. 
At  the  pit  of  the  shearing-house ;  rathei,  at 


the  well  of  Beth-Eked.  Probably  the  bodies 
were  thrown  into  the  well  (comp.  Jer.  zli. 
7).  Even  two  and  forty  men.  It  is  this 
number  which  makes  the  idea  of  a  visit  of 
compliment  incredible.  ITeither  left  he  any 
of  them.  The  Greeks  said,  Nijmos,  is  ra- 
ripa  KTciras  iratSas  KaTa\e{irci;  and  the 
general  Hebrew  practice  was  to  give  effect 
to  the  teaching  conveyed  by  the  maxim 
(see  Josh.  vii.  24,  25 ;  ch.  ix.  26 ;  xiv.  6). 

Vers.  15 — 17. — Jehonadab  the'$on  of  Be- 
ehab  aatociated  by  Jehu  in  his  acti. 

Ver.  15. — And  when  he  was  departed 
thence,  he  lighted  on  Jehonadab  the  son  of 
Bechab.  Between  Beth-Eked  and  Samaria 
Jeliu  fell  in  with  the  great  Kenite  chief, 
Jehonadab,  the  founder  of  the  remarkable 
tribe  and  sect  of  the  Bechabites  (Jer.  xxxv. 
6 — 19).  Jehonadab  is  mentioned  only  here 
and  in  the  passage  of  Jeremiah  just  qnoted; 
but  it  is  evident  that  he  was  an  important 
personage.  His  tribe,  the  Kenites,  was 
probably  of  Arab  origin,  and  certainly  of 
Arab  habits.  It  attached  itself  to  the 
Israelites  during  their  wanderings  in  the 
Sinaitio  desert,  and  was  given  a  settlement 
in  "  the  wilderness  of  Judah,"  on  the  con- 
quest of  Palestine  (Judg.  i  16).  Jehonadab 
seems  to  have  been  of  an  ascetic  turn,  and 
to  have  laid  down  for  his  tribe  a  rule  of  life 
stricter  and  more  severe  than  any  known 
previously.  He  required  them  not  merely 
to  dwell  in  tents,  and,  unless  under  the  com- 
pulsion of  war,  never  to  enter  cities,  but  also 
to  abstain  wholly  from  the  use  of  wine,  and 
to  have  neither  house,  nor  field,  nor  vineyard 
(Jer.  xxxv.  8— 10).  Gautama,  between  three 
and  four  centuries  luter,  enjoined  a  some- 
what similar  rule  upon  his  disciples.  It  is 
indicative  of  much  strength  of  character  in 
either  case,  that  so  strict  a  rule  was  accepted, 
adopted,  and  acted  upon  for  centuries. .  On 
the  present  occasion,  Jehu,  it  would  seem, 
desired  the  sanction  of  Jehonadab  to  the 
pn>.ceedings  upon  which  he  was  about  to 
enter,  as  calculated  to  legitimate  them  in 
the  eyes  of  some  who  might  otherwise  have 
regarded  them  with  disapproval.  Jehnna- 
dtu)  had,  no  doubt,  the  influence  which  is 
always  wielded  by  an  ascetic  In  Oriental 
countries.  Coming  to  meet  him.  This  ex- 
pression tells  OS  nothing  of  Jehonadab's 
intent.  The  meeting  may  have  been  merely 
a  chance  one.  And  he  sainted  him,  and  said 
to  him.  Is  thine  heart  right,  as  my  heart  is 
with  thy  heart t  literally,  he  bltited  him; 
but  the  word  used  (barak)  has  frequently 
the  sense  of  "  to  salute  "  (see  1  Sam.  xiii. 
10;  XXV.  14;  ch.  iv.  29,  eto.).    John's  in- 

3uiry  was  made  to  assure  himself  of  Jehona- 
ab's  sympathy,  on  which  no  doubt  he 
counted,  but  whereof  he  was  glad  to  leoeiv* 
a  positive  promise.  Jehonadab  must  have 
been  known  •■  a  zealous  servant  of  Jehovah, 


OB.  X.  1—36.] 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOa 


211 


•nd  might  therefore  be  assumed  to  be  hostile 
to  the  house  of  Ahab.  And  Jehonadab 
answered,  It  is.  TTBhesitatingly,  without  a 
moment's  pause,  without  the  shadow  of  a 
doubt,  the  Eenite  chief  cast  in  his  lot  with 
the  revolutionist.  Heart  and  soul  he  would 
join  him  in  an  anti-Ahab  policy.  U  it  be, 
Oive  me  thine  hand.  The  Hebrews  did  not 
clench  agreements,  like  the  Greeks  and 
Bomans,  by  grasping  each  other's  hands. 
Jehu  merely  means  to  say,  "  If  this  is  so,  if 
thou  art  heart  and  soul  with  me  in  the 
matter,  put  out  thy  hand,  and  I  will  take 
thee  into  my  chariot."  Jehu  intended  at 
once  to  do  honour  to  the  Kenite  chief,  and 
to  strengthen  his  own  position  by  being 
seen  to  be  so  familiar  with  him.  And  he — 
i.e.  Jehonadab— gave  him — i.e.  Jehu — his 
hand ;  and  he  took  him  up  to  him  into  the 
chariot.  There  was  always  room  in  a  chariot 
for  at  least  three  or  four  persons — the 
charioteer  and  the  owner  of  the  chariot  in 
froat,  and  one  or  two  guards  behind. 

Yer.  16. — And  he  said,  Come  with  me,  and 
see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord.  Jehonadab  must 
have  understood  that  some  further  measures 
were  about  to  be  taken  against  the  family 
and  adherents  of  Ahab.  He  evidently  ap- 
proved of  all  that  Jehu  had  already  done, 
and  was  willing  to  give  his  countenance  to 
further  severities.  He  probably  did  not 
know  exactly  what  Jehu  designed ;  but  he 
must  have  been  able  to  make  a  tolerably 
shrewd  guess  at  what  was  impending.  So 
they  made  him  ride  in  his  chariot.  Perhaps 
'^P'Jll  should  be  changed  into  a'?:?!,  which 
seems  to  have  been  the  reading  of  the  LXX., 
who  translate,  by  iirtKdduTev  aJrhv  iv  t^ 
ipfiari  aiiTou,  "he  made  him  ride  in  his 
ehariot.'' 

Yer.  17. — ^And  when  ha  came  to  Samaria, 
he  slew  all  that  remained  nnto  Ahab  in 
Samaria,  till  he  had  destroyed  him.  Seventy 
male  descendants  of  Ahab  had  been  already 
destroyed  in  Samaria  (vers.  1 — ^7).  It  seems 
unlikely  that  the  city  can  have  contained 
any  other  members  of  his  house  excepting 
females.  Did  Jehu  now  destroy  the  daugh- 
ters of  Ahab  resident  in  Samaria,  with 
their  families?  The  masculine  form  used — 
D^Ke'sn— 4oes  not  disprove  this.  Aooording 
to  the  saying  of  the  Lord,  which  he  spake  to 
Elijah  (comp.  ver.  10,  and  see  also  the 
comment  on  ch.  ix.  7). 

Yers.  18 — 28. — Jehu  deatroyi  the  wmthip- 
pen  of  Baal,  and  putt  on  end  to  the  Batd- 
vorihip. 

Yer.  18. — And  John  gathered  all  the 
people  together,  and  said  unto  them,  Ahab 
served  Baal  a  little;  but  Jehu  shall  serve 
iiim  mnch.  Hitherto  the  revolution  had 
home  the  appearance  of  a  mere  dynastic 
change,  like  those  introduced  by  Baasha 
(1  Kings  XV.  27—29),  Zimri  (1  Kings  xvi. 


fr— 12),  and  Omri  (1  Kings  xvi.  17—19), 
and  had  had  none  of  the  characteristics  of 
a  religious  reformation.  Probably,  as  yet, 
no  suspicion  had  touched  the  public  mind 
that  Jehu  would  be  a  less  zealous  worship- 
per of  Baal  than  his  predecessor.  The  out- 
burst against  Jezebel  s  "  whoredoms  "  and 
"witchcrafts"  (ch.  ix.  22)  would  be  known 
to  few,  and  might  not  have  been  understood 
as  a  condemnation  of  the  entire  Baalistio 
system.  The  "  zeal  for  Jehovah  "  whispered 
in  the  ear  of  Jehonadab  (ver.  16)  had  been 
hitherto  kept  secret.  Thus  there  was  no- 
thing to  prevent  the  multitude  from  giving 
implicit  credence  to  the  proclamation  now 
made,  and  looking  to  see  the  new  reign  in- 
augurated by  a  magnificent  and  prolonged 
festival  in  honour  of  the  two  great  Fhcsuician 
deities,  Baal  the  sun-god,  and  Ashtoreth  or 
Astarte  the  famous  "  Dea  Syra."  Such  festi- 
vals were  frequently  held  in  Phoenicia  and 
the  rest  of  Syria,  often  lasting  over  many 
days,  and  constituting  a  time  of  excitement, 
feasting,  and  profligate  enjoyment,  which 
possessed  immense  attraction  for  the  great 
mass  of  Asiatics. 

Yer.  19. — Now  therefore  call  unto  me  all 
the  prophets  of  Baal,  all  his  servants,  and 
all  his  priests.  In  Phcenicia,  it  would  seem, 
as  in  Egypt  and  among  the  Jews,  "  prophets  " 
and  "  priests "  were  distinct  classes  of  per- 
sons. The  Egyptians  called  the  priest  ab, 
the  prophet  neter  hon,  literally,  "  servant  of 
God."  They  held  the  priest  in  the  greater 
honour.  In  Phcenicia,  on  the  contrary 
judging  firom  the  scanty  notices  that  we 
possess,  prophets  appear  to  have  taken  pre- 
cedence of  priests,  and  to  have  had  the 
more  important  functions  assigned  to  tin  m 
(see  1  Kings  xviii  19 — 40;  xxii.  6).  Let 
none  be  wanting— literally,  let  not  a  man 
fail — ^for  I  Have  a  great  saorif  ce  to  do  to 
Baal.  Like  tii?  other  gods  of  the  heathen, 
Baal  and  Ashtoreth  were  worshipped  chiefiy 
by  sacrifice.  The  sacrifice  was  sometimes 
human,  but  more  commonly  a  sacrificial 
animal,  such  as  a  bull,  a  ram,  or  a  he-goat 
In  the  greater  festivals  several  hnndrudjs  of 
victims  were  offered;  and  their  fiesh  was 
served  up  at  the  banquets  by  which  the 
festivals  were  accompanied.  Whosoever 
shall  be  wanting,  he  shall  not  live.  His 
absence  would  be  regarded  as  an  act  of  con- 
tumacy verging  on  rebellion,  and  so  as 
deserving  of  capital  punishment.  But  Jehu 
did  it  in  snbtilty,  to  the  intent  that  he  might 
destroy  the  worshippers  of  Baal.  "  Subtilty  " 
was  characteristic  of  Jehu,  who  always  pre- 
ferred to  gain  his  ends  by  cunning  rather 
than  in  a  straightforward  way.  Idolaters 
were  by  the  Law  liable  to  death,  and  Jehn 
would  have  had  a  perfect  right  to  crush  the 
Baal-worship  throughout  the  land,  by  send- 
ing his  emissaries  everywhere,  with  orderi 


212 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


[oh.  z.  1—36. 


to  slay  all  whom  tkey  fonnd  engaged  in  it. 
But  to  draw  Bome  thousands  of  his  lubjects 
by  false  pretences  into  a  trap,  and  then  to 
kill  them  in  it  for  doing  what  he  had  him- 
self invited  them  to  do,  was  an  act  that  was 
wholly  unjustifiable,  and  that  savoured,  not 
of  the  wisdom  which  is  from  above,  but  of 
that  bastard  wisdom  which  ii  "earthly, 
sensual,  devilish"  (Jas;  iii.  15).  Jehn'i 
religious  reformation  did  not  succeed,  and 
it  was  conducted  in  such  m  way  that  it  did 
not  deserve  to  succeed.  A  little  more 
honest  boldness,  and  a  little  less  frequent 
resort  to  subterfuge  and  onft,  might  have 
had  a  different  result,  and  have  been  better 
both  for  himself  and  for  his  people. 

Yer.  20. — ^And  Jehu  said,  Froolaim  a  solemn 
assembly  for  Baal  The  word  translated 
"solemn  assembly "  is  the  same  which  is 
applied  to  the  great  feasts  of  Jehovah 
among  the  Israelites  in  I^ev.  zxiii.  36; 
Numb.  xzix.  35 ;  Deut.  xvi  8 ;  2  Chron.  vii. 
9;  Neh.  viii.  18;  Isa.  i.  13;  Joel  i.  14;  ii. 
15 ;  and  Amos  T.  21.  Originally,  it  signified 
a  time  of  repression,  or  abstention  from 
worldly  business;  but  it  had  probably 
grown  to  mean  a  day  when  worldly  business 
was  suspended  for  the  sake  of  a  religious 
gathering.  Such  gatherings  had  no  doubt 
been  held  from  time  to  time  in  honour  of 
Baal ;  and  Jehu's  proclamation  consequently 
excited  no  distrust.  And  they  praolaimed 
it.  No  opposition  was  made  to  the  king's 
wish.  No  Jehovist  party  showed  itself.  The 
"solemn  assembly"  was  proclaimed  for 
some  day  in  the  near  future,  when  all  the 
people  bad  been  apprised  of  it. 

Yer.  21. — And  Jehn  sent  throngh  all 
Israel;  i.e.  through  the  whole  of  his  own 
kingdom,  from  Dan  on  the  north  to  Bethel 
on  the  south.  And  all  the  worshippers  of 
Baal  came,  so  that  there  was  not  a  man  left 
that  came  not  Duty  and  inclination  for 
once  coincided.  The  king's  command  made 
it  incumbent  on  them,  they  would  argue,  to 
attend ;  and  attendance  would,  they  sup- 
posed, result  in  a  time  of  excitement  and 
enjoyment,  which  they  were  not  disposed 
to  miss.  The  death-penalty  threatened  for 
non-attendance  (ver.  19)  was  scarcely  needed 
to  induce  thorn  all  to  come.  And  they  oame 
into  the  house  of  Baal.  Ahab  had  erected 
a  temple  to  Baal  in  Samaria  shortly  after 
his  miirriage  with  Jezebel  (1  Kings  xvi.  22), 
Like  the  other  temples  of  the  time,  in  Judaea, 
in  Egypt,  and  in  Phoenicia,  it  was  not  a 
mere  "  house,"  but  contained  vast  courts  and 
corridors  fitted  for  the  reception  of  immense 
numbers.  And  the  house  of  Baal  was  foil 
from  one  end  to  another;  literally,  from 
brim  to  brim}  i.e.  brimful— "metaphora 
snmpta  a  vasibns  hnmore  aliqno  plenis." 

Yer.  22. — And  he  said  unto  him  that  was 
OTsr  tht  Testiy.    The  word  translated  "  tw 


try  "  (nnn^D)  occurs  only  in  this  place ;  but 
its  meaning  is  sufficiently  ascertained,  first, 
from  the  context,  and  secondly,  from  the 
cognate  Ethiopic  altah,  which  means  "a 
linen  garment."  Linen  garments  were  re- 
garded as  especially  pure,  and  were  gene- 
rally affected  by  the  priests  of  ancient 
religions,  and  preferred  by  the  worshippers. 
Heathen  temples  had  almost  always  "  ves- 
tries" or  "wardrobes"  attached  to  them, 
where  garments  considered  suitable  were 
laid  up  in  store.  Bring  forth  vestments  for 
all  the  worshippers  of  BaaL  It  may  be 
doubtod  whether  "all  the  worshippers  of 
Baal "  could  have  been  supplied  with  robes 
out  of  the  temple  vestry,  which  would  ordi- 
narily contain  only  vestments  for  the  priests. 
But  Jehu  may  have  had  tlie  supply  kept 
np  from  the  robe-room  of  the  palace,  which 
would  be  practically  inexhaustible.  The 
gift  of  garments  to  all  comers,  which  was 
certainly  not  usual,  must  have  been  in- 
tended to  render  tlie  festival  as  attractive 
as  possible.  And  he  brought  them  forth  yest- 
ments.  The  keeper  of  the  wardrobe  obeyed 
the  order  given  him,  and  supplied  vestments 
to  all  the  worshippers. 

Yer.  23. — And  Jehn  went,  and  Jehonadab 
the  son  of  Beohab,  into  the  house  of  Baal. 
Keeping  up  the  pretence  that  he  was  a  de- 
votee of  Baal,  anxious  to  "  serve  him  much  * 
(ver.  18),  Jehu  himself  entered  the  sacred 
edifice,  together  with  Jehonadab  the  son  of 
Bechab,  whom  he  wished  to  have  as  a  wit- 
ness to  his  "zeal  for  the  Lord"  (ver.  16). 
Having  entered,  he  addressed  the  multitude, 
or  the  chief  authorities  among  them,  requir- 
ing that  they  should  exercise  extreme  vigi- 
lance, and  make  it  quite  certain  that  none 
but  true  followers  of  Baal  were  present. 
And  said  unto  the  worshippers  of  Baal,  Search, 
and  look  that  there  he  here  with  yon  none  ol 
the  servants  of  the  Lord,  hut  the  worshippers 
of  Baal  only.  Jehu's  real  object  was  un- 
doubtedly to  save  the  lives  of  any  "  servants 
of  Jehovah  "  who  might  incautiously  have 
mixed  themselves  np  with  the  Baal-wor- 
shippers, out  of  curiosity,  or  to  have  their 
share  in  the  general  holiday.  That  he 
should  have  thought  such  a  thing  possible  or 
even  probable  indicates  the  general  laxity  of 
the  time,  and  the  want  of  any  sharp  line  of 
demarcation  between  the  adherents  of  the 
two  religions.  He  cleverly  masked  his  de- 
sire for  the  safety  of  his  own  religionists 
under  a  show  of  keen  anxiety  that  the 
coming  ceremonies  sliould  not  be  profaned 
by  the  presence  of  scoffers  or  indifferent 
persons.  His  requirement  was  in  the  spirit 
of  that  warning  which  the  heathen  com- 
monly gave  before  entering  upon  the  more 
sacred  rites  of  their  religion — "  Frocul  este, 
profani." 

¥M.ai— And  when  they  went  in— rather, 


flax.  1—36.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS, 


SIS 


when  (key  %ad  gone  in:  i.e.  when  tlie  whole 
multitude  of  Baal-worshippeis,  priests  and 
people,  had  entered  within  the  precincts  of 
the  temple — to  offer  laorlSoes  and  burnt 
offerings.  The  priests  officiate,  but  the 
offerings  are  regarded  as  conjointly  made 
by  priest  and  people.  Jehu  appointed  four 
score  men  without.  Josephus  says  ('Ant. 
Jud.,'  ix.  6.  §  6)  that  they  were  the  most 
trusty  men  of  his  body-guard,  which  is 
likely  enough.  They  were  no  doubt  also 
known  to  Jehu  as  attached  to  the  worship 
of  Jehovah.  And  said,  If  any  of  the  men 
whom  I  have  brought  into  your  hands  escape, 
he  thatletteth  him  go,  his  life  shall  be  for  the 
life  of  bim  (comp.  1  Kings  xx.  89).  Gaolera 
were  commonly  put  to  death  if  a  prisoner 
committed  to  their  charge  escaped  them 
(see  Acts  xii.  19 ;  xvi.  27). 

Yer.  2S. — And  it  came  to  pass,  as  soon  as 
he  had  made  an  end  of  offering  the  burnt 
offaring.  It  has  been  concluded  from  this 
that  Jehu  "  offered  the  saoiifloes  toith  his  own 
hand,  as  though  be  were  the  most  zealous  of 
Baal's  adorers  "  (Bwald, '  History  of  Israel,' 
vol.  iv.  p.  100) ;  but  the  conclusion  does  not 
follow  necessarily  from  the  expression  used. 
The  suffix  ^  in  'in'^ss  may  be  used  indefi- 
nitely, "when  one  finished,"  or  "when  fhetf 
finished;"  or  Jehu  may  be  said  to  have 
made  the  offerings,  because  he  furnished  the 
victinns,  not  because  he  immolated  them  with 
his  own  hand.  Throughout  heathendom, 
wlierever  there  were  priests,  it  was  the  duty 
of  the  priests  to  slay  the  victims  offered. 
That  Jehu  said  to  the  guard — ^literally,  to  fAa 
runners  (see  the  comment  on  1  Kings  i.  38) 
— and  to  the  captains — i.e.  the  ofScers  in 
command  of  the  guard — Go  in,  and  slay 
them ;  let  none  come  forth.  We  must  sup- 
pose that  some  guarded  the  doors,  while 
others  advanced  into  the  crowd  and  struck 
right  and  left  The  unarmed  multitude 
seems  to  have  made  no  resistance.  And  they 
smote  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword^ 
t.e.  cut  them  down  unsparingly,  smote  and 
slew  till  none  were  left  alive — and  the  guard 
and  the  oaptains  oast  them  out.  Tiiis  is 
generally  understood  to  mean  that  all  the 
bo  Jies  were  thrown  by  the  guards  out  of  the 
temple.  Dean  Stanley  says,  "Ttie  temple 
was  strewn  with  corpses,  which,  as  fast  as 
they  fell,  the  guard  and  the  officers  threw 
out  with  their  own  hands"  ('  Jewish  Church,' 
vol.  iL  p.  188).  But  it  is  not  apparent  why 
they  should  have  taken  this  trouble.  Per- 
haps Bahr  is  right  in  suggesting  that  no 
more  is  meant  than  that  the  guard  and  the 
officers  thrust  the  bodies  out  of  their  way,  as 
they  pressed  forward  to  enter  the  sanctuary 
which  contained  the  sacred  images.  And 
vent  to  the  city  of  the  house  of  BaaL  "  They 
Bade  their  way,"  as  Ewald  says,  "into  the 
Inner  sanctuary,  the  enclosure  of  which  rose 


like  •  lofty  fortress— -VJ  originally  meant 
"  fortress  "—where  Baal  was  enthroned,  sur- 
rounded  by  the  images  of  his  fellow-gods  " 
(<  History  of  Israel,'  I. «.  e.).  It  Is  to  be  re- 
membered that  the  assembled  midtitude 
occupied  the  conrt  or  courts  of  the  temple, 
within  which,  in  a  commanding  position, 
was  the  "house"  or  "sanctuary  —perhaps 
reserved  for  the  priests  only, 

Yer.  26.— And  they  brought  forth  th* 
images  out  of  the  house  of  Baal ;  rather,  tht 
pillars  (see  the  comment  on  1  Kings  xiv. 
23).  It  was  a  special  feature  of  the  Phoeni- 
cian worship  to  represent  the  gods  by  o-t^aoi 
or  Ktoyes,  which  appear  to  have  been  oouical 
stones,  or  obelisks,  destitute  of  any  shaping 
into  the  semblance  of  humanity  (see  Taci- 
tus, <  HisL,'  ii.  8 ;  Damaso.  ap.  Phot.,  *  Bib- 
liotheo.,'  p,  1063 ;  Max.  Tjt.,*  Diss.,'  xxxviii. 
p.  384).  The  Phoenicians  acknowledged 
several  deities  besides  Baal,  as  Ashtoretb, 
Melkarth,  Dagon,  Adonis  or  Tammuz,  El, 
Sadyk,  Esmun,  and  the  Kabiri.  The 
"pillars"  brought  forth  may  have  repre- 
sented some  of  these  deities,  who  might  all 
of  them  be  "  contemplar  "  deities  with  Baal ; 
or  they  may  have  been  "  Baalim,"  i.e.  forms 
and  aspects  of  Baal,  each  the  object  of  some 
special  cult  (see  Movers,  •  Phonizier,'  §  67-t). 
And  hnmed  them.  The  "  pillars  "  m  this 
instance  were  probably,  not  of  stone,  but  of 
wood. 

Yer.  27. — And  they  brake  down  the  imag« 
of  Baal ;  rather,  they  brake  in  pieoea  the 
pillar  of  Baal.  The  representation  of  Baal, 
the  main  ttelf  of  the  temple,  being  of  stone 
or  metal,  conld  not  be  destroyed  by  fire,  and 
was  therefore  broken  to  pieces  (comp.  ch. 
xxiii.  14).  And  brake  down  the  house  of 
Baal — {.e.  partially  ruined  it,  but  still  left 
portions  of  it  standing,  as  a  memorial  of  the 
sin  and  of  its  punishment — a  solemn  warn- 
ing, one  would  have  thought,  to  the  people 
of  the  capital — and  made  it  a  draught-house 
unto  this  day ;  made  it,  i.e.,  "  a  depository 
for  all  the  filth  of  the  town"  (Stanley); 
comp.  Ezra  vi.  II;  Dan.  ii.  5;  iii.  29;  and 
for  the  word  "draught"  in  this  sense,  see 
Matt.  XV.  17.  Such  a  use  was  the  greatest 
possible  desecration. 

Yer.  28. — Thus  Jehu  destroyed  Baal  out 
of  Israel.  The  measures  taken  were  effec- 
tual; the  worship  of  Baal  was  put  down, 
and  is  not  said  to  have  been  revived  in  the 
kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes,  Moloch-worsliip 
seems  to  have  taken  its  place  (see  ch.  xvii.  11% 

Yers.  29 — 31, — Jehu't  ehorleomings. 

Yer.  29. — Eowbeit  from  the  sins  of  Jero- 
boam the  son  of  Hebat,  who  made  Israel  to 
sin,  Jehu  departed  not  from  after  them.  It 
was  a  crucial  test  of  Jehu's  faithfulness  to 
Jehovah ;  would  he  maintain  the  calf-worship 
of  Jeroboam  or  not  ?  With  whatever  intent 
the  worship  had  been  set  np  by  Um  anthori 


«14 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


[oh.  z.  1->3& 


the  curse  of  Qoi  had  been  prononnced 
against  it  by  the  chief  prophet  of  the  time 
(1  Kings  xiii.  2%  and  hb  word  had  been 
attested  as  from  heaven  by  two  miracles 
(1  Kings  xiii.  4,  5).  Jehu  ought  to  have 
known  that  the  calf-worship,  if  not  as  hate- 
ful to  God  as  the  Baal-worship,  at  any  rate 
was  hateful,  was  a  standing  act  of  rebellion 
against  Jehovah,  and  laid  the  nation  under 
his  displeasure.  But,  while  his  own  interests 
were  entirely  detached  from  the  one,  they 
were,  or  at  least  would  seem  to  him  to  be, 
bound  up  with  the  other.  The  calf-worship 
was  thought  to  be  essential  to  the  mainte- 
nance of  the  divided  kingdom.  Abolish  it, 
and  all  Israel  would  "  return  to  the  house 
of  David"  (1  Kings  xii.  26—30).  Jehu 
was  not  prepared  to  risk  this  result.  His 
"zeal  for  Jehovah"  did  not  reach  so  far. 
Thus  his  "  reformation  of  religion  "  was  but 
a  half-reformation,  a  partial  turning  to  Je- 
hovah, which  brought  no  permanent  blessing 
upon  the  nation.  To  wit,  the  golden  calves 
that  were  in  Bethel,  and  that  were  in  San. 
The  erection  of  the  calves  (1  Kings  xii.  29) 
was  the  initial  sin,  their  worship  the  per- 
sistent one.  (On  the  nature  of  the  calf- 
worship,  see  the  comment  on  1  Kings  xii.  28, 
and  compare  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary ' 
on  the  same  passage.) 

Ver.  30. — And  the  Lord  said  nnto  Jehu — 
scarcely  by  direct  revelation,  rather  by  the 
mouth  of  a  prophet,  most  probably  of  Elisha, 
as  Thenius  supposes — Because  thon  hast 
done  weU  in  executing  that  which  is  light 
in  mine  eyes.  In  making  himself  the  exe- 
cutor of  God's  will  with  respect  to  the  house 
of  Ahab,  and  utterly  destroying  it,  as  he 
had  been  commanded  (ch.  ix.  7),  Jehu  had 
"  done  well ; "  he  had  also  done  well  in  put- 
ting down  the  worship  of  Baal,  and  slaying 
the  idolaters,  for  the  destruction  of  idolaters 
was  distinctly  commanded  in  the  Law  (Exod. 
xxii.  20 ;  xxxii.  27 ;  Numb.  xxv.  5).  These 
acts  of  his  are  praised ;  but  nothing  is  said 
of  his  motives  in  doing  them.  They  were 
probably  to  a  great  extent  selfish.  And  hast 
done  nnto  the  house  of  Ahab  all  that  was  in 
mine  heart  (see  ch.  ix.  21—37;  x.  1 — 7, 11, 
14),  thy  children  of  the  fourth  generation 
Bhail  sit  on  the  throne  of  Israel.  External 
obedience  was  suitably  rewarded  by  an  ex- 
ternal, earthly  honour — the  honoiir  of  having 
his  dynasty  settled  upon  the  throne  during 
five  generations,  and  for  a  period  of  above  a 
hundred  years.  Ko  other  Israelite  dynasty 
held  the  throne  longer  than  three  genera- 
tions, or  for  BO  much  as  fifty  years.  The 
"  children  "  or  descendants  of  Jehu  who  sat 
upon  the  throne  after  him  were  Jehoahaz, 
his  son,  Jehoash  or  Joash,  his  grandson, 
Jeroboam  II.,  his  great-grandson,  and  Za- 
chariah,  son  of  Jeroboam  II.,  his  great-great- 
grandson. 


Yer.  31. — But  Jehu  took  no  heed  to  walk 
in  the  Law  of  the  Lord  6od  of  Israel  with  aU 
his  heart.  Jehu's  character  is  thns  summed 
up  by  Dean  Stanley:  "The  character  of 
Jehu  is  not  difficult  to  nndentand,  if  we 
take  it  as  a  whole,  and  consider  the  general 
impression  lilt  upon  us  by  the  biblical 
account.  He  is  exactly  one  of  those  men 
whom  we  are  compelled  to  recognize,  not  for 
what  is  good  or  great  in  themselves,  but  as 
instruments  for  destroying  evil,  and  prepar- 
ing the  way  for  good;  such  a's  Augustas 
OiBsar  at  Borne,  Sultan  Mahmoud  IL  in 
Turkey,  or  one  closer  at  hand  in  the  revo- 
lutions of  our  own  time  and  neighbourhood. 
A  destiny,  long  kept  in  view  by  himself  or 
others — inscrutable  secrecy  and  reserve  in 
carrying  out  his  plans — a  union  of  cold, 
remorseless  tenacity  with  occasional  bursts 
of  furious,  wayward,  almost  fanatical  zeal ; 
— this  is  Jehu,  as  he  is  set  before  us  in  the 
historical  narrative,  the  worst  type  of  a  son 
of  Jacob — ^the  '  supplanter' . .  .  without  the 
noble  and  princely  qualities  of  Israel ;  the 
most  unlovely  and  the  most  coldly  com- 
mended of  all  the  heroes  of  his  country" 
('  Lectures  on  the  Jewish  Church,'  vol.  ii. 
p.  289).  The  estimate  is  lower  than  that 
formed  by  most  other  writers ;  but  it  is  not 
far  from  the  truth.  For  he  departed  not  from 
the  sins  of  Jeroboam,  which  made  Israel  to 
sin  (comp.  ver.  29). 

Vers.  32 — 36. — JehWt  wan,  length  of  reign, 
and  succeisor. 

Ver.  32. — ^In  those  day*  the  Lord  began  to 
out  Israel  short.  It  is  certainly  not  stated 
in  direct  terms  that  the  ill  success  of  Jehu's 
foreign  wars  was  a  punishment  on  him  for  his 
continued  maintenance  of  the  calf-idolatry: 
but  the  juxtaposition  of  vers.  31  and  32 
naturally  laises  the  idea,  and  constitutes  a 
strong  presumption  that  it  was  in  the  writer's 
mind.  The  "theocracy"  under  the  kings 
was  carried  on  mainly,  as  the  writer  of 
Chronicles  clearly  saw,  by  the  bestowal  of 
worldly  prosperity  and  military  success  on 
good  kings,  and  the  accumulation  of  mis- 
fortunes and  military  disasters  on  bad  ones 
(see  2  Chron.  xii.  5—12 ;  xiii.  4 — 18 ;  xiv. 
2—15;  XV.  2—15;  xvii.  3—5.  etc.).  By 
"cutting  Israel  short" — literally,  "cutting 
ofiF  in  Israel" — is  probably  meant  the  con- 
quest of  certain  portions  of  the  territory.  Ha- 
zael  resumed  the  war  which  Benhadad  had  so 
long  waged,  and  gained  numerous  successes. 
And  Haiiael  smote  them  in  all  the  coasts  ol 
Israel;  or,  along  their  whole  frontier  (Bahr). 
The  frontier  intended  is,  of  course,  that  on 
the  north  and  east,  where  the  Israelite  terri- 
tory was  conterminous  with  that  of  Syria. 

Ver.  33. — From  Jordan  eastward.  The 
territory  west  of  the  Jordan  was  not  attacked 
at  this  time.  Hazael's  expeditions  were 
directed  against  the  trans-Jordanio  region^ 


OH.  X.  1— 3d.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  Of  tttS  KINGS. 


aic 


the  Beats  of  the  three  tribei  of  Beaben,  Gad, 
and  Manasseh.  This  tract  was  far  easier  of 
access  than  the  other,  and  was  more  tempt- 
ing, being  the  richest  part  of  Palestine. 
The  region  comprised  all  the  land  of  Oilead 
— i.e.  the  more  gonthem  region,  reaching 
from  the  borders  of  Moab  on  the  south  to 
the  Hieromax  or  Sheriat-el-Mandh(ir  npon 
the  north,  the  proper  land  of  the  Oadltes, 
and  the  Beubenltes,  and  [a  portion  of]  the 
JIanassites — together  with  Bashan,  the  more 
northern  region,  which  belonged  wholly  to 
Manasseh — from  Aroer  (now  Arair),  whioh 
is  by  tho  river  imon — the  Wady-el-Mojeh, 
whioh  was  the  boundary  between  Israel  and 
Moab  (Numb.  xxi.  13, 24),  both  in  the  earlier 
and  (Isa.  xvi.  2)  in  the  later  times — even 
Qilead  and  Bashan.  There  Is  other  evidence, 
besides  this,  that  Hazael  was  one  of  the 
most  warlike  of  the  Syrian  kings.  We  find 
him,  on  the  Black  Obelisk  of  Shalmaneser 
II.,  mentioned  as  a  stubborn  adversary  of  the 
Assyrian  arms.  In  the  seventeenth  campaign 
of  Shalmaneser,  a  great  battle  was  fought 
between  the  two  monarchs.  Hazael  brought 
into  the  field  more  than  twelve  hundred 
chariots,  but  was  defeated,  and  obliged  to 
retreat,  his  camp  falling  into  the  hands  of 
the  enemy  ('  Eeoords  of  the  Past,'  voL  v.  p. 
34).  Four  years  later  Shalmaneser  invaded 
Hazael's  territory,  and  took,  according  to  his 
own  account  (ibid.,  p.  35),  four  cities  or  for- 
tresses belonging  to  him.  He  does  not  clai  m, 
however,  to  have  made  him  a  tributary ;  and 
by  his  later  annals  it  is  evident  that  he 
avoided  further  contest,  preferring  to  turn 
hia  arms  in  other  directions.    (On  Hazael's 


campaign  In  PhQiatia,  and  designs  against 
Jemsalem,  see  tha  comment  upon  ch.  xiL 
17, 18.) 

Yer.  34.— Kow  the  rest  of  the  aot*  of  Jehu, 
and  all  that  he  did,  and  all  his  might.  This 
last  phrase  is  remarkable,  considering  that 
Jehu's  wars,  after  be  became  king,  seem  to 
have  been  entirely  unsuccessful  ones,  that 
he  lost  a  large  portion  of  bis  dominions  to 
Syria,  and  (as  appears  by  the  Black  Obelisk) 
jaid  tribute  to  the  Assyrians  ('  Records  of 
the  Past,'  vol.  v.  p.  41).  "  Might "  has  been 
ascribed  by  the  writer  of  Kings  only  to 
Baasha  and  Omri  among  previous  Israelite 
monarclis,  and  only  to  Asa  and  Jehoshaphat 
among  previous  Jewish  ones.  "All  his 
might"  has  only  been  used  of  Asa.  We 
must  probably  understand,  that,  although 
defeated,  Jehu  gained  much  distinction,  by 
his  personal  prowess  and  other  military 
qualities,  in  the  Syrian  wars,  and  was 
reckoned  "  a  mighty  man  of  valoiu; "  in  spite 
of  the  ill  success  of  his  wars.  Are  they  not 
written  in  the  book  of  the  ohronioles  of  the 
kings  of  Israel  1  (see  the  comment  on  ch.  L 
18). 

Vers.  35,  36. — ^And  Jehn  slept  with  his 
fathers :  and  they  bulled  him  in  Samaria. 
And  Jehoahaz  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead. 
And  the  time  that  Jehu  reigned  over  Israel 
in  Samaria  was  twenty  and  eight  years. 
Twenty-eight  years  was  a  L  mg  reign  for  aa 
Israelite  king,  only  exoee  led  by  one  other 
king  in  the  entire  list,  viz.  Jerol>oam  II., 
who  is  said  in  oh.  xiv.  23  to  have  reigned 
forty-one  years.  The  kings  of  Judab  were 
longer  lived. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  fear  of  man  a  stronger  motive  with  the  wicked  and  worldly  than 
the  fea/r  of  God.  Eevolutions  subject  to  severe  trial  most  of  those  who  occupy  high 
stations  at  the  time  of  their  occurrence.  Such  persons  have  to  determine,  at  very  short 
notice  for  the  most  part,  the  line  which,  they  will  pursue,  the  side  which  they  will 
embrace,  and  the  lengths  to  which  they  will  go  in  their  support  of  it.  In  making  their 
choice  they  are  apt  to  think  less  of  what  they  ought  to  do  than  of  what  their  worldly 
interests  require  them  to  do.  They  "are  in  a  strait  betwixt  two" — on  the  one  hand 
is  the  fear  of  man,  on  the  other  the  fear  of  Qod.  The  one  ought  to  prevail ;  the  other 
commonly  does  prevail.    Let  us  consider  a  little  why  this  is  so. 

I.  Reasons  why  the  fbab  of  God  is  weak.  1.  The  wicked  and  worldly,  who 
form,  alas  I  the  vast  mass  of  mankind,  do  not  generally  even  so  much  as  realize  tho 
existence  of  God.  They  may  not  be  absolute  atheists,  but  practically  they  do  not 
have  God  in  their  thoughts.  2.  Those  who  believe  in  God  and  have  imne  fear  of  him 
view  him  as  distant,  and  his  vengeance  as  a  thing  that  may  come  or  may  not.  He  is 
merciful,  and  may  be  propitiated ;  he  is  compassionate,  and  may  not  be  "  extreme  to 
mark  what  is  done  amiss."  Men  hope  that  he  will  forget  their  misdeeds,  or  forgive 
them  for  his  Son's  sake,  or  accept  a  tardy  repentance  as  compensating  for  them  and 
blotting  them  out.  3.  Some  view  God  as  altogether  benevolent  and  beneScent,  and 
therefore  as  incapable  of  punishing  men,  forgetting  that,  if  be  is  kind,  he  is  also  just, 
and,  if  he  is  forgivjng,  he  is  also  jealous.  They  take  their  idea  of  (3od,  not  from  what 
is  revealed  concerning  him  in  Scripture,  but  from  their  own  imagination!  respeeting 
him — ^imaginations  whieh  are  •choes  of  their  wishes. 


216  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  [oh.  x.  1— 3a 

n.  Beasokb  wht  thb  fkab  or  man  is  btbonci.  1.  Man  is  visibly  present,  and 
hag  a  power  to  injure  and  pnnish  which  cannot  be  doubted.  2.  Man's  vengeance  falls 
heavily  and  speedily.  It  is  rarely  delayed ;  and  it  is  often  of  great  severity.  3.  It 
consists  of  pains  and  penalties  which  are  more  easily  realized  than  those  which  God 
threatens.  We  know  very  well  what  is  meant  by  the  death  of  the  body,  but  what  the 
death  of  the  soul  may  mean  is  obscure  to  us.  4.  If  we  oBend  men,  it  is  very  unlikely 
that  they  will  forgive  us.  Most  men  regard  clemency  as  a  weakness,  and  exact  "the 
uttermost  farthing  "  from  those  who,  they  think,  have  injured  them. 

Under  these  circumstance*,  the  fear  of  man  prevails.  The  rulers  of  Samaria, 
challenged  by  Jehu  either  to  raise  the  standard  of  revolt  against  him,  or  definitely  to 
embrace  his  cause,  and  mark  their  adhesion  to  it  by  embruing  tlieir  hands  in  blood, 
must  have  balanced  in  their  minds  for  a  time  the  two  alternatives — should  they  con- 
sent to  slay,  without  offence  alleged,  seventy  persons  obnoxious  to  the  powers  that 
were,  undeterred  by  fear  of  Divine  vengeance,  to  escape  the  anger  of  Jehu  ?  or  should 
they  brave  his  anger,  and  refuse  to  engage  in  the  massacre  required  of  them,  out  of 
regard  for  the  Law  of  God  (Exod.  xi.  13),  and  through  fear  of  the  vengeance  denounced 
by  God  upon  such  as  contravened  it  (Gen.  ix.  6)  ?  They  yielded  to  the  lower,  but 
more  immediate,  fear,  and  submitted  themselves  to  be  mere  tools  in  Jehu's  hands, 
because  they  feared  man  rather  than  God.  Having  made  up  their  minds  that  their 
forces  were  insufficient  to  contend  with  those  of  Jehu,  they  put  themselves  at  his  dis- 
posal, and  consented  to  do  all  that  he  required  of  them.  So,  constantly,  in  civil 
struggles,  parties  have  put  before  them  the  alternative  of  following  conscience  and 
embroiling  themselves  with  the  civil  authorities,  or  of  defying  those  authorities,  keeping 
their  conscience  clear,  and  observing  the  strict  Law  of  God  in  the  matters  whereon  they 
have  to  exercise  a  choice.  Sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Girondists,  the  better  part 
is  taken — duty,  truth,  virtue,  are  preferred  to  expediency,  and  martyrdom,  a  glorious 
martyrdom,  is  for  the  most  part  the  consequence ;  but  generally  the  result  is  different — 
expediency  carries  the  day,  and  the  sad  spectacle  is  seen  of  men  sacrificing  their 
principles  to  their  immediate  interest,  and  consenting  to  wade  through  crime  if  they 
may  preserve  their  worthless  lives  by  so  doing. 

Vers.  8 — 11. — The  wicked  have  small  regard  for  their  helpers  and  eonfederatee, 
Jehu  had  made  the  authorities  of  Samaria  his  tools.  He  had  required  of  them  the  per- 
formance of  a  wicked  and  bloody  act,  such  as  despotism  has  rarely  exacted  from  its 
instruments.  Seventy  persons  to  be  slain  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours — for  no  offence, 
for  no  state  necessity  except  to  smooth  the  path  of  a  usurper  I  And  the  seventy 
persons  for  the  most  part  boys  and  youths,  some  probably  infants,  and  these  defence- 
less ones  entrusted  to  the  care  and  protection  of  those  who  were  now  called  upon  to 
take  their  lives  I  It  was  a  tremendous  burden  to  cast  on  men  not  previously  his 
partisans,  not  bound  to  him  by  any  interchange  of  good  offices  and  benefits — rather, 
under  the  circumstances,  his  natural  opponents  and  adversaries.  Yet  they  took  the 
burden  on  themselves;  they  accepted  the  miserable  task  assigned  to  them — they 
accepted  it,  and  carried  it  out.  No  doubt  they  thought  that  by  so  doing  they  had 
bound  the  king  to  them,  made  him  their  debtor,  and  laid  him  under  an  obligation 
which  he  would  not  be  slow  to  acknowledge.  But  the  deed  once  done,  the  deaths  once 
accomplished,  and  immediately  the  instigator  of  the  crime  turns  against  his  accom- 
plices. "  Ye  are  righteous,"  he  says  to  the  crowd  which  has  gathered  together  to  gaze 
at  the  heads  of  the  victims — "  ye  can  discern  aright ;  now  judge  between  me  and  these 
murderers.  I  slew  my  master — I  killed  one  man,  a  political  necessity  compelling  me : 
but  who  slew  all  these  f"  He  holds  up  his  friends  and  allies,  without  the  least  com- 
punction, to  the  popular  odium.  He  entirely  conceals  the  fact  that  he  himself  has 
been  at  the  root  of  the  whole  matter,  has  conceived  the  massacre,  and  commanded  it 
(ver.  6).  He  contrasts  the  terrible  deed  of  blood,  which  has  horrified  all  who  have 
beard  of  it,  with  his  own  comparatively  small  crime,  and  claims  to  have  his  light  offence 
condoned,  overshadowed  ai  it  is  by  the  heinous  deed  of  the  Samaritans.  We  do  not 
know  whether  by  his  speech  he  provoked  any  popular  outbreak.  At  the  least,  he 
turned  the  tide  of  popular  disfavour  from  himself  to  his  confederates,  and  left  them  to 
answer,  as  best  they  might,  the  serious  question,  "  Who  slew  all  these  ?  "  It  is  worth 
the  preacher's  while  to  impress  on  men  the  frequency  of  such  conduct  on  the  part  ol 


OH.  X.  1—36.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  217 

the  persons  who  conceive  evil  designs,  but  must  have  tools  to  execute  them.  There  li 
no  solidarity  among  those  who  are  confederates  in  wickedness.  We  hear  of  "  honour 
among  thieves ; "  but  it  is  often  "  conspicuous  by  its  absence."  Monarchs  engaged  in 
plots  denounce  and  disgrace  their  ttgents,  when  the  plots  fail,  even  Bometimes  permitting 
their  execution  ;  ministers  are  conveniently  oblivious  of  the  services  rendered  by  those 
who  win  elections  by  intimidation  and  bribery ;  even  "  head-centres  "  are  apt  to  look 
coldly  on  the  work  done  by  "ratteners"  or  "moonlighters,"  and,  instead  of  commend- 
ing and  rewarding  them,  are  rather  anxious  to  disclaim  all  complicity  in  their  actions. 
If  the  poor  tools  knew  beforehand  how  little  benefit  they  would  derive  from  their 
wicked  violence,  what  small  thanks  they  would  get  from  those  who  set  them  on,  and 
how  ready  these  last  would  be,  on  any  diEBculty  arising,  to  leave  them  in  the  lurch, 
they  would  scarcely  lend  themselves  to  the  purposes  of  their  instigators.  It  is  one  of 
the  weaknesses  of  the  kingdom  of  evil  that  its  agents  do  not  keep  faith  one  with 
another.  It  would  weaken  the  kingdom  still  more  if  the  conviction  were  general  that 
this  is  so,  and  that  the  subordinate  agents  who  work  out  an  end  have  little  to  look  for 
in  the  way  of  reward  or  encouragement  from  their  employers. 

Vers.  15 — 23. — Jehu  cmd  Jehonadab — the  man  of  the  world  and  the  recluse  atcetic. 
Worldly  policy  often  finds  it  advisable  to  call  to  its  aid  the  sanctions  of  religion,  and 
the  support  of  those  who  stand  high  in  popular  estimation  as  religionists  of  more  than 
ordinary  strictness  and  sanctity.  It  is  comparatively  seldom  in  the  East  that  a  political 
revolution  is  effected  without  the  assistance  of  a  dervish  or  a  moUab  of  high  reputation 
for  strictness  of  life,  who  throws  over  a  questionable  movement  the  halo  of  his  reputed 
holiness.     In  the  present  instance  we  have,  on  the  one  hand — 

I.  Jehu,  the  man  of  the  wobld,  versed  in  the  ways  of  courts,  experienced  in 
affairs  both  civil  and  military,  a  good  general,  popular  with  his  brother-ofScers,  prompt 
in  action,  decided,  not  overburdened  with  scruples,  and  at  the  same  time  subtle, 
inclined  to  gain  his  ends  by  cunning  and  artifice  rather  than  by  force.  Circumstances 
have  brought  him  to  the  front,  and  put  the  direction  of  a  politico-religious  movement 
into  his  hands ;  but  the  situation  is  not  without  its  risks  and  dangers.  Jehu,  if  he 
does  not  absolutely  require,  cannot  but  welcome,  and  feel  his  position  strengthened  by, 
any  spiritual  support.  From  the  time  that  he  took  action,  he  had  not  received,  and 
he  did  not  dare  to  invite,  the  co-operation  of  Elisha.  He  could  not  expect  that  Elisha 
would  approve  the  proceedings  on  which  he  was  bent,  involving,  as  they  did,  a  large 
amount  of  falsehood  and  dissimulation.  All  the  more,  therc^fore,  must  he  have  rejoiced 
when  help  appeared  from  another  quarter — ^help  on  which  it  is  scarcely  possible  that  he 
can  have  reckoned.    Over  against  Jehu  stands — 

II.  Jehonadab  the  son  of  Bbchab,  a  chief  whose  position  is  abnormal  and 
peculiar.  The  tribe  of  the  Bechabites,  who^e  sheikh  he  was,  was  a  branch  of  the 
Kenites,  Midiauitish  Arabs  apparently,  settled  at  the  time  of  the  Exodus  in  the 
Sinaitic  peninsula.  The  Kenites,  or  some  of  them,  had  accompanied  the  Israelites 
during  a  large  part  of  their  wanderings  in  the  wilderness,  and  had  been  of  great  assist- 
ance to  them  (Numb.  x.  29 — 32 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  6) ;  in  return  for  which  they  were 
allowed  to  settle  in  Southern  Judasa  (Judg.  i.  16)  and  other  parts  of  the  Holy  Land 
(Judg.  iv.  11).  They  retained,  however,  their  nomadic  habits,  and  were  a  wandering 
people,  like  our  gipsies,  in  the  midst  of  the  settled  inhabitants  of  Palestine.  When 
the  Bechabite  tribe  fell  under  the  chieftainship  of  Jehonadab,  he  appears  to  have  bound 
them  down  by  stricter  rules  than  they  had  previously  observed,  and  to  have  required 
of  them  an  austerity  of  life  whereof  there  have  been  few  examples  in  the  history  of 
nations  (Jer.  xxxv.  6,  7).  They  were  to  dwell  in  tents,  avoid  cities,  drink  no  wine, 
au'l  cultivate  no  land.  Jehonadab  must  himself  have  been  a  recluse  and  an  ascetic, 
or  he  would  never  have  instituted  such  a  "  rule."  He  had  probably  the  same  sort  of 
reputation  as  now  attaches  to  a  Mohammedan  tomton  or  fakir,  and  represented  to 
the  mind  of  his  tribe,  and  even  to  numbers  among  the  Israelites,  the  strict  devout 
religionist,  whose  accession  to  a  party  or  a  cause  stamped  it  at  once  with  a  high 
moral  and  religious  character.  Jehu  needed  Jehonadab;  but  there  was  not  much 
to  attract  Jehonadab  to  Jehu.  He  would  seem  to  have  lent  Jehu  his  countenance 
simply  from  a  regard  for  the  honour  of  Jehovah,  and  a  detestation  of  the  Baal-wor- 
•hip.    But  he  would,  perhaps,  have  done  Jehovah  more  honour  had  he  held  himseU 


818  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EaNQS.         [oh.  x.  1—36. 

aloof  from  the  omfty  Mhemar  who  difgraoed  tli«  caoM  of  true  religion  bj  lies  and 
treachery. 

Ters.  29 — 33. — Hatf-hmaitchiieii  punUhed  hy  Ood  at  teeerdy  a$  actual  iipoxlaiy 
frvm  true  religion.  The  temper  of  the  Laodiceani  is  no  uncommon  one.  Men  may 
even  think  that  they  hare  a  "  zeal  for  the  Lord  "  (ver.  16),  and  yet  show  by  their  acts 
that  it  is  a  very  half-hearted  zeal — a  zeal  that  goes  a  certain  length,  and  then  stops  sud- 
denly. There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  Jehu  honestly  disliked,  nay,  perhaps  detested, 
the  religion  of  Baal.  It  was  an  effeminate,  sensual,  weakening,  debasing  system,  which 
a  rough  soldier  might  well  view  with  abhorrence.  Jehu  was  honest  and  earnest  in  his 
opposition  to  it,  as  he  showed  by  the  measures  which  he  took  to  put  it  down.  They 
were  no  half-measures — they  stamped  out  the  religion,  for  the  time  at  any  rate 
(ver.  28).  But  with  this  destructive  process  his  zeal  terminated.  He  did  not  go  on  to 
consider  what  he  could  do  to  reintroduce  and  stimulate  the  true  worship  of  Jehovah. 
Had  his  thoughts  moved  in  this  direction,  he  would  have  been  brought  face  to  face 
with  the  calf-worship,  and  would  have  had  to  consider  seriously  the  question  of  its 
maintenance  or  abolition.  But  this  question  probably  never  presented  itself  to  his 
mind.  He  was  not  possessed  by  any  real  love  of  God,  or  desire  to  worship  him  in 
spirit  and  in  truth.  Had  he  been,  he  would  have  called  in  the  advice  and  help  of 
Elisha,  and  taken  counsel  with  him  as  to  what  was  best  to  be  done.  But  this  is 
eiiactly  what  he  does  not  do.  He  comes  into  no  contact  with  Elisha.  After  delivering 
his  one  great  attack  upon  Baalism,  he  rests  upon  his  oars,  and  is  "neither  cold  nor 
hot "  (Bev.  iii.  15).  Consequently,  punishment  falls  upon  him.  Hazael  "  smites  him 
in  all  his  coasts."  While  the  apostate  Ahab  and  his  dynasty  had  maintained  the 
kii^dom,  on  the  whole,  without  serious  loss  or  diminution  of  power,  Jehu  loses  province 
after  province  to  Syria,  is  deprived  of  all  his  trans-Jordanic  territories,  and  induced  to 
submit  to  the  indigoity  of  paying  tribute  to  Assyria.  God  punishes  his  lukewarmness 
as  severely — may  we  not  say  more  severely  than  Ahab's  open  rebellion  7 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOSa 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Ahab's  sons  put  to  death.  Jehu's  commission  is  to  cut  off  utterly  the 
whole  house  of  Ahab.  Like  a  moral  plague  was  the  iniquity  of  Ahab's  house.  Every 
member  of  it,  by  heredity,  by  example,  by  association,  shared  the  guilt  of  Ahab  and 
Jezebel.  There  is  a  good  moral  reason  for  the  extermination  of  such  a  nest  of  evil- 
doers. But  Jehu  was  not  troubled  with  many  scruples  or  difficuItisgL  He  had  got  a 
certain  work  to  do,  and  he  did  it.     We  have  here — 

I.  Faithless  sebvants.-  The  general  corruption  and  demoralization  were  manifest 
in  the  way  in  which  Ahab's  sons  were  treated  by  the  elders  of  Samaria,  and  those  that 
brought  up  Ahab's  children.  It  was  no  zeal  for  what  was  right,  no  particular  hatred 
of  what  was  wrong,  that  caused  them  to  yield  so  complaisantly  to  Jehu's  real  wish. 
Jehu,  indeed,  satirized  them  to  their  face.  He  made  it  appear  as  if  he  really  wanted 
them  to  defend  their  master's  children  and  fight  for  their  master's  house.  It  would 
not  have  been  unnatural  to  expect  this  from  them.  But  they  were  sore  afraid.  Not 
only  were  they  willing,  in  their  craven  cowardice,  to  surrender  Ahab's  children  to  Jehu, 
to  let  him  work  his  own  will  on  them,  but  they  actually  slew  them  with  their  own 
hands,  and  sent  their  heads  to  Jehu.  Where  there  is  unfaithfulness  toward  Ood,  there 
wUl  he  imfait^fviness  in  the  relations  between  man  and  man.  Fickleness  is  a  charac- 
teristic of  the  world's  friendsliips.  Deception  is  a  characteristic  of  the  world's  business. 
But  the  Christian  will  be  failhfiil  to  duty,  to  conscience,  to  God.  "  He  sweareth  to 
his  own  hurt,  and  changeth  not "  (Ps.  xv.  4). 

XL  The  nNPAiUNO  wobd.  "  There  shall  fall  unto  the  earth  nothing  of  the  word  of 
the  Lord,  which  the  Lord  spake  concerning  the  house  of  Ahab :  for  the  Lord  hath  done 
that  which  he  spake  by  his  servant  Elijah."  Every  judgment  of  God  which  was 
threatened  upon  Ahab's  house  was  fulfilled.  God's  judgments  upon  Israel — how 
literally  and  fully  have  they  been  fulfilled  1  Every  judgment  pronounced  agunst  sin 
is  sure  of  certain  and  complete  fulfilment.  So  also  God's  promises  will  be  /ttlfilled. 
Not  a  single  promise  of  Qtod  was  ever  broken.    Why,  then,  should,  any  of  us  doubt  hii 


OH.  X.  1—36.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  219 

woid,  Ub  willingDesi  to  receive.  Us  power  to  Bave,  bis  desire  to  pardon  7  "  Come  now, 
uid  kt  ug  reason  together,  saitli  the  Lord :  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall 
be  u  white  as  snow ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool" — C.  H,  L 

Vers.  12 — 14. — Ahaziah'$  Irtthrenpnt  to  death.  Fresh  from  the  scene  of  retribution 
and  bloodshed  at  Jezreel,  Jehu  is  now  on  his  way  to  Samaria.  At  the  shearing- 
house  on  the  way  he  meets  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah  King  of  Judah.  Ahaziah  himself 
had  already  perished  at  Jehu's  hands  for  his  companionship  with  Jehoram.  And  now 
bis  brethren,  not  warned  by  Ahaziah's  fate,  go  down  "  to  salute  the  children  of  the 
king  and  the  children  of  the  queen."  Jehu's  vengeance  on  Ahab's  house  was  searching 
and  complete.  He  had  already  slain  at  Jezreel  not  only  Ahab's  kinsfolk,  but  his  great 
men  ukd  his  priests — all  who  in  any  way  showed  favour  or  encouragement  to  Ahab. 
In  the  same  spirit  he  now  puts  to  death  these  brethren  of  Ahaziah  because  of  their 
relationship  and  sympathy  with  Ahab's  house.     Note  here — 

L  The  ebsdIiTS  or  evil  companionship.  "  The  companion  of  fools,"  says  the  wise 
man,  "  shall  be  destroyed."  These  brethren  of  Ahaziah  might  have  pleaded  that  they 
were  doing  no  harm.  But  the  house  of  Ahab  was  notorious  for  its  wickedness.  It  had 
been  singled  out  for  the  terrible  retribution  of  God.  To  keep  up  friendship  with  men 
and  women  so  wicked  was  to  become  a  partaker  of  their  crimes.  The  old  Latin 
proverb  was  Noscitur  a  sociis — "  A  man  is  known  by  the  company  he  keeps."  If  we 
would  avoid  the  fate  of  the  wicked,  let  us  avoid  their  fellowship.  "  Enter  not  into  the 
path  of  the  wicked,  and  go  not  in  the  way  of  evil  men.  Avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn 
from  it,  and  pass  away."  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the 
ungodly,  nor  standeth  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor  sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful." 

II.  The  result  of  unheeded  warnings.  The  brethren  of  Ahaziah  had  already 
got  a  warning  in  the  &to  which  had  befallen  their  brother.  But  notwithstanding 
this,  they  went  on  to  their  own  destruction.  So  men  act  every  day.  1.  Ood's  Word 
warns  them,  but  in  vain.  They  laugh  to  scorn  the  message  of  the  gospel  that  urges 
them  to  accept  salvation,  and  to  flee  from  the  wrath' to  come.  They  act  as  the  people 
in  the  days  of  Noah,  who  disregarded  the  warnings  of  that  faithfd,  patient  preacher, 
and  knew  not  till  the  flood  came  and  swept  them  all  away.  2.  Ood's  providenees 
uwm  them,  hut  in  vain.  Sudden  deaths  remind  them  of  life's  imcertainty.  Perhaps 
for  a  day  or  two  they  are  impressed  j  and  then  they  become  engrossed  with  the  world 
agtun.  If  one  were  to  speak  to  them  about  their  soul,  they  would  gay,  "  Go  thy  way 
for  this  time;  when  I  have  a  convenient  season,  I  will  call  for  thee."  3.  Ood's 
judgments  warn  them,  hut  in  vain.  The  intemperate  man,  the  immoral  man,  the 
dishonest  man,  infatuated  with  evil  desires,  go  on  in  their  sinful  courses,  notwith- 
standing the  ruin  and  misery,  the  premature  deaths,  the  unhappy  lives,  the  degradation 
and  disgrace,  which  so  many  have  suffered  in  consequence  of  these  sins.  "  See  that 
ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh." — 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  15 — 31. — The  teal  of  Jehu,  and  its  lessons.  Jehu  is  now  going  up  to  Samaria 
with  the  resolve  to  destroy  the  prophets  of  Baal  firmly  rooted  in  his  heart.  On  his 
way  he  meets  Jehonadab  the  son  of  Bechab.  This  Jehonadab  was  the  founder  of  the 
Bechabitos.  It  was  he  who  commanded  his  children  to  drink  no  wine,  to  build  no 
houses,  and  plant  no  vineyards,  but  to  live  in  tents  all  their  days — a  command  which 
was  so  scrupulously  obeyed  by  their  descendants  that  the  Lord  instructed  the  Prophet 
Jeremiah  to  hold  them  up  as  an  example  of  obedience  to  the  Jews  in  after-years ;  and 
with  this  obedience  God  was  so  much  pleased  that  he  made  the  promise  that  Jonadab 
the  son  of  Rechab  should  not  want  a  man  to  stand  before  him  for  ever.  It  was  this 
simple-minded,  temperate,  self-denying  man  whom  Jehu  met  in  his  career  of  vengeance 
and  ambition,  and  whom  doubtless  he  wanted  to  associate  with  himself  in  order  to 
give  a  measure  of  respectability  to  his  further  proceedings.  He  invited  him  into  his 
chariot,  and  said,  "  Come  with  me,  and  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord." 

I,  There  was  muoh  that  was  good  about  Jehu's  zeal.  From  the  day  that  Jehu 
got  Us  work  to  do,  he  lost  no  time  in  the  doing  of  it.  He  was  eminently  a  man  of 
action.  That  he  had  good  qualities  no  one  can  doubt.  There  are  many  things  that 
are  attractive  about  Jehu.  He  was  a  brave  and  fearless  soldier.  Decision,  earnestness, 
promptness,  thoroughneu, — ^these  were  the  chief  features  of  his  character.    His  decided 


220  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  [oh.x.1— 3& 

character  impressed  itself  on  erery  detail  of  his  life.  When  he  was  still  far  off  from 
Jezreel,  the  watchman  npon  the  city  wall  was  able  to  distinguish  him  in  the  dim 
distance  by  the  way  he  drove  his  horses.  "  The  driving  is  like  the  driving  of  Jehu 
the  son  of  Nimshi ;  for  he  driveth  furiously."  He  did  not  waste  many  words.  When 
the  messengers  of  King-  Jehoram  rode  out  to  meet  him  with  the  question,  "  Is  it 
peace?"  his  answer  to  one  after  ihe  other  of  them,  without  reining  in  his  horses  for  a 
moment,  was,  "  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  peace  ?  turn  thee  behind  me."  Neither 
did  he  waste  words  when  he  came  to  deal  with  Jezebel  and  Jehoram.  He  knew  that 
in  such  work  as  he  was  engaged  there  is  danger  in  delay.  We  may  learn  much  from 
what  was  good  in  Jehu'g  character.  Zeal  itself  is  a  grand  thing.  It  is  men  of  zeal 
who  have  revolutionized  the  world.  Moses  was  a  man  of  zeal.  So  was  Elijah.  So 
was  Daniel.  So  was  St.  Paul.  So  was  Martin  Luther.  So  was  John  Knox.  AH  these 
men  wore  mocked  at  as  fools  and  fanatics  and  enthusiasts  in  their  time.  But  every 
one  of  those  men  has  left  his  mark  for  good  upon  the  history  of  the  world.  We  may 
say  the  same  of  such  enthusiasts  as  William  Wilberforce  and  John  Howard,  and,  to 
come  to  more  modern  times,  as  PlimsoU,  the  sailors'  friend.  It  is  the  world's  enthusiasts 
that  have  been  its  (jreatest  benefactors.  Yes ;  we  want  more  zeal ;  we  want  more 
enthusiasm.  It  is  the  fashion  amongst  many  to  sneer  at  enthusiasm,  and  to  mock  at 
zeal.  But  let  those  who  mock  at  enthusiasm  show  what  they  can  do  compared  with 
what  the  enthusiasts  have  done.  Give  me  the  man  who  has  an  enthusiasm  about 
something.  Give  me  the  man  who  thinks  that  life  is  worth  living,  and  that  there  is 
mmething  worth  living  for.  Let  it  be  study,  let  it  be  business,  let  it  be  one  of  the 
learned  professions, — the  man  who  has  enthusiasm  in  his  work  is  the  man  that  is  most 
likely  to  succeed.  If  there  is  any  one  who  should  show  enthusiasm,  it  is  the  Chriiiian. 
Who  should  be  so  full  of  zeal  ?  Who  has  so  much  cause  to  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory  ?  Who  can  point  to  such  a  leader  as  the  great  Captain  of  our  salvation  ? 
What  example  so  inspiring  as  the  example  of  Christ  ?  What  name  is  such  a  watch- 
word as  the  precious  Name  of  Jesus — the  Name  above  every  name  ?  Who  can  look 
forward  to  such  a  prospect  as  that  which  awaits  the  faithful  Christian?  "lie  thou 
faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  crown  of  life."  Who  has  such  resources 
at  his  disposal  as  the  Christian  for  work  and  conflict?  Zeal  t  surely  the  Christian 
ought  to  overflow  with  zeal.  Zeal!  when  he  thinks  of  his  Saviour  and  his  cross. 
Zeal!  when  he  thinks  that  heaven  with  all  its  glory  awaits  him.  Zeal!  when  he 
thinks  of  the  welcome  from  the  King.  Zeal !  when  he  thinks  how  short  his  time  is 
here.  Zeal!  when  he  thinks  of  the  perishing  and  needy  all  around  him.  Yes;  it  is 
well  to  have  within  your  heart  the  glow  and  fire  of  Christian  zeal.  What  if  the  care- 
less and  the  callous,  the  godless  and  the  worldly,  mock?  You  have  a  heart,  you  have 
a  hope,  you  have  a  strength,  that  is  above  their  shallow  sneers.  And,  having  Christian 
zeal,  let  it  not  spend  itself  in  mere  sentiment,  profession,  or  words.  But  let  it  show 
itself  in  action  prompt  and  decisive,  in  earnestness  and  thoroughness  of  life.  "  What- 
ever ye  do,  do  it  heartily,  as  unto  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men." 

n.  There  was  much  that  was  wrong,  and  thbkb  was  something  wanting,  in 
Jehd's  zeal.  1.  There  was  much  that  was  wrong  mingled  with  Jehu's  zeal.  (I)  In 
the  first  place,  there  was  boastfulness.  "  Come  with  me,  and  see  my  zeal  for  the  Lord." 
The  man  who  thus  parades  his  good  deeds  is  lacking  in  one  of  the  first  elements  of 
true  goodness  and  usefulness,  and  that  is  humility.  Yet  there  has  been  a  good  deal 
of  that  kind  of  zeal  for  God  in  all  ages.  The  Pharisees  considered  themselves  very 
zealous  for  the  Law  of  God,  but  they  soui.ded  a  trumpet  before  them  when  ihey  gave 
their  alms,  and  loved  to  pray  standing  at  the  corner  of  the  streets.  We  have  not  the 
sounding  of  the  trumpet  nowadays  in  the  same  form,  but  we  have  other  ways  of 
making  known  our  generous  and  philanthropic  acts.  There  is  nothing  wrong  in  these 
acts  being  made  known.  On  the  contrary,  a  public  acknowledgment  of  charitable  and 
religious  contributions  is  necessary  to  guard  against  fraudulence  and  deceit.  It  is  of 
use  also  to  remind  others  of  their  duty  and  stimulate  them,  perhaps,  to  greater  liberulity. 
But  when  we  give  our  alms  in  order  that  we  may  be  known  to  have  given  them — "  te  ha 
seen  of  men  " — we  give  from  a  wrong  motive — we  do  that  which  Christ  condemned.  It  is 
the  same  with  all  branches  of  Christian  work.  And  it  seems  to  be  one  of  the  danger* 
of  modem  Christian  life  that  there  is  too  much  temptation  to  boast  of  mere  numbers 
in  our  Churches,  or  of  so  much  money  accumulated,  or  of  so  many  converts  madei 


OH.X.  1— 36.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  221 

Too  many  Christian  worken  act  like  Jehu  when  he  said,  "  Gome  with  me,  and  see  my 
zeal  for  the  Lord."  True  Christian  work  is  for  quieter  than  this.  (2)  There  was 
something  worse  than  boastfulness  in  Jehu's  zeal.  Ther*  was  entd  treaeherp  and  deceit 
When  he  came  to  Samaria,  he  gathered  all  the  people  together  and  said,  "  Ahab  serred 
Baal  a  little ;  but  Jehu  shall  serve  him  much."  Then,  under  the  pretence  of  offering  a 
great  sacrifice  to  Baal,  he  assembled  all  the  worshippers  of  Baal  in  the  temple  of  that 
false  deity,  and,  haviag  thus  unfairly  and  deceitfully  entrapped  them,  caused  them  to  be 
Tiut  to  death.  It  was  an  act  of  deceit  for  which  there  was  no  excuse.  Matthew  Henry 
truly  observes, "  Gk)d's  service  requires  not  man's  lie."  What  a  contrast  to  Elijah's 
honesty  outspoken  conduct  when  he,  single-handed,  confronted  the  prophets  of  Baal, 
and  put  their  god  and  his  God  to  the  test  1  No  cause  will  ever  prosper,  no  matter  how 
much  zeal  may  be  manifested  in  it,  if  it  is  built  up  by  the  treachery  and  deceit  of  those 
who  are  at  the  head  of  it.  Let  us  never  so  far  accommodate  ourselves  to  the  false 
morality  of  our  time  as  to  do  evil  that  good  may  come.  Gbd  can,  and  does,  bring 
good  out  of  evil.  But  those  who  do  the  evil  must  suffer  for  it,  according  to  that 
Divine  law  of  retribution  which  was  so  plainly  and  terribly  fulfilled  in  the  case  of 
Ahab  and  Jezebel.  2.  In  addition  to  all  this,  there  was  tomething  wanting  in  all 
Jehu'*  steal.  He  had  not  the  love  of  God  in  his  heart.  He  had  indeed  obeyed  God's 
command  and  fulfilled  his  commission  in  one  partieular  direction,  but  the  ruling 
motive  in  Iiis  actions  would  seem  to  have  been  personal  ambition.  It  was  no  hatred 
of  idolatry  as  such  that  caused  him  to  destroy  the  worship  of  Baal.  Perhaps  it  was 
because  it  was  a  foreign  worship.  It  certainly  was  not  his  zeal  for  the  pure  worship 
of  God,  because  we  read,  "  Howlieit  from  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  who 
made  Israel  to  sin,  Jehu  departed  not  from  after  them,  to  wit,  the  golden  calves 
that  were  in  Bethel,  and  that  were  in  Dan"  (ver.  29).  And  again,  "But  Jehu  took 
no  heed  to  walk  in  the  Law  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  with  all  his  heart "  (ver.  31). 
We  may  learn  here  that  a  man  may  have  the  outward  form  of  godliness  without  the 
power  of  it.  He  may  appear  to  be  a  foremost  worker  in  the  cause  of  religion,  and  yet 
have  no  religion  in  his  own  heart.  He  may  even  appear  to  be  a  great  religious  reformer, 
and  yet  he  may  he  utterly  destitute  of  any  personal  reformation  of  character.  Jehu 
wa*  able  to  pull  down,  lut  he  huUt  nothing  up.  Why?  Because  his  own  charactei 
and  life  were  not  founded  on  the  rock.  He  had  not  begun  at  the  beginning — the  fear 
of  God  and  the  Law  of  God.  "  He  took  no  heed  to  walk  in  the  Law  of  God  with  all  his 
heart,"  See  to  it  that  your  zeal  springs  from  a  right  motive,  and  that  it  works  in 
ways  of  which  God  will  approve. 

HI.  Note  hbbe  some  lessons  about  God's  sealinsb.  1.  Ood  often  makes  me  of 
even  godless  men.  Perhaps  you  start  at  this.  Tes ;  but  it  is  true.  He  uses  them  for 
certain  purposes.  There  are  some  things  which  do  not  require  a  high  kind  of  character. 
So  God  sometimes  uses  even  wicked  men  to  be  the  executioners  of  his  judgments. 
The  kings  and  nations  whom  he  used  to  execute  his  judgments  upon  Israel  were  by 
no  means  rij;hteous  themselves.  Many  of  them  were  grossly  corrupt.  But  they  were 
the  rod  in  his  hand  to  chasten  and  punish  his  offending  people.  We  might  give  many 
illustrations  from  history.  To  take  one  only.  King  Henry  VIII.  of  England  was 
far  from  being  a  model  man,  yet  God  in  his  all-wise  providence  used  his  quarrel  with 
the  pope  to  be  the  means  of  furthering  and  establishing  the  Reformation  in  England. 
It  was  in  the  time  of  Henry  VIII,  that  for  the  first  time  the  papal  supremacy  in 
England  was  overthrown.  2.  Qod  gives  such  agents  of  his  justice  and  providence  their 
own  reward.  We  find  this  in  the  case  of  Jehu.  For  the  good  he  had  done,  God 
rewarded  Mm.  He  had  set  his  heart  on  the  throne,  and  Qod  gave  it  to  him.  The 
meastire  of  our  desires  is  very  often  the  measure  of  our  blessings.  LT  we  set  our 
ambition  on  earthly  rank,  or  riches,  or  honour  as  our  chief  good,  we  shall  very  likely 
get  them.  But  in  getting  them  we  shall  perhaps  lose  something  that  is  far  bettor 
worth  having.  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose 
his  own  soul?"  3.  For  God's  work  of  salvation,  he  uses  consecrated  men.  Jehu  wag 
of  use  as  a  destroyer,  as  an  image-breaker,  but  he  was  no  nation^  or  moral  reformer 
in  the  true  sense.  He  was  of  no  spiritual  benefit  to  others.  For  such  work  God  uses 
only  those  who  themselves  have  received  spiritual  blessing.  There  is  a  limit  to  the 
extent  and  to  the  ways  in  which  he  wiU  use  godless  men.  Even  David — God's  own 
servant,  who  had  repented  of  his  sins — wai  not  permitted  to  build  a  house  to  his  Name, 


Sa  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  [on.  x.  1— 3S 

becaum  hii  hands  were  stained  with  blood ;  he  had  been  a  man  of  war  all  hia  days. 
David  was  permitted  to  provide  and  store  up  the  material,  but  to  Solomon,  David's  son, 
was  given  the  great  honour  of  building  a  temple  to  the  God  of  Israel.  If  we  want  to  be 
of  use  in  God's  service,  we  must  be  thoroughly  cousecrated  to  God.  We  must  be  vessels 
meet  for  the  Master's  use.  "  Their  hands  must  be  clean,  who  bear  the  vessels  of  the 
Lord."  It  is  personal  character  that  gives  power  for  God's  service.  It  is  personal 
character  that  gives  fitness  for  God's  fellowship  here  and  hereafter.  "  Except  a  man 
be  bom  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  ef  God."  "  Follow  peace  with  all  men,  and 
holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord," — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 14. — DestrticUoH  of  Ahdb't  house.  Jehu  was  not  a  man  to  do  things  by 
halves.  Whatever  matter  he  had  in  hand,  he  pushed  with  unhesitating  feet  to  his  goal. 
His  motto  was,  "  If  it  were  then  done  when  'tis  done,  then  'twere  well  it  were  done 
quickly."  This  vigorous  determination  is  a  feature  in  his  character  worthy  of  com- 
mendation. It  is  not  so  clear  that  the  craft  and  guile  he  employed  in  secuiing  his 
ends  were,  even  from  an  Old  Testament  standpoint,  justifiable. 

L  The  ceaftt  mebsaob.  No  small  amount  of  craft,  as  this  chapter  shows,  mingled 
with  Jehu's  headlong  zeal.  1.  The  seed  royal  in  Samaria.  The  direct  posterity  of 
Abali — here  called  Ahab's  sons — ^amounted  to  seventy  persons.  Some  may  have  been 
his  own  children,  others  the  children  of  Jehoram,  or  of  his  other  sous.  They  resided 
at  Samaria,  and  were  under  the  care  of  nobles  responsible  for  their  education  and 
up-bringing.  On  them,  too,  the  judgment  of  God  was  to  fall.  In  itself  it  was  a 
common  Oriental  practice  for  the  founder  of  a  new  dynasty  to  put  to  death  the 
descendants  and  blood-relations  of  his  predecessor  (cf.  1  Kings  xv.  29;  xvi.  11 ;  ch. 
xi.  1 ;  XXV.  7).  This  was  to  protect  the  new  ruler  from  blood-vengeance.  In  the 
present  case  the  destruction  was  by  direct  command  of  Heaven.  The  principle  of 
corporate  responsibility  for  sins  committed  is  recognized  and  acted  on  throughout  the 
Old  Testament  (see  Mozley's  '  Ruling  Ideas  of  the  Old  Testament ').  It  embodies 
a  truth  of  permanent  validity  (Matt.  xxilL  34,  35).  Nevertheless,  a  pathos  attends 
a  fate  like  that  of  Ahab's  sons.  "  Whirled  down,"  as  Carlyle  says  of  other  unfortu- 
nates, "  BO  suddenly  to  the  abyss;  as  men  are,  suddenly,  by  the  wide  thunder  of  the 
mountain  avalanche,  awakened  not  by  them,  awakened  far  off  by  others  1 "  2.  The 
crafty  letter.  Having  struck  his  first  blow,  Jehu  lost  no  time  in  delivering  his  second. 
But  instead  of  openly  advancing  to  Samaria,  and  demanding  the  surrender  of  the 
seventy  sons,  he  proceeds  by  guile.  His  policy  was,  not  to  put  the  nobles  and  elders 
in  Samaria  in  opposition  to  him,  but  to  gain  them  to  Lis  side.  His  further  object  was 
to  implicate  those  persons  in  his  deeds,  by  making  them  the  direct  agents  in  the 
slaughter  of  Ahab's  sons.  The  manner  in  which  he  accomplished  these  ends  shows  no 
little  skill.  He  first  sends  a  letter  to  the  great  men  in  the  capital,  offering  them  a 
challenge  to  open  war.  He  recounts  to  them  their  advantages — the  presence  of  their 
master's  sons,  a  fortified  city,  horses,  chariots,  armour,  etc. ;  then  bids  them  select  the 
one  of  Ahab's  descendants  whom  they  think  most  suitable,  and  make  him  king,  and 
fight  for  their  master's  house.  This  put  the  nobles  in  the  dilemma,  either  of  getting 
up  an  improvised  resistance  to  Jehu,  or  of  making  unconditional  submission.  No 
time  was  given  them  to  consider.  They  must  decide  at  once,  and  that,  in  circumstances 
like  theirs,  meant  only  submission.  3.  The  submissive  reply'.  The  course  taken  by 
the  nobles  and  elders  was  what  Jehu  anticipated.  A  terrible  panic  took  possession  of 
them.  They  saw  how  vain  it  was  to  attempt  war  with  the  most  popular  and  energetic 
general  in  the  army,  backed  as  he  was  by  the  support  of  other  captains.  They  had  no 
head,  and,  notwithstanding  Jehu's  sarcastic  list  of  their  advantages,  no  proper  means 
of  defence.  The  fact  that  two  kings — not  to  speak  of  Jezebel — ^had  already  fallen 
before  this  "  scourge  of  God  "  added  to  their  dismay.  With  the  unanimity  of  despair, 
"  he  that  was  over  the  house,  and  he  that  was  over  the  city,  the  elders  also,  and  the 
bringers  up  of  the  children,"  indited  a  humble  epistle,  sent  it  to  Jehu,  and  put  them- 
selves entirely  in  his  hands,  offering  to  do  whatever  he  bade  them.  Necesdty  is  a 
terrible  tyrant.  How  many  things  men  yield  to  force  and  fear  which  they  would  not 
yield  to  reason  or  persuasion  I 

II.  Thx  tbbaohebous  uabbaobe.  1.  2%e  nei0  demand.  Jehu  took  the  leaden  at 
their  word,  and  sent  them  the  conditions  of  his  acceptance  of  their  submission.    If 


CH.X.1— 36.J  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINOa  223 

they  were  Us,  and  wonld  hearken  to  his  voice,  the  proof  of  allegiance  he  wonid  require 
of  them  would  be  that  they  bring  to  him  by  the  same  hour  to-morrow  the  heads  of 
their  master's  sons.  The  requisition  was  peremptory,  the  time  given  brief,  and  they 
had  already  committed  themselves  by  promising  obedience  to  whatever  Jehu  wished. 
Their  case  was  a  hard  one ;  nevertheless,  the  act  they  were  called  upon  to  perform  was, 
from  their  side,  a  revolting  and  treacherous  one.  2.  AhaVs  sons  <2atn.  Hateful  as  the 
requirement  was,  the  nobles  and  elders  of  Samaria,  now  that  they  had  come  to  terms 
with  Jehu,  do  not  seem  to  have  shown  any  hesitation  in  carrying  it  out.  The  sons  of 
Abab  had  been  entrusted  to  their  care ;  they  had  no  quarrel  with  them ;  they  did  not 
profess  to  be  moved  by  any  regard  for  a  command  of  God ;  yet  now  that  policy  and 
their  own  safety  dictated  that  their  charges  should  be  given  up  to  death,  they 
acquiesced  without  a  murmur.  This  shows  the  weakness  of  moral  feeling  in  the  ruling 
classes  of  Samaria.  It  shows  how  utterly  rotten  were  all  the  bonds  that  bound  man 
to  man.  The  willingness  with  which  the  men  of  Jezreel  swore  away  Naboth's  life  at 
Jezebel's  command  (1  Kings  xix.)  was  one  instance;  and  here  is  another.  "  Put  not 
your  trust  in  princes,  nor  in  the  son  of  man "  (Ps.  cxlvi.  3).  Political  morality  is  of 
the  weakest  fibre.  For  some  paltry  interest  men  will  turn  their  backs  to-morrow  on 
the  most  sacred  professions  of  to-day.  They  will  forswear  the  closest  friendships, 
stor>p  even  to  the  lowest  treachery.  3.  Jehu's  public  appeal.  That  very  evening 
apparently,  the  heads  of  Ahab's  sons  were  brought  to  Jehu  in  baskets.  He  bade  them 
be  piled  in  two  heaps  at  the  entrance  of  the  gate  until  the  morning.  Then,  standing 
in  the  gateway,  he  called  the  people  to  witness  that  the  leaders  in  Samaria  were  as 
deeply  incriminaterl  as  he.  They,  the  people  whom  he  addressed,  were  "  righteoiis," 
(.«.  clear  from  blood-guiltiness,  and  might  be  disposed  to  judge  him  severely  for  his  acts 
of  the  previous  day.  He  acknowledged  that  he  had  conspired  against  his  master,  and 
had  slain  him ;  but — pointing  to  the  pyramids  of  heads — who  had  slain  all  these  ?  In 
truth,  he  went  on  to  aver,  not  any  of  them  were  guilty,  for  this  was  but  the  fulfilment 
of  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  he  had  spoken  by  Elijah.  (1)  Jehu  was  right  in  his 
averment,  "  Know  now  that  there  shall  fall  to  the  earth  nothing  of  the  word  of  the 
Lord."  Many  demonstrations  of  that  fact  have  been  given.  We  do  well  to  impress 
the  truth  upon  our  minds.  (2)  It  is  a  common  thing  for  men  to  shield  themselves 
from  the  consequences  of  their  acts  by  pleading  that  others  are  as  guilty  as  they  are. 
This,  however,  will  not  justify  them. 

III.  AHAZiiH's  BRBTHEBN.  A  further  act  in  the  tragedy  of  the  destruction  of 
Ahab's  house  took  place  at  a  certain  shearing-house  on  the  road  to  Sa  naria.  Thither 
forty-two  brethren  (kinsmen)  of  Ahaziah  had  come  down  on  theii-  way  to  pay  a 
pleasure  visit  to  their  relations,  the  princes  at  the  capital.  They  were  appaiently  as 
yet  unaware  of  the  revolution  that  had  taken  place.  It  was,  iiowever,  to  prove  a  costly 
visit  to  them.  Jehu,  fresh  from  his  work  of  blood,  encountered  them  at  the  shearing- 
house,  and,  on  ascertaining  who  they  were,  had  them  all  put  to  death  on  the  spot. 
Their  bodies  were  oast  into  the  pit  of  the  place.  In  pursuit  of  their  pleasures,  how 
many,  like  Ahaziah's  brethren,  have  found  themselves  overtaken  by  death  I  The  way 
of  pleasure  is,  for  many,  the  way  of  death — the  way  to  the  pit  of  destruction. — J,  0. 

Vers.  15 — ^28. — Destruction  of  the  worshippers  of  Baal.  The  plans  of  Jehu  were 
already  assuming  larger  shape.  He  had  now  a  scheme  in  view  for  rooting  Baal  entirely 
out  of  the  land. 

L  The  meetino  with  Jehonadab.  1.  A  helpful  aHy.  While  relying  mainly  on 
his  own  promptitude  and  energy,  Jehu  had  a  shrewd  eye  to  whatever  would  help  to 
strengthen  his  position  before  tiie  people.  Hasting  to  Samaria  in  his  chariot,  he  met 
a  man  of  much  reputation  for  sanctity — Jehonadab  the  son  of  Eechab.  As  a  protest 
against  the  corruption  and  luxury  of  his  time,  Jehonadab  had  withdrawn  from  life  in 
cities,  and  had  laid  upon  his  sons  a  vow  that  they  would  drink  no  wine,  neither  build 
houses,  nor  plant  vineyards;  but  would  dwell  in  tents  all  their  days  (Jer.  xxxv.  6,  7). 
To  get  this  man  of  ascetic  virtue  on  his  side  would,  Jehu  felt,  greatly  fortify  his 
claims.  It  would  give  colour  and  repute  to  his  proceedings.  Jehu  at  once  sounded 
Jehonadab  as  to  his  feelings  in  regard  to  him,  and  finding  that  Jehonadab's  heart  was 
as  his  heart,  he  extended  his  hand  to  the  anchorite,  and  took  him  up  with  him  into  his 
chariot.    It  is  noticeable  how  anxious  men  who  make  no  pretensions  to  godlinesa  often 


224  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  x.  1—36. 

an  to  get  tbe  eonntenance  and  approval,  of  good  men  for  their  deeds.  Hypocrisy  has 
been  c^ed  the  homage  which  vice  pays  to  virtue,  and  this  desire  for  the  approval  of 
a  holy  man  is,  in  another  form,  the  tribute  of  worldly  policy  to  the  superior  power  of 
character.  2.  Zeal  for  the  Lord.  "Come  with  me,"  said  Jehu,  "and  see  my  zeal  for 
the  Lord."  (1)  Of  Jehu's  "  zeal,"  in  itself  considered,  there  could  be  no  question.  Zeal 
was  his  most  prominent  characteristic.  His  zeal  is  seen  in  his  eager  haste  to  attain  bis 
ends,  in  bis  scouting  of  difBculties,  in  tbe  thoroughness  with  which  each  piece  of  work 
is  accomplished,  in  the  quickness  and  skill  of  his  devices.  Such  zeal  is  in  large 
measure  a  natural  endowment — a  thing  of  temperament.  Still,  it  is  an  essential  to 
success  in  practical  undertakings,  spiritual  as  well  as  worldly.  The  man  who  gets  on 
is  tbe  man  who  does  not  let  the  grass  grow  beneath  his  feet,  who  is  an  enthusiast  in 
what  he  takes  in  hand.  "  It  is  good  to  be  zealously  afiected  always  in  a  good  thing  " 
(Gal.  iv.  18).  (2)  More  doubtfiQ  is  the  quality  of  Jehu's  zeal  "for  the  Lord."  Osten- 
sibly it  was  God  s  will  Jehu  was  carrying  out ;  outwardly  it  was  Gtod's  work  he  was 
doing.  He  may  even  have  persuaded  himself  into  the  belief  that  he  was  honestly  and 
disinterestedly  serving  God's  ends.  But  the  result  showed  that,  in  serving  God,  it  was 
really  bis  own  ends  Jehu  was  serving.  His  zeal  was  impure.  It  was  largely  inspired 
by  selfish  ambition,  by  considerations  of  policy,  by  the  thought  of  the  reward  to  him- 
seir.  It  was  impure  also  in  its  admixture  of  craft  and  worldly  expediency.  Had  the 
same  service  been  proposed  to  Jehu  without  any  apparent  material  advantages  to  him- 
self, his  zeal  would  not  have  been  so  easily  evoked.  (3)  Similarly,  how  much  that 
passes  for  "zeal  for  the  Lord  "  in  this  world  is  of  the  same  impure  nature  1  How  much 
of  it  is  inspired  by  sectarian  rivalry,  by  party  spirit^  by  the  desire  to  make  "a  fair 
show  in  the  flesh  "  (Gal.  vi.  12),  by  self-interest  and  worldly  policy  I  How  largely  is 
it  ailoyed  with  human  passion  and  intrigue  1  Truly  we  do  well  to  examine  ourselves. 
Zeal  is  to  be  tested,  not  by  its  passing  and  spasmodic  exhibitions,  but  by  its  power  of 
endurance  amidst  good  report  and  evil  report.  3.  The  end  of  AhaVt  house.  When 
Jehu  reached  Samaria  vrith  Jehonadab,  he  made  an  end  of  all  that  remained  of  the 
family  of  Abab^tbe  word  of  tbe  Lord  by  Elijah  being  thus  completely  fulfilled. 

II.  The  FEAST  TO  Baal.  X.  Jehu'sprodamatimi.  Hitherto  Jehu  had  acted  without 
giving  to  any  one  much  explanation  of  his  motives  and  designs.  He  bad  denounced 
to  Jehoram  Jezebel's  idolatries  and  witchcrafts ;  he  had  whispered  to  Jehonadab  of  his 
"  zeal  for  the  Lord ; "  but  to  the  eye  of  the  crowd  bis  proceedings  bore  only  the  com- 
plexion of  an  ordinary  political  conspiracy.  Having  established  himself  upon  the 
throne,  the  stage  was  clear  for  the  revelation  of  his  own  intentions.  And  great  dismay 
must  have  spread  through  the  ranks  of  all  those  who  looked  for  a  revival  of  true 
religion  from  tbe  downfall  of  Ahab's  house,  when  the  first  public  manifesto  of  the  new 
king  proclaimed  him  an  enthusiastic  worshipper  of  BaaL  "  Ahab,"  were  his  words, 
"  served  Baal  a  little;  but  Jehu  shall  serve  him  much."  If  Ahab's  service  of  BasJ  was 
reckoned  little,  what  was  to  be  expected  from  one  who  would  serve  him  so  much  more? 
It  was  certain  that,  whatever  Jehu  did,  he  would  do  it  with  abounding  zeal.  If  he 
took  up  Baal's  cause,  there  was  no  saying  to  what  lengths  he  would  carry  it,  or  what 
severities  he  would  employ  to  crush  rival  worships.  Terrible  disappointment  would 
seize  the  hearts  of  the  worshippers  of  Jehovah ;  and  the  servants  of  Baal,  who  had 
thought  their  cause  destroyed,  would  be  correspondingly  elated.  It  is  good  neither  to 
be  unduly  uplifted  nor  too  heavily  cast  down  at  unexpected  turns  in  public  affairs. 
Those  who  rely  for  the  success  of  their  cause  on  the  favours  of  great  men  are  apt  to  be 
sorely  disappointed.  2.  The  deluded  assembly.  It  seemed  at  the  first  as  if  Jehu  were 
to  be  every  whit  as  good  as  his  word. ,  His  proclamation  not  only  included  a  decla- 
ration of  his  fixed  intention  to  worship  Baal,  but  gave  effect  to  that  intention  by 
summoning  a  great  assembly  of  the  prophets,  priests,  and  servants  of  Baal,  to  he  held 
in  the  house  of  Baal  at  Samaria.  A  day  was  set  apart,  and  the  assembly  was  pro- 
claimed throughout  all  Israel.  The  king  was  to  offer  a  great  sacrifice,  publicly  ratifying 
his  avowal  of  allegiance  to  the  heathen  god.  From  all  parts  of  the  land  the  wor- 
shippers of  Baal  come  trooping  up,  and  the  spacious  courts  of  the  great  "  house  of  Baal " 
were  filled  to  overflowing.  As  if  to  give  tbe  highest  possible  edcU  to  the  occasion, 
Jehu  first  ordered  vestments  to  be  produced  from  the  temple  or  palace  robe-chamber, 
and  given  to  the  worshippers;  then  he  caused  search  to  be  made  that  none  but  servants 
of  B»l  were  present.    'The  worshippers  of  Ba»l  were  charmed;  yet  in  truth  they  wer* 


eH.x.1— 36.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  226 

there  as  sbeep  gathered  together  for  the  slaughter.  AH  this,  we  are  told,  "Jehu  did  In 
Bubtilty,  to  the  latent  that  he  might  destroy  the  worshippers  of  Baal."  It  is  impos- 
sible to  condone  this  flagrant  hypocrisy,  which  even  went  the  length  of  offering  up 
a  sacrifice  to  the  false  god.  How  unlike  the  open  challenge  of  Elijah,  who  gave  orders, 
indeed,  for  the  destruction  of  Baal's  prophets,  but  only  after  they  had  been  publicly 
convicted  of  imposture  (1  Kings  xviii.)  1  We  must  not  do  evil,  even  that  good  may 
come.  We  see,  however,  how  sometimes  the  wicked  are  on  the  very  brink  of  their 
destruction  when  their  hearts  are  most  lifted  up  (Esth.  v.  11,  12 ;  Pa.  Ixxiii.  18 — 20). 
Things  are  not  always  what  they  seem.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  see  the  haters 
of  truth  given  up  to  believe  a  delusion,  that  they  may  be  destroyed. 

III.  Baal  BOOTED  OUT.  1.  The  guards  posted.  While  the  festal  throng  is  rejoicing 
within,  eighty  strong  guards  are  posted  without  by  the  wily  Jehu,  to  secure  that  none 
shall  escape.  To  the  captains  and  guard  are  committed  the  task  of  actual  slaughter. 
2.  Jehu's  sacrifice.  Proceeding  to  the  interior,  Jehu  takes  part  in  the  various  solem- 
nities. At  length  the  worship  reaches  its  climax  in  the  offering  of  the  great  burnt 
offering  of  the  king.  This,  as  remarked  above,  was  an  act  not  to  be  justified.  It 
showed  how  little  Jehu  understood  the  spiritual  nature  of  God,  or  was  sincerely 
desirous  of  serving  him,  when  he  could  bring  himself  to  promote  God's  cause  by  going 
through  this  idolatrous  farce.  Is  it,  however,  worse  than  many  other  things  that  are 
professedly  done  in  the  Name,  and  ostensibly  for  the  honour,  of  God  i  3.  A  promis- 
cuous slaughter.  When  the  festivity  was  thus  at  its  height,  Jehu  gave  the  word,  and, 
the  soldiers  entering,  an  indiscriminate  and  merciless  slaughter  took  place.  Not  one  of 
Baal's  worshippers  was  allowed  to  escape.  It  was  a  fearful  massacre,  but  seems  effec- 
tually to  have  rooted  Baal-worship  out  of  the  land.  The  slaughter  of  the  deluded 
votaries  was  followed  by  the  breaking  down  of  the  house  of  Baal,  with  its  pillars, 
images,  etc.  The  retribution  in  itself  was  righteous,  and  shadows  forth  the  terrible, 
sudden,  and  overwhelming  ruin  that  shall  yet  overtake  all  God's  enemies.  But  the 
deed  of  vengeance  is  sadly  stained  with  human  passion,  deceit,  and  wrong.— J.  0. 

Vers.  29—36. — The  reign  of  Jehu.  Under  this  head  we  note— 
I.  Jehu's  ebwakd.  1.  Four  generations  on  the  throne.  Jehu  had  outwardly  ful- 
filled the  commission  given  him  by  God,  and  had  wrought  a  great  deliverance  for 
Israel.  This  public  service  God  acknowledged  by  the  promise  that  his  sons  should  sit 
upon  the  throne  to  the  fourth  generation.  The  service  was  outward,  and  the  reward 
was  outward.  Approval  of  Jehu's  deeds  did  not  extend  to  approval  of  every  detail  in 
his  conduct.  The  limit — "  fourth  generation  " — already  implies  that  Jehu  was  not  all 
he  should  have  been,  and  anticipates  that  his  sons  would  not  be  morally  better,  else 
the  line  would  have  heen  continued.  2.  The  stain  of  blood.  Jehu  had  shed  much  blood. 
Guilt  could  not  be  imputed  to  him  in  this,  so  far  as  he  was  acting  under  an  express 
Divine  command.  He  "  delivered  his  soul "  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  9),  however,  only  if  this 
Divine  command  furnished  the  actual  motive  of  his  conduct.  If  the  Divine  mandate 
but  covered  designs  of  selfish  ambition,  the  stain  of  blood  came  back  on  him.  Hence 
the  different  judgment  passed  on  these  deeds  in  Hos.  i.  4,  "  I  will  avenge  the  blood  of 
Jezreel  npon  the  house  of  Jehu."  In  2  Kings  Jehu's  acts  are  regarded  on  their  outward 
side,  while  in  Hosea  they  are  considered  on  their  iimer  and  spiritual  side.  His  real 
character  was  made  apparent  by  his  subsequent  deeds.  He  obeyed  God  only  so  far  as 
he  could  at  the  same  time  serve  himself  He  would  willingly  have  shed  the  same 
amount  of  blood  to  secure  the  throne  for  himself,  had  there  been  no  Divine  command 
at  all.  It  hence  became  impossible  to  exonerate  him  from  a  measure  of  blood-guiltiness. 
By  making  himself  one  with  Ahab  in  his  sins,  Jehu  fell  back  to  the  position  of  an 
ordinary  manslayer. 

IT.  Jehu's  FAILDBB.  I.  Eis  sin.  Generally  it  is  affirmed  that,  after  his  elevation  to 
the  throne,  "he  took  no  heed  to  walk  in  the  Law  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  with  all  his 
heart,"  and  particularly  it  is  charged  against  him  that  he  did  not  remove  the  golden 
calves  of  Jeroboam.  He  continued  that  idolatrous  and  schismatic  worship  at  Bethel 
and  at  Dan.  This  means  that  his  "  zeal  for  the  Lord "  stopped  short  at  the  point 
needed  for  the  consolidation  of  his  own  power.  Once  seated  on  the  throne,  with  no 
more  blood  of  Ahab's  house  to  shed,  he  became  indifferent  to  religious  reform.  The 
self-will  that  underlay  his  pretended  zeal  for  God  thus  became  apparent.    It  seemed  to 

II.  EIKOB.  4) 


220 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THJJ  KINGS.         tea.  xi.  1— 2t 


him  politically  prudent  to  keep  up  the  division  of  the  kingdom!  by  perpetuating  the 
calf-worship  of  Jeroboam ;  so,  though  he  knew  it  was  wrong,  he  refrained  from  inter- 
fering with  it.  We  see  in  this  the  distinction  between  true  and  false  zeal.  True  zeal 
for  God  is  careful  above  all  things  to  walk  in  God's  ways.  It  honours  his  command- 
ment above  considerations  of  expediency.  It  is  not  spasmodic,  but  persists  in  well- 
doing. False  zeal,  on  the  contrary,  is  fitful  and  wilful.  It  is  moved  when  self-interest, 
or  private  passion,  or  inclination,  or  the  praise  of  men,  coincides  with  the  Divine  com- 
mand ;  it  throws  off  the  mask  when  religion  and  interest  point  in  opposite  directions. 
It  is  time  alone  can  test  the  quality  of  zeaL  2.  Bib  punishment.  We  find  that  after 
his  declension  Jehu  suffered  severe  losses  of  territory.  Eazael  and  the  Syrians  pressed 
in,  and  took  from  him  most  of  the  land  on  the  east  side  of  Jordan.  It  is  not  difficult 
to  connect  the  two  things  as  cause  and  effect.  Had  Jehu  remaiaed  faithful  to  God,  it 
is  not  to  be  thought  that  he  would  have  suffered  these  losses.  Because  he  did  not 
remain  faithful,  he  was  scourged  more  severely  than  perhaps  another  man  would  have 
been.  He  was  raised  up  to  punish  others,  and,  foreseeing  his  declension,  an  instrument 
had  been  prepared  to  punish  him  (ch,  viii.  12).  When  God  was  against  him,  his 
generalship  and  valour  were  of  no  avail.  We  are  thus  taught  that  true  self-interest  and 
irreligion  do  not  coincide.  Jehu  sought  his  own  enrls,  and,  as  a  politic  ruler,  thought  it 
wiser  to  disobey  God  than  to  run  the  risk  of  putting  down  a  popular  idolatry.  The 
result  showed  how  short-sighted  his  calculations  were.  The  wisest  course,  even  for  our 
own  interests,  is  to  do  what  God  requires. 

Nothing  more  is  told  of  the  twenty-eight  years'  reign  of  Jehu.    He  waa  buried  in 
Samaria,  and  his  son  Jehoahaz  succeeded  him.^^.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  XL 

Vers.  1 — 21. — Ebvolution  in  JnnAH,  fol- 
lowing THB  EeVOLUTIONAET  MOVEMENTS  IH 

Israel.  Eeisn  ov  ATrtLiAH  over  Jtjdah. 
CoNSPiBAOT  or  Jehoiada,  and  Death  of 
Athaliah. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — On  learning  the  death  of 
Ahaziah  (oh.  ix.  27),  Athaliah,  daughter 
of  Ahab  and  Jezebel,  the  queen-mother, 
murders  all  her  grandohildten  (except  the 
youngest,  Joash,  who  is  secreted  by  his 
aunt,  Jehosheba)  and  seizes  the  kingdom. 
No  resistance  is  made  to  her,  and  she  retains 
the  sole  authority  for  six  yean.  The  wor- 
ship of  Baal,  introduced  by  Jehoram  into 
Judah,  and  supported  by  Ahaziah  (oli.  viiL 
27),  is  maintained  by  her  (oh.  xi.  18). 

Yer.  1. — And  when  Athaliah  the  mother 
of  Ahaziah  saw  that  her  son  was  dead.  (On 
Athaliah,  see  the  comment  upon  oh.  viii. 
18.)  She  was  married  to  Jeboram,  son  of 
Jehoshaphat,  probably  in  the  lifetime  of  his 
father,  to  cement  the  alliance  concluded  be- 
tween Ahab  and  Jehoshaphat  against  the 
Syrians  (1  Kings  xxii.  2 — 1).  She  inherited 
much  of  her  mother  Jezebel's  character,  ob- 
tained an  unlimited  asoendanoy  over  her 
husband,  Jehoram,  and  kept  her  son  Aha- 
■iah  In  leading-strings.  It  was  unquestion- 
ably through  her  influence  that  Jehoram 


was  prevailed  upon  to  introduce  the  Baal- 
worship  into  Judah  (ch.  viii.  18 ;  2  Citron, 
xxi.  5,  11),  and  Ahaziah  prevailed  upon  to 
maintain  it  (oh.  viii.  27 ;  2  Chron.  xxiL  3, 
"  He  also  walked  in  the  ways  of  the  house 
of  Ahab :  for  hi»  mother  wot  hi$  counsellor 
to  do  wickedly  ").  On  the  death  of  Ahaziah, 
she  found  her  position  seriously  imperilled. 
The  crown  would  have  passed  naturally  to 
one  of  her  grandchildren,  the  eldest  of  the 
sons  of  Ahaziah.  She  would  liave  lost  her 
position  of  gebirah,  or  queen-mother,  which 
would  have  passed  to  the  widow  of  Ahaziali, 
the  mother  of  the  new  sovereign.  If  she 
did  not  at  once  lose  all  influenoe,  at  any 
rate  a  counter-influence  to  hers  would  have 
been  established ;  and  this  might  well  have 
been  that  of  the  high  priest,  who  was  closely 
connected  by  marriage  with  the  royal  family. 
Under  these  oircumstances,  she  took  the  bold 
resolution  described  in  the  next  clause.  She 
arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal.  She 
issued  her  orders,  and  had  all  the  members 
of  the  house  of  Cavid  on  whom  she  could 
lay  her  hands  put  to  death.  The  royal 
house  had  already  been  greatly  depleted  by 
Jehoram's  murder  of  his  brothers  (2  Chron. 
xxi.  4),  by  Arab  marauders  (2  Chron.  xxi. 
17),  and  by  Jehu's  murder  of  the  "  brethren 
of  Ahaziah  "  (oh.  x.  14);  but  it  is  dear  that 
Ahaziah  bad  left  several  sons  behind  him, 
and  some  of  his  "brethren"  had  also,  in 
all  probability,  left  issue.  There  may  also 
have  been  many  other  descendants  of  David 
in  Judah,  belonging  to  other  branehes  of  the 


ek.  XT.  i— 21.1         *HE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


izi 


honie  tban  tliat  of  Behoboam.  AthaliEdi, 
no  doubt,  endeavoured  to  make  a  clean 
■weep,  and  get  lid  of  them  all. 

Ver.  2.— But  Tehosheba  ("  Jehoshabeath," 
Gbionicles;  "Josabethd,"  Josephus).  The 
daughter  of  King  Joram,  sister  of  Ahaziah — 
half-sister,  accoiding  to  Josephus  ('Ant. 
Jud.,'  ix.  7.  §  1),  the  daughter  of  Joram  by 
a  eecondary  wife,  not  by  Athaliah — took 
Joash  the  son  of  Ahazlah,  and  stole  him  from 
among  the  king's  sons  which  were  slain. 
As  aunt  of  the  royal  children,  Jehosheba 
would  have  free  entrance  into  the  palace, 
and  liberty  to  visit  all  the  apartments.  She 
did  not  dare  openly  to  oppose  Athaliah's 
will,  but  contrived  secretly  to  save  one  of 
the  intended  victims,  the  smallest  of  them, 
an  infant  of  a  year  old  (wvuSiov  tvutiaiov, 
Josephus).  His  tender  age,  probably,  moved 
her  compassion,  and  induced  her  to  select 
him  fiom  the  rest.  And  they  hid  him,  even 
him  and  his  nurse.  The  order  in  the  Hebrew 
is, "  even  him  and  his  nurse,  and  tbey  hid 
him,"  which  clears  the  sense.  Jehosheba 
stole  away  Joash  and  his  nurse,  and  they, 
t.e.  Jehosheba  and  the  nurse  together,  hid 
him  between  them.  In  the  bedchamber; 
rather,  t»  the  chamber  of  mattresses — a  room 
in  the  palace  where  mattresses,  and  per- 
haps coverlets,  were  stored.  Chardin  notes 
('Works,'  vol.  iii.  p.  857)  that  there  is 
usually  such  a  room  in  an  Oriental  palace, 
which  ia  only  used  as  a  store-chamber,  and 
not  as  a  dwelling-room.  From  Athali^,  so 
that  he  was  not  slain.  Athaliah's  servants 
^  may  not  have  been  very  anxious  to  carry  out 
her  cruel  orders  to  the  uttermost,  and  may 
have  made  no  very  careful  search. 

Ver.  3. — ^And  he  was  with  her — ^he,  i^ 
Joash,  was  with  her,i.e.  Jehosheba,  his  aunt — 
hid  in  the  house  of  the  Xord ;  {.e.  the  temple. 
We  learn  from  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxiL 
11)  that  Jehosheba  was  married  to  Jehoiada, 
the  high  priest,  and  would  thus  have  ready 
access  to  the  temple.  We  must  suppose 
that,  after  a  few  days'  concealment  in  the 
"  chamber  of  mattresses,"  Jehosheba  found 
an  opportunity  of  transferring  him,  with  his 
nurse,,  to  a  chamber  in  the  temple,  where  he 
was  thenceforward  nourished  and  brought 
up.  There  were  various  chambers  in  the 
temple  used  for  secular  purposes,  as  we 
learn  from  1  Kings  vi.  5—8  and  Neh.  ziii. 
5—9.  Six  years  (comp.  ver.  21  and  2  Chron. 
xxiv.  1).  And  Athaluh  did  reign  over  thd 
land.  It  is  difiScult  to  realize  all  that  this 
implies.  It  cannot  mean  less  than  that  for 
six  years  Baalism  was  triumphant  in  Judah 
— the  temple  was  allowed  to  fall  into  decay 
(oh.  xiL  5) — a  temple  to  Baal  was  erected 
in  Jerusalem  itself,  to  supersede  the  temple 
of  Jehovah  (oh.  A  18),  and  a  high  priest 
appointed  tn  be  a  rival  to  the  successor  of 
Aaron.    Whether  persecution  was  indulged 


In,  as  under  Jehoram  (2  Chion.  xxl.  11),  U 
uncertain :  but  the  servants  of  Jehovah 
were  at  any  rate  nnder  •  olond,  slighted, 
contemned,  held  as  of  small  account.  Per- 
haps we  may  condnde,  firom  the  position 
occupied  by  Jehoiada,  and  from  the  powers 
which  he  was  able  to  exercise  when  he  de- 
termined on  revolt  (ver.  4  {  2  Chron.  xxiii. 
1,  2),  that  Athaliah,  during  her  six  years' 
leign,  was  to  some  extent  held  in  check  by 
•  Jehovistio  party,  which  she  knew  to  exist, 
and  which  she  did  not  dare  openly  to  defy. 
Thus  she  left  Jehoiada  (apparently)  in  pos- 
session of  the  temple,  of  its  treasures  and  its 
armoury  (ver.  10);  she  allowed  the  temple 
service  to  continue  (2  Chron.  xxiii.  4 — ^7) ; 
she  permitted  the  priests  and  the  Levites  to 
serve  in  their  regular  "courses"  (2  Chron. 
xxiii.  8) ;  she  let  the  fortress  of  the  eastern 
city — for  the  temple  was  always  a  fortress 
— ^remain  in  her  enemies'  hands.  Still,  the 
time  was  evidently  one  "  of  trouble,  and  of 
rebuke,  and  blasphemy:"  the  oppressed 
worshippers  of  Jehovah  were  greatly  dis- 
contented ;  and  the  nation  generally  was 
ripe  for  a  counter-revolution,  so  soon  as  the 
signal  was  given  by  an  authority  whom  they 
could  trust. 

Vers.  4— 16. — Oorupiraey  of  Jehoiada. 
After  waiting,  impatiently  we  may  be  sure, 
for  six  long  years,  and  seeing  the  young 
prince  grow  from  an  infant  to  a  boy  of 
seven  years  of  age,  Jehoiada  deemed  that  the 
time  was  come  to  venture  on  an  effort.  It 
was  necessary  for  him  to  make  his  arrange- 
ments beforehand  with  great  oaro.  His 
first  step  was  to  sound  the  captains  of  the 
royal  guard.  To  these  men,  five  in  number 
(2  Chron.  xxiii.  1),  he  sent  secretly,  and  in- 
vited them  to  confer  with  him  in  the  temple 
on  important  business.  Finding  them  well 
disposed  to  adopt  his  views,  he  revealed  to 
them  the  fact  that  Joash  had  escaped  the 
massacre  of  Ahaziah's  sons,  and  was  still 
living,  even  allowing  them  to  see  him.  The 
result  of  the  interview  was  that  they  put 
themselves  at  Jehoiada's  disposal,  and  agreed 
to  take  their  orders  from  him  (ver.  4).  Je- 
hoiada then  proceeded  to  his  second  step. 
Either  distrusting  the  body-guard  which 
the  captains  commanded,  or  regarding  it  as 
insufficient  in  numbers,  he  gave  them  orders 
to  visit  the  various  cities  of  Judaoa,  and 
collect  from  them  a  strong  force  of  Levites 
and  other  trusty  persons,  and  bring  them 
to  Jerusalem  (2  Chron.  xxiii.  2),  where  he 
would  give  them  their  orders.    This  wm 


228 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KlNOa         [oh.  xi.  1— 2L 


done  roooeesfally,  and,  as  it  wonld  seem, 
without  in  acy  way  rousing  the  suspicions 
of  Athaliah.  A  day  was  fixed  for  proclaim- 
ing Joash  king ;  the  guard  and  the  Levites 
were  skilfully  disposed  about  the  temple 
and  the  palace ;  the  king  was  brought  up, 
crowned,  anointed,  and  saluted  as  monarch, 
with  noisy  acclamations  (ver.  12).  The 
noise  was  heard  in  the  palace,  and  Athaliah 
went  forth,  with  a  few  attendants,  to  inquire 
the  reason  of  it.  Following  the  sound,  she 
came  to  the  temple,  and  entered  it,  when 
she  saw  what  was  going  on,  and  cried  out, 
"  Treason  I  treason  1 "  By  Jehoiada's  order 
the  guards  seized  her,  conducted  her  out  ot 
the  temple,  and  slew  her  (Ters.  13 — 16). 

Ver.  4. — And  the  seventh  year — ^literally, 
aTid  in  the  letenth  year;  i.e.  in  the  course  of  it 
— Jehoiada  sent  and  fetched  the  rulers  over 
hundreds,  with  the  captains  and  the  guard ; 
rather,  the  captains  over  hundreds  (or,  cen- 
turions) of  the  Carites  and  the  guard  (see 
the  Bevised  Version).  The  "  Carites,"  here 
first  named,  are  generally  regarded  as  iden- 
tical with  the  Gherethites  of  earlier  times 
(2  Sam.  viii.  18 ;  1  Kings  i.  38 ;  1  Chron. 
xviii.  17).  They  were  undoubtedly  a  par- 
ticular portion  of  the  royal  guard,  and  may, 
perhaps,  as  many  suppose,  have  been  "  Ca- 
rian "  mercenaries,  though  we  baye  no 
other  evidence  that  the  Carians  had  adopted 
the  mercenary  life  so  early  as  the  time  of 
Athaliah.  Still,  as  their  devotion  to  it  had 
passed  into  a  proverb  when  Archilochus 
wrote  (B.o.  700—660),  it  is  quite  possible 
that  they  had  begun  the  practice  a  century 
or  two  earlier.  AVhen  Jehoiada  is  said  to 
have  "sent  and  fetched"  the  centurions, 
we  must  understand  that  he  secretly  in- 
vited them,  and  that  they  couseuted  to  come. 
He  could  not  possibly  have  any  authority 
over  them,  so  as  to  require  their  attendance. 
The  names  of  the  five  centurions,  together 
with  their  fathers'  names,  were  put  on  record 
by  the  writer  of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  zxiiL 
1),  whose  account  of  the  revolution  is  in 
many  respects  fuller  than  that  in  Kings. 
And  brought  them  to  him  into  the  house  of 
the  Lord — as  the  safest  place  for  an  inter- 
view which  had  to  be  kept  secret  firom  the 
queen — and  made  a  covenant  with  tiiem,  and 
took  an  oath  of  them  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord.  We  can  easily  understand  that  the 
soldiers,  who  had  been  willing  to  serve 
Athaliah  under  the  notion  that  the  house 
of  David  was  extinct,  might  waver  in  their 
allegiance  so  soon  as  they  heard  that  a 
Bclon  nf  the  old  royal  stock  survived,  and 
could  he  produced  at  a  momeut's  notice. 
Their  traditions  would  attach  them  to  David 


and  his  seed,  hot  to  the  house  of  Ahab. 
And  showed  them  the  king's  son.  Having 
bonnd  the  centurions  by  a  solemn  eovenant 
to  the  cause  of  the  young  king,  Jehoiada  in- 
troduced them  into  his  presence.  He  had, 
no  doubt,  previously  sworn  them  to  secrecy. 

Ter.  5. — And  he  commanded  them,  saying. 
This  is  the  thing  that  ye  shall  do.  It  is 
evident,  from  2  Chronicles  and  &om  Jose- 
phus,  that  a  considerable  interval  of  time 
separates  the  events  of  ver.  5  from  those  of 
ver.  i.  The  immediate  arrangement  made 
between  Jehoiada  and  the  ceutuiions  was 
that  they  should  "  go  throughout  the  whole 
land "  (Josephus,  '  Ant  Jud.,'  ix.  7.  §  2), 
visit  "all  the  cities  of  Judah"(2  Chron.  xxiii. 
2),  and  gather  out  of  them  a  strong  force 
of  Levites  and  priests  (Josephus),  together 
with  a  certain  number  of  other  representa- 
tive Israelites,  which  force  they  should  briiig 
with  them  to  Jemsalem,  and  place  at  his 
disposal.  To  accomplish  this  must  have 
taken  some  weeks.  When  the  force  Ijad 
arrived,  Jehoiada  summoned  it  to  meet  him 
in  the  courts  of  the  temple,  and  swore  it  to 
a  similar  covenant  to  that  which  he  had 
made  with  the  centurions.  He  then  bided 
his  time,  completed  his  arrangements,  uti- 
lized the  store  of  arms  laid  up  in  the  temple 
armoury  (ver.  10),  and  finally  gave  two 
charges — one  to  the  centurions,  which  is 
given  here  (vers.  5 — 8),  and  the  other  to  the 
force  collected  from  the  cities  of  Judah, 
which  is  given  in  Chroniules  (2  Chron. 
xxiii.  4 — 7).  The  orders  given  to  the  two 
forces  were  very  similar,  but  not  identical. 
A  third  part  of  you  that  enter  in  on  the 
sabbath.  The  royal  body-guard  consisted 
of  five  divisions,  each  probably  of  a  hundred 
men,  and  each  commanded  by  its  own 
captain  (2  Chron.  xxiiL  1).  It  was  usual 
on  the  sabbath  for  three  divisions  out  of 
the  five  to  mount  guard  at  the  royal  palace, 
while  two  were  engaged  outside,  keeping 
order  in  the  city,  and  especially  at  the 
temple.  We  do  not  know  the  ordinary  dis- 
position of  the  guard,  either  inside  or  out- 
side the  palace.  On  this  occasion  Jehoiada 
commanded  that  the  palace-guard  should 
be  disposed  as  follows :  one  division  at  the 
palace  proper,  in  tlie  courts  and  halls  and 
antechambers ;  a  second  at  one  of  the  issues 
from  the  palace,  known  as  "the  gate  of 
Sur;"  and  a  third  at  an  issue  called  "the 
gate  of  the  guard,"  which  was  certainly 
towards  the  east,  where  the  palace  ironted 
tlie  temple.  The  object  was  to  secure  the 
palace,  but  not  to  prevent  the  queen  from 
leaving  it.  Shall  even  be  keepers  of  the 
watch  of  the  king's  house ;  i.e.  of  the  royal 
palace. 

Ver.  6.— And  a  third  part  shall  be  atths 
gate  of  Sur.  The  "  gate  of  Sur "  is  noi 
elsewhere  mentioned.    It  seems  to  be  called 


oa.  XI.  1—21.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  TflE  KlKGS. 


229 


in  Chionioles  (2  Chron.  xxiii.  5)  "  the  gate 
of  the  foundation "  (lio;  nja*)  inetead  of 
"  the  gate  of  Sur  "  (mo  1IH&),  as  here —the  one 
leading  having  evidently  arisen  out  of  the 
other  by  a  corruption.  We  must  understand 
one  of  the  palace  gates,  but  which  of  them 
is  uncertain.  And  a  third  part  at  the  gate 
behind  the  guard;  called  in  yer.  19  "the 
gate  of  the  guard,"  and  shown  there  to  have 
been  on  the  east  side  of  the  palace,  where 
it  faced  the  temple,  and  abutted  on  the 
Tyropoeon.  80  shall  ye  Iceep  the  watoh  of 
the  house — t.e.  of  the  "  king's  house,"  or 
palace,  which  is  contrasted  with  the  "house 
of  the  Lord  "  of  the  next  Terse — that  it  he 
not  broken  down.  This  rendering  is  scarcely 
accepted  at  the  present  time  by  any  writers. 
Bwald  renders,  "according  to  custom;" 
Keil,  "  for  defence ; "  Furst,  "  alternately ; " 
our  Eevisers,  "and  be  a  barrier."  The 
Hebrew  word  used  occurs  nowhere  else,  and 
it  seems  impossible  to  determine  its  sense. 
The  LXX.  simply  omit  it. 

Yer.  7. — And  two  parts  of  all  you  that  go 
forth  on  the  sabbath.  Three-fifths  of  the 
guard  having  been  disposed  of  about  the 
palace,  there  remained  only  two-fifths,  or  two 
"companies"  (margin  of  Authorized  Ver- 
sion). These  Jehoiada  commanded  to  enter 
the  temple  and  protect  the  young  king. 
Even  they  shall  keep  the  watoh  of  the  house 
of  the  Iiord  about  the  king.  According  to 
Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxiii.  7),  the  great  body 
of  the  Levites  gathered  from  the  cities  of 
Judah  was  also  to  be  in  the  temple,  and  to 
assist  in  the  protection  of  the  monarch. 

Yer.  8. — And  ye  shall  compasB  the  king 
round  aboutj  every  man  with  his  weapons 
in  bis  hand.  The  guard  was  to  take  up  a 
position,  partly  in  front  of  the  king,  and 
partly  behind  him ;  interposing  themselves 
between  his  person  and  any  danger,  and  at 
the  same  time  extending  themselves  across 
the  entire  court  of  the  temple  (ver.  11)  from 
one  wall  to  the  other.  They  were,  of  course, 
to  have  their  weapons  in  their  hands,  ready 
for  use.  And  he  that  oometh  within  the 
ranges,  let  him  be  slain ;  rather,  teithin  the 
rankt.  The  order  was  that  if  any  one 
entered  the  temple,  and  attempted  to  break 
through  the  ranks  of  the  guard,  either  in 
front  of  the  king  or  behind  mm,  he  should 
instantly  be  put  to  death.  No  attempt  of 
the  kind  was  made;  and  so  the  order  re- 
mained a  dead  letter.  And  be  ye  with  the 
king  as  he  goeth  out  and  as  he  oometh  in; 
accompany  him,  >'.«.  in  all  his  movements — 
let  him  never  for  a  moment  stray  outside 
yonr  ranks — continue  to  surround  him 
whithersoever  he  goes.  Boys  are  restless, 
and  curiosity  would  lead  the  young  prince 
to  move  from  place  to  place  in  order  to  see 
what  wa<  going  on. 

Yer.  9. — And  th«  captains  over  the  hun- 


dreds— i.e.  the  five  centurions  of  the  guard, 
Azariah  the  son  of  Jeroham,  Azariah  the 
son  of  Obed,  Tshmael,  Maaseiah,  and  Eli- 
shaphat — did  aocording  to  all  things  that 
Jehoiada  the  priest  commanded.  The  secular 
arm  placed  itself  entirely  at  the  disposal  of 
the  spiritualty,  and  was  content  for  once  to 
be  subordinate.  And  they  took  every  man 
his  men  that  were  to  come  in  on  the  sabbath, 
with  them  that  should  go  out  on  the  sabbath, 
and  oame  to  Jehoiada  the  priest.  The 
position  of  Jehoiada  as  high  priest  {"the 
priest "  always  means  "  high  priest ")  had 
not  been  previously  mentioned,  probably 
because  it  was  presumed  to  be  known.  The 
Chronicler,  writing  much  later,  gives  Je- 
hoiada the  title  on  the  first  occasion  that  he 
mentions  him  (2  Chron.  xxii.  11).  When 
it  is  said  that  "  all  the  captains  took  their 
men  and  came  to  Jehoiada,"  the  intention 
is  to  mark  their  exact  obedience  to  the 
orders  given  them.  Strictly  speaking,  only 
two  out  of  the  five  actually  appeared  before 
Jehoiada  on  the  day  of  the  execution  of  his 
project,  two  divisions  only  having  been 
summoned  to  come  to  the  temple  (ver.  7). 
The  other  three  took  up  the  positions 
assigned  them  ii)  and  about  the  royal  palace. 

Yer.  10.— And  to  the  captains  over  hun- 
dreds did  the  priest  give  King  David's  spears 
and  shields,  that  were  in  the  temple  of  the 
Lord.  We  hear  of  David  carrying  with  him 
to  Jerusalem  the  "shields  of  gold,"  i.e. 
shields  ornamented  with  gold,  which  he 
took  from  the  servants  of  Hadadezer  (2  Sam. 
viii.  7);  but  otherwise  we  are  not  told  of 
his  establishing  an  armoury.  Solomon  made 
six  hundred  shields  of  solid  gold,  and  laid 
them  up  in  the  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon  (1  Kings  x.  17);  but  these  were 
carried  off  by  Sheshonk,  when  he  invaded 
Judisa  in  the  reign  of  Beboboam  (1  Kings 
xiv.  26).  Beboboam,  in  their  place,  made 
three  hundred  brazen  shields  (1  Kings  xiv. 
27),  which,  however,  were  deposited  in  the 
guard-chamber  of  the  royal  palace.  Of 
spears  collected  by  David,  and  laid  up  in 
the  temple,  we  know  nothing  beyond  the 
present  passage.  There  can  be  little  doubt 
that  the  weapons  were  brought  foith  from 
their  receptacle  with  the  view  (as  Ewald 
says)  of  "consecrating  the  work  of  the 
restoration  of  the  Davidio  house  with  the 
sacred  arms  of  the  great  founder  himself" 
(see  '  History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  136) — not, 
however,  with  arms  that  he  had  worn,  but 
with  some  which  he  had  collected  and  laid 
up. 

Yer.  11. — ^And  the  guard  stood,  every  mas 
with  his  weapons  in  his  hand,  round  about 
the  king,  from  the  right  corner  of  the  temple 
to  the  left  oomer  of  the  temple.  "  Comer" 
is  a  wrong  word  used  in  this  eonnection. 
The  Hebrew  cjn^  is  literally,  "  Bhoaldai," 


230 


tHB  SECONB  BOOK  OF  THE  toNGS.         itm.ii.l—it 


and  mnat  mean  here,  not  "eomer,"  but 
"  side  "  (w  onr  Revisers).  The  guard  was 
drawn  np  right  across  the  temple  court  from 
wall  to  Weill,  probably  in  several  ranks,  both 
before  and  behind  the  king  (see  ver.  8). 
Along  by  the  altar.  The  "  altar  "  intended 
is,  of  coarse,  the  altar  of  burnt  offering, 
which  stood  in  the  great  court,  a  little  way 
from  the  porch,  right  in  front  of  it ;  not  the 
altar  of  incense,  which  was  inside  the 
sanctuary.  No  one,  it  must  be  remembered, 
was  ever  allowed  to  enter  inside  the  sanc- 
tuary but  the  priests  and  officiating  Levites 
(see  2  Chron.  zxiii.  6).  And  the  temple. 
"  The  temple"  is  here  the  sanctuary,  as  in 
the  passage  of  Chronicles  just  quoted.  The 
guard  occupied  a  position  at  the  upper  end 
of  the  court,  immediately  in  front  of  the 
altar  and  the  temple  porch. 

Ver.  12. — And  he— i.e.  Jehoiada— brought 
forth  thir  king's  son — produced  him,  i.e., 
from  the  chamber  or  chambers  where  he  had 
been  concealed  hitherto.  (On  the  temple 
chambeis,  see  Neh.  siii.  4—9.)  And  put  the 
crown  npon  him.  That  the  Israelite  kings 
actually  wore  crowns  appears  from  2  Sam.  i. 
10  and  1  Chron.  xx.  2.  The  crown  was  pro- 
bably a  band  of  gold,  either  plain  or  set  with 
jewels  (Zech.  iz.  16),  fastened  behind  with  a 
riband.  It  receives  here  the  same  name  that 
is  given  to  the  high  priest's  diadem  in  Exod. 
xxix.  6  and  zxxix.  30.  And  gave  him  the 
testimony.  The  words  "  gave  him  "  are  not 
in  the  original,  and  are  superfluous.  What 
is  meant  plainly  is  that  the  high  priest 
laid  on  the  young  king's  head  a  copy  of  the 
Law,  or  of  some  essential  portion  of  it,  per- 
haps the  Decalogue,  which  is  often  called 
"  the  testimony  "  (Exod.  xvi.  34 ;  xxv.  16, 
21,  etc.).  The  object  apparently  was  to 
show  that  the  king  was  to  rule  by  law,  not 
arbitrarily— that  he  was  to  be,  as.  Dean 
Stanley  says,  "  not  above,  but  beneath,  the 
law  of  his  country  "  ('Jewish  Church,'  voL 
ii  p.  897).  The  ceremony  seems  to  have 
been  a  new  one,  and  is  indicative  of  the 
gradual  curtailment  of  the  regal  power 
under  the  later  monarchy.  And  they  made 
him  king,  and  anointed  him.  A  change  is 
made  from  the  singular  to  the  plural,  be- 
cause, as  we  learn  from  2  Chron.  xxiii.  11, 
"  Jehoiada  and  his  ions  anointed  him."  We 
have  had  no  mention  of  the  anointing  of  a 
new  monarch  in  Judah  since  the  time  of 
Solomon  (1  Kings  i.  89).  It  may,  however, 
have  been  the  usual  practice.  Aiid  they — 
i.e.  the  people — all  who  were  present — 
clapped  their  hands — an  ordinary  sign  of 
joy  (see  Ps.  xlvii.  1 ;  xcviii.  8 ;  Isa.  Iv.  12 ; 
Nah.  iii.  19,  etc.) — and  said,  Ood  save  the 
king !  literally,  long  live  the  king  I  (comp. 
1  Sam.  X.  21 ;  2  Sam.  xvi.  16 :  1  Kings  L  25, 
39). 

Yer.  13.— And  when  Athaliah  heard  the 


noise  of  the  gurd  (comp.  1  Kings  i,  41 — 45^ 
where  the  noise  accompanying  the  oorona- 
tion  of  Solomon  was  heard  to  an  eqnal  dis- 
tance) and  of  the  people.  The  "and,"  which 
is  omitted  in  the  present  Hebrew  text,  may 
be  supplied  by  a  very  slight  alteration.  Wa 
have  only  to  read  opri]  TjTn  for  Djn  psiri— 
an  emendation  rendered  almost  certain  by 
the  fact  that  the  plural  in  )>~  does  not  be- 
long to  the  date  of  the  writer  of  Kings. 
She  came  to  the  people  into  the  temple  of 
the  Lord.  It  was  not  her  habit  to  enter  the 
temple  on  the  sabbath,  or  on  any  other  day ; 
but,  hearing  the  noise,  she  harried  across 
&om  the  palace  to  learn  its  cause.  It  would 
seem  that  she  was  still  ausnspicioos  of 
danger,  and  bronght  no  guards  with  her,  nor 
any  large  body  of  attendants. 

Ver.  14. — ^And  when  she  looked,  behold, 
the  king  stood  by  a  pillar;  rather,  on  the 
pillar,  or  on  the  raised  platform.  The  king's 
proper  place  in  the  temple  seems  to  have 
been  a  raised  standing-place  (~nspn,  from 
ibp,  to  itand)  in  front  of  the  entrance  to 

the  sanctuary,  which  made  him  very  con- 
spicuous (comp.  ch.  xxiii.  8 ;  2  Chron.  xxiii. 
13,  and  xxxiv.  31).  As  the  manner  was — 
i.e.  as  was  the  usual  practice  when  kings 
visited  the  temple — and  the  princes — i.e. 
the  centurions  or  captains  of  the  guard — 
and  the  trumpeters  by  the  king— the  officials 
whose  business  it  was  to  blow  the  trumpet 
at  a  coronation  (see  2  Sam.  xt.  10;  1  Kings 
i.  39 ;  ix.  13) — and  all  the  people  of  the  land 
rejoiced,  and  blew  with  trumpets;  i.e.  the 
people  who  had  been  admitted  into  the 
great  court  to  witness  the  coronation.  Some 
rumour  of  what  was  about  to  occor  had  got 
abroad,  and  many  of  the  people  had  pro- 
vided themselves  with  trumpets.  As  Dean 
Stanley  puts  it,  "The  temple  court  was 
crowded  with  spectators,  and  they  too  took 
part  in  the  celebration,  and  themselves  pro- 
longed the  trumpet-blast,  blended  with  the 
musical  instraments  of  the  temple  service." 
And  Athaliah  rent  her  clothes.  Athaliah 
took  in  all  with  a  single  glance.  She  "  saw 
that  the  fatal  hour  was  come "  (Stanley) 
With  a  strong  hand  she  rent  her  royal  robes, 
partly  in  horror,  partly  in  despair ;  for  the 
single  glance  which  she  had  cast  around 
was  sufficient  to  show  her  that  all  was 
lost.  And  oried.  Treason!  Treason!  or, 
conspiracy/  eonspiraoyi  The  ory  was 
scarcely  an  appeal  for  help,  as  Josephus 
makes  it  ('Ant.  Jud.,'ix.  7.  §  3),  but  rather 
an  instinctive  utterance,  without  distinct 
aim  or  object,  wrung  from  her  under  the 
circumstances.  It  fell  dead  on  the  assembly, 
Ver.  15. — But  Jehoiada  the  priest  com- 
manded the  captains— literally,  prinaee — of 
thehvndreds,  the  offioersof  thehost— the  com- 
manders, is.,  of  the  small "  wmy  "  assembled 


4b.  ii.  1—21.]         TflJ!  SEOOlrt)  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


231 


in  the  temple  court— and  (aid  imto  them, 
Save  her  forth  without  the  ranges ;  rather, 
have  h«T  forth,  or  conduct  htr  out  between 
your  ranltt.  The  object  was  probably  to 
preserve  her  from  suffering  violenoe  at  the 
hands  of  any  of  the  people  within  the 
temple  precincts,  which  Jehoiada  desired  to 
preserve  free  from  pollution.  And  him  that 
followeth  her  kiU  with  the  sword;  t.e.  if 
any  come  after  her  out  of  the  temple,  to 
attempt  a  rescue,  slay  them  with  the  sword. 
The  order,  given  aloud,  was  sufficient  to 
deter  persons  from  making  the  attempt. 
For  the  priest  had  said,  Let  her  not  be  slain 
in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  Jehoiada  bad 
previously  given  an  order  that  her  execution 
should  take  place  outside  the  temple. 

Ver.  16. — And  they  laid  hands  on  her. 
So  the  LXX.  (iiri07iKay  owrp  x"?"*)'  ^^^ 
Vulgate,  Lather,  and  otliers;  but  most 
moderns  understand  that  they  formed  in 
two  lines,  one  on  either  side  of  her,  and  so 
let  her  pass  out  of  the  temple  and  proceed 
towards  the  palace  untouched — the  divinity 
that  hedged  a  queen  preventing  them  from 
molesting  her  until  the  time  came  for  her 
execution  (see  the  Bevised  Version).  And 
she  went  by  the  way  by  the  which  the  horses 
came  into  the  king's  house.  Josephus  makes 
Athaliah  pa«B  out  of  the  temple  by  the  east 
gate,  and  descend  into  the  Eedron  valley. 
He  says  she  was  put  to  death  "  at  the  gate 
of  the  king's  mules,"  but  does  not  mark  the 
locality.  The  gate  intended  can  scarcely 
be  the  "  horse  gate  "  of  Neh.  iii.  28,  which 
was  in  the  eastern  wall,  and  north  of  the 
temple.  It  was  probably  a  gate  on  the 
western  side  of  the  Tyropoeon  valley,  giving 
entrance  to  the  stables  of  the  palace  (comp. 
2  Ohron.  xxiii.  15,  and  see  below,  ver.  20). 
And  there  was  she  slain ;  "  with  the  sword  *' 
(ver.  20).  A  single  blow  from  one  of  the 
guardsmen  probably  sufficed. 

Vers.  17 — il.— Further  doingi  of  Je- 
hoiada. The  king  being  at  present  a  mere 
puppet  in  his  hands,  Jehoiada  had  to 
determine  the  next  steps  which  were  neces- 
sary to  be  taken.  These,  in  his  judgment, 
were  three.  1.  A  solemn  covenant  must  be 
made  between  the  king  and  the  people; 
and  another  between  the  king,  the  people, 
and  God  -  the  latter  pledging  the  king  and 
people  to  maintain  the  worship  of  Jehovah, 
and  never  again  to  apostatize;  the  former 
pledging  the  king  to  govern  according  to 
law,  and  the  people  to  remain  faithful  to 
him.  2.  The  temple  of  Baal,  erected  in 
Jemsalem  at  the  instance  of  Athaliah,  mnit 
be  destroyed.  S.  The  king  must  be  removed 
fiom  the  temple  and  installed  in  the  palace 


of  bis  ancestor*.    A  brief  aoconnt  of  thesa 
proceeding!  eoncludeg  th«  preient  chapter. 

Ver.  17. — ^And  Jehoiada  made  a  covenant 
between  the  Lord  and  the  king  and  tiia 
people.  In  the  original  it  is  "  made  the  co- 
venant ; "  and  the  meaning  is  that  the  high 
priest  renewed  the  old  covenant  understood 
to  exist  between  king  and  people  on  the 
one  hand  and  Ood  on  the  other,  that  they 
would  be  faithful  to  Grod  and  God  to  them — 
that  they  would  maintain  his  worship,  and 
that  he  would  continue  his  protection  (see 
Exod.  xix.  5—8;  xxiv.  3—8 ;  ixxiv.  10—28). 
The  apostasy  of  Jehoram,  Ahaziah,  and 
Athaliah  was  regarded  as  having  put  an 
end  to  the  old  covenant,  and  therefore  it 
was  solemnly  remade  or  renewed.  That 
they  should  be  the  Lord's  people  (comp. 
Exod.  zLx.  5 :  Deut.  iv.  20 ;  Ix.  29 ;  xxxii.  9, 
eto.) ;  between  the  king  also  and  the  people. 
The  terms  of  this  covenant  are  nowhere  dis- 
tinctly stated,  but  we  can  only  suppose  them 
to  have  expressed  in  words  the  intention  of 
that  novel  act,  the  imposition  of  "  the  testi- 
mony "  upon  the  head  of  the  king  at  the 
time  of  his  coronation  (see  the  comment 
upon  ver.  12). 

Ver.  18. — And  all  the  people  of  the  land — 
i.e.  all  those  who  had  come  up  to  Jerusalem 
from  the  various  cities  of  Judah  to  help  Je- 
hoiada (see2  Chron.  xxiii.  2) — went  into  the 
house  of  Baal.  According  to  Josephus, "  the 
house  of  Baal"  here  mentioned  was  built 
by  Jehoram  and  Athaliah  in  the  reign  of 
the  former  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  7.  §  4).  But,  if 
this  was  the  case,  it  is  rather  strange  that 
the  writer  of  Chronicles,  who  enumerates  so 
many  of  the  evil  acts  of  Jehoram  (2  Chron. 
xxi.  4,  6,  11),  does  not  mention  it.  The 
present  narrative  shows  that  the  temple 
was  in,  or  very  near,  Jerusalem ;  but  there 
is  nothing  to  fix  the  site  of  it.  And  braJie  it 
down — Josephus  says  they  "  razed  it  to  the 
ground  "  (KarEirKaif'at') — his  altars  and  his 
images  brake  they  in  pieoes  thoroughly.  It 
was  common  among  the  heathen  to  have 
several  altars  in  one  temple,  and  not  un- 
common to  have  several  images  even  of  the 
same  god,  especially  if  he  was  a  god  wor- 
shipped undn  different  forms,  as  Baal  was 
(whence  the  word  "  Baalim  ").  The  Baalim 
of  this  temple  are  mentioned  by  the  writer 
of  Chronicles  (see  2  Chron.  ixiv.  7).  And 
slew  Uattan  the  priest  of  Baal  before  the 
altars.  The  name  "  Mattan  "  recalls  that 
of  the  last  King  of  Judah,  which  was  origin- 
ally Mattau-iah,  equivalent  to  "  gift  of  Je- 
hovah" (ch.  xxIt.  17).  Matfein  would  be 
simply  "gift."  We  may  presume  that, 
though  only  called  "priest,"  he  was  the 
high  priest.  And  the  priest — i'.e.  Jehoiada 
— appointed  officer!  over  the  house  of  the 
Lord.    The  parallel  passage  of  Chionioleg 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  m.  1—21. 


(2  Chion.  xziii.  18, 19)  ezplaiiw  thii  state- 
ment. We  are  there  told  that  "  Jehoiada 
appointed  the  offlees  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord  by  the  hand  of  the  priests  the  Levites, 
...  to  oifer  the  burnt  offerings  of  the  Lord, 
ai  it  ii  written  in  the  Law  of  Moses,  with 
rejoicing  and  with  singing,  as  it  was  ordained 
by  David.  And  be  set  the  porters  at  the  gates 
of  the  house  of  the  Lord^  that  none  which 
was  unclean  in  anything  should  enter  in." 
During  Athaliah's  reign  the  temple  service 
had  ceased;  breaches  bad  been  broken  in 
the  outer  walls ;  and  neither  the  priests  nor 
the  porters  had  served  in  their  regular 
order ;  there  had  been  no  morning  or 
evening  sacrifice,  and  no  antiphoual  psalm- 
singing.  Jehoiada  re-established  the  re- 
gular courses  and  the  worship. 

Ver.  19. — And  he  took  the  rulers— lite- 
rally, princes — over  hundreds — i.e.  the  five 
centurions  of  2  Chron.  xxiii,  2 — and  the 
captains — rather,  and  the  Carito  (see  the 
comment  on  ver.  4)— and  the  guard — i.e. 
the  "  runners,"  the  other  division  of  the 
guard — and  all  the  people  of  the  land — 
those  who  had  flocked  to  his  standard  either 
originally  (2  Chron.  xxiii.  2)  or  since — and 
they  brought  down  the  king  from  the  house 
of  the  Lord.  They  escorted  Joash  from  the 
temple  to  the  palace,  first  bringing  him 
down  into  the  valley  of  the  Tyropoeon,  and 
then  conducting  him  up  the  opposite,  or 
western  hill,  on  which  the  palace  stood. 
And  came  by  the  way  of  the  gate  of  the 
guard  to  the  king's  house,  The  "gate  of 
tlie  guard"  is  probably  that  called  in  ver.  6 
"the  gate  behind  the  guard."  We  may 
presume  that  it  was  the  main  entrance  to 
the  palace  on  the  eastern  side.  And  he  sat 
on  the  throus  of  the  kings.    Not  till  he  had 


placed  Joash  on  the  royal  throne  of  his  an> 
eestors,  in  the  great  throne-room  of  tha 
palace,  was  Jehoiada  coutent  with  the  work 
of  the  day. 

Yer.  20. — And  all  the  people  of  the  land 
rejoiced,  "All  the  people  of  the  land  "  has 
here,  perhaps,  a  wider  sio;nification  than  in 
vers.  18  and  19.  The  whole  land  was  con- 
tent with  the  revolution  tliat  had  taken 
Elace.  No  opposition  showed  itself.  Ewnld 
as  no  ground  for  his  statement  thiit  the 
heathenizing  party  was  strong  in  Jerusalem, 
and  that  the  worshippers  of  Jehovah  "  had 
for  a  long  time  to  keep  wafch  iu  the  temple, 
to  prevent  surprise  by  the  heathenizing 
party"  ('History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  ISiJ, 
note  3).  He  has  mistaken  the  intention  of 
the  bist  clause  of  ver.  18.  If  anything  is 
clear  from  the  entire  narrative  of  the  early 
reign  of  Joash  (ch.  xi.  3 — 21;  xii.  1 — 16; 
2  Chron.  xxiii.  1 — 21;  xxiv.  1 — 14),  it  is 
tliat  there  was  no  heathenizing  party  in 
Jerusalem,  or  none  that  dared  to  show  itself, 
until  after  the  death  of  the  high  priest  Je- 
hoiada, which  was  later  than  the  twenty- 
third  year  of  Joash.  And  the  city — i.«. 
Jeriisaiem— was  in  quiet:  and  they  slew — 
it  might  be  translated,  when  they  had  elain 
— Athaliah  with  the  sword  beside  the  king's 
house.  The  intention  of  the  writer  is  to 
connect  the  period  of  tranquillity  with  the 
reiDoval  of  Athaliah,  and  therefore  to  point 
her  out  as  the  cause  of  disturbance  pre- 
viously. 

Ver.  21. — Seven  years  old  was  Jehoash— 
or,  Joash — when  he  began  to  reign  (comp. 
vers.  3  and  4  and  2  Chron.  xxiv.  1).  The 
clause  would  be  better  placed  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  next  ohaptei 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1 — 3  and  14 — 16. — Athaliah  and  Jezebel,  the  wicked  davghter  and  the  wicked 
mother.  It  has  often  been  noted  that,  while  women  are,  as  a  general  rule,  better  than 
men,  in  the  cases  where  they  enter  upon  evil  couises  their  wickedness  exceeds  that  of 
their  male  associates.  The  character  of  Lady  Macbeth  is  true  to  nature.  Wicked 
women  are  more  thorough-going  than  wicked  men,  more  bloody,  more  daring,  more 
unscrupulous.  In  Athaliah  we  have  a  sort  of  repetition  of  Jezebel — a  second  picture 
on  the  same  lines — the  picture  of  a  fierce,  ambitious,  utterly  unscrupulous  woman, 
occupying  much  the  same  station  as  her  mother,  equally  powerful,  equally  unsparing, 
and  equally  remorseless.     Both  women  are  represented  as — 

I.  Devotees  of  the  same  sensuous  and  immoral  cult.  Jezebel  introduces  the 
Baal  and  Ashtoreth  worship  into  Israel ;  Athaliah  into  Judah.  Bach  defiles  the  capital 
of  her  adopted  country  with  a  temple  to  Baal — a  temple  where  images  of  Baal  are  set 
up,  altars  erecteri  to  him,  and  sacrifices  offered  to  him.  Each  brings  with  her  into  her 
new  home  the  Baal  priesthood,  and  instals  it  in  power. 

IL  Open  antagonists  op  Jehovah.  Jezebel  persecutes  the  Jehovistio  prophet*, 
slaying  as  many  as  she  can,  and  threatening  the  life  even  of  Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii,  4 ; 
zix,  2).  Athaliah  stops  the  temple- worship  at  Jerusalem,  has  breaches  made  in  the 
temple  walls,  and  gives  to  Baal  the  offerings  which  properly  belong  to  Jehovah 
(2  Chron.  xxiv,  7). 


TO.  XL  1—21.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  233 

ni.  MuBDEBESBBS.  Jezebel,  of  Naboth  (1  Kings  xxi.  8 — 14)  and  of  the  Jehovistl* 
prophets  (1  Kings  xviii.  4) ;  Athaliab,  of  "  all  the  seed  royal  of  the  house  of  Judah  " 
(2  Chron.  xxii.  10). 

IV.  Eaqeb  to  obabp  and  wield  80TEBEION  FowGB.  Jezebel  governs  Ahab  (1  Kinp 
xzi.  25),  uses  his  signet  (1  Kings  xxi.  8),  orders  executions  (1  Kings  xviii.  4 ;  zxi.  10), 
and  the  like.  Athaliah  governs  Jehoram  (ch.  viii.  18)  and  Ahaziah  (2  Chron.  xzii,  3), 
and  then  seizes  the  royal  power,  and  actually  rules  Judaea  (ch.  xi.  3). 

Athaliah  is,  on  the  whole,  the  bolder  of  the  two,  and  the  more  unscrupuloua ;  since 
to  destroy  the  entire  seed  royal,  including  several  of  her  own  gi  andchildren,  was  a  more 
atrocious  and  unnatural  deed  than  any  committed  by  Jezebel ;  and  the  actual  assump- 
tion of  the  royal  name  and  power,  in  spite  of  her  sex,  was  a  more  audacious  proceeding 
than  any  on  which  her  mother  ventured.  But  her  audacity  verged  on  rashness,  which 
cannot  be  said  of  Jezebel.  She  brought  her  fate  upon  herself;  Jezebel  succumbed  to 
an  inevitable  stroke  of  adverse  fortune.  There  was  weakness  in  Athaliah's  half- 
measures  after  she  became  queen,  in  her  suffering  Jehoiada  to  retain  so  much  liberty 
and  so  much  power,  and  still  greater  weakness  in  her  unsuspiclousness.  We  cannot 
imagine  Jezebel,  if  she  had  ever  been  actual  queen,  allowing  herself  to  be  put  down  in 
the  way  that  Athaliah  was.  She  would  at  least  have  made  a  fight  for  her  life,  instead 
of  walking  straight  into  a  trap,  which  was  what  Athaliah  did.  QuemDeusvultperdert 
prius  dementat  is  an  old  saying.  Athaliah's  folly  at  the  last  can  only  be  accounted  for 
by  an  infatuation,  which  may  have  been  a  Divine  judgment  on  her. 

Vers.  4 — 19. — Jehoiada  an  example  of  a  faithful  and  wise  high  priest  under  trying 
tircumstances.  The  history  of  the  Jewish  kingdom  from  the  time  of  Saul  to  the 
Captivity  furnishes  but  few  examples  of  remarkable  high  priests.  Zadok  and  Abiathar 
were  personages  of  some  importance  in  the  time  of  David,  and  left  behind  them  a  name 
for  zeal  and  fidelity ;  but  otherwise  no  man  of  eminence  had  arisen  among  the  high 
priests  until  Jehoiada.  This  may  be  partly  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the  high 
priesthood  was  hereditary,  not  elective ;  but  still  more  by  tiie  nature  of  the  ofBce, 
which  was  not  such  as  to  bring  its  holder  into  historical  prominence  in  quiet  times. 
Jehoiada's  opportunity  for  distinction  arose  from  the  difficult  circumstances  in  which 
he  was  placed.  Holding  the  office  of  high  priest  when  the  throne  was  usurped  and 
religion  outraged  by  Athaliah,  it  devolved  on  him  to  rescue  Church  and  state  alike 
from  peril,  and  to  counter-work  the  wicked  schemes  of  an  enemy  alike  bold  and 
unscrupulous.  He  could  not  prevent  the  destruction  of  the  royal  stock  by  Athaliah, 
which  was  a  crime  so  unnatural  that  none  could  have  anticipated  it ;  but  he  did  what 
he  could.  At  the  peril  of  his  life  he  saved  one  prince,  concealed  him  from  prying 
eyes,  protected  him,  bred  him  up  secretly,  and  did  not  allow  his  existence  to  be  even 
■uspected.  In  faith  and  patience  he  waited  till  the  infant  had  become  a  boy  of  an 
age  to  interest  people,  and  till  Athaliah  had  lost  the  affections  of  all  classes  of  her 
subjects.  He  then  organized  a  counter-revolution  to  the  one  effected  by  Athaliah, 
with  the  greatest  prudence,  caution,  and  sagacity.  It  would  have  been  easy  to  gather 
partisans  and  raise  a  revolt ;  but  Jehoiada  shrank  from  the  horrors  of  a  civil  war,  and 
from  the  risk  of  losing  his  precious  charge  by  a  stray  shot  or  a  chance  sword-thrust. 
He  therefore  set  to  work  to  detach  Athaliah's  supporters  from  her  cause  by  the  peaceful 
method  of  persuasion.  First  he  gained  over  the  captains  of  her  guard,  then  through 
them  the  rank-and-file,  finally  the  "  chief  fathers '  of  Israel  in  the  various  cities 
(2  Chron.  xxiii.  2).  Doubting  the  sufficiency  of  this  force,  he  further  aummoned  to 
his  aid  a  large  body  of  Levites.  And  all  this  he  did  so  secretly  as  to  create  no  alarm, 
to  arouse  no  suspicion.  When  the  time  for  action  came,  he  made  his  arrangements 
with  the  most  consummate  skill.  He  could  not,  indeed,  have  foreseen  that  Athaliah 
would  so  play  into  his  hand,  as  she  did,  by  coming  within  the  temple  walls  with  few 
or  no  attendants;  but  be  had  taken  his  measures  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  failure 
impossible,  and  to  reduce  to  a  minimum  the  probability  of  tumult  or  armed  resistance. 
It  was  an  indication  of  extraordinary  prudence  and  political  wisdom  to  be  able  to  effect 
a  complete  revolution,  both  in  Church  and  state,  at  the  cost  of  two  lives,  both  of  them 
clearly  forfeit  by  the  Law  of  Moses.  Up  to  this  time,  Jehoiada's  wisdom  had  been  chiefly 
conspicuous.  Henceforth  it  is  his  fidelity  that  draws  our  admiration.  Aiming  at 
nothing;  for  himself^  his  first  thought  is  for  the  honour  of  Qod,  and  therefore  he  renews 


284  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  xi.  1—21. 

the  Mosaic  corenant ;  bis  next  for  the  welfare  of  his  country,  and  therefore  he  mates 
king  and  people  mutually  swear  to  each  other ;  his  third  for  the  honour  of  true  religion, 
and  therefore  he  destroys  the  temple  of  Baal,  and  inaugurates  afresh  the  Jehovistic 
service.  As  Bahr  says,  "  If  ever  a  man  stood  pure  and  homeless  in  the  midst  of  such 
a  bold,  difiBcult,  and  far-reaching  enterprise,  then  Jeboiada,  the  ideal  Israelitish  priest, 
did  so  here."  The  after-life  of  Jeboiada  is  less  remarkable  (ch.  xii.  2 — 16 ;  2  Chron. 
xxiv.  2 — 14),  but  not  unworthy  of  his  earlier  reputation. 

Vers.  15 — Xt.—OocPt  judgments  not  infrequently  faU  in  this  life,  though  sometimes 
they  are  deferred  to  the  life  beyond  the  grave.  The  Athaliahs  and  Mattans  of  history 
seldom  come  to  a  good  end.  Though  the  wicked  man  be  often  seen  in  prosperity, 
though  he  "  flourishes  as  a  green  bay  tree,"  yet  it  is  not  often  that  he  continues 
flourishing  to  the  close  of  his  days,  or  die;i  in  comfort,  peace,  and  happiness.  The 
psalmist  was  satisfied  when  he  saw  "the  end"  of  the  man  whose  long-continued 
prosperity  had  vexed  and  grieved  him  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  2 — 22).  Heathen  wisdom  bade  men 
''never  to  pronounce  anyone  happy  before  his  death,"  since  inhuman  life  changes 
were  of  continual  occurrence,  and  the  higher  a  man's  exaltation  above  his  fellows  at 
»  given  time,  the  lower  was  likely  to  be  his  depression  and  degradation  at  another. 
The  rationale  of  the  matter  seems  to  be — 

I.  God  has  attached  penalties  to  vice  in  the  wat  of  natdbal  consequence, 
WHICH  TAKE  EFFECT  IF  TIME  BE  ALLOWED.  Tyrants  lay  up  for  themselves  a  con- 
stantly increasing  amoant  of  hatred  and  resentment,  which  naturally  bursts  forth  and 
sweeps  them  away  after  a  while ;  e.g.  Hipparchus,  Tarquin,  Dionysius,  Caligula,  Nero. 
Drunkards,  gluttons,  and  profligate  persons  destroy  their  health.  Reckless  spendthrifts 
reduce  themselves  to  poverty  and  want.  Unfaithfulness  strips  men  of  their  friends, 
and  leaves  them  weak  and  defenceless  against  their  adversaries.  The  prosperity  of 
the  wicked  is  naturally  but  for  a  time — give  them  the  full  term  of  human  life,  and, 
before  they  die,  their  sin  will,  to  a  certainty,  find  them  out,  and  they  will  cease  to 
prosper. 

II.  God  does,  on  occasion,  visit  high-placed,  prosperous  sinkers  with  sudden, 
SIGNAL  PUNISHMENTS  DEALT  BY  HIS  OWN  HAND.  Scripture  gives  US  a  certain  number 
of  examples,  as  those  of  the  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodus,  Saul,  Jezebel,  Sennacherib, 
Nebuchadnezzar,  Herod  Agrippa,  and  the  like,  whose  afflictions  are  distinctly  declared 
to  have  been  sent  upon  them  by  God  himself  in  the  way  of  punishment.  While,  no 
doubt,  great  caution  is  necessary  in  applying  the  principle  thus  indicated  to  other 
persons  in  history,  and  especially  to  living  persons,  we  need  not  shrink  from  sorm 
application  of  it.  God  speaks  to  us  in  history,  not  only  in  his  Word.  When  selfish 
usurpers,  who  have  deluged  whole  continents  in  blood,  and  sacriSced  tens  or  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  lives  to  gratify  their  ambition,  are  cast  down  from  their  thrones,  and 
die  in  exile  or  banishment,  it  is  almost  impossible  not  to  see  his  hand  in  the  occurrences, 
executing  judgment.  When  an  Arius,  bent  on  the  disruption  of  the  Church,  and 
seemingly  at  the  point  of  triumph,  expires  silently  in  the  night,  or  a  Galerius,  the  most 
cruel  of  persecutors,  perishes  in  most  horrible  agonies,  there  is  no  want  of  charity 
or  of  reverence  in  once  more  recognizing  his  finger  interposed  to  save  his  Church  or  to 
avenge  his  martyred  ones.  "  Some  men's  sins  are  open  beforehand,  going  before  to 
judgment "  (1  Tim.  v.  24) ;  and,  when  the  judgment  falls,  it  would  be  wilful  blindness 
on  our  part  not  to  recognize  it.  We  must  be  cautious,  and  remember  that  those  on 
whom  the  tower  in  Siloam  fell,  and  slew  them,  were  not  sinners  above  the  other 
dwellers  in  Jerusalem  (Luke  xiii.  4)j  but,  if  it  was  God's  vengeance  that  destroyed  the 
cities  of  the  plain,  and  that  visited  Nadab  and  Abihu,  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram, 
Sihon  and  Og,  Balaam,  Adonizedek  and  his  brother  kings,  Eglon,  Sisera,  Zebah, 
Zalmunna,  Abimelech,  Agag,  Doeg,  Shimei,  Jezebel,  Haman,  Ananias,  Sapphira,  Herod 
Agrippa,  Elymas,  so  we  may  be  sure  that  it  has  fallen  on  hundreds  of  others  whose 
names  do  not  occur  in  Scripture,  coming  suddenly  upon  them,  and  cutting  them  off 
in  their  iniquities,  generally  when  neither  they  nor  others  were  in  the  least  expecting  it. 
God  is  still,  as  he  has  ever  been, "  the  great,  the  mighty  God,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  great  in 
ooansel  and  mighty  in  work ;  his  eyes  are  open  upon  all  the  ways  of  the  sons  of  men, 
to  give  every  one  according  to  his  ways  and  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings " 
(Jer.  zxxii.  18, 19).  Either  in  this  life  or  in  the  life  to  come  he  will  execute  vengeance 


OH.  XL  1—21.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  235 

upon  evil-doers.    Well  for  them  if  it  is  in  this  life,  and  if  they  so  escape  the  dreadful 
lot  of  tboie  "  to  whom  is  reserved  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever  "  (Jude  13). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1— 16.— 2^2"'***''''"*'<'"  """^  coronation  o/Joash.  This  is  •  touching  story 
of  human  wickedness  and  of  God's  overruling  and  preserving  power.  Three  principal 
personages  come  before  us  here,  from  each  of  whom  something  may  be  learned. 

I.  Athaliah  and  hbe  work.  Athaliah's  Kfe-worh  was  a  work  of  destruction.  She 
did  much  harm.  She  did  no  good.  A  daughter  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel  (sometimes  called 
a  daughter  of  Omri,  whose  granddaughter  she  was),  she  had  inherited  all  the  evil  pro- 
pensities of  her  parents.  She  destroyed  her  own  husband,  Jehoram  King  of  Judah.  We 
read  of  him  that  "  he  walked  in  the  way  ot  the  kings  of  Israel,  like  as  did  the  house  of 
Ahab :  /or  he  had  the  daughter  of  Ahab  to  wife .  and  he  wrought  that  which  was  evil 
in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  "  (2  Chron.  xxi.  6).  She  dutroyed  also  her  son  Ahaziah.  We 
read  of  him  that  "  he  also  walked  in  the  ways  of  the  house  of  Ahab  :  for  his  mother 
was  his  counsellor  to  do  wickedly.  Wherefore  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  like 
the  house  of  Abab ;  for  they  were  his  counsellors  after  the  death  of  his  father  to  his 
destruction"  (2  Chron.  xxi.  3,  4).  And  now  she  completes  her  destructive  career  by 
putting  to  death  her  grandchildren,  the  seed  royal  of  the  kingdom.  There  are  many 
women  like  Athaliah,  whose  life-work  is  a  work  of  destruction.  What  harm  one  wicked 
woman  can  do  I  Some  corrupt  the  morals  of  others.  Some,  by  their  evil-speaking  and 
slander,  do  what  they  can  to  destroy  the  reputation  and  good  name  of  their  neighbours. 
The  Jezebels  and  Athaliahs  of  Scripture  story  have  their  parallels  in  the  Queen  Marys, 
the  Pompadours,  the  Medicis,  and  the  Maintenons  of  more  modem  times. 

II.  Jehosheba  and  heb  wobe.  Jehosheba's  work  was  a  work  of  preservation.  She 
too  was  a  king's  daughter.  But  she  had  not  been  corrupted  by  the  wickedness  of  the 
court.  She  was  the  wife  of  Jehoiada  the  priest — a  good  wife  of  a  good  man.  She 
rescued  Joash  from  Athaliah's  massacre,  and  kept  him  hid  in  the  priests'  apartments 
in  the  temple.  There  he  was  hid  for  six  years,  until  the  time  that,  as  a  boy-king, 
he  was  called  to  the  throne.  If  there  are  Athaliahs  in  the  world  still,  there  are  also 
Jehoshebas.  If  there  are  women  of  cruelty,  there  are  also  women  of  sympathetic  and 
compassionate  spirit.  If  there  are  women  who  are  corrupters  of  others,  how  many  there 
are  who  by  their  own  pure  life  and  conduct  have  been  the  preservers  of  public  purity 
and  morality  I  If  one  wicked  woman  can  do  much  harm,  one  pure-minded  Christian 
woman  can  do  a  vast  amount  of  good.  What  an  amount  of  quiet  beneficence  is  being 
carried  on  by  Christian  women  throughout  the  world  at  the  present  day  1  What  a 
vast  number  of  ladies  who  visit  and  minister  to  the  poor  1  What  a  vast  number  of 
ladies  who,  in  hospitals  and  in  private  houses,  devote  themselves  to  the  noble  work 
of  nursing  the  sick  1  How  many  are  engaged  in  instructing  the  young  in  our  Sunday 
schools  1  How  many  have  gone  forth  as  missionaries  to  heathen  lands!  Woman's 
work  in  the  Christian  Church,  and  in  the  cause  of  charity  and  philanthropy,  seems  to 
be  Increasing  every  year. 

III.  Jehoiada  and  his  wobk.  Jehoiada's  work  was  of  a  twofold  nature.  Sis  work 
was  hoth  destroying  and  preserving.  He  destroyed  idolatry.  He  put  an  end  to 
Athaliah's  reign  and  life.  He  did  not  believe  in  the  policy  of  non-resistance.  He 
believed  in  doing  his  utmost  to  overthrow  even  the  power  of  the  reigning  queen,  when 
that  power  was  wickedly  obtained,  and  exercised  in  an  evil  way,  dishonouring  to  God 
and  injurious  to  the  interests  of  the  nation.  Like  many  another  reformer,  he  incurred 
the  charge  of  disloyalty  and  treason.  But  there  are  many  things  that  need  to  be 
destroyed.  And  who  can  overestimate  the  harm  done  by  a  wicked  ruler?  But 
Jehoiada  was  no  mere  revolutionist.  He  did  not  rebel  against  Athaliah  for  revolution's 
sake.  He  did  not  put  an  end  to  her  reign  because  of  his  antipathy  to  governments. 
He  would  have  agreed  with  St.  Paul  that  "  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God.-' 
He  set  up  another  king  in  her  place,  and,  in  place  of  the  idolatry  which  she  had 
sanctioned,  he  set  up  the  worship  of  the  true  God.  We  see  in  the  whole  narrative  the 
everruUng  providence  of  God.  Athaliah  thought  she  would  make  her  power  secure  by 
her  holocaust  of  young  princes.    But  man  proposes,  and  God  disposes.    We  see  also 


236  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINaa        [oh,  xi.  1—21. 


the  use  of  hunum  tnttrumentaKty.  God  works  by  means.  He  used  Jehosheba  to 
preserve  the  young  life  which  in  the  end  was  the  means,  in  Jehoiada's  hand,  of  over- 
throwing the  wicked  power  of  Athaliah. — 0.  H.  I. 

Yers.  17 — 21. — Tht  covenant  and  its  results.  Jehoiada  was  faithful  to  God.  All 
that  he  had  hitherto  done  was  but  the  work  of  a  pioneer,  preparing  the  way  for  the 
restoration  of  Gdd's  worship  and  God's  Law  in  the  land.     We  have  here — 

I.  The  covenant  made.  Very  early  in  the  history  of  God's  people  we  find  them 
entering  into  covenants  with  him.  When  Jacob  had  that  comforting  vision  at  Bethel, 
he  entered  into  a  covenant.  "  If  God  will  be  with  me,  and  will  keep  me  in  this  way 
that  I  go, ...  so  that  I  come  again  to  my  father's  house  in  peace ;  then  shall  the  Lord  be 
my  God;  and  this  stone,  which  I  have  set  for  a  pillar,  shall  be  God's  house:  and  of  all 
that  thou  shalt  give  me  I  will  surely  give  the  tenth  unto  thee."  The  pillar  he  set  up 
was  the  witness  of  the  covenant.  When  God  gave  the  ten  commandments  to  the 
children  of  Israel,  they  entered  into  a  covenant  that  they  would  keep  them  and  do  them. 
That  covenant  they  publicly  renewed  and  ratified  many  times  in  their  subsequdnt 
history.  They  renewed  it  shortly  before  the  death  of  Moses.  They  renewed  it  shortly 
before  the  death  of  Joshua,  and  on  that  occasion  Joshua  set  up  a  great  stone  to  be  a 
witness  of  what  they  had  done.  On  the  occasion  before  us  they  renew  it  under  the 
influence  of  Jehoia'la.  "  And  Jehoiada  made  a  covenant  between  the  Lord  and  the 
king  and  the  people,  that  they  should  be  the  Lord's  people ;  between  the  king  also  and 
the  people."  They  renewed  it  also  in  the  reign  of  Josiah,  and  under  Ezra  and  Nehemiah 
after  the  return  from  the  Captivity.  In  all  these  cases  we  find  three  important  features, 
common  to  them  all.  In  each  case  the  duty  of  making  the  covenant  was  enjoined 
upon  the  people  by  eminent  men  of  God — prophets,  priests,  and  kings.  In  each  case 
it  was  a  public  covenant,  entered  into  by  all  the  people.  And  in  each  case,  when  the 
covenant  was  renewed,  it  was  accompanied  by  moral  and  spiritual  revival  and  reforma- 
tion. Have  we  not  in  the  New  Testament  the  same  duty  pointed  out  and  practised, 
though  not  indeed  under  the  same  name  ?  It  was  a  public  covenant  with  the  Lord 
when  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  the  three  thousand  souls  were  baptized.  When  Paul 
praises  the  Churches  of  Macedonia  for  that  "they  first  gave  their  own  selves  to  the 
Lord ; "  when  he  calls  his  readers  to  present  themselves  a  living  sacrifice  unto  God ;  to 
remember  that  they  are  not  their  own,  but  are  bought  with  a  price ;  to  come  out  from 
among  the  godless  and  be  separate; — all  these  are  just  different  ways  of  reminding  them 
that  as  Christians  they  have  entered  into  a  covenant  with  God.  Passing  over  the  dark 
ages  which  came  upon  the  Christian  Church,  we  find  that  when  the  Bible  truths  began 
to  shed  their  light  once  more  in  the  surrounding  darkness,  the  early  Beformers  found  it 
necessary  to  band  themselves  together  in  a  solemn  covenant  with  God  and  with  one 
another.  By  this  means  they  kept  before  them  their  great  purpose.  By  this  means 
they  stimulated  and  strengthened  and  encouraged  one  another.  By  this  means  they 
lifted  up  a  testimony  against  surrounding  error.  Such  a  covenant  was  publicly  agreed 
to  by  the  Protestant  princes  and  states  of  Germany,  and  also  by  the  Huguenots  of 
France,  But  the  best-known  and  most  memorable  covenants  are  those  of  Scotland, 
John  Knox  laid  the  foundation  of  the  Keformation  in  Scotland,  but  the  covenants  built 
it  up  and  strengthened  it.  The  first  of  these  was  called  the  National  Covenant,  first 
drawn  up  in  the  year  1580.  It  was  signed  by  the  king,  nobles,  and  persons  of  all 
ranks — the  king  being  James  VI.  of  Scotland,  afterwards  James  I.  of  England.  By 
this  memorable  document  the  whole  people  of  Scotland  pledged  themselves  to  renounce 
and  resist  all  the  errors  of  popery,  and  to  maintain  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  It  was 
thii  covenant  which  was  afterwards  renewed  in  the  Greyfriar's  Churchyard  at 
Edinburgh,  when,  among  the  immense  multitude  who  signed  it,  many  opened  their 
Teins  and  wrote  their  names  with  their  own  blood.  The  other  was  the  Solemn  League 
and  Covenant,  entered  into  between  the  two  parliaments  of  England  and  Scotland,  also 
for  resistance  to  popery,  and  the  maintenance  of  pure  religion  throughout  the  land. 
These  things  suggest  to  us  that,  in  times  of  prevailing  wickedness  or  of  prevailing 
error,  it  is  the  duty  of  God's  people  to  make  public  avowal  of  their  faith  in  Christ 
and  allegiance  to  him.  It  is  a  duty  pointed  out  both  in  the  Old  Testament  and  in  the 
New,  and  confirmed  by  the  experience  of  God's  Church  both  in  Scripture  times  and  in 
more  recent  days.    If  ever  there  was  a  time  when  it  was  the  duty  of  Christ's  people 


OH.  XL  1—21.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINOS.  237 


puHicly  and  imitedlj  to  confess  him,  that  time  is  the  present.  Wickedness  abonnds. 
The  love  of  many  waxes  cold.  Many  of  Christ's  professing  people  seem  utterly 
indifferent  to  the  claims  of  their  Master  and  his  cause.  False  doctrines  are  taught ; 
and  under  the  show  of  religion  there  is  a  growing  conformity  to  the  world.  A  faithful, 
strong,  united  testimony  for  Christ  is  urgently  needed.  JEow,  then,  are  tee  to  carry  out 
this  duty  of  making  a  public  covenant  with  Qod  f  There  is  one  way  which  is  available 
to  us  all,  and  that  is  the  Lord's  Supper.  It  is  an  act  of  commemoration,  communion, 
and  consecration.  In  partaking  of  the  Lord's  Supper  we  enter  into  s  covenant  with 
God.  It  is  a  public  covenant.  The  eyes  of  the  world  are  upon  ns.  They  see  us  make 
a  profession  to  be  Christ's,  Do  they  see  that  our  practice  corresponds  with  our 
profession?  Each  commtmion  ought  to  be  a  personal  covenant  with  God  on  the  part 
of  each  individual  believer.  It  ought  to  be  a  public  covenant  with  God  on  the  part  of 
families.    It  ought  to  be  a  public  covenant  with  God  on  the  part  of  congregations. 

n.  The  covenant  kept.  Jehoiada  and  the  people  had  entered  into  a  covenant  or 
engagement  that  they  would  be  the  Lord's.  And  they  kept  their  promise.  The  first 
way  in  which  they  showed  it  was  by  breaking  in  pieces  the  idols  and  their  altars,  which 
were  so  abundant  in  the  land.  So,  if  we  take  Christ's  vows  upon  us  at  his  table,  let  us 
show  that  we  mean  what  we  profess.  Let  us  show  that  we  are  on  the  Lord's  side. 
"  Better  not  to  vow,  than  to  vow  and  not  pay."  Let  us  begin  with  oiur  own  hearts. 
Are  there  no  idols  there  that  need  to  be  thrown  down,  no  besetting  sins  that  need  to 
be  put  away,  no  evil  passions  that  need  to  be  crucified?  "  If  ye  do  return  unto  the 
Lord  with  all  your  hearts,  then  put  away  the  strange  gods  and  Ashtaroth  from  among 
you,  and  prepare  your  hearts  unto  the  Lord,  and  serve  him  only  "  (1  Sam.  vii.  3). 

III.  The  BLEssrtfGS  op  the  covenant.  "And  aU  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced, 
and  the  city  was  in  quiet."  God  kept  them  in  perfect  peace,  because  their  minds  were 
stayed  on  him.  They  kept  their  part  of  the  covenant.  God  kept  his.  We  find  in 
Scripture  that  God  promises  special  blessings  to  those  who  enter  into  a  covenant  with 
him.  Before  he  gave  the  Law  on  Mount  Sinai,  he  said  to  the  children  of  Israel,  "  Now 
therefore,  if  ye  wiE  obey  my  voice  indeed,  and  keep  my  covenant,  then  ye  shall  he  a 
peculiar  treasure  unto  me  above  all  people :  for  all  the  earth  is  mine."  Then  again 
God  says,  "  Come  ye  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the 
unclean  thing ;  and  I  will  receive  you,  and  will  be  a  Father  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  be 
my  sons  and  daughters,  saith  the  Lord  God  Almighty."  We  also  find  that  more  than 
once  these  promises  were  fulfilled.  In  the  days  of  Asa,  when  the  people  of  Judah 
made  a  covenant  with  God,  we  read  that  "  it  was  a  time  of  great  rejoicing,  for  they 
had  sought  the  Lord  with  all  their  heart,  and  he  was  found  of  them ;  and  the  Lord 
gave  them  rest  round  about."  So  in  the  days  of  Josiah,  when  they  made  the  covenant 
and  put  away  the  strange  gods,  we  read,  "  Surely  there  was  not  holden  such  a  Passover 
from  the  days  of  the  judges  that  judged  Israel,  nor  in  all  the  days  of  the  kings  of 
Israel,  nor  of  the  kings  of  Judah."  It  was  the  same  in  more  recent  times.  The 
covenanters,  whose  motto  was  "  For  Christ's  crown  and  covenant,"  and  who  shed  their 
blood  in  defence  of  Christ's  authority,  were  a  great  means  of  preserving  pure  and 
undefiled  religion  in  Scotland.  Let  us  all,  then,  faithfully  witness  for  him  by  our  lives. 
"  Come,  and  let  us  join  ourselves  to  the  Lord  in  a  perpetual  covenant  that  shall  not  be 
forgotten  "  (Jer.  L  6).— C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 21. — The  history  of  Athaliah.  "And  when  Athsliah  the  mother  of 
Ahaziah  saw  that  her  son  was  dead,"  etc.  Among  the  blackest  names  in  the  long  roll 
of  the  world's  infamy  are  those  of  kings  and  queens,  and  amongst  them  Athaliah  is  not 
the  least  abhorrent  and  revolting.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Ahab  King  of  Israel,  and 
of  Jezebel,  his  notorious  wife.  She  married  Joram  (or  Jehoram)  King  of  Judah.  She 
was  the  mother  of  Ahaziah,  and  advised  him  in  his  wickedness.  After  Jehu  had  slain 
him,  she  resolved  to  put  an  end  to  all  the  children  of  her  husband  by  his  former  wives, 
and  then  mount  the  throne  of  Judah  herself.  Butthe  half-sister  of  Ahaziah,  Jehosheba, 
secured  Joash,  one  of  the  children  and  heir  to  the  throne,  and  secreted  him  with  his 
nurse  for  six  long  years.  Is  the  seventh  year  the  young  prince  was  brought  forth  and 
placed  on  the  throne.  Crowds  of  people  assembled  to  witness  the  ceremony,  and 
Athaliah,  hearing  the  shouts  of  the  crowd,  hastened  to  the  temple,  utterly  unsuspicious 
even  of  the  exi8i^<ence  of  the  young  king.    When,  hoirever,  she  caught  a  sight  of  the 


238  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  xL  1—21. 

yoing  king  and  heard  the  hurrahs  of  the  crowd,  she  felt  that  her  atrociona  plans  had 
heon  frustrated,  and  in  her  savage  humiliation  rent  her  clothes  and  cried, "  Treason  I 
treason  I "  But  her  hour  was  over ;  she  was  too  late  to  rally  a  party  in  favour  of  her 
own  interest,  and  by  the  command  of  the  priest  she  was  instantly  removed  and  violently 
destroyed.  In  this  woman's  life,  as  here  sketched,  we  have  hereditary  dtpi  avity,  out- 
witted wickedness,  and  Just  retribution. 

I.  Hebeditabt  depbayity.  We  find  in  this  woman,  Athallah,  the  inreinal  ten- 
dencies of  her  father  and  her  mother,  Ahab  and  Jezebel.  Though  they  had  been  swept 
as  monsters  from  the  earth,  and  were  now  lying  in  the  grave,  their  hellish  spirit  lived 
and  worked  iu  this  their  daughter.  It  is,  alas !  often  so.  We  have  an  immortality  in 
others,  as  well  as  in  ourselves.  The  men  of  long-forgotten  generations  still  live  in  the 
present.  Even  the  moral  pulse  of  Adam  throbs  in  alL  By  this  fact  we  are  reminded : 
1.  That  the  moral  qualities  of  parents  may  become  physical  tendencies  in  their  children. 
The  man  who  voluntarily  (and  all  moral  qualities  are  voluntary  productions)  contracts 
habits  of  falsehood,  dishonesty,  profanity,  incontinence,  drunkenness,  and  general 
intemperance,  transmits  these  to  his  children  as  physical  tendencies.  This  is  marvel- 
lous, but  patent  to  every  observer  of  society  and  student  of  history.  Who  cannot  refer 
to  both  men  and  women  who  have  received  an  unappeasable  craving  for  strong  drinks 
by  the  drunken  habits  contracted  by  their  parents?  2.  That  the  e-^  moral  qualities  of 
parents,  reappearing  in  their  children  in  the  form  of  physical  tendencies,  is  no  complete 
Justification  for  the  children's  wickedness.  This  is  clear :  (1)  From  the  fact  that  God 
has  endowed  all  with  sufficient  force  to  control  all  physical  tendencies.  Most  men  have 
BufBcient  mental  faculties  to  quench  the  strongest  physical  passion.  (2)  From  the 
personal  consciousness  of  every  sinner.  When  the  conscience  is  quickened,  the  greatest 
liar,  debauchee,  drunkard,  thief,  becomes  filled  with  compunctions  for  the  crimes  com- 
mitted. Every  sigh  of  remorse  on  account  of  sin  is  a  testimony  to  the  power  of  the 
human  mind  to  control  the  passions.  (3)  From  the  Divine  Word  as  found  in  the 
Scriptures.  "  Whatsoever  good  thing  any  man  doeth,  the  same  shall  he  receive  of  the 
Lord,  whether  he  be  bond  or  free."  "  He  that  doeth  wrong  shall  receive  for  the  wrong 
which  he  hath  done  :  and  there  is  no  respect  of  persons."  3.  That  the  way  to  raise  the 
human  race  is  to  improve  their  moral  qualities.  Indoctrinate  men's  souls  with  truth, 
benevolence,  piety,  chastity,  purity,  etc.,  and  you  help  on  the  race  to  its  mlleuniam. 
And  in  no  other  way.    The  gospel  is  the  instrument  for  this. 

II.  Outwitted  wickedness.  No  doubt  this  woman,  who  thought  she  had  destroyed 
all  the  "  seed  royal,"  considered  she  had  made  her  way  to  the  throne  clear  and  secure. 
For  six  long  years  she  had  no  conception  that  one  had  escaped  her  bloody  purpose. 
Now  it  was  revealed  to  her,  and  her  disappointment  maddens  her  with  vengeance,  and 
excites  the  desperate  cry,  " Treason !  Treason!"  It  is  ever  so.  «' He  disappointeih  the 
devices  of  the  crafty."  History  abounds  with  the  examples  of  the  bafflement  of  wrong. 
The  conduct  of  Joseph's  brethren,  Ahithophel,  Sanballat,  Haman,  and  the  Jewish  San- 
hedrin  in  relation  to  Christ,  are  instances.  Satan,  the  arch-enemy  of  the  universe,  will 
exemplify  this  through  all  the  crises  of  his  accursed  future.  A  piece  of  conduct, 
wrought  by  the  highest  human  skill  and  earnest  industry,  if  not  in  accord  with  the 
immutable  principles  of  right  and  truth,  can  no  more  succeed  in  its  purpose  than  a 
house  can  stand,  which  is  built  regardless  of  the  resistless  laws  of  gravitation.  The 
architecture  may  look  well,  the  materials  be  most  precious,  and  the  production  be  most 
costly,  yet  down  it  must  come,  and  confound  the  builder.  Craftiness  uses  lies  as  con- 
cealment and  defence,  but  the  eternal  law  of  Providence  makes  them  snares.  One  lie 
leads  to  another,  and  so  on,  until  they  become  so  numerous  that  the  author  involves 
himself  in  contradictions,  and  he  falls  and  flounders  like  a  wild  beast  in  a  snare. 

III.  JnsT  BETRiBtrrioK.  "Jehoiada  the  priest  commanded  the  captains  of  the 
hundreds,  the  officers  of  the  host,  and  said  unto  them,  Have  her  forth  without  the 
ranges :  and  him  that  foUoweth  her  kill  with  the  sword,  .  .  .  And  they  laid  hands  on 
her ;  and  she  went  by  the  way  by  the  which  the  horses  came  into  the  king's  house : 
and  there  was  she  slain.  .  .  .  And  all  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced,  and  the  city  was 
in  quiet :  and  they  slew  Athaliah  with  the  sword  beside  the  king's  house."  Thus 
8<zpe  intereunt  aliis  meditantes  necem.  Those  who  plot  the  destruction  of  others  often 
fall  themselves.  Here  is  :  1.  A  jerrt&2e  retribution.  2.  A  jirompf  retribution.  It  came 
on  her  here  before  she  passed  into  the  other  world.    Retribution  is  going  on  now  aii«] 


CH.  XL  1—21.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KlNGa.  S3« 

here.  3.  A  retribution  administend  hy  human  hands.  Truly  "  the  triumphing  of 
the  wicked  is  thort,  and  the  joy  of  the  hypocrite  but  for  a  moment.  Though  his 
excellency  mount  npto  th«  heavens,  and  his  head  reach  unto  the  clouds ;  yet  he  shall 
perish  for  erer. . .  .Tea,  he  shall  be  chased  away  as  a  vision  of  ihe  night."  An  Oriental 
poet  thus  vividly  describes  the  retribution  that  must  follow  wickedness— 

"  All  vice  to  which  man  yields  in  greed  to  do  it. 
Or  soon  or  late,  be  sure,  he'll  sorely  rue  it ; 
Experience  deep,  howe'ei  false  seeming  blind  him, 
Surcharged  with  retribution,  out  will  find  him. 
It  locks  upon  his  soul  a  fatal  fetter. 
Explodes  throughout  his  face  in  horrid  tetter, 
Over  his  shameless  eyeballs  brings  a  blurring, 
Keeps  in  his  heart  a  deadly  fear-load  stirring ; 
At  all  pure  joys  with  fiendish  talon  snatches. 
The  noblest  traits  from  out  his  being  catches; 
Each  beam  and  hope  and  vision  darkens. 
His  conscience  stuns  whene'er  towards  heaven  he  hearkeni| 
On  goading  thorns  his  sleepless  longing  tosses, 
With  soul  remorse-foam  pleasure's  waves  emboBsea. 
Sometimes  from  phantom-fears  impels  him  flying, 
Bometimes  in  frantic  horrors  shrouds  his  dying; 
Now  turns  his  dearest  friends  to  cease  to  love  him. 
Now  spreads  avenging  Siva's  form  above  him  ; 
Makes  this  World  black  with  prison  walls  and  gibbetf, 
And  in  the  next  escape  from  hell  prohibits. 
The  whole  creation's  strange  and  endless  dealing. 
In  spite  of  shields  and  veils  and  arts  concealing, 
Proclaims  that  wliosoe'er  is  long  a  sinnei 
Can  only  be  by  it  of  woe  a  winner." 

D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Jthaliah's  murpafion.  Athaliah  was  the  evil  genius  of  Judah,  as 
Jezebel  was  of  Isricl.  The  mother  was  slain,  but,  unwarned  by  her  fall,  the  daughter 
snatched  at  the  reins  of  power,  and  held  the  throne  for  six  years.  The  track  of  botJi 
was  marked  by  violence,  bloodshed,  and  political  convulsion. 

I.  The  wickedness  of  Athaliah.  Ahaziah's  death  gave  Athaliah  her  opportunity. 
Nothing  could  more  clearly  reveal  the  wicked  disposition  of  the  woman  than  the  means 
by  which  she  raised  herself  to  the  throne.  When  she  "  saw  that  her  son  was  dead,  she 
arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal."  1.  She  was  a  woman,  yet,  to  pave  her  way  to 
power,  she  did  not  hesitate  to  crush  every  feminine  instinct  in  her  breast,  and  to  imbrue 
her  hands  in  innocent  blood.  2.  She  was  a  mother,  yet  she  remorselessly  put  to  death 
her  own  grandchildren.  The  youngest  was  a  babe,  but  her  savage  temper  made  no 
distinctions.  Her  son's  offspring  were  only  rivals,  to  be  got  out  of  the  way  by  murder. 
In  this  tigress-like  nature  of  the  queen-mother  all  womanhood  is  effaced.  Truly  "  the 
tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel "  (Prov.  xii.  10). 

II.  The  pbbservation  of  Joash.  After  all,  Athaliah's  end  was  not  gained. 
Unknown  to  this  savage  woman,  one  of  Ahaziah's  sons,  the  youngest,  was  saved  from 
the  general  massacre  by  his  aunt  Jehosheba,  and,  after  a  temporary  concealment  in  the 
gtore-chamber  of  the  palace,  was  conveyed  to  the  temple,  and  there  secretly  brought 
up.  We  have  in  this  ddiverance  of  the  young  Joash :  1.  An  example  of  faith  and 
courage.  It  was  "  by  faith  "  that  the  pious  Jehosheba  did  this  daring  act,  even  as  it 
was  by  faith  that  the  parents  of  Moses  hid  their  goodly  child  (Heb.  xi.  23).  And  faith, 
in  this  instance  as  in  the  other,  had  its  reward.  2.  A  proof  of  God's  faithfulnesg  to  his 
promise.  It  had  been  promised  to  David  that  he  should  never  want  a  man  to  sit  on 
his  throne  (1  Kings  viii.  25).  That  promise  seemed  now  frustrated,  when  to  outward 
appearance  every  descendant  of  David  was  destroyed.  But  "  the  counsel  of  the  Lord 
itandeth  for  ever  "  (Ps.  xxxiii.  11).  No  device  of  man  can  prevail  against  that.  3.  An 
illHstration  of  how  Qod  can  defeat  the  designs  of  the  wicked.  Skilfully  as  the  wicked 
lay  their  plots,  there  is  generally  something  overlooked,  forgotten,  which  brings  them 
to  nought.   Somt  witneaa  of  thair  orimes  is  left  undetected.   Tkey  seem  to  have  closed 


240  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  ix  1—21. 


ap  arery  «hink  and  cranny  through  which  defeat  ooold  enter,  yet  It  is  found  that  some 
loophole  has  been  left.    A  good  and  ine  cause  may  be  safely  left  in  the  hands  of  God.  ' 
He  will  not  suffer  It  to  falL— J.  O. 

Vers.  4 — ^21. — The  coronation  of  Joash.  For  six  years  Athatiah  was  dominant  in 
Israd.  Jehoiada  meanwhile  kept  his  secret  well.  Least  of  all  did  the  usurping  queen 
suspect  that  a  legitimate  heir  to  the  throne  was  in  hiding  in  the  temple  almost  at  her 
own  palace  door.  Her  reign  must  have  grown  well-nigh  unendurable  to  the  people, 
when  they  were  so  willing  as  the  event  proved  to  throw  it  o£f.  At  the  six  years'  end 
Jehoiada  prepared  for  his  coup  d'etat. 

I.  Jehoiada'b  pbepabationb.  1.  Joash  produced.  The  good  priest  found  it  neces- 
sary to  proceed  with  caution.  His  measures  were  taken  with  skill  and  secrecy.  He 
first  took  into  his  confidence  the  five  centurions  of  the  life-guards,  made  them  swear 
an  oath  of  fidelity,  then  produced  the  king,  and  showed  him  to  them.  The  soldiers 
entered  into  his  plan  at  once.  The  risks  were  enormous,  but  God's  shield  was  arouud 
this  one  remaining  "  lamp"  of  David's  house,  and  did  not  allow  its  tremulous  light  to 
be  extinguished.  The  boy-king  was  the  feeble  ark  that  bore  the  fortunes  of  David's 
house  and  of  Messianic  promise.  Had  he  perished,  God's  Word  would  have  fallen  to 
the  ground.  The  Chronicler  tells  how  the  capt^ns  of  hundreds  went  forth  and  secretly 
spread  among  the  Levites  and  chief  of  the  fathers  of  Israel  the  tidings  that  there  was 
still  a  living  heir  of  David's  line,  and  how  these  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  saw  the  young 
king  too  (2  Chron.  xxiii.  2,  3).  It  is  remarkable  that  a  fact  known  to  so  many  persons 
did  not  in  some  way  leak  out.  But  the  people  were  of  one  heart  and  one  soul,  and 
Athaliah  was  left  in  her  false  security  without  a  single  friend  to  warn  her  of  her  danger. 
2.  2%0  eventful  sahbath.  The  day  chosen  for  the  public  production  of  the  king  was 
probably  a  feast-day.  Otherwise  the  large  concourse  of  people  from  all  parts  of  the  land 
uould  hardly  have  failed  to  attract  attention.  It  was  a  sabbath  and  an  high  day — "  the 
better  the  day,  the  better  the  deed."  What  was  contemplated  was  indeed  a  revolution," 
and  might  involve  bloodshed;  but  it  was  also  a  reviving  of  the  fallen  theocracy,  a 
replanting  of  the  rod  of  Jesse,  and  therefore  fit  work  for  the  sabbath.  Nothing  tliat 
favourably  affects  the  fortunes  of  the  kingdom  of  God  is  out  of  place  on  the  sabbath 
day.  Jehoiada  made  careful  strategic  preparations,  combining  apparently  the  Levites 
who  went  on  and  off  duty  in  the  temple  with  the  life-guards  unHer  the  captains,  and 
assigning  to  different  companies  their  res[iective  posts.  3.  Tlie  palace  and  temple 
guarded.  Guards  were  told  off  both  for  the  "king's  house"  and  for  the,  tern  pie.  (1) 
Those  who  entered  on  duty  on  the  sabbath  were  divided  into  three  parts,  and  posti  d 
round  the  palace.  One  third  was  posted  at  the  principal  entrance ;  a  second  third  at 
"  the  gate  Sur  " — perhaps  a  side  gate — and  the  remaining  third  was  placed  at  a  gate 
which  communicated  with  the  temple  (ver.  19),  where  the  guards  or  "  runners  "  were 
usually  stationed.  (2)  Those,  again,  who  went  off  duty  on  the  sabbath  were  placed 
within  the  court  of  the  temple,  stretching  across  from  side  to  side,  to  guard  the  person 
of  the  king.  To  these  weapons  were  given  from  David's  spears  and  shields,  which  were 
in  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  While  trusting  in  God,  Jehoiada  thus  took  every  human 
precaution.  Faith  and  works  co-operate  in  God's  service.  Our  dependence  should  bo 
as  entirely  in  God  as  if  human  means  were  unavailing,  yet  our  use  of  means  should  be 
as  diligent  as  if  everything  depended  on  their  employment. 

II.  The  king  obownbd.  1.  The  safety  of  the  king's  person.  When  the  young  king 
Joash  was  brought  forth,  and  placed  on  a  raised  stand  inthe  temple  cour^  his  guard 
stood  firmly  around  him,  each  man  clutching  his  weapon.  The  instructions  were  that 
any  person  attempting  to  break  through  the  ranks  should  at  once  be  slain.  The  person 
of  David's  son  was  too  precious  to  be  left  without  an  effectual  guard.  Yet  more  effectual 
Is  the  guard  which  God  places  round  his  %ons  (Ps.  xxxiv.  6,  7).  2.  The  ceremony  of 
coronation.  The  act  of  coronation  of  the  child-king  was  then  proceeded  with.  Jehoiada 
presided  at  the  ceremony.  (1)  The  crown — visible  symbol  of  royal  office — was  placed 
upon  his  head.  God's  priest  could  well  preside  at  the  coronation  of  God's  king.  As 
son  of  David,  Joash  was  the  legitimate  heir  of  the  throne.  Boyal  authority  is  from 
Gk>d,  and  investiture  at  the  hands  of  Cbd's  ministers  is  our  acknowledgment  of  this. 
Only  those  who  rule  by  Divine  favour  can  look  for  a  blessing  on  their  crown.  (2)  He 
had  put  upon  his  head  "the  testimony,"  i«,  the  Law  of  Moses,  by  which  kings  of 


OH.  n.  1—21.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  241 

Judah  and  Israel  were  to  be  guided  (Deut.  XTil.  18—20).  "  Finely  are  both  the  crown 
and  the  book  presented  to  the  king,  that  he  might  be  not  only  mighty,  but  also  wise, 
or,  as  we  may  say,  know  God's  Word  and  right.  Thus,  even  now,  we  m»ke  kings 
with  a  sword  and  book"  (Luther).  The  highest  in  the  land  are  not  above  the  authority 
of  God's  TVord.  He  by  whom  "kings  reign"  is  mightier  than  the  mightiest,  and 
requires  fix>m  the  monarch  the  same  allegiance  as  from  the  humblest  of  bis  subjects. 
A  nation  is  happy,  prosperous,  and  blessed  only  when  QoA's  Law  is  made  the  rule  of 
its  policy  and  the  foundation  of  its  government  (Deut.  iv.  6 — 8).  (3)  He  was  anointed 
with  oil.  For  where  God  gives  office  he  gives  also  qualification  for  that  office.  Oil  is 
the  symbol  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Word  without  the  Spirit  to  interpret  it,  and  to 
give  strength  for  obedience  to  it,  is  useless.  Kings  need  the  grace  of  God  for  the  dis- 
charge of  their  duties  as  much  as,  even  more  than,  ordinary  people.  Jesus  is  God's 
King,  "anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  his  fellows"  (Heb.  1.  9).  (4)  He  was 
acknowledged  as  king  by  popular  acclamation.  "  They  clapped  their  hands  and  said, 
God  save  the  king ! "  The  Divine  choice  was  ratified  by  the  free  election  of  the  people. 
While  kingly,  like  all  other  authority,  is  derived  from  God,  a  throne  ia  only  strong 
when  it  rests  on  the  loyal  affection  of  the  body  of  the  people. 

III..  The  death  of  Athaliah.  1.  The  shout  of  a  king.  Athaliah,  though  queen 
of  Judah,  was  not  a  worshipper  of  the  God  of  Judah.  While  the  scenes  above  described 
were  being  transacted,  she  was  either  in  her  own  "  house  of  Baal,"  or  in  the  palace. 
But  now  the  ringing  shouts  of  the  people  apprised  her  that  something  was  wrong.  The 
sight  of  the  guards  posted  round  her  palace  would  add  to  her  alarms.  She  hastened  to 
the  temple,  and  there  beheld  a  spectacle  which  told  her  that  her  hour  was  come.  The 
young  Joash  was  standing  on  his  platform,  the  crown  on  his  head,  the  captains  and 
trumpeters  around  him,  while  the  air  rang  with  the  joyful  huzzas  of  the  people,  with 
the  notes  of  the  silver  trumpets,  and  with  cries  of  "  Let  the  king  live  I "  Only  in  part 
could  Athaliah  read  the  meaning  of  the  scene,  for  she  did  not  know  who  this  crowned 
boy  was.  But  she  saw  enough  to  tell  her  that  the  loyalty  of  the  people  had  found  a 
new  centre,  and  that  her  power  was  gone.  The  rejoicings  of  the  people  would  be  gall 
and  wormwood  to  her  heart,  for  they  told  her,  not  only  that  it  was  all  over  with  her 
authority,  but.  that  the  people  were  glad  it  was  so.  How  swiftly,  as  by  a  bolt  from  a 
clear  sky,  does  retribution  often  fall  upon  the  wicked  I  An  hour  before  Athaliah  had 
no  suspicion  of  any  calamity.  She  had  but  to  speak,  and  guards  and  servants  were 
ready  to  yield  her  all  obedience ;  now  her  authority  has  departed  like  a  pricked  bubble, 
and  she  stands  helpless  among  a  multitude — ^none  so  poor  as  to  do  her  revtrence.  The 
passage  is  an  illustration  of  the  proverb,  "  When  the  righteous  are  in  authority,  the 
people  rejoice ;  but  when  the  wicked  beareth  rule,  the  people  mourn  "  (Prov.  xxix.  2). 
2.  Treason  to  a  traitress.  When  Athaliah  saw  what  was  being  done,  heard  the  shouts, 
and  witnessed  the  rejoicings,  she  rent  her  garments,  and  cried,  "  Treason  I  treason!" 
Treason  is  an  act  or  series  of  acts  designed  to  compass  the  overthrow  of  a  constituted 
government,  and  is  generally  held  to  be  punishable  by  death.  It  is  wicked  and  ille- 
gitimate governments  which  nmke  most  of  the  crime  of  treason,  and  most  severely 
enforce  the  penalties  against  it.  Yet  it  is  plain  that  these  penalties  are  justified  only 
on  the  supposition  that  the  government  against  which  the  treason  is  directed  is  a 
legitimate  one.  A  government  which  is  itself  bom  and  bred  of  treason  has  no  moral 
justification  for  punishing  treason  in  others.  Athaliah  was  queen,  not  by  God's  will, 
but  in  defiance  of  all  rifjht  and  morality.  She  had  usurped  the  throne,  and  killed  (or 
thought  she  had  killed)  the  rightful  heirs  to  it  Treason  against  such  a  government, 
itself  the  offspring  of  the  blackest  treachery,  was  not  a  crime,  but  might  be  the  highest 
duty.  Still,  as  if  some  horrid  iniquity  was  being  practised,  the  traitress  rends  her 
clothes,  and  cries,  "  Treason  1 "  Her  own  treason  is  unthought  of;  she  sees  only  the 
treason  of  her  enemies.  Is  not  this  state  of  mind  too  common?  Men  are  loud  in 
denouncing  transgressions  which  they  themselves  are  flagrantly  guilty  o£  They  point 
to  the  mote  in  another's  eye,  without  reflecting  on  the  beam  in  their  own.  Callous  as 
to  their  own  falsehood,  selfishness,  and  dishonesty,  they  detect  in  an  instant,  and  loudly 
denounce,  the  same  vices  in  their  neighbours,  especially  when  practised  towards  them- 
selves. It  is  this  which  renders  them  inexcusable.  For  the  power  to  detect  sin  in 
others  implies  a  knowledge  of  the  law  which  condemns  the  person  judging  if  he  does 
the  same  things  (Bom.  ii.  1).  3.  Just  retribution.  The  order  of  Jehoiada  was  that 
u.  KINOa.  B 


242  fHfi  SECONt)   BOOK   OF   Ttlt.   gtXOS.         [cm.  xii.  1— 2l 

if  any  one  ventured  to  follow  Athallah,  he  was  to  be  killed  with  the  sword.  Bnt  no  one 
•eems  to  have  shown  any  pity  for  the  fallen  queen.  The  downfall  of  her  power  was 
thus  complete.  A  new  government  having  heen  constituted,  her  own  attempt  to  excite 
rebellion  now  fell  under  the  category  of  treason,  and  was  punishable.  Jehoiada  gives 
orders  for  her  being  taken  beyond  the  temple  hounds,  and  there  slain.  We  see  hands 
laid  upon  lier,  and  she  is  led  away,  or  goes,  "  by  the  way  by  the  which  the  horses  come 
into  the  king's  house,"  and  in  that  place  of  stahles  meets  her  death.  An  inglorious 
end !  But  w hat  glory  can  we  look  fur  to  crown  a  career  of  sin  ?  In  Athaliah,  the  last 
member  of  Ahah's  cursed  house  met  a  deserved  doom.  Judgment  against  the  smner 
may  not  always  he  executed  speedily,  but  the  stroke  will  surely  fall  at  last  (Eccles. 
viii.  11). 

IV.  A  COVENANT  WITH  Jehovah.     1.  The  covenant  with  God  renewed.    The  people 
had  received,  as  if  from  heaven,  a  new  king  of  the  line  of  David,  and  the  moment  was 
ausiiioious  for  a  new  covenant  being  entered  into,  and  formally  ratified,  with  God.     It 
is  good  when  special  mercies  are  made  an  occasion  of  renewal  of  vows.    The  covenant, 
promoted  by  Jehoiada  was  twofold.    (1)  It  was  a  covenant  between  the  king  and  i)ei))ile 
and  Jehovah.     In  this  transaction  they  solemnly  pledged  themselves  to  be  the  Lord's 
people.    National  covenanting  is  only  appropriate  when  it  springs  from  the  spontaneous 
impulse  of  the  masses  of  the  people.    Among  the  Hel,.ew8,  who,  by  the  very  form  of 
their  national  existence,  were  a  people  in  covenant  with  Jehovah,  such  renewal  of  roh- 
gious  vows  was  specially  suitable.    The  idea  of  a  "  people  of  the  Lord  "  is  now  embodied, 
not  iu  a  national  form,  but  in  the  Church  of  Christ.     (Jreat  is  the  honour  of  forming 
part  of  this  "  chosen  generation,"  this  "  royal  priesthood,"  this  «  holy  nation,"  this 
"  peculiar  people  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  9),  and  we  should  often  recall  the  fact  to  ourselves,  and 
make  it  the  basis  of  new  consecration.     (2)  It  was  a  covenant  between  the  king  and 
the  people.    He,  on  his  part,  would  pledge  himself  to  maintain  the  government  according 
to  the  Law  of  God ;  and  they,  on  theirs,  would  promise  him  loyalty  and  obedience! 
Happy  is  it,  when  rulers  and  people  stand  in  this  bond  of  mutual  confidence!    2.  Zeal 
in  religious  reform.    The  earnest  spirit  awakened  by  this  solemn  act  of  covenant  imme- 
diately showed  itself  in  zealous  efforts  for  the  removal  of  abuses.     We  read  that,  not 
one  or  two,  but  "all  the  people  of  the  land,"  set  themselves  to  reforming  work. '  (1) 
They  went  into  the  house  of  Baal,  and  brake  it  doTm.     A  house  of  Baal  in  Jerusalem, 
and  possibly  on  the  temple  hill,  was  •  delibenite  insult  to  Jehovah.    No  respect  for 
th<^  beauty  or  costliness  of  the  building  was  allowed  to  save  it  from  destmction.    When 
higher  interests  are  involved,  artistic  and  sentimental  considerations  most  go  to  the 
wall.     (2)  They  brake  in  pieces  "  thoroughly  "  Baal's  altars  and  images.    Idolatry  was 
to  be  fhoroujihly  rooted  out  in  accordance  with  the  word  of  the  testimony  (Ueut.  xii, 
1—3).    (3)  They  slew  Mattan,  the  high  priest  of  BaaL     By  the  Law  of  Israel  his  liit 
was  forfeited  through  the  practice  of  idolatry.     (4)  They  restored  the  worship  of  tlie 
temple.    This  is  implied  in  the  statement,  "  The  priest  appointed  officers  over  the  house 
of  the  Lord."    It  is  evident  from  the  next  chapter  that  the  temple  service  had  bt  en 
allowed  to  become  greatly  disorganized.    The  zeal  of  these  reformers  had,  therefore,  its 
positive  side.     They  sought  to  build  up  as  well  as  cast  down.     The  false  worship  of 
t.od  was  replaced  by  tie  true.     Court  fashion  goes  a  long  way  in  determining  pre- 
ferences in  religion.     When  Athaliah  worshipped  Baal,  it  was  fashionable  to  neglect 
Jehovah ;  now  that  Joash  restored  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  people  flocked  back  to  the 
temple.      Ihose  m  high  stations  have  great  responsibilities,  and  not  least  for  the 
exaniples  they  set  m  religion.     3.  Ue  Joy  of  the  people.    Joash  was  now  escorted  in 
gtand  procession  to  the  palace  of  his  fathers.    Athaliah  was  dead,  and  he  sat  on  thr 
wl°°^  "  j,'-^  '^"88;    Joy  filled  the  people's  hearts,  and  quiet  reigned  in  the  city 
When  godliness  is  victonous,  it  diffuses  peace  and  gladness  through  M.  minds^-J.  0. 

EXPOSITION. 
OHAPTEB  Xn. 


e 


Vers.! — 21. — The  Bmon  or  Joash.    The 

BbPAU  of    TBI    XlElIPUB.      WaB  OW    JoASH 


wiTB  Hazael,  Airo  Hu  Death  n  A  Ooh. 

SPIBAOT. 

Vera.  1—3.— The  writer  of  Kings  is  ex- 
tremely brief  and  incomplete  in  Us  ao 


OH.  xn.  1-21.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


243 


eoimt  of  the  reign  of  Joash.  He  seeme  to 
have  had  a  great  tenderneiB  for  him,  and 
to  hare  determined  that  he  would  put  on 
record  nothing  to  hia  discredit  We  have 
to  go  to  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  zziv.)  for  a 
complete  account,  and  for  an  estimate  of 
the  real  chaiaeter  of  the  king  and  of  his 
reign.  Both  writers  appear  to  have  drawn 
from  the  same  original  document,  but  the 
writer  of  Kings  made  large  omissions  from 
it.  In  a  few  points  only  is  his  narrative 
fuller  than  Chruniolea. 

Ver.  1. — In  the  nventli  year  of  7ehn. 
Athaliah  began  to  reign  very  soon  after  the 
accession  of  Jehu  (oh.  zi.  1),  and  reigned 
six  full  years  (ver.  3).  The  first  year  of 
Joash  was  thus  parallel  with  Jehu's  seventh. 
Jehoash — or  Joash,  as  he  is  called  sometimes 
in  Kings  (ch.  xi.  2;  xiii.  1, 10),  and  always 
in  Chronicles — ^began  to  reign ;  and  forty 
jean  reigned  he  in  Jernsalem— the  writer 
of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  1)  and  Jose- 
phuB  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  iz.  8.  §  4)  agree — and 
bis  mother's  name  was  Zibiah  of  Beersheba. 
Josephus  calls  her  "  Sabia." 

Ver.  2. — And  Jehoash  did  that  which  was 
right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  aU  his  days 
wherein  Jehoiada  the  priest  instructed  him. 
So  the  Septuagint,  the  Vulgate,  Luther,  De 
Wette,  Keil,  Bahr,  and  our  Revisers.  Only 
Ewald  and  Thenius  attempt  to  make  the 
passage  contradict  Chronicles  by  translat- 
ing, "Jehoash  did  that  which  was  right  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord  all  his  days,  because 
Jehoiada  the  priest  had  instructed  him." 
But  this  translation  is  very  forced  and  un- 
natural. The  writer  evidently  intended  to 
add  a  qualifying  clause  to  his  statement 
that  Joash  reigned  well  "  all  his  days,"  but 
did  not  wish  to  diaw  too  much  attention 
to  it. 

Ver.  3. — Bat  the  high  places  were  not 
taken  away.  So  it  had  been  with  the  best 
of  the  previous  kings  of  Judah,  as  Asa  (1 
Kings  XV.  14)  and  Jehoshaphat  (I  Kings 
zxii.  43) ;  and  so  it  was  with  the  other 
"good"  kings  (ch.  xiv.  4;  xv.  4,  35)  until 
the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  by  whom  the  high 
places  were  removed  (see  below,  ch.  zviii. 
4).  We  must  remember  that  it  was  Jehovah 
who  was  worshipped  in  the  "  high  places," 
not  Baal,  or  Moloch,  or  Ashtoreth  (see  the 
comment  on  1  Kings  xv.  14).  The  people 
still  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense  in  the 
high  places.  The  people,  not  the  king,  in 
the  earlier  portion  of  his  reign ;  bat  in  the 
later  portion,  probably  the  king  also  (see 
a  Chron.  zziv.  17, 18). 

Yen.  4 — ^16. — Th»  repair  oj  fht  temple. 
It  ia  rather  surprising  that  the  temple  had 


not  been  thorongMy  repaired  by  Jebolada 
during  the  long  minority  of  Joash,  when  he 
must  practically  have  had  the  sole  manage- 
ment of  affairs.  Probably  he  did  repair 
the  worst  of  the  damage  done  by  Athaliah's 
orders  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  7),  which  may  have 
been  very  considerable,  but  neglected  the 
restoration  of  such  portions  of  the  edifice  as 
appeared  to  him  of  secondary  importance, 
as  the  walls  of  the  courts  and  the  outbuild- 
ings. Joash,  however,  when  his  minority 
oame  to  an  end,  and  he  succeeded  to  the 
administration  of  the  state,  took  a  different 
view.  To  him  the  completion  of  the  repairs 
seemed  a  pressing  business.  Probably  he 
thought  the  honour  of  God  required  the 
entire  obliteration  of  Athaliah's  wicked  pro- 
ceedings, and  the  renewal  of  the  temple't 
old  glories.  His  six  years'  residence  within 
the  temple  precincts  may  have  also  inspired 
him  with  a  love  of  the  building  as  a  building. 

Ver.  4. — And  Jehoash  said  to  the  priests. 
The  initiative  of  Joash  is  strongly  marked, 
alike  in  Kings  and  Chronicles  (2  Chron. 
xxiv.  4).  The  general  weakness  of  his 
character,  and  want  of  vigour  and  decision, 
make  it  the  more  surprising  that  he  should 
in  this  particular  matter  have  shown  him- 
self capable  of  taking  his  own  line  and 
adhering  to  it  (ver.  7).  He  has  scarcely 
received  from  historians  the  credit  that  is 
due  to  him  fur  his  persistent  and  successful 
efforts  to  accomplish  an  object  which  was 
for  the  honour  of  religion,  and  which  was 
yet  not  pressed  forward  by  the  priesthood. 
Certainly  he  was  no  mere  puppet  of  the 
priestly  order.  All  the  money  of  the  dedi- 
cated things  that  is  brought  into  the  house 
of  the  Lord;  rather,  all  the  money  of  the 
holy  gifts  that  is  brought  into  the  house  of 
the  Lord ;  ie.  all  that  ye  receive  from  the 
people  in  the  way  of  money.  This  money 
accrued  from  three  sources,  which  the  king 
proceeded  to  enumerate.  First,  even  the 
money  of  every  one  that  passeth  the  ac- 
count ;  i.e.  the  census  money — ^the  aggregate 
of  the  half-shekels  received  from  the  males 
of  abovu  twenty  years  old,  whenever  a  census 
was  taken  (Exod.  xxx.  12 — 16).  The  ren- 
dering, "  current  money,"  preferred  by 
Thenius,  Bahr,  and  our  Revisers,  is  shown 
by  Keil  to  be  untenable.  Secondly,  the 
money  that  every  man  is  set  at;  i.e.  the 
redemption  money,  derived  in  part  from 
the  payments  made  for  redeeming  the  first- 
bom  (Numb,  xviii.  15,  16) ;  in  part  from 
the  sums  which  the  priests  exacted  from 
such  as  had  vowed  themaulves  (Lev.  xxviL 
2 — 8),  or  those  belonging  to  them,  to  God 


244 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [ch.  xn.  1— 2L 


And  [thirdly]  all  the  money  that  eometh 
mto  any  man's  heart  to  bring  into  the  honse 
of  the  Lord ;  »'.«.  all  the  free-will  offerings 
that  ehould  be  made  in  money  by  any  of 
the  Israelites. 

Ver.  5. — Let  the  priests  take  it  to  them, 
every  man  of  his  aoqnaiutance.  The  money 
was  to  be  gathered  of  "  all  Israel,"  out  of  aU 
"  the  cities  of  Judah "  (2  Chron.  xxlv.  5). 
The  priests  of  each  locality  were  to  be  the 
collectors,  and  would  therefore  gather  "  of 
their  acquaintance."  As  we  cannot  suppose 
that  very  much  would  accrue  from  either 
the  first  or  second  source,  since  a  census  was 
rarely  taken,  and  personal  vows  were  not 
Tciy  common,  we  must  regard  the  command 
of  Joash  as,  in  the  main,  the  authorization 
of  a  general  collection  throughout  the  king- 
dom of  voluntary  contributions  towards  the 
temple  repairs,  and  so  as  analogous  to  the 
"  letters  "  which  our  own  oovereigns,  or  arch- 
bishops, issue  from  time  to  time  for  colleo- 
tions  in  churches  for  special  objects.  And 
let  them  repair  the  breaches  of  the  house, 
wheresoever  any  breach  shall  be  found. 
The  "  breaihes,"  or  dilapidations,  may  have 
been  caused,  partly  by  the  neglect  of  neces- 
sary repairs  during  the  reigns  of  Jehoram, 
Ahaziah,  and  Athaliah;  but  they  were 
mainly  the  result  of  the  wilful  violence  of 
Athaliah  (2  Chron.  zxiv.  7).  Apparently, 
the  damage  done  must  have  been  very 
great. 

Yer.  6.^Bnt  it  was  so,  that  in  the  three 
and  twentieth  year  of  King  Jehoash  the 
priests  had  not  repaired  the  breaches  of  the 
house.  No  charge  is  made  against  the  priests 
of  malversation  or  embezzlement.  They  bad 
simply  been  negligent.  Probably  very  little 
money  had  come  in;  and  they  had  not  been 
very  active  in  their  endeavours  to  obtain 
larger  contributions.  It  must  be  remem- 
bered that  what  went  to  the  fabric  fund 
would,  for  the  most  part,  be  a  deduction 
from  the  ordinary  revenue  of  the  temple, 
which  was  not,  perhaps,  much  in  excess  of 
the  ordinary  demands  upon  it  We  can, 
therefore,  quite  understand  that  the  king's 
policy  would  not  be  popular  with  the  priests 
(see  2  Chron.  xxiv.  5).  Still,  it  is  to  be  ob- 
served that  they  are  not  said  to  have  exe- 
cuted uo  repairs,  but  only  aot  to  have 
"made  haste"  and  completed  tlieir  task  by 
the  time  that  the  king  looked  for  its  com- 
pletion. 

Ver.  7. — Then  King  Jehoash  oalled  for 
Jehoiada  the  priest.  So,  too,  the  writer  of 
Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  6).  The  king 
did  not  take  the  matter  into  his  own  hands, 
but  consulted  with  the  head  of  the  priestly 
order  on  the  best  steps  to  take  in  order  to 
expedite  the  repairs.  He  made  no  "  charge," 
delivered  no  "rebnke."  He  did  not  "re- 
move the  administration  of  the  funds  from 


the'  hands  of  the  delinqnent  order "  (Stan- 
ley). On  the  contrary,  be  left  it  in  their 
hands  (vers.  9 — 11).  Two  changes  only 
were  made :  1.  A  public  chest  was  set  np 
conspicuously  in  the  temple  court,  near  the 
great  altar,  and  the  people  were  invited  to 
bring  their  contributions  to  the  temple,  and 
hand  them  to  the  priests, who  should  straight- 
way deposit  them  in  the  chest  in  the  sight  of 
the  congregation.  2.  The  chest  was  opened 
from  time  to  time,  and  the  money  counted, 
in  the  presence  of  the  high  priest  and  of  a 
royal  secretary.  It  was  then  delivered  over 
to  "the  overseers  of  the  house" — ^persons, 
probably,  of  the  priestly  order — appointed 
by  Jehoiada  (ch.  xi.  18),  who  disbursed  it  to 
the  carpenters  and  masons  (ch.  xii  11, 12). 
The  chest  was  a  sort  of  tangible  evidence 
to  the  people  of  the  purpose  to  which  their 
contributions  would  be  applied,  and  natu- 
rally stimulated  their  giving.  The  pre- 
sence of  the  king's  officer  at  the  counting  of 
the  money,  was  equivalent,  not  really  to  an 
"  audit "  (Stanley),  but  to  a  publication  of 
the  accounts,  and  would  prevent  any  sus- 
pension of  the  work,  so  long  as  it  was  clear 
that  the  money  found  in  the  chest  had  not 
been  expended.  Thus  a  new  impetus  wa« 
given  to  the  movement  The  measures  taken 
completely  answered.  Contributions  flowed 
in  rapidly,  and  in  a  few  years  the  whole 
work  was  accomplished  (see  2  Chron.  xxiv. 
13,  14).  And  tiie  other  priests,  and  said 
unto  them,  Why  repair  ye  not  tht  breaches 
of  the  house  1  This  shows  that  no  repairs 
were  going  on  in  the  twenty-third  year  of 
Joash,  bat  not  that  none  had  been  done{)re- 
vionsly.  Ifow  therefore  receive  no  more 
money  of  your  acquaintance.  This  was  a 
revocation  of  the  order  given  in  ver.  5,  and 
necessarily  put  an  end  to  the  local  collec- 
tions, which  that  order  required.  But  de- 
liver it  for  the  breaches  of  the  house.  If 
the  priests  were  not  to  "  receive  "  the  money, 
they  could  not  "deliver"  it.  Obscurity  is 
introduced  by  the  desire  for  extreme  brevity. 
In  point  of  faof^  they  were  to  "receive" 
(ver.  9),  but  in  a  new  way. 

Ver.  8. — And  the  priests  consented  to  re- 
ceive no  more  money  of  the  people — t.s.  to 
put  an  end  to  the  local  collections  ordered 
in  ver.  5— neither  to  repair  the  breaches  of 
the  house;  i.e.  neither  to  be  responsible 
severally  for  laying  out  the  money  which 
they  collected  in  repairs. 

Yer.  9. — But  Jehoiada  the  priest  took  a 
chest  The  writer  of  Chronicles  says,  "  At 
the  king's  commandmenta  they  made  a 
chest "  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  8).  The  suggestion 
was  probably  the  king's,  but  the  ecclesi- 
astical and  civil  authorities  worked  har- 
moniously in  the  business.  And  bored  a  hole 
in  the  lid  of  it— ae  hundreds  of  thousands 
have  done  since  his  time— and  set  it  beiid* 


OB.  xn.  1—21.] 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


245 


the  altar,  on  the  rig^lit  sid*  as  one  oometh 
into  the  house  of  the  Lord.  The  altar  in- 
tended is,  of  course,  the  altar  of  burnt  offer- 
ing, which  was  in  the  court  of  the  temple, 
directly  opposite  the  porch.  The  chest  was 
placed  outside  the  sanctuary  (2  Chron.  xxiv. 
8),  and,  indeed,  outside  the  porch,  ou  the 
right  hand  as  one  entered  into  the  court  by 
the  north  door.  It  was  thus  very  conspicu- 
ous. And  the  priests  that  kept  the  door — 
t'.e.  the  door  of  the  court— put  therein  all  the 
money  that  was  brought  into  the  house  of 
the  Lord.  The  priests  received  the  money 
from  those  who  offered,  at  the  gate  of  the 
court,  and,  proceeding  to  the  chest,  dropped 
it  in  through  the  aperture.  A  man  could 
not  see  that  all  which  he  had  given  was  put 
in,  but  he  reckoned  on  the  good  faith  of  the 
priest,  and  was  satisfied. 

Ver.  10. — ^And  it  waf  to,  when  they  saw 
that  there  was  much  money  in  the  chest. 
"  When  they  saw  "  means  "  when  they  per- 
ceived," They  would  not  see  that  the  cheat 
was  becoming  full,  but  would  know  by  the 
weight,  and  perhaps  by  the  sound  which 
the  money  made  when  it  was  dropped  in. 
That  the  Idng's  scribe.  "  Boyal  secretaries  " 
were  common  in  ancient  Persia,  and  often 
acted  as  the  king's  commissioners  (Herod., 
iii.  128;  Xen.,  'Oyrop.,'  viii.  6.  §  16; 
'CEoonom.,'  iv.  8).  Such  persons  are  seen 
on  the  Assyrian  sculptured  slabs,  with  a 
roll  of  paper  or  parchment  in  one  hand,  and 
a  pen  in  the  other,  taking  account  fur  the 
king  of  the  spoil  brought  in  from  foreign 
eonnti'ies  (see  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii. 
p.  86).  And  the  high  priest.  Since  the  time 
of  Joshua,  the  high  priest  had  been  called 
simply  "the  priest."  The  restoration  of 
the  full  title  (hae-cohen  hag-gadol)  marks 
the  increasing  power  of  the  priests  and  the 
diminishing  power  of  the  Ungs  under  the 
later  monarchy.  Came  up,  and  they  put  up 
in  bags,  and  told,  the  money  that  was  found 
in  the  house  of  the  lord.  Mone^  was 
ordinarily  put  up  in  bags,  containing  a 
certain  definite  amount,  the  mouth  of  the 
bag  being  then  tied  round  with  a  string 
(see  oh.  v.  23 ;  and  comp.  Frov.  vii.  20 ;  Isa. 
ilvi.  6;  Hag.  i.  6).  Hence  putting  money 
np  in  bags  was  sometimes  called,  as  in  this 
place, "  binding  it."  No  doubt  they  "  told," 
or  counted,  the  money  first,  and  put  it  in  the 
bags  afterwards  ;  but  tartpoy  uphtpav  is  a 
very  common  figure  of  speech. 

Ver.  II. — ^And  they  gave  the  money,  being 
told — ^rather,  after  weighing  it — ^into  the 
hands  of  them  that  did  the  work,  that  had 
the  oversight  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.  It 
must  be  remembered  that  no  coins  existed 
M  yet;  and  the  lumps  of  silver  which  passed 
as  shekels  and  half-shekels,  were  of  very 
nnrertain  weight.  To  know  the  value  of 
the  money  in  each  bag,  it  was  necessary,  not 


only  to  connt  the  pieces,  but  to  weigh  each 
bag  separately.  The  bags,  when  weighed, 
were  luinded  over  by  the  high  priest  and 
the  royal  secretary  to  the  officers  whom 
Jehoiada  had  appointed  (ch.  zi  18)  to  have 
the  general  superintendence  of  the  "  house." 
And  they  laid  it  out  to  the  carpenters  and 
buUders,  that  wrought  upon  the  house  of 
the  Lordl  The  "  paid  it  out "  of  our  Bevisers 
is  better  than  "  laid  it  out."  The  overseers 
of  the  temple  paid  over  to  the  carpenters 
and  the  builders,  from  time  to  time,  such 
money  as  was  needed  for  the  work  done  or ' 
doing. 

Ver.  12. — ^And  to  masons;  rather,  to  the 
masons.  The  "  masons  "  (goderim)  are  the 
actual  artisans  who  worked  under  instruc- 
tions from  the  "builders."  And  hewers  of 
stone — or,  stone-cutters — rather,  those  wlio 
sawed  up  the  stones  on  the  spot,  than  those 
who  hewed  them  in  the  quarries — and  to 
buy  timber  and  hewed  stone  to  repair  the 
breaches  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.  The 
writer  of  Chronicles  mentions  "  workers  in 
iron  and  brass"  (bronze)  also  (2  Chron. 
xxiv.  12).  Probably,  when  once  the  work 
was  taken  thoroughly  in  hand,  it  was  found 
that  repairs  of  all  sorts  and  kinds  were 
needed.  The  temple  had  stood  for  a 
hundred  and  thirty-six  years,  and  up  to 
this  time  it  had,  so  far  as  we  know,  under- 
gone no  repairs  at  all.  Cei-tainly  none  are 
mentioned.  And  for  all  that  was  laid  out 
for  the  house  to  repair  it.  This  general 
clause  shows  how  wide  were  the  powers  of 
the  overseers.  The  suspicions  and  jealousies 
which  modern  writers  have  imagined  con- 
trast remarkably  with  the  general  confidence 
and  trust  which  seem  to  have  prevailed 
among  all  those  concerned  in  the  repairs. 

Ver.  13. — ^Howbeit  there  was  not  made 
for  the  house  of  the  Lord  howls  of  silver, 
snuffers,  basins,  trumpets,  any  vessels  of 
gold,  or  vessels  of  silver,  of  the  money  that 
was  brought  into  the  house  of  the  Lord ;  t'.e. 
while  the  repairs  were  incomplete,  while 
the  work  was  still  going  on,  no  portion  of 
the  money  taken  from  the  chest  was  ex- 
pended in  the  purchase  of  new  sacred  vessels, 
whether  of  gold  or  silver,  whether  bowls,  or 
snuffers,  or  basins,  or  trumpets — the  whole 
was  rigidly  applied  to  the  renovation  of  the 
temple  building.  There  is  no  contradiction 
between  this  statement  end  tliat  of  the 
writer  of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  14), 
who  tells  us  that,  after  the  entire  repair$ 
were  completed,  the  surplus  money  was 
expended  in  this  way,  on  the  purchase  of 
"vessels  to  minister  and  to  offer,  spoons, 
and  vessels  of  gold  and  silver."  We  can 
well  understand  that,  after  the  spoiling  of 
the  temple  l^  successive  kings  to  buy  off 
enemies— by  Behoboam  to  content  Shishak 
(1  Kings  liv.  26),  by  Asa  to  gratify  Benha« 


24« 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [ch.  xii.  1—21 


dad  0  King!  xr.  18),  and  by  Joash  himself 
(ver.  18)  to  prooure  the  retreat  of  Hazael 
from  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  the  vessels  of 
the  temple  must  have  required  lenovating 
almost  as  much  as  the  fabric  itself;  and 
when  it  was  found  that  there  remained  a 
surplus  oyer  and  above  all  that  was  needed 
for  building  purposes,  we  cannot  wonder 
that  it  was  applied  to  the  renewal  of  the 
Tessels,  absolutely  essential  as  they  were  for 
the  service  of  the  sanctuary. 

Ver.  14. — But  they  gave  that— <.«.  the 
whole  money  contributed — ^to  the  workmen 
— equivalent  to  "the  carpenters,  builders, 
masons,  hewers  of  stone,  etc.,  mentioned  in 
vers.  11,  12 — and  repaired  therewith  the 
honse  of  the  Lord ;  «'.«.  expended  the  money 
on  the  repairs. 

Ver.  15. — Uoreover  they  reolconed  not 
with  the  men,  into  whose  hand  they  delivered 
the  money  to  he  bestowed  on  workmen. 
Society  rests  upon  faith  and  trust.  In  all 
business  transactions  confidence  must  be 
reposed  in  some  one,  whose  character  is  the 
guarantee  of  his  honesty.  In  the  case 
before  us,  the  overseers  of  the  temple  were 
the  persons  trusted  to  expend  the  money 
aright  (see  ver.  11).  The  overseers  (ch.  xi. 
18)  had  been  appointed  by  the  high  priest. 
For  they  dealt  faithfully ;  i.e.  honestly. 

Ver.  16. — The  trespass  money.  When  a 
man  had  injured  another,  he  was  bound  by 
the  Law  to  make  compensation  to  the  injured 
party  at  the  valuation  of  the  priest,  with 
the  addition  of  one-fifth  more  than  the 
value  (Lev.  vi.  2—6 ;  Numb.  v.  6—8).  The 
compensation  was,  primarily,  to  be  made  to 
the  man  himself;  secondarily,  if  he  were 
dead,  to  his  nearest  kinsman;  finally,  if  he 
had  left  no  kinsman,  to  the  priest.  And  lin 
money.  According  to  the  Law,  the  priest 
was  entitled  to  no  money  with  a  sin  offer- 
ing ;  but  it  seems  to  have  become  customary 
to  make  the  priest  who  offered  it  a  volun- 
tary gift,  to  compensate  him  for  his  trouble. 
Such  free  gifts  the  priest  was  by  the  Law 
(Numb.  V.  10)  entitled  to  receive.  Was  not 
brought  into  the  house  of  the  Lord — i.e.  it 
was  not  deposited  in  the  ohest,  or  applied 
to  the  repairs,  but — it  wag  the  priests'. 

Vers.  17,  18. — The  war  of  Joaih  with 
Hazael.  A  considerable  gap  occurs  between 
vers.  16  and  17.  We  leam  from  Chronicles 
some  particulars  of  the  interval.  Not  long 
after  the  completion  of  the  repairs,  Jelioiada, 
who  had  lived  to  a  good  old  age  in  complete 
harmony  with  the  monarch,  expired.  His 
piety,  and  his  good  services,  as  preserver  of 
tiie  home  of  David,  aa  restorer  of  the  temple- 
worship,  and  joint-repairer  with  Joash  of  the 
temple  itieU;  were  regarded  a*  entitling 


him  to  extraordinarf  faneial  honoan;  and 
by  general  consent  he  was  interred  within 
the  city  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  sepulchres  of 
the  kings  (2  Ghron.  xxiv.  16).  His  removal 
led  to  a  fresh  religious  revolution.  "  The 
Jewish  aristocracy,  who  perhaps  had  never 
been  free  from  the  licentious  and  idolatrous 
taint  introdnced  by  Behoboam  and  confirmed 
by  Athaliah,  and  who  may  well  have  been 
galled  by  the  new  rise  of  the  priestly  order, 
presented  themselves  before  Joash,  and 
offered  him  the  same  obseqniona  homage 
that  had  been  paid  by  the  yonng  nobles  te 
Behoboam.  He, . . .  feeling  himself  released 
from  personal  obligations  by  the  death  of 
his  adopted  father,  threw  himself  into  their 
hands.  Athaliah  was  avenged  almost  upon 
the  spot  where  she  had  been  first  seized  by 
her  enemies"  (Stanley,  'Jewish  Ohnroh,' 
vol.  ii.  p.  S4S).  Joash  began  by  allowing 
the  reintroduction  of  idolatry  and  grove- 
worship  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  18),  and  then,  when 
remonstrated  with  by  Zechariah,  the  son  of 
Jehoiada,  who  had  succeeded  his  father  in 
the  ofBce  of  high  priest,  bad  the  remonstrant 
set  upon  by  the  people  and  slain.  The 
writer  of  Chronicles  closely  connects  this 
murderous  deed  with  the  Syrian  war,  which 
followed  it  within  a  year  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  23), 
and  was  generally  regarded  as  a  Divine 
judgment. 

Ver.  17. — ^Then  Hazael  King  of  Syria  went 
np,  and  fought  against  Qath.  Hitherto 
Judah  had  been  safe  from  any  attack  on  the 
part  of  Syria,  since  Israel  had  been  inter- 
posed between  the  two  powers.  Now,  how- 
ever, that  Hazael  had  conquered  from  Jehu 
the  entire  trans-Jordanio  territory  (ch.  x.  33), 
the  case  was  wholly  altered — Judah  and 
Syria  had  become  conterminous  along  the 
line  of  the  lower  Jordan,  and  Syria  could  in- 
vade Judtea  at  any  moment  It  is  surprising 
that  Gath  should  have  been  the  special  object 
of  attack,  since  Gath  (^AburGheith)  lay  remote 
from  the  Syrian  frontier,  in  the  south- 
western part  of  Jndeea,  and  could  only  be 
reached  from  Syria  by  an  enemy  who  was 
not  afraid  of  leaving  Jerusalem  behind  him. 
Gath,  when  last  mentioned,  was  a  Judasan 
city,  and  was  fortified  by  Behoboam  (2 
Chron.  xi.  8);  but  it  was  originally  Philis- 
tine (1  Sam.  V.  17),  and  the  Philistines  had 
recovered  it  before  the  time  of  Uzziah  (2 
(Jhron.  xxvi.  6).  To  which  power  it  belongf  d 
when  Hazael  made  war  npon  it  is  nncertidn. 
And  took  it— probably  took  it  by  storm,  and 
plundered  it,  but  did  not  attempt  an  oeen 


<m.xn.l-21.j         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


i4t 


pation — and  Eazael  aet  Iili  faoe  to  go  np 
to  Jerusalem.  If  Gath  be  Ahu-Ghe.ith,  as 
appears  probable,  It  would  be  distant  from 
Jerusalem  not  less  than  forty  miles  in  a 
Jireet  lino.  If  Hazael,  however,  was  re- 
turning to  the  trans-Jordanio  country  taken 
from  Israel,  it  would  lie  in  his  way,  and 
miglit  naturally  tempt  him  to  make  a  dash 
at  it,  more  especially  as  he  was  flushed  with 
victory. 

Yer.  18. — And  Jehoash  King  of  Jndah  took 
all  the  hallowed  things.  The  writer  of 
Clnonioles  tells  us  that,  first  of  all,  there 
was  a  battle.  "  The  army  of  the  Syrians 
Ciime  with  a  small  company  of  men,  and  the 
Lord  delivered  a  very  great  host  into  their 
hand "  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  24).  The  loss  was 
especially  heavy  among  the  nobles,  who 
ofBocred  the  Jewish  army.  Much  plunder 
was  taken  by  the  visitors  (2  Chron.  xxiv. 
23).  Then,  probably,  the  siege  of  the  city 
was  commenced,  and  Joasli,  like  Relioboain 
and  Asa  before  him  (1  Kings  xiv.  26 ;  xv. 
18),  and  Hezekiah  subsequently  (ch,  xviii. 
15, 16),  had  recourse  to  the  temple  treasures, 
and  with  them  bought  oif  the  invader.  It 
is  noticeable  that  Atbaliah  had  not  deprived 
the  temple  of  them  previously.  That  Jeho- 
ehaphat,  and  Jehoram,  and  Ahaziah,  his 
fathers,  kings  of  Judah,  had  dedicated. 
Though  Jehoram  and  Ahaziah  apostatized 
so  far  as  to  maintain  the  Uaal-worship  in 
Jerusalem,  and  even  to  force  attendance  on 
it  (2  Chron.  xxi.  11),  yet  they  did  not  re- 
linquish altogether  the  worship  of  Jehovah. 
That  Jehuram  called  his  eon,  Ahaziah, 
"  possession  of  Jehovah,"  and  Ahaziah  one 
of  his  sons,  Joash,  "  whom  Jehovah  sup- 
ports," is  indicative  of  this  syncretism, 
which  was  common  in  ancient  times,  but 
against  which  pure  Judaism  made  the 
strongest  possible  protest.  And  his  own 
hallowed  things— t.e.  tlie  gifts  which  he  had 
himself  made  to  the  temple— and  all  the 
gold  that  was  found  in  the  treasures  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  This  was  probably  not 
much ;  but  some  "  vessels  of  gold  "  had  been 
made  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  14)  out  of  the  residue 
of  the  money  subscribed  for  the  repairs. 
And  in  the  king's  house.  The  royal  palace 
bad  been  plundered  by  the  Arabs  and 
Philistines  combined  in  the  reign  of  Jehoram 
(2  Chron.  xxi.  16,  17);  but  in  the  thirty 
years  that  had  since  elapsed  there  had  been 
time  for  fresh  accumulations.  And  sent  it 
to  Hazael  King  of  Syria :  and  he  went  away 
from  Jerusalem.  Tiie  personal  presence  of 
Hazael  at  the  siege  seems  to  be  here  implied, 
while  2  Chron.  xxiv.  23  rather  implies  his 
absence.  Perhaps  he  was  absent  at  first, 
but  joined  the  besiegers  after  a  while. 

Vers.  19—21. — The  dote  of  the  reign  of 
/oaih — hi$  murder  by  hi*  lervanta.     Again 


the  narrative  of  Kings  is  to  be  Bupplemented 
by  that  of  Chronicles.  From  Chronicles  we 
learn  that,  before  the  withdrawal  of  the 
Syrians,  Joash  had  fallen  into  a  severe  ill- 
ness, which  confined  him  to  hia  apartment 
(2  Chron.  xxiv.  25).  This  gave  opportu- 
nity for  conspiracy.  Among  the  courtieri 
were  two,  perhaps  more,  whom  the  fate  of 
Zechariah  had  grieved,  and  who  were  prob- 
ably opposed  to  the  entire  seriei  of  later 
changes  in  religion  which  had  been  sanc- 
tioned by  Joash  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  17,  18). 
These  persons  "  made  a  conspiracy,"  which 
was  successful,  and  "  slew  Joash  on  his  bed  " 
(2  Chron.  xxiv.  25).  They  then  buried  him 
in  Jerusalem,  but  "  not  in  the  sepulchres  of 
the  kings." 

Yer.  19. — ^And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Joash, 
and  all  that  he  did,  are  they  not  written  in 
the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Judah  1  This 
formal  phrase,  with  which  he  concludes  his 
account  of  almost  every  Jewish  king  (I 
Kings  xiv.  29;  xv.  7,  23;  xxii.  45;  ch.  viii, 
23 ;  xiv.  18 ;  xv.  6,  etc.),  cannot  be  regarded 
as  an  acknowledgment  by  the  autlior  of  any 
special  or  designed  reticence  with  respect  to 
the  reign  of  Joash.  We  must  suppose  him 
unconscious  of  any  such  design.  He  had 
to  omit  much  in  every  case;  in  the  present 
he  happened  to  omit  all  the  darker  shades ; 
and  the  result  was  an  over-favourable  por- 
traiture of  the  monarch.  But,  in  the  pro- 
vidence of  God,  complete  historical  justice 
was  secured  by  the  labours  and  researches 
of  a  second  inspired  vniter. 

Yer.  20. — And  his  servants  arose,  and  made 
a  conspiracy.  By  "  his  servants  "  ofBcers  of 
his  household  are  probably  intended,  attend- 
ants whose  position  would  give  them  ready 
access  to  his  person.  And  slew  Joash  in  the 
house  of  Uillo.  Joash  had  probably  trans- 
ferred his  residence  to  "  the  house  of  Millo  " 
—the  great  fortress  built  by  David  (2  Sam. 
V.  9)  and  Solomon  (1  Kings  ix.  15,  24)  in 
Jerusalem — for  greater  security  during  the 
siege ;  and,  being  there  prostrated  by  sick- 
ness, could  not  remove  from  it  when  the 
siege  was  over.  Which  goeth  down  to  Silla. 
No  commentator  has  succeeded  in  explaining 
this  passage.  There  is  no  other  mention  ot 
Silla;  and  it  is  difGcult  to  understand  how 
a  fortress  could  be  said  to  "go  down"  to 
any  place.  Our  Eevisers'  conjecture—"  on 
the  way  that  goeth  down  to  Silla  " — may  be 
accepted  as  a  possible  explanation;  but  it 
implies  that  a  word  ('^^^a)  has  dropped  out 
of  the  text. 

Yer  21. — ^For  Jozachar  the  son  of  Shime* 
ath;  called  in  Chronicles  "Zabad,"  prok 
ably  through  a  corruption  of  the  text,    Hia 


M8 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOa       [oh.  xn.  1—21. 


mother,  Sbimeath,  wai,  according  to  Ohro- 
nioles  (2  Cbron.  xxiv.  26),  an  AmmoniteiM. 
And  JTehozabad  the  son  of  Shomer.  For 
"Shomer"  we  have  in  Chronicles  "Shim- 
rith,"  which  is  the  f«minine  form  of 
*'  Shomer,"  and  we  are  told  that  she  was  a 
MoabitesB.  The  Jews  were  at  all  times  fond 
of  takiug  wives  from  Moab  and  Ammon  (Buth 
L  4;  1  Kings  zi.  1;  Ezra  is.  1,  2;  Keh. 
xiii.  23),  despite  the  prohibition  of  mixed 
marriages  in  the  Law  (see  Deut.  vii.  3),  His 
servants,  smote  him,  and  he  died  (for  their 
motives,  see  the  introductory  paragraph), 
and  they  buried  him  with  his  faOieii  in  the 


eity  of  David.  Some  critics  (as  Theniui 
and  Dean  Stanley)  see  a  contradiction  be- 
tween this  statement  and  that  of  2  Chron. 
xxiv.  25,  that  he  was  "not  buried  in  the 
sepulchres  of  the  kings ; "  but,  as  Bertheau, 
Keil,  and  Bahr  observe,  "  the  two  statements 
are  not  irreconcilable,"  since  he  may  have 
been  regarded  as  "  buried  vrith  his  fathers," 
if  his  grave  was  anywhere  in  Jerusalem, 
even  though  he  was  excluded  from  the  royal 
burying-place.  And  Amaziah  his  son  reigned 
in  his  steadj  (For  the  reign  of  Amaziah, 
see  oh.  xiv.  1 — 20.) 


HOMILETIC& 

Ver.  2. — Weahness  in  d  mona/reh  almost  at  had  at  wiekedneit.  The  most  prominent 
trait  in  the  character  of  Joash  was  his  lack  of  independence  and  moral  weakness.  He 
had  no  strength  of  will,  no  stamina ;  in  the  expressive,  if  inelegant,  language  of  our 
imea,  "  no  backbone."    He  must  always  lean  upon  some  one.    Let  us  look  at  Joash — 

I.  In  his  youth.  At  this  time  he  was  so  fortunate  as  to  have  a  natural  prop  and 
support  in  Jehoiada,  his  uncle  by  marriage,  and  his  guardian  during  the  years  of  bis 
minority.  Jehoiada's  was  a  strong  character,  and  the  life  of  Joash,  while  Jehoiada 
guided  his  steps,  if  not  marked  by  any  strikingly  great  actions,  was  correct,  exemplary, 
worthy  of  praise.  There  was  piety  and  right  feeling  in  the  pains  which  he  took  to 
promote  the  restoration  of  the  temple,  and  prudence  in  the  measures  whereby  he  suc- 
ceeded in  effecting  his  purpose.  The  measures  may  have  been — probably  were — sug- 
gested by  JehoiadA;  but  the  king  deserves  some  credit  for  adopting  them. 

O^Tot  ii%v  iravipiaros,  is  airis  xivra  yoeirai, 
tpaaviinenos  T&  r"  lircira  Kal  is  tc\os  iffTly  aftflrct, 
'Eadhhs  f  ai  k^khvos,  ts  »i  t'nr6fTt  iriBTiTiu. 

As  the  writer  of  Kings  says,  "  Joash  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
all  his  days  wherein  Jehoiada  the  priest  instructed  him  "  (ver.  2).  But  Jehoiada  could 
notUTefor  ever.  He  reached  a  very  advanced  age;  but  at  last  he  "  waxed  old  and 
died "  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  15),  and  Joash  was  left  to  manage  as  he  might  without  him. 
Let  us  look  at  him  now—  , 

II.  In  his  middle  asb,  aftbb  thb  death  of  Jehoiada.  Apparently  Ms  weakness 
is  known,  and  it  is  at  once  assumed  that  he  must  put  himself  under  directors.  The 
"princes  of  Judah"  go  to  him,  pay  him  court,  flatter  him  probably,  at  any  rate  offer 
him  unusual  honours.  And  at  once  he  succumbs,  and  places  himself  under  their  influ- 
ence. We  cannot  suppose  him  not  to  have  been  aware  of  what  he  was  doing.  He 
must  have  known  the  leanings  of  the  "  princes,"  and  have  understood  that,  in  adopt- 
ing them  as  his  advisers,  he  was  giving  up  all  the  traditions  of  his  earlier  life,  and 
taking  a  new  departure.  Such  lightness  would  not  have  been  surprising  in  a  mere 
youth ;  but  Joash  was  now  at  least  thirty  years  of  age,  probably  more,  and  might  have 
been  expected  to  have  formed  and  settled  his  principles  and  his  character.  Still,  experi- 
ence shows  that  even  thirty  years  of  a  pious  life,  if  it  has  been  passed  "  under  tutors 
and  governors,"  does  not  fix  a  man's  future  in  the  same  line — ^nay,  often  leads  him  to 
an  almost  irrepressible  desire  for  revolt,  and  for  departing  widely  from  his  antecedents. 
The  desire  is  a  temptation  of  the  devil,  and,  if  yielded  to,  has  devilish  results;  but  it 
is  Tery  often  yielded  to.  Nero's  outbreak  after  he  had  got  rid  of  Seneca  is  the  most 
palpable  historical  example;  but  the  experience  of  most  persons  must  have  shown 
them  scores  of  instances  of  men,  trained  and  brought  up  in  good  courses  tiU  middle 
life,  and  then  suddenly  set  free  to  take  their  own  line,  who  have  plunged  into  dissipap 
(ion,  impiety,  and  wickedness  of  all  kinds.  The  case  of  Joash  is  extraordinary,  not  in 
its  general  features,  but  in  the  lengths  to  which  he  went.  Under  the  influence  of  the 
"princes,"  he  allowed  the  Baal-worship  to  be  reintroduced,  and  gave  it  free  tolerances 


•B.xn.1— 21.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THB  KING&  849 

When  prophets  remonstrateil,  and  Zechariah  denounced  God's  venfteance  on  those  who 
had  forsaken  him  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  19,  20),  then  Joash,  unaccustomed  to  opposition,  was 
so  exasperated  that  he  went  the  length  of  murder — murder  of  a  high  priest,  within  the 
precincts  of  the  temple,  hy  the  cruel  death  of  stoning,  and  murder  of  one  for  whom  he 
ought  to  have  had  a  special  kindness,  in  remembrance  of  the  vast  benefits  which  he  had 
received  from  his  father  (2  Chron.  xxix.  22).  It  is  quite  possible — nay,  probable — that 
Joash  (like  Henry  II.  in  the  case  of  Becket)  did  not  deliberately  determine  on  the 
murder — that  hasty  words,  uttered  in  extreme  exasperation,  were  seized  upon  (Stan- 
ley) by  his  too-ofGciouB  servants,  and  carried  out  in  act  before  be  could  retract  them. 
But  this  only  emphasizes  his  weakness.  A  well-intentioned  prince,  yielding  to  evil 
influences,  sanctions  the  most  atrocious  crime  that  the  temple  ever  witnessed  (Matt, 
xxiii.  85)  and  through  his  weakness  involves  the  nation  in  guilt  greater  than  any 
that  had  been  incurred  by  the  doings  of  the  most  wicked  of  preceding  monarchtu 

Vers.  4 — 8. — Inconvenience  of  setting  priests  and  ministers  to  "serve  tables."  How- 
ever convinced  we  may  be  of  the  honesty  of  the  priests  and  Levites  concerned  in  col- 
lecting money  at  this  time  for  the  repairs  of  the  temple,  it  is  andeniable  that  their 
proceedings  in  the  matter  created  distrust  and  dissatisfaction.  We  know  too  little  of 
tlie  monetary  arrangements  previously  in  use  among  the  Jews  to  see  with  any  real 
clearness  what  exactly  the  complaint  of  the  laity  was,  or  how  far  the  priests  and  Levites 
had  a  satisfactory  answer  to  it.  Probably  the  rules  given  were  not  sufBciently  definite; 
and  it  may  also  well  have  been  that  the  priests  and  Levites  were  not  sufficiently  versed 
in  business  transactions  to  understand  completely  what  the  rules  laid  down  expressed. 
We  must  remember  that,  in  the  early  Church,  when  the  apostles  had  to  occupy  them- 
selves with  money  matters,  it  was  not  long  before  complaints  arose  (Acts  vi.  1),  and 
the  apostles  refused  any  longer  to  "  serve  tables."  The  very  foundation  of  society  is 
a  division  of  labour.  In  an  organization  like  that  of.  the  Church,  whether  Jewish  or 
Christian,  it  is  of  extreme  importance  to  disconnect  the  performance  of  high  spiritual 
functions  from  the  duty  of  receiving,  apportioning,  and  disbursing  large  sums  of  money. 
This  is  so — 

I.  Because,  ab  a  gbnbbaIi  btjle,  the  most  spibituallt  minded  of  men  abb  thb 
MOST  INAPT  FOR  THB  DETAILS  OF  BUSINESS.  Different  qualities  of  mind,  qualities  offer- 
ing a  strong  contrast,  and  very  rarely  united  in  the  same  person,  are  requisite  for  suo- 
cesi  ill  business  and  for  winning  souls  to  Godj  also  intimate  acquaintance  with  an 
caurely  different  set  of  facts  is  in  each  case  necessary.  Spiritually  minded  men  are  in 
many  instances  woefully  deficient  in  worldly  knowledge,  know  nothing  of  book-keeping 
by  double  entry,  and  even  find  a  difficulty  in  remembering  the  multiplication  table. 
Their  faculties  are  suited  for  something  higher  than  "  serving  tables,"  and  to  employ  them 
in  such  service  is  to  waste  valuable  material  in  work  for  which  it  is  wholly  unsnited. 

II.  Because,  if  business  tbansactions  abb  ill  managed,  suspicions  abisb,  and 
God's  ministebs  should  be  above  suspicion.  A  minister's  usefulness  is  gone  if  once 
he  is  suspected  in  money  matters.  It  is  seriously  impaired,  even  if  nothing  is  proved 
against  him  beyond  incapacity  and  blundering.  Many  a  clergyman  has  got  into  most 
serious  trouble  by  undertaking  work  of  a  worldly  kind,  which  he  never  ought  to  have 
undertaken,  and  failing  in  the  proper  management  of  it,  though  his  honesty  was  quite 
unimpeachable. 

III.  Because  the  time  given  nr  ministers  to  business  matters  might  bb  bettbb 
SPENT  in  THB  PROPER  WORK  OF  THB  MiNisTKY.  This  was  what  the  apostles  felt  (Acts 
vi.  2 — i) ;  they  wished  to  give  themselves  wholly  to  "  the  ministry  of  the  Word 
and  to  prayer."  Modern  clergymen  have,  in  addition,  parochial  visiting  and  reading 
to  employ  them,  both  making  large  demands  upon  their  time,  and  impossible  to  be 
shifted  upon  others.  A  congregation  will,  in  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred,  derive 
far  more  benefit  from  their  minister  having  an  additional  hour  a  day,  or  two  hours  a 
day,  for  reading,  than  from  his  spending  the  time  in  slaving  at  accounts,  collecting  the 
children's  pence,  looking  after  clubs,  and  bargaining  for  coals  or  blankets.  The  study 
of  the  Bible,  with  all  the  new  light  which  is  thrown  upon  it  by  recent  scholarship  and 
research,  is  imperative ;  and  it  is  also  essential  that  a  clergyman  should  have  such  a 
knowledge  of  the  current  and  tendencies  of  modern  thought  as  is  only  to  be  maintained 
by  very  diligent  reading  of  the  populai-  literature,  periodical  and  other,  of  the  day. 


8B0  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [ch.  hi.  1-21. 

IV.  Because  it  pkomotes  habmont  and  union  if  the  laitt  abb  employed  ui 

THE   BUSINESS  MATTERS  OF  THE   DISTBIOT,   OB  ChUBCH,   OB   PARISH.      In   almOSt  every 

parish  or  congregation  there  will  be  among  the  laity  persons  quite  fit  to  undertake 
the  functions  whereof  we  have  been  speaking.  And  such  persons  will  in  most  cases  be 
gratified  by  being  asked  to  undertake  them.  They  will  be  glad  to  be  associated  with 
the  clergyman  in  parochial  matters,  and  to  relieve  him  of  a  portion  of  his  burdens.  It 
will  be  a  satisfaction  to  them  to  be  doing  some  work  for  Christ  and  Ms  Church,  to  feel 
that  they  are  a  part  of  the  organization,  and  that  by  their  gratuitous  service  they  are 
furthering  the  cause  of  their  Lord  and  Master.  And  the  greater  intercourse  wliich  will 
thus  take  place  between  them  and  their  spiritual  guides  will  foster  good  feeling  and 
mutual  regard  and  respect. 

Vers.  4—^6. — Church  restoration  a  good  work,  aeceptabh  to  God.  David's  desire  t» 
build  God  a  house  is  often  mentioned  to  his  honour  (2  Sam.  vii.  2  ;  1  Chron.  xvii.  1, 2 ; 
2  Chron.  vi._  7 ;  Acts  vii.  46).  Solomon's  reputation  for  piety  and  zeal  rests  mainly 
upon  the  pains  which  he  took  to  erect  for  God's  worship  a  noble  and  suitable  edifice 
(Wisd.  ix.  8_;  Ecclus,  xlvii.  13 ;  Acts  vii.  47).  The  "  repairing  of  the  house  of  God" 
(2  Chron.  zxiv.  27)  by  Joash  obtained  him  his  place  among  the  good  kings  (ch.  xii.  2). 
Josiah's  restoration  (oh.  xxii.  3—7)  helped  to  put  him  in  the  higher  category  of  those 
wlio  were  in  no  way  defective  (Ecclus.  xlix.  4).  Zcrubbabel  and  Jeshua  were  long 
held  in  honour,  because  they  "  builded  the  house,  and  set  up  an  holy  temple  to  the 
Lord"  (Ecclus.  xlix.  12).  It  was  the  great  glory  of  Judas  Maccahaeus  that  he  cleansed 
and  "  renewed  the  sanctuary  "  (1  Mace.  v.  1).  If  God  is  to  have  any  outward  worship 
at  all,  if  nations  are  to  honour  him  openly,  if  men  are  to  join  in  common  piayer  for 
mutual  encouragement  and  edification,  there  must  be  buildings  for  the  purpose :  and 
natural  reverence  requires  that  they  shall  be  kept  solely  for  the  purpose.  He  who  pro- 
vides such  buildings  does  a  good  work  j  he  who  repairs  them  when  they  need  it,  or 
restores  them  when  they  have  gone  to  decay,  shows  the  same  spirit  as  the  original 
builder,  and  deserves  scarcely  less  praise.  Of  course,  we  assume  that  both  builders 
and  repairers  and  restorers  do  their  work  in  a  proper  frame  of  mind,  and  from  prefer 
motives;  otherwise  church-building,  like  almsgiving  or  any  other  good  work,  may 
cease  to  be  pleasing  to  God, or  may  even  become  an  "offence"  to  him.  Church-builders 
and  church-restorers  should  see — 

I.  That  they  do  not  theib  work  out  of  ostentation  or  for  thbib  own  glory. 
ITiis  their  conscience  will  readily  tell  them  if  they  honestly  consult  it. 

XL  That  they  do  it  not  in  a  spirit  of  mere  .estheticism,  out  of  a  love  of  art 
Considering  the  personal  character  of  those  who  built  St.  Peter's  at  Kome,  and  the 
dominant  spirit  of  the  age,  it  is  diflficult  to  suppose  that  the  main  motive  at  work 
among  the  promoters  was  not  the  aesthetic  one.  And  there  may  be  a  danger  of  the 
tame  kind  at  the  present  day,  when  art  is  in  such  high  estimation. 

III.  That  they  do  it  not  out  op  stripe,  ob  jealousy,  or  emulation,  but,  if 

POSSIBLE,  with  a  SINOLB  BYE  TO  GOD's  HONOUR,  OB,  AT  ANY  BATE,  WITH  God's  HONOUR 

AS  THEIR  MAIN  OBJECT.  As  Bome  preached  the  gospel  out  of  strife  (Phil.  i.  15)  in  the 
apostles'  time,  so  it  may  be  that  occasionally  nowadays  the  desire  of  surpassing  a  neigh- 
bour, or  outshining  a  rival,  may  be  at  the  root  of  men's  munificence  in  church-building 
and  chapel-building.  As  "dead  flies  cause  the  ointment  of  the  apothecary  to  stink" 
(Eccies.  X.  1),  so  a  wrong  motive  takes  away  all  its  sweet  savour  from  a  good  action. 


HOMILIBS  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — 7%e  influence  of  a  vnse  counsellor.  "  Joash  did  that  which  was  right  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord  all  his  days  wherein  Jehoiada  the  priest  instructed  him." 

I.  Muou  depends  upon  THE  OHABAOTBB  OF  THB  80VEKEIQN.  Compare  England 
under  the  Stuarts  with  England  under  Cromwell  or  Queen  Victoria.  An  impure  and 
licentious  court  demoralizes  a  whole  nation.  A  pure  court  is  a  standing  rebuke  to 
iniquity  in  high  places.  We  have  much  need  to  pray  "  for  kings,  and  for  all  that  are 
in  authority."  We  have  much  need  to  be  thankful  for  the  character  and  life  of  our 
present  sovereign. 


CH.  XII.  1-.-21.]         THE   SECOND    BOOK   OF  THE  KINGS.  251 

n.  Thk  national  ufb  laboelt  depends  upon  the  ohabacter  of  thb  nation's 
conNSGLLOBs.  In  our  limited  monarchy  the  "  ministers  of  the  Crown  "  are  virtually 
the  rulers  of  the  nation.  How  important  that  a  Christian  nation  should  have  Christian 
rulers,  Christian  legislators  1  The  time  has  surely  come  when  the  voice  of  the  Christian 
people  of  the  British  empire  should  be  much  more  heard  in  Parliament.  It  is  not  so 
much  the  politics  of  party  we  need,  as  the  politics  of  Christianity.  We  want  rulers 
who  will  remember  that  "  righteousness  exalteth  a  nation."  We  want  our  laws  to  be 
based  upon  the  eternal  law  of  God.  We  want  legislators  who  have  the  fear  of  God 
before  their  eyes.  Christian  people  need  to  be  aroused  to  their  duty  in  this  matter. 
They  should  see  to  it  that,  so  far  as  they  can  secure  it,  Christian  men  are  chosen  to 
represent  them  in  the  legislature  of  the  nation. — 0.  H,  L 

Vers.  4 — 16. — T%e  repairing  of  the  temple  under  Joash :  a  missionary  sermon.  I. 
This  work  had  its  origin  in  thb  kino's  command.  Kings  get  a  great  many  hard 
knocks  nowadays.  But  kings  have  not  been  all  bad.  Considering  the  fierce  light 
which  beats  upon  a  throne,  and  the  special  temptations  to  which  they  are  exposeii, 
perhaps  the  character  of  kings  will  bear  investigation  as  well  as  the  character  ol  many 
of  their  critics.  If  in  Jewish  history  we  find  a  Jeroboam  and  an  Ahab,  we  also  find  a 
Solomon  and  a  Hezekiah.  If'in  Eoman  history  we  find  a  Nero  staining  with  cruelty 
and  bloodshed  the  imperial  purple,  we  find  others  like  Trajan  and  Marcus  Aurelius, 
the  patrons  of  literature,  philosophy,  and  the  arts.  If  in  our  British  nation  some  of 
our  sovereigns  were  not  all  they  should  have  been,  we  can  point  to  the  influence  for 
good  which  many  of  our  rulers  have  exercised.  So,  although  Joash  ended  badly,  he 
began  well.  The  first  work  of  Joash  and  Jehoiada  was  to  pull  down  the  temple  of 
Baal,  and  destroy  his  images.  Their  next  work  was  to  repair  the  temple  of  the  Lord. 
Not  merely  had  the  house  of  the  Lord  been  neglected  for  the  worship  of  Baal,  but,  as 
we  read  in  2  Chronicles,  "  the  sons  of  Athaliah,  that  wicked  woman,  had  broken  up 
the  house  of  God ;  and  also  all  the  dedicated  things  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  did  they 
bestow  upon  Baalim."  Joash  was  grieved  that  the  house  of  God  should  be  in  this 
shameful  condition.  He  gave  command  that  the  temple  should  be  repaired.  He 
instructed  the  priests  and  Levites  that  they  were  to  make  collections  for  this  pur- 
pose, not  only  in  the  temple,  but  throughout  the  land,  every  man  from  his  acquaintance. 
1.  We  have  got  the  command  of  a  King  in  reference  to  his  Church.  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  expects,  that  all  who  are  his  people  will  take  an  interest  in  building  up  that 
Church.  We  are  first  of  all  to  build  up  the  Church  of  Christ  in  our  own  land  and  in 
our  own  district.  The  professing  Christian  who  enjoys  the  privileges  of  a  Church,  but 
contributes  nothing  to  its  support,  is  not  obeying  the  teaching  of  God's  Word.  Then, 
also,  we  are  to  pray  and  give  and  labour  for  the  extension  of  Christ's  kingdom  through- 
out the  world.  "  Let  him  that  heareth  say.  Come."  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and 
preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  "The  harvest  truly  is  plenteous,  but  the  labourers 
are  few ;  pray  ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  that  he  will  send  forth  labourers 
into  his  harvest"  Here  are  three  commands  of  Christ.  How  are  we  seeking  to  fulfil 
them  ?  2.  The  cause  of  Christian  missions  rests  upon  the  command  of  our  King.  Some 
may  think  little  of  Christian  missions.  They  may  make  light  of  their  necessity,  or 
undervalue  the  work  they  have  done — though  testimonies  to  the  value  of  missionary 
work  are  becoming  more  frequent  every  year  from  explorers,  from  scientific  men,  from 
statesmen,  even  from  heathen  who  have  not  become  Christians.  But  it  is  enough  for 
the  true  Christian  that  Christ  has  commanded  the  evangelization  of  the  world.  "That 
command,"  said  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  "  is  the  marching  orders  of  the  Christian 
Church." 

n.  Thm  wobk  was  delated  by  nboleotful  pbiests.  Notwithstanding  the  com- 
mand of  King  Joash,  which  would  seem  to  have  been  given  early  in  his  reign,  for  a 
long  time  nothing  was  done.  The  time  passed  by  till  the  twenty-third  year  of  his 
reign,  and  still  the  priests  had  not  repaired  the  breaches  of  the  house  of  the  Lord. 
Joash  called  the  priests  and  the  Levites  together,  and  asked  them  why  they  had 
not  carried  out  the  work  entrusted  to  them.  Then  he  took  it  out  of  their  hands  in  a 
certain  measure.  They_  who  should  have  been  the  foremost  in  their  «eal  for  the  house 
of  God  had  been  tardy  in  this  important  work.  How  often  it  has  unhappily  been  so  in 
the  history  of  the  Christian  Church  1    It  was  through  th«  priesthood  of  the  Western 


252  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xn.  1— 2L 

Churoh  in  the  JEddlo  Ages  that  the  greatest  corrnptions  crept  in.  Forgetting  their 
spiritual  profesBion,  they  mixed  themselves  up  with  the  political  strife  of  their  day. 
The  popes  aspired  to  be  lords  over  God's  heritage — a  claim  which  Christ  forbade  his 
apostles  to  exercise.  They  thirsted  for  temporal  power,  and  put  the  power  of  the 
Church  into  competition  with  the  governments  of  the  nations,  just  as  the  present  pope  is 
seeking  to  do  in  our  own  time.  They  thirsted  for  wealth  and  splendour,  and  thus 
began  the  traffic  in  indulgences  against  which  Luther  raised  his  mighty  voice.  All  this 
time  they  were  unfaithful  to  the  high  commission  they  professed  to  hold.  They  were 
forgetful  of  the  plain  statement  of  Christ,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world."  But 
this  unfaithfulness  of  the  teachers  of  religion  is  not  confined  to  the  Church  of  Borne. 
All  Churches  have  suffered  from  it  at  one  time  or  another.  How  much  of  the  delay 
in  the  great  work  of  Christian  missions  has  been  due  to  the  neglect  and  unfaithfulness 
of  religious  teachers  1  For  centuries  scarcely  anything  was  done  to  carry  the  gospel 
into  heathen  lands.  Protestant  missions  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  existed  before  the 
nineteenth  century.  The  blight  of  moderatism,  which  was  over  all  Christian  communi- 
ties in  the  last  century,  was  fatal  to  all  missionary  effort  for  the  time.  Bat  Oo(fs  work 
does  not  depend  vj)on  men,  or  on  any  class  of  men.  If  those  who  are  stewards  of  God  are 
unfaithful  to  their  trust,  God  will  commit  it  to  other  hands.  If  men  enter  the  sacred 
ulfice  of  the  ministry  for  the  sake  of  earning  a  livelihood,  God  can  deprive  them  even 
of  that.  How  important  for  ministers  of  Christ  to  remember  that  they  are  watchmen 
upon  the  walls  of  Zion,  and  that  if  they  neglect  to  warn  the  sinner,  tbe  blood  of  lost 
souls  will  be  required  at  their  hands  1  They  are  to  be  teachers  and  examples  of 
the  flock,  leaders  in  every  good  work.  Well  it  is  for  the  Christian  minister  when 
he  can  say  with  the  Apostle  Paul,  "I  take  you  to  record  this  day,  that  I  am  pure 
from  the  blood  of  all  men,  for  I  have  not  shunned  to  declare  unto  you  all  the  counsel 
of  God." 

III.  Thm  work  was  supportbd  by  generous  people.  We  may  learn  much  from 
this  chapter  about  <Ae  place  of  money  in  the  Church  of  Ood.  First  of  all,  we  see  that 
the  people  were  regularly  rated  or  assessed  for  the  support  of  religious  ordirumces.  It  is 
to  this  that  Joash  refers  (ver.  4)  when  he  speaks  of  the  money  of  every  one  that 
passeth  the  account — the  money  that  every  man  is  set  at.  And  in  the  account  which 
is  given  in  2  Chronicles  it  is  said  that  they  made  a  proclamation  throughout  Judah 
and  Jerusalem  to  bring  in  to  the  Lord  the  collection  that  Moses  the  servant  of  the 
Lord  laid  upon  Israel  in  the  wilderness.  When  we  look  into  the  thirtieth  chapter  of 
Exodus,  the  last  chapter  of  Leviticus,  and  other  passages,  we  find  the  clear  instructions 
of  God  himself  on  this  matter.  When  the  numbering  or  census  of  the  people  was 
made,  each  one  was  assessed  at  so  much  for  an  atonement  offering.  This  money  was 
devoted  to  maintain  the  services  of  the  sanctuary.  Then  again,  if  any  one  entered 
into  a  special  vow  to  he  the  Lord's,  he  incurred  special  pecuniary  obligations,  and  was 
rated  accordingly.  All  these  offerings  Joash  ordered  to  be  set  apart  on  this  occasion 
for  the  repairs  of  the  temple,  with  the  exception  of  the  sin  and  trespass  offerings,  which 
were  secured  to  the  priests,  and  which  could  not  be  touched  for  any  other  purpose.  Prom 
these  anil  other  details  we  learn  that  God  expected  the  Israelites  to  contribute  regularly 
a  fixed  sum,  in  proportion  to  their  income,  for  the  support  of  religious  ordinances.  He 
expected  of  those  who  took  special  vows  upon  them  that  they  should  consecrate  more 
of  their  money  to  his  service.  So  God  expects  of  his  people  still,  and  particularly  of 
those  who  make  the  full  profession  of  Christianity  involved  in  attendance  at  the 
Lord's  table.  Some  preacher  stated  lately  that  it  is  no  "  charity  "  when  we  give  to 
the  support  of  the  Church  with  which  we  are  connected.  It  is  merely  the  payment 
of  m  debt — the  fulfilment  of  obligations  which  every  one  incurs  when  he^  becomes  a 
member  of  •  Christian  Church,  and  obligations  which  can  no  more  be  rightly  shirked 
than  any  other  just  and  lawful  debt.  Over  and  above  that,  he  said,  there  is,  of 
course,  a  large  margin  for  the  exercise  of  Christian  charity  and  benevolence.  This  was 
the  case  when  Joash  appealed  to  the  people  to  contribute,  not  only  the  fixed  sum  at 
which  they  were  rated,  but  also  "  all  the  money  that  cometh  into  any  man's  heart  to 
bring  into  the  house  of  the  Lord."  He  was  not  ashamed  to  appeal  to  them  for  money, 
for  it  was  for  a  good  cause.  It  was  for  God's  cause,  for  God's  house.  He  put  the  chest 
in  a  prominent  place,  where  it  could  bo  seen  (ver.  9).  And  his  faithful,  earnest  appeal 
was  not  without  effect.    We  read  in  2  Chronioles  (xxiv.  10)  tiiat "  all  the  princes  and 


cir  xn,l— 21.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  RlNGa  263 

•II  <he  people  refoked,  and  brought  in,  and  cast  into  the  chest,  until  they  had  made  an 
end."  No  doubt  tiiey  experienced  the  blessing  which  is  implied  in  the  words,  "  God 
loveth  a  chteifid  giver."  We  need  to  study  God's  Word  more  on  this  subject  of  Chris- 
tian giving.  We  have  seen  what  the  Old  Testament  rules  were.  Here  is  one  from  the 
New  Testament:  "On  the  first  day  of  the  week  let  every  one  of  you  lay  by  him  in 
store,  as  God  hath  prospered  him."  If  we  were  to  give  systematically,  as  theae  words 
exhort,  if  we  were  to  measure  our  weekly  offerings  by  our  prosperity,  how  much  larger 
our  offertories  would  be  I  what  an  overflowing  offering  of  silver  and  gold  would  be 
given  to  carry  the  gospel  to  the  heathen  I 

IV.  This  wobk  was  oabbied  out  by  faithful  wobkebs.  Those  are  very  remark- 
able words,  "Moreover  they  reckoned  not  with  the  men,  into  whose  hand  they 
delivered  the  money  to  be  bestowed  on  workmen :  for  they  dealt  faithfully  "  (ver.  15). 
There  were  faithful  workmen,  and  faithful  overseers  of  the  work.  And  what  was  the 
explanation  of  this  unusual  confidence  on  the  part  of  the  contributors,  and  unusual 
faithfulness  on  the  part  of  the  workers  ?  Ah  I  there  had  been  a  reformation  of  religion  I 
Wherever  true  religion  flourishes,  there  there  will  be  honest  and  upright  dealing 
between  man  and  man.  When  the  great  revival  of  religion  took  place  in  Ulster  in 
1859,  the  change  was  soon  manifest  in  the  conduct  of  the  whole  community.  Scenes 
of  strife  and  turbulence  became  scenes  of  kindness  and  peace.  The  ofScers  of  justice 
had  easy  work  in  maintaining  law  and  order,  and  at  many  of  the  sessions  there  was 
absolutely  no  criminal  business.  When  men  are  influenced  by  the  fear  of  God  it  will 
not  be  hard  to  procure  obedience  for  the  law  of  man.  When  the  love  of  Christ  is  in 
men's  hearts  there  will  be  love  for  our  fellow-creatures  also.  May  we  not  say  the  same 
of  the  great  work  of  missions  to  the  heathen,  that  it  is  heing  carried  on  by  faithful 
workers  t  Where  shall  we  find  such  a  record  of  faithfulness,  of  patience,  of  devotedness, 
of  perseverance,  of  heroic  courage,  as  in  the  life  and  work  of  many  a  humble  mis- 
sionary to  heathen  lands?  When  we  remember  how  many  of  those  who  have  gone 
forth  as  missionaries,  in  connection  with  the  Church  and  with  the  great  missionary 
societies,  have  sacrificed  high  literary,  or  commercial,  or  professional  prospects  at  home, 
it  is  biit  reasonable  that  the  Christian  Church  should  express  its  sympathy  vrith  such 
self-denial  and  devotedness  by  contributing  liberally  to  the  work  of  foreign  missions 
(vide  infra,  on  ch.  xilL  11—19). — 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  17 — 21.— The  last  days  ofJoash.  He  began  toeU,  hut  ended  badly.  The 
close  of  the  reign  of  Joash  is  a  melancholy  contrast  to  Its  beginning.  In  a  most 
remarkable  way  preserved,  by  the  providence  of  God  and  the  kindness  of  a  God-fearing 
woman,  from  the  massacre  of  his  brothers;  then  kept  safe  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for 
six  years  of  his  helpless  childhood; — one  would  think  he  would  never  have  forgotten 
how  much  he  owed  to  the  watchful  care  and  goodness  of  God.  He  had  been  surrounded 
with  good  influences.  Jehoiada  had  watched  over  him  like  a  father.  When  he  came 
to  the  throne,  Jehoiada  bad  caused  him  to  enter  into  a  covenant  with  God.  He  began 
his  reign  with  a  great  religious  reformation.  He  ended  it  with  a  shameful  forsaking  of 
God.  There  were  three  causes  of  his  fall.  1.  Ee  retained  the  high  places.  His 
reformation  was  not  complete.  The  germs  of  future  evil  were  there.  How  careful  we 
should  be  of  the  beginnings  of  evil  I  It  seemed  a  small  matter  to  retain  the  high 
places.  But  that  small  act  of  negligence  or  want  of  courage  prepared  the  way  for 
national  idolatry,  and  for  the  ultimate  downfall  of  Joash.  It  accustomed  the  people 
to  heathen  modes  of  worship  (cf.  infra,  on  ch.  xiv.  1 — 4).  2.  Ee  listened  to  evil 
counsellors.  It  was  an  evil  day  for  Joash  when  Jehoiada  passed  away.  "  Now  after 
the  death  of  Jehoiada  came  the  princes  of  Judah,  and  made  obeisance  to  the  king. 
ITien  the  king  hearkened  unto  them.  And  they  left  the  house  of  the  Lord  God  of  their 
faihers,  and  served  groves  and  idols:  and  wrath  came  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem  for 
this  their  trespass"  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  17, 18).'  Ah!  how  true  it  is  that  "  evil  communi- 
cations corrupt  good  manners  "  i  3.  Se  disregarded  the  warnings  of  Qod.  The  Lord 
"sent  prophets  to  them,  to  bring  them  again  unto  the  Lord ;  .  .  .  but  they  would  not 
give  ear "  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  19).  Zechariah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  came  with  a  special 
warning.  But  here  again  ,we  see  the  hardening  effect  of  sin.  Not  only  did  Joash  pay 
no  attention  to  his  warnings,  but  with  the  basest  ingratitude,  forgetful  of  all  he  owed  to 
Jehoiada,  Zechariah's  father,  he  put  Zechariah  to  death.    The  messenger  of  God  may 


tM  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xn.  1—21. 

suffer  for  his  fait'irultiess  In  re'bu'king  sin,  as  John  the  Baptist  was  imprisoned  by 
Herod,  but  no  royal  power  can  stay  the  judgments  of  God.  Joash,  who  had  slain 
(Jod's  prophet,  was  himself  slain  by  his  own  servants.  The  nation  had  forsaken  God, 
and  God  forsook  them  in  their  time  of  need.  Such  a  career  as  that  of  Joash  shows 
the  necessity  for  constant  watchfulness  against  sin.  Many,  like  hira,  begin  well,  but 
end  badly.  They  make  a  fair  profession  at  first,  but  by-and-by,  when  troubles  or 
persecutions  arise,  they  are  offended.  They  go  back  and  walk  no  more  with  (Sirist. 
Or  they  become  worldly  minded,  and,  being  engrossed  in  the  present,  forget  the  concerns 
of  eternity.  Many  might  utter  the  melancholy  cry,  "  Our  lamps  are  gone  out."  To 
every  one  of  us  the  message  may  weli  be  sent,  "Let  him  thAt  thinketh  he  ctandeth 
take  heed  lest  he  fall."— 0.  H.  I. 

\en.  1—21.— The  history  of  Joash.  "In  the  seventh  year,"  eto.  The  whole 
■tory  of  Joash  is  soon  told.  He  was  a  son  of  Ahaziah,  and  the  only  one  of  his 
children  who  escaped  the  murderous  policy  of  Athaliah.  "  It  would  seem  that  this 
child,  whom  the  pity  and  affection  of  a  pious  aunt  (Jehosheba)  had  preserved,  was 
the  only  surviving  male  representative  of  the  Ime  of  Solomon.  Jehoram,  his  grand- 
father, who  married  Athaliah,  in  order  to  strengthen  his  position  on  the  throne,  slew 
all  his  brethren,  and  all  his  own  sons  were  slain  in  an  incursion  by  the  Arabians,  except 
Ahaziah,  the  youngest,  who  succeeded  him;  while  on  the  death  of  Ahaziah,  his  wicked 
mother,  Athaliah,  •  arose  and  destroyed  all  the  seed  royal  of  the  house  of  Jndah,'  except 
the  little  child  Joash,  who  was  rescued  from  her  grasp.  So  that  the  lyiholy  alHancea 
formed  by  the  descendants  of  Solomon,  and  the  manifold  disorders  then  accruing,  had 
reduced  everything  to  the  verge  of  ruin.  Measures  were  concerted  by  Jehoiada,  the 
high  priest,  for  getting  rid  of  Athaliah,  and  placing  Joash  on  the  throne,  after  he  had 
attained  to  the  age  of  seven;  and  having  in  his  youth  the  wise  and  the  faithful  round 
his  throne,  the  earlier  part  of  the  reign  of  Joash  was  in  accordance  with  the  great 
principles  of  the  theocracy.  The  Lord's  house  was  repaired  and  set  in  order,  while  the 
temple  and  idols  of  Baal  were  thrown  down.  But  after  Jehoiada's  death,  persons  of 
a  different  stamp  got  about  him,  and,  notwithstanding  the  great  and  laudable  zeal 
which  he  had  shown  for  the  proper  restoration  of  God's  house  and  worship,  a  return 
was  made  to  idolatry  to  such  an  extent  as  to  draw  forth  severe  denunciations  from 
Zechariah,  the  son  of  Jehoiada.  Even  this  was  not  the  worst,  for  the  faithfulness  of 
Zechariah  was  repaid  with  violence;  he  was  even  stoned  to  death,  and  this,  it  is  said, 
at  the  express  command  of  the  king.  The  martyred  priest  exclaimed  as  he  expired, '  The 
Lord  look  upon  it,  and  require ; '  and  it  was  required  as  in  a  whirlwind  of  wrath.  For 
a  Syrian  host,  under  Hazael,  made  an  incursion  into  Judaea,  and  both  carried  off  much 
treasure  and  executed  summary  judgment  on  many  in  Jerusalem,  not  excepting  Joash 
himself,  whom  they  left  in  an  enfeebled  state,  and  who  was  shortly  afterwards  fallen  upon 
and  slain  by  his  servants.  Such  was  the  unhappy  termination  of  a  career  which  began 
in  much  promise  of  good,  and  the  cloud  under  which  he  died  even  followed  him  to  the 
tomb,  for  while  he  was  buried  in  the  city  of  David,  it  was  not  in  the  sepulchres  of  the 
kings  of  Judah.  He  reigned  forty  years — from  b.o.  878  to  838."  The  narrative, 
whether  we  regard  it  as  inspired  or  not,  reminds  us  of  five  things  worth  considering— 
the  dilapidating  influence  of  time  upon  the  best  material  productions  of  mankind; 
the  incongruity  of  worldly  rulers  busying  themselves  in  religious  institutions;  the 
value  of  the  co-operative  principle  in  the  enterprises  of  mankind;  the  potency  of  the 
religious  element  in  the  nature  of  even  depraved  people ;  and  the  power  of  money  to 
subdue  enemies. 

L  The  dilapidating  mrLUBNCB  of  timb  upon  the  best  uatebiai.  peoduotions  of 
UAKEIND.  Joash  here  called  upon  the  priests  and  the  people  "  to  repair  the  breaches 
of  the  house,"  i.t.  the  temple.  The  temple,  therefore,  though  it  had  not  been  built 
more  than  about  a  hundred  and  sixty  years,  had  got  into  a  state  of  dilapidation, 
there  were  breaches  in  it ;  whore  the  breaches  were  we  are  not  told,  whether  in  the 
roof,  the  floor,  the  walls,  or  in  the  ceiling.  The  crumbling  hand  of  time  had  touched 
it.  No  human  superstructure,  perhaps,  ever  appeared  on  the  earth  built  of  better 
materials,  or  in  a  better  way,  than  the  temple  of  Solomon.  It  was  the  wonder  of  ages. 
Notwithstanding  this,  it  was  subject  to  the  invincible  law  of  decay.  The  law  of 
dilapidation  seems  universal  throughout  organic  nature ;  the  trees  of  the  forest,  the 


OH.  xiL  1-21.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  255 

flowers  of  the  field,  and  the  oonntlesa  tribes  of  sentient  life  that  crowd  the  ocean,  earth, 
•nd  air,  all  fall  into  decay ;  and  so  also  with  the  material  productions  of  feeble  man. 
Throughout  the  civilized  world  we  see  mansions,  churches,  cathedrals,  palaces.  Tillages, 
towns,  and  cities,  in  ruins.  All  compound  bodies  tend  to  dissolution ;  there  is  nothing 
enduring  but  primitive  elements  or  substances.  This  being  so,  how  astoundingly 
preposterous  is  man's  effort  to  perpetuate  his  memory  in  material  monuments  I  The 
only  productions  of  men  that  defy  the  touch  of  time,  and  that  are  enduring,  are  true 
thoughts,  pure  sympathies,  and  noble  deeds.  He  who  builds  up  the  temple  of  a  true 
moral  character  produces  a  superstructure  that  will  last  through  the  sweep  of  ages,  the 
wreck  of  thrones,  and  the  crash  of  doom. 

11.  The  incongbuitt  of  wobldlt  bOTiEbb  BnsTnra  themselves  in  bglioioub 
DIBTlTnTIONS.  Joash  was  no  saint,  the  root  of  the  matter  was  not  in  him ;  he  had 
no  vital  and  ruling  sympathy  with  the  Supreme  Being,  yet  be  seemed  zealous  in  the 
work  of  repairing  the  temple.  "  Then  King  Joash  called  for  Jehoiada  the  priest,  and 
the  other  priests,  and  said  unto  them.  Why  repair  ye  not  the  breaches  of  the  house  ? 
now  therefore  receive  no  more  money  of  your  acquaintance,  but  deliver  it  for  the 
breaches  of  the  house."  Though  the  conduct  of  corrupt  meu  in  busying  themselves 
with  things  pertaining  to  religion  is  incongruous,  alas  I  it  is  not  uncommon.  Such 
conduct  generally  springs  from  one  of  two  things,  or  from  both — -policy  or  svperstition. 
The  religion  that  is  popular,  whether  it  be  true  or  false,  rulers  recognize  and  sanction. 
They  use  the  religious  element  in  the  community  as  a  means  by  which  to  strengthen 
their  thrones  and  augment  their  fame.  Not  only,  indeed,  are  kings  actuated  thus,  but 
even  the  corrupt  tradesman,  lawyer,  doctor,  etc.,  must  show  some  interest  in  the 
popular  religion  in  order  to  succeed  in  his  secular  pursuits.  But  superstition  as  well 
as  policy  often  prompts  corrupt  men  to  busy  themselves  in  matters  of  religion.  Do 
not  many  build  and  beautify  churches  and  subscribe  to  religious  institutions,  hoping 
thereby  to  escape  perdition  and  to  ensure  the  favour  of  Heaven  ?  Alas  I  some  of  the 
corruptest  men  are  often  most  busy  in  religious  affairs.  The  man  that  betrayed  the 
Son  of  QoA.  at  the  last  Passover  was  most  busy  on  that  awful  night ;  "  his  hand  was 
on  the  table." 

IIT.  The  value  or  the  co-ofebativg  pbinciple  in  the  enterprises  of  mankind. 
It  would  seem  that  the  work  of  repairing  the  temple  was  so  great  that  no  one  man 
could  have  accomplished  it.  Hence  the  king  called  earnestly  for  the  co-operation  of 
all.  "  And  Jehoash  said  to  the  priests.  All  the  money  of  the  dedicated  things  that  is 
brought  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  even  the  money  of  every  one  that  passeth  the 
account,  the  money  that  every  man  is  set  at,  and  all  the  money  that  cometh  into  any 
man's  heart  to  bring  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  let  the  priests  take  it  to  them,  every 
man  of  his  acquaintance:  and  let  them  repair  the  breaches  of  the  house."  They 
obeyed  his  voice.  The  people  gave  the  money,  and  all  set  to  work ;  the  "  priest  that 
kept  the  door,"  the  "  high  priest,"  the  "  carpenters,"  the  "  masons,"  the  "builders,"  the 
"  hewen  of  stone,"  etc.  By  this  unity  of  action  •'  they  repaired  the  house  of  the  Lord." 
Two  remarks  may  be  made  concerning  the  principle  of  co-operation.  1.  It  is  a  principle 
that  should  govern  all  men  in  the  tmdertakings  of  life.  It  was  never  the  purpose  of  the 
Almighty  that  man  should  act  alone  for  himself,  should  pursue  alone  his  own  individual 
interests.  Men  may,  and  often  do,  make  large  fortunes  by  it,  but  they  destroy  their  own 
peace  of  mind,  degrade  their  natures,  and  outrage  the  Divine  laws  of  society.  Men  are 
•11  members  of  one  great  body;  and  was  ever  a  member  made  to  work  alone?  No ;  but 
for  the  good  of  the  whole,  the  common  weal.  2.  It  is  a  principle  that  has  done  and 
is  doing  wonders  in  the  undertakings  of  life.  Our  colleges,  hospitals,  railways,  etc.,  are 
all  the  products  of  co-operation.  The  more  men  get  intellectually  enlightened  and 
morally  improved,  the  more  this  principle  will  be  put  into  operation.  This  principle, 
however,  has  its  limits.  In  spiritual  matters  it  must  not  infringe  the  realm  of  individual 
responsibility.  There  is  no  partnership  in  moral  responsibility.  Each  man  must  think, 
repent,  and  believe  for  himself.    " Every  man  nust  bear  his  own  burden," 

ly.  The  potenoX  of  the  belioiotib  element  even  in  depbatitt.  At  this 
time  Inael  wa»^morally  almost  as  corrupt  as  the  heathen  nations.  From  the  beginning 
Israel  was  the  Church  of  God  in  little  more  than  a  metaphorical  sense.  Never  in  the 
histoijrof  the  world  has  there  been  a  member  of  the  true  Church  whose  sympathies  with 
Jekovah  wera  not  supreme.    But  how  many  of  the  Jews  had  this  supreme  sympathy  7 


256  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,       {cR.  :ai.  1—21. 

Notwithstanding  tUa,  the  reli^ous  sentiment  was  in  them,  as  in  all  men,  a  constituent 
part  of  their  natures ;  and  this  sentiment  is  here  appealed  to,  and  roused  into  excite- 
ment ;  and,  heing  excited,  men  poured  forth  their  treasures  and  employed  their  energies 
for  the  repairing  of  the  temple.  This  element  in  man  often  sleeps  under  the  influence 
of  depravity,  hut  mountains  of  depravity  cannot  crush  it ;  it  lies  in  human  nature  as 
the  mightiest  latent  force.  Peter  the  Hermit,  Savanorola  the  priest,  Wesley  the 
Methodist,  and  others  in  every  age,  have  roused  it  into  mighty  action,  even  amongst 
the  most  ignorant  and  depraved  of  the  race.  Cunning  priests  and  crafty  kings  have 
appealed  to  it  as  the  strongest  force  that  can  hear  them  on  to  the  realization  of  their 
miserable  ends.  The  truly  good  and  godly  must  appeal  to  it  if  they  would  accomphsh 
any  great  work  for  mankind.  By  its  right  action  only  can  men  rise ;  by  its  dormancy 
or  wrong  development  men  must  inevitably  fidL 

V.  The  power  of  monbt  to  bubdue  enemies.  "  Hazael  King  of  Syria  ...  set  his 
face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem.  And  Joash  King  of  Jndah  took  all  the  hallowed  things 
that  ...  his  fathers  .  .  .  had  dedicated,  .  .  .  and  all  the  gold  that  was  found  in  the 
treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord, . . .  and  sent  it  to  Hazael  King  of  Syria :  and  he  went 
away  from  Jerusalem."  Here  is  a  man,  a  proud,  daring  monarch,  who  was  determined 
to  invade  Judsea,  and  to  take  possession  of  Jerusalem,  relinquishing  his  designs.  What 
was  the  force  that  broke  his  purpose  ?  Money.  It  is  said  that  Joash  sent  gold  to 
Hazael,  "  and  he  went  away  from  Jerusalem."  Truly  money  answereth  for  all  things. 
Money  can  arrest  the  march  of  armies  and  terminate  the  fiercest  campaigns.  After 
contending  armies  have  destroyed  their  thousands,  it  is  money  alone  that  brings  the 
battle  to  a  close.    Money  is  the  soul  of  all  pacifying  treaties.    What  fools  the  rulers 


to  drink :  for  in  so  doing  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  upon  his  head." — ^D.  T, 


Vers.  1 — 3. — A  mixed  character.  The  reign  of  Joash  began  with  bright  hopes, 
showed  for  a  while  excellent  promise,  yet  ended  ingloriously.  To  explain  this  we  may 
consider — 

I.  Joash's  advantages.  1.  Be  had  a  pious  education.  As  a  child  he  was  brought 
up  by  his  aunt  Jehosheba,  who,  with  her  husband  the  high  priest,  would  instil  into 
his  mind  the  principles  of  true  godliness.  In  his  strict  seclusion  he  was  kept  I'ree 
Irom  sights  of  vice.  Like  Timothy,  he  would  be  taught  firom  a  child  to  know  the 
things  that  make  wise  unto  salvation  (2  Tim.  iii.  15).  To  have  an  early  training  of 
this  kind  is  an  inestimable  advantage.  2.  He  had  a  good  counsellor.  The  early 
education  of  our  own  Queen  Victoria  was  carefully  conducted  with  a  view  to  the  royal 
office  she  was  afterwards  to  fill.  It  would  not  be  otherwise  with  young  Joash.  Jehoiada 
would  carefully  impress  upon  his  mind  the  principles  of  good  government,  and,  after  his  - 
coronation,  this  holy  man  continued  to  lie  his  guide  and  counsellor.  So  it  is  said, 
"  Jehoash  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  all  bis  days  wherein 
Jehoiada  the  priest  instructed  him."  It  is  a  happy  thing  when  a  king  is  willing  to 
receive  counsel  from  older  and  wiser  heads  than  his  own  (cf.  1  Kings  xii.  6 — 11). 
3.  He  had  an  excellent  opportunity.  Joash  started  with  every  advantage  for  reigning 
well.  The  people  were  animated  with  hatred  of  idolatry  from  the  experience  they  had 
had  of  it  in  Athaliah's  reign ;  they  were  enthusiastic  in  their  return  to  the  worship 
of  Jehovah ;  they  had  inaugurated  the  restoration  of  the  line  of  David  by  a  new 
covenant  with  God,  and  by  zealous  acts  of  reform.  The  tide  was  with  Jo^,  if  he 
had  shown  strength  of  character  sufBcient  to  avail  himself  of  it. 

n.  Joabh's  weakness.  Circumstances  test  men,  and  it  was  to  be  proved  that,  with 
all  his  advantages,  Joash  was  a  weak  king.  1.  He  lucked  independence  of  judgment. 
Whether  the  early  seclusion  of  his  life  had  anything  to  do  with  this,  we  cannot  tell ; 
but  it  seems  plain  that  he  was  not  a  king  accustomed  to  think  and  act  for  himself,  but 
one  who  was  easily  influenced  and  led  by  others.  His  nature  was  passive  clay,  on 
which  the  judgment  of  others  stamped  itself.  While  Jehoiada  lived,  he  allowed  himself 
to  be  led  by  him ;  and  when  this  good  priest  and  counsellor  died,  he  allowed  himself 
as  r(  adily  to  be  turned  into  evil  courses  by  the  wicked  nobility  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  17, 18). 
2.  He  lachtd  firmn*s$  of  uiiU.    This  defect  flowed  from  the  fwbleness  of  judgment  now 


OH.  xn.  1— 2!.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  267 

indicated.  Joash  knew  the  right,  but  he  had  not  the  courage  or  persiitence  to  do  it 
when  pressure  was  brought  to  bear  on  him  in  an  opposite  direction.  His  life  tfaua 
proved  at  last  a  wretchol  failure.  Notwithstanding  Jehoiada's  kindness  to  him,  he 
was  betrayed  at  length  into  sheddine;  the  blood  of  Zechariah,  his  benefactor's  son 
(2  Ohron.  xxiv.  20 — 22).  3.  He  lacked  true  turrender  of  heart  to  Ood.  This  was  the 
prime  defect  in  his  character.  His  goodness,  such  as  it  was — and  for  a  time  it  seemed 
perfectly  genuine — was  the  result  of  natural  amiableness,  of  early  training,  of  external 
influences ;  it  did  not  spring  from  •  root  of  true  conviction.  Therefore,  when  the  sun 
was  up,  it  was  scorched,  and  withered  away  (Matt.  xiii.  6).  '  It  was  goodness  like  the 
morning  cloud,  and  the  early  dew — unenduring  (Hos.  vi.  3).  The  lesson  we  learn  is 
the  need  of  a  radical  change  of  heart  as  the  foundation  of  true  and  enduring  piety. 

III.  Joabh'b  imperfeot  befobms.  The  one  point  noticed  about  him  at  this  stage 
is  that,  while  reforming  the  worship  of  the  temple,  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away 
as  commanded  by  the  Law.  This  was  a  reform,  it  is  to  be  allowed,  not  easily  achieved, 
but  had  Joash  been  a  man  of  more  character  he  might  have  accomplished  it,  as 
Hezekiah  did  after  him  (ch.  xviiL  4).  The  fact  that  be  did  not  attempt  it,  though 
popular  feeling  was  so  strongly  on  his  side,  is  an  evidence  of  that  weak  line  in  hu 
character  which  came  more  clearly  to  light  when  Jehoiada  was  removed.— J,  0. 

Vers.  4 — ^.—The  temple  repain — a  good  purpose  frustrated.  At  an  early  period  of 
his  reign,  Joash,  instigated  no  donbt  by  the  good  Jehoiada,  took  steps  to  have  the 
temple  put  in  a  proper  state  of  repair. 

L  The  bepaib  of  the  temple  pbojeoted.  1.  The  need  of  repair.  What  ii  stated 
in  Chronicles  of  the  condition  of  the  temple  shows  how  terrible  bad  been  the  blight 
which  had  fallen  on  true  religion  in  Judah  during  the  reign  of  Athaliah.  "That 
wicked  woman,"  we  are  told,  "  had  broken  up  the  house  of  God  " — probably  carried 
away  its  stones  to  build  or  adorn  her  own  house  of  Baal ;  or,  perhaps,  had  broken  down 
part  of  the  courts  to  make  room  for  her  temple  on  the  same  hill.  Moreover,  she  had 
taken  away  all  the  dedicated  things  to  bestow  upon  the  house  of  Baal  (2  Chron.  xxiv. 
7).  There  was  thus  much  work  to  be  done  in  repairing  the  temple,  as  the  numbers  of 
workmen  afterwards  employed  show.  Many  are  the  inroads  of  the  world  upon  the 
Church — God's  spiritual  temple ;  and  any  breaches  found  in  its  walls  should  give  rise 
to  earnest  desires  and  efforts  to  see  them  mended.  2.  The  resolve  to  repair.  Joash 
gave  orders  that  the  repairing  of  the  temple  should  be  proceeded  with.  He  had, 
perhaps,  by  this  time  attained  his  majority.  But  it  is  a  singular  thing  that,  with  such 
a  wave  of  reforming  zeal  as  passed  over  the  nation  at  the  time  of  his  accession,  the 
people  themselves  should  have  been  content  to  let  the  temple  lie  out  of  repair  so  long. 
Care  for  God's  house  is  one  of  the  ways  of  showing  honour  to  Gted  himself.  Yet  how 
slow  men  are  to  move,  or  make  sacrifices,  that  God's  worship  may  be  suitably  provided 
for  I    They  are  content  to  dwell  in  ceiled  houses,  while  God's  house  lies  waste  (Hag.  1. 4). 

II.  The  bepaib  of  the  teuple  fbotided  fob.  1.  By  sacred  dues.  In  oriSiining 
that  the  temple  should  be  repaired,  Joash  showed  also  how  the  funds  for  the  work  were 
to  be  obtained.  The  Chronicler  gives  prominence  to  the  half-shekel  tax,  which  in  the 
days  of  Moses  was  levied  for  the  benefit  of  the  sanctuary  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  6,  9),  and 
there  were  the  other  moneys  to  be  paid  on  occasion  of  the  fulfilment  of  vows  (Ley.  sxvii, 
2 — 8).  It  is  well  when  religion  is  not  left  to  be  supported  by  haphazard  contributions, 
but  when  there  is  some  definite  principle  of  giving — some  portion  of  income  which  is 
regularly  set  apart  for  the  Lord's  use.  This  creates  a  fund  which  can  be  readily  drawn 
upon  when  any  good  work  requires  aid.  2.  By  free-will  offerings.  The  stated  dues 
were  not  to  be  the  only  source  of  revenue.  There  is  named  also  "  all  the  money  that 
cometh  into  any  man's  heart  to  bring  into  the  house  of  the  Lord."  It  is  expected  that 
religion  will  touch  the  heart  of  a  man,  and  make  him  willing  to  part  with  a  portion  of 
his  substance  for  the  service  of  God.  If  it  does  not,  it  is  not  of  much  value.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  the  heart  which  is  the  source  of  true  religious  giving.  The  gifts 
which  come  from  the  hand,  not  from  the  heart,  do  not  count  for  much  in  Heaven's 
Teckoning.    "  Gk)d  loveth  a  cheerful  giver  "  (2  Cor.  ix.  7). 

III.  The  bepaib  of  the  temple  btill  mrEXEOirrED.  Year*  passed  on.  Joash  had 
now  been  twenty-three  years  upon  the  throne,  yet  the  repairs  of  the  temple  had  not  so 
much  as  begun.    It  seems  unaccountable  that  in  lo  holjr  a  work  iiidi  apathy  should 

KKmcw.  t 


268  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGa       [ch.  xn.  1—21 

have  prevailed.  The  fact  may  be  attributed:  1.  To  the  inertia  of  the  priesthood. 
Everything  seems  at  first  to  have  been  left  to  the  priests  and  Leviteg.  They  were  to 
go  through  the  land,  make  proclamation  of  the  king's  purpose,  and  collect  the  money 
for  the  work.  In  this  duty  they  appear  to  have  been  slack.  "The  Levites,"  the 
Chronicler  says,  "  hastened  it  not "  (2  Gbron.  xxiv.  6).  Large  bodies  of  men  are  slow 
to  move.  Some  of  the  priests  and  Levites  were  probably  men  of  no  great  religious 
enthusiasm.  One  can  sympathize  with  them  in  their  shrinking  fiom  the  task  of 
collecting  money.  There  are  few  tasks  more  thankless.  2.  To  the  distrust  of  the 
people.  The  people  appear  not  to  have  had  the  requisite  confidence  in  the  priests  to 
entrust  them  with  large  sums  of  money.  At  least  the  money  seems  to  have  come  in 
more  freely  after  Jehoiada  made  his  chest  with  the  hole  in  the  Ud  of  it,  than  it  did 
before.  The  distrust  of  the  people  was  natural,  for  the  priests  were  in  no  hurry  to  lay 
out  the  revenues  they  collected.  3.  To  the  self-interest  of  a  privileged  class.  The 
priestly  dues  would  sufier  serious  diminution  during  the  reign  of  such  a  queen  as 
Athaliah.  Irregularities  would  creep  in,  and  the  priests  and  Levites,  deprived  of 
their  proper  income,  would  feel  justified  in  appropriating  primarily  to  their  own  support 
whatever  moneys  came  to  hand.  Joash's  decree  had  the  effect  of  cutting  off  these 
perquisites,  and  of  restoring  them  to  their  original  use  in  keeping  up  the  sanctuary. 
It  could  not  be  expected  that  the  classes  who  were  to  suffer  would  be  very  eager  in 
carrying  out  this  decree.  It  is  never  safe  to  trust  a  privileged  class  to  carry  out  measures 
which  tell  against  its  own  interests.  Average  human  nature  is  not  so  disinterested  as 
to  act  enthusiastically  for  the  promotion  of  reforms  which  injure  itself. — J.  0. 

Vers.  7 — 16. — The  temple  repairs — o  good  purpose  aceomplished.  When  so  many 
years  had  elapsed  without  anything  being  done,  Joash  called  the  priests  to  account, 
and  ordered  them  to  take  no  more  of  the  money  of  the  people  for  themselves,  but  to 
repair  the  breaches  of  the  house.  A  new  start  was  made,  and  this  time  success  was 
attained.    We  may  ascribe  the  success  to— 

I.  Pbudent  abbakoements.  Wise,  business-like  arrangements  have  much  to  do 
with  the  success  of  any  undertaking.  Those  now  entered  into  were  under  the  superin- 
tendence of  Jehoiada,  and  afforded :  1.  Security  against  misappropriation.  Jehuiada 
obtained  a  chest,  and  bored  a  hole  in  the  lid  of  it.  It  was  placed  beside  the  altar,  on 
the  right  side,  and  all  the  money  that  was  brought  was  put  therein.  There  could  thus 
he  no  suspicion  of  any  mal-appropriation  of  the  funds.  Every  worshipper  had  the 
certainty  that  what  he  gave  would  go  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  given.  2.  A 
removal  of  temptation.  The  arrangement  of  the  chest  was  an  advantage  to  the  priests 
as  well  as  to  the  people.  It  no  longer  afforded  any  temptation  to  needy  individuals 
among  them  to  retain  funds  that  were  passing  through  their  hands.  It  put  the  order, 
as  a  whole,  above  suspicion  and  reproach.  It  is  well  not  to  put  needless  temptations 
in  any  one's  way.  3.  A  convenience  for  giving.  The  chest,  as  it  stood  there  beside 
the  altar,  was  a  permanent  depository  to  which  the  contributions  of  the  faithful  could 
be  brought.  The  people  had  not  to  seek  out  persons  to  receive  their  gifts.  They 
knew,  without  asking,  where  to  take  them.  Sound  arrangements  of  this  sort,  inspiring 
confidence,  minimizing  temptations  to  negligence  or  dishonesty,  and  consulting  the 
convenience  of  the  offerers,  were  admirably  adapted  to  promote  the  ends  aim^  at. 
llie  example  may  be  attended  to  with  profit  in  the  financial  management  of  churches, 
charities,  missionary  societies,  etc. 

IL  WiLLiHO  oivEBB.  The  fact  that  the  work  was  taken  partially  out  of  the  hands 
of  the  priests,  and  that  the  people  had  now  security  for  their  gifts  being  properly  applied, 
had  an  immediate  effect  on  the  flow  of  contributions.  We  find :  1.  Liberal  gifts 
brought.  It  was  not  long,  as  we  are  told,  before  there  was  "much  money"  in  the  chest. 
People  ace  aeMom  as  willing  to  give  for  religion  as  they  should  be,  but  if  a  good  cause 
is  put  before  them,  if  they  have  the  case  properly  presented,  and  if  they  feel  secure  as 
to  the  disposal  of  their  gifts,  it  is  wonderful  often  how  freely  liberality  flows  forth.  We 
must  not  blame  people  for  illiberality  when  their  backwardness  in  giving  arises  (torn 
removable,  and  perhaps  justifiable,  causes.  2.  A  strict  account  kept.  This  is  another 
feature  in  the  business-like  manflgement  of  the  funds  which  was  now  introduced, 
showing  what  great  pains  were  taken  to  impress  the  minds  of  the  people  with  confidence 
in  the  disposal  of  diehr  money.     When  the  chest  was  full,  the  king's  scribe  and  the 


3H.  xal— 21.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOa  259 

Ugh  priest  came  up,  opened  the  box,  put  the  money  in  bags,  and  made  a  etrict  account 
of  the  sums.  Strictness  in  pecuniary  details  may  seem  a  minor  matter,  but  it  is  really 
not  BO.  The  man  \vho  is  nooest  in  his  pecuniary  affairs  is  likely  to  be  honest  all 
through.  Nothing  shakes  confidence  so  much  as  the  suspicion  of  small  unfaithfulnesses 
in  money  transactions.  Instinctively  we  apply  the  principle,  "  He  that  is  faithful  in 
that  which  is  least  is  faithful  also  in  much :  and  he  that  is  unjast  in  the  least  is  unjust 
also  in  much.  If  therefore  ye  have  not  been  faithful  in  the  unrighteous  mammon,  who 
will  commit  to  your  trust  the  true  riches  ?  "  (Luke  xvi.  10, 11). 

UI.  Diligent  workbrb.  The  money  contributed  by  tlie  people  was  applied  to  hire 
the  services  of  workers  to  execute  the  needed  repairs.  1.  2%e  worJcera  were  mcmy. 
There  were  carpenters  and  builders,  stonemasons  and  hewers,  and  part  of  the  money 
was  expended  also  on  the  purchase  of  materials.  As  in  this  temple-building  so  in  the 
Christian  Church,  there  is  need  not  only  for  givers  but  for  workers,  and  every  variety 
of  gift  proves  to  be  of  service.  Some  can  give  who  cannot  work ;  others  can  work  who 
cannot  give ;  others  can  both  give  and  work.  There  are  needed  those  with  mission 
talent— the  quarrymen  and  excavators ;  there  are  needed  those  who  can  educate, 
or  hew  and  polish  the  stones  when  obtained ;  there  are  needed  the  organizers  and 
builders — ^those  whose  function  it  is  to  put  the  stones  in  their  places,  and  build  up  the 
holy  temple  to  the  Lord.  2.  The  workers  were  diligent.  They  were  set  on  as  soon  as 
funds  were  forthcoming  to  employ  them,  and  they  wrought  with  good  heart  till  the 
work  was  finished.  Labour  in  the  kingdom  of  God  should  be  diligent.  The  many 
workers  did  not  work  separately,  but  together,  all  of  them  helping  one  another ;  and 
similar  combination  and  co-operation  are  necessary  to  overtake  the  work  of  Christ. 

IV.  Faithfui.  overseers.  Another  step  in  the  right  direction,  following  up  the 
previous  precautions  to  inspire  confidence,  was  the  appointment  of  men  to  superintend 
the  work  who  could  be  implicitly  trusted.  It  is  a  noble  testimony  borne  concerning 
these  men  who  did  the  part  of  overseers  in  the  work  of  the  temple,  that  they  did  not 
need  to  be  reckoned  with,  "  for  they  dealt  faithfully."  1.  They  were  faithful  in  their 
oversight.  They  were  men  of  probity  and  honour,  who  conscientiously  looked  after 
the  men  set  under  them,  seeing  that  the  work  committed  to  their  care  was  properly 
done.  It  is  difficult  to  estimate  the  value,  even  in  an  economical  respect,  of  the 
higher  moral  qualities  of  character.  How  much  loss,  suffering,  disease,  death,  not  to 
speak  of  minor  annoyance,  is  inflicted  on  mankind  through  badly  inspected,  ill-done 
work  ?  There  is  a  sphere  for  faithfulness  in  the  discharge  of  every  kind  of  duty. 
Carlyle  says  of  Louis  XV.,  "  His  wide  France,  look  at  it  from  the  fixed  stars  (them- 
selves not  yet  infinitude),  is  no  wider  than  thy  narrow  brickfield,  where  thou,  too, 
didst  faithfully,  or  didst  unfaithfully.  ...  It  is  not  thy  works,  which  are  all  mortal, 
infinitely  little,  and  the  greatest  no  greater  than  the  least,  but  only  the  spirit  thou 
workest  in  that  can  have  worth  or  continuance."  2.  ITiey  were  faithful  in  their 
money  dealings.  So  perfectly  faithful  that  it  was  not  felt  necessary  to  keep  a  strict 
reckoning  with  them  as  to  their  expenditure  upon  the  workmen.  No  better  tribute 
could  be  paid  to  their  incorruptible  integrity  than  the  trust  thus  reposed  in  them.  It 
wa«  only  a  very  high  degree  of  integrity  which  would  warrant  it.  As  a  rule,  it  is  wise 
to  keep  account  even  with  those  whose  integrity  we  do  not  dispute. 

v.  Respect  for  rights.  It  is  added  that  the  revenues  which  properly  belonged  to 
the  priests,  the  trespass  money  and  sin  money,  were  not  touched  for  the  purpose  of 
the  repairs.  Neither  was  the  money  given  for  the  restoration  of  the  building  applied, 
until  the  repairs  were  completed,  to  purchase  new  vessels  for  the  sanctuary — ^bowls  of 
silver,  snuffers,  trumpets,  etc.  Probably  in  connection  with  the  above  arrangements 
for  collecting  the  people's  money  other  steps  were  taken  to  put  the  priests'  legitimate 
income,  the  tithe  dues,  etc.,  on  a  more  satisfactory  footing.  A  regard  for  justice  is  thus 
observable  throughout  the  whole  of  these  dealings.  Bight  is  the  proper  basis  to  take 
one's  stand  on  in  works  of  reformation.— J.  0. 

Vers.  17 — 21. — Lairh  days  for  Judah.  The  reign  of  Joash  began  with  bright  pro- 
mise, but  ended  in  gloom  and  tribulation.  It  furnishes  another  instance  of  the  evil 
consequences  of  forsaking  Ood. 

L  Joabh'b  afostast.  Of  this  a  fuller  account  is  given  in  the  Book  of  Chronicles 
thkn  here,  though  the  statement  in  rer.  2,  "Joash  did  right  all  his  days  whereip 


260  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  xn.  1—21, 

Jehoiada  the  priest  instraoted  Um,"  already  Itintg  at  a  ftUing  away  after  Jeholada'i 
death.  From  Chronicles  we  learn  the  nature  of  his  apostasy.  1.  He  yielded  to  had 
counsel.  His  good  adviser  having  died  at  the  extreme  age  of  a  hundred  and  thirty, 
he  listened  to  the  flatteries  and  s^uctions  of  the  princes  of  Judah,  whose  hent  was  all 
towards  evil  (2  Chron.  xxIt.  17).  2.  He  revived  idolatry.  If  he  did  not  actually 
participate  in  the  renewed  setting  up  of  idols,  he  permitted  it.  Baal-worship,  from 
which  in  infancy  he  had  suffered  so  much,  again  lifted  np  its  head  in  Jerusalem.  For 
this  trespass  it  is  said,  "  wrath  came  upon  Judab  and  Jerusalem  "  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  18). 
3.  He  shed  innocent  Wood.  This  declension  of  Joash  was  not  allowed  to  go  unrehuked. 
God  sent  prophets  to  him  to  testify  to  him  and  warn  him,  especially  Zechariah,  the  son, 
or  perhaps  grandson,  of  the  priest  Jehoiada.  But  so  far  had  the  infatuation  of  Joash  gone 
that  he  actually  permitted  this  son  of  his  former  friend  and  benefactor  to  be  stoned 
with  stones  between  the  temple  and  the  altar  in  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house  (2  Chron. 
xxiv.  20—22 ;  cf.  Matt,  xxiii.  35).  This  ineffaceable  crime  completed  his  ruin.  As 
Zechariah  died  he  had  said, "  The  liord  look  upon  it,  and  require  it "  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  22) ; 
and  God  did  require  it.  The  Jews  had  a  tradition  that,  at  the  capture  of  Jerusalem, 
this  blood  of  Zechariah  bubbled  up  from  the  floor  of  the  temple  court,  and  could  not  be 
pacified.  Nebuzaradan  brought  rabbis,  and  slew  them  on  it,  still  it  was  not  quiet ;  he 
brought  children,  and  slew  them  on  it,  still  it  was  not  qniet ;  he  slew  ninety-four  thousand 
on  it,  yet  it  was  not  quiet.    The  fable  illustrates  at  least  the  hoinousness  of  the  deed. 

II.  Hazael'b  INTA8I0N.  The  instrument  employed  to  chastise  Joash  and  the  people 
for  their  sins  was  the  redoubtable  Hazael.  He  Inraded  the  land  by  the  way  of  Fhilistia, 
and  reduced  it  to  great  distress.  We  note  regarding  the  invasion :  1.  lie  renstlese 
character.  It  was  but  a  very  small  company  of  men  that  came  with  Hazael,  hut  they 
seem  to  have  swept  the  "  very  great  host "  of  Judah  before  them  with  ease,  destroying 
the  princes  of  the  people,  who  had  been  ringleaders  in  wickedness,  and  sending  the 
spoil  on  to  Damascus  (cf.  2  Chron.  xxiv.  24).  It  is  a  fatal  thing  to  break  faith  with 
God,  to  apostatize  from  solemn  covenants  with  him,  to  provoke  him  to  anger  by  open 
wickedness  and  deeds  of  blood.  The  strength  of  a  nation  stands  not  in  its  mighty  men, 
but  in  the  favour  of  God,  and  where  that  is  withdrawn,  a  handful  of  armed  men  will 
chase  a  thousand  (cf.  Deut.  iv.  25—27 ;  xxviiL  27 — 48).  2.  The  ignonwaious  tribute. 
What,  in  so  deplorable  a  case,  could  Joash  do?  His  princes,  so  bold  in  counselling  him 
in  courses  of  sin,  were  cowards  in  the  field ;  and  Hazael  seemed  bent  on  utterly  over» 
throwing  him.  He  had  no  alternative  but  to  make  the  best  terms  he  could,  and  buy 
the  invader  off.  To  furnish  the  requisite  tribute  he  had  to  strip  both  the  temple  aad 
his  own  house  of  aU  their  goodly  treasures.  He  took  the  hallowed  things  of  his  fore- 
fathers out  of  the  temple,  and  the  gold  that  was  found  in  its  treasuries;  he  took  also 
his  own  gold,  and  sent  everything  to  HazaeL  He,  the  restorer  of  the  temple,  is  forced 
to  become  the  spoiler  of  the  temple.  To  such  depths  of  ignominy  and  misery  are  men 
led  by  forsaking  the  ways  of  Qwi.  Yet  nothing  seems  to  avail  sinners  for  warning  1 
They  go  on  as  madly  in  ways  of  wickedness  as  if  no  one  had  ever  tried  these  paths 
before  them,  and  found  them  the  ways  of  death. 

III.  The  fatal  conspiracy.  We  have,  finally,  the  account  of  how  Joash  met  hi» 
end  by  a  conspiracy  of  two  of  his  servants.  1.  The  origin  of  the  conspiracy.  We  can- 
not err  in  supposing  that  it  had  its  origin  in  the  seething  discontent  of  the  people. 
They  saw  the  kingdom  going  to  pieces  in  the  hands  of  an  unfaithful  king ;  they  saw 
righteous  blood  shed ;  they  had  suffered  severely  from  the  barbarities  of  invasion. 
The  conspirators  do  not  seem  to  have  plotted  any  dynastic  change.  Theur  act  only 
expressed  the  bitter  hatred  with  which  the  person  of  the  king  had  come  to  be  regarded. 
How  different  from  the  day  when  the  multitude  shouted,  "  Gbd  save  the  king ! "  And 
that  change  had  come  about  solely  through  Joash's  departure  from  the  right  ways  of 
God.  2.  Its  fatal  result.  The  servants,  whose  names  are  given  in  the  text,  smote  him 
fai  "  the  liouse  of  Mlllo  "  so  that  he  died.  Thus  Joash  fell  by  the  stroke  of  an  assassin, 
impitied,  unlamented  by  his  people.  When  the  bonds  of  godliness  are  loosed,  the 
bonds  of  fidelity  between  man  and  man  are  loosed  too  (Hos.  ir.  1,  2).  8.  The  dis- 
hoiMwr  to  his  body.  The  crowning  ignominy  put  upon  Joash  was  the  refusal  of  the 
people  to  allow  him  to  be  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  the  kings,  as  Jehoiada  had  been 
n  chron.  xxiv.  25).  This  confirms  what  is  said  above  of  the  odium  in  which  he  was 
held  by  his  people.— J.  0. 


OH.  xm.  1—26.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KlKGa 


261 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBB  Xni 


Vers.  1 — 25. — Beiqmb  of  Jehoahaz,  son 
OF  Jehu,  and  Joash,  bom  of  Jehoahaz, 
ovEB  Ibbael.  Notices  of  Eusha.  Wab 
Of  Israel  with  Stria. 

Vers.  1—9. — The  Beigit  of  Jehoahaz. 
The  writer  retams  in  this  chapter  to  the 
history  of  the  Israelite  kingdom,  taking  it 
up  from  the  death  of  Jehu,  which  was  re- 
corded in  the  closing  verses  of  ch.  x.  He 
sketches  briefly  the  reign  of  Jehu's  son  and 
snccessor,  Jehoahaz,  in  the  present  section, 
after  which  he  passes  to  tliat  of  Jehu's 
grandson,  Jehoash  or  Joash.  The  Syrian 
oppression  was  the  great  event  of  Jehoahaz's 
reign. 

Ver.  1. — In  the  three  and  twentieth  year 
of  Joash;  rather,  as  in  Josephus  ('Ant.  Jud.,' 
ix.  8.  §  5),  in  the  one  and  twentieth  year. 
This  is  a  correction  required  by  ver.  10  and 
also  by  ch.  xii.  1.  The  proof  is  given  at 
somewhat  tedious  length  by  Keil  ('  Biblical 
Commentary,'  pp.  373,  374)  and  Balir 
('Books  of  the  Kings,'  pp.  139,  140).  It 
seems  unnecessary  to  enter  into  a  lengthy 
discussion  of  the  point,  since  all  the  syn- 
chronisms of  the  later  kings  of  Israel  and 
Judah  are  in  confusion,  and  appear  to  be 
the  work  of  a  later  hand.  The  son  of 
Ahaziah  (comp.  ch.  xi.  2 ;  2  Chron.  xxii. 
11)  King  of  Judah,  Jehoahaz  the  son  of 
Jehu  began  to  reign  over  Israel;  literally, 
reigned  over  Israel.  The  "later  hand," 
which  inserted  the  synchronism,  neglected 
to  bring  the  two  portions  of  the  verse  into 
agreement.  Our  translators  have  sought 
to  cover  np  his  omission  by  translating 
mdlak  "  began  to  reign,"  and  then  supply- 
ing "and  reigned"  in  the  next  clause. 
And  reigned  seventeen  years  (so  also  Jose- 
phus, 1. 1.  0.). 

Ver.  2. — And  he  did  that  which  was  evil 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  There  is  no  reason 
to  believe  that  Jehoahaz  re-introduced  the 
Baal- worship,  or  sinned  in  any  other  flagrant 
way  than  by  maintaining  the  calf-worship 
at  Dan  and  Bethel.  Jehu  had  done  the 
same  (ch.  x.  29),  as  had  all  previous  kings 
of  Israel  from  the  time  of  Jeroboam.  The 
honour  of  God,  however,  required  that 
idolatry  of  whatever  kind  should  be  punished, 
and  the  Samaritan  kingdom  oould  not  other- 
wise be  saved  from  destruction  than  by 
"  casting  away  all  the  works  of  darkness  " 
and  returning  to  the  pure  worship  of 
Jehovah.     Hence  John  himself,  notiwith- 


•tanding  the  good  lervioe  that  he  had  done 
in  crusUng  the  Baal- worship,  was  chastised 
by  God  (ch.  x.  82,  33)  on  aooount  of  his 
continuance  in  the  "  sin  of  Jeroboam ; " 
and  now  Jehoahaz  was  even  more  signally 
punished.  As  Eeil  remarks,  "  The  longer 
and  the  more  obstinately  the  sin  was  con- 
tinued, the  more  severe  did  the  punishment 
become."  And  followed  the  sins  of  Jeroboam 
the  son  of  Nebat  (comp.  ch.  x.  29,  where 
the  exegetical  clause  is  added,  "To  wit, 
the  golden  calves  that  were  in  Bethel  and 
in  Dan")  whioh  made  Israel  to  sin 
(comp.  1  Kings  xv.  26;  xvi.  19,  26;  xxii. 
52,  etc.) ;  he  departed  not  therefrom.  This 
is  emphatic.  Jehoahaz  kept  up  the  worship 
to  the  full,  and  in  no  way  suflered  it  to 
decline. 

Ver.  3. — ^And  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was 
kindled  against  Israel.  We  know  so  much 
less  of  the  nature  of  the  calf-worship  and 
of  the  rites  which  accompanied  it,  that  we 
cannot  to  the  same  extent  justify  the  Divine 
severity  in  connection  with  it  as  in  connec- 
tion with  the  Baal  and  Astarte  cult.  Still, 
we  must  remember  the  coarse,  lewd  dancing 
which  accompanied  the  first  calf-worship 
(Exod.  xxxii.  19),  for  which  death  was  not 
thought  too  heavy  a  penalty  (Exod.  xxxii. 
27),  and  the  almost  universal  combination 
of  UDchaatity  with  idolatrous  ceremonies, 
which  raises  a  suspicion  that  those  who 
frequented  the  shrines  at  Dan  and  Bethel 
were  not  wholly  innocent  of  impurity.  And 
he  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  Hazael 
King  of  Syria.  The  national  sins  of  Israel 
were  mostly  punished  in  this  way,  by  the 
sword  of  some  foreign  foe.  Hazael  had 
been  already  made  an  instrument  for  the 
chastisement  of  Jehu  (oh.  x.  32,  33).  Now 
he  was  to  chastise  Jehoaliaz  stiU  more 
severely.  And  into  the  hand  of  Benhadad 
the  son  of  Hazael,  aU  their  days ;  literally, 
all  the  days.  Not  certainly  all  the  days  of 
the  two  Mngs  Hazael  and  Benhadad,  for 
Benhadad  was  entirely  worsted  in  his 
war  with  Joash  (vers.  24,  25),  but  either  all 
the  days  of  Jehoahaz,  or  all  the  days  that 
God  had  appointed  for  the  duration  of  the 
calamity.  It  is  perhaps  against  the  former 
interpretation  that  Hazael  appears  to  have 
outlived  Jehoahaz  (vers.  22—24) ;  but  Ben- 
hadad may  have  warred  against  him  as  his 
father's  general  (ver.  25)  during  his  father's 
lifetime. 

Ver.  4. — And  Jehoahaz  besought  the  Lord; 
literally,  iesmtght  the  face  of  the  Lord  (comp. 
1  Kings  xiii.  6,  and  the  comment  ad  loo.), 
Jehoahaz,  as  Josephus  says,  "  betook  him- 
self to  prayer  and  supplication  of  God, 
entreating  that  he  would  deliver  him  out 


£62 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.      [oh.  xm.  i— t& 


of  the  hands  of  Hazael,  and  not  suffer  him 
to  oontiaue  subject"  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  8.  §  6). 
He  did  not  turn  jrom  his  sin  of  idolatry, 
perhaps  did  not  suspect  that  it  was  this  sin 
which  1 1  ad  provoked  God's  anger;  but  in 
a  general  way  he  repented,  humbled  him- 
self, and  besought  God's  mercy  and  assist- 
ance. And  the  Lord  hearkened  unto  h'm 
God  accepted  his  repentance,  all  imperfect 
as  it  was,  so  far  as  to  saye  the  people  from 
the  entire  destruction  with  which  it  was 
threatened  by  the  severe  meaBuree  of  Hazael 
(ver.  7),  to  continue  the  national  existonce 
(ver.  23),  and  ultimately  to  restore  the 
national  prosperity  (ver.  25  and  ch.  xiv. 
25 — 27).  But  he  did  not  remove  the  oppres- 
sion, S8  Josephus  imagines,  in  Jehoahaz's 
time.  Ver.  22  makes  this  fact  absolutely 
certain.  For  he  saw  the  oppression  of  Israel, 
because  the  King  of  Syria  oppressed  them. 
Oppression  is  always  hateful  to  God,  even 
when  he  is  using  it  as  his  instrument  for 
chastising  or  punishing  a  guilty  people. 
He  "sees"  it,  notes  it,  lays  it  up  in  his 
remembrance  for  future  retribution  (comp. 
Bxod.  iii.  7;  Isa.  x.  5—12,  etc.).  (On 
the  nature  and  extent  of  the  oppression  of 
this  period,  see  ver.  7,  and  the  comment 
ad  !oc.) 

Yer.  5. — And  the  Lord  gave  Israel  a 
saviour,  so  that  they  went  out  from  under 
the  hand  of  the  Syrians.  A  "saviour" 
means  a  deliverer  from  the  hand  of  the 
Syrians  (comp.  Judg.  iii.  9,  15;  Neh.  ix. 
27,  where  in  the  Hebrew  the  word  used  is 
the  same).  The  special  "deliverer"  was 
probably  in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  Jero- 
boam II.,  by  whom  he  says,  in  eh.  xiv.  27, 
that  God  "saved"  Israel;  but  Joash,  who 
began  the  deliveiance  (ver.  25),  may  also 
be  glanced  at.  And  the  children  of  Israel 
dwelt  in  their  tents.  Here,  as  so  often 
elsewhere  (1  Kings  viii.  66;  xii.  16;  ch, 
xiv.  12;  Zech.  xiL  7),  the  word  "tenti"  is 
a  mere  archaism  for  "abodes,  honses." 
Israel  had  dwelt  in  tents  until  the  going 
down  into  Egypt,  and  again  from  the  time 
of  quitting  Egypt  to  the  entrance  into 
Canaan;  and  thus  the  word  ohel  had  ao> 
quired  a  secondary  meaning  of  "abode," 
"dwelling-place."  In  the  time  which 
followed  on  the  deliverance  from  the  Syrian 
yoke,  the  Israelites  of  the  ten  tribes  were 
no  longer  engaged  in  marches  and  counter- 
marches, in  battles,  Fkirmishes,  or  sieges, 
but  quietly  abode  in  their  several  houses. 
As  beforetime ;  t.«.  as  in  the  peaceful  time 
before  the  attacks  of  Hazael  began. 

Ver.  6. — Nevertheless  they  departed  not 
from  the  sins  of  the  house  of  Jeroboam,  who 
made  Israel  sin.  "  The  house  of  Jeroboam  " 
ii  an  unusual  expression  in  this  connection, 
and  is  scarcely  appropriate,  since  every 
*'  buuiie  "  luid  acted  in  the  same  way.    Some 


mannBcripts  omit  the  word,  and  it  ii  want- 
ing in  the  Chaldee,  Syriac,  and  Arabic 
versions.  Thenius  would  cancel  it.  But 
walked  therein;  literally,  he  walked.  But 
here  again  a  corruption  may  be  suspected. 
Instead  of  -ifrn  we  should  read  vhn,  which 
lost  its  final  letter  in  consequence  of  the 
vau  that  immediately  followed  it.  ijid 
there  remained  the  grove  also  in  Samaria. 
"  The  grove  in  Samaria"  was  that  idolatroua 
emblem  which  Ahab  had  set  up  at  Jezebel's 
Bug:ge8tion  (1  Kings  xvL  33),  the  nature  of 
which  has  been  much  disputed.  Some 
think  that  it  was  "an  image  of  Astarte" 
(see  '  Homiletio  Commentary '  on  1  Kings, 
p.  374) ;  but  more  probably  it  was  a  mere 
emblem,  analogous  to  the  Assyrian  "  aaored 
tree."  Its  material  may  sometimee  have 
been  wood,  but  was  perhaps  more  nsnally 
metal.  The  mistranslation  "  grove  "  origin- 
ated with  the  Septuagint  translators,  who 
uniformly  rendered  np.^K  by  i\ros.  It  i* 
surprising  that  Jehu  did  not  destroy  the 
oiherah  together  with  the  other  idolatrous 
erections  of  Ahab  in  Samaria  (ch.  x.  26 — 
28) ;  but,  for  some  reason  or  other,  it  seems 
to  have  been  spared,  and  to  have  been  still 
standing.  So  long  as  it  stood,  even  if  it  did 
not  attract  the  reUgious  regards  of  any,  it 
would  be  a  standing  dishonour  to  God,  and 
would  so  increase  the  sin  of  the  nation. 
Hence  its  mention  in  this  passage. 

Ver.  7. — Neither  did  he  leave  of  the  people 
to  Jehoahaz  but  fifty  horsemen,  and  ten 
chariots,  and  ten  thousand  footmen.  This 
verse  seems  to  be  an  exegetical  note  on 
ver.  4,  which  perhaps  it  once  followed 
immediately,  the  parenthetic  section  (vers.  5 
and  6)  having  been  added  later,  as  an  after- 
thought, either  by  the  original  writer,  or 
perhaps  by  a  later  hand.  The  meaning 
seems  to  be  that  Hazael  limited  the  stand- 
ing army  of  Jehoahaz  to  fifty  horsemen,  ten 
chariots,  and  ten  thousand  footmen,  not  that 
he  slew  the  entire  military  popnlation  except, 
this  small  remnant.  The  poUoy  of  limiting 
the  forces  to  be  maintained  by  a  subject- 
king  was  one  known  to  the  Bomans,  and 
has  often  been  adopted  in  the  East.  It  is 
still  a  part  of  our  own  policy  in  the  govern- 
ment of  India.  The  limitation  left  the 
country  at  the  meioy  of  all  its  neighbours 
(see  ver.  20).  Tor  the  King  of  Syria  had 
destroyed  them,  and  had  made  them  like  the 
dust  by  threshmg.  Possibly  this  means  no 
more  than  an  utter  destruction — a  trampling 
in  the  dust,  as  we  phrase  it  (see  Jer.  li.  33 ; 
Micah  ir.  12, 18 ;  and  perhaps  Isa.  xxi.  10). 
But  it  may  be  an  allusion  to  that  destruction 
of  prisonprs  by  means  of  a  threshing  instru- 
ment, which  was  certainly  sometimes  prao- 
tised  (2  Sam.  xii.  31 ;  Prov.  xx.  26),  and 
which  is   made  a  special  charge  against 


OH.  xiii.  1—25.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK.  OP  THE  KINOa 


868 


DsmaBCus    (Amoi    L    S.       Bee    Pniey'i 

'  Minor  Prophets,'  p.  158). 

Ver.  8. — Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Jeboahai,  and  all  that  he  did,  and  his 
might;  rather,  hi»  prowess,  or  his  valow. 
Though  defeated  and  reduced  to  subjection 
by  the  Syrians,  yet  Jehoahaz  had  dis- 
tinguished himself,  and  shown  lii«  own 
pergonal  courage,  in  the  course  of  the  war. 
Are  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 
chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Israel?  (comp. 
ch.  1.  18).  The  regular  use  of  the  plirase 
is  one  of  the  indications  that  the  two  Books 
of  the  Kings  are  by  one  author,  and  form 
one  book. 

Ver.  9.— And  Jehoahai  slept  with,  his 
fathers;  and  they  buried  him  in  Samaria 
(comp.  1  Kings  xvi.  28;  ch.  x.  33;  xiii 
13,  etc.).  The  kings  of  Israel  from  the 
time  of  Omri  were  buried  in  the  capital, 
Samaria,  as  those  of  Judah  were  in  Jeru- 
salem, It  is  uncertain  whether  they  had 
one  common  mausoleum,  like  the  kings  of 
Judah  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  27),  but  it  is  most 
probable  that  they  had.  To  rest  with  their 
fathers  in  the  same  royal  sepulchre  was 
to  be  duly  honoured  at  their  death ;  to  be 
excluded  from  it  was  a  disgrace.  And  Joash 
his  son  reigned  in  his  stead. 

Vers.  10— 25.— The  Bgtqk  < »  Joash. 
The  writer  passes  from  the  reign  of  Jeho- 
ahaz,  Jehu's  son,  to  that  of  Joash,  Jehu's 
grandson,  which  he  seems  to  have  inteaded 
at  first  to  despatch  in  the  short  space  of 
four  verses  (vers.  10 — 13).  He  afterwards, 
however,  saw  reason  to  add  to  his  narrative, 
first,  an  account  of  an  interview  between 
Joash  and  Elisha,  shortly  before  the  death 
of  the  latter  (vers.  14 — 19);  secondly,  an 
accouut  of  a  miracle  wrought  soon  after- 
wards by  means  of  Elisha's  corpse  (vers. 
20,  21);  and  thirdly,  a  brief  notice  of 
Joash's  Syrian  war  (vers.  22— 25X 

Ver.  10. — In  the  thirty  and  seventh  year 
cf  Joash  King  of  Judah.  Three  years  before 
his  death,  since  he  reigned  forty  years 
(oh.  xii.  1).  The  two  Jonshes  were  thus 
contemporary  monarchs  for  the  space  of 
three  years.  Began  Jehoash  the  son  of 
Jehoahaz  to  reign  over  Israel  in  Samaria, 
and  reigned  sixteen  years.  The  construc- 
tion is  the  same  as  that  of  ver.  1,  and  is 
equally  ungrainmatical.  Our  translators 
again  amend  the  faulty  phrase  by  introduc- 
ing the  words  "and  reigned."  The  "six- 
teen years"  of  the  reign  of  Joash  are 
confirmed  by  Josephus  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  8. 
§  6),  but  still  present  some  difficulty  (see 
the  comment  on  oh.  xiv.  23). 

Ver.  11.— And  he  did  that  which  was  evil 


in  the  sight  of  the  Lord ;  he  departed  not 
from  all  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of 
Nebat,  who  made  Israel  sin;  but  he  walked 
therein.     Josephus  says  that  Joash  was  a 

food  king,  and  quite  unlike  his  father  in 
isposition  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  I.  i.e.);  but  he  is 
not  likely  to  have  had  any  independent  data 
for  judging  of  his  character.  Our  author 
seems  to  include  both  son  and  father  in  the 
same  category  (comp.  ver.  2).  The  narrative 
contained  in  ver.  14  is  probably  the  founda- 
tion of  the  historian's  favourable  judgment. 

Ver.  12. — And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Joash, 
and  all  that  he  did,  and  his  might  wherewith 
he  fought  against,  Amaziah  King  of  Judah 
(see  ch.  xiv.  11 — 14),  are  they  not  written 
in  the  book  of  the  cluronicles  of  the  kings  of 
Israeli  Either  this  and  the  next  verses 
have  been  displaced  from  their  rightful 
position  by  some  accident,  or  the  author 
at  one  time  intended  to  terminate  his 
account  of  Joash  at  this  point.  The  formula 
used  is  one  which  regularly  closes  the  reign 
of  each  king.  The  proper  place  for  it  would 
have  been  after  ver.  25. 

Ver.  13. — And  Joash  slept  with  his  fathers; 
and  Jeroboam  sat  upon  his  throne.  Thut 
Joash  should  call  his  eldest  son  Jerubcam, 
after  the  founder  of  the  kingdom,  indicated 
a  thorough  approval  of  that  founder's  policy 
and  conduct,  and  perhaps  a  hope  that  he 
would  be  to  the  apparently  decaying  king- 
dom a  sort  of  second  founder.  The  name 
means,  "he  whose  people  is  many,"  and 
was  thus  anticipative  of  that  great  enlarge- 
ment of  the  Israelite  kingdom,  which  took 
place  under  him  (see  ch.  xiv.  25 — 28). 
And  Joash  wqs  buried  in  Samaria  with  the 
kings  of  Israel  (see  the  eomment  on 
Ter.  U). 

Ver.  14. — ITow  Dlisha  was  fallen  sick  of 
his  sickness  whereof  he  died,  Elisha,  who 
was  grown  to  manhood  before  the  death  of 
Ahab  (I  Kings  xix.  19),  must  have  been  at 
least  eighty  years  old  at  the  accession  of 
Joash.  His  illness  was  therefore  probably 
the  result  of  mere  natural  decay.  And 
Joash  the  Ebig  of  Israel  came  down  unto 
him.  The  visit  of  a  king  to  a  prophet,  in 
the  way  of  sympathy  and  compliment,  wonld 
be  a  very  unusual  ocouri-ence  at  any  period 
of  the  world's  history.  In  the  East,  and 
at  the  period  of  which  the  historian  is 
treating,  it  was  probably  unprecedented. 
Prophets  waited  upon  kings,  not  kings  upon 
prophets.  If  a  king  came  to  a  prophet's 
house,  it  was  likely  to  be  on  an  errand  of 
vengeance  (ch.  vi.  32),  not  on  one  of  kind- 
ness and  sympathy;  The  act  of  Joash 
certainly  implies  a  degree  of  tendemesi 
and  consideration  on  his  part  very  un- 
common at  the  time,  and  is  a  fact  to  which 
much  weight  should  be  attached  in  any 
estimate  that  we  form  of  his  character.    He 


264 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.      [oh.  xra.  1— 26. 


WM,  at  KDj  (ate,  a  prince  of  an  amiable  dii- 
pontion.  And  wept  over  IiiB  face — <.«.  leant 
OTer  the  rick  man  as  he  lay  on  his  bed,  and 
■hed  tears,  some  of  vhich  fell  on  liim — and 
■aid,  0  my  father,  my  father,  the  ohariot  of 
Israel,  and  the  horsemen  thereof.  A  s  Elisha 
had  addressed  Elijah,  when  he  was  quitting 
the  earth  (ch.  ii.  12),  so  Joash  now  addressed 
the  dying  Elisha,  nsing  exactly  the  same 
words,  not  (certainly)  by  a  mere  coincidence. 
Joash  must  have  known  the  circumstances 
of  Elijah's  departure,  which  had  probably 
been  entered  before  this  in  the  'Book  of 
the  Kings,'  and  intended  pointedly  to 
allude  to  them.  "  O  my  father,  my  father," 
he  meant  to  say,  "  when  Elijah  was  taken 
from  the  earth,  thou  didst  exclaim  that  the 
defence  of  Israel  was  gone  "  (see  the  com- 
ment on  ch.  ii.  12) :  "  how  mnch  more  must 
it  be  true  that  it  is  gone  now,  when  thou 
art  on  the  point  of  departure  1  He  left  thee 
as  his  successor ;  thon  leavest  no  one  1 " 

Ver.  15. — And  Dlisha  said  unto  him,  Take 
bow  and  arrows.  The  prophet  was  moved, 
no  doubt,  by  a  sudden  inspiration.  He 
wag  bidden  to  assure  the  weeping  king  of 
victory — speedy  victory — over  Syria.  The 
defence  of  Israel  would  not  fail  because  he 
— a  mere  weak  instrument  by  whom  God 
had  been  pleased  to  work — was  taken  from 
the  earth.  God  would  bless  the  king's  own 
efforts.  "Take  bow  and  arrows,"  he  ex- 
claims under  the  prophetic  afflatus,  ■*  Take 
tbem  at  once  into  thine  hands,  and  do  my 
bidding."  Words  would  not  have  been 
enough;  greater  assurance  and  conviction 
was  produced  when  prophecy  took  the  shape 
of  a  symbolical  action  (comp.  1  Sam.  xv.  27 ; 
1  Kings  xi.  30 ;  Isa.  xx.  8 ;  Jer.  xiii.  1 — 11 ; 
xviii  3,  4,  etc.).  So  the  Spirit  of  the  Ijord 
moved  the  prophet  to  the  performance  of  a 
symbolical  act,  or  set  of  acts,  which  the 
historian  now  proceeds  to  describe.  And 
he  took  unto  him  bow  and  arrows.  Joash 
would  take  these  from  the  hands  of  his 
attendants,  who  might  be  carrying  his  own 
special  weapons  after  him,  as  was  the  prac- 
tice in  Persia  ('Ancient  Monarchies,  voL 
ir.  p.  161),  or  who  would  at  any  rate  have 
arms  of  their  own,  since  they  would  wait 
upon  him  nut  merely  as  attendants,  but  aa 
guards. 

Ver.  16. — And  he  said  to  the  King  of 
Israel,  Put  thine  hand  upon  the  bow — lite- 
rally, let  thine  hand  ride  upon  the  bow ;  i.e. 
"  Take  it  into  active  use — place  thine  hands 
as  thou  dost  commonly  for  shooting"— and 
he  put  his  hand  npon  it — ^he  did  as  Elisha 
commanded — and  Slisha  pat  his  hands  npon 
the  king*!  hands.  Elisha,  it  would  seem, 
rose  from  his  bed,  and  took  the  attitude  of  an 
archer,  covering  the  king's  two  hands  with 
his  own  hands,  and  making  as  if  he  too 
wag  pulling  tha  bow,  so  that  the  shooting 


shouM  be,  or  at  least  appear  to  be,  the  joint 
act  of  himself  and  the  king.  The  intention 
was,  no  doubt,  as  Keil  says,  "  to  show  that 
the  power  which  was  to  be  given  to  the 
bow-shot"  was  not  the  king's  own  power, 
but  "came  from  the  Lord  through  the 
mediation  of  his  prophet." 

Ver.  17.— And  he  said,  Open  tha  window. 
Though  glass  was  unknown,  or  at  any  rate 
not  applied  to  windows,  yet  the  windows  of 
sitting-rooms,  and  still  more  of  bedrooms, 
had  latticed  shutters,  which  partially  ex- 
cluded the  light  and  the  air,  and  could  be 
opened  and  closed  at  pleasure  (see  the  com* 
ment  on  ch.  L  2).    The  prophet  ordered  the 
shutter  to  be  opened,  that  the  king  might 
shoot  from  the  window.     He  addressed,  not 
the  king,  whose  hands  were  both  engaged, 
but  his  own  servant,  or  one  of  the  royal 
attendants.    Eastward.   Not  so  much  in  the 
direction  of  Syria,  which  was  north-east  of 
the  Israelite  territory,  as  in  the  direction  of 
Gilead  and  Bashan,  which  had  been  the 
scene  of  Hazael's  victories  (ch.  x.  33),  and 
was  now  to  be  the  scene  of  his  reverses. 
Aphek  lay  almost  due   east  of  Shunem, 
where  it  is  probable  that  Elisha  was.    And 
he  opened  it ;  or,  and  one  opened  it,  or  they 
i^ened  it.   The  Hebrew  idiom  allows  of  this 
indefinite  use  of  the  third  person  singular. 
Then  Elisha  said,  Shoot.   And  he  shot.    And 
he — i.e.  Elisha — said,  The  arrow  of  the  Lord's 
deliverance,  and  the  arrow  of  deliverance 
from  Syria;  rather,  on  arrow.    "This  is," 
the  prophet  meant  to  say,  "  an  arrow  sym- 
bolical of  deliverance  about  to  come  from 
Jehovah,  of  deliverance  from  the  cruel  op- 
pression of  the  Syrians" — and  not  merely 
of  deliverance,  but  of  victory.    For  thon 
Shalt  smite  the  Syrians  in  Aphek.     The 
Aphek  intended  is  probably  that  which  lay 
east  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  at  the  distance 
of  about  three  miles,  in  lat.  32°  49'  nearly. 
This  place  was  on  the  direct  route  between 
Samaria  and  Damascus,  and  had  alr(  ady 
been  the  scene  of  one  great  victory  gained 
by  Israel  over  Syria  (1  Kings  xx.  26—30). 
The  site  is  marked  by  the  modem  village 
of  Fik.     Till  thon  have  consumed  them; 
literally,  till  consuming— i.e.  till  the  army 
which  thon  shalt  defeat  at  that  place  is 
destroyed  utterly.    We  have  no  account  of 
the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  but  may 
regard  the  defeat  as  one  of  those  touched  on 
in  ver.  25. 

Ver.  18. — And  he  said,  Take  the  arrows. 
And  he  took  them,  Elisha  bade  the  king 
take  into  his  hand  the  remaiuder  of  the 
arrows  which  the  quiver  contained.  This 
the  king  did,  and  held  them  in  a  bunch,  aa 
archers  do  when  they  have  no  quiver.  And 
he  said  onto  the  King  of  Israel^  Smitt  npoa 
the  ground.  It  ia  disputed  what  this  means 
The  T.YT    tianalato  Hiraiw  «i  r^y  -fir 


OH.  xm,  1— 26j]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


266 


"  Strike  npon  the  gronnd ;"  and  lo  Ewald, 
De  Wette,  and  Thenius,  who  regard  the 
opler  at  one  to  strike  with  the  arrows  against 
the  ground  (i.e.  the  floor)  or  in  the  direction 
of  the  ground.  Eeil  and  Bahr,  on  the  con- 
trary, think  that  the  order  was  to  shoot  the 
arrows  down  from  the  window  and  hit  the 
earth  with  them.  But  some  contrast  seems 
to  be  intended  between  the  "slioot"  (ni;) 
of  ver.  19  and  the  "strike"  (Tin)  of  ttie 
present  passage.  Ewald'a  explanation  is 
thus  to  be  preferred.  And  he  smote  thrice, 
and  stayed.  Joash  struck  with  the  arrows 
against  the  floor  three  times,  and  then 
paused,  thinking  he  had  done  enough.  He 
did  not  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  sym- 
bolical act,  which  reprcsenled  the  smiting 
and  slaying  of  enemies.  Ferb.ips  he  had 
not  mucli  faith  in  tlie  virtue  of  the  symbol- 
ism, which  he  may  even,  with  the  arrogance 
of  a  proud  and  worldly  minded  man,  have 
thought  childish. 

Ver.  19. — And  the  man  of  God  (comp.  ch. 
It.  7,  25 ;  vi.  6,  9 ;  viii.  4,  etc.)  was  wroth 
with  him.  Elisha  was  angered  at  the  luke- 
warmness  of  Joash,  and  his  lack  of  faith 
and  zeal.  He  himself,  from  his  higher  stand- 
point, saw  the  greatness  of  the  opportimity, 
the  abundance  of  favour  which  God  was 
ready  to  grant,  and  the  way  in  which  God'i 
favour  was  stinted  and  narrowed  by  Joash's 
want  of  receptiveness.  Had  the  king  been 
equal  to  the  occasion,  a  full  end  might  at 
once  have  been  made  of  Syria,  and  Israel 
might  have  been  enabled  to  brace  herself 
for  the  still  more  perilous  struggle  with 
Assyria,  in  which  she  ultimately  succumbed. 
And  said,  Thou  shouldest  have  smitten 
five  or  six  times;  then  hadst  thou  smitten 
Syria  till  thou  hadst  consiuned  it.  It  has 
been  suggested  that  Joash  associated  the 
number  three  with  the  notion  of  complete- 
ness, and  "thought  that  what  was  done 
thrice  was  done  perfectly "  (Bahr) ;  but  in 
this  case  the  prophet  would  scarcely  have 
been  angered.  It  is  far  more  consonant  with 
the  entire  narrative  to  suppose  that  he 
stopped  from  mere  weariness,  and  want  of 
strong  faith  and  zeal.  If  he  had  been 
earnestly  desirous  of  victory,  and  bad  had 
faith  in  the  symbolical  action  as  divinely 
directed,  he  would  have  kept  on  smiting 
till  the  prophet  told  him  it  was  enough,  or 
at  any  rate  would  have  smitten  the  ground 
five  or  six  times  instead  of  three.  The 
idea  that  he  abstained  from  modesty  or 
from  pradence,  "  lest  too  extravagant  de- 
mands might  deprive  him  of  all"  (Von 
Gerlach),  finds  no  support  in  the  text  of  the 
narrative.  He  abstained  (as  Keil  says) 
because  "he  was  wanting  in  the  proper 
zeal  for  obtaining  the  full  promises  of  God." 
Had  it  been  otherwise,  the  complete  suo- 
fless  obtained  hj  Jeroboam  JL  (oh.  iv.  25 — 


28)  might  have  been  anticipated  by  the 
space  of  fifteen  or  twenty  years.  Whereas 
now  thou  shalt  smite  Syria  but  thrice  (oomp. 
ver.  25,  which  declares  that  this  prophecy 
was  exactly  accomplished). 

Ver.  20. — And  Elisha  died,  and  they  buried 
him.  There  had  been  no  burial  of  Elijali, 
who  "  went  np  by  a  whirlwind  into  heaven  " 
(ch.  ii.  1 1).  AH  the  more  anxious,  therefore, 
would  the  Israelites  be  to  bury  their  second 
great  prophet  with  due  honour.  They  pre- 
pared him,  no  doubt,  one  of  those  excavated 
sepulchres  which  were  usual  at  the  time 
and  in  the  country — a  squared  or  vaulted 
chamber  cut  in  the  native  rock.  St.  Jerome 
says  that  the  place  of  his  sepulture  was 
near  Samaria  ('  Epitaph.  Paula'),  and  this 
is  sufficiently  probable ;  but  in  the  Middle 
Ages  his  grave  was  shown  at  Buma,  in 
Galilee  (Ewald,  '  Hist,  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p. 
122,  note  3).  According  to  Josephus  ('  Ant. 
Jud.,'  ix.  8.  §  6),  bis  funeral  was  magnificent. 
And  the  bands  of  the  Uoabites  invaded  the 
land  at  the  coming  in  of  the  year.  It  seems 
to  be  implied  that  this  was  a  nsual  occur- 
rence. Just  as  the  Syrians  in  the  days  of 
Naaman  made  marauding  raids  into  the 
land  from  time  to  time  (ch.  v.  2),  so  now  the 
Muabites  each  spring  made  an  incursion. 
The  weakness  of  Israel  i«  strongly  marked 
by  this  fact,  and  still  more  by  the  penetra- 
tion of  the  Moabites  so  deep  into  their 
country.  Amos  (ii.  1)  perhaps  glances  at 
these  incursions  of  Moab. 

Ver.  21. — And  it  came  to  pass,  as  they 
were  burying  a  man,  that.  "  They  "  is  used 
indefinitely  of  some  unnamed  Israelites,  like 
the  French  on.  Certain  persons,  it  does  not 
matter  who,  were  burying  a  man,  i.e.  about 
to  bury  him,  and  were  carrying  the  corpse 
to  the  grave,  when  an  interruption  occurred. 
Behold,  they  spied  a  band  of  men — rather, 
the  band,  i.e.  (he  band  of  that  year — and  they 
cast  the  man  into  the  sepulchre  of  Elisha. 
There  was  no  time  for  ceremony.  Hastily, 
and  somewhat  roughly,  it  may  be,  the  bearers 
of  the  body  thrust  it  into  Elisha's  tomb, 
which  happened  to  be  at  hand,  and  from  the 
mouth  of  which  they  were  able  to  remove 
the  closing  stone.  They  did  not  "  throw  " 
the  body  in,  but  pushed  it  in.  And  when 
the  man  was  let  down.  The  man  was  not 
"letdown."  Our  translators  seem  to  liave 
been  unacquainted  with  the  Jewish  mode  of 
burial.  They  imagine  that  Elisha's  tomb 
is  a  pit  dug  in  the  ground  from  the  surface 
downwards,  like  a  modem  grave,  and  the 
man  has  therefore  to  be  '*  let  down,"  or  to 
"go  dovm"  (marginal  translation)  into  it. 
The  Bevised  Version  avoids  the  mistrans- 
lation, but  weakens  the  force  of  the  original. 
Translate,  and  when  the  man  came,  etc 
And  tonohed  the  bones  of  Elisha,  he  revived. 
The  violent  push  given  to  the  corpse  ixxh 


266 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xiii.  1—25. 


itarted  to  it  •  moTement  which  bronglit  it 
m  contact  with  the  bones,  «'.«.  the  body 
(1  Kings  xiii.  81)  of  Elisha,  as  it  laj,  wound 
in  its  graTe-clothes,  but  nncoffined,  on  the 
floor  of  the  sepulchral  chamber.  At  the 
moment  of  contact  the  dead  man  came  to  life 
— "  revived."  And  stood  up  on  bis  feet.  In 
many  Jewish  tombs  the  sepulchral  chamber 
would  allow  of  this. 

Ver.  22. — Bat  Eazael  King  of  Syria  op- 
pressed Israel  all  the  days  of  Jehoahaz; 
rather,  now  Haiael  King  of  Syria  had 
oppressed  Israel,  etc.  The  author,  having 
parenthetically  related  the  extraordinaiy 
miracle  wrought  by  the  instrumentality  of 
Eliaha's  corpse,  returns  to  the  subject  of  tlie 
Syrian  oppression.  He  had,  in  vers.  14 — 19, 
dwelt  upon  the  promises  of  victory  given  by 
the  prophet  to  Joash.  He  is  now  bent  on 
relating  their  fulfilment.  But  before  doing 
so  he  recapitulates.  Ver.  22  refers  back  to 
ver.  3,  and  ver.  23  to  vers.  4  and  5. 

Yer.  23. — ^And  the  Lord  was  gracious  unto 
them,  and  had  compassion  on  them.  Even 
in  his  wrath  Ood  "  thioketh  upon  mercy." 
While  he  was  still  punishing  Israel  by  the 
sword  of  Hazael,  he  was  yet  careful  not  to 
make  a  full  end,  nut  to  allow  the  affliction 
to  proceed  too  far.  He  still  preserved  the 
nation,  and  kept  it  in  being.  And  had 
respect  unto  them — ie.  "  considered  them — 
kept  them  in  his  mind — did  not  permit  them 
to  slip  out  of  his  recollection" — because 
of  bis  covenant  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob.  God's  covenant  with  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob  was  a  covenant  of  mercy.  By  it 
he  had  pledged  himself  to  multiply  tlieir 
seed,  to  be  their  Ood,  and  the  God  of  their 
seed  after  them,  and  to  give  to  their  seed 
the  whole  land  of  Canaan  for  an  everlasting 
possession  (Gen.  xvii.  4 — 8,  etc.).  This 
covenant  bound  him  to  extend  his  protec- 
tion over  the  people  of  Israel  so  long  as  they 
had  not  utterly  and  entirely  cast  off  their 
allegiance  (comp.  ch.  xvii.  7 — 18).  And 
would  not  destroy  them.  They  were  "  per- 
secuted, but  not  forsaken;  cast  down,  but 


not  destroyed  "  (2  Oor.  W.  9).  Th«  national 
life  might  seem  to  hang  by  a  thre^id,  but 
the  thread  had  not  snapped.  Neither  cast 
he  them  from  his  presence  as  yet.  The 
writer  has  it  in  his  mind  that  ultimately 
they  were  cast  away,  rejected,  removed  out 
of  God's  sight  (oh.  xva  18,  20,  23) ;  but  it 
was  not "  as  yet " — there  was  still  an  interval 
of  a  century,  or  a  litth  more,  before  the  blow 
fell,  and  the  nation  of  the  ton  tribes  ceased 
to  exist. 

Ver.  24. — So  Hazael  King  of  Syria  died ; 
rather,  and  Haiael  .  .  .  died.  His  death 
is  a  new  fact,  not  involved  in  anything  that 
baa  been  previously  stated.  It  appears  by 
ver.  22  that  he  outlived  Jehoahaz.  And 
Benhadad  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead. 
Hazael,  the  usurper,  gave  his  eldest  son 
the  name  of  the  monarch  whom  he  liod 
murdered.  It  was  an  old  royal  name  in 
Syria  (1  Kings  xv.  18),  having  been  home 
by  at  least  two  of  Hazael's  predecessors. 
The  meaning  wliiuh  has  been  assigned  to  it 
("  Son  of  the  sun  ")  is  doubtful. 

Ver.  25. — And  Jehoasb  the  son  of  Jehoahai 
took  again  out  of  the  hand  of  Benhadad  the 
son  of  Hazael  the  cities,  which  he  had  taken 
out  of  the  hand  of  Jehoahaz  his  father  by 
war.  The  capture  of  these  cities  by  Ben- 
hadad had  not  been  previously  mentioneil. 
It  appears  by  the  present  passage,  compared 
with  ver.  22,  that,  during  the  Ufetimo  of 
his  father,  Benhadad  had  led  expeditions 
into  the  land  of  Israel,  acting  as  his  father's 
representative  and  general,  and  had  made 
himself  master  of  several  Israelite  towns. 
These  were  now  recovered  by  Jehoash. 
They  lay  probably  in  the  Cis-Jordanic  terri- 
tory. Three  times  did  Joash  beat  him,  and 
recovered  the  cities  of  Israel  (comp.  ver. 
19).  Thrice  defeated,  Hazael  was  forced  to 
abandon  his  conquests  in  Western  Samaria. 
He  retained,  however,  the  trans-Jordanio 
territory,  which  was  not  recovered  by  the 
Israelites  till  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  IL  (sea 
oh.  xiv.  25). 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — OocTi  severity  and  OocFs  goodness  alike  shown  in  the  'history  of  Israel 
wider  Jehoahaz.  I.  God's  sevebitt.  Two  sins  only  are  noted  as  existing  among  the 
people  at  this  time — the  calf-worship,  and  the  maintenance  of  the  "  grove,"  or  asherah 
(ver.  6).  One  of  these,  the  worship  of  the  calves,  was  ancestral.  It  had  been  an 
established  usage  for  a  hundred  and  twenty  year.s,  and  had  been  upheld  by  every  king 
from  the  date  of  its  institution.  Even  the  prophets,  with  one  exception  (1  Kings  xiii. 
2,  3),  had  not  denounced  it.  The  people  at  this  time  accepted  it  without  question, 
and  were  probably  quite  unconscious  that  it  was  a  sin  at  all.  The  other  sin,  the  main- 
tenance of  the  asherah,  was  negative  rather  than  positive — the  emblem  still  stood  erect; 
it  had  not  been  removed — ^but  it  is  not  said  that  it  was  worshipped.  Yet  (Sod,  in  his 
WTerity,  visited  the  people  for  these  two  sins  heavily,  terribly  (vers.  4  and  7).  He  did 
not  accept  thoughtlessness,  unconsciousness,  absence  of  any  evil  intention,  as  an  excuse. 


OH.  xra.  1— 26.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINOa  267 

Hig  honour  was  impugned  by  both  practices,  and  he  is  yery  jealous  of  his  honour.  To 
leave  the  asherah  standing,  not  to  break  it  down,  was  to  show  a  want  of  zeal  for  the 
purity  of  religion,  for  the  honour  of  God,  for  the  true  faith,  for  virtue,  for  decency.  To 
be  indifferent  to  the  calf-worship,  to  tolerate  it,  to  continue  it,  was  to  live  in  constant 
▼iolation  of  the  second  commandment.  God  could  not,  would  not,  tolerate  this.  If  tlie 
conscience  of  the  nation  had  gone  to  sleep,  he  must  rouse  it.  By  sharp  pains,  by  severe 
afflictions,  by  actual  agonies,  if  necessary,  he  must  stir  them  from  their  self-satisfaction, 
awake  them  to  self-examination  and  keen  searchings  of  heart,  and  so  bring  them  to  a 
sense  of  ttieir  ranfulness,  if  not  to  a  distinct  recognition  of  their  special  sins. 

II.  God's  goodness.  As  bood  as  any  relenting  is  shown,  as  soon  as  the  kin^ 
acknowledges  God's  hand  in  his  punishment,  and  turns  to  him  and  entreats  his  aid, 
even  although  he  does  not  put  a  stop  to  the  practices  by  which  God's  anger  has  been 
provoked  (ver.  6),  yet  the  Divine  compassion  is  stirred.  "  The  Lord  hearkened  unto 
him  "  (ver.  4).  A  saviour  is  given,  in  the  Divine  counsels,  if  not  at  once  in  fact.  The 
nation's  fall  is  arrested,  its  life  prolonged.  "  0  faithful  Christian,  if  God  heard 
Jehoahaz,  how  much  more  will  he  hear  thee,  if  thou  callest  upon  him  1  The  Lord  gave 
Israel  a  deliverer,  but  Jehoahaz  did  not  live  to  see  him.  God  hears  the  cry  of  those 
who  earnestly  call  upon  him,  and  helps  them;  but  the  time,  and  place,  and  manner  of 
his  aid  are  retained  in  his  own  discretion.  Do  not  despair  if  thy  prayar  does  not  seem 
to  be  heard,  and  the  Lord  delays  his  assistance.  He  knows  that  fitting  season  as  well 
as  he  knows  what  is  useful  to  us  "  (Starke). 

Ver.  6. — The  persistency  of  evU.  "There  remained  the  grove."  One  would  have 
thought  that,  in  such  a  reformation  as  that  of  Jehu  (ch.  x.  15 — 28),  there  would  have 
been  a  clean  sweep,  or,  at  any  rate,  that  Ahab's  pet  idolatries  (1  Kings  xvi.  33)  would 
have  gone.  But  no  I  evil  is  terribly  persistent.  "  The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after 
them,"  and  not  in  men's  recollections  only,  but  in  fact.  No  reformation  ever  sweeps 
away  at  once  all  that  it  was  intended  to  sweep  away.  "  The  grove  remains.''  How 
many  heathen  superstitions  survived  the  supersession  of  heathenism  by  Christianity  I 
How  many  iniquitous  laws  continue  in  all  countries  after  every  attempt  that  is  made 
to  reform  the  laws  t  How  many  abuses  remain  after  each  removal  of  abuses  I  The 
result  is  partly  through  the  fault  of  the  reformers,  who  are  careless  about  doing  their 
work  thoroughly,  and  cease  their  efforts  while  much  still  remains  to  be  done ;  but  it  is 
also  caused  in  part  by  the  tenacity  of  life  which  the  things  that  need  to  be  swept  away 
possess  in  themselves.  And,  as  evil  is  thus  persistent  in  communities,  so  is  it  also 
in  the  character  of  individuals.  Naturam  expeUas  furca,  tamen  usque  recurret.  A 
man  makes  a  great  effort  at  self-reformation,  changes  his  rules  of  conduct,  his  habits, 
the  whole  method  of  his  life,  as  he  thinks ;  but  in  some  corner  there  still  lurks  a 
remnant  of  the  old  leaven,  which  shortly  reasserts  itself,  and  too  often  leavens  the 
whole  mass  with  its  corrupting  influence.  The  lesson  lo  be  learnt  is  watchfulness  and 
perseverance.  By  care,  by  consideration,  and  hv  constant  effort,  the  persistency  of  evil 
may  be  met  and  counteracted.  God's  Holy  Spirit  is  always  ready  to  assist  our 
endeavours;  and,  whether  in  •  community  or  in  an  individual,  continued  effort, 
divinely  aided,  will  prevail  at  last. 

Vers.  14 — 19. — 2%e  closing  scene  of  Misha's  life.  The  time  had  come  to  Blisha 
which  comes  to  all -the  sons  of  men,  however  great,  however  holy,  at  the  last.  He  had 
exceeded  man's  ordinary  term  of  three  score  years  and  ten — nay,  he  had  exceeded  the 
extended  term  of  those  who  are  exceptionally  "  strong  "  men,  four  score  years  (Ps.  xc. 
10^— but  now  at  length  he  was  overtaken  by  sickness,  he  was  manifestly  drawing 
near  to  death.     What  lessons  does  his  departure  teach  us?    It  may  teach  us — 

L  A  LESSON  OF  CONSOLATION.  It  is  a  good  thing  so  to  have  lived  that  our  departure 
is  felt  as  a  loss,  not  merely  to  our  family  or  to  our  own  narrow  circle  of  friends,  but  to 
our  king  and  country.  Not  many  persons  can  do  the  sort  of  service  which  Elisha  did 
for  Israel ;  but  all  may  do  some  service.  All  may  seek  their  country's  good,  labour  for 
it,  strive  for  it,  pray  for  it.  All  may  use  the  powers  and  talents  committed  to  them  by 
God  in  such  a  way  that  not  themselves  alone,  but  their  country  also,  may  derive 
advantage  from  them.  Honest  endeavours  of  this  kind  will  at  any  rate  bring  to  us 
-  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  "  at  the  last — they  may  bring  to  us  something  more, 


26«  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.      [oh.  xni.  1— 25. 

TIE.  praise  and  acknowledgment  on  tbe  part  of  those  who  represent  the  nation  and  hare 
a  right  to  speak  on  its  behalf.  Due  acknowledgment  is  seldom  fjrndged,  when  the  end 
has  come  or  approaches;  and,  though  man's  judgment  is  a  "email  thing "  compared 
with  God's,  it  is  not  altogether  to  be  despised — ^we  may  feel  in  such  acknowledgment 
a  legitimate  satisfaction. 

II.  A  LESSON  OF  FORTmiOT.  Elisha  makes  no  moan,  expresses  no  complaint.  It 
is  extraordinary  how  many  men,  even  men  who  profess  to  believe  in  a  future  life  ol 
infinitely  greater  happiness  than  the  present  one,  are  discontented,  and  murmur,  or 
even  passionately  cry  out,  when  a  mortal  disease  attacks'  them.  And  this  although 
they  have  lived  the  full  term  of  average  human  life  in  this  world.  Very  few  quit  the- 
scene  gracefully,  placidly,  bravely.  Almost  all  geem  to  regard  the  summons  to  set 
their  house  in  order  as  untimely,  and  themselves  as  hardly  used  by  the  call  being  made 
upon  them.  There  is  always  something  for  which  they  think  they  might  as  well  hare 
been  allowed  to  wait — 

"  Half  the  cows  to  oalve,  and  Bamaby  Holmes  to  plough." 

in.   A  LESSON  OP  PERSBVBBANCE  AND   EPFOBT  TO   THE    VERT  END.      Elisha,   thoUgh 

stricken  with  a  mortal  disease,  does  not  give  himself  up  to  inaction,  or  cease  to  take  an 
interest  in  the  affairs  of  this  life.  On  the  contrary,  he  has  his  country's  welfare  most 
deeply  at  heart,  and  initiates  and  carries  through  a  scene,  in  which  his  physical  powers 
mast  have  been  severely  tasked,  for  encouraging  king  and  people  in  their  death-struggle 
with  Syria,  and  assuring  them  of  final  victory.  The  confidence  inspired  may  have 
been  a  serious  factor  in  the  result.  Elisha,  at  his  age,  might  have  been  excused,  had 
he  remained  wholly  passive,  and  received  the  king's  visit  as  the  compliment  which  it 
was  intended  to  be ;  but  he  could  not  be  content  without  utilizing  the  visit  to  the 
utmost.  He  rouses  the  king  from  his  despair  (ver.  14);  inspires  in  him  hope,  courage, 
energy ;  promises  him  success,  actively  participates  in  the  symbolic  drama,  which  at 
once  indicates  and  helps  forward  the  result  aimed  at.  We  may  learn  from  this  that, 
while  we  live,  we  have  active  duties  to  perform ;  we  are  not  exauctorati  till  the  last 
summons  comes  ;  on  our  sick-bed,  on  our  death-bed,  we  may  still  be  agents  for  good — 
we  may  advise,  exhort,  incite,  rebuke  evil  (ver.  19),  and  be  active  ministers  of  good, 
impressing  men  more  than  we  ever  did  before,  when  we  speak  from  the  verge  of  the 
grave,  and  having  our  "strength  made  perfect  in  weakness." 

Vers.  20,  21. — lAfe  in  death.  The  miracle  wrought  by  the  Instrumentality  of 
Elisha's  bones  would  seem  to  have  been  designed  for  three  main  ends  or  purposes. 

I.  For  the  honodb  of  the  pbophbt  ;  that  so  he  might  have  in  his  death  (as  Elijah 
had  had  in  the  method  of  his  departure)  a  testimony  from  God  that  he  was  approved 
by  him,  and  that  he  would  have  him  respected  and  honoured  by  his  countrymen. 
Worship  of  relics  was  not  a  Jewish  superstition ;  and  thus  there  was  no  danger  of  those 
ill  results  which  followed  on  the  alleged  miracles  wrought  by  the  bodies  of  Christian 
martyrs.  Those  who  witnessed  or  heard  of  the  miracle  in  Elisha's  tomb  were  led  to 
venerate  the  memory  of  the  prophet,  to  whom  so  great  a  testimony  had  been  given  ; 
and  might  thence  be  moved  to  pay  greater  attention  and  stricter  obedience  to  what 
they  knew  of  bis  teaching. 

II.  Fob  the  enooubaqement  of  the  nation.  The  death  of  Elisha  was  no  doubt 
felt  as  a  national  calamity.  Many,  besides  the  king,  must  have  seen  in  it  the  loss  to  the 
nation  of  one  who  was  more  to  it  than  "  chariots  and  horsemen  "  (ver.  14).  Despon- 
dency, we  may  be  sure,  weighed  down  the  spirits  of  numbers  who  might  think  that 
God,  in  withdrawing  his  prophet,  had  forsaken  his  people.  It  was  a  great  thing  to 
such  persons  that  they  should  have  a  clear  manifestation  that,  though  the  prophet 
was  gone,  God  still  continued  present  with  his  people,  was  still  among  them,  ready  to 
help,  potent  to  save.  The  more  spiritually  minded  might  view  the  miracle  as  sym- 
bolical, and  interpret  it  to  mean  that,  as  the  dead  man  had  sprung  to  life  again  on 
contact  with  Elisha's  bones,  so  the  dead  nation  should,  as  it  were,  rise  out  of  hig  tomb 
«nd  recover  itself,  once  more  standing  on  its  feet,  in  full  possession  of  all  its  energies. 

in.  Fob  the  honoub  op  God,  and  the  showino  pobth  of  his  tranboenbent 
POWER.  To  give  life  is  among  the  highest  of  the  Divine  attributes.  It  is  Gbd's  special 
(irivilege,  one  that  he  cannot  communicate  to  a  creature.    Even  modem  scientisti  bow 


■I.  sm.  1—26.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  269 

their  heads  hefore  the  mysterious,  Inconceiyable  act,  and  confess  that  they  find  it 
impoBBible  to  present  it  distinctly  to  their  consciousness.  But  to  give  life  to  tliat 
which  is  held  by  death,  in  which  decay  is  begun,  which  is  under  the  law  of  dissolution 
and  corruption,  is  a  still  more  incomprehensible  thing,  stranger,  more  astonishing. 
And  to  crown  all  by  bringing  the  new  life  out  of  death,  making  a  dead  corpse  the 
source  out  of  which  vitality  shall  leap  forth  to  fresh  energy,  is  to  surpass  all  that 
the  most  lively  fancy  could  imagine  of  wonderful,  and  almost  to  reconcile  contradictions. 
Gk)d  willed  at  this  time  to  show  that  he  could  effect  even  this  marvellous  thing — make 
death  give  life  to  that  which  was  recently ^ead — educe  from  one  dead  in  him  the  vital 
power  that  should  resuscitate  and  reanimate  another  also  dead,  and  make  a  tomb — 
the  place  of  death — the  scene  of  the  transformation !  "  0  Lord,  thou  art  my  God ;  I  will 
exalt  thee,  I  will  praise  thy  Name ;  for  thou  hast  done  wonderful  things  "  (Isa.  xxv.  1) ; . 
truly  "  wonderful  art  thou  in  thy  doing  towards  the  children  of  men  "  (Ps.  Ixvi.  4). 

The  miracle  of  Elisha's  bones  is  no  argument  for  relic-worship.  Belic-worship 
implies  a  belief  that  a  virtue  exists  in  the  remnants  of  a  deceased  saint's  body,  which 
enables  them  of  themselves  to  exercise  a  miraculous  power.  Elisha's  bones  were  never 
thought  to  possess  any  such  property.  They  were  not  exhumed,  placed  in  cases,  or 
exhibited  to  the  faithful  to  be  touched  with  the  hand  or  kissed  by  the  lips.  It  was 
understood  that  God  had  been  pleased  to  work  one  miracle  by  them ;  it  was  never 
supposed  that  they  might  be  expected  to  work  any  more.  They  were  therefore 
suffered  to  remain  in  the  tomb  wherein  they  had  been  from  the  first  deposited.  It 
was  not  till  the  time  of  Julian  that  any  importance  was  attached  to  them ;  though 
then  we  must  conclude  that  they  had  become  objects  of  reverential  regard,  since  the 
Apostate  took  the  trouble  to  bum  them. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0B8. 

Vers.  1 — IS,  with  22—25. — 77ie  reigng  of  Jehoakom  and  Jocuh,  king*  of  Israa. 
Observe  here — 

I.  The:  febpet0itt  of  evil.  How  sad  it  is  to  read  of  one  king  after  another, 
"  He  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  "  1  And  then  the  statement  is 
usually  made,  "  He  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made 
Israel  to  sin."  A  bad  man  does  harm  to  others  besides  himself.  "  None  of  us  liveth 
to  himself."  Not  merely  while  we  live,  but  after  we  are  gone,  our  lives  and  words  and 
deeds  will  influence  others.  We  may  think  ourselves  very  obscure  and  insignificant, 
so  insignificant  that  we  may  argue  it  does  not  matter  to  others  how  we  live.  But  who 
can  measure  the  circle  of  his  influence  ?  In  ways  that  we  know  not,  influence  may 
reach  other  hearts  and  other  lives.  Oh  I  how  dangerous  is  one  evil  influence  in  a 
community  1    It  takes  a  long  time  to  do  away  with  its  effects. 

"  The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them ; 
The  good  is  oft  interrM  with  their  bones.* 

Let  us  bo  careful  how  we  are  influencing  others.  For  "good  or  for  evil  we  are 
exercising  some  influence,  however  unconsciously,  on  those  around  us.  If  we  would 
influence  men  for  good,  we  ourselves  must  live  near  to  Gh>d. 

II.  The  meeoy  of  God.  God  punished  Jehoahaz  and  his  people  for  their  sins. 
"  He  delivered  them  into  the  hanil  of  Hazael  King  of  Syria,  and  jnto  the  hand  of  Ben- 
hadad  the  son  of  Hazael,  all  their  days."  When  suffering  or  troubles  come,  let  us  see 
whether  the  cause  of  them  is  not  within  our  own  hearts  and  lives.  But  he  mingled 
mercy  with  judgment.  God  is  ever  on  the  watch  for  signs  of  the  prodigal's  return. 
His  ear  is  ever  open  for  the  cry  of  penitence,  for  the  faintest  prayer  for  forgiveness  and 
help.  "  Jehoahaz  besought  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  hearkened  imto  him ;  for  he  saw 
Hm  oppression  of  Israel,  because  the  King  of  Syria  oppressed  them  "  (ver,  4 ;  see  also 
Tar.23> 

"Come,  let  as  to  the  Lord  ma  Ood 
With  contrite  hearts  return ; 
Out  God  ii  gradoug,  nor  will  leave 
T%*  desolate  tn  maBm. 


270  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.      [oh.  xm.  1—25. 

"  His  voice  oommands  the  tempest  forth. 
And  stillB  the  stormy  wave  ; 
And,  thoagh  bis  arm  be  strong  to  unlit, 
Tia  also  strong  to  save." 

ni.  Human  ihoratitddb.  Though  God  delivered  them  from  their  difficulty  and 
distress,  and  gave  them  peace  from  their  enemies,  yet,  when  the  difficulty  was  over, 
they  forgot  all  about  God's  mercy.  They  went  back  to  their  old  sins.  "  Nevertheless 
they  de^irted  not  from  the  sins  of  the  house  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  .  .  .  but 
walked  therein "  (ver.  6).  How  prone  the  human  heart  is  to  forsake  QoA  I  The 
Books  of  Judges  and  Kings  are  fall  of  illustrations  of  this  painful  fact.  By  forsaking 
CKkI  the  Israelites  brought  themselves  into  misery  aad  boni&ge.  Time  after  time  God 
raised  up  judges  and  kings  and  prophets  to  be  the  means  of  their  deliverance.  But 
when  these  were  dead,  or  when  the  immediate  danger  had  passed  away,  once  again  the 
people  forsook  God.  It  is  the  same  in  the  history  of  the  individuaL  How  ungrateful 
we  are  for  God's  vmceasing  and  unfailing  goodness  I  How  forgetful  of  his  command- 
ments and  his  promises  I  "  The  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself;  and  it  is  not  in  man 
that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps."  We  need  all  the  influence  of  Divine  grace  to 
keep  us  in  the  way  that  ii  right. 

IV.  A  HtTUBLED  NATION.  To  what  a  low  level  ran  reduces  a  nation  I  How  shame- 
fully Israel  was  humiliated  before  Syria  1  The  King  of  Syria  only  left  to  Jehoahaz 
fifty  horsemen,  ten  chariots,  and  ten  thousand  footmen ;  "  for  the  King  of  Syria  had 
destroyed  them,  and  had  made  them  like  the  dust  by  threshing."  The  fate  of  Israel, 
the  fate  of  other  mighty  nations  of  the  past,  are  a  great  national  lesson  to  be  remem- 
bered BO  long  as  the  world  shall  last.  Ought  we  cot  earnestly  to  pray  that  this  great 
British  empire,  which  has  been  built  up  by  God-fearing  men,  and  which  God  has 
blessed  and  honoured  so  highly,  may  not  forsake  God  for  secularism  or  gross  corrup- 
tion, and  thus  fall  into  the  fate  of  the  fallen  nations  of  the  past  ?  Knowing  how  great 
are  the  forces  of  evil,  it  becomes  every  true  Christian  to  be  more  valiant  for  the  truth, 
to  be  more  active  in  everything  that  will  extend  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  this  and 
other  lands. — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  14 — 19. — A  royat  vMt  to  a  dying  prophet.  What  a  peaceful  death-bed  Elisha'i 
was!  He  had  long  since  made  his  choice.  He  had  lived  not  for  time,  but  for  eternity ; 
not  under  the  fear  of  man,  but  under  the  fear  of  God ;  not  for  the  favour  of  kings  or 
their  rewards,  but  so  as  to  win  the  approval  of  his  conscience  and  his  Creator.  And 
now,  when  death  came,  it  brought  him  no  teiTors.  Not  only  so,  but  he  was  able  to 
give  encouragement  to  others.  When  King  Joash  sees  the  prophet  on  his  death-bed,  he 
feels  how  great  is  the  loss  which  Israel  is  about  to  sustain.  Good  men  are  a  nation's 
strength.  And  so  Joash,  bending  in  tears  over  the  dying  prophet's  couch,  exclaims, 
"  O  my  father,  my  father,  the  chariot  of  Israel,  and  the  horsemen  thereof  1 "  But  Elisha 
wants  to  keep  up  his  heart.  He  wants  to  teach  him  that,  though  the  prophet  dies,  the 
prophet's  God  remains.  The  workmen  pass  away,  but  the  work  of  God  goes  on.  So 
the  true  Christian  will  ever  look  beyond  his  own  death  to  the  glory  that  awaits  him, 
beyond  the  present  hour  of  darkness  or  difficulty  or  delay  to  the  idtimate  triumph  oi 
the  Church  of  Christ.  It  was  in  this  spirit  that  the  martyrs  died.  What  a  vision  of 
the  future  lit  up  their  suffering  faces  I  What  a  prophetic  instinct  in  such  words  as 
those  which  Bishop  Latimer  spoke  to  his  feUow-reformer  Bidley,  as  they  stood  side  by 
side,  waiting  for  the  faggots  to  be  kindled :  "  Be  of  good  cheer,  brother  Bidley,  and  play 
the  man ;  we  shall  this  day  light  such  a  candle  in  England,  as  by  God's  grace  shall 
never  be  put  out."  And  here  Elisha  on  his  death-bed  gives  utterance  to  prophetic 
words.  He  told  Joash  that  the  arrow  which,  in  obedience  to  his  directions,  he  had  shot 
forth  from  the  open  window,  signified  the  arrow  of  the  Lord's  deliverance.  But  Joash 
was  slow  to  learn  the  double  lesson  of  God's  unlimited  power  and  the  necesnty  for 
human  effort  which  this  simple  illustration  taught.  Elisha  had  already  told  him  that 
he  should  smite  the  Syrians  till  they  were  consumed,  and  then,  to  teach  him/ttrthtr- 
more  the  necessity  for  perseverance  and  patience,  he  commands  him  to  smite  upon  the 
-gronnd.  Joash,  seeing  that  the  prophet  had  already  revealed  to  him  so  much  sd^ 
encouraged  him  so  grnttly,  might  nave  continued  until  he  was  requested  to  ceace.    But 


OR.  xm.  1— 2S.]        THE  BEGOND  BOOK  OF  THE  Kmoa  271 

instead  of  that,  he  only  smote  three  times,  and  then  gare  np.  Thus  he  illustrated  hit 
own  want  of  faith  in  God's  almighty  power,  his  own  want  of  patience  and  perse- 
Terance,  and  therefore  how  little  be  deserved  Qod's  interference  on  his  behalf.  The 
old  proverb  truly  says,  "  God  helps  those  that  help  themselves."  The  chief  lesson  of 
this  incident  is —  Want  of  faith  a  hindrance  to  success  in  Christian  work. 

I.  CBRISTIANS  show  want    of    FAITB,   ALTHOnOH    THKT  HATE    DiVINE    FBOMIBEg. 

It  was  so  here  in  the  case  of  Joash.  He  had  stood  beside  the  bedside  of  Elisha  in  a 
state  of  utter  dismay.  It  had  seemed  to  him  as  if  he  already  saw  the  downfall  of  his 
kingdom,  as  if  all  other  resources  were  useless  if  the  man  of  Gud,  who  had  so  often 
guided  kings  and  people  to  victory,  was  taken  away.  But  look  at  the  encouragement 
which  Elisha  had  given  him.  He  had  taken  his  thoughts  away  from  human  wisdom 
and  human  strength,  and  turned  them  upward  to  the  almighty,  unlimited  power  of 
God.  "  The  arrow  of  the  LorcFs  deliverance."  What  suggestions  of  power,  of  help, 
of  victory,  were  in  those  simple  words  1  The  Lord's  deliverance  I  That  almighty 
power  which  delivered  Israel  out  of  the  hand  of  Pharaoh;  that  almighty  power  which 
turned  back  the  waves  of  the  Bed  Sea,  and  brought  the  people  over  safely  on  dry  land ; 
that  almighty  power  which,  only  a  few  years  since,  filled  the  dry  valley  with  water  and 
thus  gave  victory  to  Israel,  and  which,  by  smiting  the  Syrians  with  blinduess,  delivered 
Israel  out  of  the  hands  of  their  enemies ; — ^that  almighty  power,  0  Joash,  will  be  with 
you,  wUl  ddiver  you.  Oh,  what  a  thrill  of  determination,  of  resolute,  energetic 
purpose,  should  have  been  awakened  in  his  mind  I  Might  he  not  reasonably  have  felt, 
"  Yes,  the  Lord  is  on  my  side.  Victory  is  sure.  I  shall  redouble  my  efforts  against 
the  enemies  of  Israel,  against  the  workers  of  evil.  Out  of  gratitude  to  God  I  shall 
serve  the  Lord  only  "  ?  But  Joash  failed  when  put  to  the  test.  When  Elinha  gave  him 
an  opportunity  of  showing  his  faith  by  his  own  efforts,  he  only  showed  how  little  faith 
he  had  in  the  promises  of  God.  If  we  believe  that  God's  Word  is  true,  that  his 
promises  are  true,  it  is  but  reasonable  that  he  should  expect  us  to  act  on  them.  To 
every  unsaved  soul  God  says,  "Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved."  The  ^iSmise  is  salvation.  But  there  is  a  duty,  a  condition,  a  necessity,  coupled 
with  it.  That  Suty  is  faith  in  Christ — taking  him  as  our  Saviour,  serving  him  as  our 
King.  How  many  act  like  Joash  I  They  would  like  to  get  to  heaven,  but  they  are  not 
willing  to  tread  the  narrow  path.  Tbey  would  like  to  obtain  salvation,  but  they  are  not 
willing  to  take  God's  way  of  obtaining  it.  They  say,  "  If  I'm  to  be  saved,  I  shall  be 
saved."  To  any  one  who  has  been  think|ng  about  eternity  and  the  judgment  to 
come,  whose  heart  has  been  softened  by  sickness  or  bereavement,  who  has  been 
impressed  by  any  message  from  God's  Word,  but  has  not  yet  accepted  Christ,  we  would 
say,  "  Stay  not  thine  hand.  Let  not  the  good  impressions  pass  away."  "  I'h.an  shall 
we  know,  if  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord."  Arise  to-day,  and  in  the  strength  of 
God  smite  your  unbelief,  smite  the  tempter  to  the  ground.  iStrive  to  enter  in  at  the 
narrow  door.  Then  shall  that  good  impression,  then  shall  that  warning  voice,  prove  to 
be  to  you  the  arrow  of  the  Lord's  deliverance.  Take  the  step,  fulfil  the  condition,  if  you 
would  obtain  the  blessing.  The  same  applies  to  Christian  work.  How  many  call 
themselves  God's  servants,  how  many  expect  the  reward  of  the  faithful  servant,  who 
are  doing  absolutely  nothing  fur  the  Lord!  Jesus  has  given  one  very  precious  promise 
to  his  people :  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world  ;  "  but  it  is 
to  those  who  in  some  way  are  seeking  to  fulfil  that  command,  "  Go  ye  therefore,  and 
preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  The  truth  is,  the  promise  depends  upon  the 
work,  and  the  work  depends  upon  the  promise.  We  cannot  expect  God's  blessings  if 
we  are  not  doing  his  work.  And  we  cannot  do  his  work  if  we  do  not  meditate  much 
on  his  promises. 

IL   ChBIBTIAKS  show  WAHIT  of   faith,   ALTHOrOH  THST  HATE     FBOOFB  OF    DlVINI 

POWKB.  In  the  history  of  his  nation,  even  in  the  history  of  Elisha's  life  alone,  Joash 
had  many  proofs  of  Divine  power,  yet  still  he  showed  a  want  of  faith  in  God.  In  the 
whole  history  of  God's  kingdom  in  the  world,  in  the  whole  history  of  the  Christian 
Church,  we  have  proofs  of  God's  power,  yet  where  is  our  faith  at  all  proportionate  to 
the  strength  of  evidence  on  which  it  rests  ?  There  is  no  stronger  testimony  to  the 
power  of  the  gospel  than  the  history  of  modern  missions.  It  is  just  seventy  years  since 
the  first  missionaries  landed  in  Madagascar ;  it  is  not  thirty  years  since  the  terrible 
persecutions  ceased  there,  by  which  the  missionaries  were  driven  out  of  the  island,  and 


tn  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  xni.  1— 25. 

the  littie  companies  of  Christians  who  survired  the  massacre  met  for  worship  in  secret, 
in  dens  and  caves  of  the  mountains,  and  were  in  constant  danger  of  their  lires.  Yet  in 
that  large  island  to-day  there  Is  a  Christian  population  of  nearly  three  hundred  thousand, 
the  idols  have  hecn  publicly  burned,  and  the  Christian  religion  is  publicly  recognized 
bv  the  state.  What  hath  God  wrought  I  Think  of  the  work  which  Dr.  Moffat  accom- 
plished among  the  degraded  tribes  of  South  Africa,  not  so  many  years  ago.  The  con- 
version of  Africaner,  the  Hottentot  chief,  under  his  ministry,  is  well  known.  Every 
one  warned  Mofiat  against  him  as  a  man  who  was  a  terror  to  the  whole  neighbourhood. 
But  Moffat  thought  he  was  just  the  man  to  go  to  with  the  gospel.  He  went,  and  was 
the  means  of  leading  the  savage  chief  to  Christ,  and  "  Africaner's  changed  life  con- 
vinced many,  who  had  never  believed  in  them  before,  of  the  efScacy  of  Christian 
missions."  Think  of  the  progress  of  Christianity  in  Japan,  in  India,  in  China.  The 
following  testimony  was  recently  borne  to  mission  work  in  China  in  his  report  to  the 
Foreign  Office  by  the  late  British  Consul  at  Newchwang.  He  says,  "  The  labours  of 
the  missionaries  indirectly  benefit  our  merchants,  manufacturers,  and  artisans.  I 
further  believe  that,  partly  owing  to  the  Christian  principles  disseminated  by  the 
missionaries,  the  tone  of  morality  among  the  Chinese  people  has  during  the  last  twenty 
years  perceptibly  attained  a  higher  platf  inn."  The  Eev.  William  Swanson,  a  veteran 
missionary,  and  lately  moderator  of  the  Euglish  Presbyterian  Church,  slates  that  when 
he  went  to  China  twenty-six  years  ago  there  were  only  five  small  churches  at  the  treaty 
ports.  Now,  in  going  from  Canton  to  Shanghai,  and  travelling  twenty  or  twenty-five 
miles  a  day,  he  could  sleep  every  night,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  in  a  village  having 
%  Christian  church.  The  first  time  Charles  Darwin  visited  the  island  of  Tierra  del 
Fuego,  he  said  that  the  people  there  were  irreclaimable.  He  saw  four  Christian 
Fuegians  at  a  meeting  in  England,  and  was  so  impressed  by  what  he  hcaid  of  the  work 
of  the  missionaries  that  he  became  an  annual  subscriber  to  the  funds  of  the  Missionary 
Society,  and  said  he  should  feel  proud  if  the  committee  would  think  fit  to  elect  him 
one  of  its  honorary  members.  When  we  think  of  these  things,  of  th^jwonderful  work 
done  in  the  South  Sea  Islands,  and  of  the  many  nations  where  heathenism  has  yielded 
to  the  preaching  of  the  cross,  surely  we  may  well  say,  "  What  hath  God  wrought!  " 
To-day,  just  as  in  St.  Paul's  day;  the  gospel  is  "the  power  of  God  imto  salvation  to 
every  one  that  believeth."  If  we  doubt  the  power  of  the  gospel,  our  doubts  are  in  the 
face  of  overwhelming  and  irresistible  facts. 

III.  The  evil  results  of  this  want  oy  faith.  This  want  of  faith  has  ill 
results  on  lil'e  and  practice  and  Christian  work.  Many  who  went  part  of  the  way  with 
Christ  turned  back  and  walked  no  more  with  him  because  of  their  want  of  faiih.  It 
is  so  still.  Wcmt  of  faith  leads  to  low  expectations  and  feeble  efforts.  True  faith  in 
God's  presence  and  power,  instead  of  making  us  inactive  and  careless,  is  the  greatest 
stimulus  to  activity.  It  rouses  us  to  put  forth  all  our  energies.  It  makes  us  patient 
under  difficulties.  It  causes  us  to  persevere  even  when  we  see  no  immediate  result. 
How  many  a  good  work  has  been  begun,  but  given  up,  because  of  want  of  faith !  This 
was  nearly  heing  the  case  at  one  time  with  what  has  since  proved  one  of  the  mot^t  success- 
ful missions  to  the  heathen.  After  twelve  years'  labour  in  the  island  of  Tahiti,  in  the 
Pacific,  the  mission  seemed  to  be  an  utter  failure.  All  but  one  of  the  missionaries  left  the 
South  Sea  Islands.  At  home  the  directors  of  the  London  Missionary  Society  seriously  dis- 
cussed the  abandoning  of  the  mission.  But  two  members  of  the  committee,  men  of 
strong  faith  in  Q«d  and  the  gospel,  strenuously  opposed  this,  and  proposed  a  season  of 
special  prayer  for  a  blessing  on  its  work.  This  was  agreed  to ;  letters  of  encouragement 
were  written  to  the  missionaries ;  and  while  the  ship  that  bore  these  letters  was  on  hei 
way  to  Tahiti,  another  ship  was  bearing  to  England  the  ry'ected  idols  of  the  people.  How 
had  this  happened?  Some  of  the  missionaries  who  had  left  the  island  were  led  in 
some  way  to  return.  One  morning  one  of  them  went  out  into  the  fields  for  meditation, 
when  he  heard,  with  a  thrill  of  joy,  the  voice  of  a  native  raised  in  prayer  to  God — ^the 
first  token  that  their  teaching  had  been  blessed  in  Tahiti.  Soon  they  heard  of  others. 
A  Christian  Church  was  formed.  The  priests  publicly  burned  their  idols',  and  thus, 
after  a  night  of  toil  of  sixteen  years,  the  dawn  at  last  broke  (see  '  Outlines  of  Protestant 
Mksions,'  by  Bev.  John  Bobson,  D.D.).  What  a  rebuke  to  the  weak  faith  of  the 
dinot«rB  who  had  proposed  to  abandon  the  mission  I  What  a  lesson  to  ever-  minister 
and  misd^nary,  to  every  Sunday-school  teacher,  to  every  Christian  worker,  not  to  ftoy 


OH.  xm.  1—26.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  278 

their  hand,  even  when  they  tee  no  results  of  their  labour  I  "  Ho  {hat  goeth  forth  and 
weepeth,  bearing  precious  seed,  shall  doubtless  come  again  with  rejoicing,  bringing  his 
sheaves  with  him.  Work  done  for  GJod  never  dies.  Stay  not  your  handin  the  matter  0/ 
your  own  spiritual  life.  Persevere  in  the  conflict  with  yonr  besetting  sins.  Persevere 
in  the  cultivation  of  Christian  graces.  Use  the  arrow  of  the  Lord's  deliverance.  Put  on 
the  whole  armour  of  God.  Persevere  also  in  prayer  for  others.  Never  gire  up  as 
hopeless  a  single  soul.  Stay  not  thine  hand.  Fo«  can't  do  much  for  them,  perhaps, 
but  God  can.  Lay  the  case  of  erring  child  or  godless  friend  before  God  in  prayer.  Ask 
him  to  open  their  eyes.  Ask  the  Lord  Jesus  to  lay  his  hand  upon  them — to  speak  the 
word  only,  and  they  shall  be  made  whole.  Persevere  also  in  Christian  work.  "  Be  not 
weary  in  well-doing."  Leave  no  work  unfinished  for  which  God  gives  you  the  strength 
and  the  means.  Perhaps  we  have  been  shooting  too  few  arrows,  making  too  little  effort 
in  God's  cause.  Seek  the  guidance  of  God's  hand  and  the  power  which  God's  presence 
gives,  and  then  go  forth  to  win  victories  for  him. — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  20,  21. — A  resurrection  and  its  lessons.  This  miracle  was  wrought,  in  a  time 
of  prevailing  unbelief,  to  teach  a  lesson  to  a  feithless  age.  Strange  sight  indeed — ^for 
those  who  were  engrossed  with  the  sensual  pleasures  of  the  present  world,  thus  unex- 
pectedly to  be  brought  face  to  face  with  the  power  of  the  Unseen  1 

L  God's  poweb  to  baisb  the  dead.  Here  was  something  which  their  heathen  gods 
could  never  do.  Heathenism,  agnosticism, — these  systems  bring  no  comfort  to  the 
bereaved  and  sorrowing  spirit.  Christ  alone  has  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light 
through  the  gospel.  None  but  he  has  ever  dared  to  say,  "  I  am  the  Resurrection  and 
the  Life." 

II.  The  mrDTiNG  influence  of  good  men.  "  Non  omnis  moriar "  was  the  saying 
of  the  old  heathen  poet.  But  the  humblest  Christian  who  is  faithful  to  God  may  have 
confidence  that  his  influence  for  good  will  continue  long  after  be  has  passed  away  from 
earth.  1.  Misha's  words  were  to  continue.  The  prophet  was  dead,  but  his  words  still 
lived.  His  words  were  the  words  of  God.  "Heaven  and  earth  shall  yiass  away,  but  my 
words  shall  not  pass  away."  We  see  in  the  twenty-fifth  verse  how  Elisha's  prediction 
to  Joash  was  literally  fulfilled.  Three  times  Joash  defeated  the  Syrians  and  recovered 
the  cities  of  Israel.  Elisha's  words  still  remain,  to  be  our  consolation  and  comfort.  2. 
Elisha's  work  remained.  The  memory  of  his  faithfulness  to  God,  of  the  wonders  he 
was  able  to  do  by  God's  presence  with  him,  remained  to  be  a  help  and  stimulus  to 
many  faithful  servants  of  God  when  Israel  was  growing  worse  and  worse.  A  good 
man's  influence — who  can  tell  how  long  it  may  last,  or  what  unexpected  places  and 
persons  it  may  reach  ? — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 21. — The  death  of  Elisha.  "In  the  three  and  twentieth,"  etc.  The  Book 
of  Kings  is,  to  a  large  extent,  a  record  of  crime,  and  of  crime  of  the  most  heinous  and 
aggravated  character.  The  terrible  monstrosities  recorded  are,  for  the  most  part,  ascii- 
bable,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  kings.  In  this  very  chapter  we  have  a  sketch  of  two 
of  those  mouarchs  who  have  been  among  the  greatest  curses  of  their  race.  Jehoahaz, 
son  and  successor  of  Jehu  King  of  Israel,  whose  reign  was  disastrous  to  the  kingdom 
to  such  a  degree  that  his  army  was  all  but  utterly  destroyed,  and  had  become  Uke  the 
dust  on  the  "  threshing-floor ; "  and  Jehoash,  who  for  three  years  was  associated  with  his 
father  in  the  government,  and  who,  when  his  father  was  swept  away,  was  a  curse  to  the 
world  for  sixteen  years.  The  only  portion  of  this  chapter  which  requires  notice  is  from 
ver.  14  to  ver.  21.  These  verses  present  to  us  four  subjects  of  thought — a  great  man 
dying ;  a  good  man  leaving  the  world  interested  in  posterity ;  a  wicked  man  regretting 
the  event ;  and  a  dead  man  exerting  a  wonderful  influence. 

I.  A  OBEAT  HAN  DTINO.  "  Now  Elisha  was  fallen  sick  of  his  sickness  whereof  he 
died."  The  whole  history  of  Elisha  is  not  only  the  history  of  the  marvellous,  but  the 
history  of  loyalty  to  Heaven  and  of  devotion  to  the  interests  of  the  Israelite  race.  But 
here  we  find  this  great  and  good  man  dying.  Elijah,  his  master,  had  escaped  death  and 
had  been  borne  to  heaven  in  a  chariot  of  fire,  but  Elisha  had  to  die  in  the  ordinary  way 
of  mankind,  through  sickness.  It  is  true  he  was  an  old  man ;  threescore  years  had 
passed  since  he  commenced  his  prophetic  ministry.  For  a  great  many  years  we  are 
told  nothing  about  him,  but  no  doubt  he  bad  been  actively  and  usefully  fi]]|piged. 
n.  Kuras.  T 


274  THE  SECOND  LOOK  OF  TAB  K1N(JS.      [<«•  »nt  1— 2R 

ETen  the  most  useful  public  meu,  and  the  most  popular  too,  cease  tu  attract  great 
public  attention  as  they  pass  into  years.  Often  they  become  as  "  dead  men  uut  of 
sight,"  albeit  they  are  useful.  Though  all  men  have  to  die,  death  is  not  the  same  to 
all  men.  It  has  a  widely  different  significance  to  different  men.  To  the  good  man  it 
is  life  breaking  through  exuviee  and  taking  wing  to  revel  in  a  gunny  universe.  It  is 
the  "  mortal  putting  on  immortality." 

II.  A  WICKED  MAN  EEQRBTTiNG  THE  EVENT.  "  And  Joash  the  Eiug  of  Israel  came 
down  unto  him,  and  wept  over  his  face,  and  said,  0  my  father,  my  father  I "  Why  did 
he  weep  ?  Not  because  he  had  any  sympathy  with  the  character  of  the  departing 
man.  His  moral  sympathies  were  iii  antagonism  to  those  of  the  prophet.  Not  because 
he  felt  that  the  prophet  himself  would  sufi'er  loss.  He  was  not  thinking  of  the  prophet's 
gaining  or  losing  by  death.  Not  because  he  knew  that  the  event  would  be  a  loss  to 
the  living  in  generah  He  cared  nothing  for  his  race,  not  he ;  but  because  he  knew  that 
the  prophet  was  the  "  chariot  of  Israel,  and  the  horsemen  thereof."  His  chariots  and 
horsemen  were  gone,  and  Elisha  was  his  only  hope. 

III.  A   GOOD   MAN  LEAVING  THE  WORLD  INTERESTED  IN  POSTERITY.      EUsha,  thoUgh 

dying,  still  took  an  interest  in  the  future  of  his  country.  "  Elisha  said  unto  him, 
Take  bow  and  arrows.  And  he  took  unto  him  buw  and  arrows,"  etc.  (vers.  16 — 19). 
Elisha  seems  to  have  been  touched  by  the  king's  tears ;  and  he  held  out  the  hope  that 
he  would  yet  become  victorious  over  the  Syrians.  The  symbolic  action  which  the 
prophet  recommended,  putting  his  hand  upon  the  bow,  opening  the  window,  shooting 
the  arrow,  smiting  the  ground,  does  not,  I  think,  necessarily  mean  that  the  prophet 
approved  of  the  future  wars  of  the  king,  but  merely  indicated  the  fact.  He  foretold 
his  success ;  for,  in  three  campaigns  against  the  Syrians,  he  recovered  the  cities  which 
they  had  taken  from  his  father.  He  was  also  successful  in  the  war  with  Amaziah 
King  of  Judah.  But  the  point  worth  notice  is  the  interest  felt  in  the  future  by  the 
prophet  in  his  dying  hours.  Had  he  not  done  with  life  ?  Would  he  not  soun  be  in 
his  grave?  What  would  the  world  be  to  him  in  the  future  ?  An  interest  in  posterity 
seems  to  be  an  instinct  in  humanity.  There  is  a  nerve  in  humanity  that  runs  through 
all  races  and  all  generations,  linking  men  together.  " No  man  liveth  to  himself; "  all 
men  are  in  one.  The  more  moral  goodness  a  man  has  in  him  the  more  sensitive  this 
nerve  becomes.  Hence  the  best  men  in  all  ages  have  been  the  men  who  made  provision 
for  posterity. 

lY.  A  DEAD  MAN  EXEBTiNO  A  WONDERFUL  niTLUENOB.  "  It  Came  to  pass,  as  they 
were  burying  a  man,  that,  behold,  they  spied  a  band  of  men ;  and  they  cast  the  man 
into  the  sepulchre  of  Elisha :  and  when  the  man  was  let  down,  and  touched  the  bone* 
of  EUsha,  he  revived,  and  stood  up  on  his  feet,"  The  incident  which  takes  place  in 
his  grave  ia  as  strange  as  it  is  significant  and  suggestive.  The  bearers  of  a  dead 
man,  struck  with  terror  at  the  approach  of  enemies,  instead  of  carrying  the  remains 
to  their  appointed  resting-place,  pushed  them  into  the  sepulchre  where  slept  the  bones 
of  the  illustrious  Elisha.  No  sooner  did  the  corpse  touch  the  sacred  relics  of  the  great 
seer  than  it  quivered  with  life,  and  the  dead  man,  to  the  astonishment  of  all,  revived, 
and  stood  on  his  feet.  This  miraculous  incident  was  designed  and  calculated  to  make 
a  wholesome  moral  impression  on  the  mind  of  the  age.  It  had  a  tendency  to  demon- 
strate to  all  the  Divinity  of  the  prophet's  mission,  to  show  the  honour  with  which 
the  Eternal  treats  the  holy  dead,  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  Power  superior  to  death, 
and  to  foreshadow  a  future  state.  Whilst  I  would  at  all  times  studiously  endeavour 
to  avoid  the  mistake  of  what  is  called  spiritualizing  God's  Word,  I  feel  that  it  is  lawful 
to  use  an  incident  like  this  as  an  illustration  of  spiritual  realities.  The  incident  which 
occurred  in  the  grave  of  Elisha  on  this  occasion,  viz.  the  deriving  of  life  by  contact 
with  the  holy  dead,  is,  in  the  material  department  of  things  to  which  it  belongs, 
sublimely  singular.  Such  an  event  as  this,  perhaps,  wiU  never  occur  again;  but  a 
thing  analogous  to  this  in  the  spiritual  domain  is,  .thank  God,  of  frequent  occurrence. 
The  dead  minds  of  earth  are  constantly  deriving  life  from  contact  with  the  spiritual 
remains  of  the  dead.— D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — laraeVt  humiliation  under  JehoahoM.     The  story  of  the  ralgn  tt 
Jehoahaz,  Jehu's  son,  is  a  story  of  unmitigated  misfortune.    We  note— 
L  Jkboahas'b  XTiti  UU8N.     L  2%<  downward  mov«m$at  in  Itrad,     With  tkt 


CH.  xm.  1— 25.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  ^'^ 

cztiDction  of  AhaVs  honse,  the  rooting  out  of  Baal,  kdA  the  establishment  of  Jehu'ii 
dynasty  Israel  obtained  a  new  chance  of  doing  well.  But  Jehu's  reforming  zeal  soon 
died  out,  and  he  fell  back  into  godless  ways.  His  son  followed  the  worse,  and  not 
the  better,  traditions  of  his  father's  reign.  Thus  the  downward  movement  again 
began.  Of  Jehoahaz  also  the  old  monotonous  refrain  has  to  be  spoken,  "  He  did  that 
wMcb  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  This  is  the  burden  of  the  song  regarding 
every  king  of  Israel.  In  the  whole  line,  from  first  to  last,  there  is  not  one  of  whom  a 
difi'erent  report  can  be  given.  2.  The  cardinal  sin.  The  foremost  sin  of  all  these 
monarchs — that  which  fatally  entangled  them  in  other  sins — was  the  perpetuation  of 
the  worship  of  the  calves.  Beligion  affects  the  springs  of  morality,  and  this  idolatrous 
eultus  sent  poisonous  streams  through  the  whole  life  of  the  nation.  It  was  the  grand 
transgression  which,  amidst  all  temporary  reforms,  was  never  abandoned. 

II.  The  Stbian  oppression.  1.  Divine  anger.  "  The  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled 
against  Israel."  God  had  done  so  much  for  the  people,  had  granted  them  so  favour- 
able an  opportunity  for  repentance,  had  counselled  and  warned  them  so  long  by  great 
prophets  like  Elijah  and  Elisha,  that  he  was  justly  wroth  with  them  for  their  continued 
tranggressions.  God  is  jealous  of  his  honour,  and  presumptuous  transgressors  must 
expect  to  find  his  hand  laid  heavily  upon  them.  When  God's  anger  is  kindled  against 
a  people,  things  cannot  go  well.  Troubles  break  out  on  every  side,  and  calamities  fall 
thick  and  fast.  2.  Weight^/  chastisements.  God  delivered  the  people  of  Israel  into  the 
hands  of  the  kings  of  Syria — Hazael  and  Benhadad.  This  time  it  was  no  passing 
invasion.  The  completeness  of  the  conquest,  and  the  severity  of  the  oppression,  recall 
the  days  of  the  judges,  or  the  Philistine  oppression  of  the  reign  of  Saul  ^iidg.  v. 
6,  7 ;  1  Sam.  xiii.  19 — 22).  Out  of  the  hosts  of  Israel  there  was  left  to  Jehoahaz 
but  fifty  horsemen,  and  ten  chariots,  and  ten  thousand  footmen.  Elisha's  foresight  of 
the  evils  which  Hazael  would  inflict  on  the  nation  was  thus  terribly  verified.  Again 
is  the  reflection  forced  on  us — How  bitter  is  the  fruit  of  sin !  The  Bible  is  little  else 
than  a  repeated  enforcement  of  the  truth,  "  Say  ye  to  the  rightoous,  that  it  shall  be 
well  with  him.  .  .  .  Woe  unto  the  wicked  1  it  shall  be  ill  with  him :  for  the  reward  of 
his  bands  shall  be  given  him"  (Isa.  iii.  10,  11). 

III.  Jbhoahaz's  pbayek,  and  its  answbe.  1.  2%«  king's  prayer.  The  very 
existence  of  the  kingdom  seemed  threatened.  Happily,  the  desperate  straits  to  which 
he  was  reduced  led  Jehoahaz  to  humble  himself  before  God.  He  felt  himself  in  the 
hands  of  a  living  God,  and,  rightly  tracing  the  calamities  which  had  befallen  him  to 
Jehovah's  anger,  he  turned  to  Jehovah  for  his  help.  The  chastisements  with  which 
God  visits  men  for  their  sins  are  designed  to  break  their  pride  and  stubbornness,  and 
lead  them  to  repentance.  They  often  have  the  effect  of  producing  a  temporary  sub- 
mission, though  they  cannot  of  themselves  change  the  heart.  We  have  examples  in 
Pharaoh  (Exod.  viii.  28)  and  in  Ahab  (1  Kings  xxi.  27).  2,  Ood's  answer  to  the 
prayer.  A  prayer  wrung  from  the  king,  not  by  the  sense  of  his  sin,  but  by  the 
intolerable  pressure  of  affliction,  might  have  been  thought  undeserving  of  an  answer. 
But  the  Lord  is  very  pitifiil,  and  welcomes  the  faintest  approach  of  the  sinner  unto 
him.  He  does  not  thrust  the  suppliant  away,  but  seeks,  by  giving  him  tokens  of  his 
grace,  to  ripen  his  imperfect  desires  into  real  repentance.  Accordingly,  the  approaches 
of  Jehoahaz  to  the  throne  of  grace  met  with  a  gracious  response.  God  promised  a 
saviour  to  the  land,  and  ultimately  raised  one  up  in  the  person  of  Joash,  who,  but  for 
his  want  of  perseverance,  would  have  completely  deUvered  the  nation  from  the  Syrians. 
The  work  wiiich-  he  left  undone  was  finished  by  his  son,  Jeroboam  II.  Thus  God 
shows  himself  ready  to  hear  the  cries  even  of  the  worst  of  men.  None  need  despair 
in  calling  on  Heaven  when  Jehoahaz  was  listened  to  in  such  dire  straits.  Happy  they 
who  are  led  to  call,  though  it  be  from  the  depths,  to  God  (Ps.  cxxx.  1).  He  will  not 
turn  any  away.  His  promise  is,  "Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble  :  I  wiU  deliver 
thee  "  (Ps.  1.  15).  3.  Imperfect  repentance.  The  imperfection  of  Jehoahaz's  repentance 
Is  seen  in  the  fact  that  the  worship  of  the  calves  was  still  maintained ;  also  there 
remained  the  symbol  of  Astarte  in  Samaria.  God's  promise  having  been  given,  waa 
not  revoked,  and  there  were  other  reasons  why  he  was  willing  to  help  &»  people 
(jet,  23).    But  these  sins  in  high  places  wrought  ruin  afterwards. — J.  O. 

Yen.  8 — 19. — Joa$h  and  Elitha.    J°hoahaz  reigned  for  lerenteen  years,  and  waa 


276  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.      [CH.  xm,  1— 25„ 

succeeded  bj  his  sou  Jehoash,  or  Joash.    In  this  reign,  •fUr  «  long  interval,  Elisha 
•gain  appears. 

I.  AcoEBSioM  or  JoABH.  The  change  of  rulers  was  in  some  respects  a  gain  for 
Israel.  Joash  was  a  man  of  better  disposition  than  his  &ther,  and  under  his  reign 
the  kingdom,  which  had  been  so  sorely  broken  down,  was  again  partially  built  up. 
But  he  still  adhered  to  the  cardinal  sin  of  the  nation — the  calf-worship — so  that  of  him 
also  the  formula  has  to  be  employed,  "  He  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord."  That  is,  notwithstanding  military  successes,  and  some  signs  of  respect  for  and 
attention  to  Elisha's  monitions,  things  still  remained  on  a  fundamentally  false  basis 
in  the  kingdom.  So  Herod  feared  John  the  Baptist,  and  observed  him,  and,  when  be 
heard  him,  did  many  things,  and  heanl  him  gladly,  yet  remained  a  bad  man  (Mark 
\i.  20).  God's  judgment  on  men  is  not  according  to  superficial  characteristics,  but 
according  to  the  fundamental  bent  of  their  minds. 

II.  Elisha  on  his  death-bed.  1.  MisJia's  sickness.  Elisha  by  this  time  was  a  very 
old  man.  He  was  Elijah's  attendant  in  the  reign  of  Ahab ;  he  was  a  prominent  figure 
in  the  reigns  of  Ahaziah  and  Jehoram ;  he  gave  the  commission  to  Jehu  to  overthrow 
the  incurably  corrupt  dynasty  of  Ahab,  and  lived  through  the  twenty-eight  years  of 
that  king's  reign;  he  witnessed  the  troubles  of  the  reign  of  Jehoabaz,  and  was  per- 
haps the  means  of  that  monarch  being  led  to  humble  himself  before  God;  now,  in 
Joash's  reign,  he  is  still  alive.  From  the  time  of  Jehu's  accession  he  seems  to  have 
taken  little  part  in  the  political  life  of  the  nation ;  at  least,  no  accoiuts  of  his  activity 
remain  to  us.  When  the  curtain  again  lifts  he  is  lying  on  his  death-bed.  It  was  not 
to  be  with  him  as  with  Elijah.  Be  must  pay  the  common  debt  to  nature,  experience 
the  infirmities  of  age,  be  smitten  with  sickness,  and  succumb  to  death.  The  longest 
and  most  useful  life  thus  comes  to  its  close.  It  is  well  when,  on  a  death-bed,  one  can 
look  back  on  a  life  which  has  been  spent  in  the  service  of  God.  2.  The  visit  of  Joash. 
To  the  bedside  of  the  dying  Elisha  came  the  King  of  Israel,  apparently  drawn  thereto 
by  sincere  reverence  and  respect  for  the  aged  prophet.  He  came  to  him,  it  is  said,  and 
wipt,  saying,  "0  my  father,  my  father,  the  chariot  of  Israel,  and  thehoisemen  thereof  I" 
This  language  speaks  to  former  relations  of  intimacy  and  friendship  between  the  king 
and  prophet.  Probably  Elisha  had  been  the  counsellor  of  his  youth,  and  had  guided 
and  encouraged  him  in  his  duties  as  king.  It  is  to  be  remembered  also  tliat  the 
promised  deliverance  from  the  Syiians  was  not  yet  begun.  The  kingdom  was  still 
in  humiliation  and  distress,  and  Joash  may  have  felt  as  if,  with  the  death  of  Elisha, 
the  last  spark  of  hope  for  the  nation  would  be  extinguished.  We  see  how,  in  the 
hour  of  extremity,  good  men  are  felt,  even  by  the  ungodly,  to  be  a  tower  of  strength 
to  the  state.  Their  presence  and  prayers  are  its  truest  bulwark.  The  full  extent  of 
the  loss  sustained  by  their  removal  is  only  realized  when  they  are  taken  away.  We 
sec  also  how  possible  it  is  to  have  great  respect  for  God's  servants,  to  appreciate  their 
worth  to  the  community,  and  to  weep  over  and  deeply  regret  their  loss,  and  yet  not 
do  the  things  that  they  say.  Joash  shows  fairly  well  in  this  narrative,  but  his  conduct 
as  a  whole  is  stamped  as  "evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord." 

III.  The  arrow  of  deliverance.  Once  and  again  had  mighty  deliverances  for 
Israel  been  announced  through  Elisha.  The  last  was  to  be  the  greatest  of  all.  1.  The 
pledge  of  deliverance.  Kaising  himself  up  on  his  bed,  prophetic  fire  gleaming  in  his 
eye,  Elisha  bade  the  young  and  stalwart  king  take  his  bow  and  arrows.  Joash  did  as 
the  prophet  required,  not  yet  understanding  his  meaning,  but  no  doubt  forecasting 
some  encouraging  message.  Elisha  then  bade  him  put  his  hand  upon  his  bow,  and 
placing  his  own  hands  on  the  king's,  told  him  further  to  open  the  window  eastward, 
and  sljoot.  This  was  done.  Then  the  symbolic  action  was  explained.  That  arrow  he 
bad  shot  into  the  air  was  the  arrow  of  the  Lord's  deliverance,  an  arrow  pledging  deliver- 
ance from  the  yoke  of  Syria.  It  was  shot  eastwards,  because  the  Syrian  ravages  were  com- 
monly from  that  quarter  (ch.  x.  32,  33).  1'he  action  declares :  (1)  That  deliverance  in 
trouble  is  from  God  only.  As  he  alone  can  give  it,  so  he  is  the  true  Source  from  which 
to  seek  it.  (2)  GK)d  employs  human  agency  in  his  deliverances.  The  bow  and  arrows 
were  the  symbols  of  the  human  instrumentality.  Joash  had  to  put  his  hands  upon  the 
bow.  It  was  he  who  shot  the  arrow.  It  was  he  who  was  to  smite  the  Syrians.  Man 
has  his  part  given  him  in  all  God's  works  of  deliverance  on  earth.  (3)  The  human 
agent  could  oiUy  lucceed  as  God  strengthened  him.    Elisha  put  his  hands  upon  Joash's, 


OH.  xni.  1—25.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  2T7 

■igni^ng  that  the  power  to  gain  tlie  predicted  victories  came  from  God.  His  handu 
were  to  be  "  made  strong  by  the  hands  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob  "  (Gen.  xlii.  24).  It 
is  on  God's  power  we  must  always  rely  for  victory.  "  Not  unto  us,  0  Lord,  not  unto 
us,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxv.  1).  2.  The  victories  in  detail.  The  symbol  was  not  yet  complete. 
Joash's  quiver  was  yet  full,  minus  that  one  arrow,  and  the  prophet  bade  him  shoot 
other  arrows,  this  time  to  the  ground,  as  if  smitiog  something  down  to  it.  Joash 
took  his  arrows  and  began  to  smite.  He  shot  once,  and  twice,  and  thrice,  then  stayed. 
The  prophet  wab  ';vroth  at  this,  and  told  him  he  should  have  gone  on  smiting,  then 
would  the  Syrians  have  been  wholly  consumed,  whereas  now  he  would  only  gain  three 
victories  over  them.  These  successive  smitings,  therefore,  represented  the  victories 
in  detail  which  Joash  would  gain  over  the  Syrians.  One  is  at  a  loss  at  first  to  see  why 
the  prophet  should  have  dealt  so  severely  with  the  king  for  what  may  have  been  a 
perfectly  natural  mistake.  But  the  stopping  with  the  third  arrow  no  doubt  brought 
to  light  a  certain  weak  line  in  Joash's  character — a  want  of  perseverance,  a  tendency 
to  be  satisfied  with  partial  results,  to  stop  short  of  the  ultimate  goal  of  effort.  And 
one  can  see  how  that  may  have  hindered  his  complete  success  over  the  Syrians.  We 
learn  :  (1)  Very  trivial  actions  often  reveal  a  great  deal  of  character.  (2)  We  often 
have  not  from  God  because  we  ask  not.  These  shootings  of  the  arrows  were  at  once 
prayers  for  victories  from  God,  and  pledges  of  victories.  Joash,  as  it  were,  asked  for 
only  three  victories,  and  he  only  got  three.  Had  he  asked  for  more,  he  would  have 
got  more.  Had  Abraham  not  ceased  pleading  for  Sodom  when  he  did,  he  might  have 
got  a  yet  further  extension  of  grace  for  that  doomed  city  (Gen.  xviii.  32,  33).  It  is 
never  in  God  we  are  straitened  in  our  prayers;  it  is  only  in  ourselves.  (3)  It  displeases 
God  that  we  do  not  ask  more  from  him.  His  controversy  with  us  is  not  that  we  ask 
too  much,  but  that  we  do  not  ask  enough.  Joash  missed  the  full  blessing  by  stopping 
in  his  asking. — J.  0. 

Vers.  20,  21. — Power  in-  dead  hones.  These  verses  contain  a  circumstantial  notice 
of  a  singular  miracle  that  was  wrought  at  Elisha's  sepulchre  by  contact  with  his  bones. 
Bands  of  Moabites  were  ravaging  the  country,  and  one  of  these  bands  came  upon  the 
Ecene  during  a  funeral.  The  mourners  were  terrified,  and  hastily  thrust  the  corpse 
into  Elisha's  sepulchre,  which  was  hard  by ;  whereupon  the  dead  man,  having  touched 
the  bones  of  Elisha,  revived  and  stood  upon  his  feet.     We  notice — 

I.  Thb  good  HAN  LAID  IN  HIS  OBAVB.  Elisha's  sickness  had  proved  to  be  indeed 
unto  death,  and  his  mortal  remains  had  been  reverently  conveyed  to  a  sepulchre.  He 
who  had  been  the  means  of  restoring  life  to  others,  whose  very  bones  were  made  the 
instrument  of  reviving  the  dead,  was  not  able  to  protect  himself  from  the  universal 
law.  He  left  the  world  by  the  same  gate  as  ordinary  mortals.  It  is  pathetic  to  reflect 
that,  however  long  and  useful  a  life  may  be,  this  is  always  the  end  of  it.  The  certainty 
of  removal  by  death  from  the  scene  of  their  labours  should  animate  those  who  are  still 
in  the  vigour  of  their  powers  to  work  while  it  is  to-day  (John  ix.  4),  and  should  lead 
those  who  enjoy  the  presence  and  services  of  good  men  to  prize  and  honour  these 
servants  of  God  while  they  are  here.  From  the  side  of  the  saint  himself  death  is  not 
a  calamity,  but  •  gain.  "He  rests  from  his  labours,  and  his  works  follow  him" 
(Rev.  xiv.  13). 

II.  PowEB  ISSUING  FBOM  THB  OOOD  man's  gbave.  Though  Elisha  was  not  taken 
to  heaven  as  Elijah  was  without  tasting  of  death,  he  had  yet  great  honour  put  upon 
him  in  his  death.  God  set  the  seal  on  his  prophetic  work  by  making  life-giving  power 
to  issue  even  firom  <his  grave.  The  miracle  suggests  to  us  the  fact  that  from  every 
good  man's  grave  there  issues  in  an  important  sense  a  life-giving  power.  The  influence 
of  men  does  not  die  with  them.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  often  greater  after  their  deaths 
than  during  their  lives.  1.  Sometimes  in  a  literal  sense  the  grave  is  a  source  of  new 
lift  to  men.  In  the  act  of  committing  dust  todust,  and  ashes  to  ashes,  holy  impressions 
steal  over  men,  new  resolves  take  possession  of  their  hearts.  Many  a  man,  e.g.,  has 
been  brought  to  his  senses  at  the  graveside  of  a  father  or  mother,  whose  counsels, 
perhaps,  he  disrer;arded  in  life.  2.  Sumetimes  in  a  figurative  sense  souls  are  quickened 
ly  the  bones  of  the  dead.  A  man's  actions,  for  instance,  are  things  of  the  past  when  he 
is  dead.  But  they  may  be  written  in  a  book,  and  become  a  source  of  life  to  countless 
generations  who  read  them  afterwards.    It  is  but  a  few  facts  of  any  man's  life  which 


278 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  xiv.  1— 29, 


can  be  thus  rescued  from  oblivion — the  mere  bones  of  his  history ;  but  what  a  power  if 
in  them  I  So  of  a  man's  words.  The  fragments  of  a  man's  speech  that  can  be  preserved 
in  any  collection  of  his  sayings  are  comparatively  few.  They  are  the  mere  bones  o( 
his  speech.  But  they  quicken  souls  through  the  ages.  The  words  of  David,  of  St. 
Paul,  of  the  prophets,  touch  and  work  on  souls  to  the  present  hour.  The  world  is  the 
Hving  thing  it  is  because  of  the  influence  of  these  dead  men  in  it.    They  are 

"  The  dead  but  sceptred  soy'rans, 
Who  rule  our  spirits  from  their  umi." 

3.  TIte  highest  life  ha*  eome  out  of  death.  Jesus  said,  "  Except  a  com  of  wheat  fall 
into  the  ground  and  die,  it  abideth  alone,"  etc.  (John  xiL  24).  Blisha  communicated 
resurrec  I  ion-power  without  himself  rising  from  the  dead;  Christ  haa  himself  risen, 
and  is  nuw  the  Principle  of  resurrection-life  to  others. — J.  0. 

Vers.  22 — 25. — Joash's  victories.  We  have  in  the  closing  verses  s  record  of  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  given  through  Elisha.    Notice — 

I.  The  obound  of  these  victories.  While  God  had  respect  to  the  prayer  of 
Jehoahaz,  there  was  a  deeper  ground  for  his  iaterposition  to  save  Israel.  He  was 
gracious  to  them,  and  had  compassion  on  them,  and  had  respect  to  them,  we  are  told, 
because  of  his  covenant  with  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob.  More  specifically,  we 
have  as  grounds :  1.  Love  to  the  fathers,  God  remembered  Abraham  and  Isaac  and 
Jacob,  and  would  not  hastily  cast  off  their  posterity  (of.  Deut.  iv.  37 ;  Bom.  xi.  28). 
Many  of  the  blessings  which  sinners  enjoy,  the  forbearance  God  shows  them,  etc.,  are 
due  to  the  prayers  of  godly  ancestors.  2.  Begard  for  his  own  promise.  God  had 
made  a  covenant  with  the  patriarchs,  and  had  promised  to  be  a  God  to  them,  and 
to  their  seed  after  them.  That  covenant  was  the  main  fact  in  the  history  of  IsraeL 
It  underlies  and  governs  all  God's  dealings  with  them,  past,  present,  and  prospective. 
It  was  the  remembrance  of  this  covenant  which  led  to  the  deliverance  from  Egypt 
(Exod.  iL  24,  25) ;  to  the  settlement  in  Canaan  (Deut.  ix.  3) ;  and  to  God's  patient 
dealings  with  the  nation  amidst  their  various  rebellions,  and  under  their  constant 
provocations.  God  saved  them,  not  for  their  righteousness'  sake,  but  for  his  own 
Name's  sake.  He  is  the  God  of  unchanging  faithfulness.  3.  Unwillingness  to  destroy 
the  people.  God  casts  6ff  none  hastily,  for  he  has  "  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that 
dieth  "  (Ezek.  iviii.  32).  He  bears  long  with  men,  if  haply  they  will  repent.  Where- 
fore it  is  said,  "  He  would  not  destroy  them,  neither  cast  he  them  from  his  presence  as 
yet."  There  is  a  limit,  however,  to  Divine  forbearance.  The  time  came  when,  still 
remaining  impenitent,  they  were  cast  away,  though  even  then  not  for  ever. 

II.  The  extent  of  these  victories.  They  amounted,  as  Elisha  had  predicted, 
only  to  three.  Three  times  Joash  beat  the  King  of  Syria,  and  recovered  the  cities  of 
Israel  from  his  hand.  This  was  a  great  sain,  but  it  might  so  easily  have  been  greater, 
had  Joash  only  fulfilled  aright  the  conditions  of  success.  How  much  blessing  we  often 
deprive  ourstelves  of  by  our  own  unfaithfulness  and  shortcoming!  It  is  reason  for 
rejoicing  that  God  does  so  much  for  us ;  but  the  joy  must  eternally  be  shaded  by  regret 
when  we  reflect  that  it  is  by  our  own  doings  that  fix  more  is  not  done. — J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XrV. 


Vers.  1 — 29. — ^Beions  of  Amaziah,  son  of 
Joash  Kino  of  Judah,  over  Judah,  and  of 

JiBOBOAM,   SON  OF    JoASH   EiNG  OF  ISBABL, 

OVXB  Ibbail. 

Vers.  1— 20.— Thx  Beion  of  Amaziah 
ovEB  JuDAH.  This  chapter  takes  up  the 
history  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  from  the 
•nd  of  ch.  xii.,  with  which  it  is  closely  con- 


nected. The  writer,  after  a  few  sneh  general 
remarks  as  those  with  which  he  commonly 
opens  the  history  of  each  reign  (vers.  1 — 4), 
proceeds  to  relate  (I)  the  punishment  by 
Amaziah  of  the  murderers  of  his  father  (vers. 
5,  6);  (2)  the  war  of  Amaziah  with  Edom 
(ver.  7);  (3)  the  challenge  which  he  sent 
to  Joash  King  of  Israel,  that  king's  reply, 
and  the  war  which  followed  (vers.  8—16) ; 
and  (4)   the   eiroumstanoes  <d  Amuiab's 


oa.itv.l— 29,]       THE  SElCOND  600K  OF  THE  BlNfla. 


279 


death  (vera.  17 — 20).  Between  verg.  14  and 
16  theie  is  interposed  a  summary  of  the 
reign  of  King  Joash  of  Judah,  which  is  little 
more  than  a  repetition  of  ch.  ziii.  12,  13, 
and  is  thought  by  many  to  be  an  interpola- 
tion. 

Ver.  I.— In  the  aeoond  year  of  Joash  son 
of  Tehoahaz  Sing  of  Israel  reigned  Amaziah 
the  son  of  Joash  King  of  Jndah.  Again  the 
chronology  is  defective.  If  Joash  of  Israel 
ascended  the  throne  in  the  thirty-seventh 
year  of  Joash  of  Judah  (ch.  ziii.  lOX  and 
the  latter  reigned  forty  years  (oh.  :&.  1), 
Amaziah  cannot  have  become  king  till  the 
fourth  or  fifth  year  of  the  Iiraelitish  Joash, 
instead  of  the  second.  The  ordinary  expla- 
nation of  commentators  is  a  double  acces- 
sion ;  but  this  is  unsatisfactory.  It  is  best 
to  allow  that  the  chronology  of  the  later 
half  of  the  Israelite  kingdom  is  in  confusion. 

Yer.  2. — He  was  twenty  and  five  years  old 
when  he  began  to  reign,  and  reigned  twenty 
and  nine  years  in  Jemsalem.  Josephus 
('Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  9.  §  3)  and  the  author  of 
Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xzv.  1)  confirm  these 
numbers.  And  his  mother's  name  was  Je- 
hoaddan  of  Jemsalem.  Josephus  (1, 1. 0.)  calls 
her  Jodade,  but  the  LXX.  have,  more  cor- 
rectly, Joadim. 

Ver.  3. — ^And  he  did  that  which  was  right 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  yet  not  like  David 
his  father.  Only  one  King  of  Judah  hitherto, 
viz.  Asa,  liad  obtained  the  praise  that  he  "did 
that  which  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord, 
a»  did  David  his  father"  (1  Kings  xv.  11). 
All  the  others  had  fallen  short  more  or  less ; 
and  Amaziah  fell  short  in  many  respects, 
lie  was  wanting  in  "a  perfect  heart"  (2 
Chron.  zxv.  2),  i.«,  a  flzed  intention  to  do 
God's  will ;  he  was  proud  and  boastful  (ver. 
10);  he  gave  way  to  idolatry  in  his  later 
years  (2  Chron.  zzv.  11),  and  he  despised 
the  reproof  of  the  prophet  who  was  s.ent  to 
rebuke  his  sin  (2  Chron.  zzv.  16).  Though 
placed  among  the  "good  kings"  by  the 
authors  of  both  Kings  and  Chronicles,  it  is, 
as  it  were,  under  protest,  with  a  dutinot 
intimation  that,  although  better  than  most 
of  his  predecessors,  he  (ud  not  reach  a  high 
standard.  He  did  according  to  all  things  as 
Joash  his  father  did.  There  is  something  of 
Driental  hyperbole  in  this  statement,  which 
must  be  understood  in  the  spirit,  not  in  the 
letter.  The  two  kings  were  differently  cir- 
cumstanced, and  history  did  not  "repeat 
itself"  in  their  reigns.  The  position  of 
Joash  with  respect  to  Jehoiada  finds  no 
parallel  in  the  cironmstanoea  of  the  life  of 
Anaziah.  Still,  the  lives  are  parallel  to 
$ome  extent.  Both  kings  began  better  than 
tliey  ended.  Both  were  zealous  for  Jehovah 
at  first,  but  tamed  to  idolatry  at  laat    Both 


opposed  themaelvea  to  prophets,  and  treated 
their  rebukes  with  scorn.  Both  roused  con- 
•piracy  against  them  by  their  misconduct, 
and  were  mnrdered  by  the  malcontents. 
Further,  both  were  nnsuccessfnl  in  war,  had 
to  withstand  a  siege  of  their  capital,  and 
bonght  off  their  enemy  by  the  surrender  of 
the  greater  ptul  of  its  wealth,  including  the 
treasures  of  the  temple  (oomp.  ch.  siL  18 
with  ch.  ziv.  14). 

Ver.  4. — Eowbeit  the  high  places  were 
not  taken  away.  No  king  ventured  to  touch 
the  "  high  places  "  until  the  time  of  Heze- 
kiah,  by  whom  they  were  put  down  (oh, 
zviii.  4).  Even  Asa  did  not  remove  them 
(1  Kings  XT.  14).  They  were  remnants  of 
an  old  ancestral  worship  which  went  back 
to  the  time  of  the  jndgea,  and  which  had 
been  connived  at  by  jndgea  and  king^  and 
prophets.  Local  feeling  was  everywhere  in 
their  favour,  since  they  provided  for  local 
needs,  and  enabled  men  to  dispense  with 
the  long]  and  tedious  jonmey  to  the  distant 
Jerusalem.  As  yet  the  people  did  aaoriflce 
and  burnt  inoense  on  the  Ugh  places ;  lite- 
rally, wert  saerifieing  and  burning  inemse ; 
i.e.  continued  the  practice,  which  had  come 
down  to  them  from  their  ancestors.  (On  the 
morality  and  legality  of  the  practice,  see  the 
comment  on  1  Kings  iii.  2.) 

Yer.  5. — ^And  it  oame  to  pass,  as  soon  as 
the  kingdom  was  confirmed  in  his  hand. 
Joash  had  been  mnrdered  in  Jerusalem  by 
conspirators  (oh.  xii.  20).  A  time  of  trouble 
had,  no  doubt,  supervened.  The  conspirators 
would  not  wish  to  see  Amaziah  placed  upon 
the  tlirone,  and  may  have  opposed  and  de- 
layed his  appointment.  But  their  efforts 
proved  fruitless.  After  a  time,  the  young  king 
was  confirmed  (literally,  "strengthened"), 
i.e.  settled  and  established  in  his  kingdom,  all 
opposition  being  overcome  or  dying  away, 
l^s  seems  to  be  what  the  writer  means. 
He  cannot  intend  a  confirmation  by  a  foreign 
suzerain,  which  the  phrase  used  might  im- 
port (ch.  XV.  19),  when  he  has  given  no  hint 
of  any  subjection  of  the  kingdom  to  any 
foreign  power,  or  indeed  of  any  serious  at- 
tack on  its  independence.  That  he  slew  his 
servants.  Jozachar  and  Jehozabad  were 
"servants"  of  Joash,  apparently  domestic 
servants  employed  in  his  palace,  and  are 
therefore  reckoned  "servants"  also  of  his 
successor.  Whioh  had  alain  the  king  his 
father.  In  the  "  house  of  Millo,"  where  he 
lay  sick.  They  "slew  him  on  his  bed" 
(see  2  Chron.  zziv.  25). 

Yer.  6. — ^Bnt  the  children  of  the  murderers 
he  alew  not  It  was  the  ordinary  usage  in 
the  East  for  the  sons  of  traitors  to  share  the 
fate  of  their  fathers.  A  Greek  poet  went  so 
tar  as  to  say  that  a  man  was  a  fool  who  put 
to  death  the  father,  and  allowed  the  sod  to 
live.     The  practice  had  a  doable  ground. 


280 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  nv.l— 2ft 


Sons,  It  might  be  aBsamed,  wonid  be  cogni- 
zant of  their  father's  intention,  and  would 
GO  be  a«c68Sorie8  before  the  fact.  And  the 
law  of  daim,  or  "  blood-feud,"  would  make  it 
dangerouB  to  spare  them,  since  they  would 
be  bound  to  avenge  their  father's  death  on 
his  destroyer.  That  the  practice  prevailed 
among  the  Israelites  appears  from  Josh.  viL 
24,  where  we  find  the  children  of  Achan 
involved  in  his  fate,  and  again  from  2  Kings 
ix.  26,  where  we  are  told  that  Kaboth's  sons 
suffered  with  their  father.  But  it  was  con- 
trary to  an  express  command  of  the  Law,  as 
the  writer  goes  on  to  show.  According  unto 
that  which  is  written  in  the  book  of  the 
Law  of  Moses.  "  The  book  of  the  Law  of 
Moses "  (ri!?o-nniri  ibd)  may  be  either  the 
Pentateuch  regarded  as  one  book,  or  Deu- 
teronomy, the  particular  "  book  "  of  the  Pen- 
tateuch in  which  the  passage  occurs.  In 
either  case  the  passage  is  fatal  to  the  theory 
of  tlie  late  composition  of  Deuteronomy, 
which  is  here  found  t»  have  ruled  the  con- 
duct of  a  Jewish  king  a  hundred  and  fifty 
years  before  Manasseh,  two  hundred  before 
Josiah,  and  two  hundred  and  eighty  befoie 
the  return  from  the  Captivity — the  dates 
assigned  to  Deuteronomy  by  recent  "  ad- 
vanced" critics.  Wherein  the  Lord  com- 
manded, saying,  The  fathers  shall  not  be  put 
to  death  for  the  children,  nor  the  children 
be  put  to  death  for  the  fathers ;  but  every 
man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his  own  sin. 
As  usual,  when  one  sacred  writer  quotes 
another,  the  quotation  is  not  exact.  "  But " 
(DM  ^)  is  inserted  at  the  beginning  of  the 
final  clause,  and  the  form  of  the  verb  in  the 
same  clause  is  modified.  It  seems  to  be 
intended  that  we  should  be  made  to  feel 
that  it  is  the  sentiment  or  meaning  con- 
veyed, and  not  the  phraseology  in  which  it 
is  wrapped  up,  that  is  of  importance. 

Ver.  7. — He  slew  of  Edom  in  the  valley  of 
salt  ten  thousand.  Edom  had  revolted  from 
Judah  and  recovered  complete  independence 
in  the  reign  of  Jehoram,  about  fifty  years 
previously  (ch.  viii.  20).  Since  that  time  the 
two  countries  had  remained  at  peace.  Now, 
iiowever,  Amaziah  resolved  upon  a  great 
effort  to  resubjugate  them.  According  to 
Josephus  ('  Ant  Jud.,'  ix.  9.  §  1)  and  Chro- 
nicles (2  Ohron.  xxv.  5),  he  levied  an  army 
of  400,000  men— 800,000  Jews,  ami  100,000 
hired  Israelites — with  which  he  marched 
against  the  three  nations  of  the  Amalekites, 
the  IdumsBans,  and  the  Gabalitea.  Bebukpd 
by  u  prophet  for  want  of  faith  in  calling  to 
his  aid  the  wicked  Israelites,  he  consented 
to  dismiss  them,  and  made  the  invasion  at 
the  head  of  his  own  troops  only.  These 
were  carefully  organized  (2  Chron.  xxv.  5), 
and  met  with  a  great  tuccess.  Ten  thousand 
of  his  enemies  fell  in  battle,  and  an  equal 
number  were  made  prisoners.     These  last 


were  barbarously  pnt  to  death  by  being 
precipitated  from  the  top  of  a  rock  (2  Chron. 
xxv.  12).  "  The  valley  of  salt,"  the  scene 
of  the  battle,  is  probably  identified  with  the 
sunken  plain,  now  called  Es  Sahlcdh,  at  the 
southern  extri  mity  of  the  Dead  Sea.  This 
is  "  a  large  flat  of  at  least  six  miles  by  ten, 
occasionally  flooded  "  (Tristram),  but  dry  in 
the  summer-time.  It  is  full  of  salt  springs, 
and  is  bounded  on  the  west  and  north-west 
by  a  long  ridge  of  pure  salt,  known  as  the 
Khatm  Usdum,  so  that  the  name  "valley 
of  salt "  would  be  very  appropriate.  And 
took  Selah  by  war.  Selah  with  the  article 
(hai-Selah)  can  only  be  the  Idumsean  capi- 
tal, which  the  Greeks  called  Petra  (Tlerpa 
or  71  IlfTpa),  and  which  is  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  sites  in  the  world.  In  the  rocky 
mountains  wliich  form  the  eastern  boundary 
of  the  Arabah  or  sandy  slope  reaching  from 
the  edge  of  the  Sabkah  to  the  Red  Sea, 
amid  cliffs  of  gorgeous  colours,  pink  and 
crimson  and  purple,  and  ravines  as  deep 
and  narrow  as  that  of  Pfeffers,  partly  exca- 
vated in  the  rock,  partly  emplaced  upon  it, 
stood  the  Edomite  town,  difScult  to  approach, 
still  more  difficult  to  capture,  more  like  the 
home  of  a  colony  of  sea-gulls  than  that  of 
a  number  of  men.  Petra  is  graphically  de- 
scribed by  Dean  Stanley  ('  Sinai  and  Pales- 
tine,' pp.  88 — 92),  and  has  also  received 
notice  from  Eobinsou  ('  Eesearches,'  vol.  ii 
pp.  518-538),  High  ton  ('  Dictionary  of  the 
Bible,'  vol.  iii.  p.  1191)i  and  others.  And 
called  the  name  of  it  Joktheel ;  i.e.  "  sub- 
dued by  God."  The  name  took  no  perma- 
nent hold.  Selah  is  still  "  Sela  "  in  Isaiah 
(xvi.  1),  Obadiah  (ver.  3),  and  Jeremiah 
(xlix.  16).  It  is  known  only  as  "Petra"  to 
the  Greeks  and  Bomans.  Unto  this  day; 
i.e.  to  the  time  of  the  writer  who  composed 
the  account  of  -  Amaziah's  reign  for  the 
'  Book  of  the  Kings,'  and  whose  words  the 
author  of  Kings  transcribes  here  as  so  often 
elsewhere. 

Ver.  8.— Then  Amaziah  sent  messengers 
to  Jehoash,  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  son  of  Jehu, 
King  of  Israel,  saying,  Amaziah  had  a 
cause  of  complaint  against  Jehoash,  or  at 
any  rate  against  his  subjects,  which  does 
not  appear  in  the  narrative  of  Kings.  The 
author  of  Chronicles  tells  us  that,  when 
Amaziah  dismissed  his  Israelite  mercenaries 
they  were  offended,  and  vented  their  angei 
by  an  inroad  into  his  territories  (2  Ohron. 
xxv.  13),  where  they  killed  three  thousand 
men  and  "took  much  spoil."  This  was  a 
clear  casus  belli,  if  Amaziah  chose  to  con- 
sider it  such.  Come,  let  as  look  one  another 
in  the  face.  A  rude  message,  if  it  was 
actually  couched  in  these  terms.  But  per- 
haps the  writer  substitutes  the  giat  of  the 
message  for  the  language  in  which  it  was 
wrapped  up.    Josephus  says  that  Amaziah 


<m.  Tiv.  1— 29.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


281 


wrote  a  letter  to  Joash,  and  Teqnired  him  to 
submit  himself  and  people  to  the  authority 
of  the  Jewish  state,  and  thus  restore  the 
state  of  things  which  had  existed  under 
David  and  Solomon.  Otherwise  the  sword 
must  decide  between  them  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  ix. 
9.  §  2).  Whatever  its  terms,  piide  and  self- 
confidence,  the  result  of  his  success  against 
Edom,  were  at  the  root  of  the  challenge. 

Yer.  9. — And  Jehoash  the  King  of  Israel 
sent  to  Amaziah  King  of  Judah,  saying. 
According  to  Josephus,  the  reply  to  the 
thnllenge  was  given  in  a  formal  letter,  of 
which  he  presents  us  with  a  copy — 

"King  Joash  to  King  Amaziah  [sends 
greeting]: 

"  Once  upon  •  time  there  was  in  Monnt 
Lebanon  a  very  tall  cypn  ss,  and  also  there 
was  a  thistle.  And  the  thistle  sent  to  the 
cypress,  saying, 'Contract  thy  daughter  in 
marriage  to  my  son.'  And  while  this  was 
transacting,  a  wild  beast  passed  by  and  trod 
down  the  thistle.  Let  this  be  a  warning  to 
thee  not  to  cherish  immoderate  desires,  and 
not,  because  then  hast  bad  success  against 
Amalek,  to  pride  thyself  thereupon,  and  so 
draw  down  dangers  both  upon  thee  and 
upon  thy  kingdom." 

The  force  of  the  original  message  is  much 
weakened  in  this  paraphrase.  The  thistle 
that  was  in  Lebanon.  "  Thistle  "  is  a  better 
translation  than  "thorn-bush  "  (Keil),  first, 
as  a  meaner  growth,  and  secondly,  as  more 
likely  to  be  trodden  down  by  a  wild  beast. 
The  monarch  intends  to  say  that  the 
meanest  thing  in  the  Tegetable  world  sent 
to  the  grandest,  claiming  equality.  Sent  to 
the  cedar — certainly  "the  cedar,"  and  not 
"  the  cypress,"  as  translated  by  Jostphus  — 
that  was  in  Lebanon,  saying,  Give  thy 
daughter  to  my  son  to  wife.  Nube  pari 
was  a  Boman  maxim ;  and  the  rule  was  one 
generally  established  throughout  the  ancient 
world.  To  ask  a  man's  daughter  in  mar- 
riage for  one's  self  or  for  one's  son  was  to 
claim  to  be  his  equal.  And  there  passed 
by  a  wild  beast — literally,  a  beast  of  the 
fluid — that  was  in  Lebanon  (on  Lebanon 
a^  the  haunt  of  wild  beasts,  see  Cant,  iv. 
8),  and  trode  down  the  thistle.  So  levelling 
with  the  dust  the  pride  of  the  impertinent 
one.  We  must  not  seek  an  exact  applica- 
tion of  all  the  details  eitlier  of  a  fable  or  of 
a  parable.  It  is  not  required  that  metaphors 
should  "  run  on  all  fours." 

Ver,  10. — Then  hast  indeed  smitten  Edom 
(see  ver.  7,  and  the  comment),  and  thine 
heart  hath  lifted  thee  up— i.e.  made  thee 
proud,  exalted  thee  above  measure — glory 
«f  this,  and  tarry  at  home — i.e.  rest  content 
with  the  glory  which  thoa  hast  gained  in 
thy  Edomite  war;  make  thy  boast  thereof, 
but  do  not  afiiont  fireah  dangers— for  why 


dionldest  thon  meddle  to  thy  hurt — ^literally, 
why  wilt  thou  meddle  with  misfortune  t — 
that  thon  ihonldest  fall,  even  thou,  and 
Jndah  with  thee  1  Joash  was  as  confident 
of  success,  if  it  came  to  war,  as  Amariah. 
His  three  victories  over  Syria  (ch.  xiii.  25) 
were,  he  thought,  at  least  as  good  evidence 
of  military  strength  as  Amaziah's  one 
victory  over  Edom. 

Ver.  11. — But  Amaziah  would  not  hear. 
The  message  of  Joash  was  not  conciliatory, 
but  provocative.  On  hearing  it,  Amaziah 
(as  Josephus  says,  '  Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  9.  §  3) 
was  the  more  spurred  on  to  make  his  expedi- 
tion. Therefore  Jehoash  King  of  Israel  went 
up.  "  Joash,"  as  Bahr  says,  "  did  nut  wait 
for  the  attack  of  Amaziah,  but  anticipated 
his  movements,  and  carried  the  war  into  the 
enemy's  country."  Defensive  warfare  often 
requires  such  an  offensive  movement.  And 
he  and  Amaziah  King  of  Judah  looked  one 
another  in  the  face — i.e.  came  to  an  engage- 
ment (comp.  ver.  8)— at  Beth-shemesh,  which 
belongeth  to  Jndah.  Beth-sliemesh  was 
assigned  to  Judah  by  Joshua  (xix.  38), 
and  lay  on  its  western  frontier  line.  Its 
position  is  marked  by  the  modern  Ain- 
Shems,  which  lies  nearly  due  west  of  Jeru- 
salem, on  the  road  from  Hebron  to  Jaffa. 
Ain-Shems  itself  is  an  Arab  village,  but 
"just  to  the  west  of  it  are  the  manifest  traces 
of  an  ancient  site  "  (Kobinson,  '  Eesearches,' 
vol,  iii.  p.  17).  The  position  commands  the 
approaclk  from  the  Philistine  plain ;  and  we 
may  sut-pect  that  Joasli,  avoiding  the  direct 
line  of  approach,  led  his  troops  to  tho  attaclc 
througli  Philistia,  as  was  so  often  done  by 
ttie  Syrians  in  their  attacks  on  the  Mac- 
cabees (see  1  Mace.  iii.  40 ;  xiii.  12, 13 ;  xv. 
40 ;  xvi.  4—8,  etc.). 

Ver.  12. — And  Jndah  was  put  to  the  worse 
before  Israel;  and  they  fled  every  man  to 
their  tents ;  i.e.  "  to  their  homeg "  (see  the 
comment  on  ch  xiii.  5).  This  was  the  first 
trial  of  strength  between  the  two  nations  of 
which  we  have  any  distinct  account.  It 
resulted  in  the  complete  discomfiture  of 
Israel.  There  was  another  great  struggle  in 
the  time  of  Pekah  and  Ahaz,  wherein 
Ju<lah  suffered  even  more  severely  (see  2 
Chron.  xxviii.  6-8). 

Ver.  13.— And  Jehoash  King  of  Israel 
took  Amaziah  King  of  Judah,  the  son  of 
Jehoash  the  son  of  Ahaziah,  at  Beth-shemesh 
—  Josephus  says  (I.  «.  c)  that  Amaz'ali  Wits 
deserted  by  his  troops,  who  weret-eizod  with 
a  sudden  panic  andfied  from  the  field  -and 
came  to  Jerusalem,  and  brake  down  tho  wall 
of  Jerusalem.  According  to  Josephus, 
Joash  threatened  his  prisoner  with  death 
unless  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  were  opened 
to  him,  and  his  army  admitted  into  the 
town ;  and  it  was  upon  Amaziah's  repre- 
sentations that  the  surrender  was  made  aa 


28S 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  Kmoa       [oh.  xir.  1— 29. 


toon  ai  the  Iiraelite  army  appeared  before 
the  place.  The  breach  in  the  wall  was 
therefoie  not  the  result  of  siege  operations, 
bnt  the  act  of  a  conqueror,  who  desired  to 
leave  his  enemy  as  defenceless  as  possible. 
From  the  gate  of  Xphraite;  i.e.  the  main 
gate  in  the  northern  wall  of  the  city — tliat 
by  which  travellers  ordinarily  proceeded 
into  the  territory  of  the  tribe  of  £phraim. 
In  later  times  it  seems  to  have  been  called 
indifferently  "  the  gate  of  Ephraim  "  (Neh. 
viii.  16 ;  xii.  39)  and  "  the  gate  of  Ben- 
jamin" (Jer.  xxxviL  13;  Zeeh.  ilv.  10). 
The  great  norlh  road,  which  passed  through 
it,Ied  across  the  Benjamite  intothe  Kphraim- 
ite  territory.  TTuto  the  oomer  gate.  The 
"  oomer  gate  "  is  generally  thought  to  have 
been  that  at  the  north-western  angle  of  the 
city  wall,  where  it  turned  southward,  but 
this  is  perhaps  doubtful.  The  exact  line 
of  the  city  wall  in  the  time  of  Amaziah 
is  exceedingly  uncertain.  Four  hundred 
oubits;  six  hundred  feet,  or  two  hundred 
yards.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  entire 
distance  between  the  two  gates.  As  there 
were  at  least  thirteen  gates  in  the  circuit  of 
the  walls  (Neh.  iii.  1—31;  xii.  31—39; 
Zech.  xiv.  10),  wliich  were  probably  not 
more  extensive  than  those  of  the  present 
town  (3960  yards),  the  distance  of  two 
hundrra  yards  between  one  gate  and  an- 
other would  not  be  improbable,  the  average 
distance  being  about  three  hundred  yards. 

Ver.  11. — And  he  took  all  the  gold  and 
silver,  and  all  the  vessels  that  were  found ' 
in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  As  Joash  of 
Jndah  had,  fifteen  or  twenty  years  pre- 
viously, stript  tlie  temple  of  its  treasures 
to  buy  off  the  hostility  of  Hazael  (cb.  xii.  18), 
there  could  not  have  been  at  this  time  very 
much  for  Joash  of  Israel  to  lay  his  hands 
on.  Still,  whatever  there  was  passed  into 
the  possession  of  the  Israelite  king.  And  in 
the  treasures  of  the  king's  house.  Neither 
can  this  have  amounted  to  much,  unless  the 
booty  taken  from  Hazael  after  his  defeats 
(ch.  xiv.  25)  was  very  considerable.  And 
hostages.  This  is  a  new  feature  in  the 
warfare  of  the  time;  but  hostages  were 
given  and  taken  from  an  early  date  by  the 
Persians  (Xen., '  Cyrop.,'  iv.  2.  §  7 ;  Herod., 
vi.  99),  the  Greeks,  and  the  Romans. 

Vers.  15,  16.— Now  the  rest  of  the  acts 
of  Jehoash  which  he  did,  and  his  might,  and 
how  he  fought  with  Anu^iah  King  of  Jndah, 
are  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 
ehronioles  of  the  kings  of  Israeli  And 
Jehoash  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was 
buried  in  Samaria  with  the  kings  of  Israel ; 
and  Jeroboam  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead. 
These  verses  are  repeated  with  very  slight 
alterations  from  ch.  xiii.  11, 12.  Curiously, 
on  bothoooasions  they  are  out  of  piace.  It 
19  soanaly  worth  while  to  consider  how 


they  came  into  the  text  at  this  point,  since 
no  explanation  could  be  more  than  a  con- 
jecture. In  point  of  fact,  they  are  redun- 
dant. 

Ver.  17. — And  Amaziah  the  son  of  Joash 
King  of  Jndah  lived  after  the   death  of 
Jehoash  son  of  Jehoahaz  King  of  Israel 
fifteen  years.    This  note  of  time  is  based  on 
ver.  2,  which  makes  Amaziah  begin  to  reign 
in  the  eecond  year  of  Joash  of  Israi^l,  and 
hold  the  throne  for  twenty-nine  years.    If 
he  really  began  to  reign  in  the  fourth  year 
of  Joash,  he  would  have  survived  him  only 
thirteen  years  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  2). 
Ver.   18. — And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Amaziah— especially  the  circumstances  of 
his  war  with  Bdom,  as  related  in  2  (3hron. 
XXV.  5—13,  his  idolatry  (2  Chron.  xxv.  14), 
and  the  rebuke  which  he  received  from  one 
of  God's  prophets  (2  Chron.  xxv.  15,  16)  in 
consequence— are  they  not  written  in  the 
book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Judah  t 
Ver.   19. — Now  they  made  a  eonspiracy 
against  him  in  Jems^em.    The  author  of 
Chronicles  connects  this  conspiracy  with 
the  idolatry  of  which  Amaziah  was  guilty 
(2  Chrou.  xxv.  27) ;  but,  though  his  subjects 
may  have  been  offended  by  his  religious 
clianges,  and  liave  become  alienated  from 
him  in  consequence,  the  actual  conspiracy 
can  scarcely  have  been  prompted  by  an  act 
which  was  fifteen,  or  at  any  rate  thirteen, 
years  old.     It  is  more  likely  to  have  sprung 
outof  dissatisfaction  with  Amaziab'smilitary 
inaction  from  and  after  his  defeat  by  Joash. 
While  Jeroboam  U.  was  carrying  all  before 
him  in   the  north,  recovering  his  border, 
pushing  it  as  far  as   Hamath,  and  even 
exercising  a  suzerainty  over  Damascus  (vers. 
25,  28),  Amaziali  remained  passive,  cowed 
by  his  one  defeat,  and  took  no  advantage 
of  the  state  of  weakness  to  which  he  had 
reduced  Edom,  but  sat  with  folded  hands, 
doing  nothing.     The  conspirators  who  re- 
moved Amaziah,  and  placed  bis  son  Azarlah, 
or  Uzziah,  upon  the  throne,  may  be  credited 
with  the  wish  and  intention  to  bring  the 
period  of  inaction  to  an  end,  and  to  effect  in 
the  south  what  Jeroboam  was  effecting  in 
the  north.    It  is  true  that  Azariah  was  but 
sixteen  years  of  age  (ver.  21 ;  comp.  2  Chron. 
xxvi.  1),  but  he  may  have  given  indications 
of  his  ambition    and    capacity.      Sixteen, 
moreover,  is  the  time  of  manhood  in  the 
East,  and  the  conspirators  had  probably 
waited  until  Azariah  was  sixteen  in  order 
that  his  competency  to  reign  should  not  be 
disputed.    As  soon  as  he  was  on  the  throne 
he  initiated  the  warlike  policy  which  they 
desired  (see  ver.  22).    Andhefledtolachish. 
Lachish,  one  of  the  south-western  Judiean 
towns  (Josh.  XV.  39),  was  at  all  times  a 
fortress  of  importance.    It  resisted  Joshiia 
(x.  3, 81),  and  was  takwn  ij  stona.    It  waa 


CH.  Tiv.  1— 29.J       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


283 


fortifled  by  Jeroboam  againit  the  Egyptinni 
(2  Chron.  xi.  9).  It  was  besieged  and 
taken  by  Sennacherib  (oh.  zviii.  14 ;  Layard, 
•Nineveh  and  Babylon,'  pp.  149— 152X 
The  poBition  is  marked  by  the  modern  Urn- 
LaJeU,  on  "  a  low  round  swell  or  knoll," 
between  Oaza  and  Beit-Jibrin,  about 
thirteen  miles  from  Gaza  and  nearly  thirty- 
fire  from  Jerusalem.  But  they  sent  after 
him  to  Lachish,  and  slew  him  there.  So 
the  author  of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxv.  27) 
anil  Josephus  (*  Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  9.  §  3) ;  but 
details  are  wanting. 

Ver.  20.— And  they  brought  him  on 
horses ;  literally,  on  the  horsee,  wliich  must 
mean  "  on  his  horses."  Probably  Amaziah 
had  fled  to  Lachish  in  the  royal  chariot, 
and  his  body  was  now  brought  back  in  it 
to  Jerusalem.  Tlie  conspirators  were  evi- 
dently minded  to  treat  the  royal  coj  pse  with 
all  respect.  And  he  was  buried  at  Jerusalem 
with  his  fathers  in  the  city  of  David ;  i.e. 
the  city  on  the  eastern  hill,  which  Uavid 
took  from  the  Jebusites  (see  the  comiueut 
on  1  Kings  ii.  10). 

Vers.  21,   22. — Succession  of  Azariah 

AND  EeSUMPTION  OF  THE  WaB  WITH  BdOM. 

Though  reserving  his  account  of  the  reign 
of  Azaviah  to  the  next  chapter  (vers.  1 — 7), 
the  writer  is  led  by  the  circumstances  of 
Amaziah's  death  to  mention  at  once  the  fact 
of  bis  son  Azariah's  succession,  and  the  first 
important  act  of  his  reign,  the  resumption 
of  war  with  Edom.  He  then  breaks  off 
suddenly,  in  order  to  interpose  an  account 
of  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  II.,  who  was  con- 
temporary with  Amaziah  during  fourteen 
years  of  his  reign. 

Ver.  21. — And  all  the  people  of  Jndah 
took.  Azariah.  This  is  a  new  expression, 
and  implies  a  new,  perhaps  a  tumultuary, 
proceeding.  Thepeople,  uncertain  probably 
of  the  intentions  of  the  couspirators,  and 
fearful  that  they  might  set  up  a  king  not  of 
the  house  of  David,  took  the  initiative,  went 
to  the  royal  palace,  and  finding  there  a  son 
of  Amaziah — whether  his  eldest  son  or  not, 
we  cannot  say— proclaimed  him'  king  and 
placed  him  upon  the  throne.  The  author 
of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xvt  1)  agrees. 
Josephus  is  silent.  Which  was  sixteen 
years  old.  Toung  certainly,  considering 
that  his  father  was  fifty-four  (see  ver.  2), 
but  not  necessarily  "  a  younger  son,"  since 
Amaziah's  earlier  children  may  have  been 
daughters,  or  he  may  have  married  late  in 
life.  It  is  not  doubted  that  Manasseh  was 
Hezekiah's  eldest  son,  yet  he  was  only 
twelve  when  Hezekiah  died  at  the  same 
age  as  Amaziah,  vis.  fifty-four.    And  made 


him  king  instead  of  his  father  Amadah. 
There  are  two  forms  of  the  king's  name, 
Azariah  and  TTzziah.  The  difftrence  be- 
tween them  is  not  so  great  in  the  Hebrew, 
where  they  both  begin  with  the  same  letter; 
but  still  it  is  considerable.  One  name  is 
not  a  mere  contraction  of  the  other.  Some 
suppose  that  the  king  changed  one  name 
for  the  other  upon  his  accession;  others, 
that  he  was  called  indifferently  by  either, 
since  they  were  Tory  similar  in  meaning. 
"  Azariah  "  is  "  he  whose  help  is  Jehovah  ; " 
"  Uzziah,"  "  he  whose  strength  is  Jehovah." 
"  Uzziah  "  is  the  predominant  form,  occur- 
ring four  times  in  2  Kings,  twelve  times  in 
2  Chroniclea,  three  times  in  Isaiah,  once  in 
Hosea,  once  in  Amos,  and  once  in  Zeciiariab  ; 
wliile  "Azariah"  occurs  only  in  2 -Kings 
(eight  times)  and  in  1  Chron.  iii.  12  (once). 
Josi.'phus  uses  the  form  "  Ozias  "  (equivalent 
to  "  Uzziah),"  and  so  does  St.  Matthew  (i. 
8,9). 

Ver.  22. — He  built  Elath,  and  restored  it 
to  Judah.  On  the  position  of  Klath,  or 
Eloth,  and  its  importance,  see  the  cnmrnent 
on  1  Kings  ix.  26.  It  had  been  the  head- 
quarters of  Solomon's  fleet  (1  Kings  ix.  26), 
and  again  of  Jehoshaphat's  (1  Kings  xxii. 
48 ;  2  Chron.  xi.  36) ;  but  had  been,  of 
course,  recovered  by  the  Bdomites  when 
they  revolted  (ch.  viii.  22).  Azariah's  re- 
occupation  seems  to  imply  an  intention  on 
his  part  of  renewing  the  old  Bed  Sea  trade. 
By  "  built"  in  this  passage  we  must  under- 
stand "rebuilt,"  or  (as  in  2  Ciiron.  xi.  6) 
"  fortified,"  After  that  the  king  slept  with 
his  fathers.  Keil  is  probably  right  in 
understanding  this  to  mean  "immediately 
after  he  had  ascended  the  throne,"  or  "  as 
soon  as  ever  his  father  was  dead  "  (see  the 
comment  on  ver.  19).  His  further  military 
successes  will  be  considered  in  tlie  comment 
on  his  reign,  as  sketched  in  the  next 
chapter. 

Vers.  23 — 29. — Eeion  of  Jeboboah  th» 
Son  of  Joabh  over  Isbael.  This  reign, 
the  most  important  of  those  belonging  to  the 
kingdom  of  Israel  since  that  of  Ahab,  is 
treated  with  great  brevity  by  the  writer, 
whose  interest  is  far  more  in  Judah  than 
in  Israel.  Seven  verses  only  are  devoted  to 
bim.  The  result  of  his  wars  is  given  with- 
out any  account  of  the  wars  themselves. 
And  the  great  fact  of  his  ruling  over 
Damascus  only  comes  in  by  a  sort  of  after- 
thought (ver.  28).  The  usual  formulas  are 
followed  in  introducing  his  reign  and  dis- 
missing it. 

Ver.  23. — In  the  fifteenth  year  of  Amailah 
the  son  of  Joash  King  of  Judah— this  note  of 


284 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xiv.  1— 29, 


time  agrees  with  tbose  in  oh.  xiii.  10  and 
ch.  xiv.  1, 17,  bnt  not  with  that  in  oh.  xv. 
1  (see  the  comment  on  that  passage)— Jero- 
boam the  son  of  Joash  King  of  Israel  began 
to  reign  in  Samaria,  and  reigned  forty  and 
one  years.  Jofephns  says  "forty  years." 
Many  moderns  (Thenius,  Bahr,  and  others) 
extend  the  term  to  fifty-one  years.  Sume 
suppose  that  Jeroboam  was  joint-king  with 
his  tiB,ther  in  Amaziah'g  third  year,  sole 
king  from  his  fifteenth.  But  it  is  better  to 
acknowledge  the  general  confusion  of  the 
chronology,  and  to  regard  it  as  uncertain, 
unless  where  a  synchronism  is  distinctly 
made  out.  Such  assured  synchronisms  are 
the  following :  (1)  The  synohrouisin  of 
Ahab  with  Jehosliaphat;  (2)  the  synchro- 
nism of  Jelioram,  Ahab's  sou,  with  the 
same;  (3)  the  synchronism  of  Jehu's  first 
year  with  the  fhrst  year  of  Athaliah;  (4) 
the  synchronism  of  Amaziah  with  Joash 
of  Israel;  (5)  the  synchronism  of  Pekah 
with  Ahaz ;  (6)  the  synchronism  of  Hoshea's 
last  year  with  Hezekiah'g  sixth;  (7)  the 
synclironism  of  Amaziah's  fourteenth  year 
with  Jeroboam  II.'b  first,  being  t  trice  asserted 
in  two  distinct  forms  (rers.  17  and  23),  is, 
at  any  rate,  highly  probable.  Numbers 
which  occur  once  only  in  ancient  writers 
can  seldom  be  implicitly  trusted,  since  the 
liability  of  numbers  to  oormption  ia  ex- 
tsessive. 

Ver.  24.— And  he  did  that  which  wag  evil 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord;  he  departed  not 
from  all  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  tiie  son  of 
Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin  (comp.  ch.  x. 
29  and  xiii.  2,  11,  where  the  same  is  said  of 
his  father,  grandfather,  and  great-grand- 
father). The  judgments  which  had  fallen 
upon  Jehu  and  jehoahaz  on  account  of 
these  sins  did  not  teach  any  lesson  to  Joash 
or  Jeroboam  II.  The  fatal  taint,  which  was 
congenital  with  the  Israelite  monarchy, 
could  nerer  be  purged  out,  but  clung  to  it 
to  the  end. 

Ver.  25. — He  restored  the  coast  of  Israel 
from  the  entering  in  of  Hamath.  By  "  the 
entering  in  of  Hamath"  is  to  be  understood 
the  opening  into  the  Coale-Syrian  Talley  a 
little  north  of  Baalbeo,  where  the  ground 
begins  to  slope  northwards,  and  the  streams 
to  flow  in  the  same  direction  to  form  the 
Orontes.  Hamath  itself  was  between  eighty 
and  ninety  miles  further  to  the  north,  on 
the  middle  Orontes,  about  N.  lat  35°  22'. 
The  "  entering  in  of  Hamath  "  was  always 
reckoned  the  northern  boundary  of  the 
Holy  liand  (see  Numb,  xxxiv.  8;  Josh, 
xiii.  5 ;  Jndg.  iiL  8 ;  1  Kings  viii.  65).  It 
corresponded  with  the  watershed  between 
the  Orontes  and  the  Litany.  Unto  the  sea 
of  the  plain.  The  "sea  of  the  plain"  is 
undoubtedly  the  Dead  Sea,  "the  plain" 
(ha-Arabah)  being  used  aa  a  sort  of  proper 


name  for  the  lower  Jordan  valley,  like  M- 
Ohor  at  the  present  day  (see  Deut.  iii.  17 ; 
Josh.  iii.  16;  xii.  3,  etc.).  The  territory 
recovered  no  doubt  included  all  the  trani- 
Jordanic  region  as  far  south  aa  the  river 
Arnon ;  bnt  the  recovery  of  dominion  over 
Moab,  and  even  over  Ammon,  which  some 
have  seen  in  this  passage  (Ewald,  'History 
of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  124),  is  scarcely  con- 
tained in  it.  According  to  the  word  of  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel,  wMch  he  spake  by  the 
hand  of  his  servant  Jonah,  tile  son  of 
Amittai  (comp.  Jonah  i.  1).  Jonah's  date 
ia  determined  by  this  passage.  He  was 
contemporary  with  Hosea  and  Amos,  and 
earlier  than  Micah.  His  prophecy  concern- 
ing Jeroboam  is  probably  assigned  to  the 
early  part  of  that  king's  reign.  The  prophet, 
which  was  of  Oath-hepher.  Gath-bepher  is 
mentioned  in  Joshua,  under  the  name  of 
Gittah-hepher,  as  a  city  of  Zebulon  (oh. 
xix.  13),  not  far  from  Mount  Tabor.  It  ia 
conjeoturally  identified  with  El-Meshhed 
north  of  Nazareth,  where  the  tomb  of  Jonah 
is  shown. 

Yer.  26. — For  the  Lord  saw  the  affliction 
of  Israel,  that  it  was  very  bitter  (comp.  ch. 
xiii.  4,  23).  The  repetition  is  perhaps  to 
be  accounted  for  by  the  desire  of  the  writer 
to  explain  how  it  came  to  pass  that  so  great 
a  deliverance  was  granted  to  Israel  under 
a  king  who  maintained  the  worship  of  the 
calves.  He  views  it  as  the  consequence  of 
God's  infinite  compassion,  and  of  the  extreme 
bitterness  of  Israel's  aufferings  nnder  the 
Syrians  (oomp.  oh.  xiii.  7  and  Amos  i.  3). 
For  there  was  not  any  shut  up,  nor  any  left 
(see  the  comment  on  1  Kings  xiv.  10),  nor 
any  helper  for  Israel.  Apart  from  Jehovah, 
Israel  had  no  one  to  come  to  her  aid. 
Judah  would  not  help  her,  for  Judah  had 
just  suffered  at  her  hands  (vers.  11 — 14); 
still  less  would  Philistia,  or  Moab,  or 
Ammon,  who  were  her  constant  enemies. 
Her  isolation  rendered  her  all  the  more  an 
object  for  the  Divine  compassion. 

Yer.  27. — ^And  the  Lord  said  not  that  he 
wonid  blot  out  the  name  of  Israel  &om 
nnder  heaven.  God's  decision  nnder  the 
circumstances  was  not,  as  it  well  might 
have  been,  considering  Israel's  ill  desert,  to 
blot  out  forthwith  the  very  name  of  Israel 
from  the  earth.  On  the  contrary,  he  gave 
the  nation  »  breathing-space,  a,  gleam  of 
light,  a  second  summer  before  the  winter 
set  in — a  further  opportunity  of  repenting 
and  turning  to  him  with  all  their  hearts  if 
they  would  only  have  taken  advantage  of 
it,  a  chance  of  redeeming  the  past  and  re- 
establishing themselves  in  his  favour.  He 
might  well  have  destroyed  them  at  this 
time  if  he  had  looked  only  to  considerations 
of  justice,  if  in  his  wrath  he  had  not  thought 
upon  meroy.    But  he  saved  them;  •'.«.  he 


OH.  XIV.  1— 29.J        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


285 


gave  tbem  the  deliveTance  promised  first  by 
Elisha  (ch.  xiii.  17),  and  then  by  Jonah  the 
son  of  Amittai  (ver.  25) — deliverance  from 
Syria,  recovery  of  their  borders,  and  triumph 
over  their  enemies.  Be  gave  them  all  this 
by  the  hand  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash. 
Joash  began  the  salvation,  but  it  was  re- 
served for  Jeroboam  to  complete  it.  He 
was  the  true  "saviour"  (ch.  ziii.  5),  the 
true  accomplishei  of  the  work,  for  which 
his  father  only  paved  the  way.  Thus  one 
Jeroboam  founded  the  kingdom;  another 
lefounded  it,  restored  its  ancient  glories, 
and  gave  it  its  old  dimensions. 

Ter.  28. — Now  the  rest  of  the  aots  of 
Jeroboam,  and  all  that  he  did,  and  his  might, 
how  he  warred,  and  how  he  recovered  Da- 
masons  and  Hamath.  It  has  been  suggested 
that  these  words  mean  no  more  than  that 
Jeroboam  took  territory  from  Damascus  and 
Hamath — ^from  Damascus  the  trans-Jordanio 
territory  which  Hazael  had  conquered  from 
Jehu  (ch.  X.  33) ;  from  Hamath  some  small 
portion  of  the  Coele-Syrian  valley,  about  the 
head-streams  of  the  Orontes  and  Litany 
(so  Keil  and  Bahr).  But  there  does  not 
seem  to  be  any  sufficient  reason  for  giving 
the  words  nsed  this  narrow  signification. 
Damascus  was  conquered  and  annexed  by 
David  (2  Sam.  viii.  6),  and  held  for  a  time 
even  by  Solomon  (1  Kings  xi.  24),  of  whose 
kingdom  Hamath  also  seems  to  have  formed 
a  part  (1  Kings  iv.  21 — 24 ;  2  Ohron.  viii. 
4 ;  ix.  26).  The  word  "  recovered  "  is,  there- 
fore, a  suitable  one.  The  prophecy  of  Amos, 
no  doubt,  represents  Damascus  as  inde- 
pendent (Amos  i.  3,  4) ;  but  this  may  have 
been  written  before  Jeroboam  conquered  it. 
Hamath's  subjection  seems  to  be  implied  in 
Amos  vi.  2,  14.  We  may,  therefore,  well 
understand,  with  Ewald  ('History  of  Is- 
rael,' vol.iT.  p.  124)  and  Dr.  Pusey  ('Minor 
Prophets,'  pp.  157,  209),  that  Jeroboam 
"subdued  Damascus  and  even  Hamath," 
and  added  them  to  his  kingdom.  How  long 
the  subjection  continued  is  •  different  ques- 


tion. Probably,  in  the  troubles  that  fol- 
lowed the  death  of  Zaohariah  (ch.  xv.  10 — 
14),  the  yoke  was  thrown  off.  In  the  As- 
syrian Inscriptions,  Damascus  appears  under 
its  own  king  about  b.o.  786  (6.  Smith, 
'Eponym  Canon,'  p.  115),  and  it  was  cer- 
tainly independent  in  b.o.  743.  At  the 
latter  date  Hamath  also  appears  as  the 
capital  of  an  independent  kingdom  (ibid., 
pp.  118,  120)  mnder  its  own  monarch. 
Which  belonged  to  Jndah.  Keil  and  Bahr 
render,  "Hamath  o^  Judah,"  regarding  riTiri'^ 
as  a  genitive.  Ewald  proposes  to  read 
ra\x'?  npn,  "Hamath  of  Zobah"  (comp.  2 
Chron.  viii.  3),  or  else  to  ont  out  rmn'^ 
altogether.  The  passage  is  one  of  great 
difficulty.  For  Israel.  It  is  questionable 
whether  this  meaning  can  be  obtained  from 
the  present  text,  which  is  hn-w^x  Bahr 
thinks  that  it  can ;  but  Ewald  regards  the 
change  into  ^fjnb;^  as  one  "of  necessity." 

Might  we  not  avoid  all  these  alterations  by 
translating  simply — "  how  he  recovered  Da- 
mascus and  Hamath  to  Judah  through  Is- 
rael"? Attacliing  them  to  Israel  was  a 
sort  of  recovering  of  them  to  Judah,  to 
which  (».«.  the  Judah  of  David  and  Solomon) 
they  had  once  belonged.  Are  they  not 
written  in  the  book  of  the  ohronioles  of  the 
kings  of  Israel  f 

Ver.  29. — And  Jeroboam  slept  with  his 
fathers,  even  with  the  kings  of  Israel — his 
father,  grandfather,  and  great-grandfather 
had  been  actually  among  the  Mngs  of  Is- 
rael; but  all  the  kings,  his  predecessors, 
were  probably  reckoned  among  his  ancestors 
— and  Zaohariah  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
(see  the  comment  on  ch.  xv.  8).  By  Zacha- 
riah's  accession  the  promise  given  to  Jeho 
(ch.  X.  30),  that  his  "children  to  the  fourth 
generation  should  sit  on  the  throne  of  Is- 
rael," was  literally  fulfilled.  No  other  royal 
house  occupied -the  Israelitish  throne  finr 
more  than  three  generation*. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  3,  4. — Afathet'i  mil  eaampU  no  justification  for  a  ion's  miieonduct.  Amaziah 
"did  according  to  aU  things  as  Joash  his  father  did."  Like  his  father,  he  was 
half-hearted.  In  his  earlier  years  he  kept  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  and  "did  that 
which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,"  yet  not  with  any  zeal  or  energy.  Afterwards 
he  fell  away,  introduced  idolatry  (2  Chron.  iiv.  14),  and  when  a  prophet  rebuked  him 
for  his  evil  courses,  answered  him  with  scoffs  and  threatenings  (2  Chron.  ixv.  15, 16). 
His  father  Joash  had  done  even  worse  after  the  death  of  Jehoiada.  He  had  not  only 
sanctioned  idolatries  (2  Chron.  xxiy.  17, 18),  but  had  had  the  servant  of  (jbd  who 
rebuked  them  put  to  death  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  21).  This,  however,  is  not  held  by  the 
sacred  writer  to  be  any  justification  or  excuse  for  Amaziah.   The  reasons  are  manifest. 

I.   No    MAN  IB  TO  BK  CALLED   UASTEB,    NOT   EVEN    A   FATHEB.      Qod    giveS    men    in 

his  Law  and  in  their  conscience  a  standard  of  right,  which  they  are  to  follow.    He 
nowhere  bids  them  take  any  man  but  the  "  God-Man  "  for  pattern.    He  warns  them 


286  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGa        [oh.  xiv.  1— 2a 

that  men  are,  all  of  them,  more  or  legs  imperfect.  He  requires  that  parents  ghall  \m 
"  honoured,"  not  imitated. 

IL  The  evil  exauple  of  a  father  is  a  warning  to  sons,  which  bhouu)  had 
TO  AVOIDANCE,  NOT  IMITATIOK.  The  sight  of  a  diunken  father  should  disgust  sons 
with  drunkenness.  Blasphemous  and  violent  words  should  so  shock  them  as  to  suggest 
an  exactly  opposite  behaviour.  Looseness  of  morals  should  breed  in  them  a  determina- 
tion never  to  offend  in  a  way  so  absolutely  revolting.  Given  that  simplicity  which  is 
natural  to  youth,  and  every  fault  of  a  father  should  so  keenly  wound  and  vex  their 
souls  as  to  bend  thein  in  the  exactly  contrary  direction.  Sin  is  so  ugly,  so  offensive, 
so  coarse,  that  in  another  it  naturally  disgusts  us ;  and  the  more  plainly  it  is  revealed, 
the  closer  it  is  brought  to  us,  the  more  are  we  naturally  provoked  and  angered  by  it. 

IIL  The  punishment  which  sin  draws  after  it  should  comb  especially  homh 
TO  those  whose  homes  are  cursed  with  it,  and  ACT  AS  A  DBTBKRBNT.  Disease, 
decay,  the  loss  of  others'  respect,  the  severing  of  friendships,  general  dislike  and  aversion, 
in  some  cases  contempt,  dog  the  footsteps  of  sin,  and  mark  it  as  a  thing  to  be  avoided. 
Sons  are  naturally  sensitive  with  regard  to  their  fathers'  honour,  and  keen  to  mark 
whether  they  are  held  in  respect  or  no.  There  can  be  no  natural  deterrent  from  evil 
courses  stronger  than  the  perception  that  one  with  whom  we  are  bound  up  is  deterio- 
rating from  day  to  day,  not  merely  in  character,  but  in  reputation,  felling  in  men's 
esteem,  becoming  a  mark  for  their  scorn.  The  father's  fall  ^'.^ould  thus  not  produce  the 
son's,  but  rather  stimulate  the  son  to  rise  to  greater  and  greater  heights  of  virtue. 

Vers.  5,  6. — AfatJier^s  sins  not  to  he  visited  hy  the  civil  magistrate  on  his  children. 
Human  legislators  iiave  differed  greatly  in  their  judgments  upon  this  point.  In  the 
East,  and  in  early  Idmes,  the  idea  was  generally  accepted  that  the  guilt  of  the  father 
attached  to  all  his  descendants,  and  was  justly  visited  on  them.  "  Lege  cantum  erat," 
says  Q.  CurtiuB  (y^A.  Alex.,'  vi.  11),  "  ut  propinqui  eorum,  qui  re<»i  insidiati  essent,  cum 
ipsis  necarentur."  The  family  was  regarded  as  the  unit  of  society,  and  the  ciime  of 
one  member  tainted  the  whole  of  it.  What  the  Egyptian  practice  was  is  uncertain  ; 
but  we  find  the  Israelites,  shortly  after  the  Exodus,  putting  to  death  the  whole  family 
of  Achan  on  account  of  their  father's  sin  (Josh.  vii.  24,  25),  and  the  usage  seems  to 
have  continued  long  afterwards  (ch.  ix.  26).  The  Greeks  and  Bomans  adopted  a 
different  line  of  action.  Becognizing  the  separateness  of  the  individual,  they  never 
executed  a  family  en  masse,  but  only  the  guilty  member  or  members  of  it.  Yet,  in 
secondary  punishments,  the  contrary  idea  to  some  extent  prevailed.  At  Athens,  when 
the  sentence  on  a  man  was  degradation  from  his  rights  of  citizenship  (iri/t/o),  the  penalty 
was  shared  by  his  children.  A  similar  disability  attached  to  the  children  of  those  who 
were  executed.  So,  even  by  our  own  law,  attainder  and  forfeiture,  which  mfiinly  affect 
the  children,  are  attached  to  the  crime  of  treason,  and  the  property  of  felons  escheats 
to  the  Crown.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  Law  of  Moses  should  have  anticipated  the 
ultimate  judgment  of  the.  human  conscience  upon  the  point,  and  have  laid  down  so 
clearly  and  strongly  the  humane  principle  that  the  criminal  alone  should  be  punished 
fur  his  own  crime.  To  us  at  the  present  day  the  principle  may  appear  axiomatic ;  but 
at  the  time  when  Moses  enunciated  it,  the  contrary  idea  was  prevalent ;  and  it  is 
doubtful  whether  the  broad  assertion,  "  Every  man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his  own 
sins,"  had  ever  been  heard  previously.  Even  now,  though  in  the  letter  the  principle  is 
universally  accepted,  infractions  of  its  spirit  are  common  enough — 

I.  By  nations.  Nations  infringe  it  when  they  cashier  a  royal  family  for  the  fault, 
or  even  the  crime,  of  the  reigning  sovereign.  In  an  hereditary  monarchy  the  son  has 
a  right  to  succeed,  though  his  father  may  by  imconstitutional  acts  have  justly  forfeited 
the  crown.  Still  more  unjust  is  the  perpetual  exile  of  all  those  whose  ancestors  have 
ever  reigned  over  a  country.  Such  persons  are  punished,  not  so  much  for  the  sins  as 
for  the  merits — the  wisdom,  prowess,  high  renown — of  their  forefathers,  since  it  is  for 
their  merits,  ordinarily,  that  persons  are  first  placed  upon  thrones.  Confiscation  of  the 
property  of  exiled  princes  is  still  more  indefensible,  since  it  is  at  once  unjust  and  mean. 
It  may  be  added  that  forfeiture  and  attainder,  as  they  exist  in  our  own  law,  seem  to  b« 
contrary  to  the  spirit  of  th^rule,  which  is  that  no  one  should  be  punished  for  anything 
but  his  own  acts. 

II.  By  indtviduals.    Individuals  infringe  thjs  rule  when  they  maintain  a  family 


CH.  HT.  1— 29.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOS.  287 

feud,  transferring  to  the  children  of  those  by  whom  they  tsonsider  themselTes  to  have 
heen  injured  the  animosity  which  they  have  long  entertained  towards  their  parents. 
Or  when  they  treat  a  man  with  coldness  or  incivility  because  his  father  has  done 
something  disgraceful.  Or,  generally,  when  they  attach  blame  or  discredit  to  any  one, 
not  for  anything  that  he  has  done,  but  for  something  that  somebody  connected  with 
him  has  done.  Strict  justice  requires  that  each  man  should  "  bear  his  own  burden," 
and  stand  or  fall  by  his  own  actsi  If  we  allow  anything  but  his  own  acts  to  affect 
our  estimate  of  a  man — still  more,  if  we  allow  it  to  affect  our  demeanour  towards  bim — 
we  act  unjustly,  we  infringe  the  principle  of  the  law,  "  Every  man  shall  be  put  to 
death  [ix.  shall  suffer]  for  hii  own  siu." 

Vers.  8 — li.— "Pride  goea  'before  a  fall."  Amaziah's  challenge  and  its  result  furnish 
a  remarkable  illustration  of  this  maxim.    The  following  points  should  be  dwelt  upon. 

I.  The  weak  gbound  of  the  pride.  This  was  military  success,  which  is  just 
as  often  the  result  of  good  fortune,  or  one's  enemies'  mistakes,  as  of  any  merits  of  one's 
own.  Amaziah's  after-life  showed  that  he  did  not  possess  any  great  military  capacity, 
and  so  had  nothing  on  which  he  ought  to  have  prided  himself.  Men  constantly  over- 
estimate their  own  merits. 

IL  The  WBONOFnii  way  in  which  thb  pbioe  vented  itself.  In  quarrel,  cause- 
less quarrel  with  a  neighbour.  Amaziah  had  no  grievance  which  he  felt  it  necessary 
to  redress,  no  iieed  to  quarrel  with  Joash.  Having  gained  one  success,  he  was  simply 
greedy  for  more.  And  to  gratify  his  self-esteem  he  was  careless  how  many  lives  he 
sacrificed  or  what  injuries  he  inflicted  (1)  on  his  adversaries ;  (2)  on  his  own  subjects. 
He  forgot  that  the  Israelites  were  of  kindred  blood  (1  Kings  xii.  21),  of  the  same 
religion,  a  portion  of  God's  penple.  He  plunged  into  an  unnecessary  war — ^in  itself 
always  a  sin — with  a  nation  towards  which  he  ought  to  have  felt  friendly,  without 
obtaining  or  seeking  any  Divine  sanction,  in  sole  reliance  on  himself.  What  wonder 
that  God  punished  such  combined  folly  and  wickedness  I 

III.  The  obstdtaot  with  which  the  WEONanrL  coubse  was  pebsisted  nsr.  Proud 
men  dislike  above  all  things  admitting  that  they  are  in  the  wrong.  Amaziah  had 
ample  time  to  retract  his  challenge  and  give  up  his  enterprise.  Joash  was  not  at  all 
eager  for  the  encounter ;  on  the  contrary,  he  was  -quite  willing  to  have  remained  at 
peace  if  Amaziah  would  have  let  him.  But  to  retract,  still  more  to  apologize,  would 
have  been  unpleasant.  The  pride  which  had  given  birth  to  the  challenge  absolutely 
forbade  its  withdrawal. 

IV.  The  oomfletenesb  and  Sxtreue  ighominv  of  the  fall.  Amaziah  had,  no 
doubt,  counted  on  an  easy  victory ;  he  went  to  war  "  with  a  light  heart."  He  would  do 
with  Israel  as  he  had  done  with  Edom — smite  and  slay,  and  make  prisoners,  and  perhaps 
punish  his  prisoners  with  death  (ver.  7).  The  result  is,  not  a  victory,  not  even  a  drawn 
battle,  not  a  long  war  with  alternations  of  success  and  defeat,  but  one  crushing  blow, 
from  which  there  is  no  recovery  even  for  an  instant.  His  army  is  defeated,  dispersed; 
he  himself  is  a  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  his  enemy,  his  capital  is  taken,  its  walls  broken 
down,  its  treasures  carried  off.  He  is  disgraced  in  the  eyes  of  all  his  subjects,  as  well 
as  of  the  neighbouring  nations,  and  thenceforth  remains  absolutely  quiescent,  attempts 
nothings  but^  humbled  and  confounded,  "  sits  in  the  dust," 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOKa 

Vers.  1—4  with  7—20. — Compromise  tmd  %t$  conseqtKtieet.  We  read  here  of 
Amaziah  that  "  he  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  yet  not  like  David 
his  father :  he  did  according  to  all  things  as  Joash  his  father  did.  Howbeit  the  high 
placet  were  not  taken  away;  as  yet  the  people  did  sacrifice  and  burnt  incense  on  the 
high  places."  And  we  read  of  him  in  2  Chronicles  that  "  be  did  that  which  was  right 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  but  not  with  a  perfect  heart."  To  understand  the  meaning  of 
the  statement  which  we  meet  with  so  often,  that  "  the  high  places  were  not  taken 
away,"  we  must  go  back  to  the  period  before  the  children  of  brael  entered  the  promised 
lan(£  At  that  time  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  were  heathen — pagans  and  idolaters. 
One  of  the  peculiarities  of  their  heatheo  worship  was  to  have  groves  of  trees,  generally 


288  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  ht.  1—29. 

of  oaks,  planted  on  the  summit  of  the  hills.  In  these  srores  there  was  usually  placed 
a  shrine  with  an  image  of  their  deity,  just  as  we  see,  when  travelling  on  the  continent,, 
shrines  of  the  blessed  Yirgin,  or  shrines  with  a  crucifix,  by  the  roadside  and  on  the 
hill-tops.  The  custom  of  having  groves  of  oaks  for  religious  purposes  was  shared  by 
the  early  inhabitants  of  Britain,  and  the  Druids  derived  their  name  from  this  very 
practice.  In  these  groves  the  heathen  priests  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense  to  their  gods. 
It  was  to  such  groves  that  the  name  of  "high  places"  was  given.  When  the  Israelites 
were  about  to  enter  Canaan,  God  foresaw  the  temptation  to  which  they  would  be 
exposed  from  the  idolatry  of  the  heathen  inhabitants  and  of  the  neighbouring  nations. 
He  therefore  charged  them  not  only  to  drive  out  the  heathen  nations  from  Canaan,  but 
also  to  utterly  destroy  their  high  places,  to  overthrow  their  altars,  and  break  their 
graven  images,  and  burn  their  groves  with  fire  (Deut.  xii.  2,  3).  This  command  was 
repeated  over  and  over  again.  But,  notwithstanding  this,  the  high  places  were  never 
utterly  abolished.  Time  after  time  during  the  period  of  the  judges,  the  people  set 
up  a  worship  in  the  high  places,  which,  though  nominally  that  of  Jehovah,  was  tinged 
with  idolatrous  practices.  It  was  much  the  same  under  the  kings.  Now  and  then 
some  courageous.  God-fearing,  whole-hearted  king  made  a  clean  sweep  of  the  high 
places.  But  the  old  habit  was  continually  revived,  and  so  in  one  reign  after  another 
we  read  the  policy  of  compromise, "  The  high  places  were  not  taken  away."  And  when- 
ever that  was  the  case,  we  find  it  had  evil  results.  It  was  so  in  the  time  of  Solomon 
himself.  It  was  so  in  the  time  of  the  two  kings  who  succeeded  him  over  the  divided 
kingdom — Behoboam  and  Jeroboam.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of  Amaziah  now  before  us. 

L  Auaziah's  comfbomise  prepared  the  WAV  FOB  POSITIVE  BIN.  The  high  places 
in  themselves  were  not  necessarily  places  of  idolatry.  There  is  no  doubt  that  sincere 
worship  to  the  true  God  was  often  offered  up  in  them.  Thus  we  find  Solomon  sacri* 
ficing  to  the  Lord  in  Gibeon,  which  was  the  great  high  place.  But  the  associations  of 
these  places  were  entirely  idolatrous.  From  time  immemorial  they  had  been  associated 
with  the  worship  of  the  heathen  gods.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  GM  forbade  the 
use  of  them.  It  was  necessary  to  make  the  wall  of  separation  between  his  people  and 
the  heathen  as  wide  as  possible — to  teach  them  that  they  could  not  serve  God  and  Baal, 
that  there  could  be  no  compromise  between  right  and  wrong  without  danger  to  the 
right.  The  results  showed  the  wisdom  and  necessity  of  God's  strict  command.  The 
natural  tendency  of  the  human  heart  is  to  worslkip  what  is  seen,  to  look  at  the  outward 
symbol  rather  than  at  the  thing  signified.  This  was  just  what  happened  in  Amaziah's 
case.  He  did  not  see  that  there  was  any  harm  in  preserving  the  high  places.  Might 
not  God  be  worshipped  there  as  well  as  in  Jerusalem  ?  And  so  he  made  the  com- 
promise :  "  The  high  places  were  not  taken  away."  Sut  look  at  the  restilt.  "  Now  it 
came  to  pass,  after  that  Amaziah  was  come  from  the  slaughter  of  the  Edomites,  that 
he  brought  the  gods  of  the  children  of  Seir,  and  set  them  up  to  he  hit  gods,  and  bowed 
down  hunself  before  them,  and  burned  incense  unto  them  "  (2  Chron.  xxv.  14).  What 
a  falling  off  was  the.  e  I  This  is  that  Amaziah  who  began  his  career  by  doing  right 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  now  stupidly  bowing  down  before  the  lifeless  idols  of  the 
heathen  1  He  conquered  the  heathen  in  one  sense,  but  the  heathen  conquered  him  in 
another  and  more  dangerous  sense.  Has  it  not  been  the  same  in  the  history  of  the 
Christian  Church  ?  The  early  Christian  Church  was  simple  in  its  worship  and  its 
government;  its  members  were  simple  in  their  habits  and  pure  in  their  lives.  But 
when  it  became  powerful  at  Bome,  and  in  a  sense  captured  pagan  Bome,  its  very  powur 
was  its  danger.  There  was  a  sense  in  which  the  paganism  of  Bome  captured  the 
simplicity  of  the  gospel.  As  Mourant  Brock  has  so  fully  shown  in  that  interesting 
book  of  his  on  *  Bome :  Pagan  and  Papal,'  and  as  Gibbon  and  other  historians  have 
pointed  out,  Christianity,  in  Bome  at  least,  made  a  compromise  with  paganism.  And 
the  compromise  was  anything  but  an  advantage  to  the  Christian  religion.  The  ill 
effects  of  it  remain  to  this  day  in  the  images  and  pilgrimages,  and  the  many 
other  superstitions  which  deface  the  Boman  branch  of  the  Christian  Church. 
Such  facts  of  history  carry  with  them  a  memorable  lesson.  The  Christian  Church 
ought  ever  to  keep  in  mind  the  spiritual  objects  for  which  it  exists.  It  ought, 
therefore,  to  guard  most  scrupulously  the  spirituality  and  scripturality  of  its  wor« 
ship.  "  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and 
in  troth."    It  ought  to  guard  also  the  spirituality  and  scripturality  of  its  doctrine, 


OH.  xiT.  1— 29.]      THE  SE(X)m>  BOOK  OF  THE  KIKOS.  289 

and  teach  men  to  trust,  not  to  penancea  or  indulgence!  for  their  acceptance  with  God, 
but  to  the  work  and  merits  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  Mediator  between  Qoi  and  man. 
The  countries  of  the  Beformation  are  marked  out  among  the  nations  of  Europe  for 
their  prosperity  and  industry.  The  more  thorough  the  work  of  reli^ous  reformation, 
the  stronger  has  been  the  national  character,  the  more  vigorous  the  national  life.  And 
on  the  other  hand,  as  we  look  at  the  general  decay  of  the  Soman  Catholic  nations,  and 
the  corruption  that  has  marked  their  history,  may  we  not  trace  the  secret  of  their 
downfall  in  the  words  of  the  fourth  verse,  "  The  high  places  were  not  taken  away  "  ? 

II.  Amaziah's  comfbouise  led  to  temfobal  sibasteb.  Amaziah  had  elements  of 
strength  mingled  with  the  elements  of  weakness  in  his  character.  He  was  capable 
of  acting  upon  certain  occasions  with  decision  and  firmness.  What  a  pity  he  had  not 
carried  that  spirit  of  decision  into  the  most  important  duty  for  every  human  being — 
Obedience  to  the  Law  of  God  I  Once,  indeed,  he  bad  done  so.  And  the  success  which 
followed  his  obedience  to  God's  command  on  that  occasion  should  have  encouraged  him 
in  a  similar  decision  always.  He  was  going  forth  to  battle  against  the  Edomites.  He 
had  raised  out  of  his  own  kingdom  of  Judah  alone  an  army  of  three  hundred  thousand 
men.  In  addition  to  these,  he  hired  out  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  a  hundred  thousand 
men  for  a  hundred  talents  of  silver,  that  is  to  say  at  a  cost  of  about  £50,000.  But 
there  came  to  him  a  man  of  God,  saying,  "  0  king,  let  not  the  army  of  Israel  go  with 
thee ;  for  the  Lord  is  not  with  Israel "  (2  Chron.  xxv.  7).  Amaziah  had  not  yet 
hardened  his  heart  against  God's  message.  He  was  not  yet  blinded  to  the  evil  results 
of  forsaliing  God.  So  he  considered  seriously  this  difficulty,  and  saw  that  it  would  be 
felly  to  go  forth  in  defiance  of  God's  warning.  But  the  question  arose  about  the 
payment  of  these  hired  soldiers,  and  he  said,  "  what  shall  we  do  for  the  hundred  talents 
which  I  have  given  to  the  army  of  Israel?"  And  the  man  of  God  answered,  "The 
Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more  than  this."  Amaziah  hesitated  no  longer.  He 
sent  away  these  hired  troops,  though  he  incurred  their  anger  and  vengeance  in 
consequence;  but  when  he  went  forth  against  the  Edomites,  his  army  gained  a  most 
decisive  and  overwhelming  victory.  Would  that  Amaziah  had  acted  in  a  similar  spirit 
of  decision  all  through  his  life !  Would  that  he  had  showed  in  other  matters  a  similar 
spirit  of  dependence  on  God  and  obedience  to  him  1  Would  that  he  had  always 
remembered  the  prophet's  words,  "  The  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more  than 
this"!  Oh  that  we  would  all  remember  this  when  tempted  to  make  compromise  with 
the  worlfl^-when,  for  the  sake  of  worldly  gain,  or  popular  applause,  or  the  favour  of 
men,  or  earthly  rank,  we  are  tempted  to  disregard  the  voice  of  conscience  and  of  God  I 
God's  commands  are  clear.  His  promises  are  equally  clear.  We  never  gain  anything 
by  making  compromise  with  sin.  From  the  moment  that  Amaziah  forsook  God, 
success  began  to  forsake  his  banners.  He  and  his  army  were  defeated  by  the  army  of 
Israel,  and  eventually  he  himself  was  slain  by  a  conspiracy  of  his  own  servants.  Let 
us  learn  that  we  should  never,  for  the  sake  of  any  temporal  advantage,  make  a 
compromise  with  sin,  or  disobey  the  command  of  God.  We  may  le  the  losers  for  th» 
time,  hut  the  Lord  is  able  to  give  us  much  more  than  this.  In  an  interesting  book  lately 
published,  which  gives  an  account  of  the  mission  to  the  fishermen  in  the  North  Sea,  we 
are  told  that  some  of  the  owners  of  the  fishing-vessels  refused  to  allow  their  vessels  to 
be  used  for  a  prayer-meeting  or  other  religious  service ;  but  expected  the  men  to  work 
on  the  Lord's  day  as  on  others.  There  was  a  small  fleet,  all  the  skippers  of  which 
were  anxious  to  have  no  fishing  on  Sunday,  and  accordingly  sent  home  a  "  round  robin  " 
to  the  owners,  praying  for  this  concession.  They  waited  anxiously  for  the  return  of 
the  cutter  with  the  owners'  reply,  and  when  at  length  it  reached  them,  their  hopes 
were  utterly  dashed,  for  the  employers,  while  saying  they  would  not  forbid  the  skippen 
to  keep  their  fishing-gear  on  hoard,  gave  them  clearly  to  understand  that  any  skipper 
doing  so  would  run  the  risk  of  losing  his  berth  at  the  end  of  the  voyage.  The  matter 
was  quietly  and  prayerfully  discussed,  and  eventually  ail  but  one  agreed,  "  We  ought 
to  obey  God  rather  than  man; "  and  so  sabbath  after  sabbath  this  solitary  dissentient 
laboured  with  his  gear,  while  aM  the  other  vessels  were  lying-to.  As  each  skipper's 
voyage  expired,  he  ran  home  for  the  bi-monthly  refit,  yet  not  a  word  was  said  about 
discharging  hiin,  and  ai  this  happened  to  every  skipper  in  turn,  they  made  up  their 
minds  that  the  threat  was  an  empty  one.  However,  at  Christmas  the  secret  came  out; 
for  the  owner,  according  to  custom,  read  aloud  to  his  assembled  crews  the  list  of  th« 
n  Kixaa.  Q 


280  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xiT.  1— 29. 

dlfferoit  TesseV  earnings  during  the  year.  At  laet  he  stopped,  tmi  pat  down  the  paper. 
"  Oh,  hat,  air,"  exclaimed  several  skippers,  "  you  haven't  read  what  So-and-so  made," 
referring  to  the  skipper  who  had  fished  seven  days  a  week.  "  Why,  what  is  that  to 
j/ouf  I've  read  what  you've  made:  doesn't  that  satisfy  you?"  "Why,  no,  sir, 
hecause,  don't  you  see,  he's  fished  every  Sunday,  while  we've  kept  our  trawls  on  hoard." 
"  Well,  well,"  muttered  the  owner,  "  I  suppose  it's  sure  to  come  out,  so  I  may  as  well 
tell  you.  Se'a  at  the  bottom  of  the  list."  The  man  who  related  this  story  added 
reverently,  "Them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour,  but  they  that  despise  me  shall  be 
lightly  esteemed."  Those  men  showed  true  faithfulness.  They  would  have  no 
compromise.  Cost  what  it  might,  they  would  obey  the  command  of  God,  "  Bemember 
the  sabbath  day,  to  keep  it  holy."  And  be  who  gave  the  command  honoured  and 
rewarded  them  for  their  observance  of  it.  He  prospered  their  industry  on  the  six  days 
of  the  week  more  than  the  industry  of  the  man  who  laboured  on  every  day  of  the 
seven.  Even  in  temporal  blessings  the  policy  of  compromise  is  a  policy  of  disaster. 
Much  more  when  we  look  at  the  eternal  consequences,  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man, 
if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  We  find  that  Amaziah's 
spirit  of  compromise  infected  his  whole  character.  Unfaithful  himself,  he  did  not  like 
faithfulness  in  others.  When  he  began  to  worship  the  heathen  idolR,  Gk>d  sent  • 
prophet  to  remonstrate  with  him.  The  prophet  said  to  Amaziah,  "  Why  hast  thoa 
sought  after  the  gods  of  the  people,  which  could  not  deliver  their  own  people  out  of 
thine  hand  ?  "  (2  Cbron.  xxv.  15).  A  very  reasonable  question,  one  wonld  say.  But  the 
king  was  beyond  rebuke.  He  commanded  the  prophet  to  cease,  and  threatened  to 
punish  him  if  he  continued.  It  is  a  sign  that  something  is  wrong  when  men  and 
women  begin  to  dislike  faithful  preaching.  Those  whose  own  conscience  is  clear  need 
feel  no  hurt  when  sin  is  rebuked.  Beware  of  the  policy  of  compromise.  Let  there  be 
no  compromise  with  the  world,  with  godlessness,  with  sin;  no  compromise  with 
godlessness  in  your  family ;  no  compromise  with  wrong  in  your  business ;  no  compromise 
with  evil  customs  or  companionships  in  your  social  life ;  no  calling  of  evil  good,  and  of 
good  evil.  Nail  your  colours  to  the  mast.  Let  there  be  no  compromise  with  your 
own  besetting  sins.  Many  a  man  has  begun  well,  like  Amaziah,  but  has  ended  badly, 
because  he  made  a  compromise  with  sin.  He  retained  some  old  habit.  He  did  not 
put  away  the  high  places  of  his  pride,  or  his  ambition,  or  bis  covetousnesa,  or  his 
passion — and  in  the  long  run  his  sin  became  too  strong  for  him. — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  6,  6. — Personal  responsibility.  Amaziah  visits  with  just  execution  tha 
servants  who  had  conspired  against  his  father  Joash.  But  he  did  not  put  to  death 
the  children  of  the  murderers.  He  acted  on  the  principle  laid  down  by  God  through 
Moses  (Deut.  xxiv.  16),  that  "  the  fathers  shall  not  be  put  to  death  for  the  children, 
nor  the  children  for  the  fathers ;  every  man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his  own  sin." 

I.  EvEBT  ONB  OF  US  IS  BESFUNSiBLB  FOB  HIS  OWN  LiF£.  "  For  We  must  all  appear 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ ;  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  his 
body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be' good  or  bad." 

II.  EvEBT  ONE  OF  US  IS  BESPONBIBLE  FOB  THE   BIOHT  DISGHABQE  OF  HIS  OWN  DUTIES. 

We  cannot  excuse  ourselves  by  the  unfaithfulness  of  others.  Responsibility  is  some- 
thing which  we  can  never  transfer  to  any  one  else.  Men  may  deny  their  responsibility. 
They  may  refuse  to  fulfil  it.  They  may  neglect  it.  But  there  it  is.  They  cannot 
get  rid  of  it.  Our  responsibility  to  God  for  the  life  and  opportunities  which  he  has 
given  is  a  truth  we  should  do  well  to  keep  constantly  before  us, — C,  H,  L 

Vers,  1 — 29. — Significant  fade  in  Oo^s  goiiemment.  "  In  the  second  year  of 
Joash,"  etc.  In  this  chapter  we  have  a  sketch  of  a  succession  of  kings  both  of  Judah 
and  Israel.  Here  are  two  kings  of  Judah — Amaziah  and^zariah ;  and  Joash,  Jeroboam, 
and  his  son  Zachariah,  kings  of  Israel.  The  whole  chapter  suggests  certain  significant 
facts  in  God's  government  of  mankind. 

I.  The  enobmous  fbeedoh  of  action  weigh  hb  allows  wiokbd  hen.  Here  we 
learn:  1.  That  God  allows  wicked  men  to  form  wrong  coneq>tioni  vf  himself.  All 
these  kings,  although  descendants  of  Abraham,  who  was  a  monotheist,  became  idolaters 
"  The  high  places  were  not  taken  away :  as  yet  the  people  did  sacrifice  and  burnt 
incense  on  th«  high  places."    Golden  calves,  symbols  of  Egyptian  worship,  still  stood 


cktiv.i— ^9.]      ttii!  SECOND  Book  OP  tMb  KlilGS,  49i 

in  Dan  and  Bethel,  at  the  extremities  of  the  dominions.  Terribly  strange  it  aoemB  to 
ns  that  the  Almighty  Author  of  the  human  mind  should  permit  it  to  think  of  him  ai 
some  material  object  in  nature,  or  as  some  production  of  the  human  hand.  What  human 
father,  bad  he  the  power,  would  permit  his  children  to  form  not  only  wrong  but  wicked 
impressions  of  himself?  For  what  reason  this  is  permitted  I  know  not.  Albeit  it 
shows  God's  practical  respect  for  that  freedom  of  action  with  which  he  has  endowed  us. 
2.  That  God  allows  wicked  men  to  obtain  despotic  dominion  over  others.  All  these 
kings  were  wicked — Amaziah,  Azariah,  Joash,  Jeroboam,  and  Zachariah,  and  yet  they 
enjoyed  an  almost  autocratic  dominion  over  the  rights,  possessions,  and  lives  of  millions. 
Here  we  read  of  Amaziah  slaying  ten  thousand  men,  capturing  ten  thousand  prisoners, 
and  taking  Selah,  the  capitd  of  the  Gdomites,  and  of  Joash  King  of  Israel  usinp; 
harshly  the  rights  of  the  conqueror.  "  He  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  brake  down  the  wall 
of  Jerusalem  from  the  gate  of  Ephraim  unto  the  comer  gate."  It  is  said  of  Jerobcam, 
who  reigned  forty-one  years,  that  he  "  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  departed 
not  from  the  sins  of  his  father."  Antecedently  one  might  have  concluded  that,  if  a 
wicked  man  was  allowed  to  live  amongst  his  fellows,  he  would  be  doomed  to  obscurity 
and  to  social  and  political  impotence ;  but  it  is  not  so.     Why  ?    Who  shall  answer? 

II.  God  punishes  wicked  hen  bt  their  own  wickedness.  1.  A  wicked  man  is 
punished  by  his  own  wickedness.  Amaziah's  conduct  is  an  example.  Elated  with 
his  triumph  over  the  Edomites,  he  sought  occasion  of  war  with  the  King  of  Israel. 
"  Ho  sent  messengers  to  Joash,  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  son  of  Jehu,  King  of  Israel,  saying. 
Come,  let  us  look  one  another  in  the  face,"  etc.  About  fifteen  years  after  his 
defeat  he  fled  from  Jerusalem  to  Lachish  to  escape  assassination,  but  the  assassin 
pursued  him,  and  struck  him  dead.  It  is  ever  so.  Wickedness  is  its  own  punishment. 
The  wicked  passions  of  a  corrupt  man  are  his  tormenting  devils.  Sin  is  suicidal. 
2.  A  wicked  man  is  punished  by  the  wickedness  of  others.  The  thousands  whom  these 
despotic  kings  reduced  to  anguish,  destitution,  and  death,  were  idolaters  and  rebels 
against  Heaven,  and  by  the  hand  of  wicked  men  they  were  punished.  Thus  it  ever  is. 
Devils  are  their  own  tormentors.  Sin  converts  a  community  of  men  into  tormenting 
fiends ;  man  becomes  the  avenging  fate  of  man. 

CoNOLtrsiON.  Learn ;  1.  Humanity  m  this  world  is  obviously  in  a  nwrally  ahnormal 
condition.  It  can  never  be  that  he  whose  power  is  immeasurable,  whose  wisdom  and 
goodness  are  infinite  and  radiant  everywhere  above  us  and  below  us,  could  create  such  a 
state  of  things  as  we  have  here.  He  originates  the  good  alone,  permits  the  evil,  and 
will  ultimately  overrule  it  for  good.  2.  Faith  in  a  future  that  shall  rectify  the  evils  of 
the  present  seems  essential  to  true  religion.  Genuine  religion  is  a  supreme  love  for  th« 
Supreme  Existence.  But  who  could  love  a  Supreme  Existence  which  could  permit  for 
ever  such  a  state  of  existence  as  we  have  here  ?  There  must  come  a  day  of  rectification : 
"  When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  gloiy,  and  all  the  holy  angels  with  him,"  etc. 
(Matt.  xxT.  31— 46).— D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Amaziah  doing  right.  The  murder  of  Joash  King  of  Jndah,  and  the 
accession  of  his  son  Amaziah,  took  place  a  little  after  the  accession  of  Joash  the  son  of 
Jehoahaz  in  Israel,  therefore  just  before  the  turn  of  the  tide  in  the  fortunes  of  the 
latter  kingdom. 

I.  E  ABLY  RIGHT-DOING.  1.  A  promising  beginning,  Amaziah  was  not,  any  more  than 
his  father,  a  man  of  strong  character.  He  proved  to  be  vain,  lx>astful,  and  foolish.  But 
he  began  well,  giving  heed  to  the  counsels  of  God's  prophets  (cf.  2  Ghron.  xxv.  7^10), 
and  therefore  it  is  said  of  him,  "  He  did  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  It  is  not,  how- 
ever, the  beginning,  but  the  end,  which  tests  character  (Col.  i.  23 ;  Heb.  iii.  14).  2. 
Significant  shortcoming.  To  the  record  of  his  right-doing  it  is  added,  "  Yet  not  like 
David  his  father,"  or,  as  elsewhere,  "  not  with  a  perfect  heart."  His  conduct  is  likened 
to  that  of  Joash  his  father,  whose  history  very  much  resembled  his  own.  Amaziah,  like 
Joash,  began  well,  afterwards  lapsed  into  ido&try  and  cruelty,  and  died  by  conspiracy  of 
his  servants  under  a  cloud  of  ignominy  and  contempt.  Those  who  are  like  in  sin  need 
not  wonder  that  they  are  like  in  doom.  3.  Hie  high  places  unremoved.  This  was  one  of 
the  points  in  which  Amaziah  showed  a  want  of  thoroughness  in  right-doing.  The  sin 
was  one  of  shortcoming  rather  than  of  positive  transgression,  like  the  keeping  up  of  the 
worship  of  the  calves  in  IsraeL    It  is  not,  therefore,  reckoned  so  hideous  as  the  Baal- 


292  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  xiv.  1— 29. 

wonhip ;  but  the  kfter-effects  Bhow  that  no  portion  of  God's  Law  can  be  ne^eeted  with 
impunity.  The  woTship  on  high  places  was  a  temptation  and  Bnare  to  Judah.  The 
neglect  to  remove  them  reacted  seriously  on  the  life  of  the  nation. 

II.  JnsT  JUDGMENT.  The  treatment  by  Amaziah  of  his  fitther'i  murderers  gives 
farther  evidence  of  his  early  diiposition  to  do  well.  We  observe :  1.  The  execution  oj 
justice.  The  murderers  were  put  to  death.  This  was  right.  The  existence  of  even 
real  grievancea  does  not  justify  resort  to  crime.  David's  treatment  of  Saul  shows  the 
right  course  to  be  pmsued  in  such  cases  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  4 — 12).  And  a  nation  is  only 
secure  when  real  crime  is  punished  within  its  borders.  2.  Discrimination  of  innocent 
and  guilty.  It  is  specially  noted  about  Amaziah  that,  in  taking  this  vengeance  on  the 
men  who  slew  his  father,  he  did  not,  as  was  a  frequent  custom  in  those  times,  slay  the 
children  of  the  murderers.  He  acted,  therefore,  on  principle  in  his  judgment,  not  in 
blind  fury.  His  object  was  to  vindicate  justice,  not  to  take  revenge.  He  drew  the  line 
where  it  ought  to  be  drawn — between  the  actually  guilty  and  the  innocent.  There  is  a 
strong  tendency,  where  anger  is  strongly  kindled  against  a  person  or  persons,  to  allow 
rage  to  overflow  on  those  not  directly  implicated  in  their  offence.  The  odium  that 
attaches  to  them  is  extended  also  to  their  families,  and  pleasure  is  taken  in  inflicting 
insult  and  pain  on  their  children  and  relatives.  This  ought  not  to  be.  3.  Regard  for 
Qod^s  Law.  The  reason  for  Amaziah  acting  as  he  did  was  that  it  was  so  commanded  in 
the  Law  of  Moses  (Deut.  xxiv.  16).  On  the  seeming  contradiction  between  this  passage 
and  those  which  speak  of  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  being  visited  on  the  children,  or 
which  illustrate  the  actual  punishment  of  children  for  their  parents'  sins — as  in  the 
case  of  Achan  (Josh.  vii.  24 — 26) — it  may  sufSce  to  remark  that  the  rule  here  laid  down 
is  one  for  human  jurisprudence.  There  is  a  wider  treatment  of  human  beings,  con- 
stantly flnding  illustration  in  providence,  in  which  the  principles  of  organic  imion  and 
corporate  responsibility  have  full  play ;  but  God  does  not  entrust  the  enforcement  of 
these  to  any  human  magistr^y.  What  specially  concerns  us  here  is  the  fact  that, 
finding  such  a  rule  laid  down  in  the  Word  of  God,  Amaziah  faithfully  adhered  to  it. 
Uis  conduct  shows  an  advance  in  the  moral  conceptions  of  the  time — a  better  apprecia- 
tion  of  the  fact  of  individuality. 

III.  Eaklt  viotobt.  In  connection  with  this  earlier  and  more  promising  part  of 
Amaziah's  reign,  we  are  told  of  a  great  victory  which  he  gained  over  the  Edomites. 
The  Edomites  had  revolted  in  Jehoram's  reign  (ch.  viii.  20) ;  but  Amaziah  now  felt 
himself  strong  enough  to  attempt  their  resubjugation.  In  setting  out  on  this  war — 
the  origin  of  which  we  do  not  precisely  know — ^he  had  the  countenance  of  God's  pro- 
phets, and  acted  by  their  directions  (2  Chron.  ixv.  6—10).  He  had,  as  men  always 
have  when  God  is  with  them  and  they  are  content  to  be  guided  by  his  will,  great 
success.  He  slew  of  Edom  ten  thousand,  took  Selah,  or  Petra,  and  changed  its  name. 
But  the  flush  of  his  victory  proved  also  the  beginning  of  his  ruin.  1.  His  conquest 
was  not  unmarked  by  great  cruelty  (cf.  2  Chron.  xxv.  12).  2.  He  fell  into  idolatry, 
actually  setting  up  the  gods  of  the  Edomites  which  he  had  brought  home,  and  burning 
incense  to  them — those  gods  which,  as  a  prophet  reminded  him,  could  not  deliver  their 
own  people  out  of  his  hand  (2  Chron.  xxv.  15).  From  this  point  dates  his  declension. 
He  acted  precisely  as  his  father  had  done  in  forcibly  silencing  the  prophets ;  and  God, 
in  return,  gave  him  up  to  a  reprobate  mind  for  his  destruction.  Prosperity  tests  a  man's 
nature.  There  are  few  who  can  carry  the  full  cup  without  becoming  haughty  and  God- 
forgetful. — J.  0. 

Vers.  8 — 14. — Z%e  boastful  challenge,  and  it»  residtt.  It  is  in  the  light  of  the  facts 
narrated  in  the  Book  of  Chronicles,  but  not  alluded  to  here,  that  we  are  to  read  the 
story  of  Amaziah's  foUy  in  his  boastful  challenge  to  Joash  of  Israel  (cf.  2  Chron. 
xxv.  20). 

I.  Thb  boastful  CHALLKNaE.  1.  Its  motives.  It  is  not  difiScult  to  conceive  the 
kind  of  influences  which  led  Amaziah  to  give  this  challenge  to  Joash.  (1)  Naturally 
vain-glorious,  he  was  greatly  elated  by  his  successes  over  Edom,  and  was  ambitious  to 
pose  as  a  great  military  conqueror.  How  many  wars  have  had  their  origin  in  no 
higher  source  1  To  gratify  the  vanity  and  ambition  of  individuals,  or  the  lust  of 
glory  in  nations,  torrents  of  blood  have  been  shed.  (2)  Israel  was  at  this  time  in  a 
very  humbled  state,  but  showed  signs  of  reviving.    Amaziah  probably  thought  it  was 


OH.  XIV.  1—29.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGR  29S 

•  good  time  to  bring  back  the  revolted  tribes  to  the  sceptre  of  Jndah.  ^)  The  Israel- 
ites had  given  some  provocation  in  attacks  upon  the  cities  of  Judah  (2  Chron,  xxv.  13). 
This  at  least  would  furnish  a  pretext.  2.  Its  nature.  The  challenge  took  the  form  of 
a  message  to  Joash,  "  Come,  let  us  look  one  another  in  the  face."  In  giving  such  a 
challenge,  Amaziah  did  not  count  the  cost  (cf.  Luke  xiv.  31).  He  was  puffed  up  with 
conceit,  and  did  not  reflect  on  the  superior  military  abilities  of  Joash,  already  beginning 
to  be  displayed  in  his  wars  with  the  Syrians,  or  on  his  larger  forces.  Bather,  Joash's 
rising  reputation  roused  in  him  the  ambition  to  measure  himself  against  Joash.  When 
men  are  left  to  themselves  there  are  no  limits  to  the  extent  to  which  their  folly  will  lead 
them.  3.  Its  lacJe  of  sanction  from  Ood,  This  time  God  was  not  with  Amaziah  in 
his  undertaking.  No  prophet's  voice  commanded,  sanctioned,  or  promised  blessings  on 
the  war.  Amaziah  was  acting  on  his  own  motion,  and  in  reliance  solely  on  his  own 
strength.  God  had  lel't  him,  as  he  left  SauL  In  such  condition  a  man  but  plunges  on 
to  his  ruin. 

II.  The  haughty  reply.  Joash  perfectly  took  the  measure  of  his  challenger,  and 
answered  him  according  to  his  folly.  1.  His  insulting  parahle.  First,  he  replied  by  a 
parable.  He  told  bow  the  briar  (or  thistle)  of  Lebanon  sent  to  the  cedar  of  Lebanon, 
demanding  that  the  daughter  of  the  cedar  should  be  given  in  wife  to  his  son.  But  a  wild 
beast  of  the  forest  passed  by,  and  trode  down  the  briar.  The  idea  of  the  parable  is,  of 
course,  to  ridicule  the  presumption  of  Amaziah  in  venturing  to  put  himself  on  an  equality 
with  Joash.  It  was  meant  to  sting  and  insult  the  Jewish  king  by  intimating  to  him 
that  in  Joash's  eyes  he  was  no  more  than  a  contemptible  briar  in  comparison  with  the 
majestic  cedars.  On  it  we  remark  (1)  that  Joash  also  cannot  be  acquitted  of  over- 
weening arrogance.  It  is  a  scornful,  haughty  spirit  which  breathes  in  his  parable.  From 
the  Israelitish  point  of  view  the  ten  tribes  were  the  kingdom  of  Israel ;  Judah  was  the 
isolated  tribe.  But  the  state  of  Israel  at  this  time,  and  in  the  recent  past,  did  not 
warrant  these  boastful  metaphors.  The  cedar,  as  well  as  the  briar,  had  been  pretty  well 
trodden  down  by  the  wild  beast  of  .the  forest.  This  arrogant  spirit,  moreover,  is  apt  to 
lead  its  possessor  into  the  error  of  despising  things  simply  because  they  are  outwardly 
weak.  In  this  case  the  King  of  Israel  very  justly  took  the  boastful  Amaziah's  measure. 
But  it  does  not  always  follow  that  the  cedar  has  the  right  to  lord  it  over  the  briar.  It 
is  no  uncommon  thing  for  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  overcome  the  mighty  (1  Cor. 
i.  27,  28).  David  was  a  feeble  stripling  in  Goliath's  sight,  but  Goliath  fell  before  him 
(I  Sam.  xvL  43 — 51).  The  numbers  may  be  few,  but  if  they  have  a  good  cause,  are 
inspired  by  faith,  and  go  forward  at  God's  call,  one  will  chase  a  thousand  (Deut.  xxxii, 
30 ;  Josh,  xxiii.  10).  (2)  Nevertheless,  the  parable  was  just  in  so  far  as  Amaziah  was 
matching  himself  against  one  who,  as  the  event  showed,  was  greatly  his  superior. 
Joash  was  by  far  the  abler  soldier,  and  had  larger  forces.  Amaziah  wished  to  show 
himself  bis  equal,  but  lacked  the  power  of  taking  a  just  estimate  of  his  own  capabilities. 
This  is  one  of  the  first  conditions  of  a  man's  strength — to  know  himself.  "  flow  many . 
men  may  you  meet  in  middle  life  whose  career  has  been  marked  by  bitter  disappoint- 
ments, and  whose  hearts  have  been  soured  by  these  I  They  began  with  vaulting  hopes 
which  have  never  been  realized ;  and  so  they  blame  what  they  call  their  adverse  fate. 
But  you  see  the  effect  of  one  great  blunder  which  has  pursued  them  all  their  lives — you 
see  that  they  have  never  sought  to  know  themselves.  They  began  in  a  fool's  paradise, 
and  they  have  never  made  their  escape  from  it.  A  more  exact  and  modest  estimate  of 
their  own  powers,  a  clear  and  honest  apprehension  of  their  own  capacity,  a  readiness  to 
do  the  work  within  their  limits,  the  work  they  were  meant  to  do,  and  they  had  been 
spared  many  bitter  hours."  2.  Bis  contemptuous  advice.  Following  up  his  parable, 
Joash  gave  the  King  of  Judah  a  piece  of  advice,  scornfully  and  contemptuously 
expressed,  but  such  advice  as,  on  the  whole,  Amaziah  would  have  done  well  to  take. 
(1)  He  touched  truly  enough  the  motive  of  his  foolish  challenge.  "  Thou  hast  indeed 
smitten  Edom,  and  thine  heart  is  lifted  up."  A  measure  of  success  turns  the  heads  of 
some  people,  inflates  their  ideas  of  themselves,  and  incapacitates  them  for  sober  calcula- 
tion of  the  fiiture.  (2)  He  bids  him  content  himself  with  what  he  has  achieved,  and 
tarry  at  home.  The  tone  is  most  insulting,  implying  the  most  perfect  contempt  for 
Amaziah's  threatened  attack;  but  the  advice  was  wise.  Amaziah  was  a  fool  to  pro- 
voke a  needless  war,  and  run  himself  and  his  kingdom  into  danger  from  a  mere  motive 
of  vain-glory.    (8)  He  predicts  to  him  what  will  happen  if  he  persisis  in  his  foolish 


294  I'HE  Second  book  Oi*  the  fclNGS.        [oh.  xit.  l— 29, 

oouiw.  "Why  shoaldest  thou  meddle  to  thy  hnrt,  that  thou  8honMe8t  fall,  even  thou, 
•nd  Judah  with  thee?"  It  perhaps  was  not  to  he  expected  that  Amaziah  ahonld  take 
advice  bo  unpalatahle,  so  tauntingly  conveyed,  bo  wounding  to  his  pride  and  njai 
honour.  But  the  result  showed  that  Joash  had  not  overstated  his  case.  Amamah 
meddled  truly  to  his  hurt,  and  he  fell,  even  he,  and  Judah  with  him.  It  is  the  fatality 
of  a  foolish  mind  that  it  is  impregnable  to  considerations  which  wordd  show  it  its  folly. 
III.  The  OBUBHiNa  defeat.  Amaziah,  as  was  to  he  expected,  would  not  hear.  No 
obstinate  man  does.  He  went  on  his  foolish,  headstrong  way,  and  brought  down  upon 
himself  an  avalanche  of  trouble.  1.  The  army  waa  d^eated.  He  and  Joash  met  in 
battle,  and  his  army  was  utterly  routed.  It  is  characteristic  that  the  fight  took  place 
at  Beth-shemesh,  in  the  territory  of  Judah.  This  shows  that  Joash  was  the  first  to 
move  when  he  saw  that  war  was  inevitable.  While  Amaziah  was  dallying  and  muster- 
ing his  men,  Joash  was  already  on  the  march,  and  took  the  offensive.  For  victory  of 
any  kind,  much  depends  on  promptitude,  alertness,  and  activity  on  the  part  of  the 
assailant.  2.  The  king  was  taken  prisoner.  Joash  "  took  Amaziah."  How  long  the 
king  remained  a  captive  is  not  said.  He  was  probably  delivered  up  after  "hostages  " 
had  been  given.  But  the  humiliation  was  great  and  bitter.  The  people  of  Judah 
never  forgot  or  forgave  it.  3.  Jerusalem  was  captured  and  plundered.  The  royal  city 
shared  the  fate  of  its  king.  It  had  no  alternative  but  to  open  its  gates  to  the  con- 
queror. Joash  did  not  spare  it.  To  mark  the  completeness  of  his  conquest  he,  (1) 
brake  down  four  hundred  cubits  of  the  city  wall  on  the  side  towards  Ephraim ;  (2) 
plundered  the  house  of  the  Lord  and  the  palace  of  the  king  of  their  treasures.  The 
treasuries  had  been  emptied  in  the  preceding  reign  for  Hazael  (ch.  xiL  18);  now  a 
second  time  their  contents  are  taken  away.  Miserable  people,  and  miserable  king !  No 
wonder  burning  indignation  existed  against  Amaziah,  who  had  led  the  kingdom  into 
this  trouble.  We  may  see  some  parallel  to  it  in  the  feelings  of  the  French  towards 
their  emperor  after  the  Franco-Prussian  War.  The  lesson  had  been  taught  in  the 
preceding  reign,  but  Amaziah  had  not  profited  by  his  father's  misfortimes ;  and,  having 
followed  his  footsteps  in  sin,  was  now  reaping  the  consequences  in  even  severer  chas- 
tisement.— J.  0. 

Vers.  16 — 22. — Changes  in  two  thrones.  The  next  events  recorded  are  the  acces- 
sion of  Jeroboam  IL  after  the  death  of  Joash,  in  Israel ;  and  the  conspiracy  against 
Amaziah  fifteen  years  later  and  the  accession  of  Azariah,  in  Judah. 

I.  The  accession  of  Jeboboam.  More  is  not  told  us,  than  we  have  already  heard,  of 
the  "  might "  of  Joash.  Jeroboam,  who  succeeded  him,  proved  the  able  son  of  an  able 
father.  But  the  stock  of  Jehu  was  godless  as  ever.  The  new  king  also,  as  we  are  to 
see,  "did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,"  and  kept  up  the  "  sin  "  of  his  namesake,  Jero- 
boam I.,  in  the  worship  of  the  calves.  Great  natural  ability  is  often  associated  with 
godlessness  of  heart. 

II.  The  accession  of  Azabiah.  1.  Azariah  made  king.  The  notice  of  the  con- 
spiracy against  Amaziah  precedes  in  the  narrative  the  notice  of  Azariah's  accession; 
but  there  is  some  reason  from  the  chronology  to  think  that  the  son  was  made  king 
along  with  his  father  shortly  after  Amaziah's  disastrous  defeat.  (1)  It  is  stated  in 
ch.  XV.  8  that  the  son  of  Jeroboam  IL,  Zachaiiah,  began  to  reign  in  the  thirty-eighth 
year  of  Azariah,  and  as  there  is  no  sign  in  the  narrative  of  the  interregnum  of  eleven 
years  which  chrunoiogers  usually  introduce,  it  would  foUow  that  Azariah  really  began 
to  reign  about  eleven  years  before  his  father's  death.  (2)  This  is  in  itself  not  unlikely 
when  we  remember  the  odium  which  must  have  £^en  on  Amaziah  after  his  defeat  and 
captivity,  and  the  capture  of  Jerusalem.  The  proof  he  had  given  of  incapacity  for 
government  would  make  it  desirable,  to  secure  the  popularity  of  the  throne,  that  his 
son  should  be  associated  with  him  in  the  kingdom.  (3)  There  are  indications  in  the 
narrative  which  point  in  this  direction,  e.g.  the  age  of  Amaziah,  only  raxteen  years ; 
the  statement  that  Amaziah  "  lived "  fifteen  years  after  the  death  of  Joash,  where 
we  might  have  expected  the  word  "  reigned ; "  lastly,  the  statement  that  Amaziah 
"  built  Elath,  and  restored  it  to  Judah,  after  that  the  king  slept  with  his  fathers." 
2.  Amaziah's  ignominious  end.  In  any  case,  it  seems  certain  that  Amaziah's  popularity 
never  revived  after  the  unhappy  encounter  with  Joash.  Fifteen  years  rolled  on,  and 
•t  length,  from  causes  to  ui  unknown,  •  plot  wa*  formed  agmintt  lum  in  Jarusalem, 


oa.iT.  1— 38.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  Of  TfiB  KINGS. 


m 


He  fled  to  Lachish,  but  was  pursued  and  killed.  The  slain  king  was  brought  back  on 
horses,  and  buried  in  Jerusalem  in  the  royal  sepulchre.  Thus  the  sun  of  another 
descendant  of  David,  who  had  forsaken  the  Qoi  of  his  fathers,  went  down  in  blood  and 
shame. — J.  0. 

Vers.  23 — 29. — The  reign  o/Jerohoam  II.  After  the  usual  statement  that  Jeroboam 
"  did  evil  in  the  siglit  of  the  Lord,  and  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son 
of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin,"  we  have  some  brief  notices  of  his  reign.    Note — 

I.  The  revived  fobtcnes  of  Isbael.  1.  Jeroboam's  successes  in  war.  This  able 
monarch  continued  the  work  of  Joash.  In  fulfilment  of  the  promise  that  God  would 
give  Israel  a  saviour,  Jeroboam  was  enabled  to  complete  the  recovery  of  the  cities  and 
territories  of  Israel  from  the  Syrians.  "He  restored  the  coast  of  Israel  from  the  entering 
in  of  Hamath  unto  the  sea  of  the  plain,"  that  is,  he  extended  the  boundaries  of  the  king- 
dom as  widely  as  they  had  ever  reached  in  the  days  of  its  greatest  prosperity.  2.  The 
cause  of  this — Ood's  pity  for  Israel.  This  remarkable  turn  in  the  fortunes  of  Israel 
was  strange  when  it  is  remembered  that  Jeroboam  was  not  a  man  who  had  the  fear  of 
God  before  him.  The  explanation  is  that  already  given  (ch.  xiii.  23),  the  pity  which 
God  had  for  Israel,  his  desire  to  give  it  one  more  chance  before  blotting  out  its  name, 
his  respect  for  the  covenant  with  the  fathers,  and,  subordinately,  his  regard  to  the 
prayer  of  Jehoahaz  (ch.  xiii.  4,  5).  If,  as  the  result  of  this  revival  of  the  nation's  for- 
tunes, piety  did  not  also  revive,  destruction  would  come  all  the  more  speedily.  In 
raising  up  this  powerful  king  to  save  Israel,  we  see  God's  faithfulness  to  his  promise. 

II.  Prophetic  activity.  We  have  allusion  in  the  text  to  the  prophetic  activity  of 
Jonah,  the  son  of  Amittai,  the  same  who  was  sent  to  Nineveh,  and  we  know  that  in 
this  reign  other  prophets,  notably  Hosea  and  Amos,  exercised  their  ministry.  The 
writings  of  the  latter  prophets  show  us  how,  amidst  the  sunshine  of  revived  prosperity, 
the  condition  of  the  people  did  not  improve,  but  grew  more  and  more  corrupt.  But 
God's  faithfulness  and  care  and  love  for  his  people  are  shown  in  sending  such  prophets 
to  warn  them  (of.  ch.  xvii.  13).  What  could  exceed  the  tender  pathos  of  a  ministry 
like  Hosea's,  or  the  fidelity  and  earnestness  of  a  testimony  like  that  of  Amos,  who 
bearded  the  highest  in  the  land  to  bear  witness  against  them  (Amos  vii.  10)  ?  Yet  the 
people  would  not  hear,  but  attributed  their  prosperity  to  their  idols,  and  worshipped 
them  more  tlian  ever,  while  immorality,  violence,  and  the  loosening  of  all  bonds 
between  man  and  man  abounded  more  and  more  (Hos.  iv.  1). 

III.  The  eve  of  collapse.  Jeroboam  dieii,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Zachariah. 
This  was  the  fourth  generation  of  the  house  of  Jehu,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  he  reigned 
only  six  months.  From  this  time  Israel  went  rapidly  to  its  ruin.  The  height  of  pros- 
perity reached  in  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  was  but  the  last  flicker  of  the  light  before  final 
extinction.  A  little  over  thirty  years  after  Jeroboam's  death — forty  at  most — the 
words  of  the  prophets  were  fulfilled,  and  the  kingdom  of  Israel  was  destroyed,  and  it* 
people  carried  away  by  the  Assyrian. — J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XV. 


Vers.  1 — 38. — Beions  of  Azabiah  and 

JOTHAM  over  JdDAH  ;  AND  OF  ZaCHARIAH, 

Shallum,  Memahem,  Fkkahiau,  and  Feeah 
ovsu  Israel. 

Von.  1 — 7.— The  Reios  of  Azabiah  over 
JuDAH.  The  writer  now  more  and  more 
compresses  his  narrative.  Into  a  single 
chapter  be  crowds  the  events  of  seven  reigns, 
covering  the  space  of  nearly  seventy  years. 
He  is  consequently  compelled  to  omit  several 
most  important  hittorical  events,  vhioh  are 


however,  fortunately  supplied  by  the  writer 
of  Chronicles.  Azariah's  reign,  which  here 
occupies  only  seven  verses,  in  Chrunioles 
fills  an  entire  chapter  (twenty-three  verses). 
(See  2  Chron.  xxvi.  1—23.) 

Ver.  1. — In  the  twenty  and  seventh  year 
of  Jeroboam  King  of  Israel  began  Azariah 
son  of  Amaziah  ^ng  of  Jndah  to  reign.  In 
ch.  xiv.  23  it  is  distinctly  stated  that 
Jeroboam's  reign  of  forty-one  years  com- 
menced in  the  fifteenth  of  Amaziah,  who 
from  that  time  lived  only  fifteen  years  (oh. 
xiv.  17>    Either,  therefore,  Axariab  most 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [ch.  xv,  1—38 


hare  begun  to  reign  in  the  fifteenth  yew  of 
Jeioboam,  or  there  must  have  been  an  in- 
terregnam  of  twelve  years  between  the 
death  of  Amaziah  and  the  accession  of 
Azariah.  As  this  last  hypothesis  is  pre- 
cluded by  the  narrative  of  2  Chron.  xzvi.  1 
and  ch.  ziv.  20,  21,  we  must  correct  the 
"  twenty-seventh  year"  of  this  verse  into 
the  "  fifteenth."  If  we  do  this,  corresponding 
changes  will  have  to  be  made  in  vers.  8, 13, 
23,  and  27. 

Ver.  2. — Sixteen  years  old  was  he  when 
he  began  to  reign,  and  he  reigned  two  and 
fifty  years  in  Jemsalem.  These  numbers 
are  confirmed  by  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxvi. 
1 — 3)  and  by  Josephus  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  10. 
§  4),  who  says  that  he  reigned  fifty-two 
years,  and  died  at  the  age  of  sixty-eight. 
And  his  mother's  name  was  Jecholiah  of 
Jemsalem,  Josephus  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  10. 
§  3)  calls  her  "  Achiala." 

Ver.  3. — And  he  did  that  which  was  right 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  acoording  to  all  that 
his  father  Amaziah  had  done  (comp.  ch. 
xiv.  3  and[2  Chron.  xxvi.  4).  Josephus  uses 
still  stronger  expressions.  "  Azariah  was," 
he  says  (I.  s.  c),  "  a  good  king,  naturally  juat 
and  high-minded,  and  indefatigable  in  his 
administration  of  affairs."  According  to 
the  author  of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  5), 
he  "  sought  God  in  the  days  of  Zechariah," 

Ver.  4. — Save  that  the  high  places  were 
not  removed:  the  people  sacrificed  and 
burnt  inoense  still  on  the  high  places 
(comp.  oh.  xiv.  4,  and  the  comment  ad  loo.). 

Ver.  5. — And  the  Lord  smote  the  king. 
This  comes  in  somewhat  strangely,  following 
close  upon  a  statement  that  the  king  "  did 
that  which  was  right  in  the  siglit  of  the 
Lord."  We  have  to  go  to  Chronicles  for  an 
explanation.  By  Chronicles  it  appears  tliat, 
in  the  earlier  portion  of  his  reign,  Azariah 
was  a  good  and  pious  prince,  and  that  God 
blessed  him  in  all  his  undertakings.  Not 
only  did  he  recover  Eloth  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  2), 
but  he  carried  on  a  successful  war  vrith  the 
PhiUstineB — took  Gath,  Jabneh  (Jamnia), 
and  Ashdod,  and  dismantled  them  (2  Chron. 
xxvi.  6),  defeated  the  Arabians  of  Gur-Baal, 
and  the  Mehunim  or  Maonites  (2  Chron, 
xxvi.  7),  forced  the  Ammonites  to  pay  him 
a  tribute,  and  caused  his  power  to  be  known 
and  feared  far  and  wide  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  8). 
The  standing  army  which  he  maintained 
numbered  307,500  men,  under  2600  officers, 
well  armed  and  equipped  with  shields, 
spears,  helmets,  breast-plates,  bows,  and 
slings  (2  Chron.  xxvi  12 — 14).  "  His  name 
spread  far  abroad,  for  he  waa  wonderfully 
helped  "  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  15).  This  marvel- 
lous prosperity  developed  in  him  a  pride 
equal  to  that  of  his  father,  but  one  which 
vented  itself  differently.  Azariah,  deeming 
bimielf  lupeiior   to   all   other  men,  and 


exempt  bom  ordinary  rules,  boldly  invaded 
the  priestly  office,  took  a  censer,  and  entered 
into  the  temple,  and  pioeeeded  to  bun 
incense  upon  the  golden  altar  that  was 
before  the  veil  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  16—18).  It 
was  then  that "  the  Lord  smote  the  king," 
As,  in  defiance  of  the  high  priest  and  his 
attendant  train,  who  sought  to  prevent  the 
lawless  act,  Azariah  persisted  in  his  en- 
deavours, God  struck  him  with  leprosy,  liis 
forithead  grew  white  with  the  unmistajbibls 
scaly  scab,  and  in  a  moment  his  indomitable 
pride  was  quelled.  The  priests  closed  in 
upon  him  and  began  to  thrust  him  out,  but 
no  violence  was  necessary.  Aware  of  what 
had  happened,  "he  himself  also  hasted  to 
go  out,  because  the  Lord  had  smitten  him  " 
(2  Chron.  xxvi.  20),  It  is  not  very  clear 
why  the  writer  of  Kings  passes  over  these 
facts ;  but  certainly  they  are  not  discredited 
by  his  silence.  At  any  rate,  those  who 
accept  the  entire  series  of  conquests,  where- 
of the  writer  of  Kings  says  nothing,  on  the 
sole  authority  of  Chronicles,  are  logically 
precluded  from  rejecting  the  circumstances 
accompanying  the  leprosy,  which  is  acknow- 
ledged by  the  writer  of  Kings,  and  viewed 
as  a  judgment  from  God.  So  that  he  was  a 
leper  unto  the  day  of  his  death,  and  dwelt 
in  a  several  house  (comp.  2  Chron.  xxvi. 
21).  Lepers  had  to  be  separated  firom  the 
congregation — to  "  dwell  alone  " — "  without 
the  camp"  (Lev.  xiii.  46).  Ahaziah's 
"  several  house  "  is  regarded  by  some  as  an 
"  infirmary,"  or  "  hospital  for  lepers " 
(Ewald,  Gesenius,  Winer);  but  there  is  no 
reason  to  believe  that  hospitals  of  any  kind 
existed  among  the  Israelites.  The  lepers 
mentioned  in  ch.  vii.  3  are  houseless.  n<a 
n'bsnn  is  best  translated  "  house  of  separa- 
tion," and  understood  of  a  house  standing 
by  itself  in  the  open  country,  separate  &om 
others.  "  Probably  the  house  in  which  the 
leprous  king  lived  was,"  as  B'ahr  says, 
"especially  built  for  bira."  And  Jotham 
the  king's  son  was  over  the  honse—- not  over 
the  "  several  honse,"  but  over  the  royal 
palace— judging  the  people  of  the  land ;  t.«. 
executing  the  royal  functions,  whereof 
"judging"  was  one  of  the  highest.  Aza- 
riah's  infirmity  made  a  regency  necessary, 
and  naturally  his  eldest  son  held  the  office. 

Ver.  6. — And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Azariah,  and  all  that  he  did,  are  they  not 
written  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the 
kings  of  Jndahl  For  Azariah's  principal 
acts,  see  the  commentary  on  the  first  clause 
of  ver.  5. 

Ver.  7. — So  Azariali  slept  with  his  fathers , 
and  they  buried  Mm  with  his  fathers  in  the 
city  of  David.  Here  again  the  writer  of 
Chronicles  is  more  exact.  Azariah,  he  tells 
us  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  23),  was  not  buried  in 
the   xo<\k-BepulcbTe   which   contained   the 


CH.XV.  1— 38,]   THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


297 


bodiM  of  the  other  kings,  but  in  another 
part  of  the  field  wherein  the  sepulchre  wag 
situated.  This  was  quite  consonant  with 
Jewish  feeling  with  respect  to  the  unclean- 
ness  of  the  leper.  And  Jotham  his  son 
reigned  in  his  stead.  Jotham,  already  for 
some  years  prince  regent,  became  king  as  • 
matter  of  course  on  h^  father's  demise. 

Vers.  8—12. — Beion  of  Zaorabiah  oveb 
Israel.  Fclpilment  of  the  Promise  made 
TO  Jehu,  The  writer  has  nothing  to  record 
of  Zachariah  but  his  murder  by  Shallum 
after  a  reign  of  six  months.  Vers.  8,  9,  and 
II  contain  the  usual  formula.  Ver.  10 
gives  the  only  oTent  that  needed  record. 
Ver,  12  recalls  to  the  reader's  attention  a 
previous  passage,  in  which  a  prophecy  had 
been  mentioned,  wliereof  Zachariah's  reign 
was  the  fulfilment. 

Ver.  8.— In  the  thirty  and  eighth  year  of 
Azariah  King  of  Judah  did  Zachariah  the  son 
of  Jeroboam  reign  over  Israel  in  Samaria. 
If  Azariah  began  to  reign  in  the  twenty- 
seventh  year  of  Jerohoam  (ver.  1),  and 
Jeroboam  died  in  his  forty-first  or  forty- 
second  year  (ch.  xiv.  23),  Zachariah  must 
have  ascended  the  throne  in  the  fifteenth  or 
sixteenth  year  of  Azariah.  Even  if  Azariah 
became  king  in  tlie  fifteenth  of  Jeroboam, 
as  has  been  shown  to  be  probable  (see  the 
comment  on  ver.  1),  Zachariah's  accession 
onnnot  have  been  earlier  than  Azariah'a 
twenty-sixth  year.  An  interregnum  be- 
tween the  death  of  Jeroboam  and  the 
accession  of  Zachariah  is  not  to  be  thought 
of.  Six  months.  So  also  Joseph  us  (see 
•AntJud,'ix.ll.  §1). 

Ver.  9. — And  he  did  that  which  wos  evil 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  as  his  fathers  had 
done:  he  departed  not  from  the  sins  of 
Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel 
to  sin.  The  customary  formula,  witli  nothing 
to  emphasize  it.  In  the  short  space  of  barely 
six  months,  Zachariah  could  not  do  either 
much  good  or  much  evil. 

Ver.  10. — And  Shallum  the  ion  of  Jabesh 
conspired  against  him.  Josephus  calls 
Shallum'Zachariah's  "  friend,"  butotlierwise 
adds  nothing  to  the  present  narrative.  And 
smote  him  before  the  people.  The  phrase 
employed  ii  very  unusual,  and  has  justly 
excited  suspicion.  It  was  not  understood 
by  the  LXX.,  who  translate  ivdTo^ap  aiiThv 
Ke$\iulii,,  which  gives  no  sense.  £wald 
sought  to  solve  the  difficulty  by  inventing 
■  king,  "  Zobolam,"  but  otiier  critics  have 
found  this  expedient  too  bold.  The  render- 
ing of  our  transliitors  is  generally  accepted, 
thougli  qobal,  "before,"  only  occurs  here 
•nd  in  Daniel.    If  we  accept  wis  rendering, 


we  mnst  nippoae  that  the  act  of  violence 
was  done  openly,  like  John's  murder  of 
Jehoram.  And  slew  him,  and  reigned  in  hii 
stead  (comp.  ver.  13). 

Ver.  11. — And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Zachariah,  behold,  they  are  written  in  the 
hook  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Israel. 

Ver.  12.— This  was  the  word  of  the  Lord 
which  he  spake  nnto  Jehn  (comp.  oh.  x 
30),  saying,  Thy  sons  shall  sit  on  the  throne 
of  Israel  unto  the  fourth  generation.  The 
direct  promise  was,  "  Thy  house  shall  hold 
the  throne  so  long ;  "  the  implied  prophecy, 
"  They  shall  not  hold  it  longer."  Tliere 
had  not  been  wanting  other  indications  of 
the  coming  trouhles.  Hosea  had  declared 
that  God  would  avenge  the  blood  of  Jezreel 
upon  the  house  of  Jehu  (Hos.  i.  4).  Aiims 
had  gone  further,  and  had  openly  proclaim  d 
that  God  would  "rise  against  the  liouse  nf 
Jeroboam  with  the  tword"  (Amns  vii.  9). 
The  threat  had  been  understood  as  a  threat 
against  Jeroboam  himself  (Amos  vii.  Tl), 
but  this  was  a  misinterpretation.  The 
words  plainly  pointed  to  a  revolution  in  the 
time  of  his  son.  And  so  it  came  to  pass. 
The  house  of  Jehu  ceased  to  reign  in  the 
fourth  generation  of  the  descendants  of  its 
founder.  No  considerations  of  prudence  or 
of  gratitude  could  keep  the  nation  fiiithful 
to  any  dynasty  for  a  longer  time  than  tliis. 
In  breaking  oif  from  the  divinely  clios-eii 
house  of  David,  and  choosing  to  themselves 
a  king,  the  Israelites  bad  sown  the  seeds  of 
instability  in  their  state,  and  put  themselves 
at  the  mercy  of  any  ambitious  pretender. 
Five  dynasties  had  already  borne  rule  in 
the  two  hundred  years  that  the  kingdom 
had  lasted ;  four  more  were  about  to  hold 
the  throne  in  the  remaining  fifty  years  of 
its  existence.  "Unstable  as  water,  thou 
sbalt  not  excel,"  though  said  of  Beuben 
only  (Gen.  xlix.  4),  fairly  expressed  the 
character  of  the  entire  kingdom,  with  which 
Beuben  cast  in  its  lot  at  the  time  of  the 
separation. 

Vers.  13 — 15. — Short  akd  TTifiMPORTANT 
BnaN  OF  Shallttu.  Three  verses  suffice 
for  the  reign  of  Shallum,  the  son  of  Jabesh, 
who  held  the  throne  for  only  thirty  days. 
Hearing  of  his  conspiracy,  Meuahem,  the 
sonof  Gadi — "the  general,"  as  Josephus  calls 
him  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  11.  §  1)— marched  from 
Tirzah  to  Samaria,  got  Shallum  into  his 
power,  and  put  him  to  death  (ver.  14).  The 
writer  concludes  with  the  usual  formula 
(ver.  15). 

Ver.  18. — ShaUnm  the  son  of  Jabesh 
began  to  reign  in  the  nine  and  thirtieth 
year  of  TJzziah  King  of  Judah.    This  date 


298 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  xv.  1—38. 


follows  from  that  of  Ter.  8,  and  mast  stand 
or  fall  with  it.  The  tme  accession-year  of 
Shallum  was  probably  the  twenty-seventh  of 
Uzziah.  And  he  reigned  a  faU  month  in 
Samaria ;  literally,  a  month  of  dayt — "  thirty 
days  "  according  to  Joaephus. 

Ver.  14. — For  Uenahem  the  son  of  Oadi 
went  up  firom  Xirzah.  Ewald  supposes 
Tirzah  to  have  been  the  "  native  city  "  of 
Menahem '  but  this  is  not  stated.  Accord- 
ing to  Josephus  (Z.  (.  e.),  he  was  commander- 
in-chief,  and  happened  to  be  in  Tirzeh  at 
the  time.  (On  the  probable  site  of  Tirzeh, 
see  the  comment  on  1  Eiogs  xir.  17.)  It 
was  the  royal  city  of  the  kingdom  of  the  ten 
tribes  &om  the  later  part  of  Jeroboam's  reign 
to  the  building  of  Samaria  by  Omri  (see 
1  Kings  ziv.  17:  xvi.  6,  8,  15,  23).  And 
oame  to  Samaria,  and  smote  Shallum  the 
son  of  Jabesh  in  Samaria— Josephus  says 
that  there  was  a  battle,  in  which  Shallum 
wat  slain — and  slew  him,  and  reigned  in 
hii  f  tead. 

Ter.  15. — And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Shallum,  and  his  oonspiraoy  which  he  made 
(see  Ter.  10),  behold,  they  are  written  in 
the  book  of  Uio  ohrouicles  of  the  kings  of 
Isratl. 

Vers.  16 — 22.— Bxiom  op  Menahbu,  and 

EXFIDITION     or      PCL     AGAINST      SaUABIA. 

Two  events  only  of  Menabem's  reign  receive 
notice  from  the  writer.  (1)  His  capture  of 
Tiphsah,  and  severe  treatment  of  the  in- 
habitants (ver.  16).  (2)  The  invasion  of 
his  land  by  an  Assyrian  monarch,  called 
"Pul"  or  "Phul,"  and  his  submission  to 
that  monarch's  authority.  Pul's  retirement 
was  bought  by  a  large  sum  of  money,  which 
Menahem  ooUectcd  from  hi*  subjects  (vers. 
19,  20). 

Ver.  16. — Then  Uenahem  smote  Tiphsah. 
The  only  town  of  this  name  known  to  history 
or  geography  is  the  famous  city  on  the 
Euphrates  (1  Kings  iv.  24),  called  by  the 
Qreeks  Thapaacus.  It  has  been  thought 
that  Menahem  could  not  have  pushed  his 
conquests  so  far,  and  a  second  l^phsah  has 
been  invented  in  the  Israelite  highland, 
between  Tirzah  and  Samaria,  of  which  there 
is  no  other  notice  anywhere.  But "  Tiphsah," 
which  means  "  passage"  or  "  fordway,"  ia 
an  unsuitable  name  for  a  city  in  such  a 
situation.  The  view  of  Keil  is  clearly 
tenable — that  Zachariah  had  intended  to 
carry  on  his  father's  warlike  policy,  and 
had  collected  an  army  for  a  great  Eastern 
expedition,  which  had  its  head-quarters  at 
the  roylkl  city  of  Tirzah,  and  was  under  the 
command  of  Menahem.  As  the  expedition 
was  aboi}t  to  «t«rt,  the  news  oame  that 


Shallum  had  murdered  Zachariah  and 
usurped  the  throne.  Menahem  upon  this 
proceeded  from  Tirzah  to  Samaria,  crushed 
Shallum,  and,  returning  to  his  army,  carried 
out  without  further  delay  the  expedition 
already  resolved  upon.  The  Assyrian  records 
show  that,  at  the  probable  date  of  the  ex- 
pedition, Assyria  was  exceptionally  weak, 
and  in  no  condition  to  resist  an  attack, 
though  a  little  later,  under  Tiglath-pileser, 
she  recovered  herself.  And  all  that  were 
therein,  and  the  coasts  thereof,  from  Tirzah. 
"From  Tirzah"  means  " starting  from  Tir- 
zah," as  in  ver.  14.  It  is  to  be  connected 
with  "smote,"  not  with  "coasts."  Because 
they  opened  not  to  him,  therefore  he  smote 
it.  Determined  resistance  on  the  part  of 
a  city  summoned  to  surrender  has  always 
been  regarded  as  justifying  an  extreme 
severity  of  treatment.  It  is  not  dear  that 
Menahem  transgressed  the  ordinary  usages 
of  war  in  what  he  did,  however  much  he 
transgressed  the  laws  of  humanity.  And 
all  the  women  therein  that  were  with  child 
he  ripped  up  (oomp.  oh.  viii.  12,  with  the 
comment ;  and  see  also  Isa.  xiiL  18 ;  Hos. 
X.  14;  xiii.  16;  Amos  i.  13). 

Ver.  17. — In  the  nine  and  thirtieth  year 
of  Azariah  King  of  Judah  began  Menidiem 
the  son  of  Oadi  to  reign  over  Israel  (com  p. 
ver.  13,  and  the  comment),  and  reigned  ten 
years  in  Samaria.  So  Josephus  ('Ant.  Jud.,' 
ix.  11.  §  1). 

Ver.  18. — And  he  did  that  which  was  evil 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord :  he  departed  not  all 
his  days  fi^om  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son 
of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin.  The 
writer  does  not  seem  to  regard  Menahem  as 
either  better  or  worse  than  his  predecessors. 
The  usual  formula  suffices  to  describe  the 
moral  and  religious  aspect  of  his  reign. 

Ver.  19.— And  Pul  the  King  of  Assyria 
oame  against  the  land.  There  is  no  connec- 
tive in  the  Hebrew  text,  and  it  has  been 
proposed  to  supply  one;  but  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that  the  best  emendation  is  that 
suggested  by  Thenius,  who  changes  the 
VD'-^3  of  ver.  18  into  vo's,  and  attaches 
that  word  to  ver.  19.  Verl  19  will  then 
read  thus :  "  In  his  days  Pul  the  King  of 
Assyria  came  against  the  land" — and  no 
connective  will  be  wanted.  The  greatest 
doubt  has  been  entertained  with  regard  to 
the  identity  of  Pul,  whose  name  dues  not 
appear  in  the  Assyrian  Eponym  Canon,  or 
in  any  other  purely  Assyrian  document. 
But  recently  discovered  Babylonian  docu- 
ments seem  to  prove  that  Pul  (Pulu)  was 
the  Babylonian  name  for  Tiglath-pileser, 
who  reigned  under  tljat  name  in  Babylon 
during  bis  last  two  years,  and  appears  in 
the  Canon  of  Ptolemy  as  " Pons."  Tiglath- 
pileser,  the  great  foonder  of  the  later 
Assyrian    empire,    made  hi^nself  h\ii(    ig 


cm.  XV.  1-38.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


209 


B.O.  745,  and  proceeded  to  eonsolidato  the 
AB8yrian  power  on  every  side,  after  a  period 
of  great  weakness  and  disorganization.  He 
made  several  expeditions  against  Babylonia, 
and  several  into  Syria  and  Palestine.  Tlie 
expedition  in  which  he  came  into  contact 
with  Menahem  is  thought  to  have  been  that 
of  his  eighth  year,  b.o.  738  (see  Q.  Smith, 
'Eponym  Canon,'  pp.  117 — 120;  and,  for 
the  identity  of  Tigluth-pileser  with  Pul,  see 
the  '  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical 
Archeeology '  for  1884,  p.  198).  And  Mena- 
hem gave  Fnl  a  thousand  talents  of  silver. 
A  vast  sum  certainly,  equal  to  above  a 
qnarter  of  a  million  of  onr  money,  perhaps 
to  some  extent  a  punishment  for  the  siege 
and  sack  of  Tiphsah.  But  not  a  sum  that 
it  would  have  been  impossible  to  pay.  A 
King  of  Damascus,  about  fifty  years  pre- 
viously, had  bought  off  an  Assyrian  attack 
by  the  payment  of  two  thousand  three 
hundred  talents  of  silver  and  twenty  talents 
of  gold  (see  'Bponym  Canon,'  p.  115). 
That  his  hand  might  be  with  him  to  con- 
finn  the  kingdom  in  his  hand;  i.e.  that  Pul 
might  take  him  under  bis  protection,  accept 
him  as  one  of  his  subject-princes,  and  (by 
implication)  support  him  against  possible 
rivals. 

Yer.  20. — ^And  Kenahem  exacted  the 
money  of  Israel.  Either  he  was  not  pos- 
sessed of  any  acoumulated  treasure,  such  as 
the  kings  of  Judah  could  commonly  draw 
upon  (1  Kings  xv.  18 ;  ch.  xii.  18 ;  xvi.  8 ; 
xviii  15,  16),  or  he  thought  it  more  prudent 
to  keep  his  stores  untouched,  and  obtain 
the  money  from  his  subjects.  Even  of  all 
the  mighty  men  of  wealth.  The  context 
shows  this  to  be  the  meaning;  and  the 
lenderiug  is  justified  by  Buth  it  1 ;  1  Sam. 
ix.  1.  "Mighty  men  of  valour "  cannot 
possibly  be  intended.  Of  each  man  fifty 
shekels  of  silver,  to  give  to  the  King  of 
Assyria.  Fifty  shekels  was  a  heavy  tax, 
not  less  than  £5  or  £6  of  our  money. 
To  produce  a  thousand  talents,  this  tax 
had  to  be  levied  on  some  sixty  thousand 
persons.  Tiglath  -  pileeer  mentions  bis 
receipt  of  tribute  from  "Minikhimmi  of 
Tsammirin "  (Menahem  of  Someron  or 
Samaria),  but  does  not  tell  us  the  amount 
(see  '  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  120,  line  29).  So 
the  King  of  Assyria  tamed  hack,  and  stayed 
not  there  in  the  land.  Kings  of  Assyria 
usually  returned  home  at  the  eud  of  each 
campaign,  and  wintered  in  their  own 
territory. 

Yer.  21. — And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
UenaJiem,  and  all  that  he  did,  are  they  not 
written  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the 
kings  of  Israeli  Nothing  more  is  known 
of  Menahem  the  son  of  Gadi,  since  he 
certainly  cannot  he  identical  with  the  prince 
of   tt^e  sa^e  name  who  is  qieutioned  a^ 


"  Menahem  of  Samaria"  in  the  inscriptions 
of  Sennacherib  ('Eponym  Canon,'  p.  182, 
line  17).  This  second  Menahem  is  probably 
a  descendant  of  the  first,  who  was  allowed 
a  sort  of  titular  sovereignty  over  the  con- 
quered town. 

Yer.  22. — And  Uenahem  slept  with  his 
fathers — t'.e.  died — and  Fekahiah  his  son 
reigned  in  his  stead.  So  Josephns  ('  Ant. 
Jud.,'  ix.  11.  §  1),  who  calls  him  "  Phakeias.'- 

Yers.  23 — 26. — Shobt  Beion  of  Peka- 
HiAB.  The  short  reign  of  Pekahiah  was 
wholly  undistinguished.  He  held  the 
throne  for  two  years  only,  or  perhaps  for 
parts  of  two  years,  and  performed  no  action 
that  any  historian  has  thought  worthy  of 
record.  Our  author  has  nothing  to  relate 
of  him  but  the  circumstances  of  his  death 
(ver.  25),  wherewith  he  combines  the  usual 
formulas  (vers,  23,  24,  26). 

Yer.  23.— In  the  fiftieth  year  of  Azariah 
King  of  Judah;  really  in  the  thirty-seventh 
year  (see  the  comment  on  vers.  1,  8,  and 
27).  Azariah  is  mentioned  by  Tiglath- 
pileser  as  contending  with  him  in  the  year 
in  which  he  took  tribute  from  Menahem 
('Eponym  Canon,'  pp.  117 — 120),  which  is 
thought  to  have  been  B.O.  738.  Apparently, 
he  too  was  forced  to  pay  tribute  (ibid., 
pp.  117,  118,  lines  2,  3)  to  the  Assyrian 
monarch.  Fekahiah  the  son  of  Uenahem 
began  to  reign  over  Israel  in  Samaria,  and 
reigned  two  years.    So  Josephus  (I.  i.  e.). 

Yer.  24. — And  he  did  that  which  was  evil 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord :  he  departed  not 
from  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Hebat, 
who  made  Israel  to  sin.  Josephus  adds 
that  he  reigned  with  the  same  cruelty  as 
his  father  (tj  to!)  irarphs  KaTcucoKovBiia'as 
&)/ii(ti)ti),  but  we  cannot  be  sure  that  this 
is  more  than  a  conjecture,  founded  on  the 
shortness  of  his  reign. 

Yer.  25. — Bat  Fekah  the  ion  of  Bemaliah. 
Bemaliah  was  probably  a  man  of  some 
importance,  since  Pekah  seems  to  have  been 
almost  better  known  by  his  patronymic, 
Ben-Bemaliah,  "  son  of  Bemaliah,"  than 
by  his  own  proper  name  (see  Isa.  vii.  4, 
5,  9 ;  viii.  6).  A  captain  of  his — "  captain 
of  a  thousand,"  according  to  Josephus  (I. 
*.  e.) — conspired  against  him,  and  smote 
him  in  Samaria,  in  the  palace  of  the  king's 
house;  literally,  t»  tjU  tower  (or  keep) 
of  the  king's  house,  the  loftiest  part  (fon« 
is  from  on,  to  be  high)— certainly  not  the 
harem  (Ewald),  if  Pekahiah  was  feasting 
there  with  his  friends  (_So\o<j>oriieeU  4v 
aviiitoirltf  ficrii  <pl\av  atrdSwe),  as  Josephus 
says.  With  Argob  and  Arieh.  These 
seem  to  be  tbe  "  friends  "  of  Josephus,  whf 


soo 


THE  8ECX)ND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  tv.  1-3& 


were  with  the  king  and  ehnred  Ub  fate,  not 
fellow-oonspiratorB  with  Pekah.  The  names 
are  anoommon  ones.  And  with  him — i.e. 
Pekah — ^flfty  men  of  the  Oileadites ;  fifty  men 
of  "  the  Four  Hundreil,"  according  to  the 
LXX.  "  The  Four  Hundred  "  were  probably 
the  royal  body-guard,  which  at  this  time 
may  have  consiste'd  of  Gileadites.  And  he 
killed  him,  and  reigned  in  his  room.  It  does 
not  appear  that  Pekah  had  any  grievance. 
His  crime  SEjems  to  have  been  simply 
prompted  by  ambition. 

Ver.  26. — And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Pe- 
kahiah,  and  all  that  he  did,  behold,  they  are 
written  in  the  book  of  the  ohronioles  of  the 
kings  of  Israel. 

Vers.  27—31. — Beiqn  op  Pekah.    The 

writer  is  again  exceedingly  brief.  Pekah's 
reign  was  a  remarkable  one,  and  might  have 
furnished  much  material  to  the  historian. 
In  conjunction  with  Bezia  of  Damascus,  he 
made  war  upon  Judsea,  defeated  Ahaz  with 
great  loss ^2  Chron.  xxviii.  6),  and  laid  siege 
to  Jerusalem  ^iCsa.  vii.  1).  Ahaz  called  in 
the  aid  of  Assyria,  and  Tiglath-pileser  made 
two  expeditions  into  Palestine — the  one 
mentioned  in  yer.  29,  and  another  some 
years  afterwards.  In  the  latter  he  seems  to 
have  had  the  assistance  of  Hoshea,  who, 
with  his  sanction,  slew  Pekah,  and  became 
king.  The  scanty  notices  of  our  author 
must  be  supplemented  from  2  Chron.  zxviii, ; 
Isa.  vii.  1 — 9 ;  viii.  1 — 8 ;  and  the  Assyrian 
inscriptions. 

Ver.  27. — In  the  two  and  fiftieth  year  of 
Azariah  King  of  Jndah ;  rather,  in  the  thirty- 
ninth  ox  thirty-eighth  year  (see  the  comment 
on  ver  23).  Pekahiah'a  "  two  years "  may 
not  have  been  complete.  Fekah  the  son  of 
Bemaliah  began  to  reign  over  Israel  in 
Samaria,  and  reigned  twenty  years.  The 
Assyrian  records  make  this  number  impos- 
sible. Tiglath-pileser's  entire  reign  lasted 
only  eighteen  years,  yet  it  more  than  covered 
the  entire  reign  of  Fekah.  When  he  first 
invaded  the  kingdom  of  Samaria,  Menahem 
was  upon  the  throne  ('  Eponym  Canon,'  p. 
120,  line  29) ;  when  he  last  attacked  it,  pro- 
bably in  B.O.  730 — two  years  before  his  death 
in  B.C.  728 — he  set  up  Hoshea,  or,  at  any 
rate,  sanctioned  his  usurpation  (ibid.,  pp. 
123, 121,  lines  15—18).  Pekah's  entire  reign 
must  have  come  in  the  interval,  which  is 
certainly  not  more  than  one  of  fifteen,  pro- 
bably not  more  than  one  of  ten  years. 

Yer.  28. — And  he  did  that  wl.ich  was 
evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord:  he  departed 
aot  from  the  aim  of  Jeroboam  tlie  son  of 


Kebat,  who  made  Israel  to  iln.  Josephtu 
('Ant.  Jnd.,'ix..ll.  §  1)  eays  that  Pekah 
was  an  irreligious  king,  and  a  transgressor 
of  the  Law  (liirEjS^s  re  ko!  irapivoitos), 
Isaiah  shows  how  he  intrigued  with  foreign- 
ers against  his  brethren  of  the  sister  king- 
dom (Isa.  vii.  2 — 6).  The  writer  of  Chro- 
nicles tells  of  his  fierce  anger  against  the 
Jews  (2  Chron.  xxviiL  9),  and  of  the  dread- 
ful carnage  which  he  sanctioned  after  the 
great  battle. 

Ver.  29.— In  the  days  of  Fekah  King  of 
Israel  came  Tiglath-pileser  King  of  Assyria. 
Tiglath-pileser's  records  are  not  in  the  shape 
of  annals,  and  are,  moreover,  in  a  very  mu- 
tilated condition.  He  does  not  date  events, 
like  most  Assyrian  kings,  by  his  regnal  years. 
His  first  expedition  into  Syria  is  thought^ 
however,  to  have  been  in  his  third  year, 
B.O.  713,  but  there  is  no  evidence  that,  on 
this  occasion,  he  proceeded  further  south 
than  Damascus,  where  he  took  tribute  from 
Bezin.  Some  years  after  this — b.o.  738,  ac- 
cording to  Mr.  G.  Smith — he  penetrated  to 
Palestine,  where  his  chief , enemy  was  Aza- 
riah King  of  Jndah,  who  had  united  under 
his  sway  most  of  the  tribes  as  far  as  Hamath. 
After  chastising  Azariah,  he  extended  hii 
dominion  over  most  of  the  neighbouring 
states  and  kingdoms;  and  it  was  at  this 
time  that  (as  related  in  ver.  19)  he  took 
tribute  from  Menahem.  Subsequently  (about 
B.O.  734)  he  made  an  expedition  for  the  pur- 
pose of  conquest,  which  receives  very  scant 
notice,  in  one  inscription  only.  This  is  pro- 
bably the  expedition  of  the  present  passage. 
And  took  Ijon,  and  Abel-beth-maaohah. 
These  were  places  in  the  extreme  north  of 
the  Israelite  territory,  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
Lake  Merom,  such  as  would  naturally  be 
among  the  first  to  fall  before  an  Assyrian 
invader  (on  their  exact  position,  see  the 
comment  on  1  Kings  xv.  20).  And  Janoah. 
Janoah  is  now  generally  regarded  as  identi- 
cal with  the  modem  Eunin,  a  village  close 
by  "  an  ancient  fortress  of  great  strength  " 
(Bobinson,  'Later  Besearches,' p.  371),  in 
the  hill  country  north-west  of  Merom.  It 
is  in  a  direct  line  between  Abel-beth-maa- 
chah  {AMI)  and  Kedesh  (J0ade»),  as  we 
should  expect  from  the  present  passage. 
And  Eedesh,  and  Hazor.  Kedesh  is  beyond 
all  doubt  the  "Kedes,"  or  "Cades,"  of  to- 
day— an  important  site  in  the  same  moun- 
tain district,  rather  more  than  six  miles 
south  of  Hunin,  and  four  from  the  "  waters  of 
Merom"  (see  Kobinson,  *  Later  Besearches,' 
pp.  366, 367).  Hazor  was  in  the  near  neigh- 
bourhood of  Kedesh,  towards  the  south  pro- 
bably. The  exact  position  is  disputed. 
Bobinson's  arguments  in  favour  of  El-Khu- 
reibeh  are  weighty ;  but  the  engineers  em- 
ployed by  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund 
regard   Khurbat-Harrab,  between   Kedesb 


OH.  XT.  1— 3a]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


301 


and  the  Lake  Merom,  as  a  Btill  more  pio- 
bable  situation.  And  Gilead.  "Oilead/'in 
this  oonneotion,  can  scarcely  be  •'  the  whole 
of  the  land  to  the  east  of  the  Jordan  "  (Eeil, 
Bahr)— the  territory  of  Gad,  Reuben,  and 
Manasseh,  not  of  Kaphtali.  It  is  more 
likely  to  be  a  tmall  district  near  Merom, 
perhaps  the  eastern  coast  of  the  lake  (Ge- 
senius),  which  was  afterwards  a  part  of 
Gaulonitis.  The  LXX.,  instead  of  roAaaS, 
have  TaKoLdy.  And  Galilee ;  Hebrew  p^%!J 
(see  the  comment  on  1  Kings  ix.  11,  p.  190). 
The  inscription  of  Tiglath-pileser,  which 
appears  to  allude  to  this  expedition,  men- 
tions "  Galhi,"  and  "  Abel "  (probably  Abel- 
beth-maachah)  as  conquered  at  this  time, 
and  "  added  to  Assyria."  The  places  were, 
it  says,  on  the  border  of  the  land  of  Betli- 
Omri  (Samaria)  (see  the  'Eponyin  Canon,' 
p.  123,  lines  6, 7).  And  carried  them  captive 
to  Assyria.  Deportation  of  captives  was 
largely  practised  by  Tiglath-pileser,  as  ap- 
pears from  the  '  Eponym  Canon,'  pp.  118 — 
120,  and  122. 

Ver.  30. — And  Hoshea  the  son  bf  Elah 
made  a  conspiracy  against  Pekah  the  son  of 
Bemaliah,  and  smote  him,  and  slew  Mm, 
and  reigned  in  his  stead.  By  a  mutilated 
notice  in  the  records  of  Tiglath-pileser,  it 
appears  that  the  revolution  here  related 
was  the  result  of  another  invasion  of  the 
Israelite  territory  by  that  monarch.  "  The 
land  of  Beth-Omri,"  he  says,  "...  the  tribe 
,  .  .  the  goods  of  its  people  and  their  fur- 
niture I  sent  to  Assyria.  Pekah  their 
king  [I  caused  to  be  put  to  death?]  and 
Hoshea  I  appointed  to  the  kingdom  over 
them ;  their  tribute  I  received,  and  [their 
treasures?]  to  Assyria  I  sent"  ('Eponym 
Canon,'  pp.  123,  121,  lines  15—19).  It  is 
probably  this  invasion  of  which  tlie  writer 
of  Chronicles  speaks  (1  Cliron.  v.  26)  as  re- 
sulting in  the  deportation  of  the  Beubenites, 
the  Gtodites,  and  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh. 
In  the  twentieth  year  of  Jotham  the  son  of 
TTmah.  This  date  stands  in  contradiction 
with  ver.  33,  where  Jotbam's  entire  reign 
is  reckoned  at  sixteen  years,  and  appuently 
must  be  a  corrupt  reacoug. 

Ver.  31. — And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Pekah,  and  all  that  he  did  (see  the  comment 
on  vers.  27 — 31),  behold,  they  are  written  in 
the  hook  of  the  chronioles  of  the  kings  of 
Israel 

Vers.  32 — 38.— Ebion  of  Jotram.  Once 
more  the  writer  turns  from  Israel  to  Judah, 
and  proceeds  to  give  an  account  of  the  reign 
of  Jotham  the  son  of  Azariah,  or  TTzziah, 
who  was  appointed  regent  in  his  father's 
place,  when  Uzziah  was  struck  with  leprosy 
(ver.  5),     The  account  giveu  of  the  reign  ia 


■omewhat  seantyiMil  requires  to  be  supple- 
mented from  Ohionioles  (2  Chron.  xxvii.). 

Ver.  32.— In  the  seoond  year  of  Fekah 
fhe  son  of  Bemaliah  King  of  Israel  began 
jotham  the  son  of  ITzzlah  King  of  Jndah  to 
reign.  In  the  second  year  of  Pekah,  Aza- 
riah died,  and  Jotham  became  actual  king  ; 
but  his  joint  reign  with  his  father  com- 
menced very  much  earlier.  His  sole  reign 
was  probably  a  short  one. 

Ver.  33. — Five  and  twenty  years  old  was 
he  when  he  began  to  reign,  and  he  reigned 
sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem  — 1.«.  sixteen 
years  from  his  appointment  to  be  regent, 
as  appears  plainly  from  2  Chron.  xxvi.  23 
and  xxvii.  1  (comp.  Josephus,  'Ant.  Jod.,' 
ix.  10.  §  4;  12.  5  1)— and  his  mother's 
name  was  Jerusha,  the  daughter  of  Zadok, 
So  the  author  of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxvii. 
1);  Josephus  ('  AnL  Jud.,'  ix.  11.  §  2)  calls 
his  mother  "  Jerasa." 

Ver.  34:..^And  he  did  that  which  was 
right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord :  he  did  ao- 
oording  to  all  that  his  father  TTzziah  had 
done.  The  author  of  Chronicles  says  the 
same,  but  adds,  very  pertinently,  "How- 
beit  he  entered  not  into  the  temple  of  the 
Lord" — I.e.  he  did  not  repeat  his  father's 
act  of  impiety.  Josephus  is  still  warmer  in 
his  praises.  "This  Mug,"  he  says  (I.  s.  o.), 
"  was  deficient  in  no  manner  of  virtue ;  but 
was  at  once  pious  in  things  pertaining  to 
God,  and  just  in  those  pertaining  to  men. 
He  was  careful  and  watchful  over  the  city; 
whatever  needed  reparation  or  adornment, 
he  laboured  to  supply  strenuously,  as  the 
porticoes  in  the  temple  and  the  gates  thereof; 
and  where  any  part  of  the  wall  had  gone  to 
ruin,  he  raised  it  np  again,  and  built  towers 
of  vast  size  and  difficult  to  capture.  And 
in  all  other  matters  pertaining  to  the  king- 
dom, where  there  had  been  neglect,  he  ap- 
plied great  care  and  attention." 

Ver.  35. — Howbeit  the  high  places  were 
not  removed:  the  people  sacrificed  and 
burned  incense  still  in  the  high  places. 
He  built  the  higher  gate  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord.  The  "  higher  gate  "  is  thought  to  be 
that  towards  the  north,  and  its  fortification 
implied  a  fear  of  attack  from  that  quarter. 
It  must  have  become  amply  evident  to  the 
kings  of  Jndah,  at  any  rate  from  the  time  of 
the  attack  on  Menahem  (ver.  19),  that  the  in- 
dependence of  both  kingdoms  was  menaced 
by  Assyria,  and  that  it  wasof  great  importance 
that  their  principal  fortresses  shouldbeplaced 
in  a  state  of  efiScient  defence.  Azariah  had 
paid  great  attention  to  the  fortifying  and 
arming  of  Jerusalem  (2  Chron.  xxvL  9,  15), 
and  his  son  now  followed  in  hia  footsteps. 
From  2  Chron.  xxvii.  3  we  learn  that  he  not 
only  built  the  high  gate  of  the  temple,  but 
also  "on  the  wall  of  Ophel  built  mnch." 


802 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  xv.  1— 3» 


Nor  was  he  content  with  fortifying  the 
oapitnl.  He  alBO  "  built  cities  in  the  moun- 
tains of  Judah,  and  in  the  forests  he  built 
castles  and  towers."  Tiglnth-pileser  had 
made  war  on  his  father  ('  Eponym  Canon,' 
pp.  117, 118).  He  felt  that  any  day  his  own 
turn  might  come. 

Ver.  36. — Now  the  rest  of  the  aots  of  Jo- 
tham,  and  all  that  he  did.  The  principal 
event  of  Jotham's  reign  was  his  war  with 
Ammon.  The  writer  of  Chronicles  says, 
"  He  fought  also  with  the  king  of  the  Am- 
monites, and  prevailed  against  them.  And 
the  children  of  Ammon  gave  him  the  same 
year  an  hundred  talents  of  silver,  and  ten 
thousand  measures  of  wheat,  and  ten  thou- 
sand of  barley.  So  much  did  the  oliildren 
of  Ammon  pay  unto  him,  both  the  second 
year,  and  the  third"  (2  Chron.  xxvii.  5). 
JosephuB  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  11.  §  2)  gives 
nearly  the. same  account,  but  regards  the 
payment  as  an  annual  tribute,  intended  to 
be  permanent.  Are  they  not  written  in 
the  book  of  the  ohroniolet  of  the  liings  of 
Judah t 

Ver.  87. — In  those  days  the  £ord  began  to 
■end  against  Judah  Bezia  the  Eii^  of  Syria. 
Bezin's  name  occurs  in  the  Assyrian  in- 
Boriptiona  early  in  the  reign  of  Tiglath-pi- 


leser,  probably  in  the  year  b.c.  713.  At  that 
time  he  pays  to  the  Assyrians  a  heavy  tribute, 
consisting  of  eighteen  talents  of  gold,  three 
hundred  talents  of  silver,  two  hundred 
talunts  of  copper,  and  twenty  talents  of 
spice*.  Subsequently,  about  the  year  B.C. 
TSi,  he  is  found  is  revolt.  His  alliance 
with  Pekah,  here  implied,  is  directly  stated 
by  Isaiah  (vii.  2).  Begun  in  Jotham's 
reign,  it  continued,  and  came  to  a  head,  in 
the  reign  of  Ahiiz  (see  ch.  xvi.  5  and  Isa. 
vii.  1 — 9;  viii.  6).  ^  And  Fekah  the  son  of 
Bemaliah.  Pekah  and  Bezin  intended  to 
establish  on  the  Jewish  throne  a  certain 
Ben-Tabeal  (Isa.  vii,  6),  a  creature  of  their 
own,  with  whose  aid  they  thought  to  offer 
an  effectual  resistance  to  Assyria. 

Yer.  38.  —  And  Jotham  slept  with  his 
fathers,  and  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in 
the  city  of  David  his  father :  and  Aha>  his 
son  reigned  in  his  stead.  It  may  be  sus- 
pected that  the  full  name  of  this  king  was 
Jeho-ahaz.  Ahaz,  "  possession,"  is  a  name 
never  assigned  to  any  other  Israelite,  and 
it  is  one  not  likely  to  have  been  given  by  a 
religious  father  like  Jotham.  In  the  As- 
syrinn  inscriptions  the  Jewish  king  con- 
temporary with  Bezin  and  Fekah  is  called 
"Yahu-khazL" 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  leper-Jeing  a  pattern  and  a  warning,  I.  In  his  barlibb  teahs 
AzABiAH  WAS  A  PATTERN  KINO.  He  "did  that  wWch  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord"  (ver.  3);  he  "sought  God"  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  6);  he  consorted  with  "Zechariah, 
who  had  understanding  in  the  visions  of  God ; "  and  the  result  was  that  "  God  made 
him  to  prosper."  "  God  helped  him  against  the  Philistines  and  the  Arabians  and  the 
Mehunim "  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  7),  and  he  "  was  marvellously  helped "  (2  Ch  ion.  xxvi.  15). 
So  far,  he  is  a  pattern  to  us,  the  model  of  a  good  king,  of  one  who  is  at  once  religiously 
minded  and  full  of  practical  zeal  and  energy,  who  serves  God  without  ceasing  to  serve 
man,  "not  slothful  in  business,  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord"  (Earn.  xii.  11). 
But  there  is  a  reverse  to  the  picture. 

II.  In  his  lateb  teaks  Azariah  was  a  warnino  to  kings  and  great  men 
OENERALLY.  Azarfah,  like  his  father  (ch.  xiv.  10),  became  "lifted  up"  (2  Chron.  xxvi. 
16).  He  was  not  content  with  his  kingly  power  and  greatness,  his  secular  dignity  and 
majesty;  he  would  be  first  everywhere,  and  invaded  the  priestly  office  (2  Chron.  xxvi. 
16—19).  It  had  pleased  God,  in  the  theocratic  polity  which  he  had  set  up,  to  draw 
the  sharpest  possible  line  between  the  sacerdotal  order  and  the  rest  of  the  community. 
None  were  allowed  to  sacrifice,  or  to  bum  incense,  or  even  to  enter  into  the  sanctuary, 
but  "the  priests  the  sons  of  Aaron"— the  lineal  descendants  of  the  first  and  greatest 
of  the  high  priests.  Kings  had  their  functions — great  and  high  and  (in  a  certain 
sense)  sacred  functions — to  rule,  to  judge,  to  determine  on  peace  or  war ;  to  lead  armies, 
if  it  so  pleased  them ;  to  direct  the  whole  policy  of  the  nation.  Bat  one  thing  they 
might  nut  do,  and  that  was  to  assume  the  duties  which  had  been  assigned  to  the 
priests  and  Levites,  who  had  been  appointed  God's  special  ministers,  to  minister  to  him 
in  the  congregation.  The  exclusive  right  of  the  priests  to  their  functions  had  been 
rindicated  in  a  most  terrible  and  awful  way,  when,  soon  after  the  institution  of  the 
Levitical  priesthood,  its  honours  were  coveted  by  great  men  who  did  not  belong  to  the 
privileged  body.  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram,  with  their  company,  were  swallowed 
up,  and  "  went  down  quick  into  hell,"  because  they  claimed  to  be  as  "  holy  "  as  the 
priests  (Numb.  xvL  S),  and  to  offer  incense  before  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  con* 


CH.  XV.  1—38.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  303 

gregation,  each  from  hii  own  censer.  The  lesson  taught  by  the  miracle  had  been  taken 
deeply  to  heart ;  and  even  such  mighty  monarchs  as  David  and  Solomon  had  carefully 
abstained  from  setting  aside  the  privileges  of  the  priests,  or  infringing  npon  them  in 
any  way.  But  Azariah  despised  the  teaching  of  the  past,  and  the  example  set  him  by 
bis  predecessors.  See  him  as  Josephus  depicts  him!  On  a  great  festival  day,  when 
the  people  had  all  come  together  in  crowds  to  keep  the  feast,  he  robed  himself  in 
priestly  garments,  and  entering  into  the  sacred  enclosure  declared  his  intention  of  going 
within  the  temple  building,  and  himself  offering  incense  on  the  golden  altar  that  was 
before  the  veil.  In  vam  did  the  eighty  priests  in  attendance,  headed  by  the  high 
priest,  resist  him,  and  exhort  him  to  lay  aside  his  design  and  retire;  Azariab,  hot  with 
passion,  refused,  and  threatened  them  with  death  if  they  made  more  ado.  Then, 
Josephus  declares,  the  ground  suddenly  rocked  with  an  eartliquake  (comp.  Amos  i.  1 ; 
Zech.  xiv.  5),  and  the  roof  of  the  temple  gaped,  and  a  sunbeam  entering  smote  upon 
the  head  of  the  king,  and  at  once  leprosy  spread  over  his  face,  and,  overwhelmed  with 
grief  and  shame,  he  departed  ('Ant.  Jnd.,'  ix.  10.  §  4).  Here  Azariab  is  a  warning  to 
kings  (1)  that  they  attempt  not  to  minisler  the  Word  and  sacraments;  and  (2)  that 
they  in  no  way  trench  upon  the  rights  of  the  priests  or  other  ministers;  and  further, 
he  is  a  warning  to  great  men,  or  such  as  think  themselves  great,  in  less  exalted 
positions,  that  they  rest  content  with  the  performance  of  their  own  proper  duties  and 
do  not  invade  the  of&ce  of  others ;  either  (1)  by  dictating  to  ministers  what  doctrine 
they  shall  preach ;  or  (2)  by  undue  interference  with  schools,  teachers,  etc. ;  or  (3)  by 
any  other  form  of  arrogant  and  overhearing  conduct.  Punishment  will  assuredly  fall 
upon  those  who  so  act.  They  will  lose  men's  respect  and  God's  approval.  Failure 
will  overtake  them  at  the  moment  when  they  look  to  have  their  efforts  crowned  with 
complete  success.  Well  for  them  if  it  he  simply  failure,  and  not  an  utter  downfalL 
It  often  happens  that  he  who  covets  more  than  he  has  any  right  or  claim  to  have,  loses 
that  which  was  lawfuUy  in  his  possession. 

Vers.  8 — 31. — Worldly  prosperity  not  vmfrequenfty  the  rmn  o/  Mngdom».  I. 
Example  of  Samaria.  Scarcely  ever  was  there  a  more  prosperous  reign  than  that  of 
Jeroboam  II.— .a  reign  of  forty-one  years  of  continual  success,  nncheckered  by  a  mis- 
fortune— Syria  defeated,  the  old  border  everywhere  recovered,  Hamath  occupied, 
Damascus  brought  into  a  subject  condition.  As  usual,  where  there  is  military  success, 
wealth  flowed  in,  and  with  wealth,  luxury.  "  Great  houses  "  were  built  (Amos  iii.  15), 
"ivory  houses,"  i.e.  houses  inlaid  or  panelled  with  ivory;  distinct  mansions  were 
inhabited  during  the  summer  and  during  the  winter  time  (Amos  iii.  15).  The  children 
of  Israel  passed  their  lives  in  Samaria,  lying  "  in  the  corner  of  a  bed,"  and  in  Damascus 
lounging  "  upon  a  couch  "  (Amos  iii.  12).  "  Flagons  of  wine  "  were  "  loved  "  (Hos.  iii. 
1) ;  "  whoredom  and  wine  and  new  wine  took  away  their  heart "  (Hos.  iv.  Xi).  And 
with  this  softness  was  blended,  on  the  one  hand,  the  seductive  inflmnce  of  a  licentious 
religionism,  on  the  other,  the  coarser  and  ruder  vices  to  which  luxury  and  self-indul- 
gence inevitably  lead.  Patriotism  disappeared,  and  self-seeking  took  its  place. 
"Politically  all  was  anarchy  or  misrule;  kings  made  their  way  to  the  throne  through 
the  murder  of  their  predecessors,  and  made  way  for  their  successors  through  their  own. 
Shallum  slew  Zecbariah  (ch.  xv.  10);  Menahem  slew  Shallum  (ver.  14);  Pekah  slew 
the  son  of  Menahem  (ver.  25) ;  Hoshea  slew  Pekah  (ver.  30).  The  whole  kingdom  of 
Israel  was  a  military  despotism,  and,  as  in  the  lioman  empire,  those  in  command  came 
to  the  throne  "  (Pnsey's  '  Minor  Prophets,'  p.  2).  Society  was  corrupt  to  the  core.  The 
idolatries  of  the  calves,  of  Baal,  and  of  Moloch  worked  out  their  natural  results,  and 
bore  their  bitter  fruit.  "  Creature-worship,  as  St.  Paul  points  out  (Bom.  i.  23—32), 
was  the  parent  of  every  sort  of  abomination ;  and  religion  having  become  creature- 
worship,  what  God  gave  as  the  check  to  sin  became  its  incentive.  Every  command- 
ment of  God  was  broken,  and  that  habitually.  All  was  falsehood  (Hos.  iv.  1),  adultery 
(Hos.  iv.  11;  Amos  IL  7),  bloodshedding  (Hos.  v.  2;  vi.  8);  deceit  of  God  (Hos.  iv.  2) 
producing  faithlessness  to  man;  excess  and  luxury  were  supplied  by  secret  or  open 
robbery  (Hos.  vii.  1),  oppression  (Hos.  xii.  7),  false  deahng  (Amos  viii.  6;  Hos.  xii.  7), 
perreraion  of  justice  (Hoa.  z.  4 ;  Amos  ii.  6),  grinding  of  the  poor  (Hos.  xii.  7).  Blood 
was  shed  like  water,  until  one  stream  met  another  (Hos.  iv.  2),  and  overspread  the 
land  with  one  defiling  deluge.    Adultery  waa  consecrated  as  an  act  of  religion  (Hoa.  ir« 


aM  THK  SEOOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINOS.       [oh.  xr.  1— Sg 

14).  Those  who  were  first  in  rank  were  first  ia  excess.  People  and  king  vied  in 
derauchery  (Hos.  vii.  6) ;  and  the  sottish  king  joined  and  encouraged  the  free-tbinkers 
and  blasphemers  of  his  court  (Hos.  vii.  3).  The  idolatrous  priests  loved  and  shared  in 
the  sins  of  the  people  (Hos.  iv.  8,  9) ;  nay,  they  seem  to  have  set  themselves  to  inter- 
cept those  on  either  side  of  Jordan,  who  would  go  to  worship  at  Jerusalem,  laying  wait 
to  murder  them  (Hos.  v.  1 ;  vi.  9).  Corruption  had  spread  through  the  whole  land, 
even  the  places  once  sacred  through  God's  revelations  or  other  mercies  to  their  fore- 
fathers— Bethel,  Gilgal,  Gilead,  Mizpah,  Shechem — were  especial  scenes  of  corruption  or 
of  sin  (Hob.  iv.  15;  v.  1 ;  vi.  8,  9,  etc.).  Every  holy  memory  was  effaced  by  present 
coiTuption.  Could  things  he  worse  ?  There  was  one  aggravation  more.  Remonstrance 
was  useless  (Hos.  iv.  4) ;  the  knowledge  of  God  was  wUfuUy  rejected  (Hos.  iv.  6) ;  the 
people  hated  rebuke  (Amos  v,  10) ;  the  more  they  were  called,  the  more  they  refused 
(Hos.  xi  2,  7) ;  they  forbade  their  prophets  to  prophesy  (Amos  ii.  12) ;  and  their  false 
prophets  liated  God  greatly  (Hos.  ix.  7,  9).  All  attempts  to  heal  all  this  disease  only 
showed  its  incurahleiiess"  (ibid.,  p.  3). 

II.  Example  OP  Tyre.  The  prosperity  of  Tyre  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries 
before  our  era  was  extraordinary.  She  was  mistress  of  her  sister  cities,  Sidon  and  Gebal 
andArvad;  she  ruled  over  a  hundred  colonies;  on  her  island-rock  she  was  safe  from 
Assyria ;  the  trade  of  the  world  was  in  her  hands.  "  SituHte  at  the  entry  of  the  sea, 
a  merchant  of  the  people  for  many  isles  "  (Bzck.  xxvii.  3) ;  full  of  wordly  wisdom,  the 
wisdom  that  gets  increase  of  richts  (Ezek.  xxviii.  3 — 5);  rich  beyond  all  conception  in 
precious  metals,  and  in  gems  (Ezek.  xxviii.  13),  and  in  spices,  arid  in  broidered  work 
(Ezek.  xxvii.  22,24),  and  in  ivory  and  ebony  (Ezek.  xxvii.  15),  and  in  all  manner  of 
merchandise;  approved,  respected,  called  "the  renowned  city,  strong  in  the  sea" 
(Ezek.  xxvi.  17) ; — she  had  reached  the  acme  of  her  glory,  of  her  wealth,  of  her  great- 
ness. But  with  what  results  to  her  moral  tone  and  temper?  Her  heart  was  "lifted 
up"  (Ezek.  xxviii.  5);  her  pride  became  excessive;  she  said  in  her  heart,  "I  am 
of  perfect  beauty  "  (Ezek. xxvii.  3) — ^" I  am  a  god;  I  sit  in  the  seat  of  God"  (Ezek. 
xxviii.  2).  "  Iniquity  "  of  every  kind  was  found  in  her  (Ezek.  xxviii.  15) — en  vp  (Ezek. 
xxvi.  2),  and  "  violence  "  (ver.  16),  and  corrupt  wisdom  (ver.  17),  and  profanation  of 
sanctuaries  (ver.  18),  and  even  dishonesty  in  her  traffic  (ver.  18).  And  with  iniquity, 
as  usual,  came  ruin.  Because  of  her  pride,  and  her  envy,  and  her  violence,  and  her 
other  iniquities,  God  brought  a  fire  into  her  midst,  which  devoured  her  and  reduced  her 
to  ashes  (Ezek.  xxvi.  18).  The  Babylonians  were  made  God's  instrument  to  chastise 
her,  and  carry  off  her  wealiii,.an4r  break  down  her  walls,  and  destroy  her  pleasant 
houses,  and  slay  her  people  with  the  sword  (Ezek.  xxvi.  11,  12),  and  make  her  a 
byword  among  the  nations  (Ezek.  xxviL  32)— a  desolation,  a  hissing,  and  a  terror 
(ver.  36). 

ni.  Example  of  Rome.  The  ruin  of  Rome  was  undoubtedly  wrought  by  that  long 
career  of  unexampled  military  success  which  began  with  the  closing  years  of  the 
Second  Funic  War,  and  continued  till  she  was  the  world's  mistress.  The  wealth  of 
Carthage,  Macedonia,  and  Asia  flowing  into  her  coffers,  destroyed  the  antique  simplicity 
and  severity  of  manners,  stimulated  ambition,  provoked  inordinate  desire,  and  led  to 
chose  terrific  civil  wars,  in  which  the  blood  of  the  noblest  and  the  bravest  was  shed  like 
irater,  and  "Rome  fell  ruined  by  her  own  strength"  (Horace).  It  was  not  the  influx 
of  the  barbarians  that  destroyed  Rome ;  she  fell  from  internal  decay.  The  decline  of 
Roman  civilization  dates  from  before  the  fall  of  the  republic.  It  was  then  that 
population  began  to  diminish,  and  the  pure  Roman  blood  to  be  mingled  with  the  refuse 
of  every  nation.  Slaves,  freedmen,  clients,  glided  into  the  tribes  and  gentes,  and  were 
followed  by  absolute  foreigners,  Greeks  and  Egyptians  and  Syrians,  effete  races  in  a 
state  both  of  physical  and  moral  degradation,  "  The  Orontes  flowed  into  the  Tiber." 
The  very  names  of  those  in  the  highest  position  became  grotesque  and  strange,  such  as 
Cicero  and  Cato  would  have  pronounced  manifestly  barbarous.  A  decay  of  moral 
principles  followed  this  admixture.  Slavery  prevailed,  and  slavery  in  ancient  as  in 
modem  times  was  "  a  hotbed  of  vice  and  selfish  indulgence,  enervating  the  spirit  and 
vital  forces  of  mankind,  discouraging  legitimate  marriage,  and  enticing  to  promiscuous 
and  barren  concubinage.  The  fruit  of  such  hateful  unions,  if  fruit  there  were,  engaged 
little  regard  from  their  selfish  fathers,  and  both  law  and  usage  continued  to  sanction 
the  exposure  of  infants,  from  which  the  female  sex  undoubtedly  suffered  most.    The 


CH.  XV.  1—38.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  806 

losses  of  Italy  from  this  honid  practice  were  probably  the  greatest ;  but  the  province* 
also  lost  proportionably ;  the  imitation  of  Soman  habits  was  rife  on  the  remotest 
frontiers ;  the  conquests  of  the  empire  were  consolidated  by  the  attractions  of  Roman 
indulgence  and  sensuality ;  slavery  threw  discredit  on  all  manual  labour,  and  engen- 
dered a  false  sentiment  of  honour,  which  constrained  the  poorer  classes  of  freemen  to 
dependence  and  celibacy;  vice  and  idleness  went  hand-in-hand,  and  combined  to  stunt 
the  moral  and  physical  growth  of  the  Roman  citizen,  leaving  his  weak  and  morbid 
frame  exposed  in  an  unequal  contest  to  the  fatal  influences  of  his  climate"  (Merivale, 
'Roman  Empire,'  vol.  viii.  pp.  353,  354).  It  was  a  race  which  had  thus  lost  its 
stamina,  and  become  effete  and  worn  out,  that  succumbed  to  barbarian  inroads  which, 
a  few  centuries  earlier,  it  would  have  repulsed  without  any  difficulty. 


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers,  1 — 1.— Prosperity  and  its  dangers.  The  contrast  between  the  opening  and 
the  close  of  Uzziah's  reign — ^here  so  sharply  set  before  us — ^has  few  parallels  in  history. 
There  is,  indeed,  no  lack  of  monarchs  who  have  risen  to  proud  positions  of  authority  and 
power,  and  then  suddenly  have  fallen  ignominiously  from  their  pinnacle  of  pride. 
Memory  at  once  recalls  such  names  as  Nebuchadnezzar,  one  day  surveying  with  pride 
great  Babylon  that  he  had  made,  and  the  next  dwelling  among  the  beasts  of  the  field, 
his  body  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven ;  or  Napoleon,  one  day  with  all  Europe  at  his 
feet,  and  but  a  few  days  after,  like  a  caged  lion,  a  baffled,  helpless  prisoner  on  the 
lonely  island  of  St.  Helena.  But  Uzziah's  early  career  was  different  from  that  of  most 
monarchs  who  have  fallen.  To  all  appearance  he  promised  well.  He  did  right  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord.  He  did  indeed  continue  that  dangerous  eompromise  of  which 
Amaziah,  his  father,  had  been  guilty,  of  permitting  the  high  places  to  remain.  But  still 
he  worshipped  the  true  Ood.  He  sought  God's  help  and  guidance.  He  honoured  God's 
prophet.  Moreover,  he  used  his  power  well,  not  as  a  tyrant,  but  for  the  good  of  his 
people  and  for  the  prosperity  and  strengthening  of  the  nation.  And  God  prospered  him 
in  his  efforts,  as  he  will  prosper  all  those  who  seek  his  help  and  blessing  (2  Chron.  xxvi. 
S — 15).  But  in  an  evil  hour  Uzziah  (he  is  also  called  Azariah  in  this  chapter)  forgot 
that,  though  he  was  a  king,  he  owed  allegiance  to  a  greater  King.  His  prosperity 
turned  his  head.  He  forgot  how  much  he  owed  to  God.  There  was  au  old  command 
of  God,  given  after  the  rebellion  of  Korah  and  his  sons,  that  none  but  the  sons  of 
Aaron — the  priestly  family — ^were  to  offer  incense  before  the  Lord.  The  obvious  lesson 
was  that  special  fitness,  special  holiness,  was  required  of  those  who  would  stand  as 
representatives  of  the  people  before  God.  But  Uzziah  disregards' both  the  letter  and 
the  spirit  of  the  command.  He — poor  weak  mortal ! — dares  to  defy  the  living  God,  and 
enters  into  the  sanctuary  to  burn  incense.  It  is  another  case  of  compromise  and  its 
consequences.  He  had  been  so  accustomed  to  the  violation  of  God's  command  in  the 
matter  of  the  high  places,  that  now  he  thinks  very  little  of  this  flagrant  act  of  high- 
handed defiance.  The  priests  remonstrated,  but  in  vain.  The  proud  king  seizes  the 
censer,  and  thrusts  the  priests  aside  with  gestures  of  impatience  and  anger.  But  stay  I 
What  means  that  growing  whiteness  in  his  forehead?  Ahl  the  symptoms  are  too  well 
known.  The  hand  of  God  is  upon  him.  He  is  a  leper.  The  censer  fells  from  his 
hand.  He  can  resist  no  longer.  The  priests  thrust  him  forth  from  the  holy  place,  and 
beyond  the  very  precincts  of  the  temple.  Henceforth  he  is  a  king  and  yet  an  outcast, 
separated  and  secluded  from  the  hatmts  and  enjoyments  of  men  (see  2  Chron.  xxvi. 
16—21). 

I.  Pbospebitt  and  its  upwabd  path.  For  a  long  time  the  career  of  Uzziah  was 
an  upward  path.  His  motto,  would  seem  to  have  been,  as  the  motto  of  every  young 
person,  of  every  one  of  us,  ought  to  be,  "  Excelsior  1"  There  were  three  elements  in 
his  progress,  three  sources  of  his  prosperity,  three  steps  in  his  upward  path.  Along 
these  t&ee  steps  every  one  of  us  may  fairly  and  with  advantage  follow  Uzziah.  1. 
First  of  all,  there  was  the  /ear  of  Ood.  As  a  young  man,  unquestionably  he  had  the 
fear  of  God  before  his  eyes.  We  read  of  him  in  2  Chronicles  that  "  he  sought  tJte  Lord." 
This  implies  that  he  honoored  Gk>d's  worship.  He  honoured  Gbd's  house.  He 
honoured  God's  Word,  and  sought  guidance  from  the  Divine  Law.  And  what  was  the 
n.  Kuros.  X 


306  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.         [ch.  iv.  1— 38. 

consequence?  Just  wbat  the  consequence  of  a  God-fearing  life  will  always  be.  "Ai 
long  as  he  sought  the  Lord,  God  made  him  to  prosper."  It  is  so  still,  God  keeps  his 
vord.  He  has  never  yet  broken  that  promise,  "  Them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour." 
This  was  the  starting-point  in  Uzziah's  prosperity,  and,  so  long  as  he  prospered,  the 
secret  of  it  was  that  he  sought  the  Lord.  Godliness  is  the  best  foundation  of  all  true 
and  lasting  prosperity.  Men  like  the  late  Samael  Morley,  or  the  late  Sir  William 
McArthur,  were  not  less  successful  because  they  were  Uod-fearing  men,  and  theii 
business  did  not  suffer  because  of  the  large  amount  of  time  and  attention  and  money 
they  devoted  to  religious  work.  To  seek  God's  guidance  in  everything,  God's  blessing 
on  every  undertaking  and  every  event  of  life, — that  is  the  secret  of  true  prosperity  and 
success.  2,  The  second  step  in  Uzziah's  prosperity  was  a  good  man's  influence.  We 
read  in  2  Chronicles  that  "he  sought  the  Lord  in  the  days  o(  Zechariah,  who  had 
understanding  in  the  visions  of  God."  While  the  Woid  of  God  and  our  own  conscience 
are  to  be  our  chief  guides,  there  are  many  details  and  plans  of  daily  life  in  which  we 
shall  be  greatly  the  better  for  the  experience  and  advice  of  others.  To  what  kind  of 
men  do  you  go  for  your  advice  or  guidance  ?  Go  by  all  means  to  those  who  have  best 
experience  of  the  business  or  subject  in  question.  But  if  you  are  to  choose  between 
the  advice  of  a  piactical  Christian  man  and  that  of  a  practical  worldly  man,  surely  for  a 
Christian  the  Christian  man's  advice  will  carry  most  weight.  Some  one  has  well  said, 
"  You  can  never  rise  above  the  level  of  your  companionship."  Cultivate  the  society, 
leek  the  advice,  look  for  the  symjatliy,  of  good  men  and  good  women.  3.  The  third  sttp 
in  Uzziah's  prosperity  was  his  diligence  in  business.  Uzziah  was  no  idler.  He  realized 
the  responsibility  of  life.  He  realized  the  respoiisibilities  of  his  high  position.  So  we 
find  him  improving  the  defences  of  Jerusalem  and  building  towers ;  improving  also  the 
condition  of  the  country  and  digging  wells,  so  useful  to  the  traveller  and  the  husband- 
man in  the  East ;  and,  as  it  was  a  time  of  warfare,  'providing  suitable  equipments  for 
his  soldiers,  and  encouraging  new  inventions  of  military  engines  and  weapons.  No 
success  is  won  without  hard  work.  Whatsoever  our  hand  findeth  to  do,  we  should  do 
it  with  our  might.  By  these  three  methods,  then,  Uzziah  attained  to  great  prosperity. 
"He  was  marvellously  helped,  till  he  was  strong,"  are  the  words  of  the  writer  in 
2  Chronicles.  His  name  and  fame  became  well  known.  If  you  want  to  attain  to 
prosperity  and  success  in  your  business — and  it  is  a  desirable  thing  to  see  wealth, 
honourably  earned  an)  wisely  spent,  in  the  hands  of  Christian  men — then^  with  the 
strong  arm  of  a  vigorous  resolution,  out  these  three  steps  in  your  upward  path,  and 
plant  your  feet  firmly  in  them — the  fear  of  Ood,  the  inflvsnce  of  good  men,  and  diligence 
in  Imsinets.  This  is  prosperity  and  its  upward  path.  But  we  have  reached  the  summit 
of  Uzziah's  career.  Hitherto  all  has  been  progress  upward.  Hitherto  all  has  been 
bright  as  the  path'of  the  just.  But  the  scene  changes.  The  shadows  gather.  The 
footsteps  that  pointed  upwards  now  are  turned  downwards.  We  must  look  now  at  the 
other  side  of  the  picture,  at — 

II.  Pbospebity  and  its  downward  path.  We  may  gain  prosperity  by  rightful 
means,  but  sometimes  the  difficulty  is  to  keep  our  prosperity  and  our  religion  at  tite 
same  time.  Riches  bring  with  them  their  own  temptations  and  dangers.  We  see  in 
Uzziah's  case  the  way  to  prosperity,  which  we  should  follow ;  we  also  see  the  dangers 
of  prosperity,  which  we  should  avoid.  1.  Prosperity  leads  to  pride.  We  read  of 
Uzziah  in  2  Chronicles:  "But  when  he  was  strong,  his  heart  was  lifted  up  to  his 
destruction."  He  became  filled  up  with  ideas  of  his  own  importance,  and,  instead  of 
giving  God  the  glory,  reflected  with  complacency  on  all  the  great  deeds  that  he  had 
done,  and  all  the  benefits  he  had  conferred  upon  the  nation.  When  he  was  younger, 
and  in  the  beginning  of  his  career,  he  was  humbler.  He  was  very  glad  then  to  seek 
God's  guidance,  to  have  the  help  and  influence  of  Zechariah.  But  now  be  Las  golt 
beyond  all  that.    His  whole  character  is  completely  changed. 

*'  For  lowliness  is  young  ambition's  ladder, 
Whereto  the  climber  upward  turns  his  face; 
But,  when  he  once  have  gained  the  topmost  round, 
Uo  then  unto  the  ladder  turns  his  back, 
Looks  in  the  clouds,  scorning  the  base  degrees 
By  which  he  did  ascend." 


to.  XT.  1—38.]        TBE  SECOND  BOOK  Otf  TfiB  KlifGS.  tOt 

Frid«  of  riches,  pride  of  rank,  how  vaiii,  how  foolish  they  are!  Riches  may  hring  with 
them  bodily  comforts  and  enjoyments.  But  if  health  goes  or  troubles  come,  what 
comfort  can  they  bring  us  ?  Can  they  give  us  any  satisfaction  or  peace  of  mind  ?  Can 
they  banish  care  or  sickness  ?  Can  they  arrest  the  skinny  hand  of  Death  ?  Yet  this 
is  a  common  danger  to  those  who  are  prosperous  in  worldly  things — to  be  puffed  up 
with  this  empty  and  unreasonable  pride.  How  much  we  all  need,  in  any  time  ol' 
prosperity,  to  pray  for  hui.;ility  I  If  our  business  prospers,  let  us  ask  God  to  keep  us 
humble.  If  our  Chureh  prospers,  let  our  sincere  utterance  ever  be  "  Not  unto  us,  0 
Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  Name  be  all  the  praise."  2,  Prosperity  leads  to  pre- 
sumption.- It  is  a  step  further  than  pride.  Uzziah's  pride  was  bad  enough,  but  when 
it  led  him  to  trample  on  the  Law  of  God  and  to  violate  the  sacredness  of  God's  holy 
place,  his  presumption  was  a  bad  example  to  others.  Yet  how  many  there  are  whose 
prosperity  or  whose  wealth  leads  them  to  violate  the  laws  of  God !  They  think  any- 
thing becomes  them.  They  have  become  inflated  with  success,  and  the  Law  of  God  is 
a  very  small  mntter  indeed  in  their  eyes.  Look  at  Claverhouse,  inflated  with  his 
triumphs  over  the  Scottish  Covenanters,  as  with  his  dragoons  he  surrounded  the  cottage 
of  John  Brown  of  Priesthill.  Touched  by  the  prayers  of  John  Brown,  and  the  sight 
of  his  wife  and  helpless  children  gathered  round  him,  the  dragoons,  with  moistened 
eyes,  refused  to  do  their  deadly  work.  Snatching  a  pistol  from  his  belt,  Claverhouse 
himself  shot  the  good  man  through  the  head.  Turning  to  the  wife  whom  he  had 
widowed,  he  said,  "What  do  you  think  of  your  husband  now?"  "I  always  thought 
much  of  him,  sir,"  replied  the  brave  woman ;  "  but  never  so  much  as  I  do  this  day. 
But  how  are  you  to  answer  for  this  morning's  work  t "  "  To  men,"  he  replied,  "  I  can 
be  answerable,  and  as  for  God,  I  will  take  him  in  my  own  hands."  Four  years  after- 
wards, in  the  Pass  of  KUlii  crankie,  Claverhouse  died  by  an  unknown  hand.  How 
many  think  as  Claverhouse  did  I  Because  they  have  rank,  or  wealth,  or  power,  there- 
fore they  imagine  they  can  trample  on  God's  laws,  or  trample  on  morality.  Napo- 
leon the  Great  thought  that  when  he  divorced  his  innocent  and  faithful  wile;  and  he 
afterwards  testified  that  that  false  and  guilty  step  was  the  beginning  of  his  downfall 
and  disgrace.  Because,  by  their  wealth  or  their  position,  men  think  they  can  defy 
public  opinion,  therefore  they  imagine  they  can  also  disregard  the  commands  of  God. 
But  it  is  a  great  mistake.  No  prosperity,  no  riches,  no  position  in  life,  can  ever  lift  us 
above  the  Law  of  God. 

"  In  the  corrupted  onrrentB  of  this  world. 
Offences'  gilded  hand  may  shove  by  justice, 
And  oft  'tis  seen  the  wicked  prize  itself 
Buys  out  the  law.    But  'tis  not  so  above. 
TJiere  is  no  shu£9ing;  there  the  action  lies 
In  his  true  nature ;  and  we  ourselves  compelled. 
Even  to  the  teeth  and  forehead  of  our  faults. 
To  give  in  evidence." 

Ah  I  yes;  that  is  the  one  message  for  rich  and  poor  alike.  "  For  we  must  all  appear 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ;  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  his 
body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad."  Such,  then,  are  the 
dangers  which  prosperity  brings  with  it.  -  There  is  a  strong  temptation  to  presumption 
and  to  pride.  If  we  have  much  prosperity,  then  we  need  to  be  much  in  prayer.  If 
riches  increase,  the  responsibility  to  use  them  well  increases  also.  If  we  look  at 
worldly  prosperity  in  relation  to  eternity,  on  the  one  hand  it  will  seem  very  poor  and 
insignificant.  What  are  aU  the  riches  of  this  world  compared  with  the  "  inheritance 
incorruptible  and  undefiled,  that  fadeth  not  away"?  What  are  all  the  honours  and 
privileges  that  worldly  rank  and  prosperity  bring  with  them,  compared  to  the  privilege 
of  being  one  of  OocPa  children  t  What  is  all  the  society  of  earth  in  comparison  with 
the  fellowship  of  Jesus?  If  you  are  making  worldly  prosperity  the  be-all  and  end-all 
of  your  existence,  sacrificing  for  it,  as  many  do,  health  and  conscience  and  your  spiritual 
life,  pause  and  think  I  Is  it  worth  it  t  Put  the  two  worlds  in  the  balance.  To  an 
wisaved  soul,  tuith  a  dark  and  hopeless  eternity,  earthly  prosperity  it  only  a  mockery. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  worldly  prosperity,  won  by  Christian  efforts,  guided  by  a 
Christian  heart,  and  used  by  a  Christian  hand,  what  a  Uessing  it  may  become  I    Let 


308  THE  SECX)ND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.         [oh.  xv.  1—38. 

Jeaoa  Im  in  your  hMii  first.    Let  him  abide  there— his  lore  your  motive  power,  his 
Word  your  guide — and  then  there  will  be  no  danger  in  prosperity. — 0.  H.  L 

Yen.  1 — 38. — Some  lessons  from  the  hittory  of  kings.  "In  the  twenty  and  lerenth 
year  of  JerobMtm,"  etc.  The  mighty  Governor  of  the  universe  is  represented  as  saying 
to  the  Jewish  nation, "  I  gave  thee  a  king  in  mine  anger"  (Hos.  xiii.  2).  And  truly,  with 
a  certain  number  of  exceptions  here  and  there  through  the  ages,  kings  have  proved 
malific  scourges  of  the  race.  In  this  chapter  there  are  mentioned  no  less  than  seven  of 
those  men  who  are  called  kings,  but  who,  instead  of  having  one  grain  of  moral  royalty 
in  their  souls,  were  contemptible  serfs  to  the  last  degree,  slaves  to  their  passions  of 
sensuality  and  greed.  How  many  conventional  kings  in  all  ages  are  moral  paupers 
and  vassals  of  Satan  1  Glance  for  a  moment  at  each  of  the  kings  before  us.  Here  is 
Azariah,  elsewhere  called  Uzziab,  who  was  the  son  and  successor  of  Amaziah.  Here 
is  Zaehariah,  the  son  and  successur  of  Jeroboam  IL  King  of  Israel,  who  reigned 
only  six  months,  and  then  fell  by  the  hand  of  Shallum.  Here  is  Shallum,  the  fifteenth 
King  of  Israel,  and  the  murderer  of  Zaehariah,  and  who  in  his  turn  was  murdered. 
Here  is  Menahem,  the  son  of  Gadi,  who,  having  slain  Shallimi,  reigned  in  hb  stead  ten 
years — a  reign  characterized  by  ruthless  cruelty  and  tyrannic  oppression.  Here  is 
Pekahiah,  the  son  and  successor  of  Menahem,  who  reigned  two  years  over  Israel,  and 
then  was  assassinated  by  Pekah.  Here  is  Pekah,  who  was  a  general  of  the  Israelitish 
army,  and  assassinated  King  Pekahiah  in  his  palace,  and  usurped  the  govenment,  reign- 
ing, according  to  the  existing  text,  twenty  years.  Here  is  Jotham,  the  son  and  successor 
of  Uzziah,  the  eleventh  Eang  of  Judah,  who  reigned  for  sixteen  years.  He,  perhaps, 
was  the  least  wicked  of  all  these  princes.  The  whole  chapter  reminds  us  of  several 
things  worth  note. 

L  The  existenos  of  bdtbibution  in  this  ufe.  Here  we  discover  retribution 
in  the  leprosy  of  Azariah,  anl  in  the  fate  of  the  other  kings.  Of  Azariah  it  is  said, 
"  The  Lord  smote  the  king,  so  that  he  was  a  leper  unto  the  day  of  his  deatli,  and  dwelt 
in  a  several  house."  Of  all  physical  afflictions,  perhaps  that  of  leprosy  is  the  must  pain- 
ful and  revolting.  It  eats  out  the  life  of  a  man  and  dooms  him  to  solitude.  Disease 
strikes  princes  as  well  as  paupers.  Then  see  how  the  other  wicked  doers  fared.  The 
murderer  is  murdered,  the  slayer  is  slain ;  Shallum  strikes  down  Zaehariah ;  Menahem 
strikes  down  Shallum ;  and  Pul,  the  King  of  Assyria,  strikes  Menahem  with  a  terrible 
blow  of  humiliation  and  oppression  ;  Pekah  smites  Pekahiah,  and  reigns  twenty  years 
when  he  is  himself  struck  down  by  the  blow  of  an  assassin.  Truly,  even  in  this 
life,"  with  what  measure  ye  mete  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  agwn."  Though  retribu- 
tion hire  may  not  be  complete  and  adequate,  still  it  is  at  work  everywhere  in  human 
society.  It  comes  as  a  pledge  and  a  prophecy  of  that  realm  beyond  the  grave,  where 
every  man  shall  be  dealt  with  according  to  his  works. 

II.  The  mishtiness  of  belioious  ebbob.  In  this  chapter  there  Is  the  record  of 
long  periods  and  of  great  changes.  Battles  are  fought,  revolutions  are  effected,  monarch 
succeeds  monarch,  and  the  years  come  and  go ;  but  one  thing  remains,  that  is,  idolatry^ 
"The  high  places  were  not  removed:  the  people  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense  still  on  the 
high  places"  (vers.  4  and  34).  Among  the  many  evil  tendencies  of  man  there  is  none 
so  mighty  and  influential  as  the  pseudo-religious.  Two  facts  will  account  for  this. 
I.  Tlie  strength  of  the  religious  element  in  man.  Burke  and  others  of  the  wisest  of  the 
race  have  designated  man  as  a  religious  animal.  Beligion  with  man  is  not  a  faculty, 
but  the  substratum  in  which  all  the  faculties  inhere ;  it  is  the  core  and  the  root  of  his 
nature.  Hence,  wherever  man  is  found,  if  he  has  no  home,  he  has  a  shrine ;  if  be  has 
no  friend,  he  has  a  god.  2.  The  might  of  selfishness  in  man.  What  man  needs  most 
presents  the  greatest  motives  to  human  avarice  and  ambition.  Hence  the  creation  of 
bodies  of  priests  to  bolster  up  false  religions,  and  derive  position  and  wealth  from  them. 
Corruptio  optimi  pessima.   It  is  most  sad  when  men  seek  to  "  make  a  gain  of  godliness." 

ni.  The  cbavek-heabtedness  of  enslaved  feopleb.  Had  the  peoples  of  Judah 
and  Israel  been  really  men  worthy  of  their  humanity,  would  they  have  tolerated  for 
a  day  such  monsters  as  we  have  in  this  chapter  ?  The  existence  of  tyrants  is  the  foult 
•f  the  p«>ple.— D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Another  icing  leglnnmg  well,  ending  01.    It  is  nmarkable  that  three 


OH.XV.  1— 38.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  808 

UngB  of  Judah  in  sncceuion  exhibited  thia  characteristic.  They  begin  well,  serve 
Gk)d  for  k  time  and  prosper,  yet  stumble  and  fail  at  last.  We  have  seen  the  fates  of 
Joash  and  Amaziah ;  and  Azariah  furnishes  a  third  example. 

L  Azabiah's  beiqn.  1.  Sit  righteoui  rule.  Azariah  began  to  reign  when  only 
sixteen  yean  of  age ;  he  reigned  long — fifty-two  years,  and  during  the  greater  part  of 
his  reign  he  signalized  himself  as  a  king  that  did  right.  Save  that  the  high  places 
were  unremoved,  the  praise  given  to  him  is  unqualified.  He  was  an  able,  energetic 
ruler,  much  more  so  than  either  his  father  or  grandfather.  The  virtue  of  his  reign  is 
trac«l  in  Chronicles  to  the  influence  of  a  good  man,  Zechariah,  "  who  had  understanding 
in  the  visions  of  God"  (2  Chron.  ixvi.  5) — another  example  of  the  power  for  good 
exercised  by  prophets  in  the  political  history  of  Judah  (cf.  2  Chron.  xxiv.  2, 17 ;  xxv. 
7).  2.  Bis  protperity.  On  this  the  Book  of  Chronicles  dilates.  So  long  as  Azariah  (or 
TJzziah)  sought  the  Lord,  God  made  him  to  prosper.  Everything  he  touched  went 
well  with  him.  It  was  long  since  Judah  had  so  enlightened,  so  enterprising,  and  so  able 
a  king.  He  subjugated  the  Philistines,  the  Arabians  of  Gur-baal,  and  the  Ammonites  ; 
he  greatly  strengthened  the  defences  of  Jerusalem;  he  developed  the  resources  of  the 
country,  and  fostered  agriculture;  he  brought  the  organization  and  equipment  of  the 
army  to  a  high  pitch  of  perfection.  As  it  is  stated,  "  His  name  spread  far  abroad ;  for 
he  was  marvellously  helped,  till  he  was  strong"  (2  Chron.  xivL  15).  It  was  as  if  God 
wished,  by  the  abundance  of  his  blessings,  to  teach  Azariah  and  his  people  that 
assuredly  their  true  advantage  lay  in  his  service.  The  previous  reigus  had  given 
examples  of  this ;  but  here  was  a  new  proo^  still  more  undeniable  than  the  preceding. 
Yet  it  was  ineffectual  to  restrain  from  sin. 

11.  Azabiah's  lkpbobt.  1.  The  worm  at  the  root.  Azariah  had  scarcely  reached 
the  acme  of  his  power,  when,  as  in  the  case  of  his  predecessors,  declension  began. 
Unwarned  by  the  past,  he  allowed  his  heart  to  grow  proud  and  haughty.  He  was 
head  of  the  state ;  why  should  he  not  also  be  head  of  the  Church  ?  His  prophetic 
adviser  was  by  this  time  removed,  and  he  was  left  to  the  bent  of  his  own  will.  In 
his  arrogance,  he  insisted  on  going  into  the  holy  place  of  the  temple  to  burn  incense 
to  the  Lord.  It  was  there  his  doom  fell  upon  him.  We  are  again  reminded  of  the 
subtle  temptations  that  lie  in  prosperity.  When  men  wax  fat,  they  kick ;  and  their 
hearts  are  apt  to  be  lifted  up  to  their  destruction  (Dent.  viii.  11 — 14 ;  xxxii.  15).  Once 
let  pride  enter  the  heart,  and  deterioration  is  rapid.  Its  beginnings  may  be  unseen,  but 
it  by-and-by  reveals  itself  in  overt  acts.  2.  The  stroke  from  heaven.  It  was  Heaven's 
laws  that  Azariah  was  defying,  and  it  was  from  heaven  the  blow  came  which  struck  his 
pride  low.  While  yet  he  stood  at  God's  altar,  offering  unhallowed  incense,  the  leprous 
spot  began  to  burn  in  his  forehead,  and  in  presence  of  the  priests,  whose  protestations 
he  despised,  he  felt  himself  a  leper.  The  priests,  in  horror,  thrust  him  out  from  the 
holy  place.  But  it  needed  not  their  violence :  "  Yea,  himself  hasted  also  to  go  out, 
because  the  Lord  had  smitten  him"  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  20).  How  quickly  God  can  bring 
the  haughtiness  of  men  low !  He  is  a  jealous  God,  and  what  touches  the  honour  of 
his  sanctuary  and  worship  is  of  special  concern  to  him.  We  are  warned  against  will- 
worship  in  Gbd's  service  (Col.  ii.  23 ;  cf.  Numb.  x.  1,  2).  The  leprosy  was  but  the 
outward  token  of  the  invisible  sin  of  pride;  yet  how  little  shame  the  reality  of  sin 
occasions,  as  compared  with  that  caused  by  an  outward  symbol  of  it  like  this  I  We 
may  believe  that  in  the  end  inward  character  will  somehow  stamp  itself  upon  the 
outward  appearance,  and  then  men  will  see  sin  in  its  real  loathsomeness.  3.  Jotham 
as  vicegerent.  We  are  told  that  from  this  time  Azariah  took  no  more  part  in  public 
business.  He  dwelt  apart  "  in  a  several  house  " — a  living  evidence  of  the  weakness 
of  man  in  contending  with  God,  of  the  dishonour  which  is  the  Nemesis  of  pre»umptuous 
sin,  of  the  isolation  which  they  bring  upon  themselves  who  refuse  the  bounds  which 
God's  Law  prescribes.  During  this  period,  Jotham,  the  kin^s  son,  acted  as  his  deputy. 
It  would  appear,  from  comparison  with  the  Israelitish  reigns,  and  with  Assyrian 
chronology,  that  Jotham's  sixteen  regnal  years  include  thia  period  when  "he  was 
over  th» house,  judging  the  people  of  the  land."  Sin  ii  a  living  death.  Azariah  was 
king  ih'  name,  but  morally,  physically,  legally,  he  waa  dead ;  for  leprosy  in  the  body  is 
■imply  a  process  of  decay  and  death.  When,  in  fact,  he  did  die,  he  wag  buried  in 
Jerusalem,  but  in  a  "  several "  tomb,  as  during  life  he  had  dwelt  in  a  "  several "  house 
(2  Chron.  xxvi.  23).— J.  O. 


S10  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [ch.  xv.  1—38. 

Verg.  8 — 22. — Anarchy  in  Israel.  With  rapid  descent  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  which 
had  risen  to  great  external  prosperity  under  Jeroboam  XL,  hastened  to  its  fall.  The 
prophets  give  us  vivid  pictures  of  the  corruption  of  the  times.  The  bonds  of  social 
life  were  loosened^  oppres.sion  was  rampant,  the  fear  of  God  seemed  to  have  died  out  of 
the  land;  there  was  no  confidence,  peace,  or  good  will  among  any  classes  in  the  nation. 
As  a  consequence,  the  throne  was  a  prey  to  any  adventurer  who  had  power  to  seize  it. 

I.  The  fall  of  Jehu'b  house.  1.  The  shadow  of  doom.  With  the  accession  of 
Zachariah,  Jeroboam's  son,  the  fourth  generation  of  Jehu's  dynasty  ascended  the  throne 
The  shadow  of  doom  may  thus  be  said  to  have  rested  on  this  ill-fated  king.  A  prophet 
had  spoken  it  to  the  founder  of  the  house,  "  Thy  sons  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  Israel 
unto  the  fourth  generation."  That  word  had  its  bright  side  of  reward,  but  it  had  also 
its  dark  side  of  penalty,  and  it  is  this  which  becomes  prominent  as  the  predicted  term 
nears  its  close.  Yet,  as  we  can  now  also  see,  there  is  no  fate  in  the  n)atter.  The 
reason  why  Jehu's  sons  were  only  to  sit  on  the  throne  till  the  fourth  generation  lay  in 
their  own  character  and  actions.  God's  decrees  do  not  work  against,  but  in  harmony 
with,  the  existing  nature  of  things,  and  the  established  connection  of  causes  and  effects. 
Jehu's  house  was  about  to  fall  (1)  because  Jehu's  sons  had  been  ungodly.  None  of 
them  had  sought  God's  glory  or  taken  any  pains  to  promote  godliness  in  the  nation. 
On  the  contrary,  they  had  continued  sowing  the  wind  of  disobedience  to  God's  will, 
and  the  nation  was  now  to  reap  the  whirlwind.  (2)  Under  the  rule  of  these  kings, 
irreligion  and  immorality  had  spread  fast,  and  struck  their  roots  deep  and  wide  in  the 
kingdom.  This  will  undermine  any  dynasty,  will  overthrow  any  empire.  Rulers 
make  a  great  mistake  when  they  fix  attention  solely  on  external  prosperity.  If  the 
foundations  are  rotten,  the  structure  will  sooner  or  later  inevitably  come  down.  (3) 
Zachariah  himself  was  a  feeble  king.  This  is  implied  even  in  the  brief  notice  we  have 
of  him.  It  may  be  he  who  is  referred  to  by  Hosea,  "  In  the  day  of  our  king  the 
princes  have  made  him  sick  with  bottles  of  wine,"  etc.  (Hos.  vii.  5).  In  any  case,  we 
know  that  he  was  not  only  weak,  but  wicked — "  He  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord." 
2.  The  prophetic  word  fulfilled.  A  brief  six  months  of  the  throne  was  all  that  was 
allowed  to  Zachariah.  He  seems  to  have  been  held  in  contempt  by  the  people.  His 
feeble  character  would  appear  the  more  feeble  in  contrast  with  that  of  his  energetic 
and  victorious  father.  We  have  a  similar  contrast  in  English  history  between  Bichard 
Cromwell  and  his  father.-Oliver.  But  Zachariah  was  more  than  feeble,  he  was  worth- 
less. Therefore,  when  the  conspirator  Shallum  smote  the  king  in  the  light  of  public 
day,  "before  the  people,"  no  hand  seems  to  have  been  raised  in  his  defence.  He 
perished,  and  the  house  of  Jehu  was  extinguished  with  him.  Sinners  do  not  live  out 
half  their  days  (Ps.  ly.  23).    In  due  time  the  words  of  Gkxl  are  all  fulfilled. 

II.  The  keign  op  Mbnahbm.  We  may  pass  by  the  brief  reign  of  Shallum,  which 
lasted  only  a  month,  and  of  which  no  events  ar«  recorded.  He  was  slain  by  Menahem, 
the  son  of  Gadi,  illustrating  the  truth  of  which  this  chapter  affords  other  exemplifica- 
tions, that  they  who  take  the  sword  shall  perish  by  the  sword  (Matt,  xxvi.  52).  In 
respect  of  Menahem,  we  notice :  1.  His  violent  usurpation.  He  too  possessed  hunself 
of  the  throne  by  violent  means.  He  smote  Shallum  in  Samaria,  as  Shallum  had,  a 
few  weeks  before,  smitten  Zachariah.  The  effect  of  these  revolutions  on  the  morals  of 
the  people  and  the  administiatiun  of  law  may  be  imagined.  What  respect  could  be 
felt  for  royalty  established  by  such  methods?  Shallum,  indeed,  was  a  murderer,  but 
Menahem  was  no  better.  Neither  by  sanction  of  God  nor  by  election  of  the  people, 
but  solely  by  brute  force,  did  he  set  himself  upon  the  throne.  His  rule  was  thus,  in  its 
inception  and  essence,  a  tyranny.  To  this  had  Israel  come  by  rejecting  their  true 
Buler — God.  "  They  have  set  up  kings,"  said  Qod,  "  but  not  by  me  "  (Hos.  viii.  4). 
He  who  rejects  God  as  his  Sovereign  must  bear  a  heavier  yoke.  2.  Eis  sickening 
cruelties.  The  fact  that  Menahem  kept  the  throne  for  ten  years  shows  him  to  have 
been  a  man  of  no  small  natural  ability.  But  his  disposition  was  savagely  crueL  Not 
only  did  he  smite  Shallum — a  deed  which  might  be  pardoned — ^but  in  his  war  with 
'J'iphsah  he  was  guilty  of  brutal  atrocities  on  those  who  refused  to  submit  to  him 
(cf.  ver.  16).  In  this  he  showed  himself  a  man  of  a  fierce  and  unscrupulous  cha- 
racter. The  people  had  become  fierce,  godless,  and  violent;  and  God  gave  them  • 
king  after  their  own  image.  3.  Sis  league  with  Assyria.  TMb  is  not  the  first  contact 
•f  Israel  with  Assyria,  but  it  is  the  first  mention  of  that  contact  in  the  sacred  hittoiy* 


oa.iv.l— 38.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OS"  THE  KINGS.  ftll 

The  King  of  Assyria,  here  named  Pul,  came  against  the  hind,  evidently  with  hostile 
intent ;  but  Menahem,  by  the  payment  of  a  huge  tribute,  bought  him  off,  and  secured 
his  sanction  to  his  occupancy  of  the  throne.  (On  the  identification  of  Pul,  see  the 
Exposition.)  Israel  now  came  under  a  foreign  yoke,  and  "sorrowed,"  as  Hosea  says, 
"  for  the  burden  of  the  King  of  princes  "  ({los.  viii.  10).  Sin,  which  is  an  effort  after 
emancipation  from  the  Law  and  authority  of  God,  ends  in  the  sinner  being  reduced  to 
miserable  bondage  (Luke  xv.  15, 16 ;  John  yiii.  34).  4.  Eis  oppnssUm  of  the  people. 
To  raise  the  money  for  Pul,  Menahem  was  under  the  nece-sity  of  exacting  large  sums 
from  the  men  of  wealth  in  the  land.  From  each,  we  are  told,  he  took  fifty  shekels  of 
silver.  Much  of  this  money  had  been  wrung  from  the  poor,  and  now  it  was  taken  from 
the  rich.  In  the  end,  it  was  probably  upon  the  poor  that  the  burden  would  come  back. 
Thus  the  land  groaned  under  tyranny,  foreign  oppression,  robbery,  and  grinding  o( 
class  by  class.  The  end  was  not  quite  yet,  but  it  was  fast  approaching.  We  need  not 
doubt  that  Menahem's  oppressive  reign  was  hateful  to  the  people.  He  escaped,  how- 
ever, the  penalty  of  his  misdeeds  in  his  own  person,  and  "  slept  with  his  fathers."  It 
was  his  son  Pekahiah  who  reaped  the  harvest  he  had  sown. 

III.  The  beign  of  Feeah.  Pekahiah's  reign  of  two  years,  like  that  of  Shallum, 
may  be  passed  over.  A  stronger  hand  was  needed  to  hold  together  the  warring  elements 
in  this  distracted  kingdom,  and  such. a  hand  was  that  of  Pekah,  the  son  of  Bemaliah. 
1.  Overthrow  of  the  house  of  Menahem.  Menahem  had'  succeeded  in  handing  down 
the  throne  to  his  son,  but  the  latter  could  not  keep  it.  The  bold  and  ambitious  Pekah, 
one  of  Pekahiah's  captains,  having  secured  the  co-operation  of  fifty  Gileadites,  smote 
the  king  in  his  palace,  and  his  attendants  with  him.  Thus  another  violent  revolution 
took  place  in  Israel.  It  is  stated  that  Pekah  kept  the  throne  for  twenty  years,  but 
there  is  great  difficulty  at  this  point  in  adjusting  the  chronology.  It  seems  impossible, 
on  the  side  of  Judah,  to  shorten  the  reign  of  Ahaz,  having  regard  to  his  own  age,  and 
that  of  his  son  Hezekiah,  at  their  respective  accessions.  To  bring  the  Jewish  and 
Assyrian  chronologies  into  accord,  we  must  apparently  either  (1)  shorten  the  reign  of 
Pekah  by  about  ten  years,  and  bring  down  the  reign  of  Ahaz  to  a  date  considerably 
below  that  usually  given,  which  involves  also  the  abandonment  of  the  biblical  date  for 
the  commencement  of  the  reign  of  Hezekiah  (ch.  xviii.  1),  and  of  the  synchronisms  of 
this  period  generally ;  or  (2)  suppose  some  break  or  hiatus  of  twenty  years  or  so  in 
the  Assyrian  lists  at  the  epoch  of  the  accession  of  Tiglath-pileser,  i.e.  the  commence- 
ment of  the  new  Assyrian  empire.  This  view  has  its  difficulties,  but  is  not  impossible. 
Pekah's  reign  was  as  evil  as  that  of  his  predecessors.  2.  Invasiong  of  Tiglath-pileser. 
During  this  reign  began  those  invasions  of  the  Assyrians,  and  deportations  of  the 
population,  which  culminated  in  the  fall  of  Samaria  and  carrying  captive  of  the  whole 
people,  some  years  later.  This  expedition,  of  which  mention  is  made  in  the  Assyrian 
inscriptions,  took  place  towards  the  end  of  Pekah's  period  of  rule,  and  was  a  sequel 
to  the  events  related  in  ch.  xvi.  5 — 9.  Pekah,  in  alliance  with  Bezin  of  Damascus, 
had  made  a  plot  to  depose  Ahaz  of  Judah,  and  to  set  a  creature  of  his  own  upon  the 
throne  (Isa.  vii.  1 — 6).  To  this  proposed  attack  we  owe  Isaiah's  magnificent  prophecy 
of  the  Child  Immanuel.  3.  Pekah's  death.  This  intriguing  monarch  also,  as  he  had 
climbed  to  the  throne  by  assassination,  fell  a  victim  to  assassination.  He  was  slain 
by  Hoshea,  the  son  of  Elah,  who  succeeded  him  as  the  last  King  of  Israel. — J.  0. 

Vers.  32 — 38. — A  good  reign.  In  welcome  contrast  with  the  character  of  the  reigns 
we  have  been  considering,  stands  this  of  Jotham,  who  walked  in  the  footsteps  of  his 
f  ither  in  all  that  was  right. 

I.  Judah  well  qovekned.  1.  Eule  in  the  fear  of  Ood.  Jotham  proved  an  excel- 
lent ruler.  He  took  warning  from  his  father's  example,  and  "prepared  his  ways 
before  the  Lord  his  God"  (2  Chron.  xxvii.  6).  His  reign,  indeed,  was  a  brief  one 
compared  with  his  father's,  and,  had  time  been  given,  he  might  have  backslidden  as 
hid  his  predecessors.  But,  so  far  as  it  went,  his  conduct  was  blameless,  except  that 
the  high  places  were  still  unremoved.  If  we  assume  that  Jotham's  years  of  rule  are 
reckoned  from  the  time  when  he  took  his  father's  place  in  the  public  administration, 
he  cannot  have  reigned  alone  for  more  than  five  or  six  years.  2.  Rtligion  honoured. 
It  is  told  of  him,  negatively,  that  he  did  not,  like  his  father,  enter  into  the  temple  of 
the  Lord  (2  Chron  xxvii.  2),  and  positively,  that  "  he  built  the  higher  gate  of  th* 


312 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [aa.  xvi.  1—20. 


house  of  the  Lord."  Whereas  a  wicked  ruler  like  Athaliah  broke  down  the  temple, 
thii  good  king  set  himself  to  adorn  and  strengthen  it.  In  this  he  showed  a  laudable 
zeal  for  God's  honour.  3.  TJie  kingdom  itrengthened.  Jotham  strengthened  the 
kingdom  of  Judab  in  many  other  ways — by  just  administration,  by  extensive  works 
of  building,  by  subjugation  of  enemies,  etc.  (2  Chron.  xxvii.  3—6).  If  the  annals  of 
this  reign,  "  written  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Judah,"  could  be 
recovered,  they  would  show  Jotham  to  be  one  of  the  best  kings  Judah  ever  had-^-a 
worthy  son  of  a  very  able  father.  Such  rulers  are  a  blessing  to  a  country.  Their  loss 
is  to  be  deplored,  for  there  is  no  guarantee  that  their  successors  will  be  like  them. 
From  Jotham  to  Ahaz  the  descent  is  great. 

II.  Judah  thbeateked.  1.  A  discordant  note.  It  is  said  in  Obronicles  that,  not., 
withstanding  Jotham's  enlightened  and  righteous  government, "  the  people  did  yet  cor- 
ruptly "  (2  Chron.  xxvii.  2).  It  is  not  easy  to  purge  out  evil  leavea  when  once  it  has  got 
into  a  community;  and  the  worship  of  the  high  places  gave  opportunity  for  evil  practices 
to  develop  themselves  away  from  the  centre,  which  was  more  under  the  king's  eye. 
The  pictures  Isaiah  now  begins  to  draw  for  us  show  that  the  corruption  was  not  slight. 
2.  Threatened  invasion.  To  this  inward  corruption  of  the  people  may  be  attributed 
the  chastisements  which  God  now  saw  fit  to  send  on  Judah.  In  Jotham's  reign  they 
but  begin,  but  in  the  reign  of  Ahaz  they  develop  to  coDsiderable  proportions.  In 
the  text  we  are  simply  told,  "  In  those  days  the  Lord  began  to  send  against  Judah 
Bezin  the  King  of  Syria,  and  Pekah  the  son  of  Bemaliah."  These  two  kings,  as  we 
shall  subsequently  see,  had  designs  upon  the  throne  of  Judah.  Chastisement  is  the 
more  deserved  when  great  privileges  are  given  and  fail  to  be  improved. — J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


Vers.  1 — 20. — Reign  of  Ahaz  ovbb 
Judah.  Wab  of  Ahaz  with  Peeah  and 
Bezin.  Expedition  of  Tiglath-pileseb 
against  tueih.  Bbliqious  Chakoeb  hade 
BT  Ahaz.    His  Death. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — General  character  of  the 
reign  of  Ahai.  Ahaz  was  the  most  wicked 
king  that  had  as  yet  reigned  in  Judah.  The 
author,  therefore,  prefaces  his  account  of 
the  reign  by  a  brief  summary  of  some  of 
the  king's  chief  iniquities.  (1)  He  departed 
from  tlie  way  of  David  (ver.  2);  (2)  he 
made  his  son  pass  through  the  fire  to  Moloch 
(ver.  3) ;  and  (3)  he  took  an  active  part  in 
the  woj'ship  at  the  high  places  and  in  the 
groves,  at  which  most  previous  kings  had 
winked,  but  which  they  had  not  coun- 
tenanced. 

Ver.  1. — ^In  the  seventeenth  year  of  Fekah 
the  son  of  Bemaliah  Ahaz  the  son  of  Jotham 
King  of  Jadah  began  to  reign.  (For  the 
chronological  difficulties  coimected  with 
this  statement,  see  the  comment  on  ch.  xv. 
27.) 

Ver.  2. — Twenty  years  old  was  Ahaz  when 
he  began  to  reign.  As  sixteen  years  after- 
wards his  son  Hezekiah  was  twenty-flve 
(ch.  xviii.  2),  it  is  scarcely  possible  that 


Ahaz  can  have  been  no  more  than  twenty 
at  his  accession,  since  in  that  case  he  must 
have  married  at  ten  years  of  age,  and  have 
had  a  son  at  eleven  I  The  reading  of 
"twenty-five"  instead  of  "twenty,"  found 
in  some  Hebrew  codices,  in  the  Vatican 
manuscript  of  the  Septuagint,  and  else- 
where, is  therefore  to  be  preferred.  And 
reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem.  So  the 
author  of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxvili.  1) 
and  Josephus  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  ix.  12.  §  3).  The 
reign  of  Ahaz  probably  lasted  from  B.c.  742 
to  B.C.  727.  And  did  not  that  which  was 
right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  his  God,  like 
David  his  father.  Compare  what  is  said  of 
Abijah  (1  Kings  xv.  3%  but  the  form  of 
speech  here  used  is  sbnnger.  Manasseh 
(oh.  xxi.  2)  and  Amon  (oh.  xxi.  20 — 22)  alone, 
of  all  the  kings  of  Judah,  receive  greati  r 
oondemnation. 

Ver.  3. — But  he  walked  in  the  way  of 
the  kings  of  Israel,  Not,  of  course,  by 
establishing  a  worship  of  calves,  but  by 
following  the  worst  practices  of  the  worst 
Israelite  kings,  e.g.  Ahab  and  Ahaziah,  and 
reintroducing  into  Judah  the  Phosnician 
idolatry,  which  Joash  and  the  high  priest 
Jehoiada  bad  oast  out  (ch.  xi.  17,  18).  As 
the  writer  of  Chronicles  says  (2  Chron. 
xxviii.  2),  "  He  walked  in  the  ways  of  the 
kings  of  Israel,  and  made  alto  molten  image* 
for  Baalim."  Baalim  is  either  a  plural  of 
dignity,  or  a  word  denoting  the  different 
forms  under  which  Baal  was  worshipped, 


CH.XTI.1— 2a]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


313 


u  Melkarth,  Adonis,  Rimmon,  eto.  Yea, 
and  made  Ua  son  to  pass  thiOTigh  the  flie. 
la  Ohroniclea  (2  Chron.  xzviii.  3)  we  are 
told  that  "he  burnt  incense  in  the  valley 
of  Hinnom,  and  burnt  his  children  in  the 
fire,"  as  if  he  had  sacrificed  more  than  one 
son.  The  practice  of  offering  children  in 
sacrifice  vas  not  a  feature  of  the  Assyro- 
Babylonian  religion,  as  some  suppose,  but 
an  intrinsic  part  of  the  worship  of  the  Phoa- 
nicians,  common  to  them  with  the  Moabites, 
Ammonites,  and  others.  It  was  based 
upon  the  principle  of  a  man's  offering  to 
God  that  which  was  dearest  and  most 
precious  to  himself,  whence  the  crowning 
sacrifice  of  the  kind  was  a  man's  offering  of 
his  firstborn  son  (see  ch.  iii.  27 ;  Micah  vi. 
7).  Some  have  supposed  that  the  rite 
was  a  mere  dedication  or  lustration,  the 
children  passing  between  two  fires,  and 
being  thenceforward  employed  only  in  God's 
service.  But  the  expressions  used  by  the 
sacred  writer  and  others,  and  still  more  the 
descriptions  that  have  come  down  to  us  from 
heathen  and  patristic  authors,  make  it  abso- 
lutely certain  that  the  "passing  through 
the  file"  was  no  such  innocent  ceremony 
as  this,  but  involved  the  death  of  the 
children.  The  author  of  Chronicles  says, 
"Ahaz  hurnt  his  children  in  the  fire;" 
Jeremiah  (xix.  5),  "They  have  built  also 
the  high  places  of  Baal,  to  hurn  their  sons 
with  fire  for  hurnt  offerings  unto  Baal ; " 
Ezekiel  (zvi.  21),  "Thou  liast  slain  my 
children,  and  delivered  them  to  cause  them 
to  pass  through  the  fire."  Josephus  declares 
of  Ahaz  that  he  "  made  his  own  son  a  whole 
burnt  offering  (ISiov  ahoKaiTiaa-f  TraiSo)." 
Diodorus  Siculus  describes  the  ceremony 
as  it  took  place  at  Carthtige,  the  Flicenician 
colony.  There  was  iu  tlie  great  temple 
there,  he  says,  an  image  of  Saturn  (Moloch), 
which  was  a  human  figure  with  a  bull's 
head  and  outstretched  arms.  This  image 
of  metal  was  made  gluwiug  hot  by  a  fire 
kindled  within  it ;  and  the  children,  laid 
in  its  arms,  rolled  from  thence  into  the  fiery 
lap  below.  If  the  children  cried,  the  parents 
stopped  their  noise  by  fondling  and  kissing 
tht  m ;  for  the  victim  ought  not  to  weep, 
and  the  sound  of  complaint  was  drowned  in 
the  din  of  flutes  and  kettle-drums  (Died. 
Sic,  XX.  14).  "Mothers,"  tays  Plutarch 
('De  Superatitione,'  §  13),  "stood  by  with- 
out tears  or  sobs ;  if  they  wept  or  sobbed, 
they  lost  the  honour  of  the  act,  and  the 
children  were  sacrificed  notwithstanding." 
The  only  doubtful  point  is  whether  the 
children  were  placed  alive  in  the  glowing 
arms  of  the  image,  or  whether  they  were 
first  killed  and  afterwaidii  burnt  in  sacrifice ; 
but  the  description  of  Diodorus  seems  to 
imply  the  more  oruel  of  the  two  proceed- 
ings.   Acooiding  to  the  abominations  of  the 


heathen,  whom  the  lord  oast  out  from 
before  the  children  of  Israel.  (On  the 
practice  of  this  terrible  rite  by  the  Canaan- 
itish  nations  at  the  time  of  the  Israelite 
invasion,  see  Lev.  xviii.  21 ;  Deut.  xii.  31 ; 
xviii.  9, 10 ;  Ps.  cvi.  37, 38.) 

Ver.  4.— And  he  sacrificed  and  burnt 
incense  in  the  high  places.  The  special 
sin  of  Ahaz  here  noted  is  that  he  not  only 
allowed  the  high-place  and  grove  woiship, 
as  so  many  other  kings  of  Judah  had  done, 
e.g.  Solomon  (1  Kings  iii.  2),  Behoboam 
(1  Kings  xiv.  23),  Asa  (1  Kings  xv.  14), 
Jehoshaphat  (1  Kings  xxii.  43),  Joash  (ch. 
xii.  3),  Amaziah  (oh.  xiv.  4),  Azariah  (ch. 
XV.  4),  and  Jotham  (ch.  xv.  35),  but  himself 
countenanced  and  took  part  in  it,  which 
no  other  king  appears  to  have  done.  It  was 
probably  the  stimuluB  that  liis  example 
gave  to  the  cult  which  induced  Hezekiah  to 
abolish  it  (see  ch.  xviii  4),  And  on  the 
hills,  and  under  every  green  tree  (comp. 
1  Kings  xiv.  23,  with  the  comment). 

Vers.  5,  6. — War  of  Aha*  with  Pekah  and 
Betin. 

Ver.  5. — ^Then  Bezin  King  of  Syria  and 
Fakah  son  of  Bemaliah  King  of  Israel  came 
up  to  Jerusalem  to  war.  The  alliance 
between  Bezin  and  Pekah  has  been  already 
glanced  at  (ch.  xvi.  87).  It  began,  ap- 
parently, in  the  reign  of  Jotham.  The 
policy  which  brought  it  about  was  one  that 
was  entirely  new.  Since  Syria  developed 
an  aggressive  tendency  under  the  first  Ben- 
hadad  (1  Kings  xx.  1),  there  had  till  now 
been  no  alliance  made  with  her  by  either  of 
the  two  Israelite  kingdoms.  She  had  been 
reckoned  as  their  common  enemy;  and 
while  they  had  on  two  occasions  been  allied 
together  against  her  (1  Kings  xxii.  4 — 36 ; 
ch.  viii.  28),  never  as  yet  hi^  either  asked 
her  help  against  the  other.  Now,  however, 
Epliraim  became  confederate  with  Syria 
against  Judah.  The  new  policy  must  be 
ascribed  to  the  new  condition  of  things  con- 
sequent upon  the  attitude  assumed  by  Assyria 
under  Tiglath-pileser.  Assyria  had  been 
uuder  a  cloud  for  forty  years.  The  nations  of 
the  western  coast  of  Asia  had  ceased  to  fear 
her,  and  had  felt  at  liberty  to  pursue  their 
own  quarrels.  Her  recovery  of  vigour  altered 
the  whole  situation.  It  was  at  once  evident 
to  the  statesmen  who  directed  the  policy  of 
the  small  western  states  that,  unless  they 
combined,  they  were  lost.  Hence  the  alliance 
between  Pekcdi  and  Bezin,  Probably  they 
would  have  been  glad  to  have  drawn*  Ahaz 
into  the  confederacy ;  but  it  would  seem 
that  he  did  not  share  their  fears,  and  would 
not  join  them.  Hereupon  the  design  was 
formed  to  dethrone  him,  and  let  up  in  his 
place  a  new  ruler,  a  certain  Ben-Tabeai 
(Isa.  viL  S),  on  whose  assistance  they  could 


8U 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINOa        [ch.  xvi.  1— 2a 


rely.  The  two  eonfedente  princes  then 
began  the  campaign.  Pekah  invaded 
Judtea,  and  gained  a  great  victory  over 
Ahaz,  which  ia  perhaps  exaggerated  in 
2  Chron.  zxviii.  6 — 15;  Bezin  carried  his 
arms  further  sonth,  took  Elath,  and  re- 
established the  Bdomites  in  power  (see  the 
eomment  on  ver.  6).  Then  the  allies  joined 
forces  and  proceeded  to  besiege  Jerusalem. 
And  they  hesieged  Ahaz,  bnt  could  not  over- 
come him.  The  siege  is  mentioned  by  Isaiah 
(vii.  1),  who  was  commissioned  by  God 
to  comfort  Ahaz,  and  assure  him  that  the 
city  would  not  fall  (Isa.  vii.  7).  The  fortifi- 
cations of  Uzziah  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  9)  and 
Jotham  (2  Chron.  xxvii.  3)  had,  no  doubt, 
greatly  strengthened  the  city  since  the  time 
when  (as  related  in  ch.  xiv.  13)  it  was  cap- 
tured BO  easily  by  Joash. 

Yer.  6. — ^At  that  time  Bezin  King  of  Syria 
recovered  Elath  to  Syria.  The  Syrians  had 
certainly  never  previously  been  masters  of 
Elath,  which  had  always  hitherto  been 
either  Jewish  or  Edomiie  (see  1  Kings  ix. 
26 ;  xxii.  48 ;  ch.  xiv.  22).  Hence  it  seems 
to  be  necessary  that  we  should  either 
translate  the  Hebrew  verb  a'B'n  by  "gained," 
"conquered,"  instead  of  "recovered;"  or 
else  change  Dn_».,  "Syria,"  into  dik,  "  Edom." 
The  Syrians  "could  "recover"  Elath  for 
Edom ;  they  could  only  ■'  gain  "  it  for  them- 
selves. And  drave  the  Jews  from  Elath — 
I.e.  expelled  tlie  Jewish  garrison  which  had 
been  maintained  in  Elath  from  the  time  of 
its  conquest  by  Uzziah  (oh.  xiv.  22) — and 
tiie  Syrians  came  to  Elath;  rather,  the 
HaomWes— d'1?Htn  for  n»D  '•.■!!*.  Hezin  could  not 
have  thought  of  uolding  a  place  so  remote 
from  Damascus  as  Elath ;  and,  had  he  done 
sot  the  danger  of  his  kingdom  in  the  nexo 
year  would  have  necessitated  the  relinquish- 
ment of  so  distant  a  possession.  And  dwelt 
there  unto  this  day.  It  is  quite  certain  that 
Elath  belonged  to  Edom,  and  not  to  Syria, 
at  the  time  when  the  Books  of  Kings  were 
written. 

Vers.  7 — S.^Expedition  of  Tiglath-pileser 
agaimt  Pekah  and  Beiin.  In  the  extremity 
of  his  danger,  when  the  confederacy  had 
declared  itself,  or  perhaps  later,  when  he 
had  suffered  terrible  defeats,  and  was  about 
tn  be  besieged  in  his  capital  (2  Chron.  xxviii. 
5,  6),  Ahaz  invoked  the  aid  of  Tiglath- 
pileser,  sent  him  all  the  treasure  on  which 
he  could  lay  his  hands  (ver.  8),  offered  to 
plaoe  himself  and  his  kingdom  under  the 
Assyrian  monarch's  suzerainty,  and  en- 
treated him  to  come  and  "save  him  out 
of  the  hands"  of  his  enemies  (ver.  T). 
Humanly  speaking,  he  might  be  justified. 


He  had  not  called  in  one  foreign  power 
until  Pekah  had  called  in  another.  There 
was  no  other  prospect  (again  humanly 
speaking)  of  escape.  But,  liad  he  accepted 
the  offers  of  Isaiah  (vii.  4 — 16),  and  relied 
wholly  on  Jehovah,  his  position  would  have 
been  far  better.  However,  he  was  unable  to 
see  this;  he  made  his  application;  and 
Tiglath-pileser  ",came  up,"  and  utterly 
crushed  the  Syro-Israelite  confedercusy 
(ver.  9). 

Ter.  7. — So  Ahaz  sent  messengers  to 
Tiglath-pileser  King  of  Assyria,  saying. 
This  appeal  to  man  rather  than  to  God, 
this  trust  in  "  an  arm  of  flesh,"  was  exactly 
what  Isaiah  had  been  endeavouring  to  pre- 
vent, what  he  viewed  as  unfaithfulness,  and 
as  inevitably  drawing  dowu  God's  wrath 
both  upon  king  and  kingdom.  Ahaz  was 
young,  was  weak,  and  had  no  doubt  a  large 
body  of  advisers,  who  considered  the  prophet 
to  be  a  fanatic,  who  had  no  belief  in  super- 
natural aid,  and  who  thought  that  in  any 
emergency  recourse  was  to  be  had  to  the 
measures  which  human  prudence  and  human 
policy  dictated.  The  aid  of  Tigflath-pileser 
seemed  to  them,  under  the  circumstances, 
the  only  thing  that  could  save  them ;  and 
they  persuaded  the  weak  prince  to  adopt 
their  views.  I  am  thy  servant  and  thy  son. 
The  offer  of  submission  was  unmistakable. 
"Servant,"  in  the  language  of  the  time, 
meant  "slave."  Complete  subjection,  en- 
rolment among  Assyria's  feudatories,  the 
entire  loss  of  independence,  was  well  under- 
stood to  be  the  price  that  had  to  be  paid 
for  Assyria's  protection.  Ahaz  and  his 
worldly  advisers  were  prepared  to  pay  it. 
They  surrendered  themselves,  body  and  soul, 
into  the  hands  of  the  great  world-power  of 
the  period.  Come  up,  and  save  me  out  of 
the  hand  of  he  King  of  Syria,  and  out  of  the 
hand  of  the  ."ing  of  Israel,  which  rise  up 
against  me.  S.vria  is  put  forward  as  at 
once  the  more  formidable  of  the  two  foes, 
and  the  one  most  open  to  Assyrian  attack. 
Already  Damascus  bad  been  more  than  once 
menaced  by  Assyrian  armies  ('  Bponyra 
Canon,'  pp.  1I3,  115,  116),  while  the  Mng- 
dora  of  Samaria  had  only  suffered  at  her 
extremities  (ch.  xv.  29).  Samaria  could 
not  well  be  approached  excepting  through 
Syria,  and  after  Syria's  downfall. 

Yer.  8. — And  Ahaz  took  the  silver  and 
gold  that  was  found  in  the  house  of  the  Lord, 
and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house. 
Hitherto  the  temple  treasures  had  been 
diverted  from  their  proper  use,  and  secular- 
ized for  the  sole  purpose  (except  in  one 
instance)  of  buying  off  the  hostility  of  a 
foreign  foe,  who  threatened  the  city  and  the 


CH.  XVI.  1—20.]   THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


81S 


temple  itself  with  destinction  (see  1  Kings 
xiv.  26 ;  oh.  xii.  18 ;  xiv.  14).  Now,  as  on 
one  former  occasion  (1  Kings  xv.  18),  they 
were  ntilized  to  puTchase  an  alliance.  And 
sent  it  for  a  present  to  the  King  of  Assyria. 
So  Gyges  King  of  Syria  sent  presents  to 
.  Assiiur-bani-pal  to  pnrcliase  liis  aid  against 
the  Cimmerians  ('Becords  of  the  Past,'  vol. 
i.  p.  68),  and  Siisub  of  Babylon  sent  his 
temple  treasures  to  Umman-Minan  of  Elam 
(ibid.,  pp.  46, 47),  to  purchase  his  assistance 
against  Sennacherib. 

Ver.  9.— And  the  King  of  Assyria  heark- 
ened unto  him.  Overtures  of  the  l;ind  were 
Almost  certain  to  be  accepted.  The  great 
conquering  monarchs  of  the  Bast  were  always 
glad  to  receive  small  states  into  their  alliance 
for  a  time,  and  even  to  allow  them  a  shadow 
of  independence,  while  they  made  use  of 
their  services  against  their  near  neighbours. 
Tiglath-p  jleser  was  already  bent  on  conquer- 
ing Samaria  and  Damascus,  and  could  not 
fiiil  to  perceive  that  their  subjugation  would 
be  greatly  facilitated  by  his  having  the 
support  of  Judssa.  Tor  the  King  of  Assyria 
— rather,  and  the  King  of  Aesyria — went  up 
against  Damascus.  Damascus  was  naturally 
attacked  first,  as  nearer  to  Assyria  than 
Samaria,  and  also  as  more  wealthy  a&d  more 
important.  Tiglath-pileser's  records  contain 
an  account  of  the  campaign,  but  it  is  un- 
fortunately much  mutilated.  We  may 
gather  from  it,  however,  that  Eezin  began 
by  meeting  his  assailant  in  the  field,  and 
engaging  himia  a  battle  which  was  stoutly 
contested.  Eventually  the  Assyrians  were 
Tictorious,  and  Eezin,  having  fled  hastily  to 
Damascus,  shut  himself  np  within  its  walls. 
Tiglath-pileser  pursued  him,  laid  siege  to 
the  city,  and  eventually  took  it,  though  not 
perhaps  till  it  had  resisted  for  above  a  year 
('Eponym  Canon,'  p.  65).  The  Assyrian 
monarch  thus  describes  the  siege  (ibid.,  p. 
121) :  "  Damascus,  his  city,  I  besieged, 
and  like  a  caged  bird  I  enclosed  him.  His 
forests,  the  trees  of  which  were  without 
number,  I  cut  down ;  I  did  not  leave  a  tree 
standing.  [I  burnt]  Hadara,  the  house  of 
the  father  of  Bezin,  King  of  Syria."  And 
took  it.  The  ancient  Damascene  kingdom, 
which  had  lasted  from  the  time  of  Solomon 
(1  Kings  zi.  24),  was  thus  brought  to  an 
end.  Damascus  gave  the  Assyrians  no 
further  trouble ;  and  within  little  more  than 
thirty  years  it  had  been  so  absolutely  ab- 
sorb^ into  the  empire  that  its  governor  was 
one  of  the  Assyrian  eponyms  ('Eponym 
Canon,'  p.  68).  The  capture  of  the  city, 
foretold  by  Amos  (i.  4,  5),  was  followed 
by  the  destruction  of  its  wall*  and  palaces. 
And  carried  the  people  of  it  captive.  The 
system  of  iiansplauting  large  masses  of  the 
population  from  one  part  of  the  empire  to 
•nothei  seems  to  have  begun  with  Tiglath- 


pileser.  In  his  very  imperfect  and  frag^ 
mentary  annals  we  find  the  removal  of  above 
thirty  thousand  captives  recorded,  of  whom 
more  than  half  are  women.  His  example 
was  followed  by  his  successors  on  a  still 
larger  scale.  To  Eir.  The  situation  of 
"Kir"   (Tp)  is  wholly  nncertain.    It  has 

been  identified  with  Kis  (Elam  or  Kissia) ; 
with  the  country  watered  by  the  Kur ;  with 
KourSnaorKoura,ontheriverMarduB;  with 
Karin£,  the  modern  Kirrind;  with  Kirkhi 
near  Diartekr;  and  with  Kiransi  in  the 
Urumiyeh  country.  But  the  similarity  of 
sound  is  the  sole  basis  for  each  and  aU  of 
these  identifications.  It  is  best  to  confess 
our  ignorance.  And  slew  Bezin.  This  is 
perhaps  implied,  but  it  is  not  distinctly 
stated,  in  the  extant  annals  of  Tiglatli- 
pileser. 

Vers.  10 — 18. — Beligious changes  introduced 
into  Judsea  by  Ahaz.  The  new  position  into 
which  Ahaz  had  brought  himself  with 
respect  to  Assyria  was  followed  by  certain 
religions  changes,  which  were  probably,  in 
pai't  at  any  rate,  its  consequence,  thongh 
some  of  them  may  have  been  the  result  cf 
his  own  religious  (or  irreligious)  convictions. 
He  had  a  new  altar  made  and  introduced 
into  the  temple,  which  at  first  he  used  for 
his  own  private  sacrifices  (vers.  10 — 13); 
then,  that  his  new  altar  might  occupy  the 
post  of  honour,  he  removed  from  its  place 
the  old  brazen  altar  of  Solomon,  and  put  it 
in  an  inferior  position  (ver.  14).  After  this, 
he  required  all  sacrifices  to  be  offered  on 
the  new  altar  (ver.  15).  Finally,  he  pro- 
ceeded to  interfere  with  several  other  of 
Solomon's  arrangements,  with  what  par- 
ticular object  is  not  very  apparent  (vers.  17, 
18).  In  carrying  out  all  these  changes,  he 
had  the  high  priest  of  the  time  for  bis 
obsequious  servant. 

Ver.  10. — ^And  King  Ahaz  went  to  Damascus 
to  meet  Tiglath-pileser  King  of  Assyria.  It 
was  a  practice  of  the  Assyrian  monarchs  to 
hold  durbars,  or  courts,  at  central  places  in 
the  provinces,  in  the  course  of  their  military 
expeditions,  whereat  to  receive  the  subject 
princes  of  the  neighbourhood,  who  were 
expected  to  do  homage,  and  bring  with  them 
presents,  or  their  fixed  tribute.  Tiglath- 
pileser  held  one  such  court  in  the  earlier 
part  of  his  leign  at  Arpad,  a  Syrian  town, 
at  which  were  present  the  kings  of  Comma- 
gene,  Syria,  Tyre,  Carchemisb,  Gaugama, 
and  others.  He  seems  to  have  held  another 
at  some  unknown  place,  about  B.C.  732  (it 
may  have  been  at  Damascus),  which  was 


81« 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS 


[oh.  xtl  1 — 2 


attended  by  the  Mngi  of  Commagene,  Car- 
ehemish,  Gebal,  Hamath,  Gangama,  Tubal, 
Arrad,  Ammon,  Moab,  Askelon,  Gaza,  Edom, 
and  Judab,  the  last-mentioned  being  Yahn- 
khazi  (Jehoahaz),  by  which  is  probably 
meant  Ahaz.  It  is  with  reason  conjectured 
that  this  waa  the  occasion  mentioned  in  the 
text,  when  "  King  Ahaz  went  to  Damascus 
to  meet  Tiglath-pileser."  And  saw  an  altar 
that  was  at  Samasons.  It  is  almost  certain 
that  this  was  an  Assyrian  altar.  Ahaz  may 
at  one  time  have  turned  for  help  to  the  gods 
of  Syria  (2  Chron.  ixviii.  23),  and  asked 
their  aid  against  his  enemids ;  but  the  glory 
of  Syria  was  now  gone,  her  gorls  were  dis- 
aredited,  and  the  place  of  power  was  occupied 
by  Assyria,  which  had  assorted  its  supre- 
macy. When  Ahaz  visited  Tiglath-pileser 
at  Damascus,  and  "  saw  an  altar,"  it  wbs,  in 
all  probability,  Tiglath-pileser's  altar.  The 
Assyrian  kings  were  accustomed  to  carry 
altais  about  with  them,  and  to  have  them 
set  up  in  their  fortified  camps,  or  in  other 
convenient  places.  They  also,  not  unfre- 
qnently,  set  up  altars  to  the  great  gods  in 
the  countries  which  they  conquered,  and 
required  the  inhabitants  to  pay  them  rever- 
ence. Ahaz  may  either  have  been  required 
by  Tiglath-pileser  to  set  up  an  Assyrian 
altar  in  the  temple,  or  he  may  have  volun- 
teered the  act  as  one  which  was  likely  to 
please  his  suzerain.  And  King  Ahaz  sent  to 
Vr^'ah  the  priest— •.«•.  the  high  priest — the 
fashion  of  the  altar  and  the  pattern  of  it. 
Assyrian  altars  were  quite  different  from 
Jewish  ones.  Generally  they  were  of  small 
size,  either  square  with  a  battlemented  edge, 
or  round  at  the  top  and  supported  on  a 
triangular  base  ('  Diet,  of  the  Bible,'  ad  voc. 
"  Altar,"  vol.  i.  p.  55,  woodcuts  Nos.  3  and  5). 
It  is  scarcely  likely  that  Ahaz  was  par- 
ticularly pleased  with  the  pattern  (Keil), 
and  therefore  wished  to  have  one  like  it. 
He  probably  merely  wished  to  satisfy  his 
suzerain  that  he  had  conformed  to  some  of 
his  religious  usages.  According  to  aU  the 
workmanship  thereof.  Though  not  very 
elaborate,  the  Assyrian  altars  have  an 
ornamentation  which  is  peculiar  and  un- 
mistakable. Careful  instructions  would  be 
needed  for  workmen  who  had  never  seen  the 
sort  of  object  which  they  were  required  to 
produce. 

Ver.  11. — And  TTrijah  the  priest.  No 
doubt  the  Uriah  of  Isaiah  Cviii.  2),  who 
might  be  a  "  faithful  witness"  to  the  record 
of  a  fact,  though  a  bad  man,  over-complaisant 
in  cariying  out  the  will  of  the  king.  BaUt 
an  altar  according  to  all  that  King  Ahax  had 
sent  from  Samascna : — rather,  built  the  altar, 
i.e.  the  altar  commanded  by  the  mouaroh — 
10  Uiijah  the  priest  made  it  against  King 
Ahaz  oame  from  SamaBons.  A  bold  higii 
prieat   like  Azariah  (2  Ohron.  zzvi.    17) 


would  have  lefnsed  to  work  the  king's  will 
in  snch  a  matter,  which  was  certainly  • 
desecration  of  the  temple,  and  to  some  extent  ' 
a  compromise  with  idolatry.  But  Uryah 
was  a  man  of  a  weaker  fibre,  and  does  not 
seem  to  have  thought  even  of  remonstrance, 
much  less  of  resistance. 

Ver.  12. — And  vhen  the  king  wai  eome 
from  Damasons,  the  king  saw  the  altar :  and 
the  king  approached  to  the  altar,  and  offered 
thereon.  It  is  not  necessarily  implied  in 
these  words  that  Ahaz,  like  ITzziah,  usurped 
the  priestly  functions,  though  conceivably 
he  may  have  done  so,  and  Urijah  may  have 
stood  tamely  by.  What  the  writer  has  it  in 
his  mind  to  record  is  that  the  king,  ou  his 
return  from  Damascus,  at  once  made  use  of 
the  new  altar  for  his  pritate  sacrifices.  If 
he  had  meant  to  tax  Ahaz  with  so  great 
a  sin  as  that  which  brought  the  curse 
of  leprosy  upon  Uzziah,  he  would  almost 
certainly  have  made  his  meaning  clearer. 

Ver.  13. — And  he  bnmt  his  bnmt  offering 
and  his  meat  offering,  and  ponred  his  drink 
offering,  and  sprinkled  the  blood  of  his  peace 
offerings,  upon  the  altar.  (On  the  different 
kinds  of  offerings,  see  Lev.  l — ^viL) 

Yer.  14. — And  he  brought  also  the  hrazem 
altar,  which  was  before  the  lord.  One  sin 
leads  on  to  another.  Having  introduced  his 
self-invented  guaW-idolatrous  altar  into  the 
temple,  and  so  inserted  "the  thin  end  of 
the  wedge,"  Ahaz  was  not  satisfied,  but 
proceeded  to  another  innovation.  Urijah, 
having  had  no  express  order  from  the  king 
with  respect  to  the  position  of  the  new  altat, 
had  placed  it  in  front  of  the  old  one,  between 
it  and  the  eastern  gate  of  the  court.  Thns 
the  old  altar,  which  was  directly  in  front  of 
the  temple  porch,  seemed  to  cut  the  new 
altar  off  from  the  temple.  Ahaz  would  not 
have  this  continue,  and  resolved  on  removing 
the  altar  of  Solomon  from  its  place,  and 
putting  it  elsewhere.  From  the  forefront  of 
the  honse  (comp.  1  Rings  viii.  54),  from 
between  the  altar — i.e.  the  new  altar — and 
the  honse  of  the  Lord — i.e.  the  temple 
building — and  put  it  on  the  north  side  of 
the  altar.  The  removal  of  Solomon's  altar 
from  its  place  of  honour  to  a  side  position 
1(  ft  the  space  clear  between  the  temple  and 
the  new  altar,  which  thus,  without  exactly 
occupying  the  same  site,  took  practically 
the  place  of  Solomon's  altar.  Solomon's 
altar,  shifted  to  one  side,  was  put,  as  it 
were,  in  the  background ;  the  eye  rested  on 
the  new  altar,  right  in  &ont  of  the  poroh 
and  temple,  which  so  became  "the  main 
altar"  (^'n|n  na^QnX  as  it  is  called  in  the 
next  verse. 

Ver.  15. — And  King  Ahai  oomnumded 
Urijah  the  priest,  saying.  Here  the  king, 
no  doubt,  stepped  out  of  the  sphere  of  hu 
duties,  not  to  usurp  exactly  the  priestly 


OH.  xvL  1— 20.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


317 


ofB«e,  bnt  to  give  dbeotloiii  In  matten  which 
belonged,  not  to  the  regale,  bnt  to  the  mmU- 
ficale.  Urijah  onght  to  hare  refueed  obe- 
dience. TTpon  the  great  altar.  Certainly 
not  10  called  became  of  ita  lize  (KeilX  for 
it  was  probably  mnoh  smaller  than  the  old 
alUa,  bnt  becanse  of  its  position  (see  the 
comment  on  Ter.  14).  Bum  the  morning 
burnt  offering,  and  the  evening  meat  offering 
— <.e.  offer  the  daily  saoriflce  both  morning 
and  evening— and  the  king's  bnmt  saoriflce, 
and  his  meat  offering — i.e.  the  customary 
royal  sacrifices  (see  1  Kings  viiL  62) — ^wift 
the  burnt  offering  of  all  Sie  people  of  the 
land,  and  their  meat  offering,  and  their 
drink  offerings — 1'.«.  all  the  private  offerings 
of  the  people  for  themselves — and  sprinkle 
npoB  it  all  the  blood  of  the  bnmt  offering, 
and  all  the  blood  of  the  sacrifloe  (comp. 
Ezod.  xxix.  16,  20 ;  Lev.  i.  5, 11 ;  iii.  2,  8, 
13;  tU.  2;  xvii.  6;  Numb,  xviii.  17,  etc.) 
and  the  brazen  altar  shall  be  for  me  to  in- 
quire by ;  ntther,  and  a»/or  (he  irazen  altar, 
it  101*12  he  for  me  to  inquire  eonceming  it ; 
i.e.  I  shall  hereafter  detormiDe  what  ose,  if 
any,  it  shall  be  put  to.  As,  by  the  king's 
directions,  all  the  regular  and  all  the 
occasional  sacrifices  were  to  be  offered  upon 
his  new  altar,  the  other  would  practically 
be  superfluous.  It  would  have  been  only 
logical  to  remove  it,  or  break  it  up;  but  th  s 
the  king  was  probably  afraid  of  doing.  He 
therefore  said  that  he  would  take  time  to 
consider  wbat  he  should  do. 

Yer.  16. — Thus  did  Urqah  the  priest,  ao- 
oording  to  all  that  King  Ahaz  oonunanded. 
An  emphatic  condemnation  of  the  high 
priest,  whose  subserviency  evidently  pro- 
vokes the  writer's  indignation. 

Ver.  ]7. — ^And  King  Ahaz  out  off  the 
borders  of  the  bases.  By  "the  bases"  are 
probably  meant  the  stands  of  the  ten  brazen 
lavers,  which  Hiram  the  Tynan  artificer 
made  for  Solomon,  and  which  Solomon 
placed  outside  the  temple,  five  on  either 
side  of  the  entrance  (1  Kings  vii  39).  The 
"borders  of  the  bases"  seem  to  have  con- 
sisted of  ornamental  panels,  on  which  were 
carved,  in  relief,  figures  of  lions,  oxen,  and 
cherubim  (1  Kings  vii.  29),  The  object  of 
Ahaz  in  these  mutilations  may  have  been 
merely  destructive,  as  we  find  Egyptian 
kings,  after  a  change  of  religion,  mutilating 
the  tablets,  and  erasing  the  inscriptions  put 
up  in  honour  of  those  gods  who  had  ceased 
to  b«  in  favour  with  them.  Or,  possibly,  ha 
may,  as  Keil  supposes,  have  wished  to 
transfer  the  ornamental  carvings  to  some 
other  edifice,  e.g.  an  idolatrous  temple  or  a 
palace.  And  removed  the  laver  from  off 
them — ^removed,  i.e.,  from  each  base  "the 
laver"  which  stood  upon  it — and  took  down 
the  sea  from  off  the  brazen  oxen  that  were 
under  it     (On  Solomon's  "  molten  sea,"  or 


great  laver,  and  the  twelve  oxen  which 
supported  it,  comp.  1  Kings  vii.  23 — 26,  and 
Jer.  HI.  20.)  The  "sea '"was  probably  re- 
moved from  off  the  backs  of  the  oxen,  in 
order  that  they  might  be  made  use  of,  aa 
.  ornaments,  elsewhere.  And  put  it  upon  a 
pavement  of  stones ;  rather,  upon  a  pedestal 
of  »Ume  (M  pdmv  Xittiniv,  LXX.). 

Ver.  18. — And  the  covert  for  the  sabbath 
that  they  had  built  in  the  house.  The 
"  covert  for  the  sabbath  "  was  probably  (as 
Keil  notes)  "  a  covered  place  or  stand  in  the 
court  of  the  temple,  to  be  used  by  the  king 
whenever  he  visited  the  temple  with  his 
retinue  on  the  sabbath,  or  on  feast-days." 
It  may  have  been  elaborately  ornamented. 
And  the  king's  entry  without.  This  may 
have  been  "  the  ascent  into  the  house  of  tlie 
Lord,"  which  Solomon  constructed  for  his 
own  use  (1  Kings  z.  5),  and  which  was 
among  those  marvels  of  art  that  made  the 
spirit  of  the  Queen  of  Sbeba  faint  within  her. 
Turned  he  from  the  house  of  the  Lord  for 
the  King  of  Assyria.  It  is  not  clear  what 
meaning  our  translators  intended  to  express, 
and  it  is  still  less  clear  what  was  the  sense 
intended  by  the  original  writer.  Ahaz  did 
something  to  the  royal  stand  inside  the 
temple,  and  to  the  "ascent"  which  led  to  it, 
and  what  he  did  was  done,  not  "for  the 
King  of  Assyria,"  bnt  "for  fear  of  the  King 
of  Assyria;"  but  what  exactly  his  action 
was,  we  cannot  say.  No  satisfactoiy  mean- 
ing has  been  assigned  to  nyij  no  303  by 
any  commentator. 

Vers.  19,  20.— The  death  of  Ahaz.  The 
writer  terminates  his  account  of  the  reign 
of  Ahaz  with  his  usual  formulee,  which  in 
this  instance  are  wholly  colourless.  Ahaz's 
acts  were  written  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles 
of  the  Idngs ;  he  died,  and  was  buried  with 
his  fathers;  Hezekiah,  his  son,  reigned  in 
his  stead.  This  is  all  that  he  thinks  it 
needful  to  say. 

Ver.  19. — Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Ahaz  which  he  did,  are  they  not  written  in 
the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of 
Judahl  The  writer  of  Chronicles  adds  some 
important  facts  not  found  in  the  narrative 
of  Kings.  Among  them  are  the  following  : 
(1)  The  complete  defeat  of  Ahaz  by  Pekah, 
who  "smote  him  with  a  great  slaughter" 
(2  Chron.  xxviii.  5),  killing  a  hundred 
and  twenty  thousand  of  his  soldiers,  and 
carrying  on  two  hundred  thousand  captives, 
men,  women,  and  children  (2.  Chron.  xxviii. 
8);  these  captives  were,  however,  after- 
wards restored  (ver.  15).  (2)  His  defeat  by 
the  Syrians  (ver.  5).  This  is,  perhaps,  im- 
plied in  oh.  xvi.  6 ;  but  it  is  not  expressly 
stated.    (3)  His  defeat  by  the  Edomites, 


SIS 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  xvi.  1—20 


who  inyaded  his  land,  and  made  a  laige 
number  of  prisoners  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  17). 
(4)  The  conquest  in  his  reign  of  a  consider- 
able portion  of  Southern  Judasa  by  the 
Philistines  (ver.  18).  (5)  The  fact  that 
Ahaz  at  one  time  in  his  life  adopted  the 
Syrian  worship,  and  "  sacrificed  to  the  godg 
of  Damascus  which  smote  him"  (ver.  23). 
(6)  The  fact  that  in  his  latter  years  he 
shut  up  the  temple  (ver.  24),  closing  the 
doors  of  the  porcli  (2  CJhron.  xxix.  7),  ex- 
tinguisliing  tlie  lamps  (2  Chron.  xxix.  7), 
and  putting  an  eud  to  the  burning  of  incense 
and  the  oflFering  of  sacrifice.  (7)  The  fact 
that,  not  content  with  the  previously  exist- 
ing high  places,  he  set  up  a  number  of  new 
ones,  10  that  there  should  be  a  "  high  plaoa" 


in  every  several  city  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  25)i 
The  religious  condition  of  Judsea  can  scarcely 
have  been  worse  in  the  worst  time  of  Ma- 
nasseh  or  Amon. 

Ver.  20. — And  Ahaz  slept  with  his  fathers, 
and  was  buried  with  his  fathers  in  the  oity 
of  David.  This  must  be  taken  in  the  same 
sense,  and  with  the  same  limitations,  as  the 
same  phrase  in  ch.  xii.  21.  The  writer  of 
Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  27)  says,  "  And 
Ahaz  slept  with  his  fatliers,  and  they  bnried 
him  in  the  oity,  even  in  Jerusalem :  &u(  they 
hrought  him  not  into  the  sepulchres  of  the 
kings."  Like  Uzziah,  be  was  not  thonght 
worthy  of  sepulture  in  the  royal  catacomb 
(see  the  comment  on  ch.  xii.  21), 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vera.  1 — ♦. — The  gorJliness  of  parents  does  not  secure  the  persevercmee  of  tJieir  children 
in  todl-doing,  hut  increases  the  children's  guilt  if  they  take  to  evil  courses.  Ahaz,  the 
worst  of  all  the  kings  of  Judah,  is  the  son  of  one  of  whom  it  is  said  that  "  he  did 
right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  "  (ch.  xv.  34).  Manasseh,  perhaps  the  next  worst,  is 
the  child  of  the  one  king  for  whom  the  sacred  writers  have  no  word  of  blame.  Wicked 
Abimelech  is  the  son  of  the  pious  Gideon  (Judg.  ix.  1).  We  naturally  expect  the 
contrary  of  this  to  happen.  We  suppose  that  education  does  everithing,  and  we  look 
to  see  the  children  of  godly  parents  grow  up  godly,  and  are  apt,  without  any  inquiry 
into  the  circumstances,  to  suppose  that  every  ill-conducted  young  man  mu.st  have  been 
badly  brought  up.  The  dictum  of  the  wise  man,  "  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he 
should  go:  and  when  he  is  old,  he  will  not  depart  from  it"  (Prov.  xxii.  6),  may  be 
quoted  in  justification  of  such  views,  and  is  often  so  quoted,  as  if  it  were  a  rule  without 
any  excepikn.  But  no  proverb  is  of  this  character.  All  sae  general  rules,  which  admit 
of  exceptions ;  and  the  exceptional  character  of  this  particular  proverb  is  continually 
allowed  in  the  Scriptures  (Prov.  xvii.  21,  25 ;  xix.  13 ;  Ezek.  xviii,  10,  etc.).  The 
points  to  be  urged  practically  are — 

I.  That  parents  should  make  bveby  fossiblb  effort,  just  as  if  theib 
children's  characters  depended  entirely  upon  them.  "  Instruction,"  education, 
training,  though  sometimes  of  no  avail,  have,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  very  great  weight. 
Even  when  they  seem  to  have  failed,  it  often  happens  that  their  results  remain  deep 
buried  in  the  soul,  and  in  the  end  show  themselves,  and  are  of  sufficient  force  to  snatch 
many  a  brand  from  the  burning.  The  parent  must  not  despair  because  he  does  not 
see  much  fruit  of  his  labours  at  once.  He  has  to  do  his  best,  to  "  liberate  his  own 
soul,"  to  see  that,  if  his  child  be  lost,  it  is  not  owing  to  his  neglect.  He  has  to  "  hope 
agwnst  hope,"  to  persevere  with  his  efforts,  to  be  unwearied  in  his  prayers,  to  do  the 
utmost  that  lies  in  his  power  to  lead  his  children  into  the  right  path.  A  parent  ought 
never  to  despair.  While  there  is  life  there  is  hope.  The  way  of  repentance  is  o[)en  to 
all ;  and,  historically,  there  have  been  repentances  from  such  a  depth  of  depravity  that 
no  case  should  seem  quite  hopeless.  "  Where  sin  aliounded,  grace  did  much  more 
abound"  (Hom.  y.  20).  The  mercy  of  God  is  unsearchable,  unfathomable.  There  is 
no  saying  what  sinner  may  not  turn  from  his  sin,  put  away  tiie  iniquity  of  hia  doings, 
and  become  a  true  servant  of  the  Most  High. 

II.  That  parents  should  not  be  over-sorrowful,  or  depressed  beyond  measure, 

BECAUSE    THEIB    EFFORTS    TO    KBBP  THEIB    OHILDRGN  IN    THE    RIGHT    PATH   HAVE    IN 

BOMB  OASES  FAILED.  If,  indeed,  they  have  had  many  children,  and  their  efforts  have 
failed  with  aU,  they  may  reasonably  suspef  t  some  defect  in  themselves  or  in  their  system. 
But  if  the  results  are  varied,  if  a  portion  of  their  children  have  been  all  that  they  could 
wish,  while  others — despite  all  that  they  could  do — ^have  preferred  to  "  walk  in  the  way 
of  sinneri,"  and  OTen  to  "sit  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful,"  then  they  have  no  need  ta 


OH.  XVI.  1-20.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  ftl9 

■orrow  orermucb,  or  to  regard  themselves  as  culpable.  The  inflnences  which  go  to 
form  each  man's  character  are  countless,  and  with  hundreds  of  them  a  parent  has  nothii^ 
to  do.  Again,  there  is  "  the  personal  equation."  There  do  seem  to  be  some  who,  "  at 
soon  OS  they  are  born,  go  astray  and  speak  lies."  It  is  among  the  mysteries  of  man's 
esistence  here  on  earth  that  natural  dispositions  should  so  greatly  vary.  No  parent  of 
many  children  but  knows,  by  certain  experience,  that  this  is  so.  One  child  gives  no 
trouble,  and  scarcely  requires  any  guidance.  Another  is  wilful,  perverse,  headstrong, 
almost  devoid  of  good  impulses,  and  full  of  inclination  to  evil.  Parents  are  answerable 
for  neglect,  for  unwisdom,  above  all  for  bad  example ;  but  they  need  not  fear,  if  they 
earnestly  endeavour  to  do  their  duty  by  their  children,  that  in  Qod's  just  judgment  the 
iniquity  of  their  children  will  be  imputed  to  them.  "  The  son  shall  not  bear  the 
iniquity  of  the  father,  neither  shall  the  father  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  son"  (Ezek.  xviii. 
20);  «  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die"  (Ezek.  xviii.  4). 

III.  That  children  who  have  been  REuaiousLT  bboitoht  up,  nr  thbt  tubn 
TO  EVIL  COUBSES,  INCUS  A  FBAEFUL  KESP0N8IBILITT.  "  It  had  been  better  for  them 
not  to  have  known  the  way  of  righteousness,  than,  after  they  have  known  it,  to  turn 
from  the  holy  commandment  delivered  unto  them"  (2  Pet.  ii.  21).  If  children,  not- 
withstanding a  godly  tiaining,  take  to  an  evil  life,  what  must  we  suppose  that  they 
would  have  done  had  they  been  born,  as  so  many  are,  amidst  adverse  influences,  and 
from  infancy  exposed  to  contact  with  indecency,  drunkenness,  blasphemy?  Alas  I  every 
blessing  abused  becomes  a  curse ;  and  to  have  a  jpattem  of  goodness  before  our  eyes, 
to  have  virtue  instilled  into  us,  and  then  to  reject  it — to  choose  the  evil  and  refuse  the 
good — is  to  provoke  God's  heavy  displeasure,  and  bring  down  his  severe  judgments  upon 
us.  ^What  excuse  can  such  persons  offer  for  their  misconduct?  They  know  that  by 
sin  they  displease  God,  grieve  their  parents,  injure  themselves,  ruin  their  worldly 
prospects,  imperil  their  salvation ;  yet  for  a  little  present  pleasure  they  shut  their  eyes 
to  all  future  consequences,  and.  rush  to  their  destruction.  Their  conduct  is  folly,  mad- 
ness, idiocy ;  but  not  the  sort  of  madness  which  shuts  out  responsibility.  They  are 
answerable  for  it,  and  will  have  to  answer  at  God's  judgment-seat.  Oh!  that  they 
would  pause  ere  it  is  too  late,  recognize  the  folly  of  their  evil  courses,  and  "  put  away 
their  iniquity  "I  God  is  still  willing  to  pardon  all  whom  he  suffers  to  live.  Let  them 
"  arise,  and  go  to  their  Father,"  and  say  unto  him,  "  We  have  sinned  ; "  and  he  will  go 
out  to  meet  them,  and  receive;  them,  and  "there  will  be  joy  in  the  presence  of  the 
angels  Of  God  over  each  such  sinner  that  repenteth,  more  than  over  ninety  and  nine 
just  persona,  which  need  no  repentance  "  (Luke  xv.  7, 10). 

Vers.  6—7. — Ood's  punishments  of  a  nation's  sins  are  often  long  delayed,  but,  when 
they  come,  it  is  not  by  degrees,  but  suddenly,  violently,  and  at  orice.  This  subject  may 
best  be  treated,  as  the  last,  under  three  heads,  viz.  (1)  the  sins  of  Judah,  which  had 
provoked  Ood;  (2)  the  long  delay  in  their  punishment;  and  (3)  the  suddenness  and 
overwhelming  force  with  which  the  punishment  came  at  last. 

I.  Thk  bins  of  Juoah.  Though,  on  the  whole,  less  guilty  than  her  sister,  Ephraim, 
ftill  Judah  had,  from  the  division  of  the  kingdom  of  Solomon,  been  more  or  less 
unfaithful  to  Jehovah  in  several  respects.  1.  An  unauthorized  and  illegitimate  high- 
place  worship,  tinged  with  superstition  and  perhaps  even  idolatry,  had  maintained  its 
place  by  the  side  of  the  authorized  Jehovah-cult,  throughout  the  whole  period  of  the 
divided  monarchy,  from  the  accession  of  Beboboam  to  the  death  of  Ahaz  (1  Kings  xiv. 
23 ;  XV.  14 ;  xxii.  43 ;  ch.  xii.  3 ;  xiv.  4 ;  xv.  4,  35 ;  xvi.  4).  2.  The  worship  of 
Baal  had  been  introduced  from  the  sister  kingdom  by  the  influence  of  Athaliah,  and 
had  prevailed  during  the  reigns  of  her  husband,  Jehoram,  her  son,  Ahaziah,  and  her 
own  (ch.  viiL  18,  27 ;  xi.  18).  3.  Luxury  and  effeminacy  had  crept  in,  especially 
during  the  prosperous  reigns  of  Uzziah  and  Jotham,  and  had  led  on  to  debauchery  and 
licentiousness  (Isa.  L  4;  iL  6 — 8;  iiL  16 — 24;  v.  11,  12;  Joel  L  6;  Amos  vi.  1 — 6, 
etc.).  4.  Injustice  and  oppression  had  become  rife.  The  rich  men  sought  to  "join 
house  to  house,  and  field  to  field"  (Isa.  v.  8);  they  stripped  the  poor  of  their  small 
properties  by  legal  chicanery  (Isa.  iii.  14),  oppressed  them, and  "ground  their  faces  " 
(Isa.  iii.  15).  The  judges  in  the  courts  accepted  bribes  (Isa.  L  23)  and  gave  wrong 
judgments  (Isa.  t.  23).  Widows  and  orphans  were  the  special  objects  of  attack,  on 
a^connt  of  theh  weakness  a^d  defencelessness  (Ita.  L  17,  23 ;  x.  2^    6.  Tb9  forons  of 


n»  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINGa        [oh.  xti.  l^aa 

religion  were  kept:  up,  Vut  the  spirit  had  eraporated.  Men  thronged  God's  courts, 
brought  abundant  offerings,  made  many  prayers,  kept  the  new  moons  and  the  sabbaths 
and  the  appointed  feasts,  but  without  any  real  care  for  the  honour  of  God  or  any 
thought  of  seeking  to  serve  and  obey  him.  Hence  their  worship  was  "  an  offence ;  " 
their  ceremonies  were  mockeries,  their  oblations  "vain,"  their  solemn  meetings 
"  iniquity."    God  was  "  weary  to  bear  them  "  (Isa.  i.  11 — 15). 

IL  '1'he  long  delay  in  theib  F0MISHMENT.  More  than  two  centuries  had  elapsed 
since  Judah  began  to  "  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  to  provoke  him  to  jealousy 
with  their  sins  which  they  had  committed,  above  all  that  their  &thers  had  done  ",(1  Kings 
xiv.  22).  Above  a  century  had  passed  since  the  apostasy  of  Jehoram  and  Ahaziah. 
During  all  this  time  Judah  had  maintained  her  independence,  had  received  no  severe 
blow,  fal  en  under  no  crushing  affliction.  Latterly,  she  had  even  prospered.  Under  Uzziah 
she  had  recovered  Elath  (ch.  xiv.  22),  conquered  a  part  of  Philistia  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  6), 
defeated  the  Arabians  and  Mehunim  (2  Chron.  xxyi.  7),  and  made  the  Ammonites  her 
tributaries  (2  Chron.  xxvL  8) ;  under  Jotham  she  had  maintained  these  conquests,  and 
when  Ammon  revolted  had  reduced  her  to  subjection  (2  Chron.  xxvii.  5)  without  any 
difficulty.  God,  in  his  long-suffering  mercy,  bore  with  his  people.  He  would  win 
them  by  kindness,  draw  them  to  him  by  cords  of  love,  at  any  rate  ^ve  them  ample 
time  for  repentance.  But  it  was  in  vain.  The  longer  he  left  them  impnnished,  die 
fiirther  they  wandered  from  the  right  way,  and  the  more  they  hardened  their  hearts. 
The  time  came  when  the  prophet  could  only  say  of  them,  "  Ah  sinful  nation,  a  people  - 
laden  with  iniquity,  a  seed  of  evil-doers,  children  that  are  corrupters :  they  have  forsaken 
the  Lord,  they  have  provoked  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  unto  anger,  they  are  gone  away 
backward.  .  .  .  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint.  From  the  sole  of 
the  foot  even  unto  the  head  there  is  no  soundness  in  it ;  but  wounds,  and  bruises,  and 
putrefying  sores"  (Isa.  i.  4 — 6). 

III.   I'HB    suddenness   AITD   OYERWHELUINa   FOBCK    WITH    WHICH    THE    PUNISHMENT 

DESCENDED  WHEN  IT  OAHK.  Bishop  Butler  remarks  how,  in  the  punishment  which  God 
brings  upon  vicious  individuals  in  this  world,  there  is  often  a  long  respite.  "  After  the 
chief  bad  consequences,  temporal  consequences,  of  their  follies  have  been  delayed  for 
k  great  while ;  at  length  they  break  in  irresistibly,  like  an  armed  force ;  repentance  is 
too  late  to  relieve,  and  can  only  serve  to  aggravate  their  distress  ;  the  case  is  become 
desperate,  and  poverty  and  sickness,  remorse  and  anguish,  'infamy  and  death,  the 
effects  of  their  own  doings,  overwhelm  them,  beyond  possibility  of  remedy  or  escape  " 
('  Analogy  of  Religion,  Natural  and  Bevealed,'  pt.  L  ch.  ii.  p.  52).  And  so  it  is  often  with 
nations;  so  it  was  now  with  the  nation  of  the  Jews.  As  soon  as  the  punishment 
began,  blow  was  dealt  upon  blow.  First,  Bezin  "smote  them,  and  carried  away  • 
great  multitude  of  them  captives, and  brought  them  to  Damascus"  (2  Chron. xxviiL  6). 
Then  they  were  delivered  into  the  hand  of  Pekah,  who  "  smote  them  with  a  great 
slaughter,  slaying  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  in  one  day,  which  were  all  valiant 
men  "  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  5,  6).  Next,  Edom  had  her  fling  at  the  sick  lion,  and  "  came 
and  smote  Judah,  and  carried  away  captives"  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  17).  Then  Philistia 
attacked  the  cities  of  the  low  countiy,  and  of  the  south  of  Judah,  and  took  a  number 
of  them,  "  and  dwelt  there  "  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  18).  Presently,  Pekah  and  Bezin,  joining 
their  forces,  advanced  together  to  the  siege  of  Jerusalem.  All  was  lost,  except  only 
honour ;  and  then  honour  was  thrown  into  the  gulf;  Judah  went  down  on  her  knees 
to  Assyria,  and  implored  aid,  gave  tHbute,  accepted  a  suzerain,  made  the  inglorious 
confession,  **  I  am  thy  servant  and  thy  son "  (ch.  xvi.  7).  Having  incurred  defeat, 
disgrace,  the  loss  of  military  honour,  the  loss  of  the  flower  of  her  troops,  she  crowns 
all  by  giving  up  her  national  independence,  inviting  a  master,  and  herself  placing 
a  foreign  yoke  upon  her  own  shoulders.  But  for  the  wonderful  efforts  made  by 
Hezekiah  when  he  ascended  the  throne  (ch.  xviii.  S— 8),  Judna's  ruin  would  have  been 
completed  under  Ahaz ;  and  the  punishment  so  long  delayed,  when  it  came,  would 
have  been  final,  "  without  escape  or  remedy." 

Vers.  10 — 17. — A  wicked  king  aUotoed  to  have  hi»  way  hy  a  weak  priest.  The  double 
regime,  civil  and  ecclesiastical,  which  it  pleased  God  to  establish  in  his  first  Church, 
the  Jewish,  and  to  continue,  with  certain  modifications,  in  his  second  Church,  the 
Cbristian,  leema  to  have  been  designed  for  the  mutual  advantage  of  both  partie*. 


OH.  XVI.  1—20.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOa  321 

Authority,  in  whatever  hands  it  is  placed,  is  always  liahle  to  be  abused,  to  over-assert 
itself  to  grow  arbitrary,  autocratic,  tyrannical.  Hence  the  necessity  of  ehecki,  of  a 
balance  of  forces,  of  counterpoise,  of  an  arrangement  by  which  the  undue  preponderance 
of  any  single  authority  shall  be  prevented.  It  is  sometimes  needful  that  the  civil 
authority  shall  interpose  to  keep  the  spiritual  within  due  bounds,  and  disallow  the 
establishment  of  sacerdotal  tyranny.  It  is  quite  as  often  requisite  for  the  spiritualty 
to  assert  itself,  and  check  the  endeavours  of  kings  and  nobles  to  establish  an  unlimited 
autocracy.  From  time  to  time  the  two  independent  authorities,  the  civil  and  ecclesi- 
astical, the  regale  and  the  pontiJiccUe,a,Tt  sure  to  come  into  collision.  Our  own  history 
presents  instances  in  the  struggles  of  Anselm  against  Bufus,  of  Becket  against  Henry  II., 
and  of  the  seven  bishops  against  the  last  of  the  Stuart  kings.  Under  such  circum- 
stances weakness  on  either  side  constitutes  a  serious  peril  to  the  community.  A  weak 
king,  priest-ridden,  makes  dangerous  concessions  to  the  ecclesiastical  order,  and  imperils 
the  peace  and  prosperity  of  his  kingdom  by  so  doing.  A  weak  priest,  timid  and  time- 
serviDg,  allows  the  rights  of  his  order  to  be  trampled  on,  and  lays  up  no  lessan  amount 
of  trouble  in  the  future  for  the  nation  to  which  he  belongs.  If  Ahaz  had  been  succeeded 
by  another  worldly  minded  and  ambitious  king,  instead  of  the  pious  Hezekiah,  there 
is  no  saying  how  low  the  ecclesiastical  authority  might  not  have  sunk,  or  how  soon 
the  kingly  ofBce  might  not  have  freed  itself  from  all  checks,  and  have  become  absolute, 
and  in  a  short  time  tyrannical.  IJrijah  did  his  best  to  destroy  the  constitution  of  his 
cotmtry,  and  to  turn  the  Judaean  limited  monarchy  into  a  pure  despotism.  He  was 
weak  rather  than  wicked ;  but  his  weakness  might  have  bad  the  worst  results.  It  was 
only  the  accident  of  Ahaz  being  succeeded  by  a  truly  religious  prince  that  prevented 
the  precedent,  which  he  had  set,  from  entailing  ruinous  consequences. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AOTHOES. 

Vers.  1 — ^20. — Stq>$  in  a  downward  path :  the  reign  of  Ahaz.  In  the  opening 
chapters  of  Isaiah  we  have  an  accouDt  of  the  condition  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  at  the 
time  that  Ahaz  succeeded  to  the  throne.  The  prosperity  which  the  country  had 
enjoyed  under  Uzziah  had  been  continued  and  increased  under  the  righteous  reign  of 
his  son  Jotham.  And  now  the  grandson,  Ahaz,  a  young  man  of  twenty,  finds  the 
country  abounding  in  wealth,  full  of  silver  and  gold.  Isaiah  says  there  was  no  end  of 
their  treasure ;  their  land  also  was  full  of  horses,  neither  was  there  any  end  of  their 
chariots.  Their  commerce,  too,  was  in  a  thriving  condition.  "  The  ships  of  Tarshish, 
sailing  from  Elath,  could  boast  their  gilded  prows  and  stems,  and  purple  sails,  and 
brought  home  rich  cargoes  from  the  distant  East "  (Geikie, '  Hours  with  the  Bible : 
Behoboam  to  Hezekiah,'  p.  292).  But  before  Ahaz  died,  all  this  was  changed.  Enemy 
after  enemy  invaded  his  country.  The  land  became  desolate.  The  king  was  reducra 
to  great  extremities  to  obtain  money.  Instead  of  the  sunshine  of  prosperity,  there 
was  oh  every  side  the  dark  shadow  of  desolation  and  decay.  We  have  the  exphination 
of  it  all  in  the  third  and  fourth  verses.  Ahaz  began  badly,  and  every  fresh  movement 
in  his  life  was  a  step  from  bad  to  worse.  His  history  is  a  further  Illustration  of  how 
one  sin  leads  to  another.    It  was  a  continuously  downward  path. 

I.  The  first  step  in  the  downwabd  cabeeb  or  Ahaz  was  his  idolatbt.  (Vers. 
3,  4.)  He  forsook  the  worship  of  the  true  and  living  God,  and  worshipped  the  gods 
of  the  heathen.  Even  that  step  he  would  seem  to  have  taken  gradually.  At  first  he 
began  with  the  high  places,  wmch  had  never  been  taken  away.  Then  graven  images 
and  other  heathen  customs  were  used  in  the  worship  of  God;  and  finally  the  idol*  of 
the  false  gods  themselves  were  set  up.  The  policy  of  compromise  had  now  reached  its 
fitting  conclusion.  When  the  right  makes  compromise  with  the  wrong,  the  wrong  is 
.  sure  to  gain  the  victory.  So  it  was  in  this  case.  The  people  had  got  accustomed  to 
the  high  places.  They  saw  no  harm  in  thtm.  And  now  they  see  no  harm  in  the 
idols.  Isaiah  describes  the  universal  corruption  when  he  says,  "  Their  land  also  is  Aill 
of  idols ;  they  worship  the  work  of  their  own  hands,  that  which  their  own  fingers  have 
made."  And  what  a  worship  it  was  to  substitute  for  the  worship  of  the  only  true  and 
living  and  almighty  God!  A  vselesi  worship,  as  Isaiah  indicates,  to  worship  the 
work  of  their  own  handa.  It  brought  them  no  help  in  thdr  h»ur  of  diatreia.  But  it 
B.  cnM.  T 


322  THE  SECOND  BOOK  01*  THE  KtNGS.       lea.  vn.  1—^6. 

was  worse  thau  useless;.  It  was  a  /mU  cmd  degrading  worship.  It  is  best  described 
in  the  words  of  the  third  verse,  "  the  abominations  of  the  heathen."  We  can  have 
but  a  faiDt  conception  of  the  loathsome  practices  associated  with  the  worship  of  the 
pagan  deities.  The  passage  before  us  speaks  of  one  act  of  worship — by  no  means 
the  worst,  though  sufficiently  cruel  and  revolting.  This  was  the  worship  of  Moloch. 
In  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  afterwards  called  Gehenna  or  Tophet,  an  image  of  Moloch 
was  erected.  Dr.  Thomson,  in  '  The  Land  and  the  Book,'  refers  to  the  passage  in 
Jeremiah  (xix.)  where  the  valley  of  Hinnom  is  spoken  of,  and  thinks,  because  it  is 
said  there  that  the  image  of  Baal  was  there,  that  Moloch  and  Baal  were  one  and  the 
same.  At  any  rate,  part  of  the  worship  of  Moloch  consisted  in  making  children  pass 
through  the  fire  before  his  image,  or  in  actually  burning  them  in  it.  The  cries  of  the 
children  were  drowned  by  the  sound  of  musical  instruments  and  the  shouts  of  the 
frenzied  worshippers.     It  is  to  this  that  Milton  refers  when  he  says— 

"  First,  Moloch,  horrid  king,  besmear'd  with  blood 
Of  human  eacrifice,  and  parents'  tears ; 
Though  for  the  noise  of  drums  and  timbrels  loud  , 
Their  children's  cries  unheard,  that  passed  through  fin 
To  his  grim  idol." 

Such  was  the  worship  which  Ahaz,  in  his  infatuation  and  desire  to  be  like  the  nations 
round  about  him,  substituted  for  the  spiritual,  elevating  worship  of  the  great  Father 
of  us  all.  After  all,  was  he  much  worse  than  many  in  mmlern  times  who  profess  to 
be  so  enlightened  that  they  regard  the  Christian  religion  as  a  superstition?  And 
what  do  they  give  us  in  place  of  it?  A  worship  of  dead  matter,  of  blind  force ;  of  a 
mere  supposition  of  their  own  minds.  If  Christianity  be  a  superstition,  what  are  some 
of  the  fancies  of  our  philosophers  ?  Before  we  give  up  our  Christian  religion,  let  ut 
know  what  we  are  to  have  in  place  of  it.  Let  us  compare  the  results  of  Christianity 
with  the  results  of  any  rival  system,  and  how  immeasurably  superior  to  them  all  it 
stands,  in  the  purity  of  its  teachincr,  in  the  power  it  exercises  to  elevate  and  ennoble 
human  life,  and  in  the  blessings  it  has  brought  to  the  nations !  How  it  alone  lights  up 
the  darkness  of  the  grave,  and  breathes  into  the  bereaved  heart  the  inspiration  and 
comfort  of  the  heavenly  hope  I  This  was  the  first  downward  step  in  the  career  of 
Ahaz— forsaking  the  worship  of  God.  So  many  a  man  has  begun  the  downward  path. 
The  empty  seat  in  the  house  of  God  indicates  often  the  beginning  of  a  useless  and 
wasted  life.  Or  if  he  comes  to  the  house  of  God,  he  worships  God  in  form  only.  His 
thoughts  are  far  away.  Self  and  the  world,  money  and  pleasure, — how  often  are  these 
the  idols  men  worship  with  the  thoughts  of  their  hearts  and  with  all  the  efforts  of 
their  lives  I 

XL  The  next  step  in  the  downwabd  path  of  Ahaz  was  the  alliance  he 
ENTBBED  INTO.  (Vers.  6—7.)  The  Syrians  made  war  on  him  along  with  the  King 
of  Israel.  Ahaz,  in  his  difficulty,  sought  the  help  of  the  King  of  Assyria.  How 
humiliating  is  his  entreaty  I  "  I  am  thy  servant  and  thy  son,"  was  the  message  he 
&ent:  "come  up  and  save  me  out  of  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Syria,  »nd  out  of  the 
hand  of  the  King  of  Israel,  which  rise  up  against  me."  There  was  nothing  wrong  in 
itself  in  seeking  the  help  of  friendly  kings.  On  this  occasion,  however,  God  absolutely 
warned  Ahaz  against  seeking  their  help.  But,  to  begin  with,  there  was  something 
wanting.  Ahaz  did  not  seek  God's  guidance  in  the  matter.  He  did  not  seek  Gud's 
help.  He  who  had  rejected  the  service  of  the  living  God,  makes  himself  the  cringing 
slave  of  the  King  of  Assyria,  and  humbles  himself  to  a  heathen  for  help.  What  a 
mistake  when  a  nation  trusts  to  its  resources  or  its  strong  alliances,  and  forgets  to 
look  to  that  Divine  power  from  whom  all  blessings  flow  1  There  may  be  nothing 
wrong  in  all  our  efforts  to  improve  our  worldly  position,  but  there  may  be  something 
wanting.  There  may  be  nothing  wrong  in  your  life,  but  ti^re  may  be  something 
wanting.  You  may  be  anxious  to  be  useful  in  the  world ;  buf  ai«  you  setting  about 
it  in  the  right  way  ?  One  thing  is  needful,  one  thing  is  essential  to  all  true  happiness, 
to  all  true  usefulness.  That  is  the  presence  and  help  of  God.  Is  the  Lord  Jesus 
dwelling  in  your  heart  ?    Whatever  else  may  disappoint  you,  he  will  neTer  faiiL 

"  When  other  helpers  fail,  and  comforts  flee. 
Help  of  the  helpless,  oh,  abide  witti  me  I " 


ci.  XVI.  1—20.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINOa  323 

in.  The  rest  vownwabs  btep  which  Ahaz  took  was  hu  FLUKDEiiiKa  the 
HOUSE  OF  GroD.  (Vers.  8,  9,  17, 18.)  Ahaz  paid  dear  for  his  alliance  with  the  King 
of  Assyria.  He  had  already  disobeyed  and  dishonoured  Ood  by  his  idolatry.  He  had 
already  dishonoured  Ood  by  refusing  to  heed  the  warnings  which  Isaiah  gave  him. 
But  now  he  commits  a  still  more  flagrant  act  of  defiance  and  desecration.  In  ccder  to 
reward  the  Assyrian  king  for  his  help,  and  to  retain  his  friendship,  he  actually  takes 
the  silver  and  gold  that  was  found  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  sends  it  for  a  present 
to  the  King  of  Assyria.  The  worlcTt  friendships  are  often  dearly  bought.  We  pay 
for  them,  in  peace  of  mind,  in  peace  of  conscience,  in  loss  of  money,  in  loss  of  time,  a 
greater  price  than  they  are  worth.  Sooner  or  later  the  crisis  must  come  in  every 
man's  life  when  he  must  choose  between  the  friendship  of  God  and  the  friendship 
of  the  world.  What  choice  are  you  making  ?  What  choice  would  you  make  if  you 
were  put  to  the  test  now  ?  Perhaps  you  are  being  put  to  the  test  in  your  daily  life. 
Perhaps  you  are  being  tempted,  for  the  sake  of  worldly  friendship,  for  the  sake  of  your 
business,  for  the  sake  of  popularity,  to  sacrifice  some  principle,  to  trample  on  some 
command  of  God,  to  neglect  some  plain  duty  which  conscience  and  the  Word  of  God 
alike  point  out.  Business !  The  great  business  of  your  life,  of  every  man's  life,  is  to 
fear  God  and  keep  his  commandments.  "  Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God,  and  enjoy 
him  for  ever."  Oh  what  a  fearful  thing  it  is  to  take  from  Ood  that  which  rightfully 
belongs  to  him  I  It  is  a  crime  against  law,  against  morality,  to  take  from  our  tellow- 
creatures,  without  their  permission,  that  which  belongs  to  them.  But  how  much  more 
guilty  is  he  who  would  take  from  God  that  which  is  his  I  We  condemn  Ahaz  for  his 
impiety  and  sacrilege  in  taking  from  the  temple  those  things  which  had  been  consecrated 
to  Gt>d.  But  ht  us  look  into  our  ovm  hearts  and  lives.  Are  we  giving  God  that  which 
is  his  due  ?  Are  we  keeping  back  nothing  from  him  ?  Has  he  no  greater  claim  on 
our  daily  thoughts  than  a  hurried  prayer  at  morning  or  evening,  or  none  at  all  ?  Has 
he  no  greater  claim  on  our  money  than  the  few  shillings,  or,  it  may  be,  few  pounds  we 
give  to  him  every  year?  Let  us  measure  our  service  of  God  much  less  by  what  others 
do  and  give,  and  much  move  by  our  own  responsibilities,  by  our  own  overflowing  cup 
of  mercies,  by  the  relation  of  our  own  soul  to  God. 

IV.  The  NEXT  downwabd  step  of  Ahaz  was  to  86t  dp  a  heathen  altab  in  the 
HOUSE  OF  THE  LoBD.  (Vers.  10 — 17.)  Ahaz  hail  gone  to  Damascus  to  meet  the  King  of 
Assyria.  While  there  he  saw  an  altar  used  in  the  worship  of  the  heathen  gods.  Its  work- 
manship may  perhaps  have  pleased  him.  Ho  sent  to  Urijah  the  priest  a  description, 
perhaps  a  drawing  of  it,  and  Urijah,  influenced  more  by  the  fear  of  the  king  than  by  the 
fear  of  God,  caused  a  similar  altar  to  be  erected  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  When  Ahaz 
returned,  he  substituted  this  altar  for  the  altar  of  the  Lord,  ali  hough  God  himself  had 
given  the  pattern  of  that  altar  to  Moses  and  to  David.  But  all  the  idols  and  sacrifices 
of  Ahax  did  not  benefit  him  much.  He  thought  the  gods  of  the  heathen  would  help 
him ;  but,  says  the  writer  in  2  Chronicles,  "  They  were  the  ruin  of  him  and  of  Israel." 
So  in  everyday  experience  many  a  man  finds,  when  he  forsakes  the  gospel  of  Christ, 
and  turns  his  back  upon  the  Law  of  God,  to  follow  worldly  gain  or  pleasure,  or  society, 
or  dissipation,  that  these  things  are  the  ruin  of  him.  "  There  is  a  way  which  seemeth 
right  unto  a  man,  but  the  end  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death."— €.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 20. — A  peoples  king  and  priest ;  or,  kinghood  and  priesthood.  "  In  the 
seventeenth  year  of  Pekah,"  etc.  Throughout  all  lands,  almost  throughout  all  times, 
two  functionaries  have  been  at  the  head  of  the  peoples,  too  often  treading  them 
down  by  oppression,  and  fattening  on  them  by  their  greed.  One  of  these  functionaries 
was  not,  among  the  Jews,  of  Divine  ordination  ;  for  the  Almighty  is  represented  as 
saying,  "  They  have  set  up  kings,  but  not  by  me :  they  have  made  princes,  and  I  knew 
it  not."  Let  us 'notice  each  functionary  as  presented  in  this  chapter — the  king  and 
the  priest^the  one  named  Ahaz,  the  other  Urijah. 

I.  The  KmanooD.  It  is  said,  "In  the  seventeenth  year  of  Pekah  the  son  of 
Bemaliah  Ahaz  the  son  of  Jotham  King  of  Judah  began  to  reign.  Twenty  years  old 
was  Ahaz  when  he  began  to  reign,  and  reigned  sixteen  years  in  Jerusalem,  and  did  not 
that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  his  God,  like  David  his  father."  Here  we 
learn  that  Ahaz,  who  was  the  son  of  Jotham,  began  to  reign  over  Judah  in  his  twentieth 
Jt»r,  and  that  his  reign  continued  for  sixteen  jean.     Elsewhere  we  are  told  th*t 


324  THE  8ECX)ND  BOOK  Of  THE  KIKOS.       [oh.  xvl  1— SO 

Hezekiah,  bk  son,  micceeded  him  at  the  age  of  twenty-flTe  (lee  ch.  ZTili.  17).  According 
to  this  he  hecame  a  fatiier  when  he  was  only  eleven  yean  of  age.  This  is  not,  necei- 
Barily,  a  mistake  of  the  historian,  since  among  the  Jews  in  Tiberias  there  are  mothers 
of  eleven  years  of  age  and  fathers  of  thirteen.  And  in  Abyssinia  boys  of  ten  years  and 
twelve  years  enter  into  the  marriage  relationship  (see  Eeil).  The  account  given  of 
Ahaz  in  this  chapter  furnishes  us  with  an  illustration  of  several  enormous  evils. 

1.  The  dehttmanixing  force  of  false  religion.  Ahaz  was  an  idolater.  "He  walked  in 
the  way  of  the  kings  of  Israel,"  we  are  told.  Instead  of  worshipping  the  one  true  and 
living  God,  he  bowed  down  before  the  idols  of  the  heathen.  This  false  religion  of  his 
made  him  so  inhuman  that  he  "made  his  son  to  pass  through  the  fire,  accordiug  to  the 
abominations  of  the  heathen,  whom  the  Lord  cast  out  from  before  the  children  of 
Israel;  aud  he  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense  in  the  high  places,  and  on  the  hills,  and 
under  every  green  tree."  Moloch  was  this  idol-god  of  fire,  and  the  rabbins  tell  us 
"  that  it  was  made  of  brass,  and  placed  on  a  brazen  throne,  and  that  the  head  was  that 
of  a  'calf,  with  a  crown  upon  it.  The  throne  and  image  were  made  hollow,  and  a 
furious  fire  was  kindled  within  it.  The  flames  penetrated  into  the  body  and  limbs  of 
the  idol,  and,  when  the  arms  were  red  hot,  the  victim  was  thrown  into  them,  and  was 
almost  immediately  burnt  to  death."  The  revolting;  cruelty  of  Moloch-worahip  is 
thus  described  by  Milton — 

"  In  Argob  and  in  Baian,  to  the  stream 
Of  utmost  Amon.    Nor  content  with  inoh 
AudaoiouB  neighbonrhood,  the  wisest  lieait 
Of  Solomon  he  led  by  fraud  to  build 
His  temple  right  against  the  temple  of  God 
On  that  opprobrious  hill ;  and  made  his  grova 
The  pleasant  valley  of  Hiunom,  Tophet  Qienee 
And  black  Gehenna  call'd,  the  type  of  helL" 

Thus  the  idolatrous  religion  of  this  Ahaz  dehumanized  him,  by  destroying  within  him 
all  parental  affection  and  transforming  him  into  a  fiend.  This  is  true,  more  or  less, 
of  all  false  religions.  Idolatry  is  not  the  only  religion  that  makes  men  cruel.  A 
corrupt  Judaism  and  a  corrupt  Christianity  generate  in  their  votaries  the  same 
dehumanizing  results.  False  religion  kindled  in  Paul  the  savage  ferocity  of  a  wild 
beast.   "  He  breathed  out  slaughter."  Ecclesiastical  history  abounds  with  illustrations. 

2.  The  national  curse  of  a  corrupt  kinghood.  Then  "  Bezin  King  of  Syria  and  Fekah 
son  of  Bemaliah  King  of  Israel  came  up  to  Jerusalem  to  war :  and  they  besieged  Ahaz, 
but  could  not  overcome  him.  At  that  time  Bezin  King  of  Syria  recovered  Elath  to 
Syria,  and  drave  the  Jews  from  Elath :  and  the  Syrians  came  to  Elath,  and  dwelt 
there  unto  this  day."  These  two  kings,  Bezin  of  Syria  and  Pekah  of  Israel,  had  their 
eyes  upon  this  Ahaz,  saw,  perhaps,  how  his  wickedness  had  injured  his  people,  had 
taken  away  their  heart  and  exhausted  their  resources,  until  they  felt  that  this  was  the 
time  fur  striking  at  Jerusalem,  taking  possession  of  the  metropolis,  and  subjugating 
the  country.  And  they  made  the  attempt.  Although  they  could  not  "  overcome  " 
Ahaz,  and  failed  to  strike  him  down  personally,  yet  they  "  recovered  Elath  to  Syria 
[or,  '  Edom '],  and  drave  the  Jews  from  Elath."  So  it  has  ever  been ;  corrupt  kings 
expose  their  country  to  danger,  they  invite  the  invader  and  make  way  for  him. 

"  Proudly  up  the  regal  heights  they  ait  in  pampered  power. 
While  fires  smoulder  underground  that  stren^en  eveiy  hour." 

3.  The  mischievous  issues  of  a  temporary  expediency.  Ahaz,  in  order  to  extricate 
himself  from  the  difficulties  and  trials  which  Bezin  and  Pekah  had  brought  on  bis 
country,  applies  to  the  King  of  Assyria.  "  So  Ahaz  sent  messengers  to  Tiglath-pileser 
King  of  Assyria,  saying,  I  am  thy  servant  and  thy  sob  :  come  up,  and  save  me  out  of 
the  hand  of  the  King  of  Syria,  and  out  of  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Israel,  which  rise  up 
against  me.  And  Ahaz  took  the  silver  and  gold  that  was  found  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house,  and  sent  it  for  a  present  to  the  King 
of  Assyria.  And  the  King  of  Assyria  hearkened  unto  him :  for  the  King  of  Assyria 
went  up  against  Damascus,  and  took  it,  and  carried  the  people  of  it  captive  to  Eir, 
and  slew  Bezin."  What  else  could  he  do  ?  To  whom  could  he  have  looked  for  help 
in  hit  emergency  ?    The  right  thing  to  have  done  would  have  been  the  utter  renuncia- 


08.  XVI.  1—20.]     'm&  stoom)  book  ov  tss  kings.  sss 

tion  of  Ub  idolstiy,  submisrion  to  the  Divine  will,  and  inTOcation  of  the  Almighty'g 
help ;  but  he  followed  what  appeared  to  him  the  expedient,  not  the  right,  and  hence 
two  evils  ensued.  (1)  Bit  degraded  himself.  He  sold  himself  as  a  slave  to  the  king 
whose  help  he  invoked.  "  I  am  thy  servant  and  thy  son :  come  up,  and  save  me  out 
of  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Syria."  What  more  dishonourable  thing  can  a  man  do 
than  to  renounce  his  independence  and  become  the  slave  of  another  ?  He  loses  his 
self-respect,  which  is  the  very  essence  of  true  manhood. '  (2)  He  impoverished  hit 
people.  "  And  Ahaz  took  the  silver  and  gold  that  was  found  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house,  and  sent  it  for  a  present  to  the  King 
of  Assyria."  This  silver  and  gold  belonged  to  the  nation.  It  was  public  property. 
What  right  had  he  to  dispose  of  a  fraction?  No  right  whatever.  Alas  I  it  is  not 
uncommon  for  kings  to  rob  their  people,  consume  what  they  have  never  produced,  Uve 
on  the  property  of  others,  and  thus  impoverish  their  subjects  1  What  happeued  with 
Ahaz  must  happen  with  all,  in  the  long-run,  who  pursue  the  expedient  rather  than 
the  right.    The  right  alone  is  tmly  expedient. 

II.  The  fbiesthood.  Urijah  is  the  priest.  There  seems  to  have  been  more  priests 
than  one  of  this  name,  and  Uttle  is  known  of  this  Urijah  more  than  what  is  recorded 
in  the  present  chapter.  He  was  the  priest,  who  at  this  time  presided  in  the  temple  of 
Jerusalem.  He  seems  to  have  been  influential  in  the  state,  and,  although  a  professed 
monotheist,  was  in  far  too  close  connection  with  Ahaz  the  idolatrous  king.  Two  things 
are  worthy  of  note  concerning  him,  which  too  frequently  characterize  wicked  priests  in 
all  times.  1.  An  obsequious  obedience  to  the  royal  will.  The  Assyrian  king,  having 
taken  Damasctis,  is  visited  by  Ahaz  in  the  city,  the  object  of  his  visit  being,  no  doubt, 
to  congratulate  him  on  his  triumphs.  While  at  Damascus,  Ahaz  is  struck  with  the 
beauty  of  an  altar.  He  seems  to  have  been  so  charmed  with  it  that  he  commands 
Urijah,  the  priest,  to  make  one  exactly  like  it.  "  And  King  Ahaz  sent  to  Urijah  the 
priest  the  fashion  of  the  altar,  and  the  pattern  of  it,  according  to  all  the  workman- 
ship thereof."  Knowing  the  king's  wishes,  with  shameful  obsequiousness  he  sets  to 
the  work.  "  And  Urijah  the  priest  built  an  altar  according  to  all  that  King  Ahaz  had 
sent  from  Damascus:  so  Urijah  the  priest  made  it  against  King  Ahaz  came  from 
Damascus.  And  when  the  king  was  come  from  Damascus,  the  king  saw  the  altar : 
and  the  king  approached  to  the  altar,  and  offered  thereon."  This  obsequious  priest 
not  only  did  this,  but,  without  one  word  of  protest  or  reproof,  he  witnessed  the  sacri- 
fices of  the  king  at  the  altar,  and  allowed  the  position  of  the  brazen  altar  in  the  temple 
to  be  altered ;  further,  he  actually  engaged,  according  to  the  king's  command,  in  the 
services.  "  And  King  Ahaz  commanded  Urijah  the  j)riest,  saying.  Upon  the  great 
altar  bum  the  morning  burnt  offering,  and  the  evening  meat  offering,  and  the  king's 
burnt  sacrifice,  and  his  meat  offering,  with  the  burnt  offerings  of  all  the  people  of  the 
land,  and  their  meat  offering,  and  their  drink  offerings ;  and  sprinkle  upon  it  all  the 
blood  of  the  burnt  offering,  and  all  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice ;  and  the  brazen  altar 
■hall  be  for  me  to  inquire  by.  Thus  did  Urijah  the  priest,  according  to  all  that  King 
Ahaz  commanded."  Thus  wicked  priests  have  too  often  acted.  2.  An  obsequious 
silence  to  the  royal  profanation.  See  what  the  king  did,  no  doubt  in  the  presence  of 
the  priest.  "  And  Eling  Ahaz  cut  off  the  borders  of  the  bases,  and  removed  the  laver 
from  off  them;  and  took  down  the  sea  from  off  the  brazen  oxen  that  were  under  it, 
and  put  it  upon  a  pavement  of  stones.  And  the  covert  for  the  sabbath  that  they 
had  built  in  the  house,  and  the  king's  entry  without,  turned  he  from  the  house  of  the 
Lord  for  the  King  of  Assyria."  This  fawning,  sacerdotal  traitor  not  only  "did 
according  to  all  King  Ahaz  commanded,"  but  he  stood  by  silently  and  witnessed 
without  a  word  of  protest  this  spoliation  of  the  holy  temple.  Had  he  acted  according 
to  his  profession  a*  a  minister  of  the  most  high  God,  he  would  have  risen  up  in  all 
the  sternness  of  honesty  and  manhood  against  the  first  intimation  of  Ahaz  concerning 
the  construction  of  an  unauthorized  altar.  He  would  bare  said,  "  We  have  a  divinely 
sanctioned  altar  already ;  we  do  not  need  another."  And  when  the  command  came  to 
him  to  make  such  an  altar,  he  would  have  felt  it  an  insult  to  his  conscience,  an  outrage 
on  his  loyalty  to  Heaven,  and  have  broken  into  thunders  of  reproof.  When  he  saw 
the  king  8  hand  employed  in  disturbing  and  altering  the  furniture  of  the  temple,  he 
would  have  resisted  him,  as  Azariah  resisted  Uzziah  when  he  wished  to  offer  incense. 
But  instead  of  thia,  he,  like  some  of  his  class  in  almost  every  age.  Mams  to  have  bean 


^  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      [oh- xvt  i— 2d, 

transported  with  the  honour  of  seeing  the  royal  presence,  hearing  the  royal  Toico^  and 
doing  the  royal  bidding.  A  true  priest  should,  hy  inflexible  loyalty  to  Heaven,  nwuld 
kings  to  be  lords  paramount  in  all  mundane  affairs,  and  in  none  other;  and  ifcauld 
lead  them  to  be  very  kings  of  men,  governing,  not  by  craft  and  foroa^  fraud  and 
yiolenoe,  but  by  royal  thoughts,  actions,  and  aims. — D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — L—The  wickedness  of  Ahaz.  The  history  has  passed  rapidly  ovei  the 
later  kings  of  Israel.  That  kmgdom  was  lost  beyond  recovery.  "  The  victim 
haTing  once  got  his  stroke-of-grace,  the  catastrophe  can  be  considered  as  almost  come. 
There  is  small  interest  now  in  watching  his  long  low  moans;  notable  only  are  his 
sharper  agonies,  what  convulsive  struggles  he  may  make  to  cast  the  torture  off  from 
him  ;  and  then,  finally,  the  last  departure  of  life  itself"  (Carlyle).  In  Judah  the  crisis 
too  is  approaching,  but  it  is  not  yet  reached.  Prophets  and  good  kings  are  yet  to  do 
their  utmost  for  the  nation.  But  a  reiga  like  that  of  Ahaz  is  a  sensible  step  in  the 
advance  to  the  catastrophe. 

I.  The  ohabaotbb  of  thb  kino.  Though  the  son  of  the  vigorous  Jotham,  and 
already  twenty  or  twenty-five  years  old  when  he  ascended  the  throne,  Ahaz  proved 
one  of  the  weakest  and  most  incapable  of  rulers.  One  sees  in  him  the  reflection  of  the 
luxurious  and  effeminate  age  described  by  Isaiah  (iii.  12 — 26).  Feeble,  petulant, 
arbitrary,  in  his  ways  of  acting ;  without  strength  of  mind  or  strength  of  will;  bussing 
interests  of  his  kingdom  were  at  stake ;  craven  in  war ;  above  all,  full  of  religiosity  and 
himself  in  dilettante  fashion  with  novelties,  with  altars  and  sun-dials,  while  the  greatest 
superstition  without  the  faintest  spark  of  true  religion — "  this  is  that  King  Ahaz" 
(2  Chron.  xxviii.  22).  Possibly  his  father  Jotham  was  too  much  occupied  with  state 
and  public  affairs  to  give  the  necessary  attention  to  his  sou's  education — a  fatal 
mistake  not  unfrequently  committed  by  parents. 

II.  His  ABOUNDiNa  idolatries.  Ahaz  displays  great  zeal  of  his  own  kind  in 
religion,  but  it  is  zeal  of  the  most  perverse  and  suicidal  description.  We  observe : 
1.  His  imitation  of  the  Icings  of  Israel.  He  took  for  his  pattern,  not  his  ancestor 
David,  the  type  of  the  true  theocratic  king,  but  the  wicked  kings  of  the  northern 
kingdom,  whose  idolatries  were  bringing  their  own  realm  to  ruin.  He  made,  like 
them,  molten  images  to  Baal,  and  sacrificed  to  them  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  2).  Wicked 
men  seem  absolutely  impervious  to  warning.  The  northern  kingdom  was  an  object- 
lesson,  to  those  who  had  eyes  to  see,  of  the  folly  and  fatal  effects  of  this  very  course  on 
which  Ahaz  was  now  entering.  Tet  he  would  not  be  deterred.  2.  His  reversion  to 
Ganaanitish  practices.  Not  content  with  importing  the  licentious  Baal-worship 
patronized  in  Israel,  Ahaz  revived  the  worst  abominations  of  the  old  Canaanitish 
relictions.  He  even  went  so  far  as  to  sacrifice  his  own  son  to  Moloch  in  the  valley 
of  Hinnom — a  deed  indicating  a  degree  of  fanaticism,  a  blunting  of  the  moral  sense, 
and  a  depth  of  superstition  whicli  could  hardly  have  been  believed  possible  in  a  King 
of  Judah.  It  was,  moreover,  a  djiiing  defiance  of  the  direct  letter  of  God's  Law  (Deut. 
xii.  31).  Well  might  such  a  deed  bring  down  wrath  on  Judah  1  3.  Hit  extravagance 
in  worship.  It  is  further  narrated  that  Ahaz  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense  in  the  high 
places,  and  on  the  hills,  and  under  every  green  tree.  Worship  in  this  reign  seemed 
to  have  run  riot ;  yet  there  was  no  true  religion  in  it.  All  this  depraved  religiosity  was 
but  a  manifestation  of  self-will,  of  subjective  caprice ;  it  had  its  origin  in  superstition 
and  an  impure  craving  for  excitement,  not  in  the  fear  of  God.  Yet  Ahaz,  in  his 
dilettante  ■vrsnj  of  looking  at  things,  may  have  thought  that  he  was  introducing  improve- 
ments into  Jewish  reliL^ion.  He  may  have  flattered  himself  that  he  was  robbing  it  of 
its  narrowness,  and  giving  it  the  philosophic  breadth  suitable  to  persons  of  taste  and 
culture.  He  might  argue  that  there  was  something  good  in  all  religions;  that  all 
were  but  diverse  expressions,  equally  acceptable  to  God,  of  the  fundamental  instinct 
of  worship ;  and  that  none,  therefore,  ought  to  be  despised.  We  hear  such  arguments 
nowadays,  and  they  may  very  well  have  been  used  then.  Ahaz  was  but  going  in  for  a 
species  of  Jewish  Broad-Churchism.  But  the  Bible  brands  this  so-called  breadth  of 
view  as  treason  against  the  God  who  has  definitely  revealed  his  will  to  mes,  and 
taught  them  how  they  are,  and  how  they  are  not,  to  worship  him.  The  true  lessons 
to  be  learned  from  this  conduct  of  Ahaz  is  that  religiosity— delight  in  sensuous  and 
impure  religious  services — is  far  different  from  religion ;  that  altars  may  be  multiplied, 


«.  tVL  1— 20.j       TflE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  TflB  KIltGS.  llj* 


yet  multiplied  only  to  sin  (Hob.  viii.  11)  ;  that  the  religious  instinct,  itself  the  noblest 
part  of  man,  is  capable  of  the  most  perverted  developmentg ;  that  only  worship  accord- 
ing to  his  own  commandment  is  acceptable  to  God. 

III.  Not  alonk  in  binnino.  The  lengths  to  which  Ahaz  could  go,  apparently 
without  awakening  any  public  opposition,  show  that  the  heart  of  the  nation  also  had 
widely  departed  from  God.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  descriptions  in  Isiuah  (cf.  iL 
6 — 8 1  iiL  16 — 26 ;  v.  8 — 25).  The  king's  innovations  were  acceptable  to  a  people 
wearied  of  the  severer  worship  of  Jehovah.  They  were  glad  to  have  the  services 
adapted  to  their  corrupt  and  dissolute'  tastes.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against 
God"  (Bom.  viii.  7).^J.  0. 

Vers.  6 — ^9. — The  Syro-Itraelitish  taar.  Again  was  the  truth  to  be  verified  that 
national  sins  bring  in  their  train  national  calamities.  God  is  not  mocked.  He 
vindicates  the  reality  of  his  moral  government  by  visiting  the  transgressor  with 
manifest  strokes  of  his  displeasure.  In  addition  to  the  invasion  of  Pekab  and  Bezin 
spoken  of  below,  we  read  of  assaults  of  the  Edomites  and  of  the  Philistines,  by  which 
Judah  was  brought  very  low  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  17—19).  The  kingdom  also  was 
brought  into  a  state  of  servitude  to  Assyria. 

I.  The  attack  of  Fekah  and  Bezin.  1.  Th»  8yro-I$radUe  eonynraey,  Israel 
and  Syria  had  been  hereditary  enemies.  Now  they  make  common  cause,  on  the  one 
side  against  Assyria,  and  on  the  other  against  Judah.  Their  object  in  invading  Judah 
was  probably  not  the  simple  one  of  plunder,  but  the  political  one  of  still  further  strength- 
ening themselves  against  the  King  of  Assyria.  Pekah  was  a  mere  military  adventurer, 
and  would  be  restrained  from  attacking  Judah  by  no  scruples  of  brotherhood.  He  and 
Bezin  had  begun  their  attacks  while  Jotdam  was  still  alive,  but  now  that  Ahaz  was  on 
the  throne,  their  plans  took  bolder  shape.  They  conceived  the  project  of  removing 
Ahaz,  and  putting  a  certain  "son  of  Tabeal"  in  his  place  (Isa.  vii.  6).  The  news  of 
their  expedition  terrified  Ahaz  and  his  people.  Instead  of  putting  their  trust  in  God, 
their  hearts  were  moved  "  as  the  trees  of  the  wood  are  moved  by  the  wind  "  (Isa.  vii  2)l 
They  had  cause  to  fear,  for  they  showed  no  desire  to  forsake  their  sins,  and  when  a 
people  forsake  God,  they  have  no  reason  to  hope  that  God  will  protect  them.  2.  2%« 
assault  on  Jerusalem,  and  its  discomfiture.  The  earlier  part  of  the  joint  expedition  was 
crowned  with  great  success.  We  read  in  Chronicles  of  terrible  battles  that  were  fought, 
and  severe  defeats  that  were  sustained  by  the  army  of  Judah.  Large  numbers  of 
captives,  with  their  spoil,  were  taken  to  Samaria,  and  were  only  restored  by  the  inter* 
cession  of  the  Prophet  Oded  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  6 — 13).  God  permitted  Judah  to  be 
thus  far  humbled.  But  when,  elated  with  victory,  the  conquerors  pressed  on,  and 
invested  Jerusalem,  he  interposed  to  prevent  their  further 'progress.  Not  for  the  sake 
of  Ahaz,  but  for  his  own  Name's  sake,  he  saved  Jerusalem,  and  hindered  the  invaders 
from  accomplishing  their  purpose  of  overthrowing  the  house  of  David.  Isaiah  had 
]>redictcd  this  deliverance  (vii.  7),  and,  but  for  the  unbelief  of  Ahaz,  and  his  sinful 
recourse  to  the  Kinc;  of  Assyria,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  adversaries  would  have  been 
permitted  to  go  so  far  even  as  they  did.  Wicked  men  often  receive  mercies  of  which 
they  are  wholly  undeserving.  God  spares  them,  not  because  they  have  any  claim  upon 
his  favour,  but  for  the  sake  of  some  oath  or  promise  of  his  own,  or  from  regard  to  the 
righteous  who  remain,  or  in  order  to  give  the  sinners  yet  another  opportunity  of 
repentance.  Because  God  had  sworn  to  David  that  his  seed  should  sit  upon  the 
throne  (2  Sam.  vii.),  he  did  not  allow  even  the  wicked  Ahaz  to  be  removed.  In  the 
case  of  Pekah  and  Bezin,  we  see  how  entirely  human  movements  are  under  the  Divine 
control.  It  appeared  as  if  these  bold  men  would  sweep  all  before  them,  but  God  had 
said,  "  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  further "  (Job  xxxviii.  11),  and  there  their 
proud  waves  were  stayed.  3.  2%e  loss  of  Elath.  The  war  was  not  wholly  without 
gain  to  the  Syrians.  They  possessed  themselves  of  the  port  of  Elath,  at  the  head  of 
the  Bed  Sea,  and  thus  stripped  Judah  of  another  important  dependency. 

II.  The  appeal  to  Asstbia.  In  the  distress  to  which  the  repeated  attacks  on  bis 
territory  reduced  him,  Ahaz,  instead  of  casting  himself  on  Divine  protection,  foolishly 
betook  himself  to  the  King  of  Assyria.  1.  iShort-$ighted  policy.  Israel  had  set  th« 
example  of  resort  to  the  Assyrian,  but  the  prophets  had  always  denoxmced  such 
iuaenaate  conduct  (Hos.  t.  13 ;  viiL  9, 10 ;  z.  6).    £v«n  from  ths  poiat  of  •riim  «f 


<28  tHE  SSCOlJD  BOOK  0^  TBE  Km&S.      [oa.  xvl  1— 2a 

worldly  policy,  the  action  was  fooliih.  As  well  might  the  lam¥  invoke  th«  help  of 
the  lion  against  the  wolf,  as  any  lesser  power  invoke  the  help  of  the  King  of  Assyria 
against  an  enemy.  The  conqueror,  pleased  with  any  pretext  for  interfering  in  another 
nation's  affairs,  would  not  refuse  his  help,  but  only  that  the  weaker  power  which  had 
solicited  the  help  might  in  the  end  be  despoiled  and  devoured.  Thus  Ahaz  found  it 
The  King  of  Assyria  was  glad  enough  of  the  occasion  to  march  against  Israel  and 
Damascus,  but  when  once  the  conquest  was  effected,  Ahaz  found  that  he  had  derived  no 
benefit,  but  only  exchanged  one  oppressor  for  another.  2.  Expensive  help.  To  purchase 
the  aid  of  Tiglath-pileser,  Ahaz  had  (1)  to  become  a  vassal  of  the  King  of  Assyria ; 
and  (2)  to  send  him  a  large  present  of  gold  and  silver.  This  he  could  only  obtain  by 
emptying  once  more  the  often-ransacked  treasuries  of  the  temple  and  the  palace.  The 
accumulations  of  years  of  prosperity  under  IJzziah  and  Jotbam  were  again  dispersed, 
and  the  freedom  of  the  country  was  sold  to  boot.  God's  people  passed  formally  under 
the  yoke  of  a  Gentile  conqueror.  To  such  straits  was  the  kingdom  brought  by  Ahaz's 
godless  policy.  3.  The  Assyrian  a  broken  reed.  The  King  of  Assyria  marched  against 
Fekah  and  Bezin,  and  soon  reduced  them  to  his  power.  Damascus  was  severely 
dealt  with.  Its  king  was  slain,  and  the  people  carried  captive.  Fekah  was  also 
chastised;  his  territory  was  ravaged,  and  considerable  parts  of  the  population  were 
removed  (ch.  xv.  29).  The  instruments  employed  in  punishing  Ahaz  were  thus  them- 
selves punished.  The  fact  that  men  are  used  as  instruments  in  God's  providence  does 
not  exonerate  them  from  guilt.  Ahaz,  however,  as  we  learn  from  the  parallel  narrative, 
reaped  no  benefit,  for  "  Tiglath-pileser  Ring  of  Assyria  came  unto  him,  and  distressed 
him,  but  strengthened  him  not "  (2  Chron.  xxviiL  20).  It  was  his  own  ends,  not  those 
of  his  foolish  vassal,  that  the  King  of  Assyria  was  serving.  Ahaz  leaned  on  a  bruised 
reed,  and  only  got  his  hand  pierced.  Thus  it  ustially  is  with  those  who  put  their 
trust  in  the  help  of  man.  They  reap  from  their  assiduous  sowing  but  the  gall  and 
wormwood  of  chagrin  and  disappointment. — J.  0. 

Vers.  10 — 20. — Religious  innovations.  The  remaining  events  of  the  reign  of  Ahaz 
recorded  in  this  chapter  shed  a  strong  light  on  the  tug's  Mvolons  and  arbitrary 
•haracter, 

I.  The  Damaboub  altab.  1.  Ahaz  at  Damascus.  We  are  now  introduced  to 
Tiglath-pileser  holding  court  in  Dam^iscus,  and  Ahaz  is  there  as  one  of  the  vassals 
and  tributaries  of  the  Assyrian  king.  He  does  not  seem  to  feel  the  humiliation  of  his 
position,  but  is  probably  pleased  to  figure  as  part  of  so  lailliant  an  assemblage.  Thus 
the  sinner,  renouncing  true  fi-eedom  in  God's  service,  for  a  time  positively  hngs  the 
chains  which  sin  binds  upon  him.  He  counts  them  no  dishonour,  but  delights  to  wear 
them.  Yet  in  the  end  they  shall  eat  into  his  very  flesh.  2.  The  new  altar.  So 
lightly  does  his  vassalage  sit  on  Ahaz,  that  his  mind  is  free  to  lose  itself  in  admiration 
of  the  pattern  and  workmanship  of  an  altar  he  chanced  to  behold  in  that  city.  It  was, 
no  doubt,  an  altar  to  some  heathen  deity,  but  th.tt  did  not  matter.  He  was  charme>i 
with  its  appearance,  and  nothing  would  serve  him  but  to  have  the  like  of  it  set  up  ii 
Jerusalem.  What  a  measure  of  this  man's  soul — frittering  away  bis  interest  upon  the 
shape  and  decorations  of  an  altar,  while  his  kiugdom  is  sold  into  servitude;  toying  with 
trifles,  while  doing  obeisance  to  a  conqueror  1  Yet  is  the  conduct  of  Ahaz  any  more 
strange  than  that  of  multitudes  whose  sole  concern  is  for  the  vanities  of  time,  while 
the  realities  of  eternity  staud  unheeded  ?  When  men  who  are  at  variance  with  God, 
and  bondslaves  of  sin,  are  found  eagerly  amusing  themselves  with  worldly  trifles,  what 
are  they  doing  but  repeating  the  error  of  this  frivolous  monarch  ?  There  is  the  same 
lack  of  the  sense  of  proportion  in  things ;  the  same  sacrifice  of  substance  to  shadow ; 
the  same  indifference  to  supreme  interests.  3.  The  pliant  priest.  Having  obtained  a 
pattern  of  the  coveted  altar — its  fashion  and  workmanship — ^Ahaz  sent  the  same  to 
Urijah  the  priest,  to  get  a  similar  one  made  for  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  This  prieat 
was  of  a  different  mould  from  that  Azariah,  who,  with  four  score  other  priests,  resisted 
King  Uzziah  in  his  presumptuous  attempt  to  usurp  sacerdotal  functions  (2  Chron. 
xxvi.  17, 18).  Urijah  was  a  courtier  first,  and  a  priest  of  the  Lord  afterwards,  and  he 
at  once  set  about  executing  the  orders  he  had  received  from  the  king.  Facile  priests  ot 
Urijah's  stamp  have  not  been  rare  in  history.  The  tendency  of  high  dignitaries  in  many 
rountries  to  follow  court  fashion,  and  put  a  king's  pleasure  in  room  of  every  higher  law, 


OH.  XVL  1— 20.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  82» 

is  notoiloai.  Ecclesiaatics  cannot  plead  exemption,  though  In  them  the  sin  ia  greatest. 
When  even  ministers  of  the  Lord  cease  to  testify  against  evil,  and  willingly  yidd 
themselres  m  tools  to  the  working  out  of  a  wicked  king's  purposes,  religion  is  in  bad 
case.  But  here  most  probably  the  proverb  held  true,  "Like  people,  like  priest" 
(Hos.  iv.  9) — the  general  decay  of  religion  reacted  on  the  sacerdotal  orders. 

II.  Revised  ordinances.  Like  a  child  with  a  new  toy,  Ahaz,  on  his  return  home, 
pleased  himself  to  the  top  of  his  bent  with  his  new  altar.  1.  Ee  offered  his  own 
sacrifices  upon  it.  The  event  was  made  the  occasion  of  a  great  display.  Ahaz  is  thought 
by  some  to  have  mounted  the  altar^  and  himself  performed  the  sacrifices ;  none  of  the 
priests,  apparently,  Haring  to  remonstrate  with  him.  He  offered  his  burnt  offering  and 
his  meat  offering,  and  poured  out  his  drink  offering,  and  sprinkled  the  blood  of  his  peace 
offerings  upon  the  altar.  An  artistic  altar,  however,  does  not  make  acceptable  sacrifices. 
This  pompous  ritual  was  but  an  empty  form,  ministering,  not  to  God's  glory,  but  to  a 
king's  vanity.  The  motive  was  wrong ;  the  method  was  unauthorized ;  the  multitude  of 
sacrifices  but  added  to  the  magnitude  of  the  hypocrisy.  It  is  such  ritual  observances 
the  prophet  denounces :  "  To  what  purpose  is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices  unto  me  ? 
saith  the  Lord ;  I  am  full  of  the  burnt  offerings  of  rams,"  etc.  (Isa.  i.  11).  The  sacrifices 
of  the  wicked  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord.  The  only  acceptable  worship  is  that 
which  comes  from  the  heart.  2.  He  (^nged  the  position  (f  the  altar.  The  altar  which 
Solomon  made  for  burnt  offering — the  brazen  altar — was  not  good  enough  for  King 
Ahaz.  It  must  be  shifted  aside,  and  his  brand-new  altar  take  its  place.  This  was  to 
arrogate  a  right  of  altering  the  arrangements  of  the  temple  which  no  king  had  yet 
assumed.  Ahaz  was  governed  by  a  love  of  novelty,  and  perhaps  by  a  desire  to  introduce 
the  artistic  into  worship.  Art  has  its  legitimate  place  in  the  worship  of  Ood,  but  it  ia 
not  to  be  the  governing  consideration.  When  a  service  degenerates  into  a  mere  artistic 
performance,  intended  to  gratify  the  tastes  of  those  who  have  no  relish  for  spiritual 
worship,  it  is  hateful  in  God's  sight.  The  perfection  of  the  art  may  conceal  the  utter 
absence  of  life.  Most  of  all  when  central  doctrines  are  removed — such  doctrines  as  the 
atonement — ^to  give  place  to  rites  and  ceremonies  which  appeal  to  the  carnal  sense,  is 
God  mocked  by  the  pretence  of  worship.  3.  Be  improvised  new  sacrificial  arrangements. 
The  interference  of  Ahaz  with  the  temple  order  did  not  yet  cease.  He  altered  the 
whole  sacrificial  usage,  transferring  the  regular  and  occasional  sacrifices  to  his  new 
altar — now  termed  by  him  "  the  great  altar  " — and  relegating  the  brazen  altar,  which 
still  stood  in  the  court,  to  a  secondary  condition.  This  usurpation  by  the  king  of  the 
right  to  dictate  the  order  of  the  temple  services  was  tamely  submitted  to  by  Urijah, 
who  did  faithfully  all  that  he  was  told.  One  is  reminded  of  Wolsey's'  words,  "  Had 
I  but  served  my  God  with  half  the  zeal  I  served  my  king,"  etc.  Happy  for  the 
nation  had  Urijah  been  as  faithful  in  serving  God  as  he  was  in  carrying  out  the  behests 

*of  Ahaz. 

III.  MiNOB  OHANOEB.  The  history  tells  of  other  alterations  effected  by  Ahaz  in  the 
temple.  He  cut  off  the  borders  of  the  bases  of  the  lavers,  and  took  down  the  sea  from 
off  the  bronze  oxen  on  which  it  had  rested,  substituting  for  the  latter  a  pedestal  of  stone ; 
he  changed  also  the  position  of  some  other  erections  in  the  sacred  courts.  These  changes 
are  said  to  have  been  wrought  "  before,"  or  for  fear  of,  "  the  King  of  Assyria  " — perhaps 
to  hide  any  evidences  of  wealth.  Other  novelties  introduced  by  Ahaz,  such  as  "  the 
altars  which  were  on  the  top  of  the  upper  chamber  of  Ahaz  "  ^h.  xxiii.  12),  had  for 
their  motive  imitation  of  Assyrian  or  Damascene  idolatries.  What  a  contemptible 
picture  of  the  king  is  thus  presented  I  On  the  one  hand,  cringing  before  the  King  of 
Assyria,  and  dismantling  the  temple  to  avoid  exciting  his  cupidity;  on  the  other, 
slavishly  imitating  the  religion  of  the  foreigners — if  indeed  this  also  was  not  an  attempt 
to  court  Assyrian  favour.  How  total  the  loss  of  self-respect  and  of  the  spirit  of 
independence!  Other  instances  of  the  folly  and  sin  of  Ahaz  are  given  in  Chronicles ; 
e.g.,  his-worship  of  the  gods  of  Damascus  for  the  reason,  "  Because  the  gods  of  the 
kings  of  Syria  help  them,  therefore  will  I  sacrifice  to  them,  that  they  may  help  me  " 
(2  Chron.  xxviii.  23).  One  does  not  wonder  after  tiiis  to  h^r  that  Ahaz  "shut  up  the 
doors  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  while  he  "  made  him  altars  in  every  corner  of  Jerusalem  " 
(2  Chron.  xxviii.  24).  At  length  his  sixteen  years'  reign  ended,  and  the  people^  by  this 
time  sick  of  his  doings,  marked  <heir  sense  of  his  unwortbinesa  by  refusing  mm  a 
sepulchre  in  the  tombs  of  the  kings  (2  Chron,  xxviii.  27).— J,  0. 


830 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  xvn.  1— 4L 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBB  XVII. 
y«n.  1 — 11.— Thb   Beion   o*   Hoshea 

OTSB ISBABL.  DbSTBCOTION  OF  THB  ISBAELITES 

Kingdom,  akd  the  Gbounds  of  it.  Be- 
peoplino  of  thb  etmqdom  bt  asstbian 
Colonists. 

Yen.  1 — 6.— Beisn  of  Hosbba.  Hoshea, 
the  last  King  of  Israel,  had  a  short  reign  of 
nine  years  only,  during  two  of  which  he  was 
besieged  in  his  capital  by  the  Assyrians. 
The  writer  notes  that  he  was  a  bad  king, 
but  not  so  bad  as  most  of  his  predecessoTs 
(ver.  2) ;  that  he  submitted  to  Shalmaneser, 
and  then  rebelled  against  him  (vers.  3,  4) ; 
that  he  called  in  the  aid  of  So,  King  of 
Egypt  (ver.  4) ;  that  he  was  besieged  by 
Shalmaneser  in  Samaria  (ver.  5) ;  and  that 
»fter  three  years,  or  in  the  third  year  of  the 
siege,  he  was  taken,  and  with  his  people 
carried  off  into  oaptiyity  (ver.  6). 

Ver.  1. — ^In  the  twelfth  year  of  Ahaz  King 
of  Jndah  begfan  Hoshea  the  son  of  Elah  to 
reign  in  Samaria.  In  ch.  tv.  30  Hoshea 
was  said  to  have  smitten  Fekali  and  slain 
him,  and  become  king  in  his  stead, ''  in  the 
twentieth  year  of  Jotkam."  This  has  been 
supposed  to  mean  "in  the  twentieth  year 
from  the  accession  of  Jotham,"  or,  in  other 
words,  in  the  fourth  year  of  Ahaz,  since 
Jotham  reigned  only  sixteen  yeara  (ch. 
XT.  33).  But  now  the  beginning  of  bis 
reign  is  placed  eight  years  later.  An 
interregnum  of  this  duration  has  been 
placed  by  some  between  Pekah  and  Hoshea; 
but  this  is  contradicted  by  ch.  zv.  30,  and 
also  by  an  inscription  of  Tiglath-pileser 
('  E[ionym  Canon,'  pp.  123, 12  f,  lines  17, 18). 
If  Ahaz  reigned  sixteen  years,  the  present 
statement  would  seem  to  be  coiTeet,  and  the 
former  one  wrong.  Hoshea's  accession  may 
be  confidently  dated  as  in  B.O.  730.  Nine 
years  (comp.  ch.  xviii.  10).  It  is  certain 
that  Hoshea's  reign  came  to  an  end  in  the 
first  year  of  Sargon,  B.o.  722,  from  which  to 
B.C.  730  would  be  eight  complete,  or  nine 
incomplete,  years. 

Ver.  2. — And  he  did  that  which  was  evil 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  bnt  not  as  the 
kings  of  Israel  that  were  before  him. 
Hoshea'a  general  attitude  towards  Jehovah 
was  much  the  same  as  that  of  former  kings 
of  Israel.  He  maintained  the  calf-worship, 
leant  upon  "  arms  of  flesh,"  and  turned  a 
deaf  ear  to  the  teaching  of  the  prophets,  e.g. 
Hoshea  and  Micah,  who  addressed  their 
warnings  to  him.    But  be  was  not  guilty 


of  any  special  wiokedness — he  set  up  no 
new  idolatry ;  ,he  seems  to  have  allowed  his 
subjects,  if  they  pleased,  to  attend  the 
festival  worship  at  Jerusalem  (2  Chron. 
xxz.  11,  18).  The  rabbis  add  that  when 
the  golden  calf  of  Bethel  had  teen  carried 
off  by  the  Assyrians  in  one  of  their  in- 
cursions, he  did  not  replace  it  ('  Seder  01am,' 
oh.  xxii.);  but  it  is  not  at  all  clear  that 
the  image  was  carried  away  until  Hoshea's 
reign  was  over  (see  Dr.  Pussy's  comment 
on  Hos.  z.  6  in  his  '  Minor  Prophets,'  p.  61). 

Ver.  3. — ^Against  him  came  np  Shal- 
maneser King  of  Assyria.  Shalmaneser's 
succession  to  Tiglath-pileser  on  the  throne 
of  Assyria,  once  doubted,  is  now  rendered 
certain  by  the  Eponym  Canon,  which 
makes  him  ascend  the  throne  in  B.C.  727, 
and  cease  to  reign  in  b.o.  722.  It  is  un- 
certain whether  he  was  Tiglath-pileser's 
son  or  a  usurper.  The  name,  Shalmaneser 
(^Sali-manu-uzur)  was  an  old  royal  name  in 
Assyria,  and  signified  "  Shalman  protects  " 
(compare  the  names  Nabu  -  kudur  -  uzur, 
Nergal-aaar-uzur,  Nabu-pal-uzur,etc.).  And 
Hoshea  became  his  servant.  Hoshea  had 
been  placed  on  the  throne  by  Tiglatli-pileser 
('  Eponym  Canon,'  pp.  123, 124,  lines  17, 18), 
and  had  paid  him  tribute  (ibid.,  lines  18, 19). 
We  must  suppose  that  on  Tiglath-pileser's 
death,  in  B.o.  727,  he  had  revolted,  and 
resumed  his  independence.  Shalmaneser, 
having  become  king,  probably  came  up 
against  Hoshea  in  the  same  year,  and  forced 
him  to  resume  his  position  of  Assyrian 
tributary.  Tliis  may  have  been  the  time 
when  "Shalman  spoiled  Beth-Arbel  in  tl.e 
day  of  battle"  (Hos.  x.  14),  defeating 
Hoshea  near  that  place  (Arbela,  now  Irbid, 
in  Galilee),  and  taking  it.  And  gave  ^™' 
presents ;  or,  rendered  him  tribute,  as  in  the 
margin  of  the  Authorized  Version. 

Ver.  4. — And  the  King  of  Assyria  found 
eonspiracy  in  Hoshea:  for  he  had  sent 
messengers  to  So,  King  of  Egypt.  We  learn 
from  the  Prophet  Hosea  that  the  ex- 
pediency of  calling  in  Egypt  as  a  counter- 
poise to  Assyria  had  long  been  in  the 
thoughts  of  those  who  directed  the  policy 
of  the  Israelite  state  (see  Hos,  vii.  11 ;  zii.  1, 
etc.).  Now  at  last  the  plunge  was  taken. 
An  Ethiopian  dynasty  of  some  strength  and 
vigour  had  possession  of  Egypt,  and  held 
its  court  during  some  part  of  the  yoar  at 
Memphis  (Hos,  ix,  6).  The  king  who 
occupied  the  throne  was  called  Shabak  or 
Shebek — •  name  which  the  Greeks  repre- 
sented by  Sabakos  or  Sevechus,  and  the 
Hebrews  by  kid.  (The  original  vocalization 
of  this  word  was  probably  kw,  Seveh;  but 
in  later  times  thif  vocalization  wat  lost,  and 


OH.  xTii.  1— 41.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


831 


the  Masoriteg  pointed  ttie  word  ai  k'id,  Soh 
or  So).  The  Assyrians  knew  the  king  as 
Sihakbi,  and  contended  with  him  under 
Saigon.  Hoshea  now  sent  an  embassy  to 
this  monarch's  court,  requesting  his  alliance 
and  his  support  against  the  great  Asiatic 
power  by  which  the  existence  of  all  ttie 
petty  states  of  Western  Asia  was  threatened. 
Bhalmaneser  was  at  the  time  endeavouring 
to  capture  Tyre,  and  Hoshea  might  reason- 
ably fear  that,  when  Tyre  was  taken,  his 
own  turn  would  come.  It  is  not  clear  how 
Shabak  received  Hosbea's  overtures;  but 
we  may,  perhaps,  assume  that  it  was  with 
favonr,  since  otherwise  Hoshea  would 
scarcely  have  ventured  to  withhold  his 
tribute,  as  he  seems  to  have  done.  It  must 
have  been  in  reliance  on  "  the  strength  of 
Egypt "  that  he  ventured  to  brave  the  anger 
of  Assyria.  And  brought  no  present— or, 
tent  no  tribute — to  the  King  of  Assyria,  ai 
he  had  done  year  by  year:  therefore  the 
^ng  of  Assyria  shut  him  up,  and  bound 
Um  in  prison.  The  ultimate  result  is 
mentioned  at  once,  before  the  steps  by 
which  it  was  accomplished  are  related. 
Shalmaneser  did  not  "  summon  Hoshea 
before  his  presence  to  listen  to  his  explana- 
tions," and  then,  "  as  soon  as  he  came,  take 
him  prisoner,  put  him  in  chains,  and  im- 
prison him"  (as  Ewald  thinks),  but  simply 
declared  war,  invaded  Hoshea's  country, 
besieged  him  in  his  capital,  and  ultimately, 
when  he  surrendered,  consigned  him  to  a 
prison,  as  Nebuchadnezzar  afterwards  did 
Jehoiachin  (ch.  xiiv.  15 ;  xxv.  27).  Other- 
wise Hoshea's  reign  would  have  come  to  an 
end  in  his  sixth  or  seventh,  and  not  in  his 
ninth  year. 

Ver.  5. — Then  the  King  of  Assyria — 
rather,  and  the  King  of  Assyria — came  up 
throughout  all  the  land — i.e.  with  an  army 
that  spread  itself  at  once  over  tlie  whole  land, 
that  came  to  conquer,  not  merely  to  strike  a 
blow,  and  obtain  submission,  as  on  the  former 
occasion  (see  ver.  3,  and  the  comment) — and 
went  np  to  Samaria,  and  besieged  it  three 
years.  From  some  time  in  Hoshea's  seventh 
year  (ch.  xviii.  9)  to  some  time  in  his  ninth 
(ch.  xviii.  10).  According  to  the  Hebrew 
mode  of  reckoning,  parts  of  years  are 
counted  as  years ;  and  thus  the  siege  need 
not  have  lasted  much  over  a  year,  though  it 
may  have  been  extended  to  nearly  three 
years.  In  either  case,  there  was  ample 
time  for  Sbabak  to  have  brought  up  his 
forces,  had  he  been  so  minded;  and  his 
failure  to  do  so,  or  in  any  way  to  succour 
his  ally,  showed  how  little  reliance  was  to 
be  placed  on  Egyptian  promises  (comp. 
ch.  xviii  21). 

Ter.  6. — In  the  ninth  year  of  Hoshea 
the  King  of  Assyria  took  Samaria.  In 
9,0.  722,  the  ninth  year  of  Hoshea,  there 


seems  to  have  been  a  revolution  at  Nineveh. 
The  reign  of  Shalmaneser  came  to  an  end, 
and  Bargon  seated  himself  upon  the  throne. 
There  have  been  commentators  on  Kings 
(Keil,  Bahr)  who  have  supposed  that 
Shalmaneser  and  Sargon  were  the  same 
person,  and  have  even  claimed  that  the 
Assyrian  inscriptions  support  their  view. 
But  the  fact  is  otherwise.  Nothing  is  more 
certain  than  that,  according  to  them,  Sargon 
succeeded  Shalmaneser  IV.  in  B.C.  722  by 
a  revolution,  and  was  the  head  of  a  new 
dynasty.  He  claims  in  his  annals,  among 
his  earliest  acts,  the  siege  and  capture  of 
Samaria  ('Eponym  Canon,'  p.  125),  It  is 
remarkable  that  Scripture,  while  in  no  way 
connecting  him  with  the  capture,  never 
distinctly  assigns  it  to  Shalmaneser.  Here 
we  are  only  told  that  "  the  King  of  Assyria" 
took  it.  In  ch.  xviii.  9, 10,  where  we  are 
distinctly  told  that  Shalmaneser  "  came  up 
against  Samaria,  and  besieged  it,"  the 
capture  is  expressed  by  the  phrase,  "ffwy 
took  it,"  not  "he  took  it."  Perliaps  neither 
king  was  present  in  person  at  the  siege,  or, 
at  any  rate,  at  its  termination.  The  city 
may  have  been  taken  by  an  Assyrian  general, 
while  Shalmaneser  and  Sargon  were  con- 
tending for  the  crown.  In  that  case,  the 
capture  might  be  assigned  to  either.  Sargon 
certainly  claims  it;  Shalmaneser's  annals 
have  been  so  mutilated  by  his  successors  that 
we  cannot  tell  whether  he  claimed  it  or  not. 
The  city  fell  in  b.o.  722  ;  and  the  deporta- 
tion of  its  inhabitants  at  once  took  place. 
And  carried  Israel  away  into  Assyria.  The 
inscription  of  Sargon  above  referred  to 
mentions  only  the  deportation,  from  the  city 
of  Samaria  itself,  of  27,290  persons.  No 
doubt  a  vast  number  of  others  were  carried 
ott"  from  the  smaller  towns  and  from  the 
country  districts.  Still,  the  country  was  not 
left  uninhabited,  and  Sargon  assessed  its 
tribute  at  the  old  rate  ('  Eponym  Canon,' 
1. 8. 0.).  Nor  was  the  city  of  Samariadestroyed, 
since  we  hear  of  it  subsequently  more  than 
once  in  the  Assyrian  annals.  And  placed 
them  in  Halah.  "  Halab  "  (n^n,)  has  been 
supposed  by  some  to  be  the  old  Assyrian 
city  (Gen.  x.  11)  of  Oalah  (n^s),  which  was, 
down  to  the  time  of  Tiglath-pileser,  the 
main  capital ;  but  the  difference  of  spelling 
is  an  objection,  and  the  Assyrians  do  not 
seem  to  have  ever  transported  subject- 
populations  to  their  capitals.  It  is  more- 
over reasonable  to  suppose  that  Halah, 
Habor,  Gozan,  and  Hara  (1  Chron.  v.  26) 
were  in  the  same  neighbourhood.  This  last 
consideration  points  to  the  "Chalcitis"  of 
Ptolemy  (v.  18)  as  the  true  "  Halah,"  since 
it  was  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the 
Khabour,  of  Gauzanitis,  and  of  Haran.  And 
is  Habor  by  the  river  of  Qowa.     This  V  a 


832 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,     [oh.  xvn.  1— 41. 


mistranslation.  The  Hebrew  rung,  '"And 
on  Habor  (Khabor),  the  river  of  Gozan" 
(bo  aUo  in  ch.  xviii.  11).  "Habor,  the  river 
of  Gozan,"  ib  undoubtedly  one  of  the 
Khabonrs.  Those  who  find  Halah  in  Oalah, 
or  in  Calacine  (Calaohene),  generally  prefer 
the  eastern  river  which  runs  into  the  Tigris 
from  Kurdistan  a  Utile  below  Jezireh.  But 
there  is  no  eviJence  that  this  river  bore  the 
name  in  antiquity.  The  Western  Khabour, 
on  the  other  hand,  was  well  kuown  to  the 
Assyrians  under  that  appellation,  and  is 
the  Aborrhas  of  Strabo  and  Procopius,  the 
Ohaboras  of  Pliny  and  Ptolemy,  the  Aburas 
of  Isadore  of  Charax,  and  the  Abora  of 
Zosimus.  It  adjoins  a  district  called 
Chalcitis,  and  it  drains  the  country  of 
GKiuzanitis  or  Mygdonia.  The  Western 
Khabour  is  a  river  of  Upper  MesopotHmia, 
and  runs  into  the  Euphrates  &om  the  north- 
east near  the  site  of  the  ancient  Circesion. 
The  tract  which  it  drains  is  called  Mygdonia 
by  Strabo,  Gauzanitis  by  Ptolemy.  And  in 
the  cities  of  the  Medes.  Media  had  beeii 
repeatedly  invaded  and  ravaged  by  the 
Assyrians  from  the  time  of  Vul-niiari  IV. 
(about  B.C.  810);  but  the  first  king  to  con- 
quer any  portion  of  it,  and  people  its  cities 
with  settlers  from  other  parts  of  his  domi- 
nions, was  Sargon  (Oppert, '  Inscriptions  des 
Sargonides,'  pp.  25,  37).  We  learn  from  the 
present  passage  that  a  certain  number  of 
these  settlers  were  Israelites  (comp.  cb. 
xvlii.  11  and  Tobit  1.  14). 

Vers.  7 — 23. — The  provocation!  which  in- 
duced God  to  destroy  the  Israelite  kingdom. 
Here,  for  on^e,  the  writer  ceases  to  be  the 
mere  hiatorian,  and  becomes  the  religioug 
teacher  and  prophet,  drawing  out  the  lessons 
of  history,  and  justifying  the  ways  of  God 
to  man.  As  Bahr  says,  he  "  does  not  carry 
on  the  narrative  as  taken  from  the  original 
authorities,  but  himself  here  begins  a  re- 
Tiew  of  the  history  and  fate  of  Israel,  which 
ends  with  ver.  23,  and  forms  an  independent 
section  by  itself."  The  section  dividei  itself 
into  four  portions :  (1)  From  ver.  7  to  ver. 
12,  a  general  statement  of  Israel's  wicked- 
ness ;  (2)  from  ver.  13  to  ver.  15,  a  Bpeoial 
aggravation  of  their  guilt,  viz.  their  rejection 
of  prophets;  (3)  vers.  16  and  17  contain  a 
specification  of  their  chief  acts  of  lin ;  and 
(4)  from  ver.  18  to  ver.  23,  a  general  sum- 
mary, including  some  words  of  warning  to 
Jndab. 

Tor.  7. — ^For  so  it  wag,  that  the  eUIdren 
of  Israel  had  sinned  against  the  Lord  their 
Ood ;  rather.  And  it  came  to  poMs,  when,  etc. 


The  clauses  from  the  present  to  the  end  of 
ver.  17  depend  on  the  "when"  of  this 
verse ;  the  apodosis  does  not  oome  till  ver, 
18,  *'  When  the  children  of  Israel  had  done 
all  that  is  stated  in  vers.  7 — 17,  then  the 
result  was  that  the  Lord  was  very  angry 
with  Israel,  and  removed  them  out  of  his 
sight."  Which  had  bronght  them  up  ont  of 
the  land  of  Egypt.  So  commencing  his 
long  seri^  of  mercies  to  the  nation,  and 
indicating  his  gracious  favour  towards  it. 
"The  deliverance  from  Egypt,"  as  Bahr 
well  says,  "  was  not  only  the  beginning,  bnt 
the  symbol,  of  all  Divine  grace  towards 
Isrsiel,  and  the  pledge  of  its  Divine  guidance." 
Hence  the  stress  laid  upon  it,  both  here  and 
by  the  Prophet  Hosea  (comp.  Ho3.  xi  1 ; 
xii.  9, 13 ;  ziii.  4).  From  under  the  hand 
— i.e.  the  oppression — of  Fharaoh  King  of 
Egypt,  and  had  feared  other  gods ;  t.«.  re- 
verenced and  worshipped  them. 

Ver.  8. — And  walked  in  the  statutes  of 
the  heathen.  The  "  statutes  of  the  heathen  " 
are  their  customs  and  observances,  especially 
in  matters  of  religion.  The  Israelites  had 
been  repeatedly  warned  not  to  follow  these 
(see  Lev.  xviii.  3,  30 ;  Dent.  xii.  29—31 ; 
xviii.  9 — 14,  etc.).  Whom  the  Lord  cast  ont 
from  before  the  children  of  Israel— t.e.  the 
Canaanitish  nations,  whose  idolatries  and 
other  "abominations"  were  particularly 
hateful  to  God  (see  Lev.  xviii.  26 — 29 ;  Deut. 
XX.  18;  xxix.  17;  xxxii.  16,  etc.) — and  of 
the  kings  of  Israel.  The  sins  and  idolatries 
of  Israel  had  a  double  origin.  The  great 
majority  were  derived  from  the  heathen 
nations  with  whom  they  were  brought  into 
contact,  and  were  adopted  voluntarily  by 
the  people  themselves.  Of  this  kind  were 
the  worship  at  "  high  places  "  (ver.  9),  the 
"images"  and  "groves"  (ver.  10),  the 
causing  of  their  children  to  "  pass  through 
the  fire  "  (ver.  17),  the  employment  of  din- 
nation  and  enchantments  (vei.  17),  and  per- 
haps the  "  worship  of  the  host  of  heaven  " 
(ver.  16).  A  certain  number,  however, 
came  in  irom  a  different  source,  being  im- 
posed upon  the  people  by  their  kings.  To 
thig  class  belong  the  desertion  of  the  temple- 
worship,  enforced  by  Jeroboam  (ver.  21), 
the  setting  up  of  the  calves  at  Dan  and 
Bethel  (ver.  16)  by  the  same,  and  the  Baal 
and  Astarte  worship  (ver.  16),  introduced 
by  Ahah.  This  last  and  worst  idolatry  was 
not  established  without  a  good  deal  of  per- 
Beuution,  as  we  learn  from  1  Kings  xviii.  4. 
Whiok  they  had  made. 

Ver.  9.— And  the  children  of  Israel  did 
secretly  those  things  that  were  not  right 
against  the  Lord  their  Ood.  Most  of  the 
evil  practices  of  the  Israelites  were  open  and 
flagrant,  bat  some  sought  the  TeU  of  secrecy, 
as  the  use  of  divination  and  enchantments 
(ver.  17>    It  is  doubtful,  however,  whether 


OH.  xrn.  1-41.]      THE  BEOOKD  BOOK  OV  THB  EmG& 


833 


the  Hebrew  words  hare  the  Bignifloation 
assigned  to  them  in  the  Authorized  Version. 
They  may  mean  no  more  than  that  the  Is- 
raelites made  their  evil  deeds  a  barrier  be- 
tween themselves  and  God.  And  they  bnilt 
them  high  places  in  all  their  cities  (comp. 
1  Kings  xiv.  23).  "  In  all  their  cities  "  is 
probably  rhetorical ;  but  the  gist  of  the 
charge  is  that,  instead  of  Iseeping  to  the 
one  temple  and  one  altar  commanded  by 
God  for  the  conservation  of  their  belief  in 
his  unity,  the  Israelites  "  erected  places  of 
worship  all  over  the  country,  after  the 
fashion  of  the  heathen"  (Bahr),  and  so  at 
once  depraved  their  own  faith,  and  ceased  to 
be  a  perpetual  protest  to  the  surrounding 
nations.  From  the  tower  of  the  watchman 
to  the  fenced  city;  i.e.  from  the  smallest 
and  most  solitary  place  of  human  abode  to 
the  largest  and  most  populous  (comp.  ch. 
xviii.  8).  The  expression  was  no  doubt  pro- 
verbial, and  (as  used  here)  is  a  strong  hy- 
perbole. 

Yer.  10. — And  they  sat  them  up  images ; 
rather,  pillars  (comp.  Gen.  xxviii.  18,  22; 
xxxi.  13,  45,  51,  52;  xxxv.  14,  20;  Exod. 
xxiv.  i ;  Dent,  xii.  3 ;  2  Sam.  xviii.  18,  where 
the  same  word  is  so  rendered).  The  matse- 
vSth  were  stone  pillars,  anciently  connected 
with  the  worship  of  Baal,  bnt  in  Judah 
perhaps  used  in  a  debased  and  debasing 
worship  of  Jehovah  witii  self-invented  rites, 
instead  of  those  which  had  the  express 
sanction  of  God,  being  commanded  in  the 
_Law  (see  the  'Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol. 
"i.  p.  417).  And  groves  (compare  tlie  com- 
ment on  1  Kings  xiv.  14  and  23,  and  see 
also  that  on  ch.  xiii.  6)  in  every  high  hill 
— rather,  on  every  high  hill — and  under  every 
green  tree.  Note  that  the  "  groves  "  (ashS- 
rim)  were  "  set  up  under  green  trees,"  and 
must  therefore  have  been  ai-tificial  structures 
of  some  kind,  such  as  could  stand  beneath 
their  boughs. 

Ver.  11. — And  there  they  burnt  incense  in 
all  tiie  high  places  (comp.  1  Kings  iii.  3 ; 
xxii  43 ;  oh.  xii.  3 ;  xiv.  4 ;  xv.  4,  35 ;  xvi. 
4),  Incense  symbolized  prayer  (Pn.  cxli. 
2),  and  ought  to  have  been  burnt  only  on 
tiie  golilen  altar  of  incense  within  the  veil. 
As  did  the  heathen  whom  the  Lord  carried 
away  before  them.  The  offei  ing  of  incense 
to  their  gods  by  the  Canaanitish  nations  had 
not  been  previously  mentioned ;  but  the  use 
of  inoense  in  religious  worship  was  so  widely 
spread  in  the  ancient  world,  that  their  em- 
ployment of  it  mio:ht  have  been  assumed  as 
almost  certain.  The  Egyptians  used  in* 
cense  largely  in  the  worship  of  Ammon 
('  Becords  of  the  Past,'  vol.  x.  p.  19).  The 
Babylonians  burnt  a  thousand  talents'weight 
of  it  every  year  at  the  great  festival  of  Bel- 
Merodach  (Herod.,  i.  183).  The  Greeks  and 
Romans  offered  it  with  every  sacrifioe.    And 


wrought  wicked  tUngg  to  proTOke  th*  lord 
to  anger  (see  below,  vers.  15—17). 

Ver.  12. — Tor  Uiey  served  idols;  rather, 
and  they  terved  idoU.  The  sense  flows  on 
ftom  ver.  7,  each  verse  being  joined  to  the 
preceding  one  by  the  vau  connective.  Oilla- 
Um,  the  term  translated  "  idols,"  is  a  word 
rarely  used,  except  by  Ezekiel,  with  whom 
it  is  common.  "  It  contains,"  as  Bahr  says, 
"a  subordinate  contemptuous  and  abusive 
siguidcation ; "  the  primary  meaning  of 
gdlal  being  "dung,"  "ordure."  Whereof 
the  Lord  had  said  unto  them,  Te  shall  not 
do  this  thing  (see  Exod.  zx.  4^  5,  23 ;  Dent. 
iv.  16—18,  etc.). 

Ver.  13, — ^Tet  the  Lord  testified — rather, 
and  the  Lord  testified — against  Israel,  and 
against  Jndah,  by  all  the  prophets,  and  by 
all  the  seers.  A  "seer"  is,  properly,  one 
who  sees  visions ;  a  "  prophet,'  one  inspired 
to  pour  forth  utterances.  But  the  words 
were  used  as  synonyms  (see  1  Sam.  ix.  9). 
Ever  since  the  revolt  of  Jeroboam,  there  had 
been  a  succession  of  prophets  in  both  coun- 
tries whose  office  it  had  been  to  rebuke  sin 
and  to  enforce  the  precepts  of  the  Law.  In 
Judah  there  had  been  Shemaiah,  contempo- 
rary with  Behoboam  (2  Chron.  xi.  2 ;  xii.  5) ; 
Iddo,  contemporary  with  Abijah  (2  Chron. 
xiii.  22) ;  Azariah,  with  Asa  (2  Chron.  xv. 
1);  Hanani,  with  the  same  (2  Oliron.  xvi. 
7) ;  Jehu,  the  son  of  Hanani,  with  Jehosha- 
phat  (2  Chron.  xix.  2);  Jahaziel,  the  son  of 
Zechariah,  with  the  same  (2  Chron.  xx.  14); 
Eliezer,  the  son  of  Dodavah,  also  contem- 
porary with  the  same  (2  Chron.  xx.  37); 
Zechariah,  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  contempo- 
rary with  Joash  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  20);  another 
Zechariah,  contemporary  with  Uzziah  (2 
Chron.  xxvi.  5);  Joel,  Mioah,  and  Isaiah, 
besides  several  whose  names  are  unknown. 
In  Israel,  the  succession  had  inoladed  Ahi- 
jah  the  Shilonite,  contemporary  with  Jero- 
boam (1  Kings  xiv.  2) ;  Jehu,  the  son  of 
Hanani,  with  Baasha  (1  Kings  xvi.  1) ; 
Elijah,  and  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imlah,  with 
Ahab  (1  Kings  xxii.  8)  and  Ahaziah  (ch.  i. 
3)  ;  Elisha,  with  Jehoram,  Jehu,  Jehoahaz, 
and  Joash  (ch.  iii.  11 — ^xiii.  14);  Jonah, 
with  Jeroboam  XL  (oh.  xiv.  25) ;  Hosea  and 
Amos,  with  the  same  (Hos.  L  1 ;  Amos  i.  1)  ; 
and  Oded  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  9),  contemporary 
with  Fekah.  Qod  had  never  left  himself 
without  living  witness.  Besides  the  written 
testimony  of  the  Law,  he  had  sent  them  a 
continuous  series  of  prophets,  who  "  repeated 
and  enforced  the  teaching  of  the  Law  by 
word  of  mouth,  breathing  into  the  old  words 
a  new  life,  applying  them  to  the  facts  of 
their  own  times,  urging  them  on  the  con- 
sciences of  their  hearers,  and  authoritatively 
declaring  to  them  that  the  terrible  threaten- 
Ings  of  the  Law  were  directed  against  the 
rim  which  they  habitually  pnwtised." 


834 


TUE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  xvii.  1— 41, 


The  prophets  continnally  addressed  them  in 
the  Name  of  Ood, saying,  Turn  ye  from  your 
evil  ways,  and  keep  my  commandments  and 
my  statutes,  aeoording  to  all  the  Law  which 
I  commanded  yonr  fathers,  and  which  I  sent 
to  you  by  my  servants  the  prophets.  This 
was  the  general  burden  of  the  prophetical 
teaching,  both  in  Israel  and  in  Judah,  both 
before  the  captivity  of  Israel  and  afterwards 
(see  Hos.  xii.  6;  xiv.  2;  Joel  ii.  12,  13; 
Amos  V.  4 — 15;  Isa.  i.  16—20;  xxxi.  6; 
Jer.  iii.  7, 14 ;  Ezek.  xiv.  6 ;  iviii.  30,  etc.). 

Vei.  14. — Notwithstanding  they  would  not 
hear ;  rather,  and  thty  would  not  hear.  The 
construction  still  runs  on  without  any  change 
(see  the  comment  on  vers.  7  and  12).  But 
hardened  their  necks.  (On  the  origin  of  the 
phrase,  see  'Homiletio  Commentary'  on 
Exod.  xxxii.  9.)  The  obstinate  perversity  of 
the  Israelites,  which  the  phrase  expresses, 
is  noted  through  the  entire  history  (see 
Exod.  xxxiii.  3,  5 ;  xxxiv.  9 ;  Deut.  ix.  6, 
18;  Ps.  Ixxv.  5;  2  Chron.  xxx.  8;  xxxvi. 
13;  Neh.  ii.  16,  17,  29;  Jer.  vii.  26;  xvii. 
23 ;  Acts  vii.  51,  etc.).  Like  to  the  neck  of 
their  fathers,  that  did  not  believe  in  the 
Lord  their  God.  The  reference  is  especially 
to  the  many  passages  in  the  Pentateuch 
where  the  Israelites  are  called  "a  stiff- 
necked  people  "  (see,  besides  those  already 
quoted.  Dent.  xxxi.  27). 

Ver.  15.— And  they  rejected  his  statutes, 
and  his  covenant  that  he  made  with  their 
fathers.  The  covenant  made  at  Sinai,  first  by 
the  people  generally  (Exod.  xix.  5—8),  and 
then  by  their  formal  representatives  (Exod. 
xxiv.  3—8),  was,  on  their  part,  a  solemn 
promise  that  "all  which  the  Lord  com- 
manded them  they  would  do."  Kejecting 
the  "statutes"  of  God  was  thns  rejecting 
the  "  covenant."  And  his  testimonies  which 
he  testified  against  them.  The  "testi- 
monies" of  God  are  his  commandments, 
considered  as  witnessing  of  him  and  setting 
forth  his  nature.  The  use  of  the  term  is 
common  in  Deuteronomy  and  in  the  Psalms, 
but  otherwise  rare.  And  they  followed 
vanity,  and  became  vain.  False  gods  are 
"vanity;"  false  religions  are  "vanity;" 
there  is  nothing  firm  or  substantial  about 
them ;  tliey  belong  to  the  realm  of  futUity 
and  nothingness.  And  the  followers  of 
inch  religions  derive  weakness  from  them 
— they  "  become  vain  " — i.e.  weak,  futile, 
impotent.  Their  energies  are  wasted ;  they 
effect  nothing  of  that  which  they  wish  to 
effect;  they  are  completely  powerless  for 
good,  at  any  rate ;  and  they  are  not  really 
powerful  for  evil.  Their  plans,  for  the 
most  part,  miscarry;  and  "their  end  is 
destruction."  And  went  after  the  heathen 
that  were  round  about  them.  Upon  a  neg- 
lect to  keep  God's  commandments  follows 
•otive  revolt  from  him,  and  the  doing  of 


that  which  he  has  forbidden.  When  they 
rejected  God's  statutes,  the  Israelites  adopte<l 
"the  statutes  of  the  heathen  "  (ver.  8),  and 
"  walked  in  them."  Concerning  whom  the 
lord  had  charged  them,  that  they  should 
not  do  like  them  (see  above,  ver.  12,  and 
compare  the  comment  on  ver.  8). 

Vers.  16, 17.— The  main  sins  of  Israel  are 
now  specified,  that  they  themselves  may 
stand  self-oonvicted,  and  that  others  may 
be  warned  against  doing  the  like.  Firs^ 
generally. 

Ver.  16.— They  left  all  the  commandments 
of  the  lord  their  God ;  i.e.  neglected  thom, 
rendered  them  no  obedience,  offered  none 
of  the  stated  sacrifices,  attended  none  of  the 
appointed  feasts,  broke  the  moral  law  (Hos. 
iv.  1,  2,  11 ;  vii.  1,  etc.)  by  swearing,  and 
lying,  and  stealing,  and  committing  adul- 
tery, by  drunkenness,  and  lewdness,  and 
bloodshed.  And  made  them  molten  images, 
even  two  calves.  These  at  least  were  un- 
deniable—  there  they  were  at  Dan  and 
Bethel,  until  the  Captivity  came  (Hos.  viii. 
5;  X.  5,  6;  xiii.  2;  Amos  viii  14),  wor- 
shipped, sworn  by  (Amos  viii.  14),  viewed 
as  living  gods  (Amos  viii.  14),  offered  to, 
trusted  in.  Every  king  had  upheld  them, 
so  that  Bethel  was  regarded  as  "  the  king's 
court;"  and  "  the  king's  chapel "  (Amos  vii, 
13);  all  the  people  were  devoted  to  them, 
and  "brought  their  sacrifices  to  Bethel 
every  morning"  (Amos  iv.  4),  "and  their 
tithes  after  tiiree  years."  And  made  a 
grove.  The  "  grove  "  (atheraJi)  which  Ahab 
set  np  at  Samaria  (1  Kings  xvi.  38),  ai]d 
which  remained  there  certainly  to  tto  time 
of  Jehoahaz  (see  the  comment  on  ch.  xiii. 
6).  And  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven. 
This  worship  had  not  been  mentioned  before ; 
and  it  is  nowhere  else  ascribed  to  the  Is- 
raelites of  the  northern  kingdom.  Manas- 
seh  seems  to  have  introduced  it  into  Judah 
(oh.  xzi.  3 ;  zxiii.  5,  11).  Such  knowledge 
as  we  have  of  the  Western  Asiatic  religions 
seems  to  indicate  that  astral  worship, 
strictly  so  called,  was  a  peculiarity  of  the 
Assyro-Babylonian  and  Arabian  systems 
only,  and  did  not  belong  to  the  Syrian,  or 
the  Phoenician,  or  the  Canaanite.  It  may 
be  suspected  that  the  present  passage  is 
somewhat  rhetorical,  and  assigns  to  the  Is- 
raelites the  "  worship  of  the  host  of  heaven," 
simply  because  an  astral  character  attached 
to  Baal  and  Ashtoreth,  who  were  associated 
in  the  religion  of  the  Phoenicians  with  the 
sun  and  moon.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
just  possible  that  the  Assyro-Babylonian 
star- worship  had  been  introduced  into  Israel 
under  Menahem,  Pekah,  or  Hoshea.  And 
served  Baal.  The  Baal-worship,  introduced 
by  Ahab  (1  Einga  xvi.  31),  was  not  finally 
abolished  by  Jeha  (ch.  x.  28).  Like  other 
popular  religions,  it  had  a  revival.    Hosea, 


OH.  xvn.  1— 41.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KING& 


835 


writing  nnderthe  later  kings  from  Jeroboam 
EL  to  Hoshea,  alludes  to  the  Baal-worship 
(Hos.  ii.  8, 17)  as  continuing. 

Yer.  17. — And  they  oansed  their  song  and 
their  daughters  to  pass  through  the  fire. 
(On  this  phrase,  see  the  comment  upon  oh. 
xvi  3.)  The  sin  of  child-murder  had  not 
been  previously  laid  to  the  charge  of  Israel ; 
but,  as  it  had  infected  Judah  (oh.  xvi.  3), 
there  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  have 
invaded  also  the  sister  kingdom.  Perhaps 
it  is  alluded  to  by  Hosea  in  iv.  2 ;  ▼.  2 ; 
and  vi.  8.  It  was  an  old  sin  of  the  Ca- 
naanitisli  nations  (Lev.  xviii.  21,  etc.),  and 
continued  to  be  practised  by  the  Moabites 
(ch.  iii.  27;  Amoa  ii.  1)  and  Ammonites, 
neighbours  of  Israel.  And  used  divination 
and  enchantments.  The  "  witchcrafts "  of 
Jezebel  have  been  already  mentioned  (ch. 
ix.  22).  Magical  practices  always  accom- 
panieil  idolatry,  and  were  of  many  kinds. 
Sometimes  divination  was  by  means  of  staves 
or  rods  (rhabdomanoy),  which  were  mani- 
pulated in  various  ways  (Herod.,  iv.  67 ; 
Sohol.  ad  Nicandr., '  Tljeriao.,'  613  ;  Tacit., 
'German.,'  §  10;  Amm.  Marc,  xxxi.  2; 
Hos.  iv.  12).  Sometimes  it  was  by  arrows 
(Ezek.  xxi.  21).  Very  often,  especially  in 
Glreece  and  Borne,  it  was  by  inspecting  the 
entrails  of  victims.  Where  faith  in  God 
wanes,  a  trust  in  magical  practices,  astro- 
logy, chiromancy,  "  eortes  VirgiliansB,"  ho- 
roscopes, spirit-rapping,  and  the  like,  almost 
always  supervenes.  And  sold  themselves  to 
do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  lord,  to  provoke 
him  to  anger.  (On  the  expression,  "sold 
themselves  to  do  evil,"  see  the  comment  upon 
1  Kings  xxi.  20.) 

Ver.  18. — Therefore  the  lord  was  very 
angry  with  Israel;  rather,  that  then  the 
Lord  teas  very  angry,  etc.  We  have  here 
the  apodosis  of  the  long  sentence  beginning 
with  ver.  7  and  continuing  to  the  end  of 
ver.  17.  When  all  that  is  enumerated  in 
these  verses  had  taken  place,  then  the  Lord 
was  moved  to  anger  against  Israel,  then 
matters  had  reached  a  crisis,  the  cup  of 
their  iniquity  was  full,  and  God's  wrath, 
long  restrained,  descended  on  them.  And 
removed  them  ont  of  his  sight.  Bemoval 
out  of  God's  sight  is  loss  of  his  favour  and 
of  his  care.  "The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are 
over  the  righteous"  (Ps.  xxxiv.  15)— he 
"  knoweth  their  way,"  "  watcheth  over 
them"  (Jor.  xxxi.  28),  "careth  for  them" 
(Ps.  cxlvL  8);  but  "the  countenance  of 
the  Lord  is  against  them  [averted  from 
them]  who  do  evil"  (Ps.  xxxiv.  16).  He 
will  not  look  upon  them  nor  hear  them. 
There  was  none  left  hut  the  tribe  of  Judah 
only.  The  "  tribe  of  Judah  "  stands  for  the 
kingdom  of  the  two  tribes  of  Judah  and 
Benjamin  (see  1  Kings  xi.  31—36 ;  xii.  23 ; 
S  Ohron.  zvii.  14—18),  into  which  the  greater 


part  of  Dan  and  Simeon  had  also  been 
absorbed.  This  became  now,  exclusively, 
God's  "  peculiar  people,"  the  object  of  his 
love  and  of  his  care.  The  writer,  it  must 
be  remembered,  belongs  to  the  period  of 
the  Captivity,  and  is  not  speaking  of  the 
restored  Israel. 

Ver.  19. — Also  Judah  kept  not  the  com- 
mandments of  the  Lord  their  God.  The 
sharp  contrast  which  the  writer  has  drawn 
between  Israel  and  Judah  in  ver.  18  reminds 
him  that  the  difference  was  only  for  a  time. 
Judah  followed  in  Israel's  sins,  and  ulti- 
mately shared  in  her  punishment.  This 
verse  and  the  next  are  parenthetic.  But 
walked  in  the  statutes  of  Israel  which  they 
made;  t.e.  followed  Israel  in  all  her  evil 
courses,  first  in  her  Baal-worship,  under 
Jehoram,  Ahaziah,  and  Athaliah ;  then  in 
her  other  malpractices  under  Ahaz  (ch.  xvi. 
3,  4),  Manasseh  (ch.  xxi.  2 — 9),  and  Amon 
(ch.  xxi.  20 — 22).  Of  course,  the  calf-worship 
is  excepted,  Judah  having  no  temptation  to 
follow  Israel  in  that. 

Ver.  20. — And  the  Lord  rejected  all  the 
seed  of  Israel.  Go>1  is  no  respecter  of  persons. 
As  he  had  rejected  the  ten  tribes  on  account 
of  certain  transgressions,  which  have  been 
enumerated  (vers.  8 — 17),  so,  when  Judah 
committed  the  self-same  sins,  and  trans- 
gressed equally,  Judah  had  equally  to  be 
rejected.  "All  the  seed  of  Israel"  is  the 
entire  nation — Israel  in  the  widest  sense, 
made  up  of  Judah  and  of  Israel  in  the 
narrow  sense.  So  Keil,  rightly.  And 
afflicted  them — by  the  hands  of  Sargon,  and 
Sennacherib,  and  Esarhaddon  (2  Chron. 
xxxiii.  llXandPharaoh-Nechoh,  and  others 
— and  deUvered  them  into  the  hands  of 
spoilers.  The  "  spoilers  "  intended  are 
probably,  first,  the  "  bands  of  the  Ohaldees, 
and  of  the  Syrians,  and  of  the  Moabites, 
and  of  the  children  of  Ammon,"  who  were 
let  loose  upon  Judeea  by  Nebuchadnezzar 
when  Jehoiakim  rebelled  against  him  (ch. 
xxiv.  2),  and  secondly  Nebuchadnezzar  him- 
self and  Nebuzar-adan,  who  completed  the 
spoliation  of  the  country,  and  plundered 
Jerusalem  itself,  to  punish  the  revolts  of 
Jehoiachin  and  Zedekiah  (oh.  xxiv.  13 — 16 
and  XXV.  8 — 21),  when  all  the  treasures  of 
the  temple  were  carried  off.  T7ntil  he  had 
cast  them  ont  of  his  sight;  i.e.  until  he 
had  punished  Judah  at  lie  had  previously 
punished  Israel  (ver.  18),  which  was  what 
justice  required. 

Ver.  21. — Per  he  rent;  rather,  for  he 
had  rent.  The  nexus  of  the  verse  is  witli 
ver.  18.  The  difference  between  the  fates 
of  Israel  and  Judah— the  survival  of  Judah 
for  a  hundred  and  thirty-four  years — is 
traced  back  to  the  separation  under  Beho- 
boam,  and  to  the  wicked  policy  which 
Jeroboam  then  pursued,  and  left  as  a  legacy 


33S 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.      [oh.  xvn.  1—41. 


to  hi8  svccesaon.  Israel  could  anffer  slone, 
while  Judah  was  spared,  because  the  king- 
dom of  David  and  Solomon  had  been  rent 
in  twain,  and  the  two  states  had  thenceforth 
eontinned  separate.  Israel  from  the  honse 
of  David ;  and  they  made  Jeroboam  the  son 
of  Nebat  king:  and  Jeroboam  drave  Israel 
from  following  the  Lord.  The  separation 
alone  might  not  have  liad  any  ill  result; 
but  it  was  followed  by  the  appointment  of 
Jeroboam  as  king,  and  Jeroboam  introduced 
tlje  fatal  taint  of  idolatry,  from  which  all 
the  other  evils  flowed,  including  the  earlier 
destruction  of  the  northern  kingdom.  Jero- 
boam not  only  introduced  the  worship  of 
the  calves,  bnt  he  "  drave  Israel  from  follow- 
ing the  Lord" — i.e.  compelled  the  people 
to  discontinue  the  practice  of  going  up  to 
worship  at  Jerusalem  (2  Ohron.  xi.  13—16), 
and  required  them  to  take  part  in  the  ealf- 
vorship.  And  [thus]  made  them  sin  a 
great  Bin. 

Yer.  22. — ^For  the  children  of  Israel 
walked  in  all  the  siiui  of  Jeroboam  which 
he  did.  The  nation,  having  been  once 
persuaded  to  adopt  Jeroboam's  innovations, 
continued  to  "  walk  "  in  them — followed 
Jeroboam's  example  in  "aU  his  sins"— gave 
up  the  temple-worship  altogether;  accepted 
the  ministrations  of  priests  not  of  the  seed 
of  Aaron  (1  Kings  xiii.  33;  2  Chron.  xiii. 
9) ;  brought  their  tithes  to  these  idol-priests ; 
sacrificed  to  the  calves  at  Dan  and  Bethel 
(Amos  iv.  4);  and  put  their  trust  in  the 
"similitude  of  a  calf  that  eateth  hay." 
They  departed  not  from  them  (comp.  1  Kings 
XV.  26,  34;  xvi.  2,  19,  26,  31;  ch.  iii.  3; 
i.  29  ;  xiii.  6,  11 ;  xiv.  24;  xv.  9,  18,  28). 

Ver.  23. — Until  the  lord  removed  Israel 
out  of  his  sight  (see  the  comment  on  ver. 
18)  as  he  had  said  by  all  his  servants  the 
prophets.  The  destruction  of  the  kingdom 
of  Israel  had  been  distinctly  prophesied  by 
Ahijah  tlie  Shilouite  (1  Kings  xiv.  15,  16), 
Hosea  (i.  4 ;  ix.  3,  17),  and  Amos  (vii.  17). 
(xeneral  warnings  and  denunciations  had 
been  given  by  Moses  (Lev.  xxvi.  33;  Deut. 
iv.  26,  27 ;  xxviii.  36,  etc.),  by  Isaiah  (vii. 
8 ;  xxviii.  1 — 4),  and  probably  by  the  entire 
series  of  prophets  enumerated  in  the  comment 
on  ver.  13.  So  was  Israel  carried  away 
oat  of  their  own  land  to  Assyria  unto  this 
day ;  i.e.  up  to  the  time  that  the  Secotid 
Book  of  Kings  was  written,  about  B.o. 
580—560,  the  Israelites  remained  within 
the  limits  of  the  country  to  which  they 
were  carried  by  the  conqueror.  Not  long 
after  this  time,  about  B.o.  538,  a  considerable 
number  returned  with  Zerubbabel  to  Pales- 
tine, and  others  with  Ezra  (see  Ezra  ii. 
70;  iii.  1;  vi.  16,  17;  vii.  13;  viii.  35; 
1  Ohron.  ix.  2,  3;  Zech.  viii.  13).  What 
became  of  the  rest  has  been  a  fertile  subject 
of  ipeculation.    Probably  the  more  leUgious 


nnited  with  the  Jewish  communities,  which 
were  graduidly  formed  in  almost  all  the 
cities  of  the  East;  while  the  irreligious  laid 
aside  their  peculiar  cnstoms,  and  beciime 
blended  indistinguishably  with  the  heathen. 
There  is  no  ground  tor  expecting  to  find 
the  "  ten  tribes  "  anywhere  at  the  present 
day. 

Vers.  24 — 41. — 'Repeopling  of  the  Tcingrlam 
of  Israel  by  A'syrian  eohnists,  and  formation 
of  a  mixed  religion.  The  writer,  before  dis- 
missing the  subject  of  the  Israelite  kingdom, 
proceeds  to  inform  us  of  certain  results  of 
the  conquest.  Having  removed  the  bulk 
of  the  native  inhabitants,  tlie  Assyrians  did 
not  allow  the  country  to  lie  waste,  but 
proceeded  to  replace  the  population  which 
they  had  carried  off  by  settlers  from  other 
localities  (ver.  24).  These  settlers  were, 
after  a  short  time,  incommoded  by  lions, 
which  increased  upon  them,  and  diminished 
their  numbers  (ver.  25).  The  idea  arose 
that  the  visitation  was  supernatural,  and 
might  be  traced  to  the  fact  that  the  new- 
comers, not  knowing  "the  manner  of  the 
trod  of  the  land,"  displeased  him  by  the 
neglect  of  his  rites  or  by  the  introduction  of 
alien  worship  (ver.  26).  A  remedy  for  tliis 
was  sought  in  thp  sending  to  them  from 
Assyria  one  of  the  priests  who  had  been 
carried  off,  from  whom  it  was  thouglit  they 
might  learn  how  "the  God  of  the  land" 
was  to  be  propitiated.  This  was  the  origin 
of  the  "  mixed  religion "  which  grew  up  in 
the  country.  While  the  nations  who  had 
replaced  the  Israelites  brought  in  their  own 
superstitions,  and  severeilly  worshipped  theil 
own  gods  (vers.  30,  31),  there  was  a  general 
acknowledgment  of  Jehovah  by  all  of  them, 
and  a  continuance  of  Jehovistio  worship  in 
the  various  high  places.  The  nations  both 
"  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their  graven 
images,"  down  to  the  time  when  the  writer 
of  Kings  composed  his  work  (vers.  33 — 41). 

Ver.  24. — ^And  the  King  of  Assyria  brought 
men  firom  Babylon.  It  has  been  supposed, 
in  connection  with  Ezra  iv.  2,  that  no 
colonists  were  introduced  into  the  country 
till  the  time  of  Bsarhaddon,  who  began  to 
reign  in  b.o.  681.  But  this,  which  would 
be  intrinsically  most  improbable  (tor  when 
did  a  king  forego  his  tribute  from  a  fertile 
country  for  forty-one  years?),  ig contradicted 
by  a  statement  of  Sargon,  that  he  placed 
colonists    there     in    b.o.    715    ('  AJicient 


OH.  XvQ.  1— 41.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


BSl 


MonarcIiieB,'  voL  ii.  p.  415).  Tbeie  were 
not  necesBarily  the  firat ;  and,  on  the  whole, 
it  is  probable  that  the  lepeopliiig  of  the 
country  began  earlier.  Hamath  was  reduced 
by  Sargon  in  b.o.  720,  and  punished  severely. 
Its  inhabitants  were  carried  off,  and  replaced 
by  Assyrians  ('Eponym  Canon,'  p.  127). 
Probably  some  of  them  were  at  once  settled 
in  Samaria.  The  conquest  of  Babylon  by 
Sargon  was  not  till  later.  It  occurred  in 
B.O.  709,  and  was  probably  followed  by  the 
immediate  deportation  of  some  of  its  in- 
habitants to  the  same  quarter.  And  from 
Cuthah.  "  Outhah,"  or  "Cutha,"  was  an 
important  Babylonian  city,  often  mentioned 
in  the  Assyrian  inscription!  ('Becords  of 
the  Past,'  vol.  L  pp.  74,  75 ;  vol.  iii.  p.  35 ; 
vol.  T.  pp.  93,  94,  102).  Its  ruins  ecist  at 
the  site  now  called  Ibrahim,  about  fifteen 
miles  north-east  of  Babylon.  Sargon  must 
have  become  master  of  it  when  he  put 
down  Merodaoh-Baladan  and  assumed  the 
sovereignty  of  Babylonia,  in  B.O.  709.  Why 
the  later  Jews  called  the  Samaritans  "  Ou- 
thseans,"  rather  than  Sepharvites,  or  Avites, 
or  Hamatbitea,  it  is  impossible  to  determine. 
Possibly  the  Cuthsean  settlers  preponderated 
in  numbers  orer  the  others.  And  from  Ava. 
"Ava"  (sij?)  is  probably  the  same  as  the 
Ivah  (nijr)  of  ch.  xviii.  34  and  xix.  13^  and 
perliaps  identical  with  the  Ahava  (sinx) 
of  Ezra  (viii.  15,  21).  The  city  intended 
is  thought  to  be  the  "Is"  of  Herodotus 
(i.  179),  and  the  modern  Hit.  Hit  lies 
upon  the  Euphrates,  about  a  hundred  and 
thirty  miles  aboye  Babylon,  in  lat.  33°  45' 
nearly.  It  is  famous  for  its  bitumen  springs. 
And  from  Hamath  (see  the  comment  on 
ch.  xiy.  25).  Hamath  on  the  Orontes  was 
cocquered  by  Sargon  in  B.o.  720,  two 
years  after  his  capture  of  Samaria  ('  Eponym 
Canon,'  pp.  126 — 128).  Its  rude  inhabitants 
were  carried  off,  and  Assyrians  were  placed 
there.  And  from  Sepharvaim.  It  is  generally 
allowed  that  "  Sephaivaim  "  is  "Sippara," 
the  dual  form  being  accounted  for  by  the 
fact  that  Sippara  was  a  double  town,  partly 
on  the  right  and  partly  on  the  left  bank  of 
a  stream  derived  from  the  Euphrates.  Hence 
Pliny  speaks  of  it  as  "oppida  Hippare- 
norum  "  ('  Hist.  Nat.,'  yi.  30).  The  exact  site, 
at  Abu-Habba,  sixteen  miles  south-west  of 
Baghdad,  haa  only  recently  been  discovered 
(see  the  'Transactions  of  the  Society  of 
Biblical  Archeology'  for  1885,  vol.  viii. 
pp.  172 — 176).  And  placed  them  in  the 
cit>9s  of  Samaria  instead  of  the  ehildren  of 
Israel;  and  they  possessed  Samaria,  and 
dwelt  in  the  cities  thereof.  Transplantation 
of  nations,  commenced  by  Tiglath-pileser, 
was  practised  on  a  still  larger  scale  by 
Bargon.  The  following  summary  will  illus- 
trate this  point:  "In  all  his  wars  Sargon 
largely  employed  the  system  of  wholesale 
u.  vsaa. 


deportation.  The  Israelites  were  removed 
from  Samurla,  and  planted  partly  in  Gozan 
or  Mygdonia,  and  partly  in  the  cities 
recently  taken  from  the  Medea.  Hamath 
and  Damascus  were  peopled  with  oaptives 
fi;om  Armenia  and  other  regions  of  the 
north.  A  portion  of  the  Tibareni  were 
carried  captive  to  Assyria,  and  Assyrians 
were  established  in  the  Tibarenian  country. 
Vast  numbers  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
ZagroB  range  were  also  transported  to 
Assyria;  Babylonians,  Outheeans,  Sephar- 
vites, Arabians,  and  others  were  placed  in 
Samaria;  men  from  the  extreme  east  (per- 
haps Media)  in  Ashdod.  The  Comukha 
were  removed  from  the  extreme  north  to 
Susiana,  and  Ohaldsaans  were  bronght  from 
the  extreme  south  to  supply  their  places. 
Everywhere  Sargon  'changed  the  abodes' 
of  his  subjects,  his  aim  being,  as  it  would 
seem,  to  weaken  the  stronger  races  by 
dispersion,  and  to  destroy  the  spirit  of  the 
weaker  ones  by  severing  at  a  blow  all  the 
links  which  unite  a  patriotic  people  to 
the  country  it  haa  long  inhabited.  The 
practice  bad  not  been  unknown  to  previous 
monarobs;  but  it  had  never  been  employed 
by  any  of  them  so  generally  or  on  so  grand 
a  scale  as  it  was  by  this  king"  (see 
'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.  423). 

Yer.  25. — And  so  it  was  at  the  beginning 
of  theii  dwelling  there,  that  they  feared 
not  the  Lord.  They  were  ignorant,  i.e.,  of 
Jehovah,  and  paid  him  no  religious  regard. 
They  brought  with  them  their  own  forms 
of  heathenism  (see  vers.  30,  31).  Therefore 
the  Lord  sent  lions  among  tiiem.  Lioiis 
are  not  now  found  in  Palestine,  nor  indeed 
in  any  part  of  Syria,  though  they  are 
numetbus  in  Mesopotamia ;  but  anciently 
they  appear  to  have  been  tolerably  common 
in  all  parts  of  the  Holy  Land  (see  the 
comment  on  1  Kings  xiii.  24).  We  may 
gather  from  what  is  said  here  that,  though 
new  settlers  bad  been  brought  into  tlie 
country  by  the  Assyrians,  yet  still  there 
had  been  a  considerable  decrease  in  the 
population,  which  had  been  favourable  to 
the  lions  multiplying.  The  new  settlers, 
it  is  to  be  noted,  were  placed  in  the  towns 
(yer.  24);  and  it  is  probable  that  many  of 
the  country  districts  lay  waste  and  desolate. 
Still,  the  writer  views  the  great  increase  in 
the  number  of  the  lions  as  a  Divine  judg- 
ment, which  it  may  have  been,  though  based 
upon  a  natural  circumstance.  Which  Blew 
some  of  them.  (For  the  great  boldness  of 
the  Paleatinian  lion,  see  1  Kings  xiii.  24; 
XX,  36 ;  Prov.  xxii.  13 ;  Isa.  xxxi.  4 ;  xxxviii 
13;  Jer.  V.  6,  etc.) 

Yer.  26. — ^Wherefore  they  spake  to  the 
King  of  Assyria,  saying.  The  meaning 
seems  to  be,  not  that  the  colonists  made 
direct  complia.int  to  the  king,  but  that  aome 


338 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  TEB  KINGS.     [oB.  xm.  1—tL 


of  the  persons  about  the  eonrt, having  heard 
of  the  matter,  reported  it  to  him  as  one  re- 
quiring consideration  and  remedy.  Hence 
the  use  of  the  third  person  instead  of  the 
first.  The  nations  which  thou  hast  removed, 
and  placed  in  the  cities  of  Samaria  (see  ver. 
24),  know  not  the  manner  of  the  Ood  of 
the  land.  It  was  the  general  belief  of  the 
heathen  nations  of  antiquity  that  each 
country  and  nation  had  its  own  god  or 
gods,  who  presided  over  its  destinies,  pro- 
tected it,  went  out  at  the  head  of  its  armies, 
and  fought  for  it  against  its  enemies.  Each 
god  had  his  own  "  manner,"  or  ritual  and 
method  of  worship,  which  was,  in  some 
respects  at  any  rate,  different  from  that 
of  all  other  gods.  Unless  this  ritual  and 
method  were  known,  new-comers  into  any 
land  were  almost  sure  to  displease  the  local 
deity,  who  did  not  allow  of  any  departure 
from  traditional  usage  in  his  worship.  There- 
fore he  hath  sent  lions  among  them,  and, 
behold,  they  slay  them,  because  they  know 
not  the  maimer  of  the  Ood  of  the  land. 

Ver.  27. — Then  the  King  of  Assyria  com- 
manded, saying.  Carry  thither  one  of  the 
priests  whom  ye  brought  from  thence.  It 
does  not  appear  that  this  was  a  suggestion 
of  the  colonists.  Either  it  was  the  king's 
own  idea,  or  that  of  one  of  his  advisers. 
The  priests,  who  ministeied  at  the  two 
national  sanctuaries — those  of  Dan  and 
Bethel — had,  as  important  personages,  been 
all  carried  off.  Though  a  "  remnant "  of 
Israel  was  left  in  the  land  (2  Chron.  xxxiv. 
9),  they  were  probably  of  the  baser  sort 
(comp.  ch.  XXV.  12),  or  at  any  rate  could  not 
be  trusted  to  know  the  details  and  intricacies 
of  the  Samaritan  ritual.  Thus  it  was  neces- 
sary to  send  back  a  priest.  And  let  them  go 
and  dwell  there.  We  should  have  expected, 
"Let  him  go;"  but  the 'writer  assumes 
that  the  priest  would  hare  an  entourage^ 
assistant  -  ministers  and  servants,  and  so 
says,  "Letttem  go;"  but  immediately  after- 
wards. And  let  hiia  teach — since  he  alone 
would  be  competent — them  the  manner  of 
the  God  of  the  land. 

Ver.  28.— Then  one  of  the  priests  whom 
they  had  carried  away  from  Samaria— the 
country,  not  the  oity,  as  in  vers.  24  and  25 — 
came  and  dwelt  in  Bethel.  Buthel  from  a 
very  early  time  greatly  eclipsed  Dan.  While 
the  allusions  to  Bethel,  commonly  called 
"  Bethavon  "  ("  House  of  nothingness  "  for 
"House  of  God"),  are  fiequent  in  the  Is- 
raelitish  piopliets  (Hos.  iv.  15 ;  v.  8 ;  z.  5, 
8,  15;  AJnos  iii.  14;  iv.  4;  t.  5,  6;  vii 
10—13),  there  is  bnt  a  single  distinct  allu- 
sion to  Dan  (Amos  viii  14).  Bethel  was 
"the  king's  chapel"  and  "the  king's  court" 
(Amos  vii.  13).  The  priest  selected  by 
Sargon's  advisen  was  a  Bethelite  priest,  and, 
returning  thither,  took  up  the  'vorship  fami- 


liar to  him.  And  tanght  them — <.e.  the  new 
settlers— how  they  should  faar  the  Lord. 
This  worship  could  only  be  that  of  the  calf- 
priests  instituted  by  Jeroboam,  which  was, 
however,  most  certainly  a  worship  of  Je- 
hovah, and  an  imitation  or  travesty  nl  the 
temple  -  worship  at  Jerusalem.  Wheilier 
tile  returned  priest  set  up  a  new  calf-idol, 
to  replace  the  one  which  had  been  carried 
off  to  Assyria  (Hos.  x.  5),  is  donbtfuL 

Ver.  29. — Howheit  every  nation  made 
gods  of  their  own,  and  put  them  in  the 
houses  of  the  high  places  which  the  Samari- 
tans had  made,  every  nation  in  their  cities 
wherein  they  dwelt.  The  several  bands  of 
settlers  found  in  the  cities  assigned  to  them 
"  houses  of  the  high  places,"  or  high-plaee 
templeS  (ver.  9),  which  liad  been  left  stand- 
ing when  the  inljabitauts  were  carried  off. 
These  "houses"  they  converted  to  their 
own  use,  setting  up  in  them  their  several 
idolatries. 

Yer.  30. — And  the  men  of  Babylon  made 
Snoooth-henoth.  There  is  no  deity  of  this 
name  in  the  Assyrian  or  Babylonian  lists. 
The  explanation  of  the  word  as  "  tents  "  or 
"  huts  of  daughters,"  which  satisfied  Selden, 
Oalmet,  Gesenius,  Winer,  Keil,  and  others, 
is  rendered  absolutely  impossible  by  the  con- 
text, which  requires  that  the  word,  wliat- 
ever  its  meaning,  should  be  the  name  of  a 
deity.  The  Septuagint  interpreters,  while  as 
much  puzzled  as  others  by  the  word  itself, 
at  least  saw  this,  and  rendered  the  expres- 
sion by  Ti}>'  SouKxie  BfWfl,  showing  that 
they  regarded  it  as  the  name  of  a  goddess. 
The  Babylonian  goddess  who  corresponds 
most  nearly  to  the  word,  and  is  most  likely 
to  be  intended,  would  seem  to  be  Zirat- 
banit,  the  wife  of  Merodach  ('  Transactions 
of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archteology,'  vol. 
iv.  pp.  136—147).  Zirat-hanit  means  "the 
creating  lady;"  but  tlie  Hebrew  interpre- 
ter seems  to  have  mistaken  the  first  element, 
which  he  confounded  with  Zarat,  the  Baby- 
lonian for  "tents,"  and  so  translated  by 
"Succoth."  The  goddess  Zirat-banit  was 
certainly  one  of  the  principal  deities  of 
Babylon,  and  would  be  more  likely  to  be 
selected  than  any  other  goddess.  Probably 
she  was  worshipped  in  combination  with 
her  husband,  Merodach.  And  the  men  of 
Cuth— i.e.  "  Cuthah  "—made  Nergal,  Ner- 
gal  was  the  special  deity  of  Cutha.  He  was 
the  Babylonian  war-god,  and  had  a  high 
position  in  the  Assyrian  pantheon  also.  His 
name  appears  as  an  element  in  the  "  Ner- 
gal-sharezer "  of  Jeremiah  (xxzix.  3,  13) 
and  the  Keriglissar  of  Ptolemy  and  Berosus, 
And  the  men  of  Hamath  made  Ashima,  The- 
nius  conjectures  that  "  Ashima  "  represents 
the  Phoenician  Eshmoun,one  of  the  (jabiri,  (» 
eight "  Oreat  Ones,"  But  the  etymological 
resembWce  of  the  two  words  is  not  dose,  and 


oa.  XTO,  1—41.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


d39 


It  is  not  at  all  certain  that  the  Hamathites 
at  any  time  acknowledged  the  Phoenician 
deities.    The  Hamathite  inscriptions  are  in 
the  character  now  known  as  "  Hittite ; "  and 
there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  people 
were  non-Semitic.  This  identification,  there- 
fore, must  be  regarded  as  very  doubtful. 
Perhaps  "Asliiraa"  represents    Simi,  the 
daug)]terof  Hadad  (see  Melito, '  Apologia'). 
Ver.  31. — And  the  Avites  made  Nibhaz  and 
Tartak.    "  Nibhaz  "  and  "  Tartak  "  are  very 
obscure.    The  Sabians  are  said  to  have  ac- 
knowledged an  evil  demon,  whom  they  called 
Nib'az  or  Nabaz  (Norberg,  '  Onomasticon,' 
p.  100);  and  Tartak  has  been  derived  by 
Gesenins  from  the  Pehlevi  Tar-thah,  "hero 
of  darkness ; "  but  these  guesses  cannot  be 
regarded  as  entitled  to  much  attention.  We 
do  not  know  what  tlie  religion  of  the  Avites 
was,  and  need  not  be  surprised  that  the 
names  of  their  gods  are  new  to  us.    The 
polytheism  of  the  East  was  prolific  of  deities, 
and  still  more  of  divine  names.  Nibhaz  and 
Tartak  may  have  been  purely  local  gods, 
or  they  may  have  been  local  names  for  gods 
•  worshipped  under  other  appellations  in  the 
general  pantheon  of  Babylonia.    And  the 
Sepharvites  burnt  their  children  in  fire  to 
Adrammelech  and  Anammelech,  the   gods 
of  Sepharvaim.    The  god  principally  wor- 
shipped at  Sippara  was  ShaiDas,  "  the  sun." 
It  is  probable  that  "Adrammelech"  (equiva- 
lent to  adir-melek,  "  the  glorious  king,"  or 
edir-malek,  "  the  arranging  king  ")  was  one 
of  his  titles.     Shamas,  in  the  Babylonian 
mythology,  was  always  closely  connected 
with  Anunit,  a  sun-goddesa ;  and  it  is  pro- 
bably this  name  which  is  represented  by 
Anammelech,  which  we  may  regard  as  an 
intentional   corruption,  derisive  and   con- 
temptuous. 

Ver.  32. — So  they  feared  the  lord — ^rather, 
and  they  (also)  honoured  Jehovah ;  i.e.  with 
their  idolatrous  worship  they  combined  also 
the  worship  of  Jehovah  (comp.  ver.  28) — and 
made  unto  themselves  of  the  lowest  of  them 
priests  of  the  high  places^t.e.  followed  the 
example  of  Jeroboam  in  taking  for  priests 
persons  of  all  ranks,  even  the  lowast  (see 
the  comment  on  1  Kings  xii.  31) — which 
sacrificed  for  them  in  the  houses  of  the  high 
places  (comp.  ver.  29). 

Ver.  33. — They  feared  the  lord,  and  served 
their  own  gods.  This  syncretism,  this  mixed 
religion,  is  so  surprising  to  the  writer,  and 
80  abhorrent  to  his  religious  sentiments,  that 
he  cannot  but  dwell  upon  it,  not  shrinking 
from  repeating  himself  (see  vers.  32,  33,  41), 
in  order  to  arrest  the  reader's  attention,  and 
point  out  to  him  the  folly  and  absurdity  of 
such  conduct.  The  practice  was  still  going 
on  in  his  own  day  (vers.  34,  41),  and  may 
have  had  attractions  for  the  descinilants  of 
the  small  Israelite  population  which  had 


been  left  in  the  land.  After  the  manner  of 
the  nations  whom  they  carried  away  from 
thence;  rather,  after  the  manner  of  the 
nations  from  whom  they  (i.e.  the  authorities) 
carried  them  away ;  i.e.  after  the  manner  of 
their  countrymen  at  home.  The  transla- 
tion of  the  Bevised  Version  gives  the  sense, 
while  changing  the  construction — "  after 
the  manner  of  the  nations  from  among  whom 
they  had  been  carried  away." 

Ver.  34. — Unto  this  day — ».«.  the  time 
at  which  Kings  was  written  (about  B  o. 
580 — 560) — they  do  after  the  former  manners 
— tliat  is,  they  maintain  the  mixed  religion, 
which  they  set  up  on  ttie  coming  of  the  Sa- 
maritan priest  from  Assyria  a  hundred  and 
fifty  or  sixty  years  previously — ^they  fear  not 
the  Lord.  This  statement  seems  directly 
opposed  to  the  thrice- repeated  one  (vers.  32, 
33,  41),  "They  feared  the  Lord;"  but  th» 
apparent  contradiction  is  easily  reconciled. 
The  new  immigrants  "  feared  Jehovah "  in 
a  certain  sense,  t.«.  externally.  They  ad- 
mitted him  into  their  pantheon,  and  had 
ritual  observances  in  his  honour.  But  they 
did  not  really  fear  him  in  their  hearts.  Had 
they  done  so,  they  would  have  inquired 
what  were  his  laws,  statutes,  and  ordinances, 
and  would  have  set  themselves  to  obey  them. 
This  they  did  not  think  of  doing.  Neither 
do  they  after  their  statutes,  or  after  their 
ordinances — either  the  "  statutes  "  and  "  or- 
dinances" are  regarded  as  having  become 
dejure  "theirs"  by  their  occupation  of  the 
Holy  Land,  or  "  their  "  refers  by  anticipation 
to  "the  children  of  Jacob"  towards  the 
dose  of  the  verse — or  after  the  Law — rather, 
and  after  the  Xaw— and  commandment  which 
the  Lord  commanded  the  children  of  Jacob, 
whom  he  named  Israel  (see  Gen.  xxxii. 
28). 

Ver.  35. — ^With  whom  the  Lord  had  made 
a  oovenant,  and  charged  them,  saying.  Ye 
shall  not  fear  other  gods,  nor  bow  yourselves 
to  them,  nor  serve  them,  nor  sacrifice  to 
them  (see  Exod.  xx.  3 ;  Deut.  y.  7 ;  vi.  14 ; 
xi.  28.  For  the  "  covenant,"  see  Exod.  xix. 
5—8 ;  xxiv.  3— S). 

Ver.  36. — But  the  Lord,  who  brought  you 
up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  with  great 
power  and  a  stretched-ont  arm  (comp.  Exod. 
vi.  6;  Deut.  iv.  34 ;  v.  15 ;  vii.  19 ;  ix.  29 ; 
Ps.  cxxxvi.  12,  etc.),  him  shall  ye  fear,  and 
him  shall  ye  worship,  and  to  him  shall  ye  do 
sacrifice  (see  Deut.  vi  13 ;  x.  20 ;  ziii.  4 ; 
Josh.  xxiv.  14,  etc.). 

Ver.  37. — And  the  statutes,  and  the  ordi- 
nances, and  the  Law,  and  the  commandment, 
which  he  wrote  for  you — i.e.  which,  by  his 
Providence,  were  given  you  in  a  written 
form  (comp.  Exod.  xxiv.  4 ;  Deut.  xxxi.  9 ; 
Josh.  viii.  34) — ^ye  shall  observe  to  do  for 
evermore  (comp.  Lev.  xviii.  4,  5;  xix.  37; 
Deut.  iv.  6 :  T.  1 ;  vi  24,  25,  etc.) ;  and  y* 


S40 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KISGS.     [oh.  xvn.  1— 41 


■hall  not  fear  other  gods  (Bee  the  comment 
on  ver.  35). 

Ver.  38. — And  the  covenant  that  I  have 
made  with  you  ye  shall  not  forget.  The 
"covenant"  intended  is  not  the  covenant 
of  circumcision,  whicih  God  made  with 
Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  9 — 14),  but  the  cove- 
nant of  protection  and  obedience  made  at 
Sinai  between  God  and  the  entire  people 
(Eiod.  xix.  5 — 8),  and  moat  solemnly  ratified 
by  sprinkling  with  blood  and  by  a  covenant 
feast,  as  related  in  ExoJ.  xxiv.  3 — 11.  This 
was  the  covenant  which  Israel  had  been 
warned  so  frequently  not  to  "  forget "  (Dent, 
iv.  28;  viu.  11 ;  xxvi.  13;  Prov.  ii.  17),  yet 
which  they  had  "  forgotten,"  or,  at  any  rate, 
"  forsaken,"  as  already  declared  in  ver.  15. 
Neither  shall  ye  fear  other  gods.  The  writer 
has  probably  a  practical  object  in  his  re- 
iteration. He  expects  his  words  to  reach 
the  ears  of  the  mixed  race  inhabiting  Sa- 
maria in  his  day,  and  would  fain  warn  them 
against  their  idolatrous  practices,  and  point 
them  to  the  pure  worship  of  JehoTah.  It 
is  pleasing  to  remember  that  ultimately 
the  mixed  race  was  won  to  the  true  faith, 
and  that  the  Samaritans  of  our  Lord's  time 
were  as  true  worshippers  of  Jehovah,  and  as 
zealous  followers  of  the  Law,  as  the  Jews 
themselves.  The  interesting  community  at 
Nablous  still  maintains  Samaritan  forms, 
and  reads  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch. 

Ver.  39. — But  the  Lord  your  God  ye  shall 
fear  (comp.  ver.  36) ;  and  he  shall  deliver  yon 
out  of  the  hand  of  all  your  enemies.  This 
promise  had  been  made  repeatedly  (see 
Uxod.  xxiii.  27 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  7,  8 ;  Deut.  vi. 
18,  19;  XX.  4;  xxiii.  14;  xxviii.  7,  etc.). 
The  writer  of  Chronicles  aims  at  showing 
in  detail  that  the  promise  was  literally 
fulfilled  in  the  history,  victory  iu  every  case 
declaring  itself  in  favour  of  God's  people, 
when  they  were  faithful  anil  obedient,  while 
reverses  always  befell  them  in  the  contrary 


case  (see  1  Chron.  v.  20 — 22;  x.  18;  liv. 
10—16;  2  Chron.  xiL  1—12;  xiii.  4—18; 
xiv.  9—12  ;  XX.  5—30,  etc.). 

Ver.  40. — Howbeit  they  did  not  hearken. 
The  mixed  race,  with  their  mixed  religion, 
though  professing  to  be  worshippers  of 
Jehovah,  paid  no  attention  to  the  warnings 
and  threatenings  of  the  Law  (ver.  34),  which 
were  to  them  a  dead  letter.  But  they  did 
after  their  former  manner;  t.e.  they  con- 
tinued to  maintain  the  syncretism  described 
in  vers.  28—33. 

Ver.  41. — So  these  nations — t.e.  the 
Babylonians,  Cutheeans,  Hamathites,  Avites, 
and  Sepharvites  settled  in  Samaria — feared 
the  Lord,  and  served  their  graven  images. 
The  rabbinical  writers  teU  us  that  Nergal 
was  worshipped  under  the  form  of  a  cock, 
Ashima  under  the  form  of  a  goat,  Nibhaz 
nnder  the  form  of  a  dog,  Tartak  under  that 
of  an  ass,  while  Adrammelech  and  Anam- 
melech  were  represented  by  a  mule  and  » 
horse  respectively.  Not  much  confidence 
can  be  placed  iu  these  representations.  The 
Babylonian  gods  were  ordinarily  figured  in 
human  forms.  Animal  ones — as  those  of 
the  bull  and  the  lion,  generally  winged  and 
human-headed,  were  in  a  few  cases,  but 
only  in  a  few,  need  to  represent  the  gods 
symbolically.  Other  emblems  employed 
were  the  winged  circle  for  Asshur ;  the  disc 
plain  or  four-rayed  for  the  male  sun,  six  or 
eight-rayed  for  the  female  sun ;  the  crescent 
for  the  moon-god  Sin ;  the  thunderbolt  for 
the  god  of  the  atmosphere,  Vul  or  Kimmon ; 
the  wedge  or  arrow-head,  the  fundamental 
element  of  writing,  for  Nebo.  Images,  how- 
ever, were  made  of  all  the  gods,  and  were 
no  doubt  set  up  by  the  several  "  nations  " 
in  their  respective  "cities."  Both  their 
children,  and  their  children's  children — t.e. 
their  descendants  to  the  time  of  the  writer 
of  Kings — as  did  their  fathers,  so  do  they 
auto  this  day. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. —  T%e  unwisdom  of  worldly  craft  and  policy.  Hoshea  came  to  the 
throne  at  a  time  of  great  danger  and  difficulty.  The  Assyrian  system  of  gradual 
expiinsion  and  annexation  was  settled  and  almost  declared.  The  petty  states  upon 
her  borders  were  first  invaded  and  ravaged ;  then  they  were  taken  under  her  protection ; 
finally  they  were  absorbed.  The  process  had  been  going  on  from  the  days  of  Tiglath- 
pileser  I.  (about  b.o.  1130),  and  was  still  in  operation.  Damascus  was  a  recent  example 
of  it.  Under  these  circumstances,  Hoshea  could  not  but  feel  his  throne  precarious,  and 
the  independence  of  his  country  more  than  threatened.  How  would  he  act  most  wisely 
for  his  own  security  and  that  of  his  country  ?    There  were  three  courses  open  to  him. 

I.  He  might  look  solblt  to  tub  Abbyeian  kino.  Absolute  submission,  fidelity, 
watchful  regard  for  the  suzerain's  interests,  punctual  payment  of  the  fixed  tribute, 
liberal  donations  to  the  court  officials  and  the  monarch  beyond  the  sum  appointed, 
generally  secured  to  the  protected  state  the  continuance  of  its  suzerain's  favour,  and 
»  prolongation  of  its  protected  existence.  Hoshea  might  have  adopted  this  policy. 
He  might  have  bent  all  his  efforts  to  the  propitiation  of  the  Assyrian  monarch,  and 


•H.  XVII.  1— 4L]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OE  THE  KINGS.  341 

the  obtaining  of  his  favourable  regard.  In  this  way  he  would  probably  have  secured 
to  himself  a  long  and  quiet  reign ;  and  his  country  would  have  been  spared  for  many 
a  year  the  horrors  of  war,  and  his  people  the  misery  of  being  carried  into  captivity. 

n.  He  might  look  fob  a  HnuAN  pboteotob  aoadtst  Abbtbia.  Human  helps, 
negotiations,  treaties,  alliances,  are  the  natural  and  ordinary  resort  of  weak  states  when  ' 
menaced  by  a  stronger.  Cannot  a,  counterpoise  be  raised  up  against  the  monster  com- 
munity which  threatens  the  existence  of  all  its  neighbours?  Cannot  a  "balance  of 
power"  be  established?  Hoshea  was  particularly  tempted  at  the  time  by  the  rise  to 
greatness  of  a  new  dynasty  in  Egypt,  which  seemed  to  have  greater  strength  and 
greater  resources  than  had  been  possessed  by  its  predecessors.  It  was  probably  regarded 
by  his  advisers  as  a  wonderfully  clever  stroke  of  policy  when  they  suggested  that 
alliance  with  Shebek,  the  new  King  of  Egypt,  might  be  the  salvation  of  Samaria  under 
the  circumstances.  So  ^tolia  called  in  the  aid  of  Rome  against  Macedon  ;  and  so 
recently,  with  better  results,  Sardinia  called  in  the  aid  of  Prance  against  Austria. 
Hoshea  caught  at  the  suggestion.  Though  pledged  to  Assyria,  though  actually  owing 
his  throne  to  an  Assyrian  monarch  ('  Bponym  Canon,'  pp.  123,  124),  he  accepted  the 
advice,  made  alliance  with  Shebek,  and  broke  with  Shalmaneser,  to  his  own  destruction 
and  that  of  bis  country. 

HI.  Hk  mioet  dibcabd  "  aems  of  flesh,"  and  look  wholly  to  Jehovah.  The 
prophets  were  calling  Israel  to  repentance.  They  were  denouncing  the  calf-worship 
and  the  other  idolatries.  They  were  condemning  reliance  on  either  Egypt  or  Assyria 
(Hos.  vii.  11 ;  xii.  1).  They  were  threatening  the  destruction  of  the  kingdom  unless 
Israel  truly  repented  and  turned  to  the  Lord.  They  were  pointing  to  a  possible  restora- 
tion to  Grod's  favour  if  these  conditions  were  fulfilled  (Hos.  ii.  14 — 23 ;  vii.  1 — 3 ; 
xiv.  1 — 9 ;  Amos  v.  4 — 9,  and  14, 15),  and  urging  compliance  before  it  was  too  late. 
They  taught  that  God  could  save  by  his  own  power,  and  "  not  by  bow,  nor  by  sword, 
nor  by  battle,  by  horses,  nor  by  horsemen  "  (Hos.  i.  7).  I'rue  wisdom  would  have  taught 
Hoshea  and  his  advisers  to  look  for  salvation  to  this  quarter ;  but  they  were  so  infatu- 
ated with  their  trust  in  the  strength  of  Egypt  that  they  seem  not  even  to  have  given 
the  alternative  course  a  thought.  The  result  showed  that  their  (supposed)  worldly 
wisdom  was  the  extremest  unwisdom,  their  perfection  of  policy  the  worst  policy  that 
could  possibly  have  been  adopted. 

Vers.  7 — 23. — JTie  lessont  to  he  learnt  from  the  destruction  of  the  kingdom  of 
Samaria.     The  first  and  main  lesson  is,  of  course,  the  great  fact — 

I.  That  nations  abb  tbeated  by  God  as  besponsiblb  units,  and  abb  pitnished, 
EVEN  DB8TB0YED,  FOB  THEIR  8IN8.  It  was  their  "  evll  ways,"  their  transgression 
against  the  commandments  of  God,  that  lay  at  the  root  of  Israel's  rejection.  The 
prophets  Hosea  and  Amos  paint  an  awful  picture  of  the  condition  of  Samaria  under 
its  later  kings.  Luxury,  oppression,  lewdness,  drunkenness,  idolatry,  prevailed.  The 
service  of  God  was  a  lip-service,  which  "his  soul  hated."  There  was  no  truth,  no 
mercy,  no  real  "  knowledge  of  God,"  in  the  land  (Hos.  iv.  1).  "  By  swearing,  and 
lying,  and  killing,  and  stealing  .  .  .  they  broke  out,  and  blood  touched  blood"  (Hos. 
iv.  2).  "  Whoredom  and  wine  and  new  wine  had  taken  away  their  heart  "  (Hos.  iv. 
11).  "A  man  and  his  father  would  go  in  unto  the  same  maid"  (Amos  ii.  7).  False 
balances  were  employed  (Amos  viii.  5).  "  Companies  of  priests  murdered  in  the  way 
by  consent"  (Hos.  vi.  9).  Therefore  was  the  doom  pronounced  against  the  nation— 
they  shotild  "  go  into  captivity  beyond  Damascus  "  (Amos  v.  27).  "  The  Lord  swore 
hy  his  holiness  .  .  .  that  he  would  take  them  away  with  hooks,  and  their  posterity  with 
fish-hooks  "  (Amos  iv,  2).  "  The  end  came  upon  them  ;  they  could  not  be  passed  by 
any  more  "  (Amos  viii.  2).    Minor  lessons  are — 

II.  That  sins  abb  gbbatlt  aqgeavatbd  m  God's  bight  when  they  aei 
INFEACTIONS  OF  A  COVENANT  MADE  WITH  HIM.  Israel  was  Under  covenant  with  Gtoi 
— had  been  made  God's  "peculiar  people"  on  the  express  condition  of  keeping  hia 
statutes,  testimonies,  commandments,  and  judgments  (Exod.  xix.  5—8).  This  they 
had  bound  themselves  to  do;  but  they  had  done  the  exact  opposite.  Hence  tke 
reproaches  in  vers.  15  and  35—40.  It  is  the  breach  of  the  covenant  by  the  northern 
kingdom  that,  in  the  view  of  the  writer  of  Kings,  is  the  main  and  special  cause  of  its 
&1L    All  else  might  have  been  forgiven,  but  not  that,    A  covenant  it  a  holy  thing, 


W2  TSE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.       {cr.  ^-m.  1—41. 

even  when  it  is  only  between  man  and  mao  (Gal.  iii.  15) ;  but  a  covenant  between 
man  and  God — how  can  anything  be  more  holy  ?  Must  not  the  infraction  of  such 
a  covenant  entail  fearful  consequences? 

.  III.  That  it  is  a  fukther  gbeat  agqeatation  or  the  otriLT  of  biw  to 
COMMIT  IT  against  tbequbnt  WARNINGS.  "Yet  the  Lord  testified  against  Israel, 
and  against  Judah,  by  all  the  prophets,  and  by  all  the  seers,  saying,  Turn  ye  from  your 
evil  ways "  (ver.  13).  Comp.  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  15, 16,  "  And  the  Lord  God  of  their 
fathers  sent  to  them  by  his  messengers,  rising  up  betimes,  and  sending ;  because  he  had 
compassion  on  his  people,  and  on  his  dwelling-place :  but  they  mocked  the  messengers  of 
God,  and  despised  his  words,  and  misused  his  prophets,  until  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  arose 
against  his  people,  till  there  was  no  remedy."  The  sin  of  Israel  would  have  been  far 
less,  would  not  perhaps  have  been  quite  "  without  remedy,"  had  they  not  for  so  long 
a  time  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  the  warnings  and  exhortations  of  the  prophets,  refusing  to 
"  hear  the  voice  of  the  charmers,  charmed  they  never  so  wisely,"  and  persisting  in 
their  disobedience,  their  wickedness,  their  greed,  their  cruelty,  their  besotted  idolatry, 
despite  the  scathing  denunciations,  the  tender  pleadings,  the  wise  counsels,  almost  unin- 
terruptedly addressed  to  them.  "  Stiffnecked  and  imciroumcised  in  heart  and  ears " 
(Acts  vii.  51),  they  "  resisted  the  Holy  Ghost;  "  and  their  doom  had  to  be  pronounced. 
Congregations  in  this  country  and  at  the  present  day  may  be  reminded  (1)  that  Eng- 
land is  not  without  her  national  sins ;  (2)  that  the  sins  of  Christians  are,  all  of  them, 
infractions  of  the  covenant  made  in  baptism  between  themselves  and  God ;  and  (3) 
that  the  sins  of  Christians  are  committed  against  the  constant  warnings  of  God's 
appointed  ministers,  who  stand  to  them  as  the  prophets  stood  to  the  Israelites. 

Vers.  24 — 41. — The  absurdity  and  uselessness  of  a  mixed  religion.  Syncretisin  has 
been  at  all  times  a  form  which  religion  is  apt  to  assume  in  mixed  communities. 
Theoretically,  religions  are  antithetic,  exclusive,  mutually  repulsive.  Practically, 
where  they  coexist,  they  tend  to  give  and  take,  to  approximate  one  to  the  other,  to 
drop  differences,  to  blend  together  into  an  apparent,  if  not  a  real,  union.  Christianity 
had  at  first  those  who  would  sit  in  an  idol-temple,  and  partake  of  idol-sacrifices  (1  Cor. 
viii.  10).  Judaism  under  the  Seleucidse,  but  for  the  rude  impatience  of  Antiochus 
Bpiphanes,  was  on  the  point  of  making  terms  with  Hellenism.  In  Samaria,  after  the 
events  related  in  vers.  24 — 28,  a  mixed  religion — a  "  mingle-mangle,"  to  use  Refor- 
mation language — took  its  place  as  the  religion  of  the  mixed  people.  "  They  feaied 
the  Lord,  and  served  their  own  gods."  Jehovah  was  everywhere  acknowledged, 
honoured,  worshipped  with  sacrifice.  But  at  the  same  time,  heathen  gods — partial, 
local,  half-material,  sacred,  but  not  holy — were  objects  of  a  far  more  real  and  intense 
worship.     Such  a  religion  is  (1)  absurd,  (2)  useless. 

I.  Syncretism  is  abbitbd,  since  it  is  self-contradictory.  "  What  concord  has  Christ 
with  Belial  ?  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  15).  Religions  which  are  really  different  have  contradictory 
first  principles ;  and  agreement  can  only  be  effected  by  a  dropping,  on  one  side  or  the 
other,  or  both,  of  what  is  vital  and  essential.  In  the  particular  case  before  us,  absolute 
monothei-m  was  the  very  core  and  essence  of  the  Jehovah-worship ;  actual  polytheism 
was  the  root  and  groundwork  of  the  other.  The  two  were  logically  inconsistent,  incom- 
patible. Practically,  the  contradiction  may  not  always  have  been  perceived,  for  man, 
though  a  rational,  is  not  a  logical  animal ;  but  the  gentral  result,  no  doubt,  was  that 
the  monotheistic  idea  had  to  give  way :  Jehovah,  the  one  only  God  of  the  whole  earth, 
had  to  sink  into  a  "  god  of  the  land,"  and  to  receive  an  occasional  and  grudging  acknow- 
ledgment from  those  whose  hearts  were  with  their  own  gods,  Nergal  and  Ashima  aud 
Adrammeleoh.  But,  in  this  case,  the  worship  of  Jehovah  was  superfluous.  God  does 
not  thank  men  for  dragging  him  into  a  pantheon,  and  setting  him  side  by  side  with 
beings  who  are  no  gods,  but  the  fantastic  inventions  of  imaginations  depraved  and 
corrupted  by  sin. 

II.  Stnobetism  is  useless.  Contrary  systems  of  religion  will  not  aiEalgamate,_let 
men  do  what  they  may.  Either  each  neutralizes  the  other,  and  the  result  is  no  religion 
at  all ;  or  one  gets  the  upper  hand,  and  the  other  element  might  as  well  be  absent. 
There  is  no  serving  "  God  and  mammon,"  "  Christ  and  Belial."  The  mind  cannot 
really,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  accept  contradictories.  The  lips  may  do  so,  but 
nligion  is  an  affair  of  the  heart.    Syncretism  is  an  apparent,  not  a  real  union.    Thtciiei 


m.  xvii.  1—41,]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OS"  THB  KINGS.  343 

mutually  destructive  cannot  ooalesee.  Thus,  practically,  syncretism  Is  uselesi.  It  is 
either  a  mere  nominal  union  or  •  mode  of  eliminating  religion  from  human  life.  In  the 
case  before  us  it  seems  to  have  left  the  Samaritans  just  as  much  polytheists,  just  as 
much  idolaters,  as  it  found  them.  Zerubbabel  did  well  to  allow  them  no  part  in  the 
building  of  the  second  temple,  and  to  give  them  the  curt  answer,  "  Ye  have  nothing 
to  do  with  us  to  build  a  house  unto  our  Grod"  (Ezra  iv.  3).  Had  he  done  otherwise, 
he  would  have  merged  Judaism  in  a  polytheistic  and  idolatrous  pseudo-religion. 

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — B. — The  reign  of  Eoshea.  I.  A  foolish  beb vice.  The  life  of  every  man  is 
a  service  of  some  sort.  We  cannot,  even  if  we  would,  be  absolutely  our  own  masters. 
Some  men  are  the  servants  of  self.  Some  are  the  servants  of  others.  Some  are  the 
servants  of  good.  Some  are  the  servants  of  eviL  Some  are  the  servants  of  money,  or 
of  pleasure,  or  of  their  passions.  What  higher  epitaph  could  be  written  over  any 
man's  tomb  than  the  simple  words,  "A  servant  of  God"?  What  higher  choice  could 
any  man  make  than  this,  "  As  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord"?  But 
that  was  not  the  choice  which  Hoshea  made.  He  thought  the  service  of  God  was 
slavery.  He  chose  the  service  of  the  King  of  Assyria.  What  fools  men  are  sometimes ! 
How  blind  to  their  own  best  interests !  The  prodigal  son  in  his  father's  house  had 
every  comfort,  consideration,  and  care.  But  he  thought  there  was  too  much  restriction. 
He  would  like  to  have  more  of  his  own  way.  And  so  he  went  away  from  his  father's 
house.  But  he  was  glad  enough  to  return.  He  did  not  find  the  service  of  the  world 
and  of  sin  quite  so  pleasant  as  he  expected.  So  many  discover,  when  it  is  too  late, 
"  The  wages  of  sin  is  death ;  but  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord." 

II.  A  FATTHLESB  SERVANT.  Hoshea  was  Unfaithful  to  God.  And  the  man  who  is 
unfaithful  to  the  claims  of  God — the  highest  of  all  claims — is  generally  unfaithful  to 
his  fellow-men.  So  it  was  in  this  case.  "  The  King  of  Assyria  found  conspiracy  in 
Hoshea."  Hoshea  had  entered  into  engagements  which  he  did  not  fulBl.  The  beat 
security  for  right  dealing  between  man  and  man  is  obedience  to  the  Law  of  God.  The 
history  of  nations  and  individuals  teaches  us  that.  The  nation  where  God  is  honoured, 
where  the  Word  of  God  is  read,  is  generally  superior  to  others  in  the  industry,  content- 
ment, and  prosperity  of  its  inhabitants.  The  man  who  fears  God  is  the  man  who  can 
be  depended  on.  "  He  backbiteth  not  with  his  tongue,  nor  doeth  evil  to  his  neighbour, 
nor  taketh  up  a  reproach  against  his  neighbour." — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  6 — ^23. — Captivity  and  its  cause.  Here  is  the  be^nning  of  the  Aspersion  of 
Israel.  Soon  that  favoured  nation  will  be  "  a  people  scattered  and  peeled."  These 
verses  give  us  the  explanation  of  Israel's  exile.  It  is  a  solemn  warning  against  the 
neglect  of  opportunities. 

I.  Commands  disobeyed.  "  They  rejected  his  statutes "  (ver.  15) ;  "  They  lefi  all 
the  commandments  of  the  Lord  their  God  "  (ver.  16) ;  "  They  served  idols,  whereof  the 
Lord  had  said  unto  them.  Ye  shall  not  do  this  thing  "  (ver.  12).  Consider :  1.  Whose 
commands  they  disobeyed.  The  commands  of  the  Lord  their  God.  It  was  he  who  had 
brought  them  out  of  Egypt.  It  was  he  who  had  brought  them  into  the  promised  land. 
It  was  he  who  had  made  of  thera — a  race  of  humble  shepherds — a  great  nation.  When 
God  gave  the  ten  commandments,  he  prefaced  them  by  reminding  Israel  of  his  claim 
upon  them.  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  Gcd,  which  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage."  This  was  a  strong  reason  for  obedience.  "  The 
preface  to  the  ten  commandments  teaches  us  that  because  God  is  the  Lord,  and  our 
God  and  Redeemer,  therefore  we  are  bound  to  keep  all  his  commandments."  God  has 
a  similar  claim :  (1)  Ujpon  every  human  being.  This  is  the  claim  of  creation  and  preser- 
vation and  providence.  "  In  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being."  Whether 
men  like  it  or  not,  they  cannot  get  rid  of  God's  claim  upon  them.  (2)  Upon  every 
Christian.  He  has  brought  us  out  of  the  house  of  bondage.  "In  whom  we  have 
redemption  through  his  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  "  According  as  he  hath 
chosen  us  in  him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  that  we  should  be  holy  and 


S44  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KlltGS.       [oe.  xvn.  1— 41 

without  blame  before  him  in  love."  2.  What  commands  they  disobeyed.  All  God'» 
commandments  were  for  their  owa  good.  They  were  rational  and  wise  commandments. 
To  forbid  idolatry  was  to  forbid  a  sin  which  in  itself  was  imgrateful  and  dishonouring, 
to  the  true  God,  and  which  was  degrading  and  demoralizing  in  its  consequences.  Oh 
that  men  were  wise,  that  they  would  consider  the  consequences  of  sin  for  time  and  for 
eternity  I  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom,  and  to  depart  from  evil 
is  understaTiding." 

II.  Wabkings  DiSREOARDED.  Note :  1.  Oo^t  forbearance  and  mercy.  Gfod  did  not 
cut  them  off  at  once  for  their  sin.  Time  after  time  he  forgave  them.  He  sent  them 
his  prophets  to  invite  them  to  return  to  him,  to  give  them  promises  of  pardon  and 
blessing,  to  point  out  to  them  what  must  be  the  inevitable  consequence  of  perseverance 
in  sin.  His  anxiety  to  save  them  was  very  great.  The  phrase  used  in  Jeremiah  is  a 
remarkable  one.  "  They  have  not  hearliened  to  my  words,  saith  the  Lord,  which  I 
sent  unto  them  by  my  servants  the  prophets,  rising  wp  early  and  sending  them." 
What  a  wonderful  and  touching  description  of  God's  desire  to  save! — "Rising  up 
early."  As  if  he  wanted  to  be  before  men.  As  if  he  wanted  to  anticipate  their 
temptations  by  liis  messages  of  warning  and  of  guidance.  If  we  make  God's  Word  our 
morning  study,  what  a  help  we  shall  find  it  in  the  difiBculties  and  temptations  and 
duties  of  each  day !  2.  MaxCs  folly  and  Kindness.  "  Notwithstanding  they  would 
not  hear,  but  hardened  their  necks,  like  to  the  neck  of  their  fathers,  that  did  not  believe 
in  the  Lord  their  God"  (ver.  14).  All  the  warnings  were  in  vain.  " They  sold  them- 
selves to  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  17).  Is  it  not  a  true  description  of  ihe 
life  of  the  sinner  ?  He  imagines  that  sin  is  freedom,  and  he  finds  it  to  be  the  most 
grinding  and  oppressive  slavery.  He  is  "  led  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  wilL"  The 
sinner  serves  a  hard  master.  "They  caused  their  sons  and  their  daughters  to  pass 
through  the  fire  "  (ver.  17).  How  cruel  is  heathenism!  How  it  crushes  out  the  tender 
feelings  of  humanity  and  kindness !  Look  upon  the  picture  of  it  as  presented  in  its 
Molochs,  in  its  Juggernauts,  in  its  suttees.  See  how  the  aged  and  the  sick  are  left 
alone  to  die.  Contrast  with  all  this  the  spirit  and  work  of  Christianity,  its  care  for  the 
sick  and  the  poor,  its  sympathy  for  the  oppressed.  Heathenism  makes  slaves ; 
Christianity  emancipates  them.  This  is  true  alike  of  the  slavery  of  the  body  and  the 
slavery  of  the  mind.  3.  &V»  hitter  fruit.  "  And  the  Lord  rejected  all  the  seed  of 
Israel,  and  afflicted  them,  and  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  spoilers,  until  he  had 
cast  them  out  of  his  sight."  Calamity  is  never  causeless.  If  we  are  afflicted,  let  us 
see  whether  the  cause  may  not  be  in  our  own  hearts,  in  our  own  lives.  What  a  warning 
is  here  to  Churches!  What  a  warning  against  unfaithfulness,  against  setting  up  human 
ordinances  in  the  worship  of  God !  "  Eemember  therefore  from  whence  thou  art  fallen, 
and  repent,  and  do  the  first  works ;  or  else  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly,  and  will 
remove  thy  candlestick  out  of  his  place,  except  thou  repent."  What  a  warning  is  here 
against  neglect  of  opporttmities  1  If  we  fail  to  use  our  opportunities  and  privileges,  they 
will  be  certainly  taken  from  us.  Let  us  give  an  attentive  ear  to  the  warnings  of  God's 
Word,  to  the  everyday  warnings  of  God's  providence.  "  Because  I  have  called,  and  ye 
refused ;  I  have  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  regarded ;  but  ye  have  set  at 
nought  all  my  counsel,  and  would  none  of  my  reproof:  I  also  will  langh  at  your 
calamity;  I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometb.  .  .  .  They  would  none  of  my  counsel, 
they  despised  all  my  reproof.  Therefore  shall  they  eat  oif  the  fruit  of  their  own  way, 
and  be  filled  with  their  own  devices." — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  24 — 41. — Samaria  and  its  religion.  I.  Its  kablt  godlesrness.  The  land  of 
Samaria  was  now  deprived  of  its  Israelitish  inhabitants.  The  King  of  Assyria  colonized 
it  with  heathen  imndgrants.  "  At  the  beginning  of  their  dwelling  there,  they  feared 
not  the  Lord."  What  a  mistake  to  go  anywhere  without  taking  God's  presence  with 
us !  How  many  journeys  are  undertaken,  how  many  a  business  is  entered  on,  without 
ever  a  word  of  prayer  being  offered  to  God !  How  many  a  home  life  is  commenced 
without  a  family  altar  I  As  the  young  Scotch  lad  said  of  a  house  where  he  stayed  for 
some  time,  and  where  there  was  no  family  prayer,  "  There  is  no  roof  on  that  house." 
"  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it." 

II.  Its  bubbequent  judgments.  "Therefore  the  Lord  sent  lions  among  them, 
which  slew  some  of  them.     Wherefore  they  spake  to  the  King  of  Assyria,  saying, 


OH.  XVII.  1—41.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  346 

The  nations  which  'thon  hast  nmoved,  and  placed  in  the  cities  of  Samaria,  know  not 
the  manner  of  the  God  of  the  land :  therefore  he  hath  sent  lions  among  them,  and, 
behold,  they  slay  them,  because  they  know  not  the  manner  of  the  God  of  the  land" 
(vers.  25,  26).  It  was  judgment  that  first  made  them  think  of  God.  It  is  often  so 
in  the  history  of  human  life.  Men  live  without  God,  prayeiless,  godless  lives,  so  long 
as  all  appears  to  be  going  well  with  them.  But  when  sickness  comes,  or  troubles 
overtake  them,  or  death  is  drawing  near,  they  cry  to  the  Lord  then.  There  is  some- 
thing mean  about  this.  It  is  better  to  call  upon  God  and  to  come  to  him  in  trouble 
than  not  to  call  on  him  at  all ;  but  how  much  better  it  is  to  serve  him  in  ?)«alth  as 
well  as  in  sickness,  in  prosperity  as  well  as  in  troublel 

III.  Its  mixed  keligion.  Samaria  tried  the  experiment  of  serving  the  true  God 
and  the  gods  of  the  heathen  at  the  same  time.  It  tried  the  impossible  task  of  serving 
two  masters.  "They  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their  own  gods,  after  the  manner  of 
the  nations  whom  they  carried  away  from  thence  "  (ver.  33).  In  their  case,  as  in  every 
case,  it  proved  to  be  an  impossible  task.  "  Unto  this  day  they  do  after  the  former 
manners:  they  fear  not  the  Lord,  neither  do  they  after  their  statutes,  or  after  their 
ordinances,  or  after  the  Law  and  commandment  which  the  Lord  commanded  the  children 
of  Jacob "  (ver.  34) ;  "  So  these  nations  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their  graven 
images,  both  their  children,  and  their  children's  children  :  as  did  their  fathers,  so  do 
they  unto  this  day  "  (ver.  41).  They  "  feared  the  Lord : "  that  was  profession.  "  They 
served  their  graven  iniages  :  "  that  was  practice.  Tet  there  are  many  who  are  trying 
the  same  impossible  task.  They  have  a  certain  amount  of /ear  of  God.  They  are  afraid 
to  die,  afraid  of  the  judgment  to  come.  So  they  think  it  desirable  to  be  "  religious." 
They  go  to  church.  They  read  the  Bible  occasionally,  perhaps.  They  bear  the  name  of 
good  Christians.  But  it  is  a  name  only.  Their  life  cannot  be  called  a  Christian  life. 
They  serve  God  on  the  Sunday  in  a  kind  of  way,  and  the  world  or  sin  the  rest  of  the 
week.  They  try,  perhaps,  to  serve  God  and  mammon.  They  try  to  serve  God  and  the 
world.  They  are  liberal-minded  Christians.  But  this  kind  of  mixed  religion  is  no  religion 
in  the  sight  of  God.  He  cannot  have  a  divided  service.  This  is  emphatically  brought 
out  in  the  first  chapter  of  Isaiah.  There  the  inconsistency  and  uselessness  of  a  religious 
profession  combined  with  a  godless  life  is  clearly  shown.  "To  what  purpose  is  the 
multitude  of  your  sacrifices  unto  me  ? "  "  Bring  no  more  vain  oblations ; "  "  Wash 
you,  make  you  clean ;  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  }>efore  mine  eyes ;  cease  to 
do  evil;  learn  to  do  well ;  seek  judgment,  relieve  the  oppressed,  judge  the  fatherless, 
plead  for  the  widow."  Here  it  is  plainly  taught  that  a  religious  profession  is  worthless 
without  a  religious  life.  If  we  regard  iniquity  in  our  heart,  the  Lord  wUl  not  hear  us. 
It  is  interesting  to  remember  that  even  this  degraded  people  of  Samaria,  with  their 
mixed  and  corrupt  religion,  were  permitted  twice  at  least  to  receive  the  gospel  message. 
They  were  looked  down  upon  with  contempt  and  aversion  by  the  Jews.  But  there  is 
mercy  even  for  the  most  degraded.  A  city  of  Samaria  received  Christ  himself,  and 
many  of  its  people  believed  on  him,  for  the  saying  of  the  woman  who  testified,  "He 
told  me  all  thinas  that  ever  I  did."  It  was  even  in  the  apostate  city  of  Samaria  that, 
when  Philip  went  down  and  pr<  ached  Christ  unto  them,  "  the  people  with  one  accord 
gave  heed  unto  the  things  which  Philip  s|iake,"  and  many  of  them  believed  and  were 
baptized.  And  we  read  that  "  there  was  great  joy  in  that  city."  Even  to  these 
Sicniaritans,  aliens  from  the  ancient  Jewish  faith,  a  people  despised  and  hated  by  the 
.Jews,  the  gospel  of  Christ  brought  great  joy.  Surely  there  is  here  an  encouragement 
for  the  greatest  sinner.  Surely  there  is  here  a  reason  for  us  to  hope  and  work  for  the 
salvation  even  of  the  most  degraded.  Surely  an  encouragement  for  Christian  missions 
to  the  heathen. — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Aspects  of  a  corrwpt  nation.  "  In  the  twelfth  year  of  Ahaz  King  of 
Jndali  be>zan  Hoshea  the  son  of  Blah  to  reign  in  Samaria  over  Israel  nine  years,"  etc. 
lloshea,  the  king  here  mentioned,  was  the  nineteenth  and  last  King  of  Israel.  He 
lived  about  seven  hundred  and  twenty  years  or  more  before  Christ.  After  a  reign  of 
nine  years  bis  subjects  were  carried  away  captive  to  Assyria,  and  the  kingdom  of  Israel 
came  to  an  end.  The  selection  we  have  made  from  this  chapter  presents  to  ns — Atpect$ 
qf  a  corrupt  nation.  A  nation  appears  hei«  as  an  unfortunate  inheritor  of  wrong ;  as  a 
guilty  worker  of  wrong ;  and  as  a  terrible  victim  of  wrong. 


34«  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xvn.  1— 41, 

I.  Ai  AN  UNTOBTiTHATE  nmEEiTOB  OF  WBONO.  Upon  Hoshea  and  his  age  there 
came  down  the  corruptiDg  influence  of  no  less  than  eighteen  princes,  all  of  whom  were 
steeped  in  wickedness  and  fanatical  idolatry.  The  whole  nation  had  become  completely 
immoral  and  idolatrous.  This  king— the  last  of  the  Israelitish — ^it  is  said,  "did  that 
which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  but  not  as  the  kings  of  Israel  that  were  before 
him."  If  one  shade  better  than  his  predecessors,  he  was,  notwithstanding,  a  man 
whose  character  seems  unredeemed  by  one  single  virtue.  It  is  one  of  not  only  the 
commonest,  but  the  most  perplexing,  facts  in  history  that  one  generation  comes  to 
inherit,  to  a  great  extent,  the  character  of  its  predecessor.  The  thoughts,  the  principles, 
and  the  spirit  that  animated  the  men  of  the  past,  come  down  and  take  possession  of  the 
minds  of  the  men  of  the  present.  Though  the  bodies  of  our  predecessors  are  mouldering 
in  the  dust,  they  are  still  here  in  their  thoughts  and  influences.  This  is  an  undoubted 
fact.  It  serves  to  explain  three  things.  1.  2%e  vital  connection  ietween  aU  the  members 
of  the  race.  Though  men  are  countless  in  number,  and  ever  multiplying,  humanity  is 
one.  AU  are  branches  of  the  same  root,  members  of  the  same  body,  links  in  one  chain. 
None  can  be  affected  without  affecting  others ;  the  motion  of  one  link  propagates  an 
influence  to  the  end  of  the  chain.  None  of  us  liveth  unto  himself.  Solemn  thought  1 
Our  very  breathings  may  produce  ripples  upon  the  mighty  lake  of  existence,  which 
will  spread  in  ever-widening  circles  to  the  very  shores  of  eternity.  There  are  mystic 
springs  connecting  us  with  the  vmi verse.  Can  we  move  without  touching  them?  Can 
we  give  a  touch  that  will  not  send  its  vibrations  along  the  arches  of  the  boundless 
future?  The  effects  of  a  man's  influence,  either  for  good  or  evil,  will  be  determined 
by  his  moral  character.  A  bad  man  is  a  moral  curse ;  the  influence  that  streams  from 
him  will  be  moral  poison.  A  good  man,  under  G-od,  is  a  blessing ;  his  influence,  like 
the  living  waters,  will  irrigate  and  beautify  the  mental  districts  through  which  it 
flows.  2.  The  immense  difficulty  of  improving  the  moral  condition  of  the  race.  There 
have  been  men  in  every  age  and  land  who  have  "  striven  even  unto  blood  "  to  improve 
the  race.  Poets  have  depicted  the  charms  of  virtue,  moralists  have  reasoned  against 
wrong,  martyrs  have  died  for  the  right;  and  during  the  last  eighteen  centuries, 
throughout  Christendom,  the  best  men  throughout  all  communions  have  struggled 
hard  to  bring  the  world's  mind  under  the  supreme  reign  of  the  true,  the  beautiful, 
and  the  good.  But  how  miserable  has  been  the  result  1  Evil  is  everywhere  the 
dominant  force — dominant  not  merely  in  markets  and  governments,  but  even  in 
Churches.  Those  of  us  who  have  lived  longest  in  the  world,  looked  deepest  into  its 
moral  heart,  and  laboured  most  zealously  and  persistently  for  its  improvement,  feel, 
like  Sisyphus  in  ancient  fable,  struggling  to  roU  a  large  stone  to  the  top  of  a  mountain, 
which,  as  soon  as  we  think  some  progress  has  been  made,  rolls  back  to  its  old  position, 
and  that  with  greater  impetuosity.  Scripture  everywhere  recognizes  this  difficulty, 
and  speaks  of  the  work  as  a  "race,"  a  "  battle,"  a  "  crucifixion."  I  question  whether 
the  world  is  morally  much  better  than  it  has  ever  been.  3.  The  absolute  need  of  super- 
human agency  spiritually  to  redeem  the  race.  Philosophy  shows  that  a  bad  world  cannot 
improve  itself,  cannot  make  itself  good.  Bad  men  can  neither  help  themselves 
morally  nor  help  others.  If  the  world  is  to  be  improved,  thoughts  and  influences  from 
superhuman  regions  must  be  transfused  into  its  heart.  Moral  goodness  must  come  in 
a  new  form,  and  ply  new  agencies.  Herein  is  the  gospel:  "When  we  were  without 
strength,  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly." 

II.  As  A  GtriLTT  WORKER  OF  WBONQ.  Hoshea  and  his  people  were  not  only  the 
inheritors  of  the  corruptions  of  past  generations,  but  they  themselves  became  agents  in 
propagating  and  perpetuating  the  wickedness.  See  what  is  said  of  Hoshea  here.  "  The 
King  of  Assyria  found  conspiracy  in  Hoshea."  ITiis  is  only  one  specimen  or  develop- 
ment of  this  man's  wickedness.  See  what  is  said  of  his  people.  "  The  children  of 
Israel  had  sinned  against  the  Lord  their  God,  which  had  brought  them  up  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt,  from  tmder  the  hand  of  Pharaoh  King  of  Egypt,  and  had  feared  other 
gods."  So  that  while  they  were  the  inheritors  of  a  corrupt  past,  they  were  at  the  same 
time  gwUty  agents  in  a  wicked  present.  Strong  as  is  the  influence  of  the  past  upon  us, 
it  is  not  strong  enough  to  coerce  us  into  wrong.  Gracious  Heaven  has  endowed  every 
man  with  the  power  of  thought  and  resolve  sufficient,  if  he  uses  it,  to  rise  above  the 
influence  of  the  past,  and  to  mount  into  a  new  moral  orbit  of  life.  He  has  the  power 
to  itand  on  the  firm  rock  of  hit  own  individuality,  and  to  say  to  th*  awelling  sea  of 


CH.  XTiL  i— 41.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  M7 

depravity,  as  its  waves  are  approaching  him,  "  So  far  shalt  thou  oome,  and  no  further." 
Bicause  the  father  has  been  bad,  there  is  no  just  reason  why  the  child  should  be  bad 
also.  Because  all  the  generations  that  have  gone  have  been  bat^,  tbere  is  no  reason 
why  this  generation  should  be  wicked.  We  are  not  like  logs  of  wood  on  the  surging 
seas  of  past  wickedness,  but  rather  like  those  snowy  birds  that  can  at  pleasure  mount 
from  the  billows,  and  quit  them  for  the  wide  fields  of  air. 

III.  As  A  TERBiBLB  VICTIM  OP  WROKO.  "What  was  the  judicial  outcome  of  all 
this  wickedness?  Betribution  stern,  rigorous,  and  crushing.  "Then  the  King  of 
Assyria  came  up  throughout  all  the  land,  and  went  up  to  Samaria,  and  besieged  it 
three  years."  "This  was  the  third  and  final  expedition  of  Shalmaueser  against  the 
whole  of  Syria,  and  it  seems  to  have  been  after  the  lapse  of  a  year  or  two  from  his 
second  expedition.  What  new  offence  had  excited  his  wrath  has  not  been  recorded; 
but  its  a  determined  resistance  was  made  by  his  refractory  vassal,  Shalmaneser  prepared 
for  a  regular  siege  of  Samaria,  which,  through  the  stubborn  valour  of  the  Israelites 
themselves,  or  with  the  aid  of  Egyptian  troops,  lasted  for  nearly  three  years.  At 
length  the  city  capitulated ;  or,  if  Josephus  is  correct,  was  taken  by  storm.  But  the 
glory  of  this  conquest  was  not  enjoyed  by  Shalmaneser,  who  had  been  suddenly  recalled 
by  the  outbreak  of  a  domestic  revolution  occasioned,  or  at  least  encouraged,  by  his  pro- 
tracted absences  from  his  capital.  He  was  dethroned  by  the  insurrection  of  an  ambitious 
subject,  and  he  seemsto  have  died  also  before  the  fall  of  Samaria"  (Dr.  Jameson).  Thus 
the  whole  of  the  inhabilants,  one  and  all,  were  carried  away  by  tyrannic  force.  "  From 
inscriptions  in  the  palace  at  Khorasbad,"  says  a  modern  expositor,  "  which  record  the 
number  of  Israelitish  captives,  it  appears  that  27,280  were  transported  into  Assyria 
from  Samaria  and  other  parts  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  The  removal  of  entire  popu- 
lations from  vanquished  countries  to  some  other  portion  of  the  conqueror's  dominions 
had  not  been  adopted,  so  far  as  reliable  history  testifies,  as  the  policy  of  any  ancient 
sovereigns  in  the  East  until  it  was  introduced  and  acted  upon  by  the  later  Assyrian 
kings.  Soldiers  when  taken  captive  in  battle,  women  and  children  belonging  to  the 
conquered  enerny,  it  had,  indeed,  for  ages  been  the  custom  to  carry  into  the  land  of  the 
victor.  And  even  numerous  tribes  of  foreigners,  resident  within  the  territory,  and 
reduced  to  a  state  of  bondage,  like  the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  had  frequently,  by  the  arbi- 
trary will  of  ancient  kings,  been  dragged  to  different  quarters  of  their  kingdom  to 
labour  on  the  public  works."  Here  is  the  temporal  retribution,  at  any  rate,  of  two 
hundred  years  of  idolatry  and  wickedness.  Daring  this  period  Israel  had  sinned  away 
its  liberty,  its  property,  its  country.  The  ton  tribes  sinned  themselves  into  slavery, 
destitution,  and  everlasting  obscurity.  Fur  where  are  they?  Two  thousand  years 
have  rolled  away  since  this  terrible  catastrophe,  and  none  can  tell  us  who  they  are  or 
where  they  are.  "  Be  sure  your  sins  will  find  you  out."  Retribution  may  move 
silently  and  slowly,  but  ever  with  a  resistless  step.  It  follows  the  sins  of' a  tiatiun  as 
well  as  of  an  individual.  It  was  the  crimes  of  the  Israelites  that  ruined  the  kingdom, 
and  made  them  the  victims  of  this  terrible  catastrophe.  So  it  ever  is;  the  great 
dynasties  and  kingdoms  of  the  past  have  met  with  the  same  fate  by  the  same  inexor- 
able law  of  retribution.  There  are  sins  in  our  England  that  are  working  towards  its  ruin. 
The  sins  of  a  nation  work,  like  the  subterranean  fires,  underground.  The  nation  may 
have  arts  lovely  as  the  landscape,  institutions  apparently  grand  and  firm  as  the  old 
mountains.  But  whilst  the  people  revel  in  their  exuberance  of  resources,  their  natural 
beauties,  and  in  the  grandeur  of  their  institutions,  and  that  for  ages,  sin,  like  an  ocean 
of  fire  underground,  will  one  day  break  out  in  flames,  that  will  destroy  the  whole,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  ten  tribes. — D.  T. 

Vers.  9 — 23. — A  great  privilege,  wickedness,  and  ruin.  "  For  so  it  was,"  etc.  We 
have  used  the  first  verses  of  this  chapter,  in  our  last  sketch,  to  set  forth  the  aspects  of 
a  corrupt  nation.  The  Israelitish  people  appear  in  that  fragment  of  their  history  as 
an  unfortimate  inheritor  of  wrong,  a  guilty  worker  of  wrong,  and  a  terrible  victim  of 
wrong.  These  fifteen  verses  now  under  our  notice  present  to  us  three  subjects  of 
thought — a  great  national  privilege ;  a  great  national  wickedness ;  and  a  great  national 
ruin. 

I.  A  OBBAT  NATIONAL  PBiviLEOB.  We  Icam  herefrom  that  the  Infinite  Governor  of 
the  world  bad  given  them  at  least  three  great  advantages — political  freedom,  right  toth* 


848  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  TEE  KINGS.       [oh- xvii.  1— 41. 

land,  and  the  highest  apiritnal  teaching.  He  had  given  them :  1.  Pdlitiedl  freedom. 
For  ages  they  had  heen  in  political  hondage,  the  mere  slaves  of  despots;  but  here  we 
are  told  that  €k>d  had  "  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  from  under  the  hand  of 
Pharaoh  King  of  Egypt"  (ver.  7).  When  they  crossed  the  Bed  Sea,  entered  the  desert, 
and  stepped  into  Palestin^  they  were  civilly  free ;  the  chains  that  had  bound  them  so 
long  were  then  completely  broken,  and  each  had  the  common  right  of  liberty.  Political 
freedom  is  the  inalienable  right  of  aU  men,  is  one  of  the  greatest  blessings  of  •  people, 
but  one  which  in  every  age  has  been  outraged  by  despots.  The  millions  are  groaning 
in  many  a  land  still  under  political  disabilities.  2.  A  right  to  the  land.  Canaan  was 
the  common  right  of  all ;  true,  it  was  divided  amongst  the  ten  tribes,  but  this  was  not 
for  the  private  interests  of  any,  but  for  the  good  of  all.  What  we  call  "  landlordism '' 
scarcely  existed,  and  perhaps  it  would  have  been  as  well  had  it  never  existed ;  it  bars 
the  common  rights  of  mankind.  When  one  thinks  that  all  the  land  in  Scotland, 
Ireland,  Wales,  and  England  is  in  the  hands  of  eight  thousand  men,  a  number  whicfa 
could  be  crowded  into  Spurgeon's  tabernacle,  and  that  thirty  millions  have  no  portion 
in  the  land,  it  is  impossible  not  to  feel  that  the  condition  of  things  is  anomalous. 
Archdeacon  Paley,  no  mean  authority,  with  his  characteristic  clearness  and  common 
sense,  has  the  following  remarkable  words :  "  If  you  should  see  a  flock  of  pigeons  in  a 
field  of  corn,  and  if  (instead  of  each  one  picking  where  and  what  it  liked,  taking  just  as 
much  as  it  wanted  and  no  more)  you  should  see  ninety-nine  of  them  gathering  tdl  they 
got  in  a  heap,  reserving  nothing  for  themselves  but  the  chaff  and  the  refuse,  keepinj; 
this  heap  for  one,  and  that  for  the  weakest,  perhaps  the  worst  pigeon  of  the  flock,  sitting 
rounil  and  looking  on  all  the  winter,  whilst  the  one  was  devouring,  throwing  about,  and 
wasting  it ;  and  if  a  pigeon  more  hardy  or  hungry  than  the  rest  touched  a  grain  of  the 
hoard,  all  the  others  instantly  flying  upon  it  and  tearing  it  to  pieces  ;-T-if  you  should  see 
this,  you  would  see  nothing  more  than  what  is  every  day  practised  and  established 
amongst  men.  Among  men  you  see  the  ninety  and  nine  toiling  and  scraping  together 
a  heap  of  superfluities  for  one  (and  this  one  too  oftentimes  the  feeblest  and  worst  of  the 
whole  set — a  child,  a  woman,  a  madman,  or  a  fool),  getting  nothing  for  themselves  all 
the  while  but  a  little  of  the  coarsest  of  the  provision  which  their  own  industry  produces, 
looking  quietly  on  while  they  see  the  fruits  of  all  the  labour  spent  or  spoUed,  and  if 
one  of  the  number  take  or  touch  a  particle  of  the  hoard,  the  others  joining  against  him 
and  hanging  him  for  the  theft."  What  boots  collecting  and  publishing  facts  concerning 
the  sufferings  of  people,  and  entitling  the  tract  the  '  Bitter  Cry  of  Outcast  London,' 
unless  something  is  done  to  put  a  greater  share  of  the  land  into  the  hands  of  the  people, 
not  by  violence  or  spoliation,  but  by  a  calm  and  just  legislation?  Alasl  even  good 
men,  through  a  weakness  of  judgment  and  the  workings  of  a  traditional  faith,  seem  to 
dream  that  by  multiplying  churches  and  chapels  they  will  hush  the  "bitter  cry." 
How  absurd  1  3.  The  highest  spiritual  teaching.  "  The  Lord  testified  against  Israel, 
and  against  Judah,  by  all  the  prophets,  and  by  all  the  seers,  saying.  Turn  ye  from 
your  evil  ways,  and  keep  my  commandments  and  my  statutes,  according  to  all  the 
Law  which  I  commanded  your  fathers,  and  which  I  sent  to  you  by  my  servants  the 
prophets  "  (ver.  13).  One  of  the  fundamental  needs  of  mankind  is  true  ethical  teach- 
ing ;  not  the  teaching  of  abstruse  dogmas  and  vain  ceremonies,  but  the  teaching  ot 
immutable  law — the  "  statutes  of  God."  These  statutes  are  not  only  written  on 
paper,  but  on  every  page  of  Nature's  magnificent  volume,  and  on  the  tablets  of  human 
reason  and  conscience.  "  Do  unto  others  as  ye  would  have  others  do  unto  you." 
Genuine  disciples  of  such  teaching  will  evermore  act  rightly  towards  themselves, 
towards  their  fellow-men,  and  towards  their  God. 

II.  A  QBEAT  NATIONAL  WICKEDNESS.  Possessing  all  these  privileges,  how  acted  these 
people^not  merely  the  people  of  Israel,  but  the  people  of  Judah  as  well  ?  Was  the 
sentiment  of  worship  and  justice  regnant  within  them  ?  Were  they  loyal  to  all  that  is 
beautiful,  true,  and  good  ?  Nay.  1.  They  rejected  God.  "  They  woiild  not  hear,  but 
hardened  their  necks,  like  to  the  neck  of  their  fathers,  that  did  not  lielieve  in  the  Lord 
their  God,"  etc.  (vers.  14,  15).  They  declined  the  study  of  his  statutes,  and  renounced 
his  claim  on  their  devotion.  2.  They  adopted  idols.  Mark :  (1)  The  eamestneai  of 
their  idolatry.  With  what  unremitting  zeal  they  promoted  the  cause  of  idolatry  I 
"  The  children  of  Israel  did  secretly  those  things  that  were  not  right  against  the  Lord 
their  Gk>d,  and  they  built  them  high  places  in  all  their  cities '' (ver.  9).    It  is  also 


«H.  xviL  1— 41.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  349 

stated,  "They  made  them  molten  images,  even  two  calves,  and  made  a  grove,  and 
worshipped  aU  the  host  of  heaven,  and  served  Baal "  (ver.  16).  Error  on  this  earth  is 
more  active  than  truth,  wrong  is  more  industrious  than  righ^  the  spirit  of  evil  knows 
no  rest,  it  goes  to  and  &o  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  Here,  then,  is  national  wicked- 
ness. Are  we,  as  a  country,  less  wicked  than  the  nation  of  Israel  ?  I  trow  not.  True, 
we  are  all,  for  the  most  part,  theoretical  theists,  but  how  many  practical  atheists? 
For  England  to  a  large  extent  ignores  the  Almighty.  It  might  be  said  of  most  of  us, 
"  God  is  not  in  all  out  thoughts." 

_  * 

"With  lips  they  own  him  Master,  in  life  oppose  hia  Word ; 

They  every  day  deny  him,  and  yet  they  call  him  '  Lord;' 

No  more  is  their  religion  like  his  in  life  and  deed 

Than  painted  grain  on  canvas  ia  like  the  living  seed." 

(2)  The  eruelty  of  their  idolatry.  "  And  they  caused  their  sons  and  daughters  to  pasi 
through  the  fire,  and  used  divination  and  enchantments,  and  sold  themselves  to  do 
evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  17). 

III.  Gkbat  national  euin.  "Therefore  the  Lord  was  very  angry  with  Israel, 
and  removed  them  out  of  his  sight "  (ver.  18) ;  "  The  Lord  rejected  all  the  seed  of 
Israel,  and  afSicted  them,  and  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  spoilers,  until  he  had 
cast  them  out  of  his  sight"  (ver.  20).  1.  Their  ruin  involved  the  entire  loss  of  their 
country.  "  So  was  Israel  carried  away  out  of  their  own  land  to  Assyria  imto  this 
day  "  (ver.  23).  Expatriation  is  an  enormoiu  trial.  2.  Their  ruin  involved  the  loss  of 
their  national  existence.  "  The  Lord  removed  them  out  of  his  sight "  (ver.  18).  The 
ten  tribes  are  gone,  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether  they  were  ever  worth  looking  after, 
for  they  were  a  miserable  type  of  humanity.  "  The  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes,"  says 
Dr.  Blackie,  "  was  never  restored,  nor  did  the  dispersed  of  Israel  ever  attempt  to  return 
in  a  body  to  their  land."  More  than  two  hundred  years  of  idolatry  and  wickedness  have 
been  followed  by  more  than  two  thousand  years  of  dispersion  and  alienation.  Having 
said  in  their  hearts  to  God,  •Depart  from  as  1 '  God  said  to  them,  '  Depart  from  me ! ' 
The  divorce  was  completed,  and  till  a  reconciliation  shall  take  place,  its  sad,  dark  firuits 
must  remain.  3.  Their  ruin  involved  the  r«<ri6«<tue  ojfeney  o^  i/eaven.  The  Assyrians 
were  only  the  instruments.  It  is  God's  plan  to  punish  the  wicked  by  the  wicked. 
No  wonder  that  amid  so  gross  a  perversion  of  the  worship  of  the  true  God,  and  the 
national  propensity  to  do  reverence  to  idols,  the  Divine  patience  was  exhausted,  and 
that  the  God  whom  they  had  forsaken  by  violating  covenant,  an  adherence  to  which 
formed  their  title  to  the  occupation  of  Canaan,  permitted  them  to  go  into  captivity, 
that  they  might  learn  the  difference  between  hii  service  and  that  of  their  despotic 
conquerors. — D.  T. 

Vers.  24 — 41. — Subjects  worth  thinking  about,  "  And  the  King  of  Assyria  brought 
men  from  Babylon,"  etc.  This  fragment  of  Israelitish  history  brings  under  our  notice 
four  subjects  which  run  through  all  human  history,  and  which  find  their  illustration  in 
the  events  of  modern  as  well  as  ancient  life. 

I.  The  ttbannt  of  man.  Here  we  find  the  Assyrians  committing  two  great  enormi- 
ties on  the  men  of  Israel — driving  them  out  of  their  own  land  into  Assyria,  and  taking 
possession  of  their  own  country  and  home.  "  And  the  King  of  Assyria  brought  meu 
from  Babylon,  and  from  Cuthah,  and  from  Ava,  and  from  Hamath,  and  from  Sephar- 
vaim,  and  placed  them  in  the  cities  of  Samaria  instead  of  the  children  of  Israel :  and 
they  possessed  Samaria,  and  dwelt  in  the  cities  thereof."  Who  that  King  of  Assyria 
was  at  this  time  who  carried  away  the  last  remnant  of  the  ten  tribes  into  a  foreign 
land,  and  brought  from  various  parts  of  his  own  country  men  to  occupy  their  property 
and  their  homes,  whether  Shalmaneser  or  Esarhaddon,  is  a  question  not  worth  debating. 
He  was  a  tyrant.  The  places  from  which  he  selected  the  men  whom  he  placed  in  the 
cities  of  Samaria  are  mentioned.  Cuthah,  a  city  about  fifteen  miles  north-east  from 
Babylon ;  Ava,  situated  on  the  Euphrates,  to  the  north  of  Babylon ;  Hamath,  the  chief 
city  of  Upper  Syria ;  and  Sepharvaim,  supposed  to  be  on  a  branch  stream  from  the 
Euphrates,  lying  about  sixteen  miles  from  Babylon.  Now,  there  was  tyranny  in  both 
cases.  There  was  tyranny  in  taking  the  Ansyrians  from  their  own  countries  and  placing 
them  in  the  cities  of  Samaria ;  as  well  as  tyranny  in  taking  away  the  ten  tribes  from 


850  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xvn.  1— 41, 

Samaria  into  foreign  regions.  Had  the  exchange  taken  place  with  the  mutual  coasent 
of  both  parties,  there  would  have  been  no  outrage  on  the  rights  of  man,  but  it  might, 
indeed,  have  conduced  to  the  interests  of  both  parties  concerned.  Men  are  constantly 
changing  their  countries,  especially  in  this  age,  when  facilities  for  travelling  are  increas- 
ing every  day,  when  the  old  countries  are  becoming  over-populated,  their  resources 
rapidly  decreasing,  and  new  and  fertile  regions  opening  up  in  every  part  of  the  globe. 
All  this  is  right  enougli,  as  well  as  often  necessary  and  truly  expedient.  But  to  be 
forced  away  from  home,  this  is  tyranny,  and  such  tyranny  is  not  extinct  even  in  our 
England.  The  tens  of  thousands  that  leave  our  shores  every  year  for  strange  and  distant 
lands,  for  the  most  part  do  it  by  a  terrible  coercion.  Not  only  is  he  a  tyrant  who 
inflicts  positive  injustice  on  another,  but  also  he  who  withholds  from  another  his  due. 
Tyranny  is  not  confined  to  the  throne  of  despots,  but  it  sits  in  every  heart  where  there 
is  not  a  practical  regard  for  the  rights  of  others.  It  is  in  Belgravian  mansions  and 
ducal  castles,  where  the  groans  of  starving  millions  around  are  disregarded,  as  well  as 
in  the  palace  of  the  Czar  of  Bussia,  where  the  rights  of  millions  are  trodden  imderfoot. 

"  Thinkest  thou  there  is  no  tyranny  but  that 
Of  blood  and  chains  ?    The  despotism  of  vice. 
The  weakness  and  the  wickedness  of  luxury. 
The  negligence,  the  apathy,  the  evils 
Of  sensual  sloth — produce  ten  thousand  tyrants. 
Whose  delegated  cruelty  surpasses 
The  worst  acts  of  one  energetic  master,  . 
However  harsh  and  hard  in  his  own  bearing." 

(Byron.) 

n.  The  retributions  of  life.  "  And  so  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  their  dwelling 
there,  that  they  feared  not  the  Lord :  therefore  the  Lord  sent  lions  among  them,  which 
slew  some  of  them.  Wherefore  they  spake  to  the  King  of  Assyria,  saying,  The  nations 
which  thou  hast  removed,  and  placed  in  the  cities  of  Samaria,  know  not  the  manner  of 
the  God  of  the  land:  therefore  he  hath  sent  lions  among  them,  and,  behold,  they  slay 
them,  because  they  know  not  the  manner  of  the  God  of  the  land."  Probably  the 
lions  had  been  in  the  land  of  Samaria  before  the  settlement  of  the  Assyrian  colonists 
but  after  their  settlement  these  furious  beasts  of  prey  seem  to  have  been  multiplied. 
Perhaps  the  colonists  were  too  few  in  number  to  keep  them  down  and  to  check  theii 
increase.  Still,  whatever  the  natural  cause  or  causes  of  their  increase,  it  was  regardec 
by  the  new  population  as  a  retributive  visitation.  The  statement  of  the  courtiers  to  the 
king  was,  "  The  nations  which  thou  hast  removed,  and  placed  in  the  cities  of  Samaria, 
know  not  the  manner  of  the  God  of  the  land :  therefore  he  hath  sent  lions  among  them," 
etc.  The  law  of  retribution  is  ever  at  work  in  human  history,  not  only  in  the  lives  of 
nations,  but  in  the  lives  of  individuals.  No  man  can  do  a  wrong  thing  without  suffering 
for  it  in  some  form  or  other.  Nemesis  surely,  though  silently,  treads  on  the  heels  of 
wrong.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  The  lions  of  retribution 
track  our  steps  as  sinners  stealthily,  and  are  ready  to  spring  on  us  at  any  moment.  We 
are  far  enough  from  saying  that  retribution  here  is  adequate  and  complete ;  hence  there 
is  within  all  a  "fearful  looking  for"  of  some  future  judgment.  We  do  not  fuUy  dis- 
charge the  debt ;  as  we  go  on  it  accumulates,  and  there  is  a  balance  to  be  settled  in  the 
great  hereafter.  Albeit  the  retribution  here  is  a  foretaste  and  pledge  of  a  judgment  to 
come. 

"  Nature  has  her  laws. 
That  will  not  brook  infringement ;  in  all  time, 
All  circumstances,  all  etate,  in  every  clime 
She  holds  aloft  the  same  avenging  swoid. 
And,  sitting  on  her  boundless  throne  sublime, 
Tiie  vials  of  her  wrath,  with  Justice  stored, 
Shall  in  her  own  good  hour  on  all  that's  ill  be  poured." 

(PeiolvaL) 

ni.  The  pbostitution  of  beligion.  The  Assyrian  king,  it  would  seem,  in  answer 
to  the  alarm  which  was  felt  concerning  the  colonists  whom  he  had  settled  in  the  cities 
of  Samaria,  conceived  the  plan  of  adopting  religion  as  the  remedy.    "  Then  the  King  of 


OB.  zvn.  1— 41.J       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  861 

Assyria  commftnded,  saying,  Carry  thither  one  of  the  priests  whom  ye  brought  from 
thence ;  and  let  them  go  and  dwell  there,  and  let  him  teach  them  the  manner  of  the  God 
of  the  land."  The  priest  whom  the  king  sent  to  them  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the 
exiled  priests  who  had  formerly  had  his  head-quarters  at  Bethel.  It  is  not  said  this 
priest  took  a  copy  of  the  Pentateuch  with  him ;  perhaps  he  trusted  to  his  religious 
intelligence  and  to  his  oral  abilities.  The  fact  of  his  being  one  of  the  exiled  priests, 
and  being  settled  in  Bethel,  would  imply  that  he  was  not  a  Levite,  but  rather  one  of 
the  calf-worshipping  priests ;  his  instructions,  therefore,  would  most  likely  not  he  very 
sound  or  useful.  Now,  the  question  is,  why  did  this  Assyrian  king  introduce  this 
religion?  Not  because  he  or  his  people  had  any  faith  in  it.  "  Howbeit  every  nation 
made  godfl  of  their  own,  and  put  them  in  the  houses  of  the  high  places  which  the 
Samaritans  had  made,  every  nation  in  their  cities  wherein  they  dwelt,"  etc.  (vers.  29 — 
31).  Several  of  the  gods  of  these  people  are  here  mentioned.  "  Sticcoth-benoth."  The 
meaning  of  this  word,  which  is  thought  to  be  "  tents  or  booths  of  daughters,"  might 
seem  to  point  to  the  places  where  the  Babylonians  celebrated  impure  rites ;  but  here  it 
represents  one  of  the  deities.  "  Nergal "  is  said  to  have  been  worshipped  \mder  the  form 
of  a  cook ;  and  from  Layard,  in  his  woi  k  on  Nirieveh  and  Babylon,  we  find  that  a  cock 
was  sometimes  associated  with  a  priest  on  the  Assyrian  monuments.  "  Ashima,"  accord- 
ing to  some,  was  worshipped  under  the  form  of  a  he-goat,  bald  to  the  very  skin.  "  Nibhaz." 
This  deity  was  represented  in  the  figure  of  a  dog.  "  Tartak."  Accordino;  to  the  rabbis, 
this  deity  was  represented  in  the  form  of  an  ass.  "  Adrammelech."  This  means  the 
"  fire-king,"  who  was  worshipped  as  a  sun-god.  "  Anammelech,"  a  deity  worshipped, 
some  say  in  the  form  of  a  hare,  and  some  say  in  the  form  of  a  goat.'  These  were  the 
gods  in  which  the  king  and  the  colonists  seem  to  have  had  faith,  and  not  in  the  one 
true  and  living  God.  Why,  then,  did  the  king  send  this  priest  from  Bethel  to  impart 
to  them  a  knowledge  of  the  God  of  Israel?  Simply  as  a  matter  of  selfish  policy.  The 
attention  that  they  paid  to  any  representation  that  the  priest  made  of  the  true  God 
was  partial,  insincere,  and  selfish.  -  "So  they  feared  the  Lord,  and  made  unto  them- 
selves of  the  lowest  of  them  priests  of  the  high  places,  which  sacrificed  for  them 
in  the  houses  of  the  high  places.  They  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their  own  gods, 
after  the  manner  of  the  nations  whom  they  carried  away  from  thence.  Unto  this  day 
they  do  after  the  former  manners,"  etc.  Here  you  have  one  of  the  million  examples  of 
that  religion  of  policy  that  has  abounded  in  all  lands  and  times.  In  every  page  in 
history,  nay,  in  every  scene  of  life,  we  find  religion  taken  up  as  a  means  to  an  end, 
rather  than  as  the  grand  end  of  being.  Some  use  it  as  a  means  for  secular  advantage, 
others  as  a  means  for  personal  salvation — what  is  called  the  salvation  of  the  soul. 
Bulers  employ  it  as  a  means  to  govern  the  people,  and  priests  employ  it  as  a  means  to 
coerce  men  into  ecclesiastical  order  or  conventional  morality.  In  such  cases  their  own 
personal  interests  are  by  no  means  ignored.  This  is  a  prostitution  of  religion.  True 
religion  should  ever  be  pursued  as  the  supreme  end  of  man.  In  it  alone  his  highest 
obligations  are  fulfilled,  his  full  powers  employed,  his  true  destiny  realized.  But,  alas ! 
everywhere  we  find  it  regarded  as  a  subsidiary  and  partial  element  in  man's  calculations, 
experience,  and  life.  What  is  here  said  applies  to  millions  even  in  Christendom. 
"  They  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their  own  gods."  The  religion  of  policy  will  never 
rescue  man  from  the  rapacious  jaws  of  the  lions  of  retribution. 

IV.  The  THE18TIC  hukoeb  of  souiiS.  All  these  men,  both  the  colonists  and  the 
Israelites,  would  have  their  gods ;  a  god  seemed  to  them  as  necessary  almost  as  their 
life.  "  So  these  nations  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their  graven  images,  both  their 
children,  and  their  children's  children :  as  did  their  fathers,  so  do  they  unto  this  day." 
The  same  hunger  for  worship  which  the  generations  that  preceded  them  possessed  and 
developed  had  been  transmitted  to  these  their  children  as  an  innate  force  in  their  spiri- 
jtual  constitution.  The  religious  element  in  man  is  not  a  passing  sentiment,  not  a  tra- 
ditional belief,  not  something  superadded  to  his  nature.  It  is  the  very  core  of  hig 
being,  the  substratum  in  which  all  his  higher  faculties  inhere.  He  who  has  this 
element  in  him  (and  who  has  not  ?)  needs  no  argument  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  God, 
If  it  be  alive  within  him,  all  such  arguments  are  an  impertinence.  The  existence  of  a 
Supreme  Being  is  independent  of  all  proof.    It  is  written  on  the  consciousness  of  human 

*  9«e  tmjvii  on  Nineveh  md  Babylon ;  and  I(awUnBon'»  *  Ancient  IliIonani|iie«.' 


S62  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh  xvn.  1— 41. 

nature.  Like  the  fact  of  our  own  being,  it  is  too  near,  too  evident,  too  much  a  matter 
of  living  self,  for  outward  argument  to  have  any  force.  Faith  in  Otod  springs  from 
within.  It  is  based  on  those  immutable  sentiments  of  the  soul  that  outlive  all  theories 
and  defy  aU  scepticism.  To  deny  the  existence  of  God  is  to  offer  violence  to  all  that  is 
great  and  sacred  in  human  nature. — D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  end  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  We  learn  from  the  inscriptions  that 
Hoshea,  the  murderer  of  Pekah,  only  secured  his  throne  by  acknowledging  the  supre- 
macy of  the  King  of  Assyria.  It  was  not  long,  however,  before  he  conspired  to  achieve 
his  independence.     This  led  to  the  final  overthrow  of  the  kingdom. 

I.  A  LAST  FLIOKEE.  1.  Hoshea's  letter  character.  It  is  said  of  this  last  King  of 
Israel  that  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  "but  not  as  the  kings  of  Israel  that 
were  before  him."  The  testimony  rather  points  to  the  great  wickedness  of  the  earlier 
kings  than  implies  any  exceptional  virtue  in  Hoshea,  who  came  to  the  throne  by  blood, 
and  showed  no  more  reliance  on  God  than  the  others.  His  character,  however,  must 
have  had  some  redeeming  qualities.  Possibly  he  tried  to  check  some  of  the  excesses  of 
wickedness  in  the  land,  and  to  discountenance  at  least  foreign  idolatries.  The  unfavour- 
able judgment  we  are  sometimes  compelled  to  pass  on  men's  characters  as  a  whole  need 
not  blind  us  to  what  is  praiseworthy  in  them.  2.  A  hopeless  task.  It  is  both  curious 
and  pathetic  to  see  this  last  flicker  of  a  better  disposition  in  the  kings  of  Israel  just 
before  the  end.  But  even  had  Hoshea  been  a  better  ruler  than  he  was,  it  was  probably 
now  too  late  to  do  the  nation  any  good.  Every  attempt  to  bring  the  people  back  to  God 
had  proved  in  vain,  and  corruption  had  reached  a  height  which  made  a  crisis  inevitable. 
The  carcase  was  there,  and  the  vultures  were  preparing  to  descend  upon  it.  We  have 
a  modern  example  in  the  state  of  the  French  nation  prior  to  the  great  Revolution.  A 
nation,  like  an  individual,  has  its  day  of  grace,  and  if  that  is  sinned  away  there  remains 
only  "  a  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment"  (Heb.  x.  27). 

II.  Broken  ENGAOEMENT8.  \.  A  policy  of  douVle-dealing.  Hoshea's  desire  from  the 
first  was  to  free  his  land  from  the  yoke  of  Assyria.  Some  attempt  of  this  kind,  pro- 
bably at  the  death  of  Tiglath-pileser,  brought  down  upon  him  the  new  king,  Shal- 
maneser,  nho  compelled  his  submission,  and  exacted  tribute.  But  Hoshea  was  not 
faithful  to  his  engagements.  While  still  pretending  loyalty  to  Shalmaneser,  he  was 
carrjring  on  a  system  of  intrigue  with  So,  King  of  Egypt  (Sabaco).  They  "  made  a 
covenant  with  the  Assyrians,"  and  at  the  same  time  "oil  was  carried  into  Egypt" 
(Hos.  xii.  1).  It  was  not  God  Hoshea  trusted  in,  but  an  alliance  with  Egypt.  He 
relied  on  treachery,  on  double-dealing,  on  clever  intrigue,  to  get  him  out  of  lus  diffi- 
culties. This  kind  of  policy  never  permanently  succeeds.  2.  Open  revolt.  When 
Hoshea  thought  himself  strong  enough,  he  threw  off  his  allegiance  to  Shalmaneser.  He 
brought  him  no  present,  as  he  had  done  year  by  year.  He  was  playing  a  desperate 
game,  but  he  seems  to  have  thought  himself  secure.  A  people  is  justified  in  rebellion 
against  foreign  authority  when  it  is  strong  enough  to  make  success  probable ;  but 
God's  blessing  could  hardly  be  looked  for  on  an  attempt  which  was  cradled  in  dupli- 
city, and  in  which  God  himself  was  totally  ignored.  3.  A  bruised  reed.  As  might 
have  been  anticipated,  So  failed  Hoshea  in  his  hour  of  need.  His  "  oil "  and  other 
presents  had  been  sent  in  vain.  The  King  of  Assyria  came  against  him ;  but  there  was 
no  movement  on  the  part  of  Egypt  for  his  help.  He  had  trusted  in  the  staff  of  a  bruised 
reed  (ch.  xviii.  21).  How  manifold  are  the  disappointments  of  those  who  rely  on  "the 
help  of  man  "  (Ps.  Ix.  11),  and  put  their  "  trust  in  princes  "  (Ps.  cxlvi.  3)  I  Hoshea 
himself  was  captured,  and  shut  up  in  prison.    His  ultimate  fate  we  do  not  know. 

III.  Final  ruin.  1.  JVie  siege  of  Samaria.  The  King  of  Assyria  now  marched 
against  Samaria,  which  bravely  held  out  for  three  years.  Had  details  been  given  us,  it 
would  no  doubt  have  been  found  that  this  was  one  of  the  great  sieges  of  history — great 
in  its  horrors,  as  well  as  in  its  after-results.  We  may  picture  the  extremities  of  the 
famine  of  ch.  vi.  repeated  with  additional  horrors  of  anarchy  and  bloodshed  ;  or,  with 
perhaps  more  truth,  we  may  draw  our  ideas  of  this  siege  from  the  descriptions  of  the 
siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.,  xxv.).  That  was  the  concluding 
act  in  the  history  of  the  southern  kingdom,  as  this  was  the  concluding  act  in  the 
history  of  the  northern.  Both  were  long-delayed,  and  in  the  end  terrible  judgments 
of  God.    The  cup  of  ini(;^uity  was  full,  and  another  cup— the  cup  of  Gt)d'B  wra^— > 


ea.  xvn.  1—41.]  TAB  SECOND  BOOS  OT  THE  KlNGa  «53 

was  now  put  into  the  nation's  hand  (ef.  Fs.  Izxv.  8).  The  city  at  length  fell,  and  the 
final  blow  descended.  2.  The  eaptivity  of  the  tribes.  We  read  on  the  monuments  that, 
after  the  fall  of  Samaria,  the  King  of  Egypt,  alarmed  probably  for  his  own  safety, 
approached,  and  was  defeated  by  Sargon,  Sbalmaneser's  successor.  In  any  case,  help 
was  now  unavailing  for  the  unhappy  Israelites.  The  children  of  Israel  were  removed 
from  their  cities,  and  carried  away  captive  into  Assyria,  being  scattered  up  and  down 
in  the  places  named.  27,280,  according  to  Sargon,  were  taken  from  Samaria  alone. 
What  sorrow  was  here  I  Torn  from  their  land,  exiles  from  house  and  home,  forced  to 
eat  unclean  things  in  Assyria  (Hos.  is.  3,  4),  their  national  existence  extinguished, 
ruled  by  the  heathen, — all  because,  when  they  knew  God,  they  would  not  glorify  him 
as  God,  but  gave  his  glory  to  dumb  idols,  and  defiled  his  land  with  their  abominations, 
and  misused  the  gifts  he  had  so  richly  bestowed  on  them  (cf.  Hos.  ii.). — J.  O. 

Vers.  7 — 23. — Seview  of  the  history  cf  Israel.  The  Bible  does  not  simply  relate,  but 
draws  aside  the  veil  and  shows  us  the  innermost  springs  of  God's  providence,  and  how 
they  work.  It  teaches  us  to  understand  the  deepest  causes  of  the  rise  and  fall  of 
nations.  The  causes  it  insists  on  are  not  economical,  or  political,  or  intellectual,  but 
religious,  and  its  lessons  are  for  all  time.  We  may  say  of  this  survey  of  Israel's 
history — these  things  "  are  written  for  our  admonition,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the 
world  are  come"  (1  Cor.  x.  11).    We  have  here— 

I.  Manifold  proyooations.  1.  Ingratitude  to  God.  This  is  put  in  the  foreground. 
It  was  the  Lord  "  their  God  "  Israel  had  sinned  against— the  God  who  had  brought 
them  up  from  Egypt,  who  had  delivered  them  from  bondage,  who  had  made  a  nation 
of  them,  who  had  given  them  a  land  to  dwell  in,  who  had  bouad  them  to  himself  by 
solemn  covenant.  What  people  were  ever  under  stronger  obligations  to  obedience!  Yet 
they  apostatized,  and  "  feared  other  gods."  Sin  appears  more  heinous  against  a  back- 
ground of  mercies  received.  It  is  worse  for  a  nation  that  has  known  God,  that  has 
possessed  pure  ordinances,  and  has  been  graciously  dealt  with  by  him,  to  backslide,  than 
for  another  that  has  been  less  favoured.  Our  own  nation  has  been  blessed  in  these 
respects  as  few  have  been  or  are.  Correspondingly  great  are  our  responsibilities.  The 
individual  may  reflect  that  the  fact  of  spiritual  redemption — salvation  through  Christ- 
places  him  under  greater  obligations  than  could  spring  from  any  temporal  deliverance. 
2.  Heathenish  ways.  The  positive  wickedness  of  the  people  is  next  detailed.  The 
heart  of  man  cannot  exist  without  an  object  to  fill  and  occupy  it;  and  if  God  is 
neglected,  something  else  must  be  found  to  take  his  place.  The  Israelites  rejected 
Jehovah,  but  they  took  to  following  idols.  They  would  have  none  of  his  statutes,  but 
they  walked  in  the  statutes  of  the  heathen,  and  of  the  kings  of  Israel.  It  is  to  be 
remembered  that  the  heathen  worships  here  referred  to  were  saturated  through  and 
through  with  lust  and  vileness.  It  was  because  of  the  nameless  abominations  con- 
nected with  them  that  the  Lord,  after  long  forbearance,  cast  out  the  former  inhabitants 
from  Canaan  (Lev.  xviii.  24—32 ;  xx.  1 — 6).  Yet  these  were  the-  ways  into  which 
Israel  turned  back  in  the  land  which  God  had  given  them.  May  we  not  fear  as  we 
think  of  the  vices,  the  impurities,  the  filthy  abominations,  which  abound  in  our  own 
nation  ?  3.  Ze(d  in  the  service  of  idols.  Israel  had  no  heart  for  the  service  of  God,  but 
they  showed  unbounded  zeal  in  the  service  of  their  idols.  Publicly,  and  in  secret  also, 
in  every  city,  on  every  hill,  and  under  every  green  tree,  wherever  even  there  was  a 
watchman's  solitary  tower,  there  they  set  up  their  high  places,  burnt  incense,  and 
"  wrought  wicked  things  to  provoke  the  Lord  to  anger."  The  children  of  light  may 
well  learn  a  lesson  from  the  children  of  this  world  in  respect  of  zeal.  If  only  one  tithe 
of  the  earnestness  with  which  men  serve  the  devil  were  put  into  the  service  of  God, 
how  rapid  would  be  the  spread  of  true  religion !  The  wicked  throw  the  whole  energy 
of  their  souls  into  their  follies,  their  pursuit  of  pleasure,  their  service  of  the  world,  the 
devil,  and  the  flesh.  But  how  slack-handed  and  half-hearted  oftentimes  are  Christians! 
What  wonder  God's  cause  suffers  1 

IL  Bejeotion  op  pbofhkts.  1.  OocPe  prophets  sent.  God  did  not  leave  Israel  to 
sin  without  trying  every  means  to  turn  the  people  from  their  evil  ways.  Prophetii 
were  sent,  and  these  not  one  or  two,  but  "all  the  prophets  "  and  "all  the  seers."  They 
were  sent  both  to  Israel  and  to  Judah.  They  spoke  in  God's  Name  to  the  people,  testi- 
£«d  against  their  tins,  and  exhorted  them  to  return  to  tiie  ways  of  right  They  warned 
■a.  xoiaa.  S  a 


864  iBE  SteCONt)  Book  0*"  the  SINGS.     Co=.xvn.l— 41 

them  alBO  of  tlie  consequences  of  disobedience  (ver.  23).  Thus  it  was  shown  that  Gkd 
has  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth  (Ezek.  xviii.  32).  The  &ct  of  warning 
being  given  is  a  great  aggravation  of  guilt  if  sin  is  persisted  in.  It  leaves  the  trans- 
gressor without  excuse.  In  our  own  land  warnings  abound.  The  Bible  is  widely  dr- 
culated,  the  gospel  is  faithfully  preached ;  there  is  no  lack  of  voices  proclaiming  the 
need  and  duty  of  repentance.  If  men  perish,  it  is  not  in  ignorance.  They  sin  against 
light,  and  their  blood  is  on  their  own  heads.  2.  Their  tatimony  refected.  The  efforts 
of  the  prophets  to  bring  the  people  back  to  God  proved  unavailing.  No  heed  was  paid 
to  their  warnings ;  rather  the  people  grew  bolder  and  more  daring  in  sin.  If  &ithful 
counsel  does  not  soften,  it  hardens.  Judged  by  outward  results,  no  class  of  preachers 
ever  had  less  success  than  the  Hebrew  prophets.  Their  exhortations  seemed  as  water 
spilt  upon  the  ground.  Yet  through  them  was  preserved  and  kept  alive  in  the  nation 
a  remnant  according  to  grace  (Bom.  xi.  5),  and  to  it  belonged  the  great  future  of  Grod't 
priimises.  The  stubbornness  of  the  Jewish  character  was  proverbial — they  were,  and 
had  ever  been,  a  stiff-necked  people.  The  root  of  their  evil  was  they  "  did  not  believe 
in  the  Lord  their  Giod."  When  they  did  believe,  the  same  basis  of  character  dis- 
covers itself  in  their  unyielding  tenacity  and  perseverance  in  serving  God  and  obe3ring 
the  dictates  of  their  conscience  (cf.  Dan.  iii.).  3.  Aggravated  wicTcedneas.  The  people 
latterly  threw  off  all  restraint  in  the  practice  of  their  evil.  It  was  no  longer  "  secretly," 
but  openly,  that  they  rejected  the  statutes  of  the  Lord  their  Gk)d  and  his  covenant,  and 
the  testimonies  which  he  testified  against  them.  It  but  aggravated  the  evil  that  in 
name  they  still  claimed  him  as  their  God,  and  professed  to  do  him  honour,  while  in 
reality  they  had  "  left  all  his  commandments,"  and  had  changed  the  whole  substance  of 
his  religion.  The  form  is  nothing  if  the  heart  is  wanting  (Matt.  xv.  7 — 9) ;  but  the 
Israelites  changed  even  the  form.  They  went  after  vanity,  and  became  vain,  imitating 
the  heathen  who  were  round  about  them,  and  unblushingly  introducing  the  worst 
heathen  abominations  into  their  own  worship.  (1)  They  changed  the  fundamental  law 
of  Israel  in  making  molten  images — intended  to  represent  Jehovah,  no  doubt,  but  still 
idols — Baalim.  (2)  They  imported  the  Fhoeniciaa  Baal-worship,  with  its  pillars  and 
ash  eras,  and  its  licentious  rites — another  direct  violation  of  fundamental  laws.  (3) 
They  went  further  afield,  and  imported  from  Babylonia  or  Assyria  the  worship  of  "  the 
host  of  heaven  " — another  thing  directly  forbidden  on  pain  of  death  (Deut.  xvii.  2 — 7). 
(4)  Still  unsatisfied,  they  abandoned  themselves  to  the  horrid  rites  of  Moloch,  and  to 
the  practice  of  every  kind  of  divination  and  enchantment — the  last  and  lowest  stage  in 
a  people's  religious  degradation.  This  also  was  most  emphatically  forbidden  to  the 
Israelites  under  the  most  severe  penalties  (Lev.  xx.  1 — 6).  Thus  they  literally  "sold" 
themselves  to  do  evil,  throwing  off  all  shame  or  pretence  of  regard  for  God's  authority, 
and  became  confirmed  and  wedded  -to  their  evil  ways.  In  heart  and  outward  conduct 
they  had  absolutely  and  utterly  apostatized  from  God,  and  seemed  bent  only  on  pro- 
voking him  to  anger.  Instead  of  marvelling  at  their  final  rejection,  one  wonders  how  a 
holy  God  should  have  borne  with  them  so  long.  But  is  not  God's  patience  with  sinners 
and  peoples  still  just  as  wonderful?  Their  iniquities  literally  go  up  to  heaven  before 
he  cuts  them  off. 

UL  Justice  ko  lonoeb  TABBYnra.  If  the  Lord's  justice  tarries,  it  does  not  sleep. 
And  when  the  blow  does  fall,  it  is  all  the  more  severe  that  it  has  been  so  long  delayed. 
1.  Israel  rejected.  This  people  had  rejected  God,  and  God  now  rejected  them,  as  he 
had  from  the  first  threatened  he  would  do  (Lev.  xxvi.  14—29).  He  did  not  cast  tbem 
off  without  the  warning  afforded  by  many  premonitory  judgments.  But  when  neither 
judgment  nor  mercy  was  regarded,  and  the  cup  of  their  transgression  was  brimming 
over,  he  gave  them  np,  and  "  cast  them  out  of  his  sight."  They  were  carried  away  out 
of  their  own  land  to  Assyria,  and  never,  as  a  nation,  returned.  2.  Judah  not  taking 
warning.  The  sad  thing  was  that  Judah  also,  which  had  begun  to  walk  in  the  same 
paths,  (fid  not  take  warning  by  the  fall  of  the  sister  kin^om.  "  The  princes  of  Judah 
were  like  them  that  remove  the  bound  "  (Hos.  v.  10),  and  many  warnings  directed  to 
Judah  mingle  with  the  prophetic  denunciations  of  Israel.  Yet,  notwithstanding  partial 
reformations,  the  people  did  not  repent.  The  sight  is  not  unparalleled.  If  wicked 
men  could  be  deterred  from  sin,  or  led  to  repentance,  by  wamii^s,  these  are  never 
wanting.  History  and  experience  bear  uniform  testimony  that  it  is  well  with  the 
righteous,  ill  with  the  wicked ;  mf n  have  daily  examples  cf  the  miaom  effeota  of  tim 


fln.  zvii.  1— 41.J      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOS.  866 

before  their  eyes ;  yet  they  go  on  heedless  and  blinded.  It  is  not  a  question  of  reaaon, 
but  of  evil  inclination,  and  wrong  bent  of  will.  Sin  is  truly  named  folly — ^it  is  the 
absolute  unwisdom.  3.  The  origin  of  the  mischief.  Again,  the  source  of  all  these 
evils  which  came  on  Israel  is  traced  to  Jeroboam's  fatal  step  in  setting  up  the  two 
calves.  It  was  he  who  " diave  Israel  from  following  the  Lord,  and  made  them  sin  a 
great  sin."  One  step  in  the  wrong  direction  carries  many  others  in  its  train.  That  act 
of  Jeroboam  had  in  the  heart  of  it  a  principle  which  logically  meant  the  overthrow  of 
the  theocracy.  It  was  not  only  a  violation  of  the  fundamental  law  of  the  second 
commandment ;  but  it  was  an  act  of  self-will  in  religion ;  the  assertion  uf  the  right  to 
set  human  will  above  God's  ordinances,  and  change  and  alter  them  at  pleasure.  Once 
a  principle  of  that  kind  is  introduced  and  acted  on,  it  cannot  be  prevented  from  logically 
working  itself  out.  The  consequences  of  a  wrong  step  stretch  far  beyond  the  result! 
immediately  seen  or  intended.— J.  0. 

Vers.  24—41. — Heathen  occujiants  of  the  land.  The  narrative  of  the  fall  of  the 
northern  kingdom  concludes  with  an  account  of  the  arrangements  made  by  the  King 
of  Assyria  for  resettling  the  land  of  Israel. 

I.  The  new  bettlers.  1.  Their  foreign  origin.  The  policy  of  removing  rebellious 
populations  to  distant  parts — at  this  time  a  favourite  one  with  the  Assyrians — ^led  not 
only  to  the  Israelites  being  carried  away  to  Assyria,  but  to  foreign  settlers  being 
brought  and  put  down  in  their  place.  The  nationalities  of  the  new  inhabitants  are 
mentioned.  They  were  men  from  Babylon,  and  Cuthah,  and  Ava,  and  Hamath,  and 
Sepharvaim.  These' took  possession  of  the  cities  of  Samaria,  and  dwelt  in  them.  Behold 
now  God's  holy  land  in  the  possession  of  aliens,  men  without  one  glimmer  of  knowledge 
of  the  true  God  and  his  ways  1  The  Israelites  had  become  heathen  in  heart,  and  were 
removed,  and  now  real  heathen  were  put  in  their  place.  In  the  sight  of  God  the  latter 
were  less  objectionable  than  the  former.  They  had  never  known  anything  better  than 
heathenism;  while  the  Israelites  had  sinned  against  the  clearest  light  and  the  strongest 
love.  In  the  judgment-day,  the  heathen  will  rise  up  to  condemn  those  who  have 
abused  the  light  of  revelation  (Matt.  xii.  41).  2.  The  visitation  of  lions.  Thick 
darkness  had  now  settled  on  the  land.  Even  the  outward  worship  of  Jehovah  hnd 
ceased,  and  the  only  gods  known  were  those  of  the  heathen  colonists.  Yet  the  land 
was  Jehovah's,  and  however  he  might  "  wink  "  at  the  ignorance  of  a  rude,  uninstructed 
people,  it  was  not  meet  that  something  should  not  be  done  to  arouse  them  to  inquiry. 
The  removal  of  the  former  inhabitants  seems  to  have  led  to  the  multiplication  of  lions, 
and  these  now  began  to  attack  the  people  in  a  way  which  convinced  them  that  the 
God  of  the  land  was  displeased  with  them.  It  is  not  only  the  colonists  who  took,  this 
view  of  the  matter.  The  sacred  writer  gives  the  same  interpretation.  God  has  his 
own  ways  of  speaking  to  the  consciences  of  men,  and  this  was  the  one  now  adopted. 
The  people  were  right  in  seeing  in  the  visitation  a  reminder  of  their  neglect  of  "  the 
manner  of  ,the  God  of  the  land ; "  they  were  wrong  in  thinking,  that  all  that  was 
necessary  to  remedy  this  neglect  was  the  performance  of  certain  external  rites.  It  was 
moral  conduct,  based  on  a  right  knowledge  of  himself,  which  "  the  God  of  the  land  " 
required.  But  their  error  was  only  part  of  their  dark  heathen  superstition.  3.  2%eir 
reqtKst  for  instrnction.  The  people  were  much  concerned  about  the  visitation  which 
had  befallen  them,  and  their  case  was  reported  at  once  to  the  King  of  Assyria,  who 
sent  them  one  of  the  priests  who  had  been  carried  away  captive,  to  teach  them  "  how 
they  should  fear  the  Lord."  Alas !  how  shall  the  Wind  lead  the  blind!  This  priest  was 
himself  one  who  had  no  right  knowledge  of  Jehovah.  He  was  doubtless  one  of  the  priests 
of  Bethel,  who  had  been  mixed  up  with  the  calf-worship  and  all  the  other  sins  for  which 
Israel  had  been  carried  away.  It  is  evident  from  the  results  that  he  gave  the  people  no 
right  instruction.  He  probably  set  up  again  at  the  Bethel  sanctuary  the  disused  rites  of 
the  former  idolatry,  and  taught  the  people  some  external  observances  connected  with  the 
Name  of  Jehovah.  A  religion  so  deeply  corrupted  was  hardly  better  than  those  they 
already  practised.  Jehovah  remained  to  them  a  local  deity,  of  whose  real  character 
they  knew  nothing,  and  whom  they  served  from  motives  of  fear. 

H.  Mixed  belioionb.  1.  Ih-traorainary  syncretism.  An  extraordinary  Bcene  wa* 
now  witnessed.  The  new-comers,  once  settled  in  their  cities,  lost  no  time  in  organiBing 
their  leli^ons — ^ia  this,  at  all  events,  setting  an  example  to  more  enlightened  paojles. 


8M 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THB  KINGS,     [ch.  iVm.  1—37. 


The  Ugh.  places  formerly  nsed  by  tlw  Israelites  stood  temptingly  ready  to  receive  the 
»ew  idols.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  character  of  the  priest's  instructions,  they 
had  no  influence  in  checking  the  multiplication  of  strange  gods.  In  the  mixture  of 
peoples,  each  nationality  adhered  to  its  own  deity.  The  Babylonians  made  Succoth- 
benotb,  the  Cuthites  made  Nergal,  the  men  of  Hamath  made  Ashima,  etc.  The  result 
was  a  chaotic  confusion  of  religions,  guch  as  perhaps  has  never  before  or  since  been 
equalled.  The  new  worships  needed  priests,  and  these  were  made  from  the  lowest  of 
the  people.  The  whole  is  a  sad  but  instructive  picture  of  heathenism  in  its  want  of 
internal  unity,  its  Babel-like  confusion,  its  destitution  of  moral  character,  and  its 
degrading  and  cruel  practices,  e.g.  the  burning  of  the  children  in  the  fire  to  Adrammelech, 
etc.  Only  monotheism  can  give  true  unity  to  life,  religion,  and  worship.  2.  Jehovah 
and  strange  gods.  Meanwhile  Jehovah  was  not  overlooked,  but  had  his  place  given 
him  among  the  rest.  The  people  "feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their  own  gods."  This 
showed,  of  course,  that  the  first  principles  of  the  religion  of  Jehovah  were  not  under- 
stood by  them.  But  is  it  so  uncommon  a  thing  for  men — not  heathen,  but  professedly 
Christian — thus  to  attempt  to  combine  incompatibilities  ?  Is  there  not  such  a  thing 
as  attempting  to  combine  the  service  of  the  Lord  with  the  friendship  of  the  world, 
which  yet  is  declared  to  be  "enmity  with  God"  (Jas.  Iv.  4)?  Is  there  no  such  thmg 
as  professing  to  serve  God,  yet  giving  the  chief  place  in  the  heart  to  money,  pleasure, 
fashion,  or  some  other  spiritual  idol,  which  is  duly  worshipped  upon  its  own  high  place  ? 
The  less  glaring  idolatries  are  not  always  the  least  sinful.  Ere  condemning  the 
irrational  practices  of  these  heathen,  let  ua  sit  strictly  in  judgment  on  ourselves.  3. 
The  absence  of  true  religion.  The  cause  of  all  this  religious  confusion  was  that  the  true 
Gild  was  not  rightly  known.  Men  may  possess  theoretically  correct  notions  of  God, 
and  not  act  upon  them ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  base  a  right  moral  or  religious  life  on 
conceptions  of  God  which  are  fundamentally  erroneous.  These  colonists  did  not  know 
Jehovah's  real  character;  they  had  not  been  properly  instructed  in  his  statutes;  there- 
fore they  thought  they  were  serving  him  when  they  were  doing  him  the  highest 
dishonour. 

III.  A  PAST  MEMOBT.  1.  Ood^i  ancient  covenant.  The  sight  of  this  indescribable 
chaos  recalls  to  the  historian  the  memory  of  that  original  covenant  of  God  with  Israel, 
by  the  terms  of  which  the  people  were  pledged  not  to  serve  strange  gods,  but  to 
adher*  to  Jehovah,  their  Kedeemer  from  Egypt,  and  to  keep  his  holy  statutes.  Had 
they  been  faithful  to  that  covenant,  how  different  would  have  been  the  result  1  Instead 
of  being  in  exile,  the  nation  would  have  been  safe,  happy,  and  prosperous  under 
Jehovah's  care.  2.  The  melancholy/  contrast.  As  it  was,  the  people  had  been  driven 
from  their  land,  and  this  motley  crowd  of  heathen  held  possession  of  it.  Their  obedience 
was  not  better  than  that  of  the  rejected  Israelites,  and,  so  far  as  experience  had  gone, 
they  showed  no  sign  of  improvement.  It  is  due,  however,  to  the  Samaritans  to  say 
that,  when  better  instructed,  they  did  improve,  and,  in  Christ's  time,  they  were  as 
strict  monotheists  as  the  Jews,  and  more  willing  to  receive  the  gospeL— -J.  O. 


EXPOSITION. 

{Jk.  xviii. — Tvr, — Thb  Histobt  or  the  Kingdom  of  Judab  afieb  thk  Fall  oi 

Samabia. 


CHAPTER  XVm. 

Ver.  I— oh.  xix.  37. — The  Aooession  of 
IIezbeiah.  His  Successes.  TTih  Wab  with 
Sennacherib. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  Eablt  Tears  of  Hezb- 
KIAB.  From  his  narrative  of  the  destruction 
of  the  kingdom  of  Samaria,  the  writer  turns, 
with  evident  relief,  to  the  accession  of  the 
good  Mug  HezeMah  in  Judah,  and  to  a 
brief  account  of  (1^  his  religions  reformation 


(vers.  8—6);  (2)  his  revolt  from  Assyria 
(ver.  7);  and  (3)  his  war  with  the  Philis- 
tines  (ver.  8).  The  narrative  is  still  exceed- 
ingly brief,  and  has  to  be  filled  out  from  the 
Second  Book  of  Chronicles,  where  the  re- 
ligious reformation  of  Hezekiah  is  treated 
with  great  fulness  (ch.  xxix. — zxzi.). 

Ver.  1. — Now  it  came  to  pass  in  the  third 
year  of  Hoshea  son  of  Elah  King  of  Israel, 
that  Hezekiah  the  eon  of  Ahaz  King  of 
Judah  began  to  rsign.    There  can  scarcely 


(OL  xvni.  i— Sn     'mt  SfiCOND  BOOK  0*  THE  KliTGS. 


m 


be  any  donbtof  this  synchionism,  which  18  in 
close  accordance  with  the  dates  in  vers.  9, 10 
of  this  chapter,  aud  agrees  well  with  the 
Assyrian  inscriptions.  Hezekiah'a  accession 
may  be  placed  almost  certainly  in  b.o.  727. 

Ver.  2. — Twenty  wid  five  years  old  was  lie 
when  he  began  to  reign  (on  the  difficulties 
connected  with  this  statement,  and  the  best 
mode  of  meetingthem,  see  the  comment  upon 
oh.  xvi.  1) ;  and  he  reigned  twenty  and  nine 
years  in  Jerusalem.  So  Josephus  ('Ant. 
Jud.,'  I.  3.  §  1),  and  the  author  of  Chro- 
nicles (2  Ghron.  xxix.  1).  He  reigned  four- 
teen years  before  his  severe  iUnesa,  and 
fifteen  afterwards.  His  mother's  name  also 
was  Abi.  AU,  "my  father,"  is  scarcely  a 
possible  name.  We  must,  therefore,  correct 
Kings  by  Chronicles,  and  regard  her  true 
name  as  Abijah,  which  means  "Jehovah 
is  my  father"  (compare  "Abiel").  The 
daughter  of  Zachariah,  Perhaps  the  Zecha- 
riah  of  Isa.  viii.  2. 

Ver.  3.— And  he  did  that  which  was  right 
in  the  sight  of  the  lord,  according  to  all 
that  David  his  father  did.  Such  unqualified 
praise  is  only  assigned  to  two  other  kings  of 
Judah — Asa  (1  Kings  xv.  11)  and  Josiah  (ch. 
xxii.  2).  It  is  curious  that  all  three  were 
the  sons  of  wicked  fathers.  Hezekiah  was 
probably,  at  an  early  age,  brought  under 
the  influence  of  Isaiah,  who  was  on  familiar 
terms  with  his  father  Ahaz  (Isa.  vii.  3 — 16), 
and  would  be  likely  to  do  all  that  lay  in  his 
power  to  turn  Hezekiah  from  his  father's 
evil  ways,  and  to  foster  all  the  germs  of  good 
in  his  character. 

Ver.  4. — He  removed  the  high  places. 
This  was  a  comparatively  late  step  in  Heze- 
kiah's  religious  reformation.  He  began,  as 
we  learn  from  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxix.  3, 
17),  "  in  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  the  first 
month,  and  the  first  day,"  by  reopening  the 
temple,  which  Ahaz  had  shut  up,  removing 
from  it  all  the  "  filthiness  "  which  Ahaz  bad 
allowed  to  accumulate  (2  Chron.  xxix.  5), 
gathering  together  the  priests  and  Levites 
and  exhorting  them  (2  Chron.  xxix.  4^-11), 
restoring  and  renewing  the  vessels  which 
Ahaz  had  cut  in  pieces  (2  Chron.  xxix.  19), 
and  then  re-establishing  the  temple- worship 
with  all  due  solemnity  (2  Chron.  xxix.  20 — 
35).  He  next  resolved  on  holding  a  grand 
Passover-festival,  in  the  second  month,  as  it 
had  not  been  possible  to  keep  it  in  the  first 
(2  Chron.  xxx.  2,  3),  and  invited  thereto,  not 
only  his  own  subjects,  but  the  Israelites  of 
the  neighbouring  kingdom  who  were  not 
yet  carried  off,  but  were  still  under  the  rule 
of  Hoshea  (2  Chron.  xxx.  10,  11,  18).  It 
was  not  until  this  festival  was  over  that  the 
removal  of  the  high  places  was  taken  iu 
hand.  Then,  in  a  fit  of  zeal,  which  no 
doubt  the  king  encouraged,  a  multitude  of 
those  who  had  kept  the  feast  went  forth 


from  Jerusalem,  first  into  the  cities  of  Judah 
and  Benjamin,  and  then  into  several  of  the 
cities  of  Israel,  and  "brake  the  images  in 
pieces,  and  cut  down  the  groves,  and  threw 
down  the  high  places  and  the  altars,  .  .  . 
and  utterly  destroyed  them  all "  (see  2  Ghron. 
xxxi.  1).    And  brake  the  images,  and  cut 
down  the  groves ;  literally,  the  grove,  accord- 
ing to  the  present  text;  but,  as  all  the 
versions  have  the  plural,   'i'henius  thinks 
niB^N  should  be  changed  into  d^E'««.    Keil 
and  Bahr,  on  the  contrary,  would  retain  the 
singular,  but  understand  it  "collectively." 
That  idolatry  was  practised  at  s  ime  of  the 
high  places  seems  clear  from  tliis  place,  as 
well  as  from  1  Kings  xiv.  23.    Aud  brake 
in  pieces  the  brazen  serpent  that  Moses  had 
made  (see  Numb.  xxi.  9).    DifSculties  are 
raised  with  respect  to  this  statement.    Some 
argue  that  the  serpent,  having  served  its 
purpose,  would  have  been  left  hanging  at 
the  place  where  it  was  set  up  in  the  wilde"- 
ness;  others,  that  Moses  would  have  de- 
stroyed it,  lest  the  Israelites  should  make  it 
an  idol ;  others,  again,  that  it  was  not  likely 
to  have  lasted  seven  hundred  years  from  the 
Exodus,  even  if  it  was  brought  into  Pales- 
tine and  taken  c.ire  of.   It  is  supposei  I,  there- 
fore, that  an  imitation  of  the  original  serpent 
had  been  made  by  the  Jews  in  the  reign 
of  Ahaz,  had  been  called  "the  serpent  of 
Moses,"  and  was  now  destroyed.    But  there 
is  no  sufficient  reason  for  any  of  these  sup- 
positions.     Considering  what  the  serpent 
typified  (John  iii.  14),  it  is  not  surprising 
that  Moses  should  have  been  instructed  to 
preserve  it  with  the  furniture  of  the  taber- 
nacle, or  tliat,  when  once  attached  to  that 
structure,  it  should  have  been  preserved  as 
a  religious  relic  for  seven  hundred  years. 
Many  Egyptian  figures  in  bronze  now  exist 
which    are  from  three    thousand  to    lour 
thousanil  years  old.    The  statement  of  the 
writer  of  Kings,  that  Hezekiah  did   now 
destroy  "  the  serpent  that  Moses  had  made," 
is  of  more  weight  than  »  thousand  specu- 
lations concerning  what  is  likely,  or  not 
likely,  to  have  happened.    For  unto  those 
days  the  children  of  Israel  did  hum  inoeuse 
to  it.    Not,  certainly,  "from  Moses'  time  to 
Hezekiah's,"  but  from  a  date  left  vague  and 
undetermined  to  the  time  when  Hezekiah 
took    his    religious    reformation    in    hand. 
Hezekiah  found  the  practice    continuing; 
the  writer  is  not  concerned  to  say — perhaps 
does  not  know — ^when  it  began.    He  im- 
plies, however,  that  it  was  of  long  standing. 
Serpent-worship  was  widely  spread  iu  the 
Bast,  and  there  was  more  excuse  for  direct- 
ing religious  regard  toward  this  serpent  than 
toward  any  other.    And  he  called  it  Nehush- 
tan ;  rather,  and  it  wat  called  Nehushtan. 
ttlp'  is  a  singular  with  indefinite  subjeot 
("  one  caUed  "),  equivalent  to  "  they  called," 


m 


tflt!  SteCONt*  feOOtt  of  TfiB  KINGS.    i<m.XYm.l-47 


or  "  it  was  called  "  (comp.  Gen.  xxv.  26 ; 
xxxviii.  29, 30).  Nehushtac  is  not  from  am 
"  serpent,"  but  from  nwra,  "  braBS,"  and 
means  "  the  little  brass  thing,"  ]  being  a 
diminutive,  expression  of  tenderness. 

Ver.  5.— He  trusted  in  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel.  Unlike  Hoshea  (see  homiletics  on 
ch.  xvii.  1—4),  unlike  Ahaz  (ch  xvi.  7 — 10), 
Hezekiah  discarded  trust  in  man,  and — it 
may  be  after  some  hesiti\tion— put  his  trust 
wholly  in  God.  This  was  exactly  what  God 
required  as  the  condition  on  which  he  would 
give  his  aid  (Isa.  xxx.  1 — ^7),  and  what  no 

Erevious  king  since  the  Assyrian  troubles 
egan  could  bring  himself  to  do.  So  that 
after  ^^^  was  none  like  Mm  among  all  the 
kings  of  Jndah,  nor  any  that  were  before 
him.  It  has  been  concluded  from  this  state- 
ment that,  "  when  the  merits  of  the  kings 
were  summed  up  after  the  fall  of  the 
monarchy,  Hezekiah  was,  by  a  deliberate 
judgment,  put  at  the  very  top"  (Stanley 
'  Lectures  on  the  Jewish  Church,'  vol.  ii.  p. 
397)  ;  but,  as  exactly  the  same  words  are  used 
of  Jfisiah  in  ch.  xxiii.  25,  the  true  oonclusiou 
would  seem  to  be  rather  that  Hezekiah  and 
Josial  I  were  selected  from  the  rest,  and  placed 
upon  a  par,  above  all  the  others.  At  first 
sight  there  may  seem  to  be  contradiction 
between  the  two  passages,  since  absolute 
pre-eminence  over  aU  tlie  other  kings  is 
ascribed  to  Hezekiah  in  one  of  them,  to 
Josiali  in  the  other ;  but  the  context  shows 
that  the  pre-eminence  is  not  the  same  in  the 
two  cases.  To  Hezekiah  is  ascribed  pre- 
eminence in  trust;  to  Josiah,  pre-eminence 
in  an  exact  observance  of  the  Law :  one  ex- 
cels in  faith,  the  other  in  works ;  Josiah's 
whole  life  is  one  of  activity,  Hezekiah's 
great  merit  lies  in  liis  being  content,  in  the 
crisis  of  his  fate,  to  "  stand  still,  and  see  the 
salvation  of  God." 

Ver.  6. — Por  he  clave  to  the  Lord — rather, 
and  he  dove  to  the  Lord ;  i.e.  he  persevered 
through  the  whole  of  his  life;  he  did  not 
fall  into  sins  at  the  last,  like  Asa  and  Aza- 
riah  (see  2  Chron.  xvi.  7 — 12;  xxvi.  16 — 
21) — and  departed  not  from  following  Mm, 
The  writer  probably  considers  "  the  princes 
of  Judah  "  answerable  for  the  embassy  to 
l^t(>>ipt  mentioned  in  Isa.  xxx.  4,  and  ex- 
cuses Hezekiah's  ostentatious  display  of  his 
treasures  to  the  amb;isaadors  of  Merodach- 
Baladan  (ch.  xx.  13)  as  a  weakness,  not  an 
actual  breach  of  obedience.  Sut  kept  Ms 
commandments,  which  the  Lord  commanded 
Hoses. 

Yer.  7. — And  the  Lord  was  with  Mm.  Of 
no  other  King  of  Jndah  or  Israel  is  this 
said,  except  only  of  David  (2  Sam.  v.  10). 
It  was  the  promise  made  to  Moses  (Exod.  iii. 
12),  repeated  to  Joshua  (Josh.  i.  5, 7),  and  by 
Implication  given  in  them  to  all  those  who 
would  rule  hii  people  faithfully  (comp.  2 


Chron.  xt.  2).  And  he  proipeied  wMthei« 
soever  he  went  forth;  rather,  in  all  hU 
goings — in  cunetis  ad  quss  procedebat  (Vul- 
gate). Hezekiah's  prosperity  is  enlarged 
upon  by  the  writer  of  Chronicles,  who  says 
(2  Chron.  xxxii.  27—30),  "And  Hezekiah 
had  exceeding  much  riches  and  honour :  and 
he  made  himself  treasuries  for  silver,  and 
for  gold,  and  for  precious  stones,  and  for 
spices,  and  for  shields,  and  for  all  manner 
of  pleasant  jewels ;  storehouses  also  for  the 
increase  of  com,  and  wine,  and  oil;  and 
stalls  for  all  manner  of  beasts,  and  cotes  for 
flocks.  Moreover  he  provided  him  cities, 
and  possessions  of  flocks  and  herds  in  abun- 
dance: for  God  had  given  him  substance 
very  much.  .  .  .  And  Hezekiah  prospered 
in  all  his  works."  Many  brought  present*  to 
him  to  Jerusalem,  and  he  was  magnifled  in 
the  sight  of  all  the  surrormding  nations  (see 
2  Chi'on.  xxxii.  23).  And  he  rebelled  against 
the  King  of  Assyria,  and  served  him  not; 
Hezekiah's  "  rebellion  "  probably  took  place 
at  tlie  very  commencement  of  his  reign,  B.o. 
727,  in  the  year  that  Shalmaneser  ascended 
the  throne.  Most  likely  it  consisted  simply 
in  his  withholding  his  tribute,  and  neither 
going  in  person  nor  sending  representatives 
to  Nineveh,  to  congratulate  the  new  monarch 
on  his  accession.  This  would  be  understood 
as  an  assertion  of  independence.  That  it 
was  not  at  once  resented  must  be  ascribed 
to  Shalmaneser's  difficulties  with  Samaria 
and  with  Tyre,  which  were  more  pressing, 
as  they  lay  nearer  to  Assyria.  Before  these 
were  over,  Sargon  usurped  the  crown.  There 
is  reason  to  believe  that  he  made  at  least 
one  expeilition  against  Hezekiah;  but  the 
date  of  it  is  uncertain.  Bebellion  met  him 
on  all  sides,  and  had  to  be  crushed  near 
home  before  he  could  venture  to  deal  vrith 
it  on  the  remote  outskirts  of  his  empire. 
Meanwhile  Hezekiah  strengthened  himself 
and  built  up  a  considerable  power. 

Yer.  8. — He  smote  the  FMlistines.  Heze- 
kiali's  Philistine  war  seems  to  have  followed 
on  an  attempt  which  Sargon  made  to  bring 
the  whole  country  under  the  Assyrian  do- 
minion. Sargon  attacked  Philistia  in  B.O. 
720,  made  Gaza  and  the  other  towns  subject, 
and  committed  the  custody  of  them  to  tnbu- 
tary  kings,  in  whom  he  had  confidence.  But 
opposition  soon  manifested  itself.  Sargon's 
creatures  were  expelled — Akhimiti  from  Ash- 
dod,  Padi  from  Ekron.  Hezekiah  assisted 
in  this  war  of  independence,  attacked  Sar- 
gon's viceroys,  and  helped  the  cities  to  free 
themselves.  About  the  year  b.0.  711  Sargon 
speaks  of  a  league  against  Assyria,  to  which 
the  parties  were  Philititia,  Judiea  Edom, 
and  Moab  ('  Eponym  Canon,*  p.  130).  The 
Philistines,  whom  Hezekiah  "smote,"  must 
be  regarded  as  Assyrian  partisans,  whom  ha 
chastised  in  the  interests  -^    be  national 


<te.  Xna.  1-31]     *Hte  SECOND  BOOfe  Ot"  T?HE  klMS. 


«^t 


party.  He  did  not  seek  conquests  in  Philistia 
for  himself.  Even  nnto  Gaza.  Gaza  seems 
to  have  remained  faithful  to  Assyria  from  its 
capture  in  B.o.  720.  And  the  borders  thereof, 
from  the  tower  of  the  watchmen  unto  the 
fenced  city.  (On  tliis  expression,  see  the 
comment  upon  ch.  xviL  9.) 

Vera.  9 — 12. — Thb  Pcnishment  of  Sa- 
UABIA  FOB  DisoBEDiENOE.  In  coutrast  with 
Hezekiah's  piety  and  consequent  prosperity, 
the  author  places  the  disobedience  (Ter.  12) 
and  consequent  extinction  of  the  sister 
kingdom  (vers.  9—11),  which  belonged  to 
Hezekiah's  earlier  years,  and  was  an  event 
of  the  greatest  importance  to  him,  since  it 
made  his  dominions  conterminous  with  those 
of  Assyria,  and  exposed  his  northern  frontier 
to  attack  at  any  moment  from  the  Assyrian 
forces.  According  to  all  probable  human 
calculation,  the  fall  of  Samaria  should  have 
been  followed  at  once  by  an  attack  on  Judsea ; 
and  but  for  the  change  of  dynasty,  and 
troubles  on  all  sides  which  ensued  there- 
upon, this  would  naturally  have  taken  place. 
As  it  was,  Jndssa  was  allowed  a  breathing- 
space,  during  which  she  strengthened  her 
power  in  Philistia  (see  the  comment  on  the 
preceding  verse),  and  otherwise  prepared 
herself  to  resist  attack  (see  2  Chron.  xxxiii. 
8—6;  laa.  xxii.  8— 11). 

Yer.  9. — ^Andit  came  to  pass  In  the  fonrth 
year  of  King  Hezekiah,  which  was  the  seventh 
year  of  Hoshea  son  of  Elah  King  of  Israel. 
Hezekiah  began  to  reign  before  Hoshea  had 
completed  his  third  year  (ver.  1).  His 
first  year  thus  ran  parallel  with  part  of  Ho- 
shea's  third  and  part  of  his  fourth ;  hia  fourth 
with  part  of  Hoshea's  sixth  and  part  of  his 
•eventh;  his  sixth  with  part  of  Hoshea's 
eighth  and  part  of  his  ninth.  That  Shal- 
maneser  King  of  Assyria  came  np  against 
Samaria,  and  besieged  it  (lee  the  comment 
on  ch.  xviL  4,  5). 

Ver.  10. — And  at  the  end  of  three  yean 
fhey  took  it.  The  expression,  "at  the  end 
of  three  years,"  does  not  show  that  the 
three  years  were  complete.  On  the  con- 
trary, as  the  siege  began  in  Hezekiah's 
fourth  year,  probably  in  the  spring,  and 
was  over  in  his  sixth,  gay,  by  the  autumn, 
the  entire  duration  was  not  more  than  two 
years  and  a  halt  The  plural  verb,  ni?^.', 
"  they  took  it,"  is  remarkable,  since  it  would 
have  seemed  more  natural  to  write  P113^;,  "he 
took  it" — and  so  the  LXX.,  the  Vulgate,  and 
the  Syriao — but  the  writer  seems  to  have 
known  that  Shalmaneser  did  not  take  it, 


but  died  during  the  liege,  the  capture  fall- 
ing into  the  mat  year  of  Sargon  (see  the 
'Eponym  Canon,'  pp.  65,  66).  Even  in 
the  sixth  year  of  Hezekiah,  that  is  the  ninth 
year  of  Hoshea  King  of  Israel  (see  the  com- 
ment on  ver.  9),  Samaria  was  taken  (comp. 
ch.  xvii.  6). 

Ver.  11. — And  the  King  of  Assyria — i.». 
Bargon— did  carry  away  Israel  nnto  Assyria 
— the  empire,  not  the  country — and  put  them 
in  Halah  and  in  Habor  by  the  river  of  Oozan, 
and  in  the  cities  of  the  Medes  (see  the  com- 
ment on  oh.  xvii.  6). 

Ver.  12. — Because  they  obeyed  not  the 
voice  of  the  Lord  their  God,  bnt  transgressed 
his  covenant,  and  all  that  Moses  the  servant 
of  the  Lord  commanded,  and  would  not  hear 
them,  nor  do  them  (compare  the  expanded 
version  of  this  statement  in  oh.  xvii.  7 — 23). 
The  sin  of  Sanaaria  may  be  summed  up 
under  three  heads :  (1)  disobedience ;  (2) 
breach  of  the  covenant ;  and  (3)  disregard 
of  Moses,  and  the  other  "servants  of  the 
Lord." 

Vers.  18  — 16. — First  Expedition  o» 
Sennacherib  against  Hezekiah.  The 
writer  now,  as  is  his  manner,  omitting  as 
comparatively  unimportant  all  Hezekiah's 
dealings  with  Sargon,  which  were  without 
positive  result,  proceeds  to  give  a  brief 
account  of  Sennacherib's  first  expedition 
against  him,  and  of  its  unfortunate,  if  not 
disgraceful,  issue:  (1)  the  capture  of  all 
.  the  important  cities  except  Jerusalem ;  (2) 
the  submission  of  Hezekiah  to  any  terms 
which  Sennacherib  chose  to  impose;  and 
(3)  the  purchase  of  peace  by  the  payment 
of  three  hundred  talents  of  silver  and  thirty 
talents  of  gold  out  of  the  treasures  of  the 
temple  and  of  the  royal  palace.  The  narra- 
tive obtains  copious  illustration  from  the 
inscriptions  of  Sennacherib. 

Ver.  13.— Now  in  the  fourteenth  ye*r  ot 
Sing  Hezekiah  did  Sennacherib  ^ng  of 
Assyria  come  up.  It  is  impossible  to  accept 
this  note  of  time  as  genuine  without  reject- 
ing altogether  the  authority  of  the  Assyrian 
inscriptions.  Sargon  took  Samaria  in  hia 
first  year,  B.o.  722,  and  then  had  a  reign  of 
between  seventeen  and  eighteen  years,  for 
fifteen  of  which  we  have  his  annals.  He 
certainly  did  not  associate  Sennacherib 
with  him  on  the  throne,  nor  did  the  latter 
exercise  any  authority  at  all  until  B.o.  705, 
wlien,  "  on  the  12th  of  Ab  (JulyX  he  the 
throne  ascended  "  ('  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  67). 
Sennacherib  places  his  first  expedition 
against  Hezekiah  in  his  fourth  year,  •.a 
701.    Thus,  according  to  the  AssyriwB  i^ 


tto 


tHiS  SECOND  feOOE  OJf  THfi  KlNfiS.     [<«•  »vai.  1-3? 


eorda,  which  are  very  ample,  and  of  which 
we  have  the  actual  originals,  twenty  years 
intervened  between  the  capture  of  Samaria 
and  the  attack  of  Sennacherib  on  Eeze- 
kiah;  according  to  the  present  passage, 
eompared  with  vers.  9, 10,  eight  years  only 
intervened.  No  contradiction  can  be  more 
absolute.  It  has  been  proposed  to  alter  the 
date  from  "  the  fourteenth  year "  to  "  the 
twenty-sixth  year ; "  but  it  seems  most  prob- 
able that  the  original  writer  inserted  no 
date,  but  simply  said,  "And  Sennacherib, 
King  of  Assyria,  came  up,"  etc.,  just  as  he 
liad  said,  witliout  a  date,  "Ful  the  King  of 
Assyria  came  up  against  the  land  "  (ch.  xv. 
19);  and  "against  him  (Hoshea)  came  up 
Shalmaneser  "  (oh.  xvii.  3) ;  and,  with  a  very 
vague  date,  if  it  may  be  called  a  date,  "  In 
the  days  of  Fekah  King  of  Israel  came  Tig- 
lath-pileser  King  of  Asayiia"  (ch.  xv.  29. 
Comp.  also  oh.  xxiv.  1,  11),  Later  on,  a 
redactor — perhaps  the  same  who  inserted 
the  whole  series  of  synolironisms — intro- 
duced the  words,  "In  the  fourteenth  year 
of  King  Hezekiah,"  having  obtained  the 
number  from  ch.  xx.  6,  which  he  assumed 
to  belong  to  the  time  of  Sennacherib's 
attack.  Against  all  the  fenced  cities  of 
Judah,  and  took  them.  Sennacherib  himself 
says,  "  And  of  Hezekiah  of  Judab,  who  did 
not  submit  to  my  yoke,  forty-six  strong 
cities,  fortresses,  and  smaller  cities  round 
about  them  without  number,  by  the  march 
of  my  troops,  .  .  .  by  the  force  of  battering- 
rams,  mining,  and  missiles,  I  besieged,  I 
captured"  ('Eponym  Canon,'  p.  134,  lines 
6—12.  Comp.  also  2  Chron.  xxxii,  1  and 
Isa.  xxxvi.  1), 

Ver.  11.— And  EezeMah  King  of  Jndah 
lent  to  the  King  of  Assyria  to  Lachish,  say- 
ing. (On  the  position  of  Lachish,  see  the 
comment  upon  oh,  xiv.  19.)  A  bas-relief  in 
tlie  British  Museum  is  thought  to  represent 
Sennacherib  at  the  siege  of  Lachish.  He 
is  seated  on  a  highly  ornamented  throne, 
and  is  engaged  in  receiving  prisoners.  The 
city  is  represented  as  strongly  fortified,  and 
as  attacked  with  scaling-ladders  and  batter- 
ing-rams. The  surrender  is  taking  place, 
and  the  captives  of  importance  are  being 
conducted  from  one  of  the  tower-gates  to 
the  presence  of  the  conqueror.  An  accom- 
panying inscription  is  to  the  following 
effect:  "Sennacherib,  the  great  king,  the 
King  of  Assyria,  sitting  on  the  throne  of 
judgment  before  the  city  of  Lakhisha  (La- 
chish). I  give  permission  for  its  destruc- 
tion,'' Itwouldseem  that,  while  Sennacherib 
was  personally  engaged  in  this  siege,  a 
portion  of  his  army  liad  invested  Jerusalem, 
and  were  pressing  the  siege  (see  Isa.  xxii. 
1 — t).  I  have  offended;  retnm  from  me. 
The  tone  of  the  submission  is  abject.  In 
Tain  had  Isaiah  oounselled  lesistuwe,  and 


promised  deliverance  if  trust  were  placed 
in  God  (Isa.  viii.  9—15;  x.  24—26;  xiT. 
24,  25),  When  the  siege  commenced,  all 
was  dismay  within  the  walls — it  was  "a 
day  of  trouble,  and  of  treading  down,  and 
of  perplexity  "  (Isa.  xxii.  5).  Some  of  the 
rulers  fled  (Isa.  xxii.  3) ;  others  gave  them- 
selves up  for  lost,  and  resolved  on  "  a  short 
life  and  a  merry  one  "  (Isa.  xxii.  13).  Heze- 
kiah found  no  encouragement  to  resist  in 
any  of  his  counsellors  except  Isaiah,  and 
was  therefore  driven  to  despair — acknow- 
ledged himself  in  the  wrong  for  rebelling, 
and  besought  Sennacherib  to  "  return  from 
him  " — i.e.  to  retire  and  withdraw  his  troops. 
That  which  thon  pnttest  on  me  will  I  bear. 
Whatever  burden  Sennacherib  chooses  to 
put  upon  him,  Hezekiah  says  he  will  bear, 
be  it  tribute,  be  it  cession  of  territory,  be  it 
indignity  of  any  sort  or  kind.  He  makes 
no  reservation;  but  of  course  he  assumes 
that  the  terms  about  to  be  offered  him  will 
be  such  as,  according  to  the  usages  of  war 
at  the  time,  would  be  regarded  as  reason- 
able. And  the  King  of  Assyria  appointed 
unto  Hezekiah  King  of  Judah  three  hnndred 
talents  of  silver  and  thirty  talents  of  gold. 
Sennacherib  says  that  the  payment  made 
him  by  Hezekiah  was  thirty  talents  of  gold 
and  eight  hundred  talents  of  silver  ('  Records 
of  the  Fast,'  vol.  i.  p,  39,  line  34).  He  has, 
perhaps,  exaggerated,  or  he  may  have 
counted  in  all  the  silver  that  he  carried  off 
from  the  whole  of  Judsea ;  or,  possibly,  the 
payment  to  purchase  peace  was  eight  hun- 
dred talents,  the  fixed  tribute  three  hundred. 
We  learn  from  Sennacherib's  inscription 
that,  besides  making  this  money  payment, 
Hezekiah  had  to  consent  to  (1)  a  cession  of 
territory  towards  the  south-west,  which  waa 
apportioned  between  Gaza,  Ekion,  and  Ash- 
dod ;  (2)  the  surrender  of  an  Assyrian  vassal 
king,  detained  in  Jerusalem;  and  (3)  the 
contribution  to  the  harem  at  Nineveh  of 
two  if  not  more  of  his  daughters. 

Ver.  15. — And  Hezekiah  gave  him  all  the 
silver  that  was  found  in  the  house  of  tha 
Lord,  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's 
house.  Ahaz  had  exhausted  both  these 
stores  of  wealth  about  thirty  years  previously 
(oh.  xvi.  8),  and  there  could  not  have  been 
very  much  aecumulatiou  since.  Hence  the 
stripping  of  the  metal-plating  from  off  the 
temple  doors  (see  the  next  verse). 

Ver.  16. — At  that  time  did  Hezekiah  cut 
off  the  gold  from  the  doors  of  the  temple  of 
the  Lord,  and  from  the  pillars  which  Heze- 
kiah King  of  Judah  had  overlaid,  and  gave 
it  to  the  King  of  Assyria.  In  the  time  of 
his  great  wealth  and  prosperity,  Hezekiah, 
while  engaged  in  restoring  the  temple  (3 
Chron.  xxix.  17—19),  had  adomea  the 
pillars  and  doors  of  tike  eaaotnary  with  a 
metal  covering,  which  was  probably  gold, 


€H.  xvra.  1— 87.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGa 


881 


like  Solomon's  (1  Kings  Ti.  20-22,  28,  80, 
82).  To  make  up  the  "  thirty  talents  of 
gold"  he  was  now  obliged  to  nndo  his  own 
work,  and  strip  the  doors  and  pillars  bare, 
Sennacherib  tells  us  that,  besides  the  two 
large  sums  of  gold  and  silver,  Hezekiah 
sent  him  at  this  time  "  woven  cloth,  scarlet, 
embroidered ;  precious  stones  of  large  size ; 
conches  of  ivory ;  movable  thrones  of  ivory ; 
ekins  of  buffaloes ;  horns  of  buffaloes ;  and 
two  kinds  of  woods  "  ('Records  of  the  Past,' 
vol.  i.  p.  39,  lines  34—37).  It  was  customary 
to  accompany  the  fixed  tribute  with  the 
luoie  precious  products  of  each  country. 

Vers.  17 — 87. — Second  Expedition  W 
Bennaohebib.  This  section  and  ch.  xix. 
form  one  continuous  narrative,  which  can 
only  have  been  divided  on  account  of  its 
great  length  (fifty-eight  verses).  The  sub- 
ject is  one  throughout,  viz.  Sennacherib's 
Becond  expedition  against  Hezekiah.  The 
narrative  flows  on  without  a  break.  It  con- 
eists  of  (1)  an  account  of  the  embassy  of 
Babshakeh  (ch.  xviii.  17—37;  xix.  1— 
8) ;  (2)  an  account  of  an  insulting  letter 
written  by  Sennacherib  to  Hezekiah,  and 
of  Hezekiah's  "spreading  it  before  the 
Lord "  (ch.  xix.  9—14) ;  (3)  the  prayer  of 
Hezekiah,  and  God's  answer  to  it  by  the 
mouth  of  Isaiab(ch.  six.  15— 3  i);  (4)  the 
destruction  of  Sennacherib's  host,  his  flight 
to  Nineveh,  and  his  murder  by  twa  of  his 
eons.  The  Assyrian  inscriptions  are  abso. 
lutely  silent  with  respect  to  this  expedition 
and  Its  result— it  being  a  fixvd  rule  with 
the  historiographers  of  Assyria  to  pass  over 
without  notice  all  defeats  and  disasters. 

Ter.  17. — And  the  King  of  Assyria  sent 
Tartan  and  Babsaris  and  Babshakeh  from 
Laohish  to  King  Hezekiah  with  a  great  host 
against  Jerusalem.  Sennacherib  appears, 
by  his  great  inscription,  to  have  returned  to 
Kineveh,  with  his  Judsean  captives  (more 
than  two  hundred  thousand  in  number)  and 
his  rich  booty,  towards  the  close  of  the  year 
B.C.  701.  In  the  following  year  he  was 
called  into  Babylonia,  where  troubles  had 
broken  ont,  and  Hezekiah,  left  to  himself, 
Beems  to  have  made  up  his  mind  to  revolt, 
and  to  have  called  in  the  assistance  of 
Egypt  (Isa.  XXX.  4 ;  ch.  xviii.  21).  Sabatok 
was  probably  the  nominal  sovereign,  but 
Tirhakah,  who  held  his  court  at  Meroe,  was 
lord  paramount.  An  alliance  was  made; 
and  hopes  held  out  that,  if  Sennacherib 
again  marched  into  Judtea,  Hezekiah  would 
receive  effectual  aid,  especially  in  ohariote 
wad  horsemen  (ver.  84).    Under  these  cir- 


cumstances, Sennacherib  made  his  second 
expedition,  probably  in  B.C.  699.  Begarding 
Egypt  as  his  main  enemy,  and  Judjsa  as  of 
small  account,  he  led  his  army  by  the  or- 
dinary route  into  the  Philistian  plain,  press- 
ing southward,  while  he  detachc  d  a  moderate 
force  to  hold  Jerusalem  in  check,  to  threaten 
it,  and,  if  an  opportunity  offered,  to  seize  it. 
At  the  head  of  this  force  were  three  com- 
manders, who  seem  to  have  borne,  all  of 
them,  official  titles;  viz.  the  Tartan,  or 
"commander-in-chief;"  the  Babsaris,  or 
"  chief  eunuch  ; "  and  the  Babshakeh,  or 
"chief  cupbearer."  The  Tartan  was  the 
highest  of  all  the  oflBoials  of  the  empire,  and 
ranked  next  to  the  king.  Sennacherib  de- 
tached this  force  from  Lachish,  which  seems 
to  have  revolted,  and  to  have  been  under- 
going a  second  siege.  And  when  they  were 
come  up,  they  came  and  stood  by  the  conduit 
of  the  upper  pool.  It  was,  perhaps,  this 
army  which  Isaiah  saw  in  vision,  advancing 
on  Jerusalem  from  the  pass  of  Michmash 
(x.  28—32),  and  "shaking  its  hand"  at  the 
city  from  the  nortliern  plateau  outside  tho 
walls — the  traditional  "  camp  of  the  As- 
syrians." At  any  rate,  the  "  upper  pool  " 
and  the  "  fuller's  field  "  were  in  this  direction 
(see  tho  comment  on  Isa.  vii.  3).  Which  is 
in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's  field. 

Ver.  18. — And  when  they  had  called  to 
the  king — i.e.  when  they  had  announced 
that  they  had  a  message  to  deliver  to  the 
king — there  came  ont  to  them;  by  Heze- 
kiali's  order,  doubtless.  Learning  that  they 
were  three  of  Sennacherib's  highest  officials, 
he  sent  out  to  them  three  of  the  chief 
officers  of  his  own  court.  Eliakim  the  son 
of  Hilkiah,  which  was  over  the  household. 
Eecently  promoted  to  that  high  position, 
instead  of  Shebna,  according  to  the  pro- 
phecy (Isa.  xxii.  19 — 22),  and  perhaps  by 
the  influence  of  Isaiah.  And  Shebna  the 
scribe ;  or,  teeretary — the  official  employed 
to  draw  up  documents,  such  as  treaties, 
protocols,  despatches,  and  the  like.  He  had 
been  removed  to  this  inferior  position,  to 
make  room  for  Eliakim,  but  had  not  yet 
suffered  the  banishment  with  which  Isaiah 
(xxii  18)  had  threatened  him.  And  Joah 
the  son  of  Asaph  the  recorder ;  or,  remem- 
brancer— the  person  wliose  oliief  duty  it 
probably  was  to  chronicle  events  as  they 
ocourreii,  and  finally  to  draw  up  the  memoir 
of  each  reign  at  its  close.  (For  another 
view,  see  the  comment  on  1  Kings  iv.  3.) 

Yer.  19. — ^And  Babshakeh  said  unto  them. 
Although  the  third  in  order  of  dignity, 
Babshakeh  took  the  word,  probably  because 
he  was  familiar  with  the  Hebrew  language, 
and  could  speak  it  fluently  (see  ver.  26)k 
His  being  spokesman  made  him  appear  to 
be  the  chief  ambassador,  and  made  Isaiah, 
m    the    parallel    passage   (sxxvi.),   par^ 


M3 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,    [oh.  xviii.  1-37. 


orer  in  eilence  tlie  other  two.  Speak  ya 
now  to  Hezekiali.  It  was  a  rnde,  almost 
an  inenlting  commencement,  to  give  Heze- 
kiah  no  title — neither  "  the  fing,"  nor 
"  King  of  Judah,"  nor  even  "  your  master," 
but  to  call  him  merely  "Hezekiah."  The 
same  rudeness  is  persisted  in  througliout 
(vers.  22, 29, 30, 31, 32),  and  it  is  emphasized 
by  the  employment  of  some  title  or  other, 
generally  a  lofty  title,  when  Sennacherib 
b  spoken  of.  Sennacherib  himself  is  less 
rude  in  his  inscriptions  (see  the  '  Eponym 
Canon,'  pp.  133,  line  45;  134,  line  6;  136, 
lines  21,  15).  Thns  saith  the  great  king, 
the  King  of  Assyria.  The  "  great  king  " — 
mrru  rdbu — was  the  ordinary  title  assumed 
by  Assyrian  monarchs.  It  passed  from 
them  to  the  Babylonians  and  the  Persians. 
Sennacherib  calls  himself,  on  Bellino's 
cylinder, "  the  great  king,  the  powerful  king, 
the  King  of  Assyria,  the  king  unrivalled, 
the  pious  monarch,  the  worshipper  of  the 
great  gods,  the  protector  of  the  just,  the- 
lover  of  the  righteous,  the  noble  warrior, 
the  valiant  hero,  the  first  of  all  kings,  the 
great  punisher  of  unbelievers"  (see  'Becords 
of  the  Past,'  toI.  i.  p.  25).  What  confidence 
is  this  wherein  thou  tmstestt  We  may 
assume  that  Hezekiah  had,  at  the  beginning 
of  the  year,  withheld  his  tribute.  He  had 
certainly  not  gone  out  to  meet  the  "great 
king"  as  he  approached  his  territories,  to 
do  homage,  and  place  the  forces  of  Judah 
at  bis  disposal.  On  the  contrary,  he  had 
taken  up  an  attitude  of  hostility.  He  had 
fortified  hii  capital  (2  Chron.  zzxii.  2—5); 
he  bad  collected  arms  and  soldiers,  and  had 
Bhut  himself  np  in  Jerusalem,  having  made 
every  preparation  for  a  siege.  Sennacherib 
inquires  why  he  has  dared  to  do  all  this — 
on  what  strength  does  he  rely?  What  is 
the  ground  of  his  confidence? 

Ver.  20. — Thou  sayest  (but  they  are  but 
▼ain  words);  literally,  words  of  Upa;  i.e. 
words  which  the  lips  speak,  without  the 
heart  having  any  conviction  of  their  truth. 
We  must  suppose  tkat  Sennacherib  has 
either  heard  from  his  spies  that  Hezekiah 
is  speaking  to  the  people  as  he  represents 
him  to  be  speaking,  or  conjectures  what  he 
is  likely  to  say.  According  to  the  writer 
of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  7,  8),  what 
he  did  say  was  very  different.  He  neither 
boasted  of  "  counsel "  nor  of  material 
"strength;"  but  simply  said,  "There  be 
more  with  us  than  with  him :  with  him  is 
an  arm  of  flesh ;  but  with  us  is  the  Lord 
onr  God  to  help  us  and  to  fight  our  battles." 
I  have  counsel  and  strength  for  the  war, 
Sennacherib  imagines  that  Hezekiah's  real 
tmet  is  in  the  "  fleshly  arm  "  of  Egypt,  and 
in  the  counsellors  who  have  advised  and 
brought  about  the  alliance.  And  perhaps 
t^  Ll  Bot  ff^  wron^.    Hezekiah,  it  woul4 


seem,  "  halted  between  two  opinions."  Ha 
hoped  for  aid  from  Egypt;  but,  if  it  failed, 
then  he  hoped  for  the  Divine  help  promised 
by  Isaiah.  Now  on  whom  dost  than  trust, 
that  thonrehellest  against  me  t 

Ver.  21, — Now,  behold,  then  trnstest  upon 
the  staff  of  this  braised  reed,  even  upon 
Xgypt.  Sennacherib  had  good  information. 
Hezekiali's  embassy  to  Egypt  (Isa.  xxz. 
2 — ^7)  was  known  to  him;  and  he  rightly 
judged  that  Hezekiah  was  expecting  aid 
from  this  quarter.  This  expectation  be 
ridicules.  What  is  Egypt  but  a  "  bruised 
reed"?  The  Nile  bulrush  (yn)  has  a 
goodly  show ;  it  rears  itself  aloft,  and  looks 
strong  and  stately;  but  use  it  as  a  staff, 
lean  upon  it,  and  it  snaps  at  once.  Such  is 
Pharaoh — nay,  he  is  worse ;  he  is  a  hruised 
reed,  which  can  give  no  support  at  all,  even 
for  a  moment.  The  Assyrian  monarch  was 
justified  in  bis  contempt.  Egypt  ha  1  never 
yet  given  any  effectual  support  to  the  states 
attacked  by  Assyria,  Shebek  gave  no 
manner  of  aid  to  Hoshea,  but  allowed 
Samaria  to  be  conquered  in  B.C.  722  without 
making  the  slightest  effort  on  her  behalf. 
In  B.O.  720  he  came  to  the  aid  of  Gaza 
('Eponym  Canon,'  p,  126),  but  Gaza  was 
captured  notwithstanding.  In  B.o.  711 
either  he  or  Sabatok  undertook  the  protec- 
tion of  Ashdod,  but  with  tlie  same  lack  of 
success  (ibid.,  pp.  130,  131).  "  Kings  of 
Egypt"  assisted  the  Ascalonites  against 
Sennacherib  himself  in  B.C.  701,  and  were 
again  completely  defeated  (ibid.,  pp.  133, 
134).  Sargon  calls  the  King  of  Egypt,  whose 
aid  was  invited  by  the  Ashdodites  (ibid., 
p.  130,  line  37),  "  a  monarch  who  could  not 
save  them."  Onwhichif  amanlean,it  will 
go  into  his  hand,  and  pierce  it;  i.e.  trust 
in  Egypt  will  not  only  bring  a  country  no 
advantage,  but  it  will  bring  positive  injury. 
The  sharp  silicious  casing  of  a  reed  might 
run  into  the  hand  and  give  an  ugly  wound. 
So  is  Pharaoh  King  of  Hgypt  unto  all  that 
trust  on  him.  Sargon  in  one  place  (ibid., 
p.  130,  line  36)  speaks  of  a  King  of  L'gypt 
under  the  title  of  "Pharaoh." 

Ver.  22.— But  if  ye  say  unto  me,  We  trust 
in  the  Lord  our  God.  Sennacherib  bad  also 
beard  of  this  second  ground  of  trust,  which 
Hezekiah  had  certainly  put  forward  with 
great  openness  (2  Chron.  zxxii.  8).  No 
doubt  he  thought  it  purely  fantastical  and 
illusory.  But  he  was  not  unaware  that  it 
might  inspire  a  determined  resistance.  He 
therefore  condescended  to  argue  against 
reliance  on  it.  Is  not  that  he,  whose  high 
places  and  whose  altars  Hezekiah  hath 
taken  awayl  His  counsellors  have  sug- 
gested to  Sennacherib  a  specious  argument — 
How  can  Hezekiah  confidently  rely  on  the 
protection  of  the  God  of  the  land,  Jehovah, 
when  he  has  been  emplo^in^;  hiniself  for 


OH.  xvra.  1— 37.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


863 


years  in  the  destniotion  of  this  very  God's 
high  places  and  altars  ?  Surely  the  God  will 
not  favour  one  who  has  been  pnlling  down 
his  places  of  worship  1  Putting  out  of  sight 
the  special  requirements  of  the  Jewish  Law, 
the  argument  might  well  seem  unanswer- 
able. At  any  rate,  it  was  calculated  to  have 
a  certain  effect  on  the  minds  of  those  who 
were  attached  to  the  high-place  worship, 
and  desired  its  continuance.  And  hath  said 
to  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  T«  shall  worship 
before  this  altar  in  Jerusalem.  A  weak 
argument,  if  addressed  to  J  uws  of  Jerusalem 
only,  but  likely  to  have  weight  with  the 
country  Jews,  if,  as  is  probable,  they  had 
crowded  into  the  city  when  the  invasion 
began. 

Ver.  23. — Now  therefore,  I  pray  thee, 
give  pledges  to  my  lord  the  King  of  Assyria, 
and  I  will  deliver  thee  two  thousand  horses, 
if  thou  be  able  on  thy  part  to  set  riders  upon 
them.  "Pledge  thyself,"  i.e.  "to  6nd  the 
men,  and  I  will  pledge  myself  to  find  the 
horses."  It  is  a  strong  expression  of  con- 
tempt for  the  military  power  of  the  Jews. 
They  have  not  only  no  trained  cavalry,  but, 
were  any  one  to  furnish  them  with  two 
tliousand  horses,  they  could  not  find  the 
men  to  ride  them.  The  Jewish  army  does, 
in  fact,  appear  to  have  consiiited  of  infantry 
and  chariots  only. 

Ver.  24. — How  then  wilt  thou  turn  away 
the  face  of — i.e.  "  repulse, "  cause  to  retreat " 
— oni  captain  of  the  least  of  my  master's 
servants ;  literally,  one  governor — the  word 
used  is  that  which  in  modern  times  takes 
the  form  of  "pasha,"  or  "pacha."  It 
properly  applies  to  tlie  rulers  of  provinces ; 
but  as  these  were  expected  to  collect  and 
command,  upon  occasions,  the  troops  of 
their  province,  it  has  a  secondary  sense  of 
"  commander  "  or  "  captain."  And  put  thy 
trust ;  rather,  and  thou  putteit  thy  trust — in 
this  extremity  of  weakness,  so  far  as  thine 
own  forces  are  concerned,  thou  art  so  foolish 
as  to  put  thy  trust  in  Egypt,  and  to  expect 
that  her  strength  wiU  make  up  for  thine 
own  impotence.  Vain  hope  I  (see  ver.  21). 
On  Egypt  for  chariots  and  for  horsemen)  or, 
chariots  and  chariot-men. 

Ver.  25. — ^Am  I  now  come  up  without  the 
Lord  against  this  place  to  destroy  it  f  The 
Lord  said  to  me.  Go  up  against  this  land, 
and  destroy  it.  The  Assyrian  monaroha 
constantly  state  that  Asshur,  their  "great 
god,"  directs  them  to  make  war  against  this 
or  that  nation  ('  Eecords  of  the  Past,'  vol.  i. 
pp.  48,  60,  70,  71,  82,  etc.),  but  not  that  the 
god  of  the  country  to  be  attacked  does  so. 
It  is  difficult  to  account  for  Sennacherib's 
very  exceptional  boast,  "Jehovah  said  to 
me,  Qo  up  against  this  land."  Perhaps  he 
identifies  "Jehovah"  with  "Asshur." 
Pe|:ha|)s  he  has  heard  of  prophecies,  nttered 


in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  by  Jewish  prophets, 
which  threatened  the  land  with  desolation 
at  the  hand  of  the  Assyrians  (e.g.  Isa.  vii. 
17—24;  X.  5—12;  Joel  ii.  1—11,  etc.).  Or 
he  may  have  made  the  statement  in  mere 
bravado,  as  one  that  might  frighten  some, 
and  at  any  rate  could  not  be  contradicted. 

Ver.  26. — Then  said  £liakim  the  son  of 
Eilkiah,  and  Shebna,  and  Joah,  unto  Bab- 
shakeh.  Speak,  I  pray  thee,  to  thy  servants 
in  the  Syrian  language;  literally,  in  the 
Aramaic  language.  Hebrew,  Aramaic,  and 
Assyrian  were  three  cognate  languages, 
closely  allied,  and  very  similar  both  in  their 
grammatical  forms  and  in  their  vocabularies, 
but  still  sufficiently  different  to  be  distinct 
languages,  which  were  only  intelligible  to 
those  who  had  learnt  them.  Babshakeh  had 
addressed  the  Jewish  officials  in  Hebrew, 

Erobably  as  the  language  which  they  would 
est  understand,  if  it  were  not  even  the  only 
one  that  they  would  understand;  not  with 
the  express  "object  of  influencing  the 
common  people,"  as  Bahr  supposes.  But  the 
Jewish  officials  feared  that  the  words  uttered 
were  influencing  them.  They  proposed,  there- 
fore, that  the  further  negotiations  should  be 
conducted  in  Aramaic,  a  tongue  which  they 
undeistood,  and  one  which  they  supposed 
that  Kabshakeh,  as  he  knew  Hebrew,  would 
also  know.  Aramaic  was  spoken  in  most 
of  the  tract  that  lay  between  Assyria  and 
Palestine,  in  Syria  and  Damascus  certainly, 
in  Upper  Mesopotamia,  along  the  line  of  the 
Euphrates,  and  perhaps  as  far  as  the  Kha- 
bour  river.  For  we  understand  it.  It  is 
not  likely  that  the  Jews  of  this  time  gene- 
rally understood  Aramaic ;  but  high  officials 
of  the  court,  who  might  have  to  deal  with 
embassies  and  negotiate  treaties,  found  it 
necessary  to  understand  it,  just  as  such 
persons  in  our  own  country  have  to  know 
French.  And  talk  not  with  us  in  the  Jews' 
language  in  the  ears  of  the  people  that 
are  on  the  wall.  Besides  the  sentinels  and 
other  soldiers,  there  would  probably  be 
many  idlers  upon  the  wall,  attracted  by  the 
unwonted  spectacle  of  an  ambassadorial 
cortege,  and  anxious  to  pick  up  intelligence. 
The  lond  voices  of  Orientals  would  be  heard 
to  a  considerable  distance. 

Ver.  27. — But  Babshakeh  said  xmto  them, 
Hath  my  master  sent  me  to  thy  master,  and 
to  thee,  to  speak  these  words  1  hath  he  not 
sent  me  to  the  men  which  sit  on  the  wall  t 
An  intolerable  speech  on  the  part  of  an 
envoy,  and  one  which  might  have  justified 
an  order  to  send  an  arrow  through  his  head 
Ambassadors  are  accredited  by  governments 
to  governments,  and  the  safe  conduct  granted 
to  them  is  on  the  understanding  that  they 
will  conduct  themselves  according  to  estab- 
lished usage.  In  no  state  of  society  can  it 
haye  ba>n  allowable  for  enToys  to  ^terreii^ 


864 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  xvm.  1—37, 


between  the  gOTemors  and  the  governed, 
and  endeavonr  to  stiT  np  discontent  among 
the  latter.  Yet  this  is  what  Babshakeh  did, 
and  boasted  of  doing.  VeU  might  Isaiah 
say  of  snch  an  arrogant  and  lawless  aggressor, 
"He  hath  broken  the  covenant,  he  hath 
despised  the  cities,  he  regardeth  no  man " 
(see  Isa.  zxxiii.  8).  That  they  may  eat 
their  own  dung,  and  drink  their  own  piss 
with  yoni  Babshakeh  means  to  say  that 
the  effect  of  the  men  "  sitting  on  the  wall," 
and  continuing  the  defence  of  the  town, 
will  be  to  biing  them  to  the  last  extremity 
of  hunger  and  thirst,  when  they  will  be 
forced  even  to  consume  their  own  excre- 
ment (comp.  ch.  vi.  25 — 29). 

Yer.  28. — Then  Babshakeh  stood  and  cried 
with  aloud  voice  in  the  Jews'  language,  and 
spake,  saying.  Rabsliakeh  had  probably 
been  sitting  before.  He  now  stood  up  to 
attract  attention,  and  raised  his  voice  to  be 
the  better  heard.  Still  speaking  Hebrew,  and 
not  Aramaic,  he  addressed  himself  directly 
to  the  people  on  the  wall,  soldiers  and  others, 
doing  the  very  opposite  to  what  he  had  been 
requested  to  do,  and  outraging  all  propriety. 
History  scarcely  presents  any  other  instance 
of  such  coarse  and  barefaced  effrontery, 
unless  the  affronts  put  upon  a  Danubian 
principality  by  the  envoy  of  a  "  great  Power  " 
may  be  regarded  as  constituting  a  parallel. 
Hear  the  word  of  the  great  king,  the  King 
of  Assyria.  It  is  scarcely  likely  that  Senna- 
cherib had  anticipated  his  envoy's  action, 
much  less  directed  it,  and  told  him  exactly 
what  he  was  to  say.  But  Babshakeh  thinks 
his  words  will  have  more  effect  if  he  repre- 
sents them  as  those  of  his  master. 

Ver.  29. — Thus  saith  the  king,  let  not 
Eezekiah  deceive  you.  Babshakeh  and  his 
master,  no  doubt,  both  of  them  thought 
Hezekiah's  grounds  of  confidence  would 
prove  fallacious,  and  that  all  who  should 
trust  in  them  would  find  themselves  "de- 
ceived." There  were  but  two  grounds  that 
Hezekiah  could  possibly  put  forward:  (1) 
deliverance  by  human  means — ^by  his  own 
armed  strength  and  that  of  his  allies ;  (2) 
deliverance  by  supernatural  means— by  some 
great  manifestation  of  miraculous  power  on 
the  part  of  Jehovah.  Babshakeh  thinks 
both  equally  impossible.  The  first,  how- 
ever, is  too  absurd  for  argument,  and  he 
therefore  takes  no  further  notice  of  it ;  but 
the  second  he  proceeds  to  combtit,  in  vers. 
83—35.  Tor  he  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver 
yon  ont  of  his  hand.  Correct  grammar  re- 
quires "  out  of  my  hand ; "  but  Babshakeh 
forgets  that  he  is  professing  to  report  the 
words  of  Sennacherib. 

Yer.  30. — Neither  let  Eezekiah  make  yon 
trust  in  the  Lord.  Babshakeh  seems  to  be 
aware  that  this  is  the  argument  which 
Hezekiah  is,  in  point  of  fact,  mainly  urging. 


If  at  one  time  he  Iiad  tmeted  in  Egypt,  thai 
trust  was  now  quite  or  well-nigh  gone. 
The  tone  of  liis  exhortations  was  that  re- 
corded in  Chronicles  (2  Ohron.  xxxii.  6— S), 
"  He  set  captains  of  war  over  the  people,  and 
gathered  them  together  to  him  in  the  street 
of  the  gate  of  the  city,  and  spake  comfort- 
ably to  them,  saying.  Be  strong  and 
courageous,  be  not  afraid  nor  dismayed  for 
the  King  of  Assyria,  nor  for  all  the  multi- 
tude that  is  with  him :  for  there  be  more 
with  us  than  with  him  [see  ch.  vi.  16] ;  with 
him  is  an  arm  of  flesh ;  but  with  us  is  the 
Lord  our  God  to  help  ns,  and  to  fight  our 
battles.  And  the  people  restod  themselves 
upon  the  words  of  Hezekiah  King  of  Judiih." 
Saying,  The  Lord  will  surely  deliver  us,  and 
this  city  shall  not  be  delivered  into  the  hand 
of  the  King  of  Assyria.  Hezekiah's  was,  in 
part,  a  general  conviction  that  God  would 
not  forsake  his  people,  who  had  recently 
turned  to  him,  if  not  with  absolute  sincerity, 
yet  at  any  rate  with  public  confession  of 
sin,  and  public  acknowledgment  of  his 
mercies,  and  public  profession  of  an  intention 
to  serve  him;  in  part,  probably,  a  special 
reliance  on  some  definite  prophecies  of 
Isaiah,  that  the  city  should  not  be  taken 
(see  Isa.  xxxi.  4 — 6;  xxxiiii.  20—22). 

Yer.  31. — Hearken  not  to  Hezekiah:  for 
thus  saith  the  King  of  Assyria.  Babshakeh, 
before  concluding,  tries  the  effect  of  blandish- 
ments. The  King  of  Assyria  is  no  harsh 
lord,  as  he  has  been  represented  to  them. 
He  will  be  a  kinder  master  than  Hezekiah. 
Hezekiah  condemns  them  to  all  the  hard- 
ships of  a  siege ;  and  then,  if  they  survive 
it,  to  a  wasted  land,  ruined  homes,  broken 
cisterns.  Sennacherib,  if  they  will  but 
yield  to  him,  promises  them  peace  and 
prosperity,  a  time  of  quiet  enjoyment  in 
their  own  land,  and  then  removal  to  another 
equally  good,  where  they  will  "  live  and 
not  die,"  be  happy  and  not  miserable.  It 
will  be  observed  that  none  but  material  in- 
ducements are  held  out  to  them.  They  are 
expected  to  barter  freedom,  independence, 
religious  privileges,  country,  home,  for  the 
sake  of  creature  comforts — for  ease,  quiet.and 
security.  Setting  aside  the  question  whether 
they  could  count  on  the  performance  of  the 
promises  made  them,  it  will  be  felt  that 
they  did  well  not  to  he  tempted.  Better 
vigorous  national  life,  with  any  amount  of 
hardship,  struggle,  and  suffering,  than  the 
gilded  chains  of  the  most  peaceful  servitude 
Uake  an  agreement  with  me  by  a  present — 
rather,  make  peace  v>ith  me,  or  "  make  terms 
with  me"  (Knobel,  Thenius,  Keil,  Bahr);  in 
other  words,  give  in  your  submission  -  and 
come  out  to  me ;  i.e.  quit  the  town,  surrender 
it  (see  1  Sam,  xi.  3;  Jer.  xxi.  9;  xxxviii. 
17),  place  yourselves  at  my  mercy,  "and 
then"  s^e  what  great  things  I  will  do  for 


«E.  zvnL  1— 37.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINQ3. 


865 


yon."  The  tone,  as  B&hr  says,  '•»  one  of 
"wheedling"  and  cajolement.  And  then 
eat  ye  every  man  of  Ms  own  vine,  and  every 
one  of  his  fig  tree.  Proverbial  expressions 
fbr  a  peaceful,  happy  time  (see  1  Kings  iv. 
25 ;  Mioah  iv.  4 ;  Zeoh.  iii.  10),  when  there 
are  no  inroads,  no  ravages,  no  disturbances. 
Rabshakeh  promises,  in  the  name  of  Sen- 
nacherib, that  they  shall  rest  in  their  own 
land  for  a  term— an  indefinite  term — in  u 
blissful  state  of  peace  and  quietness  before 
any  new  resolution  is  taken  about  them. 
And  drink  ye  every  one  the  waters  of  his 
cistern;  rather,  of  hit  well  (i3).  Every 
man  who  had  a  field  or  a  vineyard  was  sure 
to  have  a  well  in  it.  Cisterns  for  the  storage 
of  rain-water  were  comparatively  uncommon. 

Ver.  32.— Until  I  come  and  take  you  away 
to  a  land  like  your  own  land.  Babshakeh 
did  not  dissemble  the  fact  that  tbey  must 
look  for  a  transplantation.  Probably  he 
felt  that,  if  he  did,  he  would  not  be  be- 
lieved. The  transplantations  had  been  too 
numerous  and  too  recent,  the  examples  of 
Samaria,  Damascus,  Hamath,  Ashdod,  etc., 
were  too  notorious,  for  it  to  be  worth  hie 
while  to  pretend  that  Judsea  would  have 
any  other  fate.  He  therefore  set  himself 
the  task  of  persuading  the  Jews  that  trans- 
plantation had  nothing  about  it  displeasing 
or  even  disagreable — that,  in  fact,  they  were 
to  be  envied  rather  than  pitied  for  being 
about  to  experience  it.  The  King  of  Assyria, 
in  the  goodness  of  his  paternal  breast,  would 
select  for  them  a  land  as  nearly  as  possible 
"  like  their  own  land  " — a  land  teeming  with 
com  and  wine  and  oil,  full  of  rich  arable 
tracts,  of  vineyards  and  of  olive-grounds, 
which  would  yield  them  those  fruits  of  the 
earth  to  which  they  were  accustomed,  in 
abundance'.  What  security  they  had  that 
these  promises  would  be  fulfilled,  he  did 
not  attempt  to  show  them;  much  less  did 
he  explain  to  them  why,  if  they  were  to  gain 
rather  than  lose,  it  was  worth  while  trans- 
planting them  at  all ;  how  that  transplanted 
nations  lost  all  spirit  and  patriotism,  sank 
into  apathy,  and  gave  no  trouble  to  their 
masters.  A  land  of  com  and  wine,  a  land 
of  bread  and  vineyards,  a  land  of  oil  olive 
and  of  honey  (comp.  Deut.  viii.  8,  9,  which 
has,  no  doubt,  afiected  the  language  of  the 
reporter,  who  gives  the  general  tenor  of 
Babshakeh's  speech,  but  could  not  have 
taken  down  or  have  remembered  his  exact 
words)  that  ye  may  live,  and  [not  die — 
Is  you  will  if  yon  follow  Hezekiah's  advice 
— and  [therefore]  hearken  not  nnto  Hezekiah, 
when  he  persuadeth — i.e.  seeketh  to  persuade 
—  yon,  Baying,  The  Lord  will  deliver  as 
(see  the  comment  on  ver.  30). 

Yer.  83.— Hath  any  of  the  gods  of  the 
nations  delivered  at  all  his  land  out  of  the 
hand  of  the  Xing  of  Assyria  1    To  Rab- 


shakeh, and  the  Assyrians  generally,  this 
seemed  a  crushing  and  convincing,  abso- 
lutely unanswerable,  argument.  It  had  all 
the  force  of  what  appeared  to  them  a  complete 
induction.  As  far  back  as  they  could  re- 
member, they  had  always  been  contending 
with  different  tribes  and  nations,  each  and 
all  of  whom  had  had  gods  in  whom  they 
trusted,  and  the  result  had  been  uniform — 
the  gods  had  been  unequal  to  the  task  of 
protecting  their  votaries  against  Assyria: 
how  could  it  be  imagined  that  Jehovah 
would  prove  an  exception  ?  If  he  was  not 
exactly,  as  Knobel  calls  him,  "the  iiisig- 
nifleant  god  of  an  insignificant  people,"  yet 
how  was  he  better  or  stronger  than  the 
others — than  Ohemosh,  or  Moloch,  or  Rim- 
mon,  or  Baal,  or  Ashima,  or  Khaldi,  or  Bel, 
or  Merodach?  What  had  he  done  for  the 
Jews  hitherto?  Nothing  remarkable,  so  far 
as  the  Assyrians  knew ;  for  their  memories 
did  not  reach  back  so  far  as  the  time  of 
Asa  and  the  deliverance  from  Zerah,  much 
less  to  the  conquest  of  Canaan  or  the  Exodus. 
He  had  not  saved  the  trans-Jordanic  tribes 
from  Tiglath-pileser,  or  Samaria  from  his 
successors.  Was  it  not  madness  to  suppose 
that  he  would  save  Judsea  from  Sennacherib  ? 
A  heathen  reasoner  could  not  see,  could  not 
be  expected  to  see,  the  momentous  difference ; 
that  the  gods  of  the  other  countries  were 
"no  gods"  (oh.  xix.  18),  while  Jehovah 
was  "  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth." 

Ver.  34:.— Where  are  the  gods  of  Hamath, 
and  of  Arpadt  Hamath  and  Arpad  had 
been  recently  conquered  (about  b.o.  720)  by 
Sargon  (see  the  '  Eponym  Canon,'  pp.  126  — 
128).  Of  the  latter  city  but  little  is  known, 
not  even  its  site.  We  find  it  generally  con- 
nected with  Damascus  (Jer.  xlix.  23: 
'  Eponym  Canon,'  pp.  68,  126)  and  Hamath 
(ch.  xix.  13 ;  Isa.  i.  9 ;  xxxvi.  19 ;  xxxvii. 
13:  Jer.  xlix.  23;  '  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  126), 
and  may  conjecture  that  it  lay  between 
them,  either  in  Coele-Syria  or  in  the  Anti- 
Libanus,  (On  Hamath,  see  the  commen- 
tary upon  ch.  xiv.  25 ;  and  for  its  Special  god, 
Ashima,  see  that  on  ch.  xvii.  30.)  Where 
are  the  gods  of  Sepharvaim,  Hena,  and  Ivah  % 
(On  the  cities  and  gods  of  Sepharvaim  and 
Ivah  (or  Ava),  see  the  comment  on  ch.  xvii. 
24  and  31.)  "Hena,"  mentioned  always 
with  Sepharvaim  and  Ivah  (ch.  xix.  13; 
Isa.  xxxviii.  13),  is  probably  Anah  on  tlie 
Euphrates,  about  seventy  miles  above  Hit 
(Ivah).  Nothing  is  known  of  its  gods. 
Probably  Sepharvaim,  Hena,  and  Ivah  haJ 
rebelled  in  conjunction,  and  been  recon- 
quered at  no  distant  date.  Sargon  mentions 
in  his  annals  tliat  he  besieged  and  took 
Sepharvaim  (Sippara)  in  his  twelftli  year 
(b.o.  710).  Have  they  delivered  Samaria  out 
of  mine  hand  1  There  is  probably  some  com- 
pression of  tiie  original  narrative  here.    Th  - 


866 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,     [oh.  xvra.  1— 37. 


meaning  is,  "Have  they  delivered  their 
several  cities,  or  has  the  god  of  Samaria 
delivered  his  city  out  of  my  hand  ?  "  No 
god  liad  hitherto  delivered  any  city  which 
the  ABsyrians  had  attacked. 

Ver.  35. — Who  are  they  among  all  the  gods 
of  the  oonntrieB— t.e.  the  countries  vrith 
which  Assyria  had  heen  at  war — ^that  have 
delivered  their  oonntry  out  of  mine  hand, 
that  the  Lord  shonld  deliver  Jerusalem  out 
of  mine  hand?  "Produce  an  example  of 
deliverance,"  Eabahakeh  means  to  say,  "be- 
fore you  speak  of  deliverance  as  probable, 
or  even  possible.  If  you  cannot,  relinquish 
the  hope,  and  submit  yourselves."  Eab- 
shakeh  cannot  conceive  the  idea  that  Je- 
hovah is  anything  but  a  local  god,  on  a  par 
with  all  the  other  gods  of  the  countries. 

Yer.  36.  —But  the  people  held  their  peace, 
and  answered  him  not  a  word.  All  Bab- 
shakeh's  efforts  to  produce  open  disaffection 
failed.  Whatever  impression  his  arguments 
may  have  made,  no  indication  was  given 
that  they  had  produced  any.  If^  then,  he 
had  hoped  to  bring  about  a  mutiny,  or  even 
to  create  a  disturbance,  he  was  disappointed. 
For  the  king's  commandment  was,  saying, 
Answer  tiitn  not.  Hezekiah  had  either  an- 
ticipated Eabshakeli's  tactics,  and  given 
an  order  beforehand  that  no  word  should  be 
uttered,  or  he  had  promptly  met  them  by 
sending  such  an  order,  on  learning  Bab- 
shakeh'i  proceedings,    Th«  latter  is  more 


probable,  since  inch  an  ontrageons  course  as 
that  which  Babshakeh  had  pursued  can 
scarcely  have  been  expected. 

Ver.  87. — Then  came  £lialdm  the  son  of 
Hilkiah,  which  was  over  the  household,  and 
Shebna  the  scribe,  and  Joahthe  son  of  Asaph 
the  recorder,  to  Hezekiah  with  their  clothes 
rent.  They  had  rent  their  clothes,  not  so 
much  in  grief  or  in  alarm,  as  in  horror 
at  Babshakeh's  blasphemies.  They  were 
blasphemies,  no  doubt,  aiisiug  from  "in- 
vincible ignorance,"  and  not  intended  as 
insults  to  the  one  Almighty  Being  who 
rules  the  earth,  of  whose  existence  Bab- 
shakeh had  probably  no  conception;  but 
they  struck  on  Jewish  ears  as  insults  to 
Jehovah,  and  therefore  as  dreadful  and 
horrible  (comp.  Gen.  xxxvii.  29;  1  Sam.  iv. 
13 ;  2  Sam.  i  2 ;  Ezra  ix.  3,  etc.).  And  told 
him  the  words  of  Babshakeh ;  reported  to 
him,  i.e.  as  nearly  as  they  could  all  that 
Babshakeh  had  said.  The  three  envoys 
would  supplement,  and  perliaps  correct,  one 
another;  and  Hezekiah  would  have  con- 
veyed to  him  a  full  and,  on  the  whole,  exact 
account  of  the  message  sent  to  him  through 
Babshakeh  by  the  Assyrian  Mng,  and  of 
Babshakeh's  method  of  enforcing  it.  The 
crisis  of  Hezeldah's  life  was  reached.  As 
he  acted  under  it  would  be  fixed  his  own 
fate,  his  character  in  the  judgment  of  all 
future  time,  and  the  fate  of  his  own  country. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Ver.  ^—Iconodasm  right  or  wrong,  judicious  or  injudicious,  according  to  circum- 
stances. The  destruction  of  the  brazen  serpent  of  Moses  by  Hezekiah  has  always  been 
a  favourite  argument  with  extreme  iconoclasts- for  their  extreme  views.  In  the  time 
of  Henry  VIII.,  and  still  more  in  that  of  Cromwell,  statuary  was  destroyed  or  mutilated, 
precious  pictures  were  burnt,  priceless  stained-glass  windows  were  shivered  to  atoms, 
by  those  with  whom  a  main  justification  of  their  conduct  was  the  example  of  Hezekiah. 
Let  that  example,  then,  be  considered,  both  in  respect  of  what  Hezekiah  did,  and  of 
what  he  did  not  do. 

L  What  Hezekiah  did.  1.  He  removed  the  high  places,  which  were  distinctly 
contrary  to  the  Law,  since  the  Law  allowed  sacrifice  in  one  place  only— before  the  ark 
of  the  covenant,  in  the  tabernacle,  or  at  Jerusalem.  2.  He  brake  down  the  "  images," 
or  idolatrous  emblems  of  Baal — ^mere  pilars  probably,  which  were  the  objects  of  an 
actual  worship.  3.  He  cut  down  the  groves,  or  idolatrous  emblems  of  Ashtoreth — 
"  sacred  trees,"  also  the  objects  of  worship.  4.  He  brake  in  pieces  the  brazen  serpent, 
to  which  the  Israelites  had  for  some  time  been  in  the  habit  of  offering  incense. 

II.  What  Hezekiah  did  not  do.  Hezekiah  did  not  understand  the  second  com- 
n^flndmcnt  in  any  other  sense  than  Solomon.  He  allowed  the  ministry  of  art  to 
religion.  He  left  untouched  the  carved  figures  of  cherubim  and  palm-trees  and  open 
flowers  upon  the  walls  of  the  temple  (1  Kings  vi.  29).  He  left  untouched  the  brazen 
layers,  on  the  borders  of  which  were  lions,  oxen,  and  cherubim  (1  Kings  yii.  29).  He 
probably  restored  to  thdr  place,  he  certainly  did  not  destroy,  the  twelve  oxen  (Jer. 
lii.  20)  whioh  Solomon  had  made  to  support  his  "  brazen  sea "  (1  Kings  viL  25),  «nd 
whioh  Aliaz  had  removed  from  the  temple  (ch.  xvi.  17).  He  himself  added  to  the 
gold  ornamentation  of  the  doors  and  pillars  (ch.  xviii.  16).  It  is  evident,  therefore, 
that  Hezekiak's  ioenoolMm  was  limited  to  those  objects  which  were  being  actiuUy 


OH.  XYin.  1— ST.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,  867 


•baaed  jto  idolatrous  uses  at  the  time  when  he  destroyed  them.  He  did  not  spy  around 
him,  scenting  peril  of  idolatry  in  every  image  or  other  representation  of  natural  forms 
that  bad  come  down  to  him  from  former  ages,  even  when  they  were  employed  in  the 
service  of  religion.  He  was  on  the  side  of  a  rich  and  gorgeous  and  artistic  ceremonial, 
of  a  musical  service  (2  Chron.  xzix.  25 — 27),  a  highly  ornamented  sanctuary,  a  "  hduse  " 
as  "magnifical"  as  art  could  make  it  (1  Chron.  xxii.  6),  He  recognized  that  the 
preservation  of  artistic  objects  devoted  to  religion  was  the  rule,  destruction  of  them  the 
rare  exception,  only  justified  (1)  where  idolatrous  abuse  had  actually  crept  in ;  and 
(2)  where  such  idolatrous  abuse  still  continued.  An  observance  of  these  wise 
limitations  would  have  saved  much  that  is  now  irrevocably  lost  in  the  past,  and  may 
be  required  to  save  what  remains  to  us  of  religious  ait  in  the  future. 

Vers,  6 — 7, — Oo^s  service  not  reaMy  a  hard  service.  God's  service  is  not  the  hard 
service  that  some  suppose  it  to  be.  No  doubt  it  involves  a  certain  amount  of  pain 
and  suffering.  For,  first,  there  is  no  true  service  of  God  without  self-denial ;  and  self- 
denial  is  painful.  Secondly,  it  involves  chastening  at  the  hand  of  God ;  for  "  whom 
the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth"  (Heb. 
xii.  6) ;  and  chastening  is  "  not  joyous,  but  grievous "  (Heb.  xii.  11).  But  there  are 
to  be  set  against  these  pains  so  many  and  so  great  compensations  as  leave  a  vast  pre- 
ponderance of  advantage,  and  even  enjoyment,  to  the  godly  over  the  ungodly. 

I.  T!he  satisfaction  of  a  good  conscience.  Just  as  there  is  nothing  so  painful,  so 
depressing,  so  burdensome,  as  an  evil  conscience,  the  continually  abiding  sense  of 
guiltiness  and  ill  desert,  so  there  is  nothing  which  is  a  greater  comfort  to  a  man,  more 
calculated  to  sustain  him  and  maintain  within  him  a  perpetual  quiet  cheerfulne.<!s, 
than  "  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  towards  God "  (1  Pet.  iii.  21),  the  knowledge 
that  one  has  striven  and  is  striving  to  do  God's  will,  and  that  by  God's  grace  one  has 
been  kept  from  falling  away  from  him.  Notwithstanding  their  self-depreciation  and 
self-distrust,  good  men  have,  on  the  whole,  a  self-approving  conscience  (Eom.  ii.  15), 
which  is  a  source  of  inward  satisfaction  and  enjoyment. 

XL  The  esteem  and  approval  of  good  men.  There  is  implanted  in  man  a  love  of 
approbation,  the  gratification  of  which  is  the  source  of  a  very  positive  pleasure.  Godly 
men,  good  men,  whatever  amount  of  dislike  they  may  arouse  among  those  whose 
designs  they  thwart,  or  to  whom  their  lives  are  a  continual  reproach,  elicit  from  the 
better  sort  a  much  greater  amount  of  very  warm  and  cordial  approval.  This  cannot 
but  he  a  satisfaction  to  them.  The  praise  of  men  is  not  what  they  seek ;  but  when  it 
comes  to  them  unsoucrht,  as  it  will  almost  certainly  come  at  last,  it  cannot  fail  to  be 
grateful  and  acceptable. 

III.  Temporal  pbospeeitt  arising  from  man's  eespbct  and  esteem.  The  approval 
of  our  fellow-men  naturally  leads  on  to  temporal  advantages.  Men  place  those  whom 
they  esteem  in  situations  of  trust,  which  are  also,  generally  or  frequently,  situations  of 
emolument.  They  make  them  presents  or  leave  them  legacies.  They  give  them  their 
custom,  and  recommend  their  friends  to  do  the  same.  The  worldly  maxim,  "  Honesty 
is  the  best  policy,"  witnesses  to  the  worldly  advantage  which  accrues,  by  mere  natural 
causation,  to  the  upright,  honest  man.  "  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that 
love  God;"  and,  generally  speaking,  even  this  world's  goods  seem  to  gather  round 
them,  and  to  cling  to  them,  in  spite  of  their  slight  esteem  for  earthly  dross,  and  their 
proneness  to  scatter  their  riches  on  those  around  them. 

IV.  Temporal  prosperity  ARisma  from  the  direct  action  of  Divine  providence. 
Of  this  we  have  in  Hezekiah  a  notable  example.  He  "  clave  to  the  Lord,  and  departed 
not  from  following  him,  but  kept  his  commandments,  .  .  .  and  the  Lord  was  with  him ; 
and  he  prospered  whithersoever  he  went  forth."  The  Divine  blessing  rested  on  all  that  he 
did ;  God  "  prospered  him  in  all  his  works."  When  he  seemed  at  the  point  of  death,  he 
miraculously  recovered  from  his  sickness,  and  God  added  to  his  life  fifteen  years  (ch. 
XX.  6).  When  he  provoked  a  judgment  by  indiscreet  ostentation,  the  boon  was  granted 
him  that  the  judgment  should  not  fall  in  his  days  (ch.  xx.  19).  When  an  over- 
whelming calamity  seemed  about  to  fall  upon  him,  and  to  crush  both  him  and  his 
nation,  the  catastrophe  was  averted  by  a  stupendous  miracle — the  Assyrian  host  wag 
destroyed,  and  the  peril  escaped  (ch.  xix.  35).  "Riches  and  honour  exceeding  much" 
were  given  him  (2  Chron.  zxxiL  27),  and  he  was  "  magnified  in  the  sight  of  all  th« 


868  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  xvin.  1-87. 

oations"  (2  Chron.  zxxii.  23).  It  may  lie  said  that  all  this  was  abnormal,  and  belonged 
to  "the  age  of  miracles;"  but  the  principles  of  God's  action  do  not  change,  and  if  we 
examine  human  life  at  the  present  day  dispassionately,  we  shall  find  that  still,  as  a 
general  rule,  if  men  cleave  to  the  Lord,  and  keep  his  commandments,  and  depart  not 
from  following  him,  he  will  he  with  them,  aud  will,  more  or  less,  prosper  them. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — TVif  danger  nf  trusting  to  a  purchased  peace.  I.  In  the  hibtokt  of 
NATIONS  a  purchased  peace  is  seldom  more  enduring  or  more  trustworthy  than  this 
peace  which  Hezekiah  bought  of  Sennacherib.  Once  successful  in  extorting  money  by 
threats,  why  should  an  enemy  refrain  from  repeating  the  process?  Why  should  he 
stop  till  he  has  squeezed  the  sponge  dry,  and  there  is  no  more  to  be  got  from  his 
victim?  Even  then,  why  should  he  not  step  in  and  execute  his  original  threat  of 
destruction  and  ruin  ?  So  Samaria  found  when  she  gave  her  thousand  talents  to  the 
Assyrians  (oh.  xv.  19).  So  Borne  found  when  she  bribed  Attila  and  Alaric.  So  will 
all  nations  ever  find  who  seek  to  prolong  their  lives  a  little  bit  by  paying  for  being 
let  alone.    And  so  also — 

II.  In  the  history  of  individuals.  Persons  frequently  get  themselves  into  soma 
trouble  or  other,  which  they  do  not  wish  to  be  known,  and  their  secret  is  discovered 
by  some  unscrupulous  individual,  who  proceeds  to  trade  upon  it.  What  will  they  give 
him  to  remain  silent?  If  they  once  consent  to  purchase  a  peace  of  their  enemy,  all 
peace  in  life  is  gone  from  them.  A  man's  appetite  is  only  whetted  by  the  first  bribe, 
and  still  more  by  the  second.  "  Increase  of  appetite  dotb  grow  by  what  it  feeds  on." 
Demand  follows  demand,  threat  follows  threat.  The  blood-sucker  is  insatiate.  True 
wisdom  consists  in  not  yielding  to  the  first  threat,  in  declining  to  purchase  peace,  and 
defying  the  enemy.  He  may  as  well  do  his  worst  at  once  as  at  last.  It  will  generally 
he  found  that  his  worst  is  not  so  very  had.  Even  if  it  is,  it  is  the  just  penalty  which 
has  to  be  paid  for  our  past  transgression,  and  which  must  be  paid  in  some  way  or  other, 
and  at  some  time,  here  or  hereafter.  It  is  best  for  us  that  it  should  be  paid  soon ;  for 
the  penalty  of  sin,  if  not  so  paid,  is  apt  to  be  demanded  at  last  with  a  heavy  accumulation 
f  interest. 

Vers.  20, 21. — Bruised  reeds.  It  is  astonishing  what  trust  is  still  placed,  by  generation 
after  generation  of  mankind,  in  "bruised  reeds."  Whatever  may  be  the  case  with 
individuals,  mankind,  the  human  race,  learns  nothing  from  experience.  Men  still 
trust  implicitly  in  such  "  bruised  reeds"  as  these — 

I.  Bio  battalions.  They  think  they  are  safe  if  they  have  sufficient  "  strength  for 
the  war."  They  go  on  increasing  their  military  establishments,  adding  regiment  to 
regiment,  and  battery  to  battery,  and  corps  d^armee  to  corps  d'armee.  They  count  the 
armies  of  their  neighbours;  they  reckon  up  man  against  man,  and  gun  against  gun, 
and  ship  against  ship;  and  calculate,  and  plan,  and  act,  as  if  thu  "  multitude  of  an 
host" — ^the  numherof  troops  capable  of  being  brought  at  once  into  the  field — was  every- 
thing. They  forget  that  "  it  is  nothing  to  the  Lord  to  help,  whether  with  many  or 
with  them  that  have  no  power"  (2  Chron.  xiv.  H).  They  forget,  or  misread,  history, 
and  fail  to  note  how  ofien  "  the  race  has  not  been  to  the  swift,  nor  the  battle  to  the 
strong"  (Bccles.  ix.  11). 

IL  PowEBFCli  ALLIES.  Weak  powers  have  always  some  "  Egypt "  to  which  they 
look  for  succour.  Strong  powers  count  on  "  triple  "  or  "  quadruple  "  alliances  to  augment 
their  strength,  and  render  tliem  irresistible.  They  forget  how  easily  alliances  are 
broken  up,  how  sure  they  are  to  arouse  discontents  and  jealousies,  how  little  dependence 
can  be  placed  on  the  promises  of  statesmen,  or  the  persistence  of  a  particular  mood  ia 
a  nation,  or  the  view  which  a  state  may  take  of  its  interests.  They  forget  that  the 
friend  of  to-day  may  be  the  enemy  of  to-morrow,  and  may  fail  them  at  the  moment  of 
greatest  need. 

IIL  Saoaoious  statesmen  AMD  GBNEBAL8.  It  is  forgotten,  or  at  any  rate  not  home 
steadily  in  mind,  how  intellect  decays,  how  mental  power  lessens,  as  men  grow  old; 
how  often  under  a  prolonged  strain  the  strongest  intellect  suddenly  snaps  and  is  no 
longer  of  any  account.  Nor  is  it  generally  felt  and  recognized  how  limited  and 
Imperfect  even  the  greatest  intellect  always  is — how  incompetent  to  forecast  all  possi- 
bilities, or  to  deal  with  all  emergencies.    "  The  weakness  if  God  is  stronger  than  man, 


<&  xvm.  1—37.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  369 

•ncl  the  foolisbnesB  of  Gk)d  is  wiser  than  man  "  f  1  Cor.  i.  25).  Man's  wisdom  !•  at  best 
a  poor  purblind  wisdom,  apt  to  err,  apt  to  fail  when  most  needed — a  very  **  bruised 
reed  "  to  trust  in. 

IV.  Good  luck  ob  a  fobtunate  star.  The  trust  of  the  first  Napoleon  ta  his 
" star"  is  well  known.  It  is  not  so  well  known,  but  it  is  sufficiently  attested,  that  the 
third  Napoleon  bad  nearly  as  implicit  a  trust.  Thousands  of  persons  deem  themselves 
"  lucky,"  and  trust  in  their  "  good  luck,"  as  if  it  were  an  actual  tangible  possession. 
Otherwise  there  would  be  far  less  gambling  than  there  is.  The  poor  peasants  of  Italy 
and  Germany  would  waste  less  money  in  lotteries,  and  the  simpletons  of  England  less 
in  bets  upon  horses.  Persons'  "  luck  "  is,  on  the  whole,  probably  about  equal,  and  if  a 
man  has  been  "lucky"  hitherto,  he  should  expect  to  be  "unlucky"  in  the  future. 

V.  Something  tubnino  up.  The  phrase  is  a  vulgar  one,  but  it  would  need  a  long 
periphrasis  to  express  the  idea  otherwise,  and  even  then  we  might  not  make  our 
meaning  clear.  Men  who  do  not  think  themselves  particularly  lucky  are  still  constantly 
waiting  for  "  something  to  turn  up,"  looking  for  it,  trusting  in  it.  The  trust  is  made 
an  excuse  for  idleness,  for  inaction,  for  waste  of  the  best  years  of  life,  even  for  dissipated 
courses — for  gambling,  drinking,  frequenting  evil  company.  This  "bruised  reed"  is 
more  rotten  even  than  most  of  the  others,  for  the  idler,  the  waster  of  his  time,  the 
haunter  of  smoking  saloons,  billiard-rooms,  and  race-courses,  nothing  ever  does  "  turn 
up."  He  offers  no  temptation  to  steady  business-like  men  to  employ  him.  He  does 
not  seek  work,  and  work  is  not  very  likely  to  seek  him.  He  is  an  idler,  and  will 
remain  an  idler  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  There  is  no  help  for  him,  unless  ha  gives 
up  his  ailly  trust,  and  betakes  himself  to  a  better  one. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  secret  of  a  successful  life;  or,  trust  in  God,  and  its  results. 
"What  a  refreshing  contrast  to  some  of  the  lives  we  have  been  considering,  is  this 
description  of  the  life  of  Hezekiah  1  How  pleasant  it  is  to  read  of  such  a  life  as  his, 
after  we  have  read  of  so  many  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel,  that  "  they  did  evil  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord,  and  walked  in  the  ways  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made 
Israel  to  sin  "  I  It  is  a  pleasant  contrast  even  to  the  life  of  Hezekiah's  own  father  Ahaz. 
It  is  a  somewhat  strange  thing  that,  brought  up  amid  such  evil  surroundings,  Hezekiah 
should  have  turned  out  so  well.  The  chances  were  all  against  him.  His  father's 
example  was  anything  but  favourable  to  the  development  of  religion  in  his  son.  How 
careful  parents  should  be  as  to  the  example  they  set  their  children  1  The  best  help 
parents  can  give  their  children  to  begin  life  with  is  godly  training  and  a  Christian 
example.  I  read  lately,  "  that  of  the  anarchists  at  Chicago,  who  were  executed  for 
their  crimes  some  time  ago,  almost  all  had  either  been  deprived  of  their  parents  when 
young,  or  had  never  received  any  home  training ;  they  had  never  been  to  a  Sunday 
school ;  the  influences  surrounding  them  had  been  utterly  godless."  What  a  responsi- 
bility rests  on  parents  to  train  their  children  well  I  Much  of  their  future  happiness 
depends  upon  the  home  life  of  childhood  and  youth.  Perhaps  Hezekiah  had  a  good 
mother.  Perhaps  he  had  been  entrusted  to  the  care  of  some  one  of  the  priests  who 
remained  faithful  to  God  amid  the  prevailing  unfaithfulness,  idolatry,  and  sin.  Perhaps 
he  was  early  brought  under  the  influence  of  Isaiah.  At  any  rate,  we  read  of  him  that  he 
did  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  He  is  singled  out  for  special  praise.  It  is  said  of  him 
that "  he  trusted  m  the  Lord  God  of  Israel ;  so  that  after  him  was  none  like  him  among 
the  kings  of  Judah,  nor  any  that  were  before  him  "  (ver.  5).  What  was  the  consequence  ? 
Just  what  the  consequence  will  be  to  all  who  put  their  trust  in  the  Lord  and  walk  in 
his  ways :  "  The  Lord  was  with  him ;  and  he  prospered  whithersoever  he  went  firth." 

1.  Tbubt  in  God  leadb  to  febbonal  beligion.  Hezekiah's  faith  in  God  was 
not  a  mere  idle  profession.  It  did  not  consist  in  the  mere  belief  of  certain  historical 
facts.  It  did  not  consist  in  the  mere  assent  to  certain  doctrinal  truths.  It  did  not 
consist  in  the  mere  observance  of  certain  outward  forms  and  ceremonies.  It  was  a  real 
faith.  It  extended  to  his  whole  life.  "  He  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  ol 
the  Lord,  according  to  all  that  David  his  father  did  "  (ver.  3).  "  He  clave  unto  the 
Lord,  and  departed  not  from  following  him,  but  kept  hit  commandments,  which  th« 
XL  xiNoa.  2  1 


870  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KtSQS.      [oh.  xVm.  1— 37. 

Lord  commanded  Moses  "  (ver.  6).  Such  is  true  religion.  Religion  is  the  dedication  of 
the  heart  and  life  to  God.  A  man  may  differ  from  nie  in  creed,  and  in  the  way  he  wor- 
ships the  same  God ;  but  if  he  loves  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  serves  God  in  sincerity, 
he  is  a  truly  religious  man.  "In  every  nation  he  that  feareth  God,  and  worketh 
righteousness,  is  accepted  with  him."  How  expressive  and  instructive  are  some  of  these 
quaint  old  phrases  1  " Ee  clave  unto  the  Lord."  Hezekiah  set  before  him  one  great 
aim  at  the  commencement  of  his  life,  and  that  was  to  please  God.  Whatever  it  might 
cost,  he  made  up  his  mind  to  keep  close  to  God.  It  is  a  grand  resolution  for 
the  young  to  make.  It  is  a  grand  aim  to  keep  before  them  in  life.  But  Hezekiah  had 
not  merely  a  goal  at  which  he  aimed.  He  had  certain  wdl-defined  lines  along  which 
he  reached  that  goal.  He  knew  that,  to  please  God,  he  must  keep  his  conmiandments. 
He  did  not  set  up  his  own  will  in  opposition  to  the  will  of  God,  king  though  he  was. 
He  did  not  dispute  the  wisdom  of  God's  command*  He  felt  that  God  knew  much 
better  than  he  did  the  path  of  wisdom  and  of  duty.  This  is  one  of  the  best  evidences 
of  true  faith — of  real  trust  in  God.  We  may  not  see  the  reason  for  a  command  of  God, 
but  let  us  obey  it.  A  parent  will  give  his  child  many  commands,  for  which  it  is  quite 
unnecessary,  perhaps  imdesirable,  that  the  child  should  know  the  reason.  Obedience 
based  on  faith  is  one  of  the  first  principles  of  life.  Here,  then,  was  the  beginning  of 
Hezekiah's  success  in  life.  It  began  with  the  state  of  his  own  heart.  He  trusted  in 
God.  That  trust  in  God  moulded  his  whole  character,  and  character  is  the  foundation 
of  all  that  is  permanent  in  life. 

II.  Trust  in  God  leads  to  peactioal  efpoet.  Hezekiah  very  soon  showed 
by  his  conduct  that  he  was  determined  to  serve  Gtod.  He  did  not  leave  the  people 
long  in  doubt  as  to  which  side  he  was  on.  In  the  very  first  year  of  his  reign,  and  ia 
the  first  month  of  it,  he  opened  the  doors  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  which  his  father  had 
closed,  and  repaired  them  (2  Chron.  xxix.  3).  As  soon  as  the  temple  was  set  in  proper 
order,  he  caused  the  priests  and  the  Levites  to  commence  at  once  the  public  service  of 
God.  Then,  in  the  second  month,  he  issued  a  proclamation  throughout  all  the  land 
of  Israel  and  Judah,  inviting  the  people  to  come  to  Jerusalem  to  keep  the  Passover  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  What  a  festival  and  time  of  rejoicing  that  was  I  For  seven 
days  they  kept  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  with  great  gladness,  and  the  Levites  and 
the  priests  praised  the  Lord  day  by  day,  singing  with  loud  instruments  unto  the  Lord, 
Peace  offerings  were  offered;  confession  of  sin  was  made,  not  to  the  priests,  but  to  the 
Lord  God  of  their  fathers;  and  the  presence  of  the  Lord  was  so  manifested  among 
the  large  congregation,  that  when  the  seven  days  of  the  Passover  were  ended,  the  whole 
assembly  unanimously  agreed  to  keep  seven  days  more.  "  So  there  wns  great  joy  in 
Jerusalem :  fur  since  the  time  of  Solomon  the  son  of  David  King  of  Israel  there  wai 
not  the  like  in  Jerusalem."  The  effect  of  the  service  was  electrical.  When  the 
Passover  was  finished,  the  people  went  out  to  all  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  brake  the 
images  in  pieces,  and  cut  down  the  groves,  and  threw  down  the  high  places  and 
the  altars  nntil  they  had  utterly  destroyed  them  all.  In  all  this  work  of  destroying 
the  symbols  of  idolatry,  Hezekiah  the  king  took  a  leading  part.  Even  the  brazen 
serpent  which  Moses  had  made  did  no^  escape  the  destroying  hand.  It  was  aa 
interesting  relic  of  Israel's  journeying  in  the  wilderness,  and  of  their  wonderful 
deliverance  by  God.  But  it  had  become  •  snare  to  the  people.  It  had  become  an  object 
of  worship  to  some,  as  relics  and  images  become  to  many  professing  Christians.  They 
worshipped  it  and  biunt  incense  to  it.  Hezekiah  was  not  the  man  to  destroy  anything 
that  was  a  help  to  true  devotion.  He  encouraged  the  Levites  to  use  the  trumpets,  the 
harp,  and  the  psaltery,  to  stir  up  and  stimulate  the  singing  of  the  congregation,  and  to 
render  to  God  a  hearty  and  glorious  service  of  praise.  But  he  saw  that  the  brazen 
serpent  had  become  an  idol  in  itself,  and  was  leading  the  thoughts  of  the  people  away 
from  the  true  Object  of  worship.  So  he  broke  it  in  pieces.  All  honour  to  the  determined 
reformer,  who  destroyed  everything  that  had  become  dishonouring  to  God  I  All  honour 
to  those  stem  reformers  who  from  time  to  time  have  broken  in  pieces  the  symbola  of 
idolatry  in  the  Church  of  Christ  I  Would  that  in  the  Church  of  Borne  to-day  soma 
such  reformer  would  arise,  who  would  denounce  and  overthrow  its  image-worship  and 
Mariolatry  I  Such  was  the  work  of  reformation  which  Hezekiah  accomplished  among 
his  people.  It  shows  how  Ood  honours  those  who  are  determined  to  serve  him,  and 
how  he  blesse*  immediate  and  decided  action,    Hezekiah  might  well  have  hesitated  in 


CH.  xvm.  1— 37.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  871 

this  work.  The  whole  country  iras  given  OTer  to  idolatry.  He  might  h»Te  dreaded 
a  rebellion.  In  some  parts  of  the  country  he  got  little  sympathy  in  hia  efforts  to 
restore  the  ancient  religion.  When  the  messengers  inviting  the  people  to  the  Passover 
passed  through  the  country  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  and  Zebulon,  the  people  there 
laughed  them  to  scorn  and  mocked  them.  Such  manifestations  of  popular  feeling 
might  have  caused  Hezekiah  to  falter  in  his  decision.  He  might  have  thought  that 
he  would  introduce  his  reforms  gradually.  But  no!  the  idolatry  was  wrong,  and 
it  must  be  put  down  at  once.  The  worship  of  the  true  God  was  right,  and  it  must  at 
once  he  resumed.  Hezekiah  was  right.  Had  he  waited,  had  he  begun  his  reign  by 
tolerating  idolatry  for  a  while,  he  would  have  found  it  much  harder  to  overthrow 
afterwards.  Is  there  not  here  a  lesson  for  us  all  ?  ^  you  see  the  right  path  clearly 
pointed  out  to  you,  resolve  to  walk  in  it,  though  all  men  should  be  a,gainst  you. 
Bemember  the  brave  words  of  Athanasius.  He  was  mocked  at  for  his  zeal  for  the 
truth.  Some  one  said  to  him,  "Athanasius,  all  the  world  is  against  you;"  then  said 
he,  "  Attianasius  is  against  the  world."  Follow  the  light  of  conscience  and  of  duty. 
What  matter  though  you  may  incur  danger  or  worldly  loss  by  bo  doing? 

«  And  because  right  is  right,  to  follow  right 
Were  reason  in  the  scorn  of  consequence." 

Furthermore,  whatever  work  you  see  needs  to  be  done,  do  it  at  onee.  Promptness  ana 
decision  are  two  essential  elements  of  success  in  life.  Do  you  see  that  you  need  to 
believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  if  you  are  to  be  saved  ?  ITien  come  to  him  to-day. 
A  more  convenient  season  may  never  arrive.  We  know  not  what  a  day  may  bring 
forth.  Do  you  hear  God  calling  you  by  his  Word  to  perform  some  act  of  kiniiess  or 
forgiveness?  Then  do  it  at  once.  Do  you  hear  God  calling  you  to  some  work  of 
usefulness  in  his  Church  ?  Begin  at  once  to  undertake  it.  If  our  trust  in  God  is 
a  real  trust,  it  will  lead  us,  not  only  to  personal  religion,  lut  also  to  practical  effort. 
We  can  trust  him  to  take  care  of  us  when  we  are  doing  his  work.  "  Therefore  be  ye 
steadfast,  immovable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  forasmuch  as  ye 
know  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord." 

III.  Tbust  in  God  leads  to  success  kt  lieb.  "And  the  Lord  was  with  him; 
and  he  prospered  whithersoever  he  went  forth  "  (ver.  7).  He  was  victorious  over  his 
enemies.  He  threw  off  the  yoke  of  the  King  of  Aasyria,  and  drove  hack  the  Philistines, 
who  had  made  great  inroads  during  the  previous  reign.  When  the  people  honoured 
God,  their  Ood  honoured  them  and  gave  them  victories  over  their  enemies.  As  a  reward 
of  Hezekiah's  faith  and  faithfulness,  God  gave  him  much  riches  and.honour.  Hezekiah 
had  trusted  God  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign.  He  had  done  God's  will,  though  he  did 
not  know  what  it  might  cost  him,  and  before  he  was  established  on  the  throne.  And 
God  did  not  disappoint  his  trust,  but  made  him  greater  and  more  honoured  than  all 
the  kings  of  Judah  before  or  after  his  time.  Even  in  a  temporal  point  of  view,  no  one 
ever  loses  by  trusting  God  and  doing  what  is  right.  Christ  promises  that  every  one 
who  is  willing  to  give  up  every  earthly  possession  for  his  sake  will  receive  an  hundred- 
fold more  in  this  life,  and  in  the  world  to  come  life  everlasting.  We  saw,  above,  the 
dangers  of  prosperity.  Hezekiah's  career  shows  us  what  is  the  safeguard  of  prosperity. 
"  The  Lord  was  with  him."  Where  that  can  be  said,  there  is  no  danger  in  prosperity. 
In  the  godless  man,  prosperity  is  often  a  curse.  It  hardens  his  heart.  He  thinks  that 
he  is  rich  and  increased  in  goods  and  has  need  of  nothing.  But  the  prosperity  of  the 
Christian  may  be  a  great  blessing  to  himself  and  others.  Take  with  you  into  your 
business,  into  your  social  relations,  into  every  plan  you  make  and  every  work  you 
undertake,  the  presence  of  Ood,  the  fear  of  Ood,  the  commandments  of  Ood;  and  then 
there  will  be  no  fear  of  your  success.  Trust  in  the  Lord.  Put  your  eternal  interest* 
into  the  hands  of  Jesus.  He  is  worthy  of  your  trust.  They  that  trust  themselves  to 
him  shall  never  perish.  Trust  in  the  Lor(^  that  it  may  lead  yon  to  personal  rdigion, 
to  practical  effort,  to  success  in  life. 

"  Set  thou  thy  tmst  upon  the  Lord, 
And  be  thou  doing  good. 
And  so  thou  in  the  land  shalt  dwell. 
And  verily  have  food." 

O.H.I 


Sn  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  XTm.  l—SZ 

Vers.  9 — 12. — Captivity  and  ita  earn*,  (See  homily  on  preceding  chapter,  rera. 
w— 28.^—0.  H.  L 

Tera.  13 — 16. — Eezekiah's  toeakneta.  Hezekiah  had  now  been  for  lome  time  on 
the  throne.  God  had  been  with  him  hitherto,  and  had  prospered  him.  Perhaps 
Hezekiah  began  to  trust  too  much  to  his  own  strength.  In  the  seventh  verse  we  are 
told  that  he  rebelled  against  the  King  of  Assyria,  and  served  him  not.  It  does  not 
appear  that  Hezekiah  sought  God's  guidance  before  taking  this  bold  step.  Perhaps  it 
would  have  been  wiser  if  he  had  waited  a  little  Ipnger.  At  any  rate,  now,  when  he 
begins  to  feel  the  consequences  of  his  action,  he  is  disposed  to  shrink  from  them.  The 
King  ol  Assyria  "came  up  against  all  the  fenced  cities  of  Judah.and  took  them." 
Hezekiah  was  panic-stricken.  He  trembled  for  his  throne.  He  sent  a  submissive 
message,  saying,  "  I  have  offended ;  return  from  me ;  tJiat  which  thou  puttest  on  me 
will  I  bear."    We  learn  here — 

I.  How    WEAK    EVEN    A    GOOD    MAN    IS    WITHOUT    THE    HELP    OF    GOD.       -HeZckiah 

was  a  good  man.  '  He  was  a  wise  man.  Yet  when  left  to  himself  how  weak  he  was! 
how  foolishly  he  acted !  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 
It  becometh  us  all  to  walk  humbly  with  our  God.  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory, 
save  in  tlje  cr(>ss  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

II.  The  evil  eesults  of  want  op  faith.  Hezekiah's  faith  in  God  failed  him. 
When  that  went,  he  was  helpless.  Sennacherib,  seeing  his  craven  spirit,  appointed  him 
a  tribute  of  "  three  hundred  talents  of  silver  and  thirty  talents  of  gold"  (ver.  14).  Heze- 
kiah was  in  a  difficulty.  He  had  no  money  to  meet  this  demand.  So  he  followed 
the  very  dangerous  example  set  him  by  his  father,  and  stripped  the  gold  from  the  doors 
and  pillars  of  the  house  of  God,  and  sent  it  to  the  King  of  Assyria.  Want  of  faith  often 
lew/s  men  to  use  questionable  methods.  Men  are  in  need  of  money,  and  they  cannot 
trust  God  to  provide  for  them  in  the  way  of  honest  industry,  so  they  have  recourse  to 
speculation  and  fraud.  If  we  are  doing  G^'s  will,  we  may  trust  him  to  take  care 
of  ua. 

" It  may  not  be  my  way; 
It  may  not  be  thy  way ; 
But  yet  in  his  own  way  the  Lord  will  provide." 

0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  17 — 37. — The  tempter  and  his  methods :  Rahshakeh's  address  to  the  leaders  and 
people  of  Jerusalerh.  Hezekiah's  gift  to  the  King  of  Assyria  had  not  saved  him.  The 
weakness  he  showed  was  rather  an  encouragement  to  Sennacherib  to  continue  fail 
attacks  upon  Judsea.  And  now  a  detachment  of  Sennacherib's  army,  headed  by  three 
officers  of  rank,  comes  up  to  Jerusalem.  Their  first  effort  is  to  induce  the  people  of 
Jerusalem  to  surrender.  Eabshakeh  is  the  spokesman.  His  speech  is  hke  the  speech 
of  a  Miiphistopheles.  It  may  fairly  be  taken  as  an  illustration  of  how  the  wily  tempter 
himself  proceeds  in  his  desire  to  allure  to  sin  and  destruction  the  souls  of  men. 

I.  He  pbbtends  to  be  doing  God's  work.  1.  He  ridicules  their  confidence  in 
Egypt.  Isaiah  himself  could  hardly  have  warned  them  more  strongly  against  the 
vanity  of  alliance  with  other  nations.  "  Thou  trustest  upon  the  staff  of  this  bruised 
reed,  even  upon  Egypt"  (ver.  21).  2.  He  censures  Hezekiah  for  disrespect  toward  Ood. 
"  If  ye  say  unto  me,  We  trust  in  the  Lord  God :  is  not  this  he  whose  high  places  and 
whose  altars  Hezekiah  hath  taken  away  ?  "  (ver.  22).  So  Satan  sometimes  appears  as  an 
angol  of  light.  Men  of  sin  and  worldliness  sometimes  show  a  remarkable  interest  in  the 
Church  of  God.  3.  He  represents  himself  as  having  a  commission  from  Ood.  "  Am  I 
now  come  up  without  the  Lord  against  this  place  to  destroy  it?  The  Lord  said  to  me, 
Go  up  against  this  land,  and  destroy  it"  (ver.  25).  It  is  thus  that  sin  constantly 
presents  itself  to  men  and  women.  It  masks  its  real  features.  It  presents  itself  in  a 
religious  garb.  A  debased  theatre  professes  to  be  the  teacher  of  morality.  But  for  one 
whose  life  it  has  changed  for  the  better,  there  are  thousands  whom  it  has  changed  for 
the  worse.  Perhaps  we  should  be  justified  in  going  the  length  of  Pollok,  in  his  '  Course 
Ol  Time,'  and  in  saying,  "  It  might  do  good,  but  never  did."  How  many  questionable 
practices  defend  themselrea  on  the  ground  that  they  we  sanctioned  and  encouraged  by 
«  rdigions  "  people  1 


OH.  xvra.  1— 37.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  87» 

n.  Hb  makes  uoht  of  tbubt  in  God.    But  soon  the  cloven  foot  appears.    The 
tempter  soon  begins  to  wean  the  soul  from  that  religion  of  whose  interests  he  pro- 
feesee  to  be  so  jealous.    See  here  the  inconsistency  of  Babshakeh's  speech.    He  first 
of  all  made  it  appear  that  he  was  commissioned  by  QoA,  and  that  therefore  all  their 
efforts  to  resist  him  would  be  futile.    But  now  he  proceeds  to  ridicule  the  idea  of  trust- 
ing to  God's  power.    "  Neither  let  Hezekiah  make  you  trust  in  the  Lord,  saying,  The 
Lord  will  surely  deliver  us"  (ver.  30).    "  Hath  any  of  the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered 
at  all  his  land  out  of  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Assyria  ?  "  (vers.  33—35).     So  it  is  in  the 
progress  of  sin.     He  who  is  led  away  by  the  allurements  of  the  world  and  pleasure,  first 
begins  with  pleasures  which  lie  on  the  border-land  between  the  bad  and  the  good. 
These  are  the  pleasures  or  pursuits  about  which  men  say,  "Oh  !  there  is  no  harm  in 
that."    "No  harm  "  is  a  very  dangerous  phrase.    When  we  hear  it,  we  may  generally 
doubt  its  truth.    It  usually  refers  to  pursuits  or  pleasures  which  are  the  stepping-stones 
to  worse  sins.     Many  a  man  crosses  the  bridge  of  "  no  harm,"  and  enters  tor  ever  the 
land  of  "no  good."    Let  us  never  be  induced  to  waver  in  our  trust  in  God  and  obedi- 
ence to  him.     His  way  is  the  way  of  safety  and  peace.     There  are  many  whose  work 
seems  to  be  like  that  of  Babsbakeh — ^to  weaken  the  trust  of  others  in  God,  to  diminish 
the  respect  of  others  for  the  Law  of  God.     "  Whosoever  therefore  shall  break  one  of 
these  least  commandments,  and  shall  teach  men  so,  he  shall  be  called  the  least  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven."    Where  God  and  conscience  say  to  us,  "  You  ought  not,"  let  not 
"  the  tempter  ever  persuade  us  by  saying,  "  You  may." 

III.  He  hakes  false  fromiseb.  How  fair-spoken  is  BabshakeU!  How  very 
alluring  his  promises !  If  the  people  of  Jerusalem  would  only  make  an  agreement  with 
the  King  of  Assyria  by  a  present,  then  they  would  eat  every  man  of  his  own  vine  and 
fig  tree,  until  he  would  afterwards  take  them  away  to  a  land  like  their  own  land,  "  a 
land  of  com  and  wine,  a  land  of  bread  and  vineyards,  a  land  of  oil  olive  and  of  honey, 
that  ye  may  live  and  not  die."  In  this  specious  way  he  held  before  them  an  attractive 
prospect.  But  it  was  as  empty  as  the  bubble  in  the  summer  breeze.  It  was  the 
pleasant  euphemism  by  which  he  sought  to  gloss  over  the  prospect  of  conquest  and 
captivity.  So  with  the  pleasures  of  sin.  How  bright  and  how  attractive,  to  outward 
appearance,  are  the  haunts  of  wickedness  and  vice!  The  bright  lights  of  the  gin- 
palace — how  they  allure  its  unhappy  victims,  often  by  the  contrast  with  the  dreariness 
and  misery  of  their  homes  I  What  a  pleasant  prospect  sin  in  various  forms  presents! 
But  how  terrible  is  the  reality  I  How  grim  is  the  skeleton  at  the  feast !  "  My  eon,  if 
sinners  entice  thee,  consent  thou  not."  Such  are  the  tempter'a  methods  still.  The 
thirty-sixth  verse  contains  a  very  good  suggestion  as  to  the  way  of  meeting  temptation. 
"But  the  people  held  their  peace,  and  answered  him  not  a  word;  for  the  king's  com- 
mandment was,  saying.  Answer  him  not."  It  is  a  wise  rule  not  to  parley  vrith  the  tempter. 
If  we  pray,  "Lead  us  not  into  temptation,"  then  we  ought  to  be  careful  not  to  put 
ourselves  in  temptation's  way. — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 37. — A  striking  reformation,  a  ruthless  despotism,  and  an  unprincipled 
diplomacy.  "Now  it  came  to  pass,"  etc.  Amongst  the  incidents  recorded  and  the 
characters  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  there  stand  out  in  great  prominence  three 
subjects  for  practical  contemplation:  (1)  a  striking  reformation;  (2)  a  ruthless 
despotism;  and  (3)  on  unprincipled  diplomacy.  The  many  strange  and  somewhat 
revolting  historic  events  that  make  up  the  buUt  of  this  chapter  will  come  out  in  the 
discussion  of  these  three  subjects. 

I.  A  BTRiKiNa  REFOBMATIOH.  Hezekiah,  who  was  now  King  of  Judah,  and  con- 
tinued such  for  about  twenty-nine  years,  was  a  man  of  great  excellence.  The  unknown 
historian  here  says  that  "  he  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  accord- 
ing to  all  that  David  his  father  did,"  etc.  (vers.  3 — 8).  This  is  high  testimony,  and 
his  history  shows  that  on  the  whole  it  was  well  deserved.  Compared  with  most  of  his 
predecessors  and  contemporaries,  he  appears  to  have  been  an  extraordinarily  good  man. 
He  lived  in  a  period  of  great  national  trial  and  moral  corruption.  Israel,  Judah's  sister- 
kingdom,  was  in  its  death-throes,  and  his  own  people  had  fallen  into  idolatry  of  the 
^ssest  kind.  In  the  very  dawn  of  his  reign  he  sets  himself  to  the  work  of  reforma- 
tion. We  find  in  2  Chron.  xxrx.  2 — 36  a  description  of  the  desire  for  a  thorough 
reformation  which  displayed  itself.    But  the  point  of  his  reformative  work,  on  which 


874  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINGS.     [oB.  xvm.  1— S7 

we  would  now  fasten  our  attention,  is  that  mentioned  in  ver.  i,  "He  removed  the  high 
places,  and  brake  the  images,  and  cut  down  the  groves,  and  brake  in  pieces  the  brazen 
serpent  that  Mosea  had  made:  for  unto  those  days  the  children  of  Israel  did  bum 
incense  to  it :  and  he  called  it  Nehushtan."  His  method  for  extirpating  idolatry  from 
his  country  is  detailed  with  minuteness  in  2  Chrun.  xxix.  3;  xxx.  1 — 9.  In  this 
destruction  of  the  brazen  serpent  we  are  struck  with  two  things.  1.  2%e  perverting 
tendency  of  sin.  The  brazen  serpent  (we  learn  from  Numb.  xxi.  9)  was  a  beneficent 
ordinance  of  God  to  heal  those  in  the  wilderness  who  had  been  bitten  by  the  fiery 
serpents.  But  this  Divine  ordinance,  designed  for  a  good  purpose,  and  which  had 
accumplished  good,  was  now,  through  the  forces  of  human  depravity,  become  a  great 
evil.  The  Jews  turned  what  was  a  special  display  of  Divine  goodness  into  a  great  evil. 
I  am  disposed  to  honour  them  for  preserving  it  for  upwards  of  seven  hundred  years,  and 
thus  handing  it  down  from  sire  to  son  as  a  memorial  of  heavenly  mercy ;  but  their 
conduct  in  establishing  it  as  an  object  for  worship  must  be  denounced  without  hesitancy 
or  qualification.  But  is  not  this  the  great  law  of  depravity  ?  Has  it  not  always  per- 
verted the  good  things  of  God,  and  thus  converted  blessings  into  curses?  It  has  ever 
done  so.  It  is  doing  so  now.  See  how  this  perverting  power  acts  in  relation  to  such 
Divine  blessings  as  (1)  health;  (2)  riches;  (3)  genius;  (4)  knowledge;  (5)  govern- 
ments; and  (6)  religious  institutions.'  2.  Hie  true  attributes  of  a  reformer.  Here  we 
observe:  (1)  spiritual  insight.  Hezekiah(if  our  translation  is  correct)  saw  in  this  serpent, 
which  appeared  like  a  god  to  the  people,  nothing  but  a  piece  of  brass — "  Nehustan." 
What  is  grand  to  the  vulgar  is  contemptible  to  the  spiritually  thoughtful.  The  true 
reformer  peers  into  the  heart  of  things,  and  finds  that  the  gods  of  the  people  are  but  of 
common  brass.  (2)  Invincible  honesty.  He  not  only  saw  that  it  was  brass,  but  said 
so— declared  it  in  the  ears  of  the  people.  How  many  there  are  who  have  eyes  to 
lee  the  vile  and  contemptible  in  the  objects  which  popular  feeling  admires  and  adores, 
but  who  lack  the  honesty  to  express  their  convictions  I  A  true  man  not  only  sees  the 
wrong,  but  exposes  it.  (3)  Practical  courage.  This  reformer  not  only  had  the  insight 
to  see,  and  the  honesty  to  expose  the  worthlessness  of  the  people's  gods,  hut  he  had 
the  courage  to  strike  them  from  their  pedestal.  "  F«  brake  in  pieces  the  brazen  serpent." 
I  have  no  hope  of  any  man  doing  any  real  spiritual  ^ood  who  has  not  these  three 
instincts.    He  must  not  only  have  an  eye  to  penetrate  the  seeming  and  to  descry  the 

.  real,  nor  merely  be  honebt  enough  to  speak  out  his  views,  but  he  must  have  also  the 
manly  hand  to  "  break  in  pieces  "  the  false,  in  order  to  do  the  Divine  work  of  reform. 
The  man  that  has  the  three  combined  is  the  reformer.  Almighty  Love!  midtiply 
amongst  tis  men  of  this  threefold  instinct — ^m«n  which  the  age,  the  world  demands  1 ' 
3.  The  true  sou?  of  a  reformer.  What  is  that  which  gave  him  the  true  insight  and 
attributes  of  a  reformer — which  in  truth  was  the  soul  of  the  whole?  (1)  Entire  conse- 
cration to  the  right.  "  He  trusted  in  the  Lord  God  of  Israel ;  so  that  after  him  was 
none  like  him  among  all  the  kings  of  Judah,  nor  any  that  were  before  him.  For  he 
clave  to  the  Lord,  and  departed  not  from  following  him,  but  kept  his  commandments, 
which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses.  He  trusted  in  and  clave  to  the  One  true  and 
living  God,  and  kept  his  commandments.  And  this  is  right,  and  there  is  no  right 
but  this.  (2)  Invincible  antagonism  to  the  wrong.  "  And  he  rebelled  against  the  King 
of  Assyria,  and  served  him  not."    "The  yearly  tribute  his  father  had  stipulated  to 

.  pay,  he  withheld.  Pursuing  the  policy  of  a  truly  theocratic  sovereign,  he  was,  through 
the  Divine  blessing  which  rested  on  his  government,  raised  to  a  position  of  great  public 
and  national  strength.  Shalmaneser  was  dead ;  and  assuming,  consequently,  that  full 
independent  sovereignty  which  God  had  settled  on  the  house  of  David,  he  both  shook 
off  the  Assyrian  yoke,  and,  by  an  energetic  movement  against  the  Philistines,  recovered 
the  credit  which  bis  father  Ahaz  had  lost  in  his  war  with  that  people  (2  Cbron. 
xxviii.  18)." 

II.  A  BUTHLEBB  DEBFOTisM.  There  are  two  despots  mentioned  in  this  chapter— 
Shalmaneser  and  Sennacherib,  both  kings  of  Assyria.  A  brief  description  of  the 
former  we  have  in  vers.  9, 10, 12.  What  is  stated  in  these  verses  is  but  a  repetition 
•f  wbat  we  have  in  the  preceding  chapter,  and  the  remarks  made  on  it  in  our  last  homily 
preclvdi  the  Beceesity  of  any  observations  here.    This  Shalmaneser  was  a  tyrant  ot  tM 

>  Bee  Hamttist,  vol.  ii.  p.  193. 

*  Bee  a  fall  diicoune  of  this  auhject  in  '  Beptem  in  Uno,'  p.  M. 


CH.  xvm.  1— 37.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KlNa&  876 

worst  kind.  He  invaded  and  ravaged  the  land  of  Israel,  threw  Hosbea  into  prison, 
laid  siege  to  Samaria,  carried  the  Israelites  into  Assyria,  and  located  in  their  homes 
strangers  from  various  parts  of  the  Assyrian  dominions.  Thus  he  utterlk  destroyed 
the  kingdom  of  Israel.  The  other  despot  is  Sennacherib  (vers.  13 — ^16).  Sbalmaneser 
is  gone,  and  this  Sennacheiib  takes  his  place.  The  ruthlessness  of  this  man's  despotism 
appears  in  the  following  facts,  recorded  in  the  present  chapter.  1.  Se  had  already 
invaded  a  country  in  which  he  had  no  right.  "  Now  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  King 
Hezekiah  did  Sennacherib  King  of  Assyria  come  up  against  all  the  fenced  cities  of 
Judah,  and  took  them."  "The  names  of  the  principal  of  these  cities  are  perhaps 
enumerated  by  Micah  (i.  11 — 16),  viz.  Saphir,  lying  between  Ashdod  and  Eleutheropolia 
(Eusebius  and  Jerome, '  Onomast.,'  Saphir ;  cf.  Robinson, '  Bibl.  Besearches,'  ii.  p.  370) ; 
Zaanan  or  Zenan  (Josh.  xv.  37),  (Septuagint  Btwahp) ;  Beth-Ezel  or  Azel  (Zech.  xir. 
5),  near  Saphir  and  Zaanan ;  Maroth  or  Maarath  (Josh.  xv.  69),  between  these  towns 
and  Jerusalem;  Lachish  {Um  LdMs);  Moresiheth-Oaih,  situated  in  the  direction  of 
Gath ;  Achzib,  between  Keilah  and  Mareshah  (Josh.  xv.  44) ;  Moereshah,  situated  in 
the  low  country  of  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  44) ;  Adullam,  near  Mareshah  (cf.  Isa.  zxir. 
1 — 12).  Overrunning  Palestine,  Sennacherib  laid  siege  to  the  fortress  of  Lachish, 
which  lay  seven  Boman  miles  from  Eleutheropolis,  and,  therefore,  south-west  of 
Jerusalem  on  the  way  to  Egypt.  Amongst  the  interesting  illustrations  of  sacred 
history,  furnished  by  the  recent  Assyrian  excavations,  is  a  series  of  bas-reliefs  repre- 
senting the  siege  of  a  town — a  fenced  town — among  the  uttermost  cities  of  Judah 
(Josh.  XV.  39 ;  Eobinson's  *  Biblical  Researches  *)."  Now  mark,  he  now  determines 
on  another  invasion,  although :  2.  He  had  received  from  the  king  most  humble  submis- 
sion and  large  contributions  to  have  his  country  alone.  Mark  his  humiliating  appeal, 
"  And  Hezekiah  King  of  Judah  sent  to  the  King  of  Assyria  tu  Lachish,  saying,  I  have 
offended;  return  from  me:  that  which  thou  puttest  on  me  will  I  bear."  Alas!  herein 
is  a  yielding  of  this  great  man's  courage.  Why  did  he  apologize,  pay  the  tribute 
which  his  ancestor  had  immorally  pledged?  Up  to  this  point  he  had  been  bold  in 
withholding  it.  But  here,  in  crouching  fear,  he  makes  an  apoloo;y.  And  more  than 
this,  he  unrighteously  promises  a  large  contribution  in  answer  to  the  despot's  demands. 
"  And  the  King  of  Assyria  appointed  unto  Hezekiah  King  of  Judah  three  hundred 
talents  of  silver  and  thirty  talents  of  gold."  The  sum  that  he  promised  was  extra- 
vagant, amounting  to  three  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds ;  but  what  was  worse, 
this  sum  was  abstracted  from  the  public  funds,  to  which  he  had  no  right,  and  was 
also  rifled  from  the  temple,  which  was  a  desecration.  "  And  Hezekiah  gave  him  all 
the  silver  that  was  found  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's 
house.  At  that  time  did  Hezekiah  cut  off  the  gold  from  the  doors  of  the  temple  of 
the  Lord,  and  from  the  pillars  which  Hezekiah  King  of  Judah  had  overlaid,  and 
gave  it  to  the  King  of  Assyria."  The  conduct  of  Hezekiah  in  this  matter  cannot  be 
justified.  Inasmuch  as  Sennacherib  accepted  the  offering,  he  was  in  honour  bound 
to  abandon  all  idea  of  another  invasion.  Albeit,  contrary  to  every  principle  of  justice 
and  kindness,  not  to  say  honour,  he  despatches  his  army  again  into  Judsea.  "  And 
the  King  of  Assyria  sent  Tartan,"  etc.  (ver.  17).  What  monsters  are  such  despots  1 
and  yet  they  are  not  rare.  Is  there  a  nation  existing  on  the  face  of  the  earth 
to-day,  whatever  its  form  of  government,  that  has  not  at  one  time  or  another  played 
this  part? 

III.  An  uhpbinoiplbd  diplomacy.  On  behalf  of  Hezekiah,  "Eliakim  the  son  of 
Hiikiah,  which  was  over  the  household,  and  Shebna  the  scribe,  and  Joah  the  son  of 
Asaph  the  recorder,"  appeared  before  the  invading  soldiers,  and  they  are  thus  addressed 
by  Rabshakeh,  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  invading  host :  "  And  Rabshakeh  said  unto 
them.  Speak  ye  now  to  Hezekiah,  Thus  saith  the  great  king,  the  King  of  Assyria, 
What  confidence  is  this  wherein  thou  trustest?"  etc.  He  appears  as  the  diplomatist 
of  the  Assyrian  war-king,  and  what  does  he  do?  By  an  impassioned  harangue,  fraught 
with  insolence,  falsehood,  and  blasphemy,  he  urges  Hezekiah  and  his  country  to 
surrender.  In  doing  this :  1.  He  represents  his  master,  the  King  of  Assyria,  to  in 
far  greater  than  he  is.  "  Thus  saith  the  great  king,  the  King  of  Assyria."  Great, 
indeed  1  A  flashing  meteor  and  a  gorgeous  babble,  nothing  more!  A  diplomatist  ii 
ever  tempted  to  make  his  own  country  fabulously  great  in  the  presence  of  the  one 
with  whom  he  seeks  to  negotiate.    2.  He  seek*  to  terrify  them  with  «  «e»M  of  their 


376  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  xviii.  1- -37. 

*Mer  mobility  to  re$itt  the  invading  army.    "  What  confidence  U  this  wherein  thou 
trustest?"— D.  T. 

Verg.  1 — 8. — Hezehiah  the  good.  It  is  ■with  a  sense  of  relief  that  we  emerge  from  the 
dark  and  oppressive  atmosphere  of  the  time  of  Ahaz  into  the  "clear  shining"  (2  Sam. 
xxiiL  4)  of  a  reign  like  that  of  Hezekiah.  Once  more  Divine  mercy  gave  Judah  a  king 
in  whom  the  best  traditions  of  the  theocracy  were  revived, 

I.  Eight  conduct.  1.  An  evil  upbringing  belied.  As  if  to  set  laws  of  heredity  at 
defiance,  the  worst  King  of  Judah  hitherto  is  succeeded  by  one  of  the  best — the  best 
after  David.  It  is  diflioi.'.t  on  human  principles  to  account  for  such  a  phenomenon. 
Hezekiah  had  every  disadvantage  in  inherited  tendency, in  evil  example, and  in  adverse 
surrounding  influences.  But  Divine  prace  triumphed  over  all,  and  made  ont  of  him  "  a 
chosen  vessel "  (Acts  ix.  15).  Doubtless  some  human  agency  imknown  to  us  was 
employed  in  moulding  the  young  prince's  character.  It  may  have  been  his  mother, 
"  Abi,  the  daughter  of  Zacliariah ; "  or  perhaps  the  Prophet  Isaiah,  who  had  afterwards 
so  much  to  do  with  him.  2.  A  good  example  followed.  Hezekiah  took  as  his  model, 
not  his  own  father,  but  David,  the  founder  of  his  line,  of  whom  God  had  said,  "I  have 
found  David  the  son  of  Jesse  a  man  after  mine  own  heart,  which  shall  fulfil  all  my 
will "  (Acts  xiii.  22).  Hezel?iah  is  the  new  David.  Of  no  other  since  the  times  of  Asa 
is  it  affirmed  thr.t  he  did  "  according  to  all  that  David  his  father  did ; "  and  even  of 
Asa  the  testimony  is  less  emphatic  than  here  (1  Kings  xv.  11).  Hezekiah  moimted  to 
the  original  model.  David  was  the  model  for  the  kings  of  Judah ;  we  have  a  yet 
higher  one— Christ.  It  is  well  in  ordering  our  lives  to  go  back  to  this  ultimate  standard, 
judging  ourselves,  not  by  the  degree  of  likeness  or  unlikeness  to  our  neighbours,  but  by 
the  measure  of  conformity  to  him. 

II.  BEFOBMiNa  ZEAL.  Hczekiah  evidenced  the  reality  of  his  piety  by  his  works. 
In  carrying  out  his  reforms  Hezekiah  would  no  doubt  be  strengthened  and  assisted  by 
the  prophets;  and  the  people  were  perhaps  prepared  to  acquiesce  in  them  by  their  dis- 
gust at  the  extravagant  idolatries  of  Ahaz  (cf.  2  Chron.  xxviii.  27).  1.  Temptation 
removed.  Hezekiah  early  took  the  step  which  had  hitherto  been  neglected  by  even 
the  best  kings — he  "  removed  the  high  places."  This  centralized  the  worship  at  Jeru- 
salem, and  did  away  with  the  temptations  to  idolatry  which  the  local  altars  afforded. 
It  was  further  important  as  an  evidence  of  his  thorough-going  determination  to  carry 
out  the  provisions  of  God's  Law.  We  may  wonder  how  Hezekiah  could  venture  on 
such  a  step  without  awakening  widespread  resistance  and  disaffection ;  but  the  Book  of 
Chronicles  shows  that  it  happened  while  the  wave  of  enthusiasm  created  by  the  great 
Passover  was  yet  at  its  height — a  sufficient  explanation  (2  Chron.  xxxi.  1).  2.  Destruc- 
tion of  monuments  of  idolatry.  Hezekiah  next  proceeded  to  clear  the  land  of  those 
idols  of  which  Isaiah,  at  an  earlier  period,  had  said  that  it  was  full  (Isa.  ii.  8).  He  brake 
the  images,  and  cut  down  the  asherah.  These  vigorous  measures  were  indispensable  if 
true  religion  was  to  be  re-established.  It  is  not  otherwise  with  the  individual  heart. 
True  repentance  is  a  stripping  the  soul  of  its  idols — ^love  of  money,  fashion,  gaiety,  dress, 
etc.  "Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  ma;nmon"  (Matt,  vi  24).  "Covetousnesa,  which  is 
idolatry  "  (CoL  iiL  6). 

*'The  dearest  idol  I  have  known, 
Whate'er  that  idol  be, 
Help  me  to  tear  it  from  thy  thicme) 
And  worship  only  thee." 

3.  Breaking  of  the  brazen  serpent.  A  nother  noteworthy  act  of  Hezekiah  was  his  break- 
ing in  pieces  the  brazen,  serpent  that  Moses  had  made.  This  is  the  first  and  last 
glimpse  we  get  of  this  venerable  relic  since  the  time  when  it  was  set  up  in  the  wilder- 
ness. Its  preservation  was  natural ;  it  had  done  a  wonderful  work  in  its  day ;  it  was 
the  symbol  of  a  great  deliverance;  it  had  clustered  around  it  the  associations  of  miracle; 
it  was  the  type  even  of  the  salvation  of  Messiah.  We  cannot  marvel  that  it  was 
reverenced  as  a  sacred  object.  Yet  now  it  had  become  a  snare  to  the  people,  who  burnt 
incense  to  It,  and  Hezekiah  ruthlessly  destroyed  it,  calling  it  (or  it  was  called)  con- 
temptnonsly  Nehushtan — "  a  piece  of  brass."  We  see  from  this  how  things  origintdly 
s^icred  may  become  a  snare  and  a  temptation.   Superstition  is  a  fungus  of  rank  growth. 


on.  xvm.  1— 37.J      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  377 

snd  fiwteng  on  nothing  more  readily  than  on  the  ohjects  which  call  forth  a  natural 
reyerence.  Of.  the  story  of  Gideon's  ephod  (Judg.  viii.  24 — 27).  Thus  from  the  vene- 
ration of  martyrs  in  the  Christian  Church  there  grew  the  worship  of  relics.  So  with 
all  other  aids  to  devotion,  conceptions  that  fitly  invest  religious  feelings,  which,  as 
Carlyle  says  ('On  Heioes')  are  eidola,  thmgs  seen,  symhols  of  the  invisible.  When 
the  sense  and  spiritual  meaning  goes  out  of  these,  and  they  hecome  objects  of  supersti- 
tious reverence  in  themselves,  it  is  time  for  them  to  he  broken  up.  Even  an  object  so 
sacred  as  the  serpent  which  Moses  made  sinks  to  the  level  of  a  mere  "  piece  of  brass." 
We  are  reminded  of  Knox's  reply  when  a  prisoner  in  the  galleys,  and  the  image  of  the 
Virgin  was  presented  to  him  to  kiss.  "Mother?  Mother  of  God  ?"  he  said.  "This  is 
no  mother  of  God ;  this  is  a  painted  bredd  " — ^a  piece  oi  painted  wood — and  flung  the 
thing  into  the  river. 

III.  Pre-eminent  GODLINESS.  1.  Hezekiah  the  best  of  his  line.  Additional  emphasis 
is  given  to  the  commendation  of  Hezekiah  by  the  statement,  "After  him  was  none  like 
him  among  all  the  kings  of  Judah,  nor  any  that  were  before  him."  It  is  good  to  be 
pre-eminent,  b»  it  most  of  all  to  be  pre-eminent  for  godliness.  When  we  remember  that 
among  the  kings  with  whom  Hezekiah  is  here  compared  are  such  as  Asa,  Jehoshaphat, 
and  Uzziah  before  him,  and  Josiah  after  him,  we  see  that  the  praise  is  very  great.  2. 
The  praise  particularized.  The  general  statement  is  expanded  into  its  particulars. 
Hezekiah  trusted  in  the  Lord ;  he  clave  to  the  Lord ;  he  departed  not  from  following 
him ;  he  kept  his  commandments,  as  given  to  Moses.  Trust,  fidelity,  obedience,  and 
perseverance,  in  all  these  wertf  his  distinctive  characteristics.  Some  kings  had  trusted, 
but  not  with  so  entire  a  heart ;  some  had  been  obedient,  but  not  so  fully ;  some  had 
been  faithful  for  a  time,  but  had  failed  to  persevere.  Hezekiah  had  the  better  record. 
God  puts  special  honour  on  whole-hearted  service.  We  are  to  see,  however,  that, 
exceptional. as  his  goodness  was,  Hezekiah  was  not  perfect.  He  had  his  flaws,  his  sins, 
his  failures  too.  The  intention  of  the  text  is  not  to  represent  him  as  sinless,  but  only 
as  pre-eminently  great  and  good.  "  There  is  not  a  just  man  on  earth  that  doeth  good, 
and  sinneth  not "  (Eccles.  vii.  20). 

IV.  DrviNB  BEWABD.  Hezekiah's  piety  won  for  him  Divine  favour,  protection,  and 
success.  1.  Freedom  from  servitude.  "He  rebelled  against  the  King  of  Assyria,  and 
served  him  not."  He  thus  rescued  the  kingdom  from  the  humiliatinji;  dependence  into 
which  it  had  been  brought  by  Ahaz.  2.  Victory  over  enemies.  Hezekiah  had  also 
important  victories  over  the  Philistines,  and  was  prospered  "whithersoever"  he  went 
forth.  Spiritually,  God  gives  to  those  who  fear  him  deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin 
within,  and  victory  over  the  world,  the  devil,  arid  the  flesh. — J.  0. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — Sennacherib's  first  assault.  We  enter  in  this  passage  on  the  con- 
sideration of  one  of  the  most  memorable  crises  Judah  ever  passed  throiigh.  The 
Assyrian,  the  rod  of  God's  anger  (Isa.  x.  4),  hung  over  Jerusalem,  showing  how  near 
destruction  it  was  if  God  did  not  interpose.  A  mighty  deliverance  was  vouchsafed, 
showing  how  inviolable  was  its  security  if  only  fleshly  confidence  was  renounced,  and 
the  people  put  their  trust  in  the  living  God. 

I.  Sennacherib's  early  successes.  1.  Connection  with  the  moral  state  of  the 
people.  Despite  the  efforts  of  Hezekiah  and  Isaiah,  the  moral  state  of  the  people  con- 
tinued at  bottom  unchanged.  The  enthusiasm  enkindled  by  Hezekiah's  great  Passover 
(2  Chron.  xxx.)  passed  away,  and  things  reverted  very  much  to  their  former  state. 
The  idols  which  Hezekiah  had  destroyed  were  brought  back  (cf.  Isa.  x.  10, 11).  The 
nation  is  pointedly  described  as  "an  hypocritical  nation,"  and  pictures  of  the  saddest 
kind  are  drawn  of  its  wickedness  (Isa.  x.  6 ;  cf.  oh.  i.,  xxii. ;  Micah  iii.).  At  one  point, 
indeed,  the  Prophet  Micah  was  sent  with  a  direct  announcement  of  judgment,  and  the 
fulfilment  was  only  postponed  by  the  earnest  repentance  of  the  king  (Jer.  xxvi.  18, 19 ; 
cf.  Micah  iii.  12).  Hezekiah  was  not  faultless,  but  had  himself  transgressed  through 
pride  on  the  occasion  of  the  visit  of  the  messengers  from  Babylon,  which  falls  before 
this  period  (oh.  xx.  12 — 19  ;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  31).  He  had  besides  been  seeking  to 
strengthen  himself  by  political  alliance  with  Egypt  (Isa.  xxx.).  What  wonder  that 
chastisement  should  be  allowed  to  descend  on  a  "  sinful  nation,  a  people  laden  witi 
iniquity,  a  seed  of  evil-doers  "  (Isa.  i.  4)  I  As  we  forget  God,  and  abuse  his  favours,  God 
withdraws  from  us.    2.  Ext&nt  ^f  his  successes.    (1)  Sennacherib  took  all  the  fenced 


878  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.      foH.  xviii.  1— 3T. 

cities  of  Jadah.  His-  own  acnalB  mention  forty'-six  strong  cities,  and  lesser  cities 
without  number.  He  claims  to  Iiave  taken  also  200,150  prisoners.  This  was  a  fearful 
blow  to  the  prosperity  and  resources  of  the  kingdom.  (2)  At  this  stage,  moreover, 
Sennacherib  invested  Jerusalem.  The  text  speaks  only  of  Hezekiah  paying  tribute,  and 
entreating  Sennacherib  to  depart  from  him;  but  it  is  morally  certain  that  at  this  time 
Jerusalem  endured  a  severe  siege,  and  was  saved  only  by  the  submission  referred  to. 
(a)  In  2  Obron.  zxxiL  1 — 8  we  have  an  account  of  Hezekiah's  vigorous  preparations 
for  the  siege.  (6)  Sennacherib,  in  his  own  annals,  describes  the  siege,  (o)  The  prophecy 
in  Isa.  xxii.,  which  belongs  to  this  period,  depicts  the  state  of  Jerusalem  during  the 
siege,  and  a  fearful  picture  of  demoralization  it  is.  The  theory  that  this  prophecy  refers 
to  an  earlier  siege  under  Sargon  seems  to  us  to  have  little  probability.  The  hand  of  Qod 
was  thus  lying  heavily  on  the  people.  Only  by  leading  men  to  feel  their  own  weakness 
does  God  train  them  to  rely  upon  his  help.  When  Hezekiah's  trust  in  man  was 
shattered,  and  he  was  led  to  look  to  God  alone,  Sennacherib  s  campaign  came  to  an 
ignominious  end. 

II.  Hezekiah's  submission.  1.  The  failure  of  the  arm  offiesh.  Hezekiah  had  been 
seeking  alliances  with  Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  but  no  help  reached  him  in  his  hour  of 
extremity.  Isaiah  had  warned  him  of  this  (Isa.  xxx.).  The  act  of  seeking  such  an 
alliance  implied  a  distrust  of  God.  Astute  politicians  no  doubt  thought  an  aliiance 
with  Egypt  a  much  more  tangible  affair  than  an  alliance  with  the  invisible  Jehovah. 
So  long,  however,  as  Hezekiah  looked  in  this  quarter  for  aid  he  was  doomed  to  disap- 
pointment. Neither  the  King  of  Egypt  nor  strongly  fortified  walls  availed  to  save  him. 
He  had  to  learn  the  lesson :  "  In  returning  and  rest  shall  ye  be  saved;  in  quietness  and 
in  confidence  shall  be  your  strength"  (Isa.  xxx.  15).  2.  The  humiliating  tribute. 
Despairing  of  help  from  his  ally,  and  faltering  in  his  faith  in  God,  Hezekiah  made  an 
unworthy  submission.  It  may  be  gathered  from  Isa.  xxii.  that  affairs  in  the  city  had 
reached  an  awful  height  of  wickedness.  Pestilence  was  sweeping  off  the  people  in 
crowds ;  and  Hezekiah  may  have  felt  that  he  could  stand  it  no  longer.  The  King  of 
Assyria  accepted  his  submission,  and  appointed  him  three  hundred  talents  of  silver  and 
thirty  talents  of  gold  as  tribute.  To  obtain  this  large  sum  he  had  not  only  to  empty 
once  more  the  often-ransacked  treasuries  of  the  temple  and  the  king's  house,  but  had  to 
cut  off  the  gold  from  the  very  doors  and  pillars  of  the  temple.  It  was  himself  who  had 
overlaid  these  pillars  with  the  precious  metal,  but  now  they  had  to  be  stripped  of  their 
adornment,  and  all  given  to  the  rapacious  Assyrian.  Truly  it  was  "  a  day  of  trouble, 
and  of  treading  down,  and  of  perplexity  "  (Isa.  xxii.  5).  What  humiliations  men  are 
willing  to  endure  rather  than  submit  themselves  heartily  to  the  sway  of  the  living 
God  I  After  all,  "willing"  is  not  the  word,  for  they  would  fain  escape  these  humilia- 
tions, but  find  they  cannot.  Yet  they  do  not  return.  3.  His  s^mission  no  advantage. 
Sennacherib  withdrew  to  Lachish,  and  Hezekiah  was  left  to  hope  that  by  this  great 
sacrifice  he  had  got  rid  of  him.  He  was  soon  to  be  undeceived.  What  happened  we  do 
not  know ;  possibly  some  rumours  reached  the  King  of  Assyria  of  the  march  of  Tirha- 
kah  alluded  to  in  oh.  xix.  9,  and  he  may  have  suspected  further  treachery  on  the  part 
of  Hezekiah.  In  any  case,  a  new  host  was  despatched  against  Jerusalem,  and  fresh 
demands  were  made  for  surrender  (ver.  17).  Hezekiah's  distress  must  have  been 
unspeakable.  He  had  paid  his  tribute,  and  was  no  better  than  before.  Waters  of  a 
ftiU  cup  were  wrung  out  to  him  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  10).  It  is  thus  evermore  till  men  turn 
from  the  help  of  man  to  the  help  of  God. — J.  0. 

Vers.  17 — 37. — Sabshakeh's  loastings.  From  Lachish  Sennacherib  sent  an  army  to 
Jerusalem,  and  with  it  some  of  his  highest  officers,  the  Tartan,  Babsaris,  and  Rab- 
shakeh.  Taking  their  stand  by  "  the  conduit  of  the  upper  pool,"  where  they  could  be 
heard  from  the  walls,  they  called  for  the  king  to  come  to  them.  Hezekiah  did  not  come, 
but  sent  three  envoys,  Eliakim,  Shehna,  and  Joah,  to  whom  Eabshakeh,  the  orator  of 
the  party,  addressed  himself.  His  speech  is  a  very  skilful  one  from  his  own  point  of 
view,  and  falls  into  two  parts.  It  is  pervaded  by  the  utmost  arrogancy  and  contempt 
of  the  God  of  the  Jews. 

I.  His  addbess  to  the  envoys.  The  question  Eabshakeh  had  been  sent  by  hii 
master  to  ask  of  Hezekiah  was — "What  confidence  is  this  wherein  thou  trustest?" 
He  proceeds  to  demolish  one  by  one  fiezekiah's  supposed  confidences,  and  to  (how  hon 


..  xvnLl— 37.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  B79 

Tain  It  was  for  him  to  hope  to  carry  on  the  war.  1.  Eexeleiah's  eonfidenee  4n  Egypt. 
Babshakeh  answers  his  own  question  by  declaring,  first,  that  Eezekiah's  confidence 
was  placed  in  Egypt.  This  was  true ;  and  it  was  also  true  that,  as  the  speaker  next 
went  on  to  say,  this  confidence  was  in  a  "  bruised  reed."  The  policy  of  relying  on 
Egypt,  instead  of  seeking  help  from  God,  was  Hezekial.'s  great  mistake.  Kabshakeh 
did  not  denounce  the  worthlessness  of  this  ground  of  confidence  too  scornfully.  Pharaoh 
King  of  Egypt  was  indeed  a  bruised  reed,  on  which,  if  a  man  leant,  it  would  go  into 
his  hand,  and  pierce  it.  Isaiah's  language  had  been  not  less  strong  (Isa.  xxx.).  The 
metaphor  may  be  applied  to  any  reliance  on  mere  human  wisdom,  human  power,  or 
human  help.  Often  it  has  proved  so  in  individual  experience  and  the  history  of 
nations.  Through  some  overlooked  factor  in  the  calculations,  some  unexpected  turn 
in  providence,  some  treachery,  self-interest,  or  delay  on  the  part  of  allies,  the  best- 
laid  schemes  break  down,  the  strongest  combinations  dissolve  like  smoke.  2.  SezekiaTi'a 
confidence  in  Jehovah.  Babshakeh  next  deals  with  Hezekiah's  trust  in  the  Lord.  He 
does  not  at  this  point  urge  the  plea  afterwards  put  forth,  viz.  that  no  gods  can  stand 
before  the  King  of  Assyria.  Indeed,  he  claims  (ver.  25)  to  be  commissioned  by  Jehovah — 
either  an  idle  boast  or  an  allusion  to  what  he  had  heard  of  Isaiah's  prophecies  (cf.  Isa. 
▼ii.  17 — 25 ;  x.  5—19).  But  he  skilfully  makes  use  of  Hezekiah's  action  in  destroying 
the  high  places  and  altars.  "  Is  not  this  he  whose  high  places  and  whose  altars 
Hezekiah  hath  taken  away,  and  hath  said  to  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  Ye  shall  worship 
before  this  altar  in  Jerusalem?"  This  sweeping  away  of  the  high  places  is  represented 
as  an  outrage  on  the  religion  of  Jehovah,  which  that  Deity  might  be  expected  to  avenge. 
How,  then,  could  Hezekiah  expect  any  help  from  him  ?  The  argument  was  a  skilful 
one  as  directed  to  the  body  of  the  people.  The  high  places  were  of  long-standing 
sanctity,  and  they  at  least  were  disposed  to  regard  them  with  superstitious  reverence. 
What  if,  after  all,  Hezekiah  had  displeased  Jehovah  by  suppressing  them  ?  Calamity 
upon  calamity  was  falling  on  the  nation:  was  there  not  a  cause?  A  reformer  must 
ever  lay  his  account  with  charges  of  this  kind.  Any  political,  social,  or  religious 
change  is  apt  to  be  blamed  for  troubles  that  arise  on  the  back  of  it.  Post  hoe,  ergo 
propter  hoc.  The  early  Christians  were  blamed  for  the  calamities  of  the  Bomaa 
empire ;  the  Beformation  was  blamed  for  the  civil  convulsions  that  followed  it ;  when 
drought  or  trouble  falls  on  tribes  which  have  been  persuaded  to  abandon  idolatry,  they 
are  apt  to  think  the  idols  are  angry,  and  to  go  back  to  their  old  worship.  In  this 
argument,  however,  Babshakeh  was  as  wrong  as  he  was  right  in  his  first  one.  The 
fault  was  that  the  people  did  not  trust  God  enough,  and  what  he  thought  was  a 
provocation  of  Jehovah  was  an  act  done  in  his  honour,  and  in  obedience  to  his  wilL 
3.  SezeJeiah's  confidence  in  his  resources.  Lastly,  Babshakeh  ridicules  the  idea  that 
Hezekiah  can  resist  his  master  by  force.  Where  are  his  chariots  and  horsemen?  Or, 
if  he  had  horses^  where  are  the  riders  to  put  on  them  ?  He  undertakes  to  give  two 
thousand  horses,  if  Hezekiah  will  furnish  the  men ;  and  he  knows  he  cannot.  How, 
then,  can  he  hope  to  put  to  flight  even  the  least  of  Sennacherib's  captains?  Babshakeh 
again  was  right  in  assuming  that  Hezekiah  had  not  material  forces  wherewith  to 
contend  with  Sennacherib,  and  Hezekiah  himself  was  too  well  aware  of  the  fact.  Ha  • 
bad  not  confidence  in  his  forces,  and  therein  the  orator  was  wrong.  But  Babshakeh's 
whole  speech  shows  that  hd  was  himself  committing  the  error  he  denounced  in  Hezekiah. 
If  the  question  were  retorted,  "  What  confidence  is  this  wherein  thou  trustest?  "  tha 
answer  could  only  be— In  chariots  and  horses,  in  the  proved  might  of  the  Assyrian  arms. 
His  speech  breathes  throughout  the  spirit  of  the  man  who  has  unbounded  trust  in 
armaments,  provided  only  they  are  gigantic  enough.  Because  Sennacherib  has  such 
immense  armies,  valiant  soldiers,  and  such  numbers  of  them,  therefore  he  is  invincible 
in  war,  and  can  defy  God  and  man.  The  arm  of  flesh — ^"big  battalions" — is  every- 
thing here.  Herein  lay  his  profound  mistake ;  and  it  was  soon  to  be  demonstrated. 
l!he  might  of  the  Invisibk  was  to  be  declared  against  the  power  of  the  visible. 
Philistinism  was  to  receive  another  overthrow — ^this  time  without  even  the  sling  and 
•tones  (1  Sam.  xvi.  40—61). 

IL  Addbess  to  the  Jews.  At  this  point  Hezekiah's  officers  interposed,  and  requested- 
Babshakeh  to  speak,  not  in  the  Hebrew,  but  in  the  Syrian  tongue,  that  his  language 
might  not  be  understood  by  the  people  on  the  wall.  Babshakeh  had  come  on  a  mission 
•f  diplomacy,  and  it  was  proper  that  in  the  first  instance  only  the  king's  representative! 


880  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,     [oh.  XTin.  1—37 

should  be  consulted  with.  The  envoy,  howerer,  insolently  broke  through  all  customary 
bounds,  and  declared  that  it  was  the  common  people  he  wished  to  address.  Taking  up^ 
therefore,  a  yet  better  position,  he  now  spoke  directly,  and  in  louder  tones,  to  the 
people,  who  by  this  time  may  be  supposed  to  have  crowded  the  battlements.  Again 
decuuing  that  he  bears  a  message  from  "  the  great  king,  the  King  of  Assyria,"  he  bids 
them  not  let  Hezekiah  deceive  them,  and  urges ;  1.  T&ii  advantages  of  tubmisskm.  As 
it  was,  they  were  in  evil  case.  But  if  they  surrendered  to  Sennacherib,  they  had 
nothing  to  fear.  Here  Babshakeh  touches  on  delicate  ground.  He  cannot  deny  that 
they  will  lose  their  liberty,  and  be  transported  as  captives  to  Assyria.  All  he  can  do 
is  to  attempt  to  gild  the  pill.  He  tells  them,  first,  that  in  the  mean  time  they  will  be 
allowed  the  utmost  freedom — to  eat  every  man  of  his  own  vine  and  of  his  own  fig  tree, 
and  to  drink  every  man  the  waters  of  his  own  cistern.  When  the  time  does  come  that 
they  must  be  removed — and  he  tries  to  represent  this  as  a  privilege — ^it  wiU  be  to  a 
land  like  their  own,  a  land  of  com  and  wine,  of  bread  and  vineyards,  of  oil  and  olives 
and  honey ;  a  land  where  they  shall  live,  and  not  die.  The  promises  were  alluring 
only  4>y  contrast  with  the  worse  fate  that  awaited  them  if  they  did  not  submit  to  the 
Assyrian ;  but  more  than  this,  they  were  deceitfuL  They  were  promises  which,  if  the 
people  had  trusted  to  them,  would  never  have  been  fulfilled.  Sennacherib  was  not  in 
the  habit  of  treating  his  captives  tenderly.  His  good  faith  had  just  been  tested  by 
his  perfidy  towards  Hezekiah.  Is  it  not  always  so  with  the  promises  of  the  tempter  ? 
When  a  soul  capitulates,  and  yields  to  sin,  what  becomes  of  the  bright  prospects  that 
are  opened  up  beforehand?  Are  they  ever  realized?  There  is  a  brief  period  of 
excitement,  of  giddy  delight,  then  satiety,  loathing,  the  sense  of  degradation,  the  dying 
out  of  all  real  joy.  What,  if  by  yielding  to  sin,  some  present  evil  be  avoided,  some 
immediate  good  gained  ?  Is  the  good  ever  what  was  anticipated  ?  or  can  it  compensate 
for  the  exile  from  God  and  holiness  which  is  its  price  ?  At  all  hazards  the  wise  cour^se 
is  to  adhere  to  Qod  and  duty.  The  visions  of  corn  and  wine,  of  bread  and  vineyards, 
of  oil  and  olives,  by  which  the  soul  is  tempted  from  its  allegiance,  are  illusions — as 
unsubstantial  as  the  desert  mirage.  2.  The  futility  of  mistance.  To  enforce  his 
argument  for  submission,  Babshakeh  returns  to  what  is  undeniably  his  strongest  point, 
viz.  the  futility  of  resistance.  Can  they  hope  to  be  delivered?  He  had  argued  this 
before  from  the  side  of  Hezekiah's  weakness,  showing  the  baselessness  of  his  grounds  of 
confidence ;  be  now  argues  it  from  the  side  of  Sennacherib's  strength.  Here  undoubtedly 
he  has  a  plausible  case.  (1)  From  the  military  point  of  view.  **  Let  not  Hezekiah 
deceive  you :  for  he  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver  you  out  of  his  hand."  Since  the  days 
of  Tiglath-pileser  the  Assyrian  arms  had  swept  on  in  a  tide  of  almost  uninterrupted 
conquest.  Not  only  Hamath  and  Arpad  and  Sepharvaim,  but  Babylon,  Damascus, 
Israel,  Philistia,  and  Egypt,  had  felt  the  force  of  their  resistless  might.  Judah  had 
already  severely  snfi'eredl  What  hope  had  Hezekiah,  with  his  little  handful  of  men, 
caged  hke  a  bird  in  Jerusalem,  of  rolling  back  this  tide  of  conquest!  The  thing,  on 
natui-al  grounds,  seemed  an  impossibility.  (2)  From  a  religious  point  of  view. 
"  Neither  let  Hezekiah  make  you  trust  in  the  Lord,  saying.  The  Lord  will  surely 
deliver  us."  Here  the  position  of  the  Assyrian  conqueror  seemed — from  the  heathen 
standpoint,  but  of  course  only  from  that — equally  strong.  In  heathen  view,  the  contest 
was  not  only  a  contest  of  man  with  man,  bat  of  Asshur  and  the  other  Assyrian  gods, 
with  the  gods  of  other  nations.  And  how  had  that  contest  gone?  The  gods  of  Assyria 
had  in  every  case  proved  the  stronger  in  the  battle.  Where  were  the  gods  of  the 
conquer^  nations  ?  What  had  they  been  able  to  do  for  their  worshippers  ?  What 
had  even  Jehovah  been  able  to  do  for  Samaria?  Who  among  them  all  had  delivered 
their  country  out  of  the  hand  of  Sennacherib  ?  What  hope  was  there  that  Jerusalem 
would  fare  any  better  than  Samaria  had  done?  The  validity  of  this  conclusion  depends 
entirely  upon  the  soundness  of  the  premises.  If  the  gods  of  these  nations  had  a  real 
existence,  and  Jehovah  was  but  one  more  local  deity  among  the  rest,  it  would  be 
difficult  to  resist  the  inference  that  the  chances  were  strongly  in  favour  of  Asshur. 
But  the  case  was  altered  if  these  idol-gods  were  nullities,  and  Jehovah  was  t^  •  one 
Ruler  of  heaven  and  earth,  in  whose  providence  the  movements  even  of  Sennacherib 
md  his  all-conquering  armies  were  embraced.  And  this,  of  course,  was  the  &ith  of 
Isaiah  and  Hezekiah  and  the  godly  part  of  Judah.  That  it  was  the  right  one  was 
shown  by  the  result.    We  see  from  this  example  how  a  false  view-point  compeU  •  false 


ra.  XIX.  1—87.]       THE  BEOOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


381 


and  mistaken  reading  of  the  whole  facts  of  history  and  of  human  life.  The  view  which 
hiatory  presents  to  one  who  denies  the  postulates  of  reTelation  will  differ  entirely  from 
the  view  which  it  presents  to  a  Christian  believer.  Belief  in  God  is  the  right  centre 
for  understanding  everything. 

HL  The  aubweb  of  silence.  To  these  harangues  of  Babshakeh  the  people 
"  answered  not  a  word."  Hezekiah  had  given  this  instruction  to  his  ofScers,  and  the}^, 
when  the  people  gathered,  doubtless  spread  among  them  the  knowledge  of  the  king's 
wish.  Accordingly  they  "held  their  peace."  There  were  many  reasons  why  this 
answer  of  silence  was  a  wise  one.  1.  Rabahdkeh's  words  did  not  deserve  an  answer. 
His  address  to  the  people  on  the  wall  was  a  breach  of  all  diplomatic  courtesy ;  it  had 
for  its  object  to  sow  the  seeds  of  mutiny,  and  set  the  people  against  their  king ;  it  was 
obviously  insincere  in  its  tone  and  promises,  scrupling  at  nothing  which  would  induce 
the  people  to  surrender  their  liberties;  in -relation  to  Jehovah,  it  was  profane  and 
blasphemous.  Speeches  of  that  kind  are  best  left  unanswered.  A  tempter  is  fittingly 
met  with  silence.  A  man  who  makes  insiucere  proposals  does  not  deserve  to  be  reasoned 
with.  Profanity  and  blasphemy  should  be  left  without  reply  (Matt.  vii.  6).  2.  ^roTn 
Rahshakeh's  point  of  view  no  reply  was  possible.  This  has  freely  to  be  conceded. 
What  would  it  have  availed  to  point  out  to  him  that  the  gods  of  these  other  nations 
were  no  gods,  and  that  Jehovah  was  the  one  living  and  true  God  ?  Such  statements 
would  have  but  provoked  a  new  hurst  of  mockery.  It  was  better,  therefore,  to  say 
nothing.  In  all  reasoning  with  an  opponent  there  must  be  a  basis  of  common  ground. 
When  we  reach  a  fundamental  divergence  of  first  principles,  it  is  time  to  stop.  At 
least,  if  argument  is  to  proceed,  it  must  go  back  on  these  first  principles,  and  try  to 
find  a  deeper  unity.  Failing  in  that,  it  must  cease.  Between  the  Christian  and 
unchristian  views  of  the  world,  e.g.,  there  is  no  middle  telm.  3.  Even  from  the  Jewish 
point  of  view  no  reply  was  ready.  God  was  to  be  trusted,  but  would  he  indeed  save  ? 
What  if  the  iniquities  of  the  people  had  provoked  him  to  deliver  them  up,  as  he  had 
delivered  up  Samaria?  Deliverance  was  conditional  on  repentance:  did  the  state  of 
morals  in  the  city  show  much  sign  of  repentance?  Or,  if  God  meant  to  deliver  them, 
how  would  he  do  it?  They  seemed  fast  in  the  lion's  jaws.  The  way  of  escape  from 
their  present  predicament  was  not  obvious,  yea,  no  way  seemed  possible.  What,  then, 
should  they  answer?  At  most,  their  belief  in  Jehovah's  interposition  was  an  act  of 
faith,  for  which  no  justification  could  be  given  in  outward  appearances.  In  such  crises, 
when  all  rests  on  faith,  nothing  on  sight,  the  best  attitude  of  the  soul,  at  least  in 
presence  of  the  worldly,  is  silence.  "  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God,"  is  the  counsel 
given  in  the  psalm  supposed  to  commemorate  this  deliverance  (Fs.  xlvi.  10). — J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XTX. 


Vers.  1 — 37. — Second  Expedition  of 
Sennaohebib  against  Hezekiah  (con- 
timieA).  The  chapter  falls  into  four  por- 
tions: (1)  The  sequel  to  the  embassy  of 
Kabshakeh  (vers.  1 — 8);  (2)  the  insulting 
letterofSeunaoherib(vers.  9— 14);(3)Heze- 
kiah's  prayer,  and  God's  answer  to  it  by  the 
mouth  of  Isaiah  (vers.  15 — 34) ;  and  (4)  the 
destruction  of  Sennacherib's  host,  his  hurried 
flight,  and  his  murder  at  Nineveh  by  his 
sons  (vers.  35—37).  The  narrative  runs 
parallel  with  that  in  Isa.  xxxvii.,  with  which 
it  corresponds  almost  word  for  word. 

Yer.  1. — And  it  came  to  pass,  when  King 
Hezekiah  heard  it,  that  he  rent  his  clothes — 
following  the  example  of  his  chief  ot&cea. 


who  came  into  his  presence  "with  their 
clothes  rent "  (see  oh.  xviii.  37) — and  covered 
himself  with  sackoloth.  A  sign  of  giief  and 
self-humiliation  (comp.  Gen.  zxxvii.  34; 
2  Sam.  lii.  31 ;  xxi.  10 ;  1  Kings  xx.  31 ; 
xxi.  27;  ch.  vi.  30,  etc.).  It  was  natural 
that  the  king  should  be  even  more  strongly 
affected  than  his  ministers.  And  went  into 
the  house  of  the  Iiord;  to  open  his  griefs,  ask 
counsel,  and  beg  for  aid. 

Ver.  2. — And  he  sent  EUakim,  which  was 
over  the  household,  and  Shebna  the  soribe, 
and  the  elders  of  the  priests.  "  The  elders 
of  the  priesls"  are  aged  men  holding  the 
priestly  office,  not  necessarily  the  high 
priest,  or  the  most  notable  or  most  dignified 
of  the  priests.  The  king  felt  that  ms  best 
hope,  so  far  as  man  was  concerned,  lay  in 
the  prophetical  order.  Isaiah,  Hosea,  Joel, 
Mioah,  and  perhaps  Obadiah,  were  the 
prophets  of  the  time ;  but  it  ia  not  clear  that 


382 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xrs.  1— 37. 


any  of  tbem  were  aooeBsible  except  iBafath. 
He  had  been  Ahaz's  counBellor  (lea.  vii.  4 — 
16),  and  was  now  certainly  among  the  regnlai 
connselloTS  of  Hezekiah.  Moreover,  he  was 
in  JeruBalem,  and  could  readily  be  consulted, 
Hezekiah,  therefore,  Bends  to  him  in  his 
distress,  and  sends  a  most  honourable  and 
dignified  embassy.  It  is  his  intention  to 
treat  the  prophet  with  the  utmost  respect 
and  courtesy.  No  doubt,  at  this  period  the 
prophetical  order  stood  higher  than  the 
priestly  one  in  general  estimation ;  and  not 
unworthily.  If  any  living  man  could  give 
the  king  sound  advice  under  the  circum-  - 
stances,  it  was  the  son  of  Amoz.  Covered 
with  sackcloth.  Probably  by  the  king's 
command.  Hezekiah  wished  to  emphasize 
his  own  horror  and  grief  in  the  eyes  of  the 
prophet,  and  could  only  do  bo  by  making 
his  messengers  assume  the  garb  whioli  he 
had  judged  suitable  for  himself  on  the  occa- 
sion. To  Isaiah  the  prophet  the  son  of  Amoz. 
Nothing  more  is  known  of  Amoz  beyond  his 
being  Isaiah's  father.  He  is  not  to  be  con- 
founded with  the  Prophet  Amos,  whose  name 
is  spelt  quite  differently:  tiia^,  not  Y'QK. 

Yer.  3. — ^And  they  said  unto  him,  Thus 
saith  Hezekiah,  This  day  is  a  day  of  trouble, 
and  of  rebuke,  and  of  blasphemy.  Of 
"  trouble,"  or  "  distress,"  manifestly — a  day 
on  which  the  whole  nation  is  troubled, 
grieved,  alarmed,  distressed,  made  miser- 
able. It  is  also  a  day  of  "rebuke,"  or 
rather  of  "chastisement" — a  day  on  which 
God's  hand  lies  heavy  upon  us  and  chastises 
us  for  our  sins.  And  it  is  a  day,  not  of 
"  blasphemy,"  but  of  "  abhorrence "  or  of 
"  contumely" — a  day  on  which  God  contu- 
meliously  rejects  his  people,  and  allows 
them  to  be  insnlted  by  their  enemies  (see 
the  comments  of  Keil  and  Bahr).  For  the 
children  are  come  to  the  birth,  and  there 
is  net  strength  to  bring  forth.  A  prover- 
bial expression,  probably  meaning  that  a 
dangerous  crisis  approaches,  and  that  the 
nation  has  no  Btrength  to  carry  it  through 
tlie  peril. 

Ver.  4. — It  may  be  the  Lord  thy  God — 
still  "  thy  God,"  at  any  rate,  if  he  will  not 
condescend  to  be  called  oun,  since  we  have 
BO  grievously  offended  him  by  onr  many 
sins  and  backslidings — will  bear  all  the 
words  of  Babshakeh.  "The  words  of 
Babshakeh"  (Isa.  xixvii  4);  but  the  ex- 
pression here  used  is  more  emphatio. 
Hezekiah  hoped  that  God  would  "hear" 
Rabshakeh's  words,  would  note  them,  and 
punish  them.  Whom  the  King  of  Assyria 
his  master  hath  sent  to  reproach  the  living 
Bod.  (For  the  "reproaches"  intended,  see 
eh.  xvlii.  30—35.  Fer  the  expression, « the 
living  God,"  ^n  0'nV»»,  see  Deut.  v.  26 ;  Josh, 
lil.  10;  1  Sam.  xvii.  26 ;  Ps.  xlil.  2;  Ixxiiv. 
2;  Hos.  i.  10,  etc)    A  contrast  is  intended 


between  the  "living"  Ood,  and  tlie  dead 
idols  whom  Babshakeh  has  placed  ob  a  par 
with  him.  And  will  reprove  the  words 
which  the  Lord  thy  Ood  hath  heard.  The 
"words  of  Kabsbakeh,"  liis  contemptuous 
words  concerning  Jehovah  (ch.  xviii.  33 — .S5) 
and  bis  lying  words  (ch.  xviii.  25),  consti- 
tuted the  new  feature  in  the  situation,  and, 
while  a  ground  for  "distresB,"  were  also  a 
ground  for  hope:  wonld  not  God  in  some 
signal  way  vindicate  his  own  hononr,  and 
"reprove'  them?  'Wherefore  lift  up  thy 
prayer  for  the  remnant  that  are  left.  Sen- 
nacherib, in  his  former  expedition,  wherein 
he  took  forty-six  of  the  Judssan  cities, 
besides  killing  vast  numbers,  bad,  as  he 
himself  tells  us  ('Eponym  Canon,'  p.  131), 
carried  off  into  captivity  200,150  persons. 
He  had  also  curtailed  Hezekiah's  domi- 
nions, detaching  from  them  various  cities 
with  their  territories,  and  attaching  them 
to  Ashdod,  Gaza,  and  Ekron  (ibid.,  p.  135). 
Thus  it  was  only  a  "remnant"  of  the 
Jewish  people  that  was  left  in  the  land 
(comp.  Isa.  i.  7 — 9). 

Ver.  5.— So  the  servants  of  King  Hezekiah 
came  to  Isaiah.  SuperSuous,  according  to 
modem  notions,  but  rounding  off  the  para- 
graph commenced  with  ver.  2. 

Ver.  6. — And  Isaiah  said  unto  them.  Thus 
shall  ye  say  to  your  master.  Isaiah  seems 
to  have  been  ready  with  a  reply.  The  news 
of  tlie  words  spoken  by  Babshakeh  had 
probably  flown  through  the  city,  and  reached 
him,  and  he  had  already  laid  the  matter 
before  God,  and  received  God's  instructions 
concerning  it.  He  was  therefore  able  to 
return  an  answer  at  once.  Thus  saith  the 
Lord,  Be  not  afraid  of  the  words  which 
thou  hast  heard,  with  which  the  servants 
— ^rather,  lackeys ;  the  term  used  is  not  the 
common  one  for  "servants,"  viz.  nag,  but 
•  contemptuous  one,  'Ty.3,  "foot-boys,"  or 
"lackeys" — of  the  King  of  Assyria  have 
blasphemed  me. 

Ver.  7. — Behold,  I  will  send  s  blast  npon 
him.  The  meaning  is  doubtful.  Most 
modem  critics  translate,  with  the  LXX., 
"I  will  put  a  spirit  within  him,"  and 
nudersiand  "a  spirit  of  cowardice,"  or  "a 
despondent  mood "  (Thenius),  or  "  an  ex- 
traordinary impulse  of  Divine  inspiration, 
which  is  to  hurry  him  blindly  on  "  (Dreohs- 
ler).  But  the  idea  of  our  translators,  that 
the  blast  (nn)  is  external,  and  Bent  upon 
him,  not  put  in  him— that,  in  fact,  the  de- 
struction of  his  army  is  referred  to,  seems 
defensible  by  such  passages  as  Exod.  xv.  8 
and  Isa.  xxv.  4.  The  prophecy  was,  no  doubt, 
iutentionally  vague — enough  for  its  imme- 
diate purpose,  which  was  to  comfort  and 
strengUien  Hezekiah — ^but  not  intended  to 
gratify  man's  curiosity  by  revealing  the 
exact  mode  in  which  God  would  work,    ^i 


CH.  XIX.  1—87.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


88S 


he  BliaQ  keai  a  mmeu;  literaltj,  he  thaU 
hear  a  heartat/;  i.e.  he  shall  be  told  Bome- 
thing,  which  shall  detonnine  him  on  a  hasty 
tetiMit.  It  is  best,  I  think,  to  nnderstand, 
not  news  of  Tirhakah'g  advance  (Knobel, 
Eeil,  Bahr),  mach  less  news  of  an  insur- 
rection in  some  other  part  of  the  empire 
(Cbeyne),  bnt  information  of  the  disaster  to 
bis  army.  It  is  no  objection  to  this  that 
Sennaoherib  was  "  with  his  army."  No  doubt 
he  was.  But  he  would  learu  the  catastrophe 
firom  the  mouth  of  aomo  one  who  came  into 
his  tent  and  told  him — he  would  "  hear  a 
hearsay."  And  shall  retnm  to  bis  own  land 
(see  ver.  S6),  and  I  will  cause  him  to  fall  by 
the  sword  in  his  own  land.  (On  Sennache- 
rib's murder,  see  the  comment  upon  ver.  87.) 
Ver.  8. — So  Babshakeh  returned.  Bab- 
ahakeh'a  embassy  came  to  an  end  with  the 
retirement  of  Hezekiah's  ofBcers  from  their 
conference  with  the  three  envoys  of  Sen- 
naoherib. No  further  communication  was 
held  with  him.  He  had  outraged  all  pro- 
priety by  his  appeal  to  the  "men  upon  the 
wall"  (ch.  xviii.  27 — 35);  and  it  seems  to 
have  been  thought  most  dignified  to  give 
him  no  ansvrer  at  all.  He  had  offered  no 
terms — he  had  simply  delivered  a  summons 
to  surrender,  and  the  closed  gates  and 
guarded  walls  were  a  sufficient  reply.  So 
be  felt,  and  returned  to  his  master,  re  infecta. 
And  found  the  King  of  Assyria  warring 
against  Idbnah.  The  position  of  Libnah 
relatively  to  Lachish  is  uncertain.  The 
site  of  Lachish  may  be  regarded  as  filed  to 
Vm-Lakii ;  but  that  of  Libnah  rests  wholly 
on  conjecture.  It  has  been  placed  at  Td- 
es-Safieh,  twelve  miles  north-east  of  Urn- 
Lakif;  a,tArak-el-Menthiyeh,  about  five  miles 
nearly  due  east  of  the  same ;  and  near  Umm- 
el-Bikar,  four  miles  south-east  of  Ttm-Laltii. 
A  removal  from  Um-Lakis  to  Tel-el-Safieh 
would  mean  a  retreat.  A  march  from  Um- 
Lakis  to  either  of  the  other  sites  would  be 
quite  compatible  with  an  intention  to  push 
on  to  Egypt.  For  he  had  heard  that  he 
was  departed  fi;om  Lachish.  Whether 
Lachish  had  been  taken  or  not  cannot  be 
determined  from  these  words.  But  we  can 
scarcely  suppose  that  a  place  of  such  slight 
strength  can  have  defied  the  Assyrian  arms 
successfully.  It  is  best  therefore  to  suppose, 
with  Keil  and  Thenius,  that  Lachish  had 
been  taken. 

Vera.  9 — 14. — Sennaehertb's  Utter  to  Re- 
leJciah.  Sennacherib  seems  to  have  been 
induced  to  write  to  Hezeliiah  by  the  fact 
that  he  could  not  march  against  him  at  once. 
A  forward  movement  on  the  part  of  Tirhakah 
was  reported  to  him  (ver.  9),  and  he  thought 
it  necessary  to  meet,  or  at  least  watch  it 
Bvd  he  must  vent  his  an^er  on  the  irebel 


Jndnan  monarch  in  some  way.  He  sends 
a  letter,  therefore,  as  more  weighty  and 
impressive  than  a  mere  message.  He  warns 
Hezekiah  against  being  himself  deceived  by 
Jehovah  (ver.  10);  and  he  expands  his 
inductive  argument  in  proof  of  the  irre- 
sistible might  of  Assyria,  by  an  enumeration 
of  four  more  recent  conquests  (ver.  12). 
Otherwise,  he  does  little  but  repeat  what 
Babshakeh  had  already  urged. 

Ver.  9.— And  when  he  heard  say  of  Tir- 
hakah King  of  Ethiopia.  Tirhakah  was 
one  of  the  most  distinguished  of  the  later 
Egyptian  monarcbs.  An  Ethiopian  by  birth, 
and  originally  ruling  from  Napata  over  the 
Upper  Nile  valley  from  the  First  Cataract 
to  (perhaps)  Khartoum,  he  extended  bis 
dominion  over  Egypt  probably  about  b.o.  700, 
maintaining,  however,  Shabatok,  as  a  sort 
of  puppet-king,  upon  the  throne.  About 
B.C.  693  he  succeeded  Shabatok,  and  held 
the  throne  till  b.o.  667,  being  engaged  in 
many  wars  with  the  Assyiians.  The  native 
form  of  his  name  is  "Tahrak"  or  "Tahark," 
the  Assyrian  "Tarku"  or  "Tarqu,"  the 
Greek  "Taracos"  or  "Tearchon."  He  has 
left  numerous  memorials  in  Egypt  and 
Ethiopia,  and  was  regurded  by  the  Greeks 
as  a  great  conqueror.  At  the  time  of 
Sennacherib's  second  attack  on  Hezekiah 
(about  B.o.  699)  he  was,  as  appears  in  the 
text,  not  yet  King  of  Egypt,  but  only  of 
Ethiopia.  Still,  he  regarded  Egypt  as  prac- 
tically under  bis  suzerainty,  and  when  it  was 
threatened  by  Sennacherib's  approach,  he 
marched  to  the  rescue.  Behold,  he  is  come 
out  to  fight  against  thee.  He  may  have 
regarded  himself  as  bound  in  honour  to 
come  to  the  relief  of  Hezekiah,  or  he  may 
have  been  simply  bent  on  defending  his  own 
territory.  He  sent  messengerg  again  onto 
Hezekiah,  saying, 

Ver.  10.— Thus  shall  ye  speak  to  Hezekiah 
King  of  Jndah,  saying.  The  messengers 
brought  a  "letter"  (D':iDp),  as  we  see  from 
ver.  14;  but  still  they  were  to  "speak  to 
Hezekiah  " — i.e.  they  were  first  to  read  the 
contents  to  him.  and  then  to  hand  him  the 
copy.  let  not  thy  God  in  whom  thou 
trustest  deceive  thee,  saying,  JTems^em 
shall  not  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the 
Xing  of  Assyria.  Sennacherib  drops  the 
fiction  that  he  himself  is  sent  by  Jehovah 
to  attack  Jadsaa  and  destroy  it  (ch.  xviii.  25), 
and  contents  himself  with  suggesting  that 
any  announcements  which  Hezeliiah  may 
have  received  from  his  God  are  untrust- 
worthy. Probably  he  spoke  his  convictiona. 
He  did  not  think  it  possible  that  Jerusalem 
could  resist  or  escape  him  (comp.  Isa.  ^ 
e— II  »nd  13, 14). 


884 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [OE.  ziz.  1-47. 


Yei.  11. — Behold,  thou  hast  heard  what 
the  kings  of  Assyiia  have  done  to  all  lands, 
by  destroying  them  utterly  (see  the  comment 
on  ch.  xviii.  33).  The  fact  was  indisputable 
(leever.  17).  The  question  remained — Would 
this  triumphant  career  of  success  necessarily 
continue?  And  shalt  thon  be  delivered! 
A  perfect  induction  is  impossible  in  practical 
matters.  Anything  short  of  a  perfect  in- 
duction is  short  of  a  proof. 

Ver.  12. — Have  the  gods  of  the  nations 
delivered  them  which  my  fathers  have 
destroyed  t  The  Assyrian  kings  always 
speak  of  all  tliBir  predecessors  as  their 
ancestors.  In  point  of  fact,  Sennacherib 
had  had  only  one  "father"  among  the 
previous  kings,  viz.  Sargon.  As  Sozan  (see 
the  comment  on  ch.  zvii.  6).  It  is  uncertain 
at  what  time  Gozan  was  finally  conquered 
and  absorbed.  It  was  frequently  overrun 
by  the  Assyrians  from  the  reign  of  Tiglath- 
pileser  I.  (about  b.o.  1100);  but  it  was 
probably  not  absorbed  nntil  about  B.o.  809. 
The  Prefect  of  Gozan  first  appears  in  the 
list  of  Assyrian  Eponyms  in  B.o.  791.  And 
Earan.  "  Haran  "  is  generally  admitted  to 
be  the  city  of  Terah  (Oen.  zL  32),  and 
indeed  there  is  no  rival  claimant  of  the 
name.  Its  position  was  in  the  western  part 
of  the  Gauzanitis  region,  on  the  Belik, 
•bout  lat.  36°  50'  N.  It  was  probably  con- 
•aered  by  Assyiia  about  the  same  time  as 
Gozan.  And  Bezeph.  A  town  called 
"  Bazappa,"  probably  "  Bezeph,"  appears  in 
the  Assyrian  inscriptions  from  an  early 
date.  It  Is  thought  to  have  been  in  the  near 
vicinity  of  Haran,  but  had  been  conquered 
and  absorbed  as  early  as  B.o.  818.  Whether 
it  Is  identical  with  the  Besapha  of  Ptolemy 
(•  Geograpli.,'  v.  15)  is  doubtful.  And  the 
children  of  Eden.  Probably  the  inhabitants 
of  a  city  called  "  Bit-Adini"  in  the  Assyrian 
inscriptions,  which  was  on  the  Middle 
Euphrates,  not  far  from  Garchemish,  on  the 
left  bank  ('Becords  of  the  Past,'  vol.  iii. 
pp.  69,  71,  etc.).  This  place  was  conquered 
by  Asshur-nazir-pal,  about  B.O.  877.  Which 
were  in  Thelasar.  "  Thelasar  "  is  probably 
the  Hebrew  equivalent  of  « Tel-Asshur," 
"  the  hill  or  fort  of  Asshur,"  which  may  have 
been  the  Assyrian  name  of  Bit-Adini,  or  of  a 
city  dependent  on  it.  Asshur-nazir-pal  gave 
Assyrian  names  to  several  cities  on  the 
Middle  Euphrates  (see  'Becords  of  the 
Past,'  vol.  iii.  p.  55,  line  48 ;  p.  69,  line  50). 

Ver.  13.— Where  is  the  King  of  Hamath. 
Ilu-bid,  King  of  Hamath,  raised  a  rebellion 
•gainst  Sargon  in  b.o.  720,  and  was  taken 
|grisoner  the  same  year  and  carried  to 
Assyria  (see  the  'Eponym  Canon,'  p.  127). 
And  the  King  of  Arpad.  Arpad  revolted  in 
conjunction  with  Hamath,  and  was  reduced 
about  the  same  time  ('  Eponym  Canon,'  p. 
1^.    Ita  "kine"  ii  not  mentioned,  but  be 


probably  shared  the  fate  of  Ilu-bid.  And 
the  Zing  of  the  city  of  Sepharvaim,  of  Hena, 
and  Ivahl  '  It  is  probably  not  meant  that 
these  three  cities  were  all  of  them  under  the 
dominion  of  one  and  the  same  king.  "  King" 
is  to  be  taken  distr&nitively.  (On  the  sites 
of  the  cities,  see  the  cawment  upon  oh. 
zviiL  34.) 

Ver.  14. — And  Hezekiah  received  the  letter. 
It  had  not  been  previously  stated  that 
Sennacherib  had  written  a  letter.  But  the 
author  forgets  this,  and  so  speaks  of  "the 
letter."  Kings  generally  communicated  by 
letters,  and  not  merely  by  messages  (see 
oh.  V.  5;  XX.  12;  2  Cihron.  ii  11;  Neh.  i. 
9,  etc.).  Of  the  hand  of  the  messengers,  and 
read  it.  Probably  Sennacherib  had  caused 
it  to  be  written  in  Hebrew.  And  Hezekiah 
went  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and 
spread  it  before  the  Lord.  Not  as  if  God 
would  not  otherwise  know  the  contents  of 
the  letter,  but  1o  emphasize  his  detestation 
of  the  letter,  and  to  make  it  silently  plead 
for  him  with  God.  Ewald  rightly  compaies 
what  Judas  Maccabsens  did  with  the  dis- 
figured copies  of  the  Law  at  Maspha  (1  Mace, 
iii.  48),  but  incorrectly  calls  it  ('History  of 
Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  183,  note  1,  Bng.  trans.)  "  a 
laying  down  of  the  object  in  the  sanctuary." 
Maspha  was  "  over  against "  the  temple,  at 
the  distance  of  a  mile  or  more. 

Ver.  15. — And  Hezekiah  prayed  before 
the  Lord,  and  said,  0  Lord  God  of  Israel. 
In  the  parallel  passage  of  Isaiah  (xxxvii. 
16)  we  find,  "O  Lord  of  hosts,  God  of 
Israel."    Onr  author  probably  abbreviates. 
Which  dwellest  between  the  chembims ;  or, 
on  the  cherubim — "which  hast  thy  seat," 
i.e.,  "behind  the  veil  in  the  awful  holy  of 
holies,  consecrated  to  thee,  and  where  thon 
dost  manifest  thyself."    Hezekiah,  as  Eeil 
observes,  calls  into  prominence  "the  cove- 
nant   relation    into    which    Jehovah,    the 
Almighty  Creator  and  Buler  of  the  whole 
world,  had  entered  towards  IsraeL    As  the 
covenant  God,  who  was  enthroned   above 
the  cherubim,  the  Lord  was  bound  to  help 
his  people,  if  they  turned  to  him  with  faith 
in  the  time  of  their  distress  and  entreated 
his  assistance."  Thon  art  the  God,  even  thon 
alone,  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth. 
Thou  art  not,  i.e.,  as  Sennacherib  supposes, 
a  mere  local  god,  presiding  over  Judeea,  and 
protecting  it ;  but  thou  art  the  QoA  of  all 
the  earth  and  of  all  its  kingdoms,  inolnding 
his  own,  equaUy.    Moreover,  thou  alone  art 
the  God  of  tlie  kingdoms.    Their  supposed 
gods  are  no  gods,  have  no  existence,  are  the 
mere  fictions  of  an  idle  and  excited  imagina- 
tion, are  mere  "breath"  and  "nothingness." 
Thon  hast  made  heaven  and  earth.  Whereas 
they  have  done  nothing,  have  given  no  proof 
of  their  existence  (see  Isa.  xli.  23,  24). 

Ver.  19,— Loid,  bow  down  thine  ear,  •si 


01.  xn.  1—87.]   THE  secONB  BOOK  OF  THE  EINOS. 


S85 


hear.  "Bow  down  thine  ear"  ii  a  Hebiew 
idiom  for  "  give  ear,"  "  attend  "  (aee  Ps.  xxxi. 
2 ;  Ixxi.  2 ;  Izxxvi  1 ;  Frov.  xxii.  17,  etc.).  It 
is  baaed  upon  the  fact  that,  when  men  wish 
to  catch  exactly  what  another  says  to  them, 
they  bend  themaelves  towards  him,  and 
bring  one  ear  as  near  to  him  as  they  can. 
Open,  Lord,  thine  eyes,  and  see.  Take  cog- 
nizance both  with  eye  and  ear;  i.e.  take 
full  cognizance — ^let  nothing  escape  thee. 
And  hear  the  words  of  Sennacherib,  which 
hath  lent  him  to  reproach  the  living  6od ; 
rather,  whiah  he  has  sent  to  reproach.  The 
suiSx  translated  "him"  in  our  version 
really  means  "it" — t'.e.  the  speech  or  letter 
of  Sennacherib,  which  Hezekiah  has  "  spread 
before  the  Lord." 

Yer.  17. — Of  a  tmth,  Lord,  the  kings  of 
Assyria— {.a.  Sennacherib,  and  his  prede- 
cessors— the  long  line  of  monarolis  who 
have  sat  on  the  Assyrian  throne  for  many 
past  ages — have  destroyed  the  nations  and 
their  lands;  rather,  have  laid  wotfe,  as  in 
the  parallel  passage  of  Isaiah  (xxxvii.  18). 
"  Destroyed"  is  too  strong  a  word.  Hezekiah 
fully  admits  the  boast  of  the  Assyrian 
monarch,  that  he  and  his  predecessors  have 
had  a  wonderful  career  of  success  (comp.  Isa. 
X.  5 — 14) ;  but  he  refuses  to  regard  this  past 
success  as  ensuring  success  in  the  future. 
All  is  in  the  hand  of  God,  and  will  be 
determined  as  God  pleases.  It  is  not  an  iron 
necessity  that  rules  the  world,  but  a  personal 
will,  and  this  will  maybe  afleoted  by  prayer, 
to  which  (ver.  19)  be  therefore  has  recourse, 

Ver.  18. — And  have  oast  their  gods  into 
the  fire.  The  images  worshipped  by  the 
various  nations  are  regarded  as  "  their  gods," 
which  they  were,  at  any  rate  in  the  minds 
of  the  common  people.  The  ordinary  practice 
of  the  Assyrians  was  to  carry  off  the  images 
taken  from  a  conquered  people,  and  to  set 
tiiem  up  in  their  own  country  as  trophies  of 
victory  (see  Isa.  xlvL  1,  2,  wliere  a  similar 
practice  is  ascribed  by  anticipation  to  the 
Persians).  Bat  there  are  places  in  the 
inscriptions  where  the  gods  are  said  to  have 
been  " destroyed "  or  "burnt."  It  is  reason- 
able to  suppose  that  the  images  destroyed 
were  those  of  wood,  stone,  and  bronze,  wMch 
had  little  or  no  intrinsic  value,  while  the 
gold  and  silver  idols  were  carried  off  to 
the  land  of  the  conqueror.  No  doubt  idols 
of  the  former  far  outnumbered  those  of  the 
latter  kind,  and,  at  each  sack  of  a  city  the 
"  gods "  which  it  contained  were  mostly 
burut.  For  they  were  no  gods,  but  the 
work  of  men's  hands,  wood  and  stone  (comp. 
Isa.  xlii.  17;  xliv.  9-20;  xlvL  6,  7). 
Wooden  images  (the  Greek  iiava)  were 
probably  the  earliest  that  were  made,  and, 
on  acconnt  of  their  antiquity,  were  often 
especially  reverenced.  They  were  "carved, 
but  rude,  with  nndivided  feet,  and  eyee 


indicated  by  a  line,  the  fauB  coloured  red,  or 
white,  or  gut.  It  was  only  later  that  ivory 
and  gold  plates  were  commonly  laid  over 
the  wood,  vested  and  decked  ont  with  orna- 
ments "  (Dollinger,  ■  Jew  and  Gentile,'  vol.  i. 
p.  210).  Stone  idols  were  at  first  shapeless 
masses,  then  pillars  or  cones,  finally  imita- 
tions of  the  human  form,  varying  from 
the  rudest  representations  to  the  priceless 
statues  of  Phidias.  In  Assyrian  times,  neither 
the  wooden  nor  the  stone  idols  were  possessed 
of  any  artistic  beauty.  Therefore  they  have 
destroyed  them.  "  Gods  "  of  this  kind  could 
not  help  themselves,  much  less  save  their 
devotees  or  the  cities  supposed  to  be  under 
their  protection.  It  was  not  to  be  wondered 
at  that  the  Assyrians  had  triumphed  over 
such  gods. 

Yer.  19. — Now  therefore,  0  Lord  our  God. 
Hezekiah  draws  the  strongest  possible  con- 
trast between  Jehovah  and  the  idols.  Sen- 
nacherib had  placed  them  upon  a  par  (ch. 
xviii.  33—35;  xix.  10—13).  Hezekiah 
insists  that  the  idols  are  "no  gods,"  are 
"  nothing  " — at  any  rate  are  mere  blocks  of 
wood  and  stone,  shaped  by  human  hands. 
But  Jehovah  is  "the  God  of  all  the  kingdoms 
of  the  earth  "  (ver.  15),  the  Maker  of  heaven 
and  earth  (ver.  15),  the  one  and  only  God 
(ver.  19)— answering  to  his  name,  self-exist- 
ing, all-sufficient,  the  groundwork  of  all 
other  existence.  And  he  is  "our  God" — the 
special  God  of  Israel,  bound  by  covenant  to 
protect  them  against  all  enemies.  I  beseech 
thee,  save  thou  ns  ont  of  his  hand;  i.e.  "do 
that  which  this  proud  blasphemer  thinks 
that  thou  canst  not  do  "  (ch.  xviii.  35) ;  show 
him  that  thou  art  far  mightier  than  he 
supposes,  wholly  unlike  those  "no-gods," 
over  whom  he  has  hitherto  triumphed — a 
"  very  present  Help  in  trouble  " — potent  to 
save.  That  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
may  know  that  thou  art  the  Lord  Qod.  The 
glory  of  God  is  the  end  of  creation;  and 
God's  true  saints  always  bear  the  fact  in 
mind,  and  desire  nothing  so  much  as  that 
his  glory  should  be  shown  forth  everywhere 
and  always.  Moses,  in  his  prayers  for 
rebellions  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  constantly 
urges  upon  God  that  it  will  not  be  for  his 
glory  to  destroy  or  desert  them  (Exod.  xxxii. 
12;  Numb.  xiv.  13—16;  Deut.  ix.  26—29). 
David,  in  his  great  strait,  asks  the  destruc- 
tion of  his  enemies,  "tliat  men  may  know 
that  thou,  whose  name  alone  is  Jehovah,  art 
the  Most  High  over  all  the  earth "  ^Ps. 
Ixxxiii.  18) ;  and  again  (Ps.  lix.  13),  "  Con- 
sume them  in  wrath,  consume  them,  that 
they  may  not  be;  and  let  them  know  that 
God  Tuleth  in  Jacob  unto  the  ends  of  the 
earth."  Hezekiah  prays  for  a  signal  ven- 
geance on  Sennacherib,  not  for  his  owu  sake, 
not  even  for  his  people's  sake,  so  much  as 
for  the  vindioation  of  God's  honour  among; 

S  a 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.      [oa.  xsx.  1—Zt. 


the  nationB  of  the  earth — ^that  it  may  be 
known  far  and  wide  that  Jehovah  ia  a  God 
who  can  help,  the  real  Baler  of  the  world, 
against  whom  earthly  kings  and  earthly 
might  aTail  nothing.  Even  thou  only.  It 
would  not  satisfy  Hezekiah  that  Jehovah 
should  be  acknowledged  as  a  mighty  god, 
one  of  many.  He  asks  for  such  a  demon- 
stration as  shall  convince  men  that  he  is 
unique,  that  he  stands  alone,  that  he  is  the 
only  miglity  God  in  all  the  earth. 

Ver.  20. — ^Ihen  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoi 
sent  to  Hezekiah,  saying.  As  Hezekiah 
prays,  Isaiah  is  by  Divine  revelation  made 
cognizant  of  his  prayer,  and  commissioned 
to  answer  it  favourably.  That  he  lendi  his 
answer,  instead  of  taking  it,  is  indicative  of 
the  high  status  of  the  prophets  at  this  period, 
which  made  it  not  unseemly  that,  in  spiritual 
matters,  they  should  claim  at  least  equality 
with  the  monarch.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God 
of  Israel,  That  which  thou  hast  prayed  to 
me  against  Sennacherib  King  of  Assyria  I 
have  heard.  Fir^t  of  all,  Hezekiah  is  assured 
that  his  prayer  has  been  "  heard."  God  has 
"  bowed  down  his  ear"  to  it  (ver.  16) — has 
taken  it  into  bis  consideration,  and  has  sent 
•  reply.  Then  the  reply  follows,  in  fourteen 
verses  arranged  in  four  strophes  or  stanzas. 
The  first  (vers.  21 — 21)  and  second  (vers. 
25 — 28)  are  addressed  to  Sennacherib,  and 
breathe  a  tone  of  scorn  and  contempt.  The 
third  (vers.  29 — 31),  is  addressed  to  Heze- 
kiah, and  is  encouraging  and  consolatory. 
The  fourth  (vers.  S2— 31)  is  an  assurance 
to  all  whom  it  may  concern,  that  Jerusalem 
is  safe,  that  Sennacherib  will  not  take  it, 
that  he  will  not  even  commence  its  siege. 

Ver.  21. — ^Ihis  is  the  word  that  the  lord 
hath  spoken  conoeming  him.  "  Him  "  is,  of 
course,  Sennacherib.  It  adds  great  liveliness 
and  force  to  the  opening  portion  of  the  oracle, 
that  it  should  be  addressed  directly  by 
Jehovah  to  Sennacherib,  as  an  answer  to  his 
bold  challenge.  The  only  address  at  all 
similar  in  Scripture  is  that  to  Nebuchad- 
nezzar (Dan.  iv.  31, 32),  spoken  by  "a  voice 
from  heaven."  But  the  present  passage  is 
one  of  far  greater  force  and  beauty.  The 
virgin  the  daughter  of  Zion;  rather,  (A« 
virgin  daughter  of  Zion,  w  the  virgin 
daughter,  Zion.  Cities  were  commonly  per- 
sonified by  the  sacred  writers,  and  represented 
as  **  daughters  "  (see  Isa.  xxiii.  10, 12 ;  zlvii. 
1,  S,  etc.).  "Virgin  daughter"  here  may 
perhaps  represent  "the  consciousness  of 
impregnability"  (Dieobsler);  but  the  phrase 
seems  to  have  been  nsed  rhetorically  or 
poetically,  to  heighten  the  beauty  or  pathos 
of  the  picture  (Isa.  xxiii.  12;  xlvil  1;  Jer. 
xlvi  11;  Lam.  it  13),  without  any  reference 
to  the  question  whether  the  particular  city 
bad  or  had  not  been  previously  taken. 
Jerusalem   oertabily  had   been  taken   by 


Bhishak  (1  Kings  xiv.  26),  and  hf  Joash 
(ch.  xiv.  IS);  but  Zion,  if  it  be  taken 
as  the  name  of  the  eastern  city  (Bishop 
Patrick,  ad  loo.),  may  have  been  still  a 
"  virgin  fortress.*'  Hath  despised  thee,  and 
laughed  thee  to  soom;  or,  despises  thee  and 
laughs  thee  to  scorn.  The  Hebrew  preterite 
has  often  •  present  sense.  Whatever  was 
the  case  a  little  while  ago  (see  Isa.  xxii. 
1 — 14),  the  city  now  laughs  at  thy  threats. 
The  daughter  of  Jemsalem  hath  shaken  her 
head  at  thee;  or,  icagt  her  head  at  thee — in 
scam  and  ridicule  (comp.  Ps.  xxii.  7). 

Ver.  22. — Whom  hast  thou  reproached  and 
blasphemed!  i.e.  "Against  whom  bast  thou 
been  mad  enough  to  measure  thyself? 
Whom  hast  then  dared  to  insult  and  defy  ?" 
Not  an  earthly  king — not  m  mere  angelio 
being — but  the  Omnipotent,  the  Lord  of 
earth  and  heaven.  What  utter  folly  ia  this  I 
What  mere  absurdity  ?  And  against  whom 
hast  thon  exalted  thy  voice!  t.e.  "spoken 
proudly  " — ^in  the  tone  in  which  a  superior 
speaks  of  an  inferior — and  lifted  np  th^a 
eyes  on  high  1 — i.e.  "looked  down  upon" — 
treated  with  contempt,  as  not  worth  con- 
sideration— even  against  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel.  Isaiah's  favourite  phrase — used  by 
him  twenty-seven  times,  and  only  five  times 
in  the  rest  of  Scripture — marks  this  entire 
prophecy  as  his  genuine  utterance,  not  the 
composition  of  the  vrriter  of  Kings,  but  a 
burst  of  sudden  inspiration  fi:om  the  Cory- 
phtBUs  of  the  prophetic  band.  The  oraola 
bears  all  the  marks  of  Isaiah's  elevated, 
fervid,  and  highly  poetic  style. 

Ver.  23.— By  thy  messengers— literally,  by 
Oie  hand  of  fhy  messengers — Babshakeh  and 
others  (see  oh.  xviii.  80,  35;  xix.  10—13)— 
thon  hast  zeproaohed  the  Lord,  and  hast 
said.  Sennadierib  bad  not  said  what  is  here 
attributed  to  him,  any  more  than  Sargon  had 
said  the  words  ascribed  to  him  in  Isa.  x. 
13,  11.  Bui  he  had  thought  it;  and  God 
accounts  men's  deliberate  thoughts  as  their 
ntterdnces.  Isaiah's  "  oracle "  brings  out 
and  places  in  a  striking  light  the  pride, 
self-confidence,  and  self-suliioienoy  which 
underlay  Sennacherib's  messages  and  letters. 
With  the  multitude  of  my  chariots ;  or,  with 
tharioti  upon  chariots.  The  chariot-forca 
was  the  main  arm  of  the  Assyrian  military 
service — that  on  which  most  dependence  was 
placed,  and  to  which  victory  was  commonly 
attributed.  The  number  of  chariots  that 
oould  be  brought  into  the  field  by  the 
Assyrians  is  nowhere  stated;  but  we  find 
nearly  four  thousand  hostile  chariots  col- 
lected to  oppose  an  ordinary  Assyrian  ia« 
vasion,  and  defeated  (see  'Ancient  Monar* 
Chios,'  vol.  ii.  p.  362,  note  8).  The  estimates 
of  Oterias— eleven  thousand  for  Ninus,  and 
a  hundred  thousand  for  Semiramis  (Died. 
Sic,  ii  9.  {  1) — are,  of  oourse,  anhistorieaL 


ak.  MX.  1— 3l]        THE  SECONl)  BOOK  OF  THE  KlNG& 


^7 


I  am  eome  np  to  the  height  of  the  monn- 
tains.    "  The  height  of  the  mountains "  is 
here  the  high  ground  \7hich  an  aimy  would 
have  to  traverse  in  passing  &om  the  Ocele- 
Syrian   valley  into  Palestine.     It  is   not 
exactly  Lebanon,  which  runs  parallel  with 
the  coast,  and  certainly  does  not  "guard 
Palestine  to  the  north,"  as  Keil  supposes ; 
but  it    may  be  viewed   as    »  "side"  or 
"  flank  '*   of  Lebanon.     In  point  of  fact, 
Lebanon  and  Hermon  unite  their  roots  to 
form  a  barrier  between  the  Ccele-Syrian  plain 
(El  Bulca'd)  and  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  and 
an  invader  from  the  north  must  cross  this 
barrier.    It  is  not  so  difficult  or  rugged  but 
that  the  Assyrians  could  bring  their  chariots 
over  it.    They  were  accustomed  to  traverse 
far  more  difficult  regions  in  Zagros  and 
Niphates  and  Taurus,  and   to  carry  their 
chariots  with  them,  dismounting  when  neces- 
sary, and  having  the  vehicles  lifted  over 
obstacles  by  human  hands  (see  '  Ancient 
Mnnarchies,'  voL  ii.  p.  74).    To  the  sides  of 
Lebanon.     An  army  which  invades  Pales- 
tine by  the  Coele-Syrian  valley — quite  the 
'easiest  and  most  usual  line  of  invasion — 
necessarily  passes  along  the  entire  eastern 
"side,"  or  "flank,"  of  Lebanon,  which  is 
the  proper  meaning  of  rpT ,  and  not  "  lofti- 
est height "  (Keil),  or  "  innermost  recess  " 
(Eevised  Version).     The   plural,  ^ray_,  is 
natural  when  a  mountain  range,  like  Leba- 
non, is  spoken  of.    And  will  cut  down  the 
tall  oedar  trees  thereof,  and  the  choice  fir 
trees  thereof.    The  felling  of  timber  in  the 
Syrian    mountain-chains  was    a    common 
practice  of  the  Assyrian  invaders,  and  had 
two  quite  distinct  objects.    Sometimes  it 
was  mere  cruel  devastation,  done  to  injure 
and  impoverish  the  inhabitants;  but  more 
often  it  was  done  for  the  sake  of  the  timber, 
which  the  conqueror  carried  off  into  his  own 
country.      "The  mountains  of  Amanus  I 
ascended,"   aays  Asshur-nazir-pal ;   "  wood 
for  bridges,  pines,  box,  cypress,  I  out  down 
.  .  .  cedar-wood  from  Ainanns  I  destined 
for  Bit-Hira  and  my  pleasure-house  called 
Azmakn,  and  for  the  temple  of  the  moon 
and  sun,  the  exalted  gods.    I  proceeded  to 
the  land  of  Iz-mehri,  and  took  possession 
of  it  throughout:  I  out  down  beams  for 
bridges,  and  carried  them   to    Nineveh" 
('  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  iii.  p.  74).    The 
oedar  (erez)  and  the  pine,  or  juniper  (btrSsh), 
were  in  special  request.    And  I  will  enter 
into  the  lodgings  of  his  borders — ^rather,  the 
lodge  of  its  border — ^perhaps    a  palace  or 
hunting-lodge  on  the  outskirt  of  the  Leba- 
non forest  region  (comp.  Cant.  vii.  4) — and 
into  the  forest  of  his  Carmel;  rather,  the 
/oreit  of  itt  orehard;  i.e.  the  choicest  part 
of  the  Lebanon  forest  region — ^the  part  whioh 
ia  rather  park  or  orchard  than  mere  forest. 
Yer.  24 I  bjave  digged  and  dinnk  strange 


waters ;  rather,  perhaps,  /  dig,  and  drink 
.  .  .  and  dry  up^the  preterite  having  again 
•  present  sense.  Sennacherib  means  that 
this  is  what  he  is  wont  to  do.  As  mountains 
do  not  stop  him  (ver.  23),  so  deserts  do  not 
stop  him — ^he  digs  wells  in  them,  and  drinks 
water  "strange"  to  the  soil — ^never  before 
seen  there.  And  with  the  sole  of  my  feet 
have. I  dried  np  all  the  rivers  of  besieged 
places ;  rather,  will  I  dry  up  all  the  riven 
of  Egypt  (oompsre  the  Bevlsed  Veislon. 
"  Mazor  "  is  used  for  "  Egypt "  in  Isa.  xix. 
6  and  Micah  vii.  12).  It  is  the  old  singular 
from  which  was  formed  the  dual  Hizraim. 
Whether  it  meant  "  land  of  strength ' 
(Pusey),  or  "  land  of  distress  "  (Bwald),  may 
be  doubted,  since  we  have  no  right  to 
assume  a  Hebrew  derivation.  There  was 
probably  a  native  word,  from  which  the 
Hebrew  Mazor,  the  Assyrian  Muzr,  and  the 
Arabic  Miar  were  taken.  Sennacherib's 
boast  is  tliat,  as  he  makes  deserts  travers- 
able by  digging  wells,  so,  if  rivers  try  to 
stop  him,  he  will  find  a  way  of  drying  them 
up.  Compare  the  boasts  of  Alario  in  Clau- 
dian  ('Bell.  Get.,'  pp.  525—532),  who  had 
prubably  this  passage  of  Kings  In  his 
thoughts — 

"Te  patior  suadente  fiigam,  cum  cesserit 

omnis 
Obsequiis  natura  mels  ?    Subslilere  noatrit 
Sub  pedibua  monies,  areeoere  vidimus  am- 

nes. 
Fregi  Alpes,  galeisque  Padum  victridbus 

hausi." 

Ver.  25. — Hast  thou  not  heard  long  ago  ■ 
how  I  have  done  it  ?  The  strain  suddenly 
changes — the  person  of  the  speaker  is  altered. 
It  is  no  longer  Sennacherib  who  reveals  the 
thoughts  of  his  own  heart,  but  Jehovah 
who  addresses  the  proud  monarch.  "  Hast 
thou  not  heard,  how  from  long  ago  I  have 
acted  thus  ?  Hast  thou  never  been  taught 
that  revolutions,  conquests,  the  rise  and  fall 
of  nations,  are  God's  doing,  decreed  by  him 
long,  long  ago — ay,  from  the  creation  of 
the  world?  Art  thou  not  aware  that  this 
is  so,  either  from  tradition,  or  by  listening  to 
the  voice  of  reason  within  thine  own  heart  ?  " 
It  is  implied  that  such  knowledge  ought  to 
be  in  the  possession  of  every  man.  And  of 
ancient  times  that  I  have  formed  it?  A 
rhetorical  repetition  of  the  previous  question, 
needful  for  the  balance  of  clauses,  in  whioh 
Hebrew  poetry  delights,  but  adding  nothing 
to  the  sense.  Now  have  I  brought  it  to 
pass,  that  thou  shouldest  he  to  lay  waste 
fenced  oities  into  ruinous  heaps.  The  idea 
was  very  familiar  to  Isaiah  and  bis  contem- 

Eoraries.  Years  before,  when  Assyria  first 
ecame  threatening,  Isaiah,  speaking  in  tha 
person  of  Jehovah,  had  exclaimed,  "  O  A»- 
Syrian,  the  rod  of  mine  anger,  and  the  itaS 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINGS.       [oh.  xix.  1— «7. 


In  ihelr  hand  la  mine  {ndignation.  I  will 
■end  him  against  an  hypooritical  nation, 
and  against  the  people  of  my  viath  will  I 
give  him  a  charge,  to  take  the  spoil,  and  to 
take  the  prey,  and  to  tread  them  down  like 
tho  mire  of  the  streets"  (Isa.  x.  5,  6).  But 
the  heathen  kings  whom  God  made  his  in- 
struments to  chasten  sinful  nations  imagined 
that  they  conquered  and  destroyed  and 
laid  waste  by  tiieir  own  strength  (see  Isa. 
X.  7—14). 

Ver.  26. — Therefore  their  inhahitants  were 
of  small  power ;  literally,  were  short  of  hand 
— unable, ».«.,  to  make  an  effectual  resistance. 
When  God  has  decreed  a  change  in  the  dis- 
tribution of  power  among  the  nations,  his 
providence  works  doubly.  It  infuses  con- 
fidence and  strength  into  the  aggressive 
people,  and  spreads  dismay  and  terror  among 
those  who  are  attacked.  Unaccountable 
panics  seize  them — they  seem  paralyzed; 
instead  of  making  every  possible  preparation 
for  resistance,  they  fold  their  hands  and  do 
nothing.  They  are  like  fascinated  birds 
before  the  stealthy  advance  of  the  serpent 
They  were  dismayed  and  oonfonnded.  His- 
torically, the  prophet  declares,  this  was  the 
cause  of  the  general  collapse  of  the  nations 
whom  the  Assyrians  attacked.  God  put  a 
craven  fear  into  their  hearts.  They  were  as 
the  grass  of  the  field,  and  as  the  green  herb, 
as  the  grass  on  the  house-tops.  Tho  "grass 
of  the  field"  is  one  of  the  most  frequent 
similes  for  weakness.  **  All  Qesh  is  grass  " 
(Isa.  xl.  6) ;  "  They  shall  soon  be  cut  down 
like  the  grass"  (Ps.  xxxvii.  2);  "The 
grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth  "  (Isa.  xl. 
8);  "I  am  withered  like  grass"  (iPs.  ciL 
11).  In  the  hot  sun  of  an  Eastern  sky 
nothing  faded  more  quickly.  But  this  weak- 
ness was  intensified  in  the  "grass  of  the 
house-tops."  It  "withered  helaie  it  grew 
up"  (Ps.  cxxix.  6).  The  depth  of  earth 
was  so  slight,  the  exposure  so  great,  the  heat 
BO  scorching,  that  it  sank  in  death  almost  as 
soon  as  it  had  sprung  to  life.  Such  has 
been  the  weakness  of  the  nations  given  over 
•8  a  prey  to  the  Assyrians.  And  as  com 
blasted  before  it  be  grown  np.  Com  blasted 
before  it  shoots  into  a  stalk  is  as  frail  as 
grass,  or  frailer.  It  dwindles  and  disappears 
without  even  asserting  itself. 

Ver.  27. — But  I  know  thy  abode,  and  thy 
going  out,  and  thy  ooming  in.  "  Besting  in 
peace,  going  out,  and  coming  in,  cover  all 
the  activity  of  a  man"  (Babr),  or  rather, 
cover  his  whole  life,  active  and  passive. 
Jehovah  claims  an  absolute  knowledge  of 
all  that  Bennacherib  does  or  thinks,  both 
when  he  is  in  action  and  when  be  is  at  rest. 
Nothing  is  hid  from  him  (comp.  Ps.  cxxxix. 
!•— 16).  Human  pride  should  stand  abashed 
befwe  such  absolute  knowledge.  And  thy 
ays  •gainst  m*.    Opposition  to  theii  wiU 


flits  Tiolent  men  with  fiiry  and  nge.  Stm- 
nacherib's  anger  was  primarily  against  Hea^ 
kiah',  bnt  when  once  he  -maa  convinced  that 
Hezekiah  really  tmsted  in  Jehovah  (ver. 
10),  his  fury  would  turn  against  God  him- 
self (comp.  Ps.  ii.  1 — 3,  where  the  Lord's 
anointed  is  primarily  David). 

Ver.  28. — Because  thy  rage  against  me, 
and  thy  tumult — rather,  thy  arrogancy  (see 
the  Revised  Version);  ■puttl  is  rather  the  quiet 
security  of  extreme  pride  and  self-confideno* 
than  "  tnmult " — ^is  oome  up  into  mine  ears — 
i.e.  has  attracted  my  notice — therefore  I  will 
put  my  hook  in  thy  nose,  and  my  bridle  in  thy 
lips.  The  imagery  is  most  striking.  Captive 
kings  were  actually  so  treated  by  the  As- 
syrians themselves.  A  hook  or  split-ring 
was  thrust  through  the  cartilage  of  the  nose, 
or  the  fleshy  part  of  the  under  lia  with  a 
rope  or  thong  attached  to  it,  and  in  this 
guise  they  were  led  into  tlie  monarch's 
presence,  to  receive  their  final  sentence  at 
his  hands.  In  the  sculptures  of  Sargon  at 
Khorsabad  we  see  three  prisoners  brought 
before  him  in  this  fashion,  one  of  whom  he 
seems  to  be  about  to  kill  with  a  spear 
('Ancient  Monarchies,'  voL  i.  p.  367).  In 
another  sculpture  set  op  by  a  Babylonian 
king,  his  vizier  brings  before  him  two  cap- 
tives similarly  treated,  b:it  with  the  ring, 
apparently,  passed  thr(iui,li  the  cartilage  of 
their  noees  (ibid.,  vol.  ili.  p.  436).  Manasseh 
seems  to  have  received  the  same  treatment 
at  the  hands  of  the  "captains "(2  Ohron. 
xxxiii.  11)  who  brought  him  a  ^isoner  to 
Esarhaddon  at  Babylon.  Other  allusions 
to  the  practice  in  Scripture  will  be  found 
in  Isa.  XXX.  28 ;  Ezek.  zxix.  4 ;  xxxviii.  4. 
The  threat  in  the  present  passage  was,  of 
course,  not  intended  to  be  understood  lite- 
rally, but  only  as  a  declaration  that  God 
would  bring  down  the  pride  of  Sennacherib, 
humiliate  him,  and  reduce  him  to  a  state  of 
abject  weakness  and  abasement.  And  I  will 
turn  thee  back  by  the  way  by  which  then 
earnest  (comp.  ver.  33).  The  meaning  is 
clear.  Bennacherib  would  not  be  allowed 
to  come  near  Jerusalem.  He  would  hurry 
back  by  the  low  coast  route  (ch.  xviii  17> 
by  which  he  had  made  his  invasion. 

Ver.  29. — And  this  shall  be  a  sign  nato 
thee.  Another  sudden  change  in  the  address. 
The  prophet  turns  from  Sennacherib  to 
Hezekiah,  and  proceeds  to  give  him  a  sign, 
and  otherwise  speak  to  him  encouragingly. 
Signs  were  at  the  time  freely  offered  and 
given  by  God  both  to  the  faithful  and  the 
nnfaithfnl  (see  eh.  xx.  4;  Isa.  vii.  II,  14). 
They  generally  consisted  in  the  prediction  of 
some  near  event,  whose  occurrence  was  to 
serve  as  a  pledge,  or  evidence^  of  the  probable 
fulfilment  of  another  prediction  of  an  event 
more  distant.  Such  signs  are  not  necessarily 
miraooloos.    T«  ahaU  aat  this  ju*  not 


OH.  XIX.  1—37.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


389 


thinifs  as  grow  of  themgelTU.  The  ABsyrlan 
invasion,  coming  early  in  the  spring,  as  waa 
usaal,  had  prevented  the  Israelites  from 
■owing  their  lands.  But  they  would  soon 
be  gone,  and  then  the  Israelites  could  gather 
in  such  self-sown  com  as  they  might  find  in 
the  corn-lands.  The  next  year,  probahly  a 
sabbalical  year,  they  were  authorized  to  do 
the  same,  notwithstanding  the  geneial  pro- 
hibition (Lev.  XXV.  5);  the  third  year  they, 
would  return  to  their  normal  condition. 
Tlie  sign  was  not  given  with  reference  to 
Sennacherib's  departure,  wliich  belonged  to 
the  first  year,  and  must  take  place  before 
the  ingathering  of  the  self-sown  corn  could 
begin,  but  with  reference  to  the  promise 
that  Jerusalem  should  be  free  from  any 
further  attack  on  his  part.  Sennacherib 
reigned  seventeen  years  longer,  but  led  no 
further  expedition  into  Palestine.  And  in 
the  second  year  that  which  springeth  of  the 
same;  and  in  the  third  year  sow  ye,  and 
reap,  and  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruits 
thereof. 

Yer.  30. — And  the  remnant  that  is  escaped 
of  the  honse  of  Judah,  Sennacherib,  who 
in  his  first  expedition  had  carried  away  out 
of  Judaea  200,150  prisoners  ('Eponym 
Canon,'  p.  134,  line  12),  had  in  his  second 
probably  done  considerable  damage  to  the 
towns  in  the  south-west  of  Palestine — 
Laohish,  for  instance,  which  was  a  city  of 
Judah  (Josh.  xv.  39;  ch.  xiv.  19).  The 
open  country  had  been  wasted,  great 
numbers  killed,  and  many  probably  carried 
off  by  famine  and  pestilence.  Thus  both 
Hezekiah  (ver.  4)  and  Isaiah  regard  the 
population  still  in  the  land  as  a  mere 
"remnant."  Shall  yet  again  take  root 
downward — i.e.  be  firmly  fixed  and  estab- 
lished in  the  land,  like  a  vigorous  tree 
that  strikes  its  roots  into  the  soil  deeply — 
and  bear  fruit  upward ;  i.e.  exhibit  all  the 
outward  signs  of  prosperity.  The  reign  of 
Josiah,  when  the  Jewish  dominion  em- 
braced the  whole  of  Palestine  (ch.  xxiii. 
15 — ^20),  was  the  special  fulfilment  of  this 
prophecy. 

Ver.  31. — Por  out  of  JTerasalem  shall  go 
forth  a  remnant.  The  march  of  Senna- 
cherib and  the  raid  of  Babshakeh  had 
driven  the  mass  of  the  escaped  population 
of  Judsea  to  take  refuge  within  tlie  walls  of 
Jerusalem,  from  which,  on  the  retirement 
of  the  invaders,  they  would  gladly  "go 
forth,"  to  recultivate  their  lands  (ver.  29) 
and  restore  their  ruined  homes.  And  they 
that  escape — rather,  that  shall  escape — out 
of  Uount  Zion — "  Mount  Zion  "  is  a  variant 
for  Jerusalem,  as  in  ver.  21,  and  in  Isaiah 
and  the  Psalms  so  continually — the  zeal  of 
the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  do  this.  So  in  Isa. 
ix.  7  and  xxxvii.  82.  Here  most  mann- 
Mripts  have   "the  nal  of    the    Lord," 


omitting  "of  hosts;"  and  this  is  probably 
the  right  reading.  The  meaning  is  that 
God's  zealous  love  and  care  for  his  people 
will  e£fect  their  complete  restoration  to 
prosperity  and  glory,  difficult  as  it  was  at 
the  time  to  imagine  such  a  restoration. 

Ver.  82. — Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord 
concerning  the  King  of  Assyria.  The  oracle 
concludes  with  a  general  announcement, 
addressed  to  all  whom  it  may  concern,  not 
to  any  one  individually,  concerning  the 
existing  distress.  First,  it  is  laid  down 
wliat  shall  not  be  the  issue.  He — i.e. 
Sennacherit) — shall  not  come  into — rather, 
unto — this  city— i.e.  Jerusalem — nor  shooi 
an  arrow  there — i.e.  he  shall  «ot  begin  the 
attack,  as  was  usually  done,  witli  discharges 
of  arrows,  to  clear  the  walls  of  theii 
defenders,  and  make  it  safe  for  the  sappers 
and  miners  and  the  siege  artillery  to  draw 
near — nor  come  before  it  with  shield —i.e. 
advance  close,  to  raise  the  scaling-ladders, 
or  mine  the  walls,  oi  fire  the  gates,  under 
the  protection  of  huge  shields — nor  oast  a 
bank  against  it.  Much  less  shall  lie  pro- 
ceed to  the  last  extremity  of  raising  mounds 
against  the  walls,  and  planting  upon  them 
his  balielse  and  his  battering-rams,  with  the 
object  of  effecting  a  breach.  Each  of  tlie 
successive  stages  of  a  siege  is  touched,  and 
negatived.  None  of  these  things  shall  be 
done.  There  shall  be  no  siege.  (For 
representations  of  the  Assyrian  sieges, 
banks,  and  engines,  see  Layard,  'Monu- 
ments of  Nineveh,'  second  series,  plates 
21,  31,  39,  43,  etc.;  and  Bawlinson,  'An- 
cient Monarchies,'  vol.  i  p.  303;  vol.  ii. 
p.  81.) 

Ver.  33.— By  the  way  that  he  catoe,  by 
the  same  shall  he  return  (see  ver.  28). 
Not  merely,  "he  shall  fail  of  his  object" 
(Babr,  Keil),  "he  shall  return  disap- 
pointed;" but,  literally,  Ae  shaU  retrace 
his  steps,  he  shall  quit  Palestine  by  the 
same  route  by  which  he  entered  it — the 
coast  route  along  the  maritime  plain,  which 
left  Jerusalem  on  the  right  at  a  distance  of 
forty  miles.  And  shall  not  come  into — 
rather,  unfo— this  city,  saith  the  Lord,  An 
emphatic  ending  (comp.  Isa.  xxii.  14; 
xlv.  13;  liv.  17;  Iv.  8;  lix.  20;  Ixv.  25; 
Ixvi.  21,  23). 

Ver.  84.— For  I  will  defend  this  city,  to 
save  it — ^not  merely  with  a  view  of  saving 
it,  but  in  such  sort  as  effectually  to  save  it 
— for  mine  own  sake — i.e.  because  my  own 
honour  is  concerned  in  its  preservation, 
especially  after  the  taunts  of  Sennacherib 
(ch.  xviii.  32—35;  xix.  10— 13)— and  for 
my  servant  David's  sake.  Not  so  much  on 
account  of  the  promises  made  to  David,  as 
on  account  of  the  love  which  Qod  bore 
towards  him  for  his  faithfulness  and  earnest 
devotion. 


no 


THE  BEOOND  BOOK  OP  THE  EINOa       foB.  ttx.  l—ii. 


Veil.  35—37. — DESTBVonoir  of  Skkna- 
obxbib'b  Host,  and  his  own  Violent  Death 
AT  KiNETEH.  The  sequel  is  told  in  &  few 
words.  That  night  destruotion  came  down 
on  the  host  of  Sennacherib,  as  it  lay  en- 
camped at  some  distance  from  Jerusalem, 
silently  and  swiftly.  Without  noise,  with- 
out disturbance,  the  sleeping  men  slept  the 
sleep  of  death,  and  in  the  morning,  when 
the  snrrivors  awoke,  it  was  found  that  a 
hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  were 
slain.  Upon  this,  with  the  remnant  of  his 
army,  Sennacherib  hastily  returned  to 
Nineveh.  There,  some  time  after — about 
seventeen  years  according  to  our  reckoning 
— a  conspiracy  was  formed  against  him  by 
two  of  his  sons,  who  murdered  him  as  he 
was  worshipping  in  a  temple,  and  fled  into 
Armenia.  Another  son,  Esarhaddon,  suc- 
ceeded. 

Ver.  35. — And  it  oame  to  pass  that  night. 
The  important  expression,  "  that  night,"  is 
omitted  from  the  narrative  of  Isaiah 
(xxxvii,  S6),  but  is  undoubtedly  an  original 
portion  of  the  present  history.  It  can  have 
no  other  meaning — as  Keil  and  Bahr  have 
seen — than  "the  night  following  the  day 
on  which  Isaiah  had  foretold  to  Hezekiah 
the  deliverance  of  Jerusalem."  God's  word 
"  runneth  very  swiftly."  No  sooner  was  the 
promise  given  than  the  destroying  angel 
received  his  orders,  and  "that  night"  the 
terrible  stroke  fell.  That  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  went  out ;  or,  an  angel  (&Yye\os  Kvplov, 
LXX.).  We  cannot  say,  with  Bahr,  that  it 
was  "  the  same  one  who  smote  the  firstborn 
in  Egypt,  and  inflicted  the  pestilence  after 
the  census  under  David."  Eevelation  does 
not  tell  us  that  there  is  definitely  one 
destroying  angel.  "  The  angel  of  death " 
is  a  rabbinical  invention.  It  accords 
rather  with  the  analogy  of  God's  dealings 
that  he  should  use  at  one  time  the  services 
of  one  minister,  at  another  time  those  of 
another.  And  smote.  Imagination  lias  been 
over-busy  in  conjecturing  the  exact  manner 
of  the  smiting.  Some  critics  have  suggested 
pestilence,  or  more  definitely  "the  plague" 
(Gesenius,  Dathe,  Maurer,  Bwald,  Winer, 
TheniuB,  Keil,  eto.) ;  others  a  terrible  storm 
(Vitringa,  Stanley);  others  the  simoom 
(Prideaux,  Milman);  others  a  nocturnal 
attack  by  Tirhakah  (Ussher,  Preiss,  Mi- 
ohaelis).  Some  of  these  the  text  altogether 
precludes,  as  the  attack  of  Tirhakah,  which 
must  have  aroused  the  whole  host,  and  not 
left  the  disaster  to  be  discovered  by  those 
who  "  awoke  early  in  the  morning."  Others 
are  imf  lobable,  as  the  simoom,  or  a  terrible 


storm  with  thnnder  and  lightning,  which 
have  never  been  known  to  accomplish  such 
a  destruction.  Pestilence  is  no  doubt 
possible,  but  a  pestilence  of  a  strange  and 
miraculous  character,  to  which  men  snc- 
oumbed  without  awaking  or  distarbing 
others.  But  the  narrative  rather  points  to 
sudden  and  silent  death  during  sleep,  such 
as  often  happens  to  men  in  the  course  of 
nature  singly,  and  here  on  this  occasion 
was  made  to  happen  in  one  night  to  a 
hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  men  by 
the  Divine  omnipotence  acting  abnormally. 
In  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians.  The  de« 
struction  was  not  only  at  one  time,  but  in 
one  place.  "  The  camp  of  the  Assyrians  " 
cannot  mean  half  a  dozen  camps  situated  in 
half  a  dozen  difierent  places,  as  Keil  sup- 
poses. Sennacherib  was  somewhere  with 
his  main  army,  encamped  for  the  night,  and 
there,  wherever  it  was,  the  blow  felL  But 
the  exact  locality  is  uncertain.  All  that 
the  narrative  makes  clear  is  that  it  was  not 
in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Jerusalem. 
Herodotus  places  the  catastrophe  at  Felu- 
sium  (ii.  141).  Bahr  thinks  it  was  probably 
before  Libnidi.  I  should  incline  to  place  it 
between  Libnah  and  the  Egyptian  irontier, 
Sennacherib,  when  he  heard  that  Tirhakah 
was  coming  against  him  (ver.  9),  having 
naturally  marched  forward  to  meet  and 
engage  his  army.  An  hnndred  four  soort 
and  five  thousand.  These  figures  do  not 
pretend  to  exactness,  and  can  scarcely  have 
been  more  than  a  rough  estimate.  They 
are  probably  the  Assyrians'  own  estimato 
of  their  loss,  which  the  Jews  would  learn 
from  such  of  the  fugitives  em  fell  into 
their  hands.  And  when  fhey — i^  the 
survivors — arose  early  in  the  morning,  they 
— i.e.  the  hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand 
— were  all  dead  corpses— absolutely  dead, 
that  is ;  not  merely  sick  or  dying.  The  fact 
makes  against  the  theory  of  a  pestilence. 

Ver.  36. — So  Sennacherib  King  of  Assyria 
departed,  and  went  and  retumed.  The 
original  is  more  lively,  and  more  expressive 
of  haste.  Sennacherib,  it  is  sai^  "de- 
camped, and  departed,  and  returned  "—the 
heaping  up  of  the  verbs  expressing  the 
hurry  of  the  march  home  (Keil);  comp. 
1  Kings  xiz.  3.  And  dwelt  at  Nineveh. 
Nineveh  was  Sennacherib's  favourite  resi- 
dence. He  had  built  himself  a  palace 
there,  marked  by  the  modem  mound  of 
Koyunjik.  Sargon,  his  father,  had  dwelt 
mainly  at  Dur-Sargina  or  Khorsabad, 
Tiglath-pileser  and  Shalmaneser  at  Calah 
or  Nimrud.  Sennacherib's  palace  and  his 
other  buildings  at  Nineveh  are  described 
in  his  annals  at  some  length  (see  '  Becords 
of  the  Past,'  vol.  L  pp.  50—52).  The 
expression,  "dwelt  at  Nineveh,"  does  not 
mean  that  he  never  qnitted  it*  bat  merely 


ca.  iix.  1— 37.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


391 


implies  that  he  dwelt  there  for  some  con- 
siderable time  after  his  return,  as  he 
appears  to  have  done  by  his  annals.  The 
Bponym  Canon  makes  his  last  year  b.o. 
682. 

Ver.  37. — ^And  it  came  to  pan — seventeen 
or  eighteen  years  afterwards";  not  "fifty- 
five  days"  after,  as  the  anther  of  Tobit 
(i.  21)  says — as  he  was  worshipping  in 
the  house  of  Nisrooh  his  god.  The  word 
"Nisroch"  offers  considerable  difficulty. 
It  has  been  connected  with  nesher  (iKri), 
"eagle,"  and  explained  as  a  reference  to 
the  eagle-headed  genius  sometimes  seen  in 
the  Assyrian  sculptures  ('Ancient  Mon- 
archies,' vol.-  iL  p.  265).  But  there  is  no 
evidence  that  the  genii  were  ever  wor- 
shipped in  Assyria,  much  less  that  they 
had  temples  of  their  own,  nor  is  any  name 
resembling  "Nisroch"  attached  to  any  of 
them.  The  word  itself  is  somewhat  doubt- 
ful, and  different  manuscripts  of  the  Sep- 
tuagint,  here  and  in  Isa.  xxxvii.  38,  have 
the  variants  of  Naearach,  Eaorach,  Meae- 
rach,  and  Asarach,  while  Josephus  has 
Aratkas.  Asarach  might  conceivably  be 
a  strengthened  form  of  Asshur;  bat  the 
substitution  of  sameeh  for  shin  is  against 
this  explanation.  Still,  Asshnr  was  cer- 
tainly Sennacherib's  favourite  god,  the 
deity  whom  he  principally  worshipped. 
Josephus  regards  the  name  as  belonging, 
not  to  the  god,  but  to  the  temple  (Ik  tij> 
iSfqf  ycL^  ^ApdffKp  Xeyofleyi)}),  which  is 
perhaps  the  true  solution  of  the  difficulty. 
Translate — "as  he  was  worshipping  his 
god  in  the  house  Nisroch."     That  Adiam- 


meleoh  and  Sharezsr  Ui  lona.  Adram- 
melech  is  called  "Adrammeles"  by  Aby- 
denus,  "  Ardamazanes "  by  Polyhistor. 
Neither  form  resembles  any  known  As- 
syrian name,  bnt  Adrammelech  has  a  good 
Semitic  derivation  (see  the  comment  on 
ch.  zviii.  31).  "Sharezer"  ia  probably  a 
shortened  form  of  Nergal-shar-ozer  (comp. 
"  Shalman,"  Hos.  x.  14),  which  was  a  name 
in  use  at  the  time  ('Eponym  Canon,' 
p.  68).  Abydenus  aeema  to  have  called 
him  Nergilus.  Smote  him  with  th»  iword. 
So  Josephus  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  1.  §  5)  and 
Mos.  Cbor.  ('Hist.  Armen.,'  L  22).  A 
mutilated  inscription  of  Esarhaddon's  seems 
to  have  described  his  war  with  his  brothers 
(<  Becords  of  the  Fast,'  vol.  iii.  p.  103)  at  the 
commencement  of  his  reign,  but  the  earlier 
part  is  wanting.  And  they  escaped  into  the 
land  of  Armenia;  literally,  of  Ararat.  The 
Hebrew  "Ararat"  is  the  Assyrian  "Ur- 
arda"— the  ordinary  name  for  the  country 
about  Lakes  Yan  and  Urumiyeh.  The 
name  "Armenia"  is  not  found  earlier  than 
the  inscriptions  of  Darius  Hystaspis.  And 
Esarhaddon  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead. 
Esarhaddon  (tlie  Sarchedon  of  Tobit  i.  21, 
and  the  Asshur-akh-iddin  of  the  Assyrian 
inscriptions)  succeeded  his  father  in  b.o. 
681,  and  was  engaged  for  some  time  in  a 
war  with  his  brothers  on  the  Upper 
Euphrates,  after  which  he  made  himself 
master  of  Nineveh.  He  reigned  from  b.o. 
681  to  B.o.  669,  when  he  was  succeeded  by 
his  son,  Aashur-bani-pal.  Assyria  reached 
the  acme  of  her  prosperity  in  hi*  time. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vera.  1 — 35. — 2%e  tmdom  of  trust  in  Qod,  and  the  foolishness  (^  trust  in  tAf,  The 
contrast  between  the  devout,  God-fearing,  God-trusting  Hezekiah,  and  the  proud,  self- 
trusting,  self-asserting  Sennacherib  is  one  of  the  most  striking  and  instructive  in 
■  Scripture.    The  two  are  set  one  over  against  the  other  in  the  most  graphic  way. 

I.  Thg  FiCTiTBE  OF  Hezeeiah  shows  him:  1.  Jealous  of  God's  honour.  Senna- 
cherib's words  against  God  strike  him  vrith  horror,  appear  to  him  such  shocking 
blasphemy,  that  he  rends  his  clothes  and  covers  himself  with  sackcloth  (ver.  1),  as  if 
he  would  wipe  out  the  insult  offered  to  God  by  one  of  his  creatures'  arrogancy,  by 
causing  to  be  presented  before  him  the  profoundest  self-abasement  and  self-humiliation 
on  the  part  of  another.  2.  Sensible  of  his  own  weakness.  The  day  is  "  a  day  of  trouble, 
of  rebuke,  and  of  contumely."  Israel  is  despised,  insulted,  disgraced,  and  yet  can  do 
nothing.  The  time  of  her  utmost  trial  has  come,  and  she  has  "  no  strength  "  to  carry 
her  through  the  crisis.  3.  Trustful  in  God's  power  to  save.  If  God  will,  Hezekiah 
does  not  doubt  he  can  "reprove"  Sennacherib's  words — disperse  them,  scatter  them, 
show  them  to  be  vain  words,  words  of  nought.  4.  Beliant  on  the  power  of  prayer, 
"  Wherefore  lift  up  thy  prayer  for  the  remnant  that  are  left."  Prayer  b  the  only  key 
that  can  unlock  a  door  of  escape.  He  himself  resorts  to  prayer  (ver.  15),  and  he 
exhorts  Isaiah  to  do  the  same.  If  he  himself  is  sinfiil,  Isaiah  is  a  righteous  man, 
God'i  prophet,  and  "  the  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much  " 
(Jas.  T.  16). 

n.  Thb  nonnui  or  Sxnnaohxbib  shows  Mm:  1.  A  hater  and  mOmr  ^f  Qti. 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  sts.  1—87 


"Let  not  thy  Otoi  ,  ,  .  deceive  thee"  (ver.  10).  A»  though  God  ever  deceived,  u 
though  he  were  not  the  Truth  itself.  Sennacherib  represents  him  as  either  a  poor 
braggart  who  could  not  do  what  he  had  promised,  or  a  malevolent  being  intentionally 
beguiling  men  to  their  rum.  "  Jehovah,"  he  says,  "  has  sent  him  agamst  Jerusalem," 
has  bidden  him  "  go  up  and  destroy  it "  (ch.  xviii.  25),  while  at  the  same  time  he  was 
deluding  Hezekiah  with  promises  of  deliverance.  2.  Ahsolutely  confident  in  his  ovm 
strength.  Who  can  stand  against  the  Assyrians  ?  Who  has  ever  been  able  to  resist 
them  ?  "  Hath  any  of  the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered  at  all  his  land  out  of  the  Wd 
of  the  King  of  Assyria  ?  "  (ver.  33).  And  if  not,  "  shalt  thou  be  delivered  ?  "  He  sets 
his  own  strength  against  Hezekiah's  weakness  (vers.  23,  24),  and  regards  himself  as 
irresistible.  His  will  is  law.  What  can  hinder  it?  Not  armies— least  of  all  Egyptian 
armies— not  mountains,  not  rivers,  not  deserts.  Intoxicated  with  success,  he  thinks 
there  is  no  power  equal  to  him  either  in  earth  or  heaven.  The  gods  of  the  nations 
have  all  failed.  Hezekiah's  God  will  fail  equally.  3.  Secvre  of  thefutwe,  and  tuithout 
any  thought  of  suing  for  Divine  aid.  Why  should  Sennacherib  sue?  "Success  had 
always  attended  him  in  the  past;  surely  "  to-morrow  would  be  as  to-day,"  only  "yet 
more  abundant."  He  does  not  appear  to  give  even  his  own  gods  a  thought.  Conven- 
tional ascription  of  his  victories  to  Asshur  may  be  found  in  his  inscriptions ;  but,  as 
Isaiah  lays  bare  to  us  the  workings  of  his  innermost  soul  (ver.  23, 24),  there  is  no  leaning 
on  any  higher  power,  no  recognition  of  anything  behind  his  own  greatness  and  material 
strength,  no  suspicion  even  of  the  possibiUty  of  a  reverse.  He  is  a  god  to  himself;  he 
commands  the  future ;  everything  must  necessarily  go  well  with  him. 

The  event  shows  the  wisdom  of  Hezekiah's  trust  and  the  utter  foUy  of  Sennacherib's. 
"  Out  of  the  depths"  Hezekiah  "  cries  unto  the  Lord,"  and  "the  Lord  hears  his  voice." 
"With  the  Lord  there  is  mercy,  and  with  him  is  plenteous  redemption."  Hezekiah 
may  in-  the  past  have  wavered,  have  listened  to  evil  counsellors,  have  paid  Us  court 
to  Pharaoh,  and  put  his  trust  in  the  broken  reed  Egypt ;  but  now,  at  any  rate,  he  has 
repented  of  such  evil  courses,  he  has  put  them  away  from  him,  and  thrown  himself 
wholly  upon  God.  His  words  (vers.  15 — 19)  have  the  unmistakable  ring  of  sincerity 
and  truth.  To  God  he  looks,  and  to  him  only.  His  strength  is  become  perfected  in 
his  weakness;  with  the  result  that  God  hears  his  prayer  (ver.  20),  and  grants  the 
unparalleled  deliverance  related  in  ver.  35.  Sennacherib,  on  the  other  hand,  finds  in 
a  mument  tlie  whole  ground  of  his  self-confidence  fail.  It  was  as  the  master  of  many 
legions  that  he  had  thought  to  bend  all  things  to  his  will.  Bereft  of  his  legions,  he  is 
nothing.  To-day  a  mighty  conqueror  carrjing  everything  before  him,  unfeignedly 
astonished  that  any  one  should  dare  to  disobey  his  commands ;  on  the  morrow  he  is  a 
wretched  fugitive,  hurrying  homewards  as  fast  as  his  chariot-steeds  will  bear  him,  only 
anxious  to  escape  from  the  foes  whom  he  so  lately  despised,  and  to  bury  his  shame  and 
his  disgrace  within  the  walls  of  his  distant  palace.  In  his  pride  and  his  self-trust  he  had 
thrown  out  a  challenge  to  God.  God  took  up  the  challenge,  and  struck  him  down  to 
the  earth.  The  circumstances  of  the  catastrophe  are  unique  in  the  world's  history; 
but  the  lesson  is  one  that  the  events  of  history  have  taught  again  and  again.  At  the 
height  of  his  pride  and  arrogancy  and  sell-trust,  the  ungodly  conqueror  is  stricken  with 
failure,  humiliated,  beaten  down  to  the  ground,  shown  that,  after  all,  he  is  a  mere  man, 
and  that  the  fates  of  nations  are  not  in  his  power,  but  in  the  hand  of  One  whose  name 
is  "  the  Most  High,"  and  who  ruleth  in  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — A  good  man's  prayers  sought.  Hezekiah  is  in  deep  distress  of  spirit 
at  the  haughty,  defiant,  confident  tone  of  Babshakeh.  He  wants  help  in  his  trouble. 
He  sends  not  to  his  men  of  war,  noi.  to  his  statesmen,  for  advice,  but  to  the  man 
of  Goti. 

I.  Charaoteb  aivES  oohfidemoe.  Isaiah  was  known  to  live  near  to  God.  There- 
fore Hezekiah  had  confidence  in  him.  Sere  is  a  good  test  tf  the  character  tf  your 
companions  and  associates.  Would  you  go  to  them  in  time  of  trouble?  Would 
you  expect  them  to  give  you  any  comfort?  Would  you  tell  them  the  inner  secrets 
•f  jeur  heart  f    If  not,  ii  it  not  because  you  have  no  confidence  in  them  ?    Their 


OH.  zix.  1— 37.]       THK  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KIKOa  893 

character  doe*  not  command  your  respect.    Choose  the  company,  seek  the  oounael,  ot 
good  men. 

II,  Chabaoteb  gives  foweb  ih  fbateb,  "The  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a 
righteous  man  availeth  much."  The  man  vrho  expects  an  answer  to  his  prayers  is  the 
man  who  habitually  lives  near  to  God.  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  said  she  feared  the  prayers 
of  John  Knox  more  than  an  army  of  ten  thousand  men.  Therefore  :  1.  Live  near  tu 
Ood  if  you  would  influence  others.  Power  for  service  comes  from  fellowship  with 
God.  Men  like  Isaiah  have  that  quiet  power  that  enables  them  to  inspire  others  with 
confidence.  "  Be  not  afraid  of  the  words  which  thou  hast  heard "  (ver.  6).  So  with 
St.  Paul  on  his  perilous  voyage  to  Borne.  "  I  exhort  you  to  be  of  good  cheer :  for 
there  shall  be  no  loss  of  any  man's  life  among  you,  but  of  the  ship.  For  there  stood 
by  me  this  night  the  angel  of  God,  whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve,  saying,  Fear  not, 
Paul.  .  .  .  Wherefore,  sirs,  le  of  good  cheer:  for  I  helieve  Ood,  that  it  shall  be  evert  as 
it  was  told  me."  2.  Live  near  to  God  if  you  would  have  power  in  prayer.  The  man 
who  prays  most  is  the  man  who  knows  the  power  of  prayer. 

"  Thrice  blest  whose  lires  are  &ithfiil  prayeii. 
Whose  loves  in  higher  love  endiue ; 


What  sools  possess  themselves  so  puie, 
Or  is  there  blessedness  like  theirs? 


0.  H.  I. 


Vers.  8 — 37. — Our  difficulties,  and  how  to  deal  with  them.  We  have  seen  that 
Hezekiah  was  a  man  distinguished  by  his  trust  in  God.  We  have  seen  how  his  trust 
in  God  led  him  to  act  in  times  of  peace.  His  trust  in  God  led  to  personal  religion, 
to  practical  effort,  and  to  prosperity  in  life.  We  see  here  how  he  acted  when  troubles 
came.  Depend  upon  it,  the  man  who  makes  his  peace  with  God  when  all  is  going  well 
with  him — he  will  have  peace  within  his  spirit  when  the  time  of  trouble  comes.  The 
man  who  does  not  allow  the  flowing  tide  of  worldly  prosperity  or  worldly  pleasure  to 
draw  him  away  from  God,  he  will  find  that  God  is  near  to  him  in  the  hour  of  danger 
and  of  need.  It  was  certainly  nn  hour  of  danger  and  anxiety  with  Hezekiah.  With 
a  vast  army,  Sennacherib,  the  King  of  Assyria,  was  threatening  Jerusalem.  The  very 
name  Of  Assyria  was  at  that  time  a  terror  to  the  nations,  just  as  for  a  long  time  the 
name  of  Napoleon  was  a  terror  to  Europe.  One  by  one,  nation  after  nation  had  gone 
down  before  the  triumphal  progress  of  the  Assyrian  arms.  Sennacherib,  conscious  of 
his  past  successes,  conscious  of  the  mighty  host  that  accompanies  him,  looks  down 
with  contempt  upon  Hezekiah  and  his  attempt  at  resistance.  He  sends  him  a  letter, 
in  which  he  points  out  how  futile  his  efforts  at  resistance  must  prove.  The  gods  of 
the  other  nations  had  not  been  able  to  deliver  them,  and  let  him  not  think  that  his 
God  Whom  he  served  would  deliver  him.  This  letter  and  Hezekiah's  action  regarding 
it  suggest  to  us  some  instructive  lessons. 

I.  Sennaohebib's  lettbb,  and  the  temptation  it  BBonoHT.  (Vers.  9 — 13.)  The 
drift  of  Sennacherib's  letter  was  entirely  to  lead  Hezekiah  to  distrust  Ood.  Sennacherib 
was  confident  of  victory ;  but  he  wanted  Hezekiah  to  surrender  to  him,  so  that  he 
might  obtain  as  much  tribute  as  he  could,  and  at  the  same  time  incur  no  loss  of  life 
in  his  own  army.  So  he  turns  into  ridicule  Hezekiah's  faith  in  his  God.  "  Let  not 
thy  Qod.  in  whom  thou  trustest  deceive  thee,  saying,  Jerusalem  shall  not  be  delivered 
into  the  hand  of  the"  King  of  Assyria.  Behold,  thou  hast  heard  what  the  kings  of 
Assyria  have  done  to  all  lands,  by  destroying  them  utterly :  and  shall  thou  be  delivered  f 
Have  the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered  them  which  my  fathers  have  destroyed  ?  .  .  . 
Where  is  the  King  of  Hamath,  and  the  King  of  Arpad,  and  the  King  of  the  city  of 
Sepbarvaim,  of  Hena,  and  Ivah  ?  "  In  a  similar  way  Babshakeb,  one  of  Sennacherib's 
generals,  bad  already  spoken  to  the  people  of  Jerusalem.  He  had  sought  to  influence 
their  fears.  He  had  sought  to  tempt  them  by  bribes.  He  had  said,  "  Let  not  Hezekiah 
deceive  you :  , . .  neither  let  Hezekiah  make  you  trust  in  the  Lord. . . .  Hearken  not  to 
Hezekiah :  for  thus  saith  the  Eang  of  Assyria,  Make  an  agreement  with  me  by  a  present, 
and  come  ye  out  to  me,  and  then  eat  ye  every  man  of  his  own  vine,  and  every  one  of 
his  fig  tree,  and  drink  ye  every  one  the  waters  of  his  cistern :  until  I  come  and  take  you 
away  into  a  land  like  your  own  land,  a  land  Of  com  and  wine,  a  land  of  bread  and 
vineyards,  a  land  of  oil  olive  and  of  honey,  that  ye  may  live,  and  not  die :  agd  heatkea 


(94  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xix.  1-37. 

not  nnto  Heceldah,  when  he  persuadeth  you,  saying,  The  Lord  will  deliver  us."  It  is  easy 
to  imagine  the  effect  of  such  statements  upon  a  people  few  in  number  compared  with 
the  Aisyiian's  mighty  host.  The  horrors  of  a  protracted  siege  were  in  prospect. 
The  longer  they  continued  their  resistance,  the  more  desolation  and  devastation  would 
be  committed  by  the  Assyrian  army  in  their  fields  and  homesteads.  Many  of  them 
doubtless  were  already  murmuring  at  Hezekiah,  and  some  of  them  perhaps  ready  to 
make  an  agreement  with  the  enemy.  It  was  a  trying  position  for  Hezekiah.  Both  the 
letter  of  Sennacherib,  and  the  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed,  were  a  strong 
temptation  to  him  to  distrust  God.  Be  might  have  said, "  Is  this  the  reward  which  my 
service  of  God  has  brought  me  ?  I  have  been  faithful  to  God's  commands.  I  have 
restored  the  temple ;  I  have  restored  the  service  of  God.  I  have  thrown  down  the  altars 
and  high  places,  and  broken  the  images  in  pieces.  Even  the  brazen  serpent,  which  the 
people  valued  so  highly  as  a  relic  of  the  past,  I  have  ground  to  powder,  because  their 
idolatry  of  it  was  dishonouring  to  God.  And  now  is  it  thus  that  Gtxi  rewards  me  ?  " 
This  is  just  the  temptation  that  our  di£Sculties  and  troubles  constantly  bring  to  us. 
They  tempt  us  to  distrust  God.  1.  It  is  so  in  the  growth  cf  our  own  spiritual  life. 
How  often  the  young  beginner  in  the  Christian  life  is  discouraged  by  the  difficulties 
which  arise,  and  which  he  did  not  calculate  on !  He  finds  that  there  is  still  an  old  nature 
within  him  which  has  to  be  grappled  with  and  conquered.  He  meets,  perhaps,  with 
opposition  and  discouragements  from  the  world  without,  and  perhaps  even  from  those 
from  whom  he  expected  sympathy  and  help.  These  difficulties  tempt  many  a  one  to 
distrust  Gk)d.  Many  there  are  still  who,  like  the  disciples  when  difficulties  arose,  "  go 
back,  and  walk  no  more  with  "  God.  One  of  the  common  difficulties  which  tempts  us 
to  distrust  God  is  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked.  Everything  seems  to  prosper  with  men 
who  have  no  respect  for  the  Law  of  GkxL  The  temptation  is  for  us,  in  distrust  of  God's 
promises,  to  imitate  their  godless  practices.  We  begin  to  say,  "  There  is  no  use  in  our 
being  too  scrupulous."  Ah!  what  a  mistake  that  is  I  Supposiiig  we  had  all  their 
prosperity,  would  it  compensate  us  for  the  loss  of  a  quiet  conscience  ?  Prosperity  is 
dearly  bought,  business  is  dearly  bought,  for  which  we  have  to  sacrifice  one  command- 
ment of  God,  or  silence  the  still  small  voice  of  conscience  that  speaks  within,  "  What 
shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  When- 
ever this  difficulty  of  the  prosperity  of  godless  men  troubles  you,  and  success  which 
seems  to  be  reached  by  questionable  and  unscrupulous  means,  remember  the  grand 
words  of  the  thirty-seventh  psalm,  "  Fret  not  thyself  because  of  evil-doers,  neither  be 
thou  envious  against  the  workers  of  iniquity.  For  they  shall  soon  be  cut  down  like  the 
grass,  and  wither  as  the  green  herb.  Commit  thy  way  nnto  the  Lord  :  trust  also  in  him ; 
and  he  will  bring  it  to  pass."  2.  In  the  same  way  there  are  difficulties  in  Christian 
work.  How  common  a  thing  it  is  for  Christians,  who  make  much  profession  of  their 
faith  in  God,  to  be  dismayed  and  discouraged  by  difficulties  that  arise !  Very  often  they 
are  hindered  from  engaging  in  Christian  work  at  all  just  by  the  difficulties  that  exist. 
1  do  not  mean  to  say  every  person  will  suit  every  kind  of  work.  There  may  be  many 
kinds  of  work  in  which  a  man  should  not  engage,  because  he  has  no  fitness  for  them. 
But  every  Christian  ought  to  be  engaged  in  some  work.  If  you  are  doing  nothing  for 
the  Master,  may  we  ask  you  why  ?  What  is  your  reason  ?  What  difficulty  is  in 
your  way?  No  difficulty  is  am  excuse  for  idleness.  You  may  think  yourself  too  young, 
or  too  inexperienced,  or  too  humble ;  you  may.  find  others  hard  to  work  with ;  you  may 
meet  with  discouragement  and  opposition ;  but  no  one  of  these  things  is  any  excuse  for 
idleness.  If  difficulties  were  a  reason  for  doing  nothing,  no  Christian  work  would  ever 
have  been  done — ^no  chiu'ches  built,  no  missionaries  sent  forth,  no  schools  erected — for 
there  never  was  a  Christian  work  yet  that  had  not  its  difficulties.  Let  us  learn  to  take 
as  our  motto  in  Christian  work,  "I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which 
strengtheneth  me."  Each  one  of  you,  no  doubt,  has  his  or  her  own  difficulties  to 
contend  with— difficulties  in  your  daily  employment,  difficulties  from  those  you  come 
io  contact  with,  troubles  and  anxieties  of  spirit,  cares  and  worries  of  various  kinds. 
My  message  to  you  is  this.  Be  not  undiily  cast  down  by  your  difficulties.  Don't 
make  too  much  of  them.  Just  do  with  them  as  Hezekiah  did,  and  you  will  see  how 
soon  they  will  disappear  altogether,  or  at  any  rate  they  will  be  very  considerably 
diminished. 
IL  HuBiUAii'i  FQATVB.  (Vers.  14 — 19.)  Hezekiah  had  learned  b^  experience.  As 


OH.  XIX.  1-37.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  895 

he  grew  older  he  became  wiser.  A  short  time  before,  when  Sennacherib  was  capturing 
his  cities,  and  had  advanced  npon  Jerusalem,  Hezekiah  sent  a  message  to  him, 
saying,  "I  have  ofEended;  return  from  me:  that  which  thou  puttest  on  me  will  I 
b<»r."  Sennacherib  appointed  him  the  exorbitant  tribute  of  three  hundred  talents 
of  silver  and  thirty  talents  of  gold.  Hezekiah  was  in  great  straits  for  means  to  meet 
this  demand.  In  his  difficulty  he  imitated  the  foolish  action  of  his  own  father  Ahaz, 
and  took  the  silver  that  was  found  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  besides  cutting  off  the 
gold  from  the  doors  and  pillars  of  the  temple,  and  then  sent  this  as  a  peace  offering 
to  Sennacherib.  But  notwithstanding  all  this,  Sennacherib  did  not  give  up  his 
warlike  intentions.  He  once  more  threatened  Jerusalem.  This  time  Hezekiah  acts 
differently.  Ee  had  learned  now  the  mistake  of  rashly  yielding  to  difficulties.  It  is 
a  lesson  we  all  need  to  learn.  If  we  yield  to  ov/r  difficulties,  they  will  return  again,  and 
with  renewed  force.  One  difficulty  yielded  to  makes  the  next  one  harder  to  resist. 
One  difficulty  resisted  makes  the  next  one  far  easier  to  overcome.  1.  Hezekiah's 
first  act,  after  he  had  read  Sennacherib's  letter,  was  to  go  vp  into  the  house  of  the 
Lord.  There  he  showed  his  wisdom.  If  we  want  advice  in  sickness,  advice  as  to 
our  bodily  health,  we  go  to  the  house  of  our  physician.  If  we  want  to  purchase 
food  or  clothing,  we  go  where  these  necessaries  of  life  are  to  be  obtained.  Hezekiah 
was  now  in  a  difficulty  where  human  help  could  be  of  little  or  no  use  to  him.  So 
ho  goes  to  the  one  place  where  alone  he  might  expect  help — to  the  house  of  the 
Lord.  The  very  act  of  going  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  is  a  wise  one.  It  reminds  us 
that  there  is  another  world  than  that  which  is  seen — the  world  of  spirits,  the  world 
of  the  invisible.  It  reminds  us  that  there  is  One  in  whose  hand  every  human  life  is. 
One  to  whom  in  all  ages  human  hearts  have  turned,  in  every  time  of  sorrow,  of 
difficulty,  and  of  helplessness,  and  One  whose  power  and  whose  goodoess  men  have 
acknowledged  by  raising  temples  for  his  honour  and  for  their  own  and  others'  good. 
Every  true  Christian  must  testify  what  a  blessing  the  house  of  the  Lord  has  been  to 
him.  How  should  we  have  fared  without  its  precious  privileges  ?  How  often  have 
we  felt,  when  the  Sunday  morning  came  round,  and  we  joined  in  the  song  of  praise, 
and  approached  the  mercy-seat  in  company  with  other  anxious,  sinful,  troubled,  human 
hearts  like  our  own;  as  we  listened  to  the  words  of  everlasting  life;  as  we  heard  of 
him  who  is  the  "  Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief,"  as  we  heard  him  saying 
to  us,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you 
rest ;" — ^how  often  have  we  felt  that  the  difficulties  of  the  week  vanished  ;  the  burdens 
of  the  week  were  lightened  ;  the  cloud  of  sorrow  that  hung  over  us  seemed  suddenly 
to  lift ;  we  went  forth  again  with  new  hope  in  our  hearts,  and  with  new  strength  in 
our  lives;  and  upon  our  lips,  perhaps,  were  such  words  as  these — 

"  Goodness  and  mercy  all  my  life 
Shall  surely  follow  me, 
And  in  God's  house  for  evermore 
My  dwelling-place  shall  be  "I 

Hezekiah,  then,  did  a  wise  thing  in  going  to  the  place  where  blessing  was  to  he  found. 
But  he  did  more  than  that.  2.  He  spread  the  letter  before  the  Lord.  What  a  faith 
in  God's  presence  that  showed  1 — a  real  presence,  indeed,  not  of  body,  but  of  that  ever- 
present  Spirit,  in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being  1  What  a  confidence 
it  showed  in  God's  interest  in  the  affairs  of  all  his  people  I  What  a  lesson  it  is  for  us 
all  I  The  best  thing  we  can  do  with  our  difficulties  is  to  spread  them  out  before  Ood. 
Perhaps  when  we  begin  to  spread  them  out  before  him,  some  of  them  will  seem  hardly 
worth  talking  about,  hardly  worth  spreading,  and  the  very  act  of  doing  so  will  bring 
us  relief.  But  whatever  it  may  be  that  gives  us  trouble,  even  though  it  be  a  small 
matter — something  imkind  that  has  been  said  about  us,  an  unpleasant  letter  that  we 
have  received,  an  unexpected  loss  in  business,  let  us  spread  it  out  before  Ood.  Yout 
Sunday  morning,  before  you  go  into  God's  house,  would  be  well  spent  in  thinking  over 
the  mercies  you  have  to  thank  God  for,  the  sins  you  have  to  confess,  and  the  difficulties 
which  trouble  you,  and  then  you  would  go  into  God's  bouse  asking  just  for  what  you 
need.  I  know  a  servant  of  God  who  told  me  that  he  always  made  it  a  rule  to  be  in 
his  place  in  church  at  least  five  minutes  before  the  service  began.  That  gave  him 
time,  he  said,  to  calm  his  mind,  and  to  look  into  his  own  heart.    The  good  seed  th§n 


89«  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xii.  1— 87. 

fell  on  prepared  ground,  and  he  mid  that  whenertr  he  did  not  do  H^  he  did  not  get  at 

•11  w  mudi  benefit  from  the  serrice. 

"  What  a  Friend  we  have  in  Jeani, 

All  onr  Bins  and  griefa  to  bear  I 
What  a  privilege  to  carry 

Eveiything  to  Ood  in'prayerl 
Oh,  what  peace  we  often  forfeit. 

Oh,  what  needless  pain  we  beai,— 
All  because  we  do  not  carry 

Everything  to  God  in  prayer  I" 

Hezekiah's  confidence  in  God  had  two  results.  (1)  It  encouraged  othert.  He  gathemd 
the  captains  of  war  together  in  the  street,  and  said  tothejn,  "  Be  strong  and  courageoiis, 
be  not  afraid  nor  dismayed  for  the  King  of  Assyria,  nor  for  all  the  multitude  that  is 
with  him :  for  the/re  be  more  vnth  us  than  with  him :  with  him  is  an  arm  of  flesh ; 
hut  with  us  is  the  Lord  our  Ood  to  help  us,  and  to  fight  our  battles"  (2  Chron.  xxxii. 
7,  8.).  And  so  great  was  the  confidence  which  the  words  of  the  Ving  inspired,  that  we 
are  told  that  all  the  people  rested  themselves  upon  the  words  of  Hezekiah  King  of 
Judah.  What  a  power  the  quiet  influence  of  one  believing  man  can  exercise !  What 
a  power  it  gives  us  to  live  near  to  God  I  (2)  Their  confidence  was  not  misplaced. 
God's  people  never  trust  in  him  in  vain.  Hezekiah's  prayer  was  answered.  That  very 
night  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  out  and  smote  in  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians  a  hundred 
and  eighty-five  thousand  men. 

"  Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  when  mmmer  is  green. 
That  host  with  their  banners  at  sunset  were  seen  : 
Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  when  autumn  hath  blown. 
That  host  on  the  morrow  lay  wither'd  and  strown. 

**  For  the  Angel  of  Death  spread  his  wings  on  the  blast, 
And  breathed  in  the  face  of  the  foe  as  he  pass'd ; 
And  the  eyes  of  the  sleepers  wax'd  deadly  and  chill. 
And  their  hearbs  but  once  heuvcd,  and  for  ever  were  still  t 

"  And  the  wiflowa  of  Asshur  are  loud  in  their  wail. 
And  the  idols  are  broke  in  the  temple  of  Baal ; 
And  the  might  of  the  Gentile,  unsmote  by  the  sword. 
Hath  melted  like  snow  in  the  glance  of  the  liOrdl " 

Let  us  learn  from  this  lesson  that  there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  Grod.  Let  na  ask 
his  help  and  guidance  in  every  undertaking  and  event  of  life.  Let  us  abide  in  his 
presence  continually.  Let  us  cling  closer  to  the  Bock  of  Ages.  And  then,  come  weal 
or  come  woe,  come  sickness  or  come  health,  come  adversity  or  come  success,  we  shall 
always  be  resigned  to  our  Father's  will,  and  shall  possess  within  our  hearts  the  peace 
which  passeth  all  understanding. — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — 37. — A  nation's  oalamitiei,  cotmseUm;  and  Ood.  "  And  It  came  to  pass, 
when  King  Hezekiah  heard  it,  that  he  rent  his  clothes,"  etc.  Our  purpose  in  our  sketches 
on  this  book  has  not  allowed  us  to  inquire  into  all  the  minute  particulars  of  the 
characters  or  events  recorded,  or  into  the  authorship  of  the  hook,  or  into  the  right  of 
the  prophet  or  prophets  so  frequently  to  say,  "Thus  saith  the  Lor.i,"  but  simply  in 
the  briefest  way  to  develop  for  practical  purposes  the  truths  either  expressed  or 
suggested.  In  this  chapter  we  have  three  momentous  events  recorded — the  terrible 
calamity  to  which  Jerusalem  was  exposed ;  the  utter  destruction  of  the  Assyrian  army ; 
and  the  death  of  Sennacherib  the  Assyrian  despot.  The  whole  should  be  read  in 
connection  with  Isa.  xxxvii.  We  have  here  for  notice  four  subjects  of  thought — the 
exposure  of  a  nation  to  an  overwhelming  calamity ;  the  blessing  to  a  nation  of  a  ruler 
who  looks  to  Heaven  for  help;  the  advantage  to  a  nation  of  a  truly  wise  counsellor;  and 
the  strength  of  a  nation  that  has  the  true  God  on  its  side. 

L  Thk  exfosube  or  Jl  nation  to  an  overwhelmino  oalahtft.  1.  The  natun  ot 
the  threatened  calamity.  It  was  the  invasion  of  the  King  of  Assyria.  This  was 
announced  in  startling  tonus  and  in  a  haughty  and  ruthless  s]HTit  hy  the  messengers 


OH.  xn.  1—37.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGEt  897 

of  Sennacherib.  "  Thns  shall  ye  speak  to  Hezekiab  King  of  Judah,  saying,  Let  not 
thy  God  in  whom  thou  trustest  deceive  thee,  sayisg,  Jerusalem  shall  not  he  delivered 
into  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Assyria.  Behold,  thou  hast  heard  what  the  kings 
of  Assyria  have  done  to  all  lands,  by  destroying  them  utterly:  and  shalt  thou  he 
delivered?  Have  the  gods  of  the  nations 'delivered  them  which  my  fathers  have 
destroyed  ?  "  (vers.  10 — 13).  The  danger  was  near  at  hand.  Sennacherib  was  on  his 
way  with  his  hundred  and  four  score  and  five  thousand  men.  The  tramplings  of  the 
war-horses  and  the  rattling  of  the  armour  would  soon  be  heard  in  Jerusalem.  The 
utter  destruction  of  the  city  was  contemplated,  and  seemed  rapidly  approaching.  In 
a  &r  worse  position  was  the  kingdom  of  Judah  at  this  moment  than  was  England 
when  the  Spanish  Armada  was  approaching  our  shores.  2.  The  influence  ^  tlit 
threatened  calamity.  (1)  It  struck  the  kingdom  with  a  crushing  terror.  "  And  it 
came  to  pass,  when  King  Hezekiah  heard  it,  that  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  covered 
himself  with  sackcloth,  and  went  into  the  house  of  the  Lord.  And  he  sent  Bliakim, 
which  was  over  the  household,  and  Shebna  the  scribe,  and  the  elders  of  the  priests, 
covered  with  sackcloth,  to  Isaiah  the  prophet  the  son  of  Amoz.  And  they  said  unto 
him,  Thus  saith  Hezekiah,  This  day  is  a  day  of  trouble"  (vers.  1 — 3).  The  rending 
of  the  "  clothes"  and  the  arraying  in  "  sackcloth  "  were  symbols  to  express  the  horror  of 
the  heart.  (2)  It  struck  the  kingdom  with  a  helpless  feebleness.  "  This  day  is  a  day 
of  trouble,  and  of  rebuke,  and  blasphemy :  for  the  children  are  come  to  the  birth,  and 
there  is  not  strength  to  bring  forth  "  (ver.  3).  "  The  image  is  that  of  a  parturient  woman 
whose  streogth  is  exhausted,  whose  powers  are  paralyzed,  at  the  moment  when  she 
required  to  put  forth  a  vigorous  effort.  The  expression  in  which  the  message  was 
conveyed  to  the  prophet  described,  by  a  strong  figure,  the  desperate  condition  of  the 
kingdom,  togetiier  with  the  utter  inabihty  of  the  people  to  help  themselves;  and  it 
intimated  also  a  hope  that  the  blasphemous  deSance  of  Jehovah's  power  by  the  impious 
Assyrian  might  lead  to  some  direct  interposition  for  the  vindication  of  his  honour  and 
supremacy  to  all  heathen  gods."  Here  is  utter  national  helplessness  in  a  terrible 
national  calamity. 

IL  The  blbssino  to  a  nation  of  a  rulek  who  looks  to  Heaven  fob  help. 
What,  in  the  wretched  condition  of  his  country,  does  King  Hezekiah  do  ?  He  invokes 
the  merciful  interposition  of  Heaven.  When  the  messengers  came  to  Hezekiah  with  a 
threatening  letter  from  the  King  of  Assyria  (see  vers.  10 — 13),  what  did  the  monarch 
do?  He  took  it  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  there  prayed.  "And  Hezekiah 
received  the  letter  of  the  hand  of  the  messengers,  and  read  it :  and  Hezekiah  went 
up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  spread  it  before  the  Lord.  And  Hezekiah  prayed 
before  the  Lord,  and  said,  0  Lord  God  of  Israel,"  etc.  (vers.  14 — 19).  In  this 
wonderful  prayer :  1.  Se  adores  the  God  whom,  Sennacherib  had  hlasphemed.  Ho 
addresses  him  as  the  "  God  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,"  the  Maker  of  "  heaven 
and  earth,"  the  one  and  only  Lord.  2.  Ee  implores  the  Almighty  /or  his  mrni  sake  to 
deliver  the  country.  "  Now  therefore,  0  Lord  our  God,  I  beseech  thee,  save  thou  us 
out  of  his  hand,  that  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  may  know  that  thou  art  the  Lord 
God,  even  thou  only."  "  The  best  pleas  in  prayer,"  says  an  old  author,  "  are  those 
that  are  taken  from  God's  own  honour;  therefore  the  Lord's  prayer  begins  with 
*  Hallowed  be  thy  Name,'  and  concludes, '  Thine  be  the  glory.' "  Who  is  the  greatest 
human  king?  Not  the  man  who  relies  on  his  own  power  and  skill  to  protect  his 
nation  from  danger,  and  seeks  to  secure  it  in  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  all  its 
rights ;  nor  the_  king  who  looks  to  his  armies  and  navies  in  time  of  need ;  but  he  who 
practically  realize*!  his  dependence  upon  the  "  Lord "  that  made  heaven  and  earth. 
Reverence  for  the  Infinite  is  the  soul  of  true  royalty. 

III.  The  advantage  to  a  nation  of  a  tbult  wise  oounsellob.  Apart  from  his 
inspiration,  Isaiah  may  be  fairly  taken  in  this  case  as  the  representative  of  a  wise 
counsellor,  and  that  for  two  reasons.  1.  Ee  looked  to  heaven  rather  than  to  earth  for 
his  wisdom.  "  Then  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  sent  to  Hezekiah,  saying.  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel,  That  which  thou  hast  prayed  to  me  against  Sennacherib  King  of 
Assyria  I  have  heard.  This  is  the  word  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken  concerning  him  " 
(vers.  20,  21).  The  counsel  which  he  had  to  give  he  here  declares  to  have  come  from 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel.  How  the  wisdom  was  conveyed  to  him,  whether  by  an 
outward  voice  or  an  inner  vision,  does  not  appear ;  he  had  it  from  heaven.    He  only 


898  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.       [ch.  xhl  1—87. 

is  the  true  counsellor  of  men  who  gets  his  wisdom  from  above.  Whence  do  the 
advisers  of  sovereigns  get  their  instructions  ?  From  hoary  precedents  or  the  fallibis 
conclusions  of  their  own  feeble  minds;  and  not  directly  from  above.  Hence  tho 
incessant  blunders  of  cabinets,  and  the  scandal  in  these  days  of  one  political  party 
denouncing  the  blunders  and  professing  to  correct  the  mistakes  of  the  other.  2.  What 
he  received  from  heaven  he  communicated  to  men.  In  the  communication :  (1)  "  Sen- 
nacherib is  apostrophized  in  a  highly  poetic  strain  admirably  descriptive  of  the  turgid 
vanity,  haughty  pretensions,  and  heartless  impiety  of  this  despot.  'The  virgin  tiie 
daughter  of  Zion  hath  despised  thee,  and  laughed  thee  to  scorn;  the  daughter  of 
Jerusalem  hath  shaken  her  head  at  thee,'  etc.  (vers.  21 — 28).  (2)  Hezekiah  himself 
is  personally  addressed,  and  a  sign  given  him  of  coming  deliverance.  He  is  told  that 
for  two  years  the  presence  of  the  enemy  would  interrupt  the  peaceful  pursuits  of 
husbandry,  but  in  the  third  year  the  people  would  be  in  circumstances  to  till  the 
earth,  plant  the  vineyards,  and  reap  the  fruits,  as  formerly.  '  And  this  shall  be  a  sign 
unto  thee,  Ye  shall  eat  this  year  such  things  as  grow  of  themselves,  and  in  the  second 
year  that  which  springeth  of  the  same ;  and  in  the  third  year  sow  ye,  and  reap,  and 
plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruits  thereof,'  etc.  (vers.  29 — 31).  (3)  The  issue  of 
Sennacherib's  invasion  is  announced.  'Thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning  the  King 
of  Assyria,  He  shall  not  come  into  this  city,  nor  shoot  an  arrow  there,  nor  come  before 
it  with  shield,  nor  cast  a  bank  against  it.  By  the  way  that  he  came,  by  the  same 
■hall  he  return,'  etc.  (vers.  32 — 34)  "  (Dr.  Jamieson).  Such  was  the  communication 
which,  in  language  passionate,  poetic,  and  powerful,  Isaiah  made  to  this  perplexed  and 
terrified  nation.  It  involves  two  things :  (a)  the  deliverance  of  his  country ;  (i)  the 
ruin  of  the  despot. 

IV.  Thk  stbbnqth  of  a  hation  that  has  Gk)D  on  its  bide.  Who  delivered  the 
imperilled  nation?  Who  overwhelmed  the  despot?  "The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts." 
"  And  it  came  to  pass  that  night,  that  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  out,  and  smote  in 
the  camp  of  the  Assyrians  an  hundred  four  score  and  five  thousand :  and  when  they 
arose  early  in  the  morning,  behold,  they  were  all  dead  corpses,"  etc  (vers.  35 — 37). 
Who  was  the  "  angel  of  the  Lord  "  ?  Was  it  some  transcendent  personality,  or  some 
tremendous  force  in  nature,  such  as  a  pestiferous  blast,  or  an  electric  bolt  ?  It  matters 
not;  the  "angel"  was  but  the  instrument  in  the  hand  of  God.  1.  Sow  swiftly  was 
fhe  deliverance  effected t  "That  night."  What  a  night  was  that!— one  of  the  most 
memorable  nights  of  the  world.  Perhaps  the  whole  was  effected  even  in  one  single 
hour,  or  even  in  one  instant  of  that  night.  2.  How  terrible  fhe  ruin  which  that 
deliverance  effected/  "An  hundred  four  score  and  five  thousand  men"  destroyed.  At 
nighty  a  glittering  array ;  in  the  morning,  "dead  corpses." 

*  Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  when  summer  is  grees, 
That  host  with  their  twnners  at  sunset  were  seen : 
Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  when  autumn  bath  blowup 

'   That  host  on  the  morrow  lay  wither'd  and  strown." 

n^w  rapidly  God  can  do  his  work  I  he  can  annihilate  a  universe  in  the  twinkling  of 
an  eye.  Behold  a  mystery!  Why  should  these  hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  b« 
thus  destroyed  on  account  of  the  conduct  of  one  man-»Sennacherib  ? 

"  God  is  his  own  Interpreter, 
And  he  will  make  it  plain." 

The  forty-sixth  psalm  Is  supposed  to  he  the  triumphant  outburst  of  the  delivered 
people.  "  God  is  our  Befuge  and  Strength,  a  very  present  Help  in  trouble.  .  .  .  The 
heathen  raged,  the  kingdoms  were  moved :  he  ottered  his  voice,  the  earth  melted.* 
This  Sennacherib,  this  ruthless  despot,  does  not  seem  to  have  fallen  with  the  others. 
His  body  was  not  found  amongst  tiie  dead  corpses.  Albeit,  he  did  not  escape. 
"So  Sennacherib  King  of  Assyria  departed,  and  went  and  returned,  and  dwelt  at 
Kineveh.  And  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  was  worshipping  in  the  house  of  Nisroch  his 
BroA,  that  Adrammeleoh  and  Sharezer  his  sons  smote  him  with  the  sword :  and  they 
Mcaped  into  the  land  of  Armenia.  And  Esarhaddon  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead " 
(vers.  86,  87).  What  greator  calami^  could  befall  a  man  Qkaa  to  be  murdered  \^  hia 
•WB  sou?— D,  % 


OH.  XK.  1—37.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  S99 


Vers.  1 — 7. — Hezelc{ah  and  Isaiah.  The  messengeis  whom  Hezekiah  had  lent 
havicg  returned  and  reported  to  him  the  words  of  Babshakeh  (ch,  xviii.  37),  the  king 
was  plunged  in  unspeakable  distress.  We  have  now  to  observe  his  behaviour  in  his 
trouble. 

I.  Hezekiar's  ORIS!'.  1.  Se  assumed  'the  ligna  of  deepest  mourning.  The 
messengers  had  come  to  him  with  their  clothes  rent.  Hezekit^  now  rent  his  clothes, 
and  covered  himself  with  sackcloth.  His  humiliation  was  sincere.  The  words  he  had 
heard  had  knocked  from  under  him  his  last  hope  of  help  &om  man.  He  felt  that  God's 
"chastisement"  (ver.  3)  was  upon  him,  and  that  God  alone  could  deliver.  This 
moment  of  the  realization  of  his  helplessness  was  also  the  moment  of  the  return  of 
God's  favour  to  him.  To  this  point  it  had  been  God's  aim  to  bring  him,  and  now  that 
he  threw  himself  in  his  utter  weakness  on  God's  strength,  deliverance  was  assured. 
2.  Besought  Qod  in  his  sanctuary.  . He  "  went  into  the  house  of  the  Lord."  Thither 
also  Asaph  had  gone  in  his  hour  of  trouble,  and  there  his  difficulties  were  removed 
(Fs.  Ixxiii.  17).  Hezekiah  no  doubt  sought  the  sanctuary  for  purposes  of  prayer.  We 
see  him  do  the  same  thing  on  receipt  of  Sennacherib's  letter  (ver.  14).  We  have 
every  encouragement  to  come  to  God  with  our  troubles  (Ps.  xci.  16),  and  nothing 
soothes  the  heart  like  pouring  out  all  our  sorrows  before  him  (PhiL  iv.  6,  7).  Prayer 
is  the  soul's  best  resort  in  times  of  extremity, 

II.  The  deputation  to  Isaiah.  In  addition  to  praying  himself  to  God,  Hezekiah 
sent  an  honourable  deputation  to  Isaiah,  to  request  his  intercession  for  the  city.'  1.  He 
sends  to  Ood's  prophet.  Possibly  for  some  time  Hezekiah  and  Isaiah  had  not  seen 
much  of  each  other.  The  prophet's  counsels  had  proved  distastefuL  His  denunciations 
of  the  alliance  with  Egypt  cannot  have  been  received  with  favour  (Isa.  xxx.).  His 
advice  certainly  had  not  been  taken;  nor  can  it  have  been  with  his  approval  that 
Hezekiah  made  his  ill-fated  submission  to  Sennacherib.  Now,  in  the  hour  of  trouble, 
Hezekiah  sends  once  more  to  him.  He  sends  his  highest  officers — ^the  same  who  had 
conferred  with  Babshakeh — and  the  elders  of  the  priests.  All  went  covered  with 
sackcloth,  in  token  of  their  grief,  penitence,  and  humiliation  of  heart.  This  is  what 
often  happens.  God's  servants  are  not  appreciated  till  the  hour  of  real  need  comes ; 
then  men  are  glad  to  get  their  counsels  and  their  prayers.  It  would  be  well  if,  in  the 
conduct  of  state  affairs,  respect  were  paid  to  the  counsels  of  religion  earlier.  It  would 
save  many  a  bitter  hour  afterwards.  2.  Se  makes  full  confession  of  his  sad  estate. 
A  crisis  had  come  in  which  there  was  no  ray  of  human  hope.  From  Hezekiah's  side 
it  was  a  day  of  '*  trouble  "—of  deep  distress  and  mortification ;  from  God's  side  it  was 
a  day  of  " chastisement "  (Hos.  v.  2,  "I  am  a  Bebuker  of  them  all");  from  the  side 
of  the  Assyrian,  it  was  a  day  of  "  blasphemy  " — of  impious  vaunting  against  Jehovah. 
And  like  a  woman  in  pains  of  childbirth,  without  strength  for  delivery,  they  had  no 
means  of  bringing  themselves  out  of  their  perilous  position.  "  The  metaplior  expresses 
in  the  most  affecting  manner,  the  ideas  of  extreme  pain,  imminent  danger,  critical 
emergency,  utter  weakness,  and  entire  dependence  on  the  aid  of  others  "  (Alexander). 
The  spirit  of  self-trust  is  now  utterly  slain.  In  making  this  confession,  Hezekiah 
owned  that  Isaiah  was  right,  and  he  had  all  along  been  wrong.  3.  He  entreats  the 
prophefs  prayers.  Hezekiah's  one  hope  now  was  that,  for  his  own  glory's  sake, 
Jehovah  would  "  reprove  "  the  blasphemous  words  which  Babshakeh  had  uttered,  and 
he  besought  Isaiah  to  lift  up  his  prayer  for  the  remnant  of  Jews  still  left.  It  is  a 
true  instinct  of  the  soul  which  leads  us  to  seek  the  intercession  on  our  behalf  of  those 
who  stand  nearer  to  God  than  ourselves.  "  The  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous 
man  availeth  much "  (Jas.  v.  16).  Thus  Pharaoh  besought  Moses  to  intercede  for 
him  (Exod.  viii.  8,  28 ;  x.  16) ;  Moses  on  various  occasions)  interceded  for  the  people 
(Exod.  xxxiL  30—33;  Deut.  ix.  12—20);  Elijah  interceded  for  the  land  of  Israel 
(1  Kings  xviii.  11 — 45);  the  high  priest  interceded  for  the  tribes;  and  Christ  now 
intercedes  for  us  (Bom.  viii.  34 ;  1  John  ii.  1).  We  cannot  lay  too  much  stress  on 
the  power  of  prayer,  nor  be  too  anxious  to  get  an  interest  in  the  prayers  of  the  holy. 
Hezekiah  did  well  in  joining  with  his  own  prayers  this  request  for  the  mtercession  of 
Isaiah. 

in.  Thb  pbophkt'b  beflt.  We  have  already  and  frequently  seen  how  ready  God 
la  to  respond  to  the  fidntest  movements  of  the  soul  towards  him.  The  prophet  did 
BOt  lend  those  who  now  sought  him  away  without  comfort.    He  gave  them :  1.  A 


400  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xix.  1— 37. 

toori  of  *n9(mragement.  "Be  not  afraid,"  etc.  In  his  own  Iieroic  trust  Isaiah  had 
never  faltered.  Such  trnst  is  contagious.  The  words  which  Isaiah  spoke  would  send 
a  new  thrill  of  hope  to  the  hearts  of  the  messengers.  How  manrellous  a  thing  is  faith 
in  God!  How  it  supports  a  man's  own  soul,  lifts  him  above  ordinary,  and  even 
extraordinary,  discouragements, 'and  makes  him  firm  as  a  rock  when  others  are 
trembling  and  despairing  around  (cf.  Fs.  xlvi.)l  2.  An  assurance  of  deliverance.  In 
the  name  of  God,  Isaiah  was  able  to  give  them,  further,  an  assurance  that  Sennacherib 
would  do  them  no  hurt.  God  would  put  a  spirit  in  him,  and  would  cause  him  to  hear 
tidings  which  would  make  him  depart  into  his  own  land,  and  there  he  would  perish 
with  the  sword.  Nothing  is  said  as  yet  of  the  destruction  of  the  army,  unless,  indeed, 
it  is  the  tidings  of  that  which  Sennacherib  was  to  hear.  Another  boasting  message  of 
Sennacherib  and  another  prayer  of  Hezekiah  come  in  between  this  promise  and  the 
final  and  fuller  one. — J.  0. 

Vers.  8 — 19. — SennacherWs  letter.  While  the  foregoing  events  were  taking  place, 
Eabshakeh  had  returned  to  his  royal  master.  The  siege  of  Lachish  had  been  con- 
cluded— adding  another  to  the  score  of  victories — and  Sennacherib  was  now  at  Libnah, 
Here  the  news  came  that  Tirhakah  was  on  his  march  against  him,  and  naturally 
Sennacherib  wished  to  secure  the  capitulation  of  Jerusalem  before  the  Etiiiopian  could 
arrive.  -  To  this  end  he  sent  another  message  to  Hezekiah — this  time  in  the  form  of 
a  letter — ^renewing  the  attempt  to  frighten  the  Jewish  king  into  surrender. 

I.  Sbnnacheeib's  pboud  boastings.  The  letter  is  an  echo  of  the  speech  of  Eab- 
shakeh, and  is  couched  in  the  same  boastful  spirit.  1.  He  makes  light  of  the  power  of 
Jehovah.  "  Let  not  thy  God  in  whom  thou  trustest  deceive  thee,"  etc.  Sennacherib 
assumes  that  Hezekiah  may  have  received  true  oracles  from  his  God,  but  he  warns 
him  not  to  trust  them.  In  his  arrogance,  he  defies  all  gods  as  well  as  men.  To  him 
Jehovah  was  but  one  god  among  many — the  god  of  one  small  nation — not  for  a 
moment  to  be  compared  with  the  powerful  Asshur.  His  idea  of  the  morality  of  the 
gods  is  seen  in  the  supposition  that  they  practised  deceit  upon  their  worshippers. 

2.  He  extols  his  own  prowess.  He  again  recounts  the  victories  which  he  and  previous 
kings  of  Assyria  had  gained.  Their  conquests  had  extended  to  all  lands ;  gods  and 
kings  had  everywhere  gone  down  before  them:  how  should  Hezekiah  escape ?  As  an 
induction,  Sennacherib's  argument  seems  very  complete.  The  countries  he  names  had 
been  conquered ;  their  gods  had  not  availed  to  save  them ;  their  kings  had  been  over- 
thrown.   Logic  seemed  on  his  side.    Only  faith  could  furnish  a  sufficient  answer. 

3.  He  is  certain  lieforehand  of  victory.  In  his  assurance  that  he  would  overcome 
Hezekiah,  Sennacherib  is  the  type  of  many  boasters.  Often  has  the  voice  of  the 
adversary  been  raised  in  exultation  at  his  prospective  victory  over  the  people  of  God. 
Paganism,  Mohammedanism,  and  infidelity  have  each  boasted  that  they  would  extinguish 
Christianity.  Voltaire  predicted  that  in  a  century  from  his  time  the  Bible  would  be 
fotmd  only  in  antiquarian  libraries.  The  same  scoffer  said  that  it  took  twelve  men  to 
found  Christianity,  but  he  would  show  that  one  man  was  sufficient  to  overthrow  it. 
Modern  unbelieving  science  sometimes  speaks  in  the  same  strain.  The  argument 
per  enumerationem  is  often  employed,  as  it  was  by  Sennacherib.  All  other  religions 
show  a  tendency  to  collapse ;  their  miracles  are  exploded,  belief  in  witchcraft,  etc., 
disappears  before  the  march  of  enlightenment;  therefore  Christianity  cannot  hope  to 
stand.  But  arrogance  is  a  bad  prophet.  " Before  honour  is  humility;"  but  "pride 
goeth  before  destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall "  (Prov.  xvi.  18 ;  xviii.  12). 
It  was  so  with  Sennacherib,  and  it  will  be  found  to  be  so  by  his  modern  imitators. 

II.  Hbzekiah's  pbateb.  When  Hezekiah  received  this  insulting  epistle,  he  went  ae 
before  to  the  temple,  and  spread  it  out  before  the  Lord.  He  did  as  we  should  all  do 
with  our  troubles,  carried  it  straight  to  the  presence-chamber.  God  in  truth  knows  all 
we  have  need  of  before  we  ask  him;  but  that  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  present 
our  petitions.  God  knew  all  that  was  in  this  boastful  letter ;  but  that  was  no  reason 
why  Hezekiah  should  not  place  it  before  him,  and  make  its  contents  the  basis  of  his 
prayer.  The  prayer  he  oflFered  contained :  1.  An  acknowledgment  of  God's  supremacy. 
To  Sennacherib's  false  idea  of  Jehovah,  Hezekiah  opposes  the  true  one.  The  Lord  God 
of  Israel  was  no  local  deity,  but  the  God  of  the  whole  earth.  (1)  He  is  the  Otoi  ol 
revelation.    "  0  Lord  God  of  Israel,  which  sittest  upon  the  cherubim."    It  was  becauM 


OB.  xo.  1—37.]       TH£!  S£COKt>  BOOS  OF  TBE  EINQS.  4dl 

God  had  revealed  himself  to  lerael,  and  dwelt  in  glory  above  the  mercy-seat  whereon 
Btood  the  cherubim,  that  Hezekiab  had  come  to  the  temple  to  offer  up  this  supplication. 
Communion  with  God  rests  on  God's  revelation  of  himself  to  man.  Only  as  God  has 
revealed  his  Being  to  us,  and  dwells  among  us  in  mercy,  are  we  able  to  approach  him. 
An  unknown  or  unknowable  God  can  call  forth  no  trust.  (2)  He  ia  the  God  of  provi- 
dence. "  Thou  art  the  God,  even  thou  alone,  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth."  This 
is  involved  in  the  name  Jehovah,  which  denotes  God  as  the  Being  who  is,  and  remains 
oue  with  himself  in  all  that  he  thinks,  purposes,  and  does.  His  rule  is  unlimited ;  all 
events,  great  and  small,  are  imder  his  control ;  his  counsel  is  the  one  stable  factor  in 
history.  This  conception  of  the  supremacy  of  God  in  providence  is  involved  in  the 
knowledge  he  has  given  us  of  himself  in  grace.  (3)  He  is  the  God  of  nature.  "  Thou 
hast  made  heaven  and  earth."  This  agaia  is  involved  in  the  truth  of  God's  unlimited 
rule  in  providence,  for  only  the  Maker  of  the  world  can  be  its  absolute  Ruler.  Bevers- 
ing  the  order  of  thought— oidy  because  God  is  the  Almighty  Maker  of  heaven  and 
earth,  is  he  the  Lord  in  providence ;  and  because  he  is  Lord  in  nature  and  providence, 
he  can  do  all  things  for  us  in  grace  (Ps.  cxxi.  1,  2 ;  cxxxv.  5,  6).  2.  An  expotiire  of 
Sennacherib's  fallacy.  Hezekiab  does  not  dispute  the  facts  recited  by  Sennacherib,  nor 
does  he  attempt  to  belittle  them  in  any  way.  "  Of  a  truth,  Lord,"  he  says,  "  the  kings 
of  Assyria  have  destroyed  the  nations  and  their  lands."  No  good  can  come  of  refusing 
to  look  facts  in  the  face.  It  has  often  happened  in  apologetics  that  the  attempt  has 
been  made  to  deny,  explain  away,  or  minimize  the  force  of  facts  which  were  supposed 
to  con6ict  with  religious  truth — facts  of  geology,  e.g.,  or  facts  of  history  or  human 
nature  which  did  not  square  with  religious  doctrine.  This  procedure  is  unwise,  and 
invariably  recoils  to  the  injury  of  religion.  We  are  entitled  to  ask  for  proof  of  alleged 
facts,  and  to  suspend  our  judgment  till  such  proof  Js  given ;  but  when  the  facts  are 
established,  they  should  be  frankly  admitted,  and  our  theories  widened  to  find  room  for 
them.  Truth  in  one  department  can  never  conflict  with  truth  in  another,  and  religion, 
resting  on  its  own  strong  foundations,  can  afford  to  deal  fairly  with  every  class  of 
evidence.  Hezekiab  did  not  dispute  Sennacherib's  facts ;  but  he  put  his  finger  at  once 
upon  the  fallacy  of  Sennacherib's  argument.  The  Assyrians  had  indeed  conquered  these 
many  nations,  and  cast  their  gods  into  the  fire ;  but  why  ?  Because  they  were  no  gods, 
but  the  work  of  men's  hands,  wood  and  stone.  Therefore  they  had  destroyed  them. 
It  was  different  when  they  had  to  deal  with  the  true  God,  the  Maker  of  heaven  and 
earth.  The  error  of  modem  unbelief  is  distinguishable  from,  yet  kindred  with,  the 
error  of  Sennacherib.  Sennacherib  attributed  a  reality  to  his  gods;  unbelief  allows 
none.  Tet  it  agrees  with  Sennacherib  in  denying  to  Jehovah  his  true  character  as  the 
one  living  God  of  nature,  providence,  and  grace.  Faith,  coming  to  God,  believes  "  that 
he  is,  and  that  he  is  the  Bewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him "  (Heb.  xi.  6). 
Denying  this  truth,  unbelief  scoffs  at  religion,  at  the  Bible  revelation,  at  prayer,  provi- 
dence, miracles,  redemption.  It  treats  the  confidence  of  Christians  in  their  God  aa 
illusory,  anticipates  the  downfall  of  their  system,  and  mocks  at  their  hopes  of  immor- 
tality. Its  arguments,  often  cogent  enough  if  there  is  no  living  God,  lose  all  force  the 
moment  faith  in  God  reasserts  itself.  3.  An  argument  for  OocTs  interpontion.  Having 
shown  his  grounds  for  the  belief  that  God  con  interpose,  Hezekiah  urges  two  reasons 
why  he  $hould  interpose.  (1)  The  first  is  the  honour  of  his  own  Name.  The  fact  that 
Sennacherib  had  in  his  pride  and  ignorance  thus  "  reproached  the  living  God  "  was  a 
reason  why  God  should  reveal  himself  in  his  true  character  for  Sennacherib's  discom- 
fiture. The  blasphemous  pride  of  the  creature  exalting  itself  against  the  Creator  should 
be  brought  low.  (2)  A  second  reason  was  that,  by  saving  his  people  from  Sennacherib, 
Jehovah  would  give  a  grand  lesson  of  his  sole  Deity  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth ; 
"  That  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  may  know  that  thou  art  the  Lord  God,  even  thou 
only."  It  is  God's  glory  which  Hezekiah  puts  in  the  foreground.  He  had  no  plea  of 
merit  to  urge,  either  his  own  or  the  nation's ;  therefore  he  can  but  ask  Qod  to  be  merciful 
to  them  for  his  own  Name's  sake. — J.  0. 

Vers.  20 — 34. — Laidh'$  oracle.    God  is  the  Hearer  of  prayer.    As  in  the  case  of 

Daniel  (Dan.  iz.  20),  while  Hezekiah  was  still  speaking,  an  answer  was  sent  to  him 

through  Isaiah  the  prophet  (cf.  oh.  xx.  4).    Thus  also  answers  to  prayer  were  sent  in 

the  cases  of  Paul  (Acta  iz.  10—18)  and  Cornelius  (Aets  x.  1—8).    Isaiah  was  the  one 

n.  Korok  2  d 


40a  THS  BEOOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [on.  xix.  1—37. 

Person  whose  fiuth  had  remained  unshaken  through  all  this  crisis.  But  it  is  not  merely 
saiah's  confidence  which  speaks  in  this  composition.  He  brought  to  the  king  a  direct 
"  word  of  God."  His  oracle  ia  one  of  surpassing  beauty,  grand  and  sustained  in  Btyle, 
and  expressing  the  greatest  truths. 

I.  Zion'b  debision  of  the  inyadeb.  The  introductory  picture  ii  very  striking. 
The  dty  Jerusalem  is  represented  as  a  maiden,  standing  on  a  height,  derision  imprinted 
on  every  feature,  shaking  her  head,  and  sending  out  bursts  of  mocking  laughter  after 
the  retreating  Sennacherib.  Is  she  insane  ?  Sio  to  the  world  it  might  have  seemed. 
Insane  at  least  it  might  appear  to  draw  such  a  picture  at  a  time  when  the  condition  of 
the  city  seemed  past  salvation.  But  faith's  manifestations  often  seem  like  madness  to 
the  worldly  (Acts  zxvi.  24 ;  2  Cor.  t.  13).  Faith  triumphs  beforehand  over  all  the 
power  of  the  enemy  (Luke  x.  19,  20).  It  does  not  need  to  wait  to  see  their  overthrow ; 
it  is  assured  of  it  as  if  it  had  already  happened.  The  strength  of  faith  is  seen  in  the 
degree  in  which  it  enables  its  possessor  to  rise  above  adverse  circumstances.  In  its 
higher  reaches  it  can  not  only  hope  and  wait,  but  exults  and  treats  the  threats  of  the 
enemy  with  ridicule  and  scorn  (cf.  Ps.  ii.  4).  - 

n.  Seitkaoeebib  ab  glassed  IK  HIS  OWN  ETES.  Jehovah  next  asserts  himself  as 
"  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,"  and  takes  Sennacherib  to  task  for  his  blasphemien  against 
him.  He  puts  language  into  Sennacherib's  lips  poetically  expressive  of  that  monarch's 
lofty  ideas  of  his  own  power.  Alluding  both  to  what  he  has  done  and  to  what  he 
intends  to  do,  Sennacherib  boasts, "  With  the  multitude  of  my  chariots  I  am  come  up  to 
the  height  of  the  mountains. ...  I  have  digged  and  drunk  strange  waters ;  and  with  the 
sole  of  my  feet  will  I  dry  up  all  the  rivers  of  Egypt."  The  meaning  is  that  no  obstacles 
of  nature  can  prevent  the  accomplishment  of  his  designs.  Mountains  like  Lebanon 
cannot  stop  his  march ;  he  will  find  water  even  in  the  desert ;  Egypt's  rivers  will  be 
trodden  disdainfiilly  tmderfoot.  His  chariots  pass  over  all  heights;  cedar  trees  and 
fir  trees  fall  before  him ;  he  penetrates  to  the  farthest  lodging-place  and  most  fruitful 
region  of  the  country.  It  is  "  I,"  Sennacherib  says,  "  who  do  all  this."  Such  boasting 
is :  1.  Extravagant.  In  his  inflated  self-consciousness,  Sennacherib  sets  no  bounds  to 
what  he  can  accomplish.  His  language  is  exaggerated  and  hyperbolicaL  It  is  a  man 
puffing  himself  up  to  the  dimensions  of  a  god  (cf.  Isa.  x.  13, 14 ;  xiv.  13, 14 ;  Dan.  iv. 
30).  Napoleon  was  accustomed  to  use  similar  language  to  impress  the  minds  of  hia 
ignorant  enemies  (Bahr's  'Commentary  on  2  Kings,*  p.  226).  Only  in  part  is  this  extra- 
vagant self-assertion  delusion.  Those  who  give  vent  to  it  know  very  well  that  much  of 
it  is  theatrical  and  unreal— mere  froth  and  foam.  But  it  gratifies  their  pride  to  indulge 
in  it.  2.  Irrational.  This  on  two  grounds :  (1)  Even  granting  that  these  boastings 
rested  on  real  exploits,  such  self-exaltation  is  unbecoming  in  any  mortal.  The  mightiest 
conqueror  has  only  to  reflect  how  soon  he  will  become  weak  as  other  men  (Isa.  xiv. 
10 — ^17),  to  see  how  foolish  is  his  self-glorying.  (2)  The  past  is  an  unsafe  ground  for 
boasting  as  to  the  future.  Because  his  arms  £td  hitherto  been  so  uniformly  successful, 
Sennacherib  imagined  that  it  was  impossible  any  reverse  could  now  befall  him.  He 
had  got  into  his  head  the  idea  of  his  own  invincibility.  Napoleon  had  the  same  con- 
fidence in  the  invincibility  of  his  arms.  Experience  shows  the  baselessness  of  such 
confidence.  A  long  run  of  victories,  intoxicating  the  conqueror  with  his  own  success, 
is  generally  followed  by  a  disastrous  calamity.  The  castle  gets  built  up  too  high,  and  in 
the  end  topples  over.  Napoleon  learnt  this  at  Moscow  and  Waterloo.  Excessof  pride 
nsuallyends  in  an  overthrow.  3.  JmpiouB.  Sennacherib's  boastingB,  finally,  were  impious. 
It  was  the  creature  arrogating  to  himself  the  power  of  God.  Any  reference  to  Asshur 
Sennacherib  may  have  made  in  his  inscriptions  was  hut  a  thin  veil  to  coyer  his  self- 
glorying.  His  particular  blasphemies  against  the  God  of  Israel  arose  firom  ignorance  of 
Jehovah's  true  character.  He  thought  he  was  contending  against  the  petty  god  of  a 
small  tribe,  whereas  he  had  to  deal  with  "  the  Holy  One"  who  made  heaven  and  earth. 
Men's  mistakes  as  to  God  do  not  alter  the  realities  of  their  relation  to  him.  Because 
God  is  "  the  Holy  One,"  he  cannot  overlook  men's  impieties.  Holiness  is  the  principle 
which  guards  the  Divine  honour.  It  "  guards  the  eternal  distinction  between  Creator 
and  creature,  between  God  and  man,  in  the  imion  efiected  between  them;  it  preserves 
the  Divine  dignity  and  majesty  firom  being  infringed  upon"  (Martensen). 

III.  Sennaohebib  as  beheld  bt  God.  Vastly  difiTerent  from  Srnnacherib's  view 
•f  himaalf  wBB  the  visw  taken  of  him  by  God  hia  Maker.    1.  Sennackerib  »  men 


ea.  XII.  1—87.]   THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KiNGa  4M 

instrument  in  OocTs  hands/or  the  execution  of  hie  purposes.  "Hasl  thou  not  heard 
how  I  have  done  it  long  ago,  and  formed  it  of  ancient  times  ?  Now  hare  I  brought  it 
to  pass  that  thou  shouldest  be  to  lay  waste,"  etc.  Sennacherib  was  defying  Jehovah, 
but  it  was  this  God  who  from  eyerlasting  had  decreed  the  events  that  were  taking 
place,  and  had  assigned  to  Sennacherib  the  part  he  was  to  hear  in  them.  Here  was  a 
strange  reversal  of  Sennacherib's  ideas !  It  was  the  axe  boasting  itself  against  him 
that  heweth  herewith,  and  the  saw  magnifying  itself  against  him  that  shaketh  it,  and 
the  rod  shaking  itself  against  them  that  lift  it  up  (Isa.  x.  16).  This  is  the  truth 
which  ungodly  men  constantly  ignore.  They  exalt  themselves  against  God,  forgetful 
that,  without  God,  they  could  not  think  a  thought  or  move  a  finger ;  that  it  is  he  who 
gave  them  their  being,  and  continually  sustains  them ;  that  his  providence  girds  them 
round,  and  uses  them  as  executors  of  its  purposes ;  and  that  they  have  only  as  much 
power  as  he  chooses  to  give  them,  2.  Sis  successes  due  to  Ood.  "  Therefore  their 
inhabitants  were  of  small  power,"  etc.  Sennacherib  ascribed  all  his  victories  to  his  own 
prowess,  and  founded  on  them  an  argument  for  despising  Jehovah,  whereas  it  was  because 
Jehovah  had  prospered  him  that  he  had  gained  these  victories.  It  is  God  who  brings 
low,  and  lifts  up  (1  Sam.  ii.  7).  When  he  is  against  a  people,  their  strength  is  small, 
they  are  dismayed  and  confounded,  they  are  like  grass  that  withers,  and  blasted  grain. 
Sennacherib  did  not  understand  this,  and  took  all  the  glory  to  himself.  3.  Ood  pre- 
scribes the  limits  of  his  power.  As  the  Assyrian  was  thus  an  instrument  in  God's  hand, 
it  was  for  God  to  say  how  far  he  would  be  permitted  to  go.  The  limit  was  reached 
when  he  began  to  rage  and  blaspheme  against  the  power  which  controlled  him.  God 
had  heard  his  words  and  seen  his  doings.  "  I  know  thy  abode,  and  thy  going  out,  and 
thy  coming  in,  and  thy  rage  against  me."  He  had  done  enough.  The  curb  was  now 
to  be  applied.  Drawing  a  metaphor  from  Sennacherib's  own  treatment  of  his  captives, 
the  oracle  declared,  "  I  will  put  my  hook  in  thy  nose,  and  my  bridle  in  thy  lips,  and  I 
will  turn  thee  back  by  the  way  by  which  thou  camest."  The  prediction  was  soon  to  be 
fulfilled.  No  comfort  can  be  greater,  in  times  of  "  trouble,  and  rebuke,  and  blasphemy," 
than  to  know  that  the  hostile  powers  are  under  absolute  £)ivine  control,  and  that  they 
cannot  take  one  step  beyond  what  God  allows.  "  Surely  the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise 
thee :  the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  thou  restrain "  (Fs.  Ixxvi.  10).  When  men  turn 
against  God  in  open  blasphemy,  their  power  is  nearly  at  an  end. 

IV.  A  SIGN  TO  THE  PEOPLE.  1.  A  pledge  of  God's  favour.  The  immediate  sign  of 
the  truth  of  this  oracle  would  be  the  destruction'  of  the  invading  army,  which  was  to 
take  place  that  very  night.  But  as  a  further  pledge  of  complete  deliverance  from  the 
Assyrian— a  token  that  he  would  not  return — it  was  foretold  that  within  three  years 
the  whole  land  would  be  again  under  cultivation.  In  the  interval  the  people  would  be 
provided  for  by  that  which  grew  of  itself  Material  blessings  are  withdrawn  when  God 
frowns;  restored  when  he  smiles.  2.  The  remnant  would  take  root  and  increase.  The 
land  had  been  deplorably  thinned  by  invasion  and  captivity.  Had  the  process  gone  on 
much  longer,  Judah  would  have  disappeared,  as  Israel  had  done.  A  remnant,  however, 
would  be  saved,  and  this,  taking  root  downward,  and  hearing  fruit  upward,  would  by 
God's  blessing  so  multiply  and  strengthen  as  speedily  to  renew  the  population.  3. 
God's  zeal  engaged  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  promises.  They  were  great  things  which  Grod 
had  promised,  but  the  "  zeal "  of  the  Lord  of  hosts — ^his  jealousy  for  his  own  honour,  and 
for  his  people  and  his  land — would  perform  it.  When  God's  "  zeal"  is  engaged  in  any 
undertaking,  can  we  doubt  that  it  will  prosper  ?  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against 
us  ?  "  (Rom.  viii.  39).  God's  zeal  is  engaged  in  giving  effect  to  all  efforts  for  the  exten- 
sion of  his  gospel,  the  salvation  of  men,  and  the  triumph  of  righteousness  in  the  world. 

V.  The  safety  op  the  oitt.  Finally,  a  definite  assurance  is  given  that,  let 
Sennacherib  rage  as  he  may,  the  city  would  not  be  harmed.  He  should  neither  come 
into  it,  nor  shoot  an  arrow  into  it,  nor  come  before  it  with  shield,  nor  cast  a  hank  against 
it,  as  once  before  he  had  done.  Instead,  he  would  return  by  the  way  he  came.  This 
God  would  do  (1)  for  his  own  sake,  i.e.  for  the  vindication  of  his  own  honour  from  the 
reproaches  of  Sennacherib ;  and  (2)  for  his  servant  David's  sake.  Succeeding  gene- 
rations little  know  how  much  they  owe  to  God's  regard  for  his  holy  servants  in  days 
past.  As  was  Jerusalem,  so  is  the  Church  safe  under  God's  protection  (Matt.  xvi.  18). 
For  the  higher  David's  sake,  he  will  not  let  it  perish.  But  for  God's  care  and  shielding 
power,  it  would  long  ere  this  have  been  destroyed.— J.  0. 


4(H 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINOS.        [oh.  ix.  1—21 


Vers.  35 — 37. — The  mighty  deliverance.  God's  word  was  not  long  in  being  fulfilled. 
That  very  night  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  a  hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  of 
the  host  of  the  Assyrians.  In  few  words — for  the  end  is  as  good  as  reached  with  Isaiah'i 
oracle — ^the  sacied  narrator  sums  up  the  facts  of  the  catastrophe. 

I.  The  destbuction.of  Sennachebib'b  abmt.  1.  Its  historic  truth.  On  all  hands, 
though  Sennacherib's  own  annals  pass  over  the  event  in  silence,  this  seems  to  be 
admitted.  "  Thus,"  says  Wellhausen,  "  it  proved  in  the  issue.  By  a  still  unexplained 
catastrophe,  the  main  army  of  Sennacherib  was  annihilated  on  the  frontier  between 
Egypt  and  Palestine,  and  Jerusalem  thereby  freed  from  all  danger.  The  Assyrian 
king  had  to  save  himself  by  a  hurried  retreat  to  Nineveh ;  Isaiah  was  triumphant." 
2.  Its  miraculous  character.  Granting  that  the  event  liappened,  it  seems  impossible, 
in  view  of  Isaiah's  distinct  prediction,  to  deny  its  supernatural  character.  God's  hiand 
is  almost  seen  visibly  stretched  out  for  the  deliverance  of  his  city,  and  the  bringing  low 
of  Sennacherib's  pride.  Allow  that  the  sweeping  off  of  this  great  army  was  in  any 
way  connected  with  Isaiah's  faith,  hope,  and  prayers,  and  a  supernatural  government 
of  the  world  is  established.  3.  Its  spiritual  lessons.  (1)  We  see  the  end  wliich  com- 
monly overtakes  worldly  boasters.  Greek  story  delights  to  dwell  on  the  Nemesis 
which  overtakes  inordinate  pride.  Napoleon,  the  modern  Sennacherib,  met  with  a 
discomfiture  not  dissimilar  to  that  here  recorded.  (2)  We  learn  not  to  be  afraid  of 
spiritual  boasters.  The  nations  may  rage,  and  the  people  imagiwe  a  vain  thing ;  the 
kings  of  the  earth  may  set  themselves,  and  the  rulers  take  counsel  together,  against 
the  Lord  and  his  anointed.  But  "  he  that  sits  in  the  heavens  will  laugh;  the  Lord  will 
have  them  in  derision"  (Ps.  ii.  4).  Scientific  and  philosophic  boasters  have  not  pre- 
vailed against  the  Church  yet,  and  are  not  likely  to  do  so.  (3)  We  learn  the  advantage 
of  entire  reliance  on  Gkid.  While  Hezekiah  leaned  on  the  help  of  man,  he  could 
accomplish  nothing.  When  he  cast  himself  on  Ciod's  help,  he  was  saved.  God  has 
all  power  in  heaven  and  earth  at  his  command,  and  is  able  to  do  all  things  for  us. 

II.  The  end  of  Sbnitachebib.  1.  The  great  king's  retreat.  At  this  point  "  the 
great  king,"  the  King  ot  Assyria,  his  boasting  effectually  silenced,  disappears  for  ever 
from  Jewish  history.  He  " departed,  and  went  and  returnid,  and  dwelt  in  Nineveh." 
No  more  is  heard  of  his  exploits  in  these  pages.  2.  His  miserable  end.  His  end  was 
a  fitting  satire  on  his  boasts.  Two  of  his  own  sons,  Adrammeleeh  and  Sharezer,  con- 
spired against  him,  and  slew  him  while  he  was  worshipping  in  the  houfO  of  his  god.. 
This  is  the  god  to  whose  power,  it  may  be  presumed,  he  attributed  all  his  conquests. 
Poor  god !  tliat  could  not  save  his  own  worshipper.  Sic  trmisit  gloria  mundi.  The 
sons  who  slew  him  could  not  keep  the  throne,  which  was  taken  by  Esarhaddon. — J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBB  XX 


Vers.  1 — ^21. — ^Illness  op  Hezekiah  usm 
Embassy  of  Mbrodaoh-Baladan.  Hezb- 
KiAU's  Death.  The  writer  proceeds  to  relate 
an  illness  and  a  recovery  of  Hezekiah,  which 
happened  about  the  middle  of  his  reign, 
probably  in  B.o.  713,  and  which  was  ac- 
companied by  strange,  if  not  miraculoas, 
circumstanoes  (vers.  1 — 11).  Hezeldah's 
recovery  was  followed  by  an  embassy  of 
congratulation  from  Merodach-Baladan,  King 
of  Babylon,  which  led  Hezekiah  into  an  act 
of  folly,  and  brought  upon  him  the  rebuke  of 
Isaiah  (vers.  12 — 19).  The  narrative  termi- 
nates with  a  notice  of  some  of  Hezekiah's 
{Teat  works,  and  of  his  decease  (vers.  20, 21). 


Veil.  1—11.- 
Hetekidh. 


-The  iUnet  and  recovery  of 


Ver.  1. — ^In  those  days.  This  is  a  very 
vague  note  of  time,  and  cannot  be  regarded 
as  determining  the  position  of  the  events 
here  related  with  respect  to  the  preceding 
narrative.  Ver.  6,  however,  shows  that  a 
time  anterior  to  Sennacherib's  discomfiture, 
is  intended ;  and  the  same  verse  also  fixes 
the  date  to  Hezeklah's  fourteenth  year, 
which  was  B.o.  713.  If  the  date  in  oh. 
iviii.  13  be  regarded  as  genuine,  we  must 
consider  that  tlie  illness  happened  in  the 
year  of  Sennacherib's  first  expedition  against 
Palestine;  but  if  we  regard  that  date  as 
interpolated,  and  accept  the  Assyrian  in- 
scriptions as  our  chronological  authorities, 
we  must  place  the  events  of  the  present 
chapter  twelve  years  Mrlier  than  that  as- 


CH.D.1— 21.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KBSGS. 


4dS 


pedition,  in  tlie  reign  of  Sargon  OTer  Assyria, 
•nd  iu  the  first  reign  of  Merodaoh-Baladan 
over  Babylon.  It  belongs,  at  any  rate,  to 
the  usiddle  part  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  while 
hia  treasures  were  intact  (vers.  13 — 17),  and 
had  not  been  carried  off  to  Nineveh.  Was 
Hezekiah  siok  unto  death ;  stricken,  t.e.,  by 
a  malady  which,  in  the  ordinary  course  of 
natuj'C,  would  have  been  fataL  And  the 
Prophet  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  came  to 
him.  The  designation  of  Isaiah  as  "  the 
prophet,"  and  "the  son  of  Amoz,"  as  if  pre- 
viously unknown  to  the  reader,  indicates 
the  original  independency  of  thfi  narrative, 
which  the  writer  of  Kings  probably  obtained 
from  a  separate  source.  And  said  unto  him, 
Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Set  thine  house  in 
order ;  for  thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live.  The 
statement  was  a  warning,  not  a  prophecy. 
It  is  parallel  to  that  of  Jonah  to  the 
Ninevites,  "Tet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh 
shall  be  overthrown." 

Yer.  2. — Then  he  turned  his  face  to  the 
wall — t.e.  away  from  those  who  were  standing 
beside  his  bed,  and  might  have  distracted 
his  attention,  to  pray  with  more  concentra- 
tion and  earnestness — and  prayed  unto  the 
Lord,  saying  (comp.  ch.  xix.  15).  It  was 
natural  to  Hezekiah,  in  every  kind  of  afflic- 
tion and  distress,  to  take  his  trouble  direct 
to  God. 

Ver.  3. — I  beseech  thee,  0  Lord,  remember 
now  how  I  have  walked  before  thee  in  truth 
and  with  a  perfect  heart.  There  is  no 
'Pharisaical  self-righteousness  here.  Heze- 
kiah is  conscious  that  he  has  honestly 
endeavoured  to  serve  God,  and  to  do  his 
will — that,  whatever  may  have  been  his 
ehorioomings,  his  heart  has  been  right 
towards  God.  He  ventures,  therefore,  on 
something  like  expostulation.  Why  is  he 
to  be  out  off  in  the  midst  of  his  days,  at  the 
age  of  thirty-nine,  when  such  a  wicked 
king  as  Uzziah  has  lived  to  be  sixty-eight 
(ch.  XV.  2),  and  Behoboam  to  be  fifty-eight 
(1  Kings  xiv.  21)?  It  is  to  be  remembered 
that,  under  the  old  covenant,  length  of  days 
was  expressly  promised  to  the  righteous 
(Prov.  iii.  2 ;  ix.  11 ;  x.  27,  etc.),  and  that 
*  shortened  life  was  the  proclaimed  penalty 
of  wicked-doing  (Job  xv.  32,  33;  ixii.  16; 
Ps.  Iv.  23;  Prov.  x.  27).  Hezekiah's  self- 
assertion  is  thus  a  sort  of  laying  hold  of 
God's  promises.  And  have  done  that  which 
is  good  in  thy  sight ;  comp.  ch.  xviii.  3—6; 
and  note  the  similar  pleadings  of  David, 
"  With  my  whole  Iteart  have  I  sought  thee  " 
(Ps.  cxix.  10);  "I  have  remembered  thy 
Name,  O  Lord,  and  have  kept  thy  Law.  This 
I  had  because  I  kept  thy  commandments  " 
(Ps.  cxix.  55, 56),  and  the  like.  And  Heze- 
Idsh  wept  lore.  Human  nature  shrinks 
bom  death  irstinctively,  and  it  requires  a 
very  vivid  imagination  for  even  the  Christian 


in  middle  life  to  fed.  with  St.  Paul,  that 
"it  is  better  for  him  to  depart  and  to  be 
with  Christ."  The  Hebrew  of  Hezekiah's 
time  had  far  more  reason  to  regard  death 
as  an  evil.  His  hopes  of  a  life  beyond  the 
grave  were  feeble — his  conceptions  of  the 
life,  if  life  there  were,  faint  and  unattractive. 
SheSl,  like  Hades,  was  a  vague,  awful, 
terrible  thing.  If  we  consider  Hezekiah's 
words,  "  The  grave  cannot  praise  thee, 
death  cannot  celebrate  thee:  they  that  go 
down  into  the  pit  cannot  hope  for  thy  truth. 
The  living,  the  living,  he  shall  praise  thee  " 
(Isa.  xxxviii.  18,  19),  we  may  understand 
how  the  Hebrew  shrank  &om  the  fearful 
change.  And  in  Hezekiah's  case  there  was 
a  yet  further  reason  for  grief.  Hezekiah 
had  as  yet  no  male  offspring  (Josephus, 
'Ant.  Jud.,'  X.  2.  §  1).  Manasseh  was  as 
yet  unborn  (comp.  ver.  6  with  ch.  xxi.  1). 
If  he  died  now,  his  house  would  be  cut  off, 
he  would  be  without  posterity — a  sore  grief 
to  every  Hebrew.  Ewald's  references  to 
Isa.  xxxviii.  19  and  xxxix.  7,  as  indicative 
of  Hezekiah  having  sons  at  the  time,  are 
absolutely  without  value. 

Ver.  4. — And  it  came  to  pass,  afore  Isaiah 
was  gone  out  into  the  middle  court.  The 
narrative  in  Isaiah  (xxxviii.  4)  does  not 
contain  this  touch,  which  is  very  graphic, 
and  indicative  of  the  eye-witness.  "  The 
middle  court"  is  probably  the  second  or 
intermediate  court  of  the  royal  palace, 
liiaiah  had  not  gone  further  than  this,  when 
he  was  arrested  in  his  course  by  a  Divine 
communication.  That  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came  to  him,  saying.  How  the  word  of  the 
Lord  came  to  the  prophets  is  an  inscrutable 
mystery.  Sometimes,  no  doubt  it  came  in 
vision,  which  to  a  certain  extt^nt  we  can 
understand.  But  how,  when  the  prophet 
was  secularly  engaged,  as  in  this  instance, 
walking  across  a  court,  he  knew  that  the 
thought  which  occurred  to  him  was  a  Divine 
message,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  conceive. 
Still,  w'e  cannot  doubt  that  if  God  deter- 
mines to  communicate  his  will  to  man,  he 
must  be  able,  with  the  message,  to  impart 
an  absolute  certainty  of  its  source,  an 
assured  conviction  that  it  is  his  word,  which 
pr^cludes  all  question,  hesitation,  or  dubiety. 
Isaiah,  in  the  middle  of  liis  walk,  finds  his 
steps  arrested.anewinjunction  laid  upon  him, 
with  a  necessity  of  immediately  obeying  it. 
Ver.  5. — Turn  again — or,  turn  back — 
"retrace  thy  steps,  and  enter  once  more 
into  the  bedchamber  of  tlie  king  " — and 
tell  Hezekiah  the  captain  of  my  people. 
An  unusual  title  for  the  Jewish  monarch, 
but  one  applied  in  1  Sam.  ix.  16  and  x.  1  to 
Saul,  and  in  1  Sam.  xiii.  14  and  2  Sam. 
V.  2  to  David.  The  proper  meaning  of  TJ: 
is  "  leader " — "  one  who  goes  in  ftont." 
Thus  saith  th»  Lord,  the  God  of  David  thy 


106 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [ott.  xx.  1— 2L 


father — Hezekiah  obtains  mercy,  both  as 
David'B  son  and  as  David's  imitator  (see 
oh.  xviii  8) — I  liave  heard  thy  prayer,  I 
have  seen  thy  tears  (comp.  Exod.  ii.  21; 
iii.  7 ;  Ps.  Ivi.  8).  There  is  not  a  cry,  not 
a  groan,  not  a  tear,  not  a  sigh  of  his  faithful 
ones,  to  which  the  heart  of  God  is  not  open, 
which  does  not  touch  him,  move  him,  draw 
forth  his  sympathy.  If  he  does  not  always 
grant  our  prayers,  it  is  because  we  "ask 
amiss" — without  faith,  or  without  fervour, 
or  things  not  good  for  us.  Hezekiah's 
earnest,  faithful,  aud  not  unwise  prayer 
was,  as  such  prayers  always  are,  effectual. 
Behold,  I  will  heal  thee :  on  the  third  day 
thou  Shalt  go  up  unto  tiie  house  of  the 
Iiord;  i.e.  thou  shalt  be  so  completely 
recovered  as  to  be  able  to  quit  thy  palace 
and  pay  thy  vows  in  the  courts  of  the 
Lord's  house.  God  knows  that  to  do  this 
will  be  Hezekiah's  first  wish,  as  soon  as  his 
sickness  is  past  (comp.  Isa.  xsxviii.  20). 

Ver.  6. — Aud  I  will  add  unto  thy  days 
fifteen  years.  God  "does  exceeding  abun- 
dantly more  than  we  either  ask  or  think  " 
(Eph.  iii.  20).  Hezekiah  had  asked  for 
nothing  more  than  immediate  escape  from 
death.  God  grants  him  fifteen  additional 
years  of  life,  t.e.  more  than  doubles  the  length 
of  his  reign.  And  I  will  deliver  thee  and 
this  city  out  of  the  hand  of  the  King  of 
Assyria.  If  Hezekiah's  illness  took  place 
in  B.C.  713,  and  Jerusalem  was  tlieu  in 
danger  of  being  attacked  by  the  Assyrians, 
the  king  who  threatened  the  attack  must 
have  been  Sargon.  Sargon  made  an  expe- 
dition into  Palestine  in  B.o.  720,  another  in 
B.C.  713,  and  a  third  in  B.O.  711.  In  none 
of  them  does  he  seem  tu  have  invaded 
Judisa ;  but  in  the  third  be  counts  the  Jews 
among  his  enemies  ('  Eponym  Canon,'  p. 
130,  line  32).  Hezekiah,  who  had  revolted 
from  him  (ch.  xviiL  7),  may  well  have  felt 
alarm  both  in  b.o.  713  and  711.  And  I 
will  defend  this  oity  for  mine  own  sake, 
and  for  my.  servant  David's  sake  (comp. 
ch.  xix.  34).  The  promise  given  in  B.o. 
713  in  respect  of  Sargon  was  repeated  in 
B.o.  699  (?)  with  respect  to  Sennacherib  in 
almost  the  same  words. 

Ver.  7. — ^And  Isaiah  said,  Take  a  lump 
of  figs.  Figs  were  the  usual  remedy  for 
boils.  Dioscorides  says  of  the  fig,  Smipope! 
trxKitpias ;  Pliny,  "  Ulcera  aperit ;  "  while 
Jerome,  in  his  commentary  on  Isaiah,  has 
the  following:  "Jnxta  artem  medicorum 
omnis  sanies  siccioribns  ficis  atque  contusis 
in  cutis  superficiem  provocatur."  The 
remedy  is  said  to  be  still  in  use  among 
Easterns.  It  can  scarcely  be  supposed  U> 
have  cured  a  malignant  boil  by  its  intrinsic 
force ;  but  under  the  Divine  blessing  it  was 
made  effectual,  and  the  cure  followed.  And 
the/  took  and  Uid  it  en  the  boil.    The 


royal  attendants  obtained  a  lump  of  figs, 
and  applied  it  to  the  inflamed  boil  or  car- 
buncle, as  Isaiah  had  suggested.  It  is 
impossible  to  say  what  exactly  was  the 
nature  of  the  "  boil,"  since  diseases  change 
their  characters,  and  every  age  has  its  own 
special  disorders;  but  modem  medical 
science  knows  of  more  than  one  kind  ot 
pustular  sweUing,  which,  as  soon  as  it  is 
detected,  is  regarded  as  fatal.  And  he  re- 
covered. Not  suddenly,  but  by  degrees; 
after  the  manner  of  natural  remedies.  It 
was  three  days  before  he  was  well  enough 
to  quit  the  palace,  and  offer  thanks  in  the 
temple  for  his  miraculous  cure  (see  ver.  5). 

Ver.  8. — ^And  Hezekiah  said  unto  Isaiah, 
What  shall  be  the  sign  that  the  Lord  will 
heal  me?  Having  regard  to  the  weakness 
of  human  faith,  God,  under  the  old  covenant, 
often  gave,  or  offered,  near  •'  signs  "  of  pro- 
mised blessings  that  were  more  remote,  in 
order  to  sustain  and  encourage  the  doubtful 
and  the  wavering  (comp.  Exod.  iii.  12; 
ch.  xix.  29 ;  Isa.  vii.  11,  14,  etc.).  Heze- 
kiah assumes  that  a  near  "sign"  will  now 
be  granted  to  him,  and  simply  asks  what 
the  sign  is  to  be.  And  that  I  shall  go  up 
into  the  house  of  the  Lord  the  third  day  ? 
Three  days  would  be  a  long  and  weary  time 
to  wait.  It  was  not  unnatural  that  Heze- 
kiah should  crave  some  more  immediate 
assurance  that  bis  prayer  was  indeed  heard. 
Neither  Gtod  nor  the  prophet  was  angry  at 
his  request. 

Ver.  9. — And  Isaiah  said,  This  sign  shalt  • 
thou  have  of  the  Lord,  that  the  Lord  will  do 
the  thing  that  he  hath  spoken.  Hezekiah 
is  no  more  reproved  for  asking  for  a  sign 
than  was  Gideon  (Judg.  vi.  37,  39).  Ahaz, 
his  father,  had  been  reproved  for  not  asking 

gsa.  vii.  13).  It  would  he  faithless  now  for 
hristians  to  demand  signs ;  but  in  an  age  of 
miracles,  when  there  were  prophets  upon  the 
earth  empowered  to  give  signs,  faithful  men 
might  request  them  without  incurring  Gktd's 
displeasure.  Shall  the  shadow  go  forward 
ten  degrees  1  The  Hebrew  text  will  scarcely 
bear  this  translation,  which,  however,  seems 
to  be  required  by  Hezekiah's  answer.  Per- 
haps for  r^n  we  should  read  'ij^nrj.  Or  go  back 
ten  degrees!  literally,  in  both  clauses, 
ten  itep».  There  are  abundant  reasons  for 
believing  that  the  early  dials  consisted  of 
a  gnomon  set  up  on  the  top  of  a  flight  of 
steps,  and  that  time  was  measured-  by  the 
number  of  steps  on  which  the  shadow  of 
the  gnomon  fell  (see  a  paper  by  Mr.  Bo- 
sanquet,  in  the  'Transactions  of  the  Society 
of  Biblical  Arobssology'  for  1871,  pp. 
1—82). 

Yer.  10. — ^And  Hezekiah  answered,  It  is 
a  light  thing  for  the  shadow  to  go  down  ten  - 
degrees.    Hezekiah  view's  it  as  a  compara- 
tively easy  thing  for  the  dhadow,  which  ii 


A*.  11. 1—21.]       iHfi  SECOND  BOOK  01*  DSfi  KINGS. 


407 


already  descending  the  stepa,  to  accelerate 
its  pace  and  rapidly  descend  fifteen  degrees 
iostead  of  slowly  traversing  them;  and 
therefore  tuKsepts  Isaiah's  other  offer.  Kay, 
but  let  the  shadow  return  backward  ten  de- 
grees. Let  it,  I.e.,  chatige  its  direction,  and 
having  descended  a  certain  distance,  sud- 
denly return  and  asceml  again.  This  will 
be  no  "light  thing,"  but  a  great  marvel, 
which  will  thoroughly  convince  him.  The 
thought  was  natural,  though  perhaps  not 
■trictly  logical. 

Yer.  11. — And  Isaiah  the  prophet  cried 
nnto  the  Lord.  Though  the  sign  had  been 
promised,  Isaiah  regarded  his  own  inter- 
cessional  prayer  as  not  out  of  place,  and 
"cried  unto  the  Lord,"  i.e.  prayed  with 
energy,  that  the  king's  wish  might  be  ac- 
complished. So,  though  we  have  God's 
promise  to  care  for  us,  and  keep  us  from 
want  (Matt.  vi.  25 — 30),  yet  we  must  daily 
beseech  him  to  "  give  us  this  day  our  daily 
bread."  And  he  brought  the  shadow  ten 
degrees  backward.  How  this  was  done,  we 
are  not  told,  and  can  therefore  only  conjec- 
ture. The  earlier  commentators  imagined 
that  the  revolution  of  the  earth  upon  its 
axis  was  actually  reversed  for  a  time;  but 
this  idea  is  now  generally  rejected.  It  is 
clear  from  2  Chron.  xxxii.  31  that  the 
phenomenon,  whatever  may  have  been  its 
cause,  was  local,  "  done  in  the  land "  of 
Judah,  and  not  visible  elsewhere.  Some 
modems  have  suggested  an  earthquake 
affecting  the  gnomon ;  some  a  trick  on  the 
part  of  Isaiah ;  others,  and  the  generality, 
a  very  abnormal  refraction  of  the  sun's  rays. 
An  observed  instance  of  something  similar, 
which  took  place  at  Metz,  in  Lotheringia,  in 
the  year  1703,  is  on  record.  Two  scientists, 
Professor  Seyffarth  and  Mr.  J.  W.  Bosan- 
quet,  think  that  the  phenomenon  was  due  to 
an  eclipse,  in  which  the  upper  limb  of  the 
sun  was  obscured  temporarily.  In  such  a 
case  a  slight  recession  of  the  shadow  would 
certainly  take  place;  but  it  would  scarcely 
be  such  as  to  attract  attention  from  any  one 
but  a  scientific  observer  (Stanley, '  Lectures 
on  the  Jewish  Church,'  vol.  ii.  p.  537),  On 
the  whole,  the  most  probable  cause  would 
seem  to  be  refraction,  which  is  accepted  by 
Keil,  Bahr,  and  Kay.  By  which  it  had  gone 
down  in  the  dial  of  Ahaz ;  literally,  on  the 
steps  of  Ahas.  Sun-dials  were  invented  by 
the  Babylonians  (Herod.,  ii.  109),  and  were 
no  doubt  in  use  at  Babylon  long  before  the 
time  of  Hezekiah.  They  were  of  various 
kinds,  and  in  some  of  them  the  gnomon  was 
made  to  cast  its  shadow  upon  steps.  There 
are  still  two  dials  in  India — one  at  Benares, 
known  as  the  M&nmandir,  and  the  other  at 
Delhi — where  this  ia  the  case  (see  Mr. 
Bosanqnet'a  paper,  already  quoted,  plate 
opp.  p.  35). 


Vers.  12—19. — The  eniboMty  of  Merodach- 
Baladan.  Soon  after  his  reoovery,  Heze- 
kiah received  an  embassy  from  a  new 
quarter.  Hitherto  Babylon  and  Judsea  had 
been  isolated  from  one  another,  and  had 
perhaps  scarcely  known  of  each  other's 
existence.  Assyria  had  stood  between 
them,  and  Babylonia  had  been  for  the  most 
part  an  Assyrian  dependency.  But  recently 
Babylonia  had  asserted  herself.  In  B.C.  722, 
on  the  death  of  Shalmaneser,  a  native 
Chaldean  named  Merodach-Baladan  had 
made  himself  king  of  the  country,  and 
maintained  his  independence  against  all 
the  efforts  of  Sargon  to  reduce  him.  His 
position,  however,  was  precarious,  and  it 
was  probably  in  the  hope  of  concluding  an 
alliance  with  Hezekiah — also  an  enemy  of 
Sargon's  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  6)— that 
he  sent  his  embassy.  He  had  two  excuses 
for  it.  A  neighbouring  king  might  well 
congratulate  his  brother  monarch  on  his 
recovery;  and  a  Chaldean  prince  might 
well  inquire  into  an  astronomical  marvel 
(2  Chron.  x^xiii.  31).  The  date  of  the  em- 
bassy appears  to  have  been  bo.  712,  the 
year  following  on  Hezekiah's  illness. 

Yer.  12. — At  that  time  Berodaoh-Baladan. 
Isaiah  gives  the  name  more  correctly  as 
"  Merodach-Baladan  "  (Isa.  xxxix.  1).  The 
native  form  is  Marduk-pal-iddin,  i.e.  "  Mero- 
dach  a  son  has  given."  This  king  makes 
his  first  appearance  in  an  inscription  of 
Tiglath-pileser's,  where  he  is  one  of  many 
chieftains  among  whom  Babylonia  is  di- 
vided. Subsequently  he  is  mentioned  as 
revolting  from  Sargon  in  the  latter's  first 
year,  B.o.  722  ('Records  of  the  Past,'  vol. 
vii.  p.  29),  and  holding  the  throne  of  Baby- 
lon for  twelve  years  (ibid.,  p.  41),  when  Sar- 
gon conquered  him,  deposed  him,  and  took 
the  kingdom  (ibid.,  p.  48).  This  twelve- 
years'  reign  is  acknowledged  by  Ptolemy 
in  his  Canon,  but  the  name  of  the  king  ia 
given  as  Mardoc-Empadus.  On  the  death 
of  Sargon,  in  B.o.  705,  Merodach-Baladan 
again  revolted,  and  reigned  for  six  months, 
when  he  was  driven  out  of  the  country  by 
Sennacherib,  b.o.  704.  He  continued,  how- 
ever, to  give  trouble  even  after  this  ('  Re- 
cords of  the  Past,'  vol.  vii.  p.  63);  and  his 
B0Q3  and  grandsons  were  pretenders  to  tlie 
Babylonian  throne  in  the  reigns  of  Esar- 
haddon  and  his  successor,  Asshur-bani-pal 
(see  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  469 
and  490).  The  son  of  Baladan.  In  the  As- 
■yrian  iitscriptiona  Merodach-Baladui  is 
•Iways  called   "  the  son  of  Yakin  "  ('  Be- 


408 


THE  SECOND  BOOS  OP  THE  KING8.       to=-  ^^  1—21 


oords  of  the  Past,'  vol.  vii.  p.  40;  vol.  ix. 
p.  13,  etc.).  Takln,  however,  may  have 
been  his  grandfather,  as  Nimshi  was  the 
grandfather  of  Jehu,  and  Baladan  (Bel- 
daan?)  his  father.  King  of  Babylon,  Bent 
letters  and  a  present  nnto  Hezeldah.  Thus 
opening  diplomatic  communication.  It  has 
been  almost  universally  folt  that  the  object 
of  tlie  embassy  must  have  been  to  conclude, 
or  at  any  rate  to  pave  the  way  for,  an  al- 
liance. So  Josephus  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  2.  § 
2),  Ewald,  "Von  Gerlach,  Thenius,  Keil, 
Bahr.  and  others.  Assyria  menaced  both 
countries,  and  the  common  danger  produced 
naturally  a  mutual  attraction.  But  it  was 
prudent  to  disguise  this  motive.  Tor  he  had 
heard  that  Hezeldah  had  been  sick.  As- 
eyria  could  not  take  umbrage  at  an  embassy 
of  congratulation,  nor  at  one  for  scientific 
puri>oees  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  31).  So  tliese 
two  objects  were  paraded. 

Ver.  13.— And  Hezekiah  hearkened  nnto 
them.  Hezekiah  was  dazzled  by  the  pro- 
spect that  opened  upon  him.  It  was  a 
grand  tiling  that  his  fame  should  have 
reached  so  far  as  Babylon,  a  still  grander 
thing  to  be  oifered  such  an  alliance.  It 
must  be  remembered  that  he  and  his  coun- 
eellors  were  inclined  from  the  flrst  to  meet 
Assyrian  menace  by  calling  in  foreign  aid  (ch. 
xviil.  21 — 24 ;  Isa.  xx.  6 ;  xxx.  2 — 7 ;  xxxvi. 
6).  He  had  not  yet  accepted  the  view  of 
Isaiah,  that  human  aid  was  vain,  and  that 
the  only  reasonable  ground  of  hope  or  con- 
fidence was  in  Jehovah.  And  showed  them 
all  the  house  of  his  precious  things;  t.e. 
his  treasury.  Hezekiah  did  not  do  this  in 
mere  ostentation,  though  he  may  have  had 
a  certain  pride  in  exhibiting  his  wealth. 
His  main  wish,  no  doubt,  was  to  make 
known  his  resources,  and  show  that  he  was 
a  valuable  ally.  So  Oroetes  acted  towards 
Polycrates  (Herod.,  iii.  123),  and  Hannibal 
towards  the  Gortynians  (Com.  Nep.,  '  Vit. 
Hannib.,''§  9).  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind 
that  Hezekiah's  treasures  were,  in  B.C.  712, 
still  intact,  and  included  all  that  ample 
store  which  he  sacrificed  to  save  Jerusalem 
at  the  time  of  the  first  expedition  of  Sen- 
nacherib (see  ch.  xviii.  14 — 16,  and  comp. 
'  Eporiym  Canon,'  p.  135,  where  we  find 
enumerated  among  the  treasures  given  up, 
besides  gold  and  silver,  "precious  car- 
buncles, couches  of  ivory,  elevated  thrones 
of  ivory,  skins  of  buffaloes,  horns  of  buffa- 
loes, and  weapons").  The  silver,  and  the  gold, 
and  the  spices.  Compare  the  description  of 
the  wealth  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  x.  25). 
"  Spices  "  always  form  an  important  portion 
of  the  treasure  of  Oriental  kings  (comp. 
Herod.,  ill.  97,  «u6  fin.).  And  the  preoions 
ointment;  rather,  the  precious  oil — ]d^, 
not  npS  (oompare  the  Septtiagint,  rh  ixaiov  rh 
hyativ}.    It  U  tbonght  (Keil,  Biihr)  that 


the  valuable  balsam  oil,  which  wai  obtained 
from  the  royal  gardens,  is  intended.  And  all 
the  house  of  h&  armour ;  or,  of  M»  vesseU ; 
but  arms  and  armour  are  probably  intended. 
It  would  be  almost  as  important  to  show 
that  he  had  abundant  arms  in  store,  as  that 
he  had  abundant  riches.  And  all  that  was 
found  in  his  treasures — a  clause  implying 
that  there  was  much  more  which  had  not 
been  specified,  as  precious  stones,  ivory, 
ebony,  and  the  like — ^there  was  nothing  in 
his  house,  nor  in  all  his  dominion,  that 
Hezekiah  showed  them  not.  This  is  a 
manifest  hyperbole;  but  it  can  scarcely 
mean  less  than  that  he  gave  orders  for  them 
to  be  shown  the  collections  of  arms  and 
stores  which  existed  in  his  other  strong- 
holds besides  Jerusalem.  Hezekiah,  no 
doubt,  had  many  "  store  cities,"  as  Solomon 
(2  Chron.  viii.  6)  and  Behoboam  (2  Chron. 
xi.  5-12)  had. 

Ter.  14. — Then  came  Isaiah  the  prophet 
unto  King  Hezekiah,  and  said  unto  Jmn. 
When  a  prophet  came,  unsummoned,  into  a 
king's  presence,  it  was  usually  to  rebuke 
him  (comp.  2  Sam.  xii.  1;  xxiv.  11 — 13:  1 
Kings  xiii.  1,2;  xviii.  15— 18;  xxi.  18— 22; 
ch.  i.  15,  16;  2  Chron.  xii.  5;  xvi.  7;  xx. 
37;  xxr.  7,  15,  etc.).  What  said  these 
men?  and  from  whence  came  they  unto 
thee  ?  Isaiah  does  not  ask  because  be  does 
not  know,  but  to  obtain  a  confession,  on  which 
he  may  base  the  message  that  he  has  to 
deliver.  And  Hezekiah  said,  They  are  come 
from  a  far  country,  even  from  Babylon. 
Xote  first,  that  Hezekiah  does  not  give  any 
answer  to  the  prophet's  first  question, 
"  What  said  these  men  ? "  being  unwilling 
probably  to  make  known  the  overtures  that 
he  had  received  trom  them,  since  he  knows 
that  Isaiah  is  opposed  to  any  reliance  on 
an  "arm  of  flesh;"  and  secondly,  that  he 
answers  the  second  question,  not  with  shame, 
but  with  complacency,  "They  are  come  to 
me  from  a  very  far  country,  whither  my  fame 
has  reached— even  from  Babylon  are  they 
come, '  the  glory  of  kingdoms,  the  beauty  of 
the  Chaldees'  excellency'  (Isa.  xiii.  19)." 
Self-satisfaction  shows  itself  in  the  answer. 
He  thinks  it  redounds  to  his  honour  that  he 
has  been  sought  out  from  so  great  a  distance, 
and  by  so  great  a  city. 

Ver.  15.— And  he  said,  What  have  they 
seen  in-  thine  house  1  t.e.  What  hast  thou 
showed  them?  Hast  thou  treated  them  like 
ordinary  ambassadors,  or  hast  thoa  gone  out 
of  thy  way  to  court  an  alliance  with  their 
master?  And  Hezekiah  answered,  All  the 
things  that  are  in  mine  honse  have  they 
seen :  there  is  nothing  among  my  treasures 
that  I  have  not  showed  them.  The  reply  is 
open  and  straightforward.  Hezekiah  is  not 
ashamed  of  what  he  has  done,  or  at  any  rate, 
will  not,  to  escape  blame,  take  refuge  in  liei 


OH.  XX.  1—21.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


409 


or  eonoeslment.  lie  readily  MknowIedgM 
that  bo  has  (hown  the  ambasBadon  every- 
thing. 

Ver.  16. — And  Isaiah  said  unto  HezeUah, 
Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord.  Thi  a  is  a  phrase 
of  warning  very  commou  in  the  month  of 
the  prophets,  when  they  are  about  to  deliver 
a  rebuke  or  solemn  condemnation  (comp. 
1  Kings  xxii.  19;  2  Chron.  xviii.  18;  Isa. 
i.  10;  xxviii.  14;  Jer.  viL  2;  is.  20;  x.  1; 
xis.  S,  etc. :  Ezek.  zt.  35 ;  zxxiv.  9 ;  Hos. 
iv.  1 ;  AmoB  iii.  1,  etc.). 

Yer.  17.— Behold,  the  days  oome,  tha*;  all 
that  is  in  thine  honse,  and  that  which  thy 
fathers  have  laid  np  in  store  onto  this  day, 
Ghall  he  carried  into  Babylon.  These  trea- 
sures of  thy  royal  house,  whereof  thou  art  so 
proud,  and  which  thou  hast  of  thine  own 
accord  made  known  to  the  Babylonians,  to 
obtain  their  alliance,  will  in  fact  excite  their 
cupidity,  and  the  time  will  come  when  they, 
or  what  remains  of  them  and  represents 
them,  will  be  carried  off  as  plunder  to  Baby- 
lon by  a  conquering  monarch,  who  will  strip 
thy  palace  of  its  valuables,  and  drag  thy 
descendants  into  captivity,  and  degrade 
them  to  the  condition  of  slaves  or  servants, 
and  make  them  discharge  menial  ofSces 
about  his  court.  The  revelation  was  now, 
it  would  seem,  for  the  fiist  time  made  that 
Babylon,  and  not  Assyria,  was  the  true 
enemy  which  Judssa  had.  to  fear,  the  destined 
foe  who  «ould  accomplish  all  the  threats  of 
the  prop'i.ets  from  Moses  downwards,  who 
wouM  destroy  the  holy  city  and  the  glorious 
temple  of  Solomon,  and  carry  away  the  aik 
of  the  covenant,  and  tear  the  people  from 
tlielr  homes,  and  bring  the  kingdom  of  David 
to  an  end,  aud  give  Jerusalem  over  as  a 
prey  to  desolation  for  seventy  years.  Hence- 
forth it  was  Babylon  and  not  Assyria  which 
was  feared,  Babylon  and  not  Assyria  whereto 
the  prophetic  gaze  of  Isaiah  himself  was 
directed,  and  which  became  in  his  later  pro- 
phecies (xV — Ixvi.)  the  main  ohject  of  his  de- 
nunciatior  f  Considering  the  circumstances 
of  the  tim :,  the  prophecy  is  a  most  extra- 
ordinary one.  Babylonia  was  at  the  time 
merely  one  of  several  kingdoms  bordering 
on  Assyria  which  the  Assyrians  threatened 
with  destruction.  From  the  time  of  Tiglath- 
pileser  she  had  been  continually  diminish- 
ing, while  Assyria  had  been  continually 
increasing,  in  power.  Tiglath-piles^r  had 
overrun  tiie  country  and  established  himself 
as  king  there.  Shalmaneser's  authority  had 
been  uncontested.  If  just  at  present  a 
native  prince  held  the  throne,  it  was  by  a 
very  uncertain  tenure,  and  a  few  years  later 
Assyria  regained  complete  mastery.  No 
human  foresight  could  possibly  have  antici- 
pati  d  such  a  complete  reversal  of  the  rela- 
tive positions  of  the  two  countries  as  was 
involved  in  Isaiah'8  iropheoy— a  reversal 


which  was  only  accomplished  by  the  appear- 
ance on  the  scene  of  a  new  power,  Media, 
which  hitherto  had  been  regarded  eis  of  the 
very  slightest  account,  Nothing  shall  be 
left,  saith  the  Lord  (comp.  ch.  xxv.  13—17 
and  .Ter.  Iii.  12—23). 

Ver.  18. — And  of  thy  sons  that  shall  issue 
from  thee,  which  thou  shalt  beget.  Under 
"  sons  "  are  included  by  the  Hebrew  idiom 
all  descendants,  however  remote  (Pusev's 
'Lectures  on  Daniel,'  pp.  406—409).  The 
princes  carried  off  from  Jerusalem  by  Nebu- 
chadnezzar were  Hezekiah's  descendants, 
either  iu  the  fourth  or  the  fifth  generation. 
Shall  they  take  away.  Among  the  descend- 
ants of  Hezekiab  taken  to  Babylon  by  Nebu- 
chadnezzar were  Jehoiachin  (ch.  xxiv.  15), 
Zedekiah  (ch,  xxv.  7),  Daniel  (Dan.  i.  3), 
and  others.  And  they  shall  be  eunuchs  in 
the  palaoe  of  the  King  of  Babylon.  Keil 
and  Babr  translate  Cft?^  in  this  place  by 
"  chamberlains  "  or  "  footmen ; "  but  there  is 
no  reason  why  the  word  should  not  have  its 
ordinary  sense  of  "  eunuchs "  (see  the  Sep- 
tuagint  iaovTai  tvyoSxot,  and  for  the  fulfil- 
ment, comp.  Dan.  i.  3 — 18). 

Ver.  19. — Then  said  Hezekiah  onto  Isaiah, 
Good  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  thou 
hast  spoken,  Hezekiah  accepts  the  rebuke, 
thereby  acknowledging  himself  to  have  been 
in  the  wrong,  and  submits  without  remon- 
strance to  bis  punishment.  "Good  is  the 
word  of  the  Lord  " — who  "  in  his  wrath  has 
thought  upon  mercy."  The  king  feels  that 
Grod  might,  in  justice,  have  visited  him,  in  liis 
own  person,  with  some  immediate  affliction 
or  calamity.  It  is  a  relief  to  hear  that  the 
blow  will  not  fall  during  his  lifetime.  There 
may  be  a  tinge  of  selfishness  in  his  acqui- 
escence, but  it  is  not  very  pronounced,  and 
does  not  call  for  any  severe  animadversion. 
The  Old  Testament  saints  were  not  faultless, 
and  are  not  set  before  us  as  perfect  patterns. 
There  is  one  only  "Ensample"  given  ui 
whose  steps  we  are  to  follow  in  all  things. 
And  he  said  —apparently  after  a  pause,  per- 
haps turning  to  his  courtiers,  whose  looks 
may  have  expressed  aistonishment  at  the 
words  whii'h  he  had  just  spoken — Is  it  not 
good,  if  peace  and  truth  he  in  my  days  t  i.e. 
Am  I  not  right  to  acquiesce  in  the  sentence 
and  pronounce  it  "guod,"  if  it  promises  me 
"peace  and  truth,"  or  "tranquillity  and 
steadfastness"?  Ought  I  not  to  accept 
with  thankfulness  the  immediate  boon,  in- 
stead of  troubling  myself  about  a  remote 
future  ?  The  sentiment  is  not  far  removed 
from  that  of  the  well-known  lines — 

"  I  do  not  ask  to  see 
The  distant  scene ;  one  step  enough  for  me," 

Vers.  20, 21.— The  great  morhe  of  Hezekiah, 
and  hie  deeeaee.    Hezekiah  wm  known,  not 


no 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [ch.  xx.  1— 21. 


only  M  a  pioas  king,  and  the  king  In  whose 
reign  the  pride  of  the  Assyrians  was  dashed 
to  the  ground,  but  also  as  one  who,  by  works 
of  great  importance,  conferred  permanent 
benefit  on  Jerusalem  (see  2  Chron.  xxzii. 
3-5  and  30:  Bcclns.  xlvlii.  17).  The  writer 
feels  that  he  cannot  conclude  his  notice  of 
Hezekiah's  reign  without  snme  mention  of 
these  works.  He  enters,  however,  into  no 
description,  but,  having  referred  the  reader 
for  details  to  the  "  book  of  the  chronicles," 
notes  in  the  briefest  possible  way  the  decease 
of  Hezekiah,  and  the  accession  of  his  son 
and  successor. 

Yer.  20. — And  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Hezekiah,  and  all  his  might.  Hezekiah's 
"might"  was  chiefly  shown  in  tlie  earlier 
portion  of  his  reign,  when  he  "smote  the 
Philistines,  even  unto  Gaza,  and  the  borders 
thereof"  (ch.  xviii.  8).  Against  Assyria  he 
was  unsuccessful,  and  must  have  succumbed, 
but  for  the  miraculous  destruction  of  Sen- 
nacherib's host.  And  how  he  made  a  pool ; 
rather,  the  pool,  or  the  reservoir.  The  writer 
of  Kings  either  knows  of  one  pool  only  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem,  or  regards 
one  as  so  superior  that  it  deserves  to  be 
called  Kar'  ^oxhv,  "  the  pool."  Eecent  dis- 
coveries make  it  highly  probable  that  the 
"  pool"  intended  is  that  of  Siloam,  or,  if  not 
the  present  Siloam  reservoir,  a  larger  one,  a 
little  bt'low  it,  now  known  as  Birltet  el 
Bamra  (see  the  '  Quarterly  Statement '  of 
the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund  for  April, 
1886,  p.  88).  That  there  was  at  least  one 
other  pool  in  Hezekiah's  time  is  evident  from 
Isa.  xxii.  9,  11.  And  a  conduit;  rather, 
the  conduit.  If  "  the  pool "  is  Siloam,  "  the 
conduit"  must  almost  certainly  be  that 
which  was  excavated  under  Ophel  for  the 
purpose  of  conveying  the  water  &om  the 
Well  of  the  Virgin  in  the  Kedron  valley  to 
the  Siloam  reservoir  on  the  western  side  of 
the  spur.  This  conduit,  which  is  curiously 
twisted,  has  a  length  of  1708  feet,  with  a 
height  varying  from  two  feet  to  four  or  five, 
and  a  width  of  about  two  feet.  The  roof  is 
flat,  the  sides  perpendicular,  and  the  floor 
hollowed  into  a  groove  for  the  more  rapid 
passage  of  the  water.  About  nineteen  feet 
firom  the  southern   extremity,  where   the 


channel  opens  npon  the  Siloam  pool,  a  niche 
has  been  cut  in  the  right-hand  wall  in  the 
shape  of  a  square  tablet,  and  smoothed  to 
receive  an  inscription  of  six  lines,  the  greater 
part  of  which  has  been   recovered.     The 
letters  are  of  the  old  Hebrew  or  Phcenioian 
type,  and  by  their  forms  indicate  a  date 
"between  the   eighth  and  the  sixth  cen- 
turies "  (Sayce).     The  inscription,  so  far  as 
it  is  legible,  appears  to  have  run  as  follows : 
"  Behold  the  tunnel  I     Now,  this  is  the  his- 
tory of  the  tunnel.    As  the  excavators  were 
lifting  up  the  pick,  each  towards  the  other, 
and  while  there  were  yet  three  cubits  to  be 
broken  through  ...  the  voice  of  the  one 
called  to  his  neighbour,  for  there  was  an 
excess  (?)  of  the  rook  on  the  right.    Then 
they  rose  up  .  .  .  they  struck  on  the  west  of 
the  excavators ;  the  excavators  strnck,  each 
to  meet  the  other,  pick  to  pick.    And  the 
waters  flowed  from  their  outlet  to  the  pool 
for  a  distance  of  a  thousand  cubits;  and 
three-fourths  (?)  of  a  cubit  was  the  height 
of  the  rock  over  the  head  of  the  excavation 
here."    We  leam  from  it  that  the  workmen 
began  at  either  end,  and  tunnelled  through 
the  rock  until  they  met  in  the  middle — a 
result  which  their  previous  divergences  from 
the  straight  line  force  us  to  attribute  more 
to  good  fortune  than  to  engineering  science. 
And  bronght  water  into  the  city.    The  Well 
of  the  Virgin  was  without,  the  Pool  of  Siloam 
within,  the  city — tlie  wall  of  the  town  being 
carried  across  the  Tyropoeon  valley  from  the 
extreme  point  of  Ophel  to  the  oppostte  hill 
(see  Neh.  iii.  15).    Are  they- not  written  in 
the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of 
Judah  ?    Hezekiah's  fame  rested  very  much 
upon  these  works,  as  we  see  by  what  is  said 
of  him  by  the  son  of  Sirach  (see  the  com- 
ment on  vers.  20,  21), 

Ver.  21. — And  Hezekiah  slept  with  his 
fathers.  The  writer  of  Chronicles  adds, 
"  And  they  buried  him  in  the  ohiefest,"  or 
rather,  in  the  topmost,  "  of  the  sepulchres  of 
the  sons  of  David"  (2  Ohron.  xxxii.  33). 
The  catacomb  of  David  being  now  full, 
Hezekiah  and  his  descendants  (ch.  xxi.  18, 
26;  xxiii.  30)  had  to  be  buried  elsewhere. 
The  tomb  of  Hezekiah  was  either  over  the 
catacomb  of  David,  or  on  the  ascent  which 
led  to  it.  And  Manasseh  his  son  reigned  in 
bis  stead.  So  2  Chron.,  2.  s.  o. ;  and  Josephus, 
•Ant  Jud.,'x.  a§l. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — A$pectt  of  death.  Wo  may  look  on  death  from  three  points  of  view — 
Ihat  of  the  natural  man,  unenlightened  by  Divine  revelation ;  that  of  the  Israelite  undet 
the  Law ;  and  that  of  the  Christian.  The  contemplation  will  be  wholesome,  for  we  are 
•11  too  apt  to  turn  our  thoughts  away  from  any  consideration  of  the  grim  enemy,  who 
will  certainly  have  to  be  met  and  encountered  one  day. 

L  DlATS  FBOM  THS  POINT  OF   VIEW  OF   THE   NATUBAL  KAN.      Bj  BatUTO  man   hM 


CH.  XX.  1—21.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  411 

an  abBolute  horror  of  death.  Self-preservation  is  the  first  law  of  hia  being.  He  will 
suffer  anything,  he  will  do  anything,  to  avoid  death.  Death  is  in  his  eyes  a  fierce 
monster,  cruel,  relentless,  detestable.  To  live  may  be  hard,  grievous,  wretched,  scarcely 
tolerable ;  but  to  die  is  wholly  intolerable.  It  is  to  exchange  the  bright  pure  light  of 
day  for  absolute  darkness,  or  at  best  fur  a  dim,  dull,  murky  region  in  which  souls 
wander  without  aim  or  hope.  It  is  to  be  out  off  from  all  that  is  known,  customary, 
intelligible,  and  to  be  thrown  into  a  world  unknown,  unfamiliar,  full  of  terrors.  It  is 
to  lose. all  energy,  all  vigour,  all  robustness,  all  sense  of  power.  In  the  "happy  hunting- 
fields,"  the  shade  of  the  living  man  may  still  pursue  the  unsubstantial  forms  of  elk,  ur 
deer,  or  antelope ;  but  the  sport  is  a  poor  and  colourless  replica  of  that  pursued  on  earth, 
and  is  anticipated  with  but.  little  satisfaction.  Better,  in  the  eyes  of  the  natural  man, 
to  live  on  earth,  even  as  slave  or  hireling,  the  hardest  of  all  possible  earthly  lives, 
than  to  hold  the  kingship  of  the  world  below  and  rule  over  the  entire  realm  of  shadows 
(Horn.,  '  Od.,'  489 — ^491).  In  the  vigour  of  his  youth  and  early  manhood  the  natural 
man  forgets  death,  views  it  as  so  distant  that  the  fear  of  it  scarcely  affects  him  sensibly ; 
but  let  the  shadow  be  suddenly  cast  across  his  path,  and  he  starts  from  it  with  a  cry  of 
terror.  He  can,  indeed,  meet  it  without  blenching  in  the  battle-field,  when  his  blood  is 
hot,  and  to  the  last  he  does  not  know  whether  he  will  slay  his  foe,  or  his  foe  him  ;  but  if 
he  has  to  die,  he  accepts  his  death  as  a  miserable  necessity.  It  is  hateful  to  him  to  die ; 
it  is  still  more  hateful  to  be  cut  off  in  h  s  prime,  while  he  is  still  strong,  vigorous,  lusty. 
It  is  not  till  old  age  comes  on,  and  his  arm  grows  weak,  and  his  eye  dim,  that  he  can 
look  on  death  without  loathing.  Then,  perhaps,  he  may  accept  the  necessity  without 
protest,  feeling  that  actual  death  can  be  little  worse  than  the  death-in-life  whereto  he 
has  come. 

II.  Death  feom  the  point  op  view  op  the  Isbablitb.  The  Israelite  had  not 
very  much  advantage  over  the  natural  man  in  respect  of  the  contemplation  of  death. 
But  little  was  revealed  to  him  concerning  the  life  beyond  the  grave.  He  knew,  indeed, 
that  his  life  did  not  end  everything,  that  he  would  certainly  go  down  to  Sheol  when  he 
died,  and  there  have  a  continue.d  existence ;  but  Sheol  presented  itself  to  him  in  as 
dismal  colours  as  Hades  did  to  the  Greek.  "  The  living,  the  living  shall  praise  thee ; 
Sheol  cannot  praise  thee,  death  cannot  celebrate  thee,"  cried  Hezefciah  from  his  bed  of 
'Sickness  (Isa.  xxxviii.  18,  19).  Thus  the  Israelite  too  shrank  from  death,  not  merely 
instinctively,  but  as  a  sad  and  poor  condition  compared  with  life.  And  untimely 
death  was  even  more  hateful  to  him  than  to  the  natural  man,  since  under  the  Mosaic 
dispensation  it  was  declared  to  be  a  mark  of  the  displeasure  of  God.  "  The  fear  of  the 
Lord  prolongeth  days ;  but  the  years  of  the  wicked  shall  be  shortened,"  said  Solomon 
(Prov.  X.  27).  "  Bloodthirsty  and  deceitful  men  shall  not  live  out  half  their  days," 
sang  David  (Ps.  Iv.  23).  "  Long  life  "  was  a  gift  repeatedly  promised  to  the  righteous 
fProv.  iii.  2,  16  ;  ix.  10, 11 ;  Ps.  xci.  16,  etc.) ;  and  when  a  man  found  himsdf  struck 
down  by  a  dangerous  disease  in  his  middle  age,  it  seemed  to  him,  and  to  those  about 
him,  that  he  must  have  sinned  grievously,  and  so  brought  down  upon  himself  God's 
anger.  Still  more  bitter  was  the  feeling  of  one  who  was  cut  off  in  mid  life,  if  he  was 
childless.  Then  the  man's  name  was  "  clean  put  out ; "  his  memorial  perished  with 
him;  he  had  no  more  part  or  lot  in  Israel,  no  more  inheritance  among  his  brethren. 
Thus  death  remained  a  terror  and  a  calamity,  even  to  the  most  religious  Jew,  until, 
about  the  time  of  Daniel,  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  began  to  be  preached  (Dan. 
xii.  1 — 3),  and  the  life  beyond  the  grave  to  take  a  more  cheerful  a^iect. 

III.  Death  fbom  the  point  op  view  op  the  Ohkistian.  The  whole  relation  of 
death  to  life  and  of  life  to  death  became  changed  by  the  revelation  made  to  man  in 
Christ.  Then  for  the  first  time  were  "  life  and  immortality  "  fully  "  brought  to  light." 
Then  first  it  appeared  that  earth  was  a  mere  sojourning-place  for  those  who  were 
here  as  "  strangers  and  pilgrims "  upon  it,  having  "  no  continuing  city."  Then  first 
were  the  joys  of  heaven  painted  in  glowing  hues,  and  men  told  that  "  eye  had  not  seen, 
nor  ear  heard,  neither  had  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  [to  conceive],  the  things 
which  God  had  prepared  for  those  that  love  him  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).  No  sensuous  Paradise 
of  earthly  joys  was  depicted,  no  "Castle  of  Indolence,"  no  mere  haven  of  rest,  but  man's 
tru«  home,  the  place  and  state  for  which  he  was  created,  where  is  his  citizenship,  where 
he  will  be  reunited  to  those  whom  in  life  he  loved,  where  his  nature  will  be  perfected 
and  where,  above  all,  be  will  "  bo  with  Christ "  (PhiL  i.  23),  will  « see  God"  (1  John 


tia  THB  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xx.  1-21. 


iii.  2),  and  "  know  even  aa  he  is  known  "  (1  Cor.  xilL  12).  The  prospect  of  death 
thus,  to  the  true  Christian,  lost  all  its  terrors.  "  I  am  in  a  strait  hetwixt  two,''  says 
St.  Paul,  "having  a  desire  to  depart,  and  he  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better"  (PhiL 
i.  23);  and  agaiu,  "  I  am  willing  rather  to  be  ahseat  from  the  body,  and  to  be  present 
with  the  Lord  "  (2  Cor.  v.  8).  Natural  shrinking  there  may  be,  for  "  the  flesh  is  weak ; " 
but  thousands  have  triumphed  ovei  it,  have  sought  martyrdom,  have  gone  gladly  to 
their  deaths,  and  preferred  to  die.  Even  when  there  is  no  such  exaltation  of  feeling, 
death  is  contemplated  with  calmness,  as  a  paesage  to  a  better  world — a  world  where, 
there  is  no  sorrow  nor  sighing  (Isa.  xxxv.  10),  where  there  is  no  sin,  "  where  the 
wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest"  (Job  iiu  17).  Untimely  deatn 
from  natural  disease  or  accident  is  to  the  Christian  no  sign  of  God's  displeasure,  but 
rather  an  indication  of  the  contrary.  God  takes  to  himself  those  whom  he  recognizes 
as  fit  to  die,  of  whom  it  may  be  said  that  Tt\tia94vTes  iv  ixiyif  iwX'ipairay  xp^"""* 
/uMpSvs.  He  takes  them  in  love,  not  in  wrath,  to  join  the  company  of  "  the  spirits 
of  just  men  made  perfect"  (Heh.  xii.  23),  to  be  among  his  "jewels''  (Isa.  Ixi.  10; 
MaL  iii.  17). 

Vers.  12 — 18. — The  sunshine  of  prosperity  a  greater  danger  than  the  itorms  of 
adversity.  When  Sennacherib  threatens,  when  his  messengers  blaspheme,  when  the 
huge  battalions  of  the  most  powerful  kingdom  in  the  world  have  entered  his  territory 
and  are  about  to  march  upon  his  capital,  the  Jewish  monarch  remains  firm;  his 
faith  is  unshaken ;  he  casts  his  care  upon  God,  looks  to  him  and  him  only;  believes  in 
hitn,  trusts  in  him,  regards  prayer  as  the  only  door  of  safety.  Similarly,  when  disease 
prostrates  him,  when  a  painful  and  dangerous  malady  confines  him  to  his  bed,  and 
the  prophet,  instead  of  bringing  him  words  of  comfort,  is  commissioned  to  bid  him 
"set  his  house  in  order;  for  he  shall  die,  and  not  live"  (ver.  1),  his  faith  fails  not, 
in  God  is  still  his  refuge,  to  Ck>d  alone  he  betakes  himself,  and  prays  and  weeps  sore 
(vers.  2,  3).  The  blasts  of  calamity  cannot  tear  away  from  him  the  cloak  of  faith  ; 
he  clutches  it  the  tighter  the  more  the  storm  rages ;  nothing  will  induce  him  to  let  it 
go.  But  the  danger  past,  health  restored,  the  admiiation  of  foreign  kings  attracted, 
his  ear  besieged  by  congratulations  and  flatteries,  his  court  visited  by  envoys  from  "  a 
far  country,"  and  at  once  his  grasp  relaxes,  the  thought  of  God  fades  from  his  heart, 
his  faith  sUps  from  him,  and  he  is  a  mere  worldling,  bent  on  winning  to  himself  a 
great  alliance,  and  obtaining  the  aid  of  an  "  arm  of  flesh  "  against  his  enenues.  And 
so  it  is  and  will  ever  be  with  most  of  us.  We  can  bear  the  world's  frowns,  the  buffets 
of  fortune,  the  cruelty  of  oppressors,  the  open  attacks  of  rivals  and  enemies ;  we  can 
resist  them,  defy  them,  and  still  maintain  our  integrity ;  but  let  the  world  smile,  let 
fortune  favour  us,  let  riches  increase,  let  friends  spring  up  on  all  sides,  and  how  few  of 
us  can  stand  the  sunshine  I  How  few  of  us  can  remain  as  close  to  God  as  we  were 
before!  How  few  of  us  but  drop  the  habits  of  prayer,  of  comnmniug  with  God,  of 
constant  reliance  upon  him,  which  were  familiar  to  us  in  the  darker  time,  and  substitute 
a  mere  occasional  and  perfunctory  acknowledgment  of  his  goodness  1  Alas,  how  few  1 
Oh !  may  our  cry,  the  cry  of  our  heart,  ever  be,  "  In  all  time  of  our  tribulation,  in  ail 
time  of  our  wealth,  .  ,  .  good  Lord,  deliver  us  1 " 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBS, 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Eezekiah's  sickness.  Every  changing  scene  of  life  is  depicted  for  us 
in  the  Bible.  Whatever  our  circumstances  may  be,  we  can  get  some  guidance,  help,  or 
comfort  from  that  treasure-house  of  wisdom  and  experience.     We  have  here — 

I.  A  SOLEMN  MESSAGE.  "  Set  thine  house  in  order;  for  thou  shaltdie,  and  not  live." 
1.  It  was  a  sohmn  'message  for  Hezekiah.  His  kingdom  seemed  now  to  be  securely 
established.  God  had  helped  him  against  the  Philistines,  and  had  overthrown  them. 
He  was  doubtless  looking  lorward  to  many  years  of  rest  and  quietness,  when  he  might 
enjoy  for  himself  the  benefits  of  peace,  and  develop  the  resources  of  the  nation,  so  long 
desolated  by  invading  armies.  How  startling,  then,  the  announcement  of  his  approaching 
ileath  1  2.  It  it  a  solemn  message  for  every  one.  It  is  a  solemn  thing  for  a  human 
suul  to  pass  from  time  into  eternity,  to  enter  into  the  immediate  presence  of  the  Eternal, 


«H.xz.l— aL]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINGB.  418 

to  stand  before  Qod.    3.  H  U  a  message  which  may  he  tndy  spoken  to  every  one. 
"  Thou  ehalt  die,  and  not  live."    There  is  an  hour  of  death  in  store  for  every  one  of  us. 
Somewhere  in  the  unknown  future  there  waits  for  us— 
**  The  shadow  feared  of  man." 

We  know  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth.  "  In  such  an  hour  m  ye  think  not  the 
Son  of  man  cometh."  4.  The  certainty  of  death  suggests  the  necessity  for  immediate 
frvparation.  "  Set  thine  house  in  order."  Can  you  say  that  you  are  prepared  to  meet 
your  God  ?  Is  your  heart  right  with  Qoi  ?  Have  you  set  your  house  in  order  ?  The 
time  for  preparation  is  "now."  Scripture  is  very  clear  on  that  point.  It  is  nowhere 
said,  "  See  that  you  make  ready  when  death  comes."  It  is  nowhere  said, "  Look  forward 
to  being  prepared  for  death."  No ;  that  would  only  be  deceiving  us,  because  death 
might  come  before  we  were  prepared,  though  we  might  intend  to  be  prepared  if  wa 
knew  that  death  was  near.  No;  but  it  is  said,  "^e  ready."  It  is  said,  "  Prepare  to 
meet  thy  God."    "  Now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation." 

II.  A  BOBBOWFUL  KINS.  "  Hczekiah  wept  sore."  I.  He  was  not  sorrowful  because 
of  a  guilty  conscience.  He  had  endeavoured  to  serve  God  faithfully.  No  doubt  he 
had  made  mistakes.  But  his  heart  was  right  with  Gbd.  "  I  beseech  thee,  0  Lord, 
remember  now  how  I  have  walked  before  thee  in  truth  and  with  a  perfect  heart,  and 
have  done  that  which  is  good  in  thy  sight."  It  is  well  to  have  a  good  conscience  when 
the  hour  of  death  draws  nigh.  It  is  well  when  we  can  say  with  St.  Paul,  "  Herein  do 
I  exercise  myself,  to  have  always  a  conscience  void  of  o£fence  toward  God  and  toward 
men."  Such  a  man  is  always  "  ready  to  depart."  2.  He  was  sorrowful  only  because 
of  the  shortening  of  his  life.  How  little  we  know  what  is  best  for  usl  It  was  after 
this  that  Hezekiah  was  led  astray,  as  we  shall  see,  by  the  pride  of  his  heart.  Though 
God  lengthened  Hezekiah's  life  in  answer  to  his  piteous  request,  perhaps  it  would  have 
been  better  for  him  if  he  had  been  content  to  go  when  God  first  sent  for  him.  There  is 
often  a  great  mystery  to  us  when  good  men  seem  prematurely  taken  away.  But  God 
knows  the  reason  why,  and  he  doetb  all  things  well.  Let  us  leave  the  time  of  our  own 
departure,  and  the  departure  of  our  friends,  contentedly  in  God's  hands. 

III.  A  SFiiiBED  LIFE.  The  life  was  spared  in  answer  to  prayer ;  and  yet  this  case  gives 
no  encouragement  to  what  is  commonly  known  as  "  healing  by  faith."  Isaiah  directed 
the  attendants  to  take  a  lump  of  figs  and  lay  it  for  a  plaster  on  the  boil,  and  Hezekiah 
recovered  ^ver.  7  ;  Isa.  xzxviii.  21).  We  believe  in  the  power  of  faith  and  prayer  to 
heal  the  sick,  and  yet  we  believe  in  using  the  means.  We  use  food  to  preserve  and 
sustain  our  life  from  day  to  day.  There  is  no  lack  of  faith  in  that.  And  it  shows  no 
lack  of  faith  if  we  use  means  to  restore  our  life,  asking  all  the  time  that  God's  blessing 
may  accompany  the  means  we  use.  How  many  of  our  lives  has  God  spared  ?  How 
many  of  us  has  he  brought  back  again  from  the  gates  of  death?  Let  the  goodness 
of  Qoi.  lead  us  to  repentance.  Let  the  lives  that  he  has  spared  be  dedicated  to 
him.— 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  12 — 21. — Hezekiah  and  the  amhassadors.  Friendly  greetings  are  always 
welcome.  They  are  especially  so  after  a  time  of  sickness.  Hezekiah's  illness,  no  doubt, 
called  forth  many  expressions  of  sympathy,  and,  among  the  rest,  a  message  and  present 
from  Merodach-Baladan  King  of  Babylon.  The  ambassadors  who  bore  the  message 
and  the  present  were  very  courteously  received  by  Hezekiah.  Unfortunately,  he  allowed 
himself  to  be  unduly  elated  by  the  honour  done  to  him  by  the  heathen  king.  He 
showed  the  messengers  all  the  house  of  his  precious  things,  and  all  his  treasures  of  guld 
arid  silver  and  armour;  "there  was  nothing  in  his  house,  nor  in  all  his  dominion,  that 
Hezekiah  showed  them  not."    We  see  here — 

I.  Foolish  pbidb.  Hezekiah's  prosperity  for  once  led  him  astray.  1.  He  gave  not 
glory  to  God.  It  waa  God  who  haid  prospered  him,  and  crowned  all  his  labours  with 
success.  But  there  is  no  word  of  this  to  the  ambassadors.  He  takes  all  the  honour 
and  glory  to  himself.  He  might  have,  perhaps,  excused  himself,  as  many  do,  by  saying 
that  there  is  no  use  in  obtruding  our  religion  upon  strangers.  But  why  should  he  have 
been  ashamed  to  acknowledge  God's  bountiful  hand,  if  he  was  not  ashamed  to  take 
his  bounties  ?  Why  should  any  of  us  be  ashamed  to  confess  Cihriat  ?  To  be  ashamed 
of  Christ  is  not  only  weak  and  cowardly;  it  is  unreasonable.    2.  W«  mo  also  how 


414  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KmOS.       [oh.  xx.  1—21. 

foolieh  Hezekiah's  pride  was,  when  we  remember  his  recent  sickness.  It  was  not  so 
long  since  Hezekiah,  now  so  vain  and  boastful,  turned  his  face  to  the  waU,  and  wept 
sore.  The  memory  of  that  should  have  humbled  him.  Not  only  so,  but  when  he  was 
recovered  of  his  sickness,  he  made  special  promises  of  praise  to  God  and  humility  of 
spirit.  "  The  living,  the  living,  he  shall  praise  thee,  as  I  do  this  day."  Where  was 
Hezekiah's  praise  of  God's  goodness  when  these  Babylonish  ambassadors  came  to  him  ? 
"  I  shall  go  softly  all  my  years  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul"  (Isa.  xxxviii.  16).  Where 
now  is  Hezekiah's  humility  ?  On  the  contrary,  as  it  is  said  in  2  Ohron.  xxzii.  25, 
"  Hezekiah  rendered  not  again  according  to  the  benefit  done  unto  him ;  for  his  heart 
was  lifted  up."  3.  We  see  here  how  watchful  we  need  to  be  over  our  own  hearts.  We 
read  in  2  Gbron.  xxxii.  31,  "  Howbeit  in  the  business  of  the  ambassadors  of  the  princes 
of  Babylon,  who  sent  unto  him  to  inquire  of  the  wonder  that  was  done  in  the  land, 
Ood  left  him,  to  try  him,  that  he  might  know  all  that  was  in  his  heart."  We  cannot 
tell  how  we  may  act  imtil  the  temptation  comes.  Such  a  crisis  as  this  may  come  to 
each  of  us.  Let  us  watch  and  pray,  that  we  enter  not  into  temptation.  "  Above  all 
treasure  guard  thy  heart,  for  out  of  it  are  the  fountains  of  life." 

II.  A  FAITHFUL  PBDPHBT.  Isaiah  did  not  delay  in  the  path  of  duty.  Hezekiah  had 
humbled  himself  and  his  nation,  and  he  had  dishonoured  God,  be  Tore  these  heathen 
ambassadors.  Isaiah  at  once  proceeds  to  the  king's  presence,  and  rebukes  him  for  his 
folly  and  pride  (vers.  14 — 18).  Not  only  so,  but  he  forolells  that  Babylon,  whose 
avarice  had  thus  been  aroused,  would  one  day  take  advantage  of  this  act  of  weakness, 
and  take  possession  of  the  treasures  of  Jerusalem.  Hezekiah's  answer  was  wise  and 
humble.  He  was  a  God-fearing,  if  mistaken,  man.  "Good  is  the  word  of  the  Lord 
which  thou  hast  spoken."  So  let  us  receive  God's  judgments,  in  humility,  submission, 
and  patience,  and  not  in  rebellion  and  defiance.  What  a  blessing  to  a  king  to  have  a 
faithlul  and  wise  counsellor  1  What  a  blessing  to  »  nation  and  to  a  Church  to  have 
faithful  ministers!     They  who  fear  God  need  not  fear  the  face  of  man. — C.  H.  I. 

Vers.  1 — 21. — Death.  "In  those  days  was  Hezekiah  sick  unto  death,"  etc,  A 
thoughtful  man  might  raise  many  questions  on  this  chapter — indeed,  on  all  the  chapters 
in  this  book.  He  might  ask — Who  was  the  writer  of  this  chapter,  ay,  and  of  the  entire 
Books  of  Kings  ?  A  question  this  which  has  not  been  settled,  and,  perhaps,  never  will 
be.  He  might  ask  on  what  authority  certain  men,  called  prophets,  such  as  Isaiah, 
speak  as  from  heaven,  and  say,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  Priests  and  leaders  of  all 
sects  profess  to  speak  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  say,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  Such 
questions  might  open  up  discussions  of  critical  and  speculative  interest,  but  would  be 
of  no  practical  benefit  whatever.  Anyhow,  I  forego  them.  My  purpose  all  along  has 
been  to  turn  whatever  I  find  in  this  or  any  other  book  of  the  Old  Testament  to  some 
practical  use.  Some  years  before  the  overwhelming  destruction  of  Sennacherib  and  his 
army,  as  recorded  in  the  preceding  chapter,  Hezekiah  was  seized  with  some  severe 
disease  which  threatened  the  extinction  of  his  life :  death  was  before  him.  The  account 
leads  us  to  consider  death  in  three  aspects :  ns  (I)  consciously  approaching  ;  as  (2)  tempo' 
rarity  arrested;  and  as  (3)  ultimately  triumphant, 

I.  As  CONSCIOUSLY  APPBOAOHING.  "lu  those  days  was  Hezekiah  sick  unto  death. 
And  the  Prophet  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  came  to  him,  and  said  unto  him.  Thus  saith 
the  Lord,  Set  thine  house  in  order;  for  thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live."  Mark  here  three 
things.  1.  WAen  he  became  conscious  of  its  approach.  "  In  those  days."  "By  this 
expression,"  says  Dr.  Keil,  "  the  illness  of  Hezekiah  is  merely  assigned  in  a  general 
manner  to  the  same  time  as  the  events  previously  described.  That  it  did  not  occur 
after  the  departure  of  the  Assyrians,  ...  is  evident  from  the  sixth  verse,  both 
from  the  fact  that,  in  answer  to  his  prayer,  fifteen  years  more  of  life  were  promised 
him,  and  that  he,  nevertheless,  reigned  only  twenty-nine  years  (ch.  xviii.  2); 
and  also  from  the  fact  that  God  promiseil  to  deliver  him  out  of  the  hand  of  the 
Assyrians,  and  to  defend  Jerusalem."  2.  How  he  became  conscious  of  its  approach. 
"Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Set  thine  house  in  order;  for  thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live."  It 
needs  no  Isaiah,  or  any  other  prophet,  to  deliver  this  message  to  man.  It  comes  to 
him  from  all  history,  from  every  graveyard,  from  every  funeral  procession,  as  well  as 
from  the  inexorable  law  of  decay  working  ever  in  bis  constitution.  Yes;  and  not 
merely  the.  announcemeot,  but  the  duty :  "  S^t  thine  house  in  order."    (1)  Men  h«T« 


OH.  XX.  1—21.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGi  415 


much  to  do  in  this  life.  The  "house"  is  out  of  order.  (2)  TTnleBs  the  work  Is  done 
here,  it  will  not  be  done  yonder.  "Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy 
might,"  etc.  3.  How  he  felt  in  the  consciouflness  of  its  approach.  "Then  he  turned 
his  face  to  the  wall."  (1)  He  seems  to  have  been  overwhelmingly  distressed.  «  He 
wept  sore."  He  turned  away  from  the  world,  with  all  its  multiplex  concerns,  from  all 
his  regal  pomp,  and  peered  into  the  invisible  and  the  infinite.  (2)  He  cried  earnestly 
to  heaven.  "He  prayed  imto  the  Lord,  saying,  I  beseech  thee,  0  Lord,  remember  now 
how  I  have  walked  before  thee  in  truth  and  with  a  perfect  heart,  and  have  done  that 
which  is  good  in  thy  sight."  In  his  prayer  we  note  the  cry  of  nature.  All  men,  even 
those  who  are  atheistic  in  theory,  are  urged  by  the  law  of  their  spiritual  nature  to  cry 
to  heaven  in  great  and  conscious  danger.  In  his  prayer  we  also  note  something  of 
self-righteousness.  "  Remember  now  how  I  have  walked  before  thee  in  truth  and  with 
a  perfect  heart,  and  have  done  that  which  is  good  in  thy  sight."  Though  he  had  been 
free  from  most  sins,  and  had  displayed  some  virtues,  he  had  not  done  this.  Perhaps 
no  man  that  ever  appeared  on  this  earth,  save  the  "  Son  of  man,"  could  aay,  "  I  have 
walked  before  thee  in  truth  and  with  a  perfect  heart."  Moral  self-deception  is  one  of 
the  most  prevalent  sins  of  the  human  heart.  Like  the  Pharisee  in  the  temple,  we 
exult  in  virtues  we  have  not.  Now,  death  is  approaching  all  men,  whether  we  are 
conscious  of  the  fact  or  not»  The  decree  has  gone  forth, "  Thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live." 
Death  is  ever  coming  with  stealthy  steps,  yet  with  resistless  force.  He  is  coming 
always,  whether  we  are  at  home  or  abroad,  on  ocean  or  on  land,  in  society  or  in  solitude ; 
asleep  or  awake,  he,  the  king  of  terrors,  is  coming. 

II.  As  TEMPOBABiLT  ABBESTED.  Pivo  tMngs  are  to  be  observed  here.  1.  The 
primary  Author  of  its  arrest.  "  And  it  came  to  pass,  afore  Isaiah  was  gone  out  into 
the  middle  court,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him,  saying,  Turn  again,  and 
tell  Hezekiah  the  captain  of  my  people,  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  David  thy 
father,  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  I  have  seen  thy  tears:  behold,  I  will  heal  thee." 
How  came  Isaiah  into  possession  of  this  knowledge,  this  "  word  of  thie  Lord,"  con- 
cerning Hezekiah's  restoration  ?  Was  it  by  a  dream,  or  through  some  other  supernatural 
communication?  On  this  point  I  confess  my  utter  ignorance.  The  grand  practical 
idea  is  that  God  can  arrest  death,  and  he  only.  Our  times  are  in  his  tiands.  His 
constant  visitation  preserveth  us.  He  is  the  absolute  Master  of  death.  At  his 
bidding  the  most  fragile  creature  may  live  for  ever,  the  most  robust  expire.  2.  The 
secondary  means  of  its  arrest.  "  Isaiah  said.  Take  a  lump  of  figs.  And  they  took  and 
laid  it  on  the  boil,  and  he  recovered."  It  would  seem  that  the  ancients,  in  the  case  of 
boils,  abscesses,  and  such  likej  frequently  applied  figs  to  the  affected  parts,  and  no 
doubt  there  was  remedial  virtue  in  the  figs.  For  aught  we  know,  there  may  be  an 
antidote  sleeping  in  plants  and  minerals  for  all  our  physical  complaints.  The  man 
who  lives  by  the  medical  art  is  untrue  to  his  mission,  and  unfaithful  to  his  patient, 
unless  he,  with  an  independent  mind  and  a  devoted  heart,  searches  Nature  for  those 
remedial  elements  with  which  she  is  charged.  3.  The  extraordinary  sign  of  its  arrest. 
"  And  Hezekiah  said  unto  Isaiah,  What  shall  be  the  sign  that  the  Lord  will  heal  me, 
•nd  that  I  shall  go  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  the  third  day?  And  Isaiah  said, 
This  sign  shalt  thou  have  of  the  Lord,  that  the  Lord  will  do  the  thing  that  he  hath 
spoken:  shall  the  shadow  go  forward  ten  degrees,  or  go  back  ten  degrees?  And 
Hezekiah  answered,  It  is  a  light  thing  for  the  shadow  to  go  down  ten  degrees :  nay, 
but  let  the  shadow  return  backward  ten  degrees.  And  Isaiah  the  prophet  cried  unto 
the  Lord :  and  he  brought  the  shadow  ten  degrees  backward,  by  which  it  had  gone 
down  in  the  dial  of  Ahaz."  Perhaps  it  was  natural  for  a  man,  who  when  he  felt  him- 
self on  the  brink  of  eternity  was  told  he  would  recover,  to  desire  some  assurance  of  the 
fact  so  unexpected  and  yet  so  acceptable.  Hezekiah  desired  a  sign,  and  he  had  it. 
But  what  was  the  sign  ?  We  are  told  that  the  shadow  on  the  dial-plate  "  returned  ten 
degrees  backwards."  How  was  this?  Did  the  sun  recede,  or,  in  other  words,  was  the 
rotetion  of  the  earth  reversed  ?  I  know  not ;  neither  does  it  matter.  It  is  sufBcient 
to  know  that,  whether  it  was  an  illusion,  or  a  natural  eclipse  of  the  sun,  which  soma 
astronomers  say  did  actually  take  place  at  this  time  (b.o.  689),  or  a  physical  miracle, 
It  seems  to  have  satisfied  the  king.  It  seems  to  be  a  law  of  mind,  that  phenomena 
which  it  earnestly  expects  often  occur.  "  Be  it  to  thee  according  to  thy  faith."  4.  Tha 
KMfcf  «9tenaim  c^  its  arrest    **!  will  t^id  unto  th^  days  fifteen  jreara."    Tho  ad4itio|t 


4ie  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  xx.  1— 2L 


of  fifteen  years  to  man%  brief  existence  In  thia  lifi  Is  a  considerable  item,  snd  {he  more 
BO  when  that  fifteen  years  is  added  at  a  period  whtn  the  man  has  fully  reached  middle 
life,  and  passed  through  the  chief  training  experiences.    He  who  can  add  fifteen  years 
to  a  man  s  life  can  add  eternity.    "  Our  times  are  in  his  hands."    6.  The  mental  ineffi- 
ciency of  its  arrest.    What  spiritual  good  did  these  additional  fifteen  years  accomplish 
for  the  king?    They  might  Imve  done  much ;  they  ought  to  have  done  much.    But 
did  they  make  him  a  mora%  better  man,  or  an  intellectually  wiser  man?    Not  the 
former,  I  trow,  for  mark  his  vanity.    The  letters  which  the  King  of  Babylon,  Mero- 
dach-Baladan,  despatched  to  him,  together  with  a  present,  so  excited  his  egotism  that 
he  "  hearkened  [or,  as  Isaiah  puts  it, '  was  glad  *]  unto  them,"  that  is,  the  Babylonian 
deputies ;  and  "  showed  them  all  the  house  of  hu  precious  things,  the  silver,  and  the 
gold,  and  the  precious  ointment,  and  all  the  house  of  his  armour,  and  all  that  was 
found  in  his  treasures :  there  was  nothing  in  his  house,  nor  in  all  bis  dominion,  that 
Hezekiah  showed  them  not."    At  this  time  he  had  enormous  possessions.    We  find 
from  2  Chron.  xxxii.  23  that  presents  were  brought  to  Hezekiah  from  various  quarters. 
"He  had,"  says  the  Chronicler,  "exceeding  much  riches  and  honour:  and  he  made 
himself  treasuries  for  diver,  and  for  gold,  and  for  precious  stones,  and  for  spices,  and 
for  shields,  and  for  all  manner  of  pleasant  jewels ;  storehouses  also  for  the  increase  of 
com,  and  wine,  and  oil ;  and  stalls  for  aU  manner  of  beasts,  and  cotes  for  flocks  " 
(2  Chron.  zxxii.  27, 23).    All  this,  with  an  elated  vanity,  he  exposed  to  the  Babylonian 
magnates.    Vanity,  for  many  reasons,.is  one  of  the  worst  of  all  the  bad  elements  of 
depravity ;  it  is  a  species  of  moral  evil,  hideous  to  all  beholders,  and  damnable  to  its 
possessor.    Did  these  fifteen  years  added  to  his  life  make  Hezekiah  an  intellectuaUy 
wiser  mant    No;  his  judgment  was  not  improved.    In  sooth,  he  seems  to  have  lost 
that  penetration,  that  insight  into  things  and  men,  which  he  had  previously  possessed. 
How  blind  was  he  not  to  see  that,  by  exposing  his  toeasures,  he  was  exciting  the  avarice 
of  the  Babylonians,  tempting  them  to  make  an  invasion  of  his  country  1    This  Isaiah 
told  him :  "  Behold,  the  days  come,  that  all  that  is  in  thine  house,  and  that  which  thy 
fathers  have  laid  up  in  store  unto  this  day,  shall  be  carried  into  Babylon :  nothing 
shall  be  left,  saith  the  Lord.'    Affliction  does  not  always  improve  men,  either  morally 
or  intellectually.    Ah  me  I  how  many  have  I  known  who,  when  they  have  "  turned 
their  face  to  the  wall,"  writhiog  in  agony,  with  grim  death  before  them,  have  solemnly 
vowed  improvement  should  they  ever  recover?    They  have  recovered,  and  become 
worse  in  every  respect  than  before.    What  boots  a  term  of  fifteen  years,  or  even  a 
thousand  years,  added  to^our  existence,  if  our  souls  are  not  improved  thereby  ? 

III.  As  ULTIMATELY  TBIDHFEANT.  "  And  Hezekiah  slept  with  his  fathers."  The 
end  of  the  fifteen  years  came,  and  he  meets  with  the  common  destiny  of  alL  The 
unconquered  conqueror  is  not  to  be  defrauded  of  bis  prey,  however  long  delayed.  Since 
death  cannot  be  escaped  by  any,  whether  young  or  old,  it  has  been  asked,  is  there  any 
advantage  in  longevity  ?  Bather,  would  it  not  be  .better  to  die  in  the  first  dawn  of 
infancy,  than  in  any  subsequent  period?  "  Whom  the  gods  love  die  young,"  was  said 
of  yore.    We  may  go  a  step  further,  and  say,  "  Why  live  at  all  ?  "— D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — SezthicXt  tickneu.  In  order  of  time,  this  recoverr  of  King  Hezekiah 
from  sickness  stands  before  the  destruction  of  Sennacherib,  though  m  order  of  narration 
it  comes  after  it.    So  with  the  Babylonian  embassy  (see  on  ch.  xviii.  1 — ^13). 

I.  Wabnino  of  death.  1.  Untxpkntud  sicknett.  "  In  those  days  was  Hezekiah 
sick  imto  death."  His  disease  was  some  ulcerous  growth,  called  in  the  narrative  "  a 
boil."  We  have  been  accustomed  in  this  history  to  see  troubles  of  body,  and  calamities 
in  the  stat«,  connected  with  sin,  as  part  of  its  temporal  punishment.  But  there  is  no 
reason  to  believe  that  Hezekiah  was  guilty  of  any  special  transgression  which  led  to  his 
being  visited  with  this  sickness.  His  own  conscience  was  clear,  and  there  is  no 
indication  of  blame  in  the  narrative.  AfSiction  is  sent  for  other  reasons  than  the 
punishment  of  sin,  and  we  grievously  err,  and  do  great  injustice  to  the  sufierers,  if  we 
insist  on  always  interpreting  it  in  this  light.  Job's  friends  committed  this  error  (Job 
xlii.  7,  8 ;  of.  Luke  xiiL  1—6 ;  John  iz.  1 — 3).  In  Hezekiah's  case  affliction  was  no 
doubt  sent  as  a  purificatory  and  strengthening  discipline,  intended  to  try  his  faith,  and 
lead  him  to  new  experience  of  the  grace  of  Qod.  2.  The  announcement  of  death.  It 
was  wbil«  Hezekiah's  mind  was  (i^ubled  about  hja  sickness  that  the  Prophet  Isaiah 


OR.  zx.  1—21.]       THE  8E00ND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINOS.  417 

came  to  him,  and  brdbght  tbe  message,  "  Tbns  laith  the  Lord,  .  .  .  thou  shalt  die,  and 
not  liTc"  ii  its  natural  course  the  sickness  would  have  had  a  fatal  issue.  The  fact  of 
otir  mortality  is  one  we  should  often  have  before  ua.  Every  achs,  pain,  and  trouble  of 
body,  reminds  us  that  we  are  here  but  for  a  time— that  this  is  not  our  rest.  They  are 
prophetic  of  the  end.  A  time,  however,  comes  when  the  near  approach  of  the  end  is 
unmistakable,  if  not  to  the  individual  himself,  yet  to  others.  If  a  man  is  dying,  it  is 
the  truest  kindness  to  let  him  know  it.  Isaiah  might  have  withheld  this  information 
from  Hezekiah  on  the  ground  that  it  wouM.agitate  him,  might  hasten  hia  death,  could 
do  no  good,  etc., — the  usnal  pleas  for  keeping  back  from  a  patient  the  news  of  his 
hopeless  condition.  We  have  only  to  put  the  matter  to  ourselves :  would  we  like  to 
be  within  a  few  weeks  or  days  of  our  death,  and  not  be  made  aware  of  the  fact? 
WoiiJd  we  in  such  circumstances  like  to  be  buoyed  up  by  false  hopes?  Then  why 
buoy  up  others  ?  By  acquainting  a  patient  with  his  real  state,  we  ^ve  him  opportunity 
for  setting  his  house  in  order;  for  prayer  to  God  that  might, as  in  Hezekiah's  case,  lead 
to  his  recovery;  in  any  case,  for  suitably  preparing  his  mind  in  view  of  departure. 
8.  The  duty  of  prejMration.  "  Set  thine  house  in  order,"  said  Isaiah ;  "  for  thou  shalt 
die."  It  is  a  duty  incumbent  on  us,  even  in  health,  to  have  our  worldly  affairs  so 
arranged  that,  if  we  should  be  unexpectedly  removed,  they  would  be  found  in  order. 
The  neglect  of  this  simple  duty — the  putting  it  off  under  the  idea  that  there  is  still 
plenty  of  time — leads  in  numberless  cases  to  confusion,  heartburning,  strife,  and  loss. 
If  the  putting  the  house  in  order  has  not  been  attended  to,  the  approach  of  death  is  a 
solemn  call  to  do  it.  In  any  case,  there  will  be  final  arrangements,  last  words,  loving 
directions  which  belong  peculiarly  to  the  dying  hour.  If  it  is  important  to  set  our 
worldly  affairs  in  order  in  view  of  death,  how  much  more -to  have  every  tpiritual 
preparation  made  I 

n.  Fbateb  fob  lifr.  1.  EezehiaVa  distren.  The  announcement  that  he  was 
soon  to  die  filled  Hezekiah  with  deep  grief.  He  turned  his  face  to  the  wall,  prayed 
earnestly  to  God,  and  wept  sore.  The  grounds  of  bis  distress  may  be  inferred  from  the 
hymn  composed  by  him  after  his  recovery  (Isa.  xxxviii.  9 — 20).  (1)  The  natural  love 
of  life.  This  is  implanted  in  every  one.  It  has  its  root  in  a  true  instinct,  for  death  in 
the  case  of  the  human  being  is  unnatural.  It  was  not  a  part  of  the  primal  order.  Man 
as  made  by  God  was  destined  for  immortality,  not  immortality  of  the  soul  only,  but 
immortality  of  the  whole  person.  Death  is  the  violent  wrenching  asunder  of  two  parts 
of  his  personality  which  were  meant  to  be  inseparable.  It  is  the  fruit  of  sin,  and 
abnormal  (Bom.  v.  12).  (2)  The  want  of  a  clear  hope  of  immortality.  The  experience 
of  the  Old  Testament  saints  teaches  us  to  distinguish  between  a  mere  idea  of  future 
existence,  and  such  a  hope  of  immortality  as  is  now  possessed  by  Christians.  The 
Hebrew  believed  in  the  after-existence  of  the  soul.  But  this  of  itself  brought  no 
comfort  to  them.  Sheol  was  uniformly  pictured  as  a  region  of  gloom,  silence,  and 
inaction.  Its  shaJowy  life  was  no  compensation  for  the  loss  of  the  rich,  substantial 
joys  of  earthly  existeoce.  In  hours  of  depression  this  was  the  view  of  Sheol  that 
prevailed.  Only  in  moments  of  strong  faith  did  the  believer  rise  to  the  confidence  that 
God  would  be  with  him  even  in  Sheol,  and  would  deliver  his  soul  out  of  these  gloomy 
abodes.  The  Hebrew  hope  of  immortality  was  really  a  hope  of  resurrection  (Ps.  xvi. 
10 ;  xlix.  14,  IS).  It  is  Jesus  Christ  who,  in  the  full  sense  of  the  words,  has  brought 
life  and  immortality  to  light  (2  Tim.  i.  10).  (3)  The  thought  that  death  would  cut 
him  off  from  the  comforts  of  God's  presence,  and  the  privilege  of  waiting  on  God  aad 
serving  him.  This  is  implied  in  his  view  of  Sheol,  and  is  expressed  in  his  song  (Isa. 
zxxviii.  11).  It  VKB,  therefore,  no  unmanly  fear  of  death  which  Hezekiah  showed,  but 
one  resting  on  good  and  substantial  reasons.  2.  Hezekiah's  prayer.  Out  off  from 
earthly  help,  Hezekiah  betook  himself  In  earnest  prayer  to  Qoi.  The  &ct  that  he  did 
pray,  and  that  his  prayer  was  answered,  is  an  encouragement  to  us  to  pray  for  recovery 
ttota  sickness.  The  New  Testament  also  holds  out  this  encouragement  (Jas.  v.  13 — 16). 
In  his  pleadings  with  God,  Hezekiah  adopted  a  tone  which  may  seem  to  us  to  savour  too 
much  of  self-righteousness.  "  I  beseech  thee,  0  Lord,  remember  now  how  I  have  walked 
before  thee  in  truth  and  with  a  perfect  heart,"  etc  It  was  not,  however,  in  a  spuit  of 
aelf-iighteousness  that  he  urged  this  plea.  He  was  conscious  of  many  sins  (cL  Isa. 
xxzviii.  IT),  His  meaning  was  that  he  had  endeavoured  to  serve  God  futhfnlly,  and 
with  an  undivided  htartj  uui  had  the  claim  which  God's  own  promises  gave  Um  otMt 
iLKoroa,  1  1 


418  TH«  SECOND  BOOK  OS*  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  xx.  1— 2L 

*nd  blesging  to  those  who  acted  thus.  A  good  conscience  b  a  great  encouragement  io 
prayer  to  God,  though,  with  the  deeper  views  of  siu  which  the  gospel  gives,  there  is 
rightly  a  greater  shrinking  from  pleading  anything  that  might  seem  like  one's  own 
merit  (see  Ferowne's  '  Introduction  to  the  Book  of  Psalms,'  ch.  ilL  sect.  3,  "  Asser- 
tions of  innocence  in  the  Psalms  "). 

IIL  Eeoovery  from  sickness.  1,  The  promptitude  of  Oo^i  answer.  Scarcely 
had  the  prayer  left  Hezekiah's  lips  than  the  answer  was  communicated  to  Isaiah.  The 
prophet  had  npt  yet  left  the  palace,  but  was  still  within  its  precincts,  "  in  the  middle 
court,"  when  word  came  to  him  to  return  to  Hezekiah,  and  assure  hiTn  of  recovery. 
God  in  this  case,  as  always,  was  "  waiting  to  be  gracious"  (Isa.  xxx.  18).  The  answer 
was  given  (1)  out  of  regard  to  Hezekiah  himself,  "  Tell  Hezekiah  the  captain  of  my 
people;"  (2)  in  answer  to  his  supplication,  "I  have  heard  thy  prayer;"  (3)  for  the 
sake  of  David,  "  The  Lord,  the  God  of  David  thy'  father "  (and  cf.  ver.  6).  This 
recovery  was  one  of  "  the  sure  mercies  of  David"  (Isa.  Iv.  3).  For  similar  examples  of 
prompt  answer  to  prayer,  see  on  ch.  xix.  20.  2.  The  promise  of  lengthened  life.  The 
message  which  Isaiah  was  to  carry  to  Hezekiah  contained  three  parts :  (1)  a  promise 
that  he  would  be  healed,  and  able  to  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  on  the  third  day. 
"  A  striking  instance  of  the  conditionalness  of  prophecy "  (Cheyne).  Hezekiah's  first 
use  of  his  recovered  health  is  assumed  to  be  a  visit  to  God's  bouse.  (2)  A  promise  of 
fifteen  years  more  added  to  his  life.  God  thus  exceeds  his  servants'  askings.  The  king 
sought  only  healing ;  God  assures  him  of  a  prolonged  term  of  life  (cf.  Eph.  iiL  20). 
(3)  A  promise  that  the  city  would  be  defended  against  the  Assyrians.  This  waj 
another  word  to  Hezekiah  through  which  God  caused  him  to  hope  (Ps.  cxix.  49).  Yet  he 
nearly  forfeited  it  by  his  subsequent  worldly  policy  (see  previous  chapters).  3.  Hie 
king's  recovery.  Isaiah's  word  was  fulfilled,  and  the  king  recovered.  Whether  "  the 
lump  of  figs"  was  a  simple  remedy  or  a  mere  sign  need  not  be  discussed.  In  our  case 
the  duty  of  using  means  in  connection  with  prayer  is  plain. 

IV.  The  bion  or  the  sun-dial.  1.  The  request  for  a  sign.  When  Isaiah  com- 
municated his  message  to  Hezekiah,  the  king  said,  "  What  shall  be  the  sign  that  the 
Lord  will  heal  me,"  etc.  ?  One  wonders  that  to  so  good  a  man  the  prophet's  word  should 
not  have  been  sufficient,  and  that  he  should  have  asked  for  this  additional  confirmation. 
But  (I)  It  was  an  age  of  signs  (Isa.  vii.  10 — 12 ;  viii.  18 ;  ph.  xix.  29).  (2)  The  thing 
promised  was  very  wonderful  and  hard  to  believe,  especially  after  the  announcement, 
"  Thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live,"  made  a  few  minutes  before.  There  is  no  doubt  a  greater 
blessing  on  those  that  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed  (John  xx.  29) ;  but  weak 
faith  too  has  its  rights,  and  God  shows  his  condescension  in  stooping  to  give  it  the 
needed  supports.  2.  TTte  sign  given.  Isaiah  had  offered  Ahaz  a  sign,  either  "in  the 
depth,  or  in  the  height  above"  (Isa.  vii.  11).  Hezekiah  had  now  proposed  to  him  a 
sign  in  the  height.  The  shadow  on  the  steps  of  Ahaz's  sun-dial  would  be  made  either 
to  go  forward  ten  degrees  or  go  back  ten  degrees,  according  as  Hezekiah  should  desire. 
As  the  more  wonderful  phenomenon  of  the  two,  Hezekiah  asked  that  it  might  go  back  ten 
degrees,  and  at  Isaiah's  prayer  it  was  done.  We  inquire  in  vain  as  to  how  ihe  wonder 
was  produced.  The  fact  that  it  seems  to  have  been  a  local  sign,  though  widely  noised 
abroad,  suggests  a  miracle  connected  with  the  laws  of  refraction.-— J.  0. 

Vers.  12 — 19. — The  Babylonian  embassy.  Berodach-Baladan,  or  as  he  is  more 
correctly  termed  in  Isaiah,  Merodach-Baladan  (Isa.  xxxix.  1),  at  this  time  held 
possession  of  the  throne  of  Babylon,  and  was  everywhere  casting  about  for  alUancei 
to  strengthen  him  against  Assyria.  We  have  here  the  account  of  his  embassy  to 
Hezekiah. 

I.  Beckftiok  of  thk  BABYl.oinAN  MESSENOERB.  1.  Sezekiah's  visitors.  In  the 
streets  of  Jerusalem  were  seen  strange  men,  in  princely  robes,  with  servants  bearing 
costly  presents.  They  were  the  envoys  of  the  King  of  Babylon,  ostensibly  come  to 
congratulate  Hezekiah  on  his  recovery  from  sickness,  and  to  inquire  into  the  wonder 
that  had  been  done  in  the  land  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  31).  This,  however,  was,  it  is  probable, 
only  a  pretext  to  cover  their  real  object,  which  was  to  establish  an  offensive  and  defensive 
alliance  with  Hezekiah  against  Assyria.  Professions  of  friendship  veiled  the  designi  of 
■  merely  selfish  policy.  Does  not  much  of  what  is  called  diplomacy  consist  of  deceit, 
insincere  profession,  intrigue,  lubtle  designs,  covered  by  &ir  appearances  ?   2.  Het»kia}t'$ 


OS.  XX.  1—21.]       THE  8BC0Nt>  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  419 


vanity.  Hezekiah  seems  to  have  been  completely  imposed  on  by  the  fidr  woids  of  his 
visitors.  He  felt  flattered  at  being  singled  out  for  notice  by  this  king  of  "a  far 
country,"  and  spared  no  pains  to  impress  the  ambassadors  with  ideas  of  his  own  greatness. 
He  showed  them  all  his  treasures,  all  the  resources  of  his  kingdom,  his  silver,  his  gold, 
his  precious  things,  everything  he  had.  This  love  of  display,  this  vain  desire  to  stand 
well  in  the  estimation  of  a  foreign  potentate,  this  boasting  of  mere  worldly  wealth  as 
tlie  distinction  of  his  kiogdom,  shows  a  weakness  we  should  not  have  expected  in  this 
good  king.  No  man  is  perfect.  The  best  character  has  its  side  of  weakness,  and  men 
are  singularly  apt  to  be  led  astray  when  skilful  appeals  are  made  to  their_  vanity. 
3.  Hezekiah's  sin.  It  was  not  a  mere  weakness  of  human  nature  that  Hezekiah  was 
guilty  of  when  he  "hearkened"  unto  the  ambassadors,  and  showed  them  all  his 
precious  things.  It  was  not  for  a  mere  yielding  to  vanity  that  Isaiah  afterwards  so 
severely  rebuked  him.  His  offence  was  of  a  graver  kind.  The  ambassadors  had  como 
with  proposals  for  an  alliance,  and  in  hearkening  to  them  on  this  subject  Hezekiah  bad 
really  been  unfaithful  to  his  position  as  a  theocratic  king.  He  was  departing  from  the 
example  set  him  by  David.  As  king  of  the  holy  nation,  it  was  hi*  duty  to  keep 
himself  free  from  entangling  worldly  alliances,  to  make  God  his  boast,  to  rely  on  him 
for  defence  and  help,  and  to  resist  solicitations  to  worldly  pride  and  vanity.  From  this 
ideal  he  had  fallen.  Flattered  by  the  attention  of  hiB  visitors,  deceived  by  their 
specious  proposals,  and  led  away  with  the  idea  of  figuring  as  an  important  political 
personage,  he  consented,  or  was  disposed  to  consent,  to  the  alliance  sought.  In 
displaying  his  treasures,  he  was  practically  placing  them  before  God,  as  the  glory  and 
defence  of  his  kingdom.  In  reciprocating  the  friendship  of  the  foreigners,  accepting 
their  gifts,  and  encouraging  their  advances,  he  was  taking  a  first  step  in  that  direction 
of  forming  worldly  alliances,  which  afterwards  brought  such  trouble  on  the  state.  It 
was  this  policy,  indeed,  which  ultimately  led  to  the  Captivity,  as  already  a  similar 
policy  had  wrought  the  ruin  of  Israel.  The  lessons  for  the  Christian  are  obvious. 
"The  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God"  (Jas.  iv.  4).  It  is  his  duty  to 
avoid  worldly  display,  to  guard  ap;ainst  being  ruled  by  worldly  motives  and  ambitions, 
and  to  avoid  ensnaring  worldly  alliances.  He  who  gives  way  to  these  things  is  laying 
the  foundations  of  his  own  spiritual  overthrow. 

II.  Pbediotion  of  the  Babtlonian  captivity.  1.  The  prophet  confronts  the 
king.  In  the  theocracy  the  prophet  stood  beside  the  king,  to  be  his  friend,  guide,  and 
counsellor  if  he  did  right,  and  his  accusing  conscience  if  he  did  wrong.  Thus  Nathan 
confronted  David  (2  Sam.  liL  1 — 14),  Elijah  confronted  Ahab  (1  Kings  xviii.  17 ; 
xxi.  17 — Zi\  Zechariah  confronted  Joash  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  20).  Here  Isaiah  confronts 
Hezekiah,  and  calls  him  to  account  for  his  transgression.  The  king  did  not  seem 
aware  of  his  wrong-doing,  for  he  answered  the  prophet's  questions  with  the  utmost 
frankness.  (1)  The  questions  Isaiah  asked  were  searching  ones.  He  made  Hezekiah 
tell  out  of  his  own  mouth  who  the  men  were  that  had  come  to  him,  whence  they  came, 
and  how  he  had  received  them.  The  object  of  these  interrogations  was  to  make 
Hezekiah  aware  of  his  sin.  Many  a  thing  is  done,  of  which  we  do  not  at  first  perceive 
the  criminality,  but  the  sin  of  which  is  obvious  enough  when  we  have  had  the  deed  set 
objectively  before  us.  (2)  Hezekiah's  answers  revealed  the  folly  he  had  committed. 
In  the  very  stating  of  what  he  had  done,  Hezekiah  must  have  perceived  the  magnitude 
of  his  error.  It  is  God's  design  in  his  questioning  of  us  to  bring  us  to  conviction.  He 
would  have  us  judge  ourselves.  It  does  not  follow,  that  because  we  are  unconscious  of 
sin,  therefore  we  have  no  sin.  The  object  of  Divine  discipline  is  to  make  us  conscious. 
Every  sinner  will  at  the  last  be  convicted  out  of  his  own  mouth.  2.  The  prophet 
predicts  the  Captivity.  If  doubt  remained  in  Hezekiah's  mind  as  to  his  wrong-doing,  it 
was  speedily  dispelled  by  Isaiah's  stern  answer  to  him.  The  prophet,  without  further 
parley,  announced  God's  punishment  for  the  sin  committed.  The  penalty  answered,  as 
BO  many  of  God's  penalties  do,  to  the  nature  of  the  transgression.  The  messengers  had 
come  from  Babylon;  into  Babylon  should  Hezekiah's  sons  (descendants)  be  carried 
away.  He  h^d  displayed  his  treasures ;  these  treasures  would  be  carried  to  Babylon. 
He  desired  union  with  Babylon ;  he  should  have  it  in  a  way  he  did  not  look  for.  A 
prophecy  of  this  nature  implied  a  collapse  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  as  complete  as  that 
which  had  overtaken  Israel.  Such  a  collapse  was,  of  course,  the  product  of  many  causes, 
moat  of  them  abready  in  operation.    But  not  the  least  potent  was  the  species  of  worldly 


490 


TH£  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EIKGSL       [«h.  xxi.  1— a& 


policy  of  wbieh  Hezekiah's  action  was  •  typical  example.  As  an  outstanding  and 
contributory  cause,  God  fixes  on  it  as  the  point  of  connection  for  the  prophecy.  We 
must  take  onr  share  of  the  responsibility  of  every  event  which  our  actions  have 
contributed  to  produce.  8.  The  km^t  reply.  Hezekiah  was  no  doubt  shocked  and 
startled  by  Isaiah's  message.  The  only  ray  of  consolation  he  derived  was  in  the 
thought  that  the  predicted  evil  was  not  to  fall  in  his  days,  but  in  that  of  his 
descendants.  His  language  on  this  point,  "  Is  it  not  good,  if  peace  and  truth  shall 
be  in  my  days  ?  "  may  seem  selfish  and  even  cjrnical.  It  is  doubtful,  however,  if  there 
is  much  room  for  blame.  Hezekiah  gathered  that  a  period  of  respite  was  granted,  and 
that  the  fulfilment  of  the  threatening  was  somewhat  remote.  He  rightly  took  this  as 
an  act  of  mercy  to  himself.  There  are  probably  few  who  would  not  feel  relieved  to 
know  that,  though  calamities  were  to  fall  upon  their  land  in  future  days,  there  would 
be  peace  and  truth  in  their  own  lifetime.  With  lapse  of  time,  too,  ^opportunity  was 
^ven  for  repentance;  and  who  knew  but  that  the  sentence  of  doom  might  be 
reversed  ? — J.  0. 

Vers.  20,  21  sum  up  briefly  the  good  deeds  of  Hezekiah  for  the  city,  and  narrate  hi* 
end  (see  2  Chron.  zxxiL  1—5}.— J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


Vers.  1 — ^26. — The  Beionb  of  Manasseh 

AND  AmON. 

Vers.  1 — 18. — Thb  Beion  qv  Manasseh. 
Hezekiah's  good  and  glorious  reign  was 
followed  by  one  of  exactly  the  opposite  cha- 
racter. His  son  and  succesaor,  Manasseh, 
reversed  Hezekiah's  entire  religious  policy, 
and  returned  to  the  wicked  practices  of  his 
grandfather  Ahaz.  In  vers.  8 — 9  and  ver. 
16  his  various  abominations  are  enumerated, 
while  in  vers.  10 — 15  God's  sentence  is 
pronounced  upon  them.  The  account  of 
his  reign  terminates  with  a  brief  summary 
(vers.  17.  18). 

Ver.  1. — Uanasseh  was  twelTe  yean  old. 
Manasseh  was  thus  not  bom  till  three 
years  after  Hezekiah's  dangerous  illness,  or 
till  the  year  b.o.  710.  Hezekiah  may  have 
given  him  the  name  in  the  spirit  in  which 
Joseph  gave  it  to  his  firstborn  (Gen.  xIL 
51),  because  God,  in  at  last  blessing  him 
with  a  son,  had  "made  him  forget"  his 
dangerous  illness,  with  the  griefs  and  regrets 
that  accompanied  it.  "Manasseh"  means 
"  Forgetting."  When  he  began  to  reign- 
in  B.o.  698  or  697,  tiie  seventh  oi  eighth 
year  of  Sennacherib— and  reigned  fifty  and 
five  years  in  Jerusalem,  8o  the  author  of 
Ohronioles  (2  Chron.  zxxiii.  1)  and  Jose- 
phus  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  8.  §  2).  The  reign 
exceeds  in  length  that  of  any  other  King  of 
Judah  or  Israel.  And  his  mother's  name 
was  Hephzibah.  "Hephzibah"  means  "Hy 
delight  is  in  her."  Isaiah  gives  it  as  a 
namn  of  honour  to  the  restored  Jerasalem 


(Isa.  Ixii.  4).  It  has  been  conjectured  that, 
as  queen-mother,  Hephzibah  was  regent 
during  her  son's  minority.  But  tiiere  is  no 
trace  of  her  regency  either  in  Kings  or 
Chronicles. 

Ver.  2. — ^And  he  did  that  which  was  evil 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  Manasseh  was  too 
young  at  the  death  of  his  father  for  his  cha- 
racter to  have  been  then  definitively  formed. 
He  probably  fell  under  the  influence  of 
the  "  princes  of  Judah,"  who,  supported  by 
many  of  the  priests,  had  maintained  them, 
selves  as  a  party  antagonistic  to  Isaiah 
during  the  whole  of  Hezekiah's  reign.  He- 
zekiah's  reformation  had  been  carried  out 
against  their  wishes.  They  had  always 
leant  towards  foreign  alliances  (Isa.  xx.  5 ; 
XXX.  1 — ^7)  and  foreign  rites  (Isa.  ii.  6 — 9; 
Ixv.  3).  The  accession  of  a  boy-king  would 
be  joyfully  hailed  by  them,  and  they  would 
make  every  effort  to  draw  him  to  their  side. 
It  would  seem  that  they  were  successful. 
After  the  abominations  of  the  heathen — the 
details  which  follow  in  vers.  3 — 9  suffi- 
ciently explain  this  strong  expression — 
whom  the  Lord  cast  out  before  the  oluldren 
of  Israel.  It  was  solely  because  of  their 
abomination!  that  they  were  cast  out  (see 
Gen.  XV.  16 ;  Lev.  xviii.  25 ;  xx.  23 ;  Dent, 
ix.  S;  xviii.  12,  ete.). 

Ver.  8. — ^For  he  built  up  agidn  the  high 
places  which  Hezekiah  his  father  had  de- 
stroyed (oomp.  oh.  xviii.  4,  22).  On  the 
high-place  worship,  see  the  comment  upon 
1  Kings  xiv.  23.  It  is  quite  clear  that  the 
people  were  deeply  attached  to  it,  and 
gladly  saw  it  restored.  And  he  reared  up 
altars  for  Baal;  i.e.  he  reintroduced  the 
Phosnioian  Baal-worship,  the  special  abomi< 
nation  of  the  house  of  Ahab  (1  Kings  xvi. 


Ob.  zu.  1—26.]       TBB  SfiCOKD  BOOK  Of  tBE  KlNOSb 


W. 


81:  zxii-  53;  oh.  Tiii.  18,  27,  etc.),  wMoh 
Atbaliah  had  been  the  firit  to  intiodnoe 
into  Jndah  (eh.  xi.  18),  which  Joash  had  put 
away  (eh.  xi.  18),  but  which  Ahaz  (2  Ohron. 
zxTiii.  2)  had  recalled.  And  made  a  grove ; 
literally,  an  Asherah,  or  emblem  of  Astarte 
(compare  the  comment  on  1  Kings  xir.  23) 
— as  did  Ahab  King  of  Israel  (see  1  Kings 
xtL  33)  and  worshipped  all  the  host  of 
heaven,  and  served  them.  The  worship  of 
the  host  of  heaven,  or  the  entire  multitude 
of  the  heavenly  bodies,  commonly  known  as 
Sabnanism  or  Ssabianism,  was  an  ancient 
Babylonian,  Arabian,  and  Syrian  practice. 
It  had,  perhaps,  been  introduced  among  the 
Jews  by  Ahaz  (oh.  xxiii.  12).  At  any  rate, 
it  was  from  the  time  of  Manaaseh  one  of 
the  favourite  idolatries  of  the  Jewish  people. 
The  itars  were  believed  to  guide  the  des- 
tiny of  men,  and  astrology  was  cultivated 
as  a  main  part,  or  even  as  the  essence,  of 
religion.  Astrological  tracts  form  an  im- 
portent  element  in  the  literature  of  the 
Babylonians  (see '  Records  of  the  Fast,'  vol.  i. 
pp.  153 — 163).  The  chief  objects  of  adora- 
tion in  this  worship  were  the  sun  and 
moon,  the  five  planets,  and  the  signs  of  the 
zodiac. 

Ver.  4. — ^And  he  built  altars  is  the  honss 
of  the  Lord.  He  created,  i.e.,  altars  to  other 
gods  in  the  very  temple  of  Jehovah  (see. 
ver.  5).  This  was  a  pollution  beyond  any 
that  either  Athaliah  or  Ahaz  had  vejitured 
on.  Of  which  the  Lord  had  said,  In  Jerusalem 
will  I  put  my  Name  (see  1  Kings  viii.  29 ; 
is.  8 ;  xiv.  21).  Where  Jehovah  "  put  his 
Name,"  making  the  place  his,  and  conde- 
scending, in  a  certain  sense,  to  dwell  there, 
it  might  at  least  have  been  expected  that 
he  would  not  find  himself  confronted  with 
rivals. 

Yer.  5. — And  he  built  altars  for  all  the 
host  of  heaven  in  the  two  courts  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  The  temple  of  Solomon 
had  two  oonits  only,  an  inner  and  an  outer. 
The  outer  court  was  for  the  people,  the 
inner  for  the  priests  and  Levites.  Manas- 
seh  desecrated  the  temple  to  the  extent  of 
setting  up  in  each  of  these  two  courts  an 
idolatrous  altar,  dedicated  to  the  worship 
of  the  host  of  heaven.  In  the  inner  court 
his  altar  was  a  rival  to  the  great  brazen 
altar  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  ix.  61 ;  2  Ghron. 
iv.  1),  which  Ahaz  had  for  a  time  removed 
from  its  place  in  (loni  of  the  porch  (ch.  xvi. 
14),  but  which  Hezekiah  had  most  certainly 
leinstatad. 

Ver.  6.  —  And  he  .made  his  son  pass 
through  the  fire.  The  author  of  Chronicles 
says,  "  his  eons  "  (2  Chron.  xxxiii,  6) ;  but 
this  is,  perhaps,  rhetorical.  It  was  usually 
the  eldest  son,  who,  as  the  most  precious 
possible  offering,  was  sacrificed  to  Molooh 
(see  oh.  iii  37;  xvi  8;  and,  for  the  true 


nature  of  the  saoriflee,  see  the  comment  on 
this  latter  passage).  And  observed  times. 
If  this  translation  is  right,  the  reference 
would  be  to  a  superstitious  regard  for  lucky 
and  unlnoky  days,  such-  as  we  note  in  the 
accounts  left  of  themselves  by  the  Baby- 
lonian kings,  who  begin  their  buildings  "  in 
a  happy  month,  on  an  auspicious  day  "  (see 
the  author's  'Herodotus,'  vol.  ii.  p.  487). 
But  probably  the  true  meaning  is,  "he 
exercised  Paaxavia,"  or,  "  had  regard  to  the 
evil  eye,"  a  common  superstition  in  the  East. 
And  used  enchantments,  A  use  of  spella 
is  perhaps  intended,  such  ais  those  by  which 
serpents  (o'E'ra)  were  charmed  (see  the  com- 
ment on  Isa.  xlvii.  9).  And  dealt  with 
familiar  spirits  and  wizards  —  rather,  he 
placed  in  office  necromancer!  (literally,  a  ne 
eromaneer)  and  wizards;  i.e.  he  gave  such 
persons  ofBcial  positions  at  his  court,  in- 
stead of  putting  them  to  death,  as  the  Law 
(Lev.  XX.  27)  required— he  wrought  much 
wickedness  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  to 
provoke  him  to  anger;  literally,  he  multi- 
plied to  worTc  vaicltednees ;  i.e.  he  sought  out 
every  possible  way ;  he  not  only  restored 
all  the  different  kinds  of  heathen  sacrifices 
and  idolatrous  customs  which  had  been  in 
use  under  Abnz,  but  carried  his  opposition 
to  Jehovah  a  great  deal  further.  As  Ewald 
says  (•  History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  208), 
"He  endeavoured  to  become  acquainted 
with  all  the  heathen  religions  he  could  tind 
and  introduce  them  into  Judah.  For  this 
purpose  he  sent  into  the  most  distant  lauds 
where  there  was  any  famous  cultus,  and 
grudged  no  pains  for  his  one  object." 

Ver.  7. — And  he  set  a  graven  image  of  the 
grove  that  he  had  made  in  the  house.  He 
introduced  into  the  temple,  and  set  d^  there 
for  adoration,  an  elaborately  wrought  Ashe- 
rah, or  "  sacred  tree,"  probably  copied  from 
the  elaborate  sacred  trees  of  the  Assyrians 
('Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.  2:^6). 
These  had,  in  the  centre,  the  essential 
tteW,  or  pillar,  ornamented  with  rams'  lioms, 
symbols  of  fecundity,  and  crowned  with  a 
representation  of  a  palm  tree,  the  whole 
being  encircled  by  a  framework  of  metal, 
twined  about  it,  and  throwing  ont  from  the 
circumference,  at  intervals,  either  palms  or 
blossoms,  or  in  some  instances  pomegra- 
nates or  fir-cones.  All  the  parts  represented 
either  animal  or  vegetable  productiveness- 
Of  whioh  the  Lord  said  to  David,  and  Co 
Solomon  his  son,  In  this  house,  and  in  Jeru- 
salem, which  I  have  chosen  ont  of  all  the 
tribes  of  Israel,  will  I  put  my  Name  for  ever. 
It  was  the  extremest  aggravation  of  Manas- 
seh's  wickedness  that  be  was  not  content 
to  introduce  his  new  religions  into  the  land 
in  other  places,  but  brought  them  to  God's 
special  city  which  he  had  chosen,  namely, 
Jerusalem,  and  there  established  them,  not 


1^2 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [ch.  xh.  1— 26. 


on  tbe  opposite  hills,  as  Solomon  had  done 
(1  Kings  xi.  7),  or  in  a  riral  temple  within 
the  walls,  as  had  been  done  by  Athaliah 
(ch.  xi,  18),  but  within  God's  holy  temple 
itself.  In  each  of  the  two  courts  he  placed 
an  idolatrous  altar,  whereon  the  people  were 
invited  to  deposit  their  offerings ;  and  pro- 
bably in  the  temple  building  itself,  perhaps 
in  the  very  holy  of  holies,  he  placed  that 
lust-exciting  emblem  of  Astarte,  which  was 
the  most  horrible  profanation  of  all  true 
religion,  turning  the  truth  anrl  grace  of  God 
into  lasciviousness  (Jude  4).  What  practical 
consequences  followed  on  this  profanation, 
we  are  not  distinctly  told ;  but  we  may 
readily  surmise,  especially  in  the  light  of 
ch.  xxiii.  7. 

Ver.  8. — Neither  will  I  make  the  feet  of 
Israel  move  any  more  out  of  the  land  which 
I  gave  their  fathers.  The  writer's  argu- 
ment is  that  Mauasseh,  by  these  impieties, 
annulled  God's  promises,  brought  about  the 
destruction  of  the  temple  and  of  Jerusalem, 
and  caused  the  entire  people  to  be  carried 
off  into  captivity.  The  promises  of  perma- 
nence to  the  city  and  temple,  and  of  the 
continued  possession  of  the  land  by  the 
people,  were,  he  notes,  conditional;  and 
Manasseh,  by  breaking  through  the  condi- 
tions, forfeited  them  (oomp.  ch.  xxiv.  3). 
Only  if  they  will  observe  to  do  according  to 
all  that  I  have  commanded  them,  and  accord- 
ing to  all  that  my  servant  Moses  commanded 
them.  The  words  are  not  taken  from  any 
single  passage,  but  expiess  the  general 
sense  of  numerous  passages,  as  for  example 
of  Deut.  iv.  25—27 ;  xxx.  15—19 ;  P.s.  Ixxxix. 
28—32 ;  1  Kings  ix.  4-  9,  etc. 

Ver.  9. — But  they  hearkened  not.  The 
people,  and  not  Manasseh  alone,  were  dis- 
obedient. Had  they  remained  faithful,  Ma- 
nasseh's  sin  would  not  have  affected  their 
future.  And  Manasseh  seduced  them.  The 
influence  of  a  young  and  gay  king,  always 
great,  is  in  the  East  immense.  When  such 
a  king  succeeds  one  of  strict  and  rigid  prin- 
ciples, he  easily  carries  away  the  multitude 
with  him,  and  leads  them  on  to  any  excess 
of  profligacy  and  irreligion.  The  begin- 
nings of  sill  are  delightful,  and  the  votaries 
of  pleasure,  readily  beguiled  into  evil  courses, 
know  not  where  to  stop.  Mauasseh  seduced 
them,  we  are  told,  to  do  more  evil  than 
did  the  nations  whom  the  Lord  destroyed 
before  the  children  of  Israel ;  tliat  is,  than 
the  Hivites,  Hitlites,  Amorites,  Canaanites, 
Perizzites,  Gergashites,  and  Jebusites 
(Deut.  vii.  1,  etc.).  The  sin  of  Israel  ex- 
ceeded that  of  the  Canaanitish  nations,  not 
BO  much  in  any  outward  and  tangible 
features,  as  in  the  fact  that  it  was  com- 
mitted against  light,  in  spite  of  the  Law, 
and  against  all  the  warnings  and  denuncia- 
tiont  of  the  prophets  (comp.  oh.  xvii.  13,  14), 


Ver.  10. — And  the  lord  spake  by  ica  lar- 
vants  the  prophets,  saying.  It  is  uncertain 
who  were  the  prophets  of  Manasseh'a  time. 
Probably  Isaiah  was  one  of  them  (see  'In- 
troduction to  Isaiah,'  p.  iii.).  Habakkuk 
is  thought  to  have  been  another  (Keil). 
Nahum  and  Zephaniah  seem  also  to  belong, 
in  part,  to  his  reign. 

Ver.  11. — Because  Uanasseli  Kin^  of 
Jndah  hath  done  these  abominationB  (comp. 
ver.  2),  and  hath  done  wickedly  above  all 
that  the  Amorites  did,  whioh  were  before 
him  (comp.  ver.  9).  'The  "  Amorites  "  are 
put  here  (as  in  Gen.  xv.  16 ;  1  Kings  xxi. 
26 ;  and  Amos  ii.  9, 10)  for  the  Canaanitish 
nations  generally.  Next  to  the  Hittites, 
they  were  the  most  important  of  the  seven 
nations.  And  hath  made  Jndah  also  to  sin 
with  his  idols  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  9). 
Ver.  12.— Therefore  thns  saith  the  Lord 
Ood  of  Israel,  Behold,  I  am  bringing  such 
evil  upon  Jerusalem  and  Jndah,  that  whoso- 
ever heareth  of  it,  both  his  ears  shaU  tingle. 
"As  a  sharp  discordant  note,"  says  Bahr, 
"  pains  one's  ears,  so  the  news  of  this  harsh 
punishment  shall  give  pain  to  all  who  hear 
of  it."  The  phrase  is  one  never  uttered  by 
any  other  lips  than  those  of  Jehovah  (I 
Sam.  iii.  11;  Jer.  xix.  3).  "It  denotes" 
(Keil)  "  such  a  judgment  as  has  never  been 
heard  of  before,  and  excites  alarm  and  hor- 
ror." Not  the  Jews  only,  but  the  other 
neighbouring  nations,  when  they  heard  of 
the  sufferings  endured  in  the  siege  (ch.  xxv. 
S),  and  the  severities  exercised  upon  the 
king  (ver.  7)  and  the  city  (vers.  9,  10)  and 
the  inhabitants  (ver.  11),  would  have  a  thrill 
of  pain  go  through  them  at  the  hearing, 
partly  unselfish,  partly  perhaps  selfish,  since 
the  treatment  that  was  dealt  out  to  others 
might  also  be  reserved  for  them. 

Ver.  13. — And  I  will  stretch  over  Jerusa- 
lem the  line  of  Samaria ;  i.e.  "  I  will  do  to 
Jerusalem  as  I  have  done  to  Samaria;  I 
will  execute  upon  it  a  similar  judgment." 
God  applies  his  measuring-line,  a  perfectly 
uniform  staudard,  to  all  nations,  as  to  aU 
individuals,  and  metes  out  to  tliem  an  equal 
measure  of  justice.  Jerusalem  will  be  pre- 
sently treated  as  Samaria  has  been  recently 
treated ;  and  a  similar  destruction  will  over- 
take it.  The  metaplior  is  not  to  be  pressed, 
as  if  cities  were  destroyed  with  as  much  oare 
as  tliey  are  built,  by  constant  use  of  the 
measuring-line  and  the  plummet.  And  the 
plummet  of  the  house  of  Ahab.  The  justice 
meted  out  to  the  house  of  Ahab  shall  be 
meted  out  also  to  the  house  of  David.  The 
ways  uf  God  are  equal  (Ezek.  xviii.  25),  and 
he  is  no  "  respecter  of  persons."  He  has  one 
law  for  all ;  and,  as  the  house  of  David  has 
sinned  in  the  same  way,  and  to  the  same  ex- 
tent, as  the  house  of  Ahab  had  sinned,  ona 
and  the  same  punishment  will  fall  npei 


oa,  XXI.  1—26  J       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THB  KINGS. 


423 


both  of  them.  And  I  will  wipe  Temaalem 
as  a  man  wipeth  a  dish,  wiping  it,  and 
tmning  it  upside  down.  Jerusalem  will 
be  emptied,  as  a  man  empties  his  dish  of 
the  refuse  scraps  remaining  on  it,  and  will 
be  then  put  away,  as  done  with.  The 
metaphor  expresses  contempt  as  well  as 
condemnatiou. 

Yer.  11. — And  I  will  forsake  the  remnant 
of  mine  inheritance.  "  The  remnant "  here 
is  not  the  lemnant  left  of  Judah  after  the 
deportation  of  two  hundred  thousand  souls 
by  Sennacherib  (as  in  ch.  xix.  4),  but  the 
remnant  that  is  left  of  the  wiiole  people  of 
Israel — the  two  tribes  as  distinct  from  the 
ten.  The  ten  tribes  were  forsaken  when 
the  Assyrians  took  and  destroyed  Samaria 
(oil.  xvii.  18,  23) ;  the  two  remained.  Now 
the  two  also  would  be  forsaken,  and  the  last 
remnant  of  God's  inheiitance  cast  out.  And 
deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies. 
Not  the  Chaldeans  only,  who  were  not  yet 
"their  enemies,"  but  their  persistent  and 
inveterate  enemies,  the  Syrians,  Moabltes, 
Ammonites  (see  ch.  xxiv.  2),  and  Bdomites 
(Ezek.  XXV.  12 ;  Joel  iii.  19),  who  all  joined 
with  Nebuchadnezzar  at  the  last,  and  (as 
Ewald  says,  'History  of  Israel.'vol.  iv.  p.  270) 
"indulged  their  ancient  hatred  by  taking 
a  very  active  part  in  tlie  final  war."  ,  And 
they  shall  beoome  a  prey  and  a  spoil  to  all 
their  enemies  (comp.  Jer.  xli.  2 — 10 ;  xlviii. 
27 ;  Chad.  10—14;  Zeph.  ii.  8,  etc.).  The 
years  which  immediately  followed  the  Cap- 
tivity were  years  of  terrible  sufifering  to  the 
remnant  whom  Nebuchadnezzar  left  in  the 
land  (ch.  xxv.  12).  Every  petty  povfer  in 
the  neighbourhood  felt  itself  at  liberty  to 
make  incursions  with  Judssa  at  its  pleasure, 
to  plunder  and  ravage,  and  drive  off  cap- 
tives, or  massacre  them  in  cold  blood,  or 
commit  any  other  atrocity.  Some  critics 
regard  the  description  of  Isaiah  in  ch.  xlii. 
22—24  as  prophetic  of  these  sufferings. 

Ver.  15. — Because  they  have  done  that 
which  was  evil  in  my  sight.  The  chief  sins 
of  the  people  were  the  following:  Altars 
for  the  worship  of  the  host  of  heaven  were 
erected  npon  almost  every  roof  (Jer.  xix. 
13  J  Zeph.  i.  5);  offerings  of  cakes  were 
made  in  the  very  streets  to  Astarte  (Jer.  vii. 
18);  the  fire  of  Tophet — a  huge  furnace  in 
the  valley  of  Hinnom — was  kept  constantly 
burning,  and  the  sacrifice  of  innocent 
children  to  the  bloody  sun-god,  Moloch,  was 
perpetual  (Jer.  vii.  31 ;  Ezek.  xxiii.  37) ; 
it  was  as  common  to  swear  by  the  name  of 
Moloch  as  by  that  of  Jehovah  (Zeph.  i.  5). 
Lascivious  rites  were  practised.  Close  by 
he  temple  the  unchaste  priestesses  of  Venus 
liad  their  habitations,  and  tiieir  wretched 
nale  attendants,  the  Galli  of  the  classical 
writers,  plied  their  trade  (ch.  xxiii.  7). 
Cruelty  and  oppieanon  increased  among  the 


upper  classes  (Zeph.  ilL  1 — 3);  the  prophets 
were  "light  and  treaoherous  persons;"  the 
priests  "polluted  the  eanctuary,  and  did 
violence   to   the  Law"  (Zeph.  ii.    1—3). 
"Spoiling  and  violence,"  "strife  and  con- 
tention ;"  were  rife  throughout  the  city(Hab. 
i.  3).    Ewald  sums  up  the  state  of  tilings  as 
follows ;  "  The  atmosphere  of  the  age  was 
poisoned  from  above ;  and  the  leaders  of  the 
people  of  every  class,  whose  moral  decline 
had  already  become  a  subject  of  lament  in 
the  preceding  century,  sank  into  an  almost 
incredible  degeneracy.    The  prophets,  who 
ought  to  have  been  ever  the  most  loyal 
gnardians  of  the  truth,  were  for  the  most 
part  like  dumb  and  greedy  dogs ;  many  of 
the  priests  allowed  themselves  to  be  seduced 
into  offering  heathen  sacrifices;  the  judges 
and  nobles  paid  little  heed  to  the  eternal 
right.    Equivocation  and  hypocrisy  spread 
among  those  who  ought  to  have  ministered 
most  austerely  to  public  truthfulness  of  life ; 
while  those  who  were  engaged  in  commerce 
and  trade  sank  into  the  harshest  indifference 
to  every  higher  aim,  and  thought  only  of 
the  acquisition  and  enjoyment  of  wealth. 
So  terrible  was  the  demoralization  whlcli 
set  in  under  Manasseh,  that  those  who  re- 
mained faithful  to  the  ancient  religion  were 
either  scoffed  at  as  fools,  or  allowed  to  perish 
in  cold  contempt  without  any  effort  being 
made  to  save  them,  and  were  even  derided 
after  their  death."    And  have  provoked  me 
to  anger,  since  the  day  their  fathers  oame 
forth  out  of  Egypt,   even  unto  this  day. 
The  moral  and  spiritual  depravity  of  Judah, 
though  it  only  came  to  a  head  in  the  time 
of  Manasseh,  had  its  roots  in  a  long-distant 
past.     As  St.  Stephen  pointed  out  to  the 
Sanhedrin  (Acts  vii.  39—43),  it  began  in 
the    wilderness  with    the  worship  of  the 
golden  calf,  and  went  on  to  the  woiship  of 
the  host  of  heaven,   of  Moloch,   antt   of 
Bemphan;  it  was  shown  markedly  in  the 
terrible  sm  of  Peor  (Numb.  xxv.  1 — 3);  it 
stinted  God's  hand  when  the  nations  had 
to  be  driven  out  from  Canaan  (Judg.  ii  1 — 5) ; 
it  provoked  God's  anger  greatly  during  the 
whole  period  of  the  Judges  (Judg.  ii.  1 1  —19) ; 
checked  under  David  and  Solomon,  it  broke 
out  afresh  on  the  accession  of  Behoboam 
(1  Kings  xiv.  22-24),  and  showed  itself, 
more  or  less,  under  every  subsequent  king, 
culminating  at  last  in  that  fearful  condition 
of  things  which  has  been  described  above 
(see  the  comment  on  the  first  clause  of  this 
verse). 

Ver.  16.— Moreover  Manasseh  shed  inno- 
cent blood  very  much.  We  must  not  under- 
stand this  of  his  own  offerings  to  Moloch, 
for  these  have  been  already  put  on  record 
against  him  (ver.  6),  and  this  is  something 
additional  (note  the  strong  expression,  djiv 
nor  even  of  the  multitudlnons  saoiiflces  of 


424 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  TBG  SlKOS.       too.  zxi.  1—26. 


the  same  kind  which  were  the  leBiiIt  of  his 
inflnence  on  the  people.  Some  onlminating 
honor  is  lequired,  something  not  touched 
npon  before,  and  something  specially  attach- 
ing to  the  monarch  himselt  These  oon- 
ditiona  are  answered  by  supposing  a  bloody 
persecution  of  the  faithful  to  be  intended. 
Josephus  declares  positively  that  Manasseh 
"cruelly  put  to  death  all  the  righteous 
among  the  Hebrews,  and  did  not  even  spare 
the  prophets  "  (•  Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  3.  §  1).  A 
tradition,  very  widely  received,'  declared 
Isaiah  to  have  been  one  of  the  victims 
('  Gemara  Jebam.,'  iv.  13 ; '  Sanhedr.,'  f.  1 03 ; 
Tertullian, '  De  Patientia,'  §  14 ;  Augustine, 
•De  Civ.  Dei,'  xviii.  24,  etc.).  Stanley 
says,  "  A  reign  of  terror  commenced  against 
aU  who  ventured  to  resist  the  reaction. 
Day  by  day  a  fresh  batch  of  the  prophetic 
order  were  ordered  for  eseontion.  It  seemed 
as  if  a  devouring  lion  were  let  loose  against 
them.  From  end  to  end  of  Jerusalem  were 
to  be  seen  traces  of  their  blood.  The  nobles 
who  took  their  part  were  thrown  headlong 
from  the  roc^  cliffs  of  Jerusalem"  ('Lec- 
tures on  the  Jewish  Church,'  pt.  ii'p.  492). 
The  persecution  has  been  compared  to  that 
of  Anglicans  under  Mary  Tudor.  Till  he 
had  filled  Jerusalem  from  one  end  to  another 
—i.e.  "till  he  bad  filled  it  with  blood  and 
slaughter"  (comp.  ch.  xxiv.  4) — beside  his 
sin  wherewith  he  made  Jndali  to  sin,  in 
doing  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord  (see  ver.  9). 

Ver.  17.— Kow  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Uanasseh.  Important  additions  to  the 
history  of  Manasseh  are  made  by  the  writer 
of  Chronicles.  iFrom  him  we  leam  that, 
after  prophetioal  warnings  had  been  in  vain 
addressed  to  him  and  to  his  people  (2  Chron. 
xxziii.  10),  he  was  visited  with  a  Divine 
judgment,  an  Assyrian  army  under  "cap- 
tains" being  sent  against  him,  who  took 
him  prisoner,  and  carried  him  to  Babylon — 
the  city  where  Esarhaddon,  the  successor  of 
Sennacherib,  and  contemporary  of  Manasseh, 
ordinarily  held  his  court.  Here  he  remained 
for  some  considerable  time  "in  affliction" 
(ver.  12),  and,  becoming  convinced  of  sin  and 
deeply  penitent  for  bis  manifold  transgres- 
sions, he  turned  to  God  in  sincerity  and 
truth,  and  being  restored  by  the  Assyrians 
to  his  kingdom,  he  put  away  the  idolatrous 
practices  and  emblems  which  he  had  pre- 
viously introduced,  "repaired  the  altar  of 
the  Lord "  which  had  gone  to  decay,  and 
re-established,  so  far  as  he  could,  the  worship 
of  Jehovah  (ver.  16).  A  special  prophet, 
Hosai,  seems  to  have  ohronioled  bis  sins  and 
his  repentance  in  a  work  which  survived 
the  Captivity,  and  is  twice  quoted  by  the 
compiler  of  the  Books  of  Chronicles  (2  Chnm. 
xxxUi.  18, 19).  The  submission  of  Manasseh 
to  Eawluddon  is  nots4  is  the  kttei's  annals, 


about  the  year  b.o.  680  (see  •  Epouym  Canon,' 
p.  139,  line  13).  Other  "  acts  "  of  Manasseh 
were  the  fortification  of  Jemsalem  "on  the 
west  side  of  Gihon  in  the  valley,"  the 
strengthening  of  the  defences  of  Opbel,  and 
the  occupation  with  strong  garrisons  of  the 
various  fortresses  within  his  dominions.  He 
thus  p?ayed  his  part  of  tributary  ally  to 
Assyria  with  zeal,  placing  the  south-eastern 
frontier  in  an  excellent  condition  to  resist 
the  assaults  of  Egypt.  Manasseh  onUived 
Esarhaddon,  and  was  for  many  years  con- 
temporary with  Asshnr-bani-pal,  bis  son, 
whose  inscriptions,  however,  contain  no 
mention  of  him.  Most  likely  his  name 
occurred  on  Cylinder  C,  line  3,  which  is  now 
illegible  (see  G.  Smith's  '  History  of  Asshur- 
bani-pal,'  p.  31,  line  e).  And,  all  that  he  did, 
and  his  sin  tiiat  he  sinned,  are  they  not 
written  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles  it  the 
kings  of  Jndaht  The  "sin  which  he  sinned" 
is  probably  his  persecution,  which  was  viewed 
as  his  worst  sin  (see  ver.  16;  and  oomp. 
ch.  xxiv.  4). 

Ver.  18. — And  Uanasseh  slept  with  his 
fathers,  and  was  buried  in  the  garden  of  his 
own  house.  We  have  already  seen  reason 
for  believing  that  the  catacomb  of  David 
was  full,  and  that  Hezekiah  was  bnrjed  out- 
side it,  though  in  the  neighbourhood,  on 
this  account  (see  the  comment  on  ch.  zx. 
21).  Manasseh  seems  to  have  made  a  new 
family  tomb  in  a  garden  belonging  to  his 
house  (see  ver.  26  ;  and  comp.  ch.  xxiii.  30). 
It  is  quite  .impossible  to  fix  its  site.  In  the 
garden  of  Tfzsa.  Probably  an  addition  to 
the  old  palace  garden ;  perhaps  a  purchase 
made  by  Manasseh  with  the  object  of  con- 
Terting  it  into  a  bnrial-gronnd.  "Uzza," 
or  "  Uzzah,"  was  a  common  name  among 
the  Jews  (2  Sam.  vi.  8;  Ezra  ii.  49;  Keb. 
vii.  51;  1  Chron.  vi.  29;  viii.7;  xiii.7 — 11), 
and  does  not  point  to  any  definite  individual. 
And  Amon  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead. 
"  Amon"  in  Hebrew  means  "Nursling,"  or 
"Darling,"  and  it  is  qnite  possible  that 
Manasseh  gave  his  son  the  name  in  this 
sense.  Bat  it  is  also  the  ordinary  Hebrew 
form  of  the  term  ("  Amen,"  or  "  Amun  ")  by 
which  the  Egyptians  designated  the  great 
god  of  Thebes,  whom  the  Greeks  and  Bomans 
called  "Ammon."  It  has  therefore  been 
thought  by  many  that  it  was  given  by 
Manasseh  to  liis  son  "in  an  idolatrous 
spirit"  So  Bishop  Cotton  in  Smith's  'Dic- 
tionary of  the  Bible^'  voL  L  p.  61,  and 
others. 

Vers.  19— 26.— Seioh  or  Amok.  The 
short  reign  of  Amon,  the  son  and  successor 
of  Manasseh,  was  distinguished  by  only  two 
events :  (1)  his  restoration  of  all  the  idola- 
trons  wd  wicked  piMtiees  which  his  fotber 


OH.  XXI.  1—26.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OJ  THE  KINGS, 


425 


had  upheld  daring  the  earlier  portion  of  his 
reign;  and  (2)  his  untimely  death,  in  con- 
Beqnenoe  of  a  conspiracy  which  was  formed 
against  him  among  the  officers  of  his  conrt. 
The  writer  of  Kings  is  therefore  able  to 
despatch  his  history  in  eight  verses. 

Yer.  19. — Amon  was  twenty  and  two  years 
•Id  when  he  hegan  to  reign.  So  Josephus 
('Ant.  Jud.,'  X.  4.  §  1),  and  the  author  of 
Chronicles  (2  Ohron.  xxxiii.  21).  He  must 
have  been  bom  inn.o.  664,  early  in  the  reign 
of  A  sshur-bani-pal,  probably  in  the  year  of  that 
monarch's  expedition  against  Tyre.  And 
he  reigned  two  years  in  Jernsalem.  The 
"twelve  years"  assigned  to  Amon  by  the 
Duke  of  Manchester  ('Times  of  Daniel') 
are  wholly  devoid  of  foundation,  and 
would  throw  the  entire  chronology  into  con- 
fusion. As  it  is,  there  is  a  very  exact  ac- 
cordance in  this  part  of  the  history  between 
the  profane  and  the  scriptural  dates.  And 
his  mother's  name  was  Ueshullemeth,  the 
daughter  of  Hamz  of  Jotbah.  Jotbah  is 
probably  the  same  city  as  the  "Jotbath" 
of  Deut.  X.  7,  and  the  "  Jotbathah"  of  Numb, 
xxxiii.  33,  which  was  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Ezion-geber,  and  therefore  probably  in  the 
Arabah.  Josephus,  however,  says  that  Jot- 
bah was  "  a  city  of  Judah." 

Yer.  20. — And  he  did  that  which  was 
evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  as  his  father 
Uanasseh  did  (comp.  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  22, 
and  Josephus, '  Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  4.  §  1). 

Yer.  21.— And  he  walked  in  all  the  way 
that  his  father  walked  in.  There  was  not 
a  single  one  among  the  early  wickednesses 
of  Manasseh  which  Amon  did  not  imitate. 
The  details  of  Josiah's  reformation  (ch.  xxiii. 
4 — 24)  show  that  under  Amon  (1)  the  Asberah 
or  "grove"  maintained  its  place  in  the 
temple  building;  (2)  the  two  idolatrous 
altars  stood  in  the  two  courts;  (3)  the 
temple  was  the  scene  of  the  worship  of  Baal, 
Ashtoreth,  and  the  host  of  heaven ;  (4)  the 
nnobaste  priestesses  of  the  Syrian  goddess, 
with  the  male  partners  in  their  guilt,  were 
lodged  in  houses  close  by  the  house  of  the 
liOrd;  (5)  chariots  and  horses  dedicated  to 
the  sun  were  maintained  at  one  of  the  temple 
gates;  (6)  the  fire  of  Tophet  burnt  con- 
tinually in  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  and  children 
were  there  "passed  through  the  fire  to 
Moloch;"  (7)  an  idolatrous  worship  held 
possession  of  all  the  high  places  all  over 
Judiea  and  Samaria,  and  idolatrous  priests, 
deriving  their  appointment  from  the  king, 
burnt  incense  in  the  high  places  to  Baal,  to 
the  sun,  the  moon,  the  planets,  and  all  the 
host  of  heaven;  and  (8)  magic  and  neoro- 
manoy  were  practised  openly  under  royal 
nuMtion  tluoughout  the  length  and  breadth 


of  the  land.  And  served  the  idols  that  hii 
father  served — as  Baal,  Ashtoreth,  Moloch, 
the  Asherah,  and  others— and  worshipped 
them. 

Yer.  22.— And  he  forsook  the  Lord  God  of 
his  fathers.  Other  kings,  as  Ahaz,  had 
made  a  sort  of  compromise  between  the 
worship  of  Jehovah  and  idolatry  (oh.  xvi. 
10 — 15).  Manasseh  and  Amon  forsook  the 
worship  of  Jehovah  altogether.  And  walked 
not  in  the  way  of  the  Lord ;  i.*.-  did  not 
even  maintain  an  outward  observance  of  the 
Law  of  Moses,  but  set  it  wlioUy  aside. 

Yer.  23. — And  the  servants  of  Amon — i.e. 
his  attendants,  the  officers  of  his  court — con- 
spired against  him,  and  slew  the  king  in  his 
own  house.  Conspiracies  in  the  palace, 
frequent  in  Israel  (see  1  Kings  xvi.  9 ;  ch. 
ix.  32 — 37 ;  xi.  10, 25, 30),  were  not  unknown 
in  Judah  (see  ch.  xii.  21).  They  naturally 
arose  from  various  causes,  as  insults,  injuries, 
hopes  of  advantage,  ambition,  etc.  Where, 
as  in  the  present  case,  no  due  is  given, 
it  is  idle  to  conjecture  the  motives  by 
which  the  conspirators  were  actuated.  Be- 
ligious  motives  can  scarcely  have  come  into 
play. 

Yer.  24. — ^And  the  people  of  the  land  slew 
all  them  that  had  conspired  against  King 
Amon.  We  certainly,  therefore,  cannot  at- 
tribute Amon's  murder  to  a  popular  reaction 
against  his  idolatries.  Everything  unites 
to  prove  that  the  foreign  worships  were  in 
favour  with  the  people  at  this  period,  and 
that  the  kings  who  patronized  them  were 
more  generally  popular  than  those  who 
pursued  the  opposite  course.  And  the  people 
of  the  land  made  Josiah  his  son  king  in  his 
stead.  The  prestige  of  the  house  of  David 
was  still  strong.  The  conspirators  may  have 
intended  a  change  of  dynasty ;  but  the  mass 
of  the  people  could  not  contemplate  with 
equanimity  the  occupation  of  the  throne  by 
a  stranger — one  not  of  David's  house.  They 
there,  in  a  tumultuary  manner,  having 
punished  the  conspirators  with  death,  sought 
out  the  true  heir,  and,  having  found  him, 
though  he  was  a  boy  of  but  eight  years  of 
age,  placed  him  upon  his  father's  throne 
(comp.  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  25). 

Yer.  25. — Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Amon 
which  he  did,  are  they  not  written  in  the 
hook  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings  of 
Judah  1  No  other  acts  of  Amon  have  come 
down  to  us.  He  was  probably,  during  his 
short  reign  of  two  years,  a  submissive  toibn- 
tary  of  Asshur-bani-pal. 

Yer.  26.— And  he  was  buried  in  his 
sepulchre  in  the  garden  of  TTzza — i.e.  in  the 
same  place  as  his  father  (see  ver.  18) — and 
Josiah  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead.  So 
the  writer  of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxxiii. 
25),  and  Joeephus  (i. «. «.), 


436  THE  8E(X)ND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.       [ch.  xxi.  1— 28. 


HOMILETICa 

Vere.  1 — W.^TTie  ksion  of  Manasseh's  life,  that  it  it  far  easier  to  do  than  to  undo 
evU.  Manasseh,  carried  away  by  the  impetuosity  of  youth,  and  under  tha  advice  of 
evil  counsellors,  threw  himself  into  a  movement  the  direct  opposite  of  that  instituted 
by  his  father,  and  in  a  short  time  completely  changed  in  all  respects  the  whole  religion 
of  the  kingdom.  His  idea,  so  far  as  we  can  trace  it,  seems  to  have  been  a  wdcoming 
of  heathen  and  idolatroua'creeds  and  rites  of  all  kinds  and  from  all  quarters,  together 
with  a,  stem  repression  of  the  religion  of  Jehovah.  The  bloody  rites  of  Moloch,  the 
licentious  orgies  of  the  Syrian  goddess,  the  Phoenician  Baal-worship,  -  the  Arabian 
astrology,  the  magic  and  necromancy  of  Babylon,  were  all  regarded  as  equally  worthy 
of  his  patronage,  all  given  a  home  in  his  capital ;  one  single  cult  was  disallowed,  and 
its  exercise  punished  with  death — the  worship  of  "  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."  In  all 
these  respects  Manasseh  found  it  easy  enough  to  work  his  will;  no  one  resisted  him ; 
the  awful  child-sacrifices  suited  well  with  one  side  of  the  national  temperament,  the 
wild  sensualism  of  Syrian  and  Phcenician  orgies  harmonized  with  another.  Manasseh 
easily  "  seduced  "  the  mass  of  the  people  to  do  as  he  would  have  them ;  and,  when  he 
met  with  recalcitrants,  had  a  "short  and  easy  method"  with  them — the  method  of 
instant  execution.  All  went  smoothly  and  satisfactorily  with  him,  probably  for  near 
thirty  years  of  his  reign,  when  by  some  act — we  know  not  what — he  displeased  his 
Assyrian  suzerain,  was  carried  captive  to  Babylon,  and  there,  in  the  bitterness  of 
confinement,  brought  to  see  the  error  of  his  ways.  Restored  to  his  throne,  he  thought 
to  undo  his  evil  work  as  easily  and  completely  as  he  had  done  it.  Again,  outwardly 
no  one  resisted  his  vidIL  The  external  changes  were  made.  "The  strange  gods"  were 
"  put  away  "  (2  Chron.  zzziii.  15) ;  the  idols  cleared  out  of  the  house  of  the  Lord ; 
the  idolatrous  altars  banished ;  the  formal  worship  of  Jehovah  reintroduced ;  the 
brazen  altar  of  Solomon  "  repaired  "  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  16)  and  used  for  sacrifice ;  Judah 
commanded  to  serve  Jehovah,  the  Gk)d  of  Israel.  But  the  spirit  of  true  and  pure 
religion  could  not  be  brought  back.  Thirty  years  of  idolatry  had  debauched  the  heart 
of  the  nation.  Jehovah's  faithful  followers  had  been  martyred.  The  rest  of  the  people 
could  only  give  to  Jehovah  a  lip-service.  And  thus  no  sooner  was  Manasseh  dead 
than  everything  reverted  into  its  former  condition.  The  idols  were  restored — ^the 
altars  to  the  host  of  heaven  replaced  in  the  temple  courts — ^the  flames  of  Tophet 
relighted — the  filthy  rites  of  the  Dea  Syria  re-established.  When  Josiah  came  to  the 
throne,  the  state  of  things  was  as  bad  as  it  had  ever  been,  even  in  the  worst  years  of 
Manasseh.  Baal  was  the  god  chiefly  worshipped  in  Jerusalem  (Zeph.  i.  4) ;  altars  to 
the  host  of  heaven  covered  the  housetops;  men  commonly  swore  by  Moloch;  the 
whole  nation  had  "  turned  back  from  Jehovah "  (Zeph.  i.  6),  and  the  city  was  filled 
with  "violence  and  deceit"  (Zeph.  i.  9).  Not  even  could  all  Josiah's  efforts  remedy 
the  evil  which  Manasseh  had  brought  about.  The  corruption  was  too  deep-seated; 
and  it  was  Manasseh's  evil-doing,  which  he  could  not  uudo,  that  caused  the  filial 
deitruction  of  the  kingdom  (ch.  xxiii.  26,  27 ;  xxiv.  3,  4). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — ^16. — Manasseh's  wicked  reign.  Two  thoughts  are  brought  before  us  by 
the  reign  of  Manasseh.     They  are  a  striking  contrast  to  one  another. 

I.  The  powee  op  bin.  1.  We  see  how  sin  perpetuates  itself.  The  deeds  of  Manasseh 
were  just  a  repetition  of  the  worst  deeds  of  his  predecessors.  "  He  did  that  which  was 
evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  after  the  abominations  of  the  heathen."  He  built  up 
again  the  high  places.  He  made  altars  for  Baal.  He  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven. 
He  made  bis  son  pass  through  the  fire  to  Moloch.  (What  we  have  already  said  on 
these  sins  applies  here.)  2.  We  see  also  the  progressive  power  of  sin.  There  is  a 
progress  in  sin  from  bad  to  worse.  Manasseh  imitated  the  sins  of  his  predecessors. 
But  he  went  further  than  any  of  them.  "  He  built  altars  for  all  the  host  of  heaven  in 
the  tw«  courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  5).  Worse  than  all,  he  set  up  a  carved 
imag*,  the  idol  that  he  had  made^  in  the  very  temple  of  the  living  God.     tt  is  also 


OH.  XXI,  1—26.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  427 

stated  that  he  shed  innocent  blood  yery  much,  till  he  had  filled  Jerusalem  with  blood 
from  one  end  to  the  other  (ver.  16).  Let  ns  beware  of  the  beginnings  of  evlL  3.  We 
see  also  the  power  of  sin  to  Iiarden  men's  hearts.  We  read  in  2  Chronicles  that  "  God 
spake  to  Manasseh  and  his  people;  but  they  would  not  hearken."  How  often  God 
still  speaks  to  men  by  his  Word,  by  his  providences,  and  yet  sin  has  so  hardened  their 
hearts,  that  they  pay  no  attention  to  his  warnings,  remonstrances,  and  appeals  I 

II.  The  powbb  of  fbatbb.  There  is  no  reference  in  this  account  of  Manasseh  to 
any  prayer  of  his.  And  yet,  strange  though  it  may  seem,  prayer  played  an  important 
part  in  Manasseh's  history.  When  we  turn  to  the  summary  of  his  life  which  is  given 
in  2  Ohron.  ixxiii.,  we  read  (vers.  18, 19),  "  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Manasseh,  and 
his  prayer  unto  his  God,  and  the  Words  of  the  seers  that  spake  unto  him  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  behold,  they  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel. 
Sis  prayer  also,  and  how  Qod  was  entreated  of  him,  and  all  his  sins,  and  his  trespass 
.  .  .  before  he  was  humbled :  behold,  they  are  written  among  the  sayings  of  the  seers." 
Now,  what  was  this  prayer  of  Manasseh  ?.  It  was  simply  a  prayer  for  pardon.  Observe 
how  Manasseh  lea/rned  to  pray.  For  all  his  wickedness  the  Lord  brought  judgments 
upon  him  (vers.  10 — 15).  He  brought  upon  him  and  his  people  "  the  captains  of  the 
host  of  the  King  of  Assyria,  which  took  Manasseh  prisoner,  and  bound  him  with  fetters, 
and  carried  him  to  Babylon."  It  was  then,  in  his  extremity  and  calamity,  that 
Manasseh  learned  to  pray.  "  And  when  he  was  ia  affliction,  he  besought  the  Lord  his 
God,  and  humbled  himself  greatly  before  the  God  of  his  fathers,  and  prayed  unto  him: 
and  he  was  entreated,  of  him,  and  heard  his  supplication,  and  brought  him  again  to 
Jerusalem  into  his  kingdom.  Then  Manasseh  knew  that  the  Lord  he  was  God  "  (2  Chron. 
xzxiii.  12, 13).  Often  it  is  affliction  and  trial  that  first  teach  men  to  pray,  to  turn  to 
God.  We  see  here  the  power  of  penitent  prayer.  We  see  here  that  no  one  is  too  great 
a  sinner  to  pray  to  God  for  mercy.  Tour  past  life  may  have  been  given  up  to  sin.  So 
was  Manasseh's.  You  may  have  dishonoured  and  disobeyed  God.  So  did  Manasseh. 
Yet  he  obtained  mercy.  The  greatest,  guiltiest  sinner  may  get  pardon  at  the  cross. 
"Though  your  sins  be  as- scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow;  though  they  he  red 
like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool." — C.  H.  I. 

Vera.  19 — 24. — Amon's  wicked  reign.  We  have  here  more  than  one  instructive 
lesson. 

I.  The  powbe  of  evil  often  countebacts  the  good.  Manasseh  had  humbled 
himself  before  God.  He  obtained  pardon.  But  he  could  not  undo  the  guilty  past. 
He  could  not  undo  the  effects  of  his  evil  example  and  influence.  We  see  how  his  sins 
were  imitated  and  continued  by  his  son  Amon.  How  careful  we  should  be  what 
influence  we  exercise,  what  an  example  we  leave  behind  us!  Many  a  penitent  sinner 
would  give  worlds  if  he  could  undo  the  consequences  to  others  of  his  own  past  sins. 

II.  The  law  of  betbibution  onoe  moke.  "  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall 
be  measured  to  you  again."  Every  case  of  disobedience  against  God  on  the  part  uf 
Israel  and  her  kings  brought  its  corresponding  penalty.  Amon  was  very  deflant  in  his 
sin.  "  He  humbled  not  himself  before  the  Lord,  ...  hut  trespassed  more  and  more  " 
(2  Chron.  xxxiii.  23).  He  cast  off  the  authority  of  God.  The  day  came  when  his  own 
servants  rose  in  rebellion  against  his  authority,  and  conspired  against  him,  and  slew 
him.  The  conspirators  also  met  with  their  punishment.  "The  people  of  the  land 
slew  all  them  that  had  conspired  against  King  Amon"  (ver.  24).  Amid  all  its 
coriuptlons,  the  nation  had  not  yet  utterly  lost  the  sense  of  justice.  "  Whatsoever 
a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap." — 0.  H.  I. 

Vers.  1 — 18. — Manasseh;  or,  the  material  and  morcU  in  hitman  Ufe.  "Manasseh 
was  twelve  years  old  when  he  began  to  reigti,  and  reigned  fifty  and  five  years  in 
Jerusalem.  And  his  mother's  name  was  Hephzibah.  And  he  did  that  which  was 
evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  "  Manasseh,"  says  Keil,  "  having  begun  to  rei<'n  at 
an  early  age,  did  not  choose  his  father's  ways,  but  set  up  the.idolatry  of  his  grandfather 
Ahaz  again,  since  the  godless  party  in  the  nation,  all  whose  chief  priests,  and  (false) 
prophets  stood,  and  who  would  not  hearken  to  the  Law  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  time 
of  Hezekiah  had  sought  help  against  Assyria,  not  from  Jehovah,  but  from  the 
JIgyptians,  had  obt^ned  control  of  the  ^oung  and  inexperienced  king,    ^e  built  again 


428  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.      [oh.  ixi.  1— 2flw 

'the  blgli  places  which  Hezekiah  had  destroyed,  erected  altars  for  Baal,  and  Asherah, 
like  Ahab  of  Israel.' "  There  are  two  great  mistakes  prevalent  amongst  men— one  is  an 
over-estimation  of  the  secular ;  the  other,  a  depreciation  of  the  spiritnaL  Many  theo- 
retically bold,  and  more  practically  indicate,  that  man  should  attend  mainly,  if  not 
entirely,  to  his  secular  interests, as  a  citizen  of  time;  that  the  present,  the  palpable, and  , 
the  certain  should  engage  a  far  greater  portion  of  his  attention  than  the  fature,  the  unseen, 
and  the  probable.  It  is  bad'  to  hold  these  ideas,  but  it  is  worse  to  practise  them.  More 
respect,  perhaps,  is  due  to  the  mistaken  men  who  theoretically  adopt  them,  than  to  those 
who  denounce  in  no  very  measured  terms  their  yotaries  and  yet  practically  carry  them 
out  in  their  daily  life.  And  yet  such  characters  abound  in  Christian  England,  abound 
in  our  congregations,  and  in  our  clergy  too.  The  religionist  who  gives  more  of  his 
thought,  energy,  and  time  to  the  seciUar  than  the  spiritual,  is  carrying  out  in  bis 
everyday  conduct  the  principles  of  those  secular  and  infidel  teachers  against  whom 
he  is  ever  ready  to  thunder  bis  condemnation.  Far  more  distressed  am  I  at  the 
practical  secularism  of  the  Christian  than  at  the  theoretical  secularism  of  the  sceptic 
The  other  mistake  is  overrating  the  spiritual  at  the  expense  of  the  secular.  It  is  not 
very  uncommon  for  religious  teachers  to  profess  to  despise  secular  interests,  and  so 
to  enforce  the  claims  of  piety  as  if  they  required  the  sacrifice  of  our  corporeal  and 
secular  happiness.  I  have  no  faith  in  such  representations  of  moral  duty.  Man  is 
one,  and  all  his  duties  and  interests  are  concurrent  and  harmonious ;  the  end  of 
Christianity  is  to  make  man  happy,  body  and  soul,  here  and  hereafter.  These  remarks 
are  suggested  by  the  histoiy  of  Manasseh.  He  was  the  son  of  Hezekiah ;  was  born 
upwards  of  seven  hundred  years  before  Christ ;  began  to  reign  when  he  was  twelve 
years  of  age ;  continued  his  rulership  for  fifty-five  years,  died  at  the  age  of  sixty-eight, 
and  was  buried  in  a  sepulchre  which  he  had  prepared  for  himself  in  his  own  garden 
(see  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  1 — ^20).  His  inner  life  or  character  will  appear  as  we  proceed  in 
the  illustration  of  our  subject.  In  his  biography  we  have  three  instructive  views  of 
the  tecidar  and  spiritual.    We  have  here — 

I.  The  elevation  of  the  seoulab  and  the  deobadation  of  the  bpibitcal. 
"  He  built  up  again  the  high  places  which  Hezekiah  his  father  had  destroyed ;  and  he 
reared  up  altars  for  Baal,  and  made  a  grove,  as  did  Ahab  King  of  Israel ;  and  worshipped 
all  the  host  of  heaven,  and  served  them,"  etc.  Here  is  a  man  at  the  height  of  the 
secular  elevation.  He  is  raised  to  a  throne,  called  to  bear  sway  over  a  people  the 
most  enlightened,  and  in  a  country  as  fertile  and  lovely  as  any  on  the  face  of  the  earth. 
In  the  person  of  this  Manasseh  you  have  secular  greatness  in  its  highest  altitude 
and  most  attractive  position.  But  in  connection  with  this  you  have  spiritual  degra- 
dation. Penetrate  the  gaudy  trappings  of  his  royalty,  look  within,  and  what  see  you? 
A  low,  wretched,  infamous  spirit,  a  spirit  debased  almost  to  the  lowest  point  in  morals. 
Few  names  in  the  history  of  our  sinful  world  stand  out  with  more  prominent  features 
of  depravity  and  vice  than  this  of  Manasseh.  Look  at  him :  1.  Sociallif.  How  acted  he 
as  a  son?  His  father,  Hezekiah,  was  a  man  of  undoubted  piety-~-a  monarch  of  dis- 
tinguished worth.  Many  earnest  prayers  he  offered,  no  doubt,  for  his  son,  and  many 
tender  counsels  on  religions  subjects  had  he  addressed  to  him.  Yet  what  was  the 
return  for  all  this?  His  sire  was  scarcely  cold  in  his  grave  before  the  son  commenced 
undoing  in  the  kingdom  all  that  his  pious  father  had  for  years  endeavoured  to  accomplish. 
His  insane  fanaticism  in  the  cause  of  debased  religion  was  not  surpassed  even  by  the  king 
in  modern  times  who  most  resembled  him,  Philip  II.  of  Spain.  How  did  he  act  as 
a  pa/rentt  Was  he  anxious  for  the  virtue  and  happiness  of  his  children?  No;  "he 
caused  his  children  to  pass  through  the  fire  of  the  son  of  Hinnom."  History  represents 
the  god  Moloch,  to  which  this  Manasseh  presented  his  children,  as  a  brazen  statue, 
which  was  ever  kept  burning  hot,  with  its  arms  outstretched.  Into  these  outstretched 
arms  the  idolatrous  parent  threw  his  children,  which  soon  fell  down  into  the  raging 
furnace  beneath.  2.  Seligiously.  A  dupe  of  the  most  stupid  imposture.  "He 
observed  times,  and  used  enchantments  [and  used  witchcraft],  and  dealt  with  familiar 
spirits  and  wizards."  He  was  the  maddened  votary  of  the  most  cruel  and 
monstrous  superstition.  8.  Politically.  Ruining  his  own  country,  provoking  the 
indignation  of  Heaven.  "So  Manasseh  made  Judah  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
to  err,  and  to  do  worse  than  the  heathen,  whom  the  Lord  had  destroyed  before  the 
children  of  Israel."    The  elevation  of  the  secular  and  the  degradation  «  the  apiritual, 


OH,  XM.  1—26.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KENGa  42» 

■o  manifest,  alas!  In  all  times  and  lands,  is  not  destitute  of  many  grave  and  startling 
■Liggestions.  1.  It  shows  the  moral  disorganization  of  the  human  world.  This  state 
of  things  can  never  he  according  to  the  original  plan  of  the  creation.  Can  it  be 
accordant  with  the  original  purpose  of  the  Creator  that  wickedness  should  sit  on 
thrones  and  hold  the  sceptres  of  the  world  in  its  grasp?  Can  it  be  that  Infinite  Purity 
intended  to  endow  depravity  with  such  worldly  wealth  and  power  ?  Impossible.  A 
terrible  convulsion  has  happened  to  the  human  world,  a  convulsion  that  has  thrown 
every  part  into  disorder.  "  All  the  foundations  of  the  earth  are  out  of  course."  The 
social  world  is  in  a  moral  chaos.  The  Bible  tracts  the  cause  and  propounds  the 
remedy  of  this  terrible  disorganization.  2.  It  shows  the  perverting  capability  of  the 
mnil.  The  greater  the  amount  of  worldly  good  a  man  possesses,  the  stronger  is  the 
appeal  of  the  Creator  for  his  gratitude  and  devotion.  These  earthly  mercies  urge  self- 
consecration.  Moreover,  the  larger  the  amount  of  worldly  wealth  and  power,  the 
greater  the  facilities  as  well  as  the  obligations  to  a  life  of  spiritual  intelligence,  holiness, 
and  piety.  But  here,  in  the  case  of  this  monarch,  you  have,  what  indeed  you  find  in 
different  degrees  everywhere  in  human  life  past  and  present,  the  soul  turning  these 
advantages  to  the  most  fiendish  iniquity.  The  perverting  capability  of  the  soul  within 
us  may  well  fill  us  with  amazement  and  alarm.  We  can  darken  the  light  of  truth, 
make  the  tree  of  life  drop  poison,  and  cause  the  very  breath  of  God  to  be  pestilential. 
3.  It  shows  the  high  protability  of  a  judgment.  Under  the  government  of  a  righteous 
monarch,  will  vice  always  have  its  banquets,  its  purple,  and  its  crown?  Will  the 
great  Mechanician  always  allow  the  human  engine  thus  to  ply  its  wondrous  energies 
in  confusion  ?  Will  the  great  Lord  allow  his  stewards  to  misappropriate  his  substance, 
and  never  call  them  to  account?  It  cannot  bel  There  must  come  a  day  for  balancing 
long-standing  accounts;  a  day  for  making  all  that  has  been  irregular  in  human  history 
chime  harmoniously  with  the  ori^al  law  of  the  universe. 

II.  The  deobadation  of  the  seculak  and  the  elevation  of  the  spibitual. 
The  judgment  of  God,  which  must  ever  follow  sin,  at  length  overtook  the  wicked 
monarch.  The  Assyrian  army,  under  the  direction  of  Esarhaddon,  invaded  the  country, 
and  carried  all  before  it.  The  miserable  monarch  can  make  no  effectual  resistance.  He 
is  seized^  bound  in  chains,  transported  to  Babylon,  and  then  cast  into  prison.  Here 
is  secular  degradation.  Here,  away  in  exile,  chains,  and  prison,  like  the  prodigal,  he 
began  to  think.  His  guilty  conduct  passed  under  sad  review — memory  brought  past 
crimes  and  abused  mercies  in  awful  and  startling  forms  before  him,  and  his  heart  is 
smitten  with  contrition.  He  prays;  his  prayer  is  heard;  and  here,  bereft  of  every 
vestige  of  secular  greatness,  he  begins  to  rise  spiritually,  to  become  an  intellectual  and 
moral  man  (2  phron.  zxxiii.  12).  We  may  learn  firom  this :  1.  That  tnan^s  circumstance* 
are  no  necessary  hindrances  to  conversion.  If  the  question  were  asked — ^What  circum- 
stances are  the  most  inimical  to  the  cultivation  of  piety?  I  should  unhesitatingly 
answer — Adversity.  I  am  well  aware,  indeed,  that  adversity,  as  in  the  case  before  us, 
often  succeeds  in  inducing  religious  thoughtfulness  and  penitence,  when  prosperity  has 
failed ;  that  afflictions  have  often  broken  the  moral  slumber  of  the  soul,  and  led  'the 
careless  to  consider  his  ways.  But,  notwithstanding  this,  I  cannot  regard  adversity 
itself  as  the  most  suited  to  the  cultivation  of  the  religious  character.  Sufferings  are 
inimical  to  that  grateful  feeling  and  spiritual  effort  which  religious  culture  requires. 
It  is  when  the  system  bounds  with  health,  when  Providence  smiles  on  the  path,  when 
the  mind  is  not  necessarily  pressed  with  anxieties  about  the  means  of  worldly  sub- 
sistence, when  leisure  and  facilities  for  religious  reflection  and  effort  are  at  command, 
that  men  are  in  the  best  position  to  discipline  themselves  into  a  godly  life.  But  here  we 
find  a  man  in  the  most  unfavourable  position,  away  from  religious  institutions  and  friends 
and  books,_an  imprisoned  exile  in  a  pagan  land,  beginning  to  think  of  his  ways,  and 
directing  his  feet  into  the  paths  of  holiness.  Such  a  case  as  this  meets  all  the  excuses 
which  men  offer  for  their  want  of  religion.  It  is  often  said,  "  Were  we  in  such  and 
such  circumstances  we  would  be  religious."  The  rich  man  says,  "  Were  I  in  humble 
life,  more  free  from  the  anxieties,  cares,  responsibilities,  and  associations  of  my  position, 
I  would  live  a  godly  life."  Whilst  the  poor,  on  the  other  hand  says,  with  far  more 
reason,  '•  Were  my  spirit  not  pressed  down  by  the  crushing  forces  of  poverty ;  had  I 
■u£Scient  of  worldly  goodi  to  remove  me  from  aU  necessary  anxiety,  I  would  give  my 
ndnd  to  religion,  and  serve  my  God."    The  man  in  the  midst  of  the  eseitement  «i4 


tfO  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KTSGO.       [«>•  ^zi.  1—26. 

bustle  of  commercial  life  says,  "Were  I  in  a  more  retired  aituation,  in  some  raral 
re^on  away  from  the  eternal  din  of  business — away  in  quiet  fields  and  under  clear 
skies,  amidst  the  music  of  birds  and  brooks,  I  would  serve  my  Maker."  Whilst  on 
the  contrary,  and  with  greater  reason,  the  tenant  of  these  quiet  scenes  says,  "  Were  I 
distant  from  this  eternal  monotony,  amidst  serines  of  meatal  stimulus  and  social  excite- 
ment, I  should  be  roused  from  the  apathy  which  oppresses  me,  and  I  would  be  a 
religious  man."  The  fact,  after  all,  is  that  circur*«tance8  are  no  necessary  hindrances 
or  helps  to  a  religious  life.  2.  That  Heaven's  mercy  is  greater  than  man's  iniquities. 
When  conscience-stricken  with  the  enormity  of  liis  wickedness,  this  one  of  the  chief  of 
human  sinners  betakes  himself  to  his  knees  in  humble  prayer  "  before  the  God  of  his 
fathers,"  how  is  he  treated?  Is  he  scathed  with  a  flash  of  retributive  displeasure? 
Who  would  have  wondered  if  he  had  been  so  ?  But  no.  Is  he  upbraided  for  his  past 
wickedness  ?  Who  would  have  been  surprised  if  he  had  been  stonned  with  thunders 
of  reproof?  But  no.  Is  he  received  with  cold  indifference  ?  No.  **  He  was  entreated 
of  him,  and  heard  his  supplication,  and  brought  him  again  to  Jerusalem  into  his 
kingdom."  What  a  confirmation  is  here  of  that  promise,  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his 
way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and 
he  will  have  mercy  on  him;  and  to  our  &od,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon"! 
"  Abundantly  1"  This  is  a  glorious  word,  a  word  that,  like  the  Iwundless  heavens  of  Qod, 
towers  and  expands  over  a  universe  of  sin. 

III.  The  concueebnt  elevation  both  of  the  spiritual  and  the  sboulab.  The 
Almighty  hears  his  prayer.  He  is  emancipated  from  bondage,  brought  back  to  his 
own  country,  and  restored  to  the  throne  of  Israel.  There  he  is  now  with  a  true  heart, 
in  a  noble  position — a  real  great  man  occupying  a  great  office.  This  is  a  rare  scene ; 
and  yet  the  only  scene  in  accordance  with  the  real  constitution  of  things  and  the  will 
of  God.  It  seems  to  me  that  if  man  had  remained  in  innocence,  bis  outward  position 
would  always  have  been  the  product  and  type  of  his  inner  soul ;  that  he  who  got 
a  throne  would  do  so  because  of  the  moral  nobility  of  his  nature,  and  that  in  all  cases 
secular  circumstances,  whether  elevated,  affluent,  or  otherwise,  would  ever  be  the  eflfects 
and  exponents  of  spiritual  character.  Manasseh's  restoration  to  the  throne,  and  the 
work  of  reformation  to  which  he  sets  himself,  suggest  two  subjects  of  thought. 
1.  The  tendency  of  godliness  to  promote  man's  secular  elevation.  The  monarch  comes 
back  in  spirit  to  God,  and  God  brings  him  back  to  bis  throne.  As  the  material  con- 
dition of  men  depends  upon  their  moral  condition,  improve  the  latter,  and  you  improve  th« 
former.  As  the  world  gets  spiritually  holier,  it  will  get  secularly  happier.  Godliness  u 
material  as  well  as  moral  "  gain."  The  system  that  best  promotes  godliness  is  the  system 
that  best  promotes  man's  temporal  well-being.  And  that  system  is  the  gospeL  Hence, 
let  philanthropists  adopt  this  as  their  grand  instrument.  When  Christianity  shall  have 
won  its  triumph  over  all  souls,  men's  bodies  will  be  restored  to  their  lost  inheritance 
of  health,  elasticity,  force,  and  plenty,  as  Manasseh  was  now  restored  to  his  lost  throne. 
There  is  a  physical  millennium  for  the  world  as  well  as  a  spiritual ;  the  former  will  grow 
out  of  and  reveal  the  latter,  as  trees  and  flowers  their  hidden  life.  2.  The  tendency 
of  penitence  to  make  retribution.  Concerning  Manasseh,  it  is  thus  written :  "  Now 
after  this  he  built  a  wall  without  the  city  of  David,  on  the  west  side  of  Gihon,  in  the 
valley,  even  to  the  entering  in  at  the  fish  gate,  and  compassed  about  Ophel,  and  raised 
it  up  a  very  great  height,  and  put  captains  of  war  in  all  the  fenced  cities  of  Judah. 
And  he  toolj  away  the  strange  gods,"  etc.  Here  is  restitution,  and  an  earnest  endeavour 
to  undo  the  mischief  which  he  had  wrought.  Thus  Zacchssus  acted,  and  thus  all  true 
penitents  have  ever  acted  and  will  ever  act.  True  penitence  has  a  restitutionary 
instinct.  But  how  little,  alas  1  of  the  mischief  done  can  ever  be  undone  1  What  can 
we  do  ?  We  oaimot  destroy  the  fact  of  wrong.  That  feet  will  never  be  erased  from 
the  moral  annals  of  the  universe ;  it  is  chronicled  with  unfading  ink  on  an  imperish- 
able substance.  What  can  we  do  ?  We  cannot  destroy  the  influence  of  our  wrong. 
The  wrong  that  is  gone  out  from  us  will  roU  its  pestilential  streams  down  through  the 
ages.  What  can  we  do  ?  We  can  "  cease  to  do  evil ; "  and,  thank  God  1  we  can  do 
more — we  can  make  some  compensation  for  the  injury  we  have  done  tHe  creation.  We 
can,  by  Heaven's  grace,  open  up  within  us  a  fountain  for  the  washing  away  of  sin  and 
uncleanness — a  fountain  whose  streams  will  bless  with  life  and  beauty  many  genera- 
tioBs  jft  to  com*,— D.  Ti 


OH.  XXL  1—26.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  481 

Vara.  19—2S.—Amon.  «  Amon  was  twenty  and  two  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign, 
and  he  reigned  two  years  in  Jerusalem."  This  is  a  short  account  of  the  brief  and 
wicked  reign  of  Amon  the  son  of  Manasseh, 

I.  His  KEiON  WAS  VERY  SEOBT.  "  He  reigned  two  years,"  etc.  The  wonder  is  that 
such  a  man  should  have  been  permitted  to  breathe  the  breath  of  life.  The  sooner  a  bad 
king  dies  the  better.  1.  The  better  for  his  own  salee.  It  restrains  his  own  responsi- 
bilities and  the  aggravation  of  his  guilt.  2.  The  better /or  Us  race.  A  fountain  of 
moral  poison  has  been  dried  up  for  him ;  the  social  air  is  less  poisonous. 

II.  His  eeiqn  was  vebt  wicked.  "  And  he  walked  in  all  the  way  that  his  father 
walked  in,  and  served  the  idols  that  his  father  served,  and  worshipped  them  "  Oi  the 
wickedness  of  kings  we  have  had  abundant  examples  in  these  sketches.  It  is,  indeed, 
a  fire  that  burns  athwart  the  ages. 

III.  The  beign  was  very  tbamcal.  "And  the  servants  of  Amon  conspired 
against  him,  and  slew  the  king  in  his  own  house."  How  tragic  the  end  of  this  man ! 
His  "servants,"  who  should  have  guarded  him,  murdered  him.  "His  own  house," 
that  should  have  been  his  castle  of  defence,  was  the  place  of  his  execution.  In  this 
verse  the  people  :  1.  Did  justice  to  the  traitors  who  murdered  their  king.  2.  Did  kind- 
ness to  themselves  in  preparing  the  way  for  Josiah. — D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 9, 16. — Tht  reaction  under  Manasseh.  Light  and  dark  alternate  strangely 
in  the  later  history  of  Judah.  Overlooking  the  brief  reign  of  Amon,  Hezekiah 
alternates  with  Ahaz,  and  Josiah  with  Manasseh.  The  good  kings  are  very  good, 
the  bad  kings  very  bad.  The  climax  of  wickedness  is  reached  in  Manasseh.  He  had 
a  good  father,  as  Hezekiah  had  a  wicked  one,  yet  he  outstripped  in  daring  ungodliness 
all  the  kings  before  and  after  him. 

L  His  precooity  in  evil.  1.  Sis  tendencies  were  evil.  Manasseh's  tender  years 
when  he  became  king  do  not  wholly  explaiu  the  strong  bent  he  showed  towards  evil. 
He  became  king,  it  is  true,  when  he  was  but  twelve,  a  mere  boy,  with  character 
unformed,  and  open  to  the  seductions  of  wicked  courtiers ;  but  Josiah,  his  grandson, 
was  only  eight  when  he  ascended  the  throne,  and  he  showed  a  disposition  the  very 
opposite.  Nor  does  environment  explain  everything.  Josiah  had  far  fewer  advantages 
than  Manasseh.  Evil  influences  were  round  the  young  prince,  but  there  were  good 
ones  also.  Hezekiah  his  father  would  give  him  the  best  of  training ;  his  mother, 
Hephzibah,  if  it  was  she  that  suggested  the  prophet's  allusion  in  Isa.  Ixii.  5,  seems 
to  have  left  a  fragrant  memory  behind  her ;  Isaiah  was  still  living  to  be  his  instructor, 
if  he  had  been  willing  to  be  guided  as  Josiah  was  (ch.  xii.  2) ;  there  were  also  the 
remarkable  mercies  God  had  shown  to  his  father  and  to  the  nation  but  a  few  years 
before.  Contrast  Josiah's  position,  with  Amon  for  a  father,  and  the  country  in  the 
state  to  which  it  was  reduced  afier  half  a  century  of  heathenism.  There  is  no  accounting 
for  these  differences  through  heredity,  environment,  or  in  any  other  way  which  ignores 
personality.  While  as  a  rule  the  children  of  the  good  turn  out  well,  and  the  children 
of  the  wicked  badly,  there  are  startling  exceptions  on  either  side.  Some  from  their 
childhood  seem  to  be  the  subjects  of  an  innate,  virulent  depravity,  which  only  needs 
opportunity  to  break  out  into  violent  forms  of  evil.  2.  His  environment  was  evil.  At 
the  same  time,  it  is  to  be  admitted  that  the  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed  only 
afforded  too  much  encouragement  to  the  development  of  Manasseh's  ungodly  tendencies. 
It  was  undeniably  a  disadvantage  to  be  so  early  deprived  of  a  father's  guidance,  and 
saddled  with  the  responsibilities  of  a  throne.  The  courtly  aristocratic  party  had  never 
been  in  real  sympathy  with  Hezekiah's  reforms,  and  they  doubtless  eagerly  embraced 
the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  accession  of  a  young  king  of  influencing  him  to  a 
different  line  of  conduct.  Throughout  the  country  also  Hezekiah's  reformation  had 
been  largely  external,  and  people  were  tired  of  the  restraints  which  it  imposed.  The 
reaction  which  ensued  has  been  compared  to  that  of  Queen  Mary's  reign  after  the 
death  of  Edward  YL,  or  of  the  Bestoration  after  the  Puritan  strictness  of  the  Common- 
wealth. The  upper  and  aristocratic  classes  of  a  country  have  seldom  been  marked  by 
their  fondness  for  earnest  religion.  The  way  of  the  world  and  fashion  are  far  more 
ruling  influences  with  them,  and  as  at  this  time  "  Nineveh  was  to  Western  Asia  what  the 
Paris  of  Louis  XIV,  was  to  Europe,"  it  can  easily  be  understood  that  "  not  to  imitate 
h  was  to  be  provincial  and  vulgar  "  (Geikie).    The  moment  the  heathen  spirit  got  th« 


iSa  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xxi.  1— 26. 


upper  hand,  and  secured  the  conntenance  of  the  king,  it  was  sure  to  prevaiL    The 
earnest  followers  of  Jehovah  shrank  down  into  an  inconsiderable  minority. 

IL  His  excesses  m  ioolatby.  The  account  given  of  Manasseb's  doings  shows 
to  what  lengths  he  went  in  undoing  the  arrangements  of  his  father.  He  seems,  in  fact, 
to  Lave  aimed  at  nothing  less  than  a  complete  suppression  of  the  worship  of  Jehovah, 
and  the  reorganization  of  the  religious  cult  of  the  nation  upon  foreign  models.  1.  He 
rebuilt  ihe  high  places.  These  Hezekiab  had  pulled  down — a  point  of  attainment  to 
conformity  with  God's  Law  not  reached  by  any  previous  king.  Manasseh  now  reversed 
that  action  of  his  father,  and  rebuilt  the  shrines.  The  centralization  of  worship  in 
Jerusalem  may  have  been  felt  to  be  irksome ;  perhaps,  too,  the  bad  character  of  many 
of  the  priests  added  to  its  unpopularity.  Manasseh  may  have  claimed  to  be  going 
back  to  old  custom,  with  the  end  of  making  religion  more  free,  popular,  and  joyous 
in  its  character.  In  this  he  had  the  mass  of  the  people,  and  most  of  the  ofScial  classes 
with  him,  as  "  in  England  the  bulk  of  the  nation  and  of  the  clergy  returned  at  once 
to  Bomanism,  when  restored  by  Mary,  after  the  death  of  Edward  VI."  It  is  a  sad 
thing  to  see  a  nation  going  back  from  any  high  point  of  attainment — Eeforrnation 
or  other — as,  again,  it  is  a  sad  thing  to  see  one  individual  building  again  the  things 
which  he  destroyed  (Gal.  ii.  18).  2.  Bis  wholesale  importation  of  idolatries.  (1) 
Foreign  idolatries.  Manasseh  exceeded  even  Ahaz  in  the  zeal  with  which  he  imported 
idolatries  of  every  kind  from  foreign  nations.  Baal  and  Astarte  worship,  of  course,  was 
introduced  after  the  pattern  of  Ahab,  and  the  Asherah  symbol  again  reared  itself  in 
public  view  in  Jerusalem.  The  taste  of  Ahaz  for  new  altars  was  more  than  surpassed 
under  the  auspices,  of  his  successor.  There  was  imported  also,  in  grander  style  than 
ever,  the  worship  of  the  sun  and  moon  and  heavenly  bodies — the  white  horses  and 
chariots  of  the  sun  being  now  one  of  the  institutions  of  the  temple  (ch.  xxiii.  10,  11). 
"  Hath  a  nation  changed  their  gods,  which  are  yet  no  gods  ?  "  asks  a  prophet  (Jer.  ii. 
11) ;  but  Judah  had  changed  her  God  for  senseless  idols.  A  policy  of  this  kind  is  bound 
to  end  in  the  dissolution  of  a  nation.  The  deepest  bond  of  nationality  is  religion,  and 
when  a  people  renounces  its  traditional  fa'th,  and  becomes  a  mere  receptacle  for  a  chaos 
of  foreign  religious  ideas,  it  is  sure,  ere  long,  to  fall  to  pieces.  The  Eoman  Empire 
was  in  this  condition  before  its  fall.  (2)  The  worst  idolatries.  It  was  not  merely 
foreign  idolatries  which  Manasseh  introduced,  but  the  worst,  the  vilest,  and  the  most 
cruel  of  these  idolatries.  In  particular,  licence  was  given  to  the  practice  of  the  worst 
and  vilest  rites  of  the  Astarte-worbhip,  and  that  close  by  the  very  house  of  the  Lord 
(cb.  xxiii.  6,  7);  while  the  fearftil  worship  of  Moloch,  with  its  human  sacrifices,  was 
revived,  and  the  king  himself  gave  sanction  to  it  by  devoting  at  least  one  of  his 
sons  to  the  fire.  These  were  the  abominations  for  which  God  had  cast  out  the  original 
inhabitants  of  the  land,  and  now  they  were  reintroduced  in  full  force,  (3)  The  attend- 
ant  superstitions  of  idolatry.  Idolatry  here,  as  elsewhere,  brought  in  its  train  a  host 
of  other  baleful  superstitions.  Those  who  forsake  God  have  ever  been  prone  to 
fall  a  prey  to  the  most  childish  delusions  and  impostures.  The  worship  of  the 
heavenly  bodies  brought  with  it  the  practice  of  astrology ;  the  craving  for  communion 
with  the  tmseen  world  led  to  necromancy,  witchcraft,  and  enchantments ;  boasting 
a  false  freedom,  the  mind  fell  into  an  abject  slavery  to  demonism  (of.  the  develop- 
ment of  spiritualism  in  our  own  day).  The  movers  in  this  new  introduction  of  idolatry 
would  no  doubt  claim  the  praise  due  to  minds  enlightened  and  emancipated  from  the 
narrow  ideas  in  which  the  people  of  Judah  hitherto  had  been  bound.  They  were 
bringing  in  a  new  era  of  toleration,  culture,  breadth  of  view  and  sentiment,  and  the 
result  was  to  be  a  great  improvement  in  the  state  of  the  nation.  In  reality  they  were 
loosening  all  religious  and  social  bonds,  and  opening  the  floodgates  to  corruption. 
3.  Sis  desecration  of  the  temple.  The  tale  of  Manasseh's  iniquities  is  not  yet  ended. 
Not  content  with  bringing  new  idolatries  into  vogue,  Manasseh  set  to  work  system- 
atically to  overthrow  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  and  put  his  foreign  gods  in  the  place 
devoted  t»  Jehovah's  honour.  Neither  Athaliah  nor  Ahaz  had  ventured  to  introduce 
idolatry  into  the  temple,  but  Manasseh  took  this  step  beyond  either  of  them.  He  set 
up  his  numerous  altars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  Specially  he  erected  altars  for  tha 
worship  of  the  host  of  heaven  in  the  two  courts  of  the  temple.  Then,  to  cap  all,  ha 
introduced  into  the  very  building  itself  an  imao;e  of  the  Asherah  he  had  made,  replete 
ai  that  was  with  vile  associations.    Insult  to  Jehovah  could  gr  no  further.    In  that 


OH.  XXI.  1—26.]       THE  SECOin?  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  433 

very  place  of  which  Jehovah  had  said,  "  In  Jerusalem  will  I  put  my  Name  there : " 
"  In  this  house,  and  in  Jerusalem,  which  I  have  chosen  out  of  all  tribes  of  Israel,  will 
I  put  my  Name  for  ever ; " — even  there,  in  the  very  dwelling-place  of  the  holy  God 
among  men,  this  impure  symbol  was  erected.  The  Asherah-image  in  the  temple  was, 
as  it  were,  the  summing-up  in  symbol  of  the  whole  apostasy  of  the  people,  the  formal 
token  of  their  breach  of  the  covenant,  on  fidelity  to  which  depended  their  possession  of 
the  land,  and  as  such,  the  desecration  is  frequently  alluded  to  ( Jer.  vii.  30 ;  six.  3 — 5). 
4.  Sis  shedding  of  innocent  blood.  This  is  the  final  and  culminating  charge  against 
Manasseh,  "  He  shed  innocent  blood  very  much,  till  he  had  filled  Jerusalem  from  one 
end  to  another."  The  words  speak  to  a  deliberate  and  organized  persecution  of  Jehovah's 
servants — perhaps  a  massacre  such  as  that  of  St.  Bartholomew  in  France,  a  determined 
attempt  to  crush  out  in  blood  all  dissent  from  and  opposition  to  the  king's  measures. 
This  is  the  persecution  in  which  it  is  said  that  Isaiah  perished.  It  is  the  shedding 
of  innocent  blood  which,  we  are  told  fur  her,  "  the  Lord  would  not  pardon  "  (ch.  xxiv. 
4).  "  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  his  saints  "  (Ps.  cxvi.  15).  We 
see  from  this  example  what  the  spirit  of  false  toleration,  of  spurious  culture,  of  the 
breadth  of  view  which  confounds  truth  and  error,  leads  to ;  what  real  intolerance  and 
hatred  of  God  underlie  it.  Rights  of  conscience  will  meet  with  scant  recognition 
unrler  any  system  which  denies  the  true  God. 

III.  His  late  eepentance.  It  is  a  valuable  appendix  to  this  history  which  wo  find 
in  the  Book  of  Chronicles.  There  we  are  told  what  we  should  not  have  suspected  from 
the  narrative  before  us,  that  Manasseh  late  in  life  repented  of  his  sin,  and  obtained 
mercy  from  God  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11 — 17).  We  have  had  instances  of  kings  reigning 
well  throush  the  greater  parts  of  their  lives  and  failing  at  the  close ;  this  is  the  first 
and  only  case  of  a  Jewish  king  reignino;  ill  and  finally  repenting.  We  are  taught  by  the 
story  of  Manasseh's  repentance:  1.  The  seeds  of  early  instruction  may  blossom  after 
■tioany  days.  Who  can  doubt  but  that  it  was  the  impressions  received  in  early  days 
which  at  last  revived,  and  brought  Manasseh  back  to  Jehovah.  2.  There  is  hope  for 
<he  worst  sinners.  After  Manasseh,  surely  any  one.  Nor  did  his  conversion  take  place 
till  his  course  was  nearly  run.  We  should  despair  of  none.  Miracles  of  grace  as  great 
as  this  have  perhaps  rarely  been  witnessed,  but  they  have  been  witnessed.  3.  Ood 
subdues  men  to  himself  by  affliction.  It  was  while  a  prisoner  in  Babylon — taken  there 
by  the  captains  of  the  King  of  Assyria — that  Manasseh  found  the  Lord.  4.  Repentance 
does  not  always  secure  the  reversal  of  the  temporal  effects  of  sin.  The  wickedness  of 
Manasseh  through  a  long  reign  wrought  out  its  effects  independently  of  him.  His  con- 
version came  too  late  to  undo  them.  The  blood  he  had  shed  "  the  Lord  would  not 
pardon."  The  nation  was  inculpated  as  well  as  he,  and  though  he  repented,  it  did  not. 
It  is  an  awful  thought  that  no  after-repentance  can  obliterate  the  effects  of  words  spoken 
and  deeds  done  while  sin  .still  had  dominion  over  us.  Nor  can  the  effects  of  sin  on  our 
own  health,  characters,  usefulness,  etc.,  ever  be  completely  recalled.— J.  0. 

Vers.  10 — 18. — Prophetic  denunciations.  In  all  that  he  had  done,  Manasseh  had 
not  only  sinned  himself,  but  had  "  seduced  "  others  to  sin  (ver.  9).  Persons  in  high 
jwsitions  have  this  great  influence.  They  are  the  natural  social  leaders,  and  their 
example  tells  powerfully  for  good  or  evil.  Th«  prophets,  however,  though  as  it  proved 
at  the  ri.sk  of  their  lives,  did  not  fail  to  warn  him.  It  was  no  doubt  their  faithful 
denunciations,  and  the  terrible  evils  they  predicted,  which  brought  down  upon  them 
the  king's  wrath,  and  led  to  the  great  persecution. 

I.  Manasseh  more  wicked  than  the  Oanaanitbs.  He  had  "done  wickedly  above 
all  that  the  Amorites  did."  His  deeds  may  have  been  the  same,  but  his  guilt  was 
greater  than  theirs,  inasmuch  as :  1.  Eis  light  was  greater  than  theirs.  The  Canaauites 
had  the  light  of  nature,  and  that,  indeed,  suCBced  to  render  them  inexcusable  (Rom.  i. 
18—32 ;  ii.  14, 15).  But  Manasseh  had  the  light  of  revelation.  He  was  king  of  a 
nation  to  which  God  had  made  fully  known  the  truth  of  his  Being,  character,  and 
attributes ;  which  had  laws  and  statutes  given  to  it  such  as  no  other  nation  possessed 
(Deut.  iv.  6 — 8) ;  and  which  enjoyed  the  living  ministry  of  holy  prophets.  He  had 
also  had  the  advantage  of  s  pious  father's  example  and  training.  For  such  a  one  to 
go  back  to  the  sins  of  the  Amorites  was  a  heinous  offence.  It  made  his  wiokednese 
ireater  than  theirs.    We  shall  be  judged  by  the  light  we  possess  (Luke  xii.  47,  481 

n.  KIMOB.  f  y 


484  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.        [oh.  xxi.  1— 26. 


and  if  our  light  is  not  improved  it  will  be  more  tolerable  for  heathen  nations  than  for 
us  (Matt.  zi.  21 — 24 ;  zii.  41,  42).  2.  He  was  guilty  of  apostasy ;  they  were  not.  If 
the  Amorities  did  these  abominations,  and  served  these  idols,  it  could  at  least  be  said 
that  they  had  never  lived  under  any  other  system.  God  had  suffered  them  to  walk  in  their 
own  way  (Acts  xiv.  16 ;  xvii.  30).  But  in  his  evil  Manasseh  was  guilty  of  a  direct  act 
of  apostasy.  He  was  going  back  from  past  attainments.  He  was  violating  a  covenant 
made  at  Sinai,  and  repeatedly  renewed.  It  is  a  different  thing  for  a  heathen  to  commit 
the  vile  acts  in  which  he  has  been  brought  up,  and  for  a  Christian  to  renounca 
Christian  training  and  baptismal  engagements,  and  do  the  same  acts.  3.  The  corrup- 
tion of  the  best  is  the  worst.  This  is  another  principle  which  explains  why  Manasseh's 
abominations  are  represented  as  worse  than  those  of  the  Amorites.  A  nation,  being 
once  enlightened,  cannot  sin  as  the  serai-ignorant  heathen  do.  It  develops  worse  and 
more  virulent  evils.  As  a  brute  cannot  sin  in  the  same  way  as  a  man,  or  a  child  in 
the  same  way  as  an  adult,  so  a  nation  enlightened  by  revelation  can  no  longer  sin  as 
a  nation  does  which  has  not  this  light.  The  higher  consciousness  reacts  upon  the 
Bin  and  modifies  it.  There  are  evils  possible  under  a  Christian  civilization  which 
surpass  anything  known  in  heathenism.  If  our  great  cities  show  higher  heights  of 
virtue,  they  could  also  reveal  lower  depths  of  vice  than  Nineveh,  Borne,  Pekin,  or 
Calcutta. 

II.  The  SEVERITY  OP  Jeeusalem's  PUNISHMENT.  1.  The  grounds  of  the  punishment . 
These  are  twofold ;  (1)  Manasseh's  sins  as  above  described.  "  Because  Manasseh  King 
of  Judah  hath  done  these  abominations,"  etc.  (ver.  11).  In  this  sin  of  the  king, 
however,  the  people  shared.  He  "made  Judah  also  to  sin  with  his  idols."  King  and 
people,  therefore,  must  suffer  togetlier.  There  is  a  corporate  responsibility,  which 
involves  a  community  in  common  guilt,  whether  the  sin  proceeds  from  the  head  or  the 
members.  (2)  The  entail  of  past  transgression.  "Because  they  have  done  evil  in 
my  sight  .  .  .  since  the  day  their  fathers  came  forth  from  Egypt,  unto  this  day " 
(var.  15).  That  entail  would  have  been  cut  off  by  timely  repentance,  but,  in  default 
of  repentance,  the  guilt  continues  to  be  handed  down.  This  is  another  phase  ot 
corporate  responsibility.  The  life  of  the  nation  is  continuous,  and  one  generation  has 
to  accept  its  responsibilities  from  another.  We  see  the  same  principle,  e.g.,  in  the 
handing  down  of  national  doubt.  Christ  views  the  Jewish  nation  of  his  day  as  charge- 
able with  all  the  righteous  blood  that  had  been  shed  from  the  days  of  Abel  downwards 
(Matt,  xxiii.  35).  2.  The  character  of  the  punishment.  It  would  be :  (1)  Startling. 
"Such  evil  upon  Jerusalem  and  Judah,  that  whosoever  heareth  of  it,  both  his  ears 
shall  tingle."  Wars,  sieges  of  cities,  and  captivities,  with  the  horrors  attendant  on 
them,  were  common  enough  in  those  days,  but  this  vengeance  of  God  on  Jerusalem 
would  be  so  awful  as  to  shock  and  amaze  even  those  familiarized  with  such  scenes. 
The  very  report  of  it  would  produce  a  stinging  sound  in  their  ears.  The  fulfilment  of 
the  threat  was  partly  under  Nebuchadnezzar,  but  completely  under  the  Bomans 
(Matt.  xxiv.  21).  (2)  Measured.  "  I  will  stretch  over  Jerusalem  the  line  of  Samaria, 
and  the  plummet  of  the  house  of  Ahab."  The  idea  is  that  God  would  take  strict 
account  of  Judah's  sin,  as  already  he  had  done  of  that  of  Samaria.  The  measuring- 
line  and  plummet  are  introduced  for  purposes  of  precision.  God  would  measure 
exactly  the  transgression  of  the  people;  would  note  precisely  the  degree  of  their 
deviation  from  righteousness  (cf.  Amos  vii.  7 — 9);  and  to  this  measured  guilt  the 
punishment  would  be  proportioned.  The  reason  of  tneasurement  was  that  judgment 
was  no  more  to  be  qualified  by  mercy.  The  nation  was  to  bear  the  full  load  of  its 
iniquity.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  when  God  thus  "marks  iniquity"  (Ps.  cxxx.  3);  for 
then  the  case  of  the  sinner  is  hopeless.  (3)  Complete.  "I  will  wipe  Jerusalem 
as  a  man  wipeth  a  dish,"  etc.  "  I  will  forsake  the  remnant  of  my  inheritance,"  etc. 
The  figure  of  cleansing  out  a  dish  till  it  is  as  clean  as  wiping  can  make  it  is  a  very 
graphic  one  for  the  utter  emptying  and  desolation  that  was  to  overtake  Jerusalem. 
The  city  would  not  simply  be  humbled,  as  on  many  previous  occasions,  but  would  be 
completely  destroyed,  and  the  people  led  away  by  their  enemies  as  a  prey  and  a  spoil. 
The  predictions,  as  we  know,  were  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  Manasseh  might  kill  th« 
men  who  uttered  them,  but  he  could  not  hinder  their  words  from  coming  true ;  nay, 
his  violence  put  a  new  seal  on  the  certainty  of  their  fulfilment.  In  tiie  tempond 
calamities  that  wer«  to  overtak*  Jerusalem,  we  find  a  proof  that  yeiily  there  "Is  •  Qtoi 


OH.  xxn.  1— 20.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OS"  THE  KINGS. 


435 


that  judgeth  in  the  earth"  (Ps.  Iviii.  11),  and  we  are  warned  lest  we  provoke  hii 
"  wrath  to  the  uttermost "  (1  Thess.  ii.  16)  by  our  own  impenitence. 

Ill,  Masassbh's  death.  The  reign  of  more  than  half  a  century  came  at  length  to 
a  close,  and,  though  the  last  years  of  it  were  marked  by  repentance,  it  left  indelible 
traces  of  evil  on  the  condition  of  the  people.  That  by  which  Manasseh  wag  specially 
remembered  was  "  his  sin  that  he  sinned."  He  was  buried  in  "  the  garden  of  his  own 
house,  the  garden  of  TJzza."  Amon  also  was  buried  in  this  garden  (ver.  26).  There 
wai  another  garden  which  had  a  sepulchre  in  it  (John  xix.  41) ;  but  now  different  the 
sleepers! — J.  0. 

Vera.  19—26. — The  reign  of  Amon.    In  this  king  we  have— 

L  A  PALBB  COPT  OP  HIS  PATHBB.  The  Only  noteworthy  facts  about  Amon,  during 
his  brief  two  years'  reign,  are :  1.  Sis  imitation  of  Manasseh's  wickedness.  His  father, 
during  the  greater  part  of  his  reign,  had  set  an  evil  example,  but  towards  its  close  he 
had  repented.  Amon  did  not  imitate  the  repentance,  but  imitated  the  sin.  He  walked 
in  all  the  ways  his  father  had  walked  in,  apparently  setting  up  again  the  idols  which 
big  father  had  latterly  removed  (2  Chron.  xzxiii.  15).  2.  Se  was  the  father  of  a  good 
son,  viz.  Josiah,  his  successor.  This  is  another  of  the  surprising  alternations  of 
character  already  alluded  to.  How  Josiah  came  out  of  such  a  home  with  the  character 
he  did  must  remain  inexplicable,  unless  we  are  to  attribute  it  to  hi*  grandfather's 
influence  after  his  return  from  Babylon. 

II.  Anotheb  victim  op  coubt  conbpibaot.  Joash  and  Amaziah  among  the  kings 
I'f  Judah  had  met  their  death  by  conspiracy  (ch.  xii.  20,  21;  xiv.  19),  and  many  of 
the  kings  of  Israel  had  thus  perished.  But  no  king  of  Judah  came  to  this  end  till  he 
had  first  fallen  away  from  God.  Amon  had  a  like  miserable  death.  His  servants 
conspired  against  him,  and  slew  him  in  his  own  house.  The  fact  that  they  dared  to 
do  so  may  indicate  a  tendency  to  reaction  in  the  public  mind  against  the  excesses  of 
idolatry  in  which  the  king  indulged.  The  people,  however,  had  no  intention  of  allow- 
ing conspirators  to  seize  the  throne,  so  they  slew  the  murderers,  and  set  up  Josiah  as 
king.    This,  again,  for  a  time  led  to  a  great  reaction  for  the  better.— J.  0, 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  xxn. 


Vers.  1 — 20. — Accession  of  Josiah.    Eb- 

PAIB    OP   THE    TemPLB.      BeCOVZBI   OP   THE 

Book  op  the  Law. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Genebal  Chabaoteb  op 
Josiah's  Eeign.  Bis  repair  of  the  temple. 
The  writer  begins  his  aocount  of  Josiah's 
reign  with  the  usual  brief  summary,  giving 
his  age  at  bis  accession,  the  length  of  his 
reign,  his  mother's  name  and  birthplace 
(ver.  1),  and  the  general  character  of  his 
rale  (ver.  2).  He  then  proceeds  to  men- 
tion some  circumstances  connected  with  the 
repair  of  the  temple,  which  Josiah  had  taken 
in  hand  (vers.  3 — 7). 

Ver.  1. — Josiah  was  eight  years  old  when 
he  began  to  reign.  So  the  writer  of  Chro- 
nicles (2  Chron.  zxxiv.  1)  and  Josephua 
('Ant.  Jud.,'  I.  4.  §  1).  He  must  have 
been  bom,  therefore,  when  his  father  was 
no  more  than  sixteen  yean  of  age,  and 
Amon  must  lutve   married  when  he  wag 


only  fifteen.  And  he  reigned  thirty  and 
one  years  in  Jerusalem.  Probably  from 
B.O.  640  to  B.C.  609 — a  most  important 
period  of  the  world's  history,  including,  as 
it  does,  (1)  the  great  Seythio  invasion ; 
(2)  the  fall  of  Assyria;  (3)  the  formation 
of  the  Median  empire ;  and  the  foundation 
of  the  Babylonian  empire  by  Nabopolasar. 
And  his  mother's  name  was  Jedidah — i.e. 
"Darling" — the  daughter  of  Adaiah  of 
Bosoath.  Boscnth  is  mentioned  as  among 
the  cities  of  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  39).  It  lay 
in  the  Shefelah  (Josh.  xv.  33),  not  far  from 
Laohish  and  Eglon.  The  recent  explorers 
of  Palestine  identify  it  with  the  modern 
Vm-elrBikar,  two  miles  and  a  half  south- 
east of  Ajlun  (Bglou).  (See  the  'Map  of 
Western  Palestine,'  published  by  Mr. 
Trelawny  Saunders.) 

Ver.  2. — And  he  did  that  which  was  right 
in  the  sight  of  the  lord,  and  walked  in  all 
the  way  of  David  his  father.  This  is  a 
stronger  expression  than  any  which  has 
been  used  of  any  previous  king  of  Judah 
except  Hezekiah,  and  indicates  a  very  high 
degree  of  approval.  The  son  of  Sirach  says 
of  Josiah,  "  The  wmembranoe  of  Josias  Is 


438 


THE  SECOND   BOOK   OF  THE   KINGS,      [o*-  ^^"-  1— ^0- 


like  the  oompoBition  of  the  perfume  that 
is  made  by  the  art  of  the  apothecary :  it  is 
■weet  as  honey  in  all  months,  and  as  mnsio 
at  a  banquet  of  wine.  He  behaved  himself 
uprightly  in  the  conversion  of  the  people, 
nnd  took  away  the  abominations  of  iniquity. 
He  directed  his  heart  unto  the  Lord,  and 
in  the.  time  of  the  ungodly  he  established 
the  worship  of  God.  All,  except  David  and 
Biekiae  andJosias,  were  defective:  for  they 
forsook  the  Law  of  the  Most  High,  even  the 
kings  of  Judah  failed"  (see  Boclus.  xlix. 
1—4).  And  turned  not  aside  to  the  light 
hand  or  to  the  left;  i.e.  he  never  deviated 
from  the  right  path  (comp.  Deut.  v.  32; 
ivii.  11,20;  ixviii.  14;  Josh.  i.  7;  xxiii.  6). 

Ver.  3. — And  it  came  to  pass  in  the 
eighteenth  year  of  King  Josiah  (comp. 
2  Chron.  ixxiv.  8).  The  writer  of  Kings, 
bent  on  abbreviating  as  much  as  possible, 
omits  the  early  reforms  of  Josiah,  which 
are  related  in  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3 — 7,  with 
perhaps  some  anticipation  of  whait  happened 
later.  The  young  king  gave  marked  in- 
dications of  personal  piety  and  attachment 
to  true  religion  as  early  as  the  eighth  year 
of  his  reign,  when  he  was  sixteen,  and  had 
just  attained  his  majority  (Ewald, '  History 
of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  232,  note).  Later,  in 
his  twelfth  year,  he  began  the  purging  of 
the  temple  and  of  Jerusalem,  at  the  same 
time  probably  commencing  the  repairs 
spoken  of  in  ver.  9.  Jeremiah's  prophe- 
sying, begun  in  the  same  or  in  the  next 
year  (Jer.  i.  2),  must  have  been  a  powerful 
assistance  to  his  reformation.  That  the 
king  sent  Shaphan  the  son  of  Azaliah, 
the  son  of  Ueshnllam,  the  scribe,  to  the 
house  of  the  Lord,  saying.  Shaphan  held 
the  office  which  Shebna  had  held  in  the 
lattT  part  of  Hezekiah's  reign  (ch.  xviii.  18), 
an  office  of  much  importance  and  dignity. 
According  to  the  author  of  Chronicles  (2 
Chron.  xxxiv.  8),  there  were  associated  with 
him  on  this  occasion  two  other  personages 
of  importance,  viz.  Maaseiah,  the  governor 
of  the  city  (comp.  1  Kings  ixii.  26),  and 
Joah  the  sou  of  Joahaz,  the  "  recorder,"  or 
"  remembrancer." 

Ver.  4. — Go  up  to  EilMah  the  high  priest. 
Hilkiah  is  mentioned  again  in  the  genea- 
logy of  Ezra  (Ezra  vii.  1).  He  is  there 
called  "  the  son  of  Shallum."  That  he  may 
sum  the  silver  which  is  brought  into  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  A  collection  must  have 
been  progressing  for  some  time.  As  in  the 
reign  of  Joash,  after  the  impieties  and 
idolatry  of  Athaliah,  it  was  found  necessary 
to  collect  money  for  the  repair  of  the  temple 
(oh.  xii.  4^14),  10  now,  after  the  wicked 
doing!  of  Manasseh  and  Amon,  a  renova- 
tion of  the  sacred  building  wag  required, 
and  the  money  needed  was  being  raised  by 
a  ooUeotion.    Great  can  was  t&en  in  all 


auch  cases  that  an  exact  account  ihonM  be 
kept  and  rendered.  Which  the  keeperi  of 
the  door — literally,  of  the  threthold — have 
gathered  of  the  people.  The  money  had, 
apparently,  been  allowed  to  accumulate  in 
a  box  or  boxes  (see  ch.  xiL  9),  from  the  time 
when  the  collection  was  first  authorized, 
probably  six  years  previously.  The  high 
priest  was  now  required  to  count  it,  to  take 
the  sum  of  it,  and  undertake  the  distribn- 
tion. 

Ver.  5. — ^And  let  them  deliver  it  into  the 
hand  of  the  doers  of  the  work,  that  have 
the  oversight  of  the  house  of  the  Lord. 
The  "doers  that  have  the  oversight"  are 
not  the  actual  workmen,  but  the  superin- 
tendents or  overseers  of  the  workmen,  who 
hired  them,  looked  after  them,  and  paid 
them.  And  let  them  give  it  to  the  doers 
of  the  work  which  is  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord— let  the  overseers,  i.e.,  give  out  the 
money  to  the  actual  workmen,  the  car- 
penters, etc.,  of  the  next  verse — to  repair 
the  breaches  of  the  house;  rather,  the 
dilapidation  of  the  house.  It  is  not  implied 
that  any  violence  had  been  used,  such  as  is 
required  to  make  a  "  breach."  The  "  house  " 
had  simply  been  allowed  to  fall  into  disre- 
pair. 

Ver.  6. — ^TTnto  carpenters,  and  builders, 
and  masons,  and  to  buy  timber,  and  hewn 
stone  to  repair  the  house  (comp.  2  Chron. 
xxxiv,  11).  The  money  had  to  be  ex- 
pended, partly  in  labour,  partly  in  materials. 
The  materials  consisted  of  both  wood  and 
stone,  since  it  was  of  these  that  Solomon's 
temple  had  been  built  (see  1  Kings  v.  18 ; 
vi.  7,  9,  10,  15,  36). 

Ver.  7. — Howbeit  there  was  no  reckoning 
made  with  them  of  the  money  that  was 
delivered  into  their  hand,  because  they 
dealt  faithfully  (comp.  ch.  xii.  15).  The 
superintendents  or  overseers  were  persons 
of  position,  in  whom  full  confidence  was 
placed.  Their  names  are  given  in  2  Chron. 
xxxiv.  12.    They  were,  all  of  them,  Levite*. 

Vers.  8 — 14. — Diseovery  of  the  hook  of 
the  Law.  When  Shaphan  had  transacted 
with  Hilkiah  the  business  entrusted  to  him 
by  the  king,  Hilkiah  took  the  opportunity 
of  sending  word  by  him  to  the  king  with 
respect  to  a  discovery  that  he  had  recently 
made,  during  the  investigations  connected 
with  the  repairs.  He  had  found  »  book, 
which  he  culled  without  any  doubt  or  hesita- 
tion, "  the  book  of  the  Law  " — nninpi  ISD 
—and  this  book  he  put  into  the  hands 
of  Shaphan,  who  "  read  it,"  i.e.  some  of  it, 
and  found  it  of  luch  importance  that  he 
took  it  back  with  him  to  the  i>alaoe,  and 


OH.  xxn.  1— 20.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


487 


lead  a  portion  to  the  king.  Hereupon  the 
king  "  rent  hia  clothes,"  and  required  that 
■pecial  inquiry  should  he  made  of  the  Lord 
concerning  the  words  of  the  book,  and 
particularly  concerning  the  threatenings 
contained  in  it.  The;  persona  entrusted 
with  this  task  thought  it  best  to  lay  the 
matter  before  Huldah,  a  proplietess,  who 
lived  in  Jerusalem  at  the  time,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  confer  with  her  at  her  residence. 

Ver.  8.— And  Hilkiah  the  high  priest  said 
unto  Shaphan  the  scribe,  I  have  found  the 
book  of  the  Law  in  the  house  of  the  Lord. 
There  has  been  great  difference  of  opinion 
as  to  what  it  was  which  Hilkiah  had  found. 
Ewald  believes  it  to  have  been  the  Book  of 
Deuteronomy,  which  had,  he  thinka,  been 
composed  some  thirty  or  forty  years  before 
in  Egypt  by  a  Jewish  exile,  and  had  found 
its  wiiy,  hy  a  sort  of  chance,  into  Palestine, 
where  "  some  priest "  liad  placed  a  copy  of 
it  in  the  temple  ('History  of  Israel,'  vol. 
iv.  pp.  233 — 235).  Thenius  suggests  "a 
collection  of  the  lawd  and  ordinances  of 
Moses,  which  was  afterwards  worked  up 
into  the  Pentateuch;"  Bertheau,  "the 
three  middle  books  of  the  Pentateuch, 
Exodus,  Leviticus,  and  Numbers ; "  Gram- 
berg,  "  Exodus  by  itself."  But  there  seem 
to  be  no  sufficient  grounds  for  questioning 
the  ancient  opinion — that  of  Josephus,  and 
of  the  Jews  generally— that  it  was  a  copy 
of  the  entire  Pentateuch.  (So  De  Wette, 
'Einleitung  in  das  Alt.  Test.,*  §  162  a; 
Keil, '  Commentary  on  Kings,'  pp.  477,  478; 
Bahr,  'Commentary,'  vol.  vi.  p.  257;  and 
others).  The  words,  niinn  hbd,  "  the  book 
of  the  Law,"  are  really  aufficient  to  decide 
the  point;  since,  as  Keil  says,  they  "can- 
not mean  anything  else,  either  gramma- 
tically or  historically,  than  the  Mosaic 
book  of  the  Law  (the  Pentateuch),  which 
is  so  designated,  aa  ia  generally  admitted, 
in  the  Chroniclea  and  the  Books  of  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah."  The  same  conclusion  follows 
from  tlie  expression,  "  the  book  of  the 
covenant "  (nnan  isp),  in  ch.  xxiii.  2,  and 
also  from  ch.  xxiii.  24,  25,  and  2  Chron. 
xxxiv.  14.  "Whether  or  no  the  copy  was 
the  actual  original  deposited  in  the  ark  of 
the  covenant  by  Moses  (Dent.  xxxi.  26),  as 
Keil  believes,  ia  doubtful.  As  Egyptian 
manuscripts  which  are  fiom  three  to  four 
thousand  years  old  still  exist  in  good 
condition,  there  can  be  no  reason  why  a 
manuscript  of  Moses'  time  should  not  have 
been  found  and  have  been  legible  in 
Josiah'a.  But,  if  not  the  actual  hand- 
writing of  Moses,  it  was  probably  its  lineal 
descendant — the  copy  made  for  the  temple 
lervioe,  and  kept  oNituoily  "  in  the  fide  of 


the  ark" — which  may  well  have  been  lo«t 
in  the  time  of  Manasseh  or  Amon,  and 
irhich  was  now  happily  "found."  And 
Hilkiah  gave  the  hook  to  Shaphan,  and  he 
read  it.  We  need  not  suppose  that  Sha- 
phan read  the  whole.  But  he  read  enough 
to  show  him  how  important  the  work  was, 
and  how  necessary  it  was  to  make  it  known 
to  the  king. 

Ver.  t). — And  Shaphan  the  scribe  came  to 
the  king,  and  brought  the  king  word  again, 
and  said.  Thy  servants  have  gathered  th* 
money  that  was  in  the  house  (see  above, 
vers.  4 — 6),  and  have  delivered  it  into  the 
hand  of  them  that  do  the  work,  that  have 
the  oversight  of  the  house  of  the  Lord ;  i.«. 
"We  have  carried  out  the  king's  orders 
exactly,  in  every  particular." 

Ver.  10. — And  Shaphan  the  scribe  showed 
the  king,  saying,  Hilkiah  the  priest  hath 
delivered  me  a  book.  Shaphan  does  not 
venture  to  characterize  the  book,  as  Hilkiah 
has  done.  He  ia  not  ofBcially  learned  in 
the  Law.  And  he  has  only  read  a  few 
passages  of  it.  To  him,  therefore,  it  is  only 
"a  book,"  the  authorship  and  value  of 
which  he  leaves  it  to  others  to  determine. 
And  Shaphan  read  it  before  the  king.  It 
is  most  natural  to  understand  here,  aa  in 
ver.  8,  that  Shaphan  read  portions  of  the 
book.  Where  the  author  intends  to  say 
that  the  whole  book  was  read,  he  expresses 
himself  differently  (see  ch.  xxiii.  2,  "The 
king  read  in  tlieir  ears  all  the  words  of  the 
book  of  the  covenant"). 

Ver.  H. — ^And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the 
Mng  had  heard  the  words  of  the  book  of 
the  Law,  that  he  rent  his  clothes.  To 
Josiah  the  book  was  evidently,  aa  to  Hil- 
kiah, in  some  sort  a  discovery.  It  was  not, 
however,  a  wholly  new  thing;  rather,  he 
accepted  it  as  the  recovery  of  a  thing  tliat 
was  known  to  have  been  lost,  and  was  now 
happily  found.  And  in  accepting  it  he 
regarded  it  as  authoritative.  It  was  not 
to  him  "o  book  of  Law"  (Ewald),  but 
"the  book  of  {he  Law."  We  can  well 
imagine  that,  although  the  book  may  have 
been  lost  early  in  Manasseh'g  reign,  yet 
echoes  of  it  had  lingered  on  (1)  in  the 
liturgies  of  the  Jehovistio  worship ;  (2)  in 
the  teachings  of  the  prophets;  (3)  in  the 
traditional  teaching  of  religious  families ; 
80  that  the  piona  ear  recognized  ita  phrases 
as  familiar.  It  is  also  probable  that  there 
were  external  tokens  about  the  book  indica- 
tive of  its  character,  which  caused  its  ready 
acceptance. 

Ver.  12. — And  the  king  commanded  Hil- 
kiah  the  priest,  and  Ahikam  the  son  of 
Shaphan.  "Ahikam  the  son  of  Sbaphan" 
is  almost  certainly  Jeremiah's  protector  at 
the  court  of  Jehoiakim  (Jer.  xxvi.  24),  tha 
father  of  the  Gtedaliah  who  was  made  go> 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      laa.  xxu.  1—20. 


viirnor  of  Judaea  on  Nebuchadnezzar's  final 
conquest  ( Jer.  xxxix.  14 ;  xl.  7).  "  Shaphan," 
his  father,  Is  no  doubt  "  Shaphan  the  icribe." 
And  Achbor  the  son  of  Michaiah  The  paral- 
lel passage  of  Chronicles  (2  Ohron.  xxxiv. 
20)  has  "  Abdon  the  son  of  Micah,"  which 
is  probahly  a  corrupt  reading.  Achbor  was 
tlie  father  of  Bl-nathan,  one  of  tlie  *'  princes 
of  Judah  "  (Jer.  xxxvi.  12)  in  Jehoiakim's 
reign.  And  Shaphan  the  scribe,  and  Asa- 
hiah  a  servant  of  the  Mug's — or  Aeaiah,  as 
the  name  is  given  in  Ghrouicles,  2.  $.  e. — 
saying, 

Ver.  13. — Go  ye,  inquire  of  the  Lord  for 
m«.  Inquiry  of  the  Lord,  which  from  the 
time  of  Moses  to  that  of  David  was  ordi- 
narily "  by  Urira  and  Thummim,''  was  after 
David's  time  always  made  by  the  consul- 
tation of  a  prophet  (see  1  Kings  xxii.  5-8; 
ch.  iii.  11 ;  viii.  8  ;  Jer.  xxi.  2 ;  xxxvii.  7 ; 
Ezek.  xiv.  7 ;  xx.  1,  etc.).  The  officers, 
therefore,  understood  the  king  to  mean  that 
they  were  to  seek  out  a  prophet  (see  ver.  14), 
and  so  make  the  inquiry.  And  for  the 
"people,  and  for  all  Jndah — the  threats  read  in 
tlie  king's  eare  were  probably  those  of  Deut. 
xxviii.  15 — tl8  or  Lev.  xxvi.  16 — 39,  which 
extended  to  the  whole  people — oonceming 
the  words  of  this  book  that  is  fonnd.  Not 
"  whether  they  are  authentic,  whether  they 
are  really  the  words  of  Moses "  (Duncker), 
for  of  that  Josiah  appears  to  have  had  no 
doubt ;  but  whether  they  are  words  that  are 
to  have  an  immediate  fulfilment,  "  whether," 
as  Von  Gerlach  says,  "  the  measure  of  sin 
is  already  full,  or  whether  there  is  yet  hope 
of  grace?"  (compare  Huldah's  answer  in 
vers.  16 — 20,  which  shows  what  she  under- 
stood the  king's  inquiry  to  be).  For  great 
is  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  that  is  kindled 
against  us.  Josiah  recognized  that  Judah 
bad  done,  and  was  still  doing,  exactly  those 
things  against  which  the  threatenings  of  the 
Law  were  directed — had  forsaken  Jehovah, 
and  gone  after  other  gods,  and  made  to  them- 
selves high  places,  and  set  up  images,  and 
done  after  the  customs  of  the  nations  whom 
the  Lord  had  cast  out  before  them.  He 
could  not,  therefore,  doubt  but  that  the 
wrath  of  the  Lord  "  was  kindled ; "  but 
would  it  blaze  forth  at  once  ?  Because  our 
fathers  have  not  hearkened  unto  the  words 
of  this  book,  to  do  according  unto  all  that 
which  is  written  oonceming  us.  Josiah  as- 
sumes that  their  fathers  have  had  the  book, 
and  might  have  known  its  words,  either 
because  he  conceives  that  it  had  not  been 
very  long  lost,  or  because  he  regards  them 
■a  having  possessed  other  copies. 

Yer.  14. — So  Hilkiah  the  priest,  and  Ahi- 
kam,  and  Achbor,  and  Shaphan,  and  Asa- 
hiab,  went  unto  Hnldah  the  prophetess,  the 
wife  of  Shallum  the  ion  of  Tikvah.  The 
prinoipal  prophets  at  or  very  near  the  time 


were  Jeremiah,  whose  mission  had  com- 
menced in  Josiah'B  thirteenth  year  (Jer.  i.  2). 
and  Zephaniab,  the  son  of  Cushi,  whose 
prophecy  appears  by  internal  evidence  to 
have  belonged  to  the  earliest  part  of  Josiah's 
reign  (Pusey, '  Minor  Prophets,'  p.  438).  It 
might  have  been  expected  that  the  matter 
would  have  been  laid  before  one  of  these 
two  persons.  Possibly,  however,  neither  ol 
them  was  at  Jerusalem.  Jeremiah's  early 
home  was  Anathoth,  and  Zephaniah  may 
have  finished  his  course  before  Josiah'i 
eighteenth  year  (see  Pu«ey,  I.  i.  c).  Hul- 
dah  may  thus  have  been  the  only  possessor 
of  the  prophetic  gift  who  was  accessible. 
The  son  of  Harhas,  keeper  of  the  wardrobe ; 
literally,  keeper  of  the  garmenU  (oomp.  ch. 
X.  22).  In  Chronicles  the  name  of  the 
keeper  is  given  as  "  Hasrah."  Kow  she 
dwelt  at  Jerusalem  in  the  college — rather, 
in  the  lower  city  (comp.  Zeph.  i.  10  and  Neh. 
xi.  9 ;  literally,  in  each  place,  "  the  tecond 
city  ") — and  they  oommnned  with  her;  lite- 
rally, spoke  with  har;  i?id\i](ray  vphs  oMiy, 
LXX. 

Vers.  IS— 20.— The  propheey  of  Huldah. 
The  word  of  the  Lord  comes  to  Huldah 
with  the  arrival  of  the  messengers,  or  per- 
haps previous  to  it,  and  she  is  at  once  ready 
with  her  reply.  It  divides  itself  into  two 
parts.  In  vers.  15^17  the  inquiry  made  is 
answered— answered  afBrmatively, "Yes,  the 
fiat  is  gone  forth ;  it  is  too  late  to  avert  the 
sentence;  the  anger  of  the  Lord  is  kindled, 
ami  thall  not  J>e  quenched."  After  this,  iu 
vers.  18 — 20,  a  special  message  is  sent  to  the 
king,  granting  him  an  arrest  of  judgment, 
on  account  of  his  self-humiliation  and  abase- 
ment. "  Because  his  heart  was  tender,  and 
he  had  humbled  himself  before  Jehovah,  the 
evil  should  not  happen  in  his  day." 

Ver.  15. — And  she  said  unto  them.  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  Ood  of  Israel.  Huldah  is 
the  only  example  of  a  prophetess  in  Israel, 
who  seems  to  rank  on  the  same  footing 
with  the  prophets.  Miriam  (Exod.  iv.  20), 
Deborah  (Judg.  iv.  4),  Isaiah's  wife  (Isa. 
viii.  2),  and  Anna  (Luke  ii.  36)  are  called 
"prophetesses,"  but  in  a  secondary  sense, 
as  holy  women,  having  a  certain  gift  of  song 
or  prediction  from  God.  Huldah  has  the 
full  prophetic  afflatus,  and  deliver's  God's 
oracles,  just  as  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah  do. 
The  case  is  a  remarkable  exception  to  the 
general  mle  that  women  should  "keep 
silence  in  the  Churches."  Tell  the  man 
that  sent  yon  to  me.  The  contrast  between 
this  unceremonions  phrase  and  that  used  in 
ver.  18  is  best  explained  by  Theniua,  wht 


OH.  xxn.  1— 20.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  Of  THE  KINGS. 


439 


gaya,  "In  the  first  part  Huldah  has  only  the 
subject-matter  in  mind,  while  in  ver.  18,  in 
the  quieter  flow  of  her  words,  she  takes 
notice  of  the  state  of  mind  of  the  particular 
person  who  sent  to  make  the  inquiry." 

Yer.  16.— Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Behold,  I 
will  bring  evil  upon  this  place — i.e.  Jerusa- 
lem—and upon  the  inhabitants  thereof,  even 
all  the  words  of  the  book  which  the  King  of 
Jndah  hath  read.  In  the  parallel  passage 
of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  24)  the  ex- 
pression used  is  stronger,  viz.  "Behold,  I 
will  bring  evil  upon  this  place,  and  upon  the 
inhabitants  thereof,  even  all  the  euriea  that 
are  written  in  the  book  which  they  have 
read  before  the  King  of  Judah.V  The  pas- 
sage which  most  strongly  affucted  Josiah  was 
probably  that,  already  mentioned,  in  Deut. 
xxviii.,  which  began  with  a  series  of  curses. 

Vei.  17. — Because  they  have  forsaken  me. 
This  was  the  gist  of  their  offence,  the  thing 
that  was  unpardonable.  Against  this  were 
all  the  chief  warnings  in  the  Law  (Deut. 
xii.  19;  xxix.  25—28;  xxxi.  16, 17;  xxxii. 
15,  etc.)  and  the  prophets  (Judg.  x.  13;  1 
Sam.  viii.  8 ;  xii.  9;  1  Kings  ix.  9;  xi.  33; 
xviii.  18 ;  Isa.  i.  4 ;  Ixv.  11 ;  Jer.  i.  16 ;  ii. 
18,  etc.).  It  was  not  merely  that  they  broke 
the  commandments,  but  they  turned  from 
God  altogether,  and  "  cast  him  behind  their 
back."  And  have  burned  incense  unto  other 
gods  (comp.  ch.  xxiil.  5 ;  and  see  alsa  Jer. 
I.  18 ;  vii.  9 :  xi.  13 ;  xliv.  19,  etc.),  that 
they  might  provoke  me  to  anger  with  all 
the  works  of  their  hands;  i.e.  "  with  the  idols 
that  they  have  made  for  themselves  "  (Keil) 
(comp.  1  Kings  xvi.  7).  Therefore  my 
wrath  shall  be  kindled  against  this  place 
— i.e.  against  Jerusalem — and  shall  not  be 
quenched.  Here  lies  the  whole  point  of  the 
answer.  God's  thieatenings  against  nations 
are  for  the  most  part  conditional,  and  may 
be  escaped,  or  at  least  their  fulfilment  may 
be  deferred  indefinitely,  by  repentance,  as 
we  learn  from  the  example  of  Nineveh 
(Jonah  iii.  1 — 10).  But  if  a  nation  persists 
long  in  evil-doing,  there  comes  a  time  when 
the  sentence  can  be  no  longer  averted.  A 
real  repentance  has  become  impossible,  and 
a  mock  one  does  but  proVoke  God  the  more. 
For  such  a  state  of  things  there  is  "no 
remedy"  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  16),  and  this  was 
the  state  of  things  reached  by  the  Jews. 
God's  anger  against  them  could  not  be 
quenched. 

Yer.  18. — But  to  the  King  of  Judah  which 
sent  yon  to  inquire  of  the  Lord,  thus  shall 
ye  say  to  him  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  15), 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  Ood  of  Israel,  As  touch- 
ing the  words  which  thou  hast  heard;  i.e. 
the  words  that  were  read  to  thee  by  Shaphan 
(ver.  10) — the  awful  threats  which  caused 
thee  to  rend  thy  clothes  and  to  make  in- 
quiry of  me. 


Ver.  19. — Beoaose  thine  heart  was  tender 
r,  faint,  timid  (comp.  Deut.  zx.  3;  Isa. 
vii.  4) — and  thou  hast  humbled  thyself  before 
the  Lord.  Bending  the  garments  (ver.  11) 
was  an  outward  act  of  humiliation.  Joaiah 
had  accompnnied  it  by  inward  repentance 
and  self-abasement.  He  had  even  been 
moved  to  tears  (see  the  last  clause  but  one 
of  this  verse).  When  thon  heardest  what  I 
spake  against  this  place.  The  book  was, 
therefore,  a  record  of  what  God  had  really 
spoken,  not  a  fraud  imposed  on  the  king 
by  the  high  priest,  or  on  the  high  priest 
(Ewald,  'History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  235)  by 
an  unknown  Egyptian  exile.  And  against 
the  inhabitants  thereof,  that  they  shoiUd  be- 
come a  desolation  and  a  curse.  This  is  not 
a  direct  quotation  from  the  Law,  but  a  sum- 
mary, in  pregnant  language,  of  the  general 
effect  of  such  passages  as  Lev.  xxvi.  31 — 35 
and  Deut.  xxviii.  15 — 20.  The  language 
is  like  that  of  Jeremiah  in  xxvi.  6 ;  xii. 
18;  xliv.  22.  And  hast  rent  thy  clothes 
(see  ver.  11),  and  wept  before  me.  This 
had  not  been  previously  stated,  but  might 
have  been  gathered  from  Josiah's  evident 
sincerity,  and  from  the  ordinary  habits  of 
Orientals  (comp.  oh.  viii.  11 ;  liii.  14 ;  xx. 
8).  I  also  have  heard  thee,  saith  the  Lord. 
The  general  sense  of  vers.  18,  19  is,  as  Bahr 
notes,  "Because  thou  hast  heard  me  and 
taken  heed  to  my  threats,  I  also  have  heard 
thee,  and  will  delay  tlieir  fulfilment." 

Yer.  20. — Behold  therefore,  I  will  gather 
thee  unto  thy  fathers,  and  thou  slmlt  be 
gathered  into  thy  grave  in  peace.  There  is 
a  seeming  contradiction  between  these  words 
and  the  fact  of  Josiah's  violent  death  in 
battle  against  Fharaoh-Neclioh  (ch.  xxiii. 
29).  But  the  contradiction  is  not  a  real 
one.  Huldah  was  commissioned  to  assure 
Josiah  that,  though  the  destruction  of  his 
kingdom  and  the  desolation  of  Judsea  and 
Jerusalem,  threatened  in  the  Law,  wete  at 
hand,  yet  they  would  not  come  in  his  day. 
He  would  not  see  the  evil  time.  Before  it 
carne  he  would  be  "gathered  to  liis  fathers" — 
buried,  i.e.,  in  Jerusalem,  as  his  predecessors 
had  been  (ch.  xxiii.  80),  and  not  hurried  off 
into  captivity,  to  die  in  a  foreign  land,  or 
given  "  the  burial  of  an  ass,  drawn  and  cast 
forth  before  the  gates  of  Jerusalem "  (Jer. 
xxii.  19).  The  promise  given  him  was  ful- 
filled. He  died  in  battle ;  but  he  was  buried 
in  peace  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  24,  25) ;  and  the 
fated  enemy  who  was  to  destroy  Jerusalem, 
and  carry  the  Jewish  nation  into  captivity, 
did  not  make  any  attack  upon  the  land 
until  three  years  later,  when  he  was  departed 
to  his  rest,  and  the  throne  was  occupied  by 
Jehoiakim  (see  ch.  xxiv.  1).  And  thine 
eyes  shall  not  see  all  the  evil  which  I  will 
bring  upon  this  place ;  i.e.  the  three  sieges 
of  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  deitmotion  of  the 


140 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINOa      [oh.  xxn.  1— 2a 


temple  and  city  by  Nebuzar-adan  (ch.  ZXT. 
9,  10),  the  deportation  of  the  bulk  of  the 
inhabitants  (ch.  xxt.  11),  and  the  calami- 
ties which  happened  to  the  remnant  left 
(oh.  XXV.  22 — 26).  Josiah  did  not  witness 
any  of  this.    He  was  "  taken  away  from  the 


evil  to  come."  And  they  hionght  the  king 
word  again;  t.«.  Hilkiah,  Shaphan,  and 
their  companions  (ver.  14)  reported  to  JosiaU 
the  message  which  Huldah  had  sent  by 
them. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vera.  1 — 13. — A  righteovt  branch/rom  a  wicked  root.  Josiah  is  the  most  astonishing 
instance  that  is  contained  in  Scripture  of  goodness  springing  up,  and  attaining  high 
perfection  under  the  most  extraordinarily  imfavouiable  circumstances.     Josiah  was — 

I.  The  son  op  an  bxtbaoedinabilt  wioeed  father.  Amon,  Josiah's  father,  did 
eril  in  the  sight  oi  the  Lord  to  an  extent  scarcely  equalled  even  by  any  of  the  Israelite 
morjarohs.  "He  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  his  fathers"  (ch.  xxi.  22),  and  gave  himsell 
wholly  up  to  idolatry.  And  he  did  this  notwithstanding  the  example  of  his  father's 
fall,  punishment,  and  repentance.  As  the  writer  of  Chronicles  says  (2  Ghron.  xxxiii.  23), 
"  he  trespassed  more  and  more."  Every  idolatry  of  every  neighbouring  country  was 
adopted  by  him  and  reintroduced  into  Judah ;  the  temple  was  defiled  afresh ;  the  flres 
of  Tophet  were  relighted;  sodomites  polluted  the  temple  precincts  (ch.  xxiii.  7). 
Wickedness  of  every  kind  was  encouraged,  not  only  idolatry  and  debauchery,  but 
"  violence  and  deceit "  (Zeph.  i.  9),  profane  swearing  (Zeph.  i.  5),  luxury  in  apparel 
(Zeph.  i.  8),  covetousness  (Zeph.  i.  18),  oppression  (Zeph.  iii.  1),  injustice  (Zeph.  iii.  2), 
treachery  (Zeph.  iii.  3),  and  utter  shamelessness  (Zeph.  iii.  5). 

II.  The  grandson  of  a  still  more  wicked  grandfather.  Manasseh  was 
woise  than  Amon  in  that  he  set  at  nought  all  the  restraints  of  his  bringing  up,  the 
example  of  his  saintly  father,  and  the  instruction  of  Isaiah,  whom  he  is  said  to  have 
executed.  He  was  worse,  again,  as  the  original  introducer  of  many  most  corrupting 
idolatries  which,  but  for  his  example,  Amon  might  never  have  thought  of.  And  he 
was  worse  as  enforcing  his  false  and  impure  religion  on  those  who  were  reluctant  to 
adopt  it  by  means  of  persecution,  and  so  "  filling  Jerusalem  with  innocent  blood  from 
ow  end  to  another  "  (ch.  xxi.  16) — a  sin  which  is  never  laid  to  the  charge  of  Amon. 
If  heredity  be  indeed  the  strong  predisposing  cause  which  modern  biologists  assert  it  to 
be,  what  depths  of  depravity  might  not  a  prince  have  been  expected  to  sound,  who 
had  such  a  father  as  Amon,  such  a  grandfather  as  Manasseh ! 

III.  Brought  up  in  a  corrupt  court.  Manasseh's  court,  even  after  his  repentance, 
was  probably  but  half-purified.  Amon's  must  have  been  a  sink  of  corruption.  Childish 
innocence  is  soon  lost  in  an  atmosphere  of  profligacy ;  and  Josiah,  ere  he  was  eight 
years  of  age,  had  probably  been  made  to  witness  many  of  the  worst  forms  of  human 
depravity.  "  Nil  dictu  fcedum  facture  h«c  limina  tangat  intra  quia  puer  est "  was  a 
maxim  not  likely  to  obtain  much  observance  in  a  palace  where  the  rites  of  the  Syrian 
goddess  were  approved  and  practised. 

IV.  Without,  so  fab  as  wk  know,  ant  religious  instructor.  Isaiah  had  neen 
martyred  in  the  earlier  portion  of  Manasseh's  reign.  Micah  had  gone  to  his  rest  even 
earlier.  Jeremiah  did  not  receive  his  call  imtil  Josiah's  thirteenth  year  (Jer.  i.  2).  Ha- 
bakkuk  and  Zephaniah  lived,  perhaps,  under  Amon,  but  are  not  likely  to  have  been 
allowed  access  to  his  court,  much  less  opportunity  for  influencing  the  heir  to  the  throne. 
Josiah's  ofiicial  tutors  and  instructors  under  Amon  must  undoubtedly  have  been  persons 
devoted  to  the  court  religion,  which  was  the  syncretic  idolatry  conceived  by  Manasseh 
and  maintained  by  his  successor.  It  is  not  quite  easy  to  see  how  the  young  prince 
would  come  into  contact  with  any  of  the  professors  of  true  religioD,  or  obtain  any 
knowledge  of  the  Jehovistic  worship. 

Such,  however,  was  the  natural  purity  and  strength  of  character  by  Qod's  grace 
implanted  in  the  young  prince  from  the  first,  that  to  none  of  the  evil  influences  within 
him  or  without  him  did  he  succumb.  It  is  declared  of  him  in  the  infallible  Word,  that 
"  he  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  walked  in  aU  the  way 
ef  David  his  father,  and  tamed  not  aside  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left "  (ver.  2). 
As  soon  as  he  had  any  power  to  show  what  his  inclinations  were,  as  soon  (that  is)  ai 


OH.  xxn.  1—20.]      THE  SBCWND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  4*1 


he  was  free  from  the  trammels  which  confined  a  Jewish  prince  during  his  minority,  he 
courageously  set  himself  to  undo  the  ill  that  his  father  and  grandfather  had  done,  to 
abolish  the  strange  rites,  to  drive  out  the  foul  idolatries,  and  to  restore  the  worship  of 
Jehovah.  And  he  earned  the  praise  that  "  Like  unto  him  was  there  no  king  hefore 
him,  that  turned  to  the  Lord  with  all  his  heart,  and  with  all  his  soul,  and  with  all  his 
might,  according  to  all  the  Law  of  Moses;  neither  after  him  arose  there  any  like  him  " 
(ch.  xxiii.  25).  We  may  learn  from  this  history  not  to  assign  too  much  weight  to  a 
man's  surroundings,  but  to  hold  firm  to  tbe  belief  that  (here  is  in  each  man  a  sufficient 
force  of  personality  and  will  to  enable  him,  if  his  heart  he  set  on  well-doing,  to  resist 
any  amount  of  external  circumstances,  and  to  mould  his  life  and  chaiaoter  for  himself, 
even  in  the  exact  opposite  shape  to  that  whereto  all  the  external  circumstances  pointed, 
and  which  they  might  have  seemed  to  have  rendered  necessary. 

Vers.  8 — 13. — A  strange  loss,  and  a  strange  recovery.  The  loss  by  a  nation  of 
its  sacred  book  is  a  strange  and  extraordinary  occurrence.  Books  deemed  sacred  are 
naturally  so  highly  valued  and  so  deeply  reverenced  that  the  utmost  care  is  taken  of 
them.  Generally,  copies  are  multiplied  and  are  in  so  many  hands  that  the  loss  of  all, 
while  the  nation  itself  survives,  is  practically  impossible.  It  is  practically  impossible, 
nowadays,  that  the  Christians  should  lose  their  Bible,  or  the Mohamirtedans  their  Koidn, 
or  the  Hindoos  their  Vedas,  or  the  Parsees  their  Zendavesta,  or  the  Chinese  their  Shu- 
King  or  their  Taou-tih-King.  To  understand  what  had  taken  place  in  Palestine 
shortly  before  Josiah  came  to  the  throne,  we  must  consider  the  peculiar  circumstances 
of  the  Jewish  religion,  and  the  place  which  "  the  book  of  Law"  occupied  in  it.  The 
following  points  are  especially  worthy  of  note. 

I.  The  original  book  op  the  Law  was  deposited  beside  the  aek,  and  kept 
THERE.  "It  came  to  pass,"  we  are  told,  "when  Moses  had  made  an  end  of  writing 
the  words  of  this  Law  in  a  book,  until  they  were  finished,  that  Moses  commanded  the 
Levites,  which  bare  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  saying,  Take  this  book  of  the 
Law,  and  put  it  in  the  side  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your  God,  that  it 
may  be  there  for  a  witness  against  them  "  (Deut.  xxxi.  24—26). 

II.  Thbbe  was  no  provision  fob  making  copies  of  it  until  such  time  as  Israel 
SHOULD  have  kings.  Then  indeed  each  king  was  to  "  write  him  a  copy  of  the  Law  in 
a  book  out  of  that  which  was  before  the  priests  the  Levites  "  (Deut.  xvii.  18).  But, 
except  on  such  occasions,  the  book,  it  would  seem,  remained  in  the  ark,  and  was  not 
lent  about  to  be  copied. 

III.  The  design  was  to  make  the  Law  known  to  the  people  by  reading  it  to 
them  publicly.  Such  reading  was  prescribed  once  in  each  seven  years,  in  the  sab- 
batical year,  at  the  Feast  of  Idbernacles  (Deut.  xxxi.  10 — 13).  Under  Nehemiah 
certainly  (Neh.  viii.  2 — 5),  perhaps  at  other  times,  the  precept  was  acted  on. 

IV.  Multiplication  of  copies  was  not  needed  foe  synagogues,  which  did  not  as 
YET  EXIST.  The  result  was  that  probably,  besides  the  temple  copy,  very  few  copies  of  the 
Law  had  at  any  time  existed.  Irreligious  kings,  as  Rehoboam,  Abijah,  Jehoram,  Ahaziah, 
Ahaz,  Manasseh,  and  Amon,  would,  as  a  matter  of  course,  disobey  the  precept  to  make 
a  copy  ;  and  it  is  not  even  certain  that  all  religious  kings  would  carry  out  the  precept. . 
David,  whose  delight  was  in  the  Law  (Ps.  cxix.  77),  Asa,  Jehoshaphat,  Joash,  Heze- 
kiah,  would  almost  certainly  have  made  copies ;  but  Solomon  may  not  have  done  so, 
nor  Amaziah,nor  Uzziah,  nor  Jotham.  If  the  prophets  seem  to  show  such  a  familiarity 
with  the  Law  as  implies  constant  study,  it  may  well  be  that  the  "  schools  of  the  pro- 
phets "  were  in  possession  of  some  of  the  royal  autograph  copies,  or  the  prophets  may 
have  been  allowed  access  as  often  as  they  required  it  to  the  temple  copy.  Passages  of 
the  Law,  as  the  Decalogue  and  other  precepts  regarding  conduct,  or,  again,  the  promises 
made  to  the  patrinrchs,  and  to  the  nation  at  large  through  Moses,  may  have  been  widely 
known,  being  fixed  in  the  memory  of  the  people,  and  passed  on  from  father  to  son  by 
word  of  mouth.  And  these  well-known  passages  may  also  have  sometimes  taken  a 
written  shape.  But  entire  copies  of  the  Law  must,  even  in  the  time  of  the  later  kings, 
have  been  exceedingly  scarce.  Thus  when  an  irreligious  king  like  Manasseh  set  aside 
the  Jehovistic  worship,  and  thrust,  it  may  be,  into  lumber-rooms,  the  old  furniture  of 
the  temple,  so  that  the  book  of  the  Law,  {.e.  the  temple  copy,  became  mislaid  or  lost, 
there  was  no  very  ready  way  of  replacing  it.    Nor,  perhaps,  did  there  seem  to  be  any 


442  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.      [oh.  xxn.  1— 2a 

absolute  necessity  of  so  doing.  Except  once  in  seven  years,  the  reading  of  the  Law 
does  not  appear  to  have  formed  a  part  of  any  temple  service.  The  precepts  of  the  Law 
were  inculcated  orally  by  priests  and  Levites,  who  had  received  them  from  their  pre- 
decessors. Hilkiah  and  the  priests  generally  were  probably  content  to  carry  on  tho 
traditional  teaching,  and  did  not  feel  the  need  of  seeking  the  water  of  life  from  the 
fountain-head.  But  suddenly  a  discovery  was  made.  There  had  been  no  wanton  or 
malignant  destruction  of  the  book  of  the  Law.  It  had  merely  been  thrust  out  of 
sight,  and  then  forgotten.  As  the  repair  and  restoration  of  the  temple  proceeded,  and 
even  lumber-rooms  and  closets  were  searched,  that  the  whole  building  might  be  brought 
into  proper  order,  those  employed  in  the  work  came  upon  the  lost  volume.  It  was, 
probably,  very  easily  recognized.  As  Bahr  says,  it  may  have  been  "  distinguished  by 
its  external  appearance,  size,  material,  beauty  of  the  writing,"  etc.,  as  the  Samaritan 
copy  of  the  Pentateuch  at  Nablous  is  distinguished.  Or  it  may  have  had  for  its  title, 
"  The  Book  of  the  Law  of  the  Lord  h/  the  hand  of  Moses"  (2  Chron.  xxziv.  14).  There 
may  even  have  been  priests  living  who  had  seen  the  book  before  it  was  lost,  and  knew 
it  as  the  volume  with  which,  fifty  years  before,  they  had  been  familiar.  At  any  rate, 
priests,  king,  and  people  unanimously,  though  with  much  grief  and  fear,  accepted  it. 
The  prophetess,  who  was  God's  mouthpiece  at  the  time,  confirmed  their  view ;  and  it 
remained  for  nineteenth-centm-y  critics,  to  throw  a  doubt  upon  the  conclusion  thus  come 
to,  and  to  brand  the  wurk  as  a  forgery  of  Hilkiah's,  or  as  a  chance  production  of  a  chance 
author,  who  had  amused  himself  by  composing  a  code  of  laws  for  a  Utopia. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Ver.  1 — ch.  xxiii.  30. — Ute  reign  of  King  Josiah.  The  last  days  of  Judah  as  an 
independent  kingdom  are  fast  hastening  to  a  close.  The  people,  in  spite  of  aU  God's 
merciful  dealings  with  them,  in  spite  of  all  the  judgments  and  warnings  which  he  had 
sent  to  their  fathers,  in  spite  of  the  influence  and  example  of  good  kings  and  holy 
prophets  whom  he  had  raised  up,  were  becoming  worse  and  worse.  More  tlian  a 
hundred  years  before,  God  had  already  abolished  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  when  the  ten 
tribes  were  led  away  into  captivity.  And  now  for  their  great  idolatries  the  destruction 
of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  also  is  close  at  hand.  In  the  midst  of  this  period  of  decline 
and  decay  Josiah  came  to  the  throne  to  redeem  for  a  time  the  history  of  his  nation,  and 
for  a  time  to  save  it  from  its  im]jending  doom. 

I.  Josiah'b  early  devotion.  We  read  that  in  the  eighth  year  of  his  reign,  while  he 
was  yet  young,  he  began  to  seek  after  the  God  of  David  his  lather.  He  was  then  six- 
teen years  of  age.  1.  He  began  to  seek  after  God  in  a  time  of  almost  universal  godlessness 
and  corruption.  It  is  almost  impossible  for  us  to  conceive  the  depth  of  degradation  to 
which  the  nation  had  sunk.  Two  wicked  kings  in  succession  had  undone  all  the 
reforms  of  good  King  Hezekiah.  The  first  of  these  was  Hezekiah's  own  son,  Manasseh, 
the  second  was  Manasseh's  son,  Amon.  Manasseh  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven, 
and  built  altars  for  all  the  host  of  heaven  in  the  tWo  courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lord. 
He  set  up  the  worship  of  Moloch,  which  is  almost  too  terrible  to  describe  (see  above  on 
ch.  xvi.  1 — 20).  He  made  his  own  son  to  pass  through  the  fire  to  Moloch.  He  intro- 
duced not  only  the  horrid  cruelty  of  heathenism,  but  also  its  most  filthy  lusts.  The 
reign  of  Amon  was  no  better,  but  worse.  He  revived  and  continued  all  the  idolatries 
and  all  the  corruption  of  his  father's  reign.  It  was  at  such  a  time  as  this  that,  when  Amon 
died,  his  son  Josiah,  then  only  eight  years  old,  came  to  the  throne.  At  such  a  time  as  this 
he  began  to  seek  after  the  Lord  his  God.  2.  Moreover,  he  was  the  son  of  a  godless  and 
wicked  father.  AU  the  influences  which  surrounded  him  seem  to  liave  been  unfavour- 
able to  the  growth  of  true  religion  and  the  fear  of  God.  But  Josiah  determined  that,  as 
for  him,  he  would  not  bow  down  to  idols,  that  he  would  serve  the  Lord  only.  And  God 
gave  him  strength  to  serve  him,  and  crowned  his  subsequent  efforts  with  blessing  and 
success.  Learn  here  the  folly  of  excusing  yoursdffrom  serving  Ood  hy  the  circumstances 
in  whith  you  are  placed.  Tou  are  responsible  to  God  for  your  own  life,  and  for  your  own 
conduct,  no  matter  how  others  may  act.  It  may  cost  us  many  a  hard  struggle  to  resist 
the  temptations  that  surround  us  on  every  side ;  but  it  always  succeeds  in  the  end.  You 
may  be  children  of  ungodly  partints ;  you  may  b«  at  MTvioe  in  ungodly  households ; 


OH.  xxn.  1—20.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  44Z 


you  may  be  thrown  by  yotir  business  among  ungodly  companions  and  surroundings; — 
no  matter!-  Ciod  expects  you  to  be  faithml  unto  him.  Young  men,  Josiah's  early 
devotion  is  a  bright  example  for  you  to  follow.  Never  suffer  yourselves  to  be  led  astray 
by  the  notion  that  religion  is  an  unmanly  thing.  The  truly  religious  man  k  the  noblest 
and  most  perfect  man.  He  is  great  in  all  that  constitutes  true  manhood.  And  if  you 
want  to  find  the  greatest  heroes  in  the  world's  history,  you  will  find  them,  not  among 
the  followers  of  the  world's  fashion  and  the  world's  pleasure,  but  among  the  prophets, 
apostles,  martjTS,  and  humble  Christians  in  the  Church  of  God.  It  is  the  highest  aim 
any  young  man  can  set  before  him  to  be  a  iiumble  and  devoted  follower  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Never  mind  what  circumstances  or  companions  surround  you,  except  to  try  and  make 
them  better.  Joseph  was  faithful  to  God  in  Egypt.  His  faithfulness  sent  him  to  a 
prison  for  a  time ;  but  afterwards  it  raised  him  to  be  the  greatest  man  in  Egypt  after 
the  king.  Daniel  was  faithful  to  God  in  Babylon,  though  he  knew  well  it  was  at  the 
risk  of  his  life.  His  faithfulness  brought  him  for  a  little  while  to  the  lions'  den ;  but  it 
afterwards  made  him  ruler  over  the  whole  province  of  Babylon.  It  is  true  heroism  to 
be  ready  to  suffer — to  suffer  bodily  pain,  to  suffer  the  loss  of  worldly  goods,  yes,  to  suffer 
even  the  loss  of  reputation  itself,  for  the  sake  of  truth  and  purity  and  right.  Like 
Josiah,  the  sooner  you  begin  to  serve  God  the  better.  You  will  never  regret  it. 
"  Bemember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth." 

II.  Josiab's  wobk  of  eefoemation.  (Ver.  3— ch.  xxiii.  26.)  Here  also  he  began 
very  early  to  do  what  he  believed  to  be  right.  It  was  in  the  twelfth  year  of  his  reign 
— when  he  was  only  twenty  years  old — that  he  began  to  purge  Judah  and  Jerusalem 
from  the  high  places  and  the  idols.  Then  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  his  reign — when 
he  was  twenty-six  years  old — he  began  to  repair  the  house  of  the  Lord,  which  had  been 
long  disused  and  neglected.  God  so  prospered  him  in  this  work,  that  the  people 
brought  large  sums  of  money  for  the  repairing  of  the  temple.  It  was  when  this  was 
being  done  that  Bilhiah  the  priest  fmi/nd  in  the  temple  the  look  of  the  Law.  There  it 
lay,  probably  all  covered  with  dust,  like  the  unused  Bible  in  many  a  home,  a  silent  reproof 
to  those  who  should  have  known  what  was  right  but  did  not  do  it.  When  the  book  of 
the  Law  was  read  to  the  king,  he  rent  his  clothes,  in  sorrow  and  in  shame,  when  he 
th&ugbt  of  how  the  Law  of  God  had  been  broken  and  neglectei).  It  was  determined 
that  it  should  be  so  no  longer,  and,  having  gathered  all  the  people  together,  he  read  in 
their  ears  all  the  words  of  the  Law.  Then,  standing  on  a  pillar,  he  made  a  covenant 
that  they  would  serve  the  Lord  and  keep  his  commandments,  and  all  the  people 
agreed  to  it.  After  this  was  done,  he  appointed  a  solemn  Passover  to  be  kept  by  all 
the  people.  And  it  is  said,  "  Surely  there  was  not  holden  such  a  Passover  from  the 
days  of  the  judges  that  judged  Israel,  nor  in  all  the  days  of  the  kings  of  Israel,  nor  of 
the  kings  of  Judah ;  but  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  King  Josiah,  wherein  this  Passover 
was  holden  to  the  Lord  in  Jerusalem"  (ch.  xxiii.  22,  23).  It  was  a  marvellous  work 
for  k  young  king  to  hare  accomplished  in  the  twenty-sixth  year  of  bis  age.  He  found 
the  land  full  of  idolatry  and  corruption.  But  he  had  already  pulled  down  the  altars, 
and  burned  the  idols,  and  swept  away  the  dens  of  vice.  He  found  the  temple  closed, 
neglected,  and  in  decay.  He  had  already  repaired  it  and  restored  the  worship  of  the 
true  God.  He  found  the  Law  of  God  forgotten,  forsaken,  and  unknown — the  temple  copy 
of  it  hidden  away  out  of  sight.  He  had  already  restored  it  to  its  proper  place  as  the 
ruling  principle  of  his  government  and  of  the  nation's  life.  Truly  a  marvellous  work 
for  a  young  king  of  twenty-six.  We  see  here,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  life  of  Hezekiah, 
the  power  of  decision  for  what  is  right.  Josiah  was  not  content  merely  to  know  God 
and  serve  him  by  himself.  He  was  determined  that,  so  far  as  he  had  any  influence, 
others  should  know  and  serve  God  too.  He  might  have  said,  in  the  spirit  of  many 
lukewarm  Christians  of  modern  times,  "What  matters  it?  They  have  their  religion, 
and  I  have  mine."  He  might  have  said  that,  as  a  ruler,  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  hii 
people's  religion,  but  only  with  their  conduct  as  members  of  the  state.  Not  so.  Ee 
knew  that  it  is  religion,  or  the  want  of  it,  which  makes  or  mars  the  happiness  and 
prosperity  of  the  nation.  He  knew  that,  as  a  servant  of  God,  he  was  bound  to  bear 
his  testimony  and  to  use  every  influence  in  his  power  against  sin  and  in  favonr  of 
what  was  right.  And  so  he  acted,  not  with  half-measures,  not  with  half-hearted  heil- 
tation,  but  with  firmness,  fearlessness,  promptness,  and  determination,  as  becomes  one 
who  is  doing  the  work  of  God.    And  so,  also,  God  stood  by  him,  and  gave  him  success 


444  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,     [oh.  xxn.  1—20. 

in  all  his  work.  Such  an  example  ii  full  of  inRtrnction  for  onr  modem  life.  Never  be 
a  consenting  party,  even  by  your  silence,  to  what  your  conscience  tells  you  is  wrong. 
Never  consent,  even  by  your  silence,  to  anything  dishonouring  to  Qod  or  not  in  accord- 
ance with  his  will.  Never  be  a  consenting  party  to  anything  that  you  would  be 
ashamed  of  in  the  sight  of  God  and  men — to  acts  of  injustice  to  others,  to  dishonesty 
or  unfairness  of  any  kind,  to  profanity,  to  neglect  of  Sunday  observance,  or  any  other 
form  of  prevailing  wickedness.  "  0  my  soul,  come  not  thou  into  their  secret;  with  their 
assembly,  mine  honour,  be  not  jthou  united."  Like  Josiah,  we  can  never  begin  too  soon, 
not  only  to  serve  God  ourselves,  but  also  to  bring  others  to  him.  Like  Josiah,  let  every 
servant  of  God  show  the  reality  of  his  and  her  religion  by  deeds  of  usefulness,  by  bearing 
testimony  against  sin,  and  by  unwavering  firmness  in  the  cause  of  Christ  and  duty. 

III.  Josiah's  eablt  death.  Josiah  died  at  an  early  age.  He  wai  mourned  for 
with  great  lamentation.  Some  think  that  it  is  of  him  that  Jeremiah,  in  his  Book  of 
Lamentations,  speaks  when  he  says,  "The  breath  of  our  nostrils,  the  anointed  of 
Jehovah,  was  taken  in  theii  pits,  of  whom  we  said.  Under  his  shadow  we  shall  live 
among  the  heathen."  The  passage  perhaps  indicates  how  great  was  the  influence  for 
good  which  Josiah  exercised,  and  how  much  the  people  depended  upon  him  as  their 
leader  and  defender.  His  early  death,  before  he  had  completed  bia  fortieth  year,  must 
have  caused  many  to  wonder  at  God's  mysterious  providence.  But  his  work  was  done. 
He  had  really  done  the  work  of  many  lives  in  one.  And  so  when  servants  of  God  are 
taken  away  in  the  prime  of  life — or  prematurely,  as  we  say — let  us  remember  that 
God's  ways  are  not  our  ways.  In  hia  sight  their  work  is  done.  They  have  finished 
the  work  which  be  gave  them  to  do.  Let  us  so  use  the  precious  time  which  God  has 
given  us,  that  in  our  dying  hour  we  shall  not  have  to  look  back  upon  a  wasted  life. 
But  let  us  live,  as  Josiah  lived,  a  life  of  holiness,  of  usefulness,  "  redeeming  the  time." 
And  then  when  we  are  drawing  near  to  the  gates  of  death,  we  shall  feel  that  for  us 
they  are  the  gates  of  heaven.  We  shall  be  able  humbly  and  thankfully  to  say,  "  I  have 
fought  the  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith :  henceforth 
there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge, 
shall  give  me  at  that  day." — C.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — ^20. — A  monarch  of  rare  virtue,  and  a  Ood  of  retributive  justice.  "Josiah 
was  eight  years  old,"  etc.  There  are  two  subjects  in  this  chapter  that  arrest  our  atten- 
tion, and  which  are  fertile  with  suggestions. 

I.  A  MONARCH  OF  BABE  viETUB.  "  Josiah  was  eight  years  old  when  he  began  to 
reign,  and  he  reigned  thirty  and  one  years  in  Jerusalem,"  etc.  In  this  monarch  we 
discover  four  distinguished  merits.  1.  Seligiousness  of  action.  "  He  did  that  which 
was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  This  is  the  testimony  of  the  historian,  whoever 
he  may  be,  and  we  are  further  told,  "  Josiah  walked  in  all  the  way  of  David  his  father." 
Elsewhere  we  have  given  the  biblical  account  of  David's  life.'  From  that  account  it 
might,  pel  haps,  be  questioned  whether  to  "  walk  in  the  way  of  David"  was  a  mc  rally 
creditable  life.  But  undoubtedly  in  the  opinion  of  this  writer,  Josiah  was  a  man  whose 
activity  was  inspired  by  true  religious  feeling.  Here  we  find  him  providing  for  the  repairs 
of  the  temple.  "  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  King  Josiah,  that  the 
king  sent  Sbaphan  the  son  of  Azaliah,  the  son  of  Moshullam,  the  scribe,  to  the  house  of 
the  Lord,  saying.  Go  up  to  Hilkiah  the  high  priest,  that  he  may  sum  the  silver  which  is 
brought  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  which  the  keepers  of  the  door  have  gathered  of  the 
people :  and  let  them  deliver  it  into  the  hand  of  the  doers  of  the  work,  that  have  the 
oversight  of  the  house  of  the  Lord :  and  let  them  give  it  to  the  doers  of  the  work  which 
is  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  to  repair  the  breaches  of  the  house."  The  king  who  provides 
for  the  religious  instruclion  and  worship  of  his  people  proves  thereby  that  he  is  under  the 
influence  of  the  religious  sentiment.  In  repairing  the  temple,  Josiah  honours  his  people, 
not  only  by  allowing,  but  by  encouraging  them  to  co-operate  with  him  in  the  noble  work. 
He  coerces  none ;  all  were  left  free,  and  they  did  their  work  honestly  and  honourably. 
•*  Howbeit  there  was  no  reckoning  made  with  them  of  the  money  that  was  delivered 
into  their  hand,  because  they  dealt  faithfully."  2,  Docility  of  mind.  "  And  Hilkiah 
the  high  priest  said  unto  Shaphan  the  scribe,  I  have  found  the  book  of  the  Law  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  And  Hilkiah  gave  the  book  to  Shaphan,  and  h«  read  it.  And 
'  See  '  Commentary :  Book  of  Fsalms,'  voL  ill 


OH.  xxn.  1— 20.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  445 


Shaplian  the  scrilw  came  to  the  king,  and  brought  the  Wng  word  again.  .  .  .  And 
Shaphan  the  scribe  showed  the  king,  saying,  Hilkiah  the  priest  hath  delirered  me  • 
book.  And  Shaphan  read  it  before  the  king.  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  king  had 
heard  the  words  of  the  book  of  the  Law,  that  he  rent  his  clothes."  What  book  was 
this ?  Old  time  buries  the  choicest  books;  volumes  that  once  moved  the  intellects  and 
fired  the  hearts  of  men  are  sunk  in  the  black  waves  of  oblivion.  In  all  probability  the 
book  here  was  the  Pentateuch,  the  five  books  of  Moses.  A  copy  of  this,  it  seems,  having 
been  laid  beside  the  ark  in  the  most  holy  place  (Deut.  xxxi.  25, 26),  had  been  lost,  and 
now,  during  the  repairing  of  the  temple,  it  was  discovered.  Was  this  a  Divine  book  ? 
If  so,  why  should  its  Author  have  suffered  it  to  have  been  lost,  perhaps  for  generations? 
A  human  author,  had  he  the  power  to  prevent  it,  would  not  suffer  his  productions  to  meet 
with  such  a  fate.  But  the  thoughts  of  God  are  independent  of  books ;  they  are  not  only 
written  on  the  pages  of  nature,  but  in  imperishable  characters  on  the  souls  of  men.  But 
how  did  Josiah  act  towards  this  discovered  book  ?  Did  he  reject  it,  or  was  he  indififerent 
to  it  ?  No.  "  It  came  to  pass,  when  the  king  had  heard  the  words  of  the  book  of  the 
Law,  that  he  rent  his  clothes."  Herein  how  unlike  is  this  man,  not  only  to  ordinary 
mortals,  but  also  to  ordinary  kings !  How  many  kings  have  been  ready  to  receive  new 
light  ?  Are  they  not  for  the  most  part  so  mailed  in  traditions  and  prejudices  as  to  render 
the  admission  of  a  new  truth  well-nigh  impossible  ?  If  the  modem  occupants  of  thrones 
would  but  universally  open  their  eyes  to  those  old  truths  of  eternal  right  which  come 
flashing  from  their  graves,  all  oppressions  would  cease,  and  kingdoms  would  march  on  to 
freedom  and  light.  "  Be  wise  now  therefore,  O  ye  kings :  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the 
earth."  3.  Tendtrness  of  heart.  See  how  the  discovery  of  the  book  affected  him.  "He 
rent  his  clothes."  It  is  also  said,  in  ver.  19,  "  Thine  heart  was  tender."  Sensibility  of 
heart  gives  life,  worth,  and  power  to  intellect.  Where  sensibility  and  intellect  are  not  in 
their  due  proportion,  the  character  is  defective.  Where  the  sensibility  is  stronger  than 
the  intellect,  the  man  is  likely  to  become  a  morbid  pietist  or  a  reckless  fanatic.  Where 
the  intellect  is  stronger  in  proportion  to  the  sensibility,  the  man  is  likely  to  become  a 
cold  theorist,  living  in  the  fiigid  abstractions  of  his  own  brun.  But  where  both  are 
properly  combined,  you  have  a  man  fit  for  great  things.  A  man  who,  if  he  be  a  friend, 
will  give  counsels  that  will  tell  alike  on  your  understanding  and  heart.  Sensibility 
feathers  the  arrows  of  argument,  gives  poetry  and  power  to  thought.  4.  Actvalization 
of  conviction.  When  this  discovered  document  came  under  Josiah's  attention,  and  its 
import  was  realized,  he  was  seized  with  a  conviction  that  he,  his  fathers,  and  his  people, 
had  disi'egarded,  and  even  outraged,  the  written  precepts  of  Heaven.  He  exclaims, 
"  Great  is  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  that  is  kindled  against  us,  because  our  fathers  have 
not  hearkened  unto  the  words  of  this  book,  to  dp  according  unto  all  that  which  is 
written  concerning  us."  With  this  new  conviction  burning  within  him,  what  does  he 
do  ?  Does  he  strive  to  quench  it  ?  or  does  he  allow  it  to  burn  itself  out  without  any 
effort  on  his  part  ?  No ;  he  at  once  commands  his  servants  to  make  an  effort  on  behalf 
of  himself  and  his  people,  "  Go  ye,  inquire  of  the  Lord  for  me,  and  for  the  people,  and 
for  all  Judah,  concerning  the  words  of  this  book  that  is  foimd."  The  new  emotions 
that  rushed  into  his  tender  heart  prompted  him  to  seek  immediate  counsel  how  to 
avert  the  curses  under  which  his  kingdom  lay.  They  obeyed  his  behests.  "  So  Hil- 
kiah the  priest,  and  A.hikam,  and  Achbor,  and  Shaphan,  and  Asahiah,  went  unto 
Huldah  the  prophetess,  the  wife  of  Shallum  the  son  of  Tikvah,  the  son  of  Harhas, 
keeper  of  the  wardrobe  (now  she  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  in  the  coUege) ;  and  they  com- 
muned with  her.  And  she  said  unto  them.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  Tell 
the  man  that  sent  you  to  me.  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this 
place,  and  upon  the  inhabitants  thereof,  even  all  the  words  of  the  book  which  the  King 
of  Judah  hath  read :  because  they  have  forsaken  me,"  etc.  (vers.  14 — 18).  Here  the 
pro|)hetess  spoke  the  universal  sentiment  of  mankind,  viz.  that  where  wrong  is,  suffering 
munt  follow.  All  experience,  all  history,  attests  the  truth  of  the  sentiment.  But  the 
noteworthy  point  here  is  that  this  tender-hearted  man  translated  hit  emotions  into 
actions.  He  did  not  allow  bis  new  feelings  to  pass  away  as  the  morning  cloud,  nor  did 
he  expend  them  in  sentimental  sighs  and  groans.  Well  would  it  be  for  all  men  if  they 
acted  thus ;  for  this,  in  truth,  is  the  only  method  of  spiritual  progress.  It  is  only  as 
men  embody  true  thoughts  and  feelings  in  actions  that  they  rise  to  true  manhood. 
n.  A  God  of  vxTsawrm  justice.     Such  a  God  the  prophetess  here  nveals. 


iM  THB  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.     [<m.  xxn.  I— Sa 

"  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Qoi  of  Israel,  Tell  the  man  that  sent  you  to  me,  Thus  saith  the 
Lord,  Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  place,  and  upon  the  inhabitants  thereof,  even 
all  the  words  of  the  book  which  the  King  of  Judah  hath  read."  The  government  over 
us,  and  to  which  we  are  bound  with  chains  stronger  than  adamant,  is  retributive ;_  it 
never  allows  evil  to  go  unpunished.  It  links  in  indissoluble  bonds  sufferings  to  sin. 
Sorrows  follow  sm  by  a  law  as  immutable  and  resistless  as  the  waves  follow  the  moon. 
"  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  In  this  retribution  (1)  the  wicked 
are  treated  with  severity,  and  (2)  the  good  are  treated  with  £ivour.  In  the  name  of 
Qod  this  prophetess  declares  concerning  Josiah,  "  As  touching  the  words  which  thou 
hast  heard ;  because  thine  heart  was  tender,  and  thou  hast  humbled  thyself  before  the 
Lord,  when  thou  heardest  what  I  spake  against  this  place,  and  against  the  inhabitants 
thereof,  that  they  should  become  a  desolation  and  a  curse,  and  hast  rent  thy  clothes, 
and  wept  before  me ;  I  also  have  heard  thee,  saith  the  Lord.  Behold  therefore,  I  will 
gather  thee  unto  thy  fathers,  and  thou  shalt  be  gathered  into  thy  grave  in  peace ;  and 
thine  eyes  shall  not  see  all  the  evil  which  I  will  bring  upon  this  place.  Though 
righteous  judgments  were  soon  to  descend  upon  bis  country  on  account  of  its  manifold 
and  heinous  sins,  he,  Josiah,  who  had  proved  faithful  amongst  the  faithless,  would  be 
spared  the  terrible  storm.  He  should  neither  feel  it  nor  see  it ;  his  body  would  be 
ileeping  in  the  quiet  grave,  and  his  spirit  be  gathered  to  his  "  fathers,"  with  all  the  true 
men  of  past  times.  We  are  prone  to  think  of  death  as  an  evil ;  it  is  an  event  that 
often  appals  us  with  the  ghastly  aspects  that  it  assumes  before  our  imagination.  There 
•re  circumstances  that  make  it  appear  especially  sad.  -For  example :  when  a  man  like 
Josiah,  of  immense  influence  for  good,  dies  in  the  zenith  of  life,  and  in  the  midst  of 
usefulness,  we  deem  it  an  occasion  of  special  sadness.  But  it  is  not  so,  either  to  the 
man  himself  or  to  his  generation.  He  is  taken  away  from  the  evil  that  is  coming,  and 
the  circumstance  of  his  death,  and  the  loss  caused  by  his  departure,  tend  to  rouse  hia 
contemporaries  to  serious  and  salutary  thought.  Death  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  The 
Divine  government  of  the  world  is  like  a  stream  that  rolls  under  us ;  men  are  only  as 
bubbles  that  rise  to  its  surface ;  some  are  brighter  and  larger,  and  sparkle  longer  in  the 
sun  than  others :  but  all  must  break,  whilst  the  mighty  current  rolls  on  in  its  wonted 
majesty.  We  are  shadows,  and  following  shadows.  There  is  nothing  real  but 
Gh)d.— D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Josiah :  the  temple  again  repaired.  The  reign  of  Josiah  affords  another 
example  of  the  law  of  action  and  reaction  in  national  life.  Dr.  B.  Payne  Smith  says, 
"  The  nation  itself  had  gradually  swung  round,  as  nations  now  do,  and  had  begun  to 
be  as  dissatisfied  with  Baal  and  Moloch  as  their  fathers  had  been  with  Jehovah" 
('Introduction  to  Jeremiah') ;  and  Dean  Stanley  remarks,  "  The  popular  election  which 
placed  Josiah  on  the  throne,  of  itself  marks  some  strong  change  of  public  feeling  "  (Jewish 
Church,'  vol.  ii.  p.  435).  It  is  safer,  however,  to  infer  this  change  in  public  feeling  from 
the  support  afterwards  given  to  Josiah  in  his  measures  of  reform,  than  from  the  mere 
fact  of  his  accession;  for  as  yet  his  disposition  was  quite  uncertain.  The  craving  for  a 
change  of  some  kind,  with  a  secret  weariness  of  the  policy  and  extreme  doings  of  the 
pagan  party,  had  perhaps  more  to  do  with  the  young  king's  popularity  than  any  real 
desire  to  serve  Jehovah. 

I.  Thbbe  BBQiNNrNQS.  1.  The  beginning  of  a  reign,  Josiah  was  but  a  boy  of  eight 
years  old  when  he  was  placed  upon  the  throne.  At  this  age  he  was  in  danger,  like 
his  grandfather  Manasseh,  of  being  a  mere  puppet  in  the  hands  of  the  godless  aristo- 
cracy. But  God's  providence  seems  to  have  watched  over  Josiah,  and  to  have  caused 
some  care  to  be  taken  to  guide  the  young  king  right.  The  queen-mother,  Jedidah 
("the  beloved  of  God"),  daughter  of  Adaiah  ("the  honoured  of  God"),  "may 
perhaps  have  deserved  her  lofty  name,  and  given  her  boy  the  priceless  benefit 
of  a  godly  mother's  example  and  counsels"  (Geikie).  She  may  even  have  acted 
as  regent  during  his  minority,  and  in  that  capacity  have  gathered  around  her  the 
worthy  persons  who  afterwards  figure  iu  the  narrative,  Shaphan  the  scribe,  etc.  2. 
77ie  beginning  of  grace.  Josiah  from  the  first  must  have  shown  good  dispositions, 
and  a  willingness  to  be  guided  and  taught  by  godly  counsellors.  But  it  is  to  the 
eighth  year  of  his  reign,  that  is,  his  sixteenth  year,  that  the  Book  of  Ohroniclea 
•ttribatea  the  first  decided  evidence  of  his  determination  to  seek  Jehovah.     "  For 


0H.XX1I.1— 20.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  447 


in  tte  eighth  year  of  his  reign,  while  he  was  still  young,  he  began  to  seek  after  the 
God  of  David  his  father"  (2  Ohron.  xxxiv.  3).  Prom  this  period  his  career  geems  to 
have  been  a  singularly  straightforward  and  consistent  one:  "He  walked  in  all  the 
way  of  David  his  father,  and  turned  not  aside  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left." 
What  led  to  this  decision  in  his  eighth  year  we  cannot  tell.  The  age  at  which  he  had 
now  arrived  marks  the  time  about  which  independent  thought  commonly  begins; 
possibly  some  increase  of  responsibility  led  him  to  deeper  reflection;  it  may  well  be 
that  his  mind  had  long  been  secretly  brooding  on  religion,  and  he  now  took  some 
public  step  which  showed  decidedly  which  side  he  was  on.  Nothing  seems  so  beautiful 
as  early  piety.  A  character  like  Josiah's  appearing  after  reigns  like  those  of  Manasseh 
and  Amon  is  as  a  snowdrop  at  the  close  of  winter.  It  is  the  piety  which  begins  early 
that  lasts  longest,  and  shows  the  most  blameless  record.  Beautiful  in  all,  early  grace 
is  specially  beautiful  in  those  who  occupy  high  positions,  and  are  destined  to  exercise 
a  wide  influence.  With  many  young  men  the  sixteenth  year  of  life  is  a  turning-point 
in  a  different  direction.  Josiah  then  "began"  to  seek  the  Lord.  Too  often  it  is  the 
period  when  the  restraints  of  home  religion  are  thrown  off,  and  young  men  "  begin  " 
to  think  and  act  for  themselves  in  forbidden  ways.  3.  The  beginning  of  reforms.  The 
chronicler  gives  us  another  date,  viz.  the  twelfth  year  of  Josiah's  reign,  as  that  in 
which  he  began  to  effect  a  religious  reformation  in  the  land.  "  In  the  twelfth  year 
he  began  to  purge  Judah  and  Jerusalem  from  the  high  places,  and  the  Asherim,  and 
the  graven  images,  and  the  molten  images,"  etc.  He  was  then  twenty  years  of  age, 
and  the  reforms  mentioned,  though  begun  in  that  year,  extended  on  till  after  his 
eighteenth  year.  He  had  probably  to  begin  cautiously,  dealing  with  the  more  obvious 
abuses,  and  gradually  feeling  his  way  to  bolder  changes.  A  strong  party,  no  doubt, 
were  opposed  to  his  reforms,  and  it  is  diCBcult  to  say  how  far  they  had  advanced  before 
the  repair  of  the  temple  and  the  finding  of  the  Law-book.  The  narratives  of  neither 
Chronicles  nor  Kings  adhere  strictly  to  chronological  order,  but  we  may  suppose  that 
before  the  projected  repairs  on  the  temple  building  were  undertaken,  both  "  the  land 
and  the  house "  had  been  purged  of  their  worst  abominations  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  8), 
The  Baal-altars,  idols,  and  Asherim  would  be  removed;  idolatrous  worship  on  the 
high  places  stopped,  though  the  people  may  still  have  sacrificed  on  them,  as  in  the 
latter  days  of  Manasseh,  "  yet  unto  the  Lord  their  God  only  "  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  17) ; 
the  sacrifices  to  Moloch  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom  put  an  end  to.  If  this  was  so,  it  is 
certain  that  the  temple,  in  which  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  with  a  priest  like  Hilkiah 
at  its  head,  had  been  restored,  would  not  be  left  uncleared  of  its  Baal-images,  its 
horses  of  the  sun,  its  prostitutes,  etc.  (oh.  xxiii.  6,  7, 11).  Things,  in  short,  would  be 
brought  back  to  the  state  in  which  they  had  been  left  at  Manasseh's  death  (2  Chron. 
xxxiii.  15 — 18).  This  Josiah  might  safely  attempt,  though  passages  in  the  prophets 
show  that  much  idolatry  still  remained.  Earnest  religion  invariably  brings  forth  its 
appropriate  fruits  in  zeal  for  the  honour  of  God,  the  purification  of  his  worship,  and 
the  purging  away  of  evils  and  abuses. 

n.  The  eiqhteenth  teab.  Hitherto,  whatever  Josiah  had  done  had  been  more 
or  less  the  result  of  his  individual  action.  The  conscience  of  the  nation  had  not  been 
touched,  nor  had  any  enthusiasm  been  awakened  in  favour  of  the  new  reforms.  On 
the  contrary,  these  had  probably  aroused  not  a  little  bitterness  and  sullen  hostility. 
At  the  head  of  this  narrative  in  Kings,  therefore,  is  placed  the  date  of  "  the  eighteenth 
year  of  King  Josiah,"  when  the  movement  enters  on  an  altogether  new  phase,  and 
swells  to  national  dimensions.  The  immediate  occasion  of  this  change  was  the  finding 
of  the  Law-book  in  the  temple,  and  this  again  was  owing  to  the  repairs  which  the  king 
had  ordered  to  be  executed  on  the  sacred  edifice.  Glancing  at  present  only  at  the 
narrative  of  these  repairs  on  the  temple,  we  find  that  they  were:  1.  Much  needed. 
There  is  no  record  of  repairs  on  the  temple  since  the  days  of  King  Hezekiah  (2  Chron. 
xxix.  3).  In  the  interval  the  building  had  frequenily  suffered  from  total  neglect, 
and  idolatrous  kings  had  made  changes  in  its  gtructure  to  suit  their  own  purposes. 
There  were  "breaches"  to  repair  (ver.  5),  roofs  to  fit  with  "beams"  (2  Chron.  xxxir. 
11),  and  much  carpentry  and  mason  work  to  do  with  timber  and  hewn  stone  through- 
out the  house.  It  is  strange  how  indifferent  those  who  dwell  in  their  own  "  cieled 
hOdses"  can  often  be  to  the  State  of  the  house  wherein  Gtod  is  worshipped  (Hag.  i.  4), 
It  is  the  sign  of  •  true  teal  for  God  when  there  is  a  proper  desire  shown  to  maintain 


448  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  xxn.  1— 20. 

even  the  outer  fabric  of  ecclesiastical  buildings  in  •  decent  condition  of  repair.  2. 
Already  collected  for.  The  means  for  executing  the  repairs  on  the  Lord's  house  had 
>won  obtained  by  voluntary  collections  at  the  door  of  the  temple.  It  is  by  the  king's 
order,  sent  through  Shaphan  the  scribe  to  Hilkiah  the  high  priest,  to  sum  up  the  money 
which  had  been  thus  gathered,  that  the  matter  first  comes  before  us  in  the  narrative. 
'J'hrse  collections  from  the  people,  which  must  haye  been  going  on  for  some  time,  show 
tliat  the  worship  of  Jehovah  was  now  regularly  conducted.  They  also  afford  us  a 
k's»on  as  to  the  mode  of  meeting  the  expense  connected  with  church  building  and 
re|Hiirs.  (1)  The  money  was  raised  before  the  repairs  were  commenced.  This  was  a 
sound  principle,  and,  if  more  frequently  acted  upon,  would  save  a  good  deal  of  trouble 
with  Church  debt.  The  temple  was  sorely  in  need  of  repair,  and  it  might  have  been 
pleaded  that  the  case  was  too  urgent  to  admit  of  delay  till  the  money  was  collected. 
It  was  resolved,  however,  to  collect  the  money  before  a  single  workman  was  put  upon 
the  Ijuilding.  (2)  It  was  raised  by  voluntary  subscription.  The  people  were  not 
taxed,  or  forced  in  any  way,  to  give  this  money.  It  was  their  own  free-will  offering. 
Yet  apparently  the  sums  required  were  raised  without  difficulty.  The  modern  Church 
expedients  of  bazaars,  etc.,  are  surely  inferior  to  this  Old  Testament  plan.  If  the 
appeal  to  voluntary  liberality  sometimes  does  not  yield  all  that  we  could  wish,  it  is, 
on  the  whole,  the  surest  source  of  income  to  rely  on,  and  reacts,  as  no  other  does,  on 
the  heart  of  the  giver.  3.  After  a  good  precedent.  Alike  in  the  collecting  of  the 
money,  the  distribution  to  the  workmen,  and  the  reliance  placed  in  the  fidelity  of  the 
overseers,  those  in  charge  of  this  business  seem  to  have  followed  closely  the  precedents 
of  the  reign  of  Joash.    It  is  good  to  learn  from  those  who  have  gone  before  us. — J.  0. 

Vers.  8 — 20. — The  finding  of  the  Lato-book.  The  finding  of  the  book  of  the  Law  by 
flilkiah  in  the  temple  marks  a  distinct  turning-point  in  Josiah's  reformation.  It  is 
aiiiiiitted  generally  that  this  Law-book  included,  if  it  did  not  exclusively  consist  of, 
the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.  As  it  is  further  allowed  that  some  of  the  main  narrative 
liocuments  of  our  present  Pentateuch,  and  the  book  of  the  covenant  (Exod.  xxi. — xxiii.), 
if  not  also  collections  of  priestly  laws,  were  then  in  existence,  and  had  long  been,  we 
see  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  "book  of  the  Law"  discovered  by  Hilkiah  included 
the  bulk  of  the  writings  which  make  up  "  the  five  books  of  Moses."  Several  legitimate 
inferences  may  be  drawn  from  the  narrative.  1.  A  "  book  of  the  Law  "  was  known 
to  have  been  once  in  existence.  Hilkiah  speaks  of  it  as  "  the  book  of  the  Law  " — a  book 
long  lost,  now  found,  and  at  once  recognized.  2.  The  copy  found  was  the  complete, 
standard,  authoritative  copy.  It  was  this  which  gave  it  its  peculiar  value.  3.  It 
would  seem  as  if  no  other  copies  of  the  book  were  then  known  to  exist,  at  any  rate 
none  were  in  possession  of  the  parties  named  in  this  chapter.  If  they  had  been,  we 
can  hardly  doubt  that  the  contents  would  have  been  in  some  way  communicated  to  the 
king.  This  last  inference,  however,  must  not  be  pushed  too  far.  Complete  copies  of 
the  Law  would  at  all  times  be  rare,  and  amidst  the  troubles  and  persecutions  of 
Manasseh's  long  reign  may  well  have  been  lost,  especially  as  there  do  not  seem  to  have 
been  in  Judah  organized  prophetic  guilds  such  as  existed  in  Israel,  or  at  least  the 
prophets  we  know,  Jeremiah,  Zephaniah,  Huldah,  etc.,  did  not  belong  to  them  (cf.  the 
state  of  matters  before  the  Reformation  in  Europe,  and  the  finding  of  the  Latin  Bible 
by  Luther  in  the  convent  at  Erfurt).  But  it  does  not  follow  that  in  prophetic  circles  no 
parts  or  fragments  of  the  Law  were  in  existence.  The  narrative  parts  of  the  Law  would 
be  more  frequently  copied  than  the  legislative,  and  abstracts  or  summaries  of  the  book 
of  the  covenant,  or  of  the  laws  in  Deuteronomy,  perhaps  selected  passages  from  these 
books,  may  have  been  in  circulation.  There  was  even  an  order  of  "  scribes "  whom 
Jeremiah  accuses  of  using  their  false  pens  to  falsify  the  Law.  "  How  do  ye  say.  We 
are  wise,  and  the  Law  of  the  Lord  is  with  us?  But,  behold,  the  false  pen  of  the  scribes 
hath  wrought  falsely"  (Jer.  viii.  8).  The  scribes  may  have  falsified  the  Law  itself, 
altering  its  text,  expunging  its  denunciations  against  idolatry,  or  making  unauthorized 
additions  to  it;  or  they  may  have  falsified  it  by  their  comments  and  interpretations  of 
its  meaning.  The  only  thing  certain  is  that  the  portions  of  the  Law  which  so  au«cted 
the  con8ci>>nce  of  the  king  were  not  in  any  current  summaries  or  copies. 

I.  Ftndino  God's  Wobd.  "And  Hilkiah  the  high  priest  said  unto  Shaphan  th« 
scribe,  1  have  found  the  book  of  the  Law  in  the  house  of  the  Lord."    This  Law-book — 


OB.  xxiL  1—20.]      THE  SECONB  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGa  449 

"  the  book  of  the  Law  of  Moses  "  (ch.  xiv.  6) — ^had  undergone  strange  vicissitndeg. 
We  Bee  it:  1.  Sinfully  lost.  What  treasure,  one  would  think,  bo  precious  as  the 
words  which  God  had  spoken  to  this  nation  through  their  great  law-giver  Moses — the 
statutes  and  judgments  and  commanrlments  he  had  ordered  them  to  keep,  and  which 
constituted  their  great  glory  as  a  people  (Deut.  iv.  5—8)  ?  "  What  advantage  then 
hath  the  Jew  ?  .  .  .  Much  every  way :  chiefly,  because  that  unto  them  were  committed 
the  oracles  of  God"  (Bom.  iii.  1,  2).  Yet  this  Law  of  God  had  been  so  sinfully 
neglected  that  the  very  knowledge  of  it  had  well-nigh  perished  out  of  the  land,  and 
the  book  which  contained  it,  from  which  this  knowledge  might  be  revived,  had  dis- 
appeared. The  king  had  neglected  it,  he  who  should  have  been  its  chief  defender;  the 
official  classes  of  the  court  had  neglected  it ;  the  priests  who  had  charge  of  God's  house 
had  neglected  it,  and  allowed  it  to  remain  unused  till  it  had  got  into  some  comer  or 
room  where  it  was  covered  up  with  rubbish  and  lost  sight  of;  the  scribes  used  what 
knowledge  they  retained  of  it  only  to  falsify  it.  What  sin  I  It  was  as  if  there  were  a 
deliberate  conspiracy  to  hunt  this  first  Bible  out  of  existence.  If  to-day  there  is  not 
the  same  danger  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Bible  being  lost  as  at  some  past  periods  of 
history,  it  is  not  because  among  many  classes  there  is  not  as  strong  a  hatred  of  it  or 
as  great  neglect.  With  how  many  is  the  Bible  an  unopened  book  from  one  week's,  end 
to  the  other  1  Multitudes  are  as  ignorant  of  its  contents  as  the  far-off  heathen ;  multi- 
tudes more  have  lost  whatever  knowledge  they  once  had  of  it  through  neglect  and 
misuse;  in  the  case  of  yet  greater  multitudes  its  truths  are  as  inoperative  as  if  the 
book  were  indeed  lost.  2.  Providentially  found.  God's  providence  is  seen  in  nothing 
more  remarkably  than  in  the  care  he  has  exercised  over  the  written  Word.  He  has 
wonderfully  protected  it  through  all  ages  alike  from  the  neglect  and  the  fury  of  men. 
If  for  a  time  the  knowledge  of  it  seemed  lost,  it  was  again  revived  at  the  most  favour- 
able juncture  for  the  execution  of  his  purposes.  Thus  at  the  Reformation  we  see  a 
preparation  for  the  new  movement  in  the  revival  of  learning,  the  invention  of  printing, 
the  emergence  into  light  of  important  manuscripts  of  the  New  Testament,  etc.  That 
was  practically  a  finding  of  the  Law-book  of  the  Church,  as  marvellous  and  as  provi- 
dential as  this  discovery  in  the  reign  of  Josiah.  It  was  Josiah's  zeal  in  the  repairing 
of  the  temple  which  prepared  the  way  for  the  discovery  here ;  and  the  book  was  found 
just  in  time  to  give  a  new  impetus  to  the  reforming  movement.  In  Divine  providence, 
all  things  fit  together  in  time  and  place.  3.  Beverently  examined.  Hilkiah  knew  the 
book  when  he  saw  it,  and  he  gave  it  to  Shaphan  the  scribe,  and  he  read  it.  It  would 
be  with  trembling,  eager  hand  that  Shaphan  turned  over  the  pages,  and,  with  his 
scribe's  professional  instinct,  satisfied  himself  that  this  was  the  veritable  lost  copy  of 
the  Law.  Taking  it  with  him,  he  read  it  more  leisurely,  not  completely,  of  course,  but 
parts  of  it,  those  parts  especially  which  were  new  to  him.  This  was  the  right  way  to 
treat  God's  Word.  Our  chief  anxiety,  if  we  possess  the  sacred  volume,  should  be  to 
know  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak  to  us  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  8).  Of.  Edward  Irving's  lectures 
on  "The  Word  of  God" — (1)  the  preparation  for  consulting  the  Word  of  G^;  (2)  the 
manner  of  coasulting  the  Word  of  God;  (3  and  4)  the  obeying  of  the  Word  of  God 
('  Lectures,'  vol.  i.). 

II.  Tbemblino  at  God's  Word.  1.  Sha^han's  annotuieement.  Having  ascertained 
the  contents  of  the  book  for  himself,  Shaphan  lost  no  time  in  bringing  it  under  the 
notice  of  the  king.  He  seems  to  have  felt  the  need  of  care  in  his  manner  of  doing  this. 
The  book  contained  strong  denunciations  and  terrible  threatenings  (of.  Deut.  xxviii.), 
and  he  was  not  sure  how  the  king  would  receive  the  ancient  message.  He  resolved, 
therefore,  not  to  prejudice  its  reception  by  any  statements  of  his  own,  but  simply  to 
make  the  announcement  of  the  discovery,  and  leave  the  book  to  speak  for  itself^  He 
begins,  accordingly,  by  stating  the  fulfilment  of  his  commission  in  regard  to  the  monies 
of  the  temple.  Then  he  showed  the  book  to  the  king,  saying  merely,  "  Hilkiah  the 
priest  hath  delivered  me  a  book."  Critics  have  detected  subtle  meanings  in  the 
studiously  simple  way  in  which  this  announcement  is  made;  but  the  above,  pro- 
bably, is  the  true  explanation  of  it.  2.  The  book  read.  The  king,  whose  interest  wai 
at  once  awakened,  naturally  asked  to  have  part  of  the  book  read  to  him.  Shaphan 
began  to  read,  selecting  apparently  parts  towards  the  close  of  the  roll — Deut.  xxviii., 
xxix.,  and  the  like.  How  much  he  read  we  ore  not  informed,  but  the  effect  produced 
was  instantaneous  and  profound.    Our  aim  in  reading  the  Scriptures  diould  be  to 

OiXOICUk  t« 


460  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      [ch.  xxn.  1— 20. 

ascertain  from  it  the  whole  counsel  of  God.  We  must  not  dwell  on  the  promise  to  the 
exclusion  of  the  threatening,  or  thiuk  that  any  part  is  without  its  use  "for  doctrine,  for 
reproof,  for  correclion,"  etc.  (2  Tim  iii.  16).  3.  Conviction  hy  the  Word.  "  The  Spirit 
of  God,"  say  the  Westminster  Divines,  "  maketh  the  reading,  but  especially  the  preach- 
ing of  the  Word,  an  effectual  means  of  convincing  and  converting  sinners."  Bemark- 
able  revivals  of  religion  have  often  been  product  by  the  reading  of  the  Word  alone. 
It  was  BO  in  the  case  of  Josiah.  The  book  of  the  Law  was  the  only  preacher,  but,  as 
Shaphan  read  it  aloud,  its  words  went  like  sharp  swords  to  the  heart  of  the  king.  He 
knew  previously  that  the  nation  had  committed  great  sins,  with  which  G;jd  was  dis- 
pleased, and  he  had  done  what  he  could  to  institute  reforms.  Now  for  the  first  time 
he  learned  what  direful  woes  were  predicted  on  those  who  should  commit  such  sins, 
and  he  saw  the  enormity  of  the  nation's  evil  as  he  had  never  before  realized  it.  In 
deepest  emotion  he  rent  his  clothes,  and  sent  at  once  an  honourable  deputation  "  to 
inquire  of  the  Lord  concerning  the  words  of  the  book  "  of  the  Prophetess  Huldah.  We 
see :  (1)  The  power  of  the  Word  to  convince  men  of  sin.  This  power  belongs  to  the  words 
of  Scripture  as  to  those  of  no  other  book.  "  The  Law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting 
the  soul,"  etc.  (Ps.  xix.  7).  "  The  Word  of  God  is  quick  and  powerful,  and  sharper 
than  any  two-edged  sword,"  etc.  (Heb.  iv.  12).  The  fact  that  it  is  so  is  an  evidence  of 
the  divineness  of  Scripture.  The  power  of  the  Bible  is  derived  from  the  nature  of  the 
truths  it  declares,  from  the  inspired  grandeur  of  its  utterances,  from  the  "  thus  saith 
the  Lord  "  which  stands  behind  them  and  drives  them  home  with  authority,  and  from 
the  inward  attestation  which  its  words  find  in  the  conscience  (2  Cor.  iv.  2).  Great 
reformations  have  always  been  accompanied  with  an  extended  circulation  of  the  Bible 
(Wicklifife,  Tyndale,  Luther,  etc.).  (2)  An  example  of  the  right  reception  of  the 
Word.  Josiah  did  not  act  like  the  profane  Jehoiakim,  who,  when  God's  threatenings 
were  read  to  him,  took  his  penknife  and  cut  the  prophet's  roll  to  pieces,  casting  it  into 
the  fire  (Jer.  xxxvi.  20^24).  He  trembled  at  God's  Word  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2).  He  was, 
like  Noah,  "  moved  with  fear,"  when  he  heard  of  the  dreadful  evils  God  would  bring 
upon  the  nation.  He  did  not  dispute  the  justice  of  God's  threatenings,  but  acknow- 
ledged that  he  was  righteous,  and  the  people  wicked.  He  included  himself  in  the 
general  condemnation :  "  Great  is  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  that  is  kindled  against  «», 
because  our  fathers  have  not  hearkened,"  etc.  This  is  how  God's  Word  ought  always 
to  be  received — with  humility,  with  faith,  with  trembling  of  heart  at  his  threatenings, 
if  also  with  joy  and  hope  at  his  promises. 

III.  Light  souoht  on  God's  Wobd.  1.  A  holy  woman.  The  king,  as  above  stated, 
sent  "  to  inquire  of  the  Lord"  at  the  hands  of  an  accredited  prophet,  with  the  view  of 
ascertaining  what  means  should  be  adopted  to  reverse,  if  possible,  the  curse  which  the 
sing  of  long  generations  had  brought  upon  the  nation.  The  persons  sent  were  five — 
Hilkiah  the  priest,  Shaphan  the  scribe,  and  his  son  Ahikam,  Achbor  the  son  of  Michaiah, 
and  Asahiah  a  servant  of  the  king's, — an  honourable  deputation.  The  person  to  whom 
they  went  was  a  prophetess  named  Huldah,  who  dwelt  in  Jerusalem.  This  holy 
woman  was  no  recluse,  but  the  wife  of  Shallum,  the  keeper  of  the  royal  (or  priestly) 
wardrobe.  In  the  distribution  of  God's  gifts,  woman  is  not  less  honoured,  than  man. 
We  learn  from  Huldah  that  religion  and  the  duties  of  common  life  do  not  stand  apart. 
2.  The  Word  confirmed.  On  the  general  question  the  prophetess  had  little  to  give 
them  in  the  way  of  comfort.  Probably  she  had  already  learned  the  tenor  of  the 
threatenings  in  the  sacred  book,  or  its  words  were  now  read  to  her ;  but  she  could  only 
speak  to  give  the  threatenings  emphatic  confirmation.  "Tell  the  man  that  sent  you, 
Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  place,"  etc.  The  words  of  the 
Law  would  be  fiilfilled,  because  the  people  had  committed  the  sins  which  the  Law 
denounced :  "  They  have  forsaken  me,  and  have  burned  incense  unto  other  gods,"  etc, 
Thii  is  not  contrary  to  Jeremiah's  word,  "  If  that  nation,  against  whom  I  have  pro- 
nounced, turn  from  their  evil,  I  will  repent  of  the  evil  that  I  thought  to  do  unto  them" 
(Jer.  iviii.  8 ;  cf.  ch.  xxvi.  3).  It  was  the  knowledge  and  foresight  that  Judah  would 
not  truly  repent  which  gave  the  absoluteness  to  the  prophecy.  Jeremiah,  while 
exhorting  to  repentance,  also  gives  expression  to  the  other  side  of  the  truth,  that  the 
nation's  condition  is  hopeless  (Jer.  vii.  16 ;  xv.  1,  etc.).  3.  Mercy  to  the  king.  To  the 
"man "  Huldah  had  no  message  of  comfort ;  but  to  " the  King  of  Judah "  she  had  a 
vord  of  mercy  to  send.    Because  Josiah's  heart  was  tender,  and  he  had  humbled 


CH.  xxin.  1-37.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


^1 


himself  when  he  had  heard  of  the  desolation  and  the  curse  that  would  come  npon  the 
land,  therefore  God  had  heard  him,  and  would  spare  him  the  experience  of  the  evil 
that  was  to  come.  He  would  be  taken  away  "from  the  evil  to  come"  (Isa.  IviL  1). 
Had  the  nation  as  a  whole  repented  in  like  manner,  we  cannot  doubt  that  it  womd 
have  been  similarly  spared.  God  never  rejects  the  humble  and  contrite  heart  (Isa. 
Ixvi.  2).  It  is  noteworthy  that  this  prediction  was  fulfilled  in  a  way  which  externally 
was  a  great  calamity  to  the  nation,  viz.  Josiah's  defeat  and  death  at  Megiddo,  in  battle 
with  Pharaoh-Nechoh  (oh.  xxiii.  29,  30).  God's  mercy  veils  itself  under  atrange  di». 
guises. — J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXnL 


Vers.  1 — 37. — Josiah's  Ebnewal  ov  the 
oovBKANT.     His    Eepobms    and    Death. 

REION    of  JeHOAHAZ.       AOOBSSION    07    Jb- 
HOIAEIM. 

Vers.  1 — S,— Josiah's  renemal  of  the  cove- 
nant. The  first  care  of  Joaiah,  on  receiving 
Huldah's  message,  which  stamped  the  book 
found  as  the  true  "  book  of  the  covenant," 
was  to  call  together  a  great  assembly  of 
the  nation,  which  should  be  sufficiently 
representative  of  it,  and  renew  the  cove- 
nant between  God  and  his  people  made 
originally  at  Horeb  (Exod.  xix.  5 — 8 ;  xxiv. 
3 — 8),  which  it  was  apparent,  by  the  words 
of  the  book,  that  he  and  his  people  had 
broken.  His  proceedings  may  be  fitly  com- 
pared with  those  of  Jehoiada,  the  high 
priest  after  the  reign  of  the  idolatrous  Aiha- 
liah,  recorded  in  ch.  xi.  17 ;  but  they  were 
still  more  formal  and  solemn,  inasmuch  as 
the  recent  alienation  of  the  people  from  Je- 
hovah had  been  so  much  more  prolonged, 
and  so  much  more  complete,  than  the  aliena- 
tion under  Athaliali. 


Ver.  I. — And  the  king  sent,  and  they 
gathered  nnto  him  all  the  elders  of  Jndah 
and  of  Jerusalem ;  i'.e.  all  the  elders  of  Jeru- 
salem and  of  the  rest  of  Judah.  (On  the 
important  position  held  by  "  the  elders "  in 
the  undivided  kingdom,  see  1  Kings  viii.  1, 
and  the  comment  ad  loc.;  and  on  their 
position  in  the  divided  kingdoms  of  Israel 
and  Judaii,  see  1  Kings  xx.  7,  8 ;  xxi.  8, 11 ; 
ch.  X.  1,  etc.) 

Ver.  2.— And  the  king  went  up  into  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  No  place  could  be  so 
suitable  for  the  renewal  of  the.  covenant 
between  God  and  his  people  as  the  house 
of  God,  where  Qoi  was  in  a  peculiar  way 
present,  and  the  ground  was,  like  the  ground 
at  Horeb,  holy.  Jodah  "  went  up  "  to  the 
temple  from  the  royal  palace,  which  was  on 
k  lower  level  (comp.  1  Kings  x.  S).    And  all 


the  men  of  Jndah  and  dl  the  IshaMtante  of 
Jerusalem  with  him.  Not  only  the  "  elders," 
who  had  been  summoned,  but  of  the  people, 
as  many  as  chose  to  attend,  besides.  The 
gathering  was  no  doubt  great ;  but  the  ex- 
pressions used  are  (as  with  the  Orientals 
generally)  hyperbolical.  And  the  priests, 
and  the  prophets.  The  representation  wonld 
have  been  incomplete  without  these  two 
classes — the  priests,  the  ordinary  nnd  regu- 
lar readers  (Dent.  xxxi.  11)  and  teachers 
(Deut.  xxxiii.  10)  of  the  Law ;  and  the  pro- 
phets, the  extraordinary  and  occasional 
teachers,  inspired  from  time  to  time,  and 
commissioned  to  enforce  the  Law,  and  fur- 
ther to  declare  God's  will  to  the  people. 
And  all  the  people,  both  small  and  great; 
i.e.  without  distinction  of  classes— all  ranks 
of  the  people,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor, 
noble  and  baSe-born.  All  were  concerned, 
nay,  concerned  equally,  in  a  matter  which 
touched  the  national  life  and  the  prospects 
of  each  individual.  And  he  read  in  their 
ears.  There  is  no  reason  for  translating,  with 
Keil,  "  he  caused  to  be  read  in  their  ears," 
as  though  either  the  Jewish  kings  conld  not 
read,  or  would  be  usurping  the  functions  of 
the  priests  in  publicly  reading  the  Law  to 
the  people.  If  a  king  might,  like  Solomon 
(1  Kings  viii.  22 — 61),  lead  the  prayers  of 
the  congregation  of  Israel  in  the  temple, 
much  more  might  he  read  the  Ijaw  to  them. 
The  readers  in  the  Jewish  synagogues  are 
ordinavily  lay  people.  All  the  words  of  the 
book  of  the  covenant.  Perhaps  there  is  here 
some  exaggeration,  as  in  the  phrases, "  all 
the  men  of  Judah,"  and  "  all  the  inhabitants 
of  Jerusalem."  The  entire  Pentateuch  could 
scarcely  be  read  through  in  less  than  ten 
hours.  Possibly,  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy 
was  alone  read.  Which  was  found  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord  (see  above,  ch.  xxii.  8). 

Ver.  3. — And  the  king  stood  by  a  pillar — 
•fiByn  hy  is  not  "by  the  pillar,"  but  (as  in 
ch.  xi.  14)  ■'  on  the  platform  "  (see  the  com- 
ment on  that  place) — and  made  a  covenant 
before  the  Lord ;  literally,  made  the  covenant 
(as  in  ch.  xi.  17) ;  t.e.  made,  or  renewed,  the 
old  covenant  witii  God  (Exod.  xxiv.  5— 8X 
which  had  been  broken  by  the  complete 
neglect  of  the  Law,  and  the  manifold  idol»- 


46a 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,    [oh.  xxm.  1—37. 


tries  of  ManaBseh  and  Amon.  He  renewed 
this  coTenant  "  before  the  Lord,"  i.e.  from 
hia  platform  in  the  court,  directly  opposite 
the  entrance  to  the  temple,  through  which 
he  could,  perhaps,  see  the  veil  banging  in 
front  of  the  holy  of  holies — at  any  rate 
being,  and  feeling  himself  to  be,  in  the 
immediate  presence  of  God.  To  walk  after 
the  lord — i.e.  to  be  his  true  follower  and 
servant — and  to  keep  his  commandments  and 
his  testimonies  and  his  statutes,  (On  the 
multiplication  of  such  terms,  see  the  com- 
ment upon  1  Kings  ii.  3.)  They  are  intended 
to  express  "  the  totality  of  the  Law,"  all  its 
requirements  without  exception.  With  all 
their  heart  and  all  their  soul— obedience 
was  worthless,  unless  paid  from  the  heart 
»nd  soul  (see  Dent.  iv.  29 ;  xxx.  2 ;  Joel  ii. 
12, 13) — to  perform  the  words  of  this  cove- 
nant that  were  written  iu  this  hook.  And  all 
the  people  stood  to  the  covenant.  The  repre- 
sentatives of  the  people,  one  and  all,  were 
parties  to  the  promise  made  on  their  behalf 
by  the  king,  and  signified  their  consent, 
probably  as  they  had  done  in  Horeb,  when 
"  Moses  took  the  book  of  the  covenant,  and 
read  in  the  audience  of  the  people ;  and  they 
said.  All  that  the  Lord  has  said  will  we  do, 
and  be  obedient "  (see  Deut.  xxiv.  7). 

Vers.  4 — 27. — Joeiah's  reformation  of  reli- 
gion. The  reformation  of  religion  by  Josiah 
next  engages  the  writer's  attention,  and  is 
treated,  not  chronologically,  but  rather  geo- 
grapliically,  under  the  three  heads  of  (I) 
reforms  in  Jerusalem;  (2)  reforms  outside 
Jerusalem,  but  in  the  kingdom  of  Judah ; 
and  (3)  reforms  in  the  territory  which  had 
belonged  to  the  kingdom  of  Samaria  (vers. 
4 — 20).  The  celebration  of  the  Passover  is 
then  briefly  noticed  (vers.  21 — 23) ;  and  the 
section  concludes  with  a  eulogy  of  Josiah 
(vers.  24,  25),  who,  however,  it  is  noticed 
could  not,  with  all  his  l^ety,  obtain  a  revo- 
cation of  the  sentence  passed  on  Judah  in 
consequence  of  the  sins  of  Manasseh.  The 
fate  of  Judah  was  fixed  (vers.  26,  27). 

Yer.  4. — And  the  king  commanded  Hilkiah 
the  high  priest,  and  the  priests  of  the  second 
order.  Not  the  "  deputy-high  priests,"  of 
whom  there  seems  to  have  been  only  one  at 
this  period  of  the  history  (ch.  xxv.  18) ;  nor 
the  "heads  of  the  coiusea,"  who  were  not 
recognized  as  a  distinct  class  of  priests  till 
much  later ;  but  merely  the  common  priests, 
as  distinguished  from  the  high  priest.  (So 
Keil,  Bahr.'and  others.)  And  the  keepers 
of  the  door;  litenJly,  the  keepers  of  the 
threshold ;  ie.  the  Levites,  whose  duty  it  was 
to  kaep  watch  and  ward  at  the  outer  temple 


gates  (see  1  Ohron.  xxvl.  IS— 18).  Their 
importance  at  this  time  appears  again  in  ch. 
xxv.  18.  To  bring  forth  out  of  the  temple 
of  the  Lord  all  the  vessels  that  were  made 
for  Baal.  The  reformation  naturally  began 
with  the  purging  of  the  temple.  So  the 
reformation  under  Jehoiada  (ch.  xi.  38)  and 
that  of  Manasseh  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  15). 
Under  "the  vessels"  (D>V|n)  would  be  in- 
cluded the  entire  paraphernalia  of  worship, 
even  the  two  altars  which  had  been  set  up 
in  honour  of  Baal  in  the  outer  and  the  inner 
coujts  (comp.  ch.  xxi.  5).  And  for  the  grove 
(see  ch.  xxi.  3),  and  for  all  the  host  of  heaven. 
The  three  worships  are  here  united,  because 
there  was  a  close  connection  between  them. 
Baal  was,  in  one  of  his  aspects,  the  sun ;  and 
Astarte,  the  goddess  of  the  "  grove  "-wor- 
ship, was,  in  one  of  ner  aspects,  the  moon. 
The  cult  of  "  the  liost  of  heaven,"  though, 
perhaps,  derived  from  a  different  source, 
naturally  became  associated  with  the  cults 
of  the  sun  and  moon.  And  he  bnmed  them 
without  Jerusalem  in  the  fields  of  Eidion. 
The  Law  required  that  idols  should  be 
burnt  with  fire  (Deut.  vii.  25),  and  likewise 
"groves"  (Deut.  xii.  3).  It  was  enough 
to  "overthrow  "  altars  (Deut.  xii.  3)  and  to 
"  break  "  pillars.  But  Josiah  seems  to  have 
thought  it  best  to  destroy  by  fire,  i.e.  iu  the 
completest  possible  way,  all  the  objects,  of 
whatever  Mnd,  which  had  been  connected 
with  the  idol-worship  (see  vers.  6, 12, 15, 16). 
The  burning  took  place  in  "  the  fields  of 
Kidron,"  i.e.  in  the  upper  part  of  the  Kidron 
valley,  to  the  north-east  of  Jerusalem,  in 
order  that  not  even  the  smoke  should  pollute 
the  town  (comp.  1  Kings  xv.  1 3).  And  carried 
the  ashes  of  them  unto  Bethel.  This  was  a 
very  unusual  precaution,  and  shows  Josiah 's 
extreme  scrupulousness.  He  would  not  have 
even  the  ashes  of  the  wooden  objects,  or  the 
calcined  powder  of  the  metal  ones,  remain 
even  in  the  vicinity  of  the  holy  city,  but 
transported  them  to  a  distance.  In  selecting 
Bethel  as  the  place  to  convey  them  to,  he 
was  no  doubt  actuated  by  the  circumstance 
that  that  village  was  in  some  sense  the  fount 
and  origin  of  all  the  religious  impurities 
which  had  overflowed  the  laud.  That  which 
had  proceeded  from  Bethel  might  well  be 
taken  back  thither. 

Ver.  5. — And  he  put  down  the  idolatrous 
priests ;  literally,  the  ehemarim.  The  same 
word  is  used  of  idolatrous  priests  in  Hos.  x 
5  and  Zeph.  i.  4.  It  is  best  connected 
with  the  Arabic  root  chamar,  eoUre  deum, 
and  with  the  Syriao  cumro,  "priest"  or 
"  sacrificer."  The  Syrian  priests  were  pro- 
bably so  called  at  the  time,  and  the  Hebrews 
took  the  word,  and  applied  it  to  all  false 
priests  or  idolatrous  priests,  reserving  their 
own  cohanim  (pjifi)  tot  tme  Jehovistio 
priests  only.     Wkrai  tits  Uag*  vf  Judah 


OH.  xxm.  t— 37.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


453 


had  ordained  to  l)tirn  incense  in  the  high 
places  in  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  in  the  places 
round  about  J'erusalem,  This  practice  had 
not  been  mentioDed  previously,  and  can 
Boaroely  have  belonged  to  the  earlier  king- 
dom of  Judah,  when  "the  people"  (as  we 
are  told  so  often)  "  worshipped  and  burnt 
incense  in  the  high  places."  But  it  is  quite 
in  harmony  with  the  other  doings  of  Ma- 
nasseh  aud  Amon,  that,  when  they  re-estab- 
lished the  high  places  (oh.  xxi.  3,  21),  they 
should  have  followed  the  custom  of  the 
Israelite  monarchs  at  Dan  and  Bethel  (1 
Kings  xii.  28 — 32),  and  have  "ordained 
priests  "  to  conduct  the  worship  at  them. 
Them  also  that  burned  incense  unto  Baal,  to 
the  sun,  and  to  the  moon  (on  the  Baal-worsliip 
of  Manasseh  and  Amon,  see  ch.  xxi.  3 ;  on 
the  sun-worship,  compare  below,  ver.  11 ;  the 
moon-worship  was  probably  a  form  of  the 
worship  of  Astarte),  and  to  the  planets; 
rather,  to  the  twelve  signs.  The  constella- 
tions or  signs  of  the  zodiac  are,  no  doubt, 
intended  (comp.  Job  xxxviii.  32,  where  the 
term  nnia  may  be  regarded  as  a  mere  vari- 
ant form  of  the  Trhm  of  this  passage).  The 
proper  meaning  of  the  term  is  "  mansions," 
or  "houses,"  the  zodiacal  signs  being  re- 
garded as  the  "  mansions  of  the  sun  "  by  the 
Babylonians  (see  '  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol. 
iii.  p.  419).  And  to  all  the  host  of  heaven 
(see  the  comment  on  ch.  xxl.  3). 

Ver.  6. — ^And  he  brought  out  the  grove 
from  the  house  of  the  Lord,  The  Aslierah 
set  up  by  Manasseh  (ch.  xxi.  3  and  7),  and  if 
removed  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  15),  then  replaced 
by  Amon  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  22),  is  intended. 
(On  its  probable  form,  see  the  comment  upon 
ch.  xxi.  7.)  Without  Jerusalem,  unto  the 
brook  Eidron  (see  the  commont  on  ver.  4), 
and  burned  it  at  the  brook  Eidron.  After 
the  example  of  Asa,  who  had  treated  in  the 
same  way  the  idol  of  the  queen-motber 
Maachah  (1  Kings  xv.  13).  Asa  followed  the 
example  of  Moses  (Exod.  xxxii.  20),  when 
he  destroyed  the  golden  calf.  And  stamped 
it  small  to  powder.  Metals  may  be  calcined 
by  intense  heat,  and  reduced  into  a  state  in 
■which  a  very  small  application  of  force  will 
crush  them  into  a  fine  powder.  It  is  clear 
from  the  present  passage,  that  Manasseh's 
Asherah  was  made  of  metal,  at  any  rate  in 
part.  And  cast  the  powder  thereof  upon  the 
graves  of  the  children  of  the  people;  i.e. 
"upon  the  graves  of  the  common  people" 
(comp.  Jer.  xxvi.  23,  where  the  expression 
used  in  the  Hebrew  is  the  same).  TThe 
common  people  were  not  buried,  like  the 
better  sort,  in  rock-hewn  sepulchres,  but  in 
graves  of  the  ordinary  description.  Burial- 
places  were  regarded  as  unclean,  and  were 
thus  fit  receptacles  for  any  kind  of  impurity. 
Ver.  7.— And  he  brake  down  the  houses 
(I  the   sodomites;   literally,  </  the  oon- 


secrated  ones.  (See  the  comment  on  1  Kings 
xiv.  24 ;  and  note  that  the  male  prostitutes, 
or  Galli,  who  consecrated  themselves  to  the 
Dea  Syra,  formed  an  essential  element  in 
the  Astarte-worship,  and  accompanied  it 
wherever  it  was  introduced.)  Dollinger 
says  ('  Jew  and  Gentile,'  vol.  i.  pp.  430, 
431)  of  these  wretched  penons,  "To  the 
exciting  din  of  drums,  flutes,  and  inspired 
songs,  the  Galli  cut  themselves  on  the  arms; 
aud  the  effect  of  this  act,  and  of  the  music 
accompanying  it,  was  so  strong  upon  mere 
spectators,  that  all  their  bodily  and  mental 
powers  were  thrown  into  a  tumult  of  excite- 
ment, and  they  too,  seized  by  the  desire  to 
lacerate  themselves,  deprived  themselves  of 
their  manhood  by  means  of  potsherds  lying 
ready  for  the  purpose.  Thereupon  they 
ran  with  the  mutilated  part  through  the 
city,  and  received  from  the  houses  which 
they  threw  them  into,  a  woman's  gear.  Not 
chastity,  but  barrenness,  was  intended  by 
the  mutilation.  In  this  the  GalU  only 
desired  to  be  like  their  goddess.  The 
relation  of  foul  lust,  which  -they  thence- 
forward occupied  towards  women,  was  re- 
garded as  a  holy  thing,  and  was  tolerated 
by  husbands  in  their  wives."  That  were  by 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  The  near  vicinity 
is  an  indication  that  the  Galli  took  part 
in  the  foreign  rites  introduced  into  the 
temple  by  Manasseh  and  Amon.  The  awful 
profanation  of  the  house  of  God  by  such 
orgies  is  too  terrible  to  dwell  on.  Where 
the  women  wove  hangings  for  the  grove. 
"  The  women  "  are  no  doubt  the  priestesses 
of  the  Dea  Syra,  who  are  constantly  men- 
tioned with  the  Galli,  and,  indeed,  lived 
with  them.  They  employed  themselves, 
among  other  occupations,  in  weaving  "  hang- 
ings" (literally, " houses,"  i.e.  "coverings") 
for  the  Asherah.  It  may  be  gathered  from 
Ezek.  xvi.  16  that  these  "coverings"  were 
dainty  fabrics  of  many  colours. 

Ver.  8. — And  he  brought  all  the  priests 
out  of  the  cities  of  Judah.  Here  the  writer 
diverges  from  his  proper  subject — the  reforms 
in  and  near  Jerusalem— to  speak  of  changes 
which  were  made  in  other  parts  of  Judaea. 
The  Levitical  priests,  who  in  various  cities 
of  Judah  had  conducted  the  worship  at  the 
high  places,  were' summoned  to  Jerusalem 
by  Josiah,  and  forced  to  remain  there,  that 
the  unauthorized  worship  which  they  had 
conducted  might  be  brought  to  an  end. 
And  defiled  the  high  places  where  the  priests 
had  burned  incense.  Hezekiah  bad  "  re- 
moved the  high  places,  and  broken  the 
images,  and  cut  down  the  groves "  throngh- 
ont  his  dominions  (ch.  xviii.  4),  but  he  had 
not  in  any  way  "  defiled  the  high  places ;  " 
and  therefore  no  sooner  did  a  king  take  > 
different  view  of  his  duties  than  the  w<nihip 
was  at  MM  restored   (dk  xxL  i},  mm 


464 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EISQB.    [oh.  xxin.  1—87. 


flourished  ai  before.  Josiah  conceived  the 
idea  that,  if  the  high  places  were  "defiled," 
it  would  he  impossible  to  renew  the  worship 
•tthem.  From  Oeba  to  Beersheha.  Geha 
takes  here  the  place  of  Bethel  as  the  northern 
limit  of  Judah.  It  was  situated  at  a  very 
short  distance  from  Bethel,  and  was  made 
to  supersede  it  on  account  of  the  idolatries 
by  which  Bethel  had  been  disgraced.  The 
exact  site  is  probably  the  modern  Jeiba, 
on  the  southern  edge  of  the  Wady  Snweinit. 
And  brake  down  the  high  places  of  the 
gates.  The  high-place  worship  had,  it 
would  seem,  invaded  Jerusalem  itself.  In 
some  of  the  gates  of  the  city,  which  were 
"largja  open  buildings  for  public  meetings 
and  intercourse"  (Bahr),  altars,  or  more 
elaborate  places  of  woisliip,  had  been  estab- 
lished, and  an  unauthorized  ritual  of  the 
high-place  type  had  been  set  up.  That  were 
— rather,  that  which  wai — ^in  the  entering 
in  of  the  gate  of  Joshna  the  governor  of  the 
city.  This  and  the  succeeding  clauses  are 
limitations  of  the  general  statement  con- 
cerning the  "  high  places  of  the  gates,"  and 
indicate  that  two  gates  only  had  been 
polluted  by  high-place  worship,  viz.  "the 
gate  of  Joshua,"  and  the  gate  known  kot' 
Hox^''  ^B  "  the  city  gate."  Xeither  of  these 
can  be  determinately  fixed,  since  they  are 
only  mentioned  in  the  present  passage. 
Which  were  on  a  man's  left  hand  at  the 
gate  of  the  oity;  rather,  and  also  that 
which  was  on  the  left-hand  tide  in  tlie  gate 
of  the  city.    (So  Thenius,  Keil,  and  Bahr.) 

Ver.  9. — Nevertheless  the  priests  of  the 
high  places  came  not  up  to  the  altar  of  the 
Lord  in  Jerusalem,  Though  Josiah  recalled 
to  Jerusalem  the  Levitical  priests  who  had 
recently  been  attached  to  the  various  high 
places,  yet  he  did  not  attach  them  to  the 
temple,  or  assign  them  any  part  in  Ua 
services.  Their  participation  in  a  semi- 
idolatrous  service  had  disc^nalified  them  for 
the  temple  ministrations.  But  they  did  eat 
of  the  unleavened  bread  among  their 
brethren.  They  were  allowed,  i.e.,  their 
maintenance  out  of  the  priestly  revenues, 
as  were  priests  disqualified  by  a  personal 
blemish  (Lev.  xxi.  21,  22).  Practically 
they  lived  on  the  altar  gifts  intended  for 
the  priests  (Lev.  vi.  9, 10,  22),  in  which  it 
was  unlawful  to  mix  leaven. 

Ver.  10.— And  he  defiled  Topheth,  "To- 
pheth  "  or  "  Tophet "  was  the  name  given 
to  the  place  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom  where 
the  sacrifices  were  offered  to  Moloch.  The 
root  of  the  word  is  thought  by  some  to  be 
taph  (f]n),  "  a  drum,"  because  the  cries  of 
the  children  burnt  there  were  drowned  by 
the  beating  of  drums.  Others  suggest  as 
the  root,  tuph  (f)in),  "  to  spit,"  because  the 
place  was  "  spat  at "  by  the  orthodox.  But 
@«seslw  And  Bottoher  derive  it  from  vi  I 


Aryan  root,  taph,  or  tap,  "  to  bum,"  whence 
Greek  ei^rTeir,  Tt^pa,  Latin  ttpidui,  Mod. 
Persian  td/tan,  Sanskrit  tap,  etc.,  a^id  regard 
the  meaning  as  simply  "  the  place  of  burn- 
ing" (see  the  comment  on  Isa.  xxx.  33). 
V^oh  is  in  the  valley  of  the  children  of 
Hinnom.  The  valley  of  Hinnom,  or  of  the 
sons  of  Hinnom,  is  generally  allowed  to  be 
that  which  sweeps  round  tlie  more  western 
of  the  two  hills  whereon  Jerusalem  was 
built,.in  a  direction  at  first  south  and  then 
aast,  uniting  itself  with  the  Eidron  valley 
a  little  to  the  south  of  Ophel.  The  origin 
of  the  name  is  uncertain;  but  it  ia  most 
likely  that  the  Beni-Hinnom  were  a  tribe 
of  Canaanites,  settled  on  this  side  of  Jeru- 
salem in  the  time  of  Joshua  (Josh.  zv.  8). 
The  "  valley  "  is  a  ravine,  deep  and  narrow, 
with  steep,  rocky  sides.  When  the  Moloch- 
worship  first  began  in  it  we  cannot  say; 
but  it  was  probably  before  the  time  of 
Solomon,  who  built  a  high  place  for  Moloch 
(1  Kings  xi.  II),  on  one  of  the  heights  by 
which  the  valley  is  enclosed.  (On  the 
horrible  profanations  of  the  Moloch-worship, 
see  Jer.  vii.  31,  32 ;  xix.  4 — 13 ;  xxxii.  35.) 
After  the  (Captivity,  the  valley  of  Hinnom — 
Ge-Hinnom — was  reckoned  an  accursed  and 
abominable  place,  a  sort  of  earthly  connter- 
part  of  the  place  of  final  punishment,  which 
thence  derived  its  name  of  "  Gehenna " 
(rcfj-TO);  (see  Matt.  v.  22.  29,  etc.).  That 
no  man  might  make  his  son  or  his  ^nghter 
to  pass  through  the  fire  to  Uolooh  (see 
the  comment  on  ch.  xvi.  3). 

Ver.  11. — And  he  took  away  the  horses 
that  the  kings  of  Judah  had  given  to  the 
sun.  The  custom  of  dedicating  horses  to 
the  sun  was  practised  by  many  ancient 
nations;  but  it  is  only  in  Persia  that  we 
find  horses  and  chariots  so  dedicated  (Xen., 
'Oyrop.,'  viii.  3.  §  12).  The  idea  of  the 
sun-god  as  a  charioteer,  who  drove  his 
horses  daily  across  the  sky,  is  one  common 
to  several  of  the  Aryan  nations,  ai  the 
Greeks,  the  Bomans,  the  Hindoos,  and 
others;  but  we  do  not  find  it  either  in 
Egypt  or  among  the  Senutio  peoples.  The 
sacrifice  of  the  horse  to  the  sun  was  more 
general  (Herod.,  i.  216 ;  Xen., '  Cyrop.,'  viii. 
3.  §  24;  'Anab.,'  iv.  5.  §  35;  Kig  Veda, 
vol.  ii.  pp.  112,  et  leqq.,  etc.),  but  does  not 
seem  to  have  been  adopted  by  the  Hebrews. 
It  is  not  at  all  clear  whence  the  "kings  of 
Judah" — i.e.  Ahaz,  Manasseh,  and  Amon — 
deri^d  the  idea  of  maintaining  saored 
chariots  and  horses  to  be  used  in  their  sun- 
worship.  They  certainly  could  not  have 
received  it,  as  Eeil  thinks,  "through  the 
Assyrians."  At  the  entering  in  of  the  house 
of  the  Lord — ^the  horses,  ie.,  were  kept 
near  one  of  the  entrances  to  the  temple, 
to  be  ready  for  nse  in  saored  proceesionf 
— b7  the  chamber   of  Kathsn-mdooh  tlu 


OB.  xiin.  1— 37.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


456 


ohambeilain,  vMoh  was  in  tlie  inbnTl)a. 
There  were  many  "  chambers  "  attached  to 
the  temple,  which  were  sometimes  used  h 
store-rooms  for  different  materials  (1  Chron. 
ix.  26;  2  Ohron.  xxxi.  11, 12;  Neh.  x.  88; 
xiii.  5),  sometimes  as  residences  (Neh.  xiii. 
7).  In  Josiah'g  time,  "  Nathan-meleoh  the 
chamberlain,"  or  rather  "  the  eunuch,"  ocou. 
pied  one  of  these.  It  was  situated  nnpea 
— "in  the  outskirts"  or  "purlieus"  of  the 
temple.  And  bnmed  the  chariots  of  the 
sun  with  fire  (comp.  vers.  4,  6,  15,  etc.). 
Josiah  burnt  all  the  material  objects  that 
had  been  desecrated  by  the  idolatries ;  the 
persons  and  animals  so  desecrated  he  "  re- 
moved," or  deprived  of  their  functions. 

Ver.  12. — And  the  altars  that  were  on  the 
top  of  the  upper  chamber  of  Ahaz.  It  would 
seem  that  "the  upper  chamber  of  Ahaz" 
was  within  the  temple  precincts,  since  the 
pollutions  spoken  of,  both  before  and  after, 
are  pollutions  belonging  to  the  temple.  It 
mfcy  have  been  erected  on  the  flat  roof  of 
one  of  the  gates,  or  on  the  top  of  a  store- 
chamber.  Altars  upon  roofs  were  a  new 
form  of  idolatry,  apparently  connected  with 
the  worship  of  the  "  host  of  heaven  "  (see 
Jer.  xix.  13 ;  Zeph.  i.  5).  Which  the  Idngrs 
of  Judah— i.e.  Manasseh  and  Amon,  perhaps 
also  Ahaz — had  made,  and  the  altars  which 
Kanasseh  had  made  in  the  two  oonrts  of  the 
honse  of  the  Lord  (see  above,  ch,  xxi.  4,  5). 
As  Manasseh,  on  his  repentance,  merely 
"  cast  these  altars  out  of  the  city  "  (2  Ohron. 
xxxiii.  l.")),  it  was  easy  for  Amon  to  replace 
them.  They  belonged  to  the  worship  of 
the  "host  of  heaven."  Sid  the  king  beat 
down,  and  brake  them  down  from  thence, 
and  cast  the  dust  of  them  into  the  brook 
Kidron  (comp.  ver.  6,  and  the  comment 
ad  loc). 

Ver.  IS. — And  the  high  places  that  were 
before  Jerusalem.  The  high  places  which 
Solomon  established  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Jerusalem  for  the  use  of  his  wives,  and 
in  the  worship  at  which  he  became  himself 
entangled  in  his  old  age,  appear  to  have 
been  situated  on  the  ridge  of  the  mountain 
which  lies  over  against  Jerusalem  to  the 
east,  a  part  of  which  is  Olivet.  The  southern 
summit,  the  traditional  mons  offensionU, 
was  probably  the  high  place  of  Moloch 
(Milcom),  while  the  most  northern  summit 
(now  called  Karem-es-Seyad')  has  some 
claim  to  be  regarded  as  the  high  place  of 
Ohemosh.  (So  Brocardus  in  A.D.  1280.) 
The  site  of  the  high  place  of  Ashtoreth  is 
doubtful.  Which  were  on  the  right  hand 
of  the  monnt  of  corruption.  The  name 
"  mount  of  corruption  "  seems  to  have  been 
given  after  Solomon's  time  to  the  entire 
ridge  of  hills  which  lies  over  against 
Jemsaiem  to  the  east,  on  account  of  the 
riteg  which  he  had  allowed  to  be  e«tab- 


lished  on  it.     The  "right  hand"  of  the 
mountain  would,  according  to  Jewish  no- 
tions, be  the  more  southern  part.    Which 
Solomon  the  King  of  Israel— rather,  King 
of  Israel,  since  there    is    no  article — had 
bnilded  for  Ashtoreth  the  abomination  of 
the  Zidonians  (see  1  Kings  xi.  7).     Though 
Ashtoreth,  or  Astarte,  or  Ishtar,  or  the  Dea 
Syra,  was  worsliipped  generally  throughout 
Phoenicia,  and  perhaps  even  more  widely, 
yet  she  was  in  n  peculiar  way  "  the  abomi- 
nation of  the  Zidonians,"  being  the  deity 
to  whom  the  city  of  Sidon  was  especially 
dedicated  (see  the  inscription  on  the  tomb 
of  Bshmunazar,  published  in  the  '  Becordi 
of  the  Past,'  vol.  ix.  pp.  113, 114).    And  for 
Chemosh  the  abomination  of  the  Uoabites. 
Ohemosh  appears  as  the  special  god  of  the 
Moabites   on   the   famous  Moabite   Stone 
in  eleven  places.      The    stone    itself  was 
dedicated  to  Chemosh  (line  3).  The  Moabites 
are  spoken  of  as  "  the  people  of  Chemosh" 
(lines  5,  6).     Success  in  war  comes  from 
him,  and  defeat  is  the  result  of  his  anger. 
One  of  his  designations  is"Ashtar-Chemosh" 
(line  17),  or  "Chemosh,  who  is  also  Ashtar," 
Ashtar  being  the  male  principle  correspond- 
ing to   the  female  Astarte  or  Ashtoreth. 
And  for  Milcom.    Moloch  was  called  by  the 
Jews    '  Milcom,"    or    "  Malcam  " — "  their 
king" — i.e.    the   king    of   the    Ammonite 
people,  since  he   was  the  sole  god  whom 
they   acknowledged   (see  1  Kings    xi.  5; 
Jer.  xlix.  3  compared  with  Jer.  xlviii.  7; 
Amos  i.  15 ;  Zeph.  i.  5).    The  abomination 
of  the  children  of  Ammon  (see  1   Kings 
xi.   5,  7;   and    compare    the  comment  on 
1   Kings   in  the '  Pulpit  Commentary,'   p. 
222).    Did  the  king  defile.    The  manner  of 
the  defilement  is  stated  in  the  next  verse. 

Ver.  14. — And  he  brake  in  pieces  the 
images  —  or,  pillars  (see  the  comment  on 
1  Kings  xiv.  23) — and  cut  down  the  groves — 
t.«.  the  asherim,  or  "  sacred  trees  " — and  filled 
their  places  with  the  bones  of  men.  What- 
ever_  spoke  of  death  and  dissolution  was  a 
special  defilement  to  shrines  where  the  gods 
worshipped  were  deities  of  productivity  and 
generation.  Bones  of  men  had  also  the 
actual  taint  of  corruption  about  them.  The 
"  uncleanness  "  of  dead  bodies  arose  first  out 
of  man's  natural  shrinking  from  death,  and 
was  then  further  confirmeJ  by  the  horrors 
accompanying  decay.  The  notion  was  pro- 
bably coeval  with  death  itself.  It  received 
a  sanction  from  the  Law,  which  made  it  a 
legal  defilement  to  touch  a  corpse  (Numb, 
xix.  11, 16),  and  placed  under  a  sentence  of 
uncleanness  all  that  was  in  the  tent  where 
a  man  died  (Numb.  xix.  14, 15). 

Ver.  15. — Moreover  the  altar  that  was  at 
Bethel,  and  the  high  place ;  rather,  the  altar 
that  wot  at  Bethel,  the  high  plaee,  without  any 
"and."    noan  i*  in  appoiition  with  nsa^ 


tm 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,    [oh.  xxin.  1— 3t> 


By  getting  up  an  altar  at  Bethel,  Jero- 
boam constituted  Bethel  a  "high  place." 
Which  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nehat,  who 
made  Israel  to  sin,  had  made  (comp.  1 
Kings  xii.  33 ;  xiii.  2),  both  that  altar  and 
the  high  place  he  brake  down.  "  The  high 
place  "  is  here  equivalent  to  the  "  house  of 
high  places  "  in  1  Kings  xii.  31,  and  desig- 
nates "tlie  buildings  of  this  sanctuary" 
(Keil).  At  such  a  national  centre  as  Bethel 
a  temple  would,  of  course,  accompany  the 
altar.  Whether  the  temple  and  altar  were 
in  use  or  not  at  the  time  when  Josiah 
destroyed  them,  is  uncertain.  The  mixed 
race  which  had  superseded  the  Israelites 
in  the  country  (ch.  xvii.  24 — 41)  may  have 
continued  the  worship,  or  may  have  set  it 
aside.  And  burned  the  high  place,  and 
stamped  it  small  to  powder.  It  is  not  clear 
that  this  latter  clause  applies  to  the  high 
place.  Perhaps  we  should  translate — And 
stamped  small  to  powder,  and  bnmed,  the 
grove.  It  is  for  the  most  part  only  com- 
paratively small  objects  that  are  "stamped 
small  to  powder"  (s«e  vers.  6,  12,  and 
comp.  2  Chron.  xv.  21). 

Ver.  16. — And  as  Josiah  turned  himself, 
he  spied  the  sepnlohres  that  were  there  in 
the  mount.  The  Israelite  sepulchres,  exca- 
vated in  tlie  rocky  sides  of  hills,  are  every- 
where conspicuous.  Those  of  Bethel  may 
have  been  in  the  low  hill  on  which  the 
town  stands,  or  in  the  sides  of  the  Wady 
Suweinit,  a  little  further  to  the  south.  His 
accidentaJly  "  spying  the  sepulchres  "  gave 
Josiah  the  thought  of  completing  his  dese- 
cration of  Bethel  by  having  bones  brought 
from  them  and  burnt  upon  the  altar — 
whereby  he  exactly  accomplished  the  old 
prophecy  (1  Kings  xiii.  2),  which  was  not  at 
all  in  his  mind.  And  sent,  and  took  the 
hones  out  of  the  sepulchres,  and  burned 
them  upon  the  altar,  and  polluted  it  (see  the 
comment  on  ver.  14),  according  to  the  word 
of  the  Lord  which  the  man  of  God  proclaimed, 
who  proclaimed  these  words ;  rather,  who 
prophesied  these  things.  The  reference  is  to 
1  Kings  xiii.  2,  and  the  meaning  is,  not 
that  Josiah  acted  as  he  did  in  order  to  fulfil 
the  prophecy,  but  that  in  thus  acting  he 
unconsciously  fulfilled  it. 

Ver.  17.— Then  he  said,  What  title  is  that 
that  I  see  ?  rather.  What  pillar  is  that  that 
I  teef  Josiali's  eye  caught  sight  of  a 
"pillar"  or  obelisk  (j"!'?)  among  the  tombs, 
or  In  their  neighbourhood,  and  he  had  the 
curiosity  to  ask  what  it  was.  And  the  men 
of  the  city  told  him.  It  is  the  sepnlchre  of 
the  man  of  Ood,  which  came  from  Judah 
(see  1  Kings  xiii.  1).  The  "  pillar "  could 
not  have  been  the  actual  "  sepulchre,"  but 
was  no  doubt  a  monument  connected  with 
it.  Many  of  the  Phoenician  excavated 
tombs  are  accompanied  by  monuments  aboTe 


groand,  which  are  very  conspicuous  (see 
Eenan'a  'Mission  de  Ph^nioie,' pis.  xi.,  e( 
seqq. ).  And  proclaimed  these  things  that  thou 
hast  done  against  the  altar  of  Bethel  (see  1 
Kings  xiii.  2).  According  to  the  present 
text  of  Kings,  Josiah  was  prophesied  of 
hy  name,  as  the  king  who  would  defile  the 
altar;  but  it  is  possible  that  the  words, 
"  Josiah  by  name  "  (ID^'  ir^i?**')?  I'^^s  crept 
in  from  the  margin. 

Yer.  18. — And  he  said,  Let  him  alone; 
let  no  man  move  his  bones.  Josiah  re- 
membered the  circumstances  when  they 
were  recalled  to  him,  and,  in  order  to  show 
honour  to  the  "  man  of  God  "  (1  Kings  xiii., 
passim),  commanded  that  his  tomb  should 
be  undisturbed.  So  they  let  his  bones 
alone,  with  the  bones  of  the  prophet  that 
oame  out  of  Samaria;  t.<.  with  the  bones 
of  the  Israelite  prophet,  who  had  taken  oare 
to  be  buried  with  him.  The  reference  is  to 
1  Kings  xiii.  31. 

Yer.  19. — And  all  the  houses  also  of  the 
high  places  that  were  in  the  cities  of  Sa- 
maria. The  writer  of  Chronicles  enters  into 
more  detail.  Josiah,  he  says,  carried  out 
his  destruction  of  the  high  places,  the 
groves,  and  the  images  "  in  the  cities  of  Ma- 
nasseh,  and  Ephraim,  and  Simeon,  even  unto 
Naphtali "  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  6) — «.e.  to  the 
northern  limit  of  the  Holy  Land,  which  was 
occupied  by  Naphtali  and  Asher.  By  what 
right  Josiah  exercised  sovereign  authority 
in  the  old  kingdom  of  Samaria,  which  the 
Assyrians  had  conquered  and  attached  to 
their  empire,  can  only  be  conjectured. 
Some  have  supposed  that  the  Assyrians  had 
enlarged  his  sovereignty,  and  placed  Sa- 
maria under  his  rule ;  others  regard  him  as 
having  transferred  his  allegiance  to  Kabo- 
polassar,  and  having  been  made  by  him 
viceroy  over  Palestine.  But  it  is,  perhaps, 
most  probable  that  he  merely  took  ad- 
vantage of  the  political  commotions  of  the 
time  to  extend  his  dominion  so  far  as  it 
seemed  safe  to  do  so.  Asshur-bani-pal,  the 
last  energetic  King  of  Assyria,  appears  to 
have  ceased  to  reign  in  Josiah's  fourteenth 
year,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  a  weak 
monarch,  Asshur-ebil-ili.  Great  troubles  now 
broke  out.  The  Scythians  ravaged  Western 
Asia  far  and  wide.  Assyria  was  attacked 
by  the  Modes  and  Babylonians  in  combina- 
tion. Under  these  circumstances,  Josiah 
found  himself  practically  independent,  and 
began  to  entertain  ambitious  projects.  He 
"extended  his  dominion  from  Jerusalem 
over  Samaria"  (Ewald).  Assyria  was  too 
much  occupied  to  take  any  notice.  Baby- 
lonia was  in  the  thick  of  the  struggle.  Jo- 
siah found  himself  able  to  leunite  under 
his  own  headship  all  the  scattered  portions 
of  the  old  Israelite  kingdom,  except,  per- 
haps, the  tiaii»J<«dMiio  watriet    He  levied 


OH.  xxm.  1—37.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGft. 


4sr 


taxes  in  Samaria  as  freely  as  in  Judiea  (2 
Ghion.  xxxiii.  9).  He  reformed  on  the  same 
model  the  religions  of  both  countries. 
When  finally  he  bad  to  fight  for  his  throne, 
he  marched  his  army  into  the  northern  por- 
tion of  Samaria,  and  there  fought  the  battle 
which  cost  him  his  life.  Which  the  kings 
of  Israel  had  made  to  provoke  the  Lord  to 
anger.  The  earlier  kings  of  Israel  had 
simply  allowed  the  "  high  places "  to  con- 
tinue, without  actively  increasing  or  mul- 
tiplying them ;  but  Manasseh  had  re-es- 
tablished them  after  their  destruction  by 
Hezekiah  (oh.  xxi.  3),  and  Amon  had  pro- 
bably done  the  same  after  Manasseh's  tardy 
reformation.  Josiah  took  away,  and  did  to 
them  according  to  all  the  acts  that  he  had 
done  in  Bethel  (see  above,  ver.  15). 

Ver.  20. — And  he  slew  all  the  priests  of 
the  high  places  that  were  there  upon  the 
altars.  It  is  not  directly  said  that  he  had 
done  this  at  Bethel,  though  it  had  been 
prophesied  that  he  would  do  so  (1  Kings 
xiii.  2).  Possibly  there  were  no  priests  at 
Bethel  at  the  time,  since  the  "calf"  set  up 
by  Jeroboam  had  been  carried  off  (Hos.  x. 
6)  by  the  Assyrians.  The  difference  be- 
tween the  treatment  of  the  high-place  priests 
in  Israel  and  in  Judah  (ver.  9)  clearly  im- 
plies that  the  former  were  attached  to  the 
worship  of  false  gods,  while  the  latter  were 
priests  of  Jehovah  who  worshipped  him 
with  superstitious  and  unauthorized  rites 
and  ceremonies.  And  burned  men's  bones 
apon  them  (comp.  ver.  16),  and  returned  to 
Jerusalem, 

Yer.  21. — And  the  king  commanded  all 
the  people,  saying,  Keep  the  Fassover.  The 
account  given  of  Josiah's  Passover  is  much 
more  full  in  Chronicles  than  in  Kings.  In 
Chronicles  it  occupies  nineteen  verses  of 
2  Chrnn.  xxxv.  We  learn  from  Chronicles 
that  all  the  rites  prescribed  by  the  Law, 
whether  in  Exodus,  Leviticus,  or  Deutero- 
nomy, were  duly  observed,  and  that  the 
festival  was  attended,  not  only  by  the 
Judseans,  but  by  many  Isjaeutes  from 
among  the  tea  tribes,  who  still  remained 
intermixed  with  the  Assyrian  colonists  in 
the  Samaritan  country  (see  2  Chron.  xxxT. 
17, 18).  Vnto  the  Lord  your  Ood,  as  it  is 
written  in  the  book  of  this  covenant.  The 
ordinances  for  the  due  observance  of  the 
Passover  fc  ast  are  contained  chiefly  in 
Exodus  (xii.  3—20;  xiii.  5—10).  They 
■re  repeated,  but  with  much  less  fulness, 
in  Deut.  xvL  1 — 8.  The  "book  of  the  cove- 
nant" found  by  Hilkiah  must,  therefore, 
certainly  have  contained  Exodus  (see  below, 
ver.  25). 

Ver.  22. — Sorely  there  was  not  holden 
inch  a  Passover  from  the  days  of  the  judges 
that  judged  Israel,  nor  in  all  the  days  of 
the  kings  of  Israel,  nor  of  the  kings  of 


Judah.  Such  a  Passover,  one  so  numerously 
attended  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  18),  and  so  exactly 
kept  according  to  every  ordinance  of  the 
Law  of  Moses  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  6),  had  not 
been  celebrated  during  all  the  period  of  the 
judges,  from  Joshua  to  Samuel,  nor  under 
the  kings  of  all  Israel,  Saul,  David,  and 
Solomon,  nor  under  those  of  the  separated 
kingdom  of  Judah,  from  Keboboam  to  this 
year  (the  eighteenth)  of  Josiah.  It  is  an 
extraordinary  perversity  which  concludes 
(as  do  De  Wette  and  Thenius),  from  this 
comparison  of  the  present  with  former  Pass- 
overs under  the  judges  and  the  kings,  that 
there  had  been  no  such  former  Passovers  at 
all !  Two,  at  any  rate,  are  recorded  (Josh. 
v.  10,  11 ;  2  Chron.  xxi.  13—26).  Ewald 
has  the  good  sense  to  express  his  dissent 
from  this  view,  and  to  declare  the  meaning 
of  the  writer  to  be  simply  that  "  since  the 
time  of  the  judges  there  had  never  been 
Huoh  a  celebration  of  the  Passover,  in  such 
strict  accordance,  that  is,  with  the  prescrip- 
tions of  a  saored  book  as  that  which  now 
took  place  "  (see  his  '  History  of  Israel,'  vol. 
iv.  p.  239,  Eng.  triin.s.). 

Ver.  23. — But  in  the  eighteenth  year  of 
King  Josiah,  wherein  this  Passover  was 
holden  to  the  Lord  in  Jerusalem  (compare, 
on  the  date,  ch.  xxii.  3  and  2  Oliron.  xxxv. 
19).  The  eighteenth  year  of  Josiah  cor- 
responded probably,  in  part  to  B.o.  622,  in 
part  to  B.o.  621. 

Ver.  24.  —  Moreover  the  workers  with 
familiar  spirits,  and  the  wizards.  Persons 
of  these  classes  had  been  encouraged  by  Ma- 
nasseh, in  his  earlier  reign  (ch.  xxi.  6),  and 
probably  by  Amon  (cli.  xxi.  21).  As  Josiah 
designed  a  thorough  rePormatiou,  it  was  ne- 
cessary for  him  to  put  them  down.  And  the 
images ;  literally,  the  teraphim,  wliieh  are 
thought  to  have  been  small  images  kept  as 
household  gods  in  many  Israelite  families 
from  a  very  ancient  date  (see  Gen.  xxxi. 
19 — 35).  The  superstition  was  exceedingly 
persistent.  We  find  it  under  the  judges 
(Judg.  xviii.  14),  under  Saul  (1  Sam.  xix. 
13),  here  under  the  later  kings,  and  it  is 
still  mentioned  after  the  return  from  the 
Captivity  (Zech.  x.  2).  The  superstition 
was,  apparently,  Babylonian  (Ezek.  xxi. 
21),  and  brought  frcm  Ur  of  the  Ohaldees 
by  the  family  of  Abraham.  Besides  being 
regarded  as  household  gods,  the  teraphim 
were  ased  in  divination.  And  the  idols, 
and  all  the  abominations  that  were  spied. 
The  "idols,"  gilluUm,  are  probably, like  tlie 
teraphim,  of  a  private  nature,  figures  used 
as  amulets  or  talismans.  Excepting  in 
Bzekiel,  the  word  is  an  uncommon  one. 
By  the  "  abominations  that  were  spied  "  are 
meant  secret  defilements  and  superstitious 
practices  in  households,  which  needed  to 
be  searched  out    (So  liidnins  and  Bahr.) 


468 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,     [oh.  ixm.  1-^7. 


In  the  land  of  Jndah  and  in  Jerusalem. 
Not,  apparently,  in  tha  cities  of  Samaria, 
where  suoh  a  rigid  inquisition  would  per- 
haps have  provoked  a  stubborn  resistance. 
Did  Josiah  put  away,  that  he  might  perform 
the  words  of  the  Law ;  rather,  that  lie  might 
eetdblish  the  ieordi  of  the  Law.  Lawsagaiost 
such  practices  as  Josiah  now  put  down  will 
be  fouud  in  Exod.  xxii.  18 ;  Lev.  xix.  31 ; 
XX.  27 ;  Deut.  xviii.  10 — 12.  Which  were 
written  in  the  hook  that  Eilkiah  the  priest 
found  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  (see  oh.  xxii. 
8). 

Yer.  25. — And  like  unto  him  was  there 
no  king  before  him  (see  the  comment  on  ch. 
xviii.  5).  The  writer  of  Kings  cannot  be 
said  to  place  Josiah  above  Hezekiah,  or 
Hezekiah  above  Josiah.  He  accords  them 
the  same  degree  of  praise,  but,  in  Heze- 
kiah's  case,  dwells  upon  his  trust  in  God ; 
in  Josiah's,  upon  his  exact  obedience  to  tlie 
Law.  On  the  whole,  his  judgment  accords 
very  closely  with  that  of  the  son  of  Sirach 
(Ecclus.  xlix.  4).  "  All,  except  David  and 
Ezekias  and  Josias,  were  defective :  for  they 
forsook  the  Law  of  the  Most  High."  That 
turned  to  the  lord  with  all  his  heart,  and 
with  all  his  soul,  and  with  all  his  might. 
This  triple  euumeration  is  intended  to  in- 
clude the  whole  moral  and  mental  nature  of 
man,  all  the  energies  of  his  imderstamling, 
his  will,  and  his  physical  vitality  (bee  the 
comment  on  Deut.  vi.  5 — a  passage  which  is 
in  the  writer's  mind).  According  to  all  the 
Law  of  Uoses.  This  is  an  indication  that, 
in  the  writer's  view,  the  whole  Law  was  con- 
tained in  the  book  found  by  Hilkiah. 
Neither  after  him  arose  there  any  like  him. 
This  is  but  moderate  praise,  since  the  four 
kings  who  reigned  after  him — Jehoabaz, 
Jehoiakim,  Jehoiachin,  and  ZedeMah  — 
were,  one  and  all,  wicked  princes. 

Ver.  26.  —  Notwithstanding  the  Lord 
turned  not  from  the  fierceness  of  his  great 
wrath.  It  was  too  late,  not  for  God  to  for- 
give upon  repentance,  but  for  the  nation  to 
repent  sincerely  and  heartily.  Sin  had 
become  engrained  in  the  national  character. 
Vain  were  the  warnings  of  Jeremiah,  vain 
were  his  exhortations  to  repentance  (iii.  12 
—14,  22;  iv.  1—8;  vii.  3—7,  etc.),  vain 
his  promises  that,  if  they  would  turn  to  God, 
they  would  be  forgiven  and  spared.  Thirty 
years  of  irreligion  and  idolatry  under  Ma- 
nasseh  had  sapped  the  national  vigour,  and 
made  true  repentance  an  impossibility.  How 
weak  and  half-hearted  must  have  been  the 
return  to  God  towards  the  close  of  Ma- 
nasseh's  reign,  that  it  should  have  had  no 
strength  to  resist  Amon,  a  youth  of  twenty- 
two,  but  should  have  disappeared  wholly  on 
his  accession  I  And  how  far  from  sincere 
mnst  have  been  the  present  conformity  to 
the  wijdiei  of  josiah,  the  professed  renewal 


of  the  covenant  (T«r.  3),  and  revival  of  dii- 
nsed  ceremonies  (vers.  21 — 23)  1  Jeremiah 
searched  in  vain  through  the  streets  of 
Jerusalem  to  find  a  man  that  executed  judg- 
ment, or  sought  the  truth  (Jer.  v.  1).  The 
people  had  "a  revolting  and  rebellious 
heart ;  they  were  revolted  and  gone  "  (Jer. 
T.  23).  Not  only  idolatry,  but  profligacy 
(Jer.  v.  8)  and  injustice  and  oppression 
everywhere  prevailed  (Jer.  v.  25 — 28). 
"  From  the  least  to  the  greatest  of  them, 
every  one  was  given  to  oovetouaness  "  (Jer. 
vi.  13);  even  the  prophets  and  the  priests 
"  dealt  falsely  "  (Jer.  vi.  13).  The  state  of 
things  was  one  which  necessarily  brought 
down  the  Divine  judgment,  and  all  that 
Josiah's  efforts  could  do  was  a  little  to  dela; 
it.  Wherewith  his  anger  was  kindled  against 
Judah,  because  of  all  the  provocations  that 
Jffanasseh  had  provoked  him  withal.  Ma- 
nasseh's  provocations  lived  in  their  conse- 
quences. God's  judgment  upon  Israel  was 
not  mere  vengeance  for  the  sins  that  Ma- 
nasseh  had  committed,  or  even  for  the  mul- 
titudinous iniquities  into  which  he  had  led 
the  nation  (ch.  xxi.  9).  It  was  punishment 
rendered  neces.iary  by  the  actual  condition 
of  the  nation — the  condition  whereto  it  had 
been  reduced  by  Manasseh's  evil  doings. 

Ver.  27. — And  the  Lord  said — God  sa'd 
in  his  secret  counsels,  came  to  the  determi- 
nation, and  pronounced  the  sentence  in  liis 
thouglits — I  will  remove  Judah  also  out  of 
my  sight,  as  I  have  removed  Israel  (comp. 
ch.  xvii.  18,  "  Therefore  the  Lord  was  very 
angry  with  Israel,  and  removed  them  out  of 
his  light").  The  sins  of  Judali  were  now 
as  great  as  those  of  Israel  had  been  ;  there- 
fore her  punishment  must  be  the  same,  as 
God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  And  I  will 
oast  off  this  city  Jerusalem  which  I  have 
chosen  (comp.  1  Kings  viii.  44,  48 ;  xi.  13, 
32, 36,  etc.).  God  "  chose  "  Jerusalem  when 
he  put  it  into  the  heart  of  David  to  bring 
up  tiie  ark  thither  (2  Sam.  vi.  1 — 17).  And 
the  house  of  which  I  said,  Uy  Name  shall 
he  there  (see  Deut.  xii.  11;  1  Kings  viii. 
29,  etc.).  A  visible  confirmation  was  given 
to  all  that  David  and  Solomon  had  done  in 
establishing  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  as  the 
head-quarters  of  the  national  religion,  when 
"  fire  came  down  from  heaven,  and  con- 
sumed the  burnt  offering  and  the  sacrifices  " 
made  there,  and  "tlie  glory  of  the  Lord 
filled  the  house"  (2  Chron.  rii  1;  oomp. 
2  Chron.  v.  13, 14). 

Vers.  28— 30.— The  events  of  Josiah's 
reign  ficom  his  eighteenth  to  his  thirty-first 
year  are  left  a  blank,  both  here  and  in 
Chronicles.  PoUtioally,  the  time  was  a 
stirring  one.  The  great  invasion  of  Western 
Asia  by  the  Soythio  hordes  (Hero4..  i.  103 


OH.  xzm.  1— 37.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


469 


— 106),  which  i»  alluded  to  by  Jeremiah 
(tL  1 — 5),  Ezekiel  (xxxviii.,  xxxiz.),  and 
perhaps  by  Zephaniah  (it  6),  probably 
belongs  to  it;  as  also  the  attack  of  Fsamatik 
I.  upon  Philistia  (Herod.,  ii.  105),  the  fall 
of  the  Assyrian  empire  (oiro.  b.o.  617),  and 
the  destruotion  of  Nineveh;  the  establish- 
ment of  the  independence  of  Babylon,  and 
her  rige  to  greatness;  together  with  the 
transfer  of  power  in  the  central  part  of 
Western  Asia,  from  the  Assyrians  to  the 
Modes.  Amid  the  dangers  which  beset 
htm,  Josiah  appears  to  have  conducted  him- 
self prudently,  gradually  extending  his 
power  over  Samaria  and  Galilee,  without 
coming  into  hostile  collision  with  any  of 
the  neighbouring  nations,  until  about  the 
year  b.o,  609  or  608,  when  his  land  was  in- 
vaded by  Pharaoh-Nechoh,  the  Neku  of  the 
Egyptian  monuments.  Josiah  felt  himself 
called  upon  to  resist  this  invasion,  and,  in 
doing  so,  met  his  death  (vera.  29,  30). 

-Ver.  28.— Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Josiah,  and  all  that  he  did.  Josiah  was 
reckoned  a  good  rather  than  a  great  king. 
No  mention  is  made  of  his  "  might."  The 
writer  of  Chronicles  (2  Ohron.  xxxv.  26) 
commemorates  his  "kindnesses"  or  "his 
good  deeds."  The  son  of  Sirach  speaks  of 
his  "upright"  behaviour  (Eoclus.  xlix.  2). 
Josephus  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  4.  §  1)  praises  his 
"  justice  "  and  his  "  piety,"  and  says  (ibid., 
X.  i.  §  5)  his  later  years  were  passed  "  in 
peace  and  opulence."  Are  they  not  written 
in  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings 
of  Judah  1  (see  2  Chron.  xxxv.  27). 

Yer.  29. — In  his  days  Pharaoh-Ifechah 
King  of  Egypt  went  np  against  the  King  of 
Assyria.  Neku,  the  "Pharaoh-Nechoh"  of 
this  passage,  and  the  Needs  of  Herodotus 
(ii.  158, 159),  was  the  son  of  Fsamatik  I., 
and  succeeded  his  father  on  the. throne  of 
Egypt,  probably  in  B.a.  610.  He  was  one 
of  the  most  enterprising  of  the  later  Egyptian 
kings,  and  appears  to  have  made  this  ex- 
pedition in  his  second  or  third  year.  The 
unsettled  condition  of  Western  Asia  after 
the  Scythio  invasion,  and  the  fall  of  the 
Assyrian  empire,  seemed  to  give  an  oppor- 
tunity for  Eigypt  to  reclaim  her  old  do- 
minion over  Syria  and  Mesopotamia.  The 
"  King  of  Assyria,"  against  whom  Pharaoh- 
Nechoh  "  went  up,"  was  probably  Nabopo- 
lassar,  the  father  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  His 
proper  title  was  "  King  of  Babylon,"  which 
is  what  Nebuchadnezzar  always  calls  him 
p  Eecords  of  the  Past,'  voL  v.  p.  113,  line  22 ; 
vol.  vii.  p.  71,  line  6 ;  p.  75,  line  9) ;  but  the 
Jews  not  unnaturally  regarded  him  as  the 


inheritor  of  the  Assyrian  empire,  as  indeed 
they  regarded  the  Persian  monarchs  also 
(Ezra  vi.  22),  and  therefore  gave  him  the 
title  of  "King  of  Assyria."  To  the  river 
Euphrates.  The  author  of  Chronicles  says 
that  "Necho  King  of  Egypt  came  up  to 
fight  against  Carohemish  "  (or  "  at  Carche- 
mish  ")  "  by  Euphrates,"  which  shows  that 
his  design  was  to  penetrate  into  Northern 
Syria,  where  Oarchemish  (now  Jerahm] 
was  situated,  with  a  view  probably  of  cross- 
ing the  Euphrates  by  the  ford  at  Bir,  or  by 
that  at  Balis,  into  Mesopotamia.  And  King 
Josiah  went  against  him.  It  is  possible 
that  Josiah  had  accepted  the  position  of 
Babylonian  tributary  after  the  fall  of  the 
Assyrian  kingdom,  and  tliought  himself 
bound  to  resist  an  attack  upon  his  suzerain. 
Or  he  may  simply  have  resented  the  viola- 
tion of  his  territory,  without  his  permission, 
by  a  foreign  army.  Certainly,  if  he  had 
allowed  the  free  passage  of  the  Egyptian 
troops,  backwards  and  forwards,  througli 
his  country,  he  would  in  a  short  time  have 
lost  even  the  shadow  of  independence. 
Nechoh's  assurance  that  his  expedition  was 
not  against  him  (Josiah),  but  against  the 
Assyrians  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  21),  was  not  a 
thing  to  be  relied  upon,  any  more  than  his 
declaration  that  God  had  commanded  his 
expedition.  And  he  slew  him  at  Uegiddo, 
when  he  had  seen  him.  Megiddo  is,  be- 
yond all  doubt,  the  present  M-Ledjun  on 
the  northern  outskirt  of  the  range  of  hills 
which  separates  the  Plain  of  Esdraelon  from 
that  of  Sharon.  It  is  certainly  surprising 
to  find  that  Josiah  bad  taken  up  a  position 
so  far  to  the  north,  leaving  Jerusalem,  and, 
indeed,  all  Judaea,  unprotected.  But  he 
may  have  thought  the  advantages  of  the 
position  such  as  to  compensate  for  any  risk 
to  the  Judsean  cities,  in  which  he  would, 
of  course,  have  left  garrisons.  Or,  possibly, 
as  Keil  and  Bahr  suppose,  Nechohmay  have 
conveyed  his  troops  to  the  Syrian  coast  by 
sea,  and  have  landed  in  the  Bay  of  Acre, 
close  to  the  Plain  of  Esdraelon.  In  this 
case  Josiah  would  have  no  choice,  but,  if 
he  opposed  the  Egyptian  monarch  at  all, 
must  have  met  him  where  he  did,  in  the 
Esdraelon  plain,  as  he  entered  it  from  the 
Plain  of  Acre, 

Yer.  80. — ^And  his  servants  carried  him  in 
a  chariot — his  "  second  chariot,"  according 
to  the  writer  of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxxv. 
24),  which  was  probably  one  kept  in  reserve 
in  case  flight  should  be  necessary,  of  lighter 
construction,  and  drawn  by  fleeter  horses, 
than  his  war-cliariot — dead  from  Megiddo. 
Wounded  to  death,  that  is.  From  Chro- 
nicles we  gather  that  his  wound,  which  was 
from  an  arrow,  was  not  immediately  fatal 
(2  Chron.  xxxv.  23,  24);  but  that  he  died 
of  it  oil  hii  way  to  Jerasalem,  or  directly 


MO 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,     [dh.  xxni.  1— 87. 


after  his  arnval.  And  bionght  him  to  Jern- 
salem,  and  buried  him  in  his  own  sepulchre 
(comp.  oh.  xxi.  18  and  26).  The  writer  of 
Chronicles  says,  "in  the  sepulchre  of  his 
fathers,"  appnrently  meaning  the  burial- 
place  in  which  were  interred  the  bodies 
of  Manasseh  and  Amon.  We  learn  from 
Chronicles  that  a  great  lamentation  was 
made  for  Josiah,  the  only  King  of  Judah 
slain  in  battle,  the  last  good  king  of  David's 
line,  the  pious  prince  whose  piety  had  not 
sufficed  to  avert  the  anger  of  Jehovah. 
Jeremiah  "lamented  for  him"  (2  Ohron. 
XXXV.  25),  perhaps  in  a  set  composition  (Jo- 
sephuB, '  Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  5.  §  1) ;  though  that 
composition  is  certainly  not  either  the  Book 
of  Lamentations  or  the  fourth  chapter  of 
that  book,  He  was  further  mourned  by 
"all  the  singing  men  and  the  singing 
women  "  (2  Chron.,  I.  <.  o.),  who  "  spake  of 
him  in  Iheir  lamentations,"  and  "made 
them  an  ordinance  in  Israel,"  and  entered 
these  "  lamentations,"  apparently  in  a  book, 
which  was  called  'The  Book  of  Lamen- 
tations,' or  'of  Dirges.'  And  the  people 
of  the  land  took  Jehoahaz  the  son  of  Josiah. 
Jehoahaz  was  otherwise  named  "  Shallum  " 
(1  Chron.  iii.  15 ;  Jer.  xxii.  11).  On  what 
grounds  tlie  people  preferred  him  to  his 
elder  brother,  Bliakim,  we  do  not  know. 
Perhaps  Eliakim  had  accompanied  his 
father  to  Megiddo,  and  been  made  prisoner 
by  Nechoh  in  tlie  battle.  And  anointed  him 
(see  the  comment  on  1  Kings  i.  34,  and 
tupra,  ch.  zi.  12),  and  made  him  king  in  Ms 
father's  stead. 

Vers.  31 — 33. — Shokt  Reign  of  Jehoahaz. 
Pharuoh-Nechoh,  having  defeated  Josiah, 
left  Jerusalem  and  Judasa  behind  him,  while 
he  pressed  forward  on  his  original  enter- 
prise (see  ver.  29)  into  Northern  Syria  and 
the  district  about  Carchemish,  or  the  tract 
north-east  of  Aleppo.  It  was  three  months 
before  he 'had  completed  his  conquests  in 
these  quarters,  and,  having  arranged  matters 
to  his  sati^^fnction,  set  out  on  his  return  to 
Egypt.  During  these  three  months  Jehot^ 
baz  bore  rule  at  Jerusalem  (ver.  31),  and 
"  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord"  (ver.  32). 
Ezekiel  compares  him  to  "a  young  lion," 
which  "learned  to  catch  the  prey,  and 
devoured  men"  (xix.  3).  It  may  be  sus- 
pected that  he  re-established  the  idola- 
tries which  Josiah  had  put  down ;  but  this 
b  uncertain.  Fharaoh-Nechoh,  on  his  return 
from  Carchemish,  learning  what  the  Jewa 
bad  done,  sent  envoys  to  Jerusalem,  and 
summoned  Jehoahaz  to  his  presence  at 
Kiblah,  in  the  territory  of  Hamath  (var.  S3; 


oomp.  Josephns, '  Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  9.  §  2).  Je- 
hoahaz obeyed  the  summons ;  and  Neoboh, 
having  obtained  possession  of  his  person, 
"  put  him  in  bands,"  and  carried  him  off  to 
Egypt,  where  he  died  (ver.  31 ;  comp.  Jer. 
xxii.  10 — 12 ;  Josephns,  1. 1.  e.). 

Yet.  31. — JehOEihaz  was  twenty  and  three 
years  old  when  he  began  to  reign.  He  was, 
therefore,  younger  than  his  brother  Eliakim, 
who,  three  months  later,-  was  "  twenty-five 
years  old"  (ver.  36).  His  original  name 
seems  to  have  been  "Shallum,"  as  above 
noticed  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  30). 
Probably  he  changed  it  to  "  Jehoahaz " 
("  Possession  of  Jehovah  ")  on  his  accession. 
And  he  reigned  three  months  in  Jernsalem — 
three  months  and  ten  days,  according  to 
Josephus — and  his  mother's  name  was 
Hamutal,  the  daughter  of  Jeremiah  of 
libnah.  The  father  of  Hamutal  was  not, 
therefore,  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  who  was 
a  native  of  Anathoth  (see  Jer.  i,  1). 

Ver.  32. — ^And  he  did  tbat  which  was  evil 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  (see  the  comment 
on  vers.  31 — 33).  Josephus  says  that  he 
was  curefi^s  Kal  fiiaphs  rdv  Tp&irov  (Z.  s.  e.) — 
"  irreligious  and  of  impure  habits."  Ezekiel 
(xix.  3)  seems  to  call  him  a  persecutor. 
According  to  all  that  his  fathers  had  done. 
As  idolatry  was  the  chief  sin  of  bis 
"fathers,"  Jehoahaz  must  have  been  ao 
idolater. 

Ver.  33. — ^And  Pharaoh-ITeoholi  pnt  him 
in  bands  at  Biblah.  "Biblah,"  which 
retains  its  name,  was  situated  in  the  Ccele- 
Syriau  plain,  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
Orontes,  in  lat.  31°  23'  N.  nearly.  It  com- 
manded a  ford  over  the  river  (Conder, 
'Heth  and  Moab,'  p.  17),  and  is  in  the 
midst  of  a  rich,  corn-producing  country. 
Hamath,  to  which  it  was  regarded  as  belong- 
ing, is  situated  more  than  fifty  miles  further 
down  the  river.  Biblah  was  well  placed 
as  a  centre  for  communication  with  the 
neighbouring  countries.  As  Dr.  Bobinson 
says  ('  Researches,'  vol.  iii.  p.  545),  "  From 
this  point  the  roads  were  open  by  Aleppo 
and  the  Euphrates  to  Nineveh,  or  by  Pal- 
myra (Tadmor)  to  Babylon,  by  the  end  of 
Lebanon  and  the  coast  to  Palestine  (  Philistia) 
and  Egypt,  or  through  the  Buka'a  and  the 
Jordan  valley  to  the  centre  of  the  Holy 
Land."  Nebuchadnezzar  followed  the  ex- 
ample of  Nechoh  in  making  Riblah  his  Lead- 
quarters  during  his  sieges  of  Tyre  and  Jern- 
salem (see  ch.  xxv.  21 ;  Jer.  xxxix.  5 ;  Ui. 
9,  10,  26,  27).  In  the  land  of  Hamath. 
The  "  land  of  Hamath  "  was  the  npper  part 
of  the  Coele-Syrian  valley  from  about  ki 
31°  to  lat.  35°  80*  N.  That  he  migU  not 
reign  in  Jenualem.  Neohoh  might  naturally 
diatnut  the  peopla'i  eboiee.    Ha  augkt  alsa 


OK.  xxm.  1— 37.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KDTG,3. 


461 


ngard  the  adtting  np  of  any  king  at  Jern- 
salem  without  his  aanotion  aa  an  act  of 
contumacy  on  the  part  of  a  nation  which 
had  been  piactically  conquered  by  the 
complete  defeat  of  Josiah  at  Megiddo. 
Whether  his  conduct  in  seizing  Jehoabaz 
after  inviting  him  to  a  conference  was  justi- 
fiable or  not  may  be  questioned;  but,  in 
point  of  fact,  he  did  but  use  the  right  of  the 
conqueror  somewhat  harshly.  And  put  the 
land  to  a  tribute  of  an  hnndied  talents  of 
■ilTW,  and  a  talent  of  gold.  (So  Josephus, 
2.  «. «.}  The  tribute  was  a  very  moderate  one. 
A  century  earlier  Sennacherib  bad  enacted 
a  tribute  of  three  hundred  talents  of  silver, 
and  thirty  of  gold  (see  above,  oh.  xviii.  14). 
We  may  conjecture  that  Nechoh  wished  to 
conciliate  the  Jews,  regarding  them  as 
capable  of  rendering  him  good  service  in 
the  struggle,  on  which  he  had  entered,  with 
Babylon. 

Vers.  84— 37.— AooESSioN  Ain>  Eablt 
Teabs  of  Jehoiakiu.  Fharaoh-Kechoh, 
when  he  deposed  Jehoahaz,  at  once  supplied 
his  place  by  another  king.  He  had  no 
intention  of  altering  the  govemmeatal 
system  of  Palestine,  or  of  mling  his  con- 
questa  in  any  other  way  tlmu  through 
dependent  monarohs.  His  choice  fell  on 
Josiah's  eldest  surviving  son  (I  Ohron.  iii. 
15),  Eliakim,  who  was  the  natural  successor 
of  his  father.  Eliakim,  on  ascending  the 
throne,  changed  his  name,  as  Jehoahaz 
appears  to  have  done  (see  the  comment  on 
ver.  31),  and  reigned  as  Jehoiakim.  For 
three  years  (b.o.  608—605)  he  continued  a 
submissive  vassal  of  the  Egyptian  monarch, 
and  remitted  him  his  tribute  regularly  (ver. 
86).  But  his  rule  was  in  all  respects  an 
evil  one.  He  "  did  that  which  was  evil  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  37).  He  leant 
towards  idolatry  (2  Cluon.  zxxvi.  8);  he 
was  oppressive  and  irreligious  (Josephus, 
'Ant  Jud.,'  X.  6.  $  2);  he  <*sh«d  innocent 
blood"  (Jer.  xxii.  17);  he  was  luxurious 
(Jer.  xxii.  14,  IS),  covetous  (Jer.  xxii.  17), 
and  tyrannical  (Ezek.  xix.  6). 

Ver.  34.^And  Fharaoh-lTechoh  made  Elia- 
kim the  son  of  Josiah  king  in  the  room  of 
Josiah  his  father.  (On  the  general  inclina- 
tion of  Oriental  monarchs  to  support  the 
hereditary  principle,  and  to  establish  sons 
in  their  fathers'  governments,  even  when 
the  father's  had  been  rebels  or  enemies,  see 
Herod.,  iii  15.)  And  turned  his  name  to 
Jekoii^im.  We  may  understand  that  Nechoh 
lequiied  Um  to  take  a  new  name,ai  a  mark 


of  mbjeotion  (comp.  Gen.  xlL  45 ;  Ezra  t. 
14 ;  Dan.  i.  7 ;  and  also  ch.  xxiv.  17),  but 
left  the  choice  of  the  name  to  himself.  He 
made  the  change  as  sliglit  as  possible,  merely 
substituting  "  JehovaU  "  for  "  El "  as  the 
initial  element.  The  sense  of  the  name 
remained  the  same, "  God  will  set  up."  The 
idea  that  Nechoh  was  pleased  with  the  new 
name  on  account  of  its  apparent  connection 
with  the  Egyptian  moon-god,  Aah  (Meuzel), 
is  very  fanciful.  And  took  Jehoahaz  away 
— t.e.  carried  hira  captive  to  Egypt  (see 
Jer.  xxii.  10,  11 ;  Ezek.  xix.  4),  a  very 
common  practice  of  Egyptian  conquerors, 
and  one  often  accompanied  by  extreme 
severities — and  he  eame  to  Egypt,  and  died 
there  (see  Jer.  xxii.  12,  where  this  ia  pro- 
phesied). 

Ver.  35. — And  Jehoiakim  gave  the  sUver 
and  the  gold  to  Pharaoh,  Jehoiakim,  i.e., 
paid  the  tribute,  which  Nechoh  had  fixed 
(ver.  38),  regularly.  He  did  not,  however, 
pay  it  out  of  the  state  treasury,  which  was 
exhausted.  But  he  taxed  the  land  to  give 
the  money  acoording  to  the  commandment 
of  Pharaoh :  he  exacted  the  silver  and  the 
gold  of  the  people  of  the  laud,  of  every  one 
according  to  his  taxation,  to  give  it  unto 
Pharaoh-ITechoh ;  rather,  he  had  the  land 
valvsd  (comp.  Lev.  xxvii  8),  and  "  exacted 
the  silver  and  the  gold  of  the  people  of  the 
land,  of  every  one  acoording  to  his  valiui- 
tim." 

Ver.  36. — Jehoiakim  was  twenty  and  five 
years  old  when  he  began  to  reign— he  was 
therefore  two  years  older  tlian  his  brother 
Jehoahaz  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  31) — 
and  he  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem 
— probably  from  b.o.  608  to  b.o.  597 — and 
his  mother's  name  was  Zebudah — he  was, 
therefore,  only  half-hTothei  to  Jehoahaz  and 
Zedekiah,  whose  mother  wag  "Hamutal" 
(see  ver.  31  and  ch.  xxiv.  18) — the  daughter 
of  Pedaiah  of  Bnmah.  "  Bumah  "  is  pro- 
bably the  same  city  as  the  "  Arumah "  of 
Jndg.  ix.  41,  which  was  in  the  vicinity  of 
Shechem. 

Ver.  37. — And  he  did  that  which  was  evil 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  according  to  all 
that  his  fathers  had  done.  Jeremiah  say^j 
of  Jehoiakim,  "  Woe  unto  him  that  builileth 
his  house  by  unrighteousness,  and  his 
chambers  by  wrong;  that  useth  his  neigh- 
bour's service  without  wages,  and  giveth 
him  not  for  his  work ;  that  saitb,  I  will 
buUd  me  a  large  house  and  wide  chambers, 
and  cutteth  him  out  windows;  and  it  is 
ceiled  with  cedar,  and  painted  with  ver- 
milion. Shalt  thou  reign,  because  thou 
closest  thyself  in  cedar  ?  did  not  thy"  father 
eat  and  drink,  and  do  judgment  and  justice, 
and  then  it  was  well  with  him  7  He  judged 
the  cause  of  the  poor  and  needy;  then  it 
was  well  with  him :  was  not  this  to  know 


462 


THE  SECONITBOOK  OP  THE   KINGS,     [on.  xxm.  1— 37. 


me?  eaitli  the  Lord.  Bat  thine  eyea  and 
thine  lieart  are  not  bat  for  thy  covetons- 
ness,  and  for  to  ehed  innocent  blood,  and 
for  oppresaion,  and  for  violence,  to  do  it" 
(Jer.  xxii.  13 — 17).  Josephua  calls  him 
"an  nnjnst  man  and  an  evil-doer,  neither 
piona  in  hia  relations  towards  God,  nor 
eqnitable  in  hia  dealings  with  hia  fellow- 
men"  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  X.  5.  §  2).  His  execn- 
tion  of  TTrijah,  the  son  of  Shemaiah,  for 
prophesying  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
(Jer.  xxvi.  20 — 23),  waa  an  act  at  once  of 
oraelty  and  impiety.  It  is  anapected  (Ewald, 
•History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  252)  that, 
besldei  reintroducing  into  Judah  all  tha 


foreign  rites  extirpated  by  Ma  father,  hs 
added  Egyptian  ritee  to  their  number.  The 
tyranny  which  he  practised  was  likewise  of 
an  Egyptian  cast,  including,  as  it  did,  the 
exaction  of  forced  labour  from  hia  gubjecta 
(Jer.  xxii.  13),  an  old  cuatom  of  the 
Pharaohs,  and  it  ia  quite  possibP)  that  his 
"passion  for  building  aplendid  and  coatly 
houses"  (Ewald)  was  awakened  by  his 
knowledge  of  the  magnificence  which  cha- 
racterized the  monarchs  of  the  Saitio 
dynasty,  who  revived  in  Egypt  the  archi- 
tectural glories  of  the  Bames8idea(8ee  Herod., 
ii.  153, 175, 176). 


H0MILBTI03. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Standing  to  (he  covenant.  With  a  heart  stirred  up  to  Intense  seal  for 
Qod  by  the  words  which  he  had  heard  read  out  of  the  newly  found  book — ^the  precious 
"book  of  the  Law,"  thrust  into  temporary  oblivion  by  lus  wicked  grandfather  and 
father — Josiah  felt  that  a  great  act  of  national  repentance  and  national  profession  of 
faith  was  called  for ;  and  summoning  "  the  men  of  Judah "  by  their  representatives, 
and  all  the  whole  mass  of  the  people  of  Jerusalem,  he  proceeded  to  call  upon  theiA  to 
"  stand  to  the  covenant."  The  idea  was  well  conceived  and  well  cairied  out.  After  a 
national  apostasy — an  open,  evident,  and  flagrant  turning  away  from  God,  and  adoption 
of  Idolatrous  worships  most  abominable  in  his  sight — it  was  only  fitting,  only  decent, 
that  there  should  be  a  sort  of  public  reparation  of  the  wrong  done — a  turning  to  God  as 
open,  evident,  and  manifest  as  the  turning  away  had  been.  Accordingly,  this  wag 
what  Josiah  determined  on ;  and  the  public  act  of  reparation  resolved  itself  into  three 
parts. 

I.  A  PUBLIC  EEOiTATioN  OP  THE  COVENANT.  As  the  Law  had  been  put  out  of 
sight,  neglected,  forgotten,  during  the  space  of  two  reigns,  or  the  greater  part  of  them, 
so  now  it  was  solemnly  and  publicly  recited,  proclaimed,  declared  to  be  the  basis  ol  the 
national  life,  the  law  of  the  community.  The  utmost  possible  honour  was  done  to  it 
by  the  king  reading  it  himself  in  the  ears  of  the  people — reading  it  from  first  to  last, 
"  all  the  words  of  it,"  while  the  priests  and  the  prophets  and  "  all  the  people "  stood 
attent,  listening  to  the  words  so  long  unheard,  so  long  forgotten,  so  long  treated  with 
contempt. 

II.  A  DBCLAEATION  OF  ASSENT  AND  CONSENT  TO  THE  WORDS  OF  THB  COVENANT 

BT  THE  EiNS.  The  king  was  the  federal  head  of  the  nation,  and,  in  pledging  himself 
to  the  keeping  of  the  covenant,  performed  not  a  mere  personal,  but  a  representative 
and  federal  act.  He  pledged  the  nation  as  a  whole  to  the  acceptance  and  performance 
of  the  covenant,  undertaking  for  them  that  they  should  "  walk  after  the  Lord,  and  keep 
his  commandments  and  his  testimonies  and  his  statutes  with  aU  their  heart  and  all 
their  souL" 

III.  A    DECLABATION  OF    ASSENT    AND    CONSENT   TO   THE    W0BD8   OF    THE    COVENANT 

BT  THE  PEOPLE  THEMSELVES  iNDiviDTjALLT.  Nations  Cannot  be  saved  in  the,  lump. 
It  is  necessary  that  each  individual  come  into  personal  relations  with  his  Maker  and 
Redeemer  and  Saviour.  So  "  aU  the  people,"  each  of  them  severally,  with  one  accord 
and  one  acclaim,  "stood  to  the  covenant" — pledged  themselves  to  keep  all  the  words 
of  it  henceforth  with  all  their  heart  and  with  all  their  souL  A  great  wave  of  religious 
feeling  seems  to  have  passed  over  the  people,  and  with  a  sincerity  that  was  for  the 
moment  quite  real  and  unfeigned,  they  declared  their  willing  acceptance  of  the  whole 
covenant,  of  its  terrible  threats  as  well  as  of  its  gracious  promises,  of  its  stern  commanda 
no  less  than  of  its  comforting  assurances.  They  bound  themselves  individually  to 
observe  all  the  words  that  were  written  in  the  book ;  so  renewing  their  federal  relation 
with  Q-od,  and  again  becoming — what  they  had  well-nigh  ceased  to  be— his  people. 
But  lomething  more  was  wanting.    It  is  in  no  case  enough  to  make  a  resolution  mileM 


OE.  xxm.  1— 37.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KLSQS.  46a 

we  keep  to  it.  Performance  must  follow  upon  promise.  The  people  were  bound,  not 
merely  to  "stand  to  the  covenant,"  in  the  way  of  profession,  just  ouce  in  their  livei, 
but  to  stand  to  it,  in  the  way  of  action,  thenceforward  perpetually.  It  was  here  that  they 
failed ;  and  it  is  here  that  men  most  commonly  fail.  To  resolve  is  eajy ;  to  stick  to  our 
resolutions,  difiicult.  The  writings  of  Jeremiah  prove  to  us  that,  within  a  very  few 
years  of  their  acceptance  of  the  covenant  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  Josiah,  the  people  of 
Judah  cast  it  behind  them,  became  a  backsliding  people,  returned  to  their  idolatries 
and  abominations,  forsook  God,  and  sware  by  them  that  were  no  gods,  committed 
adultery,  assembled  themselves  by  troops  in  the  harlots'  houses— were  "  as  fed  horses 
in  the  morning,  every  one  neighing  after  his  neighbour's  wife  "  (Jer.  v.  7,  8).  A 
righteous  God  could  not  but  "  visit  for  these  things  " — could  not  but  "  be  avenged  upon 
such  a  nation  as  this  "  (Jer.  v.  29). 

Vers.  4 — 27. — The  inability  of  the  best  intentions  and  the  strongest  will  to  convert  a 
nation  that  is  corrupt  to  the  core,  Josiah's  reformation  was  the  most  energetic  and 
the  most  thorough-going  that  was  ever  carried  out  by  any  Jewish  king.  It  far 
transcended,  not  only  the  efforts  made  by  Jehoiada  in  the  time  of  Joash  (ch.  xi.  17 — 
21 ;  xii.  1 — 16),  and  the  feeble  attemjits  of  Manasseh  on  his  return  from  Babylon 
(2  Chron.  zxxiii.  15 — 19),  but  even  the  earnest  endeavours  of  Hezekiah  at  the 
beginning  of  bis  reign  (ch.  xvii.  3 — 6).  "  It  extended  not  only  to  the  kingdom  of 
Judah,  but  also  to  the  former  kingdom  of  Israel ;  not  only  to  the  public,  but  also  to  the 
private,  life  of  the  people.  The  evil  was  everywhere  to  be  torn  out,  roots  and  alL 
Nothing  which  could  perpetuate  the  memory  of  heathen  or  of  illegitimate  Jehovah- 
worship  remained  standing.  All  the  places  of  worship,  all  the  images,  all  the  utensils, 
were  not  only  destroyed,  but  also  defiled ;  even  the  ashes  were  thrown  into  the  river  (?) 
at  an  unclean  place,  that  they  might  be  borne  away  for  ever.  The  idol-priests  them- 
selves were  slain,  and  the  bones  of  those  who  were  already  dead  were  taken  out  of  the 
graves  and  burnt.  The  priests  of  Jehovah,  who  had  performed  their  functions  upon 
the  heights,  were  deposed  from  their  ofBoe  and  dignity,  and  were  not  allowed  to  sacrifice 
any  more  at  the  altar  of  Jehovah  "  (Bahr).  It  may  be  added  to  this  account  that 
private  superstitions,  the  use  of  teraphim  and  gilluUm,  together  with  the  practice  of 
witchcraft  and  magic  arts,  were  put  a  stop  to,  and  the  rightful  ordinances  of  the  Mosaic 
religion  restored  and  re-established  with  the  utmost  strictness  and  exactitude  (vers. 
24,  25).  Josiah  did  all  that  a  godly  king  could  do  to  check  the  downward  course  of 
his  nation  and  recall  it  to  piety  and  virtue.  And  for  his  efibrts  the  sacred  writers  give 
him  the  highest  praise  (ch.  xxii.  2 ;  xxiii.  25 ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  2 ;  xxxv.  26 ;  Ecclus. 
xlix.  1 — 3).  It  has  been  reserved  for  modern  criticism  to  discover  that  he  defeated  his 
own  ends  by  the  violence  of  his  methods,  and  injured  the  cause  of  true  religion. by 
making  a  book — ^"  especially  such  an  imperfect  law-book  and  history  as  the  Pentateuch  " 
— the  fundamental  law  of  the  nation  (Ewald,  Eisenlohr).  It  has  not,  however,  been  as 
yet  shown  that  Josiah's  methods  weje  any  more  violent  than  the  Law  required  (Exod. 
xxii.  20;  Deut.  xiii.  5,  9,  15),  much  less  that  injury  is  done  to  the  cause  of  true 
religion  by  the  adoption  of  a  sacred  book  as  the  standard  of  religious  truth  and 
morality.  The  real  reason  for  the  failure  of  his  reformation  was  "  the  irreformability 
of  the  people."  When  they  professed  to  turn  to  God,  they  did  not  do  it  "  with  their 
whole  heart,  but  feignedly"  (Jer.  iii.  10) — at  any  rate,  with  but  half  their  heart, 
moved  by  a  gust  of  sentiment,  not  by  any  deep  strong  tide  of  religious  feeling.  And 
so  they  soon  relapsed  into  their  old  ways.  The  severe  religion,  .the  stern  morality, 
which  Josiah  sought  to  impose,  had  no  attraction  for  them.  They  shrank  from 
Mosalsm  as  cold,  hard,  austere.  They  preferred  the  religions  of  the  nations,  with  their 
lax  morality,  their  gay  rites,  their  consecration  of  voluptuousness.  So  they  "  slid  back 
by  a  perpetual  backsliding"  (Jer.  viii.  5)  ;  they  reintroduced  all  the  old  abominations; 
they  sinned  in  secret  when  they  were  unable  to  sin  in  public  ;  they  "  proceeded  from 
evil  to  evil"  (Jer.  ix.  4).  It  has  been  argued  (Ewal(^  'History  of  Israel,'  voL  iv. 
pp.  242,  243)  that  if  Josiah's  life  had  not  been  cut  short  within  thirteen  years  of  hig 
underti^ng  the  great  national  reform,  if  he  had  been  permitted  to  carry  on  for  some 
years  longer  in  the  same  spirit  the  work  which  he  had  initiated,  there  might  have  been 
•  complete  removal  of  all  the  ancient  and  deep-rooted  evils,  and  a  lasting  impression 
night  have  been  made  upon  the  character  of  the  wbde  people.    But  tbL  seenui  toe 


4M  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,     [oh.  xxm.  1— 37 

fevourable  a  forecast.  The  nation  was  rotten  to  the  core ;  the  "  whole  head  was  sick, 
and  the  whole  heart  faint ; "  '  ^from  the  sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the  head  there  was 
no  soundness  in  it ;  but  wounds,  and  bruises,  and  putrefying  sores."  When  such  is  the 
case,  no  human  efforts  can  avail  anything — not  the  strongest  will,  not  the  wisest 
measures,  not  the  purest  and  best  intentions ;  the  time  for  repentance  and  return  to 
God  is  gone  by,  and  nothing  remains  but  "  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment 
and  fieiy  indignation,  which  shall  destroy  God's  adversariei "  (Heb.  x.  27). 


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  31— ch.  xxiy.  7. — Two  royal  hrofhtri :  the  reigns  of  Jehoahat  and  Jehoiahim. 
I.  They  webb  brothers  nt  wickedness.  Of  each  of  them  it  is  said,  "  He  did  evil  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord."  What,  the  particular  sins  of  Jehoahaz  were  we  are  not  told. 
But  the  sins  of  Jehoiakim  are  fully  and  fearlessly  stated  and  denounced  by  Jeremiah. 
"Woe  unto  him  that  buildeth  his  house  by  unrighteousness,  and  his  chambers  by 
wrong ;  that  useth  his  neighbour's  service  without  wages,  and  glveth  him  not  for  his 
work ;  that  saith,  I  will  build  me  a  wide  house  and  large  chambers,  and  cutteth  him 
out  windows ;  and  it  is  ceiled  with  cedar,  and  painted  with  vermilion.  .  .  .  Thine  eyes 
and  thine  heart  are  not  but  for  thy  covetousness,  and  for  to  shed  innocent  blood,  and 
for  oppression,  and  for  violence,  to  do  it "  (Jer.  xxii.  13 — 17).  Injustice,  fraudulence, 
selfishness,  covetousness,  oppression,  violence,  murder, — such  were  the  main  character- 
istics of  him  who  should  have  been  an  example  of  the  people.  Selfishness  and  cove- 
tousness were  at  the  bottom  of  all  the  rest.  And  are  they  not  common  sins  ?  In  the 
rich  they  lead  to  injustice  and  oppression;  in  the  poor  they  lead  to  discontent  and 
envy  and  violence.  The  spirit  of  the  gospel,  by  promoting  unselfishness,  would  lead  to 
fair  and  upright  dealing  between  man  and  man. 

II.  They  wekb  both  wicked,  though  the  sohs  of  a  good  tatheb.  Even 
a  good  man  may  have  bad  sons.  Perhaps  the  home  training  they  received  waa 
defective.  Josiah  may  have  been  so  much  engrossed  with  the  cares  of  his  kingdom, 
and  the  reformation  of  his  people,  that  he  neglected  the  state  of  his  own  household. 
But  nevertheless,  they  bad  a  good  example,  which  they  neglected  to  foUosv.  Jeremiah 
reminds  Jehoiakim  of  this.  "  Did  not  thy  father  eat  and  drink,  and  do  judgment  and 
justice,  and  then  it  was  well  with  him?  He  judged  the  cause  of  the  poor  aud  needy  ; 
then  it  was  well  with  him :  was  not  this  to  know  me  ?  saith  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  xxii.  15, 
16).  The  privileges  and  the  example  they  had  received  increased  their  guilt.  "  To 
whom  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  much  be  required."  K  we  have  great  privileges,  we 
have  also  great  responsibilities.  Those  who  have  been  brought  up  in  a  Christian  land 
or  in  a  godly  home  will  be  expected  to  know  belter  than  those  who  have  been  brought 
up  in  a  heathen  country  or  amid  careless  and  godless  surroundings. 

III.  They  were  both  wicked,  thouoh  the  one  had  the  other's  fate  ab  a 
WARNING.  Jehoahaz  was  sent  into  exile  for  his  sins.  Tet  Jehoiakim,  who  succeeded 
him,  did  not  profit  by  the  warning.  None  of  us  are  without  many  warnings  against 
sin.  We  have  the  plain  warnings  of  God's  Word.  We  have  the  terrible  warnings  of 
his  providence.  How  fearful,  even  in  this  life,  are  the  consequences  of  many  sins !  We 
have  warnings  against  putting  off  the  offer  of  salvation  to  a  more  convenient  season. 
"  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh." 

IV.  They  both  had  a  miserable  end.  Jehoahaz  died  in  exile.  Pharaoh-Nechoh 
put  him  in  prison  at  Biblah,  and  he  died  in  captivity.  Speaking  of  him,  Jeremiah  says, 
"  Weep  ye  not  for  the  dead,  neither  bemoan  him :  but  weep  sore  for  him  that  goeth 
away  :  for  he  shall  return  no  more,  nor  see  his  native  country  "  (Jer.  xxii.  10).  What 
a  pathetic  strain  1  The  love  of  the  Jews  for  their  native  land  was  most  intense.  "  How 
■hall  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land?"  "  Yea,  we  wept,  when  we  remem- 
bered Zion."  But,  after  all,  what  a  profitless  kind  of  patriotism  theirs  was!  They 
loved  their  native  land,  but  they  were  blind  to  its  best  interests.  They  did  not 
remember  the  secret  of  true  prosperity  and  well-being.  They  did  not  remember  that 
"  righteousness  exalteth  a  nation,  but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people."  They  forsook 
him  who  was  their  nation's  best  Defender  and  unfailing  Friend.  A  patriotism  without 
righteousness  will  not  benefit  a  nation  much.     Jehoiakim  died  at  Jentialetn,     But 


CB.  xznL  1— 87.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KmOS.  468 

what  an  ignonUnioui  fate  wa$  his  /  Jeremiah  had  foretold  it  when  he  said,  "  They 
shall  not  lament  for  him,  saying.  Ah  my  brother!  or.  Ah  sister  I  ...  He  shall  be 
buried  with  the  burial  of  an  ass,  drawn  and  cast  forth  beyond  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  " 
(Jer.  xxiL  18, 19).  It  was  Jehoiakim  who  cut  with  his  penknife  the  roll  on  wnich 
were  written  the  words  of  the  Lord,  and  cast  the  leaves  into  the  fire  (Jer.  xxxvi.). 
For  this  God  said,  regarding  Jehoiakim,  that  he  should  have  none  to  sit  upon  the 
throne  of  David ;  "  and  his  dead  body  should  be  cast  out  in  the  day  to  the  heat,  and  in 
the  night  to  the  frost."  Jehoiakim  perished,  but  the  Word  of  Otoi,  which  he  sought  to 
destroy,  was  fulfilled.  God's  Word  cannot  be  destroyed.  Roman  emperors  sought  to 
destroy  it.  The  Church  of  Rome,  for  the  exaltation  of  the  priesthood,  kept  it  from 
the  people.  "  But  the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound."  Contrast  the  fate  of  Jehoiakim, 
who  despised  and  dishonoured  the  Word  of  God,  with  the  universal  lamentation  that 
followed  the  death  of  his  father  Josiah,  who  honoured  God'g  Word  and  obeyed  It* 
teachings. — 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  1 — ^25. — Good  aims  and  bad  methods.  "  And  the  king  sent,"  etc.  Did  iha 
world  ever  contain  a  people  more  morally  corrupt  than  that  of  the  Jews  ?  When  we 
mark  them  journeying  in  the  wilderness  forty  years,  a  more  murmuring,  disorderly, 
rebellious  set  of  men  where  else  could  we  discover  ?  When  settled  in  Palestine,  a 
"land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,"  we  find  them  committing  every  crime  of  which 
humanity  is  capable — adulteries,  suicides,  murders,  ruthless  wars,  gross  idolatries,  their 
priests  impostors,  their  kings  bloody  tyrants.  Even  David,  who  is  praised  the  most, 
was  guilty  of  debauchery,  falsehood,  and  blood.  They  were  a  nation  steeped  in 
depravity.  They  were  "  stiff-necked  and  uncircumcised  in  heart  and  ears ; "  they  did 
"  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost "  (see  Acts  vii.  51).  No  doubt  there  was  always  a 
true  "Church  of  God"  within  the  nation  (1  Kings  xix.  18);  but  to  call  the  whole 
nation  "the  Jewish  Church  "  is  a  misnomer,  and  far  from  a  harmless  one.  It  hag 
encouraged  Christian  nations  to  fashion  their  communities  after  the  Jewish  model 
instead  of  after  the  Christian  one.  The  verses  I  have  selected  record  and  illustrat« 
good  aims  and  had  methods. 

I.  Good  aims.  Josiah's  aims,  as  here  presented,  were  confessedly  high,  noble,  and 
good.  I  offer  two  remarks  concerning  his  purposes  as  presented  in  these  verses.  1.  To 
reduce  his  people  to  a  loyal  obedience  to  Heaven.  His  aim  was  to  sweep  every  vestige 
of  religious  error  and  moral  crime  from  his  dominion.  Truly,  what  more  laudable 
purpose  could  any  man  have  than  this,  to  crush  all  evil  within  his  domain,  to  cnish 
it  not  only  in  its  form  but  in  its  essence  ?  This  was  indeed  the  great  end  of  Christ'* 
mission  to  the  world.  He  came  "  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself."  2. 
Oenerated  within  him  hy  the  discovery  of  the  Divine  will.  Somehow  or  other,  as  was 
seen  in  the  last  chapter,  the  book  of  the  Law  which  was  to  regulate  the  lives  of  the 
Jewish  people  had  been  lost  in  the  temple,  lost  probably  for  many  years,  but  Hilkiak 
the  high  priest  had  just  discovered  it,  and  Josiah  becomes  acquainted  with  its  contents. 
What  is  the  result?  He  is  seized  with  the  burning  conviction  that  the  whole  nation 
is  gone  wrong,  and  forthwith  he  seeks  to  flash  the  same  conviction  into  the  souls  of 
his  people.  "  And  the  king  sent,  and  they  gathered  unto  him  all  the  elders  of  Judah 
and  of  Jerusalem.  And  the  king  went  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  all  the  men 
of  Judah  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  with  him,  and  the  priests,  and  the 
prophets,  and  all  the  people,  both  small  and  great :  and  he  read  in  their  ears  all  the 
words  of  the  book  of  the  covenant  which  was  found  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  And 
the  king  stood  by  a  pillar,  and  made  a  covenant  before  the  Lord,  to  walk  after  the 
Lord,  and  to  keep  his  commandments  and  his  testimonies  and  his  statutes  with  all 
their  heart  and  all  their  soul,  to  perform  the  words  of  this  covenant  that  were  written 
in  this  book.  And  all  the  people  stood  to  the  covenant."  Thus  sprang  his  nobla 
purpose.  It  was  not  a  capricious  whim  or  the  outcome  of  a  sudden  and  fitful  impulse; 
it  was  rooted  in  an  enlightened  conviction.  A  noble  purpose  must  be  righteously 
founded. 

n.  Bad  methods.  Beal  good  work  requires  not  only  a  good  purpose,  but  a  good 
method  also.  Saul  sought  to  honour  the  God  of  his  fathers,  and  this  was  good ;  bat 
his  method,  viz.  that  of  persecuMng  the  Christians,  was  had.  How  did  Josiah  now 
seek  to  realize  his  purpose  to  b«  eep  idolatry  from  the  iace  of  his  country  ?    Noi  \ff 

XL  KINOS.  2  H 


M«  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,    [oh.  xxni.  1— S7. 

argument,  snasion,  and  moral  influence,  but  by  brute  foret  and  violence  (vers.  4 — 28). 
"  All  the  vessels  that  were  made  for  Baal,  and  for  tlie  grove  "  (ver.  4),  that  is,  all  the 
apparatus  for  idol-worship,  these  he  ordered  to  be  burnt  outside  Jerusalem,  "  in  the 
fields  of  Kidron."  He  "  stamped  it  small  to  powder,  and  cast  the  powder  thereof 
upon  the  graves  of  the  children  of  the  people.  And  he  brake  down  the  houses  of  the 
sodomites"  (vers.  6,  7).  He  also  "brake  in  pieces  the  images,  and  cut  down  the 
groves,  and  filled  their  places  with  the  bones  of  men  "  (ver.  14).  Moreover,  "  he  slew 
all  the  priests  of  the  high  places  that  were  there  upon  the  altars,  and  burned  men's 
bones  upon  them  "  (ver.  20).  In  this  way,  the  way  of  force  and  violence,  he  essayed 
to  work  out  his  grand  purpose.  I  offer  two  remarks  concerning  his  method.  1.  /( 
was  unphilosophic.  Moral  evils  cannot  be  put  down  by  force ;  coercion  cannot  travel 
to  a  man's  soul.  The  fiercest  wind,  the  most  vivid  lightnings,  cannot  reach  the  moral 
Elijah  in  his  cave.  The  "still  small  voice"  alone  can  touch  him,  and  bring  him  out 
to  light  and  truth.  After  all  this,  were  the  people  less  idolatrous?  Before  Josiah 
was  cold  in  his  grave  idolatry  was  as  rife  as  ever.  You  may  destroy  to-day  all  heathen 
temples  and  priests  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  but  in  doing  this  you  have  done  nothing 
towards  quenching  the  spirit  of  idolatry — that  will  remain  as  rampant  as  ever ;  phoenix- 
like, it  will  rise  with  new  vitality  and  vigour  from  the  ashes  into  which  material  fires 
have  consumed  its  temples,  its  books,  and  its  feasts.  Ay,  and  you  might  destroy  all 
the  monastic  orders  and  theological  tomes  of  the  Boman  Catholic  Church,  and  leave 
the  spirit  of  popery  as  strong,  nay,  stronger  than  ever.  Truth  alone  can  conquer  error, 
love  alone  can  conquer  wrath,  right  alone  can  conquer  wrong.  2.  It  was  mischievous. 
The  evil  was  not  extinguished ;  it  burnt  with  fiercer  flame.  Persecution  has  always 
propagated  the  opinions  it  has  sought  to  crush.  The  crucified  Malefactor  became  the 
moral  Conqueror  and  Commander  of  the  people.  Violence  begets  violence,  anger  begets 
anger,  war  begets  war.    "  He  that  taketh  the  sword  shall  perish  by  the  sword." — ^D.  T. 

Vers.  26 — 37. — Lcmientahh  unsMlfuIness  and  incorrigibility.  "Notwithstanding 
the  Lord,"  etc.  This  short  fragment  of  Jewish  history  reflects  great  disgrace  on  human 
nature,  and  may  well  humble  us  in  the  dust.  It  brings  into  prominence  at  least  two 
subjects  suggestive  of  solemn  and  practical  thought. 

I.  The  wobthlessnbss  of  unwisely  dibected  efpobts  to  benefit  men,  howeveb 
WELL  INTENDED.  Josiah,  it  seems  from  the  narrative,  was  one  of  the  best  of  Israel's 
kings.  "  Like  unto  him  was  there  no  king  before  him."  Most  strenuous  were  his 
efforts  to  improve  his  country,  to  raise  it  from  the  worship  of  idols  to  the  worship  of 
the  true  God.  He  sacrifices  his  very  life  to  his  endeavours ;  and  what  was  his  success  ? 
iViZ.  "  Notwithstanding  the  Lord  turned  not  from  the  fierceness  of  his  great  wrath, 
wherewith  bis  anger  was  kindled  against  Judah,  because  of  all  the  provocations  that 
Manassch  had  provoked  him  withal.  And  the  Lord  said,  I  will  remove  Judah  also 
out  of  my  sight,  as  I  have  removed  Israel,  and  will  cast  off  this  city  Jerusalem  which 
I  have  chosen,  and  the  house  of  which  I  said.  My  Name  shall  be  there.  Now  the  rest 
of  the  acts  of  Josiah,  and  all  that  be  did,  are  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the 
chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Judah  ?  "  All  the  efforts  of  this  noble  king  seemed  to  be 
abortive.  But  why?.  Because,  as  shown  ix  our  preceding  homily,  while  his  motive 
was  good,  his  methods  were  bad.  Instead  of  depending  upon  argument  and  suasion, 
moral  influence,  and  the  embodiment  of  moral  goodness,  he  uses  force.  "  He  slew  all 
the  priests  of  the  high  places  that  were  there  upon  the  altars,  and  burned  men's  bones  upon 
them,"  etc.  Hero  is  a  principle  in  the  Divine  government  of  man.  No  man,  however 
good,  can  accomplish  a  good  thing  unless  he  employs  wise  means.  The  Church  of 
Home  is  an  example.  Its  aim,  the  bringing  of  the  world  into  the  one  fold,  is  sublimely 
good,  but  the  means  it  has  employed  not  only  neutralize  the  purpose,  but  drive  large 
masses  of  the  population  away  into  the  wilderness  of  infidelity  and  careless  living.  It  ii 
not  enough  for  a  Church  to  have  good  aims ;  it  must  have  wise  methods :  not  enough 
for  preachers  to  desire  the  salvation  of  their  people ;  they  must  use  means  in  harmony 
with  the  laws  of  thought  and  feeling.  Hence  fanatical  Churches  and  preachers  have 
always  done  more  harm  than  good.  "If  the  iron  be  blunt,  and  he  do  not  whet  the 
edge,  then  must  he  put  to  more  strength :  but  wisdom  is  profitable  to  direct."  Indeed, 
this  man's  unwise  efforts  not  only  failed  to  benefit  his  country,  they  brought  ruin  on 
himselC    He  loat  his  life.    "In  his  day*  Fhaiaoh-Neohoh  King  of  Egypt  went  up 


OH.  xxni.  1— 37.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.  467 

against  tbe  E^ng  of  Assyria  to  tbe  river  Euphrates :  and  King  Josiah  went  against 
him ;  and  he  slew  him  at  Megiddo,  when  he  had  seen  liira.  And  his  servants  carried 
him  in  a  chariot  dead  from  Megiddo."  No  doubt  Josiah  was  inspired  with  patriotic 
•nd  religious  purposes  in '  going  forth  against  Riaraoh-Nechoh,  and  in  seeking  tc 
prevent  the  march  of  a  bloody  tyrant  and  a  hostile  force  through  his  territory  in  order 
to  attack  the  King  of  Assyria.  But  where  was  his  wisdom  ?  What  chance  had  he  to 
hurl  back  such  a  formidable  invasioa?  None  whatever.  Single-handed,  of  course, 
he  could  do  nothing.  And  what  help  could  he  obtain  from  his  subjects,  most  of  whom 
had  fallen  into  that  moral  degradation  which  robs  the  soul  of  all  true  courage  and  skill  ? 

II.  The  AMAZiNQ  iKCORBiaiBiLiTY  OF  THE  Jkwish  PEOPLE.  Do  WO  find  that  the  men 
of  Israel  were  improved  by  the  efforts  of  such  kings  as  Hezekiah  and  Josiah  ?  Nay. 
They  seemed  to  grow  worse.  Scarcely  was  Josiah  in  his  grave  before  his  son  Jehoahaz, 
who  was  twenty-three  years  old,  ascended  the  throne,  and  during  the  three  months  of 
his  reign  he  "  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord ; "  and  when  he  is 
struck  down  another  son  of  Josiah,  Eliakim,  who  was  afterwards  named  Jehoiakini, 
received  the  throne,  and,  after  a  reign  of  twenty-five  years,  the  record  is,  "He  did 
that  which  is  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  Here,  then,  is  moral  incorrigibility!  In 
all.  history,  ancient  or  modern,  I  know  no  people  whose  doings  were  of  a  baser  type. 
With  all  the  lofty  advantages  which  they  had,  and  with  the  interpositions  of  Heaven 
Touchsafed  to  them,  they  seemed  to  grow  worse  from  age  to  age.  The  little  springs  of 
depravity  that  broke  forth  from  their  great  ancestors,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob, 
seemed  to  deepen,  swell  in  volume,  and  widen  as  time  rolled  on.  It  was  at  last  a  kind 
of  Stygian  stream.  You  can  scarcely  point  to  one  pellucid  wave  rising  on  its  surface. 
It  was  foul  froni  top  to  bottom.  How  sadly  have  many  professed  disciples  of  Christ 
misinterpreted  Jewish  history !  So  much  so  that  they  have  Judaized  the  very  gospel, 
and  made  Judaism  a  model  after  which  they  have  shaped  communities  professedly 
Christian. 

Conclusion.  1,  A  word  to  those  who  desire  to  he  useful.  Unless  you  practically 
recognize  the  truly  scientific  adaptation  of  means  to  ends,  and  understaad  the  eternal 
principles  by  which  the  human  mind  can  be  rightly  influenced,  you  will  "  labour  in  vun, 
and  spend  your  strength  for  nought."  There  is  no  way  by  which  coercion  can  travel 
to  a  man's  soul,  no  way  by  which  cruelties  and  persecutions  can  enlighten,  strengthen, 
and  ennoble  souls.  2.  A  word,  next,  to  those  who  desire  to  he  hehefited.  You  may 
have  seers  from  heaven  working  among  you,  endeavouring  to  improve  you  and  elevate 
you.  But  unless  you  yield  to  the  influences  and  attend  to  the  counsels,  you  will  grow 
worse  and  worse.  Pharaoh's  heart  grew  harder  under  the  ministry  of  Moses  on  the 
banks  of  the  Nile ;  the  Jewish  people  became  worse  and  worse  under  the  forty  years' 
ministry  in  the  wilderness,  and  the  contemporaries  of  Christ  filled  up  their  measure  of 
iniquity  under  his  benign  and  elilightening  ministrations.  The  things  that  belong  to 
your  peace  may  become  the  elements  of  your  ruin. — D.  T, 

Vers.  1 — 14. — Josiah'$  great  reformation.  The  narrative  of  Josiah's  reforms  con- 
tained in  this  ohapter  incorporates  several  particulars  which,  if  the  Book  of  Chronicles 
is  to  be  regarded  as  giving  the  true  chronology,  belong  to  an  earlier  period.  It 
is  next  to  incredible  that,  after  Jehovah's  worship  had  been  regularly  established, 
such  scandals  as  the  prostitution  alluded  to  in  ver.  7,  and  the  horses  and  chariots  of 
the  sun  in  ver.  11,  should  have  been  allowed  to  continue.  The  narrative  in  Kings 
seems  specially  designed  to  bring  all  Josiah's  reforms  into  one  view.    We  have — 

I.  Solemn  covenantino.  After  the  example  of  Jehoiada  in  the  reign  of  Joasb 
(2  Chron.  xxiii.  16),  and  the  still  more  ancient  example  of  Moses  (Deut.  xxix.),  Josiah 
convened  the  people  together  to  renew  the  covenant  made  with  them  by  God  at  Sinai 
(Bxod.  xxiv.  1 — 8).  The  covenanting  took  place  appropriately  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord — another  evidence  that  the  worst  abominations  had  by  this  time  been  removed 
from  the  temple.  All  classes  were  assembled,  high  and  low,  priests,  prophets,  and 
people.  In  propasing  to  them  to  enter  on  this  solemn  engagement,  in  which  he  set 
them  the  example:  1.  The  king  asked  them  to  do  a  right  thing.  It  was  Israel's 
distinction  among  the  peoples  of  the  earth  that  they  stood  in  covenant  with  God. 
Gh)d  had  chosen  them  as  a  people  for  himself,  that  they  should  serve  him  alone  in  the 
land  he  had  given  them.    If  they  had  fiuled  to  do  this,  and  now  repented  of  their 


468  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,     [oh.  xxui.  1— 37. 

(Ufwbedience,  it  ww  meet  that  th«y  should  acknowledge  their  transsressions,  and  anew 
pledge  themselveg  to  be  the  Lord's.  This  wag  what  Josiah  desired  Judah  and 
Jerusalem — "  the  remnant  of  God's  inheritanc*" — to  do.  Standing  on  a  raised  platform, 
he  set  them  the  example  of  coveaant.  It  is  a  good  thing  when  nations  have  leaders 
who  are  themselves  conspicuous  examples  of  godliness,  and  who  point  the  way  in  what 
is  right  to  their  people.  The  propriety  of  natioual  covenants  is  a  question  to  be  settled 
hj  the  circumstances  of  each  particular  age.  The  individual  Christian,  at  least,  is 
called  to  frequent  renewal  of  his  vows  to  God,  and  such  an  exercise  is  peculiarly 
suitable  after  seasons  of  backsliding.  2.  He  did  it  on  a  right  basis.  The  covenant 
was  based  on  the  declarations  of  "  the  book  of  the  covenant,"  the  words  of  which  were 
first  read  in  the  hearing  of  all  the  people.  Then  the  people,  following  the  example  of 
their  monarch,  pledged  themselves  to  walk  after  the  Lord,  to  keep  his  commandments 
and  his  testimonies  and  his  statutes  with  all  their  heart  and  soul,  and  to  perform  the 
words  that  were  written  in  the  book.  Their  covenant  thus  rested  on  the  right 
foimdation,  viz.  God's  Word,  It  is  God  who,  in  his  Word,  draws  near  to  us,  declares  to 
us  his  will,  holds  out  his  promises,  invites  us  to  engagement  with  himself,  and  lays 
down  the  rule  of  our  obedience.  A  covenant  means  nothing  save  as  it  springs  from 
faith  in,  acceptance  of,  and  submission  to  the  revealed  Word  of  God.  Our  covenanting 
Is  to  be  (1)  intelligent — based  on  the  study  of  God's  Word,  and  understanding  of  its 
requirements ;  (2)  cordial — with  all  the  heart  and  soul ;  and  (3)  dutiful — in  the  spirit 
of  obedience,  "  to  perform  the  words  of  this  covenant  that  were  written  in  this  book." 
3.  Ttt  the  engagement  was  not  sincere,  '  It  was  so  in  the  case  c^  Josiah,  but  not  in  the 
case  of  the  people  generally,  though  it  is  written,  "  All  the  people  stood  to  the  covenant." 
In  lip  they  honoured  God,  but  in  heart  they  were  far  from  him  (Isa.  zxix.  13).  This 
is  evident  from  the  descriptions  in  the  prophets.  The  movement  was  nut  a  spontaneous 
one  originating  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  themselves,  but  came  down  to  them  from 
above  through  the  king's  command.  The  formal  ceremonies  of  covenanting  were  gone 
through,  and  some  temporary,  and  perhaps  genuine,  enthusiasm  was  awakened.  But 
there  was  no  real  heart-change  of  the  people.  Their  goodness  was  like  the  morning 
cloud  and  the  early  dew  (Hos.  vi  4).  This  is  too  often  the  fate  of  movements 
originating  with  kings,  princes,  and  those  in  high  positions,  and  not  springing  from  the 
people's  own  initiative.  They  are  popular  and  fashionable,  and  draw  many  after  them 
who  have  no  real  sympathy  with  their  aims.  But  the  effects  do  not  endure.  Bank, 
fashion,  royalty,  the  adhesion  of  the  great  and  mighty  and  nuble  of  this  world  (1  Cur. 
i.  26),  do  not  of  themselves  make  a  movement  religious,  though  they  may  secure  for 
It  idai.  The  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart  (1  Sam.  xvL  7),  and  if  the  essence  of  religion 
Is  wanting,  imposing  external  forms  count  for  little. 

II.  The  temple  cleansed.  In  the  covenant  they  had  just  made,  the  people  bound 
themselves  in  the  most  solemn  manner  to  rid  the  land'of  all  visible  traces  of  idolatry 
(Exod.  xxiii.  24;  Deut.  xiL  1 — 3).  Josiah  took  this  work  in  hand  more  systematically 
than  any  king  who  had  gone  before  him  (ver.  25).  He  began  with  the  temple,  the 
thorough  purification  of  which  had  probably  been  left  over  till  the  repairs  above  referred 
to  (ch.  xxii.)  could  be  overtaken.  Similar  zeal  for  the  destruction  of  idols  was  m  ini- 
fested  at  the  conclusion  of  the  previous  covenant  under  Joash  (2  Chron.  xxiii.  17). 
1.  A  cleansing  a/way  of  the  traces  of  Baal-worship.  In  the  first  place,  a  careful  clearing 
out  was  made  of  all  the  vessels  and  utensils  that  had  been  used  in  the  service  of  Baal, 
or  of  the  Asherah,  or  of  the  host  of  heaven.  These  were  burned  in  the  valley  of 
Eidron,  and  the  ashes  of  them  carried  to  Bethel,  as  the  appropriate  source  of  this  idolatry. 
The  sacred  tree  itself — the  Asherah — was  then  cut  down,  burned  in  the  same  valley, 
and  its  ashes  sprinkled  on  the  graves  of  the  people,  many  of  whom  had  shared  in  the 
guilt  of  its  worship.  Afterwards  the  altars  erected  to  Baal  in  the  temple  courts  were 
broken  down,  and  the  dust  of  them  cast  also  into  the  valley  of  Kidron  (ver.  12).  Possibly 
the  Asherah  and  these  altars  had  been  removed,  and  treated  as  described,  at  an  earlier 
date.  2.  A  cleansing  away  of  the  traces  of  Venus-woi'ship.  The  Asherah  was  devoted 
to  the  licentious  Astarte,  and  rites  the  most  shameless  and  abominable  had  been 
conducted  in  the  temple  courts  in  honour  of  this  goddess.  Houses,  even,  had  been 
reared  close  to  the  sacred  enclosure  for  the  bands  of  depraved  men  and  women  who  took 
part  in  these  orgies.  Doubtless  the  worship  ere  this  had  been  stopped,  and  the  filthy 
aotom  Aiiveu  out,  but  the  houses  which  remained  as  a  lemiudei  of  its  existence  were 


OB.  zxm.  1— 87.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINQS.  iSi 

now  broken  down.  3.  A  deansing  away  of  the  traces  of  sun-worship.  To  the  worship 
of  the  sun  and  of  the  host  of  heaven  belonged  the  sacred  horses  and  chariots  (ver.  11), 
probably  ere  this  removed,  and  the  chariots  burned ;  and  the  altars  on  the  top  of  the 
upper  chamber  of  Ahaz,  which  successive  kings  had  set  up.  These,  like  the  altars  of 
Manasseh,  were  broken  down,  and  their  dust  scattered  in  the  adjoining  valley.  Every 
vestige  of  idolatry  was  thus  cleansed  out  of  the  house  of  which  the  Lord  had  said, 
"In  Jerusalem  will  I  put  my  Name"  (ch.  xxi.  4). 

in.  Idolatby  put  away.  Judgment  began  at  the  house  of  God  (1  Pet.  iv.  17), 
but  it  spread  thence  throughout  the  whole  land.  1.  Degradation  of  the  priests.  The 
land  apparently  had  been  already  "purged"  of  the  idols,  Asherahs,  and  sun-images, 
which  were  worshipped  at  the  high  places  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3,  4).  Measures  were  now 
talsen  to  degrade  the  priests  who  had  ministered  at  these  forbidden  altars,  and  through 
whom,  perhaps,  the  worship  was  stiil  in  many  places  carried  on.  These  priests  were 
of  different  kinds.  (1)  Some  were  "idolatrous  priests" — chemarim — after  the  fashion 
of  the  priests  of  the  northern  kingdom.  They  do  not  appear  to  have  been  of  Levitical 
descent  at  all,  but  were  "ordained"  of  the  kings  of  Judah  to  burn  incense  in  the 
high  places,  and  may  have  been  drawn,  like  Jeroboam's  chemarim,  from  "the  lowest 
of  tiie  people  "  (1  Kings  xiL  31).  Some  of  them  were  ostensibly  priests  of  Jehovah, 
serving  him,  probably,  with  idolatrous  symbols ;  others  served  Baal,  and  the  sun,  moon, 
and  planets.  The  whole  of  this  illegitimate  class  of  priests  Josiah  put  sternly  down — 
suppressing  their  order  as  contrary  to  the  Law  of  Moses.  (2)  The  second  class  of 
priests  were  true  Levites,  but  they  ministered  at  the  high  places.  These  were  brought 
from  their  several  cities  to  Jerusalem,  and  there  provided  for  out  of  the  temple 
revenues.  They  were  not,  however,  permitted  to  minister  at  the  altar  of  Jehovah, 
though,  like  the  other  priests,  they  received  their  support  from  the  temple  offerings. 
These  stringent  regulations  effectually  broke  the  power  of  this  class  throughout  the 
country.  God  must  be  served  by  a  pure  ministry.  2.  Defilement  of  the  high  places. 
The  next  part  of  Josiah's  policy  was  to  destroy  and  defile  the  high  places  tliemselves. 
One  way  in  which  this  was  done  was  by  covering  them  with  dead  men's  bones,  or  burn- 
ing dead  bones  upon  them.  The  high  places  were  thus  rendered  unclean,  and  became 
hateful  to  the  people.  Two  special  acts  of  defilement  are  mentioned  in  addition  to  that 
of  "  the  mount.of  corruption  "  next  referred  to,  viz.  (1)  the  defilement  of  the  high  places 
at  the  entrance  of  the  gate  of  Joshua ;  and  (2)  the  defilement  of  Topheth  in  the  valley 
of  Hinnom.  The  real  defilement  was  in  the  idolatrous  and  murderous  rites  with  which 
these  places  were  associated,  but  Josiah  put  a  special  brand  of  pollution  on  them,  and 
stamped  them  as  spots  to  be  held  in  abhorrence  for  their  vileness.  3.  The  defilement 
of  "  the  mount  of  corruption."  Such  was  the  appropriate  name  given  to  the  hill  on 
which  Solomon,  long  before,  had  reared  altars  to  the  heathen  gods  worshipped  by  his 
wives — Ashtoreth,  Ohemosh,  Moloch,  etc.  The  high  places  of  that  mount,  which 
directly  overlooked  Jerusalem,  did  Josiah  now  defile.  Idolatry  is  none  the  less 
pernicious  that  it  has  the  sanction  of  a  great  name,  and  flaunts  itself  under  the  guise 
of  a  spurious  toleration.  Any  spot  where  God  is  not  worshipped,  but  idols  are  set  up 
in  his  place,  soon  becomes  a  mount  of  corruption.  Heathenism  is  a  mount  of  corruption. 
Godless  civilization  will  become  a  mount  of  corruption.  Our  very  hearts  will  turn  to 
mounts  of  corruption  if  we  allow  God  to  be  dethroned  in  them. 

IV.  Lessons  of  thk  bbformation.  1.  From  what  it  did  accomplish.  Josiah's  was 
a  true  "  zeal  for  the  Lord."  He  was  actuated  by  a  right  motive,  guided  himself  strictly 
by  God's  Word,  and  directed  his  efforts  unswervingly  to  execute  God's  wiU.  He 
wrought  earnestly  to  purify  his  state  from  the  evils  that  afflicted  it,  and  to  restore  the 
influence  of  pure  and  undefiled  religion.  He  deserves  our  highest  admiration  for  the 
(1)  determination,  (2)  energy,  (3)  method,  and  (4)  thoroughness  with  which  he  did 
God's  work.  Externally,  his  work  was  a  success.  He  cleansed  the  land  from  idolatry, 
We,  too,  have  a  call  to  labour  for  the  pru-ification  of  society,  the  dethronement  of  idoLi, 
and  the  spread  of  true  religion.  The  age  of  idolatry  is  not  past.  Church,  state, 
literature,  science,  art,  have  all  their  idols.  There  is  self-idolatry,  nature-idolatry, 
wealth-idolatry,  art-idolatry,  the  idolatry  of  genius,  and  many  more  worships  besides. 
Our  own  hearts  are  abodes  of  idols.  We  do  well  to  imitate  Josiah  in  the  energy  and 
thoroughness  with  which  he  laboured  to  uproot  these  false  gods.  We  should  ba 
unsparing  in  our  judgment  of  whatever  vice,  error,  evil  lusts,  or  passions,  or  inclination!, 


470  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINOa     [oh.  xxm.  1—37 

07  tendencies,  we  discover  in  ourselveB.  Let  high  thoughts  be  mercilessly  brought 
low,  and  proud  imaginations  abased  (2  Cor.  x.  5).  Wherever  sin  is  detected,  let  it  be 
judged.  Thus  it  was  with  the  Corinthians,  "For  behold  this  selfsame  thing,  that  ye 
sorrowed  after  a  godly  sort,  what  carefulness  it  wrought  in  you,  yea,  what  clearing  of 
yourselves,  yea,  what  indignation,  yea,  what  fear,  yea,  what  vehement  desire,  yea, 
what  zeal,  yea,  what  revenge ! "  2.  From  what  it  did  not  accomplish.  This  reformation 
of  Josiah  wrought,  after  all,  only  on  the  exterior  of  the  nation's  life.  It  lacked  power 
to  reach  the  heart.  Therefore  it  failed  to  regenerate  or  save  the  nation.  We  are 
thus  pointed  to  the  need  of  a  better  covenant,  that  which  Jeremiah  predicts  in  ch. 
ixii.  31— 3i  of  his  prophecies,  "Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will 
make  a  new  covenant  with  the  house  of  Israel,  and  with  the  house  of  Judah.  ...  I 
will  put  my  Law  in  their  inward  parts,  and  write  it  in  their  hearts,"  etc. — J.  0. 

Vers.  15 — 20. — The  altar  at  Bethel.  From  Judah  Josiah  passed  on  to  Israel, 
continuing  his  work  of  idol-deraolition.  Everywhere  he  went  he  proved  himself  a 
veritable  "  hammer  of  God  " — levelling,  defacing,  dishonouring,  destroying. 

I.  An  ancient  peophect  pulpilled.  1.  Jconodasm  at  Bethel.  Bethel  had  been 
the  chief  scene  of  Israel's  idolatry — ^the  head  and  front  of  its  offending  (cf.  Hos. 
iv.  15 ;  X.  4 — 9,  etc.).  On  it  Josiah's  zeal  first  expended  itself.  Hosea  had  prophesied 
its  desolation,  the  destruction  of  its  high  places,  the  carrying  away  of  its  calf,  the 
cessation  of  its  mirth  and  feasts,  its  abandonment  to  thorns  and  nettles  (Hos.  ii.  11 ; 
ix.  6;  X.  8,  etc.).  But  an  older  voice  had  foretold  the  end  from  the  beginning. 
Scarcely  had  the  schismatic  altar,  with  its  calf,  been  set  up,  when  a  prophet  out  of 
Judah  denounced  Jeroboam's  sin  to  his  face,  and  proclaimed  that  a  future  king  would 
stain  the  altar-stones  with  the  blood  of  the  priests,  and  defile  it  by  burning  deaid  men's 
bones  upon  it.  A  sign  had  been  given  in  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  the  prediction 
(1  Kings  xiii.  1 — 10).  That  oracle  stood  at  the  head  of  the  way  of  transgression, 
warning  men  away  from  it;  but  its  voice  had  been  unheeded.  Now,  centuries  after, 
the  prediction  was  fulfilled.  Idolatry  in  some  form  still  held  its  ground  on  the  ancient 
spot,  but  Josiah  put  an  end  to  it.  The  altar  and  high  place  he  broke  down,  and 
burned  the  high  place,  and  reduced  it  to  powder,  and  burned  the  Asherah.  The 
idolatry  at  Bethel  had  wrought  out  its  effects  in  the  ruin  of  the  state.  That  evil  was 
irremediable,  but  Josiah  could  show  at  least  his  detestation  of  the  sin,  and  his 
determination  that  no  more  evil  should  be  wrought,  by  totally  demolishing  the 
sanctuary.  Special  regard  should  be  paid  to  the  removal  of  centres  of  wickedness.  It 
is  useless  to  capture  outworks,  if  strongholds  are  left  standing.  We  should  not  rest 
content  till  the  very  name  and  memory  of  sin  has  perished  in  places  that  were  con- 
spicuous for  it.  2.  The  sepulchre  invaded.  Josiah  would  have  no  half-measures.  It 
was  part  of  his  settled  policy,  not  simply  to  break  down  the  high  places,  but  to  defile 
them,  and  unfit  them  for  future  use.  In  looking  round  him  at  Bethel  for  means  to 
accomplish  this  end,  he  spied  the  sepulchres  that  were  in  the  mount,  and  sent  and 
took  bones  out  of  the  sepulchres,  and  polluted  the  altar  by  burning  them  upon  it. 
His  immediate  design  was  to  defile  the  altar,  but  in  taking  the  bones  to  bum,  he 
dishonoured  also  the  ashes  of  the  dead.  In  his  consuming  zeal  against  idolatry  he 
felt  that  no  respect  was  due  to  the  bones  of  those  who,  by  their  sins,  had  brought  death 
upon  the  nation.  It  is  easy  to  blame  the  act,  and  to  compare  it  with  the  ruthless 
violations  of  the  sanctity  of  the  grave  of  which  persecutors  have  often  been  guilty.  It 
seems  a  paltry  and  vindictive  proceeding  to  wreak  one's  vengeance  on  the  dead.  To 
Josiah,  however,  no  sanctity  attached  to  these  graves,  but  only  a  curse.  His  very  ohjpct 
was  to  do  deeds  which  would  make  men  feel,  as  they  had  never  felt  before,  the  hateful 
nature  of  idolatry,  and  the  certainty  of  a  Nemesis  attending  it.  In  having  their  bones 
dragged  out  and  bturned  upon  the  altar,  the  dead  idolaters  were,  in  a  sense,  making 
atonement  to  God's  insulted  majesty  (cf.  Jer.  viii.  1 — 3).  The  feeling,  nevertheless, 
is  one  which  might  easily  go  too  far,  and  be  mixed  up  with  mean  and  purely  spiteful 
motives.  However  it  might  be  under  Jewish  law,  it  can  hardly  be  right  now.  None 
the  less  is  it  the  case  that  a  curse  rests  upon  the  very  bones  of  the  wicked  dead 
Death  to  them  is  the  penal  stroke  of  God's  displeasure,  and,  when  they  rise,  it  is  to  th< 
resurrection  of  dam  nation  (John  v.  29). 

n.  The  bones  of  the  fbophet  bkbpeotbo.    1.  A  monument  tn  a  wicked  pUue  t»  a 


OH.  XXIII.  1—37.]     THE  SECX)ND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  471 

good  man.  Among  the  tomb8  which  Josiah  beheld  was  one  with  a  monument  befon 
it.  He  asked  whose  it  was,  and  was  told  it  was  the  monument  of  the  man  of  God 
who  prophesied  of  these  things  which  had  been  done  to  the  altar.  That  monument 
had,  perhaps,  been  built  by  the  hands  of  the  very  men  whose  sios  the  prophet  had 
denounced,  so  great  oftentimes  is  human  inconsistency  (of.  Matt,  xxiii.  28 — 30).  In 
any  case,  it  stood  there  for  centuries  a  silent  witness  against  the  iniquities  that  were 
perpetrated  in  its  presence.  Monuments  to  prophets,  martyrs,  saints,  still  crowd  our 
burial  and  public  places ;  we  pay  external  honour  to  their  memories ;  but  what  God 
will  ask  of  us  is— Do  we  imitate  their  spirit  ?  As  great  men  recede  into  the  distance, 
it  becomes  easy  to  pay  them  reverence.  These  idolatrous  Israelites  no  doubt  magnified 
their  descent  from  Abraham,  and  boasted  of  their  great  lawgiver  Moses,  at  the  very 
time  that  they  were  breaking  his  commandments.  When  the  prophets  were  among  them, 
they  sought  to  kill  them ;  then  they  built  monuments  in  their  honour.  2.  A  solitary 
tritnessfor  truth  justified  hy  the  event.  This  prophet  in  his  day  stood  alone.  Even 
among  the  dead  he  lay  alone.  The  multitudes  around  him  were  not  those  who 
believed,  but  those  who  had  disregarded  his  word.  If  ever  man  was  in  a  minority,  he 
was.  Century  after  century  rolled  by,  and  still  the  word  he  bad  spoken  remained 
unfulfilled.  Did  it  not  seem  as  if  the  oracle  were  about  to  fail  ?  But  Wisdom  in  the 
end  is  justified  of  her  children  (Matt.  xL  19).  The  prophet's  word  came  true  at  last, 
and  it  was  seen  and  acknowledged  of  all  that  he  was  right.  Thus  is  it  with  all  God's 
true  servants.  We  should  not  ooacern  ourselves  too  much  with  man's  gainsaying. 
We  have  but  to  bear  our  testimony  and  leave  the  issues  with  God.  He  will  at  length 
vindicate  us.  3.  Discrimination  between  good  and  had.  When  Josiah  learned  whose 
the  sepulchre  was,  he  gave  command  that  his  hones  should  not  be  touched,  nor  yet  the 
bones  of  the  old  prophet  who  was  buried  along  with  him  (1  Kings  xiii.  31).  The 
righteous  was  discriminated  from  the  sinners.  So  shall  it  be  at  the  last  day.  No 
confusion  will  be  made  in  the  resurrection  between  good  and  bad.  While  the  wicked 
come  forth  to  the  resurrection  of  judgment,  the  good  shall  come  forth  to  the  resinrreotion 
of  life  (John  v.  29).     A  gracious  Saviour  watches  over  their  dust. 

III.  The  slaughtee  op  the  priests.  1.  General  demolition.  The  wave  of  destruc- 
tion spread  from  Bethel  over  all  the  other  high  places  in  the  cities  of  Samaria.  Josiah's 
procession  through  the  land  was  the  signal  for  the  overthrow  of  every  species  of  idolatry. 
"  So  did  he,"  we  are  told,  "  in  the  cities  of  Manasseh,  and  Ephraim,  and  Simeon,  even 
unto  Naphtali,  in  their  ruins  round  about "  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  6).  2.  Priests  of  the  high 
places  slain.  In  connection  with  this  progress  of  Josiah  through  Israel  is  mentioned 
the  fact  that "  he  slew  all  the  priests  of  the  high  places  that  were  there  upon  the  altars." 
If  this  stem  policy  had  been  confined  to  Israel,  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  exculpat* 
Josiah  from  partiality  in  his  carrying  out  of  the  provisions  of  the  Law ;  but  the  words 
in  Chronicles  imply  that  the  like  was,  at  least  in  some  places,  done  in  -Judah  also  (2 
Chron.  xxxiv.  5).  In  what  he  did  he  was  no  doubt  strictly  within  the  letter  of  the 
Law,  which  he  and  the  people  had  sworn  to  obey,  for  that  undeniably  denounced 
death  against  idolaters  (Deut.  xiii.,  etc.).  To  equal  his  act,  therefore,  with  Manasseh's 
shedding  of  innocent  blood  is  to  miss  the  essential  fact  of  the  situation.  This  was 
not  innocent  blood  by  the  fundamental  law  of  the  constitution.  It  is  probably  with 
reference  to  this,  as  to  other  parts  of  his  conduct,  that  Josiah  gets  special  praise  for 
the  fidelity  of  his  obedience  to  the  Law  of  Moses  (ver.  25).  It  does  not  follow  that  his 
conduct  is  such  as  Christians,  living  under  a  milder  and  better  dispensation,  should 
now  imitate.  It  does  not  even  follow  that  every  individual  act  which  Josiah  did  was 
beyond  blame.  His  human  judgment  may  have  erred  at  times  on  the  side  of  severity. 
The  holiest  movements  are  not  free  from  occasional  excesses ;  but  we  should  judge 
the  movement  by  the  soul  which  actuates  it,  and  not  by  its  superficial  excrescences. 
— J.  O. 

Vers.  21 — 28. — 2S«  reformation  ootnpleted,  yet  IiraePi  sin  not  pardoned.  We  haT» 
in  these  verses — 

I.  The  great  Pabsoyeb.  1.  A  teal  of  tlte  covenant.  This  great  year  of  reformation 
began  with  a  covenant,  and  ended  with  a  Passover.  The  ceremonies  of  the  occasion  are 
folly  described  in  2  Chron.  xxxv.  The  Passover  in  the  Old  Testament  was  in  some  respects 
Tery  much  what  the  Lord's  Supper  is  in  the  New.    It  took  the  people  back  to  the  origia 


472  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.    [cH  xrai.  1— 37. 

of  th^  history,  revived  vivid  memories  of  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  and  ratified  theil 
engagement  to  he  the  Lord's.  It  reminded  of  the  past,  set  a  seal  upon  the  present, 
and  gave  a  pleilge  for  the  future.  The  Christian  sacrament  seals  God's  promises  to  the 
believer,  and,  at  the  same  time,  seals  the  believer's  covenant  with  God.  It  establishes, 
nourishes,  and  strengthens  the  life  received  in  the  new  birth.  2.  An  historic  celebra- 
tion. "  Surely  there  was  not  holden  such  a  Passover  from  the  days  of  the  judges  that 
judged  Israel,"  etc.  A  true  religious  awakening  shows  itself  (1)  in  increased  interest 
in  Owl's  ordinances ;  (2)  in  stricter  fidelity  in  observing  them ;  and  (3)  in  joyful 
alacrity  in  taking  advantage  of  them, 

n.  Fidelity  TO  Moses.  1.  Cleansing  atuay  the  concomitanti  of  idolatry.  Together 
with  the  idols,  Josiah  cleansed  out  of  the  land  the  tribes  of  wizards,  necromancers, 
soothsayers,  etc.,  who  found  their  profit  in  the  ignorance  and  superstition  of  the  people. 
Where  Bible  religion  returns,  sanity  returns.  The  hideous  spectres  begotten  of  fear 
and  superstition  vanish.  Josiah  further  carefully  eradicated  any  remaining  traces  of 
idol-worship  that  could  be  "spied."  2.  Pre-eminent  fidelity.  In  these  deeds,  and  by 
his  whole  course  as  a  reformer,  Josiah  earned  for  himself  the  distinction  of  being  the 
most  faithful  king  that  had  yet  reigned.  He  and  Hezekiah  stand  out  pre-eminent  the 
one  for  trust  in  God  (ch.  xviii.  6),  the  other  for  fidelity  to  the  Law  of  Moses.  "  Like 
nnto  him  was  there  no  king  before  him,"  etc.  Like  gems,  each  of  which  has  its  special 
beauty  and  excels  in  its  own  kind,  these  two  kings  shine  above  all  the  rest.  Only  on» 
character  exhibits  all  spiritual  excellences  in  perfection. 

III.  Ibbael's  sin  yet  tTNPARDONBD.  1.  Qod's  unappeased  anger.  "Notwithstanding 
the  Lord  turned  not  from  the  fierceness  of  his  great  wrath,"  etc.  The  sole  reason  of 
this  was  that,  notwithstanding  the  zealous  Josiah's  reforms,  the  people  had  not  in 
heart  turned  from  their  great  sins.  The  spirit  of  Manasseh  stiU  lived  in  them.  They 
were  unchanged  in  heart,  and,  with  favouring  circumstances,  were  as  ready  to  break  out 
into  idolatry  as  ever.  The  outward  face  of  things  was  improved  as  regards  religion, 
but  social  injustice  and  private  morals  were  as  bad  as  ever.  Hence  the  Lord  could 
not,  and  would  not,  turn  from  his  wrath.  It  is  real,  not  lip,  repentance  that  God  requires 
to  turn  away  his  anger  from  us.  We  see :  (1)  The  posthumous  influence  of  evil.  "  One 
sinner  destroyeth  much  good"  (Eocles.  ix.  18).  Manasseh's  deeds  lived  after  him. 
His  repentance  could  not  recall  the  mischief  they  had  done  to  the  nation.  They  went 
working  on  after  his  decease,  propagating  and  multiplying  their  influence,  till  the 
nation  was  destroyed.  (2)  The  righteuusness  of  individuals  cannot  save  an  unright- 
eous people.  Not  even  though  these  righteous  persons  are  high  in  rank,  are  deeply 
concerned  for  the  revival  of  religion,  and  labour  with  all  their  hearts  to  stem  the  tide 
of  corruption.  Their  piety  and  prayers  may  delay  judgment,  but  if  impenitence  is 
persisted  in,  they  cannot  finally  avert  it  (of.  Jer.  xv.  1,  "  Though  Moses  and  Samuel 
stood  before  me,  yet  my  mind  could  not  be  toward  this  people  ").  2.  God's  unshaken 
purpose.  "  I  will  remove  Judah  also  out  of  my  sight,"  etc.  Terrible  is  the  severity  of 
God  when  his  forbearance  is  exhausted.  Moral  laws  are  inexorable.  If  the  spiritual 
conditions,  by  which  only  a  change  could  be  effected,  are  wanting,  they  work  on  till 
the  sinner  ig  utterly  destroyed. — J.  0. 

Vers.  29 — 37. — Pharaoh-Nechoh  and  the  Jewish  kings.  A  new  power  had  risen  in 
Egypt  which  was  to  play  a  temporary,  but  influential,  part  in  the  evolution  of  God's 
purposes  towards  Judah.  Assyria  was  at  this  time  in  its  death-agonies.  The  sceptre 
of  empire  was  soon  to  pass  to  Babylon.  But  it  was  Pharaoh-Nechoh  who,  following  the 
designs  of  his  own  ambition,  was  to  set  in  motion  a  train  of  events  which  had  the  effect 
of  bringing  Judah  within  the  power  of  the  King  of  Babylon. 

L  The  death  of  Josiah.  1.  Circumstances  of  his  death.  Taking  advantage  nf  the 
troubles  in  the  East,  Pharaoh-Nechoh  was  bent  on  securing  his  own  supremacy  over  Syria 
and  extending  it  as  far  as  the  river  Euphrates.  He  disclaimed  all  intention  of  inter-. 
fering  with  Josiah  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  21),  but  that  monarch  thought  it  his  duty  to  oppose 
him.  It  was  a  perilous  venture,  and  Josiah  seems  to  have  entered  upon  it  somewhat 
rashly.  He  certainly  had  not  prophetic  sanction  for  the  enterprise.  The  issue  was  as 
might  have  been  anticipated.  He  encountered  Pharaoh-Nechoh  at  Megiddo,  and  was 
disaatrously  defeated.  Wounded  by  the  archers,  he  bade  his  servants  carry  him  away, 
und,  placing  him  in  another  chariots  they  drove  him  off.    It  i«  to  be  inferred  from  Zech. 


ra.  xxm.  1—37.]     THE  SECOOT)  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  478 

ziL  11  that  he  died  at  "  HadadrlmmoTi  in  the  yalley  of  Megiddo,"  and  that  his  dead  body 
was  afterwanls  brought  to  Jerusalem.  By  this  defeat  Judah  was  brought  into  sulJ- 
jection  to  Fharaoh-Nechoh,  and  the  way  prepared  for  its  subjection  to  Nebuchadnezzar, 
when  he,  in  turn,  became  master  of  the  situation.  It  is  wise  not  unduly  to  meddle 
with  the  quarrels  of  other  nations.  2.  Mowrning  for  his  death.  The  untimely  death 
of  Josiah  was  a  cause  of  unexampled  mourning  throughout  the  whole  land.  The 
affection  with  which  his  people  regarded  him,  and  the  confidence  they  placed  in  him, 
are  strikingly  shown  by  the  sorrow  felt  at  his  loss.  The  mourning  at  Hadadrimmon  is 
used  by  the  prophet  to  illustrate  the  mourning  which  will  take  place  at  the  national 
repentance  of  Israel  in' the  times  of  the  Messiah  (Zech.  xii.  9 — 14).  It  was  as  the 
mourning  for  a  firstborn.  Jeremiah  composed  an  elegy  for  the  good  king  departed, 
and  the  singing-men  and  singing-women  kept  up  the  practice  of  lamenting  for  him 
even  unto  the  Captivity  (2  Ohron.  xixv.  24,  25).  Well  might  Judah  mourn.  Josiah 
was  the  last  great  and  good  king  they  would  see.  But  infinitely  better  would  it  have 
been  if  their  sorrow  had  been  the  "  godly  sorrow  "  which  "  worketh  repentance  "  (2 
Cor.  vii.  10).  This  unfortunately  it  was  not,  as  the  result  showed.  It  is  because  it 
was  not  that,  the  mourning  of  Hadadrimmon  will  have  to  be  done  over  again  (Zech. 
xii.  10),  next  time  in  a  very  different  spirit.  We  see  that  it  is  possible  to  lament  good 
men,  yet  not  profit  by  their  example.  The  best  tribute  we  can  pay  the  just  is  to  live 
like  them.  3.  Providential  aspects  of  his  death.  (1)  An  irreparable  loss  to  the  nation, 
Josiah's  death  was  yet  great  gain  to  himself.  It  was  God's  way  of  taking  him  away 
from  the  evil  to  come,  and  so  of  fulfilling  the  promise  given  by  Huldah  (ch.  xxii.  20). 
.  Josiah,  perhaps,  erred  in  taking  the  step  he  did,  but  while  God  punished  him  for  his 
error,  he  providentially  overruled  the  event  for  his  good.  Death  is  sometimes  a 
blessing.  It  may  hide  things  from  our  eyes  we  had  rather  not  see ;  as,  in  the  case  of 
the  good,  it  translates  to  scenes  of  bliss  beyond  human  conception.  The  "  dark  things" 
of  God's  providence  are  those  in  which  we  may  ultimately  recognize  the  greatest 
mercy.  "  Judge  not  the  Lord  by  feeble  sense,"  etc.  (2)  In  regard  to  the  nation,  the 
providential  aspects  of  this  death  were  widely  different.  It  took  from  them  a  gift  which 
they  had  failed  to  prize,  or  at  least  to  profit  by.  It  was,  moreover,  a  step  in  Provi- 
dence towards  the  fulfilment  of  the  threatenings  of  captivity.  Pharaoh-Nechoh's  con- 
quest was  the  gate  through  which  Nebuchadnezzar  entered. 

II.  The  dbposition  of  Jehoahaz.  1.  A  brief  reign.  In  virtue  of  the  defeat  of 
Josiah,  Judah  became  ipso  facto  a  dependency  of  Pharaoh-Nechoh.  The  people,  how- 
ever, were  in  no  mood  to  acknowledge  this  subjection,  and  immediately  set  about 
making  a  king  for  themselves.  They  passed  by  Eliakim,  Josiah's  eldest  son,  and 
raised  the  next  son,  Shallum  (Jer.  xxii.  11),  to  the  throne  under  the  name  of  Jehoahaz. 
The  younger  son  was  probably  the  more  spirited  and  warlike  of  the  two.  Ezekiel 
compares  him  to  a  young  lion  (xix.  3).  Under  him  the  nation  cast  off  the  restraints 
of  the  reign  of  Josiah,  and  reverted  to  its  former  sinful  ways.  It  does  not  suffice  to 
make  a  good  king  that  he  has  (1)  a  good  father — "  the  son  of  Josiah  j "  (2)  a  good 
name — Jehoahaz,  "he  whom  the  Lord  sustains;"  or  (3)  a  solemn  anointing — they 
"  anointed  him."  The  people  probably  thought  otherwise,  for  it  was  they,  apparently, 
who  gave  him  this  name,  and  took  the  step  of  formally  consecrating  him  with  the 
anointing  oil.  Anointing  oil,  without  the  grace  which  it  symbolizes,  is  of  little  use. 
Jehoahaz  was  permitted  to  possess  his  throne  only  for  three  brief  months.  2.  A  hard 
captivity.  By  the  end  of  the  period  named,  Pharaoh-Nechoh  was  sufficiently  free  to 
attend  to  the  proceedings  at  Jerusalem.  The  city  had  flouted  his  supremacy,  and  he 
did  not  let  it  escape.  His  own  camp  was  at  Biblah,  but  he  sent  to  Jerusalem,  required 
Jehoahaz  to  attend  his  court  at  Biblah,  there  put  him  in  chains,  and  carried  him 
with  him  into  Egypt  (Ezek.  xix.  4).  This  was  a  worse  fate  than  Josiah's.  "  Weep 
ye  not  for  the  dead,"  said  Jeremiah,  "  neither  bemoan  him :  but  weep  sore  for  him 
that  goeth  away:  for  he  shall  return  no  more,  nor  see  his  native  country"  (xxii. 
10).  This  captivity  of  Jehoahaz  was  a  prelude  to  the  captivity  of  the  nation — the 
first  drop  of  the  shower  soon  about  to  fall.  Yet  the  people  would  not  hearken.  3.  A 
heavy  tribute.  In  addition  to  removing  the  king,  Pharaoh-Nechoh  put  the  land  under 
a  tribute.  He  exacted  a  hundred  talents  of  silver  and  a  talent  of  gold.  Again  we  see 
how  sin  works  out  bondage,  misery,  and  disgrace.  An  oft-read  lessen,  but  how  imnos- 
sible,  apparently,  far  this  people  to  learn  1 


474 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  SmOS.    [oh.  txtt.  1— 20. 


in.  Jbhoiakim's  vassalage.  1.  Egypt  dictates  a  Mng.  Once  again,  as  ta  the 
earliest  period  of  their  history,  Israel  was  in  bondage  to  Egypt.  Pbaraoh-Kechoh  used 
his  power  unsparingly.  The  eldest  son  of  Josiah,  who  seems  not  to  have  been  a 
favourite  with  the  people,  was  willing  to  accept  the  throne  as  a  vassal,  and  him,  accord- 
ingly, Nechoh  made  king,  changing  his  name,  in  token  of  subjection,  from  Eliakim  to 
Jehoiakim.  How  bitter  the  satire — Jehoiakim,  "he  whom  Jehovah  has  set  up"!  2. 
Jehoiakim  lecomes  Egypt's  tool.  Jehoiakim  had,  perhaps,  no  alternative  but  to  give 
"  the  silver  and  the  gold  to  Pharaoh,"  but  in  his  manner  of  exacting  it  he  showed  himself 
the  willing  tool  of  the  oppressor.  To  obtain  the  money,  he  put  heavy  taxation  on  the 
people.  His  rule  was  a  bitter,  ignominious,  and  oppressive  one  for  Judah.  Jeremiah 
says  of  him,  "  But  thine  eyes  and  thine  heart  are  not  but  for  thy  covetousness,  and  for 
to  shed  innocent  blood,  and  for  oppression,  and  for  violence,  to  do  it "  (xxii.  17).  But 
such  are  the  kings  men  must  submit  to  when  they  reject  God  for  their  Sovereign,  In 
a  moral  respect  Jehoiakim's  reign  was  "  evil,"  and  in  a  temporal  tespect  it  was  the 
■tiuabling  on  from  one  misfortune  to  another.—J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAFTEB   XXIV. 


Vera.  1 — ^20.— Beisks  of  Jehoiaeiu,  3a- 

■OIAOHIK,  AND  ZeDBEIAH. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Rest  op  the  Eeign  op  Jd- 
HOiAKDi.  Troubles  now  fell  thick  and  fast 
upon  Judsea.  Within  three  years  of  the 
invasion  of  the  country  by  Fharaoh-Nechoh, 
another  hostile  army  burst  in  from  the 
north.  In  b.o.  605,  the  last  year  of  Nabopo- 
lassar,  he  sent  his  eldest  son,  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, into  Syria,  to  assert  the  dominion 
of  Babylon  over  the  countries  lying  be- 
tween the  Euphrates  and  the  frontier  of 
Egypt.  Kechoh  sought  to  defend  his  con- 
quests, but  was  completely  defeated  at 
Carchemlsh  in  a  great  battle  (Jer.  xlvi 
2 — 12).  Syria  and  Palestine  then  lay  open 
to  the  new  invader,  and,  resistance  being 
regarded  as  hopeless,  Jehoiakim  made  his 
submission  to  Kebuchadnezzar  (ver.  1). 
But,  three  years  later  (b.o.  602),  sustained 
by  what  hope  we  know  not,  he  ventured 
on  an  act  of  rebellion,  and  declared  himself 
independent.  Nebuchadnezzar  did  not  at 
once  march  against  him,  but  caused  him 
to  be  attacked,  as  it  would  seem,  by  hia 
neighbours  (ver.  2).  A  war  without  im- 
portant result  continued  for  four  years. 
Then  Nebuchadnezzar  came  up  against  him 
in  person  for  a  second  time  (2  Chron.  xxxvi. 
6),  took  Jerusalem,  and  made  Jehoiakim 
prisoner.  He  designed  at  first  to  carry  him 
to  Babylon;  but  seems  to  have  afterwards 
determined  to  have  him  executed,  and  to 
have  treated  his  corpse  with  indignities 
(Jer.  xxii.  30;  xxxvi.  30).    The  writer  of 


Kings  throws  a  veil  over  theae  transactions, 
closing  his  narrative  with  the  customary 
phrase — Jehoiakim  "  slept  with  his  Mhers" 
(ver.  6). 

Ver.  1.— In  Us  days  Nebuchadnezzar 
King  of  Babylon  came  np.  The  Hebrew 
IS'*^'??^?  {Nebuchadnezzar)  or  .nx**!!???? 
{Nebwshadrezzar,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel)  repre- 
sents the  Babylonian  Nabu-Ttudur-vzwr 
("Nebo  is  the  protector  of  landmarks"), 
a  name  very  common  in  the  Babylonian 
and  Assyrian  inscriptions.  It  was  borne 
by  three  distinct  kings  of  Babylon,  the 
most  important  of  whom  was  Nebuchad- 
nezzar HI.,  the  son  of  Nabopolassar,  the 
monarch  of  the  present  passage.  According 
to  Berosus,  he  was  not  at  the  time  of  this 
expedition  the  actual  sovereign  of  Baby- 
lonia, but  only  the  crown  prince,  placed 
by  the  actual  king,  Nabopolassar,  at  the 
head  of  his  army.  It  is  possible  that  hia 
father  may  have  associated  him  in  the 
kingdom,  for  association  was  not  unknown 
at  Babylon;  or  the  Jews  may  have  mis- 
taken his  position;  or  the  historian  may 
call  him  king  by  prolepsis,  as  a  modern 
might  say,  "The  Emperor  Napoleon  in- 
vaded Italy  and  defeated  the  Austrians  at 
Marengo"  (see  Pusey'g  ' Daniel,' p.  400). 
His  father  had  grown  too  old  and  infirm  to 
conduct  a  military  expedition,  and  conse- 
quently sent  his  son  in  his  place,  with  the 
object  of  chastising  Neohoh,  and  recovering 
the  territory  whereof  Nechoh  had  made  him- 
self master  three  years  before  (see  oh. 
xxiii.  29 — 33,  and  compare  below,  ver.  7). 
And  Jehoiakim  became  his  servant — t.e. 
submitted  to  him,  and  became  a  tributary 
king— three  years  (from  b.o.  605  to  b.o.  602): 
then  he  turned  and  rebelled  against  him. 
How  Jehoiakim  came  to  venture  on  this 
step  we  are  not  told,  and  can  only  oon- 


OB.  xxrr.  1— 20.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


476 


jeoture.  It  U,  perhaps,  most  probable  that 
(as  Josephus  says,  'Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  6.  §  2) 
he  was  incited  to  take  this  course  by  the 
Egyptians,  who  were  still  under  the  rule 
of  the  brave  and  enterprising  Nechoh,  and 
who  may  have  hoped  to  wipe  out  by  fresh 
victories  the  disaster  experienced  at  Oar- 
cbemiih.  There  is,  perhaps,  an  allusion  to 
Jehoiakim's  expectation  of  Egyptian  suc- 
cours in  the  statement  of  ver.  7,  that  "  the 
King  of  Egypt  came  not  again  any  more 
out  of  his  laud." 

Ver.  2. — And  the  Lord  sent  against  him 
bands  of  the  Chaldees.  That  IN'ebuchad- 
nezzar  did  not  promptly  march  against 
Jehoiakim  to  suppress  his  rebellion,  ^ut 
contented  himself  with  sending  against 
him  a  few  "bands"  Onnj)  of  Chaldeans, 
and  exciting  the  neighbouring  Syrians, 
Ammonites,  and  Moabites  to  invade  and 
ravage  his  territory,  can  scarcely  be  other- 
wise accounted  for  than  by  supposing  that 
he  was  detained  in  Middle  Asia  by  wars 
or  rebellions  nearer  home.  It  may  have 
been  a  kuowled;;e  of  these  embarrassments 
that  induced  Jehoiakim  to  lend  an  ear  to 
the  persuasions  of  Nechoh.  And  bands  of  the 
Syrians,  and  bands  of  the  Uoaliites,  and 
bands  of  the  children  of  Ammon  (comp. 
Ezek.  xli.  8,  "  Then  the  nations  set  against 
him  on  every  side  from  the  provinces,  and 
spread  their  net  over  him  :  he  was  taken  in 
their  pit "),  and  sent  them  against  Judah 
to  destroy  it — i.e.  to  begin  that  waste  and 
ruin  which  should  terminate  ultimately  in 
the  complete  destruction  and  obliteration  of 
the  Judsean  kingdom — according  to  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  which  he  spake  by  his 
servants  the  prophets,  As  Isaiah,  Micah, 
Habakkuk,  Jeiemiali,  Zephaniah,  and  Hul- 
dah  (see  oh.  xxil.  16 — 20). 

Yer.  3.— Surely  at  the  commandment  of  the 
Lord  came  this  upon  Judah ;  literally,  only 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  did  this  come  upon 
Judah ;  i.e.  there  was  no  other  cause  for  it 
but  the  simple  "  mouth  "  or  "word"  of  the 
Lord.  The  LXX.,  who  translate  TrKTjy 
Ou/ihs  Kuptov  ^v  eirl  rhv  '\ov5av,  seem  to  have 
had  f)!<  instead  of  '?  in  their  copies.  To 
remove  them  ont  of  his  sight  (comp.  ch. 
xxiii.  27;  and  see  also  the  comment  on 
ch.  xvii.  18)  for  the  sins  of  Manasseh, 
according  to  all  that  he  did.  The  meaning 
is  not  that  the  nation  was  punished  for  the 
pirsonal  sins  and  crimes  of  the  wicked 
Maniisseh  forty  or  fifty  years  previously, 
but  that  the  closs  of  sins  introduced  by 
Manusseh,  being  persisted  in  by  the  people, 
brought  the  stern  judgments  of  God  upon 
them.  As  W.  G.  Sumner  well  observes, 
"The  sins  of  Manasseh  had  become  a 
designation  for  a  certain  class  of  offences, 
and  a  particular  form  of  public  and  social 
depravity,  which  wm  introduced  by  Ma- 


nasseh, bnt  of  which  generation  after 
generation  continued  to  Kb  guilty."  The 
special  sins  were  (1)  idolatry,  accompanied 
by  licentious  rites;  (2)  child-murder,  or 
sacrifice  to  Moloch;  (3)  sodomy  (oh.  xxiii. 
7);  and  (4)  the  use  of  enchantments  and 
the  practice  of  magical  arts  (ch.  xxi.  6). 

Ver.  4. — ^And  also  for  the  innocent  blood 
that  he  shed  (comp.  ch.  xxi.  16,  and  the 
comment  ad  Zoo.).  Like  the  other  "sins  of 
Manasseh,"  the  shedding  of  innocent  blood 
continued,  both  in  the  Moloch  offerings 
(Jer.  vii.  31)  and  in  the  persecntion  of  the 
righteous  (Jer.  vii.  6,  9,  etoA  Urijah  wai 
actually  put  to  death  by  JehoiaJdm  (Jer. 
xxvi.  23) ;  Jeremiah  narrowly  escaped. 
For  he  filled  Jerusalem  with  innocent  blood; 
which  the  Lord  would  not  pardon.  Blood 
"  cries  to  God  from  the  ground "  on  which 
it  falls  (Gen.  iv.  11),  and  is  "required" 
at  the  hands  of  the  bloodshedder  (Gen. 
ix.  5)  unfailingly.  Especially  is  the  blood 
of  saints  slain  for  their  religion  avenged 
and  exacted  by  the  Most  High  (see  Rev.  vi 
10;  xi.  18;  xvi.  6;  xix.  2,  etc.). 

Ver.  5. — Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of 
Jehoiakim,  and  all  that  he  did,  are  they 
not  written  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles 
of  the  kings  of  Judah  T  Among  the  acts 
of  Jehoiakim  recorded  elsewhere  in  the 
Old  Testament,  the  most  remarkable  are 
the  following:  (1)  His  execution  of  Urijah 
the  son  of  Shemaiah  (Jer.  xxvi.  23);  (2) 
his  destruction  of  the  first  collection  of  the 
early  prophecies  made  by  Jeremiah,  in  a 
fit  of  anger  at  hearing  its  contents  (Jer. 
xxxvi.  20—23);  (3)  his  order  that  Jere- 
miah and  Baruch  should  be  arrested  (Jer. 
xxxvi.  26);  (4)  his  capture  by  some  of  the 
"nations"  which  Nebuchadnezzar  had 
stirred  up  against  him,  and  delivery  into 
the  hands  of  that  monarch  (Ezek.  xix.  9), 
probably  at  Jerusalem.  How  Nebuchad- 
nezzar treated  him  is  uncertain.  Josephus 
says  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  6.  §  3)  that  he  put 
liim  to  death,  and  cast  him  out  unburied 
beyond  the  walls  of  the  city.  But  from  the 
biblical  notices  we  can  only  gather  that  he 
died  prematurely  after  a  reign  of  no  more 
than  eleven  years  (b.o.  608  to  b.o.  597),  and 
was  unlamented,  "  buried  with  the  burial  of 
an  ass,  drawn  and  oast  forth  beyond  the 
gates  of  Jerusalem"  (Jer.  xxii.  18,  19). 
Conjecture  has  filled  up  the  blanks  of  this 
history  in  several  ways,  the  most  purely 
imaginative  being,  perhaps,  that  of  Uwald, 
who  says  ('History  of  Israel,*  vol.  iv.  p. 
262),  "  When  the  Chaldean  armies  pre- 
sented themselves  at  the  gates  of  the 
capital,  Jehoiakim  seems  to  have  been 
betrayed  into  the  same  error  as  his  brother 
(Jehoahaz),  eleven  years  before.  He  gave 
ear  to  a  crafty  invitation  of  the  enemy  to 
repair  for  negotiations  to  theii  camp,  where^ 


47« 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,     [at  xxrr.  1— Ml 


In  light  of  hii  own  city,  he  was  made 
priioner.  He  offered  a  frantic  reBistance, 
and  was  dragged  away  in  a  scuffle,  and 
miserably  cut  down ;  while  even  an  honour- 
able burial  for  his  corpse,  which  his  family 
certainly  solicited,  was  refused." 

Ter.  6. — So  Jehoiakim  slept  with  hit 
fathers.  It  is  not  certain  that  the  writer 
means  anything  more  by  this  than  that 
"Jehoiakim  died."  His  body  may,  however, 
possibly  have  been  found  by  the  Jews  after 
the  Babylonians  had  withdrawn  from  be- 
fore Jerusalem,  and  have  been  entombed 
with  those  of  Manasseh,  Anaon,  and  Josiah. 
And  Jehoiachin  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead. 
Josephus  says  (I.  s.  o.)  that  Nebuchadnezzar 
placed  him  upon  the  throne,  which  is  likely 
enough,  since  he  would  certainly  not  have 
quitted  Jerusalem  without  setting  up  some 
king  or  other.  Jehoiachin  has  in  Scripture 
the  two  other  names  of  Jeconiah  (1  Ohron. 
iii.  16,  17;  Jer.  xxvii.  20;  zxviii.  4;  xzix. 
2)  and  Coniah  (Jer.  zxii  24,  28 ;  zzxvii.  1). 
Jehoiachin  and  Jeconiah  differ  only,  as 
Jehoahaz  and  Ahaziali,  by  a  reversal  of  the 
order  of  the  two  elements.  Both  mean 
"  Jehovah  will  establish  (him  )."  "  Coniah  " 
cuts  off  from  "Jeconiah"  the  sign  of 
futurity,  and  means  "Jeliovah  establishes." 
It  is  used  only  by  Jeremiah,  and  seems  used 
by  liim  to  signify  that  tiiough  "Jehovah 
establishes,"  Jeconiah  he  would  not  estab- 
lish. 

Ver.  7. — And  the  King  of  Egypt  came  not 
again  any  more  ont  of  his  land.  Nechob's 
two  expeditions  were  enough  for  him.  In 
the  first  he  was  completely  successful, 
defeated  Josiah  (ch.  xxiii.  29),  overran 
Syria  as  far  as  Carchemish,  and  made 
Phoenicia,  Judssa,  and  probably  the  ad- 
jacent countries  tributary  to  him.  In  the 
second  (Jer.  xlvi.  2—12)  he  suffered  a 
calamitous  reverse,  was  himself  defeated 
with  great  slaughter,  forced  to  fly  hastily, 
and  to  relinquish  all  his  conquests.  After 
this,  he  "came  not  any  more  out  of  his 
land."  Whatever  hopes  he  held  out  to 
Jadsea  or  to  Tyre,  he  was  not  bold  enough 
to  challenge  the  Babylonians  to  n  third 
trial  of  strength,  but  remained  peaceably 
within  his  own  borders.  For  the  King  of 
Babylon  had  taken  from  the  river  of  Egypt. 
The  D^p  f^ra  is  not  tlie  Nile,  but  the 
Wady  el  Arish,  the  generally  dry  water- 
course, which  was  the  ordinarily  accepted 
boundary  between  Egypt  and  Syria  (see 
1  Kings  viii.  65 ;  Isa.  xxvii.  12).  The  Nile 
is  the  DnsP  "iDJ-  ITnto  the  river  Euphrates 
•11  that  pertained  to  the  King  of  Egypt ;  t'.e. 
all  that  be  had  conquered  and  made  his  own 
in  hia  first  expedition  in  the  year  b.o.  608. 

T«n.  8—1 6. — Bbiom  or  Jbhoiaohih.   Tha 


■hort  reign  of  Jehoisohin  i*  now  deaoribed. 
It  lasted  bat  three  months.  For  some  reason 
which  ia  unrecorded,  Nebuchadnezzar,  who 
had  placed  him  on  the  throne,  took  offence 
at  his  conduct,  and  sent  an  army  against 
him  to  effect  big  deposition.  Jehoiachin 
offered  scarcely  any  resistance.  He  "  wen 
out"  of  the  city  (ver.  12),  with  the  queen- 
mother,  the  oflcers  of  the  court,  and  the 
princes,  and  submitted  himself  to  the  will 
of  the  great  king.  But  he  gained  nothing 
by  his  pusillanimity.  The  Babylonians 
entered  Jerusalem,  plundered  the  temp 
and  the  royal  palace,  made  prisoners  of  th 
king,  his  mother,  the  princes  and  nobles 
the  armed  garrison,  and  all  the  more  skilled 
artisans,  to  the  number  altogether  of  ten 
thousand  souls  (Josephus  says  10,832,  *  Ant. 
Jud.,'  z.  7.  §  1),  and  carried  them  captive 
to  Babylon.  Zedekiah,  the  king's  nncla 
was  made  monarch  in  hig  room. 

Ver.  8. — Jehoiaohin  was  eighteen  yean 
old  when  he  began  to  leign.  In  2  Chron. 
xxxvi.  9  he  is  said  to  have  been  only  eight 
years  old,  but  this  is  probably  an  accidental 
corruption,  the  yod,  wliich  is  the  Hebrew 
sign  for  ten,  easily  slipping  out.  As  he  had 
"wives"  (ver.  15)  and  "seed"  (Jer.  zxii. 
28),  he  could  not  well  be  less  tlian  eighteen. 
And  he  reigned  in  Jerusalem  three  months. 
"  Three  months  and  ten  days,"  according  to 
2  Ohron.  (I.  s.  e.)  and  Josephus  ('  Ant.  Jud.,' 
1. 1.  e.).  And  his  mother's  name  was  Nehushta, 
the  daughter  of  Elnathan  of  Jerusalem. 
Elnathan  was  one  of  the  chief  of  the 
Jerusalem  princes  onder  Jehoiakim  (Jer. 
zzvi.  22;  xzxTi.  IS,  ?5).  His  daugliter, 
Nehushta — the  NoetS  of  Josephus  ('Ant. 
Jud.,'  z.  6.  S  8>— was  probably  the  ruling 
spirit  of  the  tune  during  her  son's  shoil 
reign.  We  find  mention  ot  her  in  Jer.  zzii. 
26;  xxix.  2;  and  in  Josephns, '  Ant.  Jud.,' 
z.  6.  §  3,  and  z.  7.  §  1.  Ewald  suggests  that 
she  "energetically  supported"  her  son  in 
the  policy  whereby  he  offended  Nebuchad- 
nezzar. 

Ver.  9. — And  he  did  that  wliich  was  evil  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord,  according  to  all  that 
his  father  had  done  (see  ch.  zziii.  37 ;  and 
comp.  2  Chron.  zxxvi.  9).  Josephus  says 
that  Jehoiaohin  was  </>i!<rei  xpiffis  koI  W- 
Koios  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  X.  7.  §  1) ;  but  Jeremiah 
calls  him  "  a  despised  broken  idol,"  and  "  a 
vessel  wherein  is  no  pleasure"  (Jer.  zzii. 
28).  The  present  passage  probably  does 
not  mean  more  than  that  he  made  no 
attempt  at  a  religious  refvjrmation,  bat 
allowed  the  idolabries  and  superititioiu 
which  had  prevailed  onder  Jehodbai  aafi 


OH.  XXIV.  1-20.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


477 


Jehoiakim  to  eontinue.  It  is  in  his  favour 
that  he  did  not  actively  persecute  Jeremiah. 

Ver.  10. — At  that  time  the  servants  of 
Kehuchadnezzar  King  of  Bahylon  came  up 
against  Jerusalem.  This  siege  fell  probably 
into  the  year  B.C.  597,  which  was  "  the  eighth 
year  of  Nebuchadnezzar  "  (ver.  12).  Nebu- 
chadnezzar himself  was,  at  the  time,  en- 
gaged in  the  siege  of  Tyre,  which  had 
revolted  in  B.o.  598  (see  'Ancient  Monar- 
chies,' vol.  iii.  p.  51),  and  therefore  sent  his 
"  servants  " — i.e.  generals— against  Jerusa- 
lem. And  the  city  was  besieged.  Probably 
for  only  a  short  time.  Jecoiiiah  may  at 
first  have  had  some  hope  of  support  from 
Egypt,  still  under  the  rule  of  Nechoh ;  bat 
when  no  movement  was  made  in  this  quarter 
(see  the  comment  on  ver.  7),  he  determined 
not  to  provoke  his  powerful  enemy  by  an 
obstinate  resistance,  but  to  propitiate  him, 
if  possible,  by  a  prompt  surrender. 

Yer.  11. — And  Nebuchadnezzar  King  of 
Babylon  came  against  the  city,  and  Ms  ser- 
vants did  besiege  it;  rather,  his  servanti 
loere  besieging  il.  Wliile  the  siege  coaduoted 
by  his  generals  was  still  going  on,  Nebu- 
chadnezzar made  his  appearance  in  person 
before  the  walls,  probably  bringing  with 
liim  an  additional  force,  vrhicb  made  a  suc- 
cessful resistance  hopeless.  A  council  of 
war  was  no  doubt  held  under  the  new 
circumstances,  and  a  surrender  was  decided 
on. 

Ver.  12. — And  Jehoiachin  the  King  of 
Jadah  went  ont  to  the  King  of  Babylon  (for 
the  use  of  the  expression,  "  went  out  to," 
in  this  sense  of  making  a  surrender,  see  1 
Sam.  xi.  3;  Jer.  xxi.  9j  nxviii.)17,  etc.), 
he,  and  his  mother  (see  the  comment  on  ver. 
8),  and  his  servants,  and  his  princes,  and  his 
officers — rather,  hit  eunuchs  (see  the  comment 
on  ch.  XX.  18) — and  the  King  of  Babylon 
took  him  in  Uie  eighth  year  of  his  reign, 
Nebuchadnezzar  succeeded  his  father,  Nabo- 
polassar,  in  B.C.  605;  but  his  first  year  was 
not  complete  till  late  in  B.o.  601.  His 
"  eighth  year  "  was  thus  B.O.  597. 

Ver.  13. — ^And  he  carried  ont  thence  all 
the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord. 
"Thence"  moans  "  from  Jerusalem,"  whioh 
he  entered  and  plundered,  notwithstanding 
Jehoiachin's  submission,  bo  that  not  much 
was  gained  by  the  voluntary  surrender.  A 
beginning  had  been  made  of  the  carrying 
off  the  sacred  vessels  of  the  temple  in  Je- 
lioiakim's  third  (fourth?)  year  (Dan.  i.  1), 
which  was  the  first  of  Nebuchadnezzar. 
The  plundering  was  now  carried  a  step 
further ;  while  the  final  complete  sweep  of 
all  that  remained  came  eleven  years  later, 
at  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Zedekiah  (see  ch. 
XXV.  13 — 17).  And  the  treasures  of  the 
king's  house  (comp.  oh.  xx.  13).  If  the 
treasures  whioh  Hezekioh  showed  to  the 


envoyi  of  Merodaoh-Baladan  were  carried 
off  by  Sennacherib  (ch.  xviiL  15),  itill  there 
had  probably  been  fresh  accumulations  made 
during  their  long  reigns  by  Manassoh  and 
Jonah.  And  out  in  pieces  all  the  vessels  of 
gold  which  Solomon  King  of  Israel  had 
made  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  (For, an 
acoount  of  these  vessels,  see  1  Kings  vii. 
48 — 50.)  They  consisted  in  part  of  articles 
of  furniture,  like  the  altar  of  incense  and 
the  table  of  shrewbread,  which  were  thickly 
covered  with  plates  of  gold ;  in  part  of 
vessels,  etc.,  made  wholly  of  the  precious 
metal,  as  candlesticks,  or  rather  candelabra, 
snuffers,  tongs,  basins,  spoons,  censers,  and 
the  Uke.  As  the  Lord  had  said  (comp.  ch. 
XX.  17 ;  Isa.  xxxiz.  6 ;  Jer.  xv.  13 ;  xvii. 
8  ;  XX.  5,  etc.). 

Ver.  14. — And  he  carried  away  all  Jerusa- 
lem. The  expression  has  to  be  limited  by 
what  follows.  "  All  Jerusalem  "  means  all 
that  was  important  in  the  population  of  Je- 
rusalem— all  the  upper  classes,  the  "princes" 
and  "  nobles,"  all  the  men  trained  to  the 
use  of  arms,  and  all  the  skUled  craftsmen 
and  artisans  of  the  city.  The  poor  and 
weak  and  unskilled  were  left.  The  number 
deported,  according  to  our  author,  was 
either  ten  or  eleven  thousand.  The  whole 
population  of  the  ancient  city  has  been  cal- 
culated &om  its  area  at  fifteen  thousand. 
The  largest  estimate  of  the  population  of 
the  modern  city  is  seventeen  thousand.  And 
all  the  princes.  The  tarim,  or  "  princes," 
are  not  males  of  the  blood  royal,  but  the 
nobles,  or  upper  classes  of  Jerusalem  (comp. 
Jer.  XXV.  18 ;  xxvi.  10 — 16,  etc.).  And  all 
the  mighty  men  of  valour — i.e.  "aU  the 
trained  troops  "  (Ewald) ;  not  "  all  the  men 
of  wealth,"  as  Bahr  renders — even  ten 
thousand  captives.  As  the  soldiers  are 
reckoned  below  (ver.  16)  at  seven  thousand, 
and  the  craftsmen  at  one  thousand,  the  upper- 
class  captives  would  seem  to  have  been  two 
thousand;  unless,  indeed,  the  "craftsmen" 
are  additional  to  the  ten  thousand,  in  whioh 
case  the  upper-class  captives  would  have 
numbered  three  thousand,  and  the  prisoners 
have  amounted  altogether  to  eleven  thousand. 
And  all  the  craftsmen  and  smiths.  Ewald 
understands  "the  military  workmen  and 
siege  engineers "  to  be  intended  ('  History 
of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  263,  note  9) ;  but  the 
term  B'nn  in  Hebrew  includes  all  workers  in 
stone,  metal,  or  wood  (Gen.  iv.  22  ;  Isa.  xliv. 
12 ;  1  Kings  vii.  14),  and  there  is  nothing 
to  limit  it  here  to  military  craftsmen.  It 
was  an  Oriental  practice  to  weaken  a  state 
by  the  deportation  of  all  the  stronger  ele- 
ments of  its  population.  None  remained, 
save  the  poorest  sort  of  the  people  of  the 
land.  These  words  must  be  taken  with 
some  latitude.  There  are  still  "princes" 
in  Jerusalem  under  Zedekiah  (Jer.  pcxviiL 


473 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,    [oh.  xxiv.  1—20. 


4, 25, 27),  and  eonrtiera  of  rank  (Jer.  xxxvilL 
7),  and  "captains  of  foioea  "  (Jer.  xl.  7),  and 
"men  of  war"  (Jer.  lii.  7).  But  the  bulk  of 
the  inhabitants  now  left  behind  In  Jerusa- 
lem were  poor  and  of  small  account. 

Ver.  15. — And  he  carried  away  Jehoiaoliin 
to  Babylon  (comp.  2  Ohron.  xxxvi.  10 ;  Jer. 
xxii.  26;  xxir.  1 ;  lii.  31 ;  Josephus,  '  Ant. 
Jud.,'  X.  7.  §  1).  Jehoiachin  continued  a 
captive  in  Babylon  during  the  remainder  of 
Nebuchadnezzar's  reign — a  space  of  thirty- 
seven  years  (see  the  comment  on  oh.  xxv. 
27).  And  the  king's  mother  (see  above,  ver. 
12),  and  the  king's  wives— this  is  important, 
as  helping  to  determine  Jehoiachin's  age 
(see  the  comment  on  ver.  8) — and  his  officers 
— rather,  his  euiittehs  (comp.  Jer.  xxxviii.  7 ; 
xxxix.  16)— and  the  mighty  of  the  land. 
Not  only  the  "  princes "  and  the  trained 
soldiers  and  the  skilled  artisans  (ver.  14), 
but  all  who  were  of  much  account,  as  the 
bulk  of  the  priests  and  the  prophets  (see 
Jer.  xxix.  1 — 24).  Those  carried  he  into  cap- 
tivity from  Jerusalem  to  Babylon.  "  Baby- 
lon "  (h^^)  is  the  city,  not  the  country  (as 
Thenius  imagines).  It  was  the  practice  for 
the  conquering  kdnga  to  carry  their  captives 
Vfith  them  to  their  capital,  for  ostentation's 
sake,  before  determining  on  their  desti- 
nation. The  Jewish  prisoners  were,  no 
doubt,  ultimately  settled  in  various  parts  of 
Babylonia.  Hence  they  are  called  (Ezra 
ii.  1;  Neb.  vii.  6)  "the  children  of  the 
province." 

Ver.  16. — ^And  all  the  men  of  might — i.e. 
"  the  mighty  men  of  valour  "  (or,  "  trained 
soldiers  ")  of  ver.  14 — even  seven  thousand, 
and  craftsmen  and  smiths  a  thousand,  all 
that  were  strong  and  apt  for  war — the 
craftsmen  and  smiths  would  be  pressed  into 
the  military  service  in  the  event  of  a  siege 
— even  them  the  King  of  Babylon  brought 
captive  to  Babylon;  i.e.  he  brought  to 
Babylon,  not  only  the  royal  personages,  the 
officials  of  the  court,  and  the  captives  who 
belonged  to  the  upper  classes  (ver.  15),  but 
also  the  entire  military  force  wliich  he  had 
deported,  and  the  thousand  skilled  artificers. 
All,  without  exception,  were  conducted  to 
the  capital. 

Vers.  17  —  20.  —  Bablieb  Pobtion  of 
Zedekiah's  Eeign.  Nebuchadnezzar  found 
•  son  of  Josiah,  named  Mattaniah,  still  sur- 
viving at  Jerusalem.  At  his  father's  death 
he  mnst  have  been  a  boy  of  ten,  but  he  was 
now,  eleven  years  later,  of  the  age  of  twenty- 
one.  This  youth,  only  three  years  older 
than  his  nephew  Jehoiachin,  he  appointed 
king,  at  the  same  time  requiring  him  to 
change  his  name,  which  he  did  from  "  Mat- 
tMiiah"  to  "Zedekiah"  (ver.  17).     Zede- 


kiah  pnrsned  nearly  the  same  course  ol 
action  as  the  other  recent  kings.  He  showed 
no  religions  zeal,  instituted  no  reform,  but 
allowed  the  idolatrous  practices,  to  which 
the  people  were  so  addicted,  to  continue 
(ver.  19).  Though  less  irreligious  and  less 
inclined  to  persecute  than  Jehoiakim,  he 
could  not  bring  himself  to  turn  to  God.  He 
was  weak  and  vacillating,  inclined  to  follow 
the  counsels  of  Jeremiah,  but  afraid  of  the 
"  princes,"  and  ultimately  took  their  advice, 
which  was  to  ally  himself  with  Egypt,  and 
openly  rebel  against  Nebuchadnezzar.  This 
course  of  conduct  brought  about  the  destmo- 
tion  of  the  nation  (ver.  20). 

Ver.  17. — And  the  King  of  Babylon  made 
Kattaniah  his  father's  brother  king  in  his 
stead.  Josiah  had  four  sons  (1  Chron.  iii. 
15) — Johanan,  the  eldest,  who  probably 
died  before  his  father ;  Jehoialrim,  or  Elia- 
kim,  the  second,  who  was  twenty-five  years 
old  at  his  father's  death  (ch.  xxiii.  36); 
Jiihoahaz,  the  third,  otherwise  caUed  Shal- 
lum  (1  Ohron.,  I.  «.  e. ;  Jer.  xxii.  11),  who, 
when  his  father  died,  was  aged  twenty-three 
(ch.  xxiii.  31) ;  and  Mattaniah,  the  youngest, 
who  must  have  been  then  aged  ten  or  nine. 
It  was  this  fourth  son,  now  grown  to  man- 
hood, whom  Nebuchadnezzar  appointed 
king  in  Jehoiachin's  room.  And  changed 
his  name  to  Zedekiah.  (On  the  practice  of 
changing  a  king's  name  on  his  accession, 
see  the  comment  upon  ch.  xxiii.  31,  34.) 
Mattaniah  means  "  Gift  of  Jehovah  ;  " 
Zedekiah,  "  Eigliteousness  of  Jehovah." 
Josiah  had  called  his  son  the  first  of  these 
names  in  humble  acknowledgment  of  God's 
mercy  in  granting  him  a  fourth  son.  So 
other  pious  Jews  called  their  sous  "  Natlia- 
niel,"  and  Greeks  "  Tiieodotus  "  or  "  Theo- 
dorue,"  and  Eomans  "Deodatua."  Mat- 
taniali,  in  taking  the  second  of  the  names, 
may  have  had  in  his  mind  the  prophecy 
of  Jeremiah  (xxiii.  5 — 8),  where  blessings 
are  promised  to  the  reign  of  a  king  whose 
name  should  be  '^  Jehovah-tsidkenu,"  i.e. 
"  The  Lord  our  Eighteousness."  Or  he  may 
simply  have  intended  to  declare  that  "the 
rigliteousness  of  Jehovah "  was  what  he 
aimed  at  establishing.  In  this  case  it  can 
only  be  said  that  it  would  have  been  happy 
for  his  country,  had  his  profesaions  been 
corroborated  by  his  acts. 

Ver.  18. — Zedekiah  was  twenty  and  one 
years  old  when  he  began  to  reign,  and  he 
reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem,  Prob- 
ably from  B.C.  5a7  to  B.o.  586.  He  was 
thus  contemporary  with  Nebuchadnezzar  in 
Babylon,  with  Oyaxares  and  Astyages  in 
Media,  and  with  Fsamatik  IL  and  Ua-ap-ia 


OH.  xxiT.  1— 20.]     THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


47» 


(Pharaoh  -  Hophra)  in  Egypt.  And  his 
mother's  name  was  Hamnttd,  the  daughter 
of  Jeremiah  of  Libnah.  He  was  thus  full 
brother  of  Jehoahaz  (oh.  xxiii.  31),  but  only 
halt-brother  to  Jehoiakim  (ch.  xxiii.  36). 
His  father-in-law,  "  Jeremiah  of  Libnah,"  ii 
not  the  prophet,  who  was  of  Anathoth. 

Ver.  19. — ^And  he  did  that  which  was  evil 
in  the  sight  of  the  lord,  according  to  all 
that  Jehoiakim  had  done.  Keil  says,  "  His 
attitude  towards  the  Lord  exactly  resembled 
that*  of  his  brother  Jehoiakim,  except  that 
Zedekiah  does  not  appear  to  have  possessed 
fo  much  energy  for  that  which  was  evil." 
He  allowed  the  people  to  continue  their 
" pollutions "  and  "  abominations  "  (2  Chion. 
xxxvi.  14).  He  let  the  "princes"  have 
their  way,  and  do  whatever  they  pleased 
(Jer.  xxxviii.  5),  contenting  himself  with 
sometimes  outwitting  them,  and  counter- 
acting their  prooredings  (Jer.  xxxviii.  14 — 
28).  He  fell  into  the  old  error  of  "  putting 
trust  in  Egypt"  (Jer.  xxxvii.  5 — 7),  and 
made  an  alliance  with  Aprles  (Pharaoh- 
Hophra),  which  was  an  act  of  rebellion,  at 
once  against  God'and  against  his  Babylonian 
suzerain.  He  was,  upon  the  whole,  rather 
weak  tlian  wicked ;  but  his  weakness  was 
as  ruinous  to  his  country  as  active  wicked- 
ness would  have  been. 

Ver.  20.— For  through  the  anger  of  the 
Lord  it  came  to  pass  in  Jerusalem  and  Judah. 
It  was  "through  the  anger  of  the  Lord" 
at  the  persistent  impenitence  of  the  people, 
that  that  came  to  pass  which  actually  camo 
to  pass— the  rejection  of  the  nation  by  God 
and  the  easting  of  it  out  of  his  presence.  In 
his  anger  he  suffered  the  appointment  of 
another  perverse  and  faithless  monarch,  who 
made  no  attempt  at  a  reformation  of  religion, 
and  allowed  him  to  run  his  evil  course  un- 
checked, and  to  embroil  himself  with  his 
suzerain,  and  to  bring  destruction  upon  his 
nation.  God's  anger,  long  provoked  (ch. 
xxi.  10—15 :  xxiii.  26,  27 ;  xzir.  8,  4),  lay 


at  the  root  of  the  whole  series  of  events,  not 
causing  men's  sins,  but  allowing  them  to  go 
on  until  the  cup  of  their  iniquities  was  full, 
and  the  time  had  arrived  for  vengeance. 
Until  he  had  oast  them  out  from  his  presence 
(comp.  ch.  xvii.  18,  20 ;  xxiii.  27 ;  xxiv.  3). 
To  be  "  cast  out  of  God's  presence "  is  to 
lose  his  protecting  care,  to  be  separated  off 
from  him,  to  be  left  defenceless  against  our 
enemies.  When  Israel  was  once  iinally  cast 
off,  its  fate  was  sealed ;  there  was  no  further 
hope  for  it ;  the  end  was  come.  That  Zede- 
kiah rebelled  against  the  King  of  Babylon ; 
rather.  And  Zedekiah  rebelled,  etc.  The  sen- 
tence is  a  detached  one,  and  would,  perliaps, 
better  commence  oh.  xxv.  than  terminate,  as 
it  does,  ch.  xxiv.  Zedekiah,  when  he  re- 
ceived his  investiture  at  the  hands  of  Nebu- 
chadnezzar (ver.  17),  took  a  solemn  oath  of 
allegiance  and  fidelity  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  13 ; 
Ezek.  xvii.  13)  to  him  and  to  his  successors ; 
but  almost  immediately  afterwards  ho  began 
to  intrigue  with  Egypt,  sent  a  contingent 
of  troops  to  help  Fsamatik  II.  in  his  wars 
(Wiediemann,  '  Geschichte  .3!gypteus,'  p. 
159),  and  thus  sought  to  pave  the  way  for 
an  Egyptian  alliance,  on  the  strength  of 
which  he  might  venture  upon  a  revolt.  It 
was  probably  owing  to  the  suspicions  which 
these  acts  aroused  that,  in  the  fourth  year  of 
his  reign,  B.o.  594,  he  had  to  visit  Babylon 
(Jer.  li.  59),  where,  no  doubt,  he  renewed  his 
engagements  and  assured  the  Bubylouian 
monarch  of  his  fidelity.  But  these  proceed- 
ings were  nothing  but  a  blind.  On  the 
accession  of  Hophra  (Apries)  to  the  throne 
of  Egypt  in  B.C.  501,  Zedekiah  renewed  his 
application  to  the  Egyptian  court,  openly 
sending  ambassadors  (Ezek.  xvii.  15),  with 
a  request  for  infantry  and  cavalry.  Thus 
was  his  rebellion  complete,  his  "oath  des- 
pised," and  his  "  covenant  broken  "  (Ezek. 
xvii.  15,  16).  The  war  with  Babylon,  and 
the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  were  the  natural 
consequences. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vew.  1 — 4. — Gonguering  kings  and  nations  instruments  in  Oo^s  hands  to  work  out 
his  purposes.  The  sudden  disappearance  of  Assyria  from  the  scene,  and  the  sudden 
appearance  of  Babylon  upon  it  at  this  point  of  the  history,  are  very  remarkable. 
Without  a  word  upon  the  circumstances  that  had  brought  it  about,  the  writer  of  Kings 
shows  us  that  a  great  crisis  in  the  world's  history  has  come  and  gone ;  that  the  mighty 
state  which  had  dominated  Western  Asia  for  centuries  is  no  more,  and  has  been  su]:ier- 
seded  by  a  new,  and  hi  i  hcrto  scarce  heard  of,  power.  "  In  his  [Jehoiakim's]  days  Nebu- 
chadnezzar King  of  Babylon  came  up."   We  have  thus  presented  to  us,  by  implication 

I.  Assyria's  fall.  For  nearly  a  thousand  years  Assyria  had  been  "the  rod  of  God's 
anger  "  (Isa.  x.  6).  She  had  been  sent  against  nation  after  nation,  to  execute  God's 
wrath,  with  "  a  charge,  to  take  the  spoil,  and  to  take  the  prey,  and  to  tread  them  dovm 
like  the  mire  of  the  streets  "  (Isa.  x.  6).  As  Hezekiah  confessed  in  his  prayer  (ch.  xix. 
17, 18),  their  success  had  been  continual :  "  Of  a  truth,  Lord,  the  kings  of  Assyria  hava 
destroyed  the  nations  and  their  lands,  and  have  cast  their  gods  into  the  fire,"  etc    But 


180  THE  SECOND  BOOK  09  THS  KIKaS.      [oh.  xzir.  1—201 

wby  ^nd  whence  wag  ihis  T  Because  Ood  had  used  Assjnria  as  his  instrument.  Ckid 
had  brought  it  to  pass  that  Assyria  should  exist  "to  lay  waste  fenced  cities  into  nilnoui 
heaps,  ^erefore  their  inhabitants  were  of  small  power,  they  were  dismayed  and  con- 
founded ;  they  were  as  the  grass  of  the  field,  and  as  the  green  herb,  as  the  grass  on  the 
house-tops,  and  as  com  blasted  before  it  be  grown  up  "  (cb,  zix.  25, 26).  But  this  time 
was  now  gone.  Assyria  had  offended  God  by  her  pride  and  self-trust.  She  had  said, 
*'By  the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have  done  this,  and  by  my  wisdom ;  for  I  am  prudent : 
and  I  have  removed  the  bounds  of  the  people,  and  have  robbed  their  treasures,  and  I 
have  put  down  the  inhabitants  like  a  valiant  man"  (Isa.  z.  13).  The  axe  had  "boasted 
itself  against  him  that  hewed  therewith ;  and  the  saw  had  magnified  itself  against  him 
that  moved  it  to  and  fro"  (Isa.  z.  16).  Therefore  God  thought  it  time  to  vindicate  his 
own  honour,  and  Assyria  felL  Two  other  nations  were  raised  up  to  break  in  pieces  the 
proud  and  haughty  conqueror;  and,  after  a  short  struggle,  Assyria  sank,  to  rise  no 
more  (Nah.  iii.  19). 

n.  Babylon's  eisb  to  gbeatnesb.  Babylon  had  in  remote  days  (Gen.  x.  8 — 10) 
been  a  powerful  state,  and  had  even  possessed  an  empire;  but  for  the  last  seven  hundred 
years  or  more  she  had  been  content  to  play  a  very  secondary  part  in  Western  Asia,  and 
had  generally  been  either  an  Assyrian  feudatory  or  an  integral  part  of  the  Assyrian 
monarchy.  But  in  the  counsels  of  God  it  had  been  long  decreed  that  she,  and  not 
Assyria,  should  be  God's  instrument  for  the  chastisement  of  his  people  (ch.  zz. 
16 — 19)l  Therefore,  as  the  appointed  time  for  Assyria's  fall  approached,  Babylon  was 
made  to  increase  in  power  and  greatness.  A  wave  of  invasion  (Herod.,  i.  104, 105),  which 
passed  over  the  rest  of  Western  Asia,  left  her  untouched.  A'great  monarch  was  given 
her  in  the  person  of  Nabopolassar,  who  read  aright  the  signs  of  the  times,  saw  in  Media 
a  desirable  ally,  and,  having  secured  Median  co-operation,  revolted  against  the  long- 
established  sovereign  power.  A  short,  sharp  struggle  followed,  ending  in  the  utter 
collapse  of  the  great  Assyrian  empire,  and  the  siege  and  fall  of  Nineveh.  The  two 
conquering  states  partitioned  between  them  the  Assyrian  dominions — Media  taking  the 
countries  which  lay  to  the  north-west  and  north,  Babylon  those  towards  the  south-west 
and  south.  Thus,  so  far  as  the  Jews  were  concerned,  Babylon,  between  B.C.  625  andB.o. 
608,  had  stepped  into  Assyria's  place.  She  had  become  "the  hammer  of  the  whole  earth" 
(Jer.  1. 23) ;  God's  battle-axe'and  weapons  of  war  (Jer.  li.  20),  wherewith  he  brake  in  pieces 
nations  and 'kingdoms,  man  and  woman,  old  and  young,  captains  and  rulers  (Jer.  li; 
20 — 23).  The  prophecy  of  Isaiah  to  Hezekiah  (ch.  xx.  16 — 19),  which  seemed  so 
unlikely  of  fulfilment  at  the  time  that  it  was  uttered,  found  a  natural  and  easy  accom- 
plishment, the  course  of  events  in  the  latter  part  of  the  seventh  century  B.C.  having 
transferred  to  Babylonia,  under  Divine  direction  and  arrangement,  that  grand  position 
and  dignity  which  had  previously  been  Assyria's.  When  she  had  served  God's  pur- 
pose, Babylon's  turn  came ;  and  she  sank  as  suddenly  as  she  had  risen,  because  she  too 
had  been  "proud  against  the  Lord"  (Jer.  L  29),  and  had  provoked  his  indignation. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Hie  'beginning  of  the  end.  It  has  been  already  observed  (see  thb 
faomiletics  to  ch.  xvi.)  that  God's  punishment  of  a  nation,  though  often  long- 
deferred,  when  it  comes  at  last  comes  suddenly,  violently,  and  at  once.  Nineteen 
years  only  intervened— a  brief  space  in  the  life  of  a  nation — between  the  first  intima- 
tion which  the  Jews  received  of  danger  impending  from  a  new  enemy,  and  the  entire 
destruction,  by  that  enemy,  of  temple,  city,  and  nation.  Peril  first  showed  itself  in 
B.C.  605;  Jerusalem  was  destroyed  and  the  Jews  carried  into  captivity  in  B.C.  686.  From 
first  to  last  they  were  scarcely  given  a  breathing-space.  Blow  was  struck  upon  blow ; 
calamity  followed  close  upon  calamity.  "  The  beginning  of  the  end  "  is  to  be  dated 
from  Nebuchadnezzar's  first  invasion — when  "  Nebuchadnezzar  King  of  Babylon  came 
up"  against  Jehoiakim,  "and  Jehoiakim  became  his  servant  three  years"  (ver.  1). 
When  an  iron  vessel  and  an  earthen  one  come  into  contact  and  collision,  it  is  not  diffi- 
cult to  foresee  the  result  Nebuchadnezzar's  first  campaign  proved  his  absolute  superi- 
ority over  all  the  forces  that  could  be  brought  against  him  by  the  nations  of  the  west. 
Coidd  the  Jews  have  accepted,  honestly  and  loyally,  the  position  which  Jehoiakim 
professedly  took  up— that  of  a  faithful  vassal  and  feudatory,  who  would  keep  watch  over 
the  interests  of  his  suzerain,  and  aid  him  to  the  best  of  his  power — a  prolonged  thongk 
inglorioQS  existence  woiild  have  been  possible  for  the  people.    But  tb*  nation  was  ta$ 


a.  xxiT.  1—20.3      'THE  SECOND  BOOK  OS"  THE  KINGS.  481 

prond  to  submit  itself.  Neither  king  nor  people  had  any  intention  of  putting  np  with 
the  loss  of  independence  or  becoming  loyal  Babylonian  subjects,  however  strongly  the 
duty  might  be  pressed  upon  them  by  Jeremiah  and  the  other  Jehovistio  prophets.  A 
profound  antagonism  was  developed  from  the  first.  Nebuchadnezzar  probably  carried 
off  the  captives  "  of  the  king's  seed,  and  of  the  princes  "  (Dan.  i.  3),  from  Jerusalem  by 
way  of  hostages.  Jehoiakim  meditated  revolt  from  the  moment  of  his  submission ;  and 
within  three  years  threw  off  the  mask,  and  rebelled  openly.  Five  years  of  struggle 
followed.  Prompted  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  "  the  nations  set  upon  him  on  every  side 
from  the  provinces,  and  spread  their  net  over  him  "  (Ezek.  xix.  8 ;  comp.  ch.  xxiv.  2), 
ravaged  his  territory  far  and  wide,  "  destroyed  "  multitudes  of  the  people,  and,  at  last, 
"  took  the  king  in  their  snare  "  (Ezek.  xix.  8),  and  "  brought  lum  to  the  King  of 
Babylon  "  (Ezek.  xix.  9).  Nebuchadnezzar  punished  him  with  death,  cast  out  his  body 
unburied,  and  took  as  hostages  to.  Babylon  three  thousand  more  of  the  upper  classes  of 
the  citizens  (Josephus, '  Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  6.  §  3).  Distrust  and  suspicion  on  the  one  lide, 
hatred  and  sense  of  cruel  wrong  on  the  other,  must,  under  these  circumstances,  have 
grown  and  increased ;  the  antagonism,  instead  of  dying  away  with  the  lapse  of  time, 
must  have  become  accentuated.  "  The  end  "  already  approached,  though  it  "  was  not 
yet."  The  weaker  party  could  not  but  go  to  the  wall;  and  events  were  evidently 
hastening  to  a  denouement.  With  the  death  of  Jehoiakim  the  first  scene  of  the  last 
act  had  terminated. 

Vers.  8 — 16. — Blow  upon  blow,  A  mild  and  conciliatory  policy  might,  perhaps,  have 
won  the  Jews  to  acquiescence  in  their  subjection.  But  Nebuchadnezzar's  policy  was 
the  reverse,  and  could  only  tend  to  their  exasperation.  With  what  exact  intention  or 
expectation  he  made  Jehoiachin  king  after  executing  his  father,  it  is  difficult  to  con- 
jecture. Perhaps  he  thought  he  had  nothing  to  fear  from  a  youth  of  eighteen.  Perhaps 
he  trusted  to  the  known  mildness  of  the  youth's  disposition  (Josephus, '  Ant.  Jud.,'  x. 
7.  §  1).  In  either  case,  the  experiment  failed.  Jehoiachin,  within  a  few  weeks,  gave 
him  cause  of  offence,  or,  at  any  rate,  furnished  him  with  some  pretext  for  reopening  the 
quarrel.  Then  blow  was  stnick  upon  blow.  An  army  was  sent  to  besiege  the  city 
(ver.  10);  soon  the  great  king  came  up  against  it  in  person  (ver.  11).  In  vain  did 
Jehoiachin  make  submission.  He  was  seized  and  carried  off  to  Babylon,  and  there 
shut  np  in  prison.  The  temple  and  the  royal  palace  were  plundered,  and  at  least  ten 
thousand  of  the  inhabitants-r-the  noblest,  wealthiest,  bravest,  and  most  skilled — torn 
from  their  homes  and  led  into  captivity  (vers.  12 — 16).  A  remnant  only,  consisting 
chiefly  of  "  the  poorest  ,of  the  people  of  the  land  "  (ver.  14),  were  left  behind.  Jeru- 
salem, denuded  of  more  than  half  her  population,  can  scarcely  have  known  herself. 
She  "sat  solitary  "  (Lam.  i.  1)  and  "  wept  sore  in  the  night"  (Lam.  i.  2),  and  felt  that 
her  total  destruction  was  nigh  at  hand.    So  ended  the  second  scene  of  the  last  act. 


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver,  1-Hjh.  XXT.  17. —  Wickedness,  retrtbution,  and  Divine  control,  as  revealed  in 
Nebuchadnezzar's  invasion  ofJvdah.  "  In  his  days  Nebuchadnezzar,"  etc.  In  glancing 
through  these  chapters  there  are  two  objects  that  press  on  our  attention.  1.  A  national 
crisis.  The  peace,  the  dignity,  the  wealth,  the  religious  privileges  of  Judah  are  con- 
verging to  a  close.  Israel  has  already  been  carried  away  by  a  despot  to  a  foreign  land, 
and  now  Judah  is  meeting  the  same  fate.  All  nations  have  their  crises — they  have 
their  rise,  their  fall,  their  dissolution.  2.  A  terrible  despot.  The  name  of  Nebuchadnezzar 
comes  for  the  first  time  under  our  attention.  Who  is  he  ?  He  is  a  prominent  figure  in 
the  histories  and  the  prophecies  of  the  old  Scriptures.  He  was  the  son  and  successor 
of  Nabopolassar,  who,  having  revolted  Irom  Assyria  and  helped  to  destroy  Nineveh, 
brought  Babylon  at  once  into  pre-eminence.  The  victories  of  Nebuchadnezzar  were 
stupendous  and  many.  Egypt,  Syria,  Phoenicia,  Palestine,  all  bowed  to  his  triumphant 
arms.  He  made  Babylon,  his  capita),  one  of  the  most  wonderful  cities  of  the  world. 
The  walls  with  which  he  fortified  it  contained,  we  are  told,  no  less  than  five  hundred 
niillion  tons  of  masonry.  He  was  at  once  the  master  and  the  terror  of  the  age  he  lived 
in,  which  was  ux  hundred  yean  before  Ohriat.    There  ia  no  character  in  ail  hlatory 

BLKIXflfl.  Si 


482  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS.      [<«•  ^mv- 1— 2a 

more  pregnant  with  practical  suggestions  than  his — a  mighty  fiend  in  human  form. 
We  have  in  these  two  chapters  a  view  of  (1)  the  wickedness  of  man ;  (2)  the  retribution 
if  Heaven ;  (3)  and  the  supremacy  of  Qod.    Here  we  have — 

I.  The  WI0KBDNBS8  OF  MAN.  The  wickedness  here  displayed  is  marked :  1.  By 
inveteracy.  It  is  here  said  of  Jehoiachin,  "  He  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of 
the  Lord,  according  to  all  that  his  father  had  done."  In  ver.  19  the  same  is  also  said  of 
Zedekiah :  "  He  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  according  to  all  that 
Jehoiakim  had  done."  This  has,  indeed,  been  said  of  many  kings  of  Judah,  as  of  all 
the  kings  of  Israel.  What  a  hold,  then,  had  wickedness  taken  on  the  Jewish  people  I 
It  had  so  deeply  struck  its  roots  into  their  very  being  that  neither  the  mercies  nor 
the  judgments  of  Heaven  could  uproot  it.  It  was  a  cancer  transmitted  from 
sire  to  son,  poisoning  their  blood  and  eating  up  their  nature.  Thus,  then,  from 
generation  to  generation  the  wickedness  of  the  Jewish  people  seemed  to  be  a  disease 
hereditary,  ineradicable,  and  incurable.  2.  By  tyranny.  "At  that  time  the  servants 
of  Nebuchadnezzar  King  of  Babylon  came  up  against  Jerusalem,  and  the  city  was 
besieged.  And  Nebuchadnezzar  Eling  of  Babylon  came  against  the  city,  and  his 
servants  did  besiege  it."  This  is  seen  in  the  conduct  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  What  right 
had  Nebuchadnezzar  to  leave  his  own  country,  invade  Judah,  plunder  it  of  its  wealth, 
and  hear  away  by  violence  its  population  ?  None  whatever.  It  was  tyranny  of  the 
worst  kind,  an  outrage  on  every  principle  of  humanity  and  justice.  Sin  is  evermore 
tyrannic.  We  see  it  everywhere.  On  all  hands  do  we  see  men  and  women  endeavour- 
ing to  bring  others  into  subjection — masters  their  servants,  employers  their  emjiloyes, 
rulers  their  subjects.  Tyranny  everywhere  is  the  evidence,  the  effect,  and  the  instru- 
ment of  wickedness.  3.  By  inhumanity.  "  And  the  King  of  Babylon  .  .  .  carried 
out  thence  all  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's 
house,  and  cut  in  pieces  all  the  vessels  of  gold  which  Solomon  King  of  Israel  had  made 
in  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  as  the  Lord  bad  said.  And  he  carried  away  all  Jerusalem, 
and  all  the  princes,  and  all  the  mighty  men  of  valour,  even  ten  thousand  captives,  and 
all  the  craftsmen  and  smiths :  none  remained,  save  the  poorest  sort  of  the  people  of  the 
land.  And  he  carried  away  Jehoiachin  to  Babylon,  and  the  king's  mother,  and  the 
king's  wives,  and  his  oflScers,  and  the  mighty  of  the  land,  those  carried  he  into  captivity 
from  Jerusalem  to  Babylon.  And  all  the  men  of  might,  even  seven  thousand,  and 
craftsmen  and  smiths  a  thousand,  and  all  that  were  strong  and  apt  for  war,  even  them 
the  King  of  Babylon  brought  captive  to  Babylon."  He  rifled  the  country  of  its  people 
and  its  property,  and  inflicted  untold  misery  on  thousands.  Thus  wickedness  trans- 
forms man  into  a  fiend,  and  turns  society  into  a  pandemonium.  4.  By  profanity. 
We  read  here  that  Nebuchadnezzar  carried  away  all  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  and  cut  in  pieces  all  the  vessels  of  gold  which  Solomon  had  made  in  the 
temple  thereof.  We  also  read  here  that  "  he  burnt  the  house  of  the  Lord.  .  .  .  And 
the  pillars  of  brass  that  were  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  bases,  and  the 
brazen  sea  that  was  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  did  the  Ohaldees  break  in  pieces,  and 
carried  the  brass  of  them  to  Babylon.  And  the  pots,  and  the  shovels,  and  the  snuffers, 
and  the  spoons,  and  all  the  vessels  of  brass  wherewith  they  ministered,  took  they 
away.  .  ,  .  The  two  pillars,  one  sea,  and  the  bases  which  Solomon  had  made  for  the 
house  of  the  Lord ;  the  brass  of  all  these  vessels  was  without  weight."  Thus  this  ruth- 
less despot,  becoming  a  scourge  in  God's  hands,  desecrated  the  most  holy  things  in  the 
city  of  Jerusalem  and  in  the  memory  of  millions.  He  reduced  the  magnificent  pile  of 
buildings  to  ashes,  and  rifled  it  of  its  sacred  and  priceless  treasures.  Wickedness  is 
essentially  profane.  It  has  no  reverence ;  it  crushes  every  sentiment  of  sanctity  in  the 
■ouL  0  sin,  what  hast  thou  done?  Thou  hast  quenched  the  divinest  instincts  in 
human  nature,  and  poisoned  the  fountain  of  religious  and  social  sympathies,  substituted 
cmelty  for  love,  tyranny  for  justice,  blind  superstition  and  blasphemous  profanity  for 
davotion. 

n.  The  betbibtttion  of  Heaven. 

ni.  Thx  bupbkmaoy  of  Gk)D. — D.  T, 

Van.  1 — ^9. — TZie  advent  of  Nebuchadnetsir.  It  had  been  predicted  tluit  the  final 
How  on  Judah  would  be  delivered,  not  by  the  Assyrians,  but  by  the  Chaldeans.  "  Th« 
iafu  come,  that  all  that  is  in  thine  house  .  .  .  shall  be  carried  into  Babylon:  nothing 


OH.  xnv.  1—20.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  48S 

shall  be  left  "  (ch.  xx.  17 ;  cf.  Micah  iv.  10).  That  prediction  now  hasted  to  its  aocom- 
pUiihTuent.  Babylon  had  emerged  as  the  successor  to  Assyria  in  the  undisputed  poe- 
session  of  imperial  power.  Its  second  king  was  Nebuchadnezzar,  God's  chosen 
instrument  for  the  chastisement  of  Judah  and  surrounding  nations  (Jer.  xxviiA 

I.  Jbhoiakim'b  submission,  1.  The  defeat  of  Nechoh.  It  was  through  Pharaoh- 
Nechoh,  as  previously  stated,  that  Nebuchadnezzar  was  brought  into  relations  with 
Judah,  which  did  not  end  till  the  final  ruin  of  the  latter  state.  Nechoh  had  advanced 
to  Carchemish  on  the  Euphrates,  when  Nebuchadnezzar,  finding  his  hands  free, 
met  him  in  battle,  and  completely  defeated  him  (b.o.  605).  All  the  country  between 
Egypt  and  the  Euphrates,  which  Nechoh  had  conquered,  thus  fell  under  the  power  of 
Babylon  (ver.  7).  Egypt  might  intrigue,  but  was  thereafter  powerless  to  help.  Won- 
derful are  the  combinations  of  circumstances  by  which,  in  providence,  God  works  out 
his  ends.  2.  Nebuchadnezzar't  advance  on  Jerusalem.  It  was  now  the  fourth  year  of 
Jehoiakim  (Jer.  xxv.  1),  and,  as  Nechoh's  vassal,  he  had  probably  contributed  his  con- 
tingent to  the  defeated  Egyptian  army.  Nebuchadnezzar  speedily  came  against  him. 
We  learn  from  other  passages  (2  Ghron.  xxxvi.  6,  7 ;  Dan.  i.  1,  2)  that  Jerusalem 
actually  was  besieged,  and  Jehoiakim  bound  in  fetters,  Vith  the  intention  of  being  sent 
to  Babylon.  The  king  saved  himself  by  submission ;  but  the  temple  was  plundered  of 
its  sacred  vessels,  and  certain  princes,  among  them  Daniel,  were  taken  away  captive. 
This  is  the  beginning  of  the  seventy  years'  captivity  (Jer.  xxv.  11).  3.  The  three 
years\  servitude.  For  three  years  Jehoiakim  bore  the  heavy  yoke  of  the  King  of 
Babylon,  as  before  he  had  borne  that  of  Nechoh.  During  that  period  his  character 
underwent  no  improvement.  He  still  proved  himself  the  tyrant  and  oppressor  of  his 
people,  was  obstinate  and  headlong  in  his  courses,  and  sought  the  life  of  God's  prophets. 
He  built  magnificent  palaces  by  forced  labour  (Jer.  xxii.  13 — 17).  When  Jeremiah's 
roll  was  read  to  him,  he  cut  it  up  with  his  penknife,  and  threw  it  in  the  fire  (Jer.  xxxvi. 
20 — 23).  He  slew  Urijah  the  prophet,  and  would  have  put  Jeremiah  also  to  death  if 
he  had  dared  (Jer.  xxvi.  12 — 24).  Under  his  reign  heathenism  underwent  a  great 
revival,  and  the  moral  condition  of  the  people  rapidly  deteriorated.  Judah,  like  Israel 
of  former  days,  had  become  a  hopelessly  corrupt  carcase,  and  nothing  remained  but  to 
remove  it  from  the  face  of  the  earth. 

.  II.  Jehoiakim's  bebellion.  1.  Its  motives.  Three  years  Jehoiakim  served  the 
King  of  Babylon,  then  "  he  turned  and  rebelled  against  him."  Not  much  light  is 
thrown  on  the  motives  of  this  rebellion  beyond  the  fact  that  Nebucliadnezzar  was  at 
this  time  at  a  distance,  and  Jehoiakim  may  have  thought  he  might  assert  his  indepen- 
dence with  impunity.  Pharaoh-Neohoh  was  still  intriguing  to  stir  up  disaffection ;  plots 
were  always  hatching  to  get  the  subject-nations  to  combine  against  their  common 
oppressor  (cf.  Jer.  xxvii.  3 :  on  this  occasion,  however,  Moab  and  Ammon  were  on  the 
side  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  ver.  2) ;  and  false  prophets  were  never  wanting  to  predict 
success  (cf.  Jer.  xxviii.).  Jeremiah  gave  a  steady  voice  to  the  contrary,  but  it  was 
unheeded.  The  proverb  was  again  to  be  fulfilled — whom  the  gods  wish  to  destroy,  they 
first  madden.  Jehoiakim  was  given  up  to  the  delusions  of  his  own  vain  and  foolish 
notions,  and  the  people  cherished  extravagant  hopes  based  on  their  possession  of  the 
temple  and  the  Law  (Jer.  vii.  4;  viii.  8).  But  neither  temple  nor  Law  will  avail  those 
■who  refuse  to  "  thoroughly  amend "  their  "  ways  "  and  their  "  doings  "  (Jer,  viL  5), 
2.  Human  instruments  of  punishment.  "  And  the  Lord  sent  against  him  bands  of  the 
Chaldees,  and  bands  of  the  Syrians,"  etc.  Nebuchadnezzar  could  not  at  the  time 
attend  to  Jehoiakim  in  person ;  but  he  could  lay  his  commands  on  neighbouring  peoples, 
and  these  were  ordered  to  keep  up  a  galling  and  harassing  attack  on  Judah  by  means 
of  marauding  bands.  Detachments  of  his  own  Chaldeans  were  assisted  by  Syrians, 
Moabites,  and  Ammonites,  and  gave  Jehoiakim  no  peace.  God's  heritage  is  compared 
by  Jeremiah  to  "a  speckled  bird,  the  birds  round  about  are  against  her"  (Jer.  xiL  9), 
Troubles  rise  on  every  side  against  those  who  forsake  God,  3.  Ood  over  all.  It  was 
the  "Lord"  who  sent  these  hostile  bands  "  against  Judah  to  destroy  it" — "  surely  at 
the  commandment  of  the  Lord  came  this  upon  Judah,  to  remove  them  out  of  his 
sight."  In  sacred  history  everything  is  looked  at  from  the  standpoint  of  Divine  provi- 
dence. From  second  causes  it  mounts  invariably  to  the  supreme  cause.  Nebuchsd'- 
nezzaris  God's  "servant — his  instrument  for  the  chastisement  of  the  nations"  (Jei^ 
XXTiL  4 — 7);  uid  irbat,  from  the  purely  historical  point  of  view,  seems  a  lawless  plaj 


i84  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  TBB  KINGS,      [oh.  mv.  1—20. 

of  forces,  is,  from  the  Bivine  point  of  view,  a  scene  full  of  meaning,  interest,  am 
porpoEe.  The  rejection  of  Judah  is  again  in  these  verses  connected  with  the  sin  oi 
Manasseh,  only,  however,  as  before  shown,  because  people  and  rulers  made  these  sini 
their  own,  and  would  not  depart  from  them.  Heathenism  was  again  rampant  (cf. 
Ezek.  viii.),  and  Jehoiakim,  like  Manasseh,  was  shedding  "  innocent  blood  "  (Jer.  xxii. 
17).  Scripture  knows  no  fatalism  beyond  that  which  springs  from  the  incorrigihleness 
of  a  people  wedded  to  their  sins.  Neither  is  there  any  sin  which,  if  sincerely  repented 
of,  God  will  not  pardon,  thoiigh  its  temporal  effects  may  still  have  to  be  endured.  But 
there  is  the  awful  possibility  of  getting  beyond  pardon  through  our  own  oljduracy. 
Both^ides  of  the  truth  are  seen  in  Jeremiah — on  the  one  hand  exhortations  to  repent- 
ance, with  assurances  of  forgiveness  (Jer.  xviiL  7 — 10;  xxvi.  1 — 3;  xxxv.  15);  and  on 
the  other  declarations  that  the  time  for  pardon  was  past  (Jer.  vii.  13—16,  27,  28 ;  xi. 
11 — 14 ;  XV.  1 ;  xviii.  11, 12 ;  xxxvi.  16,  17,  etc.).  It  was  not  because  the  fathf-rs  haH 
eaten  sour  grapes  that  the  children's  teeth  were  set  on  edge  (Ezek.  xviii.  2) ;  but  the 
children  had  walked  in  the  fathers'  ways. 

HI.  Jbhoiakim's  son.  1.  Jehoiakim's  end.  Like  so  many  other  wicked  kings, 
Jehoiakim  came  to  a  miserable  end,  for  there  Is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  Jeremiah's 
prophecy  was  fulfilled  regarding  him,  "  He  shall  be  buried  with  the  burial  of  an  ass, 
drawn  and  oast  forth  beyond  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  "  (Jer.  xxii.  18,  19).  The  circum- 
stances are  unknown,  2.  Jehoiachin's  character.  Jehoiachin  succeeded  to  the  throne 
of  his  father,  but,  like  Jehoahaz,  he  only  held  it  for  three  months.  Of  him,  too, 
the  record  is  borne  that  he  "  did  evil."  He  is,  perhaps,  the  "  young  lion  "  of  Ezek. 
xix.  5 — 9,  whom  the  nations  took  in  their  net,  and  brought  to  the  King  of  Babylon. 
There  seem  to  have  been  some  elements  of  nobleness  in  his  nature,  and,  after  a  long 
captivity,  he  became  the  friend  and  companion  of  the  Babylonian  king  who  succeeded 
Nebuchadnezzar  (ch.  xxv.  27 — 30). — J.  0, 

Vers.  10 — 20. — The  first  general  ca/ptivity.  Some  captives  had  been  taken  to 
Babylon  on  occasion  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  first  advance  against  Jerusalem  (Dan.  i.  1,  2). 
The  full  storm  of  predicted  judgment  was  now,  however,  to  descend.  What  prophets  had 
so  long  foretold  amidst  the  scoffing  and  incredulity  of  their  godless  contemporaries  was 
now  at  length  to  be  accomplished.  The  final  tragedy  falls  into  two  parts,  of  which  the 
first  is  before  us. 

I.  Jehoiachin  makes  subbendee.  1.  The  dty  besieged.  The  attacks  of  the  Chal- 
deans, Syrians,  Moabites,  etc.,  mentioned  in  ver,  2,  had  served  an  immediate  purpose  in 
weakening  the  strength  and  exhausting  the  resources  of  Judah.  The  great  king, 
whose  fame  was  already  equalling  that  of  a  Sargon  or  a  Sennacherib,  was  now  able  to 
send  his  main  army  against  the  city,  and  soon  after  appeared  upon  the  scene  in  person. 
Again,  as  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah,  the  city  was  closely  invested ;  but  this  time  there 
was  no  Isaiah  to  hurl  back  scorn  for  scorn,  and  assure  the  trembling  king  of  the  com- 
plete discomfiture  of  the  enemy.  Neither  was  there  a  king  of  Hezekiah's  stamp  to  lay 
the  blasphemous  messages  of  the  invader  before  the  Lord,  and  entreat  his  interposition 
(ch.  xix.  14 — 19).  It  was  another  kind  of  message  Jeremiah  the  prophet  had  to  bear 
to  king  and  people.  The  day  for  mercy  was  past ;  and  in  default  of  a  general  repent- 
ance, which  was  not  to  be  expected,  there  remained  nothing  but  "a  certEun  fearful 
looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  indignation"  (Heb.  x.  27).  The  day  of  final 
reckoning  surely  comes  for  every  sinner.  It  had  come  for  Israel  a  hundred  and  twenty 
years  before ;  it  was  now  come  for  Israel's  sister  Judah.  2.  Jehoiachin's  voluntary  sur- 
render. Seeing  resistance  to  be  hopeless,  Jehoiachin  did  what,  on  the  most  favourable 
interpretation  of  his  conduct,  was  a  noble  thing.  The  city  could  not  hold  out ;  but  if 
he  and  the  other  members  of  the  royal  house  went  and  made  voluntary  surrender  of 
themselves  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  worst  horrors  might  be  spared.  This,  indeed,  was 
what  Jeremiah  always  counselled.  Jehoiachin  accordingly  went  forth,  with  Nehushtii 
his  mother,  and  his  servants,  princes,  and  officers,  and  deUvered  themselves  up  to  tht 
Babylonian  king.  He  might  feel,  with  the  lepers  of  Samaria,  "  If  they  save  us  alive, 
we  shall  live ;  and  if  they  kill  us,  we  shall  but  die  "  (ch.  vii,  4),  Or  he  may  have  been 
actuated  by  the  nobler  impulse  to  save  the  people,  and  may  have  thought,  "It  ia 
expedient  for  us,  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people,  and  that  the  whole  nation 
peraik  net "  (Jolui  His  submission  did  avert  the  worst  from  the  nation.    Hii 


OS.  XXIT.  1— 20.]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  tHE  KlNdS.  «6 

own  life  was  spared,  though  he  was  led  away  a  prisoner;  the  city  was  not  sacked  and 
burned,  as  afterwards ;  and  do  massacre  of  the  inhabitants  took  place.  A  tender  tone 
pervades  Jeremiah's  references  to  this  unfortunate  king  (Jer.  xxii.  24 — 30).  Ezekiel 
likens  him  to  "  the  highest  branch  of  the  cedar,"  which  the  "  great  eagle,  with  great 
wings,  long-winged,  full  of  feathers,  which  had  divers  colours,"  crops  off  (Ezek.  xvii. 
3, 4) ;  and  again  (according  to  some)  to  "  a  young  lion,"  who  had  "  learned  to  catch  the 
prey,  and  devoured  men,"  but  "  the  nations  set  against  him  on  every  side,"  and  "  he 
was  taken  in  their  pit,"  and  put  in  chains,  and  brought  to  the  King  of  Babylon  (Ezek. 
six.  5 — 9).  We  may  share  with  Jeremiah  in  his  sympathy  for  the  unhappy  young 
king  in  his  exile  (Jer.  xxii.  28).  Had  his  circumstances  been  more  favourable,  better 
things  might  hi.  e  been  hoped  of  him.  The  nobility  of  self-sacrifice  redeems  a  character 
from  many  fanlts, 

II.  The  oitt  dbspoilbd.  K  Jehoiachin's  surrender  saved  the  people  from  slaughter, 
it  could  not  save  the  city  fi-om  plunder,  nor  its  inhabitants  from  captivity.  Nebu- 
chadnezzar was  no  kid-gloved  conqueror ;  where  his  mailed  hand  fell,  he  let  it  be  felt. 
This  city  had  rebelled  against  him,  and  he  would  effectually  cripple  its  power  to  rebel 
again  by  impoverishing,  degrading,  and  weakening  it  to  the  utmost.  Nebuchadnezzar 
was  intent  only  on  his  own  ends,  yet  unconsciously  he  was  carrying  out  to  the  letter 
the  predictions  which  God's  prophets  had  been  dinning  into  the  people's  ears  with  so 
little  result  during  all  the  years  of  their  backsliding.  The  city  was  despoiled :  I.  0/ 
Us  wealth  and  sacred  vessels.  "  He  carried  out  thence  all  the  treasures  of  the  honse  of 
the  Lord,  and  the  treasures  of  the  king's  hoiise,  and  cut  in  pieces  all  the  vessels  of  gold 
which  Solomon  .  .  .  had  made,"  etc.  Jehoiakim  had  saved  his  treasures  at  the  expense 
of  exactions  from  the  people,  and  his  "  covetousness  "  had  doubtless  filled  them  still  more 
(Jer.  xxii.  17).  These  ill-gotten  gains  were  now  carried  away,  and  with  them  such  of 
the  temple  vessels  as  were  made  of,  or  plated  with,  gold,  the  "  cutting  to  pieces  "  being 

Srobably  confined  to  the  latter,  with  such  large  articles  as  the  golden  candlestick,  etc. 
If  the  smaller  articles  some  few  were  spared  (oh.  xxv.  15),  and  the  rest  were  preserved 
in  Babylon,  and  restored  on  the  return  (Ezra  i.  7 — 11).  Judgment  thus  again  began 
at  the  house  of  God.  As,  with  the  wealth  of  the  city,  the  wealth-producers  were  also 
taken  (ver.  14),  it  is  easy  to  see  to  what  poverty  it  was  reduced.  2.  Of  its  royal 
family  and  nohles.  "  And  he  carried  away  Jehoiachin  to  Babylon,  and  the  king's 
mother,  and  the  king's  wives,"  etc.  The  land  was  thus  deflowered  of  its  king  and  aris- 
tocracy. The  nobles,  indeed,  had  proved  no  source  of  strength  to  the  nation,  but  had 
set  an  example  of  luxury,  oppression,  corruption,  and  idolatry.  Still,  they  were  the 
representatives  of  its  old  hereditary  families  j  they  had  high  social  position  and  great 
influence ;  and  they  ought  to  have  been,  if  they  were  not,  patrons  and  examples  of 
everything  good  and  great.  Those  who  have  rank,  fortune,  and  leisure  may  be  of  the 
highest  service  to  a  state,  if  only  they  devote  their  powers  to  its  true  welfare.  They 
contribute  elements  of  refinement,  culture,  and  wealth  to  it,  which  cannot  be  lost 
without  impoverishment.  If,  however,  they  abuse  their  opportunities,  and  grow  luxu- 
rious, idle,  and  wicked,  they  have  generally  to  sufi'or  severely  in  the  end.  3.  0/  its 
artisans  and  warriors,  "  And  all  the  men  of  might,  even  seven  thousand,  and  crafts- 
men and  smiths  a  thousand,  all  that  were  strong  and  apt  for  war,"  etc.  Besides 
removing  from  the  city  the  wealth  that  enriched  it,  and  the  nobles  who  adorned  it, 
Nebuchadnezzar  took  away  the  skilful  hands  that  did  its  work,  and  the  strong  arms 
that  fought  for  it.  He  left  none  "  save  the  poorest  sort  of  the  people  of  the  land." 
This  was  to  drain  the  city  dry  of  every  element  of  its  prosperity.  The  middle  classes 
of  a  nation — its  wealth-producers  and  skilled  labourers — even  more  than  its  aristocracy — 
are  the  source  of  its  strength.  By  them  is  created  the  capital  of  the  country ;  through 
them  that  capital  undergoes  constant  renewal  and  increase ;  they  supply  the  wants  of 
every  other  class;  without  them  the  nobles  would  be  helpless,  and  on  them  "the 
poorest  sort  of  people  " — too  often  the  unfortunate,  the  shiftless,  the  inefScient  classes 
— depend  for  casual  employment  and  support.  Nebuchadnezzar  looked  well  to  his  own 
interests  when  he  deported  these  classes,  and  not  the  poor,  the  less  able,  less  thrifty,  to 
Babylon.  But  their  departure  was  ruinous  to  Jerusalem,  and  this  also  Nebuchadnezzar 
intended.  It  was,  indeed,  an  irretrievable,  crushing  blow  which  had  fallen  on  the 
nation,  none  the  less  ruinous  and  terrible  that  it  had  been  so  long  predicted,  and  was  so 
lichljT  deserved.    Piety  tends  to  the  enrichment  and  strengthening  of  a  nation,  M  ^ 


486  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.       [oh.  xxv.  1— Sa 

an  individnal,  even  temporally ;  but  a  coarse  of  ungodliness  ends  in  the  loss  of  tern- 

poral  aod  spiritual  possessions  together. 

III.  Zevkkiah  made  EiNa.  1.  Accession  of  Zedekidh.  Jehoiachin  was  a  man  of 
spirited  character,  and  Nebuchadnezzar  seems  to  have  thought  that  he  would  be  better 
served  liy  putting  a  weaker  man  upon  the  throne.  The  person  chosen  was  an  uncle  of 
the  young  king's,  a  brother  of  Jehoiakim,  whose  name,  Mattaniah,  Nebuchadnezzar 
changed  to  Zedekiah — "  the  Righteousness  of  Jehovah."  There  was  little  honour  now 
in  being  Kmg  of  Judah;  but  at  least  the  city  and  temple  still  stood;  the  priesthood 
had  not  been  carried  away ;  there  were  a  few  nobles  left  to  grace  the  court ;  and  by 
degrees  new  artisans  and  soldiers  might  have  been  got  in,  and  the  state  again  built  up. 
It  was  the  last  chance,  and  was  given  only  to  show  clearly  how  hopeless  the  moral  con- 
dition of  the  people  was.  For  if  anything  could  have  sobered  them,  and  convinced 
them  of  the  truth  of  the  words  of  the  prophets,  it  was  such  a  catastrophe  as  had 
descended  upon  them.  Deaf  to  all  warnings,  however,  whether  of  mercy  or  judgment, 
the  people  only  weut  on  from  bad  to  worse.  2.  His  weak  character.  The  outstanding 
feature  in  Zedekiah's  character  was  weakness — lack  of  courage  and  strength  of  will. 
He  was  not  without  good  impulses.  He  showed  a  friendly  disposition  to  Jeremiah ;  on 
various  occasions  he  sought  his  advice  and  intercession  (Jer.  xiL  1,  2;  xxxvii.  3; 
xxxviii.  14 — 17);  at  Jeremiah's  instigation  he  made  a  covenant  with  the  people  of 
Jerusalem,  pledging  them  to  give  liberty  to  their  bondmen  (Jer.  xxxiv,  8,  11),  and 
once  at  least  he  retrained  from  entering  into  a  proposed  league  against  Nebuchadnezzar 
(Jer.  xxvii.  3).  But  his  timid,  faithless,  unstable  nature  reveals  itself  at  every  turn. 
He  was  like  Herod,  who  did  many  things  at  the  bidding  of  John  the  Baptist,  atid 
heard  him  gladly,  yet  at  last  beheaded  him  to  please  a  wicked  woman  (Mark  vi.  20). 
Zedekiah  knew  what  was  right,  but  did  not  do  it  (Jer.  xxxvii.  2);  he  weakly  allowed 
himself  to  be  overruled  by  his  nobles — ^when  they  broke  through  his  covenant  he  had 
no  power  to  resist  (Jer.  xxxiv.  11) ;  when  they  urged  him  to  put  Jeremiah  to  death,  he 
consented,  saying,  "  Behold,  he  is  in  your  hand :  for  the  king  is  not  he  that  can  do  any- 
thing atiainst  you''  (Jer.  xxxviii.  4,  5);  then,  when  Ebed-Melech  pleaded  for  the 
prophet,  he  gave  orders  for  his  deliverance  (ver.  10) ;  he  disobeyed  Jeremiah  in  throwing 
off  his  allegiance  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  in  seeking  an  alliance  with  Egypt ;  and  when 
Nebuchadnezzar  again  came  up  against  him,  he  sought  Jeremiah's  counsel,  but  did  not 
take  it  when  it  was  given  (Jer.  xxxviii.  14 — 28),  etc.  Meanwhile  idolatry  had  firmly 
established  itself  in  the  holy  city,  and  within  the  very  precincts  of  the  temple  (Ezek. 
viii.).  Fitly,  therefore,  is  the  reign  of  this  last  king  described,  like  the  rest,  as  "  evil." 
His  weakness  and  vacillation,  his  unfaithfulness  to  his  own  best  convictions,  his  sinful 
jiielding  to  others  in  what  he  knew  to  be  wrong,  were  his  ruin.  He  was  in  a  hard  and 
difiScult  position,  and  he  had  no  strength  of  mind  to  cope  with  it.  3.  His  rebellion. 
At  length,  yielding  to  the  solicitations  of  his  nobles,  and  hopeful  of  help  from  Egypt 
(Ezek.  xvii.  15),  he  broke  his  oath  of  allegiance  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  an  act  which 
Bzekiel  strongly  condemns  (Ezek.  xvii.  16 — 19).  The  cup  was  full,  and  the  Lord  left 
him  thus  far  to  himself,  that  the  nation  might  be  destroyed.  Men  who  will  not  follow 
light,  lose  light.  A  blindness,  as  from  heaven,  falls  upon  them.  They  are  left  to  the 
bent  of  their  own  hearts,  and  their  own  counsel  is  theii  ruin.  Sin  is  the  supreme  folly, 
as  righteousness  is  the  supreme  wisdom. — J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 
OHAPTBB  XXV. 


Vera.  1 — 30. — The  Last  Siege  of  Jebu- 
BALEM.     The  Jews   led  into  Captivity. 

HlSTOBT    OF    the    EeMNANT    LEFT   BEHIND. 

Bklease  fbom  Pbison  OF  Jbhoiaohin. 

Vers.  1 — 10.— Last  Siege  asd  Captubb 
or  Jbbusaleu.  The  open  rebellion  of  Zede- 
kiah WM  followed  almost  immediately  by 


the  advance  into  Judna  of  a  Babylonian 
army  under  Nebuchadnezzar  in  person,  and 
the  strict  investment  of  the  capital.  We 
learn  the  ciroumstanees  of  the  siege  from 
Jeremiah,  in  the  prophecy  which  bears  hi* 
name,  and  in  the  Book  of  Lamentations. 
It  lasted  one  year  and  seven  mouths,  and 
was  accompanied  by  a  blockade  so  strict 
that  the  defenders  were  reduced  'x  the  last 


OB.  xxT.  1—30.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


487 


extremity,  and,  as  in  Samaria  under  Jeho- 
ntm  (ob.  vi.  29),  and  again  in  Jerusalem 
during  the  siege  by  Titus  (Josephus, '  Bell. 
Jud.,'  vi.  3.  §  4),  mothers  ate  their  children 
(see  Lam.  ii.  20 ;  iv.  10).  When  resistance 
was  no  longer  possible,  Zedekiah,  with  his 
men-at-arms,  attempted  to  escape  by  night, 
and  fled  eastward,  but  were  overtaken  and 
captured  in  the  plain  of  Jericho  ( Jer.  zxzix. 
4,  5).  Meanwhile  the  city  fell  into  the 
enemy's  hands,  and  was  treated  with  all 
the  rigours  of  war.  The  temple,  the  royal 
palace,  and  the  great  houses  of  the  rich 
men  were  first  plundered  and  then  de- 
livered to  the  flames  (ver.  9).  The  walls  of 
the  city  were  broken  down  (ver.  10),  and  the 
gates  laid  even  with  the  ground  (Lam.  ii. 
9).  A  great  massacre  of  the  population 
took  place  in  the  streets  (Lam.  ii.  3,  4). 

Yer.  1. — ^And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  ninth 
year  of  hia — i.e.  Zedekiah's — ^reign,  in  the 
tenth  month,  in  the  tenth  day  of  the  mouth. 
Extreme  exa^itness  with  respect  to  a  date 
indicates  the  extreme  importance  of  the 
event  dated.  In  the  whole  range  of  the 
history  contained  in  the  two  Books  of 
the  Kings,  there  is  no  instance  of  the  year, 
month,  and  day  being  all  given  excepting 
in  the  present  chapter,  where  we  find  this 
extreme  exactness  three  times  (vers.  1,  4, 
and  8).  The  date  in  ver.  1  is  confirmed  by 
Jer.  lii.  10  and  Ezek.  xxiv.  1.  That  Nebu- 
chadnezzar King  of  Babylon  came,  he,  and  all 
his  host,  against  Jerusalem.  According  to 
the  description  of  the  eye- witness,  Jeremiah, 
tlie  army  was  one  of  unusual  magnitude. 
Nebuchadnezzar  brought  against  Jerusalem 
at  this  time  "  all  Ms  army,  and  all  the  hing- 
doms  of  the  earth  of  his  dominion,  and  all 
the  people"  (Jer.  xxxiv.  ]).  The  march  of 
the  army  wag  not  direct  upon  Jerusalem ; 
it  at  first  spread  itself  over  Judeea,  wasting 
the  country  and  capturing  the  smaller  forti- 
fied towns  (Josephus,  '  Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  7.  §  3) 
— among  them  Lachish,  so  famous  in  the 
war  against  Sennacherib  (oh.  xviiL  14,  17 ; 
xix.  8),  and  Azekah  (Jer.  xxxiv.  7).  The 
capture  of  these  two  places  was  important 
as  intercepting  Zedekiali's  line  of  communi- 
cation with  Egypt.  Having  made  hiJmself 
master  of  them,  Nebuchadnezzar  proceeded 
to  invest  the  capital.  And  pitched  against 
it — i.e.  encamped,  and  commenced  a  regular 
Biege — and  they  built  forta  against  it  round 
about.    It  has  been  argued  that  p;.-i  does  not 

mean  a  "  fort "  or  "  tower,"  but  a  "  line  of 
ciroumvallation "  (Michaelis,  Hitzig,  The- 
niuB,  Bahr).  Jerusalem,  however,  can 
teaxeelj  be  nirroanded  by  linei  of  oiioum- 


Tallation,  which,  moreover,  were  not  em- 
ployed in  their  liegei  by  the  Orientals. 
Bdyek  (pq)  seems  to  be  properly  a  "  watch- 
tower,"  from  pn,  speeulari,  whence  it  passed 
into  the  meaning  of  a  "tower"  generally. 
The  towers  used  in  sieges  by  the  Assyrians 
and  Babylonians  were  movable  ones,  made 
of  planks,  which  were  pushed  up  to  the 
walla,  so  that  the  assailants  might  attack 
their  adversaries,  on  a  level,  with  greater 
advantage.  Sometimes  they  contained  bat- 
tering-rams (see  Layard,  '  Monuments  of 
Nineveh,'  first  series,  pi.  19 ;  and  comp. 
Jer.  lii.  4;  Ezek.  iv.  2;  xvii.  17;  xxvi.  8;. 
Josephus,  'Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  8.  §  1). 

Ver.  2. — And  the  city  was  besieged  unto 
the  eleventh  year  of  King  Zedekiah.  The 
writer  omits  all  the  details  of  the  siege, 
and  hastens  to  the  final  catastrophe.  From 
Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  we  learn  tliat,  after 
the  siege  had  continued  a  certain  time,  the 
Egyptian  monarch,  Hophra  or  Apries,  made 
an  effurt  to  carry  out  the  terms  of  his  agree- 
ment with  Zedekiah,  and  marched  an  army 
into  Southern  Judsea,  with  the  view  of  raising 
the  siege  (Jer.  xxxvii.  5 ;  Ezek.  xvii.  17). 
Nebuchadnezziir  hastened  to  meet  him. 
With  tlie  whole  or  the  greater  part  of  his 
host  he  marched  southward  and  offered 
battle  to  the  Egyptians.  Whether  an  en- 
gagement took  place  or  not  is  uncertain. 
Josephus  affirms  it,  and  says  that  Apries 
was  "  defeated  and  driven  out  of  Syria " 
(•Ant.  Jud.,'  X.  7.  §  8).  The  silence  of 
Jeremiah  is  thought  to  throw  doubt  on  his 
assertion.  At  any  rate,  the  Egyptians  re- 
tired (Jer.  xxxvii.  7)  and  took  no  further 
part  in  the  struggle.  The  Babylonians  re- 
turned, and  the  siege  recommenced.  A 
complete  blockade  was  established,  and  the 
defenders  of  the  city  soon  began  to  suffer 
from  famine  (Jer.  xxi.  7,  9 ;  Lam.  ii.  12, 20). 
Ere  long,  as  so  often  happens  in  sieges, 
famine  was  followed  by  pestilence  (Jer.  xxi. 
6, 7 ;  Josephus, '  Ant.  Jud.,'  I,  s.  e.),  and  after 
a  time  the  place  was  reduced  to  the  last 
extremity  (Lam.  iv.  3 — 9).  Bread  was  no 
longer  to  be  had,  and  mothers  devoured  their 
children  (Lam.  iv.  10).  At  length  a  breach 
was  effected  in  the  defences;  the  enemy 
poured  in ;  and  the  city  fell  (see  the  com- 
ment on  ver.  4). 

Ver.  3. — ^And  on  the  ninth  day  of  the 
fourth  month.  The  text  of  Kings  is  here 
incomplete,  and  has  to  be  restored  from 
Jer.  lu.  6.  Our  translators  have  supplied 
the  missing  words.  The  famine  prevailed 
in  the  city  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  2).  As  I 
have  elsewhere  observed,  "  The  intensity  of 
the  suffering  endured  may  be  gathered  from 
Lamentations,  Ezekiel,  and  Josephus.  The 
complexions  of  the  men  grew  black  with 
famine  (Lam.  iv.  8 ;  v.  10) ;  their  skin  was 
ihnmk  and  parched  (Lam.  ir.  8) ;  the  riob 


4M 


THB  SECOND  BOOK  OB"  THE  KINGS,     fofi.  txv.  l-«Oi 


uid  noble  women  searched  the  dunghills  for 
wrapi  of  offal  (Lam.  iv.  5) ;  the  children 
perished  for  want,  or  were  even  devoured  by 
their  parents  (Lam.  ii.  20;  iv.  3,  4,  10; 
Bzek.  V.  10) ;  water  was  scarce,  as  well  as 
food,  and  was  sold  at  a  price  (Lam.  T.  4) ; 
a  third  part  of  the  inhabitants  died  of  the 
famine,  and  the  plague  which  grew  out  of 
it  (Ezek.  V.  12)"  (see  the  '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary,' Tol.  ii.  p.  147).  And  there  wag 
no  bread  for  the  people  of  the  land.  Bread 
commonly  fails  comparatively  early  in  a 
liege.  It  was  some  time  before  the  fall  of 
the  city  that  Ebed-Melech  expressed  his 
fear  that  Jeremiah  would  starve,  since  there 
was  no  more  bread  in  the  place  (see  Jer. 
xxxviii.  9). 

Ver.  4. — And  the  city  was  broken  up; 
rather,  broken  into ;  i.e.  a  breach  was  m&de 
in  the  walls.  Probably  the  breach  was  on 
the  north  side  of  the  city,  where  the  ground 
is  nearly  level  (seeEzek.  Ix.  2).  According 
to  Josephns  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  8.  §  2),  the 
enemy  entered  through  the  breach  about 
midnight.  And  all  the  men  of  war — i.e.  all 
the  soldiers  who  formed  the  garrison — fled 
by  night  by  the  way  of  the  gate  between 
two  walls ;  rather,  between  the  two  tuaUt,  as 
in  Jer.  lii.  7.  As  the  enemy  broke  in  on 
the  north,  the  king  and  garrison  quitted 
the  city  on  the  south  by  a  gate  which  opened 
into  the  Tyropoeon  valley,  between  the  two 
walls  tliat  guarded  the  town  on  either  side 
of  it.  Which  is  by  the  king's  garden.  The 
royal  gardens  were  situated  near  the  Pool  of 
Siloam,  at  the  mouth  of  tlie  Tyropoeon,  and 
near  the  junction  of  the  Hinuom  with  the 
Kidron  valley  (see  Josephus, '  Ant.  Jud.,'  vii. 
11).  (Sow  the  Chaldees  were  against  the 
city  round  about.)  The  town,  i.e.,  was 
guarded  on  all  sides  by  Chaldean  troops, 
so  that  Zed.kiah  ami  his  soldiers  must 
either  have  attaclfed  the  line  of  guard,  and 
broken  through  it,  or  have  slipped  between 
two  of  the  blockading  posts  under  cover  of 
the  darkness.  As  no  collision  is  mentioned, 
either  here  or  in  Jeremiah,  the' latter  seems 
the  more  probable  supposition.  And  the 
king  went  the  way  toward  the  plain ;  lite- 
rally, and  he  went.  The  writer  supposes 
that  his  readers  will  understand  that  the 
king  left  the  city  with  his  troops;  and  so 
regards  "he  went"  as  sufficiently  intel- 
ligible. Jeremiah  (lii.  7)  has  "  they  went." 
By  "the  plain"  (literally," the  Arabah") 
the  valley  of  the  Jordan  is  intended,  and 
by  "  the  way  "  to  it  the  ordinary  road  from 
Jerusalem  to  Jericho. 

Ver.  5. — ^And  the  army  of  the  Ohaldeea 
punned  after  the  king.  When  the  escape 
of  Zedekiah  and  the  soldiers  of  the  garrison 
wai  discovered,  hot  pursuit  was  made,  since 
the  honour  of  the  great  king  required  that 
Uf  tnemiei  should  be  brought  motive  to 


hii  presenoe.  The  eommandeta  at  Jeni- 
salem  would  feel  this  the  more  sensibly, 
since  Nebuchadnezzar  had  for  some  time 
retired  from  the  siege,  and  left  its  conduct 
to  them,  while  he  himself  exercised  a  g»- 
neral  superintendence  over  military  affair* 
from  Biblah  (see  ver,  6).  They  were  liable 
to  be  held  responsible  for  the  escape.  And 
overtook  him  in  the  plains  of  Jerioho.  The 
"plains  of  Jerioho"  (in.T.  nin^ip)  is  the  fertile 
tract  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Jordan  near 
its  embouchure,  which  was  excellently  wa- 
tered, and  cultivated  in  gardens,  orchards, 
and  palm-groves.  It  is  probable,  though 
not  certain,  that  Zedekiah  intended  to  cross 
the  Jordan,  and  seek  a  refuge  in  Moab. 
And  all  his  army  were  scattered  from  him 
(comp.  Ezek.  xii.  14).  This  seems  to  be 
mentioned  in  order  to  account  for  there 
being  no  engagement.  Perhaps,  thinking 
themselves  in  security,  and  imagining  that 
they  were  not  followed,  the  troops  had  dis- 
persed themselves  among  the  farmhouses 
and  homesteads,  to  obtain  a  much-needed 
refreshment. 

Ver.  6.— So. they  took  the  king  [Zede- 
kiah], and  brought  him  up  to  the  Sxag  of 
Babylon.  The  presentation  of  rebel  kings, 
when  captured,  to  their  suzerain,  seated  on 
his  throne,  is  one  of  the  most  common 
subjects  of  AB.syrian  and  Babylonian  sculp- 
tures (see  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  i 
p.  292 ;  vol.  iii.  p.  7 ;  Layard,  •  Monuments 
of  Nineveh,'  second  series,  pis.  23,  36,  etc.). 
The  Egyptian  and  Persian  artists  alsc 
represent  it.  To  Biblah.  (For  the  situa- 
tion of  Biblah,  see  the  comment  on  ch. 
xxiii.  33.)  As  Nebuchadnezzar  was  en- 
gaged at  one  and  the  same  time  in  di- 
recting the  sieges  both  of  Tyre  and  of 
Jerusalem,  it  was  a  most  convenient 
position  for  him  to  occupy.  And  they  gave 
judgment  upon  him.  As  a  rebel,  who  had 
broken  his  covenant  and  his  oath  (Ezek. 
xvii.  16,  18),  Zedekiah  was  brought  to  trial 
before  Nebuchadnezzar  and  his  great  lords. 
The  facts  could  not  be  denied,  and  sentence 
was  therefore  passed  upon  him,  nominally 
by  the  court,  practically  by  Nebuchadnezzar 
(Jer.  lii.  9).  By  an  unusual  act  of  clem- 
ency, his  life  was  spared ;  but  the  judgment 
w'as  still  sufficiently  8evere,(see  the  next 
verse). 

Ver.  7. — And  they  slew  the  sons  of  Zede- 
kiah before  his  eyes  (comp.  Herod.,  iii. 
14,  and  2  Maco.  vii.,  for  similar  aggravations 
of  condemned  persons'  sufferings).  As 
Zedekiah  was  no  more  than  thirty-two 
years  of  age  (ch.  xxiv.  18),  bis  sons  must 
have  been  minors,  who  could  not  justly  ba 
held  responsible  for  theii  father's  doings. 
It  was  usual,  however,  in  the  East,  and  even 
among  the  Jews,  to  punish  children  for  the 
■ins  of  their  fathen  (le*  Josh.  viL  24,  8S{ 


««.jav.l-«0.]       THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS. 


489 


oh.  ix.  26;  ziv.  6;  Dan.  tL  24).    And  put 

out  the  eyes  of  Zedeldah.  This,  too,  was 
a  commoa  Oriental  practice.  The  Philis- 
tines blinded  Samson  (Judg.  xvi.  21). 
Bargon,  in  one  of  his  sculptures,  seems  to 
be  blinding  a  prisoner  with  a  spear  (Botta, 
•Monumens  de  Ninive,'  pi.  18).  The 
ancient  Persians  often  blinded  criminals 
(Xen.,  '  Anab.,'  i.  9.  §  13 ;  Ammian.  Marc, 
xxTiL  12;  Prooop.,  'De  Bell.  Pers.,'  i.  11. 
p.  80).  In  modem  Persia,  it  was,  until 
▼ery  lately,  usual  for  a  king,  on  his  acces- 
sion, to  blind  all  his  brothers,  in  order  that 
they  might  be  disqualified  from  reigning. 
The  operation  was  commonly  performed  in 
Persia  by  means  of  a  red-hot  ii'on  rod 
(see  Herod.,  vii.  18).  Zedekiah's  loss  of 
eyesight  reconciled  the  two  apparently 
conflicting  prophecies — ^that  he  would  be 
carried  captive  to  Babylon  (Jer.  sxii.  5, 
etc.),  and  that  he  would  never  see  it  (Ezek. 
xii.  13) — ^in  a  remarkable  manner.  And 
bound  him  with  fetters  of  brass;  literally, 
with  a  pair  of  hrazen  fettert.  Assyrian 
fetters  consisted  of  two  thick  rings  of  iron, 
joined  together  by  a  single  long  lint  (Botta, 
I.  a.  o.) ;  Babylonian  were  probably  similar. 
Captives  of  importance  are  usually  repre- 
sented as  fettered  in  the  sculptures.  And 
carried  him  to  Babylon.  Jeremiah  adds 
(Hi.  11)  that  Nebuchadnezzar  "put  him 
in  prison  till  the  day  of  his  death;" 
and  so  Josephus  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  8.  §  7). 
The  latter  writer  further  tells  us  that,  at 
his  death,  the  Babylonian  monarch  gave 
him  a  royal  funeral  (comp.  Jer.  xxxiv.  6). 

Yer.  8. — And  in  the  fifth  month,  on  the 
seventh  day  of  the  month,  Jeremiah  says 
(lii.  12)  that  it  was  on  the  tenth  day  of 
the  month;  and  bo  Josephus  ('Bell.  Jud.,' 
vi.  4.  §  8).  The  mistake  probably  arose 
from  a  copyist  mistaking  '  (ten)  for  I  (seven). 
According  to  Josephus,  it  was  on  the  same 
day  of  the  same  month  that  the  final 
destruction  of  the  temple  by  the  soldiers 
of  Titus  was  accomplished.  Which  is  the 
nineteenth  year  of  King  B'ebnohadnezzar 
King  of  Babylon.  Nebuchadnezzar  as- 
cended the  throne  in  B.C.  605,  which  was 
the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim,  who  began 
to  reign  in  b.o.  608.  The  seven  remaining 
years  of  Jehoiakim,  added  to  the  eleven  of 
Zedekiith,  and  the  three  months  of  Je- 
hoiachin,  produce  the  result  of  the  text — 
that  the  last  year  of  Zedekiah  was  the 
nineteenth  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  Came 
Nebuzar-adan.  Nebuchadnezzar  had  ap- 
parently hesitated  as  to  how  he  should 
treat  Jerusalem,  since  nearly  %  month 
elapsed  between  the  capture  of  the  city 
and  the  commencement  of  tie  work  of 
destruction.  He  was  probably  led  to  de- 
stroy the  city  by  the  length  of  the  resist- 
t/apu,  (U|d   the   natural   strength  of    the 


position.  The  name,  Nebuzar-adan,  h 
probably  a  Hebraized  form  of  the  Baby- 
Ionian  Nebu:sar-iddina,  "Nebo  has  given 
(us)  a  king."  Captain  of  the  guard ;  lite- 
rally, chief  of  the  executioners;  but  as  the 
king's  guard  were  employed  to  execute  his 
commissions,  and  especially  his  death- 
sentences,  the  paraphrase  is  quite  allow- 
able. A  servant  of  the  King  of  Babylon— 
i.e.  a  subject — unto  Jerusalem.  He  came 
doubtless  with  instructions,  which  he  pro- 
ceeded to  carry  out. 

Yer.  9. — And  he  burnt  the  house  of  the 
lord.  After  it  had  stood,  according  to 
Josephus  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  8.  §  5),  four 
hundred  and  seventy  years  six  montlis  and 
ten  days.  This  calculation,  however,  seems 
to  exceed  the  truth.  Neither  the  Assyrians 
nor  the  Babylonians  had  any  regard  for  the 

fods  of  other  nations.  They  everywhere 
urnt  the  temples,  plundered  the  shrines, 
and  carried  on  the  images  as  trophies  of 
victory.  In  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  they 
would  find  no  images  except  those  of  the 
two  cherubim  (1  Kings  vi.  23 — 28),  which 
they  probably  took  away  with  them.  And 
the  king's  house  (see  1  Kings  vii.  1, 
8 — 12;  oh.  xi.  16).  The  royal  palace  was, 
perhaps,  almost  as  magnificent  as  the 
temple ;  and  its  destruction  was  almost  as 
great  a  loss  to  art.  It  doubtless  contained 
Solomon's  tlirone  of  ivory  (1  Kings  x.  18), 
to  which  there  was  an  ascent  by  six  steps, 
with  two  sculptured  lions  on  each  step. 
And  all  the  houses  of  Jerusalem.  This 
statement  is  qualified  by  the  words  of  the 
following  clause,  which  show  that  only  the 
houses  of  the  princes  and  great  men  were 
purposely  set  on  fire.  Many  of  the  re- 
maining habitations  may  have  perished  in 
the  conflagration,  but  some  probably  es- 
caped, and  were  inhabited  by  "the  poor 
of  the  land."  And  every  great  man's  house 
burnt  he  with  fire  (comp.  2  Chrou.  xxxvi. 
19,  where  the  Chaldeans  are  said  to  have 
burnt  "  all  the  palaces/'). 

Yer.  10.— And  all  the  army  of  the  Chal- 
dees,  that  were  with  the  oaptain  of  the 
guard,  brake  down  the  walls  of  Jerasalem 
round  about.  A  complete  demolition  is  not 
intended.  When  the  exiles  returned,  and 
even  in  the  time  of  Nehemiah  (ii.  13, 15), 
much  of  the  wall  was  still  standing,  and  the 
circuit  was  easily  traced.  Probably  the 
Babylonians  did  not  do  more  than  break 
one  or  two  large  breaches  in  the  wall,  as 
Joash  had  done  (ch.  xiv.  18)  when  Le  took 
Jerusalem  in  the  reign  of  Amaziah. 

Vers.  11— 21.— i^'ofe  of  the  itihabitanU  of 
Juddh,  and  of  the  contents  of  fhe  tempk. 
Having  burnt  the  temple,  the  royal  palace^ 
and  (he  grand  residences  tf  the  piinoipal 


490 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  xxv.  1— 30t 


eitiwns,  Nebnzar-adan  proceeded  to  divide 
the  inhabitants  of  tiie  city  and  oonntrj 
into  t-wo  bodies — those  wliom  he  would  leave 
in  the  land,  and  those  whom  he  would 
carry  off.  The  line  of  demarcation  wm, 
in  a  general  way,  a  social  one.  The  rich 
and  well-to-do  he  would  take  with  him ;  the 
poor  and  insignificant  he  would  leave  be- 
hind (vers.  11,  12).  Among  the  former 
were  included  the  high  priest,  the  "  second 
priest,"  three  of  the  temple  Levites,  the 
commandant  of  the  city,  a  certain  num- 
ber of  the  royal  councillors,  the  "  prin- 
cipal scribe  of  the  host,"  and  sixty  of  the 
"princes"  (vers.  18,  19).  The  latter  were 
chiefly  persons  of  the  agricultural  class, 
who  were  left  to  be  "vinedressers  and 
husbandmen."  From  the  temple,  which  had 
been  already  plundered  twice  (2  Chron. 
zxzvL  7,  10),  he  carried  off  such  vessels  in 
gold  and  silver  and  bronze  as  were  still 
remaining  there,  together  with  the  bronze 
of  the  two  pillars  Jachin  and  Boaz,  of  the 
great  laver,  or  "molten  sea,"  and  of  the 
stands  for  the  smaller  lavers,  all  of  which 
he  broke  up  (ver.  13).  Having  reached 
Biblah,  where  Nebuchadnezzar  still  was, 
he  delivered  up  to  him  both  the  booty  and 
the  prisoners.  Bather  more  than  seventy 
of  the  latter  Nebuchadnezzar  punished  with 
death  (ver.  21).  The  rest  were  taken  to 
Babylon. 

Yer.  11. — Now  the  rest  of  the  people  that 
were  left  in  the  city — i.e.  that  remained 
behind  when  the  king  and  the  garrison 
fled — and  the  fugitives  that  fell  away  to 
the  K^g  of  Babylon,  with  the  remnant  of 
the  multitude ;  rather,  I>oth  the  fugitivet  that 
had  fallen  away  to  the  King  of  Babylon,  and 
the  remnant  of  the  multitude.  The  writer 
means  to  divide  "tlie  rest  of  the  people"  into 
two  classes:  (1)  those  who  during  the 
siege,  or  before  it,  had  deserted  to  the 
Babylonians,  as  no  doubt  many  did,  and  as 
Jeremiah  was  accused  of  doing  (Jer.  xxxvii. 
13);  (2)  those  who  were  found  inside  the 
city  when  it  was  taken.  Sid  Nebuzar- 
adan  the  captain  of  the  guard  carry  away. 

Ver.  12. — But  the  captain  of  the  guard 
left  of  the  poor  of  tht  land.  It  was  incon- 
venient to  deport  persons  who  had  little  or 
nothing.  In  tlie  Assyrian  sculptures  we  see 
the  captives,  who  are  carried  off,  generally 
accompanied  by  their  own  baggage-animals, 
and  taking  with  them  a  certain  amount  of 
their  own  household  stuff.  Pauper  immi- 
gianta  would  not  have  been  of  any  advan- 


tage to  a  country.  To  be  vinedressers  and 
husbandmen.  Jeremiah  adds  that  Nebu- 
zar-adan  "  gave  "  these  persons  "  vineyards 
and  fields  at  the  same  time"  (Jer.  xxxix. 
10).  The  Babylonians  did  not  wish  Judssa 
to  lie  waste,  since  it  could  then  have  paid 
no  tribute.  On  the  contrary,  they  designed 
its  continued  cultivation;  and  Gedaliah, 
the  governor  of  their  appointment,  made 
great  efibrts  to  have  cultivation  resumed 
and  extended  (see  Jer.  xl.  10, 12). 

Ver.  13. — ^And  the  pillars  of  braos  that 
were  in  the  house  of  the  lord.  The  two 
columns,  Jachin  and  Boaz,  cast  by  Hiram 
under  the  directions  of  Solomon  (1  Kings 
vii.  IS — 22),  are  intended.  They  were 
works  of  art  of  an  elaborate  character,  but 
being  too  bulky  to  be  carried  off  entire 
they  were  "broken  in  pieces."  And  tht 
bases.  "The  bases"  were  the  stands  foi 
the  lavers,  also  made  by  Hiram  for  Solomon 
(1  Kings  vii.  27 — 37),  and  very  elaborate, 
having  "borders"  ornamented  with  lions, 
oxen,  and  cherubim.  And  the  brazen  sea 
that  was  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  This 
was  the  great  laver,  fifteen  feet  in  diameter, 
emplaced  originally  on  the  backs  of  twelve 
oxen,  three  facing  each  way  (1  Kings  vii. 
23 — 26),  which  King  Ahaz  had  taken  down 
&om  off  the  oxen  (ch.  xvi.  17)  and  "put 
upon  a  pavement  of  stones,"  but  which 
Hezekiah  had  probably  restored.  The 
oxen  are  mentioned  by  Jeremiah  (lii.  20) 
among  the  objects  which  Nebuzar-adan 
carried  off.  Bid  the  Chaldees  break  in 
pieces — thus  destroying  the  workmanship, 
in  which  their  value  mainly  consisted — and 
earned  the  brass  of  them  to  Babylon, 
Brass,  or  rather  bronze,  was  used  by  the 
Babylonians  for  vessels,  arms,  armour,  and 
implements  generally. 

Ver.  14. — And  the  pots.  The  word  used, 
niTD,  is  translated  by  "caldrons"  in  Jer. 
lii.  18,  and  "  ash-pans  "  in  Eiod.  xxvii.  3. 
The  latter  is  probably  right.  And  the 
shovels — appurtenances  of  the  altar  of  burnt 
sacrifice  —  and  the  snuffers  —  rather,  the 
knives — and  the  spoons — or,  iTioense-cups^- 
and  all  the  vessels  of  brass  wherewith  they 
ministered.  It  appears  that  after  the  two 
previous  spoliations  of  the  temple  by  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, in  B.C.  605  and  in  b.o.  597, 
wherein  so  many  of  the  more  costly  vessels 
Had  been  carried  off  (Dan,  i.  2 ;  oh.  xxiv. 
13),  the  ministrations  had  to  be  performed 
mainly  with  vessels  of  bronze.  Took  they 
away.  Soldiers  are  often  represented  in 
the  Assyrian  sculptures  as  carrying  ofl 
vessels  from  temples,  apparently  on  their 
own  account  (see  '  Ancient  Monarchies,'  voL 
i,  p,  475,  2nd  edit,). 

Ver,  15, — And  the  firepans,  and  the  bowls ; 
rather,  the  muff-diahei  (Exod,  xxv.  38;  1 
Kings  viL  CO)  and  iht  bowls,  oi  harim  (Kzod. 


OH.  XXT.  1— 80.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


491 


xH.  22;  1  Kings  vii.  50;  2  Chron.  iv.  8). 
Of  these  Solomon  made  one  hundred,  all  in 
gold.  And  such  things  as  weie  of  gold,  in 
goli  The  "and"  supplied  by  our  trans- 
lators -would  be  better  omitted.  The  writer 
means  that  of  the  articles  enumerated  some 
were  in  gold  and  some  in  silver,  though 
probably  the  greater  part  were  in  bronze. 
And  of  silver,  in  silver,  the  captain  of  the 
guard  took  away  (comp.  Jer.  lii.  19). 

Ver.  16. — The  two  pillars  (see  the  comment 
on  ver.  13),  one  sea — rather,  the  one  sea — 
and  the  bases  which  Solomon  had  made  for 
the  honse  of  the  Lord ;  the  brass  of  all  these 
vessels  was  without  weight ;  i.e.  the  quan- 
tity of  the  brass  was  so  large  that  it  was 
not  thought  to  be  worth  while  to  weigh  it. 
When  gold  and  silver  vessels  were  carried 
off,  their  weight  was  carefully  taken  by  the 
royal  scribes  or  secretaries  ('  Ancient  Monar- 
chies,' vol.  i.  p.  47.6),  who  placed  it  on 
record  as  a  check  upon  embezzlement  or 
peculation. 

Ver.  17. — The  height  of  the  one  pillar  was 
eighteen  cubits  (comp.  1  Kings  vii.  15  and 
Jer.  lii.  21,  in  which  latter  place  an  even 
more  elaborate  account  of  the  pillars  is 
given),  and  the  chapiter  upon  it  was  brass ; 
rather,  and  there  was  a  chapiter  (or  capital) 
upon  it  of  iross— and  the  height  of  the 
chapiter  three  cubits.  The  measure  given, 
both  in  1  Kings  vii.  16  and  Jer.  lii.  22,  is 
"five  cubits,"  which  is  generally  regarded 
■s  correct ;  but  the  proportion  of  3  to  18,  or 
one-sixth,  is  far  more  suitable  for  a  capital 
than  that  of  5  to  18,  or  between  a  third  and 
a  fourth.  And  the  wreathen  work — rather, 
and  there  was  wreathen  work,  or  network — 
and  pomegranates  upon  the  chapiter  round 
about,  all  of  brass  (comp.  1  Kings  vii.  18, 
19):  and  like  unto  these  had  the  second 
pillar  with  wreathen  work.  The  ornamen- 
tation of  the  second  pillar  was  the  same  as 
that  of  the  first  (see  Jer.  lii.  22). 

Ver.  18.— And  the  captain  of  the  guard 
took  Seraiah  the  chief  priest.  The  "chief 
priest "  is  a  new  expression ;  but  it  can  only 
mean  the  "  high  priest."  Seraiah  seems  to 
have  been  the  grandson  of  Hilkiah  (1  Chron. 
vi.  13,  14),  and  an- ancestor  (grandfather 
or  great-grandfather)  of  Ezra  (Ezra  vii.  1). 
He  had  stayed  at  his  post  till  the  city  was 
taken,  and  was  now  seized  by  Nebuzar-adan 
as  one  of  the  most  important  personages 
whom  he  found  in  the  city.  And  Zephaniah 
the  second  priest.  Keil  and  Bahr  translate 
"  a  priest  of  the  second  order,"  i.e.  a  mere 
ordinary  priest;  but  something  more  than 
this  must  be  intended  by  Jeremiah,  who 
calls  him  (lii  34),  ."Uf'pri  ps,  i.e.  dis- 
tinctly "the  second  priest."  It  is  conjec- 
tured that  he  was  the  high  priest's  substi- 
tute, empowered  to  act  for  him  on  occasions. 
PoBsibly   he  wtw   the   Zephaniah,  son  of 


Maaseiah,  of  whom  we  hear  a  good  deal  in 
Jeremiah  (see  Jer.  xxi.  1 ;  xxix,  25 — 29 ; 
xxxvii.  3).  And  the  three  keepers  of  the 
door;  rather,  and  three  keepers  of  the 
threshold.  There  were  twenty-five  "gate- 
keepers" of  the  temple  (1  Ohron.  xxvi.  17, 
18),  all  of  them  Levites.  On  what  principle 
Nebuzar-adan  selected  three  out  of  the 
twenty-four  is  uncertain,  since  we  have  no 
evidence  that  the  temple  had,  as  Bahr  says 
it  had, "  three  main  entrances."  Jer.  xxxviii. 
14  certainly  does  not  prove  this. 

Ver.  19. — And  out  of  the  city  he  took  an 
officer — ^literally,  a  eunwh — that  was  set 
over  the  men  of  war — eunuchs  were  often 
employed  in  the  East  as  commanders  of 
soldiers.  Bagoas,  general  of  the  Persian 
monarch,  Oohus,  is  a  noted  example — and 
five  men  of  them  that  were  in  the  king's 
presence — literally,  of  them ,  that  saw  the 
king's  facei  i.e.  that  were  haljitually  about 
the  court;  Jeremiah  says  (lii.  25)  "seven 
men  "  instead  of  five — which  were  found  in 
the  city — the  majority  of  the  courtiers  had, 
no  doubt,  dispersed,  and  were  not  to  be  found 
when  Nebuzar-adan  searched  for  them — and 
the  principal  scribe  of  the  host ;  rather,  aa 
in  the  margin,  the  scribe  of  the  captain  of 
the  host  (rhv  ypafifiarea  tov  &pxoyros  ttJs 
Swd/ieas,  LXX.).  "  Scribes  "  or  "  secre- 
taries" always  accompanied  the  march  of 
Assyrian  armies,  to  count  and  record  the 
number  of  the  slain,  to  catalogue  the  spoil, 
perhaps  to  write  despatches  and  the  like. 
We  may  gather  that  Jewish  commandants 
were  similarly  attended.  Which  mustered 
the  people  of  the  land — i.e.  enrolled  them, 
or  entered  them  upon  the  army  list,  another 
of  the  "scribe's"  duties— and  threescore  men 
of  the  people  of  the  land  that  were  found  in 
the  city.  Probably  notables  of  one  kind  or 
another,  persons  regarded  as  especially  re- 
sponsible for  the  revolt. 

Ver.  20. — And  Nebuzar-adan  captain  of 
the  guard  took  these,  and  brought  them  to 
the  King  of  Babylon  to  Eiblah(see  the  com- 
ment on  ver.  6).  Two  batches  of  prisoners 
seem  to  have  been  brought  before  Nebuchad- 
nezzar at  Eiblah — first,  the  moat  important 
of  all  the  captives,  Zedekiab  and  his  sons 
(vers.  6, 7) ;  then,  a  month  later,  Seraiah  the 
high  priest,  and  the  other  persons  enume- 
rated in  vers.  18  and  19.  The  remaining 
prisoners  were  no  doubt  brought  also  by 
Nebuzar-adan  to  Eiblah,  but  were  not  con- 
ducted into  the  presence  of  the  king. 

Ver.  21. — And  the  King  of  Babylon  smote 
them,  and  slew  them  at  Eiblah  in  the  land 
of  Hamath.  Severities  of  this  kind  cha- 
racterized all  ancient  warfare.  The  As- 
syrian sculptures  show  us  prisoners  of  war 
impaled  on  crosses,  beheaded,  beaten  on  the 
head  with  maces,  and  sometimes  extended 
on  the  ground  and  flayed.    The  inscription: 


«8S 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.      [oh.  xxv.  1— 3a 


■peak  ot  hnndreds  sb  thna  exeonted,  And 
mention  others  as  burnt  in  faraaceg,  or 
thrown  to  wild  beasts,  or  cruelly  mutilated. 
Herodotus  says  (iii.  159)  that  Darius  Hystas- 
pia  crucified  three  thousand  prisoners  round 
about  Babylon  after  one  of  its  reroltg.  That 
monarch  himself,  in  the  Behistuu  inscription, 
■peaks  of  many  cases  where,  after  capturing 
rebel  chiefs  in  the  field  or  behind  walls, 
he  executed  them  and  their  principal  adhe- 
rents (see  Col.  ii.  Far.  13;  Col.  iii.  Par.  8, 
11).  If  Nebuchadnezzar  contented  himself 
with  the  execution  of  between  seventy  and 
eighty  of  the  rebel  inhabitants  of  Jerusa- 
lem, he  cannot  be  charged  with  cruelty,  or 
extreme  severity,  according  to  the  notions  of 
the  time.  So  Judah  was  carried  away  oat 
of  their  land.  Jeremiah  adds  an  estimate  of 
the  number  carried  off.  These  were,  he 
gays  (Iii.  28—30),  in  the  captivity  of  the 
■eventh  (query,  seventeenth?)  year,  3023; 
in  the  captivity  of  the  eighteenth  year,  832 ; 
and  in  that  of  the  twenty-third,  five  years 
later,  745,  making  a  total  of  4600.  If  we 
Buppose  these  persons  to  be  men,  and  multiply 
by  four  for  the  women  and  children,  the  en- 
tire number  will  still  be  no  more  than  18,400. 

Teni.  22 — 26. — Hutory  of  <ft«  remnant 
left  tn  the  land  hy  Nebuzar-adan.  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, when  he  carried  off  Zedekiah 
to  Babylon,  appointed,  as  governor  of  Judaea, 
a  certain  Gedaliah,  a  Jew  of  good  position, 
but  not  of  the  royal  family.  Gedaliah  made 
Mizpah,  near  Jerusalem,  his  residence ;  and 
here  he  was  shortly  joined  by  a  number  of 
Jews  of  importance,  who  had  escaped  from 
Jerusalem  and  hidden  themselves  until  the 
Babylonians  were  gone.  Of  these  the  most 
eminent  were  Jobanan  the  sou  of  Kareah, 
and  Ishmael,  a  member  of  the  royal  house 
of  David.  Gedaliah  irrged  the  refugees  to 
be  good  subjects  of  the  King  of  Babylon, 
and  to  settle  themselves  to  agricultural  pur- 
suits. His  advice  was  accepted  and  at  first 
followed;  but  presently  a  warning  was  given 
to  Gedaliah  by  Johanan  that  Ishmael  de- 
signed bis  destruction ;  and  soon  afterwards, 
ea  Gedaliah  took  no  precautions,  the  murder 
was  actually  carried  out.  Other  atrocities 
followed ;  but  after  a  time  Johanan  and  the 
other  leading  refugees  took  up  arms,  forced 
Ishmael  to  fly  to  the  Ammonites,  and  then, 
fearing  that  Nebuchadnezzar  would  hold 
them  responsible  for  Ishmael's  act,  against 
Jeremiah'i  remonstrances,  fled,  with  the 
gmi  mass  of  the  Jews  that  had  been  left 
to  th*  land,  ftom  J'adna  into  Egypt.    Here 


our  writer  leaves  them  (rer.  26),  without 
touching  on  the  calamities  which  befell  them 
there,  according  to  the  prophetic  annoonoo- 
ments  of  Jeremiah  (xlir.  2—28). 

Ver.  22. — ^And  as  for  the  people  that  re- 
mained in  the  land  of  Judah.  These  con- 
sisted of  Gedaliah  and  his  court,  which 
included  Jeremiah,  Barucb,  and  some  prin- 
cesses of  the  royal  house  (Jer.  xliii.  6) ;  the 
poor  of  the  land,  whom  Nebuzar-adan  had 
intentionally  left  behind ;  and  a  considerable 
number  of  Jewish  refugees  of  a  better  class, 
who  came  in  from  the  neighbouring  nations, 
and  from  places  in  Judsea  where  they  had 
been  hiding  themselves  (Jer.  xl.  7 — 12).  For 
about  two  months  all  went  well  with  this 
"  remnant,"  who  applied  themselves  to  agri- 
cultural pursuits,  in  which  they  prospered 
greatly.  Whom  ITebachadnezzar  King  of 
Babylon  had  left  (see  ver.  12),  even  over 
them  he  made  Qe^Iiah  the  son  of  Ahikam. 
Ahikam  had  protected  Jeremiah  in  his 
earlier  days  (Jer.  xxvi.  24);  Gedaliah  pro- 
tected him  in  the  latter  part  of  the  siege 
(Jer.  xxxix.  14).  Nebuchadnezzar's  choice 
of  Gedaliah  for  governor  was  probably  made 
from  some  knowledge  of  his  having  sided 
with  Jeremiah,  whose  persistent  endeavours 
to  make  the  Jews  submit  to  the  Babylonian 
yoke  seem  to  have  been  well  known,  not 
only  to  the  Jews,  but  to  the  Babylonians; 
most  likely  by  reason  of  the  letter  he  sent  to 
his  countrymen  already  in  captivity  (Jer. 
xxix.).  The  son  of  Shaphan,  ruler.  Probably 
not  "  Shaphan  the  scribe  "  (ch.  xxii.  3,  12), 
but  an  unknown  person  of  the  same  name. 

Ver.  23. — And  when  all  the  captains  of 
the  armies;  rather,  the  captains  oftheforcea 
(Revised  Version) ;  t.e.  the  officers  in  com- 
mand of  the  troops  which  had  defended 
Jerusalem,  and,  having  escaped  from  the 
city,  were  dispersed  and  scattered  in  various 
directions,  partly  in  Judsea,  partly  in  foreign 
countries.  They  and  their  men^apparently, 
each  of  them  had  kept  with  him  a  certain 
number  of  the  men  under  his  command — 
heard  that  the  King  of  Babylon  had  mad* 
Gedaliah  governor.  The  news  was  grati- 
fying to  them.-  It  was  something  to  have 
a  Jewish  ruler  set  over  them,  and  not  a 
Babylonian;  it  was,  perhaps,  even  more  to 
have  a  man  noted  for  his  justice  and  mode- 
ration (Josephus,  '  Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  9.  §  12), 
who  had  no  selfish  aims,  but  desired  simply 
the  prosperity  and  good  government  of  the 
country.  There  oame  to  Gedaliah  to  Mizpah, 
even  Ishmael  the  son  of  N'ethaniah,  and  Jo- 
hanan the  son  of  CareiUi — Jeremiah  (xl.  8) 
has  "  Johanan  and  Jonathan,  the  sons  of 
Eareah" — and  Seraiahthe  son  of  Tanhumeth 
the  Netophathite.  In  Jer.  xl.  8  we  read, 
"  And  Seraiah  the  son  of  Tanbnmetti,  and 


OH.  XXV.  1—30,]      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS. 


49S 


fhe  MMM  o/  Ephai  the  Ketophatbite,"  by 
which  it  would  seem  that  loine  woids  have 
fallen  out  hem.  B7''Netophathite"  is  to 
be  nndeTstood  "native of  Netophah,"  now 
Antubab,  near  Bethlehem  (see  Ezra  ii.  22 ; 
Neb.  vii.  26).  And  Jaazaniah  the  son  of  a 
Ilaaohatbite.  Called  Jetaniah  by  Jeremiah, 
and  said  by  him  ^lii<  1)  to  have  been  the 
son  of  a  certain  Hoshaiah.  Hosliaiah  was 
a  native  of  the  Syrian  kingdom,  or  district, 
known  as  Maachab,  or  Maachathi  (Dent. 
iiL  14;  1  Obion,  xiz.  6, 7),  which  adjoined 
Bashan  towards  the  north.  They  and  their 
men.  The  persons  mentioned,  tiiat  is,  with 
the  soldiers  under  them,  came  to  Gedaliah 
at  Mizpah,and  placed  themselves  under  him 
•s  his  subjects. 

Yer.  24. — And  Oedaliah  sware  to  them, 
and  to  their  men.  As  rebels,  their  lives 
were  forfeit;  but  Gedaliah  granted  them 
an  amnesty,  and  for  their  greater  assurance 
■wore  to  them  that,  so  long  as  they  remained 
peaceful  subjects  of  the  King  of  Babylon, 
they  should  suffer  no  barm.  Jeremiah  adds 
(xl.  10)  that  he  urged  them  to  apply  them- 
selves diligently  to  agricultural  pursuits. 
And  said  nnto  them.  Fear  not  to  be  the 
servants  of  the  Chaldees :  dwell  in  the  land, 
and  serve  the  King  of  Babylon;  and  it 
shall  be  well  with  yon;  'rather,  and  mid 
unto  tliem,  Fear  not  because  of  Oie  servants  of 
the  Chaldeans,  etc.  "  Do  not  be  afraid,"  t.e., 
"  of  the  Chaldean  ofScials  and  guards  ( Jer. 
zlii.  3)  that  are  about  my  court.  Be  assured 
that  they  shall  do  you  no  hurt." 

Yer.  25. — ^And  it  came  to  pass  in  the 
seventh  month  —  two  months  only  after 
Gedaliah  received  his  appointment  as 
governor,  which  was  in  the  fifth  month — 
that  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaiuah,  the  son 
of  Elishama — "  Nethanlah  "  is  otherwise 
noknown;  "Elishama"  may  be  the  "scribe" 
or  secretary  of  Jehoiakim  mentioned  in 
Jer.  xzxvi.  12,  20— of  the  seed  royal.  So 
Josephus  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  z.  9.  §  2)  and  Jere- 
miah (zli.  1).  Joeephus  adds  that  he  was 
a  wicked  and  most  crafty  man,  who,  during 
the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  had  made  his  escape 
from  the  place,  and  fled  for  shelter  to 
Baalim  (Baalis,  Jer.  zl.  14),  King  of 
Ammon,  with  whom  be  remained  till  the 
siege  was  over.  Came,  and  ten  men  with 
him — as  his  retinue — and  smote  Oedaliah, 
that  he  died.  Gedaliah  had  been  warned 
by  Johanan  and  the  other  captains  (Jer. 
zl.  13 — 15)  of  Ishmael's  probable  intentions, 
but  had  treated  the  accusation  as  a  calumny, 
and  reftised  to  believe  that  his  life  was  in 
any  danger.  When  Ishmael  and  his  ten 
companions  arrived,  he  stUl  suspected 
nothing,  but  received  them  hospitably  (Jer. 
zli.  1),  entertained  them  at  a  grand  banquet, 
according  to  Josephus  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  z.  9. 
f  4),  and  being  overtaken  with  dnmkennesa, 


was  attacked  and  killed  without  difficulty. 
And  the  Jews  and  the  Chaldees  that  wer* 
with  him  at  Mizpah  (oomp.  Jer.  zlL  3, 
"  Ishmael  also  slew  aU  the  Jews  that  were 
with  him,  even  with  Gedaliah,  at  Mizpah, 
and  the  Chaldeans  that  were  found  there, 
and  the  men  of  war  ").  It  is  evident  from 
this  that  Gedaliah  had  a  Chaldean  guard. 

Yer.  26. — And  all  the  people,  both  small 
and  great,  and  the  captains  of  the  armies 
(see  above,  ver.  23).  The  leader  of  the 
movement  was  Johanan,  the  son  of  Careah. 
Having  first  attacked  Ishmael,  and  forced 
him  to  fly  to  the  Ammonites  (Jer.  zlL  15), 
he  almost  immediately  afterwards  conceived 
a  fear  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  would,  he 
thought,  resent  the  murder  of  Gedaliah,  and 
even  avenge  it  upon  those  who  had  done 
all  they  could  to  prevent  it.  He  therefore 
gathered  together  the  people,  and  made  a 
preliminary  retreat  to  Chimham,  near  Beth- 
lehem (Jer.  zli.  17),  on  the  road  to  Egypt, 
whence  he  subsequently,  against  the  earnest 
remonstrances  and  prophetic  warnings  of 
Jeremiah  (xlii.  9 — 22),  carried  them  on  into 
Egypt  itself  (Jer.  zliii.  1—7).  The  first  settle- 
ment  was  made  at  Tahpanhes,  or  Daphnes. 
Arose,  and  came  into  Egypt :  for  they  were 
afraid  of  the  Chaldees  (see  Jer.  xli.  18 ;  xliii. 
3).  There  does  not  appear  to  have  been  any 
real  reason  for  this  fear.  Nebuchadnezzar 
might  have  been  trusted  to  distinguish 
between  the  act  of  an  individual  and  con- 
spiracy on  the  part  of  the  nation. 

'Vers.27— 30.— Fate  of  JeJioiaehin.  The 
writer  of  Kings,  whose  general  narrative, 
since  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  has  been  gloomy 
and  dispiriting,  seems  to  have  desired  to 
terminate  his  history  in  a  more  cheerful 
strain.  He  therefore  mentions,  as  his  last 
incident,  the  &te  of  Jehoiachin,  who,  after 
thirty-siz  years  of  a  cruel  and  seemingly 
hopeless  imprisonment,  experienced  a  happy 
change  of  circumstances.  The  king  who 
succeeded  Nebuchadnezzar,  his  son,  Evil- 
Merodaoh,  in  the  first  year  of  his  sovereignty 
had  compassion  upon  the  miserable  captive, 
and  releasing  him  from  prison,  changed  his 
garments  (ver.  29),  and  gave  him  a  place  at 
his  table,  among  other  dethroned  monarchs, 
even  ezalting  him  above  the  rest  (ver.  28), 
and  making  him  an  allowance  for  his 
support  (ver.  30).  This  alleviation  of  thsii 
king's  condition  could  not  but  be  felt  by  the 
captive  Jews  as  a  happy  omen — a  portent  of 
the  time  when  their  lot  too  would  be  alle- 
viated, and  the  Almighty  Disposer  of  events, 
having  punished  them  sufficiently  for  their 


494 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINGa     [oh.  zzv.  1— 80. 


■ina,  would  relent  at  last,  and  pnt  an  end 
to  their  banish  ment,  and  give  them  lest  and 
peace  in  theii  native  country. 

Ver.  27. — And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  seven 
and  thirtieth  year  of  the  captivity  of  Jehoia- 
chin  King  of  Jndah.  According  to  Berosus 
and  the  Canon  of  Ptolemy,  Nebuchadnezzar 
reigned  forty-four  years.  He  carried  off 
Jehoiaobin  to  Babylon  in  his  eighth  year 
(ch.  xxiv.  12),  and  thus  the  year  of  hia 
death  vf  ould  exactly  coincide  with  the  thirty- 
seventh  year  of  the  captivity  of  the  Jewish 
prince.  In  the  twelfth  month,  on  the  seven 
and  twentieth  day  of  the  month.  The  five 
and  twentieth  day,  according  to  Jeremiah 
(lii.  31).  (On  the  rarity  of  such  exact  dates 
ia  the  historical  Scriptures,  see  the  comment 
on  ver.  1.)  That  Evil  -  Uerodaoh  King 
of  Bahylon.  The  native  name,  which  is 
thus  expressed,  seems  to  have  been"  Avil- 
Marduk."  The  meaning  of  avU  is  nnceitain; 
but  the  name  probably  placed  the  prince 
under  the  protection  of  Merodaoh,  who  was 
Nebuchadnezzar's  favourite  god.  Avil- 
Marduk  aEcended  the  Babylonian  throne 
in  B.a  561,  and  reigned  two  years  only, 
when  he  was  murdered  by  Neriglissar,  or 
Nergal-sar-uzur,  his  brother-in-law.  In  the 
year  that  he  began  to  reign — the  year 
B.o.  561 — did  lift  up  the  head  of  Jehoiachin 
King  of  Jndah  out  of  prison.  (For  the 
phrase  used,  see  Gen.  xl.  13,  19,  20.)  The 
act  was  probably  part  of  a  larger  measure 
of  pardon  and  amnesty,  intended  to  in- 
augurate favourably  the  new  reign. 

Ver.  28. — ^And  he  spake  kindly  to  him ; 
literally,  ha  ipdke  good  things  with  him;  but 
the  meaning  is  well  expressed  by  our  ren- 
,  dering.  Evil-Merodaoh  compassionated  the 
sufferings  of  the  unfortunate  monarch,  who 
had  grown  old  in  prison,  and  strove  by  kind 
speech  to  make  up  to  him  for  them  in  a 
certain  measure.  And  set  bis  throne  above 
the  throne  of  the  kings  that  were  with  him  in 
Babylon.  Evil-Merodach  had  at  his  court 
other  captured  kings  besides  Jehoiaobin, 
whose  presence  was  considered  to  enhance 
his  dignity  and  grandeur  (comp.  Judg.  i.  7). 
An  honourable  position  and  probably  a  seat 
of  honour  was  assigned  to  each;  but  the 
highest  position  among  them  was  now  con- 
ferred on  Jehoiacbin.  Whether  he  had 
actually  a  more  elevated  seat,  is  (as  Bahr 
observes)  a  matter  of  no  importance. 

Yer.  29.— And  changed  his  prison  ga^ 
ments.  The  subject  to  "changed"  may 
be  either  "Jehoiacbin"  or  "Evil-Merodaoh." 
Our  translators  preferred  the  latter,  oni 
Bevisers  the  former.  In  either  ease  the 
general  meaning  is  the  same.  Evil-Mero- 
daoh supplied  snitable   garments   to   the 


released  monarch  Instead  of  bis  <*  prison 
garments,"  and  Jehoiacbin  arrayed  himself 
in  the  comely  apparel  before  taking  his  seat 
among  bis  equals.  Dresses  of  hononr  are 
among  the  most  common  gifts  which  an 
Oriental  monarch  makes  to  his  subjects 
(see  Oen.  sli.  42;  Esth.  vi.  8, 11 ;  viii  15; 
Dan.  V.  29;  Xen.,  'CyropV  v.  1.  §  1).  And 
he— {.e.  Jehoiacbin — did  eat  bread  oontinu- 
ally  before  him.  Besides  giving  occasional 
great  feasts  (see  Esth.  i.  8 — 9),  Oriental 
monarohs  usually  entertain  at  their  table 
daily  a  large  number  of  guests,  some  of 
whom  are  specially  invited,  while  others 
have  the  privilege  of  daily  attendance  (see 
*  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  iii.  pp.  214, 215). 
It  was  to  this  latter  class  that  Jehoiacbin 
was  admitted.  Comp.  2  Sam.  ix.  7 — 13| 
which  shows  that  the  custom  was  one  not 
unknown  at  the  Jewish  court.  All  tiie  days 
of  his — <.e.  Jehoiachin's — ^life.  Jehoiacbin 
enjoyed  tiiis  privilege  till  his  death. 
Whether  this  fell  in  the  lifetime  of  Evil- 
Merodach  or  not,  is  scarcely  in  the  writer's 
thoughts.  He  merely  means  to  tell  us  that 
the  comparative  comfort  and  dignity  which 
Jehoiacbin  enjoyed  after  the  accession  of 
Evil-Merodach  to  the  throne  was  not  sub- 
sequently clouded  over  or  disturbed.  He 
continued  a  privileged  person  at  the  Baby- 
lonian court  80  long  as  he  lived. 

Ver.  80. — And  lus  allowance  was  a  eon- 
tinnal  allowance.  Eeil  supposes  that  this 
''allowance"  was  a  daily  "ration  of  food," 
intended  for  the  maintenance  of  a  certain 
number  of  servants  or  retainers.  But  it  ia 
quite  as  likely  to  have  been  a  money  pay- 
ment. The  word  translated  by  "allowance" 
— ^nu;]^ — does  not  point  necessarily  to  food. 
It  is  a  "  portion"  of  any  kind.  Oiven  him 
of  the  king — 1.«.  out  of  the  privy  purse,  by 
the  king's  command — a  daily  rate  for  every 
day — or,  a  certain  amount  day  by  day — all 
the  days  of  his  life  (see  the  comment  on  the 
preceding  verse).  Both  the  privileges  ac- 
corded to  Jehoiacbin,  his  sustenance  at  the 
king's  table,  and  his  allowance,  whether  in 
money  or  in  kind,  continued  to  the  day  of  hia 
death.  Neither  of  them  was  ever  revoked 
or  forfeited.  Thus  this  last  representative 
of  the  Davidio  monarchy,  after  thirty-six 
years  of  ohastiseiaent,  experienced  a  happy 
change  of  oiroumstances,  and  died  in  peace 
and  comfort.  Probably,  as  Keil  says, "  tliis 
event  was  intended  as  a  comforting  sign  to 
the  whole  of  the  captive  people,  that  the 
Lord  would  one  day  pnt  an  end  to  their 
banishment,  if  they  would  acknowledge 
that  it  was  a  well-merited  punishment  for 
their  sins  that  they  had  been  driven  away 
from  before  his  face,  and  would  turn  again 
to  the  Lord  their  Gtoi  with  all  their  heart" 


OH.  xxT.  1— 30.]       THE  8E00ND  BOOK  OF  THK  KINQ&  496 


HOMILETICa. 

Ven.  1 — 10.— ThtfcUl  of  Jvddh  and  Jemtalem  a  toamingfor  oR  time  to  dU  nation*. 
Jerumlem  had  defied  Zerah  with  his  host  of  a  million  men  (2  Chron.  sir.  9 — 16),  and 
had  triumphed  over  Sennacherib  at  the  head  of  all  the  armed  force  of  Assyria  (ch.  six. 
35,  36) :  why  did  she  succumb  to  Nebuchadnezzar  ?  It  is  quite  certain  that  BaWlon 
was  not  a  stronger  power  than  either  Egypt  or  Assyria  when  in  their  prime.  There 
ia  no  reason  to  believe  that  Nebuchadnezzar  was  a  better  general  than  Sennacherib,  or 
even  than  Zerah.  The  ground  of  the  difference  in  the  result  of  Judah's  struggle  with 
Babylon,  and  her  earlier  struggles  with  Egypt  and  Assyria,  is  certainly  not  to  be  sought 
in  the  greater  strength  of  her  assailant,  but  in  her  own  increased  weakness.  What, 
then,  were  the  causes  of  this  weakness  ? 

L  It  was  not  the  result  of  ant  deoline  nr  uilitabt  stbekotk,  as  osdinabilt 
ESTIMATED.  The  population  of  Judasa  may  have  diminished,  but  under  Josiah  her 
dominion  had  increased  (ch.  xziii.  15 — 20),  and  it  is  probable  that  she  could  still  put 
into  the  field  as  many  men  as  at  any  former  period.  Even  if  there  were  a  diminution 
in  the  number  of  her  troops,  the  fact  would  not  have  been  one  of  much  importance, 
rince  her  military  successes  had  never  been  dependent  upon  the  numerical  proportion 
between  her  own  forces  and  those  of  her  adversaries,  but  had  been  most  signal  and 
striking  where  the  disproportion  had  been  the  greatest  (see  Numb.  xzxi.  3 — H ;  Judg. 
TiL  7—22;  viiL  4—12;  xt.  15;  1  Sam.  xiv.  11—16;  2  Obron.  xiv.  8—12;  xx. 
16—24,  etc.). 

II.  It  was  not  ntonnoRD  bt  internal  qttabbel  ob  dissension.  Ewald  attributes 
the  fall  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  mainly  to  the  antagonism  between  the  monarchy  and 
the  prophetical  order,  and  to  the  violence  employed  by  each  against  the  other.  "  The 
kingdom  of  Judah  was  torn,"  he  says,  "  with  less  and  less  hope  of  remedy,  by  the 
most  irreconcilable  internal  divisions ;  and  the  sharpest  dissensions  at  length  made 
their  way  into  the  sanctity  of  every  house."  Violence  on  the  part  of  the  kings  was 
met  by  violence  on  the  part  of  the  prophets ;  and  "  the  sacred  land  went  to  ruin  under 
■  the  development  of  the  element  of  force "  ('  History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iv.  p.  289).  It  is 
difficult  to  discover  any  sufficient  support  for  this  view  in  the  sacred  narrative,  which 
shows  us  Hezekiah  on  the  most  friendly  terms  with  Isaiah,  Josiah  on  the  same  terms 
with  Huldah,  and  Zedekiah  certainly  not  on  unfriendly  terms  with  Jeremiah.  In  the 
closing  scene  the  antagonism  is  not  between  prophetism  and  monarchy,  hut  between 
prophetism  and  an  aristocratical  clique.  Nor  is  it  at  all  clear  that  the  final  result  was 
seriously  afiected  by  the  antagonism  in  question.  It  may  have  somewhat  relaxed  the 
defence ;  but  we  cannot  possibly  imagine  that,  if  there  had  been  no  difference  of  view, 
no  sharp  dissension,  a  successful  resistance  could  have  been  mad&  The  resistance 
might,  perhaps,  have  been  prolonged  had  all  IsraeUtes  been  of  one  mind;  but  still 
Babylon  would  have  prevailed  in  the  end. 

lU.  It  was  not  fbou  ant  tbeacbert  ob  debebtion  on  the  fabt  of  allies. 
Allies  had  never  done  Judasa  much  good ;  and  dependence  on  them  was  regarded  as  an 
indication  of  want  of  faith  in  Jehovah.  But,  so  far  as  the  matter  of  alliances  went, 
Judah  was  in  a  superior,  rather  than  in  an  inferior,  position  now  than  formerly.  Her 
natural  allies  in  any  struggle  with  the  dominant  power  of  Western  Asia  were 
Phcenicia  and  Egypt ;  and  at  this  time  both  Phcenicia  and  Egypt  rendered  her  aid. 
Tyre  was  in  revolt  against  Babylon  from  b.o.  698  to  b.o.  685,  and  gave  occupation  to 
a  considerable  portion  of  the  Babylonian  forces  while  Jerusalem  was  being  besieged. 
Egypt,  under  the  enterprising  Hophra  (Apries),  took  the  field  soon  after  the  siege 
began,  and  for  a  time  succeeded  in  raising  it.  Babylon  had  to  contend  with  the  three 
allies.  Tyre,  Egypt,  and  Judsea,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  but  proved  equal  to  the 
■train,  and  overcame  all  three  antagonists. 

Judaea's  weakness  lay  in  this — that  she  had  offended  God.  From  the  time  of  Moses 
to  that  of  Zedekiah,  it  was  not  her  own  inherent  strength,  or  vigour,  or  energy,  that 
had  protected  and  sustained  her,  bat  the  supporting  hand  of  the  Almighty.  God  had 
ever  "gone  forth  with  her  armies"  (Ps.  Ix.  10).  OnA  had  given  her  "help  from 
trouble.  Through  Qod  she  had  "  done  valiantly."  He  it  was  who  had  "  trodden 
d«WB  her  enemies "  (Fk  Ix.  11,  12).    Many  of  their  deliverances  had  been  tkrongh 


4,96  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINOa  [oh.  xxv.  1— 80. 

Mtxud  miracle;  otbers  were  the  result  of  •  divinely  infuRed  oonrags  mrrading  their 
own  imnlu,  or  •  panic  falling  upon  their  adversaries.  It  was  only  as  God's  "peculiar 
people,"  enjoying  his  covenanted  protection,  that  they  could  possibly  hold  their  place 
among  the  natioDS  of  the  earth,  so  soon  as  great  empires  were  formed  and  tnighty 
monarchs  devised  schemes  of  extensive  conquests.  God's  arm  had  saved  them  bova 
Egypt  and  from  Assyria ;  he  could  as  easily  have  saved  them  from  Babylon.  "  It  is 
nothing  with  God  to  help,  whether  with  many,  or  with  them  that  have  no  power  " 
(2  Chron.  ziv.  11).  He  could  have  bridled  Nebuchadnezzar  as  easily  as  Zerah  or 
Sennacherib,  and  have  saved  the  Jews  under  Zedekiah  as  readily  as  under  Asa  or 
Hezekiah.  But  Judah's  sins  came  between  him  and  them.  The  persistent  transgres- 
sions of  the  people  from  the  time  of  Manasseh,  their  idolatries,  immoralities,  cruelties, 
and  wickedness  of  all  kinds,  shortened  God's  arm,  that  he  could  not  interpose  to  save 
them.  As  the  author  of  Ohronicles  puts  it,  "  there  was  no  remedy  "  (2  Chron.  zzzvi. 
16).  "  They  had  transgressed  very  much  after  all  the  abominations  of  the  heathen ; 
and  polluted  the  house  of  the  Lord  which  he  had  hallowed  in  Jerusalem ;  .  .  .  they  had 
mocked  the  messengers  of  Qoi,  and  despised  his  words,  and  misused  his  prophets  " 
(2  Chron.  zzxvi.  14—16) ;  and  so  "  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  ini(|uities.''  Under 
such  circumstances,  Gh>d  could  not  spare  even  his  own  children  (Isa.  i.  4;  Ixiii.  16) — 
his  own  people.  Can,  then,  any  sinful  nation  hope  to  escape  ?  Ought  not  each  to 
feel  the  fate  of  Judah  a  warning  to  itself?  a  warning  to  repent  of  its  evil  ways,  and 
turn  from  them,  and  walk  in  the  paths  of  righteousness,  according  to  the  exhortation 
of  Isaiah  ? — "  Wash  you,  make  you  clean ;  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before 
mine  eyes;  cease  to  do  evil;  learn  to  do  well;  seek  judgment,  relieve  the  oppressed, 
judge  tiie  fatherless,  plead  for  the  widow.  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saith 
the  Lord ;  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though  they 
be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool.  H  ye  be  willing  and  obedient,  ye  shall  eat 
the  good  of  the  land :  but  if  ye  refuse  and  rebel,  ye  shall  be  devoured  with  the  sword : 
for  &e  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it"  (Isa.  L  16—20). 

Vers.  27 — 30. — "  The  Iwring-hindntst  of  the  Lord.'  God,  « In  Ws  wrat>i,  thinketh 
upon  mercy."  The  captive  king,  and  the  captive  nation,  each  of  them  suffered  a  long 
and  severe  punishment.  Each  of  them  must  have  been  inclined  to  sink  into  a  state 
of  hopelessness  and  apathy.  Each  may  have  thought  that  God  had  forgotten  them 
altogether,  or  at  any  rate  had  forgotten,  and  would  forget,  to  be  gracious.  Thirty-six 
years — how  long  a  space  is  this  in  the  life  of  a  man  1  Jehoiachin  had  grown  from  a 
youth  into  a  man  of  full  age,  and  from  a  man  of  full  age  almost  into  an  old  man,  for 
he  was  in  his  fifty-fifth  year,  and  Jewish  monarchs  rarely  reached  the  ^e  of  sixty. 
Yet  he  had  not  really  been  forgotten.  God  had  had  his  eye  upon  him  all  the  while, 
and  had  kept  in  reserve  for  him  a  happy  change  of  circumstances.  The  Disposer  of 
events  brought  Evil-Merodach  to  the  throne,  and  put  it  into  the  heart  of  that  monarch 
to  have  compassion  upon  the  aged  captive.  Jehoiachin  passed  from  a  dungeon  to  a 
chair  of  state  (ver.  28),  from  prison  food  and  prison  dress  to  royal  banquets  and  apparel 
fitting  his  rank,  from  the  extreme  of  misery  to  happiness,  dignity,  and  honour.  This 
was  the  doing  of  the  Almighty  Father,  using  men  as  his  instruments ;  and  it  was  a 
strong  evidence  of  his  loving-kindness.  Would  not  the  nation  likewise  experience  his 
mercy  t  The  penal  sentence  passed  upon  it  was  well  deserved,  and  might,  in  strict 
justice,  have  been  finaL  But  would  God  exact  the  uttermost  farthing?  No.  By  the 
release  and  restoration  to  honour  of  Jehoiachin,  he  sufficiently  indicated  to  his  people 
that  for  them  too  there  was  a  place  of  repentance,  a  day  of  grace,  a  restoration  to  his 
favour.  A  ray  of  light  thus  broke  in  upon  the  long, darkness  of  the  Captivity.  God's 
gracious  intont  was  indicated.  The  nation  felt  a  stir  of  hope,  and  woke  up  to  the 
expectation  of  a  new  life ;  Isaiah's  later  prophecies  (xl. — ^Ixvi.),  which  had  seemed  a  dead 
letter,  became  living  woids,  speaking  to  the  heart  of  the  people ;  and  the  later  years 
of  the  Captivity  were  cheered  by  the  prospect — ever  becoming  brighter  and  clearer— of 
a  reinstatement  in  G«d's  favour,  a  return  to  the  Holy  Land,  and  a  restoration  of  toe 
fianctuary  (Dan.  ix.  2^19)^ 


OH.  XXV.  1—30.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINaS.  497 


H0MILIB8  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 21, — I%e  latt  days  of  Jerusalem.  The  shameful  story  of  Judah's  dis- 
obedience and  sin  is  now  drawing  to  a  close.  Rpre  we  have  an  account  of  the  capture 
of  Jerusalem  and  its  king  by  Nebuchadnezzar  King  of  Babylon.  Zedekiah,  the  king, 
was  taken  prisoner.  His  sons  were  first  put  to  death  before  his  eyes.  Then  his  own 
eyes  were  put  out.  He  was  bound  in  fetters  of  brass,  and  carried  away  to  Babylon. 
Jerusalem  itself,  the  city  of  David  and  Solomon,  was  a  scene  of  desolation.  Nebuzar- 
adan,  captain  of  the  Babylonian  guard,  burnt  with  fire  the  house  of  the  Lord  and  the 
king's  house  and  all  ths  principal  houses  of  the  city.  The  men  of  war  had  deserted 
their  posts  and  fled  from  the  city.  All  who  remained  there  were  taken  captive.  The 
poor  of  the  land  only  were  left  to  be  vinedressers  and  husbandmen.  What  were  the 
causes  of  this  sad  downfall? 

I.  The  wickedness  of  its  bttlebb.  One  after  the  other,  the  kings  of  Judah  had 
done  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  1.  Hiey  disobeyed  Ood^s  commands.  They  imitated 
the  idolatry  and  the  vices  of  the  heathen.  2.  They  ill-treated  Ood's  prophets.  When 
men  begin  to  despise  and  ill-treat  God's  messengers,  those  who  are  trying  to  lead  them 
to  what  is  right,  they  are  blind  to  their  own  true  interests.  The  treatment  which  the 
Prophet  Jeremiah  in  particular  received  showed  how  low  in  degradation  the  kingdom 
of  Judah  had  sunk.  After  the  prophet's  fearless  denunciations  of  national  sin  (Jer, 
xiiL — xix.),  Pashur,  who  was  chief  governor  of  the  temple,  smote  Jeremiah,  and  put 
him  in  the  stocks,  or  pillory,  that  was  in  the  high  gate  of  Benjamin,  near  ttie  temple, 
where  all  men  might  see  him  and  mock  at  his  disgrace.  We  have  seen  how  Jehoiakim 
cut  the  roll  of  Jeremiah's  prophecies  with  his  penknife,  and  burned  its  leaves. 
Jeremiah's  last  years  at  Jerusalem  were  years  of  increased  sufiering  and  persecution. 

'  Zedekiah  actually  put  him  in  prison.  The  princes  cast  him  to  perish  in  a  hideous  pit 
in  the  prison-house,  where  he  sank  in  the  mire,  hut  at  the  intercession  of  an  Ethiopian 
oEBcer,  Ebed-Melech,  the  king  rescued  him.  Wickedness  in  high  places  soon  proves  to 
be  a  nation's  ruin, 

II.  The  OOEBUPTION  of  its  people.  Unhappily,  the  people  were  just  as  corrupt  and 
as  godless  as  their  rulers.  A  nation  is  responsible  for  its  national  sins.  The  sins  of 
Judah  cried  aloud  to  Heaven  for  vengeance.  And  in  the  days  of  the  Captivity  they 
were  taught  to  feel  that  there  is  a  Ood  that  reigneth  in  the  earth.  We  learn  from  the 
fate  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem :  1.  The  danger  of  forsaking  Ood.  They  forsook  God 
in  the  day  of  their  prosperity.  And  when  the  hour  of  their  need  came,  the  gods  whom 
they  served  were  not  able  to  deliver  them.  2.  2%e  danger  of  disregarding  GocPs  Word. 
How  often,  in  these  later  years  of  Judah's  history,  was  the  Law  of  God  utterly  neglected 
and  forgotten  I  No  life  can  be  truly  happy  which  is  not  based  on  the  Word  of  God. 
No  home  can  be  truly  happy  where  the  Bible  is  not  read.  No  nation  can  expect 
prosperity  which  disregards  the  Word  of  God.  3.  The  danger  of  despising  OocTs 
warnings.  Every  message  God  sends  us  is  for  our  good.  If  it  is  worth  his  while  to 
speak  to  us,  it  is  worth  our  while  to  listen.  Neglected  warnings — ^what  guilt  they 
involve  I  what  danger  they  threaten  1  "Because  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused;  I 
have  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  iVMttded ;  .  .  .  I  also  will  laugh  at  your 
calamity;  I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh." — 0.  H.  L 

Vers.  18 — ^21. — Bpaeefor  rtpentanee.  "  And  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  Seraiah 
the  chief  priest,  and  Zepfaaniah  the  second  priest,  and  the  three  keepers  of  the  door,"  etc. 
This  piece  of  history  may  be  usefully  employed  to  illustrate  that  space  which  Heaven 
allows  to  be  given  men  for  improvement  in  this  life.    Notice  here — 

I.  Space  fob  ihfboveuent.  "And  the  captain  of  the  guard,"  etc.  Though  wa 
have  reason  to  think  that  the  army  of  Chaldeans  were  much  enraged  agunst  the  city 
for  holding  out  with  so  much  stubbornness,  yet  they  did  not  therefore  pnt  all  to  fire 
and  sword  as  soon  as  they  had  taken  the  city  (which  is  too  commonly  done  in  snch 
cases),  but  three  months  after  Nebuzar-adan  was  sent  with  orders  to  complete  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem.  This  space  God  gave  them  to  repent  after  all  the  foregoing 
days  of  his  patience ;  but  in  vain.  Their  hearts  were  still  hardened.  Thus  wu^ed 
men  constantly  ignore  "  things  that  belong  to  their  peac«." 

iLKnrafc  S  k 


498  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  EINa&     [oh.  xzv.  1— 3a 

IL  Spaob  fob  iufbovement  heoleoted.  "  And  out  of  the  city  he  took  an  officer 
that  was  set  over  the  men  of  war,"  etc.  These  men,  to  whom  time  had  been  given  to  do 
the  work  required,  day  after  day  neglected  it.  No  effort  was  put  forth  to  avoid  the 
threatened  calamity.  It  is  ever  thus.  Men  are  waiting  for  a  more  "convenient 
season."    The  cry,  "  Unless  ye  repent  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish,"  was  neglected. 

IIL  Neglected  space  fob  ihfbovement  avenged.  "  And  Nebuzar-adan  captain 
of  the  guard  took  these,  and  brought  them  to  the  King  of  Babylon  to  Riblah."  "  Be 
sure  your  sins  will  find  you  out."  "  Rejoice,  O,  young  man,  in  thy  youth ;  .  .  .  but 
know  thou,  that  for  all  these  things  God  will  bring  thee  into  judgment." 

IV.  The  avenoement  of  this  neglect  was  terrible  in  the  extreme.  "  And 
the  King  of  Babylon  smote  them,  and  slew  them  at  liiblah  in  the  land  of  Hamath.  So 
Judah  was  carried  away  out  of  their  land."  The  city  and  the  temple  were  burnt.  The 
walls  were  never  repaired  until  Nehemiah's  time ;  and  Judah  was  carried  out  of  their 
land,  etc.  The  history  of  this  calamity  is  too  well  known  to  record  here.  "  Because 
sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons 
of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil." — D.  T. 

Vers.  22 — 26. — Bulers  and  their  enemies.  "  And  as  for  the  people  that  remained  in 
the  land  of  Judah,  whom  Nebuchadnezzar  King  of  Babylon  had  left,"  etc.  By  this 
fragment  of  Jewish  history  two  observations  are  suggested. 

I.  Men  are  bohetiues  elevated  into  responsible  positions.  OedcUiah,  a  friend 
of  Jeremiah's,  and  acting  under  the  prophet's  counsel,  took  the  government  of  Judaea, 
and  fixed  his  court  at  Mizpah.  He  seemed  on  the  whole  qualified  for  the  office  he 
assumed.  The  people  committed  to  his  charge  were  those  who  were  left  in  the  country 
after  Judah  had  been  carried  away  into  Babylonian  captivity.  They  were,  perhaps, 
considered  too  insigniScant  to  be  removed.  However,  being  peasantry,  who  could  till 
the  land  and  dress  the  vineyards,  he  counselled  them  to  submit  to  his  rule,  promising 
them  that  they  should  retain  their  possessions  and  enjoy  the  produce  of  the  land.  Such 
was  the  responsible  position  to  which  this  Gedaliah  was  elevated.  In  every  age  and 
land  there  are  some  men  thus  distinguished — men  that  rise  to  eminence  and  obtain 
distinction  and  power.  Sometimes  it  may  be  by  the  force  of  their  own  genius  and 
character,  and  sometimes  by  the  force  «nd  patronage  of  others.  Hence  in  Church  and 
stftte,  literature,  commerce,  and  art,  we  have  rulers  ecclesiastical,  political,  scholastic, 
and  mercantile.  This  arrangement  in  our  social  life  has  many  signal  advantages, 
although  often  exposed  to  many  terrible  evils. 

II.  Malignant  enmity  sometimes  fbustbates  the  fubpose  of  aircH  men. 
"  But  it  came  to  pass  in  the  seventh  month,  that  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nathaniah,  the 
son  of  Elishama,  of  the  seed  royal,  came,  and  ten  men  with  him,  and  smote  Gedaliah, 
that  he  died,  and  the  Jews  and  the  Chaldees  that  were  with  him  at  Mizpah,"  Thus 
envy  is  always  excited  by  superiority,  and  one  of  the  most  cruel  of  human  passions 
terminated  the  life  of  Gedaliah  and  the  purpose  of  his  mission  a  few  brief  months 
after  his  elevation  to  office.  Envy  murdered  Gedaliah,  and  drove  back  those  poor  scattered 
Jews  to  Egypt,  which  they  loathed.  Thus  envy  is  ever  at  work,  blasting  the  reputa- 
tions and  degrading  the  positions  of  distinguished  men.  "  Envy  is  the  daughter  of 
Piide,  the  author  of  murder  and  revenge,  the  beginner  of  secret  sedition,  and  the 
perpetual  tormentor  of  virtue.  Envy  is  the  filthy  sume  of  the  soul ;  a  worm,  a  poison 
or  quicksilver  which  consumeth  the  flesh,  and  drieth  up  the  marrow  of  the  bones " 
(Socrates).— D.  T. 

Vera.  27 — 30. — JehoicuAin  om  a  victim  of  tyrannie  detpotitm,  and  a»  an  object  of 
delivering  mercy.  "  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  seven  and  thirtieth  year/'  etc. 
The  life  of  this  man  has  been  ahready  sketched.  The  incident  here  recorded  presents 
him— 

L  As  A  TioTiM  OF  TTBANNio  DESPOTISM.  He  had  been  In  prison  for  thirty-seven 
years,  and  was  fifty-five  years  of  age.  It  was  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  tyrannic  King  of 
Babylon,  that  stripped  this  man  of  liberty  and  freedom,  and  shut  him  up  in  a  dungeon 
for  this  long  period  of  time.    Such  despotism  has  prevailed  in  all  ages  and  lands. 

n.  As  AN  OBJECT  OF  DELrvERiNO  HEROT.  We  are  told  that  as  soon  as  EvO- 
JUrodach  came  to  the  throne  on  the  death  of  his  father  Nebuchadnessar,  mercy  stirrsd 


CH.  XXV.  1—30.]       THE  SECOND  BOOt  OF  THE  KINGR  499 

his  heart  and  relieved  this  poor  victim  of  tyranny.  Corrupt  as  this  world  is,  the  element 
of  mercy  is  not  entirdy  extinct.  This  mercy  gave  honour  and  liberty  to  the  man  who 
had  been  ao  long  in  confinement  and  disgrace.  Let  not  the  victims  of  tyranny — and 
they  abound  everywhere — despair.  Mercy  will  ere  long  sound  the  trump  of  jubilee 
over  all  the  land.  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  said  the  great  Redeemer  of  the  race,  "  is 
upon  me,  because  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor ;  he  hath  sent 
me  to  heal  the  broken-hearted,  to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives,  and  recovering  of 
sight  to  the  blind,  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised." — ^D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Th*  fall  and  destruction  of  Jermalem,  With  this  account  of  the 
siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar  should  be  compared  the  narrative  of  its  later 
destruction  by  Titus  (a.d.  70).  History  does  not  always  repeat  itself;  but  in  this 
instance  it  does  ao  with  marvellous  fidelity.  The  close  investment  of  the  city,  the 
desperate  resistance,  the  horrors  of  famine  within,  the  incidents  of  the  capture,  the 
burning  of  the  temple,  the  demolition  of  the  walls,  and  the  captivity  of  the  people, 
present  striking  parallels  in  the  two  cases.  By  one  of  those  rare  coincidences  that 
sometimes  occur,  it  was  on  the  very  same  month  and  day  of  the  month  on  which  the 
temple  was  burned  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  that  the  sanctuary  was  fired  by  the  soldiers 
of  Titus.  The  earlier  destruction  fulfilled  the  predictions  of  the  prophets ;  the  later  the 
predictions  of  our  Lord  (Matt.  xxiv.). 

L  The  last  sieoe.  1.  Fatal  dates.  The  days  which  mark  the  different  stages 
of  this  terrible  siege  of  Nebuchadnezzar  are  minutely  recorded  and  carefully  rememberedl 
"The  ninth  year"  of  Zedekiah,  "in  the  tenth  month,  in  the  tenth  day  of  the  month," 
Nebuchadnezzar  came,  he  and  his  host,  against  Jerusalem  (ver.  1) ;  in  the  eleventh 
year  of  Zedekiah  "  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  fourth  month  the  famine  prevailed  in  the 
city"  (ver.  3),  and  a  breach  was  effected;  "in  the  fifth  month,  on  the  seventh  day  of 
the  month,  which  is  the  nineteenth  year  of  King  Nebuchadnezzar,"  the  temple  and  other 
buildings  were  burned  by  Nebuzar-adan  (ver.  8).  We  have  the  same  careful  dating 
in  Jer.  xxxix.  1,  2 ;  lii.  4, 12  (in  the  latter  passage  "  tenth  "  for  "  seventh  "  as  above). 
These  were  dates  which  burned  themselves  into  the  very  memories  of  the  wretchra 
people  crowded  in  the  city,  and  could  never  be  forgotten.  Indirectly  they  testify  to 
the  intensity  of  misery  which  was  endured,  which  made  them  so  well  remembered. 
They  were  observed  afterwards  as  regular  days  of  fasting  (Zech.  vii.  3,  5 ;  viii.  19). 
2.  The  enemy  without.  Nebuchadnezzar's  army  came  Up  against  the  city,  and  closely 
invested  it,  building  forts  against  it  round  about.  Ezek.  xxi.  is  a  vivid  prophecy  of 
what  was  about  to  happen.  The  prophet  aimounces  the  impending  capture  of  the 
holy  city.  A  sword  was  furbished  which  would  work  terrible  destruction.  Ezekiel 
is  directed  to  mark  off  two  ways  along  which  this  sword  was  to  travel — ^the  one  leading 
to  Jerusalem,  and  the  other  to  Babbath  of  Ammon.  The  scene  changes,  and  we  see 
the  King  of  Babylon  standing  at  the  head  of  the  ways,  deliberating  which  one  he  shall 
choose.  He  shakes  the  arrows,  consults  images,  looks  for  omens  in  the  liver  of  dead 
beasts.  The  decision  given  is  for  advancing  first  against  Jerusalem.  Now  he  is  at 
its  gates,  and  has  appointed  captains  "  to  open  the  mouth  in  the  slaughter,  to  lift  up 
the  voice  with  shouting,  to  appoint  battering-rams  against  the  gates,  to  cast  a  mount, 
and  to  build  a  fort "  (Ezek.  xxi.  21,  22).  3.  T?ie  famine  within.  For  a  year  and 
five  months  the  weary  siege  dragged  itself  on,  the  people  within  well  knowing  that^ 
when  once  it  was  captured,  they  could  expect  no  mercy.  The  writings  of  Jeremiah  give 
us  a  vivid  picture  of  the  city  during  this  period.  From  the  first  the  prophet  held  out 
no  hope.  When  Zedekiah,  at  the  beginning  of  the  siege  entreated  him,  "  Inquire,  I 
pray  thee^  of  the  Lord  for  us,"  Jeremiah  plainly  told  him  that  the  city  was  delivered 
to  iba  Chaldeans,  and  that  Nebuchadnezzar  would  not  spare  them,  "  neither  have  pity, 
nor  have  mercy  "  (Jer.  xxi.  1 — 7).  Life  was  promised,  however,  to  those  who  should 
surren'^er  themselves  to  the  enemy  (vers.  8 — 10).  This  strain  was  kept  up  throughout, 
in  spito  of  imprisonment,  threats,  and  the  contrary  testimony  of  false  prophets  (cf.  Jer. 
xxxii.  1 — 6;  xxxiv.  1 — 7;  xxxvii.  6—21;  xxxviii.,  ete.).  At  one  point  an  Egyptian 
army  came  forth  against  the  Chaldeans,  and  great  hopes  were  raised,  but  Jeremiah 
bade  the  people  not  deceive  themselves,  for  the  Chaldeans  would  prevail,  as  indeed 
they  did,  in  spite  of  a  temporary  raising  of  the  siege  (Jer.  xxxviL  6 — 11).  By-and-by, 
M  in  the  previous  long  siege  of  Samtuia  by  the  Syrians  (ch.  vi.  24; — 33),  the  misery 


600  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS,      [ch.  xxv.  1— 30 

of  the  people  became  extreme.  The  bread  was  "  spent "  in  the  city  ( Jer.  xxzvii.  21). 
The  Book  of  Lamentations  gives  vivid  glimpses  of  the  horrors — ^the  young  children 
fainting  for  hunger  at  the  top  of  every  street  (Lam.  a.  11,  19);  crying  to  their 
mothers,  Where  is  com  and  wine?  H^am.  iL  12);  and  asking  bread,  and  no  man 
breaking  it  to  them  (Lam.  iv.  4) ;  the  delicately  nurtured  lying  on  dunghills  (Lam.  iv. 
6) ;  women  eating  their  own  offspring  (Lam.  iL  20),  etc. 

II.  The  fatb  of  Zedeeiah.  As  the  vigour  of  the  defence  slackened,  the  besiegers 
redoubled  their  energies,  till,  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  fourth  month,  a  breach  was 
made  in  the  walls,  and  Nebuchadnezzar's  princes  penetrated  as  far  as  the  middle  gate 
(Jer.  zzix.  1—3).  The  stages  that  follow  are,  as  respects  Zedekiah,  those  of :  1.  Might, 
The  besiegers  had  entered  by  the  north  side  of  the  city,  and  the  king,  with  his  men 
of  war,  feeling  that  all  was  lost,  made  their  escape  by  night  through  a  gate  of  the  city 
on  the  south — ^"the  gate  between  the  two  walls,  which  is  by  the  king's  garden" — and, 
evading  the  Chaldeans  in  the  darkness,  fled  towards  the  Jordan.  By  a  symbolic  action 
Ezekiel  bad  foretold  this  flight,  and  the  actual  manner  of  the  escape,  down  to  its 
minutest  details — a  singular  instance  of  the  unerring  prescience  of  these  inspired 
prophets  (Ezek.  xii.  1 — 16).  What  the  king's  thoughts  were  as  he  fled  that  night 
with  beating  heart  and  covered  face,  who  can  tell?  Jeremiah  had  been  vindicated, 
and  the  prophets  who  had  buoyed  the  people  up  with  so  many  false  hopes  were  now 
shown  to  be  miserable  deceivers.  2.  Capture.  The  flight  of  the  king  was  soon 
discovered,  and  a  contingent  of  Chaldeans  was  despatched  in  pursmt.  It  was  not  long 
ere  they  overtook  the  fleeing  monarch,  no  doubt  faint  with  hunger,  unnerved  by  fear, 
and  exhausted  with  the  miles  he  had  already  traversed,  unable  therefore  to  make  any 
defence.  If  his  followers  made  any  stand,  they  were  speedily  scattered,  and  the  king 
was  taken  on  the  plains  of  Jericho.  His  hopes,  his  plans,  his  intrigues  with  Egypt, 
all  had  come  to  nothing.  He  stood  there,  a  prisoner  of  the  Chaldeans,  as  Jeremiah 
declared  he  would  be.  It  is  God's  Word  that  always  comes  true.  Would  that  Zedekiah 
had  believed  it  in  time  I  3.  Funishment.  The  fate  which  awaited  Zedekiah  was  not 
long  deferred.  With  his  sons,  and  the  nobles  who  were  with  him  (Jer.  xxxix.  6; 
liL  10),  he  was  taken  to  Biblah,  to  have  judgment  passed  on  him  by  Nebuchadnezzar. 
Little  mercy  had  he  to  look  for  from  the  haughty,  infuriate  king,  who  had  given  him 
his  throne,  and  whose  covenant  he  had  broken,  entailing  on  him  the  trouble  and  delay 
of  a  sixteen  months'  siege.  Tortures,  perhaps,  and  death  in  protracted  agonies.  The 
wonder  is  that  Zedekiah  escaped  as  mercifully  as  he  did.  But  his  punishment  was, 
nevertheless,  heart-breaking  in  its  severity.  (1)  He  saw  his  own  sons  slain  before 
his  eyes.  It  was  the  last  spectacle  he  ever  beheld ;  for  (2)  his  own  eyes  were  next  put 
out.  Then  (3)  he  was  bound  with  fetters  of  brass,  and  carried  to  Babylon,  where  he 
remained  a  prisoner  all  the  rest  of  his  life  (Jer.  liL  11 ;  cf.  xxxiv.  5 — 8).  The  nobles 
of  Judah  were  at  the  same  time  slain  (Jer.  xxxix.  6 ;  lii.  10).  Life  thus  ended  for 
Zedekiah  when  he  was  yet  a  young  man  of  little  over  thirty  years  of  age.  His  sons 
must  have  been  mere  boys,  and  their  pitiable  death  would  be  a  pang  in  his  heart 
greater  even  than  the  pain  of  the  iron  which  pierced  his  eyes.  The  joy  of  life  was 
lost  to  him,  like  the  darkness  which  had  now  fallen  for  ever  on  the  outer  world.  The 
dreary  living  death  of  the  prison  was  all  that  was  left  to  him.  Miserable  man,  how 
bitterly  he  bad  to  expiate  his  sin,  and  mourn  over  past  errors  and  self-willed  courses ! 
Will  it  be  otherwise  with  those  who  stand  at  the  last  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
God,  if  their  lives  are  spent  in  disobedience?  If  it  was  hard  to  fiice  Nebuchadnezzar 
when  he  was  "  full  of  fury,  and  the  form  of  his  visage  was  changed  "  (Dan.  iii.  19), 
how  shall  men  endure  "  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  "  (Bev.  vi.  16)  ? 

III.  Jebusalxm  skbtboyed.  a  month  elapsed  before  the  destruction  of  the  now 
captured  city  was  carried  out.  It  was  probably  during  this  interval  that  Jeremiah 
composed  his  passionate  and  pathetic  Lamentations.  When  at  length  the  work  was 
taken  in  hand  by  Nebuzar-adan,  an  officer  deputed  for  the  purpose,  it  was  done  with 
characteristic  thoroughness,  amidst  the  glee  of  Judah's  hereditary  enemies,  whoss 
shouts,  "  Base  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the  foundations  thereof  1 "  (Fg.  cxxxvii.  7),  stimulated 
the  work  of  demolition.  We  see :  1.  7%e  temple  burned.  "  He  burnt  the  house  of  the 
Lord,"  etc  Thus  came  to  an  end  the  great  and  beautiful  house  of  God,  built  by 
Rolomon,  oonseorated  by  so  many  ceremonies  and  prayers  (1  Kings  viii.),  and  whose 
coorut  had  so  often  resounded  with  the  psalms  and  shouts  of  the  multitude  that  kept 


OH.  xxT.  1—30.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  "  601 

holy  day  (Pa.  xlii,  6).  But  idolatry  and  hypocrisy  had  made  "  the  house  of  prayer  " 
into  "a  den  of  robhers"  (Isa,  lyi.  7;  Jer.  viL  11 ;  Matt.  xxi.  13),  and  Gpd's  glory  had 
been  seen  by  the  prophet  on  the  banks  of  the  Ohebar  departing  from  it  (Ezek.  xL  22, 
23).  The  temple  had  been  the  special  boast  of  the  godless  people.  They  had  trusted 
in  lying  words,  saying,  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord,  The  temple  of  the  Lord,  The  temple 
of  the  Lord,  are  these  "  (Jer.  vii.  4).  This  was  to  make  the  temple  a  fetish,  and,  as 
Hezekiah  had  broken  the  brazen  serpent  in  pieces  when  it  began  to  be  worshipped 
(ch.  xviii.  4),  it  had  become  necessary  to  destroy  the  temple  also.  2.  The  buildings 
burned.  "  The  king's  house,  and  all  the  houses  of  Jerusalem,  and  every  great  man's 
house  burnt  he  with  fire."  When  the  central  glory  of  the  city  had  perished,  secular 
palaces  and  houses  could  not  expect  to  escape.  They  also  were  set  on  fire,  and  the 
ruddy  blaze,  spreading  from  street  to  street,  would  consume  most  of  the  humbler 
houses  as  well.  How  faithfully  had  all  this  been  foretold,  yet  none  would  believe  it  I 
Literally  had  Jerusalem  now  become  heaps  (Micah  iii.  12).  3.  The  walla  broken  down. 
"All  the  army  of  the  Chaldeans  .  .  .  brake  down  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  round  about." 
This  completed  the  catastrophe,  made  the  holy  city  a  heap  of  ruins,  and  rendered 
it  impossible  for  inhabitants  any  longer  to  dwell  in  it.  Gedaliah  made  his  head- 
quarters at  Mizpah  (ver.  23).  The  centre  of  Judah's  nationality  was  destroyed. 
Jerusalem  had  been  emptied,  "  as  a  man  wipeth  a  dish,  wiping  it,  and  turning  it 
upside  down  "  (ch.  xxi.  13).  One  stands  appalled  at  so  complete  a  wreck  of  •  city 
which  God  had  once  honoured  by  making  it  the  place  of  his  abode,  and  for  which  he 
had  done  such  great  things  in  the  past.  But  the  lesson  we  are  to  learn  from  it  is  that 
nothing  can  reverse  the  action  of  moral  laws.  God  is  terrible  in  his  justice.  Though 
a  person  or  place  is  as  "  the  signet  upon  his  right  hand,"  yet  will  he  pluck  it  thence, 
if  it  abandons  itself  to  wickedness  (Jer.  xxii.  24,  28). — J.  0. 

Vers.  11 — 21. — 2%«  final  deportation.  An  end  having  been  made  of  the  city,  the 
next  step  was  to  complete  the  conquest  by  deporting  to  Babylon  the  remnant  of  the 
population,  and  carrying  away  the  spoil.  To  this  task  Nebuzar-adan  now  addressed 
himself. 

I.  The  people  carried  awat.  1.  ITie  gleanings  taken.  Ten  or  eleven  thousand 
persons  had  been  carried  away  in  the  earlier  captivity  (ch.  xxiv.  14),  including  amongst 
them  the  best  part  of  the  population  (cf^  Jer.  xxiv.  3—10).  The  remnant  had  since 
been  thinned  by  famine,  pestilence,  and  war  (Jer.  xxi.  7 ;  xxiv.  10).  On  the  most 
probable  view  of  Jer.  Iii.  28  ("  seventeenth  "  for  "  seventh  "),  a  further  large  deportation 
of  captives — over  three  thousand — took  place  a  year  before  the  conclusion  of  the  siege. 
Now  there  were  only  the  gleanings  to  take  away,  and  these  amounted  to  but  eight 
hundred  and  thirty-two  persons  (Jer.  Iii.  29).  They  were  but  a  small  handful  compared 
with  those  who  had  perished,  but  they  would  comprise  all  the  people  of  any  position 
and  influence.  They  consisted  of  those  who  were  in  the  city,  of  those  who  had 
previously  deserted  to  the  Chaldeans,  and  of  the  pickings  of  the  multitude  outside. 
The  mourning  and  lamentation  occasioned  by  these  captivities  is  poetically  represented 
by  Jeremiah  in  the  well-known  description  of  Rachel  weeping  for  her  children,  and 
refusing  to  be  comforted,  as  she  sees  the  long  trains  defile  away  (Jer.  xxxi.  15).  2. 
The  poor  left.  As  before,  it  was  only  the  poorest  of  the  land,  those  "  which  had 
nothing "  (Jer.  xxxix.  10)  who  were  left  behind,  to  till  the  fields  and  care  for  the 
vineyards.  With  the  exception  of  these,  the  country  was  depopulated.  The  best 
even  of  this  poorer  class  had  been  removed  in  the  last  sifting  of  the  population,  so  that 
the  residue  must  have  been  poor  indeed.  They  formed  but  a  scant  remnant ;  but  even 
they,  as  we  shall  see,  were  unable  to  hold  together,  and  were  soon  to  be  expatriated, 
leaving  the  land  utterly  desolate. 

II.  The  brazen  vessels  oabbied  awat.  The  UmpU  plunder.  The  more  valu- 
able of  the  temple  vessels  had  been  carried  away  in  the  first  captivity  (ch.  xxiv.  13), 
but  there  remained  a  large  number  of  articles  and  utensils  of  brass,  together  with  some 
of  the  precious  metals  (ver.  15),  either  formerly  overlooked  or  subsequently  replaced. 
All  these  had  been  gathered  out  before  the  temple  was  burnt,  and  were  now  carried 
away  as  spoil.  They  consisted  (1)  of  the  two  brazen  pillars,  Jachin  and  Boaz,  which 
stood  In  the  porch  of  the  temple,  and  by  their  symbolical  names,  "  He  shall  establish," 
"In  it  it  strength," iritneised  to  the  fact  that  God's  dwelling-place  was  now  established 


602  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGa     [oh.  xxv.  1— 3 


in  the  midst  of  his  people,  and  that  ita  st«bility  was  Moored  1^  his  presence.  (2)  The 
bases,  with  their  lavers,  for  washing  the  sacrifices ;  and  the  molten  sea  for  the  use  of 
the  priests.  (3)  The  common  utensils  connected  with  the  service  of  the  altar  and 
sanctuary — pots,  shovels,  etc.  These  brazen  pillars,  vessels,  and  utensils  were  the  work 
of  Hiram  of  Tyre,  and  were  wrought  with  the  utmost  artistic  skill  (1  Kings  vii.  13 — 61). 
The  pillars  were  masterpieces  of  strength  and  ornamental  beauty  ;  the  sea  and  bases 
were  also  exquisitely  carved  and  adorned  with  figures  of  cherubim,  palms,  and  flowers. 
They  were  the  pride  and  glory  of  the  temple,  and  as  mere  works  of  art  stood  in  the 
highest  place.  8.  Treatment  of  tAe  vessels.  The  more  grievous,  for  the  above  reasons, 
was  the  treatment  to  which  these  beautiful  objects  were  now  subjected.  Not  only 
were  they  torn  from  their  places  and  uses  in  the  temple,  but  they  were  ruthlessly 
broken  to  pieces,  that  they  might  be  the  more  easily  carried  away.  Hiram's  master- 
pieces had  sunk  to  the  level  of  common  brass,  and  were  treated  only  as  such.  The 
lesser  vessels  were,  of  course,  taken  away  whole.  What  could  more  significantly  tell 
of  the  departure  of  God  from  his  house,  the  rejection  of  its  worship,  and  the  reversal 
of  the  promises  of  stability,  etc.,  he  had  given  in  connection  with  it,  than  this 
ignominious  treatment  of  its  sacred  vessels?  They  had,  indeed,  when  his  presence 
was  withdrawn,  become  mere  "  pieces  of  brass,"  as  did  the  brazen  serpent  of  Moses, 
when  men  turned  it  into  an  occasion  for  sin  (ch.  xviiL  4).  Their  house  was  left  unto 
them  desolate  (Matt,  xxiii.  38). 

III.  Tbb  blaughtkb  of  the  origf  hen.  a  final  act  of  vengeance  was  yet  to  be 
perpetrated.  Singling  out  a  number  of  the  chief  men,  Nebuzar-adan  broi^ht  them  to 
Nebuchadnezzar  at  Biblah,  and  there  "  the  King  of  Babylon  smote  them,  and  slew 
them."  The  victims  were  contributed  by :  1.  The  temple,  "  Seraiah  the  chief  priest, 
and  Zephaniah  the  second  priest,  and  three  keepers  of  the  door."  2.  I%e  army  and 
court.  "An  o£Scer  that  was  set  over  the  men  of  war,  and  five  men  of  them  that 
were  in  the  king's  presence  .  .  ,  and  the  principal  scribe  of  the  host."  3.  The  citizens, 
"  Three  score  men  of  the  people  of  the  land  that  were  found  in  the  city."  All  classes 
were  thus  represented,  and  bore  their  share  in  the  expiation  of  the  common  guilt.  The 
slaughter  was  no  doubt  partly  intended  to  inspire  terror  in  those  who  were  left. — J.  0. 

Vers.  22 — 26. — Oedaliah  and  the  remrumt.  Nothing  could  more  effectually  show 
the  hopeless  condition  of  the  people,  and  their  unfitness  for  self-government,  than  this 
brief  narrative  of  events  which  followed  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  The  detailed 
history  is  given  in  Jer.  xl. — xliiL 

I.  Gedaliah  made  oovebnob.  It  was  necessary  to  appoint  a  governor  over  the 
land,  and  for  this  purpose  Nebuchadnezzar  chose  "  Gedaliali  the  son  of  Ahikam,  the 
son  of  Shaphan."  The  country  was  desolate,  and  had  been  robbed  of  its  chief  elements 
of  strength ;  but,  had  the  people  chosen  to  hold  together,  they  might  still  have  sub- 
sisted with  a  reasonable  degree  of  comfort,  and  gradually  again  built  up  a  prosperous 
community.  1.  They  had  a  good  governor.  Gedaliah  was  one  of  themselves,  a  man 
of  an  honourable  and  godly  stock,  a  sincere  patriot,  aud  of  a  kindly  and  generous 
nature.  Under  his  nile  they  had  nothing  to  fear,  and  were  assured  of  every  help  and 
encouragement.  2.  They  had  a  good  company.  In  numbers  the  population  was 
probably  still  not  inconsiderable,  and  it  was  soon  reinforced  by  many  Jews,  "who 
returned  out  of  all  places  whither  they  were  driven,  and  came  to  the  land  of  Judah,  to 
Gedaliah,  unto  Mizpah  "  (Jer.  xl.  12).  They  came  from  Moab,  from  Ammon,  from 
Kdom,  and  "  all  the  countries,"  attracted  by  the  prospect  of  the  fields  and  vineyards 
which  were  to  be  had  for  the  asking  (Jer.  xxxix,  10 ;  xl".  11).  A  numlxsr  of  captains 
with  their  men  also,  who  had  been  hiding  in  the  fields,  came  to  Gedaliah,  aud  took 
possession  of  the  cities  (cf.  Jer.  xl.  10).  Their  names  are  given — Ishmael,  Johanan, 
Seraiah,  Jaazaniah,  etc.  There  were  here  the  elements  of  a  community  which,  with 
proper  cohesion,  might  soon  have  come  to  something.  3.  They  had  good  promises.  To 
those  who  came  to  him  Gedaliah  gave  ready  welcome  and  reassuring  promises.  He 
swore  to  the  captains  that  they  need  fear  no  barm.  Let  them  dwell  in  the  land,  and 
serve  the  King  of  Babylon,  and  it  would  be  well  with  them.  Let  them  gather  wine, 
and  summer  fruits,  and  oil,  and  dwell  in  the  cities  they  had  occupied  (Jer.  xl.  10).  It 
may,  indeed,  be  affirmed  that  the  bulk  of  the  people  now  left  in  the  land  were  better  ofi 
materially  than  they  had  been  for  some  time.     Formeriy  they  were  poor  and  starving. 


OH.  XXV.  1— 30.J       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  THE  KINGS.  608 

ground  down  by  oppression,  and  many  of  them  bondmen ;  now  they  bad  liberty,  land, 
the  choice  of  fields  and  vineyards,  and  the  advantage  of  keeping  to  themselves  the  fruit* 
of  their  labour. 

II.  Gedaliah's  murdeb,  and  the  flioht  unto  Estft.  What  the  people  might 
have  come  to  under  Gedaliah's  benevolent  rule,  time  was  not  given  to  show.  It  soon 
became  fatally  evident  that  the  people  were  incapable  of  making  the  best  of  their 
situation,  and  of  working  heartily  and  loyally  together  for  the  general  good.  Among 
the  leaders  there  was  a  want  of  faith,  of  patriotism,  of  principle ;  among  the  people  the 
sense  of  nationality  was  utterly  broken.  This  hopeless  want  of  cohesion  and  absence 
of  higher  sentiment  was  shown :  1.  In  the  murder  of  Oedaliah.  Turbulent  spirits 
were  among  the  captains,  who  had  no  concern  but  for  their  own  advantage,  and  were 
utterly  unscrupulous  as  to  the  means  they  took  to  gain  it.  Intrigue,  treachery,  and 
violence  were  more  congenial  to  them  than  the  restraints  of  settled  government.  One 
of  these  captains,  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah,  was  of  the  seed  royal,  and  naturally 
resented  the  elevation  of  a  commoner  like  Gedaliah  to  the  position  of  governor. 
Instigated  by  Baalis  King  of  the  Ammonites,  he  formed  a  plot  for  Gedaliah's 
assassination,  and  with  the  help  of  ten  men  he  secretly  carried  it  out,  slaying  not  only 
the  unsuspicious  governor,  but  all  the  Jews  and  Chaldeans  and  men  of  war  that  were 
with  him  at  Mizpah  (cf.  Jer.  xL  13 — 16 ;  xli.  1—3).  Ishmael  gained  nothing  by  his 
treachery,  for  he  was  immediately  afterwards  pursued,  and  his  captives  taken  from  him 
(Jer.  xli.  11 — 18).  What  a  picture  of  the  wickedness  of  the  human  heart  is  given  in 
his  dastardly  deed,  and  in  the  manner  of  its  accomplishment  1  Ishmael's  moving  principle 
was  envy,  the  source  of  so  much  crime.  To  gratify  a  base  grudge  against  one  whom 
he  regarded  as  his  rival,  he  was  willing  to  become  the  tool  of  an  enemy  of  his  people^  to 
break  eacred  pledges,  to  repay  kindness  with  murder,  and  to  plunge  the  affairs  of  a 
community  that  needed  nothing  so  much  as  peace  into  irretrievable  confusion. 
"  Prom  whence  come  vsars  and  fightings  among  you  1 "  etc.  (Jas.  iv.  1, 2).  2.  The  flight 
into  Egypt.  The  narrative  here  only  tells  that,  for  fear  of  the  vengeance  of  the 
Chaldeans,  "  all  the  people,  both  small  and  great,  and  the  captains  of  the  armies,  arose, 
and  came  to  Egypt.  Prom  Jeremiah,  however,  we  learn,  that  first  the  leaders  con- 
sulted the  prophet  as  to  what  they  should  do,  promising  faithfully  to  abide  by  hia 
directions ;  that  he  counselled  them  from  the  Lord  to  abide  where  they  were,  and  not 
go  down  to  Egypt ;  and  that  then  they  turned  against  him — "  all  the  proud  men  " — 
and  said,  "Thou  speakest  falsely:  the  Lord  our  God  hath  not  sent  thee  to  say,  Go 
not  into  Egypt  to  sojourn  there  "  (Jer.  xlii. ;  xliii.  1 — 7).  They  then  took  their  own 
way,  and  compelled  Jeremiah  and  all  the  people  to  go  with  them.  Here  the  same 
unchastened,  wayward,  stubborn  spirit  reveals  itself  which  .had  been  the  cause  of  all 
their  troubles.  Had  they  obeyed  Jeremiah,  they  were  assured  that  it  would  be  well 
with  them ;  while,  if  they  went  down  to  Egypt,  it  was  foretold  that  the  sword  and 
famine,  which  they  feared,  would  overtake  them  (Jer.  xlii,  16),  as  from  the  recently 
disinterred  ruins  at  Tahpanhes  we  know  it  actually  did.  But  through  this  self-willed 
action  of  their  own,  God's  Word  was  fulfilled,  and  the  land  of  Judah  swept  clean  of  its 
remaining  inhabitants. — J.  0. 

Vers.  27 — 30. — Jehoiachin't  restoration.    We  have  here — 

I.  A  LONG  CAPTIVITY.  "  In  the  thirty-seventh  year  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiachin 
King  of  Judah."  1.  Weary  years.  Thirty-seven  years  was  a  long  time  to  spend  in 
prison.  The  king  was  but  eighteen  years  of  age  when  he  was  taken  away,  so  that  now 
he  would  be  fifty- five.  Existence  must  have  seemed  hopeless,  yet  he  went  on  enduring. 
He  was  suffering  even  more  for  his  fathers'  sins,  and  for  the  nation's  sins,  than  for  his 
own.  Life  is  sweet,  and  hard  to  part  with,  and  the  love  of  it  is  nowhere  more  strongly 
seen  than  when  men  go  on  clinging  to  it  under  conditions  which  might,  if  anything 
could,  suggest  the  question,  "Is  life  worth  living?"  Jehoiachin  must  have  had  a 
Btout  heart  to  endure  so  long.  2.  A  change  of  rviers.  Nebuchadnezzar  at  length  died, 
and  his  son  Evil-Merodach  ascended  the  throne.  Possibly  this  prince  may  have  formed 
a  friendship  with  Jehoiachin  in  prison,  and  this  may  have  contributed  to  sustain  the 
captive  king's  hopes.    A  change  of  government  usually  brings  many  other  changes  in 

its  train, 
n.  A  OUMFSK  or  8UN8HINB  AT  THB  OLOSK.    1.  At  the  clo$e  of  Jthoiockin't  1^9. 


e04  THB  SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE  KINGS,      [oh.  xxT.  1-4HX 

The  new  ruler  treated  Jeboiachin  as  a  human  being,  a  friend,  and  a  king.  (1)  He  took 
him  out  of  prison,  changing  the  policy  of  harshness  for  one  of  kindness.  (2)  He  set 
his  throne  above  the  throne  of  the  kings  that  were  with  him  in  Babylon.  It  was  a 
shadowy  honour ;  but  is  any  earthly  throne  more  than  a  shadow  ?  Evil-Merodach 
himself  kept  his  for  only  two  years,  and  was  then  murdered.  (3)  He  gave  him 
suitable  provision.  The  ignominy  of  prison  garments  was  changed  for  honourable 
clothing ;  the  scarcity  and  hard  fare  of  the  dungeon  was  altered  for  the  royal  bounty  of 
the  king's  own  table.  Jeboiachin,  in  short,  had  now  everything  but  freedom.  But 
how  much  does  that  mean  I  He  was  still  an  exile.  All  he  enjoyed  was  but  an 
alleviation  of  captivity.  2.  At  the  close  of  the  book.  It  is  not  without  purpose  that 
the  Book  of  Kings  closes  with  tMs  glimpse  of  brightness.  The  story  it  has  had  to  tell 
has  been  a  sad  one — a  story  of  disappointment,  failure,  rejection,  exile.  But  there  is 
unshaken  faith,  even  amidst  the  gloom,  that  God's  counsel  will  stand,  and  that  he 
hath  not  cast  off  his  people  whom  he  foreknew  (Bom.  xi.  2).  Jeremiah  had  predicted 
the  exile,  but  he  had  also  predicted  restoration  after  seventy  years  (Jer.  xxv.  11, 12  ; 
xxix.  10).  That  period  had  but  half  elapsed,  but  this  kindness  shown  to  Jehoiachin 
seened  prophetic  of  the  end,  and  is  inserted  to  sustain  faith  and  hope  in  the  minds  of 
the  exiles.  The  history  of  the  world,  like  the  history  in  this  lx)ok,  will  close  in  peace 
ukd  brightness  under  Christ's  reign.— ^,  0. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 


to 


THE   SECOND   BOOK   OF   THE   KINGS. 


OHAPTKR  I. 

THIHB 

rus 

rn«3n 

rAOC 

Elijah  taken  up    ... 

86 

The  Short  Beign  of  Ahaziah  :  his  Sins, 

Seeking  the  Translated 

88 

and  their  Punishment     ... 

... 

S 

The  Healing  of  the  Spring... 

89 

The  "Spirit  we  areof "— the  Old  Dis- 

The Mockers  at  Bethel 

40 

pensation  and  the  Now  ... 

... 

6 

Carmel  ...           ...           ... 

41 

Seeking  after  Strange  Gods :  its  Cause 

and  Consequence 

•*. 

7 

Fire  from  Heaven...           ... 

Worldly  Eoyalty  and  Personal  Godli- 

9 

CHAPTEB   HI. 

nesB    •■•           ...           ••• 

... 

12 

Half-repentances  not  accepted  by  God 

47 

Man  in  Three  Aspects 

... 

12 

Rebellion    not    to  be   entered    upon 

The  Revolt  of  Moab            ^ 

... 

13 

with  a  Light  Heart 

48 

Ahaziah's  Sickness             ... 

... 

13 

Faith  and  Un  faith  tested  by  Danger 

'J'he  Prophet  of  Fire 

... 

15 

and  Difficulty    ... 

49 

Unwritten  History              m. 

•«. 

17 

The  Servant  of  God  in  the  Presence 
of  the  Great  of  the  Earth 

49 

CHAPTEB  IL 

God's  Enemies  rewarded  after   their 
Deserving 

60 

Preparation  for  oar  Departure 

from 

The  Continuity  of  Evil 

50 

Earth  ...            ... 

•■> 

24 

Forgetting  God,  and  its  Results 

50 

Faithfnl  Friendship 

... 

25 

Elisha  and  the  Minstrel     ...            ... 

51 

Desire  for  Spiritual  Exaltation 

... 

26 

The  Valley  Full  of  Ditches 

53 

The  Signs  of  a  Teacher  sent  from  God 

26 

Tlie  Heartlessness  of  Heathenism     ... 

56 

Parting  "Visits      

... 

27 

Evil — the  same  in  Principle,  though 

A  Parting  Request 

... 

28 

not  in  F  <rm      ... 

56 

Parted  Friends     ... 

... 

29 

Worldly  Bulers— Men  in  Trial  seek- 

The Beginning  of  Elisha's  Work 

... 

29 

ing  Help  from  a  Godly  Man 

56 

The  Waters  healed 

... 

80 

Aspects  of  a  Godly  Man     ...            ... 

57 

The  Departure  of  Good  Men 

... 

82 

Jehoram ;  or,  Qualified  Evil              ... 

58 

The    Proper   Spirit   for   Theological 

King  Mesha's  Bebellion     ... 

59 

Students           ...           ... 

... 

SB 

The  Alliance  of  the  Three  Kings     ... 

59 

Ridionle ...           ...           •— 

... 

S3 

Man's  Extremity  is  God's  Opportunity 

60 

Preparative  to  Translation ... 

•M 

84 

An  Evil  Consoienoe           ... 

61 

» Tho  Sons  of  the  Prophet*" 

M. 

86 

ThoDefMttoflloab           ^           «. 

61 

INDEX. 


OHAPTEB  IV. 

Tb»  Seed  of  the    Bighteona   neTer 

fonaken  by  God             ...           ...  70 

Godlinesa   has,  to  a  Large   Extent, 

the  Promise  of  this  Life,  ai  well  as 

of  the  Life  to  come          ...           „.  71 

Limits  to  Inepiration          ...           ...  72 

The  Widow's  Oil  increased...           ...  72 

Kindness  requited               ...            ...  75 

Death  and  Restoration        ...            ...  76 

Death  in  the  Pot:  a  Sermon  to  Toung 

Men    ...            ...           ...           ...  77 

The  Loaves  mnltiplied      ...           ...  79 

A  Prophet's  Widow  and  a  Prophet's 

Kindness          ...           ...           ...  80 

HospitaUiy           81 

Great  Trials         ...           ...           ...  82 

The  £elatioo  of  Prayer  to  Secondary 

Oanses...           ...           ...           ...  83 

Ministries  to  Man,  Good  and  Bad    ...  83 

The  Miracles  of  Elisha :  the  Pot  of  Oil  81 
The   Lady  of  Sliunem:     1.    A    Son 

given  ...           ...           ...           ...  86 

The  Lady  of  Shunem:  2.  The  Son 

taken  and  restored         ...            ...  87 

The  Deadly  Pottage           ...           ...  90 

The  Twenty  Barley  Loaves              „  91 

CHAPTEB  V. 

The  Lessons  taught  by  the  Stoiy  of 
Naaman  ...  ...  ...      99 

The  Lessons  taught  by  the  Sin  and 
Punishment  of  Gehazi    ...  ...    101 

The  Captive  Israclitish  Maid  ...    102 

Naaman  the  Syrian  ...  ...    104 

Elisha  and  Gehazi  ...  ...    106 

History    of    Naaman's    Disease    and 
Core,  ninstrative  of  Certain  Forces 
in  the  Life  of  Man  ...  ...    109 

The  Story  of  Naaman:  1.  The  Dis- 
interested Maiden  ...  ...     113 

The  Story  of  Naaman :  2.  The  Sug- 
gestive Cure     ...  ...  ...    115 

The  Story  of  Naaman:  3.  Gehazi's 
Falsebood  ...  „.  ...    117 

CHAPTEB  VL 

M«tnal  Love  and  Help  the  Best  Bond 
of  Bellgious  Communities  ...    125 

Wiaked  Men  vainly  Attempt  to  oat- 
wHa«d  ^  M.  ...    126 


The  Spirit-Woild,  and  the  Power  to 

Discern  it         «•  ».  ...    127 

Half-heartednesa  ...  ...  ...    128 

Princes  may  be  resisted  when  they 

are  bent  upon  Wrong-doing  ...  129 

An    Early  Theological    College;    it« 

Life  and  Lessons  ...  m.  129 

God's  Presence  withliis  People        ...    131 

Eyes  dosed,  and  Eyes  opened  ...  133 

Samaria  besieged ...  ...  ...  134 

A  Church-Extension  Enterprise       ...  135 

The  King  of  Syria  and  Elisha  ...  13(j 

Invincible  Helpers  of  the  Good         ...  138 

Subjects  worth  consideriisg  ...  141 

The  Borrowed  Axe  .^  ...  142 

A  Bootless  Invasion  ...  ».  143 

The  Siege  of  Samaria         m<  m.  145 

CHAPTEB  VII. 

The  Sin  of  the  Scoffer,  and  its  Punish- 
ment  ...  ...  ...  ...  151 

The  Plenitude  of  Gfd's  Power  to  de- 
liver from  the  Extremest  Dangers  152 
Afflictions  may  alienate  Men  from  God 
instead  of  bringing  them   Near  to 
him     ...            ...            ...            ...  153 

Unseasonable  Distrust        ...  ...  154 

The  Unbelieving  Lord       ...  154, 159 

A  Divine   Teacher  aad  a   Haus;hty 

Sceptic  ...  ...  ...  156 

The  Force  of  Will  ...  ...  157 

The  Bight  and  the  Prudent  ...  158 

The  Help  that  comes  to   Distressed 

Men  from  Without  ...  ...  158 

God's  Promise  realized  and  his  Truth 

vindicated  ...  ...  ...  159 

The  Four  Lepers  ...  ...  ...  169 

The  Good  News  verified     m.  m.  lt>2 

OHAPTEB  Vm 

"  All  Things  work  together  for  Good 

to  them  that  love  God  "  ...  ...  172 

The  Power  of  Calamity  to  bend  the 

Spirit  of  the  Proud  ...  ...  172 

Hazael  and  Elisha  ...  173, 185 

The  Power  of  Bad  Women  for  Evil ...  174 

The  Shunammite's  Land  restored    ...  175 

Elisha,  Hazael,  and  Benhadad         ...  177 

Topics  for  Eeflection  ,„  ...  179 

Striking  Charaotem  ...  ...  181 

LeMoni  from  the  Life  of  Jeboram    ...  18} 


INDEX. 


m 


FASB 

The  Shnnammito  and  her  Lands  .m  183 
Two  Kinga  of  Judah  ...  m    186 

CHAPTER  K. 
The  Prophet  and  the  Prophet-Disoiple 

— the  Dutiei  of  Direction  and  of 

Obedience         ...  ...  ...    196 

Political  Revolutions  Justifiable  under 

Certain  CiroamstciDces    ...  ...    197 

Retribution  may  be  Long  in  Coming, 

but  it  comes  at  Last        ...  ...    198 

The  Deaths  of  Jehoram  and  Jezebel ; 

or,  the  Divine  Law  of  Retribution ...     199 
The  History  of  Jehu  ...  ...    201 

Jehu  made  King  ...  ...  ...    202 

Jehu  as  Avenger  ...  .m  m.    201 

CHAPTER  X. 

The  Fear  of  Man  a  Stronger  Motive 
with  the  Wicked  and  Worldly  than 
the  Fear  of  Ood  ...  ...    219 

The  Wicked  have  Small  Regard  for 

their  Helpers  and  Confederates    ...    216 
Jehu  and  Jehonadab — the  Man  of  the 

World  and  the  Recluse  Ascetio     ...    217 
Half-heartedness  punished  by  Ood  as 
severely  as  Actual  Apostasy   from 
True  Religion  ...  ...  ...    218 

Ahab's  Sons  put  to  Death  ...  ...    218 

Ahaziah's  Brethren  put  to  Death  ...  219 
The  Zeal  of  Jehu,  and  its  Lessons  ...  219 
Destruction  of  Akab's  House  ...     222 

Destruction  of  the  Worshippers  of  Baal  223 
The  Reign  of  Jehu  ...  ...    225 

CHAPTER  XL 

Athaliah  and    Jezebel,   the  Wicked 

Daughter  and  the  Wicked  Mother       232 
Johoiada  an  Example  of  a  Faithful 
and  Wise  High  Priest  under  Trying 
Circumstances  ...  ...  ...    233 

God's    Judgments    not    nnfrequently 
fall  in  this  Life,  though  sometimes 
they  are  deferred  to  the  Life  beyond 
the  Grave  ...  ...  ...    231 

The  Preservation  and  Coronation  of 
Joash  ...  ...  ...  ...    235 

The  Covenant  and  its  Resulta  ...    236 

The  History  of  Athaliah    ...  ...    237 

Athaliah's  Usurpation        .^  ...    239 

The  Coronation  of  Joash    .m  m.    240 


CHAPTER  XIL 

THSm  PASI 

Weakness  in  a  Monarch  almost  as  Bad 

as  Wickedness  ...  ...  ...    248 

Inconvenience  of  setting  Priests  and 

Ministers  "  to  serve  Tal)les"  ...  249 
Church  Restoration  a  Good  Work,  ao- 

oeptabletoGod...  ...  ...    250 

The  Influence  of  a  Wise  Counsellor ...  250 
The  Repairing  of  the  Temple  under 

Joash  :  a  Missionary  Sermon        ...    251 
The  Last  Days  of  Joash      ...  ...    253 

The  History  of  Joash  ...  ...    254 

A  Mixed  Character  ...  ...  256 

The  Temple  Repairs — a  Good  Purpose 

frustrated  ...  ...  ...  257 

The  Temple  Repairs — a  Good  Purpose 

accomplished     ...  ...  ...  258 

Dark  Days  for  Judah         ...  ...  259 

CHAPTER  XIIL 

God's  Severity  and  God's  Goodness 
alike  shown  in  the  History  of  Israel 

under  Jehoahaz  ...  ...  266 

The  Persistency  of  Evil      ...  ...  267 

The  Closing  Scene  of  Elisha's  Life  ...  267 

Life  in  Death        ...  268 

The  BeiguB  of  Jehoahaz  and  Joash, 

Kings  of  Israel ...  ...  ...  269 

A  Royal  Visit  to  a  Dying  Prophet    ...  270 

A  Resurrection  and  its  Lessons         ...  273 

The  Death  of  Elisha  ...  ...  273 

Israel's  Humiliation  under  Jehoahaz  274 

Joash  and  Elisha  ...  ...  ...  275 

Power  in  Dead  Bones         ...  ...  277 

Joash's  Victories  ...  ...  ...  278 

CHAPTER   XrV. 

A  Father's  Evil  Example  no  Justi- 
fication for  a  Son's  Misconduct      ...  285 
A  Father's  Sins  not  to  be  visited  by 
the  Civil  Magistrate  on  his  Chil- 
dren   ...            ...            ...            ...  286 

•'  Pride  goes  before  a  Fall "  ...  287 

Compromise  and  its  Consequences    ...  287 

Personal  Responsibility      ...  ...  290 

Significant   Facts  in  God's  Govern- 
ment ...  M.  ...  ...  290 

Amaziah  doing  Right         ...  ...  891 

The  Boastful  Challenge,  and  its  Re- 
sults  ...  ...  ...  ...  292 

Changes  in  Two  Thrones    ...  m.  294 

The  Bei(^  of  Jeroboani  IL  ..»  9M 


INDEX. 


OHAPTEB  XT. 

rAoa 

The   Leper-King   *   Pattern   and  • 

Warning  ...  ...  ...    302 

Worldly  Prosperity  not  unfreqdently 

the  Bain  of  Kingdoms    ...  •..    803 

Prosperity  and  its  Dangers  ...    305 

Some   Lessons  &om   the  History  of 

Kings...  ...  ...  ...    308 

Another  King  beginning  Well,  ending 

111        »..  ...  ...  ...     308 

Anarchy  in  Israel...  ...  ...    310 

A  Good  Beign      ...  ...  ...    311 

CHAPTEB  XVL 

The  Godliness  of  Parents  does  not 
secure  the  Perseverance  of  their 
Children  in  Well-doing,  bnt  in- 
creases the  Children's  Guilt  if  they 
take  to  Evil  Courses       ...  ...    318 

QoA'b  Pnnishments  of  a  Nation's  Sins 
are  oftened  long  delayed,  but,  when 
they  come,  it  is  not  by  Degrees,  but 
suddenly,  violently,  and  at  once    ...    319 

A  Wicked  King  allowed  to  have  his 
Way  by  a  Weak  Priest 320 

Steps  in  a  Downward  Path :  the  Beiga 
ofAbaz  ...  ...  ...    321 

A  People's  King  and  Priest;  or,  King- 
hood  and  Priesthood       ...  ...    323 

The  Wickedness  of  Ahaz   ...  ...     326 

The  Syro-Israelitish  War   ...  ...    327 

Beligions  Innoratiou*        ...  ...    328 

CHAPTEB  XVIL 

The  Unwisdom  of  Worldly  Craft  and 

Policy...  ...  ...  ...  840 

The   Lessons  to  be  learnt  from  the 
Destruction  of  the  Kingdom  of  Sa- 
maria ...  ...  ...  ...  341 

The  Absurdity  and  Uselessness  of  a 

Mixed  Beligion...  ...  ...  842 

The  Beign  of  Hosbea         ...  ...  843 

Captivity  and  its  Cause     ...  ...  843 

Samaria  and  its  Beligion    ...  ...  844 

Aspects  of  a  Corrupt  Nation  ...  845 

A  Great  Privilege,  Wickedness,  and 

Bnin  ...  ...  ...  ...  847 

Subjects  worth  thinking  about  ...  849 

The  End  of  the  Kingdom  of  Israel   ...  852 

Beview  of  the  History  of  Israel        ...  853 

Heathen  Ooonpants  of  the  Land      ...  855 


...    873 
...    876 


CHAPTEB  XVm. 

VAai 

Iconoclasm   Bight   at  Wrong,  Judi- 
cious  or  Injudicions,  according  to 
Circumstances  ...  ...  ...    866 

God's  Service  not  really  a  Hard  Ser- 
vice    ...  ...  ...  ...    367 

The  Danger  of  Trnsting  to  a  Purchased 
Peace ...  ...  ...         ^ ...    368 

Bmised  Beeda      ...  ...  ...    368 

The  Secret  of  a  Successful  Life ;  or. 

Trust  in  God,  and  its  Besulta       ...    369 
Captivity  and  its  Cause      ...  ...    372 

Hezekiah's  Weakness  ...  ...    372 

The    Tempter    and    his    Methods: 
Babshakeh's  Address  to  the  Lead- 
ers and  People  of  Jerusalem  ...    372 
A  Striking  Beformation,  a  Buthless 
Despotism,   and   an   Unprincipled 
Diplomacy    /     ...           ... 

Hezekiah  the  Good  ... 

Sennacherib's  First  Assault  ...    377 

Babshakeh's  Boastings       .m  ...    378 

CHAPTEB  XIX. 

The  Wisdom   of  Trust  in  God,  and 

the  Foolishness  of  Tmst  in  Self    ...  391 

A  Good  Miin's  Prayers  sought  ...  392 

Onr  Difficulties,  and  how  to  deal  with 

them  ...  ...  ...  ...  393 

A   Nation's   Calamities,    Counsellur, 

and  God  ...  ...  ...  896 

Hezekiah  and  Isaiah  ...  ...  399 

Sennacherib's  Letter  ...  ...  400 

Isaiah's  Oracle      ...  ...  ...  401 

The  Mighty  Deliverance    ...  ...  404 

CHAPTEB  XX. 

Aspects  of  Death...            ...  ...  410 

The  Sunshine  of  Prosperity  a  Greater 
Danger    than   the   Storms  of  Ad- 
versity...          ...           ...  ...  412 

Hezekiah's  Sickness          ...  412,  416 

Hezekiah  and  the  Ambassadors  ...  413 

Death     ...           ...           ...  ...  414 

The  Babylonian  Embassy  ...  ...  418 

CHAPTEB  XXL 
The  Lesson  of  Manasseh's  Life,  that 
it  is  far  Easier  to  do  than  to  undo 
Evil    ...  ...  ...  ...    426 

Manasseh's  Wicked  Beign  ...  m.    434 


INDEX. 


tmau  PiQg 

Auics's  Wicked  Ueign        ...           ...  427 

Manasseh;  or,  the  Material  and  Moral 

in  Human  Life 427 

Amon     ...            ...            ...            ...  431 

The  Beaotion  nnder  Manasseh         ...  431 

Prophetic  Denunciationa    ...            ...  433 

The  Beign  of  Amon           ...           ...  435 

CHAPTEB  XXIL 

A  BighteouB  Branch  from  a  Wicked 

Boot    ...  ...  ...  ...  440 

A  Strange  Loss,  and  a  Strange  Be- 

covery...  ...  ...  ...  441 

The  Beign  of  King  Josiah  ...  ...  442 

A  Monarch  of  Bare  Virtue,  and  a 

Ood  of  Betributive  Justice  ...  441 

Josiah :  the  Temple  again  repaired  ...  446 

The  Finding  of  the  Law-Book         ...  118 

CHAPTEB  XXm. 

Standing  to  the  Covenant  ...  ...    462 

The  Inability  of  the  Best  Intentions 

and  the  Strongest  Will  to  convert  a 

Nation  that  ia  Corrupt  to  the  Core . . ,    463 
Two  Boyal  Brothers:  the  Beigna  of 

Jehoahaz  and  Jehoiakim  ...    464 

Good  Aims  and  Bad  Methods  ...    463 

Lamentable  TJnskilfulnesg  and  Inaor- 

rigibilltj  ...  ... 

Josiah's  Great  Beformatios 

Tbe  Altar  at  Bethel  470 


...    466 
...    467 


THKUB  rAGS 

The  Beformation  completed,  yet  Israel's 
Sin  not  pardoned  ...  ...    471 

Pharaoh-Neohoh  and  the  Jewish 
Kings ...  M.  .M  ...    472 

CHAPTEB  XXIV. 

Conquering  Kings  and  Nations  Instm- 
ments  in  God's  Hands  to  work  out 
his  Purposes      ...  ...  ...    479 

The  Beginning,  of  the  End ...  ...    480 

Blow  npon  Blow  ...  ...  ...    481 

Wickedness,  Betribntion,  and  Divine 
Control,  as  revealed  in  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's Invasion  of  Judah  ...    481 
The  Advent  of  Nebuchadnezzar        ...    482 
The  First  General  Captivity  ^,    484 

CHAPTEB  XXV. 

The  Fall  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  a 

Warning  for  all  Time  to  all  Nations  49S 

••  The  Loving-Kindness  of  the  Lord  "  496 

The  Last  Days  of  Jerusalem  ...  497 

Space  for  Bepentance         ...  ...  497 

Bulers  and  their  Enemies  ...  ...  498 

Jehoiachin  as  a  Victim  of  Tyrannic 
Despotism,  and  as  an  Object  of  De- 
livering Mercy  ...  ...  ...  498 

The  Fall  and  Destruction  of  Jerusalem  499 

The  Final  Deportation       ...  ...  501 

Gedaliah  and  the  Bemnant  ...  502 

Jehoiachin's  Bestoration     .„  ...  503 


jU,^Jtl-)i^>),u  ,    , 


i.i   u-v  ni]i  nm  uu  tun  fnHnutmuifiimmiui-imitnHHiint  H(; 
.  LIB- jjjjt )  J  r,)jjii»iJn  )   )  miuijiiiumiumilj-fithuii  in  in  tliii  )iimiJniu>iiiJjii  ntu  JtiiiiiJiinti] 

■■' ■ "-i  k  iiinuiiiimnmvmm; ^'■"" 


ajirtuHJ  iJ»imn-wi»j(j  uin*j(m»HH ' 

-■- 4Hnn "     ^       

I  wnu-,. ,._ „ ,.,... 


,,  , .If  iiswitW'UHimmiuu  (n>HHmj-iiH}im 


limn  iiHtmij-wDHn  uin*j(m»H) 


, ....imwmuummnj- 

-    ■  ■■'ii--' — 


Urn 

ma. 


w-uuM-^iaiwSu^uSi 


tun  jJIiHUihtmJi  illj?i|ii4j|iiiji 

, , hi  ^l^n,ii^mnlmhii^^ 

imam  mn^n  uUmmn  ^nyy»nimmm>h>niimn  \ 

(.jHHwHiwn  jm  mjiiJjjJiimtjjniiijuKiHftOJJi 

-'-  ■-'■■-■' ' "'-' iKUUnUtJiiiiun  ulujtiiitmiifj: 

wimwrntiHrnJ  \\m  m  ImmiHtjmfjiiinmJHiHfmr 
-■" " "^ -iwmiiHimj-— ■' 


, j»)-ijtKl"i>lK 

■   ji,m  «'>»mmiv*''Wi^»K*w*-»-w*  -■— "■^-  — = -  ■ 

■■'Igjjg^^mWMWnw! 

,ii}M>im;  .,  , ,. 


-7/>l>rH>/tl 


■ "" ' >.r4J»J>iKIH}J»JHWl>nMi  hv'-' ^ ^  -■.---,„  --■-.- 


1  tiiunii  )H»Hi)Hninvt>HmiHH 


_ , ,  hH(lHnj(H»tmHWi  ,-  ,-, 


■Hifi»l 

.■umiti...-, ,,,.-.. 


yiimmix^A-^  li>  i)l»»i 


fv 

__  ,  liiimiJJiniiMK;-..,. 

,  Mm)  J}  jMrns-'tt  M  wj  i :  iri.nti: 

.  jj»m>Jnfiiw»iiii]iini-i"Hini. 

Bll  l>/rfWttmiUJtJ>U|(J)rJfillJJJlljI»HH 

(MtJimjih.'Hmimjw 


mmWiiiiinmimiMm 
fMmwimmiwmMiH ,, 


i/tmiiWtiWHtlHt 


)Wmi}>HlJ)))mtM 


