CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


052067 


DATE  DUE 

107"C      1M 

liAfx3" 

13*7©  J  IB 

CAVLOBD 

PRINTED  (N  U.S.A. 

Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104762 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 

AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S  E. 

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A. 

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &   WAG-NALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  REV.  II.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D., 


DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 


AND  BY  THE 


REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,  M.A. 


I.  THESSALONIANS. 

(Exposition  cmb  fomiletics: 
By  REV.   P.   J.   GKLOAG,  D.D. 

flomilif s  bj>  borious  Qltttljors : 

REV.  PROF.  T.  CROSKERY,  D.D.  REV.  W.  F,  ADENEY,  M.A 

REV.  B.  C.  CAFFIN,  M.A.  REV.  R.  FINLAYSON,  B.A 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE   FIRST  EPISTLE   OF 

PAUL  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


§  1.  The  Authorship  of  the  Epistlr. 

There  is  no  doubt  that'  the  author  of  this  First  Epistle  to  the  Thegsaloniaus 
is  the  Apostle  Paul.  This  is  one  of  those  scriptural  writings  the  genuine- 
ness of  which  has  been  almost  universally  acknowledged.  It  has  been 
called  in  question  only  by  theologians  of  the  most  extreme  school  of 
criticism,1  and  has  even  been  admitted  by  some  belonging  to  that  sohooP 
The  external  evidence  in  its  favour  is  strong.  It  is  indirectly  alluded  to 
by  the  apostolic  Fathers ;  it  is  directly  referred  to  by  such  early  Fathers  as 
Irenseus,  Clement  of  Alexandria,  and  Tertullian ;  it  is  contained  in  the 
Muratorian  Canon,  and  in  the  early  Syriac  and  Latin  versions  belonging 
to  the  second  century  ;  and  its  genuineness  has  never  been  challenged  until 
recent  times.  To  quote  only  one  of  these  Fathers ;  Irenseus  (a.d.  179)  thus 
writes :  **  And  on  account  of  this  the  apostle,  explaining  himself,  has  set 
forth  the  perfect  man  of  salvation,  saying  thus  in  the  First  Epistle  to  tho 
The^salonians :  •  And  may  the  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  wholly,  and  may 
your  whole  spirit  and  soul  and  body  be  preserved  without  complaint  until 
the  advent  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  ('  Adv.  Hseres.,'  v.  6,  1).  Nor  is 
the  internal  evidence  less  strong  than  the  external.  The  character  of  Paul 
is  distinctly  impressed  upon  this  Epistle;  his  intense  love  for  his  converts, 
his  anxiety  about  their  spiritual  welfare,  his  joy  when  he  receives  a  favour- 
able account  of  their  faith  and  charity,  his  zeal  for  the  cause  of  the  Lord 
for  which  he  is  ready  to  sacrifice  everything,  his  noble  independence  of 
spirit, — all  these  characteristics  of  the  apostle  are  seen  in  this  Epistle.  So 
also  the  style  and  mode  of  expression  are  Paul's.  We  have  the  same 
employment  of  emphatic  terms,  the  same  rich  use  of  synonyms,  the  same 

1  See  author's  •  Pauline  Epistles,'  pp.  79—106. 

*  Baur  and  the  Tubingen  school;  Hilgenfeld,  hawevar,  asserts  Hi  genuineness. 

<»3 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


accumulation  of  ideas,  the  same  digressions  suggested  by  a  word,  the 
same  preference  for  participial  constructions  as  are  elsewhere  found  in 
Paul's  other  Epistles.  In  short,  as  Professor  Jowett  observes,  "  It  has  been 
objected  against  the  genuineness  of  this  Epistle  that  it  contains  only  a 
single  statement  of  doctrine.  But  liveliness,  personality,  similar  traits  of 
disposition,  are  more  difficult  to  invent  than  statements  of  doctrine.  A 
later  age  might  have  supplied  these,  but  it  could  hardly  have  caught  the 
very  likeness  and  portrait  of  the  apostle.  .  .  .  Such  intricate  similarities  of 
language,  such  lively  traits  of  character,  it  is  not  within  the  power  of  any 
forger  to  invent,  and,  least  of  all,  a  forger  of  the  second  century."1  Nor 
is  there  anything  in  the  contents  of  the  Epistle  at  variance  with  tbe  opinion 
that  it  was  written  by  Paul.  It  has,  indeed,  been  asserted  that  it  is  devoid 
of  individuality  and  doctrinal  statements.  Its  perusal  will  show  that  it 
is  at  once  lively  and  specially  adapted  to  the  wants  of  the  Thessalonians. 
And  that  it  is  devoid  of  doctrinal  statements  is  an  assertion  which  may 
also  well  be  disputed ;  but  even  admitting  that  there  is  a  partial  truth  in 
the  remark,  yet  this  is  easily  accounted  for  by  the  circumstances  under 
which  the  Epistle  was  written. 

The  coincidences  between  the  Epistle  and  the  incidents  in  the  life  of 
Paul,  as  recorded  in  the  Acts,  is  another  striking  proof  of  its  authenticity.* 
In  the  Acts  we  read  of  the  persecution  to  which  Paul  and  Silas  were 
subjected  at  Philippi,  when,  in  violation  of  their  rights  as  Boman 
citizens,  they  were  publicly  scourged  and  cast  into  prison.  In  the  Epistle, 
written  in  the  name  of  Paul  and  Silas,  there  is  reference  to  this  shameful 
treatment :  "  Even  after  we  had  suffered  before  and  were  shamefully 
entreated,  as  ye  know,  at  Philippi,  we  were  bold  in  our  God  to  speak  unto 
you  the  gospel  of  God  with  much  contention  "  (ch.  ii.  2).  In  the  Acts  we 
are  informed  that  Paul  and  Silas  encountered  a  similar  persecution  at 
Thessalonica.  "  The  Jews  which  believed  not,  moved  with  envy,  took 
unto  them  certain  fellows  of  the  baser  sort,  and  gathered  a  company,  and 
set  all  the  city  on  an  uproar,  and  assaulted  the  house  of  Jason,  and  sought 
to  bring  them  out  to  the  people"  (Acts  xvii.  5).  In  the  Epistle  Paul 
appeals  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Thessalonians  concerning  this  treatment : 
"  For  verily,  when  we  were  with  you,  we  told  you  before  that  we  should 
suffer  tribulation ;  even  as  it  came  to  pass,  and  ye  know  "  (oh.  iii.  4).  In 
the  Acts  we  are  informed  that  Paul  parted  from  his  companions,  Silas  and 
Timothy,  at  Beroea,  and  was  rejoined  by  them  at  Corinth :  "  And  when 
Silas  and  Timotheus  were  come  from  Macedonia  (to  Corinth),  Paul  was 
pressed  in  the  spirit,  and  testified  to  the  Jews  that  Jesus  was  Christ" 
(Acts  xviii.  5).  And  the  Epistle,  written,  as  wo  shall  afterwards  Bee,  from 
Corinth,  is  in  the  joint  names  of  Paul  and  Silvanus  and  Timotheus.  Not 
only  are  there  these  coincidences,  but  also  additional  statements  in  the 
Epistle  supplementing  the  history,  thus  proving  that  the  one  reoord  oould 

■  Jowett'g  '  St.  Part's  Epistles,'  vol.  i.  pp.  24—26  1st  edit.,  pp.  28,  29  2nd  edit. 
*  Paley's  '  Horn  Paulina  :'«!  Thessalontana. 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&  in 

not  have  been  copied  from  the  other.  Thus  in  the  Acts  we  are  informed 
that  Silas  and  Timothy  did  not  join  Paul  until  after  his  arrival  at  Corinth 
(Acts  xviii.  5) ;  whereas  in  the  Epistle  there  is  a  statement  which  has  led 
many1  to  affirm  that  Timothy  joined  Paul  at  Athens,  and  was  sent  by  him 
from  that  city  to  Thessalonica:  "  Wherefore  when  we  could  no  longer 
forbear,  we  thought  it  good  to  be  left  at  Athens  alone  ;  and  sent  Timotheus, 
our  brother,  and  minister  of  God,  and  our  fellow-labourer  in  the  gospel  of 
Christ,  to  establish  you,  and  to  comfort  you  concerning  your  faith  "  (ch.  iii. 
1,  2).  In  the  Acts  we  are  informed  that  Paul  preached  in  the  synagogue 
for  three  sabbaths,  reasoning  with  the  Jews  (Acts  xvii.  2) ;  whereas  there 
are  references  in  the  Epistle  which  have  induced  some  to  think  that  his 
residence  in  Thessalonica  was  more  protracted.  In  the  Acts  we  are  only 
informed  that  Paul  preached  in  the  synagogue  to  the  Jews  and  devout 
Greeks,  that  is,  the  religious  proselytes;  whereas  it  is  evident  from  the 
whole  character  of  the  Epistle  that  the  Church  was  composed  of  Gentile 
converts.  These  differences  are  not  contradictions,  and  may  easily  be 
adjusted ;  but  they  are  apparent  enough  to  demonstrate  the  independence 
both  of  the  history  and  the  Epistle. 

§  2.  The  Church  of  Thessalonica. 

Thessalonica  was  a  large  seaport  of  Macedonia,  situated  in  the  form  of 
an  amphitheatre  on  the  slope  of  a  hill  at  the  north-east  end  of  the  Thermaic 
Gulf,  now  called  the  Gulf  of  Salonica.  It  had  in  antiquity  various  names. 
Thus  it  was  called  Emathia  and  Halia.  In  ancient  history  it  appears 
under  the  name  Therma,  so  called  from  the  hot  springs  in  the  neighbour- 
hood. Under  this  name  it  is  mentioned  in  the  account  of  the  invasion  of 
Xerxes,  and  in  the  history  of  the  Peloponnesian  War.  We  are  informed 
that  Cassander,  the  son  of  Antipater,  King  of  Macedonia,  rebuilt  Therma, 
and  called  it  Thessalonica,  after  the  name  of  his  wife,  the  half-sister  of 
Alexander  the  Great  (Strabo,  vii.  Frag.  24).  According  to  another  account, 
less  trustworthy,  it  was  so  called  by  Philip,  the  father  of  Alexander, 
to  commemorate  his  victury  over  the  Thessalonians.  In  the  Middle  Ages 
it  appears  under  the  contracted  form  Salneck ;  and  is  now  known  under 
the  name  Salonica.  Under  the  Romans  Thessalonica  became  a  city  of 
great  importance.  During  the  temporary  division  of  Macedonia  into  four 
districts,  it  was  the  capital  of  the  second  district ;  and  afterwards,  when 
the  Boman  province  of  Macedonia  was  formed,  it  became  the  metropolis  of 
the  country,  and  the  rosidence  of  the  Roman  governor.  In  the  civil  wars 
it  sided  with  Augustus  and  Antony,  and  was  rewarded  by  receiving  the 
privileges  of  a  free  city.  Strabo,  who  lived  shortly  before  the  Christian 
era,  observes  that  "  it  has  at  present  the  largest  population  of  any  town  in 
the  distriot "  (Strabo  vii.  7,  4).  In  the  time  of  Paul,  then,  Thessalonica  was 
a  populous  and  nourishing  town;  it  was  chiefly  inhabited  by  Greeks,  with 
•  8o  Paler,  Bleek,  Neander,  Jowett,  and  Ellioott, 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


a  mixture  of  Bomans.  The  Jews  also  were  attracted  to  it  in  great  numbers 
for  the  sake  of  commerce,  and  here  was  the  synagogue  of  the  district  (Acts 
xvii.  1).  It  has  always  been  a  city  of  great  importance.,  It  long  continued 
to  be  a  bulwark  against  the  assaults  of  the  northern  barbarians,  and  after- 
wards of  the  Saracens.  When  the  Greek  empire  became  enfeebled,  Thessa- 
lonica  was  attached  to  the  Venetian  Bepublic,  and  remained  so  until  the 
year  1430,  when  it  was  captured  by  the  Turks,  in  whose  possession  it 
continues  to  this  day.  It  is  considered  as  the  second  city  of  European 
Turkey,  having  a  population  of  about  seventy  thousand,  of  whom  at  least 
thirty  thousand  are  Jews.  Thessalonica  has  many  remains  of  antiquity, 
one  of  which  deserves  special  mention,  a  triumphal  arch,  erected  to  com- 
memorate the  victory  of  Philippi,  and  which  must  have  been  standing 
when  Paul  visited  that  city. 

We  have  an  account  of  the  origin  of  the  Church  of  Thessalonica  in  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles.  In  his  second  great  missionary  journey,  Paul  and 
his  fellow-labourers,  Silas  and  Timothy,  had  arrived  at  Alexandria  Troas, 
when  he  was  directed  by  a  vision  to  cross  over  the  Aigea.11  Sea  and  repair 
to  Europe.  In  obedience  to  this  Divine  direction,  we  are  informed  that 
loosing  from  Troas,  they  came  with  a  straight  course  to  the  island  of 
Sainothracia,  and  the  next  day  to  Neapolis,  and  from  that  they  journeyed 
inland  to  Philippi  (Acts  xvi.  11,  12).  Here  they  remained  fur  some  time, 
preaching  the  gospel  with  great  success,  until  they  were  driven  from  it  by 
a  severe  persecution.  From  Philippi  Paul  and  his  companions  proceeded, 
by  way  of  Amphipolis  and  Apollonia,  to  Thessalonica.  Here  was  the  chief 
synagogue  of  the  district,  and  into  it  Paul,  according  to  his  custom,  entered 
and  preached  the  gospel.  He  proved  to  the  Jews  from  their  Scriptures 
that  the  Messiah  was  to  suffer  and  rise  from  the  dead ;  and  he  showed 
them  that  Jesus  did  thus  suffer  and  rise  again,  and  was  consequently  the 
Messiah  (Acts  xvii.  3).  It  would  also  appear  that  at  Thessalonica  he 
dwelt  much  on  the  kingdom  and  second  advent  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 
he  laid  great  stress  on  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  on  his  exaltation  to 
the  throne  of  eternal  majesty.  Hence  the  accusation  brought  against  him 
that  he  proclaimed  another  King,  one  Jesus  (Acts  xvii.  7);  and,  in  his 
Epistle,  he  observes,  "Ye  know  how  we  exhorted  and  comforted  and 
charged  every  one  of  you,  as  a  father  doth  his  children,  that  you  would 
walk  worthy  of  God,  who  hath  called  you  unto  his  kingdom  and  glory  " 
(ch.  ii.  11,  12).  For  three  sabbaths  Paul  continued  his  efforts  in  the 
Jewish  synagogue  with  considerable  success ;  some  of  the  Jews  believed, 
but  his  converts  were  especially  numerous  among  the  devuut  Greeks  (Acts 
xvii.  1 — 4).  At  length  the  unbelieving  Jews,  moved  with  envy,  raised 
a  tumult  against  Paul  and  his  companions ;  they  stirred  up  the  rabble,  and 
assaulted  the  house  of  Jason,  with  whom  the  Christian  preachers  lodged ; 
and  when  they  failed  to  capture  them,  they  dragged  Jason  and  certain  of 
the  converts  before  the  magistrates  of  the  city,  accusing  them  of  disturbing 
the  public  peace  and  of  harbouring  traitors  to  the  emperor.    In  consequence 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  * 

of  this,  to  avoid  further  disturbance,  Paul  and  Silas  left  the  city  by  night, 
and  repaired  to  the  neighbouring  town  of  Beroea  (Acta  xvii.  10). 

In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  a  residence  in  Thessalonica  of  only  three 
weeks  is  mentioned  (Acts  xvii.  2).  There  are,  however,  statements  in  the 
Epistle  which  would  lead  us  to  infer  that  his  residence  was  for  a  somewhat 
longer  period.  A  flourishing  Church  was  formed  in  Thessalonica;  the 
gospel  spread  from  it  as  a  centre  throughout  Macedonia ;  its  fame  was 
everywhere  diffused ;  and  for  this  success  a  longer  space  of  time  than  three 
weeks  would  appear  requisite.  Besides,  at  Thessalonica  Paul  supported 
himself  by  manual  labour.  "  Te  remember,"  he  writes,  "  our  labour  and 
travail :  for  labouring  night  and  day,  because  we  would  not  be  chargeable 
unto  any  of  you,  we  preached  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God  "  (oh.  ii.  9).  And 
it  was  his  custom  to  do  so  only  when  his  residence  in  any  city  was  pro- 
longed. And  we  are  informed  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  that  his 
converts  in  Philippi  "  sent  to  Thessalonica  once  and  again  to  his  necessities; " 
and  that  this  was  on  the  occasion  of  this  visit  to  Thessalonica  is  evident, 
for  the  apostle  tells  us  that  it  was  "  in  the  beginning  "of  the  gospel "  (Phil, 
iv.  15,  16).  Now,  the  distance  between .  these  two  cities  was  a  hundred 
miles;  'and  therefore  more  than  three  weeks  appear  to  be  necessary  for 
the  transmission  of  this  twofold  supply  for  his  wants.  Still,  however,  his 
residence  could  not  have  been  long,  and  his  departure  from  the  city  was 
compulsory.  Probably  Paul  preached  for  three  successive  sabbaths  in  the 
synagogue,  but,  finding  the  Jews  obstinate  and  the  synagogue  closed  against 
him,  he  turned,  as  his  manner  was,  to  the  Gentiles ;  and  it  was  his  success 
among  the  Gentiles  that  stirred  up  the  wrath  of  the  Jews,  and  excited  that 
disturbance  which  was  the  occasion  of  his  leaving  Thessalonica. 

The  result  of  Paul's  ministry  during  the  three  sabbaths  he  preached  in 
the  synagogue  is  thus  given  by  the  author  of  the  Acts :  "  And  some  of 
them  believed,  and  consorted  with  Paul  and  Silas ;  and  of  the  devout 
Greeks  a  great  multitude,  and  of  the  chief  women  not  a  few  "  (Acts  xvii.  4). 
From  this  it  appears  that  his  success  was  small  among  the  Jews,  but  great 
among  the  devout  Greeks,  that  is,  those  Greeks  who  had  previously  detached 
themselves  from  idolatry  and  were  seeking  after  God,  and  were  thus  in 
a  manner  prepared  for  the  reception  of  Christianity.  Afterwards  it  is 
probable  that  Paul  preached  to  the  Gentiles,  and  made  numerous  converts 
among  them.  Although  the  Jews  were  numerous  in  Thessalonica,  yet  it 
is  evident  from  the  two  Epistles  that  the  Church  there  was  chiefly  composed 
of  Gentile  converts.  They  are  described  as  those  who  turned  to  God  from 
idols  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God  (eh.  i.  9) — a  description  applicable 
to  oonverted  Gentiles,  but  not  to  converted  Jews  and  Jewish  proselytes ; 
and  in  neither  Epistle  is  there  a  direct  quotation  from  the  Old  Testament, 
the  only  probable  allusion  being  to  the  prophecies  of  Daniel  in  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  man  of  sin  contained  in  the  Second  Epistle  (2  Thess  ii.  4). 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


i  3.  The  Occasion  of  the  Epistlb. 

Paul,  driven  from  Thessalonica,  had  repaired  to  Bercea,  but  from  this  also 
he  had  been  compelled  to  depart  by  the  machinations  of  the  Jews  of 
Thessalonica  (Acts  xvii.  13,  14).  He  had  learned  that  the  persecution 
which  had  arisen  during  his  presence  was  continued  m  his  absence  (oh.  ii. 
14).  And  henoe  he  was  filled  with  anxiety  about  his  Thessalonian 
converts.  He  knew  that  by  reason  of  the  shortness  of  his  residence  they 
were  only  partially  instructed  in  Christianity,  and  he  naturally  feared 
that  they  might  fall  from  the  faith.  Twice  he  had  planned  to  visit  them ; 
but  circumstances  had  prevented  him  (ch.  ii.  18).  Accordingly,  no  longer 
able  to  master  his  anxiety,  he  sent  his  fellow-labourer  Timothy,  either  from 
Bercea  or  Athens,  to  ascertain  their  state  (ch.  iii.  1,  2).  Paul,  meanwhile, 
had  repaired  from  Bercea  to  Athens,  and  thence  to  Corinth;  and  there 
Timothy  joined  him,  and  the  information  which  he  brought  was  the  occasion 
of  this  Epistle.  That  information  was  upon  the  whole  consolatory  and 
satisfactory.  Timothy  brought  good  tidings  of  the  faith  and  charity  of 
the  Thessalonian s,  of  their  affectionate  regard  for  the  apostle,  and  of  their 
earnest  desire  to  see  him.  The  Thessalonians,  in  spite  of  the  persecution 
whioh  they  endured,  continued  steadfast  to  the  faith ;  they  were  examples 
to  all  that  believed  in  Thessalonica  and  Achaia  (ch.  i.  7  ;  iii.  6,  7).  But, 
however  favourable  this  report  of  Timothy,  there  were  still  many  defects 
to  supply,  many  errors  to  correct,  and  many  evil  practices  to  reform.  The 
religious  knowledge  of  the  Thessalonians  was  defective;  their  religion  had 
partially  degenerated  into  fanaticism ;  and  especially  they  were  filled 
with  excitement  under  the  persuasion  of  the  immediate  coming  of  Christ. 
Some  of  them  had  neglected  their  worldly  duties  and  had  sunk  into  an 
indolent  inactivity  (ch.  iv.  11,  12).  It  would  appear  that  some  of  the 
converts  had  died,  and  their  friends  were  distressed  on  their  account,  lest 
they  should  forfeit  the  blessings  to  be  bestowed  at  the  advent  of  Christ 
(oh.  iv.  13).  Nor  had  the  Thessalonians  entirely  detached  themselves  from 
the  vices  of  their  former  heathen  state.  The  apostle  had  to  warn  them 
against  sensuality,  that  vice  so  prevalent  among  the  Gentiles ;  and  he  had 
to  rebuke  the  covetousness  of  some  as  well  as  the  indolence  of  others  (ch. 
iv.  1—7). 

With  regard  to  its  contents,  the  Epistle  is  divided  into  two  parts :  the 
first,  comprehending  the  first  three  chapters,  may  be  termed  historical ; 
the  second,  including  the  two  last  chapters,  is  practical.  The  apostle, 
after  saluting  the  Thessalonians,  renders  thanks  to  God  for  the  entrance 
of  the  gospel  among  them,  for  the  mighty  efficacy  with  which  it  was 
accompanied,  and  for  the  steadfastness  of  their  faith  (ch.  L).  He  alludes 
to  his  demeanour  when  in  Thessalonica ;  how,  notwithstanding  his  shameful 
treatment  at  Philippi,  he  had  preached  the  gospel  among  them  amid  much 
contention ;  how  he  had  sought  neither  their  money  nor  their  applause,  but, 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  »ii 

actuated  by  the  purest  motives,  had  laboured  incessantly  for  their  spiritual 
welfare,  and  was  ready  to  sacrifice  himself  for  them  (oh.  ii.).  He  mentions 
the  extreme  anxiety  he  had  on  their  account,  the  mission  of  Timothy  to 
them,  and  the  great  satisfaction  he  experienced  at  the  information  which 
Timothy  brought  of  the  steadfastness  of  their  faith  and  the  abundance  of 
their  charity  (oh.  iii.).  He  then  exhorts  them  to  continue  in  holiness, 
carefully  to  avoid  the  lusts  of  the  Gentiles  who  knew  not  God,  and,  instead 
of  being  led  away  by  excitement  as  if  the  advent  of  Christ  was  at  hand, 
to  be  diligent  in  the  performance  of  their  earthly  duties.  He  comforts 
them  concerning  the  fate  of  their  departed  friends,  and  exhorts  them  to  be 
watchful  and  prepared  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  (ch.  iv.).  Then  follow 
a  series  of  detached  exhortations  to  cultivate  the  virtues  of  Christianity, 
and  the  Epistle  concludes  with  the  apostolio  benediction  (ch.  v.)i 


I  4.  The  Date  of  the  Epistlk. 

When  Paul  and  Silas  left  Thessalonica,  they  came  to  Bercea;  Timothy 
probably  remained  behind,  but  he  also  soon  joined  them.  Paul  left  them 
both  at  Bercea,  and  proceeded  alone  to  Athens.  Timothy  was  probably  sent 
from  Bercea  back  to  Thessalonica  to  confirm  the  Church  there,  though  some 
suppose  that  this  mission  took  place  from  Athens.  At  Athens  Paul  intended 
to  remain  until  his  companions  joined  him ;  he  sent  a  message  to  Silas  and 
Timothy  to  come  to  him  with  all  speed  (Acts  xyii.  14,  15).  It  would, 
however,  appear  that  he  left  Athens  without  them ;  unforeseen  circum- 
stances had  prevented  them  complying  with  his  request,  and  they  did  not 
rejoin  him  until  his  arrival  at  Corinth.  Now,  as  the  Epistle  is  written  in 
the  joint  names  of  Paul,  Silvanus,  and  Timotheus,  it  is  evident  that  it  was 
not  composed  until  all  three  met  together  at  Corinth.  Some  time  also  must 
have  elapsed  between  the  planting  of  Christianity  in  Thessalonica  and  the 
writing  of  this  Epistle.  Paul  had  twice  attempted  to  visit  them ;  Timothy 
had  been  sent  by  the  apostle  and  had  returned  from  his  mission ;  and  the 
faith  of  the  Thessalonians  had  been  spread  abroad  throughout  Macedonia 
and  Achaia  (ch.  i.  7,  8).  The  interval,  however,  could  not  have  been  long. 
Timothy  returned  at  the  commencement  of  Paul's  residence  at  Corinth; 
and  the  apostle's  anxiety  for  the  Thessalonians  would  induce  him  to  write 
the  Epistle  immediately  on  his  receiving  the  information.  He  speaks  of 
his  absence  from  them  as  having  as  yet  lasted  only  a  short  time.  "  We, 
brethren,  being  taken  from  you  for  a  short  time  in  presence,  not  in  heart, 
endeavoured  the  more  abundantly  to  see  your  face  with  great  desire " 
(ch.  ii.  17).  We  may,  therefore,  safely  fix  the  time  of  the  composition  of 
the  Epistle  toward  the  close  of  the  year  52  or  the  beginning  of  the  year 
53,  and  during  the  early  part  of  Paul's  residence  at  Corinth,  about  six 
months  after  the  planting  of  Christianity  in  Thessalonica. 

Accordingly  the  place  of  writing  was  Corinth.     In  our  New  Testament, 


viti  INTRODUCTION  TO 


at  the  end  of  the  Epistle,  there  is  appended  the  note  :  "  The  First  Epistle 
to  the  Thessalonians  was  written  from  Athens."  Though  such  a  note  ia 
found  in  the  most  ancient  manuscripts,  it  is  evidently  a  mistake.  The 
Epistle  could  not  have  been  written  from  Athens,  for  Silas  and  Timothy- 
were  not  both  there  with  the  apostle;  and  it  was  not  written  until  the 
return  of  Timothy  from  Thessalonica,  which  occurred  at  Corinth;  nor  is 
there  any  ground  for  the  supposition  ihat  Paul  and  his  companions,  during 
his  residence  at  Corinth,  made  a  short  excursion  to  Athens.  The  mistake 
appears  to  have  arisen  from  a  carele-s  inference  drawn  from  the  words, 
"  We  thought  it  good  to  be  left  at  Athens  alone"  (ch.  iii.  1);  whereas 
the  reference  there  is  evidently  to  a  past  event,  and  indirectly  implies 
that  the  apostle  was  not  at  Athens  when  he  wrote  these  words.  These 
subscriptions  at  the  end  of  the  Epistles  have  no  authority ;  and  although 
in  general  correct,  yet  occasionally,  as  in  the  present  instance,  they  are 
erroneous. 

§  5.  The  Peculiarities  or  the  Efistlk. 

The  special  peculiarity  of  this  Epistle  is  that  it  is  undoubtedly  the  first 
oi  Paul's  extant  Epistles.  Whether  it  is  the  first  Epistle  that  Paul  ever 
wrote  is  an  entirely  different  question ;  but  it  is  the  first  that  has  come 
down  to  us.  This  is  a  point  on  which  almost  all  commentators  are  agreed. 
In  all  probability  it  is  the  earliest  of  the  books  of  the  New  Testament, 
with  the  possible  exception  of  the  Epistle  of  James. 

It  is  erroneous  to  affirm  that  this  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  is 
devoid  of  doctrinal  statements.  The  supreme  dignity  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  spiritual  kingdom  which  he  has  established  in  this  world,  the 
deliverance  from  the  wrath  to  come  effected  by  him,  the  necessity  of  holi- 
ness for  salvation,  the  reign  of  Christ  in  heaven,  the  resurrection  of  the 
just,  the  second  advent  of  Christ,  the  blessedness  of  a  future  state  to  the 
righteous  and  the  wrath  which  awaits  the  wicked,  are  all  clearly  deduced 
from  this  Epistle.  The  great  plan  of  redemption  through  the  sufferings 
of  Christ  was  clear  to  the  apostle  from  the  beginning.  We  can  hardly 
even  affirm  that  there  was  a  development  in  the  views  of  the  apostle — 
a  progress  made  in  spiritual  knowledge  and  insight  into  the  ways  of  God. 
No  doubt  different  doctrines  are  insisted  on  in  the  different  Epistles;  but 
this  arose  from  the  circumstances  of  the  Churches  to  whom  the  apostle 
wrote.  Thus  in  this  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  there  is  no  mention  of 
the  great  Pauline  doctrine  of  justification,  beoause  in  that  Churoh  there 
was  no  controversy  with  the  Judaistic  Christians,  and  therefore  no  necessity 
of  defending  the  doctrine  of  justification  against  erroneous  notions;  whereas 
the  errors  of  the  Galatian  Church  caused  the  apostle  to  dwell  specially  on 
that  doctrine.  So  also  at  a  still  later  period  the  incipient  Gnostio  errors 
were  the  occasion  which  induced  the  apostle  to  insist  more  fully  on  the 
nature  of  Christ's  Person  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Colossians  and  Ephesians 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLES  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN& 


than  in  his  earlier  Epistles.  Bishop  Lightfoot,  in  his  able  article  on  the 
"  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,"  in  Smith's  '  Biblical  Dictionary,'  notices 
three  points  of  difference  between  these  and  Paul's  later  Epistles.  First, 
in  the  general  style  of  these  earlier  letters  there  is  greater  simplicity  and 
less  exuberance  of  language.  Secondly,  the  antagonism  is  different.  Here 
the  opposition  comes  from  the  unconverted  Jews;  afterwards  Paul's  oppo- 
nents are  Judnizing  Christians.  Thirdly,  the  doctrinal  teaching  of  the 
apostle  does  not  bear  quite  the  same  aspect  as  in  the  later  Epistles.  Many 
of  the  distinctive  doctrines  of  Christianity  which  are  inseparably  connected 
with  Paul's  name  were  not  evolved  and  distinctly  enunciated  until  the 
needs  of  the  Church  drew  them  out  into  prominence  at  a  later  date.  So 
far,  then,  it  may  be  true  that  this  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  is  not 
so  doctrinal  as  the  Epistles  to  the  Romans,  Galatians,  and  Ephesians. 
The  circumstances  of  the  Church  determined  the  contents  of  the  Epistle. 
The  doctrine  most  insisted  on  and  explained  is  the  second  advent,  because 
erroneous  views  prevailed  concerning  it  among  the  Thessalonians,  giving 
rise  to  many  disorders. 

Paul,  in  writing  to  the  Thessalonians,  lays  bare  his  heart ;  he  speaks  of 
his  gentleness  among  them,  even  as  a  nursing  mother  eherisheth  her 
children,  and  of  his  readiness  to  impart  unto  them,  not  the  gospel  of  God 
only,  but  his  own  soul  by  reason  of  the  affection  which  he  bore  to  them. 
The  Epistle  which  it  most  closely  resembles  is  that  to  the  Fhilippians. 
The  Macedonian  Churches  were  peculiarly  attached  to  the  apostle,  and  he 
to  them ;  he  writes  to  them  in  the  fulness  of  his  affection ;  and  exhorts 
them,  not  so  much  with  the  authority  of  a  spiritual  teacher,  as  with  the 
love  and  tenderness  of  parental  affection,  even  as  a  father  doth  his  ohildres. 

f  6.     Literature. 

List  of  works  consulted  in  the  following  Exposition  ;— 
Alexander,  Bishop  of  Derry, "  Epistles  to  Thessalonians,"  in  *  Speaker's  Commentary,* 
1881 ;  Alford,  H,  'The  Greek  Testament,'  vol.  iii.,  3rd.  edit.,  1866;  Auberlen,  0.  A., 
"  1  Thessalonians  i.,  ii.,"  in  Lange's  '  Bibelwerk/  1869  ;  Bleek,  J.  F.,  '  Introduction  to 
the  New  Testament,'  translation  1870;  'Lectures  on  the  Apocalypse,'  translation 
1875 :  Calvin,  J.,  '  Commentary  on  the  Thessalonians,'  translation  1851 ;  Conybeare 
and  How  son,  'Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,'  2nd  edit.,  1862;  Davidson,  S.,  'Intro- 
duction to  the  New  Testament/  1st  edit.,  3  vols.,  1851 ;  '  Introduction  to  the  Study  of 
the  New  Testament,' 2  vols.,  1868;  De  Wette,  W.M.L.,  '  Exegetisches  Handbuch: 
Thessalonicher,' 1864;  Diedrich,  J., '  Die  Briefe  St.  Pauli,*  Leipzig,  1858 ;  Doddridge, 
P.,  'Family  Expositor;'  Diisterdieck,  F.,  'Offenbarung  Johannis:'  dritte  Anflage, 
1877 ;  Eadie,  John, '  Commentary  on  Thessalonians,'  1877;  Ellicott,  Bishop, '  St.  Paul's 
Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,'  3rd  edit.,  1866  j  Elliott,  E.  B.,  « Hora  Apocalyptic*,' 
6th  edit.,  1862  ;  Farrar,  F.  W., '  Articles  in  the  Expositor,'  vols.  i.  and  ii.,  2nd  series ; 
Gloag, P.  J.,  'Pauline  Epistles,'  1874;  Hofmann,  J. 0.  K., ' Die  heilige  Schrift  N. T. : 
Th.  i.,  Thessalonicher/  1869 ;  *  Schriftbeweis,'  1854 ;  Hurd,  Bishop,  *  On  the  Prophecies,' 
vol.  ii.,  4th  edit.,  1776 ;  Jowett,  B.,  *  St.  Paul's  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,'  etc.,  1st 
edit.,  1855;  2nd  edit.,  1859;  Kirchhofer,  J„  ' Quellensammlung/  1842;  Koch,  A., 
'Commentar  tther  d.  1  Thessalonicher/  1865;  Lardner,  N.,  'Credibility  of  the  Gospel 
History,'  1815  ;  Lee,  W.,  "  Revelations,"  in  'Speaker's  Commentary,'  1881 ;  Lightfoot, 


S  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  THESSALONIANS. 

Bishop,  article  "  Thessaloniana,"  in  Smith's  '  Dictionary ; '  Lillie,  J.,  '  Lectures  on  the 
Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,'  1863 ;  Liinemnian,  G-.,  "  Briefe  an  d.  Thess.,"  in  Meyer's 
'  Kommentar,"  dritte  Auflage,  1867 ;  Translation  of  the  same,  1880 ;  Macknight,  J., 
'Translation  of  the  Epistles;'  Meyrick,  F.,  article  on  "Antichrist,"  in  Smith's 
'Dictionary;'  Newton,  Bishop,  'Dissertations  on  the  Prophecies;'  Olshausen,  H., 
'  On  the  Thessalonians,'  translation  1851 ;  Paley,  W., '  Horae  Paulinas ; '  Paterson,  A ., 
'  Commentary  on  1  Thessalonians,'  1857 ;  Kenan,  B., ' L' Antichrist,  3rd  edit.,  1873 ; 
Renss,  E.,  '  Geschichte  d.  heiligen  Schriften,'  vierte  Auflage,  1864 ;  Riggenbach,  C.  J ., 
"  Commentary  on  Thess.,"  in  Lange's  '  Bibelwerk,'  1869 ;  Vaughan,  0.  J., '  First  Epistle 
to  the  Thessalonians,'  1864 ;  Whitby,  D.,  '  Commentary  on  the  New  Testament ; ' 
Wieseler,  Earl, '  Chronologie  d,  Apost.  Zeitaltera,'  1848  ;  Wordsworth,  Bishop, '  Greek 
Testament,'  6th  edit,  i&tii. 


THE    FIRST   EPISTLE   OF 


PAUL  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  L 


Contests. — Paul,  after  the  address  and 
salutation,  teetilies  that  he  renders  constant 
thanks  to  God  for  the  Thessalonians,  calling 
to  remembrance  their  faith,  love,  and  hope, 
being  assured  of  their  election.  He  ex- 
presses his  joy  in  their  cordial  reception  of 
the  gospel  and  the  Christian  character 
which  they  exhibited,  being  examples  to  all 
believers  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia.  He 
mentions  the  favourable  report  which  he 
had  of  their  conversion  to  God  from  idols, 
and  of  then  waiting  for  the  advent  of 
Christ 

Ver.  1. — Paul.  He  does  not  call  himself 
"  an  apostle,"  not  because  the  Thessalonians 
were  newly  converted  (Chrysostom),  or  from 
tenderness  to  Silvanus  who  was  not  an 
apostle  (Estius),  or  because  his  apostolic 
authority  was  not  yet  recognized  (Jowett), 
or  because  he  had  merely  commenced  his 
apostolic  labours  (Wordsworth) ;  but  because 
his  aposileship  had  never  been  called  in 
question  by  the  Thessalonians.  For  the 
same  reason  he  omits  this  title  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Philippians ;  whereas  he  strongly  in- 
sists upon  it  in  his  Epistles  to  the  Corin- 
thians and  Galatians,  because  among  them 
there  were  many  opposed  to  his  authority. 
And  Silvanus.  The  same  »s  the  Silas  of  the 
Acts.  He  is  mentioned  as  a  chief  man 
among  the  brethren,  »ud  a  prophet  or 
inspired  teacher  (Acta  xv.  22,  32).  His 
latin  aaaie  landers  it  probable  that  he  was 
a  Hellenistic  Jew,  and,  like  Paul,  he  was  a 
Roman  citizen  (Acts  xvi.  37).  He  was  sent 
with  Judas  Barsabas  from  Jerusalem,  to 
convey  the  apostolic  decrees  to  Antioch; 
and  he  accompanied  Paul  instead  of  Bar- 
nabas on  his  second    missionary  journey 

I.    THESSALOiOANS. 


(Acts  xv.  40).  He  suffered  Imprisonment 
with  Paul  at  Philippi;  and  was  engaged 
with  him  in  preaching  the  gospel  in  Thes- 
salonica,  Beroca,  and  Corinth.  His  ministry 
at  Corinth  is  honourably  mentioned  by  Paid 
in  his  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians 
(2  Cor.  i.  9).  After  this  there  is  no  more 
mention  of  Silvanus  in  the  Acts,  and  it  is 
doubtful  whether  he  was  the  Silvanus  by 
whom  the  First  Epistle  of  Peter  was  con- 
veyed to  the  Churches'  of  Asia  (1  Pet.  v.  12).' 
Ancient  tradition,  erroneously  supposing 
that  Silas  and  Silvanus  were  different 
persons,  makes  Sil»s  the  Bishop  of  Corinth, 
and  Silvanus  the  Bishop  of  Thessalonioa. 
And  Timotheos.  The  well-known  disciple  of 
Paul.  He  was  a  native  of  Lystra,  having  a 
Greek  father  and  a  Jewish  mother  (Acts 
xvi.  1).  He  joined  Paul  and  Silas  on  their 
second  missionary  journey  at  Lystra,  and 
was  with  them  in  Philippi,  Thessalonica, 
and  Corinth.  He  was  with  Paul  on  his 
third  missionary  journey,  and  was  sent  by 
him  on  a  mission  to  Macedonia  and  Corinth 
(Acts  xix.  22 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  10),  and  accom- 
panied him  into  Asia  on  his  last  journey  to 
Jerusalem  (Acts  xx.  4).  He  was  also  with 
Paul  during  his  first  Roman  imprisonment, 
when  he  wrote  the  Epistles  to  the  Philippians 
and  Colossians  (Phil.  i.  1 ;  Col.  i.  1).  After- 
wards he  resided  at  Ephesus  (1  Tim.  i.  3) ; 
from  which  he  was  recalled  to  Rome  by 
Paul  shortly  before  his  martyrdom  (2  Tim. 
iv.  21).  The  last  mention  of  Timothy  is  in 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews :  "  Know  ye 
that  our  brother  Timothy  is  set  at  liberty; 
witl)  whom,  if  he  come  shortly,  I  will  set 
you  "  (Heb.  xiii.  23).  According  to  eccle- 
siastical tradition,  he  became  Bishop  of 
Ephesus,    and   there  suffered  martyrdom. 

1  Some,  on  insufficient  reasons,  identify 
Silas  with  Tertius  (Bom.  xvi.  22),  and 
in  hers  with  Luke. 


THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.     [oil.  l  1—10. 


Silvanus  and  Timotheus  are  associated  with 
T'aul  in  his  address  to  the  Thessalonians, 
not  to  give  weight  and  authority  to  hi* 
Kpietle,  but  because  they  assisted  him  in 
the  planting  of  tho  Church  at  The^salonica, 
and  were  now  with  him  at  Corinth,  when 
lie  was  writing  this  Epistle.  Silvanus  is 
placed  first,  because  he  was  the  older  and 
had  been  longer  with  the  apostle,  and,  as  is 
evident  from  the  Acts,  was  at  this  time  the 
more  important  of  the  two  (Acts  xvi.  19; 
xvii  4).  By  being  included  in  the  address, 
they  are  represented  at  joint  authors  of  the 
Epistle  with  Paul,  although  they  were  only 
so  in  name.  It  is  possible  that  Paul  em- 
ployed one  of  them  as  his  amanuensis  in 
writing  the  Epistle.  Unto  the  Churoh.  The 
word  "  Church"  denotes  a  select  assembly ; 
here,  Christians  selected  from  the  world.  It 
does  not  denote  in  the  New  Testament,  as 
with  us,  a  building,  but  the  congregation. 
In  Paul's  later  Epistles,  those  addressed  are 
called,  not  the  Church,  but  saints.  Of  the 
Thessalonians.  In  other  Epistles  the  address 
is  to  the  city,  as  Borne,  Philippi,  Colosse ; 
here  it  is  to  the  inhabitants.  The  Churoh 
of  the  Thessaloniaos  was  chiefly  composed  of 
converted  Gentiles,  with  a  small  number  of 
converted  Jews  (see  Introduction).  Which 
it;  to  be  omitted,  as  not  being  in  the  original. 
In  God  the  Father  and  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  The  characteristic  peculiarity  of  the 
Church :  they  are  in  God  and  Christ,  that 
is,  in  fellowship  with  them,  united  to  them. 
"  In  God  the  Father  "  characterizes  them  as 
not  being  heathens;  "in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ"  characterizes  them  as  not  being 
Jews.  Graoe  be  onto  yon,  and  peace.  The 
usual  apostolus  benediction.  "Grace"  is 
the  Greek  and  "  peace  "  is  the  Jewish  form  of 
salutation.  The  Greeks  commenced  their 
epistles  with  wishing  grace  for  those  to 
whom  they  wrote;  and  the  usual  form  of 
salutation  among  the  Jews  was  Shalom  or 
"  peace ; "  the  apostle  combines  them,  thus 
intimating  that  both  Greeks  and  Jews  are 
one  in  Christ  Jesus.  In  the  Pastoral  Epistles 
and  in  the  Secomd  Epistle  of  John  the  form 
is  "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace  "  (2  John  3), 
and  in  the  Epistle  of  Jade  H  is  "  Mercy, 
peace,  and  love"  (Jude  2).  From  God  the 
Father,  and  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
These  words  are  wanting  in  some  impor- 
tant manuscripts,  and  are  omitted  in  the 
B.V.  The  preponderance,  however,  of  ex- 
ternal authority  is  in  their  favour. 

Yer.  2. — We.  Many  expositors  (Oony- 
beare,  Koch,  Jowett)  suppose  that  the  plural 
is  here  used  for  the  singular ;  as  Paul  else- 
where does  in  other  parts  of  this  Epistle. 
Thus:  "Wherefore  we  weald  come  unto 
you,  even  I  Peal,  once  and  again"  (ch. 
ii.  18);  "Wherefore  when  we  could  no 
longer  forbear,  we  thought  it  good  to  be  left 


at  Athens  alone"  (oh.  lii.  1).  In  these 
verses  the  pronoun  "  we "  is  evidently  re- 
stricted to  Paul.  Still,  however,  Silvanus 
and  Timotheus  being  mentioned  directly 
before,  it  is  most  natural  to  include  them 
here.  Give  thanks  to  God  always  for  yon  all. 
All  Paul's  Epistles,  with  the  solitary  excep- 
tion of  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  com- 
mence with  an  expression  of  thanksgiving. 
Slaking  mention  of'  you  in  our  prayers; 
whilst  we  are  engaged  in  prayer  for  you. 
Paul's  prayer  for  the  Thessalonians  took  the 
form  of  thanksgiving. 

Yer.  3. — Bemembering  without  ceasing. 
Some  attach  the.  words,  "  without  ceasing," 
or  "unceasingly,"  to  the  previous  clause; 
"  making  mention  of  you  unceasingly  in 
our  prayers"  (so  Alfard).    Your  work  of 
faith,  and  labour  of  love,  and  patienoe  of 
hope.     These  expressions  are   not   to  be 
weakened,  as  if  they  were  a  mere  Hebraism 
for  active  faith,  laborious  love,  and  patient 
hope.    We  have  here  the    three  cardinal 
virtues — faith,  love,  and  hope  (1  Cor.  xiii. 
13).      Elsewhere    these    graces    are    com- 
bined.     Thus    again    in    this    Epistle: 
"Putting  on  the  breastplate  of  faith  and 
love;  and  for  an  helmet,  the  hope  of  sal- 
vation "  (oh.  v.  8) ;  and  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Colossians :  "  Since  we  heard  of  your  faith 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  of  the  love  which  ye 
have  to  all  saints,  for  the  hope  which  is 
laid  up  for  you  in  heaven"  (Col.  i.  4,  5). 
By  the  "  work  of  faith"  is  not  meant  faith 
itself  as  the  work  of  God  (John  vi.  29),  but 
that  faith  which  is  energetic,  which  is  active 
and  living,  productive  of  good  works.    By 
the  "labour,  or  toil,  of  love"  is  not  meant 
that  love  which  is  devoted  to  God,  but  that 
love  which  manifests  itself  in  acts  of  kind- 
ness toward  our  fellow-Christians  and  toward 
the  human  race.    And  by  the  "  patience  of 
hope "  is  meant  that  constancy   whioh  re- 
mains unconquered  by   trials  and  persecu- 
tions. There  is  a  climax  here;  faith  manifests 
itself  by  its  works — its  active  exertion ;  love 
by  its  toils — its  works  of  self-denial;  and 
hope  by  its  patience — its  endurance  amid 
trials  and  discouragements.   "  Bemembering, 
the  apostle  would  say,  your  faith,  hope, 
and  love :    a  faith   that  had  its  outward 
effect  on  your  lives  ;  a  love  that  spent  itself 
in  the  service  of  others ;  and  a  hope  that 
was  no  mere  transient  feeling,  but  was  con- 
tent to  wait  for  the  things  unseen,  when 
Christ  should  be  revealed"  (Jowett).    In 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     These  words  dc  not 
refer  to  all  three   virtues  (Hofmann),  but 
only    to    the    last,    specifying    its    object, 
namely,  that  it  is  hope  in  the  advent  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.      This  is  hope's  highest 
expectation,  because  at    the    advent    the 
kingdom  of  Christ  will  come  in  its  glory 
In  the  sight  of  (or  rather,  before)  God  and 


oh.  i.  1—10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


onr  Father.  These  words  are  to  be  conjoined 
with  "remembering:"  "remembering  un- 
eeasingly  before  God  and  our  Father  your 
work  of  faith,"  etc.  According  to  the 
English  idinm,  the  conjunction  "and"  is 
dropped — "  God  our  Father." 

Ver.  4. — Knowing ;  that  is,  not  the  Thes- 
salonians  themselves,  but  we,  Paul  and  Sil- 
vanus  and  Timothcus ;  knowing,  being  well 
assured  of.  Brethren  beloved,  your  election 
of  God ;  or  rather,  as  it  is  in  the  margin 
and  in  thi  E.V.,  Knowing  brethren,  be- 
loved of  God,  your  election.  By  election 
is  meant  that  act  of  free  grace  by  which 
God  destines  individuals  to  become  believers 
in  Christ.  Thus  the  Thessalonian  converts 
were  chosen  or  elected  by  God  from  among 
their  heathen  countrymen  to  become  Chris- 
tians. The  ultimate  reason  of  their  Chris- 
tianity was  their  erection  of  God.    . 

Ver.  5. — For;  or  rather,  how  that  (E.V.); 
or,  became  ;  assigning  the  reasons  for  Paul's 
confidence  in  their  election ;  and  these  rea- 
sons were  two :  first,  the  powerful  entrance 
which  the  gospel  had  among  them;  and 
secondly,  the  joyful  reception  which  was 
given  to  it  by  the  Thessaloniang.  Our  gospel ; 
that  is,  the  gospel  which  was  preached  by 
us.  Came  not  unto  you  in  word  only.  The 
gospel  came  in  word,  for  this  was  a  necessary 
pre-requisite,  but  "  not  in  word  only,"  that 
is,  it  was  not  a  bare  publication  or  commu- 
nication in  human  words.  But  in  power. 
Some  restrict  the  epithets  which  here  follow 
to  the  teachers,  as  denoting  the  mode  in 
which  they  preached  the  gospel;  but  it  is 
better  to  refer  them  both  to  the  teachers 
and  the  taught.  By  "  power  "  is  not  meant 
miracles,  but,  in  contrast  to  "  word,"  the 
power  with  which  Paul  and  his  companions 
preached,  and  the  impression  which  the 
gospel  made  on  the  hearers.  And  in  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Here  also  the  reference  is,  not 
to  miraculous  gifts,  but  to  the  influences  of 
the  Spirit  accompanying  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel ;  such  was  the  efficacy  of  Paul's 
preaching  that  it  proved  itself  to  be  accom- 
panied by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
in  the  conversion  of  his  hearers.  There  is 
here  an  ascent :  the  gospel  came  in  power, 
and,  what  is  more,  it  came  in  the  Holy 
Ghost.  And  in  much  assurance.  By  "as- 
surance "  here  is  meant  the  confidence  with 
which  Paul  and  his  fellow-workers  preached 
the  gospel  to  the  Theesalonians,  and  the 
fulness  of  conviction  with  which  the  Thes- 
salonians  received  it.  As  ye  know.  An 
appeal  to  their  knowledge  that  what  he  now 
states  is  true.  What  manner  of  men  we 
were  among  yon.  Alluding  to  the  blame- 
lessness  of  their  behaviour  when  in  Thessa- 
lonica.  For  your  sake ;  namely,  that  we 
sought  not  our  own  profit  or  advantage, 
but  your  spiritual  good. 


Ver.  6. — Now  follows  the  second  reason 
assigned  by  Paul  tor  his  confidence  in  their 
election.  And  ye  became  followers  (or,  imi- 
tators) of  ns,  and  of  the  lord;  of  Christ 
By  becoming  imitators  of  the  apostle,  they 
became  imitators  of  Christ.  "Be  ye  fol- 
lowers of  me,"  writes  St.  Paul  to  the  Corin- 
thians, "even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ"  (1 
Cor.  xi.  1).  The  point  of  imitation  did  not 
consist  in  their  cordial  reception  of  the  gos- 
pel, for  that  could  not  anply  to  Christ ;  but  in 
their  joyful  endurance  of  suffering.  Having 
received  the  word  in  muoh  aflliction.  We 
learn  from  the  Acts  that  the  unbelieving  Jews 
stirred  up  the  heathen  rabble,  and  raised  a 
persecution  against  Paul  and  his  associates, 
in  consequence  of.  which  they  had  to  depart 
from  Thessalonica  (Acts  xvii.  4 — 10).  It 
would  appear  that,  after  the  apostle  had  left 
the  city,  the  persecution,  far  from  a'  mating, 
rather  increased,  and  the  Gentile  inhabit- 
ants united  with  the  unbelieving  Jews 
against  the  Christians;  the  Tliessalonian 
converts  suffered  from  their  own  country- 
men as  well  as  from  the  Jews  (ch.  ii.  14). 
With  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  that  is,  not 
merely  spiritual  joy,  or  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  but  joy  which  proceeds  from  the 
Holy  Ghost—joy  which  is  produced  by  him, 
of  which  he  is  the  Author. 

Ver.  7. — So  that  ye  were  ensamples.  The 
word  here  rendered  "ensamples"  litemlly 
signifies  "types."  It  is  used  to  denote  a 
form  or  figure  (Acts  vii.  43),  a  model  or 
likeness  (Acts  vii.  44),  a  mark  or  impression 
(John  zx.  25).  Hence,  in  a  metaphorical 
sense,  it  came  to  signify  an  example,  a 
pattern  for  imitation.  "Now  these  things 
are  our  examples"  (1  Cor.  x.  6).  To  all 
that  believe—  to  all  believers— in  Macedonia 
and  Achaia.  These  are  the  two  provinces 
into  which  ancient  Greece  was  divided  by 
the  Romans,  each  of  which  was  governed  by 
a  proconsul.  Macedonia  was  the  northern 
portion,  including  Macedonia  proper,  Epirus 
and  Dlyricum ;  at  first  it  was  divided  into 
four  districts,  but  afterwards  united  into 
one  province,  of  which  Thessalonica  was 
constituted  the  capital.  Achaia  was  the 
southern  portion  of  ancient  Greece,  includ- 
ing the  Peloponnesus,  Attica,  Bceotia,  etc., 
and,  until  recently,  was  nearly  of  the  same 
dimensions  with  the  modern  kingdom  of 
Greece ;  its  capital  was  Corinth. 

Ver.  8. — For ;  or,  because  the  proof  of  this 
praise  conferred  on  the  ThesBalonians.  From 
you  sounded  out.  Besounded  like  the  sound 
of  a  trumpet.  Comp.  Kom.  x.  18,  "Their 
sound  went  into  all  the  earth,  and  their 
words  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  The 
word  of  the  Lord.  This  does  not  intimate 
that  the  Thessalonians  by  their  missionary 
activity  disseminated  the  gospel,  but  that 
from  them  locally  the  gospel  had  spread. 


THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  l  1— 10. 


Not  only  in  Macedonia  and  Aohaia,  but  also 
in  every  place  your  faith  to  God-ward  is 
spread  abroad.  There  is  a  slight  difficulty 
in  the  construction.  The  sentence  is  com- 
plete without  the  addition,  "  your  faith  to 
God-ward  is  spread  abroad,"  and,  therefore, 
we  must  consider  these  words  as  equivalent 
to  "  from  you  sounded  out  the  word  of  the 
Lord."  When  the  apostle  says  that  "the 
faith  of  the  Thessalonians  is  spread  abroad 
in  every  place,"  the  meaning  is  that  the 
report  of  their  joyful  reception  of  the  gospel 
had  excited  universal  attention.  There  is 
here  a  certain  use  of  the  figure  hyperbole. 
The  words,  "  in  every  pla  e,"  are  not  to  be 
taken  in  their  full  literal  sense,  but  are 
merely  a  strong  expression  for  the  wide 
diffusion  of  the  faith  of  the  Thessalonians. 
Paul  uses  similar  hyperboles  in  other  places, 
as  when  he  speaks  of  the  faith  of  the  Romans 
being  spoken  of  throughout  the  whole  world 
(Bom.  i.  8),  and  of  the  gospel  having  come 
into  all  the  world  (Col.  i.  6).  This  wide 
diffusion  of  the  faith  of  the  Thessalonians, 
notwithstanding  the  recent  date  of  their 
conversion,  may  be  accounted  for  when  we 
consider  that  Thessalonica  and  Corinth 
were  two  great  commercial  cities,  from  and 
to  which  there  wag  a  constant  coming  and 
going,  so  that  reports  might  easily  be  trans- 
mitted by  merchants  and  strangers.  It  has 
also  been  suggested  that  Aquila  and  Pris- 
cilla,  who  had  lately  come  from  Borne  (Acts 
xviii  2),  must  in  their  journey  have  passed 
through  Thessalonica,  aud  would  bring  with 
them  to  Corinth  such  a  report  of  the  faith 
of  the  Thessalonians  (Wieseler).  So  that  we 
need  not  to  speak  anything ;  that  is,  of  your 
faith,  as  this  is  already  so  well  known  and 
applauded. 

Ver.  9. — For  they  themselves ;  that  is,  the 
reporter!,  those  in  Macedonia,  Achaia,  and 
every  ofhor  place  Show  of  us ;  or,  report 
eoncerning  us  (B.V.)  in  regard  to  our 
preaching  or  entrance  among  you.  Instead  of 
questions  being  asked  of  us  by  them,  as  would 
natunlly  be  expected,  they  of  their  own 
accord  giro  information.  What  manner  of 
entering  in  we  had  among  you.  "  Entering" 
here  evidently  refers,  not  merely  to  the  out- 
ward entrance,  the  mere  preaching  of  the 
gospel  among  the  Thessalonians ;  but  to 
the  access,  the  internal  entrance,  which  ^the 
gospel  found  into  their  hearts ;  that  is,  with 


what  power  and  fulness  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

we  preached  the  gospel  unto  you,  and  with 
what  joy  and  confidence  nnd  contempt  of 
danger  ye  received  it.  And  how  ye  turned 
to  God  from  idols.  This,  as  already  remarked, 
is  one  of  the  proofs  that  tho  Church  of  Thes- 
salonica was  chiefly  composed  of  Gentile 
converts,  though,  of  course,  not  to  the  exclu- 
sion of  the  Jewish  element  (Acts  xvii.  4). 
To  serve  the  living  and  true  God.  Two  epi- 
thets employed  in  contrast  to  the  idols  of 
the  heathen :  "  living,"  in  opposition  to  dead 
idols,  which  were  nothing  in  the  world ; 
"  true,"  not  in  the  sense  of  veracious,  but 
of  real  in  opposition  to  the  imaginary  gods 
of  the  heathen. 

Ver.  10.— And  to  wait.  The  faith  of  the 
Thessalonians  took  the  form  of  hope  or  ex- 
pectation for  the  coming  of  the  Lord;  an 
element  of  Christian  feeling,  perhaps,  not  so 
prominent  in  the  present  day.  For  his  Son 
from  heaven  ;  referring  to  the  second  advent. 
Christ  on  his  departure  from  this  world 
went  to  heaven,  where  he  resides,  making 
intercession  for  us,  but  from  thence  he  will 
come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  In 
the  primitive  Church  the  advent  of  Christ 
was  not  regarded  as  at  a  distance,  but  a* 
an  event  which  might  at  any  moment  occur. 
Whom  he  raised  from  the  dead;  with  em- 
phasis placed  before  "Jesus,"  because  his 
resurrection  from  the  dead  was  the  open  de- 
claration, the  public  inauguration,  of  his  Di- 
vine sonship  (Bom.  i.  4).  Even  Jesus  which 
delivered  us.  The  participle  is  pi  esent ;  not 
past,  "who  delivered  us,"  namely,  by  his 
death  ;  nor  future,  "  who  shall  deliver  us," 
at  the  judgment ;  but  present, "  who  delivers 
ns;"  the  deliverance  is  going  on — it  com- 
menced with  his  death,  but  will  not  be  com- 
pleted until  his  advent.  Or  the  word  may 
be  used  as  a  substantive,  "Jesus,  our  De- 
liverer." From  the  wrath ;  or  righteous  in- 
dignation of  God ;  here  punishment  as  the 
effect  of  wrath.  "  The  wrath  of  God  is,  in 
its  deepest  ground,  love ;  love  itself  becomes 
a  consuming  fire  to  whatever  is  opposed  to 
the  nature  of  goodness  "  (Koch).  To  oome ; 
literally,  which  is  coming,  the  coming  wrath, 
denoting  its  al  isolute  certainty.  This  coming 
wrath  will  take  place  at  the  advent  of  Christ, 
when  he  appears,  not  only  for  the  salva- 
tion of  his  people,  but  for  the  destruction 
of  his  enemies. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vert.  1,  2. — The  character  of  Christians.  1.  They  are  converted;  they  turn  to  God 
from  idols.  As  the  heathen  turned  from  material  idols,  so  do  believers  from  spiritual  idols. 
A  change  is  effected  in  their  disposition;  their  chief  affection  is  now  fixed  on  God  and 
Christ ;  they  serve  the  living  and  true  God.  2.  They  wait  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 
they  expect  salvation  from  him,  and  look  forward  to  his  second  coming.  3.  The$  live 
u  holy  life ;  they  possess  the  three  cardinal  virtues,  and  prove  that  they  do  so  by  taeir 
outward  manifestations. 


oh.  I.  1—1Q.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  8 

Ver.  3. — The  three  cardinal  virtues :  faith,  love,  and  hope.  1.  Their  erder.  Faith  is 
the  commencement  of  the  spiritual  life,  love  its  progress  and  continuance,  and  hope 
its  completion ;  faith  is  the  foundation,  love  the  structure,  and  hope  the  top-stone  of 
God's  spiritual  temple  in  the  soul.  2.  Their  manifestations.  Faith  is  seen  by  its 
works ;  love,  by  its  self-denying  exertions ;  and  hope,  by  its  patience  and  endurance. 
3.  Their  reference  to  time.  Faith  refers  to  the  past,  love  to  the  present,  and  hope  to 
the  future. 

Ver.  5. — The  entrance  of  the  gospel.  1.  Negatively.  "Not  in  word  only."  The 
preaching  of  the  gospel  will  only  add  to  our  condemnation  if  we  do  not  by  faith  accept 
it ;  not  nominal,  but  real  Christianity  is  the  chief  matter ;  the  entrance  must  not  be 
external,  but  internal.  2.  Positively.  "  In  power,"  arresting  us  in  our  worldly  career  ; 
"  in  the  Holy  Ghost,"  being  the  Agent  of  our  conversion ;  "  in  much  assurance,"  so 
that  we  know  from  experience  its  truth  and  efficacy. 

Ver.  6. — The  imitation  of  Christ.  Christ  not  only  died  as  a  Sacrifice,  but  lived  as  an 
Example.  He  is  the  great  Example  whom  we  must  imitate,  the  Pattern  of  the  new 
creation,  the  Original  of  which  all  believers  are  copies.  Especially  we  must  imitate  him 
in  his  patient  endurance  of  suffering.  The  cross  is  ever  the  Christian's  motto;  and  we 
can  only  eater  into  heaven  through  tribulation. 

Ver.  6. — The  union  of  affliction  with  joy.  The  Thessalonians  "received  the  word  with 
much  affliction  and  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Christianity  makes  no  stoical  demands. 
Spiritual  joy  does  not  exclude,  but  even  includes,  sorrow.  "  Sorrowing,  yet  always 
rejoicing,"  is  the  Christian's  condition.  To  glory  in  tribulation  is  the  Christian's  expert 
ence,     "  In  the  spiritual  world  joy  and  sorrow  are  not  two,  but  one." 

Ver.  7. — The  example  of  Christian*.  It  was  greatly  to  the  praise  of  the  Thessa- 
lonians that  they  were  examples  to  all  believers  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia.  1.  Con- 
sistent believers  are  living  evidences  of  the  truth  of  Christianity.  By  the  purity  of  their 
conduct,  by  their  unselfishness,  by  their  patience  in  suffering,  they  prove  that  there  is 
something  real  and  living  in  Christianity.  2.  Inconsistent  believers  are  obstacles  in  the 
way  iff  the  gospel.  They  confirm  the  worldly  in  their  worldliness,  as  if  Christianity 
were  a  mere  pretence,  and  thus  give  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  God  to  blaspheme. 

Ver.  10. — The  expectation  of  the  advent.  Believers  are  here  described  as  waiting  for 
the  Son  of  God  from  heaven.  Certainty  of  the  fact  of  the  advent ;  Christ  shall  come 
from  heaven.  Uncertainty  of  the  time  of  the  advent ;  "  Of  that  day  knoweth'  no  man, 
not  even  the  angels  who  are  in  heaven."  It  would  appear  that  the  early  Christians 
believed  that  Christ  might  come  at  any  time,  even  in  their  days ;  the  first  advent,  being 
bo  recent,  excited  within  them  the  expectation  of  the  immediateness  of  the  second. 
Hence  the  doctrine  of  the  second  advent  occupied  a  much  more  prominent  place  in  the 
thoughts  of  the  primitive  Christians  than  it  does  in  ours.  It  was  to  them  a  living 
power;  believers  then  lived  in  constant  expectation  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord ;  whereas 
the  teaching  of  the  present  day  has  in  a  measure  passed  from  it ;  its  uncertainty,  instead 
of  exciting  us  to  holiness  and  watchfulness,  is  too  often  abased  as  an  encouragement  to 
iloth  and  security. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBS. 

Ver.  1. — Address  and  salutation.  At  a  point  almost  midway  between  the  apostle's 
call  and  his  martyrdom  he  penned  this  first  of  his  thirteen  Epistles,  which  was,  perhaps, 
the  earliest  book  of  New  Testament  Scripture,  and  addressed  to  one  of  the  primary 
centres  of  European  Christianity. 

L  The  authors  op  the  salutation.  "  Paul,  and  Silvanus,  and  Timothy."  Simply 
Paul,  without  official  adjunct  of  any  sort,  for  there  was  no  one  in  the  Thessalonian 
Church  to  challenge  his  apostleship  or  his  relationship  to  Christ.  He  associates  Sil- 
vanus and  Timothy  with  himself  in  the  salutation  as  they  were  associated  with  him  in 
the  original  foundation  of  the  Church ;  Silvanus  being  placed  next  to  himself,  becauss 


«  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  1. 1— 1Q 

he  ni  of  older  standing  and  greater  weight  in  the  Church  than  Timothy,  a  compara- 
tively young  evangelist. 

II.  The  Chubch  to  which  the  salutation  was  addressed.  "To  the  Church  of 
the  Thessalonians  in.  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1.  Its  situation. 
Thessalonica  was  the  capital  of  all  Macedonia,  and  is  still  the  second  city  of  European 
Turkey.  Important  then  as  now  by  its  commerce ;  important  by  its  place  on  the  great 
road  which  connected  Rome  with  its  Asiatic  dependencies ;  but  more  important  in  the 
eye  of  the  apostle  as  a  grand  centre  of  missionary  operations  both  by  land  and  sea,  and 
with  a  mingled  population  of  Jews  and  Gentiles.  2.  Its  true  character  as  a  Church.  It 
was  "the  Church  of  the  Thessalonians" — a  regularly  organized  community  of  Chris- 
tians, mostly  Gentiles,  having  the  root  and  ground  of  its  spiritual  existence  in  union 
with  the  Father  and  the  Sun.  They  were  "  in  the  fellowship  of  the  Father  and  the 
Son,"  because  they  were  "  dwelling  in  God,  and  God  in  them,"  and  "  they  were  in  him 
that  is  true,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ."  The  one  fellowship  implies  the  other ;  for 
Jesus  said,  "No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me ; "  yet  it  is  also  true  that  it  is 
"  God  who  calls  us  into  the  fellowship  of  the  Son  "  (1  Cor.  i.  9).  This  double  fellow- 
ship is  secured  by  the  bund  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  enjoyed  by  the  Thessalonians  it 
implied :  (1)  Their  devotion  to  the  truth ;  for  only  "  as  abiding  in  the  doctrine  of 
Christ "  they  would  have  "  both  the  Father  and  the  Son  "  (2  John  9 ;  1  John  ii.  24). 
There  is  no  fellowship  but  in  the  truth.  To  be  in  darkness  is  to  be  out  of  fellow- 
ship (1  John  i.  6).  (2)  Their  unity.  "  Even  as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee, 
that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us  "  (John  xvii.  21).  (3)  Their  love  to  one  another. 
"  If  we  love  one  another  God  abideth  in  us  "  (1  John  iv.  12).  (4)  Their  boldness  in 
the  day  of  judgment  (1  John  ii.  28).  (5)  Their  ultimate  perfection.  "  I  in  them,  and 
thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one  "  (John  xvii.  21 — 23).  Behold  thus 
the  high  dignity  and  blessed  privilege  of  the  Church  at  Thessalonica. 

IIL  The  salutation.  "  Grace  and  peace  be  unto  you."  (See  homiletical  hints  on 
GaLL6;  CoLi.  2.)— T.C. 

Vers.  2,  3. — Heartfelt  thanksgiving  for  spiritual  prosperity.  The  apostle  begins  by 
a  full  and  earnest  expression  of  thanksgiving  such  as  is  characteristic  of  all  his  Epistles 
except  that  to  the  Galatians. 

I.  The  ground  of  thanksoivtno.  "  Remembering  without  ceasing  your  work  of 
faith,  and  labour  of  love,  and  patience  of  hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  We  consider 
here:  1.  The  graces  of  the  Christian  life.  We  have  here,  in  the  first  Epistle  ever 
written  by  the  apostle,  his  favourite  trilogy  of  Christian  principles.  (1)  The  three 
graces  are  fundamental.  As  the  three  principal  colours  of  the  rainbow — red,  yellow,  and 
blue,  representing  respectively  heat,  light,  and  purifying  power — supply  in  their  combi- 
nation all  the  other  colours,  so,  by  a  sort  of  moral  analysis,  it  can  be  shown  that  faith, 
hope,  and  love  lie  at  the  foundation,  or  enter  into  the  composition,  of  all  other  Chris- 
tian graces  whatever.  (2)  They  are  three  inseparable  graces.  Faith  always  works  by 
love,  and  love  is  inseparable  from  hope,  for  "hope  maketh  not  ashamed,  because  the 
love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Rom.  v.  5).  Faith  is  the 
necessary  root,  as  hope  and  love  are  its  unfailing  fruits.  As  faith  works  by  love,  it  is 
also  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for.  (3)  They  are  at  once  the  defence  and  the  adorn- 
ment of  Christian  life.  "  Let  us,  who  are  of  the  day,  be  sober,  putting  on  the  breast- 
plate of  faith  and  love;  and  for  a  helmet,  the  hope  of  salvation  *  (ch.  v.  8).  (4)  They 
are  the  abiding  principles  of  Christian  life :  "  Now  abideth  faith,  hope,  love,  these 
three  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  13).  They  do  not  die  with  death ;  for  in  eternity  the  Church  will 
be  made  perfect  in  love,  as  it  will  ever  continue  to  trust  in  the  Lord,  and  hope  for  new 
developments  of  truth  and  new  disclosures  of  blessedness.  2.  The  practical  aspect  of 
these  graces  as  forces  in  the  life  of  the  Church.  There  is  a  climax  in  the  exhibition  of 
the  three  graces.  The  apostle  does  not  say,  "  the  work  of  faith,  the  work  of  love,  the 
work  of  hope,"  but  ascends  from  work  to  labour,  and  from  labour  to  endurance.  There 
is  a  work  that  is  a  refreshing  exercise  of  our  energies,  but  it  involves  no  exhaustion 
or  fatigue ;  but  when  work  has  deepened  into  labour  we  become  conscious  of  the 
limitation  of  our  strength,  and  then  we  have  to  call  in  the  new  principle  of  endurance  or 
"  patience,"  if  we  are  to  carry  it  to  a  triumphant  result.  (1)  The  work  of  faith  points 
to  •>  work  springing  out  of  faith;  for  faith  is  the  most  active  of  all  the  principles  which 


tt.il— 10J    THE  FIBST  EHSTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  ? 

influence  human  conduct.  Their  faith  was,  therefore,  a  fruitful  faith.  (2)  The  labour 
of  love  suggests  the  sacrifices  which  we  are  ready  to  make  for  the  objects  of  our  love. 
It  was  not  "  love  in  word  or  in  tongue,"  but  "  in  deed  and  in  truth  "  (1  John  iii.  18). 
(3)  The  patience  of  hope  suggests  the  severity  of  present  afflictions,  which  are  borne 
with  constancy  and  perseverance  because  the  sufferers  are  cheered  by  hope.  But  it  is 
"hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  "  that  is,  hope  of  his  second  advent;  for  the  Thessa- 
lonians  had  a  constant  and  overwhelming  sense  of  the  nearness  of  his  coming,  which  in 
some  cases  broke  in  upon  the  continuity  of  their  daily  duties. 

II.  The  occasion,  circumstances,  and  frequency  of  the  apostle's  thanksgiving. 
"  We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you  all,  making  mention  of  you  in  our  prayers." 
1.  It  was  in  his  prayers  for  them  that  he  expressed  Ms  thanksgiving.  "Even  in  the 
sight  of  God  and  our  Father."  The  care  of  all  the  Churches  was  upon  him  daily  (2  Cor. 
xi.  28),  and  under  such  a  burden  he  "  bowed  his  knees  to  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  It  is  happy  for  Christians  to  be  remembered  in  the  prayers  of  saints,  to  be 
borne  upon  their  hearts,  to  be  borne  up  before  God  in  intercessory  prayer  (Rorn.  i.  9 ; 
Eph.  i.  16).  His  thanksgivings  were  as  constant  as  his  prayers.  2.  The  thanksgivings 
were  addressed  to  God  because  the  spiritual  prosperity  at  Thessalonica  was  due  neither 
to  the  converts  themselves  nor  to  the  preachers  of  the  gospel.  We  must  ever  speak  of 
the  grace  of  God,  and  exalt  it  in  our  praises.  3.  The  thanksgiving  was  all  the  more 
hearty  and  full  because  it  had  regard  to  the  prosperity  of  the  entire  community.  "  All 
of  you,"  because  they  were  an  eminent  seal  of  his  apostleship,  a  blessed  effect  of  his 
ministry  among  them. — T.  0. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — Their  election  and  it*  fruits  another  ground  of  thanksgiving.  The 
apostle,  Jew  as  he  was,  addresses  these  Gentiles  as  his  brethren,  and  represents  them 
as  the  objects  of  Divine  love.     "  Knowing,  brethren  beloved  of  God,  your  election." 

L  There  is  an  election  according  to  grace.  1.  The  election  referred  to  here  was 
not  an  election  to  external  privilege  or  ecclesiastical  relationship;  for  that  might  have  had 
a  very  uncertain  issue,  and  would  not  have  been  the  subject  of  such  abounding  thankful- 
ness as  he  expresses  in  this  passage.  2.  It  was  not  even  the  call  to  obtain  glory,  which  they 
had  received  through  his  gospel  (2  Thess.  ii.  13, 14) ;  for  the  election  only  realized  itself  in 
that  call,  Scripture  always  distinguishing  the  order  of  election  and  calling.  "  Whom  he 
did  predestinate,  them  he  also  called  "  (Bom.  viii.  30).  3.  Much  less  is  the  election  to  be 
identified  with  regeneration,  conversion,  or  faith.  These  were  its  effects.  4.  It  was  an 
election  to  eternal  life,  involving  all  the  various  processes  of  his  grace.  (Rom.  xi.  5.)  (1) 
It  is  an  election  in  Christ  (Eph.  i.  4).  (2)  It  is  irrespective  of  merit  (Rom.  ix.  11). 
(3)  It  is  through  faith  and  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  (2  Thess.  ii.  13).  (4)  It  is  to 
eternal  glory  (Rom.  ix.  23). 

II.  The  knowledge  of  this  election  is  a  possible  and  an  actual  experience. 
The  apostle's  knowledge  was  not  derived  from  special  revelation,  neither  was  it  the 
mere  credulity  of  a  kindly  charity,  "  hoping  all  things  "  in  the  absence  of  evidence.  It 
had  a  double  ground — one  subjective  and  the  other  objective;  one  based  upon  the 
apostle's  conscious  experience  in  preaching  the  gospel,  the  other  upon  their  practical 
and  hearty  reception  of  the  truth.  1.  The  subjective  evidence.  "  For  our  gospel  came 
not  unto  you  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much 
assurance."  (1)  It  did  come  in  word,  for  it  was  conveyed  to  the  Thessalonians  in 
human  speech,  albeit  not  "  in  the  enticing  words  of  man's  Wisdom,"  but  it  passed 
beyond  the  word.  It  did  not  merely  sound  in  the  ear  nor  touch  the  understanding. 
(2)  But  it  came  in  power — on  the  part  of  the  preachers  with  an  overwhelming  force 
and  persuasiveness,  so  that  "  the  faith  of  the  people  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of 
man,  but  in  the  power  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  5).  There  was  a  conscious  abounding  energy 
which  carried  them  beyond  themselves,  with  an  overmastering  conviction  that  they 
would  prevail.  (3)  It  came  also  "  in  the  Holy  Ghost,"  or,  as  the  apostle  elsewhere 
phrases  it,  "  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  4).  The  Word 
would  otherwise  have  been  a  dead  letter  and  a  killing  letter,  but  the  Spirit  gave  it  life. 
The  power  of  the  gospel,  therefore,  was  due  to  the  efficient  operation  of  the  Spirit.  (4) 
It  came  also  "in  much  assurance,"  not  on  the  part  of  the  Thessalonians,  but  on  the  part 
of  the  preachers  of  the  gospel,  who  were  fully  convinced  of  its  truth,  and  had  thorough 
confidence  in  its  power.    (5)  This  subjective  evidence  was  confirmed  by  their  own 


8  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ok.  h 1— 10. 

recollection  of  the  three  preachers  of  the  gospel — "  As  ye  know  what  manner  of  men  we 
were  among  you  for  your  sake."  The  Thessalonians  would  have  s  Tery  vivid  recollec- 
tion both  of  the  preaching  and  the  preachers.  The  three  brethren  were  conspicuous  by 
their  holiness,  their  zeal,  and  their  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  Thessalonians.  This 
was  no  self-flattery,  for  it  was  confirmed  by  the  knowledge  of  their  converts.  2.  The 
objective  evidence  of  their  election.  "  And  ye  became  imitators  of  us,  and  of  the  Lord, 
having  received  the  Word  in  much  affliction,  with  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Their  ready 
imitation  of  the  apostle  and  his  colleagues — which  was,  in  truth,  an  imitation  of  Christ, 
so  far  as  they  were  connected  with  him  in  his  life  and  truth — was  a  practical  proof  of 
the  sincerity  of  their  conversion.  The  imitation  was  manifest  in  the  spirit  and  circum- 
stances of  their  reception  of  the  truth.  (1)  The  truth  was  received  "in  mnch  afflic- 
tion." The  history  of  their  conversion  confirms  this  statement  (Acts  xvii.  5,  9).  But 
the  persecution  continued  after  the  departure  of  the  apostle.  The  gospel  had  its  draw- 
backs,' but  the  Thessalonians  were  steadfast  in  their  allegiance  to  the  truth.  (2)  Tet 
it  was  received  "with  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  j "  that  is,  the  joy  that  springs  from  his 
presence  in  the  soul.  They  were  thus  imitating  that  apostle  who  "  took  pleasure  in 
infirmities,  in  reproaches,  in  necessities,  in  persecutions,  in  distresses  for  Christ's  sake  " 
(2  Cor.  xii.  9, 10).  The  joy  in  question  is  (o)  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22) ;  (b)  it 
is  essentially  connected  with  the  kingdom  of  God  as  part  of  its  blessedness  (Bom.  ziv. 
17) ;  (c)  it  is  capable  of  increase  through  the  very  presence  of  affliction  (Acts  v.  41) ; 
(d)  it  is  the  strength  of  the  believer — "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  shall  be  your  strength  " 
(Neh.  viii.  10) ;  (e)  its  advent  marks  a  distinct  change  in  the  world's  history ;  (/)  it 
ought  to  be  constant  (Phil.  iv.  4);  (g)  it  is  maintained  through  abiding  in  Christ 
(John  xv.  10, 11).— T.  C. 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  profound  impression  made  by  the  conversion  of  the  Thessalonians. 
Having  become  imitators  of  the  apostles  and  of  our  Lord,  they  soon  became  examples 
for  the  imitation  of  other  Churches.  Their  conversion  lifted  them  np  into  a  sudden  and 
distinct  visibility  in  two  directions. 

L  The  gospel  was  thus  carried  through  Northern  and  Southern  Greece  like 
the  binding  sound  of  a  trumpet.  "  For  from  you  hath  sounded  out  the  Word  of 
the  Lord  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia."  These  two  divisions  of  Greece,  included  in 
the  Boman  empire,  received  the  report  of  the  gospel,  which  went  forth  like  a  joyful- 
sound,  proclaiming  with  no  uncertainty  liberty  to  the  captives.  1.  A  work  of  grace  in 
one  place  quickly  leads  to  a  work  of  grace  in  other  places.  The  tale  of  wonder  is 
repeated  with  solemn  surprise,  gratitude,  and  expectation.  2.  Churches  already  in 
existence  were  stirred  and  stimulated  by  the  visible  work  of  grace  at  Thessalonica. 

II.  The  report  of  their  faith  received  a  wide  publicity  everywhere,  even 
outside  the  limits  of  Greece.  This  was  not  wonderful,  for  the  city  was,  as  Cicero 
says,  in  the  very  bosom  of  the  Roman  empire,  a  centre  of  business  and  influence  which 
touched  its  furthest  limits.  Their  faith  must  have  had  the  solid  stamp  of  reality  to 
produce  such  a  widespread  sensation.  It  must  have  been  practical  and  self-manifos- 
tative,  for  they  did  not  hide  it  in  their  own  breasts,  but  declared  it  by  words  and  deeds. 
There  was,  therefore,  no  necessity  for  the  apostle  speaking  about  it— "so  that  we  need 
not  to  speak  anything." — T.  C. 

Vers.  9,  10. — The  nature  of  the  impression  made  upon  the  world  by  the  spectacle  of 
Thessalonian  piety.  It  was  a  truly  providential  foresight  that  led  the  apostles  at  the 
beginning  of  the  gospel  to  plant  it  first  in  the  great  cities  of  the  world.  Thus  it  first 
appeared  at  Jerusalem,  Antioch,  Ephesus,  Thessalonica,  Rome,  and  Corinth. 

I.  The  world  was  first  impressed  by  the  rapid  and  immediate  success  or  the 
apostles.  "  For  they  themselves  show  of  us  what  manner  of  entering  in  we  bad  unto 
you."  The  world  seemed  to  appreciate  the  boldness,  the  sincerity,  the  uprightness  of 
the  preachers,  as  elements  of  their  success ;  for  there  was  no  dexterous  flattery,  there 
was  no  spirit  of  self-seeking,  there  was  no  guileful  strategy,  in  the  proclamation  of  the 
gospel. 

II.  The  world  was  still  more  deeply  impressed  by  the  blessed  effects  of  the 
apostles'  preaohino.  "  And  how  ye  turned  to  God  from  idols  to  serve  the  living  and 
>rue  God."    1.  M  was  a  conversion  from  idolatry.     Immediately  and  at  once°thev 


at  1. 1—10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THE&SALONIANS.  • 

received  converting  grace,  under  the  influence  of  which  they  turned  to  the  Lord  from 
their  dead  and  fictitious  deities. .  (1)  Idolatry  is  apostasy  from  God.  These  Thessa- 
lonians  "  had  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God  for  the  likeness  of  an  image  of 
corruptible  man,  and  of  birds,  and  four-footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things  "  (Rom.  i.  23). 
They  had  been  "joined  to  their  idols  "  for  ages  (Hos.  iv.  17).  They  had  been  hitherto 
walking  just  like  other  Gentiles,  in  all  moral  blindness  and  carnality  of  heart  (Eph.  iv. 
17, 18).  (2)  Their  conversion  was  a  repudiation  of  idolatry.  It  was  not  mere  prosely- 
tism.  It  was  the  bursting  asunder  of  ties  which  had  an  immense  social  as  well  is 
religious  weight  in  pagan  life.  (3)  It  was  a  thorough  consecration  to  the  service  >{ 
the  living  and  true  God.  As  their  God  was  true  God  and  living  God,  having  life  in 
himself  and  a  true  and  faithful  relation  to  his  worshippers,  they  could  give  him  ihe 
living  service  of  faith,  obedience,  and  d.  pendence.  2.  Another  effect  of  the  apostles' 
preaching  was  their  expectation  of  .our  Lord's  coming.  The  doctrine  of  the  advent 
occupies  the  foreground  in  the  thoughts  of  the  Thessalonians,  as  in  the  two  Epistles 
addressed  to  them.  As  faith  underlies  the  service  of  the  true  God,  so  hope  underlies 
the  expectation  of  the  Lord's  coming.  "  And  to  wait  for  his  Son  from  heaven,  whom  he 
raised  from  the  dead,  even  Jesus,  who  delivereth  us  from  the  wrath  to  come."  (1) 
This  implies  the  belief  that  Jesus  is  in  heaven,  to  reign,  to  plead,  to  prepare  a  place  for 
us.  (2)  It  implies  the  belief  that  he  will  return  from  heaven.  The  Thessalonians  may 
have  believed  that  he  would  return  in  that  age,  hut  all  Christians  live  in  the  "  blessed 
hope  "  of  his  second  coming.  (3)  This  waiting  attitude  implied  the  recognition  of  a 
certain  connection  between  Christ's  resurrection  and  our  deliverance  from  the  wrath  'o 
come.  They  were  not  waiting  for  a  dead  man  lying  in  a  Jewish  grave,  but  for  One 
raised  from  the  dead,  and  living  in  the  power  of  an  endless  life.  His  resurrection  implied 
the  completion  of  bis  atoning  work,  as  the  work  of  atonement  supplies  the  ground  for 
our  continuous  deliverance  from  the  wrath  that  is  coming.  There  is  a  wrath  coming 
upon  disobedient  sinners,  but  there  is  a  way  of  deliverance  provided  In  the  Word  >f 
Jesus  Christ  ratified  by  his  resurrection  from  the  dead. — T.  C. 

yOT.  \m — The  address.  I.  The  wbiteb.  1.  He  uses  no  title.  He  does  not  style 
himself  apostle.  He  asserted  his  apostolic  authority  when  it  was  necessary  to  do  so ; 
for  the  sake  of  others,  as  in  his  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians  and  Galatians.  Now  it 
was  not  necessary ;  the  Macedonian  Churches  regarded  him  with  affection  and  reverence. 
He  simply  gives  his  name,  his  new  name — Paul.  He  had  laid  aside  his  old  name  with 
all  its  associations.  It  recalled  the  memory  of  the  famous  king,  Saul  the  son  of  Kish, 
of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  It  recalled  to  the  apostle  the  memories  of  his  own  old  uncon- 
verted life,  his  sell-satisfied  Pharisaism,  his  persecution  of  the  Church,  especially  that 
one  saddest  day  of  his  life,  when  he  consented  to  the  death  of  the  first  martyr  of  the 
Lord,  the  holy  Stephen.  He  had  laid  aside  his  old  name,  and  with  it  his  old  modes  of 
thought,  his  old  life.  Paul  was,  we  may  say,  his  Christian  name ;  we  do  not  read  af  it 
before  the  beginning  of  his  first  missionary  journey ;  it  was  consecrated  now  by  con- 
stant, untiring,  self-sacrificing  labour.  It  was  known  wherever  Christ  was  preached  as 
the  name  of  the  great  missionary,  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  the  first  of  the  noble 
band  of  Christian  missionaries,  who  had  left  his  home  and  all  that  once  he  loved  to 
devote  himself,  heart  and  soul,  to  the  mission  work  with  all  its  hardships,  all  its 
dangers.  Many  holy  men  have  trodden  in  his  steps ;  but  it  was  Paul  who  first  set  the 
high  example,  who  kindled  the  sacred  enthusiasm  which  has  led  so  many  saints  in 
every  age  to  fulfil  the  Lord's  command,  to  go  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel 
to  every  creature.  Paul  is  a  Latin  name ;  it  means  "  little."  St.  Augustine  in  one  place 
suggests  that  St.  Paul  may  have  chosen  it  to  mark  himself  as  "  the  least  of  the  apostles." 
There  are  other  possible  reasons  for  the  change,  and  it  may  be  thought  that  St.  Paul 
would  have  shrunk  from  what  might  seem  almost  like  a  parade  of  humility.  But  at 
least  we  may  find  a  lesson  here.  God  exalteth  the  humble.  Paul  is  a  famous  name. 
Others  have  borne  it — some  distinguished  Romans ;  but  it  was  reserved  for  the  apostle 
to  make  the  name  honoured  and  beloved  throughout  the  civilized  world.  The  Paulus 
who  conquered  Macedonia  for  Rome  is  far  less  famous  now  than  the  Paul  who  won  the 
Macedonian  Churches  for  Christ.  2.  He  associates  others  with  himself.  Paul  is  the 
spiritual  father  of  the  Thessalonian  Christians  ;  he  is  the  writer  of  the  Epistle,  net 
Silvanua  or  Timotheus  (see  2  Thess.  ill.  17).    But  they  had  laboured  with  him  i» 


10  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  i.  1—10. 

Thessalonica;  Silvanus  certainly,  Tiraotheus  in  all  probability;  they  had  shared  hit 
dangers  there;  they  were  well  known  to  the  Thessalonians.  So  he  joins  their  names 
with  his  own,  recognizing  their  brotherly  fellowship,  their  faithful  co-operation,  and 
shrinking,  it  may  be,  from  putting  himself  into  unnecessary  prominence.  He  seeks  not 
honour  for  himself;  he  has  no  literary  ambition;  his  one  aim  is  the  salvation  of  his 
converts,  the  glory  of  God.  (1)  Silvanus,  or,  in  the  shortened  form  of  the  name,  Silas. 
He,  like  St.  Paul,  was  a  Roman  citizen,  and  bore  a  Latin  name.  It  was,  in  the  Latin 
mythology,  the  name  of  the  sylvan  god,  who  was  supposed  to  protect  the  sheep,  and 
save  them  from  wolves.  When  he  became  a  Christian,  that  name  might  perhaps  serve 
to  remind  him  of  the  great  duty  of  tending  the  flock  for  which  the  good  Shepherd  died. 
He  had  been  a  leader  in  the  Church  at  Jerusalem ;  he  was  a  prophet  (Acts  xv.  32),  that 
is,  he  had  the  gift  of  spiritual,  inspired  eloquence ;  he  used  it  to  exhort  and  confirm  the 
brethren.  He  accompanied  St.  Paul  in  his  first  missionary  journey ;  he  worked  with 
him,  he  suffered  with  him.  In  the  dungeon  at  Philippi,  his  feet  made  fast  in  the 
stocks,  he  prayed  and  sang  praises  unto  God.  His  presence  and  sympathy  had  cheered 
St.  Paul  in  I  s  dangers.  Companionship -in  affliction  had  bound  them  very  close  to  one 
another.  When  working  together  at  Thessalonica  they  must  have  still  felt  the  effects  of 
the  many  stripes  which  they  had  received  at  Philippi.  It  was  natural  that  St.  Paul 
should  mention  Silas  in  wriiing  to  the  Thessalonians.  We  may  notice  here  that  he 
furnishes  one  of  the  links  which  couple  together  the  two  apostles  whose  differences 
(Gal.  ii.  11 — 21)  have  been  so  much  magnified  by  heretics  of  old,  by  unbelievers  now. 
St.  Paul  loved  Silvanus ;  St.  Peter  counted  him  a  faithful  brother  (1  Pet.  v.  12).  (2) 
Tiiuotlieus,  St.  Paul's  dearest  companion,  his  own  son  in  the  faith,  bound  to  him  with 
the  closest  ties  of  tender,  personal  affection.  He  stands  first  among  the  noble  company 
of  holy,  loving  fellow-workers  whom  St.  Paul  had  drawn  around  himself.  He  was 
known  to  the  Thessalonians ;  his  name,  indeed,  does  not  appear  in  the  record  of  St. 
Paul's  visit  to  Thessalonica  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  But  we  know  that  he  was  sent 
there  afterwards  to  establish  and  to  comfort  the  Thessalonian  Christians  concerning 
their  faith  (ch.  iii.  2).  Doubtless  he  was  chosen  for  that  work  because  of  the  Christian 
zeal,  the  loving,  gentle  sympathy  which  marked  his  beautiful  character.  He  fulfilled 
his  mission,  and  brought  back  to  the  apostle  good  tidings  of  the  faith  and  charity  of  the 
Thessalonians     He  greets  them  now. 

II.  The  Church.  1.  The  foundation  of  the  Thetsalonian  Church.  St.  Paul  had 
been  shamefully  treated  at  Philippi ;  he  had  not  lost  courage.  He  came  to  Thessalonica ; 
he  went,  ae  he  wa3  wont,  to  the  synagogue.  There  he  preached  for  three  sabbath  days; 
he  "  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  Scriptures."  He  showed  (as  our  Lord  himself  had 
shown  to  the  two  disciples  on  the  way  to  Emmaus)  that  it  was  necessary  that  the 
Messiah  should  suffer,  and  should  rise  again  from  the  dead  ;  he  showed  that  Jesus  was 
the  Messiah,  the  Christ.  All  true  preaching  must  be  full  of  Scripture ;  all  true  preaching 
must  be  full  of  Christ.  St.  Paul's  words  were  greatly  blessed.  Some  Jews  believed,  a 
great  multitude  of  Greek  proselytes,  many  ladies  of  rank.  Those  three  sabbaths 
had  been  wonderfully  fruitful ;  a  Church  was  formed  at  Thessalonica.  2.  The  word 
"  Ghwch."  This  is  the  earliest  of  St.  Paul's  extant  Epistles ;  it  may  be  (possibly  the 
Epistle  of  St.  James  was  written  earlier)  the  earliest  of  all  the  writings  of  the  New 
Testament.  Then,  if  we  were  to  read  the  New  Testament  in  chronological  order,  we 
should  meet  here  with  the  word  "  Church  "  for  the  first  time.  St.  James  (ii.  2)  uses  the 
word  "  synagogue,"  not  "  Church."  Our  Lord,  of  course,  used  it  earlier.  He  founded  the 
Church.  He  had  said,  "  On  this  rock  will  I  build  my  Church ; "  and  again,  "  Tell  it  to 
the  Church."  But  the  date  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel  is  probably  later  than  that  of  this 
Epistle.  The  Greek  word  means  simply  an  assembly,  a  congregation,  as  the  word 
"  synagogue  "  means  a  meeting.  It  is  derived  from  a  verb  which  means  to  call  out  or 
summon,  and  is  regularly  used  in  classical  Greek  of  the  assemblies  of  citizens  summoned 
by  the  magistrate  in  the  Greek  commonwealths  for  legislative  or  other  political  pur- 
poses (comp.  Acts  xix.  39) ;  sometimes  of  other  assemblies,  as  of  the  crowd  of  artisans 
collected  by  Demetrius  (Acts  xix.  32,  41).  It  is  used  of  the  congregation  of  Israel 
in  Acts  vii.  38  ;  Heb.  ii.  12  ;  and  sometimes  in  the  Septuagint.  The  New  Testament 
has  taken  the  word  and  filled  it  with  a  new  and  holy  meaning.  It  is  the  assembly 
which  Christ  hath  chosen  to  himself  out  of  the  world — the  flock  of  Christ.  The  visible 
Church  of  Christ  is  "a  congregation  of  faithful  men,  in  which  the  pure  Word  of  God  is 


ob.  1. 1—10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  11 

preached,  and  the  sacraments  be  duly  ministered  according  to  Christ's  ordinance  in  all 
those  things  that  of  necessity  are  requisite  to  the  same."  The  great  day  of  Pentecost 
was  the  true  birthday  of  the  Church ;  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  then  sent  down  from 
heaven  knit  together  the  disciples  into  one  body,  the  mystical  body  of  Christ.  St.  Luke 
gives  us,  in  the  second  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  a  description  of  the  Church  at 
that  time.  "  Then  they  that  gladly  received  the  Word  were  baptized : .  .  .  and  they 
continued  steadfastly  in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship,  and  in  breaking  of  bread, 
and  in  prayers."  Thus  the  notes  of  the  Church,  according  to  Holy  Scripture,  are  baptism, 
fellowship  with  the  apostles,  the  doctrine  of  the  apostles,  the  holy  communion,  public 
worship.  The  Church  is  also  one,  for  it  is  one  body  in  Christ,  united  into  one  fellow- 
ship by  the  indwelling  of  the  one  Spirit.  It  is  holy,  because  it  is  being  sanctified  by  the 
Holy  Ghost ;  all  its  members  are  dedicated  to  God  in  holy  baptism ;  they  are  all  pledged 
by  that  dedication  to  follow  alter  holiness  of  heart  and  life.  It  is  catholic,  because  it 
is  not  confined  to  one  nation,  like  the  synagogue,  but  universal,  world-wide,  open  to  all 
who  receive  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  apostolic,  because  it  is  built  upon  the  foundation 
of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief  Corner-stone;  and 
because  it  continues  in  the  doctrine  and  fellowship  of  the  apostles.  It  is  the  bride  of 
Christ.  "  Christ  loved  the  Church,  and  gave  himself  for  it ;  that  he  might  sanctify  and 
cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  Word,  that  he  might  present  it  unto 
himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing ;  but  that  it 
should  be  holy  and  without  blemish."  3.  The  Church  of  the  Thessaloniam.  Now 
there  was  a  branch  of  the  one  Church  at  Tbessalonica.  (1)  It  was  the  second  Church 
founded  in  Europe.  The  first  was  at  Philippi,  a  small  place,  though  a  Roman  colony. 
Thessalonica  was  a  populous  city,  the  metropolis  of  Macedonia.  God  plants  his  Church 
everywhere.  It  embraces  all  who  will  accept  the  gospel — poor  and  rich,  ignorant  and 
learned;  it  meets  the  deepest  needs  of  all  places  alike — the  quiet  country  and  the 
stirring  city.  (2)  It  was  already  organized.  It  had  its  ministers  (ch.  v.  12,  13),  and 
its  assemblies  for  public  worship  (ch.  v.  27).  Short  as  St.  Paul's  visit  was,  he  had,  it 
si  ems,  ordained  elders  there,  as  he  was  wont  to  do  in  every  Church  (Acts  xiv.  23),  and 
had  provided  for  the  regular  meetings  of  the  brethren.  (3)  It  was  in  God  the  Father 
and  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  was  its  essential  characteristic.  As  Chrysostom 
says,  "  There  were  many  4icK\ri<rlcn,  many  assemblies  both  Jewish  and  Greek.  St.  Paul 
writes  to  that  assembly,  that  congregation,  which  was  in  God.  It  is  a  high  exaltation, 
above  all  other  possible  dignities,  to  be  in  God."  Thessalonica  formerly  lay  in  wicked- 
ness, in  the  evil  one  (1  John  v.  19),  in  the  sphere  of  his  activity.  Now,  the  Church  there 
was  in  God.  The  presence  of  God  was  the  very  atmosphere  in  which  the  Church  lived 
and  moved.  It  lay  in  the  everlasting  arms,  encircled  with  his  embrace,  guarded  by 
his  love.  The  words  imply  a  close  intimate  union,  an  exceeding  great  depth  of  love  and 
tenderness,  a  very  great  and  profound  truth,  which  does  not  admit  of  formal  definition, 
and  cannot  be  adequately  expressed  in  language ;  but  it  is  realized,  in  a  greater  or  less 
degree,  in  the  inner  life  of  those  true  members  of  the  Church  who  abide  in  that  invisible, 
but  most  holy  and  most  blessed,  union  with  the  Lord.  God  had  breathed  into  the 
Church  of  the  Thessalonians  the  breath  of  life — that  new  life,  that  sternal  life,  which 
consists  in  the  personal  knowledge  of  God.  That  life  is  in  his  Son.  Christ  is  the  Life. 
"  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  The  Thessalonian  Church  wag  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  as  it  was  in  God.  "  We  are  in  him  that  is  true,"  says  St.  John, :'  even  in  his 
Son  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life."  The  Church  is  in  Christ, 
then  surely  Christ  is  God.  The  Church  cannot  be  said  to  be  in  any  craature ;  in 
St.  Paul,  for  instance,  or  in  any  other  of  the  holiest  saints  of  God,  Such  an  assertion 
would  be  unmeaning,  blasphemous.  Then  in  the  first  verse  of  the  first  of  St.  Paul's 
Epistles  (the  least  dogmatic,  some  say,  of  all  his  Epistles,  possibly  the  earliest  of  the  New 
Testament  writings),  he  distinctly  teaches  the  great  doctrine  of  the  divinity  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  "  In  Christ,"  "  in  the  Lord,"  is  a  constant  formula  of  St.  Paul's ; 
he  is  never  weary  of  repeating  it,  never  weary  of  enforcing  the  great  truth  that  the 
Christian  lives  in  Christ.  Here  he  asserts  the  same  thing  of  the  Church  as  a  whole. 
It  is  in  Christ,  living  in  his  life,  holy  in  his  holiness,  strong  in  his  strength,  glorious 
(John  xvM.  22)  in  his  glory ;  the  glory  of  his  presence  now,  the  glory  of  eternal  life 
with  him  henceforth  in  heaven.  The  Church  is  "  in  Christ ;"  ita  members  must  strive 
to  realize  the  blessedness  of  that  holy  fellowship  in  their  own  individual  bobU. 


12  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&    [ch.  1. 1— 10. 

Outward  membership  will  not  avail  for  our  salvation,  unless  we  abide  in  living 
spiritual  communion  with  the  Lord. 

III.  Thk  salutation.  1.  Grace.  It  is  one  of  those  words  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
has  taken  from  common  use  and  filled  with  a  sweet  and  sacred  meaning.  (1)  It  is  the 
gracious  favour  of  God  which  rests  upon  all  who  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
That  favour  is  essentially  free,  spontaneous,  flowing  out  of  that  eternal  love  which  is 
intimately  one  with  the  very  being  of  God.  "  God  is  love."  It  is  given  in  and  through 
the  Lord  Jesus ;  it  is  "  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (2)  It  is  the  gratitude, 
the  spirit  of  joyful  thankfulness,  which  should  be  the  happy  temper  of  those  who 
believe  in  the  grace  of  God.  (3)  It  sometimes  (as  in  Col.  iv.  6)  expresses  the 
sweetness,  the  winning  beauty,  the  dignified  gracefulness  of  the  true  Christian  character. 
The  grace  of  God  produces  thankfulness,  and  gives  grace  and  beauty  to  the  life.  2. 
Peace.  It  was  the  first  greeting  of  the  risen  Lord  to  his  apustles,  "  Peace  be  unto  you." 
It  became  the  apostolic  greeting.  The  Macedonian  Churches  had  little  outward  peace; 
they  were  early  called  to  suffer.  They  needed  that  blessed  peace  which  God  alone  can 
give.    (See  homiletics  on  Phil.  i.  2  and  iv.  7.) 

Lessons.  1.  Imitate  St.  Paul  in  his  humility.  Notice  every  feature,  every  mani- 
festation of  that  great  grace ;  it  is  hard  to  learn.  2.  The  Church,  as  a  whole,  is  in  God  ; 
in  his  guardianship,  in  his  encircling  love.  We  must  strive  and  pray  to  realize  that 
loving  presence  individually,  to  be  in  God  ourselves.  3.  Pray  that  grace  and  peace  may 
rest  on  all  who  bear  the  Name  of  Christ. — B.  C.  0. 

Vers.  2 — 6. — The  apostle's  thanksgiving.  I.  Its  char acteb.  1.  It  is  shared  with  his 
companion*.  "  We  give  thanks."  The  three  friends  prayed  and  gave  thanks  together. 
It  is  true  that  the  plural  number  is  characteristic  of  these  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians ; 
the  singular  is  avoided,  it  seems,  from  motives  of  modesty.  But  here,  immediately 
after  the  mention  of  the  three  names,  it  is  natural  to  regard  the  thanksgiving  as  pro- 
ceeding from  all.  It  is  a  true  Christian  feeling  that  draws  friends  together  for  religious 
exercises.  The  faith,  the  love,  of  the  one  kindles,  strengthens,  the  like  graces  in  the 
other.  The  tide  of  prayer  and  praise  from  many  hearts  flows  in  deeper,  fuller  volume 
towards  the  throne.  And  we  know  that  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in 
his  Name,  there  is  he  in  the  midst  of  them.  2.  It  is  constant.  "  We  give  thanks  to 
God  always."  Thanksgiving  is  the  joy  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven ;  it  is  the  outpouring 
of  the  Christian  heart  upon  earth.  The  nearer  we  can  approach  to  perpetual  thanks- 
giving, the  nearer  we  draw  to  heaven.  "  Sursum  corda ! " — "  Lift  up  your  hearts  1 "  is  an 
exhortation  which  we  daily  need.  May  God  give  us  grace  to  answer  daily,  hourly, 
"  We  lift  them  up  unto  the  Lord."  3.  It  is  for  all.  The  true  shepherd  knows  his 
sheep;  he  loves  them  all,  he  prays  for  all.  He  does  not  divide  them  into  parties.  The 
closer  his  own  walk  with  God,  the  more  he  is  enabled  to  keep  himself  apart  from  and 
above  party  divisions.  But  the  infant  Thessalonian  Church  seems  to  have  enjoyed  the 
blessing  of  unity.  It  was  not,  like  Corinth,  distracted  by  strife  and  party  feeling. 
4.  It  accompanied  prayer.  Thanksgiving  and  prayer  ever  go  together.  The  man  who 
prays  earnestly  must  give  thanks,  for  prayer  brings  him  into  the  sense  of  God's  most 
gracious  presence ;  and  with  that  presence  cometh  joy — joy  in  the  Lord.  True  prayer 
must  involve  intercession,  for  in  answer  to  prayer  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given ;  and  the 
first,  the  chief  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  is  love.  St.  Paul  is  a  remarkable  example  of 
perseverance  in  Intercessory  prayer. 

II.  Its  aBOUNDS.  1.  His  remembrance  of  their  spiritual  state.  He  was  working 
hard  at  Corinth  ;  in  the  midst  of  his  labour,  with  all  its  new  interests,  he  remembered 
without  ceasing  the  Christians  of  Thessalonica.  The  care  of  all  the  Churches  was 
already  beginning  to  press  upon  him.  He  was  unwearied  in  his  labours,  in  his 
supplications,  in  his  constant  thoughtfulness  for  all  the  Churches  which  ha  had 
founded,  for  all  the  converts  whom  he  had  brought  to  Christ.  Mark  the  extent, 
the  comprehensiveness  of  his  love  for  souls.  2.  Hit  description  of  that  state.  The 
Thessalonian  Christians  already  exhibited  the  three  chief  Christian  graces.  (1)  Faith, 
and  that  not  a  dead  faith,  bat  a  faith  that  was  ever  working  through  love.  St. 
Paul  remembered  their  work  of  faith.  Faith  is  itself  a  work,  the  work  of  God. 
"  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  he  hath  sent."  It  is  itaelf  a 
work,  and  it  must  work  in  the  soul,  for  it  is  an  active  principle.    It  cannot  exist  with- 


Ofctl—lO.]    THE  EIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  13 

out  working.  Its  working  may  not  always  express  itself  in  outward  action ;  it  will  do 
so  when  possible ;  but  it  will  be  always  working  in  the  inner  sphere  of  the  heart, 
producing  self-purification,  self-consecration,  spiritual  self-sacrifice.  Each  step  toward* 
holiness  is  a  work  of  faith,  hidden,  it  may  be,  from  the  eyes  of  men,  but  seen  by  him 
who  searcheth  the  heart.  The  Thessalonians  had  shown  their  faith  by  their  works. 
(2)  Love,  the  greatest  of  the  three,  manifests  itself  in  labour.  The  word  is  a  strong 
one ;  "  toil,"  perhaps,  is  a  better  rendering.  Toil  is  not  painful  when  it  is  prompted  by 
love.  True  Christian  love  must  lead  the  believer  to  toil  -for  the  gospel's  sake,  for  the 
souls  and  bodies  of  those  whom  Jesus  loved.  The  abundance  of  the  Christian's  labours 
is  the  measure  of  his  love.  "  I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all "  (says  St.  Paul, 
1  Cor.  xv.  10):  "yet  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  me."  (3)  Hope. 
The  object  of  the  Christian's  hope  is  the  Saviour — our  "  Lord  Jesns  Christ,  which  is  our 
Hope."  We  hope  for  him — for  his  gracious  presence  revealed  in  fuller  measure  now,  for 
the  blissful  vision  of  his  glorious  beauty  hereafter.  That  hope  is  patient.  The  husband- 
man waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth ;  the  Christian  wait*  patiently  for 
Christ.  It  works  patience  in  the  soul.  He  can  endure  the  troubles  of  life  who  is 
blessed  with  the  lively  hope  of  the  inheritance  reserved  in  heaven.  The  Thessalonians 
showed  in  their  lives  the  presence  of  this  lively  hope.  All  this  the  apostle  remembered 
without  ceasing  before  God  in  his  prayers  and  meditations.  3.  His  confidence  in  God's 
election.  Himself  "  a  vessel  of  election ".  (Acts  ix.  15),  he  felt  sure  that  the  same 
gracious  choice  had  rested  on  the  Thessalonian  Christians.  God  had  "  chosen  them  to 
salvation,"  he  tells  them  in  the  Second  Epistle.  St.  Paul  loves  to  dwell  on  the  great 
truth  of  God's  election.  4.  The  evidence  of  that  election.  St.  Paul  finds  it :  (1)  In  the 
lives  of  the  Thessalonians.  Archbishop  Leighton  beautifully  says,  "  If  men  can  read 
the  characters  of  God's  image  in  their  own  souls,  these  are  the  counterpart  of  the  golden 
characters  of  his  love  in  which  their  names  are  written  in  the  book  of  life.  He  that 
loves  God  may  be  sure  that  he  was  first  loved  of  God ;  and  he  that  chooses  God  for  his 
delight  and  portion  may  conclude  confidently  that  God  hath  chosen  him  to  be  one  of 
those  that  shall  enjoy  him  and  be  happy  in  him  for  ever ;  for  that  our  lov»  of  him  is 
but  the  return  and  repercussion  of  the  beams  of  his  love  shining  upon  us."  The 
Thessalonians  received  the  Word;  they  showed  the  martyr  spirit;  they  were  content  to 
suffer  as  Christiana  for  the  gospel's  sake.  They  had  joy  amid  tears — that  holy  joy 
which  the  presence  of  the  blessed  Spirit  can  give  even  in  the  midst  of  afflictions.  They 
were  learning  in  their  own  experience  the  meaning  of  that  seeming  contradiction, 
"  Sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing."  They  imitated  the  holy  life  of  St.  Paul,  the  holiest 
life  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  By  this  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  they  were 
making  their  calling  and  election  sure.  (2)  In  the  energy  and  success  of  his  own 
preaching  among  them.  He  had  brought  them  the  gospel,  the  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy.  He  had  delivered  his  message  with  power,  with  the  strength  of  deep  conviction. 
The  Holy  Ghost  was  with  him,  teaching  him  what  to  speak,  filling  him  with  a  Divine 
fervour  and  enthusiasm.  His  words  were  more  than  mere  sounds ;  they  were  a  message 
full  of  intense  meaning — a  message  from  God.  The  Thessalonians  had  felt  the  power  of 
his  preaching ;  they  were  his  witnesses.  This  energy  was  not  his  own ;  it  came  from 
God ;  it  proved  that  God  was  with  him  ;  it  was  a  sure  evidence  that  God  was  blessing 
the  apostle's  work ;  it  was  given  for  the  sake  of  the  Thessalonians ;  it  surely  meant 
that  God  had  chosen  them  to  be  his  own. 

Learn :  1.  To  take  delight  in  the  spiritual  progress,  in  the  faith,  hope,  love  of  our 
fellow-Christians.  2.  To  thank  God  for  it.  3.  To  refer  all  that  seems  good  in  us  to  God's 
electing  grace.    4.  To  look  for  the  evidence  of  that  election  in  holiness  of  life. — B.  C.  C. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — The  happy  results  of  the  conversion  of  the  Thessalonians.  I.  Thbt 
became  an  example  to  othees.  1.  True  piety  tends  to  propagate  itself.  .The  Thessa- 
lonians had  not  long  embraced  Christianity.  But  they  had  learned  much ;  they  had 
given  their  hearts  to  God.  The  Macedonian  Churches  gave  St.  Paul,  from  the  first, 
deep  and  unmingled  satisfaction.  Thessalonica  was  the  metropolis  of  Macedonia,  the 
seat  of  government,  a  centre  of  trade.  It  became  a  centre  of  spiritual  life.  All 
believers  throughout  Macedonia  and  Achaia  looked  to  the  Thessalonians.  Si.  Paul  was 
now  at  Corinth,  the  chief  city  of  Achaia.  The  Lord  had  much  people  in  that  city ;  but 
then  were  grave  evils  at  Corinth,  many  causes  for  anxiety  and  distress.    St.  Paul  moat 


14  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  l  1—10, 

have  told  the  Corinthians  often  of  the  simple  faith  and  obedience  of  the  Macedonians. 
So  the  Thessalonians  became  an  example  to  the  converts  whose  lot  was  cast  among 
the  sensual  temptations  and  the  intellectual  restlessness  of  the  famous  Peloponnesian 
town.  The  lives  of  good  men  are  very  precious  ;  they  are  a  living  proof  of  the  power 
of  God's  grace ;  they  are  facts  which  can  be  seen  and  tested ;  facts  from  which  the 
reality  of  the  forces  which  are  working  in  the  unseen  sphere  of  God's  spiritual  agency 
can  be  inferred  with  as  much  certainty  as  the  laws  of  nature  from  the  facts  of  observa- 
tion and  experiment.  2.  The  Word  of  God  is  living  and  powerful.  The  Thessaloniang 
had  received  it ;  it  was  in  their  hearts  and  on  their  lips.  As  the  starry  heavens  with 
their  silent  witness  declare  the  glory  of  God,  so  it  is  with  the  stars  that  are  in  the 
right  hand  of  the  Son  of  God  (Rev.  i.  20);  their  sound  goetb  forth  into  all  the  earth. 
That  heavenly  melody  was  issuing  now  from  Thessalonica.  "  It  hath  sounded  forth," 
St.  Paul  says,  like  a  clear,  thrilling  trumpet-strain.  It  hath  sounded,  and  still  it 
sounds,  reaching  far  and  wide  with  its  penetrating  tones.  The  conversion  of  the 
Thessalonians  was  known  not  only  in  the  neighbouring  regions  of  Greece.  The  glad 
news  had  brought  joy  wherever  the  gospel  had  reached.  It  was  not  necessary  for  the 
apostle  to  praise  the  faith  of  the  Thessalonians ;  men  knew  it,  talked  of  it  among  them- 
selves, reported  it  to  the  great  missionary  himself. 

II.  The  testimony  that  was  bokne  to  the  faith  of  the  Thessalonians. 
Christians  talked :  1.  Of  the  wonderful  success  of  St.  PauVs  preaching.  Those  three 
weeks  (he  may  have  remained  there  somewhat  longer)  had  been  a  time  of  marvellous 
fruitfulness.  It  was  but  an  entrance,  the  time  was  so  short ;  but  what  an  entrance  1 — so 
full  of  power,  so  manifestly  under  the  Divine  guidance.  The  three  men — Silas,  of 
whom  we  know  so  lit  lie ;  Timotheus,  shy  and  timid  ;  Paul,  of  whom  it  was  said  in 
Corinth  that  his  bodily  presence  was  weak,  and  his  speech  contemptible, — they  had 
done  wonders  in  Thessalonica.  God  was  with  them  plainly ;  there  could  be  no  other 
explanation  of  such  strange  unexampled  energy.  2.  Of  the  change  wrought  in  the 
Thessalonians.  They  turned  from  idol-worship.  The  Thessalonian  Church  was  mainly 
Gentile ;  there  were  a  few  Jews  among  them,  but  the  Jews  as  a  body  bitterly  perse- 
cuted the  infant  Church.  The  gospel  was  glad  tidings  indeed  to  thoughtful  Gentiles. 
The  Jews  had  great  and  precious  truths,  though  their  teachers  had  well-nigh  hidden 
them  under  a  mass  of  traditions  and  idle  forms.  But  what  was  there  in.  the  heathenism 
of  the  day  on  which  a  thinking  man  could  rest  his  soul  ?  There  were  temples  every- 
where, but  what  man  who  felt  the  yearnings  of  the  human  soul  for  righteousness  and 
God  could  in  his  heart  reverence  the  deities  who  were  worshipped  there  V  So  the 
Thessalonians  turned  from  their  idols:  (1)  To  serve  the  living  and  true  God.  The 
Gentiles  did  not  serve  their  gods.  It  could  not  be.  They  admired  the  temples  and 
the  statues  as  works  of  art ;  they  regarded  their  religion  as  of  some  political  impor- 
tance, a  part  of  statecraft.  But  now  the  converts  were  ready  to  serve  God,  for  they 
began  to  know  him.  Their  idols  were  dead  things;  the  God  whom  Paul  preached  was 
living,  loving,  and  powerful ;  they  felt  his  power  in  their  hearts,  nay,  he  was  the  Life  ; 
all  life  (they  knew  now)  came  from  him,  and  was  his  gift.  Their  idols  were  false 
gods,  there  was  no  truth  in  them ;  they  were  images  of  that  which  was  not ;  for  an 
idol,  as  St.  Paul  taught  them,  was  "  nothing  in  the  world."  The  Thessalonians  could 
see  the  snowy  top  of  Olympus ;  the  stories  of  the  gods  who  dwelt  there  were  but  idle 
tales.  St.  Paul  had  taught  them  of  the  great  Creator  who  is  very  God,  living  and 
true  ;  nay,  the  one  only  Source  of  real  life  and  being.  He  is  the  very  God,  the  self- 
existing  One,  I  am  that  i  am.  There  is  none  other.  (2)  To  wait  for  his  Son  from 
heaven.  Hope  is  the  key-note  of  this  Epistle,  as  joy  and  faith  are  of  the  Epistles  to 
the  Philippians  and  the  Bomans.  St.  Paul  had  taught  his  converts  not  only  to  believe 
in  God  the  Father  who  made  us,  but  also  in  God  the  Son  who  redeemed  us.  He 
taught  them  the  great  truths  of  the  Besurrection  and  Ascension,  the  blessed  doctrine  of 
the  atonement.  Some  of  the  Thessalonians,  perhaps,  had  tried  to  grapple  with  the 
dark  mysteries  of  life,  sin  and  misery.  St.  Paul  pointed  them  to  Jesus.  "  Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God,  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  There  is  wrath  coming  in  its 
awfulness ;  but  there  is  a  Deliverer — One  who  is  delivering  us  now,  who  is  daily  deliver- 
ing us  from  the  power  of  sin,  as  we  draw  nearer  and  nearer  to  him ;  who  will  deliver 
us  from  the  punishment  of  sin,  if  by  the  gracious  help  of  the  blessed  Spirit  we  abide  in 
him.    And  this  Deliverer  is  Jesus, 


oh.  1. 1— 10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  IE 

Lessons.  1.  The  holy  lives  of  Christian  people  help  the  blessed  work  of  saving  souls ; 
holy  lives  are  more  persuasive  than  holy  words.  Let  each  Christian  strive  to  do  his 
part.  2.  We  are  not  in  heathen  darkness ;  God  has  given  us  the  light  of  his  gospel. 
Let  us  be  thankful,  and  show  our  thankfulness  in  our  lives.  3.  Wait  for  the  coming 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  all  our  hopes  are  in  him. — B.  G.  C. 

Ver.  1. — -Introduction.  This  Epistle  has  the  distinction  of  being  the  first  in  time 
of  all  Paul's  Epistles.  The  leading  thought,  to  which  there  is  reference  toward 
the  close  of  each  of  the  five  chapters  into  which  the  Epistle  has  been  divided,  is  the 
second  coming  of  our  Lord.  The  first  three  chapters  are  personal,  setting  forth  the 
apostle's  connection  with  the  Thessalonians,  and  interest  in  them  as  a  Church.  In 
the  remaining  two  chapters  he  addresses  them  in  view  of  their  condition  as  a  Church, 
and  especially  in  view  of  anxiety  connected  with  the  second  coming.  Pleased  with  the 
progress  they  were  making,  he  writes  to  them  in  a  quiet,  practical,  prevailingly 
consolatory  strain. 

L  The  writers.  "  Paul,  and  Silvanus,  and  Timothy."  Paul  comes  first,  as  pre- 
eminently the  writer.  It  can  be  made  out  that  the  matter  and  style  are  characteris- 
tically Pauline.  It  speaks  to  his  humility  that  he  does  not  claim  it  as  his  own,  that  he 
does  not  put  forward  his  official  position,  but  associates  two  brethren  with  him  as  joint- 
writers.  These,  Silvanus  (to  be  identified  with  Silas)  and  Timothy  (less  prominent  at 
the  time),  assisted  at  the  founding  of  the  Thessalonian  Church.  Timothy  had  just 
returned  from  a  visit  of  inquiry  to  Thessalonica.  He  therefore  claims  them  as  adding 
the  weight  of  their  influence  with  the  Thessalonians  to  his  own.  And  their  place  as 
joint-writers  is  accorded  to  them  throughout.  Only  in  three  places,  for  a  special  reason 
in  each  case,  does  he  make  use  of  the  singular  number. 

II.  Community  addressed.  "Unto  the  Church  of  the  Thessalonians  in  God  the  Father 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Thessalonica — so  named  by  Cassander  in  honour  »f  his 
wife,  who  was  a  sister  of  Alexander  the  Great — was  well  situated  for  commerce  "  >»  She 
inner  bend  of  the  Thermaic  gulf — half-way  between  the  Adriatic  and  the  Hellespont — 
on  the  sea-margin  of  a  vast  plain  watered  by  several  rivers,"  the  chief  of  these  being 
the  Axius  and  Haliacmon.  Under  the  Romans  it  became  a  large,  wealthy,  and 
populous  city ;  and  was  chosen  as  the  Macedonian  capital.  Its  importance  has  been 
well  kept,  up  to  the  present  day.  Saloniki  (slightly  altered  from  Thessalonica)  ranks 
next  to  Constantinople  in  European  Turkey,  with  a  population  of  seventy  thousand. 
Paul  visited  Thessalonica  in  his  second  missionary  tour,  after  the  rough  handling  he 
had  received  in  the  other  Macedonian  city  of  Philippi.  The  Jews,  being  more  numerous 
here  than  at  Philippi,  had  a  synagogue ;  and  in  this,  Paul,  for  three  sabbath  days, 
reasoned  with  them  from  the  Scriptures,  opening  aud  alleging  that  it  behoved  the  Christ 
to  suffer  and  to  rise  again  from  the  dead,  and  that  this  Jesus  is  the  Christ.  The  result 
was  so  far  favourable.  Some  Jews  were  persuaded,  and  consorted  with  Paul  and  Silas ; 
of  the  Gentile  proselytes  attached  to  the  Jewish  synagogue,  a  great  multitude,  and, 
among  these,  not  a  few  chief  women.  But  there  was  also  what  was  unfavourable. 
The  Jews  as  a  body,  being  moved  with  jealousy,  took  unto  them  certain  vile  fellows  of 
the  rabble,  and  raised  a  tumult  against  the  Christian  preachers,  which  ended  in  their 
departing  by  night  for  Berosa.  Paul  and  his  assistants  had  a  very  short  time  in  vhich 
to  found  a  Church  in  Thessalonica.  For  three  sabbath  days  Paul  reasoned  in  the 
Jewish  synagogue.  We  may  allow  a  little  longer  time  for  the  ripening  of  Jewish 
opposition.  Short  as  the  time  was,  they  had  settled  down  to  supporting  themselves  by 
labouring  with  their  own  hands.  Short  as  the  time  was,  the  Philippian  Christians,  in 
their  eagerness,  had  managed  once  and  again  to  send  unto  Paul's  necessity.  What 
would  render  the  formation  of  a  Christian  Church  at  Thessalonica  easier  was  the  number 
of  Gentile  proselytes  who  embraced  Christianity.  These  had  received  training  in 
monotheistic  ideas,  and  had  already  the  elements  of  a  godly  character.  But,  beyond 
this,  many  Gentile  idolaters  must  have  been  brought  in;  for  the  entering  in  of  Paul 
and  his  companions  was  signalized  as  a  turning  of  the  majority  of  them  from  idols  unto 
the  living  and  the  true  God.  Under  the  conditions  of  time  and  manual  labour  and 
Jewish  fanaticism,  the  founding  of  the  Thessalonian  Church  was  a  most  marvellous 
work.  So  short  time  with  them,  Paul  wrote  to  them  when  he  got  to  Corinth,  after 
visiting  Berosa  and  Athens,  about  the  close  of  the  year  52.     The  Thessalonians  are 


1«  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  1. 1—10. 

addressed  as  a  Church,  i.e.  In  tbeir  corporate  capacity,  with  corporate  responsibilities  and 
privileges,  not  as  saints,  ije.  in  respect  of  the  consecration  of  the  members  individually. 
They  are  addressed  as  a  Church  in  God  the  Father,  i.e.  as  having  all  the  position  of  sons. 
They  are  also  addressed  as  a  Church  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  i.e.  as  a  Christian  family 
where  the  sons  are  all  saved  men  placed  under  the  superintendence  of  him  who  has  the 
position  of  Lord,  and  distributes  to  their  need. 

III.  Greeting.  "  Grace  to  yon  and  peace."  This  did  not  necessarily  exclude 
favour  and  peace  from  men,  from  these  persecuting  Jews.  But  whether  it  had  that 
sweep  or  not,  it  certainly  meant  the  Divine  treatment  of  them,  not  according  to  merit, 
but  according  to  infinite  mercifulness,  and  the  consequent  freeing  of  them  from  all 
disturbing  influences.     It  is  what  we  should  invoke  for  all  our  friends. — R.  F. 

"Vers.  2 — 10. — Manifestation  of  interest.  I.  How  they  thanked  God  fob  the 
Thessalonians.  "  We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you  all,  making  mention  of  you 
in  our  prayers."  The  three  Christian  preachers  away  at  Corinth,  and  in  the  midst  of 
their  engagements  there,  were  interested  in  their  Thessalonian  converts.  They  were  so 
interested  as  to  act  as  priests  for  them.  This  they  did  at  the  tin  one  of  grace,  praying 
for  them  by  name,  in  view  of  their  special  needs  as  a  Church.  This  they  would  also  do 
unitedly,  praying  to  all  the  more  purpose  that  they  united  their  prayers ;  for  a  threefold 
cord  is  not  easily  broken.  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job  in  a  land  may  not  counteract  all 
wickedness ;  but  Paul,  Silas,  and  Timothy,  agreeing  as  touching  what  they  asked  for 
a  progressing  Church  like  Thessalonica,  would  certainly  mean  valuable  help  to  them 
from  heaven.  Praying,  they  gave  thanks  always.  This  designation  of  time  is  not  to 
be  understood  with  the  utmost  strictness.  It  is  prescribed  in  Exodus  that  Aaron 
should  beat  the  judgment  of  the  children  of  Israel  (the  Urim  and  Tim  minim)  upon  his 
heart  before  the  Lord  continually,  i.e.  whenever  he  went  into  the  holy  place  to 
discharge  the  pontifical  functions.  So  the  meaning  here  is  that,  whenever  these  men 
of  God  went  into  the  presence  of  God  to  discharge  the  priestly  function  of  prayer  for 
the  ThessaloniaDs,  their  hearts  were  filled  with  gratitude  for  them,  .which  they  poured 
forth  in  thanksgiving.  They  gave  thanks  to  Odd,  who  had  made  the  Thessalonians  a 
Church,  who  had  blessed  them  hitherto,  and"  upon  whom  they  depended  for  future 
blessing  They  gave  thanke  to  God  for  them  all.  They  did  not  know  of  any  (and 
their  information  was  recent)  who  were  bringing  dishonour  on  the  Thessalonian 
society.     They  were  all  with  one  heart  helping  forward  the  common  Christian  good. 

II.  Upon  what  they  proceeded  in  thanking  God  for  the  Thessalonians. 
"  Remembering  without  ceasing."  They  proceeded  in  their  thanksgivings  upon  what 
they  remembered  of  the  Thessalonians.  The  impression  produced  at  the  time  had  not 
been  effaced  by  fresh  scenes,  new  engagements,  the  lapse  of  time.  By  thinking  of 
them  and  hearing  from  them  their  impression  of  them  had  not  ceased  to  be  lively. 
This  impression  concerned  the  three  Christian  graces— -faith,  love,  hope.  In  1  Cor.  xiii. 
love  is  placed  last,  the  object  being  to  exalt  it,  in  its  permanent  value,  over  the  other 
two  Here,  as  also  in  the  fifth  chapter  and  in  Col.  i.,  and  virtually  in  Titus  ii., 
the  natural  order  is  followed,  faith  manifesting  itself  in  love  (Gal.  v.  6),  and  hope  rising 
out  of  love  (Rom.  v.  5).  Hope  is  also  properly  held  to  come  last,  as  the  link  between 
the  present  and  the  future.  What  the  Christian  pioneers  remembered  was  the  practical 
outcome  of  each  grace.  1.  "  Tour  work  of  faith."  In  the  eleventh  of  the  Hebrews  we 
read  of  special  works  which  were  produced  by  faith.  But  the  work,  in  its  totality,  which 
each  man  produces,  is  the  life  which  he  lives  before  the  world.  And  he  who  believes 
that  there  is  the  eye  of  the  holy,  heart-searching  God  upon  him ;  that  he  is  here  to  carry 
out  the  Divine  behests;  that  according  as  he  does  or  does  not  carry  out  these  behests 
does  he  lie  under  the  Divine  approval  or  disapproval ;  that  there  is  a  judgment  coming 
which  shall  prove  each  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is  ; — such  a  man  will  surely  produce 
a  work  very  different  from  him  who  habitually  looks  only  to  the  seen  and  the  temporal. 
The  adoption  of  faith  as  the  principle  of  their  lives  meant  to  die  Thessalonians  the 
abandonment  of  many  vices,  and  the  cultivation  of  sincerity,  humility,  purity, 
temperance,  and  other  Christian  excellences.  2.  "  And  labour  of  love."  The  word 
translated  "  labour  "  approaches  the  meaning  of  painful  effort.  We  are  not  merely  to  wish 
well  to  others  and  to  rejoice  in  their  good ; — that  implies  no  laboriousness  of  love.  But 
we  are  to  burden  ourselves  with  the  wants  of  others,  and  to  undertake  labours  on  behah 


OK.  1.1—10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  17 

of  the  sick,  on  behalf  of  the  poor,  on  behalf  of  the  oppressed,  on  behalf  of  the  ignorant, 
on  behalf  of  the  erring.  The  Thessalonian  Christians  were  full  of  these  labours ;  their 
Church  life  had  become  one  labour  of  love,  a  putting  forth  of  painful  effort  for  each 
other,  without  thought  of  reward,  with  only  the  desire  to  please  the  Master.  It  was 
a  labour  of  purest,  freest  love,  that  the  Master  himself  undertook  on  behalf  of  those 
whom  he  was  not  ashamed  to  call  his  brethren.  3.  "  And  patience  of  hope  in  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  Hope  was  the  characteristic  grace  of  the  Thessalonians.  It  was  hope 
in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  more  exactly  defined  in  the  Epistle  as  hope  with 
regard  to  his  coming.  It  was  a  hope  which  burned  in  them  with  cxi  raordinary  intensity. 
So  eager  were  they  as  to  the  time  of  its  realization  that  there  was  a  likelihood  of 
impatience  being  engendered  by  delay.  When  the  Thessalonians  are  remembered  here 
for  the  patience  of  their  hope,  we  are  to  understand  the  brave  way  in  which  they 
maintained  the  conflict  with  sin  within,  and  especially  with  persecution  without.  It  is 
the  hope  of  victory  that  sustains  the  soldier  under  all  the  hardships  of  (he  march  and 
the  dangers  of  the  battle-field.  So  it  was  the  hope  of  the  infinite  compensation  that 
there  would  be  at  the  coming  of  Christ  that  sustained  them  under  the  disadvantages  of 
their  position.  What  to  them  were  all  that  their  enemies  mijht  inflict  on  them,  when 
any  day  Christ  might  come  among  them  for  their  deliverance  ?  They  could  say  with 
their  teacher, "  For  I  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be 
compared  with  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed  to  us-ward."  Additional  circumstance. 
"  Before  our  God  and  Father."  This  points  to  the  solemnity  and  also  the  joy  of  the 
remembrance.  It  was  in  prayer  that  it  took  place.  It  was  there  before  the  God  of 
Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy,  the  Heart-searching  One,  who  could  testify  that  it  was  no 
formal  remembrance,  but  was  marked  by  sincerity.  It  was  also  before  their  Father,  who, 
as  Infinite  Benevolence,  regarded  it  with  pleasure. 

III.  There  is  noted  the  pact  op  the  election  op  the  Thessalonians. 
"Knowing,  brethren  beloved  of  God,  your  election."  Paul,  for  himself  and  his  helpers, 
addresses  them  as  brethren.  What  they  had  in  common  was  that  they  were  beloved 
of  God.  What  marked  them  as  objects  of  Divine  love  was  their  election.  This  is  a 
word  of  deep  and  gracious  import,  which  is  more  opened  up  in  other  places  in  Scripture. 
What  marked  ancient  Israel  was  that  they  were  the  election.  In  succession  to  ancient 
Israel,  Christians  were  the  election.  Among  others  these  Thessalonian  Christians  had 
most  of  them  been  elected  out  of  heathenism,  elected  to  all  the  privileges  of  the  new 
covenant.  They  owed  this  their  position  not  to  their  own  merits.  It  was  no  doings  of 
their  own  that  brought  Christ  into  the  world.  It  was  by  circumstances  over  which 
they  had  no  control  that  the  gospel  was  preached  to  them  in  Thessalonica.  It  was 
not  in  their  own  strength  that  they  believed.  It  was  Divine  love,  then,  that  gave  them 
their  position  among  the  election,  and  to  Divine  love  was  to  be  all  the  praise. 

IV.  Paul  and  his  helpers  came  to  the  knowledge  op  their  election  bv 
consideration  op  Divine  assistance  vouchsafed  in  preaching  to  them.  ,  "  How 
that  our  gospel  came  not  unto  you  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance ;  even  as  ye  know  what  manner  of  men  we  showed 
ourselves  toward  you  for  your  sake."  The  gospel  is  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  all 
men.  It  could  only  be  called  their  gospel  inasmuch  as  they  used  it  instrnmentally  in 
the  conversion  of  souls.  It  was  Christ  who  was  the  great  Subject  of  it.  "  Neither  is 
there  salvation  in  any  other."  These  three  agreed  as  to  the  purport  of  the  gospel.  It 
was  not  different  from  the  gospel  as  preached  by  Peter  or  any  other  Christian  teacher. 
In  dealing  with  the  Jews  in  Thessalonica,  as  we  learn  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
the  gospel  proper  was  accompanied  with  the  producing  of  proof  from  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures  that  the  Messiah  was  to  suffer  and  to  rise  from  the  dead ;  and  the  fitting  into 
it  of  other  proof  that  the  historical  Jesus,  who  had  lately  been  on  the  earth,  met  all 
the  requirements  of  their  Scriptures.  But  to  Jews  and  Gentiles  alike  it  was  the  free 
offer  of  salvation,  based  on  the  great  facts  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  God's  Son  in 
our  nature.  This  gospel  had  come  to  them  in  Thessalonica  ;  it  had  providentially  been 
directed  their  way.  It  had  come  to  them  in  word,  in  the  Word  preached,  and  that  was 
a  great  point  gained.  "  For  how  shall  they  believe  in  him  of  whom  they  have  not 
heard?"  But -it  had  not  come  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power.  They  felt  power 
descending  on  them  in  the  delivery  of  their  message.  This  was  nothing  else  than  the 
assistance  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     And  it  was  accompanied  with  the  deep  assurance  that 

i.  thessalonians.  o 


18  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&    [ch.  1. 1— 10 

their  message  was  taking  effect.  The  Thessalo titans  themselves  had  the  proof  of  their 
being  men  who  were  divinely  assisted  toward  them.  And,  as  this  Divine  assistance 
was  granted  in  their  interest,  it  pointed  to  their  being  in  the  number  of  the  elect. 

V.  Paul  and  his  helpers  game  to  the  knowledge  of  the  election  of  th* 
Thessalonians  by  consideration  op  their  power  of  imitation.  "  And  ye  became 
imitators  of  us,  and  of  the  Lord,  having  received  the  Word  in  much  affliction,  with  joy 
of  the  Holy  Ghost."  There  is  a  point  of  difference.  They  preached  the  Word,  or  rather 
—for  a  new  aspect  is  brought  up — the  Lord  in  them.  It  was  the  Lord's  message  they 
delivered ;  they  were  the  instruments  of  the  Lord  in  its  delivery.  It  was,  therefore,  the 
Lord  as  well  as  they,  and  more  than  they,  in  the  preaching.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Thessalonians  received  the  Word.  This  is  not  inconsistent  with  what  is  said  in  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles  in  connection  with  Beroea :  "  Now  these  were  more  noble  than  those  in 
Thessalonica,  in  that  they  received  the  Word  with  all  readiness  of  mind,  examining  the 
Scriptures  daily,  whether  these  things  were  so."  For  the  meaning  there  is  that  the 
Beronan  Jews  were  a  nobler  class  than  the  Thessalonian  Jews,  which  is  no  reflection  on 
the  Thessalonian  Christians,  who,  with  few  exceptions,  were  Gentiles.  The  testimony 
of  this  Epistle  is  that  they  were  a  Church  peculiarly  receptive  of  the  Wurd.  Allowing 
for  -this  difference  which  the  sense  requires,  the  imitation  is  to  be  restricted  to  the 
associated  circumstances  and  spirit.  "In  much  affliction,  with  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
It  was  the  Word  that  gave  rise  to  much  affliction.  And  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at 
that,  when  the  light  comes  into  conflict  with  darkness,  this  should  be  the  result  to 
those  who  are  associated  with  the  light.  In  much  affliction  the  three  subordinates  and 
the  great  Superintendent  in  them  drew  joy  from  the  Word  preached.  "  Sorrowful,  yet 
always  rejoicing,"  said  the  greatest  of  the  three.  In  the  same  affliction  the  Thessa- 
lonians were  imitators,  in  drawing  joy  from  the  Word  received.  They  were  not 
crushed  under  the  affliction,  but,  imbibing  the  comfort  of  the  Word,  they  rose 
triumphant  over  it.  Tn  both  cases  the  joy,  which  was  not  to  be  thought  of  as  earthly, 
proceeded  from  the  liuly  Ghost  dwelling  within.  This  was  the  second  thing  that 
pointed  to  their  election. 

VI.  The  Thessalonians  were  so  good  imitators  as  to  become  an  ensample 
to  others.  "  So  that  ye  became  an  ensample  to  all  that  believe  in  Macedonia  and  in 
Achaia."  These  were  the  two  Roman  divisions  of  Greece.  It  is  implied  that  the 
circumstances  of  the  Grecian  Churches  were  similar.  To  believe  was,  more  or  1  _ss,  to 
be  opposed,  to  be  afflicted.  The  Thessalonians  were  an  encouragement  to  the  other 
Churches.  Philippians,  Beroeans,  Athenians,  Corinthians,  might  all  take  heart  from 
the  manner  in  which  the  Thessalonians  triumphed  over  their  affliction. 

VII.  There  was  a  widespread  report  regarding}  Thessalonica  which   was 
vert  serviceable.    "  For  from  you  hath  sounded  forth  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  not 
only  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  but  in  every  place  your  faith  to  God-ward  is  gone  forth ; 
so  that  we  need  not  to  speak  anything."     This  shows  how  the  Thessalonians  could  be 
an  ensample  to  so  many.    There  was  the  condition  of  publicity.    In  the  language  which 
is  used,  prominence  is  given  to  the  Word,  and  it  is  characterized,  not  now  as  "  our 
gospel,"  but  as  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord."    From  them  at  Thessalonica  the  Word  of  the 
Lord  had  sounded  forth.    The  Word  of  the  Lord  sounds  forth,  not  merely  when  we 
preach  it,  but  also  when,  as  these  Thessalonians  did,  we  receive  it  and  allow  it  to  have 
influence  upon  our  lives.     From  them  at  Thessalonica  there  had  been  a  notable 
sounding  forth.    The  image  employed  is  that  of  a  trumpet,   filling  with  its  clear 
sound  ail  the  surrounding  places.      Hill   and   valley,   hamlet  and  homestead,   are 
waked  with  it.      So   the  gospel-trumpet  had   been   sounded  at  Thessalonica,  and 
the  result  is  represented  as  the  filling  of  all  Greece  with  the  clear  sound  of  the 
gospel.    Its  wakeful  sound  had  reached  the  important  places,  not  only  in  Macedonia, 
but    in    Achaia.      There    is    suggested    by   this  what  the  Church    has  to  do  for 
the  world;  it  has  to  sound  the  gospel-trumpet,  so  that,  without  any  hyperbole,  the 
whole  world  shall  be  filled  with  the  clear  sound  of  the  gospeL    The  sounding  forth 
from  Thessalonica  had  reached  even   to   places  beyond    Greece.      And,  in   giving 
expression  to  this,  Paul,  as  he  sometimes  does,  gives  a  different  turn  to  the  sentence. 
'We  should  have  expected  it  to  run  so  as  to  be  complete :  "  .Not  only  in  Macedonia  and 
Achaia,  but  in  places  beyond."    He,  however,  lays  hold  on  what  the  Word  had  notably 
done  for  the  Thessalonians,  viz.  made  them  monotheists,  given  them  faith  to  God-ward, 


OB.  1. 1— 10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  19 

and  the  sentence  is  made  to  ran :  "  But  in  every  place  your  faith  to  God- ward  U  gone 
forth."  "  The  currency  of  the  reports  was  probably  much  promoted  by  the  commercial 
intercourse  between  Thessalonica  and  other  cities,  both  in  Greece  and  elsewhere.  Wieseler 
suggests  that  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  who  had  lately  come  from  Rome  to  Corinth  (Acts 
xviii.  2),  might  have  mentioned  to  the  apostle  the  prevalence  of  the  report  even  in  that 
more  distant  city.  If  this  be  so,  the  justice  and  truth  of  the  apostle's  hyperbole  is  still 
more  apparent ;  to  be  known  in  Rome  was  to  be  known  everywhere."  This  may  be 
true,  but  still  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  sounding  forth  to  distant  places  if 
rather  ascribed  to  the  vigour  with  which  the  gospel-trumpet  had  been  sounded  at 
Thessalonica.  By  the  g>ing  forth  of  their  faith  there  was  great  service  done.  In 
preaching  the  gospel  in  new  places,  it  was  Paul's  custom  to  hold  up  what  it  had  done 
for  other  places.  With  regard  to  Thessalonica,  he  was  placed  in  an  exceptional  position. 
In  Beroea,  in  Athens,  in  Corinth,  wherever  he  went,  he  needed  not  to  labour  in  language 
to  create  an  impression  of  what  the  gospel  had  done  for  Thessalonica.  He  needed  not 
to  say  anything,  the  work  being  already  done  for  him. 

VIII.  The  two  points  to  which  the  bepobt  referred.  1.  The  entering  in  of 
Paul  and  his  helpers.  "  For  they  themselves  report  concerning  us  what  mauner  of 
entering  in  we  had  unto  you."  This  has  already  been  particularized.  It  was  their 
gospel  coming  unto  the  Thessalonians,  not  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance.  It  was  that  attested  by  the  Thessalonians.  It 
was  the  Lord  in  them  preaching  the  Word  in  much  affliction,  with  joy  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Now  it  is  generalized—"  what  manner  of  entering  in  we  had  unto  you."  They 
did  not  need  to  enter  upon  that ;  the  people  themselves  in  the  various  places  came 
forward  with  their  acknowledgments.  This  was  important  to  the  three  ministers ; 
it  was  a  seal  to  their  ministry,  it  was  added  influence  in  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel. 
A  minister  may  well  aspire  to  have  such  a  record.  2.  The  response  of  the  Thessa- 
lonians. "  And  how  ye  turned  unto  God  from  idols,  to  serve  a  living  and  true  God,  and 
to  wait  for  bis  Son  from  heaven,  whom  he  raised  from  the  dead."  This  is  an  expansion 
of  the  previous  words, "  your  faith  to  God-ward."  They  had  been  idolaters.  This  is  to 
be  understood  of  the  Thessalonian  Church  as  a  whole,  which  points  to  its  composition. 
They  turned  unto  God  from  idols.  There  is  marked  their  conversion  to  monoth  ism. 
They  turned  from  idols  "  to  serve  a  living  and  true  God."  The  old  translation  is  better 
here :  "  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God."  Idols  are  dead ;  their  living  touch  upon  the 
soul  can  never  be  felt.  They  turned  from  dead  idols  to  the  living  God,  the  God 
in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,  who  giveth  to  all  life  and  breath 
and  all  things.  Idols  are  false  and  vain,  they  can  do  no  good  to  their  votaries.  They 
turned  from  false  and  vain  idols  to  the  true  God,  who  cannot  deceive  his  worship- 
pers, who  comforts  and  cheers  them,  who  is  the  Rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek 
him.  Turning  from  idols,  they  made  their  life  a  service  of  this  living  and  true  God — 
not  a  dead,  make-believe  service,  hut  characterized,  from  its  object,  by  life  and  truth, 
a  waiting  on  him  to  carry  out  his  behests.  There  is  marked  their  conversion  to  Chris- 
tianity. They  turned  from  idols  to  wait  for  his  Son  Irom  heaven,  whom  he  raised  from 
the  dead.  They  laid  hold  on  the  great  Christian  fact,  that  God  gave  up  his  Son  to  die 
for  man.  They  also  laid  hold  on  the  other  great  Christian  fact,  that  God  raised 
him  from  the  dead  and  raised  him  to  heaven.  They  further  believed,  on  Divine 
authority,  that  God's  Son  was  to  come  from  heaven.  Round  this  their  life  as  a  Church 
very  much  revolved ;  they  were  fascinated  by  its  influence.  They  waited  for  his  Son 
from  heaven;  they  lived  in  daily  expectation  of  his  coming.  While  we  are  not  curious 
about  the  time  of  Christ's  coming,  let  us  not  lose  the  influence  of  the  fact  of  Christ's 
coming.  Let  us  consider  whether  we  are  prepared  for  his  coming.  Let  us  be  dead  to 
the  charms  of  the  world,  dead  also  to  its  opposition.  Let  us  take  comfort,  under 
present  troubles,  from  this  coming  (John  xiv.  1 — 3).  Let  us  joyfully  anticipate  the 
coming  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  We  may  well  learn  from  the  Thessalonians  to  give  this  subject 
greater  prevalence  in  our  thoughts.  Let  us,  like  them,  be  found  in  the  attitude  of 
expectancy.  Christ's  last  message  to  man  is  this:  "Yea,  I  come  quickly."  And  the 
reply  which  we  are  expected  to  make  is  this:  "Amen:  come,  Lord  Jesus."  "Even  Jesus, 
which  delivereth  us  from  the  wrath  to  come."  This  is  the  first  of  the  three  references 
to  the  wrath  of  God  in  this  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians.  It  is  an  element  that  is 
more  largely  prevalent  in  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians.     It  was  natural  that, 


20  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  i.  1—10 

writing  so  much  to  the  Thessalonians  about  the  second  coming,  he  should  introduce  the 
future  wrath.  The  full  expression  in  this  place,  *'  the  wrath  to  come,"  had  already  been 
used  by  one  who  could  preach  the  terrors  of  the  Law.  When  the  Baptist  saw  many  of 
the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  coming  to  his  baptism,  he  said  unto  them, "  Ye  offspring  of 
vipers,  who  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wruth  to  come?"  Paul,  standing  after  the  great 
Messianic  manifestation,  could  say  more  definitely  and  mildly,  "  Even  Jesus,  which 
delivereth  us  from  the  wrath  to  come."  (1)  The  reality  of  the  wrath.  By  the  wrath  of 
God  we  are  to  understand  the  disposition  which  leads  him  to  inflict,  punishment  for  sin. 
It  cannot  be  said  of  God  that  he  is  wrathful,  or  that  wrath  is  the  predominant  feature 
in  his  character.  For  "he  delighteth  in  mercy;"  but  "judgment  is  his  strange  work." 
When  men  put  themselves  in  opposition  to  God,  while  he  is  displeased,  he  is  also 
grieved.  We  read  of  the  grieving  of  the  Spirit ;  of  Christ,  while  looking  round  on  his 
audience  with  anger,  being  grieved  at  the  hardening  of  their  hearts.  Even  when  God, 
from  necessities  of  government,  may  iiave  to  remove  the  reprobate  from  his  presence, 
there  is  not  wanting  the  tone  of  indignant  rebuke,  "  Cast  ye  out  the  unprofitable  servant 
into  the  outer  darkuess  :  there  shall  be  the  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  But  with 
this  righteous  indignation  there  is  no  mingling  of  malice,  but  only  a  feeling  of  infinite 
reluctance  to  resort  to  such  a  measure  with  any  of  his  creatures.  It  is  supposed  to  be 
derogatory  to  the  Divine  character  that  there  should  be  wrath  in  the  heart  of  God  at  all. 
But  "how  is  he  to  regard  sin  ?  Is  sin  to  be  committed  under  his  government,  and  no  notice 
to  he  taken  of  it,  especially  when  it  is  of  the  very  nature  of  sin  to  strike  at  the  Divine 
government?  Such  an  idea  would  certainly  be  repudiated  in  connection  with  human 
government.  Or  are  we  to  suppose  that  he  can  become  accustomed  to  the  sight  of  sin, 
so  as  not  to  heed  this  sin  or  that  sin  in  the  great  multitude  that  are  committed  every 
day  upon  this  earth  ?  But  God  can  never  see  sin  to  be  other  than  it  really  is.  It  stands 
out  before  him  in  all  its  details  and  in  all  its  vileness,as  that  which  interferes  with  his 
government,  thwarts  his  holy  ends  among  men.  And  as  he  has  taught  us  to  flash  out 
in  anger  against  wrong-doing,  so  we  must  believe  that  his  own  soul  flashes  out  in  anger 
against  wrong  done  to  his  government.  But  we  must  exclude  from  the  Divine  out- 
flashing  such  inequality  as  attaches  to  human  outflashing.  The  Thrice-holy  One  never 
knows  the  perturbing  influence  of  passion ;  sin  is  not  felt  more  keenly  at  the  first, 
and  less  keenly  when  time  has  exerted  its  sway — it  is  ever  unchanged  before  his  mind. 
He  continues  unsatisfied,  and  the  fire  burns  within  him  against  it,  until  it  is  removed 
out  of  his  sight.  So  far  from  wrath  being  derogatory  to  God,  it  must  enter  into  a 
right  conception  of  the  Divine  character.  It  is  necessary  to  the  consistency  of  the 
Divine  character.  To  favour  the  following  of  a  certain  course,  and  yet  to  view  with 
indifference  the  following  of  an  opposite  course,  is  simply  characterlessness.  According 
to  the  ardour  with  which  we  regard  one  course  must  we  burn  against  its  opposite.  We 
must  think  of  God  as  infinitely  favouring  righteousness  ,  and  he  would  not  be  true  to 
himself  if  his  feelings  did  not  infinitely  burn  against  iniquity.  According  as  he  is 
attracted  to  the  pole  of  holiness,  so  powerfully  must  he  be  repelled  from  the  opposite 
pole  of  sin.  Even  under  the  New  Testament  economy  it  is  said  that  "  our  God  is  a 
consuming  fire."  More  prominence  is  given  to  this  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  it  is  a 
necessary  conception  of  God,  that,  as  he  is  consumed  with  zeal  for  the  cause  of  truth 
and  love,  so  he  is  a  consuming  fire  to  all  that  is  opposed  to  it.  There  is  a  certain 
course  which  he  favours — which  he  puts  forward  as  obligatory.  He  gives  us  every 
encouragement  to  follow  this  course;  it  is  the  consuming  desire  of  his  heart  to  see  it 
followed  by  us.  This  may  be  said  to  be  the  course  of  humble  dependence  upon  him. 
If  we  follow  this  course,  he  is  pleased,  and  he  marks  his  pleasure,  by  making  our 
humility  return  in  liberty  and  happiness  upon  ourselves.  But  if  we  wilfully  assert 
our  independence  and  follow  our  own  course,  then  God  will  make  our  wilfulness  recoil 
in  bondage  ami  misery  upon  our  own  souls.  Wrath  is  even  necessary  to  our  rising  to 
a  proper  conception  of  the  Divine  compassion.  We  miss  what  the  Divine  compassion 
is,  unless  we  first  apprehend  ourselves  as  objects  of  the  Divine  wrath.  "  That  heathen 
antiquity  had  no  idea  of  God's  love  is  attributable  to  the  fact  that  it  had  no  living 
conviction  of  the  world  being  under  God's  wrath.  Plato  and  Aristotle  rise  only  to  the 
bare  representation  of  God  as  being  a  jealous  God ;  and  men  who  in  our  day  speak  of 
dispassionate  love  rise  no  higher  than  tiny."  (2)  The  time  to  which  the  wrath  is 
referred.     The  wrath  to  come  is  the  disposition  of  wrath  in  its  future  manifestation. 


oh.  1. 1—10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  21 

It  is  in  the  nest  world  that  it  is  to  come  to  its  foil  manifestation.  Even  now  God 
manifests  his  displeasure  against  sin.  The  Flood  was  an  early  and  signal  instance 
of  God's  wrath  burning  against  a  wicked  world.  And  the  destruction  of  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah  was  another  signal  instance  of  God's  wrath  burning  aaainst  wicked 
communities.  But  under  the  present  order  of  things  God  does  not  ordinarily  deal 
with  man  in  unmixed  wrath.  He  lias  ends  of  redemption  in  view.  And,  though  he 
does  give  experience  of  judgment  that  men  may  not  be  forgetful  of  him,  still  he  ' 
mingles  meiey  with  judgment.  And  usually  he  gives  us  to  experience  far  more 
mercy  than  judgment,  that  thereby  he  may  commend  redemption  to  us.  Ha  exercises 
wonderful  forbearance  toward  us,  that  thereby  he  may  win  us  over  to  himself. 
Thus  it  is  that  meantime  there  is  no  adequate  impression  given  of  the  punitive 
justice  of  God.  We  do  not  see  punishment  following  always  upon  sin.  We  do  not 
see  punishment  proportioned  to  sin.  The  more  hardened  in  sin  men  are,  the  more 
may  they  escape  present  punishment.  It  does  not  yet  appear  what  God's  displeasure 
against  sinners  is,  any  more  than  it  yet  appears  what  his  love  to  his  people  is.  There 
are  hindrances  which  prevent  a  full  manifestation  in  both  cases.  In  the  next  world 
these  hindrances  will  be  removed,  and  then  it  will  be  seen  clearly  how  God  views 
every  one  who  through  a  period  of  grace  continues  to  oppose  himself  to  Divine  love. 
The  sins  of  this  life,  unforgiveu,  will  cry  unto  G  id  ;  and  his  wrath,  no  longer  restrained, 
will  go  forth.  There  are  things  for  which,  it  is  said  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians, 
the  wrath  of  God  cometh  upon  the  children  of  disobedience.  There  is  a  certain  open 
defiance  and  forgetfulness  of  God  (encouraging  to  ungodliness)  which  in  a  special 
manner  attracts  the  Divine  judgment.  But  it  is  true  of  a  sinful  life  as  a  whole, 
that  what  there  is  in  it  of  resistance  to  God  draws  down  on  it,  when  the  time  comes, 
the  Divine  wrath.  This  is  to  be  at  the  day  of  judgment,  which  is  called  "  the  day 
of  wrath  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God."  Then  there  will  be 
a  righteous  summing-up  of  the  life  lived  on  earth  as  a  whole  ;  and  the  wrath  that 
descends  will  exactly  indicate  what  God's  estimate  of  the  life  is.  That  there  will 
be  retribution,  and  retribution  exactly  proportioned  to  each  life,  some  being  punished 
with  few  stripes  and  others  with  many  stripes,  is  most  certain.  We  cannot  define 
with  exactness  tihe  manner  and  contents  of  the  retribution.  The  language  employed 
in  Scripture  is  sufficiently  fitted  to  create  alarm :  "  But  unto  them  that  are  factious 
and  obey  not  the  truth,  but  obey  unrighteousness,  shall  be  wrath  and  indignation, 
tribulation  and  anguish  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  worketh  evil."  What  is  at 
first  the  assertion  of  independence  toward  God,  will  become,  retributively,  hindrance 
and  bondage  in  complete  subjugation  and  environment  by  God.  What  is,  in  its 
working,  excitement  and  self-gratification,  will  become,  retributively,  in  the  distrac- 
tion of  the  mind,  in  the  upbra'dings  of  conscience,  a  feeling  of  anguish.  There  is  ihus 
before  the  life  of  sin  a  dark  future.  "  There  remaineth  a  certain  fearful  expectation  of 
judgment,  and  a  fierceness  of  fire  which  shall  devour  the  adversaries."  And  the  life  of 
sin  is  not  to  be  judged  by  what  it  is  at  present  in  its  licence  and  excitements  and 
restraint  of  judgment,  but  is  to  be  judged  by  what  it  is  to  come  to.  It  is  in  the  next 
world  that  the  nothingness  and  wretchedness  of  a  life  of  sin  will  be  fully  evidenced.  And 
what  a  power  ul  deterrent  is  this  to  continuing  our  resistance  to  Divine  grace !  (3)  The 
Deliverer  from  the  wraih  to  come.  This  is  the  gracious  side  which  is  now  presented 
in  the  gospel.  We  must  think  of  the  wrath  to  come,  in  order  that  we  may  properly 
conceive  of  the  Deliverer.  He  is  appropriately  called  Jesus.  "  Thou  shalt  cali  his 
name  Jesus,  for  it  is  he  that  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins."  Here  it  is  saving 
from  the  wrath  of  God  on  account  of  their  sins.  We  read  of  heroes  of  antiquity 
who  were  renowned  for  delivering  countries  from  the  monsters  with  which  they  were 
infested.  The  New  Testament  tells  of  One  who  delivers  from  the  evil  most  to  be  feared 
of  man — the  wrath  to  come.  It  is  not  to  be  understood  that  Jesus  did  deliver  (on 
the  cross)  or  mil  deliver  (at  the  last  day),  but  rather  that  it  is  his  office  to  deliver. 
This  is  the  great  part  which  he  performs  for  men;  it  belongs  to  Jesus  to  deliver 
from  the  wrath  to  come.  This  office  entailed  on  the  Holder  of  it  infinite  self-abnega- 
tion. " The  Son  of  God, . . .  even  Jesus."  And, as  the  Son  of  God,  he  had  to  begin  by 
laying  aside  his  Divine  glory,  not  counting  it  a  prize  to  be  clutched  at  by  him.  And 
he  caine  down  into  our  nature,  that  he  might  receive  into  himself  the  wrath  due  to  our 
sin.     He  became  the  great  vessel  of  wrath     What  should  have  been  poured  into  us 


22  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  j,  1— 10 

ww  poured  into  him.  Thus  the  Deliverer  is  the  greatest  of  all  sufferers.  He  is  one 
who  has  marks  of  mysterious  sorrow  and  anguish  upon  his  nature.  And  that  shows 
how  far  it  it-  from  being  according  to  the  heart  of  God  to  make  men  miserable,  to  send 
wrath  upon  them.  He  interposes  between  the  sinner  and  the  results  of  his  sin  in  this 
great  Deliverer  sent  forth  from  his  own  bosom.  He  says,  "  Save  from  going  down  to  the 
pit,  for  I  have  found  a  ransom."  Bather  does  he  inflict  wrath  upon  his  Kun  than  inflict 
it  on  us.  So  far  as  his  doing  is  concerned,  he  has  removed  the  wrath  to  come — he  has 
made  it  non-existent.  Is  that  not  proof,  the  most  conclusive,  that  wrath  is  most 
abhorrent  to  him,  that  in  his  heart  of  hearts  he  wishes  us  to  escape  from  wrath,  wishes 
to  make  us  all  happy?  (4)  Our  relation  to  the  Deliverer.  It  is  said  here,  "which 
delivereth  us  from  the  wrath  to  come."  And  the  context  shows  that  the  reference  is  to 
believers.  All  are  welcome  to  come  into  a  saving  relation  to  Christ ;  but,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  all  do  not  come.  In  Thessalonica  there  were  many  to  whom  the  gospel 
of  deliverance  came,  who,  in  their  idolatrous  life,  thought  it  an  idle  tale.  There  were 
some  who,  tired  of  their  idolatrous  life,  welcomed  the  thought  of  deliverance,  and 
gave  a  ready  ear  to  the  apostle  when  he  told  them  of  Jesus  "  which  delivereth 
from  the  wrath  to  come."  And  there  are  many  still  in  our  more  enlightened  times 
who  treat  wrath  and  deliverance  from  it  as  an  intrusion.  The  great  work  which 
Jesus  accomplished  has  no  interest  to  them.  They  like  to  go  on  in  their  own  self- 
pleasing  way,  heedless  of  the  issues.  There  are  others,  and  these  are  the  believers, 
who  are  unsatisfied  in  a  life  merely  in  the  present.  They  are  anxious  to  know  how  they 
are  to  meet  the  eternal  issues.  And  feeling  unable  to  do  this  themselves,  as  guilty 
before  God,  they  shelter  themselves  in  Jesus,  "  which  delivereth  from  the  wrath  to 
come."  Taking  him  as  their  Representative,  entering  into  the  full  benefit  of  his  deliver- 
ance, the  future  is  relieved  to  them,  and,  for  the  first  time,  they  breathe  freely  as  in  the 
atmosphere  of  heaven.  Out  of  Christ  the  wrath  to  come  is  still  a  reality,  and  a  reality 
which  has  been  made  more  dreadful  to  those  who  refuse  to  escape  from  it.  In  Christ 
let  us  take  the  comfort  of  our  position,  let  us  dismiss  our  fear  of  future  wrath ;  and  let 
us  remember  him  to  whom  we  owe  our  escape,  and  let  us  prove  our  gratitude  by  a  life 
of  loyalty  to  our  Deliverer. — B.  F. 

Ver.  3. —  Works  of  grace.  In  writing  to  the  Corinthians  St.  Paul  singles  out  three 
Christian  graces  for  supreme  honour — faith,  hope,  and  love.  Here  he  selects  the  same 
three  graces,  but  not  simply  to  praise  them  for  their  own  inherent  merits.  They  are 
now  regarded  in  their  energetic  operation,  as  powers  and  influences ;  and  the  fruits  of 
their  activity  are  the  subjects  of  the  apostle's  thankful  recognition.  He  makes  mention 
in  prayer  of  the  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love  and  patience  of  hope. 

L  Christian  graces  are  active  powers.  They  are  beautiful  in  themselves,  but 
they  are  not  to  exist  solely  for  their  own  beauty.  Flowers  are  lovely,  but  the  object 
of  the  existence  of  flowers  is  not  that  they  may  dream  through  the  summer  hours  in 
their  loveliness,  and  then  fade  and  wither  and  die.  They  serve  an  important  end 
in  the  economy  of  plants  by  preparing  fruit  and  seeds.  1.  The  active  operation  of 
Christian  grace  glorifies  God.  While  dwelling  only  in  the  depths  of  the  soul,  quiescent 
and  secret,  they  do  not  show  forth  the  glory  of  God.  '*  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified, 
that  ye  bear  much  fruit"  (John  xv.  8).  2.  The  active  operation  of  the  Christian 
graces  is  a  means  of  benefiting  our  fellow-men.  Faith,  love,  and  hope  are  not  given  to 
us  for  our  own  enjoyment  only.  They  are  aids  for  our  mission  in  life — the  mission 
of  serving  God  by  serving  mankind.  We  must  let  them  have  their  perfect  work, 
that  this  mission  may  be  fulfilled.  3.  The  active  operation  of  the  Christian  graces 
is  a  proof  of  their  vital  health.  "  Faith  apart  from  works  is  barren"  (Jas.  ii.  20).  By 
the  fruits  they  bear  we  know  how  far  we  have  the  graces  within  us. 

II.  Christian  graces  have  their  separate  spheres  of  energy.  1.  Faith  has  its 
work.  When  we  both  believe  and  actively  trust  in  the  helps  of  the  Unseen,  we  are 
encouraged  to  use  them,  and  when  we  yield  ourselves  in  faith  to  the  will  and  law  of  the 
Unseen,  we  learn  to  obey  the  authority  above  us.  Hence  the  work  of  faith.  This  is 
characterized  by  decision — it  is  no  wavering,  hesitating,  intermittent  activity — by 
calmness  and  by  energy.  2.  Love  has  its  labour.  Labour  is  harder  tha:i  work.  It  implies 
great  effort,  toil,  and  trouble.  Love  goes  beyond  faith  and  undertakes  greater  tasks 
But  with  love  "all  toil  is  sweet.''    An  enthusiasm  amounting  to  passion  characterizes 


OH.  1. 1—10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  23 

this  activity  and  distinguishes  it  from  the  sober  work  of  faith.  Love  to  God  and  love 
to  man  are  necessary  for  the  hardest  work.  It  was  not  mere  faith,  it  was  love,  that 
inspired  the  awful  toils  and  sacrifices  of  Christ.  3.  Hope  has  its  patience.  This  is  the 
passive  fruit  of  Divine  grace.  It  is  not  therefore  the  less  important,  nor  does  it  there- 
fore show  the  less  energy.  We  need  strength  for  endurance  as  much  as  strength  for 
action.  Christian  hope  manifests  its  energy  by  unflinching  perseverance  in  spit*  of 
present  crosses  and  distresses. 

III.  Christian  graces  must  co-operate  for  the  ripening  of  the  full  Christian 
life.  St.  Paul  rejoices  that  all  three  of  the  primary  graces  were  in  active  operation 
in  the  Thessalonian  Church.  Characters  are  too  often  one-sided.  Faith  is  hard  if  love 
is  wanting.  Love  is  weak  and  wild  if  it  is  not  supported  and  guided  by  faith.  Hope 
is  an  idle  dream  without  these  two  graces,  and  they  are  sad  and  gloomy  if  they  are  not 
cheered  by  hope.  As  the  C"rd  is  far  stronger  than  the  separate  strands,  faith,  hope,  and 
love  united  produce  energies  many  times  greater  than  the  results  of  their  individual 
efficacy.  The  perfect  Christian  character  is  the  character  that  is  developed  into  rich 
fruitfulness  on  all  sides.  All  the  colours  in  the  bow  must  blend  to  produce  the  pure 
white  of  saintliness. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  6. — The  dynamic  gospel.  If  we  may  illustrate  spiritual  truths  by  describing 
them  in  the  terminology  of  physical  science,  we  may  say  that  the  great  mistake  which  the 
Church,  as  well  as  the  world,  has  been  making  over  and  over  again  is  that  of  treating 
the  gospel  statically  instead  of  dynamically — as  a  settled  creed  to  be  embraced  in  its 
rigid  form  rather  than  as  a  power  to  be  submitted  to  in  its  progressive  influence.  But 
it  is  evident  that  the  apostles  cared  not  one  straw  for  their  preaching  except  in  so  far  as 
it  was  the  vehicle  of  Divine  energy.  They  taught  the  truth,  not  as  professors  of 
metaphysics  in  a  college,  but  as  workmen  who  were  bringing  a  new  force  to  bear  on  the 
reconstruction  of  society. 

I.  It  is  vain  to  receive  the  gospel  in  word  only.  1.  It  may  be  published.  A 
heathen  country  may  open  its  ports  to  missionaries.  Bible  societies  may  circulate  the 
Scriptures  through  every  country  and  hamlot.  Preachers  may  never  cease  to  expound 
it.  And  all  this  will  be  as  nothing  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  people  who  will  not  hear, 
understand,  believe,  and  submit  to  the  truth.  2.  It  may  be  heard.  Crowds  may  flock 
to  the  churches.  Attentive  congregations  may  hang  upon  the  lips  of  popular  preachers. 
And  still  no  good  may  be  done  while  the  truih  is  not  understood,  believed,  and  obeyed. 
3.  It  may  be  understood.  The  meaning  of  the  language  used  may  be  intelligible  enough. 
People  may  give  themselves  the  trouble  of  thinking  out  the  subjects  presented  to  them 
by  the  preachers.  Still  all  is  vain  if  the  gospel  is  not  believed  and  submitted  to.  4.  It 
may  be  believed.  The  truth  may  not  be  doubted.  We  may  have  a  certain  conviction 
of  it,  and  yet  even  this  may  count  for  nothing  without  the  faith  that  accepts  the  influences 
and  follows  the  directions  of  the  gospel.  There  is  a  world  of  differ  nee  between  believing 
the  gospel  and  believing  in  Christ ;  at  least,  in  the  only  way  in  which  this  is  of  practical 
importance,  viz.  as  a  trustful  acceptance  of  his  grace  and  a  loyal  devotion  to  his  will. 
So  long  as  we  come  short  of  this  we  may  have  the  gospel,  but  it  will  be  "  words,  words, 
words  " — the  letter  that  killeth,  not  the  spirit  that  quickeneth. 

II.  Th&  gospel  mat  be  received  in  power.  This  very  statement  seems  to  strike 
some  people  who  have  long  been  familiar  with  the  words  of  the  gospel  as  a  new  revela- 
tion, as  itself  a  fresh  gospel.  But  we  have  to  learn  the  power  as  well  as  the  truth  of 
the  gospel  if  it  is  to  be  of  any  real  good  to  us.  1.  The  operation  of  the  power  of  the 
gospel  consists  in  changing  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men.  The  gospel  does  not  simply 
promise  future  salvation.  It  effects  present  regeneration.  The  new  birth  is  the  essential 
beginning  of  redemption.  Nothing  but  a  power,  vast,  overwhelming,  penetrating,  and 
omnipotent,  can  make  new  creatures  of  old,  stubborn  profligates  and  hypocrites,  men  of 
the  world,  and  self-righteous  Pharisees.  2.  The  secret  of  the  power  of  the  gospel  is  in 
the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  new  man  is  "born  of  the  Spirit"  (John  iii.  5). 
Christ  is  "the  Power  of  God,"  because  he  baptizes  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (Matt.  iii. 
11).  Christ  expressly  connected  the  power  of  apostolic  preaching  with  the  gift  of  tne 
Holy  Spirit  z  "  Ye  shall  receive  power,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you  "  (Acts 
i.  8).  Preachers  need  this  to  give  force  to  their  words,  and  hearers  to  receive  the  truth 
effectually.    3.  The  sign  of  the  power  of  the  gospel  will  1m  muck  mnuranc$.    Tht 


24  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  1. 1— 10. 

faith  which  grows  out  of  experiencing  this  power  will  be  much  stronger,  more  vivid, 
and  more  joyous  than  that  of  first  believing  the  truth  of  the  gospel.' — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  6. — Affliction  with  Joy.  The  Christians  of  Thessalonica  had  no  sooner  accepted 
the  gospel  than  they  were  attacked  witli  swift,  sharp  persecution;  and  it  is  to  be 
remarked  that,  while  in  other  places  the  apostles  were  often  assailed  and  the  converts 
spared,  here  the  full  force  of  the  assault  fell  on  the  infant  Church  (Acts  xvii.  5 — 10). 
St.  Paul  frequently  refers  to  the  sufferings  that  so  quickly  tested  the  faith  of  this  brave 
Christian  community  at  the  very  commencement  of  its  new  life  (ch.  ii.  14;  iii.  2-  5). 
But  in  spite  of  persecution  a  peculiar  joy  seems  to  have  possessed  the  Church  at 
Thessalonica.  The  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  are  to  he  distinguished  for  hearty 
congratulations  and  a  spirit  of  gladness.  Here  is  an  apparent  paradox,  which,  however, 
when  regarded  from  a  higher  standpoint,  resolves  itself  into  a  spiritual  harmony. 

I  An  earthly  paradox.  St.  Paul  was  much  inclined  to  tlie  use  of  startling  para- 
doxes. His  vigorous  mind  seemed  to  delight  in  facing  them.  Thus  his  style  is  rugged 
with  great  contrasting  ideas.  1.  The  gospel  does  not  prevent  affliction.  To  the  Thes- 
salonians it  was  the  means  of  bringing  suffering.  Christians  often  suffer  more  of 
earthly  trouble,  rather  than  less,  than  others  (Heb.  xii.  8).  Though  the  gospel  is  good 
news,  and  though  it  brings  gladness  to  the  soul,  it  may  be  ushered  in  with  storms  and 
sufferings  in  the  outer  life.  This  might  be  expected,  seeing  that  it  is  in  conflict  with 
the  prince  of  this  world.  2.  Affliction  does  not  prevent  the  experience  of  the  joy  of  the 
gospel.  In  spite  of  much  affliction,  the  Thessalonians  had  joy.  The  world  sees  only 
the  outside.  Hence  its  common  verdict  that  religion  must  be  melancholy.  It  can  see 
the  flaming  fagots ;  it  cannot  see  the  exultant  heart  of  the  martyr.  It  is  a  great  truth 
to  know  that,  when  God  does  not  remove  trouble,  he  may  give  us  such  gladness  of 
heart  as  shall  entirely  counteract  it.  Surely  it  is  better  to  rejoice  in  tribulation  than 
tc  be  sad  in  prosperity 

II  The  spiritual  harmony  1.  The  affliction  is  external,  while  the  joy  is  internal 
The  two  belong  to  different  spheres.  It  would  be  impossible  for  one  and  the  same 
person  to  be  in  temporal  prosperity  and  adversity  at  the  same  moment,  or  to  be  at  once 
in  spiritual  sunshine  and  undei  spiritual  clouds.  But  it  may  well  be  that,  while  the 
earthly  sun  is  shrouded  ii  gloom,  the  heavenly  sun  is  shining  in  full  splendour.  2.  The 
affliction  comes  from  earthly  causes,  the  joy' from  heavenly.  Men  persecute,  the  Holy 
Bpirit  inspires  joy.  Here  are  different  sources  of  experience,  and  accordingly  the 
experiences  differ.  3.  The  affliction  rather  helps  the  spiritual  joy  than  otherwise.  It 
prevents  men  from  looking  to  external  things  for  comfort.  It  enables  them  to  see  that 
true  joy  must  be  inward  and  spiritual. 

In  conclusion,  observe  that  affliction  is  no  reason  for  the  rejection  of  the  gospel,  since 
this  is  not  therefore  the  less  true,  and  it  claims  to  be  received  on  its  truth,  not  on  our 
pleasure,  and  also  because  the  joy  it  brings  will  not  be  lessened  by  any  external 
tiouble.— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  8. — How  the  Word  is  sounded  forth.  I.  The  need  of  sounding  forth  the 
gospel.  This  is  a  fine  expression,  "  sounded  forth ; "  not  merely  whispered  in  the  ear, 
but  proclaimed  far  and  wide,  with  a  fulness,  a  richness,  and  a  power  that  command 
attention.    Such  is  the  proclamation  that  the  royal  message  of  the  gospel  deserves. 

1.  The  gospel  comes  from  Ood.  It  is  not  like  the  composition  of  an  obscure  man.  If 
God  opens  his  mouth,  surely  his  words  must  be  worthy  of  publishing  in  trumpet-notes. 

2.  The  gospel  is  for  all  men.  It  is  not  a  secret  doctrine  for  the  cultured  few.  All  the 
world  needs  it,  all  the  world  has  a  right  to  have  it.  Therefore  it  should  spread  over 
wide  territories  and  penetrate  to  remote  districts.  The  alarm-bell  must  be  resonant, 
the  bugle-call  must  be  clear  and  piercing,  the  shepherd's  voice  must  be  high  and  full 
that  the  wandering  sheep  may  hear  it  and  return  to  the  fold.  3.  The  gospel  is  conjlwted 
by  other  voices.  Men  are  preoccupied.  The  din  of  the  world  renders  them  deaf  to  the 
message  from  heaven.  The  world  will  not  lie  in  solemn  stillness  to  hear  the  angels 
sing.  The  sound  of  the  gospel  must  go  forth  so  that  deaf  ears  shall  be  unstopped,  and 
walls  of  prejudice  fall  flat  like  those  of  old  Jericho  at  the  trumpet-notes  of  Israel's  priests. 

H  The  method  of  sounding  forth  the  gospel.  1.  It  must  be  sounded  by  living 
men.    A  written  gospel  is  not  enough.     Soul  must  stir  soul.     2.  It  must  be  sounded 


oh.  1.1— 10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  25 

in  the  conduct  of  Christians.  It  would  seem  that  St.  Paul  was  thinking  rather  of  the 
Influence  of  the  heroic  endurance  of  the  Thessalonians  and  of  their  spiritual  prosperity 
than  of  the  missionary  labours  of  evangelists  sent  out  hy  them,  for  he  writes  of  how 
they  became  an  ensample  to  all  that  helieve  in  Macedonia  and  in  Achaia,  and  how  in 
every  place  their  faith  to  God-ward  was  gone  forth.  The  loudest,  clearest,  most  eloquent, 
most  unanswerable  proclamation  of  the  gospel  is  the  unconscious  testimony  of  Christian 
living.  3.  It  may  be  sounded  forth  with  redoubled  energy  from  the  midst  of  affliction. 
The  troubles  endured  by  the  Thessalonians  tested  and  revealed  their  faith,  and  so 
led  to  the  fuller  proclamation  of  the  gospel.  "  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of 
the  Church."  Men  never  preach  Christ  so  perfectly  as  when  they  die  for  him.  The 
torch  that  kindled  Latimer's  fagots  at  Oxford  kindled  a  glorious  fire  of  reformation 
throughout  England.  4.  It  can  be  sounded  forth  with  greatest  effect  from  central 
"positions.  Thessalonica  was  the  capital  of  Macedonia.  What  happened  there  waa 
not  done  in  a  corner.  Christian  testimony  witnessed  at  this  great  centre  would  spread 
far  and  wide.  It  is  our  duty  to  establish  Christian  influences  in  prominent  places. 
While  not  boasting  of  our  own  doings,  and  not  letting  our  left  hand  know  what  our 
right  hand  doeth,  we  should  still  not  hide  our  candle  under  a  bushel,  but  so  let  our 
light  shine  bufore  men  that  we  may  glorify  our  Father  which  is  in  heaven,  and  remem- 
ber that,  if  a  city  which  is  set  on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid,  it  is  most  important  that  the 
light  of  the  gospel  should  shine  from  such  a  place. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  9, 10. — The  great  change.  The  Thessalonians  were  converted  heathens.  To 
them  the  blessedness  of  the  gospel  would  be  largely  measured  by  its  contrast  with  the 
darkness  of  paganism.  In  Christendom  the  language  descriptive  of  the  acceptance  of 
the  spiritual  blessings  of  the  gospel  would,  of  course,  be  different.  But  little  else  than 
the  language;  and  with  the  essential,  spiritual  signification  of  it,  even  this  would 
scarcely  need  altering.  St.  Paul  regards  the  great  change  in  two  aspects,  present  and 
future. 

I.  The  present  aspect  of  the  great  change.  "Ye  turned  unto  God  from  idols, 
to  serve  a- living  and  true  God."  1.  It  is  emancipation  from,  an  evil  service  and  enliit- 
ment  in  a  good  service.  In  the  old  condition  a  man  is  a  servant,  of  idols,  of  sin,  of 
passion,  of  the  world,  of  Satan.  He  thinks  himself  free,  but  he  is  really  a  miserable 
slave.  In  the  changed  condition  the  Christian  is  freed  from  this  thraldom.  But  he  is 
not  the  less  a  servant.  He  no  longer  serves  in  hard  bondage.  Love  is  his  chain,  and 
free  devotion  his  service.  Still  he  serves.  2.  It  is  the  gluing  up  of  death  and  falsehood 
and  the  acceptance  of  truth  and  life.  (1)  The  idol  is  lifeless.  All  worldly,  sinful 
living  is  a  devotion  to  lifeless  gods,  to  mere  material  things  that  perish  in  the  using. 
The  Christian  serves  a  living  God,  who  can  give  vital  grace,  accept  loving  devotion, 
and  commune  with  his  people.  (2)  The  idol  is  false.  Idolatry  is  a  lie.  All  earthly 
things  when  exalted  into  gods  become  unreal  and  only  mock  their  devotees.  God  is  real, 
and  he  only  can  be  rightly  served  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  We  come  to  reality,  to  fact,  to 
truth,  when  we  come  to  God. 

II.  The  futube  aspect  of  the  gbeat  ohanoe.  1.  It  consists  in  a  turning  from 
wrath.  Whether  we  anticipate  it  with  fear,  or  delude  ourselves  in  the  dream  of 
evading  it,  or  simply  ignore  it  with  stolid  indifference,  the  fact  remains  that  for  all  of 
us,  while  in  our  sins,  there  is  a  certain  looking  for  of  judgment.  If  we  are  children 
of  sin  we  must  be  children  of  wrath.  It  is  no  small  blessing  to  be  able  to  face  the 
future  and  to  see  that  reasonably  and  righteously  all  the  horror  of  Divine  wrath  is  gone 
in  the  free  pardon  of  sin.  It  is  like  turning  one's  face  from  the  lowering  thunder- 
cloud to  the  silver  light  of  sunrise.  2.  It  leads  on  to  an  anticipation  of  the  coming 
glory  of  Christ.  All  the  early  Christians  were  much  occupied  with  this  anticipation, 
but  none  more  so  than  the  Thessalonians.  The  hope  of  the  Parousia  is  an  ever- 
recurrent  theme  in  the  two  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  to  this  Church.  His  own  mind  must 
also  have  been  very  full  of  it  when  he  wrote  these  letters.  In  their  immediate  expecta- 
tion— at  least,  as  far  as  a  visible  appearance  and  triumph  of  Christ  was  concerned — ths 
first  Christians  were  disappointed.  But  the  great  promises  still  cheer  us  as  we  wait  for 
te  glory  that  is  reserved  in  the  future.  The  Christian  conversion  thus  not  merely 
results  in  a  deliverance  from  wrath ;  it  inspires  a  grand  hope  and  promises  a  rich  glory 
in  the  days  to  come. — W.  F.  A. 


2* 


THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    Lou.  u.  1— 2a 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  n. 


Contents. — Paul  turns  from  the  reports 
of  otliers  to  the  experience  of  the  readers. 
They  themselves  knew  that  his  entrance 
was  not  powerless ;  although  maltreated  in 
Philippi,  he  was  emboldened  to  preach  the 
gospel  at  Thessalonica.  His  preaching  did 
not  proceed  either  from  delusion  on  his  part 
or  from  a  desire  to  delude  others.  He  felt 
approved  by  God,  and  was  actuated  by  no 
improper  motives :  he  sought  neither  their 
praise  nor  their  money ;  so  far  from  insisting 
on  his  apostolic  rights,  he  was  gentle  among 
them,  and  conducted  himself  with  the 
tenderness  of  a  nursing  mother  toward  her 
children ;  and  so  far  from  his  ministry  being 
a  pretext  for  covetousness,  he  had  laboured 
for  his  own  support;  and  thus  he  could 
confidently  appeal  to  the  Thessalonians  as 
witnesses  of  the  blamelessness  of  his  con- 
duct And  as  his  entrance  among  them  was 
not  powerless,  so  he  thanked  Clod  that  it 
resulted  in  their  reception  of  the  gospel; 
they  had  embraced  it  as  the  word  of  God, 
and  had  not  shunned  persecution  for  its 
sake;  they  had  in  tlds  become  the  imitators 
of  the  Churches  in  Judaea.  The  apostle  then 
alludes  to  his  earnest  desires  to  see  them; 
twice  he  had  attempted  to  come  to  Thessa- 
lonica, and  twice  he  had  been  prevented  by 
the  machinations  of  Satan.  They  were  very 
dear  to  him — the  objects  of  his  tender  affec- 
tions, and  the  source  of  his  rejoicing  before 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  his  coming. 

Ver.  1. — For  yourselves,  brethren ;  in  con- 
trast to  other  persons.  Not  only  do  strangers 
report  the  power  and  efficacy  of  our  preach- 
ing among  you,  but  you  yourselves  are  ex- 
perimentally acquainted  with  it.  Enow  our 
entrance  in  unto  you ;  referring,  not  merely 
to  the  mere  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the 
Thessalonians,  but  to  the  entrance  which 
the  gospel  found  into  their  hearts— to  its 
coming,  not  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power 
(oh  i.  5).  That  it  was  not  in  vain ;  not 
empty,  useless,  to  no  purpose,— descriptive 
of  the  character  of  the  apostolus  entrance 
among  them.  Our  entrance  among  you 
was  not  powerless,  unreal;  on  the  contrajy, 
it  was  mighty,  energetic,  powerful.  The 
reference  is  chiefly  to  the  manner  or  mode 
in  wbioh  Paul  and  his  companions  preached 


the  gospel,  though  not  entirely  excluding 
the  success  of  the  gospel  among  the  Thes- 
salonians (comp.  1  Cor.  xv.  14, "  And  if  Christ 
be  not  risen,  then  is  our  preaching  vain,  and 
your  faith  is  also  vain  ")• 

Ver.  2. — But  even  after  we  had  suffered 
before,  and  were  shamefully  entreated.  As 
the  word  here  rendered  "  suffered  before " 
does  not  in  itself  imply  that  the  sufferings 
were  unjust,  the  apostle  adds,  "  and  were 
shamefully  entreated."  As  ye  know,  at 
Philippi  We  are  informed,  in  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles,  that  Paul  and  Silas  were 
publicly  scourged  and  oast  into  prison;  and 
scourging  with  ruds  was  regarded  as  an 
ignominious  punishment,  and  therefore 
was  forbidden  to  be  inflicted  on  Roman  citi- 
zens, such  as  Paul  and  Silas  were.  "  They 
have  beaten  us  openly  uncondemned,  being 
Romans,  and  have  cast  us  into  prison " 
(Acts  xvi.  37).  We  were  bold  in  our  God  to 
speak  unto  yon.  The  word  here  rendered 
"bold"  denotes  boldness  or  freedom  of 
speech ;  and  hence  some  render  the  clause, 
"  We  were  bold  of  speech  in  our  God,  so  a* 
to  speak  unto  you"  (Ellicott).  Perhaps, 
however,  as  the  verb  "to  speak"  follows, 
it  is  better  to  render  the  olause, "  We  were 
confident  in  our  God  to  speak;"  or  "em- 
boldened to  speak"  (R.V.,  "we  waxed  bold"). 
This  boldness  or  confidence  was  in  our  God, 
that  is,  on  account  of  our  fellowship  or  union 
with  him.  The  gospel  of  God.  The  genitive 
of  origin,  denoting,  not  merely  that  God  was 
the  Object,  but  that  he  was  the  Author  of  the 
gospel.  With  much  contention ;  or,  in  much 
conflict  (R.V.),  alluding  to  the  peril  and 
danger  with  which  Paul  preached  tile  gospel 
in  Thessalonica. 

Ver.  3. — For  our  exhortation.  This  word 
has  a  twofold  signification,  denoting  both 
"  exhortation  "  and  "  consolation ; "  when  it 
refers  to  the  moral  conduct  it  denotes  ex- 
hortation, but  when  it  is  an  address  to  a 
sufferer  it  denotes  consolation.  In  the  gospel 
these  two  meanings  are  blended  together. 
Was  not  of  deeeit.  Not  in  the  sense  of  guile, 
which  would  be  tautological,  but  simply 
"  error,"  without  any  direct  evil  intent ;  our 
gospel  was  not  a  delusion — we  were  not  our- 
selves deceived.  Nor  of  nneleanness;  a 
word  usually  employed  to  denote  sensuality, 
and  in  this  sense  the  meaning  is — We  did 
not,  like  the  heathen  in  their  worship,  give 
occasion  to  unclean  practices :  "  We  have 
corrupted  no  man"  (2  Cor.  vii.  2).  The 
word,  however,  may  be  taken  in  a  more 
general  sense,  as  denoting  imparity  of  dis- 
position, impure  motives:  each  m  the 
impure  desire  of  applause  or  of  gain,  to 


oh.  n.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


27 


which  the  apostle  afterwards  alludes.  Or  of 
guile.  As  we  were  not  ourselves  deceived, 
so  neither  did  we  attempt  to  deceive  others. 
The  apostle  did  not  adapt  his  religion  as 
Mahomet,  to  suit  the  prejudices  or  passions 
of  men ;  he  did  not  employ  any  seductive  or 
temporizing  arts ;  but  he  boldly  went  in  the 
face  of  the  prevailing  religions  of  the  age, 
both  of  the  Jews  and  of  the  Gentiles. 

Ver.  4. — But;  in  contrast.  As;  according 
as.  We  were  allowed.  The  old  English 
for  "approved."  Of  God.  The  word  ren- 
dered "allowed"  signifies  tried,  tested  as 
gold  is  tested  in  the  fire,  and  hence  also  the 
result  of  that  trial, "  approved."  As  we  were 
esteemed  worthy  to  be  put  in  trust  with 
the  gospel;  entrusted  with  its  publication. 
Even  so ;  in  this  condition  of  approval  and 
trust.  We  speak,  not  as  pleasing  men,  but 
God,  that  trieth.  The  same  verb  that  is 
rendered  "allowed"  in  the  first  part  of  the 
verse;  hence  "proveth,"  or  "approveth." 
Our  hearts.  Not  a  general  statement, 
"  God  who  is  the  Discerner  of  the  heart ; " 
but  "our  hearts,"  namely,  of  us,  the  pub- 
lishers of  the  gospel — Paul  and  Silas  and 
Timothy;  thus  appealing  to  God,  as  the 
infallible  Judge  of  their  sincerity. 

Ver.  5. — For;  confirming  the  statement 
that  the  preachers  of  the  gospel  did  not  seek 
to  please  men,  but  God.  Neither  at  any 
time  used  we  flattering  words;  endeavouring 
to  gain  you  by  flattery  and  praise ;  we  did 
not  pander  to  your  feelings;  we  did  not 
soften  the  demands  of  the  gospel.  As  ye 
know,  nor  a  cloak — or  pretext — of  covetous- 
ness.  We  did  not  use  the  gospel  as  a  pretext 
to  mask  our  real  motive,  which  was  cove- 
toneness,  pretending  to  seek  your  spiritual 
good,  whereas  in  reality  we  sought  our  own 
advantage.  Paul  could  with  perfect  con- 
fidence appeal  to  his  converts,  and  say,  "I 
have  coveted  no  man's  silver,  or  gold,  or 
apparel "  (Acts  xx.  33).  He  was  free  from 
all  sinister  motives.  "  He  did  not  use  words 
such  as  flattery  uses,  or  pretexts  such  as 
covetousness "  (Jowett).  God  is  witness. 
Paul  appeals  to  the  Thessalonians  them- 
selves that  he  had  not  used  flattering  words  ; 
so  now  he  appeals  to  God  that  the  motive 
of  his  conduct  was  not  covetousness.  Men 
can  judge  the  external  conduct,  they  can 
hear  the  flattering  words;  but  God  only 
can  know  the  motive  of  action — he  only  can 
discern  the  covetousness. 

Ver.  6. — Nor  of  (or,  from)  men  sought  we 
glory,  neither  of  you,  nor  yet  of  others,  when 
we  might  have  been  burdensome.  These 
words  admit  of  two  meanings.  The  apostle 
may  refer  to  his  refusal  to  seek  mainten- 
ance from  the  Thessalonians,  and  in  this 
sense  become  a  burden  to  them.  But  such 
a  meaning  does  not  suit  the  context ;  and 
besides,  this  refusal  of  maintenance  is  after- 


wards alluded  to  by  the  apostle.  The 
reference  here  is  not  to  maintenance,  but  to 
glory:  we  did  not  seek  glory  from  you, 
when  we  might  have  been  burdensome, 
when  we  might  have  done  so.  Hence  the 
word  is  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  honour, 
importance;  when  we  might  have  claimed 
honour.  As — in  virtue  of  our  character  as — 
the  apostles  of  Christ.  Paul  does  not  speak 
of  himself  alone,  but  he  includes  Silas  and 
Timothy,  and  therefore  the  word  "  apostles  " 
is  to  be  taken,  not  in  its  restricted,  but  in 
its  wider  meaning. 

Ver.  7. — But.  The  apostle  now  describes 
his  conduct  positively.  We  were  gentle ; 
a  word  used  of  the  amiable  conduct  of  a 
superior  toward  an  inferior,  as  of  a  master 
toward  a  servant,  a  prince  toward  his 
subjects,  or  a  father  toward  his  children. 
"  The  servant  of  God  must  not  strive,  but 
be  gentle  toward  all  men  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  24). 
Some  manuscripts  read,  "  We  were  babes 
among  you" — the  difference  being  only 
the  addition  of  another  letter.  Among 
you;  in  our  intercourse  with  you.  Even 
as  a  nurse;  or  rather,  a  nursing  mother, 
for  the  children  are  her  own.  Cherisheth ; 
the  word  employed  for  birds  warming  and 
cherishing  their  young.  Her  children.  A 
stronger  expression  of  tenderness  and  love 
could  hardly  be  made.  Even  as  a  nursing 
mother  dedicates  her  life  for  her  infant ;  so, 
says  Paul,  we  are  willing  to  dedicate  our- 
selves for  you.  Some  important  manuscripts 
read  the  verse  thus :  "  But  we  were  babes 
among  you,  even  as  a  nurse  eberisheth  her 
children ; "  but  this  arises  from  an  obvious 
error  of  the  transcriber. 

Ver.  8. — So  being  affectionately  desirous 
of  you ;  a  strong  expression  in  the  original : 
"being  filled  with  earnest  love  for  you." 
We  were  willing.  The  word  denotes  a  pre- 
determination of  the  will:  "we  esteemed  it 
good."  To  have  imparted  unto  you,  not  the 
gospel  of  God  only,  but  also  our  own  souls. 
An  evident  climax  :  not  only  were  we  willing 
to  preach  the  gospel  of  God  to  you,  but 
more  than  this,  to  sacrifice  our  own  lives  for 
your  advantage.  The  word  here  rendered 
"souls"  denotes  lives;  and  the  meaning  is 
that  the  apostle  was  willing  to  submit  to 
death  for  the  sake  of  the  Thessalonians. 
The  plural  "we"  still  implies  Paul  and 
Silas  and  Timothy.  The  thought  is — As  a 
nursing  mother  not  only  nourishes  her 
childi  en,  but  is  also  ready  to  sacrifice  her 
lite  for  them;  so  the  apostle  not  only 
nourished  his  spiritual  children  with  the 
pure  milk  of  the  gospel,  but  was  ready  to 
sacrifice  his  own  life  for  their  spiritual  main- 
tenance ;  thus  expressing  in  the  strongest 
manner  the  womanly  tenderness  of  the 
apostle  toward  his  converts.  Because  ys 
were  dear  unto  us. 


■>* 


THE  PIB8T  EPISTLE  TO*  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—20. 


Ver.  9. — For ;  a  proof  or  confirmation  of 
this  clearness  of  the  Thessaloniana  to  the 
apoBtle.  Ye  remember,  brethren  ;  recalling 
to  their  recollection  his  conduct  when  he 
was  with  them.  Our  labour  and  travail. 
These  two  terms  frequently  occur  together 
(2  Cor.  xi.  27;  2  Thess.  iii.  8),  and  can 
hardly  he  distinguished;  "labour,"  or"  toil," 
is  active,  denoting  exertion  ;  "  travail "  is 
passive,  denoting  weariness  or  fatigue,  the 
effect  of  the  exertion.  Tor  labouring ;  in  its 
strict  meaning  chiefly  used  of  manual  labour. 
Paul  here  refers  to  his  working  for  his  own 
support  as  a  tent-maker.  Night  and  day. 
Night  preoedes  according  to  the  Jewish 
mode  of  reckoning.  It  does  not  denote  that 
the  apostle  made  up  by  labour  at  night  the 
loss  of  time  during  the  day  which  his  higher 
duties,  as  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  occa- 
sioned ;  that  he  wrought  at  his  trade  at 
night,  and  preached  during  the  day ;  but  the 
phrase,  "  night  and  day,"  denotes  inces- 
santly, continually.  Because  we  would  not 
be  chargeable  to  any  of  you.  Not  a  proof  of 
the  poverty  of  the  Church  of  Thessalonica ; 
but  the  reason  of  this  unselfish  con  duct  of  the 
apostle  was  that  no  hindrance  should  arise 
on  his  part  to  the  spread  of  the  gospel; 
that  no  imputation  of  selfishness  or  oove- 
tousness  should  be  laid  to  his  charge.  As 
he  had  done  at  Thessalonica  so  the  apostle 
acted  in  other  plaoes.  Thus  at  the  time 
he  was  writing  this  Epistle  he  was  working 
for  his  support  at  Corinth  (1  Cor.  iv.  12; 
2  Cor.  xi.  9).  And  such  was  also  his  practice 
at  Ephesus ;  for  in  his  farewell  address  to 
the  Ephesian  elders  be  could  appeal  to 
them:  "Yea,  ye  yourselves  know,  that  these 
hands  have  ministered  unto  my  necessities, 
and  to  them  that  were  with  me  "  (Acts  xx. 
34).  We  preached  unto  you  the  gospel  of 
God.    Thus  freely,  without  charge. 

Yer.  10. — Ye  are  witnesses,  and  God  also ; 
ye  of  the  outward  conduct,  and  God  of  the 
motives  which  actuated  us.  How  holily  and 
justly  and  uublamably;  "holily  "denoting  the 
apostle's  conduct  to  God,  "justly"  his  con- 
duot  to  man,  and  "  uublamably  "  the  negative 
side  of  both  particulars.  We  behaved  our- 
selves  among  you  that  believe.  The  apostle 
here  refers  to  his  own  personal  demeanour 
and  to  that  of  Silas  and  Timothy  among 
them,  in  order  thai  the  Thessalonians  might 
realize  the  purity  of  their  conduct,  and  so 
might  continue  steadfast  in  their  attachment 
to  the  gospel  which  they  taught.  He  men- 
tions specially  "  them  that  believe,"  not  that 
he  acted  otherwise  among  those  that  did  not 
believe,  but  because  believers  were  cognizant 
of  i lis  conduct. 

Ver.  11. — As  ye  know  how  we  exhorted 
and  comforted  and  charged  every  one  of  you, 
as  a  father  doth  his  children,  The  transla- 
tion of   this  verse  is  somewhat  faulty;  it 


ought  to  be,  as  in  the  R.V.,  as  ye  know  how 
we  dealt  with  each  one  of  you,  as  a  father  with 
his  own  children,  exhorting  you,  and  encourag- 
ing you,  and  testifying.  Paul  here  ohanges 
the  image  from  that  of  a  nursing  mother 
to  that  of  a  father;  because  then  he  was 
speaking  of  his  tender  care  for  his  converts, 
whereas  here  he  speaks  of  the  instructions 
and  admonitions  which  he  gave  them  ;  as  a 
mother  he  nourished  their  spiritual  life,  and 
as  a  father  he  superintended  their  spiritual 
education.  "  Exhorting  and  comforting  and 
charging ; "  representing  three  modes  of 
the  apostle's  instructions  :  "  exhorting  "  de- 
notes also  encouraging  and  consoling ;  "  con:  - 
forting  "  denotes  supporting  and  sustaining 
(«  Comfort  the  feeble  minded,"  oh.  v.  14) ;  and 
"  charging  "  denotes  testifying  or  protesting 
— a  solemn  pressing  home  of  the  exhortation 
to  the  hearers. 

Ver.  12. — That  (or,  to  the  end  fhaf)  ye  would 
walk  worthy  of  God;  so  as  to  adorn  the  gospel 
of  God.  So  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossistns : 
"  That  ye  would  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord 
unto  all  pleasing "  (Col.  i.  10).  Who  hath 
called  you ;  or,  as  the  best  attested  manu- 
scripts read,  who  calleth  you.  To  his  kingdom 
and  glory.  Not  to  be  weakened  as  if  it  were 
a  Hebraism  for  "  his  glorious  kingdom,"  or 
"  the  kingdom  of  his  glory ;"  but  the  kingdom 
and  glory  are  to  be  viewed  as  two  different 
objects.  "God  called  you  to  his  kingdom," 
namely,  the  Messianic  kingdom  which  hs 
has  established  on  earth ;  and  which  will 
be  completely  realized  at  the  advent.  And 
"  God  called  you  to  his  glory,"  namely,  the 
glory  which  is  in  reserve  for  all  the  members 
of  his  kingdom. 

Ver.  13. — For  this  cause.  Not  because 
God  has  called  you  to  his  kingdom  and 
glory,  but,  referring  to  what  follows,  because 
of  your  reception  of  the  gospel.  We  thank 
God.  Although  the  reception  of  the  gospel 
was  in  one  sense  the  free  and  voluntary  act 
on  the  part  of  the  Thessalonians;  yet  in 
another  sense  it  was  the  act  of  God  who 
ordained  them  to  accept  the  gospel ;  their 
belief  was  an  operation  of  God  in  them. 
Without  ceasing,  because,  when  ye  reoeived 
the  Word  of  God  which  ye  heard  of  us; 
literally,  because  when  ye  received  from  us  the 
M  ord  of  hearing,  which  is  of  God.  The  gospel 
is  called  "  the  Word  of  hearing,"  because  it 
came  by  hearing ;  hence  "the  Word  heard," 
or  "  the  Word  of  the  message  "  (R.  V.).  It  is 
further  designated  "of  God"— the  Word 
whose  Author  is  God.  Ye  received  it  not  as 
the  word  of  men — as  if  it  were  of  human 
origin— but  as  it  is  in  truth,  the  Word  Oi 
God— of  Divine  origin — which  effeotually 
wOrketh.  The  pronoun  may  refer  toGod,  "win 
effectually  worketh,"  or  better  to  the  Word 
of  God,  as  the  principal  subject  of  the  sen- 
tence.   Also  in  you  that  believe.    The  gospel 


cn.li.  1— 20.]    THE  FIRST      EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN& 


29 


was  powerful  as  respects  the  preachers,  and 
effectual  as  respects  the  hearers. 

Ver.  14. — For  ye,  brethren,  became  fol- 
lowers ;  or  rather,  imitators,  namely,  in  the 
endurance  of  suffering  for  the  Bake  of  the 
gospel,  not  in  intention  only,  but  in  reality. 
Of  the  Churches  Of  God  which  in  Judaea  are 
in  Christ  Jesus.  These  Churches  are  men- 
tioned as  being  at  this  early  period  the 
most  prominent.  The  Bpecial  mention  of 
persecution  by  the  Jews  has  its  origin  in  the 
fact  that  it  wag  by  the  unbelieving  Jews 
that  Paul  was  persecuted  at  Thessalonica, 
For  ye  also  have  suffered  like  things  of  your 
own  countrymen.  One  of  the  proofs  that 
the  Church  of  Thessalonica  was  Gentile  in 
its  origin;  as  these  countrymen  were  evidently 
Gentiles,  being  here  distinguished  from  the 
Jews.  From  this  it  would  seem  that,  after 
Paul  and  his  companions  had  left  Thessalo- 
nica, the  persecution  which  arose  against 
the  Christians  continued,  and  the  Gentiles 
combined  with  the  Jews  in  opposing  the 
gospel.  Even  as  they — the  Churches  of  God 
in  Judaea — have  of  the  Jews.  We  learn  from 
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  that  the  Jewish 
Christians  in  Judsea  were  exposed  to  severe 
persecution  from  their  unbelieving  country- 
men :  Stephen  was  pot  to  death,  and  Paul 
himself,  in  his  unconverted  state,  was  a  chief 
among  the  persecutors. 

Ver.  15. — Who  both  killed  the  .Lord  Jesus ; 
emphatic,  to  point  out  the  greatness  of  their 
wickedness.  And  their  own  prophets;  or, 
as  some  manuscripts  read,  and  the  prophets. 
This  crime  was  often  laid  to  the  charge  of 
the  Jews  ;  thus,  by  our  Lord,  "  Ye  are  wit- 
nesses unto  yourselves,  that  ye  are  the 
children  of  them  which  killed  the  prophets  " 
(Matt,  xxiii,  31) ;  and  by  the  protomartyr 
Stephen,  "  Which  of  the  prophets  have  not 
your  fathers  persecuted?"  (Acts  vii.  25.) 
And  have  persecuted  us;  literally,  driven 
us  out,  as  Paul  and  Silas  were  expelled  from 
Thessalonica.  And  they  please  not  God,  but 
are  contrary  to  all  men.  The  hatred  and  con- 
tempt which  the  Jews  bore  to  other  nations 
is  noticed  by  Tacitus,  Juvenal,  and  other 
heathen  writers.  Thus  Tacitus  writes  of 
them  :  "  They  are  faithful  to  obstinacy,  and 
merciful  toward  themselves,  but  toward  all 
others  are  actuated  l>y  the  most  irreconcil- 
able hatred  (odium  humani  generis)."  And 
Juvenal  says,  "They  will  not  show  the 
road  to  one  who  wag  not  of  their  religion, 
nor  lead  the  thirsty  person  if  unciieum- 
oiied  to  the  oommon  spring."  Perhaps, 
however,  the  apostle  refers  here,  not  to  the 
enmity  of  the  Jews  to  the  human  race,  in 
general,  though  perfectly  cognizant  of  their 
bigotry  and  intolerance ;  as  this  enmity 
was  a  perversion  of  their  peculiar  distinction 
as  the  people  of  God;  but  rather  to  their 
opposition  to  hi*  preaching  the  gospel  to 


the  Gentiles— to  their  extreme  reluctance 
that  the  Gentiles  along  with  themselves 
should  be  admitted  into  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

Ver.  16. — Forbidding  us — by  contradict- 
ing, blaspheming,  slandering,  laying  snares 
— to  speak  to  the  Gentiles  that  they  might 
be  saved.  Not  that  the  Jews  were  averse 
to  the  proselytism  of  the  Gentiles,  provided 
they  were  circumcised  and  kept  the  Law 
of  Moses;  on  the  contrary,  Judaism  at 
this  period  was  a  proselytizing  religion; 
but  their  great  objection  to  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel  was  that  the  preachers  did 
not  insist  on  the  Gentiles  becoming  Jews 
before  they  became  Christians.  And,  ac- 
cordingly, we  learn  from  the  Acts  of  the 
ApusLles  that  the  unbelieving  Jews  were 
the  most  violent  and  implacable  enemies  of 
the  gospel.  Of  the  numerous  persecutions 
mentioned  in  the  Acts,  there,  were  only  two, 
namely,  those  at  Philippi  and  Ephesus, 
whioh  were  not  occasioned  by  the  Jews. 
To  fill  up  their  sins  alway ;  so  that  the 
measure  of  their  iniquity  became  full  to 
overflowing.  Their  forbidding  the  apostles 
to  preach  to  the  Gentiles  was  the  last  drop 
which  caused  the  cap  of  their  iniquity  to 
overflow  (oomp.  Gen.  xv.  16,  "  The  iniquity 
of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full").  The 
remark  of  Professor  Jowett  is  well  worthy 
of  notice:  "In  the  beginning  of  sin  and 
evil  it  seems  as  if  men  were  free  agents, 
and  had  the  power  of  going  on  or  of  re- 
treating. But  as  the  crisis  of  their  fate 
approaches,  they  are  bound  under  a  ourse  ; 
and  the  form  in  whioh  their  destiny  presents 
itself  to  our  minds  is  as  though  it  were 
certain,  and  only  a  question  of  time  how 
soon  it  is  to  be  fulfilled."  For  the  wrath  ; 
that  wrath  whioh  was  predicted  and  is 
merited  by  them.  "Wrath"  is  here  used 
for  punishment,  which  is  the  effect  of 
wrath.  Is  oome  upon  them  to  the  utter- 
most ;  literally,  to  the  end.  The  apostle 
here  refers  to  the  judgments  of  God,  which 
were  impending  on  Jerusalem  and  the 
Jewish  people ;  judgments  whioh  were  fear- 
fully executed  in  the  awful  sufferings  they 
endured  in  the  Jewish  war,  and  in  the 
destruction  of  their  oity  by  the  Bomans. 

Ver.  17. — Here  a  new  chapter  ought  to 
have  commenced,  passing  on  to  another 
subject,  the  apostle's  desire  to  visit  the 
Thessalonians.  But  we,  brethren,  being 
taken  from  you;  literally,  being  bereaved  of 
you  (B.V.).  For  a  short  time;  literally, 
for  the  space  of  an  hour.  And  yet  it  was 
several  years  before  the  apostle  revisited 
Thessalonica;  but  he  here  speaks  of  the 
short  period — a  space  of  six  months — whioh 
had  already  separated  them ;  not,  as  some 
suppose,  that  his  mind  was  so  full  of  the 
ideas  of  eternity    that  he  overlooked  all 


*> 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE   THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1— 20. 


divisions  of  time.  In  presence,  not  in  heart. 
Similar  expressions  are  common  in  Paul's 
Epistles,  denoting  his  love  for  his  converts ; 
thus :  "  Though  I  be  absent  in  the  flesh,  yet 
I  am  with  you  in  the  spirit"  (Col.  ii.  5). 
Endeavoured  the  more  abundantly  to  see 
your  face  with  great  desire ;  because  our 
separation  lias  been  so  short.  As  has  been 
well  observed,  "  Universal  experience 
testifies  that  the  pain  of  separation  from 
friends  and  the  desire  to  return  to  them  are 
more  vivid,  the  more  freshly  the  remem- 
brance of  the  departure  is  on  the  mind " 
(Luneuiauu). 

Ver.  18. — Wherefore  we  would  have  come 
unto  you,  even  I  Paul.  Paul  distinguishes 
himself,  because  in  all  probability  his  com- 
panions, Silas  and  Timothy,  had  been  at 
Thessalonica  after  he  had  left  it.  Onoe  and 
again.  Not  used  indefinitely,  but  referring 
to  two  separate  attempts  which  Paul  made 
to  revisit  the  Thessalonians.  But  Satan 
hindered  us ;  denoting,  not  the  enemies  of 
Christianity,  but  the  devil,  the  author  of 
all  the  hindrances  in  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Paul  here  recognizes  the  personality  of 
Satan,  as  the  author  of  all  evil,  the  great 
opponent  of  God  and  Christ.  We  are  Dot 
informed  by  what  instrumentality  thiB  hin- 
drance of  Satan  took  place.  It  may  refer 
to  the  various  persecutions  against  Paul, 
which  prevented  him  returning  to  Thessa- 
lonica, and  especially  to  that  persecution 
raised  against  him  in  Bercea  by  the  Jews 
of  Thessalonica  (Aots   zvii   13).    In  one 


sense,  indee.l,  the  hindrances  arose  in  the 
way  of  God's  providence,  for  under  its 
direction  all  the  journeys  of  Paul  were 
placed,  and  Satan  coula  not  have  hindered 
him  from  preaching  the  gospel  in  any  quar- 
ter, unless  by  the  Divine  permission  (comp. 
Acts  xvi.  7 ;  Rom.  i.  13). 

Ver.  19.— For  what  is  our  hope,  or  joy, 
or  crown  of  rejoicing?  or,  glorying.  The 
ap  btle  calls  the  Thessalonians  his  ■'  hope," 
not  because  he  anticipates  any  reward 
from  their  conversion,  or  because  their  con- 
version would  counterbalance  his  former  per- 
secution of  the  Christians,  but  because  he 
hoped  to  meet  them  in  glory ;  he  calls  them 
his  "joy,"  because  he  would  rejoice  with 
them  in  their  final  salvation ;  and  he  calls 
them  his  "  crown  of  rejoicing,"  because  he 
regards  them  as  trophies  of  the  victory  of 
the  gospel  which  he  preached.  Similarly 
he  calls  the  Philippians  "  his  joy  and 
crown"  (Phil.  iv.  1).  Are  not  even  ye; 
or  rather,  are  not  ye  alsof — ye  as  well  as 
other  Christians?  In  the  presenoe  of — 
before — our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  his  ooming ; 
at  the  restoration  of  his  Messianic  kingdom. 

Ver.  20.— For  ye  are  our  glory  and  joy. 
Some  refer  this  verse  to  the  present,  and 
the  former  verse  to  the  future ;  not  merely 
at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but 
even  now  ye  are  our  glory  and  joy.  But 
there  is  no  treason  for  this  distinction ;  the 
words  are  merely  confirmatory,  and  added 
from  the  fulness  of  the  apostle's  emotions. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vert.  8,  6. — Motives  of  action.  Man  judges  us  by  our  outward  conduct;  God  by 
our  internal  disposition.  The  apostle  appeals  to  God  as  a  witness  of  the  purity  of  his 
motives.  He  asserts  that  he  was  free  from  all  desire  of  personal  fame  or  interest.  Can 
we  make  the  same  appeal  and  the  same  assertion?  1.  Are  we  influenced  by  unworthy 
motives?  Is  covetousness,  the  desire  of  fame,  or  the  love  of  power,  the  mainspring  of 
our  life  ?  2.  Or  are  we  influenced  by  worthy  motives  ?  Do  we  seek  to  please,  not 
man,  but  God  ?  Is  the  glory  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  the  chief  end  of  our  life  and 
actions? 

Vers.  7, 11,  19. — The  trite  pastorate.  1.  Its  qualities.  Paul  compares  himself  to  * 
nursing  mother  and  a  father.  A  minister  should  resemble  the  one  in  his  tenderness  and 
loving  sympathy,  and  the  other  in  his  wisdom  and  firmness.  2.  Its  mode :  exhorting, 
comforting,  and  charging.  3.  Its  reward :  (1)  conversion  of  the  hearers ;  (2)  a  joyful 
meeting  with  them  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord. 

Ver.  12. — Our  high  and  holy  calling.  We  ought  to  walk  worthy  of  God,  so  as :  1. 
To  obey  God's  laws.  2.  To  imitate  God's  moral  perfections.  3.  To  enjoy  God's  fellow- 
ship. 4.  To  adorn  God's  gospel.  6.  To  promote  God's  cause.  6.  To  live  to  God's 
glory. 

Ver.  13. —  The  gospel  a  Divine  revelation.  1.  Negatively.  The  gospel  is  not  the 
word  of  man;  not  the  result  of  man's  wisdom;  does  not  spring  from  a  development 
of  human  thought;  its  doctrines  are  not  within  the  sphere  of  the  human  intellect.     2. 


cm.  n.  1—20.]     THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN8.  81 

Positively.    Tbe  gospel  if  the  Word  of  God.    This  seen  from  its  origin,  its  content*, 
and  its  efficacy. 

Ver.  16. — Beware  of  opposing  the  gospel.  The  Jews  did  m.  They  endeavoured  to 
prevent  the  apostle  preaching  to  the  Gentiles,  and  wrath  came  upon  them  to  the  utter- 
most ;  and  so  will  all  opposition  made  to  the  gospel  terminate  (Pa.  ii.  6,  9).  If  we 
ourselves  will  not  embrace  the  gospel,  let  us  beware  of  throwing  obstacles  in  the  way  of 
those  who  would.  Especially  let  parents  beware  how  they  act  toward  their  children 
when  under  religious  impressions. 

Ver.  18. — The  opposition  of  Satan  to  the  gospel.    "  Satan  hindered  us." 

I.  The  personality  op  Satan.  Christ  and  Satan,  the  heads  of  two  opposite  empires 
— the  one  the  kingdom  of  light,  and  the  other  the  kingdom  of  darkness ;  the  one  the 
source  of  all  that  is  good,  and  the  other  the  source  of  all  that  is  evil. 

II.  The  AttENCT  of  Satan.  He  hindereth  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  He  worketh  in 
the  children  of  disobedience.    Mode  of  his  operation ;  the  instruments  which  he  employs. 

III.  The  final  victory  of  Christ  over  Satan.  Though  Satan  hindereth  the 
gospel,  yet  it  is  only  for  a  season.  "  The  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  our  feet 
Bhortly  "  (Rom.  xvL  20). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—4. — Effectiveness  of  the  gospel.  Entrance  into  Thessalonica.  It  was  not  neces- 
sary, however,  to  depend  upon  foreign  testimony  for  the  facts  of  the  case,  for  the  Thes- 
salonians  themselves  were  the  best  witnesses.  "  For  yourselves,  tin  thren,  know  our 
entrance  in  unto  you,  that  it  was  not  in  vain,"  but  an  effective  living  reality,  a  great  and 
gracious  success.     The  proof  of  the  fact  is  contained  in  two  circumstances. 

I.  The  boldness  of  the  three  preachers.  "  But  even  after  that  we  had  suffered 
before,  and  were  shamefully  entreated,  as  ye  know,  at  Philippi,  we  were  bold  in  our  God 
to  speak  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God  with  much  conflict."  The  insulting  treatment 
the  apostle  had  received  at  Philippi  had  not  the  effect  of  scaring  him  away,  or  of 
leading  him  to  withdraw  into  Asia,  leaving  Europe  to  its  fate.  Such  treatment  would 
have  deterred  men  of  a  different  stamp.  His  boldness  was  not  mere  stoical  courage,  but 
based  on  faith,  for  he  was  "  bold  in  our  God,"  and  was  equal  to  present  perils  as  well  as 
to  past  persecutions ;  for  he  spoke  the  gospel  of  God  "  in  much  conflict,"  caused,  as  we 
know,  by  the  league  of  violence  which  the  Jews  of  Thessalonica  formed  with  "  lewd 
fellows  of  the  baser  sort "  against  the  gospel. 

II.  The  spirit  and  method  of  their  ministry.  "  For  our  exhortation  was  not  of 
deceit,  nor  of  uncleanness,  nor  in  guile."  The  matter  is  exhibited  first  negatively,  and 
then  positively.  1.  Negatively.  His  persuasive  exhibition  of  the  truth  was  not  (1) 
"  of  deceit."  He  was  not  deceived  himself — he  had  not  "  followed  cunningly  devised 
fables  "—neither  did  he  design  to  deceive  others,  for  he  preached  the  truth  as  it  is 
in  Jesus.  Therefore  there  was  all  the  greater  force  and  fervour  and  directness  in  his 
teaching.  (2)  "Nor  of  uncleanness."  There  were  no  impure  or  sinister  ends  in  his 
teaching,  implying  love  of  gain;  nor  any  disposition  to  tolerate  those  subtle  forms  ol 
temptation  which  sometimes  manifest  themselves  even  under  the  guise  of  piety.  (3) 
"  Nor  in  guile,"  for  he  was  straightforward  and  sincere  in  his  methods,  with  "  no  cunning 
craftiness,"  no  manoeuvres,  no  strategy;  for  they  had " renounced  the  hidden  things  ol 
dishonesty,  not  walking  in  craftiness,  nor  handling  the  Word  of  God  deceitfully  " 
(2  Cor.  iv.  2).  2.  Positively.  The  method  of  his  preaching  met  with  the  Divine 
approval.  "  But  as  we  were  approved  of  God  to  be  put  in  trust  with  the  gospel,  even  so 
we  speak ;  not  as  pleasing  men,  but  God,  who  trieth  our  hearts."  (1)  The  gospel  is  a 
solemn  trust,  a  rich  treasure.  There  are  many  human  trusts  which  men  would  rather 
shirk,  but  the  apostle  is  not  unwilling  to  accept  this  trust  for  the  good  i-f  the  world. 
(2)  He  claims  no  independent  worthiness  for  so  sacred  a  trust.  God  gave  him  any 
worthiness  or  sufficiency  he  possessed.  "  Our  sufficiency  is  of  God,  who  also  hath 
made  us  able  ministers  of  the  New  Testament "  (2  Cor.  iii.  5, 6).  (3)  He  discharged  his 
trust  (o)  with  a  perrect  disregard  for  men's  opinions  about  him  (1  Cor.  iv.  3) ;  (6)  and 
with  no  desire  to  catoh  the  favour  of  men.     "  Not  as  pleasing  men ; "  for  "  as  of  siucerity , 


3»  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1— 20. 

as  of  God,  in  the  sight  of  God,  speak  we  in  Christ "  (2  Cor.  ii.  17).  Not  sacrificing  truth 
to  the  fancies  or  prejudices  of  men  in  order  to  secure  their  favour.  If  "  he  pleased  men, 
he  should  not  he  the  servant  of  God  "  (Gal.  i.  10).  (4)  He  had  supreme  and  final  regard 
to  the  all-seeing  God,  "  who  trieth  the  hearts,"  who  knows  the  springs  of  all  actions, 
discovers  all  artifices,  and  brings  all  hidden  things  to  light.  Men  look  on  the  outward 
appearance.  God  "spares  all  beings  but  himself  that  awful  sight — a  naked  human 
heart."  He  "  seeth  not  as  man  seeth."  It  ia  Tain,  therefore,  to  appear  other  than 
we  are.— T.  C. 

Vers.  5—8. — The  spirit  and  method  of  apostolic  labour.  The  apostle  sets  it  forth 
under  two  aspects. 

I.  Negatively.  "  For  neither  at  any  time  were  we  found  using  words  of  flattery.as 
ye  know,  nor  a  cloak  of  covetousness,  God  is  witness ;  nor  seeking  glory  of  men."  1. 
The  apostle  and  his  colleagues  did  not  attempt  to  win  their  way  by  flattery,  either  by 
setting  forth  high  views  of  human  nature,  or  hy  holding  men's  persons  in  admintt'on 
for  the  sake  of  advantage ;  for  their  gospel  tended  rather  to  humble  man  and  subdue  bis 
pride.  Flattery  is  a  gross  dishonour  hoth  to  God  and  man,  for  it  implies  untruthlul- 
ness;  and  may  become  fatal  in  its  results  to  easily  deluded  sinners.  The  apostle 
appealed  to  the  Thessalonians  in  confirmation  of  his  statement.  2.  They  did  not  use 
their  position  as  a  cloak  of  covetousness,  as  God  could  testify,  who  knows  the  heart. 
The  apostle  might  say  now.  as  he  afterwards  said  to  the  elders  of  Ephesns,  "  I  coveted 
no  man's  silver,  nor  gold,  nor  apparel."  The  false  teachers  were  chargeable  with  cove- 
tousness, for  "  through  covetousness  shall  they  with  feigned  words  make  merchandise 
of  you  "  (2  Pet.  ii.  1,  3).  How  emphatically  the  apostle  insists  upon  ministers  of  the 
gospej  being  free  from  this  vice!  "Not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre."  3.  They  were  not  fond 
of  vain-glory.  "  Nor  seeking  glory  of  men,  neither  from  you,  nor  from  others,  when  we 
might  have  been  burdensome  as  apostles  of  Christ,"  or  might  have  stood  on  their  dignity 
as  apostles  of  Christ.  There  is  no  allusion  here  to  his  claim  to  minUterial  support,  hut 
rather  to  the  position  of  magisterial  dignity  he  might  have  assumed,  with  all  its  pomp 
and  peremptoriness  and  sternness.  His  spirit  at  Thessalonica  was  not  that  of  lordship 
ovei  God's  heritage. 

II.  Positively.  "  But  we  were  gentle  in  the  midst  of  you,  as  when  a  nurse  cherisheth 
her  own  children."  1.  They  were  gentle  in  their  intercourse  with  their  converts ;  unas- 
suming and  mild,  with  no  haughty  or  imperious  airs,  challenging  honour  and  homage. 
They  acted  in  the  very  spirit  of  the  good  Shepherd. '  Long  afterwards  the  apostle  could 
remind  one  of  his  present  colleagues  that  "the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive,  but 
be  gentle  to  all  men,  apt  to  teach,  patient,  in  meekness  instructing  those  that  oppose 
themselves"  (2  Tim.  ii.  24 — 26).  This  gentleness,  which  is  at  imce  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit 
(Gal.  v.  22)  and  it  characteristic  of  the  "wisdom  from  above"  (Jas.  hi.  17),  becomes  all 
the  more  impressive  when  it  is  linked  with  the  highest  strength  of  character.  2.  They 
were  most  affectionate  in  their  intercourse  with  their  converts.  "  Even  so,  being  affec- 
tionately desirous  of  you,  we  were  well  pleased  to  impart  to  you,  not  the  gospel  of 
God  only,  but  also  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were  become  very  dear  to  us."  (1)  Their 
yearning  love  was  manifest :  (a)  In  their  imparting  the  gospel  to  them.  As  their  spiritual 
parents  they  travailed  in  birth  till  Christ  was  formed  in  them,  and  then  they  fed  them 
thereaftei  with  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word.  (6)  hi  their  readiness  to  risk  their  lives 
for  the  sake  of  their  children  in  the  faith.  They  verily  carried  their  lives  in  their  hands. 
(2}  This  apostolic  solicitude  on  their  behalf  sprung  out  of  their  deep  love  for  the 
Thessalonians,  as  being  at  once  the  trophies  of  their  ministry,  and  as  being  pre-eminently 
docile  in  their  attitude  toward  the  gospel  and  its  preachers.  There  is  hardly  any 
stronger  tie  in  this  world  than  that  which  links  together  a  spiritual  father  and  his 
couveits. — T.  0. 

\er.  9. — A  retrospect  of  hit  disinterested  and  self-sacrificing  labnurs.  He  next  recalls 
the  circumstances  of  his  ardent  and  laborious  ministry  amongst  them.  "  For  ye 
remember,  brethren,  our  labour  and  travail :  working  night  and  day,  that  we  might 
not  burden  any  of  you,  we  preached  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God." 

I.  The  ministry  of  the  apostle  was  always  laborious.  He  could  say  to  the 
Corinthians  that  "  he  had  approved  himseif  as  the  minister  of  God  in  labours  ; "  that "  ia 


oh.  n.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  A3 

labours  he  was  more  abundant "  (2  Cor.  ri.  4,  5 ;  xi.  23) ;  exhausting  Us  strength  daily 
in  his  eager  anxiety  to  reach  the  people  with  the  gospel  of  God.  If  ever  man  went  to 
the  edge  of  his  possibility,  it  was  the  Apostle  Paul.  The  labour  might  be  exhausting  in 
itself,  or  on  account  of  the  obstacles  thrown  in  his  way,  but  it  became  the  habit  of  his 
daily  life. 

tit  It  was  doubly  laborious  at  Thessalonica  oh  account  op  the  necessity  hb 
imposed  upon  himself  of  working  fob  his  living.  Occupied  in  preaching  or  teaching 
through  the  day,  he  devoted  his  nights  to  his  craft  as  a  tent-maker.  1.  The  necessity  in 
question  was  not  imposed  by  either  the  Mosaic  or  the  Christian  Law.  He  showed  to  the 
Corinthians  that  alike  natural  justice,  the  Mosaic  ordinance,  and  positive  law,  as 
announced  by  our  Lord  himself,  required  them  to  support  the  ministers  of  the  gospel 
(1  Cor.  ix.).  "  They  who  preach  the  gospel  shall  also  live  of  the  gospel."  2.  It  wot  a 
necessity  based  upon  a  high  Christian  expediency.  At  Corinth  he  thought  good  "  not  to 
use  his  power  in  the  gospel,"  and  therefore  preached  the  gospel  there  "  without  charge." 
The  malignity  of  Jewish  enemies  led  him  to  avoid  even  the  appearance  of  covetous- 
ness,  or  of  attempting  to  "  make  a  gain  "  of  the  Corinthians.  We  do  not  know  under 
what  circumstances  he  was  led  to  pursue  a  similar  course  at  Thessalonica.  It  may  have 
been  from  similar  accusations,  or  from  a  tendency  he  had  observed  among  certain  saints 
in  the  city  to  forswear  work  and  go  about  as  "  busybodies."  But  his  policy  was  excep- 
tional, and  affords  no  rule  in  modern  times  unless  the  circumstances  should  again  become 
exceptional.  3.  It  was  a  necessity  cheerfully  accepted/or  the  good  of  the  Thessalonians. 
He  had  but  two  means  of  support  in  the  city.  (1)  He  was  not  supported  by  super- 
natural means,  like  Elijah  in  the  desert.  (2)  He  was  occasionally  helped  by  the 
thoughtful  kindness  of  the  Philippians.  "I  robbed  other  Churches,"  he  tells  the  Corin- 
thians, "  taking  wages  of  them  to  do  you  service."  He  tells  the  Philippians,  "  For  even 
in  Thessalonica  ye  sent  once  and  again  to  my  necessities"  (Phil.  iv.  15 — 17).  (3)  He 
had  to  supplement  these  occasional  gifts  by  "  working  with  his  own  hands."  Every 
Jew  had  to  learn  a  trade.     The  apostle  thus  dignifies  common  industry. — T.  C. 

Vers.  10 — 12.— Appeal  alike  to  man  and  to  Ood  respecting  his  personal  and  his  official 
work  at  Thessalonica.     This  double  appeal  attests  his  profound  sincerity. 

I.  Consider  his  personal  deportment.  "  Ye  are  witnesses,  and  God,  how  holily, 
and  justly,  and  unblainably  we  behaved  ourselves  among  you  that  believe."  He  touches 
on  the  twofold  relationship  of  the  Christian  life  toward  God  and  toward  man,  for  he 
had  always  exercised  himself  "  to  have  a  conscience  void  of  offence  toward  man  and 
God," and  strove  "to  give  no  offence  in  anything,  that  the  ministry  be  not  blamed  " 
(Acts  xxvi.  16 ;  2  Cor.  vL  3).  He  had  striven  to  walk  circumspectly  in  a  world  prone 
to  suspect  sinister  ends  even  in  the  best  of  men.  The  apostle's  walk  was  on  high,  even 
as  his  calling  was  high. 

II.  Consider  his  official  deportment.  It  was  manifest  in  his  method  of  dealing 
with  his  converts,  and  in  the  end  which  he  kept  steadily  in  view  in  all  his  ministry. 
1.  Sis  method  of  dealing  with  his  converts.  "  As  ye  know  how  we  exhorted  and  com- 
forted, and  testified  to  each  one  of  you  as  a  father  doth  his  children."  (1)  Mark 
the  varieties  in  his  mode  of  dealing  with  his  converts,  (a)  He  exhorted  them,  for 
their  position  of  persecution  and  temptation  demanded  that  he  "  should  give  them  much 

-  exhortation  "  (Acts  xx.  2).  (6)  He  comforted  them,  in  the  presence  of  many  disquieting 
circumstances  in  their  conditiou.  (c)  He  testified  to  them,  exhibiting  gospel  truth  with 
all  urgency.  (2)  Mark  the  affectionate  spirit  of  his  dealing  with  them:  "-As  a 
lather  doth  his  children ;  "  for  he  combined  a  father's  unwearying  lore  with  his  power 
of  direction  and  authority.  (3)  Mark  the  individualizing  interest  in  their  welfare : 
"  Each  one  of  you."  Whether  they  were  rich  or  poor,  few  or  many,  he  passed  by  none 
of  them.  They  all  had  a  place  in  his  heart.  2.  The  aim  of  all  his  affectionate  and 
individualizing  interest  in  their  welfare.  "  That  you  would  walk  worthy  of  God,  who 
calleth  you  into  his  kingdom  and  glory."  The  duty  here  enjoined,  "  Walk  worthy  of 
God."  This  implies  (1)  conformity  to  his  revealed  will ;  (2)  adornment  of  the  gospel 
by  a  holy  walk  ;  (3)  supreme  regard  to  the  obligations  involved  in  the  high  calling  of 
God — these  being  necessitated  by  (a)  the  nature  of  the  call,  which  is  not  external,  but 
spiritual;  (6)  by  the  consideration  o^him  who  calls  us ;  (c)  by  the  holy  ends  of  the 
call;  (d)  by  the  consideration  of  tbv  .  high  destiny:  *>r  they  are  called  to  "his  own 

%,   THESSALONIANS.  » 


34  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN8.    [an.  n.  1—20. 

kingdom  and  glory."  This  kingdom  is  that  which  is  established  in  the  mediation  of 
Christ,  into  which  we  enter  by 'the  gate  of  regeneration,  and  which  reaches  its  Ml  and 
final  development  in  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  The  glory  is  that  which  he  impresses 
upon  his  people  here,  and  which  receives  its  full  manifestation  hereafter.— T.  0. 

Ver.  13. — The  Thessalonian  reception  of  the  truth.  The  apostle  had  spoken  of  hie 
own  part  in  the  work  of  grace ;  he  now  speaks  of  the  manner  in  which  his  converts 
accepted  the  truth.  "  Ye  are  my  witnesses ;  now  I  am  yours."  His  immediate  ground 
of  thankfulness  was  that  they  had  received,  not  man's  word,  but  God's,  and  that  the 
Word  was  so  thoroughly  efficacious.  "For  this  cause  also  thank  we  God  without 
ceasing,  because  when  ye  received  the  Word  of  God  which  ye  heard  of  us,  ye  received 
not  the  word  of  men,  but  as  it  is  in  truth,  the  Word  of  God." 

I.  They  appreciated  the  difference  between  the  word  of  men  and  the  Woru 
of  God.  1.  They  first  heard  it  no  doubt  with  interest  and  docility  of spirit.  "Faith 
cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word  of  God."  The  Word  was  not  read  but 
heard  in  the  preaching  of  the  apostles ;  it  was  no  discovery  of  their  own  mind.  2. 
They  received  it  as  an  external  fact  made  known  to  them  by  man.  3.  They  welcomed 
it  with  the  inner  acceptance  of  faith.  It  was  "  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  heard  it  " 
(Heb.  iv.  2).  It  was  "  the  joy  and  the  rejoicing  of  their  heart "  (Jer.  xv.  16).  4.  Their 
glad  acceptance  of  it  was  conditioned  upon  its  Divine  origin>  It  was  not  man's  word, 
representing  a  new  speculation  in  philosophy  or  ethics ;  it  was  "  the  Word  of  God " 
(Bom.  x.  14).  It  was  therefore  (1)  an  infallible  Word ;  (2)  bearing  the  impress  of 
Divine  authority ;  (3)  and  therefore  to  be  received  with  reverence  and  love. 

II.  They  manifested  the  power  of  the  troth  in  their  lives.  "  Which  effectu- 
ally worketh  also  in  you  that  believe."  1.  This  effectual  operation  is  conditioned  upon 
their  faith.  "The  Word  preached  did  not  profit  them,  not  being  mixed  with  faith  in 
tliem  that  heard  it "  (Heb.  iv.  2).  The  gospel  is  only  to  the  believer  "  the  power  of  God 
to  salvation"  (Bom.  i.  16).  2.  Its  'power  was  manifest  in  quickening,  enlightening, 
sanctifying,  and  comforting  under  all  afflictions  and  persecutions. — T.  C. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — The  evidence  of  the  effectual  working  of  (he  Divine  Word.  They  were 
able  to  inii  i.&te  the  patience  and  constancy  of  the  Judasan  Churches  under  great  persecu- 
tions. These  Churches  were  referred  to  probably  because  they  were  the  oldest  Churches, 
and  the  most  severely  persecuted. 

I.  It  is  a  hiqh  honour  as  well  as  privilege  fob  Churches  to  be  selected  as 
patterns  of  patience  to  othee  Chubches.  "  For  ye,  brethren,  became  followers  of 
the  Churches  of  God  which  in  Judaea  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  We  are  first  to  be  imitators 
of  Christ,  then  of  all  who  follow  in  his  steps,  who  keep  on  "  looking  to  Jesus  "  (Heb.  xii. 
2).  There  were  many  Churches  in  Judaea,  for  Christianity  was  founded  by  Jews  ;  its 
first  converts  were  Jews ;  its  first  martyrs  were  Jews;  and  the  Churches  among  them 
rejoiced  in  the  fellowship  of  Christ,  as  the  Source  of  their  life  and  comfort. 

II.  The  path  of  the  Thessalonians  was  one  of  severe  trial  and  continuous 
persecution.  "  For  ye  also  have  suffered  like  things  from  your  own  countrymen,  even 
as  they  from  the  Jews."  1.  They  had  received  the  Word  "  in  much  affliction."  (Ch.  i.  6.) 
The  first  outbreak  of  violence  against  them  occurred  after  their  conversion  (Acts  xvii.  5). 
They  belonged  to  one  of  those  Churches  of  Macedonia  of  which  the  apostle  long  after- 
wards wrote  to  the  Corinthians  as  "  enduring  a  great  trial  of  affliction."  It  came  from 
their  heathen  countrymen.  2.  Their  trials  attested  the  genuineness  of  their  conversion. 
The  heathen  would  have  had  no  quarrel  with  a  dead  faith.  The  Thessalonians  did  not 
"  sleep  as  did  others."  They  discovered  by  sharp  experience  that  "  all  that  will  live 
godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  12).  3.  Their  trials  involved 
the  precious  experience  of  a  "fellowship  in  Chrisfs  sufferings."  (Phil.  iii.  10.)  4.  Their 
trials  manifested  at  once  the  strength  of  their  faith  and  their  Christian  constancy. 

III.  It  was  some  comfort  to  the  Thessalonians  to  know  that  thet  were 
not  the  onIiY  sufferers  from  the  FURY  of  PERSECUTORS.  "  Even  as  they  have 
of  the  Jews :  who  both  killed  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  their  own  prophets,  and  drave  u* 
out"  This  terrible  invective  against  the  Jews  illustrates  the  saying  that  the  apostle 
often  "goes  off  at  a  word."  It  recalls  the  language  of  Stephen  before  his  murderers 
(Act*  vii.  52).     The  malignity  of  the  Jews  against  their  believing  countrymen  was 


oh.  a,  1—20.]    THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&  U 

extreme.  1.  The  Jew*  were  murderers  of  Jesus  and  the  prophets.  Though  the  Saviour 
was  executed  by  the  Romans,  the  responsibility  of  the  terrible  deed  rests  on  the  Jews, 
who  "  for  envy  "  delivered  him  up,  and  "  killed  the  Prince  of  life."  They  likewise  killed 
their  own  prophets,  whose  very  sepulchres  they  afterwards  built  and  garnished.  What 
wonder,  then,  that  the  Thessalonian  converts  should  escape)  2.  The  Jews,  though 
zealous  for  God,  did  not  please  him.  "  They  pleased  not  God,"  but  rather  provoked 
him  to  anger  by  their  unbelief  and  their  wickedness.  3.  T/iey  were  at  cross-purposes 
with  all  mankind.  They  were  "  contrary  to  all  men."  They  were  anti-social,  exclusive, 
and  bitter,  so  that  the  heathen  Tacitus  could  describe  them  as  "holding  an  attitude 
of  hostility  and  hatred  to  the  human  race."  But  it  was  specially  manifest  in  their 
resistance  to  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles — "  forbidding  us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles  that 
they  may  be  saved."  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  supply  abundant  evidence  of  this  fact. 
4.  The  end  to  which  all  this  wickedness  toward  God  and  man  was  tending.  "  To  fill  up 
their  sins  at  all  times."  (1)  God  often  allows  nations  to  complete  the  sum  of  their 
wickedness  before  bringing  upon  them  final  retribution.  "  The  iniquity  of  the 
Amorites  was  not  yet  full "  (Gen.  xv.  16).  (2)  The  judgment  upon  the  Jews  was  at 
hand — "  but  the  wrath  is  come  upon  them  to  the  uttermost."  "  There  is  now  nothing 
between  it  and  them."  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  was  still  future,  but  "  the  days 
of  vengeance  were  already  come."  The  fire  was  already  burning,  which  would  never 
be  quenched  till  the  vengeance  was  complete.  The  apostle  seems  to  regard  the  moment 
of  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah  as  marking  the  outpouring  of  the  Divine  wrath.  The 
history  of  the  Jews  from  that  moment  is  a  significant  commentary  on  the  passage. 
— T.O. 

Vers.  17, 18. — The  apostle's  anxiety  to  visit  the  Thessahnians.  His  departure  had 
been  very  sudden,  but  he  had  never  ceased  to  regret  his  separation  from  them. 

I.  HlS  GRIEF   AT  THE    SEVERANCE  OP  PERSONAL    INTERCOURSE    WITH   THEM.       "But 

we,  brethren,  being  bereaved  of  you  for  a  short  season  in  presence,  not  in  heart."  The 
term  is  expressive  of  the  orphan-feeling  felt  by  children  deprived  of  their  parents,  or 
of  parents  bereaved  of  their  children.  He  seems  to  say  like  Jacob,  "  If  I  am  bereaved 
of  my  children,  I  am  bereaved."  1.  His  grief  was  a  proof  of  his  deep  affection  for  them. 
Grace  intensifies  all  right  human  affections.  2.  Absence,  instead  of  weakening,  rather 
strengthened  his  desire  to  see  them  again  face  to  face.  Neither  time  nor  distance  could 
diminish  his  interest  in  them. 

II.  The  separation  was  immediately  followed  by  several  attempts  to 
revisit  them.  "  We  endeavoured  the  more  exceedingly  to  see  your  face  with  great 
desire."  The  difficulties  were  great,  but  he  tried  once  and  again  to  get  back  to 
Thessalonica,  probably  in  the  period  when  Silas  and  Timothy  were  temporarily  gone 
from  him. 

III.  The  obstacles  to  his  return.  "But  Satan  hindered  us."  1.  The  apostle 
believed  in  the  existence  of  a  personal  evil  spirit  as  well  as  in  his  steadfast  resistance  to 
the  kingdom  of  God  in  all  its  interests.  He  was  "  not  ignorant  of  Satan's  devices." 
2.  The  obstacles  may  have  arisen  through  Satan  inciting  evil  men  to  rai'e  conflicts  and 
tribulations  round  the  apostle,  so  as  to  allow  of  no  leisure  for  the  projected  visit. 

IV.  The  ground  of  his  anxiety  to  revisit  them.  "  For  what  is  our  hope,  or 
joy,  or  crown  of  rejoicing?  Are  not  even  ye  before  our  Lord  Jesus  at  his  coming?" 
He  did  not  desire  to  have  his  labour  in  vain.  1.  They  were  closely  identified  with  his 
own  future  honour  and  happiness,  by  the  hope  that  they  would  not  be  "  ashamed  at 
Christ's  coming,"  but  would  be  "  his  joy  and  crown  of  rejoicing."  He  would  then 
"  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ  that  he  had  not  run  in  vain,  neither  laboured  in  vain  " 
(Phil.  ii.  15, 16).  Therefore  he  longed  to  be  near  to  them  that  "  he  might  impart  to 
them  some  spiritual  gift,"  and  watch  over  the  walk  of  his  spiritual  children.  2.  His 
wish  implies  (1)  that  there  will  be  degrees  of  glory  in  heaven  according  to  the  measures 
of  a  minister's  usefulness ;  (2)  that  he  will  be  able  *o  identify  his  converts  in  heaven. 
— T.  C. 

Vers.  1 12. — The  characteristics  of  St.  PauVs  preaching  at  Thessalonica.    L  Appeal 

to  the  recollkction  of  the  Thkssalonians.  1.  His  first  appearance  among  them 
had  not  been  in  vain     Others  had  borne  witness  to  its  results.    That  testimony  was  tene ; 


96  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—20 

the  Thessalonians  knew  it  themselves.  The  apostle  appeals  to  them  in  all  the 
confidence  of  Christian  simplicity.  Perfectly  sincere  and  single-hearted  himself,  he 
knew  that  as  a  body  they  had  appreciated  the  purity  of  his  motives.  They  could  bear 
testimony  (he  knew  that  they  would  gladly  do  so)  that  his  preaching  from  the 
beginning  had  not  been  empty  talk,  but  full  of  energy  and  life  and  Are.  It  is  a  blessed 
thing,  this  mutual  confidence  between  a  pastor  and  his  flock.  2.  His  previous  suffer- 
ings had  not  abated  his  zeal.  He  had  been  cruelly  treated  at  Philippi ;  he  bore  the 
marks  of  the  lictors'  rods  when  he  entered  Thessalonica.  It  did  not  damp  his  ardour. 
His  Lord  had  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before 
him.  For  the  same  joy,  the  great  joy  of  saving  souls,  St.  Paul  was  content  to  suffer, 
and,  if  Deed  be,  to  die.  Troubles  soon  came  upon  him  in  Thessalonica.  He  preached 
amid  much  conflict,  but  he  was  full  of  courage.  3.  His  courage  was  of  Cfod.  We 
were  bold  m  our. God.  It  was  he  who  gave  them  boldness,  he  who  taught  them  what 
to  speak ;  they  felt  that  it  was  not  they,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  who  spoke  in  them. 
They  abode  in  him,  in  his  encompassing,  irradiating  presence,  within  the  sphere  of  his 
gracious  influence ;  hence  came  their  utterance,  their  boldness  of  speech.  4.  For  their 
gospel  (pur  gospel,  he  calls  it  in  ch.  i.  5)  was  the  gospel  of  Ood.  They  were  the 
messengers,  but  he  had  given  the  message.  It  was  his  glad  tidings ;  it  came  from  him, 
and  it  brought  tidings  of  him,  of  his  will,  of  his  justice,  of  his  love ;  it  told  men  of  a 
Creator,  a  Saviour,  a  Sanctifier.  It  was  a  high  mission  to  preach  that  blessed  gospel ; 
the  sense  of  its  unspeakable  preciousoess  inspired  their  burning  words. 

II.  What  theib  preaching  was  not.  The  Jews  had  tried  to  poison  the  minds 
of  the  Thessalonians  against  the  apostle ;  they  imputed  low,  earthly  motives  to  him. 
St.  Paul  repudiates  their  insinuations.  1.  There  was  no  mixture  of  selfish  motive. 
Thei'  preaching  was  not  of  error  or  of  deceit.  They  were  not  deceived  themselves, 
they  did  not  deceive  others.  They  did  not  belong  to  the  crowd  of  wandering  impostors 
like  Simon  Magus,  or  Elymas  the  sorcerer.  They  knew  certainly  the  truth  of  their 
mission.  St.  Paul  had  seen  the  Lord ;  what  he  delivered  to  the  Thessalonians  he  had  first 
received  of  the  Lord.  He  knew  this  from  the  sure  evidence  of  experience.  His  own 
truthfulness  was  manifest ;  the  mighty  change  that  had  come  over  his  life,  the  great- 
ness of  his  sacrifices  proved  it.  There  was  no  uncleanness  (as,  perhaps,  some  of  his 
enemies  maliciously  suggested),  no  impurity  of  any  kind,  attaching  to  his  exhortation 
or  his  conduct.  None  who  knew  him  could  charge  him  with  such  things.  But  a  life 
of  self-sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  souls  was  unexampled.  He  was  the  first  missionary  who 
had  traversed  Asia  Minor,  and  now  came  to  Europe  for  that  lofty  purpose.  The  mass 
of  men,  whether  Jews  or  heathens,  could  not  understand  his  noble  character;  it  was 
high  above  them.  They  judged  him  by  themselves.  They  were  incapable  of  such 
self-denial  for  the  sake  of  others ;  they  could  not  believe  in  it ;  they  had  no  faith  in 
love,  in  purity,  in  high  religious  motive.  Such  a  life,  too,  if  real,  if  genuine,  was  a 
rebuke  to  them.  It  angered  them.  They  could  not  bear  to  think  of  its  contrast  with 
their  own  life  ;  it  was  like  light  and  darkness.  And  so  they  believed,  or  forced  them- 
selves to  believe,  that  it  was  not  genuine.  A  true  life  like  St.  Paul's  seemed  to  them 
above  human  nature — impossible,  inexplicable.  And  they  sdd  that  it  was  not  true; 
they  attributed  his  actions  to  vulgar  motives,  to  low  selfish  designs.  2.  There  was  no 
covetousness.  His  life  was  not  one  of  pretences,  fair  words  serving  to  conceal  the  covetous- 
ness  which  (so  said  his  enemies)  was  his  real  motive.  But  his  treasure  was  in  heaven. 
He  had  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things  for  Christ.  He  had  in  him  a  hidden  treasure, 
a  pearl  of  great  price,  for  which  he  was  content  to  count  all  else  as  loss.  He  could  not 
covet  earthly  gold  who  had  the  true  riches.  But  he  had  to  endure  this  among  other 
slanders.  It  was  said  of  him  at  Corinth  (2  Cor.  xii.  17 ;  vii.  2).  He  was  obliged  to 
take  with  him  delegates  of  the  Churches  to  assist  him  in  the  administration  of  alms, 
that  he  might  avoid  blame  (2  Cor.  viii.  20,  21).  What  a  sad  proof  of  the  meanness  of 
human  nature  that  such  a  motive  should  be  attributed  to  such  a  man !  3.  There  was 
no  desire  of  glory.  They  did  not  seek  to  please  men,  but  God.  They  knew  that  God 
tried  the  hearts,  and,  knowing  that,  they  sought  only  to  approve  their  inner  and  outer 
life  to  him.  "We  labour,  said  St.  Paul  (2  Cor.  v.  9),  it  is  our  ambition  to  be  well 
pleasing  unto  him.  God  had  proved  them ;  he  had  entrusted  them  with  the  gospel. 
It  was  a  high  privilege.  St.  Paul  counted  it  so ;  he  magnified  his  office.  He  sought 
for  nothing  else.     The  great  work  of  winning  souls  was,  he  well  knew,  of  all  works  the 


os.  n.  1—20.]    THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&,  87 

highest  and  the  noblest.  God  was  proving  their  hearts  now.  He,  the  Searcher  of 
hearts,  knew  their  work  through  and  through.  He  knew  the  inner  life  of  thought  and 
motive,  as  well  as  the  outer  life  of  word  and  action.  They  fully  recognized  this  great 
truth.  They  knew  that  their  motives  were  pure  and  unselfish.  God  knew  it  too. 
It  was  all  they  wanted.  They  sought  not  praise  of  men.  They  had  no  pleasure  in 
flattery ;  they  did  not  flatter  others.  That  the  Thessalonians  knew.  God  knew  the 
purity  of  their  motives.  "  God  is  witness,"  they  could  say.  How  blessed  that  life 
must  be  which  could  thus  appeal  to  his  all-seeing  eyel  They  were  apostles  of  Christ ; 
St.  Paul  in  the  highest  sense,  Silvanus  and  Timotheus  in  the  more  extended  meaning 
of  the  word.  St.  Paul  may,  indeed,  be  using  the  plural  number  of  himself  only ;  more 
probably  in  this  place  he  includes  his  companions.  They  might  have  claimed  honour 
for  themselves ;  they  might  have  made  men  feel  the  weight  of  their  apostolic  dignity. 
But  they  sought  not  glory  from  men.  They  had  overcome  that  temptation  which  is 
so  strong  in  most  men,  the  "  last  infirmity  of  noble  minds,"  the  desire  of  earthly  glory. 
III.  What  their  preaching  was.  1.  They  were  gentle.  There  is  very  strong  manu- 
script evidence  for  viimoi,  babes.  If  that  is  the  true  reading,  St.  Paul  means  that  their 
character  was  one  uf  childlike  simplicity,  free  from  selfish  motives ;  they  were  babes  in 
malice,  but  men  in  understanding  (1  Cor.  xiv.  20).  But  "  gentle  "  suits  the  context 
better.  "  The  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive,  but  be  gentle  unto  all  men."  St. 
Paul  adduces  the  most  touching  type  of  human  tenderness — the  nursing  mother  cherish- 
ing her  own  children,  warming  them  in  her  bosom.  Such  had  been  his  gentleness 
among  bis  children  after  the  faith.  He  had  sought  to  win  them  by  gentle  words.  He 
had  told  them  of  the  gentleness  of  Christ.  He  had  set  before  them  the  attractive 
picture  of  the  Saviour's  tender  love.  Gentleness  wins  more  hearts  than  sternness.  The 
apostle  knew  the  terrors  of  the  Lord.  He  could  remind  his  converts  of  the  awful  things 
beyond  the  grave.  "  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ."  But  he 
knew  that  love  is  a  more  powerful  motive  than  fear.  "  Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear." 
The  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  draweth  all  men  to  the  Saviour,  because  it  is  the  manifesta- 
tion of  that  love  that  passeth  knowledge — the  love  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  They  were 
actuated  by  the  strong  love  of  souls.  The  Thessalonians  had  become  very  dear  to  them. 
They  had  not  known  them  long,  but  they  recognized  them  as  sheep  of  that  little  flock 
which  the  Lord  Jesus  bids  those  who  love  him  to  feed  for  his  love's  sake.  Thus  loving 
them,  they  were  affectionately  desirous  of  their  salvation.  They  were  ready  to  give  them 
not  only  the  blessed  gospel,  but  their  own  selves,  their  own  lives,  in  humble  imitation 
of  the  good  Shepherd  who  laid  down  his  life  for  the  sheep.  They  had  exposed  them- 
selves to  the  greatest  dangers  for  the  work's  sake;  for  that  work  they  were  ready,  if  need 
be,  to  die.  The  love  of  souls  is  the  essential  requisite  for  real  success  in  the  sacred  work 
of  the  ministry.  Other  qualifications  may  win  the  praise  of  men ;  but  the  true  work  of 
winning  souls  can  be  wrought  only  by  those  who  have  learned  from  the  blessed  Saviour 
something  of  that  holy  love  which  burned  in  the  sacred  heart  of  Jesus.  3.  They  were 
absolutely  disinterested.  They  would  not  be  burdensome  to  their  new  converts.  The 
Philippian  Church  had  twice  sent  help  to  the  apostle  during  his  residence  at  Thessa- 
lonica  (Phil.  iv.  16).  That  help  he  had  accepted ;  it  was  unasked,  freely  given.  He 
welcomed  it  for  the  sake  of  the  givers,  as  an  evidence  of  their  love.  But  the  gifts, 
though  very  precious  as  a  proof  of  Christian  charity,  were  probably  small  in  themselves; 
the  Philippian  Churoh  was  very  poor.  It  seems  also  to  have  been  a  season  of  scarcity ; 
times  were  bad.  The  missionaries  had  to  labour  for  their  livelihood.  St.  Paul's  craft, 
weaving  tent-cloth  of  goats'  hair,  was  hard,  wearisome,  ill-paid  work.  He  had  to  labour 
night  and  day.  Yet  he  achieved  those  great  results.  He  had  but  the  sabbath  to  him- 
self. Three  sabbath  days  he  spent  in  reasoning  with  the  Jews,  and  preaching  Jesus  in 
the  synagogue  at  Thessalonica ;  other  days  he  had  to  work,  to  work  hard  and  long,  for 
hit  daily  bread.  The  Greeks  despised  manual  labour ;  they  called  it  vulgar ;  they  left 
such  work  to  slaves.  The  apostle  teaches  by  his  own  example  the  dignity  of  honest 
labour,  the  dignity  of  true  Christian  independence.  Probably  the  Thessalonians  eonld 
have  helped  him.  "  Not  a  few  of  the  chief  women  "  had  become  Christians.  They 
must,  one  thinks,  have  been  willing.  St.  Paul  must  have  had  reasons  for  declining 
their  aid,  as  he  afterwards  declined  the  aid  of  the  Corinthians  (2  Cor.  xi.  9,  10).  How 
these  thoughts  increase  our  admiration  of  the  great  apostle!  Amid  all  these  difficulties, 
all  these  cares,  all  this  engrossing  labour,  he  preached  with  power,  with  perseverance, 


»  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—20, 

vfth  success  such  as  only  an  ardent  love  of  souls,  only  the  presence  of  God  the  Holy 
Ghost,  could  give.  4.  They  set  a  high  example.  The  Thessalonians  saw  their  outward 
Hfe ;  God  could  read  the  secrets  of  their  hearts.  That  life  was  pure  and  holy  towards 
Tod,  just  and  righteous  in  its  relations  to  men.  The  Christians  of  Thessalonica  knew 
.hat  they  were  blameless.  Others  might,  perhaps,  be  busy  with  their  insinuations ; 
unbelievers  might  suggest  this  or  that  unworthy  motive.  The  Christians  had  learned 
to  know  St.  Paul  and  his  companions.  They  knew  the  sincerity,  the  purity  of  their 
lives.  Nay,  St.  Paul  could  fearlessly  appeal  to  a  higher  Witness— to  the  all-seeing  God 
Example  is  a  mighty  aid  in  preaching  the  gospel.  Deeds  are  more  persuasive  thai 
words.  _  A  holy  life  is  an  evidence  of  the  reality  of  those  spiritual  facts  which  thi 
preacher, describes  in  words.  5.  They  tauyht  their  converts  individually.  They  were 
not  contented  with  preaching  in  the  synagogues  every  sabbath  day  ;  they  taught  from 
house  to  house.  The  converts  were  many,  we  read  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Chry- 
sostom  wonders  at  their  zeal  in  omitting  no  one  in  so  great  a  multitude.  They  sought 
out  each,  caring  for  each  separate  soul,  sharing  the  angels'  joy  over  one  sinner  thai 
repenteth.  They  tried  all  means  of  winning  souls.  They  exhorted,  stirring  the  souls  of 
men  with  burning  words,  suggesting  nobler  views  of  human  life  and  destiny ;  they 
comforted,  encouraging  the  afflicted,  the  despondent,  the  penitent,  by  the  glad  tidings  of 
pardon,  peace,  and  hope ;  they  testified,  urging  their  converts  by  every  constraining 
motive  to  persevere  in  the  Christian  life.  And  all  this  they  did  with  such  earnestness, 
with  such  affectionate  interest,  with  such  love  as  a  father  shows  towards  his  own 
children.  A  bright  example  of  the  pastor's  work.  6.  The  purport  of  their  exhortation. 
God  was  calling  them ;  they  must  walk  worthily  of  that  high  calling.  He  was  calling 
them  into  his  kingdom  now,  into  the  kingdom  which  Chvist  had  come  to  found — his 
Church.  They  had  become  children  of  the  kingdom.  He  was  calling  them  higher  yet, 
to  his  glory,  to  the  beatific  vision,  that  the  Saviour's  prayer  might  be  fulfilled,  "  I  will 
that  they  whom  thou  hast  given  me  be  with  me  where  I  am,  that  they  may  behold  my 
glory  which  thou  hast  given  me."  Their  walk  in  life  must  show  the  reality  of  their 
hope.  Walk  implies  movement,  change  of  place  and  scene.  As  they  move  hither  and 
thither  in  the  course  of  their  daily  lives,  in  their  business,  in  their  amusements,  they 
must  ever  think  of  that  high  calling,  and  live  according  to  their  hopes.  Their  religion 
was  not  to  be  confined  to  the  sabbath,  to  the  synagogue,  to  the  hours  spent  on  their 
knees  in  private  prayer;  they  must  carry  it  everywhere  with  them;  it  must  guide, 
stimulate,  comfort,  encourage  in  all  the  varying  circumstances  of  daily  life.  Their  life 
must  be  worthy  of  their  calling.  They  must  show  its  influence ;  they  must  adorn  tht 
doctrine  of  God  their  Saviour  in  all  things. 

Lessons.  1.  Study  the  lives  of  St.  Paul  and  other  holy  men.  2.  Let  not  that 
study  end  in  admiration;  act  upon  it.  3.  In  such  lives  is  seen  the  manifest  workings 
of  the  grace  of  God.  4.  The  sight  of  such  lives  confirms  the  faith  of  the  wavering, 
kindles  the  desire  of  the  lukewarm.  5.  True  Christians  are  the  light  of  the  world  ; 
they  must  let  their  light  shine  before  men.  6.  But  not  for  their  own  glory ;  they 
must  seek  only  the  glory  of  God. — B.  C.  C 

Vers.  18— 16.— The  effects  of  the  gospel.  I.  Its  reception  by  the  Thessalonians 
1.  They  believed  that  it  came  from  God.  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothens  brought  thr 
message;  the  Thessalonians  recognized  it  as  the  message  of  God.  They  felt  that  ii 
came  from  him.  (1)  Their  words  were  such  as  never  man  untaught  of  God  could 
speak.  The  gospel  was  utterly  unlike  anything  that  had  been  heard  or  read  before.  Ii 
stood  alone,  unique,  separate  from  all  other  histories.  No  human  imagination  could 
have  pictured  it ;  no  human  genius  could  have  thought  it  out.  It  must  be  of  God  ■  ii 
could  have  no  other  source.  It  bore  within  itself  the  evidence  of  its  inspiration,  of'its 
Divine  origin.  And  (2)  they  felt  its  energy  within  their  hearts.  It  did  not  lie  dormant 
there;  it  was  living  and  powerful.  It  wrought  within  them  with  a  mighty  working 
drawing  them  by  a  strange  constraining  power  away  from  their  old  self-pleasing  lives 
into  the  new  life  of  faith  and  love  and  self-denial.  That  living  force  showed  that  ii 
was  the  Word  of  God.  No  mere  human  words  could  so  stir  the  heart.  The  preaching 
of  the  cross  might  be  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jews,  it  might  seem  foolishness  to  the 
Greeks;  but  to  those  who  had  the  precious  gift  of  faith,  it  was  "  the  power  of  God  and 
the  wisdom  of  God."    2.  They  showed  their  faith  by  their  works.    The  infant  European 


cm.  n.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  80 

Churches  imitated  the  oldest  Churches,  those  of  Judaaa.  All  alike  belonged  to  God ;  all 
were  in  Christ  Jesus,  living  branches  in  the  true  Vine.  The  new  converts  sought  to  lire 
like  the  first  Christians.  "  Then  had  the  Churches  rest  throughout  all  Judssa  and 
Galilee  and  Samaria,  and  were  edified ;  and  walking  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  in  the 
comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  were  multiplied."  They  imitated  them  in  active  holiness, 
and  they  imitated  them  in  patient  endurance. 

II.  The  opposition  of  the  woeld.  1.  The  Gentile  opposition.  It  flint  appeared  in 
Macedonia.  In  Philippi  the  evangelists  were  for  the  first  time  brought  before  Gentile 
magistrates.  The  politarchs  of  Thessalonica  had  more  sense  of  justice  than  the 
so-called  praetors  of  Philippi.  They  contented  themselves  with  taking  security  from  the 
Christians  who  were  brought  before  them.  But  the  converts  were  exposed  to  great 
persecution  in  both  places  from  the  first.  In  his  letters  to  both  Churches,  St.  Paul 
again  and  again  mentions  their  sufferings.  In  writing  to  the  Corinthians  he  speaks  of 
the  "  great  trial  of  affliction "  which  beset  the  Macedonian  Christians.  The  Thessa- 
lonians  had  to  suffer  much  at  the  hands  of  their  own  countrymen.  But  they  had  been 
taught  that  those  who  would  live  a  godly  life  must  suffer  persecution,  and  so  they 
thought  it  not  strange.  It  had  been  so  from  the  beginning  of  Christianity.  They 
looked  to  the  example  of  the  earliest  Churches.  2.  The  Jewish  opposition.  The  Jews 
had  slain  the  prophets ;  they  had  slain  the  Lord  Jesus ;  they  had  chased  the  apostle 
from  city  to  city.  They  were  St.  Paul's  own  countrymen.  He  loved  them  dearly.  He 
could  find  no  words  strong  enough  tu  express  his  intense  longing  for  their  salvation  (see 
Bom.  ix.  1 — 3).  But  they  were  constantly  thwarting  his  work— that  work  of  saving 
souls  on  which  his  whole  heart  was  set.  They  were  doing  so  now  at  Corinth,  opposing 
themselves  and  blaspheming  (Acts  xviii.  6).  St.  Paul  could  not  restrain  his  feelings  of 
holy  indignation.  They  call  themselves  (he  says)  the  peculiar  people  of  God ;  but  they 
please  him  not.  He  willeth  that  all  men  should  be  saved,  and  they  are  contrary  to  all 
men.  In  that  hatred  of  the  human  race  which  heathen  writers  attribute  to  them,  they 
tried  to  hinder  the  apostle  from  preaching  to  the  Gentiles.  Nothing  angered  them 
more  than  the  proclamation  of  a  free  salvation  offered  to  Jew  and  Gentile  alike  (see 
Acts  xxii.  21,  22).  This  wicked  jealousy  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  sins.  Their 
sin  was  its  own  punishment.  That  hardened  heart  was  the  beginning  of  the  Judgment 
that  was  coming. 

Learn :  1.  To  reverence  the  Gospel  as  the  Word  of  God.  2.  To  look  for  its  inner 
working  in  the  heart.    3.  To  imitate  the  saints  of  God  in  patient  endurance. — B.  C.  C. 

Vers.  17 — 20. — St.  Paul's  love  for  his  converts.  L  His  longing  desibb  to  see 
them.  1.  His  efforts  to  return  to  Thessalonica.  He  had  not  been  long  away.  He  was 
at  Corinth  now.  Perhaps  the  jealousies,  the  dissensions,  the  sin  which  encompassed 
him  there  made  him  long  all  the  more  for  the  simple  faith  and  love  of  his  Macedonian 
friends.  He  was  with  them  even  now  in  heart,  thinking  of  them  in  the  hour  of  prayer, 
remembering  them  in  his  thankgivings.  But  there  was  a  feeling  of  bereavement,  almost 
of  desolation,  when  he  thought  of  their  absence.  So  very  dear  they  had  become  to  him 
during  the  short  time  which  he  spent  at  Thessalonica.  We  feel,  as  we  read  these  words, 
the  depth  of  St.  Paul's  affection;  we  feel  the  power  of  Christian  love.  2.  What  hindered 
him  from  coming.  It  was  Satan,  Satan  the  adversary — that  awful  being  whose  presence 
in  God's  world  is  so  great  a  mystery,  but  whose  personality  is  so  clearly  taught  in  Holy 
Scripture,  whose  power  and  malice  we  have  all  so  often  felt.  Twice  the  apostle  pur- 
posed to  revisit  Thessalonica;  twice  the  hindrance  came.  The  visit  would  have  given 
him  great  comfort.  Satan  envied  him  that  comfort,  that  sweet  communion  with  his 
Christian  friends.  Satan  hinders  us,  we  may  be  sure.  He  tries  to  rob  us  of  the  conso- 
lations of  religion,  of  the  sweetness  of  Christian  sympathy.  His  agency  is  more  wide- 
spread than  we  think.  He  is  the  accuser  of  the  brethren,  their  adversary  in  the  religious 
life.  But  God  sitteth  on  high.  He  will  not  suffer  us  to  be  tempted  above  that  we  are 
able.  He  will  make  all  things,  even  the  temptations  of  the  evil  one,  work  together  for 
our  good  if  we  abide  in  his  love. 

IL  His  expressions  of  affection.  1.  They  are  his  glory  and  hit  joy.  They  are  so 
now.  He  had  few  joys  in  this  world,  few  earthly  comforts.  His  life  was  spent  in  hard 
labour  amid  dangers  and  privations.  It  was  relieved  by  very  few  pleasures.  The 
natural  beauty,  the  historical  associations  of  the  plaoes  which  he  visited  in  hit  travels, 


40  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   THE   THESSALONIANS.     [oh.  n.  1— 20. 


to  have  given  him  no  enjoyment.  His  one  joy  was  to  save  souls ;  bis  one  pleasure 
was  the  loving  sympathy  of  his  converts.  He  sought  no  earthly  glory ;  fame  was 
nothing  to  him.  The  souls  won  to  Christ  by  his  preaching  were  his  glory.  2.  They 
would  be  his  crown  at  the  last.  Not  they  only,  others  saved  by  his  preaching  at 
Damascus,  at  Antioch,  in  Cyprus,  in  Asia  Minor,  were  his  hope  and  joy ;  but  none  were 
more  tenderly  loved  than  the  Christians  of  Macedonia,  none  are  addressed  with  more 
endearing  words.  He  ever  looked  forward  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ;  the  great  day  was  always  in  his  thoughts.  What  joy  would  it  be  to  present 
these  happy  souls  to  Christ,  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  the  heavenly  bridegroom  I  This  was 
his  hope;  this  would  he  his  crown — the  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away,  which  the 
chief  Shepherd  shall  give  in  that  day  to  those  faithful  presbyters  who  have  fed  the 
flock  of  God  willingly  and  of  a  ready  mind,  being  themselves  ensamples  to  the  flock. 

Lessons.  1.  True  Christians  will  delight  in  the  society  of  those  like-minded  with 
themselves.  2.  We  must  remember  the  restless  energy  of  Satan.  We  must  trust  in 
God.  He  is  stronger  than  the  strong  man  armed.  3.  We  must  pray  for  grace  to  love 
the  saints  of  God  as  St.  Paul  loved  them. — B.  C.  C. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  manner  of  the  preachers;  or,  self-portraiture.  I.  What  the 
Thessalonians  had  found  their  preaching  to  be.  1.  Not  void  of  power.  "  For  your- 
selves, brethren,  know  our  entering  in  unto  you,  that  it  hath  not  been  found  vain."  "For" 
goes  back  to  the  first  of  the  two  divisions  given  at  the  close  of  the  previous  chapter. 
This  is  indicated  by  the  recurrence  of  the  leading  Greek  word  translated  "entering  in." 
It  was  said,  "  For  they  themselves  report  concerning  us  what  manner  of  entering  in  we 
had  unto  you."  There  is  an  advance  to  a  farther  point.  Not  only  did  the  people  in  the 
various  places  report,  but  they  themselves  had  the  evidences  in  their  possession.  The 
evidences  are  regarded  as  extending  down  to  the  time  of  the  Thessalonian  letter  being 
received.  Taken  hold  of  at  that  moment,  and  addressed  as  brethren,  they  are  asked 
this  question,  "  What  has  the  entering  in  of  us  preachers  been  found  to  be  ?  "  And, 
having  had  ample  time  to  estimate  the  entering  in,  they  are  confidently  expected  to 
give  this  testimony,  "  It  hath  not  been  found  vain."  The  epithet  "  vain"  might  mean 
empty  of  result ;  but  that  thought  falls  under  the  second  division,  which  is  taken  up  at 
ver.  13.  It  must,  therefore,  mean  empty  of  all  that  it  ought  causally  to  contain— empty 
of  purpose,  and  earnestness,  in  a  word,  of  evangelical  power.  2.  Characterized  by 
fortitude.  "  But  having  suffered  before,  and  been  shamefully  entreated,  as  ye  know,  at 
Philippi,  we  waxed  bold  in  our  God  to  speak  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God  in  much  con- 
flict." This  is  so  far  confirmed  by  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  where  the  narrative  of  the 
entering  in  to  Thessalonica  is  immediately  preceded  by  the  narrative  of  the  rough  treat- 
ment received  at  Philippi.  The  feature  of  the  suffering  before  referred  to  here  is  there 
presented  as  imprisonment.  It  was  imprisonment  with  aggravated  circumstances. 
Paul  and  Silas  were  dragged  into  the  market-place  before  the  magistrates,  by  whose 
orders  they  were  beaten  with  rods.  After  many  stripes  had  been  laid  on  them  they 
were  cast  into  the  inner  prison,  and  their  feet  made  fast  in  the  stocks.  This  was 
shameful  treatment,  not  because  they  were  there  in  Philippi  on  an  errand  of  mercy, 
which  heathen  magistrates  could  not  appreciate,  but  because  their  rights  were  not 
respected.  It  was  an  irregularity  to  lay  stripes  on  them  at  all  as  Boman  citizens.  It 
was  a  further  irregularity  to  punish  so  hastily  in  obedience  to  clamour,  and  without  an 
opportunity  of  defence  being  granted.  All  this  was  known  to  the  Thessalonians.  So 
far  the  statement  here  supplements  the  narrative  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  We  read 
further,  that  Timothy  accompanied  Paul  from  Lystra,  and  again  that  he  was  left  behind 
at  Bercea,  but  there  is  nothing  said  of  him  in  the  interval.  We  learn  from  this  notice 
that  he  was  co-operating  with  Paul  and  Silas  both  in  Philippi  and  in  Thessalonica 
although,  we  may  understand,  not  so  prominent  an  object  of  attack  as  the  others  who 
were  his  seniors  both  in  age  and  in  service.  The  three  were  not  intimidated  by  this 
treatment  in  Philippi.  On  the  contrary,  proceeding  to  Thessalonica,  they  waxed  bold 
in  their  God  to  speak  unto  the  Thessalonians  the  gospel  of  God.  It  was  the  gospel  of 
God,  inasmuch  as  it  came  as  a  glad  message  from  God.  They  looked  to  God  s/thetr 
God,  who  had  commissioned  them  to  deliver  his  message.  As  commissioned  by  God  to 
deliver  Us  message,  they  did  not  flee,  like  Jonah,  through  fear,  but  they  emboldened 
theDuelTM  in  their  God,  that  he  would  give  them  his  protection  and  support.    It  did 


can.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&  41 

not  fare  with  them  in  Thessalonica  differently  from  what  it  did  in  Philippi.  Their 
message  brought  them  into  conflict  with  the  powers  of  unbelief.  It  was  a  confliot  of 
a  formidable  nature.  But  the  fact  that  they  were  able  to  stand  forth  and  speak  the 
gospel  of  God  in  the  face  of  strong  opposition  was  evidence  of  the  very  highest  value 
that  their  entering  in  to  Thessalonica  was  not  vaiu. 

II.  Their  general  habit  ah  pbeaohebs.  1.  They  were  not  like  the  idolatrous 
priests.  (1)  They  did  not  preach  out  of  error.  "  For  our  exhortation  is  not  of  error." 
There  was  not  much  of  what  is  here  called  exhortation  in  the  ministrations  of  the 
idolatrous  priests.  They  did  not  lay  themselves  out  to  influence  men  by  suasion  to 
what  was  considered  to  be  the  right  belief  and  the  right  life.  The  old  translation  in  this 
place,  "  deceit,"  was  objectionable.  Such  men  were  not  impostors  to  begin  with.  They 
believed  in  their  system.  It  was  what  they  had  received  by  tradition  from  their 
fathers.  Nevertheless  it  was  a  system  of  error,  literally,  "  wandering."  Heathenism 
was  a  wandering  from  God,  whether  objects  of  worship  were  sought  in  the  stony  worlii, 
in  the  silence  of  vegetable  life,  behind  the  hieroglyphics  of  the  brute  creation,  or  behind 
the  human  form.  Out  of  such  error  they  ministered  to  man.  Paul  and  his  com- 
panions, on  the  other  hand,  ministered  out  of  truth.  They  had  the  true  conception  of 
God  and  of  human  life.  Their  exhortation  had  its  inspiring  cause  in  Christianity.  As 
moved  themselves  by  its  soul-cheering  truth,  they  sought  to  move  others.  (2)  They 
did  not  preach  out  of  uncleanness.  "  Nor  of  uncleanness."  This  was  the  general  cha- 
racter of  heathen  ministrations,  but,  as  denied  here,  it  would  seem,  from  the  context, 
to  refer  more  particularly  to  the  impure  love  of  gain.  Those  who  ministered  in  heathen 
temples  were  in  the  habit  of  receiving  gifts  from  the  worshippers.  And  there  was  the 
danger,  and,  in  the  absence  of  better  influences,  the  likelihood  of  gain  becoming  the 
end,  in  which  their  ministrations  had  motive  power.  This  was  not  the  end  in  which 
the  apostle  and  his  companions  found  motive  for  their  way  of  exhortation.  (3)  They 
did  not  resort  to  unworthy  methods  in  preaching.  "  Nor  in  guile."  Heathen  priests 
could  not  but  be  conscious  of  much  imposture.  Conscious  of  no  inflatus,  of  no  extra- 
ordinary knowledge  possessed  by  them,  they  yet  professed  to  tell  the  future  from  the 
position  of  the  stars,  from  the  flight  of  birds,  from  the  entrails  of  animals.  They  had 
to  do  with  unrealities  in  many  forms,  in  order  to  keep  up  their  influence  with  the  wor- 
shipper!. The  apostle  and  his  companions,  as  their  end  was  the  salvation  of  souls,  so 
they  only  sought  it  by  the  use  of  means  which  their  conscience  could  approve.  2. 
They  realized  their  responsibility.  "  But  even  as  we  have  been  approved  of  God  to  be 
entrusted  with  the  gospel,  so  we  speak ;  not  as  pleasing  men,  but  God  which  proveth 
our  hearts."  There  are  two  ideas  in  a  trust.  The  first  is  acting  for  another.  He  who 
makes  over  the  trust  does  not  act  himself  by  reason  of  death,  or  by  reason  of  infirmity, 
or  by  reason  of  absence  (as  in  the  analogy  that  is  made  use  of  in  Luke  xix.  12).  The 
trustee — he  to  whom  the  trust  is  made  over— acts  in  his  name  and  for  his  interest. 
The  second  idea  is  acting  apart  by  one's  self.  The  trustee  may  have  directions  to  guide 
him,  and  ample  resources  to  draw  upon  in  the  management  of  the  trust.  But  other- 
wise he  acts  independently.  He  is  left  there  alone  with  the  trust ;  in  responsibility  it 
is  his  and  not  another's  if  it  is  managed  well ;  it  is  his  and  not  another's  if  it  is  mis- 
managed. (1)  What  their  trust  was.  "  So  we  speak."  A  minister  must  not  be  devoid 
of  thoughts,  and  must  also  be  able  to  give  clear  expression  to  them.  He  has  also  to 
stand  up  before  his  fellow-men,  and  to  speak  to  them  face  to  face  with  a  practical  aim. 
That,  with  the  speaking  of  which  he  is  intrusted,  is  the  gospel.  "  The  gospel  of  the 
glory  of  the  blessed  God,  which  was  committed  to  my  trust."  The  gospel  is  properly 
the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  all  people.  It  begins  with  the  message  of  pardon  to  the 
guilty,  of  adoption  into  the  family  of  God  of  the  disowned  and  disinherited.  It  is,  in 
its  gladsome  breadth,  the  promise  of  the  communication  of  the  Divine  life  and  happi- 
ness to  our  being.  It  is  this  which  the  minister  has  to  speak  with  a  view  to  its  accept- 
ance. It  is  not  meant  that  he  is  only  to  speak  this.  For  he  has  the  whole  Bible  to 
open  up  as  he  can.  He  has  other  important  truth  to  present,  eveu  the  terrors  of  the 
Law  in  its  bearing  on  the  gospel.  Neither  is  he  to  confine  himself  in  his  illustrations 
to  the  Bible.  For  as  all  roads  led  to  Rome,  so  all  things  can  legitimately  and  usefully 
be  made  to  lead  to  the  gospel.  Only  nothing  is  to  be  dilated  upon  or  brought  in 
which  has  not  the  effect  of  making  prominent  the  gospel  proper,  or  the  glad  message 
from  God  to  "oan.    (2)  Their  being  chosen  for  the  trust.    "As  urn  have  been  mfproted 


42 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1— 20 


of  God."  "It  was  requisite,"  it  has  been  said  of  Lhe  Athenian  priesthoods  '< that  all 
prieste  should  be  of  Ultimate  birth,  without  bodily  defect  and  °g»£™Nf  !J3J 
conversation.  These  particulars  were  ascertained  by  a  dokimas.a.  X' ^™°*  ™  ™f 
of  all  who  are  in  the  office  of  the  ministry  that  they  have  revived  *eD.vme  approval 
There  must  be  a  certain  aptitude  in  natural  gifts  for  preaching  the  gospel.  There  must 
especially  be  aptitude  in  the  moral  state  of  the  preacher.  God  has  seen JSt by  savea 
men  to  save  men.  He  employs,  in  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  those  who  have 
.Tmpathy  with  the  gospel,  fn  Ithis  light  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy  were^no  pre- 
tenders, but  hart  received  the  Divine  stamp-had  been  pronounced  fit,  from  «•"  8» 
and  experiences,  to  be^en.p^ 


into  a  law  universal.  We  are  not  to  please  men  as  though  we  were  responsible  to 
them.  We  are  not  to  please  men  as  though  we  had  to  consult  their  false  tastes,  their 
natural  dislike  to  the  gospel.  On  the  contrary,  all  man-pleasing  is  to  be  repudiated 
where  it  intei  feres  with  the  main  design  of  the  gospel,  which  is  to  effects  change  upon 
the  heart  Excellence  they  cultivated.  This  was  God-pleasing.  This  is  a  safe  rule  to 
follow  in  every  case.  For  he  is  infinite  excellence,  and  he  who  seeks  to  please  him 
follows  no  low  or  variable  standard.  It  is  the  fit  thing  to  do  in  the  position  in  which 
we  are  placed.  He  has  entrusted  us  preachers  with  the  gospel ;  it  is  therefore  simply 
our  duty  to  please  .him  who  has  given  us  so  solemn  a  trust.  If  we  have  been  approved 
of  God  to  be  entrusted  with  the  gospel,  that  is  so  far  well.  But  there  is  an  approval 
that  we  have  to  look  forward  to  at  the  end  of  our  labours.  And  shall  it  then  be  seen 
that  we  have  stood  the  test  ?  Shall  we  then  receive  the  word  of  approval,  Well  done, 
good  and  faithful  servant "  ?  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy  claimed  that,  in  accordance 
with  the  fact  of  their  having  been  approved,  they  spake  pleasing  God.  And  this  is 
heightened  by  the  consideration  that  God  is  regarded  as  proving  their  hearts,  lhey 
preached  as  under  the  eye  of  the  heart-trying  God.  They  preached  as  if  asking  God 
to  remove  from  their  hearts  all  that  unfitted  them  for  dealing  with  the  gospel.  Ihey 
preached  with  some  consciousness  in  the  depth  of  their  being  that  their  single  aim  was 
to  find  acceptance  for  the  good  message. 

III.  Their  habit  toward  the  Thessalonians.    1.  Denial  of  selfishness.    {1)  in 
the  form  of  flattery.     "  For  neither  at  any  time  were  we  found  using  words  of  flattery, 
as  ye  know."     In  proof  of  what  was  their  general  habit,  an  appeal  is  made  to  what  their 
habit  was  particularly  toward  the  Thessalonians.     At  no  time  were  they  found  using 
speech  whose  contents  were  flattery.     Having  denied  generally  the  method  of  deceit, 
they  now  deny,  toward  the  Thessalonians,  the  method  of  flattery.     It  is  a  method 
commonly  resorted  to  by  deceivers.    It  may  seem  removed  from  selfishness,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  away  of  pleasing  men.     In  that  respect  it  is  not  so  odious  as  a  habit  of  detrac- 
tion.   But  the  flatterer  is  essentially  selfish.     He  professes  affection  he  dots  not  feel ; 
he  bestows  praises  beyond  what  he  considers  to  be  deserved.    He  thus  goes  against  the 
person  he  seeks  to  flatter,  who  has  a  right  to  have  presented  to  him  what  a  man  really 
is,  and  not  what  he  assumes  to  be — a  true  face,  and  not  a  mask.     And  he  further  goes 
against  him,  inasmuch  as  he  would  have  him  think  of  himself  as  different  from  what 
he  really  is.     Paul  and  his  companions  were  not  slow  to  let  the  real  affection  of  their 
heart  be  known,  and  to  bestow  praises  where  they  were  deserved.    But  they  disclaimed 
flattery,  appealing,  in  support  of  their  truthfulness  in  doing  so,  to  the  experience  of  the 
Thessalonians.     (2,  In  the  form  of  covetousnes*.    "  Nor  a  cloak  of  covetousness,  God  is 
witness."    The  idea  of  deceit  is  carried  forward  in  the  word  "  cloak."    It  is  something 
worn  under  which,  or,  to  keep  nearer  to  the  Greek  word,  "  woven  before  "  ("  pretext "), 
behind  which  the  real  design  is  concealed.   Covetousness  is  doubly  degrading  in  connec- 
tion with  sacred  service.    It  is  laid  down  as  one  of  the  qualifications  of  a  minister  that 
he  is  not  to  be  greedy  of  filthy  lucre.     Paul  and  his  companions  did  not  use  great  pro- 
fession of  godliness,  or  of  affection  and  esteem  for  the  Thessalonians,  as  a  pretext  for 
netting  their  money.    They  were  conscious  to  their  own  minds  of  purity  in  this  matter, 
and,  feeling  the  vast  importance  of  being  thoroughly  cleared  from  such  an  imputation, 
they  solemnly  call  God  to  witness  that  they  were  stating  the  truth.     This  form  oi 
confirmation — ■**  God  is  witness  " — approaching  to  the  oath,  is  only  to  be  used  in  a  matter 


ch.ii.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  43 

of  great  moment,  and  especially  where  hidden  motive  is  concerned.  (3)  In  the  form  of 
a  desire/or  honour.  "  Nor  seeking  glory  of  men,  neither  from  you,  nor  from  others, 
when  we  might  have  been  burdensome,  as  apostles  of  Christ."  This  is  an  alternative 
to  covetousness.  Following  the  method  of  deceit,  they  might  have  been  seeking,  not 
money,  but  glory.  Christ  says,  "  I  receive  not  glory  from  men."  And  he  declares  this 
to  be  an  obstacle  to  believing.  "  How  can  ye  believe,  which  receive  glory  one  of  another, 
and  the  glory  that  cometh  from  the  only  God  ye  seek  not?"  Paul  and  his  companions 
had  not  sought  glory  which  had  its  origin  in  men,  neither  more  immediately  from  them 
nor  from  others.  They  had  not  done  this  when,  as  the  meaning  would  seem  to  be, 
they  might  have  claimed  honour  as  the  apostles  of  Christ.  The  idea  of  "  burdensome- 
ness  "  seems  out  of  keeping  with  the  immediate  context,  the  preceding  thought  being 
"  glory,"  and  the  succeeding  thought  being  "  gentleness."  -It  seems  better,  then,  to  adopt 
the  other  meaning  which  the  words  equally  well  bear :  "  When  we  might  have  claimed 
dignity,  assumed  consequence."  They  had  an  honourable  status  as  apostles  of  Christ, 
that  designation  being  taken  widely.  The  honour  connected  with  it  came,  not  from 
men,  but  from  Christ.  It  was  a  great  honour  to  hold  a  commission  from  Christ.  But 
they  did  not  put  forward  their  official  position ;  they  did  not  exact  a  recognition  of  it 
from  men.  2.  On  the  positive  side  their  motherly  unselfishness.  "  But  we  were  gentle 
in  the  midst  of  you,  as  when  a  nurse  cherisheth  her  own  children :  even  so,  being 
affectionately  desirous  of  you,  we  were  well  pleased  to  impart  unto  you,  not  the  gospel 
of  God  only,  but  also  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were  become  very  dear  to  us."  So  far 
from  being  mere  officials  taken  up  with  their  dignity,  they  were  gentle  in  the  midst  of 
them.  Their  whole  bearing  in  the  midst  of  the  Thessalonians  was  like  that  of  a  parent 
in  the  midst  of  his  children.  Nay,  that  does  not  suffice  to  bring  out  the  nature  of  the 
gentleness.  It  is  not  the  father  who  is  taken ;  but,  as  expressing  greater  tenderness, 
the  mother.  In  another  place  (Gal.  iv.  19)  Paul  also  makes  use  of  the  motherly :  "  My 
little  children,  of  whom  I  am  again  in  travail  until  Christ  be  formed  in  you."  Here 
he  not  only  takes  the  mother,  but  the  mother  at  the  time  when  she  is  nursing.  As 
when  a  nurse  cherisheth  her  own  children.  It  is  then  that  the  motherly  feeling  is 
most  active  in  her.  It  is  then  that  she  uses  the  sweetest  expressions,  holds  her  child 
with  the  greatest  fondness  and  solicitude.  But  the  nursing  mother  is  not  only  the 
picture  of  gentleness  ;  she  is  also  the  picture  of  unselfishness.  She  does  not  think  of 
receiving  from  her  child  ;  she  thinks  only  of  giving.  She  gives  from  herself,  and,  if 
that  child's  life  were  in  danger,  she  would  not  hesitate  to  give  her  own  life.  So  the 
motherly  was  very  active  in  them  at  Thessalonica.  They  were  affectionately  desirous 
of  the  Thessalonians.  Desire  has  a  certain  contrary  nature  to  affection.  Desire  draws 
in ;  affection  gives  out.  It  is  giving  out  that  is  referred  to  here.  It  would  seem,  there- 
fore, better  to  translate,  "  Having  a  fond  affection  for  you."  In  the  working  of  this 
affection  they  gave  to  the  Thessalonians  the  milk  of  the  Word — here  called  the  gospel 
of  God — what  was  given  them  by  the  great  and  tender  Giver  to  give  to  the  new-born. 
And  such  was  the  unselfishness  of  their  affection  that  they  had  the  willingness,  if  it 
had  been  necessary,  to  give  their  very  lives  for  the  Thessalonians,  because,  in  their 
craving  for  the  Word,  they  were  felt  to  be  very  dear.  8.  Striking  exemplification  of 
unselfishness.  "  For  ye  remember,  brethren,  our  labour  and  travail :  working  night  and 
day,  that  we  might  not  burden  any  of  you,  we  preached  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God." 
The  apostle  and  his  companions  "  practically  gave  up  their  existence  "  to  the  Thessa- 
lonians. Those  addressed  as  brethren  are  called  upon  to  call  to  mind  the  labour  and 
travail  undergone  for  them.  The  second  word  serves  the  purpose  of  intensification. 
There  was  giving  out  of  strength  in  "  heralding  "  the  gospel  of  God.  A  herald  does 
not  spare  himself ;  as  gospel  heralds  they  did  not  spare  themselves  in  soul  or  body. 
This  work  of  heralding  was  by  itself  labour  and  travail ;  but  it  was  added  to  by  the 
circumstances  under  which  they  heralded.  They  felt  themselves  under  the  necessity 
of  working— Paul,  no  doubt,  at  the  work  of  tent-making.  That  also  was  labour  and 
travail ;  for  it  was  night  and  day — as  we  would  say,  day  and  night;  not  completed  with 
daylight,  but  extending  into  the  night.  There  was  no  reason  for  his  not  receiving  from 
the  Philippians  as  he  did  at  Thessalonica.  There  was  reason  for  his  not  receiving  from 
the  Thessalonians.  The  reason  given  is,  the  desire  not  to  burden  any  of  them.  His 
not  foeliug  free  to  burden  any  of  them,  whatever  determined  it,  raised  him  now  above 
the  suspicion  of  being  covetous  among  them.    He  had  only  beta  a  giver,  like  a  nursing 


44  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—20. 

mother.  4.  What  their  behaviour  generally  was  toward  the  Thessalonians.  "  Ye  are 
witnesses,  and  God  also,  how  holily  and  righteously  and  unblamably  we  behaved  our- 
selves toward  you  that  believe."  Their  behaviour  is  defined  as  being  toward  the  Thes- 
salonians  as  believers.  We  may  think  of  Paul  as  speaking  for  himself  and  his 
companions.  How  did  he  bear  himself  toward  these  believers  ?  (1)  Holily,  i.e.  with 
love  and  reverence  toward  God  in  them.  (2)  Righteously,  i.e.  with  due  consideration 
for  their  position.  This  must  be  taken  to  include  their  position  as  believers.  There 
was  what  was  suitable  for  them,  as  adopted  into  the  family  of  God  through  faith. 
(3)  Unblamably,  a  strong  word  which  is  used  not  infrequently  by  the  apostle.  It  is 
the  negative  side  of  the  two  positions  that  have  been  given.  Here  there  is  a  concen- 
tration of  the  self-praise,  as  it  may  seem,  that  pervades  the  paragraph.  How  could 
he  act  so  holily  and  righteously  toward  the  Thessalonians  as  to  incur  no  blame  from 
them  or  from  God  ?  But  that  is  not  all :  he  makes  an  appeal  to  them  as  witnesses, 
and,  the  second  time  in  the  paragraph,  he  makes  a  solemn  appeal  to  God  as  Witness  even 
of  his  inward  disposition.  It  cannot  be  understood  that  he  lays  claim  to  perfection  ;  for 
it  is  he  who  6ays  in  another  place," "  Not  that  I  have  already  obtained,  or  am  already 
made  perfect."  But  it  must  be  understood  that  he  claimed  to  be  sincere,  and  sincere  in 
no  ordinary  degree,  in  seeking  the  good  of  the  Thessalonians.  In  claiming  this  he  was 
not  really  praising  himself ;  but  he  was  making  clear  what  was  fitted  to  influence 
powerfully  the  Thessalonians  in  their  fidelity  to  the  gospel.  He  points  to  them  as 
believers,  because,  it  may  be,  they  were  fitted  to  appreciate  the  spirituality  of  his 
bearing.  He  points  to  them  as  believers,  chiefly  as  showing  that  they  worthily 
responded  to  what  his  bearing  was.  5.  Their  fatherly  dealing.  There  are  frequent 
allusions  to  fatherhood  in  God  in  Scripture.  One  of  the  allusions  to  motherhood  in 
God  is  in  Isa.  lxvi.  13,  "  As  one  whom  his  mother  comforteth,  so  will  I  comfort  you." 
Both  meet  in  God,  forming  a  complete  conception. 

"  No  earthly  father  loves  like  thee, 
No  mother  e'er  so  mild." 

So  they  must  meet  in  the  servant  of  God.  Paul  has  already  in  this  paragraph  referred 
to  himself  as  acting  the  motherly  part ;  he  now  supplements  it  by  referring  to  himself 
as  acting  the  fatherly  part.  (1)  Individual  dealing.  "As  ye  know  how  we  dealt 
with  each  one  of  you,  as  a  father  dealeth  with  his  own  children."  It  is  the  part  of 
a  father  to  have  his  children  under  his  eye.  He  is  acquainted  with  their  little  histories 
and  peculiar  dispositions.  And  he  does  not  deal  with  all  alike,  but  studies  their  various 
ways,  and  deals  with  them  accordingly.  8o  it  is  the  part  of  a  minister  not  only  to 
make  a  general  declaration  of  the  gospel,  but  also,  father-like,  to  deal  with  his  people 
individually,  according  to  what  he  knows  of  their  circumstances  and  needs.  (2)  Three 
words  descriptive  of  the  nature  of  fatherly  dealing.  "  Exhorting  you."  It  is  the  part 
of  a  father  not  merely  to  tell  his  children  their  duty,  but  also  to  exhort  them,  to  urge 
them  warmly  to  duty,  especially  from  his  own  experiences  of  life.  So  it  is  the  part  of 
a  minister  not  only  to  hold  up  Scripture  precept  for  instruction,  but  also,  father-like, 
warmly  to  recommend  its  observance,  especially  from  his  own  spiritual  experiences. 
"  And  encouraging  you."  It  is  the  part  of  a  father  to  hold  out  encouragement  to  the 
performance  of  duty.  Nothing  can  be  more  fatal  to  the  young  than  a  discouraging 
tone.  So  it  is  the  part  of  a  minister  not  to  be  harsh,  censorious,  despondent,  but, 
father-like,  to  catch  a  geniality  and  hopefulness  from  his  message  which  may  be  said 
to  have  come  from  the  fatherhood  of  God.  "And  testifying."  The  word  can  bear  a 
stronger  meaning— charging,  conjuring.  There  are  times  when  a  father  addresses  his 
children  as  with  his  dy  ing  breath,  conjures  them  by  all  that  he  counts  dear  and  sacred,  by 
a  consideration  of  their  best  interests,  not  to  give  way  to  temptation,  but  to  follow  in 
the  path  of  duty.  So  there  are  times  when  it  is  becoming  for  a  minister  to  concentrate 
his  earnestness  and  to  address  his  people  as  with  his  dying  breath,  conjuring  them  by 
the  authority  of  .God,  by  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  by  the  dreadful 
issues  at  stake,  by  the  solemnity  of  judgment,  not  to  allow  themselves  to  be  cheated 
out  of  happiness,  but  to  make  sure  of  Christ  as  their  everlasting  Portion.  (3)  To  what 
the  fatherly  dealing  it  to  be  directed.  "To  the  end  that  ye  should  walk  worthily  of 
God,  who  calleth  you  into  his  own  kingdom  and  glory."  It  is  the  part  of  a  father  to 
endeavour  to  hold  the  children  to  what  ia  noble.    For  this  purpose  he  love*  to  tall  thera 


old.  1—20.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAJJS.  « 

of  the  good  name  their  family  has  borne,  of  the  call  which  that  addresses  to  them  to 
follow  out  a  good  career.  And  so  ha  exhorts,  encourages,  conjures  them.  Let  them 
not  stain  that  noble  name,  let  them  not  stop  short  of  that  noble  career.  So  it  is  the 
part  of  a  minister,  father-like,  to  tell  his  people  of  their  high  dignity  and  destiny,  of 
their  being  called  by  God  into  bis  own  kingdom,  of  their  being  called  in  that  kingdom 
to  share  with  God  in  his  glory.  And  so  he  exhorts,  encourages,  conjures  them.  Let 
them  prove  worthy  of  having  place  and  honour  in  God's  kingdom.  Let  the  royal 
stamp  be  on  all  their  conduct. — R.  F. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — Response  of  the  Themalonians  to  (he  proclamation  of  the  gospel  by 
Paul  and  Ms  companions.  L  Their  acceptance  of  the  Word.  "  And  for  this  cause 
we  also  thank  God  without  ceasing,  that  when  ye  received  from  us  the  word  of  the 
message,  even  the  Word  of  God,  ye  accepted  it  not  as  the  word  of  men,  but,  as  it  is  in 
truth,  the  Word  of  God,  which  also  worketh  in  you  that  believe."  With  this  com- 
mences the  second  of  the  divisions  indicated  at  the  close  of  the  first  chapter.  Our 
attention  is  turned  away  from  the  preachers  to  the  hearers.  It  is  confusing  to  join 
"  also  "  to  "  we,"  and  to  suppose  the  meaning  to  be,  with  Lttnemann,  "  We  as  wall  as 
every  true  Christian  who  hears  of  your  oonduct,"  or,  with  Ellicott,  "  We  as  well  as  yon 
who  have  so  much  to  be  thankful  for."  It  makes  an  easier  transition  to  join  "also" 
to  "  thank,"  making  the  subject  of  thanksgiving  something  additional  to  the  earnest- 
ness of  the  preachers.  We  may  translate  freely,  "  Having  this  as  an  antecedent,  we 
have  this  in  addition  as  a  consequent  for  which  to  thank  God."  Here,  then,  is  a  falling 
back  into  the  thankful  strain  with  which  the  Epistle  commenced.  The  very  word 
translated  "  without  ceasing"  is  caught  up.  Having  given  out  their  strength  in  preach- 
ing, they  had  unceasing  cause  of  thanksgiving  to  God  in  the  result.  In  setting  forth 
the  result,  the  word  is  described  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Thessalonians  in  relation 
to  the  preachers.  The  nearest  translation  is  "the  from-us-heard-word."  This  they 
received  in  the  outward  ordinance  of  preaching.  Having  thus  received  it,  they  next 
accepted  it  or  received  it  into  their  inmost  being.  They  gave  this  inner  reception  to  it, 
as  being,  in  their  estimation,  not  the  word  of  man.  It  was  indeed  delivered  by  men. 
It  was  a  word  of  human  salvation.  In  its  very  humaimess  it  was  fitted  to  reach  men. 
But  their  estimation  of  the  word  rose  above  it  as  a  mere  human  word  to  what  it  really 
was  (as  attested  here),  the  Word  of  God.  It  was  a  Word  given  under  Divine  direction. 
It  was  a  Word  that  came  from  the  heart  of  God.  It  was  a  Word  of  the  overflowing  of 
Divine  love.  It  was  a  Word,  moreover,  that  was  accompanied  with  the  Divine  efficacy. 
In  harmony  .with  its  being  the  Divine  Word,  it  is  described  as  working  in  them  that 
believe.  Faith  is  the  organ  for  our  reception  of  the  Word.  We  may  receive  the  Divine 
Word  in  the  outward  ordinance  of  preaching,  but  if  there  is  not  this  organ  of  inner 
reception  it  must  remain  inoperative.  On  the  other  hand,  if  there  is  faith,  and  in 
proportion  as  there  is  faith,  does  the  mighty  power  of  the  word  pass  into  us,  even  up  to 
the  full  extent  of  our  capacity  and  need.  It  is,  therefore,  our  duty  to  see  that  we  pre- 
sent no  obstacle  of  unbelief  to  the  efficacy  of  the  Word  in  us.  "  That  the  Word  may 
become  effectual  to  salvation  we  must  attend  thereunto  with  diligence,  preparation,  and 
prayer ;  receive  it  with  faith  and  love,  lay  it  up  in  our  hearts,  and  practise  it  in  our  lives." 

II.  The  accepted  Word  wrought  in  them  to  oive  them  Christian  heroism. 
"  For  ye,  brethren,  became  imitators  of  the  Churches  of  God  which  are  in  Judsea  in 
•Christ  Jesus :  for  ye  also  suffered  the  same  things  of  your  own  countrymen,  even  as  they 
did  of  the  Jews."  There  were,  to  appearance,  other  Churches  of  God  in  Judsea.  It 
was,  therefore,  necessary  to  distinguish  Christian  Churches  in  Judasa.  It  is  not  to  be 
understood  that  the  Thessalonian  Christians  were  designedly  imitators  of  the  Judasan 
Churches.  In  result  they  were  imitators.  In  similar  circumstances  they  exhibited  a 
similar  spirit.  Judsea  was  notably  the  quarter  where  Christian  heroism  was  most 
required.  The  Jews  there  were  filled  with  deepest  rancour  against  Christ.  By 
their  numbers  they  were  more  to  be  considered  by  the  Soman  power,  and  were  able  to 
go  to  greater  lengths  against  the  Christians.  It  could  be  said  of  the  Thessalonian 
Christians  that  they  were  not  behind  the  Judajan  Churches  in  Christian  heroism.  They 
suffered  the  same  things  of  their  own  countrymen.  We  are,  therefore,  to  understand 
that  they  were  subjected  to  severe  persecution  in  Thessalonica.  We  know  that  the 
Jaws  had  to  do  with  tbe  persecution  as  instigators,  but,  as  they  had  little  in  their 


46  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANa    [on.  n.  1—20 

power  without  the  action  of  the  Gentile  authorities,  their  own  countrymen  are  referred 
to  as  those  at  whose  bands  the  Thessalonians  suffered.  A  position  was  held  for  Christ 
at  Thessalonica  as  in  Judaea.  And,  in  recording  this  to  the  praise  of  the  Thessalonians, 
they  waim  toward  them  and  address  them  as  brethren. 

IIL  Foe  their  encouragement  in  heroism  the  Jews  are  presented  in  their 
true  character.  1.  Their  past  conduct.  (1)  Worst  manifestation.  "Who  both 
killed  the  Lord  Jesus."  In  the  Greek  the  mind  is  first  made  to  rest  on  the  word 
"  Lord."  Then  there  is  brought  into  neighbourhood  and  sharp  contrast  with  it  the 
word  "  killed."  The  "  Lord  "  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  to  whom  Divine  attri- 
butes are  ascribed — whom  David  owned  as  his  Lord — they  did  not  own  or  submit  to ; 
but,  going  in  the  opposite  direction  as  far  as  they  could  go,  him  they  murdered.  They 
did  this  not  only  to  him  who  was  the  Impersonation  of  authority,  but  was  also  the 
Accomplisher  of  the  loving,  saving  purpose  of  God.  For  "Jesus"  is  added  as  a  third 
woid.  This  the  Jews  did  as  a  nation.  They  said  in  effect,  through  their  constituted 
authorities,  "  This  is  the  heir ;  come,  let  us  kill  him."  In  thus  charging  guilt  home 
upon  the  Jews,  Paul  was  charging  it  home  upon  himself.  For  wherever  he  was  at  the 
time  of  the  crucifixion,  in  his  then  state  of  mind  he  was  in  full  sympathy  with  the 
action  of  the  rulers.  And  it  is  right  that  we  should  see  here  not  only  the  blackness  of 
the  Jewish  heait,  but  the  blackness  of  the  human  heart.  This  was  what  we  did  to  our 
Lord  when  he  came  on  an  errand  of  mercy  to  our  earth.  We  laid  hands  on  him  and 
put  him  to  death.  For  this  let  us  be  deeply  humbled  before  God.  Let  us  say  with 
Job,  in  nearer  contact  with  God,  "  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes."  (2) 
Manifestations  leading  up  to  the  worst.  "  And  the  prophets."  What  the  Jews  did  to 
their  Messiah  was  not  an  isolated  act.  It  was  only  of  a  piece  with  what  their  previous 
conduct  had  been.  "  Which  of  the  prophets,"  said  Stephen,  "  did  not  your  fathers  per- 
secute? and  they  killed  them  which  showed  before  of  the  coming  of  the  Righteous 
One ;  of  whom  ye  have  now  become  betrayers  and  murderers."  The  treatment  they 
gave  to  God's  messengers,  whose  work  it  was  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  Messiah  by 
rebuke  and  prediction,  led  up  to  the  treatment  they  gave  their  Messiah.  In  his  pre- 
Christian  state  Paul  was  well  entitled  to  be  called  "  son  of  them  that  slew  the  prophets ; " 
and  so  are  all  who  abuse  and  thwart,  or  stand  aloof  from,  those  who  are  seeking  to 
advance  the  cause  of  God  in  the  world.  (3)  Manifestation  subsequent  to  the  worst. 
"  And  drave  out  us."  The  reference  seems  to  be  to  the  driving  of  the  apostles  out  of 
Judaea.  This  was  overruled  by  God  for  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  beyond  Juda?a ; 
but  none  the  less  was  it  culpable.  It  showed  that  the  spirit  of  penitence  had  not 
passed  over  them  for  the  heinous  crime  of  which  they  had  been  guilty.  They  were 
still  holding  to  the  words,  "  His  blood  be  upon  us,  and  upon  our  children."  2.  Con- 
demnation of  their  conduct.  (1)  It  was  against  Ood.  "  And  please  not  God."  The 
Jews  thought  they  were  pleasing  God  in  what  they  did  to  Christ  and  also  to  the  pro- 
phets and  apostles.  This  is  denied  of  them.  They  were  really,  in  their  anti-Christian 
position,  setting  themselves  against  the  Divine  ends.  They  were  setting  themselves 
against  the  whole  meaning  of  their  existence  as  a  nation,  against  the  teaching  of  their 
oracles,  against  the  design  of  their  rites.  They  were  setting  themselves  against  the 
evidence  of  miracles,  and  against  the  stronger  evidence  of  a  goodness  which  should 
have  carried  conviction  to  every  honest  heart.  If  they  could  be  so  far  mistaken,  have 
not  we  reason  to  be  on  our  guard  ?  We  may  think  that  we  are  pleasing  God  when  we 
have  never  learned  the  alphabet  of  the  Divine  teaching,  have  never  subjected  ourselves 
to  the  Divine  control.  (2)  It  was  against  man.  "  And  are  contrary  to  all  men ;  for- 
bidding us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles  that  they  may  he  saved."  Their  condemnation 
manward  is  as  strong  as  their  condemnation  Godward.  They  were  contrary  to  all  men, 
is  the  language  used;  and  the  proof  which  is  given  is  conclusive.  The  gospel  is  the 
offer  of  salvation  to  all  men.  But  the  universality,  which  is  its  glory,  was  to  them  its 
defect.  They  had  the  idea  of  keeping  salvation  to  themselves.  They  had  the  idea  that 
they  were  blessed  the  more,  the  fewer  they  were  that  were  blessed.  And  when  the 
apostles  spoke  to  the  Gentiles,  and  thus  preached  the  larger  salvation,  as  if  the  blessing 
were  being  taken  away  from  them,  they  forbade  them  in  such  manner  as  they  could, 
by  contradiction,  calumnies,  laying  snares  for  their  life.  If  this  was  their  full,  let  us 
beware  lest  it  should  be  ours.  The  first  saved  (for  as  Christians  we  stand  where  the 
Jews  stood)  must  understand  it  to  be  their  duty,  not  to  draw  the  line  at  themselves, 


OH.IL  1—20.]    THE  FIRST    EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  47 


but  to  reach  forth  in  blessing  to  all  the  unsaved.  3.  Final  result  of  their  conduct.  (1) 
In  guilt.  "To  fill  up  their  sins  alway."  There  is  here  a  reflection  of  our  Lord's 
words,  "  Fill  ye  up  then  the  measure  of  your  fathers."  The  Jews  were  on  their  trial  as 
a  nation.  In  this  trial  they  should  have  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  good  actions,  of 
service  to  the  world.  That  would  have  been  their  vindication  before  God.  Instead  of 
that,  they  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  sins.  There  is  significant  language  used  in 
Gen.  xv.  16,  "  But  in  the  fourth  generation  they  shall  come  hither  again ;  for  the 
iniquity  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full."  It  is  a  sad  thing  that  it  could  be  said  of 
the  Jews  with  Divine  helps,  as  of  the  Amorites  without  Divine  helps,  that  they  were 
filling  up  their  sins.  They  were  filling  up  their  sins  alway.  It  was  a  course  which 
they  did  not  alter  by  a  genuine  deep  conformed  repentance  as  a  nation.  The  general 
tendency  of  their  conduct,  both  before  Christ,  at  the  time  of  Christ,  and  after  Christ, 
was  to  fill  up  their  sins.  They  obstinately  put  away  God  from  them,  disregarded  the 
Divine  calls  and  warnings.  And  the  ultimate  result  of  such  conduct,  in  the  working 
out  of  the  eternal  purpose,  could  only  be  as  here  set  down,  the  bringing  of  the  measure 
of  their  sins  up  to  the  full.  (2)  In  punishment.  "  But  the  wrath  is  come  upon  them 
to  the  uttermost."  This  is  in  contrast  with  the  filling  up  of  their  sins,  in  their  oppo- 
sition to  God  and  man.  The  wrath  of  God,  which  is  here  mentioned  for  the  second 
time  in  the  Epistle,  is  to  be  thought  of  as  the  predestined  or  the  merited  wrath.  It  is 
a  wrath  which  descends  upon  nations  as  well  as  upon  individuals.  As  the  measure  of 
their  sins  is  thought  of  as  being  brought  up  to  the  full,  so  the  wrath  is  thought  of  as 
reaching  its  utmost  limit,  when  it  must  discharge  itself — when,  instead  of  probationary 
dealing,  there  must  be  inflictive  judgment.  The  inspired  writers  here  had  words  of 
our  Lord  on  which  to  proceed.  "  That  upon  you  may  come  all  the  righteous  blood 
shed  on  the  earth,  from  the  blood  of  Abel  the  righteous  unto  the  blood  of  Zacharias 
son  of  Barachiah,  whom  ye  slew  between  the  sanctuary  and  the  altar.  Verily  I  say 
unto  you,  All  these  things  shall  come  upon  this  generation."  The  apostolic  words  were 
written  within  fifteen  years  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  when  the  Jews  were  fiually 
rejected  as  a  nation.  There  is  hope  of  their  conversion  at  some  future  period ;  but  it 
cannot  be  said  that  to  this  day  the  wrath  of  God,  for  their  long  course  of  disobedience, 
has  been  removed. — B.  F. 

Vers.  17 — 20. — Great  desire  to  see  the  Thessalonians.  With  this  another  chapter 
might  fitly  have  commenced. 

I.  Their  desire  was  all  the  greater  that  they  were  orphaned  of  the  Thes- 
salonians. "  But  we,  brethren,  being  bereaved  of  you  for  a  short  season,  in  presence, 
not  in  heart,  endeavoured  the  more  exceedingly  to  see  your  face  with  great  desire." 
Very  different  were  Paul  and  his  associates  from  the  Jewish  persecutors.  They  had 
the  most  tender  feelings  toward  the  Thessalonians,  whom  they  acknowledge  as 
brethren.  The  principal  statement  is  that  they  were  orphaned.  It  is  a  word  whioh  is 
usually  applied  to  children  who  are  bereaved  of  their  parents.  It  is  here  adopted  as  a 
strong  word  to  express  the  great  pain  which  those  apostolic  men  felt  in  being  separated 
from  their  loved  converts.  They  have  already  called  themselves  father  and  mother  to 
the  Thessalonians.  Now  it  is  rather  the  Thessalonians  who  are  father  and  mother  to 
them,  of  whom  they  have  been  bereaved,  by  whom  they  have  been  left  desolate. 
Two  mitigating  circumstances  are  added.  It  was  separation  for  a  short  season,  literally, 
"  the  season  of  an  hour."  It  is  the  language  of  emotion.  It  was  but  the  season  of  an 
hour,  compared  with  the  time  they  would  be  together  in  the  better  world.  Then  it 
was  separation  in  presence,  not  in  heart.  Still,  with  these  mitigating  circumstances, 
they  were  in  an  orphaned  state.  All  the  more  exceedingly,  then,  were  they  zealous  to 
see  their  face  with  great  desire.  This  reference  to  the  effect  of  absence  is  a  touch  of 
nature  which  the  Thessalonians  could  well  appreciate. 

II.  Paul  was  hindered  in  having  his  desire  to  see  them  gratified.  "  Because 
we  would  fain  have  come  unto  you,  I  Paul  once  and  again ;  and  Satan  hindered  us." 
They  would  fain  have  come  unto  tbem.  Having  said  this,  Paul  (correctively  so  far) 
refers  to  two  definite  occasions  on  which  his  plans  were  to  proceed  to  Thessalonica, 
The  statement  did  not  pertain  to  Silas  and  Timothy,  as  they  were  probably  not  with 
him.  By  necessity  of  fact  he  therefore  detaches  himself  from  the  others :  "  I  Paul 
once  and  again."    And  once  and  twice  Satan  hindered  him.    There  is  distinct  test*- 


48  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—20. 

mony  here  to  Paul's  belief  in  a  personal  tempter.  Satan  appears  here  in  his  real  cha- 
racter as  adversary  of  God's  people.  Repeatedly  he  actually  succeeded  in  hindering 
Paul  in  his  good  intentions.  Though  only  a  secondary  agent,  he  has  a  wide  range  in 
the  use  of  means.  We  are  to  think  of  the  means  here  not  as  sickness  (which  was 
allowed  in  the  case  of  Job),  nor  as  other  work  needing  to  be  done  elsewhere,  hut  as 
difficulties  caused  by  the  working  of  evil  in  the  minds  of  persecuting  enemies  or 
unfaithful  friends.  The  language  is,  "Satan  hindered  us;"  for  there  was  not  only  a 
hindering  of  Paul,  but  of  Silas  and  Timothy  as  well,  who  were  interested  in  the 
advancement  of  the  cause  in  Thessalomca. 

III.  Esteem  was  the  reason  fob  desiring  to  see  the  Thessalonians.  "For 
what  is  our  hope,  or  joy,  or  crown  of  glorying?  Are  not  even  ye,  before  our  Lord  Jesus 
at  his  coming  ?  For  ye  are  our  glory  and  our  joy."  The  use  of  the  plural,  which 
begins  with  the  preceding  word,  illustrates  the  humility  and  generosity  of  the  apostle. 
As  in  the  next  statement  of  fact  he  has  to  slide  again  into  the  singular,  he  might 
naturally  have  preserved  the  singular  in  this  intermediate  burst  of  feeling.  But  he 
will  not  exclude  Silas  and  Timothy  when  it  is  possible  to  include  them.  These 
apostolic  men  had  their  hope.  Without  hope  it  is  not  possible  to  endure  existence. 
And  if  the  future  is  not  really  bright,  it  is  made  to  appear  bright  with  false  colours. 
They  had  not  only  their  hope,  but  their  joy  ;  i.e.  they  were  joyful  in  view  of  what  they 
hoped  for,  which  again  was  a  crown  of  glorying.  As  Christian  athletes  they  looked 
forward  to  their  wreath  of  victory.  This  is  thought  of  as  the  Thessalonian  converts, 
they  among  others.  These  conquerors  were  not  to  appear  alone  before  our  Lord  Jesus 
at  bis  coming.  But  their  converts  in  the  various  places  were  to  be  as  a  wreath  of 
victory  around  their  heads.  It  is  faith  that  brings  us  into  a  fundamentally  right 
relation  to  Christ ;  but  within  that  relation  there  is  room  for  greater  or  less  activity. 
The  teaching  here  is  that  we  are  to  aim  at  not  appearing  before  Christ  alone  at  his 
coming.  Christian  parents  and  Christian  ministers  ought  to  be  in  a  position  to  say 
then,  "  Behold  I,  and  the  children  whom  the  Lord  hath  given  me."  There  is  inci- 
dentally a  comforting  thought  in  the  language  used.  It  is  implied  that  Paul  would 
know  his  converts  at  Christ's  coming.  We  may,  therefore,  feel  certain  that  Christian 
friends  will  know  each  other  in  the  future  state.  And  what  a  stimulus  is  this  to  be 
unremitting  in  our  prayers  and  labours,  so  that  all  who  are  dear  to  us  shall  appear  in 
that  happy  company  at  last,  not  one  wanting  1  It  is  added,  "  For  ye  are  our  glory  and 
our  joy."  As  woman  is  said  to  be  the  glory  of  the  man,  so  converts  are  here  said  to  be 
the  glory  of  ministers.  The  Thessalonian  converts  were  a  halo  around  the  heads  of 
their  teaohers.  They  were  also  their  joy,  a  aource  of  deep  satisfaction,  as  their  wreath 
of  victory  at  the  looked-for  coming. — B.  F. 

Ver.  2. — Boldness  »'»   declaring  the  gospel.      I.  There  are  circumstances  that 

MAKR    THE   DECLARATION  OF  THE   GOSPEL   AN   ACT  OP    BOLDNESS.      St.    Paul    had    been 

"  shamefully  entreated  "  at  Philippi.  Danger  threatened  also  at  Thessalonica.  But  the 
apostle  wai  nothing  daunted,  not  even  holding  his  life  dear  in  the  prosecution  of  his 
great  mission.  Similar  dangers  beset  the  missionary  now,  and  no  one  has  a  right  to 
undertake  mission  work  who  is  not  prepared  to  endure  hardship  as  a  good  soldier  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Moral  courage  is  not  less  requisite  in  outwardly  peaceful  circumstances. 
The  discouragement  of  indifference,  the  chilliug  influence  of  ridicule,  and  even  the 
hindrance  of  direct  opposition,  will  meet  us  if  we  are  faithful  to  our  duty  of  declaring 
the  gospel  where  it  is  most  needed. 

IL  IT  18  THE  DOTY  OF  THOSE  WHO  ARE  ENTRUSTED  WITH  THE  GOSFKL  HOT  TO  SHRINK 
FROM  DECLARING  IT  IS  SPITE  OF  ADVERSE   CIRCUMSTANCES.      It  is   a  trust,  and  the   trust 

must  be  discharged  even  if  the  steward  die  at  his  post.  The  world  needs  the  gospel 
most  when  it  is  most  opposed  to  it.  For  the  sake  of  the  very  men  who  mock  or  resist 
us  we  must  faithfully  discharge  our  message.  Others  also  need  it  who  must  not  be 
kept  out  of  their  lawful  privileges  by  our  weak  fears.  Moreover,  the  glory  of  God  must 
be  sought  above  all  considerations  of  personal  safety.  How  strangely  that  passion  of 
devotion  to  Christ  which  inspired  the  apostles  to  preach  him  at  the  peril  of  their  lives 
contrasts  with  the  selfish,  comfort-loving  habits  of  many  who  have  undertaken  to 
discharge  the  duties  of  the  same  stewardship  in  our  own  day  1 

IIL   A   BOLD,  DECIDED  DECLARATION  OF   THE   GOSPEL  IS  ALWAYS   NECESSARY.      Chri» 


ch.  n.  1— 20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN8.  49 

tianity  1b  no  religion  for  cowards.  It  is  a  gross  error  to  suppose  that  it  unmans  its 
followers.  The  greatest  heroes  of  the  first  century  were  the  Christians.  A  manly 
courage  is  much  needed  in  the  present  day.  The  gospel  should  always  be  declared 
clearly,  positively,  and  confidently  by  those  who  have  a  sure  faith  in  it  themselves.  It 
is  a  great  mistake  to  think  that  a  timid,  apologetic  tone  will  be  more  conciliatory.  We 
have  no  need  to  be  thus  timidly  apologetic  for  the  gospel,  if  it  is  true ;  but  if  it  is  not 
true,  we  have  no  right  to  defend  it  at  all.  In  either  case  a  weak,  half-hearted  advocacy  is 
culpable.  Enmity  is  best  overcome  and  ridicule  shamed  by  courage.  It  is  most  foolish 
for  the  Christian  advocate  to  be  afraid  of  boldly  stating  his  beliefs  before  his  sceptical 
opponent.  Let  us,  however,  distinguish  true  boldness  from  heedless  provocativeness  on 
the  one  hand,  and  from  mere  insolence  on  the  other.  Christians  are  to  be  wise  as 
serpents,  to  be  courteous,  and  as  far  as  in  them  lies  to  live  peaceably  with  all  men. 

1Y.  The  source  of  Christian  boldness  is  in  God.  This  boldness  is  a  very  different 
thing  from  mere  brute  daring.  It  is  spiritual,  sober,  thoughtful.  It  has  to  face 
spiritual  as  well  as  carnal  foes.  It  comes,  like  other  Christian  graces,  as  an  inspiration 
from  the  Spirit  of  God.  They  who  are  most  deeply  in  communion  with  God  when  by 
themselves  will  be  most  thoroughly  brave  when  in  the  world.  Thus  Joshua  was  made 
courageous  by  his  vision  of  the  "captain  of  the  host  of  the  Lord"  (Josh.  v.  14). 
— W.  P.  A. 

Yw.  4. — Entrusted  with  the  gospel.  L  The  gospel  is  a  tbust.  1.  The  gospel  is  of 
great  value.  If  property  is  put  in  trust  it  is  presumably  valuable.  We  carefully 
guard  what  we  prize  highly.  God's  message  of  reconciliation  is  a  charter  of  liberty, 
a  covenant  of  grace,  a  promissory  note  of  future  blessings.  2.  The  gospel  needs  to  be 
guarded  and  administered.  It  is  in  danger  of  being  lost,  forgotten,  perverted,  and 
corrupted.  Trustees  are  required  in  order  to  preserve  it  in  its  integrity  and  to  give  it 
forth  to  those  who  need  it.  3.  The  gospel  is  entrusted  to  men.  There  are  those  who 
are  put  in  trust  with  the  gospel.  Men  are  to  trust  God ;  God  also  trusts  men.  lie 
confides  in  the  honour  and  devotion  of  his  people.  As  the  steward  is  entrusted  with 
his  master's  estate,  the  servant  of  God  receives  a  trust  of  the  rich  treasures  of  the 
gospel.  The  treasure  is  committed  to  earthen  vessels.  Thus  does  God  honour  his 
children  and  use  them  for  his  good  purposes. 

II.  The  trustees  of  the  gospel  abe  chosen  and  approved  of  God.  God  called 
the  prophets,  and  Christ  called  the  apostles.  Every  true  Christian  minister  is  called  of 
God.  The  Church  is  God's  chosen  company  of  trustees  of  the  gospel.  Christian 
nations  are  providentially  appointed  for  its  custodianship.  Certain  qualifications  are 
required  in  the  trustees,  in  order  that  they  may  be  approved  of  God.  1.  They  must 
hold  the  truth  themselves.  "  Not  of  error  "  (ver.  3).  The  first  requisites  are  an  under- 
standing of  and  a  belief  in  the  gospel.  2.  They  must  live  in  accordance  with  the 
truth.  "Nor  of  uncleanness."  The  trustee  of  the  holy  gospel  must  be  a  regenerate 
man.  Otherwise  his  conduct  will  damage  the  gospel  which  he  holds.  3.  They  must 
be  honest  in  the  discharge  of  the  trust.  "  Nor  in  guile."  No  self-seeking,  double- 
dealing,  or  men-pleasing  can  be  permitted  in  the  trustees  of  the  gospel.  They  must 
be  sincerely  devoted  to  the  truth  that  is  entrusted  to  them. 

HI.  The  trusteeship  of  the  gospel  imposes  important  duties.  1.  The_ gospel 
must  be  preserved  in  its  integrity.  The  trustees  are  not  permitted  to  tamper  with  the 
trust.  We  have  no  right  to  add  to  or  to  detract  from  the  gospel  as  it  is  given  to  us  in 
the  New  Testament.  It  is  a  matter  of  honour  that  one  who  holds  office  in  a  Christian 
Church  should  not  avail  himself  of  the  advantages  of  his  position  to  advance  private 
views  which  in  any  way  militate  against  what  is  contained  in  the  gospel  charter  on 
which  the  Church  is  founded.  The  New  Testament  is  a  trust-deed,  and  its  provisions 
must  be  studiously  observed,  or  the  trusteeship  implied  by  any  active  work  in  the 
Church  must  be  resigned.  Any  other  course  is  dishonest.  2.  The  trust  of  the  gospel 
must  be  discharged  for  the  benefit  of  those  for  whom  it  is  designed.  The  trustees 
must  study  the  interests  of  the  beneficiaries.  Trustees  of  the  gospel  are  teachers  of  the 
eospeL  This  truth  of  God  is  not  to  be  wrapped  up  in  a  napkin,  but  made  use  of  for 
the  good  of  mankind.  The  Jews  were  entrusted  with  the  oracles  of  God  that  ultimately 
the  Gentiles  might  receive  those  oracles  from  their  hands.  The  Church  is  intrusted 
with  the  gospel  that  she  may  convey  it  to  the  world.    The  trust  of  the  gospel  carries 

L,  THBSSAL0NIAH8.  ■ 


50  THE  PIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  h.  1—20. 

with  it  the  obligation  of  undertaking  missionary  enterprises.  3.  The  trust  of  the 
gospel  must  be  discharged  to  the  approved  of  God.  It  is  bis  trust.  He  will  call  the 
stewards  to  account.  Their  aim,  i  erefore,  must  be,  not  to  please  men,  but  "God 
which  proveth  our  hearts." — W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  use  of  affectionateness  in  commending  the  gospel.  It  is  Tory 
interesting  to  observe  what  a  wealth  of  affection  St.  Paul  poured  out  upon  the  Churches 
which  came  under  his  care.  He  was  not  satisfied  with  declaring  the  facts  of  the  gospel 
and  demonstrating  the  truth  of  them  to  the  conviction  of  his  hearers.  He  was  very 
different  from  a  cold  philosopher  who  simply  aims  at  establishing  a  certain  thesis. 
Deep  feeling  entered  into  his  work.  A  touching  gentleness  and  affectionateness  may 
be  felt  as  the  pervading  tone  of  his  treatment  of  his  converts.  He  does  not  behave  as  a 
master  who  is  ambitious  to  lord  it  over  the  heritage  of  Christ.  He  is  like  a  nurse  with  her 
children.   The  example  of  the  great  apostle  is  worthy  of  the  study  of  all  Christian  teachers. 

I.  The  gospel  is  best  commended  bt  affectionateness  in  the  Christian 
preaches.  The  gospel  bases  its  first  claims  on  its  own  truth  and  reasonableness,  and 
it  is  necessary  that  men  should  be  convinced  on  these  points  if  due  respect  for  the 
rights  of  the  human  intellect  is  to  be  observed.  Nevertheless  the  most  persuasive 
power  is  not  to  be  found  in  hard  reason;  nor  does  it  reside  in  the  splendours  of 
eloquence.  It  is  much  more  effective  when  it  comes  from  simple,  natural  affectionate- 
ness. Men  are  more  vulnerable  in  the  heart  than  in  the  head.  The  Christian  teacher 
must  attack  both  strongholds  ;  he  will  be  foolish  indeed  if  he  neglect  the  more  accessible 
one.  It  is  often  seen  in  experience  that  affectionateness  conquers  where  convincing 
logic  falls  dead,  and  where  glowing  rhetoric  only  dazzles  the  hearers.  1.  The  influence 
of  the  preacher  depends  chiefly  on  his  affectionateness.  His  relations  with  his  hearers 
are  personal.  He  is  more  than  the  herald.  He  is  the  shepherd  of  the  flock,  the 
father  or  brother  of  the  family,  the  nurse  of  the  babes  in  Christ.  Thus  ties  of  love 
between  pastor  and  people  not  only  make  the  association  in  Church  life  happy;  they 
also  afford  the  greatest  aids  to  the  work  of  the  ministry.  2.  The  truth  of  the  gospel  is 
best  revealed  through  affectionateness.  The  gospel  is  no  dreamy  dogma,  no  hard  law, 
no  pompous  manifesto.  It  is  a  message  from  a  father  to  his  children,  and  a  story  of 
lore  in  death.  The  Bible  is  a  most  human  book,  homely,  brotherly,  pathetic  in  its 
affectionate  character.  But  this  character  of  the  Bible  and  of  the  gospel  is  marred  and 
almost  lost  to  view  when  harsh  language  and  cold  feelings  accompany  the  preaching  of 
it.    The  gospel  of  love  should  be  offered  in  a  kindred  spirit  of  love. 

II.  A  right  feeling  of  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  will  lead  to  affectionateness 
in  the  Christian  preacher.  It  is  most  important  that  the  desired  affectionateness 
should  be  genuine.  The  pretence  of  it  is  mere  hypocrisy.  Affectionate  language 
which  does  not  spring  from  a  heart  of  love  is  a  mockery.  It  is  better  to  have  an  honest 
hardness  than  this  assumed  unctuousness.  It  is  important,  also,  that  the  affectionate- 
ness should  be  healthy  and  manly,  and  should  not  degenerate  into  effeminate  senti- 
mentality. The  gospel  itself  should  inspire  the  right  affectionateness.  1.  The  spirit 
of  the  gospel  being  love,  if  we  truly  receive  the  gospel  it  will  inspire  love.  The  greatest 
change  which  it  produces  in  men  is  to  cast  out  selfishness,  and  to  give  a  heart  of  love 
to  God  and  man.  2.  We  best  show  our  love  to  Christ  by  loving  our  brethren.  We 
love  Christ  in  them.  He  who  loves  Christ  warmly  will  have  the  spirit  which  St. 
Paul  manifested  to  the  Churches  under  his  care. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  12. —  Worthy  of  God.  I.  To  be  worthy  of  God  is  the  highest  aim  of 
spiritual  aspiration.  It  is  so  high  an  aim  that  it  seems  to  be  hopelessly  out  of  our 
reach.  Are  we  not  in  everything  unworthy  of  God  ?  Our  sinfulness  is  direct  ill-desert, 
our  unbelief,  weakness,  and  imperfection  dishonouring  to  Divine  grace,  our  very  virtues 
and  good  deeds  of  no  absolute  worth,  because  at  best  we  are  unprofitable  servants,  who 
have  but  done  that  which  it  was  our  duty  to  do.  Nevertheless  :  1.  We  should  aim  at 
the  highest  attainment,  though  as  yet  we  may  be  far  from  reaching  it.  2.  We  may 
become  increasingly  less  unworthy  of  God.  3.  We  may  truly  honour  God  by  our 
character  and  deeds.  4.  We  may  hope  at  last  to  be  worthy  of  God  in  the  sense  that 
we  shall  be  fit  to  dwell  with  him;  no  disgrace  to  his  Name  when  we  bear  it, and  able  to 
take  our  position  as  members  of  his  family. 


ch.  u.  1—20.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  61 

II.  To  BE   WORTHY   OF  GOD  IS  TO   BE  LIVING  IN  A  BIGHT  COURSE  OF   DAILY   LIFE. 

This  is  expressed  by  the  word  "  walk."  1.  It  must  be  a  continuous  course.  To  have 
passing  phases  of  very  pure  spiritual  thought  is  not  to  be  so  worthy  of  God  as  to  walk 
continuously  in  obedience  to  his  will  though  on  a  much  lower  plain.  2.  It  is  to  be 
■striven  after  in  daily  life.  We  do  not  want  angels' wings  wherewith  to  soar  into 
unearthly  altitudes.  We  can  walk  on  the  lowly  earth  and  yet  be  worthy  of  God. 
The  worthiness  depends  on  the  spirit  of  our  conduct,  not  on  the  sphere  in  which  we 
live.  With  coarse  surroundings,  in  toilsome  drudgery,  by  humble  tasks,  the  soul  can 
so  live  as  to  be  worthy  of  God. 

III.  It  is  the  duty  of  all  Chbistians  to  be  worthy  of  God.  The  requirement 
does  not  belong  to  a  counsel  of  perfection  which  a  few  rare  souls  may  adopt  at  their 
will.  It  is  laid  upon  all  Christians  as  a  duty.  The  special  ground  of  the  obligation  is 
in  what  God  has  done  for  his  people.  He  has  called  them  "  into  his  own  kingdom  and 
glory."  1.  Gratitude  requires  us  to  walk  worthy  of  God.  His  gifts  and  his  promises 
reveal  love  and  sacrifice  on  his  part  which  naturally  call  for  love  and  devotion  on  ours. 
2.  The  future  destiny  of  Christians  also  demands  this  conduct.  The  heir  should  behave  as 
befits  his  future  position.  "  Prince  Hal "  was  an  unworthy  prince  in  his  youth,  especially 
because  he  disgraced  himself  in  view  of  an  exalted  future.  Christians  are  heirs  of  God's 
kingdom.     Therefore  they  should  walk  worthily  of  him  who  has  called  them  into  it. 

IV.  It  is  the  object  of  Christian  preaching  to  lead  men  to  be  thus  worthy 
of  God.  If  the  aim  of  the  spiritual  life  must  be  high,  so  also  must  be  that  of  its  guide 
Mini  teacher.  The  preacher's  work  is  not  done  when  a  soul  is  first  turned  from  the 
slavery  of  sin  to  the  service  of  Christ.  Then  follows  all  the  education  and  training  of 
the  new  life  up  to  the  perfect  worthiness.  Hence  the  need  of  affectionate  influence  and 
all  graces  of  persuasion. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  13.— The  Word  of  Qod.  I.  St.  Paul  claimed  to  be  a  teacher  of  the 
Word  of  God.  1.  He  did  not  admit  that  his  teachings  were  merely  human  specula- 
tions on  religious  subjects.  His  position  was  entirely  different  from  that  of  the  most 
gifted  philosopher,  more  exalted  since  he  stood  forth  as  the  apostle  of  superhuman 
truth,  and  also  more  humble  since  he  subordinated  his  own  private  ideas  to  the  message 
of  which  he  was  but  the  bearer.  2.  St.  Paul  did  not  profess  to  be  simply  a  witness  of 
the  facts  of  the  gospel.  That  was  the  position  of  the  first  Christian  teachers.  St.  Peter 
and  his  companions  of  the  day  of  Pentecost  presented  themselves  as  witnesses  of  the 
great  transactions  of  the  life  of  Christ,  and  chiefly  of  his  resurrection.  They  narrated 
what  they  had  seen  and  heard  (Acts  ii.  32 ;  1  John  i.  1).  St.  Paul  had  not  been  a 
companion  of  our  Lord.  But  he  had  something  higher  than  the  knowledge  of  experience 
and  observation.  He  did  not  learn  his  gospel  of  men ;  it  was  revealed  to  him  in  the 
solitudes  of  Arabia.  3.  <S(.  Paul  claimed  to  be  inspired  with  a  Divine  revelation. 
It  was  not  his  thought,  nor  even  his  testimony  of  Divine  facts,  but  the  Word  of  God 
that  he  proclaimed.  It  is  plain  that  the  apostle  used  his  own  language,  and  spoke  in 
a  characteristic  and  individual  style.  He  also  reasoned  with  his  own  intellect ;  for 
inspiration  does  not  simply  breathe  through  a  man  as  through  a  mechanical  instrument. 
But  his  language  and  thought  and  whole  being  were  illumined  and  eleyated  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  >o  that  he  saw  the  truth  of  God  and  was  able  to  speak  the  Word  of  God. 

II.  The  Thkssalonians  accepted  St.  Paul's  message  as  the  Word  of  God.  1. 
They  admitted  the  fact.  They  did  so,  no  doubt,  first  because  the  power  and  personal 
influence  of  the  apostle  impressed  them ;  then  because  they  were  convinced  by  his 
arguments ;  then  because  they  must  have  felt  the  inherent  beauty  and  greatness  of 
what  he  taught ;  and  lastly  because  they  saw  the  good  effects  of  his  gospel.  By  these 
four  gradations  we  are  led  on  to  a  more  and  more  consistent  belief  in  the  Divine  authority 
of  the  gospel ;  viz.  by  authority,  by  argument,  by  the  excellency  of  the  gospel  itself, 
and  by  its  fruits.  2.  The  Thessalonians  received  the  message  as  befitted  its  Divine 
origin.  (1)  They  believed  in  its  truth.  God  only  speaks  what  is  true.  To  establish 
a  message  as  the  Word  of  God  is  to  prove  its  truth.  (2)  They  submitted  to  its 
authority.  There  may  be  many  things  in  the  gospel  which  we  cannot  account  for. 
Our  faith  in  God  should  be  implicit.  (3)  They  yielded  to  its  influence.  Thus  they  let 
it  work  in  them.  The  Word  of  God  is  a  word  of  grace  and  a  word  of  command.  To 
accept  it  aright  we  must  avail  ourselves  of  the  grace  and  obey  the  command.    To 


52  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE   TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  ii.  1—20. 

receive  •  word  of  pardon  as  from  a  king  is  to  leave  the  prison  when  the  door  is  open. 
To  receive  a  message  as  from  a  master  is  to  carry  out  the  order. 

III.  St.  Paul's  teaching  proved  itself  to  be  the  Word  op  God  bt  its  effects. 
It  was  found  to  be  working  in  the  Church  at  Thessalonica.  The  Word  of  God  is 
powerful  (Heb.  iv.  12).  Christ's  words  were  spirit  and  life  (John  vi.  63).  This  Divine 
Word  is  no  barren  revelation  of  far-off  celestial  curiosities.  It  is  a  message  concerning 
human  and  earthly  as  well  as  heavenly  affairs.  Like  the  first  creative  word,  when 
God  spake  and  it  was  done,  the  message  of  the  new  creation  is  a  word  that  effects. 
God's  words  are  deeds.  But  that  they  may  be  deeds  in  us  it  is  necessary  for  us  to 
receive  them  in  faith.  And  in  proportion  to  our  faith  will  the  energy  cf  God's  Word 
work  in  us.— W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  16. — Fulness  of  sins.  "  To  fill  up  their  sins  alway."  This  is  a  terrible  and 
myst'  "ious  expression.  Some  light  may  be  gained  by  considering  it  in  relation  to  the 
history  of  the  Jews,  as  it  is  of  these  people  that  it  is  here  written.  They  had 
accumulated  sin  upon  sin  in  slaying  Christ  and  the  prophets,  in  expelling  the  apostles 
from  their  communis  n,  and  finally  in  hindering  the  Gentiles  from  receiving  that  gospel 
which  they  had  rejected  for  themselves.  But  there  was  to  come  an  end  to  this  tale  of 
wickedness.  The  time  was  drawing  near  when  the  Jews  would  no  longer  have  power 
to  hurt  the  cause  of  Christianity,  and  when  swift  punishment  for  their  accumulated 
iniquities  would  descend  in  (he  destruction  of  their  city  and  nation.  They  were 
hastening  to  fill  up  thi  sins  which  must  issue  in  this  fearful  doom. 

L  The  greatest  sin  is  that  of  sinning  without  restraint.  It  is  a  mistake  to 
speak  of  every  sin  as  of  infinite  guilt,  or  of  all  sins  as  equally  guilty.  Such  an  assertion 
is  not  only  false,  it  tends  either  to  despair  or  to  reckless  excess  in  sinning.  However 
far  one  has  gone  in  sin,  it  is  better  to  stop  than  to  go  on  to  greater  enormities.  To  be 
adding  sin  to  sin,  and  to  be  sinning  "  alway,"  are  signs  of  reckless,  abandoned  depravity. 

II.  There  is  a  fulness  of  sins  which  brings  its  own  penalty.  When  sin  reaches 
this  point  the  penalty  can  no  longer  be  stayed.  The  cup  once  full  flows  over  in  wrath 
and  ruin.  It  is  as  though  forbearance  and  guilt  were  in  the  scales.  When  guilt  is  full 
the  balance  dips.  There  is  an  end  to  all  possible  long-suffering.  The  more  men  go  on 
in  excesses  of  sin,  the  faster  do  they  approach  the  inevitable  day  of  reckoning.  The 
sooner  the  sin  is  filled  up  to  the  measure  which  passes  endurance,  the  sooner  must  the 
stroke  of  doom  fall. 

III.  Fulness  of  bins  must  lead  to  fulness  of  punishment.  They  who  fill  up 
their  sins  always  will  have  the  wrath  "  come  upon  them  to  the  uttermost."  The 
worst  debtor  must  be  made  to  pay  the  last  farthing.  The  swifter  the  rush  downhill, 
the  greater  the  crash  at  the  bottom.  The  more  tares  that  are  sown  in  spring,  the 
more  bundles  to  burn  in  harvest.  He  who  fills  the  present  life  with  sins  will  have  the 
next  life  filled  with  wrath. 

IV.  There  seems  to  be  a  limit  to  sinb.  There  is  a  fulness  of  sins.  There  is  no 
fulness  of  virtues ;  these  can  be  developed  indefinitely.  The  good  man  is  growing  up 
to  a  perfection.  The  bad  man  is  being  corrupted,  not  to  a  perfection,  but  to  a  fulness. 
Evil  has  limits  ;  goodness  has  none.  Satan  is  let  loose  for  a  time.  G  id  restrains  the 
wrath  of  the  wicked.  Sin,  through  rebellion  against  God,  cannot  break  away  from  all 
Divine  control.  Sins  are  limited  by  several  means  :  1.  Capacity.  We  have  a  limited 
power  of  sinning.  2.  Time.  God  sometimes  cuts  the  sinner  off  in  the  midst  of  his 
days,  and  brings  the  guilty  nation  to  destruction.  3.  Providential  control.  The 
fulness  of  sins  is  not  the  amount  which  God  predestines  to  be  committed,  for  God  is 
not  the  author  of  sin,  nor  does  he  will  or  permit  it.  This  fulness  is  the  measure 
beyond  which  God  stays  the  evil  from  proceeding.  When  the  tide  of  iniquity,  driven 
onwards  by  rebellious  powers,  reaches  this  fulness,  God  says,  "  Here  shall  thy  proud 
waves  be  stayed,"  and  the  storm  beats  itself  out  in  impotent  fury. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  IS.— Hindered  by  Satan.  St.  Paul  tells  his  friends  at  Thessalonica  that  he 
was  anxious  to  revisit  them,  and  that  he  made  the  attempt  to  do  so  more  than  once, 
but  that  he  was  hindered   by  Satan.    The  direct  impediment  may   have  been  the 

opposition  of  his  enemies  (Acts  xvii.  13, 14)  ;  or  it  may  have  been  bodily  sickness "  a 

thorn  in  the  flesh,  a  messenger  of  Satan."    Whatever  this  immediate  and  visible  hin- 


oh.  m.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


53 


drance  was,  the  point  of  interest  to  us  is  that  St.  Paul  attributed  it  to  Satan.    Let  us 
consider  the  hindrance  thrown  in  the  way  of  good  work  by  Satan. 

I.  Satan  hinders  the  work  of  the  gospel.  1.  The  hindrance  is  to  be  seen  in  all 
times.  Doors  are  shut ;  enemies  are  raised  up ;  misunderstandings  throw  mission  work 
into  confusion.  2.  The' source  of  the  hindrance  may  be  discovered  by  its  character. 
"By  their  fruits  they  shall  know  them."  The  excuse  maybe  the  preservation  of 
order,  the  restraint  of  excesses,  or  conservative  respect  for  old  ways.  That  the  real 
source  of  opposition  is  Satanic  may  be  known  when  (1)  bad  men  are  the  agents,  (2)  a 
good  moral  reformation  is  frustrated.  3.  This  hindrance  converts  mission  work  into  a 
warfare.  The  Church  becomes  an  army.  The  forces  of  light  and  darkness  are  drawn 
up  in  battle  array.  New  territory  cannot  simply  be  claimed  by  planting  the  standard 
of  the  cross  upon  it.     It  must  be  fought  for  and  won  in  conquest. 

II.  Satan's  hindrance  is  independent  op  the  character  of  the  Christian 
labourers.  Of  course,  if  these  men  receive  Satan  into  their  hearts,  so  much  the  more 
effectually  will  their  mission  be  frustrated.  They  become  traitors  who  destroy  their 
own  cause  by  opening  the  gates  of  the  citadel  to  the  foe.  Sin  indulged  by  the  servant 
of  Christ  is  treason.  This  is  a  certain  and  fearful  hindrance  to  success.  But  the 
Christian  labourer  may  be  faithful  and  may  still  be  hindered  by  Satan.  In  the  old 
tradition  Satan  dared  to  oppose  the  archangel  Michael.  Shall  we  be  surprised  that  he 
opposes  a  man?  Satan  resisted  and  tempted  Christ.  He  hindered  St.  Paul.  There- 
fore do  not  let  us  think  that  all  difficulties  will  vanish  if  only  we  are  true  and  faithful. 
Satan  may  hinder  us,  though  we  are  innocent,  through  the  wickedness  of  other  men. 

III.  Satan's  hindrance  is  overruled  by  God's  providence.  Here  St.  Paul  writes 
of  Satan  hindering  him.  In  the  Acts  St.  Luke  tells  us  how,  when  the  apostle  and  his 
friends  "assayed  to  go  into  Bithynia,  .  .  .  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  suffered  them  not  "(Acts 
xvi.  7).  Is  it  not  possible  that  sometimes  the  two  influences  may  have  concurred  in 
effecting  the  same  results  though  originating  in  the  very  opposite  sources  and  prompted 
by  contradictory  motives?  Thus  the  messenger  of  Satan  that  was  sent  to  buffet  St. 
Paul  was  the  means  of  applying  a  wholesome  discipline  and  of  saving  him  from  undue 
self-exaltation.  Thus,  too,  though  Satan  troubled  Job,  with  the  object  of  showing  him 
to  be  a  hypocrite  ;  the  great  trial  proved  to  be  for  the  glory  of  God  as  well  as  for  the 
honour  of  his  servant.  Satan  tempted  Christ,  and  so  made  him  the  better  High  Prient 
for  us.  Satan  compassed  the  death  of  Christ,  and  thereby  led  to  the  redemption  of 
the  world.  Satan's  hindrance  to  our  work  may  be  overruled  for  its  more  full  accom- 
plishment in  the  end,  just  as  the  east  winds  of  early  spring  help  to  secure  a  good  fruit 
harvest  by  checking  the  too-early  development  of  bud  and  blossom.  Moreover,  all  this 
hindrance  is  but  temporary.  Satan's  reign  is  lor  a  season  only.  And  when  the  hin- 
drance is  removed  the  final  result  will  not  have  suffered  for  the  delay.  Perhaps  it  will 
even  come  the  quicker  for  the  temporary  hindrance,  as,  when  once  it  bursts  its  bounds, 
the  stream  rushes  out  with  the  more  vehemence  for  having  been  dammed  up.  Let  us 
not  be  impatient.     Remember  that  God  has  all  eternity  to  work  with. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IIL 


Contents. — The  apostle,  no  longer  able 
to  repress  his  longing  and  anxiety  for  the 
Thessalonians,  resolved  to  be  left  alone  at 
Athens,  and  sent  Timothy  for  the  purpose 
of  exhorting  thgm  to  endurance  amid  their 
persecutions,  and  to  bring  him  information 
concerning  their  condition.  Timothy  had 
just  rejoined  him  at  Corinth,  and  the 
apostle  expresses  the  extreme  satisfaction 
which  he  felt  at  the  welcome  tidings  which 
his  messenger  had  brought  of  their  faith 


and  love;  it  put  new  life  into  him,  and 
comforted  him  in  all  his  affliction  and 
distress.  He  prays  God  that  he  may  be 
permitted  to  revisit  the  Thessalonians,  and 
to  supply  what  waB  still  defective  in  their 
faith;  and  lie  makes  it  the  object  of  his 
earnest  supplication  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
would  make  them  so  to  increase  in  love  and 
establish  them  in  holiness  that  they  may 
be  blameless  at  his  appearance  with  all  his 
holy  ones. 

Ver.  1. — This  verse  if  closely  connected 
with    the   concluding    verses    of   the    last 


54 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  in.  1—13. 


chapter,    from    which    it   should    not    he 

separated.  ^Therefore;  on  account  of  my 
affection  loward  you  and  my  repeated  vain 
attemptB  to  see  you.  When  we.  Some  refer 
the  plural  to  Paul,  Silas,  and  Timothy  (ch. 
i.  1);  others  to  Paul  and  Silas,  as  Timothy 
had  been  sent  to  Thessalonica ;  but  it  is  to 
be  restricted  to  Paul,  as  is  evident  from 
eh.  ii.  38  and  iii.  5,  and  inasmuch  as  Paul 
was  left  alone  at  Athens ;  the  plural  being 
here  used  for  the  singular.  Could  no  longer 
forbear ;  could  no  longer  restrain  our  long- 
ing and  anxiety  to  know  your  condition. 
We  thought  it  good ;  a  happy  translation  of 
the  original,  expressing  both  "  we  were 
pleased  and  resolved."  To  he  left  at  Athens 
alone ;  an  expression  of  solitude.  Alone  in 
Athens,  in  the  very  metropolis  of  idolatry. 
Compare  with  this  the  common  saying, 
"Alone  in  London."  In  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  we  are  informed  that  Paul  came 
to  Athens  alone,  and  that  there  he  waited 
for  Silas  and  Timothy  (Acts  xvii.  14,  15), 
and  that  these  fellow-workers  rejoined  him 
at  Corinth  (Acts  xviii.  5).  Many  expositors, 
however,  from  this  and  the  next  verse,  infer 
that  Timothy  at  least  joined  Paul  at  Athens, 
but  was  sent  back  by  him  to  Thessalonica, 
to  inquire  into  the  condition  of  his  converts 
in  that  city.  Such  is  the  opinion  of 
Olshausen,  Neander,  De  Wette,  Liinemann, 
Hofmann,  Koch,  and  Schott ;  and,  among 
English  expositors,  of  Macknight,  Paley, 
Eadie,  Jowett,  Ellicutl,  and  Wordsworth. 
There  is  no  contradiction  between  this  view 
and  the  narrative  of  the  Acts.  Luke  merely 
omits  to  mention  Timothy's  short  visit  to 
Athens  and  departure  from  it,  and  relates 
only  the  final  reunion  of  these  three  fellow- 
workers  at  Corinth.  Indeed,  Paley  gives 
this  coming  of  Timothy  to  Athens  as  one  of 
the  undesigned  coincidences  between  this 
Epistle  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.1 
Still,  however,  we  are  not  necessitated  to 
suppose  that  Timothy  joined  the  apostle  at 
Athens.  The  words  admit  of  the  opinion 
that  he  was  sent  by  Paul  direct  from  Beroea, 
and  not  from  Athens;  and  that  he  and 
Silas  did  not  join  Paul  until  they  came 
from  Macedonia  to  Corinth.  Such  is  the 
opinion  of  Hug,  Wieseler,  Koppe,  Alford, 
and  Vaughan. 

Ver.  2. — And  sent  Timotheus.  This  was 
a  great  aot  of  self-sacrifice  on  the  part  of 
Paul ;  because  to  be  without  an  assistant 
and  fellow-labourer  in  the  gospel  in  such  a 
city  as  Athens,  the  very  centre  and  strong 
hold  of  heathenism,  full  of  temples  and 
idols,  must  necessarily  have  brought  upon 
him  many  discomforts ;  and  yet  his  anxiety 
for  the  Thessalonians  overcame  all  motives 


1    Paley's  4Hor»  Paulina,'   1  Thessalo- 
limns,  No.  iii 


of  personal  convenience.  Our  brother,  and 
minister  of  God,  and  our  fellow-labourer. 
The  reading  of  manuscripts  here  varies. 
Some  important  manuscripts  read,  "our 
brother  and  fellow-worker  with  God" — a 
phrase  which  is  elsewhere  employed  by  the 
apostle:  "for  we  are  labourers  together 
with  God"  (1  Cor.  iii.  9).  Retaining, 
however,  the  reading  of  the  text,  Paul  here 
calls  Timothy  his  brother,  expressing  his 
esteem  and  fraternal  affection  for  him;  "a 
minister  of  God,"  expressing  Timothy's 
official  position  and  the  honour  conferred 
on  him  by  Christ;  and  his  "  fellow-labourer," 
expressing  his  laborious  work  in  preaching 
the  gospel,  and  reminding  the  Thessalonians 
of  his  labours  among  them.  Different 
reasons  have  been  assigned  for  this  eulogy 
pronounced  by  Paul  on  Timothy.  Some 
suppose  that  it  was  to  show  how  eagerly  he 
consulted  the  welfare  of  the  Thessalonians, 
by.  sending  to  them  a  person  of  such  im- 
portance and  of  such  use  to  himself  as 
Timothy  (Calvin) ;  others  think  that  it  was 
to  recommend  Timothy  to  the  favourable 
regard  of  the  Thessalonians  in  the  absence 
of  himself  (Chrysostom) ;  but  it  appears  to 
be  the  natural  outburst  of  affection  for  his 
favourite  disciple.  In  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
Timothy  had  laboured  with  Paul  and  Silas 
in  the  publication  of  the  gospel  at  Thessa- 
lonica, and  was  consequently  well  known  to 
the  Thessalonians,  and  favourably  regarded 
by  them.  To  establish  you,  and  to  comfort 
yon ;  or  rather,  to  exhort  you,  as  the  matter  of 
exhortation  follows.  Concerning  your  faith ; 
in  order  to  the  continuance  and  furtherance 
of  your  faith.  The  purpose  of  the  mission 
of  Timothy  ;  namely,  to  confirm  the  Thessa- 
lonians in  the  faith,  to  exhort  them  to 
perseverance  in  Christianity,  notwithstand- 
ing the  persecutions  to  which  they  were 
exposed. 

Ver.  3. — This  verse  contains  the  objeot  of 
the  exhortation ;  the  clause  is  au  accusative 
to  the  verb.  That  no  man  should  be  moved 
(or,  shaken)  by;  or  rather,  in;  expressing 
the  position  in  which  they  were  placed. 
These  affile „ions.  The  same  word  as  "  tribula- 
tion "  in  the  next  verse.  For  yourselves  know. 
How  they  knew  is  explaineil,  partly  from 
the  forewarnings  of  the  apostle,  and  partly 
from  their  own  experience.  That  we ;  not  to 
be  referred  to  Paul  only,  nor  to  Paul  and 
his  companions,  Silas  and  Timothy,  nor  to 
Paul  and  the  Thessalonians,  but  to  all 
Christians  in  general ;  that  we  Christians. 
Are  appointed  thereunto ;  namely,  bv  God. 
Our  afflictions  do  not  result  from  chance, 
but  are  the  necessary  consequence  of  our 
Christianity;  they  arise  from  the  appoint- 
ment and  ordinance  of  God.  Tribulation  is 
the  Christian's  portion.  Whatever  truth 
there  may  be  in  the  saying  thfit  prosperity 


<*.  in.  1— 13.]    THE  SlRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


is  the  promise  of  the  Old  Testament, 
affliction  is  certainly  the  promise  of  the 
New.  We  must  be  conformed  to  Christ  in 
his  sufferings.  "  In  the  world,"  says  our 
Lord,  "ye  shall  hare  tribulation"  (John 
xvi.  33).  When  our  Lord  called  Paul  to 
his  apostleship,  he  showed  him  how 
great  tilings  he  must  suffer  for  his  Name's 
sake  (Acts  ix.  16).  All  the  apostles 
suffered  from  persecution,  and  concerning 
Christians  in  genera  1  Paul  asserts  that  it  is 
only  through  tribulation  that  they  can 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  (Acts  xiv. 
22 ;  see  Rev.  vii.  14). 

Ver.  4.- For;  assigning  tlie  reason  why 
they  sliould  not  be  moved  by  these  afflic- 
tion s.  Verily,  when  we  were  with  you,  we  told 
you  before  that  we  ;  here  also  Christians  in 
general.  Should  suffer.  Not  a  simple  future, 
but  denoting  that  it  was  thus  appointed  in 
the  counsels  of  God — that  their  tribulation 
was  the  result  of  the  Divine  purpose. 
Tribulation  (affliction) ;  even  as  it  came  to 
pass,  and  ye  know ;  that  is,  from  your  own 
experience.  The  affliction,  then,  was  not 
some  strange  thing  which  had  befallen 
them. 

Yer.  5.— For  this  cause,  when  I  could  no 
longer  forbear ;  no  longerTepress  my  anxiety, 
and  endure  my  want  of  information  con- 
cerning you.  I  sent  to  know  your  faith ;  to 
receive  information  concerning  your  spiritual 
condition.  Lest  by  some  means  the  tempter ; 
a  designation  of  Satan,  used  also  by  Matthew 
(iv.  3).  Have  tempted  you,  and  our  labour 
be  in  vain ;  that  is,  useless,  without  result 
(see  on  ch.  ii.  1;  oomp.  also  Gal.  iv.  11,  "I 
am  afraid,  lest  I  have  bestowed  upon  you 
labour  in  vain").  The  temptation  to 
which  the  Thessiilnnians  were  exposed  was 
that  of  apodlasy  from  Christianity,  through 
the  fear  or  endurance  of  persecution.'  That 
the  tempter  had  tempted  them  is  probable 
— it  was  almost  unavoidable;  that  he  had 
succeeded  in  his  temptation,  and  had  thus 
rendered  the  apostle's  labours  among  them 
useless,  was  uncertain — a  contingency  which 
might  possibly  have  taken  place. 

Ver.  (J. — But  now  when  Timothens  oame 
from  you  unto  us.  Timothy,  as  we  learn 
from  the  Acts,  in  company  with  Silas, 
joined  Paul  at  Corinth  (Acts  xviii.  15),  and 
brought  him  information  concerning  the 
state  of  the  Thessalonian  Church.  And 
brought  us  good  tidings;  the  same  word 
which  is  elsewhere  employed  for  preaching 
the  gospel.  The  information  which  Timothy 
brought  to  the  apostle  was  as  it  were  a 
gospel  to  him  (comp.  Luke  ii.  10,  "  Behold 
I  bring  you  good  tidings").  Of  your 
faith  and  oharity.  The  good  tidings  which 
Timothy  brought  referred  to  the  spiritual 
condition  of  the  Thessalonians — th.  ir  faith 
had  not  been  shaken  and  their  lnv<»  had  not 


waxed  cold  under  the  persecutions  to  which 
they  were  exposed ;  and  along  with  thei  i 
faith  and  love  was  the  affection  which  they 
bore  to  the  apostle,  and  their  earnest  desire 
to  see  him.  And  that  ye  have  oonstant 
remembranoe  of  us  always,  desiring  greatly 
to  see  us,  as  we  also  to  see  you.  The  affec- 
tion between  the  Thessalonians  and  the 
apostle  was  mutual. 

Ver.7. — Therefore,  brethren,  we  were  com- 
forted over  you — with  reference  to  you — in 
all  our  affliction  and  distress.  Some  refer 
"  affliction  "  to  outward  troubles,  and  "  dis- 
tress" to  internal  evils — referring  the  one 
to  the  persecutions  arising  from  his  Corin- 
thian opponents,  and  the  other  to  his  bodily 
infirmity  (Koch).  Such  a  distinction  is, 
however,  precarious.  The  words  do  not 
refer  to  the  apostle's  anxiety  on  account  of 
the  Thessalonians,  for  that  was  removed  by 
the  coming  of  Timothy.  Clearly  some  ex- 
ternal trouble  is  denoted.  Paul,  when  he 
preached  the  gospel  at  Corinth,  and  before 
he  obtained  the  protection  of  Gallio,  was 
exposed  to  much  persecution  and  danger. 
The  Jews  had  expelled  him  from  their 
synagogue  (Acts  xviii.  6),  and  attempts  had 
been  made  against  him  which  at  length 
broke  out  into  an  insurrection  against  him, 
when  he  was  dragged  before  the  Roman 
tribunal  (Acts  xviii.  12).  His  condition  at 
Corinth  when  he  wrote  this  Epistle  was 
dark  and  gloomy.  By  your  faith ;  by  the 
steadfastness  of  your  faith.  The  good  news 
which  Timothy  brought  of  the  faith  and 
love  of  the  Thessalonians  comforted  the 
apostle  amid  all  the  trials  and  difficulties 
and  disappointments  of  his  ministry  (comp. 
with  this  passage  2  Cor.  vii.  4 — 7). 

Ver.  8. — For  no  w  we  live.  Not  to  be  referred 
to  the  eternal  and  future  life  (Chrysostom) ; 
or  to  be  weakened  as  if  it  merely  signified, 
"  We  relish  yaA  enjoy  life  notwithstanding 
our  affliction  and  distress"  (Pelt);  but  the 
meaning  is  the  good  tidings  which  Timothy 
has. brought  have  imparted  new  life  unto 
us ;  "we  are  in  the  full  strength  and  fresh- 
ness of  life,  we  do  not  feel  the  sorrows  and 
tribulations  which  the  outer  world  prepares 
for  us"  (Lunemann).  The  apostle  con- 
siders his  condition  of  affliction  and  distress 
as  a  kind  of  death  ;  so,  elsewhere  he  says, 
"I  die  daily"  (1  Cor.  xv.  31);  and  from 
which  death  he  was  now  again  raised  to 
life.  If ;  provided — a  hypothetical  assump- 
tion. Ye  stand  fast;  continue  firm  in  the 
faith  of  the  gospel.  In  the  Lord;  the 
element  of  true  life. 

Ver.  9. — For;  assigning  the  reason  of  the 
declaration,  "  now  we  live."  What  thanks 
can  we  render  to  God  again  for  you.  As 
their  steadfastness  in  the  faith  was  owing 
to  God's  grace,  thanks  was  to  be  rendered  to 
God  on  their  behalf.    For  all  the  joy ;  joy 


M 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  m.  1—13. 


in  all  its  fulness  (comp.  Jan.  i.  2,  "  Count  it 
all  joy  ").  Wherewith  we  joy  for  your  sakes 
before  our  God.  Giving  prominence  to  the 
purity  of  their  joy. 

Ver.  10. — Night  and  day  (comp.  ch.  ii.  9) 
praying  exceedingly.  Denoting  the  intense 
earnestness  and  anxiety  of  the  apostle  for 
the  spiritual  welfare  of  the  Thessalonians, 
that  found  vent  to  itself  in  incessant  prayer 
for  them.  Now  follows  the  subject-matt,  r 
of  bis  prayer:  That  we  might  see  your  face, 
and  might  perfect  that  which  is  lacking  in 
your  faith.  The  faith  of  the  Thessalonians 
was  not  perfect ;  it  was  "  lacking  "  in  several 
respeetg.  It  was  defective  in  extent ;  they 
were  ignorant  of  many  of  the  doctrines  of 
the  gospel,  and  had  formed  erroneous  views 
of  other  doctrines,  such  as  the  second 
advent.  It  was  defective  in  application  ; 
t.iey  had  not  yet  renounced  all  the  corrupt 
practices  of  their  former  heathen  life,  nor 
had  they  embodied  all  the  precepts  of  the 
gospel  into  their  actual  life.  The  Thessa- 
lonians were  as  yet  but  novices.  So  also 
the  reason  which  impelled  Paul  to  wish  to 
come  to  Rome  was  to  supply  that  which  was 
lacking  in  the  faith  of  the  Roman  converts 
(Rom.  i.  11).  Confirmation  was  a  work  in 
which  the  apostle  delighted,  being  both 
important  and  desirable  In  general,  faith 
at  first  is  weak  and  defective ;  it  is  only 
developed  by  degrees.  Especially  is  it  in- 
creased by  every  increase  of  spiritual  know- 
ledge. "  Add  to  your  faith  knowledge  "  (2 
Pet.  i.  5,  6).  The  remark  of  Calvin  is 
worthy  of  attention :  "  Paul  is  desirous  of 
having  the  opportunity  given  him  of  sup- 
plying what  is  wanting  in  the  faith  of  the 
Thessalonians,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing, 
completing  in  all  its  parts  their  faitli  which 
was  as  yet  imperfect.  Yet  this  is  the  faith 
which  he  had  previously  extolled  mar- 
vellously. From  this  we  infer  that  those 
who  far  surpass  others  are  still  far  distant 
from  the  goal.  Hence,  whatever  progress 
we  may  have  made,  let  us  keep  in  view  our 
deficiencies,  that  we  may  not  be  reluctant 
to  aim  at  something  further." 

Ver.  11. — Now  God  himself  and  our 
Father;  or,  as  we  would  express  it  according 
to  the  English  idiom,  God  himself,  our  Father, 
omitting  theconj  unction.  And  our  Lord  Jesus 


Christ.  Some  suppose  that  the  three  Divine 
Persons  of  the  sacred  Trinity  are  here  ex- 
pressly named :  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
the  Father,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  but 
the  words  in  the  originnl  will  not  bear  this 
sense:  "God  himself  and  our  Father"  is 
the  same  Divine  Person.  Direct.  It  is  to 
be  observed  that  the  verb  "direct"  is  in 
the  Greek  in  the  singular,  thus  denoting  a 
unity  between  God  our  Father  and  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  At  all  events,  we  have 
an  express  prayer  directed  to  Christ,  thus 
necessarily  implying  his  Divine  nature.  Our 
way  unto  you. 

Ver.  12. — And  the  lord.  By  some  re- 
ferred to  the  First  Person  of  the  blessed 
Trinity,  God  our  Father  (Alford) ;  by 
others  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  the  Father  and 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  afterwards  both 
mentioned  in  the  prayer;  but  it  is  to  be  re- 
ferred, according  to  the  prevailing  usage  in 
Paul's  Epistle,  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Make  you ;  literally,  you  may  the  Lord  make, 
putting  the  emphasis  on  "  you."  To  inorease 
and  abound  in  love  one  toward  another; 
toward  your  fellow-Christians.  And  toward 
all  men ;  toward  the  human  race  in  general. 
"  This  is  the  character  of  Divine  love  to 
comprehend  all ;  whereas  human  love  hath 
respect  to  ouo  man  and  not  to  another" 
(Theoiihylaet).  Even  as  we  do  toward  you; 
that  is,  as  we  abound  in  love  toward  yon. 

Ver.  13.— To  the  end  (in  order  that)  he 
may  establish  your  hearts  unblamable  in 
holiness  before  God.  In  the  sight  of  God,  in 
his  judgment  who  searcheth  the  hearts. 
The  words,  "before  God,"  are  to  be  con- 
joined neither  with  "holiness"  nor  with 
"  unblamable,"  but  with  the  whole  phrase, 
"  unblamable  in  holiness."  Even  our  Father, 
at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  at 
the  second  advent.  With  all  his  saints. 
By  "saints"  or  "holy  ones"  are  by  some 
understood  the  angels  who  shall  accompany 
Christ  to  judgment;  but  although  the  term 
"saints"  is  used  of  the  angels  in  the  Old 
Testament,  it  is  never  so  employed  in  the 
New.  Tne  word  seems  to  denote  those  holy 
men  who  have  died  in  the  Lord  and  who 
shall  be  raised  at  the  advent,  and  accom- 
pany Christ  to  the  judgment. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  3,  4.— -Connection  between  affliction  and  religion.  True  religion,  instead  of 
delivering  those  who  possess  it  from  suffering,  rather  entails  suffering  upon  them. 
Believers  are  appointed  by  God  to  suffer  tribulation.  This  was  peculiarly  true  of  the 
early  Christians,  but  it  is  true  generally.  We  are  appointed  to  afflictions  (1)  in  order 
that  by  them  our  fitness  for  heaven  and  our  relish  for  our  everlasting  rest  may  be 
increased;  (2)  in  order  that  we  may  thus  learn  the  blessed  graces  of  patience  and 
resignation — graces  which  we  could  not  learn  in  health  and  prosperity,  and  which  will 
be  useful  to  us  in  a  world  of  glory  (J  Cor.  iv.  17,  18). 


oh.  in.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  61 

Vers.  3,  8. — Steadfastness  in  faith  and  affliction.  "  That  no  man  should  be  moved 
by  these  afflictions."  We  are  certainly  not  now  exposed  to  persecutions,  but  still  there 
are  afflictions  peculiar  to  the  Christian  life.  We  are  forewarned  of  them,  and  therefore 
are  not  to  regard  them  as  strange  or  unexpected  calamities.  1.  This  steadfastness  it 
the  work  of  God.  God  is  able  to  make  us  stand,  and  will  cause  ns  to  be  more  than 
conquerors.  He  can  even,  while  we  continue  in  this  state  of  warfare,  establish  oui 
hearts  unblamable  in  holiness.  2.  This  steadfastness  is  the  work  if  man.  We  must 
co-operate  with  God.  We  must  beware  of  being  either  terrified  by  threats  or  allured 
by  blandishments.  We  must  exercise  prayer,  watchfulness,  and  the  active  performance 
of  Christian  duties. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — The  duties  of  minister  and  people.  In  the  reciprocal  feelings  of  the 
apostle  and  his  Thessalonian  converts,  we  gain  instruction  regarding  the  mutual 
conduct  of  minister  and  people.  1.  Duties  of  the  minister.  The  affection  and  anxiety 
which  he  should  have  for  his  people ;  the  earnestness  with  which  he  should  pray  for 
them ;  the  gratitude  with  which  he  should  thank  God  for  their  spiritual  welfare ;  the 
joy  which  he  experiences  in  the  steadfastness  of  their  faith  and  the  warmth  of  their 
charity ;  the  care  and  diligence  with  which  he  should  supply  what  is  lacking  in  their 
faith.  2.  Duties  of  the  people.  The  reciprocal. affection  which  they  should  have  for 
their  minister ;  the  good  remembrance  which  they  should  entertain  of  him ;  the 
obedience  which  they  should  render  unto  him  in  spiritual  matters;  the  constant 
prayers  which  they  should  offer  up  for  him. 

Ver.  9. — Joy  in  the.  spiritual  welfare  of  other*.  We  rejoice  in  the  temporal  prosperity 
of  our  friends ;  much  more  ought  we  to  rejoice  in  their  spiritual  prosperity.  "  Now  we 
live,"  says  the  apostle,  "  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord."  And  similarly  the  Apostle 
John  says,  "  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  the  truth." 
We  must  imitate  the  angels  in  heaven,  who  rejoice  at  the  repentam  e  of  a  sinner.  We 
must  imbibe  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  Jesus  himself,  who  is  represented  as  rejoicing  when 
he  had  found  the  sheep  that  was  lust.  We  should  rejoice  (1)  because  souls  are 
rescued  from  hell  and  Satan  ;  (2)  because  Christ  is  glorified  in  the  salvation  of  men  ; 
(3)  because  new  members  are  born  into  the  family  of  God ;  (4)  because  boundless 
happiness  is  secured. 

Ver.  10. — Defective  faith.  Our  faith  may  be  defective  in  various  ways.  1.  In  its 
quality.  It  may  be  mingled  with  unbelief  or  with  doubts;  we  may  only  partially 
believe.  If  so,  let  our  prayer  be,  "  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief."  2.  In  its 
objects.  It  may  not  embrace  all  \he  revealed  truths  of  religion  ;  we  may  be  ignorant 
of  some  of  them,  or  have  adopted  erroneous  notions  concerning  others.  If  so,  we  must 
"  add  to  our  faith  knowledge."  3.  In  its  efficacy.  It  may  be  too  much  of  a  dead 
faith ;  it  may  not  exercise  itself  outwardly  ;  it  may  not  sufficiently  influence  our 
practice.  If  so,  we  must  remember  that  "  faith,  if  it  hath  not  works,  is  dead."  4.  In 
its  steadfastness.  Our  faith  may  be  wavering,  unstable,  liable  to  fail;  it  may  be 
variable  ;  sometimes  we  may  be  strong  in  the  faith,  and  at  other  times  weak.  If  so, 
let  our  prayer  be,  "  Lord,  increase  our  faith." 

Ver.  12. — Prayer  addressed  to  Christ.  We  have  here  an  instance  of  prayer  addressed 
to  Christ.  The  apostle  prays  that  Christ  may  direct  his  way  to  the  Thessalonians,  and 
make  them  abound  in  love.  The  martyr  Stephen  breathed  out  his  spirit  in  a  prayer 
to  Christ.  And  Christians  in  general  are  represented  as  those  who  in  every  place  call 
on  the  Lord  Jesus.  "  There  is  no  foundation,"  as  Bishop  Alexander  remarks,  "  for 
any  such  statement  as  that  '  truly  primitive  and  apostolic  prayer  is  invariably  to 
God  through  Christ.'"  Christ  himself  is  often  in  Scripture  the  direct  Object  of  wor- 
ship. Now,  if  Christ  be  not  Ood,  the  apostle  and  early  Christians  were  idolaters. 
The  divinity  of  Christ  is  the  only  ground  on  which  the  wor.-hip  of  Christ  can  be 
defended. 

Vers.  12, 13.— Religious  progress.  X.  The  nature  of  religious  progress.  It  is  an 
increase  iu  love  to  our  fellow-Cliristians  and  to  all  men.      2.  The  ultim"'«.  end  >f 


5ft  THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    Fjih.  ih.  1—13. 

religious  progres*.    The  establishment  of  our  hearts  in  holiness,  and  our  being  presented 
blameless  before  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  his  coming. 

Ver.  13. — The  ultimate  end  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  The  establishment  of 
believers  in  holiness  before  God  at  the  advent  of  Christ  is  the  ultimate  deskn  of 
Christianity.  Or,  as  Paul  elsewhere  expresses  the  same  truth,  "Christ  loved  the 
Church,  and  gave  himself  for  it ;  that  he  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with  the  washing 
of  water  by  the  word,  that  lie  might  present  it  to  himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having 
spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing;  but  that  it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish" 
(Eph.  v.  26,  27).  And  again,  "  That  ye  may  be  blameless  in  the  day  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ "  (1  Cor.  i.  8).  What  a  glorious  consummation!  What  a  perfection  of 
holiness  1  When  faitli  and  love  will  both  be  perfect;  when  all  that  is  lacking  in  our 
faith  will  be  supplied;  and  all  that  is  defective  in  our  love  will  be  remedied;  and 
when  the  whole  Church  will  be  presented  faultless  and  blameless  before  God;  whei 
sin  and  moral  imperfection  will  be  for  ever  excluded! 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 6.— The  design  of  Timothy's  mission  to  Thessalonica.  When  the  apostle 
could  no  longer  control  Ids  longing  to  see  his  converts,  he  sent  them  Timothy  by  way 
of  relieving  his  solicitude  in  their  behalf.  His  love  for  them  was  manifest  in  all  the 
circumstances  of  this  mission. 

I.  He  sacrifices  his  own  immediate  comfokt  to  their  benefit.  "We  thought 
it  good  to  be  left  at  Athens  alone."  1.  Though  Timothy  was  most  necessary  to  him  in 
the  ministry,  he  parted  with  him  for  their  good.  2.  Athens,  as  a  seat  of  boundless 
idolatry,  exercised  such  a  depressing  influence  upon  him  that  he  needed  the  stimulus 
of  Timothy's  society.    Yet  he  denied  himself  this  comfort  that  he  might  serve  them. 

II.  He  despatches  to  them  the  most  highly  esteemed  of  his  fellow- 
labourers.  "  Our  brother,  and  minister  of  God,  and  fellow-labourer  in  the  gospel  ol 
Christ."  He  selects  one  best  fitted  to  serve  them  by  his  gifts,  his  experience,  and  his 
knowledge  of  the  apostle's  views  and  wishes.  The  various  titles  here  given  to  Timothy 
help  to  honour  him  before  the  Churches,  and  to  challenge  the  abiding  confidence  of  the 

'  Thessalonians. 

III.  The  design  of  Timothy's  mission.  It  was  twofold :  "  To  establish  you,  and 
to  comfort  you  concerning  your  faitli,"  and  "to  know  your  faith."  1.  The  necessity 
for  his  mission.  The  afflictions  which  they  were  enduring  for  the  gospel.  (1)  Thess- 
afflictions  had  a  most  disturbing  tendency.  "  That  no  one  be  disquieted  by  these 
afflictions."  The  converts  had  newly  emerged  .from  heathenism,  and  therefore  the 
apostle  was'  more  concerned  on  their  behalf.  Yet,  as  we  know  from  the  Second  Epistle, 
they  remained  firm.  "  We  ourselves  glory  in  you  in  the  Churches  of  God  for  youi 
patience  and  faith  in  all  your  persecutions  and  tribulations  that  ye  endure  "  (U  Thess. 
i.  4).  (2)  These  afflictions  were  of  Divine  appointment.  "Pur  yourselves  know  that 
we  are  appointed  thereunto."  They  were,  therefore,  "  no  strange  thmg."  They  come 
by  the  will  of  God,  who  has  determined  their  nature,  severity,  and  duration.  "  Behold, 
I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves."  The  afflictions  were  not  accidental. 
(3)  They  were  clearly  foreseen  by  the  apostle.  "  When  we  were  with  you  we  told  you 
beforehand  that  we  are  to  suffer  affliction."  (o)  It  is  the  duty  of  ministers  to  forewarn 
their  converts  of  coming  affliction,  lest  they  should  be  offended  thereby.  (5)  Converts, 
when  forewarned,  ought  to  be  forearmed,  so  that  they  may  not  sink  under  them,  much 
less  forsake  the  gospel  on  account  of  them.  "  For  the  light  afflictions  are  but  for 
a  moment,  and  work  out  an  exceeding  weight  of  glory."  (4)  Satan  is  the  main  source 
of  danger  in  these  afflictions.  "  Lest  by  any  means  the  tempter  had  tempted  you." 
The  apostle  was  "  not  ignorant  of  his  devices,"  and  was  apprehensive  lest  Satan  should 
get  an  advantage  of  his  converts  by  moving  them  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel,  and 
causing  them  to  relinquish  their  profession  of  it.  (5)  The  only  security  against  Satan's 
temptations — faith ;  for  this  "  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world  " — this  is  the 
shield  "  wherewith  they  could  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked."  2.  The  manner 
in  which  Timothy's  mission  was  to  be  discharged.    "  To  establish  you  and  to  comfort 


ch.  ni.  1— 13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN8.  59 

you  concerning  your  faith."  (1)  In  relation  to  the  Thessalonians.  Timothy  would 
(a)  establish  them  by  giving  them  a  fresh  exhibition  of  the  truth  with  its  manifold 
evidences.  The  strongest  faith  needs  confirmation.  The  apostles  were  in  the  habit  of 
confirming  the  souls  of  the  disciples  (Acts  xiv.  22).  (6)  He  would  comfort  them  con- 
cerning their  faith  by  exhibiting  the  example  of  Christ,  the  glory  that  must  accrue  to 
God  from  their  steadfastness,  and  the  hope  of  the  coming  kingdom.  (2)  In  relation 
to  the  apostle  himself.  "  To  know  your  faith."  One  object  of  his  sending  Timothy 
was  to  put  an  end  to  his  own  anxieties  and  doubts  on  their  behalf,  for  he  might  fear 
that  "  his  labour  would  be  in  vain."  He  might  hope  the  best  but  fear  the  worst,  for 
he  was  most  deeply  concerned  in  their  welfare. — T.  0. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — The  happy  issue  of  Timothy's  visit  to  Thessalonica.  This  Epistle  was 
written  immediately  after  Timothy's  return  as  expressive  of  the  apostle's  hearty  relief 
at  his  tidings. 

I.  The  good  tidings.  "  Your  faith  and  charity,  and  that  ye  have  remembrance 
of  us  always,  desiring  greatly  to  see  us,  as  we  also  to  see  you."  1.  Their  faith.  He 
was  gratified  to  hear  of  the  steadfastness  and  soundness  of  their  faith.  They  abounded 
in  the  (1)  grace  of  faith,  which  was  unfeigned,  growing,  and  lively ;  (2)  in  the  doctrine 
of  faith,  which  had  much  light  in  it;  (3)  in  the  profession  of  faith,  which  they  held  fast 
without  wavering,  out  of  a  pure  conscience.  2.  Their  love.  This,  which  was  the 
fruit  of  their  faith,  had  not  waxed  cold  on  account  of  abounding  iniquity.  Their  faith 
worked  by  love.  The  two  graces  are  always  found  together.  Christian  love  must  be 
without  dissimulation,  in  deed  and  in  truth,  fervent  and  constant.  3.  Their  constant 
and  kindly  remembrance  of  the  apostle.  "  Ye  have  a  good  remembrance  of  us  always." 
They  thought  much  of  their  spiritual  teachers,  bore  their  persons  in  memory,  thought 
of  them  with  gratitude  ami  respect,  and,  no  doubt,  remembered  them  in  their  prayers. 
i.  Their  desire  to  see  the  apostle.  They  desired  to  have  their  memories  refreshed  by 
a  personal  visit  from  him.  If  they  had  begun  to  fall  away,  they  would  not  have  been 
so  anxious  to  see  him.  There  was  a  tender  attachment  on  both  sides,  for  there  was 
a  longing  on  both  sides  for  further  fellowship. 

II.  The  effectb  of  these  good  tidings  on  the  apostle.  "  Therefore  we  were 
comforted  over  you  in  all  our  affliction  and  distress  by  your  faith."  1.  They  enabled 
him,  if  not  to  forget,  at  least  to  bear  up,  under  a  weighty  burden  of  trial.  He  was  now 
at  Corinth,  in  peril  and  persecution  from  the  Jews,  who  "  opposed  themselves  anr". 
blasphemed "  (Acts  xviii.  5 — 17;  1  Cor.  ii.  3).  He  was  disconsolate  and  dispirited, 
almost  like  a  dead  man,  carrying  about  with  him  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  but  now 
the  news  of  Timothy  revived  him,  like  life  from  the  dead,  infusing  into  him  new  life 
and  vigour.  It  was  their  faith  especially  which  comfortel  him.  There  is  no  comfort 
to  a  minister  comparable  to  that  which  springs  from  the  stability  and  perseverance  of 
his  people.  2.  The  very  continuance  of  his  life  seemed  to  be  dependent  upon  their 
steadfastness.  "For  now  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord."  The  language  is 
almost  painfully  strong.  It  suggested  to  them  :  (1)  T he  necessity  of  continued  watchful- 
ness and  faith.  (2)  The  true  secret  of  steadfastness — being  "  in  the  Lord."  Thus  only 
would  "  they  build  themselves  up  in  their  most  holy  faith,"  ''continuing  steadfastly 
in  the  Church's  prayers  and  instructions."  (3)  How  much  they  could  affect,  not  the 
comfort  only,  but  the  life  of  their  teachers,  by  their  vigilance  and  perseverance  I — T.  C. 

Vers.  9, 10. — The  apostle's  gratitude  to  God  and  his  further  solicitude  for  his  converts. 

1.  His  gratitude  for  the  joy  imparted  by  Timothy's  tidings.  "  For  what  thanks 
can  we  render  to  God  again  f  >r  you,  lor  all  the  joy  wherewith  we  joy  for  your  sakes 
before  our  God  ?  "    1.  He  has  no  words  to  express  his  gratitude  io  God  for  their  constancy. 

2.  The  joy  he  experienced  was  not  in  the  greed  of  any  worldly  advantage  he  had  gained, 
but  was  the  hearty  and  sincere  joy  of  one  profoundly  interested  in  their  spiritual 
welfare.  3.  It  was  joy  "  before  God,"  who  sees  and  knows  all  inward  thoughts  and 
feelings,  and  therefore  knows  its  reality  and  power. 

IL  His  prayerful  anxiety  to  see  the  Thessalonians  fob  their  further 
benefit.  "  Night  and  day  praying  exceedingly  that  we  might  see  your  face,  and 
mi^ht  perfect  that  which  is  lacking  in  your  faith."  His  prayers  had  an  extraordinary 
fervency.    Ministers  ought  to  be  much  in  prayer  for  their  flocks.     L  Th»  deficiencies 


60  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  in.  1—13 

in  their  faith.  They  had  already  received  the  grace  of  faith  and  the  doctrine  of  faith, 
and  exhibited  in  its  fulness  the  "  work  of  faith."  But  there  were  deficiencies  still  to  he 
supplied.  (1)  Their  faith  wanted  still  greater  power,  for  they  had  hardly  yet  escaped 
all  danger  of  relapse  into  heathen  impurities.  (2)  It  wanted  to  be  more  widely. 
diffused  through  all  the  duties  of  life,  for  they  needed  to  mind  honest  industry  and 
forswear  idleness.  (3)  They  needed  fuller  light  upon  the  second  advent.  2.  The 
design  of  the  ministry  is  to  supply  these  deficiencies  of  faith.  The  apostle  longed  to  be 
at  Thessalonica  once  more,  not  only  to  impart  to  them  "  some  spiritual  gift,  to  the  end 
they  might  be  established"  (Rom.  i.  10, 11),  hut  to  give  them  fuller  teaching  upon  the 
various  points  where  their  faith  needed  enlargement.  It  is  God's  work  to  increase  faith, 
but  ministers  can  promote  it  as  instruments,  for  they  are  "for  the  perfecting  of  the 
saints  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God." — T.  C. 

Ver.  11. — Further  prayer  for  his  personal  return  to  Thessalonica.  The  apostle  had 
hitherto  been  hindered  by  Satan  from  carrying  out  his  intention.  ,"But  may  God  him- 
self and  our  Father,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  direct  our  way  unto  you." 

I.  The  apostle  recognized  a  Divine  band  in  all  that  concerned  his  personal 
life.  His  way  to  Thessalonica  seemed  hitherto  blocked  up,  but  he  felt  that  it 
depended,  not  upon  Satan,  nor  upon  his  wicked  instruments,  but  upon  the  will  of  God 
himself,  whether  he  should  ever  take  that  way.  This  implies :  1.  Our  journey*  art 
not  in  our  own  power.  Man  may  plan  his  own  ways,  but  God  directs  his  goings ;  for 
"a  good  man's  steps  are  ordered  by  the  Lord."  2.  Our  journeys  are  not  to  be  under- 
taken without  God's  will.  (Jas.  iv.  13,  14 ;  Rom.  i.  10.)  It  is  lor  him  to  order  us  where 
and  when  to  go.     3.  It  is  in  his  power  only  to  remove  the  obstacles  to  our  journeys. 

II.  The  apostle  recognized  this  providential  guidance  as  equally  exercised 
bt  the  Father  and  the  Son.  1.  He  prays  here  to  both  Father  and  Son.  The  same 
prayer  is  addressed  to  both  without  distinction,  for  the  verb  is  in  the  singular  number. 
Must  not  Jesus,  therefore,  be  a  Divine  Person  ?  2.  Father  and  Son  are  here  regarded 
as  possessing  one  indivisible  will,  as  exercising  a  joint  agency  in  the  guidance  of  men, 
and  as  possessing  an  equality  of  power  to  this  end.  Athanasius  saw  this  fact  clearly  in 
the  grammatical  peculiarity  of  the  passage.  3.  The  apostle  exercises  an  appropriating 
faith  in  both  Father  and  Son,  for  he  speaks  of  "  our  God  and  Father,"  and  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  He  was,  therefore,  all  the  more  disposed  to  trust  submissively  to  the 
directing  hand  of  God. — T.  C. 

Vers.  1.2, 13. — The  apostle's  prayer  for  the  progressive  sanctification  of  the  Thessalonians 
and  their  final  peifecliun  at  the  coming  of  Christ.  He  has  just  prayed  for  himself,  but 
whether  he  is  to  come  to  them  or  not,  he  has  a  prayer  for  their  spiritual  benefit. 

I.  Consider  the  Person  to  whom  the  prater  is  addressed.  "  But  you  may 
the  Lord  enlarge."  It  is  the  Lord  Jesus,  who,  '*  as  the  Purchaser  of  the  Church  with 
his  own  blood,"  has  received  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  for  the  benefit  of  his  people. 
It  was  to  the  Lord  the  apostles  addressed  the  unanimous  prayer,  "  Increase  our  faith." 

II.  The  blessing  prated  for.  "But  you  may  the  Lord  enlarge  and  make  to 
abound  in  love  toward  one  another,  and  toward  all."  1.  The  existence  of  their  love 
is  frankly  admitted.  He  had  spoken  of  "  their  lahour  of  love."  He  prays  now  for 
its  increase.  2.  Their  love  was  to  be  an  abounding  love.  (1)  There  were  defects  in 
their  love,  as  there  were  defects  in  their  faith,  to  be  supplied  from  the  inexhaustible 
Source  of  all  love.  (2)  The  objects  of  their  love  were  (a)  "  one  another,"  those  of 
the  household  of  faith,  who  were  to  have  the  first  place  in  their  affections ;  (6)  but 
"  all  men  "  likewise,  as  children  of  a  common  Father,  for  as  we  have  opportunity  we 
must  do  good  unto  all  men  (Gal.  vi.  10),  the  world  itself  being  the  field  of  our 
missionary  labours.  The  Apostle  Peter  adds  "love  "to  "brotherly  kindness"  in  the 
chain  of  Christian  graces,  as  if  to  imply  that  brotherly  kindness  might  become  a  narrow, 
sectarian  thing,  and  therefore  the  love  of  man  as  man  is  enjoined. 

IIL  The  design  and  tendenct  of  this  progressive  increase.  "To  the  end  that 
he  may  stablish  your  hearts  unblamahle  in  holiness  before  our  God  and  Father  at 
the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all  his  saints."  1.  This  implies  that  establish- 
ment in  holiness  is  necessarily  involved  in  the  enlargement  of  both  faith  and  love.  2.  It 
implies  that  stability  in  holiness  is  the  great  end  of  Christian  life  in  a  world  which 


ch.  ui.1— 13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  61 


shakes  believers  by  fears  and  temptations  and  delusions.  3.  It  implies  that  without 
perfect  holiness  we  cannot  appear  without  blame  before  God.  4.  It  implies  that  perfect 
holiness  is  reserved  for  the  second  coming.  (1)  It  is  not  attainable  in  this  life.  We 
are  not  here  "  without  spot  or  wrinkle."  (2)  It  is  connected  with  the  redemption 
of  the  body.  (3)  It  is  connected  with  the  final  glorification  of  the  redeemed ;  for  all 
the  saints  are  to  be  associated  with  the  Judge  as  assessors  in  the  final  judgment  (Luke 
xxii.  30;  John  v.  28 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  3).  Therefore  let  us  pray  for  the  increase  of  faith 
and  love,  and  live  in  the  blessed  hope  of  the  "day  of  Christ." — T.  C. 

Vera.  1 — 5. — Proof  of  the  apostle's  love  for  the  Thessalonians.  I.  The  mission  op 
Timothy.  1.  He  could  no  longer  forbear.  Mark  the  intensity  of  his  affection.  He 
repeats  the  words  twice,  ver.  1  and  ver.  6,  first  in  the  plural,  then  in  the  singular 
number,  implying,  perhaps,  that  while  all  the  missionaries  longed  to  know  how  it  fared 
with  the  Thessalonians,  his  longing  was  the  most  overmastering.  He  must  hear  of 
his  converts,  cost  him  what  it  might.  The  suspense  was  agonizing ;  he  could  endure 
it  no  longer ;  so  deep,  so  burning,  was  his  interest  in  their  spiritual  state.  What  an 
example  to  Christian  pastors  now  !  2.  He  would  submit  to  any  sacrifice ;  he  would  be  left 
alone  at  Athens.  "  Alone  in  London"  has  almost  passed  into  a  proverb.  Loneliness  is 
nowhere  felt  so  much  as  in  a  great  city — a 

"  Crowded  wilderness, 
Where  ever-moving  myriads  seem  to  say, 
'  Go  1  thou  art  nought  to  us,  nor  we  to  thee — away  I ' " 

St.  Paul  felt  like  this  at  Athens.  To  the  student  of  history,  to  the  lover  of  classical 
antiquities,  Athens  is  one  of  the  most  attractive  of  cities.  To  St.  Paul  it  was  almost  a 
desert.  He  does  not  seem  to  have  found  delight  in  natural  beauty  or  in  historic 
associations;  the  one  object  of  his  life  wa3  to  extend  the  Redeemer's  kingdom,  to  win 
souls  to  Christ. »  The  Athenians  of  his  day  had  much  curiosity,  much  versatility,  but 
no  depth  of  character,  no  real  longing  after  truth.  They  did  not  persecute ;  they  had 
not  earnestness  enough  for  that.  But  mockery  and  indifference  were  more  painful  to 
St.  Paul  than  danger  and  suffering.  He  could  not  feel  at  home  in  Athens.  And  he 
was  one  of  those  men  to  whom  sympathy  is  almost  a  necessity ;  his  one  earthly 
comfort  waj  the  society  of  Christian  friends.  This  Epistle  shows  the  intensity  of  his 
affections;  he  can  scarcely  find  words  strong  enough  to  express  his  love  for  the 
Thessalonians,  his  yearning  desire  to  see  them  again.  Yet  he  had  spent  only  three 
weeks,  or  perhaps  a  short  time  longer,  at  Thessalonica.  How,  then,  must  he  have 
prized  the  society  of  Timotheus,  the  dearest  of  all  his  friends  !  He  was  his  brother,  his 
fellow-labourer ;  he  could  ill  spare  him,  especially  while  labouring  in  vain,  as  it  seemed, 
in  that  most  uncongenial  place.  But  he  would  send  him;  he  would  endure  that 
isolation  which  was  so  oppressive  to  him.  Even  for  himself  it  was  better  than  the  cruel 
uncertainty  which  he  could  bear  no  longer ;  and  the  visit  of  Timotheus  would  be  very 
useful  to  the  infant  Church  at  Thessalonica.  So  he  thought  it  good ;  it  pleased  him, 
there  was  a  pleasure  mingled  with  the  pain,  to  be  left  at  Athens  alone.  There  is  a 
pleasure  in  self-sacrifice,  severe  but  real;  there  is  a  peace  in  the  conscious  submission 
of  the  human  will  to  the  blessed  will  of  God — a  peace  not  granted  to  all,  for  not  all 
take  up  the  cross,  but  very  precious,  very  high  and  holy.  3.  So  he  sent  his  closest  friend 
and  companion.  His  words  show  how  he  felt  the  separation.  He  describes  him  as  his 
brother;  elsewhere  he  calls  him  his  son  in  the  faith,  his  dearly  beloved  son.  His 
presence,  his  loving  care,  his  affectionate  sympathy,  were  very  dear  to  St.  Paul. 
His  help,  too,  was  very  needful ;  he  was  the  minister  of  God,  St.  Paul's  fellow-labourer 
in  the  gospel  (the  readings  are  somewhat  confused,  but  the  meaning  is  plain)  ;  he 
could  assist  him  in  his  difficult  and  almost  heartless  labour  at  Athens.  Like  St.  Paul, 
he  delighted  to  serve  God,  to  do  God's  work,  to  preach  the  glad  tidings  of  the  atone- 
ment, the  resurrection  of  Christ,  the  life  and  immortality  brought  to  light  by  the 
Lord  Jesus.  There  was  work,  hard  work,  enough  and  more  than  enough,  for  both  of 
them  at  Athens ;  but  St.  Paul,  in  his  intense  anxiety  for  the  Thessalonians,  sent  to 
them  his  dearest  companion  and  his  best  helper.  Old  work  must  not  be  neglected  foi 
new;  it  is  a  common  temptation.  The  care  of  all  the  Churches  pressed  upon  St.  Paul. 
The  minister  of  God  must  care  for  all  the  souls  entrusted  to  his  charge. 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALOftlANS.    (ca.ia.U-tS. 


II.  The  pubpose  of  Timothy's  mission.  1.  To  stablisk  them.  They  were  but 
neophytes — Christians  of  a  few  months.  The  first  work  of  drawing  men  to  take  an 
interest  in  religion  is  often  easier  than  the  work  which  follows  oi  tttablishing  and 
building  them  up  in  the  faith.  It  is  hard  to  persevere ;  we  know  it  from  our  own 
experience.  It  may  be  that  by  God's  grace  we  have  drawn  nigh  to  the  crucified  One ; 
we  have  felt  something  of  the  sweetness  of  his  precious  love ;  our  hearts  have  burned 
within  us  as  we  listened  to  his  voice,  "  Come  unto  me."  In  such  moments  we  have 
felt,  perhaps,  that  our  work  was  well-nigh  done,  and  our  souls  saved  for  ever;  we 
thought  that  we  could  never  fall  from  him  whom  we  had  learned  to  love  so  dearly. 
But  a  little  while,  and  we  found  ourselves  miserably  disappointed.  The  time  of  tempta- 
tion came ;  or  perhaps,  without  any  definite  temptation,  the  freshness  of  those  glowing 
feelings  passed  away ;  we  lost  our  first  love,  and  sunk  back  into  that  cold  indifference 
which  we  hoped  we  had  shaken  off  for  ever.  We  lost  all  that  we  seemed  to  have 
gained ;  we  had  to  begin  our  work  again.  Alas !  many  are  thus  always  beginning ; 
their  spiritual  history  is  a  series  of  oscillations  between  permitted  carelessness  and 
feeble  repentance.  They  make  no  real  progress  towards  that  holiness  without  which 
we  cannot  see  God.  They  need  a  Timotheus  to  stablish  them.  It  is  one  of  the  most 
important,  one  of  the  most  difficult,  duties  of  the  ministers  of  God  to  persevere  them- 
selves, to  lead  others  to  persevere.  2.  To  comfort  them,  or  rather,  perhaps,  to  exhort 
them.  They  needed  both,  comfort  and  exhortation.  The  cross  was  coming.  They 
were  but  babes  in  Christ;  they  shrunk  from  its  sharpness.  But  "we  must  through 
much  tribulation  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  The  grace  of  perseverance  is  best 
acquired  in  the  bracing  air  of  affliction.  "  The  trying  of  our  faith  worketh  patience." 
Self-denial,  the  mortification  of  the  flesh,  are,  alas!  to  many  of  us  but  empty  sounds. 
They  must  become  realities  in  our  daily  lives  if  we  are  to  be  Christians  indeed.  The 
sentimental  religion  of  mere  poetry  and  feeling  is  a  weak  and  sickly  exotic ;  it  will 
never  bear  the  cold  blasts  of  temptation,  it  will  not  stand  in  the  evil  day.  Timotheus 
was  to  comfort  the  Thessalonians  in  their  troubles,  to  exhort  them  to  patient  endurance, 
that  their  faith  might  not  fail  them,  that  it  might  rather  grow  and  increase.  3.  To 
prepare  them  for  tribulation.  (1)  Afflictions  must  come.  It  is  a  law  of  Christ's  king- 
dom. "Whom  the  Lord  loveth,  he  chasteneth."  The  Saviour  endured  the  cross, 
despising  the  shame ;  the  Christian  must  consider  him,  always  "  looking  unto  Jesus." 
*  We  are  appointed  thereunto,"  St.  Paul  says ;  not  himself  only,  but  all  Christians.  It  is 
God's  ordinance ;  it  is  "  the  trial  of  faith,  much  more  precious  than  of  gold."  The  gold 
perisheth,  the  faith  abideth ;  it  will  issue  in  praise  and  honour  and  glory  at  the  appearing 
of  Jesus  Christ.  But  "  we  are  appointed  thereunto."  We  must  recognize  this,  and 
accept  it  cheerfully  as  the  law  of  our  Christian  race.  The  cross  is  the  very  badge  and 
emblem  of  our  religion ;  the  cross  is  a  sacred  object  in  the  Christian's  eyes ;  but  it  will 
not  profit  us  unless  we  bear  the  inner  cross,  the  spiritual  cross  of  self-sacrifice  wrought 
into  our  souls  by  the  power  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Lord  Jesus  bore  the  cross 
first ;  his  death  upon  the  cross  gave  a  deep  aud  awful  and  blessed  meaning  to  the  word ; 
it  invested  the  cross  with  glory  aud  solemn  beauty  and  attractive  sweetness.  His  saints 
have  followed  him.  One  after  another  they  have  taken  up  the  cross;  they  came  out 
of  great  tribulation.  From  the  quiet  rest  of  paradise  their  voices  seem  to  float  around 
us  yet,  telling  us  of  the  power  of  the  Saviour's  cross  and  the  high  rewards  of  suffering 
for  his  sake.  "We  are  appointed  thereunto,"  St.  Paul  said  to  the  Thessalonians;  he 
does  not  attempt  to  hide  it  from  them.  They  were  very  young  Christians,  but,  young 
as  they  were,  they  must  experience  the  law  of  suffering.  "  Ye  knew  it,"  St.  Paul  says ; 
for  they  knew  the  blessed  story  of  the  cross,  and  they  knew  the  meaning  of  the  cross. 
The  Churches  of  Macedonia  had  a  great  trial  of  affliction.  We  are  not  called  to  suffer 
in  the  same  way,  but  the  cross  has  the  same-  meaning  still.  "In  the  world  ye  shall 
have  tribulation."  "We  are  appointed  thereunto."  We  are  not  in  danger  of  the 
martyr's  death,  but  the  martyr's  spirit  is  as  necessary  as  ever  it  was ;  its  essence  lies  in 
the  prayer  which  we  daily  use,  "  Thy  will  be  done."  We  must  not  be  moved  by  these 
afflictions;  they  must  not  be  allowed  to  disquiet  us,  to  disturb  the  steadfastness  of  our 
faith.  Affliction  is  the  ordinary  atmosphere  of  the  Christian  life.  (Si)  St.  Paul  had 
told  them  this.  When  he  was  with  them,  short'  as  the  time  was — three  weeks  or  a 
little  more — he  warned  them  of  the  coming  trials.  It  was  a  great  help  when  the  time 
came.    As  Chrysostom  says,  if  the  physician  warns  his  patient  of  the  prbbable  symp- 


ch.  m.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  68 

toms  of  his  disease,  he  is  not  so  terrified  when  they  come.  Thus  the  Thessalonians 
were  prepared  to  see  the  sufferings  of  St.  Paul  and  his  companions — prepared  themselves 
to  follow  them  as  they  followed  Christ.  The  preacher  must  not  dwell  exclusively  on 
the  bright  side  of  religion,  its  beauty  and  its  joys ;  he  must  point  to  the  cross ;  he  must 
prepare  himself  and  his  people  to  endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ. 
(3)  But  though  he  had  warned  them,  he  was  still  anxious.  The  affliction  had  come,  as 
he  had  said.  He  knew  that  they  were  suffering;  he  felt  for  them  in  their  trials. 
Especially  he  was  anxious  to  know  how  that  newly  formed  faith  of  theirs  would 
endure  the  first  shock  of  persecution.  Tlie  tempter  had  tempted  them — that  was 
certain.  These  trials  were  his  work.  It  was  permitted ;  it  was  overruled  for  good,  as 
-the  event  showed.  But  it  came  from  the  same  evil  one  who  had  tempted  Job  to  curse 
God,  and  was  foiled  then  by  the  patience  of  that  holy  man,  and  now,  by  the  grace  of 
God,  vouchsafed  to  the  Thessalonians.  But  St.  Paul  did  not  know  the  issue.  He  had 
heard  of  the  temptation,  and  with  the  tender,  trembling  solicitude  of  a  loving  parent  he 
feared — he  could  not  help  fearing — lest  his  labour  should  prove  in  vain.  Mark,  again, 
his  firm  belief  in  the  personality  of  Satan.  He  knew  his  malice ;  he  was  not  ignorant 
of  his  devices,  and  he  feared  for  his  children  in  the  faith. 

Lessons.  1.  Pray  for  the  love  of  souls ;  seek  to  love  souls  with  a  great  love,  as 
St.  Paul  yearned  for  the  salvation  of  his  converts.  2.  Be  content,  like  him,  to  suffer 
privations  for  the  souls  of  others.  3.  Pray  for  the  grace  of  perseverance  ;  be  distrustful 
of  self;  trust  only  Christ;  watch  always.  4.  Expect  afflictions,  chastisements;  they 
must  come ;  they  form  a  necessary  part  of  Christian  experience ;  be  prepared  for  them. 
— B.O.O. 

Vers.  6—10. —  The  return  of  Timotheus.  I.  The  good  news.  1.  The  faith  and 
charity  of  the  Thessahnians.  This  was  good  tidings  to  St.  Paul.  The  gospel  was  good 
tidings  to  nil  who  felt  the  misery  of  sin,  to  all  who  had  been  distressed  by  the  strange, 
perplexing  mysteries  of  life.  Tidings  of  a  Deliverer,  of  an  atonement,  of  the  gracious 
help  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  of  eternal  life  to  come,  were  full  of  joy  and  gladness  to 
the  Thessalonians.  Out  of  that  first  great  joy  sprang  other  gifts  of  joy.  The  apostles 
had  no  greater  joy  titan  to  hear  that  their  children  were  walking  in  the  truth.  They 
had  so  entered  into  the  full  meaning  of  that  short  prayer,  "  Thy  will  be  done,  in  earth 
as  it  is  in  heaven,"  that  tttey  had  learned  to  share  the  holy  joy  wherewith  the  blessed 
inhabitants  of  heaven  rejoice  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth.  Goud  news  to  them  did 
not  mean  this  or  that  earthly  success,  but  the  growth  in  grace  of  Christian  souls.  Are 
we  thus  affected  when  we  hear  of  the  victories  of  the  gospel,  of  missionary  triumphs 
abroad,  of  converted  sinners,  of  holy  deaths  at  home?  it  is  a  sure  index  of  our 
spiritual  state.  If  we  know  ourselves  the  deep  blessedness  of  communion  with  God,  we 
shall  count  it  good  news  indeed  when  we  hear  of  other  souls  being  drawn  into  that  holy 
fellowship.  The  glory  of  God  is  the  one  highest  object  to  which  all  ttue  Christians 
look,  and  each  redeemed  soul  brings  new  glory  and  honour  to  the  great  Redeemer.  The 
deeper,  the  purer  our  joy  in  the  growth  of  holiness  around  us,  the  nearer  our  approach, 
while  we  are  yet  on  earth,  to  the  holy  joy  of  heaven.  Timotheus  brought  news  that 
the  faith  of  the  Thessalonians  had  not  wavered  in  the  fiery  trial,  that  their  charity  was 
living  and  fervent.  It  was  glad  news  indeed  to  St.  Paul.  2.  Their  remembrance  of  the 
apostle.  St.  Paul  had  a  tender  human  heart ;  he  writes  these  words,  as  Bengel  says, 
with  a  fresh  joy,  with  the  tenderest  love.  The  steadfastness  of  their  faith  was  the  chief 
part  of  the  g.>od  news  ;  but  also  their  personal  love  for  the  apostle  was  very  precious  to 
him.  To  hear  that  they  loved  him  still,  that  they  desired  greatly  to  see  him,  that 
they  remembered  his  presence,  his  words,  his  affection,  was  very  sweet  to  him. 

IL  St.  Paul's  delight.  1.  He  was  comforted.  He  had  need  of  comfort  and 
encouragement.  Since  he  left  Thessalonica  he  had  met  with  great  perplexities  and 
disappointments  at  Athens;  and  now  at  Corinth  he  was  working  amid  many  difficul- 
ties, much  harassed  by  the  persecutions  of  the  Jews,  toiling  hard  for  his  daily  bread. 
He  tells  them  of  his  necessities,  of  his  affliction.  But  now  he  was  comforted ;  and  it 
was  their  faith  that  brought  him  comfort,  that  encouraged  him  in  his  work.  How 
these  words  must  have  pleased  the  Thessalonians,  who  so.  loved  the  apostle  1  To  hear 
uf  their  faith  was  good  tidings  to  him ;  to  be  told  that  that  faith  had  given  him  such 
deep  comfort'  in  his  troubles  must  have  been  good  news  to  them.    2.  Thkr  perievtrance 


64  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  m.  1—13. 

gave  him  new  life.  He  knew  what  it  was  to  die  daily,  to  bear  about  always  in  the  body 
the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  But  if  death,  as  he  says,  was  working  in  him,  there  was 
a  new  life  that  more  than  balanced  it ;  a  new  life,  full  of  warm,  glowing  feelings,  full 
of  high  hopes  and  eager  aspirations.  And  that  life  was  nourished  and  sustained  by  the 
continued  progress  of  the  gospel.  The  tidings  of  their  faith  gave  him  a  sense  of  life,  a 
spiritual  energy,  a  joy  analogous  to  that  joy  in  the  mere  sense  of  Hving  which  we 
experience  sometimes  in  the  bloom  of  youth  and  health.  But  his  joy  was  wholly 
spiritual ;  the  life  of  Christ  in  other  souls  seemed  to  stimulate  the  energies  of  the  same 
Divine  life  in  himself ;  he  felt  the  water  of  life  within  him  springing  up  with  renewed 
freshness,  as  he  listened  to  the  glad  words  of  Timotheus  telling  him  how  the  Thes- 
salonians  were  standing  fast  in  the  Lord.  They  were  in  the  Lord,  as  he  was — in  the 
sphere  of  his  gracious  presence,  of  his  Divine  working ;  and  to  be  in  the  Lord  is  life,  for 
he  is  the  Life.  Spiritual  life  consists  in  union  with  him,  without  whom  we  can  do 
nothing.  The  Thessalonian  Christians  were  in  him  ;  so  was  St.  Paul.  Their  life  and 
lis  life  came  from  the  same  Source.  The  knowledge  of  their  faith  and  love,  their 
spiritual  lifer  quickened  the  Divioe  life  that  lived  in  him. 

III.  His  thanksgiving.  1.  He  thanks  Oodfor  them.  He  regards  thanksgiving  as  a 
return  due  to  Almighty  God  for  his  mercies.  So  the  psalmist,  "What  shall  1  render 
unto  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  towards  me?"  He  fulfils  his  own  precept,  "In 
everything  give  thanks."  Thanksgiving  is  the  outflow  of  a  loving  heart.  The  love  of 
God  is  the  very  essence  of  religion  ;  and  the  more  we  love  him,  the  more  fervent  will 
be  our  thanksgivings.  St.  Paul  thanks  God  for  the  Thessalonians,  for  their  faith  and 
love :  for  faith  and  love  come  from  God,  who  is  the  Object  of  faith,  who  alone  can 
increase  our  faith ;  who  is  Love,  from  whom,  the  highest  Love,  cometh  all  pure  and 
holy  love.  2.  Be  thanks  Qodfor  his  own  joy.  Holy  joy  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  the 
gift  of  the  Spirit,  the  foretaste  of  the  joy  of  heaven ;  it  must  issue  in  thanksgiving. 
St.  Paul's  joy  was  full  and  complete.  He  thanks  God  for  all  the  joy  wherewith  he  was 
joying.  There  were  no  shadows  to  darken  its  brightness ;  he  had  heard  of  no  back- 
slidings  among  the  Thessalonians.  And  it  was  pure ;  it  could  bear  the  all-seeing  eye  of 
God.  "  We  joy  before  our  God,"  he  says.  There  was  no  element  of  selfishness,  no 
earthly  pride,  no  lower  motive,  to  defile  it.  Such  joy  in  the  salvation  of  souls  is  indeed 
heavenly ;  it  is  like  the  ineffable  joy  wherewith  the  blessed  rejoice  before  the  throne. 
3.  He  adds  prayer  to  his  thanksgiving.  Prayer  and  thanksgiving  ever  go  together ; 
they  act  and  react  upon  one  another.  Prayer  leads  to  thanksgiving ;  thanksgiving 
lenas  increasing  energy  to  prayer.  (1)  He  prayed  night  and  day.  The  quiet  of  the 
night  is  a  time  for  holy  thoughts.  The  psalmist  thought  of  the  Name  of  God  in  the 
night  season,  and  received  comfort.  The  Christian  prays ;  he  watches  with  Christ  as  he 
lies  yet  awake  on  his  bed.  He  prayed  night  and  day.  While  working  at  his  daily 
labour,  the  hard  work  of  weaving  the  goats'  hair,  he  ever  prayed.  So  it  is  with 
Christians  now.    They 

"  Ply  their  daily  task  with  busier  feet, 
Because  their  secret  souls  some  holy  strain  repeat." 

(2)  He  prayed  exceedingly.  "Above  measure,"  the  words  mean  literally.  The  more  we 
pray,  the  more  we  love  prayer.  The  prayers  of  the  Christian  increase  in  fervour,  in 
earnestness,  and  in  delight,  the  nearer  he  draws  to  God.  l'rayer  occupies  more  and 
more  of  his  time ;  it  tends  to  assume  more  and  more  its  proper  place  as  the  great  work 
of  life,  the  most  important  part  of  each  day's  business.  St.  Paul's  love  for  the  Thes- 
salonians deepened  the  importunity  of  his  intercession.  (3)  He  prayed  that  he  might 
see  their  face.  To  see  a  good  man's  face,  to  hear  his  voice,  to  touch  his  hand,  is  a 
source  of  true  pleasure.  St.  John  trusted  to  speak  face  to  face  with  his  Christian 
friends,  "  that  our  joy,"  he  says,  "  may  be  full."  So  was  it  with  St.  Paul.  (4)  That 
he  might  be  enabled  to  do  them  good.  He  had  been  but  a  very  short  time  with  them. 
He  wished  to  give  them  further  instruction,  to  fill  up  what  was  lacking  in  their  know- 
ledge. Christians  may  be  living  near  to  God,  but  there  is  always  room  for  further 
advance  in  knowledge  and  in  holiness.  A  saint  of  God  like  St.  Paul  can  always  do  us 
good.  • 

Learn:  1.  To  rejoice  in  the  spiritual  progress  of  others.  2.  To  thank  God  for  it 
3.  To  take  delight  in  intercourse  with  holy  men. — B.  C.  0. 


oh.  111.  1—13.]    T1IE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  «S 

Vers.  11 — 13. — St.  PaviPs  prayer  for  hU  converts.  I.  God  himself  is  thb  onlt 
Giveb  of  all  good  thinos.  1.  He  can  give  the  apostle  and  his  converts  the  great  joy 
of  another  meeting.  The  Tliessalonians  might  be  zealous  in  their  religious  duties ; 
St.  Paul  might  pray  exceedingly,  above  measure ;  but  it  is  God  himself,  not  any  creature, 
from  whom  all  goodness  flows.  The  word  aiinfe  ("  himself")  is  emphatic.  He  only  can 
save ;  he  only  is  the  Giver  of  joy.  He  is  our  God,  therefore  he  is  able ;  he  is  our 
Father,  therefore  he  is  willing  to  help  us.  His  is  the  kingdom  and  the  power  and  the 
glory,  and  he  loves  us  with  a  Father's  love.  The  apostle  adds  the  Saviour's  Name : 
"  God  our  Father,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  He  addresses  Christ  in  the  language  of 
direct  prayer.  He  uses,  too,  a  verb  in  the  singular  number.  There  can  be  no  satis- 
factory explanation  of  this,  save  that  furnished  by  our  Lord's  own  words,  "  I  and  my 
Father  are  one."  From  him  only,  tlie  Triune  God,  cometh  every  blessing.  He  can 
bring  St.  Paul  again  to  the  Tliessalonians.  He  will,  if  it  is  good  for  him  and  for  them. 
2.  He  can  increase  in  them  the  great  grace  of  charity.  Love  is  the  chiefest  of  all 
graces ;  it  expels  all  manner  of  sin  little  by  little  from  the  heart  which  it  fills ;  it 
consumes  selfishness  little  by  little  with  its  heavenly  fire.  ■  It  must  abound  in  the 
Christian's  heart,  for  it  is  the  best  of  all  treasures ;  it  must  be  fervent,  intense,  for  luke- 
warmness  is  hateful  to  the  Lord.  It  must  be  wide  in  its  range ;  for  that  love  which 
rests  on  some  men  because  they  are  agreeable,  and  excludes  others  because  they  do  not 
please,  is  merely  human ;  not  of  God — mere  natural  affection  ;  not  the  precious  grace  of 
holy  love.  God  loved  the  world ;  the  measure  of  his  love  is  the  gift  of  his  Son.  His 
saints  in  their  poor  way  must  imitate  him.  He  only  can  make  them  abound  in  love  ; 
for  love  is  of  God,  and  every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God  and  knoweth  God.  Love  is 
the  best  gift  of  the  good  Spirit  of  God.  We  must  covet  earnestly  that  great  grace,  and 
seek  it  from  him  of  whose  only  gift  it  cometh. 

II.  God  can  fulfil  the  good  wobk  which  he  began.  1.  Holiness  comes  from  him. 
Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord  ;  and  it  is  God  the  Holy  Ghost  who 
sanctifieth  the  elect  people  of  God.  He  can  cleanse  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  by  his 
Divine  inspiration.  He  can  make  the  soul  that  was  unclean  pure  and  blameless.  We 
must  listen  to  his  voice  speaking  in  our  hearts.  He  checks  us  when  we  are  tempted  to 
sin  ;  he  calls  us  ever  onwards  to  holiness,  to  self-consecration,  to  closer  union  with 
Christ.  It  is  our  part  to  recognize  his  awful  presence,  to  shrink  with  godly  fear  from 
grieving  the  indwelling  Spirit,  to  make  silence  in  our  hearts  to  listen  to  his  voice,  to 
pray  with  ever-deepening  earnestness,  "  Speak,  Lord ;  for  thy  servant  lieareth."  2.  He 
can  enable  us  to  persevere.  The  psalmist  says,  "  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed,  my  heart  is 
fixed."  That  fixedness,  that  establishment  of  the  heart  in  holiness,  cometh  from  God  ; 
it  is  his  gilt.  "Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  thee, 
because  he  trusteth  in  thee."  We  need  to  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  to  be 
strengthened  with  all  might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  man.  Then  we  shall  persevere 
unto  the  end;  then  we  shall  be  found  unblamable  in  holiness  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  with  all  his  saints.  St.  Paul  ever  looked  forward  to  that  second  coming  ; 
it  filled  the  whole  range  of  his  hopes.  So  ought  Christians  now  to  live,  "  looking  for 
and  hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God." 

Lessons.  1.  St.  Paul  prays  that  God  would  direct  his  way  to  Thessalonica.  We 
may  pray  for  the  great  blessing  of  intercourse  with  those  whom  we  love ;  but  it  must 
be  "  in  the  Lord,"  in  humble  submission  to  his  will.  2.  But  above  all  things  we  should 
pray  for  their  continued  growth  in  grace  and  holiness,  in  preparation  for  the  coming  of 
the  Lord.— B.  C.  0. 

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  subject  is  still  great  desire  to  see  the  Thessaloniant.  I.  Paul  alonk 
at  Athens.  "  Wherefore  when  we  could  no  longer  forbear,  we  thought  it  good  to  he 
left  behind  at  Athens  alone."  There  is  continued  the  use  of  the  plural ;  but  it  is  to  be 
regarded  as  corrected  by  the  use  of  the  singular  in  the  fifth  verse.  The  correction 
relates  to  the  mission  of  Timothy,  which  is  to  be  understood  as  covering  Paul's  being 
left  behind  at  Athens.  For  want  of  full  materials  it  is  difficult  to  understand  the 
bearing  of  what  is  said  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  on  what  is  said  here.  But  the  most 
probable  account  of  matters  seems  to  be  the  following.  Silas  and  Timothy  were  left 
behind  at  Beroea.  They  that  conducted  Paul  from  Beroea  brought  him  as  far  as 
Athens;  and  immediately  returned  with  •  commandment  unto  Silas  and  Timothy 
t,  thissalonians.  f 


*«  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  m.  1—13. 

that  they  should  come  to  him  with  al!  speed.  Here  comes  in  the  link  which  is  given 
here:  Wherefore  (i.e.  on  account  of  his  endeavour  to  see  the  Thessalonians  having 
twice  proved  abortive)  when  he  could  no  longer  forbear  (i.e.  when  he  was  necessitated 
to  give  some  relief  to  his  feeling  of  being  orphaned),  he  thought  it  good  to  be  left  behind 
at  Athens  alone.  This  was  a  change  of  plan,  but  arising  out  of  the  very  best  feeling. 
He  sent  on  to  Bercea  a  second  commandment,  that  Timothy  should  proceed  to  Thessa- 
lonica before  joining  him,  Silas  meantime  remaining  at  Bercea.  In  that  case  Paul  wag 
really  left  behind  at  Athens,  though  not  with  the  greatest  literalism.  He  was  left 
.behind  from  the  point  of  view  of  Timothy  going  on  to  Thessalonica,  and  also  of  his 
intention  to  have  had  Silas  and  Timothy  with  him  at  Athens.  It  was  the  being  alone 
at  Athens  that  made  him  think  of  sending  for  Silas  and  Timothy,  while  his  conductors 
from  Beroea  had  not  yet  left.  He  felt  the  atmosphere  to  be  so  oppressive  beyond  his 
expectations  that  he  longed  for  their  fellowship.  And  while  he  whs  waiting  for  them, 
as  we  learn  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the  feeling  did  not  abate.  "He  went  forth 
into  this  beautiful  city  which  was  associated  with  the  greatest  intellectual  refinement. 
And,  though  a  man  of  gigantic  intellect,  he  was  not  attracted  to  the  study  of  its  works 
of  art  or  philosophies.  No,  it  was  the  gospel  sandals  with  which  his  feet  were  shod. 
It  was  in  the  light  of  Christ  that  he  contemplated  the  city.  Its  principal  works  of  art 
were  temples.  There  on  the  Areopagus  was  a  temple  of  Mars,  with  the  subterranean 
sanctuary  of  the  Furies.  On  the  prominent  Acropolis  was  the  Parthenon,  or  temple  of 
Athene,  the  protectress  of  the  city,  and,  next  to  it  in  magnificence,  the  Erectheum  with 
its  presiding  deities.  A  third  rock  was  associated  with  Jove.  There  was  an  altar  of 
Prometheus  within  the  groves  of  the  Academy ;  the  Lyceum  was  dedicated  to  Apollo. 
At  every  turn  were  structures  connected  with  idolatrous  worship,  and,  among  the  many, 
tlie  eye  of  the  apostle  detected  an  altar  with  this  inscription,  "To  the  Unknown  God," 
from  which  he  afterwards  took  occasion  to  preach  to  the  Athenians  some  of  the  elemen- 
tary truths  of  religion.  It  was  while  alone  in  this  city  full  of  idols,  oppressed  by  its 
false  forms  of  religion,  that  he  longed  for  Silas  and  Timothy  to  come  on  to  him.  But, 
strong  as  his  desire  for  their  fellowship  was,  it  was  soon  overmastered  by  another,  viz. 
desire  toward  the  Thessalonians,  for  the  gratification  of  which  he  was  willing  to  make 
sacrifice  by  remaining  alone  at  Athens. 

II.  Mission  of  Timothy  with  refekence  to  the  Thessalonians.  "And  sent 
Timothy,  our  brother  and  God's  minister  in  the  gospel  of  Christ."  Timothy  is  some- 
times called  Paul's  son ;  he  is  here  called  his  brother.  He  was  a  son  who  had  already 
grown  up  to  be  a  companion  and  associate  in  work.  He  was  one  to  whom  Paul  gave 
commandment,  yet  it  was  properly  to  God  that  he  stood  or  felL  The  sphere  in  which 
he  ministered  to  God  was  the  gospel  of  Christ.  It  was  his  duty  generally  to  bring  the 
gospel  of  Christ  to  the  wants  of  men.  But  let  us  think  of  it  as  his  duty  specially  to  bring 
'the  gospel  of  Christ  to  the  wants  of  the  Thessalonians.  1.  Timothy  was  to  seek  to  influence 
them  against  their  being  moved  by  the  pressing  afflictions.  "  To  establish  you,  and  to 
comfort  you  concerning  your  faith  ;  that  no  man  be  moved  by  these  afflictions."  The 
afflictions,  not  confined  to  the  Thessalonians,  but  having  the  first  reference  to  them, 
are  regarded  as  present.  It  was  Thessalonian  afflictions  that  forced  Paul  to  leave 
Thessalonica  much  sooner  than  he  had  intended.  It  was  in  a  manner  Thessalonian 
afflictions  that  followed  him  to  Beroea.  At  the  time  of  sending  Timothy  he  may  have 
had  late  information  of  the  things  suffered  by  the  Thessalonians  of  their  own  country- 
men. By  indications,  then,  he  could  only  think  of  the  afflictions  as  what  might  any 
moment  be  experienced  by  them.  In  consequence  of  these  afflictions  Timothy  was 
sent  to  establish  them.  It  was  work  which  might  expose  him  to  the  attacks  of  the 
virulent  Jews  of  Thessalonica ;  and  this  establishing  work  is  usually  committed  to  older 
men.  But  that  by  which  he  was  himself  established  was  his  message.  And  it  was  to 
this  that  he  was  to  look  for  establishing  the  Thessalonians.  He  was  to  exhort  them 
(not  comfort  them)  concerning  their  faith,  that  no  man  should  be  moved  by  these 
afflictions.  He  was  to  hold  up  persuasively  before  them  the  gospel  of  Christ,  that  their 
faith  thereby  being  strengthened,  they  might  be  kept  from  apostatizing.  2.  There 
was  reason  for  their  not  being  moved  by  the  afflictions.  "  For  yourselves  know  that 
hereunto  we  are  appointed.  For  verily,  wheu  we  were  with  you,  we  told  you  before- 
hand that  we  are  to  suffer  affliction ;  even  as  it  come  to  pass,  and  ye  know."  The 
Thessalonians,  and  Paul  as  well,  and  not  they  alone,  were  appointed  to  suffer  affliction. 


ob.  ni.  1— 13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  67 


It  was  the  sovereign,  all-wise  decree  of  God  that,  through  the  affliction  of  his  people, 
the  gospel  was  to  be  spread  abroad,  and  transmitted  to  future  generations.  And  that 
was  a  reason  why  they  were  not  to  be  moved  in  affliction.  They  were  not  being  made 
the  sport  of  chance,  or  simply  left  to  the  will  of  their  enemies;  but  they  were  sub- 
mitting to  the  reasonable  necessary  appointment  of  their  heavenly  Father,  and  that 
along  with  others.  The  Thessalonians  were  well  acquainted  with  this  doctrine.  It  had 
been  taught  them  by  Paul,  when  he  was  with  them.  And  in  this  he  was  simply 
following  the  great  Teacher.  It  was  impossible  for  him  to  hold  out  false  expectations. 
He  told  them  whom  he  asked  to  enter  into  his  service  that  they  were  to  count  the 
cost ;  they  might  be  called  even  to  lay  down  their  lives  for  his  sake.  And  at  the  last 
he  recurs  to  this  in  speaking  to  his  disciples.  "  If  the  world  hateth  you,  ye  know  that 
it  hath  hated  me  before  it  hated  you.  .  .  .  Remember  the  word  that  I  said  unto  you,  A 
servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord.  If  they  persecuted  me,  they  will  also  persecute 
you ;  if  they  kept  my  word,  they  will  keep  yours  also.  .  .  .  These  things  have  I  spoken 
unto  you,  that  ye  should  not  be  made  to  stumble.  They  shall  put  you  out  of  the 
synagogues :  yea,  the  hour  cometh,  that  whosoever  killeth  you  shall  think  that  he 
offereth  service  unto  God.  And  these  things  will  they  do,  because  they  have  not  known 
the  Father,  nor  me.  But  these  things  have  1  spoken  unto  you,  that  when  their  hour 
is  come,  ye  may  remember  them,  how  that  I  told  you."  As  Paul,  after  the  Master, 
taught,  so  it  came  to  pass,  and  so  they  bad  experience.  Being  thus  prepared  before- 
hand, their  affliction,  instead  of  shaking  them,  was  fitted  to  have  a  confirming  effect 
upon  them. 

IIL  Mission  op  Timothy  with  reference  to  Paul.  "  For  this  cause  I  also,  when  I 
could  no  longer  forbear,  sent  that  I  might  know  your  faith,  lest  by  any  means  the  tempter 
had  tempted  you,  and  our  labour  should  be  in  vain."  It  seems  best  to  connect  "also" 
with  "  sent,"  as  is  grammatically  allowable.  He  sent  not  merely  lor  the  sake  of  the 
Thessalonians,  but  also  for  his  own  sake.  The  affliction  was  a  special  reason  why  he, 
Paul  (the  singular  being  introduced),  could  no  longer  forbear.  He  wanted  information 
regarding  their  faith.  Connected  with  this  was  anxiety.  As  a  fact,  the  tempter  had 
tempted  them.  God  temptetb  no  man;  he  seeks  only  through  affliction  to  make  his 
people  conquerors.  Through  affliction  Satan,  according  to  his  nature,  had  sought  to 
seduce  the  Thessalonians  to  apostasy.  And  it  might  be  that  by  some  means  (for  he 
is  fertile  in  means)  he  had  succeeded  in  his  nefarious  object.  In  that  case  his  labour 
among  the  Thessalonians,  and  laborious  praying  for  them,  in  all  of  which  he  had  a 
natural  interest  before  God,  would  be  vain.  It  would  be  as  if  his  lot  had  never  been 
cast  among  them.  Wishing,  then,  to  have  his  mind  relieved  from  this  state  of  anxiety, 
he  had  sent  on  Timothy. 

IV.  Good  news  from  Thebsalonioa.  "But  when  Timothy  came  even  now  unto 
us  from  you,  'and  brought  us  glad  tidings."  Paul  had  meantime  gone  on  from  Athens 
to  Corinth,  where,  according  to  Acts  xviii.  5,  he  was  joined  by  Silas  and  Timothy.  He 
lost  no  time  in  writing  to  Thessalonica  after  their  arrival.  Timothy,  who  seems  not 
to  have  delayed  by  the  way,  was  the  bringer  of  good  news,  of  a  kind  of  gospel — being, 
indeed,  tidings  of  the  fruit  of  the  gospel.  He  announced  what  the  gospel  had  wrought 
for  the  Thessalonians  in  three  particulars.  1.  "Of  your  faith."  Timothy  was  able  to 
tell  his  master,  by  whom  he  had  been  sent,  that  they  had  such  a  hold  upon  the  Divine 

•  help,  that  they  were  able  to  stand  against  the  assaults  of  their  enemies.  2.  "  And 
love."  He  had  also  this  good  news  to  tell  Paul,  that,  in  the  face  of  opposition,  they 
were  not  weakened  by  division,  but  were  only  drawn  the  closer  together  in  the  bonds 
of  Christian  love.  3.  "  And  that  ye  have  good  remembrance  of  us  always,  longing  to 
see  us,  even  as  we  also  to  see  you.  He  had  the  further  tidings  to  convey,  that  they 
had  a  lively  impression  of  all  he  had  been  to  them — to  whom,  under  God,  more  than  to 
any  other,  they  owed  their  existence  as  a  Church.  His  name  was  a  savour  of  a  sweet 
smell  among  them.  At  all  times  they  thought  of  him  with  pleasure.  And  as  it  had 
been  told  them  that  he  had  a  longing  to  see  them,  so  they  wished  it  to  be  told  him 
that  they  had  a  longing  to  see  again  the  face,  and  not  less  to  hear  again  the  voice,  of 
their  teacher. 

V.  Comfort  impa3ted  by  the  good  hkws.  "For  this  cause,  brethren,  we  were 
comforted  over  you  in  all  our  distress  and  affliction  through  your  faith:  for  now  we 
live,  If  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord."    "  As  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul,  so  is  good  news 


68  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  in.  1— 13. 

from  a  far  country."  When  Jacob  knew  that  Joseph  was  alive,  his  spirit  revived. 
Paul  had  not  a  little  of  distress  and  affliction,  of  trouble  from  without,  that  was 
straitening  and  oppressive,  at  Corinth  as  elsewhere ;  but,  when  the  good  news  came 
regarding  his  Thessalonian  converts,  he  forgot  his  distress  and  affliction.  He  was  com- 
forted over  them,  in  his  brooding  love.  What  in  them  specially  communicated  comfort 
to  him  was  their  faith,  i.e.  the  faith  which  enabled  them  to  stand  fast  in  the  Lord. 
So  dependent  was  he  on  them  for  happiness,  that  he  only  truly  lived,  had  life  in  its 
vigour  and  elasticity,  if  he  could  think  of  them  as  standing  fast  in  the  Lord.  While 
he  thus  acknowledges  their  steadfastness  in  the  past,  he  gently  appeals  to  them  to 
remain  steadfast  in  the  future.  Let  them  not  take  away  the  condition  of  his  happiness. 
A  Christian  parent  is  dependent  for  his  happiness  on  the  conduct  of  his  children.  If  he 
hears  of  them,  when  on  going  out  into  the  world  they  come  to  their  trial,  as  departing 
from  the  Lord,  then  his  spirit  is  crushed.  But  if  he  hears  a  good  report  of  them  as 
standing  fast  in  the  Lord  (in  his  strength  and  purpose),  then  his  bones  are  made  fat. 
And  so  is  it  with  a  Christian  minister  and  his  people. 

VI.  Thanksgiving  on  account  of  the  good  news.  "  For  what  thanksgiving  can 
we  render  again  unto  God  for  you,  for  all  the  joy  wherewith  we  joy  for  your  sakes 
before  our  God?"  The  good  news,  the  glad  tidings,  filled  the  apostle's  heart  with  joy. 
There  is  an  unhallowed  joy  which  is  not  worthy  of  the  name  of  joy.  Not  connected 
with  a  recognition  oi  God,  not  in  accordance  with  God's  laws,  it  cannot  bear  the  Divine 
inspection.  The  joy  of  the  apostle  for  his  Thessalonian  converts  was  not  of  this  nature. 
It  extended  over  a  wide  range,  but  over  all  the  range  he  joyed  for  them  before  God.  It 
was  not  joy  away  from  God,  but  joy  to  which  he  could  ask  God  to  be  privy,  as  being 
joy  in  their  Christian  state,  especially  in  their  Christian  steadfastness.  This  pure  joy, 
which  was  his  life,  the  apostle  poured  forth  in  thanksgiving.  It  was  God  alone  who 
had  made  their  mountain  to  stand  strong ;  to  him,  therefore,  was  due  all  the  praise. 
Thanksgiving  is  a  return  which  God  desires  from  us  for  his  mercies.  And  we  must 
often  feel,  with  the  apostle,  that  we  cannot  make  a  sufficient  return  in  this  form  for 
mercies  bestowed  upon  ourselves  and  upon  others. 

"  Through  all  eternity  to  the* 
A  joyful  song  I'll  raise: 
For,  oh  I  eternity's  too  short 
To  utter  all  thy  praise." 

VII.  Prater  with  which  the  thanksgiving  is  blended.  "  Night  and  day  praying 
exceedingly."  He  gave  thanks  when  he  prayed,  and  that  was  night  and  day.  He 
borrowed  from  both,  which  is  suggestive  of  morning  and  evening  as  fitting  seasons  for 
the  duty  of  prayer.  How  fitting  that  in  the  morning  we  should  turn  to  God  and 
consecrate  to  him  the  powers  he  has  renewed !  How  fitting  that  before'  returning  to 
the  world,  to  meet  its  temptations,  to  be  entrusted  with  opportunities  of  usefulness,  to 
meet  what  Providence  has  awaiting  us, — how  fitting  that  before  we  take  the  first  step  we 
should  implore  the  favour  of  him  on  whom  the  lot  of  every  day  depends !  How  fitting, 
too,  that  in  the  evening  we  should  thank  God  for  the  benefits  of  the  day,  that  we 
should  seek  to  be  relieved  of  the  burden  of  its  transgressions,  and  that  we  should 
commit  ourselves  through  the  night  to  the  keeping  of  him  who  neither  slumbers  nor 
sleeps !  We  can  understand  that  the  apostle  would  borrow  largely  from  the  night ;  • 
for,  apart  from  his  labours  night  and  day,  his  prayers  here  are  described  as  beyond 
measure.  _  What  a  rebuke  to  those  who,  instead  of  breaking  beyond  bounds  in  the 
impetuosity  of  devotion,  narrow  their  prayers  within  small  compass,  or  omit  them 
altogether!  Here  we  discover  the  secret  of  his  power;  and  let  us,  in  this  undevout 
age,  go  back  to  his  style  of  praying,  without  any  loss  of  intensity,  beyond  bounds. 
Two  subjects  of  prayer.  1.  "  That  we  may  see  your  face."  It  has  been  said  of  Paul 
by  James  Martineau,  that  "  his  ardent  and  generous  soul  had  fastened  itself  on  no  one 
living  object,  but  on  an  abstraction,  a  thing  of  his  own  mind,  the  truth ; "  "  that  he  rested 
nowhere  long  enough  to  feel  his  nature  silently  yet  irrevocably  depositing  itself  there, 
but  was  at  all  times  ready  to  gather  up  his  feelings  and  pass  on ;"  that  he  loved  his 
disciples  less  in  their  individual  persons  and  for  their  own  sakes  than  as  depositaries  of 
the  truth — as  links  of  a  living  chain  of  minds  by  which  that  truth  would  complete  its 
circuit,  and  find  a  passage  for  its  renovating  power.     But  it  is  difficult  to  know  what 


ch.  in.  1—13.';     THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  «9 

personal  attachment  is,  if  there  are  not  the  marks  of  it  in  Paul.  Did  he  merely  gather 
up  his  feelings  and  pass  on,  when  he  was  driven  hy  persecution  from  Thessalonica  ? 
No ;  the  Thessalonians,  in  the  short  time,  had  obtained  a  place  in  his  heart,  which  was 
not  transient,  which  they  have  to  this  day  in  heaven.  And  night  and  day,  when  he 
was  away,  they  came  up  before  him  in  his  audience  with  God;  and  what,  going  beyond 
bounds,  he  asked  was  partly  this — that  he  might  see  their  face.  He  wished  to  have 
fellowship  with  them,  soul  with  soul,  such  as  is  best  promoted  by  direct  personal  inter- 
course. That  he  embraced  so  many  in  his  affection,  that  he  could  not  give  them  more 
time  individually,  did  not  make  his  attachment  less  truly  personal.  2.  "And  may 
perfect  that  which  is  lacking  in  your  faith."  It  is  true  that  Paul  had  an  object  beyond 
seeing  their  face,  and  that  was  that  he  might  the  better  impart  to  them  spiritual  benefit. 
But  is  that  attaching  importance  to  the  person  only  as  a  home  for  the  truth  ?  If  so, 
then  it  is  what  should  be  true  of  all  affection.  The  more  ardently  we  love  persons,  the 
more  should  we  love  them  not  as  mere  earthly  beings,  but  rather  as  having  a  heavenly 
constitution,  as  those  in  whom  it  is  fitting  that  the  truth  should  have  a  resting-place 
and  home.  The  more  we  love  to  see  their  face,  the  more  we  should  seek  to  perfect  that 
which  is  lacking  in  their  faith.  Paul  meant  no  reflection  on  the  Thessalonians,  who 
were  little  more  than  beginner*  as  believers.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  they  bad 
come  up  to  the  full  measure  of  faith.  They  had  stood  the  tests  to  which  they  had 
been  put,  but  there  might  be  stronger  tests  coming.  Neither  they  nor  he  had  come 
up  to  the  full-measured  faith  of  the  Master,  who  had  stood  even  the  forsaking  of  the 
Father.  Privileged  to  come  among  them,  he  could  only  hope  to  be  helpful  in  making  up 
the  deficiencies  of  their  faith  by  a  fuller  and  more  earnest  exhibition  of  gospel  truth. 

VIII.  Pbaybb  thrown  into  form  to  be  overheard  by  God.  Two  petitions 
corresponding  to  the  two  subjects  of  prayer.  1.  "  Now  may  our  God  and  Father  him- 
self, and  the  Lord  Jesus,  direct  our  way  unto  you."  Paul  prayed  to  have  his  way 
directed  unto  the  Thessalonians.  In  the  same  way  the  servant  of  Abraham  prayed  to 
have  his  way  prospered  in  the  obtaining  of  a  wife  for  Isaac.  We  may  learn  that  we 
are  to  make  even  external  arrangements  subjects  of  prayer.  "  Our  God  and  Father  him- 
self .  .  .  direct  our  way  unto  you."  Satan,  with  his  misanthropic  qualities,  twice  suc- 
ceeded in  hindering  him  in  his  endeavours  to  proceed  to  Thessalonica.  He  looks  above 
his  own  feeble  endeavours  and  the  hinderings  of  Satan,  to  God,  in  his  almightiness  and 
fatherliness,  himself  to  direct  his  way  unto  the  Thessalonians.  "  The  Lord  Jesus  direct 
our  way  unto  you."  We  may  learn  that  it  is  right  to  pray  to  Christ,  though  it  is  more 
usual  to  pray  to  the  Father  through  Christ.  The  way  of  his  servants,  even  the 
external  way,  is  in  his  sovereign  ham  Is.  We  must  not  forget  that  he  controls  all  things 
in  heaven  and  in  earth.  In  this  verse  there  is  a  most  remarkable  enallage  of  number — 
two  nominatives  followed,  not  by  a  plural,  but  by  a  singular  verb.  It  is  one  of  the 
most  striking  proofs  in  Scripture,  all  the  more  that  it  comes  in  incidentally,  of  the 
absolute  unity  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.  It  was  made  effective  use  of  by  Athanasius, 
in  his  case  against  Alius.  2.  (1)  More  immediately.  "  And  the  Lord  make  you  to 
increase  and  abound  in  love  one  toward  another,  and  to  all  men,  even  as  we  also  do 
toward  you."  If  there  is  any  distinction  between  the  two  main  verbs  here,  it  is  that 
the  first  refers  more  to  range,  the  second  to  degree.  It  is  implied  that  the  Thessalonians 
already  increased  and  abounded  in  love ;  still  there  was  room  for  higher  things. 
"  Whether  I  come  or  no,  the  Lord  make  you  to  increase  and  abound  in  love."  They 
were  to  increase  and  abound  in  love  one  toward  another  (within  the  Christian  circle  at 
Thessalonica),  and  toward  all  men  (the  wider  Christian  ^circle,  and,  beyond  it,  the  world 
lying  in  wickedness).  This  is  in  conformity  with  what  Peter  says,  that  to  brotherly 
kindness  we  are  to  add  charity.  There  is  a  concentration  of  our  affections  in  our  home. 
But  we  are  not  selfishly  to  confine  them  there ;  rather  are  we  to  get  there  refreshment 
for  a  wider  circle.  So  there  is  a  concentration  of  our  affections  in  the  Church  or 
enlarged  home.  But  we  are  not  to  make  it  a  close  guild;  rather,  in  its  refreshing  fellow- 
ship, are  we  to  be  fitted  for  embracing  in  our  affection  the  whole  world.  The  apostle 
supports  his  petition  by  his  own  example.  It  is  literally, "  even  as  we  also  toward  you." 
And  it  is  better  to  leave  it  thus  indefinite,  that  Paul's  example  may  extend  over  past 
and  present.  He  was  not  one  who.  had  confined  his  affections  to  any  narrow  circle; 
but  they  had  gone  out  toward  them  in  Thessalonica,  and  were  still  going  out.  It  ia 
true  that,  whan  the  truth  finds  a  home  in  a  person,  there  is  a  look  beyond  him  to  its 


70  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  in.  1—13. 

finding  a  home  by  him  in  others.  And  the  more  truly  and  deeply  we  are  attached  to 
men  as  persons,  the  more  shall  we  with  Paul  feel  prompted  to  view  them  as  appointed 
for  the  transmission  of  the  truth.  (2)  Ultimately.  "  To  the  end  he  may  stablish  your 
hearts  unblamable  in  holiness  before  our  God  and  Father,  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  with  all  his  saints."  By  the  stablishing  of  our  hearts  we  are  to  understand  our 
being  made  proof  in  our  inmost  being  against  temptation,  our  being  placed  above  the 
reach  of  a  fall.  This  is  to  be  brought  about  by  love  proceeding  from  faith.  As  love  is 
said  to  be  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law,  and  the  bond  of  perfection,  so  it  is  here  viewed  as 
consummating  our  establishment.  We  are  to  be  established,  so  as  to  be  in  the  sphere 
of  holiness,  sanctity  without  blame,  and  that  under  the  searching  yet  loving  eye  of 
God.  Such  a  consummation  seems  far  beyond  us  at  present ;  but  it  will  be  realized 
for  us  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  with  all  his  saints.  His  power  over  the  evil  of 
our  hearts,  through  His  blood  and  Spirit,  will  then  be  fully  manifested.  With 
imperfect  holiness  now,  then  we  shall  be  saints  indeed.  And  as  Christ's  saints,  the 
trophies  of  his  power,  we  shall  attend  on  him  at  his  coming,  and  swell  the  majesty  of 
his  train.  Let  us,  then,  give  love  the  sweep  of  our  being,  to  the  dislodging  of  sin,  to  the 
incoming  of  saintliness,  that  in  Christ's  day  of  triumph  we  may  be,  with  the  saints,  in 
his  train. — R.  P. 

Ver.  5. — Bow  the  work  of  the  gospel  may  he  frustrated  by  temptation.  St  Paul  has 
just  referred  to  the  external  hindrance  to  his  journeying  that  Satan  was  able  to  throw 
across  his  path  (ch.  ii.  18).  He  now  writes  of  a  much  more  serious  Satanic  opposition 
in  the  temptation  of  his  converts  to  unfaithfulness.  He  is  anxious  lest  during  his 
absence  the  fierce  enmity  of  the  Jews,  either  by  some  more  violent  attack  on  the 
Church  or  by  the  harassing  of  incessant  petty  persecution,  may  at  length  have  broken 
down  the  fidelity  of  the  Chiistians  at  Thessalonica.  And  he  shows  his  anxiety  by 
sending  to  inquire  of  the  state  of  the  Thessalonian  Church.  The  danger  in  which  these 
Greek  Christians  lay  besets  the  people  of  God  in  all  ages,  though  the  form  in  which  it 
presents  itself  varies  considerably. 

I.  The  tempter  raises  up  temptations  in  order  to  frustrate  the  work  of  the 
gospel.  1.  The  tempter  furnishes  temptations.  A  temptation  implies  two  things : 
(1)  a  latent  appetite  or  desire  in  the  mind  of  the  tempted,  which  appetite  or  desire  may 
be  natural  or  acquired,  innocent  or  corrupt,  such  as  the  innate  instinct  of  self-preserva- 
tion or  the  artificial  craving  for  strong  drink;  and  (2)  external  circumstances  that  tend 
to  rouse  the  internal  longing.  Now,  the  tempter  may  work  through  either  of  these  two 
elements  of  temptation.  He  may  sway  the  mind  towards  certain  thoughts  and  impulses, 
or  he  may  present  to  the  mind  occasions  of  sin  by  bringing  about  an  arrangement  of 
circumstances  which  shall  appeal  to  the  internal  desire  in  such  a  way  that  indulgence 
would  be  unlawful.  Thus  dangers  appeal  to  the  instinct  of  self-preservations  and  for- 
bidden delights  to  the  love  of  pleasure.  2.  These  temptations  tend  to  frustrate  the  work 
of  the  gospel.  All  is  undone  if  the  Church  proves  unfaithful.  High  knowledge  may 
be  acquired,  elaborate  organization  may  be  perlected,  busy  work  may  be  accomplished, 
and  yet,  if  the  purity  of  the  spiritual  life  is  invaded,  or  the  faithfulness  that  should  mark 
the  soldier  of  Christ  corrupted,  the  labour  that  led  to  the  happiest  results  is  all  in  vain. 

II.  The  tempter  can  only  frustrate  the  work  of  the  gospel  when  the 
tempted  yield  to  temptation.  1.  The  power  of  the  tempter  is  limited  to  temptation. 
He  can  persuade ;  he  cannot  compel.  He  may  use  threats,  or  he  may  use  cajolery. 
But  he  cannot  use  force.  For  the  violence  that  is  done  to  the  body  of  the  martyr  is 
no  violence  to  his  soul,  but  only  a  powerful  persuasive  influence.  Satan  goes  about  like 
a  roaring  lion.  He  has  a  deep  throat,  but  blunt  fangs.  2.  We  are  free  to  resist 
temptation.  Temptation  cannot  destroy  free-will.  The  tempter  simply  tries  to  induce 
us  to  choose  the  evil.  If  we  do  not  choose  it,  he  is  powerless.  And  tiie  decision  lies 
entirely  with  ourselves.  3.  The  grace  of  Qod  will  help  us  to  resist  temptation  effectually. 
We  are  not  left  alone  to  battle  with  the  tempter.  If  Satan  is  against  us,  God  is  for  us. 
Stronger  and  greater  influences  for  good  are  provided  for  counteracting  the  evil  influences. 
But  these  are  equally  outside  our  liberty  of  choice — good  persuasion  as  against  bad  per- 
suasion. It  is  for  us  to  lend  ourselves  to  the  helpful  grace  of  God  in  Christ  if  we 
are  to  be  strong  to  resist  temptation  and  to  prevent  the  work  of  the  gospel  from  being 
frustrated  in  u». — W.  F.  A. 


0H.ni.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  73 

Ver.  8. — St.  Paul's  devotion  to  his  converts.  I.  A  picture  op  Christian  love.  St 
Paul  is  intensely  devoted  to  his  converts.  Their  prosperity  is  his  life,  their  unfaith* 
fulness  his  death.  Love  of  the  brethren  is  a  conspicuous  feature  in  the  early  Christian 
charaoter — more  conspicuous  than,  alasl  it  is  in  the  modern  Church.  An  apostle 
felt  more  than  a  brotherly  love  for  the  Churches  he  had  planted.  His  affection  was 
that  of  a  father  for  his  children.  1.  Christianity  promotes  care  for  others.  It  is 
directly  opposed  to  a  self-seeking  exclusiveness  as  much  in  spiritual  as  in  worldly 
affairs.  As  it  bids  a  man  not  simply  care  for  the  enriching  of  himself  with  material 
wealth,  so  it  equally  forbids  him  to  seek  only  for  the  saving  of  his  own  soul.  The 
Church  of  Christ  is  always  required  to  have  in  view  the  object  which  Ignatius  Loyola 
propounded  as  the  great  end  of  the  society  of  the  Jesuits  when  he  wrote,  "  The  end  of 
this  society  is  not  only,  with  the  grace  of  God,  to  devote  ourselves  to  the  salvation  and 
perfection  of  our  own  souls,  but  also,  with  the  same  Divine  grace,  to  labour  most 
earnestly  for  the  salvation  and  perfection  of  our  neighbour."  2.  Christianity  binds 
Christians  together  in  close  bonds  of  affection.  This  is  its  aim,  and  this  is  what  it  does 
when  unhindered  by  culpable  selfishness  and  coldness.  The  gospel  introduces  a  new 
experience  into  the  world.  Christian  love  is  quite  unlike  pagan  friendship,  being  (1) 
broader;  (2)  deeper,  founded  on  spiritual  union;  and  (3)  warmer. 

II.  An  inducement  to  Christian  fidelity.  1.  The  inducement  is  first  direct  and 
personal.  St.  Paul  urges  the  Thessalonians  to  be  steadfast  because  he  feels  his  own 
life  to  be  wrapped  up  in  their  fidelity.  For  his  sake,  if  not  for  their  own,  he  desires 
them  to  resist  the  temptations  that  are  trying  them.  No  doubt  so  devoted  and  affec- 
tionate a  man  as  St.  Paul  would  be  able  to  bring  great  weight  of  persuasion  to  bear  on  his 
converts  by  this  appeal  to  their  consideration  for  their  spiritual  father.  A  similar 
influence  may  be  helpful  now.  If  we  know  one  who  has  laboured,  prayed,  and  watched 
for  our  soul,  surely  the  desire  not  to  grieve  him  at  the  last  by  proving  all  his  toil  to 
have  been  in  vain  should  be  a  motive  for  profiting  by  it.  The  scholar  should  feel  thus 
towards  his  teacher,  the  child  towards  his  Christian  mother;  above  all,  every  one  of  us 
towards  Christ,  that  his  work  may  not  he  in  vain — that,  after  all  he  has  suffered  for  us, 
he  should  not  be  made  to  suffer  by  us.  2.  Further,  the  inducement  is  general  and 
inferential.  If  the  steadfastness  of  the  Thessalonians  was  a  matter  of  such  profound 
concern  to  St.  Paul,  it  must  have  been  of  great  importance  in  itself.  Here  is  a  strong 
reason  for  not  thinking  lightly  of  Christian  fidelity.  An  apostle  feels  that  he  lives  in 
the  faithfulness  of  his  converts.  How  supremely  necessary  must  that  faithfulness  be 
for  them !  how  supremely  necessary  must  it  ever  be  for  the  Church ! 

III.  An  example  for  Christian  work.  The  Church  at  Thessalonica  was  faithful. 
St.  Paul  was  not  disappointed  in  his  friends.  The  secret  of  this  steadfastness  may  be 
seen  in  the  spirit  of  the  apostle.  He  was  no  perfunctory  preacher.  Not  only  was  his 
heart  in  his  work ;  his  heart  was  with  the  people  to  whom  he  ministered.  Their 
faithfulness  and  failure  were  questions  of  life  and  death  to  him.  The  servant  of  Christ 
has  here  an  example  of  supreme  interest.  Learning,  eloquence,  holiness,  zeal,  all  fail 
without  love.  The  preacher  who  identifies  himself  with  his  people  is  the  most  success- 
ful in  winning  them  for  Christ. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  12. — The  increase  of  love.  I.  The  increase  of  love  is  the  first  essential  op 
Christian  progress.  St.  Paul  sets  it  first  aud  by  itself  as  the  root  and  secret  of  the 
blameless  holiness  before  God  which  he  regards  as  the  great  consummation  of  perfection. 
The  Church  has  too  often  disregarded  this  primary  note  of  progress,  preferring  growth 
in  knowledge,  enlarged  activity,  and  more  extended  influence  in  the  w>iid.  But  it 
needs  to  be  seen  that  the  one  measure  of  spiritual  prosperity  is  the  degree  in  which  love 
abounds.  The  reasons  for  this  honouring  of  Christian  love  are  apparent.  1.  Love  is  the 
most  like  God  of  all  human  experiences.  We  are  nearest  to  God  when  we  love  one 
another  most.  2.  Love  is  the  most  fruitful  grace.  It  does  most  good  to  the  world  and 
inspires  the  best  service  of  God.  3.  Love  is  the  foundation  of  all  other  graces.  It 
opens  the  eyes  of  knowledge,  and  kindles  the  ardour  of  zeal,  and  inspires  the  life  of  faith, 
and  breathes  holiness  into  the  soul. 

n.  This  increase  of  love  must  be  in  extent  as  well  ab  is  intensity.  It  is  not 
enough  that  we  have  a  very  warm,  passionate  devotion  if  this  is  confined  to  a  narrow 
circle.   One  of  the  most  important  features  of  Christian  lore,  in  contradistinction  to  the 


72  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  m.  1—13. 

natural  kindness  of  persons  of  an  affectionate  disposition,  is  its  breadth.  It  is  not  led 
by  fancy  and  confined  to  the  arbitrary  selection  of  a  merely  human  love.  1.  It  begins 
with  Christ.  Though  St.  Paul  does  not  here  express  this  truth,  he  implies  it.  For  he 
is  writing  to  a  Christian  Church,  not  to  a  mixed  crowd  of  men  of  the  world.  He 
assumes  devotion  to  Christ,  and  seeks  for  the  fruits  of  it.  Now,  it  is  part  of  the  glory 
of  Christianity  that  it  reveals  man  in  his  most  attractive  character  when  it  shows 
Christ  to  us.  Thus  the  enthusiasm  of  humanity  is  possible,  because,  first  seeing  man 
in  Christ,  we  afterwards  learn  to  see  Christ  in  every  man.  2.  It  expands  into  love  for 
all  Christians.  The  special  characteristic  of  the  brotherly  love,  so  much  enforced  in 
the  New  Testament,  is  that  it  flows  out  to  Christians  as  such,  irrespective  of  personal 
attractiveness  or  the  reverse.  Of  course  we  must  have  our  natural  affinities  and  special 
friendships.  Christ  had  as  much.  But  we  must  not  confine  Christian  love  to  such 
cases.  Indeed,  the  specially  Christian  character  of  love  is  not  seen  until  this  love  is 
bestowed  upon  those  who  would  not  have  received  it  had  they  not  been  united  to  us 
through  Christ.  3.  It  must  extend  to  all  men.  Christian  love  is  not  confined  to  the 
Christian  community.  The  disciple  of  Christ  is  the  true  philanthropist.  It  is  not 
simply  that  in  the  spirit  of  Christian  universalism  we  are  to  endeavour  to  draw  all  men 
within  the  fold  of  Christ ;  we  are  also  to  love  them  while  they  remain  outside  it.  We 
are  to  love  them  as  men.  From  this  we  may  infer  that  religious  exclusiveness  is  a  sin, 
that  Christian  people  should  take  interest  in  all  things  human — in  the  science,  art, 
business,  politics,  and  social  and  domestic  affairs  of  the  world.  The  progress  of  our 
Christian  life  may  be  measured  by  the  cheerful  sympathy,  breadth,  and  generosity  of 
our  humanity. 

III.  The  increase  of  love  is  a  fruit  of  Divine  gracb.  St.  Paul  prays  that  the 
Lord  may  make  the  Thessalonians  increase  and  abound  in  love.     1.  Love  is  only 

fossible  where  the  hard  heart  of  selfishness  has  teen  softened.  It  is  the  work  of  God's 
pirit  within  us  to  make  this  change.  God  also  casts  out  the  impurities  which  deaden 
genuine  love  and  the  aversions  which  limit  it.  2.  Love  springs  up  in  us  by  contact 
with  the  Divine  love.  That  love  must  be  revealed  and  "  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  " 
in  order  that  our  love  may  be  stimulated.  3.  Nevertheless  human  influences  help  the 
development  of  Christian  love.  The  apostle  referred  to  his  own  example :  "  Even  as  we 
do  towards  you."  Christian  love  is  contagious.  The  study  of  the  lives  of  men  of 
large-hearted  charity  is  helpful  in  the  overthrowing  of  our  narrow  prejudices  and  the 
arousing  of  a  broad,  strong  spirit  of  loving-kindness. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  13. — Divine  culture.  God  is  carrying  on  a  process  of  culture  with  his  people, 
training,  educating,  and  forming  them  according  to  his  own  ideal  of  humanity.  To 
ignore  this  process  while  admitting  the  merciful  kindness  of  God  in  other  respects  is  to 
take  a  low  view  both  of  providence  and  of  Christianity.  To  recognize  it  is  to  do  much 
towards  lightening  the  burdens  and  the  mystery  of  all  this  unintelligible  life.  For 
pain,  temptation,  and  disappointment  can  be  better  borne  when  we  know  that  the  end 
of  God's  dealings  with  us  is  not  our  enjoyment  of  present  ease,  but  our  education  in 
character. 

I.  The  subject  of  Divine  culture.  "  Your  hearts."  The  education  that  secures 
good  habits  is  a  shallow  training  if  it  leaves  the  source  and  spring  of  conduct  untouched. 
It  may  drill ;  it  cannot  discipline.  Neither  is  the  mere  infusion  of  knowledge,  nor  even 
this  with  the  addition  of  the  cultivation  of  taste  and  the  development  of  mental  energy, 
the  great  requisite  in  God's  culture.  He  aims  at  renewing  and  purifying  the  heart. 
He  is  not  satisfied  with  decorous  conduct  as  a  mask  for  a  corrupt  heart.  But,  having 
secured  purity  of  heart,  he  knows  that  right  conduct  will  follow.  Moreover,  if  the 
external  act  may  appear  to  men  questionable,  God,  reading  the  heart,  accounts  his 
people  blameless  when  the  motive  is  good. 

II.  The  character  moulded  under  Divine  culture.  "Unblamable  in  holiness." 
1.  It  is  holiness.  God  does  not  satisfy  himself  with  the  forgiveness  of  the  past ;  we 
should  not  be  satisfied  with  that.  He  aims  at  the  real  and  positive  holiness  of  his 
people.  Holiness  is  more  than  dutifulness,  more  than  virtue.  It  includes  these  human 
types  of  goodness,  but  it  goes  beyond  them.  It  goes  down  to  thought,  affection,  and 
conduct,  seeking  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart.  It  rises  to  the  character  of  God  him 
self.    Holiness  is  godlike  goodness,  as  virtue  is  human  goodness.    2.  This  holiness  is 


oh.  iv.  1— 18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


73 


to  be  unblamable.  It  is  to  be  perfect.  It  is  to  stand  the  test  of  a  searching  scrutiny. 
Yet  it  is  not  a  barren  negative  purity.  For  we  may  be  blamed  for  sins  of  omission  as 
much  as  for  sins  of  transgression.  It  is  the  unprofitable  servant  who  is  cast  into  the 
outer  darkness.     To  be  unblamable  we  must  faithfully  discharge  our  trust. 

III.  The  standard  aimed  at  in  Divine  culture.  The  holiness  is  to  be  unblam- 
able before  our  God  and  Father  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  with  all  his  saints. 
1.  God  is  satisfied  with  no  less  holiness  than  such  as  is  pure  in  his  own  sight.  Our 
standard  is  low  because  our  conscience  is  corrupt.  The  height  of  God's  aim  is  only  to 
be  measured  by  the  loftiness  of  his  own  character.  Nevertheless,  be  it  remembered, 
God  will  expect  no  more  of  us  than  is  humanly  possible.  The  gardener  aims  at  pro- 
ducing a  perfect  flower  up  to  his  own  ideal,  but  still  only  up  to  his  own  ideal  of  what 
a  flower  should  be ;  he  does  not  seek  in  it  the  properties  of  animal  or  man.  2.  The 
test  is  to  be  applied  at  the  coming  of  Christ  with  his  saints.  They  come  to  judge  the 
world. 

IV.  The  stability  sect/bed  by  Divine  culture.  "  Stablish  your  hearts."  High 
culture  often  produces  a  result  which  is  brief  in  proportion  to  its  excellence.  The 
forced  hot-house  flower  soon  fades.  Knowledge  acquired  simply  to  meet  an  examina- 
tion is  quickly  forgotten.  This  is  not  education.  God  aims  at  more  than  the  momentary 
elevation  of  rare  seasons  of  grace.  He  will  have  a  firm  and  lasting  character — a  spiritual 
life  which  is  also  an  eternal  life. 

V.  The  means  employed  for  Divine  culture.  Ter.  12  describes  this.  It  is  an 
increasing  and  abounding  love.  Holiness  springs  from  love.  They  greatly  err  who 
seek  it  in  the  lonely  and  chill  altitudes  of  an  inhuman  saintliness.  By  mutual  Christian 
love,  and  by  a  broad,  practical  love  of  mankind,  we  are  trained  in  the  purity  which  may 
be  at  last  quite  blameless,  even  in  the  sight  of  God. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Contents. — With  this  chapter  the  second 
portion  of  the  Epistle — its  practical  appli- 
cation— commences.  The  apostle  exhorts 
and  entreats  the  Thessalonians  to  make  pro- 
gress in  the  Christian  life,  and  to  practise 
those  commandments  which,  when  he  was 
with  them,  he  gave  them  by  the  authority 
of  Jesus  Christ.  God  had  called  them  to 
holiness  and  to  the  renunciation  of  their 
heathen  practices.  They  must  especially  be 
on  their  guard  against  impurity,  to  which 
as  Gentiles  they  were  formerly  so  prone. 
He  who  rejected  his  injunctions  rejected,  not 
man,  but  God,  whose  commands  they  were. 
As  they  were  already  taught  of  God  in  the 
active  practice  of  Christian  love,  so  they 
must  abound  therein.  They  must  not  allow 
themselves  to  be  led  away  by  excitement,  as 
if  the  day  of  Christ  were  at  hand,  but  with 
quietness  and  honesty  perform  the  duties 
of  their  earthly  calling,  and  so  commend  the 
gospel  to  unbelievers.  And  with  regard  to 
their  anxiety  concerning  the  fate  of  their 
deoeased  friends,  they  were  to  be  comforted 
by  the  thought  that  the  dead  in  Christ 
would  be  no  losers  at  the  advent,  bat  would 


rise  first,  and,  along  with  the  living,  would 
be  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  at  his 
coming,  and  so  they  shall  all  be  united  in 
one  holy  fellowship  with  him. 

Ver.  1. — Furthermore ;  literally,  finally  ; 
for therest  —  introducing  the  closing  or  prac- 
tical part  of  the  Epistle.  The  apostle  uses 
the  same  word  elsewhere  at  the  close  of  his 
Epistles  (comp.  2  Cor.  xiii.  1 ;  Eph.  vL  10 ; 
Phil.  iv.  8;  2  Thess.  iii.  1).  Then;  or 
rather,  there/ore ;  connecting  this  exhortation 
with  the  closing  verses  of  the  last  chapter : 
In  order  that  you  may  be  established  un- 
blamably  in  holiness  at  the  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  must  do  your  part, 
you  must  earnestly  strive  after  holiness. 
We ;  to  he  restricted  to  Paul.  Beseech  ypu, 
brethren,  and  exhort  you  by  the  Lord  Jesus ; 
or  rather,  in  the  Lord  Jesus;  that  is,  in 
fellowship  with  him— the  sphere  or  element 
within  which  the  apostle  besought  and  ex- 
horted the  Thessalonians.  He  wrote  as  the 
organ  or  instrument  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
That  as  ye  have  received  of  us.  Paul  here 
appeals  to  the  exhortations  which  he  gave 
them  during  his  residence  among  them  at 
Thessalonica.  How  ye  ought  to  walk  and 
to  please  God;  how  you  ought  to  conduct 
yourselves  so  as  to  please  God.  The  walk- 
ing was  the  means  of  pleasing.  The  B.V., 
after  these  words,  on  the  authority  of  manu- 
scripts, adds,  "'even  as  ye  do  walk."    So  y« 


74 


THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  iv.  1— 18. 


would  abound  more  and  more.  The  apostle 
acknowledges  their  Christian  walking; 
they  had  already  entered  upon  the  road; 
their  conduct  was  snnutified ;  but  he  exhorts 
them  to  abound  therein  with  still  greater 
care  and  fidelity. 

Ver.  2. — For  ye  know ;  appealing  to  their 
memory  in  confirmation  of  what  he  had 
said.  What  oommandments  we  gave  yon  by 
the  Lord  Jesus ;  or,  through  the  Lord  Jems  ; 
that  is,  not  merely  by  his  authority,  but  by 
means  of  him,  bo  that  these  commandments 
did  not  proceed  from  Paul,  but  from  the 
Lord  Jesus  himself.  We  have  here,  and 
indeed  in  this  chapter  throughout,  an  asser- 
tion of  the  inspiration  of  the  apostle:  the 
commandments  which  he  gave  to  the  Thes- 
saloniang  were  the  commandments  of  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

Ver.  3.— For  this  is  the  will  of  God.  The 
phrase,  "the  will  of  God,"  has  two  signifi- 
cations in  Scripture:  the  one  is  the  de- 
termination of  God — his  decree ;  the  other 
is  his  desire,  that  in  which  he  delights — a 
will,  however,  which  may  be  frustrated  by 
the  perversity  of  his  creatures.  It  is  in 
this  latter  sense  that  the  word  is  here  em- 
ployed. Even  your  sanctiflcation ;  complete 
consecration;  holiness  taken  in  its  most 
general  sense.  Our  holiness  is  the  great 
design  of  Christ's  death,  and  is  the  revealed 
will  of  God.  Some  (Olshausen,  Lunemann) 
restrict  the  term  to  moral  purity,  and  con- 
sider the  next  clause  as  its  explanation 
(comp.  Rom.  xii.  1).  That  ye  should  abstain 
from  fornication ;  a  vice  fearfully  prevalent 
among  the  henthen,  and  which,  indeed, 
they  hardly  regarded  as  wrong.  Especially 
it  was  the  great  sin  of  Corinth,  from  which 
the  apostle  wrote,  the  patron  goddess  of 
which  city  was  Venus. 

Ver.  4.— That  every  one  of  you  should 
know  how  to  possess.  The  word  here  ren- 
dered "possess"  rather  signifies  "acquire." 
The  R.V.  Tenders  the  clause,  "that  each 
one  of  you  know  how  to  possess  himself  of; " 
hence  it  admits  of  the  translation,  "to  ob- 
tain the  mastery  over."  His  vessel.  This 
word  has  gnen  rise  to  a  diversity  of  interpre- 
tation. Especially  two  meanings  have  been 
given  to  it.  By  some  it  is  supposed  to  be  a 
figurative  expression  for  "  wife,"  in  which 
sense  the  word  is  used,  though  rarely,  by 
Hebrew  writers.  Peter  speaks  of  the  wife 
"  as  the  weaker  vessel "  (1  Pet.  iii.  7).  This 
is  the  meaning  adopted  by  Augustine,  Schott, 
De  Wette,  Koch,  Hofmann,  Lunemann, 
Riggonbaoh;  and,  among  English  ex- 
positors, by  Alford,  Jowett,  Ellicott,  and 
Eadie.  Tin's  meaning  is,  however,  to  be 
rejected  as  unusual  and  strange,  and  unsuit- 
able to  what  follows  in  the  next  verse.  The 
other  meaning — "one's  own  body" — is  more 
appropriate.    Thus  Paul  says,  "We  have 


this  treasure,"  namely,  the  gospel,  "in 
earthen  vessels"  (2  Cor.  iv.  7;  comp.  also 
1  Sam.  xxi.  5).  The  body  may  well  be 
compared  to  a  vessel,  as  it  contains  the 
soul.  This  meaning  is  adopted  by  Chry- 
sostom,  Calvin,  Grotius,  Bengel,  Olshausen, 
Meyer;  and,  among  English  expositors,  by 
Macknight,  Conybeare,  Bishop  Alexander, 
WordswoTth,  and  Vaughan.  In  sanotifioa- 
tion  and  honour.  What  the  apostle  here 
requires  is  that  every  one  should  obtain 
the  mastery  over  his  own  body,  and  that 
whereas,  as  Gentiles,  they  had  yielded  their 
members  servants  to  uncleannesB  and  to 
iniquity  unto  iniquity,  they  should  now, 
as  Christians,  yield  their  members  servants 
to  righteousness  unto  holiness  (Rom.  vi.  19). 

Ver.  5. — Not  in  the  lust  of  concupiscence 
— not  in  the  passion  of  lust  (R.V.)— even  as 
the  Gentiles  whioh  know  not  God;  and 
therefore  from  whom  nothing  better  was 
to  be  expected.  The  moral  sense  of  the 
heathen  was  so  perverted,  and  their  natures 
so  corrupt,  that  they  looked  upon  fornica- 
tion as  a  thing  indifferent. 

Ver.  6. — That  no  man  go  beyond;  or, 
transgress.  And  defraud;  or,  as  it  is  in  the 
margin  of  our  Bibles,  oppress,  or,  overreach ; 
wrong  (R.V.).  His  brother.  Not  an  ex- 
hortation against  dishonesty,  or  prohibition 
against  all  attempts  to  overreach  in  usual 
mutual  intercourse,  as  the  words  would  at 
first  sight  seem  to  imply,  and  as  some  con- 
sider it  (Hofmann,  Lunemann,  Riggenbach) ; 
but,  as  is  evident  from  the  context,  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  former  exhortation,  a  prohi- 
bition against  impurity.  In  any  matter ;  or, 
more  properly,  tn  the  matter,  namely,  that 
about  which  I  have  been  discoursing.  "  An 
example  of  the  modest  reserve  and  refined 
delicacy  which  characterize  the  holy  apostle's 
language  in  speaking  of  things  which  the 
Gentiles  did  without  shame,  and  thus,  by  a 
chaste  bashfulness  of  words,  commending 
the  duty  of  unblemished  purity  in  deeds  " 
(Wordsworth).1  Because  the  Lord  is  the 
Avenger  of  all  such;  either  of  all  such  as 
are  thus  defrauded  or  of  all  such  sinful 
practices.  As  we  also  have  forewarned  you 
and  testified. 

Ver.  7. — For  God  hath  not  called  us  unto ; 
or,  for  the  purpose  of.  TJnoleanness ;  moral 
unoleanness  in  general  (comp.  1  Cor.  vi.  15). 
But  unto ;  or,  in ;  in  a  state  of.  Holiness ;  or 
sanctification  ;  the  same  word  as  in  the  third 
verse ;  so  that  holiness  is  the  whole  sphere 
of  our  Christian  life. 

Ver.  8.— He  therefore  that  despiseth ;  or, 
as  it  is  in  the  margin,  rejecteth^KY.).  What 
is  rejected  is  either  the  above  commands  to 
moral  purity,  or  the  Christian  calling  to 
holiness,  or,  better  still,  Paul  himself,  as  the 

'  Bee  also  Jowett,  in  low- 


on.  iv.  1 — 18.J    THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


75 


organ  of  God.  Despiseth ;  or,  rejeeteth.  Not 
man;  that  is,  not  me,  as  if  the  commands 
were  given  from  myself— were  of  mere 
human  origin.  But  God  ;  the  Giver  of  these 
commands.  So  also  Peter  said  unto 
Ananias,  "  Thou  hast  not  lied  unto  man, 
but  unto  God"  (Acts  v.  4);  and  our  Lord 
says,  "  He  that  rejeeteth  you  rejeeteth  me" 
(Luke  x.  16).  Who  hath  also  given  unto  us 
his  Holy  Spirit.  If  this  is  the  correct 
reading,  then  the  apostle  here  again  asserts 
Ids  own  inspiration,  and  that  in  the  strongest 
and  plainest  terms.  The  best  manuscripts, 
however,  read,  "  who  giveth  his  Holy  Spirit 
unto  you"  (E.V.) — a  strong  enforcement  of 
holiness,  inasmuch  as  the  Holy  Spirit  was 
given  them  for  the  express  purpose  of  pro- 
ducing holiness  within  them. 

Ver.  9. — The  apostle  now  proceeds  to  a 
new  exhortation.  But  as  touching  brotherly 
love.  Brotherly  love  is  the  love  of  Chris- 
tiana to  Christians,  that  special  affection 
which  believers  bear  to  each  other;  a  virtue 
which  was  carried  to  such  perfection  in  the 
primitive  Church  as  to  call  forth  the  ad- 
miration of  their  heathen  adversaries.  This 
virtue  is  often  inculcated  in  Scripture  (Heb. 
xiii.  1 ;  1  John  iii.  14),  and  is  distinguished 
from  love  in  general  (2  Pet.  i.  7).  Ye  need 
not  that  I  write  unto  you ;  a  delicate  and 
gentle  reproof.  For  ye  yourselves  are  taught 
of  God.  We  are  not  here  to  think  of  the 
new  commandment  of  brotherly  love  given 
by  the  Saviour,  nor  on  the  Divine  compassion 
exciting  us  to  love;  but  "  taught  of  God" 
by  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  oi  i  their  hearts 
and  consciences  to  love  one  another. 

Ver.  10. — And  indeed  ye  do  it  toward  all 
the  brethren  which  are  in  all  Macedonia. 
Not  only  to  those  in  Tliessalouica,  but  to  all 
believers  in  your  country  and  neighbour- 
hood. Bnt  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  that 
ye  increase  more  and  more ;  that  ye  make 
progress  in  brotherly  love — that  it  increase 
in  purity,  in  warmth,  and  in  extent. 

Ver.  11. — And  that  ye  study;  literally, 
that  ye  be  ambitious.  To  be  quiet ;  to  avoid 
unrest,  to  live  in  peace.  Worldly  ambition 
excludes  quietness  and  prompts  to  restless- 
ness ;  so  that  the  apostle's  admonition  really 
is,  ",that  ye  be  ambitious  not  to  be  ambi- 
tious." The  unrest  which  disturbed  the 
peace  of  the  Thessalonian  Church  was  not 
political,  but  religious;  it  arose  from  the 
excitement  naturally  occasioned  by  the 
entrance  of  the  new  feeling  of  Christianity 
among  them.  It  would  also  appear  that 
they  were"  excited  by  the  idea  of  Christ's 
immediate  advent.  This  had  occasioned 
disorders,  and  had  caused  several  to  neglect 
thfeir  ordinary  business  and  to  give  them- 
selves over  to  an  indolent  inactivity,  so  that 
Christian  prudence  was  overborne  (comp.  2 
Then.  iii.  6 — 12  ^     Perhaps,  alio,  the  libe^ 


rality  of  the  richer  members  of  the  Church 
was  abused  and  perverted,  so  as  to  promote 
indolence.  And  to  do  your  own  business ;  to 
attend  to  the  duties  of  your  worldly  calling, 
to  avoid  idleness.  And  to  work  with  your 
own  hands.  From  this  it  would  appear  that 
the  members  of  the  Thefesalonian  Church 
were  chiefly  composed  of  the  labouring 
classes.  As  we  commanded  you.  A  precisely 
similar  exhortation  is  given  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Ephesians :  "  Let  him  that  stole  steal 
no  more :  but  rather  let  him  labour,  working 
with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is  good" 
(Eph.  iv.  28). 

Ver.  12. — That  ye  walk  honestly;  that  is, 
honourably  ;  seemly.  Toward  them  that  are 
without ;  without  the  pale  of  the  Christian 
Church,  toward  those  who  are  not  Chris- 
tians, whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,  the  unbe- 
lieving world.  So  also,  in  another  Epistle, 
the  apostle  says,  "  Walk  in  wisdom  toward 
them  that  are  without"  (Col.  iv.  5).  That 
ye  may  have  lack  of  nothing ;  either  neuter, 
of  no  thing ;  or  perhaps  rather  masculine,  of 
no  man ;  that  ye  be  under  no  necessity  of 
asking  assistance  either  from  heathens  or 
from  fellow-Christians ;  inasmuch  as  working 
with  your  hands  will  put  you  in  possession 
of  what  is  necessary  for  life ;  whereas  idle- 
ness necessarily  involves  poverty  and  depen- 
dence on  others. 

Ver.  13. — With  this  verse  the  apostle 
proceeds  to  another  subject,  namely,  to 
comfort  those  who  were  mourning  the  death 
of  their  friends.  It  would  appear  that  the 
Thessalonians  were  in  perplexity  and  dis- 
tress concerning  the  fate  of  their  deceased 
friends,  fearing  that  these  would  miss  those 
blessings  which  they  expected  Christ  to 
confer  at  his  advent.  Their  views  of  the 
time  and  nature  of  the  advent  and  of  the 
future  state  in  general  were  confused.  They 
expected  that  Christ  would  come  imme- 
diately and  establish  his  kingdom  on  earth ; 
and  consequently  they  feared  that  those  who 
had  died  would  be  excluded  from  it.  But  I 
would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant,  brethren ; 
a  phrase  often  used  by  the  apostle,  when  he 
makes  a  transition  to  new  and  important 
matters  (comp.  Bom.  i.  13 ;  xi.  25 ;  1  Cor. 
x.  1 ;  xii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  i.  8).  Concerning  them 
which  are  asleep;  or,  are  fallen  asleep. 
The  death  of  believers  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment is  frequently  called  "  sleep."  "  Our 
friend  Lazarus  sleepeth  "  (John  xi.  11).  Of 
Stephen  it  is  said  that  "he  fell  asleep" 
(Acts  vii.  60).  "  Many  are  weak  and  Bickly 
among  you,  and  many  sleep  "  (1  Cor.  xi.  30). 
"  Then  they  also  which  are  fallen  asleep  in 
Christ  are  perished  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  18).  "  We 
shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be 
changed  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  51).  "  He  fell  asleep  " 
is  a  common  epitaph  on  early  Christian 
tombstones     It  U  to  be  observed  that  it  is 


T6 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS,    [oh.  r*.  1—18. 


not  of  the  dead  generally  that  the  apostle 
speaks,  bat  of  the  dead  in  Christ,  and  espe- 
cially of  those  members  of  the  Thessalonian 
Church  who  had  died.  That  ye  Borrow  not. 
Some  suppose  that  sorrow  for  our  deceased 
friends  is  here  utterly  prohibited ;  inasmuch 
as  if  we  had  a  Arm  belief  in  their  blessed- 
ness we  would  rejoice  and  not  mourn.  But 
the  sorrow  here  prohibited  is  a  despairing 
and  an  unbelieving  sorrow ;  we  are  forbidden 
to  sorrow  as  those  who  have  no  hope,  no 
belief  in  a  blessed  resurrection.  The  tears 
of  Jesus  at  the  tomb  of  Lazarus  have 
authorized  and  sanctified  Christian  sorrow. 
"Paul,"  observes  Calvin,  "lifts  up  the 
minds  of  believers  to  a  consideration  of  the 
resurrection,  lest  they  should  indulge  exces- 
sive grief  on  occasion  of  the  d.ath  of  their 
relatives,  for  it  were  unseemly  that  there 
should  be  no  difference  between  them  and 
unbelievers,  who  put  no  end  or  measure  to 
their  grief,  for  this  reason,  that  in  death  they 
recognize  nothing  but  destruction.  Those 
that  abuse  this  testimony  so  as  to  establish 
among  Christians  stoical  indifference,  that 
is,  an  iron  hardness,  will  find  nothing  of  this 
nature  in  Paul's  words."  Even  as  others ; 
literally,  as  the  rest ;  namely,  the  heathen. 
Which  have  no  hope ;  no  hope  of  immortality 
beyond  death,  or  no  hope  of  the  resurrection. 
The  heathen,  with  very  few  exceptions,  had 
no  hope  of  a  future  life,  and  hence  they 
mourned  over  the  death  of  their  friends  as 
an  irreparable  loss.  This  disconsolate  feeling 
is  apparent  in  their  writings  (for  examples, 
see  Lunemann,  Alford,  and  Jowett,  in  loco). 

Ver.  14. — For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died 
and  rose  again.  The  apostle's  argument 
proceeds  on  the  supposition  that  Christ  and 
believers  are  one  body,  of  which  Christ  is 
the  Head  and  believers  are  the  members; 
and  that  consequently  what  happens  to  the 
Head  must  happen  to  the  members.  Our 
knowledge  and  belief  of  a  future  state,  and 
especially  of  the  resurrection,  is  founded  on 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  (comp.  1  Cor.  xv. 
12—20).  Even  so  them  also  which  sleep  in 
Jesus ;  or  more  literally,  through  Jesus.  Will 
God  bring  with  him;  namely,  with  Jesus. 
These  words  are  differently  construed.  Some 
read  them  thus :  "  Even  so  them  also  which 
sleep  will  Ood  through  Jesus  bring  with 
him"  (De  Wette,  Lunemann);  but  this 
appears  to  be  an  awkward  construction ;  as 
we  must  then  render  the  clause,  "  will  God 
through  Jesus  bring  with  Jesus."  It  is, 
therefore,  better  to  refer  the  words, "  through 
Jesus,"  to  the  first  clause.  It  is  through 
Jesus  that  believers  fall  asleep;  it  is  he 
who  changes  the  nature  of  death,  for  all  his 
people,  from  being  the  king  of  tenon  into  a 
quiet  and  gentle  sleep,  from  which  they  will 
awaken  to  eternal  life. 

Ver.  14. — lor  this  we  say  unto  yon  by  the 


word  of  the  Lord ;  or  rather,  by  a  word  of 
the  Lord.  The  apostle  does  not  refer  to 
those  portions  of  the  gospel  which  record 
our  Lord's  discourses  concerning  the  last 
things ;  nor  to  some  sayings  of  Christ  pre- 
served by  tradition ;  but  to  a  direct  revelation 
made  unto  himself  by  the  Lord.  We  know 
from  Scripture  that  Paul  had  many  such 
revelations  imparted  to  him  (comp.  1  Cor. 
xi.  23  ;  Gal.  i.  11,  12).  That  we  which  are 
alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the 
Lord.  These  words  are  the  occasiou  of  an 
important  discussion.  It  has  been  affirmed 
that  the  apostle  here  asserts  that  he  himself 
expected  to  be  alive,  with  the  majority  of 
those  to  whom  he  was  writing,  at  the  Lord's 
advent;  that,  according  to  his  expectation, 
Christ's  second  coming  was  close  at  hand. 
"  Those  who  are  alive  and  remain  "  are  dis- 
tinguished from  "  those  who  are  asleep," 
and  iu  the  former  class  the  apostle  includes 
himself  and  his  readers.  And  a  similar 
declaration  is  contained  in  the  First  Epistle 
to  the  Corinthians :  "  We  shall  not  all  sleep, 
but  we  shall  all  be  changed  "  (1  Cor.  xv. 
51).  Such  is  the  view  adopted  by  Grotius, 
Olshauseu,  Koch,  Neamler,  Lechler,  Baur, 
Winer,  Reuss,  Lunemann,  Riggenbach  ;  and, 
among  English  divines,  by  Alford,  Jowett) 
Stanley,  and  Conybeare.  Some  of  them 
suppose  that  Paul  changed  his  opinion  on 
this  point  —  that  whilst  in  his  earlier 
Epistles  he  taught  the  immediateness  of  the 
advent,  in  his  later  Epistles  he  renounced 
this  hope  and  looked  forward  to  his  own 
departure.  There  does  not  seem  to  be  any 
ground  for  this  opinion.  On  the  contrary,  it 
would  appear  from  the  Second  Epistle  to 
the  Thessalonian  s,  written  only  a  few  weeks 
after  this  Epistle,  that  Paul  did  not  expect 
the  advent  immediately ,but  mentions  a  series 
of  events  which  would  intervene  before  its 
occurrence  (2  These,  ii.  1 — 3).  And  in  this 
Epistle  he  represses  the  curiosity  of  the 
Thessalonians  about  the  precise  time  of  the 
advent  by  telling  them  that  it  was  beyond 
the  sphere  of  his  teaching  (ch.  v.  1,  2).  We 
consider,  then,  that  the  apostle  speaks  here 
as  a  member  of  the  Christian  body,  and  uses 
a  very  common  form  of  expression — that  we 
Christians  which  are  alive  and  remain  unto 
the  coming  of  the  Lord ;  but  not  at  all  in- 
tending to  express  his  confidence  that  he 
himself  and  his  converts  would  be  actually 
alive  at  the  advent.  "  He  spake,"  says  St. 
Chrysostom,  "  not  of  himself,  but  of  Chris- 
tians who  would  be  alive  at  the  day  of 
judgment."  Suoh  is  the  view  adopted  by 
Chrysostom,  Calvin,  Bengel,  Hofmann, 
Lange,  Macknight,  Ellicott,  Bishop  Alex- 
ander, Wordsworth,  and  Vaughan.  At  the 
same  time,  it  must  be  remembered  that 
the  time  of  the  advent  was  expressly  con- 
cealed (Matt.  xxiv.  86 ;  Aoto  L  7<)  and  that 


oh.  iv.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


77 


it  might  occur  at  any  period ;  and,  by  reason 
of  tlieir  proximity  to  the  first  advent,  the 
primitive  Christians  would  be  deeply  im- 
pressed with  the  possibility  or  even  proba- 
bility of  its  occurrence  in  their  day*. 
Christians  were  to  be  living  always  in 
readiness  for  this  great  event,  and  thus  it 
became  a  matter  of  expectation.  "  Strictly 
speaking,  the  expectation  of  the  day  of  the 
Lord  wns  not  a  belief,  but  a  necessity  in 
the  early  Church ;  clinging  as  it  did  to  the 
thought  of  Christ,  it  could  not  bear  to  be 
separated  from  him ;  it  was  his  absence,  not 
his  presence,  that  the  first  believers  found 
it  hard  to  realize "  ( Jowett).  Hence  Paul 
might  not  regard  the  advent  as  far  removed 
into  the  distant  future,  as  wholly  impossible 
to  happi  n  iu  his  days,  but  as  an  occurrence 
which  might  at  any  time  take  place ;  but  he 
did  not  teach  anything  definite  or  certain  on 
the  subject.1  Shall  not  prevent ;  go  before 
or  anticipate,  obtain  the  preference  over,  get 
before,  so  that  those  that  are  asleep  might 
be  left  behind  and  fail  of  the  prize.  Them 
that  are  asleep ;  those  who  are  dead,  so  that 
they,  the  living,  should  be  glorified  before 
them,  or  perhaps  hinder  their  glorification. 

Ver.  16. — For ;  assigning  a  reason  for  the 
above  assertion, "  because."  The  Lord  himself; 
not  merely  the  Lord  as  the  chief  Person  and 
Actor  on  that  day,  in  contrast  to  his  saints, 
but  emphatic,  "the  Lord  himself,"  the  Lord 
in  his  own  proper  Person.  Shall  descend  from 
heaven ;  where  the  crucified  and  risen  Jesus 
is  now  enthroned,  seated  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  With  a  shout ;  a  word  denoting  a 
commanding  shout  as  that  of  a  leader  to  his 
host  when  he  leads  them  into  the  battle,  or 
of  the  army  when  it  rushes  to  the  fight. 
Some  refer  this  shout  to  what  follows — the 
voice  of  the  archangel  and  the  trump  of 
God  ;  but  there  are  three  particulars  here 
mentioned.  Others  attribute'  it  to  Christ 
himself.  With  the  voice  of  the  archangel ; 
or  rather,  of  an  archangel.  There  is  only 
one  archangel  mentioned  in  Scripture  (Jude 
9)  ;  the  word  denotes,  not  "chief  angel,"  but 
"  chief  or  ruler  of  the  angels."  Accordingly, 
some  suppose  that  Christ  himself  is  here 
meant,  as  to  him  alone,  it  is  asserted,  does 
this  title  belong;  but  the  Lord  and  the 
archangel  are  here  evidently  distinguished. 
Others  strangely  imagine  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  here  meant.  Others  fix  on  the 
archangel  Michael  (Jude  9).  Christ  is 
represented  as  accompanied  by  angels  to 

1  See  dissertation  on  "Paul's  Views  of 
the  Advent "  in  the  author's  '  Introduction 
to  the  Paulina  Kpintla*,'  pp.  94—106. 


the  judg  lent;  and  it  is  futile  to  inquire 
who  this  leader  of  the  angels  is.  And  the 
trump  of  God ;  even  as  :  1  ie  trumpet  sounded 
at  the  giving  of  the  Law  from  Sinai.  Also 
the  advent  of  Christ  to  judgment  is  repre- 
sented as  heralded  by  the  sound  of  a 
trumpet  (Matt.  xxiv.  31 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  51,  52). 
"  We  are  to  recognize  three  particulars,  fol- 
lowing each  other  in  rapid  succession  — the 
commanding  shout  of  the  King  himself,  the 
voice  of  the  archangel  summoning  the  other 
angels,  and  the  trump  of  God  which  awakens 
the  dead  and  collects  believers"  (Biggen- 
baoh).  And  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise 
first.  Some  suppose  that  the  reference  here 
is  to  the  first  resurrection ;  that  the  righteous, 
"the  dead  in  Christ,"  shall  rise  before  the 
wicked,  "  the  dead  not  in  Christ; "  and  that 
a  thousand  years,  or  the  millennium,  will 
intervene  between  the  first  and  second 
resurrections  (Rev.  xx.  4,  5).  But  this  is 
an  entirely  erroneous  supposition.  All  that 
is  here  asserted  is  that  the  dead  in  Christ 
shall  rise  before  the  living  in  Christ  shall 
be  changed;  there  is  no  contrast  between 
the  dead  in  Christ  and  the  dead  not  in 
Christ,  nor  any  allusion  to  the  resurrection 
of  the  wicked. 

Ver.  17. — Then  we  whioh  are  alive  and 
remain ;  or,  are  left ;  that  is,  the  saints  who 
shall  then  be  found  alive  on  the  earth.  The 
apostle  classes  himself  among  the  living, 
because  he  was  then  alive.  Shall  be  caught 
up.  The  expression  describes  the  irresistible 
power  with  which  the  saints  shall  be  caught 
up,  perhaps  by  the  ministry  of  angels.  To- 
gether with  them ;  with  the  dead  in  Christ 
who  are  raised.  In  the  olouds.  Our  Lord  is 
described  as  coming  to  judgment  in  the 
clouds  of  heaven  (Matt.  xxiv.  30 ;  Bev.  i.  7). 
According  to  the  Old  Testament  represen- 
tation, God  is  described  as  making  the 
clouds  his  chariot  (Ps.  civ.  3).  To  meet 
the  Lord;  in  his  descent  from  heaven  to 
earth.  lit  the  air.  Not  that  he  shall  fix  his 
throne  in  the  air,  but  that  he  passes  through 
the  air  iu  his  descent  to  the  earth.  And  so 
shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord ;  shall  share 
a  blessed  eternity  in  the  vision  and  partici- 
pation of  his  glory.  The  apostle  does  not 
here  describe  the  solemnities  of  the  judg- 
ment ;  but  stops  at  the  meeting  of  Christ 
and  his  risen  saints,  because  his  object  was 
to  comfort  the  Thessalonians  under  bereave- 
ment 

Ver.  18.— Wherefore  comfort  one  another 
with  these  words ;  on  the  ground  of  that 
Divine  revelation  whioh  I  have  made  oat* 
you. 


78  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&    [oh.  iv.  1—18. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  8,  7.— Holiness  the  design  of  revelation.    Holiness  is  the  end  aimed  at  in  all 

the  dispensations  of  G"d.  (1)  God  has  chosen  us  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  that 
we  should  be  holy  (Eph.  i.  4) ;  (2)  Christ  gave  himself  for  us  to  redeem  us  from  all 
iniquity  (Titus  ii.  14) ;  (3)  the  Holy  Spirit  is  conferred  to  sanctify  us  (Titus  iii.  5 ; 
2  Thess.  ii.  13) ;  (4)  the  Word  is  the  instrument  of  sanctification  (John  xvii.  17)  ;  and 
(5)  God  chastens  us  in  order  that  we  might  be  made  partakers  of  his  holiness  (Heb. 
xii.  10).    In  short,  holiness  is  salvation — our  restoration  to  the  moral  image  of  God. 

Ver.  9. — Brotherly  love.  1.  Its  nature.  It  is  a  love  to  all  believers  as  believers,  as 
being  the  children  of  the  same  Father,  the  brethren  of  the  same  Saviour,  the  members 
of  the  same  family,  the  sharers  of  the  same  grace,  and  the  expectants  of  the  same 
glorious  immortality.  To  all  men  we  are  related  by  a. common  humanity,  but  to 
Christians  we  are  still  more  closely  related  by  a  common  Christianity.  2.  Its  manifes- 
tations. It  will  show  itself  in  acts  of  kindness  done  to  believers,  in  preferring  their 
company  to  that  of  worldly  men,  and  in  conversing  with  them  on  religious  subjects. 
3.  The  evidence  arising  from  brotherly  love.  It  is  a  proof  that  we  are  not  of  the  world, 
that  we  love  God  and  that  we  are  Christ's  friends  and  disciples. 

Ver.  11. — Quietness  and  faithfulness  in  worldly  duties.  1.  Quietness.  A  true 
Christian  is  of  a  quiet  and  retiring  disposition  ;  he  shrinks  from  worldly  bustle;  he  is 
free  from  worldly  ambition  ;  like  the  lily  of  the  valley,  he  loves  the  shade ;  he  knows 
that  this  is  not  his  home,  ami  he  looks  for  a  better  country,  even  a  heavenly.  2. 
Faithfulness.  A  true  Christian  faithfully  performs  his  worldly  duties,  because  he 
believes  them  to  be  assigned  him  by  the  Lord ;  and  he  labours  assiduously  at  his  calling, 
because  he  recognizes  it  as  the  law  of  Providence  that  if  any  man  do  not  work 
neither  shall  he  eat. 

Ver.  12. — Honesty.  1.  Its  nature.  We  must  guard  against  commercial  dishonesty  ; 
all  attempts  to  go  beyond  and  defraud  our  brother ;  all  overestimating  what  we  sell, 
and  underestimating  what  we  buy ;  all  shrinking  from  the  payment  of  debts ;  all  mean 
practices  to  gain  customers.  2.  Its  importance.  Temptations  to  dishonesty  in  this 
commercial  age.  Dishonesty  combined  with  religious  profession  gives  occasion  to  the 
enemies  of  God  to  blaspheme.  We  must  walk  honestly  toward  them  that  are  without. 
The  independence  and  loftiness  of  character  which  honesty  imparts. 

Ver.  13. — The  death  of  friends.  1.  The  Christian's  sorrow  for  the  death  of  friends. 
All  sorrow  not  here  forbidden ;  only  commanded  not  to  sorrow  as  those  who  have  no 
hope.  The  Christian  sorrow  is  a  submissive  sorrow,  which  discerns  the  hand  of  God  ; 
a  holy  sorrow,  which  improves  the  affliction  ;  a  disinterested  sorrow,  which,  whilst  it 
mourns  over  the  loss,  is  comforted  at  the  thoughts  of  the  happiness  of  the  departed ;  an 
enlightened  sorrow,  which  looks  forward  to  the  future,  and  regards  our  separation  from 
our  departed  friends  as  being  neither  final  nor  complete.  2.  The  Christian's  improve- 
ment of  the  death  of  friends.  It  teaches  us  the  vanity  of  the  world,  the  power  of 
religion,  and  the  necessity  of  preparation  for  our  own  death. 

Ver.  14. — Resurrection  of  believers.  The  ground  of  their  resurrection  rests  on  their 
union  to  Christ  and  on  his  resurrection.  Not  only  are  their  souls  immortal,  but  their 
bodies  shall  be  redeemed  from  the  grave.  The  voice  of  the  archangel  and  the  trump  of 
God  will  call  them  from  their  graves,  and,  endowed  with  spiritual  bodies,  they  shall  be 
caught  up  in  the  clouds  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  The  resurrection  is  purely  a 
doctrine  of  revelation ;  it  formed  no  part  of  the  religion  of  nature ;  the  natural  analogies 
which  are  adduced  are  defective  in  essential  point*. 


ch.  it.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  TO 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  importance  of  living  in  harmony  with,  the  Divine  will.  The  prac- 
tical part  of  the  Epistle  begins  at  this  point. 

I.  Mark  the  affectionate  manner  of  the  apostle's  address.  "We  beseech 
you  and  exhort  by  the  Lord  Jesus."  He  does  not  speak  in  the  language  of  command, 
much  less  assume  the  air  of  a  lord  over  God's  heritage,  but  meekly  and  affectionately 
ir.  the  way  of  entreaty.  But  there  was  all  the  force  of  authority  in  the  very  entreaty 
because  it  was  grounded  in  the  Lord  Jesus  as  its  source  and  element. 

II.  The  important  nature  of  his  request.  "  That  according  as  ye  received  from 
us  how  ye  ought  to  walk  and  please  God,  ye  would  abound  yet  more."  1.  It  is  the 
duty  of  a  minister  to  enforce  moral  duties  as  well  as  gospel  doctrines.  Scripture  knows 
nothing  of  antinomianism  except  to  condemn  it.  It  is  necessary  for  ministers  to  expound 
duty  as  well  as  doctrine.  2.  It  is  possible  to  please  God  in  holy  walking.  This  does 
not  imply  that  the  saints'  acceptance  depends  upon  themselves,  but  that  God  is  pleased 
with  what  a  believer  does  in  faith  from  a  principle  of  love,  in  the  grace  of  Christ,  for  the 
Divine  glory.  "  The  Lord  takeih  pleasure  in  his  people."  Even  when  our  hearts  con- 
demn us,  "  he  upbraideth  not "  (Jas.  i.  5).  3.  It  is  necessary  to  increase  in  godliness. 
"  So  ye  would  abound  yet  more."  (1)  The  apostle  recognizes  their  begun  sanctifi- 
cation.  The  best  texts  add  the  words,  "  even  as  also  ye  walk."  (2)  He  enforces  the 
necessity  of  making  further  increase  in  holy  walking.  There  must  be  an  "exercising 
of  themselves  unto  godliness,"  a  resolute  **  going  on  unto  perfection  "  in  the  exercise  of 
every  grace,  in  the  discharge  of  every  duty,  "  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God  " 
(2  Cor.  vii.  1). 

III.  Enforcement  of  the  exhortation.  "  For  ye  know  what  commandments  we 
gave  you  by  the  Lord  Jesus."  1.  The  aposth's  position  was  purely  ministerial,  for  he 
merely  delivered  what  he  had  received  from  the  Lord.  2.  The  moral  duties  he  enjoins 
are  based  in  the  gospel  of  Christ,  which  supplies  the  motives  to  a  full-hearted  obedience. 
— T.C. 

Ver.  3. — Sanctification  a  Divine  arrangement.  "  For  this  is  God's  will,  your  sancti- 
fication,"    The  first  duty  expressed  is  personal  holiness. 

I.  The  nature  of  sanctification.  1.  It  implies  the  consecration  of  all  our 
faculties  and  powers,  both  of  body  and  mind,  to  God's  service.    2.  It  implies  personal 


to  exertion  and  encourage  to  prayer.  "  Teach  me  to  do  thy  will,  for  thou  art  my  God." 
2.  It  was  the  design  of  Christ's  death ;  for  he  "  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might 
redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  to  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good 
works  "  (Titus  ii.  14). 

HI.  The  means  of  sanctification.  1.  It  is  by  the  truth.  "  Sanctify  them  by  thy 
truth  :  thy  Word  is  truth."  2.  It  is  by  his  ordinances.  3.  It  is  by  his  providences. 
(Ps.  cxix.  71 ;  Heb.  xii.  10 ;  Rom.  ii.  4.)  4.  It  is,  above  all,  by  the  Spirit  of  holiness, 
as  its  sole  Author. — T.  C. 

Ver.  3. Warning  against  sins  of  impurity.  The  apostle  comes  at  once  to  par- 
ticulars. "That  ye  should  abstain  from  fornication."  Though  adultery  and  incest  were 
ciimes  among  the  heathen,  fornication  was  not  accounted  a  sin  at  all.  Therefore  we 
can  understand  the  emphatic  place  which  is  assigned  to  this  sin  in  the  synodal  letters 
to  the  Gentile  Churches  (Acts  xv.  20—29).  The  Gentiles  "walked  after  the  flesh  in 
the  lust  of  uncleanness." 

I.  Consider  the  heinousness  of  this  bin.  1.  It  is  a  sin  against  God.  So  Joseph 
regarded  it  (Gen.  xxxix.  9).  The  law  to  restrain  from  this  sin  is  grounded  in  the 
reason  "  For  I  the  Lord  am  holy  "  (Lev.  xix.  2).     The  Divine  nature  which  believers 

i     _      ii t.    i„  «..;*-/>   innrniciotimf  wifK  *'  t\\a  wipniTitinn    f.hai-.   is    in    t.hft  wnrlii 


TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  nr.  1—18. 

is  a  tin  against  our  neighbour.  This  is  implied  in  the  seventh  commandment.  S.  It 
is  a  sin  against  our  own  bodies.  (1  Cor.  vi.  18.)  Sinners  dishonour  their  own  bodies 
(Rom.  i.  24).  4.  It  is  a  sin  against  the  soul.  "  Whoredom  takes  away  the  heart " 
(Hos.  iv.  11). 

II.  Consider  the  fatal  consequences  of  this  sin.  1.  It  wastes  the  body.  (Job 
xx.  11.)  2.  It  wars  against  the  soul.  (1  Pet.  ii.  11.)  3.  It  causes  shame.  (Prov.  vi. 
33;  Eph.  v.  12.)  i.  It  entails  poverty.  (Prov.  vi.  26.)  5.  It  excludes  from  the  kingdom 
of  God.    (1  Cor.  vi.  9, 10.)— T.  C. 

Vers.  4 — 8. — Bow  personal  purity  is  to  be  maintained.  The  sanctifies tion  which  is 
God's  will  requires  that  "  every  one  of  you  know  how  to  possess  himself  of  his  own 
vessel  in  sanctification  and  honour,  not  in  passion  of  lust."  The  vessel  is  not  a  wife, 
but  a  man's  own  body.  If  it  meant  a  wife,  it  might  be  said  that  every  man  would  be 
bound  to  marry.  The  wife  is  no  doubt  called  the  "  weaker  vessel,"  the  evident  meaning 
of  the  term  of  comparison  being  that  the  husband  is  also  "  a  vessel." 

I.  How  the  body  is  to  be  used.  1.  Negatively.  (1)  It  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  outside 
the  pale  of  moral  obligation,  as  antinomian  perverters  say,  basing  their  error  on  the 
words  of  the  apostle,  "It  is  not  I  that  do  it,  but  sin  that  dwelleth  in  me ; "  "  In  me,  that 
is,  in  my  flesh,  there  dwelleth  no  good  thing."  (2)  It  is  not  to  be  injured  or  mutilated 
by  asceticism,  after  Romish  example.  The  apostle  condemns  "  the  neglecting  of  the 
body  "  and  "  the  not  sparing  of  the  body  "  (Col.  ii.  23).  (3)  It  is  not  to  be  made  "  an 
instrument  of  unrighteousness  "  through  sensuality — "  not  in  passion  of  lust."  Sensu- 
ality is  quite  inconsistent  with  the  very  idea  of  sanctification.  2.  Positively.  (1)  The 
body  is  to  be  kept  under  control ;  the  Christian  "  must  know  how  to  possess  himself  of 
his  own  vessel."  He  "  must  keep  under  the  body ;"  he  must  make  it  servant  and  not 
master,  and  not  allow  its  natural  liberty  to  run  into  licentiousness.  (2)  He  must 
treat  it  with  all  due  honour — "  in  sanctification  and  honour ; "  (a)  because  it  is  God's 
workmanship,  for  "we  are  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made;"  (6)  because  it  is  "the 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (1  Cor.  vi.  19) ;  (c)  because  it  is  an  heir  of  the  resurrection  j 
(d)  because  it  is,  and  ought  to  be,  like  the  believer  himself,  "  a  vessel  unto  honour, 
sanctified  and  meet  for  the  Master's  use,"  for  the  body  has  much  to  do  in  the  economy 
of  grace. 

II.  Dissuasives  against  personal  IMPUMTT.  1.  The  knowledge  of  God  received 
by  the  Christian  ought  to  guard  us  against  it.  The  apostle  here  attributes  Gentile 
impurity  to  ignorance  of  God.  "  Even  as  the  Gentiles  who  know  not  God."  Th* 
world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  was  alienated  from  the  life  of  God,  and  thus  sunk  int< 
moral  disorder.  The  apostle  shows  in  the  first  chapter  of  Romans  how  God,  as  a 
righteous  retribution,  gave  over  the  idolatrous  Gentiles  to  all  sorts  of  moral  dishonour. 
2.  Another  dissuasive  is  the  regard  we  ought  to  have  for  a  brother's  family  honour. 
"  That  no  man  go  beyond  and  defraud  his  brother  in  this  matter."  A  breach  upon 
family  honour  is  a  far  worse  offence  than  any  breach  upon  property.  The  stain  is 
indelibly  deeper.  3.  Another  dissuasive  is  the  Divine  vengeance.  For  "  the  Lord  is 
the  Avenger  concerning  all  these  things."  If  the  vengeance  does  not  reach  men  in 
this  world,  it  will  in  the  next,  where  they  will  have  their  portion  in  the  lake  that 
burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone.  They  shall  "not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God" 
(1  Cor.  vi.  9).  4.  The  nature  of  the  Divine  call  is  another  dissuasive.  For  "God  did 
not  call  you  for  uncleanness,  but  in  sanctification."  They  had  received  "a  holy 
calling,"  a  "  high  calling ; "  and  though  "  called  unto  liberty,"  they  were  "  created  unto 
good  works."  They  were  "  called  to  be  saints ; "  for  God  says,  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am 
holy."  5.  Another  dissuasive  is  that  the  sin  involves  a  despisal  of  God,  who  has  given 
us  his  Holy  Spirit  that  we  may  attain  to  sanctification.  "  He  therefore  that  despiseth, 
despiseth  not  man  but  God,  who  hath  also  given  \into  us  his  Holy  Spirit."  God  has  ordered 
all  our  family  relations,  and  any  dishonour  done  to  them  involves  a  contempt  of  his 
authority.  We  have  in  this  passage  God — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit — interested  in 
man's  salvation  and  holiness. — T.  C. 

Vers.  9, 10. — Inculcation  of  brotherly  love.    The  apostle  next  reminds  the  Thessa- 
lonians  of  the  duty  of  abounding  in  brotherly  love. 
L  The  nature  of  tp">  love.     1.  It  is  the  affection  of  those  who  are  children  of  (he 


oh.  iv.  1—18.]    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  81 

tame  Father.  (Gal.  iv.  26.)  Members  of  the  same  "  household  of  faith  "  (Gal.  vi.  10). 
"  Every  one  that  loveth  him  that  begat  loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  him  " 
(1  John  v.  1).  2.  It  is  a  practical  love.  "  Not  in  word  only,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth  " 
(1  John  iii.  18).  It  showed  itself  in  "  labours  of  love,"  and  especially  through  the 
whole  of  Macedonia.  3.  It  was  a  duty  thoroughly  understood  by  believers,  because 
they  were  "  taught  of  God  to  love  one  another  "  in  both  Testaments.  4.  It  was  the 
test  of  regeneration.  (1  John  iii.  14.)  5.  It  was  a  token  of  discipleship.  (John  xiii. 
35.)    6.  It  was  essential  to  the  growth  of  the  Church.    (Eph.  iv.  16.) 

II.  The  motives  to  this  love.  1.  The  command  of  Christ.  (John  xiii.  34.)  2. 
The  example  of  Christ.  (Eph.  v.  2.)  3.  The  glory  of  Christ  in  the  world  is  promoted 
by  it.  (John  xiii.  35.)  s  4.  It  will  be  a  powerful  means  towards  the  world's  conversion. 
(John  vii.  21.) 

III.  The  manifestation  of  this  love.  1.  In  bearing  one  another's  burdens  (Gal. 
vi.  2).  The  Thessalonians  several  years  afterwards  showed  this  spirit,  as  we  see  by 
2  Cor.  viii.  1,  2,  toward  the  Churches  of  Macedonia.  2.  "  In  honour  preferring  one 
another "  (Rom.  xii.  10).  3.  "  Forbearing  one  another,  and  forgiving  one  another " 
(Col.  iii.  13).    4.  "  Not  suffering  sin  upon  a  brother  "  (Lev.  xix.  17). — T.  0. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Inculcation  of  the  duty  of  quiet  and  honest  industry.  "  And  that  ye 
study  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  your  own  business,  and  to  work  with  your  own  hands,  as 

we  commanded  you." 

I.  A    WARNING    AGAINST   THREE   INCONSISTENT   AND   UNPROFITABLE     MODES   OF    LIFE. 

1.  They  were  to  guard  against  a  spirit  of  restlessness.  "  That  ye  study  to  be  quiet." 
There  had,  perhaps,  arisen  an  unsettlement  of  mind  on  account  of  their  belief  in  the 
nearness  of  Christ's  advent,  as  well  as  some  uneasiness  on  account  of  the  fate  of  their 
deceased  brethren.  It  led  to  a  desultoriness  of  life  little  effective  for  any  good  end. 
The  apostle,  therefore,  counsels  sedateness  and  calmness.  We  ought  to  live  "  a  quiet 
and  peaceable  life  in  all  godliness  and  honesty"  (1  Tim.  ii.  2).  2.  They  were  to  guard 
against  a  meddling  and  pragmatical  spirit.  "  Do  your  own  business."  Love  natural  ly 
inclines  us  to  "look  not  on  our  own  things,  but  also  on  the  things  of  others"  (Phil. 
ii.  4),  but  it  must  not  prompt  either  to  the  neglect  of  our  own  business  or  to  undue 
interference  with  that  of  others.  We  must  not  be  "busybodies  in  other  men's  matters." 
3.  They  were  to  guard  against  idleness.  "  Work  with  your  own  hands."  The  converts 
probably  belonged  mostly  to  the  artisan  class.  The  belief  in  the  nearness  of  the  advent 
had  unhinged  their  minds,  and  led  them  to  neglect  the  duties  of  their  secular  calling. 
Industry  is  a  commander!  duty.  "  Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling  wherein 
he  was  called"  (1  Cor.  vii.  20).  The  Thessalonians  needed  to  be  reminded  of  it,  for  he 
had  occasion  to  speak  of  it  in  his  first  visit.     Idleness  has  peculiar  temptations. 

II.  Motives  to  the  discharge  of  these  duties.  "That  ye  may  walk  honestly 
toward  them  that  are  without,  and  that  ye  may  have  need  of  nothing."  1.  We  are  to 
have  consideration  to  the  opinion  of  those  without.  They  may  misjudge  us,  yet  their 
judgments  may  be  often  true.  We  must  not  repel  them  by  our  inconsistencies  of 
conduct.  We  must  give  "  none  occasion  to  the  adversary  to  speak  reproachfully " 
(1  Tim.  v.  14).  2.  We  are  to  provide  a  supply  for  our  own  wants,  (l)so  as  to  Support 
ourselves  respectably,  (2)  and  to  enable  us  to  supply  the  need  of  others.  Christianity 
is  above  all  things  a  self-respecting  religion,  and  has  the  promise  even  "of  the  life  that 
now  is."    Mendicancy  is  essentially  degrading. — T.  C. 

Ver.  13. — Sorrow  for  the  dead.  The  apostle  next  refers  to  the  share  of  the  Christian 
dead  in  the  coming  of  Christ,  respecting  which  some  misapprehensions  seem  to  have 
existed  at  Thessalonica. 

I.  The  death  of  friends  is  a  cause  of  deep  sorrow  to  survivors.  Such  sorrow 
is  instinctive,  and  is  not  forbidden  by  the  gospel:  for  "Jesus  wept"  at  the  grave  of 
Lazarus,  and  the  friends  of  Stephen  "  made  great  lamentation  over  him."  True  religion 
does  not  destroy,  but  restrains,  natural  affections. 

II.  There  is  a  difference  between  Christian  and  heathen  sorrow.  That 
of  the  heathen  is  extravagant,  because  there  is  "no  hope  "in  the  death  of  their 
relatives.  It  is  "  the  sorrow  of  the  world,"  which  is  utterly  uncheered  by  hope.  The 
sorrow  of  the  Christian  is  sober  and  chastened  by  the  hope  of  the  gospel. 

i.  jtessalonians.  « 


82  THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  nr.  1— 18. 

m.  The  cause  of  Thessalonian  sobbow.  1.  It  was  not  that  there  was  a  denial 
or  doubt  of  the  resurrection  from  the  dead,  such  as  existed  at  Corinth.  2.  Nor  was  it 
that  the  resurrection  was  regarded  as  past  already,  according  to  the  heresy  of  Hymenseus 
and  Philetus.  3.  But  it  was  that  it  was  feared  the  Christian  dead  would  not  be 
raised  to  share  with  the  living  in  the  coming  glories  of  the  advent. 

IV.  The  resurrection  has  changed  death  into  a  sleep.  "  Those  that  are 
asleep."  1.  There  is  nothing  in  the  word  to  justify  the  idea  of  the  souVs  unconsciousness 
in  the  period  between  death  and  resurrection.  2.  Sleep  implies  an  awaking.  This  will 
occur  at  the  resurrection.    Thus  the  hope  of  the  Church  is  the  hope  of  the  resurrection. 

V.  The  importance  op  exact  knowledge  respecting  the  futube  destiny  oh 
the  saints.  "I  would  not  have  you  ignorant."  Ignorance  of  the  truth  mars  our 
spiritual  comfort. — T.  C. 

Vers.  14,  15.. — Reasons  against  sorrow  for  the  dead.  The  apostle  gives  several 
reasons  why  the  Thessalonians  ought  not  to  sorrow  for  their  dead. 

I.  The  fundamental  reason  is  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ. 
"  If  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again."  These  are  the  primary  facts  of 
Christianity.  They  are  inseparably  linked  together,  for  the  resurrection  was  the  crown 
of  the  redeeming  sacrifice;  for  if  he  was  delivered  for  our  offences,  he  was  raised  again 
for  our  justification.    Deny  either  or  both,  we  "  are  yet  in  our  sins." 

II.  The  second  reason  is,  when  Christ  comes  again  from  the  Father's  right 
hand,  he  will  bring  with  him  the  sleeping  saints.  "  Even  so  them  also  who 
sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him."  1.  The  dead  saints  sleep  in  Jesus.  They 
are  associated  with  him  both  in  life  and  in  death.  They  "  die  in  the  Lord  ; "  "  they  are 
present  with  the  Lord."  2.  They  will  accompany  Jesus  at  his  second  coming.  This 
includes  (1)  their  resurrection  from  the  dead, — for  "he  who  raised  up  the  Lord  Jesus 
shall  raise  up  us  also  by  Jesus  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  14) ;  (2)  their  joining  the  retinue  of  Jesus 
to  share  his  triumph.  As  risen  from  the  dead,  he  becomes  "  the  Firstfruits  of  them 
that  slept." 

III.  The  third  reason  is  that  the  living  saints  will  not  precede  thh 
dead  saints  at  the  coming  of  Christ.  "  For  this  we  say  unto  you  by  the  word 
of  the  Lord,  that  we  which  are  alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord  shall 
not  precede  them  which  are  asleep."  This  fact  would  effectively  dissipate  their  sorrow 
for  their  departed  friends.  1.  It  is  a  fact  made  known  by  special  revelation.  Such 
revelations  were  frequently  made  to  the  apostle,  as  in  the  case  of  his  special  mission 
field  (Acts  xxii.  18 — 21),  the  position  of  Gentile  saints  (Eph.  iii.  3),  the  Lord's  Supper 
(1  Cor.  xi.  23),  and  the  reality  and  proofs  of  Christ's  resurrection  (1  Cor.  xv.  3).  2.  It 
is  a  fact  that  does  not  imply  either  the  nearness  of  the  second  advent,  or  the  apostle's  own 
share  as  a  living  man  in  its  glories.  He  says,  "  We  which  are  alive  and  remain  to  the 
coming  of  Christ ; "  he  merely  identifies  the  living  believers  of  the  last  age  with  him- 
self, as  if  he  said,  "  Those  of  us  Christians  who  may  be  alive  at  the  advent."  He  could 
not  have  believed  that  he  would  not  die  before  the  advent,  for  (1)  ihat  would  imply 
that  "  the  word  of  the  Lord"  had  misled  him ;  (2)  he  actually  preferred  to  be  absent 
from  the  body,  and  toward  the  end  of  his  life  spoke  of  death  as  "  gain,"  and  of  his 
desiring  "  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,"  words  quite  inconsistent  with  this  theory  ; 
(3)  he  virtually  declares  in  the  Second  Epistle  that  the  advent  could  not  happen  in 
his  lifetime  (2  Thess.  ii.) ;  (4)  he  knew  that  no  man,  not  even  the  Son  of  man,  knew 
the  time  of  the  advent  (Mark  xiii.  42).  3.  /*  is  a  fact  that  the  living  saints  will  not 
get  the  start  of  the  dead  saints  in  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  This  is  his  express  revelation 
from  the  Lord.  "  The  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first,"  or  before  the  living  are  changed 
(1  Cor.  xv.).  The  Thessalonians  need  not,  therefore,  sorrow  for  their  departed  friends, 
neither  be  afraid  themselves  to  die. — T.  C. 

Vers.  16—18. — The  order  of  events  at  the  second  advent.  The  apostle  justifies 
his  statement  by  a  fuller  revelation  of  the  truth.     He  sets  forth  the  order  of  events. 

I.  The  descent  of  the  Lord  from  heaven.  "For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend 
from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of 
God."  1.  It  will  be  a  descent  of  our  personal  Lord.  "  No  phantom,  no  providential 
substitute,  no  vicarious  spirit ; "  the  same  Person  that  ascended  is  he  that  will  descend 


OH.  iv.  1—18.]    THE   KIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  88 

2.  It  will  be  a  descent  with  awe-inspiring  accompaniments.  (1)  "  With  a  signal 
shout"  by  the  Lord  himself,  which  will  be  taken  up  and  prolonged  by  (2)  "tlie  voice  of 
the  archangel;  "  for  he  is  to  come,  "bringing  with  him  all  the  holy  angels"  (Matt.  xxv. 
31) ;  and  (3)  "the  trump  of  God,"  for  "  the  trumpet  shall  sound  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  52), 
and  "  he  shall  send  his  angels  with  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet "  (Matt.  xxiv.  31).  It  is 
God's  trumpet  because  employed  in  his  heavenly  service.  It  will  be  the  sound  of  a 
literal  trumpet,  like  that  which  was  heard  upon  Sinai  (Exod.  xix.  16,  19).  These 
various  sounds  are  to  herald  the  descent  of  the  Lord,  and  to  gather  the  elect  together 
from  the  four  winds  of  heaven. 

II.  The  resurrection  op  the  dead  saints.  "  And  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise 
first."  There  is  no  allusion  to  the  resurrection  of  the  wicked.  The  apostle  is  con- 
cerned at  present  with  the  destinies  and  glories  of  a  single  class.  So  far  from  the 
sainted  dead  being  overlooked,  the  priority  of  resurrection  is  to  belong  to  them. 

III.  The  change  op  the  living  saints.  This  wondeiful  transformation  is  here 
rather  implied  than  asserted.  "  For  we  shall  not  all  die,  but  we  shall  be  changed " 
(1  Cor.  xv.  51). 

IV.  The  simultaneous  assumption  op  both  classes  op  saints.  "Then  we 
which  are  alive  and  remain  shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them  to  meet  the  Lord 
in  the  air."  1.  As  one  united  hand,  the  saints,  in  spiritualized  bodies,  will  be  caught 
up  in  clouds — those  "  clouds  which  are  his  chariot " — just  as  he  himself  ascended  "  in  a 
cloud,"  and  "  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight "  (Acts  i.  9).  The  new  bodies  of 
believers  will  be  able  to  pass  with  ease  through  the  air.  2.  The  saints  will  then  "  meet 
the  Lord  in  the  air" — not  in  heaven  as  he  leaves  it,  nor  in  earth  as  he  approaches  it, 
but  between  heaven  and  earth.  The  apostle  does  not  say  whether  they  will  at  once 
descend  to  earth  and  return  with  him  to  heaven.  He  is  silent  upon  the  question  of 
the  judgment  or  the  entry  into  final  glory. 

V.  The  perpetual  eesidenoe  op  the  saints  with  the  Lord.  "  And  so  shall 
we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  1.  It  will  be  a  meeting  without  a  parting.  The  inter- 
course begun  will  have  an  endless  duration.  Believers  shall  "  go  no  more  out."  2.  It 
implies  an  intimate  fellowship  with  the  Lord.  3.  It  will  be  the  fulfilment  of  our  Lord's 
prayer :  "  That  they  also  whom  thou  hast  given  me  bo  with  me  where  I  am,  that 
the)  may  behold  my  glory  "  (John  xvii.  24). 

VI.  The  consolatory  influence  op  all  these  truths.  "Wherefore  comfort 
one  another  with  these  words."  Chase  away  your  sorrow ;  the  dead  are  not  lost  or 
forgotten ;  they  shall  share  in  the  glories  of  the  advent.  There  was  surely  deep  and 
lasting  consolation  in  such  truths. — T.  C. 

Vers.  1, 2. Exhortation.    St.  Paul's  affectionate  importunity.     1.  He  beseeches. 

He  has'finished  the  personal  part  of  his  letter ;  he  has  told  them  of  his  love,  his  constant 
remembrance  of  them,  his  prayers  for  them,  his  thanksgiving ;  he  has  reminded  them 
of  the  close  spiritual  ties  which  bound  them  to  him.  Now  he  beseeches  them  to 
persevere.  He  knows  the  exceeding  difficulty  of  maintaining  a  Christian  life  in  this 
sinful  world ;  he  knows  the  momentous  issues  that  depend  on  perseverance ;  he  loves 
his  converts  with  an  intense  love ;  therefore  he  beseeches  (comp.  2  Cor.  v.  20).  He 
uses  all  means  of  persuasion  in  turns.  Now  he  commands,  now  he  beseeches.  Some- 
times entreaty  is  more  prevailing  than  commandment,  gentleness  than  authority. 
No  Qualities  are  more  important  in  the  work  of  the  ministry  than  a  genuine  love  for 
souls,  a  real  and  evident  anxiety  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  our  people.  St.  Paul 
beseeches  •  it  is  an  example  to  all  Christian  ministers.  2.  He  exhorts  them  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christian  people  need  all  manner  of  encouragement,  comfort,  exhortation. 
That  exhortation  prevails  which  is  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  His  presence  his  grace,  himself, 
is  the  sphere  of  the  Christian's  spiritual  activity  He  who  lives  habitua  ly  in  that 
fellowship  which  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Chinst  is  best  able  to  lead 
others  to  God  and  heaven.  For  he  who  hath  the  Son  hath  life.  The ,  Lord  Jesus  >s  the 
Life  -and  he  who  hath  that  life  himself,  hath  from  the  life  that  abideth  in  him  the 
warmth,  the  fervour,  the  holy  enthusiasm,  without  which  relig.ous  exhortation  has 
no  wwer  no  reality.  "In  the  Lord  Jesus."  Mark  how  frequently  those  words, »  fa 
Phrist »  «'  in  the  Lord  "  are  on  the  lips  of  St.  Paul.  It  is  a  constant  formula  wjth  hinx 
SS it  U  ™£™Tr«iI  of  life,  full  of  hoi,  meaning.      « Not  I,  Christ  liveth  in  me." 


84  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  iv.  1—18. 

3.  He  reminds  them  of  his  former  teaching.  He  had  given  them  a  charge,  and  that 
through  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  had  received  of  the  Lord  that  which  he  delivered  unto 
them.  The  commandments  were  not  his;  they  were  the  commandments  of  Christ. 
He  had  received  them  from  Christ;  and  through  Christ's  appointment,  guidance, 
presence,  he  delivered  them  to  the  Thessalonians.  He  appeals  to  their  recollection. 
They  knew  them  ;  they  had  the  knowledge ;  that  knowledge  involves  a  deep  and  solemn 
responsibility.  The  Lord  tells  us  in  the  Gospel  of  the  co  deuination  that  hangs  over 
the  careless  servant  who  knew  his  Lord's  will,  and  prepared  not  himself,  neither  did 
according  to  his  will.  Hence  the  force  of  the  apostle's  words,  "  Ye  know."  Much  had 
been  given  to  them,  much  would  be  required.  It  is  a  warning  to  he  always  remembered, 
to  be  urged  constantly  upon  ourselves,  upon  those  who  are  brought  in  any  way  under 
our  influence.  "  Ye  know."  Knowledge,  if  it  issue  in  obedience,  is  exceeding  precious ; 
knowledge  without  obedience  involves  an  awful  danger.  "  Ye  know  ; "  therefore  we 
must  use  that  knowledge,  that  precious  talent  entrusted  to  our  keeping.  The 
tremendous  alternative  lies  before  us — the  blessed  words,  "Well  done!"  or  the  sentence 
that  fills  the  heart  with  shuddering  awe,  "  Thou  wicked  and  slothful  servant !  "  4.  He 
urges  them  to  continual  progress.  He  had  taught  them  how  to  walk  and  to  please  God. 
The  subject  of  his  practical  teaching  was  how  to  walk,  not  how  to  talk.  They  must 
walk  in  the  Spirit,  he  had  told  them;  their  daily  life  in  all  its  details  and  circum- 
stances must  be  guided  by  the  promptings  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  Speak,  Lord ;  for  thy 
servant  heareth,"  is  the  key-note  of  the  true  Christian  life.  Thus  living  they  would 
please  God.  To  please  God  is  the  highest  Christian  ambition;  the  consciousness  of 
pleasing  him  is  the  highest  Christian  joy.  But  walking  implies  progress.  Standing  still 
is  dangerous ;  it  must  issue  in  backsliding.  They  must  go  on  from  strength  to  strength  ; 
they  must  forget  those  things  that  are  behind,  and  press  on  to  those  tha*  are  before. 
The  grace  of  God  abounds;  it  is  without  limit.  He  giveth  to  all  nun  1...  rally,  and 
upbraideth  not.  So  must  the  Christian  abound  more  and  more  in  the  exercise  of  the 
graces  communicated  to  him  by  God;  he  must  work  the  works  of  righteousness  with 
ever-increasing  energy,  as  the  grace  of  God  more  and  more  fills  his  heart. 

Lessons.  1.  Do  all  things  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  learn  by  experience  the 
meaning  of  those  rleep  words,  "  in  the  Lord."  2.  Remember  that  knowledge  implies 
responsibility.  3.  Strive  to  maintain  continual  progress  in  all  Christian  graces,  in 
faith,  hope,  love,  humility,  patience. — B.  C.  C. 

Vers.  3 — 8. — The  law  of  purity.  I.  Pubity  of  hbabt.  1.  The  will  of  God  the  rule 
of  the  Christian  life.  To  please  God  is  the  strongest  desire  of  the  true  Christian;  and 
we  please  him  by  obedience.  The  Lord  delighteth  not  in  outward  observances  as  he 
doth  in  "obeying  the  voice  of  the  Lord."  The  Christian's  prayer  is,  "  Thy  will  be  done." 
The  standard  of  that  obedience  is  the  obedience  of  the  angels  in  heaven.  It  is  above 
our  reach ;  but  it  is  what  we  are  bidden  to  aim  at,  what  we  are  told  to  pray  for  in  our 
daily  prayers.  It  should  be  the  effort  of  our  lives  to  lift  ourselves  up,  by  the  grace  of 
God  assisting  us,  nearer  and  nearer  to  that  heavenly  rule.  Without  that  grace  we  are 
helpless;  but  "I  can  do  all  things,"  says  St.  Paul, "  through  him  that  strengtheneth  me." 
2.  The  will  of  God  is  our  sanctification.  He  willeth  that  all  men  should  be  saved  ; 
but  salviitiou  is  possible  only  through  sancti ti cation ;  for  without  holiness  no  man  shall 
see  the  Lord.  Sanctification  is  the  separation  from  all  that  is  evil,  the  entire  consecra- 
tion of  the  whole  man  to  the  service  of  God,  the  gradual  conforming  of  the  human  will 
to  the  blessed  will  of  God.  Christ  is  our  Sanctification.  "  He  of  God  is  made  unto  us 
Wisdom,  and  Ki  hteousness,  and  Sanctification."  Faith  brings  us  near  to  him,  and  he 
becomes  our  Righteousness ;  then  the  work  of  sanctification  begins.  It  is  a  progressive 
work,  slow  and  gradual.  The  more  the  believer  grows  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  more  does  that  blessed  knowledge  exert  its  hallowing  power.  The 
beauty  of  holiness,  the  sweetness  of  fellowship  with  God,  the  glories  of  his  coming  king- 
dom, are  more  and  more  deeply  felt.  Then,  when  the  affections  are  set  upon  things  above, 
and  the  heart's  love  is  centred  upon  God,  the  soul  reacheth  forth  after  Christ,  lon^in" 
above  all  things  to  be  like  him,  yearning  after  holiness  with  a  strong,  intense  desire^ 
eagerly  striving  to  purge  itself  from  the  defilement  of  sin,  and  to  advance  ever  onwards 
in  the  work  of  sanctification;  and  that  because  I  he  Lord  Jesus  Christ  dwelleth  there 
himself,  and  the  pulses  of  his  love  beat  in  the  converted  heart.   He  is  our  Sanctification, 


m,  it.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLB  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&  86 

He  abideth  In  his  people's  heart  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  All  holy  desires, 
all  good  counsels,  all  just  works,  come  from  him — from  his  inspiring,  elevating  presence. 
This  is  the  will  of  God;  this  is  what  God  would  have  us  to  be.  It  is  a  very  high  and 
heavenly  state ;_  yet  in  its  various  degrees  it  must  be  by  the  grace  of  God  within  our 
reach.  For  he  is  the  God  of  truth ;  his  promises  are  not  deceitful;  his  commandments 
do  not  mock  us  with  a  standard  impossible  of  attainment. 

II.  Purity  of  life.    1.  Chastity.    The  apostle  is  writing  to  converts  who  but  • 
short  time  before  had  been  heathens.    It  was  necessary  to  speak  very  plainly  and 
solemnly  on  this  subject ;  for  the  heathen  .commonly  regarded  that  impurity,  which  is 
so  great  a  sin  in  the  sight  of  God,  almost  as  a  thing  indifferent.     But  the  will  of  God  is 
our  sanctification,  and  sanctification  involves  purity.    Without  sanctification  we  cannot 
see  the  Lord ;  but  the  pure  in  heart  shall  see  him.    God  is  light ;  in  him  is  no  dark- 
ness at  all.   There  is  something  awful  in  the  stainless  purity  of  the  starry  heavens.    As 
we  gaze  into  them,  we  feel  ourselves  oppressed  with  an  overwhelming  sense  of  our  own 
uncleanness.    It  is  a  parable  of  the  ineffable  purity  of  God.    In  his  sight  the  heavens 
are  not  clean.    He  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil;  therefore  only  the  pure  in  heart 
can  see  his  face.     That  inner  purity  covers  the  whole  spiritual  life.    It  implies  freedom 
from  all  lower  motives — all  that  is  selfish,  earthly,  false,  hypocritical;  it  is  that  trans- 
parency of  character  which  flows  from  the  consciousness  of  the  perpetual  presence  of 
God.    But  that  inner  purity,  which  is  so  large  an  element  in  sanctification,  involves 
the  perfect  purity  of  the  outward  life.     Religion  is  not  morality,  but  it  cannot  exist 
without  morality.    It  transcends  morality,  but  it  implies  it.   This  was  not  the  teaching 
of  the  religion  which  the  Thessalonians  had  abandoned.    That  admitted  immorality. 
Their  very  gods  were  immoral.  They  were  served,  not  by  purity  of  life,  but  by  sacrifices 
and  outward  rites  often  leading  to  impurity.   Hence  the  urgency  of  the  apostle's  appeal. 
Amid  the  evil  surroundings  of  a  heathen  town,  living  in  an  atmosphere  of  depraved 
public  opinion,  new  converts  were  exposed  to  constant  and  great  dangers.    St.  Paul 
reminds  them  that  holiness,  without  which  there  is  no  salvation,  is  impossible  without 
chastity.    Fornication  is  not,  what  they  once  deemed  it,  a  thing  indifferent.    It  is  an 
awful  sin  against  God.    Christianity  has  taught  us  this.    We  know  it  well.     We 
wonder  at  the  light  way  in  which  heathen  writers  speak  of  abominations  which  now  we 
shrink  from  naming.   But  the  sin  exists  still  in  terrible  strength.   It  hides  itself,  indeed ; 
it  Walketh  in  the  darkness ;  Christianity  has  driven  it  there.     But  still,  alas !  it  slays 
its  thousands  and  its  ten  thousands.    It  cuts  a  soul  away  from  God  with  a  fearful 
rapidity.    It  fills  the  man  with  impure  images,  unholy  desires.    It  drives  out  of  the 
heart  the  thought  of  God.    The  soul  that  is  tainted  with  this  foul  leprosy  cannot  pray. 
It  cannot  endure  the  thought  of  the  presence  of  God  in  his  heart-searching  nearness,  in 
his  awful  purity.     Impurity  destroys  the  possibility  of  the  slightest  approach  to  that 
sanctification  without  which  we  cannot  see  God.     Hence  the  necessity  of  the  apostle's 
earnest  words,  "  The  will  of  God  is  your  sanctification ;  and  there  can  be  no  sanctifica- 
tion if  ye  live  in  uncleanness."   2.  Honour.   The  unclean  life  of  the  heathen  cities  was 
full  of  sin  and  shame.    The  Christian  life  is  truly  honourable.    The  Christian's  body  is 
a  holy  thing.    It  has  been  dedicated  to  God.    It  is  "  for  the  Lord  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  13). 
The  Christian  must  acquire  a  mastery  over  it  in  honour.   He  must  yield  his  "members 
as  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God."    The  Christian  husband  must  give  honour 
to  his  wife.    Christian  marriage  must  be  honourable,  for  it  is  a  parable  of  the  mystical 
union  that  is  betwixt  Christ  and  his  Church.    The  life  of  holiness  and  purity  is  a  thing 
to  be  honoured.    Those  who  honour  holiness  honour  God,  who  is  the  most  holy  One,  the 
one  Fountain  of  holiness.   3.  The  knowledge  of  Ood.   The  heathens  knew  not  God.   They 
might  have  known  him.    He  had  manifested  in  the  works  of  creation  his  eternal  power 
and  Godhead.    But  they  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge.     They  changed 
the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God  into  an  image  made  like  to  corruptible  man.    Their 
false  gods  resembled  men,  not  only  in  their  form,  but  also  in  their  sins  and  uncleanness. 
Men  had  framed  a  conception  of  Ueity  from  their  own  corrupt  nature,  and  that  concep- 
tion reacted  powerfully  upon  their  character.     Their  gods  were  like  them,  and  they 
were  like  their  gods.    The  Thessalonian  Christians  had  learned  a  holier  knowledge. 
They  must  not  live  like  the  heathen,  who  knew  not  the  true  and  living  God.    Their 
knowledge  must  act  upon  their  life.    They  must  be  pure.    4»  Impurity  is  a  sin  against 
Win.    "  Satan  himself  is  transformed  into  an  angel  of  light."    Impure  desires  assume 


86  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  iv.  1—18. 

the  form  ot  love ;  tmcleanness  usurps  and  degrades  the  sacred  name  of  love.  The 
sensual  man  ruins  in  body  and  in  soul  those  whom  he  professes  to  love.  Be  uses  words 
of  tenderness.  He  is  the  most  cruel,  the  deadliest  enemy  in  his  wiokel  selfishness. 
He  cares  not  for  the  nearest  and  holiest  ties.  He  sins  against  the  sanctity  of  matri- 
mony. He  brings  misery  upon  families.  Seeking  only  the  gratification  of  his  own 
wicked  lust,  he  transgresses  and  wrongs  his  brethren.  But  his  sin  will  bring  swift 
punishment  upon  him.  The  Lord  is  the  Avenger  in  all  such  things.  He  called  us 
not  for  uncleanness,  but  in  sanctification.  Sanctification  is  the  very  sphere  in  which 
the  new  life  moves  and  energizes.  Uncleanness  is  utterly  alien  to  it.  The  Lord  who 
called  us  in  sanctification  will  punish  with  that  awful  vengeance  which  belongeth  to 
him  all  who  for  their  wicked  pleasure  sin  against  their  brethren.  5.  It  is  a  sin 
against  God.  God  hath  given  us  his  Holy  Spirit.  He  hath  given  that  great  gift 
"  unto  you,"  the  apostle  says — to  you  Thessalonians.  He  gave  it  once,  he  is  giving 
it  still.  It  is  this  great  fact  which  makes  uncleanness  in  Christians  a  sin  of  such 
exceeding  awfulness.  Their  bodies  are  the  temples  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  To 
bring  impure  thought  into  that  most  sacred  presence,  to  defile  that  body  which 
he  has  taken  to  be  his  Church  and  shrine,  is  an  outrage,  an  insult  to  that  Divine 
Majesty.  Such  a  man  hath  done  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace.  Of  what  punishment 
shall  he  be  thought  worthy  ?  The  Spirit  of  purity  cannot  abide  in  an  impure  heart. 
He  will  depart,  as  he  once  departed  from  Saul.  There  are  awful  things  in  Holy  Scrip- 
ture said  of  those  who  resist  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  will  not  listen  to  his  still  small  voice 
speaking  in  the  heart,  but  continue  to  vex  him  by  wilful  and  persistent  disobedience, 
till  at  last  his  voice  is  heard  no  more,  and  his  gracious  influences  are  quenched.  It  is 
enough  to  fill  the  thoughtful  Christian  with  shuddering  awe  when  he  reflects  on  that 
sanctification  which  the  Word  of  God  requires,  and  contrasts  it  with  the  fearful  preva- 
lence of  sins  of  impurity. 

Lessons.  1.  Long  after  holiness,  pray  for  it,  struggle  for  it  with  the  deepest  yearn- 
ings of  the  heart,  the  most  earnest  efforts  of  the  life.  2.  Flee  from  the  slightest  touch 
of  impurity — the  thought,  the  look,  the  word.  It  is  a  deadly  poison,  a  loathsome 
serpent ;  it  stingeth  unto  death.  3.  Remember  God  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  the 
Christian's  heart.     Keep  thyself  pure. — B.  C.  C. 

Vers.  9—12. — The  law  of  love.  I.  Oh  its  positive  side.  1.  It  is  taught  by  God. 
God  is  love,  and  love  is  of  God.  The  Church  of  God  is  the  school  of  love.  God  him- 
self is  the  great  Teacher.  He  teaches  us  by  his  own  example.  "  So  God  loved  the 
world,  he  gave  his  only  Son ; "  "  The  Son  of  God  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me." 
The  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  reveals  to  us  the  blessed  love  of  God.  God  the 
Holy  Ghost  teaches  his  people  to  comprehend  with  all  saints  what  is  the  length,  and 
breadth,  and  depth,  and  height,  and  to  know  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge. 
He  shows  us  something  of  his  own  blessed  love,  and  bids  us  learn  of  him.  "  This  is  my 
commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have  loved  you."  We  are  his  disciples, 
his  pupils ;  we  learn  of  him.  What  should  we  learn,  if  we  learn  not  to  love  ?  It  is 
the  great  task  of  life.  Our  lives  are  wasted  if  we  have  not  learned  that  holiest  lesson 
before  we  die ;  for  heaven  is  the  home  of  love.  There  is  no  place  there  for  the  soul  that 
hath  not  learned  to  love.  God  is  the  Teacher.  He  had  taught  the  Thessalonians. 
They  did  love  the  brethren.  They  needed  not,  the  apostle  says  in  his  tenderness,  a 
human  teacher.  2.  Yet  St.  Paul  exhorts  them.  For  love  is  a  debt  which  is  never 
fully  paid.  The  great  lesson  of  love  is  never  fully  learned.  We  are  dull  scholars.  Our 
natural  selfishness  keeps  us  back.  We  need  every  incentive,  every  help.  There  must 
be  a  continual  growth.  To  stand  still  is  to  lose  ground.  We  must  urge  ourselves,  we 
must  urge  others,  to  abound  more  and  more.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  our  Example.  "  As  I 
have  loved  you,"  he  says.  The  depth,  the  purity  of  that  holiest  love  is  altogether 
above  us,  out  of  our  reach  ;  we  cannot  attain  unto  it.  We  see  its  effects  in  the  lives 
of  his  saints.  We  know  how  the  love  of  Christ  constrained  the  holy  apostle  St.  Paul 
to  live  no  longer  to  himself,  but  to  him  who  died  for  him  and  rose  again.  We  despair 
of  ever  reaching  that  high  degree  of  holy  love ;  but  it  must  be  the  strongest  yearning 
of  our  hearts  to  advance  continually,  to  abound  more  and  more. 

II.  Ok  its  negative  side.  1.  Christian  ambition.  Ambition  (^tXonpfa)  is  a  oom- 
mon  word  in  Greek  ethics  and  history,  a  prominent  characteristic  of  Greek  political  life. 


oh.  iv.  1— 18.J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIA.N8.  87 


There  b  •  Christian  ambition ;  its  object  is  not  to  be  first  in  the  arena  of  political  strife, 
but  to  preach  the  gospel,  to  please  God,  to  live  a  quiet,  holy  life  (compare  in  the  Greek, 
Bom.  xv.  20 ;  2  Cor.  v.  9).  Political  QiKoti/iU,  Bengel  says,  blushes  to  be  quiet.  The 
Greeks  were  eager,  bustling,  restless,  each  longing  to  be  first.  The  apostle  seeks  to 
turn  the  ambition  of  the  Thessalonians  into  another  channel.  Their  ambition  should 
be  to  be  quiet — to  keep  themselves  free,  as  far  as  might  be,  from  political  excitement 
and  social  rivalry,  that  they  might  cultivate  the  inner  life  of  love  and  peace  and  com- 
munion with  God.  Love  would  lead  them  to  abstain  from  meddling  with  other  men's 
matters — to  do  their  own  duty  in  the  station  where  God  had  called  them.  Love  would 
keep  them  free  from  envy  and  party  spirit,  and  help  them  to  maintain  a  current  of 
quiet,  peaceful  thought  within  their  souls.  2.  Christian  dignity.  Love  would  keep 
them  from  everything  that  might  bring  the  gospel  into  discredit.  The  Christian  has 
duties  towards  those  who  are  without.  His  light  must  shine  before  men,  that  they 
may  be  led  to  glorify  him  from  whom  the  light  cometh.  The  life  of  the  Thessalonian 
Christians  must  be  honest,  becoming.  The  apostle  insists  on  the  dignity  of  honest 
labour.  It  was  little  regarded.  Educated  Greeks  and  Romans  spoke  of  it  as  coarse 
and  vulgar.  The  Lord  Jesus  worked  with  his  hands,  so  did  St.  Paul.  Christianity  has 
invested  the  life  of  industry  with  a  grace  of  its  own.  St.  Paul  here  uses  the  same  word 
in  connection  with  honest  labour  which  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  is  employed  to 
designate  the  ladies  of  rank  at  Bercea,  the  "  honourable  women  "  who  believed.  The 
Christian  must  be  careful  to  use  words  in  their  true  sense.  It  is  not  wealth  or  rank 
that  is  truly  respectable,  but  virtue  and  holiness.  Thus  living,  thus  labouring,  they 
would  have  need  of  nothing ;  rather,  perhaps,  of  no  man.  They  would  attain  that 
honourable  independence  which  enables  .one  to  "  look  the  whole  world  in  the  face,  for 
he  owes  not  any  man." 

Lessons.  1.  Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts;  pray  for  growth  in  charity.  2.  Let 
your  ambition  be  a  Christian  ambition;  try  to  be  first  in  humility,  first  in  self- 
sacrifice,  first  in  the  quiet  discharge  of  daily  duties.  3.  Never  despise  labour ;  it  was 
the  lot  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  it  has  its  own  moral  beauty  and  dignity. — B.  C.  C. 

Veri.  13 — 18. — The  resurrection.  I.  Comfort  for  the  sorrowing.  1.  The  dead 
hi  Christ  sleep.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  abolished  death  ;  he  has  changed  it  into 
sleep.  "  She  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth,"  he  said  of  the  little  daughter  of  Jairus.  The 
sting  ot  death  is  sin,  but  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  The  Lord 
died  and  rose  again.  He  died;  he  encountered  the  king  of  terrors  in  all  his  awful  power; 
but  by  his  death  he  hath  abolished  death  to  his  saints.  Stephen  fell  asleep  under  the 
crushing  shower  of  stones.  So  is  it  with  believers  now ;  they  are  laid  to  sleep  through 
Jesus.  Through  his  atonement,  through  his  loving  care,  through  his  gracious  presence, 
death  is  but  sleep  to  them.  They  die  in  the  Lord ;  they  rest  from  their  labours.  They 
are  not  unconscious ;  they  do  not  "  sleep  idly,"  for  they  are  blessed ;  they  are  "  with  the 
Lord,  which  is  far  better."  Yet  that  quiet  rest  of  the  holy  dead  in  Paradise  is  as 
a  peaceful  slumber  compared  with  the  entrancing  joy  of  the  glorious  resurrection.  Yes, 
they  sleep ;  they  have  not  yet  attained  unto  that  perfect  consummation  and  bliss  both 
in  body  and  soul  which  shall  be  theirs  in  God's  everlasting  glory.  There  the  redeemed 
of  the  Lord,  perfected  in  strength  and  gladness,  entranced  in  the  contemplation  of  the 
beauty  of  the  Lord,  the  beatific  vision,  need  rest  no  longer.  "  They  rest  not  day  and 
night,  saying,  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to 
come."  But  now  they  rest.  They  are  in  peace ;  they  are  happy,  for  they  are  with  Christ. 
2.  Therefore  the  Christian's  sorrow  is  full  of  hope.  We  must  sorrow  when  our  loved 
ones  fall  from  our  side.  The  Lord  wept  over  the  grave  of  Lazarus.  Not  to  sorrow 
would  be  the  hard  stern  temper  of  stoicism.  The  Christian  sorrows  over  the  grave, 
but  it  is  a  sorrow  chastened  by  faith,  cheered  by  hope.  The  heathen  might  envy  the 
very  flowers  of  the  field.  "  They  die,  indeed,  but  it  is  to  spring  up  again  with  renewed 
life  and  beauty ;  while  man,  when  he  dieth,  sleepeth  on  for  ever — a  still,  silent  sleep; 
he  waketh  nevermore."  Such  was  the  wailing  of  the  heathen  poet.  It  is  not  so  with 
the  Christian.  He  finds  comfort  himself,  he  comforts  others,  with  the  blessed  words 
of  Holy  Scripture.  His  sorrow  is  not  hopeless,  like  that  of  the  heathen ;  he  looks  for 
a  happy  meeting  in  that  blessed  place  where  there  is  "  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow, 
nor  crying."    3.  That  hope  springs  out  of  faith.     We  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose 


88  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  it.  1—18. 

again.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  the  earnest  of  our  resurrection.  He  ia  the  First- 
fruits,  the  First-begotten  from  the  dead ;  they  that  are  his  shall  follow  him.  The 
resurrection  of  Christ  was  one  principal  topic  of  the  apostolic  preaching ;  it  is  now  one 
of  the  most  precious  articles  of  the  Christian  faith,  the  very  centre  of  our  most  cherished 
hopes.  He  was  seen  by  many,  by  Mary  Magdalene,  by  the  other  holy  women,  by  the 
apostles,  by  more  than  five  hundred  brethren  at  once.  "Blessed  are  they  that  have 
not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed." 

II.  The  coming  of  the  Lord.  1.  Its  solemn  accompaniments.  He  shall  come, 
the  Lord  Jesus  himself,  with  his  holy  angels.  He  shall  descend  from  heaven  with 
a  shout.  His  voice  will  pierce  through  the  universe  ;  all  they  that  are  in  the  graves 
shall  hear  it.  The  trumpet  shall  sound.  The  voice  of  the  trumpet,  exceeding  loud, 
filled  the  people  of  Israel  with  trembling  at  Mount  Sinai.  More  awful  by  far  will  be 
the  voice  of  the  archangel  and  the  trump  of  God  that  wakes  the  dead.  What  that 
trumpet  may  be  -we  cannot  tell ;  but  sound  it  will,  "  for  this  we  say  unto  you  by  the 
word  of  the  Lord."  2.  Its  end  and  purpose.  The  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first.  They 
shall  hear  his  voice,  though  they  have  lain  in  their  graves,  some  of  them,  almost  from 
the  beginning.  Tbey  shall  come  forth,  and  that  first.  Then  follows  the  assumption  of 
the  living.  Those  who  are  found  alive,  who  have  not  entered  into  the  deep,  quiet  rest 
of  Paradise,  shall  be  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  We  shall  meet  one 
another ;  we  shall  meet  him ;  we  shall  be  for  ever  with  him.  "  Wherefore  comfort  one 
another  with  these  words." 

Lessons.  1.  Let  sorrow  in  bereavement  be  Christian  sorrow,  softened  by  faith  and  hope. 
2.  The  holy  dead  are  at  rest.  Do  not  call  them  "  poor ; "  they  are  blessed.  3.  Let  us 
strive  to  walk  with  God  now,  that  we  may  be  ever  with  the  Lord. — B.  C.  0. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Sanctification.  With  this  chapter  commences  the  hortatory  part  of 
the  Epistle. 

I.    ExeORTATION  TO  ADVANCE  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH  WHAT  HAD  BEEN  DELIVERED  TO 

them  of  the  Divine  will.  "  Finally  then,  brethren,  we  beseech  and  exhort  you  in  the 
Lord  Jesus,  that,  as  ye  received  of  us  how  ye  ought  to  walk  and  to  please  God,  even  as 
ye  do  Walk, — that  ye  abound  more  and  more."  The  announcement  which  ia  made 
by  "  finally  "  of  the  close  of  the  Epistle  is  to  be  taken  as  meaning  that  the  remaining 
part  is  to  be  taken  up  with  that  which  is  now  introduced.  There  is  a  natural  transi- 
tion from  the  prospect  oi  being  unblamable  in  holiness,  with  which  the  personal  part 
of  the  Epistle  ends,  to  this  hortatory  part.  The  exhortation  is  very  affectionate  in  tone. 
The  Thessalonians  are  addressed  as  brethren.  And  there  is  not  the  simple  form,  "  We 
exhort  you,"  but  it  is  preceded  by  a  less  frequent  form  (only  once  used  by  Paul  beyond 
these  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians), "  We  beseech  you,  which  is  the  language  in  which 
friend  earnestly  presses  home  a  request  on  friend.  "We  exhort  you"  is  more  the 
language  in  which  a  teacher  earnestly  presses  home  duty  on  his  hearers.  "  We  exhort 
you  "  is,  moreover,  defined  and  heightened  by  the  addition  of  the  words  "  in  the  Lord 
Jesus."  The  three  Christian  teachers  found  the  element  of  their  exhortation,  not  in 
themselves,  but  in  him  who,  as  Saviour,  has  a  right  to  rule  all  lives.  It  is  implied  that 
the  tone  of  Christ  toward  us  is  that  of  earnest  exhortation,  in  which  he  perfectly 
reflects  God ;  for  it  is  said,  in  2  Cor.  v.  20,  that  God  exhorts,  which  should  have  been 
the  translation  there.  There  had  been  delivered  by  the  teachers  to  the  Thessalonians 
the  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  and,  as  they  had  formerly  sought  to  please  their  false 
deities,  so,  when  they  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  it  became  their  duty  to 
please  him.  There  had  also  been  delivered  to  them  how  they  ought  to  walk  and 
to  please  God,  i.e.  to  say,  this  had  been  presented  to  them  in  considerable  detail,  so  that 
they  could  readily  follow  the  course  of  life  that  was  pleasing  to  God.  To  their 
credit  it  could  he  said  that  they  were  following  in  their  God-pleasing  course,  and 
what  is  pressed  home  on  them  is,  that  they  should  abound  more  and  more  in  it. 
"  The  Lord  make  you  to  abound,"  is  language  which  has  already  been  used ;  and  this 
exhortation  to  abound  more  and  more,  which  recurs  in  the  tenth  verse,  may  be  said  to 
be  the  watchword  given  to  the  Thessalonians.  However  much  we  have  walked  and 
pleased  God,  we  have  not  done  it  enough.  Let  us  abound  more  and  more  in  the  oourse 
that  is  pointed  out  to  us  in  the  Bible  as  pleasing  to  God. 

II.   APPEAL  TO  THEIR  MEMORY   IN  CONNECTION    WITH   WHAT    RAD    BEEN   DXLIV«RED 


ch.  iv.  1—18.]     THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  89 


to  them  of  THE  Divine  will.  "  For  ye  know  what  charge  we  gave  you  through  the 
Lord  Jesus."  There  is  not  a  happy  change  made  from  "commandments"  in  the  old 
translation  to  "  charge"  in  the  revised  translation  here.  There  is  an  obscuring  of  the 
idea,  which  is  that  the  Divine  will  has  been  delivered  in  the  form  of  commandments. 
There  were  the  ten  commandments  of  the  moral  Law.  These,  possessed  by  the  Israel- 
ites, placed  them  far  in  advance  of  the  heathen  around  them.  Coming  out  of  heathen- 
ism, it  would  be  a  great  boon  to  the  Thessalonians  to  have  these  fixed  in  their  memory. 
Presented  along  with  Christian  considerations,  they  would  become  Christian  com- 
mandments. There  were  other  Christian  commandments,  of  which  we  have  examples 
toward  the  close  of  the  Epistle,  which  would  be  reiterated  and  reinforced  until  thev 
also  were  fixed  in  the  memory.  In  these  commandments  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy 
were  only  the  medium  of  delivery.  Given  by  the  authority  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  they 
were  to  be  regarded  as  his  commandments.  These  being  now  to  be  referred  to,  they 
are  indirectly  asked  to  call  them  to  mind. 

IIL  Purpobt  of  the  Divine  will.  1.  Generally.  u  For  this  is  the  will  of  God, 
even  your  sanctification."  It  was  affirmed  by  William  of  Ockham  that  "  if  God  had 
commanded  his  creatures  to  hate  himself,  the  hatred  of  God  would  ever  be  the  duty  of 
man."  It  was  a  violent  supposition  to  make  of  him,  whose  will  is  absolutely  wedded  to 
holiness,  and  who  can  only  command  his  creatures  to  be  holy.  The  will  of  God  is  here 
said  to  be  our  sanctification.  This  is  a  word  which  is  very  often  used  in  a  passive  sense. 
"  Sanctification  is  the  work  of  God's  free  grace,  whereby  we  are  renewed  in  the  whole 
man  after  the  image  of  God,  and  are  enabled  more  and  more  to  die  unto  sin  and  live 
unto  righteousness."  The  Greek  word  here  has,  however,  the  active  sense.  The  way  in 
which  we  are  actively  to  advance  the  work  of  our  sanctification,  is  by  yielding  up  our 
will  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  that  he  requires  of  us  from  moment  to  moment.  By 
abounding  more  and  more  in  the  cour.se  that  is  pleasing  to  God,  we  shall  more  and  more 
die  unto  sin  and  live  unto  righteousness,  more  and  more  be  made  according  to  the 
Divine  idea,  from  our  inmost  life  to  its  most  outward  manifestation.  2.  Particularly. 
(1)  Fornication.  "That  ye  abstain  from  fornication;  that  each  one  of  you  know  how 
to  possess  himself  of  his  own  vessel  in  sanctification  and  honour,  not  in  the  passion  of 
lust,  even  as  the  Gentiles  which  know  not  God."  This  is  one  of  the  commandments 
in  which  the  Divine  will  finds  expression.  In  1  Cor.  vii.  2  marriage  is  put  forward  as 
the  remedial  course  against  fornication.  The  form  here  is,  that  there  can  be  the 
possession  of  a  wife  in  consistency  with  sanctification  and  honour.  This  is  put  in 
favourable  contrast  with  another  possession  belonging  to  Gentilism,  possession  in  the 
passion  of  lust,  i.e.  in  which  the  morbid  sensual  desire  acquires  the  force  of  a  passion. 
The  fact  of  fornication  being  so  rife  in  the  Gentilism  with  which  they  were  sur- 
rounded, and  out  of  which  they  had  lately  come,  is  the  reason  why  the  Thessalonians 
are  specially  guarded  against  it.  What  was  to  be  accounted  for  in  the  Gentiles  by 
their  ignorance  of  God,  was  not  to.be  excused  in  them  who  had  been  blessed  with  the 
knowledge  of  God.  (2)  Adultery.  "  That  no  man  transgress,  and  wrong  his  brother  in 
the  matter."  This  sin  is  not  named,  but  only  that  mentioned  in  which  it  differs  from 
the  preceding.  Being  an  overreaching  and  wronging,  not  a  neighbour,  but  a  Christian 
brother,  in  the  matter  involved,  it  is  "doubly  flagitious." 

IV.  Warning.  "  Because  the  Lord  is  an  Avenger  in  all  these  things,  as  also  we 
forewarned  you  and  testified,"  In  Ephesians  the  warning  is,  "  Let  no  man  deceive  you 
with  empty  words:  for  because  of  these  things  cometh  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the 
sons  of  disobedience."  In  Colossians  it  is  similar :  "  For  which  things'  sake  cometh  the 
wrath  of  God  upon  the  sons  of  disobedience."  The  idea  here  is  that  the  Lord  is 
Avenger  in  all  the  things  that  have  been  referred  to.  "  For  the  Father  judgeth  no  man, 
but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son."  As  Judge,  he  is  to  be  thought  of  as 
Bighter  between  man  and  God.  When  men  give  themselves  up  to  sensuality,  God  hag 
a  controversy  with  them.  And,  by  appeal  from  God  against  men,  Christ  comes  in  as 
Bighter  in  the  controversy,  to  vindicate  the  holy  character  of  his  Father's  laws,  to  punish 
for  the  unholy  use  of  his  Father's  gifts.  From  the  immediate  context  we  are  also 
led  to  think  of  Christ  as  Bighter  between  man  and  man.  He  is  the  Bighter  of  the 
slave  who  is  trampled  upon  without  pity  by  his  unlawful  owner.  He  is  the  Bighter 
of  the  man  who  has  the  purity  and  peace  of  his  house  invaded  by  the  .adulterer.  When 
with  the  Thessalonians,  the  teachers  had  made  this  their  teaching  clear.    In  view  of 


ao  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  rr.  1— ia 

judgment  they  had  warned  them,  and  solemnly  testified  to  them,  that  these  thiu«« 
would  not  go  unpunished. 

V.  The  holy  object  op  their  calling.  "  For  God  called  us  not  for  unoleanness, 
but  in  sanctification."  The  thought  is  similar  to  what  is  expressed  in  the  third  verse. 
There  is  this  difference,  that  the  will  of  God  there  is  here  connected  with  a  historical 
point.  Let  them  remember  the  great  turning-point  from  heathenism  to  Christianity. 
Then  God  graciously  called  them  in  the  gospel  of  his  Son.  An'1  to  what  did  he  call 
them  ?  It  was  not  to  a  life  of  uncleanness,  but,  in  keeping  with  the  holy  life  of  Christ, 
in  keeping  with  the  holiness  of  God  vindicated  on  the  cross,  it  was  to  find  the  sphere 
of  their  calling  in  the  pursuit  of  holiness. 

VI.  The  rejecter.  "  Therefore  he  that  rejecteth,  rejecteth  not  man,  but  God,  who 
giveth  his  Holy  Spirit  unto  you."  This  is  drawn  as  a  conclusion  from  the  object  of 
their  Christian  calling.  There  is  not  singled  out  an  actual  rejecter  among  the  Thessa- 
lonians.  But,  should  such  a  rejecter  arise  among  them,  let  it  be  known  that  he  is  not 
a  rejecter  of  man  in  his  interests  and  rights,  but  a  rejecter  of  God,  who  has  laid 
down  laws  and  limits  for  his  creatures.  He  is  especially  a  rejecter  of  God,  who  gives, 
to  those  whom  he  has  called  in  Christ,  his  Holy  Spirit.  Sanctification  is  pre-eminently 
the  Holy  Spirit's  work.  And  for  any  of  them  to  indulge  in  the  sins  referred  to, 
would  have  this  as  its  gravest  condemnation,  that  it  was  a  thwarting  and  grieving  of 
the  Spirit  in  his  holy  strivings. — R.  F. 

Vers.  9 — 12. — The  Christian  circle  and  accounting  by  them  that  are  without.  1. 
Brotherly  love.  1.  The  disposition.  "  But  concerning  love  of  the  brethren  ye  have  no 
need  that  one  write  unto  you  :  for  ye  yourselves  are  taught  of  God  to  love  one  another." 
There  is  a  rhetorical  touch  here  which  is  called  "  passing  over" — not  saying  what  might 
be  said  with  a  view  to  gaining  over.  For  while  it  is  said,  "  Ye  have  no  need,"  the  design 
is  more  effectually  to  impress  on  the  Thessalonians  the  necessity  of  brotherly  love.  While 
they  are  graciously  commended,  they  are  at  the  same  time  shown  how  proper  it  is  for 
them  to  love  the  brethren  as  being  taught  of  God.  Their  education  in  this  important 
department  was  a  reality.  To  be  taught  of  God  does  not  exclude  human  help,  the  help 
of  others,  or,  as  contrasted  with  that,  self-help.  Only  human  help  does  not  avail,  unless 
it  is  taken  up  and  made  effectual  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Teachings  and  experiences  must  be 
inwardly  interpreted,  and  made  luminous  to  us.  We  must  therefore  stand  in  an  imme- 
diate relation  to  God  as  his  disciples  who  are  taught  of  him ;  who,  according  to  another 
representation,  have  an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One  to  know  all  things.  It  is  fitting 
that  he  who  has  made  our  minds,  and  retains  sovereign  power  over  them,  should  teach 
us.  It  is  also  fitting  that  he  should  teach  according  to  his  own  nature.  As  Love,  he 
has  created  us,  sustains  us  in  being,  earnestly  desires  our  well-being,  places  us  under 
numberless  obligations  to  him.  Shall  he  not  then  school  us  to  love  ?  As  under  the 
Divine  teaching  we  form  a  brotherhood  of  Christian  disciples.  And  this  is  the  only 
fellowship  of  minds  that  is  right  to  the  core,  that  will  stand  all  the  tests,  that  will 
stand  out  in  eternal  permanence.  In  the  brethren  there  is  something  of  Christian 
excellence  on  which  to  rest  our  love,  and  we  are  to  recognize  and  value  and  delight  in 
that,  even  under  an  uninviting  exterior,  and,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  to  desire  its  increase 
and  perfectness.  2.  Its  manifestation.  "  For  indeed  ye  do  it  toward  all  the  brethren 
which  are  in  all  Macedonia."  An  argument  has  been  founded  on  this  statement  against 
the  early  date  of  the  Epistle ;  but  it  tells  the  other  way.  For  the  love  is  not  said  to  be 
manifested  toward  all  the  brethren,  but "  toward  all  the  brethren  which  are  in  all  Mace- 
donia;" i.e.  to  say,  its  manifestation  was  yet  limited  to  the  Christian  circle  nearest  to 
the  Thessalonians.  We  are  to  think  of  Philippi,  a  hundred  miles  distant  on  the  one 
side,  and  Beroea,  twenty  miles  on  the  other.  To  the  Christians  in  these  places  they  had 
found  opportunities  of  showing  their  Christian  love.  It  was  just  such  an  outgoing 
as  might  commendably  be  connected  with  the  short  period  of  a  few  months.  The 
word  "do"  is  emphatic  after  "taught."  The  lesson  is  that  Divine  teaching  is  to 
be  followed  by  suitable  practice.  Love  must  be  allowed  free  outlet.  "Love,"  says 
Barrow,  "  is  a  busy  and  active,  a  vigorous  and  sprightful,  a  courageous  and  industrious 
disposition  of  soul ;  -which  will  prompt  a  man,  and  push  him  forward  to  undertake  or 
undergo  anything — to  endure  pains,  to  encounter  dangers,  to  surmount  difficulties  for 
.the  good  of  its  object     Such  is  true  charity ;  it  will  dispose  us  to  love,  as  St.  John 


on.iv.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  91 

prescribeth,  in  work  and  in  truth ;  not  only  in  mental  desire,  but  in  effectual  perform- 
ance ;  not. only  in  verbal  pretence,  but  in  real  effect."  3.  Its  increase.  "  But  we  exhort 
you,  brethren,  that  ye  abound  more  and  more."  What  Paul  had  prayed  for  (ch.  iii. 
12)  is  now  made  subject  of  affectionate  exhortation.  The  watchword  formerly  applied 
to  the  whole  of  a  God-pleasing  course  is  now  specially  applied  to  brotherly  love. 
Let  them  abound  more  and  more.  Let  them  seek  opportunities  of  manifesting  their 
interest  in  Christ's  people  beyond  Macedonia.  And  let  them  look  to  tlie  purifying  and 
intensifying  of  their  love  to  the  brethren.  And,  with  a  longer  Christian  history  than 
they  had,  have  we  not  need  of  the  same  watchword  ?  If  we  have  abounded,  let  us 
abound  more  and  more.  Let  us  embrace,  in  intelligent  practical  interest,  a  wider  and 
wider  extent  of  the  Christian  world.  The  great  obstacle  to  love  is  selfishness,  or  exor- 
bitant fondness  for  our  own  interests,  for  which  we  have  all  reason  to  humble  ourselves 
before  God.  When  shall  we  be  taught  to  abandon  this  ?  When  shall  we  be  taught  as 
in  the  great  school  of  Christ,  by  the  great  lesson  of  the  cross,  to  give  love  the  unlimited 
sway  of  our  being,  so  that  we  shall  ungrudgingly  delight  in  our  Christian  brethren,  seek 
their  advancement  in  Christian  excellence,  and  help  them  in  all  ways  that  we  can  ? 

II.  Accounting  by  them  that  abb  without  the  Chbistun  circle.  1.  Quietness 
and  doing  our  own  business.  "And  that  ye  study  to  be  quint,  and  to  do  your  own 
business."  "  Be  ambitious "  is  the  marginal  reading  for  "  study,"  and  the  idea  of 
honour  which  is  in  the  Greek  word  is  to  be  regarded  as  thrown  into  prominence  by  the 
association.  "  Be  ambitious  to  be  quiet."  This  is  a  paradox ;  for  whereas  restlessness 
belongs  to  ambition,  we  are  to  make  it  the  object  of  our  ambition  to  be  quiet. 
"Political  ambition,"  says  Bengel,  "blushes  to  be  quiet; "and,  it  may  be  added, 
Christian  ambition  rejoices  to  be  quiet.  What  is  it  that  is  here  commanded  to  us  ? 
It  is  not  a  mere  negation.  To  be  quiet  is  not  necessarily  to  be  without  strong  force  in 
our  nature ;  but  it  is  to  have  those  forces  so  placed  under  Divine  restraints,  so  mode- 
rated by  reason,  justice  and  charity,  modesty  and  sobriety,  as  that  we  can  do  our  own 
business,  can  confine  ourselves  to  the  sphere  of  our  own  proper  duties.  We  may  indeed 
interpose,  when-  the  honour  and  interest  of  God  is  much  concerned,  when  the  public 
weal  and  safety  are  much  endangered.  We  may  interpose  for  the  succour  of  right  against 
palpable  wrong,  for  our  own  just  and  necessary  defence.  We  may  interpose  when  our 
neighbour  is  plainly  going  to  ruin,  "  snatching  him,"  as  Jude  says,  "  out  of  the  fire." 
We  may  also  interpose  when  we  can  do  our  neighbour  considerable  good.  For  all  that  is 
really  doing  our  own  business.  But  we  are  not  to  be  impelled  by  ambition,  or  covetous 
desire,  or  self-conceit,  or  any  other  disturbing  influence,  beyond  our  own  proper  bounds. 
We  are  not  to  attempt,  unasked,  to  manage  for  another,  to  overbear  his  will,  to  impose  on 
him  our  opinions,  to  make  free  in  conversation  with  his  character,  to  pry  into  his  affairs. 
We  are  not  to  thrust  upon  him  our  advice,  to  reprove  him  unbecomingly,  or  rashly,  or 
unreasonably,  or  harshly.  We  are  not  to  interpose  in  the  contentions  of  others  so  as  to 
make  ourselves  parties,  or  so  as  to  raise  or  foment  dissensions.  For  all  that,  against  what 
is  here  commended,  is  turbulent  meddling  with  what  God  has  not  made  our  business. 
"  We  may  consider,"  says  BaiTow,  "  that  every  man  hath  business  of  his  own  sufficient 
to  employ  him ;  to  exercise  his  mind,  to  exhaust  his  care  and  pains,  to  take  up  all  his 
time  and  leisure.  To  study  his  own  near  concernments,  to  provide  fur  the  necessities  and 
conveniences  of  his  life,  to  look  to  the  interests  of  his  soul,  to  be  diligent  in  his  calling, 
to  discharge  carefully  and  faithfully  all  his  duties  relating  to  God  and  man,  will  abun- 
dantly employ  a  man  ;  well  it  is  if  some  of  them  do  not  encumber  and  distract  him. 
Seeing,  then,  every  man  hath  burden  enough  on  his  shoulders,  imposed  by  God  and 
nature,  it  is  vain  to  take  on  him  more  load,  by  engaging  himself  in  the  affairs  of  others ; 
he  will  thence  be  forced,  either  to  shake  off  his  own  business,  or  to  become  overburdened 
and  oppressed  with  more  than  he  can  bear.  It  is  indeed  hence  observable,  and  it  needs 
must  happen,  that  those  who  meddle  with  the  business  of  others  are  wont  to  neglect 
their  own ;  they  that  are  much  abroad  can  seldom  be  at  home  ;  they  that  know  others 
most  are  least  acquainted-  with  themselves.  Philosophers  therefore  generally  have 
advised  men  to  shun  needless  occupations  as  the  certain  impediments  of  a  good  and 
happy  life;  they  bid  us  endeavour  to  simplify  ourselves,  or  to  get  into  a  condition 
requiring  of  us  the  least  that  can  be  to  do."  2.  Working  with  our  own  hand*.  "  And 
to  work  with  your  hands,  even  as  we  charged  you."  This  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  parti- 
cular injunction  under  the  foregoing.    In  the  Second  Epistle  the  language  is,  *'  that  they 


92  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  it.  1—18. 

quietly  work."  The  language  here  seems  to  point  to  this,  that  many  of  the  members  of 
the  Thessalonian  Church  were  handicraftsmen.  From  this  injunction,  and  the  way  in 
which  the  second  coming  is  introduced  in  the  next  paragraph,  it  would  seem  that  the 
disturbing  influence  in  the  Church  of  Thessalonica  was  religious  excitement,  called  forth 
by  the  new  world  of  thought  into  which  Christianity  had  brought  them.  They  were  espe- 
cially excited  by  the  prospects  connected  with  the  second  coming.  Paul,  for  one,  saw  the 
danger  of  their  being  carried  away  by  the  excitement — not  so  as  to  be  meddlesome,  but 
so  as  to  be  negligent  of  their  earthly  calling.  Therefore  he  charged  them  well  to  work 
with  their  own  hands,  which  also  he  enforced  by  his  example.  In  this  he  showed  his 
sense  of  the  importance  of  quiet  industry.  However  much  we  may  be  under  the  influ- 
ence of  the  great  truths  and  prospects  of  our  religion,  let  us  not  be  without  the  steadying 
condition  of  our  earthly  calling.  3.  We  are  to  be  quietly  industrious  so  as  not  to  produce 
a  bad  imjiression  on  them  that  are  without.  "  That  ye  may  walk  honestly  toward  them 
that  are  without,  and  may  have  need  of  nothing."  What  there  is  of  connection  between 
the  two  parts  of  the  paragraph  seems  to  be  this.  We  are  to  exhibit  Live  within  the 
Christian  circle ;  we  are  also,  within  the  Christian  circle,  to  be  quietly  industrious,  so 
as  not  to  give  occasion  of  offence  to  them  that  are  without.  We  are  to  remember  that 
the  eye  of  the  world  is  upon  us,  and  that  we  are  subjected  to  its  judgment.  And 
there  are  certain  external  features  of  the  Christian  circle  upon  which  the  world  is  quite 
fitted  to  pronounce  judgment.  Upon  none  is  it  more  ready  to  fix  than  upon  anything 
like  the  neglect  of  the  ordinary  duties  of  life.  Therefore  it  is  recommended  that  we 
quietly  work  with  our  own  hands,  with  this  specially  in  view,  that  we  may  walk 
becomingly  (i.e.  honestly)  toward  them  that  are  without,  and  have  all  that  is  necessary 
for  our  wants.  By  industry  and  honesty  we  shall  commend  our  religion  to  them  that 
are  without;  for  these  are  things  which  they  can  appreciate  and  by  which  they  are 
likely  to  be  attracted.  Whereas,  by  idleness  and  indisposition  to  pay  our  debte,  we  shall 
bring  a  reproach  upon  our  religion  whicli  does  not  belong  to  it,  and  repel  from  us  them 
that  are  without.  In  early  times  the  heathen  called  healthy  beggars  traders  on  Christ, 
in  allusion  to  what  is  here  guarded  against.  Let  us  not  by  meddlesomeness,  or  by  any 
want  of  industry,  or  honesty,  or  prudence,  or  straightforwardness,  present  Christ  in  an 
unlovely  aspect  to  them  that  are  without. — B.  F. 

Vers.  13 — 18. — Anxiety  about  the  state  of  the  Christian  dead.  I.  State  of  the 
Christian  dead  no  cause  fob  bobbow.  "  But  we  would  not  have  you  ignorant, 
brethren,  concerning  them  that  fall  asleep ;  that  ye  sorrow  not,  even  as  the  rest,  which 
have  no  hope."  Paul  (the  principal  writer)  sets  himself  here  to  administer  consolation 
to  the  Thessalonians.  In  doing  so  he  practises  the  duty  he  lays  down  in  the  concluding 
words  of  the  paragraph.  Himself  in  possession  of  comfort  about  the  state  of  the  Chris- 
tian dead,  he  could  not  leave  them  in  ignorance  of  it.  As  his  Christian  brethren,  they 
must  be  sharers  with  him.  Timothy  had  probably  communicated  to  him  the  occasion 
of  their  anxiety.  It  was  in  the  Thessalonian  Church  as  in  other  Churches — there  were 
those  who,  from  time  to  time,  were  falling  asleep.  The  change  in  the  translation 
extends  the  scope  of  the  language  beyond  the  actually  dead.  How  did  it  fare  with 
their  dead,  and  how  also  would  it  fare  with  those  whom  death  would  yet  overtake  ? 
Christians  are  distinguished  from  the  rest  of  mankind.  It  is  said  of  the  latter  as  a 
class,  that  they  sorrow  having  no  hope.  What  did  the  men  of  the  old  heathen  world 
think  with  regard  to  their  dead?  Theocritus  says,  "The  living  have  hopes,  but  the 
dead  are  without  hope."  JEschylus  says,  "  Of  the  once  dead  there  is  no  resurrection." 
Lucretius  says,  "  Nor  does  any  one  stand  forth  awaked,  whom  once  the  cold  pause  of 
life  has  found."  Catullus  says,  "  Suns  may  set  and  return  ;  when  once  our  brief  day 
has  set  we  must  sleep  one  everlasting  night."  It  is  a  sad  thought  that  some  modern 
thinkers  have  given  expression  to  the  same  blank  hopelessness.  Strauss  has  said,  "A 
life  beyond  the  grave  is  the  last  enemy  which  speculative  criticism  has  to  oppose  and, 
if  possible,  to  conquer."  The  whole  hOpe  of  John  Stuart  Mill  was  an  earthly  future,  not 
for  the  individual,  but  for  the  race,  created  by  science  "  when  all  the  greater  evils  of 
life  shall  have  been  removed."  If  such  were  our  creed,  or  want  of  creed,  we  might  well 
sorrow  when  our  friends  have  been  taken  away.  Our  only  feeling  could  be  that  we 
had  seen  the  last  of  them.  Their  memory  might  remain  (John  Stuart  Mill,  writing 
after  the  death  of  his  wife,  said,  "  Her  memory  is  to  me  a  religion  ") ;  but  that  cannot 


oh.  iv.  1— 18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  93 

lift  the  gloom  from  tbe  extinction  of  personal  existence.  Let  do  rude  hand  rob  ut  of 
the  comfort  which  our  Christianity  brings.  It  tells  us  here  that  we  are  not  to  sorrow 
for  the  state  of  our  Christian  dead.  We  may  indeed  sorrow  for  our  being  deprived  of 
their  earthly  society.  The  Master  himself  gave  relief  to  his  nature  in  weeping,  even  in 
view  of  a  speedy  resurrection.  Paul  tells  us  that  the  removal  of  his  friend  Epaphroditus 
would  have  been  to  him  sorrow  upon  sorrow.  But,  as  for  the  state  of  our  Christian 
dead,  we  are  here  told  that  they  axe  fallen  asleep.  The  description  is  in  respect  of  the 
body,  and  contains  three  ideas.  1.  Continued  existence.  A  man  continues  to  exist, 
though  he  is  in  a  state  of  sleep.  The  body  is  still,  but  the  mind  may  be  active  in 
creams.  And  so,  when  the  bodies  of  our  Christian  dead  are  in  the  stillness  of  the  grave, 
there  is  no  cessation  of  their  existence.  All  doubt  on  this  sub}  ct  must  be  put  to  rest 
by  the  words  of  our  Saviour  on  the  cross  to  the  dying  penitent  at  his  side,  "  To-day 
thou  shalt  be  with  me  in  Parailise."  The  souls  of  the  departed  are  not  in  a  state  of 
sleep ;  but  they  are  wakened  up  to  a  higher  life.  2.  Repose.  In  sleep  we  lose  our  hold 
upon  the  world ;  we  forget  its  cares  and  pleasures ;  we  are  being  calmed  and  soothed  in 
our  feelings.  And  so  we  are  to  think  of  our  Christian  dead  as  for  ever  released  from 
the  work  and  toil,  the  pain  and  sorrow,  of  this  life,  and  as  now  calmed  and  soothed 
in  the  presence  of  God.  "  And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying,  Write,  Blessed 
are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth :  yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that  they 
may  rest  from  their  labours,  for  their  works  follow  with  them."  3.  Wakening.  We 
think  of  sleep  as  followed  by  a  waking.  And  so  we  are  to  think  of  a  wakening 
for  our  Christian  dead,  though  it  may  be  after  long  years.  They  are  awake  now  in 
respect  of  their  souls;  our  fuller  comfort  is  that  they  shall  yet  be  awake  in  respect  of 
those  bodies  which  we  have  sorrowfully  laid  in  the  grave.  "  I  will  ransom  them  from 
the  power  of  the  urave ;  I  will  redeem  them  from  death :  0  death,  I  will  be  thy  plagues; 
0  grave,  I  will  be  thy  destruction." 

II.  Reason  fob  the  Christian  dead  being  associated  with  theib  Lord  at  his 
coming.  "  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also  that  are 
fallen  asleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him."  The  apostle  goes  back  to  the  cardinal 
facts  of  Christ's  death  and  resurrection.  These  are  facts  for  which  those  who  reject 
our  continued  existence  after  death  have  little  respect ;  but  they  are  dear  to  the  Chris- 
tian heart,  and  the  more  firmly  our  faith  lays  hold  upon  them,  the  more  animated  is 
our  hope  for  our  Christian  dead.  We  believe  that  Jesus  died ;  thus  briefly  does  the 
apostle  state  the  fundamental  article  of  our  Christian  faith.  "  Such  is  the  historial 
and  supernatural  basis  of  Christianity — its  very  definition,  its  breath  of  life,  the  source 
from  whence  springs  all  its  greatness,  strength,  and  uniqueness."  The  apostle  states 
the  fact  plainly,  "  Jesus  died,"  which  is  all  the  more  observable  that  it  is  followed  by  a 
statement  not  plain  but  consolatory — our  Christian  dead  axe  fallen  asleep.  We  believe 
in  a  God  who,  in  infinite  love,  became  man,  that  he  might  verily  (not  in  semblance) 
die,  and  who  was  not  less  truly  God  than  man  when  he  was  nailed  to  the  cross.  We 
believe  in  a  God-Man  who  came  under  the  broken  Law,  and  endured  death  as  the  curse 
due  for  sin.  And  our  faith  follows  him  beyond  his  death.  We  believe  that  Jesus  rose 
again.  That  is  the  second  great  article  of  our  Christian  faith.  Having  in  his  death 
made  full  atonement  for  sin,  he  could  not  be  holden  of  death.  He  rose  victoriously  out 
of  the  state  of  insensibility  and  lifelessness  in  which  his  body  lay  in  the  tomb.  He 
rose  with  the  same  body,  but  changed  to  a  nobler  quality.  We  further  believe  that 
he  died  and  rose  again,  not  for  himself,  but  for  those  whom  he  represented.  He  experi- 
enced death  and  conquest  as  Jesus— Saviour,  Leader  of  his  people.  United  to  him,  his 
people  are  not  to  be  separated  from  him  in  destiny.  He  is  here  associated  with  then- 
death.  They  are  laid  to  sleep  by  Jesus,  as  the  preposition  should  be.  "  There  is  called 
up  the  image  of  Jesus  himself  caring  for  his  own  when  the  life  departs — laying  them 
to  rest  in  the  grave,  and  watching  over  them  there  with  his  omnipotent  love.  And, 
as  he  is  associated  with  their  death,  so  they  are  to  be  associated  with  his  coming. 
Them  that  are  laid  to  sleep  by  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Jesus.  We  are  brought  in  view 
here  of  what  distressed  the  Thessalonians.  It  was  not  a  question  simply  of  the  resur- 
rection ;  in  that  case  the  language  would  have  been,  "  them  will  God  raise  up."  But  we 
are  carried  a  point  beyond  that,  to  their  being  brought  as  raised  with  Jesus.  We  may, 
therefore,  understand  that  what  distressed  the  Thessalonians  was  the  bearing  of  the 
coming  of  Christ  on  them  who  did  not  live  to  see  that  event.    Would  they  not  stand 


94  THE  FIRST   KP1STLK  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  iv.  1—18. 

at  a  great  disadvantage?  Would  they  l.ave  any  share  at  all  in  his  corning?  Were 
they  not  to  be  sorrowed  over  as  those  who  had  missed  the  great  object] of  their  hope? 
For  the  relief  of  the  Thessalonians  Paul  tells  them  this,  to  begin  with,  that  the  Christian 
dead  are  to  be  brought  with  Jesus.  We  are  not  to  think  of  them  as  brought  from 
heaven,  for  they  are  viewed  in  respect  of  their  being  in  their  graves.  But  we  may  think 
of  them  as  joining  their  descending  Lord,  and  brought  with  him  to  earth. 
HI.  Revelation  made  to  Paul  that  the  Christian  living  are  not  to  have  the 

PRECEDENCE  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  DEAD  AT  CHRIST'S  COMING.      "  For  this  We  Say  Unto  yOU 

by  the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we  that  are  alive,  that  are  left  unto  the  coming  of  the 
Lord,  shall  in  no  wise  precede  them  that  are  fallen  asleep."  It  is  true  that  in  all  he 
says  in  this  Epistle  he  is  under  the  direction  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  In  what  he  is 
now  to  say  he  proceeds  on  a  word  of  the  Lord  such  as  there  is  in  the  Epistles  to  the 
seven  Churches.  He  was  privileged  to  announce  directly  from  the  heavenly  Christ 
what  had  hitherto  been  concealed.  The  heavenly  Christ  was  so  interested  in  the  Thes- 
salonians that  he  had  given  his  servant  this  revelation  for  them.  The  apostle  divides 
Christians  into  two  classes — "  we  that  are  alive,  that  are  left  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord," 
and  "  they  that  are  fallen  asleep."  He  includes  himself  in  the  former  class,  and  from 
this  it  has  been  very  confidently  inferred  that  he  had  a  definite  expectation  of  living. 
unto  the  coming  of  Christ.  But  he  includes,  not  only  himself  and  Silas  and  Timothy, 
but  also  the  Thessalonians,  about  whom  he  has  said  that  there  were  those  among  them 
who  from  time  to  time  were  falling  asleep.  Did  he,  then,  having  a  definite  expectation 
for  all,  believe  in  all  being  saved  from  death  by  an  immediate  coming  of  Christ  ?  Is  it 
not  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  he  thought  of  the  living  and  left  as  in  a  continual 
flux  ?  This  is  borne  out  by  the  use  of  the  present  instead  of  the  future — "  we  who  are 
for  the  present  the  living  and  left,  who  have  no  certainty  that  we  will  not  remain  unto 
the  coming  of  Christ,  but  have  also  no  certainty  that  another  moment  will  not  transfer 
us  to  the  class  of  them  that  are  fallen  asleep."  The  revelation  made  to  Paul  related  to 
a  question  of  priority  of  time.  It  is  strongly  denied  of  the  Christian  living  that  they 
will  come  into  the  presence  of  the  Lord  at  his  coming  before  the  Christian  dead.  This 
was  further  relief  to  the  distressed  Thessalonians.  Their  departed  Christian  friends 
would  not  only  be  brought  with  Jesus ;  it  was  also  true  that  this  bringing  would  not 
be  deferred  until  after  the  Christian  living  had  taken  their  places  in  nearer  relation  to 
their  Lord. 

IV.  Great  drama  of  the  future.  Here  we  are  supplied  more  particularly  with 
the  contents  of  "  the  word  of  the  Lord."  1.  Prelude  :  The  Lord  descending  in  majesty. 
"  For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  heaven,  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the 
archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God."  The  central  Figure  is  the  Lord  himself.  He 
now  sits  enthroned  in  heaven,  Lord  over  all.  But  he  shall  yet  descend  from  heaven. 
There  is  thus  confirmation  of  the  announcement  made  by  the  heavenly  visitants  to  the 
disciples  gazing  after  their  vanished  Lord :  "  This  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from 
you  into  heaven,  shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven."  We 
are  left  to  think  of  the  majesty  of  our  descending  Lord  chiefly  from  the  accompani- 
ments of  the  descent.  He  shall  descend  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel, 
and  with  the  trump.  The  shout  is  such  a  shout  of  command  as  is  given  by  a  leader  to 
his  host.  There  are  some  who  think  of  the  shout  of  command  as  given  by  Christ. 
This  is  the  view  which  is  adopted  by  Milton  in  his  conception  of  another  soene. 

"  The  Son  gave  signal  high 
To  the  bright  minister  that  watched :  he  blew 
His  trumpet,  heard  in  Oreb  since  perhaps 
When  God  descended ;  and  perhaps  once  mon 
To  sound  at  general  doom." 

There  is  this  consideration  which  tells  against  that  interpretation,  that  God  has  been 
introduced  as  bringing  them  that  are  asleep  with  Jesus.  We  are  thus  led  to  think  or 
God  as  the  Actor  behind  the  scene,  which  is  confirmed  by  the  expression  following — 
"  the  trump  of  God."  This  makes  it  more  natural  to  think  of  the  accompaniments 
of  the  scene  as  arranged  by  God.  Are  we,  then,  to  think  of  God  as  giving  the  shout 
of  command?  The  objection  to  that  view  is,  that  the  shout  is  represented  not 
as  preceding  (as  befitting  God)  but  a»  accompanying  the  descent.     It  seems  batter, 


jh.  it.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  96 

then,  to  think  of  the  shout  as  given  by  the  archangel  in  the  Name  of  God,  and  as  oom- 
prehendiug  the  two  things  which  follow.  First,  the  moment  that  the  Lord  descends 
from  his  heavenly  throne,  the  archangel,  apprised  of  what  is  to  happen,  marshals  his 
innumerable  host.  The  shout  of  command  he  gives  in  this  case  with  the  living  voice — 
the  voice  of  the  archangel.  The  angels  are  an  orderly  multitude.  "  He  doeth  according 
to  his  will  in  the  army  of  heaven  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  "  (with  whom 
the  idea  of  orderliness  is  not  associated).  We  read  of  "twelve  legions  of  angels." 
The  angels  are  led  by  an  archangel.  We  read  in  Scripture  of  the  angel  Gabriel,  and  also 
of  the  seven  angels  that  stand  before  God,  but  only  in  another  place  of  an  archangel  who 
is  there  named  Michael.  Our  Lord  prepared  us  himself  for  this  glorious  accompaniment 
of  his  coming :  "  When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the  angels  with 
him ;  "  "  When  he  cometh  in  the  glory  of  his  Father  with  the  holy  angels ;  "  "  When 
he  cometh  in  his  own  glory,  and  the  glory  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  holy  angels."  An 
army  associated  with  royalty  gives  an  impression  of  power  and  grandeur.  So  how 
mighty  and  glorious  a  Personage  must  he  be,  in  whose  honour  all  the  legions  of  angels 
are  marshalled !  They  are  mighty  angels,  and  holy  angels,  and  especially  are  they  in 
sympathy  with  the  work  of  honouring  Christ.  As  they  sang  over  his  birth  on  earth, 
so  do  they  accompany  him  in  his  triumphal  descent  to  earth,  having  this  to  rejoice 
their  hearts,  that  they  also  are  to  share  in  the  glorious  consummation.  The  archangel, 
having  marshalled  his  host  to  move  in  harmony  with  the  descending  Lord,  at  a  subse- 
quent stage  is  to  give  another  shout  of  command,  this  time  not  with  the  living  voice, 
but  with  the  trumpet  put  into  his  hand  by  God.  Milton  thinks  of  the  trumpet  that 
was  used  "  when  God  descended  "  in  Horeb,  calling  the  congregation  of  Israel,  as  being 
the  same  trump  of  God.  Very  vividly  in  1  Cor.  xv.  is  it  associated  with  the  resurrec- 
tion :  "  At  the  last  trump :  for  the  trumpet  shall  sound."  2.  First  act :  Besurrection  of 
the  Christian  dead.  "  And  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first."  "  The  trumpet  shall 
sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible."  The  trumpet  is  simply  the  instru- 
ment ;  it  is  the  power  of  God,  communicated  through  the  trumpet,  that  raises  the  dead. 
A  trumpet  supposes  a  faculty  of  hearing  ;  but  this  trump  of  God  has  miraculously  to 
supply  the  faculty  of  hearing.  The  remains  of  our  Christian  friends  which  we  lay  in 
the  grave  soon  mingle  with  the  dust.  Tbey  hear  not  any  sound  of  earth  that  passes 
over  them.  But  there  is  a  trumpet-call,  with  Divine,  all-penetrating  power  in  it,  that 
one  day  they  shall  hear  in  their  graves,  and  hearing  they  shall  start  up  as  once  they 
wen,  and  yet  how  changed  1  It  was  beside  the  purpose  of  the  revelation  to  bring  into 
view  the  resurrection  of  others  than  Christians,  or  the  nature  of  the  resurrection-body. 
The  Thessalonians  were  so  taken  up  with  the  coming,  that  the  resurrection  was  thrown 
out  of  view.  It  did  not  enter,  or  did  but  little  enter,  into  their  understanding  of  the  last 
things.  Therefore  their  attention  is  concentrated  upon  the  simple  fruitful  fact  of  the 
resurrection.  It  meant  the  presence  of  their  departed  Christian  friends  in  the  body  on 
the  earth  ready  to  meet  Christ.  And  that  all  fear  of  their  being  anticipated  might  be 
removed,  it  is  stated  not  only  that  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise,  but  that  they  shall  rise 
first,  i.e.  to  say,  they  shall  rise  before  the  assumption  of  the  Christian  living.  The 
Christian  dead  now  in  the  resurrection-body,  and  the  Christian  living,  will  be  on  the 
earth  at  the  same  time,  equally  ready  for  the  approach  of  Christ.  3.  Second  act: 
Assumption  of  the  Christian  living.  "  Then  we  that  are  alive,  that  are  left,  shall 
together  with  them  be  caught  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air."  The 
Christian  living  are  to  be  swiftly,  irresistibly  caught  up.  This  implies  their  transforma- 
tion in  their  bodies.  They  are  to  be  caught- up  at  the  same  time  with  the  Christian 
dead  who  have  been  raised.  The  two  classes  will  form  one  great  blessed  company, 
between  whom  what  distinguished  them  has  passed  away.  How  they  will  be  marshalled 
does  not  appear.  We  do  read  of  leading  places  being  assigned  to  the  twelve  apostles. 
That  they  will  be  as  orderly  in  their  multitudinousness  as  the  innumerable  company  of 
the  angels,  we  do  not  doubt.  Caught  up  in  the  enveloping  upbearing  clouds  in  one  body, 
they  are  to  meet  their  descending  Lord  with  the  marshalled  army  of  angels  in  the  air. 
As  persons  of  distinction  go  forth  to  meet  their  prince,  so  they  now,  all  of  them  glorified 
persons,  are  caught  up  to  meet  their  Lord  in  his  triumphal  descent.  4.  Finale :  Perpetual 
enjoyment  of  the  society  of  Christ.  "  And  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  There  is  a 
blank  here,  which  it  did  not  lie  within  the  purpose  of  the  revelation  to  have  filled  up. 
That  the  Lord  actually  descended  to  earth  may  be  regarded  as  certain.    The  air  was 


96  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.     [oh.  iv.  1—18. 

his  pathway  to  earth.  When  it  is  said  that  the  fallen  asleep  God  will  bring  wjth  Jesus, 
the  meaning  plainly  is  (taken  in  connection  with  the  language  which  has  just  been 
used)  that,  joining  our  Lord  in  the  air,  they  will  be  brought  with  him  to  earth.  We 
may  think  of  the  earth  as  transformed,  in  preparation  for  the  Lord's  coming.  Some 
would  interpose  here  a  lengthened  personal  reign  of  Christ  on  earth  with  his  saints.  We 
are  only  on  sure  ground  when  we  think  of  Christ  as  coming  for  judgment.  "  But  when 
the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the  angels  with  him,  then  shall  he  sit  on 
the  throne  of  his  glory,  and  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  the  nations  :  and  he  shall 
separate  them  one  from  another,  as  the  shepherd  separateth  the  sheep  from  the  goats." 
AH  that  is  here  passed  over,  and  we  are  presented  simply  with  the  final  state  of  the  two 
classes  that  have  been  united.  "  And  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  The  meeting 
referred  to  shall  be  followed  by  no  parting.  It  is  Christ's  wish  and  promise  that  we 
should  be  with  him.  "  And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again,  and 
receive  you  unto  myself,  that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  be  also."  Christ  has  prayed  to 
the  Father  that  we  should  be  with  him.  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also  whom  thou 
hast  given  me  be  with  me  where  I  am."  And  when  we  have  been  brought  into  his 
presence,  in  spite  of  death  and  all  opposing  powers,  separation  will  be  impossible.  As 
members,  we  must  be  with  our  Head ;  as  loving,  we  must  be  with  the  great  Object  of 
our  love.  To  be  with  the  Lord  is  to  be  in  the  most  favoured  position  for  the  enjoyment 
of  his  love,  for  the  comprehension  of  his  mind,  for  the  reception  of  his  Spirit,  for  the 
accomplishment  of  his  plans.  To  be  with  the  Lord  is  also  to  be  with  that  great  and 
blessed  company  who  shall  be  gathered  round  him,  comprehending  the  elder  sons  of 
creation,  the  great  and  good  of  all  ages,  and  those  Christian  friends  we  have  "  loved  ere 
since  acd  lost  awhile."  What  is  the  position  we  shall  be  carrii  d  forward  to  through  the 
course  of  eternal  ages  is  more  than  tongue  can  tell,  more  than  heart  can  conceive. 

V.  Mutual  comforting.  "  Wherefore  comfort  one  another  with  these  words."  We 
might  read  "  exhort  one  another."  But  in  view  of  the  sorrow  of  the  Thessalonians 
we  rightly  read  " comfort  one  another."  We  might  even  read  "cheer  one  another;" 
for  the  words  are  not  only  of  a  comforting,  but  of  an  inspiriting  nature.  It  is  not 
Christian  teachers,  but  Christians  generally,  who  are  addressed.  Knowing  what  comfort 
is,  let  us  not  selfishly  allow  our  Christian  brethren  to  be  ignorant  of  it.  Even  in  our 
ordinary  partings  in  the  world  there  is  an  element  of  sadness  that  calls  for  comfort. 
As  Shakespeare  has  it — 

"  So  part  we  sadly  in  this  troublous  world 
To  meet  with  joy  in  sweet  Jerusalem." 

How  thankful  ought  we  to  be  that  we  are  not  in  the  position  of  those  who  have  no  hope  , 
that  we  can  tell  those  who  have  lost  Christian  friends  of  the  sweet  and  cheering  truth 
of  Christ's  coming  !  It  is  sad  to  think  of  them  sleeping  in  the  dust  of  the  earth ;  but, 
laid  to  sleep  by  Christ,  then  they  shall  awake.  They  shall  rest  and  stand  in  their  lot 
at  the  end  of  the  days.  They  shall  hear  the  resurrection-call,  and  stand  in  the  body 
as  once  they  stood  upon  this  earth.  They  shall  be  present  as  witnesses  and  actors  at 
the  most  glorious  event  the  universe  shall  ever  have  seen.  They,  and  we  too,  shall 
be  borne  up  in  the  clouds  to  meet  and  welcome  our  descending  Lord.  And  from  that 
first  united  meeting  of  him  in  our  embodied,  completed  stafe,  we  shall  be  for  ever  with 
the  Lord.— R.  F. 

V«r.  1. — Christian  progress.  This  verse  introduces  a  series  of  practical  exhortations 
by  au  urgent  entreaiy  to  general  Christian  progress.  The  details  of  conduct  must  be 
considered.  But  the  spirit  and  character  of  the  whole  life  are  of  primary  importance. 
First  see  to  the  health  of  the  whole  tree  ;  then  prune  and  train  the  several  branches. 

I.  The  great  obligation  of  Christian  progress.  1.  It  requires  afull,rownd  develop- 
ment of  spiritual  graces.  It  is  not  satisfied  with  a  shrunken,  shrivelled  life  of  the  soul. 
The  meagre  Christianity  of  those  who  are  only  concerned  with  the  minimum  require- 
ments of  religion  is  foreign  to  the  very  nature  of  a  true  spiritual  life.  This  should 
abound ;  it  should  overflow ;  it  should  be  developed  in  all  directions.  A  one-sided  life  is 
maimed  and  marred,  however  advanced  it  may  be  in  a  particular  direction.  We  should 
a"im  at  completing  the  circle  of  graces.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  being  "  perfect."  2. 
Tt  proceeds  by  gradual  growth.     We  are  to  abound  "  mora  and  more."    The  attainment 


rat  it.  1— 18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THE3SAL0NIANS.  97 

which  is  respectable  to-day  will  become  despicable  if  it  is  not  exceeded  to-morrow. 
The  growth  is  double — a  greater  achievement  according  to  our  present  capacities  and 
an  enlargement  of  those  capacities.  The  precious  wine  rises  higher  in  the  vessel ;  and 
the  vessel  itself  expands. 

II.  The  distinctive  characteristics  op  Christian  progress.  1.  It  consists  t»  eon- 
duct.  We  are  r.  quired  to  grow  in  knowledge.  But  this  is  not  the  most  important  form 
of  spiritual  progress.  It  has  come  about,  unfortunately,  that  the  phrase  "  advanced 
Christianity"  stands  for  a  certain  doctrinal  movement.  It  should  be  chiefly  used  for 
moral  and  spiritual  progress.  The  great  advance  is  to  be  in  the  walk  and  conversation 
of  life — the  daily,  normal  conduct.  2.  It  is  guided  by  knowledge.  St.  Paul  exhorts  his 
readers  to  abound  more  and  more  in  the  conduct  which  follows  bis  directions,  "  As  ye 
have  received  of  us."  This  progress  is  not  to  be  according  to  our  own  fancied  ideal  of 
perfection.  It  is  in  pursuit  of  clear  duty,  and  that  duty  is  declared  in  Christian 
teaching.  3.  It  is  grounded  on  previous  experience.  In  the  Revised  Version  we  read 
the  addition,  "even  as  ye  do  walk."  Future  progress  depends  on  our  present  position. 
We  must  not  be  always  laying  a  new  foundation.  The  Christian  life  is  not  a  series  of 
revolutions.  Because  more  is  required  of  the  Christian,  the  good  already  attained  is  not 
ignored.  4.  It  aims  at  pleasing  God.  Thus  it  is  characterized  by  a  regard  for  the  will 
of  God.  It  is  not  satisfied  with  reaching  any  human  standard.  It  is  required  to  be 
pure,  true,  and  spiritual. 

III.  The  strong  inducements  towards  Christian  progress.  1.  They  are  urged  with 
personal  appeals.  St.  Paul  beseeches  and  exhorts.  He  appeals  to  the  brotherhood  of 
Christians  and  its  tie  of  mutual  affection  between  himself  and  his  readers.  2.  They  are 
centred  in  regard  for  Christ.  "  By  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  This  is  a  sort  of  adjuration. 
The  close  relation  of  the  Christian  to  Christ  is  his  grand  motive  for  striving  after  true 
progress.  The  graee  of  Christ  supplies  the  power ;  the  love  of  Christ  brings  the  obliga- 
tion. By  all  that  he  is  to  us  we  are  urged  to  be  worthy  of  him  in  an  even  richer  and 
fuller  Christian  life.— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  9. — Love  of.  the  brethren.  Christianity  introduced  a  new  word  into  the  speech  of 
mankind — "Philadelphia,"  "  love  of  the  brethren."  This  word  distinguishes  a  remark- 
able characteristic  of  the  early  Church.  It  describes  how  the  first  Christians  regarded 
themselves  as  the  members  of  one  family.  It  was  no  visionary  socialism,  no  commu- 
nistic scheme,  that  led  them  to  have  all  things  common.  They  felt  like  the  members 
of  one  household,  like  the  nearest  kindred  in  one  home,  and  in  the  spirit  of  home  life 
they  shared  their  possessions.  This  was  only  possible  so  long  as  the  family  spirit  per- 
vaded the  Church.  Circumstances  altered  the  hibits  of  the  Church  as  it  grew  in 
numbers  and  spread  over  a  wider  area.  But  all  through  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  the 
same  family  affection  of  Christians  is  apparent.  Love  of  the  brethren  is  a  leading 
feature  of  Christianity. 

I.  Its  scope  and  area.  1.  It  is  specially  confined  to  fellow-Christians.  It  is  to  be 
distinguished  from  philanthropy.  We  should  love  all  men.  Our  neighbour,  be  he 
of  the  house  of  Israel,  a  Samaritan  or  a  heathen, ,  has  claims  upon  us.  But  love  of 
the  brethren  is  to  be  distinguished  from  this  general  love  of  one's  kind.  It  is  the 
Christian's  love  of  the  Christian.  2.  It  is  due  to  all  Christians.  It  should  not  be 
given  to  a  particular  chosen  circle  of  intimates  only,  nor  simply  to  the  members  of  one 
sect,  nor  to  tho.se  only  who  excite  our  admiration.  All  Christians,  of  all  ranks  and 
orders,  rich  and  poor,  cultured  and  ignorant,  saintly  and  imperfect,  orthodox  and 
heterodox,  in  every  branch  of  the  Catholic  Church  of  Christ,  have  claims  upon  our  love. 

II.  Its  origin.  1.  A  common  fatherhood.  We  all  have  the  same  Father  in  heaven. 
In  proportion  as  we  realize  the  broad  fatherhood  of  God  shall  we  enter  into  the 
brotherly  love  of  his  family.  He  is  the  Father  of  whom  "  every  family  in  earth  and 
heaven  is  named."  2.  A  common  brotherly  relation  to  Christ.  Every  Christian  can 
claim  Christ  as  his  Brother.  The  great  elder  Brother  binds  all  the  members  of  the 
family  together  by  attracting  them  all  to  himself.  We  learn  to  love  our  fellow- 
Christian  by  seeing  the  Christ  in  him.  3.  Common  interests.  We  share  the  same 
blessings,  enjoy  the  same  redemption,  walk  in  the  same  pilgrimage,  and  are  travelling 
towards  the  same  home. 

III.  Its  influence.    True  love  of  the  brethren  cannot  be  without  effect.     Only  th< 

I,    THE8SALONIAN8. 


98  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  iv.  1—18. 

lack  of  it  could  hare  permitted  the  fearful  quarrels  and  enmities  that  have  divided 
Christendom.  Regard  a  man  'as  your  brother,  and  you  will  be  loth  to  hound  him  to 
death.  Were  this  love  stronger  many  blessings  would  result.  1.  Mutual  forbearance. 
We  permit  our  brother  to  hold  his  own  opinion  and  follow  his  own  conscipnce.  2. 
Mutual  helpfulness.  Selfish  Christianity  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  To  bear  one 
another's  burdens  is  just  to  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  3.  Power  to  influence  the  world. 
Civil  war  in  the  Church  means  paralysis  of  the  army  that  should  conquer  the  world  for 
Christ.  When  Christians  again  learn  the  almost  lost  art  of  loving  one  another,  they 
will  attract  converts  from  the  world  outside  by  better  means  than  reasoning  and  preach- 
ing.—W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  11. — The  industrial  life.  Christianity  has  something  to  say  on  the  industrial 
life.  It  has  been  charged  with  discrediting  industry.  No  calumny  could  be  more 
false.  It  certainly  discourages  engrossing  worldly  cares,  and  bids  men  remember 
their  heavenly  citizenship.  But  it  only  inculcates  a  more  faithful  discharge  of  earthly 
duty  by  insisting  on  lofty  views  of  life  and  the  pure  principles  which  should  inspire  it. 
Three  duties  in  regard  to  the  industrial  life  are  here  urged  by  St.  Paul. 

L  An  ambition  to  be  quiet.  The  word  '"study  "  means  literally,  "  be  ambitious." 
This  is  a  remarkable  collocation  of  ideas — ambition  and  quiet.  It  is  as  though  the 
apostle  said,  "  You  have  been  ambitious  to  make  a  noise  in  the  world ;  reverse  your . 
aim :  be  ambitious  of  quiet."  This  striking  piece  of  advice  is  urged  in  close  con- 
nection with  directions  regarding  the  industrial  life.  Probably  the  Church  at  Thessa- 
lonica  was  largely  composed  of  working-men.  There  was  a  danger  lest  the  new 
privileges  of  Christianity  should  make  some  of  these  men  foolishly  anxious  to  make 
themselves  conspicuous.  1.  We  should  aim  at  doing  much  good  without  attracting 
attention  to  ourselves.  The  Christian  should  not  clamour  for  recognition.  He  should 
be  content  that  his  work  prospers,  though  he  remains  obscure.  2.  We  should  he  too 
busy  with  work  to  have  much  time  for  talk.  Busybodies  are  generally  drones.  How 
silent  is  the  work  of  God  in  nature !  Silently  the  forest  grows.  So  let  our  work  be 
done.  3.  We  should  work  peaceably.  The  noisy  man  is  too  often  the  quarrelsome 
man.  In  the  ambition  to  sound  a  name  abroad,  bitter  envy  and  jealousy  are  excited. 
4.  Ignorant  people  should  not  suppose  that  the  privileyes  of  Christian  brotherhood  qualify 
them  to  teach  others.     "  Be  not  many  teachers  "  (Ja^.  iii.  1). 

II.  A  doing  one's  own  BUSINESS.  1.  The  claims  of  the  Church  are  no  excuse  for  the 
neglect  of  a  man's  secular  business.  It  is  wrong  to  become  so  much  the  slave  of 
business  as  to  have  no  time  or  energy  for  mission  work,  Sunday  school  teaching,  etc. 
But  it  is  also  most  certainly  wrong  to  fail  in  our  duty  in  the  secular  sphere.  The 
Christian  should  be  the  most  punctual,  prompt,  and  energetic  man  of  business.  He 
should  serve  Christ  in  it.  If  he  is  responsible  to  others,  his  religion  should  strengthen 
his  fidelity  not  to  give  eye-service  as  a  man-pleaser.  2.  Religion  does  not  remove  a  man 
from  the  station  in  which  he  is  placed  by  Providence.  It  may  so  improve  his  habits  of 
work  and  may  bring  such  blessings  upon  him  as  may  enable  him  gradually  to  rise  in 
the  social  scale.  But  it  may  permit  no  such  external  change ;  it  should  not  be  expected 
to  do  so  in  every  case.  And  however  that  may  be,  religion  can  make  no  sudden 
change  in  a  man's  circumstances.  The  Christian  slave  was  in  outward  circumstances 
a  slave  still.  The  artisan  remained  an  artisan.  3.  Christianity  forbids  us  to  be 
envious  of  the  more  prosperous  condition  of  other  people.  It  is  not  for  us  to  snatch  at 
their  privileges  to  the  neglect  of  our  own  duty.  Every  man  has  his  Divine  vocation. 
It  is  the  Christian's  duty  to  find  his  special  vocation  and  to  follow  it,  whether  it  lead 
him  up  the  Beulah  heights  or  down  through  the  valley  of  humiliation.  In  the 
Church  let  each  man  find  his  own  place  and  do  his  own  work.  There  is  a  diversity  of 
gifts.  One  has  a  gift  of  speech,  another  a  gift  of  deft  handiwork.  Let  neither  be 
ambitious  to  usurp  the  place  of  the  other.  4.  Christians  should  be  too  busy  with  their 
own  work  to  have  time  to  judge  their  neighbours.  We  are  workmen,  not  judges.  To 
his  own  Master  each  man  stands  or  falls. 

III.  An  honest  diligence  in  manual  labour.  This  duty  is  clearly  brought  out 
in  the  Revised  Version,  which  omits  the  word  " own"  before  "  hands,"  so  that  we  read 
the  clause,  "  Work  with  your  hands."  Thus  we  have  a  direct  recommendation  of 
manual  labour.    L  Manual  labour  is  necessary.    There  is  hard,  rough  work  of  this 


oh.it.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  W 

kind  that  most  be  done.  It  Is  cowardly  to  shirk  it.  Cultivated  people  do  not  object  to 
hard  work  for  amusement,  e.g.  rowing,  Alpine  climbing.  Why  should  it  be  shunned 
when  it  is  useful  ?  2.  Manual  labour  is  honourable.  Any  work  done  with  a  good 
purpose  is  honourable.  The  work  of  the  carpenter  is  often  more  honourable  than  that 
of  the  financier.  The  dirtiest  work  is  not  always  done  by  the  roughest  hands.  The 
crowding  of  the  sons  of  working  men  into  the  ranks  of  clerks  is  not  a  healthy  sign 
if  it  betokens  a  shame  of  honest  toil.  3.  Manual  labour  it  wholesome.  The  punish- 
ment of  Adam  is  no  curse.  It  is  a  blessing  that  man  has  to  "  eat  his  bread  in  the 
sweat  of  his  face."  While  the  early  monks  were  busy,  building,  digging,  weaving, 
monasticism  presented  a  picture  of  pure  Christian  living.  Riches  brought  superiority 
to  physical  industry,  and  corruption  speedily  followed.  The  best  of  Christ's  apostles 
were  working  men. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  12. — Christians  before  the  world.  In  the  previous  verse  St.  Paul  has  been 
urging  upon  his  readers  the  duty  of  quiet  industry.  He  now  gives  two  reasons  for 
this  advice — first,  that  they  may  walk  honestly  before  the  world ;  and  secondly,  that 
they  may  have  need  of  nothing.  The  apostle  turns  to  the  same  subject  in  his  Second 
Epistle.  "  If  any  mau  will  not  work,  neither  let  him  eat,"  he  says  (2  Thess.  iii.  10). 
God  only  provides  for  us  when  we  cannot  provide  for  ourselves  ;  or,  rather,  he  provides 
for  us  by  helping  us  to  provide  for  ourselves.  He  feeds  the  ravens  by  giving  them 
strong  wings  and  claws  and  beaks,  and  by  providing  them  prey.  But  the  birds  must 
catch  their  quarry.  We  need  not  be  anxious  about  the  morrow  if  we  are  diligent  in 
doing  our  own  business.  So  much  for  the  second  reason  for  diligence.  The  first  demands 
more  extended  inquiry,  and  may  be  taken  by  itself  as  a  fertile  subject  for  meditation. 
We  are  to  be  diligent  in  our  secular  business  in  order  that  we  may  "walk  honestly 
towards  them  that  are  without." 

I.  Christians  owe  duties  to  the  world.  Christians  have  no  right  to  treat 
"  them  that  are  without "  as  outlaws.  If  we  should  pray  for  those  who  de.-pitefully  use 
us,  much  more  should  we  treat  them  honestly.  And  if  we  are  to  be  kind  to  our 
enemies,  certainly  we  are  required  to  be  just  to  those  who  are  not  inimical  to  us.  The 
Christian  must  pay  his  debts  to  an  infidel.  The  temperate  man  must  fulfil  his  obli- 
gations to  the  drunkard.  The  spiritually  minded  man  must  be  just  to  the  worldly 
minded  man.    Christians  should  respect  the  rights  of  the  heathen  in  foreign  countries. 

II.  The  world  judges  Christians  according  to  their  discharge  of  these 
duties.  These  it  can  appreciate,  It  knows  nothing  of  the  behaviour  of  Christians 
in  the  Church.  It  cares  nothing  for  orthodox  creeds  or  devout  psalm-singing.  But  it 
can  estimate  the  value  of  a  thorough  piece  of  work,  and  it  can  see  the  merit  of  a 
prompt  payment.  If  we  are  wanting  in  these  things,  the  world  will  only  regard  us  as 
hypocrites  when  we  make  much  of  ourreligion  in  spiritual  matters — and  rightly,  for  if 
we  are  not  honest  men  we  cannot  be  saints. 

III.  The  world  judges  of  Christianity  according  to  the  external  conduct 
of  Christians  in  this  respect.  Here  is  a  graver  consideration.  The  honbur  of 
Christ  is  concerned.  The  defaulting  Christian  gives  a  shock  to  Christian  evidences. 
One  glaring  instance  of  misconduct  in  secular  affairs  does  more  to  hinder  the  progress  of 
true  religion  than  volumes  of  sermons  can  do  to  advance  it.  Even  the  negligent  and 
idle  Christian  brings  discredit  on  his  Master.  The  Christian  artisan  should  be  known 
from  the  secularist  by  the  greater  diligence  and  thoroughness  of  his  work. 

IV.  Christians  have  no  right  to  expect  good  treatment  from  the  world 
unless  they  behave  honestly  towards  it.  The  Church  at  Thessalonica  lived  in 
constant  danger  of  an  assault  from  the  hostile  heathen  population  of  the  city.  It  was 
most  desirable  that  no  shadow  of  an  excuse  should  be  given  for  an  attack.  Idleness, 
noisy  restlessness,  interference  with  other  people,  would  provoke  opposition.  Quiet 
industry  waa  most  safe.  When  a  master  found  that  the  Christians  were  his  best  hands 
he  would  not  be  inclined  to  molest  them.  We  shall  best  conciliate  opponents  and 
silence  enmity  and  at  last  win  respect  by  a  quiet,  unassuming,  diligent  discharge  of 
our  daily  duty.— W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  13, 14. — Sorrow  for  the  dead  transfigured  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  In 
the  neighbourhood  of  Thessalonica — Salonica  it  is  now  called — there  may  ba  seen  at  the 


100  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  it.  1—18. 

present  day  ancient  tombs  on  which  are  to  be  read  inscriptions  expressing  hopeless 
regret  for  the  dead.  The  Church  addressed  by  St.  Paul  was  a  little  community  which 
had  learnt  to  enjoy  a  strange,  new  view  of  the  state  and  prospects  of  the  departed, 
planted  in  the  midst  of  a  great  pagan  populace  that  held  the  melancholy  sentiments  of 
these  epitaphs.  Contrasting  the  Christians  with  "  the  rest "  of  the  people,  the  apostle 
reminds  them  that  they  should  not  give  way  to  the  despairing  sorrow  that  was  natural 
to  men  who  had  no  hope. 

I.  Outside  Christianity  sorrow  fob  the  dead  is  hopeless.  1.  History  and 
experience  establish  this  fact.  Pagan  tombs  everywhere  express  themselves  with 
various  degrees  of  despair,  but  never  with  cheerful  hope.  Nations  like  the  Egyptians 
that  had  a  firm  faith  in  a  future  life  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  enjoyed  any  hopes 
respecting  that  life.  A  general  dream  of  immortality  pervades  our  race ;  but  it  is 
everywhere  dim  and  cheerless.  Many  men  at  all  times  have  broken  away  from  it 
altogether,  and  have  said  with  Catullus,  "  When  once  our  brief  day  has  set  we  must 
sleep  one  everlasting  night."  2.  Reasoning  cannot  conquer  the  common  hopelessness 
of  Borrow  for  the  dead.  The  arguments  outside  Christianity  may  be  divided  into  two 
classes :  (1)  Naturalistic ;  e.g.  from  the  nature  of  consciousness,  from  the  indestructi- 
bility of  all  known  existences,  from  the  general  instinct  of  immortality,  from  analogies 
of  sleep,  transformations  of  insects,  succession  of  winter,  spring,  etc.  Less  and  less 
weight  is  being  ascribed  to  all  such  reasoning.  It  will  not  bear  the  strain  of  anxious 
doubt.  The  mourner  turns  his  eyes  in  vain  to  nature  for  comfort.  (2)  Theistic.  (a) 
In  the  wisdom  of  Cod.  Man's  life  being  but  imperfectly  developed  here,  the  Divine 
idea  of  humanity  would  be  vain  and  futile  without  a  larger  world  for  realizing  it.  (b) 
In  the  justice  of  God — the  necessity  of  a  future  judgment,  (c)  In  the  goodness  of 
God.  A  father  would  not  mock  his  child  by  creating  him  so  that  he  has  a  great 
hunger  for  a  future  which  is  unattainable.  Nevertheless  even  these  arguments  do  not 
satisfy,  for  who  can  venture  to  speak  with  assurance  of  the  high  counsels  of  the 
Almighty  ?  and,  moreover,  they  presuppose  a  knowledge  of  the  character  of  God  which 
only  Christianity  clearly  furnishes. 

II.  Christianity  draws  the  stiko  of  hopelessness  from  sorrow  fob  the  dead 
1.  It  does  not  destroy  that  sorrow.  To  do  so  would  be  impossible.  We  must  grieve  at 
parting  from  those  who  are  dear  to  us.  Indeed  it  would  be  unhealthy  for  us  entirely  to 
conquer  natural  sorrow.  We  should  have  to  conquer  natural  love  first.  A  softening, 
subduing,  purifying  mission  comes  with  this  grief,  and  is  one  of  the  best  means  of 
helping  us  to  receive  Christian  truth.  2.  But  Christianity  removes  the  sting  from  this 
sorrow  by  depriving  it  of  hopelessness.  The  hope  which  St.  Paul  refers  to  is  plainly 
the  hope  of  receiving  back  those  who  have  been  taken  from  us  by  death.  They  are 
gone,  but  not  gone  for  ever.  Every  weary  year  as  it  passes  brings  us  nearer  to  the 
happy  reunion.  The  words  of  St.  Paul  plainly  show  that  he  believed  in  the  mutual 
recognition  of  friends  in  the  future  life. 

III.  The  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  abe  the  secret  of  this  Chris- 
tian transfiguration  of  sorrow  fob  THE  dead.  1.  The  strongest  argument  to 
convince  men  generally  of  a  future  life  is  to  be  found  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ  taken 
in  connection  with  his  life  and  teaching.  He  spoke  of  judgment  and  of  eternal  life.  He 
confirmed  his  words  by  rising  from  the  dead.  The  confirmation  is  twofold.  (1)  The 
resurrection  is  a  Divine  authentication  of  the  claims  and  mission  of  Christ.  (2)  It  is 
an  instance,  a  crucial  test,  a  proof  that  a  future  life  is  possible.  2.  For  Christians  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  are  grounds  for  enjoying  the  hope  of  a  reunion  of  all 
the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord.  (1)  The  triumph  of  Christ  is  here  shown.  Now,  the 
object  of  his  death  and  resurrection  was  to  redeem  the  world.  But  this  redemption 
would  be  vain  if  there  were  no  resurrection.  "  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hoped  in 
Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most  pitiable."  The  resurrection  of  Christ  proves  that  the 
object  of  his  death  was  obtained.  It  must  therefore  be  followed  by  the  resurrection  of 
his  people  in  order  that  the  redemption  thus  accomplished  may  be  fully  realized  in 
them.  (2)  The  union  of  Christians  with  Christ  secures  their  resurrection.  His 
experience  becomes  the  experience  of  his  people,  because  he  Uvea  in  them  and  they  live 
in  him  (1  Cor.  xv.  22>— W.  F.  A. 

Ten.  16, 16. — The  order  of  the  second  advent.     The  mbjeota  here  brought  before  u» 


oh.  it.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALON1ANS.  101 


are  entirely  beyond  the  reach  of  speculation.  We  have  no  data  whatever  to  go  upon 
beyond  the  authoritative  declarations  of  the  Word  of  God.  St.  Paul  himself  was  not 
prepared  to  reason  about  them.  He  could  simply  declare  what  was  revealed  to  him. 
But  this  he  did  declare  with  marvellous,  unhesitating  positiveness.  He  prefaces  his 
declaration  by  distinctly  claiming  the  authority  of  inspiration  for  it.  "  For  this  we 
say  unto  you  by  the  word  of  the  Lord."  So  remarkable  a  revelation  as  that  of  the 
following  verses  needed  some  such  assurance  of  its  origin  to  commend  it  to  us.  We 
must  take  it  in  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  written,  or  we  must  leave  it  alone.  It  is 
useless  to  begin  rationalizing  with  it.  It  is  foolish  to  attempt  to  go  one  step  beyond 
what  is  written.  A  sermon  on  such  subjects  must  be  as  purely  expository  of  the 
words  of  Scripture  as  possible.  We  note  here  three  events  in  time,  and  their  external 
consequence.  The  order  of  these  three  events  is  what  St.  Paul  is  most  immediately 
concerned  with.  The  occasion  of  his  writing  on  them  appears  to  have  been  the  trouble 
felt  by  his  readers  as  to  the  condition  of  those  Christians  who  died  before  the  second 
advent  of  Christ  which  they  were  expecting  shortly  to  happen.  Would  these  departed 
brethren  miss  the  joy  of  welcoming  their  glorified  Saviour?  The  order  of  events 
described  by  the  apostle  removes  this  difficulty. 

L  The  fibst  event  is  the  advent  op  Christ.  1.  Be  is  to  come  in  Person.  He 
does  not  forget  the  world  for  which  he  died.  He  will  return  to  his  weary,  waiting 
Church.  2.  He  is  to  come  in  glory.  His  first  advent  was  humble  and  obscure.  Few 
knew  the  Babe  in  the  manger.  Lowly  and  self-sacrificing  was  the  whole  life  that 
followed.  But  every  one  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted.  The  humble  Jesus 
is  to  come  again  as  the  exalted  Lord.  3.  lie  is  to  come  conspicuously.  The  shout,  the 
full  voice  of  an  archangel,  the  blast  of  a  trumpet — these  awful  sounds  surely  betoken 
no  obscure  mystical  advent  which  can  be  questioned  after  it  has  occurred.  When 
Christ  comes  a  second  time  no  one  will  say,  "  Is  the  Lord  among  us  or  no?"  All  will 
hear  the  great  shout  and  the  pealing  angel-notes. 

IL  The  second  event  is  the  return  of  the  departed.  Instead  of  missing 
the  joy  of  that  great  advent,  as  their  friends  sadly  feared,  those  Christians  who  had 
fallen  asleep  will  be  the  first  to  share  it.  The  trumpet  will  awake  the  dead  before  it 
arouses  the  living.  There  will  be  no  advantage  in  being  among  the  living  at  the  time 
of  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  Some,  even  in  our  own  day,  have  fondly  hoped  for 
some  such  privilege.  But  St.  Paul  distinctly  tells  us  that  the  privilege  is  the  other 
way.  The  departed  will  be  the  most  privileged.  This  is  fair ;  for  if  they  have  endured 
the  pangs  of  death  to  reach  Christ,  it  is  right  that  they  should  see  him  first. 

HI.  The  third  event  is  the  association  of  livino  Christians  with  the 
second  advent  of  Christ.  They  take  the  second  place  in  honour,  not  having 
wrestled  with  death  and  conquered  the  dread  foe,  as  their  departed  brethren  have  done. 
But  they  also  join  in  the  glad  triumph  of  their  Lord.  Of  the  physical  process 
described  as  being  "caught  up  into  the  clouds"  we  know  nothing,  and  therefore 
cannot  tell  how  it  will  be  realized  till  it  is  accomplished.  The  attempt  to  explain  it 
baa  only  made  the  subject  ridiculous.  But  the  two  spiritual  facts  accompanying  it  are 
clear.  A  joyous  meeting  with  Christ  and  the  departed,  and  a  change  of  state  and 
sphere ;  the  earthly  life  and  its  limitations  giving  place  to  the  heavenly  life  and  its  more 
exalted  powers. 

IV.  The  eternal  consequence  is  the  permanent  dwelling  of  Christians 
with  Christ.  The  second  advent  here  described  is  not  a  passing  event  which  ends. 
It  is  not  a  mere  visit  of  Christ.  It  is  not  like  the  first  advent,  which,  after  a  few  years, 
was  followed  by  the  death  and,  after  his  resurrection,  the  ascension  of  Christ.  Christ 
will  never  leave  his  people  again.  1.  It  secures  joy.  The  joy  of  love  is  to  be  with 
those  we  love.  The  highest  Christian  happiness  is  to  be  "  for  ever  with  the  Lord." 
This  is  heaven.  2.  It  protects  from  trouble.  God  wipes  away  tears  from  all  eyes. 
Associated  with  Christ  for  ever,  his  people  can  never  weep  again.  3.  It  guards  from  sin. 
Where  the  triumphant  Christ  always  is,  the  defeated  tempter  can  never  come.  4.  It 
accomplishes  the  reunion  of  friends.  All  being  with  Christ,  all  are  also  together.  The 
home  is  perfected  by  the  gathering  of  the  blessed  dead  with  the  glorified  living  around 
the  abiding  Christ— W.  F.  A. 


102  THE  EIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oit.I- 88. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Coktbhts.— With  regard  to  the  time 
of  that  glorious  advent  when  believers, 
whether  dead  or  living,  will  be  gathered 
together  to  Christ,  the  TheBsalonians  had 
already  been  fully  instructed.  They  knew 
well  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  would  come 
suddenly  and  unexpectedly,  and  surprise 
an  ungodly  world.  But  they  were  not  in 
darkness  so  as  to  be  taken  by  surprise. 
Still,  however,  they  must  exercise  constant 
watchfulness  and  sobriety,  and  be  armed 
with  the  Christian  graces  of  faith,  love,  and 
hope,  being  comforted  with  the  assurance 
that  God  had  not  appointed  them  to  wrath, 
but  to  the  acquisition  of  salvation  through 
Jeans  Christ,  who  died  for  their  benefit,  in 
order  that,  whether  living  or  dead,  they 
might  share  in  the  blessings  of  his  advent. 

Now  follows  a  series  of  short  admonitions. 
The  Thessalonians  were  to  love  and  honour 
their  ministers,  to  live  in  peace  among 
themselves,  to  admonish  the  disorderly,  to 
encourage  the  faint-hearted,  to  support  the 
weak,  and  to  exercise  forbearance  toward 
all  men.  They  were  to  be  on  their  guard 
against  revenge,  to  preserve  Christian  joy- 
fulness,  to  be  constant  in  prayer,  and  to 
maintain  a  thankful  disposition.  They 
were  not  to  quench  the  Spirit,  nor  despise 
prophesyings,  but  were  to  test  all  things, 
retaining  the  good  and  rejecting  the  evil. 
And  it  was  his  earnest  prayer  for  them  that 
God  would  so  completely  sanctify  them  that 
they  might  be  blameless  at  the  advent  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  After  requesting  an 
interest  in  their  prayers,  and  solemnly 
charging  them  to  read  this  Epistle  to  the 
assembled  Church,  the  apostle  concludes 
with  his  apostolic  benediction. 

Ver.  1. — This  verse  is  connected  with 
what  precedes.  The  apostle  was  comforting 
the  Thessalonians  under  the  loss  of  their 
deceased  friends  by  the  assurance  that  both 
the  living  and  the  dead  would  be  gathered 
together  at  the  advent.  The  question 
would  naturally  arise,  "When  shall  these 
thingB  be?"  (Luke  xxi.  7);  and  it  would 
appear  that  the  Thessalonians  expected  an 
immediate  advent.  The  apostle  represses 
their  curiosity  tin  this  point  by  reminding 
them  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  time  of  the 


Lord's  coming.  But  of  the  times  and  the  sea- 
sons, brethren;  that  is,  of  the  time  and  the  pre- 
cise period  of  the  Lord's  advent.  "  Times  " 
and  "seasons"  are  elsewhere  united  together 
(Ecoles.  iii. ;  Dan.  ii.  21 ;  Acts  i.  7).  The 
word  translated  "times"  denotes  tims 
absolutely  without  regard  to  circumstances ; 
and  the  word  rendered  "seasons"  denotes 
a  definite  point  of  time ;  not  merely  the 
day,  but  the  hour  (Hark  xiii.  32).  Ye  have 
no  need  that  I  write  unto  yon;  literally, 
that  ought  be  written  unto  you  (B.V.) ;  corn  p. 
oh.  iv.  9.  The  reason  why  it  was. not  need- 
ful for  the  apostle  to  write  unto  them  was, 
not  because  he  regarded  the  information 
unprofitable  or  superfluous,  or  because  he 
knew  it  to  be  impossible,  but  because  he 
had  already  informed  them  when  at  Thes- 
salonica  that  the  time  of  the  advent  was 
beyond  the  sphere  of  his  teaching.  The 
apostle  mentions  this  to  repress  that  vain 
curiosity  which  is  natural  to  man,  and  which 
was  the  occasion  of  so  much  disorder  among 
the  Thessalonians.  Our  duty  is,  not  to  pry 
into  the  times  and  seasons  which  the  Father 
hath  put  in  his  own  power  (Acts  i.  7),  but 
to  exercise  constant  watchfulness. 

Ver.  2. — For  yourselves  know  perfectly ; 
namely,  not  from  Scripture,  nor  from  oral 
tradition,  but  from  the  teaching  of  the 
apostle  when  in  Thessalonioa.  That  the  day 
of  the  Lord.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  "  is  a 
common  Old  Testament  expression,  denot- 
ing the  coming  of  the  Divine  judgments 
(Joel  i.  15;  ii.  1);  and  by  the  phrase  here 
is  meant,  not  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem, 
nor  the  day  of  one's  death,  but  the  day  of 
the  Lord's  advent,  when  Christ  shall  descend 
from  heaven  in  glory  for  the  resurrection  of 
the  dead  and  the  judgment  of  the  world. 
The  idea  of  judgment  is  contained  in  the 
term  "day."  So  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the 
night.  The  same  comparison  is  used  by  our 
Lord  himself  (Matt.  xxiv.  43;  Luke  xii. 
39),  and  the  very  words  are  employed  by 
Peter  (2  Pet.  iii.  10).  The  point  of  resem- 
blance is  evidently  the  unexpectedness  and 
suddenness  of  the  coming.  The  thief  comes 
upon  people  in  the  night  season,  when  they 
are  asleep  and  unprepared ;  so,  in  a  similar 
manner,  when  Christ  comes,  he  will  find 
the  world  unprepared  and  not  expecting 
his  advent.  The  ancient  Fathers  inferred 
from  this  passage  that  Christ  would  come  to 
judgment  in  the  night  season,  and  hence 
they  instituted  vigils,  or  night  watches. 
Some,  still  more  precisely,  fixed  the  coming 
on  Easter  night,  from  the  analogy  of  the 
deliverance  of  the  Israelites  from  Egypt  on 
the  paschal  evening. 

Ver.  3. — For ;  the  best  manuscripts  omit 


oh.  v.  1—28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN& 


103 


this  conjunction;  the  description  is  con- 
tinuous. When  they  shall  say ;  namely,  the 
unbelieving  world.  Peace  and  safety;  peace 
denoting  internal  rest,  and  safety  external 
security.  Sadden  destruction  oometh  upon 
them.  When  they  thought  themselves  most 
secure,  they  were  then  in  the  greatest 
danger;  when  they  were  most  off  their 
guard,  then  the  crisis  came.  As  travail  upon 
a  woman  with  child.  The  primary  point  of 
resemblance  is  certainly  the  suddenness  and 
unexpectedness  of  the  event;  as  labour 
comes  upon  a  woman  suddenly,  so  sudden 
destruction  cometh  upon  the  ungodly  world. 
Still,  however,  the  nnavoidableness  of  the 
judgment  may  also  be  here  intimated ;  there 
is  no  possibility  of  escape :  this  is  implied 
in  the  last  clause,  and  they  shall  not  esoape. 

Ver.  4. — But  ye,  brethren ;  ye  believers, 
in  opposition  to  the  unbelieving  world.  Are 
not  in  darkness ;  referring  back  to  the  night 
(ver.  2),  whin  the  thief  comes.  By  darkness 
is  here  meant,  not  merely  ignorance,  but 
moral  depravity — the  darkness  of  sin.  Ye 
are  not  in  the  ignorant  and  sinful  condition 
of  the  unredeemed  world,  so  as  to  be  sur- 
prised by  the  day  of  the  Lord.  With  you 
it  is  not  night,  but  day;  the  light  of  the 
gospel  is  shining  around  you ;  and  there- 
fore the  day  of  the  Lord's  coming  will  not 
surprise'  you  in  an  unprepared  state.  That ; 
a  statement,  not  of  result,  but  of  purpose — 
"in  order  that."  That  day ;  the  day ;  namely, 
the  day  of  the  Lord.  Should  overtake  you — 
surprise  you — as  a  thief. 

Ver.  5. — Ye  are  all  the  children  of  the 
light,  and  the  children  of  the  day.  Hebra- 
istic expressions  denoting,  Ye  all  belong  to 
the  light  and  to  the  day.  An  affirmation, 
strengthening  the  previous  declaration. 
The  light  and  the  day  are  synonymous 
expressions — the  day  being  the  period  of 
light,  as  opposed  to  the  night  and  darkness. 
We  are  not  of  the  night,  nor  of  darkness; 
rendering  the  positive  assertion  more  em- 
phatic. 

Ver.  6. — Therefore ;  because  we  are  the 
children  of  the  light  and  of  the  day, 
because  we  have  been  enlightened  and 
purified,  we  ought  to  be  watchful  and  sober, 
so  that  we  may  not  be  unprepared  for  the 
day  of  the  Lord.  Privileges  will  avail  us 
nothing,  unless  we  use  them  and  walk  up 
to  them.  Let  us  not  sleep.  Sleep  is  here 
evidently  used  metaphorically  to  denote 
religious  carelessness.  As  do  others ;  the 
unbelieving  and  ungodly.  But  let  us  watch 
and  be  sober;  evidently  to  be  understood 
metaphorically  of  spiritual  vigilance  and 
sobriety:  watchfulness  denoting  wakeful- 
ness from  sleep,  and  sobriety  freedom  from 
intoxication.  Both  must  be  combined :  we 
must  be  watchful,  on  our  guard,  and  we 
must  be  sober,  armed  and  prepared;  "for 


even  by  day,"  observes  St.  Chrysostom,  "  it 
one  watches,  but  is  not  sober,  he  will  fall 
into  numberless  dangers."  The  same  exhor- 
tation is  given  by  Peter,  but  in  the  reverse 
order :  "  Be  sober,  be  vigilant "  (1  Pet.  v.  8). 

Ver.  7. — For ;  the  reason  of  this  exhorta- 
tion. They  that  sleep  sleep  in  the  night; 
and  they  that  are  drunken  are  drunken  in 
the  night.  Here  not  to  be  taken  in  a  meta- 
phorical sense,  but  a  simple  statement  of 
fact — what  occurs  in  ordinary  experience. 
The  night  is  the  season  in  which  sleep  and 
drunkenness  usually  occur;  whereas  the 
day  is  the  season  of  watchfulness,  sobriety, 
and  work.  Both  heathen  and  Jews  con- 
siilered  it  as  eminently  disgraceful  for  a 
man  to  be  seen  drunken  in  the  day-time. 
Hence,  when  the  Jews  accused  the  believers 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost  with  being  filled 
with  new  wine,  Peter  answered,  "  We  are 
not  drunken,  as  ye  suppose,  seeing  it  is  but 
the  third  hour  of  the  day  "  (Acts  ii.  15). 

Ver.  8. — But;  contrast  to  the  conduct  of 
those  who  are  of  the  night :  let  us  not  only 
be  watchful,  but  armed.  The  apostle  now 
adopts  a  favourite  figure,  that  of  spiritual 
armour.  The  arms  which  he  here  mentions 
are  only  two — the  breastplate  to  protect  the 
heart,  and  the  helmet  to  guard  the  head ; 
they  are  both  defensive  weapons,  because 
the  reference  here  is  not  so  much  to  the 
believer's  conflict  with  evil,  as  to  his 
defence  against  surprise.  And  by  these 
spiritual  weapons  are  denoted  the  three 
cardinal  graces — faith,  love,  and  hope  (oh.  i. 
3).  Let  us  who  are  of  the  day,  be  sober, 
putting  on  the  breastplate  of  faith  and  love. 
By  "  faith  "  is  here  meant  faith  in  Christ ; 
and  by  "  love,"  not  so  much  love  to  God  as 
love  to  man.  These  preserve  the  heart  of  a 
Christian  against  the  assaults  and  influ- 
ences of  evil,  as  the  breastplate  guards  the 
heart  of  the  earthly  warrior.  And  for  a 
helmet,  the  hope  of  salvation.  Salvation  in 
its  most  comprehensive  sense.  The  hope  of 
salvation  sustains  our  courage  ami.  I  all  the 
trials  of  life  by  holding  out  to  us  the 
prospect  of  eternal  blessedness.  Vigilance 
is  of  no  avail  unless  armed  by  faith,  hope, 
and  love.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians 
there  is  a  still  fuller  enumeration  of  the 
Christian  armour  (Eph.  vi.  14 — 18) ;  and 
there  is  a  slight  difference  in  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  weapons.  Here  the  apostle 
speaks  of  the  breastplate  of  faith  and  love; 
there  of  the  breastplate  of  righteousness 
and  of  the  shield  of  faith.  Here  the  helmet 
is  called  the  hope  of  salvation ;  there  the 
apostle  speaks  of  the  helmet  of  salvation. 
And  besides  these  defensive  weapons,  other 
weapons  of  defence  and  the  sword,  a  weapon 
of  offence,  are  mentioned. 

Ver.  9. — For.  Not  a  new  reason  for  watch- 
fulness and  sobriety,  but  referring  to  "  the 


104 


THK  FIRST   EPISTLE  TO   THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  v.  1—28. 


hope  of  salvation,"  why  we  may  with  con- 
fidence pnt  on  Bach  a  hope  as  a  helmet. 
God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath,  but  to 
obtain — or,  to  the  acquisition  of — salvation  by 
— or,  through— out  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Not 
through  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  nor  even 
through  faith  in  Christ,  but  through  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself,  through  what  he 
has  done  for  us,  and  especially  through  his 
atoning  death.  The  appointment  of  God's 
grace  is  here  mentioned  as  the  efficient 
cause  of  our  salvation  ;  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  as  the  Mediator  through  whom 
salvation  is  bestowed. 

Ver.  10. — Who  died.  His  death  being  the 
meritorious  cause  of  our  salvation.  For  us ; 
that  is  here,  not  "  instead  of  ub,"  but  "  for 
our  benefit,"  or  "on  our  account."  That, 
whether  we  wake  or  sleep.  Here  not  to  be 
taken  in  an  ethical  sense — whether  we  are 
spiritually  awake  or  asleep,  for  those  who 
are  spiritually  asleep  will  be  surprised  by 
the  coming  of  the  Lord ;  nor  in  a  natural 
sense — whether  he  come  in  the  night  and 
find  lis  taking  our  natural  sleep,  or  in  the 
day,  when  we  are  awake — which  would  be  a 
mere  trifling  observation ;  but  in  a  meta- 
phorical sense — whether  we  are  alive  or 
dead.  The  apostle  has  just  been  speaking 
of  those  who  are  dead  under  the  designa- 
tion of  those  "  who  are  asleep  "  (ch.  iv.  13), 
and  therefore  it  is  natural  to  interpret  the 
clause,  "  whether  we  wake  or  Bleep,"  of  the 
condition  of  believers  at  the  coming  of  the 
Lord.  There  is  here  certainly  a  change  of 
metaphor :  "sleep"  in  ver.  6  denotes  religious 
carelessness ;  in  ver.  7,  natural  sleep ;  and 
here,  death.  We  shall  live  together — or,  in 
one  company — with  him.  The  apostle  is  still 
continuing  his  consolatory  address  to  those 
who  were  mourning  over  their  deceased 
friends;  and  he  tells  them  that  at  the 
advent  there  will  be  no  difference  between 
those  who  are  then  alive  and  those  who 
sleep — both  will  live  together  with  the  Lord 
(comp.  Bom.  xiv.  8,  9). 

Ver.  11. — Wherefore  ;  because,  whether 
alive  or  dead,  you  will  equally  share  in  the 
blessings  of  the  advent.  Comfort  yourselves 
together.  The  words  refer  back  to  the  last 
verse  of  the  preceding  chapter  (ch.  iv.  18), 
and  with  them  the  apostle  eoncludes  his 
consolatory  address  to  those  who  were 
mourning  over  the  loss  of  their  friends. 
And  edify  one  another;  or,  build  up.  It 
was  a  favourite  figure  of  the  apostle  to 
compare  the  Christian  Church  and  each 
individual  believer  to  a  building. 

Ver.  12 With  this  verse  commences  a 

new  paragraph.  The  apostle  adds  in  eon- 
elusion  a  few  brief  and  somewhat  miscel- 
laneous exhortations.  And  we  beseech  yon, 
brethren;  an  expression  of  earnestness  and 
aflbotion.    Tc  know  j  that  u,  to  value,  appre- 


ciate, and  esteem.  Them  whioh  labour 
among  yon.  It  was  Paul's  custom  to  or- 
ganize the  Churches  which  he  had  founded, 
and  to  appoint  presbyters  among  them. 
Although  the  Church  of  Thessalonica  had 
been  so  recently  founded,  yet  it  had  its 
presbyters.  And  are  over  you.  The  pres- 
byters, in  virtue  of  their  office,  presided  over 
the  Christian  assemblies.  In  the  Lord;  the 
sphere  in  which  they  were  set  over  the 
Church ;  they  were  ordained  to  minister  in 
sacred  things.  And  admonish  you.  There 
are  not  three  classes  or  orders  of  office- 
bearers here  mentioned — those  who  laboured 
among  them,  those  who  presided  over  them, 
and  those  who  admonished  them  (Mae- 
knight);  but  all  these  duties  belonged  to 
one  class,  namely,  the  presbyters. 

Ver.  13. — And  to  esteem  them  very  highly 
in  love  for  their  work's  sake;  that  is,  both 
on  account  of  their  labours,  and  especially 
on  account  of  the  dignity  of  their  office,  for 
their  work  is  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Both 
love  for  their  persons  and  respect  for  their 
authority  are  here  enjoined.  And;  to  be 
omitted,  as  not  in  the  original.  Be  at  peaoe 
among  yourselves.  A  new  exhortation,  en- 
tirely independent  of  the  preceding;  it  is 
not  addressed  to  the  presbyters,  but  to  the 
members  of  the  Church  in  general. 

Ver.  14. — Now  we  exhort  yon,  brethren; 
an  exhortation  also  addressed  to  all.  Warn 
them  that  are  unrul-  ;  or,  as  in  the  margin, 
disorderly  (B.V.).  Different  modes  of 
treatment  have  to  be  adapted  to  different 
classes;  the  unruly  have  to  be  warned. 
The  word  here  rendered  "  unruly  "  or  "  dis- 
orderly" was  originally  a  military  term 
expressing  the  character  of  those  soldiers 
who  would  not  keep  their  ranks — out  of  the 
ranks.  It  would  seem  from  this  and  other 
intimations  that  disorders  existed  among 
the  Thessalonians ;  and  that,  especially 
being  impressed  by  a  belief  in  the  near 
approach  of  the  advent,  several  of  them 
neglected  the  common  duties  of  life,  and 
abstained  from  working.  Comfort  the  feeble- 
minded. By  "  the  feeble-minded  "  are  meant 
the  despondins  or  faint-hearted  ;  those  who 
were  agitated  about  the  fate  of  their  deceased 
friends,  or  those  who  despaired  of  the  grace 
of  God  by  reason  of  their  sins.  These  were 
not  to  be  reprimanded,  but  comforted  and 
exhorted.  Support  the  weak.  By  "the 
weak  "  are  not  meant  those  who  are  phy- 
sically weak — the  sick ;  but  those  who  are 
spiritually  weak,  whose  faith  was  feeble — 
those  who  were  afraid  of  persecution,  or  were 
troubled  with  vain  scruples.  These  were  to 
be  supported — confirmed  in  the  faith.  Be 
patient  toward  all  men ;  all  men  in  general, 
whether  believers  or  unbelievers;  toward 
them  patienoa  and  forbearane*  warn  to  ba 
•xereiaad. 


ch.v.  1— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN& 


106 


Ver.  15. — See  that  none  render  evil  for 
evil  unto  any.  The  prohibition  of  revenge 
is  peculiarly  Christian,  neither  corresponding 
to  the  spirit  of  heathenism,  nor  yet  clearly 
revealed  in  Judaism.  A  precisely  similar 
prohibition  is  given  in  Rom.  xii.  17,  "Re- 
compense to  no  man  evil  for  evil."  But  ever 
follow ;  pursue  after.  That  whioh  is  good ; 
the  good,  the  beneficial.  Both  among  your- 
selves ;  your  fellow-Christians.  And  to  all 
men.  The  human  race  in  general;  the  one 
being  brotherly  kindness  and  the  other 
charity  (2  Pet.  i.  7). 

Ver.  16. — Rejoice  evermore;  or,  rejoice 
always  (R.V.).  Joy  is  that  feeling  of  delight 
which  arises  from  the  possession  of  present 
good,  or  from  the  anticipation  of  future 
happiness ;  and  in  both  respects  the  believer 
has  abundant  reason  for  constant  joy.  He 
possesses  the  blessedness  of  forgiveness  and 
the  sure  prospect  of  eternal  life,  and  he  hat 
the  consciousness  that  all  things  work  to- 
gether for  good  to  them  that  love  God  (Rom. 
viii.  28).  God  wishes  hia  people  to  be 
happy,  and  does  not  suffer  them  to  be  indif- 
ferent to  their  own  peace.  He  commands 
them  to  rejoice,  yea,  to  rejoice  evermore. 
"  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  always,  and  again  I 
say,  Rejoice  "  (Phil.  iv.  4). 

Ver.  17. — Pray  without  ceasing-.  The 
means  of  promoting  religious  joy  is  prayer. 
This  prayer  is  to  be  "  without  ceasing,"  im- 
plying constancy  (Col.  iv.  2)  and  persever- 
ance (Rom.  xii.  12 ;  Eph.  vi  18;  Luke  xviii. 
1).  This  is  not  a  mere  precept  "capable  of 
fulfilment  in  idea,  rather  than  in  fact" 
(Jowett);  but  it  is  an  exhortation  to  li'-e  in 
a  devotional  frame  of  mind.  It  it  .. pos- 
sible to  be  always  on  our  bended  knees,  but 
we  may  be  in  the  spirit  of  prayer  when 
engaged  in  the  duties  of  our  earthly  calling. 
Prayer  may  be  without  ceasing  in  the  heart 
which  is  full  of  the  presence  of  God,  and 
evermore  communing  with  him. 

Ver.  18. — In  everything  give  thanks.  In 
every  circumstance — in  joy  and  in  sorrow;  for 
everything — for  prosperity  and  for  adversity ; 
in  every  place — in  the  house  of  God  and 
on  the  bed  of  sickness ;  Christians  should 
not  only  be  engaged  in  constant  prayer,  but 
in  constant  thanksgiving;  indeed,  their 
prayers  should  partake  largely  of  the  nature 
of  thanksgiving.  For  this ;  this  thankful 
spirit.  Is  the  will  of  God;  his  deBire.  In 
Christ  Jesus ;  the  sphere  in  which  this  will 
of  God  is  displayed.  Concerning  you.  God 
by  the  gift  of  his  Son  has  laid  us  under  the 
obligation  of  perpetual  thanksgiving.  Our 
whole  lives  ought  to  be  one  continued  thank- 
offering  for  all  the  blessings  of  redemption. 

Ver.  19.— ftuenoh  not  the  Spirit  The 
Spirit  is  here  considered  as  a  flame  which 
may  be  extinguished  (Matt.  iii.  11).  The 
descent  «t  the  Spirit  at  Pentecost  was  in 


the  form  of  cloven  tongues  like  as  of  flre 
(Acts  ii.  3).  By  the  Spirit  here  is  usually 
understood  the  miraculous  gifts  of  the 
Spirit — speaking  with  tongues  or  prophesy- 
ings ;  and  it  is  supposed  that  the  apostle 
here  forbids  the  exercise  of  these  gifts 
being  hindered  or  checked.  In  the  next 
verse  the  gift  of  prophesying  is  mentioned. 
But  there  is  no  reason  to  exclude  the  ordi- 
nary and  still  more  valuable  gifts  of  the 
Spirit,  such  as  pure  thoughts,  holy  actions, 
devout  affections,  which  may  be  effectually 
quenched  by  a  careless  or  immoral  life. 
"  Quench  not  the  Spirit."  Do  not  those 
things  which  are  opposed  to  his  influences. 
Be  on  your  guard  against  sin,  as  opposed  to 
the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul.  In  this 
sense  the  admonition  is  similar  to  that  given 
by  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians : 
"  Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God"  (Eph. 
iv.  30). 

Ver.  20.— Despise  not  prophesyings.  This 
refers  to  the  miraculous  gift  of  prophecy 
possessed  by  the  primitive  Church.  And 
by  prophesyings  here  we  are  to  understand, 
not  the  prediction  of  the  future,  but  in- 
spired discourse,  conducive  to  the  instruc- 
tion and  edification  of  the  Church.  "  By  the 
term  'prophesying,'"  observes  Calvin,  "I 
do  not  understand  the  gift  of  foretelling  the 
future,  but  the  science  of  interpreting  Scrip- 
ture, so  that  a  prophet  is  an  interpreter  of 
the  will  of  God."  This  useful  gift,  it  would 
seem,  was  apt  to  be  despised,  and  the  infe- 
rior miraculous  gift  of  tongues  to  be  preferred 
before  it  (1  Cor.  xiv.  1—3). 

Ver.  21. — Prove  all  things.  This  exhor- 
tation is  olosely  connected  with  the  preced- 
ing. "Prove  all  tilings,"  namely,  whatever 
was  advanced  by  the  prophets  in  their  in- 
spired discourses  (comp.  1  John  iv.  1, 
"  Believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits 
whether  they  are  of  God  ").  "  Prove  "  here 
means  to  test,  as  metals  are  tested  in  the  fire ; 
and  hence  the  word  frequently  denotes  the 
favourable  result  of  the  testing,  or  approval. 
There  was  a  special  gift  of  discerning 
spirits  in  the  primitive  Church  (1  Cor.  xii.  10; 
xiv.  2!t)-  But  although  the  words  primarily 
refer  to  the  testing  of  prophetio  utterances, 
yet  they  have  a  general  application.  We 
should  not  rest  our  faith  on  the  authority 
of  others.  The  right  of  private  judgment 
is  the  characteristic  and  privilege  of  Pro- 
testantism. We  ought  thoroughly  to  ex- 
amine all  doctrines  by  the  test  of  Scripture, 
and  then,  discerning  their  reasons,  we  shall 
be  able  to  take  a  firmer  hold  of  them.  At 
the  same  time,  the  fundamental  principle  of 
rationalism,  that  reason  as  such  is  the  judge 
of  the  doctrines  of  revelation,  is  not  con- 
tained in  these  words,  and  oannot  be  inferred 
from  them.  Holdfast;  retain.  That  whioh 
is  good;  the  good,  the  beautiful,  the  honour- 


106 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  1. 1— 2a 


able;  a  different  word  from  that  rendered 
"  good"  in  ver.  15.  We  are  to  retain  what- 
ever is  good  in  those  "all  things  "  which  we 
are  to  prove  or  teat,  namely,  in  the  pro- 
phesying*. 

Ver.  22. — Abstain  from  all  appearanoe  of 
evil.  This  verse  is  connected  with  the  last, 
and  states  negatively  what  is  there  stated 
positively.  Test  the  declarations  of  the 
prophets ;  retain  the  good,  and  reject  the 
evil.  The  word  translated  "appearance" 
lias  been  differently  rendered;  it  denotes 
form,  figure,  species,  kind ;  so  that  the 
clause  is  to  be  rendered,  "  Abstain  from  all 
form  of  evil "  (B.V.),  or,  "  of  the  evil,"  the 
word  being  an  abstract  substantive.  The 
whole  exhortation  is  similar  to  that  given  in 
Rom.  xii.  9,  only  there  the  negative  state- 
ment is  put  first :  "  Abhor  that  which  is 
evil ;  cleave  to  that  which  is  good."  Some 
suppose  that  the  metaphor  employed  is  from 
the  practise  of  money-changers  who  tested 
the  money  offered  to  them,  rejecting  what 
was  base  and  retaining  what  was  genuine. 
Among  the  Fathers  we  meet  with  the  phrase, 
"  Be  ye  experienced  money-changers,"  as  a 
traditionary  saying  of  our  Lord ;  and  some 
suppose  that  the  apostle  refers  to  this  saying, 
and  give  the  following  paraphrase:  "The 
good  money  keep ;  with  every  sort  of  bad 
money  have  nothing  to  do ;  act  as  experi- 
enced money-changers  :  all  the  money  pre- 
sented to  you  as  good,  test."  Such  a 
supposition  is  fanciful  and  far-fetched. 

Ver.  23. — And  the  very  God  of  peace ;  the 
God  who  communicates  peace;  an  expres- 
sion frequently  employed  by  Paul  at  the 
close  of  his  Epistles  (Bom.  xv.  33 ;  zvi.  20; 
Phil.  iv.  9;  2  Cor.  xiii.  11 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  16). 
Sanotify  you  wholly;  that  is,  perfectly, 
without  anything  wanting,  referring  to  the 
entireness  of  the  sanctification,  which  is 
presently  expressed  in  detail.  And  I  pray 
God  your  whole  spirit  and  soul  and  body ; 
the  adjective  "  whole "  applies  to  all  the 
three  substantives.  The  apostle  here 
divides  human  nature  into  three  parts — 
spirit,  soul,  and  body;  and  this  threefold 
division  is  not  a  mere  rhetorical  statement : 
"  The  apostle  pouring  forth  from  the  fulness 
of  his  heart  a  prayer  for  his  converts " 
(Jowett);  but  a  distinct  statement  of  the 
three  component  parts  of  human  nature. 
The  "spirit"  is  the  highest  part  of  man, 
that  which  assimilates  him  to  God  ;  renders 
him  capable  of  religion,  and  susceptible  of 
heing  acted  upon  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The 
"  soul "  is  the  inferior  part  of  his  mental 
nature,  the  seat  of  the  passions  and  desires, 
of  the  natural  propensities.  The  "body" 
is  the  corporeal  frame.  Suoh  a  threefold 
distinction  of  human  nature  was  not  un- 
known among  the  Stoics  and   Platonists. 


There  are  also  traces  of  it  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, the  spirit,  or  breath  of  God,  being 
distinguished  from  the  soul.  Be  preserved 
blameless.  "  The  spirit  is  preserved  blame- 
less at  the  advent  when  the  voice  of  truth 
rules  it,  the  soul  when  it  strives  against  all 
the  charms  of  the  senses,  and  the  body  when 
it  is  not  abused  as  the  instrument  of  shame- 
ful actions  "  (Lunemann).  Unto  the  ooming 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Ver.  24. — Faithful  is  he  that  oalleth  yon. , 
Paul  knows  that  he  does  not  beseech  God  ' 
in  vain.  He  who  calls  you  to  the  Christian 
faith  is  faithful  to  fulfil  his  promises.  God's 
calling  is  the  commencement  of  a  series 
which  terminates  in  glorification  (Bom.  viii. 
30).  A  similar  appeal  to  the  faithfulness  of 
God  is  elsewhere  made  by  the  apostle  (1 
Cor.  i.  9 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  3).  Who  also  will  do 
it;  namely,  will  preserve  you  blameless 
unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Ver.  25. — Brethren,  pray  for  us;  namely, 
that  our  apostolic  work  may  be  successful ; 
that  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  have  free 
course  and  be  glorified"  (2  Thess.  iii.  1). 
The  apostle,  in  almost  all  his  Epistles, 
requests  from  his  converts  an  interest  in 
their  prayers  (Bom.  xv.  30 ;  2  Cor.  i.  11 ; 
Eph.  vi.  19 ;  Col.  iv.  3 ;  2  Thess.  iii  1 ; 
comp.  Heb.  xiii.  18).  Ministers  and  people 
need  each  other's  prayers,  and  prayer  is  a 
duty  which  they  owe  to  each  other. 

Ver.  26. — Greet  all  the  brethren  with  a 
holy  kiss.  That  certain  persons  were  en- 
joined to  salute  the  other  members  of  the 
Church  is  a  proof  that  the  Epistle  was 
given  into  the  hands  of  the  presbyters.  The 
reference  is  to  the  mode  of  Balutation  in  the 
East.  The  kiss  is  called  "  holy  "  because  it 
was  the  symbol  of  Christian  affection.  The 
same  exhortation  is  made  in  other  Epistles 
(Bom.  xvi.  16 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  20 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  12). 

Ver.  27. — I  charge  you;  namely,  the 
presbyters.  By  the  Lord;  namely,  Christ,  an 
indirect  proof  of  his  Divinity,  the  adjuration 
being  in  his  Name.  The  reason  of  this 
solemn  charge  was,  not  on  account  of  any 
remissness  on  the  part  of  the  presbyters,  but 
was  occasioned  by  the  earnestness  of  the 
apostle  and  by  his  consciousness  that  what 
he  wrote  was  most  important  to  the  Thessa- 
lonians,  and  was  the  command  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  That  this  Epistle  be  read  unto 
all  the  holy  brethren ;  onto  the  Church  of 
Thessalonica. 

Ver.  28.— The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  be  with  yon.  A  similar  salutation 
is  to  be  found  at  the  close  of  all  Paul's 
Epistles ;  indeed,  in  the  Seoond  Epistle  to 
the  Thessalonians,  he  states  that  this  salu- 
tation was  the  token  which  he  affixed  to  his 
Epistles  (2  Thess.  iii.  IT,  18).  Amen.  Tc 
be  rejected,  as  not  in  the  original. 


OH.  t.  1—28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE   TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&  101 


HOMILETICS. 

Ter.  6. — Watchfulness  and  sobriety.  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  uncertain  as  regards  its 
time.  The  early  Christians  were  mistaken  in  regarding  that  time  as  at  hand,  and  we 
perhaps  may  be  equally  mistaken  in  regarding  it  as  distant.  But  there  is  an  event 
which  to  each  of  us  is,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  the  same  as  "  the  day  of  the  Lord," 
which  is  both  near  and  uncertain — the  day  of  our  death.  Let  us  be  watchful,  so  that 
that  day  may  not  overtake  us  in  an  unprepared  state ;  and  let  us  be  sober,  never 
indulging  ourselves  in  any  course  of  action  in  which  we  would  not  wish  death  to 
surprise  us. 

Ver.  8. — Spiritual  armour.  We  must  not  only  be  watchful,  but  be  armed  sentinels. 
To  guard  against  surprise  we  must  especially  provide  ourselves  with  two  defensive 
weapons.  1.  The  breast/date  of  faith  and  love.  By  faith  in  Christ  and  love  to  man 
we  shall  effectually  preserve  our  hearts  against  evil  influences.  Faith  imparts  courage, 
and  love  preserves  us  from  selfishness,  the  great  inlet  to  evil.  The  stronger  and  the  more 
living  our  faith,  and  the  purer  and  the  more  active  our  love,  the  more  completely  shall 
we  be  guarded  against  evil.  2.  The  helmet  of  the  hope  of  salvation.  By  "  the  hope  of 
salvation  "  we  shall  preserve  our  head  from  being  filled  with  the  idle  dreams  of  worldly 
happiness,  whether  of  power  or  fame.  Hope  will  defend  us  from  being  seduced  by  the 
world's  pleasures  or  allured  by  the  world's  honours. 

Ver.  15. — Christian  forgiveness.  1.  Its  peculiarity.  Forgiveness  of  our  enemies  is 
pre-eminently  a  Christian  virtue.  It  had  no  place  in  the  morality  of  the  heathen. 
The  utmost  they  could  attain  to  was,  "Thou  shalt  love  all  men  except  those  who  have 
wronged  thee."  It  was  very  obscurely  revealed  in  the  Old  Testament.  The  ancient 
saints  did  not  distinguish  between  sinners  and  their  sins ;  hence  David's  bitter  curses 
against  his  and  the  Lord's  enemies.  Jesus  Christ  was  the  first  to  lay  special  stress  on 
forgiveness.  2.  Its  properties.  Forgiveness  must  be  free,  full,  and  universal;  no 
feelings  of  enmity  or  ill  will  to  any  of  our  fellow-men  ought  to  lodge  in  our  hearts. 
We  must  imitate  the  example  of  our  Saviour,  who  on  the  cross  prayed  for  the 
forgiveness  of  his  murderers. 

Ver.  16. — Religious  joy.  1.  Its  sources.  Religious  joy  springs  from  four  sources : 
from  the  relation  in  which  believers  stand  to  God,  and  then  it  is  the  joy  of  love ;  from 
the  interest  which  they  have  in  Christ,  and  then  it  is  the  joy  of  faith ;  from  the 
indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  then  it  is  the  joy  of  holiness ;  and  from  the  hopes 
which  they  have  of  heaven,  and  then  it  is  the  joy  Of  hope.  2.  Its  properties.  Keligious 
joy  is  ordinarily  calm ;  it  is  serious;  it  may  be  often  interrupted ;  it  is  purifying ;  it  is 
generally  greater  at  peculiar  seasons ;  and  it  is  often  sensibly  felt  at  the  hour  of  death. 
3.  Means  of  obtaining  it.  We  must  live  by  faith  in  Christ,  guard  against  seeking  our 
chief  happiness  in  any  creature-good,  and  be  diligent  in  the  performance  of  our  religious 
duties. 

Ver.  17. — Unceasing  prayer.  We  ought  not  only  to  have  stated  hours  of  prayer,  but 
to  be  continually  raising'  up  ejaculatory  prayers,  carrying  on  a  constant  intercourse 
between  God  and  our  souls ;  our  prayers  should  be  like  the  angels  which  Jacob  saw 
continually  ascending  the  mystic  ladder  to  the  throne  of  God.  Unceasing  prayer 
implies:  1.  A  devotional  spirit:  walking  with  God.  2.  Ejaculatory  prayer:  our 
thoughts  rising  in  prayer  amid  our  daily  occupations.  3.  Perseverance  in  prayer :  not 
leaving  off  until  our  prayers  are  answered.  4.  Regularity  in  prayer :  carefully  keeping 
the  appointed  seasons  for  prayer.  5.  Conjunction  of  thanksgiving  with  our  prayer* : 
realizing  God's  mercies  and  grace. 

Ver.  19. — Quenching  the  Spirit.  1.  How  we  may  quench  the  Spirit.  We  quench  the 
Spirit  by  the  commission  of  grievous  sins,  by  the  indulgence  of  sensuality,  covetous- 
ness,  pride,  and  the  irascible  passions,  and  by  formality  and  lukewarmness  in  our 
religion,    2.  Sow  we  may  cherish  the  Bxwrit,    We  cherish  the  Spirit  by  earnest  desires 


108  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THES8ALONIANS.    [oh.  t.  1— 2a 

for  his  influences,  by  a  diligent  use  of  the  means  of  grace,  by  a  spirit  of  trust  and 
dependence,  and  by  compliance  with  his  secret  impressions. 

Vers.  21,  22.— Use  of  reason  in  religion.  1.  The  office  of  reason  in  religion.  Reason 
is  of  use  to  examine  the  evidences  of  revelation,  to  ascertain  the  contents  of  revelation, 
and  to  judge  that  there  is  no  contradiction  to  reason  and  morality  in  those  doctrines 
which  we  suppose  are  deducible  from  Scripture.  2.  The  limitation  of  reason  in  religion. 
Distinction  between  what  is  above  reason  and  what  is  contrary  to  reason.  When  once 
we  prove  that  Scripture  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  that  such  and  such  doctrines  are  con- 
tained in  it,  then  it  is  the  province  of  reason  to  submit  to  faith,  because  the  truth  of 
these  doctrines  rests  on  their  being  part  of  a  Divine  revelation ;  the  doctrines  of  reve- 
lation are  above,  but  they  can  never  be  proved  to  be  contrary  to,  reason. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Certainty  of  the  time  of  the  second  advent.  There  is  a  natural  cariosity 
to  know  "the  times  and  the  seasons"  connected  with  an  event  so  transcendently 
important  to  the  human  race.  "  But  of  the  times  and  the  seasons  ye  have  no  need  that 
I  write  unto  you." 

I.  God  has  times  and  seasons  in  his  own  power.  It  is  solemnly  true  that  "  to 
everything  there  is  a  season,  and  a  time  to  every  purpose  under  the  sun  "  (Eccles.  iii.  1). 
God  has  "  determined  the  times  before  appointed  "  (Acts  xvii.  26).  His  Son  came  "  in 
the  fulness  of  time  "  (Gal.  iv.  4).  There  is  often  a  curious  periodicity  in  the  great  time- 
intervals  marked  in  sacred  history. 

II.  God  has  hid  from  man  the  precise  date  of  the  second  domino.  "Of 
that  day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no  man,  no,  not  the  angels  which  are  in  heaven, 
neither  the  Son,  but  the  Father  "  (Mark  xiii.  32) ;  "  It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times 
and  the  seasons  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power"  (Acts  i.  7). 

III.  The  day  op  the  Lord  will  be  perfectly  unexpected.  "  The  day  of  the 
Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night."  1.  It  is  the  day  of  the  Lord,  as  it  is  "  the  day 
of  the  Son  of  man."  "  The  day  of  God ; "  "  the  day  of  redemption,"  involving  that  of 
the  body  as  well  as  the  soul ;  "  the  last  day,"  the  day  which  winds  up  the  destinies 
of  the  universe.  2.  It  will  he  sudden  and  unexpected.  It  will  be  "  as  a  thief  in  the 
night,"  who  comes  without  previous  warning  at  such  an  hour  as  we  are  not  looking  for 
him.  This  is  true,  even  though  there  may  be  signs  in  the  sun  and  moon  and  stars,  and 
distress  of  nations,  and  men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear  (Luke  xxi.).  These  will  be  the 
first  signs  to  break  up  the  calm,  but  the  wicked  will  not  see  them  in  their  true  light. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  simile  of  the  thief  to  justify  the  opinion  that  Jesus  will  come 
in  the  night. 

IV.  The  security  of  the  wicked.  "  For  when  they  shall  say,  Peace  and  safety ; 
then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them,  as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  child ;  and 
they  shall  not  escape."  1.  Their  condition  is  one  of  "peace,"  inner  quiet,  and  "  safety," 
external  tranquillity.  2.  Their  fate.  "  They  shall  not  escape."  It  will  be  with  them 
as  with  the  men  in  the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot  (Matt.  xxiv.  36 — 39).  The  catastrophe 
will  be  as  inevitable  and  as  full  of  fear  as  in  the  case  of  a  "  woman  in  travail." 

V.  The  preparedness  of  the  righteous.  This  lies  in  their  character.  "  Bnt  ye, 
brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief."  1.  They 
were  "  not  in  darkness."  They  were  "  sons  of  light,  sons  of  the  day."  Darkness 
is  the  characteristic  of  the  wicked.  (1)  There  is  darkness  in  their  understanding. 
(2)  There  is  darkness  in  their  hearts.  "  Their  foolish  hearts  are  darkened."  (3)  They 
walk  in  darkness,  and  therefore  stumble  and  go  astray.  (4)  They  live  in  darkness 
(Ps.  ovii.  10),  they  belong  to  "  the  kingdom  of  darkness "  (Col.  i.  13) ;  they  are 
under  "the  world-rulers  of  this  darkness"  (Eph.  vi.  12).  (5)  But  the  darkness 
does  not  hide  them  from  God's  vengeance.  2.  Believers  are  "  sons  of  light."  "  Sons 
of  the  day."  (1)  They  walk  in  the  light  (1  John  i.  7);  for  "he  that  foUoweth 
me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  life"  (John  viii  12). 

!2)  They  are  in  fellowship  with  God,  for  they  cannot  have  it  and  walk  in  darkness 
1  John  i.  6,  7).    (3)  They  "  have  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness,  and  put  en  the 


oh.t.  1— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN8.  109 

armour  of  light "  (Rom.  xiii.  12).    (4)  They  are  in  fellowship  with  all  believer*;  for 
"  he  that  walketh  in  darkness  hateth  his  brother  "  (1  John  ii.  9). — T.  0. 

Vera.  6 — 8. — A  warning  against  watchlessness.  The  apostle  says  that,  aa  children  of 
light  and  of  the  day,  believers  ought  to  exercise  vigilance  and  sobriety  in  view  of  the 
solemn  prospects  before  them. 

L  The  sin  and  danger  of  spiritual  sleep.  "  Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others." 
There  are  three  kinds  of  sleep  spoken  of  in  Scripture — the  sleep  of  nature,  which 
restores  the  wasted  energies  of  the  body ;  the  sleep  of  death ;  and  the  sleep  of  the  text, 
which  is  always  fraught  with  peril,  its  prevailing  idea  being  insensibility.   The  sleeper  is : 

1.  Not  aware  of  his  danger.  2.  Forgetful  of  his  duty.  3.  Unconscious  of  the  real  world 
around  him.    4.  Immovable  to  all  appeals.     5.  May  not  even  know  that  he  is  asleep. 

II.  The  duty  of  watchfulness  and  sobriety.  "  But  let  us  watch  and  be  sober," 
so  as  to  be  always  prepared  for  the  Lord's  coming.  We  are  not  to  be  overcharged  with 
surfeiting  and  drunkenness,  so  that  that  day  should  overtake  us  unawares.  Let  us  watch 
that  we  may  be  sober.  1.  The  reason  is  that  sleep  and  drunkenness  are  work*  of 
darkness  done  in  the  night.  "  They  that  sleep  sleep  in  the  night ;  and  they  that  be 
drunken  are  drunken  in  the  night."  Those  spiritually  asleep  "  sleep  through  all  life's 
agitations,  beneath  the  thunders  of  Sinai,  and  the  pleadings  of  mercy  from  the  cross." 
Like  drunken  men,  they  are  intoxicated  with  life's  delights,  "  minding  earthly  things," 
occupied  supremely  with  "  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness."  Believers  are  not  so,  into 
whose  heart  "  God  has  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  to  give  the  light 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Christ  Jesus "  (J  Cor.  iv.  6). 

2.  Another  reason  for  watchful  sobriety  is  that  our  life  is  a  spiritual  warfare.  The 
believer  is  to  be  a  sentinel  always  on  guard,  or  a  soldier  on  the  battle-field — "  having  on 
the  breastplate  of  faith  and  love ;  and  for  an  helmet,  the  hope  of  salvation."  As  a  good 
soldier,  bound  to  endure  hardness,  he  goes  forth  into  the  conflict  of  life,  equipped  in 
Divine  armour,  not  for  aggression  but  for  defence.  The  pieces  of  armour  here 
enumerated  are  for  the  protection  of  vital  parts,  the  heart  and  the  head.  (1)  Faith 
is  the  principal  part  of  this  spiritual  armour.  "  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh 
the  world,  even  our  faith "  (1  John  v.  4,  5).  It  is  by  faith  they  resist  the  devil 
(1  Pet.  v.  9).  It  is  by  it  all  difficulties  are  overcome  (Matt.  xvii.  20).  If  it  is  by 
the  "sword  of  the  Spirit,  the  Word  of  God,"  we  are  to  conquer,  faith  ia  the 
arm  that  wields  the  sword.  The  eleventh  chapter  of  Hebrews  illustrates  the  power 
of  faith  as  a  principle  of  action  and  as  a  principle  of  endurance.  (2)  Love  ia  joined 
with  faith  to  form ,  the  breastplate,  for  "  faith  worketh  by  love  "  (Gal.  v.  6).  Love 
preserves  from  apostasy,  and  knits  the  saints  together,  because  it  is  the  bond  of 
perfection,  and  thus  enables  us  to  bear  all  trial  through  love  to  the  Redeemer.  (3)  The 
hope  of  salvation  is  the  helmet.  In  the  corresponding  passage  in  Ephesians,  the 
helmet  is  salvation  itself;  but  the  difference  is  not  material,  the  salvation  in  the  one 
case  being  partially  enjoyed,  in  the  other  an  object  of  future  hope.  Hope  is  a  protection 
to  the  believer,  as  it  nerves  him  to  meet  danger,  and  enables  him  to  brave  difficulties, 
by  looking  to  the  glorious  objects  in  view.  Therefore  it  is  "the  patience  of  hope." 
Thus  the  three  Christian  graces  make  the  soul  watchful  and  ready  for  the  Lord's 
coming. — T.  0. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — The  source,  channel,  and  end  of  the  salvation  hoped  for.  The  apostle 
is  now  led  to  illustrate  the  hope  of  salvation. 

L  Its  source.  "For  God  did  not  appoint  us  to  wrath,  but  to  the  obtaining  of 
salvation."  1.  The  calling  is  according  to  the  purpose.  "  Whom  he  predestinates, 
them  he  also  calls."  The  security  of  the  believer  depends,  not  upon  himself,  but  upon 
God's  unchangeable  and  loving  purpose.  2.  The  purpose  is  not  to  wrath,  but  to 
salvation.  Though  believers  were  once  "'children  of  wrath,"  they  are  now  reconciled 
to  God,  and  saved  from  wrath  to  come.  3.  God's  purpose  of  mercy  toward  us  dots  not 
free  us  from  the  necessity  of  being  watchful  concerning  the  means  of  salvation. 

II.  The  channel  of  salvation.  "By  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1.  The  covenant 
was  "  ordained  in  the  hand  of  a  mediator.''  (Gal.  iii.  19.)  2.  Hi*  death,  not  his 
doctrine  or  example  merely,  was  necessary  to  our  solvation,  "  Who  died  for  us."  S.  Bit 
death  was  substitutionary.    It  was  "  for  us." 


110  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  ▼.  1—28. 

III.  The  end  of  this  salvation.  "  Who  died  for  us*  that*  whether  we  wake  or 
sleep,  we  should  live  with  him  together."  This  was  "the  joy  set  before  him "  for 
which  "  he  endured  the  cross  "  (Heb.  xii.  2)  that  we  might  live  to  him  in  order  to 
our  living  with  him.  1.  It  is  life  with  Christ.  Not  merely  life  in  him,  but  life  with 
him  in  glory.  "  I  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better  "  (Phil.  i.  23). 
It  is  the  greatest  joy  and  glory  of  heaven  (Rom.  xiv.  8,  9 ;  1  Cor.  v.  9).  2.  It  is  life 
with  all  believers.  They  are  to  live  with  him,  unsevered  from  one  another ;  for  whether 
they  "  are  alive  and  remain,"  or  whether  they  are  of  those  who  "  have  fallen  asleep," 
they  will  be  together,  in  Christ's  society.  Thus  the  great  salvation  is  the  "  common 
salvation." 

IV.  The  consolatory  aspect  of  these  truths.  "Wherefore  comfort  yourselves 
together,  and  edify  one  another,  even  as  also  ye  do."  These  truths  afforded  a  grand 
basis  for  mutual  comfort  and  edification.  The  Thessalonians  ought,  therefore,  to 
dismiss  their  despondency  and  alarm,  and  encourage  each  other  with  the  blessed  hopes 
of  the  gospel. — T.  0. 

Vers.  12, 13. — The  due  recognition  of  Christian  pastors.  The  apostle  next  touches 
upon  the  relation  of  the  Church  to  its  teachers. 

I.  The  appointment  of  pastors  in  the  Church.  1.  This  was  by  Divine  appoint- 
ment. "He  gave  pastors  and  teachers*  (Eph.  iv.  11).  There  is  no  hint  given  in 
Scripture  of  a  time  when  pastors  would  cease  to  be  necessary,  and  when  the  Church 
would  be  served  by  an  "  any-man  ministry."  2.  It  was  the  custom  of  the  apostles  to 
"  appoint  elders  in  every  city,"  for  they  understood  the  advantages  of  a  full'  ecclesiastical 
organization. 

II.  The  official  position  and  duties  of  pastors.  1.  They  are  labourers  in  the 
Church.  "We  beseech  you,  brethren,  to  know  them  which  labour  among  you." 
(1)  This  work  is  no  sinecure,  but  a  hard  exhausting  service,  with  heavy  responsibilities 
and  many  cares,  (a)  It  is  labour  in  preaching.  For  they  "  labour  in  the  Word  and 
doctrine "  (1  Tim.  i.  5),  "  rightly  dividing  the  Word  of  truth  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  15),  giving 
each  of  the  household  of  faith  "  a  portion  of  meat  in  due  season "  (Luke  xii.  42). 
(6)  It  is  labour  in  earnestly  contending  for  the  faith  as  well  as  in  dispensing  the 
ordinances  of  religion.  (2)  It  is  labour  in  a  Divine  partnership.  For  pastors  are 
"  labourers  together  with "  God  in  the  work  of  perfecting  the  Church  (1  Cor.  Hi.  9). 
2.  They  are  presidents  in  the  Churches.  "  Those  which  are  over  you  in  the  Lord."  This 
refers  to  the  elders  or  presbyters,  who  are  also  called  pastors,  or  shepherds,  or  bishops 
(Acts  xx.  17,  28).  (1)  The  appointment  of  rulers  is  essential  to  order  and  harmony  in 
the  Church.  (2)  Yet  they  are  not  a  sacerdotal  caste,  nor  "  lords  over  God's  heritage" 
(1  Pet.  v.  3).  (3)  Their  official  superiority  is  "in  the  Lord,"  because  from  him 
deriving  its  warrant,  motive,  and  blessing.  3.  They  are  spiritual  guides.  "And 
admonish  you."  They  have  "  to  watch  for  your  souls  as  they  that  must  give  account " 
(Heb.  xiii.  17).  Therefore  they  must  "reprove,  rebuke,  exhort  with  all  long-suffering 
and  doctrine  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  2).  They  have  to  "  warn  every  man,  and  teach  every  man  in 
all  wisdom,  that  they  may  present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Col.  i.  28). 
They  have  to  warn  against  sins  committed,  and  urge  to  duties  neglected. 

III.  The  obligations  of  Christian  people  totheib  pastors.  1.  They  must 
give  them  due  recognition  as  pastors.  They  must  "  know  them."  They  must  make 
themselves  acquainted  with  them,  that  pastors  may  be  the  better  able  to  know  the 
state  of  their  souls,  and  they  must  acknowledge  their  position  as  "  stewards  of  the 
mysteries  of  God,"  and  submit  to  their  ministry.  2.  They  must  "  esteem  them  very 
highly  in  love  for  their  work's  sake."  (1)  The  bond  is  not  to  be  one  of  mere  official 
relationship,  but  of  affection.  (2)  A  due  respect  for  the  ministry  is  an  important 
element  in  its  efficiency  and  success.  Therefore  we  are  to  "  hold  such  in  reputation," 
and  to  count  them  "  worthy  of  double  honour."  3.  The  ground  of  this  claim  is  "for 
their  work's  sake."  Not  for  the  mere  office,  which  may  be  often  filled  unworthily, 
though  it  is  still  entitled  to  consideration,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  "  labours  of  love  " 
involved  in  its  faithful  discharge.  Ministers  who  "  make  full  proof  of  their  ministry  " 
challenge  the  abiding  respect  of  their  flocks. — T.  (X 

Ver,  13. — Inculcation  of  mutual  peace.     "  And  be  at  peace  among  yourselves,' 


oh.  T.  1—28,]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN3.  Ill 

This  is  connected  with  the  previous  verse,  for  a  faithful  pastorate  tends  to  unity  and 
peace. 

I.  This  peace  depends  upon  oub  Divine  calling.  For  it  is  the  "peace  unto 
which  we  are  called  "  (Col.  iii.  15). 

II.  IT     IB     ESSENTIAL    TO    GROWTH    AND    BLESSING.      (Eph.    iv.    3;     Ps.    CXXxiii.    1; 

Jas.  iii.  18.) 

IIL    IT   IS   ONE   OP  THE   BLESSINGS   ALWAYS   TO   BE   PRATED   FOR.      (Ps.  CXXii.  6—8.) 

IV.  IT  IS   ONE   OF  THE   BEATITUDES   WITH   A  PROMISE.     (Matt.  V.  9.) 

V.  IT  IS  ONE   OP   THE   FAIREST   GROWTHS  OF  THE   SPIRIT.      (Gal.  V.  22.) — T.  0. 

Ver.  14. — Mutual  duties  of  Church  members.  The  Church  must  act  as  well  as  its 
pastors. 

I.  Admonition  to  the  disorderly.  "Warn  them  that  are  unruly."  1.  The 
unruly  are,  literally,  those  who  break  rank,  taking  exceptional  courses,  to  the  injury 
of  the  peace  or  unity  of  the  Church.  Probably  the  apostle  refers  to  the  unhinging 
effect  of  the  error  concerning  the  near  approach  of  the  advent,  leading  individuals  to 
abandon  work  and  loiter  about  in  a  sort  of  meddlesome  idleness.  2.  Such  persons  need 
to  be  warned,  even  with  sharpness  of  reproof,  yet  in  love}  for  "  God  is  not  the  author 
of  confusion,  but  of  peace,  in  all  the  Churches  of  the  saints  "  (1  Cor.  xiv.  33).  Warn  them 
to  "  do  their  own  business,  and  work  with  their  own  hands." 

II.  Comfort  for  the  feeble-minded.  "Comfort  the  feeble-minded."  1.  These 
persona  were  overburdened  with  sorrow  on  account  of  the  dead,  under  the  influence  of 
error  respecting  their  safety.  They  were  not  intellectually  feeble,  but  had  become 
dispirited  and  desponding  through  their  failure  to  realize  the  hope  of  the  resurrection 
at  the  advent.  2.  They  were  to  be  comforted;  not  rebuked  or  admonished  for  their  sins, 
but  exhorted  lovingly  in  the  truth.  It  is  the  Lord's  way  "  to  raise  them  that  are 
bowed  down,"  and  "  to  comfort  them  which  be  in  any  trouble  "  (2  Cor.  i.  4).  There  is 
"  consolation  in  Christ." 

III.  Support  for  the  weak.  "  Support  the  weak."  1.  The  weak  in  faith,  or  other 
Christian  graces,  who  may  still  feel  the  lingering  influence  of  Jewish  prejudice  and 
pagan  delusions.  We  are  to  "  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak."  2.  They  must  be 
sustained,  not  despised  for  their  weakness.  "  Be  eyes  to  the  blind ;  be  feet  to  the 
lame."  Thus  "  we  fulfil  the  Law  of  Christ."  We  must  "  lift  up  the  hands  which  hang 
down,  and  the  feeble  knees  "  (Heb.  xii.  12, 13). 

IV.  Patience  toward  all  men.  "Be  patient  toward  all  men."  1.  Patience  or 
long-suffering,  in  view  of  the  perverseness,  or  defects,  or  follies,  or  sins  of  men.  It  points 
to  a  temper  not  easily  moved  or  offended,  to  a  disposition  to  bear  and  forbear  after  the 
example  of  that  Father  who  "  is  long-suffering  to  us-ward,  not  willing  that  any  should 
perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance"  (2  Pet.  iii.  9).  This  disposition  greatly 
promotes  the  comfort  and  usefulness  of  life.  2.  It  is  to  be  exercised  toward  all  men. 
Even  to  those  outside  the  household  of  faith  who  may  gainsay  or  persecute  the  truth. 
— T.  0. 

Ver.  16. — Abstinence  from  revenge,  and  the  steadfast  pursuit  of  good.  To  a  people 
freshly  emerged  out  of  paganism  this  counsel  was  still  most  appropriate,  for  the  Greeks 
were  remarkable  for  their  undying  feuds. 

I.  Warning  against  retaliation.  "  See  that  none  render  evil  for  evil  to  any  man." 
1.  Retaliation  is  condemned  both  by  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments.  (Lev.  xix.  18 ; 
Rom.  xii.  19.)  2.  It  is  condemned  by  Chrisfs  beautiful  example  of  forbearance.  (1  Pet. 
ii.  23.)  "  Who,  when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again  ;  when  he  suffered,  threatened 
not."  3.  It  is  expressly  rebuked  by  Christ  in  the  case  of  the  disciples  James  and  John. 
(Luke  ix.  54, 55.)  4.  It  springs  from  a  spiteful  heart.  (Ezek.  xxv.  15.)  5.  It  indicates 
a  want  of  trust  in  Ood.    (Prov.  xx.  22.) 

II.  Inculcation  of  the  pursuit  of  good.  "  But  ever  follow  that  which  is  good, 
both  among  yourselves  and  to  all  men."  Believers  are  not  to  resist  evil,  but  to  return 
good  for  evil — to  overcome  evil  with  good.  1.  The  good  to  be  done  is  after  the  example 
of  Christ,  who  "  went  about  every  day  doing  good."  2.  It  is  done  in  virtue  of  union 
with  Christ.  (John  xv.  4,  5;  Phil.  i.  11.)  3.  It  is  the  preordained  pathway  of  Cod's 
Mdren.   (Eph.  ii.  10.)    4.  Christians  ought  to  provoke  each  other  to  good.   (Heb.  x.  24.) 


11*  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  T.  1— 2a 

6.  It  it  a  grand  argument  for  the  gospel.  (Matt.  v.  16.)  6.  It  it  to  be  catholic  in  its 
spirit ;  for  it  is  to  lie  done,  not  to  believers  only,  but  "  to  all  men."  The  believer  is  to 
have  "  brotherly  kindness "  as  well  as  "  love "  (2  Pet.  i.  7).  7.  It  it  to  be  earnestly 
pursued.  "  Follow  after  that  which  is  good."  (1)  Because  it  glorifies  God  (Matt.  v.  16). 
(2)  Because  God  remembers  it  (Heb.  vi.  9, 10).  (3)  Because  it  is  an  evidence  of  faith 
(Jas.  ii.  14—20).    (4)  Because  it  shall  be  brought  into  judgment  (2  Cor.  v.  10).— T.  C. 

Ver.  18.— The  duty  and  the  privilege  of  constant  joy.  "  Rejoice  evermore."  (See 
homiletical  hints  on  PhiL  iii.  1 ;  iv.  4.)— T.  C. 

Ver.  17. — The  duty  of  constant  prayer.  "  Pray  without  ceasing."  There  is  a  mutual 
affinity  between  joy,  prayer,  and  thanksgiving,  as  we  see  by  other  passages  of  Scripture 
(PhU.  iii.  4—6 ;  Col.  iv.  2). 

I.  Prayer  the  duty,  the  privilege,  the  interest,  of  all  believers.  1.  It  it  a 
commanded  duty.  (Matt.  viL  7.)  2.  It  is  a  sign  of  conversion.  (Acts  ix.  11.)  3.  Saints 
delight  in  it.  (Ps.xlii.4 ;  cxxii.  1.)  4.  It  is  recommended:  (1)  By  the  example  of  Christ 
(Luke  xxii.  32).  (2)  By  the  experience  of  past  mercies  (Ps.  iv.  1).  (3)  By  the  faith- 
fulness of  God  (Ps.  cxliii.  1).  (4)  By  the  fulness  of  the  promises  (Ps.  cxix.  49; 
1  John  ▼.  15). 

II.  This  necessity  of  constant  supplication.  "  Pray  without  ceasing."  1.  There 
is  nothing  in  the  words  to  justify  the  neglect  of  other  duties.  The  apostle  travelled  and 
preached  and  laboured  with  his  hands  as  well  as  prayed ;  but  he  cultivated  a  constant 
spirit  of  supplication.    It  is  not  true,  therefore,  that  it  can  be  fulfilled  only  in  idea. 

2.  It  is  a  command  not  to  befuljilled  by  set  hours  of  prayer,  much  less  by  adherence  to 
a  monastic  rigour  of  devotion.  Yet  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  set  hours.  The  psalmist 
prayed  at  evening,  morning,  and  noon  (Ps.  Iv.  17).  Yea,  "  seven  times  a  day  do  I 
praise  thee  "  (Ps.  cxix.  164).  Daniel  prayed  three  times  a  day  (Dan.  vi.  10).  3.  The 
apostle  enjoins  a  constant  spirit  of  prayer  in  view  of  our  constant  dependence  on  the 
Lord.  Prayer  should  interspace  all  our  works.  The  heart  may  rise  to  a  throne  of 
grace  in  inward  prayer  when  the  hands  are  busy  with  the  duties  of  life. — T.  C. 

Ver.  18. — The  duty  of  thanksgiving.  It  is  the  natural  fruit  of  joy  as  it  is  the  natural 
accompaniment  of  prayer.  "  In  everything  give  thanks ;  for  this  is  the  will  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus  concerning  you." 

I.  Thanksgiving  is  the  exercise  of  a  jotful  and  praying  heart.  1.  It  is  a 
mark  of  the  wicked  that  they  have  no  thankfulness.  They  who  glorified  not  God  "  neither 
were  thankful"  (Rom.  i.  21).  It  is  a  sign  of  the  antichristian  apostasy  that  men 
"shall  be  unthankful"  (2  Tim.  iii.  2).  Since  "every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift" 
comes  from  the  Father  of  Lights,  the  guilt  of  such  ingratitude  is  great.  2.  It  is  the 
mark  of  the  saints  in  heaven  that  they  are  full  of  thanksgivings.  (Rev.  xix.  6, 7;  vii.  12.) 

3.  It  is  likewise  a  mark  of  the  saints  on  earth.  "  Blessed  are  they  which  dwell  in  thy 
house :  they  will  be  still  praising  thee  "  (Ps.  lxxxiv.  4).  They  abound  in  faith  with 
thanksgiving  (Col.  ii.  7).  They  offer  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving  (Ps.  cxvi.  17).  They 
habitually  offer  thanksgiving  (Dan.  vi.  10). 

II.  Thanksgiving  must  be  universal  in  its  sphere.  "  In  everything  give  thanks." 
1.  For  the  supply  of  our  bodily  wants.  (1  Tim.  iv.  3, 4.)  2.  For  the  gift  of  Christ.  (2  Cor. 
ix.  15.)  3'.  For  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  the  Lord.  (Ps.  cvi.  1.)  4.  In  all 
circumstances  of  prosperity  and  adversity,  joy  and  sorrow,  health  and  sickness.  Job 
could  say  in  the  depth  of  his  affliction,  "  Blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Lord  "  (Job  i. 
8,  20,  21). 

III.  Thb  ground  and  reason  of  this  duty.  "  For  this  is  the  will  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus  concerning  you."  The  Scripture  as  well  as  the  light  of  nature  directs  to  it,  as  it 
sets  forth  that  "  good  and  perfect  and  acceptable  will  of  God,"  "  Whoso  offereth  praise 
glorifieth  me."  In  Jesus  Christ  is  this  will  revealed  and  made  effectual ;  for  all  God's 
mercies  reach  us  through  the  channel  of  his  mediation.  Therefore  we  "  are  to  give 
thanks  unto  God  and  the  Father  by  him "  (Col.  iii.  17) ;  therefore  "  by  him  let  us 
offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually  "  (Heb.  xiii.  15). — T.  0. 

Vara.  19 — 21. — Exhortations  regarding  spiritual  gifts.    These  three  verses  refer  to 


oh.t.  1— 28.]    THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  U3 

one  subject,  the  extraordinary  manifestation!  of  the  Spirit  so  frequent  in  the  Church  at 
this  period,  but  apply  likewise  to  his  ordinary  influence  in  believers. 

I.  The  sin  and  danger  of  quenching  the  Spibit.  "Quench  not  the  Spirit." 
Perhaps  there  was  a  tendency  to  repress  spiritual  utterances,  either  because  they  had 
become  fanatical,  or  from  an  undue  love  of  order.  It  is  possible  to  resist  the  Spirit. 
God  strives  with  man,  who  may  yet  resist  all  his  importunities  (Acts  vii.  51),  "  insult- 
ing the  Spirit  of  grace"  (Heb.  x.  29).  Even  in  the  case  of  believers,  "  the  flesh  lusteth 
against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh"  (Gal.  v.  17).  It  is  both  sinful  and 
dangerous  for  believers  to  "  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  they  are  sealed  to 
the  day  of  redemption  "  (Eph.  iv.  30).    The  text  suggests  the  idea  of  quenching  a  fire. 

1.  The  Spirit  acts  upon  the  believer's  nature  like  a  fire,  warming,  purifying,  refining. 

2.  The  fire  may  be  quenched  by  neglecting  it  quite  as  much  as  by  casting  water  upon  it. 
This  is  the  tendency  of  neglect.  3.  Sin  has  a  tendency  to  quench  the  Spirit,  as  water 
quenches  fire.  We  ought  to  stir  up  our  gifts  and  graces  that  they  may  shine  the 
brighter,  and  give  both  light  and  heat  around  us.  Tet  provision  is  made  in  the  cove- 
nant of  grace  that  the  fire  once  kindled  will  never  be  quenched. 

II.  These  must  be  no  undervaluation  of  prophesyings.  "  Despise  not  prophe- 
syings."  1.  These  were  spiritual  utterances,  som-  times  in  psalms  and  hymns,  "  for  the 
edification  and  exhortation  and  comfort"  of  believers,  though  they  had  the  effect 
sometimes  of  laying  bare  the  hearts  of  unbelievers  (1  Cor.  xiv.  25).  They  were  more 
important  than  other  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  and  therefore  more  to  be  coveted  (1  Cor.  xii.  31). 
2.  They  were,  therefore,  not  to  be  despised.  (1)  Perhaps  there  had  been  "  false  pro- 
phets "  at  Thessalonica  who  had  tried  to  pervert  the  truth,  or  weak  members  who  had 
abused  the  gift  of  prophecy.  The  tendency,  therefore,  to  underrate  the  gift  was  natural, 
but  not  proper.  (2)  Perhaps  the  exercise  of  this  gift  created  less  wonder  or  made  less 
visible  impression  than  other  gifts,  like  those  of  tongues  and  healing.  Therefore  it  came 
to  be  rather  despised. 

III.  The  necessity  of  testing  spiritual  gifts.  "  Prove  all  things ;  hold  fast  that 
Irhich  is  good."    Instead  of  rejecting  prophesyings,  they  were  to  test  them  by  a  due 

1  spiritual  discernment.  1.  They  were  to  be  tested:  (1)  By  a  comparison  with  the  original 
tradition  given  to  them  (2  Thess.  ii.  2).  (2)  By  a  comparison  with  the  prophesyings  of 
others  who  sat  as  judges  (1  Cor.  xiv.  29).  There  was,  besides,  a  supernatural  gift  of 
"  discerning  of  spirits  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  10,  14,  29).  (3)  By  marking  the  practical  fruits 
of  these  prophesyings.  "  Hold  fast  that  which  is  good."  Our  Lord  said,  "  Beware  of 
false  prophets,  which  come  to  you  in  sheep's  clothing,  but  inwardly  they  are  ravening 
wolves.  Te  shall  know  them  by  their  fruits"  (Matt.  v.  15,  16).  True  doctrine  is 
"  according  to  godliness  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  3).  Thus  Christians  are  to  examine  the  grounds 
of  their  faith,  to  hold  fast  nothing  that  has  not  first  been  tried,  and  to  retain  only 
"  that  which  is  good."  2.  Believers  have  the  capacity  as  well  as  the  right  to  test  all 
things.  They  are  "to  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God"  (1  John  iv.  1).  (1) 
They  are  the  spiritual ;  "  they  judge  all  things,  yet  they  themselves  are  judged  of  no 
man  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  15).  They  have  "  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  they  know  all 
things"  (1  John  ii.  20).  ('J)  A  right  state  of  heart  is  necessary  to  this  power  of  insight. 
"  If  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine  whether  it  be  of  God  " 
(John  vii.  17).  "  Walk  as  children  of  light  .  .  .  proving  what  is  acceptable  unto  God  " 
(Eph.  v.  8— 10).— T.  C. 

Ver.  22. — Warning  against  every  form  of  evil.  "  Abstain  from  every  form  of  evil," 
whether  practical  or  doctrinal. 

I.  We  need  to  be  warned  against  evil.  1.  Because  we  naturally  tend  to  do  evil. 
2.  Because  evil  is  so  injurious  to  our  spirits,  in  repressing  joy,  prayer,  and  thanks- 
giving. 3.  Because  it  gives  offence  to  others.  Therefore  we  ought  to  abhor  that  which 
k  evil,  to  cleave  to  that  which  is  good. 

II.  The  forms  of  evil  are  very  various,  and  therefore  not  easily  detected. 
Truth  is  one;  error  is  manifold.  Satan  can  disguise  error  under  forms  difficult  of 
detection.  It  is  sometimes  difficult  to  decide  what  is  evil.  But "  •  sound  heart  i»  the 
beet  casuist."— T.  C. 

Vers.  23,  24. — Prayer  for  tht  sanctification  and   preservation  of  Thessalonimn 

I.  TWTOWALONIANS.  t 


114  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  v.  1—28. 

believers.  I.  It  IB  A  pbateb  fob  perfect  sanctification.  "And  the  very  God  of 
peace  sanctify  you  wholly."  1.  It  is  the  design  of  the  God  of  peace  to  do  this.  Our 
Lord  came  to  "  save  his  people  from  their  sins,"  to  "  redeem  them  from  all  iniquity."  2. 
This  sanctification  is  to  extend  to  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  (1)  The  body  is  to  be  sancti- 
fied, for  it  is  to  become  an  "  instrument  of  righteousness,"  a  "  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost," 
and  eventually  will  receive  its  "  redemption  "  in  the  resurrection  (Rom.  viii.  23).  (2) 
The  soul  is  to  be  sanctified.  It  is  the  principle  of  animal  life.  It  is  the  self.  The 
individual  life  of  man  is  to  be  fully  sanctified.  (3)  The  spirit  points  to  the  inner  life 
as  coming  from  God,  as  the  soul  is  life  as  constituted  in  man.  The  spirit  is  the  higher 
aspect  of  self,  the  spiritual  man  being  man  as  grace  has  reconstructed  him.  Yet  the 
two  words  are  parallel,  though  not  equivalent ;  signifying  not  two  separate  natures  in 
man,  but  two  separate  functions  of  the  same  nature.  Provision  is  made  for  the  sanctifi- 
cation of  the  whole  man.  3.  It  is  not  perfect  in  the  present  life.  The  very  prayer  that 
God  might  sanctify  them  wholly  implies  that  it  was  an  attainment  yet  to  be  reached. 

II.  It  is  a  pbayek  fob  the  preservation  of  saints  till  the  coming  of  Christ. 
"May  your  spirit  and  soul  and  body  be  preserved  blameless."  1.  It  is  God  only  who 
can  keep  ut.  He  "  beeps  us  from  falling,"  that  "  he  may  present  us  faultless  before 
the  presence  of  his  glory  with  exceeding  joy "  (Jude  24).  He  "  keeps  us  from 
evil"  (John  xvii.  15).  Saints  are  "kept  by  his  power"  through  faith  unto  salvation 
(1  Pet.  i.  5).  2.  The  preservation  is  to  extend  till  the  second  advent.  Not  till  death, 
but  till  his  coming,  implying  that  body  and  soul  are  alike  to  share  in  the  final 
redemption.  "  He  that  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you  will  perform  it  till  the  dav  of 
Jesus  Christ "  (Phil.  i.  6). 

III.  The  ground  of  his  confidence  in  God's  purpose  of  sanctification  and 
preservation.  "  Faithful  is  ho  that  calleth  you,  who  also  will  do  it."  1.  God's  faith- 
fulness is  the  guarantee.  He  "  also  will  do  it."  He  will  be  faithful  to  his  oath,  to  his 
promises,  to  his  covenant ;  for  he  has  promised  to  cleanse  his  people  from  all  their  sins, 
and  preserve  them  to  his  kingdom  and  glory.  God  is  faithful  "by  whom  ye  were 
called  into  the  fellowship  of  his  Son  "  (2  Cor.  i.  8,  9).  2.  Effectual  calling  is  another 
guarantee.  For  whom  he  calls  he  justifies  and  glorifies.  If  he  gives  grace,  he  gives 
glory.    The  calling  implies  perfection,  as  it  is  the  first  step  to  it. — T.  C. 

Vers.  25 — 27. — Three  closing  injunctions.  L  The  apostle  asks  an  interest  in  the 
prayers  of  the  Thessalonians.  "  Brethren,  pray  for  us."  1.  He  did  not  feel  himself 
independent,  in  spite  of  all  his  high  graces  and  gifts,  of  the  intercessions  of  the  humblest 
disciples.  His  request  is  a  proof  of  his  deep  humility.  2.  His  position,  with  the  care  of 
all  the  Churches  upon  his  heart,  entitled  him  to  their  prayers.  He  said  to  the  Roman 
Christians,  "  Strive  together  with  me  in  your  prayers  to  God  for  me."  (1)  He  wanted 
a  door  of  utterance  as  well  as  a  door  of  entrance.  (2)  He  wanted  to  be  delivered  from 
unreasonable  and  wicked  men.  (3)  He  wanted  to  see  the  gospel  flourishing  in  all  the 
Churches. 

II.  Exhortation  for  Christians  to  salute  each  other.  "  Greet  all  the  brethren 
with  a  holy  kiss."  Eastern  customs  differ  from  Western ;  but  the  salutation  ought  still 
to  prevail  in  all  our  Churches,  not  in  the  letter,  but  in  the  spirit.  It  ought  to  express 
the  feeling  of  oneness,  of  affection,  of  equality  among  the  disciples  of  the  same  Lord. 
Christianity  purifies  and  elevates  worldly  courtesy. 

III.  Solemn  adjuration  to  have  the  Epistle  bead  to  all  the  brethren.  "  I 
charge  you  by  the  Lord  that  this  Epistle  be  read  unto  all  the  holy  brethren."  Cunjec- 
tures  have  been  freely  expressed  that  the  elders  at  Thessalonica  may  have  been  disin- 
clined to  read  the  letter  to  the  Church.  There  is  not  much  ground  for  the  opinion.  1. 
This  Epistle  was  the  first  ever  written  by  the  apostle  to  any  Church;  and  as  the  disciples 
may  not  have  known  how  to  use  it,  he  gives  specific  directions  on  the  subject.  2.  He 
recognizes  the  right  of  all  the  brethren  to  read  it.  Rome  denies  to  the  laity  this  right. 
— T.  0. 

Vera.  1 — 11. — "  The  day  of  the  Lord"  I.  The  time  of  its  coming.  1.  There  was 
no  real  need  to  write  to  them  about  this.  St.  Paul  hal  spoken  of  it;  it  had  been  a 
|niiici|ial  subject  of  his  teaching.  They  knew  all  that  could  be  known,  all  that  they 
■i  aided  to  know  for  their  souls'  health.     But  there  was  a  restless  curiosity,  an  eager 


OH.T.  1— 28.]    THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  116 

longing  "  to  know  the  times  or  the  seasons  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own 
power."  Such  knowledge  was  not  for  the  apostles  ;  it  is  not  for  the  Church.  "  Of  that 
day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no  man."  But,  in  spite  of  these  words  of  Christ,  human 
thought  has  ever  busied  itself,  it  busies  itself  still,  to  pry  into  this  awful  secret.  St. 
Paul  had  told  the  Thessalonians  all  he  knew ;  there  was  no  need  to  write  it  again. 
Hut  he  deals  gently  with  them.  He  tries  to  quiet  their  restless  anxiety.  2.  They  knew 
that  it  could  not  he  known.  It  cometh  suddenly,  when  men  are  least  expecting  it ; 
when  they  say,  "Peace  and  safety."  It  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night.  They  knew  the 
Lord's  illustration.  St.  Paul  had  told  them.  It  was  enough  for  them  to  know. 
Suddenly,  as  the  lightning  that  cometh  out  of  the  east  and  shineth  even  to  the  west, 
the  Son  of  man  shall  come.  That  we  know;  nothing  more  can  be  known.  It  is  a 
thought  full  of  awfulness,  full  of  deep  lessons  and  solemn  warnings. 

II.  Readiness  for  its  coming.  1.  Christians  are  not  in  the  darkness.  Darkness  is 
the  element,  the  sphere  of  the  unconverted  life.  Darkness  is  ignorance  of  God,  igno- 
rance of  the  atoning  work  of  Christ,  ignorance  of  the  blessed  influences  of  God  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Such  darkness  is  either  intellectual,  darkness  of  the  understanding;  or 
spiritual,  darkness  of  the  heart  and  will.  The  two  act  and  react  upon  one  another. 
Darkness  of  the  understanding  produces  in  some  cases  and  in  some  measure  darkness 
of  the  heart.  Darkness  of  the  heart  often  results  in  darkness  of  the  understanding. 
There  are  cases  of  dakness  which  seem  to  us  the  most  perplexing  of  problems ;  men 
and  women  who  have  from  the  very  beginning  of  life  been  enveloped  in  an  atmosphere 
of  ignorance,  brutality,  and  sin,  from  which  there  seems  to  be  no  escape— who  seem  to 
us,  as  people  say,  to  "  have  no  chance,"  no  possibility,  humanly  speaking,  of  attaining 
to  enlightenment  and  the  knowledgo  of  God.  What  can  be  done  in  such  cases?  We 
must,  each  one  of  us,  do  all  that  lies  in  our  power  to  help  the  helpless  and  to  teach 
the  ignorant;  and  then,  when  we  have  "done  what  we  could,"  we  can  only  leave 
them,  in  the  trustfulness  of  faith,  to  his  mercy  who,  we  know,  will  require  little  of  those 
to  whom  little  has  been  given.  But  the  darkness  which  we  have  to  face  in  our  daily 
walk  is,  more  commonly,  not  like  this,  but  wilful  darkness.  "  He  that  hateth  his 
brother"  (St.  John  says)  "  is  in  darkness  even  until  now."  Any  wilful  sin  deliberately 
indulged  darkens  the  heart.  "  If  thine  eye  be  evil,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of 
darkness."  The  soul  that  cherislies  a  secret  sin  cannot  believe,  cannot  see  God,  cannot 
be  in  readiness  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  If  such  are  not  awakened  to  a  sense  of 
guilt  and  danger,  the  great  day  must  overtake  them  as  a  thief,  coming  upon  them  in 
all  its  sudden  awfulness.  2.  They  are  sons  of  light.  "  God  hath  shined  in  their  hearts, 
to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ." 
The  true  light  now  shineth.  We  are  in  the  light,  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  God, 
the  light  of  the  presence  of  God.  We  belong  to  the  light ;  it  is  all  around  us ;  it  is  in 
us.  Indeed,  the  true  light  "  lighteth  every  man."  The  Lord  is  loving  unto  every  man. 
"  The  Lamb  of  God  taketh  away  [beareth]  the  sin  of  the  world."  We  must  believe,  in 
spite  of  sad  and  dark  appearances,  that  there  is  no  child  of  man  on  whom  the  heavenly 
Father  hath  not  shined ;  none  who  are  left  to  perish  without  a  hope  of  salvation.  The 
light  shineth  upon  all ;  but  they  are  sons  of  light  whose  souls  within  are  lighted  with 
that  heavenly  slow,  who  come  to  the  light  and  rejoice  in  the  light,  and  in  the  bright- 
ness "of  that  light  see  what  others  cannot  see  because  their  eyes  are  holden — the  fair 
beauty  of  the  Lord,  the  exceeding  loveliness  of  the  blessed  Saviour's  life,  the  aureole 
of  golden  liglit  that  bathes  the  cross  of  Christ  in  a  glory  of  unearthly  radiance. 
3.  Therefore  they  must  walk  in  the  light.  They  must  live  in  the  consciousness  of  that 
light,  feeling  i's  warmth  and  glory  ;  as  they  move  hither  and  thither  in  their  daily  life, 
they  must  walk  in  the  sente  of  that  light  which  is  all  around  them.  It  shows  things 
in  their  true  colours.  Sin  is  hateful,  loathsome ;  you  see  its  utter  hideousness  when 
the  light  shines  upon  it.  Holiness  is  fair  and  bright ;  yon  see  its  attractive  beauty 
when  the  heavenly  light  shines  on  it  in  its  glory.  The  light  shines  into  our  hearts ; 
it  shows  us  our  guilt,  our  misery,  our  danger.  But,  blessed  be  God,  it  does  more  than 
that.  It  hath  a  purifying  power ;  it  cleanses  what  was  unclean  ;  it  brightens  what  was 
dark.  "  If  we  walk  in  the  light  .  .  .  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all 
Bin."  i.  They  are  sons  of  day,  there/ore  they  must  watch.  The  light  shows  the  danger 
of  sloth ;  it  rests  upon  those  awful  words,  "  Thou  wicked  and  slothful  servant,"  and 
brings  them  out  iutf  Ml  distinctness.    They  must  not  sleep,  as  do  others.    Indiffer- 


116  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  v.  1—28. 

ence  and  apathy  are  deadly  enemies  of  the  soul.  The  unbelieving  multitude  sleep ; 
they  are  thoughtless  about  their  souls,  careless  of  the  awful  destinies  which  lie  before 
us.  The  believer  will  watch ;  for  he  will  remember  the  reiterated  commandment  of  his 
Lord,  "  Watch,  therefore.  .  .  .  What  1  say  unto  you,  1  say  unto  all,  Watch."  Watch  • 
fulness  is  thoughtfulness ;  it  is  a  vivid  interest  in  everything  that  belongs  to  the 
spiritual  life,  an  earnest  desire  to  quicken  it  into  ever  new  energies,  a  freshness  of 
spirit,  an  active  vigilance  in  guarding  against  all  the  dangers  and  temptations  that 
surround  us.  "  They  that  sleep,  sleep  in  the  night,"  but  we  are  sons  of  day.  We  must 
watch  as  men  that  wait  for  their  Lord.  We  know  not  when  he  cometh ;  we  must  be 
watchful  always  lest  that  day  overtake  us  as  a  thief.  It  cometh  as  a  thief.  This  warning 
of  our  Lord  is  not  only  recorded  in  the  Gospels,  but  St.  Paul,  St.  Peter,  St.  John,  re-echo 
the  solemn  words.  It  made  a  deep  impression  on  the  minds  of  the  early  Christians;  witness 
the  name  Gregory  ("watchful")  so  common  in  the  ancient  Church.  Would  that  that 
impression  remained,  that  we  too  might  he  stirred  to  ever-deepening  watchfulness.  "  The 
Lord  is  at  hand."  5.  They  must  he  sober.  "  They  that  be  drunken  are  drunken  in  the 
night."  The  Christian  must  he  so  her.  Intoxication  causes  drowsiness ;  it  is  inconsistent 
with  watchfulness.  The  intemperate  cannot  watch.  The  Christian  must  be  temperate 
in  all  things ;  strictly  temperate  as  regards  food  and  drink,  for  temperance  is  the  fruit 
of  the. Spirit,  and  drunkenness  is  one  of  those  works  of  the  flesh  of  which  it  is  written 
that  "  they  which  do  such  things  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."  He  must  be 
temperate  in  all  his  enjoyments;  for  all  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and 
the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life, — all  these  things  intoxicate  their  votaries, 
and  make  them  slothful  and  drowsy  in  the  concerns  of  the  soul.  Hut  we  must  be 
sober,  for  we  are  of  the  day ;  we  walk  in  the  light  of  day  and  are  looking  for  the 
coming  of  the  day  of  the  Lord.  6.  They  must  be  prepared/or  the  assaults  of  temptation. 
They  must  be  clothed  with  the  armour  of  light.  (1)  The  breastplate  of  faith  and  love. 
The  hosts  of  darkness  will  gather  round  the  Christian  warrior  as  he  stands  watchful 
at  his  post.  They  cannot  harm  him  if  he  continue  faithful ;  the  fiery  darts  of  the 
wicked  one  cannot  pierce  the  breastplate  of  faith  and  love.  Faith  is  trustfulness.  The 
soul  that  trusts  in  Christ  is  fixed  and  steadfast.  Trust  not  in  earthly  things ;  they  will 
fail  you  at  the  last.  But  trust  in  Christ;  he  ahideth  faithful ;  he  is  able  to  save  even  to 
the  uttermost ;  his  love  is  stronger  than  death.  Faith  protects  the  Christian's  heart. 
"  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  Faith  overcomes  the 
world.  Love  springs  out  of  faith,  and  quickens  faith.  Believe  in  Christ,  and  love  him 
you  must,  for  faith  realizes  his  presence  in  all  his  grace  and  tenderness.  "  We  have 
known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us ; "  "  We  love  him,  because  he  first 
loved  us."  Love  reacts  on  faith  ;  for  God,  who  is  Love,  can  be  known  only  of  those 
who  have  learned  of  him  the  great  lesson  of  love.  "Every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of 
God,  and  knoweth  God."  Like  is  known  by  like.  He  who  knows  not  in  his  own  heart 
what  it  is  to  love,  cannot  know  God,  who  is  the  eternal  Love.  Love  grows  out  of  faith, 
and  love  fills  faith  with  life  and  joy  and  holy  enthusiasm.  Love  and  faith  protect  the 
Christian  as  he  watches ;  they  sustain  his  energies.  Faith  preserves  him  from  anxious 
doubts  ;  the  holy  love  of  God  keeps  out  all  carnal  loves.  (2)  The  helmet  of  the 
Christian  warrior.  The  hope  of  salvation  guards  his  head.  Other  hopes  may  fall  in 
shattered  ruins  on  him  ;  they  will  not  crush  him  ;  they  may  vex  and  bruise,  but  they 
will  not  reach  a  mortal  part ;  they  may  strike  him  as  he  stands  erect  and  fearless ;  they 
will  glance  off  from  the  polished  surface  of  the  helmet  of  salvation.  The  blessed  hope 
of  life  eternal  living  in  the  heart  supports  the  Christian  in  toil,  in  sorrow,  in  sickness, 
and  in  death.  "  Now  abideth  faith,  hope,  charity,  these  three."  He  will  watch  who 
hath  these  blessed  graces;  he  will  persevere,  faithful  unto  death,  looking  always  for  the 
coming  of  the  great  and  awful  day.  7.  God  is  their  Strength.  Without  him  they  can 
do  nothing.  He  did  not  appoint  us  to  wrath.  He  is  our  Father ;  he  is  not  willing  that 
any  should  perish.  He  willeth  that  all  men  should  be  saved.  Salvation,  great  and 
blessed  word,  is  what  God  willeth  for  us  all.  8.  The  work  of  the  Lurd  Jesus.  Our 
salvation  is  his  work.  He  died  for  us,  on  our  behalf  and  in  our  stead ;  his  precious  death 
is  the  high  example  of  entire  self-sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  others;  it  is  the  atonement 
for  our  sins.  "  For  us."  Those  great  words  stimulate  us  to  love  and  serve  him ;  they 
should  be  constantly  in  our  thoughts ;  they  should  fill  us  with  wonder,  awe,  and  ador- 
ing love.     "  For  us,"  though  we  were  sinners;  "for  us,"  though  he  is  God  ;  "for  us" — we 


oh.  v.  1—28.]    THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE   THESSALONIAX3.  117 

can  never  reach  the  depths  of  mysterious,  blessed  meaning  wliich  lie  hid  In  those  two 
simple  words.  He  died  that  we,  whether  we  watch  or  sleep,  wliile  we  remain  among 
the  living,  watching  for  his  coming,  and  while  we  sleep  with  those  who  are  laid  to  sleep 
through  Jesus,  should  ever  live  together  with  him.  His  death  is  our  life ;  by  his  death 
he  took  away  the  power  of  sin,  which  is  the  death  of  the  soul.  He  dieil  that  we  might 
live  in  that  holy  life  which  is  in  fellowship  with  him.  That  life  begins  now.  "Ye 
have  eternal  life,"  St.  John  says.  Christ's  saints  live  with  him  and  in  him,  for  he  is 
their  Life.  They  live  with  him  during  their  earthly  pilgrimage  ;  they  live  with  him  in 
Paradise,  where  the  holy  departed  are  with  Christ ;  they  shall  live  with  him  in  that 
t:lory  which  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of 
man.  9.  Practical  conclusion.  (1)  They  must  comfort  one  another.  The  word 
wavers  in  its  meaning  between  comfort  and  exhortation.  The  two  ideas,  indeed,  run 
very  near  together,  as  the  etymology  of  the  English  word  "  comfort "  suggests.  To 
comfort,  according  to  its  derivaiion,  is  to  strengthen.  Comfort,  consolation,  is  a  source 
of  strength.  The  despondent,  those  who  brood  over  their  sufferings  and  fret  them- 
selves  in  their  troubles,  are  timid,  devoid  of  energy  and  strength.  Comfort  helps  them 
to  "  lift  up  the  hands  which  hang  down,  and  the  feeble  knees,"  and  stimulates  them  to 
look  forward  to  the  future  with  hope  and  courage.  The  Thessalonian  Christians  needed 
both  comfort  and  exhortation.  They  had  a  great  trial  of  affliction ;  they  suffered  much 
persecution  from  the  beginning.  No  earthly  comfort  is  so  great  as  the  sympathy  of 
loving  Christian  friends.  And  those  who  sympathize  with  us  stir  us  up  by  their 
example,  by  their  loving  words;  their  sympathy  implies  exhortation;  it  issues  in 
exhortation,  it  makes  exhortation  real  and  effective.  (2)  They  must  edify  one  another. 
To  edify  is  to  build  up.  The  wise  builder  builds  his  house  on  the  rock,  which  is  Christ. 
He  is  the  Foundation  ;  Christians  are  "  built  up  in  him."  In  the  deepest  sense  he  is  the 
Builder.  "  On  this  rock  I  will  build  my  Church."  But,  St.  Paul  says, "  we  are  labourers 
together  with  God."  Such  grace  he  gives  to  his  servants  that  they  are  privileged  to 
help  on  the  great  work,  to  build  upon  the  one  Foundation.  There  is  no  higher,  holier 
work  than  this,  to  prepare  the  living  stones,  to  build  them  up  into  the  one  holy 
temple,  the  Church  of  the  living  God.  The  Thessalonians  were  doing  it.  St.  Paul 
recognizes  their  loving  labours,  and  urges  them  to  persevere.  Be  it  ours  to  follow 
them. 

Lessons.  1.  It  is  not  for  us  to  know  the  times  and  seasons ;  be  not  too  curious ; 
but :  2.  Prepare  in  quiet  faith :  "  the  Lord  is  at  hand."  3.  Live  as  sons  of  light ;  pray 
for  grace  to  realize  the  presence  of  G<>d,  to  see  the  cross  by  faith,  to  watch  in  hope  and 
love.  4.  Each  Christian,  however  humble,  has  his  place  in  building  up  the  Church  of 
Christ ;  let  each  do  his  part. — B.  C.  C. 

Vers.  12 — 22. — Closing  exhortations.  I.  The  ministers  of  the  Church.  1.  Their 
duties.  (1)  They  labour.  The  work  of  the  Christian  ministry  involves  much  labour — 
unseen  labour  in  prayer  and  study,  outward  labour  in  preaching,  in  visiting  the  sick 
and  aged,  in  feeding  the  Church  of  God  which  he  purchased  with  his  own  blood. 
They  are  unworthy  of  their  high  calling  who  do  not  labour.  (2)  They  preside  over 
the  flock,  but  it  is  "in  the  Lord;"  by  his  appointment,  in  his  strength,  in  accordance 
with  his  will,  with  a  view  to  his  glory,  not  their  own.  They  must  not  seek  to  be 
"lords  over  God's  heritage,"  but  rather  be  ensamples  to  the  flock,  first  in  humility, 
first  in  self-denial,  first  in  Christian  love.  (3)  They  admonish — a  difficult,  a  painful 
duty,  but  often  the  duty  of  a  minister;  not  to  be  neglected  by  those  who  watch  for 
souls  as  they  that  must  give  account,  but  to  be  performed  in  humility  and  gentleness, 
with  many  prayers  for  guidance  and  for  wisdom.  2.  The  respect  due  to  their  office. 
St.  Paul  beseeches  the  Thessalonians  (mark  his  earnestness)  to  recognize  the  labours  of 
their  presbyters;  perhaps  there  had  been  some  neglect  of  them.  It  is  good  for  Chris- 
tians themselves  to  know  the  ministers  who  work  among  them,  to  take  a  lively  interest 
in  their  work,  their  difficulties,  their  necessities:  so  they  may  share  in  that  holy  work 
themselves.  Such  an  interest  will  lead  them  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in  love  for  their 
work's  sake,  for  its  dignity  and  importance,  but  also  for  the  faithfulness  with  which 
it  is  performed.  The  indolent  and  careless  will  not  win  this  esteem.  Severance 
towards  those  set  over  us  and  due  subordination,  tend  to  promote  the  peace  of  the 
Church.   That  peace  is  of  the  utmost  moment.   Our  unhappy  divisions  give  occasion  to 


118  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  v.  1— 28. 

the  adversary  to  speak  reproachfully,  and  draw  Christians  away  from  the  quiet  pursuit 
of  holiness  into  the  unhealthy  atmosphere  of  controversy. 

II.  The  duties  of  the  brethren  generally.  1.  Admonition  and  encouragement. 
All  Christians  must  take  their  part  in  the  great  work  of  saving  souls;  all  are  respon- 
sible, in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  for  the  welfare  of  the  souls  that  come  within  their 
influence.  All  true  Christians  must  admonish  when  admonition  is  needed ;  all  must 
comfort  those  who  stand  in  need  of  comfort.  All  must  support  the  weak,  and  all  must 
practise  patience  towards  all  men,  unbelievers  as  well  as  believers.  For  these  duties 
are  so  many  different  phases  of  Christian  love,  aid  Christian  love  is  the  highest  of  all 
graces.  The  love  of  the  brethren  is  the  proof  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto 
life.  Then  the  Christian  who  is  living  in  that  life  which  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God 
must  take  a  deep  and  holy  interest  in  the  souls  around  him.  The  nearer  he  lives  to 
God  the  better  he  will  be  able  to  admonish,  to  comfort,  to  support;  the  more  willing 
he  will  be  to  labour  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  2.  They  must  teach  the  unlawfulness  of 
revenge.  The  heathen  almost  universally  applauded  it.  To  return  evil  for  evil,  they 
thought,  was  as  commendable  as  to  requite  good  with  good.  The  Christian  must  learn 
of  Christ,  the  blessed  Master,  to  pray,  "  Father,  forgive  them."  He  must  crush  out  of 
his  heart  all  revengeful  feelings ;  he  must  learn  to  love  his  enemies,  to  pray  for  those 
who  use  him  despitefully.  It  is  a  hard  lesson  sometimes.  We  shall  learn  it  if  we  are 
living  by  faith  in  the  presence  of  the  cross.  He  died  for  the  Thessalonians  when  they 
were  enemies ;  they  mu.-t  learn  of  him  to  be  kind  to  all  men,  even  to  the  unthankful  and 
to  the  evil.  3.  Christian  joy.  It  is  a  duty,  not  merely  a  privilege.  A  sullen,  joyless 
temper  implies  a  want  of  faith,  the  absence  of  hope  and  love.  "Tlie  kingdom  of  God 
is  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  Joy  is  one  of  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit.  He  dwelleth  in  the  Christian  heart,  and  his  presence  bringeth  joy.  There 
must  be  joy  where  God  is;  the  joy  of  heaven  lieth  in  this,  "He  that  siiteth  on  the 
throne  shall  dwell  among  them."  And  the  joy  of  the  faithlul  on  earth  is  joy  in  the 
Lord,  joy  in  his  presence,  in  his  love.  Not  to  rejoice  is  want  of  trustfulness  in  him 
whose  love  should  gladden  the  Christian  heart.  Barrow  begins  his  great  sermon  on 
this  text  with  the  words,  "  0  good  apostle,  how  acceptable  rules  dost  thou  prescribe  ! 
0  gracious  God,  how  gracious  laws  dost  thou  inspire ! "  but "  res  severa  verum  gaudium." 
Many  rejoice  at  times,  in  seasons  of  excitement ;  but  to  rejoice  evermore,  in  sickness, 
and  pain,  and  disappointments,  and  bereavements — this  is  difficult  indeed ;  this  implies 
a  high  degree  of  self-mastery,  a  living  faith  in  God.  We  must  learn  to  regard  joy  as 
our  bounden  duty,  a  duty  which  flows  out  of  the  great  debt  of  love  which  we  owe  to 
God.  Joy  is  the  expression  of  our  gratitude;  it  ought  to  be  the  free-will  offering  of  a 
thankful  heart.  "  Rejoice  evermore "  is  the  commandment  of  the  Lord.  He  who 
commands  gives  also  power  to  obey.  He  giveth  to  all  men  largely.  He  gives  his  Holy 
Spirit  to  all  who  ask  in  faith,  and  with  the  Spirit  comes  the  gift  of  joy.  4.  Persever- 
ance in  prayer.  The  whole  of  the  Christian  life  should  be  consecrated  to  God — every 
action,  word,  thought.  This  involves  a  constant  reference  of  all  the  little  details  of  our 
daily  lives  to  the  will  of  God.  We  should  refer  them  all  to  him,  as  Hezikiah  spread 
the  letter  of  Sennacherib  before  the  Lord.  No  emergency  is  so  great  as  to  keep  the 
faithful  Christian  from  his  God,  none  of  our  little  difficulties  is  so  small  as  to  make  it 
needless  or  unseemly  to  consult  the  Lord  in  prayer.  "  Whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  in 
deed,  do  all  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  Thus  the  whole  life  must  be  sanctified 
by  habitual  communion  with  God,  while  in  the  stated  hours  of  prayer  the  believer  will 
constantly  entreat  the  Giver  of  all  good  with  unceasing  and  ever  more  urgent  impor- 
tunity for  more  abundant  grace,  for  larger  spiritual  gifts,  for  strength  from  on  high  to 
offer  daily  a  more  acceptable  service.  Tims  prayer  will  be  without  ceasing.  The  heart 
prays  when  the  lips  are  silent.  5.  Thankfulness.  Thanksgiving  must  always  accom- 
pany prayer.  It  springs  but  of  faithful  prayer;  for  faithful  prayer  brings  us  into  the 
presence  of  God,  and  in  that  presence  we  must  give  thanks.  Thanksgiving,  like 
prayer,  should  be  without  ceasing,  in  everything.  We  thank  God  for  his  unspeakable 
gift,  the  gift  of  Christ;  we  thank  him  for  our  access  to  him  in  prayer  and  praise  and 
holy  sacrament;  we  thank  him  for  our  creation,  preservation,  and  all  the  blessings  of 
this  life.  We  must  learn  to  thank  him,  not  only  in  our  joys,  but  in  our  sorrows  too 
We  must  thank  him  for  his  chastisements,  for  they  are  sent  in  love.  "  Hast  thou 
suffered  any  evil,"  says  Chrysostom ;  (t  if  thou  wilt,  it  is  no  evil ;  give  thanks  to  God 


oil.  v.  1—28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  119 

and  the  evil  is  turned  to  good."  He  practised  what  he  taught ;  in  the  midst  of  cruel 
afflictions  he  died  with  the  words,  "  Glory  be  to  God  for  all  things,"  on  his  lips.  This 
is  the  will  of  God — God  would  have  the  Christian's  life  to  he  a  life  of  joy,  a  life  of 
unceasing  prayer,  of  perpetual  thanksgiving.  This  is  his  will  in  Christ  Jesus,  revealed 
in  the  words  of  Christ,  exemplified  in  the  life  of  Christ,  rendered  possible  by  the  grace 
of  Christ  to  those  who  abide  in  him.  6.  Spiritual  gifts.  The  Divine  tire  was  kindled 
at  the  great  day  of  Pentecost  in  the  baptism  of  fire;  the  like  holy  flame  burns  in  all 
true  Christian  hearts.  It  is  of  all  gifts  the  most  precious.  It  involves  an  awful 
responsibility.  (1)  It  is  our  rart  to  stir  up  the  gift  of  God  that  is  in  us;  to  watch  very 
carefully  lest,  through  sin  or  carelessness  or  indifference,  the  holy  fire  lose  its  brightness 
and  its  power.  The  foolish  virgins  were  suddenly  aroused  to  the  consciousness  that 
their  lamps  were  going  out.  The  Lord  was  come;  they  had  no  oil,  they  were  not 
ready.  It  was  too  late.  Arise  and  trim  your  lamps;  take  warning  in  time;  quench  not 
the  Spirit.  An  unclean  life,  says  Chrysostom,  quenches  that  holy  fire ;  so  q\oes  apathy, 
indifference  in  religion.  Sin  is  like  water  poured  upon  the  flame.  There  is  no  fellow- 
ship between  light  and  darkness ;  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelleth  not  in  the  impure  heart. 
Indifference  gradually  quenches  the  fire.  The  lamp  will  not  burn  without  the  oil ;  the 
daily  renewal  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  necessary  for  the  support  of  the  spiritual  life  within 
us.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  departed  from  Saul ;  he  may  depart  from  us  if  we  live,  like 
Saul,  in  wilfulness  and  disobedience.  It  is  a  fearful  thought  that  we  have  the  awful 
power  of  quenching  that  Spirit  which  is  the  very  life  of  our  souls.  It  should  stimulate 
us  to  constant,  anxious  watchfulness.  (2)  Quench  not  the  Spirit  in  others;  despise  not 
prophesyings,  but  prove  all  things.  There  is  a  holy  enthusiasm  which  comes  from 
God ;  there  is  a  fanaticism,  a  mere  fervour  of  excitement,  which  is  not  of  God.  We 
must  not  believe  every  spirit,  lest  we  be  carried  about  with  every  blast  of  vain  doctrine. 
We  are  bidden  to  "  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God."  There  were  prophesyings 
in  the  apostolic  times,  flowing  from  the  direct  inspiration  and  impulse  of  the  Holy 
Spirit ;  there  are  such  utterances  now.  There  were  then,  and  there  are  now,  counterfeit 
likenesses  of  these  spiritual  gifts.  There  i?  need  of  care.  God  giveth  to  his  chosen  a 
power  of  spiritual  discernment.  "  He  that  is.  spiritual  judgeth  all  things ;"  he  will  hold 
fast  that  which  is  good.  7.  All  evil  must  be  avoided.  Every  form  of  evil;  little  sins, 
as  they  are  called,  as  well  as  great  sins.  Little  sins  are  the  first  symptoms  of  the 
deadly  disease.  It  may  be  checked  at  its  outbreak ;  if  neglected,  it  may  slay  the  soul. 
The  danger  is  great ;  the  enemy  is  awful  in  his  power  and  malignity.  Hate  all  that 
comes  from  him. — B.  C.  C. 

Vers.  23,  24. — The  result  of  obedience  to  these  commandments — Banctification.  I.  It 
is  the  gift  of  God.  1.  Peace.  Peace  is  the  blessed  fruit  of  obedience.  Be  careful 
for  nothing ;  live  in  prayer  and  thanksgiving,  and  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all 
understanding,  shall  keep  your  hearts  and  thoughts.  But  it  comes  from  God.  He  is 
the  God  of  peace.  It  is  his ;  "  My  peace,"  the  Lord  Jesus  says.  It  is  God  who  maketh 
peace,  who  reconciles  the  world  unto  himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them. 
2.  Soilness.  Holiness  is  the  sum  of  all  Christian  graces.  All  the  precepts  contained 
in  the  previous  verses  are  here  taken  together;  they  meet  and  are  summed  up  in 
holiness.  But  no  human  effort  can  sanctify  the  heart  without  the  grace  of  God. 
Therefore  the  apostle  is  not  content  with  exhorting  the  Thessalonians ;  lie  prays  that 
God  may  sanctify  them.  May  he  himself  (he  says  emphatically),  "  the  God  of  peace, 
sanctify  you  whully."     He  goes  on  to  expand  the  last  word. 

II.  It  must  pebvade  the  whole  being.  1.  The  spirit.  This  is  the  highest  part  of 
our  immaterial  nature,  the  breath  of  life,  inbreathed  by  Almighty  God.  It  is  the  part 
receptive  of  Divine  communications,  which,  in  the  regenerate,  holds  converse  with 
God;  which  is  the  sphere  of  the  operations  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  man  is 
spiritual  in  whom  the  spirit  rules;  he  is  natural  (tyvxticis)  iu  whom  the  soul  (^ux^)  has 
usurped  the  place  of  the  spirit.  The  evil  spirit  seeks  to  enslave  the  spirit  of  man ;  he 
strives  to  enter  in  and  dwell  in  the  spirit  wh  ch  should  be  God's.  The  peace  of  God  is 
the  true  garrison;  it  guards  the  heart  and  thoughts  of  the  faithful,  leaving  no  ingress 
for  the  wicked  one.  2.  The  soul.  Each  of  the  two  words  is  sometimes  used  for  our 
whole  invisible  nature ;  but,  when  distinguished  from  the  spirit,  the  soul  is  the  lower 
part  of  our  immaterial  being,  which  belongs  in  common  to  the  whole  animal  creation  ; 


120  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  v.  1—28. 

the  seat  of  the  appetites,  desires,  affections.  Those  men  in  whom  the  animal  soul  pre- 
dominates are  called  by  St.  Jude  "sensual,  not  having  the  spirit"  (^i/x«ol, »«»/« M^ 
txorrfi).  The  soul  is  sanctified  when  it  submits  itself  to  the  divinely  enlightened 
spirit,  when  all  its  appetites,  feelings,  longings,  are  controlled  and  regulated  by  the 
sanctified  spirit.  3.  The  body.  The  Christian  body  is  a  holy  thing.  It  should  be  the 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  it  should  be  presented  unto  God  a  living  sacrifice.  It  is 
sanctified  when  it  is  ruled  by  the^spirit,  when  it  is  kept  pure  from  the  defilements  of 
sensual  sin,  when  its  members  are  made  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God.  The 
apostle  prays  that  the  whole  man,  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  may  be  preserved  in  the  whole 
sphere  of  its  existence,  so  as  to  be  without  blame  in  the  great  day.  4.  How  it  this 
pouibl*  t  God  is  faithful ;  he  will  do  it.  He  calleth  us.  His  calling  is  not  vain,  his 
promises  are  not  delusive ;  they  are  true,  for  he  is  the  Truth.  He  will  do  it — all  that  he 
has  promised,  all  that  we  pray  for,  more  than  we  pray  for,  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or 
think ;  for  his  power  worketh  in  us.  He  will  do  it.  He  will  give  us  his  Holy  Spirit ; 
he  will  sanctify  us  wholly  if  we  yield  ourselves  to  his  purifying  influences;  he  will  pre- 
serve our  entire  bein;;  blameless  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  if  only  we  persevere — if 
we  abide  in  him.    This  little  verse  has  been  well  called  "  the  sum  of  all  consolation." 

Lessons.  1.  Work,  but  pray.  Be  obedient,  but  always  look  to  God,  and  trust  only 
in  his  grace ;  it  is  he  that  giveth  holiness.  2.  Pray  for  entire  sanctification.  Body,  soul, 
and  spirit — all  are  God's;  glorify  him  in  all.  3.  Obey  his  calling;  he  will  fulfil  his 
promises. — B.  0.  C. 

Vers.  25 — 28. — Conclusion.  I.  He  asks  for  their  prayers.  He,  the  great  apostle, 
begs  for  the  prayers  of  these  neophytes,  these  babes  in  Christ.  It  shows :  1.  His 
humility.  2.  The  value  of  prayer.  A  good  man  has  said,  "  Prayer  is  possession. 
Faithful  prayer  is  the  sure  possession  of  all  that  the  redeemed  will  of  man  can  desire. 
The  man  who  is  full  of  prayer  is  full  of  power.  I  would  rather  have  the  gift  of  a 
brother's  faithful  prayers  than  of  his  plentiful  substance.  And  I  feel  that  when  I  have 
given  to  a  brother  my  faithful  prayers  I  have  given  him  my  best  and  greatest  gift." 
3.  The  duty  of  praying  for  the  clergy.  They  have  a  great  charge,  an  awful  responsi- 
bility. They  might  well  shrink  from  the  burden,  conscious,  as  they  are  of  sin  and 
weakness.  But  they  work,  if  they  are  faithful,  in  the  strength  of  God  and  in  the 
strength  of  prayer— their  own  prayers  and  the  prayers  of  the  Church.  The  prayers  of 
the  Church  are  their  due,  for  it  is  the  commandment  of  the  Lord.  When  they  fail  in 
energy,  in  self-denial,  in  holy  example,  it  may  be  in  part  the  fault  of  those  who  do  not 
pray,  as  they  are  bidden,  for  the  ministers  of  God. 

II.  The  kiss  of  peace.  St.  Paul  four  times,  St.  Peter  once,  bid  Christians  to  salute 
one  another  with  a  holy  kiss.  The  practice  was  universal  hi  ancient  times;  it  was 
associated  with  the  Holy  Communion.  Now  it  exists  only  in  the  Coptic  Church  of 
Egypt.  The  outward  form  has  passed  away ;  ancient  customs  may  be  disused  when 
changes  in  habits  and  feeling  render  them  no  longer  suitable.  The  sacred  duty  of 
brotherly  love  remains  unchanged  for  ever.  "  By  this  shall  men  know  that  ye  are  my 
disciples,  when  ye  have  love  one  towards  another." 

III.  The  Epistle  to  be  bead  in  the  Church.  Mark  his  earnestness :  he  adjures 
them  by  the  Lord.  It  was  his  first  Epistle.  This  solemn  injunction  was  more  needed 
now  than  afterwards.  Then  the  Epistle  was  to  stand  on  a  level  with  the  ancient 
Scriptures;  it  was  to  be  read  publicly,  as  Moses  and  the  prophets  were  read  in  the 
synagogues.  It  was  to  be  read  to  all.  The  open  Bible  must  be  given  to  all.  All  need 
its  holy  lessons ;  all  have  a  right,  by  the  gracious  gift  of  God,  to  the  blessings  which 
it  offers. 

IV.  The  grace  of  oub  Lobd  Jesus  Christ.  He  begins  his  Epistle  with  grace ;  he 
ends  it  with  grace.  The  grace  of  God  is  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  our  salvation. 
'"  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am;"  "By  grace  are  ye  saved."  All  our  truest 
happiness  here,  all  our  hopes  for  blessedness  hereafter,  come  from  the  grace  of  God. 

LES30NS.  1.  Try  to  realize  the  great  value  of  prayer;  desire  the  prayers  of  the 
saints.  2.  Pray  (or  the  clergy ;  it  is  a  sacred  duty.  3.  Love  the  brethren.  4.  The 
Bible  is  a  precious  book ;  see  that  you  prize  it. — B.  0.  0. 

Vers.  1 — 11.— Exhortation  in  view  of  the  Lord's  coming,     L  How  the  day  c*  the 


oh.  v.  1—28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAttS.  121 

Lord  is  sudden  and  unexpected  in  its  coming.  "  But  concerning  the  times  and  the 
seasous,  brethren,  ye  have  no  need  that  aught  be  written  unto  you.  For  yourselves 
know  perfectly  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night."  By  the 
same  method  which  is  followed  in  ch.  iv.  9,  the  apostle  seeks  to  impress  on  the  Thessa- 
lonians  a  certain  point  relating  to  the  times  and  the  seasons  which  make  up  the  period 
of  the  Lord's  dealing  with  men.  This  related  more  particularly  to  the  day  of  the 
Lord,  the  day  when  the  Lord  is  to  descend  to  earth,  which  is  to  be  thought  of  as  the 
completing  point  of  the  times  and  the  seasons.  It  is  practically  to  each  of  us  the  day 
of  our  death.  When  with  them  he  had  taken  care  that  they  should  accurately  under- 
stand the  sudden  and  unexpected  nature  of  the  advent.  There  were  decisive  words  of 
the  Lord  on  which  to  proceed.  "  But  of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  one,  not  even 
the  angels  of  heaven,  neither  the  Son,  but  the  Father  only ; "  "  It  is  not  for  you  to 
know  the  times  or  the  seasons,  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power."  There 
wat  even  the  same  image  employed  by  our  Lord  which  is  employed  here.  "  But  know 
this,  that  if  the  master  of  the  house  had  known  in  what  hour  the  thief  was  coming,  he 
would  have  watched,  and  not  have  left  his  house  to  be  broken  through."  As  a  thief, 
without  notice  given  and  under  cover  of  the  night,  approaches  the  dwelling  which  its 
occupant  thinks  secure,  so  stealthily  approaches  the  day  of  the  Lord.  To  all  alike  the 
uncertainty  exists,  and  will  exist.  All  fixings  of  the  time,  such  as  are  sometimes 
attempted,  are  wholly  unwarranted.  God  does  not  mean  that  either  the  Church  or  the 
world  should  know  the  time,  any  more  than  he  means  that  any  of  us  should  know  the 
time  of  our  death. 

II.   HOW  TO  THE  CARNALLY  SECURE  THE  DAT  OF  THE  LOBD  IS  TO  COME  AS  A  TERRIBLE 

surprise.  "  When  they  are  saying,  Peace  and  safety,  then  sudden  destruction  cometh 
upon  them,  as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  child ;  and  they  shall  in  no  wise  escape." 
The  image  is  carried  forward,  and  we  are  to  think  of  those  who  confine  their  interest 
to  the  earthly  sphere,  and  do  not  dream  of  their  possession  as  ever  to  be  disturbed. 
But,  having  sown  carnal  security,  they  are  to  reap  destruction,  and  not  only  in  their 
earthly  but  also  in  their  higher  interest.  It  is  a  strong  word  which  is  employed,  and 
corresponds  to  "  wrath,"  which  is  afterwards  employed.  This  feeling  of  carnal  security 
grows  upon  men.  At  first  they  chide  themselves  that  they  neglect  Christ  and  their 
everlasting  salvation.  But,  carried  forward  by  the  desire  of  earthly  gratification  and 
in  confidence  in  their  own  strength,  they  find  excuses  for  the  course  which  they  are 
following.  A  state  of  moral  darkness  is  produced  in  them.  They  become  blinded  to 
the  character  of  Cod,  and  the  opposition  which  is  ever  widening  between  their  life  and 
the  will  of  God.  The  result  is,  that  qualms  of  conscience  leave  them,  and  they  say, 
"  I  have  a  feeling  of  peace  within,  and  there  is  no  trouble  from  without."  But  just  when 
they  come  to  this  height  of  carnal  security,  then  sudden  destruction  comes  upon  them, 
from  which  there  shall  be  no  escape.  Thus,  it  would  seem,  will  it  be  at  last.  All 
men  will  not  be  ready  for  the  descending  Lord.  "  As  were  the  days  of  Noah,  so  shall 
be  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man.  For  as  in  those  days  which  were  before  the  flood 
they  were  eating  and  drinking,  marrying  and  given  in  marriage,  until  the  day  that 
Noah  entered  into  the  ark,  and  they  knew  not  until  the  flood  came,  and  took  them  all 
away ;  so  shall  be  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man."  So  it  would  seem  is  it,  anticipatively , 
now.  Men  go  on  in  their  sinful  courses,  until  they  are  suddenly  overtaken  by  death 
and  destruction. 

1IL   HOW  TO   SONS  OF  LIGHT  AND   SONS  OF   TOE   DAY   THE  DAT  OF   THE  LORD  SHOULD 

not  be  A  bubprise.  "  But  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that  day  should  over- 
take you  as  a  thief:  for  ye  are  all  sons  of  light,  and  sons  of  the  day :  we  are  not  of  the 
night,  nor  of  darkness."  The  Thessalonian  brethren  are  excluded  from  the  darkness 
which  is  implied  in  the  state  of  carnal  security ;  it  was  not,  therefore,  designed  that 
that  day  should  overtake  them  as  a  thief.  The  class  to  which  they,  as  Christians, 
properly  belonged,  was  that  of  sons  of  light  and  sons  of  the  day.  They  are  those  to 
whom  the  Lord  has  been  revealed,  especially  to  whom  it  has  been  revealed  that  he  will 
come,  and  who  thus  have  light  in  them.  They  are  those  upon  whom  the  Sun  of 
righteousness  has  risen,  making  day  around  them.  Welcoming  the  light,  even  in  its 
reproving  power,  they  come  to  be  made  of  light  and  enveloped  with  light,  so  that  they 
are  sons  of  light  (which  is  the  Divine  nature)  and  sons  of  the  day  (which  is  the  Divine 
'Tirompassraent'.     When  it  is  always  light,  the  thief  has  not  opportunity  of  approach- 


122  THE  FIBST  El'ISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  v.  1— 2a 

ing  without  being  seen.  So  those  who  have  abundance  of  light  in  them  and  around 
them  should  not  be  surpri-ed  by  the  day  of  the  Lord.  The  class  from  which  we  as 
Christians  are  excluded  is  that  <  >f  those  who  are  of  the  night  and  of  darkness.  They 
are  those  who  have  moral  night  drawn  around  them.  They  are  those  into  whose 
nature  the  light  of  God's  mercy  and  truth  has  not  penetrated.  Loving  the  darkness 
rather  than  the  light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil,  they  come  to  have  darkness  as  their 
surrounding  and  iheir  nature,  so  that  they  are  of  the  night  and  of  darkness.  It  was 
open  to  the  apostle,  from  the  use  "f  similar  expressions  by  our  Loid  ("  sons  of  this  world," 
"  sons  of  the  devil "),  to  have  said  sons  of  the  night  and  sons  of  darkness.  He  seems  to 
have  chosen  his  language  purposely  to  avoid  the  idea  of  freedom,  to  bring  out  the  idea 
of  servitude.  They  are  not  like  the  free  sons  of  light  and  free  sons  of  the  day.  They 
are  rather  those  who  are  hemmed  in  by  the  night,  who  are  enslaved  to  darkness.  When 
there  is  darkness  in  and  around  a  dwelling  there  may  be  said  to  be  an  invitation  to  the 
thief  to  approach.  So  those  who  have  darkness  in  and  around  their  being  may  be  aaid 
to  invite  a  surprise  from  the  day  of  the  Lord. 

IT.   HOW  WE   ARE    BOUND,  AS   ENLIGHTENED   CHRISTIANS,  TO   WATCH    AND    BE   SOBER. 

"  So  then  let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  the  rest,  but  let  us  watch  and  be  sober.  For  they  that 
sleep  sleep  in  the  ni-bt ;  and  they  that  be  drunken  are  drunken  in  the  night."  There 
is  put  forward  what  we  are  not  to  do.  Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  the  rest  of  mankind 
Sleeping  implies  obliviousness  and  inactivity.  The  rest  of  mankind  are  in  an  oblivious, 
inactive  state,  especially  with  regard  to  the  solemn  issues  of  life.  Let  us  who  have 
light  not  be  like  them.  What  we  are  to  do  is  to  watch.  We  are  to  have  the  wakeful 
activity  of  the  sentinel  at  his  post.  He  knows  not  from  what  side  or  what  hour  the 
enemy  may  approach,  so  he  h  <s  altogether  and  always  to  be  vigilant.  In  like  manner, 
let  us  take  full  account  of  the  fact  that  death  is  coming.  And,  seeing  we  know  not 
how  or  what  hour  it  may  come,  let  our  vigilance  all  round  never  sleep.  What  we  are 
to  do  is  also  to  be  tober.  A  subject  should  be  in  a  fit  state  when  ushered  into  the 
presence  of  his  sovereign.  It  will  be  a  solemn  thing  for  us  to  be  ushered  into  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  at  death ;  aud  we  should  be  in  a  fit  state  for  the  occasion.  We 
should  especially  have  our  appetites  in  proper  restraint.  We  should  have  the  full 
command  of  our  powers.  We  should  be  so  employed  from  moment  to  moment  that, 
when  the  last  moment  comes,  we  can  fitly  leave  our  employments  and  pass  into  the 
presence  of  our  Judge.  Not  to  be  doing  this,  is  to  be  conforming  to  unenlightened 
practices.  "  They  that  sleep  sleep  in  the  night ;  and  they  that  be  drunken  are  drunken 
in  the  night."  The  literal  fact  is  stated  as  the  basis  for  thought.  Night  is  the  con- 
genial time  for  sleep.  So  those  who  are  in  the  night  of  sin  are  in  a  drowsy,  unalarmed 
state  with  regard  to  their  spiritual  concerns.  They  do  not  take  into  account  that  they 
have  to  meet  death,  and  yet,  however  deep  their  sleep,  they  lave  to  meet  it  and  ihe 
realities  to  which  they  will  be  wakened  up  after  death.  NLdit  is  also  the  congenial 
time  for  drunkenness.  How  much  of  the  drinking  that  is  to  be  deplored  goes  on  after 
darkness  has  set  in  I  So  those  who  are  in  the  night  of  sin  are  in  a  state  of  spiritual 
intoxication.  And  that  is  the  worst  thing  that  can  be  said  of  the  literal  drunkard. 
His  spiritual  nature  is  in  a  bad  state.  In  not  restraining  his  appetites  he  is  rebelling 
against  God.  In  continuing  in  sin  he  is  hardening  his  heart.  And  he  is  not  fit  for 
passing  into  the  presence  of  his  Judge.  And  so  is  it,  too,  wi  h  those  who  are  drunken 
with  the  world's  engagements  and  cares.  They  become  incapacitated  for  spiritual 
exercise,  and  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  Lord's  presence.  "  But  take  heed  to  yourselves, 
lest  haply  your  hearts  be  overcharged  « ith  surfeiting,  and  drunkenness,  and  cares  of  this 
life,  and  that  day  come  on  you  suddenly  as  a  snare." 

V.   HOW  WE  ABE   TO  GIVE   PROOF  THAT  WE  ARE  SOBER  BY    BEING  ARMED  WITH  FAITH, 

love,  and  hope.  "  But  let  us,  since  we  are  of  the  day,  be  sober,  putting  on  the  breast- 
plate of  faith  and  love ;  and  for  a  helmet,  the  hope  of  salvation."  Having  the  light  of 
day,  and  knowing  what  is  coming,  let  us,  as  sober  men,  take  all  due  precautions.  For 
us  to  be  forewarned  should  be  to  be  forearmed.  It  is  only  defensive  armour  that  is 
thought  of  here  as  brought  into  requisition.  The  idea  seems  to  be,  that  we  are  to  be 
armed  against  all  that  would  unfit  us  for  our  Lord's  coming.  1.  The  breastplate.  This 
is  a  double  piece  of  armour.  It  is  faith  and  love  combined.  Faith  apprehends  the 
Lord's  coming,  in  opposition  to  blind  unbelief  which  says,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  his 
coming  ?  for  since  the  fathers  fell  a-leep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were."    Faith  defends 


CE.v.1— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  123 


by  encircling  us  with  the  Divine  strength,  which  is  as  though  every  part  of  our 
defenceless  hearts  were  covered  with  armour.  But  faith  only  rightly  defends  when, 
at  the  same  time,  love  gives  Christ  the  possession  of  our  hearts.  It  is  the  world  that 
tempts  us  to  forget  the  Lord's  coming,  to  make  no  preparation  for  death.  When  our 
hearts  are  filled  with  love  to  the  Saviour,  we  are  enabled  to  keep  out  the  world.  The 
breastplate  of  our  defence  being  completed  by  love,  brings  it  into  agreement  with  what, 
in  Eph.  vi.  14,  and  also  in  Isa.  lix.  17,  is  called  "  the  breastplate  of  righteousness."  2. 
The  helmet.  This  is  a  single  piece  of  armour.  In  Eph.  vi.  17,  and  also  in  Isa.  lix.  17, 
it  is  simply  called  "  the  helmet  of  salvation."  But  what  is  meant  is  what  is  here  called 
"  the  hope  of  salvation."  We  have  a  certain  experience  of  salvation  already  in  the  work- 
ing of  faith  and  love.  Hope  reaches  beyond  this  experience  forward  to  the  salvation 
which  is  to  be  completed  at  the  Lord's  coming.  This  hope  is  a  defence  to  us,  as  the 
helmet  used  to  be  to  the  warrior.  Wearing  this  provided  armour,  we  can  hold  our 
head  high  and  scathless  above  present  troubles.  Let  us,  then,  as  sober  men,  not  unclasp 
our  breastplate,  not  lay  aside  our  helmet. 

VI.  HOW  THE  SALVATION   HOPED  FOR   HAS   BEEN  MADE  A  DlVINE  CERTAINTY  TO  US. 

"For  God  appointed  us  not  unto  wrath,  but  unto  the  obtaining  of  salvation  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  For  those  who  are  sunk  in  spiritual  slumber  and  intoxication 
there  is  an  appointment  unto  wrath.  The  Divine  displeasure  must  be  manifested 
against  the  rebellious  course  which  they  have  been  following.  But  for  us  who  are 
acting  as  sober  men  there  is  an  appointment  unto  the  obtaining  of  salvation  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  i.e.  at  his  coming.  And  what  God  has  appointed  will  be  carried 
out.  A  soldier  endures  in  the  hope  of  victory.  But  the  victory  is  to  him  an  uncertainty ; 
it  may  not  be  realized,  or  he  may  not  live  to  share  in  it.  But  the  Christian  soldier  has 
a  Divine  appointment  on  which  to  proceed.  If  even  now  we  take  Christ  as  our  Saviour, 
and  from  this  point  wait  fur  his  coming,  then  God  intends  that  we  shall  conquer.  Let 
us  seize  the  advantage  of  our  position.  While  we  have  our  faith  and  love  in  vigorous 
exercise,  let  us  know  also  the  sustaining  power  of  a  lively  hope. 

VII.  HOW  THE   OBTAINING  OF  SALVATION  HAS  BECOME  ASSURED   TO  US.      "  Who  died 

for  us,  that,  whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  we  should  live  together  with  him."  1.  Our  lift 
has  its  source  in  Chrisfs  death.  Christ  died  for  our  benefit,  and,  by  implication,  in 
our  stead.  He  died  in  the  way  of  making  satisfaction  for  our  sin.  In  him,  as  our 
Representative  or  Head,  we  obtain  the  benefits  of  his  work.  It  is  as  though  we  had 
died,  as  though  we  had  made  satisfaction  for  sin.  Thus  in  condescending  love,  in 
accordance  with  eternal  principles,  are  we  introduced  into  salvation.  2.  The  final  end 
•  of  Chrisfs  death  is  that  we  should  live  together  with  him.  Christ  died  with  this  view, 
that  we  should  ultimately  live  along  with  him,  and  have  fellowship  with  him ;  we 
entering  into  his  thoughts  and  delighting  in  his  love,  while  he  enters  into  our  thoughts 
and  delights  in  our  love.  3.  This  end  is  independent  of  our  waking  or  sleeping  at 
Christ's  coming.  Our  waking  or  sleeping  is  accidental;  the  essential  thing  is  that  we 
shall  have  fellowship  with  Christ,  and  fellowship,  as  it  then  shall  be,  in  the  body. 
Both  classes,  those  who  wake  and  those  who  sleep,  have  the  same  reason  for  assuring 
themselves  that  they  shall  live  together  with  him,  viz.  in  the  fact  that  be  has  died  to 
merit  it  for  them,  as  he  lives  to  secure  it  for  them.  Those  who  wake  shall  be  changed 
without  the  union  between  soul  and  body  being  broken ;  and,  changed,  they  shall  live 
together  with  him.  Those  who  sleep  have  the  union  between  the  soul  and  bo  ly  broken, 
without  any  break  in  the  union  between  the  soul  and  Christ  and  in  fellowship  with 
him;  and,  raised  from  their  graves,  they  shall  live  together  with  him.  Thus  the  ultimate 
state  of  both  classes  is  to  be  the  same,  the  apostle  returning  here  to  the  conclusion 
reached  in  ch.  iv.  17,  where  it  is  said  of  the  same  two  classes  united  that  they  shall 
be  for  ever  with  the  Lord. 

VIIL     HOW    IN    THE    CIRCUMSTANCES     THEY    ARE    TO    ACT    TOWARD     EACH     OTHER. 

"  Wherefore  exhort  one  another,  and  build  each  other  up,  even  as  also  ye  do."  There 
is  an  unhappy  change  from  "  comfort "  to  "  exhort "  in  the  translation.  It  ought  to 
be  "  comfort,"  as  in  the  parallel  verse  at  the  close  of  the  previous  paragraph.  They 
were  to  comfort  one  another  with  what  was  blessed  in  the  Lord's  coming.  They  were 
also  to  edify  each  other,  in  preparation  for  the  Lord's  coming — communicating  know- 
ledge to  each  other,  praying  for  each  other,  pressing  duty  on  each  other,  stimulating 
aeh  other  by  example.     This  they  were  doing,  and  in  that  way  were  admirably 


124  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THES8ALONIANS.    [oh.  v.  1— 28 

answering  the  ends  of  their  being  in  a  Christian  society.  But  let  them  go  on,  and  not, 
while  only  a  little  away  from  the  starting-point,  suppose  that  they  have  reached  finality. 
Let  us,  too,  make  the  end  of  our  being  in  a  Christian  society  comfort  and,  especially, 
edification  to  all  the  members. — R.  F. 

Vers.  12 — 22. — Exhortations.  I.  Duty  toward  the  presidents.  "  But  we  beseech 
you,  brethren,  to  know  them  that  labour  among  you,  and  are  over  you  in  the  Lord,  and 
admonish  you ;  and  to  esteem  them  exceeding  highly  in  love  for  their  work's  s.ike." 
The  Greek  bears  that  those  who  labour,  preside,  and  admonish  are  all  one  class.  From 
other  places  in  the  New  Testament  we  must  understand  that  the  reference  is  to  the 
class  of  the  elders.  "  And  when  they  had  appointed  for  them  elders  in  every  Church, 
and  had  prayed  with  fasting,  they  commended  them  to  the  Lord,  on  whom  they  had 
believed."  "  For  this  cause,"  Paul  says  to  Titus,  "  left  I  thee  in  Crete,  that  thou 
shouldest  set  in  order  the  things  that  are  wanting,  and  appoint  elders  in  every  city,  as 
I  gave  thee  charge."  From  1  Tim.  v.  17  it  appears  that  there  were  elders  who  simply 
ruled,  and  others  who  both  ruled  and  taught.  The  language  employed  in  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  elders  here  does  not  require  a  restriction  in  the  application  to  teaching 
elders.  It  can  only  he  said  that  the  greater  extent  of  their  duties  warrants  a  special 
application  to  them.  There' is  put  forward  the  idea  of  their  being  workers.  In  any 
office  the  first  thing  to  be  looked  to  is  the  amount  of  real  honest  work  that  is  done  in  it. 
Certainly  it  is  not  meant  that  any  ecclesiastical  office  should  be  a  sinecure.  There  was 
spiritual  work  to  be  done  among  the  Thessalonians,  and  there  were  those  who  were 
appointed  for  the  doing  of  it.  These  did  their  work  even  to  weariness.  Next  to  their 
being  workers,  they  were  presidents.  In  1  Tim.  v.  17  the  elders  are  described  as  thus 
ruling  or  presiding.  In  this  presidency  there  is  implied  the  possession  of  ecclesiastical 
power ;  but  it  is  with  limitations.  Believers  stand  in  an  immediate  personal  relation 
to  the  Lord.  But  there  is  also  the  relation  in  which  believers  stand  collectively  to  the 
Lord.  In  this  relation  Christ  is  not  only  President ;  but  there  are  those  who  in  each 
Christian  society  preside  in  the  Lord,  i.e.  they  preside  in  his  Name,  they  represent  his 
authority  in  the  relation.  To  them  belongs  the  power  of  the  keys,  or  of  admitting  and 
excluding.  To  them  it  belongs  to  preside  at  the  ordinance  of  the  supper.  To  them  it 
belongs  to  sit  in  judgment  in  matters  connected  with  the  efficient  working  of  the 
society.  As  presidents,  they  are  also  monitors,  not  restrictively  teachers.  It  belongs  to 
them  as  characterized  by  piety  and  practical  wisdom,  and  as  foremost  in  every  good 
work  themselves,  in  a  special  manner,  in  virtue  of  their  office,  to  press  duty  on  those  over 
whom  they  have  been  placed,  to  stir  up  the  negligent,  to  administer  rebuke  to  the 
erring.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  members  of  a  Christian  society  toward  their  laborious 
presidents  and  monitors  to  know  them.  It  is  usual  to  take  this  knowing  as  equivalent 
to  knowing  with  appreciation,  which  is  afterward  defined  as  esteeming  in  love.  It 
seems  better  not  to  bring  forward  the  ideas  of  esteem  and  love,  but  to  think  only  of 
that  on  which  the  esteem  and  love  are  founded,  viz.  such  a  marking  of  the  presidents 
as  leads  to  their  being  esteemed  and  loved.  The  esteem  is  to  be  founded  on  the  work 
belonging  to  their  office.  They  are  engaged  in  the  Lord's  work,  in  seeking  the 
spiritual  good  of  those  over  whom  they  have  been  placed.  And  as  that  is  the  mo>t 
important  of  all  kinds  of  work,  they  are  not  only  to  be  esteemed,  but  esteemed  exceed- 
ing highly  for  their  work's  sake.  "While  they  are  to  be  esteemed,  they  are  also  to  be 
loved.  Love  is  to  be  the  element  in  which  the  esteem  is  to  have  its  subsistence  and 
nourishment.  They  are  not  to  be  judged  harshly,  but,  in  love,  a  kindly  view  is  to  be 
taken  of  them,  and  their  defects  overlooked. 

II.  Duty  of  regarding  the  peace  of  the  Christian  circle.  "Be  at  peace 
among  yourselves."  Our  Lord  exhorts  the  twelve  in  almost  the  same  terms :  "  Be  at 
peace  one  with  another."  The  exhortation  means  that  we  are  to  cultivate  toward  the 
members  of  the  Christian  circle  such  good  feeling  as  will  dispose  us  not  only  to  refrain 
from  strife,  but  also  to  be  on  good  terms  with  them.  And  if  we  are  to  be  peaceably  dis- 
posed, as  we  are  elsewhere  exhorted,  toward  all  men,  much  more  are  we  to  be  peace- 
ably disposed,  as  we  are  here  exhorted,  to  those  to  whom  we  stand  in  nearer  alliance 
and  engagement,  who  are  subjects  with  us  of  the  same  Prince  of  peace.  The  most 
fruitful  cause  of  congregational  or  more  widely  ecclesiastical  dispeace  is  fondness  for 
power  or  honour.     It  was  wlien  the  twelve  hail  disputed  one  with  another  who  was 


dh.  v.  1— 28.]    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  126 

the  greatest  (Mark  ix.  34),  and  had  turned  against  one  who  used  Christ's  Name  yet 
followed  not  them  (Mark  ix.  38),  that  they  were  exhorted  to  be  at  peace  one  with 
another  (Mark  ix.  50).  John  refers  to  a  certain  Diotrephes,  in  a  Church  to  which  he 
wrote,  who  loved  to  have  the  pre-eminence  among  them.  There  are  those  who  are  more 
concerned  to  advance  themselves,  or  their  family  connection,  or  their  party,  than  the 
common  ends  for  which  the  society  exists.  A  co-operating  cause  is  prejudice.  There 
are  those  who  are  more  attached  to  opinions  hastily  formed,  or  traditionally  received, 
or  to  which  they  are  constitutionally  inclined  as  more  liberal  or  more  conservative, 
than  to  the  truth  horvestly  inquired  into.  When,  with  this,  there  conspires  worldly 
motive,  leading  to  wciMlv  policy,  the  result,  on  occasion  or,  it  may  be,  on  little 
.occasion,  is  dispeace.  One  cure  fur  dispeice  is  respect  for  the  properly  constituted 
authorities,  or  good  feeling  toward  the  presidents.  This  will  oft  n  carry  a  society 
through  a  difficult  trial.  A  more  effective  cure  is  abundance  of  Christian,  work.  It 
was  when  the  twelve  were  in  the  way  (unemployed  so  far)  that  they  disputed  who  was 
the  greatest.  When  afterward  they  were  in  the  midst  of  their  work,  the  question 
would  not  be  who  was  the  greatest,  but  who  could  do  the  most  work  for  Christ.  For 
a  Church  to  be  actively  engaged  in  real  work  for  the  Master  is  to  be  in  the  best 
position  for  its  own  peace.  Fray,  then,  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem,  and  for  its  order 
liness  and  tioly  activity,  as  conducive  to  peace. 

III.  Doty  toward  three  classes  within  the  Christian  circle.  1.  The  dis- 
orderly. "And  we  exhort  you,  brethren,  admonish  the  disorderly."  This  class  is 
described  by  a  word  which  is  used  of  soldiers  who  do  not  keep  their  rank.  There  were 
those  in  the  Thessalouian  Church  who  were  out  of  rank,  in  the  way  of  being  negligent 
of  their  business,  under  the  influence  of  the  coming  of  Christ.  In  Christian  Churches 
still  there  are  those  who  are  out  of  rank,  in  the  way  of  being  careless  in  attendance  on 
ordinances,  in  the  way  of  being  dissipated,  in  the  way  of  being  chargeable  with  dis- 
honourable actions.  If  it  is  a  grave  fault  to  be  disorderly  in  a  military  sense,  it  is  no 
less  grave  a  fault  to  be  disorderly  in  a  Christian  sense.  Must  it  not  be  offensive  to  him 
who  is  pre-eminently  charged  with  the  order  of  the  Church,  the  Captain  of  our  sal- 
vation ?  And  his  command,  laid  not  merely  on  the  presidents  but  on  all,  is  that  such 
should  be  admonished.  They  all  need  to  be  admonished  to  the  performance  of  the 
duty  with  regard  to  which  they  are  at  fault ;  and  some  of  them  need  to  be  admonished 
to  take  the  first  step  in  the  Christian  life.  2.  The  faint-hearted.  "  Encourage  the 
faint-hearted."  In  our  Churches  there  are  those  who  are  faint-hearted  on  account  of  the 
loss  of  friends,  as  the  Thessaionians  were  faint-hearted  on  account  of  the  supposed  fate 
of  Christian  friends  taken  away  before  the  coming.  There  are  those  who  are  depressed 
by  the  state  of  their  temporal  affairs,  as  the  Thessaionians  would  have  a  depressing 
influence  in  the  way  in  which  maintenance  and  home  and  even  life  were  affected  by 
persecution.  There  are  always  those  who  are  apt  to  be  faint-hearted  on  account  of  their 
spiritual  slate.  Have  they  a  real  interest  in  Christ?  Are  they  making  progress  in  the 
Christian  life?  Are  they  doing  any  good?  Are  they  having  an  iufluence  for  good 
upon  those  over  whom  they  are  immediately  placed?  The  command  of  Christ,  laid  on 
all,  is  that  such  are  to  be  encouraged.  Let  them  be  encouraged  by  the  thought  of  the 
kind  Providence  that  is  exercised  over  them.  Let  them  he  encouraged  to  the  exercise 
of  faith.  "  0  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst  thou  doubt?"  "  Why  art  thou  cast 
down,  0  my  soul  ?  aud  why  art  thou  disquieted  in  me  ?  hope  thou  in  God :  for  I  shall 
yet  praise  him,  who  is  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God."  3.  The  weak. 
"  Support  the  weak."  There  would  be  those  among  the  Thessaionians  who  felt  the 
weakening  influence  of  the  heathenism  out  of  which  they  had  come.  Heathen  habits 
could  not  be  laid  aside  in  a  day.  So  there  are  those  in  our  Churches  who  are  anxious 
to  do  well,  but  are  apt  to  stumble  from  the  strength  of  evil  habit.  The  command  of 
Christ,  laid  on  all,  is  that  such  are  not  to  be  left  to  stand  or  fall  by  themselves;  but 
they  are  to  be  supported  by  symi  athy  and  counsel  and  example  until  they  attain  to 
greater  moral  strength — as  infants,  or  those,  weakened  by  disease,  need  to  be  supported, 
until  they  can  go  about  freely. 

IV.  The  one  duty  toward  all  within  the  Christian  otrole.  "Be  long- 
suffering  toward  alL"  It  seems  better  to  confine  the  reference  to  the  Christian  circle, 
and  to  consider  the  reference  as  widened  in  the  following  verse.  This  is  the  condition 
ot  mind  that  will  fit  us  for  dealing  witn  all.    It  was  not  unfitting  that  the  duty  should 


126  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  v.  1— 2& 

be  laid  upon  a  young  Church  like  that  of  Thessalonica.  Young  Christians  are  of  a 
sanguine  disposition.  In  their  own  enthusiasm  they  look  for  others  being  enthusiastic. 
They  need,  in  their  experience  of  the  difficulty  of  evil  being  cast  out  of  their  own 
hearts,  of  keeping  up  their  own  enthusiasm,  to  be  taught  the  lesson  of  patience.  Let 
them  not  be  less  earnest,  but  let  them  bear  long,  in  the  hope  of  seeing  those  who  are 
lukewarm  and  faulty  brought  into  a  better  state. 

V.  Doty  especially  toward  those  who  injure  us.  "  See  that  none  render  unto 
any  one  evil  for  evil ;  but  alway  follow  after  that  which  is  good,  one  toward  another,  and 
toward  all."  The  heathenish  idea  is  to  return  evil  for  evil.  Even  Aristotle  regarded 
it  not  less  reasonable  to  return  evil  for  evil,  than  to  return  good  for  good  ;  "for  other- 
wise," he  says, "  if  a  man  must  not  retaliate,  his  condition  appears  to  be  as  bad  as  slavery  " 
('  Ethics,'  bk.  v.  ch.  5).  This  heathenish  disposition  to  take  revenge  on  those  who 
injure  us  needs  to  be  conquered  by  us.  Hence  there  is  enjoined  on  us  care :  "  Take 
heed  that  none  render  unto  any  one  evil  for  evil."  There  is  danger,  if  we  are  not  careful, 
of  our  giving  way  to  revengeful  ,feelings.  The  Christian  idea  is  that  we  are  to  resist 
not  evil :  "  Whosoever  smiteth  thee  on  the  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  other  also." 
The  meaning  here  is  that,  instead  of  returning  evil  for  evil,  we  are  to  do  kind  offices  to 
those  who  injure  us.  This  is  the  best  way  of  gaining  our  offending  brethren.  It  is 
also  the  best  way  of  gaining  over  them  that  are  outside.  There  is  no  more  powerful 
argument  in  favour  of  Christianity  than  its  conquest  of  revengefulness,  its  disposing  us 
to  return  good  for  evil. 

VI.  Duty  of  rejoicing.  "  Rejoice  alway."  The  happy  God  designs  us  to  be  happy 
like  himself,  and  not  merely  in  heaven.  We  cannot,  indeed,  have  a  light  heart  when 
we  think  of  the  evil  in  us  and  around  us.  But  while  sorrowful,  we  can  always  rejoice 
in  the  thought  of  our  Christian  advantages.  "  He  that  hath  the  inexhaustible  Spring 
of  good  for  his  portion,  that  hath  his  welfare  entrusted  in  God's  most  faithful  hand, 
that  hath  the  infinite  Beauty  and  Excellency  for  the  perpetual  object  of  his  contem- 
plation, that  enjoyeth  the  serenity  of  a  sound  mind,  of  a  pure  heart,  of  a  quiet 
conscience,  of  a  sure  hope,  what  can  he  want  to  refresh  or  comfort  him  ?  If  we  scan 
all  the  doctrines,  all  the  institutions,  all  the  precepts,  all  the  promises  of  Christianity, 
will  not  each  appear  pregnant  with  matter  of  joy,  will  not  each  yield  great  reason  and 
strong  obligation  to  this  duty  of  rejoicing  evermore  ?  "    (Barrow). 

VH.  Duty  of  prayer.  "  Pray  without  ceasing."  This  cannot  mean  that  prayer 
is  to  occupy  our  whole  time.  For  prayer  is  only  one  duty,  and  we  have  to  propor- 
tion our  time  between  our  various  duties.  But  it  means  that  we  are  to  make  prayer 
part  of  the  great  business  of  our  life,  and  not  a  by-business.  It  means  that  we  are  to 
connect  prayer  with  the  principal  occasions  of  our  life.  It  means  that  in  particular 
matters  we  are  to  pray  on,  until  we  succeed  in  the  object  of  our  requests.  It  means 
that  we  are  to  have  stated  times  for  prayer,  especially  the  natural  seasons  of  morning 
and  evening.  It  means  that  in  the  intensity  of  our  earnestness  we  are  to  overleap 
these  stated  times.  "  Devotion  is  the  best  food  of  our  souls,  which  preserveth  their 
life  and  health,  which  repaireth  their  strength  and  vigour :  if  we,  therefore,  long  abstain 
from  it,  we  shall  starve  or  pine  away ;  we  shall  be  faint  and  feeble  in  all  religious  per- 
formances ;  we  shall  have  none  at  all,  or  a  very  languid  and  meagre  piety  "  (Barrow). 

VIII.  Duty  of  thanksgiving.  "  In  everything  give  thanks,  for  this  is  the  will  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus  to  you-ward."  To  give  thanks  means  that,  sincerely,  duly  sensible 
of  our  benefits,  we  are  to  make  cheerful  acknowledgment  of  them  to  God.  To  jnve 
thanks  in  everything  means  that  we  are  to  thank  God,  not  only  in  great  things,  but 
also  in  small  things ;  not  only  in  rare  things,  but  also  in  common  things.  It  means 
that  we  are  to  thank  God,  not  only  in  present  things,  but  for  past  mercies  as  well,  and 
even  for  what  is  laid  up  for  future  enjoyment.  It  means  that  we  are  to  thank  God, 
not  merely  in  things  affecting  ourselves,  but  also  in  things  affecting  others.  It  means 
that  we  are  to  thank  God,  not  merely  in  prosperous  things,  but  also  in  adverse  things, 
recognizing  the  merciful  moderating  of  them,  the  merciful  design  in  them,  the  support- 
ing grace  under  them,  and  the  benefit  resulting  from  them.  It  means  that  we  are  to 
thank  God,  not  merely  in  things  affecting  our  bodies,  but  also  in  things  affecting  oui 
souls.  The  duty  of  thanksgiving  is  here  enforced  by  the  consideration  that  this  is  the 
will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  to  us-ward.  In  Christ  Jesus  he  is  infinite  kindness, 
always  overflowing  in  blessing  on  us.     How  fitting,  then,  that  we  should,  through 


CH.v.l— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSAL0NIAN8.  127 

Christ  Jesus,  "offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually,  the  fruit  of  our  lips"! 
This  has  the  distinction  of  being  the  most  delightful  of  all  duties.  "  For  praise  and 
thanksgiving  are  the  most  delectable  business  of  heaven  ;  and  God  grant  they  may  be 
our  greatest  delight,  our  frequent  employment  upon  earth  "  (Barrow). 

IX.  Duty  toward  the  Spibit.  "  Quench  not  the  Spirit."  The  Spirit  is  com- 
pared here,  as  in  other  places  in  Scripture,  to  fire.  There  is  the  beginning  of  spiritual 
life  in  every  man.  There  is  the  depraved  nature,  hut  there  is  also  the  Spirit  with  his 
vital  energy  to  be  cherished  or  quenched.  It  is  especially  in  connection  with  the 
gospel  that  the  Spirit  is  given  to  men.  In  the  gospel  there  is  presented  a  Divine  call 
*x)  accept  of  Divine  mercy,  and  there  is,  in  connection  with  it,  a  Divine  warning  against 
refusing  Divine  mercy.  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  eternal  life;  but  he  that 
obeyeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."  The 
Spirit,  in  the  Word  read  or  preached,  brings  the  gospel  call  to  bear  upon  the  conscience 
and  heart.  The, feeling  that  we  ought  to  accept  of  salvation  and  not  throw  away  our 
existence,  the  desire  to  give  Christ  our  confidence  and  not  spurn  his  love,  is  the  working 
of  the  Spirit.  And,  in  providence  after  providence,  does  the  Spirit  more  gently  whisper 
to  us,  or  more  loudly  rouse  us  up  to  the  importance  of  the  Divine  call  and  warning. 
It  is  suggested  by  the  context,  that  what  those  who  have  felt  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
have  to  fear  is  the  repression  of  enthusiasm.  Let  them  give  free  outlet  to  the  working 
of  the  Spirit,  and  not  be  deterred  by  the  conventionalities  even  of  religious  society.  If 
they  feel  prompted  to  pray,  let  them  not  restrain  prayer.  If  they  feel  prompted  to 
study  God's  Word,  let  them  sit  down  and  pore  over  it.  If  they  feel  prompted  to  throw 
themselves  into  Christian  work,  let  them  not  hold  back.  It  was  by  a  strange  perversity 
of  will  on  the  part  of  Saul  that  he  was  deserted  by  the  Spirit.  David  feared  that  his 
outbreak  of  sin  would  drive  away  the  Holy  Spirit  from  him.  What  prevents  men 
feeling  the  power  of  the  Spirit  is  especially  an  irregular  life.  They  turn  away  from 
good,  and  give  the  reins  to  their  passions,  and  another  spirit  than  God's  takes  possession 
of  them.  But  there  is  not  needed  outward  irregularity  to  quench  the  Spirit.  The 
essential  thing  is  the  withdrawing  of  the  mind  from  the  range  of  the  Divine  revelation, 
the  paying  no  heed  to  the  Divine  voice,  the  smothering  good  feeling  even  under  the 
ordinary  engagements  of  life,  the  neglecting  to  follow  up  good  impressions  by  a  decisive 
step  for.Christ.  The  result  in  the  following  out  of  trial  is  a  state  of  mind  in  which 
there  is  an  insensibility  to  the  importance  of  the  Divine  call  and  warning.  Conviction 
of  sin  or  uneasiness  about  it  ceases ;  interest  in  what  is  good  dies  out.  The  Spirit  of 
God  takes  his  departure,  and  an  evil  spirit  takes  full  possession.  There  is  this 
encouraging  thought  to  those  who  have  been  resisting  and  grieving  the  Spirit,  that 
while  there  is  the  slightest  thought  of  good  remaining  in  their  hearts,  it  may  be  fanned 
into  a  flame.  The  Spirit,  long  slighted,  at  last  cherished,  will  come,  and  with  his  vital 
energy  fill  their  whole  being. 

X.  Doty  with  beoard  to  prophesying*.  "  Despise  not  prophesyings."  These 
were  special  manifestations  of  the  Spirit.  As  in  the  Corinthian  Church,  and  also  in  the 
Galatian  Churches,  so  in  (he  Church  of  Thessalonica,  there  was  the  presence  of  miracles. 
There  was  the  gift  of  healing;  there  was  also  the  gift  of  tongues.  As  striking  mani- 
festations the  use  they  served  was  especially  in  irupn  ssiaj;  and  drawing  the  attention 
of  them  that  were  outside.  Prophesyings  were  intelligent  and,  pro! -ably,  impassioned 
utterances  of  Divine  truth  under  the  inflatus  of  the  Spirit.  As  such  the  use  they 
served  was  especially  in  promoting  the  edification  of  the  Church.  Let  none,  then,  run 
the  risk  of  quenching  the  Spirit  by  placing  a  low  value  on  his  less  striking  but  far 
more  important  manifestations. 

XI.  Duty  of  proving  all  things.  "  Prove  all  things."  The  language  is  taken 
from  the  art  of  the  assayer.  He  has  special  skill  in  applying  tests,  with  the  view  of 
discovering  what  is  real  and  what  is  counterfeit  in  metals,  what  is  good  coin  and  what 
is  bad  coin.  So  the  Christian  assayer  is  to  be  specially  skilled  in  testing  the  real 
nature  of  things.  There  is  nothing  in  the  language  to  restrict  the  reference  to  the 
prophesyings  which  have  been  mentioned.  It  is  not  said  "  all  prophesyings,"  or  "all  these 
things."  And  if  there  is  an  antithesis,  as  some  authorities  have  it,  in  the  assertion  of 
"hut,"  yet  is  it  preserved  by  regarding  prophesyings  as  included  among  all  things. 
The  wideness  of  the  reference  is  confirmed  by  the  consideration  that  things  aa  proved 
are  divided  into  things  to  he  chosen  and  things  to  he  rejected.    In  prophesyings,  as 


128  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  v.  1—28- 

inspired,  there  was  no  element  to  be  rejected.  Proving  them  could  only  mean  learning 
to  put  due  value  upon  them,  partly  in  comparison  with  other  Divine  gifts.  Ordinary 
teachings  have  not  all  the  true  ring  or  composition.  "  0  holy  simplicity  ! "  exclaimed 
Huss,  when  he  saw  an  aged  devout  woman  throwing  a  fagot  on  to  his  burning  pile. 
But  our  safeguard  is  not  a  holy  simplicity,  believing  all  that  we  have  been  told  by  good 
men ;  it  is  rather,  in  dependence  on  the  direction  of  God,  the  exercise  of  an  independent 
Judgment.  That  is  the  sheet-anchor  of  our  Protestantism.  We  reject  the  claim  of  the 
Koman  Catholic  that  we  are  to  accept  of  things  because  they  are  taught  by  the  Church, 
because  they  have  been  ordained  by  councils,  because  they  have  even  the  support  oi 
the  apostolic  Fathers.  The  thing  to  be  deplored  is  that  much  of  our  Protestantism  ii 
'.raditional,  an  unreasoning  acceptance  of  belief.  With  regard  to  opinions  which  past' 
current  in  society,  we  are  not  to  accept  of  them  because  they  are  popular,  because  thej 
are  well -sounding,  because  they  are  associated  with  particular  names  or  parties ;  but 
we  are  to  have  a  Divine  insight  into  them  as  true  or  false.  With  regard  to  what  is- 
presented  for  the  regulation  of  our  conduct,  there  is  evil  as  well  as  good  presented  for 
our  acceptance.  And  evil  is  not  presented  to  us  as  evil ;  it  takes  specious  forms — even 
Satan  puts  on  the  garb  of  an  angel  of  light.  We  have  need,  therefore,  to  be  on  our 
guard ;  we  have  need  to  have  our  senses  exercised  to  discern  good  and  evil.  Let  us 
inquire,  regarding  an  action  or  course  of  action,  whether  it  is  fitted  to  yield  not  simply 
a  present  but  a  solid  and  lasting  satisfaction,  without  regrets  in  the  future  ;  whether  it 
is  according  to  right  principle  and  conducive  to  strength  of  character,  and  fitted  also 
to  be  beneficial  to  others.  "  If  we  discerned  ourselves,"  says  the  apostle,  "  we  should 
not  be  judged."  Let  us  be  just  with  ourselves,  that  we  may  escape  the  consequences 
of  a  false  judgment.  Let  us  impartially  apply  the  tests  now,  as  those  to  whom  they  are 
to  be  impartially  and  convincingly  applied  at  the  day  of  judgment. 

XII.  Duty  in  view  of  thb  result  of  proving  all  things.  1.  On  the  one 
hand  to  hold  fast  the  good.  "  Hold  fast  that  which  is  good."  It  is  implied  that  we 
are  not  to  be  always  proving.  As  a  result  of  our  proving,  we  find  out  that  which  U 
good.  It  is  a  duty  we  owe  to  that  which  is  good  to  hold  it  fast,  and  not  to  let  it  go. 
If  we  have  found  the  Bible  to  be  the  Word  of  God,  let  us  hold  it  fast.  Let  us  take 
it  as  nutriment  to  our  souls.  Let  it  be  the  test  by  which  we  try  things.  "  To  the 
Law  and  to  the  testimony :  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  word,  it  is  because  there 
is  no  light  in  them."  If  we  have  satisfied  ourselves  as  to  the  claims  of  Christ  as  our 
Divine  teacher,  let  us  hold  him  fast ;  let  us  take  his  teachings  into  our  being,  and  let 
the  confessing  of  Christ  be  that  by  which  we  try  the  spirits,  not  persons,  but  rather  the 
spirit  by  which  individuals,  communities,  institutes,  systems,  are  animated.  If  we  have 
satisfied  ourselves  that  Christ  has  made  full  atonement  for  our  sin,  let  us  hold  that  truth 
fast  as  central,  let  us  take  all  the  comfort  there  is  in  it,  and  let  it  be  the  test  of  loyalty 
to  Christ.  If  we  have  found  out  what  a  good  life  is  as  commended  and  exemplified  by 
Christ,  and  as  put  to  the  proof  by  ourselves,  let  us  hold  it  fast  as  what  has  held  us  up 
in  the  past,  as  what  has  held  up  the  good  in  all  the  generations,  as  what  will  hold  us 
up  until  we  obtain  an  immutable  standing  in  heaven.  And  let  us  not,  with  a  false 
toleration,  think  that  any  life  can  be  good  which  wants  the  great  theistic,  and  especially 
the  great  Christian,  elements.  2.  On  the  other  hand  to  abstain  from  evil.  "  Abstain 
from  every  form  of  evil."  The  old  translation  is  indefensible  here.  The  words  should 
not  have  formed  a  verse  by  themselves ;  they  should  have  been  added  on  to  the  former 
words.  In  view  of  the  good  and  evil  that  are  separated  in  the  proving  of  things,  we  are 
on  the  one  hand  to  hold  fast  that  which  is  good,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  abstain  from 
every  form  of  evil.  If  anything  is  yet  undetermined  to  our  mind,  our  duty  as  already 
laid  down  is  to  find  out  its  true  nature.  If,  after  examination,  it  is  of  a  doubtful  nature, 
or  seems  to  be  bordering  on  evil,  our  duty  certainly  is  to  abstain  from  it.  But  the  duty 
laid  down  here  is  different  from  that.  It  is  our  duty  with  regard  to  what  we  have 
found  out  to  be  one  of  the  many  forms  of  evil.  Having  found  it  out  to  be  evil  iu 
reality,  let  us  not  hesitate  about  our  course,  let  us  abstain  from  it,  let  us  refuse  to  taste 
it  even  as  we  would  not  take  poison,  let  us  turn  away  from  it  as  from  that  which  is 
alien  from  our  being  and  fitted  only  to  work  our  destruction. — B.  F. 

Vers.  23 — 28. — Prayer.  L  Prater  for  the  banctifioation  of  thb  Tiiessa- 
loni/ws,     "And   tlie   God  of  peace  himself  sanctify  you  wholly;    and  may   you? 


oh.  v.  1— 28.]    THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  129 

spirit  and  soul  and  body  be  preserved  entire,  without  blame  at  the  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  From  the  object  of  the  prayer  God  is  here  named  the  God  of 
peace.  The  peace  which  takes  away  the  discord  of  our  nature  and  restores  its  harmony 
is  his  will  and  gift.  But  he  is  only  the  God  of  peace  to  us  in  our  sanctification.  The 
apostle  had  been  exhorting  to  various  forms  of  holiness.  Feeling,  however,  how  feeble 
his  part  was  in  their  sanctification,  he  m^kes  his  appeal  to  the  first  Cause  of  Sanctifi- 
cation. "  The  God  of  peace  himself  sanctify  you."  In  sanctification  there  is  the  idea 
of  being  set  apart  to  the  service  of  God.  In  the  prayer  the  stress  is  laid  on  the  wholeness 
of  the  sanctifi "ation.  In  the  word  translated  "  wholly  "  there  is  the  idea  of  wholeness 
in  the  way  of  the  end  being  reached.  The  materials  of  the  temple-building  and  vessels 
were  originally  in  a  rough  state.  But,  put  into  the  hands  of  cunning  workmen,  they 
were  brought  up  into  apt  and  consistent  and  beautiful  forms.  And  not  without 
sprinkling  of  blood  were  they  dedicated  to  God.  So  the  stuff  of  which  we  are  made 
is  originally  in  an  unpolished,  defiled  condition ;  but,  in  the  hands  of  the  great  Artificer, 
through  the  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  are  we  being  brought  up  into  a  state  in 
which,  in  our  whole  being,  we  shall  be  fit  for  being  employed  in  the  service  of  God. 
In  the  second  part  of  the  prayer  there  is  brought  in  another  aspect  of  the  wholeness  of 
sanctification.  And  the  word  which  indicates  it  is  brought  forward  in  the  original  out 
of  its  natural  position,  so  as  to  be  ^separated  from  the  similar  word  translated  "  wholly  " 
only  by  "  and."  It  conveys  the  idea  of  being  whole  in  the  way  of  being  entire  in  its  parts. 
"  It  means  what  represents  the  whole  undivided  possession,  what  is  not  weakened  by 
division,  and  thus  subsists  in  perfect  integrity  "  (Delitzsch).  The  integrity  re!ers  to  the 
three  parts  into  which  our  nature  is  here  regarded  as  divided — spirit  and  soul  and 
body.  In  some  places  Scripture  language  turns  upon  the  distinction  between  the 
material  and  immaterial  nature  of  man.  Here  the  immaterial  nature  is  divided  into 
spirit  and  soul.  And  this  is  in  keeping  with  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit  in 
Heb.  iv.  12,  and  also  with  the  contrast  between  the  present  psychical  body  and  the 
future  spiritual  body  in  1  Cor.  xv.  "  Whilst  the  soul,"  says  Olshausen,  who  has  made 
a  special  study  of  this  subject,  "  denotes  the  lower  region  of  the  inner  man — comprises, 
therefore,  the  powers  to  which  analogous  ones  are  found  in  animal  life  also,  as  under- 
standing, appetitive  faculty,  memory,  fancy — the  spirit  includes  those  natural  dis- 
positions which  constitute  the  true  human  life ;  viz.  reason,  as  the  faculty  of  perceiving 
the  Divine;  conscience,  as  the  faculty  of  distinguishing  moral  good  and  evil;  free-will, 
as  the  faculty  of  moral  choice,  by  which  the  ability  to  form  a  history  is  purchased." 
The  spirit,  we  may  say,  is  that  by  which  we  have  the  power  of  knowing  and  serving 
God,  and  of  making  character,  and  in  which,  in  its  whole  range,  we  are  separated  from 
the  brutes.  The  soul  is  the  lower  part  of  the  inner  man,  in  which,  in  its  judgments, 
and  longings,  and  recollections,  and  imaginings,  the  spirit  is  designed  to  bear  rule.  The 
body,  or  outer  man,  which  is  quickened  by  the  soul,  and  has  the  power  of  exciting  the 
soul,  is  another  sphere  in  which,  in  its  appetites  and  powers,  the  spirit  is  designed  to 
bear  rule  through  the  soul.  The  spirit  is  wholly  sanctified  in  the  sense  intended  when, 
through  the  possession  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  reason  and  conscience  faithfully  represent 
the  Divine  voice, and  the  will  is  faithfully  responsive ;  when,  as  a  whole.it  is  the  ruling 
centre  with  reference  to  the  rest  of  the  nature.  The  soul  is  wholly  sanctified  when  the 
understanding  is  used  as  a  help  to  the  keeping  of  Divine  precepts ;  when  the  desires 
and  affections  are  divinely  regulated  and  purified  and  tempered ;  when  there  is  a  ready 
memory  for  the  Word  of  God,  and  a  readiness  from  past  associations  in  calling  up 
good  thoughts ;  when  the  imagination  is  filled  with  Christ  and  the  Christian  ideal  and 
the  Christian  prospect;  when,  as  a  whole,  this  part  of  our  nature  does  not  assert 
its  independence  of  the  spirit  above,  and  can  resist  the  charms  of  the  senses  below. 
The  body  is  wholly  sanctified  when  its  various  members  are  used  as  instruments  of 
righteousness  ;  when,  as  a  whole,  it  does  not  aspire  to  rule  in  the  soul ;  when  it  takes 
its  law  from  pure  judgments,  and  desires,  and  recollections,  and  imaginings.  Such 
is  the  wholeness  of  sanctification  in  the  integrity  of  the  nature.  And  what,  on  the 
positive  side,  is  represented  as  integrity  of  nature,  on  the  negative  side  is  represented 
as  being  without  blame.  Here  there  is  a  glance  forward,  as  there  frequently  is  in  this 
Epistle,  to  the  coming  of  Christ.  It  is  then  that  the  integrity  of  our  nature  is  to  be 
fully  realized,  and  to  be  placed  in  inviolable  keeping.  Beyond  that  point,  the  integrity 
of  our  nature  perfectly  attained,  no  power  in  the  universe  can  ever  break. 

I.    THESSALONIANS.  _ 


130  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  t.  1—28 

II.  Thb  prayer  grounded  in  the  faithfulness  op  God.  "Faithful  is  he  that 
calleth  you,  who  will  also  do  it."  There  is  a  distinct  covenanting  on  the  part  of  God 
to  bring  about  our  sanctification.  "  For  this  is  the  covenant  that  I  will  make  with  the 
house  of  Israel  after  those  days,  saith  the  Lord ;  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  mind, 
and  on  their  heart  also  will  I  write  them  :  and  I  will  be  to  them  a  God,  and  they  shall 
be  to  me  a  people."  God,  in  calling,  actually  begins  the  covenant  work  of  our  sanctifi- 
cation,  and  an  appeal  can  be  made  to  him  as  the  faithful  God,  by  ourselves  or  others, 
to  carry  out  what  he  has  begun.  Let  us  not  be  backward  to  remind  him  of  his 
promise,  or  to  look  for  it  being  followed  by  performance. 

Conclusion.  1.  Bequest  for  prayer,  "  Brethren,  pray  for  us."  This  request  for  prayer 
comes  from  the  three  Christian  workers.  They  were  thrown  upon  those  for  whom  they 
laboured,  in  being  themselves  also  compassed  with  infirmity.  They  felt  that,  if  the 
Divine  blessing  was  to  rest  upon  their  work  in  the  highest  measure,  then  the  Thessa- 
loniau  Church  must  join  with  the  other  Churches  in  giving  them  the  assistance  of  their 
prayers.  2.  The  holy  kiss.  "  Salute  all  the  brethren  with  a  holy  kiss."  This  was  the 
common  Eastern  form  of  salutation,  associated  with  religion.  Apparently  the  elders 
were  thus  to  salute  the  members  of  the  Thessalonian  Church,  one  by  one,  in  the  name 
of  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy.  Propriety  does  not  allow  with  us  the  use  of  this  form 
of  salutation  between  the  various  members  of  the  Christian  circle.  But  there  is  no 
reason  why  there  should  not  be  all  the  good  feeling  and  fellowship  with  Christ  of 
which  the  holy  kiss  is  symbolic.  At  the  same  time,  if  love  is  to  be  sustained,  it  must 
be  allowed  all  suitable  forms  of  manifestation.  3.  Direction  as  to  the  public  reading  of 
the  Epistle.  "  I  adjure  you  by  the  Lord  that  this  Epistle  be  read  unto  all  the  brethren." 
The  direction  is  given  in  the  most  solemn  manner.  Paul  writes  in  his  own  name,  and 
adjures  by  the  Lord.  The  adjuration  was  apparently  founded  on  the  importance  of  the 
Epistle,  not  merely  to  the  elders  to  whom  it  was  handed,  but  to  the  whole  community. 
Let  it  be  brought  directly  to  bear  upon  all,  that  they  may  each  for  themselves  have 
their  impression  of  its  contents.  Such  an  adjuration  in  the  first  of  Paul's  Epistles 
significantly  points  to  the  right  of  every  Christian  member  to  have  direct  access  to  the 
Word  of  God.  "  What  Paul,"  says  Bengel, "  commands  with  an  adjuration,  Rome  pro- 
hibits with  an  anathema."  4.  Benediction.  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be 
with  you."  He  ends  his  Epistle  as  he  began,  by  imploring  grace.  It  is  to  the  ever- 
living  Divine  Head  of  the  Church  that  we  must  look  for  the  bestowal  of  the  blessing, 
and  not  according  to  the  merit  of  any  for  whom  we  implore  it,  but  only  according  to  the 
abundance  of  the  merit  that  he  has  obtained  for  them. — R.  F. 

Vers.  2 — 4. — A  thief  in  the  night.  The  one  idea  to  be  impressed  upon  us  by  this 
striking  image  is  that  of  unexpectedness.  The  thief  succeeds  in  making  his  entrance 
when  he  is  least  expected.  So  will  it  be  on  "  the  day  of  the  Lord."  The  idea  is  derived 
from  the  teaching  of  Christ,  in  which  it  is  more  fully  expanded  (see  Matt.  xxiv. 
43,  44).  The  "day  of  the  Lord"  which  is  to  come  thus  suddenly  is  often  referred  to 
in  the  Old  Testament.  There  it  is  a  dreadful  occasion  of  Divine  manifestation  for 
judgment,  to  be  hailed  with  gladness  when  the  judgment  falls  on  the  enemies  of  Israel 
and  brings  the  chosen  people  deliverance,  but  to  be  regarded  with  terror  by  sinful 
Israelites  (Amos  v.  18).  St.  Paul  regards  it  as  the  day  of  Christ's  second  advent.  But 
the  general  use  of  the  expression  in  the  Old  Testament  justifies  us  in  applying  the 
warniDg  concerning  it  to  various  forms  of  the  parousia. 

I.  The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  upon  the  benighted  as  a  thief.  1.  The  day 
is  unexpected.  What  did  the  heathen  fellow-citizens  of  the  Tbessalonians  know,  or 
think,  or  care  about  the  glorious  advent  of  Christ,  with  its  angel-su  mmons  and  its  trumpet- 
blast  for  which  the  Christians  were  watching  so  eagerly  ?  The  Jews  did  not  expect  the 
coming  of  the  Son  of  man  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  The  world  does  not  think 
of  the  great  judgment-day.  Worldly  people  do  not  contemplate  death.  2.  No  signs 
are  given  to  the  world  of  the  dawning  of  this  dread  day.  No  lurid  twilight  betokens  the 
tempestuous  morning.  It  bursts  suddenly  upon  a  world  slumbering  in  darkness.  ■ 
Science,  philosophy,  ordinary  signs  of  the  times,  give  no  hint  of  it  to  the  unspiritual. 
The  biblical  arithmetic  of  our  modern  prophets  is  always  proving  itself  at  fault.  No 
bare  intellectual  calculation  will  ever  discover  the  "  day  of  the  Lord."  3.  It  is  best  for 
the  world  that  no  natural  signs  should  herald  this  day.     (1)  Christian  people  are  better 


oh.  v.  1—28.}    THE  F1KST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  131 

without  the  common  signs  which  could  he  discerned  by  ordinary  observation.  To 
possess  them  would  be  to  walk  by  sight.  They  are  hot  given  in  order  that  faith  may 
be  exercised.  (2)  The  world  at  large  is  better  without  these  signs.  They  would  dis- 
arrange all  the  necessary  pursuits  of  life.  Some  would  cry  abjectly  for  mercy  without 
really  repenting  at  heart.  Some,  as  when  plagues  raged  in  cities,  would  fling  off  all 
restraints  and  plunge  into  a  reckless  course  of  debauchery.  Some  would  coldly  calculate 
the  time  allowed  for  sinning  before  they  would  need  to  bethink  them  of  preparing  for 
the  end. 

II.  The  day  of  the  Lord  will  not  oomb  upon  the  enlightened  as  a  thief.  St. 
Paul  makes  an  important  distinction  here — one  that  is  not  always  recognized :  "  But 
ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief."  1. 
No  men  are  enlightened  as  to  the  date  of  the  second  advent.  Even  Christ  did  not  know 
it.  This  he  distinctly  says  (Mark  xiii.  32).  2.  Christians  are  enlightened  as  to  the 
fact  and  the  character  of  the  second  advent.  (1)  They  know  that  Christ  will  come  again, 
which  is  more  than  the  unbelieving  world  knows.  They  have  Christ's  own  promise  to 
rely  upon  (Matt.  xxiv.  30).  (2)  They  know  that  Christ  will  come  unexpectedly.  At 
least,  they  ought  to  know  this  if  they  read  the  teachings  of  Scripture  on  the  subject. 

3.  The  enlightenment  of  Christians  will  prevent  the  second  advent  from  coming  upon 
them  like  a  thief.  When  we  are  prepared  for  a  surprise,  it  is  no  longer  a  surprise.  If 
we  know  a  thing  may  happen  at  any  time,  its  occurrence  will  not  give  us  the  shock  of 
an  unexpected  event.  Christ,  longed  for,  eagerly  desired,  fondly  expected,  will  come 
at  an  hour  when  his  people  know  not,  but  not  when  his  true  disciples  are  unprepared 
to  welceme  him. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  6—8. — Night  and  day.  St.  Paul  writes  of  two  classes  of  people  whose  con- 
ditions correspond  respectively  to  night  and  day.  Many  associations  of  gloom  and  evil 
and  ignorance  gather  round  the  image  of  night,  while  their  opposites — brightness, 
goodness,  knowledge,  etc. — are  suggested  by  the  idea  of  day.  One  advantage  of  the 
metaphorical  language  of  Scripture  is  that  it  gives  to  us  richer  and  more  suggestive 
ideas  than  could  be  conveyed  by  bare  abstract  phrases.  Subsidiary  notions,  like  chro- 
matic chords  in  music,  give  tone  and  richness  to  the  main  idea  impressed  upon  us  by 
a  manifold  and  significant  image.  This  is  apparent  with  the  use  of  the  images  light 
and  darkness  by  St.  John.  St.  Paul  would  have  us  think  that  the  unspiritual  and 
godless  world  is  in  general  like  a  people  of  the  night,  while  the  Church  is  like  a  city  of 
light.  But  probably  the  enlightenment  of  revelation,  the  daylight  of  spiritual  know- 
ledge, is  the  prominent  thought  in  the  mind  of  the  apostle.  For  we  find  that  in 
previous  verses  he  has  been  referring  to  the  shock  of  surprise  to  the  world  which  will 
not  be  shared  by  enlightened  Christians.  On  the  fact  of  their  greater  enlightenment  he 
now  founds  an  exhortation  to  conduct  worthy  of  it  The  fuller  light  demands  the 
holier  life.    Sons  of  the  day  have  not  the  excuses  of  children  of  night. 

I.  The  ohildben  of  the  night.  1.  These  are  in  darkness.  The  darkness  is  not 
confined  to  the  illiterate.  Nor  is  it  confined  to  the  inhabitants  of  heathen  lands. 
People  in  Christian  countries,  who  are  familiar  with  the  language  of  the  New  Testament, 
may  be  totally  ignorant  of  its  spiritual  thought.  Such  people,  though  they  sit  in 
university  chairs  as  professors  of  divinity,  are  blinded  with  midnight  blackness.  Was 
not  Faust  in  the  night?  2.  Some  of  the  children  of  the  night  sleep.  These  are  the 
thoughtless  and  careless.  They  may  be  awake  to  secular  business.  But  they  slumber 
over  moral  and  spiritual  subjects.  If  they  think  of  them  at  all  it  is  with  dreamy 
unconcern.  3.  Others  of  the  children  of  the  night  are  awake  only  to  evil.  They  spend 
the  night  in  drunkenness.    They  hide  shameful  practices  under  the  cloak  of  darkness. 

4.  The  guilt  of  the  children  of  the  night  is  mitigated  just  in  proportion  as  their 
benighting  is  not  wilful.  If  it  arises  from  their  unhappy  circumstances,  these  unfortu- 
nate people  cannot  be  condemned  to  the  same  doom  as  that  of  men  who  sin  with  their 
eyes  open,  or  as  that  of  those  who  wilfully  put  out  their  eyes  because  they  love  darkness. 

II.  The  sons  of  the  day.  1.  These  are  enlightened.  They  may  not  be  brilliantly 
intellectual  nor  highly  educated.  They  may  be  illiterate  in  human  lore.  But  the 
"  eyes  of  their  hearts  "  (Eph.  i.  18)  are  opened.  By  faith  and  love  and  obedience  they 
have  come  to  know  what  God  has  revealed  through  his  Spirit.  2.  Sons  of  the  day  are 
expected  to  bo  wakeful.    It  is  natural  to  sleep  in  the  night.    Sleep  in  the  day  betokens 


132  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  v.  1—28, 

sinful  indolence.  The  indifference  of  spiritually  ignorant  people  is  natural.  That  of 
Christians  on  whom  has  risen  "  the  Dayspring  from  on  high "  is  monstrous.  3.  Sons 
of  the  day  are  expected  to  be  sober.  It  is  bad  enough  to  be  drunken  in  the  night,  but 
a  debauch  which  is  not  shamed  by  the  light  of  day  proves  itself  to  be  scandalously 
depraved.  There  are  excesses  of  passion,  of  self-will,  and  of  worldly  excitement  which 
Christian  people  who  have  escaped  the  coarser  sins  fall  into.  These  are  not  excusable 
in  the  children  of  the  night,  but  they  are  much  less  excusable  in  the  sons  of  the  day. 
Sobriety  becomes  the  enlightened  Christian.  This  sobriety  need  not  consist  in  Puritan 
rigour ;  much  less  should  it  partake  of  sourness,  gloom,  or  prim  formality.  The  sober 
Christian  should  remember  that  the  typical  citizen  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  a  little 
child.  Sobriety  is  just  the  opposite  to  unrestrained  passionateness  of  pleasure  or  anger. 
4.  Sons  of  the  day  are  provided  with  armour.  The  three  graces — faith,  hope,  and  love 
— constitute  the  armour  of  the  Christian.  They  protect  the  two  most  vital  parts — 
breast  and  head.  Faith  and  love  come  together,  for  they  interact.  Faith  working  by 
love  protects  the  heart.  Hope,  the  hope  of  final  deliverance  from  trial  and  temptation, 
is  the  helmet,  because  it  protects  the  head  by  keeping  the  thoughts  clear  and  calm. 
— W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  9,  10. — The  Divine  appointment  of  Christian*.  To  some  it  may  seem  super- 
fluous that  a  Christian  apostle,  writing  to  the  members  of  a  Christian  Church,  should 
say,  "  God  appointed  us  not  unto  wrath."  But  the  import  of  this  declaration  is  made 
apparent  by  what  precedes.  St.  Paul  has  been  contrasting  the  condition  of  the  sons  of 
light  with  that  of  the  children  of  darkness.  Among  the  latter  are  to  be  found  all 
degrees  of  that  conduct  which  hides  under  the  cloak  of  night — from  the  carelessness  that 
sleeps,  down  to  the  debauchery  that  is  awake  only  to  cause  its  own  shame.  Such  things 
must  bring  wrath  in  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  2).  But  Christians  are  called  to  quite 
another  life.  They  are  not  destined  to  wrath.  Let  them,  therefore,  not  behave  as  the 
sons  of  the  night,  but  in  a  way  that  is  worthy  of  their  call  to  salvation,  with  sobriety 
and  confidence,  strong  in  faith  and  love,  and  rejoicing  in  hope  (ver.  8). 

I.  The  Divine  appointment  to  salvation.  1.  It  springs  from  an  august  Source. 
God  appoints  to  salvation.  He  has  a  hand  in  our  destinies.  We  are  not  left  to  dis- 
cover a  way  of  escape  from  ruin  for  ourselves.  God  has  interfered  for  our  deliverance. 
2.  It  is  dttermined  by  a  firm  ordinance.  God  "appointed."  This  word  signifies  pre- 
vision, arrangement,  definite  order.  Bedemption  is  not  an  irregular  makeshift  brought 
about  by  a  hasty  after-thought.  It  enters  into  the  calm,  eternal  thoughts  of  God,  and 
takes  its  place  in  the  orderly  disposition  of  the  Divine  government.  3.  It  aims  at 
securing  a  large  result.  When  God  makes  bare  his  arm  and  settles  a  solemn  appoint- 
ment, this  must  be  for  some  adequate  result.  The  object  must  be  large  to  justify  so 
large  an  action.  Here  it  is  nothing  less  than"  perfect  deliverance  from  the  ruin  of  sin. 
Salvation  is  not  a  technical  phrase.  It  is  too  big  a  word  to  be  defined  by  a  theological 
sentence.  It  is  deliverance  all  round — from  root  and  fruit  of  evil,  from  wrath  of  justice, 
from  penalty  of  law,  from  tyranny  of  Satan,  from  vice  of  heart,  from  judgment  without, 
from  corruption  within.  4.  It  is  to  be  personally  accepted.  We  are  appointed  to 
"  the  obtaining  of  salvation  ; "  for  (1)  though  ordained  by  God,  it  is  not  enjoyed  by  us 
until  we  have  personal  experience  of  it ;  (2)  this  personal  acceptance  depends  on  our 
own  will  and  act ;  (3)  the  full  consequences  of  the  Divine  ordinance  of  salvation  are 
still  future. 

II.  The  method  of  accomplishing  this  Divine  appointment.  1.  It  is  secured  by 
the  mediation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Thus  it  is  to  be  obtained  "  through  "  him, 
which  means  (1)  that  the  salvation  itself  is  brought  about  by  the  action  of  Christ ;  and 
(2)  that  it  becomes  ours  when  we  are  united  to  Christ.  Now  each  of  these  points  has 
its  own  distinct  position  in  the  great  work.  Too  often  they  are  confused  together.  It 
is  not  necessary  for  us  to  comprehend  all  that  Christ  does.  Our  part  is  to  see  that  we 
are  united  to  him.  He  will  do  his  part  whether  we  understand  it  or  not.  2.  It 
involved  the  death  of  Christ/or  us.  So  much  we  know  as  a  fact,  whatever  theory  we 
may  have  as  to  the  bearings  of  the  crucifixion  upon  the  process  of  redemption.  And  it 
is  the  great  fact  which  is  of  supreme  importance  to  us.  It  is  unfortunate  that  abstract 
propositions  concerning  the  theological  aspects  of  it  should  confuse  our  vision  of  the 
simple,  touching  statement,  "  He.  dcd  f  >r  us." 


oh.  v.  1—28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  133 

III.  Thb  end  fob  which  this  Divine  appointment  is  made.  1.  This  it  that  we 
may  live  in  fellowship  with  Christ.  Strictly  speaking,  the  fellowship  with  Christ  is  given 
as  the  object  of  the  suffering  of  death  by  Christ.  But  the  earlier  part  of  the  passage 
shows  us  the  Divine  appointment  of  salvation  as  secured  through  Christ.  Putting  the 
two  together,  we  see  that  salvation  is  worthless  without  the  life  in  Christ,  as  well  as 
that  salvation  is  only  possible  to  those  who  are  in  fellowship  with  Christ.  Salvation  is 
in  itself  a  negative  term.  Bare  deliverance  is  of  little  use  unless  some  good  is  to  be 
made  of  the  liberty  and  immunity.  While  a  fellow-creature  is  being  saved  from  death 
by  drowning  we  follow  the  process  with  intense  interest ;  but  after  his  deliverance  we 
may  not  feel  much  concern  with  his  future  career.  It  may  be  that  he  will  make  but  a 
poor  use  of  his  restored  life.  If  we  finished  the  story  we  might  find  the  issue  to  be  a 
pitiable  anti-climax.  God  is  guarding  his  great  appointment  from  a  similar  catastrophe. 
They  who  are  saved  live  in  fellowship  with  Christ.  Such  a  life  is  worth  securing  at 
the  greatest  cost.  2.  This  fellowship  with  Christ  is  independent  of  the  greatest  outward 
changes.    It  remains  whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  i.e.  whether  we  live  or  die.. — W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — Three  universal  exhortations.  The  striking  feature  of  these  three 
exhortations  is  their  universality.  It  is  natural  that  we  should  sometimes  pray  and 
rejoice  and  give  thanks.  But  certainly  it  does  not  come  naturally  to  us  to  be  always 
doing  these  three  things.  Nearly  all  men  experience  them  at  some  time  in  their  lives. 
Universality  and  continuance  are  to  be  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  Christians 
in  regard  to  them.  It  is,  says  St.  Paul,  "  the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  to  you-ward  " 
that  these  remarkable  signs  of  grace  should  be  seen  in  Christian  people. 

I.  Perpetual  bejoioino.  Christians  are,  of  course,  subject  to  natural  fluctuation* 
of  mood  and  feeling.  They  are  also  liable  to  the  changes  of  fortune ;  and  they  are  not 
callous  to  the  perception  of  them.  None  of  us  can  escape  sorrow.  Some  good  people 
have  the  greatest  troubles.  The  only  perfect  Man  who  ever  lived  was  "a  Man  of 
sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief."  How,  then,  can  we  rejoice  always  ?  St.  Paul  was 
too  real  and  too  sympathetic  to  mock  the  sorrowing  with  the  glib  words  of  cheer  that 
shallow  comforters  administer.  If  he  exhorted,  he  knew  that  the  exhortation  wag 
practicable.  1.  Christian  rejoicing  is  a  deep,  calm  joy.  The  surface  may  be  ruffled 
while  the  depths  are  still;  cross-currents  may  vary  while  the  undercurrent  runs  steadily 
on.  Surface  pain  may  conceal  sacred  joys  which  it  cannot  destroy.  2.  The  secret  of 
Christian  joy  is  inwardness.  These  Christians  do  not  depend  on  external  circumstances 
for  their  happiness.  The  spiritual  sources  of  rejoicing  in  the  love  and  presence  of  God 
are  not  disturbed  by  earthly  calamities.  Often  they  give  forth  sweetest  blessedness 
under  the  blows  of  affliction,  as  the  waters  flowed  out  when  Moses  struck  the  rock.  If 
we  want  to  rejoice  always  we  must  live  always  near  to  God.  The  first  exhortation  is 
closely  connected  with  the  second.  3.  Christians  are  also  helped  to  rejoice  always  by 
living  in  the  future  (2  Cor.  iv.  17, 18). 

II.  Ceaseless  prating.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  this  does  not  mean  that  we  are  to 
be  always  on  our  knees.  That  is  not  possible ;  nor  would  it  be  right,  for  the  work  of 
life  must  be  done.  We  are  not  only  worshippers;  we  are  servants.  1.  Ceaseless  praying 
is  a  continuous  direction  of  the  heart  towards  God.  The  essence  of  prayer  is  not  the 
uttering  of  devout  phrases.  God  does  not  hear  us  for  our  much  speaking.  Christ  con- 
demned long  prayers,  not  because  we  could  pray  too  much,  but  because  they  became 
superstitious  as  though  a  worth  lay  in  their  length,  and  also  because  they  became 
formal  when  the  spirit  flagged.  Prayer  is  essentially  spiritual  communion  with 
God.  This  must  be  supported,  however,  and  inspired  by  definite  seasons  wholly 
given  to  devotion.  People  often  abuse  the  motto,  Laborare  est  orare.  It  is  only  true 
of  the  prayerful  man.  2.  Ceaseless  praying  is  attainable  through  the  enjoyment  of 
unbroken  union  with  Qod.  Our  thought  may  not  be  always  occupied  with  God  because 
the  duties  of  life  demand  our  attention,  and  its  recreations  are  requisite  for  our  health. 
But  if  we  live  near  to  God  we  shall  have  an  abiding  sense  of  God's  nearness,  a  quick 
uplifting  of  the  heart  to  him  in  quiet  moments,  and  many  a  secret  talk  with  him  even 
in  our  busiest  hours. 

III.  Universal  thanksgiving.  The  difficulty  is  to  make  this  honest.  For  it  is  an 
insult  to  God  to  utter  words  of  thanksgiving  while  the  heart  is  ungrateful.  How  can 
we  thank  God  for  pain,  for  loss,  for  things  the  good  of  which  we  canuot  discover?    L 


134  THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  v.  1— 26 

Universal  thanksgiving  it  possible  through  the  perception  that  under  all  circumstances 
blessings  outnumber  and  outweigh  troubles.  We  fix  our  thoughts  on  our  trouble  to  the 
neglect  of  a  thousand  blessings.  A  fairer,  wider  consideration  would  call  up  more 
grateful  thoughts.  2.  Universal  thanksgiving  is  possible  by  means  of  faith  that  holds 
troubles  sent  by  God  to  be  blessings  in  disguise.  A  mere  consideration  of  the  facts  of 
life  will  not  create  it.  But  when  we  have  come  to  believe  that  "  the  mercy  of  the  Lord 
endureth  for  ever,"  we  have  learnt  the  secret  of  universal  thankfulness. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  19. — Quenching  the  Spirit.  This  verse  is  often  misread.  The  context  shows 
that  it  does  not  refer  to  the  resistance  of  the  sinner  to  the  striving  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
his  heart.  For  the  words  immediately  following,  "  despise  not  prophesyings,"  indicate 
its  reference  to  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  inspiring  utterances  in  the  Church.  Some 
prosaic,  cautious  people  were  inclined  to  check  these  enthusiastic  utterances.  Perhaps 
there  were  foolish  would-be  prophets  who  were  making  themselves  and  the  Church 
ridiculous  by  their  predictions  about  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  a  subject  in  which  the 
Church  at  Thessalonica  was  then  deeply  interested.  St.  Paul  does  not  wish  his  readers 
to  accept  all  that  is  offered  to  them,  for  he  says,  "  Prove  all  things."  But  he  fears  lest, 
in  the  rejection  of  imposture,  pretence,  illusion,  and  misguided  fanaticism,  genuine 
teachings  of  the  Divine  Spirit  should  be  discarded.  Therefore  he  warns  his  readers 
against  the  danger  of  quenching  the  Spirit. 

L  There  is  a  fire  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  fire  that  is  not  to  be  quenched.  In  Old 
Testament  times  a  prophet  was  fitted  for  his  mission  by  having  a  live  coal  from  off  the 
altar  laid  upon  his  lips  (Isa.  vi.  6).  Christ,  who  came  to  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
came  also  to  baptize  with  fire.  The  Spirit  descended  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  under  the 
form  of  tongues  of  flame.  God's  Spirit  deepens  feeling,  kindles  enthusiasm,  rouses 
sacred  passion,  sets  the  soul  aflame  with  love.  He  who  has  not  felt  the  fire  knows  not 
some  of  the  strongest  working  of  the  Spirit,  as  the  psalmist  knew  it  when  he  said, 
"  While  I  was  musing  the  fire  burned  "  (Ps.  xxxix.  3). 

IL  There  is  a  danger  lest  we  should  quench  the  Spirit.  1.  In  our  own  hearts. 
If  we  check  our  more  generous  emotions,  and  harden  ourselves  with  maxims  of  the 
world,  and  so  immerse  ourselves  in  grinding  business  cares  that  we  have  no  thought  or 
heart  left  for  spiritual  feelings,  we  shall  quench  the  Spirit  in  ourselves.  For  us  there 
will  be  no  revelation.  To  us  heaven  will  be  black  as  midnight,  silent  as  the  grave. 
No  warmth  of  devotion  nor  flash  of  spiritual  perception  will  brighten  up  the  dull  and 
dreary  chambers  of  our  souls.  2.  In  others.  Beware  of  checking  young  enthusiasm. 
It  may  err ;  but  it  had  better  err  than  die.  Middle-aged  common  sense  may  not  under- 
stand it.  But  this  may  not  be  the  fault  of  young  enthusiasm.  It  may  result  from  the 
deadened  perceptions  of  an  unsympathizing  mind.  If  we  cannot  follow,  at  least  let  us 
not  check  an  inspiration  which  may  be  too  high  for  our  low  sunken  lives.  3.  In 
Scripture.  Absolutely,  of  course,  we  cannot  quench  the  Spirit  in  Scripture.  The  Book 
remains,  whatever  we  may  think  of  it.  But  to  ourselves  we  may  quench  the  Spirit.  A 
dry,  hard  critical  examination  of  the  Bible,  ignoring  all  devotional,  practical,  and 
spiritual  uses  of  it,  will  rob  it  of  all  inspiration  for  the  reader.  With  some  the  fires  are 
burnt  out;  they  only  grope  among  the  ashes,  and  cannot  find  a  lingering  spark.  To 
such  people  the  Bible  is  the  most  dreary  book  in  the  world.  In  order  that  the  fire  of 
inspiration  should  touch  us,  the  fire  of  love  and  faith  must  be  kept  alive  on  the  altar  oi 
our  hearts. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  21. — Private  Judgment.  This  verse  should  be  read  in  connection  with  the  pre- 
ceding passage.  There  we  find  a  caution  against  quenching  the  Spirit  and  despising 
prophesyings  by  a  narrow,  cold,  or  prejudiced  refusal  to  listen  to  the  utterances  of  our 
fellow-Chi istians.  Here  we  have  a  warning  in  the  other  direction,  that  we  may  guard 
against  accepting  every  saying  which  professes  to  be  the  outcome  of  spiritual  influences. 
We  must  try  the  spirits  and  accept  each  only  as  its  claim  is  proven.  But  the  universal 
character  of  the  verse  before  us  gives  it  a  more  general  application  to  all  teaching. 

I.  St.  Paul  recognizes  the  bight  and  duty  of  private  judgment.  This  funda- 
mental principle  of  Protestantism  is  Pauline.  The  apostle  is  not  writing  to  doctors  of 
livinity  or  authorized  teachers ;  he  is  addressing  the  whole  Church  (see  oh.  i.  1).  To 
:he  general  congregation  of  Christiana  he  says,  "  Prove  all  things."    The  advice  was  in 


oh.  v.  1—28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  135 

accordance  with  his  own  practice.  He  speaks  of  himself  and  his  colleagues — "  by  the 
manifestation  of  the  truth  commending  ourselves  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the 
sight  of  God"  (2  Cor.  iv.  2).  Contrast  the  Koran  with  the  New  Testament.  Moham- 
med dogmatizes;  St.  Paul  reasons.  We  cannot  shelter  ourselves  in  error  under  the 
mgis  of  high  authority.  St.  Paul  abandoned  with  contempt  the  errors  which  he  culti- 
vated while  ho  sat  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel.  It  is  our  duty  as  well  as  our  right  to  have 
independent  personal  convictions. 

II.  The  requirement  of  inquiry  is  universal.  "All  things."  We  mnst  take 
nothing  for  granted.  Some  of  the  surest  convictions  of  one  age  are  absolutely  repudiated 
by  another  age.  This  statement  becomes  softened  in  practice  by  the  ease  and  uncon- 
sciousness with  which  many  things  may  be  proved  to  us.  We  have  not  to  carry  on 
elaborate,  original  inquiries  to  establish  every  point  of  our  belief.  There  are  beliefs 
which  are  best  proved  without  any  such  inquiry.  But  all  must  be  proved.  The  reason 
is  twofold.  1.  Many  specious  delusions  threaten  to  deceive  us.  There  have  been  false 
prophets  flattering  the  people  with  smooth  words  since  the  days  of  Jeremiah's  oppo- 
nents. Truth  and  error  are  mixed.  Forged  coins  closely  resemble  good  sovereigns. 
Care  must  be  taken  to  sift  the  chaff  from  the  wheat.  2.  Truth  is  most  valuable  to  us 
when  we  have  tested  and  proved  it  for  ourselves.  Then  we  understand  it  most  clearly, 
believe  it  most  heartily,  and  value  it  most  highly.  The  few  islands  of  truth  for  which 
a  man  has  laboured  and  fought  through  seas  of  difficulty  are  more  precious  to  him  than 
vast  continents  of  truth  which  he  inherits  at  second  hand. 

III.  The  method  of  inquiry  must  be  experimental.  This  is  implied  by  the 
word  "  prove,"  which  means  test,  and  is  used  of  the  assaying  of  precious  metals.  High 
a  priori  argument  is  a  dangerous  guide.  The  more  tedious  and  less  pretentious 
methods  of  observation  and  experiment  are  safer.  To  this  method  Christ  referred  when, 
speaking  of  the  various  teachers  who  should  arise,  he  said,  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall 
know  theim."  This  does  not  mean  that  we  are  to  taste  the  fruits,  i.e.  to  adopt  every 
system  in  order  to  discover  its  merits.  We  can  observe  its  working  in  others.  There- 
fore the  first  requisite  in  regard  to  any  new  teaching  is  patience.  Give  it  time  to  reveal 
itself  by  its  fruits,  and  do  not  pass  a  hasty  judgment  upon  it.  If  you  do  not  wait 
for  the  harvest,  you  may  oot  out  wheat  with  tares.  Next,  careful  inquiry  is  to  be 
made ;  ideas  and  their  fruits  are  to  be  tested.  But  two  cautions  should  be  borne  in 
mind.  1.  The  experience  and  testimony  of  other  people  is  evidence.  We  may  not 
accept  what  any  say  simply  on  the  authority  of  their  official  position.  We  who  do 
not  believe  in  the  Pope  of  Rome  would  be  very  foolish  if  we  adopted  a  little  private 
pope  of  our  own  creation.  But  the  authority  of  knowledge,  experience,  and  ability  is 
weight  in  evidence.  2.  We  must  not  assume  that  nothing  is  true  but  what  we  can  prove. 
To  do  this  is  to  dethrone  the  pope  only  to  set  up  our  own  infallibility. 

IV.  The  end  of  inquiry  is  to  discover  and  to  hold  to  what  is  good.  It  is 
not  reasonable,  nor  happy,  nor  healthy  to  live  in  a  permanent  condition  of  unsettled 
conviction.  It  is  useless  to  inquire  at  all  if  our  inquiry  is  not  to  lead  us  to  some 
decisive  issue.  When  we  have  arrived  at  a  truth,  we  need  not  repeat  the  process  of 
seeking  for  it  over  and  over  again.  Having  proved  certain  things  to  be  good,  we  may 
rest  satisfied  with  the  result — always  preserving  an  open  mind  for  new  light,  for  it  is 
a  great  mistake  to  confound  an  open  mind  with  an  empty  mind.  1.  The  result  of 
inquiry  should  be  to  discover  what  is  good.  The  good  is  more  important  than  the 
beautiful,  the  pleasant,  the  convenient,  the  striking,  and  the  novel.  2.  When  the  good 
is  discovered  it  should  be  held  firmly.  Then  the  seeker  after  light  is  to  become  the 
guardian  and  champion  of  truth. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  23. — Complete  sanctification.  In  concluding  his  Epistle,  and  finishing  his  lilt 
of  practical  exhortations,  St.  Paul  sums  up  his  desires  for  the  welfare  of  his  readers  by 
one  comprehensive  prayer  for  their  complete  sanctification. 

I.  Consider  the  nature  of  sanctification.  The  sanctification  of  a  man  makes 
a  sanctuary  of  him.  It  consecrates  him  to  the  service  and  for  the  presence  of  God.. 
It  includes  two  things,  the  second  of  which  is  essential  to  the  first.  1.  Dedication. 
The  sanctified  man  is  dedicated  to  God.  He  yields  himself  up  to  the  will  of  God. 
He  is  ready  for  any  use  to  which  God  may  put  him.  He  lives  to  glorify  God. 
2.  Purification.    We  have  come  to  regard  this  as  essentially  the  same  as  sanctification, 


136  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO    THE   THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  ▼.  1—28. 


It  is  not  so,  for  Christ  was  sanctified  (John  xvii.  19),  and  he  never  needed  to  be 
purified.  But  the  great  hindrance  to  our  consecration  of  ourselves  to  God  or  to  any 
special  Divine  purpose,  is  sin.  Therefore  for  us  the  one  great  preliminary  is  purifi- 
cation. 

II.  Observe  the  scope  of  sanctifioation.  It  is  to  be  complete:  1.  In  range. 
It  affects  spirit,  soul,  and  body— St.  Paul's  human  trinity.  (1)  Spirit.  Our  highest 
thoughts,  aspirations,  and  efforts  are  to  be  sound,  pure,  and  devoted  to  God.  (2)  Soul. 
Our  lower  capacities  of  feeling  and  acting  in  our  natural  human  life  are  to  be  equally 
sanctified.  We  cannot  have  a  devout  spirituality  side  by  side  with  a  carnal  natural 
imagination.  Moreover,  our  natural  humanity,  in  its  lower  perceptions  and  energies, 
should  be  used  for  the  service  of  God.  (3)  Body.  This  is  not  only  not  to  be  degraded 
by  vicious  appetite,  but  to  be  used  as  an  instrument  for  God's  service.  It  is  un- 
christian to  mutilate  or  weaken  the  body.  This  should  be  kept  sound  and  healthy 
and  vigorous  for  our  Master's  use.  2.  In  intensity.  The  sanctification  is  to  be 
thorough.  Each  part  of  our  nature  is  to  be  "wholly"  sanctified.  We  must  not 
dedicate  ourselves  to  God  half-heartedly.  He  requires  the  whole  surrender  of  our 
whole  nature. 

III.  Note  the  source  of  sanctifioation.  It  is  in  God.  St.  Paul  turns  from 
exhortation  to  prayer.  Here  and  there  little  duties  are  directed  by  our  own  will  and 
energy.  But  the  grand  work  of  complete  purification  and  consecration  must  be  God's. 
1.  By  means  of  his  spiritual  influence.  He  sanctifies  by  breathing  into  us  his  Holy 
Spirit.  Contact  with  God  burns  out  sin,  and  lifts  the  soul  into  an  atmosphere  of 
holiness.  2.  By  means  of  his  providential  care.  St.  Paul  prays  that  God  will  keep 
his  readers  "  entire  " — as  we  read  in  the  Revised  Version.  He  guards  from  too  great 
temptation. 

IV.  Look  at  the  end  of  sanctifioation.  This  is  to  be  "  blameless  at  the  coming 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1.  Preparation  for  the  second  advent.  We  are  required 
to  be  ready  to  meet  Christ.  The  glad  expectation  should  encourage  every  effort  to 
prepare,  lest  we  should  be  like  the  foolish  virgins.  2.  Blamelessness.  Christ  comes 
as  Judge.  How  sad,  after  longing  to  see  him,  to  meet,  instead  of  a  welcome  from  our 
Lord,  only  stern  words  of  rebuke  1 — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  24. — Ood's  faithfulness.  Between  the  Divine  call  to  salvation  and  the  full 
accomplishment  of  salvation,  the  Christian  needs  faith  to  watch  and  wait,  to  work  and 
walk  through  the  darkness.  The  rock  on  which  he  must  build  this  faith  is  God's 
faithfulness. 

I.  Characteristics  of  God's  faithfulness.  L  God  performs  what  he  promises, 
God  promises  in  his  Word.  He  promises  most  solemnly,  and  as  it  were  by  oath,  in  his 
covenants,  e.g.  with  Noah,  with  Abraham,  with  Moses  and  Israel,  and  the  new  covenant 
sealed  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  God  also  promises  by  his  actions.  Natural  instincts, 
such  as  the  innate  thirst  for  light,  the  yearning  for  immortality,  etc.,  are  the  Creator's 
promises  written  on  the  very  being  of  his  creatures.  God's  faithfulness  means  that  he 
will  not  belie  these  promises.  2.  God  is  true  to  himself.  His  consistency  and  immu- 
tability are  the  grounds  of  his  faithfulness.  Because  he  is  true  to  himself  he  will  be 
true  to  us :  "  The  mercy  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever."  If  we  are  left  to  "  the 
uncovenanted  mercies"  of  God,  these  are  large  and  sure  enough  to  dispel  all  fear.  3. 
God  justifies  the  confidence  of  his  children.  Faithfulness  implies  trustworthiness.  If 
we  commit  our  souls  to  God  as  to  a  faithful  Creator,  he  accepts  our  trust,  and  thereby 
pledges  his  honour  not  to  desert  us. 

-  II.  Grounds  for  believing  in  God's  faithfulness.  1.  Our  knowledge  of  the  nature 
of  God.  If  we  believe  in  God  at  all,  we  must  believe  in  him  as  moral,  good,  nay, 
perfect.  A  weak  and  limited  being  may  change  and  fail.  God  is  too  great  to  be  faith- 
less. 2.  The  testimony  of  those  tvho  can  best  speak  for  God.  We  judge  of  a  person's 
character  largely  on  the  evidence  of  those  who  have  the  most  intimate  acquaintance. 
Now  we  find  prophets  and  saints  who  are  nearest  to  God  in  thought  and  life  most 
positive  in  asserting  his  faithfulness.  Only  they  who  dwell  in  the  outer  courts  of  his 
temple,  or  altogether  away  from  his  presence,  venture  to  deny  it.  3.  The  evidence  afforded 
by  the  life  of  Christ.  Christ  was  the  great  Revealer  of  the  character  of  God ;  and  Christ 
was  faithful  even  to  death.    4.  The  witness  of  history  to  the  past  faithfulness  of  God  f 


oh.  t.  1—28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  137 

eg.  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  the  return  from  the  captivity,  the  advent  of  Christ, 
the  presence  of  Christ  in  his  Church  to  guide  and  strengthen  and  bless.  5.  The  confir- 
mation of  personal  experience.  Many  have  proved  Cud's  faithfulness  in  their  own 
lives.  They  can  say,  "  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard  him,  and  saved  him 
out  of  all  his  troubh  s." 

III.  Temptations  to  doubt  God's  faithfulness.  1.  The  weary  time  of  waiting. 
God  does  not  fulfil  his  promises  as  soon  as  he  makes  them.  Long  intervals  try  our 
faith.  So  was  it  with  the  Jewish  expectation  of  the  Messiah ;  so  is  it  with  the  Christian 
expectation  of  the  second  advent.  The  heart  is  sickened  with  hope  deferred.  But 
this  doubt  is  as  foolish  as  that  of  one  who,  seeing  the  morning  to  be  long  in  coming, 
begins  to  distrust  the  promise  of  sunrise.  2.  Appearances  of  unfaithf ulness.  Nothing 
tries  love  so  painfully  as  the  necessity  of  so  acting  as  to  provoke  doubts  of  its  own 
constancy.  Yet  the  truest  love  will  not  shrink  from  this  necessity  when  it  arises.  God 
seems  to  desert  us,  or  he  visits  us  in  chastisement.  It  is  his  greater  faithfulness  that 
leads  him  so  to  act  as  to  cloud  our  vision  of  his  love.  3.  The  unexpected  fulfilment  of 
Divine  promises,  God  does  not  always  fulfil  his  promises  in  the  way  expected  by  us. 
Then  we  are  disappointed.  But  the  error  was  in  our  previous  delusion,  not  in  any 
change  on  God's  part.  Moreover,  the  true  Divine  fulfilment,  though  at  first  less 
pleasing  to  us  than  our  expectation  of  it,  always  proves  in  the  long  run  to  be  far  better. 

IV.  The  responses  which  God's  faithfulness  should  call  forth  from  us. 
L  Adoration.  The  faithfulness  of  God  is  one  of  the  most  worthy  themes  of  worship. 
2.  Trust.  Faithfulness  merits  confidence,  and  it  encourages  it.  3.  Fidelity.  If  God 
ie  faithful  to  un,  he  lias  n  right  to  bid  us  be  uaulul. — W.  F.  A. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 


TO 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF 

ST.  PAUL  TO   THE   THESSALONIANS. 


CHAPTER  I 

THEME  HO« 

The  Character  of  Christians              ...  4 

The  Three  Cardinal  Virtues             ...  5 

The  Entrance  of  the  Gospel              ...  5 

The  Imitation  of  Christ       ...            ...  5 

The  Union  of  Affliction  with  Joy     ...  5 

The  Example  of  Christians                ...  5 

The  Expectation  of  the  Advent        ...  5 

Addresses  and  Salutation    ...            ...  5 

Heartfelt  Thanksgiving  for  Spiritual 

Prosperity         ...            ...           ...  6 

Their  Election  and  its  Fruits  another 

Ground  of  Thanksgiving               ...  7 
The  Profound   Impression    made  -by 
the    Conversion   of   the    Thessalo- 

nians  ...            ...            ...            ...  8 

The  Nature  of  the  Impression  made 
upon  the  World  by  the  Spectacle  of 

Thessalonian  Piety          ...            ...  8 

The  Address         ...            ...           ...  9 

The  Apostle's  Thanksgiving            ...  12 
The  Happy  Results  of  the  Conversion 

of  the  Thessalonians        ...           ...  13 

Introduction          ...            ...            ...  15 

Manifestation  of  Interest    ...           ...  16 

Works  of  Grace    ...           ...           ...  22 

The  Dynamic  Gospel          ...            ...  23 

Affliction  with  Joy              ...            ...  24 

How  the  Word  is  sounded  forth        ...  24 

The  Great  Change              ...            ...  25 


CHAPTER  It 

THEM  HOB 

Motives  of  Action  ...  ...  ...      SO 

Tlie  True  Pastorate  30 

Our  High  and  Holy  Calling  ...      30 

The  Gospel  a  Divine  Revelation       ...      30 
Beware  of  Opposing  the  Gospel        ...      31 
The  Opposition  of  Satan  to  the  Gospel      31 
Effectiveness  of  the  Gospel . . .  3 1 ,  38 

The  Spirit  and  Method  of  Apostolic 
Labour  ...  ...  ...      32 

A  Retrospect  of  his  Disinterested  and 
Self-sacrificing  Labours  ...  ...      32 

Appeal  alike  to  Man  and  to  God  re- 
specting his  Personal  and  his  Official 
Work  at  Thessalonica      ...  ...      33 

The  Thessalonian  Reception  of  the 

Truth...  34 

The  Evidence  of  the  Effectual  Work- 
ing of  the  Divine  Word  ...  ...      34 

The  Apostle's  Anxiety  to  visit  the 
Thessalonians    ...  ...  ...      85 

The    Characteristics    of    St.    Paul's 

Preaching  at  Thessalonica  ...      35 

St.  Paul's  Lore  for  his  Converts        ...      39 
The  Manner  of  the  Preachers ;  or,  Self- 
Portraiture        ...  ...  ...      40 

Response  of  the  Thessalonians  to  the 
Proclamation  of  the  Gospel  by  Paul 
and  his  Companions         ...  ...      45 

Great  Desire  to  see  the  Thessalonians       47 


INDEX. 


torn  h« 

Boldness  in  declaring  the  Gospel     ...  48 

Entrusted  with  the  Gospel ...            ...  49 

The  Use  of  Affectionateness  in  com- 
mending the  Gospel        ...           ...  50 

Worthy  of  God     ...           ...           ...  50 

The  Word  of  God ...           ...           ...  51 

Fulness  of  Sins     ...            ...            ...  52 

Hindered  by  Satan             ...           ...  52 

CHAPTEB  IIL 

Connection    between   Affliction    and 

Religion             ...            ...            ...  56 

Steadfastness  in  Faith  and  Affliction  57 

The  Duties  of  Minister  and  People  ...  57 

Joy  in  the  Spiritual  Welfare  of  Others  57 

Defective  Faith     ...            ...            ...  57 

Prayer  addressed  to  Christ ...            ...  57 

Religious  Progress               ...            ...  57 

The  Ultimate  End   of  the  Christian 

Dispensation      ...            ...            ...  58 

The  Design  of  Timothy's  Mission  to 

Thessalonica      ...            ...            ...  58 

The  Happy  Issue  of  Timothy's  Visit 

to  Thessalonica...            ...            ...  59 

The  Apostle's  Gratitude  to  God  and 
his  Further  Solicitude  for  his  Con- 
verts   ...           ...           ...           ...  59 

Further  Prayer  for  his  Personal  Return 

to  Thessalonica...            ...            ...  60 

The  Apostle's    Prayer  for   the  Pro- 
gressive Sanctification  of  the  Thes- 
salonians  and  their  Final  Perfection 

at  the  Coming  of  Christ  ...            ...  60 

Proof  of  the  Apostle's  Love  for  the 

Thessalonians    ...            ...            ...  61 

The  Return  of  Timotheus  ...            ...  63 

81  Paul's  Prayer  for  his  Converts    ...  65 

Great  Desire  to  gee  the  Thessalonians  65 
How  the  Work  of  the  Gospel  may  he 

frustrated  by  Temptation               ...  70 

Bt.  Paul's  Devotion  to  his  Converts  ...  71 

The  Increase  of  Love         ...           ...  71 

Divine  Culture     ...           ...           M,  72 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Holiness  the  Design  of  Revelation    ...  78 

Brotherly  Love     ...           ...           ...  78 

Qnietness  and  Faithfulness  in  Worldly 
Duties...  ...  ...  ...78 

Honesty...            ...            ...            ...  78 

The  Death  of  Friends        ...           ...  78 


THIWE  PAGE 

Resurrection  of  Believers    ...            ...  78 

The  Importance  of  Living  in  Harmony 

with  the  Divine  Will      ...           ...  79 

Sanctification  a  Divine  Arrangement  79 
Warning  against  Sins  of  Impurity    ...  79 
How  Personal  Purity  is  to  be  main- 
tained...           ...            ...            ...  80 

Inculcation  of  Brotherly  Love           ...  80 
Inculcation  of  the  Duty  of  Quiet  and 

Honest  Industry             ...           ...  81 

Sorrow  for  the  Dead            ...            ...  81 

Reasons  against  Sorrow  for  the  Dead  82 
The  Order  of  Events  at  the  Second 

Advent              ...            ...            ...  82 

Exhortation          ...            ...            ...  83 

The  Law  of  Purity              ...            ...  84 

The  Law  of  Love  ...            ...            ...  86 

The  Resurrection ...  87 

Sanctification        ...            ...            ...  88 

The  Christian  Circle  and  Accounting 

by  them  that  are  without               ...  90 
Anxiety -about  the  State  of  the  Chris- 
tian Dead          ...            ...            ...  92 

Christian  Progress               ...            ...  96 

Love  of  the  Brethren         ...           ...  97 

The  Industrial  Life            ...           ...  98 

Christians  before  the  World'             ...  99 
Sorrow  for  the  Dead  transfigured  by 

the  Resurrection  of  Christ             ...  99 

The  Order  of  the  Second  Advent     ...  100 


CHAPTER  V. 

Watchfulness  and  Sobriety... 

...    107 

Spiritual  Armour ...            ... 

...    107 

Christian  Forgiveness         ... 

...    107 

Religious  Joy       ...           ... 

...    107 

Unceasing  Prayer                ... 

...     107 

Quenohing  the  Spirit          ... 

107, 134 

Use  of  Reason  in  Religion  ... 

...    108 

Certainty  of  the  Time  of  the  Second 

Advent  108 

A  Warning  against  Watchlessness  ...  109 
The  Source,  Channel,  and  End  of  the 

Salvation  hoped  for         ...  ...    109 

The  Due   Recognition  of   Christian 

Pastors  ...  ...  ...    110 

Inculcation  of  Mutual  Peace  ...    110 

Mutual  Duties  of  Church  Members  ...  HI 
Abstinence   from   Revenge,  and  the 

Steadfast  Pursuit  of  Good  ...     1U 

The  Duly  and  the  Privilege  of  Constant 

Joy      ...  ...  ...  ...     klm 


INDEX. 


m 


The  Duty  of  Constant  Prayer  ...  112 
The  Duty  of  Thanksgiving  ...  112 
Exhortations  regarding  Spiritual  Gifts  112 
Warning  against  Every  Form  of  Evil...  113 
Prayer  for  the  Sanotifieation  and  Pre- 
servation of  Thessalonian  Believers  113 
Three  Closing  Injunctions  ...           ...  114 

"The  Day  of  the  Lord" 114 

Closing  Exhortations           ...            ...  117 

The  Result  of  Obedience  to  these  Com- 
mandment*—Sanotifieation           ...  119 
Conclusion            m»           —           ~  120 


TRBHB  PAU 

Exhortation  in  View  of  the  Lord's 

Coming             ...           ...           ...  120 

Exhortations         ...            ...            ...  124 

Prayer    ...           ...           ...           ...  128 

A  Thief  in  the  Night         130 

Night  and  Day     ...           ...           ...  131 

The  Divine  Appointment  of  Christians  132 

Three  Universal  Exhortations          ...  133 

Private  Judgment             ...          ...  134 

Complete  Sanotifieation      m           —  135 

God's  Faithfuln«»             «.           «.  IK 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY*  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D., 


DEAN   OF    GLOUCESTER  ; 


AND   BY  THE 


REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,  M.A. 


II.  THESSALONIANS. 

(Exposition  unb  f^omilctics : 
By  REV.   P.   J.   GLOAG,   D.D. 

(jjomiliee  bg  Marions  Qlutljors : 

RdV.   PROF.   T.   CROSKERY,    D.D.  REV.   W.    F.   ADENEY,   M.A. 

BEV.    B.   C.   CAFF1N,   M.A.  REV.    R.    FINLAYSON,   B.A. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
Mew  York  and  Toronto. 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OP 

PAUL  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 

INTRODUCTION. 

§  1.  The  Authorship  of  the  Epistlb. 

The  external  evidence  in  favour  of  the  authenticity  of  the  Second  Epistle  to 
the  Thessalonians  is  even  stronger  than  that  in  favour  of  the  First  Epistle. 
In  consequence  of  the  prediction  of  the  "  man  of  sin,"  contained  in  the  second 
chapter,  which  prediction  made  a  great  impression  on  the  early  Church, 
it  is  more  frequently  referred  to  and  quoted  by  the  Christian  Fathers. 
The  testimonies  of  Justin  Martyr,  Irenaeus,  Clemens  of  Alexandria,  and 
Tertullian  may  all  he  appealed  to.  Justin  Martyr  (a.d.  140)  unquestionably 
alludes  to  this  Epistle  when  he  says,  "  When  also  the  man  of  apostasy, 
who  speaketh  great  things  against  the  Most  High,  shall  dare  to  commit 
unlawful  deeds  against  us  Christians"  ('  Dial,  cum  Tryph.,'  o.  110).  And 
the  following  direct  quotations  are  found  in  the  writings  of  Irenaeus 
(a.d.  178) :  "  And  again  in  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  speaking 
of  antichrist,  Paul  says,  •  And  then  shall  that  wicked  one  be  revealed  whom 
the  Lord  Jesus  shall  slay  with  the  spirit  of  his  mouth,  and  destroy  with 
the  presence  of  his  coming' (ch.  ii.  8)"  ('Adv.  H  seres.,'  iii.  7,2).  And 
again :  "  Concerning  whom  the  apostle  in  the  Epistle  which  is  the  Second 
to  the  Thessalonians  thus  speaks  :  '  Except  a  falling  away  come  first,  and 
the  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdition :  who  opposeth  and  exalteth 
himself  above  all  that  is  called  God  or  that  is  worshipped '  (ch.  ii  3,  4)  " 
('  Adv.  Haeres.,'  v.  25.  1). 

Nor  is  the  internal  evidence  by  any  means  deficient.  The  character  of 
Paul  is  impressed  upon  this  Epistle ;  his  lively  sympathy  with  his  converts, 
his  gratitude  to  God  for  the  increase  of  their  faith  and  love,  his  joy  in  their 
spiritual  welfare,  his  tenderness  when  censuring  them,  his  assertion  of  his 
apostolic  authority,  his  reference  to  his  former  instructions,  his  request  for 
an  interest  in  their  prayers, — all  these  characteristics  of  the  apostle  are 

U.    THESSALONIANS.  b 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


found  in  this  Epistle.  The  style  is  undoubtedly  Pauline.  We  have  the 
same  form  of  salutation  at  the  beginning  and  of  benediction  at  the  close, 
the  same  parallelisms,  the  same  digressions  and  expansions,  the  same 
expressions  and  peculiarities  of  diction,  whioh  are  elsewhere  found  in 
Paul's  other  Epistles.1  The  prophetio  portion  in  the  second  chapter  has 
indeed  been  adduced  as  an  evidence  of  spuriousness.  But  this  objection  is 
partly  founded  on  a  mistaken  interpretation  of  the  prediction ;  and  although 
it  is  admitted  that  there  is  here  a  striking  peculiarity,  yet  this  peculiarity 
relates  only  to  the  matter,  not  to  the  phraseology,  which  is  undoubtedly 
Pauline.  "  The  passage  in  question,"  observes  Dean  Alford,  "  will  be  found 
on  comparison  to  bear,  in  style  and  flow  of  sentences,  a  close  resemblance  to 
the  denunciatory  and  prophetio  portions  of  the  other  Epistles.  Compare, 
for  instance,  ver.  3  with  Col.  ii.  8,  16;  vers.  8,  9  with  1  Cor.  xv.  24 — 28 ; 
ver.  10  with  Kom.  i.  18,  1  Cor.  i.  18,  and  2  Cor.  ii.  15;  ver.  11  with  Bom  i. 
24,  26;  ver.  12  with  Bom.  ii.  5,  9  and  Bom.  i.  22."'  And  although  this 
passage  has  been  much  objected  to  by  modern  critics,  yet  hardly  any 
scriptural  passage  has  been  more  frequently  referred  to  by  the  early  Fathers, 
and  that  without  any  doubt  that  it  formed  a  part  of  a  genuine  Epistle 
of  Paul. 

The  undesigned  coincidences  noticed  in  this  Epistle  are  few  and  unim- 
portant. The  obscurity  of  the  prediction  concerning  antichrist  has  been 
adverted  to  as  a  proof  of  genuineness.  No  author,,  it  has  been  remarked, 
writes  unintelligibly  on  purpose;  but  it  is  to  be  observed  that  what  is 
almost  unintelligible  to  us  was  not  unintelligible  to  the  Thessalonians. 
They  had  a  key  to  the  interpretation  of  the  passage  in  the  oral  instructions 
of  the  apostle  given  when  he  was  at  Thessalonica :  "  Remember  ye  not,  that, 
when  I  was  with  you,  I  told  you  of  these  things  ?  And  now  ye  know  what 
withholdeth  that  he  might  be  revealed  in  his  time "  (oh.  ii.  5,  6).*  In  the 
Epistle  Paul  observes :  "  Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's  bread  for  nought ; 
but  wrought  with  labour  and  travail  night  and  day,  that  we  might  not  be 
chargeable  unto  any  of  you "  (ch.  iii.  8).  The  apostle  here  asserts  that 
he  received  nothing  in  the  way  of  maintenance  from  the  Thessalonians ; 
and  this  fact  is  confirmed  by  a  statement  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians, 
wherein  it  is  said  that  his  wants  in  Thessalonica  were  at  least  partially 
supplied  by  the  Philippians :  "  Now  ye  Philippians  know  also  that  in  the 
beginning  of  the  gospel,  when  I  departed  from  Macedonia,  no  Church 
communicated  with  me  as  concerning  giving  and  receiving,  but  ye  only. 
For  even  in  Thessalonica  ye  sent  once  and  again  to  my  necessity  "  (Phil.  iv. 
15,  16).  And  the  motive  which  induced  the  apostle  to  decline  support 
from  the  Thessalonians,  namely,  to  give  them  an  example  of  honest  labour 
and  diligence  in  work  (ch.  iii.  9),  was  the  same  which  aotuated  him  to 

1  See  author's  '  Pauline  Epistles,'  p.  108 ;  and  also  Jowett's  '  Epistles  of  Paul,'  toL  L  pp. 
140—142,  1st  edit. 

*  At  lord's  '  Greek  Testament,'  vol.  iii.,  Prolegomena,  p.  59. 

*  Paley'i '  Horn  Paulina : '  2  Thessalonians,  No.  i. 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


lfl 


pursue  the  same  course  of  conduct  at  Ephesus  (Acts  xx.  34,  35).    There 

appears  also  to  be  in  this  Epistle  a  reference  to  the  First  Epistle,  where  the 
apostle  says,  "Therefore,  brethren,  stand  fast,  and  hold  the  traditions 
which  ye  have  been  taught,  whether  by  word,  or  in  our  Epistle  "  (ch.  ii.  15). 

S  2.  The  Occasion  of  the  Epistle. 

The  persons  to  whom  this  Epistle  was  written  were  "  the  Church  of  the 
Thessalonians "  (ch.  i.  1),  or  the  Christian  converts  in  the  city  of  Thessa- 
lonica.  We  have  already  fully  discussed  this  point  in  the  introductory 
remarks  to  the  FJrst  Epistle. 

In  order  to  understand  this  Second  Epistle,  we  must  endeavour  to  ascer- 
tain the  condition  of  the  Thessalonian  Church  when  the  apostle  wrote 
to  them.  Paul  had  been  compelled  to  leave  the  Thessalonians  only  partially 
instructed  in  Christianity ;  they  were  defective  both  in  the  knowledge  of 
its  doctrines  and  in  the  practice  of  its  precepts.  He  had  written  them  an 
Epistle  to  correct  abuses  and  to  supply  what  was  lacking  in  their  faith 
(1  Thess.  iii.  10).  The  intelligence  brought  baok  to  the  apostle  by  the 
bearer  of  the  First  Epistle,  or  through  some  other  channel,  was  the  occasion 
of  this  Epistle.  The  apostle  received  a  good  report  of  the  Thessalonians, 
and  is  enabled  to  express  his  joy  and  thankfulness  to  God  that  their  faith 
grew  exceedingly,  and  the  love  of  every  one  toward  each  other  abounded 
(ch.  i.  3).  But  still  the  erroneous  views  concerning  the  advent,  and  the 
consequent  disorders  to  which  he  had  adverted  in  the  First  Epistle,  had 
rather  increased  than  diminished.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  left  the 
world  only  twenty  years  before.  He  had  promised  to  return  at  an  uncertain 
date,  and  therefore  nothing  was  more  natural  than  that  the  Church  in 
general  Bhould  have  expected  his  immediate  return.  Various  circumstances, 
both  in  the  Church  and  in  the  world,  heightened  this  expectation.  Such 
a  view  of  an  immediate  advent  had  taken  possession  of  the  minds  of  the 
Thessalonian  converts.  Their  anxiety  for  the  loss  of  their  deceased 
relatives,  who,  they  thought,  would  lose  all  the  benefits  occurring  at  the 
advent,  had  indeed  been  assuaged  by  the  former  Epistle,  but  the  expecta- 
tion of  the  immediate  advent  itself  had  grown  in  strength.  The  Thessa- 
lonians, it  would  seem,  from  misapprehending  some  passages  of  the  First 
Epistle,  considered  that  the  day  of  Christ  was  at  hand  (ch.  ii.  2).  Mistaken 
and  enthusiastic  men  had  also  nourished  this  deception  by  appealing  to 
visions  and  to  the  traditionary  sayings  of  the  apostle;  and  it  would  even 
appear  that  an  Epistle  had  been  forged  in  the  name  of  the  apostle.  The 
Church  was  thrown  into  a  state  of  wild  excitement;  an  impatient  and 
fanatical  longing  for  the  instant  when  Christ  would  come  seized  upon  one 
portion,  whilst  fear  and  consternation  at  the  awfulness  of  the  event  over- 
whelmed another.  The  consequence  was  that  many  of  the  Thessalonians 
were  neglecting  their  secular  business  and  living  idle  and  useless  lives, 
conceiving  that  there  was  no  use  of  working  in  a  world  which  was  so  soon 


Iv  INTRODUCTION  TO 


to  be  destroyed,  or  of  performing  the  duties  belonging  to  s  state  of  things 
which  was  so  soon  to  terminate.  Their  only  duty  they  felt  was  to  be  in 
readiness  fur  the  immediate  coming  of  their  Lord. 

Accordingly  the  design  of  the  apostle,  in  writing  this  Epistle,  was  to 
correct  the  error  which  the  Thessalonians  entertained  concerning  the 
immediate  advent,  and  to  rectify  those  abuses  to  which  that  error  had 
given  rise.  The  main  object  of  the  apostle  was  to  warn  the  Thessalonians 
against  thinking  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  was  imminent.  The  apostle 
reminds  them  of  his  former  instructions  on  this  point,  and  tells  them  that 
a  series  of  events — the  manifestation  and  destruction  of  the  man  of  sin — 
would  intervene.  "Now  we  beseech  yon  concerning  the  advent  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  our  gathering  together  unto  him,  that  ye  be  not 
soon  shaken  from  your  mind,  or  be  troubled,  neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  word, 
nor  by  letter  as  from  us,  as  that  the  day  of  Christ  is  present"  (ch.  ii.  1,  2). 
And,  along  with  this  correction  of  error,  was  the  correction  of  the  disorders 
occasioned  by  it.  There  were  among  the  Thessalonians  some  who  walked 
disorderly,  working  not  at  all ;  them  he  enjoined  to  return  to  their  employ- 
ments, to  do  their  work  with  quietness,  and  to  eat  the  bread  of  honest 
labour  (ch.  iii.  10—12). 

With  regard  to  its  contents,  the  Epistle  is  divided  into  three  parts,  nearly 
corresponding  to  the  three  chapters  in  our  version ;  the  first  part  is 
eucharistic,  the  second  apocalyptic,  and  the  third  practical.  The  apostle, 
after  saluting  the  Thessalonians,  renders  thanks  to  God  for  the  good  report 
which  he  had  received  of  them,  for  the  increase  of  their  faith  and  love,  and 
for  their  great  patience  under  prolonged  persecution  ;  he  comforts  them 
under  their  sufferings  by  the  prospect  of  rest  and  recompense  at  the  advent 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  prays  for  their  continuance  in  the  faith,  and  for  the 
glory  of  Christ's  name  through  their  steadfastness  and  holiness  (ch.  i.). 
He  then  proceeds  to  the  principal  object  which  he  had  in  view — the  correc- 
tion of  their  error  in  supposing  that  the  day  of  Christ  was  imminent.  He 
admonishes  them  not  to  suffer  themselves  to  be  led  away  by  excitement  as 
if  Christ  would  immediately  appear,  he  reminds  them  of  his  former  con- 
versations with  them  on  this  subject,  and  he  describes  the  coming  of  the 
man  of  sin  which  must  precede  the  coming  of  Christ  (ch.  ii.  1 — 12).  He 
then  exhorts  them  to  attend  to  the  admonitions  he  had  given  them,  whether 
by  word  or  by  his  Epistle;  he  prays  that  the  Lord  might  direct  their 
minds  to  a  patient  waiting  for  the  advent  of  Christ ;  he  especially  warns 
them  against  that  unsteadiness  and  idleness  which  prevailed  among  them  ; 
he  enjoins  them  to  discountenance  and  admonish  all  those  who  would  not 
be  persuaded  by  his  injunctions ;  and  he  concludes  his  Epistle  by  appending 
with  his  own  hand  his  apostolic  benediction,  as  a  token  of  its  genuineness 
(oh.  fi.  13— iii). 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


|  8.  The  Date  of  the  Epistm. 

This  Epistle  was  evidently  written  shortly  after  the  First.  Silas  and 
Timothy,  as  in  the  First  Epistle,  are  conjoined  with  Paul  in  the  salutation, 
and  were  consequently  stilL  in  his  company  when  he  wrote  this  Epistle. 
'But  when  Paul  left  Corinth,  we  are  not  informed  that  these  two  fellow- 
workers  accompanied  him  (Acts  xvii.  8);  nor,  from  what  appears,  were 
they  ever  afterwards  both  together  with  him.  Timothy,  we  are  informed, 
rejoined  Paul  at  Ephesus  (Acts  xix.  22) ;  but  there  is  no  further  mention 
of  Silas  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Bt-sides,  the  relations  and  wants  of 
the  Church  are  similar  to  those  which  are  presupposed  in  the  First  Epistle,; 
similar  commendations,  warnings,  instructions,  and  prayers  are  contained 
in  both  Epistles ;  the  only  difference  being  what  the  lapse  of  a  few  months 
might  effect  in  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  Thessalonian  Church.  A 
closer  indication  of  time  is  supposed  to  be  contained  in  ch.  iii.  2,  where  the 
apostle  entreats  the  Thessalonians  to  pray  for  him  that  he  might  be 
delivered  from  unreasonable  and  wicked  men— evidently  from  his  unbeliev- 
ing Jewish  opponents— from  which  it  has  been  inferred  that  the  outbreak 
of  Jewish  hatred  and  fanaticism,  when  the  apostle  was  dragged  before 
Gallic,  was  about  to  take  place.  At  all  events,  time  must  be  allowed  for 
further  information  concerning  the  Church  of  Thessalonica  to  have  reached 
the  apostle,  for  the  progress  which  the  Tin  ssalonians  made  in  faith  and 
love,  and  for  the  further  development  of  the  error  concerning  the  advent. 
We  cannot  be  wrong  in  fixing  the  time  of  the  composition  of  this  Epistle' 
to  the  later  part  of  Paul's  residence  in  Corinth,  or  to  the  close  of  a.d.  53. 
Calvin  is  undoubtedly  mistaken  when  he  supposes  that  this  Epistle  wag 
written  during  the  last  journey  of  Paul  to  Jerusalem,  supposing  that  the 
"unreasonable  and  wicked  men"  were  the  Judaizing  Christians  who 
dogged  his  steps. 

Some — Grotius,  Ewald,  Laurent,  Baur,  Davidson  (2nd  edit.) — reverse  the 
order  of  the  Epistles,  and  suppose  that  this  Second  Epistle  was  in  reality 
the  First.  But  the  reasons  which  they  give  for  this  opinion  are  without 
weight,  The  mark  of  genuineness,  at  the  close  of  the  Epistle,  was  given 
in  consequence  of  the  existence  of  a  spurious  Epistle  (oh.  ii.  2),  and  not 
because  it  was  the  first  Epistle  which  the  apostle  wrote.  The  Second 
Epistle  presupposes  the  First  The  First  Epistle  describes  how  the  Thes- 
salonians received  the  Word  of  God,  whilst  the  Second  Epistle  mentions 
their  progress  in  faith,  love,  and  patience.  The  First  Epistle  treats  of  the 
uncertainty  of  the  advent ;  the  Second  Epistle  corrects  the  misapprehension 
of  the  Thessalonians  concerning  that  uncertainty.  The  First  Epistle  adverts 
to  the  spirit  of  disorder,  the  germs  of  which  the  apostle  saw  in  the  Thes- 
salonian Church ;  the  Second  Epistle  rebukes  this  spirit  still  more  sharply, 
as  these  germs  had  developed  and  borne  pernicious  fruit.  The  First  Epistle 
had  given  the  Thessalonians  commandments  to  be  obeyed;  and,  in  the 


¥t  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  THESSALONIANS. 

Second  Epistle,  the  apostle  exhorts  them  to  hold  the  traditions  which  he 
had  delivered  to  them,  whether  by  word  or  his  Epistle. 

The  place  of  writing  was  Corinth.  The  note  at  the  end  of  the  Epistle, 
"  The  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  was  written  from  Athens," 
although  found  in  very  ancient  manuscripts,  is  undoubtedly  erroneous ;  so 
also  are  other  statements  which  refer  the  composition  of  this  Epistle  to 
Bercea,  Laodicea,  or  Borne.  This,  then,  is  the  second  of  Paul's  extant 
Epistles. 

f  4.  The  Peculiarities  of  the  Epistle. 

The  great  peculiarity  of  this  Epistle — that  which  distinguishes  it  from 
all  Paul's  other  Epistles,  and  imparts  to  it  a  peculiar  importance,  and  at 
the  same  time  renders  its  exposition  a  matter  of  great  difficulty — is  the 
prediction  of  the  man  of  sin,  contained  in  the  second  chapter  (vers.  1 — 12). 
This  section  is  distinguished  from  all  the  other  writings  of  Paul,  and  is 
closely  allied  to  the  prophecies  of  Daniel  and  the  apocalyptic  visions  of 
John.  Here  the  apostle  glances  into  the  future,  and  predicts  what  is  to 
happen  in  the  latter  days.  There  are  other  portions  of  his  Epistles  in 
which  he  refers  to  what  will  occur  in  the  last  days,  and  at  the  period  of 
the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God  (2  Tim.  iii.  1 — 5;  Eom.  viii.  19 — 24), 
and  he  also  foretells  the  full  conversion  of  both  Jews  and  Gentiles. to  the 
faith  of  Jesus  (Eom.  xi.  25) ;  but  this  is  the  only  passage  in  all  his  Epistles 
where  a  detailed  prophecy  is  given.  This  prediction  of  the  man  of  sin,  as 
already  observed,  had  peculiar  attractions  to  the  early  Church  suffering 
from  persecution;  and  it  has  been  the  subject  of  numerous  dissertations  in 
modern  times;  its  very  obscurity  being  one  cause  of  the  interest  attached 
to  it,  and  of  the  amount  of  ingenious  labour  expended  on  its  elucidation. 


THE   SECOND  EPISTLE   OF 

PAUL  TO  THE  THESSALONIArlS. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  I 

Contents. — Paul,  after  the  address  and 
salutation,  commences  this  Epistle  by  render- 
ing thanks  to  God  for  the  welcome  intelli- 
gence he  had  received  of  the  increase  of  the 
faith  and  love  of  his  Thessalonian  converts, 
so  that  he  was  enabled  to  boast  of  them 
throughout  all  the  Churches  of  Achaia,  on 
account  of  their  steadfastness  in  the  en- 
durance of  continued  persecution.  Their 
present  suffering  was  an  evidence  of  a  future 
state  of  retribution,  when  the  justice  of  God 
would  be  vindicated,  and  affliction  would  be 
rendered  to  their  persecutors  and  rest  to 
them  the  persecuted,  on  that  great  day  when 
the^Lord  Jesus  would  appear  in  glory  for 
the  destruction  of  his  enemies  and  the  glorifi- 
cation of  his  people.  The  apostle  expresses 
his  constant  prayer  for  the  Thessalonians 
that  God  would  enable  them  to  walk  worthy 
of  their  high  vocation,  so  as  to  be  made 
partakers  of  that  glory  which  would  be 
conferred  on  believers  at  the  advent. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Paul,  and  Silvanus,  and  Timo- 
theus.  This  Epistle,  like  the  former,  is 
written  in  their  conjoint  names,  as  all  three 
were  engaged  in  the  planting  of  the  Church 
in  Thessalonica.  Unto  the  Church  of  the 
Thessalonians  in  God  our  Father  and  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ:  graoe  unto  you,  and 
peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  (For  the  exposition  of  these 
two  verses,  see  remarks  on  1  Thess.  i.  1, 
where  the  address  and  salutation  are  almost 
entirely  the  same.) 

Ver.3. — We.  Not  to  be  restricted  to  Paul, 
the  plural  being  used  for  the  singular,  as  is 
elsewhere  the  case  (1  Thess.  ii.  8;  iii.  1); 
but  inclusive  of  Silas  and  Timothy,  inas- 

II.  THESSALONIANS. 


much  as  they  are  mentioned  directly  before 
(see  note  to  1  Thess.  i.  2).  Are  bound ;  feel 
ourselves  morally  constrained.  To  thank 
God  always  for  you,  brethren  (comp.  1  Thess. 
i.  2).  The  apostle  first  praises  his  converts 
for  what  good  was  in  them,  before  he  censures 
them  for  their  faults,  and  in  this  manner  he 
secures  their  attention.  As  it  is  meet ;  as  it 
is  right  and  proper  in  the  circumstances  of 
the  case.  The  words  are  not  to  be  considered 
as  a  parenthetic  clause,  far  less  as  a  tautolo- 
gical expression  ( Jowett) ;  but  they  state  that 
the  reason  of  the  apostle's  thanksgiving 
arose  from  the  spiritual  condition  of  the 
Thessalonians;  "with  the  acknowledgment 
of  personal  obligation,  Paul  joins  a  recog- 
nition of  the  circumstances  of  the  case" 
(Hofmann).  Because  that  your  faith  groweth, 
exceedingly — superabounds — and  the  oharity 
of  every  one  of  you  all.  The  subject  of  the 
apostle's  thanksgiving  was  the  increase  of 
the  faith  and  love  of  the  Thessalonians: 
faith  here  being  faith  in  Christ,  and  love 
being  love  to  man.  Faith  and  love  contain 
in  themselves  the  whole  of  the  Christian 
life ;  faith  is  its  commencement,  its  source ; 
love  is  not  only  its  outcome,  its  spiritual 
action,  but  its  completion ;  the  climax  of  the 
Christian  life  is  to  be  made  perfect  in  love. 
Here,  however,  love  is  restricted  by  the 
context  to  love  to  believers,  or  brotherly 
love.  Toward  eaoh  other ;  that  is,  toward 
your  fellow-Christians  in  Thessalonica. 
Love  is  not  a  mere  general  affection,  but 
is  to  be  specially  manifested  —  "toward 
each  believer."  Aboundeth;  inoreaseth  in 
intensity. 

Ver.  4. — So  that  we  ourselves.  "We" — 
Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy,  the  founders 
of  the  Church  of  Thessalonica.  "  We  our- 
selves," not  merely  we  of  our  own  accord 
(Hofmann),  but  we  as  well  as  our  informants, 
who  brought  us  this  intelligence  of  the 
increase  of  your  faith  and  love.    Glory  in 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  i  1—12. 


yon  in  the  Churches  of  God ;  that  is,  in  those 
Churches  with  which  we  come  in  contact; 
namely,  the  Church  at  Corinth  and  the 
Churches  in  Achaia.  It  would  appear  from 
this  that  several  Churches  had  been  founded 
in  Achaia,  as,  for  example,  the  Church  of 
Cenehrea  (Rom.  xvi.  1).  For  your  patienoe 
and  faith ;  not  to  be  weakened  as  a  Hebraism 
for  "  your  patient  faith,"  or  "  for  the  patience 
of  your  faith ;  "  nor  is  faith  to  be  taken  in  the 
sense  of  faithfulness  or  fidelity  (Liinemann); 
but,  as  in  the  previous  verse,  it  denotes 
"faith  hi  Christ."  Patience  is  steadfast 
endurance,  which,  in  order  to  be  of  any  value 
in  the  sight  of  God,  must  be  combined  with 
faith ;  stoical  endurance  is  not  here  nor  any- 
where else  inculcated  in  Scripture.  In  all 
your  persecutions  and  tribulations — afflic- 
tions—that ye  endure ;  or,  are  enduring;  the 
persecution  which  arose  when  Paul  was  at 
Thessalonica  being  continued.  The  patience 
and  faith  of  the  Thessalonians  shone  the 
more  brilliantly  amid  persecution  and  afflic- 
tion, even  as  the  stars  shine  brightest  in 
the  dark  night.  To  be  a  true  Christian  in 
the  time  of  peace  is  a  great  matter ;  but  to 
be  a  true  Christian  in  the  season  of  persecu- 
tion is  a  greater ;  faith  is  then  tested  in  the 
furnace. 

Ver.  5. — Which  is  a  manifest  token.  A 
sentence  in  apposition,  so  that  the  words, 
"  which  is,"  printed  in  italics,  ought  to  be 
omitted.  By  "  token  "  is  here  meant  pledge 
or  proof.  The  reference  is  not  simply  to  the 
Thessalonians,  but  to  the  whole  clause — to 
the  fact  of  the  Thessalonians  steadfastly  en- 
during persecutions  and  affliction ;  in  other 
words,  to  their  sufferings  for  the  sake  of  the 
gospel.  Of  the  righteous — just — judgment 
Of  God.  Not  to  be  referred  to  the  present 
state,  and  particularly  to  sufferings  perfect- 
ing the  Thessalonians  and  preparing  them 
for  the  kingdom  of  God  (OUhausen);  but  to 
the  future  judgment.  These  words  imply 
that  the  Bufferings  of  the  righteous  and  the 
prosperity  of  their  wicked  persecutors  was 
a  clear  proof  that  there  shall  be  a  future 
state  of  retribution,  when  the  inequalities  of 
the  present  state  of  things  will  be  adjusted, 
when  the  apparent  violations  of  justice  will 
be  rectified,  and  when  matters  will  be  com- 
pletely reversed — when  the  persecutors  will 
be  punished  and  the  persecuted  rewarded 
(comp.  Phil.  i.  28, "  And  in  nothing  terrified 
by  your  adversaries ;  which  is  to  them  an 
evident  token  of  perdition,  but  to  you  of 
salvation  and  that  of  God").  That;  in  order 
that,  indicating  the  purpose  of  God's  dis- 
pensation. Ye  may  be  counted  worthy. 
Paul  here  finds,  in  the  faith  and  patience  of 
the  Thessalonians  amid  persecution,  an  evi- 
dence of  a  state  of  reward,  as  well  as  in  the 
cruelties  of  their  persecutors  an  evidence  of 
a  state  of  punishment    The  idea  that  man 


can  merit  salvation  as  a  reward  from  God  is 
not  contained  in  this  passage.  As  all  men 
are  sinners,  salvation  can  only  be  obtained 
through  the  merits  and  mediation  of  Christ. 
But  with  this  grace  of  God,  justice  is  not 
abolished;  the  rightious  will  be  rewarded 
for  their  faith  and  patience  (comp.  Heb.  vi. 
10;  also  Heb.  si.  6;  Luke  vi.  35;  1  Cor. 
iii.  8 ;  2  John  8).  Of  the  kingdom  of  God; 
namely,  the  Messianic  kingdom  which  Christ 
will  establish  at  the  advent:  here  the 
heavenly  state.  For  which ;  for  the  sake  of 
which.  Ye  also  suffer ;  or  rather,  are  Buffer- 
ing ;  the  sufferings  being  continued  down  to 
the  time  when  the  apostle  wrote  this  Epistle. 

Ver.  0.— Seeing  it  is;  or  rather,  if  indeed 
it  it;  if  so  be  that  it  it  (R.V.).  A  hypotheti- 
cal sentence,  not,  however,  introducing  an 
uncertain  or  conditional  fact,  but  an  em- 
phatic assertion — what  is  felt  by  all  to  be 
true.  A  righteous  thing  with  God.  Not 
only  will  the  justice  of  God  be  displayed  in 
the  rewards  of  the  righteous,  in  counting 
them  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God  for 
which  they  suffer,  but  it  will  also  be  dis- 
played in  the  punishments  to  be  inflicted  on 
their  persecutors,  lo  recompense  tribula- 
tion to  them  that  trouble  you.  We  have 
here  an  example  of  one  of  the  most  common 
defects  of  our  English  Version  in  rendering 
cognate  words  by  different  terms,  and  thus 
creating  needless  perplexities  and  giving  rise 
to  erroneous  interpretations;  the  words 
"tribulation"  and  "trouble"  are  cognate, 
and  hence  the  verse  ought  to  be  rendered  as 
in  the  R.V.,  "  If  so  be  that  it  is  a  righteous 
thing  with  God  to  recompense  affliction  to 
them  that  afflict  you." 

Ver.  7. — And  to  yon  who  are  troubled — 
afflicted — rest.  The  word  "  rest "  here  is  a 
noun  in  the  accusative,  not  a  verb,  as  Eng- 
lish readers  might  at  the  first  glance  sup- 
pose. It  literally  denotes  relaxation,  ease. 
The  meaning  of  the  passage  is  that  it  is  a 
righteous  thing  with  God  to  recompense 
rest  to  you  who  are  afflicted.  The  recom- 
pense of  the  persecutors — those  who  afflict,  is 
affliction ;  the  recompense  of  the  persecuted 
— the  afflicted,  is  rest  (comp.  Matt.  xi.  28, 29). 
The  rest  or  relaxation  here  mentioned  is 
that  which  awaits  believers,  not  in  this 
world,  but  in  the  next,  "  where  the  wicked 
ceaae  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at 
rest"  (Job  iii.  17).  "There  remaineth  a 
rest  for  the  people  of  God"  (Heb.  iv.  9). 
The  happiness  of  heaven  on  its  negative 
side,  as  freedom  from  earthly  affliction  and 
persecution,  is  here  stated-  It  is  rest  to  the 
weary,  freedom  to  the  enslaved,  release  from 
sorrow,  suffering,  and  pain,  relaxation  from 
toil,  ease  from  noise  and  turmoil,  the  quiet 
haven  of  peace  after  being  tossed  about  in 
the  tempestuous  ocean.  With  us ;  that  ia,  not 
with  us  Believers  in  general,  or  with  us  the 


ch.  l  1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


apostles,  the  champions  of  the  faith,  and 
btill  less  with  us  Jews,  the  saints  of  Israel; 
hut  witli  us,  the  writers  of  this  Epistle, 
namely,  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy.  When 
the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed;  or,  more 
literally,  at  the  revelation  or  apocalypse  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  The  advent  of  Christ  is 
generally  expressed  hy  another  word,  par- 
ousia,  denoting  "presence;"  here  the  word 
is  apocalypse,  bringing  before  us  in  a  more 
vivid  manner  the  visible  manifestation 
of  Christ.  The  advent  of  Christ  is  the 
period  when  he  who  has  hitherto  been  con- 
cealed will  be  manifested  as  the  supreme 
Ruler  and  Judge  of  the  world.  From  heaven ; 
where  now  he  is  concealed  from  human 
view,  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  "With 
his  mighty  angels;  not  with  his  host  of 
angels,  but,  as  it  is  in  the  margin  of  our 
Bibles,  "  with  the  angels  of  his  power  *— 
serving  his  power  and  proclaiming  his  might. 
It  is  the  uniform  declaration  of  Scripture 
that  Christ  will  come  to  judgment  attended 
by  his  holy  angels  (Matt.  xvi.  27 ;  xxiv.  31  ; 
J  ude  14).  And  these  angels  are  "  the  angels 
of  his  power,"  sent  forth  to  execute  his  com- 
mands.  By  their  instrumentality  the  dead 
shall  be  called  from  their  graves,  and  the 
wicked  separated  from  among  the  just  (1 
Thess.  iv.  10  ;  Matt.  xiii.  49). 

Ver.  8. — In  flaming  fire ;  not  the  instru- 
mentof  punishment — "in  flaming  fire  taking 
vengeance ; '  but  a  further  desc:  iption  o.  the 
glory  of  Christ's  appearance — "  revealed  in 
flaming  fire."  In  the  Old  Testament  God 
is  represented  as  appearing  in  flaming  fire, 
as  when  he  manifested  himself  to  Moses  in 
the  burning  bush  (Exod.  iii.  2 ;  Acts  vii.  30) ; 
and  especially  his  coming  to  judgment  is 
represented  as  coming  in  fire  (Ps.  xcvii.  3). 
What  is  there  asserted  of  God  is  here  re- 
ferred to  Christ  (comp.  Rev.  xix.  22).  There 
is  also  a  probable  reference  to  the  Shechinah 
or  cloud  of  glory  in  which  Christ  will  appear 
for  judgment  (Rev.  i.  7).  Some  also  suppose 
a  reference  to  the  fire  of  the  universal  con- 
flagration which  shall  usher  in  the  last  day 
(2  Pet.  iii.  10),  and  others  to  the  fire  which 
shall  consume  the  ungodly,  but  it  is  best  to 
restrict  the  expression  to  the  glory  of  Christ's 
manifestation.  Taking  vengeance ;  literally, 
giving;  that  is,  awarding  or  allotting  ven- 
geance, representing  the  act,  not  of  a  con- 
queror or  of  an  avenger,  but  of  a  righteous 
Judge.  On  them  that  know  not  God — the 
unbelieving  Gentiles -and  that;  or  rather, 
on  them  (hat;  a  second  class  being  here 
denoted.  Obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  namely,  the  unbelieving  Jews. 
The  ignorance  of  the  one  and  the  disobedi- 
ence of  the  other  were  the  causes  of  their 
punishment. 

Ver.  9. — Who;  namely, the  unbelieving 
Gentiles  and  Jews.     Shall   he  punished; 


literally,  shall  pay  the  penalty;  shall  suffer 
punishment  (B.V.).  With  everlasting  de- 
struction ;  or  rather,  even  everlasting  destruc- 
tion ;  the  words  being  in  apposition.  "  De- 
struction "  here  denotes  ruin,  death ;  the 
word  is  only  used  in  Paul's  Epistles  (1  Cor. 
v.  8;  1  Thess.  v.  3;  1  Tim.  vi.  9).  The 
Greek  word  translated  "  everlasting,"  from 
dogmatie  reasons,  has  given  rise  to  much 
controversy.  Here  it  appears  to  denote 
eternal— eternity  to  come.  The  eternal  pun- 
ishment of  the  wicked  seems  here  asserted; 
a  terrible  declaration,  which  the  mind  shud- 
ders to  contemplate.  The  observation  oi 
Olshausen  is  worthy  of  attention :  "  This  is 
the  only  passage  in  Paul's  Epistles  in  which 
everlasting  damnation  is  openly  declared, 
whereas  not  a  few  occur  in  which  a  bringing 
back  of  all  the  lost  ones  is  apparently  as- 
sumed as  possible;"  but  he  adds,  "For  the 
supposition  that  Paul  did  indeed  in  the 
earliest  of  his  Epistles  still  teach  everlasting 
damnation,  but  gave  it  up  in  later  times,  there 
exists  no  sufficient  foundation,  because  the 
bringing  back  again  is  nowhere  freely  ami 
openly  declared."  *  From  the  presence  (or, 
face)  of  the  Lord.  This  clause  has  received 
a  threefold  interpretation.  Some  (De  Wette, 
Hofmann)  take  the  preposition  "  from  "  in  a 
causal  sense,  denoting  the  efficient  cause  of 
thepuiiishmentofthe  wicked—  that  they  will 
be  as  it  were  blasted  by  the  face  of  the  Lord. 
Others  (Chrysostom,  Theophylact)  take  it 
in  a  temporal  sense,  denoting  the  swiftness 
of  the  punishment  of  the  wicked — that  their 
punishment  will  rise  directly  on  the  appear- 
ance of  Christ  (Liinemann,  Alford).  And 
others  take  it  in  a  local  sense,  denoting 
banishment  or  separation — that  the  wicked 
will  be  expelled  from  that  joy  and  glory 
which  reign  in  the  presence  of  Christ ;  they 
shall  be  banished  away  from  the  presence  of 
the  Lord.  This  last  interpretation  seems  to 
be  the  correct  meaning;  it  gives  to  the  pre- 
position its  full  force.  And  from  the  glory  of 
his  power ;  not  a  Hebraism  for  "  his  mighty 
glory  "  (Jowett),  but  from  that  glory  which 
has  its  origin  in  his  power — the  wicked  will 
be  banished  from  the  manifestation  of  his 
power  in  the  glorification  of  his  saints.  The 
punishment  of  the  wicked  on  its  negative 
side  is  here  stated.  As  the  presence  of  the 
glorified  Jesus  will  constitute  the  happiness 
of  heaven,  bo  banishment  from  his  presence 
will  constitute  the  misery  of  hell,  because  the 
soul  is  then  cut  oil  from  the  source  of  all 
good  and  of  all  holiness. 

Ver.  10. — When ;  defining  the  period  when 
this  judgment  of  the  wicked  will  occur.  He ; 
namely,  the  Lord  Jesus.  Shall  oome  to  be 
glorified;  the  purpose  of  his  coming.  In; 
not  "  through,"  or  "  among,"  but  "  in,"  as 

1  Olshausen  on  Thessalonians,  fa  loeo. 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  i.  1—12. 


She  sphere  or  element  of  his  glory.  His 
taints;  not  the  holy  angels  who  will  ac- 
company him  to  judgment,  but  holy  men 
whom  he  has  redeemed  with  his  blood. 
Christ  will  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  inas- 
much as  their  glory  was  the  result  of  his 
sufferings  and  death,  and  their  holiness  is 
the  reflection  of  his  holiness;  "They  will 
reflect  as  in  a  mirror  the  glory  of  the  Lord." 
And  to  be  admired;  wondered  at,  praised. 
In  all  them  that  believe ;  or,  believed.  The 
work  of  faith  is  past;  the  result  of  faith, 
the  state  of  sight  and  glory,  has  commenced. 
The  glorification  of  believers  will  thus 
become  the  glorification  of  Christ.  The 
glory  of  Christ  does  not  arise  from  the 
punishment  of  the  wicked,  but  from  the 
glorification  of  believers.  Christ  will  indeed 
be  glorified  in  the  punishment  of  the  wicked. 
Hia  justice  will  be  manifested  and  vindi- 
cated ;  but  his  glory  will  be  especially  seen 
in  the  manifestation  of  his  mercy  toward 
believers.  Because  our  testimony;  namely, 
the  testimony  of  Paul  and  his  associates,  Silas 
•nd  Timothy.  Among  you ;  or  rather,  unto 
you.  Was  believed ;  to  be  considered  as  a 
parenthesis.  In  that  day;  namely,  the  day 
of  the  Lord's  advent,  to  be  connected  with 
the  commencement  of  the  verse,  "In  that 
day  when  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in 
his  saints."  Some,  overlooking  the  paren- 
thesis, render  the  words  either,  "because 
our  testimony  concerning  that  day  was 
believed  among  you;"  or,  "because  our 
testimony  among  you  shall  be  believed  on 
that  day " — assented  to  by  the  whole 
universe;  bnt  the  first  rendering  gives  a 
false  meaning  to  the  preposition,  and  the 
second  a  false  construction  to  the  verb,  as  if 
it  were  future. 

Ver.  11. — Wherefore;  with  a  view  to  this 
consummation,  in  order  that  Christ  may  be 
glorified  in  yon.    We  pray  alwayr  for  yon 


that  our  God  would  count  you  worthy  of 
this  calling ;  or  rather,  of  your  calling  (R.V.). 
The  calling  was,  properly  speaking,  only  the 
commencement  of  the  Christian  life,  but  as 
it  was  the  first  link  in  a  chain  that  termi- 
nated in  glory,  it  is  used  to  denote  the 
whole  Christian  life— your  vocation  as 
Christians.  And  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure 
of  his  goodness.  The  pronoun  "  his  "  is  not 
in  the  original.  The  words  have  been 
differently  rendered:  some  render  them  "all 
God's  pleasure  in  our  goodness ; "  others 
restrict  both  words  to  mean  "every  desire  of 
goodness"  (R.V.).  And  the  work  of  faith; 
that  faith  which  is  active,  living,  produc- 
tive of  good  works  (see  exposition  on  1 
Thess.  i.  3).  With  power ;  or,  in  power;  to  be 
taken  adverbially,  and  to  be  connected  with 
the  verb  "fulfil:"  "That  God  would 
mightily  fulfil  in  yon  all  moral  goodness, 
and  a  faith  which  is  energetic" 

Ver.  12. — That  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  or  simply,  of  our  Lord  Jesus, 
"Christ"  not  being  in  the  original.  The 
"name  of  our  Lord  Jesus"  is  not  a  mere 
periphrasis  for  the  Lord  Jesus  himself, 
but  the  name  denotes  his  nature  and 
character.  The  second  petition  of  our  Lord's 
prayer  is  "  Hallowed  be  thy  Name,"  and 
this  the  apostle  applies  to  Christ ;  he  prays 
that  his  Name  may  be  hallowed  among  the 
Thessaloniaus — an  incidental  proof  of  his 
divinity.  May  be  glorified  in  you,  and  yon 
in  him ;  a  twofold  glorification :  Christ  is 
glorified  in  believers,  when  by  their  holiness 
they  promote  his  cause  and  reflect  his 
glory ;  and  believer*  are  glorified  in  Christ, 
when  they  receive  out  of  his  infinite  fulness. 
According  to  the  grace  of  our  God  and  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Some  suppose  that  the 
epithet  "  God  "  also  belongs  to  Jesus  Christ, 
but  the  construction  hardly  bean  this 
meaning. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  4. — Chrittian  patience.  1.  Its  nature.  It  denotes  steadfast  endurance.  Nega- 
tively,  not  stoical  endurance  or  apathetic  fatalism.  Positively,  a  spirit  of  calm  sub- 
mission to  the  providence  of  God  and  resignation  to  his  will.  2.  Its  source.  It  has 
its  root  in  faith ;  it  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit ;  and  it  is  combined  with  hope.  3. 
Means  of  acquiring  it.  Pray  to  God  as  the  Giver  of  patience ;  look  to  Christ  as  the 
Example  of  patience ;  submit  to  affliction  as  the  cause  of  patience ;  cultivate  faith  as 
the  support  of  patience ;  and  meditate  on  heaven  as  the  goal  of  patience. 

Vers.  6,  7.— A  future  state  of  retribution.  Rewards  and  punishments  in  this  world 
are  unequally  distributed.  The  righteous  are  often  persecuted  and  afflicted,  whereas  the 
wicked  are  often  happy  and  prosperous.  Herod  sits  upon  the  throne,  and  Christ  expires 
on  the  cross.  But  this  state  of  things  shall  be  rectified.  Christ  shall  recompense  to 
the  wicked  tribulation — they  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord ;  and  he  shall  recompense  to  the  righteous  rest  they  shall  be 
counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God  for  which  they  suffer. 


oh.  1 1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&  6 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  manner  of  Christ's  second  coming.  1.  He  shall  come  in  person.  Not 
merely  in  spirit  or  in  power,  but  in  a  visible  form ;  he  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  ; 
every  eye  iball  see  him.  2.  He  shall  come  in  power.  He  shall  be  accompanied  by  the 
angels  if  his  might,  who  shall  execute  his  commands,  call  the  dead  from  their  graves, 
assemble  together  the  elect,  separate  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  and 
consign  the  wicked  to  the  abodes  of  woe.  3.  He  shall  come  in  glory.  "  In  flaming 
fire  " — in  the  Shechinah,  the  cloud  of  glory.  4.  He  shall  come  in  justice  ;  punishing 
the  ungodly  and  rewarding  his  faithful  servant!. 

Vera.  9,  10. — The  coming  of  Christ  for  Judgment.  1.  It*  reality.  Th«  difference 
between  his  first  and  second  coming.  Then  he  came  to  save  the  world,  now  he  shall 
come  to  judge  the  world.  Then  he  came  as  Son  of  man,  now  he  shall  come  as  Son  of 
God.  2.  Its  purpose.  He  shall  come  to  award  punishment  to  his  enemies;  they  shall 
be  for  ever  banished  from  his  presence,  the  Source  of  all  happiness,  the  Author  of  all 
holiness.  He  shall  come  for  the  salvation  of  his  people — to  conquer  all  their  enemies, 
to  rescue  their  bodies  from  the  grave,  to  acknowledge  them  as  his  before  an  assembled 
universe,  and  to  receive  them  into  the  abodes  of  eternal  happiness. 

Vers.  10,  12. — Christ  glorified  in  his  saints.  1.  By  their  holy  conduct  they 
display  his  character.  His  image  is  impressed  upon  them ;  they  mirror  forth  the  glory 
of  the  Lord.  2.  By  their  active  exertion  in  well-doing  they  advance  his  glory. 
3.  Their  future  glorification  is  the  glory  of  Christ.  The  glory  of  his  work,  in  that  he 
saved  them ;  the  glory  of  his  grace,  in  that  he  redeemed  them ;  the  glory  of  his  power, 
in  that  he  has  rescued  them  from  all  their  enemies.  Throughout  eternity  believers 
will  be  jewels  in  the  Saviour's  crown. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  8. — Thanksgiving  for  the  spiritual  progress  of  the  Thessalonians.  Timothy 
had  brought  the  apostle  tidings  of  their  faith,  their  love,  their  sufferings,  and  their 
patience. 

I.  The  grounds  of  his  thanksgiving.  "  Because  that  your  faith  groweth  exceed- 
ingly, and  the  love  of  each  one  of  you  all  toward  each  other  aboundeth."  1.  The 
marked  growth  of  their  faith.  At  his  last  writing  to  them  he  had  hinted  at  deficiencies 
in  their  faith  (1  Thess.  iii.  10),  but  he  had  now  learned  that  it  had  grown  exceedingly. 
(1)  Growth  is  a  sign  of  a  living  faith.  (2)  It  is  right  to  pray  for  the  increase  of  faith 
(Luke  xvii.  5).  (3)  Faith  grows  (o)  in  its  strength  (6)  and  in  its  range.  The  Thessa- 
lonians had  been  able  to  receive  new  truths,  and  to  bear  the  shock  of  persecution  with 
calmness.  Their  faith  worked  by  love  (Gal.  v.  6),  and  the  trial  of  their  faith  worked 
patience  (Jas.  i.  3).  2.  The  marked  growth  of  their  love  to  one  another.  He  had 
prayed  for  an  increase  of  love  among  them,  and  he  was  thankful  that  his  prayer  had 
been  heard.  (1)  Their  love  had  grown  in  fervour,  (a)  Their  persecutions  had  endeared 
them  the  more  to  each  other,  (i)  They  "  looked  not  every  man  on  his  own  things, 
but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others"  (Phil.  ii.  4).-  They  "bore  one  another's 
burdens  "  (Gal.  vi.  2).  They  were  "  kindly  affectioned  to  one  another  with  brotherly 
love"  (Rom.  xii.  10).  (2)  Their  love  had  giown  in  its  range.  They  had  an  indivi- 
dualizing solicitude  in  each  other's  welfare,  no  saint  being  outside  the  pale  of  their 
kindly  regards. 

Ii.  The  obligation  and  appbopbiateness  of  his  thanksgiving.  "  We  are  bound 
to  thank  God  always  for  you,  brethren,  as  it  is  meet."  1.  The  apostle  regards  it  as  a 
positive  debt  which  it  would  be  injustice  not  to  discharge,  for  he  feels  that  God  is  the 
true  Author  of  all  the  blessings  they  had  received.  2.  He  regards  it  as  demanded  by 
the  very  proprieties  of  the  case.  "As  it  is  meet" — that  this  recognition  should  be 
made.— EG. 

Ver.  4. — The  apostle's  interest  in  the  Thessalonian  Church  at  manifested  by  his 
praises  of  it  to  other  Churches.  He  hadMbrmerly  listened  to  their  praises  from  the  lips 
of  other  Churches ;  he  could  now  sound  their  praises  at  Corinth  and  elsewhere,  ascribing 
all  the  while  due  praise  to  God. 


6  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  i.  1—12. 

L  Thb  ground  of  his  praises.  "  For  your  patience  and  faith  in  all  your  per- 
secutions and  tribulations  that  ye  endure."  1.  Afflictions,  whether  in  the  form  of  sharp 
persecution  or  of  more  general  trouble,  are  the  lot  of  Ood's  faithful  children.  They  are 
"appointed  thereunto  "  (1  Thess.  ii.  3).  2.  It  is  the  glory  of  a  Christian  to  bear  tuck 
afflictions  with  patience  and  faith.  The  Thessalonians  had  not  been  "  moved  by  these 
afflictions  "(1  Thess.  iii.  3).  (1)  Their  patience  was  the  result  of  their  faith.  "The 
trial  of  your  faith  worketh  patience "  (Jas.  i.  3).  Their  trials  did  not  uproot  their 
faith.  They  had  "  the  patience  of  hope."  The  faith  and  the  patience  are  always 
closely  allied.  "  I  know  thy  faith  and  thy  patieuce  "  (Rev.  ii.  19).  (2)  It  is  for  the  glory 
of  God  and  for  the  good  of  believers  that "  patience  should  have  its  perfect  work  "  (Jas. 
i.  4 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  20).  (3)  It  is  necessary  to  the  inheritance  of  the  promises  (Heb.  vi. 
12 ;  x.  36). 

II.  IT    18   NOT   UNLAWFUL,  BUT   EXPEDIENT,  THAT  A   MINISTER  SHOULD  QLORT   DC  HIS 

people.  Not  in  their  social  rank,  or  riches,  or  numbers,  but  in  the  graces  of  the 
Spirit  manifested  in  their  life.  The  apostle  elsewhere  advises  us  not  to  glory  in  men, 
but  in  the  Lord.    But  in  this  case  the  glory  is  given  to  God,  not  to  man. 

III.  It  promotes  the  spiritual  welfare  of  Churches  to  hear  of  the  success  of 
the  gospel  in  other  Churches.  The  example  of  faith,  love,  and  patience  at  Thessa- 
lonica  would  stimulate  the  saints  in  all  Greece. — T.  C. 

Ver.  5. — The  significance  of  these  sufferings  in  relation  to  Divine  judgment.  He 
comforts  them  with  the  thought  of  the  certainty  of  the  future  judgment. 

I.  There  will  be  a  righteous  judgment  of  men.  "Verily  there  is  a  God  that 
judgeth  in  the  earth  "  (Ps.  lviii.  11).  The  afflictions  of  the  righteous  and  the  prosperity 
of  the  wicked  in  the  present  world  are  not  inconsistent  with  this  righteous  judgment. 
The  problem  is  an  old  one,  how  to  understand  the  mystery  of  Divine  providence.  The 
Book  of  Job  sets  forth  its  conditions  and  its  mysteries.  The  disturbing  effect  of  sin  i: 
not  sufficiently  considered  in  estimating  the  character  of  the  Divine  administration.  It 
is  the  inequalities'^  Divine  providence  that  lead  us  to  expect  a  future  rectification  oi 
wrongs ;  for  God's  judgment  is  righteous. 

II.  The  patient  heroism  of  the  saints  is  itself  a  sign  of  God's  righteous 
judgment.  "Which  is  a  token  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  that  ye  may  be 
counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  for  which  ye  also  suffer."  1.  It  is  not  that 
believers  suffer,  receiving  here  their  evil  things,  while  the  wicked  receive  their  good  things. 
2.  It  is  not  because  God  is  just  and  there  must  be  a  future  judgment.  3.  It  is  not  that 
the  persecution  was  an  indication  how  the  judgment  would  go  at  the  last  day.  4.  It  is 
that  the  patience  of  the  saints  accredited  them,  by  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  as  meet 
heirs  of  his  kingdom,  while  it  was  a  presage  of  the  coming  judgment,  when  the  future 
would  bring  its  double  compensation  for  the  present.  The  idea  is  the  same  as  in  the 
Philippian  Epistle :  "  And  in  nothing  terrified  by  your  adversaries :  which  is  to  them 
an  evident  token  of  perdition,  but  to  you  of  salvation,  and  that  of  God  "  (Phil.  i.  28). 
It  follows,  therefore,  (1)  that  God  is  not  forgetful  or  indifferent  to  the  sufferings  of  his 
saints;  (2)  that  patience  is  a  special  qualification  for  the  enjoyment  of  God's  kingdom ; 
(3)  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the 
future  happiness  of  the  saints,  who  will  have  an  eternal  weight  of  glory. — T.  C 

Vers.  6 — 10. — The  future  judgment  as  to  its  righteousness,  time,  circumstances,  and 
results  to  the  two  classes  concerned  in  it.  The  apostle  proceeds  to  set  forth  the  certainty 
of  the  Divine  judgment  as  affecting  the  saints  and  their  persecutors. 

I.  The  righteousness  of  this  judgment.  "Seeing  it  is  a  righteous  thing  with 
God  to  recompense  affliction  to  them  that  afflict  you ;  and  to  you  who  are  afflicted  rest 
with  us."  1.  An  appeal  is  made  to  man's  innate  sense  of  justice.  A  want  of  this 
element  of  justice  in  human  character  is  regarded  as  a  defect.  A  right-minded  man  is 
indignant  at  wrong,  and  delights  in  the  retribution  that  falls  upon  wrong-doers.  This 
sentiment  of  justice  is  but  a  reflection  of  Divine  character,  for  we  are  made  in  the  image 
of  that  God  who  hates  sin  with  "a  perfect  hatred"  (Ps.  cxxxix.  22).  2.  God  is  "not 
unrighteous  who  taketh  vengeance  "  (Bom.  iii.  6),  for  he  has  established  in  his  govern- 
ment of  the  world  an  inseparable  connection  between  sin  and  misery.  Therefore  we 
may  expect  to  see  a  Divine  retaliation  upon  transgressors — "  affliction  to  them  that 


oh.  1. 1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  7 

afflict  yon  " — the  penalty  partaking  of  the  very  character  of  the  sin.  On  the  other  hand, 
God  is  not  "  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love."  The  afflicted 
shall  be  recompensed  with  "  rest,"  as  well  as  reward  for  all  their  patience. 

II.  The  time  op  the  judgment.  "  When  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from 
heaven."  1.  There  is  a  day  appointed  for  the  judgment  of  the  world ;  for  God  "  hath 
appointed  a  day  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by  that  Man  whom 
he  hath  ordained  "  (Acts  xvii.  30,  31).  2.  Tht  day  is  that  which  is  to  be  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Lord  from  heaven.  He  is  now  in  heaven,  "  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of 
God"  (Acts  vii.  56) ;  but  he  shall  then  come  forth  in  glory  to  those  who  "wait  for 
him,"  to  the  judgment  of  the  world.  3.  The  time  of  the  judgment  is  unknown  to  man. 
The  day  of  the  Lord  "  shall  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night." 

III.  The  sunoKDiNATE  circumstances  of  the  judgment.  1.  The  angelic  retinue. 
"The  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  the  angels  of  his  power." 
(1)  They  manifest  hiB  power  and  enhance  his  glory.  They  will  be  with  him  when  he 
"  shall  come  in  glory,  and  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  his  glory  "  (Matt.  xxv.  31).  (2)  They 
execute  his  purposes,  whether  of  wrath  or  mercy,  (a)  They  "  gather  together  his  elect 
from  the  four  winds"  (Mark  xiii.  27).  (6)  They  "shall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all 
things  that  offend,  and  them  that  do  iniquity,  and  shall  cast  them  into  a  furnace  of  fire" 
(Matt.  xiii.  41 ,  42).  2.  The  flaming  glory  of  his  manifestation.  It  shall  be  "  in  flaming 
fire ; "  not  as  the  instrument  of  vengeance,  but  as  enhancing  the  glory  of  the  Divine 
presence.  "  Our  God  shall  come,  and  shall  not  keep  silence :  a  fire  shall  devour  before 
him,  and  it  shall  be  very  tempestuous  round  about  him.  He  shall  call  to  the  heavens 
from  above,  and  to  the  earth,  that  he  may  judge  his  people"  (Ps.  1.  3,  4). 

IV.  The  results  op  the  judgment  to  the  two  classes.  1.  The  class  of  perse- 
cutors. "  Those  which  afflict  you."  (1)  Wicked  men  cannot  endure  the  saints.  It  is 
with  them  as  with  Cain,  who  slew  his  brother.  Wherefore?  "Because  his  own  works 
were  evil,  and  his  brother's  righteous  "  (1  John  iii.  12).  (2)  The  cry  of  the  saints  rises 
to  heaven  against  them.  "  How  long,  O  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and 
avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  ?  "  (Rev.  vi.  10).  (3)  The  persecutors 
are  of  two  classes.  "  Them  that  know  not  God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (a)  The  first  class  refers  to  Gentile  persecutors.  "They  know 
not  God."  Ignorance  is  their  great  sin.  They  had  resisted  the  light  of  nature,  (o)  It 
was  wilful  ignorance,  for  they  had  the  truth  brought  to  their  doors  in  Thessalonica ; 
(0)  their  ignorance  made  confidence  in  God  impossible,  (7)  as  well  as  an  intelligent 
worship  of  God.  (6)  The  second  class  refers  to  Jewish  persecutors — "  that  obey  not 
the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  As  ignorance  was  the  6in  of  the  Gentiles,  dis- 
obedience was  the  sin  of  the  Jews.  They  knew  God,  but  rejected  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
They  were  fiercer  persecutors  of  the  saints  even  than  the  Gentiles,  (a)  Christ  is  the 
Author  of  the  gospel  as  well  as  its  theme,  (fl)  The  gospel  is  to  be  obeyed  as  well  as 
received,  and  is  therefore  called  "the  obedience  of  faith;"  for  faith  without  obedience 
is  dead,  as  obedience  without  faith  has  no  value.  (4)  The  judgment  upon  the  persecu- 
tors. It  is  described  first  generally  and  then  more  definitely.  The  Lord  Jesus  shall 
take  vengeance  upon  them.  They  "  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction 
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power."  This  represents  "  the 
wrath  of  the  Lamb"  (Rev.  vi.  16, 17).  (a)  The  judgment  is  everlasting  destruction. 
This  does  not  imply  annihilation — an  idea  equally  opposed  to  Scripture  and  to  the  facts 
of  natural  science.  The  term  "everlasting"  associated  with  it  neutralizes  the  idea  of 
annihilation,  which  implies  a  point  of  time  in  which  the  wicked  cease  to  exist.  The 
duration  of  the  punishment  will  be  as  the  duration  of  the  blessedness  (Rev.  xvi.  26 ; 
Heb,  ix.  14;  Matt.  xxv.  46).  (6)  It  involves  separation  from  "the  face  of  the  Lord, 
and  the  glory  of  his  strength."  It  is  heaven  to  "see  Christ  as  he  is,"  to  he  "  with  him 
where  he  is,  that  they  may  behold  his  glory."  The  sum  of  all  woe  is,  "Depart  from 
me."  A  great  gulf  is  fixed  between  the  saved  and  the  lost  (Luke  xvi.  26).  The 
wicked  are  to  be  outside  the  apocalyptic  city  of  God.  "  Outside  are  dogs  "  (Rev.  xvi.  14, 
15).  2.  The  class  of  saints.  The  results  of  the  judgment  as  affecting  them  are  thus 
described.  (1)  They  are  to  be  accounted  "  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God."  (a)  They 
are  heirs  of  it,  as  children  of  God.  (6)  They  are  called  into  it.  (c)  The  kingdom 
"shall  be  given  to  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High"  (Dan.  vii.  27).  "  The 
saints  shall  judge  the  world"  (1  Cor.  vi.  2,  3).    They  shall  "inherit  the  kingdom" 


8  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  1 1—12. 

(Matt.  xxv.  34).  This  is  "  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  to  them  at  the  revelation  of 
Jesus  Christ "  (1  Pet.  i.  13).  (2)  They  shall  receive  rest — "  rest  with  us,"  as  the  Lord's 
recompense  for  all  their  sufferings.     It  points  to  their  release   from  persecutions. 

(a)  There  is  a  rest — a  sabbatism — "  for  the  people  of  God  "  (Heb.  iv.  9).  They  "  shall 
rest  from  their  labours,  aDd  their  works  do  follow  them  "  (Rev.  xiv.  13).  (6)  It  is  rest 
in  the  fellowship  of  all  saints — "  rest  with  us."  (3)  The  effect  of  the  Lord's  second 
advent — "  that  he  may  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  be  admired  in  all  them  that 
believe."  (a)  The  Church  is  to  be  "  the  glory  of  Christ."  Jesus  said,  "  The  glory 
which  thou  gavest  me  I  have  given  them  "  (John  xvii.  10,  22).  '*  The  beauty  of  the 
Lord  God  shall  be  upon  her,"  and  "  his  glory  shall  be  seen  upon  her  "  (Ps.  xc.  17) ; 
Isa.  lx.  2).  The  Church  is  addressed  thus:  "There  shall  also  be  a  crown  of  glory  in 
the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  a  royal  diadem  in  the  hand  of  thy  God "  (Isa.  Mi.  3). 

(b)  Christ  shall  be  an  Object  of  wonder  to  believers  in  that  day.  "  To  be  admired  in  all 
them  that  believe."  The  wonder  will  spring  out  of  the  extraordinary  manifestations 
of  his  glory  and  power. — T.  C. 

Vers.  11,  12. — Prayer  for  the  Thessalonians  in  prospect  of  their  glorification.  His 
wish  was  that  they  would  undergo  the  necessary  preparatory  work  in  anticipation  of 
their  future  glorification.    It  was  a  double  prayer. 

I.  A   PRAYER   THAT  HIS   CONVERTS  MIGHT  APPROVE  THE  REALITY   OF  THEIR  CALLING 

by  their  faith  and  life.  "  Whereunto  we  pray  always  for  you,  brethren,  that 
God  would  count  you  worthy  of  his  calling."  1.  The  nature  and  intent  of  the  calling. 
(1)  It  is  the  effectual  call  of  the  Spirit  in  conversion  (1  Cor.  i.  24).  (2)  It  is  according 
to  the  Divine  purpose  (Rom.  viii.  28).  (3)  It  is  (o)  high  (Phil.  iii.  14);  (6)  holy 
(2  Tim.  i.  9);  (c)  heavenly  (Heb.  iii.  1).  (4)  It  is  a  call  (a)  to  fellowship  with  Christ 
(1  Cor.  i.  9) ;  (6)  to  holiness  (1  Thess.  iv.  7) ;  (c)  to  liberty  (Gal.  v.  13) ;  (d)  to  peace 
(Col.  iii.  15) ;  (e)  to  glory  and  virtue  (2  Pet.  i.  3) ;  (/)  to  eternal  life  (1  Tim.  vi.  12). 
2.  A  walk  worthy  of  such  a  calling.  "  That  God  would  count  j  ou  worthy  of  thil 
calling."  How  can  any  sinful  man  be  accounted  worthy  of  it?  He  is  already  called, 
and  God's  counting  him  worthy  proceeds  on  the  supposition  of  that  pre-existing  fact. 
It  supposes :  (1)  That  their  life  would  be  found  at  the  last  day  in  harmony  with  the 
call  (1  Thess.  v.  24).  (2)  That  they  would  meanwhile  *'  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation 
wherewith  they  were  called"  (Eph.  iv.  1),  and  "make  their  calling  and  election  sure" 
(2  Pet.  i.  10).     (3)  That  they  would  have  occasion  to  praise  God  for  the  call  (1  Pet.  ii.  9). 

II.  A  PRAYER  THAT  HIS  CONVERTS  MIGHT  FULLY  REALIZE  THE  BLESSED  PROCESS 
THROUGH   WHICH   THE   APOSTLE'S  OBJECT  MIGHT  BE   SECURED.      The  process  IS  twofold. 

1.  That  God  would  work  in  them  every  delight  in  moral  goodness.  "  Fulfil  every  good 
pleasure  of  goodness."  (1)  Good  men  delight  in  goodness  and  in  doing  good.  (2)  It 
is  God  who  implants  this  delight  in  them ;  for  they  are  "  his  workmanship,  created  in 
Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works"  (Eph.  ii.  10).  They  are,  therefore,  to  be  "zealous  of 
good  works  "  (Titus  ii.  14),  and  to  provoke  one  another  to  "  good  works  "  (Heb.  x.  24). 
This  goodness  is  one  of  the  Spirit's  fruits  (Gal.  v.  22).  2.  That  God  would  fulfil 
the  work  of  faith  with  power.  (1)  Faith  is  an  operative  grace ;  it  "  worketh  by  love ; " 
it  justifies  itself  by  good  works.  (2)  It  is  a  Divine  work.  Therefore,  as  something 
may  have  been  lacking  therein,  the  apostle  prays  that  he  who  is  the  Author  of  their 
faith  would  be  the  Finisher  of  it  (Heb.  xii.  2).  (3)  It  is  a  work  done  with  power.  At 
their  conversion,  the  Thessalonians  felt  the  "  greatness  of  his  power  to  us-ward  who 
believe  "  (Eph.  i.  19),  and  the  same  power  is  needed  to  make  it  triumphant  as  a  principle 
of  action  and  as  a  principle  of  endurance.  "  Our  sufficiency  is  of  God;"  we  are  "kept  by 
the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation'"  (1  Pet.  i.  5). 

III.  THE   ULTIMATE    OBJECT   OF    THE    APOSTLB'B  PRAYERS  FOB    THK    THESSALONIANS. 

"  That  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  glorified  in  you,  and  ye  in  him." 
1.  The  very  Name  of  Christ  is  to  be  glorified  in  the  saints.  (1)  Because  it  is  "  a  Name 
that  is  above  every  name,  at  which  every  knee  should  bow  "  (Phil.  ii.  10).  (2)  Because 
it  is  the  Name  for  the  sake  of  which  the  saints  are  now  "hated  of  all  nations"  (Matt, 
xxiv.  9).  (3)  Because  it  is  the  Name  by  which  the  saints  are  called  (Jas.  ii.  7). 
(4)  It  is  glorified  in  the  saints  (o)  in  their  holiness  of  life;  (6)  in  their  victory  over 
the  world  and  sin ;  (c)  in  their  steadfast  loyalty  to  him ;  (d)  in  their  final  exaltation  to 
"  his  kingdom  and  glory."    2.  The  saints  will  be  glorified  in  Christ.    (1)  In  his  wear- 


ch.  1. 1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  9 

ing  tbeir  nature  on  the  throne ;  for  "he is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren"  (Heb.  ii- 
11).  (2)  In  their  being  clothed  with  his  righteousness—"  comely  with  the  comeliness 
he  has  put  upon  them."  {3)  In  their  "reigning  with  him,"  and  "being  glorified 
together"  (2  Tim.  ii.  12;  Bom.  viii.  17).  They  shall  be  "partakers  of  his  glory." 
3.  The  spring  or  source  of  all  the  blessings  of  the  saints.  "  According  to  the  grace  of  our 
God  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (1)  The  whole  work  of  salvation  till  it  ends  in  glory 
illustrates  "  the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace."  (a)  The  purpose  of  the  Father  is  of 
grace;  (6)  the  mediation  of  the  Son  is  of  grace;  (c)  the  blessings  of  the  new 
covenant  are  all  of  grace.  (2)  This  grace  has  a  unity  of  source — "  in  our  God  and 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;"  implying  oneness  of  essence  and  the  coequal  Godhead  of 
Father  and  Son.— T.  a 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  introduction.  I.  The  address.  1.  The  description.  St.  Paul 
repeats  the  opening  words  of  the  First  Epistle.  He  addresses  the  same  Church ;  he 
describes  it  in  the  same  sacred  words..  It  is  "  in  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  He  could  say  of  it  nothing  higher,  nothing  holier.  To  be  in  God,  in  Christ, 
is  of  all  positions  the  loftiest,  of  all  blessings  the  most  precious.  None  are  so  highly 
exalted  as  those  who  are  nearest  to  Christ;  none  have  such  rich  store  of  heavenly 
treasure  as  those  who  abide  in  him,  in  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead. 
There  is  but  one  slight  variation.  In  the  First  Epistle  he  said,  "  the  Father ; "  here  it  is 
"  our  Father."  The  pronoun  implies  a  close,  endearing,  affectionate  relationship.  The 
Church  ii  in  God  our  Father,  in  the  embrace  of  his  fatherly  love,  chosen  by  his  electing 
grace ;  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  saved  by  his  precious  death,  living  in  that  life  which 
flows  from  Christ,  which  is  Christ.  2.  The  salutation.  He  uses  the  same  words  as  in 
the  First  Epistle ;  he  could  find  no  more  suitable  terms  to  express  his  good  wishes  for 
his  converts.  He  could  desire  nothing  better  for  them  than  grace,  and  peace ;  grace,  the 
origin,  the  source,  of  every  highest  blessing;  peace,  the  sweet  and  holy  end,  the  very 
crown,  of  the  Christian  life.  It  is  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that 
these  and  all  other  blessings  flow.  St.  Paul  joins  together  the  two  Divine  Persons ;  they 
could  not  be  thus  associated  as  the  one  ultimate  source  of  grace  and  peace,  were  they  not 
both  alike  Divine.  Peace  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit ;  with  the  Holy  Spirit  whom  the  Lord 
Jesus  sends  unto  us  from  the  Father  comes  the  sacred  gift  of  peace.  Grace  and  peace 
come  from  God  the  Father  by  the  incarnation,  atonement,  intercession  of  God  the  Son, 
through  the  indwelling  presence  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  the  love  of  God  flow  into  the  Christian  heart  through  the  fellowship  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  All  that  the  Christian  can  desire  for  himself,  for  his  friends,  for  the  whole 
Church,  comes  from  God ;  he  seeks  it  of  God  in  prayer ;  he  knows  that  God  will  hear. 
"  This  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him,  that,  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  his 
will,  he  heareth  us." 

IL  Tax  THANKSoivnro.  1.  The  duty.  Thanksgiving  la  a  debt  which  we  owe  to 
God,  a  debt  which  we  must  always  acknowledge,  which  we  can  never  fully  discharge. 
It  is  very  meet,  right,  and  our  bounden  duty,  that  we  should  at  all  times  and  in  all 
places  give  thanks  for  all  things  unto  God.  We  must  thank  him  for  his  grace  given  to 
ourselves ;  and  if  that  grace  abides  in  us,  we  shall  feel  ourselves  bound  to  thank  him 
for  the  working  of.  the  same  grace  in  others.  We  shall  regard  every  true  conversion, 
every  increase  of  grace  in  others,  as  a  blessing  granted  to  the  whole  Church  and  to  our- 
selves. We  shall  feel  a  keen,  living  interest  in  each  soul  that  is  gathered  into  Christ's 
flock,  and  bo  share  the  angels'  joy  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth.  For  the  welfare  of 
each  member  affects  the  whole  Church;  when  "one  member  is  honoured,  all  the 
members  rejoice  with  it."  Such  was  the  feeling  of  St.  PauL  "  We  are  bound,"  he  says — 
we  owe  it  as  a  debt — "  to  thank  God  always  for  you."  He  fulfils  his  own  precept ;  he 
gives  thanks  always.  The  thanksgiving  of  the  faithful  Christian  must  be  continuous, 
never-ending.  2.  The  ground  of  St.  Pauls  thanksgiving.  (1)  The  faith  of  the  Thes- 
■aloniana.  He  had  gladly  recognized  their  faith  and  love  in  his  First  Epistle ;  he  had 
again  and  again  exhorted  them  to  abound  more  and  more.  Now,  writing  a  second 
time  after  a  short  interval,  he  thanks  God  for  the  growth  of  their  faith.  It  had  kicreased 
"exceedingly;"  he  uses  one  of  those  strong  words  which  his  ardent  feelings  so  often 
suggested.  "Lord,  increase  our  faith,"  is  a  prayer  which  we  cannot  make  too  often. 
Faith  most  grow  if  it  is  true  and  living;  for  it  is  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen ;  it 


10  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  l  1—12. 

brings  the  cross  of  Christ,  the  presence  of  God,  within  the  range  of  our  mental  view. 
That  holy  vision  will  draw  us  nearer  ever  by  its  constraining  power,  quickening  and 
deepening  in  our  hearts  the  faith  which  first  brought  us  by  the  leading  of  the  Spirit  to 
the  Saviour.  The  faith  of  the  Thessalonians  was  growing  exceedingly;  so  it  will  be 
with  us,  in  spite  of  the  unbelief  and  indifference  which  so  fill  the  air,  if  we  persevere 
in  prayer,  and  try,  in  humble  dependence  on  the  grace  of  God,  to  fashion  our  lives 
according  to  our  prayers.  (2)  Their  love  was  abounding  also.  Love  is  the  fairest 
ornament  of  a  Christian  Church.  Faith  is  the  root,  love  is  the  fruit.  The  tree  that 
grows  downwards  will  grow  upwards  also ;  the  fair  growth  of  foliage,  flower,  and  fruit 
will  bear  some  proportion  to  the  unseen  depth  and  strength  of  the  root  below.  The 
Thessalonian  Church  was  rich  in  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  And  their  love  was  not  only 
increasing  in  fervour,  but  in  range  also.  It  was  not  partial,  not  limited  to  this  man 
or  that  man  according  to  natural  tastes  and  similarities  of  disposition.  It  extended 
throughout  the  Church ;  the  love  of  each  one  of  them  all  was  abounding  toward  one 
another.  It  is  a  bright  picture.  Indeed,  the  Thessalonians  were  not  without  their 
faults,  as  we  find  in  ch.  ii.  and  iii. ;  but  the  apostle,  in  his  love  and  thankfulness, 
gladly  dwells  on  the  spiritual  progress  of  the  Church  before  he  proceeds  to  notice  the 
shortcomings  of  individual  members.  It  shows  his  love  and  his  wisdom.  The 
encouragement  of  the  opening  verses  would  dispose  the  Thessalonians  to  receive  in 
a  good  spirit  the  few  reproofs  that  follow.  3.  The  expression  of  his  thankfulness.  He 
not  only  gives  thanks  to  God ;  he  glories  before  men.  "  We  ourselves,"  he  says — "  we 
glory."  Though  his  deep  humility  might  have  witliheld  him  from  glorying  over 
a  result  which  was  due,  under  God,  to  his  own  zealous  labours,  the  rapid  growth  of 
their  faith  and  love  so  filled  him  with  exuberant  gladness  that  he  could  not  refrain  his 
lips.  "  God  forbid,"  he  says  elsewhere,  "  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  But  he  is  really  glorying  in  the  cross  now;  he  glories,  not  in  his 
own  achievements,  but  in  the  triumphs  of  the  cross.  It  was  the  work  of  God  in  real 
truth,  not  his  work;  he  knew  it  well.  Indeed,  he  had  laboured  abundantly — that  he 
knew,  he  could  not  help  knowing  it;  but  he  gladly  explains  the  abundance  of  his 
labours  by  the  abundance  of  grace  that  was  vouchsafed  unto  him.  "  Yet  not  I,"  he  says, 
"  but  the  grace  of  God  that  was  with  me."  The  faith,  hope,  and  love  of  the  Thessa- 
lonians proved,  as  he  said  in  the  First  Epistle,  their  election.  God  had  chosen  them  to 
be  his  own;  his  grace  worked  mightily  in  them.  And  now  St.  Paul  was  glorying  in 
the  faith  and  patience  of  his  converts.  They  were  in  great  affliction ;  he  sympathized 
with  them,  he  comforted  them;  but  yet  he  rejoiced  over  them.  Their  affliction  by  the 
grace  of  God  was  turned  to  a  blessing ;  it  proved  the  steadfastness  of  their  faith  and 
their  patience,  and  it  strengthened  them. 

Lesson6.  1.  Thankfulness  is  the  Christian's  duty ;  thank  God  always.  2.  Especially 
thank  him  for  his  grace  working  in  his  people.  3.  Glory  in  the  victories  of  grace,  not 
in  worldly  successes.     4.  Pray  for  continual  progress  in  faith,  love,  patience. — B.  C.  C. 

Vers.  5 — 7. — Hie  persecutions  of  the  Thessalonians.  I.  The  meaning  of  affliction. 
1.  It  does  not  mean  that  Qod  is  angry  with  us.  Job's  friends  thought  so.  So  did  Asaph 
once;  but  when  he  weut  into  the  sanctuary  of  God  his"  eyes  were  enlightened;  he 
understood  then  that  God  himself  is  the  Portion  of  his  people ;  that  there  is  nothing 
upon  earth  to  be  desired  in  comparison  with  him ;  that  though  heart  and  flesh  may 
fail,  God  is  enough,  and  more  than  enough,  for  his  chosen  in  this  world,  and  in  the 
world  to  come  will  receive  them  to  glory.  God's  dealings  with  men  are  often  misinter- 
preted; people  use  the  word  "judgment"  carelessly  and  without  knowledge.  Affliction 
would  be  almost  intolerable,  if  it  were  indeed  always  a  proof  of  the  Divine  wrath.  But, 
God  be  thanked,  he  himself  has  told  us  it  ernes  in  love.  2.  It  is  a  trial  of  our  faith. 
Satan  said,  "  Doth  Job  serve  God  for  nought  ?  "  The  werld  often  says  so  now ;  it  imputes 
lower  motives ;  it  refuses  to  believe  in  unselfish  goodness.  The  man  who  can  say  in 
the  midst  of  troubles,  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;  blessed  be  the 
Name  of  the  Lord,"  is  a  living  proof  of  the  reality,  of  the  sustaining  power,  of  the 
presence  of  God;  one  of  those  miracles  of  grace  which,  thank  God,  are  still  daily 
wrought  around  us  in  the  world.  These  things  are  among  the  facts  registered  by  the 
observer  of  spiritual  truths — facts  as  real  as  the  facts  of  external  nature,  and  of  far 
deeper  and  more  abiding  moment.    3.  It  worketh  paii*ne$.    The  trial  of  God's  sainte 


t*.  L 1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  11 

is  mora  precious  than  that  of  gold  which  perisheth.  Gold  is  tried  by  Are ;  God's  people 
are  tried  in  the  furnace  of  affliction.  Affliction,  meekly  borne,  hath  a  refining  power; 
it  elevates  and  refines  the  whole  sharacter ;  "  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteous- 
ness to  them  that  are  exercised  thereby."  Faith  is  strengthened  by  trials ;  patience  is 
acquired  by  the  haViit  of  enduring  affliction.  Without  endurance,  without  suffering,  there 
is  no  opportunity  of  developing  the  grace  of  patience. 

IL  The  ultimate  issue  of  persecution.  1.  To  the  persecuted.  Rest — rest  with 
all  saints ;  with  St.  Paul  who  had  been  the  means  of  their  conversion,  who  was  then 
writing  to  comfort  them.  The  weary  and  heavy  laden  who  come  to  Christ,  as  he  bills 
them,  find  in  him  rest  for  their  souls  even  in  this  present  life.  There  is  an  inner 
rest  of  the  spirit,  amid  outward  unrest  and  trouble,  which  is  the  pledged  possession 
of  the  soul  that  hath  found  Christ  and  resteth  in  faith  on  him.  "  Thou  shalt  keep 
him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  thee :  because  he  trusteth  in  thee. 
Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever :  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength ; "  or 
rather,  as  in  the  margin,  "  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  the  Bock  of  ages."  'J  he  only  rest  for 
the  penitent,  for  the  sorrowful,  is  on  the  breast  of  Jesus.  We  find  rest  there  now ; 
\>ut  the  truest,  deepest  rest  is  yet  to  come  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  "Eequiescat  in 
pace,"  we  say  of  the  departed.  They  are  found  worthy  of  that  rest  in  the  kingdom 
of  God  who  have  endured  affliction  in  faith  and  patience.  God  is  pleased,  in  his 
gracious  condescension,  to  call  them  worthy.  "  They  shall  walk  with  me  in  white,  for 
they  are  worthy."  That  worthiness  is  of  God;  it  is  his  gift;  he  makes  them  worthy 
by  his  grace.  He  called  them  not  because  they  were  worthy,  says  St.  Augustine; 
rather  by  his  choice  he  makes  them  worthy.  It  is  not  their  merit  but  his  election, 
not  their  goodness  but  his  lU'aee,  that  makes  them  what  they  are.  They  have  not 
chosen  him,  but  he  hath  chosen  them  that  they  should  bring  forth  much  fruit.  They 
are  not  wise,  or  strong,  or  holy ;'  but  Christ  their  Lord  is  all.  He  is  present  with  them, 
abiding  in  them  by  his  Spirit,  purging  away  their  sins,  communicating  to  them 
more  and  more  of  his  own  holiness  and  love.  As  he  is,  so  are  they  in  this  world; 
and  they  know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  they  shall  be  like  him,  for  they  shall  see 
him  as  he  is.  For  his  sake  they  are  counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  in 
the  hope  of  that  kingdom  they  are  willing  now  to  suffer.  But  these  present  sufferings 
are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  coming  glory.  They  know  it,  and  they 
suffer  patiently,  for  they  recognize  that  great  truth  that  ouly  by  the  way  of  the  cross 
can  we  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  2.  To  the  persecutors.  God  will  recompense 
affliction  to  those  who  afflict  his  saints.  They  who  persecute  the  Lord's  disciples 
persecute  the  Lord  himself.  It  pertains  to  his  justice  that  such  must  receive  the  due 
reward  of  their  deeds.  It  is  right;  and  because  it  is  right,  it  must  be  so.  Christians 
must  pray  for  their  persecutors ;  they  must  do  what  lieth  in  them  to  soften  their 
hearts,  to  save  their  souls,  to  avert  the  coming  judgment.  But  when  the  judgment 
comes  they  can  but  stand  by,  and  recognize  in  solemn  awe  the  justice  of  the  most 
holy  God. 

Lessons.  1.  Chastisements  are  sent  in  mercy  ;  be  patient,  be  thankful.  2.  Chastise- 
ment is  only  grievous  if  we  do  not  understand  its  meaning ;  accept  it  as  sent  from 
God ;  take  it  as  a  cross ;  be  careful  not  to  lose  its  blessed  fruits.  3.  Think  of  the  ' 
great  joy  of  those  who  are  counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God ;  let  that  high 
hope  be  your  comfort  in  trouble.  4.  Envy  not  the  oppressor,  and  choose  none  of  his 
ways. — B.  0.  C. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — The  great  day.  L  The  judgment  of  the  wicked.  1.  The  revelation 
of  the  Judge.  It  is  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  once  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men ;  he 
is  ordained  of  God  to  be  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead.  He  shall  come  as  God  once 
came  down  on  Mount  Sinai,  in  the  like  awful  glory.  (1)  With  the  angels.  They  shall 
gather  the  wicked  from  among  the  just,  and  shall  cast  them  into  the  furnace  of  fire. 
The  angels  will  be  the  ministers  of  his  justice — the  blessed  angels  who  are  now  the 
messengers  of  his  love  and  grace.  Now  they  rejoice  over  each  sinner  that  repenteth ; 
then  they  will  cast  the  impenitent  into  the  everlasting  fire.  We  think  of  the  angels 
as  gentle,  loving,  holy,  as  our  friends  and  guardians ;  they  are  so,  so  far  as  we  are 
Christ's.  They  desire  to  look  into  the  mysteries  of  redemption ;  they  announced  the 
Saviour's  birth ;  they  ministered  to  him  in  his  temptation,  his  agony ;  they  celebrated 


It  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  i.  1—12, 

his  resurrection  and  ascension.  Now  they  are  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  that 
shall  be  heirs  of  salvation ;  they  encamp  round  about  those  who  fear  the  Lord,  and 
deliver  them.  They  help  in  carrying  on  his  blessed  work  of  love.  But  they  are  holy ; 
they  hate  evil ;  they  must  turn  away  from  those  who  hare  yielded  themselves  to  the 
dominion  of  the  evil  one ;  they  must  execute  at  the  last  the  awful  judgment  of  God, 
Fearful  thought,  that  the  blessed  angels,  loving  and  holy  as  they  are,  must  one  day 
cast  the  hardened  sinner  into  hell,  as  once  they  cast  Satan  out  of  heaven.  (2)  In 
flaming  fire.  The  Lord  shall  be  revealed  in  flaming  fire,  in  that  glory  which  he  had 
before  the  world  was.  His  throne  is  fiery  flame  (Dan.  vii.  9).  He  himself  is  a  con- 
suming fire.  The  sight  will  be  appalling  to  the  lost,  full  of  unutterable  terror;  "they 
shall  say  to  the  rocks,  Fall  on  us ;  and  to  the  hills,  Cover  us."  "  By  thine  agony  and 
bloody  sweat,  by  thy  cross  and  passion,  good  Lord,  deliver  us."  2.  The  lost.  Two 
classes  are  mentioned  here.  (1)  Those  who  know  not  God — the  heathen.  They  might 
have  known  him.  Some  of  them  did  know  him.  They  had  not  the  Law,  the  outward 
Law,  but  it  was  written  in  their  hearts  ;  God  spoke  to  them  in  the  voice  of  conscience. 
They  listened ;  they  did  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  Law.  Such  men,  we  are 
sure,  God  in  his  great  mercy  will  accept  and  save.  But,  alas !  the  fearful  picture  drawn 
by  St.  Paul  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Ejiistle  to  the  Rinnans  represents  with  only  too 
much  truth  the  general  state  of  the  heathen  world  in  the  apostolic  times.  Their 
blindness  was  criminal ;  it  was  the  result  of  willul  and  habitual  sin;  theii  ignorance 
was  without  excuse.  (2)  Those  who  obeyed  not  the  gospel.  All,  whether  Jews  or 
Gentiles,  who  had  heard  the  preaching  of  Christ.  They  had  heard,  as  we  have,  all 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  had  done  and  suffered  for  us ;  they  had  had  the  opportunity  of 
hearing  his  holy  precepts.  "This  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come  into  the 
world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light."  To  know  the  gospel  and  not  to 
obey  it,  to  have  the  light  around  us  and  not  to  admit  it  into  our  hearts,  not  to  walk 
as  children  of  light — this  must  bring  the  judgment  of  God  upon  the  disobedient. 
The  greater  the  light,  the  heavier  the  responsibility  of  those  who  sin  against  light  and 
-  knowledge.  3.  The  punishment.  The  Lord  Jesus  will  award  vengeance.  "  Vengeance 
is  mine ;  I  will  recompense,  saith  the  Lord."  Terrible  thought,  that  vengeance  must 
come  from  him,  the  most  loving  Saviour,  who  loved  the  souls  of  men  with  a  love  so 
burning,  so  intense  in  its  Divine  tenderness!  But  it  must  be  so.  The  exceeding  guilt 
of  sin  is  manifest  in  this;  it  turns  the  chiefest  of  blessings  into  an  increase  of  con- 
demnation ;  the  cross  is  utter  death  to  the  impenitent  and  the  ungodly.  And  that 
vengeance  takes  effect  in  destruction.  The  destruction  is  eternal ;  then  it  is  not 
annihilation.  It  is  the  destruction  of  all  gladness,  hope,  all  that  makes  life  worth 
living ;  it  is  the  exclusion  from  the  face  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power. 
Only  the  pure  in  heart  can  see  God.  The  lost  souls  cannot  see  his  face.  The  exclusion 
is  eternal;  is  it  endless?  It  continues  through  the  ages;  will  those  ages  of  misery 
ever  end  in  restoration  ?  Can  a  soul,  once  so  hardened  in  guilt  that  it  must  be  shut 
out  of  the  presence  of  God,  ever  repent  in  that  exclusion?  It  sinned  obstinately 
against  light  during  its  time  of  probation ;  can  it  recover  itself  now  that  the  light 
is  withdrawn?  It  is  hardened  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  and  the  power  of  evil 
habits ;  can  it  break  those  chains  of  darkness  now  ?  These  are  dark,  awful  questions. 
We  may  ask,  on  the  other  hand,  how  can  "God  be  all  in  all,"  if  sin  is  to  exist  for  ever? 
how  can  it  be  that  "  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive,"  while  there  is  still  a  hell  in 
the  universe  of  God?  The  subject  is  beset  with  difficulties  and  perplexities;  it  excites 
bewildering,  harrowing  thoughts.  We  must  leave  it  where  Holy  Scripture  leaves  it. 
We  would  gladly  believe,  if  it  were  possible,  that  there  is  hope  beyond  the  grave  for 
those  who  die  unblest ;  but  such  an  expectation  has  no  scriptural  authority  beyond 
a  few  slight  and  doubtful  hints.  Who  would  dare  to  trust  to  a  hope  so  exceeding 
slender?  No;  if  we  shrink  in  terror  from  the  thought  of  being  one  day  shut  out  ot 
God's  presence  into  the  great  outer  darkness,  let  us  try  to  live  in  that  gracious 
presence  now. 

11.  The  olobt  of  the  bighteous,  \.- Its  time :  when  he  shall  come.  They  Buffer 
now ;  sometimes  they  are  persecuted,  their  name  is  cast  out  as  evil.  But  they  have 
their  consolation ;  they  see  indeed  through  a  glass  darkly,  but  yet  they  do  see  by 
faith  the  glory  of  the  Lord;  they  are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory 
as  by  the  Lord  the  Spirit.    They  have  a  glory  now;  but  it  is  an  inner  spiritual 


oh.  1. 1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  18 


glory  derived  from  the  indwelling  of  the  blessed  Spirit  whom  the  world  seeth  not, 
neither  knowoth.  Now  they  are  the  sons  of  God  ;  when  he  shall  appear,  they  shall 
be  like  him,  for  they  shall  see  him  as  he  is.  2.  Its  natwre :  the  unveiled  presenile  of 
Christ.  He  shall  be  glorified  in  his  saints.  "I  am  glorified  in  them,"  he  said,  when 
about  to  leave  them.  When  he  comes  again,  that  glory  shall  shine  forth  in  all  its 
radiant  splendour.  He  shall  be  admired  in  all  them  that  believe.  The  glory  of  his 
presence  abiding  in  them  shall  arouse  the  wondering  admiration  of  all.  The  lost  spirits 
will  wonder;  they  will  be  amazed  at  the  strangeness  of  the  salvation  of  the  blessed. 
"  This  is  he  "  (Wisd.  v.  3,  5)  "  whom  we  sometimes  had  in  derision  .  .  .  how  is  he  num- 
bered among  the  children  of  God,  and  his  lot  is  among  the  saints  ?  "  The  very  angels 
will  wonder  at  the  exceeding  glory  of  the  Lord  shining  in  his  saints.  For  he  will 
change  the  body  of  their  humiliation,  and  make  it  like  the  body  of  his  glory. 

Lessons.  1.  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ ;  let  us  keep 
that  awful  day  in  our  thoughts.  2.  Think  on  the  fearful  misery  of  eternal  separation 
from  God  ;  live  in  his  presence  now.  3.  We  hope  to  be  like  him  in  his  glory  ;  let  us 
take  up  the  cross. — B.  C.  C. 

Vers.  11,  12.— St.  PauTs  prayer .  for  the  Thessalonians.  I.  Its  purpobt.  1.  Be 
•prays  that  God's  favour  may  rest  upon  them.  That  he  may  count  them  worthy.  We 
feel  that  we  are  all  unworthy — unworthy  of  his  grace  and  presence.  We  are  not  worthy 
that  he,  the  blessed  One,  should  enter  under  our  roof,  into  our  heart.  But  whom  he 
loves,  those  he  makes  worthy  of  his  love.  He  counts  them  worthy,  though  they  are  in 
themselves  unworthy  ;  his  grace  makes  them  worthy  in  Christ.  He  calls  them ;  they 
through  grace  obey  the  calling.  He  calls  them  ever  higher,  nearer  to  himself,  till  they 
reach  at  length  the  prize  of  the  high  calling.  2.  That  God  who  begun  the  good  work 
in  them  would  complete  it.  He  prays  (1)  that  God  would  fulfil  in  them  every  desire 
of  goodness.  He  had  used  the  same  word  of  himself  (Rom.  x.  1) :  "  My  heart's  desire 
and  prayer  for  Israel  is,  that  they  might  be  saved."  His  heart's  desire  (eJSoiela)  was  a 
good  desire ;  it  issued  from  goodness — goodness  given  by  God,  inwrought  into  his  heart 
by  the  working  of  the  good  Spirit  of  God.  All  holy  desires  come  from  God ;  he  prompts 
them ;  they  issue  out  of  the  goodness  which  comes  from  him,  from  his  grace.  He  will 
fulfil  such  desires,  for  he  has  promised,  "  Blessed  are  they  which  do  hunger  and  thirst 
after  righteousness :  for  they  shall  be  filled."  The  holy  desire  will  issue,  if  we  persevere 
in  prayer,  in  the  good  counsel,  in  the  just  work.  He  prays  (2)  that  God  would  fulfil 
the  work  of  faith.  In  his  First  Epistle  he  spoke  of  Ms  affectionate  remembrance  of 
their  work  of  faith  ;  now  he  prays  that  God  miiht  fulfil  that  work  in  power.  Faith 
is  itself  a  work,  "  the  work  of  God  " — a  work  which  issues  from  God,  from  his  grace ; 
a  work  which  is  pleasing  to  God,  for  it  is  his  will ;  a  work  which  ends  in  God,  in  the 
contemplation  of  God,  in  the  glory  of  God.  And  faiih  works;  it  is  a  living  principle, 
an  active  energy.  It  will  lead  on  to  ever  more  earnest  prayer,  to  a  closer  walk  with 
God.  And  that  prayer,  that  communion  with  God,  will  continually  deepen  and  strengthen 
faith ;  for  in  answer  to  faithful  prayer  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given,  and  the  Spirit  is  power 
— power  from  on  high. 

U.  Its  final  end — thk  sloby  of  God.  1.  That  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  might 
be  glorified  in  the  Thessalonians.  That  men  might  see  their  good  works,  and  glorify 
the  Lord  that  bought  them,  the  Father  that  called  them.  We  say  in  our  daily  prayers, 
"  Hallowed  be  thy  Name."  We  have  been  baptized  into  that  great  Name ;  that  holy 
Name  is  upon  us.  Very  weak  and  sinful  as  we  are,  that  great  Name  may  be  hallowed, 
glorified  in  us,  if  we  do  all  things,  great  or  small,  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  if  we 
always  give  thanks  to  the  Father  by  him ;  if  we  show  in  our  daily  walk  before  men 
the  power  of  his  grace.  It  is  the  great  end  of  the  Christian  life.  "  Whatsoever  ye  do, 
do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  2.  That  they  might  be  glorified  in  him.  His  saints  share 
his  glory.  "  The  glory  which  thou  gavest  me,  I  have  given  them."  He  dwelleth  in 
them,  and  they  in  him.  His  glory  is  theirs,  for  they  are  his.  "  Ye  are  Christ's." 
And  he  is  theirs.  The  Father  gave  the  Son,  the  Son  of  God  gave  himself  for  us,  to  us. 
Hence  it  is  that  his  true  people,  beholding  (though  now  in  a  glass  darkly)  his  glory,  are 
changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory.  And  that  according  to  the  grace  of 
our  God  and  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  All  our  bhssings  come  from  his  grace;  he  is  oui 
God,  therefore  we  can  trust  in  him.    He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost,  for  he  ii 


14  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  l  1^12. 

Almighty.  He  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  therefore  we  may  cast  all  our  care  upon  him, 
for  he  will  save  us ;  he  loveth  us  even  to  the  end. 

Lessons.  1.  Our  salvation  is  of  God ;  its  beginning,  course,  end — all  is  of  grace. 
2.  Every  good  desire  comes  from  him ;  ask  him  to  strengthen  the  desire,  to  develop 
it  into  action.  3.  Seek  power  from  him — power  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  and  win 
the  victory  at  last.  4.  Let  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  the  one  great  aim 
above  all  other  motives. — B.  0.  C. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — Manifestation  of  solemn  interest.    Address  and  salutation.    "  Paul, 

and  SilvamiB,  and  Timothy,  unto  the  Church  of  the  Thessalonians  in  God  our  Father 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  Grace  to  you  and  peace  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  The  address  is  the  same  as  in  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians, 
with  the  exception  of  the  substitution  of  "  our  Father  "  for  "  the  Father."  The  saluta- 
tion is  also  the  same,  with  the  addition  of  the  twofold  source  from  which  grace  and 
peace  are  invoked,  which  is  the  same  as  in  many  of  Paul's  Epistles,  with  the  exception 
of  the  substitution  of  "  the  Father  "  for  "  our  Father." 

I.  Recognition  of  the  satisfactory  condition  of  the  Thessalonian  Chcboh. 
1.  Be/ore  God.  "  We  are  bound  to  give  thanks  to  God  alway  for  you,  brethren,  even 
as  it  is  meet,  for  that  your  faith  groweth  exceedingly,  and  the  love  of  each  one  of  you 
all  toward  one  another  aboundeth."  We  are  to  understand  that  information  had 
reached  Paul  and  his  companions  from  Thessalonica  since  the  despatch  of  their  first 
letter  to  that  place.  It  was  information  of  faith  and  love  on  the  part  of  the  Thessa- 
lonian converts,  of  such  a  nature  as  to  make  Paul  (taking  him  as  representative)  feel 
inwardly  bound  to  thank  God  alway  for  them.  This  inward  feeling  answered  to  an 
outward  fitness  of  circumstances.  In  the  previous  letter  he  had  shown  a  deep  interest 
in  the  perfecting  of  the  lacking  elements  in  their  faith.  Wc  may  think  of  a  tree  that 
has  not  come  to  its  full  proportions.  It  could  now  be  said  of  them,  after  an  interval 
of  less  than  a  year,  that  their  faith  was  growing  exceedingly.  It  was  exhibiting  such 
increase  as  a  healthy  faith  always  exhibits,  and  this  in  a  marked  degreo.  For  such 
large  realization  of  his  wishes  in  the  time  it  was  only  meet  that  he  should  thank  God. 
He  had  also  expressly  prayed  that  the  Lord  would  make  them  to  abound  in  love  one 
toward  another.  It  could  now  be  said  that  this  was  in  the  way  of  fulfilment.  Their 
love  was  in  process  of  enlargement  as  all  love  should  be,  and  in  a  marked  degree  as  the 
word  would  seem  to  imply.  Their  love  was  markedly  individual.  There  was  love 
toward  the  circle  as  a  whole  which  was  real  and  commendatory,  but  there  was  also 
personal  attachment  between  the  various  members  of  the  circle,  individual  toward  indi- 
vidual. Their  love  was  also  markedly  universal  within  the  circle.  The  abounding 
was  in  the  love  of  each  one  of  them  all  toward  one  another.  That  testified  to  a  har- 
monious circle.  "  When  we  love  in  part,"  says  Theophylact,  "  this  is  not  love,  but 
division.  For  if  it  is  for  God's  sake  thou  lovest,  see  that  thou  love  all."  There  is  a 
symmetry  in  love  which  requires  that,  loving  our  heavenly  Father,  we  should  love  all 
his  children ;  that,  loving  Christ,  we  should  love  the  whole  Christian  circle.  In  the 
Thessalonian  circle  no  exception  is  made  of  the  busybodies  afterwards  referred  to  as 
loved  or  loving.  In  being  busybodies  they  were  not  doing  their  duty  by  the  other 
members  of  the  circle ;  but  the  obstacle  thus  presented  to  their  brethren  loving  them 
was  commendably  surmounted.  As  for  the  love  of  the  busybodies  themselves,  it  was 
not  sufficiently  characterized  by  wisdom,  and  did,  therefore,  contain  something  to  be 
subtracted.  Still,  his  prayer  had  been  in  so  large  a  degree  answered  that  it  was  only 
meet  that  he  should  give  thanks  to  God  for  them.  What  obstacles  there  are  to  our 
loving  in  the  Christian  circle  let  us  try  to  surmount,  and  let  us  not  ourselves  present 
any  obstacles.  And  let  us  be  thankful  before  God  for  what  harmony  is  enjoyed.  2. 
Before  the  Churches.  "  So  that  we  ourselves  glory  in  you  in  the  Churches  of  God 
for  your  patience  and  faith  in  all  your  persecutions  and  in  the  afflictions  which  ye 
endure."  Formerly  there  was  no  need  to  say  anything  of  their  faith  to  God-ward. 
Their  conversion  to  Christianity,  with  joy  fulness  in  attendant  persecution,  was  widely 
known.  It  was  not  now  that  others  were  behindhand ;  for  they  had  warm  friends, 
and  these  not  a  few,  who  gloried  in  them.  But  Paul  and  his  companions  were  so  over- 
joyed that  they  were  moved  to  join  with  others  in  glorying  in  them.  The  sphere  of 
glorying  was  the  Churches  of  God,  i.e.  Corinth,  from  which  this  letter  was  written,  and 


oh.  1. 1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  16 

other  Churches  with  which  they  had  correspondence.  What  they  especially  gloried  In 
was  the  patience  of  the  Thessalonians.  Persecution  had  come  upon  them  after  perse- 
cution; they  were  then  enduring  afflictions.  But  they  had  nobly  stood  their  ground. 
Their  patience  was  sustained  by  faith — faith  in  a  kind  and  wise  Providence  that  was 
watching  over  them,  that  made  use  of  their  afflictions  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel,  that 
would  not  leave  them  in  the  end  unrewarded.  This  patience  sustained  by  faith,  Paul 
and  his  companions  held  up  before  the  Churches  for  their  encouragement  in  like  cir- 
cumstances. This  being  their  motive,  there  was  no  breach  of  modesty  in  the 
instructors  of  the  Thessalonians  themselvet  glorying  in  them. 

II.  Righteous  judgment  of  God.  1.  With  reference  to  the  Tliessahniatu.  "Which 
is  a  manifest  token  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God;  to  the  end  that  ye  maybe 
counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  for  which  ye  also  suffer."  The  patience  sus- 
tained hy  faith,  which  was  held  up  for  the  encouragement  of  the  Churches,  is  now  use<l 
for  the  encouragement  of  the  Thessalonians  themselves.  Let  them  think  of  the  judg- 
ment of  God  that  was  coming.  That  judgment  would  he  righteous  in  dealing  with  men 
according  to  character.  The  character  they  possessed  left  no  doubt  as  to  what  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God  would  be.  It  looked  forward  to  their  being  in  the  end 
counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  For  that  kingdom  they  were  suffering ;  but 
let  them  know  that  they  who  thus  suffered  would  also  reign.  2.  With  reference  to 
their  persecutors.  "  If  so  be  that  it  is  a  righteous  thing  with  God  to  recompense 
affliction  to  them  that  afflict  you,  and  to  you  that  are  afflicted  rest  with  us."  The 
persecutors  had  no  source  of  encouragement  in  their  character.  They  also  had  to  pass 
under  the  judgment  of  God;  but  what  could  righteous  judgment  mean  to  them? 
Their  character  was  that  of  cruelly  afflicting  God's  people.  Could  it  be  a  righteous 
thing  with  God  to  place  them  alongside  of  patient  sufferers  as  worthy  of  the  kingdom? 
That  would  be  to  have  no  regard  to  distinction  in  character,  to  make  God  the  friend  of 
cruelty  as  much  as  of  patience,  and  in  that  way  to  contradict  the  very  idea  of  righteous 
judgment.  The  incontestably  righteous  thing  could  only  be  that  with  what  measure 
they  meted  it  should  be  measured  unto  them;  that,  giving  affliction,  there  should  be 
given  back  to  them  affliction;  while,  to  the  afflicted  Thessalonians,  the  righteous 
opposite  would  be  release  from  the  strain  of  affliction — release  in  company  with  Paul 
and  Silas  and  Timothy  in  like  manner  afflicted. 

III.  Judicial  pboceddbb  under  which  dealing  with  the  Thessalonians  and 
their  persecutors  falls.  1.  Toward  the  ungodly.  (1)  Judge  and  time  of  judgment. 
"At  the  revelation  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  The  righteous  judgment  of  God  is  now 
associated,  as  in  other  Scriptures,  with  the  Second  Person  of  the  Godhead.  It  is  as 
Jesus,  or  Saviour,  that  he  is  to  fill  the  lordly  office,  and  to  exercise  the  lordly  preroga- 
tives of  Judge.  He  is  now  concealed  from  human  view,  upon  which  the  ungodly 
presume.  But  one  day  he  shall  appear  upon  this  earthly  scene,  and  not  in  the  lowly 
form  in  which  he  before  appeared,  but  in  a  form  that  shall  mark  his  Divine  sovereignty. 
(2)  Place  from  which  revealed.  "  From  heaven."  When  before  he  appeared  there  was 
no  impression  of  his  coming  from  heaven.  He  was  born  upon  this  earth ;  he  wore 
the  earthly  form  of  our  humanity  until,  having  made  atonement  for  our  sin,  he 
ascended  into  heaven  and  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.  The 
heaven  which  then  opened  to  receive  him  will  again  open,  that  he  may  reveal  himself 
on  earth  for  judgment.  It  will  be  observed  that  this  revelation  from  heaven  is  identical 
with  the  descent  from  heaven  described  in  1  Thessalonians.  (3)  Manner  of  revela- 
tion. First  circumstance.  "With  the  angels  of  his  power."  In  the  former  description 
the  Lord  appeared,  attended  by  the  archangel  and  (by  implication)  his  angelic  host. 
The  old  translation  here  is  "  mighty  angels."  Their  attendance,  as  of  an  army  upon  an 
earthly  sovereign,  is  intended  to  give  an  impression  of  his  power.  This  they  give  by 
their  numbers;  they  may  also  give  it  by  the  personal  might,  more  than  human,  with 
which  they  are  endowed.  Second  circumstance.  "In  naming  fire."  In  the  former 
description  it  is  the  clouds  that  are  mentioned.  Here  the  Lord  appears  encircled  with 
a  flame  of  fire.  The  clouds  conceal  and  moderate  for  the  saints  that  have  been  acknow- 
ledged. The  uncreated  splendour  displayed  before  men  in  view  of  judgment  is  as  fire. 
In  1  Cor.  iii.  13  fire  is  associated  with  judgments  "Each  man's  work  shall  be  made 
manifest:  for  the  day  shall  declare  it,  because  it  is  revealed  by  fire;  and  the  fire  itself 
shall  prove  each  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is."    As  separating  from  it  all  impurity, 


16  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS,    [oh.  i.  1—12. 

this  judicial  fire  must  have  a  fearful  aspect  to  the  ungodly.  The  description  here  bean 
a  close  resemblance  to  what  is  found  in  Dan.  vii.  9,  10:  "  I  beheld  till  the  thrones 
weie  cast  down,  and  the  Ancient  of  days  did  sit,  whose  garment  was  white  as  snow, 
and  the  hair  of  his  head  like  the  pure  wool :  his  throoe  was  like  the  fiery  flame,  and 
his  wheels  as  burning  fire.  A  fiery  stream  issued  and  came  forth  from  before  him : 
thousand  thousands  ministered  unto  him,  and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  stood 
before  him  :  the  judgment  was  set,  and  the  books  were  opened."  The  description  is 
here  transferred  from  the  Ancient  of  days  to  him  who  is  there  styled  the  Son  of  man. 

(4)  Judicial  action  toward  two  classes  of  the  ungodly.  "  Rendering  vengeance."  Judg- 
ment is  the  manifestation  of  the  justice  of  God.  When  men  are  convicted  before  a 
human  tribunal  they  have  to  give  an  equivalent  for  the  wrong  they  have  done  to 
others.  Society  in  that  way  not  only  protects  itself,  but  expresses  its  indignation 
against  their  crimes.  The  Lord  is  to  take  his  seat  as  Judge,  first  convicting  and  then 
pronouncing  sentence.  In  this  there  is  implied  no  revengeful  feeling ;  but  there  is 
implied  holy  indignation,  in  the  name  of  the  highest  Authority  in  the  universe,  against 
all  the  ungodly  for  all  their  works  of  ungodliness  which  they  have  ungodly  wrought. 
First  class  of  the  ungodly.  "  To  them  that  know  not  God."  This  is  a  description  ot 
the  heathen.  And  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  vengeance  is  to  be  rendered  not  merely  to  the 
wicked  world-rulers  (Pharaohs  and  Neros),  to  those  who  have  traded  in  their  fellow-men, 
to  those  who  have  been  covenant-breakers,  to  those  who  have  taken  away  the  life  of  the 
innocent,  but  to  the  heathen  as  a  whole.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  to  be  noticed  that 
they  are  not  regarded  historically,  but  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  writers  as  those 
who  have  had  to  do  with  their  not  knowing  God.  In  so  far,  therefore,  as  it  can  be 
justly  said  that,  from  their  bad  environments,  they  have  not  had  to  do  with  this  not 
knowing  God,  vengeance  shall  not  be  rendered  to  them.  But,  in  so  far  as  they  have 
not  followed  their  light,  there  shall  not  any  of  them  escape.  Second  class  of  the  ungodly. 
"  And  to  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus.''  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  iden- 
tified with  gospel  as  well  as  with  Law,  with  mercy  as  well  as  with  judgment.  What 
is  the  gospel  but  the  good  news  of  the  Son  of  God  coming  into  our  nature,  and  suffering 
vengeance,  just  indignation  and  death,  in  room  of  .the  transgressors?  And  when  he 
comes  forward  now  in  the  ministration  of  tho  gospel,  and  commands  men  everywhere 
to  repent  of  their  sins  and  to  accept  of  mercy,  has  he  not  a  right  to  be  obeyed  ?  And 
will  the  most  humanitarian  maintain  that  he  who  obeys  not  should  go  unpunished? 

(5)  Their  punishment  in  its  contents.  "Who  shall  suffer  punishment,  even  eternal 
destruction  from  the  face  of  the  Lord  and  from  the  glory  of  his  might."  Such  being 
their  character  (as  "  who "  implies),  they  shall  suffer  punishment.  The  suffering  ot 
punishment  by  them  corresponds  to  the  rendering  of  vengeance  by  the  Lord.  The 
punishment  is  declared  to  be  destructive.  This  may  mean,  and  in  some  of  its  applica- 
tions does  mean,  annihilation.  But  there  is  not  good  reason  for  supposing  that  it  means 
annihilation  in  its  application  to  the  punishment  of  the  ungodly.  It  seems  to  involve 
a  low  conception  of  the  nature  of  man  and  of  the  moral  government  of  God,  to  suppose 
that  human  beings  are  to  be  placed  under  trial,  and  to  work  out  a  moral  history,  and 
that  after  their  failure  they  are  in  multitudes  to  be  quenched  in  the  darkness  of  non- 
existence. It  seems  more  reasonable  to  take  the  meaning  to  be  that  they  shall  be 
destroyed,  in  being  consigned  to  a  state  of  misery  for  which  in  their  creation  they 
were  not  intended.  Their  nature  (unlike  that  of  Christ's  people,  1  Thess.  iv.  23) 
being  disintegrated  by  sin,  their  peace  shall  be  completely  broken.  The  epithet 
"eternal*'  which  is  applied  to  destruction  is  of  terrible  import.  It  points  to  the  pun- 
ishment as  stretching  away  into  the  eternal  world.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  by 
itself  it  is  decisive  for  the  absolute  eternity  of  future  punishment.  It  is  not  so  decisive 
as  if  the  form  had  been  endless.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  decisive  against  the 
endlessness  of  future  punishment  that  the  word  means  age-long.  It  needs  to  be 
considered  in  connection  with  the  subjects  to  which  it  is  applied.  Eternal  sin,  as  the 
right  reading  now  is  in  Mark  iii.  29,  apparently  means  sin  for  which  there  is  no 
escape  from  punishment.  Eternal  punishment  does  not  mean  that  judgment  is  eternally 
proceeding,  but  that  its  issues  reach  into  eternity.  The  similar  word  which  in  the  Old 
Testament  is  applied  to  the  mountains  from  the  nature  of  the  case  imports  a  limited 
eternity.  The  eternal  times  through  which  the  mystery  was  hidden  can  only  mean 
limited  times  into  which  the  past  eternity  was  regarded  as  divided.    Applied  to  God, 


oh.  l  1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  17 

as  the  word  is  in  the  same  sentence  at  the  close  of  Romans,  it  indicates  the  absolute 
eternity  of  God.  Applied  to  life,  as  it  very  frequently  is,  from  the  nature  of  life  and 
from  the  Divine  guarantee,  it  means  life  that  is  endless  and,  as  it  is  expressed  in  one 
place,  indissoluble.  It  still  remains  a  question  whether,  from  the  nature  of  spiritual 
death  and  from  the  character  of  God  along  with  other  teachings,  destruction  is  to  be 
regarded  as  eternal  in  the  sense  of  being  endless.  It  certainly  is  a  word  which  is  fitted 
to  strike  terror  into  the  ungodly.  The  destruction  is  further  represented  as  the  greatest 
of  all  deprivations.  It  is  to  be  away  from  the  face  of  the  Lord.  The  supreme  pleasure 
of  Christ's  people  is  to  be  their  beholding  his  face  of  infinite  benignity  turned  toward 
them.  "As  for  me,"  says  the  psalmist,  "  I  will  behold  thy  face  in  righteousness." 
"  And  they  shall  see  his  face,"  it  is  said  in  the  last  chapter  of  Revelation.  So  the 
bitterest  element  in  the  case  of  the  ungodly  will  be  that  no  look  of  love,  no  look  of  the 
infinite  benignity  of  the  Saviour,  will  be  turned  toward  them.  As  the  earth  without 
sunshine,  so  must  it  be  to  be  away  from  the  face  of  Christ.  It  is  also  to  be  away  from 
his  glory.  Three  disciples  were  taken  up  to  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  to  see  his 
glory.  He  also  encouraged  the,  eleven  at  the  last  by  the  prospect  of  their  seeing  his 
glory.  "  That  where  I  am  they  also  may  be  with  me,  that  they  may  behold  my  glory 
which  thou  hast  given  me."  It  is  particularly  here  the  glory  of  his  might.  He  who 
has  the  look  of  infinite  benignity  gives  also  in  his  appearance  the  impression  of  infinite 
might.  How  glorious  a  Being  to  be  privileged,  without  fear,  yet  with  solemn  awe,  to 
look  upon  1  To  be  eternally  destroyed,  then,  from  the  face  of  the  Lord  and  from  the 
glory  of  his  might,  such  will  be  the  terrible  punishment  awarded  to  them  that  know 
not  God,  and  to  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  2.  Toward  the 
saints.  "  When  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  be  marvelled  at  in  all 
them  that  believed  (because  our  testimony  unto  you  was  believed)  in  that  day." 
Contemporaneous  with  his  judicial  action  toward  the  ungodly,  is  to  be  his  judicial 
action  toward  his  own.  They  are  here  called  his  saints,  answering  perfectly  to  that 
description  then  as  they  only  imperfectly  do  now.  As  his  saints,  they  shall  be  acknow- 
ledged on  the  day  of  judgment;  and  their  reward  shall  be  to  have  their  outward 
condition  brought  into  perfect  correspondence  with  their  inward  character.  This  is 
called  their  glorification.  The  Lord,  having  given  grace,  will  also  give  glory.  We 
may  think  of  the  glory  as  the  blossoming  forth  of  the  grace.  As  the  flower  comes  to 
beauty  of  form,  so  they  shall  be  made  beautiful  to  look  upon  in  their  higher  order  of 
being.  Their  glorification  is  here  presented  under  the  special  aspect  of  the  glorification  of 
Christ  in  them.  As  Judge,  he  is  to  carry  out  his  own  word.  "  And  the  glory  which  thou 
hast  given  me  I  have  given  unto  them."  As  he  is  in  them  as  the  source  of  their  holiness,  so 
is  hig  beauty  to  shine  forth  in  their  outward  form.  From  heaven  we  "  wait  for  a  Saviour, 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  who  shall  fashion  anew  the  body  of  our  humiliation,  that  it  may 
be  conformed  to  the  body  of  his  glory,  according  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  even 
to  subject  all  things  unto  himself."  This  glorification  of  Christ  in  the  saints  shall  call 
forth  the  wonder  of  the  assembled  universe.  They  shall  marvel  at  the  infinite  benignity 
and  power  of  him  who  out  of  darkness  has  made  light,  who  upon  rebels  against  his 
Father's  authority  has  stamped  his  own  glorious  image.  In  connection  with  the 
marvelling,  is  brought  in  the  condition  of  our  future  glorification.  "With  a  look  back 
from  judgment  it  is  said,  "  in  all  them  that  believed."  And  believing  is  taken  up 
and  connected  particularly  with  the  Thessalonians — "  because  our  testimony  unto  you 
was  believed."  In  keeping  with  this  language,  faith  is  defined  by  Bishop  Pearson  "as 
an  assent  unto  truths  credible  upon  the  testimony  of  God  delivered  unto  us  by  the 
apostles  and  prophets."  Let  us  give  cordial  assent  to  the  facts  and  truths  of  the  gospel, 
which  we  have  upon  the  best  of  testimony,  that  we  may  not  come  short  of  the  glorifica- 
tion which  shall  be  the  marvel  of  the  universe.  There  was  not  needed  further  predica- 
tion of  time,  but  it  is  emphasized  by  the  addition  of  the  words,  "  in  that  day."  The 
day  when  the  Lord  is  to  render  vengeance  to  the  ungodly,  that  is  to  be  the  day  when  he 
is  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  be  marvelled  at  in  all  them  that  believed. 

IV.  Pbaykb  in  connection  with  the  glorification  op  the  Thessalonianb.  "To 
which  end  we  also  pray  always  for  you,  that  our  God  may  count  you  worthy  of  your 
calling,  and  fulfil  every  desire  of  goodness  and  every  work  of  faith,  with  power;  that 
the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  may  be  glorified  in  you,  and  ye  in  him,  according  to  the 
grace  of  our  God  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Toward  their  glorification  the  wishes, 
II.  thessalonians.  o 


18  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  i.  1—12 

and  not  only  the  wishes  but  the  prayers  also,  of  Paul  and  his  companions  were  directed, 
and  always  directed.  As  believing,  God  was  calling  them  to  glory.  Our  God,  say  the 
petitioners,  grant  to  the  Thessalonians  at  the  last  to  be  counted  worthy  of  their  calling. 
For  this  end  let  power  sufficient  be  granted  to  bring  to  completion  every  inward  desire 
and  the  outward  work  appointed  them.  They  had  aspirations  after  goodness ;  let  these 
receive  fulfilment.  They  had  a  life  to  live  before  the  world  according  to  the  faith  by 
which  they  were  actuated ;  let  it  be  as  a  finished  piece  of  work.  Thus,  having  teal 
excellence,  would  they  be  adjudged  worthy  of  glory.  The  final  end  of  their  glorification 
is  emphasized  by  repetition,  with  some  modification  of  form.  There  is  brought  in  "  the 
Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus,"  i.e.  as  he  is  revealed  to  men  as  Saviour,  exalted  to  sovereignty. 
And,  as  they  are  to  be  the  element  in  which  his  Name  is  to  be  glorified,  so  reciprocally 
is  he  to  be  the  element  in  which  they  are  to  find  their  glorification.  Thus  is  identifica- 
tion with  Christ  in  glory  made  clear  as  clear  can  be.  This  final  end  of  glorification  is 
looked  tor  in  prayer  on  behalf  of  the  Thessalonians,  not  according  to  their  deservings, 
but,  say  the  petitioners,  according  to  the  grace  (undeserved  and  rich)  of  our  God  and 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (in  his  superabundant  merits). — R.  F. 

Ver.  2. — Orace  and  peace.  St.  Paul  opens  his  Second  Epistle  with  the  expression  ot 
the  same  good  wishes  which  he  expressed  in  his  earlier  Epistle.  There  is  no  need  of  a 
spiritual  parsimony  for  reserving  highest  benedictions.  The  best  can  be  breathed  freely, 
because  there  is  no  end  to  the  resources  of  God.  But  we  need  not  fear  to  repeat  them, 
inasmuch  as  they  are  always  suitable  to  Christian  needs.  Though  we  may  tire  of  the 
words,  "  grace  and  peace,"  and  shall  do  so  if  we  do  not  enter  into  the  spirit  of  them,  we 
can  never  tire  of  the  things  themselves,  for  they  are  large  as  the  universe  and  fresh  as 
eternity.  Grace  and  peace  represent  the  origin  and  the  perfection,  the  foundation  and 
the  pinnacle,  the  root  and  the  fruit,  of  Christian  prosperity.  It  begins  in  grace  and 
rests  on  grace  and  draws  its  supplies  from  grace ;  it  grows  into  round,  ripe  fulness  in 
peace. 

I.  Grace  is  the  source  of  Christian  prosperity.  1.  Christian  grace  it  essentially 
God's  free  favour.  This  is  the  first  characteristic  of  the  hew  covenant  It  starts 
with  mercy  to  the  sinner ;  it  continues  with  grace  to  the  saint.  It  is  beyond  nature 
which  leaves  us  to  our  own  devices,  and  law  which  directs  but  does  not  aid,  and  justice 
which  rewards  according  to  our  works,  because  it  offers  its  blessings  to  the  undeserving 
"  without  money  and  without  price."  Grace  is  the  keyrnote  of  the  anthem  of  the 
Bethlehem  angels.  2.  Christian  grace  is  an  active  energy  of  God.  It  is  not  the  bare 
negative  mercy  that  lets  off  penalties,  that  withholds  the  hand  of  justice  from  striking 
the  blow  of  doom.  Nor  is  it  only  a  kindly  disposition.  It  is  the  highest  Divine  energy 
and  the  most  vigorous  fruitful  activity.  God  works  upon  us  in  grace.  3.  Christian 
grace  works  through  the  whole  of  the  Christian  life.  We  do  not  simply  depend  upon 
God's  grace  for  the  pardon  of  our  sins  and  the  renewal  of  our  hearts  at  the  commence- 
ment of  our  better  life.  We  continue  to  live  upon  grace.  It  begins  by  delivering  us 
from  our  Egyptian  bondage ;  it  continues  by  supplying  our  daily  bread.  Christians 
would  as  surely  perish  without  these  supplies  of  grace,  even  after  the  first  forgiving  act 
of  salvation,  as  the  Israelites  would  have  perished  without  the  manna  even  after  they 
had  crossed  the  Red  Sea. 

II.  Peace  is  the  crown  op  Christian  prosperity.  1.  Peace  is  the  first  interest  of 
a  nation,  a  Church,  a  soul.  We  cannot  enjoy  wealth,  pleasure,  or  comlort  if  we  have 
not  peace.  For  peace  we  pine  and  yearn.  2.  Peace  is  the  most  perfect  of  blessings. 
When  this  is  rich  and  full  we  want  little  else. "  We  can  afford  to  suffer  if  we  bear  our 
lot  with  interior  peace.  It  may  be  said  of  peace,  as  it  is  said  of  love,  it "  suffereth 
long."  3.  Peace  is  the  greatest  outcome  of  grace.  It  cannot  be  had  without  grace. 
Grace  restores  us  to  peaceable  relations  with  God,  gives  us  peaceable  dispositions  to 
bear  and  forebear  one  with  another,  and  breathes  into  us  a  spirit  of  content,  submission, 
and  holy  calm.  We  may  advance  far  in  activity,  etc.,  before  we  gain  this  precious  gem 
of  grace.  Inward  serenity  in  all  weathers  of  outward  circumstance  is  the  last  produot 
of  spiritual  culture. 

III.  Grace  and  peace  are  enjoyed  through  our  union  with  God  and  Christ. 
The  twofold  benediction  has  a  twofold  reference.  1.  Grace  originates  in  the  Father, 
The  first  thought  of  redeeming  the  world  arose  in  the  bosom  of  God,    The  secret  of 


bh.  1.1— 12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  19 

these  wonderful  blessings  is  a  Father's  lore.  2.  Peace  is  found  in  union  with  God. 
We  enjoy  the  peace  that  is  never  absent  from  the  Spirit  of  God  when  we  approach  his 
holy,  serene  presence.  3.  Both  are  received  by  us  through  Christ.  He  is  the  incarna- 
tion of  God's  grace.  He  makes  a  way  by  his  sacrifice  for  us  to  enjoy  it.  He  is  also 
"our  peace."  When  we  learn  the  "  secret  of  Jesus"  we  shall  have  the  peace  of  God 
which  passeth  all  understanding. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  3. — Growing  faith.  In  his  former  Epistle  St.  Paul  congratulated  the  Thessa- 
lonians  on  the  fruits  of  faith,  love,  and  hope  which  he  saw  among  them  (1  Thess.  i.  3), 
and  he  prayed  for  the  increase  of  their  love  (1  Thess.  iii.  12).  Now  he  is  thankful  that 
their  faith  continues  to  grow,  and  that  their  mutual  affection  is  full  and  overflowing. 
Let  us  consider  the  first  of  these  two  signs  of  progress.  (For  the  "  increase  of  love," 
see  on  1  Thess.  iii.  12.) 

I.  Thk  signs  of  growing  faith.  Faith  is  an  invisible  spiritual  grace.  How,  then, 
did  St.  Paul  know  that  it  was  increasing  in  the  distant  Church  of  the  Thessalonians  ? 
We  need  not  suppose  that  he  possessed  any  supernatural  insight  for  reading  the  hearts 
of  men.  If  faith  grows  the  fruits  of  faith  grow.  A  feeble  faith  makes  a  feeble  life. 
When  the  whole  heart  is  faint  the  whole  head  is  sick  (Isa.  i.  5).  Faith  is  always  known 
by  its  works,  and  the  health  and  vigour  and  stature  of  faith  by  the  character  and 
measure  of  Christian  activity.  Note  some  of  the  signs  of  growing  faith.  1.  Brighter 
cheerfulness.  We  are  less  distressed  with  doubt,  have  little  torment  of  fear,  bear 
present  ills  patiently,  when  we  trust  the  goodness  of  God  more  fully.  2.  Deeper 
devotion.  Slight  faith  means  cold  prayer.  We  are  near  to  God  just  in  proportion  as 
we  have  faith  in  him.  3.  Fuller  activity.  We  work  half-heartily  when  we  believe 
half-heartedly.  A  strong  trust  in  the  grace  of  God  gives  a  strong  energy  for  doing  the 
work  of  God.  4.  Warmer  love.  Faith  worketh  by  love  (Gal.  v.  6).  When  we  trust 
Christ  more  truly  we  feel  the  force  of  his  love  more  deeply  and  love  him  more  warmly 
in  return,  and  then  our  love  to  Christ  shows  itself  in  love  of  the  brethren. 

II.  The  skcret  of  growing  faith.  Faith  flows  from  the  grace  of  God.  It  is  a  gift 
of  God  (Eph.  ii.  8).  Nevertheless,  God  is  always  willing  to  bestow  this  gift,  and  our 
reception  of  it  depends  on  what  we  do.  Faith  will  not  grow  without  cultivation.  Two 
most  important  truths,  too  often  ignored,  help  us  to  the  secret.  1.  Faith  grows  by 
means  of  what  it  feeds  on.  This  is  in  harmony  with  a  law  of  all  growth.  Nothing  can 
come  from  nothing.  If  a  child  is  not  fed  it  will  die,  certainly  it  will  not  grow.  Grow- 
ing plants  take  nourishment  from  air  and  soil.  Faith  will  not  grow  by  our  wishing  it 
to  grow,  nor  by  any  manipulation  with  it.  Yet  people,  so  to  speak,  take  out  their  faith 
and  try  to  do  something  with  it  in  order  to  improve  it.  The  great  mistake  is  to  think 
of  increasing  our  faith  by  any  consideration  of  the  faith  itself.  We  must  forget  our 
faith  and  look  at  Christ,  and  then  our  faith  will  grow  unconsciously.  We  have  too 
much  introspection.  An  intelligent  consideration  of  the  grounds  of  faith,  especially  a 
study  of  Christ,  reading  of  Scripture,  prayer,  "  means  of  grace,"  etc.,  help  faith  to  grow. 
2.  Faith  grows  by  exercise.  This  is  also  natural.  Children  need  exercise  that  their 
bodies  may  grow.  Unused  limbs  shrink  and  shrivel  up.  The  arm  of  the  blacksmith  is 
strong  with  work.  The  intellect  grows  by  being  employed.  The  torpid  intellect 
becomes  stupid.  So  faith  must  he  used  in  order  that  it  may  grow.  Instead  of  deploring 
our  little  faith,  let  us  use  it  and  it  will  grow  larger.  This  is  Christ's  own  advice ;  for 
when  his  disciples  said,  "  Lord,  increase  our  faith,"  instead  of  doing  as  they  wished 
by  a  miracle,  he  almost  rebuked  them  by  saying  that  if  they  had  faith  as  small  as  a 
grain  of  mustard  seed,  even  that  when  fully  exercised  would  be  enough  to  remove  a 
mountain ;  and,  like  the  seed  which  is  a  living  thing,  it  would  grow  when  planted.  It 
is  as  foolish  not  to  use  our  faith  because  it  is  small  as  it  would  be  not  to  plant  the  seed 
for  a  similar  reason.  Thus  we  keep  faith  small.  It  must  be  employed  if  it  is  to  grow. 
— W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  6.—^  token  of  righteous  judgment.  St  Paul  regards  the  patient  endurance  of 
persecution  by  the  Thessalonian  Christians  as  "a  manifest  token  of  the  righteous 
judgment  of  God."  Here  Is  one  of  those  paradoxes  of  triumphant  faith  in  which  the 
apostle  delighted.  Te  the  superficial  observer  the  aspect  of  affairs  told  the  very  opposite 
story  to  that  which  St  Paul  read  in  it    Good  men  were  persecuted,  and  they  bore 


20  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.     [ch.  i.  1  -1% 

their  persecution  patiently;  yet  nothing  was  done  for  their  redress.  Was  not  this  a 
break-down  of  justice  ?  The  case  is  like  that  of  the  psalmist,  who  was  perplexed  at  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked  till  he  went  into  the  sanctuary,  and  theD,  by  faith  and  the 
knowledge  of  unseen  Divine  law,  understood  their  end  (Ps.  lxxiii.  17).  His  faith  in 
the  supremacy  and  justice  of  God  leads  the  apostle  to  put  the  contrary  construction  on 
passing  events  to  that  which  would  be  laid  upon  them  by  unbelief. 

I.  The  patient  endurance  op  persecution  is  a  token  of  God's  coming  judgment 
of  reward.  The  judgment  has  two  sides.  There  are  sheep  as  well  as  goats.  To 
those  who  groan  under  the  yoke  of  present  injustice  the  coming  of  a  future  judgment 
must  be  nailed  with  joy.  Then  the  cruelty  will  cease,  the  calumny  will  be  repudiated, 
the  wrong  will  be  righted.  But  how  is  the  patient  endurance  of  persecution  a  token 
of  the  coming  judgment  ?  1.  It  shows  the  necessity  of  it.  Of  course,  this  argument  is 
only  addressed  to  faith.  If  we  believe  in  God  and  his  righteousness  we  cannot  suppose 
that  he  will  permit  wrongs  to  remain  unredressed.  If  justice  were  done  on  earth  we 
need  expect  no  further  rectification.  But  the  postponement  of  justice  makes  the  future 
coming  of  it  certain.  Here  is  a  reason  for  looking  forward  to  a  future  life.  If  this  life 
were  rounded  into  perfection  we  should  not  have  so  much  occasion  for  expecting  another 
life.  But  now  that  it  is  broken  and  not  justly  completed  there  must  be  a  future.  If 
the  wages  of  God's  labourers  are  not  paid  to-day  there  must  be  a  morrow  when  they 
will  be  paid.  2.  It  permits  the  persecuted  to  look  forward  to  a  happy  issue  from  it. 
They  will  not  be  counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God  simply  because  they  endure 
persecution.  Suffering  is  not  merit.  Heaven  is  not  bare  compensation.  But  the 
patient  endurance  is  a  sign  of  character,  and  it  reveals  a  fitness  for  the  future  award  of 
blessings.  The  untried  may  be  uncertain  of  their  fate.  The  tried  and  faithful  have 
reason  for  more  confidence. 

II.  The  unavenged  infliction  of  persecution  is  a  token  of  Gob's  coming  judg- 
ment of  punishment.  The  blood  of  Abel  cries  to  God  from  the  ground.  The  meek, 
patient  endurance  of  the  martyr  demands  future  retribution  more  powerfully  than  the 
loudest  cry  for  vengeance.  The  better  the  character  of  the  persecuted  is,  the  less  they 
deserve  their  ill  treatment  and  the  more  patiently  they  bear  it,  the  greater  will  the  guilt 
of  the  persecutors  appear.  Thus  this  condition  of  affairs  is  a  token  of  a  coming  judg- 
ment of  wrath.  1.  It  shows  the  necessity  of  it.  If  justice  were  already  done,  guilty  men 
might  have  some  excuse  for  denying  the  probability  of  a  future  judgment.  But  now 
they  cannot  speak  of  it  as  an  idle  threat  of  the  Church.  Justice  demands  it.  2.  It 
warns  the  wicked  to  expect  a  dreadful  doom.  It  reveals  the  guilt  of  their  sin ;  and  it 
makes  so  glaringly  apparent  the  contrast  between  their  conduct  and  that  of  their 
victims  that  a  difference  of  destiny  of  corresponding  magnitude  may  be  eKpected. — 
W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  6 — 10. — The  judgment-day.  This  vivid  description  of  the  judgment-day 
begins  with  an  appeal  to  the  justice  of  its  awful  events  :  "  If  so  be  that  it  is  a  righteous 
thing,"  etc.  The  details  of  the  great  day  can  only  be  revealed  by  Divine  inspiration. 
But  the  great  outlines  of  its  proceedings  may  be  predicted  by  our  own  consciences. 

I.  The  separation  of  destinies.  Destinies  are  now  apparently  mixed  and  dis- 
arranged without  any  evident  regard  to  justice.  They  will  not  be  so  then.  There 
will  be  a  clear  division  between  the  sheep  and  the  goats.  1.  Suffering  to  the  per- 
secutors. They  who  give  affliction  shall  suffer  affliction.  There  is  a  law  of  nature 
as  well  as  a  principle  of  fairness  in  the  lex  talionis  when  it  is  rightly  applied.  A  bad 
man's  doom  is  to  be  the  recoil  of  his  evil  deeds  upon  his  own  head.  2.  Best  to  the 
persecuted.  The  specially  coveted  reward  of  the  afflicted  is  rest.  To  the  weary 
sufferer  that  alone  is  an  immeasurable  blessing.  There  is  some  compensation  in  the 
fact  that  rest,  which  to  the  idle  and  comfortable  is  itself  a  weariness,  becomes  the 
most  happy  solace  to  the  suffering.  Note :  (1)  This  rest  is  the  more  enjoyable  because 
it  is  shared  with  beloved  friends  (Paul,  Silas,  etc).  (2)  It  is  not  given  to  all  the 
afflicted,  but  to  afflicted  Christians. 

IL  The  time  of  the  judgment.  It  is  here  synchronized  with  the  second  advent 
(jf  Christ.  He  is  King  and  Judge  as  well  as  Friend  and  Saviour.  His  repudiation  of 
the  office  of  Judge  during  his  earthly  humiliation  (Luke  xii.  14)  should  only  make  us 
feel  how  surely  the  exercise  of  his  rightful  judicial  functions  must  be  reserved  for  some 


oh.  k  1—12.]    'J  HE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&  21 

future  occasion.    Jesus  Christ  cannot  endure  eternal  injustice.     He  is  strong  to  execute 
as  well  as  righteous  to  desire  judgment. 

III.  The  persons  condemned.  Two  classes  are  named.  X.  Those  who  are  ignorant 
of  Qod.  The  heathen  world  seems  to  be  here  referred  to.  Why  should  these  benighted 
people  be  punished  for  their  ignorance?  Because  they  might  have  known  God  (Rom. 
i.  18— <20).  But  they  can  only  be  punished  in  so  far  as  their  ignorance  was  wilful 
and  came  from  moral  causes,  i.e.  in  so  far  as  they  "held  down  the  truth  in  unrighteous- 
ness," Doubtless  there  have  been  good  heathen  men  who  have  not  committed  that 
offence.  2.  Those  who  obey  not  the  gospel.  People  of  Christendom  are  now  referred  to. 
It  is  of  no  use  to  live  in  a  Christian  nation,  nor  to  belong  to  a  Christian  Church,  nor 
to  believe  in  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  if  we  do  not  obey  the  gospel.  Obedience  is  the 
one  test.  Heathen  are  only  condemned  for  wilful  neglect  of  God,  Christian  nations 
for  disobedience  to  the  Christian  gospel. 

IV.  The  doom  of  the  guilty.  1.  They  are  to  suffer  punishment.  Their  doom 
will  not  be  purely  privative,  nor  will  merely  natural  consequences  follow  their  evil 
conduct.  Distinct  penalties  will  be  imposed.  2.  The  punishment  will  chiefly  consist 
in  "eternal  destruction."  This  dreadful  phrase  certainly  cannot  be  taken  as  an 
equivalent  for  everlasting  torment.  Is  not  sin  everywhere  destructive?  The  wages 
of  sin  is  not  pain — though  pain  does  follow  it — but  death.  This  destroying  process, 
left  to  itself,  will  go  on  for  ever.  All  hope  of  a  far-off  end  to  it  must  be  in  some 
interference  with  its  action  by  the  Divine  mercy,  which  is  also  eternal.  3.  The  punish- 
ment will  be  increased  by  the  nvasure  of  the  glory  that  is  missed.  The  eternal  destruc- 
tion involves  separation  "  from  the  face  of  the  Lord."  In  his  presence  there  is  fulness 
of  joy.  Spiritual  destruction  includes  the  killing  out  of  the  spiritual  eye  that  beholds 
the  beatific  vision. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  11. —  Worthy  of  the  Christian  calling.  Here  is  a  prayer  with  two  aspects.  It 
looks  to  heaven  and  to  earth.  It  is  concerned  wjth  God's  estimate  of  his  people  and 
with  their  own  spiritual  successes. 

I.  The  heavenward  aspect  of  the  prayeb.  St.  Paul  has  just  been  describing  the 
great  and  terrible  judgment-day  in  language  of  fire  and  thunder.  Now  he  expresses 
his  anxiety  that  all  may  be  well  with  his  readers  on  that  day,  when  they  will  be 
called  to  account  to  ascertain  how  far  they  have  walked  worthily  in  respect  of  their 
vocation.  1.  Christians  have  a  calling.  We  are  called  to  be  Christians,  and  being 
Christians,  to  enter  the  pilgrimage  of  the  heavenly  life.  The  object  of  this  general 
calling  is  to  follow  Christ.  Bat  we  are  also  each  of  us  called  to  some  specific  indivi- 
dual vocation.  2.  The  Christian  calling  involves  high  obligations.  It  is  no  light  matter 
to  be  found  worthy  of  it.  When  a  great  trust  is  put  upon  a  man  a  heavy  responsibility 
accompanies  his  discharge  thereof.  So  is  it  with  every  Christian.  3.  Ood  watches  «« 
in  the  pursuit  of  our  calling.  We  are  observed  of  God,  neither  escaping  his  eye  in 
our  most  secret  hours,  nor  disregarded  by  him  in  our  least  important  actions.  4.  God 
will  bring  us  to  account  for  our  fulfilment  of  our  calling.  It  is  most  important  that 
he  should  reckon  us  to  have  worthily  discharged  our  vocation  because  "  his  favour  is 
life."  But  he  who  calls  us  to  the  Christian  life  can  give  us  grace  to  discharge  its 
obligations.    We  can  pray  that  we  may  be  accounted  worthy. 

II.  The  earthward  aspect  of  the  prater.  1.  It  seeks  the  fulfilment  of  every 
desire  of  goodness.  These  are  the  desires  which  spring  out  of  the  good  disposition  of 
a  Christian  heart.  (1)  It  is  not  every  desire  of  a  good  man  that  is  to  be  fulfilled. 
Good  people  may  have  foolish  wishes.  The  desires  to  be  prayed  about  are  those  which 
spring  directly  out  of  goodness.  (2)  Good  desires  may  be  unsatisfied.  We  may  wish 
well  and  not  have  opportunity  or  power  for  executing  our  wishes.  The  spirit  may  be 
willing  while  the  flesh  is  weak,  or  the  spirit  may  be  weak  in  energy  while  it  is  good 
in  intention.  2.  It  seeks  the  fulfilment  of  every  work  of  faith.  St.  Paul  agrees  with 
St.  James  that  faith  shows  itself  by  works.  But  he  sees  deeper  into  the  difficulties 
of  weak  human  nature.  Though  our  trust  and  fidelity  prompt  us  to  obedient  service, 
innumerable  hindrances  intervene  and  frustrate  our  energies.  We  need  that  God 
should  establish  the  work  of  our  hands.  Even  when  we  sow  and  water  well  he  must 
give  the  increase.  3.  The  accomplishment  of  these  ends  depends  on  a  gift  of  power. 
Goodness  without  strength  is  futile.    But  the  strong  God  infuses  strength  (Ps.  lxxiii. 


22  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—17. 

26).    The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  Spirit  of  power.    The  Church  should  pray  more  earnestly 
for  the  grace  of  energy. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  12. — Glorified.  I.  The  great  end  of  the  Christian  vocation  is  to  Slobify 
the  Name  of  Christ.  The  blessings  for  which  St.  Paul  has  heen  praying  are  to  lead 
up  to  this  great  result.  1.  The  Christian  lives  for  Christ.  Christ  is  the  chief  Corner- 
stone of  the  finished  temple  as  well  as  the  Foundation  with  which  the  building  is 
begun.  He  is  the  Omega  as  well  as  the  Alpha.  We  begin  with  him ;  in  him,  too, 
we  end.  Receiving  all  our  grace  from  Christ,  we  are  to  devote  our  lives  to  him.  2. 
The  Christian  lives  for  the  glory  of  Christ.  We  cannot  minister  to  his  wants  directly 
as  did  those  women  who  gave  of  their  substance  during  his  earthly  humiliation — 
though  we  can  do  so  virtually  when  we  give  to  his  brethren.  But  we  can  minister  to 
his  glory  as  directly  as  did  those  disciples  who  cast  their  garments  in  his  path  and 
hailed  his  entrance  into  Jerusalem  with  shouts  of  praise.  3.  The  Christian  honours 
Christ  by  glorifying  his  Name.  The  Name  is  not  merely  the  distinctive  appellation, 
but  the  descriptive  characteristic.  To  Jesus  there  is  given  "  the  Name  which  is  above 
every  name  "  (Phil.  ii.  9).  His  Name  is  what  is  known  of  him  and  praised  in  him, 
i.e.  his  fame.  So  we  speak  of  one  making  a  name.  We  cannot  add  to  the  greatness 
and  glorionsness  of  our  Lord.  But  we  can  make  his  fame  to  be  more  widely  spread 
and  more  highly  exalted  among  men. 

II.  When  the  Name  of  Christ  is  glorified  his  people  share  the  glory.  1. 
There  is  a  prospect  of  glorification  for  Christians.  The  doleful  plaint  of  the  despised 
sufferer  is  not  to  be  the  only  song  of  the  Church.  Not  only  will  joy  follow  sorrow, 
but  exaltation  will  succeed  humiliation.  The  Thessalonian  Christians  were  a  despised 
and  persecuted  community  living  among  cruel,  scornful  neighbours.  This  trying 
condition  was  not  to  he  permanent.  For  their  shame  they  would  have  double  glory 
in  the  end.  2.  Christian  glorification  follows  the  glorification  of  Christ.  The  first 
point  is  the  glorifying  of  our  God's  Name ;  that  of  his  people  comes  second.  The  order 
is  significant.  (1)  We  must  not  seek  our  own  glory,  but  in  seeking  Christ's  ours  will 
follow  unsought.  (2)  Until  the  master  is  glorified  the  servants  must  remain  in 
obscurity.  The  great  glory  of  the  second  advent  will  be  followed  by  the  exaltation 
of  the  Church.  8.  Christian  glorification  depends  on  union  with  Christ.  We  are  to 
be  glorified  in  him.  (1)  All  that  makes  the  Christian  glorious  comes  from  Christ. 
Without  him  we  are  shamed  and  dark  and  dead.  (2)  Glory  comes  to  us  through  our 
sharing  Christ's  glory,  as  the  clouds  are  glorified  in  the  light  of  the  rising  sun. 

III.  The  glorification  of  Christ  and  his  people  arises  from  a  worthy  ful- 
filment of  the  Christian  calling  according  to  Divine  grace.  1.  It  arises  from  a 
worthy  fulfilment  of  the  Christian  calling.  St.  Paul  prayed  that  God  would  count  his 
people  worthy  of  their  calling  for  this  express  purpose,  that  they  might  glorify  Christ, 
etc.  (ver.  11).  We  glorify  Christ  by  our  lives.  Songs  of  praise  go  for  little  if  our  con- 
duct dishonours  our  Lord.  The  richest  anthem  of  praise  rises  from  the  silent  living  of 
a  pure  and  useful  Christian  life.  Our  own  glory  is  also  only  possible  when  our  life  in 
Christ  has  been  fruitful.  2.  It  depends  on  Divine  grace.  It  is  "according  to  the 
grace,"  etc.,  i.e.  the  glory  corresponds  to  the  grace.  The  more  grace  we  have  the  greater 
will  be  the  glory.    Fulness  of  grace  brings  fulness  of  glory. — W.  F.  A. 


EXPOSITION. 
CHAPTER IL 


Covrnts. — The  apostle  now  proceeds  to 
the  principal  object  which  he  had  in  view 
in  writing  this  Epistle.  The  Thessalonians 
had  adopted  erroneous  notions  concerning 
the  advent ;  they  supposed  that  the  day  of 
the  Lord  was  imminent,  and,  in  consequence 
of  this  belief,  they  were  thrown  into  a  state 


of  excitement  and  alarm.  The  apostle 
reminds  them  of  his  former  instructions  on 
this  subject;  how  he  had  told  them  that 
before  the  coming  of  the  day  of  the  Lord 
there  should  be  a  great  apostasy,  and  the  man 
of  sin,  whose  nature  and  characteristics  ha 
had  described  to  them,  should  be  revealed; 
but  that  at  present  there  was  a  restraining 
influence  which  prevented  his  appearanee. 


ch.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 


28 


When  that  restraining  influence  was  removed, 
the  man  of  sin  would  be  revealed,  accompanied 
with  powers  and  signs  and  wonders  of  false- 
hood, and  would  succeed  in  deceiving  those 
who  were  destitute  of  the  love  of  the  truth. 
Then  would  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  come  and 
destroy  him  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth  and 
the  appearance  of  his  presence.  The  apostle 
thanks  God  that  the  Thessalonians,  on  the 
contrary,  were  chosen  to  salvation  and  to  a 
participation  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord ;  he 
exhorts  them  to  stand  fast  in  the  instruc- 
tions which  he  had  delivered  them ;  and  he 
concludes  with  a  prayer  for  their  consolation 
anil  confirmation. 

This  chapter  is  involved  in  difficulties ;  it 
is  the  obscurest  passage  in  the  writings  of 
Paul ;  it  is  pre-eminently  one  of  those  things 
in  his  Epistles  which  are  hard  to  be  under- 
stood (2  Pet.  iii.  16).  But  it  is  to  be  ob- 
served that  the  description  of  the  man  of 
sin,  though  obscure  to  us,  was  not  necessarily 
obscure  to  the  Thessalonians.  They  had 
information  on  this  point  which  we  do  not 
possess.  The  apostle,  when  at  Thessalonica, 
had  instructed  them  in  this  subject,  and 
to  these  instructions  he  refers  in  the  de- 
scription which  he  here  gives  (vers.  5,  6). 
Nor  was  the  information  which  he  imparted 
to  them  indefinite  and  general,  but  definite 
and  precise.  He  had  described  the  nature 
of  the  apostasy,  the  characteristics  of  the 
man  of  sin,  and  the  influences  which  retarded 
his  manifestation  (vera.  3,  4);  and  if  these 
points  were  known  to  us,  as  they  were  to 
the  Thessalonians,  most  of  the  obscurity 
which  rata  on  this  prediction  would  dis- 
appear. At  present  we  give  the  exposition 
of  the  passage,  reserving  the  discussion  of 
the  various  theories  concerning  its  interpre- 
tation to  an  excursus  at  the  end  of  the 


Ver.  1. — Now;  literally,  but";  a  particle  of 
transition.  We  beseech  you.  Passing  from 
what  he  besought  God  for  them  to  what  he 
beseeches  them.  Brethren,  by.  Considered 
by  some,  as  in  the  A.V.,  as  a  form  of  adjura- 
tion. Thus  Calvin :  "  He  adjures  believers 
by  the  coming  of  Christ;  for  it  is  customary 
to  adjure  by  those  things  which  are  re- 
garded by  us  with  reverence."  But  such  a 
construction  is  unknown  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, and  is  besides  unnatural.  Otliers 
render  the  preposition  "in  behalf  of"  or  "in 
theinterest  of,"  "  as  though  he  were  pleading, 
In  honour  of  that  day,  that  the  expectation 


of  it  might  not  be  a  source  of  disorder  in  the 
Churoh"  (Jowett);  bnt  such  a  sense  is  too 
artificial.  It  is  best  to  render  it  "  concern- 
ing," or,  as  in  the  K.V.,  "  touching."  The 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Some 
(Whitby,  Hammond)  suppose  that  by  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  here  meant 
his  coming  in  spirit  at  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  and  that  the  apostasy  was  the 
revolt  of  the  Jews  from  the  Romans ;  the  re- 
straining power  being  differently  interpreted. 
But.this  is'a  forced  and  extravagant  interpre- 
tation, and  is  completely  overthrown  by  what 
the  apostle  says  in  the  next  verse,  for  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  was  imminent. 
Besides,  the  Thessalonians,  who  were  chiefly 
Gentile  converts,  were  too  distant  from  Jeru- 
salem to  be  much  troubled  by  the  destruc- 
tion of  that  city.  By  the  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  then,  is  here  meant,  as 
is  the  uniform  meaning  of  the  phrase  in 
the  writings  of  Paul,  the  second  advent. 
And  by  (or,  concerning)  our  gathering  to- 
gether unto  him.  The  word  translated 
"  gathering  together  "  occurs  only  once  again 
in  the  New  Testament,  where  it  is  used  with 
reference  to  the  assembling  of  Christians  for 
worship  (Heb.  x.  35).  Here  it  is  used  with 
reference  to  the  assembling  of  believers  to 
Christ;  when  he  shall  be  revealed  from 
heaven  ;  it  refers,  not  to  the  raising  of  the 
dead,  but  to  the  gathering  together  of  those 
who  are  then  alive  (see  1  Thess.  iv.  17). 

Ver.  2. — That ;  to  the  end  that,  the  purpose 
for  which  the  apostle  besought  the  Thessa- 
lonians. Ye  be  not  soon  ;  quickly.  This  has 
been  variously  interpreted,  "so  soon  after  my 
exhortation,"  or  "  so  soon  after  my  departure 
from  Thessalonica,"  or  "  so  soon  after  your  re- 
ception of  the  gospel,"  or  "  bo  soon  after  this 
opinion  of  the  imminence  of  Christ's  coming 
was  promulgated."  Others  refer  it  to  man- 
ner rather  than  to  time — "  soon  and  with 
small  reason"  (Alford).  Shaken;  agitated 
like  the  waves  by  a  storm,  as  the  word  signi- 
fies. In  mind;  or  rather, from  your  mind; 
from  your  sober  reason.  Or  be  troubled; 
a  still  stronger  expression;  "terrified." 
Neither  by  spirit;  not  any  falsely  under- 
stood prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament,  nor 
any  mistaken  revelations,  whether  by  visions 
or  dreams ;  but  prophetical  discourses  deli- 
vered by  members  of  the  Church  in  a  state  of 
excitement,  announcing  the  immediate  com- 
ing of  Christ,  and  which  were  mistaken  for 
Divine  communications.  There  does  not 
appear  to  have  been  any  intention  to  deceive; 
the  Thessalonians  erred  in  neglecting  "to 
try  the  spirits"  and  to  "prove  the  pro- 
phecies." Nor  by  word;  not  any  traditional 
word  of  Christ,  nor  any  misinterpretation 
of  his  prophecy  concerning  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem,  nor  a  calm  discourse  in  distinc- 
tion from  prophetie  utterances;  bat   the 


24 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—17. 


report  of  some  of  the  apostle's  words,  either 
erroneous  or  misunderstood.  Nor  by  letter. 
Not  the  apostle's  former  Epistle  to  the  Thes- 
salonianB,  the  passages  in  which  concerning 
the  advent  had  been  misinterpreted  (Paley) ; 
for,  if  this  were  the  case,  the  apostle  would 
have  expressed  himself  more  plainly  and 
would  not  have  repudiated  it;  but  some 
letter,  either  forged  in  the  apostle's  name  or 
pretending  to  inculcate  his  views.  As  from 
us.  These  words  apply  to  the  last  two  par- 
ticulars :  "  Let  no  pretended  saying  or  pre- 
tended letter  of  mine  disturb  you  in  this 
matter."  As  that — to  the  effect  that — the 
day  of  Christ;  or,  as  the  best  manuscripts 
read,  of  the  Lord.  Is  at  hand ;  literally,  ii 
present,  so  R.V.  The  verb  is  so  translated 
in  the  other  passages  where  it  occurs  (Rom. 
viii.  38 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  22 ;  Gal.  i.  i ;  Heb.  ix.  9), 
except  in  2  Tim.  iii.  1,  where  it  ought  also 
to  have  been  so  rendered.  It  is,  however, 
difficult  to  conceive  how  the  Thessalonians 
could  think  that  the  day  of  the  LoTd  was 
actually  present.  We  cannot  imagine  that 
they  thought  that  Christ  had  already  come 
for  judgment.  To  escape  the  difficulty, 
some  conceive  that  "the  day  of  the  Lord"  is 
not  identical  with  "  the  coming  of  the  Lord," 
but  that,  besides  the  actual  advent,  it  in- 
cludes the  events  which  are  its  antecedents 
and  concomitants  (Eadie).  It  appears,  how- 
ever, best  to  suppose  that  the  word  is  a 
strong  expression  for  the  imminence  of  that 
day ;  that  the  hour  of  the  advent  was  about 
to  strike.  The  Thessalonians  ought  always 
to  be  living  in  a  state  of  preparation  for  the 
day  of  the  Lord,  as  that  day  would  come 
suddenly  and  unexpectedly;  but  they  were 
not  to  be  so  impressed  with  a  sense  of  its 
immediateness  as  to  be  deprived  of  their 
sober  reason. 

Ver.  3. — Let  no  man  deceive  yon  by  any 
means ;  in  any  way,  not  only  in  any  of  the 
foregoing  methods,  "  by  spirit,  or  word,  or 
letter,"  but  in  any  way  whatever.  For  (that 
day  shall  not  come).  The  bracketed  words 
are  not  in  the  original,  but  are  correctly 
supplied  for  the  completion  of  the  sense. 
Except  there  come  a  falling  away;  or,  the 
apostasy  ;  namely,  that  apostasy  about  which 
the  apostle,  when  in  Thessalonioa,  had  in- 
structed his  readers.  The  falling  away  here 
alluded  to  is  evidently  religious,  not  political. 
Hi  nee  it  cannot  be  the  revolt  of  the  Jews 
from  the  Romans,  or  any  of  those  revolts 
and  disturbances  which  then  occurred  in 
the  political  world.  Nor  must  we  conceive 
that  the  man  of  sin  himself  is  here  meant ; 
for  this  apostasy  precedes  his  coming 
— prepares  the  way  for  his  advent ;  it  is 
not  the  result,  but  the  cause,  of  his  appear- 
ance. The  word,  then,  is  to  be  taken  gene- 
rally to  donote  that  remarkable  "  falling 
away"  from  Christianity  concerning  which 


Paul  had  instructed  the  Thessalonians  (comp. 
1  Tim.  iv.  1 — 3).  First ;  namely,  before  the 
eoming  of  the  day  of  the  Lord.  And  that 
man  of  sin ;  in  whom  sin  is,  as  it  were, 
personified,  as  righteousness  is  in  Christ. 
Be  revealed.  The  apostle  considers  the  man 
of  sin  as  the  counterpart  of  Christ;  as 
Christ  was  revealed,  so  shall  the  man  of  sin 
be  revealed.  The  son  of  perdition;  whose 
sin  necessarily  conducts  to  perdition;  not 
here  the  perdition  of  his  followers,  but  his 
own  perdition.  The  same  name  which  was 
applied  by  our  Lord  to  Judas  Iacariot 
(John  xvii.  12). 

Ver.  4. — Who  opposeth;  or,  the  opposer, 
taken  substantively.  The  object  of  oppo- 
sition is  not  so  much  believers,  as  Christ; 
he  is  antichrist,  the  opponent  of  Christ. 
And  yet  antichrist  is  not  Satan,  the  great 
adversary  (1  Pet.  v.  8 ;  Rev.  xii.  10),  for  he 
is  expressly  distinguished  from  him  (ch.  ii. 
9),  but  the  instrument  of  Satan.  As  Satan 
entered  into  the  heart  of  Judas  Iscariot,  the 
son  of  perdition,  so  does  he  take  possession 
of  the  man  of  sin.  And  exalteth  himself 
above ;  or  rather,  against,  in  a  hostile  man- 
ner. All  that  is  called  God  ;  not  only  against 
all  the  false  gods  of  the  heathen,  but  also 
against  the  true  God  (comp.  Dan.  vii.  25; 
xi.  36).  Or  that  is  worshipped ;  that  is  an 
object  of  worship.  The  same  word  that  is 
used  in  Acts  xvii,  23,  "  As  I  passed  by  and 
beheld  your  devotions  " — the  objects  of  your 
worship.  So  that  he  as  God.  The  words 
"  as  God  "  are  to  be  omitted,  as  not  found  in 
the  best  manuscripts.  Sitteth  in  the  temple 
of  God.  According  to  some,  the  temple  of 
Jerusalem  (De  Wette,  Liiuemann,  Eadie), 
either  as  it  then  existed  or  as  restored  ac- 
cording to  the  prophecy  of  Ezekiel.  But  it 
appears  more  correct  to  refer  the  expression 
metaphorically  to  the  Christian  Church.  It 
is  a  favourite  metaphor  of  Paul  to  compare 
believers  in  particular,  or  the  Church  iu 
general,  to  the  temple  of  God  (comp.  1  Cor. 
iii.  17;  vi.  19;  Eph.  ii.  20—22).  Showing- 
exhibiting — himself  that  he  is  God.  His 
sitting  in  the  temple  of  God  was  an  asser- 
tion of  his  divinity ;  he  claimed  to  be 
regarded  and  worshipped  as  God.  This 
was  the  crowning  act  of  his  impiety ;  not 
only,  like  the  Roman  emperors,  he  demanded 
to  be  worshipped  as  one  of  many  gods,  but 
he  claimed  to  himself  the  prerogative  of 
the  Godhead,  not  only  to  the  exclusion  of  the 
false  gods  of  heathenism,  but  even  of  the 
true  God. 

Ver.  5. — Remember  ye  not,  that,  when  I 
was  yet  with  yon,  I  told  yon  these  things  1 
These  words  contain  a  reproach.  Had  the 
Thessalonians  remembered  the  instructions 
of  the  apostle,  they  would  not  have  been 
so  soon  shaken  from  their  sober  reason  or 
troubled.     The  apostle,  when  he  was  in 


oh.  h.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN& 


2fi 


Thessalonica,  had  told  them  of  these  things ; 
he  had  instructed  them  concerning  the 
nature  of  the  apostasy  and  the  coming  of 
the  man  of  sin  ;  so  that,  as  already  observed, 
this  description,  so  obscure  to  us,  was  not 
obsoure  to  the  Thessalonians, — they  pos- 
sessed the  key  to  its  interpretation. 

Ver.  6. — And  now.  The  particle  "now" 
has  been  variously  interpreted.  Some  con- 
nect it  with  the  restraining  influence: 
"And  ye  know  what  now  withholdeth ; " 
but  if  so,  there  would  have  been  a  different 
arrangement  of  the  words  in  the  original. 
Others  consider  it  as  a  mere  particle  of 
transition :  "  Now,  to  pass  over  to  another 
subject;"  but  there  is  no  transition,  the 
apostle  continues  his  description  of  the  man 
of  sin.  It  is  rather  to  be  considered  as  a 
pirticle  of  time:  "Now  ye  know,  because 
you  have  been  instructed  on  this  point." 
Ye  know;  Paul  having  told  them  when  he 
was  at  Thessalonica.  What  withholdeth; 
hindereth.  The  hindrance  does  not  refer 
to  the  prevention  of  the  apostle  from  speak- 
ing freely  on  this  subject,  lest  he  should 
involve  himself  in  political  difficulties ;  nor 
to  any  delay  in  the  coming  of  Christ;  but 
to  •  restraint  upon  the  appearance  of  the 
man  of  sin :  "  Ye  know  what  prevents  his 
open  manifestation."  That  he ;  namely,  the 
man  of  sin.  Might  be  revealed  in  his  time ; 
literally,  in  his  season;  in  his  proper  time, 
the  time  appointed  by  God.  Events  were 
not  yet  ripe  lor  his  appearance.  Just  as 
there  was  a  "  fulness  of  time  "  when  Christ 
should  appear  (Gal.  iv.  4),  so  there  was  a 
"fulness  of  time"  when  the  man  of  sin 
should  be  revealed;  there  was  a  series  of 
events  going  on  which  would  culminate  in 
his  revelation.  The  nature  of  this  restrain- 
ing or  withholding  influence  will  after- 
wards be  considered;  whatever  it  was,  the 
Thessalonians  were  formerly  explicitly  in- 
formed. 

Ver.  7. —  Tor  the  mystery.  "Mystery" 
here  denotes  something  which  was  unknown 
or  secret  before  it  was  revealed  (comp. 
Eph.  iii.  3 — 5).  So  also  one  of  the  names 
of  Babylon,  the  seat  of  the  antichiistian 
power,  is  Mystery  (Rev.  xvii.  3).  Of  ini- 
quity ;  rather,  of  lawlessness ;  namely,  this 
apostasy  which  shall  precede  the  coming  of 
the  man  of  sin.  The  genitive  here  is  that 
of  apposition — "  that  mystery  which  is  law- 
lessness," whose  essence  and  sphere  of 
operation  is  lawlessness.  Doth  already 
work ;  or,  is  already  working.  The  mystery 
of  iniquity  even  now  works  in  secret ;  but 
the  man  of  sin  himself  will  not  appear 
until  the  restraining  power  be  removed. 
Even  at  the  time  the  apostle  wrote  the 
seeds  of  apostasy  were  already  sown ;  the 
leaven  of  lawlessness  was  fermenting  inside 
Christianity ;  tile  foundations  of  a  false  Chris- 


tianity were  being  laid.  Thus  the  apostle 
warned  the  Ephesians  that  false  teachers 
would  arise  from  among  themselves;  to 
Timothy  he  writes  of  those  perilous  times 
which  were  then  present ;  and,  in  his 
Epistles,,  mention  is  made  of  false  practices 
and  doctrines,  such  as  the  worship  of  angels, 
abstinence  from  meats,  bodily  mortifications, 
and  the  honour  conferred  on  celibacy.  So 
also  John,  in  his  First  Epistle,  refers  to  this 
working  of  this  anticliristian  power  when 
he  says,  "Little  children,  it  is  the  last  time : 
and  as  ye  have  heard  that  antichrist  shall 
come,  even  now  are  there  many  antichrists. . . . 
Every  spirit  that  confesscth  not  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  not  of  God  : 
and  this  is  that  spirit  of  antichrist,  whereof 
ye  have  heard  that  it  should  come ;  and 
even  now  already  is  it  in  the  world"  (1  John 
ii.  18;  iv.  3).  "Antichrist  does  not  step  on 
the  scene  suddenly  without  any  prepara- 
tions; on  the  contrary,  a  stream  of  anti- 
Christian  sentiment  and  conduct  pervades 
the  whole  history  Of  the  world  "  (Olshausen). 
Only  he  that  now  letteth;  or,  restraineth, 
the  old  meaning  of  the  word  "let."  Will 
let.  These  words  are  not  in  the  original, 
and  ought  to  be  omitted.  Until  he  be  taken 
out  of  the  way.  The  whole  clause  ought  to 
be  rendered,  "The  mystery  of  lawlessness 
is  already  working,  only  until  he  who  re- 
straineth is  removed  ;  "  when  that  takes 
place,  when  the  restraining  influence  is 
removed,  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  will  no 
longer  work  secretly,  but  will  be  openly 
manifested. 

Ver.  8. — And  then;  namely,  so  soon  as 
he  that  restraineth  is  taken  out  of  the  way. 
Shall  that  Wicked ;  or,  that  lawless  one,  in 
whom  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  is  realized ; 
not  different  from,  but  the  same  with,  the 
"man  of  sin,  the  son  of  perdition."  Be 
revealed ;  appear  unveiled  in  all  his  naked 
deformity.  No  longer  working  secretly,  but 
openly,  and  in  an  undisguised  form;  no 
longer  the  mystery,  but  the  revelation  of 
lawlessness.  The  apostle  now  interrupts 
his  description  of  the  man  of  sin  by  an- 
nouncing his  doom.  Whom  the  Lord;  or, 
as  the  best-attested  manuscripts  read,  whom 
the  Lord  Jesus.  Shall  consume;  or  rather, 
shall  slay  (E.  V.).  With  the  spirit  (or,  breath) 
of  his  mouth.  Various  interpretations  have 
been  given  to  this  clause.  Some  refer  it  to 
the  Word  of  God,  and  others  to  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  suppose  that  the  conversion  of 
the  world  is  here  predicted;  but  this  is 
evidently  an  erroneous  interpretation,  as 
the  doom  of  antichrist  is  here  announced. 
Others  refer  the  term  toaory  or  word,  and 
think  that  the  sentence  of  condemnation 
pronounced  by  the  Lord  Jesus  on  the  wicked 
is  intended.  But  the  words  are  to  be  taken 
literally  as  a  description  of  the  power  aaJ 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—17. 


irresistible  might  of  Christ  at  hit  coming — 
that  the  mere  breath  of  his  mouth  ia  suffi- 
cient to  consume  the  wicked  (comp.  Isa.  xi. 
4,  "  He  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod 
of  his  mouth,  and  with  the  breath  of  his 
lips  shall  he  slay  the  wicked  ").  And  shall 
destroy  (or,  annihilate)  with  the  brightness 
(or,  appearance)  of  his  coming.  The  two 
words,  epiphany  and  paromia,  which  are 
elsewhere  used  separately  to  denote  the 
coming  of  Christ,  are  here  employed.  There 
is  no  ground  for  the  assertion  that  the  first 
is  the  subjective  and  the  second  the  objec- 
tive aspect  of  Christ's  coining  (Olshausen). 
The  brightness  of  Christ's  coming  is  not 
here  expressed ;  but  the  meaning  is  that  the 
mere  appearance  of  Christ's  presence  will 
annihilate  the  wicked. 

Ver.  9. — The  apostle  resumes  his  descrip- 
tion of  the  man  of  sin.  Even  him ;  not  in 
the  original,  but  necessary  for  the  sense. 
Whose  coming.  The  use  of  the  same  term, 
parousia,  employed  to  denote  the  coming  of 
Christ  exhibits  the  counterpart  of  the  man 
of  sin.  Is  after  the  working — according  to 
the  energy — of  Satan.  Satan  is  the  agent 
who  works  in  the  man  of  sin ;  he  being  the 
organ  or  instrument  ot  Satan.  With  all 
power  and  signs  and  lying  wonders.  The 
adjective  "  lying "  ought  to  be  rendered  as 
a  substantive,  and  applied  to  all  three: 
"  With  all  powers  and  signs  and  wonders  of 
falsehood ; "  whose  origin,  nature,  and  pur- 
pose is  falsehood.  Here,  also,  the  counter- 
part to  Christ  is  manifest ;  for  the  same  terms 
— "  powers,"  "  signs,"  and  "wonders,"  are  em- 
ployed to  denote  his  miracles  (Acts  ii.  22 ; 
Heb.  ii.  4).  The  miracles  of  Christ  were 
m  i  racles  of  truth ;  the  miracles  of  the  man 
of  sin  would  be  miracles  of  falsehood.  There 
does  not  seem  to  be  any  essential  difference 
between  powers,  signs,  and  wonders ;  but 
the  words  are  employed  as  a  mere  rhetorical 
enumeration.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that 
the  man  of  sin  will  be  enabled  to  perform 
real  miracles ;  they  are  the  wonders  of 
falsehood ;  but  still  by  them  his  followers 
will  be  deceived  (comp.  Matt.  xxiv.  24). 

Yer.  10. — And  with  all  deceivableness  of 
unrighteousness ;  or  rather,  with  all  deceit 
o]  unrighteousness  (B.V.);  either  with  all 
deceit  leading  to  unrighteousness  or  with 
all  deceit  which  is  unrighteousness.  The 
man  of  sin  works  by  deceit  and  falsehood  ; 
and  by  means  of  imposture  and  wonders  and 
high  pretensions  he  will  succeed  in  imposing 
on  the  world.  The  energetic  power  of  the 
man  of  sin  is,  however,  by  no  means  irresis- 
tible; only  they  who  perish  will  succumb 
to  it.  In  them.  In  the  best  manuscripts 
the  preposition  "  in  "  is  wanting ;  therefore 
the  words  are  to  be  translated  for  them  or  to 
them.  That  perish  (comp.  2  Cor.  ii.  15); 
beoause  they  reoeived  not  the  love  of  the 


truth.  Not  only  did  they  not  receive  the 
truth  when  it  was  offered  them,  but,  what 
was  worse,  they  were  destitute  even  of  a  love 
of  the  truth.  By  the  truth  here  is  meant, 
not  Christ  himself,  as  some  expositors  think, 
but  primarily  the  Christian  truth,  and 
secondarily  the  truth  generally.  There 
was  in  them  a  want  of  susceptibility  for  the 
truth,  and  thus  not  only  were  they  prevented 
embracing  the  gospel,  but  they  were  led 
astray  by  numerous  errors  and  delusions. 
That  they  might  be  saved.  The  result 
which  naturally  would  arise  from  the  recep- 
tion of  the  truth. 

Ver.  11. — For  this  cause ;  on  account  of 
their  being  destitute  of  a  love  of  the  truth. 
God  shall  send  them ;  or  rather,  God  sends 
(hem;  the  present  being  chosen  because  the 
apostasy  had  already  commenced,  the 
mystery  of  lawlessness  was  already  working. 
Strong  delusion;  or,  a  working  of  error 
(B.V.).  These  words  are  not  to  be  weakened, 
as  if  they  meant  merely  that  in  righteous 
judgment  God  permitted  strong  delusion  to 
he  sent  them;  the  words  are  not  a  mere 
assertion  of  judicial  permission,  but  of  actual 
retribution.  It  is  the  ordinance  of  God  that 
the  wicked  by  their  wicked  actions  fall  into 
greater  wickedness,  and  that  thus  sin  is 
punished  by  sin;  and  what  is  an  ordinance 
of  God  is  appointed  by  God  himself.  That 
they  should  believe  a  lie ;  or  rather,  the  lie, 
namely  the  falsehood  which  the  man  ot  sin 
disseminates  by  his  deceit  of  unrighteous- 
ness. Being  destitute  of  the  love  of  the 
truth,  they  are  necessarily  led  to  believe  a 
lie — l  heir  minds  are  open  to  all  manner  ot 
falsehood  and  delusion. 

Ver.  12. — That ;  in  order  that.  The  state- 
ment of  purpose  depending,  not  upon  "  that 
they  should  believe  a  lie,"  but  upon  "  God 
sends  them  a  strong  delusion" — denoting  a 
still  more  remote  purpose  of  God.  God,  as 
the  moral  Kuler  of  the  universe,  will  pro- 
nounce sentence  of  condemnation  against 
them,  this  sentence  being  the  necessary 
result  of  their  receiving  not  the  love  of  the 
truth.  Its  reception  would  have  been  the 
cause  of  their  salvation ;  its  rejection  results 
in  their  condemnation.  They  all  might  be 
damned;  or  rather,  judged  (B.V.).  The 
verb  employed  does  not  here,  or  else- 
where, express  the  idea  of  condemnation, 
though  this  is  implied  by  the  context.  Who 
believed  not  the  truth ;  namely,  the  Chris- 
tian truth ;  their  unbelief  of  it  was  the  con- 
sequence of  their  want  of  love  of  the  truth, 
and  was  the  cause  of  their  being  judged. 
But  had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness.  Their 
delight  in  unrighteousness  was  wholly  in. 
compatible  with  tbeir  belief  in  the  truth 
their  want  of  faith  arose,  not  from  any  defeoi 
in  their  understanding,  but  from  the  perve* 
sion  of  their  moral  nature.  _ 


■m.  U.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TH"E  THESSALONIANS.  27 


Here   the  description  of  the  man  of  sin 

joncludes,  and  hence  the  second  division  of 
the  Epistle  closes.  The  succeeding  verses 
should  have  been  attached  to  a  new  para- 
graph, being  the  commencement  of  the  third 
or  hortatory  portion  of  the  Epistle. 

Yer.  13. — But;  this  may  he  considered  as  a 
simple  particle  of  transition,  or  as  containing 
a  contrast  to  those  alluded  to  in  the  previous 
verses.  I  thank  God  that  you  are  not  ex- 
posed to  the  delusions  of  the  man  of  sin  and 
to  the  destruction  of  his  followers.  We. 
By  some  restricted  to  Paul,  and  by  others 
as  including  Silos  and  Timotheus  (ch.  i.  1). 
Are  bound  to  give  thanks  alway  to  God. 
Notwithstanding  the  disorders  which  had 
arisen  in  the  Church  of  Thessalonica,  Paul 
had  abundant  reason  to  thank  God  for  his 
great  grace  vouchsafed  to  the  Thessalonians, 
in  retaining  them  in  the  gospel;  and  in 
enabling  them  to  abound  in  faith  and  love. 
For  you,  brethren  beloved  of  the  Lord; 
that  is,  of  Christ.  In  the  former  Epistle  he 
calls  them  "  beloved  of  God  "  (1  Thess.  i. 
4),  here  "of  Christ;"  one  of  tho  numerous 
indirect  proofs  in  these  Epistles  of  the 
Divinity  of  Christ  Because  God  hath  from 
the  beginning.  Some  valuable  manuscripts 
read,  "  because  God  hath  chosen  you  as  first- 
fruits,"  and  this  rendering  has  been  adopted 
by  several  eminent  expositors  (Jowett, 
Hofmann,  Riggenbach);  but  the  prepon- 
derance of  authorities  is  in  favour  of  the 
reading  in  our  A.Y.  The  phrase,  "from 
the  beginning,"  does  not  denote  "from  the 
beginning  of  the  gospel,"  but  "from  eter- 
nity." The  apostle  refers  the  salvation  of 
the  Thessalooians  to  the  eternal  election  of 
God.  Chosen  yon  to  salvation — the  final 
purpose  of  God's  election.  Through;  or 
rather,  in,  denoting  the  elements  in  which 
the  salvation  consisted,  Or,  which  is  the 
same  thing,  the  state  into  which  they 
were  chosen.  Sanctiflcation  of  the  Spirit 
— the  Divine  side — and  belief  of  the  truth — 
the  human  side  of  the  element  in  which  the 
salvation  was  realized. 
Vex.  14.— Whereunto;   to  witoi.     The 


reference  being  to  the  whole  clause,  being 

"chosen  to  salvation  in  sanctifioation  of  the 
Spirit  and  belief  of  the  truth."  He  called 
you.  Whom  God  elects  from  eternity,  he 
calls  in  time.  By  our  gospel;  the  gospel 
preached  by  us.  To  the  obtaining  (or, 
acquisition)  of  the  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  .Different  meanings  have  been 
attached  to  these  words ;  some  Tender  them 
"  for  the  purpose  of  an  acquisition  of  glory 
to  Jesus  Christ;"  others,  "for  a  glorious 
possession  of  Jesus  Christ ; "  and  others,  "  to 
be  possessors  or  sharers  iu  the  glory  of 
Jesus  Christ."  The  last  meaning  is  the 
correct  one.  Believers  are  constituted 
"  heirs  of  God  and  joint-heirs  with  Jesus 
Christ." 

Yer.  15. — Therefore,  brethren,  stand  fast, 
and  hold  the  traditions.  Traditions  gene- 
rally denote  statements  orally  delivered  and 
reported  ;  here  the  word  denotes  the  apostle's 
instructions  in  Christianity,  whether  these 
are  given  by  word  of  mouth  or  by  letter. 
Which  ye  have  been  taught,  whether  by  word ; 
referring  to  the  apostle's  preaching  when  in 
Thessulunica.  Or  our  Epistle ;  referring  to 
the  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians. 

Yer.  16. — Now  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
God,  even  our  Father,  who  hath  loved  us. 
These  last  words,  "  who  hath  loved  us,"  are 
to  be  restricted  to  God  our  Father,  whose 
love  was  manifested  in  sending  his  Son  to 
rescue  sinners  from  destruction.  And  hath 
given  us  everlasting  consolation ;  or,  comfort ; 
everlasting  as  contrasted  with  the  temporary 
and  deceitful  comfort  which  the  world  gives. 
And  good  hope  through  grace ;  or,  in  grace. 
"  In  grace  "  belongs  to  the  verb  "hath  given," 
and  denotes  the  mode  of  the  gift — of  his 
own  free  grace,  in  contrast  to  personal 
merit. 

Ver.  17. — Comfort  your  hearts,  and  stab- 
lish  you ;  or,  according  to  the  best  manu- 
scripts, ttablish  them,  namely,  your  hearts. 
These  verbs  are  in  the  singular,  but  their 
nominative  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and 
God  our  Father,  thus  implying  the  unity 
between  these  Divine  Persons.  In  every 
good  word  and  work. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1, 2. — The  tecond  advent.  1.  The  time  of  the  advent.  The  erroneous  notions 
of  the  Thessalonians  concerning  the  advent.  Our  Lord's  references  and  the  references 
in  the  Epistles  to  the  advent.  There  is  no  reason  for  the  assertion  that  the  apostles 
believed  in  or  taught  the  immediate  coming  of  Christ.  They  announced  the  certainty 
of  the  advent,  but  the  precise  time  was  not  within  the  sphere  of  their  inspiration. 
2.  The  practical  influence  which  the  doctrine  of  the  tecond  advent  should  have  upon  us. 
Negatively,  it  should  not  deprive  us  of  our  sober  reason  or  fill  us  with  alarm.  Posi- 
tively, its  certainty  should  inspire  us  with  hope  and  fill  us  with  joy ;  its  uncertainty 
should  stir  us  up  to  watchfulness,  and  preserve  us  in  patience.  We  must  not  measure 
by  our  impatience  the  purposes  of  him  with  whom  "  one  day  is  as  a  thousand  years,  and 
i  thousand  years  as  one  day." 


28  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—17. 

Ver.  8. — Importance  of  religious  knowledge.  We  are  surrounded  by  many  influences 
tending  either  to  lead  us  into  error  and  delusion,  or  into  scepticism  and  infidelity.  We 
must  add  to  our  faith  knowledge,  and  seek  to  he  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  faith. 
The  truth  ought  to  he  the  great  subject  of  inquiry.  Let  us  cultivate  the  love  of  the 
truth ;  let  us  pursue  the  truth  wherever  it  leads,  lest  we  should  render  ourselves  liable 
to  the  condemnation  of  those  who  believe  not  the  truth,  but  have  pleasure  in  un- 
righteousness ;  and  lest  we  should  be  led  from  error  to  error,  and  be  lost  in  a  perfect 
maze  of  falsehood. 

Vers.  3 — 9. — The  doctrine  of  antichrist.  Antichrist  is  the  caricature  or  counterpart 
of  Christ.  1.  He  is  ihe  man  of  sin,  the  personification  of  iniquity;  whereas  Christ 
is  the  righteous  One,  the  personification  of  righteousness.  2.  He  is  the  mystery  of 
iniquity ;  whereas  Christ  is  the  mystery  of  godliness.  3.  His  advent  is  announced 
by  the  same  word  as  the  advent  of  Christ.  4.  His  coming  occurred  in  its  proper  season  ; 
so  also  Christ  came  in  the  fulness  of  time.  5.  His  coming  is  after  the  working  of 
Satan;  whereas  Christ's  coming  is  in  the  power  of  tlie  Holy  Ghost.  6.  He  performs 
miracles  of  falsehood,  a  counterpart  of  the  real  miracles  which  Christ  performed.  7. 
He  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  thus  occupying  the  proper  seat  of  Christ.  8.  He 
shows  or  exhibits  liimself  as  God,  whereas  Christ  is  the  true  manifestation  of  the  God- 
head. In  short,  the  kingdom  of  light  which  Christ  has  established  has  its  counterpart 
in  the  kingdom  of  da.kness. 

Ver.  13. — Sanctification.  1.  Its  nature.  It  denotes  separation  and  consecration. 
It  consists  in  the  mortification  of  sin  and  the  production  of  holiness.  2.  Its  pi  operties. 
Universal, adapted  to  our  peculiar  characters,  discernible,  progressive,  in  this  life  always 
imperfect,  constant,  and  eternal.  3.  Its  Author.  The  Holy  Spirit  the  immediate 
Author;  it  is  his  peculiar  office  to  produce  holiness  in  the  soul.  He  not  only  purifies 
our  affections,  but  takes  up  his  abode  in  our  hearts.  4.  Its  instrument.  The  belief  of 
the  truth.  The  instrument  with  which  the  Spirit  works  is  the  Word  of  God.  We 
must  not  d'sioiii  these  two ;  the  agency  of  the  Spirit  and  the  instrumentality  of  the 
Word  are  both  equally  essential  and  equally  important. 

Ver.  15. — Retention  of  Scripture.  Whilst  we  reject  the  false  and  wrong,  we  must 
hold  fast  to  the  true  and  right.  This  is  an  age  of  testing.  1.  We  must  examine  the 
evidences  of  the  Word  of  God.  2.  We  must  endeavour  to  find  out  its  meaning  by 
careful  study,  and  by  prayer  for  the  guidance  and  teaching  of  God's  Spirit,  3.  We 
must  bring  all  doctrines  and  opinions  to  the  test  of  Scripture,  and  draw  our  belief  from 
the  Word  of  God,  and  not  from  the  opinions  and  traditions  of  men.  4.  We  must  ever 
walk  up  to  the  light  which  we  have.  The  Spirit  is  promised  to  guide  us  into  all  truth, 
and  if  we  depend  upon  him  and  follow  his  guidance,  we  shall  not  he  suffered  to 
go  astray. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers,  1,  2.— A  misapprehension  respecting  the  time  of  the  second  advent.  The  apostle's 
main  design  in  this  Epistle  is  to  correct  a  most  disquieting  error  that  had  arisen  upon 
this  point. 

I.  The  panic  in  thb  Thessalonian  Chokch.  1.  It  was  concerning  the  date  of  the 
second  coming  of  Christ.  "  Touching  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  our 
gathering  tog<  ther  unto  him."  The  facts  of  this  august  event  had  been  prophetically 
described  in  the  First  Epistle.  (1)  It  was  the  personal  coming  of  Christ  in  "the  day 
of  the  Lord"  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  (2)  It  was  an  event  involving  their 
"gathering  together  unto  him"  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air:  a  happy  meeting,  a 
marvellously  glorious  sight.  2.  The  misapprehension  caused  a  sort  of  panic.  "That 
ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or  be  troubled "' — like  a  ship  tossed  upon  a  stormy  sea. 
It  was  this  deep  agitation  of  mind,  this  consternation  and  surprise,  which  led  to  the 
unsettled  spirit  that  manifested  itself  in  the  'I  hessalonian  Church.  Errors  in  the. 
ivgion  of  dispensational  truth  often  have  this  tendency.  3.  The  panic  wis  due  to  one 
or  other  of  three  sources.     "  Neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  word,  nor  by  letter  as  from  us." 


oh.  ii.  1—17.]    THE  SECuND  EP1STLK  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  29 

(1)  It  may  have  had  its  origin  in  some  pretended  revelation  or  spiiihial  utterance  in 
the  Thessalonian  Church.  Our  Lord  had  predicted  false  alarms  of  this  sort.  "  Then 
if  any  man  shall  say  unto  you,  Lo,  here  is  Christ,  or  there;  believe  him  not"  (Matt. 
xxiv.  23).  (2)  Or  it  may  have  come  "  through  word,"  that  is,  word  of  mouth,  sup- 
posed to  be  spoken  by  the  apostle  during  his  visit  to  Thessalonica.  (3)  Or  "  through 
letter  as  from  us,"  apparently  forged  letters  such  as  had  already  become  rife  in  the 
early  Church. 

II.  The  ground  of  the  panic.  "  As  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  now  present.'' 
This  is  the  correct  translation ;  not  "  it  is  at  hand."  1.  It  could  inspire  no  terror  for 
the  Thessalonians  to  know  that  the  day  was  at  hand,  lor  this  had  always  been  the 
apostle's  teaching,  as  well  as  that  of  all  Scripture  (Matt.  xxiv. ;  Horn.  xiii.  12  ;  Phil. 
'.v.  5;  Heb.  x.  25,  37;  Jas.  v.  8;  1  Pet.  iv.  7).  They  had  been  already  familiar  with 
the  doctrine,  which  ought  rather  to  have  filled  their  hearts  with  transcendent  gladness. 
2.  Their  disquii  tude  and  distress  arose  from  the  belief  that  the  Lord  had  already  come 
without  their  sharing  in  the  glory  of  his  kingdom.  Their  relatives  were  still  lying  in 
their  graves  without  any  sign  of  resurrection,  and  they  themselves  saw  no  sign  of  that 
transformation  of  body  in  themselves  that  was  to  be  the  prelude  to  their  meeting  the 
Lord  in  the  air.  The  apostle  tells  them  distinctly  that  the  day  has  not  come,  and 
that  the  signs  of  its  approach  had  not  yet  been  exhibited. — T.  C. 

Vers.  3 — 8.— The  rise  of  the  apostasy  and  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin  must 
precede  the  second  advent.  This  fact  would  assure  them  that  a  period  of  time  of  at 
least  indefinite  extent  would  intervene  before  the  day  of  the  Lord.  "Let  no  man 
deceive  you  by  any  means." 

I.  The  coming  of  the  apostasy.  "  Because  the  day  will  not  set  in  unless  there 
come  the  apostasy  .first."  1.  The  apostasy  is  so  des~  ribed  because  it  was  already  familiar 
to  their  minds  through  his  oral  teaching.  "  III  menibi  r  ye  not,  that,  when  I  was  with 
you,  I  was  telling  you  of  these  things  ?  "  2.  It  points  to  a  signal  defection  from  the 
Christian  faith.  We  imagine  that  the  primitive  Churches  were  signally  free  from 
error  or  fault  of  any  sort.  The  apostle  hin.s  If  notes  the  signs  of  beginning  apostasy 
even  in  his  own  day.  (1)  "  The  mystery  of  lawlessness  doth  already  work."  (2) 
There  were  for  himself  "perils  from  false  brethren."  (3)  There  were  in  the  Church 
itself  "enerhies  of  the  cross  of  Christ."  (4)  Later  still  "many  deceivers  had  enteral 
into  the  world."  (5)  The  apostle  foresaw  that  the  evil  "would  increase  unto  more 
ungodliness."  (6)  This  apostasy  was  to  prec  de  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin,  not 
to  be  regarded  as  identical  with  it.  ¥et  the  two  movements  were  not  to  be  regarded 
as  independent  of  each  other,  except  in  the  order  or  time  of  their  development. 
(7)  The  signs  of  the  apostasy  in  Christendom  are  to  be  seen  principally  in  the 
Papacy,  but  likewise  in  the  kindred  errors  and  corruptions  of  the  Greek  Church  as 
well  as  in  the  delusions  of  Mohammedanism.  The  elements  of  the  apostasy  were, 
however,  to  be  gathered  up  and  concentrated  at  last  in  a  single  person  as  their  final 
embodiment. 

II.  The  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin.  '"  And  that  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the 
son  of  perdition;  who  opposuth  and  exalteth  himself  above  everyone  called  God,  or 
anobjeeiof  worship."  His  characteristics  are  here  distinctly  dcscril  ed.  1.  He  does 
not  represent  a  system  of  error,  like  Romanism,  or  the  papal  hierarchy,  or  a  succession 
of  popes,  but  a  single  person.  The  man  of  sin  has  not  yet  appeared.  Yet  ltomanism, 
or  the  papacy,  comprehends  much  that  is  involved  in  the  idea  of  this  terrible  person, 
who,  however,  goes  beyond  it  in  the  appalling  extent  of  his  wickedness.  The  passage 
is  not  symbolic,  but  literal.  It  is  a  literal  person  who  is  described.  2.  He  is  "  the 
son  of  pei  dition."  (1)  Not  because  he  brings  ruin  to  others,  but  (2)  because  he  is 
himself  doomed  to  ruin — going  literally  to  "  his  own  place,"  like  Judas,  who  may  be 
regarded  M  a  type  of  him.  3.  His  boundless  and  blasphemous  assumptions.  (1)  His 
opposition  to  every  God,  true  and  false.  (2)  His  self-elevation  above  every  God, 
true  and  false.  His  action  recalls  the  prophecy  of  Daniel :  "  The  king  shall  do 
according  to  his  will;  and  he  shall  exalt  himself  above  every  god,  and  shall  speak 
marvellous  things  against  the  God  of  gods"  (Dan.  xi.  36).  This  prophecy  refers  to 
a  polytheistic  king.  The  apostle  refers  to  the:  man  of  sin  as  repudiating  all  worship, 
as  if  he  represented  a  higher  divinity  than  anything  worshipped  on  earth,    (a)  The 


30  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO.  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—17. 

description  does  not  apply  to  the  pope  or  the  papacy :  (a)  Because  the  pope,  though  the 
head  of  a  system  of  idolatry,  does  not  oppose  God  or  exalt  himself  above  him,  but  rather 
owns  himself  "  a  servant  of  servants  of  the  most  high  God,"  and  blesses  the  people, 
not  in  his  own  Dame,  but  in  the  Name  of  the  Triune  God.  (j9)  Because,  instead  of 
exalting  himself  above  God  or  objects  of  worship,  he  multiplies  the  objects  of  worship 
by  the  canonization  of  new  saints,  and  submits,  like  the  humblest  of  his  followers,  to 
the  worship  of  the  very  saints  he  has  made.  (7)  Because  the  pope,  though  guilty  of 
arrogating  almost  Divine  powers  to  himself,  does  not  supersede  God  so  as  to  make 
himself  God.  The  man  of  sin  "sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  himself  that  he 
is  God."  Though  votaries  of  the  papacy  have  often  given  Divine  titles  to  the  popes, 
the  Popes  have  never  assumed  to  be  God,  but  only  vicars  of  Jesus  Christ  on  earth. 
They  have  claimed  to  be  viceroys  of  God.  The  temple  of  God  cannot  be  the  Vatican  ; 
nor  the  Christian  Church,  which  is  an  ideal  building ;  nor  can  Rome  be  regarded  as  the 
centre  of  the  Christian  Church.  (!)  Because  this  prophetic  sketch  contains  no  allusion 
to  strictly  papal  peculiarities,  such  as  idolatry,  either  as  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  saints, 
angels,  or  relics,  the  inveniion  of  purgatory,  priestly  absolution,  bloody  fanaticism, 
debased  casuistry,  lordship  over  the  world  of  spirits.  (6)  The  description  applies  to 
the  man  of  sin — the  lawless  one — for  whom  the  Papacy  prepares  the  way  by  a  long 
course  of  apostasy  from  the  truth,  (o)  This  terrible  person  is  to  oppose  God  and  all 
worship  of  every  sort,  and  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  an  impersonation  of  infidel 
wickedness.  (/B)  He  is  to  sit  down  in  the  vacated  "  temple  of  God  "  and  claim  all  the 
attributes  of  divinity.  He  sits  down  in  God's  place — for  the  temple  is  God's  dwelling — 
in  some  actual  temple,  and  appropriates  it  to  his  own  use.  Wherever  the  scene  of  this 
marvellous  usurpation  may  be,  it  signifies  the  obliteration  of  all  Christian  interests  and 
the  triumph  of  atheistic  malignity.  When  the  Lord  comes,  "  shall  he  find  faith  in  the 
earth?"  We  see  how  Positivism  in  our  own  day  has  forsaken  the  worship  of  a 
personal  God  and  betaken  itself  to  the  worship  of  concrete  humanity.  The  man  of 
sin  will  use  the  papacy  as  Augnste  Comte  travestied  it  in  constructing  forms  of  Posi- 
tivist  devotion,  by  turning  it  into  some  darker  shape  and  making  it  the  tremendous 
instrument  of  the  world's  final  ruin. 

III.  The  check  to  the  full  development  of  the  man  op  sin.  "  And  now  what 
restraineth  ye  know,  in  order  that  he  may  be  revealed  in  his  own  time.  For  the 
mystery  of  iniquity  is  already  working  only  till  he  who  now  restraineth  be -taken  out 
of  the  way."  These  words  imply :  1.  That  the  apostasy  was  already  in  being;  for  "  the 
mystery  of  lawlessness  is  already  working."  The  two,  if  not  identical,  are  closely 
connected  together.  (1)  It  antagonizes  Christ,  who  is  "the  mystery  of  godliness  " 
(1  Tim.  iii.  16).  The  mystery  is  a  process,  not  a  person,  yet  it  works  against  the 
person  of  Christ.  (2)  Many  of  the  elements  of  the  "  apostasy  "  were  in  existence  in 
the  days  of  the  apostles,  at  least  in  the  germ-state.  The  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  and 
the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  point  to  an  early  development  of  Gnostic  error  which 
found  its  place  in  due  time  in  the  papal  system  (Col.  ii. ;  2  Tim.  iii.).  The  self-deifying 
tendency  was  manifested  in  the  conduct  of  several  of  the  Caesars.  2.  The  words  imply 
that  the  working  of  the  apostasy  was  still  undefined  and  as  yet  unguessed  at.  It  was 
still  "a  mystery,"  to  be  revealed  in  due  time.  Nothing  is  more  remarkable  than  the 
gradual  growth  of  error  in  the  patristic  age.  False  opinions  held  by  pious  Fathers  ip. 
one  age  were  held  by  errorists  in  the  next  age  to  the  exclusion  of  the  truth.  3.  The 
words  imply  that,  as  the  apostasy  would  last  through  ages,  the  check  would  likewise 
exercise  a  continuous  effect.  The  common  opinion  is  that  the  Roman  empire  was  the 
restraining  power  upon  the  development  of  the  man  of  sin.  It  was  certainly  such  upon 
the  course  of  the  apostasy,  which  was  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  man  of  sin.  It  held  the 
Papacy  in  check  till  it  was  itself  swept  away  by  barbarian  violence.  Because  it  has 
passed  away,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  man  of  sin  must  have  been  revealed  at  once ; 
for  other  checks  have  been  supplied,  and  are  being  still  continuously  supplied,  in  the 
polity  of  nations  and  in  the  face  of  Divine  truth,  to  restrain  the  last  terrible  manifesta- 
tion of  his  power. 

IV.  The  doom  of  the  man  of  sin.  "  Whom  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  consume  with 
the  breath  of  his  mouth,  and  shall  destroy  with  the  appearance  of  his  coming."  1.  This 
does  net  refer  to  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  Christ  working  in  the  minds  qf  men  for  the 
destruction   of  antichristian  error  and  antitheistic  wickedness,    but  to  the    actual 


oh.  IL  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  81 

personal  advent  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  language  implies  the  suddenness  and  the 
completeness  of  the  overthrow  of  the  man  of  sin,  who  thereby  becomes  "  the  son  of  perdi- 
tion." 3.  The  picture  presented  may  be  identical  with  the  Gog  and  Magog  conspiracy 
which  is  to  follow  the  millennium.  (Rev.  xx.  7,  8.)  The  Lord  puts  the  question, 
"  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  in  the  earth  ?  "  (Luke  xviii.  8). 
Thus  the  apostle  assures  the  Thessalonians  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  cannot  have 
come,  because  all  the  events  here  pictured  must  happen  before  that  great  and  terrible 
day.— T.  C. 

Vers.  9 — 12. — The  methods  of  the  man  of  sin  and  the  retribution  that  overtakes  his 
victims.  The  apostle,  after  telling  the  doom  of  the  man  of  sin  by  anticipation,  goes 
back  upon  his  description  so  as  to  bring  out  the  contrast  between  the  coming  of  Christ 
and  the  coming  of  his  arch-enemy. 

I.  The  methods  of  the  man  of  sin.  "  Whose  coming  is  after  the  working  of  Satan 
in  all  powers  and  signs  and  prodigies  of  lying."  1.  The  source  of  all  this  wonder- 
working activity — Satan.  There  is  more  than  human  depravity  at  work  in  this 
tremendous  revelation  of  evil  power.  As  Satan  is  a  liar  and  the  father  of  lies,  he  will 
stamp  falsehood  upon  the  whole  system,  which  he  will  elaborate  with  superhuman 
craft  for  the  misguidance  of  men.  2.  The  character  of  this  activity.  It  is  external 
and  internal.  (1)  It  is  external — "  in  powers  and  signs  and  prodigies  of  lying."  (a)  These 
are  to  be  a  mimicry  of  Clirist's  miracles,  for  the  three  words  here  used  are  twice  applied 
to  our  Lord's  miracles  (Heb.  ii.  4 ;  Acts  ii.  22).  (6)  They  were  not  real  miracles,  as 
if  they  had  been  done  by  Divine  power,  but  jugglers'  tricks  or  such-like  startling 
wonders  as  might  delude  "  the  perishing "  into  the  belief  that  they  were  done  by 
Divine  power.  The  signs  were  to  be  as  false  as  their  author,  (c)  Their  design  was  to 
attest  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  of  the  man  of  sin.  (2)  It  is  internal — "  in  all  deceit  of 
unrighteousness  " — so  as  to  pass  sooner  for  truth.  Guile  marks  his  whole  career,  and 
unrighteousness  is  the  aim  and  result.  He  "  speaks  lies  in  hypocrisy ; "  "by  good 
words  and  fair  speeches  he  deceives  the  hearts  of  the  simple"  (1  Tim.  iv.  2; 
Bom.  xvi.  18).  The  ministers  of  Satan  can  as  easily  transform  themselves  into  minis- 
ters of  righteousness  as  Satan  himself  become  an  "angel  of  light"  (2  Cor.  xi.  14,  15). 
3.  The  effects  of  this  wonder-working  actiuity.  They  are  confined  "  to  those  that  are 
perishing."  It  is  not  possible  "  to  deceive  the  elect"  (Mark  xiii.  22).  Those  who  are 
blinded  to  the  glory  of  the  gospel  are  in  the  way  of  easy  deception  (2  Cor.  iv.  3). 
It  is  those  on  the  way  to  perdition  who  are  so  easily  deceived. 

II.  The  retribution  that  overtakes  the  victims  of  the  man  of  sin.  "  Because 
they  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth,  that  they  might  be  saved."  The  causes  of  the 
success  of  the  man  of  sin  are  first  described  on  the  side  of  man  and  then  on  the  side  of 
God.  The  whole  case  is  one  of  just  retribution.  1.  The  sin  of  the  perishing.  (1)  The 
truth  was  that  which  brought  salvaiion  near,  disclosing  at  once  their  need  of  a  Saviour 
and  the  readiness  of  Christ  to  save  them.  (2)  They  did  not  receive  it,  though  it  was 
offered  them,  but  rejected  and  despised  it.  (3)  They  rejected  it  because  they  had 
"  not  the  love  of  the  truth."  Without  this  love,  the  truth  will  do  us  no  good ;  it  must 
be  received  into  the  heart  as  well  as  the  head.  Augustine  prayed,  "  Lord,  make  m« 
taste  that  by  love  which  I  taste  by  knowledge."  2.  The  Divine  retribution  for  the  sin 
of  the  perishing.  "And  for  this  cause  God  is  sending  them  an  inworlung  error,  that 
they  should  believe  the  lie"  of  the  man  of  sin.  They  rejected  the  truth  of  God;  God 
will,  as  a  judicial,  punitive  infliction,  send  them  blindness  so  that  the  error  of  the 
man  of  sin  will  be  received  as  truth.  "  A  terrible  combination  when  both  God  and 
Satan  are  agreed  to  deceive  a  man!"  There  is  a  double  punishment  here.  (1)  They 
will  actually  believe  the  lie  of  the  man  of  sin.  Sin  often  in  the  moral  government  of 
God  is  punished  by  deeper  sin.  Those  who  care  nothing  for  the  truth  are  easily 
seduced  into  the  worst  errors.  Men  will  at  last  become  so  perverse  as  to  call  "  evil 
good,  and  good  evil."  (2)  They  will  be  finally  judged  for  the  pleasure  they  have  taken 
in  unrighteousness.    "  That  all  may  be  judged  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had 

.  pleasure  in  unrighteousness."  It  follows :  (a)  That  error  is  not  an  innocent  thing.  It 
has  practical  issues  of  the  most  momentous  character.  (6)  That  it  is  a  fearful  rer\  ersion 
of  the  human  soul  to  take  pleasure  in  what  God  hates,  (c)  That  God  allows  the  sin 
and  madno-s  of  men  to  develop  themselves  to  their  fullest  extent,   (d)  That  God  in  thia 


32  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—17 

way  will  be  finally  justified  in  their  judgment ;  he  "  will  be  justified  in  his  speaking, 
and  shall  be  clear  in  his  judging  "  (Ps.  li.  4). — T.  G. 

Vers.  18, 14. — Apostolic  thanksgiving  for  the  election  and  the  calling  of  the  Thessa- 
lonians.     I.  The  Divine  election.     "  God  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen  you." 

1.  There  is  an  "election  according  to  grace"  (Rom.  xi.  5).  It  is  not  to  be  confounded 
with  the  calling,  which  is  an  effect  of  it.  "  Whom  he  predestinated,  them  he  also  called  " 
(Bom.  viii.  30).  Our  salvation  is  always  traced  to  "his  own  purpose  and  grace  which 
was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began."  2.  The  date  of  the  election. 
"  From  the  beginning."  It  is  "  from  the  foundation  of  the  world "  (Eph.  i.  4),  and 
therefore  does  not  rest  upon  the  personal  claims  of  individuals.  3.  The  means  of  the 
election.  "  In  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  and  belief  of  the  truth."  The  election  is  to 
the  means  as  well  as  the  end ;  it  cannot  take  effect  without  the  means.  There  is  an 
objective  as  well  as  a  subjective  side  in  the  sphere  of  the  election.  (1)  The  sanctifica- 
tion of  the  Spirit.  This  is  the  objective  side,  (a)  It  implies  a  spiritual  change  of 
nature.  The  Spirit  applies  the  salvation,  and  regeneration  is  his  first  work.  (6)  Sancti- 
fication is  the  evidence  as  well  as  the  fruit  of  election.  (2)  "  The  belief  of  the  truth." 
This  is  the  subjective  side.  Man  is  not  passive  in  his  salvation,  (a)  As  the  Spirit  is  the 
agent,  the  truth  is  the  instrument  of  salvation,  (b)  The  truth  must  be  believed  in 
order  to  salvation.  As  men  are  chosen  to  be  saints,  they  are  chosen  also  to  be  believers. 
(3)  The  necessary  connection  between  the  sanctification  and  the  belief.  It  might 
appear  as  if  the  belief  of  the  truth  ought  to  precede  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit. 
But  there  cannot  be  faith  without  the  operation  of  the  Spirit,  while,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  sanctification  is  "  through  the  truth."  The  two  are  inseparably  joined  together. 
4.  The  end  of  the  election.  "  God  hath  chosen  you  to  salvation."  (1)  It  is  not  an 
election  to  Church  privileges.  (2)  Nor  to  national  privileges.  (3)  But  to  salvation 
itself,  (a)  This  is  salvation  from  sin  and  sorrow,  death  and  hell.  (J)  It  is  "  the  end 
of  our  faith  "(1  Pet.  i.  9). 

II.  The  Divine  calling.  "  Whereunto  he  called  you  by  our  gospel,  to  the  obtaining 
of  the  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  election  issues  in  the  call.  1.  The  Author 
of  the  call.  God.  "  There  is  one  Lawgiver  who  is  able  to  save  and  to  destroy."  He 
has  the  right  to  call  and  the  power  to  call.  Nothing  but  Divine  power  can  save  the 
soul.  2.  The  means  of  the  call.  "  Our  gospel."  The  ministry  of  the  Word  was  the 
great  instrument  in  the  Spirit's  hand  of  their  conversion.  3.  The  end  of  the  call. 
(1)  It  was  to  obtain  the  glory  of  Christ.  It  was  to  be  obtained,  not  purchased  or 
wrought  out  by  their  personal  righteousness.  (2)  Believers  are  to  share  in  the  very 
glory  of  their  Redeemer. — T.  C. 

Ver.  15.J— Exhortation  to  a  steadfast  maintenance  of  apostolic  traditions.  "There- 
fore stand  fast,  and  hold  the  traditions  which  ye  have  been  taught,  whether  by  word,  oi 
our  Epistle." 

I.  The  ground  of  this  exhortation.  It  was  their  election  and  calling.  There  is 
a  perfect  consistency  between  the  Divine  election  and  the  obligations  of  Christian  duty. 

II.  The  necessity  of  Christian  bta  mlity.  It  was  specially  needful  at  Thessalo- 
nica,  in  the  midst  of  the  agitations  and  shakings  and  restlessness  that  prevailed  on  the 
subject  of  the  second  advent.  Believers  were  not  "  to  be  carried  about  by  every  wind 
of  doctrine,"  lest  "  being  led  away  with  the  error  of  the  wicked,  they  should  fall  from 
their  own  steadfastness."  They  were  to  "  hold  fast  the  beginning  of  the,ir  confidence," 
and  not "  be  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel."    1.  There  is  safety  in  stability. 

2.  There  it  comfort  in  it.  3.  It  gives  glory  to  God.  4.  It  gives  strength  and  en- 
couragement to  the  weak  and  vacillating. 

III.  The  manifestation  of  this  stability.  "  Hold  fast  the  traditions."  1.  They 
were  of  two  kinds,  oral  and  written.  "  Whether  by  word,  or  our  Epistle."  (1)  They 
included  apostolic  doctrines — "  the  form  of  doctrine  delivered  to  them."  (2)  Apostolic 
ordinances,  such  as  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  thev  had  received  from  the 
apostles,  as  the  apostles  from  the  Lord.  (3)  Apostolic  rules  and  asages  for  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Church.  2.  The  traditions  in  question  afford  no  warrant  for  the  Roman 
Catholic  doctrine  of  traditions  handed  down  through  ages.  Because :  (1)  The  word  is 
here  applied  to  both  oral  and  written  teaching.    (2)  The  traditions  were  not  handed 


en.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANa.  33 

down  from  some  one  anterior  to  the  apostle,  and  from  the  apostle  handed  down 
to  the  Thessalonians ;  nor  were  they  committed  to  the  Thessalonians  to  be  handed 
down  to  future  ages.  They  were  handed  over  directly  by  the  apostle  to  the  Thessa- 
lonians. (3)  The  doctrine  of  tradition  dishonours  the  Scriptures,  because  the  traditions 
are  said  to  be  necessitated  by  the  defectiveness  and  obscurity  of  Scripture.— T.  0. 

Vers.  16, 17. — Prayer  after  exhortation.  The  comprehensive  prayer  for  blessing  with 
which  he  concludes  is  strictly  after  the  apostle's  manner. 

I.  The  authors  of  the  blessings  prated  for.  "Now  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
himself,  and  God,  even  our  Father."  The  order  of  mention  is  unusual,  though  the 
name  of  Jesus  occurs  first  in  the  apostolic  benediction  (2  Cor.  xiii.  14).  1.  God  the 
Father  is  the  ultimate  Source  of  blessing,  as  it  is  through  Jesus  Christ  the  blessing  comes 
to  us.  2.  There  is  an  entire  equality  between  them,  seeing  the  blessing  is  attributed  to 
both.  3.  There  it  oneness  of  essence,  as  is  indicated  by  the  singular  verb  used  in 
the  passage. 

II.  The  ground  of  expectation  that  the  blessings  asked  will  b«  given. 
"Who  loved  us,  and  gave  us  everlasting  consolation  and  good  hope  through  grace." 
1.  The  Divine  love  is  the  true  ground  of  all  our  hopes  of  blessing,  for  it  is  everlasting, 
unchangeable,  practical  in  its  ends.  2.  The  two  elements  in  the  Divine  gift.  (1)  "  Ever- 
lasting consolation."  (a)  A  source  of  unfailing  comfort  in  the  midst  of  the  trials  of 
life,  spiinging  out  of  everlasting  sources  and  sufficing  to  all  eternity ;  for  God  is  a  "  God 
of  all  comfort,"  and  "  if  there  be  any  consolation,"  it  is  in  Christ.  (6)  This  comfort  is 
a  gift — a  mark  of  Divine  favour,  not  of  human  merit.  (2)  "  A  good  hope  through  grace." 
(a)  This  is  "  the  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  who  cannot  lie,  promised  before  the 
world  began  "  (Titus  i.  2).  (6)  It  is  a  good  hope  (a)  because  of  its  Author ;  (£)  because 
of  its  foundation,  "  through  grace  ;*'  (7)  because  of  its  purifying  effects  (I  John  iii.  4). 

III.  The  blessings  prated  fob.  1.  Heart-comfort.  "  Comfort  your  hearts."  They 
needed  to  be  comforted  on  account  of  their  troubles  respecting  the  second  advent. 
None  but  God  can  give  true  and  lasting  comfort.  "  Thou  hast  put  gladness  into  my 
heart."  2.  Establishment  and  perseverance.  "  And  stablish  you  in  every  good  word 
and  work."  (1)  This  blessing  is  to  be  sought  especially  in  restless  and  unsettled  times. 
(2)  Stability  is  to  be  sought  in  "  every  good  word,"  so  that  believers  may  not  be  carried 
away  by  "  winds  of  doctrine ; "  and  in  "  every  good  work,"  so  that  they  may  not  be 
shaken  by  doubt  and  thus  become  restless  and  disorderly  in  conduct.  Instability  is 
weakness,  as  stability  is  strength. — T.  C. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  day  of  Christ  not  immediate.  I.  The  mistake  of  the  Thessalo- 
nians. 1.  In  itself.  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  present;  it  is  already  dawning;  it  is 
close  upon  us.  This  thought  had  taken  possession  of  their  souls ;  it  rilled  their  hearts ; 
it  left  no  room  for  ordinary  commonplace  duties.  They  were  neglecting  these  in  their 
strong  excitement,  in  their  eager  anticipation  of  the  approach  of  the  great  day.  What 
was  the  use  of  attention  to  business,  of  daily  labour,  of  the  quiet  performance  of  their 
accustomed  tasks,  when  the  Lord  was  to  be  expected  at  once,  when  they  were  to  be 
caught  up,  away  from  earth  and  its  employments,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  "  We 
which  are  alive  and  remain  shall  be  caught  up,"  St.  Paul  had  said  in  his  First  Epistle. 
They  misunderstood  his  words;  they  supposed  that  it  must  be  during  their  own  life- 
time ;  that  it  might  be,  that  it  would  be,  immediate.  2.  Its  origin.  Spirit,  word,  or 
letter.  "Believe  not  every  spirit"  (St.  John  said);  "try  the  spirits  whether  they  are 
of  God."  There  were  utterances  which  claimed  to  be  inspired  and  were  not  so.  The 
discerning  of  spirits  was  one  of  the  manifold  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  was  their 
duty  not  to  despise  prophesying,  but  yet  to  prove  all  things.  There  were  also  words 
quoted  as  if  spoken  by  St.  Paul ;  letters,  too,  purporting  to  come  from  him.  Men 
misrepresented  him  ;  they  attributed  the  sayings  of  others,  their  own,  perhaps,  to  the 
holy  apostle ;  even  letters,  it  seems,  were  current,  said  to  be  the  apostle's,  but  not 
really  his.  People  are  perplexed  often  nowadays  by  the  many  differences  of  opinion 
which  exist  among  Christians.  The  fact  of  this  diversity  is  to  some  an  excuse  for 
unbelief  or  for  sloth  in  spiritual  things ;  to  others,  a  real  temptation,  a  great  trial  of 
faith.  But  we  see  it  has  been  so  from  the  beginning.  There  were  errors  of  belief  in 
this  infant  Church  of  Thessalonica  while  the  apostle,  who  had  founded  it,  was  still 

II.  THESSALONIANS.  D 


14  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1— 11. 

near  at  hand — at  Corinth.  Even  in  these  early  days  things  which  he  had  said  were 
misunderstood;  his  authority  was  claimed  for  words  which  he  had  never  spoken ;  and, 
strangest  of  all,  there  were  written  letters  bearing  his  name  whic'i  were  falsely  ascribed 
to  him.  We  have  our  trials  now.  We  are  troubled,  some  of  us,  by  the  difficulties 
which  arise  from  various  readings  or  interpretations,  by  the  doubts  thrown  by  modern 
writers  on  this  or  that  book  of  Holy  Scripture,  by  the  conflict  of  opinions  in  the  Church. 
It  is  some  comfort  to  think  that  we  of  this  age  are  not  alone  in  our  temptations;  op- 
position is  not  one  of  such  singular  perplexity  as  some  of  us  are  apt  to  think.  If  we 
persevere  in  prayer,  if  we  try  to  live  by  faith  looking  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
doubts  which  vex  us  will  soon  be  clean  d  away. 

II.  St.  Paul's  way  of  dealing  with  that  mistake.  1.  He  beseeches  them.  He 
ii  very  gentle  with  his  converts,  very  earnest  too,  and  affectionate ;  full  of  deep  anxiety 
for  their  spiritual  welfare.  And  it  was  a  matter  of  great  importance.  St.  Paul  had 
dwelt  much  upon  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  The  Parousia  was  a  subject  of  much  excited 
talk,  much  stirring  of  heart  among  the  Thessalonians.  St.  Paul  had  spoken  in  his  First 
Epistle  of  "  our  gathering  togi  ther  unto  him  ; "  how  •'  we  that  are  alive  and  remain  shaJ 
be  caught  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air."  It  was  a  prospect  very 
blessed,  very  awful  too;  it  had  been  opened  out  in  strong,  startling  words.  They 
inferred  from  his  way  of  expressing  himself  that  it  was  very  close  at  hand,  to  be  looked 
for  immediately ;  their  excitement  was  intense.  He  beseeches  them  to  listen.  2.  They 
must  be  calm.  Religion  lies  in  a  calm,  quiet  walk  with  God.  It  has  its  emotions,  they 
are  at  times  deep  and  strong;  it  has  its  enthusiasm,  but  it  is  ordered  and  grave.  They 
must  not  allow  themselves  to  be  shaken  from  thi-ir  settled  judgment ;  they  must  not  give 
way  to  this  trembling,  uneasy  excitement.  They  must  return  to  the  quiet,  steady 
discharge  of  the  common  duties  of  life;  their  best  strength  was  in  quietness  and  confi- 
dence. This  was  the  best  preparation  for  the  •coming  of  Christ.  That  coming  was  not 
immediate ;  much  was  to  happen  first. 

LESbONS.  1.  Learn  to  be  sober,  thoughtful,  to  distrust  excitement,  to  live  in  patient 
continuance  of  well-doing.  2.  There  will  be  difficulties,  perplexities;  they  are  trials  of 
faith ;  they  must  be  endured  in  patience  and  overcome  by  faith.  3.  Prepare  for  the 
coming  of  Christ.  The  best  preparation  is  to  perform  each  duty  as  it  comes  in  faith 
and  prayer  as  unto  the  Lord. — B.  C.  C. 

Vers.  3 — 12. — The  man  of  sin.  I.  He  must  come  before  the  day  of  the  Lobd. 
1.  His  revelation.  He  is  antichrist — the  evil  counterpart  of  the  most  holy  Saviour; 
he  has  his  revelation,  his  apocalypse.  There  must  be  an  apostasy  before  the  coming  of 
the  Lord — a  great,  notable  apostasy.  The  apostle  had  warned  the  Thessalonians  of  it; 
we  need  these  warnings  now.  We  must  not  be  discouraged  when  we  see  scepticism, 
unbelief,  rampant  around  us.  These  things  must  be;  Holy  Scripture  has  forewarned  us. 
We  must  be  prepared;  we  must  be  calm  and  steadfast,  looking  for  the  coming  of  the 
Lord.  Such  apostasies  there  have  been  ;  there  have  been  precursors  of  the  man  of  sin, 
such  as  Caligula  shortly  before  the  date  of  this  Epistle,  or  Nero  shortly  after.  There 
have  been  evil  men  among  the  popes  of  Home  who  have  exhibited  in  their  lives  some  of 
the  characteristic  features  of  the  antichrist.  But  the  apostasy  is  yi  t  to  come ;  the  man 
of  sin  is  yet  in  the  future ;  the  mystery  of  iniquity  is  working  even  now ;  it  is  working 
below  the  surface,  in  secret ;  hereafter,  we  know  not  when,  it  will  burst  forth  into  open 
day  in  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin.  We  must  not  look  forward  to  a  continual 
unopposed  progress  of  the  gospel ;  we  must  not  expect  that  religion  will  go  on  in  ever- 
extended  triumphs,  with  no  checks,  no  defeats,  overspreading  the  earth  more  and  more 
with  its  blessed  influences.  Such  an  expectation  is  not  warranted  either  by  Scripture 
or  by  the  signs  of  the  times.  Scripture  tells  us  of  the  coming  apostasy,.of  the  revelation 
of  the  man  of  sin.  And  in  the  world  the  forces  of  unbelief  and  evil  are  evidently 
gathering  themselves  for  a  mighty  conflict.  In  our  own  country,  it  is  true  there  has 
been  a  great  revival  of  religious  zeal,  great  love  for  Christ,  much  earnest,  self-denying 
work  for  his  sake.  But  alongside  of  this  there  has  been  a  great  outburst  of  infidelity, 
a  widespread  scepticism,  a  hatred  of  revelation,  manifesting  itself  in  the  life  and  works 
of  men  of  learning  and  culture ;  while  elsewhere  the  revolt  against  all  forms  of  authority 
Divine  and  human,  has  been  more  outspoken  and  far  more  » iduly  spread.  The  armies 
of  God  and  Satan,  the  powers  of  good  and  evil,  light  and  darkness,  faith  and  unbelief 


cfl.  a.  1 — 17.]    THE  SECOND  EflSTLE  TO  THE  THESSALOtflANS.  36 

seem  to  tie  already  marshalled  in  preparation  for  an  awful  struggle.  It  must  come, 
Holy  Scripture  warns  us ;  it  will  culminate  in  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin.  He 
will  be  revealed — out  of  previous  obscurity;  the  apparition  will  be  unveiled  out  of  dark- 
ness. 2.  Bis  character.  He  is  a  person,  a  man  of  mighty  intellect  and  giant  strength 
of  will,  who  will  take  advantage  of  a  general  development  of  unbelief  and  lawlessness, 
and  gain  for  a  time  a  widespread  sovereignty.  Sin  fills  his  being;  it  becomes,  as  it 
were,  incarnate  in  him ;  it  dominates  his  entire  personality.  He  is  "  a  son  of  perdition  " 
like  Judas  (compare  the  common  Hebraism,  "a  son  of  death"),  destined  himself  to  eternal 
death,  involving  in  utter  death  all  who  follow  him.  He  is  an  adversary,  a  human 
Satan,  filled  with  all  the  awful  energy,  the  concentrated  malice  of  the  evil  one.  He  is 
the  antichrist,  the  avowed  and  bitter  enemy  of  the  holy  Saviour,  bringing  with  his 
intense  wickedness  the  horrible  cry  of  "  Ecrasez  l'infame ! "  into  awful  prominence.  He 
exalts  himself  against  every  one  that  is  called  God ;  he  sits  in  the  temple  of  God, 
reviving  the  madness  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  the  impious  attempt  of  Caligula.  Sucli 
a  man  the  world  has  not  yet  seen.  There  hare  been  many  outbursts  of  wickedness, 
many  evil  men  in  the  long  course  of  history  have  risen  to  sovereign  power ;  but  no  one 
yet  has  combined  in  himself  all  the  characteristics  ascribed  to  the  man  of  sin  in  this 
Epistle.  It  is  a  fearful  spectacle  which  is  yet  to  come.  St.  Paul  warned  the  Thes- 
salonians  that  such  things  there  would  be,  uprisings  of  malice  and  persecution,  anticipa- 
tions of  the  man  of  sin.  He  warns  the  whole  Church  throughout  all  time  that  such 
things  are  to  be  looked  for ;  that  sooner  or  later,  before  the  end  cometh,  the  man  of  sin 
himself  shall  be  revealed  in  all  the  awful  energy  of  unmingled  wickedness,  relieved  by 
no  one  trace  of  goodness. 

II.  The  obstacle.  1.  The  Thessalonians  knew  what  it  was.  St.  Paul  had  told 
them  of  this  during  his  short  residence  in  Thcssalonica.  For  some  reason  he  had  dwelt 
much  on  this  awtul  subject;  it  must  have  been  necessary  for  the  Thessalonians  in 
their  special  circumstances,  though  we  know  not  why.  They  bad  knowledge  which  we 
have  not ;  they  knew  precisely  what  we  cannot  find  out  for  certain  with  all  our  search- 
ing. We  may  be  satisfied  that  this  knowledge,  then  good  for  them,  is  not  now  necessary 
for  us,  or  it  would  have  been  more  clearly  revealed.  "  Ye  have  an  unction  from  the 
Holy  One,"  St.  John  says  of  believers,  "  and  ye  know  all  things  " — all  that  we  need  to 
know  .for  life  and  godliness.  2.  What  was  it?  The  Roman  empire,  the  power  of 
Roman  law,  the  emperor  as  embodying  that  power.  This  was  the  answer  of  most 
ancient  writers ;  it  seems  to  be  the  most  common  answer  now.  Then  the  power  of 
Rome  checked  the  outburst  of  anarchy  and  lawlessness.  It  is  still  the  majesty  of  law, 
the  authority  of  well-ordered  governments,  that  fulfils  the  same  office.  The  mystery 
of  lawlessness  is  working  now ;  it  has  not  reached  its  height,  it  has  not  embodied  itself 
in  the  fearful  personality  of  the  man  of  sin.  But  it  is  working ;  and  it  is  a  mystery, 
the  terrible  counterpart  of  the  mystery  of  godliness.  There  is  a  mystery  in  evil,  a 
strange,  fearful  mystery,  dark  secrets  not  yet  revealed ;  a  mystery  which  suggests  awful, 
heart-rending  questionings — questionings  which  can  be  quieted  only  in  his  presence  who 
giveth  rest  to  the  troubled,  anxious  soul.  This  mystery  of  lawlessness  was  working 
even  then  in  the  world  which  the  God  of  love  created ;  it  is  working  now ;  but  it  is 
held  down  by  the  restraining  power ;  it  cannot  give  birth  to  the  man  of  sin  till  his  time 
shall  come,  the  time  foreordained  in  the  counsels  of  God.  Then  the  restraining  power 
will  be  taken  out  of  the  way ;  lawlessness  will  prevail,  and  its  creature  and  embodiment, 
tha  lawless  one,  will  come. 

III.  His  activity.  1:  It  is  but/or  a  short  time.  The  Lord  Jesus  shall  destroy  him, 
and  that  in  an  instant,  when  he  cometh.  He  needs  only  to  speak  the  word  of  power ; 
the  breath  of  his  mouth  shall  sweep  the  adversary  into  that  perdition  to  which  he  was 
appointed.  The  manifestation  of  his  coming,  the  very  sight  of  the  awful  Judge,  shall 
slay  the  wicked  one.  This  must  be  our  consolation  when  the  dark  problems  of  life 
distress  our  souls — ''the  Lord  cometh."  Then  shall  come  the  assured  triumph  of 
righteousness,  the  crowning  victory  over  all  the  powers  of  eviL  2.  But  it  is  tremendous. 
As  God  is  revealed  in  Christ,  so  is  Satan  revealed  in  the  man  of  sin,  the  antichrist. 
The  "miracles  and  wonders  and  signs"  (Acts  ii.  22)  which  God  did  by  Christ  are 
parodied  by  the  power  and  signs  and  wonders  which  Satan  will  work  through  the  agency 
of  the  man  of  sin.  As  Christ's  coming  is  with  power,  with  his  mighty  angels  in  flaming, 
fire,  so  is  the  coming  of  the  lawless  one  with  all  power  according  to  the  working  of 


36  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  ii.  1—17. 


Satan,  Ab  God  worketh  in  his  saints  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure,  so 
Satan  worketh  in  this  his  representative  with  all  the  awful  energy  of  diabolical  wicked- 
ness. The  antichrist,  says  Bengel,  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  Satan  as  Christ  to 
God.  The  antichrist  will  work  miracles,  but  they  are  by  the  energy  of  Satan,  wondi  rs 
of  falsehood.  They  are  not  mere  deceptions,  they  are  real  miracles;  but  they  are  the 
works  of  him  who  is  the  father  of  lies ;  and  they  are  lies,  inasmuch  as  they  are  intended 
to  mislead  men  into  worshipping  him  as  God  who  is  tlia  personation  of  S^atan,  the  liar 
from  the  beginning.  Lies,  too,  they  are,  because  they  are  the  signs  of  a  power  which  is 
only  a  miserable  imposture,  which  must  sonn  end  in  death  and  ruin.  Our  Lord  has 
warned  us  (Matt.  xxiv.  24)  of  false  Christs  and  false  prophets  whose  signs  and  wonders 
should  be  so  startling  as  to  deceive,  if  it  were  possible,  the  very  elect.  The~  false 
prophet,  the  second  beast,  of  the  Eevelation  doeth  great  wonders,  so  that  he  maketh 
fire  to  come  down  from  heaven,  and  deceiveth  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  by  the 
means  of  those  miracles  which  he  hath  power  to  do.  Then  there  may  be,  there  will  be, 
false  miracles,  lying  wonders.  Miracles  alone  do  not  always  prove  the  agency  of  God, 
but  miracles  with  holiness,  works  of  faith  issuing  out  of  a  life  filled  with  the  presence 
of  God.  The  blessed  life  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  is  a  mightier  miracle  than  the 
physical  wonders  which  he  wrought.  A  life  of  perfect  purity  and  transcendent  holiness 
in  the  weakness  of  human  flesh,  amid  all  the  temptations  of  this  wicked  world,  is  to  us 
a  more  convincing  proof  of  the  Divine  mission  of  Christ  than  the  signs  from  heaven 
would  have  been  which  the  Jews  so  often  asked  for.  The  Church  must  expect  the 
coming  of  lying  wonders;  she  must  stand  unshaken  amid  all  the  developments  of 
Satanic  energy.  The  elect  will  not  be  deceived,  for  they  will  recognize  the  notes  of 
antichrist,  "all  the  deceivableness  of  unrighteousness;"  they  will  remember  the  warn- 
ings of  Holy  Scripture :  "  Whosoever  doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God,"  "  He  that 
committeth  sin  is  of  the  devil ;  for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning." 

IV.  Its  result.  1.  He  deceiveth  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth ;  not  the  elect — the 
souls  of  the  righteous  are  in  the  hand  of  God ;  but  those  who  have  not  been  sealed  with 
that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise  which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance,  the  pledge  of  that 
seal  of  the  living  God  which  his  angel  shall  one  day  set  upon  the  forel'eads  of  his 
chosen.  But  there  are,  alas !  those  that  are  perishing,  who  have  not  passed  from  death 
unto  life  through  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  but  still  abide  in  death.  Such  men  the  man 
of  sin,  the  lawless  fine,  deceives  and  engulfs  in  his  own  utter  destruction.  2.  Theii 
own  wilfulness  is  the  cause  of  their  ruin.  "  God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish." 
The  true  light  lighteth  every  man.  It  came  to  them,  but  they  received  it  not.  They 
received  not  Christ.  He  is  the  Truth,  and  he  is  Love.  He  came  into  the  world  that  the 
world  through  him  might  be  saved.  But  they  received  not  him  who  is  the  Way,  the 
Truth,  and  the  Life.  They  had  no  love  for  the  truth,  no  desire  for  it.  They  were  quite 
indifferent  to  the  truth,  though  their  conscience  told  them  that  it  was  the  truth;  they 
were  worse  than  indifferent,  they  rejected  it.  They  might  have  been  saved;  the  truth 
would  have  made  them  free.  They  niijiht  have  been  sanctified  through  the  truth;  for 
the  truth  of  God,  received  into  the  heart,  hath  power  to  cleanse,  to  purify,  to  save  the 
soul.  But  they  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil.  3.  It 
ends  injudicial  blindness.  God's  Spirit  will  nut  always  strive  with  man.  In  his  awful 
justice  he  gives  over  to  a  reprobate  mind  those  who  persevere  in  disobedience.  He 
sendeth  them  a  strong  delusion,  a  working  of  error.  As  virtue  is  its  own  reward,  so 
sin  is  its  own  punishment.  Eternal  sin  (see  Mark  iii.  29  in  the  best-supported  reading) 
is  the  fearful  end  of  the  obstinate  sinner.  That  hardening  of  the  heart,  in  which 
habitual  sin  must  at  last  result,  is  ascribed  in  Holy  Scripture  sometimes  to  God,  some- 
times to  the  sinner  himself,  sometimes  to  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  They  are  different 
modes  of  expressing  the  same  law  of  God's  government.  He  has  so  ordered  our  moral 
nature,  that  sin,  when  it  is  full  grown,  bringeth  forth  death.  He  lets  the  rebel  have 
his  own  will ;  he  leaves  him  to  be  "  lord  of  himself,  that  heritage  of  woe."  The  Spirit 
is  withdrawn  at  last  from  those  who  vex,  grieve,  resist,  his  gracious  influences.  But 
there  is  something  more  awful  still.  Not  only  did  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  depart  from 
Saul,  but  "  an  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  troubled  him."  God  himself  sends  at  the  last, 
in  his  most  awful  justice,  the  strong  delusion,  the  inworking  of  error.  It  is  the  last 
state,  worse  than  the  first;  after  which  comes  that  dreadful  sentence,  "It  is  impossible 
...  to  renew  them  again  unto  repentance."    This  thought  gives  a  most  terrible 


ch.  u.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  3? 

significance  to  every  act  of  wilful,  unrepented  sin ;  every  such  act  brings  a  man  nearer 
(how  near  he  cannot  tell)  to  that  most  awful  state  whence  there  is  no  repentance. 
Then  comes  judicial  blindness ;  the  li^ht  that  was  within  them  becomes  darkness. 
They  would  not  believe  the  truth  of  God,  now  they  believe  the  lie  of  the  man  of  sin. 
it  is  the  judgment  of  God.  We  see  indications  of  it  from  time  to  time  in  the  credulity 
of  unbelief.  Men  who  reject  the  Bible  are  sometimes  ready  to  believe  anything  except 
the  Bible ;  they  will  greedily  accept  any  legend,  any  scientific  hypothesis,  though 
evidently  not  more  than  a  provisional  hypothesis,  which  seems  to  contradict  the  Bible  j 
they  will  deify  humanity,  they  will  worship  the  idol  which  is  the  creature  of  their  own 
thoughts  rather  than  the  living  God.  This  unbelief  sprang  out  of  sin;  they  "had 
pleasure  in  unrighteousness."  There  is  such  a  thing  as  honest  doubt;  such  were  the 
doubts  of  Asaph,  of  Thomas.  But  unbelief  in  a  very  large  measure  comes  from  moral 
causes.  Sin  darkens  the  heart  and  the  mind ;  sin  always  leads  to  practical,  often  to 
intellectual,  unbelief.  "Everyone  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  light;"  he  walketh  in 
darkness ;  he  seetti  not  the  coming  judgment. 

Lessons.  1.  Be  prepared  for  times  of  darkness — they  must  come ;  be  strong  in  faith. 
2.  If  unbelief  becomes  dominant,  still  believe ;  God  has  forewarned  us.  3.  Anarchy, 
confusion,  leads  to  the  predominance  of  sin.  "  Give  peace  in  our  time,  0  Lord."  4.  Even 
miracles  may  deceive.  Christ  remaineth  faithful ;  trust  always  in  him.  5.  Hate  sin 
with  utter  hatred ;  it  ends  in  hardness  of  heart. — B,  C.  C. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — St.  Paul's  hopes  far  the  Thessalonians.  I.  He  thanks  God  fob  his 
past  mercies  shown  to  them.  1.  For  their  election.  He  turns  from  prophecies  of 
coming  terrors  to  thoughts  of  hope  and  consolation.  He  repeats  the  words  of  ch.  i.  3, 
"  Weare  bound  to  give  thanks."  He  felt  the  greatness  of  God's  mercies  to  the  Thessalonians. 
Mercies  shown  to  them  were  shown  to  him ;  he  so  dearly  loved  them.  It  was  his  bounden 
duty  to  thank  God  for  them  ;  how  much  more  was  it  their  duty  to  be  thankful  for  the 
grace  granted  to  thi  m  !  God  had  set  his  love  upon  them ;  God  had  chosen  them  from 
the  beginning:  This  was  the  source  of  their  blessedness;  not  any  merits,  any  good 
deeds,  of  theirs.  All  our  hopes  rest  on  the  electing  grace  of  God.  That  thought  is  full 
of  sweet,  pleasant,  and  unspeakable  comfort  to  godly  persons.  It  was  so  to  the  Thessa- 
lonian  Christians,  especially  at  this  time,  when  awful  anticipations  of  the  coming  end  were 
casting  a  dark  shadow  over  them.  That  election  manifests  itself  in  holiness  of  life.  The 
seal  of  the  Spirit  is  the  earnest,  the  pledge,  of  the  heavenly  inheritance.  God's  elect  must 
feel  within  themselves  the  working  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  mortifying  the  works  of  the 
flesh,  and  their  earthly  members,  and  drawing  up  their  minds  to  high  and  heavenly 
things.  The  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  is  the  sphere  in  which  the  life  of  election  moves 
and  energizes.  And  with  the  growth  of  holiness  in  the  heart  faith  is  ever  deepened 
and  strengthened.  The  working  of  the  Spirit  greatly  confirms  the  faith  of  eternal  sal- 
vation to  be  enjoyed  through  Christ ;  it  convinces  the  Christian  soul  with  a  mighty 
power,  with  the  certainty  of  intuition,  of  the  reality  of  the  great  truths  of  the  gospel,  so 
that  the  Christian  walks  in  ever-increasing  faith,  in  the  power  of  that  victory  which 
overcometh  the  world.  2.  For  the  hope  of  glory.  God  had  predestinated  the  Thessa- 
lonians to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son;  by  the  preaching  of  St.  Paul  be  had 
called  them  to  that  state  of  salvation.  They  were  living  in  a  present  salvation ;  they  were 
looking  forwards  to  a  future  glory ;  their  high  hope  was  the  obtaining  of  the  glory  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  His  glory  will  be  the  glory  of  his  saints,  for  he  has  given  it  them 
(John  xvii.  22).  They  are  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs'  with  Christ.  All  that  Christ 
has  is  theirs  in  hope ;  for  Christ  himself  is  theirs,  and  they  are  Christ's.  The  Christian 
who  cherishes  this  high  and  blessed  hope  must  live  in  continual  thankfulness. 

II.  He  ubges  them  to  steadfastness.  L  In  the  life  of  faith.  Stand  fast,  he  says ; 
fight  the  good  fight  of  faith.  You  must  do  your  part.  God  has  chosen  you ;  he  has 
given  you  his  Spirit ;  he  has  called  you  to  salvation.  Yet  you  must  work  out  that  salva- 
tion. We  need  not  perplex  ourselves  with  the  deep  mysteries  which  thought  cannot 
fathom ;  in  practice,  the  duty  of  perseverance  follows  from  the  electing  grace  of  God. 
He  has  chosen  you ;  persevere,  for  he  gives  you  the  power ;  be  steadfast,  for  you  owe  a 
great  debt  of  gratitude  to  him  who  has  so  greatfy  loved  you.  2.  In  doctrine.  Hold  the 
traditions.  St.  Paul  had  taught  the  Thessalonians  by  word  of  mouth.  We  must 
remember  that  in  all  probability  not  one  of  our  four  Gospels  was  yet  written.    The 


38  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONlANS.    [on.  n.  1—17. 

Thessalonians  knew  the  history  of  our  Lord's  life  and  death,  and  the  doctrines  of  the 
Christian  faith,  only  through  the  oral  teaching  of  St.  Paul.  The  First  Epistle  was  the  only 
part  of  the  New  Testament  Scriptures  known  to  them  ;  probably  the  only  part  as  yet  in 
existence.  St.  Paul  had  taught  orally  for  several  years  before  he  began  to  write.  Oral 
teaching  was  often  misunderstood,  often  forgotten,  as  this  Epistle  shows.  But  the  teach- 
ing of  an  apostle,  whether  by  word  or  by  writing,  was  a  precious  deposit,  for  that 
which  he  delivered  to  his  converts  he  had  himself  received  of  the  Lord.  Be  it  ours  to 
continue  steadfast  in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship. 

m.  He  soms  up  his  hopes  in  a  benediction.  1.  Se  points  them  to  Ood.  The 
clause  begins  in  the  Greek  with  the  emphatic  abr6s,  himself.  We  must  stand  fast,  we 
must  persevere  ;  but  it  is  he  who  establishes  the  hearts  of  his  chosen ;  he  only  is  our 
everlasting  Strength,  the  Bock  of  ages.  The  apostle  in  this  place,  as  in  2  Cor.  xiii.  14, 
puts  the  Saviour's  name  first,  because  it  is  by  Christ  that  we  have  access  to  the  Father. 
We  feel  that  this  order  would  have  been  incongruous,  impossible,  unless  Christ  were 
indeed  God ;  we  feel  that  the  singular  verb  could  not  be  used,  as  it  is  twice,  in  ver.  17, 
unless  he  and  the  Father  were  one  (comp.  1  Thess.  iii.  11).  God  the  Father  is  our 
Father,  St.  Paul  says  emphatically.  He  loved  us ;  on  his  fatherly  love  rests  our  election, 
our  hope  of  glory.  He  has  given  already  to  his  saints  eternal  comfort,  a  comfort 
independent  of  the  changes  and  chances  of  this  earthly  life — a  comfort  eternal,  for  it 
rests  on  him  who  is  eternal ;  and  with  that  comfort  which  is  present,  though  not  temporal, 
not  confined  within  the  limits  of  time,  he  has  given  also  a  good  hope  of  future  glory, 
the  blessed  hope  of  everlasting  life  with  God  in  heaven.  And  this  he  has  given  in  grace, 
in  the  encompassing  atmosphere  of  his  favour,  without  merit  or  works  of  ours.  2.  Be 
prays  that  God's  blessing  may  still  rest  upon  them.  He  who  loved  them,  and  gave  them 
eternal  comfort  and  good  hope,  will  surely  comfort  and  establish  them.  His  first  gifts 
are  a  pledge  of  their  continuance.  He  will  not  leave  his  work  unfinished.  His  love 
is  like  himself,  eternal.  He  can  shed  that  blessed  comfort  into  the  heart,  the  inmost 
seat  of  joy  and  sorrow.  When  there  is  hidden  comfort  there,  outward  troubles  may 
cause  sorrow,  but  cannot  take  away  the  fulness  of  joy.  He  can  establish  our  heart ; 
he  can  give  us  that  established  heart,  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord  (Ps.  cxii.  7,  8), 
which  the  world,  the  flesh,  the  devil,  cannot  shake.  Then  we  shall  speak  only  words 
of  truth  and  love,  and  do  only  works  of  righteousness  and  faith  through  that  inner 
comfort  and  strength  which  comes  from  God  alone. 

Lessons.  1.  In  the  midst  of  dangers  there  is  comfort  for  the  saints  ;  they  are  in  the 
hands  of  God ;  God  hath  chosen  them.  2.  Look  for  the  evidence  of  God's  election  in 
holiness  of  life ;  without  holiness  we  cannot  see  him.  3.  Be  steadfast ;  make  your  calling 
and  election  sure;  take  heed  lest  ye  fall.  4.  Only  God  can  give  "eternal  comfort." 
Seek  that  precious  gift  of  him ;  it  is  given  to  those  whom  he  stablisb.es  in  every  good 
word  and  work. — B.  C.  C. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — Antichrist.  L  Eebob  regarding  the  coming  of  Chbist.  "  Now 
we  beseech  you,  brethren,  touching  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  our 
gathering  together  unto  him ;  to  the  end  that  ye  be  not  quickly  shaken  from  your 
mind,  nor  yet  be  troubled,  either  by  spirit,  or  by  word,  or  by  Epistle  as  from  us,  as  that 
the  day  of  the  Lord  is  now  present ;  let  no  man  beguile  you  in  any  wise."  The  apostle 
beseeches  the  Thessalonians  as  brethren,  in  the  interest  of  correct  views  of  the  ooming 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  his  principal  topic  in  both  Epistles.  The  com- 
forting side  of  the  coming  is  the  gathering  together  of  all  believers  unto  him,  never  to 
be  followed  by  a  separation,  as  set  forth  in  1  Thess.  iv.  17,  "  Then  we  that  are  alive, 
that  are  left,  shall  together  with  them  "  (the  dead  in  Christ  who  have  been  raised)  "  be 
caught  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air :  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the 
Lord."  By  the  way  in  which  he  introduces  this  gathering  together,  it  can  be  seen  that 
it  was  very  attractive  to  him.  It  was  that  in  the  coming  which  he  especially  wished 
to  be  conserved.  In  the  beginning  of  1  Thess.  v.  the  apostle  had  distinctly  taught  the 
uncertainty  of  the  time  of  the  coming.  But  representations  had  been  made  to  the 
Thessalonians  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  was  actually  beginning.  Three  forms  which 
these  representations  might  take,  or,  more  probably,  did  take,  are  specified.  There  were 
representations  founded  upon  pretended  prophecy.  There  were  also  representations 
lounJed  upon  an  alleged  oral  communication  of  the  apostle.    There  were  further  repre- 


en.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  39 

sentations  founded  upon  an  alleged  Epistle  of  the  apostle.  The  existence  and  circula- 
tion of  a  fabricated  Epistle  seetn  to  be  hinted  at  in  the  words  at  the  close  of  this  Epistle : 
"  The  salutation  of  me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand,  which  is  the  token  in  every  Epistle : 
so  I  write."  If  the  Thessalonians  accepted  of  these  representations,  there  was  danger  of 
their  being  precipitately  shaken  from  their  composure  of  mind  and  even  thrown  into 
a  terrified  state,  as  at  sea  men  are  discomposed  and  even  horrified  by  the  bursting  of 
a  storm  upon  them.  The  apostle,  therefore,  considered  it  necessary  to  write  this  Epistle, 
to  put  them  on  their  guard  against  their  b<  ing  led  away  by  these  representations.  Let 
no  man  beguile  them  in  these  ways,  or,  making  it  wider,  in  any  other  way. 

II.  The  antichristian  manifestation.  1.  The  coming  of  Christ  to  bf  preceded  by 
apostasy.  "  For  it  will  not  be,  except  the  falling  away  come  first."  "  Apostasy  "  (after  the 
Greek)  is  the  more  technical  word — the  apostasy  of  which  the  Tht  ssalonians  had  been  told. 
There  is,  particularly,  meant  falling  away  from  the  faith  of  Christ.  It  is  a  movement 
begun  by  those  who  have  been  within  the  Christian  circle,  and  who,  after  having  been 
advantaged  by  Christianity  in  outward  enlightenment  and  quickening,  have  ungratefully 
turned  away.  Or  the  movement  away  from  Christ  may  dishonourably  be  encouraged  by 
those  who  still  remain  within  the  Christian  circle,  but  have  lost  faith  in  the  distinctive 
teachings  of  Christianity.  The  name  of  "  apostate  "  has  been  given  to  the  Emperor  Julian 
for  his  signal  renunciation  of  Christianity,  but  it  is  a  name  which  belongs  to  every  one 
who  in  the  struggle  of  life  parts  with  his  early  Christian  convictions,  his  good  tradi- 
tions. Let  us  see  that  we  are  not,  in  the  smallest  degree,  contributing  to  the  move- 
ment away  from  Christ.  2.  The  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin.  "  And  the  man  of  sin 
be  revealed."  It  is  now  an  exploded  idea  that  the  man  of  sin  means  popery.  The 
principal  interpreters — Olshausen,  EUicott,  Alford,  Eadie — hold  to  the  idea  of  the  man 
of  sin  being  &  person.  He  is  supposed  to  be  the  last  and  worst  product  of  the  apostasy. 
He  is  a  caricature  of  Christ,  having  a  mystery,  and  revelation,  and  miracles,  and  claim 
of  divinity,  a  coming  and  preparation,  even  as  Christ  has.  He  is  as  inclusive  of  all 
the  bad  forms  of  humanity,  as  Christ  is  of  all  its  good  forms.  It  cannot  be  said  of  this 
most  unlovely  conception  that  it  has  the  similitude  of  truth.  It  cannot  be  dogmatically 
laid  down  as  a  matter  of  interpretation  that  the  man  ol  sin  is  a  person,  any  more  than 
the  restrainer  is  a  person.  The  designation  "  man  of  sin  "  points,  in  the  first  place,  to 
sin  as  the  essence  of  the  apostasy.  The  moving  a«ay  from  Christ  is  an  opposing 
of  the  Divine  authority.  The  designation  "  man  of  sin  "  points,  in  the  second  place, 
to  sin  as  working  under  human  (not  angelic)  conditions,  and,  taken  along  with  apostasy, 
points  especially  to  the  development  of  sin  in  human  history.  The  designation  "  man  of 
sin"points,  in  the  third  place,  to  this  historical  development,  not  as  actual, but  as  idealized. 
As  the  language,  "  0  man  of  Cod,"  is  a  call  to  consider  the  true  ideal  of  manhood,  so  the 
man  of  sin  may  he  viewed  as  the  ideal  of  the  development  of  sin  among  men.  In  so 
far  as  popery  is  after  this  ideal  may  it  be  said  to  be  the  man  of  sin.  In  so  far  as  any  of 
us  take  after  the  bad  ideal  of  manhood  may  it  be  said  to  us,"  0  man  of  sin!"  calling  us 
to  consider  what  we  are  following  after.  Let  us  see  that  we  do  not  in  the  least  merit 
the  designation.  Bjr  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin  is  to  be  understood  the  bringing 
out  of  the  real  nature  of  sin.  It  may  put  on  specious  forms,  but  it  is  essential  vile- 
ness ;  it  is  uglier  than  the  ugliest  of  creatures,  it  is  more  venomous  than  the  serpent,  it  is 
more  grovelling  than  the  earth-worm,  it  is  blacker  than  darkness.  And  in  the  working 
of  Providence  in  human  history,  it  is  intended  that  this  should  be,  with  accumulating 
evidence  and  unmistakably,  brought  out.  And  we  are  here  taught  that  there  cannot 
be  the  revelation  of  Christ  at  his  coming  until  all  that  is  evil  in  sin  has  been  brought 
out.  3.  The  son  of  perdition.  "  The  son  of  perdition."  The  common  Hebrew  form  is 
followed.  Sprung  from  perdition,  he  has  perdition  as  his  destiny.  The  designation 
marks  the  result  of  the  movement  away  from  Christ.  Every  such  movement  must 
prove  in  the  end  abortive.  How  many  of  those  movements  that  once  had  vitality  in 
them  have  already  ended  in  perdition !  The  designation  was  given  by  our  Lord  to  Judas 
Iscariot :  "And  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of  perdition."  And  it  is  certainly  not 
to  be  wondered  at  that  he  whose  apostasy  was  aggravated  by  the  proximity  in  which 
he  stood  to  Christ  should  strikingly  be  shown  in  his  suicidal  end  to  be  the  son  of 
perdition.  In  so  far  as  any  of  us  are  moving  away  from  Christ  we  are  placing  our 
paternity  in  perdition,  and  are  working  out  perdition  as  our  destiny.  Let  us,  then,  be 
warned  by  what  will  yet  be  seen  to  come  out  of  sin.    4.  The  opposer  of  Christ.  "  He  that 


40  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    ten.  u.  1— It. 

opposeth."  It  is  not  said, "  He  that  opposeth  Christ,"  but,  from  the  way  in  which  Christian 
thought  is  interwoven  with  the  whole  paragraph,  we  may  understand  that  to  be  the 
meaning.  We  may,  therefore,  regard  the  movement  as  described  by  the  designation 
"  antichrist "  with  which  John  supplies  us.  As  it  is  in  its  origin  a  movement  away 
from  Christ,  so  it  comes  to  have  the  character  of  being  directed  against  Christ.  It  is 
a  movement  in  which  advantages  gained  from  Christ  are  unworthily  used  against  him. 
As  it  is  the  object  of  God  in  the  Church  to  put  forward  Christ  for  the  acceptance  of 
men,  so  it  is  the  object  of  antichrist  to  draw  away  men  from  Christ.  Popery  is  anti- 
christ in  so  far  as  it  does  not  give  Christ  and  his  words  and  his  death  their  proper 
place  in  Christian  belief  and  life.  It  may  be  said  of  us  that  we  are  antichrist  in  so  far 
as  we  do  not  yield  ourselves  up  to  Christ,  and  do  not  to  our  utmost  ability  help  forward 
the  cause  of  Christ.  "  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me,  and  he  that  gathereth  not 
with  me  scattereth  abroad."  5.  The  deifier  of  self.  "  And  exalteth  himself  against  all 
that  is  called  God  or  that  is  worshipped ;  so  that  he  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God, 
setting  himself  forth  as  God."  There  is  strong  confirmation  here  of  the  doctrine  of 
Miiller,  that  all  sin  is  of  the  nature  of  selfishness.  Antichrist  is  selfishness  rising  to  the 
impious  height  of  self-deification.  He  raises  himself  above  and  against  him  who  is 
truly  called  God,  without  thereby  falling  into  idolatry ;  for  he  also  raises  himself  above 
and  against  those  that  have  only  the  name  of  gods,  and,  it  is  added  (going  beyond  the 
actually  named),  above  and  against  all  that  can  be  turned  into  an  object  of  worship. 
He  does  not,  therefore,  shut  out  the  sacred  sphere ;  rather  does  he  fill  it  with  himself. 
He  is  the  centre  of  all  wisdom,  power,  and  glory  for  which  worship  is  due.  The  startling 
language  is  that  he  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  setting  himself  forth  as  God.  There 
is  supposed  to  be  meant  a  session  in  the  actual  temple  in  Jerusalem  by  those  who, 
laying  undue  stress  upon  the  language  here,  regard  the  paragiaph  as  having  already 
received  its  fulfilment.  3ut  there  is  reference  to  the  actual  temple  only  by  way  of  illustra- 
tion. As  God  was  represented  as  sitting  between  the  cherubim,  requiring  the  adoration 
of  all  Israelites  (as  he  was  the  object  of  adoration  to  the  highest  intelligences),  so  anti- 
christ entertains  the  thought  of  divinity  and  strictly  requires  adoration.  While  in 
Christ's  consciousness  of  divinity  there  was  the  element  of  infinite  self-sacrifice,  in 
antichrist's  presumptuous  thought  of  divinity  there  is  only  the  element  of  utter 
selfishness.  We  are  not  to  think  here  merely  of  him  who  sits  in  the  Church  and 
arrogantly  wields  spiritual  power.  Rather  are  we  to  see  the  tendency  of  the  whole 
movement  away  from  Christ.  This  is  how  it  aims  at  expressing  itself.  This  is  the 
dreadful  interpretation  of  what  it  would  be  at.  And  it  is  true  of  us  all,  in  so  fur  as  we 
are  selfish,  that  we  are  aiming  at  making  a  temple  for  ourselves  in  which  to  sit  down 
and  to  require  adoration.  As  we  in  our  present  state  of  feeling  can  only  recoil  from  such 
self-deification,  let  us  beware  of  that  selfishness  which  is  at  the  heart  of  sin.  6.  The 
Thessalonians  reminded  of  former  teachings  on  the  above  points.  "  Remember  ye  not,  that, 
when  I  was  yet  with  you,  I  told  you  these  things  ? "  in  his  teachings  on  the  coming 
he  was  not  corrected  or  supplemented  by  recent  revelation.  He  had  occupied  the  same 
position  from  the  beginning;  such  is  undoubtedly  his  own  contention,  and  is  against 
the  contention  of  some  who  attribute  to  him  that  he  believed  that  he  would  live  to  see 
the  coming.  He  reminds  the  Thessalonians  here,  not  without  some  measure  of  blame, 
that  when  he  was  with  them  (and- he  singles  out  himself  in  making  this  statement)  he 
told  them  some  things  which  he  was  now  putting  down  in  Ins  letter. 

III.  The  restraining;  power.  1.  What  restrains  the  antichristian  manifestation. 
"  And  now  ye  know  that  which  restraineth,  to  the  end  that  he  may  be  revealed  in  his 
own  season."  This  was  another  point  on  which  he  had  given  them  information.  It  is 
left  indefinite  what  the  restraining  power  is.  The  prevailing  opinion,  as  expressed  by 
Ellicott,  is  "well-ordered  human  rule,  the  principles  of  legality  as  opposed  to  those  of 
lawlessness — of  which  the  Roman  empire  was  the  then  embodiment  and  manifestation." 
It  is  true  that  civil  rule  keeps  back  many  of  the  manifestations  of  evil.  The  civil  ruler 
is  a  terror  to  evil-doers.  If  men  were  allowed  to  give  vent  to  their  evil  passions  with- 
out dread  of  punishment,  this  world  would  be  a  pandemonium.  But,  at  the  same  time, 
it  is  true  that  the  worst  manifestations  of  evil,  of  proud  defiance  of  God,  of  bitter 
rancour  against  Christ  (which  are  chiefly  to  be  thought  of  in  connection  with  the  anti- 
christian movement),  are  those  with  which  the  civil  magistrate  has  little  to  do.  The 
condition  upon  which  these  manif  stations  depend  is  rather  the  increased  setting  forth 


oh.  ii.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANa  41 


of  Christ.  There  is  a  manifestation  of  good  going  forward,  as  well  as  •  manifestation  of 
evil.  It  must  yet  be  shown  in  human  history  that  there  is  an  essential  lovelinest 
belonging  to  the  Christian  life.  Many  Scriptures  promise  a  period  of  conquest  for  the 
Churchy  When  the  Church  extends  its  conquests  there  will  be  a  solidarity  of  influence 
on  the  side  of  Christ  of  which  no  adequate  conception  can  now  be  formed.  The  result 
of  that  will  be,  among  those  who  participate  in  the  antichristian  movement,  deepened 
hatred  against  Christ.  As  when  he  conquered  on  the  cross  there  was  a  calling  forth 
against  him  of  the  worst  elements  especially  of  superhuman  evil,  so  when  he  advances 
to  conquest  in  human  history  there  will  be  a  similar  calling  forth  of  the  worst  elements 
especially  of  human  evil.  The  time  when  evil  is  thus  powerfully  to  be  revealed  has 
been  fixed  by  God.  It  may  be  said  that  the  apostle  should,  according  to  the  inter- 
pretation, have  regarded  the  Christian  manifestation  as  coming  to  a  head.  But  it  was 
open  to  him  to  regard  it  under  a  special  aspect  as  that  which  in  its  yet  partial 
character  held  back  the  full  manifestation  of  antichrist.  2.  The  'present  working  of 
the  mystery  of  lawlessness.  "  For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  doth  already  work." 
"  Lawlessness,"  which  corresponds  to  "sin,"  formerly  used,  is  not  to  be  taken  as  favouring 
the  view  that  the  restraining  power  is  human  rule.  It  points  to  the  antichristian 
movement  as  characterized  by  a  disposition  to  cast  off  all  authority,  especially  the 
highest  authority.  The  stress  is  to  be  laid  on  "  mystery."  Evil  was  then  working,  and 
in  working  was  revealing  itself,  but  its  true  nature  as  opposition  to  Christ  was  largely 
concealed,  was  only  very  partially  revealed.  A  lurid  light  was  thrown  upon  it  by  the 
ten  great  persecutions  which,  under  the  Soman  emperors,  were  directed  against 
Christianity.  Light  is  thrown  upon  it  by  the  attacks  which  in  the  present  day  are 
made  upon  Christianity.  But  it  would  seem  that  we  have  not  seen  all  that  is  in  it  of 
apposition  to  Christ.  The  mystery  oi  lawlessness  still  works.  3.  The  removal  of  the 
restrainer.  "  Only  there  is  one  that  restraineth  now,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way. 
And  then  shall  be  revealed  the  lawless  one,  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  slay  with  the 
breath  of  his  mouth,  and  bring  to  nought  by  the  manifestation  of  his  coming." 
E.licott  regards  the  use  of  the  masculine  gender  as  a  realistic  touch,  by  which  what 
was  previously  expressed  by  the  more  abstract  "restraining  power"  is  now  represented 
as  concrete  and  personified.  It  is  strange  how  this  should  not  be  regarded  as  applying 
also  to  the  "lawless  one"  to  whom  the  restrainer  is  here  opposed.  If  the  restrainer  is 
human  rule,  then  his  removal  must  mean  the  upturning  (apparently  general)  of  human 
rule.  And  that  is  what  is  contemplated  by  some  as  the  conclusion  to  human  history. 
But  the  restrainer  being  "  Christianity  not  come  to  the  season  of  its  full  manifestation," 
his  removal  must  mean  the  arrival  of  that  season.  When  Christianity,  working  among 
the  multitudes  of  men,  brings  its  full  influence  to  bear  on  the  antichristian  movement, 
in  what  it  calls  forth  of  opposition,  that  movement  will  come  to  the  completeness  of  its 
exposure.  And  antichrist,  thus  morally  defeated,  eternally  disproved,  will  have  taken 
away  from  it  its  sphere  of  operation.  It  will  be  slain  with  the  breath  of  Christ's  mouth, 
and  brought  to  nought  by  the  manifestation  of  his  coming. 

IV.  The  lying  character  op  the  antichristian  movement.  1.  Lies  of  Satan. 
"  Even  he,  whose  coming  is  according  to  the  working  of  Satan  with  all  power  and  signs 
and  lying  wonders."  As  Satan  is  a  liar  and  the  father  of  lies,  so  the  antichristian 
movement  which  he  inspires  is  characterized  by  lying.  As  Christ  has  power  and 
signs  and  wonders  of  truth,  so  the  antichristian  movement  has  power  and  signs  and 
wonders  of  lying.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  Church  of  Rome  puts  forward  a  claim  of 
miracle-working,  which  helps  it  to  preserve  its  influence  over  minds,  but  which  it 
cannot  establish.  The  power  and  signs  and  wonders  by  which  men  are  apt  to  bs  deluded 
now  are  more  of  an  intellectual  nature.  It  is  objected  to  Christianity  that  the  miracles 
with  which  it  is  bound  up  are  shown  by  science  to  be  impossible.  It  is  objected  that 
it  presents  too  severe  a  view  of  our  human  condition,  in  representing  us  as  standing  in 
need  of  salvation.  It  is  objected  that  it  presents  too  severe  a  view  of  the  character  of 
God,  in  representing  him  as  punishing  sin  in  Christ.  It  is  objected  that  it  presents  too 
severe  a  view  of  human  duty,  in  calling  upon  us  to  forsake  all  and  follow  Christ. 
When  these  objections  are  powerfully  presented,  and  so  as  to  have  the  appearance  of 
saving  the  character  of  God  from  aspersions,  there  may  be  the  effcet,  which  false 
miracles  have  often  had,  of  men  being  deluded.  2.  Lies  of  Satan  leading  to  unrigMeons- 
nets.     "With  all  deceit  of  unrighteousness."     When  men  entertain  false  views, 


42  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  ii.  1—17 

especially  of  the  character  of  God,  there  is  an  easy  transition  to  unrighteousness.  Thera 
are  many  ways  in  which  they  can  persuade  themselves,  that  they  may  exercise  liberty 
in  their  manner  of  living.  They  do  not  need  to  pray  to  God  ;  they  do  not  need  to  read 
God's  Book  ;  they  do  not  need  to  keep  God's  day  ;  they  do  not  need  to  be  strictly 
honourable  in  their  transactions  ;  tliey  do  not  need  to  make  sacrifices  for  others.  It  is 
enough  that  they  keep  up  an  appearance  of  probity  and  purity,  and,  it  may  be,  of 
religion,  before  men.  They  can  leave  all  their  failings  to  the  general  mercy  of  God. 
3.  Unrighteousness  leading  to  destruction.  "For  them  that  are  perishing."  Prom 
unrighteousness  there  is  a  necessary,  though,  it  may  not  be,  an  immediate,  transition  to 
destruction.  When  men  do  not  observe  the  rules  which  are  laid  down  for  them  by 
God,  they  are  contending  with  God,  and,  contending  with  God,  they  cannot  in  the  end 
succeed ;  for  God  is  stronger  than  they.  There  were  those  who  were  perishing  in  their 
unrighteousness  in  Paul's  day.  And  there  are  still  those  who  seem  to  be  perishing 
in  their  unrighteousness.  4.  The  just  dealing  of  God.  (1)  What  those  who  are  in 
the  antichristian  movement  reject.  "Because  they  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth, 
that  they  might  be  saved."  The  apostle  uolds  that  it  was  their  own  fault  if- they 
were  perishing.  And,  in  doing  so,  he  brings  forward  very  precious  truth.  God  has 
in  view  our  salvation.  He  willeth  that  all  men  should  be  saved,  and  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth.  For  this  end  he  makes  us  the  offer,  not  of  the  truth,  but 
of  the  disposition  which  is  necessary  for  finding  it — the  love  of  the  truth.  Of  all 
dispositions  it  is  that  which  is  most  needed  to  begin  with.  It  is  that  wlich  is 
needed  against  the  deceitfulness  of  the  heart.  It  is  that  which  is  needed  against 
the  delusive  lies  of  Satan.  If  we  accept  of  the  love  of  the  truth,  if  we  have  the  dis- 
position to  know  the  truth  about  ourselves,  and  to  follow  the  Divine  leading — and 
God  promises  us  this  disposition — then  we  shall  certainly  be  led  on  o  salvation.  But  if 
we  do  not  accept  of  ihe  love  of  the  truth,  if  we  have  the  disposition  to  flatter  ourselves, 
and  to  follow  some  ignis fatuus  of  our  own  imagination — and  that  is  only  too  natural  to 
us — we  shall  as  certainly  he  led  on  to  destruction.  (2)  What  they  induce.  "  And  for 
thip  cause  God  sendeth  tliem  a  working  of  error,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie :  that  they 
all  might  be  judged  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  righteousness." 
Receiving  not  the  truth,  it  was  not  with  them  as  though  the  offer  had  not  been  made 
to  them.  There  was  induced  a  state  of  judicial  blindness.  As  it  was  induced  in  con- 
nection with  the  Divine  offer  which  was  refused,  and  in  accordance  with  the  Divine 
laws  in  their  nature,  it  could  be  attributed  to  God.  It  could  be  said  that  God 
sent  them  a  working  of  error,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie.  Christianity  is  the 
most  reasonable,  most  beautiful  thing  in  existence.  But  when  men  are  in  a  state  of 
judicial  blindness,  they  do  not  see  its  reasonableness  and  beauty  ;  they  believe  men 
who  lie  about  it,  and  treat  it  with  indifference,  or  disdain,  or  hatred.  This  can  only 
lead  on  to  their  being  judged  and  condemned,  the  ground  of  their  condemnation 
being  their  not  believing  the  truth  especially  about  Christ,  but  taking  pleasure  in 
unrighteousness.  Let  us  see,  then,  that  we  accept  the  great  offer  from  God  of  veracity, 
of  love  for  the  truth.  Let  us  be  willing  to  take  a  truthful  view  of  things ;  not  taking 
darkness  for  light,  and  evil  for  good.  Let  us  be  willing  to  follow  the  Divine  leading. 
Let  us  especially  be  open  toward  Christ — toward  the  efficacy  of  his  blood,  tcward 
the  convincing  power  of  his  teachings,  toward  the  enjoyment  of  his  fellowship. 
And,  if  the  antichristian  manifestation  goes  forward  around  us,  let  us  be  all  the  more 
decided  on  the  side  of  Christ. — R.  F. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — Exhortation  to  steadfastness.  I.  How  grounded.  1.  The  election 
of  the  Thessalonians.  "  But  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  to  God  alway  for  you,  brethren 
beloved  of  the  Lord,  for  that  God  chose  you  from  the  beginning  unto  salvation."  This 
is  another  overflowing  of  gratitude  for  the  Thessalonians,  who  are  described  not,  as  in 
1  Thess.  i.  4,  as  "  brethren  beloved  of  God,"  but  as  "brethren  beloved  of  the  Lord,"  i.e. 
sharing  with  Paul  and  his  colleagues  iu  the  special  love  and  care  of  him  who  presides 
over  the  brotherhood.  There  is  the  same  inward  binding  that  there  was  before  (ch.  i.  3) 
to  give  thanks  to  God,  and  to  give  thanks  to  God  alway.  What  gave  perpetual  matter 
of  thanksgiving,  as  in  1  Thess.  i.  4,  was  the  election  of  the  Thessalonians.  There  is  not 
brought  in  here,  as  there  is  there,  their  being  chosen  out  of  a  condition  of  sin,  but  it  is 
implied  in  their  being  chosen  unto  a  condition  of  salvation.    They  had  been  chosen  from 


oh.  ij.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  43 

the  beginning,  i.e.  from  eternity.  When  God  contemplated  the  creation  of  a  race  of 
men,  and  contemplated  at  the  same  time  the  incursion  of  evil  into  human  nature  and 
human  history,  he  also  contemplated  human  salvation.  It  was  also  within  the  Divine 
plan  (going  out  into  all  particulars)  that  the  Thessalonians  among  others  should  be 
saved.  2.  Means  of  the  realization  of  their  election.  (1)  Inward  means,  (a)  From  the 
Spirit.  "In  sanctification  of  the  Spirit."  Precedence  is  naturally  given  to  ihe  work 
of  the  Spirit.  For  we  must  feel  that,  if  God  had  not  approached  us  first,  we  never 
should  have  approached  him.  The  work  of  the  Spirit,  from  beginning  to  end,  is  a 
work  of  sanctification.  It  is  a  saving  work,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  reclamation  of  our 
nature  from  unholy  uses.  On  the  Positive  side  it  i3  the  fitting  our  nature  for  Divine 
uses.  As  the  Spirit  is  the  Agent  of  our  sanctification,  his  all-sufficient  help  must  be 
entirely  depended  upon.  (6)  From  themselves.  "  And  belief  of  the  truth."  In  election 
we  are  responsible  for  our  state  of  mind.  The  Spirit  works  on  our  mind  through  the 
truth.  We  may  think  of  the  truth  that  God  has  provided  salvation  for  us.  We 
may  also  think  of  the  truth  that  God  (according  to  ver.  10)  has  made  us  the  offer 
of  the  love  of  the  truth.  We  may  further  think  of  the  Divine  ideal  to  which  our  life 
is  to  be  brought  up.  The  Spirit  has  sovereign  power  in  the  presentation  of  truth  to 
the  mind;  and  what  we  have  to  do  is  to  be  receptive,  to  offer  no  obstacle  to  his 
presentation  of  the  truth.  And  we  are  sanctified  only  in  so  far  as  we  have  received 
the  truth  into  us.  (2)  Outward  means.  "Whereunto  he  called  you  through  our 
gospel."  The  gospel  is  especially  the  offer  of  salvation  on  the  ground  of  Christ's 
death.  It  was  their  gospel,  as  that  in  connection  with  which  they  served  God.  There 
was  Divine  sovereignty  in  the  Thessalonians  being  favoured  with  the  gi-s  el.  It  was 
by  circumstances  over  which  they  had  no  control  that  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy 
were  sent  to  Thessalonica.  These  servants  of  Christ  stood  forward  and  preached  the 
gospel  to  them,  and  it  was  when  they  received  it  as  a  message  from  God  that  they 
were  called  to  salvation.  From  that  point  their  calling  dated.  There  it  added  the 
outward  aspect  of  the  salvation  to  which  they  were  called.  "  To  the  obtaining  of  the 
glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  This  is  characteristic  of  the  Epistle.  The  glory  b> 
which  we  are  called  is  the  glory  which  is  possessed  by  Christ,  and  which  he,  as  sove- 
reign Dispenser,  is  to  make  our  possession.  We  are  to  be  glorified  with  nothing  less 
than  the  glory  of  Christ.  It  will  be  seen  that  God,  in  electing,  has  in  contemplation 
all  the  means  of  the  election  being  realized.  We  may  assure  ourselves  of  belonging 
to  the  number  of  the  elect,  in  so  far  as  we  have  evidence  of  our  election  in  our 
sanctification. 

II.  How  put.  "  Pi  i  then,  brethren,  stand  fast,  and  hold  the  traditions  which  ye 
were  taught,  whether  by  word,  or  Epistle  of  ours."  Election  contemplating  the  means 
of  its  realization  in  faith,  it  is  not  improper  to  found  upon  election  an  exhortation  to 
steadfastness.  They  had  taken  up  their  Christian  position.  Attempts  would  be  made 
in  the  way  of  persecution  to  move  them  away  from  their  position.  The  ill-grounded 
expectation  of  the  immediate  coming  was  fraught  with  perils  to  them.  It  was  already 
having  a  bad  effect  upon  some  in  making  them  idle.  It  would  be  trying,  to  think  thai 
it  was  well  grounded  and  not  to  have  it  realized.  It  would  even  be  trying,  to  know 
that  it  was  ill  grounded  and  to  have  to  give  it  up.  There  would  be  danger  of  religious 
excitement  being-  followed  by  reaction.  Let  them  beware,  then,  of  apostatizing;  let 
them  stand  fast.  The  way  in  which  they  were  to  stand  fast  was  by  holding  fast  the 
traditions.  By  the  "  traditions"  we  are  to  understand  the  truths  handed  to  men.  For 
instance,  there  was  the  revelation  which  was  necessary  for  the  stablishing  of  the 
Thessalonians,  that  there  was  to  be  an  apostasy  before  the  corning  of  Christ.  In  the 
traditions  they  had  been  instructed  both  orally  and  by  writing.  We  are  limited  tn 
the  latter  mode  of  instruction.  What  are  known  as  ecclesiastical  traditions  have 
not  independent  authority,  but  have  to  be  tested  by  the  written  Word.  All  our  oral 
instruction  has  to  be  founded  upon  the  written  Word.  By  being  in  writing,  the  truths 
handed  to  us  are  preserved  from  corruption.  We  know  that  we  have  them  in  the 
form  in  which  God  wishes  us  to  have  them.  It  is  difficult  to  escape  the  influence  ol 
traditional  interpretation.  Yet  there  is  always  the  opportunity  of  a  true  interp'  etation, 
while  we  have  the  text  as  it  was  left  by  inspired  men.  The  written  Word  is  one 
of  th«  great  boons  conferred  on  men.  It  is  a  great  advantage  to  a  child  that  he  ha^ 
not  everything  to  learn  for  himself,  but  has  the  benefit  of  the  experience  of  his  parents. 


44  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  il  1—1?, 

So  it  is  a  great  advantage  to  us,  that  we  are  not  left  to  our  own  childish  and  foolish 
thoughts,  but  that  we  have  the  written  instructions  of  our  heavenly  Father.  It  is  hy 
holding  to  these  written  instructions,  as  an  unchanging  element  in  the  midst  of  all 
the  tests  to  which  we  are  subjected,  in  the  midst  of  all  the  temptations  to  which  we 
are  exposed,  that  we  shall  be  enabled  valiantly  to  maintain  our  Christian  position. 

III.  How  followed  up.  Invocation  of  the  Divine  blessing.  1.  How  God  is  invoked. 
(1)  In  the  Second  Person.  "  Now  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself."  From  evangelical 
activity  there  is  a  rise  first  to  the  Mediator  and  lordly  Dispenser  of  blessings  in  the 
Church.  After  the  preachers  have  done  their  best  for  the  Thessalonians,  they  have 
the  painful  consciousness  left  that  they  are  impotent  in  themselves.  At  Corinth  Paul 
planted,  Apollos  watered,  but  God  gave  the  increase.  So  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy, 
feeling  that  they,  in  speaking  and  writing  to  the  Thessalonians,  were  only  held  by  him 
who  holds  the  seven  stars  in  his  right  hand,  implore  his  help  to  make  their  activity 
successful.  "  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  accomplish  what  we  are  aiming  at  for 
them.  Let  his  almighty  efficacy  be  communicated  through  our  feeble  instrumentality." 
If  we  would  do  any  good  to  any  in  whom  we  are  interested,  Christ  must  do  it  for  us. 
His  high  -priestly  service  must  be  recognized  by  us.  Therefore  let  us  ever  rise  above 
our  mere  wishing  and  striving  for  others  to  him  who  can  make  our  wishing  and 
striving  effectual.  (2)  In  the  First  Person,  (a)  Sis  fatherhood.  "  And  God  our 
Father."  From  evangelical  activity  there  is  a  rise,  through  the  Mediator,  to  him  who 
is  the  Final  Reason  and  Contriver  of  redemption.  We  have  some  influence  with  God 
when  we  can  call  him  our  Father.  We  naturally  expect  to  have  more  influence  with 
a  friend  than  with  a  stranger.  We  can  appeal  to  him  as  a  friend.  We  can,  if  need 
be,  intercede  on  the  score  of  friendship  and  long  acquaintance.  So  we  can  appeal 
to  God  as  our  Father,  to  bless  not  only  ourselves  but  others.  And,  should  every  other 
appeal  fail,  surely  this  shall  not  fail.  When  the  cry  comes  up  on  behalf  of  his  needy 
children,  "  Our  Father,  wilt  thou  not  bless  ?"  surely  he  will  not  turn  away  his  ear.  (b) 
Wherein  it  was  manifested.  "  Which  loved  us."  This  is  timed  in  the  past,  and  calls 
up  the  great  act  of  love — the  gift  of  the  Son.  Our  Father,  who  gave  his  Son  for  us. 
We  can  behold  in  this  how  Gcd  can  love.  Some  would  represent  it  as  very  un- 
fatherly.  But,  apart  from  the  Son's  unforced  consent,  there  is  this  consideration,  that, 
where  there  is  true  fatherly  feeling,  it  is  not  more  easy  to  sacrifice  a  son  than  to 
sacrifice  one's  self.  David  felt  this  when  he  uttered  his  lamentation  over  Absalom : 
"  Would  God  I  had  died  for  thee,  0  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son ! "  We  must  hold  that, 
loving  the  Son  infinitely,  the  Father  could  as  well  have  sacrificed  himself  as  his 
Son.  The  marvel  and  mystery  is,  that,  loving  his  Son  infinitely,  he  could  be  moved 
to  sacrifice  him  for  us  his  undeserving  creatures.  But  surely  by  this  act  of  devotion 
the  love  of  God  for  us  is  placed  for  ever  beyond  all  doubt.  In  presence  of  the  cross, 
to  doubt,  or  to  act  as  though  we  doubted,  that  God  loves  us,  is  doing  him  the  most 
glaring  injustice,  (c)  What  it  obtained  for  us.  "And  gave  us  eternal  comfort." 
There  is  no  hiding  it,  that  it  is  comfort  that  we  all  need.  There  is  an  evil  heart,  to 
keep  us  from  being  happy.  It  gives  rise  to  slavish  fear  of  God  and  forebodings  oi 
judgment.  There  is  also  an  evil  world,  which  alone  is  sufficient  to  keep  us  from  being 
perfectly  happy.  It  is  an  evil  world,  where  there  is  exposure  to  poverty,  to  sickness, 
to  bereavement,  to  death.  It  is  an  evil  world,  where,  with  sensitive  spirits,  we  have  to 
look  forth  on  so  much  sin  and  wretchedness.  Where,  then,  is  the  comfort?  There 
is  no  real  comfort  for  a  guilty  conscience  in  ignorance  or  distraction.  It  is  unsub- 
stantial comfort,  to  know  that  our  suffering  is  common.  There  is  some  substantial 
comfort  in  the  sympathy  of  our  fellow-men,  but  it  is  variable.  We  may  not  find 
friends  all  that  we  would  desire  them  to  be  to  us.  Those  by  whom  we  are  most 
comforted  may  be  taken  away,  and  we  have  to  be  comforted  for  their  loss.  But  there 
is  comfort  provided  by  eternal  love,  and  comfort  that  is  eternal  in  its  nature.  There 
is  comfort  in  knowing  that  our  great  Substitute  has  made  full  satisfaction  for  our 
sin.  There  is  comfort  in  knowing  that  we  are  clasped  to  the  heart  of  the  everlasting 
Father.  That  is  comfort  which  is  neither  deceitful  nor  fleeting.  It  is  sufficient  for 
us  amid  all  the  cares  of  life.  It  is'  independent  of  all  contingencies.  "And  good 
hope."  Comfort  refers  to  time  present ;  *hope  refers  to  time  future.  Beyond  all  that 
we  have  of  good  and  of  comfort  under  evil,  there  is  hope.  And  what  is  this  hope  ? 
It  is  the  hope  of  our  real  joys  being  perfected,  of  our  being  delivered  from  the  plague 


ch.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  46 

of  an  evil  heart  and  the  burden  of  an  evil  world,  of  our  being  placed  where  there 
will  be  no  more  need  of  comfort — in  the  presence  of  the  eternal  Love.  It  is  also  a  good 
hope,  in  its  being  well  founded — not  founded  on  our  own  thoughts,  but  founded  on 
the  character  and  work  and  promise  of  God.  It  is  a  hope  which  is  even  now  good 
in  its  cheering  influence  upon  our  hearts,  (d)  Obtained  without  deserving  of  ours. 
"  Through  grace."  The  comfort  is  not  self-created  ;  we  have  had  nothing  to  do  with 
the  procui  ing  of  it.  But,  seeing  it  has  been  graciously  provided  for  us  by  eternal 
Love,  we  have  good  reason  for  taking  it  in  the  whole  benefit  into  our  hearts.  The 
hope  is  one  which  we  could  not  have  dared  to  cherish  of  ourselves.  It  is  far  beyond 
anything  that  we  could  have  thought  of.  But  we  cannot  limit  the  grace  of  God. 
If  it  is  his  good  pleasure  to  give  us  this  hope,  we  have  good  reason  for  cherishing  it. 
2.  For  what  end  Odd  is  invoked.  (1)  To  bless  the  Tlv  ssalonians  with  comfort. 
"Comfort  your  hearts."  There  is  another  incidental  proof  here  of  the  Divinity  of 
our  Lord  in  the  use  of  a  singular  verb,  while  both  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  God  our 
Father  are  ihe  subject.  The  hearts  of  the  Thessalonians  were  full  of  hopes  and  fears  in 
view  of  the  coming  which  was  thought  to  be  imminent ;  comfort  is,  therefore,  invoked 
for  their  hearts.  It  cannot  but  be  congenial  to  God  to  comfort  the  Church.  "  Comfort 
ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  God.  Speak  ye  comfoitably  to  Jerusalem,  and 
cry  unto  her,  that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that  her  iniquity  is  pardoned :  for  she 
hath  received  of  the  Lord's  hand  double  for  all  her  sins."  Having  provided  the  comfort 
in  Christ,  he  must  best  know  how,  through  Christ,  to  apply  it  to  our  need.  (2) 
To  bless  them  also  with  stability.  "  And  stablish  them."  Comfort  is  invoked  partly 
with  a  view  to  stability.  When  we  are  uncomforted  we  are  unstable  as  water.  Our 
energies  are  relaxed,  and  we  are  unfitted  for  our  work.  Sorrow  is  weakness,  but 
comfort  is  strength.  Double  sphere  in  which  stability  is  invoked/or  them,  (a)  Work. 
"  In  every  good  work."  It  was  not  unnecessary  that  they  should  be  reminded  that 
they  were  called  to  work,  even  to  work  with  their  hands.  God  grant  them  all  the 
good  elements  which  belong  to  work.  Let  the  simplest  work  be  done  honestly.  Let 
not  their  works  "  with  self  be  soiled."  Let  them  be  done  unto  the  glory  of  God. 
In  these,  and  in  all  the  elements  of  good  work,  let  them  be  confirmed.  (i)  Word. 
"  And  word."  Good  speaking  is  even  more  difficult  than  good  acting.  "  If  any  man 
offend  not  in  word,  the  same  is  a  perfect  man."  God  grant  them  all  the  good  elements 
which  belong  to  speaking.  Let  every  word  be  characterized  by  truthfulness.  Let  it 
also  have  fitness ;  for  "  a  word  fitly  spoken  is  like  apples  of  gold  in  pictures  of 
silver."  Let  it  also  have  who'esomeness,  and  not  be  like  bad  fruit.  Let  it  breathe 
kindliness.  Let  it  breathe  loyalty  to  Christ.  In  these,  and  in  all  the  elements  of  good 
speaking,  let  them  be  confirmed. — B.  F. 

Vera.  1,  2. — A  great  delusion.  One  object,  perhaps  the  principal  object,  of  this 
Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  following  as  it  does  so  closely  upon  the  First 
Epistle,  is  to  correct  a  disturbing  error  that  was  obtaining  some  considerable  footing 
among  the  Macedonian  Christians. 

I.  The  great  delusion.  The  First  Epistle  contains  repeated  references  to  an 
expectation  of  the  second  advent  of  Christ  which  was  evidently  very  strong  in  the 
Thessalonian  Church.  The  wish  is  father  to  the  thought.  From  expecting  "  the  day 
of  the  Lord  "  to  arrive  at  any  moment,  some  had  been  led,  on  most  insufficient  evidence, 
to  ask  whether  it  had  not  already  come.  The  great  delusion  was  that  ''  the  day  of  th« 
Lord  is  now  present."  It  is  not  likely  that  any  supposed  Christ  to  have  come,  though 
in  an  invisible  way,  and  in  a  different  manner  from  which  it  was  expected,  or  that  they 
thought  he  might  have  come  to  another  place,  unseen  and  lmknown  to  the  Churches  of 
northern  Greece.  What  they  were  inclined  to  think  seems  to  have  been  that  the  new 
era  in  which  Christ  was  to  appear  had  already  dawned,  though  he  himself  had  not  yet 
come.  Similar  is  the  delusion  of  any  who  suppose  that  the  day  of  grace  is  ever  and 
the  time  of  judgment  come,  or  that  of  those  who  think  they  have  got  into  a  new  dis- 
pensation beyond  the  dispensation  of  the  New  Testament. 

II.  The  sources  of  the  delusion.  1.  Latter-day  prophecy.  The  expression 
"either  by  spirit"  seems  to  refer  to  the  supposed  inspiration  of  Christian  prophets. 
St.  Paul  had  previously  warned  his  friends  to  prove  all  things,  while  not  quenching  the 
Spirit  by  despising  prophesyings  (1  Thess.  v.   19  —21).    We  must  beware  of  self- 


46        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE   TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  ii.  1—17. 

deluded  fanatics  as  well  as  of  deliberate  deceivers.  2.  False  apostolical  tradition. 
"  By  word  "  probably  means  by  reported  word  of  St.  Paul,  which  word,  however,  never 
really  came  from  him.  Thus  early  were  false  traditions  afloat.  See  the  mistaken 
tradition  about  St.  John  (John  xxi.  23).  If  these  erroneous  traditions  were  current 
during  the  lifetime  of  the  apostles,  how  can  we  accept  so-called  "apostolic  tradition" 
as  an  authority  ?  3.  A  forged  Epistle.  The  mistake  could  scarcely  have  arisen  from 
our  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  since  that  Epistle  referred  to  the  great  day  as 
future,  while  the  error  made  it  present.  It  is  important  to  ascertain  the  authenticity 
of  the  books  of  Scripture. 

III.  The  danger  of  the  delusion.  St.  Paul  warns  against  it  as  something  to  be 
carefully  avoided.  Many  evils  attached  to  it.  1.  Erroneous  views.  These  are  bad 
in  themselves,  as  true  views  are  desirable  on  their  own  account.  The  soul  suffers  for 
want  of  truth  as  the  body  for  want  of  light.  2.  Dishonouring  conceptions  of  the  second 
advent.  If  the  day  were  already  come,  where  was  the  glory,  the  judgment,  the  rectifi- 
cation of  all  things?  False  doctrines  dishonour  Christ  even  when  they  are  meant  to 
glorify  him.  3.  Confusion  of  conduct.  Such  a  delusion  as  that  which  was  creeping 
into  the  Thessalonian  Church  would  disarrange  all  practical  life.  Delusions  about  the 
second  advent  distract  attention  from  sober  Christian  work. 

IV.  The  warning  against  the  delusion.  1.  Form  no  hasty  opinion.  "  Be  not 
quickly  shaken,"  etc.  Specious  arguments  should  be  examined  at  leisure  before  they 
are  adopted.  2.  Do  not  permit  novel  teaching  to  give  distress.  If  the  heart  is  well 
settled  in  Christian  truth,  though  the  mind  should  be  open  to  receive  new  light,  no 
distress  or  disturbance  need  be  felt.  3.  Beware  of  deception.  "  Let  no  man  beguile 
you."  Christians  should  be  watchful  and  "wise  as  serpents,*'  each  having  his  own 
independent  convictions. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  3. — The  man  of  sin.  The  man  of  sin  and  his  awful  character  and  career,  here 
described  by  St.  Paul,  are  subjects  of  such  deep  and  dreadful  mystery,  that  we  may 
well  take  warning  from  the  intricate  confusion  of  the  interpretations  jut  forth  by  those 
people  who  profess  to  expound  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  and  content  ourselves  with 
accepting  the  prediction  as  it  stands  without  attempting  to  identify  it  with  particular 
historical  events.  Though  some  of  its  terms  apply  well  to  certain  explanations,  and 
others  to  different  explanations,  no  explanation  has  yet  been  furnished  which  fairly  and 
without  any  straining  of  words  covers  the  whole  of  them.  From  Nero  to  the  pope,  from 
the  days  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  to  those  of  the  yet  future  millennium,  certain  odious 
persons  and  systems  have  been  selected  for  a  realization  of  the  prophecy.  Leaving 
these  dubious  identifications,  let  us  look  at  the  main  outlines  of  the  picture. 

I.  There  is  a  man  of  sin.  Whether  he  lived  in  the  past  or  has  yet  to  appear,  a 
man  to  whom  this  awful  name  belongs  is  described  in  inspired  Scripture.  The  Bible 
does  not  ignore  the  awful  depths  of  human  wickedness.  It  is  dreadfully  significant 
that  this  evil  being  is  a  man,  not  a  devil.  Humanity,  which  was  created  in  the  image 
of  God  and  intended  to  be  a  temple  of  God,  may  b  •  degraded  into  the  image  of  Satan 
and  become  a  haunt  of  iniquity.  As  good  works  through  human  sympathies,  so  does 
evil.  A  bad  man  is  more  dangerous  than  a  fallen  angel,  because  he  is  nearer  to  his 
fellow-men. 

II.  The  man  of  bin  follows  an  apostasy.  1.  Spiritual  apostasy  leads  a  man  to 
moral  corruption.  The  man  who  has  forsaken  Christ  is  tempted  to  fill  into  gross  sin. 
Faith  is  the  great  preservative  of  morals.  2.  Apostasy  lays  the  Church  open  to  attacks 
from  her  enemies.  The  "  man  of  sin  "  could  not  arise  before  the  Church  had  fallen,  nor 
if  he  had  appeared  could  he  have  had  any  power  against  a  faithful  Church. 

HI.  The  man  of  sin  precedes  the  second  advent  of  Christ.  It  was  a  mistake 
on  the  part  of  the  Thessalonian  Church  to  suppose  that  "  the  day  of  the  Lord "  had 
arrived,  because  the  dreadful  appearance  of  the  man  of  sin  which  was  to  precede  that 
day  had  not  yet  been  seen.  St.  Paul  warns  us  that  apostasy  and  the  frightful  life  of 
this  wicked  man — whoever  he  may  be — must  come  before  Christ  returns.  He  does 
not  encourage  us  to  look  for  a  gradual,  unbroken  progress  of  Christianity.  The  growth 
of  the  harvest  fruit  is  arrested  and  delayed  by  frost  and  storm.  Christ  even  wondered 
whether  he  should  find  any  faith  left  on  the  earth  at  his  return  (Luke  xviii.  8).  The 
glorious  consummation  of  all  things  to  which  the  Christian  looks  forward  is  not  to  be 


OH.n.  1— 17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         47 

expected  as  the  result  of  quiet  improvement  without  relapse.  Between  the  present  and 
that  "  great  Divine  event "  dark  chasms  of  iniquity  yawn.  Every  age  has  thought  it 
could  detect  signs  of  this  evil  in  its  midst.  So  the  unbelief  and  corruptions  of  our 
own  day  are  taken  by  some  to  be  "  signs."  Unhappily  the  language  of  the  apostle 
wains  us  to  expect  more  terribly  demonstrative  signs  than  any  yet  seen. 

IV.  The  appearance  op  the  man  op  sin  is  a  sign  of  the  approaching  advent  of 
Christ.  Here  is  some  encouragement  for  the  Church  to  endure  the  trials  of  the  darkest 
times.  These  times  are  to  usher  in  the  great  aud  glorious  day  of  the  Lord.  Evil,  when 
most  triumphant,  is  nearest  defeat.  Dreadful  as  may  be  its  transient  success,  it  will 
soon  be  swept  away.  When  the  horror  of  sin  is  blackest,  the  judgment  whioh  is  to 
sweep  it  away  is  nearest  at  hand.  Christ  will  come  again  when  he  will  be  most  needed. 
— W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  mystery  of  lawlessness.  The  exact,  objective  application  of  this 
prediction,  like  that  of  the  preceding  description,  is  not  easy  to  discover.  But  principles 
are  involved  which  are  susceptible  of  general  application. 

I.  There  is  a  mystery  op  lawlessness.  By  this  expression  the  apostle  probably 
means  a  mystery  the  character  of  which  is  lawless.  1.  We  may  expect  to  meet  with 
new  mysteries.  While  time  and  inquiry  resolve  some  mysteries,  they  bring  upon  us 
fresh  ones.  We  are  not  to  expect  to  be  able  to  understand  all  the  forces  and  influences 
with  which  we  are  surrounded.  It  is  enough  that  we  are  in  the  hands  of  God  who 
knows  all,  and  trusting  in  Christ  who  can  lead  us  safely  through  the  darkness.  2. 
New  mysteries  may  he  characterized  by  new  lawlessness.  The  answer  to  our  inquiries 
may  be  very  unsatisfactory  in  revealing  only  evil.  There  are  strange  novelties  which 
are  obscure  in  all  points  but  their  moral  character,  and  that  is  plainly  evil.  If  so,  we  may 
hope  for  no  good  from  them,  and  need  not  further  interest  ourselves  in  them.  3;  All 
lawlessness  is  mysterious.  How  did  it  originate?  How  is  its  existence  possible? 
Why  does  not  God  sweep  it  away  ?  These  questions  have  perplexed  men  in  all  ages. 
We  bow  before  them  in  helpless,  pained  wonder. 

II.  There  is  a  restraint  on  the  mystery  of  lawlessness.  1.  Its  full  power  is 
not  yet  revealed.  There  are  those  who  treat  all  sin  with  unbecoming  levity,  because 
they  do  not  yet  see  its  terrible  fruits.  They  are  playing  with  a  torpid  adder,  that  m»y 
awake  at  any  moment  and  inflict  a  fatal  wound.  No  one  knows  what  hidden  possi- 
bilities of  harm  lurk  in  the  deep  caverns  of  undeveloped  sin.  There  are  volcanoes  in 
the  hearts  of  some  quiet  men  which  may  burst  into  destructive  fires.  2.  Human 
means  may  be  used  to  restrain  the  mystery  of  lawlessness.  Government,  law,  society, 
healthy  habits  of  the  majority,  keep  it  down  for  a  time.  3.  Qod  holds  the  mystery  of 
lawlessness  in  check.  He  is  supreme  over  its  wildest  raging.  "  He  that  sitteth  in  the 
heavens  shall  laugh."     God  restrains  the  superabundant  wrath  of  man  (Ps.  lxxvi.  10). 

HI.  The  hidden  mystery  of  lawlessness  will  be  eevealed.  The  volcano  must 
break  into  eruption  some  day.  Evil  cannot  slumber  for  ever.  Hypocrisy  will  tire  of 
its  meek,  innocent  demeanour.  The  harvest  of  sin  will  have  to  be  reaped.  Let  not 
any  man  put  his  confidence  in  the  secretness  or  slowness  of  the  processes  of  evil. 
The  more  they  are  hidilen  now,  the  worse  will  be  the  appalling  outburst  of  them  when 
the  restraint  under  which  they  groan  at  present  is  released.  The  longer  the  wild 
horses  are  held  in  bj  the  leash,  the  fiercer  will  be  their  mad  gallop  when  they  break 


IV.  Christ  will  conquer  the  mystery  of  lawlessness.  Evil  will  not  long  be 
rampant.  One  fearful  rebellion  and  then  a  tremendous  defeat.  1.  Christ  is  to  be  the 
Conqueror  of  it.  He  came  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  We  could  not  effect  this 
great  work.  He,  our  Saviour,  does  it  for  us.  2.  Christ  is  to  come  again  for  this  object. 
When  the  mystery  is  revealed,  Christ's  "  manifestation  "  follows.  3.  Christ  conquers 
with  a  breath.  His  first  work  was  difficult,  involving  his  death.  His  last  work  will  be 
divinely  simple,  and  yet  sublimely  successful. — W.  P.  A. 

Vers.  .10 — 12. — The  love  of  the  truth.  The  reason  for  the  doom  of  those  who  are  to 
be  destroyed  at  the  second  coming  of  Christ  here  given,  is  that  they  do  not  receive  the 
love  of  the  truth. 

I.  God  expects  us  to  receive  the  love  or  the  truth.    1.  Truth  is  good  in 


18  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—17. 

itself.  Truth  is  to  the  soul  what  light  is  to  the  body.  It  is  natural  for  men  to  love  the 
day,  unnatural  for  them  to  shun  it.  In  a  right  and  healthy  state  we  should  love  truth 
simply  as  truth,  whatever  else  it  be.  2.  Christian  truth  is  peculiarly  attractive. 
Scientific  truth  is  beautiful,  philosophic  truth  is  valuable;  but  the  truth  of  the  gospel 
has  far  deeper  attractions,  because  it  contains  revelation  of  the  love  and  fatherhood  of 
God,  of  the  grace  and  goodness  of  Christ,  of  the  redemption  of  the  world,  of  the  way  of 
salvation,  of  the  heavenly  rest,  etc.  3.  Truth  should  be  welcomed  with  love.  We  cannot 
accept  it  to  any  advantage  until  we  love  it ;  for  (1)  love  opens  our  eyes  to  a  sympa- 
thetic understanding  of  it,  and  (2)  love  saves  us  from  a  cold,  barren  acceptance  of  it, 
and  helps  us  to  receive  it  profitably. 

IL  It  is  an  evil  heart  that  prevents  men  from  receiving  the  love  of  the 
tbuth.  St.  Paul  traces  back  the  bad  condition  of  those  who  reject  the  love  of  the 
truth  to  the  fact  that  they  "  had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness."  The  pleasures  of  sin 
cannot  exist  side  by  side  with  the  love  of  the  truth.  Evil  hates  the  light  (John  iii. 
19).  Moral  corruption  has  no  sympathy  for  the  lofty  thirst  for  truth  of  a  pure  soul. 
Hence  it  may  be  concluded  that  indifference  to  truth  is  a  sign  of  moral  evil.  The 
corrupt  life  is  a  false  life,  and  its  departure  from  truth  reveals  the  baseness  of  the 
character  beneath.  This  is  why  the  rejection  of  the  truth  is  culpable.  Intellectual 
doubt  is  of  quite  a  different  character.  Indeed,  it  often  arises  from  genuine  love  of 
truth,  while  self-satisfied  orthodoxy  is  often  quite  indifferent  to  verifiable  facts, 
preferring  respectable  error  to  painful  truth. 

III.  The  penalty  of  rejecting  the  love  of  the  truth  is  incapacity  to 
know  truth  from  error.  God  punishes  men  in  this  condition  by  sending  "  them  a 
working  of  error,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie."  This  is  an  awful  fate.  Truth  is  too 
precious  a  pearl  to  be  cast  before  swine.  They  who  do  not  love  it  shall  not  have  it. 
Liars  become  incapable  of  knowing  truth.  The  habit  of  indifference  to  truth  so  grows 
upon  some  people  that  the  whole  idea  of  truth  becomes  obscure  and  meaningless  to  them, 
and  they  ask  with  Pilate,  half  bewildered,  half  scornful,  "  What  is  truth?"  Is  not 
this  a  veritable  destruction — the  spiritual  eye  blinded  and  burnt  out  by  the  fires  of 
falsehood  and  unrighteousness;  the  highest  intellectual  faculty,  that  of  grasping  truth, 
killed  by  corruption  and  falsehood?  God  save  us  all  from  this  hideous  dooml — 
W.F.A. 

Vers.  13, 14. — The  Divine  work  of  salvation.  We  are  to  be  thankful  to  God  for  the 
happy  spiritual  prospects  of  our  fellow-Christians,  because  they  all  spring  from  his  good 
purpose  and  work.  The  most  striking  characteristic  of  the  description  before  us  is  its 
attributing  the  whole  process  from  beginning  to  end  to  the  will  and  action  of  God. 

L  The  beginning.  1.  An  initial  Divine  choice.  This  dates  back  to  the  dim  ages 
of  an  awful  antiquity.  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth.  In 
the  beginning  was  the  Word.  In  the  beginning  God  chose  his  people  for  himself. 
Salvation  is  no  after- thought  coming  in  to  redeem  the  failure  of  creation.  It  was  all 
planned  from  the  first.  When  God  made  man  he  foresaw  sin  and  determined  on 
redemption.  Kach  one  of  us  is  thought  of  by  God  from  the  first.  We  come  into  the 
world  to  fulfil  vocations  which  God  designed  for  us  when  he  first  planned  the  universe. 
2.  A  present  Divine  call.  The  choice  would  be  of  no  use  if  it  were  not  made  known  to 
us.  But  when  the  time  for  executing  God's  great  design  has  arrived,  he  makes  it 
euffjciently  known  for 'us  to  be  able  to  follow  it.  He  calls  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel. 
The  gospel,  then,  is  an  invitation.  It  is  good  news,  but  only  for  those  who  will  accept 
the  invitation.  This  new  gospel  came  to  bid  men  fulfil  an  ancient  destiny.  The  latest 
work  accomplishes  the  oldest  thought  of  God. 

II.  The  process.  1.  Sanctification  of  the  Spirit.  This  is  the  Divine  side  of  the 
process.  Prior  to  it  is  the  great  atoning  work  of  Christ.  But  that  work  is  done  for  us 
that  we  may  receive  the  Spirit  of  God  as  its  fruit.  Now  we  are  looking  at  the  work 
of  God  in  us.  God  purifies  and  consecrates  his  people  by  an  inspiration  of  his  own 
Spirit.  No  safety  is  possible  to  the  guilty,  no  glory  to  the  unholy.  The  cleansing 
process  must  come  before  the  great  end  can  be  reached.  2.  Belief  of  the  truth.  This 
is  our  side  of  the  process.  It  is  useiws  for  us  to  wait  for  our  sanctification  and  for  the 
baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  to  produce  it.  It  will  not  come  without  out  active 
reception  of  it,    There  is  no  magic  about  the  process  of  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 


oh.  ri.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONTAN3.         49 

It  comes  on  certain  conditions  being  fulfilled  by  us.  (1)  Truth  is  the  vehicle  that 
conveys  it  into  our  hearts.  (2)  Faith  is  the  door  in  our  hearts  that  opens  to 
receive  it. 

III.  The  end.  1.  Salvation.  Take  this  word  in  the  largest,  roundest  sense,  as 
deliverance  from  all  evil.  It  is  painfully  true  that  in  our  greatest  joy  and  thankful- 
ness we  have  to  recollect  that  at  best  we  are  plucked  as  brands  from  the  burning.  No 
blessing  can  be  enjoyed  till  the  awful  ruin  into  which  our  souls  were  all  of  them 
sinking  through  our  great  and  dreadful  sin  has  been  stayed.  2.  Glory.  Salvation  is 
the  beginning  of  God's  work  in  us;  glory  is  the  completion  of  it.  We  can  have  no 
•.lory  while  we  are  in  the  mire  of  sin  and  wretchedness.  But  when  we  are  delivered, 
God  will  not  leave  us  like  drowning  men  on  a  barren  rock,  saved  from  present  destruc- 
tion indeed,  but  with  dreary  future  prospects.  He  will  not  have  ended  his  work  with 
us  till  he  has  exalted  us  into  the  region  of  his  own  glory. — W.  F.  A. 

Vers.  16,  17. — A  benediction.  I.  The  sources  of  the  benediction.  A  true 
benediction  is  more  than  an  expression  of  good  wishes.  It  is  a  prayer  by  one  who  has 
especial  weight  in  intercession,  althiugh  it  is  expressed  to  the  person  for  whom  it  is 
offered.  The  benediction  of  so  great  and  good  a  man  as  St.  Paul  is  of  great  value, 
because  the  "effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much."  But  the 
blessings  desired  by  the  apostle  are  not  given  by  him  any  more  than  the  blessings  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  to  their  children  were  given  by  the  patriarchs.  The  sources 
of  the  blessings  of  a  benediction  are  not  human  nor  earthly  at  all.  Here  they  are 
declared.  1.  The  personal  influence  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  strikingly  expressed  by 
the  reference  to  "our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself."  His  brotherhood  and  his  love  lead 
hinvto  bless  us.  His  Divinity,  his  goodness,  and  his  sacrifice  give  him  authority  in 
heaven.  In  his  own  right  he  blesses.  And  he  does  not  delegate  the  blessing.  He 
confers  it  himself.  2.  The  fatherhood  of  God.  Because  God  is  "  our  Father  "  we  may 
expect  blessings  from  him.  Fears  and  doub's  arise  from  partial  views  of  God,  and 
views  which  leave  out  of  account  his  great  fatherly  nature.  He  does  not  bless  as  a 
Master  paying  wages,  but  as  a  Father  dealing  affectionately  with  his  children. 

II.  The  assurances  op  the  bknediction.  Grounds  for  believing  that  God  will 
give  the  blessing  are  given  for  the  encouragement  of  faith.  1.  Love  in  the  past.  He 
has  revealed  his  character  by  his  providence,  and  he  has  proved  in  this  way  that  he 
loves  his  children.  But  a  parent's  love  is  distinguished  from  all  other  kinds  of  love  by 
its  permanence.  If  God  ever  did  love,  he  still  loves.  2.  Eternal  comfort.  This  we 
have  now  in  the  peace  of  forgiveness  and  the  rest  of  faith.  The  peace  is  such  that  the 
world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  The  rest  is  beneath  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock 
that  outlasts  even  the  seemingly  everlasting  hills.  3.  Hope  for  the  future.  God  has 
uttered  promises  and  encouraged  hopes.  We  cannot  believe  that  he  will  mock  the 
expectations  which  he  has  raised. 

III.  The  objects  of  the  benediction.  1.  Heart-comfort.  We  have  eternal  com- 
fort ;  nevertheless  we  need  more  comfort.  No  soul  is  yet  perfectly  at  rest.  Sorrow 
.listresses  the  most  trustful.  (1)  Observe  the  breadth  of  the  Divine  comfort.  We  may 
have  it  in  some  departments  of  life  and  yet  miss  it  in  others.  The  Greek  word 
parahlesis  has  a  wider,  fuller  meaning  than  our  word  "comfort."  It  stands  for  all 
help,  and  help  in  every  direction  is  what  our  souls  need.  (2)  Note  the  home  of  the 
Divine  comfort.  It  is  to  be  in  our  hearts.  Comfort  anywhere  else  is  vain.  Com- 
fortable houses,  clothes,  etc.,  leave  the  deepest  trouble  untouched.  The  heart  may  be 
on  a  rack  when  the  body  is  on  a  downy  couch.  God's  comfort  reaches  the  heart. 
2.  Stability  in  work  and  word.  We  must  not  stop  at  comfort.  We  are  consoled  in 
distress  that  we  may  be  free  and  strong  and  glad  for  service.  (1)  The  service  must 
come  from  the  heart.  "The  heart"  is  to  be  stablished  for  service.  (2)  It  must  be 
various  and  complete — "every  good  work."  (3)  It  must  extend  to  speech — "and 
word."  The  Scriptures  lay  great  stress  on  a  right  use  of  speech.  (4)  It  must  be 
steadfast.  This  is  the  end  of  the  benediction.  Eternal  comfort  must  be  balanced  by 
steadfast  faithfulness. — W.  F.  A. 


H.  THEgSALONIANi. 


6*  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cB.  H  1— It. 


EXCURSUS  ON  THE  MAN  OF  SIN.1 


This  is  one  of  the  moBt  remarkable  prophecies  in  the  New  Testament.  It  occurs  in 
the  writings  of  St.  Paul,  whose  practical  mind  constituted  him  rather  the  preacher  o( 
the  present  than  the  prophet  of  the  future.  There  is  an  obscurity  in  the  language 
which,  as  already  observed,  could  not  have  been  so  great  to  those  to  whom  the  apostle 
wrote,  for  he  had  previously  instructed  his  readers  in  the  nature  of  the  occurrence 
(ch.  ii.  6,  6) ;  but  our  ignorance  of  these  instructions  renders  the  passage  to  ua 
enigmatical  and  difficult  to  understand ;  and  perhaps,  also,  this  obscurity  is  increased 
by  reason  of  our  distance  from  the  time  when  the  apostle  wrote.  There  are  in  this 
prediction  several  points  requiring  consideration :  the  apostasy  or  falling  away  which 
was  secretly  working  even  in  the  apostle's  days;  a  withholding  or  restraining  influence 
which  prevented  its  open  manifestation  and  full  development ;  the  advent  of  the  man 
of  sin,  his  characteristics  and  final  doom.  We  shall,  first,  give  a  history  of  the  various 
opinions  concerning  this  subject  in  past  ages,  and  then  consider  those  views  which  are 
most  prevalent  in  our  days. 

The  following  is  a  literal  translation  of  the  passage,  in  accordance  with  the  exposi- 
tion given  in  the  foregoing  padres :  "  But  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  concerning  the 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  our  assembling  together  unto  him,  that  you  be 
not  soon  shaken  from  your  sober  mind,  nor  be  troubled,  neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  word, 
nor  by  epistle  as  from  us,  to  the  effect  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  imminent.2  Let  no 
man  deceive  you  by  any  means,  because  that  day  shall  not  come,  except  there  come 
the  apostasy  first,  and  the  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdition,  who  opposeth 
and  exalteth  himself  against  all  that  is  called  God,  or  is  an  object  of  worship ;  so  that 
he  sits  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God.  Remember  yon  not  that 
when  I  was  with  you,  I  told  you  these  things?  And  cow  you  know  what  restraineth, 
that  he  might  be  revealed  in  his  time.  For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  is  already 
working,  yet  only  until  he  that  restraineth  is  removed ; s  and  then  shall  the  lawless 
one  be  revealed,  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  slay  with  the  breath  of  his  mouth,  and 
annihilate  by  the  appearance  of  his  coming;  even  him  whose  coming  is  after  the 
working  of  Satan,  in  all  power  and  signs  and  wonders  of  falsehood,  and  in  all  deceit 
of  unrighteousness  for  them  that  perish,  because  they  receive  not  the  love  of  the  truth, 
that  they  might  be  saved.  And  for  this  cause  God  sends  to  them  the  working  of 
error,  that  they  might  believe  the  lie ;  that  they  might  be  judged  who  believed  not  the 
truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness." 

According  to  these  words,  this  much  is  evident — that  the  apostle  expected  a  falling 
away  from  the  purity  of  Christianity.  Nor  is  this  the  only  passage  where  St.  Paul 
alludes  to  such  a  declension  from  primitive  faith  and  holiness;  there  are  allusions  to 
it  in  his  other  Epistles,  but  especially  in  the  Pastoral  Epistles,  where  he  describes  the 
apostasy  of  the  latter  days :  "  Now  the  Spirit  speaketh  expressly,  that  in  the  latter 

1  This  excursus  is  chiefly  an  expansion  and  revision  of  a  dissertation  on  "  The  Man  of 
Sin  "  in  the  author's  work  entitled  '  Introduction  to  the  Pauline  Epistles.'  For  dissertations 
on  the  Man  of  Sin,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Alford's  '  Greek  Testament,'  vol.  iii.,  Prolegomena, 
pp.  55 — 68,  3rd  edit. ;  Eadie's  '  Commentary  on  the  Thessalonians,'  pp.  329 — 367 ;  Elliott's 
'Horts  Apocalypticse,'  vol.  iii.  pp.  91,  etc.,  5th  edit.;  Hurd,  'On  Prophecy,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  1, 
etc.,  4th  edit. ;  Jowett  on  the  '  Thessalonians,'  vol.  i  pp.  168 — 182,  1st  edit.,  pp.  178 — 194, 
2nd  edit.;  Lunemann's  'Briefe  an  die  Thessalonicher,'  pp.  214 — 229,  and  the  translation  of 
the  same,  pp.  222,  etc. ;  an  article  on  "  Antichrist"  by  Meyrick,  in  the  appendix  to  Smith's 
'  Dictionary  of  the  Bible?; '  Bishop  Newton's  '  Dissertation  on  St.  Paul's  Prophecy  of  the 
Man  of  Sin ; '  Biggenbach's  dissertation  in  the  Commentary  on  the  Thessalonians  in  Lange's 
<  Commentary ; '  and  Wordsworth's  '  Grenk  Testament,'  in  loco. 

*  Or  "is  present."    (See  Exposition.) 

*  Revised  Version,  "  For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  doth  already  work :  only  there  U  one 
that  restraineth  now,  until  ha  be  taken  ont  of  the  way"  (see  footnote  in  the  Revised 
Edition). 


OB.  n.  1— It.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  61 

times  some  shall  depart  from  the  faith,  giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits,  and  doctrines  of 
devils;  speaking  lies  in  hypocrisy;  having  their  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron; 
forbidding  to  marry,  and  commanding  to  abstain  from  meats,  which  God  hath  created 
to  be  received  with  thanksgiving  of  them  which  believe  and  know  the  truth"  (1  Tim. 
iv.  1 — 3).  So  also,  in  his  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy,  he  alludes  to  the  impending 
nature  of  this  period  of  apostasy — the  mystery  of  lawlessness  was  already  working: 
"This  know  also,  that  in  the  last  days  perilous  times  shall  come,"  or  rather,  "are 
present "  (2  Tim.  iii.  1 — 5).  And  St.  Peter  affirms  that  there  shall  arise  in  the  Church 
false  teachers,  who  shall  privily  "bring  in  damnable  heresies,  even  denying  the  Lord 
that  bought  them,  and  shall  bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction"  (2  Pet.  ii.  1); 
and  that  "in  the  last  days  there  shall  be  scoffers,  walking  after  their  lusts"  (2  Pet. 
iii.  2).  And  a  similar  declaration  is  made  by  St.  Jude :  "  Remember  ye  the  words 
which  were  spoken  before  of  the  apostles  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  how  that  they  told 
you  theio  should  be  mockers  in  the  last  time,  who  should  walk  after  their  own 
ungodly  lusts"  (Jude  17, 18).  And  our  Lord  himself,  in  his  eschatological  discourse, 
warned  his  disciples  that  there  should  arise  false  (Jhrists  and  false  prophets  (Matt. 
xxiv.  24)— a  declaration  which  probably  lies  at  the  root  of  all  similar  apocalyptic 
assertions.1  In  these  passages,  however,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  a  plurality  of  false 
teachers  is  asserted;  whereas,  in  our  passage,  they  are  concentrated  in  an  individual — 
the  Man  of  Sin. 

Especially  in  the  Epistles  of  St.  John — there  is  express  mention  of  Antichrist  of  a 
person  (or  persons)  who  is  the  opponent  of  Clirish.  It  is  only  in  these  Epistles  that 
the  word  occurs,  and  it  does  so  four  times :  "  Little  children,  it  is  the  last  time :  and  as 
ye  have  heard  that  [the]  Antichrist  shall  come,  even  now  there  are  many  Antichrists." 
"  Who  is  a  liar  but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  ?  He  is  Antichrist,  that 
denietb  the  Father  and  the  Son."  "Every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  come  in  the  flesh  is  not  of  God:  and  this  is  that  spirit  of  Antichrist,  whereof  ye 
have  heard  that  it  should  come;  and  even  now  already  is  it  in  the  world."  "For  many 
deceivers  are  entered  into  the  world,  who  confess  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the 
flesh.  This  is  a  deceiver  and  an  Antichrist"  (1  John  ii.  18,  22;  iv.  3;  2  John  7). 
Now,  the  Man  of  Sin  of  St.  Paul  has  been  identified  with  the  Antichrist  of  St.  John. 
They  agree  in  several  points:  in  both  he  is  described  as  an  individual,  whose  coming 
will  be  foreshadowed  by  many  forerunners;2  in  both  his  advent  is  future,  but  the  evil 
principle,  the  apostasy  or  spirit  of  Antichrist,  is  already  at  work  ;  and  in  both  there  is 
open  opposiiion  to  God  and  Christ.  It  is,  however,  to  be  observed  that  in  St.  John 
the  Antichvistian  error  is  more  positively  stated  as  consisting  in  the  denial  that  Jesus 
Christ  came  in  the  flesh, — accordingly,  as  Gnosticism,  which  we  know  was  already 
secretly  corrupting  the  Church ;  and  hence  the  reason  why  some  have  connected  the 
Man  of  Sin  with  the  errors  of  the  Gnostics,  whereas  it  does  not  appear  from  St.  Paul's 
words  that  the  characteristics  of  the  Gnostics  correspond  with  the  characteristics  of 
the  Man  of  Sin;  but;  on  the  other  hand,  the  denial  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  is 
common  to  both. 

It  would  far  exceed  the  limits  of  this  exiur.-m  to  compare  the  Man  of  Sin  with  the 
declarations  concerning  the  manifestations  of  evil  in  the  Apocalypse  of  St.  John.  In 
mat  mysterious  book  there  appears  to  be  two  centres  or  impersonations  of  evil:  the 
one  described  as  the  beast  coming  out  of  the  sea,  to  whom  the  dragon  gave  his  power 
and  seat  and  great  authority  (Eev.  xiii.  1,  2) ;  and  the  other,  as  another  beast  coming 
out  of  the  earth,  who  had  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  and  spake  like  a  dragon  (Rev.  xiii. 
11),  and  who  has  been  identified  with  the  false  prophet  (Rev.  xvi.  13 ;  xix.  20 ;  xx.  10).* 
Whether  there  is  a  resemblance  between  the  Man  of  Sin  and  either  or  both  of  these 
beasts,  we  do  not  inquire ;  in  both  a  manifestation  or  revelation  of  evil,  and  the  con- 
centration of  it  in  an  individual  or  individuals,  is  predicted. 

1  On  the  connection  between  Paul's  prediction  and  our  Lord's  prophecy,  see  De  Wette't 
•  Thessalonicher,'  p.  188. 

»  "  The  mystery  of  iniquity  working,"  in  St.  Paul's  prophecy;  the  "  many  Antichrists"  of 
St  John. 

*  Archdeacon  Farrar  entertains  the  strange  idea  that  the  first  beast  coming  out  of  the  sea 
is  Nero;  and  the  second  beast  coming  out  of  the  earth,  or  the  false  prophet,  is  Vespasian 
(see  articles  in  the  Expositor,  May  and  September,  1881). 


62  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cu.  u.  1—17. 

The  prediction  of  St.  Paul  bears  a  still  more  striking  resemblance  to  the  vision  of 
Daniel  concerning  the  wicked  and  persecuting  king  (Dan.  xi.)  than  to  either  the  Anti- 
christ of  St.  John  or  the  beasts  of  the  Apocalypse.  That  prophecy  of  Daniel  received 
its  primary  accomplishment  in  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  the  great  persecutor  of  the  Jews, 
but  the  concluding  portion  is  applicable  to  a  future  opponent  of  God  and  his  people, 
and  finds  its  full  accomplishment  in  him.1  Now,  the  imagery  employed  by  the  prophet 
and  the  apostle  is  the  same.  Paul  predicts  a  falling  away ;  and  Daniel  tells  us  that  the 
king  shall  "  have  intelligence  with  them  that  forsake  the  holy  covenant"  (Dan.  xi.  30). 
Paul  tells  us  that  the  Man  of  Sin  shall  sit  in  the  temple  of  God,  displaying  himself  as 
God ;  and  Daniel,  in  the  passage  quoted  by  our  Lord,  spenks  of  the  abomination  of 
desolation  being  set  up  in  the  holy  place  (Dan.  xi.  31).  Paul  foretells  that  the  Man 
of  Sin  shall  oppose  and  exalt  himself  against  all  that  is  called  God  or  is  an  object  of 
worship;  and  Daniel  tells  us  that  the  king  shall  exalt  and  magnify  himself  above 
every  god,  and  shall  speak  marvellous  things  against  the  God  of  gods,  and  shall  prosper 
till  the  indignation  be  accomplished  (Dan.  xi.  36).  This  resemblance  between  the 
persecuting  king  of  Daniel  and  the  Man  of  Sin  is  repeatedly  noticed  by  the  early 
Fathers.  Thus  Origen  observes,  "  What  is  stated  by  Paul  in  the  words  quoted  by  him 
when  he  says, '  so  he  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God,' 
is  in  Daniel  referred  to  in  the  following  manner :  '  And  on  the  temple  shall  be  the 
abomination  of  desolation,  and  at  the  end  of  time  an  end  shall  be  put  to  the  deso- 
lation ' "  (Origen,  '  Contra.  Cels.,'  vi.  46).*  There  can  hardly,  then,  be  a  reasonable 
doubt  that  Paul  in  his  prediction  had  this  prophecy  of  Daniel  in  view.' 

The  prediction  of  St.  Paul  concerning  the  Man  of  Sin  made  a  deep  impression  upon 
the  early  Fathers,  and  the  references  to  it  in  their  writings  are  numerous.  There  is 
also  a  comparative  unanimity  in  their  sentiments.  In  general,  they  considered  that 
the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction  was  future ;  that  the  Man  of  Sin  was  Antichrist,  and  an 
individual;  and  that  the  restraining  influence  was  the  Roman  empire.  Justin  Martyr 
speaks  of  the  Man  of  Sin  as  the  man  of  apostasy,  who  speaks  strange  things  against  the 
Most  High,  and  shall  venture  to  do  unlawful  deeds  on  earth  against  Christians  ('Dial. 
cum  Tryph.,'  c.  110).  Irenseus  observes  "  that  he,  being  an  apostate  and  a  robber,  is 
anxious  to  be  adored  by  God ;  and  that,  although  a  mere  slave,  he  wishes  himself  to  be 
proclaimed  as  a  king.  For  he,  being  endued  with  the  power  of  the  devil,  shall  come,  not 
as  a  ri»hteous  king  in  subjection  to  God,  but  as  the  lawless  one;  concentrating  in 
himself  all  Satanic  apostasy,  and,  setting  aside  all  idols,  he  shall  persuade  men  that  he 
himself  is  God  "  ('  Adv.  Haer.,'  v.  25. 1).  Tertullian  alludes  to  the  Roman  empire  as 
the  restraining  power :  "  What  obstacle  is  there  but  the  Roman  state,  the  falling  away 
of  which  shall  introduce  Antichrist,  for  then  shall  be  revealed  the  lawless  one?"  ('De 
Resurr.,'  c.  24).  And  again,  "  We  Christians  are  under  peculiar  necessity  of  praying 
for  the  emperors  and  for  the  complete  stability  of  the  empire,  because  we  know  that 
dreadful  power  which  hangs  over  the  world  and  the  conclusion  of  the  age,  which 
threatens  the  most  horrible  evils,  is  only  retarded  by  the  continued  existence  of  the 
Roman  empire.  This  is  what  we  would  not  experience.  And,  while  we  pray  that  it 
may  be  deferred,  we  hereby  show  our  good  will  to  the  perpetuity  of  the  Roman  state  * 
(' Apol.,'  c.  32).  Hippolytus  supposes  that  Antichrist  will  be  a  Jew,  belonging  to  the 
tribe  of  Dan:4  "As  Christ  springs  from  the  tribe  of  Judah,  so  Antichrist  is  to  spring 
from  the  tribe  of  Dan"  ('De  Antichristo,'  c.  14).  Cyprian  regards  Antiochus 
Epiphanes  as  the  type  of  Antichrist  ('Exhort,  ad  Martyr.,'  o.  11).    And  Jerome 

*  The  Jews  considered  Antiochus  Epiphanes  as  the  type  of  Antichrist,  to  whom  they  gave 
the  name  of  Armillus.  Thus  the  Targum  translates  Isa..  xi.  4,  "By  the  breath  of  his 
mouth  he  shall  slay  Armillus,  the  wicked  one."  According  to  the  Jewish  notions,  Armillus 
shall  appear  in  the  last  days ;  he  shall  be  born  of  a  marble  statue  in  one  of  the  churches  of 
Romef  the  Romans  shall  acknowledge  him  as  their  Messiah,  and  accept  him  as  their  king; 
he  shall  make  war  with  Israel,  and  in  the  battle  that  will  ensue  Messiah  ben  Joseph  will  be 
slain ;  but  Messiah  ben  David  shall  appear,  and  utterly  destroy  Armillus  and  his  followers. 

*  See  also  Ireneeus, '  Adv.  Haw-'  v.  25.  3. 

*  For  the  resemblance  between  this  prediction  of  Paul  and  the  prophecy  of  DanieL 
■ee  Jowett  on  '  St.  Paul's  Epistles,'  vol.  i  p.  174,  eto.,  1st  edit. ;  Hofmann's  '  Sehriftbeweia/ 
vol.  ii.  p.  U14,  eta 

*  The  mnaiB  opinion  is  entertained  by  Irenreus,  'Adv.  Hrer.,'  r.  SO.  % 


oh.  11.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANfe  5 J 

observes,  "  As  the  Saviour  had  Solomon  and  other  saints  as  types  of  his  coming,  so  we 
may  rightly  believe  that  Antichrist  had,  as  a  type  of  himself,  that  most  wiuked  king 
Antiochus,  who  persecuted  the  saints  and  profaned  the  temple*'  (on  Dan.  xi.  35). 
There  was  a  diversity  of  opinion  among  them  regarding  the  meaning  of  the  temple  ol 
God,  in  which  the  Man  of  Sin  was  to  seat  himself.  Seme  of  the  Fatliers  (Chry- 
sostom,  Theodoret,  Augustine,  Jerome)  interpreted  the  expression  figuratively  as  de- 
noting the  Christian  Church ;  whilst  others  (Irenaeus,  Cyril)  took  it  literally,  and 
referred  it  to  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  supposing  that  the  Man  of  Sin  would  rebuild 
the  temple. 

It  was  an  opinion  in  the  early  Church,  continuing  even  to  the  date  of  the  fourth 
century,  that  Nero  was  Antichrist.  Of  course,  such  an  opinion  cannot  refer  to  the  Man 
of  Sin,  as  this  would  involve  an  anachronism;  but  can  only  be  applied  to  Antichrist 
as  dsscribed  in  the  Apocalypse.  Too  much  has  been  made  of  this  Nero  myth,  as  it  is 
seldom  alluded  to  by  the  early  Fathers  until  the  close  of  the  third  century.  Nero  was 
the  first  emperor  who  persecuted  the  Christians,  and  was  therefore  peculiarly  obnoxious 
to  them.  After  his  death,  there  was  a  general  impression  throughout  the  Roman  world 
that  he  was  not  really  dead,  but  was  living  in  concealment  in  Parthia,  and  would 
return  to  regain  his  empire.  "About  this  time,"  observes  Tacitus, "  a  report  that  Nero 
was  still  alive,  and  on  his  way  to  the  East,  excited  a  false  alarm  throughout  Achaia  and 
Asia"  ('  Hist.,'  ii.  8).  And  Suetonius  mentions  that  it  was  thought  that  Nero  was  stdl 
alivo.and  would  shortly  return  to  Borne,  and  take  vengeance  on  all  his  enemies  ('  Nero,' 
57).  Mention  is  made  in  history  of  three  impostors  who  personated  Nero  :  one  in  Achaia 
and  Proconsular  Asia,  in  the  reign  of  Otho ;  a  second,  also  in  Proconsular  Asia,  in  the 
reign  of  Titus;  and  a  third,  protected  by  the  Parthians,  in  the  reign  of  Domitian. 
From  this  notion  appears  to  have  arisen  the  Christian  idea  that  Nero  would  be  a<*ain 
raised  up  as  Antichrist.1  The  earliest  notice  of  this  opinion  appears  in  the  fourth  o( 
the  Sybdline  books  (a.d.  80),  which,  however,  is  considered  by  critics  to  be  not  of 
Christian,  but  of  Jewish  origin.  In  the  fifth  Sybilline  book,  supposed  to  be  of  the 
time  of  Hadrian  (a.d.  130),  according  to  some  by  a  Jewish  Christian,  and  according 
to  others  by  an  Egyptian  Jew,  the  Antichrist  Beliar  is  identified  with  Nero.*  Not 
until  the  close  of  the  third  century  (a.d.  290)  does  Victorinus,  Bishop  of  Pettau,  in  his 
exposition  of  the  Apocalypse,  identify  the  beast  rising  out  of  the  sea  with  Nero :  "  Now 
that  one  of  the  heads  was,  as  it  were,  slain  to  death,  in  this  he  speaks  of  Nero ;"  and 
Chrysostom  regarded  Nero  as  the  type  of  Antichrist.3  The  great  reason,  however,  on 
which  certain  writers  ground  their  opinion  that  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse  considered 
Nero  to  be  Antichrist,  was  the  declaration  contained  in  Rev.  xvii.  10,  11,  "  And  there 
are  seven  kings  :  five  are  fallen,  and  one  is,  and  the  other  is  not  yet  come  ;  and  when 
he  cometh,  he  must  continue  a  short  space.  And  the  beast  which  was,  and  is  not,  even 
he  is  the  eighth,  and  is  of  the  seven,  and  goeth  into  perdition  " — a  passage  referred  to  by 
Victorinus.4  By  the  five  kings  they  understand  the  five  emperors  who  had  already 
reigned — Augustus,  Tiberius,  Caius,  Claudius,  and  Nero ;  by  the  sixth,  Galba  (or,  accord- 
ing to  others,  Vespasian:  Galbi,  Otho,  and  Vitellius  being  omitted,  as  their  reigns  were 
short)  ;  by  the  seventh,  Otho  (or,  according  to  others,  Titus);  and  by  the  eighth,  who 
was  also  one  of  the  seven,  Antichrist  or  Nero  restored  to  life.  This  passage  is  still 
ippealed  to  by  recent  writers  who  adopt  the  Nero  hypothesis.6    Lactantius  (a.d.  306), 

1  Sea  Merivale's  'History  of  the  Romans  under  the  Empire,'  cabinet  edit.,  yoL  vii. 
pp.  50,  etc.,  348,  etc. 

*  See,  on  the  Sybilline  oracles  and  their  probable  age,  Drummond's  '  Jewish  Messiah, 
pp.  10—16.   According  to  Friedlieb,  both  the  fourth  and  the  fifth  books  are  of  Jewish  origin. 

*  Lardner's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  94. 

4  Victorinus  supposes  the  five  kings  who  had  fallen  to  be  Galba,  Otho,  Vitellius, 
Vespasian,  and  Titus ;  the  sixth,  Domitian ;  the  seventh,  Nerva ;  and  the  eighth,  Antichrist 
or  Nero. 

*  As Lficke  Ewald,  Bleek, De  Wette,  Kenan,  Immer,  Diisteidieck,  and  Archdeacon  Farrar. 
Diisterdieck  and  Archdeacon  Farrar  (who,  however,  appears  undecided)  suppose  that  the 
eighth  king  is  Domitian,  who  came  as  Nero  in  spirit,  and  who  was  alBO  called  Nero.  Most 
of  these  writers  suppose  that  Augustus  was  the  first  emperor,  though  no  sufficient  reason 
can  be  assigned  for  the  exclusion  of  Julius  Csesar.  Benan  commences  with  Julius  Csesar, 
and,  according  to  him,  Nero  was  the  sixth  emperor,  whom  the  author  of  the  Apocalypss 


54  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TEtE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1— if. 


oh  the  other  hand,  repudiates  this  hypothesis  as  extravagant:  "Some  persons  of 
extravagant  imagination,"  he  observes,  "suppose  that  Nero,  having  been  conveyed  to 
a  distant  region,  is  still  alive ;  and  to  him  they  apply  the  Sybilline  verses  concerning 
'  the  fugitive  who  slew  his  own  mother,  heing  to  come  from  the  uttermost  boundaries 
of  the  earth  ; '  as  if  he  who  was  the  first,  shall  also  be  the  last  persecutor,  and  thus  prove 
the  forerunner  of  Antichrist,  But  we  ought  not  to  believe  those  who,  affirming  that 
the  two  prophets,  Enoch  and  Elijah,  have  been  translated  into  some  remote  place,  that 
they  might  attend  our  Lord  when  he  shall  come  to  the  judgment,  also  fancy  that  Nero 
is  to  appear  hereafter  as  the  forerunner  of  the  devil,  when  he  shall  come  to  lay  wastr 
the  earth  and  overthrow  mankind." ' 

The  opponents  of  hierarchical  power  in  the  Middle  Ages  regarded  the  pope  as  Anti- 
christ, and  considered  the  passage  in  question  as  a  prediction  of  the  origin  and  growth 
of  the  papal  authority.  Thus  as  early  as  the  close  of  the  tenth  century  (a.d.  V91), 
Arnulph,  Bishop  of  Orleans,  declared  at  the  Council  of  Rheims  that  if  the  Roman 
pontiff  was  destitute  of  charity,  and  puffed  up  with  knowledge,  he  was  Antichrist. 
This  view  was  entertained  by  Robert  GrostSte  the  celebrated  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  by 
Savonarola,  by  the  Albigenses,  the  Waldenses,  Wickliffe  and  the  Wickliffites,  the 
Hussites,  and  all  those  secis  who  were  in  opposition  to  the  Roman  hierarchy.  Even 
St.  Bernard  uses  this  bold  language  :  "  The  ministers  of  Christ  are  become  the  servants 
of  Antichrist,  and  the  beast  of  the  Apocalypse  has  seated  himself  in  the  chair  of 
St.  Peter."  2 

The  Reformers  in  general  adopted  this  opinion.  Such  was  the  view  of  Luther,  Calvin, 
Zuinglius,  Melancthon,  Beza,  and  Bucer ;  and,  among  English  Reformers,  Cranmer, 
Ridley,  Latimer,  Hooper,  and  Jewell.  According  to  them,  the  apostasy  is  the  falling  away 
fiom  evangelical  doctrine  to  the  traditions  of  men  and  the  corruptions  of  popery ;  the 
Man  of  Sin,  or  Antichrist,  is  not,  as  the  Fathers  conceived,  an  individual,  but  the  succes- 
sion of  po,  es — series  et  successio  hominum ;  and  the  restraining  power  is  the  Roman  empire, 
out  of  whose  ruins  the  papacy  arose.  The  Lutheran  Church  inserted  this  opinion  as 
an  article  in  their  creed  (Articl.  Smalc,  ii.  4).  In  the  dedication  of  the  translators  of 
the  Authorized  Version  to  King  James,  it  is  assumed  that  the  pope  is  the  Man  of  Sin  ; 
and  that  monarch  is  complimented  for  writing  in  the  defence  of  the  truth,  which  gave 
"  such  a  blow  unto  that  Man  of  Sin  as  will  not  be  healed."  And  the  assertion  that  the 
pope  is  Antichrist  and  the  Man  of  Sin  forms  one  of  the  articles  of  the  Westmins'er 
Confession :  "  There  is  no  other  head  of  the  Church  but  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  nor  can 
the  Pope  of  Rome  in  any  sense  be  head  thereof,  but  is  that  Antichrist,  that  Man  of  Si" 
and  son  of  perdition,  that  exalteth  himself  in  the  Church  against  Christ  and  all  that  is 
called  God  "  (ch.  xxv.  6). 

The  lJoinanists,  on  the  other  hand,  were  naturally  led  by  opposition  to  consider  the 
passage  as  a  prediction  of  the  rise  and  growth  of  Protestantism.  The  apostasy  was 
the  falling  away  from  the  Romish  Church  by  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation.  The 
Man  of  Sin  denoted  heretics  in  general,  but  especially  Luther,  the  chief  of  the  Reformers. 
The  restraining  influence  was  the  German  empire,  considered  as  a  continuation  of  the 
Roman  empire.  This,  however,  was  not  the  general  opinion  of  the  Church  of  Rome; 
most  of  their  theologians  supposed  that  Antichrist,  or  the  Man  of  Sin,  was  an  individual 
whose  coming  is  yet  future. 

The  Greek  Church  was  naturally  -led  to  regard  the  prophecy  as  a  prediction  o! 
Mohammedanism;  the  apostasy  was  the  falling  away  of  many  Greek  and  Oriental 
Churches  to  Mohammedanism;  the  man  of  sin  was  Mohammed;  and  the  restraining 
influence  the  power  of  the  lloman  empire.3  Some  of  the  Reformers  (Melancthon,  Bucer, 
Musculus)  considered  that  there  were  two  Antichrists — one  belonging  to  the  Eastern 
Church  and  the  other  to  the  Western  ;  the  Eastern  Antichrist  was  Mohammed,  and  the 

erroneously  supposed  to  be  alive.  (See  a  most  interesting  note  on  this  Nero  fable  by  Arch- 
deacon Lee,  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  New  Testament,  vol.  iv.  p.  759,  etc.  See  also 
Bleek's  '  Lectures  on  the  Apocalypse,'  p.  86,  etc  ;  Diisterdieck's  *  Offenbarung  Johanuis,* 
p.  521,  etc.) 

1  Laotantius, '  De  Mortibus  Perseoutorum,'  o.  ii. 

*  Quoted  by  Bishop  Hurd, '  On  Prophecy,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  28,  29. 

*  Innocent  III.  endeavoured  to  stir  up  a  crusade  by  the  declaration  that  Mohammed  wai 
the  Man  of  Sin. 


can.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALON]  AttS.  66 

Western  was  the  pope.  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance  that  all  three — the  Greeks,  the 
Romans,  and  the  Protestants — were  at  one  as  regards  the  restraining  influence  j  this  they 
regarded  as  the  imperial  power — the  Eoinan  empire,  either  in  itself  or  continued  in  the 
Greek  and  German  empires. 

The  modern  views  concerning  the  Man  of  Sin  are  chiefly  four :  the  Rationalists,  who 
consider  that  there  is  no  prophecy ;  the  Prseterists,  who  consider  the  prophecy  as  already 
fulfilled;  the  Progressionists,  who  regard  it  as  being  fulfilled  or  in  the  course  of  fulfil- 
ment ;  and  the  Futurists,  who  regard  the  fulfilment  as  still  future. 

1.  The  first  class  of  expositors  are  those  who  regard  all  the  usual  interpretations  as 
proceeding  from  a  false  assumption  as  if  there  were  a  prophecy,  whereas  there  is  in 
reality  no  prediction  at  all.  This  opir.on  is  adopted  by  Koppe,  Pelt,  De  Wette,  Ltine- 
mann,  Jowett,  and  Davidson.  Koppe  appears  to  have  been  the  earliest  who  took  this  view 
of  the  passage.  He  idealizes  the  prediction,  and  supposes  that  the  apostle  is  only  stating 
his  impressions  of  what  might  be  the  future  state  of  the  Church  from  a  consideration  of 
the  times  in  which  he  lived.  The  apostle  was  profoundly  impressed  with  the  prophecies 
of  Daniel,  and  from  them  he  dreaded  an  outburst  of  evil  after  his  death,  and  he  expressed 
his  forebodings  in  language  coloured  from  Daniel.  Pelt  supposes  that  the  mystery  of 
iniquity  was  the  inward  principle  of  evil  which  the  apostle  foresaw  would  afterwards 
break  forth  in  a  more  open  and  violent  form;  that  the  restraining  power  was  the  will 
of  God  holiling  back  the  kingdom  of  Saian  ;  and  that  the  coming  of  Christ  was  the 
final  victory  of  good  over  evil.  So  also  De  Wette  observes!,  "  He  goes  altogether  wrong 
who  finds  here  any  more  than  the  apostle's  subjective  anticipation,  from  his  own 
historical  position,  of  the  future  of  the  Christian  Church.  Instead  of  rising  to  the 
example  of  Christ,  acknowledging  the  limitation  which  there  is  to  a  definite  foreknowledge 
of  the  future,  the  apostle  pays  a  tribute  to  human  weakness,  since  he  wanted  to  know 
too  much  beforehand."  *  Liinemann  considers  that  Paul  was  so  entirely  engrossed  by  his 
ideas  of  the  proximity  of  the  advent  that,  carried  away  by  his  individuality,  he  "  wished 
to  settle  more  exactly  concerning  its  circumstances  and  conditions  the  historical  relations 
of  the  coming  of  Christ  than  is  allotted  to  man  in  general  to  know,  even  although  he 
should  be  the  apostle,  the  most  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God."  a  "  Such  passages  [Col.  ii. 
8,  16 ;  Eph.  vi.  12],"  observes  Professor  Jowett,  "  are  a  much  safer  guide  to  the  interpre- 
tation of  the  one  we  are  considering  than  the  meaning  of  similar  passages  in  the  Old 
Testament.  For  they  indicate  to  us  the  habitual  thought  of  the  apostle's  mind;  'a 
falling  away  first,'  suggested,  probably,  by  the  wavering  which  he  saw  among  his  own 
converts,  the  grievous  wolves  entering  into  the  Church  of  Ephesus  (Acts  xx.  29),  the 
turning  away  of  all  them  of  Asia  (2  Tim.  i.  15).  When  we  consider  that  his  own 
converts  and  Jewish  opponents  or  half-converts  were  all  the  world  to  him ;  that  through 
them,  as  it  were  in  a  glass,  he  appeared  to  see  the  workings  of  human  nature  generally, 
we  understand  how  this  double  image  of  good  and  evil  should  have  presented  itself  to 
him,  and  the  kind  of  necessity  that  he  felt  that  Christ  and  Antichrist  should  alternate 
with  each  other.  It  was  not  that  he  foresaw  some  great  conflict,  decisive  of  the  destinies 
of  mankind.  What  he  anticipated  for  man  nearly  resembled  the  spiritual  combat  in 
the  seventh  chapter  of  the  Romans."3  And  Dr.  Davidson  remarks,  "  The  passage  does 
not  contain  a  prophecy,  but  rather  the  writer's  notion  on  a  subject  which  did  not  concern 
the  proper  faith  and  duty  of  mankind.  Those  notions  were  shaped  by  the  floating 
belief  of  his  day,  and  have  nothing  beyond  an  historical  interest.  They  belong  to  the 
past  of  Christianity — to  its  infantine  state,  when  it  was  emerging  out  of  Judaism,  and 
assuming  that  independent  position  to  which  no  man  contributed  so  much  as  the  apostle 
of  the  Gentiles.4 

Such  a  view  is  at  variance  with  the  idea  of  inspiration — in  other  words,  with  the 
supposition  that  the  apostle  was  guided  in  writing  by  a  higher  Spirit  than  his  own. 
The  supernatural  is  entirely  overlooked  ;  the  apostle  writes  according  to  his  own  fancies ; 

1  De  Wette,  however,  expresses  himself  very  differently,  in  the  preface  to  his  exposition 
of  the  Apocalypse ;  there  he  recognizes  the  symptoms  of  Antichrist  in  the  God-denying 
egoism  of  our  day,  with  its  rejection  of  all  restraints. 

2  Liinemann,  'Briefe  an  die  Thessalonicher,'  pp.  229,  230,  translation  of  the  same, 
p.  237. 

»  Jowett's  '  St.  Paul's  Epistles,'  vol.  i.  p.  177, 1st  edit. 

•  Davidson's  '  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament,'  vol.  i.  p.  14  (new  edit). 


66  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—17. 

he  is  led  astray  by  his  erroneous  opinions.  How  such  a  view  is  "  entirely  consistent 
with  the  apostle's  inspiration  "is  difficult  to  understand,  even  although  we  employ  the 
term  "inspiration  "  in  a  very  bread  sense.  The  power  of  foretelling  the  future  is  denied 
to  the  sacred  writers.  "  We  take  them,"  observes  Dr.  Davidson,  "  as  guides  to  faith  and 
practice  generally  without  adopting  all  that  they  propounded,  or  believing  that  they  could 
foretell  events."1  It  is  evident  the  apostleis  here  giving  a  prediction  of  what  shall  take 
place ;  and  therefore,  if  there  were  no  real  prediction,  he  was  on  this  point  mistaken  and 
in  error,  and  consequently  uninspired.  If  we  admit  inspiration,  we  must  receive  the 
truths  declared  as  the  revelation  of  God :  the  Scripture  contains  truths  to  be  received, 
and  not  the  mere  opinions  of  fallen  men  to  be  canvassed. 

2.  The  sec  >nd  class  of  interpreters  are  those  who,  recognizing  a  prediction,  regard  it 
as  already  fulfilled.  To  this  class  belong  Grotius,  Wetstein,  Hammond,  Le  Clerc,  Whitby, 
Schottgen,  Wieseler,  Kern,  Dollinger,  and  Baumgaiten.  These  generally  agree  in  consider- 
ing that  the  prophecy  received  its  accomplishment  in  Christ's  coming  in  spirit  to  destroy 
Jerusalem,  although  they  differ  widely  in  details.  Grotius  supposes  that  the  Man  of  Sin 
was  Caligula,  whodemanded  supreme  and  universal  worship  as  god,  and  ordered  his  statue 
to  be  placed  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem ;  he  who  restrained  was  Vitellius,  the  Proconsul 
of  Syria,  who,  at  the  risk  of  his  life,  refused  to  obey  the  order  of  Caligula;  and  the 
lawless  one  was  Simon  Magus.  It  seemed  to  Paul  that  the  delineation  of  Antiochus 
Epiphanes  in  Daniel  was  to  be  realized  in  Caligula.2  But  the  distinction  between  the 
Man  of  Sin  and  the  lawless  one  is  incorrect,  and  besides,  the  interpretation  involves  an 
anachronism,  as  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  was  written  after  the  death  oi 
Caligula.  Wetstein  adopts  the  extravagant  opinion  that  the  Man  of  Sin  was  Titus,"  the 
delight  of  the  human  race,"  whose  army  brought  their  idolatrous  ensigns  into  the 
captured  temple  and  offered  sacrifices  there ;  and  that  the  restraining  influence  was 
Nero,  that  monster  of  iniquity,  whose  death  was  necessary  for  the  rule  of  Titus. 
Hammond  imagined  that,  by  the  Man  of  Sin,  Simon  Magus,  together  with  his  followers 
the  Gnostics,  was  meant;  the  apostasy  was  the  falling  away  of  the  Christians  into 
Gnosticism ;  and  the  restraining  influence  was  the  apostles,  who,  by  still  preaching  to  the 
Jews,  preserved  the  union  still  subsisting  between  Jews  and  Christians.*  Le  Clerc 
supposes  that  the  apostasy  was  the  revolt  of  the  Jews  from  the  Romans  ;  the  Man  cl 
Sin  was  the  rebellious  Jews,  and  especially  their  leader  Simon  the  son  of  Giora;  and  the 
restraining  power  was  the  chief  of  the  Jewish  nation,  who  were  against  the  revolt.  Whitby 
also  considers  the  apos'asy  was  the  revolt  of  the  Jews  from  the  Roman  empire  or  from 
the  faith ;  the  Man  of  Sin  was  the  Jewish  nation,  with  their  high  priest  and  Sanhedrim; 
and  the  restraining  power  was  Claudius,  during  whose  reign  the  Jews  would  not  rebel,  as 
they  were  under  great  obligations  to  him.4  Schottgen  also  agrees  with  Whitby  in  con- 
sidering that  by  the  Man  of  Sin  is  meant  the  Pharisees,  the  rabbis,  and  the  doctors  of 
the  Law  ;  but  he  differs  from  him  in  considering  that  the  restraining  power  was  the 
prayers  of  the  Christians,  which  warded  off  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  until  they  had 
left  the  city  and  retired  to  Pella.  Much  more  ingenious  is  the  opinion  of  Wieseler.  He 
also  considers  the  prophecy  as  a  prediction  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  "  He  that 
restraineth  "  must  be  some  good  influence  which  delayed  the  catastrophe,  and  this  he 
considers  to  be  the  pious  Jews  then  living,  particularly  the  Christians;  and  if  the 
singular  number  requires  an  individual,  then  the  ristrainer  is  James  the  Just,  the  Lord's 
brother.  Not  until  James  was  murdered  and  the  Christians  had  removed  from  Jeru- 
salem was  the  city  taken.6  Kern  considers  that  the  Man  of  Sin  is  Nero ;  he  that  restraineth 
is  Vespasian  and  his  son  Titus ;  and  the  apostasy  is  the  revolt  of  the  Jews  or  the 
departure  of  the  Christians.'  Dollinger,  like  Kern,  supposes  Antichrist  to  be  Nero. 
Nero  was  already  adopted  by  Claudius,  and  was  regarded  by  many  as  the  future  Cassar. 
"  He    that  restraineth "  was  Claudius.     The   coming  of  Christ  was  his  coming  to 

1  Davidson's  '  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament,"  vol.  i.  p.  15  (new  edit.). 
'  Grotius,  '  Annotationes  in  II.  Epistolam  ad  Thessal.' 

*  Hammond  on  the  New  Testament,  in  loco. 

4  Whitby's  '  Commentary,'  pp.  813—818.    London  :  Thomas  Tegg,  1842. 

*  Wieseler's  '  Ohronologie  des  apostolischen  Zietalters,'  pp.  268 — 277. 

"  Kem,  on  this  account,  considers  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thesaalonians  to  be  spnriou* 
The  same  view  is  maintained  by  Baur,  Hilgenfeld,  and  others  belonging  to  the  Tubingei 
lohool. 


ch.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  87 

axecute  judgment  on  Jerusalem ;  and  although  Nero  did  not  personally  undertake 
inything  against  the  Jews,  yet  he  did  so  by  his  lieutenant  Vespasian.  The  apostasy 
was  the  departure  of  the  Christians  into  the  errors  of  the  Gnostics.  Dollinger,  howerer, 
considers  that  there  may  be  a  more  complete  fulfilment  in  the  last  days.1  Baumgarten 
thinks  that  the  prophecy  reflects  the  experience  of  the  apostle :  the  Man  of  Sin  was  the 
Jews  who  everywhere  opposed  his  preaching  the  gospel ;  the  apostasy  was  the  renuncia- 
tion of  Jesus  as  the  Messiah ;  and  the  restraining  influence  was  the  imperial  authority 
which  hitherto  had  protected  the  apostle  and  kept  the  Jews  in  check.  This  opinion 
appears  to  be  partially  adopted  by  Bishop  Lightibot :  "  It  seems,  upon  the  whole,  pro- 
bable," he  observes,  "  that  the  Antichrist  is  represented  especially  by  Judaism.  With  a 
prophetic  insight,  the  apostle  foresaw,  as  he  contemplated  the  moral  and  political  condi- 
tion of  the  race,  the  approach  of  a  great  and  overwhelming  catastrophe.  ...  It  was  to 
Soman  justice  and  Roman  magistrates  that  the  apostle  had  recourse  at  this  time  to 
shield  him  from  the  enmity  of  the  Jews  and  to  check  their  violence."  2  At  the  same 
time,  he  thinks  that  the  prophecy  has  not  yet  received  its  most  striking  and  complete, 
fulfilment. 

It  would  be  a  mere  waste  of  time  to  examine  these  views  seriatim.  So  far  as  they 
consider  the  prophecy  as  having  received  its. full  accomplishment,  they  do  not  satisfy 
its  conditions,  and  have  only  a  general  and  fancied  resemblance.  Especially  it  is  fatal 
to  the  views  of  this  class  of  interpreters  that  the  coming  of  Christ  alluded  to  is  evidently 
not  his  coming  in  spirit  to  destroy  Jerusalem,  but,  as  the  context  shows,  and  as  is  thr 
uniform  meaning  of  the  phrase  in  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  his  coming  in  person  to  establish 
his  spiritual  kingdom. 

3.  The  third  class  of  exponents  are  those  who  regard  the  prophecy  as  being  fulfilled, 
or  as  in  the  course  of  fulfilment ;  that  is,  as  already  partially  fulfilled,  but  awaiting  its 
complete  accomplishment :  we  allude  to  those  who  find  in  the  passage  a  prediction  ol 
popery.  Besides  the  early  Reformers,  this  opinion  is  advocated  by  Hooker,  Hurd, 
Newton,  Turretin,  Benson,  Bengel,  Doddridge,  Macknight,  Miehaelis,  Elliott,  and 
Bishop  Wordsworth. 

This  opinion  proceeds  on  the  assumption  that  the  restraining  influence  is  the  Roman 
empire.  In  the  prediction,  that  influence  is  both  masculine  and  neuter ;  by  the  mascu- 
line the  emperor  is  meant,  and  by  the  neuter  the  empire.  This  opinion  is  that  of  the 
early  Fathers,  and  was  generally  adopted  with  various  modifications  by  Greeks,  Roman- 
es, and  Protestants.3  It  is  in  itself  highly  probable,  and  may  have  been  handed  down 
by  tradition  from  the  Church  of  Thessalouica,  who  had  been  instructed  concerning  its 
nature  (ch.  ii.  6).  If  the  restrainer  was  the  Roman  emperor,  we  may  understand 
the  reason  of  the  reserve  of  the  apostle.  If  he  had  stated  this  in  so  many  words,  he 
would  have  been  regarded  as  an  enemy  to  the  Roman  government,  because  he  would 
then  teach  the  destruction  of  the  empire,  and  would  have  involved  Christians  in  perse- 
cution. Prudence  required  a  discreet  silence  on  this  point.  This  reason  for  reserve 
was  recognized  by  the  early  Fathers.  "  If  St.  Paul,"  observes  Chrysostom,  "  had  said 
that  the  Roman  empire  will  soon  be  dissolved,  the  heathen  world  would  have  destroyed 
him  as  a  rebel  and  all  the  faithful  with  him,  as  persons  who  took  up  arms  against  the 
state.  But  St.  Paul  means  the  Roman  empire  ;  and  when  that  shall  have  been  taken 
away,  then  the  Man  of  Sin  will  come.  For  as  the  power  of  Babylon  was  dissolved  by 
the  Persian  dynasty,  and  the  Persian  was  supplanted  by  the  Greek,  and  the  Greek  by 
the  Roman,  so  the  Roman  will  be  dissolved  by  Antichrist,  and  Antichrist  by  Christ " 
(in  loco).  Now,  in  the  view  of  those  who  regard  the  pope  as  the  Man  of  Sin,  this  pre- 
diction was  fully  verified.  No  sooner  was  the  restrainer  removed  than  the  Man  of  Sin 
was  revealed.  As  long  as  the  Roman  emperor  continued  heathen  and  resident  at 
Rome,  no  ecclesiastical  power  was  permitted  to  exalt  itself;  but  no  sooner  did  the 

1  For  Dollinger's  views,  see  Lunemann, '  On  the  Thessalonians,'  p.  232 ;  and  Riggenbaeh 
in  Lange's  '  Commentary.' 

*  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  article  "  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians." 

*  To  this  general  opinion  the  view  of  Calvin  is  a  notable  exception.  He  supposes  that 
the  restraining  influence  was  the  limited  diffusion  of  the  gospel,  and  that  the  Man  of  Sin 
was  not  to  be  manifested  until  the  gospel  was  preached  to  the  whole  world.  "  This,  there- 
fore, was  the  delay  until  the  career  of  the  gospel  should  be  completed,  because  a  gracious 
invitation  to  salvation  was  first  in  order"  (Calvin,  in  loco). 


68  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—17. 

emperor  remove  from  Borne  to  Constantinople,  than  the  papacy  arose — the  restraint 
on  the  Bishop  of  Rome  was  removed  ;  and  after  the  Roman  empire  in  the  West  cama 
to  an  end  by  the  dethronement  of  Augustulus,  the  power  of  the  pope  mightily  in- 
creased. 

But  the  great  point  of  inquiry  is — Is  there  a  sufficient  resemblance  between  this 
prophecy  and  Romanism,  so  that  we  may  conclude  that  they  are  related  to  each  other 
as  prediction  and  fulfilment?  Are  the  characteristics  of  the  Man  of  Sin  found  in 
popery  ?  Those  who  belong  to  this  class  of  interpreters  assert  that  the  resemblance  is 
striking  and  obvious.  An  apostasy  is  predicted,  and  there  is  in  Romanism  a  falling 
•way  from  the  pure  gospel  to  the  traditions  of  men ;  the  doctrines  of  purgatory,  tran- 
■ubstantiation,  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass,  the  adoration  of  the  Virgin  and  the  saints,  are 
adduced  as  examples.  The  Man  of  Sin  is  represented  as  opposing  and  exalting  himself 
against  all  that  is  called  God  or  is  an  object  of  worship ;  and  this  is  considered  as 
receiving  its  fulfilment  in  the  pope  exalting  himself  above  all  human  and  Divine 
authority,  claiming  the  title  "  king  of  kings,  and  lord  of  lords,"  applying  to  himself 
the  words  of  the  psalmist,  "  All  kings  shall  bow  down  before  thee,"  styling  himself 
universal  bishop,1  and  asserting  his  power  to  dispose  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth. 
The  Man  of  Sin  is  said  to  seat  himself  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  himself  as  God. 
The  temple  of  God  is  here  understood  to  be  the  Christian  Church,  and  the  pope  places 
himself  in  it  as  its  supreme  head,  the  vicar  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  shows  himself  as  God 
by  claiming  Divine  attributes,  as  holiness  and  infallibility  ;  assuming  Divine  preroga- 
tives, as  the  power  of  pardoning  sins  and  the  opening  and  shutting  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven ;  and  using  such  Divine  titles  as  "  Our  Lord  God  the  pope,"  "  Another  God  on 
earth."  J  Every  pope,  on  his  election,  is  placed  on  the  high  altar  of  St.  Peter's,  and  receives 
the  adoration  of  the  cardinals.  The  coming  of  the  Man  of  Sin  is  after  the  working  of 
Satan,  with  all  power,  and  signs,  and  wonders  of  falsehood.  And  this  is  considered  as 
receiving  its  fulfilment  in  the  false  miracles  of  popery ;  in  the  impositions  of  indulgences 
and  purgatory ;  in  the  wonders  done  by  sacred  images  moving,  speaking,  bleeding ;  -in 
the  prodigies  effected  by  sacred  relics;  in  the  supernatural  visitations  of  the  Virgin; 
and  in  the  pretended  power  of  working  miracles  which  the  Church  of  Rome  still  claims ; 
as  Bellarmine  reckons  the  glory  of  miracles  as  the  eleventh  mark  of  the  Catholic  Cfctrch. 
God  is  represented  as  punishing  sin  by  sin,  "  sending  to  them  the  working  of  error  that 
they  misiht  believe  the  lie."  The  popish  legends,  which  have  gained  such  credit  as  to 
be  admitted  among  their  ceremonies,  and  especially  the  monstrous  doctrine  of  transub- 
stantiation,  are  regarded  as  the  fulfilment  of  this  part  of  the  prophecy.8  And,  besides, 
in  the  other  passage  where  Paul  predicts  the  falling  away  of  the  latter  times,  the  marks 
which  he  gives  find  their  counterpart  in  the  corruption  of  popery :  "  Giving  heed  to 
seducing  spirits,  and  doctrines  of  devils ;  speaking  lies  in  hypocrisy ;  having  their  con- 
science seared  with  a  hot  iron ;  forbidding  to  marry,  and  commanding  to  abstain  from 
meats  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  1—3). 

Paul  represents  the  system  as  working  even  in  his  days :  "  For  the  mystery  of 
lawlessness  is  already  working "  (ch.  ii.  7).  It  works  inwardly ;  it  is  a  mystery, 
something  concealed  and  unknown  until  it  is  revealed;  the  germs  of  the  Antichristian 
system  were  already  in  the  Church ;  the  leaven  of  corruption  was  at  work.  Paul  knew 
this  because  he  was  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  can  see  what  man 
cannot  see  (Wordsworth).  But,  in  truth,  the  germs  of  the  Antichristian  system  are 
discernible  in  the  false  doctrines  and  superstitious  practices  alluded  to  in  Paul's  Epistles ; 
and  it  is  asserted  that  there  is  a  striking  resemblance  between  them  and  the  doctrines 
and  practices  of  Romanism ;  as,  for  example,  the  worship  of  angels  (Col.  ii.  8),  the 

1  In  the  remarkable  words  of  Gregory  the  Great,  in  opposition  to  the  Patriarch  of  Con- 
itantinople,  "  Whoever  calls  himself  universal  bishop  is  the  precursor  of  Antichrist." 

*  These  and  such-like  titles  are  oited  in  Jewell's  'Apology;'  Poole's  '  Annotations ;' 
Newton,  'On  the  Prophecies.'  See  also  Barrow's  'Treatise  on  the  Pope's  Supremacy ; ' 
Stillingfleet,  '  On  Popery,'  oh.  xviii. ;  and  Luthardt's  '  Saving  Truths  of  Christianity,' 
pp.  395,  396. 

*  "  The  annals  of  the  world,"  observes  Dr.  Macknight,  "  cannot  produce  persons  and 
events  to  which  the  things  written  in  this  passnge  can  be  applied  with  bo  much  fitness  a» 
to  the  bishops  of  Knme.  Why,  then,  should  we  be  in  any  doubt  concerning  the  interpreta- 
tion and  application  of  this  fumous  prophecy  1 " 


oh.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  69 

abstinence  from  certain  foods  (1  Cor.  viii.  8),  bodily  mortification  (Col.  ii.  23),  the 
traditions  and  doctrines  and  commandments  of  men  (Col.  ii.  8,  22) ;  so  that,  as  Bishop 
Newton  observes,  "  the  foundations  of  popery  were  laid,  indeed,  in  the  apostles'  days, 
but  the  superstructure  was  raised  by  degrees,  and  several  ages  passed  before  the  build- 
ing was  completed,  and  the  Man  of  Sin  was  revealed  in  full  perfection."1 

Of  course,  according  to  this  view  of  the  subject,  the  complete  fulfilment  of  the 
prophecy  is  still  future.  The  destruction  of  the  Man  of  Sin — that  is,  according  to  this 
view,  Romanism — is  also  predicted :  "  Whom  the  Lord  Jesus  will  slay  with  the  breath 
of  his  mouth,  and  annihilate  by  the  appearance  of  his  coming"  (ch.  ii.  8).  We  have 
shown,  in  the  Exposition,  that  by  this  cannot  be  meant  the  preaching  of  the  pure 
gospel,  or  the  diffusion  of  the  Word  of  God  at  the  Reformation ;  the  language  is  denun- 
ciatory. As,  however,  this  portion  of  the  prophecy  is  unfulfilled,  it  is  not  required 
to  off  r  any  explanations.  The  interpretation  of  unfulfilled  prophecy  is  probably 
beyond  the  powers  of  the  human  mind ;  the  fulfilment  is  the  only  key  to  the  inter- 
pretation. 

To  this  view  of  the  subject  numerous  objections  have  been  raised :  there  are  three 
which  merit  consideration.  (1)  It  is  affirmed  that  the  Man  of  Sin  is  distinctly  asserted 
to  be  an  individual ;  he  is  called  "  the  lawless  one,"  "  the  son  of  perdition ; "  whereas, 
according  to  the  above  view,  he  is  an  ecclesiastical  system,  or  a  succession  of  indivi- 
duals. But,  as  Bishop  Lightfoot  observes,  "in  all  figurative  passages  it  is  arbitrary 
to  assum»that  a  person  is  denoted  when  we  find  a  personification.  Thus  the  Man  of 
Sin  here  need  not  be  an  individual  man  ;  it  may  be  a  body  of  men,  or  a  power,  or  a 
spiritual  influence."1  The  restraining  influence,  which  is  put  at  one  time  in  the  neuter 
and  at  another  time  in  the  masculine,  is  almost  universally  acknowledged  to  be,  not  a 
person,  but  an  influence  or  series  of  persons.  So,  in  like  manner,  the  Man  of  Sin  may 
be  a  succession  of  individuals;  at  least,  there  is  no  absolute  necessity  arising  from  the 
terms  of  the  prophecy  to  regard  him  as  a  person.3  (2)  It  is  affirmed  that,  even  admitting 
all  the  striking  coincidences,  yet  the  idea  of  popery  does  not  and  never  did  fulfil  the 
prophecy  in  ver.  4.  So  far  from  the  pope  opposing  and  exalting  himself  against  all 
that  is  called  God  or  is  an  object  of  worship,  his  "abject  adoration  and  submission  tc 
them  has  ever  been  one  of  his. most  notable  peculiarities"4  (Alford).  But  to  this  it 
has  been  replied  that  the  arrogance  of  the  pope,  his  assertion  that  he  is  the  vicar  of 
Christ,  his  claim  of  infallibility,  which  has  lately  been  conceded  to  him,  are  a  distinct 
fulfilment  of  this  prediction.  (3)  It  is  said  that  "  if  the  papacy  be  Antichrist,  then  has 
the  manifestation  been  made  and  endured  now  for  nearly  fifteen  hundred  years,  and  yet  the 
day  of  the  Lord  has  not  come,  which,  by  the  terms  of  our  prophecy,  such  manifestation 
is  immediately  to  precede  "  (Alford).  But  to  this  it  has  been  answered  that  it  is  not 
asserted  that  the  coming  of  Christ  follows  directly  on  the  coming  of  the  Man  of  Sin,  but 
merely  that  the  Man  of  Sin  will  precede ;  the  interval  between  the  two  comings  is 
nowhere  defined.  Besides,  it  may  be  that  there  is  a  development  of  Antichrist,  and 
that  his  final  destruction  by  the  coming  of  the  Lord  will  not  occur  until  his  full  develop- 
ment. Thus,  for  example,  the  spiritual  power  of  popery  may  be  unfolding  itself;  the 
mystery  of  lawlessness  may  be  still  wcrking,  as  was  lately  seen  in  the  introduction  of 
two  new  dogmas  into  the  Romish  Church — the  immaculate  conception  of  .the  Vir-uu, 
and  the  personal  infallibility  of  the  pope.  The  career  of  the  Man  of  Sin  has  not 
yet  run. 

Upon  the  whole,  on  an  impartial  review  of  the  subject,  we  cannot  avoid  the 
impression  that  the  points  of  resemblance  between  the  prophecy  and  Romanism  are 
numerous,  varied,  and  striking.  Our  forefathers  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  application  of 
the  prediction,  and  perhaps  they  were  nearer  the  truth  than  we  in  modern  times  who 
hesitate.  Such  an  opinion  may  be  considered  as  uncharitable  and  unjust,  and  is 
certainly  not  in  accordance  with  the  more  liberal  spirit  of  our  age,  where  popery  is 
viewed  M  it  presently  exists,  divested  of  its  power  to  persecute,  and  as  seen  in  the 
culture,  refinement,  and  piety  of  many  of  its  adherents.    But  when  we  reflect  upon 

On  the  Pro- 
phecies.' ...._,  ... 
•  Alford's  'Greek  Testament,'  vol.  in.,  Prolegomena,  p.  66. 


60  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  il  1—17. 

the  abominable  persecutions  of  the  Inquisition,  the  monstrous  wickedness  of  the  popes 
prior  to  the  Reformation,1  the  atrocities  perpetrated  in  the  name  of  religion,1  the  crimes 
committed  by  the  priests,3  and  the  general  corruption  of  the  whole  system ;  and  when 
we  think  that  it  is  only  the  restraining  influence  of  Protestantism  which  prevents  a 
repetition  of  such  actions,  we  may  see  reason,  if  not  to  affirm  positively,  yet  to  suspect 
that  such  an  opinion  may  be  founded  on  truth,  and,  if  so,  be  neither  uncharitable 
nor  unjust. 

4.  The  fourth  class  of  interpreters  consider  the  fulfilment  as  future,  and  that  we  are 
not  to  look  for  any  past  occurrences  as  answering  all  its  requirements.  This  opinion 
is  the  one  which  is  chiefly  favoured  in  our  days.  It  has  been  adopted  by  Hofmann, 
Ewald,  Olshausen,  Biggenbach,  Lange,  Alford,  Ellicott,  Lillie,  Eadie,  Meyrick,  and 
Bishop  Alexander,  although  there  is  a  considerable  difference  in  their  views. 

It  is  maintained  that  it  is  unwarrantable  to  consider  the  pope  as  Antichrist,  and  the 
papacy  as  an  Antichristian  system.  The  essential  doctrines  of  Christianity  are  main- 
tained and  defended  by  the  Romanists.  The  cross  of  Christ  is  exalted,  and  his  suffer- 
ings are  declared  to  be  an  atonement  for  sin.  The  great  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  not 
only  maintained,  but  prominently  brought  forward.  The  influences  of  the  Spirit  are 
recognized  and  depended  on.  And  the  pope,  instead  of  opposing  himself  to  God,  owns 
himself  to  be  the  servant  and  worshipper  of  God.4  Hence  it  is  considered  that  in  the 
future  there  may  be  a  fuller  completion  than  has  ever  yet  taken  place  in  the  past. 
Prophecy  has  many  partial  fulfilments,  until  it  reaches  its  climax  in  a  complete  accom- 
plishment. Thus  the  Messianic  prophecies  of  our  Lord  were  partially  fulfilled  in 
David,  in  Solomon,  in  the  Jewish  nation.  So  it  may  be  with  this  prediction ;  its  final 
application  may  be  reserved  for  the  last  days  of  this  world's  probation.  The  anti- 
christian elements,  which  are  now  found  dispersed,  may  be  collected  and  exhibited  in 
an  individual  who  will  be  the  realization  of  the  Man  of  Sin. 

According  to  Hofmann,  the  whole  passage  refers  to  the  visions  of  Daniel.  Paul 
applies  the  prophecy  therein  contained  to  the  latter  days.  The  power  that  restraineth 
the  outburst  of  evil  is  a  good  principle ;  just  as  Michael,  the  guardian  angel  of  the 
Jews,' withstood  the  Prince  of  Persia  (Dan.  x.  20).  When  the  good  principle  which 
was  preserving  the  world  in  agreement  with  God  is  removed,  then  Antichrist  will 
appear  in  the  form  of  some  mighty  lawless  conqueror.  Hofmann  appears  actually  to 
expect  the  revivification  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes.6  Ewald,  again,  applies  to  the  prophecy 
the  prediction  of  Malachi  concerning  the  coming  of  Elijah.  He  supposes  that  by  that 
which  hinders  the  appearance  of  Antichrist  the  coming  of  Elijah  is  meant,  and  that 
Antichrist  will  not  be  revealed  in  all  his  atrocious  wickedness  until  Elijah  be  taken 
out  of  the  way  and  again  translated  to  heaven." 

Omitting  these  interpretations,  which  must  appear  to  our  English  minds  fanciful 
and  extravagant,  based  on  mere  conjecture,  and  wholly  arbitrary  in  their  nature,  we 
come  to  the  more  rational  statements  of  other  divines.  In  general,  according  to  them, 
the  Man  of  Sin  is  an  individual  of  gigantic  mental  power,  enormous  daring,  and  extreme 
wickedness,  who  shall  appear  on  the  earth  in  the  latter  days;  and  the  restraining 
influence  which  prevents  the  appearance  of  such  an  individual  is  moral  order  or  govern- 
ment. Thus,  according  to  Olshausen,  the  Man  of  Sin  is  an  individual.  All  the  manifesta- 
tions of  evil,  the  revolt  of  the  Jews  from  the  Romans,  Nero,  Mohammed,  the  development 
of  the  papacy  in  the  Middle  Ages,  the  French  Revolution  of  1789,  with  the  abolition 
of  Christianity,  and  the  setting  up  of  a  prostitute  as  the  goddess  of  Reason  in  the 
cathedral  church  of  Paris,  and  the  present  diffusion  of  infidelity  and  atheism,  are  the 
precursors  of  Antichrist;  but  they  contain  only  some  of  his  characteristics,  not  all.7 
Similarly  Dean  Alford  observes,  "  Though  eighteen  hundred  years  later,  we  stand,  with 
regard  to  this  prophecy,  where  the  apostle  stood;  the  day  of  the  Lord  not  present, 
and  not  to  arrive  until  the  Man  of  Sin  be  manifested;  the  mystery  of  iniquity  still 

1  As,  for  example,  Sixtus  IV ,  Innocent  VIII.,  Alexander  VEL 

*  The  massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew. 

'  See  Froude's  '  The  English  in  Ireland,'  1  ik.  iii.  oh.  i.  seot  %, 
'  See  Eadie,  '  On  the  Thessalonians,'  p.  353. 
'  Hofinann's  '  Thessalonioher,'  p.  333. 

•  Ewald's  '  Sendsehreiber  der  Apostel  Paulus,'  p.  27. 

'  Olshausen, '  On  the  Thessalonians,'  pp.  488,  489,  Clark's  translation. 


oh.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  «1 


working,  and  much  advanced  in  its  working ;  the  restrainer  still  hindering.  And  let  us 
ask  ourselves — What  does  this  represent  to  us  ?  Is  it  not  indicative  of  a  state  in  which 
the  lawlessness  is  working  on,  so  to  speak,  underground,  under  the  surface  of  things, 
gaining  throughout  these  many  ages  more  expansive  force,  more  accumulated  power, 
but  still  hidden  and  unconcentrated  ?  And,  might  we  not  look,  in  the  progress  of  such 
a  state  of  things,  for  repeated  minor  embodiments  of  this  lawlessness;  the  many  Anti- 
christs (1  John  ii.  18)  springing  up  here  and  there  in  different  countries,  the  apostasy 
going  onward  and  growing,  just  as  there  were  of  Christ  himself  frequent  types  and 
minor  embodiments  before  he  came  in  the  flesh  ?  Thus  in  the  papacy,  where  so  many 
of  the  prophetic  features  are  combined,  we  see,  as  it  were,  a  standing  embodiment  and 
type  of  the  final  Antichrist — in  the  remarkable  words  of  Gregory  the  Great,  the 
prcBeursor  Antichristi;  and  in  Nero,  and  in  every  persecutor  as  be  arose,  and  Mahomet, 
and  Napoleon,  and  many  other  forms  and  agencies  of  evil,  other  and  more  transient 
types  and  examples  of  him."1  And  Bishop  Ellicott  remarks,  "The  adversary  is 
Antichrist,  no  mere  set  of  principles  or  succession  of  opponents,  but  one  single  person, 
being  as  truly  man  as  he  whom  he  impiously  opposes."  And  he  observes,  "  The 
restraining  principle  is  the  power  of  well-ordered  human  rule,  the  principles  of  legality 
as  opposed  to  those  of  lawlessness,  of  which  the  Ronjan  emperor  was  the  then  embodi- 
ment and  manifestation."  8  Similar  views  are  adopted  by  Bishop  Alexander,8  Dr.  Eadie, 
Lillie,'  and  Riggenbach.  Meyrick,  in  his  interesting  and  exhaustive  article  on  "  Anti- 
christ," in  the  appendix  to  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible/  thus  expresses  his  view 
of  the  sum  of  Scripture  teaching  with  regard  to  Antichrist :  "  It  would  appear  that 
there  is  to  be  evolved  from  the  womb  of  the  corrupt  Church  an  individual  Antichrist, 
who,  being  himself  a  scoffer  and  contemner  of  all  religion,  will  yet  act  as  the  patron 
and  defender  of  the  corrupt  Church,  and  compel  men  to  submit  to  her  sway  by  the  force 
of  the  secular  arm  and  by  means  of  bloody  persecutions.  He  will  unite  the  old  foes, 
superstition  and  unbelief,  in  a  combined  attack  on  liberty  and  religion.  He  will  have 
the  power  of  performing  lying  miracles  and  beguiling  souls,  being  the  embodiment  of 
Satanic  as  distinct  from  brutal  wickedness."  Or,  as  Lange  puts  it,  "  Antichrist  may 
proceed  from  •  coalition  between  completed  absolutism  and  completed  radicalism." 

Of  course,  according  to  this  view,  the  fulfilment  being  yet  future,  we  cannot  apply 
t.o  its  truth  or  falsehood  the  characteristics  given  us  in  the  prophecy  itself.  It  appears 
to  be  the  uniform  doctrine  of  Scripture,  as  seen  both  in  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment and  of  the  New,  that  before  the  consummation  of  all  things  there  will  be  a  final 
and  desperate  struggle  between  the  principles  of  good  and  evil.  The  revolt  against  all 
rule  and  authority,  the  spread  of  Nihilism,  the  increase  of  infidelity  and  agnosticism, 
the  unblushing  proclamation  of  atheism  and  the  support  given  to  it  in  the  scientific 
and  political  world,  the  deification  of  materialism,  are  all  the  precursors  of  Antichrist. 
It  may  only  require  a  dissolution  of  order  and  a  corruption  of  morals,  greater  and  more 
universal  than  that  which  occurred  in  the  great  French  Revolution,  to  usher  in  the 
coming  of  the  Man  of  Sin,  who,  amid  the  confusion,  will  seize  upon  the  sceptre  of 
dominion.  We  may  figure  him  as  an  individual,  a  man  of  more  commanding  abilities 
and  far  greater  wickedness  than  the  first  Napoleon ;  one  who  will  subdue  the  world, 
and  in  the  height  of  his  impiety  and  ambition  proclaim  his  atheism,  and  that  man 
himself  is  God.  We  cannot  penetrate  into  the  future,  but  we  may  rest  confident  that, 
if  such  a  state  of  things  should  happen,  the  final  victory  of  the  good  over  the  evil 
cannot  be  doubted ;  the  breath  of  the  Lord  is  sufficient  to  overthrow  the  kingdom  of 
Antichrist,  and  to  baffle  all  his  pretensions.  "  Whom  the  Lord  shall  slay  with  the 
breath  of  his  mouth,  and  annihilate  by  the  appearance  of  his  coming." 

'  Alford's  *  Greek  Testament,'  vol.  iii.,  Prolegomena,  p.  67. 

•  Ellicott,  '  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,'  p.  109. 

•  Commentary  on  the  Thessalonians  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  To?,  iii.  p.  741 

•  iillie's '  Lectures  on  the  Thessalonians,'  p.  537.  etc. 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  hi.  1—18 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  ID. 


Contbkts. — The  apostle  now  comes  to  the 
conclusion  of  his  Epistle.  He  heseeclies  the 
Thessalonians  for  an  interest  in  their  prayers, 
that  the  gospel  may  be  rapidly  diffused  and 
glorified  by  numerous  conversions,  and  that 
he  and  his  fellow-workers  may  be  enabled 
to  preach  it  nnhindered  by  the  opposition  of 
their  enemies.  He  expresses  his  confidence 
that  the  Lord  will  preserve  them  from  evil 
and  render  them  obedient  to  his  instruc- 
tions, it  being  his  earnest  prayer  for  them 
that  they  might  be  directed  into  the  love  of 
God  and  the  patience  of  Jesus  Christ  The 
apostle  then  proceeds  to  admonish  them  on 
account  of  the  disorderly  conduct  which 
many  of  them  exhibited.  He  had  heard 
that  there  were  some  among  them  who 
walked  disorderly,  and  who,  either  from 
dread  or  from  excitement  on  account  of 
their  belief  in  the  immediate  coming  of  the 
Lord,  had  desisted  from  their  worldly  em- 
ployments. He  commands  such  to  return  to 
their  duties,  giving  himself  as  an  example, 
inasmuch  as,  when  at  Thessalonica,  he  had 
laboured  with  his  own  hands  for  support. 
If,  however,  such  disorderly  persons  were 
not  to  be  persuaded,  then  he  enjoins  the 
members  of  the  Church  to  withdraw  from 
them  and  exclude  them  from  their  society, 
in-  order  that  they  might  be  ashamed  and 
brought  to  repentance  and  amendment  of 
life.  He  invokes  peaoe  upon  them  from  the 
Lord  of  peace ;  he  authenticates  his  Epistle 
to  guard  against  imposition ;  and  concludes 
with  his  apostolic  benediction. 

Ver.  1. — Finally;  furthermore;  for  the 
rett;  introducing  the  concluding  part  of 
the  Epistle  (see  1  Thess.  iv.  1).  Brethren, 
pray  for  us  (see  a  similar  request  in  1  Thess. 
v.  25).  Observe  the  unselfishness  of  the 
apostle's  request.  He  does  not  ask  the 
Thessalonians  to  pray  specially  for  himself, 
but  for  the  unimpeded  diffusion  and  success 
of  the  gospel,  and  for  himself  only  in  so  far 
aa  that  he  might  be  freed  from  all  hindrances 
in  preaching  the  gospel — that  God  would  be 
pleased  to  crown  his  labours  with  success. 
That ;  introducing  the  subject-matter  of 
prayer;  what  he  requested  the  Thessa- 
lonians to  pray  for.  The  word  of  the  Lord — 
namely,  the  gospel — may  have  free  course ; 
literally,  may  run  ;  that  all  obstacles  to  its 


progress  may  be  removed ;  that  its  diffusion 
may  be  free  and  unimpeded ;  that,  like  the 
sun,  it  may  rejoice  as  a  strong  man  to  run 
his  race  (Ps.  xix.  5 ;  comp.  Ps  cxlvii.  15, 
"  He  sendeth  forth  his  commandment  upon 
earth:  his  word  runneth  very  swiftly"). 
And  be  glorified;  namely,  in  the  conversion 
of  souls  (comp.  Acts  xiii.  48).  The  allusion 
may  be  to  the  applause  given  to  the  victors 
in  the  foot-races  which  constituted  so  con- 
siderable a  part  of  the  Grecian  games.  This 
personification  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  is 
a  favourite  figure  with  the  apostle.  "In 
St.  Paul's  language  there  is  but  a  thin  film 
between  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Divine  per- 
sonal Spirit,  and  the  spirit  in  the  believer's 
inmost  being.  And  so  in  St.  Paul's  concep- 
tion there  is  but  a  thin  film  between  the 
Word  preached  and  the  living  Word  of  God 
who  is  God"  (Bishop  Alexander).  Even  as 
it  is  with  you ;  a  recognition  of  the  eager- 
ness with  which  the  Thessalonians  had 
received  the  gospel. 

Ver.  2. — And  that;  a  further  addition 
to  the  prayer.  We ;  either  I  Paul,  or  else 
Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy.  May  be 
delivered ;  not  may  ''  come  off  victorious 
whether  by  life  or  death"  (Calvin),  but 
m,iy  be  rescued  from  our  enemies.  Jowett 
observes  that  we  have  here  the  shrinking 
of  the  flesh  from  the  dangers  which  awaited 
the  apostle.  But  there  is  no  trace  of 
cowardice  in  these  words ;  the  apostle  de- 
sires deliverance,  not  for  his  own  sake,  but 
for  the  sake  of  the  free  diffusion  of  the 
gospel.  From  unreasonable ;  a  word  whose  > 
original  meaning  is  "  out  of  place ; "  then 
used  in  an  ethical  sense,  "wicked,"  "absurd," 
"  unreasonable ; "  perhaps  here  applied  to 
persons  who  will  not  listen  to  arguments. 
And  wicked  men.  By  these  unreasonable 
and  wicked  men  are  not  to  be  understood 
the  Jews  of  Thessalonica,  from  whom  Paul 
formerly  suffered,  for  their  influence  would 
hardly  extend  to  Corinth;  nor  Christians 
who  were  only  so  in  name  (Calvin),  and 
specially  the  Judaizing  Christians,  for  there 
is  no  allusion  as  yet  to  their  attacks  upon 
the  apostle ;  but  the  fanatical  and  unbeliev- 
ing Jews  at  Corinth  (see  Acts  xviii.  12). 
For  all  men  have  not  faith ;  or,  the  faith ; 
the  faith  it  not  (he  possession  of  all.  Faith 
here  is  the  Christian  faith:  all  men  have 
not  received  it — obviously  alluding  to  the 
unbelieving  Jews.  The  words  cannot  mean, 
all  men  have  not  the  true  faith — referring 
to  pretended  Christians— false  brethren,  but 
secret  enemies  (Calvin).  Nor  is  it  to  be 
rendered  "  all  men  have  not  the  capacity  of 
faith."  Others  understand  by  faith  that 
upright  and  candid  disposition  which  would 


ch.  m.  1— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&       63 


engage  men  to  receive  the  testimony  of  the 
apostle ;  and  others  fidelity,  as  if  the  apostle 
meant,  "There  are  few  mien  whom  we  can 
trust" 

Ver.  8. — But;  in  contrast  with  the  men 
iust  mentioned.  The  Lord  is  faithful ;  as  if 
the  apostle  had  said, "  Man.  may  be  faithless, 
but  the  Lord  is  faithful "  (see  Bom.  iii.  4). 
"  In  contrast  to  the  infidelity  of  man,  he 
praises  the  fidelity  of  God"  (Bengel).  By 
the  Lord,  Christ  is  meant.  In  the  former 
Epistle,  faithfulness  is  attributed  to  God 
(1  Thess.  v.  24),  here  to  Christ.  This  faith- 
fulness of  Christ  consisted  in  watching  over 
his  Church,  and  in  effecting  its  diffusion  in 
spite  of  all  tlie  opposition  of  these  unreason- 
able and  wicked  men.  Who  shall  stablish 
you,  and  keep  you  from  evil ;  or,  the  evil. 
The  word  "  evil "  may  be  either  masculine 
or  neuter:  if  masculine,  then  it  denotes 
"the  evil  one;"  if  neuter,  then  "evil" 
in  general.  There  is  nothing  in  the  word 
itself  to  determine  its  meaning ;  this  must 
De  learned  from  the  context.  Most  com- 
mentators (Calvin,  Bengel,  Olshausen,  Hof- 
mann,  Macknight,  Eliicott,  Eadie,  and 
Bishop  Alexander)  suppose  tl  at  the  evil 
one  is  meant ;  ami  it  is  so  rendered  in  the 
E.V. :  "  Guard  you  from  the  evil  one."  .  But 
it  is  better  to  take  the  word  abstractly — 
"  evil "  in  general,  whether  evil  persons  or 
evil  things ;  as  a  contrast  to  "  every  good 
word  and  work"  (ch.  ii.  17).  So  Alford, 
Liinemann,  De  Wette,  Jowett,  Lillie.  There 
is  the  same  difference  of  opinion  with  regard 
to  the  words  in  the  Lord's  Prayer :  "  Deliver 
us  from  evil;"  or  "from  (he  evil  one" 
(E.V.).  Here,  also,  notwithstanding  the 
high  authorities  on  the  opposite  side,  we 
consider  that  our  Lord's  words  are  not 
'  limited  to  the  evil  one,  but  are  to  be  taken 
generally — "  evil  "  in  the  widest  sense,  as 
being  much  more  forcible. 

Ver.  4. — And  we  have  confidence  in  the 
Lord.  The  apostle  confidently  expects  the 
obedience  of  the  Thessalonians,  but  his 
confidence  is  not  fixed  on  them — on  their 
own  efforts,  endeavours,  and  resolutions — 
but  on  the  Lord,  namely,  Christ;  on  his 
grace  and  strength  communicated  to  and 
perfected  in  weakness.  The  obedience  of 
the  Thessalonians  flowed  from  the  grace 
of  Christ;  it  was  in  consequence  of  the 
communication  of  the  influences  of  his 
Spirit  that  they  were  enabled  to  make  pro- 
gress and  to  persevere  in  the  Christian  life. 
"  Here,"  observes  Professor  Jowett,  "  as 
elsewhere,  the  apostle  speaks  of  believing, 
hoping,  doing  all  things  in  Christ.  We 
lead  an  ordinary  life  as  well  as  a  religious 
one ;  but,  with  the  apostle,  his  ordinary  life 
is  his  religious  one,  and  hence  he  uses 
religious  expressions  in  reference  to  all  that 
he  nays  and  does."    The  apostle  lives  in 


the  sphere  of  Christ.  Touching  you ;  with 
reference  to  you — the  direction  of  his  con- 
fidence. That  ye  both  do  and  will  do  the 
things  which  we  command  yon.  There  is 
here  the  same  union  of  Divine  assistance 
and  human  effort,  of  God's  working  and 
man's  working,  which  pervades  the  whole 
s  heme  of  the  gospel  salvation  (see  Phil.  ii. 
12,13). 

Ver.  5. — And  the  Lord ;  namely,  Christ, 
for  so  the  word  "  Lord  "  is  to  be  rendered  in 
St.  Paul's  Epistles.  Bishop  Wordsworth 
supposes  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  here 
invoked,  as  both  God  and  Christ  are  after- 
wards mentioned  in  the  petition;  but  the 
term  "  Lord  "  is  not  applied  by  the  apostle 
to  the  Holy  Ghost ;  2  Cor.  iii.  17  -is  the 
only  apparent  exception.  Direct  your  hearts  ; 
as  the  heart  is  the  fountain  of  Christian 
life — the  centre  of  the  will.  Into  the  love 
of  God.  Here  not  God's  love  to  us,  specially 
"the  manifestation  of  the  love  of  God  in 
Christ  and  his  work  of  redemption"  (Ols- 
hausen) ;  nor  the  love  of  God  to  man,  which 
is  to  be  the  pattern  of  our  love  to  God  ;  but, 
objectively,  our  love  to  God.  This  love  of 
God  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  Law ;  and  hence 
the  apostle  prays  lhat  the  Thessalonians 
may  be  directed  into  it  as  the  source  and 
essence  of  all  acceptable  obedience.  And 
into  the  patient  waiting  for  Christ.  The 
words,  "  patient  waiting,"  wre  but  one 
word  in  the  original,  generally  translated 
"  patience  "  or  "  endurance."  The  clause 
has  been  differently  interpreted.  Some 
(Calvin,  Hofmann,  Jowett)  render  it,  as  in 
the  A. V.,  "patient  waiting  for  Christ." 
And  this  is  conformable  to  the  context,  as 
the  object  of  Paul  was  to  repress  all  impatient 
longing  for  the  advent.  But  such  a  mean- 
ing is  not  linguistically  justifiable.  Others 
render  it,  "patience  for  Clirist,"  that  is, 
steadfast  end  urance  for  his  sake  (De  Wette) ; 
but  there  is  no  preposition  in  the  original. 
The  words  simply  mean  "  Christ's  patience," 
or  "the  patience  of  Christ"  (B.V.),  the 
patience  which  he  exhibited  under  his 
unparalleled  sufferings.  The  Thessalonians 
were  exposed  to  persecutions,  and  therefore 
the  apostle  prays  that  they  might  be  directed 
into  the  patience  of  Christ,  as  this  would 
enable  them  to  bear  all  their  sufferings  with 
composure.  Love  and  patience  comprehend 
the  active  and  passive  virtues  of  Christianity. 

Now  follows  a  warning  against  the  dis- 
orderly life  and  oonduct  which  the  expec- 
tation of  the  immediate  advent  of  Christ 
had  produced.  On  account  of  the  supposed 
nearness  of  the  day  of  the  Lord,  great 
disorders  had  arisen  in  the  Thessalonian 
Church.  Work  had  been  given  up  by 
many,  who    walked    about    in    fanatical 


64        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ex.  m.  1— 18 


idleness.  The  apostle  had  censured  this 
conduct  in  his  former  Epistle  (1  Thess.  iv. 
11,  12),  but  the  evil  had  rather  increased 
than  diminished;  and,  accordingly,  he  se- 
verely rebukes  this  spirit,  and  sets  himself 
to  correct  the  disorders  occasioned  by  it. 

Ver.  6. — Now  we  command  you,  brethren. 
An  injunction,  not  specially  direcled  to  the 
elders  or  office-beareis,  but  to  the  members,  of 
the  Church  in  general(see  1  Thess.  v.  14).  In 
the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Strength- 
ening the  command,  as  being  given  in  the 
Name  and  autl  lority  of  the  great  Head  of  the 
Church ;  not  we,  but  Christ  himself  commands 
you.  That  ye  withdraw  yourselves.  A 
nautical  expression,  denoting  to  "  shorten 
the  sails ; "  hence  metaphorically  to  keep  out 
of  the  way,  to  withdraw ;  that  ye  avoid  in- 
tercourse and  fellowship  with  ;  no  allusion 
as  yet  to  excommunication.  From  every 
brother — fellow  Christian — that  walketh  dis- 
orderly ;  literally,  out  of  tlis  ranks  (see  1 
Thess.  v.  H).  And  not  after  the  tradition; 
or,  the  instructions ;  not  the  example  of  the 
apostle,  which  is  afterwards  mentioned,  but 
the  instructions  which  he  orally  delivered 
when  at  Thessalonica,  and  subsequently 
confirmed  by  the  Epistle  which  he  had 
written  to  them  (see  ch.  ii.  15).  Which  he 
received  of  us.  Here  the  readings  of  manu- 
scripts differ.  Some  read  "which  you  re- 
ceived of  us,''  and  others  "  which  they," 
namely,  those  represented  by  the  brother 
that  walketh  disorderly,  "  received  of  us " 
(so  E.V.). 

Ver.  7. — For  yourselves  know  ;  without  it 
being  necessary  for  me  to  say  anything  about 
the  matter;  ye  yourselves  are  witnesses. 
How  ye  ought  to  follow  (or,  imitate)  us; 
better,  perhaps,  to  be  restricted  to  Paul  than 
used  as  inclusive  of  Silas  and  Timothy.  For 
we  behaved  not  ourselves  disorderly  among 
you ;  referring  to  the  apostle's  residence  in 
Thessalonica. 

Ver.  8. — Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's 
bread;  a  Hebraism  for  "neither  did  we 
get  our  sustenance,"  a9  bread  was  the  staff 
of  life.  For  nought ;  gratis,  free  of  expense. 
But  wrought  with  labour  and  travail  night 
and  day,  that  we  might  not  be  chargeable 
unto  any  of  you.  The  apostle  makes  the 
same  declaration  in  his  First  Epistle,  ex- 
pressed in  almost  similar  termB :  "  For  ye 
remember,  brethren,  our  labour  and  travail  ; 
for  labouring  night  and  day,  because  we 
would  not  be  chargeable  unto  any  of  you, 
we  preached  unto  yon  the  gospel  of  God  "  (1 
Thess.  ii.  9). 

Ver.  9. — Not  because  we  have  not  power ; 
that  is,  to  demand  support.  Paul,  as  an 
apostle,  had  the  rightof  maintenance  from  the 
Churches  among  whom  he  laboured.  This 
right  of  support  he  insists  upon  in  the  First 


Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  (1  Cor.  ix.  1  —18). 

But  for  the  sake  of  his  converts,  to  give 
them  an  example  of  diligent  working,  and 
to  remove  every  impediment  to  the  progress 
of  the  gospel,  he  often  waived  his  rights. 
Thus  he  did  at  Thessalonica  (1  Thess.  ii.  6, 
9),  at  Corinth  (Acts  xviii.  3 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  9), 
and  at  Ephesus  (Acts  xx.  34) ;  in  all  these 
places  he  laboured  for  his  maintenance  as  a 
tent-maker.  But — we  acted  so — to  make  our- 
selves an  ensample  unto  you  to  follow — 
imitate — us. 

Ver.  10. — For  even  when  we  were  with 
you ;  during  our  residence  in  Thessalonica. 
This  we  commanded,  that  if  any  man  would 
not  work,  neither  should  he  eat.  This  or 
similar  expressions  have  been  shown  to  be 
a  proverb  in  frequent  use  among  the  Jews. 
Thus :  "  Whoever  doth  not  work  doth  not 
eat"  ('Bereshith  Eabba');  "Let  not  him 
who  would  not  labour  before  the  sabbath 
eat  on  the  sabbath  "  ('  In  Lib.  Zenon.').  It 
is  a  law  of  naiure,  and  the  apostle  here  sanc- 
tions it  as  a  law  of  Christianity.  There  is 
here  a  reference  to  the  sentence  pronounced 
on  man  in  Paradise  in  consequence  of  dis- 
obedience :  "  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt 
thou  eat  bread  "  (Gen.  iii.  19).  Labour,  in- 
deed, may  in  one  point  of  view  be  considered 
as  part  ot  the  curse,  but  it  is  also  a  blessing 
adapted  to  man's  fallen  nature.  Labour  is 
the  law  of  God;  idleness  is  the  parent  of 
many  crimes  and  iB  pruductive  of  misery. 
He  who  has  no  business  allotted  to  him 
ought  to  choose  some  useful  occupation  for 
himself. 

Ver.  11. — For ;  the  reason  for  the  allusion 
to  this  proverb.  We  hear.  The  apostle  had 
either  heard  from  Timothy  who  had  rejoined 
him  from  Thessalonica,  or  from  the  report 
of  the  bearers  of  the  First  Epistle.  That 
there  are  some  which  walk  among  you  dis- 
orderly, working  not  at  all,  but  are  busy- 
bodies.  There  is  here  a  paranomasia  or 
play  upon  words,  the  words  "working"  and 
"busyb.dies"  being  cognate.  It  is  difficult 
to  preserve  the  resemblance  in  a  translation. 
**  Busy  only  with  what  is  not  their  own 
business  "  (Jowett) ;  "  Working  at  no  busi- 
ness, but  being  busybodies"  (Ellicolt) ;  "  Not 
busy,  but  busybodies  "  (Wordsworth).  The 
word  "  busybodies  "  denotes  buBy  in  useless 
ami  superfluous  things,  about  which  one 
need  not  trouble  himself — occupied  about 
trifles.  The  apostle  refers  to  the  fanatical 
excitement  in  the  Church  on  account  of 
which  the  Thessalonians,  instead  of  occupy- 
ing themselves  with  the  fulfilment  of  the 
duties  of  their  eaithly  calling,  busied  them- 
selves about  matters  which  were  unprofitable 
and  vain. 

Ver.  12. — Now  them  that  are  suoh  we 
command  and  exhort  by  (or,  as  the  best 
manuscripts    read,    in)    our    Lord    Jestu 


oh.  m.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALOKIANS.        t>5 


Christ ;  in  him,  as  the  source  of  authority ; 
"  In  his  Name."  That  with  quietness.  In 
contrast  to  being  busybodies,  with  calmness 
of  spirit,  freedom  from  excitement.  They 
work,  and  eat  their  own  bread;  not  the 
bread  of  others,  hut  their  own,  for  which 
they  have  laboured  and  which  they  have 
earned.  They  would  thus  be  independent 
of  the  liberality  and  generosity  of  others. 
(For  similar  exhortations,  see  1  Thess.  iv. 
11;  Eph.  iv.  i8.) 

Ver.  13. — But  ye,  brethren;  contrasted 
with  those  who  walk  disorderly,  ye  who  have 
not  neglected  your  worldly  employments. 
Be  not  weary  in  well-doing ;  or,  as  it  is  in 
the  margin,  faint  not  in  well-doing  ;  "  lose  not 
heart  in  well-doing  "  (Ellicott).  The  phrase 
has  been  differently  interpreted.  Thus 
Chrysostom  explains  it  that  indolent  persons, 
however  justly  they  may  be  condemned,  must 
not  be  suffered  to  perish  from  want — a  mean- 
ing opposed  to  the  context.  Calvin  renders 
it  that,  although  there  are  many  thai,  are 
undeserving  and  abuse  our  liberality,  we 
must  not  on  this  account  leave  off  helping 
those  who  need  our  aid:  let  not  the  slotli  of 
those  disorderly  persons  hinder  or  damp 
your  charity — a  most  needful  admonition, 
but  it  does  not  exhaust  all  that  is  meant  by 
the  precept.  Others  restrict  it  to  diligence 
in  our  earthly  duties :  though  others  be 
idle,  working  not  at  all,  let  not  their  example 
lead  you  astray ;  be  not  ye  weary  in  doing 
what  is  right  and  proper  (  Liinemann).  But 
the  phrase  is  to  be  understood  in  its  general 
sense,  denoting  holy  and  upright  conduct 
(see  Gal.  vi.  9,  where  the  same  exhortation 
is  given). 

Ver.  14. — And  if  any  man  obey  not  our 
word  by  this  Epistle,  note  that  man.  Some 
attach  the  words,  "  by  this  Epistle,"  to  "  note 
that  man,"  and  render  the  cluuse,  "  Note  that 
man  by  an  epistle  to  me."  Thus  Calvin : 
"  He  desires  that  they  may  be  reported  to 
him,  that  he  may  reprove  them  by  his 
authority."  So  also  in  the  margin  of  our 
A. V.:  "Signify  that  man  by  an  epistle." 
But  the  piesence  of  the  article  denoting  a 
definite  Epistle,  "this  Epistle,"  and  the 
order  of  the  words  in  the  Greek,  are  against 
this  interpretation.  Others  render  the  clause, 
"  Note  that  man  by  this  Epistle ; "  point  out 
to  him  the  injunctions  and  the  warnings 
which  are  contained  in  it  against  such  a  line  of 
conduct ;  but  such  a  meaning  is  too  artificial. 
It  is  better,  therefore,  to  attach  the  words, 
"by  this  Epistle,"  to  "  our  word,"  as  in  the 
A.V. :  "  If  any  man  obey  not  our  word  by 
this  Epistle."  "  Note  that  man  j "  that  is,  set 
•  mark  upon  him,  note  him  for  the  sake  of 
avoidance,  excommunicate  him  from  your 
society.  And  have  no  company  with  him. 
Exclude  him  from  your  fellowship  meetings, 
your  lovo-feasts.    That  he  may  be  ashamed; 

II.  THESSALONIANS. 


the  design  or  object  of  thus  noting  him. 
As  if  the  apostle  had  said,  "Bring  the 
force  of  Christian  opinion  to  bear  upon  him. 
Show  your  moral  indignation  by  excluding 
him  from  the  Christiau  community."  The 
noting  or  excommunicating  was  moro  of 
the  nature  of  a  correction  than  of  a  punish- 
ment, and  its  design  was  the  reclaiming  of 
the  offender. 

Ver.  15. — Yet;  or  as  it  is  in  the  original, 
and;  a  purely  connective  particle.  Count 
him  not  as  an  enemy;  an  entire  oulcast. 
But  admonish  him  as  a  brother;  a  Chris- 
tian brother.  No  hostile  feeling  was  to  be 
united  with  this  avoidance  of  intercourse 
with  the  erring,  but  rather  loving  admo- 
nition, inasmuch  as  he  was  still  a  Christian 
brother. 

Ver.  16. — Now  the  lord  of  peace  himself. 
In  1  Thess.  v.  23  it  is  "  the  God  of  peace  " 
who  is  invoked:  "And  the  very  God  of 
peace  sanctify  you  wholly."  Here  it  is 
Christ  who  is  named  as  "  the  Lord  of  peace." 
He  is  the  Lord  of  peace,  as  the  Author,  the 
Procurer,  the  Mediator  of  peace.  Peace  is 
here  to  be  taken  in  its  widest  sense — peace 
with  God,  complete  salvation.  Give  you 
peace  always  by  all  means.  Some  manu- 
scripts read  "  in  every  place,"  but  the  read- 
ing in  our  version  is  best  attested — "  always 
by  all  means ;  "  "  at  all  times  and  in  every 
way ;  "  whether  it  be  outward  or  inward,  for 
time  or  for  eternity.  The  apostle  could 
desire  no  higher  blessing  for  his  converts. 
The  Lord  be  with  you  all. 

Ver.  17. — The  salutation  of  Paul  with  mine 
own  hand.  The  apostle  usually  dictated 
his  Epistles  to  an  amanuensis,  but  wrote 
the  concluding  words  with  Mb  own  hand. 
Thus  Tertius  was  his  amanuensis  when  he 
wrote  the  Epistle  to  the  Bomans  (Bom.  xvi. 
22).  Probably  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians 
is  an  exception  (Gal.  vi.  11),  and  also  the 
Epistle  to  Philemon  (Philem.  19).  The  same 
authentication  expressed  in  the  same  words 
is  found  in  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corin, 
thians  (1  Cor.  xvi.  21),  and  in  the  Epistle  to 
the  Colossians  (Col.  iv.  18).  Whioh  ;  refer- 
ring, not  to  the  salutation,  but  to  the  whole 
clause;  which  circumstance.  Is  the  token; 
the  mark  of  authentication.  Of  every  Epistle. 
Such  authentication  was  especially  necessary 
in  the  case  of  the  Thessalonians,  as  it  would 
seem  that  a  forged  epistle  had  been  circu- 
lated among  them  (ch.  ii.  2).  Some  restriot 
the  words  to  the  Epistles  which  the  apostle 
would  afterwards  write  to  the  Thessalonians 
(Liinemann) ;  but  they  are  rather  to  be  under- 
stood of  a  caution  whioh  the  apostle  prac- 
tised, or  was  to  practise,  in  all  his  Epistles. 
Some  refer  the  token  to  the  words,  "The 
salutation  of  Paul  with  mine  own  hand," 
and  although  these  words  are  only  found  in 
two  other  Epistles,  yet  it  is  asserted  that  the 


66 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  m.  1—18. 


other  Epistles  were  otherwise  sufficiently 
authenticated.  But  it  appears  better  to  un- 
derstand by  the  salutation  the  benediction 
whioh  follows ;  and  a  similar  salutation  or 


benediction  is  found  at  the  close  of  all  Paul's 
Epistles  (see  1  Thess.  v.  28). 

Ver.  18. — The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesu* 
Christ  be  with  you  all. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Ver.  1. — Intercessory  prayer.  1.  Its  duty.  We  must  not  be  selfish  or  confined  in 
our  prayers,  but  bear  each  other's  burdens  before  a  throne  of  grace.  Christian  love 
finds  its  outlet  in  intercession.  A  desire  for  the  salvation  of  others  must  manifest 
itself  in  prayer  for  their  conversion.  God  is  the  Hearer  of  prayer,  and  will  answer  our 
prayers  for  others  as  well  as  for- ourselves.  The  command  of  God  to  make  intercession 
for  all  men  should  constrain  us,  and  the  example  of  holy  men  should  encourage  us. 
2.  Its  objects.  Sinners,  that  they  may  be  saved  ;  believers,  that  they  may  be  confirmed 
in  the  faith  and  kept  from  evil ;  ministers,  that  their  ministry  may  be  blessed ;  the 
gospel,  that  it  may  have  free  course  and  be  glorified. 

Ver.  3. — Perseverance  of  the  saints.  1.  Its  nature.  By  the  perseverance  of  the 
saints  is  meant  that  all  true  believers,  those  who  are  united  to  Christ  by  faith  and 
sanctified  by  his  Spirit,  can  never  fall  from  the  faith  ;  that  they  shall  always  abide  in 
a  state  of  grace  or  favour  with  God ;  and  that  they  shall  continue  in  holiness  unto  the 
end.  2.  Its  ground.  The  perseverance  of  the  saints  is  founded  on  the  faithfulness 
of  Christ.  "  The  Lord  is  faithful."  He  who  has  begun  the  good  work  will  carry  it  on ; 
he  who  intercedes  for  us  in  heaven  will  obtain  his  requests ;  he  who  has  bestowed  upon 
us  his  Spirit  will  not  withdraw  his  grace.  3.  Its  uses.  The  perseverance  of  the  saints 
is  full  of  comfort  to  confirmed  believers ;  it  is  that  which  imparts  security  to  all  their 
other  blessings,  transforms  their  hopes  into  assurance,  and  fills  them  with  joy  unspeak- 
able. On  the  other  hand,  it  affords  no  encouragement  to  licentiousness,  for  it  is  a  per- 
severance in  holiness ;  it  is  not  that  believers  will  be  saved  whatever  their  conduct  may 
be,  but  that  they  will  persevere  in  holiness  unto  the  end. 

Ver.  5. — The  patience  of  Christ.  1.  Its  perfection.  As  seen  in  Lis  conduct  toward 
God  and  man  during  his  sufferings,  and  in  contract  to  the  conduct  of  the  most  patient 
men,  as  for  example  Job,  Moses,  and  Paul.  2.  Its  example.  We  have  need  of  patience 
in  this  world  of  toil  and  sufferim:.  A  contemplation  of  the  patience  with  which  Christ 
endured  his  unparalleled  sufferings  is  the  best  antidote  against  impatience  under  any 
sufferings  which  we  may  be  called  upon  to  endure. 

Ver.  6. — Avoidance  of  evil  company.  The  apostle  commands  us  to  withdraw  ourselves 
from  every  brother  that  walketh  disorderly,  and  to  have  no  fellowship  with  those  who 
obey  not  his  instructions.  We  must  avoid  making  wicked  men  our  companions,  other- 
wise we  shall  soon  be  led  astray  and  contaminated  by  their  evil  principles.  The  happi- 
ness or  misery  of  the  young  for  time  and  for  eternity  is,  humanly  speaking,  dependent 
upon  those  whom  they  now  choose  as  their  intimate  companions. 

Ver.  10. — The  sanctity  of  labour.  True  religion  hallows  earthly  labour.  Christianity 
is  not  designed  to  draw  a  man  out  of  the  world,  to  cause  him  to  neglect  his  earthly 
duties,  or  to  make  him  idle;  but  to  consecrate  and  sanctify  his  worldly  employments; 
to  cause  him  to  perioral  them  in  a  religious  spirit,  and  to  look  up  to  God  as  his  chief 
Master.  Paul  himself  wrought  at  the  occupation  of  a  tent-maker ;  and  a  far  greater 
than  Paul,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself,  was  for  the  greater  part  of  his  life  engaged 
in  the  occupation  of  a  carpenter.  "Earthly  things,"  observes  Dr.  Arnold,  "are 
precious  when  we  use  them  as  the  materials  with  which  we  may  build  for  ourselves 
a  heavenly  habitation  ;  and  the  humblest  and  most  ordinary  trade  or  employment  may 
be  carried  on  with  such  a  temper  and  such  a  spirit  that  it  may  advance  us  daily  on  our 
way  to  heaven ;  and  the  angels  themselves  may  behold  us  engaged  in  it  with  respect 
and  love." 


Ver.  11. — Evil  of  being  busybodiei.    Basybodies  are  idle,  yet  busy ;  idle  as  regards 


cam.  1— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN&        6f 


their  own  work,  but  busy  with  the  business  of  others ;  ever  meddling  with  what 
belongs  not  to  them ;  always  counselling  others  and  interfering  with  their  concerns, 
whilst  neglecting  their  own ; — a  character  at  once  mean  and  degrading,  the  cause  of 
much  annoyance  to  themselves  and  of  mischief  to  others. 

Ver.  13. — Weariness  in  well-doing.  1.  The  specification  of  some  different  forms  of 
well-doing.  The  advancement  of  men's  temporal  interests,  the  promotion  of  religion, 
the  diffusion  of  the  gospel,  working  with  and  for  Christ.  We  must  remember  that  we 
ourselves  must  first  he  good  before  we  can  do  good ;  there  must  first  be  well-being 
before  there  can  be  well-doing.  Good  works  can  only  proceed  from  good  men.  2.  The 
causes  of  weariness  in  well-doing.  A  love  of  ease  and  a  wish  not  to  put  ourselves  to 
trouble ;  a  want  of  self-denial ;  the  monotony  of  the  work ;  a  want  of  co-operation 
and  sympathy ;  a  want  of  apparent  success ;  a  want  of  realization  of  Christ's  claims 
on  our  lives  and  services.  3.  Considerations  why  we  should  not  be  weary  in  well-doing. 
Our  duty  as  Christians ;  the  bright  example  of  Christ;  the  reward  which  awaits  us — 
the  rest  which  remains  for  the  people  of  God, 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1, 2. — The  prayers  of  the  Thessalonians  asked  by  the  apostle.  He  had  prayed 
for  them  ;  he  now  asks  them  to  pray  for  him. 

I.  Ministers  need  the  prayers  of  their  people.  "Finally,  brethren,  pray  for 
us."  1.  Because  their  work  is  a  great  work.  2.  Because  it  is  weighted  down  with 
opposition  and  hindrance.  3.  Because  ministers  feel  their  need,  not  only  of  human 
sympathy,  but  of  Divine  grace,  wisdom,  and  strength.  4.  Because  such  prayers  knit 
the  hearts  of  pastor  and  people  more  closely  together. 

IL  The  double  purport  op  the  prayer  for  the  apostle.  It  was  for  no  mere  per- 
sonal or  selfish  object,  but  had  exclusive  reference  to  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel.  To 
pray  for  ministers  is  to  pray  for  the  gospel.  1.  It  was  a  prayer  for  the  rapid  spread  of 
the  gospel.  "  That  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  run  and  be  glorified,  even  as  it  is  also 
with  you."  (1)  There  were  grave  hindrances  in  its  way  presented  by  Jewish  prejudice, 
Gentile  fanaticism,  and  the- jealousy  of  the  Roman  power.  He  is  anxious  that  the 
gospel  should  not  go  halting  and  picking  its  steps,  but  "like  a  stroDg  man  rejoicing 
to  run  a  race,"  overleaping  all  barriers  of  space  and  prejudice  and  hatred.  Ministers 
have  their  "  feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace."  It  is  God  only 
who  can  remove  all  impediments  and  make  the  mountains  a  plain  before  Zerubbabel 
(2)  The  apostle  was  anxious  that  the  gospel  should  be  glorified— as  "  the  power  of  Goc 
unto  salvation" — by  the  conversion  of  large  numbers  of  people,  by  their  cheerful 
obedience  to  the  truth,  and  by  their  orderly  walk  in  the  gospel.  He  quotes  the  example 
of  the  Thessalonians  themselves — ''even  as  it  is  with  you" — as  worthy  of  imitation 
in  spite  of  some  exceptional  defects.  The  courteous  reference  would  lead  his  converts 
to  pray  for  him  with  deeper  interest  and  fervour.  2.  It  was  a  prayer  for  deliverance 
from  obstructive  enemies.  "And  that  we  may  be  delivered  from  unreasonable  and 
wicked  men."  The  impediments  to  the  free  progress  of  the  gospel  were  evil  men. 
They  were  his  Jewish  enemies  at  Corinth  who  rose  against  the  apostle  and  brought 
him  to  the  judgment-seat  of  Gallio  (Acts  xviii.  12).  (1)  It  was  a  prayer  that  his 
career  might  not  be  cut  short  by  their  malignity.  The  apostle's  life  was,  perhaps,  the 
most  valuable  in  all  the  world  in  that  generation,  but  it  seemed  to  be  at  the  mercy 
of  men  without  scruple  or  mercy.  He  was,  indeed,  "  in  deaths  oft."  His_  enemies 
either  lay  in  wait  for  him  to  destroy  him,  or  roused  the  fanaticism  of  mobs  against  him. 
(2)  It  was  an  enmity  directed  by  men  without  any  check  from  reason  or  principle 
His  most  persevering  enemies  through  life  were  the  Jews.  No  reason  or  argument 
could  satisfy  them  or  mollify  their  hatred.  Their  conduct  was  easily  explained  by  the 
fact  that  "  all  men  have  not  faith."  As  if  nothing  better  could  be  expected  from 
godless  and  blaspheming  Jews. — T.  0. 

Vera.  3,  4. — The  apostle's  cheerful  assurance  and  confidence  on  behalf  of  the  Thessa- 


68         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  ra.  1— 1& 

'oniana.    He  dismisses  all  thoughts  about  himself,  and   returns  to  the  thought  ol 
comforting  his  converts. 

L  The  double  blessing  in  store  for  them.  "  Who  shall  stablish  you,  and  keep 
you  from  eviL"  1.  An  essential  factor  in  their  Christian  comfort  was  establishment 
(1)  in  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  which  were  threatened  by  godless  or  fickle  specu- 
lators ;  (2)  in  the  grace  of  faith,  which  may  be  weakened  by  persecution  or  by  miscon- 
ceptions of  truth ;  (3)  in  the  profession  of  faith,  which  true  believers  will  be  able  to 
hold  fast  to  the  end.  2.  An  equally  essential  factor  was  their  preservation  from  evil, 
either  (1)  in  the  form  of  sin,  that  it  should  not  have  dominion  over  them  or  reign  unto 
death  ;  (2)  or  in  the  form  of  Satanic  temptation ;  (3)  or  in  the  form  of  opposition 
from  unreasonable  and  wicked  men. 

II.  The  argument  to  assure  them  op  this  double  blessingi.  "The  Lord  is 
faithful."  He  will  be  true  to  his  promises,  and  not  suffer  one  of  them  to  fail.  The 
Lord  Jesus  is  at  once  the  Author  and  the  Finisher  of  our  faith.  "  We  are  complete  in 
him ; "  we  are  "  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might."  "  If  we  believe 
not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself"  (2  Tim.  ii.  13).  "I  can  do  all 
things  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  me  "  (Phil.  iv.  13). 

III.  The  confidence  of  the  apostle  based  on  this  assurance.  "But  we  have 
confidence  in  the  Lord  touching  you,  that  you  are  both  doing  and  will  do  the  things 
which  we  command  you."  1.  The  ultimate  ground  of  his  confidence  touching  them  was 
in  the  grace  and  strength  of  the  Lord,  not  in  themselves,  or  their  wisdom,  or  strength. 
2.  The  matter  of  his  confidence — their  present  and  future  obedience  to  his  commands. 
There  must  be  a  patient  continuance  in  well-doing ;  a  ready,  universal,  perpetual 
obedience  to  the  commands  he  had  already  given  them  by  the  authority  of  Christ,  and 
to  those  which  he  was  now  about  to  give  to  them. — T.  C. 

Ver.  5. — The  apostle's  further  prayer  for  his  converts.    They  needed  grace  to  enable 

them  to  discharge  all  these  duties. 

I.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  true  Director  of  the  heabt.  "  The  Lord  direct 
your  hearts  into  the  love  of  God,  and  the  patience  of  Christ."  1.  The  heart  need* 
direction.  It  is  the  fountain  of  life  and  feeling  and  action.  But  it  is  often  wayward 
in  its  impulses.  2.  The  heart  that  is  self-led  is  misled.  We  cannot  direct  our  own 
hearts,  neither  can  apostles  do  it  for  us ;  the  Lord  only  can  do  it.  He  directs  us  by 
his  Spirit,  not  only  into  all  truth,  but  into  all  right  feeling  and  all  acceptable  obedience. 
He  only  can  change  us  into  his  own  likeness. 

II.  The  right  direction  of  the  Christian  heabt.  "  Into  the  love  of  God,  and 
the  patience  of  Christ."  1.  The  love  of  God  is  the  spring  of  all  evangelical  obedience, 
and  the  motive-force  of  nil  spiritual  power.  The  Thessalonians  had  love  already,  but 
the  apostle  prays  for  fuller  measures  of  it,  that  they  may  be  prepared  for  yet  more 
exact  and  thorough  and  unquestioning  obedience.  2.  The  patience  of  Christ,  which 
so  characterized  him,  is  to  be  copied  in  the  lives  of  his  followers  exposed  to  similar  per- 
secutions. His  sufferings  are  their  sufferings ;  and  they  need  his  patience  to  enable 
them  to  endure  them,  as  well  as  to  sustain  that  "patient  continuance  in  well-doing" 
in  the  midst  of  evil  which  will  keep  them  free  from  restlessness  and  disorderly  walking. 
—T.  C. 

Ver.  6. — The  apostle's  method  of  dealing  with  the  idle  busybodies  of  the  Thcssalonian 
Church.     This  is  one  of  the  leading  objects  of  this  Epistle. 

I.  The  nature  of  the  offence  rebuked  by  the  apostle.  "Withdraw  your- 
selves from  every  brother  that  walketh  disorderly,  and  not  after  the  tradition  they 
received  from  us."  1.  It  was  a  habit  of  idleness  caused  by  the  unsettling  tendency  of 
the  belief  that  the  day  of  the  Lord's  coming  was  near  at  hand  to  wind  up  all  human 
affairs.  They  were,  therefore, "  working  not  at  all,"  allowing  themselves  to  be  ignobly 
dependent  either  upon  richer  brethren  or  upon  ecclesiastical  funds.  2.  Linked  with 
this  idle  habit  was  the  disposition  to  be  "  busybodies " — concerning  themselves  with 
matters  that  did  not  belong  to  them.  "  Bishops  in  other  men's  dioceses,"  as  the  figure 
of  the  apostle  elsewhere  describes  the  same  class  (1  Pet.  iv.  16) ;  like  the  younger  widows 
who  "  were  wandering  about  from  house  to  house,  and  not  only  idle,  but  tattlers  also 
and  busybodies"  (1  Tim.  v.  13).     This  unworthy  habit  of  life  was  a  serious  annoyanca 


ob.  m.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         6fi 

and  interruption  to  neighbours,  as  well  as  an  unwarranted  tax  upon  the  generosity  ol 
their  rich  patrons.  3.  It  was  an  aggravation  of  the  offence  that  the  offenders  were  not 
only  "  brethren,"  but  were  living  in  deliberate  disregard  of  the  apostle's  oral  instructions 
(luring  his  first  visit  to  Thessalonica.  "  For  even  when  we  were  with  you,  this  we 
commanded  you,  that  if  any  would  not  work,  neither  let  him  eat."  Thus  I  hey  showed 
a  reckless  defiance  of  apostolic  counsel.  This  was  surely  to  "  break  rank,"  as  the  word 
"  disorder  "  suggests. 

II.  The  apostle's  command  to  the  Church  bespeotino  these  offenders.  1. 
The  time  was  past  for  mere  requests  or  exhortations.  He  had  addressed  tliem  in  this 
milder  tone  in  the  First  Epistle  :  "  We  beseech  you  that  ye  study  to  be  quiet,  and  do 
your  own  business"  (1  Thess.  iv.  11).  But  his  request  had  been  disregarded.  2.  The 
command  lie  now  addresses  to  them  was  backed  by  Divine  authority.  "  We  command 
you  in  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (1)  Because  he  is  the  Source  of  all  autho- 
rity in  the  Church;  (2)  because  the  conduct  of  the  Thessalonian  busybodies  wag 
a  dishonour  to  the  Lord  who  bought  them ;  (3)  because  it  was  a  command  to  which 
obedience  could  be  secured  so  long  as  the  Christians  "  directed  their  hearts  into  the 
love  of  God,  and  the  patience  of  Christ."  3.  It  was  a  command  to  the  body  of  the 
Church  to  "  withdraw  themselves  "  from  the  disorderly  brethren.  (1)  It  was  no  command 
to  excommunicate  them.  It  was  no  case  of  expulsion  or  exclusion  from  Church 
fellowship,  but  (2)  what  may  be  called  social  excommunication.  The  brethren  were  to 
avoid  all  unnecessary  intercourse  with  them,  perhaps  the  richer  members  to  encourage 
them  no  ionger  in  their  indolent  and  restless  fanaticism  by  their  ill-placed  generosity, 
and  thus  bring  them  to  a  sense  of  shame  and  repentance  for  their  laziness  and  tale- 
bearing.— T.  C. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — The  example  of  the  apostle  himself  as  a  support  to  hit  command.  I. 
The  apostle's  example.  "For  we  were  not  disorderly  among  you,  nor  did  we  eat 
bread  for  nought  from  any  one,  but  in  toil  and  weariness,  working  night  and  day." 
Though  there  were  rich  people  in  the  Church,  he  accepted  no  gift  from  them,  but 
laboured  at  his  craft  assiduously  to  earn  a  living  for  himself.  1.  His  refusal  of  support 
from  his  converts  did  not  invalidate  his  right  to  it.  "Not  because  we  have  not 
authority  " — an  authority  which  he  fully  expounds  in  1  Cor.  ix. — for  "  the  labourer  is 
worthy  of  his  hire,"  and  has  he  not  "a  right  to  forbear  working"?  2.  It  was  based 
upon  a  supreme  regard  to  Thessalonian  interests.  (1)  "  That  we  might  not  be  a  burden 
to  any  one  of  you,"  (2)  and  "  that  we  might  give  ourselves  for  a  pattern  unto  you  to 
imitate  us."  The  apostle  had  evidently  in  view  the  extravagances  of  conduct  that  were 
beginning  at  an  early  period  to  spring  from  misunderstandings  respecting  the  time  of 
the  Lord's  coming.  He  was  not  ashamed  of  his  handicraft.  No  Christian  man  ought 
ever  to  be  ashamed  of  honest  labour. 

II.  The  apostle's  injunction  to  the  disorderly.  "  For  even  when  we  were  with 
you,  this  we  commanded  you,  that  if  any  one  will  not  work,  neither  let  him  eat."  1. 
This  does  not  apply  to  those  who  cannot  v>orh,  but  to  those  who  will  not.  The  command 
iloes  not  touch  cases  of  charity.  2.  It  is  a  command  based  on  the  original  law  of  Eden. 
"In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread  "  (Gen.  iii.  19).  Work  is  a  Divine  order, 
not  repealed  by  Christianity  but  lifted  up  to  higher  blessing  and  dignity.  The  idle 
man  ought,  therefore,  to  be  allowed  to  suffer  the  effects  of  his  idleness.  3.  It  is  a  com- 
mand which,  when  obeyed,  will  introduce  tranquillity  into  life,  and  at  the  same  time 
conduce  to  an  honest  self-respect.  "That  working  with  quietness  they  eat  their  own 
bread."  (1)  They  would  thus  be  eating  their  own  bread,  not  the  bread  earned  by 
others'  toil,  nor  that  reserved  by  the  same  toil  for  the  use  of  the  really  destitute  and 
poor.  (2)  They  would  thus  carry  more  quietness  into  their  own  lives  as  well  as  those 
of  their  neighbours,  for  there  would  be  no  time  for  intermeddling  with  other  people's 
concerns.  We  should  live  "  quiet  and  peaceable  lives  in  all  godliness  and  honesty 
(1  Tim.  ii.  2).— T.  C. 

Ver.  13. — Exhortation  to  well-doing.    "Brethren,  be  not  weary  in  well-doing." 

I.  This  implies  that  they  had  been  hitherto  engaged  in  well-doing.  "  Walk- 
ing honestly  to  them  that  were  without "  (1  Thess.  iv.  12). 

II.  It  is  an  injunction  needed  by  the  vtcrt  condition  of  thi  Thebsalonux 


70       THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  m.  1—18, 

Chubch.  Their  charity  might  have  heen  abused  by  the  idle,  but  they  were  not  to  be 
discouraged  by  these  examples  of  fanatical  restlessness  from  the  practice  of  beneficence. 
III.  It  is  an  injunction  powerfully  recommended  all  through  this  gospel. 
1.  It  was  putting  into  practice  the  patience  of  Christ,  for  which  the  apostle  prayed  in 
their  interest.  2.  Ood  is  glorified  by  well-doing.  (John  xv.  8.)  3.  God  remembers  it. 
(Heb.  vi.  9, 10.)  4.  A  blessing  attends  it.  (Jas.  i.  25.)  5.  It  follows  us  into  our 
final  rest.    (Bev.  xiv.  13.)— T.  0. 

Vers.  14,  15. — The  true  spirit  of  faithful  dealing  with  an  erring  brother.  The 
apostle  returns  to  this  subject  again. 

I.  His  reiterated  command.  "  If  any  man  obey  not  our  word  by  this  Epistle,  note 
that  man,  and  have  no  company  with  hint."  Let  him  be  a  marked  m»n,  like  a  leper  in 
your  midst,  standing  wholly  isolated  in  a  heathen  city.  This  would  be  a  social  extru- 
sion deeply  felt  by  a  "  brother"  who  would  be  cut  off  from  the  cordial  greetings  of  the 
Church. 

II.  The  design  of  this  social  excommunication.  "  That  he  may  be  ashamed." 
It  is  not  "  for  destruction,"  but  for  edification  ;  it  is  to  bring  the  offender  to  a  due  sense 
of  his  sin,  and  to  a  resolution  for  its  abandonment. 

III.  The  spirit  in  which  the  command  is  to  be  carried  out.  "  Yet  fount  him 
not  as  an  enemy,  but  admonish  him  as  a  brother."  1.  It  is  an  injunction  not  to  regard 
him  as  your  enemy,  or  as  an  enemy  of  Christ,  as  if  he  had  denied  the  faith,  or  sunk  into 
profligacy,  or  relapsed  into  heathenism.  There  must  be  neither  hostility  nor  careless- 
ness on  your  side,  but  rather  "  the  love  that  suffereth  long,  and  is  kind.  2.  It  is  an 
injunction  to  affectionate  admonition.  "  But  admonish  him  as  a  brother."  How  this 
would  be  consistent  with  the  withdrawal  of  all  intercourse  it  is  unnecessary  to  speculate. 
There  was  to  be  a  faithful  dealing  with  him  that  he  might  be  won  back,  and  "  Satan 
have  no  advan  age"  over  him. — T.  C. 

Ver.  16. — A  prayer  for  peace.  "  Now  the  Lord  of  peace  himself  give  you  peace 
:ilways  in  every  way." 

I.  The  Author  of  this  blessing.  "The  Lord  of  peace  himself" — Jesus  Christ. 
1.  He  is  our  abiding  Peace.  (Eph.  ii.  14.)  2.  He  gives  it  as  his  legacy  to  the  Church. 
(John  xiv.  27.)  3.  He  guides  into  the  way  of  peace.  (Luke  i.  79.)  4.  He  is  the  Prince 
if  peace.    (Isa.  ix.  6.)    5.  Peace  is  preached  by  him.    (Eph.  ii.  17;  Acts  x.  36.) 

II.  The  peace  in  question  includes:  1.  Reconciliation  with  Ood.  2.  Peace  with 
one  another.  3.  Pence  in  all  the  relations  of  life.  4.  Peace  in  the  midst  of  speculative 
disturbances.    5.  Peace  m  the  midst  of  persecutions.    6.  Peace  in  the  prospect  of  death. 

III.  It  was  a  prayer  for  a  continuous  peace.  "Always."  It  was  to  be  as 
uninterrupted  as  a  river  (Isa.  xlviii.  18),  with  no  breaks  made  in  it  by  the  world,  the 
flesh,  or  the  devil.     None  but  the  Lord  of  peace  could  sustain  such  a  peace  in  power. 

IV.  It  is  peace  to  be  acquired  in  every  way — by  praying,  by  preaching,  by 
conversation. 

V  The  pendant  to  this  happy  prayer.  "The  Lord  be  with  you  all."  A  com- 
prehensive benediction  upon  the  disorderly  as  well  as  the  orderly  brethren  of  Thessa- 
lonica.  "  Be  with  you  all " — "  by  his  presence  to  comfort  and  refresh ;  by  his  power  to 
keep  and  preserve;  by  his  grace  to  assist;  and  by  his  Spirit  to  counsel,  advise,  and 
direct."— T.  C. 

Vers.  17, 18. — The  closing  salutation  with  its  autographic  significance.  "The  salu- 
tation of  me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand,  which  is  the  token  in  every  Epistle:  so  I 
write."  He  takes  the  pen  out  of  the  hand  of  his  amanuensis  and  writes  the  closing 
words  himself. 

I.  It  was  important  to  authenticate  the  Epistle.  There  were  letters  falsely 
attributed  to  him  (1  Thess.  ii.  2).  It  is  essential  for  Christians  to  kcow  the  distinction 
between  the  human  and  the  Divine.  The  Thessalonians  would  be  able  to  identify  his 
large,  bold  handwriting  (Gal.  vi.  11). 

II.  The  salutation  was  not  a  mere  symbol  of  friendship,  but  a  prayer  fob  his 
beloved  converts.  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all."  1.  His 
Epistles  began  with  prayer ;    they  end  with  prayer — "  fencing  round  that  which  he 


ch.  m.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         71 

said  with  mighty  walls  on  either  side.''  2.  All  the  good  he  desires  for  hi*  converts  is 
included  in  the  grace  of  the  God-Man.  The  prayer  implies  the  Divinity  of  Christ. 
His  name  alone  appears  in  his  parting  supplication.  3.  It  is  a  parting  request  for  all 
the  brethren  without  exception,  including  even  those  who  received  his  rebukes. — T.  0. 

Vers.  1,  2s— Prayer  for  missions.  I.  The  importance  of  it.  Prayer  is  a  mighty 
power ;  we  must  use  it.  We  must  not  stand  by  indifferent  and  uninterested,  and  leave 
the  progress  of  the  gospel  to  missionaries  abroad,  to  God's  ministers  at  home.  We 
must  all  take  our  part  in  the  work.  Success  in  that  work  depends  in  large  measure  on 
the  prayers  of  the  faithful.  All  who  pray  earnestly  for  the  work  of  missions  are  really 
helpers,  as  really,  though  not  in  the  same  degree,  as  the  most  hardworking  missionaries. 
Faithful  prayer  is  as  necessary  as  faithful  preaching.  The  united  prayers  of  the  Church, 
the  mighty  volume  of  supplication  that  ascends  in  behalf  of  missions,  is  the  strength  of 
those  who  labour  in  loneliness  and  self-denial  among  heathen  and  savages.  Each  one 
of  us,  however  humble,  may  contribute  his  share  to  the  great  result.  All  who  do  so 
are  co-workers  in  the  blessed  work  of  saving  souls.  It  is  a  high  privilege ;  the  Lord 
has  committed  the  progress  of  Christianity  to  the  prayers  of  his  people.  We  may  well 
ask  ourselves  if  we  have  been  as  energetic  as  we  ought  in  that  great  spiritual  work. 
-  II.  The  ddtt  of  phateb.  1.  For  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  St.  Paul  urges  it  con- 
stantly upon  his  converts.  He  had  been  praying  for  the  Thessalonians ;  now  he  asks 
for  their  prayers  in  return.  It  is  a  commandment.  He  bids  us  pray  that  the  Word  of 
the  Lord  may  run,  that  it  may  meet  with  no  check  in  its  onward  course,  but  spread 
ever  further  and  wider,  from  city  to  city,  from  country  to  country,  till  "  the  earth  shall 
be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  This  is  the  only 
limit.  The  Church  must  not  be  stationary ;  it  must  be  always  in  movement.  The 
water  of  life  is  living  water^ever  welling  up  fresh  and  clear;  it  is  a  running  stream. 
Stagnation  means  corruption.  The  gospel  must  keep  moving  onward,  winning  fresh 
hearts,  exerting  an  eVer-growing  influence  over  those  who  have  long  felt  its  power.  To 
stand  still  is  to  go  back,  to  win  no  new  victories  is  to  lose  its  ancient  triumphs.  It  is 
our  bounden  duty  to  help  on  this  progress  by  our  earnest  prayers.  We  are  met  by  an 
inert  mass  of  apathy ;  we  must  strive  to  kindle  it  into  life  by  our  fervent  supplications. 
"  Ask,  and  ye  shall  have."  The  apathy  of  which,  it  may  be,  we  complain  so  bitterly, 
may  be  due  in  large  measure  to  our  own  spiritual  sloth,  to  the  sluggishness  of  our 
prayers.  Where  the  Word  of  the  Lord  runs,  it  will  be  glorified;  it  is  living  and 
powerful ;  it  will  manifest  its  energy  in  the  blessed  lives,  the  holy  deaths,  of  converted 
men ;  it  will  show  forth  the  glory  of  the  Lord  in  that  glory  of  holiness  which,  springing 
from  his  indwelling  presence,  will  transform  the  souls  in  whom  that  presence  abides. 
2.  For  the  missionaries  themselves.  They  are  exposed  to  many  dangers ;  it  was  so  with 
St.  Paul.  He  was  now  at  Corinth,  a  city  where  there  was  a  great  work  to  do,  for  the 
Lord  had  much  people  there.  But  he  met  with  much  opposition,  at  first  from  fanatical 
Jews,  afterwards  from  "  false  brethren  "  and  "  false  apostles."  He  bids  the  Thessa- 
lonians pray  that  he  might  be  delivered  from  these  men,  not  for  his  own  sake — he 
counted  not  his  life  dear  unto  himself — but  that  he  might  finish  his  course  with  joy, 
and  be  blessed  in  saving  many  souls.  So  we  should  pray  now  for  faithful  missionaries, 
that  they  may  be  delivered  from  unreasonable  and  wicked  men. 

Lessons.  1.  Pray  constantly  for  the  success  of  the  gospel  in  all  the  world.  Christ 
bids  you ;  his  apostles  bid  you.  2.  Do  not  think  yourself  too  weak  and  sinful  to  do  so ; 
such  humility  is  false  humility ;  it  defrauds  God's  ministers  of  the  assistance  which 
you  are  bound  to  give  them.  3.  Believe  in  the  power  of  prayer;  it  is  an  important 
element  in  a  living  faith. — B.  C.  C. 

Yen.  3 — 5. — St.  Paul's  confidence.  "L  He  tbdbts  nr  the  Lobd.  1.  The  Lard  is 
faithful.  All  men  have  not  the  faith ;  the  faith  is  not  the  possession  of  all.  These 
unreasonable  and  wicked  men  seem  to  be  beyond  its  saving  influences.  But  the  Lord  is 
faithful.  He  is  the  Truth  ;  his  promises  are  sure.  Amid  the  tumult  of  opposition,  the 
rude  fanaticism  of  the  Jews,  the  sneers  of  the  philosophic  Greeks,  St.  Paul  still  trusted 
in  the  Lord.  "The  Lord  is  faithful."  It  is  a  great  word;  we  may  well  pray  that  it 
may  be  engraven  in  our  hearts,  as  the  centre  of  our  hopes,  the  strength  of  our  souls. 
2.  He  mil  strengthen  the  Thessalonians.    It  is  what  St.  Paul  prayed  for  hi  ike  last 


72        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  in.  1—18 

chapter.  He  knows" that  his  prayer  is  heard.  God  will  stablish  the  Thessalonians.  He 
has  built  his  Church  upon  a  rock ;  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.  The 
rain  may  descend,  the  flood  may  come,  the  stream  of  adversity  may  beat  vehemently 
against  the  Church  of  God ;  it  cannot  fall,  for  it  is  founded  upon  the  rock.  God  is 
faithful.  He  will  keep  them  from  the  evil — from  the  evil  which  surrounds  them  in  the 
world,  from  the  power  of  the  evil  one.  The  words  sound  like  a  reminiscence  of  the 
Lord's  prayer.  Compare  also  2  Tim.  iv.  18,  "The  Lord  shall  deliver  me  from  every 
evil  work,  and  will  preserve  me  unto  his  heavenly  kingdom."  St.  Paul,  it  seems,  was 
accustomed  to  use  the  same  holy  words  which  we  say  in  our  daily  prayers.  How  many 
generations  of  Christians  that  prayer  has  helped  in  their  heavenward  journey !  They 
are  safe  now  with  Christ.  We  are  marching  onwards  to  that  rest  which  they  have 
reached.  We  have  the  same  helps  which  they  had.  Let  us  seek  that  holy  confidence 
which  St.  Paul  had.  The  Lord  is  faithful ;  he  will  stablish  you ;  he  will  keep  you 
from  the  evil. 

II.  He  has  confidence  in  the  Thessalonians.  Or  rather  in  the  Lord  touching 
them.  It  is  in  the  Lord  always  that  he  trusts;  but  that  confidence  in  the  Lord  reaches 
to  the  Thessalonians;  he  believes  that  they  are  doing  now,  and  will  continue  to  do  the 
things  which  he  commands  them,  because  he  is  sure  that  the  Lord  will  stablish  them, 
and  keep  them  from  the  evil.  It  is  an  exhortation  delicately  expressed  in  the  language 
of  confidence.  He  trusts  them;  the  consciousness  of  being  trusted  is  a  strong  motive 
for  obedience ;  there  is  a  sense  of  shame  in  disobeying  a  master,  a  teacher,  who  reposes 
implicit  confidence  in  his  pupils.     Mark  the  delicate  tact  of  the  apostle. 

III.  He  doubts  them  not,  yet  he  prays  fob  them.  1.  For  growth  »'n  love.  In 
1  Thess.  iii.  11  he  had  prayed  that  God  would  direct  his  way  to  the  Thessalonians; 
here  he  prays  that  God  would  direct  their  hearts  into  the  way  of  love.  The  way  of 
love  is  the  way  that  leads  to  God,  who  is  love.  We  need. to  be  directed  thither.  Our 
attention  is  often  distracted  by  the  various  paths  which  lead  this  way  and  that  in  the 
journey  of  life.  God  can  direct  us  by  his  Spirit  into  the  one  path  which  leads  to  God. 
That  path  is  love,  self-denying,  sell-forgetting  love — the  love  which  comes  from  God 
and  ends  in  God.  For  love  is  of  God,  it  is  his  gift ;  it  comes  from  him  who  is  the  only 
Fountain  of  pure  and  holy  love.  And  it  ends  in  him  ;  for  God  only  is  the  true  Object  of 
our  highest  love ;  only  in  him  can  the  deep  yearnings  of  our  souls  find  their  proper 
satisfaction.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart."  It  is  his  com- 
mandment, the  first  of  all  the  commandments.  He  does  not  mock  us  with  commands 
which  we  cannot  obey;  he  giveth  his  Spirit;  and  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  is  the  gift  of 
power.  He  can  direct;  he  will,  if  we  see ;  it  in  persevering  prayer,  direct  our  hearts 
into  the  love  of  God.  2.  For  growth  in  patience.  The  Church  of  Thessalonica  needed 
patience ;  it  was  much  afflicted  from  the  first.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  the  great 
Example  of  patience.  He  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame.  If  we  would  run 
with  patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  us,  we  must  consider  him,  always  looking  unto 
Jesus.  In  our  sufferings  we  must  meditate  on  the  sufferings  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour, 
and  pray  for  grace  to  follow  his  example.  We  need  his  patience,  such  patience  as  he 
had.     We  must  pray  for  it.    The  Lord  will  direct  us  to  it. 

Lessons.  1.  The  Lord  is  faithful;  trust  in  him.  He  is  true;  he  will  establish  the 
hearts  of  his  chosen.  2.  We  must  be  stern  with  ourselves,  but  gentle  with  others; 
gentle  words  of  confidence  win  those  whom  harshness  would  only  repel.  3.  Pray  for 
love ;  pray  for  patience. — B.  C.  C. 

Vers.  6 — 15. — The  importance  of  the  common  duties  of  daily  life  shown.  L  By  St. 
Paul's  earnest  appeals.  1.  lie  commands,  and  that  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  There  were  some  among  the  Thessalonian  Christians  who  walked  disorderly, 
whose  lives  were  not  ordered  according  to  the  teaching  which  they  had  received  from 
St.  Paul.  The  Church  generally  was  sound,  as  the  Epistle,  shows,  but  there  was  a 
section  that  needed  counsel  and  firm  treatment.  Probably  the  prevalent  restlessness 
about  the  approach  of  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  filled  their  minds  that  it  seemed  hard  to 
attend  to  less  exciting  matters.  In  view  of  an  event  so  awful,  the  little  details  of  daily 
occupation  seemed  trivial  and  insignificant.  The  whole  course  of  life,  with  all  its 
complex  interests,  might  any  moment  be  abruptly  checked  by  the  sudden  coming  of 
the  Lord.    It  was  hard  to  descend  from  the  contemplation  of  a  topic  so  absorbing  to  the 


ch.  in.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         73 


little  duties  of  work  and  everyday  life.  But  the  apostle  commands,  and  that  with 
the  greatest  earnestness.  It  is  just  in  those  little  duties  that  our  responsibility  chiefly 
lies.  It  is  in  the  small  matters  of  daily  life  that  the  battle  between  good  and  evil  is 
fought  out  for  each  individual  soul.  "  The  daily  round,  the  common  task,"  is  the  field  in 
which  we  are  trained  for  heaven ;  or,  if  not  for  heaven,  it  must  he  for  hell.  Ordinary 
lives  are  commonplace ;  they  do  not  present  opportunities  for  showy  action  ;  there  are 
few  emergencies,  little  excitement  in  them.  The  lives  of  most  of  us  are,  by  God's 
appointment,  ordinary  and  commonplace  ;  it  is  the  discipline  for  eternity  which  he  has 
provided  for  us.  The  quiet,  faithful  performance  of  those  common  duties  is  the  best 
preparation  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  He  cannot  find  us  better  employed  than  in 
the  work,  whatever  it  may  be,  which  his  providence  has  given  us  to  do.  And,  in  truth, 
those  commonplace  lives  afford  ample  opportunities  for  self-denial,  if  only  we  will  use 
them  ;  a  road  for  drawing  daily  nearer  to  God,  if  only  we  will  take  the  path  pointed 
out  by  his  providence,  not  some  self-chosen  way  of  our  own.  A  commonplace  life 
may  be  in  the  eyes  of  the  holy  angels  full  of  beauty  and  heroism.  To  do  each  little 
duty,  as  it  comes,  faithfully  and  thoroughly ;  to  keep  the  thought  of  God's  presence 
constantly  before  us,  and  to  try  in  all  things,  great  and  small  alike,  to  please  him  ;  to 
persevere  all  the  day,  and  every  day,  in  the  quiet  life  of  duty ; — this  involves  a  sustained 
effort,  a  lofty  faith,  a  holy  love,  which  are  in  the  sight  of  God  of  great  price.  The  life 
of  duty,  however  humble  and  quiet  that  duty  may  be,  is  the  life  of  holiness.  Religious 
fervour,  religious  excitement,  if  it  ends  in  excitement  and  does  not  issue  in  obedience, 
is  but  a  counterfeit  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  it  will  not  abide  the  day  of  his  coming.  In 
the  First  Epistle  St.  Paul  had  bidden  the  Thessalonians  to  study  to  be  quiet,  to  do  their 
own  business,  to  work  with  their  own  hands.  He  speaks  more  strongly  now.  Probably 
the  excitement  had  increased ;  it  had  led  to  the  disorder  which  he  condemns.  He  com- 
mands them  now,  and  that  in  virtue  of  his  apostolic  authority,  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  whose  ambassador  he  was.  Sometimes  God's  ministers  must  speak  with 
authority.  They  must  be  instant  in  season,  out  of  season ;  they  must  reprove,  rebuke, 
exhort ;  but  such  rebukes  will  avail  little,  unless  they  are  administered  with  much  long- 
suffering,  with  humility  and  godly  fear,  and  enforced  by  that  authority  of  character 
which  only  holiness  of  life  can  give.  To  possess  such  authority,  a  man  must  have  that 
reality  the  absence  of  which  is.  so  soon  detected;  he  must  have  that  ready  sympathy 
which  is  such  a  source  of  power  and  success  in  ministerial  work.  2.  They  must  with- 
draw themselves  from  every  brother  that  walketh  disorderly.  St.  Paul  is  not  issuing  a 
sentence  of  excommunication,  as  in  1  Cor.  v.  and  1  Tim.  i.  20.  The  conduct  of  these 
Thessalonians  was  not  so  utterly  wicked  as  that  of  the  incestuous  person  at  Corinth ; 
their  errors  were  not  so  dangerous  as  those  of  Hymenasus  and  Alexander.  But  they 
were  neglecting  the  duties  of  their  station;  they  were  living  in  disobedience.  It  was 
not  right  for  Christians  to  recognize  such  men  as  brethren  ;  their  lives  were  a  scandal ; 
they  were  bringing  discredit  upon  the  Christian  name.  True  Christians  must  be  jealous 
for  their  Master's  honour;  they  must  sometimes  show  openly  their  disapprobation  of 
inconsistency.  It  is  a  difficult  and  painful  duty.  It  is  necessary,  in  performing  it,  to 
keep  a  very  careful  watch  over  our  own  motives ;  to  speak  and  act  in  deep  humility  and 
real  charity ;  to  cast  first  the  beam  out  of  our  own  eye ;  to  reuember  the  Saviour's  rule, 
"  Judge  not."  But  though  a  difficult  duty,  it  is  sometimes  a  duty.  A  true  Christian 
must  not  live  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  men  who  disgrace  their  Christian  profes-ion. 
He  will  not  walk  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly,  nor  stand  in  the  way  of  sinners.  All 
his  delight  will  be  in  the  saints  who  are  on  the  earth.  Especially  he  must  avoid  the 
companionship  of  those  who  make  a  great  show  of  religion  and  live  ungodly  lives. 
No  sin  is  more  dangerous  than  hypocrisy;  none  is  more  strongly  condemned  by 
our  Lord. 

II.  By  his  example.  1.  He  did  not  behave  himself  disorderly.  He  illustrated  in  his 
life  the  power  of  true  religion.  He  was  a  man  of  warm  affections,  of  enthusiastic 
character,  full  of  high  hopes ;  but  he  never  allowed  any  excitement  of  feeling  to  interfere 
with  the  quiet  performance  of  daily  duties.  His  life  and  preaching  supplemented  one 
Another.  His  preaching  disclosed  the  motives  which  prompted  his  actions  and  regulated 
his  life ;  his  life  was  his  preaching  translated  into  action — it  showed  the  reality,  the 
living  force,  of  the  truths  which  he  preached.  2.  He  worked  with  his  own  hands.  He 
•Jways  asserted  the  right  of  the  apostles  and  their  companions  to  maintenance  from  the 


74         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  in.  1—18. 

Churches.  The  Lord  hath  ordained,  he  said,  that  they  which  preach  the  gospel  should 
live  of  the  gospel.  But  he  did  not  claim  this  right  for  himself.  It  was  not  pride  that 
prompted  his  conduct;  he  accepted  the  gifts  of  the  Philippians.  But  he  knew  the 
value  of  an  example  of  self-denying  and  absolutely  disinterested  labour.  The  Gentile 
world  had  never  seen  such  a  life.  It  was  a  power  in  itself;  it  constrained  the 
admiration  and  won  the  hearts  of  mjn ;  it  forced  them  to  admit  the  reality  of  a  religion 
which  sustained  him  in  such  unparalleled  self-sacrifices.  So  he  would  not  eat  any 
man's  bread  for  nought.  For  nought,  he  says  in  his  humility;  though  he  knew  well 
that  his  converts  in  Thessalonica  owed  to  him,  like  Philemon,  even  their  own  selves, 
lie  wrought  with  his  own  hands,  and  that  night  and  day.  It  was  hard,  uninteresting, 
ill-paid  labour.  It  required  the  close  application  of  many  hours  to  earn  even  the  simple 
livelihood  which  contented  him.  But  he  worked  on  in  patience,  knowing  the  power 
■  if  example. 

III.  He  insists  on  the  duty  op  honest  labour.  1.  He  had  done  so  during  his  stay 
at  Thessalonica.  He  had  given  his  opinion  in  the  words  of  a  short,  stern  proverb,  "  If 
any  will  not  work,  neither  let  him  eat."  Labour  is  the  ordinance  of  God ;  a  punish- 
ment at  first  (Gen.  iii.  19),  but  it  is  turned  into  a  blessing  (Ps.  cxxviii.  2)  to  those 
who  accept  it  as  the  will  of  God,  and  use  it  as  a  discipline  of  obedience  and  self-denial. 
Work,  in  some  form  or  other,  is  a  necessity  for  us ;  without  work,  life  soon  becomes 
dreary,  full  of  restlessness  and  dissatisfaction.  To  have  nothing  to  do  is  far  from 
unviable;  it  is  full  of  ennui  and  weariness.  Time  is  a  priceless  talent,  given  us  that 
we  might  work  out  our  own  salvatiun  ;  to  waste  it  day  after  day,  to  "  kill  time,"  as  the 
saying  is,  is  a  miserable  misuse  of  the  good  gifts  of  God.  We  mu>t  all  work,  if  we 
would  be  happy  here,  if  we  would  be  ready  to  meet  the  Lord  when  he  cometh. 
Mental  labour  is  the  lot  of  some,  manual  labour  of  others.  God  has  ordered  our  lot 
and  appointed  our  work.  Work  of  some  sort  we  must  have.  None  l:ave  a  right  to 
<at  their  bread  without  labour,  neither  the  rich  nor  the  poor.  (1)  If  God  has  given 
us  worldly  means,  still  we  have  no  right  to  eat  the  bread  of  idleness.  We  must  find 
work  to  do,  the  work  which  the  Master  has  set  us.  .  If  we  need  not  work  for  our- 
selves, we  must  work  for  others.  There  is  work  enough  for  all  in  the  vineyard  of  the 
Lord ;  only  in  work  can  we  find  peace  and  satisfaction.  Without  work,  we  are  eating 
the  bread  which  we  have  not  earned ;  without  work,  we  must  in  the  end  be  restless 
and  unhappy ;  without  work,  how  can  we  bear  to  read  those  aw'ful  words,  "  Thou 
wicked  and  slothful  servant"?   (2)  And  the  apostle  forbids  indiscriminate  almsgiving. 

•When  the  Lord  said,  "  Give  to  him  that  asketh  thee,"  he  did  not  mean  to  the  idle 
and  the  worthless.  Give  freely,  but  give  to  the  old,  the  sick,  the  helpless.  It  is  a 
difficult  thing  to  give  rightly ;  it  needs  study,  thought,  prayer.  We  must  not  encoutage 
idleness,  but  neither  must  we  allow  our  heart  to  be  hardened  by  the  imposture  which 
we  meet  so  often.  Be  generous,  full  of  sympathy  to  the  afflicted,  but  let  the  idle  be 
corrected  by  the  stern  discipline  of  hunger.  To  give  to  such  is  doubly  wrong ;  it 
encourages  the  slothful  in  their  sinful  idleness,  and  it  robs  the  really  poor.  2.  He 
repeats  his  exhortation  now.  There  were  busy  bodies  at  Thessalonica,  who  neglected 
their  own  business,  and  busied  themselves  with  matters  which  did  not  concern  them, 
or  with  curious  questions  which  were  beyond  their  rea-h.  It  is  always  so  with  the 
.die;  the  restless  thoughts  must  find  occupation,  and  commonly  find  it  in  mischief. 
St.  Paul  exhorts  them  again.  He  does  not  sternly  leave  them  to  themselves;  he  longs 
for  their  spiritual  welfare.  He  exhorts  them,  and  that  in  the  pi\  scnce  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  to  work  with  quietness;  not. to  let  excited  feelings  interfere  with  the  quiet, 
well-ordered  life  of  Christian  duty;  but  to  eat  their  own  bread,  the  bread  earned  by 
honest  labour ;  not  to  live  on  the  alms  of  others,  when  they  might  preserve  a  manly 
Christian  independence. 

IV.  He  asks  the  brethren  to  support  his  exhortations.  1.  They  must  not  be 
weary  in  well-doing.  There  is  much  to  make  Christians  weary ;  their  own  helplessness 
and  sinfulness;  the  disappointments,  misunderstandings,  ingratitude,  which  i hey  meet 
with  in  their  work.  But  they  must  persevere  in  the  quiet  walk  of  duty ;  they  must 
do  good,  seeking  no  reward  save  that  which  comes  from  our  Father  who  seeth  in  secret. 
Weariness  is  hard  to  bear ;  it  will  press  heavily  upon  us  at  times.  We  must  run  with 
patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  us,  looking  always  unto  Jesus.  2.  They  must  carry 
out  his  censures.    His  Epistle  was  an  authoritative  document;  it  came  from  the  Lord's 


ch.  m.  1— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         75 

•pestle,  armed  with  the  Lord's  authority.  It  must  be  obeyed  ;  it  was  the  duty  of  the 
Church  to  enforce  obedience.  The  brethren  must  show  their  concurrence  with  St.  Paul 
by  not  keeping  company  with  any  professing  Christians  who  may  still  persist  in 
disorderly  conduct.  But  they  must  be  careful  not  to  sin  against  the  law  of  love.  The 
offender  is  a  brother  still ;  they  must  admonish  him  for  his  soul's  sake ;  they  must 
show  by  their  conduct  their  sorrow,  their  disapproval  of  his  disobedience,  that  the 
disapprobation  of  Christians  known  and  respected  may  bring  him  to  a  sense  of  shame, 
and,  by  God's  grace,  to  amendment  of  life. 

Lessons.  1.  Duty  seems  sometimes  dull  and  prosaic,  but  it  is  our  appointed  path  , 
do  each  little  duty  as  in  the  sight  of  God.  2.  There  is  a  true  dignity  in  honest  labour ; 
never  despise  it  in  others ;  work  yourself  in  the  station  to  which  God  has  called  you. 
3.  Be  careful  in  your  choice  of  companions ;  avoid  the  disorderly ;  seek  the  society  of 
the  pious  and  obedient. — B.  0.  C. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — Conclusion.  I.  The  closing  prater  fob  peace.  1.  Only  the  Lord 
can  give  it.  Again  we  have  the  solemn  aJris,  himself.  He  is  the  Lord  of  peace;  it 
is  his  :  "  My  peace  I  give  unto  you."  He  only  can  grant  that  chiefest  blessing.  The 
Thessalonians  might  have  their  difficulties,  their  dangers ;  they  might  be  weary.  But 
it  is  the  weary  and  the  heavy  laden  whom  the  Lord  calls  to  himself.  "  Come  unto  me," 
he  says,  "and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Only  we  must  take  up  his  yoke,  the  yoke  of  obedience; 
only  we  must  bear  his  burden,  the  burden  of  the  cross ;  and  we  shall  find  peace,  rest 
for  our  souls.  For  his  yoke  is  easy.  It  seems  not  so  at  first ;  we  are  tempted  often  to 
be  disorderly,  to  forsake  the  quiet  path  of  duty ;  it  is  hard  to  resist  temptation.  But  if 
we  come  to  Christ  and  learn  of  him,  the  blessed  Master,  he  will  teach  us  the  grace  and 
blessedness  of  obedience,  and  we  shall  gradually  learn  something  of  his  own  lesson — to 
do  our  Father's  will  as  it  is  done  in  heaven,  gladly  and  with  cheerful  submission.  His 
burden  is  light.  It  seems  not  so  at  first ;  the  cross  is  sharp.  But  he  bore  the  cross  once 
for  us;  he  bears  it  with  us  now.  When  he  strengthens  us  we  can  do  all  things  ;  the 
heavy  burden  becomes  light  when  we  rest  on  his  strength.  He  is  the  Lord  of  peace. 
Peace  is  his  to  give ;  he  will  give  it  to  the  chosen.  2.  He  can  give  it  always.  At  all 
times  and  in  all  ways  we  need  the  peace  of  God.  We  want  it  in  the  Church,  in  the 
commonwealth,  in  the  family ;  we  want  it  all  the  day  and  every  day.  We  shall  have 
it  if  he  is  with  us,  for  with  his  presence  comes  the  gift  of  peace.  "  The  Lord  be  with 
you."  It  is  a  precious  benediction.  We  listen,  we  accept  it  in  humble  thankfulness. 
We  must  strive  ourselves  to  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  to  realize  the  deep  truth 
of  his  presence,  to  draw  daily  nearer  and  nearer  to  him. 

II.  St.  Paul's  own  salutation.  1.  His  autograph.  He  writes  the  concluding  words 
with  his  own  hand.  His  Epistles  were  sacred  writings ;  they  were  the  work  of  an 
inspired  apostle ;  they  had  the  stamp  of  Divine  authority.  St.  Paul  marks  their 
importance  by  his  closing  words.  He  did  not,  perhaps  he  could  not,  write  the  whole ; 
he  writes  his  signature  at  the  last.  In  his  own  handwriting,  perhaps,  as  some  have 
thought,  large  and  clumsy  (comp.  Gal.  vi.  11  in  the  Greek),  but  known  and  loved  by 
his  converts,  he  sends  his  last  word  of  love ;  he  salutes,  he  greets  them  with  the  embrace 
of  Christian  charity.  2.  His  last  benediction.  As  always,  he  ends  with  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  had  prayed  in  his  first  Epistle  that  it  might  rest  upon  them. 
Now  he  adds  the  significant  word  "  all."  He  had  been  obliged  to  blame  some  of  them, 
to  blame  them  severely ;  but  he  will  not  end  his  Epistle  with  words  of  censure.  He 
prays  that  grace  may  be  with  them  all.  He  loves  them  all ;  he  longs  for  the  restoration 
of  those  who  were  living  disorderly,  for  the  continual  progress  and  sanctification  of  the 
whole  Church.  And  so  he  prays  for  grace.  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  can 
convert  the  erring ;  that  same  grace  can  comfort  and  confirm  the  faithful.  St.  Paul 
closes  all  his  Epistles  with  a  prayer  for  grace.  The  grace  of  God  should  be  always  in 
our  thoughts,  in  our  hearts,  in  our  prayers  for  ourselves  and  others. 

Lessons.  1.  Only  God  can  give  true  and  lasting  peace ;  seek  it  of  him ;  he  giveth 
to  all  men  liberally.  2.  We  need  it  always,  everywhere  ;  then  pray  always,  every- 
where. 3.  By  grace  ye  are  saved;  refer  everything  to  the  grace  of  God;  trust  only  in 
that  grace,  not  in  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done. — B.  0.  C. 

Yen.  1 5.— Intimation  of  the  close  of  the  Epistle.    "  Finally  brethren.1' 


76        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  m.  1— 1& 

I.  Request  fob  prayer  on  behalf  of  the  preachers.  1.  For  the  diffusion  and 
glorification  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  through  their  instrumentality.    Diffusion.    "  Pray 

or  us,  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  run."  The  Word  of  the  Lord  is  the  Word  ai 
iven  by  the  Lord  to  be  diffused.  It  is  especially  the  offer  of  salvation  to  perishing 
men  on  the  ground  of  Christ's  work.  The  Thessalonians  are  asked  to  pray  that  the 
Word  of  the  Lord,  by  their  preaching,  may  run,  i.e.  have  free  and  rapid  course.  In  the 
same  way  we  are  to  pray  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  be  everywhere  preached. 
This  is  a  motto  for  a  Bible  Sooiety :  "  Pray  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  run."  By 
both  means  may  it  accomplish  its  course.  Let  no  country  be  shut  to  the  preaching  of 
i  he  gospel,  to  the  circulation  of  the  Scriptures.  Let  the  earth  be  filled  with  knowledge. 
Glorification.  "  And  be  glorified."  For  this,  too,  prayer  needs  to  be  made.  May  the 
Divine  Spirit  accompany  the  Word  in  its  course  through  the  world.  And,  wherever  it 
omes,  let  it  be  glorified.  Let  it  be  shown  to  be  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  by  its  powerful 
aving  effects  upon  the  hearts  of  all  who  hear  it  or  read  it.  Commendatory  statement 
ivith  reference  to  the  Thessalonians.  "  As  also  it  is  with  you."  In  its  course  through 
;he  world  in  those  days,  the  Word  came  to  Thessalonica.  And  they  presented  no 
<  ihstacle  in  their  hearts  to  its  reception.  They  received  it,  not  as  the  word  of  men,  but 
is  it  is  in  truth  the  Word  of  God.  And  it  was  signally  glorified  in  its  being  the  means 
"f  their  being  turned  from  idols  to  the  living  and  true  God.  Let  the  Word  of  the  Lord 
dso  be  glorified  in  our  conversion,  in  the  transformation  of  our  characters.  Let  us  be 
willing  trophies  of  the  power  of  the  Word  to  change  ns  to  the  Divine  form.  2.  For  the 
presence  of  a  condition  without  which  they  could  not  be  instrumental  in  diffusing  and 
glorifying  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  "  And  that  we  may  be  delivered  from  unreasonable 
•uid  evil  men."  Id  most  places  the  preachers  had  to  encounter  unreasonable  and  evil 
men.  If  these  had  their  way,  the  Word  of  the  Lord  would  be  impeded,  by  there  not 
1  i-ing  freedom  for  preaching  it.  The  Thessalonians,  then,  are  asked  to  pray,  on  behalf 
"f  the  preachers,  for  their  deliverance  from  these  unreasonable  and  evil  men.  They 
are  not  forbidden  to  pray  for  their  personal  salvation,  but  they  are  enjoined  to  pray 
against  them  as  impeders  of  the  Word.  Let  Divine  restraint  be  laid  upon  their  un- 
i  casonableness  and  malice,  but  let  Divine  speed  be  granted  to  the  Word.  Reason  for 
expecting  the  existence  of  unreasonable  and  evil  men.  "  For  all  have  not  faith."  The 
meaning  is  not  that  all  have  not  aptitude  for  faith.  It  is  one  of  the  devil's  lies  that 
religion  is  only  a  matter  for  some  people.  The  meaning  is,  that  all  are  not,  in  the  way 
i if  faith,  receptive  of  the  Word.  We  need  not,  therefore,  wonder  if,  in  the  case  of  some, 
i  heir  want  of  sympathy  with  the  Word  shows  itself  in  forms  of  unreasonableness  and 
malice.  They  are  only  working  out  their  position  more  vigorously  than  some  others, 
even  as  Paul  aid  in  his  pre-Christian  state. 

II.  They  had  confidence  that  the  Lord  would  assist  the  Thessalonians. 
"  But  the  Lord  is  faithful,  who  shall  stablish  you,  and  guard  you  from  the  evil  one." 
They  at  once  turn  away  from  their  own  case  to  the  case  of  the  Thessalonians.  There 
were  unreasonable  and  evil  men  at  Thessalonica  too.  But  the  Lord  was  to  be  trusted 
in  as  Protector  of  his  Church  in  every  place,  and  stronger  than  the  unreasonable  and 
ovil  men.  And  their  Lord  Protector,  the  preachers  were  persuaded,  would  make  them 
immovable  against  the  assaults  of  their  enemies,  and  would  deliver  them  from  the  evil 
m.e,  the  inspirer  of  their  unreasonableness  and  malice. 

III.  Their  confidence  in  the  Lord  extended  to  the  co-operation  of  the  Thes- 
salonians with  the  Lord  assisting  them.  "  And  we  have  confidence  in  the  Lord 
louching  you,  that  ye  both  do  and  will  do  the  things  which  we  command."  In  the 
language,  "And  we  have  confidence  in  the  Lord,"-there  is  a  carrying  forward  of  the 
thought.  Their  confidence  in  the  Lord  extended  to  the  Thessalonians  doing  their 
part.  They  had  no  doubt  that  in  the  present  they  wero  doing  what  they  were  com- 
manded. They  had  no  doubt  also  in  their  resolution  for  the  future.  This  expression 
i  if  confidence  has  the  force  of  hopeful  exhortation. 

IV.  Pbayeb  that  the  Lobd  would  assist  the  Thessalonians.  "And  the  Lord 
Urect  your  hearts."  Though  the  Lord  promises  to  assist  us,  and  to  assist  as  in  con- 
nection with  our  good  resolution,  yet  we  need  to  pray  for  his  assistance.  The  prayer 
is  for  the  directing — not  mere  directing,  but  the  powerful  directing — of  our  hearts.  Of 
ourselves  our  hearts  are  misdirected.  But,  in  virtue  of  his  triumph  on  Calvary,  the 
Lord  has  power  over  our  hearts  to  direct  them  aright.     There  is  a  twofold  direction 


OLm.1— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE   TO   THE   THESSALONIAN&        77 

mentioned.  1.  The  central  disposition.  "Into  the  love  of  God."  Our  heart*  are 
rightly  directed,  when  they  are  directed  in  love  toward  him  who  is  the  Centre  of  our 
being.  As  being  should  tend  toward  its  source,  so  should  we  tend  toward  God.  As  it 
is  natural  for  a  child  to  love  his  parents,  so  surely  it  is  natural  for  us  to  love  him  by 
whom  we  have  been  made,  and  for  whom  we  have  been  made.  It  was  the  object  of 
the  Lord,  in  his  personal  ministry  on  earth,  to  hold  up  befure  men  the  immeasurable 
goodness  of  God.  So  it  is  bis  object  in  our  hearts,  by  his  Spirit,  to  hold  up  Divine 
excellence,  so  that  we  may  be  powerfully  attracted  toward  God.  And  in  this  love,  as 
it  is  real  and  active,  is  there  motive  power  for  the  keeping  of  the  commandmonts  of 
God  handed  to  us  by  inspired  men.  The  Lord,  then,  give  us  this  love  for  ourselves  and 
our  friends.  May  God  be  so  presented  to  us  that  all  misdirection  of  our  hearts  shall  be 
powerfully  overcome.  2.  The  special  disposition  in  their  situation.  "  And  into  the 
patience  of  Christ."  By  the  patience  of  Christ  we  aro  to  understand  the  patience 
exhibited  by  Christ  which  is  held  up  before  us  as  our  ideal.  "  For  consider  him  that 
endured  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself.''  In  the  midst,  then,  of  unreason- 
able and  evil  men — not  more  unreasonable  and  evil  than  those  which  assailed  Christ- 
let  them  in  the  same  spirit  endure. — K.  F. 

Vers.  6 — 15. — Duty  of  withdrawing  from  a  disorderly  brother.  L  Duty  stated. 
"  Now  we  command  you,  brethren,  in  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  yc 
withdraw  yourselves  from  every  brother  that  walketh  disorderly,  and  not  after  the 
tradition  which  they  received  of  us."  The  commandment,  being  in  the  Name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  was  as  authoritative  as  though  it  had  been  given  directly  by  him 
who  has  the  absolute  right  to  command  in  the  Church.  It  was  a  commandment 
relating  to  a  brother  walking  disorderly,  and  not  after  the  received  tradition.  It 
is  implied  that  a  definite  order  had  been  appointed  by  the  Lord  for  the  conduct  of 
members  of  the  Church.  This  order,  handed  to  the  preachers,  had  been  handed  by  them 
to  the  Thessalonians.  But  how  was  a  brother  to  be  dealt  with  who  did  not  observe 
this  order?  Our  Lord  had  laid  down  the  rule  with  regard  to  one  who  offended  directly 
against  a  brother.  "  And  if  thy  brother  sin  against  thee,  go,  show  him  his  fault  between 
thee  and  him  alone :  if  he  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy  brother.  But  if  he  hear 
thee  not,  take  with  thee  one  or  two  more,  that  at  the  mouth  of  two  witnesses  or  three 
every  word  may  be  established.  And  if  he  refuse  to  hear  them,  tell  it  unto  the  Church : 
and  if  he  refuse  to  hear  the  Church  also,  let  him  be  unto  thee  as  the  Gentile  and  the 
publican."  What  we  have  here  differs  from  that  in  being  the  case  of  one  who  by  his 
conduct  offended  against  the  general  order  and  reputation  of  the  Church  to  which  he 
belonged.  In  1  Cor.  v.  there  is  the  ordaining  of  discipline  in  a  case  of  very  great 
scandal  in  the  Corinthian  Church.  '*  For  I  verily,  being  absent  in  body,  but  present  in 
spirit,  have  already,  as  though  I  were  present,  judged  him  that  hath  so  wrought  this 
thing,  in  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, ...  to  deliver  such  a  one  unto  Satan  for 
the  destruction  of  the  flesh,  that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 
The  disorderliness  in  the  Thessalonian  Church  was  not  of  the  gravest  nature.  Nor  was 
it  disorderliness  with  the  greatest  amount  of  deliberation ;  but  was  rather  the  conse- 
quence of  a  false  impresion  with  regard  to  the  coming.  Nor  was  it  the  most  confirmed 
disorderliness,  being  after  clear  enunciation  of  duty  as  shown  in  1  Tliess.  iv.  11,  12, 
and,  we  may  suppose,  after  warning  as  directed  in.  1  Thess.  v.  14 ;  but  disorderliness  to 
which  discipline  had  not  yet  been  applied.  There  is  allowed,  then,  to  the  disorderly 
person  the  position  of  brother,  and  apparently  the  right  to  sit  down  at  the  Lord's  table. 
But  the  right-minded  members  of  the  Thessalonian  community  are  directed  to  with- 
draw from  him.  Let  him,  in  the  way  of  discipline,  be  shunned  in  private  intercourse. 
Let  him  be  made  clearly  to  understand  that  no  countenance  is  given  to  him  in  his 
disorderly  course. 

II.  Duty  enforced  bt  the  example  of  the  preachers.  "  For  yourselves  know 
how  ye  ought  to  imitate  us :  for  we  behaved  not  ourselves  disorderly  among  you ;  neither 
did  we  eat  bread  for  nought  at  any  man's  hand,  but  in  labour  and  travail,  working  night 
and  day,  that  we  might  not  burden  any  of  you."  An  appeal  is  made  to  what  was  within 
their  own  knowledge  and  observation.  They  were  aware,  without  their  requiring  to 
be  told,  that  there  had  been  nothing  disorderly  in  the  behaviour  of  the  preachers  among 
them.     They  had  practised  what  they  had  taught.     They  had  been  an  example  in  all 


78         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  m.  1—18. 

particulars  of  the  order  of  which  they  had  been  the  medium  of  delivery.  Special  refer- 
ence fa  made  to  their  being  an  example  of  independence  acquired  by  manual  labour. 
It  could  not  be  said  of  them  that  they  had  eaten  bread  for  nought  at  any  man's  hand. 
They  had  eaten  bread  in  labour  and  travail,  working  night  and  day,  to  be  raised  above 
the  point  of  being  burdensome  to  any  of  them.  Very  similar  language  is  used  in  the 
First  Epistle.  "  For  ye  remember,  brethren,  our  labour  and  travail :  working  night 
and  day,  that  we  might  not  burden  any  of  you."  The  thought  there  is  that,  by  their 
having  adopted  this  course,  they  were  placed  above  all  suspicion  of  selfishness.  They 
were  only  givers  to  the  Thessalonians,  as  mothers  to  their  infant  children.  We  are 
here  told  what  led  to  their  supporting  themselves  by  the  labour  of  their  own  hands. 
It  was  the  consideration  of  example.  In  the  excitement  into  which  the  Thessalonian 
Church  had  been  thrown  by  the  announcement  of  the  coming,  there  had  been  early 
observed  a  tendency  to  neglect  the  duties  of  their  worldly  calling,  which  could  only 
result  in  their  making  themselves  a  burden.  To  counteract  this  tendency,  they  had 
thrown  the  influence  of  their  example  into  the  scale  of  industry.  As  they  were  not 
burdensome  to  the  Thessalonians,  let  none  of  them  he  burdensome  to  any.  Reservation 
of  right.  "  Not  because  we  have  not  the  right,  but  to  make  ourselves  an  example  unto 
you,  that  ye  should  imitate  us."  As  preachers  they  had  the  right  to  be  maintained  by 
those  to  whom  they  ministered.  In  preaching  they  were  as  much  labouring — giving 
out  their  strength,  even  the  strength  of  their  bodies — as  when  they  were  tent-making, 
or  engaged  in  other  manual  labour.  And,  according  to  the  principle  which  is  brought 
in  elsewhere,  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire.  In  certain  circumstances  they  felt 
free  to  accept  of  maintenance  from  those  among  whom  they  laboured,  and  thus  to 
give  their  whole  strength  to  spiritual  work.  Even  at  Thessalonica  they  felt  free  to 
accept  of  a  gift  from  the  Philippian  Church.  They  did  not  feel  free  to  accept  of 
maintenance  from  the  Thessalonian  Church,  simply  because  it  was  necessary,  by  their 
example,  to  encourage  among  them  a  spirit  of  independence  in  connection  with  diligence 
in  performing  the  duties  of  their  worldly  calling. 

III.   DOTY  ENFORCED  BT  THE  PLAIN  MANNEB  IN  WHICH  THE    PBEACHEBB  HAD  TAUGHT. 

"  For  even  when  we  were  with  you,  this  we  commanded  you,  If  any  will  not  work, 
neither  let  him  eat."  In  the  First  Epistle  it  had  been  said,  "  And  that  ye  study  to 
be  quiet,  and  to  do  your  own  business,  and  to  work  with  your  hands,  even  as  we 
charged  you."  The  Thessalonians  are  now  referred  back,  beyond  that  point,  to  the  time 
when  the  preachers  were  with  them.  In  prescribing  starvation  as  the  remedy  for  the 
shirking  of  labour,  Christianity  has  a  certain  aspect  of  severity.  And  yet,  in  this 
respect,  Christianity  is  only  sanctified  common  sense.  There  may  be  doubt  in  par- 
ticular cases  whether  a  man  has  the  ability  to  work  or  the  opportunity  to  work. 
But  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  this,  that  if  he  has  the  ability  to  work  and  the  oppor- 
tunity and  will  not  work,  then  he  should  be  allowed  to  starve.  That  is  to  say,  let  the 
struggle  go  on  in  him  between  hunger  and  indolence.  There  is  no  call  for  our  inter- 
posing in  the  name  of  Christian  charity,  which  needs  to  be  salted  with  salt,  if  it  would 
not  lose  its  flavour.  We  may  expect  that  the  struggle  will  end  in  hunger  gaining  the 
mastery  over  his  indolence.  And  there  will  be  an  experience  gained  which  may  make  him 
a  profitable  member  of  society  for  the  time  to  come.  It  is  well  that  the  Christian  rule 
is  so  plainly  laid  down.  For  there  is  a  false  spiritualism  that  looks  askance  at  labour. 
It  has  even  been  attempted  to  throw  a  Christian  halo  around  idleness  in  the  order  of 
the  mendicant  monks.  But  there  is  a  sensible  practical  tone  about  Christianity  which 
must  commend  it  even  to  those  who  are  not  in  sympathy  with  its  central  teaching.  We 
do  not  need  to  engage  in  our  worldly  business  with  a  grudge,  as  though  all  the  time 
gained  to  the  body  were  lost  to  the  soul.  We  may  feel  free,  with  Paul  and  Silas  and 
Timothy,  in  labour  and  travail,  to  work  night  and  day,  that  we  may  not  be  burden- 
some to  any.  There  is  indeed  danger,  and  very  great  danger,  of  our  going  over  to  the 
other  side,  and  neglecting  our  spiritual  duties,  becoming  worldly  in  our  business.  But 
that  is  to  go  beyond  the  intention  of  Christ.  He  means  that,  by  attention  to  our 
spiritual  duties,  we  should  be  fitted  for  our  worldly  duties.  He  means  that  we  should 
be  mindful  of  him,  and  loyal  to  his  laws  in  our  worldly  duties.  He  means  that,  through 
the  right  performance  of  our  worldly  duties,  our  highest  spirituality  should  be  pro- 
moted. And  blessed  is  he  who  can  work  out  this  problem  aright  in  his  life. 
IT.  Occasion  fob  latino  down  thk  duty.  "  For  we  hear  of  some  that  walk  among 


oh.  m.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.       79 

you  disorderly,  that  work  not  at  all,  but  are  busybodies."  There  were  some,  the  few 
among  them,  who  did  not  observe  the  order  given  by  the  Lord.  Specially,  they  did 
not  observe  the  Lord's  appointment  of  labour.  They  are  described  as  working  not  at 
all.  They  were  not  idlers  pure  and  simple,  to  begin  with.  They  did  not  work,  because 
they  thought  the  coming  was  already  commenced.  They  were  really  in  a  high  state 
■  of  tension.  And,  as  their  energies  were  not  allowed  scope  at  all  within  their  propel 
work,  they  had  to  find  scope  in  work  beyond.  This  is  brought  out  in  the  Greek  as  it 
cannot  so  well  be  brought  out  in  the  English  translation.  It  is  literally,  and  in  a 
paradoxical  way,  "  working  nothing,  but  working  beyond."  They  did  not  busy  them- 
selves with  work  that  belonged  to  them ;  they  even  energetically  busied  themselves 
in  a  meddlesome  way  with  work  that  did  not  belong  to  them. 

V.  The  disorderly  brethren  addressed.  "  Now  them  that  are  such  we  command 
and  exhort  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  with  quietness  they  work,  and  eat  their  own 
oread."  The  Lord's  authority  and  suasion  is  brought  to  bear  on  them  as  a  class.  It 
was  not  sufficient  excuse  for  them  that  they  took  the  Lord's  coming  to  be  imminent. 
Even  though  their  impression  had  been  well  founded,  they  were  not  therefore  justified 
in  freeing  themselves  from  the  Divine  ordinance.  If  we  knew  when  definitely  we  were 
to  die,  it  would  still  be  our  duty,  our  strength  being  continued  to  us,  to  work  up  to 
the  very  last  moment.  That  would  be  in  the  way  of  preparing  for  our  change.  So  they 
should  rather  have  thought  of  being  called  away  from  their  ordinary  work  by  Christ  at 
his  coming.  They  would  thereby  have  saved  themselves  from  much  sinful  and  dis- 
quieting speculation  and  intrusion  into  what  did  not  concern  them.  When  we  work, 
and  work  with  all  the  might  of  our  nature,  within  our  own  proper  sphere,  we  can  have 
the  accompaniment  of  quiet.  We  can  have  restlessness  banished  from  our  mind  ;  and 
we  can  avoid  the  annoyance  that  comes  from  meddling  with  the  affairs  of  others. 
When  we  work,  too,  with  a  diligent  hand,  we  are  put  in  a  position  of  honourable  inde- 
pendence. We  do  not  need  to  be  a  burden  upon  others.  We  can  eat  our  own  bread, 
eat  what  we  have  earned  by  the  sweat  of  our  brow.  To  orderliness,  then,  in  the  form 
of  attention  to  the  duties  of  their  worldly  calling,  with  all  the  weight  of  the  Lord's 
authority,  with  all  the  charm  of  the  Lord's  suasion,  the  preachers  sought  to  bring  back 
the  few  among  the  Thessalonians  who  had  been  disorderly. 

VI.  The  Church  addressed  as  right-minded.  "  But  ye,  brethren,  be  not  weary  in 
well-doing."  From  the  way  in  which  the  Church  is  addressed,  it  can  be  seen  that  the 
right-minded  from  their  numbers  were  properly  representative.  From  the  context, 
"  well-doing "  is  to  be  understood  in  its  less  restricted  sense.  Those  were  doing  well,  in 
honouring  the  Lord's  appointment  of  labour.  The  position  in  which  they  were  placed 
was  trying.  It  was  hard  for  them  to  work  on  amid  all  the  excitement  that  prevailed, 
especially  if  they  themselves  had  the  impression  that  the  coming  was  impending. 
What  need  was  there  for  work,  when  a  new  order  of  things  was  being  introduced  ? 
Was  it  not  more  commendable  to  lay  down  their  tools  and  devoutly  wait  for  the 
heavens  being  opened  over  them  ?  By  this  unsettling  influence  some  of  their  number 
had  been  carried  away.  And  the  position  of  matters  was  aggravated  by  the  support  of 
these  unprofitable  members  being  thrown  upon  the  Church.  All  the  more  honour,  then, 
to  them,  the  right-minded,  that,  amid  temptation,  they  held  to  the  old  order,  that  they 
thought  it  the  right  thing  to  labour  on  diligently,  till  they  actually  heard  their  Lord's 
voice  on  earth  commanding  them  to  cease  from  labour.  Let  them  not  weary  in  follow- 
ing an  upright  course.  When  an  upright  man  sees  his  unscrupulous  neighbours  taking 
many  an  advantage  which  in  his  conscience  he  is  not  free  to  take,  he  is  tempted  to 
ask  what  advantage  there  is  in  uprightness.  But,  though  the  disadvantages  were  a 
hundred  times  greater  than  they  really  are,  it  would  still  be  our  duty  to  follow  the 
Divine  leadings.  Let  us  not  weary  in  the  path  that  leads  to  God  and  life.  There  is 
nothing  that  is  in  the  end  wearying  and  wearing  out  but  a  mind  that  is  conscious  of 
wrong-doing. 

VII.  FURTHEB  SPECIFICATION  OF  THE  COURSE  TO  BE  FOLLOWED  WITH  THE  DISORDERLY 

brother.  "  And  if  any  man  obeyeth  not  our  word  by  this  Epistle,  note  that  man, 
that  ye  have  no  company  with  him,  to  the  end  that  he  may  be  ashamed."  The  right- 
minded  being  numerous  could  act  in  the  name  of  the  Church.  The  disorderly  brother 
could  be  called  before  them,  or  before  a  court  representative  of  the  Lord's  authority  in 
the  Church.    In  some  way  his  attention  was  to  be  specially  directed  to  the  part  of  the 


•0       THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  m.  1—18. 

letter  which  pertained  to  him.  And  obedience  was  to  be  demanded  of  Mm  to  what 
was  laid  down  in  the  letter.  The  ground  was  taken  from  under  the  position  be  occu- 
pied by  the  announcement  that  the  coming  was  to  be  preceded  by  an  apostasy  and 
the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin.  That  put  the  coming  into  the  distance,  and  gave 
an  aspect  of  stability  to  the  old  order  of  things,  including  the  six  days'  labour  of  the 
fourth  commandment.  But  it  was  not  easy  to  get  rid  of  all  the  false  excitement  at 
once.  And  the  habit  of  idleness  had  to  be  overcome,  so  far  as  it  bad  been  formed. 
Against  these  hindrances  the  authority  of  the  teachers  was  to  be  brought  to  bear.  If 
after  trial  he  persisted  in  neglecting  to  work,  then  the  course  to  be  followed  was  to 
note  that  man,  and  have  no  company  with  him.  He  was  to  be  dealt  with  even  as 
others  who  are  mentioned  in  1  Cor.  v. :  "  But  now  I  write  unto  you  not  to  keep 
company  if  any  man  that  is  named  a  brother  be  a  fornicator,  or  covetous,  or  an 
idolater,  or  a  revile r,  or  a  drunkard,  or  an  extortioner ;  with  such  a  one,  no,  not  to  eat." 
The  idler  among  them  was  to  be  a  marked  man,  even  as  the  greater  offender ;  the 
whole  sentiment  of  the  Church  was  to  be  brought  to  bear  agaiost  his  idleness.  They 
were  not  to  have  free  intercourse  or  companionship  with  him.  They  were  not  to  admit 
him  into  their  privacy.  They  were  not  to  invite  him  to  their  houses,  to  contribute  to 
his  support,  or  in  any  way  to  show  him  countenance  in  his  disorderly  course.  They 
were  to  do  this  with  a  disciplinary  end  in  view,  viz.  to  shame  him  out  of  his  idleness. 
It  was  a  shame  for  a  man,  being  able-bodied,  to  be  idle  and  to  throw  himself  as  a 
burden  upon  others.  It  was  especially  a  shame  in  a  Christian,  who  was  surely  not  to 
he  behind  his  heathen  neighbour  in  the  ordinary  duties  of  life.  By  producing  in  him 
a  feeling  of  shame  his  amendment  would  be  secured.  Caution  to  be  observed.  "  And 
yet  count  him  not  as  an  enemy,  but  admonish  him  as  a  brother."  They  were  not  to 
take  the  extreme  step  of  cutting  him  off  altogether  from  Church  fellowship.  He  was 
not  hopelessly  removed  from  good.  There  was  nothing  decisive  against  the  reality  of 
his  Christianity.  They  were  therefore,  while  withdrawing  from  him,  to  acknowledge 
him  as  a  brother,  giving  him  to  feel  that,  on  returning  to  orderliness,  they  would 
welcome  him  back  to  freedom  of  Christian  intercourse.  There  is  a  ride  laid  down  here/or 
our  guidance  in  Christian  intercourse.  We  are  only  to  have  free  intercourse  with  those 
who  are  at  one  with  us  in  the  great  essentials  of  the  Christian  faith  and  life.  We  are 
not  to  be  on  easy  terms  with  those  of  whose  sentiments,  or  of  whose  mode  of  life,  we 
cannot  approve.  That  would  be  to  tolerate  their  sentiments,  to  tolerate  their  conduct, 
and  thus  to  compromise  our  position  and  open  up  the  way  for  our  own  deterioration. 
It  would  also  be  to  encourage  them  in  their  position  and  prevent  their  amendment. 
Our  duty  is  to  withdraw  from  them,  so  far  as  it  is  necessary  to  conserve  our  own  posi- 
tion, and  so  far  as  it  is  necessary  to  convince  them  that  we  do  not  countenance  them 
in  their  position.  But  we  are  not  to  go  to  the  extreme  of  bearing  ourselves  toward 
them  as  though  they  did  not  belong  to  the  Christian  circle.  We  are  not  to  treat  them 
as  enemies.  But  we  are  to  perform  toward  them  the  brotherly  duty  of  trying  to 
remove  sin  from  them,  so  as  to  open  up  the  way  for  the  restoration  of  all  suitable 
Christian  intercourse.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  many  Christians  are  not  sufficiently 
careful  as  to  those  with  whom  they  freely  associate.  They  look  to  position,  to  con- 
venience, to  companionableness,  to  sympathy  in  smaller  matters,  and  not  so  much  as 
they  should  do  to  the  great  ends  of  intercourse.  There  are  even  those  belonging  to 
the  Christian  circle  against  whose  ideas  and  conduct  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  protest. 
When  they  are  habitually  worldly,  or  unsettling,  or  uncharitable,  or  unbrotherly  in 
conversation,  or  given  to  intemperance,  even  as  we  love  the  order  which  Christ  approves, 
and  as  we  would  not  be  partakers  with  them  in  their  sins,  we  must  withdraw  from 
them,  while  not,  in  moral  cowardice,  shirking  the  duty  of  speaking  out  what  we  think 
and  admonishing  them  for  their  good. — B.  V. 

Vers.  16 — 18.— Concluding  words.  I.  Salutation.  1.  Invocation  of  peace.  (1) 
From  whom  peace  is  invoked.  "  Now  the  Lord  of  peace  himself."  We  are  to  nse 
above  what  we  can  do  for  others  to  the  Lord  of  peace  himself.  He  has  purchased 
peace  for  us  by  his  death.  "  He  is  our  Peace ; "  "  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was 
upon  him."  He  is,  therefore,  the  sovereign  Dispenser  of  the  blessing  of  pence  in  the 
Churches.  Peace  was  the  legacy  he  left  to  his  believing  people  in  the  world.  "  Peace 
I  leave  with  you ;  my  peace  I  give  unto  you :  not  as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you. 


ch.  m.  1— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         81 

Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid."  When,  after  bis  resurrection, 
he  appeared  to  his  disciples,  he  hailed  them  with  the  salutation  of  peace.  "  As  they 
thus  spake,"  we  are  told,  "  Jesus  himself  stood  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  saith  unto 
them,  Peace  be  unto  you ; "  and  yet  again,  on  the  same  occasion,  he  said,  "  Peace  be 
unto  you."  We  wish,  then,  for  all  in  whom  we  are  interested,  that  our  ascended  Lord 
would  bestow  "peace  upon  them,  even  as  he  bestowed  peace  upon  the  disciples  before 
he  ascended.  (2)  The  peace  invoked.  "  Give  you  peace."  "  Peace  be  with  you,"  is  a 
seutiment  which  we  should  have  in  our  hearts,  and  often  on  our  lips,  especially  in 
parting  with  our  friends,  as  Paul  here  in  his  letter  parts  with  the  Thessalonians.  They 
leave  us  for  a  time,  but  not  without  our  sincere  wishes  for  their  peace.  Now,  what  is 
the  peace  that  we  wish  especially  for  those  that  we  are  interested  in  ?  To  he  clear  with 
Ood.  There  is  no  greater  evil  than  to  be  in  a  state  of  unreconciledness  to  God.  "  There 
is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."  They  have  sometimes  a  peace,  a  want 
of  such  dispeace  as  might  be  expected,  but  only  by  blinking  the  facts  of  their  case. 
They  do  not  thus  get  quit  of  their  sins,  any  more  than  men  can  get  out  of  debt  by 
pertinaciously  refusing  to  look  into  their  accounts.  Their  state  remains  unaltered. 
Their  sins  will  find  them  out,  it  may  be  in  this  life.  Certainly,  when  earthly  things 
cannot  longer  preoccupy  them,  and  in  the  presence  of  eternal  realities  they  are  thrown 
back  upon  themselves,  then  will  conscience  fill  them  with  dispeace.  For  persons  who 
are  insensible  to  their  actual  condition  as  sinners  we  can  only  wish  dispeace.-  "  Let 
sinners  in  Zion  be  afraid,  let  fearfulness  surprise  the  hypocrites."  What  we  wish  for 
our  friends  is  a  peace  that  corresponds  to  facts.  We  wish  them  to  be  in  a  state  of 
reconciliation,  and  to  be  conscious  of  that.  We  wish  them  to  be  so  that  they  can 
inquire  most  narrowly  into  their  state,  and  honestly  come  to  the  conclusion  that  they 
have  an  interest  in  Christ,  while  repeated  self-examination  can  only  result  in  the 
discovery  of  something  more  in  their  character  that  needs  to  be  removed.  To  have  a 
feeling  of  repose  in  Ood.  We  are  such  beings  that  our  peace  is  only  to  be  found  in 
dependence,  in  leaning.  We  are  apt  to  seek  a  resting-place  in  the  creature ;  but,  alas, 
all  that  is  beneath  the  highest  fails  us,  and  we  are  driven  from  one  resting-place 
to  another,  like  the  dove  that  could  find  no  rest  on  the  unstable  waters.  "  Return  unto 
thy  rest,  0  my  soul."  True  peace  is  only  to  be  found  in  him  from  whom  our  being 
hag  come  and  to  whom  it  tends,  in  leaning  our  weakness  on  his  strength,  our  ignorance 
on  his  wisdom,  our  sinfulness  on  his  grace.  This  is  a  rest  out  of  which  we  cannot  be 
driven,  which  makes  us  independent  of  the  creature,  which  cures  our  restlessness  of 
spirit.  And  as  this  is  what  we  so  much  wish  for  ourselves,  so  we  wish  it  for  our 
friends.  To  have  a  feeling  of  satisfaction  in  being  employed  as  God  wants  them,  to  be 
employed.  It  is  essential  to  our  peace  that  our  faculties  should  be  truly  and  healthily 
employed.  "  Great  peace  have  they  who  love  thy  Law."  And  what  we  wish  for  our 
friends  is  that,  in  some  worthy  way,  they  should  work  out  the  plan  of  their  life  given 
them  by  God.  To  have  peace  from  without.  It  is  said  that,  when  a  man's  ways  please 
the  Lord,  he  makes  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him.  And  that  is  often 
strikingly  fulfilled.  But  it  is  not  what  every  one  can  enjoy.  Even  Christ  had  his  enemies, 
who  gave  no  cause  of  offence  to  any.  And  we  cannot  calculate  on  escaping,  who  fail  so 
much  in  our  social  duties.  But  still  we  wish  this  outward  peace  for  our  friends  so  far 
as  it  may  please  God.  Let  them  be  delivered  from  unreasonable  and  evil  men.  "  Let 
no  root  of  bitterness  springing  up  trouble  them."  May  causes  of  annoyance,  elements 
of  discord,  be  removed  from  families  and  from  Churches  I  (3)  Time  for  which  peace  is 
invoked.  "At  all  times."  That  would  not  be  a  good  wish  which  was  limited  to 
a  certain  time,  and  was  not  made  to  extend  over  a  longer  period.  If  we  wish  peace 
at  all,  we  will  not  wish  it  merely  for  a  day,  or  for  a  month,  or  for  a  year,  but  for  all 
time.  Let  them  not  by  carelessness  lose  their  evidences.  Let  not  the  coming  years 
bring  discord  into  their  hearts  or  into  their  circle.  The  Lord  give  them  peace  in  the 
season  of  affliction.  The  Lord  especially  give  them  peace  in  their  dying  hour.  The 
Lord  give  them  peace  when  they  enter  upon  a  new  and  solemn  scene.  May  peace 
abide  with  them  for  ever.  (4)  Ways  in  which  peace  is  invoked.  "  In  all  ways."  The 
Lord  of  peace  knows  best  how  to  see  to  the  peace  of  our  friends  ;  with  him,  therefore, 
the  ways  may  be  left.  The  Lord  use  us,  if  we  are  his  way  of  promoting  their  peace. 
The  Lord  work  even  against  them  in  his  providence,  if  that  is  necessary  to  their  being 
ejected  from  their  false  confidences.    The  Lord  especially  increase  their  faith,  that  their 

U.  THESSALONIANS.  % 


d*       THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALON1ANS.    [oh.  m.  1—18. 

peace  may  flow  as  a  river,  broadening  and  deepening,  until  it  loses  itself  in  the  ocean 
of  eternity.  2.  Invocation  of  the  Lord's  presence.  "  The  Lord  be  with  you  all."  This 
is  a  brief  but  comprehensive  form  of  salutation.  The  Lord  be  with  our  friends,  wherever 
their  lot  is  cast.  The  Lord  go  with  them  where  they  go,  and  dwell  with  them  where 
they  dwell.  The  Lord  be  with  them  in  their  going  out  and  in  their  coming  in.  The 
Lord  be  with  them  in  their  basket  and  in  their  store.  The  Lord  especially  be  with 
them  in  the  great  work  of  their  life. 

II.  Remark  regarding  the  handwriting  of  the  salutation.  "  The  salutation 
of  me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand,  which  is  the  token  in  every  Epistle :  so  I  write." 
Paul,  here  dissociating  himself  from  Silas  and  Timothy  as  joint-writers,  singles  out 
himself  by  name.  It  is  he  who  has  given  turn  and  form  to  the  thought  throughout. 
It  is  he  who  pre-eminently  had  the  care  of  the  Gentile  Churches.  At  the  close  of 
1  Corinthians,  and  also  at  the  close  of  Colossians,  there  is  the  same  language  as  here. 
u  The  salutation  of  me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand."  In  those  places  there  is  no  salutation 
preceding;  we  require,  therefore,  mentally  to  supply  a  salutation.  Here,  where  there  is 
a  salutation  preceding,  we  are  supplied  with  what  the  salutation  is.  We  are  to  think 
of  the  weak-eyed  Paul  as  seated  in  his  room  in  the  city  of  Corinth,  and  dictating  the 
letter  to  the  amanuensis  beside  him.  While  he  had  anything  on  his  mind  to  say  to 
these  Thessalonians  in  the  way  of  commendation,  or  direction,  or  advice,  the  amanuensis 
continued  to  write.  But,  having  fully  unburdened  his  mind,  he  took  the  roll  of  parch- 
ment into  his  own  hand,  and,  in  his  own  handwriting,  put  down  these  words :  "  Now 
the  Lord  of  peace  himself  give  you  peace  at  all  times  in  all  ways.  The  Lord  be  with 
you  all."  Still  continuing  to  write,  he  adds  the  explanatory  note :  "  The  salutation 
of  me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand."  In  his  explanation  he  includes  his  reason  for  giving 
his  own  handwriting :  "  Which  is  the  token  in  every  Epistle :  so  I  write  "  (i.e.  in  these 
characters).  A  forged  epistle  in  his  name  had  been  circulated  in  Thessalonica ;  to 
prevent  such  imposition  in  future,  he  gives  them,  in  the  few  words  in  his  own  ha™^ 
writing,  a  token  or  seal  by  which  to  assure  themselves  of  the  genuineness  of  iUk 
letters.  Let  them  accept  of  no  letter  which  did  not  carry  with  it  the  evidence  of  its 
genuineness. 

DH.  Benediction.  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all."  This 
is  the  short  form  which  is  found  in  the  First  Epistle,  with  -the  thoughtful  addition  of 
"  all."  There  were  some  persons  in  the  Thessalonian  Church  who  had  come  under  his 
censure.  As  in  the  sixteenth  verse  he  has  included  them  in  his  salutation  ("  with  you 
all"),  so  now  he  includes  them  in  his  benediction.  He  leaves  the  Thessalonians  for  the 
time,  with  no  grudge  in  his  heart  against  any,  but  with  the  catholic  desire  that  they 
should  all  be  dealt  with,  not  according- to  their  own  demerit,  but  according  to  the  merit 
of  their  Saviour,  of  which  he  is  sovereign  Imputer. — R.  F. 

Ver.  1. — Prayer  for  missions.  Money  is  not  the  sinew  of  the  spiritual  wars  of  the 
Church.  Hie  necessary  appeals  for  money  so  urgently  pressed  by  the  friends  of 
missions  should  not  blind  our  eyes  to  the  higher  needs  of  those  great  enterprises.  All 
the  wealth  of  the  Stock  Exchange  could  not  convert  one  soul.  As  it  was  in  Israel's 
great  battle  with  Amalek,  when  Joshua  could  only  prevail  in  the  field  so  long  as  Moses 
prayed  on  the  mountain,  the  missionary  is  successful  in  proportion  as  the  Church  is 
prayerful.  In  order  that  this  assertion  may  not  fall  powerless  as  an  empty,  dogmatic 
platitude,  inquire  how  it  may  be  substantiated  by  a  consideration  of  the  chief  elements 
of  true  success  in  the  mission  field. 

I.  The  spiritual  character  of  the  labour  or  the  missionaries.  Money  cannot 
make  missionaries.  It  may  send  men  abroad,  feed,  clothe,  and  house  them,  but  it 
cannot  pnt  an  apostolic  spirit  in  them,  nor  cheer  and  strengthen  that  spirit  when 
it  flags;  and  yet  without  such  a  spirit  no  missionary  work  can  be  looked  for.  Careys 
do  not  come  with  good  balance-sheets,  nor  are  Moffats  evolved  out  of  glowing  financial 
reports.  The  great  want  of  the  missionary  societies  is  men,  not  money.  1.  Prayer 
is  necessary  that  the  right  men  may  he  forthcoming.  God  only  can  find  the  men,  sod 
the  most  gifted  men  will  fail  except  they  go  in  pursuit  of  a  Divine  vocation.  St.  Paul 
was  appointed  "  not  from  men,  nor  through  man "  (Gal.  i.  1) ;  he  was  sent  on  his 
specific  mission  through  indications  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  response  to  the  prayers  of  the 
Church  at  Antioch  (Acts  xiii.  2).    2.  Prayer  it  necessary  that  missionaries  may  be 


oh.  in.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.        83 

sustained.  There  is  much  to  damp  the  ardour  and  depress  the  spirit  of  the  missionary 
amid  all  the  degraded  scenes  of  his  work.  St.  Paul  had  been  praying  for  his  friends  at 
Thessalonica ;  in  return  he  sought  their  prayers  for  his  work.  He  so  identified  himself 
with  his  mission  as  to  regard  prayer  for  the  mission  as  prayer  for  himself. 

II.  The  external  progress  of  the  truth.  St.  Paul  asks  for  prayer  "  that  the 
"Word  of  the  Lord  may  run."  Nothing  is  more  striking  than  the  fact  that  the  rate 
of  progress  of  Christian  missions  is  not  at  all  proportionate  to  the  perfection  of  the 
mechanism  with  which  they  are  organized.  The  years  of  biggest  subscriptions  are  not 
always  the  years  of  most  numerous  conversions.  1.  Prayer  is  necessary  that  God  may 
remove  obstructions  to  the  progress  of  Christianity.  Governments  may  hinder  missions. 
Countries  are  sometimes  closed  against  missionaries.  Then  we  must  pray  that  God 
would  open  a  way.  What  doors  has  he  opened  in  our  day  1  The  Word  is  now  free 
to  run  through  the  vast  populations  of  China.  "  The  great  dark  continent "  is  opening 
up  to  the  light.  This  is  not  done  by  money.  "  It  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is 
marvellous  in  our  eyes."  2.  Prayer  is  necessary  that  God  may  dispose  the  minds 
of  men  to  receive  the  truth.  In  a  neighbouring  Macedonian  Church  lived  the  first 
European  resident  converted  by  St.  Paul,  and  of  her  it  is  said,  "  whose  heart  the  Lord 
opened,  to  give  heed  unto  the  things  which  were  spoken  by  Paul "  (Acts  xvi.  14). 
Therefore  we  must  pray  that  God's  Spirit  may  go  with  the  Word,  to  prepare  the  soil  to 
receive  it  and  to  quicken  it  when  it  is  sown. 

III.  The  internal  fbuttfulness  of  the  gospel.  The  apostle  is  not  satisfied 
with  desiring  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  "  run ; "  he  wishes  also  that  it  may  be 
"  glorified."  This  further  wish  strikes  a  high  note.  It  reminds  us  that  missionary 
success  cannot  be  measured  by  the  numbers  of  the  converts.  The  great  question  is — 
what  is  the  character  of  them  ?  Statistical  reports  are  delusive.  The  missionary  who 
can  make  no  sensational  return  of  long  lists  of  converts  may  be  doing  the  most  real, 
solid,  lasting  work  in  laying  the  foundation  of  true  Christian  character  in  a  few. 
There  are  nominal  Christians  in  heathen  lands  who  are  a  dishonour  to  the  name  they 
bear,  as  there  are  also  at  home.  Prayer  is  necessary  that  a  right  character  may  be 
cultivated  in  mission  Churches.  Christ  was  glorified  when  the  man  who  had  been 
a  fierce  demoniac  sat  clothed  and  in  his  right  mind  at  the  feet  of  his  Deliverer.  The 
Christian  who  has  been  a  savage  is  the  finest  witness  of  the  power  of  the  gospel.  But 
it  if  very  difficult  to  irradicate  the  vices  of  heathenism,  as  missionaries  know  to  their 
sorrow.    Let  us  pray  for  this  most  hard  but  most  needful  work. — W.  F.  A. 

Tar.  Z.— Security.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  how  much  anxiety  St.  Paul  spends  on 
the  normal  and  permanent  character  of  his  Christian  converts.  He  is  not  satisfied  with 
having  won  their  first  confession  of  faith,  nor  is  he  content  that  now  and  again  they 
should  flash  out  with  some  brilliant  display  of  spiritual  energy.  His  chief  concern  is 
-with  their  life  throughout,  his  chief  desire  for  the  strength  and  persistence  of  its  higher 
character.  It  is  important  for  all  of  us  to  bear  in  mind  that  salvation  is  not  an  isolated 
act,  that  it  is  a  chronic  condition.  We  are  always  in  danger  of  falling  unless  we  are 
kept  in  a  continuous  Divine  security. 

I.  The  two  elements  of  security.  1.  Internal  stability.  We  are  in  danger  of 
falling  through  our  own  weakness.  Badly  built  houses  do  not  wait  for  an  earthquake 
to  throw  them  down ;  they  crumble  to  pieces.  (1)  The  first  requisite  for  security  is 
a  good  foundation.  Christians  should  see  to  it  that  they  are  building  on  Christ,  and 
not  on  their  own  doings  and  habits.  (2)  The  next  requisite  is  compact,  solid  building. 
The  building  of  wood,  hay,  and  stubble  is  fragile,  though  it  may  be  erected  on  a  founda- 
tion of  rock.  We  want  firm  principles,  sound  habits,  decided  convictions.  2.  External 
protection.  (1)  We  are  in  danger  from  the  evil  one.  In  estimating  our  measure  of 
security  we  have  to  take  into  account  the  character  of  our  environment.  The  ship 
may  be  well  built  and  yet  it  may  not  be  able  to  withstand  the  pressure  of  ice-floes. 
The  strongest  house  may  give  way  before  an  avalanche.  The  Christian  is  beset  by 
temptations.  It  is  not  enough  that  he  is  firm  in  his  personal  will  to  do  right ;  he 
needs  protection  from  external  inducements  to  go  astray.  (2)  To  be  secure  against  this 
danger  we  need  to  be  guarded.  We  can  never  be  strong  enough  to  withstand  the 
whole  force  of  an  attack  of  Satan.  Some  providential  warding  off  of  die  fiercest  blows 
seems  to  be  necessary. 


84       THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  m.  1— lb. 

IL  The  great  ground  of  security.  St.  Paul  does  not  wish,  or  hope,  or  pray  for 
the  security  of  his  friends.  He  knows  and  is  confident  that  they  have  a  good  ground 
of  security.  Our  fears  are  due  to  our  unbelief.  Faith  has  her  feet  on  an  immovable 
rock.  1.  The  ground  of  our  security  is  Christ.  (1)  He  strengthens  us  with  internal 
stability.  The  indwelling  Christ  is  the  source  ana  secret  of  Christian  vigour.  Weak, 
wavering  Christians  have  too  little  of  Christ  in  their  lives.  (2)  He  guards  us  against 
external  assaults.  Christ  has  faced  and  met  and  defeated  the  tempter.  He  interposes 
the  presence  of  his  Holy  Spirit  between  the  evil  spirit  and  our  hearts.  2.  The  reason 
for  trusting  in  Christ  for  security  is  his  faithfulness.  It  should  be  sufficient  for  us  to 
have  confidence  in  his  goodness.  He  is  so  gracious,  so  kind,  so  generous  to  help,  that 
we  may  be  sure  that  he  will  aid  his  people  in  their  greatest  dangers.  But  we  have 
more  than  this  assurance.  He  has  promised  help  (Matt,  xxviii.  20) ;  he  is  appointed 
by  God  as  our  Saviour,  and  therefore,  in  fulfilment  of  his  great  mission,  fidelity  leads 
him  to  see  to  the  security  of  his  people. — W.  P.  A. 

Ver.  5. — The  patience  of  Christ.  The  Christian  life  has  two  aspects,  a  heavenward 
and  an  earthward  aspect.  In  its  heavenly  relations  it  should  be  filled  with  love  to 
God;  in  its  earthly  relations — especially  when  under  such  trials  as  befell  the  early 
Christians — it  needs  to  be  fortified  to  endure  with  patience.  The  latter  grace  claims 
particular  attention. 

I.  Great  patience  is  requisite  fob  the  endurance  of  earthly  life.  Very 
great  differences  in  successive  ages  and  in  various  individual  lots  make  the  amounts  of 
patience  necessary  for  each  man  to  be  very  unequal.  It  would  be  foolish  for  one  in  our 
own  day,  to  whom  the  lines  have  fallen  in  pleasant  places,  to  pose  with  the  solemn, 
martyr-like  demeanour  which  was  natural  to  Christians  in  the  days  of  persecution. 
They  needed  patience  to  face  cruel  calamities  which  we  happily  are  spared.  Neverthe- 
less, "  man  is  born  to  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upward;"  the  quietest  public  times  see 
the  bitterest  private  sorrows  in  some  households ;  great,  awful  spiritual  troubles  come 
upon  men  whose  external  circumstances  are  placid  and  sunny ;  and  even  where  no  one 
heavy  blow  falls,  innumerable  small  vexing  cares,  like  the  Egyptian  plague  of  flies,  fret 
and  wear  the  soul.  Therefore  patience  is  still  greatly  needed.  It  is  one  thing  to  suffer 
trouble  and  quite  another  thing  to  bear  it,  not  to  be  crushed  by  it,  not  to  rebel  against 
the  Power  that  sends  it,  even  in  secret  thought,  but  to  stand  up  under  it,  with  dumb, 
unmurmuring  endurance,  like  those  sad,  calm  Caryatides  that  have  stood  for  centuries 
bearing  on  their  patient  heads  ponderous  temple  structures. 

II.  The  patience  of  Christ  is  the  model  and  the  inspiration  for  the  patience 
of  Christians.  This  wonderful  patience  of  Christ  may  be  best  appreciated  when  we 
come  to  meditate  on  its  relation  to  his  circumstances  and  experience.  1.  His  previous 
glory.  They  who  have  once  known  better  days  feel  the  smart  of  adversity  most 
keenly.  Prom  heaven's  throne  to  the  cross — what  a  descent  I  2.  Hit  extreme  suffer- 
ings. Was  ever  there  sorrow  like  his?  Gross  insult  was  added  to  cruel  torture ;  and 
insult  tries  patience  worse  than  pain.  3.  His  sensitive  nature.  There  are  men  who 
seem -to  feel  a  needle-prick  more  acutely  than  others  feel  a  sword-thrust.  Our  Lord 
was  one  who  felt  most  acutely,  with  the  painfully  delicate  perception  of  the  most 
refined  nature.  4.  His  powers  of  resistance.  He  might  have  summoned  legends  of 
angels  to  his  assistance.  5.  The  marvellous  spirit  with  which  he  endured  all.  "  He 
was  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter."  He  not  only  prayed  for  his  murderers,  but  he 
calmly  weighed  their  guilt  and  defended  them  on  account  of  their  ignorance.  This 
wonderful  patience  of  our  Lord  is  a  model  for  us ;  it  is  also  an  inspiration.  As  we 
turn  from  the  petty  complaints  of  men  to  the  sight  of  that  awful,  Divine  patience, 
surely  our  murmurings  must  be  shamed  and  silenced. 

III.  It  is  requisite  that  God  should  direct  oub  hearts  into  the  patience  of 
Christ.  1.  The  patience  must  penetrate  to  our  hearts.  Patience  of  language  and  of 
constrained  demeanour  is  superficial  and  will  not  satisfy  God,  nor  can  it  remain  long 
without  tht  deeper  patience  of  the  heart.  2.  Our  hearts  cannot  receive  this  patience 
till  they  are  directed  aright  by  Ood.  It  depends  on  our  disposition,  which  we  must 
have  moulded  by  the  hand  of  God  into  a  firm  faith  and  a  calm  endurance.  S.  This 
patience  follows  love  to  Ood.  Our  hearts  are  to  be  first  directed  into  lore.  When  we 
love  as  Christ  loved  we  can  endure  as  he  endured. — W.  P.  A. 


OH.  m.  1—18.]    THE   SECOND   EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         86 

Ver.  10. — Pauperizing  ch'irity.  There  appear  to  have  been  idle,  talkative  persons  is 
the  Thessalonian  Church  who  neglected  their  trades  while  they  made  themselves  very 
prominent  in  the  Christian  assemblies,  expecting  to  be  supported  out  of  the  common 
funds.  St.  Paul  justly  rebukes  their  disgraceful  conduct.  He  points  to  his  own 
example.  Even  he,  an  apostle,  devoted  to  the  work  of  the  Churches,  did  not  draw  from 
the  funds  of  the  Churches,  but  supported  himself  by  his  own  labour.  The  wholesome 
direction  which  he  gives  has  a  certain  grim  humour  about  it.  Here  is  his  remedy  for 
the  tiresome,  loquacious  idlers :  starve  them  into  industiy.  That  process  will  bring 
them  to  their  senses.  It  would  have  been  well  if  the  same  wise,  manly  counsel  had 
always  prevailed  in  the  Church.  A  weak  and  foolish  administration  of  Christian 
charity  has  too  often  fostered  the  poverty  it  aimed  at  curing.  Some  of  the  reasons 
which  make  it  positively  wrong  for  the  charitable  to  support  the  idle  should  be  well 
weighed  by  those  persons  who  are  more  kind-hearted  than  reflective. 

I.  It  injures  the  recipient.  Thus  paupers  are  bred  and  multiplied.  1.  The  »m 
of  idleness  is  encouraged ;  for  idleness  is  a  sin.  Those  who  encourage  it  will  have  to 
bear  part  of  the  guilt  of  it.  2.  The  indolent  are  tempted  to  many  vices.  The  idle 
members  of  the  Church  gave  to  the  Thessalonians  the  greatest  trouble.  Work  is 
a  moral  antiseptic.  3.  Independence  is  destroyed.  The  able-bodied  pauper  is  quite 
unmanned  by  the  loss  of  his  independence.  There  was  some  sense  in  those  stern  old 
Elizabethan  laws  against  sturdy  beggars  and  vagrants. 

II.  It  injures  the  giver.  1.  Where  public  funds  are  thus  misappropriated,  an 
injustice  is  done  to  those  who  contribute  to  them.  We  do  not  pay  poor  rates  in  order  to 
encourage  idleness,  nor  do  we  give  communion  offerings  for  that  unworthy  object. 
District  visitors  who  have  the  administration  of  moneys  subscribed  by  other  people 
should  remember  this,  and  not  permit  soft-heartedness  to  oust  justice.  2.  Where  only 
private  benevolence  is  concerned,  the  heart  is  hardened  in  the  end  by  the  sight  of  the 
abuse  of  charity. 

III.  It  injures  the  truly  needy.  We  take  the  children's  bread  and  give  it  to 
dogs,  and  the  children  starve.     The  idlers  are  the  most  clamorous  for  assistance,  while 

'the  deserving  are  the  most  backward  to  make  their  wants  known.  Suffering  in  silence, 
they  are  often  neglected,  because  greedy,  worthless  persons  step  in  first  and  ravage  the 
small  heritage  of  the  poor. 

IV.  It  injures  the  community.  1.  It  discourages  industry  generally.  Not  only 
are  the  idle  encouraged  in  their  discreditable  way  of  living,  but  a  tax  is  put  upon 
industry,  and  men  do  not  feel  so  strongly  inclined  to  work  honestly  for  their  daily 
bread.  2.  It  propagates  the  worst  class  of  society.  The  idle  part  of  the  population  of 
great  cities  are  the  canker  of  civilization.  There  vice  and  crime  breed  most  freely.  It 
is  the  law  of  England  that  no  man  need  starve.  But  it  is  right  and  necessary  that 
when  the  state  gives  bread  it  should  compel  labour — i.e.,  of  course,  if  there  is  health 
for  work.  Idleness  is  the  curse  of  the  East ;  Syrian  felahin  will  sit  to  reap  their  corn. 
Wise  Christians  will  ever  protest  against  this  fatal  vice,  and  all  who  administer  Church 
funds  should  feel  a  heavy  responsibility  resting  upon  them  to  guard  against  increasing 
it  by  well-meant  but  foolish  doles  of  charity. — W.  P.  A. ' 

Ver.  14. — Church  discipline.  There  are  several  references  to  Church  discipline  in  the 
writings  of  St.  Paul,  showing  that  he  was  desirous  to  see  order  and  a  healthy  character 
of  Church  life  maintained  among  his  readers.  In  an  earlier  verse  of  the  present  chapter 
(ver.  6)  he  advises  the  Thessalonians  to  withdraw  themselves  *  from  every  brother  that 
walketh  disorderly ; "  now  he  bids  them  not  keep  company  with  those  who  refuse  to 
obey  his  apostolic  message. 

I.  Idleness  is  an  offence  heavy  enough  to  merit  Church  discipline.  The 
preceding  verses  show  that  St.  Paul  has  in  mind  those  idle  busybodies  who  walked 
disorderly  (ver.  11,  etc.).  We  visit  dishonesty,  intemperance,  etc.,  with  censure.  The 
apostle  goes  further,  and  selects  idleness  for  special  notice  by  the  Church.  So  great 
does  he  feel  the  evil  of  it  to  be. 

H.  Neglect  of  apostolic  injunctions  is  the  immediate  occasion  fob  the 
exercise  of  Church  discipline.  The  idle  are  first  to  be  admonished  (ver.  12).  When 
admonition  fails,  farther  measures  must  be  taken.  The  apostles  had  no  ambition  to  be 
lords  over  Christ's  heritage ;  though  their  commanding  influenoe  naturally  gave  great 


86        THE   SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  ih.  1— la 

weight  to  tlieir  directions,  similar  to  that  which  comes  unsought  to  the  European 
missionary  among  converts  from  heathen  savagery.  Nevertheless,  it  was  not  this 
adventitious  authority  that  St.  Paul  relied  upon.  He  wrote  under  inspiration.  His 
message  was  prompted  by  the  Divine  Spirit.  When  we  refuse  to  hearken  to  the 
admonitions  of  the  New  Testament  we  are  resisting  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God. 

III.  Church  discipline  is  to  be  exercised  by  means  of  quiet  separation.  There 
is  no  word  here  of  physical  force.  It  was  impossible  for  a  Christian  community  living 
in  a  pagan  city  to  call  in  the  ad  of  the  civil  power  to  execute  its  decrees ;  but  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that,  had  the  possibility  of  anything  of  the  kind  been  contem- 
plated in  the  mind  of  St.  Paul,  he  would  have  repudiated  it — holding  as  he  did  that 
his  weapons  were  not  carnal.  Further,  there  is  no  reference  to  spiritual  excommunica- 
tion, no  cursing  with  bell  and  book.  Simple  separation  is  all  that  is  advised.  This  is 
a  peaceful,  geutle,  but  effective  mode  of  censure.  It  would,  of  course,  directly  stop  the 
evil  practice  of  idlers  living  on  the  Church  funds.  And  it  would  administer  a  rebuke 
that  would  be  all  the  more  eloquent  that  it  was  silent.  It  is  always  our  duty  to  see 
that  our  Church  fellowship  is  kept  pure.  We  should  have  the  courage  to  separate 
from  those  who  disgrace  the  Christian  name.  We  should  be  careful  for  our  own  sakes 
that  the  society  we  select  to  move  in  is  healthy  and  elevated  in  moral  tone.  For  the 
sake  of  others  we  should  discourage  unworthy  conduct  by  refusing  to  associate  with 
those  who  are  guilty  of  it.  Some  who  are  not  brave  enough  to  do  this  are  guilty  of 
great  meanness  in  talking  against  offenders  behind  their  backs,  while  treating  them  in 
the  most  friendly  way  when  in  their  presence. 

IY.  The  object  of  Church  discipline  is  to  recover  the  offendeb.  The  most 
stern  penalties  are  to  be  inflicted  with  a  merciful  end.  Here  the  mild  punishment  of 
quiet  separation  is  to  aim  at  restoring  the  wrong-doer.  First  he  is  to  be  shamed,  as  he 
will  be  if  there  be  any  right  spirit  in  him.  Men  should  feel  ashamed  of  idleness. 
Then  and  throughout  lie  is  to  be  regarded,  not  as  an  enemy,  but  only  as  an  erring 
brother.  Thus  tender  and  sympathetic  should  Christians  be  with  one  another  in 
regard  to  their  failings,  remembering  that  it  is  only  through  the  forgiving  grace  of 
Christ  that  any  of  us  enjoy  the  privileges  of  Christianity.  There  is  no  room  for 
a  Pharisee  in  the  Church,  and  we  must  beware  lest  the  exercise  of  Church  discipline 
develop  his  ugly  spirit. — W.  F.  A. 

Ver.  16. — Peace  from  the  Ood  of  peace.  After  giving  directions  about  the  small 
trouble  that  disturbed  the  Thessalonian  Christians — small  indeed  when  compared  with 
the  bitter  factiousness  and  the  graver  sin  that  subsequently  disturbed  the  Church 
at  Corinth — St.  Paul  prays  that  peace  may  reign  among  them  and  that  the  Lord  may 
be  with  all  of  them,  with  the  erring  in  their  restoration  as  well  as  with  the  faithful 
brethren.  The  peace  which  he  desiderates  so  earnestly  is  clearly  more  than  mutual 
concord ;  it  is  that  deep  peace  of  God  in  the  heart  which  is  at  the  root  of  peace  among 
men,  and  is  itself  the  greatest  of  blessings. 

I.  Perfect  Christian  peaoe  is  universal.  What  most  strikes  us  in  regard  to  the 
peace  here  referred  to  is  the  universality  of  its  scope  and  area.  1.  Perfect  Christian 
peace  is  continuous  and  unbroken.  It  is  to  be  enjoyed  "  at  all  times."  In  closing  the 
First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  St.  Paul  wished  his  readers  to  "  rejoice  alway " 
(1  Thess.  v.  17).  Now  he  prays  that  they  may  have  continuous  peace.  If  we  cannot 
have  the  joy  of  the  angels  we  may  have  the  peace  of  God,  which  is  better.  As  there 
are  some  who  have  happiness  without  peace,  so  there  are  others  who  have  peace  without 
happiness.  There  is  a  transient  superficial  calm  which  the  world  calls  peace ;  but  volca- 
noes slumber  beneath,  and  in  a  moment  it  may  be  shattered  as  with  an  earthquake. 
There  is  no  peace  in  the  wicked.  There  is  an  eternal  peace  for .  the  people  of  God. 
2.  Perfect  Christian  peace  comes  through  various  means.  St.  Paul  adds  the  curious 
phrase,  "  in  all  ways."  It  is  not  only  that  peace  may  be  enjoyed  continuously  in  spite 
of  changing  and  adverse  circumstances,  but  those  very  circumstances,  even  the  most 
unfriendly  of  them,  are  to  minister  to  the  peace.  This  may  appear  paradoxical,  but  in 
experience  we  find  that  the  troubles  and  distractions  which  would  upset  all  peace  if  we 
only  had  the  surface  peace  of  earth  drive  us  nearer  to  God,  and  so  help  us  to  realize 
mow  perfoetly  the  eternal  peace  of  heaven. 

IL  PjcanoT  Christian  peace  flows  fbom  Christ.     It  is  not  to  be  get  kjr  any 


ch.  in.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS,        87 

efforts  of  our  own  wills.  We  cannot  pacify  ourselves  any  more  than  the  sea  can  calm 
the  raging  of  its  own  wild  waves.  He  who  said,  "  Peace,  be  still ! "  to  the  storm  on  the 
lake  is  the  only  One  who  can  quell  the  tempests  that  surge  in  human  hearts.  Christ 
infuses  his  own  peace  because  he  is  the  Lord  of  peace.  1.  He  is  ai  peace  in  hit  own 
tout.  Peace  is  contagious.  The  peaceful  gives  peace.  We  may  often  see  how  much 
one  quiet,  self-possessed  man  can  do  to  allay  the  panic  of  a  whole  crowd.  "  My  peace 
I  give  unto  you,"  said  Jesus  (John  xiv.  27).  2.  He  reigns  in  peace.  Christ  does  not 
provoke  enmity  and  warfare  except  against  evil.  Among  his  own  people  he  reigns 
pacifically.  3.  He  directly  bestows  peace.  St.  Paul's  wish  is  a  prayer.  We  pray  that 
Christ  may  breathe  his  peace  into  us  by  a  direct  inspiration.  This  richest,  deepest, 
purest  hWing  is  for  those  who  dwell  near  to  their  Lord  and  drink  of  bia  Sp'rit. 
-W.F.A 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF 


ST.  PAUL   TO   THE   THESSALONIANS 


CHAPTER  L 

TSEHE  TiOB 

Christian  Patience               ...            ...  4 

A  Future  State  of  Retribution           ...  4 
The  Manner  of  Christ's  Second  Com- 
ing     ...           ...           ...           ...  5 

The  Coming  of  Christ  for  Judgment  5 
Christ  Glorified  in  his  Saints            ...  5 
Thanksgiving  for  the   Spiritual  Pro- 
gress of  the  Tliessalonians              ...  5 
The  Apostle's  Interest  in  the  Thessa- 
lonian  Church  as  manifested  by  his 
Praises  of  it  to  other  Churches      ...  5 
The  Significance  of  these  Sufferings 

in  Relation  to  Divine  Judgment    ...  6 
The  Future  Judgment  as  to  its  Right- 
eousness, Time,  Circumstances,  and 
Results  to  the  Two  Classes  concerned 

in  it     ...            ...            ...            ...  6 

Prayer  for  the  Theasnlonians  in  Pro- 
spect of  their  Glorification              ...  8 
The  Introduction  ...            ...            ...  9 

The  Persecutions  of  the  Thessalonians  10 

The  Great  Day     ...           ...           ...  11 

St.  Paul's  Prayer  for  the  Thessalonians  13 

Manifestation  of  Solemn  Interest      ...  14 

Grace  and  Peace  ...            ...            ...  18 

Growing  Faith      ...            ...            ...  19 

A  Token  of  Righteous  Judgment     ...  19 

The  Judgment-Day            20 

Worthy  of  the  Christian  Calling       ...  21 


Glorified . 


22 


CHAPTER  It 

THEHB  PA«» 

The  Second  Advent             ...            ...  27 

Importance  of  Religious  Knowledge ...  28 

The  Doctrine  of  Antichrist                ...  28 

Sanctification        ...            ...            ...  28 

Retention  of  Scripture        ...            ...  28 

A  Misapprehension  respectingthe  Time 

of  the  Second  Advent      ...            ...  28 

The  Rise  of  the  Apostasy  and   the 
Revelation  of  the  Man  of  Sin  must 

precede  the  Second  Advent           ...  29 
The  Methods  of  the  Man  of  Sin  and 
the  Retribution  that  overtakes   his 

Victims             ...           ...           ...  SI 

Apostolio  Thanksgiving  for  the  Elec- 
tion and  the  Calling  of  the  Thessa- 
lonians              ...            ...            ...  82 

Exhortation   to    a  Steadfast  Mainte- 
nance of  Apostolio  Traditions        ,..  32 
Prayer  after  Exhortation    ...            ...  33 

The  Day  of  Christ  not  Immediate     ...  33 

The  Man  of  Sin 34,46 

St.  Paul's  Hopes  for  the  Thessalouians  37 

Antichrist              ...            ...            ...  38 

Exhortation  to  Steadfastness             ...  42 

A  Great  Delusion...            ...            ...  45 

The  Mystery  of  Lawlessness             ...  47 

The  Love  of  the  Truth       47 

The  Divine  Work  of  Salvation           ...  48 

A  Benediction      ...            ...            ...  49 

Excesses  on  thi  Mah  of  Si»       ...  60 


INDEX. 


CHAPTER  IIL 

naa 

r-AOE 

Intercessory  Prayer             ... 

...      66 

Perseverance  of  the  Saints  ... 

...      66 

The  Patience  of  Christ 

66,84 

Avoidance  of  Evil  Company 

...      66 

The  Sanctity  of  Labour 

...      66 

Evil  of  being  Busy  bodies    ... 

...      66 

Weariness  in  Well-Doing    ... 

...       67 

The  Prayers  of  the  Thessalonians 
asked  by  the  Apostle       ...  ...      67 

The  Apostle's  Cheerful  Assurance  and 
Confidence  on  Behalf  of  the  Thessa- 
lonians ...  ...  ...      67 

The  Apostle's  Further  Prayer  for  his 
Converts  ...  ...  ...      68 

The  Apostle's  Method  of  Dealing  with 
the  Idle  Busy  bodies  of  the  Thessa- 
lonian  Church  ...  ...  ...      68 

The  Example  of  the  Apostle  himself 
as  •  Support  to  his  Command        ...      69 


Exhortation  to  Well-Doing                ...  69 
The  True  Spirit  of  Faithful  Dealing 

with  an  Erring  Brother  ...            ...  70 

A  Prayer  for  Peace             ...           ...  70 

The  Closing  Salutation,  with  its  Auto- 
graphic Significance        ...            ...  70 

Prayer  for  Missions  ...  71, 82 

St.  Paul's  Confidence          ...            ...  71 

The  Importance  of  the  Common  Duties 

of  Daily  Life  shown         ...            ...  72 

Conclusion             ...            ...            ...  75 

Intimation  of  the  Close  of  the  Epistle  75 
Duty  of  Withdrawing  from  a  Disorderly 

Brother             ...           ...           ...  77 

Conciuding  Words               ...            ...  SO 

Security                 ...            ...            ...  83 

Pauperizing  Charity            ...            ...  85 

Church  Discipline                ...            ...  85 

Peace  from  the  God  of  Peace              ..  86 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D., 


DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  : 


AND  BY  THE 


REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


I.  TIMOTHY. 

(Exposition  anb  f  omilctics  : 

By   THE    RIGHT   HON.    AND    RIGHT    REV. 
LORD  A.  C.  HERVEY,  D.D., 

IORD  BISHOP  OP  BATH  AND  WELLS. 

tjomilu s  bg  toarions  Qlntljore : 

RBV.  PROF.  T.  CROSKERY,  D.D.  REV.  R.  FINLAYSON,  B.A 

REV.  W.  M.  STATHAM. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Three  main  inquiries  present  themselves  to  the  student  of  the  pastoral 
Epistles :  (1)  their  authenticity ;  (2)  their  chronology ;  (3)  their  contents, 
including  the  matters  treated  of  in  them,  and  the  style  in  which  they 
•are  written.  These  three  inquiries  necessarily  touch  one  another,  and 
run  into  one  another,  at  many  points.  Still,  they  may  well  be  separately 
treated  of. 

§  1.  The  Authenticity  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles. 

The  authenticity  of  these  Epistles,  as  the  genuine  works  of  the  Apostle 
Paul,  whose  name  is  prefixed  to  all  three,  rests  upon  the  twofold  authority 
of  external  witnesses  and  internal  evidence. 

1.  The  external  witness  is  as  follows.  Eusebius  reckons  them  ("the 
fourteen  Epistles  of  Paul ")  among  the  universally  acknowledged  books  of 
Holy  Scripture,  and  speaks  of  them  as  manifest  and  certain  ('  Eccl.  Hist.,' 
III.  iii.  and  xxv.),  with  some  reservation  as  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 
The  Muratorian  Canon  (about  A.d.  170)  includes  thirteen  Epistles  of  St. 
Paul,  excluding  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews;  the  Peschito  Canon  (of  about 
the  same  date)  reckons  fourteen  EpistleR  of  St.  Paul,  including  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  ("  Canon,"  in  '  Dictionary  of  Bible ')  ;  and  they  have  never 
been  doubted  by  any  Church  writers,  but  have  held  their  place  in  all  the 
canons  of  East  and  West.  Phrases  identical  with  those  in  these  Epistles, 
and  presumably  quoted  from  them,  occur  in  almost  contemporary  writers. 
Clemens  Romanus  (*  1  Cor.,'  ii.)  has  "Etoi/aoi  els  wav  tpyov  ayaOov  (comp.  Titus 
iii.  1).  In  c.  xxix.  he  says,  Tlpo<re\6(opev  avrw  lv  ba-ioTiyn  i/ru^i)?,  ayvas  /ecu 
d/iidirous  x«pas  aipovres  irpos  auTov  (comp.  1  Tim.  ii.  8).  Polycarp  (o.  iv.) 
uses  St.  Paul's  very  words,  'A.px?l  iravriav  \aXeir&v  cpikapyvpia  (comp.  1  Tim. 
vi.  10) ;  OvSev  elimjveyKanev  eis  rbv  /eder/toy,  ctAA'  ovSe  i£eveyKeiv  ti  l^o/xev 
(comp.  1  Tim.  vi.  7).  Theophilus  of  Antioch  (a.d.  181)  quotes  1  Tim.  ii. 
1,  2  verbatim  as  being  the  utterance  of  ©ctos  Adyos,  "the  Word  of  God  " 
('Ad  Auto!.,'  iii.  14).     The  same  writer,  in  a  passage  in  general  harmony 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


with  Titus  iii.  3 — 7,  uses  the  very  words  of  Titus  Hi.  5,  Ata  Xovrpov  waXtyyt- 
varuK  ('  Ad  Autol.,'  i.  2).  The  different  liturgies,  as  quoted  in  the  notes 
on  1  Tim.  ii.  1,  are  manifestly  founded  on  that  passage.  Irenseus  (a.d. 
178),  in  his  book  'Against  Heresies,'  repeatedly  quotes  by  name  all  three 
Epistles  (1  Tim.  i.  4;  2  Tim.  iv.  21;  Titus  iii.  10,  etc).  Tertullian  (a.d. 
200),  in  '  De  Prescript.,'  cap.  xxv.,  quotes  again  and  again  by  name  St.  Paul's 
First  and  Second  Epistles  to  Timothy.  Clement  of  Alexandria  (a.d.  194) 
again  and  again  quotes  both  Epistles  to  Timothy,  and  says  that  the  heretics 
reject  them  because  their  errors  are  refuted  by  them  ('  Strom.,'  ii.,  iii.,  and  i.). 
He  quotes  also  the  Epistle  to  Titus.  Many  other  references  and  quotations 
may  be  found  in  Lardner  (vol.  i.),  as  well  as  in  various  '  Introductions,' 
as  Huther,  Olshausen,  Alfoid  (where  they  are  very  clearly  arranged); 
'Speaker's  Commentary;'  'New  Testament  Commentary,'  edited  by  the  Bishop 
of  Gloucester  and  Bristol;  'Dictionary  of  Bible,'  art.  "Timothy,"  etc. 
But  the  above  establish  conclusively  the  acceptance  of  these  Epistles  as 
authentic  by  the  unanimous  consent  of  Church  writers  of  the  three  first 
centuries  of  the  Christian  era — a  unanimity  which  oontinued  down  to  the 
present  century. 

2.  The  internal  evidence  is  no  less  strong.  "We  must  remember  that,  if 
these  Epistles  are  not  St.  Paul's,  they  are  artful  forgeries,  written  for  the 
express  purpose  of  deceiving.  Is  it  possible  to  suppose  that  writings  so 
grave,  so  sober,  so  simple  and  yet  so  powerful;  breathing  such  a  noble 
spirit  of  love  and  goodness,  of  high  courage  and  holy  resolves ;  replete  with 
such  great  wisdom  and  such  exalted  piety ;  having  no  apparent  object  but 
the  well-being  of  the  Christian  societies  to  which  they  refer ;  and  so  well 
calculated  to  promote  that  well-being ;  were  written  with  a  pen  steeped  in 
lies  and  falsehood  ?  It  is  impossible  to  suppose  it.  The  transparent  truth 
of  these  Epistles  is  their  own  oredential  that  they  are  the  work  of  him 
whose  name  they  bear. 

But  all  the  details  of  the  Epistles  point  to  the  same  conclusion.  While 
there  is  a  marked  and  striking  difference  in  the  vocabulary  of  these  Epistles, 
which  a  forger  would  have  avoided  (to  which  we  shall  revert  by-and-by), 
there  is  an  identity  of  tone  and  sentiment,  and  also  of  words  and  phrases, 
which  bespeaks  them  to  be  the  birth  of  the  same  brain  as  the  other  universally 
acknowledged  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.  Compare,  for  instance,  the  opening  and 
the  closing  salutations  of  the  three  Epistles  with  those  of  St.  Paul's  other 
Epistles :  they  are  the  same.  Compare  the  sentiment  in  1  Tim.  i.  5  with  Bom. 
xiii.  10 ;  Gal.  v.  6,  and  the  general  attitude  of  the  writer's  mind  towards  the 
Jewish  opponents  and  the  Law  of  Moses,  as  seen  in  1  Tim.  i.  4 — 11 ;  Titus 
i.  10 — 16 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  5—8,  with  St.  Paul's  language  and  conduct  towards  the 
unbelievers  and  Judaizers  among  the  Jews,  as  seen  generally  in  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles,  and  in  such  passages  in  the  Epistles  as  Bom.  ii.  17 — 29;  vii. 
12 ;  Gal.  i.,  ii.,  iii.,  iv.,  v.,  vi. ;  Phil.  iii. ;  Col.  ii.  16—23 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  14—16  ; 
and  you  see  the  very  same  mind.  Notice,  again,  how  the  writer  of  the  pastoral 
Epistles,  in  such  passages  as  1  Tim.  i.  11 — 16 ;  ii.  6 — 7 ;  vi.  13 — 16 ;  2  Tim.  L 


THE   PASTORAL .  EPISTLES. 


8 — 11 ;  iv.  7, 8 ;  Titus  ii.  11 — 13 ;  iii.  4—7,  breaks  out  into  rapturous  exhibi- 
tions of  the  grace  of  the  gospel,  and  refers  to  his  own  office  as  a  preacher  of  it ; 
and  the  similar  sentiments  in  such  passages  as  Bom.  L  6,  14 — 17;  xv.  15, 
16;  1  Cor.i.  17;  xv.  1—11 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4—7;  Gal.  i.  1—5  (and  throughout 
the  Epistle);  Eph.  iii.  7—12;  Col.  L  23,  and  in  many  others.  Compare, 
again,  the  allusions  to  his  own  conversion,  in  1  Cor.  xv.  9  and  Eph.  iii.  8, 
with  that  in  1  Tim.  i.  12, 13 ;  the  allusion  to  his  special  office  as  the  .apostle 
of  the  Gentiles,  in  Bono.  xi.  13,  with  that  in  1  Tim.  ii.  7 ;  and  the  references 
to  his  own  sufferings  for  the  gospel,  e.g.  in  2  Cor.  i.  4 — iO;  iv.  7 — 12;  vi. 
4—10;  xi.  23—28;  1  Thess.  ii.  2,  with  those  in  2  Tim.  i.  8,  12;  ii.  9,  10; 
iii.  10,  11.  Comp.  1  Cor.  xiv.  34,  35  with  1  Tim.  ii.  11,  12.  Then  the 
doctrinal  teaching  is  exaotly  the  same ;  precepts  of  holy  living,  in  all  its 
details  of  character,  temper,  and  conduct,  flow  from  dogmatic  statements 
just  as  they  do  in  the  other  Epistles  (see  1  Tim.  iii.  15,  16;  vi.  12 — 16; 
2  Tim.  i.  8—12;  ii.  19;  Titus  ii.  11—14;  iii.  4—8;  and  Eph.  iv.  20—32; 
v.  1 — 4;  Col.  iii.  1 — 5,  8^-17,  etc.).  The  interposition  of  the  doxology  in 
1  Tim.  i.  17  is  exaotly  in  the  manner  of  Bom.  i.  25;  ix.  5;  xi.  36;  xvi.  27 ; 
Eph.  iii.  20,  21,  etc.  Compare,  again,  the  two  sentences  of- excommunication 
— the  one  mentioned  in  1  Cor.  v.  3 — 5,  the  other  in  1  Tim.  i.  20.  Compare 
the  two  notices  of  the  temptation  of  Eve  by  the  serpent,  in  2  Cor.  xi.  3  and 
1  Tim.  ii.  13,  14 ;  and  the  reference  to  Deut.  xxv.  4  in  1  Cor.  ix.  9  and 
1  Tim.  v.  18.  Compare  the  directions  to  Christian  slaves,  in  1  Tim.  vi.  1,2, 
with  those  in  Eph.  vi.  5 — 8  and  Col.  iii.  22 — 25;  the  metaphor  from  the  games, 
in  1  Tim.  vi.  12;  2  Tim.  ii.  5;  iv.  7,  8,  with  that  in  1  Cor.  ix.  24—27; 
that  of  the  different  vessels  of  gold,  silver,  and  wood  and  earth,  in  2  Tim. 
ii.  20,  with  that  of  the  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay,  stubble,  of 
1  Cor.  iii.  12 ;  and  compare  also  Bom.  ix.  22,  23  and  2  Cor.  iv.  7.  Compare 
the  prophetic  announcement  of  the  apostasy,  in  2  Thess.  ii.  3,  with  that  in 
1  Tim.  iv.  1.  We  see  exactly  the  same  tone  of  thought  in  Acts  xxiii.  1  as 
in  2  Tim.  i.  3;  in  Bom.  xiv.  14,  20,  and  1  Cor.  x'ii.,  and  Col.  ii.  16 — 23,  as 
in  1  Tim.  iv.  3—5  and  Titus  i.  14,  15;  in  Phil.  iv.  11  as  in  1  Tim.  vi.  8; 
and  in  Bom.  xiv.  6  as  in  1-  Tim.  iv.  3.  Many  precepts  are  common  to  the 
pastoral  and  the  other  Epistles,  as  e.g.  1  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  Titus  i.  8,  and  Bom. 
xii.  13;  1  Tim.  v.  10  and  Bom.  xii.  13;  1  Tim.  vi.  5  (A.V.)  and  2  Thess. 
iii.  14;  2  Tim.  ii.  24,  25,  and  2  Cor.  ii.  6,  7,  and  2  Thess.  iii.  15 ;  to  which  it 
would  be  easy  to  add  more  examples.  The  directions  for  public  worship 
in  1  Cor.  xiv.  34  and  1  Tim.  ii.  8 — 13  are  also  very  similar.  The  repeated 
reference  to  the  second  coming  of  our  Lord  is  another  feature  common  to 
the  pastoral  and  the  other  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  14;  2  Tim. 
iv.  1,  8;  Titus  ii.  13,  compared  with  1  Cor.  i.  7;  xv.  23;  1  Thess.  ii.  19; 
iii.  13 ;  v.  23 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  1,  8 ;  Phil.  iii.  20,  etc.).  There  is  a  marked 
resemblance  in  thought  between  Titus  iii.  3 — 7  and  Eph.  ii.  2 — 8 ;  between 
Titus  iii.  5  and  Eph.  v.  26.  Note,  again,  St.  Paul's  manner  of  communicating 
information,  to  those  to  whom  he  wrote,  concerning  his  affairs  and  surround- 
ings, as  seen  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  5 — 8,  in  Col.  iv.  7 — 13,  and  in  2  Tim.  iv.  9 — 17; 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


and  the  affectionate  remembranoe  of  past  days,  shown  alike  in  1  Thess.  i, 
2 — 8  and  2  Tim.  i.  3 — 5,  16 — 18.  Then  there  is  the  same  estimate  oi 
individuals  shown  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  as  is  seen  in  the  other  Epistles. 
Compare  the  mention  of  Timothy,  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  10  and  Phil.  ii.  19,  20  with 
those  in  1  Tim.  i.  2 ;  2  Tim.  i.  2—5 ;  iv.  9,  21 ;  that  of  Luke,  in  Col.  iv.  14, 
with  that  in  2  Tim.  iv.  11 ;  that  of  Mark,  in  Col.  iv.  10,  with  that  in  2  Tim. 
iv.  11;  and  observe  also  the  coincidence  of  the  statements  which  represent 
Mark,  in  Col.  iv.  10,  as  going  to  Colossaa,  and  in  2  Tim.  iv.  11  as  being  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Ephesus,  where  Timothy  might  pick  him  up  and 
bring  him  to  Borne  with  him.  It  may  be  added,  generally,  that  we  have 
a  certain  number  of  the  same  workers  associated  with  St.  Paul  in  both  sets 
of  Epistles,  as  Timothy,  Titus,  Luke,  A  polios,  Tychicus,  Trophimus  (Acts 
xx.  4 ;  xxi.  29),  Demas,  Mark,  Priscilla  and  Aquila ;  and  at  the  same  time, 
as  was  to  be  expected  after  an  interval  of  several  years,  the  disappearance 
of  some,  old  names,  as  Sopater,  Aristarchus,  Gaius,  Secundus,  Tertius, 
Quartus,  Onesimus,  Justus,  Epaphras,  Epaphroditus,  Sosthenes,  Lucius, 
Jesus  called  Justus,  etc ;  and  the  introduction  of  some  new  ones,  as 
Phygellus  and  Hermogenes,  Onesiphorus,  Crescens,  Carpus,  Eubulus,  Linus, 
Pudens,  Claudia,  Artemas,  Zenas,  and  others.  The  same  thing  may  be 
said  of  places.  While  we  have  the  old  familiar  scenes  of  St.  Paul's  apostolic 
labours — Miletus,  Ephesus,  Troas,  Macedonia,  Corinth — still  before  us,  some 
new  ones  are  introduced,  as  Crete,  Nicopolis,  and  Dalmatia. 

The  other  quite  different  class  of  resemblances  is  that  of  words  and 
phrases,  and  literary  style.  St.  Paul  had  a  way  of  stringing  together  a 
number  of  words,  substantives  or  adjectives,  or  short  sentences.  Examples 
of  this  may  be  seen  in  Bom.  i.  29 — 31 ;  viii.  35,  39 ;  xvi.  14;  1  Cor.  iii.  12 ; 
v.  11 ;  vi.  9,  10;  xii.  8—10,  28;  2  Cor.  vi.  4—10;  xi.  23—27  ;  Gal.  v.  19— 
23 ;  Eph.  iv.  31 ;  Col.  iii.  5,  8,  12,  and  elsewhere.  An  exactly  similar  mode 
is  seen  in  1  Tim.  i.  9,  10;  vi.  4,  5;  2  Tim.  iii.  2—4,  10,  11;  Titus  i.  7,  8; 
ii.  3 — 8;  iii.  3.  St.  Paul's  ardent  and  impulsive  mind  led  to  frequent 
digressions  and  long  parentheses  in  his  writing,  and  occasional  grammatical 
anomalies.  Take  the1  familiar  examples  of  Bom.  ii.  13 — 15;  v.  13 — 17; 
Gal.  ii.  6—9;  Eph.  iii.  2 — 21,  etc.  With  these  compare  the  long  parenthesis 
in  1  Tim.  i.  5 — 17 ;  that  in  1  Tim.  iii.  5  and  in  2  Tim.  i.  3;  and  the  gram- 
matical difficulties  of  such  passages  as  1  Tim.  iii.  16  (B.T.);  iv.  16.  Again, 
St  Paul  was  fond  of  the  preposition  xnrip,  of  which  examples  are  given  in 
the  note  to  1  Tim.  i.  14 ;  and  the  avai  Xeyo/ievov  in  that  passage,  u7re/oe7rA.e'o- 
vcure,  is  in  marked  agreement  with  this  use.  The  verb  4>avep6<D,  in  1  Tim. 
iii.  16 ;  2  Tim.  i.  10 ;  Titus  i.  3,  is  of  very  frequent  use  by  St.  Paul  in  Bomans, 
1  and  2  Corinthians,  Ephesians,  and  Colossians.  The  use  of  vo/xos  in  1  Tim. 
i.  9  is  the  same  as  that  in  Bom.  ii.  12 — ]4;  of  evSwafiom  in  1  Tim.  i.  12;  2 
Tim.  ii.  1 ;  iv.  17  as  that  in  Bom.  iv.  20 ;  Eph.  vi.  10 ;  Phil.  iv.  13 ;  Heb.  xi.  34 ; 
and  of  KaXetD  in  1  Tim.  vi.  12  and  2  Tim.  i.  9  as  that  in  Bom.  viii.  30 ;  ix.  24  ; 

1  Cor.  i.  9 ;  vii.  15,  etc. ;  Gal.  i.  6,  etc ;  Eph.  iv.  1 ;  Col.  iii.  15 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  12 ; 

2  Thess.  ii.  14,  etc.     We  find  &<j>0apros  in  Bomans,  Corinthians,  and  1  Tim 


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 


i.  17  (elsewhere  only  in  1  Peter);  iir&Qopuax  in  Bom.  xi.  1,  2  and  in  1  Tim.  i. 
19  (elsewhere  only  in  the  Acts) ;  dvojjros  in  Rom.  i.  14  and  Gal.  iii.  1,  3,  and 
in  1  Tim.  vi.  9  and  Titus  iii.  3  (elsewhere  only  in  Luke  xxiv.  25) ;  dwiroKpnos 
in  Romans,  Corinthians,  and  in  1  Tim.  i.  5  and  2  Tim.  i.  5  (elsewhere  only  in 
1  Pet.  i.  22  and  Jas.  iii.  17).  Compare  wefyia  StiXi'as  in  2  Tim.  i.  7  with 
■nrev/ua  SovXeias  eh  <j>6f3ov  in  Rom.  viii.  15 ;  xpovmv  alwvuav  in  2  Tim.  i.  9  and  Titus 
i.  2  with  Rom.  xvi.  25  and  1  Cor.  ii.  7.  St.  Paul  applies  the  noun  irXdxrp.a 
to  the  man,  and  the  verb  irkdcrcrw  to  God  his  Maker,  in  Rom.  ix.  20 ;  and  the 
writer  of  1  Tim.  ii.  13  also  uses  ir\a<r<ro/ta.i.  of  the  formation  of  man  by  God. 
The  term  dyia<r/u,os,  which  is  used  by  St.  Paul  seven  or  eight  times  (and 
only  once  by  St.  Peter  besides),  is  also  found  in  1  Tim.  ii.  15.  St.  Paul 
speaks  of  the  gospel  as  the  "  mystery  of  Christ,"  "  the  hidden  mystery,"  etc., 
in  Rom.  xvi.  25 ;  Eph.  iii.  3,  4;  Col.  i.  26,  and  frequently  elsewhere ;  and  so 
we  have  the  phrases,  "  the  mystery  of  the  faith,"  "  the  mystery  of  godliness," 
in  1  Tim.  iii.  9,  16.  The  following  thirty  words  are  also  peculiar  to  St. 
Paul  and  to  the  pastoral  Epistles:  dvey/cAip-os,  avrapKtia,  aoparos,  inrtpo)(^, 
o-e/ti/ds,  [tea-Crris,  virorayq,  u/}pi<mjs,  irpoto-Trifu,  IvSctKvvpi,  irpaorqi,  xprjOTorrjs, 
ava.Ka.lvaxn's,  irpoKOTrreiv  (except  Luke  ii.  52),  irpoKoirrj,  okeOpos,  Karapyiut 
(except  Luke  xiii.  7),  ovrpaiavo'S,  iKKaOaiput,  iprios,  dXafw,  dVrropyos,  &<nrov8os 
(T.R.),  poptpuuTis,  al\pM\ayrev<o,  vtapevat,  a8oKt//,os,  paKpoOvpia  (except  James 
and  1  and  2  Peter),  TrdOrifw.  (except  1  Peter),  ir\dtr<ru>. 

But  when  we  pass  from  these  resemblances  in  mere  diction  to  consider 
the  intellectual  power,  the  verve,  and  Divine  glow  of  the  pastoral  Epistles, 
the  evidence  is  overwhelming.  Place  by  their  side  the  epistle  of  Clement 
of  Rome  to  the  Corinthians,  or  the  epistles  of  Ignatius  and  Polycarp,  or 
the  (so-called)  'Epistle  of  Barnabas,'  and  you  feel  the  immeasurable 
difference  between  them.  The  combination  of  mental  vigour  and  sober, 
practical  good  sense,  and  sagacious  intuition  with  regard  to  men  and 
things,  and  extensive  knowledge,  with  fervent  zeal,  and  enthusiasm  of 
temperament,  and  ardent  piety,  and  entire  self-sacrifice,  and  heavenly 
mindedness,  and  the  upward,  onward  movement  of  the  whole  inner  man 
under  the  guidance  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  producing  an  inartistic  eloquence 
of  immense  force  and  persuasiveness,  is  found  in  these  pastoral  Epistles,  as 
in  all  the  other  Epistles  of  this  great  apostle ;  but  it  is  found  nowhere  else. 
St.  Paul,  we  know,  could  have  written  them;  we  know  of  no  one  else  who 
could.  To  attribute  them  to  some  unknown  fraudulent  impostor  instead  of 
to  him,  the  stamp  of  whose  personality  they  bear  in  every  line  as  distinctly 
as  they  hear  his  name  in  their  superscriptions,  is  a  caricature  of  criticism, 
and  a  burlesque  of  unhelief. 

Applying,  further,  the  usual  tests  of  authenticity,  we  may  observe  that 
all  the  historical  and  chronological  marks  which  we  can  discover  in  these 
Epistles  agree  with  the  theory  of  their  being  written  in  the  reign  of  the 
Emperor  Nero.  The  earnestness  with  which  the  apostle  directs  prayers  for 
rulers  to  be  used  in  all  churches — "  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  life  "  (1  Tim. 
ii.  1,  2 ;  Titus  iii.  1) — tallies  well  with  the  idea  that  the  attitude  of  Nero 


INTltODUOTION  TO 


towards  the  Christians  was  heginning  to  excite  considerahle  anxiety.  Snoh 
thoughts  as  those  in  1  Tim.  i.  1  and  vi.  15  derive  fresh  significance  from 
such  an  idea;  while  the  later  utterance  of  2  Tim.  iv.  16 — 18  shows  that 
what  was  only  feared  before  had  become  a  fact,  and  that  the  writer  of 
2  Timothy  was  in  the  midst  of  the  Neronian  persecution. 

Again,  the  restless  state  of  the  Jewish  mind,  and  the  unhealthy  crop  of 
heresies;  containing  the  germ  of  later  Gnosticism,  springing  up  amongst 
the  semi-Christian  Jews,  which  is  reflected  in  the  pastoral  Epistles,  is  in 
accordance  with  all  that  we  know  of  Jewish  sectarianism  at  this  time,  as 
depicted  by  Philo,  Josephus,  and  other  later  writers  quoted  by  Bishop 
Lightfoot  ('Introduction  to  Colossians,'  p.  83,  note).  Gnosticism,  as  it 
appears  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  and  as  it  was  taught  by  Cerinthus— 
Gnosticism,  evidenced  by  a  few  Gnostic  allusions,  as  dvriOia-ei's  t>}s  <l/ev$<i>vv- 
fiov  yiweu>s  (1  Tim.  vi.  20) ;  by  a  mystical  instead  of  the  real  resurrection 
(2  Tim.  ii.  18) ;  by  abstinence  from  meats  and  from  marriage ;  by  old 
wives'  fables  and  ascetic  practices  (1  Tim.  i.  8,  9)  ; — does  indeed  appear  in 
the  pastoral  Epistles,  as  was  inevitable,  considering  their  scope ;  but  it  is 
a  Gnosticism  distinctly  of  Jewish  origin  (Titus  i.  10,  141,  and  as  different 
from  the  later  Gnosticism  of  Marcion  and  Yalentinian  and  Tatian  as  the 
acorn  is  from  the  oak  tree,  or  the  infant  from  the  grown-up  man.  These 
passages,  which  the  great  ingenuity  and  learning  of  Baur  have  laboured 
to  wrest  into  evidences  against  the  authenticity  of  these  Epistles,  are  really 
very  weighty  evidences  in  their  favour. 

So,  too,  are  all  the  marks  of  the  then  ecclesiastical  polity  which  stand 
out  in  these  Epistles.  The  case  may  be  thus  stated.  Towards  the  end  of 
the  second  century,  when  it  is  argued  by  Baur  and  his  followers  that  these 
Epistles  were  forged,  diocesan  episcopacy  was  universal  in  the  whole 
Church,  and  the  word  btmtkottos  meant  exclusively  what  we  now  mean  by 
a  bishop  as  distinguished  from  presbyters.  And  not  only  so,  but  it  was  the 
universal  belief  that  such  episcopacy  had  existed  in  regular  succession  from 
the  apostles  themselves,  and  lists  of  bishops  were  preserved  in  several 
Churches,  of  whom  the  first  was  said  to  have  been  appointed  by  an  apostle. 
Under  these  circumstances,  it  seems  to  be  absolutely  impossible  that  a 
forger,  writing  in  the  latter  part  of  the  second  century,  and  personating 
St  .Paul,  should  represent  the  clergy  in  Crete  and  at  Ephesus  under  the 
name  of  ima-Konot  (1  Tim.  iii. ;  Titus  i.  7),  and  should  not  make  mention 
of  any  bishop  presiding  over  those  Churches.  So,  again,  the  use  of  the 
word  "  presbyter "  in  these  Epistles  distinctly  shows  the  term  not  yet 
hardened  down  into  an  exclusively  technical  term.  The  same  thing  is  also 
true  of  the  words  Sicucovos,  Sicucovia,  and  Stafcoveiv  (see  1  Tim.  v.  1 ;  iv.  6 ; 
i.  12;  2  Tim.  iv.  6,  11 ;  i.  18),  so  that  the  use  of  these  ecclesiastical  forms 
in  the  pastoral  Epistles  is,  when  properly  weighed,  an  evidence  of  very 
great  weight  in  favour  of  their  belonging  to  the  first,  not  the  second, 
century. 

In  like  manner,  the  missionary  and  movable  episcopates  of  Timothy  and 


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  tii 

Titus,  and,  apparently,  of  Tychicus  and  Artemas  likewise,  is  strongly 
indicative  of  the  third  quarter  of  the  first  century,  and  was  not  at  all 
likely  to  occur  to  a  writer  of  the  latter  part  of  the  second  century.  As  far 
as  appears  from  the  pastoral  Epistles,  bishops  with  settled  dioceses  did  not 
exist  at  the  time  when  they  were  written.  The  apostles  exercised  full 
episcopal  powers  themselves;  and  appear  to  have  had  in  their  train  a 
oertain  number  of  missionary  bishops,  whom  they  sent  for  a  time  to  take 
the  oversight  of  particular  Churches,  as  they  were  needed,  and  then  passed 
on  to  superintend  other  Churches.  Bishops  with  &  fixed  diocese  arose  front 
these,  but  did  not  become  the  rule  till  the  apostles  who  appointed  them 
had  passed  away. 

A  further  indication  of  the  time  when  these  Epistles  were  written  may 
also  be  found  in  their  style,  which  does  belong  to  the  latter  part  of 
the  first  century,  and  does  not  belong  to  the  latter  pari  of  the  second. 
Frequent  resemblances  in  style  and  matter  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
to  the  First  Epistle  of  Peter,  to  the  Epistle  of  James,  as  well  as  to  the 
diction  of  Philo,  Josephus,  the  later  Books  of  the  Maccabees,  Plutarch,  and  to 
the  sentiments  of  Seneca,  indicate  a  writer  of  the  Neronian  age,  and  not 
one  at  the  time  of  the  Antonines. 

But,  as  hinted  abo.ve,  there  are  features  in  the  literary  style  of  the 
pastoral  Epistles  which  are  very  peculiar,  and  which,  if  taken  alone,  would  be 
suggestive  of  a  different  authorship  from  that  of  St.  Paul's  other  Epistles. 
In  the  Appendix  to  this  Introduction  will  be  found  a  list  of  a  hundred 
and  eighty-seven  words,  of  which  one  hundred  and  sixty-five  are  found 
only  in  the  pastoral  Epistles,1  eleven  only  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  and  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  and  eleven  only  in  the  pastoral  Epistles,  Hebrews, 
St.  James,  St.  Peter,  St.  Luke,  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Of  these, 
aboat  forty-four  are  found  in  the  LXX.,  but  in  some  instances  very  rarely, 
sc  that  the  LXX.  cannot  be  the  quarry  from  which  St.  Paul  dug  these 
new  additions  to  his  vocabulary.  But  they  are  almost  all  good  classical 
words ;  and  it  is  further  remarkable,  with  regard  to  other  words  which  are 
found  in  other  parts  of  Holy  Scripture,  that  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  they 
follow  the  classical  rather  than  the  Hellenistic  usage. 

The  natural  inferences  from  the  above  facts  are  (1)  that  these  pastoral 
Epistles  were  written  later  than  the  other  Epistles;  (2)  that  in  the 
interval  the  writer  had  enlarged  his  acquaintance  with  Greek  classics ; 
(3)  that,  as  his  two  correspondents  were  Greeks,  he  wrote  to  them  in 
the  purest  Greek  he  could  command. 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  theory  which  assigns  the  pastoral  Epistles  to 
the  time  after  St.  Paul's  return  from  Spain  fully  agrees  with  the  first  two 
of  the  above  inferences.  It  places  an  interval  of  two  or  three  years  between 
the  latest  of  St.  Paul's  other  Epistles  and  these  Epistles  to  Timothy  and 
Titus,  and  it  also  indicates  a  space  of  two  years  (Acts  xxviii.  31),  during 
which  he  may  well  have  had  leisure  to  increase  largely  his  acquaintance 
1  One  of  these  (efxpprnu)  ia  found  also  once  in  the  Epistle  to  Philemon. 


▼IB  INTRODUCTION  TO 


with  Greek  classical  literature.  If  among  those  that  "  came  in  unto  him  " 
at  his  own  hired  house  (Acts  xxviii.  30)  were  any  men  like  Seneca,  or  the 
elder  Pliny,  or  Sergius  Paulus,  St.  Paul  may  well  have  thought  it  useful 
to  read  Greek  classical  writers — Aristotle,  Polybius,  Plutarch,  Demosthenes, 
and  others — with  the  view  of  increasing  his  influence  with  men  of  culture 
and  learning  in  the  great  capital  of  the  world.  And  the  fiuit  of  such 
studies  would  be  seen  in  the  enlarged  vocabulary  of  the  pastoral  Epistles. 
It  is  curious  that  this  conjecture  is  somewhat  strengthened  by  the  cir- 
cumstance that  St.  Paul  appears  to  have  made  his  residence  in  Crete 
the  occasion  of  reading  the  poems  of  the  great  Cretan  prophet  and  poet 
Epiraenides  (Titus  i.  12).  It  may  also  be  added  that  the  effect  of  fresh  read- 
ing upon  a  person's  style  would  be  much  greater  in  the  case  of  an  acquired 
language,  as  Greek  probably  was  to  St.  Paul,  than  in  the  case  of  a  person's 
mother- tongue.  The  variation  in  the  vocabulary  of  the  pastoral  Epistles 
may,  of  course,  also  partly  be  accounted  for  by  the  difference  in  the  matters 
treated  of  in  them  ;  and  by  the  books  of  the  heretics,  which  St.  Paul  may 
have  read  with  a  view  to  refuting  them.  Such  phrases  as  the  dvTi^etras 
T7J9  ^/evSuivv/xov  yvdicreajs  (1  Tim.  vi.  20),  and  the  allusion  to  the  fiefiykoi 
Kevo<t>u>viai  of  the  heretics,  indicate  some  acquaintance  with  their  writings. 

The  conclusion,  then,  with  regard  to  the  internal  marks  of  stylo,  diction, 
sentiment,  doctrine,  incidental  allusions  to  men,  and  things,  and  places,  and 
institutions,  is  that  they  are  in  full  accordance  with  the  external  testimony 
which  assigns  these  Epistles  undoubtingly  to  the  apostle  whose  name  they 
bear ;  and  that  the  pastoral  Epistles  are  the  authentic  works  of  St.  Paul. 

§  2.  The  Chronology  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles. 

Our  next  task  is  to  ascertain  the  chronology  of  these  Epistles;  their 
chronology  (1)  relatively  to  each  other ;  (2)  to  the  incidents  in  St.  Paul's 
life  ;  (3)  the  absolute  time  of  their  composition.) 

1.  To  begin  with  their  chronology  relatively  to  each  other.  D  awing 
our  conclusions  solely  from  the  Epistles  themselves,  the  order  which 
naturally  presents  itself  is  the  following :  (1)  the  Epistle  to  Titus;  (2) the 
First  Epistle  to  Timothy ;  (3)  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy.  And  this 
order  is  founded  upon  the  following  reasons.  All  the  internal  marks  of 
the  Epistles  indicate,  according  to  the  almost  unanimous  opinion  of  com- 
mentators, that  they  were  written  at  no  long  interval  from  one  another. 
This  is  indicated,  as  regards  Titus  and  1  Timothy,  by  the  close  resemblance 
of  matter  and  .words,  analogous  to  the  resemblances  of  the  Epistles  to  the 
Ephesians  and  Colossians ;  and,  as  regards  2  Timothy  and  the  two  other 
Epistles,  partly  by  the  same  kind  of  resemblances  (though  less  frequent),  by 
the  evidences  of  the  same  enemies  and  the  same  difficulties  having  to  be 
encountered  by  Timothy  at  the  time  of  the  writing  of  the  Second  Epistle  that 
existed  at  the  time  of  writing  the  first ;  and  further,  by  the  route  indicated 
in  2  Timothy  as  taken  by  St.  Paul  shortly  before  that  Epistle  was  written, 
agreeing  exactly  with  that  which  may  be  inferred  from  the  Epistle  to  Titua 


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 


and  the  First  Epistle  to  Timothy.  Assuming  that  the  three  Epistles  were 
written  in  the  same  year,  and  that  "the  winter"  spoken  of  in  Titus  iii.  12 
and  2  Tim.  iv.  20  is  the  same  winter,  we  get  the  following  itinerary  for 
St.  Paul :  Crete  (Tiius  i.  3),  Miletus  (2  Tim.  iii.  20),  possibly  Ephosus 
(1  Tim.  i.  3),  Troas  (2  Tim.  iii.  13),  Macedonia  (1  Tim.  i.  3),  Corinth  (2 
Tim.  iii.  20),  Nicopolis  (Titus  iii.  12),  Rome  (2  Tim.  i.  17 ;  iv.  15—17).  As, 
then,  it  is  clear  that  when  St.  Paul  left  Crete  he  intended  to  go  to  Kicopolis, 
and  as  the  places  ahove  enumerated  lie  exactly  on  the  route  which  he 
probably  would  have  taken,  we  conclude  that  the  journey  which  we  thus 
gather  from  1  and  2  Timothy  is  that  of  which  Titus  furnishes  us  with  the 
terminus  a  quo  and  the  terminus  ad  quern.  Again,  as  the  leaving  Titus  in 
Crete  is  the  first  incident  disclosed  in  this  journey  from  south  to  north, 
it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  this  Epistle  was  written  first,  probably  imme- 
diately after  St.  Paul  left  Crete,  as  the  instructions  in  it  would  be  needed 
immediately.  Timothy  would  not  be  sent  to  Ephesus  till  a  little  later, 
probably  from  Miletus,  and  1  Timothy  would  not  be  written  till  after  he  had 
been  a  short  time  there  (1  Tim.  i.  3) — written,  perhaps,  from  Troas,  with 
the  intention  of  soon  joining  Timothy  at  Ephesus  (1  Tim.  iii.  14;  iv.  13). 
St.  Paul's  intention  probably  was  to  go  no  further  than  Macedonia  in  the 
first  instance  (1  Tim.  i.  3),  and  return  from  thence  to  Ephesus  before  going 
on  to  Nicopolis.  But  circumstances  of  which  we  know  nothing  led  him  on 
to  Corinth,  and  he  abandoned  his  intention  of  returning  to  Ephesus.  Did 
he  send  for  Timothy  to  Macedonia  when  he  found  he  could  not  go  to 
Ephesus,  and  there  part  from  him  with  many  tears  (2  Tim.  i.  4)?  This 
would  well  agree  with  the  mention  of  the  subsequent  events  relating  to 
Demas,  Crescens,  Titus,  Tychicus,  and  Erastus.  But  then  there  is  the 
clause  (2  Tim.  iv.  20),  "  But  Trophimus  1  left  at  Miletus  sick."  But  that 
may  have  been  added,  as  it  were,  out  of  its  proper  place,  to  account  for  the 
absence  of  the  only  other  member  of  the  missionary  band  not  yet  noticed. 
Demas,  Crescens,  Titus,  Luke,  Mark,  Tychicus,  Erastus,  were  all  accounted 
for,  and  so  he  adds,  "  Trophimus  can't  be  with  me,  because  I  left  him  at 
Miletus  sick,  when  I  was  on  my  way  to  Macedonia." 

The  above  theory  also  will  explain  the  clause  in  2  Tim.  iv.  12  which  has 
a  good  deal  puzzled  commentators.  St.  Paul,  of  course,  would  not  bring 
Timothy  away  from  Ephesus  for  any  length  of  time  without  sending  some 
one  to  take  his  place.  We  learn  from  Titus  iii.  12  that  Tychicus  was  one 
of  those  whom  St.  Paul  contemplated  sending  to  Crete  to  take  Titus's  place 
when  he  came  to  Nicopolis.  He  probably  did  send  Artemas.  Tychicus 
was  therefore  free ;  and  so  St.  Paul,  having  summoned  Timothy  to  Rome, 
tells  him  that  Tychicus  will  take  his  place  at  Ephesus  during  his 
absence. 

But  to  follow  St.  Paul.  From  Corinth  he  appears  to  have  gone  to 
Nicopolis,  because  the  mention  of  Titus  as  gone  to  Dalmatia  seems  to  imply 
that  he  had  met  St.  Paul  at  Nicopolis  according  to  appointment,  and  from 
thence  had  been  sent  by  him  to  the  neighbouring  province  of  Dalmatia 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


when  Crescens  also  went  to  Galatia.  At  Nicopolis,  apparently,  the  first 
Bigns  of  danger  began  to  show  themselves ;  and  Demas  made  some  excuse 
for  going  to  his  native  city  of  Thessalonica,  leaving  St.  Paul  to  confront  the 
danger  without  his  aid.  Whether  he  was  arrested  while  at  Nicopolis,  which 
was  in  the  province  of  Achaia,  and  taken  to  Borne  as  a  prisoner,  which 
seems  most  probable,  or  whether  he  voluntarily,  for  reasons  we  know  not 
of,  sailed  from  Apollonia  to  Brundusium,  and  thence  proceeded  to  Borne,  and 
was  seized  and  imprisoned  there,  we  have  no  certain  means  of  deciding. 
All  that  the  existing  documents  enable  us  to.  conclude  with  anything  like 
certainty  is  that  he  did  go  on  to  Borne,  and  was  a  prisoner  there  when  he 
wrote  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy. 

The  reasons  for  concluding  that  2  Timothy  was  written  from  Borne  are 
(1)  the  tradition  that  it  was  at  Borne  that  he  was  tried  and  condemned  to 
death  and  suffered  martyrdom.  This  tradition,  though  surprisingly  vague, 
is  constant  and  unanimous.  The  earliest  witness,  that  of  Clement  of 
Borne,  who  could  have  told  us  all  about  it,  is  most  provokingly  indefinite.  He 
tells  us  that  Paul,  after  many  sufferings,  "  having  come  to  the  boundary  of 
the  West,  and  having  testified  (/xaprupijcras)  before  the  rulers  (iw  qyov/tcwM'), 
so  departed  from  this  world  "  (*  1  Epist.  to  the  Corinth.,'  o.  5).  Dionysius, 
Bishop  of  Corinth  (about  a.d.  170),  says  that  Peter  and  Paul  both  taught  in 
Italy,  and  suffered  martyrdom  there  at  the  same  time  (' Ap.  Euseb.,'  ii.  25). 
Cains  the  presbyter  says  that  the  "trophies  of  those  who  founded  the 
Church  of  Borne  (i.e.  Peter  and  Paul)  may  be  seen  both  at  the  Vatican  and 
on  the  Via  Ostia  " — meaning  the  churches  or  monuments  dedicated  to  them 
(ibid.).  Eusebius  also  quotes  Tertullian  as  saying  expressly  that  Nero  was 
the  first  empfltor  who  persecuted  the  Christians  ;  that  he  was  led  on  to  the 
slaughter  of  the  apostles,  and  that  Paul's  head  was  out  off  at  Borne  itself, 
and  Peter  in  like  manner  was  crucified,  in  Nero's  reign.  Eusebius  adds 
that  this  narrative  is  confirmed  by  the  inscription  (jrpoaprjo-is)  still  extant  on 
their  respective  tombs  at  Borne.  Eusebius  also  states  in  the  following  book 
(iii.  1,  2)  that  St.  Paul,  having  preached  the  Gospel  from  Jerusalem  to 
Illyricum,  at  last  suffered  martyrdom  at  Borne  under  Nero,  and  quotes 
Origen  as  his  authority.  He  adds  that  St.  Paul  wrote  the  Epistle  to 
Timothy,  in  which  he  mentions  Linus,  from  Borne. 

(2)  The  internal  evidence  of  that  Epistle  also  points  to  Borne  as  the  place 
where  it  was  written.  If  ch.  i.  17  relates  to  a  recent  visit  of  Onesiphorus, 
that  would,  of  course,  be  in  itself  decisive  evidence.  But,  omitting  that  as 
doubtful,  we  may  take  oh.  iv.  17  as  at  least  probably  indicating  Borne 
as  the  place  where  he  was  at  the  time  The  seat  of  judgment,  the  presence 
of  the  emperor,  the  concourse  of  the  Gentiles,  the  names  of  the  persons 
sending  salutations,  including  Linus,  the  first  Bishop  of  Borne,  and  the 
expressions  of  the  near  approach  of  his  death  in  oh.  iv.  7,  8,  leave  little 
doubt  that  he  was  now  at  Borne ;  and,  if  so,  2  Timothy  must  have  been  the 
last  of  the  three  pastoral  Epistles. 

2.  But  at  what  period  of  St.  Paul's  life  were  these  Epistles  written?    Th« 


tHB  PASTOftAL  EPISTLES. 


question  has  already  been  partially  answered  in  the  preceding  section,  but 
it  is  important  enough  to  demand  a  separate  consideration. 

Hug,  in  his  'Introduction  to  the  Writings  of  the  New  Testament'  (vol. 
ii.  sects,  xc,  ciii.,  cxxii.,  cxxiii.),  assigns  the  Epistle  to  Titus  to  St.  Paul's 
second  missionary  journey.  He  supposes  that,  when  he  left  Corinth  (Acts 
xviii.  18)  to  go  to  Ephesus,  he,  either  voluntarily  or  by  stress  of  weather, 
went  round  by  Crete,  and  that  he  left  Titus  there ;  that  he  then  pur- 
sued his  journey  to  Ephesus,  wrote  the  Epistle  to  Titus,  recommended 
Apollos  to  him,  who  he  knew  was  going  on  from  Corinth  (Acts  xxiii. 
27)  ;  then  proceeded  to  Csesarea,  Jerusalem,  and  Antioch  ;  and  from 
thence,  passing  through  Galatia  and  Phrygia,  so  returned  to  Ephesus 
(Acts  xviii.  22,  23 ;  xix.  1),  having  wintered  by  the  way  at  Nicopolis 
in  Cilicia,  a  city  lying  between  Antioch  and  Tarsus,  near  to  Issus. 
But  the  objections  to  this  scheme  are  insuperable.  The  narrative  of  his 
passage  from  Cenchrea  to  Ephesus  with  Aquila  and  Priscilla  is  quite 
incompatible  with  a  sojourn  at  Crete  by  the  way.  So  important  an  incident 
oould  not  have  been  omitted.  There  is  every  appearance,  moreover,  of 
haste  in  the  apostle's  movements  from  Corinth,  in  order  to  enable  him  to 
reach  Jerusalem  by  the  feast  (probably  of  Pentecost)  in  connection  with 
the  fulfilment  of  his  vow  (Acts  xviii.  18,  21),  which  makes  the  notion  of  a 
sojourn  in  Crete  as  unseasonable  as  possible.  Then  Nicopolis  in  Cilicia  is 
the  most  unlikely  place  imaginable  for  him  to  winter  in.  It  was  an  obscure 
city,  not  connected  with  any  missionary  work  of  St.  Paul's  that  we  know 
of,  and  it  is  obvious  to  suppose  that  he  would  rather  have  wintered  at 
Antioch,  or,  if  so  near  his  own  home,  at  Tarsus.  Nor  is  it  possible  to 
account  for  the  omission  of  the  mention  of  Nicopolis  in  the  account  given 
by  St.  Luke,  in  Acts  xviii.  22,  23,  of  how  Paul  spent  his  time,  if  he  passed 
some  three  months  of  the  winter  there.  By  Hug's  own  admission  there  is 
no  other  time  in  the  compass  of  St.  Luke's  narrative  when  St.  Paul  could 
possibly  have  gone  to  Crete. 

He  assigns  1  Timothy  to  St.  Paul's  third  missionary  journey — to 
the  time,  viz.,  when  St.  Paul  left  Ephesus,  after  the  tumult,  to  go  to 
Macedonia  (Acts  xx.  1).  But  it  is  surely  absolutely  fatal  to  this  theory 
that  we  read,  in  Acts  xix.  22,  just  before  the  tumult,  that  he  "  sent  into 
Macedonia  two  of  them  tliat  ministered  unto  him,  Timotheus  and 
Erastus  (to  precede  him);  but  he  himself  stayed  in  Asia  for  a  season." 
Nor  is  it  less  in  flat  contradiction  to  St.  Paul's  declared  purpose  (Acts  xix. 
21 ;  xx.  3)  of  going  from  Macedonia  and  Achaia  to  Jerusalem,  that  he  tells 
Timothy,  in  1  Tim.  iii.  14,  15,  that  it  is  his  intention  to  return  very  shortly 
to  Ephesus.  We  know,  in  fact,  that,  though  he  was  obliged  by  the  violence 
of  the  Jews  (Acts  xx.  3)  to  return  by  way  of  Macedonia,  yet  he  would  not 
even  so  much  as  go  to  Ephesus  for  a  day,  but  sent  for  the  elders  to  meet 
him  at  Miletus  (Acts  xx.  16,  17).  We  know  also  that  Timothy,  whom  he 
had  sent  before  him  to  Macedonia,  returned  with  him  from  Macedonia  into 
Asia  (Acts  xx.  4),  and  was  with  him  when  he  wrote  2  Cor.  i.  1.     So  that 


*il  INTRODtJOTlON  TO 


every  detail  is  directly  opposed  to  the  idea  that  the  journey  into  Macedonia 
of  1  Tim.  i.  3  is  the  same  as  the  journey  of  Acts  xix.  21  and  xx.  1,  and,  con- 
sequently, that  1  Timothy  was  written  at  this  time. 

Hug  assigns  2  Timothy  to  the  time  of  St.  Paul's  first  imprisonment  at 
Eome,  and  places  it  after  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  and  before  those 
to  the  Colossians  and  Philemon.  There  are,  no  doubt,  some  coincidences 
which,  taken  alone,  encourage  such  a  conclusion.  For  example,  Timothy 
was  not  with  St.  Paul  when  he  wrote  to  the  Ephesians  (i.  1),  but  in  that 
same  Epistle  (vi.  21)  he  tells  the  Ephesians  that  he  has  sent  Tychicus  to 
them,  and  we  find  that  Timothy  was  with  St.  Paul  when  he  wrote  Col. 
i.  1.  But  in  2  Timothy  we  find  St.  Paul  writing  to  Timothy  and  bidding 
him  come  to  him  quickly,  and  telling  him  that  he  had  sent  Tychicus  to 
Ephesus.  Again,  in  Col.  iv.  10 — 14  we  find  the  following  persons  with  St. 
Paul .-  Mark,  Luke,  Demas,  besides  Timothy  (i.  2),  and  Tychicus,  who  had 
just  left  him.  But  in  2  Tim.  iv.  we  find  Luke  with  him,  Demas  had  just 
forsaken  him,  Tychicus  had  just  been  sent  away  by  him,  and  Timothy  and 
Mark  were  immediately  expected.  But  the  force  of  these  coincidences  is 
very  much  weakened  by  the  following  considerations.  St.  Paul's  staff  of 
missionary  companions  and  associates  consisted  of  about  twenty-two  persons, 
of  whom  mention  is  made  either  during  his  imprisonment  at  Eome  or 
shortly  before.  They  are  the  following :  Apollos,  Aquila,  Aristarchus,  Demas, 
Epaphras  or  Epaphroditus,  Erastus,  Gaius,  Justus,  Lucius,  Luke,  Mark, 
Onesimus,  Priscilla,  Secundus,  Silas,  Sopater,  Sosthenes,  Sylvanus,  Timothy, 
Titus,  TropMmu8,  Tychicus.  Of  these,  eleven  (those  in  italics)  appear  in  the 
pastoral  Epistles  as  still  at  work  with  St.  Paul.  The  other  eleven  are  not 
mentioned  in  the  pastoral  Epistles.  But  nine  new  names  appear :  Artemas, 
Carpus,  Claudia,  Crescens,  Eubulus,  Linus,  Onesiphorus,  Pudens,  and  Zenas. 
This  is  very  much  the  proportion  of  charge  in  the  personnel  whioh  three 
or  four  years  might  be  expected  to  produce. 

Again,  if  we  look  closely  into  the  supposed  coincidences  in  the  situation 
exposed  by  Col.  iv.  and  2  Tim.  iv.,  some  of  them  are  transformed  into 
contradictions.  Thus  2  Tim.  iv.  10,  11  represents  Demas  as  having  for- 
saken St.  Paul  and  gone  to  Thessalonioa,  whereas  Col.  iv.  14  (written, 
according  to  Hug,  after  2  Timothy)  represents  him  as  still  with  St.  Paul. 
Again,  2  Tim.  iv.  11  represents  Mark  as  probably  coming  from  the 
neighbourhood  of  Ephesus  to  St.  Paul  at  Eomo  to  minister  to  him;  but 
Col.  iv.  10  represents  him  as  likely  soon  to  go  from  Eome  to  Colossre,  and 
apparently  as  a  stranger.  Once  more,  the  notice  of  Erastus  and  of  Tropbi- 
mus,  in  2  Tim.  iv.  20,  naturally  implies  that  Erastus  had  been  in  Corinth 
with  Paul,  but  remained  there  when  Paul  came  away,  and,  in  like  manner, 
that  he  and  Trophimus  had  both  been  at  Miletus  together,  whioh,  of  course, 
is  fatal  to  Hug's  theory.  His  expedient  of  translating  &v&mtw,  "  they  left," 
is  very  unnatural  and  forced,  and  his  rendering  of  e/iavev  does  not  suit  the 
aorist,  which  rather  gives  the  sense  "  When  I  came  away,  he  stopped  at 
Corinth." 


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  xiii 

Other  circumstances  militate  strongly  against  the  composition  of  2 
Timothy  at  the  time  of  St.  Paul's  first  imprisonment.  St.  Luke's  account 
of  that  imprisonment  by  no  means  prepares  the  reader  for  a  tragic  termina- 
tion of  it  (Acts  xxviii.  30,  31).  Nor  does  St.  Paul's  own  language,  in  the 
Epistles  to  the  Ephesians,  Philippians,  Colossians,  and  Philemon,  indicate 
any  expectation  on  his  part  that  he  would  be  condemned  to  death ;  rather, 
on  the  contrary,  he  expresses  the  hope  of  a  speedy  deliverance  (Eph.  vi.  21, 
22;  Phil.  ii.  24;  Col.  iv.  8;  Philem.  22).  But  in  2  Timothy  his  strain  is 
wholly  different.  He  writes  with  the  feeling  that  his  work  is  done,  and 
his  departure  is  near  at  hand  (2  Tim.  iv.  6 — 8,  18) ;  not  a  word  of  being 
delivered  in  answer  to  their  prayers,  nor  of  expectation  of  being  set  free. 
The  difference  is  marked,  and  surely  most  significant. 

The  necessary  conclusion  is  that  Hug's  scheme  is  quite  impracticable. 
Various  other  hypotheses,  assigning  the  date  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  to  some 
part  of  St.  Paul's  life  unwritten  by  St.  Luke  in  the  Acts,  of  which  the 
principal  are  enumerated  and  explained  by  Huther  in  his  '  Introduction,' 
are  equally  incompatible  with  one  or  more  plain  statements  in  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles  or  in  the  Epistles  themselves,  and  must  therefore  alike  be 
abandoned. 

Moreover,  they  all  fail  to  account  for  those  peculiarities  in  the  diction  of 
the  pastoral  Epistles  which  are  pointed  out  in  the  first  part  of  this  Intro- 
duction. If  the  difficulties  in  finding  any  place  in  the  naiTative  of  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles  in  which  to  fit  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  with  their  allusions 
could  be  got  over  (which  they  cannot),  we  should  be  landed  in  the  no  less 
formidable  difficulty  of  having  to  account  for  great  changes  of  language  as 
compared  with  St.  Paul's  other  Epistles,  and  a  difference  in  the  aspect  of 
the  institutions  of  the  Church  and  of  the  rising  heresies,  as  reflected  in 
these  Epistles,  from  what  we  see  either  in  the  Acts  or  in  St.  Paul's  other 
Epistles. 

We  are  driven,  therefore,  to  acoept  the  hypothesis  which  assigns  these 
Epistles  to  a  time  posterior  to  that  embraced  in  the  narrative  of  St.  Luke. 
And  we  will  now  state  the  case  for  this  hypothesis  from  its  positive  side. 

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  close  with  the  statement  that  St.  Paul  "abode 
two  whole  years  in  his  own  hired  dwelling,  and  received  all  that  went  in 
unto  him,  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  teaching  all  things  concern- 
ing the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  with  all  boldness,  none  forbidding  him."  It  is 
quite  as  natural  a  sequel  to  this  statement  that,  at  the  end  of  the  two  years, 
the  apostle  resumed  his  active  career  as  "the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles,"  as 
that  he  was  led  out  to  execution  as  a  criminal :  most  people  will  think  it  is 
a  more  natural  one.  However,  in  the  absence  of  any  further  information 
from  Holy  Scripture,  we  must  have  recourse  to  such  other  sources  of  infor- 
mation as  are  open  to  us.  Eusebius,  who  was  the  great  collector  of  history 
from  works  now  lost,  and  of  traditions  current  in  the  Church,  after  citing 
the  closing  words  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  tells  us  ('  Eccl.  Hist.,'  ii.  xxii.) 
that  the  current  account  was  that  the  apostle,  having  then  made  his  defence, 


xb  INTRODUCTION  TO 


afterwards  started  again  on  his  work  of  preaching ;  but  that,  having  corns 
to  Borne  a  second  time,  he  was  made  perfect  by  martyrdom.  At  which 
time,  being  in  prison,  he  wrote  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy.  Eusebius 
adds,  after  commenting  somewhat  confusedly  upon  the  last  chapter  of 
2  Timothy,  that  he  wrote  thus  much  to  show  that  St.  Paul  did  not 
accomplish  his  martyrdom  during  that  sojourn  at  Borne  which  is  narrated 
by  St.  Luke.  He  adds  that  Nero  was  comparatively  mild  and  clement  at 
the  time  of  Paul's  first  visit,  and  so  received  his  defence  favourably;  but 
that  later,  having  fallen  into  monstrous  crimes,  be  attacked  the  apostles 
along  with  others.  From  this  it  is  evident  that  Eusebius,  with  such  means 
of  information  as  he  could  command,  believed  the  account  which  was 
current,  in  his  time  to  be  true. 

Clement  of  Borne,  again,  in  his  'Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,'  in  the 
passage*  quoted  above  (p.  x.),  uses  language  which,  in  the  light  of  the 
above  traditions,  certainly  points  strongly  to  the  visit  to  Spain :  to  rippa 
•rijs  8v(t«ds,  "  the  utmost  bound  of  the  West,"  could  not  mean  "  Italy  "  in  the 
mouth  of  a  person  living  at  Borne,  but  is  a  natural  description  of  Spain. 
Following  the  order  used  by  Clement,  this  visit  to  Spain  immediately 
preceded  his  testimony  before  the  rulers  of  the  world,  and  his  departure 
from  this  life :  'Ei!  to  vkppja.  ti}s  ovo-ccas  &Su>v,  koX  paprvpijo-as  hrl  rmv  f/yov- 
fieviav,  ourcos  am/AAay^  tov  Koayxou. 

The  Muratorian  Fragment  on  the  Canon  adds  another  early  testimony  to 
the  belief  of  the  Church  that  St.  Paul  went  to  Spain  after  his  captivity  in 
Borne.  For,  though  the  passage  is  so  corrupt  and  mutilated  as  to  defy 
translation,  yet  the  words,  "  profectionem  Pauli  ab  urbe  ad  Spaniam  pro- 
ficiscentis,"  tell  us  certainly,  as  Eouth  observes  ('  Beliq.  Sac.,'  vol.  iv. 
p.  20),  that  St.  Paul,  on  leaving  Borne,  went  to  Spain.  If  to  these  early 
testimonies  we  add  the  later  one  of  Venantius  Fortunatus,  in  the  sixth 
century,  who  expressly  asserts  that  St.  Paul  went  to  Cadiz  (which  is 
described  by  the  line,  "  Transit  et  oceanum,  vel  qua  facit  insula  portum  "), 
etc. ;  of  Theodoret  ('  Ps.  xvi.'),  who  says  of  St.  Paul  that  "  he  came  to  Spain; " 
of  St.  Jerome,  who,  following  Eusebius' '  Chronicon '  (A.  2083),  places  Paul's 
martyrdom  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  Nero  (a.d.  67  or  68),  three  or  four 
years  after  his  liberation  from  his  first  confinement  ('  Catal.  Script.  Eccle- 
siast.'); — we  have  sufficient  external  testimony  on  which  to  rest  an  attempt 
to  assign  a  later  date  to  the  pastoral  Epistles  than  that  which  is  bounded 
by  the  close  of  St.  Luke's  narrative.  Assuming,  then,  that  Paul's  first  con- 
finement at  Borne  terminated  in  the  spring  of  a.d.  63,  and  that  he  imme- 
diately, according  to  his  original  intention  (Bom.  xv.  24),  went  to  Spain, 
we  may  assign  two  years  to  his  visit  to  Spain,  and  possibly  to  Britain,  and 
place  Mb  return  to  Cadiz  in  the  early  spring  of  a.d.  65.  Proceeding  thence 
toward  the  former  scene  of  his  labours,  he  would  go  to  Crete,  and  perhaps 
stay  one  month  there  (Titus  i.  3).  Leaving  Titus  there,  he  sailed  to 
Miletus,  say  on  the  1st  of  April  (2  Tim.  iv.  20),  and  wrote  from  thenoe  the 
Epistle  to  Titus.     He  may  have  gone  to  Ephesus  from  Miletus,  but  more 


THE  PASTOEAL  EPISTLES. 


probably  (Acts  xx.  25)  sent  Timothy  there,  perhaps  intending  to  follow  him; 
but,  from  circumstances  with  which  we  are  unacquainted,  he  thought  it  better 
to  go  straight  to  Macedonia  (1  Tim.  i.  3),  and  wrote  1  Timothy  from  Troas, 
where  he  had  his  writing  apparatus  (2  Tim.  iv.  13).  He  had  intended  to  go 
back  from  Macedonia  to  Ephesus  (1  Tim.  iii.  14 ;  iv.  13),  but  again  his  inten- 
tions were  frustrated,  and  possibly  he  sent  for  Timothy  to  Macedonia  (2  Tim. 
i.  4)  before  he  proceeded  to  Corinth.  Be  this  as  it  may,  he  certainly  went 
to  Corinth  (2  Tim.  iv.  20),  and  thence  to  Nicopolis,  situated  in  Bpirus, 
but  in  the  province  "of  Achaia.  There  Titus  joined  him,  say  in  the  month 
of  July,  having  been  relieved  by  Artemas  (Titus  iii.  12),  Nicopolis  being  the 
general  rendezvous,  and  was  sent  by  him  into  Dalmatia.  At  the  same  time, 
Creseens  went  to  Galatia.  Demas,  who  had  also  come  there  among  others, 
or  who  may  have  been  Paul's  travelling  companion,  on  the  appearance  of 
danger,  returned  precipitately  to  his  native  place  of  Thessalonica,  and  St. 
Paul  proceeded  with  Luke  to  Eome,  where  he  may  have  arrived  in  August. 
As  his  settled  plan  had  been  to  winter  in  Nicopolis  (Titus  iii.  12),  it  seems 
most  probable  that  his  journey  to  Borne  was  not  a  voluntary  one.  There  is 
not  the  slightest  hint  in  Scripture,  or  in  any  history,  as  to  the  place  or  the 
circumstances  of  his  arrest.  But  knowing  that  he  went  to  Nicopolis  in 
Epirus,  intending  to  pass  the  winter  there,  and  that  very  shortly  after  he 
was  a  prisoner  at  Borne,  the  natural  inference  is  that  he  was  arrested  by 
the  authorities  of  the  province  of  Achaia,  and  by  them  sent  to  Borne  for 
trial.  His  route  would  be  from  Aulon,  the  seaport  of  Illyria,  to  Brun- 
dusium,  and  thence  by  the  Via  Appia  to  Borne. 

The  cause  of  the  arrest  of  St.  Paul  is  not  far  to  seek.  The  great  fire  of 
Borne,  supposed  to  have  been  the  work  of  Nero  himself,  took  place  "  on  the 
night  of  July  19,  A.D.  64"  (Lewin,  vol.  ii.  p.  359).  Nero,  according  to  the 
well-known  narrative  of  Tacitus  ('  Annals,'  xv.  44),  to  divert  suspicion  from 
himself,  laid  the  blame  of  the  fire  upon  the  Christians,  and  inflicted  the 
most  atrocious  punishments  upon  them.  The  persecution,  which  at  first 
affected  only  the  Christians  at  Kome,  was  afterwards  extended  to  Christians 
in  the  provinces,  and  it  was  made  criminal  to  profess  the  Christian  faith 
(see  the  passages  quoted  by  Lewin  from  Tacitus,  Sulpitius  Severus,  and 
Orosius).  The  frequent  allusions  to  persecution  and  suffering  in  the  First 
Epistle  of  St.  Peter  (1  Pet.  ii.  12 ;  iii  16 ;  iv.  1,  12—16 ;  v.  8,  9)  seem  to 
point  distinctly  to  this  general  persecution.  It  only  required  the  active 
malice  of  any  one  or  more  persons  to  bring  any  Christian  before  the  Boman 
governors  on  a  charge  of  impiety.  It  is  very  likely  that  the  bitter  enmity 
of  the  Jews  of  Corinth,  who  plotted  against  his  life  a  few  years  before  (Acts 
xx.  3),  took  advantage  ot  these  persecuting  edicts  to  accuse  him  before  the 
Proconsul  of  Achaia. 

Be  this,  however,  as  it  may,  what  is  certain  is  that  St.  Paul  was  once 
more  a  prisoner  at  Borne,  and  may  have  arrived  there  iu  August,  as  above 
suggested.  It  would  appear,  from  2  Tim.  iv.  16,  17,  that  his  case  had  come 
before  Nero  soon  after  his  arrival — say  in  the  end  of  August  or  September — 

PAST.    EPIST.  b 


xyi  INTRODUCTION  TO 


and  that  he  did  not  expect  it  to  come  on  again  before  the  winter  vacation  (2 
Tim.  iv.  21).  He  accordingly  wrote  the  Second  Epistle  to  Tincothy,  in  which 
the  uppermost  thought  was  to  encourage  Timothy,  and  exhort  him  not  to  be 
cast  down  by  the  calamitous  state  of  the  Church,  and  the  apostle's  imprison- 
ment, of  which  the  news  had  doubtless  spread  rapidly  from  Corinth  to 
Ephesus,  but  to  be  ready  to  endure  hardness  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ. 
St.  Paul  expresses  in  touching  language  his  own  unmoved  faith  and  constancy 
and  trust ;  complains  gently  of  the  defection  of  false  friends ;  makes  loving 
mention  of  old  kindnesses  received  from  faithful  followers  now  departed ; 
gives  earnest  counsel  to  Timothy ;  foretells  coming  dangers ;  presses  home 
faithful  warnings  and  loving  exhortations  to  fearlessness  in  the  duties  of 
his  great  office ;  and  then  ends  with  a  brief  statement  of  the  chief  events 
of  interest  which  had  occurred  since  they  parted,  including  his  own  defence 
before  Nero,  together  with  an  earnest  request,  twice  repeated,  to  Timothy 
to  come  to  him  before  the  winter.  He  also  mentions  that  he  had  sent 
Tychious — he  does  not  say  when,  or  from  whence — to  Ephesus,  doubtless  for 
the  purpose  of  taking  Timothy's  place  when  he  came  to  Borne. 

Here,  however,  it  may  be  well  to  emphasize  one  or  two  points.  One, 
that  the  news  of  St.  Paul's  being  a  prisoner  must  have  been  communicated 
to  Timothy  by  some  previous  message,  either  from  St.  Paul  himself  or,  with 
his  privity,  possibly  by  Tychicus,  or  in  some  other  way,  as  this  Epistle 
clearly  supposes  Timothy  to  be  already  acquainted  with  the  circumstance. 
The  other,  that  St.  Paul  did  not  expect  to  be  called  for  his  final  trial  for  the 
next  three  months  at  least,  since  it  would  take  so  long  for  his  letter  to  reach 
Timothy  and  for  Timothy  to  travel  to  Borne.  A  third  point  is  important 
to  note,  viz.  that  the  details  given  in  the  last  chapter  are  a  distinct  proof 
that  the  journey  to  which  those  details  refer — embracing  Miletus,  Troas, 
Macedonia,  Corinth,  and  Borne — was  a  very  recent  one,  and  that  as  the  last 
stage  in  that  journey  was  Borne,  it  is  demonstrated  that  this  was  not  the 
same  visit  to  Borne  as  that  related  by  St.  Luke,  which  was  by  way  of  Malta, 
Syracuse,  Bhegium,  and  Puteoli. 

Still  treading  upon  uncertain  ground,  we  go  on  to  observe  that,  taking 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  as  written  at  this  time,  it  would  appear  that 
Timothy,  on  receipt  of  St.  Paul's  Second  Epistle,  immediately  started  to  come 
to  Borne,  but  was  arrested  on  the  way,  the  persecution  of  Christians  being 
now  active  in  the  provinces.  The  place  of  his  arrest  is  not  indicated,  but 
it  may  probably  have  been  Achaia,  through  which  he  would  be  passing  on 
his  way  from  Ephesus  to  Borne.  The  welcome  intelligence,  however,  had 
now  reached  the  writer  of  the  Hebrews  that  Timothy  was  set  at  liberty, 
and  was  on  his  way  (apparently)  to  Borne.  If  St.  Paul  was  the  writer  of 
the  Epistle,  it  would  appear,  further,  that  at  this  time — some  three  or  four 
months  later  than  2  Timothy — he  had  hopes  of  his  own  speedy  libera- 
tion. Upon  what  these  hopes  were  built  we  have  no  means  of  deciding. 
But  several  months  had  elapsed  since  his  "first  defence;"  Timothy  was 
released ;  perhaps  there  was  some  slackening  in  the  persecution,  and  some 


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  xvii 

reason  to  hope  that  it  had  served  its  turn  in  diverting  suspicion  from  Nero, 
and  was  near  its  close.  Anyhow,  he  hoped  to  be  "  restored  unto  them  soon," 
and  to  come  to  them  with  Timothy  (Heb.  xiii.  19,  23).1 

But  this  expectation  was  not  destined  to  be  fulfilled.  Nor  do  we  know 
whether  Timothy  arrived  in  time  to  see  him  alive.  Perhaps  he  did,  if  the 
traditional  date  of  St.  Paul's  martyrdom,  June  29,  is  true  (Lewin,  vol.  ii. 
p.  400),  as  that  would  allow  plenty  of  time  for  Timothy  to  reach  Borne. 
It  would  also  be  intensely  interesting  to  know  whether  St.  Peter  and  St. 
Paul  met  before  or  at  the  time  of  their  respective  martyrdoms.  Had  the 
writing  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (supposing  it  to  be  St.  Paul's)  by 
the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  anything  to  do  with  a  desire  on  the  part  of  the 
apostle  of  the  circumcision  to  show  the  perfect  unity  that  existed  between 
himself  and"  St.  Paul  ?  Were  they  the  same  body  of  Hebrews  in  whole 
or  in  part  as  those  to  whom  St.  Peter  wrote  his  First  Epistle  ?  It  is  certainly 
remarkable  that  both  Epistles  imply  that  those  to  whom  they  were  addressed 
had  lately  been  under  grievous  persecution,  and  both  have  a  strong  light 
thrown  upon  them  by  the  circumstances  of  the  Neronian  persecution  (Heb. 
x.  32—34;  xi.  32—40;  xii.  1—13;  xiii.  3;  1  Pet.  ii.  12;  iii.  14—18;  iv.  12—19; 
v.  8 — 10).  Moreover,  the  passage  2  Pet.  iii.  15  distinctly  asserts  that  St.  Paul 
had  written  them  an  Epistle.  And  if  2  Peter  was  written  to  the  same  body  of 
Christians  as  1  Peter  was  (2  Pet.  iii.  1),  then  we  are  told,  in  so  many  words, 
that  the  Epistle  of  St.  Paul  to  which  allusion  is  made  was  addressed  to  the 
Hebrews  "of  the  Dispersion  in  Pontns,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and 
Bithynia."  Could  this  Epistle  be  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews?  There  is 
certainly  a  very  strong  resemblance  in  the  allegorical  teaching  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  to  that  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians.  Compare 
the  passage  about  Hagar  (Gal.  iv.  22 — 31)  with  that  about  Melchisedec 
(Heb.  v.,  vii.;  Gal.  iii.  11  with  Heb.  x.  38;  Gal.  iii.  20  with  Heb.  xii.  24, 
etc. ;  and,  as  regards  the  particular  reference  in  2  Pet.  iii.  15,  it  seems  to  be 
justified  by  Heb.  ix.  28  and  x.  35 — 39,  better  than  by  any  other  passage  in 
St.  Paul's  Epistles.  But  if  it  is  St.  Paul's,  why  does  it  not  bear  his  name, 
as  all  his  other  Epistles  do  ?  It  is  impossible  to  give  a  decided  answer  to 
this  question.  But  a  concurrence  of  several  slight  indications  suggests 
a  possible  explanation.  The  mention  of  St.  Paul  by  St.  Peter  in  2  Pet. 
ii.  15 ;  the  fact  that  St.  Paul  did  write  a  letter  to  those  Hebrew  Chri&tians 
who  were  under  St.  Peter's  special  charge  (2  Pet.  iii.  15);  the  coming  of 
Mark  to  St.  Paul  at  Koine  (2  Tim.  iv.  11)  from  St.  Peter  at  Babylon  (1  Pet. 
v.  13);  the  mission  of  Crescens  to  Galatia  (2  Tim.  iv.  10);  and  the  presence 
of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  together  at  Borne  at  the  time  of  their  martyrdoms, 
as  related  by  Clemens  Bomanus,  Eusebius,  and  others; — all  point  to  some 
intercourse  between  the  two  apostles  about  this  time.  It  occurs  to  one, 
therefore,  that  St.  Peter  might,  in  order  to  emphasize  the  union  between 
himself  and  St.  Paul,  and  between  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  Churches,  have 

1  If  the  reading  of  the  T.E.  of  Heb.  z.  34,  Scir/toit  pov,  is  true,  it  supplies  a  direct  testimony 
to  the  imprisonment  of  the  writer.    But  without  it  Heb.  xiii.  18  is  sufficient 


xviil  INTRODUCTION  TO 


requested  St.  Paul  (through  Mark  or  otherwise)  to  write  to  the  Jews  of 
the  Dispersion,  and  that  St.  Paul,  in  complying  with  the  request,  with  his 
usual  delicacy  of  feeling,  may  have  withheld  his  apostolio  style,  and  given 
his  Epistle  more  the  form  of  a  treatise  than  of  a  letter  (see,  too,  Heb.  xiii.  22). 

Not,  however,  to  dwell  upon  uncertain  speculations,  the  practical  matter 
is  that,  if  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was  written  at  this  time,  we  may 
register  the  further  fact  of  Timothy's  imprisonment  and  release,  and,  if 
written  by  St.  Paul,  that  of  his  own  expectation  of  being  released,  and 
must  also  modify  the  statement  in  the  note  to  2  Tim.  iv.  22,  that  we  have 
there  the  last  utterance  of  the  great  apostle. 

Upon  the  whole,  we  conclude,  with  confidence,  that  the  pastoral  Epistles 
were  written  subsequently  to  St.  Paul's  imprisonment  at  Borne  related  in 
Acts  xxviii.,  and  shortly  before  bis  martyrdom  in  the  imperial  oity  as 
related  in  ecclesiastical  history. 

3.  As  regards  the  absolute  date  of  the  pastoral  Epistles,  they  may,  with 
most  probability,  be  assigned  to  the  year  A,d.  65,  a.d.  66,  or  a.d.  67,  accord- 
ing as  St.  Paul's  martyrdom  is  assigned  to  a.d.  66,  a.d.  67,  or  a.d.  68. 
Eusebius  ('Chronic'  A.,  2083)  says,  under  the  thirteenth  year  of  Nero, 
that  Peter  and  Paul  suffered  martyrdom;  while  Jerome  places  it  in  the 
fourteenth  year.  It  is  impossible  to  arrive  at  certainty  in  the  matter. 
Some  considerations  point  strongly  to  a.d.  65  for  the  Epistles,  and  a.d.  66 
For  the  martyrdom. 

§  3.  The  Contents  akd  Style  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles. 

The  contents  and  style  of  these  Epistles  need  detain  us  but  a  short  time, 
having  been  already  partially  discussed  in  the  preceding  pages.  In  regard 
to  style,  the  three  Epistles  go  together,  and  show  plain  indications  of 
having  been  written  nearly  at  the  same  time.  But  in  regard  to  their 
consents,  the  Epistle  to  Titus  and  the  First  Epistle  to  Timothy  go  together, 
and  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  stands  alone.  The  object  and  motive  of 
the  two  first  were  precisely  similar.  Paul,  having  left  Titus  in  the  tem- 
porary oversight  of  the  Churches  of  Crete,  and  Timothy  in  that  of  the 
Church  of  Ephesus,  writes  plain  practical  instructions  to  both  of  them  how 
to  order  and  rule  the  Churches  committed  to  them.  The  conduct  of  the 
public  prayers,  the  qualifications  of  the  clergy,  the  discipline  of  the  Church 
societies,  the  example  to  be  set  to  the  Christian  communities  by  the  chief 
pastor,  together  with  earnest  warnings  in  regard  to  growing  heresies,  make 
up  the  bulk  of  both  Epistles,  supplemented  by  a  few  directions  peculiar  to 
each  case.  Nothing  can  be  more  obvious,  more  artless,  and  less  open  to 
suspicion  of  any  concealed  motive,  than  the  treatment  of  the  subjects  in 
hand.  The  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  is  of  a  different  character,  as  it  was 
caused  by  wholly  different  oircumstances.  Its  main ,  purpose  was  to  en- 
courage Timothy,  under  the  new  danger  which  had  come  upon  the  Church 
through  the  Neronian  persecutions,  and  the  apostle's  imprisonment  under 
a  capital  charge.     By  bis  own  noble  example  of  faith  and  constancy,  by 


THE  PASTOBAL  EPISTLES.  xlx 

cogent  reasonings  and  exhortations,  and  by  the  strongest  Christian 
motives,  St.  Panl  strives  to  comfort  and  sustain  Timothy  under  the  trying 
and  perilous  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed,  and  adds  some  pro- 
phetic warnings  concerning  coming  heresies,  and  directions  as  to  how 
Timothy  is  to  meet  them.  A  brief  statement  of  the  present  condition  of 
his  affairs  at  Eome,  with  a  pressing  entreaty  to  Timothy,  twice  repeated, 
to  hasten  to  him,  and  the  usual  salutations,  complete  the  Epistle. 

Some  remarkable  features  of  the  style  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  have  been 
pointed  out  in  the  preceding  sections.  They  cannot  be  too  carefully 
weighed  by  those  who  would  form  a  sound  judgment  on  the  difficult 
questions  connected  with  them.  The  fact  of  there  being  a  hundred 
and  sixty-five  words,  nearly  all  good  classical  Greek,  which  occur  in  the 
pastoral  Epistles,  but  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament,  and  few  of 
them  in  the  LXX.  (see  Appendix) ;  about  thirty  common  to  the  pastoral 
Epistles  and  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  not  found  elsewhere  in  the  New 
Testament  (with  only  three  or  four  exceptions) ;  and  twenty-two  found  else- 
where in  the  New  Testament  only  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  the  Epistles 
of  St.  Peter  and  St.  James,  in  St.  Luke  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  (p.  9), 
— are  significant  facts,  which,  if  rightly  used,  must  throw  light  upon  the 
situation.  The  natural  inferences  from  them,  and  from  the  heretioal 
opinions  referred  to,  and  the  exact  phase  of  Church  government  and 
Church  institutions  disclosed,  undoubtedly  is  that  these  Epistles  belong 
to  a  somewhat  later  period  than  the  other  Epistles  of  St.  Paul ;  that  in 
the  interval  St.  Paul  had  read  a  good  deal  of  classical  Greek;  that  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was  either  St.  Paul's  composition,  or,  at  least,  that' 
he  had  a  good  deal  to  do  with  it ;  that  St.  Peter  had  seen  St.  Paul's 
Epistles,  or  some  of  them ;  and  that  both  writers  were  acquainted  with  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles. 

With  regard  to  the  general  scheme  of  St.  Paul's  last  journey  to  Eome, 
proposed  in  the  preceding  pages,  it  may  be  well  to  call  attention  to  the 
fact  that  it  springs  directly  from  the  pastoral  Epistles  themselves. 
Assuming,  as  a  starting-point,  the  expedition  to  Spain,  indicated  by 
Clement  of  Eome  as  having  immediately  preceded  Paul's  martyrdom,  we 
come  in  regular  order  to  Crete,  Miletus,  possibly  Ephesus,  Troas,  Mace- 
donia, Corinth,  \icopolis,  Eome.  There  are  no  imaginary  journeys,  or 
tiials  at  Ephesus,  or  vacant  years  to  be  filled  -up  with  supposed  events, 
as  in  other  schemes.  But  we  have  one  consistent  j  urney,  every  stage  of 
which  is  indicated  in  the  Epistles  themselves,  and  the  period  of  one  year 
from  spring  to  winter  also  indicated,  within  which  the  events  naturally 
fall.  And  it  is  further  satisfactory  to  find  that  these  indications,  together 
with  others  above  referred  to,  fall  in  with  the  best  authenticated  ecclesias- 
tical traditions,  which  bring  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  together  to  Eome  in 
the  time  of  the  Neronian  persecution,  to  seal  with  their  blood  their  united 
testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 


xx 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


Appendix  :  List  of  Words  Peculiar  to  the  Pastoral  Epistles. 


eTtpoSiSacTKoAeiV :  1  Tim.  i.  3;  vi.  3.         C 
awepdvros :  1  Tim.  i.  4.  0.,  LXX. 

in$iTi)ais :  1  Tim  i.  4. 
jtuflos :  1  Tim.  i.  4;  iv.  7;  2  Tim.  iv.  4; 

Titus  i.  14;  2  Pet.  i.  16.  0.,  LXX.,  X. 
h<rTt>xh<raPTts :  1  Tim.  i.  6.  0,  LXX. 

iCtrpdwrftrav :  1  Tim.  i.  6 ;  Heb.  xii.  13. 

0,  LXX.,  X. 
IMTcuoXoyta :  1  Tim.  i.  6.  C. 

SiaySejSaioOfrai :  1  Tim.  i.  7 !  Titus  iii.  8. 

C.,X. 
ro/itnas :  1  Tim.  i.  8 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  5. 

0.,  LXX.  (once). 
avviroTdKTois :  1  Tim.  i.  9;  Titus  i.  6; 

Heb.  ii.  8.  C,  LXX.  (?),  X. 

ivoalots:  1  Tim.  i.  9;  2  Tim.  iii.  2.      LXX. 
PcPfaois:  1  Tim.  i.  9;  iv.  7;  vi.  20; 

2  Tim.  ii.  16 ;  Heb.  xii.  16.  0.,  LXX ,  X. 
itaTpaKiftus :  1  Tim.  i.  9.  C. 

Hr/TpaAcjnis :  1  Tim.  i.  9.  C. 

avSpoipivois:  1  Tim.  i.  9.  0.,  LXX. 

ivSpairotuTTois :  1  Tim.  i.  10.  C. 

imipKoir.   1  Tim.  i.  10.  C. 

iiyiatmio-ti  (in   the   sense  of  "  sound," 

eto.):   1  Tim.  i.  10;   2  Tim.  iv.  3; 

Titus  ii.  1.  0. 

$\t£<r<prifios  (applied  to  a  person) :  1  Tim. 

i.  13 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  2. 
Su&ktiis  :  1  Tim.  i.  13. 

uirepeirXtLdvaae  :    1  Tim.  i.  '14. 
maris  i  \6yos:   1  Tim.  i.  15;   iii.  1; 
•      iv.  9;  2  Tim.  ii.  11 ;  Titus  iii.  8. 
airoSoxvs :  1  Tim.  i.  15  ;  iv.  9. 
<mori™<rw:  1  Tim.  i.  16;  2  Tim.  i.  12.     C. 
irrti^is :  1  Tim  ii.  1 ;  iv.  5.         0.,  LXX. 
inrcpoxf  (in  the  sense  of  "  authority  ")  : 

1  Tim.  ii.  2.  C. 
ffpeuos :  1  Tim.  ii.  2.  0.  (late). 
Sidyw.  1  Tim.  ii.  2;  Titus  iii.  3.  C. 
evvefcit} :  1  Tim.  ii.  2;  iii.  Iti;  iv.  7,  8 ; 

vi.  3,  5,  6,  11;  2  Tim.  iii.  5;  Titus 
i.  1.     Elsewhere  only  in  Acts  iii.  12 ; 

2  Pet.  i.  3,  6,  11;  iii.  7.  X. 
<np.vorf)s:  1  Tim.  ii.  2;  iii.  4  (T.K.); 

Titus  ii.  7.  0. 

airiSSaciov :  1  Tim.  ii.  3 ;  v.  4.  0. 

p.talrr\s  (as  applied  to  Jesus  Christ)  : 
1  Tim.  ii.  5;  Heb.  viii.  6;  ix.  15; 
xii.  24.  X. 

i.vrl\urpov:  1  Tim.  ii.  6. 

KaTtuTTDKfi :  1  Tim.  ii.  9.  0. 

k6ciuos  :  1  Tim.  ii.  9 ;  iii.  2.  G. 

■tr\cyp.turt :  1  Tim.  ii.  9.  0. 

ivayye X\e<r0ou  (in  the  sense  of  "  to  pro- 
fess ") :  1  Tim.  ii.  10 ;  vi.  21.  0. 

«6o«/8efe :  1  Tim.  ii.  10.  0.,  LXX. 

TfKroyovia '.  1  Tim.  ii.  15. 


opeytrai:   1  Tim.  iii  1;  vi.  10;  Heb. 
,  *i.  16.  0.,  X. 

avevlhryirrovi    1   Tim.  iii.  2;  v.  7;  vi. 

14-  C. 

vriQ&Kiov :  1  Tim.  iii.  2,  11;  Titus  ii.  2.      C. 
aiiippova :  1  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  Titus  i.  8 ;  ii. 

a« 5-  C. 

<pi\6t,tvov :  1  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  Titus  i.  8 ;  1 

Pet.  iv.  9.  c.,  X. 

8i5«KTiK<fi' :  1  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  24. 
iripoivos :  1  Tim.  iii.  3 ;  Titus  i  7.  C. 

irATfKTijv ;  1  Tim.  iii.  3 ;  Titus  i.  7. 

0.  (but  rarely). 
alaxpoKeptil)  i   1  Tim.   iii.  3  (T.E.),  8; 

Titus  i.  7.  0.  (rare). 

&p.axof.  1  Tim.  iii.  3;  Titus  iii.  2. 

LXX.,  0. 
a<piKdpyvpov :  1  Tim.  iii.  3 ;  Heb.  xiii.  5.  X. 
vt6<pvTov :  1  Tim.  iii.  6.  LXX. 

7v<pa>0eis:  1  Tim.  iii.  6;  vi.  4;  2  Tim. 

iii.  4.  (J, 

Si\6yovs :  1  Tim.  iii.  8. 
Sia86\ovs  (in  the  sense  of  "slanderers") : 

1  Tim.  iii.  11 ;  2  Tim.  iii.   S ;  Titus 

ii.  3.  c. 

SiaKovriaavi  es  (in  the  sense  of  " serving 

as  deacons  ") :  1  Tim.  iii.  10, 13. 
cSpatwfta :  1  Tim.  iii.  15. 
6/io\oyov/ic'vus :  1  Tim.  iii.  16.        C,  LXX. 
farms :  1  Tim.iv.  1.   C.(rare ;  faris  common). 
Serepos :  1  Tim.  iv.  1.  C.,  LXX 

irAiiros  (as  an  adj.) :  1  Tim.  iv.  1.  0. 

\jieuSo\iya>v:  1  Tim.  iv.  2.  0. 

KeitavTmpiaffneevy  ;  1  Tim.  iv.  2.  0. 

/icTaAjjif w :  1  Tim.  iv.  3.  0. 

aTr60KriTov:  1  Tim.  iv.  4.  0.,  LXX. 

v7roTiee/«i/os:  1  Tim.  iv.  6  (in  the  sense 

of  "  putting  in  mind  ").  C,  LXX. 

liapTvpov/iivTi  (in  the   sense  of  "well 

spoken  of"):  1  Tim.  v.  10,  frequent 

in  the  Epistle  to  Hebrews,  and  Acts.    X. 
4i/Tpe<p6neiios:  1  Tim.  iv.  6.  0. 

ypadSfis :  1  Tim.  iv.  7.  C. 

yinvafc :  1  Tim.  iv.  7 ;  Heb.  v.  14 ;  xii. 

11 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  14.  C.,  X. 

yufivaala :  1  Tim.  iv.  8.       0.,  LXX.  (once). 
ayveitf :  1  Tim.  iv.  12;  v.  2.  C. 

^iriirA^lps :  1  Tim.  v.  1.  C 

iKyova:'l  Tim.  v.  4.  C,  LXX. 

ap.oi&b.s :  1  Tim.  v.  4.  C,  LXX. 

b.ir65tKTov :  1  Tim.  v.  4.  C.  (rare). 

liep.ovaii.ivri :  1  Tim.  V.  5.  C. 

(ntaKmSiaa :  1  Tim.  v.  6  (and  Jas.  v.  5). 

0.,  LXX. 
KaraKtyiata :  1  Tim.  v.  9.  0. 

4TiKVOTp6<pri(rev :  1  Tim.  v.  10.  Cs 

Hei>oti6xw*i>'-  1  Tim.  v.  10.  0. 


1  "  0 "  denotes  that  the  words  to  which  it  is  affixed  are  found  in  good  classical  Greek ; 
**  LXX.,"  that  the  words  so  marked  are  found  in  the  Septuiigint ;  "  X.,"  that  they  are  found 
in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  also,  or  in  the  Acts,  or  1  or  2  Peter. 


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 


xxl 


irlipieevev  :  1  Tim.  v.  10,  16.  0. 

KaTaaTpTiviiauuri:  1  Tim.  v.  11. 
<p Kiapoi :  1  Tim.  v.  13 ;  4  Mace.  O. 

wtpiepyoi:  1  Tim.  v.  13  (und  Acts  zix. 

19).  C,  X. 

raeyoyoyciy :  1  Tim.  v.  14.  O.  (rarely). 

olxoSeairoTe'tv  :  1  Tim.  V.  14. 
upoKpliiwros:  1  Tim.  v.  21. 
npicicKiaiv :  1  Tim.  v.  21.  0. 

vSpov6ret :  1  Tim.  f.  23.  0. 

irpdSijXoi :  1  Tim.  v.  24,  25 ;  Heb.  vii. 

14.  C,  LXX,  X. 

voaav :  1  Tim.  vi.  4.  0.,  LXX. 

Koyo/iaxtas  :  1  Tim.  vi.  4. 
uTTtii/oiai :  1  Tim.  vi.  4.  0. 

SiaTraparpiBat :  1  Tim.  vi.  5. 
iropia/xos  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  5.  0.,  LXX. 

ffKeniffnaral  1  Tim.  vi.  8.  0.  (rare). 

<j>i\apyvpia :  1  Tim.  vi.  10.  C,  LXX. 

mpUirftpav :  1  Tim.  vi.  10.  0.  (rare). 

irpowro8€(oy(R.T.):  1  Tira.vi.ll.  Philo. 
imp6(n-rov :  1  Tim.  vi.  16.  C.  (late). 

wxiciptos  (applied  to  God) :  1  Tim.  i.  11 ; 

vi.'15.  C 

i57)A.<STijTi :  1  Tim  vi.  17.  0. 

h.ya@oepyiiv :  1  Tim.  vi.  18  (aya6oepy6s, 

ayaQocpyla).  C 

euiieraSdrovs  :  1  Tim.  vi.  18.  0.  (rare) 

KoivuviRovs :  1  Tim.  vi.  18.  C. 

biroBnaavpiCovTes :  1  Tim.  vi.  18. 

0.  (rare),  LXX.  (rare). 
xapaltfiKTiv  (or  TrapaKwraSiiKiiv) :  1  Tim. 

ri.  20;  2  Tim.  i.  12,14.  0. 

Kevo-pavla:  1  Tim.  vi.  20 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  16. 
ttyTifltVeis :  1  Tim.  vi.  20.  0. 

ndwn :  2  Tim.  i.  5.  C. 

Si"  <r>v  turlav:  2  Tim.  i.  6,    12;    Titus 

i.  13;  Heb.  ii.  11.  X. 

ava^onrvpetv  i  2  Tim,  i.  6.  C.»  LXX, 

SeiAfas :  2  Tim.  i.  7.  C. 

euHppoviffp-ov  :  2  Tim.  i.  7.  C.  (rare) 

auyKuKtm&.9ii<rov  :  2  Tim.  i.  8. 
$Xf :  2  Tim.  i.  13 ;  1  Tim.  i.  19 ;  iii.  9 

(in  a  peculiar  use). 
anzaTpajp-naav    (with     an     accus.):     2 
Tim.  i.  15 ;  Titus  i.  14 ;  Heb.  xii.  25.. 

C,  X. 
avtyvl-ev :  2  Tim.  i.  16.  0. 

irpaypiareims :  2  Tim.  ii.  4._  0.,  LXX. 

trTpaTO\oyj}trauTt :  2  Tim.  n.  4.  C. 

oflAf :  2  Tim.  ii.  5.  C. 

A07O/u»x«"  -■  2  Tim.  ii.  14  (SiraJ  \eyifievov'). 
Xpfatpov  :  2  Tim.  ii.  14.  C,  LXX. 

Karairrpoipf :  2  Tim.  ii.  14  (in  a  moral 
sense  ami  Keyip-tvov) ;  2  Pet.  ii.  6. 

LXX.,  X. 
ivetrafo-xwroi' :     2    Tim.   ii.    15    (ctTraf 

\ey6ixcv0v). 
opBoTO/iovrra :  2  Tim.  ii.  15.  C  LXX. 

jrf prfo-Too-o  (in  the  sense  of  "  avoid  ") : 
2  Tim.  ii.  16;  Titus  iii.  9.    Josephus, 
Lucian. 
irvrphrovvi :  2  Tim.  ii  18 ;  Titus  i.  11.    0. 


tUxprxTTos:  2 Tim.  ii.  21 ;  iv.  11  (Philem. 

11).  0.,  LXX.  (once). 

cf  uiTtpwds :  2  Tim.  ii.  22.  Josephus.  0. 
laraiSeirovs :  2  Tim.  ii.  23,  C,  LXX. 

ytvvwai  (in  a  figurative  sense) :  2  Tim. 

ii.  23.  0. 

&pe£<fcaKoi/ :  2  Tim.  ii.  24.  C.  (late). 

ivTiBiarifle/ieVous :   2  Tim.  ii.  25  (curaf 

ivarlitywrLV.  2  Tim.  ii.  26. 

C.  (somewhat  rare), 
iCanohaevot :  2  Tim.  ii.  26 ;  Luke  v.  10. 

C,  LXX. 
<j>l\avroi :  2  Tim.  iii.  2.  0.  (Aristotle). 

<pt\dpyvpoi:  2  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  Luke  xvi.  14. 

C,  X. 
AycWtoi:  2  Tim.  iii.  2;  Luke  vi.  35. 

0.,  LXX.,  X. 
fomvSoi:  2  Tim.  iii.  3  (omitted in  E.T. 

Bom.  i.  31).  C. 

lucpaTfts :  2  Tim.  iii.  3.  C 

hvnixepoi :  2  Tim.  iii.  3.  C. 

a<pt\aya6oi :  2  Tim.  iii.  3. 

C.  ((pi\iyaBos,  Aristotle). 
<t>t\iitiopoi :  2  Tim.  iii.  4.  C. 

<pi\6eeof.  2  Tim.  iii.  4.  C.  (Aristotle). 

biroTpfaov :  2  Tim.  iii.  5.  0. 

ivSivovTes :  2  Tim.  iii.  6.  0. 

ynvamdpia:  2  Tim.  iii.  6.  C.  (late). 

(toreipecip^eTO :  2  Tim.  iii.  8;  2  Pet.  ii.  12. 

C,  X 
ayur/rj :  2  Tim.  iii.  10.  0.  (Aristotle),  LXX. 
yiriTis :  2  Tim.  iii.  13.  9- 

ZirurT<i>Si\s :  2  Tim.  iii.  14.  0.,  LXX. 

6e6m>ev(TTOs:  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  C. 

iirai>6pea><ra>:  2  Tim.  iii.  16. 

0.  (Aristotle,  etc.),  LXX. 
Uprtos:  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  0. 

Kvyeipevot:  2  Tim.  iv.  3.  C. 

imowpeiaovffi  I   2  Tim.  iv.  3. 

C.  (late  and  rare). 

avaAio-ews  :  2  Tim.  iv.  6.  C. 

(p€h6vriv :  2  Tim.  iv.  13. 

nffifyavas :  2  Tim.  iv.  13. 

XaA/crfr :  2  Tim.  iv.  14.  C. 

napeyevero  (in  a  technical  sense) :  2  Tim. 

iv.  16  (E.T.). 
tyevHs :  Titus  i.  2. 

0.,  LXX.  (once ;  Symmachus  once). 
iititmpB&ar):  Titus  i.  5.  0.  (late  and  rare). 
6pyl\os :  Titus  i.  7.  0.,  LXX. 

(bi\aya8os :  Titus  i.  8. 

0.  (rare),  LXX.  (once,  Wisd.  vii.  22). 
lyieparfis :  Titus  i.  8.  C. 

lia,Ttuo\6yos:  Titus  i.  10.  C 

iiruTToiilCa :  Titus  i.  11.  0 

j88eAiMCT<Js  :  Titus  i.  16.  LXX. 

Upoirptirfo:  Titus  ii.  3;  4  Mace,  (twice).  0. 
KariiTT-iiiui :  Titus  ii.  3 ;  3  Mnco.  (once).  0. 
ica\o$i$<l(Tica\os :  Titus  ii.  3  (oral  Xeyi- 

fievov). 
(Tutppoviioxri :  Titus  ii.  4.  C 

<pt \av5povs  l  Titug  ii.  4.  C 


C. 


zza 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


etKovpis,  or 

oUovpy  6s :  Titus  ii.  5.  0. 

iSuupBopia :  Titus  ii.  7.  O.  (afim<p0opos). 

aKardyimaTos :  Titus  ii.  8 ;  2  Mace.  iv.  7. 
oar'ipios  (adj.):   Titus  ii.   11;  Wisd. 

i.  14 ;  3  Maco.  vii.  18.  O. 

icepioirioi' :  Titus  ii.  14.  LXX. 

wtpuppovdrv :  Titus  ii.  15 ;  4  Mace,  vl  9. 


tiAyovres(rlv  ftlov):  Titus  iii.  3 ;  1  Tim. 

ii.  2.  0.,  LXX 

arvyriTSs :  Titus  iii.  3.  0 

tppovrlfaat :  Titus  iii.  8.  C,  LXX 

ctya<pe\eis :  Titus  iii.  9 ;  Heb.  vii.  18. 

0.,  X,  LXX 
ulptTmiv :  Titus  iii.  10.  C 

4l4<rTpairT3.t:  Titus  iii.  11.  0.,  LXX 


The  result  of  the  above  enumeration  is  that  there  are — 
165  words  found  only  in  the  pastoral  Epistles. 
11  only  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  and  Hebrews. 
11  only  in  the  pastoral  Epistles,  Peter,  James,  Luke,  and  the  Acta. 

187 


(5.  Literature  on  the  Pastoral  Epistles. 

A  considerable  range  of  literature,  both  English  and  German,  has  gathered  round  the 
question  of  the  authorship  of  the  pastoral  Epistles.  The  following  are  some  of  the 
chief  works  bearing  on  it. 

English :  Dean  Alford's  '  Prolegomena  to  the  Pastoral  Epistles,'  a  very  able  -and 
conclusive  statement ;  "  Introduction  to  the  Pastoral  Epistles,"  in  the  '  Speaker's 
Commentary,'  by  Professor  Wace ;  article  by  Dr.  Salmon,  in  the  Christian  Observer, 
1877,  p.  801;  "Introduction  to  the  Epistles  to  Timothy,"  in  Dr.  Schaaf's  'Popular 
Commentary  on  the  New  Testament,'  by  Dean  Plumptre;  article  on  "Timothy 
Epistles,"  in  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  by  Dean  Plumptre ;  "  Introduction  to  the 
Pastoral  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,"  in  'New  Testament  Commentary  for  English  Readers,' 
edited  by  Bishop  Ellicott,  by  Canon  Spence ;  "  Excursus  on  the  Genuineness  of  the 
Pastoral  Epistles,"  in  the  Appendix  to  vol.  ii.  of  Farrar"s  'Life  and  Work  of  St. 
Paul ; '  "  Appendix  on  the  Date  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles,"  in  Conybeare  and  Howson's 
'  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul ; '  see  also  Paley's  '  Hora?  Paulina?,'  ch.  xi. — xiii. 

Translated  from  the  German :  "  Introduction  to  Pastoral  Epistles,"  in  Meyer's 
'  Commentary,'  by  Huther ;  "  General  Introduction  to  Pastoral  Epistles,"  by  Wiesinger, 
in  Olshausen's  '  Biblical  Commentary.' 

The  above  all  support  the  authenticity  of  the  pastoral  Epistles,  and  some  of  them 
with  great  ability  and  learning.  Alford  adds  the  following  list :  Hug,  Bertholdt. 
Pielmoser,  Guerike,  Bohl,  Curtius,  Klug,  Heydenreich,  Mack,  Planck,  Wegscheider, 
Bcckhaus.  Some  German  critics,  as  Schleiermacher,  J.  E.  C.  Schmidt,  Ustin,  Liicke, 
Neander,  and  Bleek,  only  reject  1  Timothy,  but  accept  Titus  and  2  Timothy  as  genuine 
(Davidson,  vol.  ii.  p.  73). 

Of  those  which  impugn  the  authenticity  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  in  whole,  the 
following  are  the  most  important. 

Of  English,  writers :  Dr.  Davidson,  '  Introduclion  to  the  Study  of  the  New  Testament 
(2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  21 — 93).  But  Dr.  Davidson  states  the  case  so  unfairly  as  to 
make  his  argument  valueless.  The  statement  (p.  26),  most  weighty  if  true,  that  the 
theory  of  "Paul's  release  and  second  imprisonment  arose  from  exegetical  difficulties 
inherent  in  the  E[iistles  them-elves,"  and  that  "the  entire  hypothesis  is  a  fiction 
intended  to  prop  up  the  authenticity  of  the  writings,"  is  absolutely  unfounded  in  truth. 
The  testimonies  of  Clement,  the  Muratorian  Fragment,  Eusebius,  Jerome,  Chrysostom, 
Venantius  Fortunatus,  and  others,  to  a  journey  to  Spain  and  a  second  imprisonment, 
have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  "  exegetical  difficulties."  They  may  be  vague  and 
unsatisfactory,  but  they  are  an  entirely  independent  evidence  of  a  belief  prevalent  in 
the  early  Church,  that  St.  Paul  did  go  to  Spain,  and  did  undergo  a  second  imprison- 
ment at  Rome.  The  pastoral  Epistles  confirm  this  belief.  Again,  such  criticisms  as 
that  Clement  would  not  have  said  i\9<&r  of  St.  Paul  "  going "  to  Spain  (p.  22),  and 
that  rb  rcpfia  rijs  tiforeut  means  "the  western  part  of  the  empire  generally,"  are  surely 
unworthy  of  a  scholar.  There  is  also  a  strange  incongruity  in  borrowing  Baur's 
plausible  assertion  that  the  phrase,  iyrtiiireis  r%s  ^evSweil/iov  yvt&veas  (p.  65),  is  due  to 


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 


Mareion,  and  yet  placing  the  writing  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  between  a.d.  115  and 
125  (p.  69),  when  Mareion  was  a  youth,  and  had  written  nothing.  The  objections, 
too,  to  the  style  and  matter  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  are  most  captious,  and  for  the 
most  part  irrelevant.  Tate's  'Continuous  History  of  St.  Paul'  is  quoted  by  Dr. 
Davidson. 

Of  German  writers  the  first  was  Eichhorn,  'Introduction  to  the  New  Testament; ' 
then  came  Baur's  elaborate  works,  'Die  Pastoral-briefe  des  Apostel  Paulus,'  and  'Der 
Apostel  Paulus  ; '  De  Wette  followed  him,  more  or  less,  in  his  '  Kurz-gefassten  Hatid- 
buch,'  placing  the  Epistles,  however,  before  the  middle  of  the  second  century ;  then 
Schott,  Schrader  ('Der  Apostel  Paulus'),  Credner  ('  Einleitung') ;  and,  quoted  by  Dr." 
Farrar  ('  St.  Paul,'  ii.  514),  Zeller,  Hilgenfeld,  Schenk'.'l,  Ewald,  Hausrath,  Renan, 
Pfleiderer  ('  Paulinism '),  Erenkel,  Reuss  ('  Des  E  ^itres '),  etc. 

The  question  of  authenticity  really  turns  upon  whether  or  no  there  are  any  distinct 
indications  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  of  the  Gnostic  heresy  having  then  assumed  the  pro- 
portions that  it  attained  under  Mareion  in  the  middle  of  the  second  century.  The  one 
suspicious  phrase  is  the  ai/TiflfVeij  rijs  tyevSuvipov  yvtitrews,  because  avn6£<rtit  was  the 
name  of  one  of  Marcion's  works,  and  yv&a-is  is  the  proper  designation  of  the  doctrine 
of  the  Gnostics.  But  there  is  not  the  slightest  improbability  in  the  peculiar  style  of 
teaching  meant  by  ivrfiiasis  having  begun  in  the  time  of  St.  Paul,  or  in  the  conceited 
claim  to  exclusive  yvatrit  having  been  already  made  by  the  precursor  of  Mareion  and 

his  brother  heretics. 

* 

Excursus  on  the  Testimony  of  Hegesippus  as  preserved  by  Eusebius, 
'  Ecd.  Hist.'  Hi.  xxxii. 

Eusebius  quotes  Hegesippus  as  saying  that,  till  the  death  of  the  apostles,  the  Church 
had  been  as  a  pure  virgin ;  but  that  when  the  apostles  were  all  dead,  ttjs  &64ov  ir\£rris 
tV  apxV  iKififimtr  r\  aharaaa,  impious  error  was  first  formed  into  a  compact  system, 
through  the  deceit  of  the  false  teachers  (rav  iTcpoStSatriciKwv) ;  who,  now  having  no 
apostle  to  oppose  them,  dared  to  oppose  the  preaching  of  the  truth  by  the  preaching 
of  science  falsely  so  called  (tV  tycvStivvpov  yv&aiv).  The  natural  and  obvious  inference 
from  this  passage  is  that  Hegesippus  was  acquainted  with  St.  Paul's  First  Epistle  to 
Timothy,  and  quoted  its  ipsissima  verba  to  show  what  had  taken  place  in  spite  of  his 
apostolic  warning,  though  in  accordance  with  his  apostolic  prediction  (1  Tim.  iv.).  The 
(TepoSiSiiTKaKot  who  lurked  in  secret  in  the  apostle's  time,  and  carried  on  their  enterprise 
"  against  the  sound  canon  of  saving  doctrine  "  in  darkness,  had  now  emerged  into  the 
light,  and  formed  schismatical  and  heretical  communities.  The  passage  is  a  strong 
testimony  to  the  authenticity  of  1  Timothy.  The  suggestion  that  Hegesippus  wag  an 
Ebionite  is  absolutely  baseless.  All  we  know  of  him  stamps  him  as  a  Catholic  Christian 
(see  art.  "  Hegesippus,"  in  the  '  Dictionary  of  Christian  Biography ').  The  contradic- 
tion between  Hegesippus's  statement,  and  the  representation  of  an  incipient  heresy 
existing  in  St.  Paul's  time,  as  gathered  from  1  Timothy,  exists  only  in  Dr.  Baur's 
imagination. 

Excursus  on  the  Passage  in   dements  'Epistle  to  the  Cormthiamt'  bearing  upon 
St.  Paul's  Visit  to  Spain. 

The  passage,  as  found  in  Hefele's  edition  of  the  '  Apostolic  Fathers,"  is  as  follows : 

'O  tlifpos  Sict  (rj\ov  SSikov  wtf  &"•  *M*  Mo,  o^Ai  nAeforas  imiveyKev  w6vovs,  Kid  oSra  jxapTv 
pfitrat  iropeiBn  tls  rbv  o<pei\ipcvov  t6ttov  rijs  56%r)S.  Aid  griKov  koI  6  VlavAos  iwopovrjs  Ppa&etov 
'hn<t%e>,  iwti.KiS  Setr/ii  tpopeaas,  <pvya5ev6ets,  Ai9a<riels.  K4}pv{  yevSpevos  iv  re  Tp  h/woKy  koL 
iv  rff  Siaeif  rb  yevvtuor  tjjs  irforeaw  ainov  K\kos  l\a0ev,  StKtuo<rivr)V  8i$A£as  '6\ov  rbv  niapw, 
Kol  fai  tA  Tcppa  t5)J  Siaeas  i\0wr,  /cal  paprvp-fiiras  Arl  T&v  fiyov/itvav,  ovtus  AirnWdyn  toS 
ic6<rpo»,  Kol  els  rbv  t.yiovT&imv  iiropeiBri,  K.r.K. 

The  exact  English  of  the  above  is  as  follows :  "  Peter,  on  account  of  unjust  envy,1 
underwent  not  one  or  two,  but  many  labours,  and  so,  having  borne  witness  [suffered 
martyrdom],  he  went  to  the  place  of  glory  which  was  his  due.    On  account  of  envy, 

1  Zrj\ov,  difficult  to  translate  exactly.    It  means  envy,  jealousy,  anger,  or  any  strong 


xxiv  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 

Paul  too  received  the  prize  of  endurance,  having  been  in  chains  seven  times,  expelled, 
stoned.  Having  preached  [the  gospel]  both  in  the  East  and  in  the  West,  he  obtained 
the  noble  reputation  due  to  his  faith.  Having  taught  righteousness  to  the  whole  world, 
and  having  come  as  far  as  the  utmost  bounds  of  the  West,  and  having  borne  witness 
[suffered  martyrdom]  before  the  rulers,  he  so  passed  out  of  the  world,  and  came  to  the 
holy  place,"  etc. 

It  is  to  be  observed  on  the  above  passage :  (1)  That  the  coupling  together  of  Peter  and 
Paul  as  martyrs  is  decidedly  in  favour  of  St.  Paul's  second  imprisonment  at  Rome,  and  the 
ecclesiastical  tradition  which  makes  him  and  Peter  suffer,  martyrdom  at  the  same  time. 
(2)  That  the  phrase  paprvpfaas,  being  used  of  both,  is  a  proof  that  martyrdom,  and  not 
mere  confession,  is  meant  in  St.  Paul's  case.  (3)  That  his  having  come  to  "  the  bounds  of 
the  West "  must  mean  something  precise  and  definite,  different  from  the  general  statement 
that  he  preached  the  gospel  in  the  West.  (4)  That  Clement,  writing  from  Rome,  would 
never  have  called  Rome  "  the  bound  of  the  West,"  but  that  by  Roman  writers  Spain, 
and  especially  Grades,  or  Cadiz,  was  habitually  described  as  the  extreme  western  point. 
"  Omnibus  in  terris  quae  sunt  a  Gadibus  usque  Auroram  et  Gangem  "  (Juvenal,  '  Sat.,' 
x.).  Staiins  calls  Gades  "cubilia  solis;"  Horace,  "remotis  Gadibus;"  Silius  Italicus, 
"  hominum  finem  Gades."  Geryon,  King  of  Hesperia  (the  West),  fed  his  oxen  in  the 
island  of  Erythria  (the  isla  de  Leon,  i.e.  Gades),  which  was  also  the  name  of  one  of  the 
Hesperides,  whose  abode  was  fixed  by  the  earliest  traditions  on  Oceanus,  in  the  extreme 
West.  Strabo  calls  G  i'deira  &rx<i™j  iSpv/iivri  rrjs  yrjs  (iii.  i.  8),  "  situated  at  the  extreme 
end  of  the  earth."  He  calls  the  promontory  Hieron  (near  Gades)  "  the  most  western 
point  [or,  *  boundary-mark/  ati/itta*],  not  only  of  Europe,  but  of  the  whole  world  "  (iii.  i. 
4).  Pindar,  too,  speaks  of  Gades  as  the  point  beyond  which  no  mortal  could  advance 
('  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Geography,'  art.  "  Herculis  Columns  ").  So  that 
to  a  Roman,  T^pna.rrjs  Siaeus  would  be  the  natural  description  of  Gades.  And  it 
is  to  Gades  that  Venantius  Fortunatus  sends  St.  Paul.  "  Transit  et  oceanum,  vel  quJk 
facit  insula  portum,"  etc.,  which,  of  course,  means  Gades.  (5)  The  visit  to  the 
extreme  bounds  of  the  West  immediately  precedes  his  martyrdom  at  Rome,  in 
Clement's  enumeration  of  St.  Paul's  doings.  (6)  The  use  of  oStuj,  in  the  passage  about 
St.  Peter  which  precedes,  teaches  us  not  to  put  a  full  stop  after  ieyovnevav,  and  begin 
a  new  sentence  with  oSrm,  as  in  the  Latin  version  in  Hefele,  and  Dr.  Farrar's  quota- 
tion ;  but  to  construe  it,  as  is  much  more  natural  and'more  in  accordance  with  Greek 
idiom,  with  imiwdyri  (as  the  previous  oStu  is  with  liropeithi),  as  referring  to'the  circum- 
stances under  which  he  passed  away  and  went  to  a  better  place.  (7)  The  manuscript 
text  of  Clement  is  very  imperfect.  The  difficulty  of  breaking  up  the  passage  into  its 
component  parts,  due  apparently  to  the  absence  of  proper  copulative  particles,  may 
probably  be  assigned  to  this  cause.  But  there  is  no  ground  whatever  for  saying,  with 
Dr.  Farrar  (p.  606),  that,  "if  Spain  is  intended,  and  if  paprupfia-as  means  *  martyrdom,' 
then  the  author,  taken  literally,  would  imply  that  St.  Paul  perished  in  Spain."  What 
the  writer  says  is  that,  having  successively  taught  righteousness  to  the  whole  world, 
reached  the  utmost  bounds  of  .the  West,  and  suffered  martyrdom  before  the  rulers,  he 
at  last  passed  out  of  this  world  and  received  his  reward  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
(See  translation  of  the  '  Epistle  of  Clement'  in  Bishop  Lightfoot's  'Appendix  to  St, 
Clement  of  Rome,'  which  agrees  substantially  with  that  given  above.) 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OP 

PAUL    TO    TIMOTHY 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  L 


Ver.  I.— Christ  Jesus  for  Jesus  Christ, 
A.V.  and  T.R. ;  according  to  for  by,  A.V. ; 
Christ  Jesus  our  hope  for  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
which  is  our  hope,  A.V.  aid  T.E.  For  the 
inscription,  pomp.  Rom.  i.  1,  5;  1  Cor.  L  1; 
2  Oer.  i.  1;  Gal.  i.  1 ;  Eph.  i.  1;  Col.  i.  1; 
2  Tim.  i.  1 ;  Tit's  i.  1 ;  in  all  which  St.  Paul 
assertshis  h  post  leslii  p,  and  ascribes  it  directly 
to  "  the  will  of  God  "  (comp.  Gal.  i.  11,  12, 
etc).  According  to  the  commandment  (as 
Titus  i.  3)  expresses  the  same  truth,  but  pos- 
sibly with  a  more  direct  reference  to  the 
tommand,  "Separate  me  Paul  and  Barnabas," 
recorded  in  Acts  xiii.  2.  This  assertion  of 
his  apostolic  authority  indicates  that  this 
is  net  a  private  letter  to  Timothy,  but  a 
publio  Church  document  for  all  time  Our 
hope  (comp.  Col.  i.  27 ;  Acts  xxviii.  20). 

Ver.  2. — My  true  child  in  faith  for  my  own 
son  in  (he  faith,  A.V. ;  peace  for  and  peace, 
A.V. ;  the  Father  for  our  Father,  A.V.  and 
T.R. ;  Christ  Jesus  for  Jesus  Christ,  A.V. 
and  T.R.  My  true  child  in  faith.  A  most 
awkward  phrase,  which  can  only  mean  that 
Timothy  was  St.  Paul's  true  child  because 
his  faith  was  equal  to  St.  Paul's,  which  is 
not  St.  Paul's  meaning.  Timothy  was  St. 
Paul's  own  son,  because  he  had  begotten 
him  in  the  gospel  (1  Cor.  iv.  14 — 16 ;  Pnilem. 
10) — his  spiritual  son.  This  is  best  expressed 
as  in  the  A.V.  by  "  in  the  faith"  (comp.  Titus 
i.  4,  where  the  same  idea  is  expressed  by 
K&rJt  Kotvh"  wltrrtv).  Grace,  mercy,  and  pesos. 
This  varies  from  the  blessing  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Epistles  to  the  Romans,  Corin- 
thians, Galatians,  Ephesians,  Philippians, 
Colossiang,  and  Thessalonians,  by  the  addi- 
tion of  the  word  "  mercy,"  as  in  2  Tim.  i.  2  and 
Titus  i.  4  in  the  T.R.,  and  also  in  2  John  3 
and  Jnde  2.  It  seems  in  St.  Paul  to  con- 
nect itself  with  that  deeper  sense  of  the  need 
and  of  the  enjoyment  of  mercy  which  went 

X,  TIMOTHY. 


with  his  deepening  sense  of  sin  as  be  drew 
towards  his  end,  and  harmonizes  beautifully 
with  what  he  says  in  vers.  12 — 16.  The 
analogy  of  the  other  forms  of  blessing 
quoted  above  strongly  favours  the  sense  onr 
Father  rather  than  the  Father.  Whether 
we  read  f)/iuv  with  the  T.R.  or  omit  it  with 
the  R.T.,  the  iilea  of  Father  is  contrasted, 
not  with  that  of  Son,  but  w.th  that  of  Lord ; 
the  two  words  express  the  relation  of  the 
Persons  of  the  Godhead,  not  to  each  other, 
but  to  the  Church. 

Ver.  3. — Exhorted  for  besought,  A.V. ;  tarry 
for  abide  still,  A.V.;  was  going  for  went, 
A.V. ;  certain  men  for  some,  A.V. ;  not  to 
teach  a  different  for  that  they  teach  no  other, 
A.V.  Exhorted  (imp&cci\e<ra).  In  about  sixty 
places  this  word  has  the  sense  of  "  beseech, 
"  entreat,"  "desire,"  "  pray,"  which  is  more 
suitable  to  this  passage  than  the  R.V.  exhort. 
It  is  a  strong  expression,  and  seems  to  imply 
that  Timothy  had  been  anxious  to  go  with 
St.  Paul  to  Macedonia,  to  share  his  labours 
and  wait  upon  him ;  but  that  St.  Paul,  with 
that  noble  disinterestedness  which  charac- 
terized his  whole  life,  had,  not  without  diffi- 
culty, persuaded  him  to  abide  at  Ephesus. 
Tarry.  Here  again  the  R.V.  is  unfortunate. 
The  exact  sense  of  vpo<rp.(tvai  is  "  to  stay 
on,"  o?,  as  in  the  A.  V., "  to  abide  still."  The 
word  tells  us  that  Timothy  was  already  at 
Ephesus  when  he  received  the  request  frcm 
St.  Paul  to  stay  on  there  instead  of  going 
to  Macedonia.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
phrase  that  implies  that  St.  Paul  was  at 
Ephesus  himself  when  he  made  the  reqnest 
to  Timothy.  It  may  have  been  made  by 
message  or  by  letter.  When  I  was  going. 
Some  commentators  have  endeavoured  to 
explain  iropev6/ia>ot  as  applying  to  Timothy, 
or  as  if  the  order  were  %va  wopev6/j.evos 
irapayyet\jis ;  bnt  the  Greek  will  not  admit 
of  it.  Charge  (irapayytlkvs);  a  word  imply- 
ing authority,  almost  invariably  rendered 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  l  1- 


"  command"  or  "charge."  It  is  taken  up 
in  ver.  18  (rairnv  t^v  irapayye\iav),  "This 
charge,"  etc.  Teach  a  different  doctrine 
(iTepoSiSao-KaXeiy).  This  is  one  of  the  many- 
words  peculiar  to  the  pastoral  Epistles.  It 
only  occurs  here  and  ch.  vi.  3.  It  is  formed 
from  4T<=po5i5<£(TKaAos,  a  teacher  of  other  than 
right  doctrine,  and  means  "  to  play  the  part 
of  a  teacher  of  other  than  right  doctrine," 
just  as  in  ecclesiastical  language  IrepdHol-os 
means  "  one  who  holds  opinions  contrary  to 
that  which  is  orthodox,"  and  such  as  do  so 
are  said  IrepoSoJcij/.  The  classical  sense  is 
a  little  different,  "  one  who  holds  a  different 
opinion  " — "  to  be  of  a  different  opinion."  The 
introduction  of  the  word  into  the  vocabulary 
of  Scripture  is  a  sign  of  the  somewhat  later 
age  to  which  this  Epistle  belongs,  when 
heresies  were  growing  and  multiplying. 
Other  similar  compounds  are  hep6y\aa(ros 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  21)  and  eTepo(vyeiy  (2  Cor.  vi. 

14)- 

Ver.  4. — To  give  for  give,  A.V. ;  the  which 
for  which,  A.V. ;  questionings  for  questions, 
A.V. ;  a  dispensation  of  God  for  godly  edify- 
ing, A.V.  and  T.R.  (olKovoptav  ®eov  for 
olnofioiilav  @eov) ;  so  do  I  now  for  so  do,  A.Y. 
Fables  (see  ch.  iv.  7).  If  the  spirit  which 
gave  birth  to  the  fables  of  the  Talmud  was 
already  at  work  among  the  Jews,  we  have  a 
ready  explanation  of  the  phrase.  And  that 
they  were  Jewish  fables  (not  later  Gnostio 
delusions)  is  proved  by  the  parallel  passage 
in  Titus  i.  14,  "  Not  giving  heed  to  Jewish 
fables."  The  prevalence  of  sorcery  among 
the  Jews  at  this  time  is  a  further  instance 
of  their  inclination  to  fable  (see  Acts  viii. 
9;  xiii.  6;  xix.  13).  Endless  genealogies. 
What  was  the  particular  abuse  of  genealogies 
which  St.  Paul  here  condemns  we  have  not 
sufficient  historical  knowledge  to  enable  us 
to  decide.  But  that  they  were  Jewish  forms 
of  "  vain  talking,"  and  not  Gnostio,  and 
related  to  human  pedigrees,  not  to  "  emana- 
tions of  awns,"  may  be  concluded  from  the 
connection  in  which  they  are  mentioned  in 
Titus  iii.  9,  and  from  the  invariable  meaning 
of  the  word  yeveahoyla  itself.  It  is  true 
that  Irenwus  ('  Contr.  Hser.,'  lib.  i.)  applies 
this  passage  to  the  Valentinians  and  their 
succession  of  aeons  (By  thus,  Nous,  Logos, 
Anthropus,  etc — in  all  thirty,  male  and 
female) ;  and  so  does  Tertullian,  who  speaks 
of  the  seeds  of  the  Gnostic  heresies  as  already 
budding  in  St.  Paul's  days  ('  Ad  vers  Valen- 
tin.,' cap.  iii.  and  elsewhere),  and  Grotius  sup- 
ports this  explanation  ('  Comment.,'  1  Tim. 
i.  4).  But  it  was  very  natural  that  Ireneeus 
and  Tertullian,  living  when  the  heresies  of 
Yalentinus,  Marcion,  and  others  were  at 
their  height,  should  so  accommodate  St. 
Paul's  words — which  is  all  that  Ireneeus 
does.  On  the  other  hand,  neither  Ireneeus 
nor  Tertullian  shows  that  ywcaXoyia.  was  a 


word  applied  to  the  emanations  of  the  sons 
in  the  Gnostio  vocabulary.  The  genealogies, 
then,  were  Jewish  pedigrees,  either  used 
literally  to  exalt  individuals  as  being  of 
priestly  or  Davidic  origin  (as  the  pedigrees 
of  the  Desposyni,  or  later  of  the  princes  of 
the  Captivity),  or  used  cabbalistically,  so  as 
to  draw  fanciful  doctrines  from  the  names 
composing  a  genealogy,  or  in  some  other 
way  which  we  do  not  know  of  (see  the 
writers  'Genealogies  of  Christ,'  ch.  iii.  § 
ii.  1 ;  and  note  0  at  the  end  of  the  volume/ 
Endless  (lariptun-os) ;  found  only  here  in 
the  New  Testament  and  so  one  of  the 
words  peculiar  to  the  pastoral  Epistles,  but 
used  in  the  LXX.  for  "infinite,"  "im- 
measurable." It  means  either  "  endless," 
"interminable,"  or,  "  having  no  useful  end 
or  purpose ; "  obSiv  xph<r't""'  (Chrysostom). 
But  the  former  ("interminable")  is  the 
better  rendering,  and  in  accordance  with 
its  classical  use.  Questionings  (farlioeis  or 
e'/cfijT^creis,  B.T.).  (For  flrnins,  see  John 
iii.  25;  Acts  xxv.  20;  and  below,  ch.  vi. 
4;  2  Tim.  ii.  23;  Titus  iii.  9 ;  and  for  the 
kindred  ^tij/io,  Aots  xv.  2 ;  xviii.  15 ;  xxiii. 
2  J ;  xxv.  19  ;  xxvi.  3.)  The  reading  Ik^tiiitm 
is  only  found  here.  A  dispensation  of  God. 
This  version  arises  from  the  Greek  o\Kovop.{m>, 
which  is  the  reading  of  the  B.T.  and  almost 
all  manuscripts.  The  T.R.  oiKoBofiicw  is 
thought  to  be  a  conjecture  of  Erasmus, 
which,  from  its  much  easier  sense,  was  taken 
into  the  T.B.  Taking  the  reading  olKovopiav, 
the  phrase,  "  a  dispensation  of  God  whioh 
is  in  faith,"  must  mean  the  gospel  as  de- 
livered by  revelation  and  received  by  faith. 
These  fables  and  genealogies  address  them- 
selves, the  apostle  says,  to  the  disputatious, 
itching  curiosity  of  men's  minds,  not  to 
their  faith.  The  substance  of  them  is  matter 
of  doubtful  disputation,  not  revealed  truth. 
"  The  dispensation  "  is  better  English  than 
"  a  dispensation."  So  do  I  now ;  or,  as  the 
A  V.,  so  do,  is  the  conjectural  filling  up  oi 
the  unfinished  sentence  which  began  "  as  1 
exhorted  thee."  But  it  is  much  more  natural 
and  simple  to  take  ver.  18  as  the  apodosis, 
and  the  intermediate  verses  as  a  digression 
caused  by  St.  Paul's  desire  to  show  how 
exactly  the  charge  was  in  agreement  with 
the  true  spirit  of  the  Law  of  God 

Ver.  5. — But  for  now,  A.V. ;  charge  for 
commandment,  A.V. ;  love  for  charity,  A.Y. ; 
a  good  for  of  a  good,  and  faith  for  of  faith, 
A.V.  But  the  end  of  the  charge.  Before 
proceeding  with  his  sentence,  in  whioh  he 
was  about  solemnly  to  commit  the  trust  of 
the  episcopate  of  the  Church  of  Ephesus  to 
Timothy,  he  breaks  off  abruptly  to  show  th« 
beneficent  character  of  the  charge,  viz.  the 
furtherance  of  that  brotherly  love  and  purity 
of  heart  and  life  which  are  the  true  fruit  of 
the  gospel  dispensation,  but  which  some,  by 


oh.  i.  1—20.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


their  false  doctrine,  were  so  ruthlessly  im- 
peding. Eaoh  of  these  phrases,  "a  pure 
heart "  and  "  a  good  conscience  "  and  "  faith 
unfeigned,"  seems  to  rebuke  by  contrast  the 
merely  ceremonial  cleanness  and  the  defiled 
conscience  and  the  merely  nominal  Chris- 
tianity of  these  heretical  Judaizers  (corap. 
Titus  i.  10—16). 

Ver.  6. — Which  things  for  which,  A.V. ; 
talking  for  jangling,  A.V.  Having  swerved 
(euTTOxho-aiiTes');  literally,  having  missed  the 
mark,  as  in  the  margin.  It  is  found  in 
the  New  Testament  only  here  and  ch.  vi. 
21;  2  Tim.  ii.  18.  In  Eccles.  vii.  19  (21, 
A.V.)  and  viii.  9  (11,  A.V.)  it  is  used  in 
a  slightly  different  sense,  "forego"  and 
"  miss."  In  Polybius  and  Plutarch  repeat- 
edly, "to  miss  the  mark,"  "to  fail,"  with 
the  kindred  acnoxos,  aoroxfa,  acrrdxyv-a. 
These  men  missed  the  true  end  of  the 
gospel — purity  of  heart  and  conscience  and 
life — and  only  reached  vain  and  boastful 
talking.  Have  turned  aside  (4^rpJmniarav) ; 
ch.  v  15 ;  vi.  20 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  4 ;  Heb.  xii.  13 ; 
but  not  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament.  It 
is  found  in  the.  active  voice  in  the  LXX.,  and 
is  common  in  all  voices  in  classical  Greek. 
Vain  talking  (narcuohoyla) ;  here  only  in  the 
New  Testament,  and  not  found  in  the 
LXX.,  but  used  by  Strabo,  Plutarch,  and 
Porphyry.  The  adjective  fiaTcuo\6yas  is 
used  in  Titus  i.  10,  and  applied  especially 
to  those  "of  the  circumcision."  The  Latin 
equivalents  are  vaniloquus  and  vaniloquium. 
Livy's  description  of  a  vaniloquus  is  "  Maria 
terrasque  inani  snnitu  verborum  complevit" 
(lib.  xxxv.  48 ;  comp.  Jude  16). 

Ver.  7. — Though  they  understand  for  un- 
derstanding, A.V. ;  confidently  affirm  for 
affirm,  A.V.  Teachers  of  the  Law  (mno- 
StSi<rKa\oi,  as  Luke  v.  17 :  Acts  v.  34).  This, 
again,  distinctly  marks  the  Jewish  origin  of 
these  heretics.  Though  they  understand, 
etc.  So  our  Lord  rebuked  the  scribes  and 
teachers  of  the  Law  in  his  day :  "  Ye  do  err, 
not  knowing  the  Scriptures  nor  the  power 
of  God ; "  "  Ye  do  greatly  err"  (Matt.  xxii. 
29 ;  Mark  xii.  27;  Matt.  xii.  7,  etc. ;  compare, 
too,  Eom.  ii.  17—24).  They  confidently 
affirm  ($ia/9E/3ato5jTai).  Elsewhere  in  the 
New  Testament  only  in  Titus  iii.  8,  "  I 
will  that  thou  affirm  confidently."  So  in 
classical  Greek,  "to  maintain  strongly," 
"to  be  positive."  This  was  right  in  the 
minister  of  Christ  declaring  Divine  truth, 
but  very  wrong  in  these  vain  janglers.  The 
nature  of  their  confident  assertions  is  ap- 
parent from  what  follows — they  spoke  of 
the  Law,  but  not  lawfully. 

Ver.  8. — The  Law  is  good  (see  the 
similar  statement  in  Enm.  vii.  12).  The 
■Jews  thought  that  St.  Paul  spoke  against 
the  Law  (comp.  Acts  vi.  13,  14),  because  he 
vindicated  its  true  use  (Bom.  x.  4;  GaL 


iii.  24  ;~iv.  4,  5,  etc.).  But  he  everywhere 
speaks  of  the  Law  as  good  and  holy.  If  a 
man — i.e.  a  teacher  of  the  Law — use  it  law- 
fully; knowing  its  proper  use,  as  it  follows 
in  the  next  verse. 

Ver.  9. — As  knowing  for  knowing,  A.V. ; 
Law  for  the  Law,  A.  V. ;  unruly  for  diso- 
bedient, A.V. ;  and  sinners  for  and  for 
sinners,  A.V. ;  the  unholy  for  unholy,  A.V. 
Law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man.  It  is 
much  better  to  render  v6pos*  with  the  A.V., 
"the  Law,"  as  e.g.  Eom.  ii.  12—14.  The 
whole  proposition  relates  to  the  Law  of 
Moses,  which  these  teachers  perverted  and 
tried  to  force  upon  Christians,  being  igno- 
rant that  the  Law  was  made,  not  for  the 
righteous,  but  for  sinners.  For  is  not  made, 
we  might  render  does  not  apply  to  or  is  not 
in  force  against.  Keirw  with  the  dative  fol- 
lowing (as  2  Mace.  iv.  11)  suggests  some 
such  meaning,  somewhat  different  from  the 
simple  i>6fi.as  icen-at.  This  freedom  of  the 
righteous  from  the  Law  is  what  St.  Paul 
everywhere  asserts  (Eom.  vi.  14 ;  viii.  2 ; 
Gal.  ii.  19 ;  iii.  25 ;  v.  18,  etc.),  the  Law  being 
viewed,  not  as  a  holy  rule  of  life,  but  as  a 
system  of  penalties — "a  Law  of  sin  and 
death."  That  i>6/j.os  here  means  the  Law 
of  Moses  is  further  evident  from  this,  that 
in  the  following  list  the  apostle  clearly 
follows  the  general  order  of  the  Decalogue, 
taking  fist  the  offences  against,  the  first 
table,  and  then  sins  against  the  fifth,  sixth, 
seventh,  and  ninth  commandments  (compare, 
too,  ver.  11  with  Eom.  ii.  16).  Lawless 
(avifytois);  with  no  special  reference  to  its 
etymology,  but  meaning  simply  "  trans- 
gressors," "  wicked,"  as  Luke  xxii.  37 ;  Acts 
ii.  23 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  8  (A.V.),  and  very  fre- 
quently in  the  LXX.  Unruly  (Jaxmari.- 
ktois);  insubordinate,  resisting  lawful  au- 
thority. In  the  LXX.  for  the  Hebrew  hy'bi 
(1  Sam.ii.  12,  Symmachus),and  perhaps  Prov. 
xvi.  27.  In  the  New  Testament  it  is  peculiar 
in  this  sense  to  the  pastoral  Epistles,  being 
only  found  here  and  in  Titus  i.  6, 10.  In  Heb. 
ii.  10  it  has  the  classical  sense  of  "  unsub- 
dued." The  express  application  of  the  word 
in  Titus  i.  10,  to  the  "unruly  talkers  of  the 
circumcision,"  shows  that  St.  Paul  has  them 
in  view  here  also.  Ungodly  and  sinners,  for 
the  unholy  and  profane.  All  terms  im- 
plying offences  against  the  first  table.  'Atre- 
04m  (with  the  kindred  atresia  and  a<re/3&>)  is 
always  rendered  "ungodly,"  "ungodliness," 
"  to  ant  ungodly ; "  a/iapraKoU,  sinners,  viz. 
against  God;  avoaioa,  unholy  (found  only 
here  and  at  2  Tim.  iii.  2  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, but  frequent  in  the  LXX.)  is  the 
contrary  to  haws,  holy,  saintly;  j3e/9ifAois 
(whence  0e$i\K6a,  to  profane,  Matt.  xii. 
5;  Acts  xxiv.  6),  profane,  of  person!  and 
things  not  consecrated  to  God — peculiar  in 
the  New  Testament  to  the  pastoral  ^piitlti 


THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh,  l  1—20. 


(oh.  iv.  7 ;  vi.  20  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  16 ;)  and  Heb.  xii 
16,  but  found  commonly  in  the  LXX.  and  in 
classical  Greek.  narpa\tpats  and  /xtjt  pa,\tpai5, 
not  murderers,  but,  as  in  the  margin, 
"smiters,  ill-men  of  father  and  mother." 
Both  words  are  only  found  here  in  the 
New  Testament,  but  found  in  Demosthenes, 
Aristophanes,  etc.  The  allusion  here  is  to 
Ex.id.  xxi.  15,  where  the  Hebrew  word  for 
"  smiteth  "  is  ngD,  which  does  not  necessarily 
mean  "to  smite  to  death"  any  more  than 
aKoia  does.  'Av$po<p6vois,  man-slayers; 
found  only  here  in  the  New  Testament, 
but  used  in  2  Mace.  ix.  28  and  in  classical 
writers.     The  reference  is  to  Exod.  xxi.  12. 

Ver.  10. — Fornicators  for  whoremongers, 
A.V. ;  abusers  of  themselves  with,  men  for  them 
that  defile  themselves  with  mankind,  A.V. ; 
false  swearers  for  perjured  persons,  A.V. ;  con- 
trary for  that  is  contrary,  A.V. ;  the  sound  for 
sound,  A.V.  Uipvots,  aptrcvoicolTois.  The  latter 
word  is  only  found  in  the  New  Ttstament 
here  and  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  and  nowliere  else; 
but  the  reference  is  to  Lev.  xviii.  22,  where 
the  two  words  &poevos  and  Kolrn  occur, 
though  not  in  actual  composition.  'AvSpa- 
voiiaTvus,  men-stealers;  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  but  very  common,  with  its  many 
kindred  forms,  hyBpairoBlfav,  av$pairo8t<rii6s, 
ifSpiwoSov,  etc.,  in  classical  Greek.  The 
last  word  is  found  once  in  the  LXX.,  viz. 
in  3  Mace  vii.  5.  The  crime  of  man- 
stealing  is  denounced  Exod.  xxi.  16;  Dent. 
xxiv.  -7.  Veia-Tois,  4m6picoLs,  liars,  false 
swearers.  The  latter  word  only  occurs  here 
in  the  New  Testament — the  verb  emopntu  iu 
Matt.  v.  33 — and  twice  in  the  LXX.,  where 
fwiopxla  is  also  found  (Wisd.  xiv.  25) ;  all  are 
common  in  classical  Greek.  The  reference 
is  to  Lev.  xix  11,  12.  The  order  of  the 
offences,  as  ahove  noted,  is  that  of  the 
Decalogue.  The  sound  doctrine.  The 
article  is  better  omitted,  as  in  the  A.V. 
This  is  one  of  the  many  phrases  peculiar  to 
the  pastoral  Epistles.  Though  the  verb 
tiytatvetv  occurs  three  times  in  St.  Luke's 
Gospel  and  once  in  3  John  2  in  its  literal 
sense  of  bodily  health,  it  is  only  in  the 
pastoral  Epistles  that  it  is  applied  to 
doctrine  (see  ch.  vi.  3;  2  Tim.  i.  13;  iv.  3; 
Titus  i.  9, 13;  ii.  1,  2;  and  note  on  2  Tim. 
iv.  3). 

Ver.  11. — The  gospel  of  the  glory  for  the 
glorious  gospel,  A.V.  The  gospel  of  the  glory 
of  the  blessed  God.  The  phrase,  to  tiuyyi- 
Ktov  rrjs  86£t]s  tov  ficucaplov  0eov,  cannot  mean, 
as  in  the  A.V.,  "  the  glorious  gospel  of  the 
blessed  God,"  except  by  a  very  forced  con- 
struction. It  might  mean  three  things  :  (1) 
rrjs  Sifas  tov  0eo5  might  be  a  periphrasis  for 
"  God,"  as  Rom.  vi.  4,  or  Exod.  xxiv.  16, 17 ; 
xxxiii.  18 ;  Lev.  ix.  6,  23 ;  Ps.  civ.  31 ;  2 
Oor.  iv.  6  ;  or  as  "  the  Name  of  the  Lord  " 
(Prov.  xviii.  10 ;  Isa.  xxx.  27,  etc) ;  and  as 


we  say  "  the  queen's  majesty,"  the  "  king's 
grace."  Or  (2)  "  the  glory  of  God  "  might 
mean  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  Brightness  of 
God's  glory,  the  Image  of  the  invisible  God, 
in  whose  face  the  glory  of  God  shines  (2  Cor. 
iv.  4, 6).  Or  (3)  it  might  mean  the  gospel  which 
tells  of  the  glory  of  God,  which  reveals  and 
proclaims  his  glory,  the  glory  of  his  grace 
(Eph.  i.  6,  12),  or  perhaps  here  rather  the 
glory  of  his  holiness,  which  St.  Paul's 
"  sound  doctrine  "  pressed  for  imitation  upon 
all  Christians  (see  ch.  vi.  3) ;  comp.  2  Cor. 
iv.  4,  "  The  gospel  of  the  glory  of  ChriBt." 
Either  the  first  or  last  is  doubtless  the  true 
meaning.  The  blessed  God.  This  and  ch. 
vi.  IS  are  the  only  passages  in  the  New 
Testament  where  paKttptos,  blessed,  is  an 
epithet  of  God.  Elsewhere  "blessed"  is 
ev\oyr)Tos ;  as  e.g.  Mark  xiv.  61 ;  2  Cor.  xi. 
31.  In  classical  Greek  pimp  is  the  proper 
epithet  of  the  gods ;  fidxapes  @e£r  paicdpios  is 
usually  spoken  of  men  or  qualities,  and  es- 
pecially of  the  happy  dead.  It  does  not 
appear  how  or  why  the  apostle  here  applies 
na.Ka.pios  to  God.  Committed  to  my  trust ; 
literally,  with  which  I  was  entrusted.  A 
thoroughly  Pauline  statement  (comp.  Bom. 
i.  1,  5 ;  ii.  16 ;  Gal.  i.  11, 12 ;  Eph.  iii.  1—8, 
etc.). 

Ver.  12.— J  thank  for  and  1  thank,  A.V. 
and  T.B. ;  him  that  enabled  me,  even  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord  for  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  who 
hath  enabled  me,  A.V. ;  appointing  me  to  his 
service  for  putting  me  into  the  ministry,  A.V. 
I  thank,  etc.  This  outburst  of  praise  for 
the  mercy  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  had 
called  him  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  is 
caused  by  the  thought,  which  immediately 
precedes,  of  his  being  entrusted  with  the 
gospel.  He  thus  disclaims  any  notion  of 
merit  on  his  part.  That  enabled  me  (hSwa- 
lx.iio-a.vTi).  This  verb  occurs  once  in  the 
Acts  (ix.  22);  three  times  in  St.  Paul's 
other  Epistles  (Bom.  iv.  20;  Eph.  vi.  10; 
Phil.  iv.  13);  three  times  in  the  pastoral 
Epistles  (here ;  2  Tim.  ii.  1  and  iv.  17);  and 
Heb.  xi.  34.  It  denotes  the  giving  that 
peculiar  power  which  was  the  gift  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  which  was  necessary  for 
the  work  of  an  apostle  to  enable  him  to  bear 
witness  to  Christ  in  the  face  of  an  adverse 
world.  This  power  (SiW/m)  Christ  pro- 
mised to  his  apostles  before  his  ascension 
(Acts  i.  8).  St.  Paul  received  it  after  his 
conversion  (Acts  ix.  22).  He  continued  to 
hold  it  throughout  his  apostleship  (Phil.  iv. 
13) ;  he  enjoyed  it  especially  at  the  approach 
of  his  martyrdom  (2  Tim.  iv.  17).  It  com- 
prised strength  of  faith,  strength  to  testify 
and  to  preach,  strength  to  endure  and  suffer. 
St.  Paul's  whole  course  is  the  best  illus- 
tration of  the  nature  of  the  tivafus  which 
Christ  gave  him  (see  in  Eph.  iii  6  the  x<W> 
the    SmKorla,  and  the  Siyafin  all  brought 


OH.  Li — 20.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


together  as  here).  Appointing  me  to  bis 
service.  _  The  A.V.,  putting  me  into  the 
ministry,  is  a  better  rendering,  because  "  the 
ministry"  exactly  expresses  the  particular 
kind  of  service  to  which  the  Lord  appointed 
him  (see  the  exactly  parallel  passage,  Eph. 
iii.  7).  The  absence  of  the  article  is  unim- 
portant (Bom.  xii.  7 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  15 ;  2  Tim. 
IV.  11).  (For  the  general  phrase,  comp. 
Acts  xx.  28;  1  Cor.  xii.  28;  or,  still  more 
exactly  as  regards  the  grammar,  1  Thess. 

T.9.) 

Ver.  13. — Though  I  was  for  who  was,  A.V. 
»nd  T.R.;  howbeit  for  but,  A.Y.  A  blas- 
phemer (&\a<r<pT]iJiov);  applied,  as  here,  to 
persons,  only  in  2  Tim.  iii.  2;  applied  to 
words,  Acts  vi.  11, 13  (T.R.).  The  verb  fiKcur- 
<prineiv,  and  the  substantive  pKao-Qnuia,  are 
very  common,  both  in  the  sense  of  "blas- 
pheming" and  of  "railing "or  "reviling." 
St.  Paul  was  a  blasphemer  because  he  spoke 
against  the  Name  of  Jesus,  which  he  had 
since  discovered  was  a  Name  above  all  names. 
A  persecutor  (Sii&mp) ;  only  here ;  but  the 
verb  SiniKeTv  is  applied  to  St.  Paul  re- 
peatedly (Aots  ix.  4,  5 ;  xxii.  4 ;  xxvi.  11, 
etc.),  and  the  Sii&icTns  here  refers  possibly 
to  that  very  narrative.  Injurious  (ifSpurriis) ; 
only  here  and  Bom.  i.  30,  where  it  is  ren- 
dered "  insolent,"  B.V.  The  verb  i&pi(eu/, 
both  in  the  New  Testament  and  in  classical 
Greek,  means  to  "treat  or  use  others  de- 
gpitefully,"  "to  outrage  and  insult"  them, 
not  without  personal  violence  (Matt.  xxii. 
6;  Luke  xviii.  32;  Acts  xiv.  5;  1  Thess. 
ii.  2).  The  tifipiariis  is  one  who  so  treats 
others.  St.  Paul  was  thinking  of  his  own 
conduct  toward  the  Christians,  whom  he  not 
only  reviled,  but  handled  roughly  and  cast 
into  prison  (Acts  viii.  3;  ix.  1;  xxii.  19). 
There  is  no  English  word  which  exactly 
renders  bflpiarfo. 

Ver.  14. — Abounded  exceedingly  for  wot 
exceeding  abundant,  A.V.  Abounded  ex- 
ceedingly {{mepnrKeSvaat) ;  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament  or  elsewhere  except  "in 
Psalterio  Salomonis  Ps.  v.  19,  et  in  fragmento 
Hermes  ap.  Fabricium  Bibl.  Grsec,  lib.  v.  cap. 
1 "  (Schleusner).  But  the  word  is  thoroughly 
Pauline  (comp.  uvepaiponat,  &nepav£dva,  uirep- 
jSaAAw,  farepeKTelvu,  farepveptffffeiiw,  vnep- 
vifxW,  and  other  compounds  with  Owep.  It 
is  further  remarkable,  as  regards  ivep  itself, 
that  of  the  hundred  and  fifty-eight  times  (or 
thereabouts)  that  it  occurs  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament, one  hundred  and  six  are  in  St.  Paul's 
Epistles,  and  twelve  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  and  only  forty  in  all  the  otlier 
books.  With  faith  and  love,  etc.  The 
grace  bestowed  upon  St.  Paul  at  and  after 
his  conversion  showed  itself  in  the  wonder- 
ful faith  and  love  toward  Jesus  Christ,  whom 
he  had  previously  disbelieved  in  and  re- 
viled, which  accompanied  that  grace  (/ierii) 


and  was  the  fruit  of  it,  and  characterized 
his  whole  after-life. 

Ver.  15.— Faithful  is  the  laying  for  this 
is  a  faithful  saying,  A.V.  Faithful  is  the 
saying  (wttnbi  d  \6yos).  This  formula  is  pe- 
culiar to  the  pastoral  Epistles  (ch.  iii.  1 ;  iv. 
9  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  11 ;  Titus  iii.  8),  and  seems  to 
indicate  that  there  were  a  number  of  pithy 
sayings,  maxims,  portions  of  hymns  or  of 
catechetical  teaching,  current  in  the  Church, 
and  possibly  originating  in  the  inspired  say- 
ings of  the  Church  prophets,  to  which  the 
apostle  appeals,  and  to  which  he  gives  his 
sanction.  The  one  appealed  to  here  would 
be  simply, "  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world 
to  save  sinners."  This,  St.  Paul  adds,  is 
worthy  of  all  acceptation — by  all,  and  with- 
out any  reserve.  Acceptation  (&woSoxrjs) ; 
only  here  an  1  ch.  iv.  9,  in  connection  with 
the  same  formula.  The  verb  airoSex<>/«" 
occurs  in  Luke  viii.  40;  Acts  ii.  41;  xv.  4; 
xviii.  29;  xxiv.  3;  xxviii.  30.  It  contains 
the  idea  of  a  glad,  willing  acceptance  (see 
note  on  Acts  ii.  41).  So  doubtless  cnroSoxi 
also  means  "hearty  reception."  lam  ohief ; 
in  respect  of  his  having  been  "  a  blasphemer, 
a  persecutor,  and  injurious."  That  great 
sin  was  indeed  freely  forgiven  by  God's 
grace,  but  it  could  never  be  forgotten  by 
him  who  had  been  guilty  of  it.  "  Manet 
alta  mente  repostum  "  (comp.  Eph.  iii.  8). 

Ver.  16. — As  chief  for  first,  A.V. ;  might 
Jesus  Christ  for  Jesus  Christ  might,  A.V. ; 
his  long-suffering  for  long-suffering,  A.V. ;  an 
ensample  of  for  a  pattern  to,  A.V. ;  unto 
eternal  life  for  to  life  everlasting,  A.V. 
That  in  me  as  ohief;  rather,  as  A.V.,  first; 
i.e.  both  in  order  of  time,  and  in  respect 
also  of  the  greatness  of  the  sin  forgiven. 
Show  forth  (ArSefgirrcu ;  see  2  Tim.  iv.  14, 
note).  All  his  long-suffering;  more  pro- 
perly, as  Alford,  the  whole  long-suffering; 
i.e.  the  entirety  of  long-suffering — all  that 
was  possible,  every  kind  and  degree  of  long- 
suffering,  'o  iros  with  the  substantive 
denotes  the  whole  of  a  thing :  rhv  irdvTa 
XpAvov,  "the  whole  time"  (Acts  xx.  18); 
6  iroj  vinos,  "  the  whole  Law  "  (Gal.  v.  14). 
So  in  the  two  examples  from  Polybius,  Tijs- 
vourvs  &\oyuTTias  and  tt}s  irdaris  aroirias, 
"the  utmost  unreasonableness,"  and  "the 
utmost  strangeness,"  the  construction  is 
exactly  the  same.  Long-suffering  (jjuucpoBv- 
pna) ;  more  literally,  longanimity ;  very  fre- 
quent both  in  the  New  Testament  and  in 
the  LXX.  The  adjective  p.a«p60up.os 
(LXX.)  is  a  translation  of  the  Hebrew  TfiN 
D'as,  "  long,"  or  "  slow  to  anger,"  to  which 
the  opposite  is  O'SN  isp,  otiBv/nos  (LXX.), 
"short  to  anger,"  t.e.' hasty,  passionate. 
The  verb  futKpoBvfUa  also  occurs  frequently, 
both  in  the  New  Testament  and  in  the 
LXX.:  'H  ayairy)  /j.aKpo8v/ie7,  " Charity  suf- 
ferc-th  long"  (1  Cor.  xiii.  4).     For  an  •» 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[ok.  l  1—2 


■ample  (npbs  iiroriiratnv).  The  word  only 
occun  in  the  New  Testament  here  and  2 
Tim.  i.  12 ;  but  both  it  and  the  verb  (mo- 
Tuirta  are  good  classical  words.  The  mean- 
ing of  SmiT&racris  is  "  a  sketch  "  or  "  outline," 
and  hence  "  a  pattern."  This  pattern  is 
spoken  of  as  being  the  property  of,  being  for 
the  use  of,  them  which  should  hereafter 
believe.  Jnst  as  the  workman  looks  at  his 
plan,  or  outline,  by  which  he  is  to  work,  so 
those  future  believers  would  see  in  Christ's 
dealings  with  St.  Paul  the  exact  pattern  of 
the  long-suffering  which  they  might  expect 
for  themselves.  Others  take  tnroriirwa-is  in 
the  sense  of  "  instruction,"  but  this  sense 
cannot  be  made  good.  Believe  on  him  unto 
eternal  life.  Thew  words  hang  together. 
The  particular  force  of  irurreieiv  en'  <jut£, 
"found  in  the  New  Testament  only  here 
and  Bom.  ix.  33;  x.  11;  and  1  Pet.  ii.  6" 
(Huther) — as  distinguished  from  the  other 
constructions  of  irurreic iv ' — is  to  "rest," 
"lean  on"  (Ellicott).  St.  Paul  thus  inci- 
dentally affirms  that  his  own  faith  rested 
upon  Jesus  Christ  in  the  full  assurance  of 
attaining  to  eternal  life  (see  ch.  vi.  12 ;  2 
Tim.  i.  1,  2). 

Ver.  17. — Incorruptible  for  immortal,  A.V. ; 
only  God  for  only  wise  God,  A.V.  and  T.B. 
The  King  eternal.  The  Greek  ha*  the  un- 
usual phrase,  t$  &a<ri\e? t&v  alavav, "  the  king 
of  the  worlds  or  ages,"  which  is  not  found  else- 
where in  the  New  Testament,  but  is  found 
twice  in  the  LXX.— Tobit  xiii.  6  and  10— 
and  in  the  Liturgy  of  St.  James,  in  the  ev%h 
n"]s  lvdp£eas  and  elsewhere.  The  similar 
phrase,  i  &ei>s  tav  altivay,  is  also  found  in 
Ecclus.  xxxvi.  17.  In  all  these  passages  it 
is  quite  clear  that  the  phrase  is  equivalent 
to  aidvios,  Eternal,  as  a  title  of  the  Lord,  as 
in  Bom.  xvi.  26.  The  geuitive  w  aliivav 
is  qualitative.  In  Tobit  xiii.  6  he  is  "  the 
Lord  of  righteousness,"  i.e.  the  righteous 
Lord;  and  "the  King  of  the  ages,"  i.e.  of 
eternity,  i.e.  "  the  eternal  King,"  the  King 
through  all  the  ages.  And  in  ver.  10  it  is 
said,  "  Bless  the  eternal  King,"  who,  it 
follows,  will,  as  King,  "  love  the  miserable 
els  Trdaas  ras  y eve as  tov  al&vos;"  and  then  it 
follows,  in  ver.  12,"  They  that  love  thee  shall 
be  blessed  si's  rdv  alum;"  and  again  in  ver.  1 8, 
"  Bless  the  Lord,  who  hath  exalted  Jerusalem 
(Is itdvias  robs  alavas;"  and  the  same  concep- 
tion is  in  the  phrase,  <rv  el  o  @ebs  rav  aiivov. 
Satan,  on  the  other  hand,  is  6  debs  tov 
alavos  roirov,  "  the  god  of  this  world  "  (com- 
pare such  passages  as  Fs.  cii.  21 ;  civ.  31 ; 
cv.  8 ;  cxxxv.  13 ;  cxlv.  13 ;  and  the  doxo- 
logy  in  the  Xord's  Prayer,  "  Thine  is  the 
kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory,  els 
tous  alavas  ").  It  seems  to  be,  therefore,  quite 

i  

'  Tltarevety  airy,  iv  airf,  els  airiv,  and 


certain  that  St.  Panl  is  here  using  a  familiar 
Jewish  phrase  for  "  eternal "  which  has  no- 
thing whatever  to  do  with  Gnostic  fflons. 
Perhaps  in  the  use  of  the  phrase,  0am\ebs 
ruv  aiavav,  we  may  trace  a  contrast  passiug 
through  the  writer's  mind  between  the 
short-lived  power  of  that  hateful  0a<ri\eis, 
Nero,  by  whom  his  life  would  soon  be  taken 
away,  and  the  kingdom  of  the  eternal  King 
(comp.ch.vi.15, 16).  Incorruptible  (iupBdpra); 
applied  to  God  also  in  Bom.  i.  23,  where,  us 
here, it  means  "immortal"  (A  ptvos  %xuv  <^a~ 
v  as  lav,  ch.  vi.  16),  not  subject  to  the  corrup- 
tion of  death,  just  as  lupSaptria  is  coupled  with 
"life"  (2 Tim.  i.  10)  and  opposed  to  "  death" 
So  on  the  other  hand,  tpBopii,  means  "  death." 
Qiapr6s,"  perishable."  Elsewhere  itisapplied 
to  a  crown,  to  the  raised  dead,  to  the  inherit- 
ance of  the  saints,  to  the  seed  of  the  new 
birth,  to  the  apparel  of  a  holy  heart,  which 
no  rust  or  moth  corrupts  (1  Cor.  ix.  25 ;  xv. 
52 ;  1  Pet.  i.  4, 23 ;  iii.  4).  Invisible  (aopdra) ; 
as  Col.  i.  15 ;  Heb.  xi.  27.  (See  also  Bom. 
i.  20 ;  and  crimp,  eh.  vi.  16,  for  the  sense.) 
The  word  is  used  by  Philo  of  God,  and  of 
the  Word.  Here  it  is  especially  predicated 
of  God  the  Father,  according  to  what  our 
Lord  says  (John  i.  18;  vi.  46;  any.  9); 
though  some  of  the  Fathers,  Nioene  and  post- 
Nicene,  predicate  it  also  of  the  Word  or 
Second  Person  (Hilary,  Chrysostom,  etc). 
But  in  Scripture  the  Son  is  spoken  of  as  the 
Manifestation,  the  Image  {elttav  and  xaPaK- 
riip)  of  the  Father,  through  whom  the  Father 
is  seen  and  known;  doparos,  therefore,  applies 
to  the  Father  (see  Bishop  Lightfoot's  note 
on  Col.  i.  15).  The  only  God.  The  best 
manuscripts  omit  trotyif,  which  seems  to  have 
crept  in  here  from  Bom.  xvi.  26.  The  exact 
construction  is, "  To  the  eternal  King,  the 
Immortal,  the  invisible,  the  only  God  [or, 
'  who  alone  iB  God  '],  be  honour,"  etc.  Be 
honour  and  glory.  A  little  varied  from  St. 
Paul's  usual  doxologies  (see  Bom.  xi.  36 ; 
xvi.  27 ;  Gal.  i.  5 ;  Eph.  iii.  21 ;  and  ch.  vi 
16,  where  5<i|a  stands  alone,  aud  has  the 
article — Ellicott  on  Gal.  i.  5).  In  Bom.  ii. 
10  5<f{a  and  ti^tj  are  coupled  together,  but 
applied  to  man.  This  interposition  of  a 
doxology  is  quite  in  St.  Paul's  manner. 

Ver.  18. — My  child  for  son,  A.V. ;  by  them 
thou  mayest  for  thou  by  (hem  mightest,  A.V. ; 
the  good  for  a  good,  A.V.  This  charge.  The 
apostle  now  picks  up  the  thread  which  he 
had  dropped  at  ver.  4,  and  solemnly  com- 
mits to  Timothy  the  episcopal  care  of  the 
Ephesian  Church,  for  which  he  had  bid 
him  stop  at  Ephesus.  Omitting  the  long 
digression  in  vers.  5 — 17,  the  sense  runs 
clearly  thus:  "As  I  besought  thee  to  tarry  at 
Ephesus  in  order  that  thou  mightest  eharge 
some  not  to  teach  a  different  doctrine,  so  now 
do  I  place  this  charge  in  thy  hands,  accord- 
ing to  the  prophecies  which  pointed  to  thee. 


OH.  L  1—20.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   TIMOTHY. 


that  thou  mayest  war  the  good  warfare  ac- 
cording to  the  tenor  of  them."  He  thus  adds 
that  he  entrusted  this  charge  to  Timothy,  not 
mero  motu,  but  according  to  direct  indications 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  through  the  prophets  of 
the  Church,  which  pointed  out  Timothy  as 
the  person  who  was  to  war  that  good  war- 
rare.  The  words,  tva  aTparcAp  4y  avrtus  rfyv 
«a\  V  erpaTelav,  might  possibly  depend  upon 
tcis  vpoayoiaas  4irl-  <re,  meaning  that  those 
prophecies  had  this  end  in  pointing  to 
Timothy,  viz.  that  he  might  war  the  good 
warfare,  that  he  might  be  placed  in  the 
difficult  post  of  arptxTTiyiis,  and  the  ev  avrats 
follows  rather  more  naturally  in  this  case. 
But  it  is,  perhaps,  butter  to  take  them  as 
dependent  upon  TiaparlBeiuu.  By  them  (ey  ai- 
raw).  Here  ev  may  beeither  thecausaeffieient, 
indicating  that  by  the  influence  of  these  pro- 
phecies Timothy  would  war  the  good  war- 
rare,  or  be  equivalent  to  Kara,  "according 
to  "  (see  Schleusner's  *  Lexicon  '). 

Ver.  19. — Thrust  from  them  for  put  away, 
A. V.;  made  shipwreck  concerning  the  faith 
for  concerning  faith  have  made  shipwreck, 
A.V.  Thrust  from  them.  The  addition 
"  from  them  "  is  meant  to  give  the  force  of  the 
middle  voice  as  in  Acts  vii.  39,  A.V.  The 
verl-  iw(t>8o/j.ai  occurs  Acts  vii.  27,  39  ;  Bom. 
xi.  1, 2.  It  is  a  strong  expression,  implying 
hen.  the  wilful  resistance  to  the  voice  of 
conscience.  The  form  farw94a>,  -copai  is  found, 
Acts  xiii.  46,  and  frequently  in  the  LXX. 
Whi/h  (V)  applies  to  the  good  conscience 
only.  Hence  the  important  lesson  that 
deviations  from  the  true  faith  are  preceded 
by  vie  lations  of  the  conscience.  The  surest 
way  t>  maintain  a  pure  faith  is  to  maintain 
a  goal  and  tender  conscience  (comp.  ch. 
ii.  9;  John  vii.  17).  The  faith.  It  is  by 
no  means  certain  that  ij  vlcms  here  means 
"the  ;aith"  rather  than  "faith"  (subjec- 


tive). Both  the  grammar  and  the  sense 
equally  admit  the  rendering  "faith,"  refer- 
ring to  the  preceding  nlans.  (For  the  phrase, 
irepl  tV  iria-Tiv,  "with  respect  to,"  comp. 
oh.  vi.  4;  2  Tim.  ii.  18 ;  Titus  ii.  7.) 

Ver.  20. — Delivered  for  have  delivered, 
A- V.;  might  be  taught  for  may  learn,  A.V. 
Hymenseus;  probably  the  same  as  is  men- 
tioned 2  Tim.  ii.  17,  18,  as  holding  heretical 
dootrine  concerning  the  resurrection,  and 
overthrowing  the  faith  of  some.  It  is  an 
uncommon  name,  though  borne  by  a  Bishop 
of  Alexandria  in  the  second  century,  and 
by  a  Bishop  of  Jerusalem  in  the  third. 
Alexander ;  doubtless  the  same  as  "  Alex- 
ander the  coppersmith"  of  2  Tim.  iv.  14. 
I  delivered  unto  Satan.  The  passages  in 
Scripture  which  throw  light  on  this  difficult 
phrase  are,  chiefly,  the  following :  the  almost 
identical  passage,  1  Cor.  v.  5 ;  Job  i.  12 ; 
ii.  6,  7 ;  Luke  xiii.  16 ;  Acts  v.  5,  10 ;  x.  38 ; 
xiii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  30 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  7 ;  and 
Heb.  ii.  14.  Putting  these  together,  it  ap- 
pears that  sickness  and  bodily  infirmity 
and  death  are,  within  certain  limits,  in  the 
power  of  Satan  to  inflict.  And  that  the 
apostles  were  able,  on  fitting  occasions,  to 
hand  over  peccant  members  of  the  Church 
to  this  power  of  Satan,  that  by  such  disci- 
pline "  the  spirit  might  be  saved."  In  the 
case  of  Hymenssus  and  Alexander  (as  in  that 
of  the  incestuous  person  at  Corinth),  the 
punishment  incident  on  this  delivery  to 
Satan  would  appear  to  have  been  short  of 
death,  but  in  tbe  ease  of  the  two  first  not  to 
have  had  the  effect  of  bringing  them  to  a 
true  repentance.  Might  be  taught  (irniSev- 
Buai);  viz.  by  correction  and  punishment, 
as  children  are  taught  (Heb.  xii.  6—8). 
The  metaphor  in  the  word  KoKa<p t  (ny  (2  Cor. 
xii.  7)  is  similar. 


HOMILETICS. 

Tei  1. 1,  2, 19,  20. — Church  government.  St.  Paul  was  about  to  commit  extensive 
powers  in  the  Church  to  Timothy.  It  was  therefore  necessary  that  he  should  define 
clearly  the  source  of  his  own  authority.  This  he  does  very  distinctly.  He  was  an 
apostle  according  to  the  commandment  of  God  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Hence 
his  power  to  delegate  authority  to  his  son  Timothy,  and  hence  the  duty  of  the  Church 
to  submit  to  Timothy's  ruling.  Among  the  powers  committed  to  Timothy  was  that  of 
ordaining  bishops  and  deacons  by  the  laying  on  of  hands  (ch.  iii.  and  v.  22,  compared 
with  2  Tim.  ii.  2),  which  seems  to  give  us  very  clearly  the  doctrine  of  apostolical 
succession.  Por  it  should  be  observed  that  this  succession  is  alone  consistent  with  what 
St.  Paul  here  writes.  If  the  power  to  appoint  and  ordain  their  ministers  had  been 
vested  by  Christ's  ordinance  in  the  congregation,  St.  Paul  would  have  been  violating 
the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  Church  by  sending  Timothy  to  do  that  which  really 
belonged  to  the  Ephesian  congregation  to  do.  But  the  theory  that  the  government  of 
the  Church  is  in  the  hands  of  those  who  have  received  their  commission  by  succession 
from  the  apostles  is  in  exact  accord  with  what  St  Paul  here  writes  to  Timothy. 


8  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  l  1—20. 

Vera.  3—11,  19,  20.—  The  heretic.  We  have  in  these  verses  some  of  the  charac- 
teristics of  heresy  very  graphically  portrayed.  First,  there  is  the  teaching  of  other  or 
different  doctrine  from  that  which  they  had  received.  The  Fathers  always  lay  stress 
upon  novelty  as  characteristic  of  heresy,  while  it  was  characteristic  of  the  Church  to 
teach  the  old  truths  which  had  been  handed  down  to  them  by  those  who  went  hefore 
them.  And  they  are  right.  "  I  delivered  unto  you  that  which  I  also  received,''  is  the 
spirit  of  sound  teaching.  To  invent  new  doctrines,  and  to  preach  things  of  one's  own 
choosing,  is  the  spirit  cf  heresy.  Then,  again,  it  is  characteristic  of  heresy  to  start 
curious  questions,  not  with  a  view  to  real  edification  in  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  but 
for  the  sake  of  displaying  subtlety  in  disputing,  and  keeping  up  controversy  and  a  war 
of  words,  and  factious  partisanship.  The  unity  of  the  Church,  and  loving  agreement 
amongst  the  brethren,  is  the  last  thing  that  heretics  think  of.  Puffed  up  with  self- 
importance,  desirous  of  being  leaders,  despising  others,  treating  with  contempt  all  who 
will  not  follow  them,  they  turn  the  Church  into  a  bear-garden,  and  substitute  vain 
jangling  for  the  words  of  truth  and  soberness.  Especially  is  arrogance  combined  with 
ignorance  a  leading  feature  in  the  heretic ;  and  in  his  method  of  handling  Divine  truth 
he  makes  a  display  of  both.  Another  feature  may  be  noted,  as  set  forth  in  ver.  19,  viz. 
the  divorce  between  conscience  and  faith.  The  heretic  handles  the  things  of  God  as 
matter  for  mere  intellectual  contests,  apart  from  reverence  and  godly  fear.  He  disputes 
about  God  and  about  Christ,  and  thinks  it  unimportant  whether  his  own  heart  is  pure 
or  impure.  He  walks  in  open  disobedience  to  God's  commandments,  and  yet  thinks 
himself  competent  to  judge  of  God's  nature  and  attributes.  He  darkens  his  own  soul 
by  sin,  and  yet  dares  to  approach  the  mystery  of  godliness.  Lastly,  it  is  characteristic 
of  the  heretic  that  he  rarely,  if  ever,  repents,  and  returns  to  the  faith  which  he  denied. 
Hymenseus  and  Alexander,  in  spite  of  the  godly  discipline  ministered  to  them  for  their 
correction,  are  still  found  subverting  the  faith  of  many,  and  withstanding  the  apostle 
of  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  latest  mention  of  them.  They  were  in  this  respect  like  their 
brethren  in  heresy,  Simon  Magus,  Cerinthus,  Marcion,  Yalentinus,  Montanus,  Manes, 
Arius,  Socinus,  and  many  more.  The  shipwreck  of  faith  is,  for  the  most  part,  total  and 
irremediable. 

Vers.  12 — 18. — The  apostle.  The  character  of  the  apostle  and  true  minister  of  the 
gospel  stands  out  here  in  striking  and  glorious  contrast  with  that  of  the  heretic.  Called 
by  the  grace  of  God  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  not  self-appointed ;  enabled  by  the  grace 
of  God,  not  trusting  in  his  own  cleverness ;  seeking  the  glory  of  God  and  the  salvation 
of  souls,  not  aiming  at  his  own  self-exaltation ; — the  apostle  and  minister  of  Christ  moves 
altogether  in  a  different  plane  from  the  heretical  leader.  A  humble  sense  of  his  own 
un worthiness,  instead  of  arrogant  self-conceit ;  a  lively  apprehension  of  the  mercy  and 
love  of  God  to  his  own  soul,  instead  of  a  self-sufficient  reliance  upon  his  own  intellect ;  a 
faithful  delivery  of  the  truth  committed  to  him,  instead  of  a  presumptuous  fabrication 
of  new  doctrines ;  and  a  glowing  faith  and  love,  with  a  growing  apprehension  of  the  glory 
of  the  central  truths  of  the  gospel,  instead  of  a  vain  reaching  after  new  things,  and  an 
itching  for  exciting  fables, — mark  off  the  true  servant  of  Christ  from  the  pretentious 
heretic  by  unmistakable  distinctions.  Well  were  it  for  the  Church  if  these  charac- 
teristics of  the  true  bishop  of  souls  were  more  distinctly  visible  in  all  her  ministers. 
Questions,  and  strifes  of  words,  and  fables,  and  speculations,  which  tend  to  division  more 
than  to  unity,  may  be  found  in  the  teaching  and  writing  of  professing  Churchmen,- as 
well  as  in  those  of  avowed  heretics.  Let  "  the  faithful  saying  "  hold  its  supreme  place 
in  the  heart  and  in  the  teaching  of  the  Church's  ministers,  and  the  unity  as  well  as  the 
holiness  of  the  Church  will  be  proportionately  increased.  Its  strength  to  resist  heresy 
will  be  increased  in  the  same  degree. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Apostolic  address  and  greeting.    As  this  Epistle  was  designed  to  bear 
an  official  character,  it  was  necessary  that  its  address  should  set  forth  the  authority 
under  which  the  apostle  gave  his  instructions  concerning  Church  order  and  Christian  " 
work. 


<W.  L 1— 20l]  the  first  epistlb  to  tdiotht.  t 

L  The  apostle's  authority.  "Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  according  to  the 
commandment  of  God  our  Saviour,  and  Christ  Jesus,  who  is  our  Hope."  The  apostle- 
ship  was  his,  not  merely  because  he  was  called  to  it  (Rom.  i.  1),  or  destined  to  it  by  the 
will  of  God  (1  Cor.  i.  1),  but  according  to  express  Divine  commandment.  L  It  was 
the  commandment  of  (tod  ow  Saviour,  evidently  in  allusion  to  the  command  of  the 
Spirit  at  Antioch,  "  Separate  me  Barnabas  and  Saul  for  the  work  whereunto  I  have 
appointed  them  "  (Acts  xiii.  2),  but  more  distinctly  to  his  earlier  call  (Acts  xxvi.  16), 
as  "  a  vessel  of  election  "  (Acts  ix.  15),  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  Jews  and  Gentiles.  As 
the  things  of  the  Father  are  the  Son's,  so  the  things  of  the  Son  are  the  Spirit's.  Thus 
God — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost — gave  him  his  original  appointment.  Thus  the 
salvation  would1  be  seen  to  be  of  God's  purpose  and  agency ;  for  he  is  "  God  our  Saviour." 
2.  It  was  also  the  commandment  of  Christ  Jesus,  our  Hope.  Therefore  his  ordinary 
title  is  "  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  aged  apostle,  in  the  near  prospect  of  death, 
dwells  on  the  thought  of  Christ  as  his  one  blessed  hope.  He  is  our  Hope  (1)  as  its 
Author ;  (2)  as  its  Object ;  (3)  as  its  Revealer ;  (4)  as  its  Procurer ;  (5)  but,  above  all, 
as  its  Substance  and  Foundation.    He  is  our  very  "  Hope  of  glory"  (Col.  i.  27). 

H.  The  apostle's  greeting.  "  To  Timothy,  my  true  child  in  the  faith."  1.  Hit 
early  life.  Timothy  was  a  native  of  Lycaonia  in  Asia  Minor,  probably  of  Lystra,- 
one  of  its  towns.  His  father  was  a  pagan,  his  mother  a  pious  Jewess,  named  Eunice, 
who  trained  him  early  in  the  principles  of  true  religion.  It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  the 
apostle's  more  intimate  companions  were  Gentiles,  or  with  Gentile  blood  in  their  veins — 
Timothy,  Titus,  Luke,  and  even  Demas.  2.  His  relationship  to  the  Apostle  Paul. 
(1)  He  was  converted  by  the  apostle.  (2)  He  was  associated  with  the  apostle  during 
a  longer  range  of  time  than  any  other  disciple.  (3)  He  was  an  interesting  disciple  of 
the  Lord,  (a)  There  was  great  personal  aflvction  between  Timothy  and  Paul.  (J)  There 
was  "  no  one  like  minded  "  with  Timothy  who  could  be  brought  to  take  care  of  individual 
Churches,  (e)  Timothy  was  a  constant  organ  of  personal  communication  between  the 
apostle  and  individual  Churches,  (d)  He  seems  to  have  been  of  a  soft  and,  perhaps, 
timid  temperament,  (e)  He  was  very  abstemious  in  his  habits  (ch.  v.  23).  8.  The  salu- 
tation. "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace,  from  God  the  Father  and  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 
(1)  The  blessings  invoked  upon  Timothy,  (a)  Grace — a  fresh  discovery  of  Divine  favour, 
an  increase  of  grace,  a  fuller  enjoyment  of  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  (b)  Mercy — a  fresh 
application  of  the  pardoning  mercy  of  God  in  Christ.  It  occurs  only  here  and  in  the 
Second  Epistle  to  Timothy —suggested,  perhaps,  by  the  nearness  of  his  own  death,  and 
the  increasing  difficulties  of  his  last  days ;  for  he  hopes  that  Timothy  may  share  in  the 
mercy  he  has  sought  for  himself,  (c)  Peace — peace  of  conscience  through  the  blood 
of  Christ,  so  necessary  "  to  keep  heart  and  mind  "  in  the  midst  of  the  perturbations  and 
distractions  of  his  service  at  Ephesus.  (2)  The  Source  of  these  blessings.  They  spring 
alike  from  the  Father  and  the  Son — a  proof  of  the  coequal  Godhead  of  the  Son  t  for  they 
are  strictly  Divine  gifts. — T.  0. 

Vers.  3, 4. —  The  object  of  Timothy's  continued  sojourn  at  Ephesus.    I.  Consider  the 

TENDER   OABE  WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  TAKES  OF  THE  EpHESIAN  CHURCH.      "  As  I  beSOUght 

thee  to  abide  still  at  Ephesus,  when  I  was  going  into  Macedonia,  so  do  I  beseech  th  ee  now 
that  thou  charge  some  that  they  teach  no  other  doctrine."  As  Timothy  was  with  the 
apostle  in  his  first  journey  through  Macedonia  (Acts  xvL  3, 12 ;  xx.  3,  4),  this  must 
refer  to  a  later  journey,  occurring  after  the  first  imprisonment  at  Rome.  1.  Mark  the 
affectionate  style  of  his  address—"  I  besought  thee ; "  whereas  to  Titus  he  said,  "  I  gave 
thee  command"  (Titus  i.  5).  Timothy  received  no  authoritative  injunction,  but  merely 
a  tender  request  that  he  would  prolong  his  stay  so  as  to  check  the  waywardness  of  false 
teachers  who  had  risen  to  mar  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel.  2.  Mark  the  tendency  of 
the  purest  Churches  to  be  spoiled  by  false  doctrine.  The  apostle  had  foretold  the  rise 
of  a  separatist  party  when  he  was  addressing  the  elders  of  Ephesus  at  Miletus  (Acts 
xx._29,  30).  They  may  have  been  few — "some ;"  but  if  they  were  like  "  the  grievous 
wolves"  of  the  prediction,  they  might  succeed  in  "drawing  away  disciples  after  them, 
speaking  perverse  things." 

II,   THE  CHARGE  WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  GIVES  TO  BE  ADDRESSED  TO  THE  FALSE  TEACHERS. 

1.  It  was  a  charge  that  they  should  teach  no  doctrine  different  from  the  go-pel.  "That 
they  teach  no  other  doctrine."    (1)  This  implied  that  the  apostle's  doctrine  was  the  true 


10  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  1 1—20. 

standard  of  teaching  by  which  all  other  teaching  was  to  be  judged.  (2)  There  may  hare 
been  no  doctrinal  heresy  at  Ephesus ;  but  the  teaching,  being  of  a  morbid,  unedifying, 
speculative  character,  would  tend  to  reduce  the  warmth  of  "  the  first  love  "  of  Ephesian 
saints,  if  not  to  lead  to  serious  departures  from  the  faith.  (3)  Ministers  must  take 
special  care  that  no  false  doctrines  be  broached  in  the  Church  of  God.  2.  It  was  a 
charge  that  the  errorists  should  give  no  heed  to  fables  and  genealogies.  (1)  Fables. 
Evidently  rabbinical  fableB  and  fabrications  in  the  regions  of  history  and  doctrine.  The 
Talmud  is  full  of  them.  (2)  Endless  genealogies.  The  genealogies  of  the  Pentateuch 
were  actually  made  the  foundation  of  allegorical  interpretations  by  Jews  like  Philo,  who 
largely  influenced  their  countrymen.  There  may  have  been  a  disposition  likewise, 
on  the  part  of  Jews,  to  establish  their  genealogical  connection  with  Abraham,  as  if  the 
bond  of  a  physical  relationship  could  add  strength  to  that  firmer  bond  which  allies  all 
to  Abraham,  whether  they  are  Jews  or  Gentiles,  who  believe  in  Christ  (Gal.  iii.  29). 
3.  Consider  the  ground  upon  which  the  apostle  condemns  this  injurious  teaching.  "  Inas- 
much as  they  minister  questions,  rather  than  the  dispensation  of  God  which  is  in 
faith."  (1)  The  teaching  was  unprofitably  disputatious.  It  ministered  questions  not 
easily  answered,  and  which,  if  answered,  had  no  practical  bearing  upon  Christian  life. 
(2)  It  did  not  tend  to  promote  the  scheme  of  salvation  as  set  forth  by  the  apostles — 
"  the  dispensation  of  God  which  is  in  faith."  (a)  God's  dispensation  is  simply  his 
method  of  salvation,  as  unfolded  in  the  gospel  (Eph.  i.  10),  with  which  the  Apostle 
Paul  was  specially  entrusted  (1  Cor.  iv.  1).  (6)  This  dispensation  has  its  principle  in 
faith ;  unlike  the  fables  and  genealogies,  which  might  exercise  the  mind  or  the  imagina- 
tion, but  not  the  heart.  Faith  is  the  sphere  of  action  upon  which  the  dispensation 
turns.  (3)  The  apostle's  anxiety  to  check  this  false  teaching  at  Ephesus  had  evidently 
two  grounds,  (o)  This  rabbinical  teaching,  if  allowed  to  enter  into  the  training  of 
Gentile  congregations,  would  cause  Christianity  to  shrink  into  the  narrow  limits  of 
a  mere  Jewish  sect.  Judaism  might  thus  become  the  grave  of  Christianity,  (b)  It 
would  despiri tualize  the  Christian  Church,  and  rob  it  of  its  "  first  love,"  and  prepare 
tke  way  to  bitter  apostasy. — T.  C. 

Vers.  6 — 7. — Nature  of  the  charge  connected  with  the  fulfilment  of  God's  dispensa- 
tion. In  resisting  these  false  teachers,  Timothy  must  remember  the  true  scope  and 
design  of  the  practical  teaching  which  sets  forth  the  scheme  of  Divine  salvation 
for  man. 

I.  The  end  op  this  teaching  is  love.  1.  The  teaching,  as  opposed  to  "fables 
and  genealogies,"  is  of  the  nature  of  a  solemn  charge  or  practical  exhortation.  It  is 
not  (1)  the  Mosaic  Law,  nor  (2)  the  evangelical  law,  but  (3)  sound  doctrine  in  its.  pre- 
ceptive, and  therefore  practical  form.  2.  The  end  or  aim  of  it  is  love.  *'  The  end  of 
the  charge  is  love."  It  is  love  to  men,  not  to  God ;  for  the  charge  stands  in  contrast 
with  "  the  questionings  which  minister  strifes "  (2  Tim.  ii.  23).  Practical  religious 
teaching  has  a  tendency  to  unite  men  in  love.  (1)  It  is  hard  to  maintain  brotherly 
love  in  presence  of  active  differences  of  doctrine.  (2)  It  is  impossible  to  edify  without 
love;  for  "love  edifieth"  (1  Cor.  viii.  1),  as  speculations  and  contentions  cannot. 

II.  The  nature  or  the  love  which  is  belated  to  this  gospel  chabge.  It  is 
"  love  out  of  a  pure  heart,  and  of  a  good  conscience,  and  of  faith  unfeigned."  This  is  the 
threefold  foundation  on  which  it  rests.  1.  It  springs  out  of  a  pure  heart  as  its  inward 
seat.  (1)  Such  a  heart  is  purified  by  faith  (Acts  xv.  9).  (2)  Sprinkled  from  an  evil 
conscience  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  (3)  Directed  into  the  love  of  God  (2  Thess.  iii.  5). 
(4)  Inclined  to  God's  testimonies  (Pg.  cxix.  36).  (5)  Therefore  it  is  a  heart  pure  from 
■elfish  desires,  ignoble  aims,  and  sinister  policy.  The  love  springing  from  such  a  heart 
must  be  "without  dissimulation ; "  for  it  is  loving  with  a  pure  heart  fervently.  2.  It 
springs  from  a  good  conscience.  (1)  Such  a  conscience  is  made  good  by  the  sprinkling 
of  the  blood  of  Christ,  which  reconciles  us  to  God.  Thus  we  have  the  answer  of  a  good 
conscience  before  God.  (2)  It  is  purged  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God. 
(3)  Therefore  a  man  is  enabled  to  keep  a  conscience  void  of  offence  toward  God  and 
man ;  to  be  true  to  his  convictions  of  truth  and  duty,  and  to  respond  faithfully  to  every 
moral  obligation.  Love  springing  from  such  a  source  will  have  its  actings  wisely 
determined.  3.  It  springs  from  faith  unfeigned.  (1)  This  is  its  true  origin;  for  "faith 
wwketh  by  love,"  and  must  therefore  be  in  existence  before  love.     (2)  It  gives  reality 


oh.  1.1— 20. J  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  11 

and  power  to  love,  because  it  is  itself  not  the  pretence  of  faith,  hut  faith  in  reel  existence 
and  power.  There  was  thus  a  marked  contrast  with  the  life  of  the  false  teachers- 
corrupted  in  mind  (ch.  vi.  5),  seared  in  conscience  (ch.  iv.  2),  and  "  reprobate  con- 
cerning the  faith  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  8).  4.  Mark  the  order  of  grace  here  followed.  In  the 
order  of  nature,  faith  must  be  placed  first.  The  apostle  follows  the  order  of  practical 
working.  Furthest  down  in  man's  inner  nature  is  the  deep  well  of  a  purified  heart; 
then  the  love,  as  it  comes  forth  into  exercise,  must  be  arrested  on  its  way  by  a  good 
conscience,  to  receive  restraint  and  regulation ;  then,  to  sustain  the  vigour  of  love  ir> 
its  continuous  exercise,  there  must  be  faith  unfeigned,  grasping  the  promises  of  God, 
and  in  intimate  relation  to  things  not  seen. 

III.  The  evil  effects  op  swerving  from  this  threefold  foundation  of  love. 
"  From  which  things  some  having  swerved  have  turned  aside  to  vain  talking."  1.  The 
persons  referred  to  had  evidently  belonged,  if  they  did  not  still  belony  to,  the  Church  at 
Ephesus.  Timothy  could  not  otherwise  have  exercised  authority  over  them.  2.  The 
swerve  was  moral  in  its  nature,  but  it  would  have  intellectual  effects  of  an  injurious 
character.  How  often  does  the  heart  determine  the  bias  of  the  mind !  3.  Its  actual 
result  was  a  persistent  habit  of  vain  talking.  It  was  empty  babbling,  without  sense 
or  profit — about  mere  trifles,  to  the  neglect  of  weightier  matters  of  doctrine. 

IV.  The  presumptuous  ignorance  of  this  party.  "  Desiring  to  be  teachers  of  the 
Law,  not  understanding  either  what  they  say,  or  concerning  what  things  they  con- 
fidently affirm."  1.  It  is  no  new  fact  m  life  to  find  the  least  qualifiid  the  most 
ready  to  undertake  the  task  of  instruction.  They  were  ignorant  and  unlearned  men, 
who  were  only  able  to  wrest  the  Scriptures  to  their  own  destruction.  2.  Their 
ignorance  was  of  the  most  unquestionable  character;  for  they  neither  understood 
their  own  averments  or  arguments,  as  to  their  nature  and  drift,  nor  did  they  compre- 
hend the  things  concerning  which  they  were  so  ready  to  give  their  foolish  but  deliberate 
judgment.  (1)-  It  is  evident  they  did  not  reject  and  disparage  the  Mosaic  Law,  but 
rather  exalted  it  by  their  interpretations.  (2)  They  were  not  mere  Judaists  such  as 
the  apostle  contended  with  in  Galatia  and  elsewhere ;  for  they  are  not  charged  with  any 
attempt,  either  to  maintain  the  ancient  customs  or  to  bring  in  legal  observances  out  of 
their  proper  place.  (3)  They  rather,  as  misunderstanding  the  true  nature  and  design  of 
the  Law,  tried  to  work  up  a  compost  of  Judaic  and  Gnostic  elements,  which  explained 
the  Law  according  to  the  philosophic  views  of  the  East.  Therefore  their  theology  was 
marred  by  fanciful  allegorizings  of  the  Law,  which  eliminated  its  moral  element,  and  thus 
robbed  it  of  all  power  to  touch  the  heart  or  conscience  of  men.  (4)  The  case  in  hand 
illustrates  the  progress  of  error  in  the  Church.  The  incipient  Gnosticism  of  Ephesus 
gradually  developed  into  the  more  pronounced  Gnosticism  so  pointedly  condemned  by 
the  Apostle  John  in  his  First  Epistle. — T.  C. 

Vers.  8,  9. — The  nature  and  design  of  the  Law.  "  We  know  that  the  Law  is  good, 
if  a  man  use  it  lawfully."  This  passage  contains  the  last  recorded  utterance  of  the 
apostle  concerning  the  Law,  and  of  which  he  speaks  with  all  the  conscious  authority  of 
an  apostle.  He  asserts  the  goodness  of  the  Law — the  moral  Law,  not  the  ceremonial, 
which  was  now  disannulled,  for  the  context  refers  expressly  to  the  precepts  of  the 
Decalogue — and  this  goodness  is  manifest  if  you  keep  in  view  the  moral  end  for  which 
It  Was  given.  Perhaps  the  apostle  may  have  had  in  view  the  lax  moral  practice  of  the 
errorists  at  Ephesus. 

I.  The  lawful  use  of  the  Law.  Scripture  sets  forth  its  design  in  plain  language. 
1.  It  was  a  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Ghrist.  (Gal.  iii.  24.)  Thus  "  Christ  is  the  end  of 
the  Law  for  righteousness  "  (Bom.  x.  4).  2.  But  it  only  brings  us  to  Christ  as  it  reveals 
to  us  our  imperfections  and  our  sins.  "  For  by  the  Law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin  " 
(Bom.  iii.  20).  It  was,  indeed,  "  added  because  of  transgressions  "  (Gal.  iii.  19).  The 
Law  shows  us  our  sinfulness,  and  drives  us  to  the  Saviour.  It  thus  "  shuts  us  up  to 
faith  "(Gal.  iii.  23). 

II.  The  unlawful  use  of  the  Law.  1.  To  make  it  the  occasion  of  endless  logo- 
machies— of  vain  talking,  of  "  strivings  about  the  Law."  2.  To  seek  justification  by 
obedience  to  its  precepts.  3.  To  strive  for  the  attainment  of  holiness  by  a  use  of  the 
Law,  interpretedT  not  in  its  plain  sense,  but  with  meanings  imposed  upon  it  by 
mystical  allegorizings  and  theosophic  culture.     The  errorists  at  Ephesus  were  no 


18  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  l  1— 20. 

Pharisaic  legalists  or  mere  Judaists,  but  persons  ignorant  of  the  true  nature  and  design 
of  the  Law ;  who  abstained  from  things  lawful  and  good,  and  were  yet  morally  corrupt 
(Titus  i.  10 ;  Rev.  ii.  9, 14,  20,  24). 

III.     GltOUND    Or    THE    DISTINCTION    BETWEEN    ITS    LAWFUL    AND    UNLAWFUL    USB. 

"  Knowing  -this,  that  the  Law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man,  but  for  the  lawless."  1. 
The  Law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man.  (1)  This  does  not  mean  that  a  righteous 
man — that  is,  a  man  right  with  God,  whose  experience  has  made  the  principles  of 
righteousness  habitual  with  him — has  no  relation  whatever  to  the  Law.  (a)  Because 
the  Law  had  relation  to  (a)  Adam  in  innocence,  who  had  the  Law  written  in  his  heart ; 
(0)  to  Abraham,  who  was  a  righteous  man ;  (y)  to  David,  who  was  a  righteous  man ; 
(S)  and  to  all  the  Old  Testament  saints ;  («)  it  had  even  relation  to  Jesus  Christ  him- 
s  If,  who  was  "made  under  the  Law  " — the  very  "  Law  that  was  in  his  heart "  (Ps.  xL 
8),  of  which  he  was  "  the  end  for  righteousness"  (Rom.  x.  4),  because  he  came  to  fulfil 
it  (Matt.  v.  1(B).  (6)  Because  the  Law  has  relation  to  believers  under  the  Christian 
dispensation ;  for  this  very  apostle  enforces  the  obligation  to  obey  it,  specifying  six  of  its 
enactments  (Rom.  xiii.  8,  9 ;  Eph.  vi.  1).  James  says  that  believers  who  show  respect 
of  persons  become  "  transgressors  of  the  Law."  Therefore,  when  the  apostle  says  "  the 
Law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man,"  he  does  not  mean  that  the  righteous  man  is  no 
longer  bound  to  obey  it.  He  delights  in  it ;  he  actually  serves  it  (Rom.  vii.  25).  If  any 
should  say  that  the  apostle  means  that  the  righteous  do  not  need  the  Law  to  direct  them, 
we  answer  that  they  might  as  well  say  they  do  not  need  the  Scripture  to  direct  them,  as  the 
Law  is  already  in  their  hearts.  How  is  a  righteous  man  to  know  sin  but  by  the  Law  ? 
"  For  by  the  Law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  (2)  His  statement  has  an  abstract  cast, 
like  our  Lord's  saying, "  I  am  not  come  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance." 
(a)  The  Law  was  not  made  because  of  righteous,  but  because  of  wicked,  men.  "  It 
was  added  because  of  transgressions."  It  is  similar  to  the  statement  of  the  apostle  con- 
cerning the  nine  graces  of  the  Spirit — ''against  such  there  is  no  Law  "(Gal.  v.  23). 
The  Law  does  not,  cannot  condemn,  any  one  of  these  graces.  (V)  The  Law  was  never 
made  for  the  righteous  man  in  the  sense  in  which  it  was  made  for  the  unrighteous 
man,  to  condemn  him ;  for  the  righteous  man  is  redeemed  from  the  curse  of  the  Law 
(Gal.  ill.  13).  Its  penalty  cannot  affect  him ;  its  burden  does  not  weigh  him  down ;  its 
terrors  do  not  bring  him  into  bondage.  On  the  contrary,  he  delights  in  it  as  he  serves 
it.  Thus,  while  in  one  sense  the  righteous  man  delights  in  it  and  serves  it,  he  is  in 
another  sense  "not  under  the  Law,  but  under  grace  "  (Rom.  vi  14).  It  may  be  further 
observed  that  if  Adam  had  continued  in  his  original  righteousness,  the  Law  of  Sinai 
would  never  have  been  given  to  man.  "  It  was  added  because  of  transgressions."  2.  The 
Law  is  made  for  the  wicked.  They  are  described  according  to  the  two  tables  of  the 
Decalogue.  Those  in  the  first  table  go  in  pairs.  (1)  The  lawless  and  unruly.  These 
terms  describe  opposition  to  the  Law — the  one  in  its  more  subjective,  the  other  in  its 
more  objective  side ;  the  one  representing,  perhaps,  a  more  passive,  the  other  a  more 
active  hostility  to  Law.  (2)  The  ungodly  and  sinful.  These  terms  describe  the  opposi- 
tion to  God — the  one  without  reverence  for  him,  the  other  living  in  defiance  of  him.  (3) 
The  unholy  and  profane.  These  terms  describe  the  manifestation  of  the  wicked  and 
godless  spirit  toward  the  Name  or  ordinances  of  God.  They  touch  upon  the  violation  of 
the  first  four  commandments.  (4)  Those  in  the  second  table  begin  with  (a)  sins  against 
the  fifth  commandment:  "smiters  of  fathers  and  smiters  of  mothers;"  (6)  sins  against  the 
sixth :  "  man-slayers ; "  (c)  sins  against  the  seventh :  "  fornicators,  sodomites ; "  (d)  sins 
against  the  eighth:  "men-stealers" — this  Bpecial  form  of  transgression  being  selected 
because  the  theft  of  a  man  himself  is  a  far  more  serious  offence  than  the  theft  of  his 
goods;  (e)  sins  against  the  ninth:  "for  liars,  for  perjurors" — the  one  being  a  great 
advance  in  enormity  upon  the  other.  (/)  Strange  that  the  apostle  does  not  enumerate 
the  tenth,  which  operated  upon  himself  so  powerfully  (Rom.  vii.  7).  Perhaps  it  wa» 
designed  by  the  inclusive  reference  no  longer  to  the  committers  of  sin,  but  to  the  sine 
themselves :  "  And  if  there  be  any  [other  thing  that  is  contrary  to  the  sound  instruction, 
according  to  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  God  which  was  committed  to  my  trust."  Thie 
language  implies  (1)  that  the  list  is  not  designed  to  be  exhaustive  of  the  various  forme 
of  evil  in  the  world ;  (2)  that  the  Law  and  the  gospel  are  in  perfect  harmony  respecting 
what  is  sin ;  (3)  that  the  depign  of  the  gospel  is  to  set  forth  the  glory  of  God*s  mercy, 
goodness  and  love ;  (4)  that  the  gospel  is  a  precious  deposit  committed  to  human  hand** 


ail.  1—20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  13 

to  be  dispensed  for  the  benefit  of  the  race  of  man.    The  apostle  did  not  shrink  from 
such  a  solemn  trust,  but  rather  rejoiced  in  it. — T.  C. 

Vers.  12, 13. — Ejaculation  of  thankfulness  for  this  high  trust.  Though  he  appears  to 
turn  aside  for  a  moment  from  the  false  teachers,  he  is  still  carrying  out  his  design  to 
inspire  Timothy  with  a  proper  view  of  the  true  nature  and  importance  of  the  gospel. 

I.  The  subject-matter  of  his  thanksgiving.  "  1  thank  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord, 
that  enabled  me,  for  that  he  counted  me  faithful,  appointing  me  to  the  ministry."  1. 
The  Lord  gave  him  strength  for  his  work.  "  He  enabled  me."  He  gave  him  all  his 
intellectual  abilities,  all  his  capacity  for  winning  men  to  the  truth,  all  his  firmness, 
endurance,  and  patience  in  preaching  the  gospel.  2.  The  Lord  gave  him  his  appoint- 
ment to  the  ministry.  (1)  The  apostle  did  not  thrust  himself  into  it,  nor  take  this 
honour  to  himself,  neither  was  he  called  unto  it  by  men.  (2)  It  was  the  Lord  himself 
who  made  a  minister  of  him ;  for  the  apostle  speaks  of  "  the  ministry  which  I  received  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  to  testify  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  "  (Acts  xx.  24).  The  ministry 
here  signifies  the  more  humble  service,  rather  than  the  apostleship ;  for  he  refers  rather 
to  the  work  to  be  done  than  to  the  prerogatives  of  his  office.  (3)  The  Lord  counted  him 
faithful  for  the  work;  not  that  the  faithfulness  was  a  foreseen  quality  which  became 
the  ground  of  his  call  to  office,  but  that  he  counted  him  faithful  because  he  made  him 
so,  for  he  speaks  of  himself  as  "  one  who  hath  obtained  mercy  of  the  Lord  to  be  faithful " 
(1  Cor.  vii.  25).  Faithfulness  must  be  the  pre-eminent  quality  of  the  steward  of  God 
(1  Cor.  iv.  2). 

II.  His  thanksgiving  ib  greatly  enhanced  by  the  thought  of  his  deep  un- 
wobthiness.  "  Who  was  before  a  blasphemer,  and  a  persecutor,  and  a  doer  of  outrage." 
These  are  words  of  bitter  self-accusation.  1.  He  had  leen  a  blasphemer.  He  spoke  evil 
himself  of  the  Name  of  Jesus,  and  compelled  others  to  follow  his  example  (Acts  xxvi. 
11).  This  was  the  highest  sin  that  could  be  committed  against  God.  2.  He  had  been  a 
persecutor.  "  I  persecuted  this  way  unto  the  death,  binding  and  delivering  into  prisons 
both  men  and  women"  (Acts  xxii.  4).  He  "breathed  out  threatenings  and  slaughter 
against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord"  (Acts  ix.  1).  He  not  only  spoke  evil  of  Christ,  but 
persecuted  Christ  in  his  members.  3.  He  had  been  a  doer  of  outrage.  Not  content 
merely  with  reproachful  words,  he  broke  out  into  deeds  of  violence.  His  conduct  was 
contumelious  and  injurious  in  the  last  degree. — T.  C. 

Ver.  13. — The  Lord's  mercy  contrasted  with  his  own  want  of  it.  Great  as  his  sin  had 
been,  he  became  a  subject  of  Divine  mercy. 

I.  The  Lord's  mercy  to  him.  "I  obtained  mercy."  1.  The  mercy  included  the 
pardon  of  his  great  wickedness.  It  was  mercy  unsought  for  as  well  as  unmerited.  2. 
It  was  mercy  with  the  grace  of  apostleship  added  to  it. 

II.  The  ground  and  reason  of  this  mercy.  "  Because  I  did  it  ignorantly  in  unbe- 
lief." 1.  The  true  ground  of  mercy  is  nothing  whatever  in  man,  but  the  compassion 
of  Ood  himself  (Titus  iii.  5).  2.  The  apostle  does  not  signify  that  he  had  any  claim  to 
God's  mercy,  for  he  calls  himself  in  the  next  verse  "  the  very  chief  of  sinners."  3.  He 
does  not  mean  to  lessen  the  enormity  of  his  guilt,  but  sets  it  forth,  in  all  its  attending 
circumstances,  as  not  being  such  as  excluded  him  from  the  pale  of  mercy,  because  he 
had  not  sinned  against  his  own  convictions.  (1)  He  did  it  ignorantly ;  but  ignorance 
was  no  excuse  where  there  were  the  means  of  knowledge ;  and  unbelief,  out  of  which  the 
ignorance  springs,  could  not  be  accepted  as  an  excuse,  since  he  had  heard  the  statement 
of  Stephen.  Besides,  all  sins  spring  from  ignorance,  and  are  aggravated  by  unbelief. 
(2)  But  he  did  not  sin  wilfully  against  light  and  conscience,  and  so  commit  the  sin 
against  the  Holy  Ghost.  (3)  He  who  has  compassion  on  the  ignorant  had  compassion 
upon  him,  when  he  found  him  an  ignorant  and  blinded  zealot.  Thus  were  confirmed  the 
words  of  Christ,  that  every  sin  against  the  Son  of  man  will  be  forgiven,  so  long  as  there 
is  no  blasphemy  against  the  Spirit  (Matt.  xii.  31).  The  apostle  had  not  deliberately  set 
at  nought  the  counsel  of  God,  but  stood  on  exactly  the  same  ground  with  those  sinners 
converted  at  Pentecost,  who  had  acted  "  in  ignorance "  (Acts  iii.  17).  The  sin  was 
great  in  both  cases,  but  it  was  not  unpardonable.  (4)  There  is  nothing  in  the  apostle's 
statement  to  justify  the  opinion  that  those  who  have  never  heard  of  Christ  will  be  for- 
given on  account  of  their  ignorance.     Our  Lord's  words  warrant  the  expectation  thai 


14  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  1.1—20. 

there  will  be  %  mitigation,  but  not  a  remission,  of  punishment  in  such  cases.  "  He  that 
knew  not,  and  did  commit  things  worthy  of  stripes,  shall  be  beaten  with  few  stripes  " 
(Luke  xii.  48).  The  language  in  both  passages  justifies  charitable  judgment*  even 
respecting  persecutors. — T.  C. 

Ver.  14. — The  superabounding  grace  of  the  Lord  to  (he  apostle.  He  now  explains 
how  fully  he  received  of  God's  mercy  in  spite  of  his  unbelief. 

I.  The  mercy  of  the  Lord  overflowed  in  grace  on  God's  side.  "But  the 
grace  of  our  Lord  superabounded."  His  salvation  was  of  free  grace.  He  had  done 
nothing  to  deserve  it,  but  rather  everything  to  forfeit  his  claim  upon  it.  It  was  grace 
first  that  made  him  a  Christian,  and  then  made  him  an  apostle. 

II.  The  mercy  op  the  Lord  overflowed  in  faith  and  love  on  man's  side. 
"  With  faith  and  love  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  1.  These  two  graces  are  the  fruits  of 
grace.  When  grace  abounds,  they  will  necessarily  abound.  2.  Faith  stands  in  opposi- 
tion to  his  old  unbelief.  It  is  that  grace  which  receives  every  blessing  from  Christ,  and 
gives  him  all  the  glory,  bringing  peace,  joy,  and  comfort  into  the  heart,  and  ending  in 
eternal  life.  3.  Love  stands  in  opposition  to  his  former  rage  and  cruelty.  He  now  has 
love  to  God  and  man.  4.  His  faith  and  love  find  their  true  spring  in  Jesus  Christ,  as 
in  him  all  fulness  dwells. — T.  C. 

Ver.  15. — The  summary  of  the  gospel.     This  statement  is  grounded  on  his  own 

experience  of  God's  saving  mercy. 

I.  The  truth  and  certainty  of  the  gospel  eevelation.  "  Faithful  is  the  Word, 
and  worthy  of  all  acceptation."  Five  times  does  this  phrase  occur  in  the  pastoral 
Epistles.  It  was  a  sort  of  formula  or  watchword  of  the  early  Christian  Churches.  1.  The 
doctrine  of  salvation  is  entitled  to  all  credit.  It  is  certain  that  Christ  came  to  save 
sinners.  2.  It  is  to  be  received  by  all  sorts  of  people,  with  heartiness  and  gladness,  as 
a  doctrine  suitable  to  the  necessities  of  all  men.  With  what  zeal  it  ought,  therefore,  to 
be  set  before  men ! 

n.  The  substance  of  the  gospel  revelation.  "That  Christ  Jesus  came  into 
the  world  to  save  sinners;  of  whom  I  am  chief."  1.  This  language  implies  Christ 's 
pre-existence.  He  left  the  glory  which  he  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was 
(John  xvi.  28).  2.  It  implies  that  he  came  voluntarily  of  his  own  free  will.  It  is 
true  that  God's  love  is  manifest  in  the  sending  of  Jesus,  but  Christ's  love  is  equally 
manifest  in  his  advent.  It  was  necessary  that  he  should  come  into  the  world,  because 
he  could  not  otherwise  suffer  and  die  in  our  stead.  The  fact  that  he  came  as  man  in 
the  fulness  of  time  implies  that  the  mere  forth-putting  of  spiritual  power  from  heaven 
did  not  suffice.  A  man's  work  had  to  be  done  that  God's  mercy  might  reach  us.  3.  It 
suggests  the  true  design  of  his  coming.  "  To  save  sinners."  (1)  This  implies  the  revelation 
of  God's  will  to  man.  (2)  The  impetration  of  salvation  through  Christ's  suffering  and 
obedience.  (3)  The  application  of  the  salvation  to  the  objects  of  it.  (4)  That  sinners 
need  salvation,  and  are  lost  without  it.  (5)  That  the  greatest  sinners  have  no  right  to 
despair  of  salvation — "  of  whom  I  am  chief."  (a)  The  apostle  speaks  of  himself  in  the 
present  tense,  not  in  the  past,  for  he  still  feels  himself  to  be  but  a  believing  sinner.  (6) 
The  language  recalls  his  frequent  allusions  to  his  persecutions  of  the  Church  of  God. 
God  had  forgiven  him,  but  he  could  never  forgive  himself.  He  places  himself  in  the 
very  front  rank  of  transgressors  because  of  his  share  in  the  devastation  of  the  Church, 
(c)  The  language  implies  his  deep  humility.  It  was  an  element  in  his  spiritual  great- 
ness that  he  had  such  a  sense  of  his  own  sin.  He  calls  himself  elsewhere  "  less  than 
the  least  of  all  saints  "  (Eph.  iii.  8).  (d)  It  is  well  to  be  mindful  of  our  sin  in  a  way 
of  godly  sorrow,  as  a  means  of  keeping  us  humble  and  thankful  for  the  rich  grace  of  the 
gospel  dispensed  to  us. — T.  C. 

Vers.  16,  17. — The  apostle  an  example  of  the  Divine  long-suffering  to  all  ages. 
There  was  an  economical  purpose  in  the  salvation  of  the  Apostle  Paul. 

I.  The  exercise  of  the  Lord's  long-suffering  toward  the  apostm.  "How- 
beit  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy."  1.  The  mercy  takes  the  form  of  long-suffering ; 
for  the  Lord  bore  long  with  the  ways  of  this  fierce  persecutor  of  the  saints,  when  he 
might  have  cut  his  career  short  in  judgment.    2,  It  took  the  form  of  positive  deliverance 


oh.  1. 1—20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  16 

from  guilt  and  sin  and  death.    How  often  "  the  long-suffering  of  the  Lord  is  to  usward 
salvation"  (2  Pet.  iii.  9)  ! 

IL  The  design  of  this  remarkable  exhibition  of  mercy.  "  That  in  me  as 
the  chief  Jesus  Christ  might  show  forth  all  long-suffering,  for  a  pattern  to  them  who 
should  hereafter  believe  on  him  to  life  everlasting."  1.  The  long-suffering  is  exercised 
by  the  Lord  himself.  It  is  he  who  is  wounded  in  the  persecutions  of  his  members. 
"  Saul,  Saul  I  why  persecutest  thou  me  ?  "  Yet  it  is  he  who  shows  mercy.  2.  The 
greatest  persecutors  may  not  despair  of  mercy.  The  Lord  will  tarry  long  with  them 
if  peradventure  they  may  repent  and  turn  to  him.  3.  The  case  of  Paul — "  the  chief 
of  sinners" — ought  to  encourage  sinners  of  every  class  and  sort  to  exercise  hope  and 
trust  in  the  Lord,  as  well  as  to  meet  the  misgivings  of  those  who  think  they  have 
sinned  too  much  to  warrant  the  expectation  that  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  upon  them. 
4.  Trust  in  Jesus  Christ  necessarily  brings  with  it  eternal  life.  There  is  nothing  needed 
but  faith  for  this  purpose.    "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life." 

III.  Ascription  of  praise  and  thankfulness  to  God  for  his  meroy.  1.  Con- 
sider the  titles  by  which  Ood  is  addressed.  "  Now  to  the  King  of  the  aaes,  incorruptible, 
invisible,  the  only  God."  (1)  He  is  King  of  the  ages,  as  his  kingdom  is  called  the 
kingdom  of  all  the  ages  (Pa.  cxlv.  13);  because  as  God,  knowing  the  end  from  the 
beginning,  he  fixes  the  periods  or  stages  of  the  development  through  which  this  world 
is  destined  to  pass,  shaping  all  events  according  to  his  pleasure,  and  making  all  things 
work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  him.  (2)  Incorruptible ;  because  "  he  only 
hath  immortality"  (ch.  vi.  16).  (3)  Invisible;  for  no  man  hath  seen  him  at  any 
time,  as  he  dwells  in  light  inaccessible.  (4)  The  only  God ;  in  opposition  to  the  false 
gods  of  the  heathen,  or  to  the  multitudes  of  angels  and  principalities  and  powers.  2. 
Consider  the  doxology.  "  Unto  him  be  honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever."  (1)  They 
already  belong  to  him  alone.  (2)  They  will  belong  to  him  to  all  eternity.  (3)  The 
thought  of  the  overruling  wisdom  and  mercy  and  goodness  of  God  in  his  case  leads  to 
this  devout  acknowledgment. — T.  C. 

Vers.  18 — 20. — The  solemn  charge  to  Timothy.  The  apostle  here  returns  to  the  duty 
of  directing  Timothy. 

I.  It  is  necessary  fob  even  good  ministers  to  be  reminded  of  theib  duties 
and  responsibilities.  "  This  charge  I  commit  to  thee,  my  son  Timothy."  1.  The 
charge  may  have  indirectly  alluded  to  the  commands  already  given,  but  refers  imme- 
diately to  the  good  warfare  in  which  he  is  to  war  as  the  fulfilment  of  his  calling.  2. 
It  is  committed  to  him  like  a  precious  deposit  to  be  guarded  and  kept.  How  anxious 
the  apostle  is  that  Timothy  should  be  faithful  to  his  position  and  his  responsibilities ! 

II.  It  is  a  solemn  thing  to  invoke  the  memory  of  prophecies  or  pious  anti- 
cipations in  aid  of  a  difficult  career.  "  According  to  the  prophecies  that  went 
before  on  thee,  that  by  them  thou  mightest  war  a  good  warfare."  1.  The  allusion  is  to 
prophecies  uttered  probably  at  his  ordination  by  the  prophets  of  the  Church,  foretelling 
his  future  zeal  and  success.  Such  prophetic  intimations  were  not  uncommon  in  the 
primitive  Church.  We  trace  them  at  Jerusalem  (Acts  xi.  27,  28),  at  Antioch  (Acts 
xiii.  1),  at  Corinth  (1  Cor.  xiv.),  at  Csesarea  (Acts  xxi.  8 — 10).  2.  Such  prophecies 
would  act  with  a  stimulating,  self-protective  power  upon  a  temperament  like  that  of 
Timothy,  inclined,  perhaps,  to  softness  and  timidity.  They  would  encourage  him  in 
the  midst  of  his  present  perils  and  trials  at  Ephesus.  3.  It  is  a  serious  thing  to 
disappoint  the  hopes  of  the  pious. 

IH.  The  puepose  contemplated  by  the  command  as  well  as  its  immediate 
subject.  "  That  by  them  " — that  is,  in  virtue  of  them — "  thou  mightest  war  a  good  war- 
fare." The  figure  is  a  familiar  one  with  the  apostle  (Eph.  vi.  12 ;  2  Cor.  x.  3,  4  ;  2  Tim. 
ii.  3).  1.  Christian  life,  and  above  all  that  of  a  minister,  is  a  good  warfare.  (1)  It  is 
good  because  it  is  against  evil — the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil ;  (2)  because  it  is 
directed  toward  the  good  of  men ;  (3)  because  it  is  for  a  good  end,  the  glory  of  God. 
2.  It  is  to  be  carried  on  (1)  under  Christ  as  Captain  (Heb.  ii.  10) ;  (2)  with  watch- 
fulness and  sobriety  (1  Cor.  xvi.  13 ;  1  Thess.  v.  6) ;  (3)  with  an  enduring  hardness 
(2  Tim.  ii.  3, 10) ;  (4)  with  self-denial  (1  Cor.  ix.  25—27) ;  (5)  with  prayer  (Eph.  vi.  18). 

IV.  The  weapons  in  this  warfabe  are  faith  and  a  good  conscience.  "Hold 
ing  faith  and  a  good  conscience."    The  two  must  go  together,  but  faith  must  necessarily 


16  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh  l  1—20 

go  first.  You  cannot  have  a  good  conscience  without  faith,  nor  faith  in  its  reality  with- 
out a  good  conscience.  There  must  be  faith  in  your  teaching,  conscience  in  your  actions. 
1.  Faith.  There  is  "  the  shield  of  faith."  It  is  not  the  mere  doctrine  of  faith,  but  the 
grace  of  faith.  It  is  by  this  faith  we  overcome  (1)  the  world  (1  John  vk  4,  5) ;  (2) 
the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  24) ;  (3)  the  devil  (1  John  ii.  14) ;  (4)  everything  that  exalts  itself 
(2  Cor.  x.  6) ;  (5)  death  and  the  grave  (1  Cor.  xv.  64,  55).  A  mere  intellectual  belie! 
could  not  produce  such  results ;  for  "  the  devils  believe  and  tremble."  2.  A  good  conscience . 
(1)  It  is  good  because  it  is  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  Christ  (Heb.  ix.  14).  (2)  Be- 
cause it  helps  to  keep  the  faith  in  purity  (1  Tim.  iii.  9).  (3)  Christians  ought  to  seek 
the  approval  of  their  consciences  in  all  things  (Acts  xxiv.  16).  (4)  Its  testimony  ought 
to  be  a  source  of  joy  (2  Cor.  i.  12  ;  1  John  iii.  21).  (5)  Ministers  ought  always  to  com- 
mend themselves  to  the  consciences  of  their  people  (2  Cor.  iv.  2). 

V.  The  woeful  shipwreck  of  conscience.  "  Which  some  having  put  away  con- 
cerning faith  have  made  shipwreck."  The  figure  is  a  nautical  one.  When  the  cargo  or 
ballast  of  a  good  conscience  is  tossed  overboard,  the  ship  becomes  unmanageable,  and  is 
easily  shipwrecked.  "Some"  at  Ephesus  resolutely  stifled  the  admonitions  of  con- 
science, and  thus  turned  faith  into  a  mere  matter  of  speculation,  with  no  influence 
whatever  upon  their  practice.  1.  These  persons  made  shipwreck  of  the  doctrine  of  faith  ; 
for  they  held  that  the  resurrection  is  past  already  (2  Tim.  ii  18).  2.  If  they  mads 
shipwreck  of  the  grace  of  faith,  it  may  not  have  been  a  total  shipwreck;  for  the  discipline 
imposed  upon  them  by  the  apostle  was  for  the  saving  of  the  spirit,  "  not  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  flesh  "  (2  Cor.  v.  5).  3.  The  apostle's  method  of  dealing  with  these  offenders. 
"  Of  whom  are  Hymenseus  and  Alexander ;  whom  I  delivered  unto  Satan,  that  they  may 
be  taught  not  to  blaspheme."  (1)  Hymenseus  was  almost  certainly  the  same  as  the 
impugner  of  a  future  resurrection  (2  Tim.  ii.  17) ;  and  Alexander  was  probably,  but 
not  so  certainly,  the  same  as  Alexander  the  coppersmith  (2  Tim.  iv.  14),  who  was  a  reso- 
lute personal  enemy  of  the  apostle.  (2)  The  apostle  delivered  them  unto  Satan,  which 
seems  to  have  included*  (a)  a  solemn  excommunication  from  the  Church,  carried  out  no 
doubt  by  the  Church  at  the  apostle's  command ;  and  (6)  the  infliction  of  bodily  disease. 
Cases  of  the  exercise  of  this  terrible  apostolic  power  are  those  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira, 
Elymas,  and  the  incestuous  person  at  Corinth.  (3)  It  was  not  an  irrevocable  sentence, 
for  its  remission  depended  upon  the  return  of  the  offenders  to  faith  and  repentance. 
"  That  they  may  be  taught  through  chastisement  not  to  blaspheme."  The  design  was 
the  recovery  of  the  offenders ;  but  neither  this  Epistle  nor  the  next  throws  any  light 
upon  the  ultimate  effect  of  the  severe  discipline  inflicted  by  the  apostle. — T.  C. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  Divine  benediction.  "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace,  from  God  our 
Father  and  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  This  is  a  trinity  of  blessing.  The  gospel  is  to  be 
preached  as  a  new  life.  This  contrasts  with  vain  jangling  in  the  sixth  verse.  Some 
had  swerved,  or  literally  turned  aside,  as  an  arrow  that  misses  the  mark.  Paul  speaks  of 
"  questions,  rather  than  godly  edifying  which  is  in  faith."  And  there  are  questions 
mysterious,  questions  curious,  which  unregenerated  hearts  may  discuss  to  the  hindrance 
of  true  religion.  This  salutation  of  the  young  apostle  begins,  therefore,  with  a  high 
spiritual  tone :  "  Grace,  mercy,  peace." 

L  Who  the  gifts  were  fbom.  "God  our  Father  and  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." 
But  in  the  first  verse  Paul  speaks  of  God  as  our  Saviour.  Notice  this ;  it  is  peculiar, 
and  may  keep  us  from  confining  ideas  of  pity  and  tenderness  to  Christ  alone.  God  is 
the  Author  of  salvation.  Be  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Here,  then,  we 
come  to  the  Fountain-head  of  the  river  of  grace.  Paul  cannot  give  grace,  mercy,  and 
peace ;  they  are  from  "  God  our  Father  and  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Paul  was  the 
ambassador  of  the  gospel,  not  the  author  of  it;  •  preacher,  not  a  priest.  The  priest 
never  dies,  because  proud  human  nature  never  dies.  Men  like  to  say, "  through  us."  In 
after  years,  when  Paul  was  dead,  there  might  have  come  so-pe  temptation  to  Timothy 
to  say,  "  I  derived  my  apostolate  from,  I  stood  next  to,  him."  But  a  salutation  is  not  a 
consecration. 

IL  What  are  the  gifts  themselves  ?  Emphatically  Christian  gifts.  The  Roman 
motto  would  have  been,  "  Courage,  skill,  force."  The  Athenian  motto  would  have  been, 
"  Pleasure,  beauty,  philosophy."  1.  Grace.  God's  favour.  The  beautiful  Divine  nature 
revealing  itself  on  the  cross  as  forgiveness,  and  in  a  life  of  tenderness,  pity,  and  holiness  to 


ca.i.i— 20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  17 

which  the  Christian  is  to  be  conformed.  Grace  forgives  and  grace  renews.  It  is  a  larga 
word.  It  carries  at  its  heart  all  that  we  mean  by  moral  loveliness  and  gracefulness.  It 
is  the  fulfilment  of  the  ancient  prayer,  "  Let  the  beauty,  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon 
us."  2.  Mercy.  What  a  picture  of  cruelty  we  see  in  the  Eoman  age,  with  its  amphi- 
theatres, its  gladiators,  its  horrors  on  a  Roman  holiday,  and  its  slave  quarters  1  No 
hospitals  for  the  sick,  no  asylums  for  the  poor  and  needy.  "  Mercy. "  The  cross  meant 
mercy.  The  parables  meant  mercy.  The  prayer  was  fulfilled,  "Lord,  show  us  the 
Father."  8.  Peace.  The  Jews  had  their  disputations  about  eatings  and  drinkings  and 
genealogies.  Their  Church  was  alive,  only  with  vigorous  disputation.  The  gospel  meant 
true  peace — peace,  not  of  condition,  but  of  conscience.  Ever  must  it  be  so.  Peace  with 
God  1  Peace  with  our  brethren !  Peace  within  ourselves  1  So  the  Saviour's  legacy  was 
realized :  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you :  not  as  the  world  giveth, 
give  I  unto  you." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6. — The  vital  end  of  religion.  "  Now  the  end  of  the  commandment  is  charity.'' 
When  we  know  the  Divine  end  or  purpose,  we  get  light  on  all  that  leads  to  that 
end.  Charity,  or  love  that  is  like  God's  own  love,  is  the  end  of  all.  Religious 
principle  in  its  root  and  stem  is  to  blossom  into  the  beauty  of  Christ-like  character. 
Christianity  is  a  truth,  that  it  may  be  a  life.  It  is  not  to  be  mere  doctrine,  or  mere 
ritual.  We  may  be  fiery  disputants  without  being  faithful  soldiers.  We  may  even  be 
workers  in  the  vineyard,  without  the  faith  which  worketh  by  love.  Ecclesiasticism  is 
not  necessarily  religion.  There  may  be  Church  uniformity,  Church  harmony,  and 
aesthetic  ceremonial,  and  yet,  so  far  as  Divine  life  is  concerned,  there  may  be  "  no  breath 
at  all  in  the  midst  of  it."    Let  us  confine  ourselves  to  the  first  word. 

I.  Charity  is  higher  than  uniformity.  With  Constantino  Christianity  meant 
uniformity,  with  Hildebrand  it  meant  supremacy.  But  in  its  spirituality  and  simplicity 
the  gospel  remains  the  same  in  all  ages.  We  are  to  live  Christ ;  and  to  live  Christ  is 
to  live  in  love,  as  Christ  also  loved  us,  and  gave  himself  for  us.  Ecclesiasticism  is  often 
a  system  of  severe  outward  drill,  an  obedience  to  outward  rite  and  cult.  So  the  Romish 
Church  in  Spain,  centuries  ago,  forcibly  converted  the  Moors  by  dashing  holy  water  in 
their  faces,  and  so  admitted  them  into  the  communion  of  the  Church.  The  gospel 
cannot  be  spread  by  a  rough-and-ready  "  multitudinism  "  like  that.  It  must  begin  in 
personal  faith,  and  work  in  the  spirit  of  love. 

IL  Chabity  finds  its  image  in  God.  We  need  not  ask  what  this  love  is.  For  we 
have  seen  it  incarnated  in  the  words  and  deeds  of  the  Christ,  and  in  his  sufferings  for 
"  our  sakes  "  upon  the  cross.  1.  It  is  not  the  selfish  love  which  gives  affection  where  it 
receives  affection,  and  turns  even  a  gift  into  barter  and  exchange.  2.  It  is  not  the  costless 
love  which  will  be  an  almoner  ol  bounty  where  there  is  no  personal  self-denial  and 
suffering ;  but  it  gives  itself.  3.  It  is  not  the  love  of  a  passing  mood,  which  ministers  in 
affectionate  ways  in  times  of  high-wrought  emotion ;  but  a  love  which  is  full  of  forbear- 
ance with  our  faults,  and  is  triumphant  over  our  faithlessness.  So  the  end  of  the  com- 
mandment is  worthy  of  the  God  who  gives  the  commandment.  Like  himself,  it  is  charity. 
And  we  have  reached  the  highest  vision-point  in  Revelation,  when  we  see  in  its  sublime 
teaching's,  not  mere  commandments  which  may  be  arbitrary,  but  an  unfolding  of  the 
nature  of  God.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  5. Life's  inner  springs.    "  Out  of  a  pure  heart."    This  is  the  soil  in  which  the 

heavenly  grace  grows,  and  this  soil  is  essential  to  the  purity  and  beauty  of  the  grace.  It 
is  not  enough  to  plant  the  seed ;  we  must  till  and  nourish  the  soil. 

I.  The  heart  is  the  testing-place  of  what  we  like.  Here  I  would  give 
emphasis  to  the  fact  that  "  the  good  man  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart  brings 
forth  good  things."  There  must  be  passion  in  all  true  life.  As  Mr.  Ruskin  truly  says, 
"  The  entire  object  of  true  education  is  to  make  people  not  merely  do  the  right  things, 
but  enjoy  the  right  things  ;  not  merely  industrious,  but  to  love  industry ;  not  merely 
learned,  but  to  love  learning ;  not  merely  pure,  but  to  love  purity ;  not  merely  just,  but 
to  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness.  Taste  is'not  only  a  part  and  index  of  morality ; 
it  is  the  only  morality.  The  first  and  last  and  closest  trial-question  to  any  living  crea- 
te jg What  do  you  like  ?    Tell  me  what  you  like,  and  I'll  tell  you  what  you  are." 

Exactly!  So  says  the  gospel.  "Out  of  the  heart  are  the  issues  of  life; "  "As  a  man 
i.  timothy.  o 


16  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.i.1— 2<>- 

thmketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."     This  is  a  true  teaching,  and  may  open  up  a  new  view  of 
moral  and  spiritual  life  to  the  thoughtful  mind. 

II.  Thb  heart  is  the  revealing  pabt  of  the  true  man.  You  must  watch  life  in 
its  temper  and  spirit  at  all  times  and  in  all  places.  You  may  be  deceived  by  good  actions. 
Men  may  build  almshouses  and  yet  live  so  as  to  break  hearts ;  they  may  be  courageous  in 
confronting  tyrannies  abroad,  and  yet  live  impure  lives  in  the  indulgence  of  besetting  sins. 
Think  of  this.  Good  actions  do  not  make  a  good  man ;  it  is  the  good  man  that  makes 
the  good  actions.  A  man  may  be  beneficent  and  give  thousands  to  hospitals,  or  brave 
and  rescue  drowning  men  from  death,  or  patriotic  and  save  a  nation  in  perilous  times, 
and  yet  he  may  not  have  the  mind  of  Christ,  and  his  heart  may  be  unrenewed.  "  A  pure 
heart."  We  all  love  pure  things — the  white  marble,  the  rain-washed  sky,  the  peerless 
alabaster,  the  silver  wings  of  the  dove.  So  Christ  would  have  us  all  desire  and  seek  the 
pure  heart. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  5. — The  sense  of  rectitude.  "  And  of  a  good  conscience."  We  here  come  to  the 
ethical  region  of  rectitude,  showing  us  how  complete  the  gospel  is,  and  how  it  stands 
related  to  the  whole  of  our  complex  nature.  We  notice  here  the  connection  of  "  good  " 
with  conscience ;  let  us  see  what  it  means.  May  there  be  another  conscience  that  is 
not  good? 

I.  There  mat  be  the  casuist's  conscience.  We  see  this  in  the  case  of  the  scribes 
and  Pharisees  in  the  time  of  our  Lord.  The  simple  instincts  of  justice  and  mercy  were 
perverted  by  ecclesiastical  routine,  and  the  minutiae  of  legal  ordinations.  They  overlaid 
the  Law,  which  appealed  to  the  native  instincts  of  conscience,  by  their  traditions,  which 
did  not  so  appeal,  and  which  were  burdensome  and  troublesome.  So  in  Luther's  time  the 
consciences  of  men  were  in  the  keeping  of  the  priests,  and  an  artificial  and  Jesuitical 
morality  made  even  immorality  sometimes  expedient  and  lawful.  Men  lost  the  native 
instincts  of  right  and  wrong  in  obedience  to  an  artificial  and  ecclesiastical  code  of  morals ; 
they  worried  themselves  about  sins  that  were  no  sins,  and  they  lost  the  consciousness 
that  men  may  be  sinners  even  when  they  are  obedient  sons  of  the  Church. 

II.  There  may  be  the  worldly  conscience.  This  makes  custom  into  a  god. 
Conscience  is  ruled  and  regulated  by  what  is  expedient,  or  what  society  expects  of  men. 
They  are  pained  at  the  sin  which  brings  shame  before  men,  but  are  not  disconcerted  at 
desires,  emotions,  and  actions  which  are  evil  in  the  sight  of  God.  It  is  a  wonderful 
interesting  study  this — the  relation  of  society  to  sin.  For  there  are  fashionable  vices 
and  respectable  sins  which  are  heinous  in  the  sight  of  God,  but  the  conscience  is  at  ease 
because  the  spirit  of  the  age  does  not  condemn  them.  How  important,  then,  it  is  to 
keep  conscience  enlightened  by  the  Word  of  God  and  invigorated  by  the  Holy  Ghost ! 
The  end  of  the  commandment  is  in  the  best  sense  to  make  you  a  law  unto  yourself.  It 
is  important  to  have  the  Bible  in  our  heads,  but  it  is  most  important  to  have  Christ 
enthroned  in  the  tribunal  of  conscience  within. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6. — The  absence  of  hypocrisy.  "And  faith  unfeigned."  We  all  dislike  shams. 
Led  by  Carlyle,  the  English  nation  has  lately  heard  many  prophetic  voices  against 
them.  We  insist,  in  art,  in  dress,  in  manners,  and  in  religion,  on  sincerity.  Without 
this  nothing  is  beautiful,  because  nothing  is  real.  We  hate  feigned  learning,  feigned 
skill,  feigned  culture,  and  feigned  superiority.  The  apostle  tells  us  here  that  faith 
must  be  unfeigned.  Now,  if  the  end  of  the  commandment  is  love,  the  argument  is  this, 
that  the  faith  which  is  to  be  worked  by  such  a  glorious  inspiration  of  charity  must  be 
an  honest,  earnest,  real  faith. 

I.  We  must  believe  in  humanity  before  we  can  love  men.  Believe,  that  is,  that 
there  is  an  ideal  of  God  in  every  man ;  that  underneath  his  depravity  and  degradation 
there  it  a  moral  nature  which  may  be  renewed,  and  a  life  which  may  be  transfigured 
into  the  glory  of  Christ.  For  man's  conscience  was  made  to  know  the  truth,  his  heart 
to  feel  it,  and  his  will  to  be  guided  and  energized  by  it.  If  we  think  of  men  cynically 
or  contemptuously,  then  there  will  be  no  earnest  efforts  to  save  that  which  is  lost. 

II.  We  must  believe  in  the  power  of  Christ  and  his  cross;  or  wb  shall 
hot  be  enthusiastic  in  preaching  them.  No  doubter  can  be  a  good  preacher.  Men 
know  and  feel  the  power  of  ardent  faith.  The  arrow  will  miss  the  mark  if  the  hand  of 
the  archer  shakes,  or  distrusts  its  weapon.     The  one  great  element  of  success  is  unfeigned 


0S.L1— 20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  It 

faith — a  faith  which  says,  "  I  believed,  and  therefore  have  I  spoken."  There  may  be  a 
variable  faith,  like  that  of  the  Vicar  of  Bray's,  which  believed  anything — Romanistic, 
Rationalistic,  or  Evangelical — for  the  sake  of  position.  But  the  mask  soon  drops,  and 
men,  instead  of  receiving  the  truth,  despise  the  false  teacher.  "  We  believe  and  are  sure 
that  thou  art  that  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,"  is  the  essential  basis  of  a  true 
ministry.  Such  a  faith  will  be  touched  with  enthusiasm  like  unto  his  who  said,  "  God 
forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 

III.  We  must  believe  in  a  vital  sense  so  as  to  live  our  belief.  An  unfeigned 
faith  is  one  that  we  practise  ourselves ;  one  that  fills  every  channel  of  our  being — our 
ethical  life,  our  philanthropies,  our  missionary  endeavours,  our  home  joys  and  sanctities. 
There  is  a  faith  which  is  merely  dogmatic — which  holds  fast  the  Christian  doctrines,  but 
fails  to  translate  them  into  life.  The  atonement  itself,  so  august  and  awful,  must  ever 
stand  alone  as  a  Divine  sacrifice ;  but  its  moral  effect  is  to  be  live'/,.  "  We  thus  judge,  that 
if  One  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead ;  and  that  we  who  live  should  not  henceforth  live 
unto  ourselves,  but  unto  him  who  died  for  us  and  rose  again."  Faith  is  not  to  be  a  wax- 
work fruit — something  artificial  and  unreal — but  the  living  vine,  of  which  Christ  is  the 
root— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  11. — A  gospel  of  glory.  u  According  to  the  glorious  gospel."  These  are  the 
words  of  a  true  enthusiasm.  St.  Paul  gloried  in  the  gospel.  We  may  read  it,  however, 
as  in-the  Revised  Version,  "According  to  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  God."  Either  way  the 
glory  of  it  fills  the  heart  of  the  apostle  with  intense  rapture.  No  good  work  is  done 
without  enthusiasm.  The  great  Italian  artists — men  like  Angelico,  Fra  Bartolomeo,  and 
Michael  Angelo— associated  heaven  with  earth  in  their  work,  and  did  it,  not  for  mere 
pay,  but  for  great  ideal  results.  So  also  great  apostles  and  reformers,  like  Paul,  Wickliffe, 
and  Luther,  were  enthusiasts.  But  all  healthy  enthusiasm  is  inspired  by  reality  and 
truth.  Some  men  have  made  shipwreck  of  religion  because  they  lost  the  compass  of 
the  Word  of  God;  and  others,  dependent  on  feeling  alone,  have  wandered,  being  led  by 
the  ignis-fatuus  of  imagination  alone. 

I.  Paul  sees  in  himself  what  the  gospel  can  do.  "Take  me,"  he  says;  "I  was 
before  a  persecutor,  and  injurious."  What  could  account  for  such  a  change  as  is  embodied 
in  the  man  who  from  Saul  became  Paul  ?  No  theory  of  moral  dynamics  can  stand,  that 
suggests  he  lifted  himself  into  so  great  a  change.  Neither  could  the  Hebrew  Church  of 
that  age,  which  was  coldly  ritual,  sterile,  and  barren.  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and 
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners;  of 
whom  I  am  chief.  Howbeit  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy,  that  in  me  first  Christ 
Jesus  might  show  forth  all  long-suffering,  for  a  pattern  to  them  which  should  hereafter 
believe  on  him  to  life  everlasting."  No  man  can  be  so  ardent  about  a  cure  as  he  who 
has  tried  a  physician ;  no  man  admires  the  great  artist  so  much  as  he  who  has  tested 
his  own  feeble  powers.  And  now  "  what  the  Law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak 
through  the  flesh,  God  sending  his  own  Son,"  had  done,  and  done  in  Paul :  he  is  a 
proof  of  the  gospel  before  he  becomes  a  preacher  of  it. 

II.  Paul  gives  a  new  significance  to  the  word  "  glory."  On  his  lips  glory  takes 
a  new  meaning.  He  had  seen  the  glories  of  the  Caesars,  who  raised  their  thrones  on 
hecatombs  of  human  lives,  and  filled  their  courts  with  unbounded  luxuries  and  lusts. 
Surrounded  by  soldiers  and  courtesans,  their  glory  was  in  their  shame.  He  had  seen  the 
glories  of  the  architects,  sculptors,  and  artists,  at  Athens,  Corinth,  and  Borne.  But  the 
glory  of  which  he  spoke  was  in  a  life  that  gave  itself — that  came,  not  to  be  ministered 
unto,  but  to  minister,  and  that  on  the  cross  died  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  It 
was  the  glory  of  goodness,  the  glory  of  compassion,  the  glory  of  self-sacrifice. 

III.  Paul  rejoices  to  tell  the  good  news  of  this  glory.  It  is  the  glorious 
gospel, or  the  glorious  "  good  news"  for  all  men — Greek  and  Jew,  barbarian  and  Scythian, 
bond  and  free.  How  simple  a  thing  it  seems — "  good  news  " !  and  yet  it  is  speech  that 
moves  the  world  I  Homer  is  remembered,  when  the  military  heroes  of  Greece  are  for- 
gotten. Songs  live  longer  than  thrones.  This  good  news  was  of  a  Christ  who  had  died 
and  risen,  and  was  working  then  in  the  hearts  of  men.  Paul  lived  long  enough  to  plant 
Churches, and  to  show  that  the  cross  could  turn  men  "from  darkness  to  light,  and  from 
the  power  of  Satan  unto  God."  He  could  show  them  not  only  the  root,  but  the  tree ; 
not  obIt  the  seed,  but  the  flower.    It  was  good  news  in  relation  to  man  himself — to  h's 


20  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  i.  1—20. 

present  history  and  his  everlasting  destiny.  The  gospel  had  made  life  desirable,  and 
checked  the  false  euthanasia  of  Roman  suicide;  and  it  had  spread  a  great  sky  of  immor- 
tality above  men's  heads,  so  that  to  live  was  Christ,  and  to  die  was  gain. — \V.  M.  S. 

Ver.  11. —  The  nature  of  Ood.  "  Of  the  blessed  God."  Prove  that  the  gospel  cornea 
from  God,  and  it  must  be  blessed;  for  God  is  blessed  in  himself.  His  nature  is  light, 
which  is  always  beautiful ;  and  love,  which  is  always  beneficent. 

I.  This  is  a  description  of  the  Divine  nature.  Not  of  some  of  the  attributes 
of  that  nature,  but  of  the  very  heart  and  centre  of  it.  Not  the  Omnipotent,  the 
Omnipresent,  the  Omniscient;  but  the  Blessed  1  Look  at  nature!  Siudy  its  purity, 
its  harmony,  its  exquisite  adaptations  of  provision  and  plenty  to  the  varied  wants  of  all 
living  things,  show  that  God  is  not  a  Being  of  mere  power  or  wisdom,  but  One  whose 
works  are  very  good,  One  who  wished  his  creatures  to  share  in  his  own  blessedness.  1. 
Look  at  his  revelation.  Do  we  want  beatitudes  ?  Duty  turned  to  joy  ?  We  find  the 
way  of  peace  and  rest  and  joy  in  obedience  to  his  will.  2.  Look  at  the  Christ,  himself. 
Blessed  within,  amid  all  outward  forms  of  temptation  and  all  endurances  of  trial.  "  That 
my  joy  may  remain  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  may  be  full."  3.  Look  at  the  cross.  Designed 
to  make  atonement,  to  reconcile  man  to  God,  and  so  to  renew  his  image  within,  and 
to  make  man  understand  that  separation  from  God  was  the  root-cause  of  all  his  misery. 
The  gospel  is  not  only  a  revelation  of  doctrine ;  it  is  an  unfolding  of  the  Divine  nature, 
into  which  we  may  be  changed  "  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord." 

II.  This  is  the  unique  revelation  of  the  gospel.  False  religions  give  prominence 
to  aspects  of  power,  and  merge  into  dreads.  The  gospel  alone  shows  that  God  is  Love. 
And  in  revealing  the  blessed  nature  of  God  in  his  Son,  it  has  shown  us  that  evil  is 
misery  because  it  is  another  nature.  Life  apart  from  God  is  death — death  to  peace,  purity, 
harmony,  holiness.  Men  have  in  their  experience  testified  to  this.  All  is  vanity  apart 
from  him.  Over  all  life  may  be  inscribed,  "  Nihil  sine  Deo  " — "  Nothing  without  God." 
So  Christ  would  lead  us  to  the  Father,  unite  us  with  the  Father,  and  transform  us  into 
the  likeness  of  the  Father — One  who  is  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  the  King  of  kings, 
and  Lord  of  lords. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  11. —  Trustees  of  the  truth.  "Which  was  committed  to  my  trust."  Here 
Paul  speaks  of  the  preacher  of  this  glorious  gospel  as  a  trustee.  It  is  not  a  gospel  of 
merely  personal  salvation ;  it  is  not  designed  to  awaken  only  moral  and  spiritual 
admiration  for  its  teachings ;  nor  for  the  culture  of  immortal  happiness,  so  far  as  we  are 
ourselves  alone  concerned. 

I.  The  gospel  is  ours  in  trust.  Water  is  sweet,  but  others  are  perishing  with 
thirst.  The  open  sky  is  beautiful,  but  others  are  in  prison.  Peace  is  restful,  but 
others  are  in  pain.  What  do  you  think  in  earthly  matters  of  fraudulent  or  neglectful 
trustees?  You  rank  them  amongst  the  very  worst  of  men.  How  many  sons  and 
daughters  of  the  careful  and  the  prudent  have  been  ruined  through  the  long  years  by 
negligent  trustees ! 

II.  The  gospel  affects  all  trusteeships.  Its  spirit  is  to  pervade  all  that  we 
have  and  are.  Men  are  coming  to  see  that  knowledge,  skill,  wealth,  are  not  only 
to  be  enjoyed  for  personal  gratification,  but  to  be  used  for  the  uplifting  and  bettering  of 
others.  These  will,  and  always  must  be,  "  our  own ; "  but  we  are  to  look  also  "  on  the 
things  of  others."  Do  not  fence  in  the  park  of  your  life,  but  act  the  steward  of  its 
beauties  and  its  joys.-  Bights  of  possession  there  are,  and  yet  responsibilities  of  posses- 
sion too.  Look  at  Christ.  1.  He  knew  the  secret  of  blessedness,  and  came  to  earth  to 
reveal  it.  2.  He  knew  the  grandeur  of.  human  nature,  and  came  to  live  in  it  and  to 
restore  it.  3.  He  knew  the  mastery  that  evil  had  over  us,  and  he  came  to  break  the 
fetters.  4.  He  knew  that  sin  separated  us  from  God,  and  he  came  to  die,  "  the  just  for 
the  unjust,  to  bring  us  unto  God."  Our  captains  at  sea  are  guardians  of  life,  and  bravely 
do  they  do  their  duty.  Our  soldiers  are  trustees  of  a  nation's  honour,  and  never  have 
failed  in  the  great  crises  of  her  life.  And  our  great  citizen-fellowships  are  trustees  of 
broad  rivers,  open  commons,  and  the  health  and  well-being  of  the  poor,  and  have  striven 
to  protect  theii  interests.  As  Christians  we  are  each  and  all  trustees  of  the  gospel.  It 
is  no  mere  ecclesiastical  privilege ;  for,  alas !  ecclesiastics  have  too  often  been  trustees  only 
of  their  own  right*,  or  the  rights  of  their  special  Churches.    We  are  all  trustees  of  the 


ch.  1. 1— 20.]  THE   FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  21 


glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God,  and  woe  be  to  any  of  us  who  shirk  our  responsibilities 
or  idly  neglect  our  trust ! — W.  M.  S. 

_Ver.  19.  —  Human  wreckage.  "Some  have  made  shipwreck."  Words  sound 
differently  to  different  men.  Language  is  a  "  word-picture,"  and  we  must  see  the 
facts  before  we  understand  the  word.  Paul  chooses  a  metaphor  applied  to  character, 
which  is  so  terrible  when  applied  to  disasters  at  sea.  Many  a  beautiful  vessel  has 
arrested  the  gaze  of  admiring  spectators  as  she  spread  her  sails  to  the  favouring  breeze, 
and  breasted  the  waters  like  a  thing  of  life.  But,  on  another  shore,  her  shiverecf  timbers 
and  her  shattered  prow  have  been  washed  up  as  the  wreckage  of  a  once  gallant  ship,  her 
half-defaced  name  the  only  testimony  to  her  fate.  So  Paul  had  seen  men  wrecked  on 
the  breakers  of  self-indulgence,  vice,  and  folly.  Paul  associated  loss  of  character  with 
loss  oi"  faith.  "  Holding  faith,  and  a  good  conscience ;  which  some  having  put  away 
have  made  shipwreck." 

L  Shipwreck  sometimes  comes  at  the  very  commencement  op  the  voyagk. 
Th(  ship  scarcely  leaves  the  river  before  she  runs  aground.  There  has  been  too  much 
sell-confidence,  and  the  Divine  Pilot  has  not  had  the  ship  in  hand. 

II.  Shipwreck  sometimes  comes  at  the  close  of  the  voyage,  when  the  ship  is 
almost  home ;  when  from  the  masthead  land  was  almost  in  sight.  But  the  watch  has 
not  been  kept.  Tn  the  voyage  of  life  we  may  have  the  cross  on  the  flag,  and  the  chart 
in  the  cabin,  and  the  compass  on  the  deck  ;  but  we  sleep,  as  do  others,  and  we  are 
wrecked  with  the  land  almost  in  sight. 

III.  Shipwreck  affects  the  very  highest  elements  of  our  being.  "A  good 
conscience,"  the  sweetest  meal  to  which  ever  a  man  sat  down !  The  sublimest  music, 
which  no  Beethoven  or  Mendelssohn  can  approach !  The  noblest  heritage  that  a  Moses 
could  sacrifice  Egypt  for !  A  conscience  cleansed  by  Christ's  blood,  enlightened  by  the 
Word  of  God,  and  quickened  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  A  good  conscience ! "  Wealth  cannot 
purchase  it,  envy  cannot  steal  it,  poverty  cannot  harm  it,  and  nought  but  sin  can  denude 
it  of  its  crown.  It  is  the  strength  of  the  confessor's  endurance,  the  lustre  of  the  suf- 
ferer's countenance,  the  peace  of  the  martyr's  heart.  "  A  good  conscience."  Wreck  that, 
and  all  is  lost ;  and  the  sun  of  the  moral  firmament  sets  in  darkness. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Introduction.  1.  Sender.  "  Paul,  an  a.postle  of  Christ  Jesus  according 
to  the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour,  and  Christ  Jesus  our  Hope."  It  is  usual  for 
Paul  to  begin  his  letters  by  taking  the  designation  of  apostle.  He  thus  claimed  to 
write,  and  to  order  ecclesiastical  affairs,  under  infallible  direction.  In  thus  writing  to 
Timothy,  who  had  no  special  need  of  being  reminded  of  his  authority,  he  would  seem 
to  give  an  official  character  to  the  letter.  While  he  claimed  authority,  it  was,  at  the  same 
time,  as  himself  belonging  to  Christ  Jesus.  Not  satisfied  with  stating  to  whom  he  belonged 
in  the  authority  he  exercised,  he  further  traces  his  apostleship,  not,  as  in  previous  Epistles, 
up  to  its  primal  source  in  the  will  of  God,  but  more  immediately  to  the  commandment 
of  God  or  actual  appointment  after  his  conversion.  He  received  his  appointment  from 
■God  our  Saviour — a  designation  of  God  which  in  the  New  Testament  is  peculiar  to  the 
pastoral  Epistles.  It  is  introduced  here  as  carrying  with  it  the  obligation  on  the  part  of 
Paul  and  Timothy  to  be  the  bearers  of  the  Divine  salvation  to  their  fellow-men.  He 
also  received  his  appointment  from  Christ  Jesus,  whom  he  thus,  the  second  time  in 
the  short  space,  introduces.  By  Christ,  as  acting  for  God,  all  appointments  are  mnde. 
The  seven  stars,  i.e.  Christian  ministers,  are  held  by  him  in  his  right  hand ;  and  he  has 
the  whole  ordering  of  their  locality  and  time  of  service.  In  this  second  introduction  of 
his  name  he  is  designated  our  Hope,  i.e.  lie  from  whom  the  appointed  have  their  reward, 
and  in  whom  it  subsists.  2.  To  whom  addressed.  "Unto  Timothy,  my  true  child  in  faith." 
Not  according  to  the  flesh,  but  in  the  sphere  of  faith,  was  Timothy  his  child.  Thus  he 
is  accustomed  to  regard  his  converts ;  he  is  both  father  and  mother  to  them.  We  may, 
therefore,  conclude  that  Timothy,  though  of  godly  parentage  and  with  godly  influences 
working  efficaciously  in  him,  owed  it  to  Paul's  instrumentality  that  he  was  converted 
to  Christianity.  It  was  in  Lystra,  a  city  of  Lycaonia,  on  Paul's  second  visit,  that 
Timothy  joined  him  as  his  assistant.  He  was  his  true  child,  not  only  in  his  being 
his  convert,  tut  in  hi*  having  the  evidence  of  that  in  his  being  after  the  same  stamp 
—like-minded,  as  he  is  called  in  Phil.  ii..  20 ;  one  who  seemed  instinctively  to  entct 


to  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  1. 1— 2C 

into  his  views  and  plans,  and  therefore,  we  may  say,  the  ideal  of  an  assistant.  8. 
Salutation.  "  Grace,  mercy,  peace,  from  God  the  Father  and  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 
The  insertion  of  mercy  in  the  salutation  is  a  peculiarity  of  the  Epistles  to  Timothy. 
There  is  invoked  grace  on  him  as  unworthy,  mercy  on  him  as  exposed  to  suffering,  peace 
on  him  as  the  result  of  his  being  graciously  and  mercifully  dealt  with.  The  Source 
from  which  the  blessing  is  invoked  is  God  the  Father.  It  is  to  the  fatherly  feeling  in 
God — that  which  is  highest  in  his  nature,  and  with  which  redemption  originated — that 
our  appeal  is  to  be  made  for  saving  blessings  for  ourselves  and  for  our  friends.  In  the 
thought  of  Christ  as  the  second  Source  of  blessing,  Paul  finds  occasion  for  the  third 
introduction  of  the  name  of  Christ.  He  is  thought  of  as  our  Lord,  i.e.  the  sovereign 
Dispenser  of  the  saving  blessings  in  his  Father's  house,  of  which  there  are  enough 
and  to  spare. 

I.  Charge  devolved  ok  Timothy.  "As  I  exhorted  thee  to  tarry  at  Ephesus, 
when  I  was  going  into  Macedonia,  that  thou  mightest  charge  certain  men  not  to  teach 
a  different  doctrine,  neither  to  give  heed  to  fables  and  endless  genealogies,  the  which 
minister  questionings,  rather  than  a  dispensation  of  God  which  is  in  faith ;  so  do  1 
now."  The  time  of  the  journey  into  Macedonia  would  seem  to  be  after  the  first 
imprisonment  at  Eome,  beyond  the  period  included  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  This 
brings  the  date  of  the  Epistle  well  on  to  the  close  of  the  apostle's  life.  If  this  is  correct, 
then  Paul's  confident  anticipation  of  never  again  being  in  Ephesus  was  not  verified. 
For  it  is  here  mentioned  as  his  point  of  departure  for  Macedonia.  He  would  have  taken 
Timothy  with  him ;  but  there  were  manifestations  in  the  Church  at  Ephesus  which 
necessitated  him  to  leave  him  behind.  There  were  certain  persons  not  otherwise 
characterized,  who  taught  a  different  doctrine,  i.e.  different  from  the  gospel  as  preached 
by  Paul.  It  could  not  be  called  a  different  gospel  as  in  the  Galatian  Churches ;  it  was 
rather  something  taught  by  itself  which  tended  to  frustrate  the  ends  of  the  gospel. 
It  was  a  giving  heed  to  fables  and  endless  genealogies.  We  come  upon  incipient  Gnosticism 
here,  of  which  we  have  already  seen  traces  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians.  This  is 
best  known  as  Eastern  mysticism  in  contact  with  Christianity.  But  there  seems  reason 
to  believe  that  there  was  a  prior  contact  of  Eastern  mysticism  with  Judaism  in  the 
form  of  Essenism.  This  has  many  elements  in  common  with  Gnosticism;  the  peculiarity 
is  that  it  is  Jewish  materials  that  are  thrown  into  the  mystic  form.  A  great  feature 
in  Gnosticism  is  the  interposing  of  intermediate  agencies,  to  account  for  the  creation  of 
the  world,  supposed  to  be  evil,  so  that  God  could  not  come  into  immediate  contact  with 
it  in  its  creation.  What  were  afterward  known  as  seons  or  emanations,  in  the  Epistle  to 
the  Colossians  are  called  angels.  Here  the  interminable  genealogies  found  in  rabbinical 
speculations  are  associated  with  the  intermediate  agencies.  God  created  a  being  at 
a  certain  remove  from  himself,  with  a  name  which  they  were  in  a  position  to  give. 
This  being  created  another  at  a  further  remove  from  God,  who  also  was  named.  The 
object  was  to  come  down  to  the  name  of  one  who  was  bad  enough  to  create  the  world; 
but  it  was  difficult  to  know  where  to  stop.  Upon  these  genealogies  ingenuity  was 
exercised ;  but,  as  there  was  nothing  of  the  element  of  certainty  in  them,  they  only 
ministered  questionings  or  disputings  as  to  the  names.  What  Timothy  was  to  direct 
his  efforts  to  was  to  set  forth  the  dispensation  of  God  which  is  in  faith,  i.e.  the  Divine 
order  of  things,  as  seen  partly  in  creation  and  specially  in  redemption,  in  which  faith 
can  lay  hold  on  certainty.  "  By  faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  have  been  framed 
by  the  word  of  God,  so  that  what  is  seen  hath  not  been  made  out  of  th'ngs  which  do 
appear."  By  faith  also  we  understand  that  Infinite  Love  has  in  Christ  Jesus  provided 
a  full  atonement  for  our  sins. 

II.  The  end  of  the  charge.  "But  the  end  of  the  charge  is  love.''  The  link  of 
connection  is  the  charge  to  be  given  by  Timothy  to  the  false  teachers.  The  thought 
which  follows  is,  these  teachers  missing  the  aim  of  what  is  charged  on  them.  We  have 
here,  then,  not  the  end  aimed  at  in  others,  as  the  end  of  the  physician  is  health  (which 
is  Ellicott's  idea),  but  plainly  the  end  aimed  at  in  what  is  charged  on  the  teacher.  The 
words  are  suitable  to  one  who  is  receiving  a  charge.  "  What  is  the  end  of  what  I  charge 
on  you?"  says  the  giver  of  the  charge;  "it  is  that  you  have  your  being  filled  with  love." 
This  is  the  qualification  of  the  healer  of  the  body :  he  must  be  thoroughly  interested  in 
the  recovery  of  his  patients.  So  it  may  be  said  to  be  the  main  qualification  of  the 
healer  of  the  soul :  he  must  be  thoroughly  interested  k  th*  spiritual  health  of  thos* 


•a.  1.1-  -20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  » 

who  are  committed  to  his  care.  L  The  love  of  the  teacher  must  he  associated  with  pure 
dements.  "  Out  of  a  pure  heart."  He  must  have,  mingled  with  his  affection,  and  giving 
character  to  it,  an  antipathy  to  sin  in  every  form,  to  unreality,  to  superficiality ;  and 
a  passion  for  holiness  in  every  form,  for  reality,  for  depth.  2.  The  love  of  the  teacher 
must  he  associated  with  conscientiousness.  "  And  a  good  conscience."  He  must  have, 
in  the  first  place,  a  conscience  that  faithfully  witnesses  to  his  duty,  to  the  methods  he 
should  follow  in  his  work,  to  the  forms  of  service  his  love  for  the  people  should  take. 
And  he  must  have,  in  the  second  place — which  is  also  included  in  the  scriptural  idea  of 
a  good  conscience — the  approval  of  his  own  mind,  the  consciousness  that  he  is  using  all 
diligence  in  carrying  out  his  ideas  of  duty,  in  following  his  methods,  in  his  endeavours 
to  be  serviceable.  3.  The  love  of  the  teacher  must  be  fed  from  the  highest  Source.  "  And 
faith  unfeigned."  His  faith  brings  him  into  contact  with  an  invisible  Saviour,  by  whom 
he  is  elevated  in  his  whole  spirit  as  a  teacher,  at  the  fountain  of  whose  love  his  love 
is  fed,  and  not  only  in  intensity  but  in  all  that  it  needs  of  purity  and  direction.  Only 
his  faith  must  be  unfeigned ;  for  if  it  is  not  in  his  life,  if  it  is  only  as  a  mask,  then 
he  can  only  come  into  contact  with  his  own  imaginings,  by  which  certainly  he  cannot 
be  elevated,  from  which  source  his  love  cannot  properly  be  fed. 

HI.  The  end  missed.  "  From  which  things  some  having  swerved  have  turned  aside 
unto  vain  talking ;  desiring  to  be  teachers  of  the  Law,  though  they  understand  neither 
what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  confidently  affirm."  The  end  was  missed  by  the  false 
teachers.  They  did  not  hit  the  purity  of  motive,  conscientiousness,  unfeignedness  of 
faith,  that  should  have  given  character  to  their  affection.  Being  thus  incapable  of 
profitable  discourse,  they  "  turned  aside  unto  vain  talking."  They  gave  themselves  out 
to  be  "  teachers  of  the  Law,"  i.e.  the  Mosaic  Law,  especially  the  Law  of  the  ten  com- 
mandments, afterward  referred  to  in  detail.  But  they  were  doubly  disqualified.  They 
were  confused  in  what  they  said.  They  were,  therefore,  different  from  the  teachers  of 
the  Law  who  were  opposed  in  the  Churches  of  Galatia.  For  these  were  not  chargeable 
with  incoherencies ;  they  knew  well  enough  what  they  said  in  seeking  to  subvert 
Christian  liberty.  We  are  rather  to  think  of  mystical  interpretation  of  the  Law.  They 
were  further  disqualified  in  not  understanding  their  subject,  viz.  the  Law;  the  confidence 
of  their  affirmations  being  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  their  ignorance. 

IV.  Use  op  the  Law.  "But  we  know  that  the  Law  is  good,  if  a  man  use  it  lawfully, 
as  knowing  this,  that  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man,  but  for  the  lawless  and 
unruly,  for  the  ungodly  and  sinners,  for  the  unholy  and  profane,  for  murderers  of  fathers 
and  murderers  of  mothers,  for  man-slayers,  for  fornicators,  for  abusers  of  themselves  with 
men,  for  men-stealers,  for  liars,  for  false  swearers,  and  if  there  be  any  other  thing  contrary 
to  the  sound  doctrine."  The  apostle  begins  by  laying  down  a  proposition  about  the 
Law  which  no  one  w6uld  be  disposed  to  controvert.  It  was  a  boon  from  Heaven  if  used 
according  to  its  intention.  In  the  next  proposition  he  indicates  the  intention  of  the 
law  as  coming  under  the  intention  of  all  law.  His  position  is,  that  law  is  not  made  for 
a  righteous  man.  "  Let  us  think  of  the  relation  in  which  a  good  man  stands  to  the 
laws  of  his  country.  In  one  sense,  indeed,  he  is  under  them;  but  in  another  and 
higher  sense  he  is  above  them,  and  moves  along  his  course  with  conscious  freedomi, 
as  if  he  scarcely  knew  of  their  existence.  For  what  is  the  object  of  such  laws  but 
to  prevent,  under  severe  penalties,  the  commission  of  crime?  Crime,  however,  is  already 
the  object  of  his  abhorrence ;  he  needs  no  penalties  to  keep  him  from  it.  He  would 
never  harm  the  person  or  property  of  a  neighbour,  though  there  were  not  a  single 
enactment  in  the  statute-book  on  the  subject.  His  own  love  of  good  and  hatred  of  evil 
keep  him  in  the  path  of  rectitude,  not  the  fines,  imprisonments,  or  tortures  which  the 
law  hangs  around  the  path  of  the  criminal.  The  law  was  not  made  for  him  "  As  truly 
can  it  be  said  that  the  Law  of  the  ten  commandments  is  not  made  for  the  Christian, 
who  is  the  righteous  man.  For  he  is  justified  by  the  faith  of  Christ,  i.e.  he  is  regarded 
as  having  fulfilled  the  whole  Law  in  Christ.  What  more,  then,  has  the  Law  to  do  with 
Mm?  And  further,  so  far  as  he  answers  to  the  conception  of  a  Christian,  he  is 
sanctified  by  the  faith  of  Christ.  He  is  in  Christ  as  the  Source  of  his  holiness.  He 
has  got  beyond  the  discipline  of  the  Law,  inasmuch  as  he  has  got  it  already  in  his 
heart.  Thus  does  the  apostle  take  the  ground  from  under  the  would-be  teachers  of  the 
Law,  whose  position  would  be  that  the  Law  mystically  interpreted  was  necessary  to 
putting  the  crown  of  perfection  on  the  Christian.     The  Law  is  made  for  unrighteom 


24  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  L 1— 20. 

persons,  of  whom  many  classes  are  mentioned.  These  are  grouped  with  reference  to  the 
two  tables  of  the  Law.  Under  the  head  of  breakers  of  the  first  table,  ie.  the  unrighteous 
toward  God,  are  given  six  classes  in  pairs.  There  are  the  lawless  and  unruly.  With 
aggravation,  they  refuse  to  be  under  law,  making  their  own  pleasure  their  law. 
There  are  the  ungodly  and  sinners.  They  have  thrown  off  all  awe  of  God.  There  are 
the  unholy  and  profane.  Instead  of  being  consecrated  to  God,  they  trample  on  holy 
things.  If  the  division  of  commandments  had  been  followed,  the  classes  would  have 
been  deniers  of  God,  idolaters,  the  profane,  sabbath-breakers.  Generally,  it  is  disregard 
of  what  is  Divine  that  is  brought  out  under  this  head.  Under  the  second  head,  of 
breakers  of  the  second  table,  i.e.  the  unrighteous  toward  man,  are  given  eight  classes, 
six  of  them  in  pairs.  Here  the  division  of  commandments  is  followed.  There  are 
murderers  of  fathers  and  murderers  of  mothers.  "  Smiters"  is  preferred  by  some.  These 
are  the  breakers  of  the  fifth  commandment  with  the  greatest  aggravation.  Next  by 
itself  stands  the  class  of  man-slayers.  These  are  the  breakers  of  the  sixth  commandment. 
There  are  fornicators  and  abusers  of  themselves  with  men.  These  workers  of  abomina- 
tion are  the  breakers  of  the  seventh  commandment.  Next  by  itself  stands  the  class 
of  men-stealers.  The  apostle  puts  the  man-stealer  as  the  most  flagrant  of  all  breakers  of 
the  eighth  commandment.  No  theft  of  a  man's  goods  can  be  compared  with  that  most 
atrocious  act  which  steals  the  man  himself,  and  robs  him  of  that  free  will  which  is  the 
first  gift  of  his  Creator.  And  of  this  crime  all  are  guilty  who,  whether  directly  or 
indirectly,  are  engaged  in,  or  uphold,  from  whatever  pretence,  the  making  or  keeping 
of  slaves.  There  are  liars  and  false  swearers.  These  are  the  breakers  of  the  ninth 
commandment.  He  does  not  go  on  to  the  breakers  of  the  tenth  commandment, 
but  concludes  with  the  greatest  inclusiveness,  "  And  if  there  be  any  other  thing 
contrary  to  the  sound  doctrine"  {i.e.  not  morbid,  as  the  teaching  of  the  mystical 
interpreters).  The  apostle's  position  is  that  the  Law  is  made  for  all  these  unrighteous 
persons.  But  for  things  being  in  an  abnormal  state  there  would  not  have  been  the 
writing  down  of  so  plain  duties  in  the  ten  commandments,  especially  in  the  form, 
"  Thou  shalt  not."  The  Law  is  made  for  sinners,  in  being  intended  to  hold  up  before 
them  a  proper  representation  of  righteousness,  by  which,  if  they  are  convicted,  they 
should  also  feel  shut  up  to  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith.  Has  the  Law,  then, 
no  use  for  the  Christian?  Only  in  so  far  as  he  is  not  Christianized.  It  is  of  use 
in  keeping  him  under  grace  as  the  source  of  his  security  and  happiness.  And  it  is  of 
use  in  so  far  as  it  holds  up  a  representation  of  righteousness  that  reaches  beyond  his 
attainment.  The  truth  is  well  brought  out  in  one  of  the  symbolical  books  of  the 
Lutherans.  "  Although  the  Law  was  not  made  for  the  righteous  (as  the  apostle  testifies, 
1  Tim.  i.  9),  yet  this  is  not  to  be  understood  as  if  the  righteous  might  live  without  law ; 
for  the  Divine  Law  is  written  upon  their  hearts.  The  true  and  genuine  meaning, 
therefore,  of  Paul's  words  is,  that  the  Law  cannot  bring  those  who  have  been  reconciled 
to  God  through  Christ  under  its  curse,  and  that  its  restraint  cannot  be  irksome  to  the 
renewed,  since  they  delight  in  the  Law  of  God  after  the  inner  man.  But  believers  are 
not  completely  and  perfectly  renewed  in  this  life ;  and  though  their  sins  are  covered 
by  the  absolutely  perfect  obedience  of  Christ,  so  as  not  to  be  imputed  to  believers  to 
their  condemnation,  and  though  the  mortification  of  the  old  Adam  and  the  renovation 
in  the  spirit  of  their  mind  has  been  begun  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  yet  the  old  Adam  still 
remains  in  nature's  powers  and  affections." 

V.  Accordance  with  the  gospel.  "  According  to  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  the 
blessed  God,  which  was  committed  to  my  trust."  The  gospel  may  be  presented  either 
in  relation  to  man,  or  in  relation  to  God.  In  relation  to  man,  the  gospel  is  manifold. 
It  is  a  gospel  of  peace;  it  quiets  the  guilty  conscience.  It  is  a  gospel  of  purity;  it 
purifies  the  heart.  It  is  a  gospel  of  comfort;  it  imparts  to  us  a  strong  consolation 
under  all  the  ills  of  this  life.  It  is  a  gospel  of  hope ;  it  opens  up  to  us  beyond  this 
bounded  life  the  boundless  prospect  of  the  life  everlasting.  In  relation  to  God,  too,  the 
gospel  is  manifold.  It  is  the  gospel  of  a  righteous  God;  it  is  a  satisfaction  of  Divine 
justice.  It  is  the  gospel  of  a  gracious  God ;  it  is  an  overflow  of  Divine  mercy  and 
compassion.  It  is  the  gospel  of  a  wise  God ;  it  is  the  application  of  Divine  intelligence 
to  a  very  difficult  problem.  It  is  the  gospel  of  an  almighty  God;  it  is  an  agency 
charged  with  Divine  power.  It  is  here  the  gospel,  not  of  a  righteous  God,  not  of  a 
gracious  God,  not  of  a  wise  God,  not  of  an  almighty  God,  but  of  a  blessed  God.    And 


oh.  1 1—20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  25 

in  this  connection  it  is  put  forward  as  embodying  the  glory  of  the  blessed  God.  "The 
gospel  of  the  glory  of  the  blessed  God."  Such  are  the  words  of  Paul,  the  great  gospol 
preacher,  to  his  pupil  Timothy.  Consider,  in  the  first  place,  how  it  belongs  to  the 
blessed  God  to  communicate  his  blessedness ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  how  the  gospel 
is  a  communication  of  the  glory  of  the  blessedness  of  God.  First,  then,  how  it  belongs 
to  tht  blessed  God  to  communicate  his  blessedness.  The  "  blessed  God  "  is  an  uncommon 
conception  in  Scripture.  We  indeed  find — "Art  thou  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the 
Blessed?"  "The  Creator,  who  is  blessed  for  ever;"  "God  blessed  for  ever."  But 
"blessed"  there  is  adorable,  worthy  to  be  praised;  literally,  "worthy  to  be  well 
spoken  of."  It  is  the  word  which  conveys  an  acknowledgment  of  God's  claim  to 
undivided  worship.'  Whereas  "blessed"  here  is  equivalent  to  "happy"  as  applied 
to  us.  God  is  said  to  be  blessed,  as  we  are  said  to  be  happy.  And  seeing  "  blessed  " 
is  used  in  a  totally  different  sense  in  Scripture,  the  "happy  God"  would  best  convey 
the  sense  here.  And  we  see  no  reason  why  we  should  not  say  that  God  is  happy, 
when  in  the  original  the  word  which  is  applied  to  God  is  the  same  which  is  applied 
to  man.  There  is  only  one  other  place  in  Scripture  where  God  is  said  to  be 
thus  blessed ;  and,  noticeably,  it  is  in  this  same  Epistle :  "  The  blessed  and  only 
Potentate ; "  literally,  "  the  happy  and  only  Potentate."  It  is  as  if  the  inspired  writer 
consciously  supplied  a  want.  It  had  never  been  said  that  God  was  happy.  So  twice  he 
introduces  this  conception  into  this  late  Epistle.  And  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  in  the 
Revised  Version  "happy"  has  not  been  substituted  for  "blessed"  in  the  two  places. 
The  blessedness  of  God  is  not  different  in  kind  from  ours.  If  there  is  any  deep  calm 
in  our  minds,  that  is  the  same  with  the  calm  of  God.  If  any  true  thrill  of  joy  passes 
through  our  hearts,  that  is  the  same  which  passes  through  the  heart  of  God.  But 
blessedness  is  God's  in  a  way  that  it  is  not  ours.  We  are  only  blessed  in  him  who 
gave  us  being,  and  for  whom  we  have  being.  And  ours  is  a  blessedness  that  can  be 
added  to.  We  are  finite,  and  there  will  always  be,  in  the  fact  of  our  finitude,  a  desire 
to  be  more  blessed.  But  God  is  self-blessed.  We  think  of  this  by  means  of  the  con- 
ception of  God  existing  far  away  in  a  past  eternity,  when  there  was  yet  no  other 
intelligence,  not  even  the  faintest  reflection  of  his  glory  in  any  created  object,  and  as 
happy  then  as  now  when  he  has  peopled  a  universe.  Such  a  thought  is  not  bearable 
by  us,  and  God  has  not  asked  us  to  dwell  upon  it ;  and  we  would  say  that,  while  we 
may  be  forced  thus  to  think  of  Godhead  as  self-poised,  or  resting  in  self,  we  may  at 
the  same  time  be  allowed  to  dwell  upon  the  far  more  pleasing  thought  of  the  Three 
Persons  of  the  Godhead  as  resting  in  one  another.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  are 
happy  in  one  another's  society  and  fellowship.  It  will  be  felt  that  that  thought,  which 
is  denied  to  the  Unitarian,  greatly  relieves  the  thought  of  a  God  isolated,  in  his  blessed- 
ness, away  before  and  out  of  time.  Still  the  fact  remains,  that  as  the  one  God  is 
infinitely  blessed,  so  also  he  is  blessed  in  himself.  As  there  is  in  his  boundless 
being  no  void  of  blessedness  to  fill  up,  no  jarring  note  to  correct,  so  there  can  be  no 
desire  to  make  himself  more  blessed.  But  it  perfectly  consists  with  that  that  he  should 
desire  to  make  others  blessed.  This  is  in  keeping  with  what  we  find  among  men.  It 
is  true  of  the  miserable  man  that  he  is  selfish.  It  is  there  that  he  is  wrong,  at  the 
very  commencement.  In  the  very  act  of  enclosing  himself,  or  in  the  habit  of  keeping 
himself  enclosed  within  his  own  shell,  he  shuts  himself  out  from  blessedness.  He  does 
not  go  out  to  God.  At  every  approach  and  overture  of  God,  he  draws  back  further 
within  himself.  His  sin  is  that  he  will  keep  within  himself,  and  will  not  go  out  in 
confession  and  desire  and  faith  toward  God.  And  so  God  does  not  bless  him.  He 
does  not  go  out  in  love  to  God's  creatures,  and  so  these  do  not  bless  him.  And  thus, 
shutting  himself  out  from  blessedness,  his  tendency  is  to  grudge  blessedness  to  others. 
He  has  a  secret  joy  in  misfortune. .  He  could  see  a  funeral  pall  drawn  over  all  that  is 
fair  in  nature.  He  would  have  the  smile  to  vanish  from  our  countenance.  He  would 
have  sweet  voices  hushed.  He  would  have  all  things  brought  down  to  his  own  dull 
level.  And,  worst  outcome  of  all — yet  we  would  say  a  necessary  outcome— he 
grudges  even  God  his  blessedness.  His  feeling  is  that,  being  miserable  himself,  he 
could  see  God  less  happy  than  he  is.  The  happy  man,  on  the  other  hand,  is  unselfish. 
It  is  by  being  open  that  he  comes  to  be  happy.  He  goes  out  to  God  in  meek  abnega- 
tion of  self,  and  so  God  blesses  him.  He  goes  out  to  God's  creatures  in  delight  and 
gratitude  and  mercy,  and  so  he  receives  contributions  to  his  happiness  on  every  side. 


26  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  1. 1—20. 

Now,  Just  ss  the  miserable  man  would  have  a  miserable  world  around  him,  bo  the 
happy  man  would  have  a  happy  world  around  him.  He  would  distribute  happiness 
most  lavishly.  He  would  admit  all  to  a  share  of  it.  He  would  have  all  to  be  happy  as 
he  is  happy.  "  I  would  to  God,"  said  Paul  to  Agrippa,  "  that  not  only  thou,  but  also 
all  that  hear  me  this  day,  were  both  almost  and  altogether  such  as  I  am,  except  these 
bonds."  The  happy  man  is  magnanimous ;  he  wishes  ill  to  no  one ;  he  invokes  blessing 
even  upon  his  enemies.  Out  of  his  own  heart  of  blessedness  there  seems  to  rise  the 
desire  to  make  others  blessed.  And  so,  although  God  can  have  no  desire  to  make  him- 
self more  blessed,  yet,  being  full  of  blessedness  himself,  he  desires  to  make  others  blessed. 
Creation  may  be  taken  as  an  expression  of  that  desire  on  the  part  of  God.  Creation 
is  just  God  flowing  out  in  blessedness.  It  is  God  saying,  "Let  me  not  keep  my  blessed- 
ness to  myself;  let  others  be  blessed  with  me."  "What  purpose  in  creation  can  we  con- 
ceive into  which  that  does  not  enter?  It  is  true  that  we  are  created  to  give  praise  to 
God ;  but  that  is  more  from  our  side.  From  God's  side,  it  is  perhaps  better  to  say 
that  he  created  us,  not  so  much  that  he  might  receive  our  praise,  as  that  we  might 
receive  his  blessedness.  God,  we  may  suppose,  would  not  have  created  for  the  mere 
purpose  of  creating,  however  pleasurable  that  is  to  him.  Neither  would  he  have 
created  merely  to  have  a  sphere  for  the  exercise  of  his  power.  What  to  him  were 
empty  worlds  in  which  to  store  up  his  power,  through  which  at  will  to  roll  the  thunder 
of  his  power?  Neither  would  he  have  created  for  the  mere  pleasure  of  working  accord- 
ing to  a  plan,  or  of  having  the  marvels  of  his  wisdom  set  forth  before  him.  What  to 
him  were  the  clothing  matter  with  plants  and  trees,  touching  each  minutest  part  with 
his  plastic  hand,  and  varying  every  form?  The  blessed  God  created,  not  to  have 
pleasure  himself,  but  to  give  pleasure.  It  was  that,  we  think,  that  moved  him  to  create. 
And  therefore  he  made  living  creatures — creatures  capable  of  receiving  pleasure.  And 
he  cared  for  having  nothing  in  the  world  which  was  not  to  bless  them.  From  the 
tiniest  insect  that  dances  out  its  lifetime  in  a  summer  sun,  through  all  the  orders  of 
living  beings  up  to  man  himself,  invested  with  lordship,  he  has  only  one  design — to 
make  existence  pleasurable  to  his  creatures.  True,  there  is  evil  in  the  world,  reaching 
down  from  man  to  the  other  creatures  which  necessarily  share  with  him  his  earthly 
lot.  But  there  is  reason  for  the  evil ;  and  the  evil,  it  is  to  be  observed,  id  not  in  the 
creation.  It  has  been  induced  on  an  all-good  creation.  In  no  case  does  God  as  a  final 
end  make  a  being  to  inflict  pain  on  it.  And  even  as  it  is,  with  the  evil  introduced  into 
our  world,  who  will  say  that  God  intends  our  destruction?  It  would  have  been  a  very 
different  world  if  there  had  been  the  shadowing  forth  of  any  such  intention.  It  is  of 
things  as  they  are  that  Paul  says,  taking  a  broad  retrospective  view  of  God's  dealings 
in  providence,  "  He  left  not  himself  without  witness,  in  that  he  did  good,  and  gave  us 
rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful  seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness."  He 
would  not  continue  to  make  provision  for  our  support,  did  he  mean  our  destruction. 
And  not  only  does  he  make  provision  for  our  support,  but  he  gives  us  all  things  richly  to 
enjoy.  He  gives  us  food,  and  the  other  necessaries  of  life  in  abundance.  And  not  only 
so,  but  he  gives  us  many  things  for  the  mere  pleasure  of  them.  He  arranges  objects  in 
nature  with  a  regard  to  beauty.  He  richly  colours  them ;  he  floods  them  with  a  kindlv 
light.  He  gives  us  flowers ;  he  gives  us  the  song  of  birds.  He  gives  us  rainbows  and 
sunsets,  and  clouds  of  many  a  form.  And  he  curtains  the  earth,  that  he  may  show 
us  the  glory  of  the  starry  heavens.  And  all  these  things  he  gives  us  chiefly  as  luxuries. 
We  say,  then,  that  even  in  nature  God  testifies  to  his  desire,  to  his  intention  to 
make  us  happy.  Even  in  nature,  which  has  been  spoken  of  as  "  red  in  tooth  and 
claw  with  ravin,"  God  gives  us  the  promise  of  the  coming  gospel.  Consider,  in  the 
second  place,  how  the  gospel  is  a  communication  of  the  glory  of  the  blessedness  of  God. 
We  remark  (1)  that  this  is  true  of  the  gospel,  if  we  consider  who  are  made  blessed  by  it. 
It  is  a  gospel  of  blessedness  to  us.  It  does  not  need  to  be  proved  that  we  are  not  in 
the  state  for  which  God  intended  us.  We  do  not  bear  the  impress  of  the  blessed  God. 
The  lark  mounts  up  on  wings  of  joy  to  the  sky.  Song  seems  to  be  of  its  very  nature. 
And  as  soon  as  it  has  got  strength  of  wing,  it  mounts  up  and  pours  out  its  song.  We 
oould  scarcely  think  of  a  lark  in  a  summer  day,  hiding  itself  away  from  the  h> ht  and 
refusing  to  sing.  But  it  is  not  so  natural  for  us  to  be  happy.  We  are  accustomed  to 
misery.  We  do  not  expect  men  to  be  highly  joyous.  We  do  not  expect  men  to  be 
Musical  to  the  height  of  their  nature.    We  expect  a  certain  depression,  a  certain  note 


ch.  1. 1—20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  27 

of  sadness  in  all  their  joy.  What  tetter  confession  could  there  be  that  we  are  miserable  ? 
We  are  sadly  out  of  tune.  Who  can  bring  joy  out  of  us  ?  Now,  here  comes  in  the 
gospel  to  make  us  happy.  God  could  have  made  others  happy.  If  there  had  not  been 
enough,  he  could  have  created  more;  and  poured  out  his  happiness  upon  them.  But 
no;  here  are  a  few  miserable  beings.  Out  of  the  hundred  sheep,  here  is  one  that 
has  strayed  away  in  the  wilds  and  haunts  of  beasts  of  prey.  Out  of  the  countless 
myriads  that  are  in  God's  universe,  here  are  a  few  that  are  miserable.  And  the  blessed 
God  says,  "  I  would  make  them  happy ;  I  would  bring  back  joy  to  their  hearts ;  I  would 
pour  out  my  blessedness  on  them."  As  if  one  more  philanthropic  than  the  rest  should 
gay, ««  I  will  not  go  to  tbe  homes  of  peace  and  health  and  plenty,  and  try  to  make  those 
already  ble.-sed  doubly  blessed  ;  but  I  will  go  to  the  prisons,  and  to  the  hospitals, 
and  to  the  alleys,  and,  wherever  I  see  suffering,  I  will  attempt  to  relieve  it."  Glorious 
gospel,  then,  that  has  respect  to  us  who  are  miserable  !  But  far  more  glorious,  if  it  is 
considered  how  we  are  miserable.  We  are  miserable  by  our  own  act.  In  our  folly  and 
sin,  we  hate  thrown  away  blessedness.  We  have  sold  it  for  a  mess  of  pottage. 
Strange  it  is,  yet  it  is  truly  none  other  than  this,  that  we  have  willed  our  own  misery. 
And,  having  guiltily  willed  our  own  misery,  God,  we  can  suppose,  might  have  willed 
it  too.  He  might  have  said,  "  I  have  made  all  my  creatures  for  happiness;  but  these — 
these  whom  I  have  honoured  above  others — they  will  not  have  it ;  they  have  spurned 
it  away  from  them,  and  so  by  their  own  act,  not  by  my  wish,  they  are  miserable." 
But  glorious  gospel,  in  spite  of  our  sin,  the  blessed  God  willed  our  happiness.  And  ir_ 
his  compassions  he  said,  "  I  will  raise  them  out  of  their  misery."  And  so  his  language 
now  is,  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  your  misery."  Thrice  to  this  effect  he  speaks  in  Ezekiel : 
"Have  I  any  pleasure  at  all  that  the  wicked  should  die?  saith  the  Lord  God;"  "For 
I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  saith  the  Lord  God ; "  "  Say  unto 
them  that  pine  away  in.  their  sins,  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in 
the  death  of  the  wicke'd."  Here,  then,  is  our  glorious  gospel.  The  blessed  God,  the 
Fountain  of  blessedness,  wishes  you  to  be  blessed.  Whoever  you  are  that  are  unhappy, 
that  are  pining  away  in  your  sins,  that  are  afraid  of  eternal  misery,  believe  it,  that 
is  not  according  to  God's  heart.  To  the  most  wretched,  woe-begone,  sin-distract»d 
soul  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  we  are  warranted  in  the  Name  of  the  happy  God  to  say — 
Be  happy.  We  remark  (2)  the  gospel  is  glorious,  if  we  consider  the  means  by  which,  we 
are  made  blessed.  If  creation  was  pleasing  to  God,  it  was  also  easy.  He  had  simply 
to  will  the  existence  of  happy  creatures.  But  he  had  to  do  more  than  will  us  sinners 
to  be  happy.  We  look  upon  a  great  city ;  we  think  by  what  means  it  has  been  built 
up ;  we  think  of  the  incalculable  labour  that  has  been  spent  upon  it.  We  think  how 
generations  of  men  have  toiled  hard  at  it,  with  what  anxiety  they  have  contrived, 
with  what  patience  and  endurance  they  have  laid  stone  upon  stone,  and  added  house 
to  house  and  street  to  street.  We  think  how  many  able  men  have  spent  their  lives, 
sacrificed  their  available  strength,  in  the  building  up  of  this  city,  and  then  we  think 
with  what  majestic  ease,  and  how  in  a  moment  of  time,  God  might  have  placed  it  there 
complete.  But  to  make  us  sinners  happy,  was  work  more  difficult  for  God  than  for  us 
the  building  up  of  a  city — work  requiring  greater  sacrifice  of  life.  But  glorious  gospel, 
glorious  beyond  all  parallel,  glorious  beyond  all  conception,  the  ble-sod  Son  in  the 
bosom  of  the  blessed  Father  said,  "  I  will  undertake  it ;  I  will  suffer  and"  die  to  make 
men  happy."  And  so  he  takes  measures  to  suffer  and  die.  He  descends  into  our 
humanity.  And  do  you  say  it  is  man  who  is  there,  suffering  and  agonizing  and  dying  ? 
Say,  rather,  it  is  God  in  our  humanity.  Why,  the  means  used  to  make  us  happy  are 
altogether' stupendous  in  their  proportions.  And  dreadfully  hard-hearted  and  void  of  all 
feeling  must  we  be,  if  we  can  see  these  means  used  before  our  eyes,  and  yet  we  be  content 
to  remain  in  our  misery,  as  though  God  had  done  nothing  but  had  allowed  us  to  suffer 
the  consequences  of  our  sins.  Oh,  let  us  learn  the  lesson  that  Calvary  has  to  teach  us 
about  God's  desire  to  make  us  happy.  Let  us  dismiss  every  dark  conception  of  God 
from  our  minds  which  an  evil  heart  may  throw  up.  Let  us  feel  that  on  God's  part 
there  is  an  infinite  willingness,  nay,  an  infinite  anxiety  and  longing  to  bless  us.  And 
let  us  heartily  respond  to  God's  desire  to  bless  us,  in  the  way  prescribed  by  him.  Let 
us  take,  as  the  object  of  our  faith,  what  has  come  out  of  that  heart  of  blessedness, 
and  is  now  evidently  set  before  us.  Let  us  take,  as  the  object  of  our  faith,  the  lull 
and  free  and  meritorious  righteousness  of  the  crucified  Son  of  God,  to  make  us  juat  and 


28  THE  FD3ST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  1. 1— %k 

■  -  — - 

holy,  that  bo  we  may  be  happy.  We  remark  (3)  that  the  gospel  is  glorious,  if  we  con- 
sider the  nature  of  the  blessedness  that  is  communicated  by  it.  The  blessedness  for 
which  man  was  intended,  and  to  which  he  would  have  attained  through  obedience,  wm 
very  great.  Passing  safely  through  the  gate  of  trial  and  peril,  he  would  have  attained — 
shall  we  say  ? — to  a  God-like  blessedness.  He  would  have  had  the  blessedness  of  a  free, 
intelligent  being.  He  would  have  been  made  blessed  with  God,  and  in  the  enjoyment 
of  God,  to  all  eternity.  Now,  the  gospel  is  glorious  in  proclaiming  this,  that  man  is 
not  to  be  less  blessed  than  he  would  have  been  had  he  never  fallen  from  blessedness. 
He  is  not  to  be  mulcted  in  blessedness.  He  is  not  to  have  a  stigma  upon  him  to  mark 
the  dishonour  he  formerly  did  to  God.  He  is  not  to  he  placed  on  a  lower  order  of 
blessed  beings.  Nay,  in  the  fact  that  Christ  has  taken  our  human  nature  into  glorious 
union  with  his  Divine  nature,  have  we  not  thereby  been  made  capable  of  a  higher 
blessedness  ?  And  not  only  so,  but  we  have  been  redeemed.  And  how  peculiarly  blessed 
it  is  to  be  redeemed  1  It  is  more  than  if  we  had  stood.  We  can  now  not  only  say, 
"  Our  God,"  but "  Our  Redeemer."  How  often  does  God  take  the  name  in  Isaiah !  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord,  thy  Redeemer."  It  is  a  new  tie,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee, 
0  Jacob,  and  he  that  formed  thee,  0  Israel,  Fear  not ;  for  I  have  redeemed  thee."  Our 
peace  is  peculiarly  blessed ;  it  is  the  feeling  of  reconciliation,  the  sweet  sense  of  sin 
forgiven.  Our  joy  is  peculiarly  blessed;  it  is  the  joy  of  salvation.  It  is  the  sense  of 
indebtedness  to  Divine  grace.  We  were  on  the  broad  road  to  destruction.  We  were 
down  in  the  horrible  pit,  and  in  the  miry  clay;  but  we  have  been  saved,  we  have  been 
redeemed.  And  does  not  the  woe  we  have  escaped  sweeten  our  present  joy  ?  Can  we 
ever  forget  it  ?  Our  heaven,  we  think,  will  begin  with  a  sight  of  the  woe  of  which  we 
were  worthy.  And  then  we  have  been  redeemed  by  God.  "  Your  Redeemer,  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel."  And  does  it  not  heighten  our  blessedness  to  remember  that  we  owe  it 
to  the  grace  of  the  most  holy  God  ?  And  then  he  has  redeemed  us  by  no  less  glorious 
a  Being  than  his  own  well-beloved  Son,  and  at  the  expense  of  that  Son's  life.  Is  that 
not  fitted  to  raise  the  soul  to  its  most  joyful  exercise?  The  blessedness  of  every 
intelligent  being  has  been  heightened  in  connection  with  this  salvation.  For  views  have 
been  presented  by  it  of  the  character  of  God  which  could  not  otherwise  have  been  pre- 
sented. Still,  there  is  always  this  additional  in  our  case.  We  are  the  parties  concerned ; 
we  are  the  parties  for  whom  all  this  has  been  done ;  we  are  the  parties  for  whom  this 
great  salvation  has  been  provided.  It  is  a  glorious  gospel,  then,  we  say.  It  makes  us 
doubly  blessed.  It  seems  to  contain  the  elements  of  an  ecstatic  bliss.  Ever  as  we  realize 
the  greatness  of  the  redemption,  we  shall  become  more  gloriously  blessed.  We  conclude 
with  two  practical  remarks.  First,  let  us  keep  near  to  the  Source  of  blessedness  by 
faith  and  prayer  and  meditation.  Let  us  not  go  out  to  any  creaturely  good,  far  less  to 
evil,  as  though  it  were  the  fountain  of  pleasure ;  but  let  us  go  out  to  the  blessed  God 
himself,  especially  in  the  glorious  gospel,  that  we  may  have  our  hearts  filled  with  a 
hallowed  and  satisfying  joy.  "  Whosoever  drinketh  of  this  water" — of  mere  creaturely 
pleasure — "  shall  thirst  again :  but  whosoever  shall  drink  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give 
him  shall  never  thirst ;  but  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of 
water  springing  up  to  everlasting  life."  In  the  second  place,  being  blessed  ourselves, 
let  us  seek  to  make  blessed.  That  is  to  be  like  the  happy  God.  Xet  us  make  sacrifices 
for  the  happiness  of  others.  Let  us  count  those  moments  the  happiest  of  our  existence 
in  which  we  lose  sight  of  self,  in  prayerful  or  active  devotion  to  the  interests  of  those 
whom  Providence  puts  in  our  way,  or  more  specially  commits  to  our  care.  And  if  sin 
was  not  an  inseparable  obstacle  in  the  way  of  God  blessing  us,  let  it  not  be  an  inseparable 
obstacle  in  the  way  of  our  seeking  to  bless  others.  "  But  I  say  unto  you,  Love  your 
enemies,  bless  them  that  curse  you,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray  for  them 
that  despitefully  use  you,  and  persecute  you-;  that  ye  may  be  the  children  of  your 
Father  which  is  in  heaven :  for  he  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good, 
and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust." — B.  F. 

Vers.  12 — 17. — Personal  digression.  L .  Thankfulness  fo»  being  appointed  by 
Chbist  to  his  sebviob.  "  I  thank  him  that  enabled  me,  even  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord, 
for  that  he  counted  me  faithful,  appointing  me  to  his  service.''  At  the  close  of  the 
eleventh  verse  Paul  brings  in  his  relation  to  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  the  happy  God.  It 
WM  a  trust  committed  to  him,  i.e.  it  was  made  his  great  business  to  convey  the  message 


oh.  l  1—20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  28 

of  happiness  to  his  fellow-men.  And  as  he  was  made  responsible,  bc  also  he  was 
empowered.  He  was  not  sent  a  warfare  on  his  own  charges.  He  was  supplied  with  all 
that  was  necessary  for  the  discharge  of  the  duties  connected  with  the  trust.  And  so 
he  cannot  refrain  from  turning  aside  for  a  little,  to  pour  forth  his  soul  in  gratitude  to 
him  who  empowered  him  as  he  also  gave  him  the  trust,  even  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord, 
the  great  Head  of  the  Church,  from  whom  proceed  all  ministerial  appointments  and 
all  ministerial  qualifications.  What  called  forth  his  gratitude  was,  that  Christ  reposed 
confidence  in  him  in  appointing  him  to  his  service.  He  saw  that  he  was  one  who  could 
be  used  and  trusted  for  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel ;  and  so  he  gave  him  the  appoint- 
ment and  the  qualifications.  To  be  assured  of  this  as  Paul  was  is  great  joy.  How 
thankful  ministers  should  be,  if  they  have  some  evidence,  in  their  own  earnestness 
and  in  the  fruits  of  their  ministry,  that  they  have  not  mistaken  their  calling  I 

II.  The  consideration  of  his  previous  life.  "  Though  I  was  before  a  blasphemer, 
and  a  persecutor,  and  injurious :  howbeit  I  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did  it  ignorantly 
in  unbelief."  The  gratitude  of  the  apostle  was  enhanced  by  the  consideration  of  his 
persecuting  career.  He  was  before  a  blasphemer,  his  evil  speaking  being  directed 
against  the  Name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  He  was  also  a  persecutor  even  in  this  respect, 
that  he  compelled  others  to  blaspheme.  And  he  rose  to  the  full  conception  of  a  perse- 
cutor in  the  tyrannical  way  in  which  he  went  about  the  work  of  persecution.  At  this 
stage  of  his  life  he  was  far  removed  from  being  the  minister  of  Christ.  But  though  he 
showed  no  mercy,  he  obtained  mercy.  There  was  this  to  be  said  for  him,  that  what 
■  he  did  against  Christ  he  did  ignorantly.  He  acted  under  an  erroneous  impression.  It 
was  not  that  he  knew  Christ  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  hated  him  for  his  Divine  cre- 
dentials, especially  because  he  manifested  the  Divine  goodness.  But  he  was  carried 
away  by  zeal  for  the  Jewish  religion,  which,  he  thought,  was  greatly  endangered  by 
the  triumphs  of  Christianity.  He  was  thus  not  in  the  most  direct,  most  deliberate 
way,  against  Christ.  And,  so  far  as  he  was  not  throwing  away  the  most  sacred  con- 
victions, he  was  within  the  pale  of  mercy.  He  was  within  the  scope  of  the  Saviour's 
intercession  from  the  throne,  if  we  are  to  regard  it  as  conformed  to  his  intercession 
from  the  cross,  which  was  in  these  words :  "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not 
what  they  do  " — words  which  are  echoed  by  Peter  in  his  address  to  the  Jews,  "And  now, 
brethren,  I  wot  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  it,  as  did  also  your  rulers."  It  was  in 
a  state  of  unbelief  that  he  was  ignorant.  This  implied  that  he  had  not  followed  his 
lights  as  others  had  followed  theirs,  not  greater  than  his.  He  had  been  directed  away 
from  Christianity  by  confidence  in  his  own  righteousness.  And  he  had  given  way 
to  the  disposition,  so  natural  to  the  depraved  heart,  to  make  a  tyrannical  use  of  power. 
He  was,  therefore,  most  culpable,  standing  in  need  of  repentance  and  forgiveness,  as 
Peter  went  on  to  impress  on  the  Jews  in  the  address  just  referred  to :  "  Repent  ye, 
therefore,  and  be  converted,  that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out." 

IIL  -  Grace  abounding  exceedingly.  "  And  the  grace  of  our  Lord  abounded  exceed- 
ingly with  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  In  Kom.  v.  Paul  says  of  sin 
that  it  abounded ;  here  the  same  word  is  used  of  grace,  with  an  addition  to  it  which 
gives  it  the  force  of  a  superlative.  He  labours  to  express  the  stretch  of  grace  which 
our  Lord  had  to  make  toward  him  when  he,  a  guilty  persecutor,  was  saved.  His  salva- 
tion was  accompanied  by  the  two  graces,  faith  and  love.  From  being  a  disbeliever  in 
Christianity  he  became  a  humble  believer  in  it,  even  preaching  the  faith  of  which 
formerly  he  made  havoc.  From  having  the  spirit  of  the  persecutor  he  came  to  have 
the  spirit  of  the  Christian,  forgiving  those  who  persecuted  him,  and  seeking  to  subdue 
men,  not  by  force,  but  by  the  power  of  Christian  truth  and  example.  It  is  said  of  this 
love  that  it  is  in  Christ  Jesus — subsisting  in  him,  and  determined  in  its  outgoings  by 
him.  We  can  understand  that  his  own  experience  of  salvation  had  to  do  with  his 
eminence  as  a  minister  of  Christ.  It  filled  him  with  deep  personal  gratitude  to  his 
Saviour.  It  urged  him  to  labour,  so  as  to  take  revenge  on  himself  for  the  evil  he  had 
done.  It  fitted  him  for  sympathizing  with  others  in  such  condition  as  that  in  which 
he  had  been.  And  it  enabled  him  the  better  to  understand  the  sweet  gentle  spirit 
of  the  religion  of  Christ,  that  he  could  contrast  it  with  his  own  unlovely  persecuting  xeaL 

IV.  The  gospel  through  which  grace  operated.  1.  Beliableness  of  the  gotpel. 
"  Faithful  is  the  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation."  When  our  Epistle  was  written, 
this  was  one  of  the  sayings  that  passed  as  proverbs  in  Christian  circles.    TUi  pre- 


30  THE  PIKST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  i.  1—20. 

fatory  formula  is  peculiar  to  the  pastoral  Epistles.  The  first  clause,  which  occurs  five 
times,  points  to  the  certitude  of  the  gospel.  The  would-be  teachers  of  the  Law — appa- 
rently Essenes — dealt  in  fables  for  which  there  was  no  ground  of  certainty,  and  in 
genealogies  or  namings  of  intermediate  agencies,  which  only  ministered  disputings  as 
to  the  names.  The  apostle  regards  the  gospel  as  the  embodiment  of  certainty.  Ven- 
turing our  immortal  souls  upon  the  truth  of  this  sayirg,  it  will  not  prove  a  myth,  but 
a  glorious  reality.  The  second  clause,  which  occurs  twice,  points  to  the  saying  as 
worthy  of  a  universal  welcome.  Let  ail  men  lay  hold  upon  it  as  an  essentially  good 
saying — good  for  the  whole  nature ;  it  is  only  the  reception  it  deserves.  2.  Particular 
form  in  which  the  gospel  is  presented.  "  That  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save 
sinners."  This  is  the  gospel  in  all  simplicity,  to  which  the  aged  apostle  cleaves.  The 
Anointed  of  God  for  salvation  said  of  himself,  "  I  came  out  from  the  Father,  and  am 
come  into  the  world."  The  world  is  to  be  understood  in  the  physical  sense ;  it  is  the 
earth,  however,  not  in  the  purity  of  the  conception,  but  the  earth  as  it  has  become 
the  congenial  abode  for  sinners.  It  could  not  be  said  of  Christ  when  he  was  here,  that 
this  was  his  original  or  congenial  abode.  He  came  into  the  world,  he  came  from  a  pure 
world,  from  the  Father,  and  that  meant  a  world  of  highest  purity.  And  what  drew 
him  to  this  world,  with  all  its  uncongeniality  ?  Jesus,  the  Name  which  he  has  made 
his  own,  the  Name  which  is  above  every  name,  points  to  his  nature  as  love.  It  is 
of  the  nature  of  love  to  find  a  congenial  outlet  in  saving.  But  whom  on  this  earth 
did  Christ  come  to  save  ?  Men  who  were  wronged,  upon  whom  superhuman  powers 
were  causelessly  inflicting  tortures?  Did  he  come  to  assert  their  innocence  against 
their  strong  oppressors?  No;  men  who  were  in  the  wrong  themselves,  who  were 
wrongers  of  God,  and  were  the  causes  of  their  own  misery.  It  was  sinners  that  drew 
the  Saviour  down  to  earth.  He  longed  to  save  them  from  their  misery,  from  themselves 
as  the  guilty  causes  of  their  misery,  from  their  sinful  habits  and  associations,  and  to 
make  them  pure  as  the  heaven  from  which  he  came.  In  saving  sinners,  he  had  to 
suffer  from  sinners,  in  his  purity  coming  into  contact  with  their  impurity,  and  exposing 
him  to  their  hate.  He  had  especially  to  suffer  in  the  room  of  tinners,  in  all  the  loneli- 
ness of  a  pure,  perfect  life,  treading  the  wine-press  of  the  Divine  wrath  against  sin. 
3.  Individualization  of  the  gospel.  "  Of  whom  I  am  chief."  He  was  not  at  the  head 
of  sinners  in  this  sense,  that  at  one  time  he  had  reached  a  point  beyond  which  sinning 
could  not  go  in  heinousness.  He  had  not  committed  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost. 
He  had  not  sinned  like  Judas,  in  close  neighbourhood  to  Christ  and  in  clear  impression 
of  his  Divinity.  He  had  never  been,  in  sinning,  beyond  the  pale  of  mercy.  Neither 
was  he  in  the  position  to  compare  himself  with  all  who  had  obtained  mercy,  and  to  say 
infallibly  that  he  was  the  greatest  of  them  all.  But  he  was  at  the  head  of  sinners 
in  his  sense  of  his  own  utter  unworthiness  apart  from  Christ.  That  unworthiness  he 
viewed  chiefly,  we  may  say,  in  the  lurid  light  of  his  persecuting  career.  It  was  so 
complete  a  self-revelation,  that  he  could  not  keep  it  from  coming  up  before  his  imagina- 
tion when  he  thought  of  self.  But  this  self-revelation  was  not  all  before  his  conversion. 
He  knew  how  self  was  ever  seeking  to  mingle  with  all  he  did.  In  the  whole  discovery, 
then,  of  what  he  was  apart  from  Christ,  as  one  for  whom  the  gospel  was  intended, 
he  could  say  in  all  truthfulness  of  feeling,  and  with  no  decrease  of  truthfulness  as  he 
advanced  in  the  Christian  life,  but  rather  an  increase,  that  he  was  at  the  head  of  the 
class  of  sinners. 

V.  Encouragement  to  sinners.  "  Howbeit  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy,  that 
in  me  as  chief  might  Jesus  Christ  show  forth  all  his  long-suffering,  for  an  ensample 
of  them  which  should  hereafter  believe  on  him  unto  eternal  life."  There  was  a  fitness 
in  Paul  as  chief  in  obtaining  mercy  also  coming  at  an  early  period  in  the  history  of  the 
Christian  Church,  for  the  sake  of  future  generations.  He  was  a  typical  illustration 
in  what  happened  in  his  case  of  the  fulness  of  the  long-suffering  of  Christ.  For  the 
first  thirty  years  of  his  life  he  was  going  in  the  wrong  direction  altogether.  As  he 
drew  near  the  end  of  that  period  he  seemed  far  enough  away  from  believing,  in  the 
active  violent  part  he  took  against  Christ.  But  Christ  did  not,  as  he  could  have  done, 
make  his  hostility  to  recoil  upon  his  own  head.  But  he  treated  him  magnanimously, 
as  one  who  is  conscious  of  pure  intention  and  forgiving  love  can  do  his  foe.  He  treated 
him  without  haste,  giving  him  space  for  experience,  for  thinking  about  the  Divine 
dealing,  and  for  seeing  his  errcr.    And,  in  the  end,  Paul  was  subdued  into  believing, 


oh.  l  1—20.]  THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  31 

to  the  praise  of  the  long-suffering  of  Christ.  Whoever  thinks  he  is  far  enough  away 
from  believing,  in  resistance  to  the  Divine  leadings,  in  hostility  offered  to  Christ,  Paul 
would  have  him  to  be  encouraged  by  his  example  to  believe  on  Christ,  the  certain  end 
of  this  believing  being  eternal  life,  or  possession,  up  to  our  capacity,  of  the  blessedness 
of  the  Divine  life. 

VI.  Doxoloot.  "Now  unto  the  King  eternal,  incorruptible,  invisible,  the  only 
God,  be  honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen."  The  apostle  concludes  hia 
personal  digression  with  a  doxology  which  is  unique  in  its  character,  and,  we  may  be 
sure,  appropriate.  God  is  styled,  as  he  is  nowhere  else  in  the  Scriptures,  literally  "  King 
of  the  ages,"  i.e.  Sovereign  Controller  of  the  vast  periods  under  which  centuries  and 
millenniums  are  included.  Outside  of  them  himself  in  his  absolute  eternity,  he  sways  all 
that  takes  place  in  them.  He  can  be  long-suffering  as  he  is  in  Christ ;  he  does  not  need 
to  be  in  haste,  having  the  ages  in  which  to  work  out  his  purposes.  He  is  also  styled 
"  incorruptible,"  as  he  is  also  in  Bom.  i.  23 ;  and  "  invisible,"  as  he  is  in  Col.  i.  15  and  Heb. 
ii.  27.  There  is  great  difficulty  in  all  religions  in  rising  above  gross  notions  of  God.  As" 
a  pure  Spirit  there  is  denied  of  him  the  corruptibility  and  visibility  which  pertain  to 
our  corporeal  nature.  There  is  not,  therefore,  permitted  a  corporeal  representation,  or 
any  image  of  him,  as  tending  to  degrade  our  conception  of  him.  He  is  further  styled 
"  the  only  God,"  as  in  ch.  vi.  15  he  is  styled  "  the  only  Potentate."  This  seems  to  be 
chiefly  directed  against  the  Essene  religion,  which  invested  their  intermediate  agents 
with  Divinepowers  of  creation.  To  God,  as  thus  exalted,  is  ascribed,  with  a  fulness  of 
expression,  honour  and  glory  (as  in  Eev.  v.  13)  to  the  ages  of  ages  over  which  the 
Divine  existence  extends. — B.  P. 

Vers.  18 — 20. — Recurrence  to  Timothy.  1.  The  charge.  "This  charge  I  commit 
unto  thee,  my  child  Timothy,  according  to  the  prophecies  which  went  before  on  thee, 
that  by  them  thou  mayest  war  the  good  warfare ;  holding  faith  and  a  good  conscience." 
The  reference  seems  back  to  ver.  3,  which,  though  distant,  is  the  only  charge  which  has 
been  defined,  viz.  the  charge  laid  on  Timothy,  that  he  should  charge  certain  men  not 
to  teach  a  different  doctrine,  neither  to  give  heed  to  fables  and  endless  genealogies. 
This  involved  his  coming  into  contact  with  these  men,  and  so  there  is  naturally  intro- 
duced the  idea  of  warfare.  He  was  to  embrace  his  opportunity  in  Ephesus  of  warring 
the  good  warfare.  "  Knighthood  "  is  Luther's  word,  the  suggestion  being  the  whole  service 
in  war  that  is  required  of  a  good  Christian  knight,  such  as  he  would  wish  the  youthful 
Timothy  to  be.  It  is  the  good  warfare ;  for  it  is  not  mere  romance,  but  a  warfare 
against  all  forms  of  sin — a  warfare  in  the  Name  of  the  Savio*  and  with  his  gospel,  and  a 
warfare  which  has  the  promise  of  success.  To  call  forth  the  knightly  qualities  in 
Timothy,  Paul  calls  up  the  prophecies  which  went  before  on  him.  These  were  founded 
on  the  good  hopes  which  he  awakened  in  good  men,  when  first  he  began  to  show  his 
qualities ;  he  must  not  disappoint  these  good  hopes.  As  prophecies,  or  uttered  under 
the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  prior  to  or  at  his  introduction  into  office,  they  were  to  be 
taken  as  a  Divine  indication  that  he  was  being  put  to  his  proper  work.  They  would 
also,  we  may  believe,  point  to  the  hard  work  which,  as  a  good  knight,  he  would  not  fear 
to  face.  Thus  using  the  prophecies,  they  would  be  a  Divine  assistance  to  him ;  they 
would  be  as  armour  in  which  he  was  clad.  Especially,  however,  with  a  view  to  what  is 
to  follow,  would  the  apostle  impress  on  him  the  importance  of  holding  faith  and  a  good 
conscience.  Prophecies,  expressions  of  good  opinion,  are  only  useful  in  so  far  as  they 
help  us  to  lay  hold  by  faith  upon  the  great  Source  of  strength,  in  whom  alone  we  can 
show  all  knightly  activity  and  endurance.  They  are  also  useful,  only  if  we  do  not  allow 
them  to  seduce  us  to  part  with  a  good  conscience,  our  better  self — that  inward  monitor 
that  from  moment  to  moment  points  to  us  our  duty,  and  in  whose  approval  we  can  feel 
that  we  have  the  approval  of  God.  2.  Warning.  "  Which  some  having  thrust  from  them 
made  shjtpwreck  concerning  the  faith :  of  whom  is  Hymenseus  and  Alexander ;  whom  I 
delivered  unto  Satan,  that  they  might  be  taught  not  to  blaspheme."  For  Timothy's 
warning,  Paul  points  to  the  heretics.  Instead  of  holding  faith  and  a  good  conscience, 
these  thrust  away  from  them  the  latter,  as  men,  with  a  certain  violence,  put  away 
something  that  is  disagreeable.  Their  truest  friend  they  thrust  aside,  as  they  would  a 
troublesome  creditor.  The  result  was,  that  they  made  shipwreck  of  their  faith.  Throw- 
ing away  all  that  was  needed  to  direct  them,  all  that  served  as  chart,  compass,  rudder, 


32 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE   TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  ii.  1 — 15. 


they  made  shipwreck  of  themselves  concerning  faith  in  Christ,  thus  coming  short  oi 
eternal  life.  How  disastrous,  especially  for  those  who  seemed  to  make  a  fair  start  in 
the  voyage  of  life  1  The  teaching  of  the  apostle  is  suggestive  regarding  the  causes  of 
heresy.  "  As  unbelief  nearly  always  leads  to  grosser  or  more  refined  immorality,  so  not 
rarely  it  begins  from  an  immoral  ground,  at  least  when  faith  existed  before  (Bom.  i.  21). 
This  is  a  deep  mental  truth ;  for  it  is  far  too  common  to  represent  faith  or  infidelity  as  a 
matter  of  abstract  opinion.''  Earnestness  in  life  leads  to  correct  opinion  (John  vii.  17), 
whereas  moral  indifference  makes  it  for  our  interest  to  doubt.  Heresies  have  a  secret 
moral  genesis  which  will  one  day  be  made  plain.  Two  notable  heretics  are  mentioned, 
here— Hymenaeus  and  Alexander.  In  2  Tim.  ii.  17  Hymenseus  is  associated  with 
Philetus  in  this,  that  their  teaching  did  eat  like  a  cancer.  He  and  Alexander  (not  the 
coppersmith  of  2  Tim.  iv.  14)  are  here  referred  to  as  having  been  delivered  unto  Satan. 
This  seems  strong  language  to  us  who  have  nothing  to  impress  us  in  the  shape  of  such 
apostolic  discipline  in  our  time.  It  is  properly  regarded  as  "a  form  of  Christian  excom- 
munication, declaring  the  person  to  be  reduced  to  the  state  of  a  heathen,  accompanied 
with  the  authoritative  infliction  of  bodily  disease  or  death."  In  this  case  the  infliction 
of  punishment  was  with  a  view  to  reformation.  There  was  nothing  to  hinder  their  being 
received  back  into  the  Christian  Church.  Their  probation  was  not  at  an  end;  there 
was  reason  for  further  dealing,  and  what  was  suitable  to  their  case  was  the  hard 
dealing  here  referred  to.  Better  that  men  should  be  excommunicated — with  which 
power  the  Church  is  still  invested — better  that  men  should  have  disease  sent  upon 
them,  than  that  they  should  remain  in  a  state  of  religious  indifference  or  be  spreaders 
of  error. — B.  V. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IL 


Ver.  1. — Tint  of  all,  that  for  that,  first  of 
all,  A.V. ;  thanksgivings  for  and  giving  of 
thanks,  A.V.  I  exhort  therefore.  The  inser- 
tion of  the  connecting  particle  "  therefore  " 
marks  that  this  arrangement  of  Church 
prayers  is  a  part — as  the  following  words, 
first  of  all,  mark  that  it  is  the  first  part— 
of  that  charge  or  administration  which  was 
now  committed  to  Timothy.  Supplications, 
prayers,  intercessions,  thanksgivings  (see 
the  Prayer  for  the  Church  Militant).  The 
question  naturally  arises  whether  the  first 
words  here  used — SeV«s,  irpo<rtvxAs,  and 
sV7eu{eis — have  any  distinctive  meaning,  or 
are  merely  accumulated,  like  synonyms  in 
legal  documents,  or  various  phrases  in 
rhetorical  addresses,  to  ensure  completeness 
and  to  add  force.  It  is  against  the  notion  of 
any  distinctive  meaning  attaching  to  them 
that  no  such  distinction  ean  be  supported  by 
actual  use.  In  Phil.  iv.  6  two  of  the  words 
(irpoaevxh  and  Se'rjo-is)  are  used  in  conjunction 
as  here  with  evxapurrla,  with  no  apparent 
difference,  both  being  the  way  of  making 
known  their  requests  to  God  (so  also  Eph. 
vi.  18  and  ch.  v.  5).  Again,  in  the  ancient 
Liturgies,  the  words  SieaBat  and  npoaeix«r flai 
are  constantly  used  of  the  same  prayer.  It 
may,  however,  perhaps  be  said  that  every 
5e??<ris  is  a  wpoffevxv,  though  every  irpoatvx'fl 
isnot  aS^qau.  The  5eji<ns  is  a  "  petition" — 
a  distinct  asking  something  of  God,  which  a 
77  pwtvjck  need  not  necessarily  be.    It  may 


be  merely  an  act  of  adoration,  of  confession, 
of  recital  of  God's  mercies,  and  so  on.  So 
as  regards  ivrei^fts,  here  rendered  "inter- 
cessions." There  is  nothing  in  the  ety- 
mology or  in  the  use  of  this  word,  which  only 
occurs  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  in 
ch.  iv.  5,  to  limit  the  meaning  of  it  to 
"  intercession."  Nor  has  it  this  meaning  in 
the  passage  where  it  occurs  in  the  Liturgy  of 
St.  Clement,  near  the  close,  where  God  is 
addressed  as  'O  Kal  twv  (FuairiavT&v  ivttrrd- 
nevos  Ttti  4vTei£eis,  "  Who  understandest  the 
petitions  even  of  those  who  are  silent."  In 
2  Mace.  iv.  8  and  Diod.  Sic,  xvi.  55  it  seems 
to  mean  "  a  request  preferred  in  a  personal 
interview,"  which  is  an  extension  of  its 
common  meaning  in  classical  Greek  oi 
"  access,"  "  an  interview,"  "  social  inter- 
course," or  the  like.  But  when  we  turn  to 
the  use  of  the  verb  ivTvyxifc  in  the  New 
Testament,  we  seem  to  get  the  idea  of  "  inter- 
cession." 'EvTvyxdvity  rm  is  to  go  to  some 
one  to  ask  him  to  take  action  against  or  t'n 
favour  of  some  third  party  (see  Acts  xxv. 
24 ;  Bom.  xi.  2 ;  viii.  27,  28,  34 ;  Heb.  vii. 
25) ;  and  so  Chrysostom  (quoted  in  Steph., 
'Thesaur.')  explains  ivTvxia  to  be  the 
action  of  one  who  applies  to  God  to  avenge 
him  of  those  who  have  done  him  wrong.  So 
that  perhaps  "intercessions"  is,  on  the  whole, 
the  best  rendering  here,  though  an  imperfect 
one ;  and  would  comprise  the  prayers  for  the 
emperor,  for  the  Church,  for  the  sick, 
travellers,  slaves,  captives,  etc.,  for  the 
bishops,  clergy,  and  laity,  etc,  and  such 


ol  n.  1—16.] 


THE  TIEST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


prayers  as  "  Turn  away  from  us  every  plot 
(4n0ov\1)v)  of  wioked  men  "  (Liturgy  of  St. 
Mark). 

Ver.  2.— And  aU  for  and  for  all,  A.V. ; 
high  place  for  authority,  A.  V. ;  tranquil  and 
quiet  for  quiet  and  peaceable,  A.V. ;  gravity 
for  honesty,  A.V.  For  kings,  etc.  The  early 
Liturgies  closely  followed  these  directions. 
"  Every  day,  both  in  the  evening  and  the 
morning,  we  offer  prayers  for  the  whole  world, 
for  kings,  and  for  all  in  authority"  (Chrysost., 
in  loc.).  So  ia  the  Liturgy  of  St.  Mark : 
"Preservo  our  king  in  peace,  in  virtue,  and 
righteousness.  . . .  Subdue  his  enemies  under 
him  .  .  .  incline  him  to  peace  towards  us 
and  towards  thy  Holy  Name,  that  in  the 
serenity  of  his  reign  we  too  may  lead  a 
tranquil  and  quiet  life  in  all  piety  and 
honesty  [or, '  gravity ']."  In  the  Liturgy  of  St. 
Clement :  "  Let  us  pray  for  kings  and  those 
in  authority,  that  they  may  be  peaceably 
inclined  toward  us,  and  that  we  may  lead  a 
tranquil  and  quiet  life  in  all  piety  and 
honesty  [or,'gravity,].'•,  In  the  Liturgy  of  St. 
Chrysostom:  "Let  us  pray  for  our  most 
religious  and  God-protected  emperors,  and 
all  their  palace  and  court."  "We  offer  this 
our  reasonable  service  on  behalf  of  our  most 
faithful  and  Christian  (<pi\oxplo-rav)  em- 
perors, and  all  their  palace  and  court."  And 
in  the  Liturgy  of  St.  Basil :  "  Remember, 
Lord,  our  most  religious  and  faithful  kings 
.  .  .  that  in  their  serenity  we  may  lead  a 
tranquil  and  quiet  life  in  all  godliness  and 
gravity.  Remember,  0  Lord,  all  rulers  and 
all  in  authority,  and  all  our  brethren  in  the 
palace,  and  the  whole  court."  In  high  plaoe 
(Iv  virepoxv)  \  elsewhere  only  in  1  Cor.  ii  1, 
where  it  is  rendered  "  excellency."  But  in 
Bom.  xiii.  1  we  have  i£ovaiais  fafpexoi- 
<rais,  "the  higher  powers;"  and  in  1  Pet.  ii. 
13,  Tip  /3ao-iAei  us  imepixovri,  "  the  king  as 
Bupreme."  In  2  Mace.  in.  11  the  phrase,  AvSpbs 
iv  intepoxy  k"h  ivo  u,  occurs ;  and  in  Poly  bin  a, 
oi  h  faepoxtf  Svres.  It  is  often  used  in  Poly- 
bins  for  "authority"  or  "power."  That  we 
may  lead  a  tranquil  and  quiet  life  in  all 
godliness  and  gravity.  The  prayer  for  the 
rulers  is  recommended  (as  was  explained  in 
the  above  extracts  from  the  Liturgies)  in 
order  to  obtain  for  Christians  a  tranquil  life, 
undisturbed  by  persecution  and  molestation, 
in  spite,  of  their  peculiar  way  of  life.  Their 
wish  was  to  be  allowed  to  live  in  the  faith 
and  obedience  of  the  gospel,  "in  godliness 
and  gravity,"  without  being  interfered  with 
by  the  heathen  magistrates.  The  clause  in 
the  Prayer  for  the  Church  Militant  which 
corresponds  to  this  is  "that  under  her  we 
may  be  godly  and  quietly  governed."  Tran- 
quil (ilpt/iot);  found  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  The^derivatives,  fipepuos,  itpep.4a, 
eta,  are  common  in  the  LXX.  They  all 
apply  to  •  still,  undisturbed,-  life.  Quiet 
L  TMOTirr. 


(5o-«X<oj)  ;  found  only  here  and  1  Pet.  Hi.  4 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  in  the  LXX.  in 
Isa.  lxvi.  2.  But  the  noun  V«X'«  and  the 
verb  yavxdfciv  are  common.  Godliness  (e&ra- 
0ela).  One  of  the  words  almost  peculiar  to 
the  pastoral  Epistles  (ch.  iii.  16;  iv.  7,  8; 
vi.  3, 5,  6, 1 1 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  5 ;  Titus  i.  1) ;  but 
elsewhere  only  in  Acts  iii.  12 ;  2  Pet.  i.  8, 
6,  7;  iii.  11.  Cornelius  was  eiiaefiris,  and 
so  was  one  of  the  soldiers  who  waited  upon 
him  (Acts  x.  2,  7).  Ananias  was  W  p 
tboc&hs  (Acts  xxii.  12,  T.R.).  The  adverb 
elaePas  is  also  peculiar  to  the  pastoral 
Epistles  (2  Tim.  iii.  12;  Titus  ii.  12). 
Oravity  (o-e/ivoT^s) ;  so  rendered  also  in  the 
A.V.  of  ch.  iii.  4  and  Titus  ii.  7 — the  only  other 
places  in  the  New  Testament  where  it  is 
found.  So  also  the  adjective  aep.v6s  (oh.  iii 
8,  11 ;  Titus  ii.  2).  Elsewhere  in  the  New 
Testament  only  in  Phil.  iv.  8,  where  it  is 
rendered  "  honest "  in  the  A.V.,  and  "  honour- 
able" in  the  B.V.  In  classical  Greek 
atuvis  is  properly  spoken  of  the  gods, 
"august,"  "venerable,"  and,  when  applied 
to  persons,  indicates  a  similar  quality.  Here 
ffe/jtvorfis  is  the  respectable,  venerable,  and 
dignified  sobriety  of  a  truly  godly  man. 

Ver.  3.— This  for  for  this,  A.V.  and  T.B. 
Acceptable  (tur6tiierov) ;  only  here  and  ch.  v. 
4  in  the  New  Testament,  and  in  one  doubtful 
passage  in  Aquila's  version  of  Cant.  i.  13. 
Pound  in  Plutarch.  The  verb  anoS4xt>fuu, 
to  receive  gladly,  is  frequently  used  by 
St.  Luke  (viii.  10;  Acts  ii.  41,  where  see 
note;  etc).  God  oar  Saviour  (see  ch.  i.  1 
and  Luke  i  47 ;  Titus  i.  3 ;  ii.  10, 13  (per- 
haps); iii.  4;  2  Pet.  i.  1  (perhaps);  Jude 
25,  by  which  it  appears  that  the  phrase  is 
confined  to  the  pastoral  among  St.  Paul's 
Epistles).  In  the  Old  Testament  the  phrase 
occurs  frequently  (see  2  Sam.  xxii.  3;  Ps. 
cvi.  21 ;  Isa.  xliii.  3 ;  xlv.  21,  etc.). 

Ver.  4. — Willeth  that  all  men  should  be 
saved  for  will  have  aU  men  to  be  saved,  A.V. ; 
come  to  for  to  come  unto,  A.V.  All  men,  etc ; 
to  show  that  it  is  in  accordance  with  God's 
will  to  pray  for  "all  men"  (ver.  1).  (For 
the  doctrinal  statement,  comp.  ver.  6;  Titus 
ii.  11 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9,  etc.) 

Ver.  5. — One  .  .  .  also  for  and  one,  A.V. ; 
himself  man  for  the  man,  A.V.  For  there 
is  one  God,  etc.  The  connection  of  ideas 
indicated  by  yi.p  seems  to  be  this :  Pray  to 
God  for  all  men,  Jews  and  Gentiles,  bar- 
barians, Scythians,  bond  and  free.  For  this 
is  good  and  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  the 
one  God,  who  is  the  God  of  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth.  And  God  wills  that  all  should 
come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  troth  as  it  is 
in  Jesus,  because  Jesus  Christ  U  the  One 
Mediator  between  God  and  all  men,  by  whom 
alone  men  can  come  to  the  Father,  and  who 
gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all.  One  Media- 
tor.   The  term  ^mWtiji  is  only  applied  to 


84 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  n.  1 — 16. 


our  Saviour  in  the  New  Testament  here  and 
in  Heb.  viii.  6 ;  ix.  15 ;  xii.  24.  In  the  only 
other  passage  where  St.  Paul  uses  it  (Gal. 
iii.  19,  20)  it  is  applied  to  Moses  the  media- 
tor of  the  Old  Testament.  In  the  LXX.  it 
only  occurs  in  Job  is.  33.  Himself  man. 
Surely  an  infelicitous  and  unnecessary  change 
from  the  A.V.  Even  supposing  that  the 
exact  construction  of  the  sentence  requires 
"  Christ  Jesus "  to  be  taken  as  the  Bubject 
and  "  man "  as  the  predicate,  the  English 
way  of  expressing  that  sense  is  to  say,  "the 
man  Christ  Jesus."  But  it  is  very  far  from 
certain  that  twtpmrot,  standing  as  it  does  in 
opposition  to  @e6s,  is  not  the  subject,  and 
must  not  therefore  be  rendered  "the  man." 
The  man.  The  human  nature  of  our  Lord  is 
here  insisted  upon,  to  show  how  fit  he  is  to 
mediate  for  man,  as  his  Godhead  fits  him  to 
mediate  with  God. 

Ver.  6. — The  testimony  to  be  borne  in  its 
own  times  for  to  be  testified  in  due  time,  A.V. 
Tb  fiapriptov  natpois  iSiots.  This  phrase  is 
somewhat  obscure,  and  is  differently  ex- 
plained. But  the  most  literal  renderingand 
the  best  sense  seems  to  be :  "  The  testimony, 
at  its  proper  time,  to  which  I  was  appointed 
a  preacher  and  an  apostle,"  meaning  that 
the  mediation  and  redemption  of  Jesus 
Christ  was  the  subject-matter  of  that  testi- 
mony which  he  Paul  was  appointed  to  bear 
at  the  proper  time.  Tb  fiapriptov  eis  b  must 
be  taken  together,  without  any  intervening 
stop.  Th}s  accounts  for  the  article  r6.  The 
exactly  parallel  place  is  Titus  i.  1,  2,  as  a 
close  comparison  of  the  two  passages  will 
show.  A  further  proof  of  the  identity  of 
thought  in  the  two  passages  is  the  recurrence 
in  both  of  the  phrase,  tiriyvuois  a\r}9cias. 
A  ransom  (avrtXtirpov) ;  here  only  iD  the  New 
Testament,  but  it  is  used  perhaps  by  Sym- 
machus  in  Ps.  xlviii.  9  (xlix.,  A.V.),  where 
the  LXX.  haveT^v  Ttfjt^jV  ttjs  \vrpwaeo)S 
tijj  ^«x?»  avrov,  following  the  reading  -|f>\| 
instead  of  "if)',,  as  in  the  Hebrew  text. 
"What  means  a  ransom?  .  .  .  They  were 
about  to  perish,  but  in  their  stead  he  gave  his 
Son,  and  sent  us  as  heralds  to  proclaim  the 
cross  "  (Chrysostom).  The  equivalent  word 
in  the  Gospels  is  avrdWay^a  (Matt.  xvi.  26; 
Mark  viii.  37).  'AvriKxirpov  does  not  seem  to 
differ  materially  in  meaning  from  Kirpov,  the 
common  classical  word  for  "  ransom "  (i.e. 
redemption  money),  and  used  by  our  Lord 
of  his  own  life  given  as  a  ransom  for  many 
(Matt.  xx.  28 ;  Mark  x.  45).  It  is  the  price 
given  as  an  equivalent  for  setting  free  the 
prisoner,  or  sparing  the  forfeited  life ;  \vrp6ai 
(Luke  xxiv.  21,  etc.),  \irpa<ris  (Luke  i.  68, 
etc.),  Kvrptrriis  (Acts  vii.  35),  hnroKirpieais 
(Luke  xxi.  28;  Bom.  iii.  24,  and  passim), 
haveall  thesenseof  "  redeem,"  "redemption," 
and  the  like.  In  its  own  times.  The  notion 
of  a  time  specially  appointed  for  Christ's 


coming  into  the  world  is  frequently  dwelt 
upon  in  Scripture ;  e.g.  Gal.  iv.  4 ;  Eph.  i 
10;  Heb.  i.  2  (eomp.  Acts  xvii.  30,  31;  2 
Cor.  vi.  2).    (See  the  same  phrase,  oh.  vi.  15.) 

Ver.  7. —  Was  appointed  for  am  ordained, 
A.V. ;  truth  for  truth  in  Christ,  A.V.  and 
T.E. ;  I  lie  for  and  lie,  A.V. ;  truth  for  verity, 
A.V.  I  was  appointed,  etc.  It  is  quite  in 
St.  Paul's  manner  thus  to  refer  to  his  own 
apostolic  mission  (see  Bom.  i.  5;  xi.  13; 
xv.  16;  1  Cor.i  1, 17;  iii.  10;  2  Cor. v.  18; 
Gal.  i.  1,  etc.;  Eph.  iii.  2,  8;  and  many 
other  places).  A  preacher  («^pu{;  as  in  2 
Tim.  i.  11).  So  Mark  xvi.  15,  "  Preach  the 
gospel"  is  KmpitwT*  rb  tvayyc\u>i> ;  and  in 
ver.  20,  "  They  .  .  .  preached  everywhere " 
is  'E/ci)pu|ai/  irai/raxou;  and  2  Tim.  iv.  2, 
"Pleach  the  word"  is  K^pvgov  rbv  \6yov; 
and  generally  it  is  the  word  rendered 
"  preacl  i."  It  combines  the  idea  of  authority 
in  the  preacher  who  is  the  authorized  herald 
(Rom.  x.  15),  and  publicity  for  his  message 
(Matt.  x.  27 ;  Luke  xii.  3).  I  speak  the  truth, 
etc.  The  reason  for  this  strong  asseveration 
of  his  office  as  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  is 
not  at  first  sight  apparent.  But  it  was 
probably  made  in  view  of  the  antagonism  of 
the  Judaizing  teachers  referred  to  in  ch.  i. 
3,  19,  20  (comp.  Bom.  xi.  13 ;  xv;  15, 16). 

Ver.  8. — Desire  for  will,  A.V. ;  the  men  for 
men,  A.V. ;  in  every  place  for  everywhere, 
A.V. ;  disputing  for  doubting,  A.V.  I  desire, 
etc.  He  takes  up  the  subject  again  which 
he  had  opened  in  ver.  1,  but  had  somewhat 
digressed  from  in  vers.  4 — 7,  and  gives 
further  directions  as  to  the  persons  who 
are  to  make  the  prayers  spoken  of  in  ver. 
1,  viz.  men  (robs  &vSpas),  not  women,  as  it 
follows  more  at  large  in  vers.  9 — 1 5.  The 
stress  is  clearly  upon  "  men  "  (or, "  the  men  " 
— it  makes  no  difference);  and  there  is  no 
force  in  Alford's  remark  that  in  that  case  it 
would  have  been  robs  tvSpas  npoaeixeaBoi. 
The  prayers  had  been  already  ordered  in 
ver.  1 ;  the  additional  detail,  that  they  were 
to  be  offered  by  men,  is  now  added.  In  every 
place;  not,  as  Chrysostom  thiuks,  in  contrast 
to  the  Jewish  worship,  which  was  coufiued 
to  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  but  merely 
meaning  wherever  a  Christian  congregation 
is  assembled.  lofting  up  holy  hands.  Alford 
quotes  Clem.  Bom. '  To  the  Corinthians,'  Ep. 
i.  ch.  29 :  Hpoffe\6wfiev  •  .  .  iv  dtrtSrvTi  tyvxys 
ayvas  Kal  afiiaPTOvs  xe"*Pas  alpouvrts  vpbs 
airiv  (comp.  Ps.  xxvi.  6;  xxviii.  2 ;  xliii.  20 ; 
lxiii.  4;  2  Chron.  vi.  12, 13).  Without  wrath. 
It  appears  from  several  passages  in  Chrysos- 
tom that  the  habit  of  praying  angry  prayers 
was  not  unknown  in  hig  day.  "Do  you 
pray  against  your  brother  ?  But  your  prayer 
is  not  against  him,  but  against  yourself. 
You  provoke  God  by  uttering  those  impious 
words, '  Show  him  the  rame ; " '  So  do  to  him ; ' 
'Smite  him;'  ' Recompense  him ; '  .  .  .and 


oh.  n.  1—15.] 


THE  PIKST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


*5 


much  more  to  the  same  effect "  ('Horn.'  vi.). 
In  *  Horn.'  viii.  his  comment  on  thiB  passage 
is:  "Without  bearing  malice.  .  .  .  Let  no 
one  approach  God  in  enmity,  or  in  an  unami- 
able  temper."  And  disputing  (5ia\oyi<r/j.ov), 
The  exact  meaning  of  Sia\ayurii6s  is  perhaps 
best  seen  in  Luke  v.  21,  22,  where  both  the 
verb  and  the  substantive  are  used.  The  Sia- 
Koyuriiol  are  cavillings,  questionings  proceed- 
ing from  a  captious, unbelieving  spirit.  They 
are  SioXo7i<rjuol  leovnpol  (Matt.  xv.  19).  The 
word  is  always  used  in  u  bad  sense  in  the 
New  Testament.  Forms  of  prayer  were  not 
yet  established  in  the  Church,  but  these 
cautions  show  the  need  of  them. 

Ver.  9. — In  like  manner  for  in  like  manner 
also,  A.V.  and  T.B.;  braided  for  broided, 
A.  V. ;  and  gold  for  or  gold,  A.V. ;  raiment  for 
array,  A.V.  The  apostle  here  passes  on  to 
the  duties  of  women  as  members  of  the  con- 
gregation, and  he  places  first  modesty  of 
demeanour  and  dress,  the  contrary  to  these 
being  likely  to  prove  a  hurt  and  a  hindrance 
to  their  fellow-worshippers.  Adorn  them- 
selves in  modest  apparel.  This  is  obviously 
the  true  construction,  Koaiutv  depending 
upon  fiobhoiuu.  There  is  a  little  doubt  as  to 
the  exact  meaning  of  kotootoA.^  here,  the 
only  place  where  it  oceurs  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. Alford  argueB  strongly  in  favour  of 
the  meaning  "apparel."  But  it  may  also 
mean  "  steadiness  "  or  "  quietness  "  of  de- 
meanour ;  and  then  the  phrase  will  be  exactly 
parallel  to  1  Pet.  iii.  5,  "  The  incorruptible 
apparel  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit."  And 
the  meaning  will  be,  "Let  Christiau  women 
adorn  themselves  with  a  decent  and  well- 
ordered  quietness  of  demeanour,  in  strict 
accordance  with  [or, '  together  with ']  shame- 
fastness  and  sobriety  {jierd,  'in  strict  accord 
with,'  or  'together  with']  not  with  braided 
hair,"  etc.  A  woman's  true  ornament  is  not 
the  finery  which  she  gets  from  the  milliner, 
but  the  chaste  discretion  which  she  has  from 
the  Spirit  of  God.  Modest  (k6#iuos)  ;  only 
found  in  the  New  Testament  here  and  in 
eh.  iii.  2,  where  it  is  rendered  "  of  good  be- 
haviour "  in  the  A.V.,  and  "  modest "  in  the 
margin,  "orderly  "  in  the  R.V.  It  is  common 
in  classical  Greek  in  the  sense  of  "well- 
ordered,"  "well-behaved."  Shamefastness 
(aiSais,  bashfulness).  So  the  edition  of  1611 ; 
"  shamefacednesB  "  in  the  later  editions  is  a 
corruption.  Archbishop  Trench  compares 
"steadfast,"  "  soothfast,"  "rootfast,"  "  master- 
fast,"  "  footfast,"  "  bedfast,"  with  their  sub- 
stantives ('  Synonyms  of  New  Test.,'  §  xx.). 
Sobriety  {auxppotrivn,  as  in  ver.  15,  q. i>.); 
soundness,  health,  purity,  and  integrity 
of  mind.  'Airb  Toff  Btias  -ri,t  <ppivas  e\etv 
(Ohrysostom, '  Ap.  Trench.').  Braided  hair 
(v\4ynaou>);  found  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  but  used  in  Aquila  and  Theodo- 
tion,  instead  of  the  x\fK*Ls  or  xfauttls  of  the 


LXX.,  in  Isa.  xxviii.  5,  for  rn'BJf,  a  "dia- 
dem," or  "twined  garland."  in  classical 
Greek  v\4y/MTa  are  anything  twined,  ten- 
drils of  the  vine,  wiokerwork,  ohaplets,  etc. 
The  corresponding  word  in  1  Pet.  iii.  3  is 
i/xir\oKii  rpixav, "  plaiting  the  hair."  Costly 
raiment  Qfiarurfji^  iroXureAer).  For  ipaTurpiis, 
comp.  Luke  vii.  25;  ix.  29;  Acts  xx.  33; 
Ps.  xlv.  10,  LXX. ;  etc.,  which  show  that  the 
word  is  used  /ear1  i&xhv  of  any  splendid 
garment  (Schleusner).  IIo\uTeA.^s,  costly 
(see  Mark  xiv.  3;  1  Pet.  iii.  4,  and  fre- 
quently in  the  LXX.).  St.  Peter  manifestly 
had  this  passage  before  him,  from  the  marked 
verbal  coincidences, as  well  as  close  similarity 
of  thought  (^uirAoirij,  xpvaiov,  xiafios,  i/idrior, 
troKvreKfo,  ayaBonoiovaai  (compared  with  Si 
%pyav  dyc/Suv),  rjauxia,  {morayii,  (compared 
with  viroraffffofievat),  aylat  yvvaiKes,  K.T.A. 
(compared  with  faayyeWS/uvaa  Beotrefieiaii). 
(See  reference  to  St.  Paul's  Epistles  in  2 
Pet.  iii.  15.) 

Ver.  10.— Through  for  with,  A.V.  (The 
change  from  "  with  "  to  "  through  "  is  quite 
unnecessary,  though  more  strictly  accurate. 
"  With  "  doeB  equally  well  for  Iv  and  Sid,  the 
one  applied  to  the  ornaments  and  dress  in  or 
with  which  the  woman  adorns  herself,  the 
other  to  the  good  works  by  which  she  is 
adorned.)  Professing  godliness.  In  all 
other  passages  in  the  New  Testament  where 
it  occurs,  iirayyeWeffBai  means  "  to  promise," 
except  in  ch.  vi.  21,  where,  as  here,  it  means 
"  to  profess,"  as  it  frequently  does  in  classi- 
cal Greek  :  *Eira77eAAe<rflat  hperfo,  <ro<piav, 
etc.  0eocre/3eia  only  occurs  here  in  the  New 
Testament ;  but  it  is  used  in  the  LXX.  in 
Job  xxviii.  28;  Gen.  xx.  11 ;  also  in  Xeno- 
phon.  In  John  ix.  31  we  have  0focre/34jj, 
"a  worshipper  of  God."  Through  good  works. 
Compare  the  description  of  Dorcas  (Acts  ix. 
86,  39).  "Epya  ayadd  mean  especially  acts 
of  charity  (comp.  ch.  v.  10;  2  Cor.  ix.  8, 
9;  Col.  l.  11;  elsewhere  it  is  used  more 
generally,  like  ipyo.  na\d,  though  this  phrase 
also  sometimes  points  especially  to  acts  of 
oharity,  as  in  ch.  v.  10;  vi.  18;  Titus  iii. 
14 ;  Heb.  x.  24). 

Ver.  11. — A  for  the,  A.V.;  quietness  for 
silence,  A.V.  Quietness  is  not  so  good  a 
rendering  as  "  silence,"  because  the  quietness 
here  meant  is  silence,  as  appears  clearly  by 
the  parallel  direction  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  34.  So 
Acts  xxii.  2,  imp&axov  r)<rvxLav  is  properly 
rendered  in  the  A.V.,  "They  kept  silence." 
And  yo-vxairav  (Luke  xiv.  4  and  Acts  xi. 
18)  is  rendered,  both  in  the  A.V.  and  the 
R.V.,  ''They  held  their  peaoe."  With  all 
subjection  (Jv  rsdan  iiroTayjj);  as  oh.  iii.  4. 
The  words  occur  also  in  2  Cor.  ix.  13; 
Gal.  ii.  5.  But  the  verb  mora<raofiai  is 
very  common  in  the  sense  of  "being  sub- 
ject." It  is  used  of  the  subjeotion  of  the 
wife  to  her  husband  (1  Cor.  xiv.  84;  Eph. 


36 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  h.  1 — 15. 


v.  22;  Col.  iii.  18;  Titus  U.  5;  1  Pet 
iiJ.  1). 

Ver.  12.— Permit  for  suffer,  A.V. ;  have 
dominion  for  usurp  authority,  A.V. ;  a  for  the, 
A.V. ;  quietness  for  silence,  A.V.  Permit. 
Why  "permit"  is  better  than  "suffer"  it 
is  difficult  to  see.  'EiriTpeTreiv  is  rendered 
"suffer"  in  theB.V.  in  Matt.  viii.  21 ;  xix. 
8 ;  Mark  x.  4 ;  Luke  ix.  59,  etc  Quietness 
(see  preceding  note).  The  true  type  of  the 
womanly  attitude  is  that  of  Mary,  who  "  sat 
at  Jesus'  feet,  and  heard  his  Word"  (Luke 
x.  39). 

Ver.  13.— Was  formed  (iir\d<T8ri).  The 
word  used  in  the  LXX.  in  Gen.  ii.  7,  'EnKaatv 
6  ®ebs  tov  HuBpuirov,  k.t.a.,  "  The  Lord  God 
formed  man  out  of  the  dust  of  the  ground ; " 
an.  I  in  Gen.  ii.  19  of  the  beasts  of  the  field; 
whence  the  word  irpa)T6ir\aa-Tos  (Wisd.  vii. 
1;  x.  1),  "first  made;"  "first  formed," 
A.V.  So  in  Rom.  ix.  20  man  is  called  tA 
irK&aixa,  "  the  thing  made ; "  and  God  is  6 
n\iaas,  "he  that  mude  it."  "Plaster," 
"  plastic,"  "  protoplasm,"  are,  of  course,  from 
the  same  root.  (For  the  argument,  see  the 
very  similar  one  in  1  Cor.  xi.  8,  9.) 

Vet.  14. — Beguiled  (twice)  for  deceived, 
A.V. ;  hath  fallen  into  for  was  in  the,  A.V. 
Beguiled  (hirari\6ii).  The  same  word  as  is 
used  in  Gen.  iii.  13,  "  The  serpent  beguiled 
me ; "  fa&rnai  /if,  LXX.  (comp.  2  Cor.  xi. 
3,  where  the  verb  used  is  Qi)TrA.TT)<rev). 
Hath  fallen  into  transgression.  Fell  (not 
hath  fallen)  is  the  right  tense  to  use  here  in 
English,  though  the  Greek  perfect,  it  is 
true,  contains  the  further  idea  of  continuance 
in  the  fall,  as  in  1  Cor.  ix.  22  ;  xiii.  1 1 ;  1 
These,  ii.  1 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  20.  So  also  Matt.  i. 
22;  xix.  8;  xxi.  4;  xxv.  6;  Mark  v.  33; 
John  i.  3 ;  2  Cor.  i.  19 ;  and  elsewhere,  71=- 
7ove  is  best  rendered  by  the  past  (not  the 
perfect)  tense.  It  has  frequently  the  notion 
of  transition  into  a  certain  condition  (see 
Bom.  vi.  5;  vii.  13;  1  Cor.  ix.  22;  xiii.  11; 
2  Cor.  v.  17;  xii.  11;  Gal.  iv.  16,  etc.). 
Bishop  Ellicott  gives  the  passages  in  which 
■ylyvoiiai  is  followed,  as  here,  by  iv  (Luke 
xxii.  44 ;  Acts  xxii.  17 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  7 ;  1 
Thess.  ii.  5),  "  denoting  entrance  into,  and 
continuance  in,  any  given  state."  As  re- 
gards the  apostle's  statement,  Adam  was 
not  beguiled,  we  must  understand  it  as 
based  merely  upon  the  text  in  Genesis  to 
whioh  he  refers,  in  which  Eve  (not  Adam) 


says,  'O  tipts  fa&Tt)<rt  iu,  "The  serpent 
beguiled  me."  Just  as  in  Gal.  iii.  16  he 
reasons  from  tnrtp pari  being  in  the  singular 
number,  and  as  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews 
(vii.  3)  reasons  from  the  silence  of  Gen.  xiv. 
regarding  the  parentage  of  Mclchizedek. 
Huther  (in  loe.)  says  that  this  mode  of 
reasoning  is  peculiar  to  allegorical  interpre- 
tation. 

Ver.  15. — But  for  notwithstanding,  A.V. ; 
through  the  child-bearing  for  in  child-bearing, 
A. V.;  love  for  charity,  A.V. ;  sanctification 
for  holiness,  A.V.  She  shall  be  saved ;  i.e. 
the  woman  generically.  The  transition  from 
the  personal  Eve  to  the  generic  woman  is 
further  marked  by-  the  transition  from  the 
singular  to  the  plural,  "  if  they  continue," 
etc.  The  natural  and  simple  explanation 
of  the  passage  is  that  the  special  temporal 
punishment  pronounced  against  the  woman, 
immediately  after  her  sin,  "In  sorrow  shalt 
thou  bring  forth  children  "  (Gen.  iii.  16) — (to 
which  St.  Paul  here  evidently  alludeB)— and 
endured  by  all  women  ever  since,  was  a  set- 
off, so  to  speak,  to  the  special  guilt  of  Eve 
in  yielding  to  the  guile  of  the  serpent;  so 
that  now  the  woman  might  attain  salvation 
as  well  as  the  man  (although  she  was  not 
suffered  to  teach)  if  she  continued  in  faith 
and  charity.  The  child-tearing  (rrjs  tckvo- 
yopias)  ;  here  only ;  but  the  verb  reKvoyoveu, 
which  occurs  in  ch.  v.  14,  is  found  (though 
very  rarely)  in  classical  Greek.  The  equiva- 
lent, both  in  the  LXX.  and  in  classical 
Greek,  is  rexvimoUia.  The  reference  to  the 
birth  of  Christ — the  Seed  of  the  woman — 
which  some  commentators  (Hammond,  Peile, 
Wordsworth,  Ellicott,  etc. ;  not  Bengel,  Al- 
ford,  or  the  German  school  generally)  see 
here,  is  rather  strained,  and  anyhow  cannot 
be  proved  without  an  inspired  interpreter. 
The  stress  which  is  laid  by  some  of  the 
above  on  the  use  of  the  definite  article  here 
has  no  justification  (see  e.g.  2  Pet.  i.  5 — 7, 
where  even  the  B.V.  does  not  think  of 
translating  "  the  virtue,"  "  the  knowledge," 
"  the  temperance,"  etc.).  Nor  is  the  mean- 
ing of  Sicf,  which  Alford  and  others  press, 
"  through,"  i.e.  "  in  spite  of,"  like  Sia  nvp6s 
in  1  Cor.  iii.  15, at  nil  probable  from  the  cm- 
text.  Sanctification  (ay, aa^6s;  Bom.  vi.  19; 
1  Thess.  iv.  3,  etc.).  Sobriety  (<raQpoafoij) ; 
as  in  ver.  9.  It  only  occurs  besides  in  Acts 
xxvi.25. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 15. — Public  worship.  The  whole  chapter  is  given  up  to  directions  concern- 
ing the  public  worship  of  the  Church.    We  may  notice  the  following  particulars. 

I.  The  subjects  of  public  pbayeb.  When  the  Church  meets  together  in  the  Name 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  it  meets  as  pre-eminently  the  friend  of  the  human  race.  As 
the  Church  of  him  who  is  the  world's  Saviour  and  Redeemer,  it  must  manifest  the 
same  spirit  of  universal  love  which  animated  him,    It  ii  not  M  being  hfttert  of  the 


oh.  n.  1—15.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  87 


human  race  (as  their  enemies  falsely  said),  but  as  being  true  lovers  of  their  kind,  that 
Christians  banded  themselves  together  and  refused  all  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful 
works  of  darkness.  This  love,  then,  was  especially  to  be  shown  in  their  united  prayers. 
When  they  came  together,  though  perhaps  their  enemies  were  thirsting  for  their  blood, 
they  were  to  offer  up  their  united  prayers  for  all  men.  Specially,  with  a  view  to  the 
peace  and  order  of  society,  should  they  pray  for  kings  and  governors  and  all  in  authority, 
that  by  God's  blessing  upon  their  government  the  course  of  this  world  might  be  so 
peaceably  ordered  that  his  Church  might  serve  him  joyfully  in  all  godly  quietness. 
And  if  we  consider  how  much  human  happiness  depends  upon  good  government  on  the 
part  of  the  rulers,  and  upon  quiet  obedience  to  the  laws  on  the  part  of  the  people, 
we  shall  see  how  much  need  there  is  for  such  prayers.  In  our  own  days  the  restless 
spirit  that  is  abroad,  the  impatience  of  all  control,  and  the  general  weakening  of  rule 
and  authority  all  over  the  world,  increases  the  need  both  of  wisdom  and  strength  in 
rulers,  and  consequently  for  the  strengthening  of  their  hands  by  the  prayers  and 
intercessions  of  the  people  of  God. 

_  H.  The  persons  who  abb  to  pray  in  the  Chbistian  assemblies.  These  are 
limited  to  the  men.  The  prayers  and  the  teaching  in  the  congregation  are  to  be 
conducted  by  men  only.  The  difference  of  sex,  and  the  different  social  and  religious 
functions  of  each  sex,  are  really  of  Divine  appointment.  As  St.  Paul  says  to  the 
Corinthians  (1  Cor.  xi.  9),  "  the  woman  was  made  for  the  man,  and  not  the  man  for 
the  woman ; "  and  all  the  subsequent  relations  of  the  man  and  woman,  in  the  family, 
in  the  state,  and  in  the  Church,  are  naturally  evolved  from  their  primeval  state  as 
ordered  by  God.  It  is  obvious,  too,  that  there  must  be  harmony  in  these  various 
relations,  and  that  the  principle  which  rules  in  one  department  of  life  must  rule  in 
the  others  also.  Anyhow,  it  is  distinctly  laid  down,  on  the  apostolic  authority  of  St. 
Paul,  that  in  the  Church  assemblies  the  functions  of  public  prayer,  and  public  teaching 
and  preaching,  are  confined  to  men.  The  wide  field  of  more  private  female  ministra- 
tions is  still  open  to  godly  women,  and  seems  to  be  amply  justified  by  the  existence  of 
prophetesses  in  the  primitive  Church,  and  by  such  examples  as  that  of  Priscilla  (Acts 
xviii.  26).  As  regards  the  character  of  the  men  who  lead  the  prayers  of  the  congrega- 
tion, three  qualifications  are  named:  holiness,  quietness  of  spirit,  simplicity  in  the 
petitions.  The  hands  that  are  lifted  up  to  God  in  prayer  must  be  clean  hands,  unstained 
by  blood,  untainted  by  bribes  or  dishonest  gains,  unpolluted  by  any  evil  deeds.  The 
prayers  that  are  offered  must  come  from  hearts  where  no  malice  or  ill  will  dwells,  no 
resentment  for  wrongs  received  or  injuries  endured ;  and  from  minds  where  the  spirit 
of  controversy  is  dumb,  and  no  cavilling  is  to  be  found.  Sincerity  and  godly  simplicity, 
with  an  honest  faith  in  the  faithfulness  of  God,  are  essential  to  acceptable  prayer. 
HI.  The  third  feature  in  the  public  assemblies  of  the  saints  on  which  St.  Paul  insists 

is  THE  MODEST  DRESS  AND  DEMEANOUB  OF  THE  CONGREGATION.      This  applies  especially 

to  the  women,  but  it  is  true  of  the  men  also.  Christians  come  to  church  to  worship 
the  glorious  God,  to  humble  themselves  before  his  holy  presence,  and  to  hear  his 
Word,  not  for  display,  not  to  attract  notice,  not  for  vain-glory  or  worldly  vanity. 
It  is,  therefore,  quite  out  of  place  for  either  men  or  women  to  make  a  parade  of  finery 
in  church.  The  ornaments  best  suited  for  persons  professing  godliness  at  all  times, 
but  especially  when  they  approach  the  throne  of  God,  are  those  of  a  pure  heart  and 
a  meek  spirit,  and  an  abundance  of  good  works.  It  is  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart 
which  needs  adorning  for  its  access  to  the  court  of  heaven. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — The  regulation  of  public  worship.  The  apostle  gives  Timothy  a  series  oi 
injunctions  respecting  the  assemblies  for  public  worship,  which  sprang  naturally  out  of 
the  solemn  charge  he  had  given  him  in  the  previous  chapter. 

I.  The  paramount  dutt  of  PUBLIC  pbayer.  "I  exhort  therefore,  first  of  all, 
that  petitions,  prayers,  supplications,  thanksgivings,  be  made  for  all  men."  1.  Th<- 
leading  place  given  to  prayer  in  this  series  of  instructions  respecting  the  administration 
of  the  Church,  proves  its  pre-eminent  importance.  It  is  the  breath  of  vital  godliness 
(1)  God  promises  to  hear  public  prayer  (2  Chron.  vii.  14 — 16) ;  (2)  Christ  sanctifies  it 


3S  THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  n.  1— 1& 

by  his  presence  (Matt,  xviii.  20) ;  (3)  the  saints  delight  in  it  (Ps.  xlii.  4) ;  (4)  they 
are  to  be  exhorted  to  the  exercise  of  it  (Heb.  x.  25) ;  (5)  it  is  not  to  be  conducted  in  an 
unknown  tongue  (1  Cor.  xiv.  14 — 16).  2.  The  variety  of  terms  in  which  it  is  here 
described  implies  the  diversity  of  circumstances  in  whi:h  God's  people  are  placed.  (1) 
"Petitions."  This  term  expresses  the  sense  of  insufficiency  and  need,  and  may  be  a 
special  form  of  a  particular  prayer.  (2)  "  Prayers."  This  is  prayer  in  general,  as  repre- 
senting the  spirit  of  devotion.  (3)  "Supplications."  This  signifies  a  closer  dealing 
with  God,  a  more  childlike  confidence  in  prayer.  (4)  "  Thanksgivings."  This  suggests 
that  element  which  ought  never  to  be  absent  from  our  supplications — gratitude  for  past 
mercies. 

II.  Fob  whom  are  we  to  prat?  "For  all  men."  1.  It  would  not  be  acceptable 
prayer  if  we  were  to  pray  only  for  ourselves.  It  is  not  Christ-like  to  look  down  with 
a  sense  of  superiority  upon  the  mass  of  men  as  sunk  in  perdition.  2.  We  are  bound  tc 
love  all  men,  and  therefore  to  pray  for  their  welfare.  Much  of  our  happiness  depends 
upon  our  identifying  ourselves  lovingly  with  others. 

III.  Praters  are  speciallt  to  be  made  for  kings  and  all  in  high  place. 
"  For  kings  and  for  all  in  high  place."    1.  Such  persons  pre-eminently  need  our  prayers. 

(1)  They  wield  great  power  for  good  or  evil ;  (2)  they  are  exposed  to  many  dangers ; 
(3)  they  are  liable  to  greater  temptations  than  other  men.  2.  God  has  power  to 
influence  their  public  action.  (1)  The  hearts  of  kings  are  in  his  hands ;  (2)  he  sets 
them  up  and  he  removes  them  (Dan.  ii.  21);  (3)  he  can  establish  their  throne  in 
righteousness  and  justice  (Prov.  xvi.  12).  3.  Kings  can  do  much  to  promote  the  well- 
being  of  the  Church  of  God.  "That  we  may  pass  a  quiet  and  tranquil  life  in  all  godli- 
ness and  gravity."  We  should  pray  for  kings,  because  they  can  promote  our  outward 
peace  and  our  inward  tranquillity,  by  restraining  the  bad  and  encouraging  the  good. 
Kings  can  thus  protect  us  in  the  exercise  of  our  religion  and  in  the  practice  of  godliness. 
Wicked  kings  can  expose  the  godly  to  cruel  risks,  and  expose  their  gravity  to  unseemly 
perils.  4.  The  duty  of  praying  for  kings  is  not  affected  by  the  consideration  that  they 
are  pagans,  or  oppressors,  or  persecutors.  (1)  Christians  will  pray  the  more  earnestly 
for  them  that  God  will  change  their  hearts.  All  the  kings  were  pagans  in  the  days  ot 
the  apostle,  and  many  of  them  persecutors.  (2)  It  was  specially  necessary  to  enjoin 
prayer  for  kings  upon  Christian  communities,  consisting  largely  of  Jews  who  had  an 
intense  longing  to  throw  off  the  Koman  yoke.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  it  was  the 
cessation  of  prayer  by  the  Jews  on  behalf  of  the  Eoman  emperor  that  led  to  the  final 
war  four  years  after  this  injunction  was  given  by  the  apostle.  It  may  have  been  owing 
to  his  injunction  that  the  Christians  were  not  involved  in  the  disasters  of  that  fatal 
rebellion.— T.  0. 

Vers.  3, 4. — The  beneficial  and  acceptable  nature  of  such  catholic  prayer.  "  For  this  is 
good  and  acceptable  before  God  our  Saviour." 

I.  Such  prater  for  all  sorts  of  men  is  good.  It  is  good :  1.  Because  it  springs 
from  a  good  motive,  a  loving  interest  in  our  fellow-men.  2.  Because  it  is  directed  to  a 
good  end,  the  promotion  of  their  highest  welfare.  3.  Because  it  is  a  divinely  commanded 
duty. 

II.  Such  prater  is  acceptable  before  God  our  Saviour.  It  meets  God's 
highest  approval  because  it  is  in  accordance  with  his  own  gracious  designs  toward 
the  sons  of  men. 

III.  Reason  or  ground  for  this  universality  of  our  public  praters.  It  is  good 
and  acceptable  "  before  God  our  Saviour,  who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and  to  come 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  He  wills  that  all  men  should  be  saved,  therefore  we 
should  pray  for  all  men.  Our  prayers  will  thus  be  in  conformity  with  his  will.  1.  Con- 
sider the  nature  of  thi  salvation  here  described.  (1)  It  is  not  mere  salvation  from 
intellectual  error,  for  it  is  that  which  is  involved  in  "  the  full  knowledge  of  the  truth." 

(2)  It  is  not  mere  salvability,  as  if  he  made  the  salvation  of  all  men  possible.  (3)  It 
is  not  salvation  merely  offered  for  man's  acceptance,  but  salvation  actually  obtained  and 
enjoyed.  The  immediate  end  is  "  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,"  the  ultimate  end  salva- 
tion in  its  completeness.  2.  Consider  the  relation  of  the  Divine  will  to  this  salvation. 
"Who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved."  (1)  There  is  nothing  in  the  language  to  justify 
the  theory  of  Universalis ts  thai  all  men  will  ultimately  be  saved,     (a)  The  apostle  uses 


<"*•  tt  1—15.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  89 

the  term  (&.«,  not  the  stronger  term  (lou\lrai,  which  implies  will  with  a  purpose  or 
intent,  (b)  If  he  had  used  the  term  <ra>(ai,  he  must  have  saved  all ;  but  the  word  is 
<rct0i)vtu,  implying  his  will  that  they  should  be  brought,  through  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth,  to  salvation,  (c)  If  we  are  to  interpret  the  will  of  God  by  his  providence,  we 
must  understand  it  in  consistency  with  the  fact  that  the  large  majority  of  mankind 
have  never  heard  of  salvation  and  have  no  knowledge  of  it.  (d)  It  must  be  remembered 
that  many  must  have  failed  to  reach  this  salvation  before  Christ  died  at  all.  (2)  The 
language  of  universality  is  consistent  with  other  language  of  Scripture,  (a)  Christ 
says,  "  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me  "  (John  xii.  32) ;  "  All  men 
shall  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  "  (Luke  iii.  6).  The  Messiah  "  shall  pour  out  his 
Spirit  upon  all  flesh"  (Joel  ii.  28).  Christ "  died  for  all,"  and  he  may  therefore  be  truly 
called  Salvator  hominum.  He  died  for  all  to  arrest  the  immediate  execution  of  the 
sentence  of  the  Law  upon  man  for  sin ;  to  obtain  for  him  unnumbered  blessings  in  thir 
life,  that  he  might  secure  a  proper  foundation  for  the  offer  of  salvation  through  his 
blood.  (b)  But  the  design  of  God  in  the  death  of  Christ  had  not  the  same  relation  to 
all.  He  is  "  the  Saviour  of  all,  but  especially  of  them  that  believe."  He  is  the  Saviour 
of  his  people,  of  his  Church,  of  the  elect,  (c)  The  language  of  universality  used  in  the 
passage  was  suggested  by  way  of  contrast  to  the  restrictiveness  of  Gnostic  teaching, 
which  led  the  apostle  to  say  to  the  Colossians  that  his  aim  was  "  to  present  every  man 
perfect  in  Christ "  (Col.  i.  28) ;  perhaps,  likewise,  the  restrictiveness  of  a  narrow  Judaism, 
for  he  emphasizes  in  the  context  his  mission  as  "  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles."  There  is 
deep  mystery  in  God's  counsels.  But  he  here  sets  forth  his  good  will  to  man,  and 
charges  it  on  the  conscience  of  believers  to  pray  that  all  without  exception  should  be 
brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth. — T.  C. 

Vers.  5 — 7. — Seasons  for  this  universality  of  prayer  in  the  relation  of  all  men  to  God 
and  Christ.  "  For  there  is  one  God,  one  Mediator  also  between  God  and  men,  himself 
man,  Christ  Jesus."  The  salvation  of  men  cannot,  therefore,  be  to  us  a  matter  of  selfish 
indifference. 

I.  The  relation  of  all  men  to  God.  The  unity  of  God  is  consistent  with  all 
differences  of  dispensation.  "  There  is  one  providence  belonging  to  the  one  God,"  The 
apostle  tells  the  Romans  that,  "  as  God  is  one,"  he  is  the  God  of  the  Gentiles  as  well  as 
the  Jews  (Rom.  iii.  30).  There  is,  indeed, "  one  God  and  Father  of  all "  (Eph.  iv.  4,  5). 
The  apostle  also  says, "  The  mediator  "  (Moses)  "  is  not  of  one  " — one  seed,  i.e.  including 
Jew  and  Gentile,  for  Moses  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  Gentile — "  but  God  is  one,"  in 
relation  to  Jew  and  Gentile  (Gal.  iii.  20).  In  these  passages  the  apostle  sets  forth  the 
universality  of  the  gospel  offer.  But  in  the  text  he  infers  the  universality  of  the 
Divine  good  will  from  the  provisions  made  for  man's  salvation. 

II.  The  relation  op  all  men  to  the  Mediator.  "  One  Mediator  also  between 
God  and  men,  himself  man,  Christ  Jesus."  1.  There  is  but  one  Mediator.  The  Gnostic 
mediation  of  angels  is,  therefore,  excluded  (Col.  ii.  15, 18).  Likewise  the  mediation  of 
saints  and  angels,  as  held  by  the  Uhurch  of  Rome.  This  idea  is  dishonouring  to  the 
only  Mediator.  There  is  no  Scripture  for  the  distinction  made  between  a  mediator  of 
redemption  (Christ)  and  mediators  of  intercession  (saints  and  angels).  2.  The  Mediator 
wot  man  as  well  as  God.  (1)  He  was  truly  man,  in  opposition  to  the  Docetic  notion 
that  he  did  not  possess  a  real  human  nature.  (2)  He  was  God  as  well  as  man  in  his 
Mediatorship,  in  opposition  to  the  Roman  Catholic  theory  that  he  only  mediated  in  his 
human  nature.  The  design  of  this  error  is  to  make  way  for  human  mediators.  It  is 
said  to  be  absurd  to  conceive  of  Christ  as  God  mediating  between  sinners  and  himself. 
(a)  We  answer  that  the  Divine  nature  operated  in  Christ's  priestly  work  as  well  as  the 
human,  for  "  he  through  the  eternal  Spirit "  (his  own  Spirit)  "  offered  himself  to  God  " 
(Heb.  ix.  14).  (6)  If  he  did  not  mediate  in  his  Divine  nature  as  well  as  his  human 
nature,  he  could  not  have  been  in  any  sense  Mediator  of  the  Old  Testament  saints, 
because  their  redemption  was  completed  before  he  came  in  the  flesh.  The  human 
nature  is  naturally  emphasized  because  of  the  wtrk  of  suffering  and  death  which  is  here 
ascribed  to  him.  3.  tlve  passage  does  not  imply  that  Christ  was  not  God.  He  is  else- 
where frequently  called  God  and  true  God,  but  here  there  is  a  necessary  reference  to 
the  catholic  doctrine  of  a  subordination  of  office.  4.  The  reference  to  the  mediatorship 
brings  up  the  idea  of  a  covenant  between  God  and  man.    Christ  is  the  Head  of  humanity, 


40  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  n.  1—18. 

the  new  Man,  the  Lord  from  heaven,  able  to  restore  the  lost  relationship  between  God 
and  man.  6.  The  mediatory  agency  is  wrought  through  Christ's  sufferings  and  death. 
"Who  gaye  himself  a  Ransom  for  all."  (1)  This  proves  that  all  the  blessings  of 
redemption  come  from  the  death  of  Christ,  not  merely  from  his  incarnation.  (2)  He 
Toluntarily  gave  himself  as  the  Victim,  yet  he  is  "  God's  unspeakable  Gift."  (3)  His 
death  was  strictly  substitutionary.  The  words  of  the  apostle  resemble  those  of  our 
Lord  himself — "he  gave  himself  a  Ransom  for  many"  (Matt.  xx.  28).  He  was  thus 
the  Substitute  contemplated  by  the  apostle  as  the  Messiah  who  had  obtained  from  the 
Father  the  heritage  of  all  families  and  nations  of  the  earth,  not  Jews  alone,  but  Gentiles. 
HI.  The  tbub  purpose  of  the  gospel  message.  "  The  testimony  to  be  borne  in 
its  own  times."  1.  Thus  the  death  of  Christ  is  the  great  message  to  be  carried  to  all  the 
world,  ft  is  not  his  birth,  or  his  example,  or  his  truth,  but,  above  all,  what  is  the 
completion  of  them  all — his  death  on  Calvary.  2.  It  is  to  be  preached  in  all  times  till 
the  second  coming  of  the  Lord.  3.  The  apostle's  own  relation  to  this  testimony. 
"  Whereunto  I  was  appointed  a  herald  and  an  apostle  (I  speak  the  truth,  I  lie  not) ; 
a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and  truth."  Thus  the  universality  of  the  remedial 
scheme  is  represented  by  the  very  mission  of  the  apostle  himself.  He  was  "  a  herald  " 
to  proclaim  the  glad  tidings  here;  "an  apostle" — let  men  say  what  they  will,  he  is  an 
apostle,  therefore  the  surpassing  importance  of  his  message — and  "a  teacher  of  the 
Gentiles" — to  mark  the  world-embracing  character  of  his  gospel — "in  faith  and  truth," 
to  signalize  respectively  the  subjective  and  the  objective  elements  in  which  his  apostle- 
ship  was  to  find  its  appropriate  sphere. — T.  C. 

Ver.  8. — The  conduct  of  public  prayer  by  men.  The  apostle  now  proceeds  to  indicate 
the  persons  by  whom  public  prayer  is  to  be  conducted,  and  the  spirit  which  is  to 
govern  this  part  of  public  worship. 

L  Prayer  in  the  Christian  assemblies  is  to  be  conducted  by  men.  "  I  wish 
then  that  prayer  be  made  in  every  place  by  men."  1.  It  is  for  men  to  manage  and 
direct  the  public  services  of  the  Church ;  it  is  for  women  to  take  a  more  quiet  though 
not  less  real  place  in  worship.  As  woman  had  been  emancipated  by  the  gospel — for 
there  were  no  longer  "male  and  female"  in  Christ — and  as  she  had  taken  such  a 
prominent  place  in  ministering  to  Christ,  the  apostles,  and  the  saints,  there  may  have 
been  a  disposition  on  the  part  of  female  converts  to  assert  themselves  actively  in  the 
public  life  of  the  Church  at  Ephesus  and  elsewhere.  The  apostle  expresses  not  a  mere 
wish  or  desire,  but,  what  is  equivalent  to  a  solemn  command,  that  the  men  alone  should 
be  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  the  public  services.  The  injunction  does  not  affect 
the  right  or  duty  of  women  to  conduct  prayer  in  private  life  or  in  meetings  of  their 
own  sex.  2.  Prayer  is  to  be  made  in  every  place.  This  rule  is  to  obtain  in  all  public 
assemblies  of  the  saints,  wherever  held.  There  is,  perhaps,  a  recollection  of  our  Lord's 
words  that  there  is  to  be  no  restriction  of  prayer  to  one  holy  place  (John  iv.  21). 

II.  The  spirit  and  manner  in  which  public  pbateb  is  to  be  conducted.  "  Lifting 
up  holy  hands  without  wrath  or  disputing."  1.  The  posture  must  be  reverent.  It  was 
customary  for  the  Jews  to  pray  with  uplifted  hands.  It  was  likewise  the  general 
attitude  adopted  by  the  early  Christians.  It  was  the  attitude  significant  (l)  of  the 
elevation  of  the  heart  to  God ;  (2)  of  the  expectation  of  an  answer  from  heaven.  2. 
The  uplifted  hands  must  be  holy.  They  must  be  hands  unstained  by  vice.  "  Cleanse 
your  hands,  purify  your  hearts "  (Jas.  iv.  8).  The  hands  must  be  free  from  any  sin 
that  would  render  prayer  unacceptable  to  God.  "  Wash  you,  make  you  clean  "  (Isa. 
i.  16).  3.  Prayer  should  be  free  from  all  passionate  feeling.  "  Without  wrath  and  dis- 
puting." Perhaps  arising  from  religious  altercation  or  debate.  Prayer  belongs  to  the 
peaceful  heart.  Faith  and  love  are  its  two  sustaining  principles,  and  exclude  the  idea 
of  passion  against  our  fellow-men. — T.  C. 

Vers.  9, 10. — The  attire  and  deportment  of  women  in  the  Christian  assemblies.  Th< 
apostle  continues  his  directions  in  relation  to  public  prayer.  "  Likewise,"  he  says,  it 
effect,  "  let  women  when  they  pray  be  modestly  adorned." 

I.  Theib  appabel  and  depobtment.  "  Likewise  also  that  women  adorn  themselves, 
in  modest  apparel,  with  shamefastness  and  sobriety ;  not  with  braided  hair,  and  gold, 
and  pearls,  and  costly  raiment."    1.  The  injunction  refers  specially  to  the  dress  •/ 


en.  n.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  41 

women  in  the  Christian  assemblies,  which  ought  not  to  be  showy  or  conspicuous,  calcu- 
lated either  to  swell  the  heart  of  the  wearer  with  pride,  or  to  attract  the  eyes  of  others 
in  forgetfulness  of  the  solemnity  of  public  worship.  2.  While  adornment  is  expressly 
allowed,  according  to  age  and  station,  to  the  exclusion  of  anything  slovenly,  there  must 
be  nothing  in  the  attire  or  deportment  inconsistent  with  modesty,  self-restraint,  or 
Christian  simplicity.  There  must  be  no  excessive  care  bestowed  upon  the  adjustment 
of  the  hair,  and  no  adornment  with  gold,  or  pearls,  or  costly  array  inconsistent  with  the 
attire  previously  recommended.  Plaiting  the  hair  may  be  the  most  convenient  way  of 
arranging  it,  and  wearing  ornaments  is  no  more  sinful  in  itself  than  wearing  apparel. 
The  injunction  is  that  women  should  not  seek  such  adornments  as  would  either 
endanger  piety  or  draw  away  their  affections  from  higher  things. 

II.  The  true  adornment  of  women.  "But  (which  becometh  women  professing 
godliness)  through  good  works."  1.  Religion  is  external  as  well  as  internal.  There 
is  the  form  which  must  be  clothed  with  the  power  of  godliness ;  religion  must  not  be 
secret,  but  manifest  to  the  world.  Therefore  women  must  profess  the  Christian  name, 
and  take  part  in  the  worship  of  the  Church.  2.  There  must  be  a  harmony  between  the 
profession  of  godliness  and  those  deeds  of  mercy  and  piety  which,  Dorcas-like,  show  the 
true  disciple  of  Jesus.  3.  The  highest  distinction  of  women  does  not  spring  from  dress 
or  decoration,  but  from  the  lustre  that  is  thrown  round  their  character  by  works  of 
goodness.  They  will  thus  "adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour"  (Titus  ii.  10). 
— T.  0. 

Vers.  11 — 15. — The  proper  sphere  and  behaviour  of  women.  The  apostle  is  still 
thinking  of  the  public  services  of  the  Church. 

I.  The  woman  is  forbidden  to  teach  or  preach  in  tee  Church.  "  Let  a  woman 
learn  in  silence  in  all  subjection.  But  I  permit  not  a  woman  to  teach,  nor  to  lord  it 
over  the  man,  but  to  be  in  silence."  This  injunction  has  a  threefold  relation — first  to 
herself,  then  to  her  husband,  then  to  the  Church.  1.  She  is  to  learn  in  silence.  This 
duty  concerns  herself.  She  is  to  be  a  learner,  not  a  teacher.  She  is  to  give  all  devout 
attention  to  the  public  instruction,  so  as  to  learn  more  and  more  of  Christ  and  his 
gospel.  And  if  what  she  heard  was  either  difficult  or  doubtful,  she  was  to  ask  her 
husband  at  home  (1  Cor.  xiv.  34) ;  and,  in  case  of  his  inability  to  meet  her  difficulties, 
she  could  resort  privately  to  the  authorized  teachers  of  the  Church.  This  learning 
attitude  was  to  be  "in  all  subjection"  both  to  her  husband  and  to  the  rulers  of  the 
Church.  Yet  it  did  not  imply  that  she  was  to  accept  false  teaching,  or  forego  her  just 
right  to  prove  all  things  and  reject  what  was  unsound.  2.  She  is  not  to  lord  it  over  the 
man.  As  teaching  or  preaching  is  the  act  of  those  in  authority,  her  assumption  of  this 
function  would  imply  a  lprdship  over  her  husband.  Husband  and  wife  are  "heirs 
together  of  the  grace  of  life,"  but  the  gospel  has  not  exalted  woman  to  a  position  of 
authority  over  her  husband.  3.  She  is  not  to  teach  in  the  Church.  (1)  This  injunction 
of  the  apostle  does  not  forbid  her  teaching  privately,  either  her  children,  as  Timothy 
was  taught  by  his  mother,  or  her  servants,  or  the  younger  women  (Titus  ii.  4),  or  even 
her  husband  privately  on  fit  occasions,  or  even  strangers,  as  Priscilla  taught  Apollos 
(Acts  xviii.  26).  (2)  It  forbids  her  teaching  in  public,  (o)  It  is  suggestive  that  the 
words  usually  translated  in  the  New  Testament  "to  preach"  (jcnp&aau,  cvayyextfa, 
Harayy4\Koi)  are  not  used  in  connection  with  this  prohibition,  as  if  women  were  merely 
forbidden  to  preach,  but  still  allowed  to  teach.  The  word  used  here  is  "  to  teach  " 
(SiSiffKa),  and  the  word  used  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  (Ka\4a) — "to  talk,  chatter,  babble" — is 
even  more  comprehensive.  These  words  all  include  preaching  as  the  greater  includes 
the  less;  therefore  preaching  is  also  forbidden  to  women.  (6)  Prophesying  was  for- 
bidden to  women  as  well  as  teaching.  This  was  a  supernatural  gift  enjoyed  both  by 
men  and  women  in  the  primitive  Church,  but  is  not  enjoyed  now  by  either  men  or 
women.  It  is  never  in  the  New  Testament  used  for  preaching,  or  for  mere  speaking  in 
meeting.  But  were  there  not  women  who  prophesied  in  the  Corinthian  Church? 
(1  Cor.  xi.  4,  5.)  (o)  The  gift  of  prophecy  being  connected  with  the  gift  of  tongues, 
and.  both  being  now  obsolete,the  title  of  women  to  the  exercise  of  such  a  gift  in  this 
age  utterly  fails.  (0)  The  apostle,  in  his  discussion  concerning  prophecy  and  the  gift 
of  tongues,  forbids  women  to  speak  at  all  in  the  Churches  (1  Cor.  xiv.).  It  was  in  the 
very  midst  of  his  injunction*  respecting  *-U*  use  of  supernatural  gifts  that  he  says,  "  As 


it  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  n.  1—15. 

hi  all  Churches  of  the  saints,  let  your  women  keep  silence  in  the  Churches,  for  it  is  not 
permitted  to  them  to  speak  ...  for  it  is  a  shame  for  women  to  speak  in  the  Churches." 
Prophesying  as  well  as  preaching  is  forbidden  to  women.  (7)  Much  unnecessary 
difficulty  has  been  caused  by  the  passage  respecting  "  a  woman  praying  or  prophesying 
with  her  head  uncovered "  (1  Cor.  xi.  5).  The  apostle  seems  for  the  time  to  allow 
the  practice,  while  he  condemns  the  manner  of  its  performance;  but  afterwards  he 
forbids  the  practice  itself.  In  the  earlier  passage  he  rebukes  merely  the  indecency  of 
an  existing  custom,  and  then  in  the  later  he  forbids  the  custom  itself.  Calvin 
says,  "  By  condemning  the  one  he  does  not  commend  the  other."  You  cannot  regard 
as  of  equal  authority  a  practice  and  a  command,  both  explicit  and  repeated,  which 
destroys  the  practice.  (8)  '« But  these  directions  were  given  to  Greek  Churches,  and 
tannot  apply  to  the  women  of  our  day."  We  answer  that  they  apply  to  all  Churches ; 
for  the  apostle  says,  "  As  in  all  Churches  of  the  saints,  let  your  women  keep  silence  in 
the  Churches."  The  reasons  given  for  the  prohibition  prove  that  it  has  nothing  to  do 
with  usages,  or  customs,  or  times,  or  races. 

II.  The  reason  ob  ground  of  the  apostle's  prohibition.  It  is  to  be  found  in 
the  original  law  of  the  relation  of  woman  to  man.  1.  Man's  headship  in  creation.  "  For 
Adam  was  first  formed,  then  Eve."  Man's  priority  of  creation  is  the  first  reason,  but  it  is 
to  be  taken  together  with  the  statement  in  1  Cor.  xi.  8,  9,  "  For  the  man  is  not  of  the 
woman,  but  the  woman  of  the  man ;  for  also  the  man  was  not  made  for  the  sake  of  the 
woman,  but  the  woman  for  the  sake  of  the  man."  Besides,  as  "  the  Head  of  every  man 
is  Christ,  the  head  of  the  woman  is  the  man  "  (1  Cor.  xi.  3).  "  The  husband  is  the  head 
of  the  wife  "  (Eph.  v.  23).  The  woman,  therefore,  stands  under  law  to  her  husband,  and 
therefore  any  attempt  on  her  part  to  assume  the  part  of  head  or  guide  is  to  overturn 
the  primal  order  of  creation.  2.  Woman's  priority  in  transgression.  "  And  Adam  was 
not  deceived,  but  the  woman  being  altogether  deceived  fell  into  transgression."  They 
both  sinned;  but  Adam  was  not  deceived,  for  he  fully  understood  the  sin  he  was  com- 
mitting when  he  yielded  to  the  persuasiveness  of  his  wife.  (1)  This  reference  implies 
the  truly  historical  character  of  the  narrative  in  Genesis.  It  is  no  myth  or  legend. 
The  fall  of  man  is  an  historic  fact  of  the  greatest  importance,  for  it  grounds  the  doctrine 
of  original  sin,  without  which  human  nature,  says  Pascal,  is  an  inexplicable  riddle. 
(2)  The  deception  was  practised  upon  Eve,  not  upon  Adam,  for  she  confessed  that  the 
serpent  beguiled  her.,  (3)  This  facility  of  deception  on  her  part  seems  to  suggest  to 
the  apostle  her  inferiority  to  man  in  strength  of  intellect,  and  the  consequent  wrongness 
of  allowing  to  woman  an  intellectual  supremacy  over  man. 

III.  The  blessing  upon  woman  standing  within  her  true  sphere.  "But  she 
shall  be  saved  through  the  child-bearing,  if  they  abide  in  faith  and  love  and  holiness 
with  sobriety."  1.  It  is  here  implied  that  woman  is  to  fijid  her  right  sphere  in  the 
relations  of  motherhood.  The  change  of  number  implies  that  Eve  is  here  to  be  regarded 
as  the  representative  of  her  sex.  Her  sphere  is  in  the  home  life ;  her  destiny  lies  in 
the  faithful  discharge  of  its  duties.  Eve  was  to  be  the  mother  of  all  living ;  it  was  to 
be  through  the  seed  thus  given  her  that  the  curse  was  to  be  lifted  off  the  world,  and 
the  head  of  the  serpent  bruised.  There  is  an  evident  allusion  in  "  the  child-bearing  " 
to  the  Incarnation,  but  it  points  likewise  to  the  collective  seed  associated  with  Christ. 
2.  It  implies  that  women  are  not  saved,  as  Eon  an  Catholics  contend,  by  mere  child- 
bearing,  so  that  a  woman  dying  in  her  travail  is  necessarily  saved,  for  the  apostle  links 
with  it  certain  spiritual  qualifications  as  necessary  to  salvation.  (1)  Faith — implicitly 
resting  in  the  Divine  promise  and  upon  the  Divine  Redeemer,  "as  the  seed  ef  the 
woman ; "  (2)  love,  as  the  inspiration  of  all  her  wifely  and  motherly  duties ;  (3)  holiness, 
as  implying  purity  of  life,  circumspectness  of  walk,  and  devotedness  to  God ;  (4)  with 
sobriety,  as  marking  the  self-effacing,  self-restraining,  self-governing  spirit  which  she 
is  to  carry  into  all  the  conditions  of  her  life  as  a  Christian  mother. — T.  C. 

Ver.  2. — "A  quiet  life."  Nothing  in  the  gospel  was  revolutionary.  Its  aim  was  not 
to  upset  thrones,  but  to  purify  all  the  centres  of  power ;  not  to  make  assault  at  once  on 
polygamy  and  slavery,  but  to  undermine  them  by  the  Christian  spirit  and  sacrifice.  Prayer 
is  here  made  for  kings  and  all  in  authority.  Rulership  there  must  be.  Anarchy  is 
misery.  Fields  must  be  ploughed;  grain  must  be  stored;  homes  must  be  protected; 
cr  else  weakness  becomes  the  prey  of  strength.    The  purpose,  then,  of  God,  in  ordination 


OT.  n.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  4S 


of  law  and  government,  is  that  we  may  enjoy  a  quiet  life.  To  some  a  quiet  life  is  tha 
least  desirable  thing ;  but  it  is  the  life  of  nature,  and  it  is  the  most  blessed  life.  How 
quietly  the  flowers  blow,  the  stars  shine,  the  dew  de-cends,  the  l>irds  wing  their 
night,  the  light  falls !  1.  "A  quiet  life ; "  for  if  there  he  disorder,  all  life  is  at  a  stand- 
still. Even  great  artists  like  Gerome,  during  the  last  French  Revolution,  had  to  bury 
their  pictures,  for  the  time,  beneath  the  earth.  2.  "  Quiet ; "  for  think  of  the  forces 
around  us.  We  need  good  government  to  preserve  us  from  the  violent,  the  lewd,  and 
the  criminal.  The  sea  of  human  passion  is  always  ready  to  break  its  barriers;  the 
volcano  would  soon  burst  through  the  crust.  3.  "  Quiet ;"  for  this  is  the  great  enjoy- 
ment of  life.  Our  happiest  hours  have  been  quiet  ones — at  home ;  by  the  river  or  the 
sea ;  in  the  valleys  and  in  the  forests ;  and  in  the  Church  of  God.  "  That  we  may  lead,'' 
which  implies  continuance;  life  without  trepidation;  absence  of  the  disorders  which 
check  industry,  prudence,  and  enterprise. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  2. — "A  peaceable  life."  Christ  said,  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,"  and  he  intended 
this  to  be  the  element  in  which  nations  and  families  and  individuals  should  live. 
Through  faith  in  him,  we  have  peace  with  God,  peace  with  our  brother,  and  peace  in 
ourselves.  The  world  delights  in  noise  and  tumult;  fills  its  forums  with  fierce  dis- 
cussions and  debates ;  hangs  the  pictures  of  Wouvermans,  with  their  fierce  battle-fields, 
on  its  walls.  Some  people  are  said  to  delight  in  strife — to  be  what  is  called  "  law-thirsty ; " 
and  in  quiet  villages,  even,  you  meet  with  antagonisms  that  are  fierce  and  frequent.  1. 
"  Peaceable ; "  for  the  gospel  is  to  overcome  evil  with  yood.  To  triumph,  not  by  carnal 
weapons,  but  those  that  are  mighty  through  God,  and  which  have  the  secret  majesty  of 
their  power  in  the  cross.  2.  "  Peaceable ; "  for  passion  must  be  governed  by  conscience 
and  Christ.  Unquestionably  the  microscope  shows  us  insects  at  war  in  the  globule  of 
water ;  and  the  beasts  of  the  forest  meet  in  deadliest  conflict.  But  man  is  to  triumph 
over  himself ;  reason  is  to  be  lord  over  passion,  and  Christ  is  to  be  Lord  over  all.  3. 
"  Peaceable ;  "for  a  home  without  this  is  misery.  Where  jarring  and  disputation  are, 
there  the  atmosphere  is  destructive  of  all  holy,  happy  life.  4.  "  Peaceable ;  "for  this  is 
the  end  of  law.  Forms  of  government  are  not  all  in  all.  Greece  and  Rome  alike  fell 
under  the  same  form  of  government  under  which  they  rose.  5.  "  Peaceable ;  "for  the 
Prince  of  Peace  is  to  reign.  He  came  to  fulfii  the  angels'  song,  "Peace  on  earth,  and 
good  will  to  man ;  "  and  one  day,  by  his  cross,  he  will  draw  all  hearts  unto  himself. — 
W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  2. — Moral  loveliness.  "  In  all  godliness  and  honesty."  It  may  be  said  that 
"  godliness  "  includes  "  honesty ; "  but  we  must  not  be  the  slaves  of  pedantry  in  words ; 
it  is  good  sometimes  to  emphasize. 

I.  Godliness  is  essential  to  the  okdeb  of  the  state.  Rousseau  remarks,  "  A 
country  cannot  well  subsist  without  liberty,  nor  liberty  without  virtue."  Peaceable 
lives  must  be  godly  lives.  The  safety  of  a  nation  is  not  "lions  chained,"  but  "lions 
turned  to  lambs."  Modern  sociology  thinks  it  can  do  without  godliness.  It  has 
invented  some  philosophy  of  morals  of  its  own ;  some  ideal  of  utility  called  "  the  greatest 
guod  of  the  greatest  number."  Philosophers  may  understand  it,  but  common  people 
cannot.  So  much  depends  on  what  is  meant  by  "  the  greatest  good."  For  if  you  exclude 
the  soul,  the  greatest  good  is  only  a  secular  paradise,  and  that  is  death  to  all  the  heroism 
which  can  deny  itself  earthly  pleasure  for  the  sake  of  high  spiritual  ends.  By  "  godli- 
ness "  we  understand  God-likeness  in  men.  Some  talk  of  seraphic  holiness ;  we  prefer  the 
old  word  "  godliness."  Let  a  seraph  be  a  seraph ;  we  want  to  be  men.  It  is  not  wise 
for  children  to  sing,  "  I  want  to  be  an  angel ; "  they  should  want  to  be  good  children. 
We  want  godliness ;  purity  like  God's ;  pity  like  God's ;  fidelity  like  God's ;  holiness 
like  God's.    "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy." 

II.  Honesty  is  essential  to  the  tkue  Christian  life.  No  fine  ideas  of  spirituality 
that  set  at  nought  common  morality  must  find  honour  amongst  us.  While  our  hearts 
are  in  heaven,  our  feet  are  upon  the  earth.  1.  We  must  be  honest  to  our  convictions ; 
act  out  what  we  think ;  dare  to  be  true  to  ourselves.  2.  We  must  be  honest  in  word ; 
dealing  in  good  coin ;  not  pretending  to  be  what  we  are  not.  Better  honest  silver  than 
counterfeit  gold.  3.  We  are  to  be  honest  in  deed.  Whether  we  build,  or  buy,  or  sell, 
whether  we  paint  with  the  artist,  or  mingle  in  the  marts  of  commerce,  we  an  to  Me  to 


•»  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  n.  1—15. 

St  that  the  stamp  of  honesty  is  on  all  we  do.  For  all  this  we  are  to  pray ;  for  there  is 
a  great  sky  over  us  all,  and  a  great  Father  in  heaven,  and  a  great  Saviour  in  whose  Name 
we  may  pray.  So  life  will  he  peaceful  and  holy ;  based  upon  the  granite  rock,  but  bathed 
in  the  delicate  haze  of  the  firmament  of  heaven ;  solidity  clothed  with  beauty ;  and  he  to 
whom  we  pray  heareth  us  always. — W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  6. — The  self-giving  of  Christ.  "Who  gave  himself  a  Ransom  for  all,  to  be 
testified  in  due  time."  We  are  indebted  to  the  slavery  of  St.  Paul's  time  for  the  use  of 
the  word  "  ransom."  So  literature,  in  its  words,  enshrines  history.  We  cannot  make  a 
perfect  theory  of  the  Atonement.  Many  have  tried.  Some  have  taken  the  idea  of  slavery; 
some  have  taken  the  idea  of  debt.  There  has  been  the  "commercial "  theory,  and  the 
"  legal  "  theory ;  but  no  theory  is  complete  that  does  not  contain  all  the  ideas.  The 
idea  of  "  ransom  "  has  had  its  false  theory ;  for  in  the  seventh  century  some  theologians 
said,  "  It  was  a  price  paid  to  the  devil."  That  we  are  the  slaves  of  sin,  and  that  Christ 
ransoms  us,  is  the  great  doctrine  of  the  gospel. 

I.  Christ  gave  himself.  The  humanity  of  that  age  gave  others.  What  is  the  great 
study  of  the  dying  Roman  age?  Selfishness.  The  patricians,  wrapped  up  in  togas, 
saw,  in  the  Colosseum,  the  gladiators  fall  to  amuse  them.  The  great  generals  brought 
home  as  slaves — physicians,  musicians,  and  workmen,  and  used  them  as  good  invest- 
ments. Rome  bore  away  the  native  art  of  Greece  to  decorate  its  own  homes.  Not  only  the 
humanity  of  that  age,  but  the  humanity  of  every  age  without  Christ,  tends  to  self-ism. 
The  philosophy  of  the  cross  is  the  only  social  philosophy.  It  does  not  take.  It  leaves 
men  to  the  personal  use  of  their  gifts  and  possessions ;  but  it  says,  "  Give  yourself — 
your  purest  ideals,  your  best  impulses,  your  noblest  powers,  for  the  good  of  others." 

II.  The  CiBSAKB  op  that  age  had  no  true  poweb.  They  held  men  by  the  throat, 
and  not  by  the  heart ;  and  they  were  lifted  to  Ctesarship  by  the  Praetorian  guards. 
They  rose  and  fell  by  the  sword ;  and  the  dagger  or  the  Tiber  saw  the  last  of  them. 
The  words  were  a  satire  on  the  Saviour,  "  saying  that  he  also  himself  is  Christ,  a  King" 
— an  unconscious  prophecy,  and  yet  how  true !  His  kingdom  came  without  observation ; 
it  was  an  empire  within  the  heart ;  it  was  not  in  word,  but  in  power ;  it  was  not  with 
observation,  but  it  silently  grew  like  the  mustard  seed.  Its  foundation  was  in  this, 
"He  gave  himself" — his  exquisite  sensibilities,  his  sacred  energies,  his  unwearied 
endurance,  his  contact  with  shame  and  scorn ;  and  then,  on  the  cross,  he  died, "  the  Just 
for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  9. — Modest  adornment.  "That  women  adorn  themselves  in  modest  apparel." 
The  gospel  never  permits  asceticism.  As  God  is  the  God  of  beauty,  and  nature  is 
clothed  with  garments  Hike  the  high  priest  of  old)  of  glory  and  beauty,  so  here  we 
have  the  true  idea  carried  out  in  religion.  Women  are  "  to  adorn  themselves."  God's 
most  beautiful  work  in  creation,  the  human  frame,  is  to  be  fitly  apparelled ;  for,  to  this 
day,  art  knows  no  higher  subject  than  the  human  face  and  form.     But — 

I.  Modesty  is  to  be  the  spirit  of  all  adornment,  because  the  nature  of  the  being 
adorned  is  a  sacred  nature.  Woman  is  the  true  guardian  of  virtue.  Her  manner,  her 
temper,  her  spirit, — all  these  constitute  the  best  defence  of  virtue. 

II.  Duess  is  the  symbol  or  character.  If  there  is  absence  of  shame-heartedness, 
there  will  be  absence  of  shame-facedness.  The  womanhood  of  that  age  had  sunk  very 
low.  By  turns  woman  had  been  the  toy  or  slave  of  man.  The  gospel  uplifted  her ; 
for  we  aro  all  equal  in  the  sight  of  God.  There  was  neither  male  nor  female  there ;  and 
she  must  help  the  great  ideal,  and  by  modest  apparel  show  the  innate  modesty  of 
her  thought  and  feeling.  For,  say  what  we  like,  dress  acts  upon  the  mind  and  character. 
Dress  lifc  e  a  clown,  and  you  will  feel  like  a  clown.  Modest  apparel  need  not  be  shorn  of 
taste  aid  refinement  and  true  beauty.  It  is  no  dishonour  to  a  woman  that  she  likes 
dress.  It  is  not  Christian  to  destroy  that  taste ;  but  that  which  becometh  women  pro- 
fessing godliness  is  modest  though  beautiful  apparel. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Universalism.  I.  Universality  in  odb  appearing  before  God  on 
behalf  of  others.  1.  Broad  teaching.  "  I  exhort  therefore,  first  of  all,  that  suppli- 
cations, prayers,  intercessions,  thank^ivings,  be  made  for  all  men."  This  is  the  first 
duty  which  pressed  upon  the  npostte:s  mind,  as  claiming  attention.     If  a  priest  is  one 


08.  n.  1—16.]  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  46 

who  acts  for  otl  crs,  then  there  is  here  required  of  us  priestly  service,  which  is  only  in 
accordance  with  our  being  called,  in  1  Pet.  ii.  6,  a  holy  priesthood.    Our  priestly  service 
is  here  regarded  as  twofold.     (1)  Prayer  for  all.    For  the  sake  of  emphasis  and  fulness 
three  words  are  used  to  denote  prayer,  which  a  Greek  would  be  better  able  to  distinguish 
than  we  can  do  now.    The  first  word  seems  to  mark  the  state  of  need  out  of  which 
petitions  take  their  rise.    The  second  word  seems  to  mark  our  approaching  God  with 
our  petitions.     The  third  word  seems  to  mark  the  urgent  way  in  which  we  are  to 
approach  God  with  our  petitions.    An  intercessory  character  is  given  to  all  three  by 
the  accompanying  words.     It  is  right  that  we  should  turn  our  wants  into  petitions  for 
ourselves,  that  we  should  approach  God  with  these  petitions,  and  that  we  should  press 
them  with  all  urgency.    But  there  is  a  range  of  want  beyond  ourselves  which  we  are  here 
directed  to  cover  by  intercession.     We  are  to  turn  the  wants  of  others  into  intercessions 
for  them ;  with  our  intercessory  petitions  we  are  to  go  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  we  are 
to  press  them  there  with  all  the  urgency  of  which  we  are  capable.     We  are  not  to  be 
so  selfish  as  to  think  only  of  ourselves  in  our  prayers.     The  Spirit,  even  in  the  way  of 
blessing  us,  would  direct  us  away  from  ourselves  to  what  others  need.     But  for  whom 
are  we  to  intercede  ?    This  is  the  point  to  which  the  teaching  of  the  apostle  specially 
refers.     It  is  certainly  our  duty  to  intercede  for  our  family  and  friends.    "  He  that  pro- 
videth  not  for  his  own,  and  specially  for  those  of  his  own  house,  hath  denied  the  faith, 
and  is  worse  than  an  infidel."    And,  if  we  do  not  take  the  wants  of  our  own  before  God, 
we  are  not  acting  the  natural  part,  which  is  to  be  expected  of  us  as  Christians.    But 
there  is  also  a  family  selfishness,  from  which,  if  we  would  have  the  larger  blessing,  we 
must  be  freed  in  our  prayers.     "  0  God,  the  Creator  and  Preserver  of  all  mankind,  we 
humbly  beseech  thee  for  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men ;  that  thou  wouldest  be  pleased 
to  make  thy  ways  known  unto  them,  thy  saving  health  unto  all  nations."    We  are  not 
to  be  prevented  from  interceding  for  others  by  reason  of  their  ill  desert.   God  has  shown 
us  Abraham,  that  prince  of  the  elder  covenant,  using  his  privilege  on  behalf  of  unde- 
serving Lot,  and  also  on  behalf  of  ungodly  Sodom.    He  has  also  shown  us  his  afflicted 
patriarch  under  direction  to  pray  for  the  uncharitable  Eliphaz,  Zophar,  and  Bildad. 
They  were  to  offer  sacrifice ;  but  God  said, "  My  servant  Job  shall  pray  for  you :  for  him 
will  I  accept."     "  We  are  to  pursue  the  sinner  with  love ;  we  are  to  weave  around  the 
impenitent  a  network  of  prayer  from  which  he  may  find  it  hard  to  extricate  himself." 
We  are  not  to  allow  obscurity  or  distance  to  separate  us  from  souls.     St.  Vincent  dc 
Paul  conveys  some  of  his  prayers  (as  by  a  definite  grant) ."  to  the  most  forgotten  soul 
in  purgatory."    Surely  we  are  entitled  to  convey  our  prayers  to  the  most  forgotten  soul 
in  this  world.    Boman  Catholic  writers  are  to  be  commended  for  the  stress  they  lay  on 
the  ties  which  unite  us  to  the  great  human  society  in  which  God  has  placed  us.    It  is 
not  their  truth,  for  it  is  simply  the  spirit  of  our  being  here  enjoined  to  offer  up  prayer 
for  all  men.    We  are  to  think  of  ourselves  as  belonging  to  a  great  world  of  need,  belong- 
ing to  it  more  than  we  do  to  ourselves ;  and  we  belong  to  it  in  this  way,  that  we  are 
bound  to  pray  for  it  with  all  earnestness  that  the  ends  of  Christ  may  be  advanced  ih  it ; 
thus,  we  believe,  making  our  influence  felt  in  circle  after  circle  to  its  utmost  bound. 
(2)  Tlianksgiving  for  all.    It  is  the  frequent  teaching  of  the  apostle  that  thanksgiving 
is  to  accompany  the  presentation  of  petitions.    We  are  not  to  be  so  much  taken  up 
with  our  wants  as  to'  forget  our  mercies.     While,  then,  we  are  to  be  quick  to  see  the 
wants  of  others,  we  are  also  to  be  quick  to  see  their  mercies.    And  while  we  turn  their 
wants  into  intercessions,  we  are  to  turn  their  mercies  into  thanksgivings.  But  for  whom 
are  we  to  thank  God  ?    We  are  especially  to  give  thanks  fqr  those  who  are  bound  up 
with  us  in  the  family  unity,  if  they  are  free  from  calamity,  and  more  so  if  they  are  the 
subject*  of  saving  grace.     There  may  be  those  in  our  homes  who  cannot  thank  God  for 
themselves,  and  we  are  to  do  this  for  them.    But  we  are  to  give  our  thanksgivings  a 
wider  sweep.     We  are  to  give  thanks  for  our  neighbour,  even  when  he  may  bear  us  a 
grudge,  even  when  his  interests  may 'seem  to  conflict  with  ours.     We  are  to  get  beyond 
all  that  would  narrow  our  souls,  and  lay  hold  upon  this,  that  God  sees  fit  to  bless  him ; 
and  why  should  we  begrudge  the  Giver  his  due  of  praise  ?    We  are  to  thank  God  for 
those  who  are  sensible  of  their  mercies,  and  are  not  remiss  themselves  in  thanking  God. 
We  do  not  need  to  be  afraid  of  God  receiving  too  much  gratitude  for  mercies  bestowed. 
If  there  are  those  who  are  ungrateful  for  mercies  and  do  not  give  God  the  glory,  it  it 
meet  that  we,  who  have  a  right  understanding  of  things  and  are  jealous  of  God's  glory, 


46  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  n.  1—15. 

ihould  see  that  he  is  not  robbed  of  Ms  sacrifice  of  praise.  Our  thanksgiving  is  to 
extend  far  beyond  our  knowledge.  We  are  to  seize  the  spirit  of  universality  which  the 
apostle  here  inculcates.  "  Almighty  God,  Father  of  all  mercies,  we  thine  unworthy 
servants  do  give  thee  most  humble  and  hearty  thanks  for  all  thy  goodness  and  loving- 
kindness  to  us  and  to  all  men."  A  requirement  for  both  parts  of  this  priestly  work  is, 
that  we  take  pains  to  acquaint  ourselves  with  the  men  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  and  with 
what  is  taking  place  among  them.  A  second  requirement  is  that  we  open  our  hearts 
to  their  needs  and  mercies.  By  intelligence  and  large-heartedness,  our  work  shall 
answei  its  end,  viz.  the  calling  down  of  blessing  on  men.  2.  Special  teaching.  "  For 
kings  and  all  that  are  in  high  place ;  that  we  may  lead  a  tranquil  and  quiet  life  in  all 
godliness  and  gravity."  We  are  to  understand  the  highest  and  the  subordinate  repre- 
sentatives of  authority  in  the  state.  Our  duty  branches  out  in  the  same  way  as  before. 
(1)  Prayer  for  kings  and  magistrates.  We  are  to  pray  for  them  especially  in  their 
official  capacity,  that  they  may  be  enabled  faithfully  to  discharge  the  duties  of  their 
office,  and  to  glorify  God  therein.  (2)  Thanksgiving  for  kings  and  magistrates.  In 
this  land  we  can  give  unfeigned  thanks  to  God  that  we  enjoy  so  largely  the  blessings 
of  good  government.  The  public  recognition  of  kings  and  magistrates  would  be  con- 
ducive to  their  leading  a  tranquil  and  quiet  life.  The  first  word  points  to  the  state  not 
using  its  power  against  them.  The  second  word  points  to  their  not  provoking  a  collision 
with  the  state.  By  the  course  enjoined,  a  right  impression  would  go  abroad  regarding 
them,  that  they  were  not  decriers  of  dignities,  secret  plotters  against  the  existing  form 
of  government.  It  was  good  advice  which  was  given  to  the  Jews  of  the  Captivity : 
"  Seek  the  peace  of  the  city,  whither  I  have  caused  you  to  be  carried  away  captives,  and 
pray  unto  the  Lord  fur  it:  for  in  the  peace  thereof  shall  ye  have  peace."  So  the  good 
advice  of  the  apostle  here  saved  the  Christians  (in  the  midst  of  the  Boman  empire) 
from  many  a  false  step.  They  could  follow  the  quiet  course  in  all  godliness  and  gravity. 
The  first  word  points  to  the  habit  of  the  Christian's  mind,  which  is  that  he  has  a 
regard  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  things.  The  second  word  points  to  his  having  a 
regard  to  the  propriety  of  things,  which  is  "  the  appropriate  setting  of  higher  graces  and 
virtues."  Not  mere  policy,  but  the  God-regarding  habit,  and  the  sense  of  propriety, 
kept  the  Christians  in  the  quiet  course.  3.  Motive.  "  This  is  good  and  acceptable  in 
the  sight  of  God  our  Saviour."  The  intermediate  reference  is  brought  in  to  illustrate 
the  universality  of  our  service  for  others.  This  service  in  its  universality  is  recom- 
mended, as  having  a  high  excellence  in  itself.  Moreover,  it  is  peculiarly  pleasing  to  God 
in  his  character  as  Saviour,  which  is  to  be  further  brought  out.  Even  Bousseau  is  our 
teacher  of  universality.  "  The  good  man,"  he  says,  "  plans  his  life  with  a  reference  to 
the  whole,  while  the  wicked  man  would  gladly  order  all  things  with  reference  to 
himself.  The  latter  makes  himself  the  centre  of  all  things,  the  other  orders  all  with 
reference  to  a  common  Centre,  even  to  God." 

II.  Universality  or  the  purpose  of  salvation.  "Who  willeth  that  all  men 
should  be  saved,  and  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  It  would  be  making  feeble- 
ness of  the  words  to  suppose  the  apostle's  idea  to  be  that  God  is  willing  that  all  men 
should  be  saved,  as  it  is  plainly  dogmatic  prejudice  that  accounts  for  Calvin's  assertion 
that  the  apostle  is  thinking,  not  of  individuals,  but  of  classes  of  men.  It  is  a  great 
truth,  of  which  we  are  not  to  be  robbed,  that  of  every  man  it  can  be  said  that  God 
willeth  that  he  should  be  saved.  We  are  to  think  of  his  will  as  in  a  state  of  active 
volition.  It  was  in  this  state  when,  in  the  depths  of  eternity,  he  formed  the  purpose 
of  our  salvation.  It  is  in  this  state  now  when,  in  the  pleadings  of  the  exalted  Christ, 
in  the  workings  of  the  Spirit,  in  all  the  dealings  of  Providence,  he  is  seeking  to  secure 
the  condition  of  our  salvation,  viz.  our  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  We  are 
to  understand  not  mere  intellectual  knowledge,  but  experimental  knowledge — our 
laying  hold  by  faith  upon  our  Bepresentative,  and  coming  to  know  in  our  experience 
that  there  is  salvation  in  him.  This  his  active  volition  is  directed  toward  all ;  it  can- 
not be  said  that  he  desires  the  salvation  of  one  more  than  of  another.  He  uses  means, 
not  towards  one  here  and  another  there,  but  towards  all  alike  coming  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  truth,  and  finding  ample  and  everlasting  shelter  in  his  love.  And  if  it  is  so 
with  God,  it  is  made  plain  as  it  could  not  otherwise  be,  that  we  are  not  to  narrow  down 
our  petitions  and  thanksgivings  (which  are  expressive  of  active  volition)  to  a  little 
circle  of  our  own,  but  are  to  widen  them  out  even  toward  all  men. 


cM.  ii.  1— 16. j  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  11 

HI.  Universality  of  the  dispensation  of  salvation.  1.  Presided  over  by  the 
one  God.  "  For  there  is  one  God."  The  pagan  idea  was  that  there  were  many  gods. 
There  was  a  god  for  every  nation,  a  god  for  every  small  community,  a  god  for  every 
household.  The  god  so  attached  was  supposed  to  be  devoted  to  the  interests  of  his 
devotees,  in  preference  or  even  in  opposition  to  the  interests  of  all  others.  What  was 
that  but  breaking  up  the  race  into  factions,  and  under  the  most  powerful  example? 
We  have  a  much  nobler  conception — all  men  under  one  God,  and  not  different  men 
under  different  gods.  As  we  are  all  under  the  canopy  of  heaven,  so  we  are  all  under 
the  same  canopy  of  the  Divine  love.  "Is  he  the  God  of  the  Jews  only?  Is  he  not 
also  of  the  Gentiles?    Yes,  of  the  Gentiles  also." 

■The  great  God  that  loveth  all, 
Hath  made  both  great  and  email.'* 

That  shuts  out  all  dashing  of  administration.  Aa  all  are  under  the  same  Divine  govern- 
ment, so  all  are  governed  on  the  same  impartial,  universal  principles,  and  governed 
toward  the  one  end  of  their  salvation.  2.  In  the  hands  of  the  one  Mediator.  "  One 
Mediator  also  between  God  and  men,  himself  man,  Christ  Jesus."  A  mediator  is  one 
who  acts  between  two.  Christ  Jesus  is  here  said  to  be  Mediator  between  God  and 
man.  God,  as  it  were,  allows  the  administration  to  go  out  of  his  hands,  but  it  does  not 
suffer  in  doing  so;  for  it  passes  into  the  hand,  not  of  many  mediators  with  many 
administrations,  but  into  the  hands  of  one  Mediator,  by  which  there  is  preserved  the 
grand  equality  and  universality  of  the  administration.  Christ  could  mediate  on  the 
Divine  side,  being  God  himself,  thus  carrying  into  the  administration  the  whole  mind 
of  him  whom  he  represented.  The  remarkable  thing  which  alone  is  noted  was  that,  to 
mediate  on  the  human  side,  he  became  man,  being  linked  not  to  some  men,  but  to  all 
men ;  bo  that  his  mediation  could  be  in  the  interest,  not  of  some,  but  of  ali  It  is  matter 
for  solemn  thought  to  every  man  that  Christ  is  linked  to  him,  and  linked  to  him  with 
a  view— according  to  the  whole  spirit  of  the  administration — to  his  being  saved. 

IV.  Universality  of  the  eansom.  "  Who  gave  himself  a  Ransom  for  all."  If  the 
language  had  been  that  Christ  gave  himself  for  all,  there  would  not  have  been  excluded 
the  idea  of  substitution.  But  emphasis  is  given  to  this  idea  by  the  word  which  is 
translated  "  ransom."  It  is  literally  "  loosing-price  instead  of."  It  is  implied  that  we 
were  captives,  hopelessly  bound  in  the  consequences  of  our  sins.  Not  able  to  do  any- 
thing for  ourselves,  we  needed  to  be  indebted  to  a  substitute.  The  price  our  Substitute 
paid  as  ransom  was  himself,  i.e.  his  life,  which,  being  the  life  of  him  who  was  God  as 
well  as  man,  was  more  than  equal  to  the  lives  of  all  men  together.  Such  is  the  way — 
not  to  be  too  much  literalized — in  which  the  truth  is  conveyed  here.  The  stress  of 
the  thought  is  to  be  laid  on  all.  Time  was  when  it  was  considered  dangerous  to  say 
that  Christ  died  for  all.  The  apostle  does  not  shrink  from  it,  neither  here  nor  where 
his  language  is  that  "  Christ  tasted  death  for  every  man."  It  adds  a  deep  solemnity  to 
the  existence  of  a  man,  that  this  price  has  been  paid  for  him.  How  shall  he  get  rid  of 
the  obligation  incurred,  unless  by  doing  as  the  captivs  does  for  whose  ransom  the  stipu- 
lated money  has  been  paid  ?  As  the  captive  goes  forth  into  the  possession  of  freedom, 
grateful  to  his  redeemer,  so  let  each  of  us  go  forth  into  the  possession  of  our  freedom 
in  Christ,  grateful  to  him  as  having  redeemed  us  with  his  blood. 

V.  Univebsality  of  the  testimony.  "The  testimony  to  be  borne  in  Its  own 
times."  It  is  generally  assumed  that  the  reference  is  to  the  universal  proclamation  of 
the  gospel.  But  there  is  this  to  be  considered,  that  what  is  to  be  witnessed  to  is,  that 
Christ  Jesus  gave  himself  a  Kansom  for  all,  i.e.  all  that  ever  lived,  that  live  now,  or 
shall  ever  live.  And  this  does  not  seem  to  be  properly  witnessed  to  or  borne  out  merely 
by  the  men  of  a  distant  time,  or  of  distant  times  or  ages,  all  having  the  knowledge  of 
the  gospel.  It  is  better  not  to  fix  down  the  manner  of  the  testimony,  but  to  allow  the 
verse  to  remain  in  its  own  universality,  to  have  its  due  weight  as  one  of  many  verses 
that  bear  upon  the  same  point.  There  is  suggested — not  more  than  suggested — some 
great  testimony  to  the  universality  of  the  ransom.  We  cannot  tell  what  the  testimony 
will  be,  as  it  is  here,  for  good  reason,  not  condescended  on.  It  is  not  borne  new,  but  it 
is  to  be  borne— it  may  be  after  long  ages— yet  in  its  own  times. 

VI.  Paul's  contribution  to  the  universality  of  the  testimony.    "Where- 


48  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  n.  1—15 

unto  I  was  appointed  a  preacher  and  an  apostle  (I  speak  the  truth,  I  lie  not),  a  teacher 
of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and  truth."  Paul  was  privileged  in  his  day — before  the  arrival 
of  the  times — to  help  forward  the  demonstration  of  the  universal  ransom.  For  this  he 
was  appointed  a  preacher,  literally  a  herald,  i.e.  one  that  cried  aloud  in  the  Name  of 
Christ  and  spared  not.  He  was  also  appointed  to  the  high  office  of  apostle,  with  ' 
which  is  connected  the  double  asseveration,  "  I  speak  the  truth,  I  lie  not."  We  cannot 
think  of  it  being  made  thus  strong  for  the  Bake  of  Timothy,  but  for  the  sake  of  some 
who  were  to  be  reached  through  Timothy.  He  was  further  appointed  a  teacher  of  the 
Gentiles  in  faith  and  truth.  In  this  he  overstepped  Jewish  limits,  and  was  entering  as 
far  as  he  could  into  the  universality  of  the  gospel.  And  what  he  called  upon  men 
everywhere  to  do  was  to  believe,  the  object  of  their  faith  being  the  truth  that  Christ 
died  for  them  and  for  all. — R.  F. 

Vers.  8 — 15. — The  sexes  in  the  Christian  assembly.  I.  The  pabt  of  the  men — to 
lead  in  pkayeb.  "  I  desire  therefore  that  the  men  pray  in  every  place,  lifting  up 
holy  hands,  without  wrath  and  disputing."  The  mind  of  the  apostle,  as  here  expressed, 
is  that  in  every  place  where  men  and  women  assemble  for  Divine  worship,  the  duty  of 
conducting  the  public  devotions  shall  devolve  upon  the  men.  They,  and  not  the 
women,  as  appears  from  the  following  contrast,  are  to  be  the  mouth  of  the  congregation 
in  prayer  offered  to  God.  This  assignment  of  leading  in  prayer  to  them  is  mentioned 
along  with  the  appropriate  bodily  posture,  viz.  the  lifting  up  of  the  hands  (as  toward 
heaven)  in  the  way  of  invoking  the  Divine  blessing  upon  the  congregation.  With  this 
is  connected  the  inward  qualification — lifting  up  holy  hands,  i.e.  that  do  things  that 
accord  with  their  being  engaged  in  so  sacred  a  service.  It  is  not  the  place  that  is  to 
hallow  the  hands,  but  it  is  the  hands  that  are  to  be  holy,  to  be  in  keeping  with  the 
place.  The  orderliness  implied  in  the  men  having  their  proper  place  would  tend  to 
prevent  the  use  of  unholy  perturbation  of  feeling,  and  the  breaking  forth  of  unseemly 
disputing,  such  as  would  unfit  the  congregation  for  engaging  in  prayer.  "  He  that  prays 
to  God,"  says  Jeremy  Taylor,  in  •  The  Return  of  Prayers,'  "  with  an  angry,  that  is,  with 
a  troubled  and  discomposed  spirit,  is  like  him  that  retires  into  a  battle  to  meditate,  and 
sets  up  his  closet  in  the  out-quarters  of  an  army,  and  chooses  a  frontier  garrison  to  be 
wise  in.  Anger  is  a  perfect  alienation  of  the  mind  from  prayer,  and  therefore  is  con- 
trary to  that  attention  which  presents  our  prayers  in  a  right  line  to  God.  For  so  have  I 
seen  a  lark  rising  from  its  bed  of  grass,  and  soaring  upwards,  and  singing  as  he  rises, 
and  hopes  to  get  to  heaven,  and  rise  above  the  clouds ;  but  the  poor  bird  was  beaten 
back  with  the  loud  sighings  of  an  eastern  wind,  and  his  motion  made  irregular  and 
inconsistent,  descending  more  at  every  breath  of  the  tempest  than  it  could  recover  by 
the  libration  and  frequent  weighing  of  his  wings,  till  the  little  creature  was  forced  to 
sit  down  and  pant,  and  stay  till  the  storm  was  over ;  and  then  it  made  a  prosperous 
flight,  and  did  rise  and  sing,  as  if  it  had  learned  music  and  motion  from  an  angel." 

II.  The  pabt  of  the  women.  1.  To  be  becomingly  dressed.  "  In  like  manner, 
that  women  adorn  themselves  in  modest  apparel,  with  shamefastness,  and  sobriety; 
not  with  braided  hair,  and  gold  or  pearls  or  costly  raiment ;  but  (which  becometh 
women  professing  godliness)  through  good  works."  It  is  with  regard  to  dress  that 
the  apostle  charges  the  women.  They  are  not  forbidden  to  adorn  themselves.  In 
nature  God  has  a  regard  to  adornment ;  the  flowers  are  painted  chiefly  in  the  way  of 
appealing  to  the  sense  of  the  beautiful.  So  the  apostle  regards  it  as  particularly 
appropriate  to  the  women  that  they  are  to  adorn  themselves ;  but  they  are  to  adorn 
themselves  in  modest  apparel.  There  seems  to  be  a  wider  reference  than  modest,  and 
a  twofold  reference.  It  is  apparel  that  is  suitable  to  women  as  such.  This  certainly 
excludes  dress  that  shocks  the  womanly  feeling  of  modesty.  But  it  alBO  includes  dress 
that  is  tasteful.  Apart  from  what  is  expensive,  good  taste  may  be  displayed  in  dress, 
as  in  the  proper  blending  of  colours.  There  is  no  religion  in  negligence  as  to  dress.  A 
woman  should  never  be  above  attending  to  what  is  clean  and  whole  and  neat  in  dress ; 
and  especially  should  she  attend  to  this  in  appearing  in  the  house  of  God.  It  is  apparel 
that  is  suitable  to  women  in  respect  of  their  circumstances.  Age,  rank,  means,  demands 
of  religion,  come  in  as  modifying  conditions.  A  brightness  of  colour  that  is  in  place  in 
youth,  is  out  of  place  in  age.  The  servant  is  not  to  dress  as  her  mistress.  She  who 
dresses  upon  a  small  income  is  not  to  be  as  she  who  dresses  upon  a  large  income. 


ch.  n.  1—15.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  49 

There  Is  not  to  be  dressing  as  though  this  world  were  a  paradise,  and  not,  as  it  really 
is,  full  of  human  want.    With  outward  deportment  as  to  dress,  are  connected  the 
inward  feeling*.     There  is  shamefastness,  as  the  word  originally  was  in  the  Authorized 
Version.    This  feeling  given  to  the  woman  should  make  her  shrink  from  all  impropriety 
in  dress.    There  is  also  sobriety,  or  the  feeling  that  keeps  the  love  for  dress  within  the 
bounds  of  reason  and  religion.    The  apostle  descends  to  particulars.    Women  are  not 
to  adorn  themselves  with  braided  hair  and  gold,  or  pearls,  or  costly  raiment.    It  cannot 
be  meant  that  these  things  are  absolutely  forbidden.     Long  hair  is  an  ornament  to  a 
woman,  and  it  is  natural  that  it  should  be  braided.     Gold  is  an  excellent  substance, 
and  can  be  wrought  into  most  beautiful  forms.     It  is  God  who  has  given  the  lustre  to 
pearls.    Ideas  of  what  is  beautiful  can  be  carried  to  a  great  extent  in  garments,  as  in 
the  garments  prescribed  for  the  Jewish  high  priest.     It  can  only  be  meant  that  they 
are  to  be  duly  subordinated  by  women.     They  are  not  to  make  ends  of  them,  as  women 
of  the  world  do.    They  are  not  to  vie  with  one  another  in  the  use  of  them.     They  are 
not  to  be  used  in  the  way  of  gratifying  personal  vanity,  or  in  the  way  of  ostentation 
and  drawing  attention  upon  them.    They  are  not  to  be  used  as  though  they  were 
essential,  being  only  on  the  outside,  and  an  uncertain  possession  which  cannot  be  carried 
beyond  the  world.    They  are  only  to  be  sought  in  connection  with,  and  in  due  Bub- 
ordination  to,  inward  virtues.    This  is  the  thought  to  which  the  apostle  carries  us 
forward.    There  is  that  which  becomes  a  woman  professing  godliness,  i.e.  professing  to 
be  regulated  by  the  will  of  God  in  dress  as  in  all  matters.     And  the  will  of  God  will  be 
considered  in  connection  with  the  state  of  the  world.     It  is  such  a  world  that  Christ 
needed  to  come  into  it  to  save  it.    Moreover,  it  is  such  a  world  that  Christ's  servants 
need  to  do  much  saving  work  in  it.    And  a  true  Christian  woman  will  not  set  her  heart 
on  what  is  showy  or  genuinely  beautiful  in  dress  or  ornament,  but  will  set  her  heart 
on  what  is  more  valuable.     She  will  seek  to  be  adorned  with  the  ornament  of  a  meek 
and  quiet  spirit,  which  in  the  sight  of  God  is  of  great  price.    She  will  seek  to  be 
adorned,  as  the  idea  is  here,  with  a  kindly,  benevolent  disposition,  such  as  finds  its 
medium  in  good  works.     She  will  consider  that  the  time  and  money  unnecessarily 
spent  upon  the  braiding  of  the  hair,  and  gold,  or  pearls,  or  costly  raiment,  is  so  much 
taken  from  her  power  of  performing  good  works.     It  must  be  said  that  the  position  of 
a  true  Christian  woman  has  its  difficulties.    Fashion  which  exercises  such  a  sway  is 
not  the  expression  of  pure  Christian  sentiments.    It  is  to  a  large  extent  the  expression 
of  worldliness,  or  the  striving  after  externals.    The  true  Christian  woman,  then,  has 
it  as  her  task,  on  the  one  hand,  not  to  go  altogether  against  fashion  so  as  to  be  singular 
and  to  call  attention  to  her,  which  would  offend  her  feeling  of  modesty ;  on  the  other 
hand,  to  attain  to  simplicity  and  inexpensiveness  in  dress,  so  as  to  leave  her  free  for 
discharging  her  Christian  function  as  a  doer  of  good  works.    2.  To  be  a  learner,  and 
not  a  teacher.    "  Let  a  woman  learn  in  quietness  with  all  subjection.    But  I  permit  not 
a  woman  to  teach,  nor  to  have  dominion  over  a  man,  but  to  be  in  quietness."    The 
woman  is  to  be  receptive  with  regard  to  public  teachings.    She  is  to  be  a  learner,  not 
breaking  the  silence  even  to  the  extent  of  asking  a  question.    For  the  language  here 
is  partly  to  be  explained  by  what  is  said  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  35,  "  And  if  they  will  learn 
anything,  let  them  ask  their  husbands  at  home."    The  position  of  the  apostle,  that  a 
woman  is  not  to  be  a  teacher  in  the  house  of  God,  is  very  implicit :  "  I  permit  not  a 
woman  to  teach."    Whatever  her  qualifications — and  some  women  are  better  qualified 
to  teach  than  some  men — the  apostolic  enactment  is  against  her  teaching.    This  enact- 
ment is  grounded  in  what  is  natural.    It  would  be  reversing  the  natural  order  of 
superiority  for  men  to  sit  under  a  woman  as  their  teacher.    lit  would  also  be  giving 
woman  a  publicity  from  which  every  one  who  is  unsophisticated  and  retains  her  native 
modesty  must  shrink.    Her  natural  unfitness  set  forth  in  two  facts.    (1)  Eve  was  created 
after  Adam.    "  For  Adam  was  first  formed,  then  Eve."    The  apostle  regards  this  fact 
as  emblematic  of  a  headship  originally  given  to  the  man,  which  carries  with  it  his 
exclusive  right  to  be  a  teacher  in  the  house  of  God.    (2)  The  woman  was  first  in  the 
transgression.    "And  Adam  was  not  beguiled,  but  the  woman  being  beguiled  hath 
fallen  into  transgression."    We  are  not  to  understand  that,  for  introducing  sin  into  the 
world,  she  was  thrown  into  a  subordination  which  did  not  originally  belong  to  her.    But 
rather  the  way  in  which,  acting  for  herself  without  regard  to  her  husband,  she  was 
worked  upon  by  the  tempter  was  emblematic  of  a  natural  disposition  which  unfits  her 

J,  TIMOTHY  B 


60 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TlMOTHt. 


[oh.  m.  i— i(L 


for  taking  a  public  position.  Promise  annexed.  "  But  she  shall  be  saved  through  the 
child-bearing,  if  they  continue  in  faith  and  love  and  sanctification  with  sobriety."  So 
eminent  an  interpreter  as  Ellicott  interprets  this  of  the  child-bearing  by  pre-eminence — 
woman  giving  birth  to  the  Messiah — but  without  good  reason.  The  apostle  has  beec 
excluding  woman  from  activity  in  Church  life  in  connection  with  which  there  is,  pub- 
licity ;  here  he  points  to  her  proper  destiny  as  activity  in  family  life.  There  is  reference 
to  the  form  in  which  the  curse  fell  upon  the  woman ;  in  connection  with  this  is  there 
promise  of  blessing.  There  is  not  excluded  from  the  promise  the  lower  salvation.  A 
mother,  laying  hold  upon  this  promise,  can  hope  in  her  danger  to  be  preserved  alive,  with 
due  submission,  as  is  right  in  the  sphere  of  temporal  blessing,  to  the  disposing  of  God. 
There  is  special  reference  to  the  higher  salvation.  "  She  shall  be  saved,"  shall  find  the 
path  of  her  highest  well-being,  "if  they"  (there  is  a  change  to  the  class  of  Christian 
mothers,  or  more  generally  of  Christian  women,  one  depending  to  a  certain  extent  on 
all} — "if  they  continue  in  faith,"  i.e.  toward  Christ, "  and  love,"  i.e.  especially  toward  the 
needy,  "and  sanctification,"  i.e.  attention  to  the  rules  of  pergonal  purity,  with  such  sobriety 
•a  shall  keep  them  to  their  proper  sphere. — B.  F. 


EXPOSITION1. 


CHAPTER  nt 


Ver.  1.— Faithful  it  the  saying  for  (his  is 
a  true  laying,  A.V. ;  seeketh  for  desire,  A.V. 
Faithful  is  the  saying  (see  above,  ch.  i.  15, 
note).  This  manifestly  refers  to  what 
follows,  not,  as  Chrysostom  and  others,  and 
margin  of  the  R.V.,  to  the  saying^  which 
precedes,  in  eh.  ii.  15.  Seeketb  (opeyerai); 
literally,  stretches  out  his  hands  after.  It 
is  peculiar  in  the  New  Testament  to  the 
pastoral  Epistles  and  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  though  common  in  classical  Greek 
(see  ch.  vi.  10 ;  Heb.  xi.  1 6).  The  noun  Spc£is, 
appetite,  desire  (which  is  found  several 
times  in  the  LXX.),  is  used  once  by  St.  Paul 
(Bom.  i.  27).  The  office  of  a  bishop ;  mean- 
ing here,  as  everywhere  else  in  Scripture, 
that  of  a  presbyter,  or  priest.  'EirHr/comj,  in 
the  sense  of  "the  episcopate,"  occurs  only 
here  and  Acts  i.  20,  where  it  is  rendered 
"bishopric"  in  the  A.V.,  and  "overseer- 
ship"  in  the  margin  of  the  R.V.,  being  the 
translation  in  the  LXX.  of  Ps.  cviii.  (oix., 
A.V.)  9  of  the  Hebrew  irnpsp,  "his  office." 
Elsewhere  (Luke  xix.  44V  1  Pet.  ii-  12; 
v.  6)  it  means  "  visitation."  But  (nicxoiros, 
"  bishop  "  (ver.  2)— except  in  1  Pet.  ii.  25, 
where  it  is  applied  to  Christ — always  means 
the  overseer  of  the  particular  flock, — the 
presbyter  (AotB  xx.  28 ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  Titus  i.  7); 
and  iwurxoTrelv  the  functions  of  such  Merxo- 
ttoi  (1  Pet.  v.  2  compared  with  1).  It  was 
not  till  the  sub-apostolic  age  that  the  name 
of  iirta-KOTTos  was  confined  to  the  chief  over- 
seer who  had  "  priests  and  deacons  "  under 
him,  as  Timothy  and  Titus  had.  Possibly 
this  application  of  the  word  arose  from  the 
visits  of  the  apostles,  and  afterwards  of 
men  sent  by  the  apostles,  as  Timothy  and 
Titus,  Tychicus  and  Artemas,  were,  to  visit 
the  Churches,  being  occasional  and  tem- 


porary only,  as  those  of  Visitor*  For  such 
occasional  visitation  is  implied  in  the  verb 
tiriffK<=W«o-0ai  (Matt.  xxv.  36,  43;  Luke  i. 
68,  78;  Acts  vii.  23;  xv.  36;  Jas,  i.  27). 
Afterwards,  when  the  wants  of  the  Churches 
required  permanent  oversight,  the  name 
itrlaxoiros — vescovo  (It.),  eveque  (Pr.),  bischof 
(Ger.),  biseeop  (A.-S.),  aipiskaupus  (Mceso- 
Goth.),  etc. — became  universal  for  the  chief 
overseer  of  the  Church.  A  good  work 
(koXov  Ipyov,  not  ayaSov,  as  ver.  10).  Ka\6r 
means  "honourable,"  "becoming,"  "bene- 
ficial," and  the  like. 

Ver.  2.— The  for  a,  A.V. ;  therefore  for 
then,  A. V.;  without  reproach  for  blameless, 
A. V.;  temperate  for  vigilant,  A.V. ;  sober- 
minded  for  sober,  A.V. ;  orderly  for  of  good 
behaviour,  A.V.  The  bishop  (see  note  on 
ver.  I) ;  "  a  bishop "  is  better  English. 
Without  reproaoh  (a«irf\ijirros) ;  only  here 
and  ch.  v.  7  and  vi.  14  in  the  New  Testament ; 
not  found  anywhere  in  the  LXX.,  but  used 
by  Thuoydides,  Euripides,  and  others,  in 
the  sense  of  "  not  open  to  attack,"  "  blame- 
less." The  metaphor  is  said  (though  denied 
by  others)  to  be  from  wrestling  or  boxing, 
when  a  man  leaves  no  part  of  his  body 
exposed  to  the,  attack  of  his  adversary. 
The  husband  of  one  wife  (com p.  Titus  i.  6). 
Three  senses  are  possible.  The  passage 
may  be  understood  (1)  as  requiring  a  bishop, 
(or  presbyter)  to  have  a  wife,  and  so  some 
took  it  even  in  Chrysostora's  time  (though 
he  does  not  so  understand  it),  and  so  the 
Russian  Church  understands  it ;  (2)  as  pro- 
hibiting his  having  more  than  one  wife  at 
a  time ;  (3)  as  prohibiting  second  marriages 
for  priests  and  bishops.  Bishop  Words- 
worth, Bishop  Ellicott,  and  Dean  Alford, 
among  English  commentators,  all  agree  in 
thinking  that  (3)  is  the  apostle's  meaning. 
In  spite  of  such  consensus,  it  appeal!  in 


OH.  III.  1—16.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


81 


the  highest  degree  improbable  that  St.  Paul 
should  have  laid  down  such  a  condition 
for  the  priesthood.  There  is  nothing  in  hia 
writings  when  treating  expressly  of  second 
marriages  (Bom.  vii.  2,  8 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  8,  39) 
to  suggest  the  notion  of  there  being  any- 
thing disreputable  in  a  second  marriage, 
and  it  would  obviously  cast  a  great  slur 
upon  second  marriages  if  it  were  laid  down 
as  a  principle  that  no  one  who  had  married 
twice  was  fit  to  be  an  tvitntcmos.  But,  if 
we  consider  the  general  laxity  in  regard 
to  marriage,  and  the  facility  of  divorce, 
which  prevailed  among  Jews  and  Bomans 
at  this  time,  it  must  have  been  a  common 
thing  for  a  man  to  have  more  than  one 
woman  living  who  had  been  his  wife.  And 
this,  as  a  distiuct  breach  of  the  primeval 
law  (Gen.  ii.  24),  would  properly  be  a  bar 
to  any  one  being  called  to  the  "  office  of  a 
bishop."  The  same  case  is  supposed  in 
1  Cor.  vii.  10 — 13.  But  it  is  utterly  unsup- 
ported by  any  single  passage  in  Scripture 
that  a  second  marriage  should  disqualify 
a  man  for  the  sacred  ministry.  As  regards 
the  opinion  of  the  early  Church,  it  was  not 
at  all  uniform,  and  amongst  those  who  held 
that  this  passage  absolutely  prohibits  second 
marriages  in  the  case  of  an  episcopus,  it 
was  merely  a  part  of  the  asceticism  of  the 
day.  As  a  matter  of  course,  such  writers 
as  Origen  and  Teitullian  held  it.  The 
very  early  opinion  that  Joseph,  the  husband 
of  Mary,  had  children'  by  a  former  wife, 
which  finds  place  in  the  Protevangelium  of 
James  (ix.),  is  hardly  consistent  with  the 
theory  of  the  disreputablenesB  of  second 
marriages.  In  like  manner,  the  phrase  in 
oh.  v.  9,  ivbs  avtybs  ywii,  is  best  explained 
in  accordance  with  the  apostle's  doctrine 
about  the  lawfulness  of  a  woman's  second 
marriage,  as  meaning  that  she  was  the 
husband  of  one  man  only,  as  long  as  her 
husband  lived.  (For  the  chief  patristic 
opinions  on  the  subject,  see  Bishop  Words- 
worth's note,  and  Bingham's  'Christian 
Antiquities,'  bk.  iv.  ch.  v.)  Temperate 
(vnfdMop) ;  peculiar  to  the  pastoral  Epistles 
(see  ver.  11  and  Titus  ii.  2),  but  found 
in  classical  Greek.  The  verb  viiQeiv  means 
"  to  be  sober"  (1  Thess.  v.  6;  2  Tim.  iv.  5 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  13;  iv.  7;  v.  8).  It  denotes  that 
timperate  use  of  meat  and  drink  which 
keeps  the  mind  watchful  and  on  the  alert, 
and  then  the  state  of  mind  itself  so  pro- 
duced. The  opposite  state  of  mind  is 
described  in  Luke  xxi.  34.  Sober-minded 
(<r<b<ppova) ;  in  the  New  Testament  only 
here  and  in  Titus  i.  8;  ii.  2,  5.  But 
aa<ppov4a  is  found  in  the  Gospels  aud 
Epistles;  (Taxppovi(w,  (Tw(ppovnr^6s,  ffaiQpSvus, 
in  the  pastoral  Epistles ;  and  autypotrivri  in 
ch.  ii.  15  (where  see  note).  Orderly  (k6<tiuov  ; 
see  ch.  ii.  9,  note).     Given  to  hospitality 


(QiU&vov ;  as  Titus  i.  8  and  1  Pet.  iv.  9). 
The  substantive  tpiAofcvta  is  found  in  Bom. 
xii.  13;  Heb.  xiii.  2.  Apt  to  teach  (Bi- 
ScuctmSv');  only  here  and  2  Tim.  ii  24,  and 
Philo, '  De  Pram,  et  Virt.,'  4  (Huther).  The 
classical  word  is  5i8a<TKaAi/c(ij,  though  chiefly 
applied  to  things.  In  the  above-quoted 
passage  in  1  Pet.  iv.  the  gifts  of  speaking 
and  ministering  are,  as  here,  placed  along- 
side that  of  hospitality. 

Ver.  3. — No  brawler  for  not  given  to  wine, 
A.V. ;  the  R.T.  omits  the  clause  piii  aiirxpo- 
Keptir) ;  gentle  for  patient,  A.V. ;  contentious 
for  a  brawler,  A.V. ;  no  lover  of  money,  for 
not  covetous,  A.V.  No  brawler  (ji)i  irdpowov) ; 
only  here  and  Titus  i.  7;  but,  as  well  as 
irapolvios,  common  in  classical  Greek,  in  the 
sense  of  "quarrelsome  over  wine."  In 
Matt.  xi.  19  and  Luke  vii.  34  "wine- 
bibber"  is  olvoTi6ri\s.  In  1  Pet.  iv.  3  the 
word  for  "excess  of  wine"  is  oivoQXvyia. 
No  striker  (jib  jtMjkttjj')  ;  only  here  and 
Titus  i.  7.  It  is  used,  though  rarely,  in 
classical  Greek  for  a  "striker,"  "brawler." 
There  is  but  weak  manuscript  authority 
for  the  reading  in  the  T.K.,  /«j  al<rxpoKep5rj, 
not  given  to  filthy  lucre,  which  is  thought 
to  have  been  derived  from  Titus  i.  7  (g.».). 
The  internal  evidence,  however,  is  in  its 
favour,  as  something  is  wanted  to  correspond 
to  hcpiX&pyvpov,  just  as  irapoivov  and  hK-^kti^ 
correspond  to  imeutri  and  &/mxov  respec- 
tively. Gentle  (bneucri);  as  Titus  iii.  2. 
So  also  it  is  rendered  in  the  A.V.  of  Jas. 
iii.  17;  1  Pet.  ii.  18.  It  is  very  common 
in  classical  Greek,  in  the  sense  of  "fair," 
"  meet,"  "  suitable,"  of  things  ;  and  of 
"fair,"  "kind,"  "gentle,"  of  persons.  The 
substantive  imeixeia  means  "  clemency," 
"  gentleness,"  (Acts  xxiv.  4 ;  2  Cor.  x.  1). 
Not  contentious  (&iiaxoi>) ;  only  here  and 
Titus  iii.  3  in  the  New  Testament,  and  in 
Ecclus.  xix.  5  in  the  Complutensian  edition. 
It  is  also  used  in  this  sense  in  iEschjlus, 
'  Persse,'  955,  though  its  more  common  mean- 
ing in  classical  Greek  is  "  invincible."  No 
lover  of  money  [htpt\6.pyvpov) ;  only  here 
and  Heb.  xiii.  5.  'AfiXapyupla  occurs  in 
Hippocrates.  The  positive  iptkdpyvpos, 
ipiKapyvpia,  occurs  in  eh.  vi.  10 ;  2  Tim.  iii. 
2;  Luke  xvi.  14.  Neither  the  AV.  nor 
the  R.V.  quite  preserves  the  form  of  the 
original  sentence,  where  the  three  negative 
qualities  (jui)  irapou>ov,  /«}  irtcfj/mji',  /1117  aiaxpo- 
icepdrj,  T.R.)  are  followed  by  three  positive 
qualities  (fmetieijt  &fiaxoi>,  i<pi\dpyvpov— 
"  gentle,"  "  peaceful,"  and  "  indifferent 
about  money  ").  . 

Ver.  4. — One  that  ruleth  well  his  own 
house.  The  Mtriunros  is  one  who  has  to 
preside  over  and  rule  (vpolaraaBa/^  the  house 
of  God  (ch.  v.  17;  Bom.  xii.  8;  1  Thess.  v. 
12),  as  the  high  priest  was  called  "  ruler  of 
the  house  of  God"  (1  Chron.  ix.  11;  Neh, 


52 


TflE  Bl&ST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHt. 


[ofl.  lit.  1—16. 


xi.  11).  Bo  in  Justin  Martyr  the  bishop  is 
nailed  i  irpoeo-TOs  rav  d$ek<bav  ('Apology,'  11) 
and  simply  S  wpoetrrws,  and  similarly  in  Heb. 
xiii.  7  the  clergy  are  oi  yyoinevoi  vfi&v,  "  they 
which  have  the  rule  over  you."  How  needful, 
then,  is  it  that  he  should  rule  well  his  own 
house,  and  have  his  own  children  in  sub- 
jection I  The  testimony  given  in  this  passage 
to  a  married  clergy  is  too  clear  to  need  any 
comment.  In  subjection  (iv  uiroTa-yij);  as 
above,  ch.  ii.  11,  where  see  note.  For  the 
sense,  comp.  Titus  i.  6,  which  leads  us  to 
apply  the  woids,  with  all  gravity  (crep.v6- 
t7)tos,  the  contrary  to  "riot,"  lururta),  to 
the  children.  The  children  of  the  Mo-kottos 
are  to  exhibit  that  seriousness  and  sobriety 
of  conduct  which  is  in  accordance  with  their 
father's  office,  /urd,  together  with,  as  in 
ch.  i.  14. 

Ver.  5. — But  for  for,  A.V.,  knoweth  for 
know,  A.V. 

Ver.  6. — Puffed  up  for  lifted  up  with  pride, 
A.V.  A  novice  (ye6tpvTov) ;  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament,  but  found  repeatedly  in  the 
LXX.  in  its  literal  sense  of  "a  tree"  or 
"  plantation  "  newly  planted  (Ps.  cxxvii. 
3  (cxxviii.  3,  A.V.) ;  ^jxliv.  12;  Isa.  v.  7). 
Here  the  novice  or  neophyte  is  one  recently 
converted  and  received  into  the  Church 
(comp.  1  Cor.  iii.  6;  Isa.  lxi.  3).  As  such 
he  is  not  yet  fit  to  be  a  ru'er  and  a  teacher 
of  the  brethren.  The  reason  follows.  Lest 
being  puffed  up  he  fall  into  the  condemna- 
tion of  the  devil.  TvtpaBeis,  puffed  up,  is 
peculiar  in  the  New  Testament  to  the 
pastoral  Epistles  (ch.  vi.  4;  2  Tim.  iii.  4), 
from  rv(j>6s,  smoke  (comp.  Xivov  Tvtj>6fievov, 
"smoking  flax,"  Matt.  xii.  10).  The  idea 
seems  to  be  "lightness,"  "emptiness," 
and  "elation."  Some  add  that  of  "obscura- 
tion" as  by  smoke;  rvtp6a,  to  wrap  in 
smoke;  reri^m/aut  to  be  wrapt  in  clouds 
of  conceit  and  folly  (Liddell  and  Scott). 
The  condemnation  of  the  deviL  A  some- 
what obscure  phrase.  It  means  either  (1) 
the  same  condemnation  as  that  into  which  the 
devil  fell  through  pride, — and  so  Chrysostom, 
Olshansen,  Bishop  Ellicott,  Wordsworth, 
Alford,  etc.,  take  it ;  or  (2)  the  condemnation 
or  accusation  of  the  devil.  In  the  latter 
case  xp'ifia  would  be  used  in  the  same  sense 
as  Kpl<ris  in  Jude  9,  and  would  mean  the 
charge  preferred  against  him  "by  "the 
accuser  of  the  brethren"  (comp.  Job  i.  9; 
ii.  4,  5).  One  of  the  senses  of  Kplvu  is  "  to 
accuse  " — like  KaTiryopeij/(Liddell  and  Scott). 
And  this  view  agrees  with  oval iap.lv  koX 
iraryiSa  tov  5mfS6\ov  in  ver.  7,  which  means, 
not  the  trap  into  which  the  devil  fell,  but 
the  trap  laid  by  the  devil.  It  remains  doubt- 
ful which  is  the  true  sense,  but  (2)  seems,  on 
the  whole,  the  most  probable.  The  devil 
(rod  5ta&6\ov)  can  only  mean  Satan  (Matt. 
iv.  1;  xiii.  39,  etc),  though   possibly  con- 


ceived of  as  speaking  by  the  mouth  of 
traducers  and  viliflers  of  the  Church,  as  in 
ver.  7. 

Ver.  7. — Good  testimony  from  for  a  good 
report  of,  A.V. ;  that  for  which,  A.V.  Good 
testimony  (naprupiav  Kuktyi  see  ch.  v.  10). 
So  it  is  said  of  Timothy  himself  that  i/mp- 
rvpelro,  "he  was  well  reported  of  by  the 
brethren"  (Acts  xvi.  2).  In  accordance 
with  this  rule,  letters  testimonial  are  re- 
quired of  all  persons  to  be  ordained.  Note 
the  importance  of  character  in  a  clergyman 
(comp.  2  Cor.  vi.  3).  Them  that  are  without 
(twv  e(ai9ev) ;  used  in  Matt,  xxiii.  27 ;  Luke 
xi.  39 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  3;  Eev.  xi.  2,  etc.,  of  that 
which  is  outside  or  external  literally,  as 
tl  ie  outside  of  the  cup,  the  outer  ornament  ot 
the  body,  the  outside  of  the  sepulchre,  the 
outer  court  of  the  temple.  It  is  synonymous 
with  the  more  common  form,  efa>.  (For  the 
phrase,  "  they  that  are  without "  (pi  e£o>),  as 
applied  to  those  who  are  not  members  of  the 
Church,  see  Mark  iv.  11;  John  ix.  34,  35; 
1  Cor.  v.  12,  13 ;  Col.  iv.  5 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  12.) 
The  opposite  is  etra,  earaBev  (1  Cor.  T.  12; 
Matt,  xxiii.  25,  etc.).  So  exoteric  and  esoteric, 
of  doctrines  intended  respectively  for  the 
outside  world  or  the  inner  circle  of  disciples. 
Reproach  (6veiSi<r/i6v);  the  reproaches  and 
revilings  cast  upon  him  by  unbelievers 
(Bom.  xv.  3;  Heb.  x.  33;  xi.  26;  xiii.  13). 
The  verb  oveiSlfcur  has  the  same  sense  (ch. 
iv.  10;  Matt.  v.  11 ;  Murk  xv.  32;  Luke  vi. 
22 ;  1  Pet.  iv  14),  and  so  in  classical  Greek. 
This  reproach  is  further  described  as  the 
snare  of  the  devil  (comp.  ch.  vi.  9 ;  2  Tim. 
ii.  26),  because  it  is  through  these  revilings 
that  the  devil  seeks  to  impair  the  power  of 
his  ministry  and  frighten  him  from  the 
exercise  of  it.  The  genitive  toS  SmjSifAou 
depends  only  upon  myiSa,  not  upon  ovei 
biap.iv.  The  km  does  not  indicate  that  there 
are  two  separate  things  into  which  he  falls, 
but  adds,  as  a  description  of  the  dyeiSur/uis, 
that  it  is  "a  snare  of  the  devil."  The  idea 
in  1  Pet.  v.  8  is  analogous.  There  it  is  by 
afflictions  that  the  devil  seeks  to  devour  the 
disciple  who  is  weak  in  faith.  Those  afflic- 
tions might  well  be  described  as  waylSa  rod 
Siap6\ov, "  a  snare  of  the  devil,"  set  for  weak 
souls. 

Ver.  8. — Deacons  in  like  manner  must  for 
likewise  must  the  deacons,  A.V.  Grave 
(o-ipivois);  in  Phil.  iv.  8  rendered  "honest" 
in  the  A.V.,  and  "honourable"  in  the  B.V., 
and  "venerable"  in  the  margin.  None  of 
the  words  are  satisfactory,  but  "honest"  in 
the  sense  of  honnete,  i.e.  "respectable," 
"  becoming  the  dignity  of  a  man,"  comes 
nearest  to  the  meaning  of  <re/iv6s.  "Aviip 
irep.vos  is  a  man  who  inspires  respect  by  his 
conduct  and  deportment.  It  occurs  again  in 
ver.  11  and  in  Titus  ii.  2.  Double-tongued 
(5tk6yovs) ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testament, 


oh.  m.  1 — 16.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


63 


or  indeed  anywhere.  The  verb  8iXo7«7i'  and 
the  noun  $i\oyla  are  found  in  Xenophon  and 
Dibdorus  Sionlus,  but  in  a  different  sense 
— "  to  repeat,"  "  repetition."  Here  SiKoyos  is 
used  in  the  sense  of  5iy\ao-<ros  (Prov.  xi.  13 ; 
Boclus.  xxviii.  13),  "  a  slanderer,"  "  a  false- 
tongued  man,"  who,  as  Theophylact  (ap. 
Schleusner)  well  explains  it,  thinks  one  thing 
and  says  another,  and  says  different  things 
to  different  people.  The  caution  here  given 
is  of  incalculable  importance  to  young 
curates  They  must  not  allow  themselves 
to  be  either  receptacles  or  vehicles  of  scandal 
and  detraction.  Their  speech  to  rich  and 
poor  alike  must  be  perfectly  sincere  and 
ingenuous.  Not  given  to  much  vine.  The 
effect  of  the  best  sermon  may  be  undone,  and 
more  than  undone,  if  the  preacher  sinks  into 
the  pot-companion  of  his  hearers.  He  at 
once  ceases  to  be  cre/icos,  to  inspire  respect 
(comp.  Titus  ii.  3  where  the  additional  idea, 
most  true,  of  the  slavery  of  drunkards,  is  in- 
troduced). Greedy  of  filthy  lucre  (auaxpa- 
nepSeTs);  only  here  and  in  ver.  3  (T.B.)  and 
Titus  i.  7.  The  adverb  al<rxp<"ctpSas  occurs 
in  1  Pet.  v.  2,  and  is  one  of  many  points  of 
resemblance  between  the  pastoral  Epistles 
ami  1  Peter.  Balaam,  Gehazi,  and  Judas 
Iscariot  are  the  three  prominent  examples  of 
professed  servants  of  God  being  lovers  of 
filthy  lucre.  Achan  (Josh.  vii.  21)  is  another 
(see  ch.  vi.  10).  When  luore  is  the  price 
for  doing  wrong,  it  is  "  filthy."  When  lucre 
is  sought  on  occasions  where  none  is  due,  it 
is  "  filthy ; "  and  when  the  desire  of  even 
just  gains  is  excessive,  it  ceases  to  be  clean. 
Ver.  9. — Holding  the  mystery  of  the  faith 
in  a  pure  conscience.  Mva-riipiov,  a  mystery, 
is  that  which,  having  been  long  hidden,  is  at 
length  disclosed,  either  to  men  generally  or 
to  elect  disciples.  It  is  derived  from  )mia, 
to  initiate,  of  which  the  passive  nv4o/iai,  to 
be  instructed  or  initiated,  is  found  in  Phil, 
iv.  12,  and  is  common  in  classical  Greek, 
being  itself  derived  from  /xia,  "  to  close  the 
lips  as  in  pronouncing  the  syllable  /*«," 
whence  also  mutus.  The  idea  is  of  some- 
thing secret,  which  might  not  be  spoken  of. 
In  the  New  Testament  we  have  "the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  "  (Matt, 
xiii.  11;  Luke  viii.  10;  Mark  iv.  11);  and 
St.  Paul  brings  out  the  full  force  of  the  word 
when  he  speaks  (Bom.  xvi.  25)  of  "the 
mystery  which  was  kept  secret  (aea  iyrinevov) 
since  the  world  began  .  .  .  but  is  now  made 
known  to  all  nations  for  the  obedience  of 
failh"  (see  too  Eph.  iii.  3—6;  Col.  ii.  26, 
etc.).  "The  faith"  is  equivalent  to  "the 
gospel,"  or  "the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  or 
the  "  godliness  "  of  ver.  16  (where  see  note); 
and  "the  mystery  of  the  faith"  might  be 
paraphrased  by  "the  revealed  truth  of 
Christianity."  What  is  ad  Jed,  "in  a  pure 
conscience."  teaches  us  that  orthodoxy  with- 


out personal  holiness  is  little  worth.  Holding 
"  the  truth  in  unrighteousness  "  is  severely 
condemned  by  St.  Paul  (Bom.  i.  18).  He 
says  of  himself  (Acts  xxiii.  1), "  I  have  lived 
in  all  good  conscience  before  God  until  this 
day"  (comp.  Acts  xxiv.  16;  2  Cor.  i.  12; 
ch.  i.  5, 19,  etc.).  Ii  is  much  to  be  observed 
how  St.  Paul,  the  great  teaoher  of  the 
doctrine  of  grace,  lays  constant  stress  upon 
the  functions  of  the  conscience,  and  the 
necessity  of  having  a  pure  conscience. 

Ver.  10. — Serve  as  deacons  for  use  the 
office  of  a  deacon,  A.V. ;  if  they  he  for  being 
found,  A.V.  And  let  these  also,  eto.  There 
is  an  ambiguity  in  the  English  here.  It  is 
not"  these  also" — these  in  addition  to  others, 
i.e.  the  bishops  before  named — but "  these  be 
also  first  proved."  Their  general  character, 
as  described  in  vers.  8,  9,  must  not  be  taken 
upon  loose  hearsay,  but  must  be  put  to  the 
test  by  examination,  by  special  testimony, 
by  inquiry,  and  then,  if  they  are  aviyK\i)Toi, 
not  accused,  not  open  to  just  blame,  blame- 
less, let  them  be  admitted  to  serve  as  deacons 
(see  ver.  13,  note).  The  Church  of  England 
scrupulously  acts  up  to  these  directions  by 
requiring  written  testimonials,  by  personal 
inquiries  made  by  the  bishop,  by  the  Si  quit, 
by  the  appeal  to  the  congregation  in  the 
Ordination  Service,  "Brethren,  if  there  be 
any  of  you  who  knoweth  any  impediment,  or 
notable  crime,  in  any  of  these  persons  pre- 
sented to  be  ordained  deacons,  for  the  which 
he  ought  not  to  be  admitted  to  that  office, 
let  him  come  forth  in  the  name  of  God,  and 
show  what  the  crime  or  impediment  is ; "  as 
well  as  by  the  careful  examination  of  the 
candidates.  Blameless  (comp.  Titus  i.  6, 
7) ;  aviyxXriTos,  rendered  in  the  Vulgate 
nullum  crimen  habentes  (which  seems  to 
explain  the  "  notable  crime  "  of  the  Ordina- 
tion Service),  and  in  Col.  i.  22  "unreprov- 
able"  both  in  the  A.V.  and  the  B.V.  The 
whole  passage,  from  ver.  2  to  ver.  13,  shows 
the  supreme  importance  of  a  holy  and 
blameless  conversation  in  the  clergy. 

Ver.  11. — Women  in  like  manner  must  for 
even  so  must  their  wives,  A.V. ;  temperate  for 
sober,  A.V.  Women.  What  is  meant  by 
these  "  women  "  ?  Certainly  not  women  in 
general,  which  would  be  quite  out  of  harmony 
with  the  context.    The  choice  lies  between 

(1)  the  wives  of  the  deacons,  as  in  the  A.V. ; 

(2)  the  wives  of  the  episcopi  and  deacons ; 

(3)  deaconesses.  This  last,  on  the  whole,  is 
the  most  probable.  The  male  deacons  had 
just  been  spoken  of,  and  so  the  apostle  goes 
on  to  speak  of  the  female  deacons  (a.l 
hi&xovoi,  Bom.  xvi.  1).  He  conceives  of  the 
deacon's  office  as  consisting  of  two  branches 
— (1)  the  deacons,  (2)  the  deaconesses ;  and 
gives  appropriate  directions  for  each.  It 
must  be  remembered  that  the  office  of  the 
early  deacon  was  in  a  great  measure  secular, 


64 


THE  FDJST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  in.  1—16. 


bo  that  there  1b  nothing  strange  in  that  of 
the  deaconess  being  coupled  with  it.  The 
return  in  ver.  12  to  the  male  deacon  is  in 
favour  of  understanding  "  the  women  "of  the 
deaconesses,  as  showing  that  the  sul iject  of 
the  diaconate  was  not  done  with.  Chry- 
sostom  (who  says,  "  He  is  speaking  of  those 
who  hold  the  rank  of  deaconesses '")  and  all 
the  ancient  commentators,  and  De  Wette, 
Wiesinger,  Wordsworth,  Alford,  and  Ellicott 
among  the  moderns,  so  understand  it  (see 
following  note s).  Grave  (o-e/ivas ;  see  ver.  8, 
note).  Hot  slanderers  (uj)  SiafioAovs,  corre- 
sponding to  the  /m)  Si\6yovs  of  ver.  8).  This 
use  of  SiAPaKos,  which  is  the  classical  one, 
is  peculiar  in  the  New  Testament  to  the 
pastoral  Epistles  (see  2  Tim.  iii.  3 ;  Titus  ii. 
3).  Temperate  (vi]4>aA.fovs ;  see  ver.  2,  note). 
It  corresponds  here  to  the  ^ii)  otvip  iro\\$ 
Trpoffe'xoi'Tas  of  ver.  8.  Faithful  in  all  things 
(jrMTTcki  ty  irocric).  This  seems  to  refer 
specially  to  their  being  the  almoners  of  the 
Church  charities,  and  so  favours  the  explana- 
tion of  "women"  as  meaning  deaconesses. 
Tlurris  means  especially  "trusty"  (Matt, 
xxiv.  45 ;  xxv.  21 ;  Luke  xii.  42 ;  xvi.  10, 
etOj). 

Ver.  12. — Deacons  for  the  deacons,  A.V. ; 
husbands  for  the  husbands,  A.V.  Husbands 
of  one  wife  (see  above,  ver.  2,  note).  Ruling, 
eta  {irpoi<TT&n<ivoi);  literally,  being  at  the 
head  of,  presiding  over  (see  ver.  4,  note).  In 
Bom.  xii.  8  and!  Thess.  v.  12  it  is  applied  to 
the  spiritual  ruler,  the  iiriaKOTros  or  irpecr/3ti- 
Ttpos,  of  the  Church.  Elsewhere  only  in  the 
pastoral  Epistles  (above,  vers.  4  and  5 ;  ch. 
v.  17;  Titus  iii  8,  14).  Their  own  houses 
(above,  ver.  5).  "  Their  own  "  is  in  contrast 
to  "  God's  house." 

Ver.  13. — Served  well  as  deacons  for  used 
the  office  of  a  deacon  well,  A.V. ;  gain  to 
themselves  a  good  standing  for  purchase  to 
themselves  a  good  degree,  A.V.  Served  .  .  . 
as  deacons  (SiaKovi)travTei);  as  in  ver.  10.  In 
this  technical  sense  only  found  in  these  two 
passages ;  which  well  agrees  with  the  late 
date  of  this  Epistle,  when  the  technical  sense 
of  Siixovos  was  established.  Gain  to  them- 
selves a  good  standing.  The  sense  of  the 
passage  depends  a  good  deal  upon  the  exact 
meaning  of  BaSfioi.  In  1  Bam.  v.  4,  5,  in  the 
LXX.,  iBafljwfj  is  the  rendering  of  ]npn 
(rendered  aWpiov  in  Ezek.  ix.  3 ;  x.  4),  a  some- 
what unusual  word  for  a  "  threshold."  In 
2  Kings  xx.  9, 10, 11,  it  is  the  rendering  of 
n^yjD,  "a  degree  on  the  sun-dial."  This 
latter  seems  to  suit  better  the  verb  ireptTot- 
o'wrai,  they  gain  or  acquire,  which  suggests 
the  idea  of  advancement.  It  does  not  follow 
that  St.  Paul  had  in  his  mind  their  advance- 
ment from  the  "inferior  office"  to  "the 
higher  ministries  in  the  Church  "  (Ordination 
Service);  he  may  merely  have  meant  to  say 
that  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  a  deacon 


in  an  efficient  and  exemplary  manner  raised 
a  man  to  high  estimation  in  the  Church,  and 
so  gave  him  confidence  in  confessing  the 
faith  of  Jesus  Christ  both  by  word  and  deed. 
Gain  to  themselves  (irepiiroiovvTaC)',  acquire 
by  purchase  or  otherwise.  Frequent  in  the 
LXX.;  but  only  elsewhere  in  the  New 
Testament  in  Acts  xx.  28.  Boldness  (rappV 
alav) ;  very  common  in  the  New  Testament 
(comp.  Acts  iv.  13,  29,  31;  Eph.  vi.  19; 
Phil.  i.  20,  etc.),  where  it  is  especially  applied 
to  bohlness  in  preaching  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
This  seems  to  imply  that  St.  Paul  contem- 
plated preaching  as  a  part  of  the  deacon's 
work.  We  know  that  Philip  the  deacon  and 
Stephen  the  deacon  were  both  preachers. 

Ver.  14. — To  come  unto  thee ;  to  Ephesus, 
where  Timothy  wbb  (ch.  i.  3). 

Ver.  15. — Wen  ought  to  behave  themselves 
for  thou  oughtest  to  behave  thyself,  A.V.  To 
behave  thyself  (araoTpe^eo-Sai) ;  variously 
rendered,  both  in  the  A.V.  and  the  B.V., "  to 
have  one's  conversation,"  "to  live,"  "to  pass 
(one's  time),"  "to  be  used"  (Heb.  x.  33). 
It  is  literally  "  to  go  up  and  down  "  a  given 
place,  "  backwards  and  forwards,"  hence  "  to 
dwell  in  it."  The  substantive  dvaa-Tpo<t>ii,  in 
the  thirteen  places  where  it  occurs  in  the 
New  Testament,  is  always  rendered  "  con- 
versation "  in  the  A.V. ;  in  the  B.V.,  " man- 
ner of  life,"  "  life,"  "  issue  of  life,"  "  manner 
of  living,"  "behaviour,"  "living."  It  is  a 
favourite  word  in  the  two  Epistles  of  St. 
Peter,  where  it  occurs  eight  times.  The 
house  of  God.  This  phrase  here  denotes,  as 
it  is  explained  in  the  following  words,  the 
Church  on  earth.  So  Heb.  iii.  6,  "  Christ  as 
a  Son  over  his  house ;  whose  house  are  we," 
where  the  reference  is  to  Numb.  xii.  7,  "  My 
servant  Moses  ...  is  faithful  in  all  mine 
house. "  The  Churoh  of  the  living  God.  II  ore 
is  again  a  somewhat  remarkable  resemblance 
to  the  phraseology  of  the  Epstle  to  the 
Hebrews,  "  Ye  are  come  unto  Mount  Zion, 
and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God, ...  to 
the  general  assembly  and  Church  of  the 
Firstborn"  (Heb.  xii.  22,  23).  However, 
the  phraseology  is  not  peculiar  to  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews.  Thus  we  read  in  2  Cor.  vi. 
16,  "Ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God." 
The  phrase,  "  the  living  God,"  occurs  seven 
times  in  St.  Paul's  Epislles,  and  four  times 
in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  It  occurs 
three  times  in  the  Gospels,  once  in  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles,  and  once  in  the  Revelation. 
Here  it  is  used  by  St.  Paul  to  enhance  the 
obligation  to  a  holy  and  blameless  walk  in 
those  who  have  the  oversight  of  his  Church. 
The  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth.  Some 
apply  these  words  to  Timothy  himself  (Gre- 
gory of  Nyssa,  Gregory  Nazianzen,  Basil, 
and  others  cited  by  Alford),  after  the  analogy 
of  Gal.  ii.  9,  where  James,  Cephas,  and  John 
are  said  to  be  "pillars"  (o-r  i5a.oi)>  and  Bev 


oh.  ni  1—16.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


55 


HI.  12,  where  it  is  said  of  him  that  over- 
cometh, "  I  -will  make  him  a  pillar  (ariXov) 
in  the  house  of  my  God."     And    bo,  in 

Venantius  Fortunatus,  St.  Paul  is  called 
"stilus  ille."  But  the  metaphors  of  "a 
pillar"  and  "a  foundation"  do  not  all 
suit  the  verb  avuoTpltparecu ;  and  it  is  well 
argued  that  the  absence  of  the  pronoun  ire 
is  unfavourable  to  the  application  of  "the 
pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth "  to  the  sub- 
ject of  the  first  clause.  It  is  therefore  better 
to  understand  this  clause  as  descriptive  of 
the  Church  of  God.  The  Church  is  the 
pillar  of  the  truth.  It  supports  it;  holds  it 
together — binds  together  its  different  parts. 
And  it  is  the  ground  of  the  truth.  By  it  the 
truth  is  made  fast,  firm,  and  fixed.  The 
ground  (cSpafa/ui).  This  word  only  ocours 
here  at  all;  IBpalos,  common  both  in  the 
New  Testament,  the  LXX.,  and  in  classical 
Greek,  means  "  fixed,"  "  firm,"  or  "  fast."  In 
the  A.V.  of  1  Cor.  vii.  37  and  xv.  58,  "  stead- 
fast;" Col.  i.  23  (where  it  is  coupled  with 
Tc0€,u€\ia>,u<=i/a),  "settled."  Thence  kSpcu6a>, 
in  late  Greek,  "  to  make  firm  or  fast,"  and 
iSpalupa,  the  "establishment"  or  "ground- 
ing "  of  the  truth ;  that  in  and  by  which  the 
truth  is  placed  on  a  sure  and  fixed  basis. 

Ver.  16.— Be  who  for  God,  A. V.  and  T.B.; 
manifested  for  manifest,  A.V. ;  among  the 
nations  for  unto  the  Gentiles,  A.V.;  in  for 
into,  A.V.  Without  controversy  (fytoAoyou- 
MfV&is);  only  here  in  the  New  Testament, 
but  used  in  the  same  sense  in  the  LXX. 
and  in  classical  Greek,  "confessedly,"  by 
common  confession.  Great  is  the  mystery  of 
godliness.  This  is  said  to  enhance  the  glory 
of  the  Church  just  spoken  of,  to  whom  this 
mystery  has  been  entrusted,  and  so  still 
farther  to  impress  upon  Timothy  the  vital 
necessity  of  a  wise  and  holy  walk  in  the 
Church.  The  mystery  of  godliness  is  all 
that  truth  which  "  in  other  ages  was  not 
made  known  unto  the  sons  of  men,  as  it  is 
now  revealed  unto  his  holy  apostles  and 
prophets  by  the  Spirit."  Godliness  (rijs 
(MiSdas);  •  je. "  the  Christian  faith;"  what 
in  ch.  vi.  3  is  called  "  The  words  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  the  doctrine  which  is 
according  to  godliness  (tjj  tear'  tiaePelav 
SiSihtkuMij),"  and  in  2  Tim.'i.  1,  "  The  truth 
which  is  according  to  godliness."  In  ver.  9 
it  is  "  the  mystery  of  the  faith,"  where  7)  iria-ris 
it  equivalent  to  y  e&aefela.  Bishop  Ellicott, 
however,  does  not  admit  this  objective  sense 
of  rj  ttiVtu  or  7]  tiaefttia,  but  explains  the 
genitive  as  "a  pure  possessive  genitive," 
the  mystery  appertaining  to,  or  the  property 
of,  subjective  faith  and  godliness ;  but  this 
is  a  use  not  borne  out  by  any  passage  in 
which  the  word  "mystery"  occurs.  It  is 
always  mysteries  (or  mystery)  of  the  king- 
dom of  God,  of  Christ,  of  God,  of  the  gospel, 
and  the  like.     In  the  following  passages  the 


objective  sense  of  ii  irfo-nt  is  either  necessary 
or  by  far  the  most  natural :  Acts  iii.  7 ;  xiii. 
8 ;  xiv.  22 ;  xvi.  S;  Gal.  i.  23;  Eph.  iv.  5; 
Phil.  i.  27;  Col.  i.  23;  ii.  7;  ch.  i.  19;  v. 
8;  vi.  10,21;  2Tim.iv.7;  Titus  L 13;  Jas. 
ii.  1 ;  Jude  3.  Having  thus  exalted  the 
"  mystery  of  godliness,"  St.  Paul  goes  on  to 
expound  it.  He  who  (jfs).  This  is  generally 
adopted  now  '  as  the  true  reading,  instead 
of  @t6s  (OS,  instead  of  ©2).  Bishop 
Ellicott  satisfied  himself,  by  most  careful 
personal  examination,  that  the  original 
reading  of  the  Cod.  Alex,  was  OS,  and  that 
it  had  been  altered  by  a  later  hand  to  ©2. 
The  Cod.  Sinait.  certainly  has  85,  and  to 
this  all  the  older  versions  agree.  The  Vul- 
gate has  quod,  agreeing  with  sacramentum 
and  representing  the  Greek  i.  Accepting 
this,  then,  as  the  true  reading,  we  proceed  to 
explain  it.  "Os,  who,  is  a  relative,  and  must, 
therefore,  have  an  antecedent.  But  there  is 
no  expressed  antecedent  of  the  masculine 
gender  for  it  to  agree  with.  The  antecedent, 
therefore,  must  be  understood,  and  gathered 
from  the  preceding  words,  ri  jt.vari\piov  -rrjs 
ebirePetas.  It  can  only  be  Christ.  The 
mystery  of  the  whole  Old  Testament,  that 
which  was  wrapped  in  types  and  hidden 
under  veils,  was  Christ  (Col.  i.  27).  Moses 
spake  of  him,  the  Psalms  speak  of  him,  the 
prophets  speak  of  him;  but  all  of  them 
spake  darkly.  But  in  the  gospel  "the 
mystery  of  Christ "  (Col.  iv.  3)  is  revealed. 
Christ  is  the  Mystery  of  Christianity.  It  is, 
therefore,  no  difficult  step  to  pass  from  "  the 
mystery "  to  "  Christ,"  and  to  supply  the 
word  "  Christ "  as  the  antecedent  to  "who." 
Was  manifested  (etpavepiiOtf);  a  word  fre- 
quently applied  to  Christ  (John  i.  31  ;  1 
John  i.  2;  iii.  5,  8,  etc.).  The  idea  is  the 
same  in  John  i.  14.  Justified  in  the  spirit. 
This  is  rather  an  obscure  expression.  But 
it  seems  to  describe  our  Lord's  spotless 
righteousness,  perhaps  with  special  reference 
to  the  declaration  of  it  at  his  baptism. 
"  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well 
pleased."  We  have  the  same  contrast 
between  the  fleSh  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in 
1  Pet.  iii.  18.  And  between  the  flesh  and 
the  spirit  of  a  Christian  man  in  Bom.  viii.  10, 
"The  body  is  dead  because  of  Bin,  but  the 
spirit  is  life  because  of  righteousness."  To 
this  clause  apparently  the  remark  of  Chry- 
sostom  applies,  "  God  became  man,  and  man 
became  God."  *  The  spirit "  seems  to  mean 
the  moral  nature — the  inner  man.  Been  of 
angels.  Perhaps  the  multitude  of  the 
heavenly  host  who  welcomed  the  birth  of 
Christ  were  permitted  to  see  the  new-born 
Babe,  as  he  seems  to  have  done  who  described 
him  to  the  shepherds  as  "  wrapped  in  swad- 

1  Bishop    Wordsworth,    Alford,    Bishop 
KHiertt,  and  Tischendcrf,  Lachmann,  etc 


56 


THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  in.  1—16. 


dling  clothes  "  (Luke  ii.  12—14).  Angels 
ministered  unto  him  after  the  temptation 
(Mark  i.  13),  and  in  the  Garden  of  Geth- 
semane  (Matt.  xxii.  43,  where  the  word 
ii^flij  is  used),  and  at  his  resurrection  (Matt, 
xxviii.  2)  The  special  interest  of  angels  in 
the  "  great  mystery  "  is  referred  to  in  1  Pet. 
i.  12;  Heb.  i.  6.  Preached  among  the  nations 
(eirnpixDv  f"  eOpeaiv).  It  would  have  been 
better  to  keep  the  rendering  "  Gentiles " 
here,  to  mark  the  identity  of  thought  with 
Eph.  iii.  6,  8,  where,  in  the  apostle's  view, 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles, 
that  they  mig  ..the  fellow-heirs  with  the  Jews 
of  the  promises  of  God,  is  one  main  feature 
of  the  mystery  (comp.  oh.  ii.  7).  Believed 
on  in  the  world.  The  next  step  in  this 
ascending  scale  is  the  acceptance  of  Christ 
in  the  world  as  the  Saviour  thereof.  The 
language  here  is  not  stronger  than  that  of  Col . 
i.  5,  6,  "  The  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel, 
which  is  come  unto  you;  even  as  it  is  also  in 
nil  the  world,  and  beareth  fruit."  And  in  Col. 
l.  23,  "  The  gospel  which  was  preached  in  all 


creation  nnder  heaven "  (comp.  Bom.  i.  8). 
The  statement  in  Mark  xvi.  15 — 20  might 
almost  have  been  in  St.  Paul's  mind.  Note 
the  use  there  of  the  words  xripi^ure,  imtpi^av, 
riv  koVjuox,  o  irurreiffas,  iri<rTei<ra<rt,  aveA-fjippTi, 
Received  np  in  glory.  The  change  of  "  into  " 
(A.V.)  into  "iu"  is  of  very  doubtful  propriety. 
In  New  Testament  Greek  eV  frequently 
follows  verbs  of  motion,  and  means  the  same 
as  els,  like  the  Hebrew  a.  Our  Lord  is  not 
said  to  have  ascended  in  glory  (as  he  ap- 
peared at  the  Transfiguration),  but,  as  St. 
Mark  has  it, "  He  was  received  np  into 
heaven,  and  [there]  sat  down  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,"  fulfilling  John  xvii.  5. 
This  grand  burst  of  dogmatic  teaching  is 
somewhat  like  that  in  ch.  ii.  5—7.  There  is 
no  adequate  evidence  of  its  being,  as  many 
commentators  have  thought,  a  portion  of  a 
hymn  or  creed  used  in  the  Church.  It 
rather  implies  the  same  tension  in  the 
apostle's  mind  which  is  apparent  in  other 
parts  of  the  Epistle  (comp.  oh.  ri.  11  and 
following  verses). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 16. — Tht  clergy.  It  was  one  of  the  weightiest  duties  laid  upon  Timothy, 
when  called  to  be  the  spiritual  ruler  of  the  Church  of  Ephesus,  to  take  care  that  the 
priests  and  deacons  were  men  well  qualified  for  their  holy  office.  The  condition  of  a 
congregation  depends  so  largely  upon  the  spiritual  character  of  those  who  minister  to 
it,  that  the  choice  of  fit  persons  to  serve  in  the  -sacred  ministry  of  God's  Church  is 
a  matter  of  vital  importance  to  the  welfare  of  the  people,  and  demands  the  utmost 
wisdom  and  fidelity  of  those  who  have  the  chief  oversight  of  the  house  of  God. 
Accordingly  St.  Paul  lays  down  with  great  care  the  qualifications  of  priests  and  deacons 
respectively.  For  the  priest  an  irreproachable  character  amongst  those  outside  as  well 
as  those  inside  the  Church,  in  order  to  ensure  respect;  a  life  of  chastity,  that  his 
example  may  give  no  countenance  to  a  lax  morality;  strict  temperance  in  the  use 
of  meat  and  drink,  both  for  his  own  sake  and  as  an  example  to  others ;  a  staid,  sober 
mind  and  demeanour,  as  becomes  one  who  lives  near  to  God,  and  handles  holy  things; 
a  large  hospitality,  as  one  who  counts  all  he  has  to  belong  to  the  Church,  whose  servant 
he  is;  aptitude  to  teach  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  and  a  delight  in  teaching;  a 
placable,  gentle  disposition,  abhorring  brawls  and  quarrels,  and  studying  peace  with 
all  men;  the  absence  of  all  greediness  and  covetousness,  as  one  whose  conversation 
is  in  heaven,  and  as  one  determined  to  be  fair  and  impartial  in  all  his  dealings  with 
men ; — these  are  the  things  needful  for  one  who  is  a  priest  in  the  Church  of  God.  But 
besides  these  strictly  personal  qualifications  he  must  have  a  well-ordered  house.  His 
family  must  bear  the  traces  of  a  gentle  but  firm  parental  discipline.  He  that  is  a  ruler 
in  the  house  of  God  must  show  that  he  can  rule  his  own  children  and  servants ;  and  a 
portion  of  the  gravity  and  sobriety  of  the  man  of  God  must  be  seen  in  the  members 
of  his  household.  With  regard  to  deacons,  they  too  must  be  grave  in  their  demeanour 
and  conversation ;  in  all  their  private  intercourse  with  the  members  of  the  .Church  where 
they  serve,  they  must  he  conspicuously  honest  and  ingenuous.  In  all  social  intercourse 
they  must  show  themselves  temperate  and  abstemious.  In  handling  the  public  money, 
and  ministering  the  alms  of  the  faithful,  they  must  make  it  clear  that  none  sticks  to 
their  own  fingers,  and  that  they  have  no  eye  to  gain  in  the  ministrations  they  under- 
take. The  spirit  of  their  ministrations  must  be  "  all  for  love  and  nothing  for  reward." 
Nor  must  they  be  only  honest  men ;  they  must  be  devout  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  thoroughly  instructed  in  the  mystery  of  the  Christian  faith,  and  adorning  that 
faith  by  their  personal  holiness.    As  regards  their  families,  the  same  rule  applies  to 


oh.  m.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  67 

them  as  to  the  priests.  Like  the  priests,  they  hold  office  in  the  Church  of  God ;  they 
minister  in  that  temple  where  God's  pure  truth  is  fixed  and  established  for  ever  ;  they 
are  the  expounders,  with  the  priests,  of  the  great  mystery  of  godliness,  the  incarnate 
Word,  the  peached  Jesus,  the  glorified  Christ.  What,  then,  ought  their  character  to 
be;  how  high  above  things  earthly,  how  closely  assimilated  to  the  glorious  holiness 
of  heaven  1 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  l.—The  Christian  pastorate  a  good  work.  The  apostle,  having  in  the  previous 
chapter  regulated  the  worship  of  the  Congregation  and  placed  it  in  the  hands  of  men,  not 
women,  now  proceeds  to  describe  the  qualifications  of  the  pastors  of  congregations,  as 
if  to  imply  that  the  pastorate  did  not  belong  to  all  men. 

I.  The  office  of  pastob  is  a  good  wobk.  "  Faithful  is  the  saying,  If  any  one 
seeketh  the  office  of  pastor  [or, '  bishop'],  he  desireth  a  good  work."  1.  The  office  in  question 
was  held  by  persons  called  by  the  two  names  of  bishop  and  elder.  (1)  The  apostle  uses 
the  terms  of  the  same  office  (Titus  i.  5 — 7).  (2)  The  terms  came  from  two  different 
quarters.  The  term  "  elder,"  or  "  presbyter,"  was  of  Jewish  origin,  and  was  earlier  than 
the  other,  having  been  long  in  use  in  the  synagogue  administration.  It  had  respect 
primarily  to  the  age  of  those  presiding  over  the  religious  community,  but  came  by-and- 
by,  and  especially  in  the  Christian  Church,  to  signify  its  head,  and  was  a  title  of  dignity 
and  gravity.  The  other  term,  "  bishop,"  came  from  the  Greek  world,  and  was  a  designa- 
tion of  the  duties  of  the  office  as  involving  an  oversight  of  the  Churches.  (3)  The 
term  "  bishop  "  is,  therefore,  mostly  employed  of  the  Churches  in  Asia  Minor,  "consisting 
of  converted  Greeks,  but  the  Jewish  term  "elder"  had  precedence  of  it  at  that  earlier 
stage  when  the  Church  consisted  of  a  nucleus  of  converted  Jews.  In  Crete,  where 
the  Greek  and  Jewish  elements  were  about  equally  powerful,  both  terms  are  used. 
2.  The  office  in  question  is  a  good  work.  This  was  one  of  the  faithful  sayings  of  the 
apostle.  It  was  (1)  a  work,  not  a  sinecure,  or  title  of  honour,  but  a  laborious  office, 
and  therefore  pastors  are  called  "  labourers  in  the  Word  and  doctrine ; "  (2)  a  good 
work,  being  excellent  in  itself,  and  in  its  aims  as  for  the  good  of  men  and  the  glory  of  God. 

II.  The  pastorate  is  a  worthy  object  of  ambition.  "  He  desireth  a  good  work." 
It  may  be  laudably  desired,  not  as  an  office  of  profit  or  honour,  but  with  a  supreme 
regard  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  welfare  of  man,  and  ought  not  to  be  undertaken 
except  by  those  who  have  a  real  delight  and  pleasure  in  acting  upon  these  groat  prin- 
ciples.—T.  C. 

Ver.  2. — The  positive  qualifications  of  the  Christian  pastor.  The  apostle  first  sets 
forth  those  qualifications  which  respect  the  personal  life  of  the  pastor,  and  afterwards 
those  which  affect  his  family  life.  His  personal  qualifications  are  those  of  a  spiritual 
and  moral  order  presented  positively. 

I.  He  ought  to  be  blameless.  It  may  be  hard  for  a  faithful  man  to  avoid  the 
censure  of  a  critical  society,  but  he  must  be  irreproachable  as  being  guilty  of  no  scandal, 
and,  above  all,  free  from  the  vices  enumerated  under  the  negative  aspect  of  his  qualifi- 
cations.    He  must  be  held  in  high  moral  repute  by  the  community  around  him. 

II.  He  is  to  be  the  husband  of  one  wife.  1.  This  condemns  the  rule  of  celibacy 
in  the  Church  of  Borne.  It  is  quite  absurd  to  say  that  the  "  one  wife  "  is  the  Church ; 
for  the  context  regards  the  minister  as  having  relation  both  to  a  Church  and  to  a  wife 
(ver.  5).  Besides,  this  Roman  idea  would  make  the  Church  the  wife  of  many  husbands. 
Where  the  apostle,  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  1  Corinthians,  seems  to  favour  a  celibate 
condition  "  on  account  of  the  present  distress,"  it  is  not  on  account  of  any  superior 
holiness  belonging  to  the  unmarried  state,  but  because  it  sometimes  affords  a  better 
opportunity  for  pursuing  Christian  work  under  trying  conditions.  2.  It  does  not  neces- 
sarily compel  pastors  to  marry,  like  the  Greek  Church,  which  yet  inconsistently  reserves 
its  bishoprics  for  unmarried  monks.  But  it  clearly  gives  the  preference  to  a  married 
ministry.  3.  It  does  not  mean  that  a  pastor  is  to  avoid  a  second  marriage1 — as  the  Greek 
Fathers  generally  understood  it  under  the  growing  influence  of  Eastern  asceticism — 
because  the  apostle  sanctions  such  marriages  (1  Cor.  vii.  1) ;  and,  secondly,  because  a 


68  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  in.  1—16. 

remarrying  does  not  make  a  pastor  more  than  the  husband  of  one  wife.  4.  It  seems, 
then,  to  mean  that  the  pastor  was  to  be  "  the  husband  of  one  wife"  avoiding  the  polygamy 
that  was  then  so  common  among  the  Jews,  and  the  system  of  divorce  still  so  common 
in  that  age,  and  remaining  faithful  to  the  wife  of  his  choice. 

III.  Soder.  He  must  be  not  only  so  in  eating  and  drinking,  but  watchful  over  him- 
self, his  work,  and  his  actions. 

IY.  Discreet.  With  a  sound  judgment  and  good  understanding,  capable  of  directing 
himself  wisely  in  the  midst  of  difficult  situations. 

V.  Orderly.  With  a  due  proportion  in  his  life,  modest  in  deportment,  courteous  tc 
all,  of  a  calm  temper  and  grave  demeanour. 

VI.  Given  to  hospitality.  In  an  age  when  Christians  travelled  from  place  to 
place,  and  were  exposed  to  the  risks  of  cril  companionship  in  public  inns,  it  was  impor- 
tant that  pastors  should  be  able  to  show  hospitality,  and  assist  with  their  counsel  as 
well  as  with  the  necessaries  of  life. 

VII.  Apt  to  teach.  The  pastor  must  have  the  capacity  to  impart  Christian  know- 
ledge, the  ability  to  interpret  Scripture,  to  explain  its  doctrines,  to  enforce  its  precepts, 
and  to  defend  it  against  errorists  of  every  class.  He  must  possess  the  gifts  of  utterance 
and  knowledge.  He  must  have  both  "  skill  and  will,  ability  and  dexterity,  being  neither 
ignorant  of  his  duty  nor  negligent  in  the  performance  of  it." — T.  0. 

Ver.  3. — The  negative  qualifications  of  the  Christian  pastor.  I.  Not  violent  oveb 
wine.  In  allusion  not  so  much  to  drunkenness  as  to  the  noisy  and  quarrelsome 
temper  which  is  generated  by  wine-bibbing.  The  word  impliedly  condemns  both  cause 
and  effect. 

II.  No  striker.  In  evident  allusion  to  the  previous  temper.  The  pastor  must 
never  lift  his  hand  in  anger  or  violence. 

HI.  Forbearing.  Reasonable  and  gentle,  rather  disposed  to  take  wrong  than 
avenge  it. 

IV.  Not  contentious.  Neither  litigious  nor  quarrelsome,  seeking  peace  with 
all  men. 

V.  No  lover  of  money.  He  must  appear  to  be  perfectly  disinterested,  not  mercenary 
in  his  aims,  not  seeking  his  own  things  rather  than  the  things  of  Jesus  Christ;  but,  on 
the  contrary,  he  must  himself  be  generous  and  hospitable  and  kind,  with  a  heart  and 
a  hand  ever  ready  to  relieve  distress. — T.  C. 

Vera.  4,  5. — The  Christian  pastor  in  hit  home  life.  The  apostle  here  turns  to  the 
family  life  of  the  pastor  as  an  important  element  affecting  the  public  examination  ot 
his  character. 

I.  The  importance  of  a  well-ordered  household.  "  One  that  ruleth  well  his 
own  house,  having  his  children  in  subjection  with  all  gravity."  1.  The  pastor  ii  no 
ascetic  recluse,  but  shares  in  the  everyday  life  of  the  world.  2.  He  must  have  firmness 
and  authority  to  rule  his  family — wife,  children,  and  servants;  not  slack  in  Ms  rule 
like  old  Eli,  but  faithful  as  Abraham,  who  not  only  taught  but  commanded  his  children 
and  household  to  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord.  3.  He  is  to  rule  gently  yet  firmly,  so 
as,  while  securing  subjection  in  his  household,  he  creates  that  gravity  of  deportment 
which  is  the  accompanying  grace  of  obedience  in  children  reared  under  wise  and  loving 
mastery. 

II.  The  well-ordered  household  the  test  of  fitness  fob  the  rule  of  the 
house  of  God.  "  For  if  a  man  know  not  how  to  rule  his  own  house,  how  shall  he  take 
care  of  the  Church  of  God?"  1.  The  argument  is  from  the  less  to  the  greater.  The 
family  is  the  lesser  sphere,  the  Church  the  larger  family.  The  family  needs  much 
prudence,  care,  forethought,  affection.  But  while  it  is  the  narrowest  sphere,  it  is 
governed  with  peculiar  advantages,  arising  from  the  feelings  of  love  and  dependence  on 
the  part  of  the  children.  If  there  is  failure  here,  there  is  a  self-evident  unfitness  for 
the  wider  and  more  complex  administration  of  the  Church.  2.  The  Church  of  Ood  is 
to  be  a  subject  of  anxious  care  to  the  pastor.  The  Greek  word  implies  this  thought. 
The  apostle  himself  had  the  care  of  all  the  Churches  upon  him.  But  the  pastor  has 
a  care  for  the  individual  members  of  his  flock,  to  seek  the  conversion  of  sinners,  to 
instruct  the  ignorant,  to  guide  the  perplexed,  to  comfort  the  doubting,  to  check  the 


oh.  in.  1— 16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  59 

wayward,  and  to  defend  the  flock  against  errorists.    "  Who  is  sufficient  for  these 
things?"— T.  C. 

Ver.  6. — The  pastor  must  not  be  a  novice.    "  Not  a  novice." 

I.  The  advantages  of  experience  in  a  pastor.  The  apostle  does  not  refer  to 
youth,  but  to  inexperience.  Yet  the  qualification  must  be  regarded  relatively;  for 
a  longer  or  a  shorter  probation  might  be  required,  according  to  circumstances.  The 
Church  at  Ephesus  had  been  long  enough  established  to  admit  of  a  selection  being 
made  out  of  men  of  Christian  experience  and  wisdom.  It  is  significant  to  remark  that 
no  definite  age  is  assigned  for  candidates  for  the  ministry.  In  a  Church  like  that  of 
Ephesus,  threatened  with  heresy  within  and  violence  without,  it  was  necessary  that 
the  elders  should  be  men  with  a  rare  understanding  of  the  mysteries  of  the  faith,  and 
with  a  large  fund  of  sanctified  experience. 

II.  The  beason  or  ground  op  the  apostle's  counsel.  "  Lest,  being  besotted  with 
pride,  he  should  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil."  1.  The  risk  of  the  novice  is 
an  undue  self-elation,  arising  from  the  thought  of  the  dignity  of  his  office  and  of  the 
estimation  in  which  he  is  held  on  account  of  his  gifts.  His  judgment  would  thus 
become  clouded,  and  he  would  fail  to  see  the  true  relation  of  things.  2.  The  consequence 
would  be  his  falling  under  the  very  condemnation  pronounced  upon  the  devil.  Thus 
a  bunding  pride  would  receive  its  just  retribution.  3.  It  is  evident  that  the  apostle 
believed  in  the  existence  of  a  personal  evil  spirit,  the  adversary  of  God  and  man.  It 
is  equally  evident  that  he  regarded  the  fall  of  the  devil  as  due  to  pride,  and  that  he 
regarded  him  as  the  tempter  of  man. — T.  C. 

Yer.  7. — The  pastor  must  have  an  honest  reputation  before  the  world.  He  must  stand 
well  both  without  and  within  the  Church. 

I.  The  importance  of  an  unblemished  reputation.  "  But  he  must  also  have 
a  good  testimony  from  them  that  are  without."  1.  It  is  a  mistake  to  ignore  or  defy  the 
opinion  of  the  world  in  matters  falling  fairly  within  its  judgment.  What  we  do  ought 
not  only  to  be  "  acceptable  to  God,  but  approved  of  men  "  (Rom.  xiv.  18).  "  Let  not 
your  good  be  evil  spoken  of"  (Rom.  xiv.  16).  The  world  understands  the  principles  of 
natural  justice.  The  minister  cannot  violate  these  without  loss  of  reputation  and 
influence.  2.  A  blameless  life  is  calculated  to  make,  a  deep  impression  on  the  world. 
"  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they,  seeing  your  good  works,  may  glorify 
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven "  (Matt.  v.  16).  Your  holy  walk  ought  to  attract 
"  those  that  are  without  "  into  the  happy  communion  of  the  Church.  3.  It  is  a  great 
evil  to  blast  the  reputation  of  Christian  ministers,  for  it  undermines  their  influence  for 
good. 

II.  The  dangers  of  a  doubtful  reputation  before  the  world.  "  Lest  he  fall 
into  reproach  and  the  snare  of  the  devil."  It  would  be  a  great  risk  to  introduce  into 
the  ministry  one  who  had  once  followed  a  loose  life,  because  those  who  were  familiar 
with  his  history  would  be  ready  to  suspect  the  purity  of  his  congregation  from  the 
blemished  reputation  of  its  pastor.  The  effect  in  the  minister  might  be  diverse.  1.  Be 
might  be  excited  to  an  angry  resentment  of  such  disagreeable  attacks.  2.  He  might  fall 
into  despair,  and^-tlmsjbecome  reckless,  and  ultimately  justify  the  worst  imputations 
of  the  world.  3.  He  mighTcease  to  reprove  transgressors  because  he  had  not  the  courage 
to  condemn  faults  which  were  only  too  observable  in  himself.  Thus  the  devil  would 
set  its  snares  around  him  for  his  undoing.  When  George  HI.  was  asked  to  give  a 
bishopric  to  a  clergyman  who  had  made  a  serious  lapse  from  virtue,  and  was  told  that 
the  clergyman  had  long  ago  repented  of  it,  his  appropriate  answer  was,  "  I  would  rather 
appoint  bishops  who  had  not  that  particular  sin  to  repent  of." — T.  C. 

Vers.  8, 9. — The  qualifications  of  deacons.  The  apostle  next  proceeds  to  direct  Timothy 
respecting  the  character  and  appointment  of  another  class  of  office-bearers. 

L  The  order  of  deacons.  1.  Their  origin.  We  find  the  first  trace  of  the  order 
about  two  years  after  the  Ascension  (Acts  vi.  1 — 4).  It  owed  its  origin  to  a  necessity 
that  arose  from  the  extension  of  the  Church.  Seven  deacons  were  appointed  as  almoners. 
They  are  not  so  called,  but  their  mime  is  traceable  in  the  two  terms  which  indicate  the 
sphere  of  their  office,  "  serving  tables  "  and  "  ministry  "  (SuuroWa,  iuuewtio  rpcnrlfais) 


60  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  hl  1—16. 

2.  Their  sphere  of  duty.  It  is  expressly  distinguished  from  "  the  ministry  of  the  Word" 
and  "prayer"  (ver.  4),  and  was  therefore,  as  the  "serving  of  tables"  signifies,  an 
office  for  the  care  of  the  poor  and  strangers  who  might  be  connected  with  the  Church. 
The  deaconship  was,  therefore,  a  purely  secular  office.  3.  Historic  notices  of  deacons. 
The  earliest  notices  of  the  order  are  apparently  in  Bom.  xii.  7,  "  Or  ministry  (deaconship), 
let  us  wait  on  our  ministering  "  (deaconship) ;  in  1  Cor.  xii.  28, "  helps  "  (kvriKiityeis) ;  and 
at  a  later  time  in  1  Pet.  iv.  11,  "  If  any  man  minister  "  (SmKoveT).  We  read  in  Phil.  i.  1 
of  "  the  bishops  and  deacons,"  and  in  Rom.  xvi.  1  of  Phoebe  as  "  a  deaconess  "  of  the 
Church  at  Cenchrea. 

II.  The  qualifications  of  deacons.  1.  "  Grave."  Of  a  serious  demeanour,  befitting 
the  position  of  responsibility  held  by  them.  2.  "  Not  double-tongued."  Not  saying 
one  thing  to  one  person  and  another  to  another,  under  the  pressure,  perhaps,  of  applica- 
tions for  assistance;  or,  not  promising  aid  which  is  afterwards  withheld.  Misunder- 
standings would  necessarily  arise  from  any  kind  of  prevarication.  3.  "  Not  addicted  to 
much  wine."  The  deacons  must  not  be  given  to  pleasures  of  the  table,  which  rendei 
people  unfit  for  disagreeable  duty,  and  tempt  to  the  consumption  of  the  wealth  committed 
to  their  keeping.  4.  "  Not  lovers  of  base  gain."  There  might  otherwise  arise  a  Judas 
among  the  deacons  to  embezzle  the  Church  funds.  5.  "  Holding  the  mystery  of  the 
faith  in  a  pure  conscience."  (1)  The  mystery  is  what  faith  is  conversant  with — a  thing 
once  secret,  but  now  revealed  by  Christ's  gospel ;  called  variously  "  the  mystery  of  God," 
"  the  mystery  of  Christ,"  "the  mystery  of  his  will,"  "the  mystery  of  godliness,"  and  "the 
mystery  of  the  gospel,"  which  is  the  great  subject  of  gospel-preaching.  It  was  the  mystery 
of  redemption  through  the  blood  of  Christ.  (2)  The  mystery  of  faith  was  not  to  be 
speculatively,  but  practically,  held  and  maintained.  •"In  a  pure  conscience."  The 
deacons  were  to  be  sincerely  attached  to  the  truth,  and  to  realize  its  practical  power  va 
their  life  and  experience.  (3)  They  are  to  "  hold  the  mystery,"  not  to  preach  it.  There 
is  no  intimation  that  the  deacons,  as  such,  were  preachers,  though  two  of  them  (Stephep 
and  Philip)  are  afterwards  found  acting  as  evangelists. 

III.  The  method  of  their  appointment.  "  And  these  also  let  them  first  be  proved ; 
then  let  them  serve  as  deacons,  if  they  are  without  blame."  1.  The  election  of  the  seven 
deacon*  was  left  in  the  hands  of.  the  Christian  p  ople  themselves.  (Acts  vi.  3.)  2.  There 
is  no  formal  method  prescribed  for  testing  their  qualifications.  Their  fitness  could  be 
easily  judged  of  without  any  regular  investigation.  The  moral  element,  however,  was 
to  be  supreme  in  such  appointments ;  for  they  were  not  chosen  unless  they  were  "  without 
blame."  3.  Their  formal  appointment  to  service.  Let  them  serve  in  the  various  branches 
of  their  office  as  deacons. — T.  C. 

Ver.  11. — The  qualification!  of  deaconesses.  "  Women  in  like  manner  must  be  grave, 
not  slanderers,  sober,  faithful  in  all  things."  The  allusion  is  evidently  not  to  the  wives 
of  deacons,  but  to  deaconesses.  Why  should  the  duties  of  deacons'  wives  be  set  forth 
when  there  is  no  allusion  to  the  duties  of  ministers'  wives  ?  The  omission  of  all  mention 
of  domestic  duties  in  this  case  is  significant. 

I.  The  obdbb  of  deaconesses.  There  was  evidently  such  an  order  in  the  primitive 
Churchi  Phoebe  of  Cenchrea  (Eom.  xvi.  1),  Euodias  and  Syntyche  (Phil.  iv.  2),  and 
probably  the  association  with  which  Dorcas  was  connected  at  Joppa  (Acts  ix.  36—41), 
seem  to  have  belonged  to  the  order.  The  order  did  not  cease  to  exist  till  the  fifth 
century  in  the  Latin  Church,  and  till  the  twelfth  in  the  Greek  Church.  It  had  its 
origin,  probably,  in  the  extreme  jealousy  which  guarded  the  relations  of  the  sexes  in 
early  times,  for  women  were  comparatively  secluded  from  the  society  of  men.  Deacon- 
esses were,  therefore,  appointed  to  maintain  the  religious  intercourse  of  Christian  women 
with  a  Church  whose  ministrations  were  in  the  hands  of  men. 

II.  The  qualifications  of  deaconesses.  1.  "  Grave."  Not  given  to  levity  or  gay 
manners,  but  sober  in  speech,  gesture,  and  dress.  2.  "  Not  slanderers."  Not  too  ready 
to  take  up  an  accusation  against  the  poor,  or  too  ready  to  Use  the  tongue  in  the  way  ol 
false  insinuation.  3.  "  Sober."  Not  to  be  given  to  pleasures  of  the  table,  but  showing 
a  seemly  abstemiousness.  4.  "  Faithful  in  all  things."  Faithful  in  all  ecclesiastical 
duties.  (1)  Faithful  to  the  poor,  whose  secrets  are  to  be  jealously  kept ;  (2)  faithful 
to  the  Church,  which  entrusts  its  funds  to  their  wise  and  discriminating  distribution; 

ml  (3)  faithful  to  God  in  all  religious  obligations  whatsoever. — T,  C, 


oh.  in.  1— lti.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  61 

Vera.  12, 13. — The  domestic  duty  of  deacons.  The  apostle  here  returns  to  add  some 
further  injunctions  about  deacons,  as  well  as  to  suggest  a  reason  for  exacting  the  qualifi- 
cations already  described. 

I.  The  deacons'  domestic  relations.  1.  "  Let  the  deacons  be  the  husbands  of  one 
wife."  The  same  qualification  is  needed  for  deacons  as  for  bishops,  for  their  houses  were 
to  be  examples  of  purity,  peace,  and  orderliness.  2.  "  Euling  their  children  and  their 
own  houses  well."  The  father  of  a  loving  household  would  be  best  fitted  for  the 
sympathetic  administration  of  funds  allocated  to  the  poor,  while  the  pious  order  of  his 
family  would  enhance  the  public  confidence  in  the  reality  of  his  religious  character. 

II.  Reason  fob  the  various  qualifications  described.  "For  those  who  have 
done  the  work  of  a  deacon  well  obtain  for  themselves  a  good  degree,  and  much  boldness 
in  the  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  1.  The  good  degree  does  not  refer  to  promotion 
to  higher  ecclesiastical  office.  The  idea,  indeed,  would  be  quite  an  anachronism.  2.  It 
refers  to  the  place  of  honour  and  distinction  that  will  be  given  to  the  faithful  deacon  in 
the  day  of  final  recompense.  The  doctrine  of  rewards  is  that  of  Scripture,  and  especially 
of  our  Lord's  parables  (Matt.  xxv.  45 ;  Luke  xix.  11 — 27).  3.  There  is  the  further  idea 
of  the  joyful  confidence  toward  Qod  which  would  characterize  him  in  view  of  a  faithful 
discharge  of  his  duties — a  confidence  springing  out  of  faith  resting  in  Jesus  Christ. — T.  C. 

Vers.  14, 15. —  The  importance  of  a  due  regulation  of  Church  order.  The  apostle 
expected  to  visit  Ephesus  shortly,  but  in  case  of  his  visit  being  delayed  by  necessary 
causes.he  deemed  it  right  to  give  Timothy  these  instructions  in  writing  respecting  the 
appointment  of  bishops  and  deacons,  and  other  details  of  Church  order.  "  These  things 
I  write  to  thee,  hoping  to  come  shortly ;  but  if  I  should  tarry,  [I  write  them]  that  thou 
mayest  know  how  thou  oughtest  to  conduct  thyself  in  God's  house." 

I.  The  necessity  of  a  due  order  in  the  Church.  1.  Darbyites  suppose  that  it  is 
wrong  for  man  to  make  arrangements  in  God's  Church  —  that  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost  who 
should  regulate  the  order  of  worship  and  service,  and  that  his  presidency  should  be 
recognized  in  everything.  In  that  case  why  should  the  apostle  have  been  at  such  pains 
to  regulate  even  the  ministrations  of  prophets  and  speakers  with  tongues  at  Corinth  ? 
God  is  a  God  of  peace,  not  of  confusion  (1  Cor.  xiv.  33).  2.  It  was  not  enough  for 
Timothy  to  stir  up  his  own  personal  gifts  and  do  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  but  he  must 
execute  the  special  commission  he  had  received  from  the  apostle,  to  regulate  the  appoint- 
ment of  the  office-bearers  of  the  Church,  and  the  details  of  Church  worship.  The  Church 
was  to  be  guided  in  choice  of  ministers  by  the  considerations  suggested  by  the  apostle. 
3.  There  was  special  reason  for  these  instructions  in  the  rise  of  heresies  at  Ephesus  and 
elsewhere.    (Ch.  iv.  1 — 3.) 

II.  The  dignity  and  office  of  the  Church.  It  is  "  God's  house,  which  indeed 
is  the  Church  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar  and  basement  of  the  truth."  1.  It  is  the 
Church  of  the  living  Qod.  (1)  It  is  so,  regarded  either  as  the  Christian  congregation 
with  a  local  reference,  or  as  the  whole  Church  of  the  redeemed,  in  communion  with 
Christ  and  with  each  of  its  members.  (2)  Its  internal  glory  consists  in  the  fact  that  it 
is  no  material  temple  of  dead  deities,  like  the  proud  temple  of  Diana  which  reared  itself 
aloft  over  the  roofs  of  Ephesus ;  but  a  spiritual  community,  realizing  the  living  and 
personal  presence  of  God  in  the  midst  of  it.  2.  It  is  the  house  of  Qod.  (1)  This 
term  denoted  primarily  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  secondarily  the  covenant  people 
(Numb.  xii.  7 ;  Hos.  viii.  1),  who  had  God  for  a  Sanctuary  or  Dwelling-place  (Ps.  xc.  1 ; 
Ezek.  xi.  16).  There  was  a  mutual  indwelling — they  in  him,  and  he  in  them.  (2)  It 
now  denotes  the  Church  of  God,  represented  variously  as  (a)  a  spiritual  building 
resting  on  Christ  as  chief  Corner-stone  (Eph.  ii.  20);  (6)  as  the  true  temple  in 
which  God  dwells  (1  Cor.  vi.  16);  (c)  as  the  household  or  "house  of  God,"  over 
which  is  Christ  as  Son  (Heb.  iii.  6)—"  whose  house  are  we."  Moses  was  servant  in  this 
house,  Jesus  a  Son  over  it ;  it  was,  therefore,  the  same  house  in  the  two  dispensations. 
A  proof,  in  opposition  to  Darbyism,  that  the  Church  existed  in  Old  Testament  times,  and 
did  not  first  come  into  existence  at  Pentecost.  3.  It  is  the  pillar  and  basement  of  the 
truth.  (1)  Negatively,  Christ,  and  not  the  Church,  is  the  only  ground  of  truth.  "  For 
other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Christ  Jesus"  (1  Cor.  iii.  11). 
This  passage  implies  that  the  Church  rests  upon  the  truth  rather  than  that  the  truth 
rests  on  the  Church.    But  a  misapprehension  arises  from  confounding  the  truth  as  it 


62  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  hi.  1— 1«, 

is  in  itself  with  the  truth  as  apprehended  hy  believers  and  acknowledged  before  the 
world.  Further,  the  truth  does  not  derive  its  authority  from  the  Church,  but  from 
Christ.  (2)  Positively,  the  passage  sets  forth  (a)  the  presentative  manifestation  of  the 
truth ;  for  "  the  Church  is  the  pillar  of  the  truth."  The  Church  is  to  hold  up  the 
saving  truths  of  the  gospel  before  the  eyes  of  men.  It  is  a  pillar  inscribed  all  over  with 
the  truth.  Without  the  Church  "  there  would  be  no  witness,  no  guardian  of  archives, 
no  basis,  nothing  whereon  acknowledged  truth  would  rest."  It  is  the  Church  which 
holds  the  deposit  of  truth,  and  perpetuates  it  from  generation  to  generation.  (6)  The 
passago  sets  forth  the  stability  of  the  truth.  "  The  Church  is  the  basis  of  truth."  The 
truth  finds  its  true  basis  in  the  hearts  of  believing  men,  who  hold  forth  the  glories 
of  redemption  amidst  all  the  fluctuations  of  the  world.  There  is  nothing  in  this  exposi- 
tion to  sanction  the  assumptions  of  the  Church  of  Borne,  because  she  must  first  sub- 
stantiate her  claims  to  be  a  teacher  of  the  truth  before  she  can  be  regarded  as  "a 
pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth." — T.  0. 

Ver.  16. — The  treasure  of  truth  committed  to  the  Church's  guardianship.  I.  It  is 
Christ  in  all  his  relations  as  the  Mystery  of  godliness.  This  implies  that  he 
is  the  Eevelation  of  God  to  man ;  for  God  "  has  made  known  what  is  the  wealth  of  the 
glory  of  this  mystery  among  the  Gentiles,  which  is  Christ  in  you,  the  Hope  of  glory  " 
(Col.  i.  27).  Thus  Christianity  is  Christ.  He  is  the  Centre  of  Christian  theology,  as 
he  is  the  Object  of  Christian  faith  and  love. 

II.  The  manifestation  of  the  person  of  Christ.  He  is  set  forth  as  the  Life  of 
the  Church,  and  if  he  were  not  God  as  well  as  man,  the  mystery  would  not  be  so  obvious 
to  our  understanding.  1.  He  was  "manifested  in  the  flesh."  This  very  expression 
implies  the  divinity  of  Christ ;  for  it  would  be  superfluous,  if  not  absurd,  to  say  these 
words  of  any  mere  man.  The  words  imply  (1)  that  it  was  essential  Deity  that  was 
manifested;  (2)  that  it  was  a  manifestation  made,  not  to  our  understanding,  but  to  our 
senses ;  (3)  that  there  was  a  real  incarnation,  for  he  was  manifest  in  the  flesh,  or,  as 
John  says,  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh."  It  was  not  only  by  the  flesh,  but  in  the  flesh. 
2.  He  was  "justified  in  the  spirit."  He  was  approved  to  be  righteous  in  the  higher 
principle  of  spiritual  life  within  him.  There  is  no  allusion  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
■pint  here  is  the  counterpart  of  the  flesh.  Christ  fulfilled  all  righteousness.  If  his 
manifestation  in  the  flesh  exhibited  his  true  and  real  humanity,  his  justification  in  the 
spirit  exhibited  his  holiness  and  perfection.  The  passage  consists  of  a  series  of  parallel 
clauses,  of  which  every  two  form  a  connected  pair.  3.  He  was  "  seen  of  angels"  In  the 
sense  of  showing  himself  to  them  in  his  incarnation.  They  announced  his  advent,  they 
ministered  to  his  wants,  they  heralded  his  resurrection,  they  attended  him  in  his 
triumphant  return  to  heaven,  and  they  now  see  him  in  his  glorified  humanity.  4.  He 
was  "preached  among  the  Oentiles."  Here,  again,  is  another  pair  of  opposites;  the 
angels  inhabitants  of  a  holy  heaven,  the  Gentiles  inhabitants  of  a  sinful  earth.  It  was 
one  of  the  six  glories  of  our  Redeemer  that  he  was  to  be  a  "  Light  to  the  Gentiles " 
(Isa.  xlix.  6).  5.  He  was  "  helieved  on  in  the  world."  Christianity  is  a  world-wide 
religion,  embraced  by  men  of  all  nationalities ;  unlike  Mohammedanism  and  Buddhism, 
which  are  restricted  to  the  East.  The  gospel  finds  acceptance  alike  in  East  and  West. 
6.  He  was  "  received  up  in  glory."  In  reference  to  Christ's  historical  ascent  to  heaven 
amidst  circumstances  of  marvellous  glory.  The  last  pair  of  opposites  is  the  world  and 
glory.  How  far  they  are  apart !  Yet  they  are  brought  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ. 
This  passage,  from  its  antithetical  structure,  would  seem  to  have  been  an  ancient  hymn 
of  the  Church,  setting  forth  the  leading  facts  of  the  Messianic  story. — T.  C. 

Ver.  15. — Behaviour  in  church.  "  That  thou  mayest  know  how  thou  oughtest 
to  behave  thyself  in  the  house  of  God."  "  Behaviour "  seems  a  commonplace  word 
enough,  and  we  often  assign  it  a  subordinate  place  in  religion.  It  is,  however,  a  word 
large  as  "  character."  It  is  a  vocabulary  in  itself.  It  is  not  "  do  "-haviour,  but  "  be  "- 
haviour !  What  I  do  may  be  accidental ;  what  I  am  is  everything.  Paul  has  been 
addressing  pastors,  deacons,  women  professing  godliness,  and  wives.  He  has  dealt  with 
marriage,  and  the  ruling  of  children ;  and  now  he  speaks  to  the  Church  about  the 
conduct  of  men  in  church. 

What  n  bkhavioubT    A  man's  behaviour  reveals  much  of  what  he  is.    Earnest 


OB.  m.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHfr.  W 

or  frivolous ;  gentle  or  hard ;  forgiving  or  unforgiving ;  selfish  or  generous ;  pitiful 
or  censorious;  appreciative  or  unthankful.  Behaviour  is  an  cvcry-hour  sermon.  It 
corrects  the  notion  that  a  man's  religion  is  mainly  in  his  doctrine  or  opinions,  his  ritual 
or  ceremonial.  Manners  are  not  to  be  put  on  like  a  garment,  nor  can  we  masquerade 
in  them  and  pretend  to  be  what  we  are  not.  Bending  the  knee  is  nothing,  if  we  are  not 
reverent  at  heart.  A  gift  is  nothing,  unless  given  from  love.  Prayer  is  nothing,  unless 
our  life  is  a  prayer.  Praise  is  nothing,  unless  our  life  be  a  garment  of  praise.  Manners 
are  not  etiquette,  nor  best  dresses,  nor  courtesies  of  speech ;  they  are  the  expressions  of 
a  life.  In  this  aspect  their  potency  is  wonderful.  In  church  we  are  to  behave  well ; 
not  to  give  ourselves  airs,  as  rich,  or  learned,  or  superior  people,  but  to  remember  that 
we  are  bought  with  a  price.  But  behaviour  is  not  much  thought  about.  There  is  an 
idea  that  some  men  are  good  at  heart,  though  they  are  brusque,  if  you  knew  how  to 
approach  them.  This  is  nonsense.  The  flower  does  not  wait  for  me  to  unfold  it ;  it 
does  not  say,  "  If  you  knew  how  to  tempt  my  kindness,  I  would  -give  you  fragrant 
incense."   It  is  a  flower  everywhere,  to  everybody. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  16. — "  What  "  Church  "  means.  "  In  the  house  of  God,  which  is  the  Church  of 
the  living  God."  The  idea  of  what  the  Church  is,  is  to  regulate  what  our  behaviour  is. 
The  word  "church"  comes  from  the  Greek  words  Kurios  oikos.  These  two  words 
abbreviated  make  "  church"  or  "  kirk." 

I.  If  it  be  the  Church  of  God,  in  our  behaviour  there  must  be  beverenoe. 
Reverence  is  at  the  root  of  all  religion.  Flippancy  of  manner,  indevoutness  of  heart, 
will  destroy  the  best  service.  We  read  the  old  command,  "Ye  shall  reverence  my 
sanctuary,  saith  the  Lord;"  and  wherever  we  meet  together,  even  in  the  humblest 
church,  "  the  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple,"  and  we  are  to  "  keep  silence "  or  "  be  reve- 
rent "  before  him. 

II.  Behaviour  means  life.  It  is  the  Church,  not  merely  of  the  God  of  Abraham, 
or  Isaac,  or  Jacob,  but  of  the  living  God.  We  do  not  build  temples  as  monuments  of 
a  past  glory.  Christ  said,  "Do  this  in  remembrance  of  me."  Before  his  departure  he 
said, "  I  go  away  and  come  again ; "  and  wherever  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in 
his  Name,  there  he  is  in  the  midst  of  them.  This  Church  of  God  is  further  described  as 
the  pillar,  or  ground  and  stay,  of  the  truth ;  that  is  to  say,  that  no  sacred  books  will 
preserve  religion  without  a  sacred  life.  Men  may  answer  an  argument  or  adopt  a 
theory,  but  the  victory  of  the  early  Church  was  won  by  the  Church's  life  or  behaviour. 
"See  how  these  Christians  love  one  another."  Learn,  then,  the  great  lesson,  that 
behaviour  is  everything.  "  How  unblamably  we  behave  ourselves,"  says  Paul  to  the 
Thessalonians.    "  I  will  behave  myself  wisely  in  a  perfect  way,"  says  the  psalmist.— 

W.  M.a 

Vers.  1 — IS. — Qualification!  of  three  classes  of  office-bearers.  I.  Qualifications  of 
a  bishop.  Preliminary  direction  to  Timothy.  "  Faithful  is  the  saying,  If  a  man  seeketh 
the  office  of  a  bishop,  he  desireth  a  good  work.''  The  Scripture  idea  of  the  episcopate  is 
that  of  oversight,  viz.  of  souls.  A  bishop  was  one  who  had  the  duty  of  overseeing  a  con- 
gregation in  spiritual  matters,  being,  in  respect  of  gravity  and  dignity,  called  presbyter 
or  elder.  Timothy  was  to  encourage  any  who  sought  to  enter  into  the  episcopate.  The 
laying  in  Christian  circles  was  to  be  relied  on,  "  If  a  man  seeketh  the  office  of  a  bishop, 
he  desireth  a  good  work."  It  is  not  a  sinecure,  but  a  work  or  employment  taxing  the 
energies.  Its  excellence  lies  in  its  having  respect  to  men's  highest  interests.  But  if  he 
was  to  encourage  entrance  into  the  episcopate,  he  was  not  to  do  so  without  regard  to  the 
proper  qualifications  which  he  has  laid  down  for  him.  "  The  bishop  therefore  must  be 
without  reproach."  This  is  a  general  qualification.  A  minister  is  not  to  be  chosen 
without  regard  to  character.  If  a  man  gives  just  ground  for  reproach — has  not  character 
behind  his  gifts — he  is  not  fitted  for  the  .office  of  a  minister,  which  is  to  influence  men 
in  the  production  of  Christian  character.  "  The  husband  of  one  wife."  Some  high 
authorities  take  the  meaning  to  be  that  the  contraction  of  a  second  marriage,  even  after 
the  death  of  the  first  wife,  was  a  disqualification  for  the  office  of  a  bishop.  But  this 
forbidding  to  ecclesiastics  of  what  in  the  New  Testament  is  expressly  permitted  to  others, 
seems  to  belong  to  a  post-apostolic  asceticism.  The  language  seems  to  be  directed 
against  "any  deviation  from  morality  in  respect  of  marriage,  whether  by  concubinage, 


64  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  t°H.  m.  t— 16 

polygamy,  or  improper  second  marriages."  "  Temperate,  sober-minded,  orderly."  One 
who  is  to  be  chosen  as  a  minister  must  be  temperate,  i.e.  must  have  command  of  his 
desires  and  his  temper.  He  must  also  be  sober-minded,  i.e.  must  bring  sound  sense  to  the 
consideration  of  all  matters.  He  must  also  be  orderly,  i.e.  must  have  a  love  for  good  rules. 
"  Given  to  hospitality."  He  must  be  raised  above  all  meanness  toward  those  whom  ho 
ought  tc  entertain.  How  is  he  to  commend  the  generosity  of  God,  if  he  is  niggardly  in 
his  own  dealings?  "Apt  to  teach."  This  is  a  special  qualification.  With  all  that  is 
righteous  and  sensible  and  even  lovely  in  his  character,  he  must  have  skill  in  teaching — 
in  opening  the  Word,  and  in  bringing  it  to  bear  for  all  its  uses  on  the  wants  of  men. 
However  excellent  a  man's  character  is,  he  is  not  fit  for  being  a  minister  if  he  cannot 
skilfully  handle  Divine  truth.  "  No  brawler,  no  striker ;  but  gentle,  not  contentious." 
A  disqualification  is  being  quarrelsome  over  wine,  and  consequently  coming  to  blows. 
He  must,  on  the  other  hand,  be  gentle ;  i.e.  while  he  is  to  be  thoroughly  reasonable,  he  is 
to  be  kindly  and  forbearing,  waiving  even  his  rights  for  the  sake  of  gaining  his  end  as  a 
minister,  viz.  the  spiritual  good  of  those  with  whom  ho  deals.  It  is  a  disqualification 
to  be  contentious,  *.e.  to  be  in  one's  element,  and  to  give  way  to  unholy  feelings,  in 
fighting.  "No  lover  of  money."  It  is  a  further  disqualification  to  have  a  grovelling 
desire  for  money,  instead  of  having  a  feeling  of  responsibility  with  regard  to  its  proper 
uses.  "  One  that  ruleth  well  his  own  house,  having  his  children  in  subjection  with  all 
gravity."  This  is  in  one  view  an  ordinary  qualification,  inasmuch  as  it  is  what  is 
expected  of  every  one  who  is  in  authority  in  a  house.  It  is  expected  even  of  a  man 
who  is  not  qualified  to  teach  that  he  can  rule  well  his  own  house,  i.e.  lay  down  proper 
rules  for  his  household,  and  see  to  their  being  carried  out.  The  apostle's  idea  of  ruling 
the  house  well,  is  the  having  the  children  in  subjection  with  all  gravity.  "  In  the  phrase, 
'all  gravity,'  he  is  looking  at  a  kind  of  obedience  that  touches  the  deepest  notes  of 
principle  and  character.  Contrary  to  this,  there  is  an  obedience  without  principle,  which 
is  obedience  with  all  levity ;  that  which  is  paid  to  mere  will  and  force  j  that  which  is 
another  name  for  fear ;  that  which  is  bought  by  promises  and  paid  by  indulgences ; 
that  which  makes  a  time-server,  or  a  coward,  or  a  lying  pretender,  as  the  case  may  be, 
and  not  a  Christian.  This  latter — that  which  makes  a  Christian — is  the  aim  of  all  true 
government,  and  should  never  be  out  of  sight  for  an  hour."  Parenthesis  showing  how 
a  bishop  ought  to  be  able  to  rule  his  own  house  well.  "But  if  a  man  knoweth  not 
how  to  rule  his  own  house,  how  shall  he  take  care  of  the  Church  of  God  ?  "  A  bishop 
has  to  manage  men.  The  Church  of  God  is  the  family  enlarged  and  heightened.  If 
one  fails  in  the  lower  sphere,  how  can  he  be  expected  to  succeed  in  the  higher  sphere  ? 
Even  Confucius  had  before  this  time  said,  "  It  is  impossible  that  he  who  kndws  not  how 
to  govern  and  reform  his  own  family  should  rightly  govern  and  reform  a  people."  "  Not 
a  novice,  lest  being  puffed  up  he  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil."  By  a  novice 
we  are  to  understand  a  recent  convert  to  Christianity.  Such  a  one  being  necessarily 
inexperienced  in  the  truth,  and  also  in  the  evil  of  his  own  heart,  was  unfitted  for  office. 
And  the  putting  him  into  office  was  fitted  to  have  a  bad  effect  upon  him.  The 
introducer  of  evil  into  the  universe  was  in  high  position,  but  gave  way  to  a  feeling  of 
pride.  How  this  feeling  operated  is  described  by  a  word  which  means  enveloped  with 
smoke,  as  if  that  were  the  kind  of  atmosphere  that  pride  throws  around  a  person.  In 
some  matter  in  which  his  rank  was  involved,  under  the  clouding  of  pride,  instead  of 
bending  to  the  will  of  God,  which  would  have  been  his  approval,  he  asserted  his  self- 
importance,  which  was  his  condemnation.  So  the  novice,  instead  of  being  weighed 
down  under  the  responsiblities  of  office,  is  more  likely,  under  the  clouding  of  pride 
occasioned  by  his  elevation,  to  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil.  "  Moreover  he 
must  have  good  testimony  from  them  that  are  without  lest  he  fall  into  reproach ;  and  the 
snare  of  the  devil."  He  must  be  able  to  command  the  respect  of  non-Christians, 
especially  for  his  acting  in  a  way  consistent  with  his  professions.  For  if  he  falls  so  low 
as  not  to  be  respected  by  those,  then  this  want  of  respect  is  sure  to  be  used  as  a  snare 
by  Satan  for  his  destruction. 

IL  Qualifications  of  deacons.  "  Deacons  in  like  manner."  Deacons,  originally 
the  almoners  of  the  Church,  came  to  be  regarded  as  assistants  of  the  elders,  having  the 
oversight  of  the  temporal  affairs  as  these  of  the  spiritual  affairs  of  a  congregation. 
"  Must  be  grave."  They  must  feel  the  responsibility  of  life,  and  especially  the  respon- 
sibilty  connected  with  their  office.    "  Not  double-tongued,  not  given  to  much  wine,  not 


oh.  m.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  65 

greedy  of  filthy  lucre."  Of  the  three  disqualifications,  the  first  has  respect  to  a  tempta- 
tion connected  with  the  desire  for  public  favour,  the  second  has  respect  to  a  temptation 
connected  with  the  enjoyment  of  hospitality,  the  third  has  respect  to  a  temptation 
connected  with  the  use  of  office.  Those  who  serve  God  in  the  management  of  the 
temporal  affairs  of  a  congregation  must  be  free  from  obsequiousness,  from  intemperate 
habits,  from  avarice.  "  Holding  the  mystery  of  the  faith  in  a  pure  conscience."  Their 
duty  to  the  truth,  regarded  as  the  object  of  faith  which  was  formerly  concealed  from 
men,  was  not  to  teach  it,  but  to  enshrine  it  in  a  holy  life,  characterized  by  the  power 
which  has  to  do  with  the  production  of  it.  "  And  let  these  also  first  be  proved ;  then 
let  them  serve  as  deacons,  if  they  be  blameless."  The  deacons,  no  more  than  the  bishops, 
were  to  be  put  suddenly  into  office.  Opportunity  was  to  be  given  for  their  being  proved, 
and,  if  found  to  be  blameless  in  the  estimation  of  those  who  had  opportunity  of  \vatchirjf 
their  conduct,  they  were  to  be  appointed  to  service. 

III.  Qualifications  op  deaconesses.  "  Women  in  like  manner."  The  apostle  has 
not  yet  given  all  the  qualifications  of  the  deacons ;  we  must,  therefore,  think  of  these 
women  as  closely  associated  with  the  diaconate.  We  might  think  of  the  wives  of  the 
deacons,  but,  as  nothing  has  been  said  about  the  wives  of  bishops,  and  as  by  the  inser- 
tion of  the  phrase,  "  in  like  manner,"  we  are  led  to  think  of  the  election  of  women  to 
office,  it  is  better  to  think  of  deaconesses.  We  have  an  example  of  a  deaconess  in 
Phoebe  of  Cenchrea,  mentioned  in  Kom.  xvi.  1.  They  were  probably  assistants  in  the 
same  way  as  the  deacons,  in  so  far  as  they  had  the  care  of  the  sick  and  the  destitute. 
"  Must  be  grave,  not  slanderers,  temperate,  faithful  in  all  things."  It  was  fitting  that 
those  who  were  engaged  in  such  service  should  be  women  who  were  serious,  or  free  from 
frivolity.  They  were  not  to  go  about  from  house  to  house  as  bearers  of  evil  reports. 
They  were  to  be  temperate,  or  free  from  all  unholy  excitement.  And  they  were  to  be 
faithful  in  all  things,  not  abusing  their  charge. 

IV.  Qualifications  op  deacons  resumed.  "  Let  deacons  be  husbands  of  one  wife, 
ruling  their  children  and  their  own  house  well."  In  these  two  particulars  the  apostle 
requires  the  same  qualifications  of  the  deacons  as  of  the  bishops.  "  For  they  that  have 
served  well  as  deacons  gain  to  themselves  a  good  standing,  and  great  boldness  in  the 
faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  old  translation  is  preferable  here — "purchase  to 
themselves  a  good  degree."  The  idea  is  that  they  obtain  for  themselves  a  step,  or  get 
higher  up.  In  those  days  this  might  mean  their  elevation  to  the  episcopate.  They 
also  obtain  Christian  boldness,  such  as  was  especially  required  in  those  days  of  peril. 
For  getting  up,  and  the  encountering  of  greater  difficulties,  go  together. — R.  F. 

Vers.  14 — 16. —  Upholder  of  the  truth,  and  grandeur  of  truth  upheld.  I.  Reason  for 
giving  Timothy  written  instructions.  "  These  things  write  I  unto  thee,  hoping  to 
come  unto  thee  shortly ;  but  if  I  tarry  long,  that  thou  may  est  know  how  men  ought  to 
behave  themselves  in  the  house  of  God,  which  is  the  Church  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar 
and  ground  of  the  truth."  Paul  hoped  to  come  to  Timothy  at  Ephesus  shortly ;  there  wag 
a  possibility,  however,  of  his  hope  not  being  realized.  In  the  event  of  his  tarrying  long, 
'I  imothy  had  written  instructions  for  his  conduct  as  an  ecclesiastic.  It  would  be  held 
to  be  of  great  consequence  that  any  one  who  officiated  in  the  temple  of  Diana  should 
be  in  a  fit  state  of  body  and  of  mind,  and  should  be  conversant  with  the  ceremonial. 
It  was  of  far  greater  consequence  that  Timothy  should  know  what  was  suitable 
behaviour  for  the  house  of  God.  This  was  not  the  temple  of  a  dead  idol,  but — passing 
over  from  the  material  structure  to  what  was  typified  by  it — the  Church  of  the  living 
God.  It  was  "  a  living  and  spiritual  community,  a  life-stream  of  believers  in  an  ever- 
living  God."  .  It  was  fitting,  then,  that  there  should  be  those  arrangements  which  are 
most  conducive  to  the  life  of  the  community.  This  Church  of  the  living  God  is  declared 
to  be  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth.  There  was  a  singular  appropriateness  in  the 
larguage.  The  columns  in  the  temple  of  Diana  were  one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  in 
number,  sixty  feet  high,  each  the  gift  of  a  king.  Massive  in  their  form,  substantial  in 
their  basement,  they  gave  promise  of  the  structure  being  upheld  in  its  integrity  down 
through  the  centuries.  And  such  it  seemed  to  Paul  was  the  Church — a  columnar 
structure,  substantially  based,  by  which  the  truth  is  to  be  upheld  from  age  to  age.  It 
is  a  great  honour  which  God  has  laid  on  such  imperfect  believers  as  we  are ;  and  we 
should  see  to  it  that  we  do  not  belie  the  representation,  that  we  do  nothing  to  take 

L   TIMOTHY.  V 


66  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  m.  1—16. 

x  way  from  the  strength  of  the  structure,  that  we  preserve  the  continuity  of  the  Church'i 
life,  that  we  witness  faithfully  to  what  God  is  and  to  what  he  has  done. 

H.  Grandeur  of  the  truth  upheld  bt  the  Church.  "  And  without  controversy 
great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness."  The  truth  is  here  called  "  the  mystery  of  godliness." 
A  mystery  is  that  which,  being  concealed  for  a  time,  is  brought  out  of  concealment  by  a 
revelation.  It  is  also  something  above  our  comprehension.  And  that  meaning  is  not 
excluded  here.  For  it  is  the  mystery  of  godliness  or  piety.  If  is  the  mystery  by  which 
the  Divine  life  is  nourished  in  the  soul.  As  religious  beings,  we  need  something  that 
stretches  away  into  infinitude.  We  can  only  breathe  freely  in  an  element  of  mystery. 
All  religions  that  have  ever  been  have  sought  to  provide  for  the  appetite  for  the  wonderful. 
And  where  there  has  not  been  found  real  mystery,  there  have  been  dark  inventions. 
But  confessedly  great  is  the  mystery  which  the  Christian  religion  provides  for  our 
nourishment.  It  is  pronounced  great  by  all  who  are  capable  of  judging.  And  even 
those  who  reject  it  do  so  not  unfrequently  on  the  ground  of  its  being  incredible,  or  too 
great  to  be  true.  The  subject  of  the  mystery  is  Christ.  As  set  forth  in  the  language 
which  follows  it  is  entirely  Christ,  or  the  facts  about  Christ.  And  the  teaching  is  that 
it  is  by  meditating  upon  these  facts  that  we  become  pious  or  religious.  Of  the  facts 
themselves  we  can  take  tangible  hold;  it  is  when  we  try  to  explain  them  to  ourselves 
that  we  rise  into  the  region  where  our  religious  feelings  are  excited  and  receive  their 
nourishment.  The  rhythmic  way  in  which  the  facts  are  presented  has  led  some  to 
suppose  that  they  are  taken  from  a  Christian  hymn  in  existence  at  the  time  when  Paul 
wrote.  We  can  believe  them  to  have  been  written  by  Paul.  In  either  case  they  have 
the  stamp  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  are  to  be  divided  into  threes,  the  first  two  in  each 
division  pointing  to  earthly  relations,  the  third  to  heavenly.  Of  the  earthly  relations, 
the  first  in  each  division  is  external,  the  second  internal.  Facts  particularized.  "  He 
who  was  manifested  in  the  flesh."  There  is  good  reason  for  the  change  from  "  God  "  to 
"  He  who."  We  are  not  dependent  on  the  old  reading  for  the  proof  of  our  Lord's  divinity. 
The  manifestation  of  Christ  implies  previous  concealment.  And  the  language  is  more 
suggestive  of  the  concealment  of  pre-existence  than  of  the  concealment  of  non-existence. 
The  beginning  of  the  mystery  is  Christ  coming  out  of  that  concealment.  "  The  Word 
became  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us."  The  Creator  descended  into  the  conditions, 
circumstances,  of  a  creature.  He  was  made  of  the  substance  of  a  woman.  The 
almighty  Builder  of  the  universe  was  a  helpless  infant  on  a  mother's  knee.  The  eternal 
Son  was  the  infant  of  days.  He  descended  so  low  that  he  had  to  proceed  from  weakness 
to  strength,  from  ignorance  to  knowledge.  That,  however,  is  only  part  of  the  mystery. 
it  is  said  here  that  he  was  manifested  in  the  flesh,  and  that  means,  not  our  nature  as  it 
came  from  the  hand  of  God,  but  our  nature  as  it  has  suffered  from  the  fall.  He 
descended  into  our  weak,  passible,  mortal  nature,  to  which  the  unfallen  Adam  was  a 
stranger.  He  was  in  a  state  of  utter  bodily  exhaustion  from  want  of  food  when  he  was 
tempted  in  the  wilderness.  He  sat  down  wearied  with  his  journey  at  Jacob's  well. 
He  was  often  worn  out  with  the  arduous  nature  of  his  work.  His  compassion  brought 
sorrow  to  his  heart,  which  found  vent  in  tears  and  sighs  and  groans.  At  last  his  flesh 
succumbed,  could  not  bear  any  longer  the  burden  laid  on  it ;  and  his  lifeless  body  was 
laid  in  the  tomb.  But  still,  as  we  consider,  the  mystery  deepens.  He  died,  not  as 
paying  the  common  debt  of  nature,  but  under  the  stroke  of  the  Divine  vengeance. 
"  Awake,  0  sword,  against  my  Shepherd,  against  the  Man  that  is  mine  equal,  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts."  This  is  not  so  much  for  the  understanding  as  for  the  inner  sanctuary  of 
the  heart.  It  is  not  so  much  to  be  fixed  in  words  as  to  be  pondered  and  admired  and 
felt.  "Justified  in  the  spirit."  In  the  flesh  he  did  not  appear  to  be  the  pre-existent 
Son  of  God,  and  the  Sent  of  God  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world ;  but  he  was  this  in  his 
spirit  or  higher  nature,  and  was  vindicated  as  such  both  in  the  Divine  marks  which  were 
put  upon  him,  and  in  the  principle  which  pervaded  his  life.  There  was  a  mark  put 
upon  him  at  the  very  first  in  his  being  .separated  from  the  taint  of  our  nature  through 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  glimpse  we  have  of  him  in  his  youth  shows  him 
right  in  spirit  both  toward  his  Father  and  that  Father's  earthly  representatives.  At  his 
baptism  he  received  not  the  Spirit  by  measuio,  and  there  was  the  attestation  of  the 
voice  from  the  excellent  glory,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased." 
At  the  outset  of  his  public  career,  under  extreme  temptation,  he  showed  that  he  was 
not  to  be  turned  aside  from  his  mission.    His  starry  pathway  of  miracles  witnessed  to 


oh.  m.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPlSTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  #T 

the  truth  of  his  claims.  And  not  less  did  his  opening  of  the  mind  of  God,  and  applica- 
tion of  the  truth  to  human  need,  witness  to  the  singleness  and  loftiness  of  his  spirit. 
There  was  a  reiterated  attestation  from  heaven  to  his  Divine  nature  and  mission  at  his 
transfiguration.  But  especially  was  he  justified  in  the  manner  in  which  he  died.  He 
resisted  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin.  As  we  with  some  degree  of  resignation  may 
bear  a  light  trial,  so  he  with  perfect  resignation  bore  the  unmitigated  weight  of  the 
Divine  vengeance.  As  we  with  some  degree  of  self-forgetfulness  may  labour  for  those 
who  are  near  to  us,  so  he  with  perfect  self-forgetfulness  and  magnanimity  sacrificed 
himself  for  sinners.  That  death  in  all  its  terribleness,  reaching  far  beyond  our  concep- 
tion, was  what  pre-eminently  made  proof  of  him,  and  it  showed  his  spirit  to  be  in  perfect 
accord  with  the  will  of  God  in  salvation.  Last  of  all,  he  was  justified  by  his  resurrection. 
It  is  said,  in  Eom.  i.  4,  that  by  this  he  was  declared  with  power  to  be  the  Son  of  God. 
It  was  God  setting  his  seal  upon  his  whole  career.  Because  he  was  pleased  with  the 
manner  in  which  he  had  acted  all  along,  saw  the  ends  of  justice  and  mercy  carried  out 
successfully  in  human  salvation,  therefore  it  was  that  he  raised  him  from  the  dead. 
"  Seen  of  angels."  He  was  an  object  of  interest  to  the  heavenly  world.  We  find  angels 
jubilantly  ushering  him  into  this  world,  within  sight  and  hearing  of  men.  They  appear 
at  the  commencement  of  his  ministry,  strengthening  him  after  his  temptation.  And 
again  they  appear  at  the  close,  strengthening  him  after  his  agony,  and  also  watching 
over  his  tomb.  But  were  they  not  always  there  behind  the  veil?  Unseen  by  us,  they 
go  about  our  world  ministering  to  the  heirs  of  salvation.  Would  they  not  minister, 
more  than  was  seen,  to  the  Author  of  salvation  ?  They  came  forward  upon  the  scene  at 
critical  times.  It  was  enough ;  we  can  imagine  the  rest.  But  the  language  seems  also 
to  point  to  the  fact  that,  in  becoming  incarnate,  Christ  made  himself  to  be  seen  by 
angels.  In  the  human  form  assumed  by  him  he  held  them  in  rapt  gaze.  They  could 
not  turn  away  from  beholding  and  wondering.  They  saw  the  Son  of  God  in  a  form  that 
was  level  to  them,  that  was  even  below  them ;  for  he  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the 
angels.  What  cause  for  wonder  in  the  change  from  that  ineffable,  unapproachable  glory 
to  this  frail  flesh ;  from  that  God  most  high,  to  this  infant  lying  in  a  manger !  And  as 
the  mystery  was  developed,  how  would  their  wonder  increase !  He  was  degraded  until 
he  could  to  no  lower  depth  be  degraded.  Well  might  they  be  overwhelmed  with  wonder 
as  they  looked  on  at  Calvary.  Having  a  desire  to  look  into  these  things,  as  we  are  told, 
they  would  be  lost  in  trying  to  account  for  them.  Even  when  knowing  the  object  con- 
templated, they  would  be  amazed  to  think  that,  for  the  accomplishment  of  it,  the  Divine 
Son  should  descend  into  such  a  condition  of  mortal  woe.  "  Preached  among  the  nations." 
This  is  quite  a  new  interest.  Angels  merely  saw,  admired  from  a  distance.  They  were 
spectators  contemplating  that  in  which  they  were  not  directly  involved.  It  was  different 
with  men.  He  was  the  subject  of  an  evangel  to  them.  He  was  proclaimed  as  their 
personal  Saviour,  without  whom-  they  were  lost,  in  whom  alone  they  had  standing 
before  God  and  everlasting  blessedness.  But  stress  is  laid  upon  the  universal  reference 
of  the  preaching.  He  was  preached,  not  to  one  nation,  but  among  the  nations  (Jews 
included),  without  distinction.  This  was  being  realized  as  historical  fact.  He  was 
being  proclaimed  without  respect  to  national  distinction,  without  respect  to  social 
condition,  without  respect  to  culture,  with  respect  simply  to  the  fact  that  all  were 
sinners  and  in  need  of  salvation.  Following  upon  his  having  taken  the  common  nature, 
and  his  having  wrought  out  the  common  salvation,  the  message  of  salvation  was  being 
conveyed  with  the  utmost  impartiality.  This  was  part  of  the  mystery  which  was  then 
being  disclosed,  and  which  the  unprejudiced  agreed  in  calling  great.  It  was  impressive 
to  the  early  Church  to  witness  the  proclamation  of  a  world-wide  salvation.  "Believed 
on  in  the  world."  God  does  not  force  us  to  believe.  There  must  be  a  sufficient  cause 
for  our  faith,  sufficient  to  move  our  hearts  and  gain  us  over.  Our  faith  must  be  caused 
in  a  rational  way,  in  a  way  consistent  with  the  nature  of  God  and  our  own  nature. 
The  cause  must  be  homogeneous  with  respect  to  the  effect,  spiritual  as  faith  is  a  spiritual 
effect.  How,  then,  is  Christ  to  be  believed  on  in  the  world,  »-e.  in  that  which  is  naturally 
unbelieving,  which  contains  no  germ  of  faith  which  can  be  cultivated  ?  How  can  light 
be  brought  out  of  darkness,  how  can  faith  be  brought  out  of  unbelief?  And  yet  what 
have  we  here  ?  There  is  such  a  potency  in  the  fact  of  God  incarnate  as  to  work  a  moral 
miracle,  to  evoke  faith  from  that  which  is  naturally  incapable  of  faith.  And  wherein 
does  the  potency  lie?    It  is  in  the  love  which  the  fact  manifests.    "The  Son  of  God, 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLK  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  it.  1— lft. 


who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  up  for  me."  He  did  not  spare  himself  all  the  humilia- 
tion of  the  death  of  the  cross.  That  is  a  fact  which  require!,  to  be  contemplated ;  but, 
as  it  is  contemplated,  it  asserts  its  power  over  hearts,  so  as  to  make  the  insensate  feel, 
the  unbelieving  believe.  Kow,  the  apostle  regards  it  as  glorious  tesiimony  to  the 
greatness  of  the  mystery  that  Christ  should  actually  be  believed  on  in  the  world,  that 
there  should  be  some  trophies  of  the  power  of  his  love  over  unbelief,  that  there  should 
be  some  to  offer  him  a  home  in  their  hearts  "  Received  up  in  glory."  In  the 
biographies  of  great  men  we  are  told  of  one  achievement  gained  after  another,  of  one 
honour  conferred  after  another.  But  however  long  and  glorious  the  scr<  ill  which  can  be 
shown,  it  has  to  end  with  their  bidding  a  long  farewell  to  all  their  greatness.  And, 
i  hough  monuments  are  raised  to  their  memory,  it  cannot  take  away  the  essential 
ingloriousness  of  the  termination  to  their  career.  With  Christ  it  is  at  the  earthly 
termination  that  to  outward  appearance  he  becomes  great.  He  had  indeed,  like  others 
and  more  than  others,  to  undergo  the  ingloriousness  of  dying,  and  of  being  laid  in  the 
tomb.  But  that  ingloriousness  was  completely  reversed  by  his  resurrection.  He  lingered 
long  enough  on  earth  for  history  to  attest  the  fact  that  he  was  indeed  risen.  And  then 
he  made  his  triumphal  entry  into  heaven.  "Why  leap  ye,  ye  high  hills?  this  is  the 
hill  which  God  desireth  to  dwell  in;  yea,  the  Lord  will  dwell  in  it  for  ever.  The 
chariots  of  God  are  twenty  thousand,  even  thousands  of  angels :  the  Lord  is  among  them, 
as  in  Sinai,  in  the  holy  place.  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  thou  hast  led  captivity 
captive."  He  was  received  up  into  glory  —into  glorious  exaltation  in  our  nature  at  the 
right  hand  of  God — and  in  glory  he  f<  r  ever  remains.  This  is  conclusive  evidence  to 
the  greatness  of  the  mystery.  The  godly  delight  to  dwell  upon  and  to  feed  their  life,  not 
only  with  the  humiliation,  but,  beyond  that,  with  the  exaltation. — R.  F. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Ver.  1. — But  for  now,  A.V.  ;  taith  for 
speakeOi,  A.V. ;  later  for  the  latter,  A.V. ; 
fall  away  for  depart,  A.V.  The  Spirit  saith 
expresBly  (pnT&s);  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  very  rare  in  classical  Greek. 
But  the  adjective  faris,  in  the  sense  of 
something  "  laid  down,"  "  definite,"  "  ex- 
pressly mentioned,"  is  common.  It  was, 
doubtless,  on  account  of  these  prophetio 
warnings  of  a  falling  away  from  the  faith, 
that  the  apostle  gave  the  preceding  heads 
of  Christian  doctrine  in  such  a  terse  and 
tangible  form,  and  laid  such  a  solemn  charge 
upon  Timothy.  (For  examples  of  these 
prophetic  utteiances,  see  Acts  xi.  28;  xiii. 
2 ;  xx.  23 ;  xxi.  1 1 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  8 ;  xiv.  30, 
32,  etc.)  Shall  fall  away  (airoffriiaoyTat). 
So  St.  Paul  says  (2  Thess.  ii.  3)  that  the 
day  of  Christ  will  not  be,  "  except  the 
falling  away  (ri  airoinaaia)  come  first"  (comp. 
Heb.  iii.  12).  The  faith ;  objective  (see  ch. 
iii.  9  and  16,  note).  This  "  falling  away  " 
is  to  take  place  4y  iart^o:-;  /coipois ;  not,  as 
in  the  K.V.,  in  "later  times,"  but  as  in 
the  A. V., "  the  latter  times."  The  adjective 
Sarepos  is  only  found  here  in  the  New 
Testament.  But  in  the  LXX.  (e.g.  1  Chron. 
xxix.  29 ;  Jer.  1.  19  [xxvii.  17,  LXX.]), 
Sarcpos  means  "the  last,"  as  opposed  to 
"the  first."  And  so  the  adverb  Sarepoy 
always  in  the  New  Testament  (see  Matt.  iv. 
2;  xxi.  37;  xxvi  60;  or  more  fully  liarepoy 


■tt&yruv,  xxil.  27).  Here,  therefore,  iv  itrrt- 
pots  Kaipois  is  equivalent  to  iv  rats  4trx&rvs 
riftepais  (Acts  ii.  17)  and  iv  laxirius  r)ii4pvus 
(2  Tim.  iii.  1 ;  comp.  Jas.  v.  3 ;  1  Pet.  i.  5 ; 
2  Pet.  iii.  3;  Jude  18).  It  should  be 
observed  that  in  all  tlnse  passages  there 
is  no  article.  Giving  heed  (itpoaexovrts) ; 
as  in  ver.  13 ;  in  on.  i.  4 ;  Titus  i.  14 ; 
Acts  viii.  6,  and  elsewhere.  Seducing  spirits 
(pveiiuuri  vKavois).  Such  were  the  "  lying 
spirits "  who  deceived  (^iti£t7)o-o»)  Ahab  to 
his  destruction  (2  Rings  xxii.  22).  UKdvos, 
seducing,  is  not  elsewhere  found  in  the 
New  Testament  as  an  adjective  (see  Matt, 
xxvii.  63;  2  Cor.  vi.  8;  2  John  7,  in  all 
which  places  however,  it  is  almost  an 
adjective).  The  idea  is  "  causing  to  wander," 
or  "  go  astray."  St.  John  warns  his  people 
against  such  deceiving  spirits  (John  iv. 
1 — 6).  He  calls  them  genetically  irvtina 
ttjs  -n-Kavvs,  "  the  spirit  of  error."  Doctrines 
of  devils ;  i.e.  teachings  suggested  by  devils. 
So  the  unbelieving  Jews  suggested  that 
John  the  Baptist  hud  a  devil  (Luke  vii.  83), 
and  that  our  Lord  himself  had  a  devil 
(John  vii.  20 ;  viii.  48,  52 ;  x.  19). 

Ver.  2. — Through  the  hypocrisy  of  men 
that  speak  lies  for  speaking  lies  in  hypocrisy, 
A.Y. ;  branded  in  their  own  conscience  at 
with  for  having  their  conscience  seared  with, 
A.V.  Through  the  hypoorisy  of  men,  etc 
The  construction  is  rather  obscure,  as  the 
most  obvious  way  of  construing  is  that  of 
(he  A.Y,  where  $evS6\oyvy  must  agree  with 


ch.  nr.  1—16.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


«9 


Saipovlttv.  But  then  the  clause,  "having 
their  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron," 
does  not  suit  "devils."  It  is  therefore, 
perhaps,  best  to  translate  the  clause  as  the 
B.Y.  does,  and  to  explain,  with  Bishop 
Ellicott,  that  the  preposition  iv,  which  pre- 
cedes iwoKptaei,  defines  the  instrument  by 
which  they  were  led  to  give  heed  to  seduc- 
ing spirits,  viz.  the  hypocritical  pretences 
of  the  men  who  spake  lies,  and  whose  con- 
sciences were  seared.  If  tyevSoKdyuv  agrees 
with  Saifioviaw,  we  must  conceive  that  St. 
Paul  passes  insensibly  from  "the  devils" 
to  the  false  teachers  who  spake  as  they 
taught  them.  In  the  Gospels,  the  speech 
of  the  devils,  and  of  those  possessed  by 
devils,  is  often  interchanged,  as  e.g.  Luke 
iv.  33,  34,  41 ;  Mark  i.  23,  24.  Men  that 
speak  lies  (<pevdo\6yu>v) ;  only  found  here  in 
the  New  Testament,  but  occasionally  in 
classical  Greek.  Branded  (KeicauTTipiturjue- 
vav) ;  here  only  in  the  New  Testament,  but 
used  in  Greek  medical  and  other  writers 
for  "to  brand,"  or  "cauterize;"  uavrfip  and 
Kam^piov,  a  branding-iron.  The  applica- 
tion of  the  image  is  somewhat  uncertain. 
If  the  idea  is  that  of  "a  brand,"  a  mark 
burnt  in  upon  the  forehead  of  a  slave  or 
criminal,  then  the  meaning  is  that  these 
men  have  their  own  infamy  stamped  upon 
their  own  consciences.  It  is  not  patent 
only  to  others,  but  to  themselves  also.  But 
if  the  metaphor  is  from  the  cauterizing  a 
wound,  as  the  A.Y.  takes  it,  then  the  idea 
is  that  these  men's  consciences  are  become 
as  insensible  to  the  touch  as  the  skin  that 
has  been  cauterized  is.  The  metaphor,  in 
this  case,  is  somewhat  similar  to  that  of 
itap&w,  iriparts  (Mark  iii.  5;  vi.  52;  John 
xii.  40,  etc.).  The  latter  interpretation 
seems  to  Suit  the  general  context  best,  and 
the  medical  use  of  the  term,  which  St.  Paul 
might  have  learnt  from  Luke.  The  emphasis 
of  TJjs  'Slas,  "  their  own  conscience,"  implies 
that  they  were  not  merely  deceivers  of 
others,  but  were  self-deceived. 

Ver.  3. — Created  for  hath  created,  A.V. ; 
by  for  of,  A.V. ;  that  for  which,  A.V.  For- 
bidding to  marry.  This  is  mentioned  as 
showing  itself  first  among  the  Bssenes  and 
Therapeutse  by  Josephus  ('  Bell.  Jud.,'  ii. 
viii.  2,  and  'Ant.  Jud.,'  xviii.  i.  5).  It 
became  later  a  special  tenet  of  the  Gnostics, 
as  stated  by  Clem.  Alex.,  '  Strom.,'  iii.  6 ; 
Irenasus,  '  Hser.,'  i.  22,  etc.  (quoted  by 
Ellicott).  See  other  quotations  in  Pole's 
Synopsis.  Commanding  to  abstain  from 
meats ;  PpapuiTav  (1  Cor.  viii.  8 ;  Heb.  is. 
10;  comp.  Ppdo-ei,  Col.  ii.  16;  Rom.  xiv.  17). 
The  word  "commanding"  has  to  be  sup- 
plied from  the  preceding  Kahv6vTuv,  "  com- 
manding not."  Some  of  the  sects  prohibited 
the  use  of  animal  food.  A  trace  of  this 
asceticism  in  regard  to  food  is  found  in 


Col.  ii.  16,  21,  23.  (For  a  full  list  of 
authorities  on  the  asceticism  of  the  Jewish 
SLCts,  see  Bishop  Light  loot,  'Introduction 
to  the  Epistle  to  the  Coloss.,'  pp.  83,  84.) 
The  chief  passages  relating  to  it  are  those 
referred  to  above  from  Josephus :  rd/tov 
(nrepoipia  -rap'  avrois,  "  They  despise  mar- 
riage ;  "  'Effiralav  ovSeh  &yerai  yuvatKa, 
"  None  of  the  Essenes  marry "  (Philo, 
'Fragm.,'  p.  633);  "Gens  sine  ulla  femiea, 
venere  abdicate  '' — "  A  people  without  a 
single  woman,  for  they  renounce  marriage  " 
(Plin.,  'Nat.  Hist.,'  v.  15).  As  regards 
their  food,  Bishop  Lightfoot  says,  "  The 
Essene  drank  no  wine;  he  did  not  touch 
animal  food.  His  meal  consisted  of  a  piece 
of  bread,  and  a  single  mess  of  vegetables  " 
('Introd.,'  p.  86).  Professor  Burton  (in 
Kitto's  'Cyclopaedia,'  art.  "Gnosticism") 
says  of  the  later  Gnostics  that,  from  their 
principle  of  the  utter  malignity  of  matter, 
and  the  elevating  nature  of  yva>ats,  two  very 
opposite  results  ensued — one  that  many 
Gnostics  led  very  profligate  lives ;  the  other 
that  many  practised  great  austerities  in 
order  to  mortify  the  body  and  its  sensual 
appetites  (p.  770).  Some  of  our  modern 
Eucratites,  in  their  language  concerning 
the  use  of  wine  and  beer,  approach 
Gnosticism  very  closely.  To  be  received 
(jls  fier&Ariil/ii'') ;  a  classical  word,  but  only 
found  here  in  the  New  Testament,  not  UBed 
bytheLXX.  With  thanksgiving.  Observe 
the  identity  of  thought  with  Bom.  xiv.  6. 
These  passages,  tog.  ther  with  our  Lor.l's 
action  at  the  last  Supper  (Luke  xxii.  17, 
19),  at  the  multiplication  of  the  loaves  and 
fishes  (Luke  ix.  16),  and  St.  Paul's  on  board 
ship  (Acts  xxvii.  35),  are  conclusive  as  to 
the  Christian  duty  of  giving  thanks,  com- 
monly called  "saying  grace"  at  meals. 
The  truth  (see  ch.  iii.  15;  John  xviii.  37; 
Eph.  iv.  21,  etc.). 

Ver.  4. — Is  to  he  rejected  for  to  be  refused, 
A.V.  Nothing  is  to  he  rejected.  The  A.V., 
"nothing  to  bo  refused,"  manifestly  uses 
"nothing"  in  its  adverbial  sense  ("in  no 
degree,"  "not  at  all,"  Johnson's  '  Diet.'),  as 
ohSiv  in  Greek  is  also  commonly  usul 
(Liddell  and  Scott).  In  fact,  it  is  very 
difficult  to  constiue  the  pass  ge  as  the  R.V. 
does.  To  say  "nothing  is  lo  be  njectid 
if  it  is  received,"  is  scarcely  sen  e.  Hut  to 
say  that  every  creature  of  God  is  good  (and 
on  that  account  not  to  be  rejected)  if  it  is 
received  with  thanksgiving,  is  very  good 
and  edifying  sense.  Creature  (ktI^plo).  The 
form  commonly  used  by  St.  Paul  is  ktIitis 
(Rom.  viii.  20,  21,  22;  2  Cor.  v.  17,  etc.). 
But  KT-foyui  stands  by  the  side  of  ttrlois, 
like  Ppupu  by  the  side  of  PpGxns,  '6pap.a  by 
the  side  of  opaois,  ir<W  by  the  side  of 
n-iio-is,  and  many  more.  The  form  KTla/ia  is 
found  in  Jas.  i.  18 ;  and  twice  in  Bevelation 


70 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  it.  1—16, 


Good  (xaKiv) ;  with  reference  to  Gen.  i.  10, 
12,  etc.  To  be  refused  (far6fr\i)Tov);  only 
here  in  the  New  Testament,  but  found  in 
classical  Greek,  and  not  uncommon  in  the 
LXX.  and  other  Greek  versions,  for  that 
which  is  "  unclean,"  or  "  abominable."  If 
it  be  received  with  thanksgiving.  This 
clearly  refers  to  "every  creature  of  God," 
and  is  the  condition  on  which  it  is  good 
in  relation  to  the  receiver.  Nothing  can 
be  clearer  or  more  certain  than  that  the 
apostle  is  not  arguing  against  the  Mani- 
chean  doctrine  of  the  evil  of  matter,  or  the 
works  of  the  Demiurge,  but  against  Jewish 
scruples  about  meats.  "  Every  creature  of 
God,"  he  says,  "is  good" — words  which 
would  have  no  force  if  the  creatures  in 
question  were  not  admitted  to  be  the  works 
of  God,  but  thought  to  be  the  works  of  the 
Demiurge.  But  applied  to  the  Jewish 
scrupleB,  the  words  are  perfectly  relevant. 
Every  creature  of  God  is  good,  and  on  no 
account  to  be  treated  as  common  or  unclean 
(Aots  x.  15,  28),  provided  only  that  it  be 
received  with  thanksgiving. 

Ver.  5. — Through  for  by,  A.V.  It  is  sancti- 
fied through  the  Word  of  God.  Considerable 
difference  of  opinion  prevails  among  com- 
mentators as  to  the  precise  meaning  of  this 
verse,  especially  of  the  phrase,  "  the  Word 
of  God."  Some  refer  to  Gen.  i.  4,  10,  12, 
eto. ;  others  to  Gen.  i.  29 ;  ix.  4,  as  contain- 
ing the  original  grant  of  meats  for  the  use  of 
man;  others  to  the  scriptural  phrases  em- 
bodied in  the  words  of  the  4vrev£is,  the  prayer 
of  thanksgiving.  Another  possible  refer- 
ence would  be  to  the  Word  of  God  recorded 
in  Aots  x.  13,  15,  28,  by  which  that  which 
had  previously  been  unclean  was  now  made 
clean  or  holy;  or,  lastly,  it  might  mean 
"the  blessing  of  God"  given  in  answer  to 
the  "  prayer  "  on  each  occasion,  which  suits 
well  the  present  tense,  ayid&Tiiu.  Prayer 
(JvTtvfrs ;  see  ch.  ii.  1,  note). 

Ver.  6. — Mind  for  remembrance,  A.V.  ; 
Christ  Jesus  for  Jesus  Christ,  A.V.  and  T.R. ; 
nourished  for  nourished  up,  A.V. ;  the  faith 
for  faith,  A.V. ;  the  good  for  good,  A.V  ; 
which  thou  hast  followed  until  now  for  where- 
unto  thou  hast  attained,  A.V.  If  thou  put 
the  brethren  in  mind  of  these  things  (jama 
{nroTtBtitcvos  Tots  a5eA.#o*s);  if  thou  suggest 
these  things  to  the  brethren,  lay  them  down 
as  principles  upon  which  their  conduct  is  to 
be  based ;  or,  enjoin  them  (Liddell  and  Scott). 
It  only  occurs  in  this  metaphorical  sense 
here  in  the  New  Testament,  but  is  very 
common  in  classical  G  reek,  and  not  unfre- 
quent  in  the  LXX.  It  has  often  the  mean- 
ing of  "  to  advise  "  or  •'  counsel."  Of  course, 
"  hypothesis,"  the  assumed  basis  from  which 
you  start,  is  the  h&me  root.  The  brethren  (roTs 
kSe\(f>o!s).  The  distinctive  name  for  the 
members  of  Christ's  Church,  throughout  the 


Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  the  Epistles. 
The  whole  body  is  called  7j  aS(\<p6Tns,  "  the 
brotherhood  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  17;  v.  9).  A  good 
minister  (JSuLkovos).  The  application  of  this 
term  to  Timothy,  like  that  of  iirlo-icomi  to 
presbyters  (ch.  iii.  2),  is  an  indication  of 
the  early  date  of  the  Epistle,  before  the  dis- 
tinctive names  of  the  Church  officers  had 
quite  hardened  down  into  a  technical  mean- 
ing. Nourished  (4vTp£<p6p.evos) ;  here  only 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  not  used  in  the 
LXX. ;  but  in  classical  Greek  not  uncom- 
mon in  the  sense  of  "brought  up  in," 
"trained  in  from  childhood."  In  Latin, 
innutritus.  The  phrase,  "  nourished  in  the 
words  of  the  faith,"  etc.,  explains  the  xa\bs 
SiAkovos,  and  shows  what  a  man  must  be  to 
deserve  the  appellation — one,  viz.,  who  is 
nourished  in  the  words  of  the  faith,  etc. 
The  faith ;  here  again  objective,  as  in  ver.  6 
(see  note).  The  good  doctrine,  eto.  In 
opposition  to  the  "doctrines  of  devils"  in 
ver.  1.  The  different  epithets  of  this  true 
Christian  doctrine  are  r\  koMj  (as  here);  ij 
byialvovaa  (ch.  i.  10 ;  Titus  i  9 ;  ii.  1) ;  fj  xar' 
^ucrejSefae  StSaffKaKia  (ch.  VI.  3);  and  in  ch. 
vi.  1  we  have  simply  r\  SiSacntaAia,  without 
any  epithet.  In  like  manner,  ri  tIcttis,  q 
a\r)6ela,  ri  eiureflela,  severally  denote  the 
Christian  religion.  Which  thou  hast  fol- 
lowed until  now  (^  ■n-apriKoKouBiiKas').  This 
is  a  rather  more  'faithful  rendering  than 
that  of  the  A.V. ;  it  is,  literally,  which  thou 
hast  kept  close  to,  either  for  the  purpose  of 
imitating  it,  or,  as  2  Tim.  iii.  10,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  observing  it.  Or,  to  put  it  differently, 
in  one  case  so  as  to  teach  it  identically,  and 
in  the  other  so  as  to  know  it  perfectly.  In 
this  last  aspect  it  is  also  used  in  Luke  i.  3. 
The  classical  use  is  "  to  follow  closely  any 
one's  steps,"  or  "  the  course  of  events,"  when 
used  literally ;  or,  metaphorically,  "  to  fol- 
low with  one's  thoughts,"  "  to  understand." 
Ver.  7. — Unto  godliness  for  rather  unto  god- 
liness, A.V.  The  K.V.,  by  putting  a  full  stop 
after  "  fables,"  disturbs  the  natural  flow  of 
the  thought.  The  two  imperatives  vapanov 
and  ytj/j.va£e  connect  and  contrast  the 
thoughts  in  the  two  clauses  of  the  verse,  a9 
the  A.V.  indicates  by  the  insertion  of 
"  rather."  Profane  (PePiiKovs ;  ch.  i.  9,  note). 
Old  wives'  (ypdaiSeis);  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament;  not  used  in  LXX. ;  rare  in  classi- 
cal Greek.  Exercise  thyself  unto  godliness 
(yv/ii>a£e  <reavr6v).  The  verb  yvfiyd(eiv 
ocours  in  the  New  Testament  only  in  this 
place,  twice  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
(v.  14;  xii.  11),  and  once  in  2  Peter  (ii. 
14).  In  the  LXX.  it  occurs  only  once  (2 
Maco.  x.  15),  but  is  common  in  classical 
Greek.  The  metaphor  is  drawn  from  train- 
ing for  gymnastic  exercises.  As  regards 
the  whole  passage,  it  seems  that  there  were 
current  among  the  Jews  at  this  time  many 


oh.  vr.  1—16.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


71 


H fables "(«h.i. 4;  2Tim.iv.4;  TitusL  14; 
2  Pet.  i.  16),  childish  legends  and  dootrines, 
«ome  of  them  directed  especially  to  enforcing 
certain  rules  about  eating  and  drinking,  and 
other  "bodily  exercises,"  which  St.  Paul 
utterly  discountenances,  and  contrasts  with 
that  "good  doctrine"  which  he  directs 
Timothy  continually  to  teach.  This  would 
account,  naturally,  for  the  introduction  of 
the  phrase,  ytifivafe  aeavrSv, 

Ver.  8. — Is  profitable  for  a  little  for  pro- 
fiteth  little,  A.V. ;  for  for  unto,  A.V. ;  which 
for  that,  A.V.  Bodily  exercise.  Exercise 
which  only  affects  the  body,  such  as  those 
rules  which  the  Jewish  ascetics  enforced. 
rvpvcuria  only  occurs  here  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament, and  not  at  all  in  the  LXX.,  but  is 
not  uncommon  in  clas.-ical  Greek.  Another 
form  is  yifivatrts,  and  yvfivdffiov  is  the  place 
where  such  yi/tvairis  takes  place.  For  a 
little ;  margin,  for  little,  which  is  the  best 
rendering.  Tlpbs  ixiyof,  as  lillicott  well  re- 
marks, may  moan  either  "  ior  a  little  while" 
or  "for  a  little"  (better,  "for  little"),  but 
cannot  mean  both.  The  contrast  with  irphs 
navra  determines  its  meaning  here  to  be 
"  for  little,"  which  is  exactly  the  same 
meaning  as  the  A.V.  Promise  of  the  life. 
The  genitive  here  is  the  genitive  of  the 
thing  promised,  as  in  Acts  ii.  33  ;  Gal.  iii. 
14;  2  Tim.  i.  1.  Aud  the  thing  promised 
U  "the  life  that  now  is,"  meaning,  of  course, 
lis  enjoyment  in  peace  and  happiness  (comp. 
Ps.  xxxiv.  12  [xxxiii.,  LXX].,  where  6 
deXtev  (aiiv  is  parallel  to  ar/xnav  yixepas  .  .  . 
iyaOis)  J  and  "  that  which  is  to  come,"  viz. 
eternal  life).  There  is  no  occasion  to  strain 
after  greater  grammatical  precision.  There 
is  no  contradiction  between  this  statement 
of  the  happiness  of  a  godly  life  and  St. 
Paul's  statement  in  1  Cor.  xv.  19.  Another 
possible  way  of  construing  the  words  is  that 
of  Bishop  Eliioott  and  the  '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary : '  "  Having  the  promise  of  life,  both 
the  present  and  the  future."  But  in  this 
case  we  should  have  had  rrjs  re  vvv  ko\,  k.t.A. 
Ver.  9. — Faithful  is  the  saying  for  this  is 
a  faithful  saying,  A.V.  (see  ch.  i.  IS,  note). 
Here,  however,  the  merits  \6yos  is  that  which 
precedes,  viz.  that  "godliness  is  profitable 
for  all  things,"  etc.,  which  we  thus  learn  was 
a  proverbial  saying. 

Ver.  10. — To  this  end  for  therefore,  A.V.; 
labour  and  strive  for  both  labour  and  suffer 
reproach,  AV.  and  T.R. ;  have  our  hope  set 
on  for  trust  in,  A.V. ;  them  for  those,  A.V. 
For  to  this  end ;  or,  with  this  in  view.  He 
thus  justifies  his  assertion  that  the  saying 
he  had  quoted  is  a  faitliful  one,  by  showing 
that  the  promise  and  nil  that  it  contained 
was  the  ground  of  all  his  labours  anil  those 
of  his  fellow-labourers  in  the  gospel.  Strive 
(iyunftf/MSa);  so  many  good  manuscripts, 
instead  of  TJl.  oi>et$i{4iie8ai  but  the  read- 


ing is  doubtful.  The  sense  of  the  T.B., 
"  suffer  reproach,"  seems  preferable,  and 
the  expression  more  forcible,  as  conveying 
something  more  than  mere  labour — the  bitter 
reproaches  and  persecutions  which  he  en- 
dured (2  Tim.  iii.  11  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  9—13 ;  2  Cor. 
xi.  23—27) ;  and  all  because  of  his  firm  trust 
iu  the  promises  of  the  living  God.  Our  hope 
set  on.  Bather  a  clumsy  phrase,  though  it 
expresses  accurately  the  iiKx'tica/iev  eirl  @e<ji 
(uvti  ;  but  it  was  hardly  worth  altering  the 
A. V.,  "we  trust  in  the  living  God."  In 
oh.  v.  5  we  have  ^Airi/tex  4irl  &e6v,  with  no 
appreciable  difference  of  sense.  Specially 
of  them  that  believe ;  and  therefore  we  who 
believe  have  special  cause  to  hope  in  him, 
and  to  trust  his  promises. 

Ver.  11. — Command  (irapdyyeWe ;  see  ch. 
i.  3,  note;  v.  7;  vi.  13,  17).  It  is  used  very 
frequently  in  the  Gospels  of  our  Lord's 
couimands  to  the  apostles  and  others,  and  by 
St.  Paul  of  his  own  apostolic  directions  to 
the  Churches  (1  Thess.  iv.  11 ;  2  Thess.  iii 
4,  6,  etc.). 

Ver.  12. — An  ensample  to  them  that  be- 
lieve for  on  example  of  the  believers,  A.V. ; 
manner  of  life  for  conversation,  A.V. ;  love 
for  charity,  A.V. ;  B.T.  omits  in  spirit, 
A.V.  and  T.B.  Let  no  man  despise  thy 
youth  (comp.  1  Cor.  xvi.  11;  Titus  ii.  15). 
The  construction  of  the  sentence  is  mani- 
festly that  adopted  in  the  A.V.  ;md  followed 
in  the  B.V.  Timothy  would  certainly  be 
under  forty  years  at  this  time,  and  might 
be  not  above  thirty-five.  Either  age  would 
be  decidedly  early  for  so  responsible  an  office 
—one  in  which  he  would  have  many  elders 
(jrpeo-pirepoi)  under  him  (ch.  v.  1,  17,  19). 
An  ensample  (rimos) ;  properly  the  original 
"  pattern  "  or  "  model "  after  which  anything 
is  made  or  fashioned;  hence  a  "pattern" 
or  "  example."  It  is  used  in  the  same  sense 
as  here  in  Phil.  iii.  17;  1  Thess.  i.  7;  2 
Thess.  iii.  9 ;  Titus  ii.  1;  1  Pet.  v.  3.  Them 
that  believe.  The  K.V.  has  apparently  so 
translated  r&v  vunStv  in  order  to  assimilate 
it  with  the  marav  in  ver.  10.  But  oi  irurrol 
are  simply  "believers,"  or  "Christians" — 
"the  flock,"  as  St.  Peter  has  it,  and  had 
better  he  so  rendered.  Timothy  is  exhorted 
to  make  it  impossible  for  any  one  to  question 
his  authority  on  the  score  of  bis  youth  by 
beinga  model  of  theChristian  graces  required 
in  believers.  In  word.  Specially  in  his 
teaching.  The  exhortation  to  Titus  (ii.  1, 7, 
etc.)  is  very  similar,  "  Speak  thou  the  things 
which  befit  the  tound  doctrine.  ...  In  all 
things  showing  thyself  an  ensample  of  good 
works ;  in  thy  doctrine  showing  uncorrupt 
ness,  gravity,  sound  speech  (Aoyoy  fryi?))" 
etc.  (comp.  too  ch.  v.  17;  2  Tim.  i.  13). 
Manner  of  life  (.avaffTpotfiTJ ;  see  ch.  iii.  IS, 
note).  Purity  (jkyvelif);  elsewhere  in  the 
New  Testament  only  in  ch.  v.  2,  where  it 


72 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  rV.  1—1*. 


has  the  same  special  sense  (compare  ay  vis,  2 
Cor.  xi.  2  ;  ch.  v.  22 ;  Titus  ii.  5 ;  1  Pet.  Hi.  2). 
Ver.  13. — Heed  for  attendance,  A.V.;  teach- 
ing for  doctrine,  A.V.  Till  I  come  (ch.  iii. 
14;  i.  3).  Reading  (rjj  avayvdnrei).  The 
public  reading  of  the  Scriptures  (the  Lessons, 
as  we  should  say).  This  we  know  was  the 
practice  in  the  synagogue  (Luke  iv.  16,  etc.; 
Acts  xiii.  27 ;  xv.  21 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  15).  We 
see  the  beginning  of  reading  the  New  Testa- 
ment in  the  Christian  assemblies  in  Eph.  iii. 
4;  and  Col.  iv.  16;  and  generally  in  the  fact  of 
Epistles  being  addressed  by  the  apostles  to 
Churches.  The  avayv&arns,  the  reader, 
lector,  was  a  regular  order  in  the  third  and 
fourth  centuries  (Bingham,  vol.  i.  p  i  88). 
The  office  is  being  revived  in  our  day.  Ex- 
hortation (tj  TmpuK\4\<rei);  see  Acts  iv.  36, 
where  Barnabas's  name  is  interpreted  as 
meaning  "  Sou  of  exhortation  "  (E.V),  and 
xiii.  15 ;  comp.  Bom.  xii.  7  (where,  as  here, 
•jrapaKXriffis  and  5i8a<rita\ta  are  coupled  to- 
gether) ;  1  Thess.  ii.  3,  etc.  Teaching  (Si5a- 
axaXla) ;  almost  always  rendered  "doctrine" 
in  the  A.V.  But  here,  where,  the  act  of 
teaching  (like  the  act  of  reading,  the  act  of 
exhorting,  in  the  two  preceding  clauses)  is 
intended,  "  teaching "  is  perhaps  the  best 
word  according  to  our  modern  usage.  As 
regards  the  difference  between  $i$a<rna\(a 
and  irapi.K\r\(ris,  the  former  would  express 
"doctrinal  teaching,"  whether  of  dogma  or 
of  precept,  the  latter  entreaties  to  believe  the 
one  and  practise  the  other  (see  Acts  xi. 
23  and  xiv.  22  for  good  examples  of  irupi- 

Ver.  14.— The  gift  (xapia-fm).  The  verb 
Xapi(ofmi  means  "  to  give  anything  freely," 
gratuitously,  of  mere  good  will,  without  any 
payment  or  return  (Luke  vii.  42 ;  Acts  xxvii. 
24 ;  Bom.  viii.  32 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  12,  etc.).  Hence 
xipurim  came  to  be  especially  applied  to  the 
gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  are  pre- 
eminently "free  gifts"  (see  Acts  viii.  20). 
It  is  so  applied  in  Bom.  i.  11 ;  xii.  6 ;  1  Cor. 
i.  7 ;  xii.  4, 9,  28,  SO,  31 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  10.  Here, 
then,  as  in  the  similar  passage,  2  Tim.  i.  6, 
the  "gift"  spoken  of  is  the  special  grace 
given  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  those  who  are 
separated  for  "  the  office  and  work  of  a  priest 
in  the  Church  of  God  by  the  imposition  of 
hands  "  (Ordering  of  Priests).  This  gift  St. 
Paul  bids  him  not  negleot  (fih  fyieAei).  The 
word  contains  the  idea  of  contemptuous 
neglect — neglect  as  of  an  unimportant  thing. 
In  Matt.  xxii.  5  the  persons  invited  to  the 
feast  made  light  of  it,  and  went  away  to 
other  things  which  they  cared  more  about. 
In  Heb.  ii  3,  Tn\iKa&n}s  ap.eh'fitTavTes  (tbtt|. 
pias,  and  viii.  9,  imply  a  contemptuous  disre- 
gard. So  here  Timothy  is  reminded  that  in  his 
ordination  he  received  a  great  x«V"rMa>  aQd 
that  he  must  value  it  duly,  and  use  it  dili- 
gently.   It  must  not  be  let  lie  slumbering 


and  smouldering,  but  must  be  stirred  up  into 
a  flame.  The  lesson  here  and  in  2  Tim.  i.  6 
seems  to  be  that  we  must  look  back  to  our 
ordination,  and  to  the  spiritual  grace  given 
in  it,  as  things  not  exhausted.  The  grace 
is  there,  but  it  must  not  be  lightly  thought 
of.  Which  was  given  thee  by  prophecy. 
This  seems  to  be  explained  by  Acts  xiii, 
1 — 3,  where  Barnabas  and  Saul  were  sepa- 
rated for  their  work  by  the  laying  on  ol 
the  hands  apparently  of  the  prophets  and 
teachers,  at  the  express  command  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  speaking  doubtless  by  the  mouth  of 
one  of  the  prophets.  Timothy,  it  appears, 
was  designated  for  his  work  by  a  like  com- 
mand of  the  Holy  Ghost,  speaking  by  one  of 
the  Church  prophets,  and  received  his  com- 
mission by  a  like  "  laying  on  of  hands  "  by 
the  elders  of  the  Church.  If  St.  Paul  refers, 
as  he  appears  to  do,  to  the  same  occasion  in 
2  Tim.  i.  6,  then  it  appears  that  he  laid  his 
hands  on  Timothy,  together  with  the  pres- 
byters, as  is  done  by  the  bishop  in  the  ordi- 
nation of  priests.  The  presbytery  (toS  irpta- 
fivreplov).  The  word  is  borrowed  from  the 
Jewish  nomenclature  (see  1  .uke  xxii.  6;  Acts 
xxii.  5).  In  a  slightly  different  sense  for 
"  the  office  of  a  presbyter,"  Sus.,  v.  50  (Cod. 
Alex.). 

Ver.  15. — Be  diligent  in  for  meditate  upon, 
A.V. ;  progress  for  profiting,  A.V. ;  be  mani- 
fest unto  for  appear  to,  A.V.  Be  diligent, 
ete.  (javra.  fii\era).  Give  all  your  atten- 
tion and  care  and  study  to  these  things. 
It  is  just  the  contrary  to  fxri  &./i4\ei  in  ver. 
14.  The  verb  neKerda,  besides  this  pas- 
sage, occurs  in  its  classical  sense  of  "pre- 
meditating" or  "getting  up  a  speech,"  in 
Mark  xiii.  1 1  (where,  however,  the  reading  is 
doubtful),  and  again  in  Aots  iv.  25,  in  the 
sense  of  "  premeditating  "  certain  actions. 
A  kindred  use  in  classical  Greek  is  "to 
practise  "  or  "  exercise  "  an  art,  as  rhetorio, 
dancing,  shooting  with  a  bow,  and  the  like. 
It  is  very  common  in  the  LXX„  in  the  sense 
of  "meditating,"  practising  in  the  thoughts 
Give  thyself  wholly  to  them  (tv  tovtois  foBi); 
literally,  be  in  these  things;  i.e.  be  wholly 
and  always  occupied  with  them.  The  simi- 
lar phrases  in  Greek  and  Latin  classics  are 
'Ev  Toirots  i  Ka?aap  %v  (Plutarch) ; "  Omnia  in 
hoc  sum"(Hor.,  'Ep.,'  i.  1.  1);  "Nescio 
quid  meditans  nugarum,  et  totus  in  illis" 
(Hor.,'Sat.,'i.  9. 2);  and  in  theLXX.,'Ex  <p6pv 
Kvptov  iVfli  4\ij»  tV  fifiepav  (Prov.  xxiii.  17). 
Thy  progress  (yi  irpoKOTs4\).  Progress,  advance, 
or  growth,  is  the  idea  of  irpoitowii.  It  is  used 
twice  in  Phil.  i.  12,  25.  A  good  example  of 
its  use  in  classical  Greek  is  that  in  Polyb., 
iii.  4,  fi^-ntrts  Ka\  trpoKOTr}i  t^s  Vafiaiwv  Suva- 
trreias.  The  use  of  the  verb  TtpoK&ma  for  "to 
advance,"  "make  progress,"  is  still  more 
common  (Luke  ii.  52 ;  Bom.  xiii.  12 ;  Gal.  i. 
14;  2  Tim.  ii.  16;  iii.  9,  14>    It  is  wed 


OH.  IT.  1—16.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


78 


equally  of  progress  in  good  or  evil.  Unto  all. 
The  R.T.  reads  iratrii/  for  lv  rturw  in  the 
T.B.,  which  may  be  rendered  either  "  to  [or, 
'among']  all  persons"  or  "in  all  things." 

Ver.  16. — To  for  unto,  A.V.  (twice);  thy 
leaching  for  the  doctrine,  A.V. ;  then  things 
for  them,  A.V. ;  save  both  for  both  save,  A.V. 
Take  heed  (ftrexO ;  as  in  Acts  Hi.  5  (see  too 
Luke  xiv.  7).  Thy  teaching.  The  A.V., 
the  doctrine,  is  the  better  rendering,  though 
the  difference  of  meaning  is  very  Blight. 
The  use  of  it  BttiatTicakla  in  ch.  vi.  1  and  3 
and  TitiiB  ii.  10  strongly  supports  the  sense 
of  "doctrine,"  i.e.  the  thing  taught  (see 
note  on  ver.  13).  Continue  in  these  things 
(inl/tcye  avrots)  ;  comp.  Acts  xiii.  43 ;  Eom. 
vi.  1  i  xL  22,  23 ;  Col.  i.  23.  It  is  impos- 
sible to  give  a  satisfactory  solution  to  the 


question — What  does  abreits  refer  to?  It  seems 
to  me  necessarily  to  refer  to  what  immediately 
precedes,  viz.  <reavT<ji  xa)  rff  SiSaaita\la,  ana 
so  to  refer  rather  to  the  sense  of  the  words 
than  to  the  exact  grammar.  The  things 
which  he  was  to  "take  heed  to"  were  his 
own  conduct  and  example  (included  in 
ireavTtS)  and  the  doctrine  which  he  preached; 
and  in  a  steady  continuance  in  these  things 
— faithful  living  and  faithful  teaching — 
he  would  save  both  himself  and  his  hearers. 
The  application  of  the  words  to  the  ravra 
of  ver.  15,  or  to  all  the  things  enumerated 
from  ver.  12  onwards,  or,  taken  as  a  mascu- 
line, to  the  Epheeiant,  or  the  hearert,  as 
variously  proposed  by  eminent  commentators, 
seems  alike  impossible. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1— 16. — Latter-day  apostasies.  The  history  of  the  Christian  Church  is  the  history 
of  the  sowing  of  tares  as  well  as  of  the  sowing  of  good  grain;  and  it  describes  the  work 
of  seducing  spirits  as  well  as  that  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  work  of  heresy  is  not 
merely  the  denial  of  true  doctrine,  but  it  is  the  invention  and  propagation  of  a  multitude 
of  false  doctrines.  Nor,  again,  are  the  false  doctrines  so  invented  and  promulgated,  on 
the  face  of  them,  necessarily  ungodly  doctrines.  On  the  contrary,  they  often  assume  to 
themselves  to  be  holier,  stricter,  more  heavenly  doctrines,  than  those  of  the  Church  of 
God.  The  Church  of  God  is  not  holy  enough  for  these  spirit-taught  separatists ;  the 
precepts  of  Jesus  Christ  do  not  attain  a  standard  high  enough  for  their  exalted  aspira- 
tions ;  the  apostles  do  but  grovel  in  the  dust  of  commonplace  piety,  while  these  self-serit 
teachers  soar  to  the  heights  of  the  true  knowledge  of  the  Infinite  1  But  not  only  does 
Church  history  record  the  rise,  in  a  lamentable  succession,  of  the  various  troublers  of 
the  spiritual  Israel,  the  men  who  have  done  more  to  hinder  God's  work  on  earth  than 
all  the  persecutors  and  atheists  put  together  have  accomplished — the  Cerinthuses, 
and  Marcions,  and  Montanuses,  and  Manicheuses,  and  Socinuses,  and  countless  other 
sectaries  of  later  times — but  the  spirit  of  prophecy  revealed  beforehand  for  the  Church's 
warning  that  so  it  should  be.  The  Holy  Ghost,  in  no  obscure  or  doubtful  words,  made 
it  known  to  the  Church  that  there  would  be  apostasies  many  and  grievous  from  the 
faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,  that  the  leaders  of  those  apostasies  would  be  seducing 

spirits spirits  of  antichrist,  as  St.  John  has  it — and  that  some  of  them  at  least  would 

put  on  the  hypocritical  appearance  of  greater  holiness,  for  the  purpose  of  the  better 
deceiving  the  heart?  of  the  simple.  Thus  while  Christ  taught  by  his  apostle  that 
"  marriage  is  honourable  in  all,"  these  forbade  to  marry ;  while  the  Word  of  God  declared 
that  "  every  creature  of  God  is  good,  and  nothing  to  be  refused,  if  it  be  received  with 
thanksgiving,"  these  commanded  "  to  abstain  from  meats,"  saying,  "  Touch  not,  taste 
not,  handle  not."  The  Word  of  God  teaches  that  God  gives  us  richly  all  things  to 
enjoy;  these  enjoined  every  kind  of  austerity  to  the  body — "bodily  exercises"  which 
profited  little.  The  Word  of  God  bids  us  approach  bodily  to  the  throne  of  grace 
through  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ;  these  would  keep  men  back  from  God,  and 
substitute,  in  the  name  of  humility,  the  worship  of  angels.  And  that  these  pernicious 
doctrines  were  not  confined  to  the  first  ages  of  the  Church,  the  history  of  the  Church 
too  sadly  teaches.  The  most  opposite  forms  of  heresy  which  have  in  all  ages  distracted 
the  Church  have  always  had  this  in  common,  that,  pretending  to  improve  upon  the  sound, 
sober,  and  wise  teaching  of  the  Word  of  God,  they  have  corrupted  and  forsaken  it. 
Enforced  celibacy  for  pure-minded  chastity ;  artificial  rules  of  abstinence  for  habitual 
temperance  and  self-restraint ;  grovelling  saint  and  image  worship  for  direct  communion 
with  the  living  God ;  self-righteous  separation  from  the  world  for  holy  living  in  the 
world;  bruising  the  body  for  mortifying  the  soul;  pretentious  rejection  of  wealth  for 
self-denying  use  of  it ;  leaving  the  state  of  life  in  which  God  has  placed  a  man,  instead 


ft  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  iv.  1—16. 


of  adorning  the  gospel  in  it;  making  those  things  to  be  sins  which  God  has  not  made 
sins,  and  those  things  to  be  virtues  which  God  has  not  made  virtues  j — these  have  ever 
been  the  characteristics  of  those  "  doctrines  of  devils,"  the  purpose  of  which  is  to  turn 
the  simple  away  from  the  truth.  "  The  good  minister  of  Jesus  Christ "  must  hold  his 
course  boldly  and  straightforwardly  in  the  teeth  of  all  such  false  doctrine.  He  must 
not  parley  with  the  teachers  of  heresy,  nor  mix  the  wine  of  the  gospel  with  the  water 
of  falsehood.  He  knows  that  the  Word  of  God  is  purer,  and  holier,  and  wiser,  and 
higher,  than  all  the  subtleties  of  human  invention,  and  will  stand  in  its  glory  when 
they  are  all  swept  away  into  nothingness.  And,  knowing  this,  he  must  give  himself 
wholly  to  teaching  the  truth,  whether  men  will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear,  being 
fully  assured  that  in  so  doing  he  will  both  save  himself  and  them  that  hear  him. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,2.—^  predicted  apostasy  in  the  Christian  Church.  In  opposition  to  this 
exhibition  of  the  mystery  of  godliness,  the  apostle  places  the  prediction  of  a  serious 
apostasy  from  the  faith. 

L  The  apostasy  is  a  subject  of  express  peediotion.  "  But  the  Spirit  speaketh 
expressly,  that  in  after  times  some  shall  depart  from  the  faith."  It  may  seem  strange 
that  apostasy  should  be  thought  of  so  soon  after  the  foundation  of  Christianity,  but  the 
Church  is  fully  forewarned  of  the  coming  danger.  It  was  foretold,  not  obscurely,  but 
expressly,  in  the  prophecies  by  Daniel  (vii.  25 ;  viii.  23),  of  our  Lord  (Matt.  xxiv. 
4, 11),  and  of  the  apostle  himself  (2  Thess.  ii ;  Acts  xx.  29, 30 ;  Col.  ii.).  But  he  here 
alludes  more  specifically  to  a  development  of  error  in  the  future,  the  germs  of  which 
he  discerns  in  the  present. 

II.  The  time  op  its  afpeabanoe.  "  In  after  times."  The  words  signify  any  period 
subsequent  to  the  age  in  which  the  apostle  lived,  for  he  saw  in  the  apostasy  of  the 
present  the  beginning  of  a  still  more  serious  apostasy  in  the  future.  The  mystery  of 
iniquity  had  already  begun  to  work.  But  it  would  project  its  evil  shadow  far  forward 
into  the  dispensation,  in  many  various  forms. 

HI.  The  extent  op  the  apostasy.  "  Some  shall  depart  from  the  faith."  1.  Some, 
not  all.  Not  the  whole  visible  Church,  but  a  considerable  part  of  it.  Thus  an  assur- 
ance is  given  that  the  true  Church  of  God.  shall  not  be  extinguished.  2.  The  apostasy  is 
from  the  doctrine  of  faith — though  it  he  the  mystery  of  godliness — not  the  grace  of  faith, 
which,  being  of  an  incorruptible  origin,  cannot  be  lost.  Christ  is  the  Author  and 
Finisher  of  faith.  The  elect  cannot  be  finally  deceived.  The  doctrine  of  faith  was  to 
be  corrupted  by  "  denying  what  was  true,  by  adding  what  was  false." 

IV.  The  beason  oe  process  of  the  apostasy.  "  Giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits, 
and  doctrines  of  devils."  The  prime  movers  were  not  false  teachers,  but  unseen  agents 
in  the  spirit-world.  1.  Man  does  not  stand  isolated  in  this  world.  If  he  is  not  influenced 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  is  influenced  by  the  spirits  of  delusion,  who  are  the  emissaries  of 
Satan.  If  we  are  not  possessed  by  the  truth,  error  will  make  an  easy  conquest  of  us. 
Often  the  heart  that  is  made  empty  by  scepticism  is  the  most  ready  to  welcome  super- 
stition. 2.  It  is  possible  for  evil  spirits  to  influence  the  human  mind.  (1)  Satan  could 
tempt  David  to  number  the  people  (1  Chron.  xxi.  1).  As  the  father  of  lies,  the  suggestion 
of  error  would  be  a  congenial  work.  The  coming  of  the  man  of  sin  is  to  be  after  the 
working  of  Satan.  (2)  There  is  a  sacrifice  to  devils,  a  communion  with  devils,  a  cup 
of  devils,  a  table  of  devils  (1  Cor.  x.  20,  21).  There  is  a  spiritual  wickedness  in  high 
places  capable  of  compassing  great  destruction  by  error.  (3)  The  apostle  teaches  the 
personality  of  such  evil  spirits.  (4)  There  is  no  more  difficulty  in  understanding  their 
communication  of  thought  to  man,  than  in  understanding  the  communication  of  thought 
from  oae  evil  man  to  another.  An  evil  man  can  communicate  evil  by  a  glance  of  his 
eye.  But  if  the  Spirit  of  God  can,  without  the  intervention  of  the  senses,  influence  the 
minds  of  believers,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  seducing  spirits  can  have  access  to  the 
centres  of  thought  and  feeling  without  any  similar  intervention. 

V.  The  character  of  the  false  teachers  under  such  evil  inspiration.  "  In 
the  hypocrisy  of  speakers  of  lies,  being  branded  in  their  own  conscience  as  with  a  hot 
iron."    1.  They  assumed  a  mask  of  holiness  which  they  did  not  possess,  with  the  view 


ol  it.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  75 

of  giving  better  currency  to  their  lies.  Their  assumed  sanctity  would  throw  the  unwary 
off  their  guard,  and  lead  to  the  confounding  of  truth  with  error.  The  lies  they  taught 
were  that  holiness  was  to  be  attained  through  abstinence  from  marriage  and  particular 
kinds  of  food.  2.  They  were  essentially  corrupt,  for  their  conscience  had  become  so 
seared  through  transgression  that  they  had  lost  the  true  distinctions  between  right  and 
wrong,  error  and  truth.  They  were  incapable  of  relishing  the  "  mystery  of  godliness," 
and  therefore  devoted  themselves  to  the  arts  of  religious  seduction  in  the  interests  of  an 
essentially  unspiritual  asceticism. — T.  C. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — The  practical  features  of  the  apostasy.  The  apostle  does  not  enumerate 
the  doctrinal  errors  of  the  apostates,  but  touches  upon  two  practical  characteristics 
which  would  fall  under  general  observation. 

I.  There  was  a  prohibition  ob  restraint  upon  marriage.  "  Forbidding  to  marry." 
1.  This  was  an  ascetic  tendency  already  manifested  in  the  East,  especially  among  the 
Essenes  of  Palestine  and  the  Therapeutse  of  Egypt.  2.  It  may  have  already  influenced 
Christian  opinion  in  the  Corinthian  Church ;  for  the  apostle  is  obliged  to  solve  spiri- 
tualistic doubts  regarding  marriage  (1  Cor.  vii.).  3.'  The  tendency  developed  in  less 
than  a  century  into  a  Gnostic  contempt  for  marriage.  4.  It  entered  patristic  theology 
in  the  form  of  an  exaggerated  admiration  for  virginity,  to  the  disparagement  of  married 
life.  5.  It  developed  inside  the  Latin  and  Greek  Churches  into  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy 
and  the  religious  orders.    6.  It  was  a  tendency  wholly  opposed  to  Scripture  teaching. 

(1)  It  forbade  what  Scripture  allowed :  "  Marriage  is  honourable  in  all "  (Heb.  xiii.  2). 

(2)  It  forbade  the  marriage  of  ministers,  while  Old  Testament  priests  and  New  Testa- 
ment ministers  were  to  be  "  husbands  of  one  wife  "  (ch.  iii.  2).  "  Have  we  not  power 
to  lead  about  a  wife,  a  sister?"  (1  Cor.  ix.  5).  Several  of  the  apostles  made  U8e  of  this 
power :  "As  well  as  othfer  apostles,  .  .  .  and  Cephas."  (3)  The  reason  why  the  apostle 
says  so  little  here  concerning  the  restriction  on  marriage,  and  so  much  on  that  respect- 
ing meats,  is  probably  because  the  one  was  so  manifestly  opposed  to  the  whole  plan  of 
creation,  that  the  common  sense  of  men  would  reject  it  as  unnatural  and  wrong.  Per- 
haps, also,  the  one  tendency  had  not  assumed  so  definite  a  form  as  the  other.  The  very 
liberty  allowed  under  the  gospel  to  abstain  from  marriage  was  not  grounded  on  the  idea 
of  the  superior  holiness  of  celibacy  or  virginity,  but  on  its  affording  in  special  circum- 
stances greater  opportunities  and  freedom  for  spiritual  work  (1  Cor.  vii.  32—37). 

H.  There  was  a  prohibition  or  restraint  upon  the  use  or  certain  kinds 
of  food.  "And  commanding  to  abstain  from  meats,  which  God  hath  created  to  be 
received  with  thanksgiving  by  them  who  believe  and  know  the  truth."  Probably  the 
restriction  was  as  to  the  use  of  flesh.  The  Essenes  and  the  Therapeutas  abstained  from 
particular  kinds  of  food.  The  Gnostic  schools  developed  the  tendency  still  more,  and 
in  due  time  it  was  stereotyped  into  the  penitential  usages  of  Romanism.  The  apostle 
argues  strenuously  against  this  abuse.  1.  It  was  contrary  to  God's  design  in  creation. 
(1)  All  food  was  from  the  hand  of  the  Maker;  nothing  was  therefore  to  be  accounted 
common  or  unclean  under  the  gospel.  (2)  All  food  was  good.  "  For  every  creature  of 
God  is  good,  and  nothing  to  be  refused."  It  was  not,  therefore,  for  man  to  place  restric- 
tions upon  what  God  had  given  with  such  a  liberal  hand  for  his  use.  "  The  earth  is 
the  Lord's,  and  the  fulnesB  thereof."  2.  The  conditions  under  which  the  true,  design  of 
God  in  creation  is  fulfilled.  (1)  The  food  was  for  all  creatures;  but  "believers  and 
those  who  have  known  the  truth  "  had  a  covenant  right  to  it,  and  the  true  end  of  crea- 
tion was  only  fully  satisfied  in  them.  (2)  The  right  manner  of  receiving  the  food  pro- 
vided. "  If  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving ; "  for  it  is  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God 
ind  prayer.  This  implies  (o)  that  food  is  to  be  gratefully  received  as  God's  gift ;  (6) 
that  our  thanksgiving  is  presented  on  the  objective  side  by  the  Word  of  God,  and  on 
the  subjective  side  by  prayer.  Thus  the  custom  of  grace  before  and  after  meat  is 
grounded  in  a  Divine  command. — T.  C. 

Vers.  6,  7. — The  due  equipment  and  duties  of  a  minister  of  Christ.  I.  The  minister 
must  be  always  teaching.  "By  setting  forth  these  things  to  the  brethren,  thou 
■halt  be  a  good  minister  of  Jesus  Christ."  It  was  the  duty  of  Timothy  to  counsel  the 
brethren  at  Ephesus  concerning  the  present  signs  of  the  coming  apostasy,  and  to  instruct 
them  how  they  should  counteract  its  mischiefs.    It  is  probable  that  some  at  Ephesus 


76  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  |ot-  rv.  1— 16. 

had  already  been  betrayed  by  ascetic  seductions  into  an  unhealthy  mode  of  life. 
Timothy  was  to  be  mindful  of  the  present  truth  and  the  present  error. 

n.  The  MiNrsTBR  must  be  always  learning.  "Nourishing  thyself  up  in  the 
words  of  the  faith  and  of  the  good  instruction  which  thou  hast  diligently  followed."  1. 
There  must  be  a  continuous  and  permanent  process  of  self-instruction,  as  the  tense  of 
the  participle  signifies.  The  minister  must  never  cease  to  learn,  because  he  has  to  set 
the  truth  in  new  lights,  and  to  counteract  error  out  of  the  large  storehouse  of  Divine 
truth.  2.  The  minister's  armoury  is  the  Word  of  faith  and  good  instruction  thoroughly 
mastered.  (1)  Nothing  but  God's  Word  received  by  faith  will  enable  Timothy  to  fight 
the  battle  of  truth.  He  is  not  to  overcome  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  power 
of  God.  (2)  He  is  to  adhere  faithfully  to  the  truth  already  attained.  Progress  in 
knowledge  does  not  imply  a  constant  changing  of  opinions. 

HI.  The  minister  must  be  always  working  toward  a  profitable  result.  "  But 
the  profane  and  old  wives'  fables  avoid,  and  rather  exercise  thyself  unto  godliness." 
L.  Negatively,  the  minister  is  to  avoid  foolish  and  unprofitable  studies.  The  apostle 
referred  to  fables  familiarity  known,  Jewish  in  origin,  perhaps  with  a  mixture  of  Gentile 
theosophy,  which  were  morally  unfruitful,  but  practically  dangerous  as  preparing  the 
way  for  the  apostasy  of  the  future.  The  minister  must  himself  stand  free  from  all 
sympathy  with  such  injurious  formalism  as  was  embodied  in  the  rabbinical  studies,  as 
leading  to  the  neglect  of  the  weightier  matters  of  the  Law.  2.  Positively,  the  minister 
is  to  exercise  himself  unto  godliness.  (1)  This  implies  that  godliness  is  a  pursuit  that 
demands  the  strenuous  application  of  all  our  energies  of  mind,  body,  and  spirit.  (2)  It 
implies  that  godliness  must  be  the  chief  business  of  a  minister  as  well  as  the  chief  aim 
of  his  life  to  promote  it  among  the  members  of  his  flock,  (o)  It  has  its  inner  seat  in 
the  heart.  (6)  It  works  outward  into  the  life,  (c)  It  is  a  progressive  state,  (d)  It 
was  the  one  chief  concern  of  the  apostle  himself.    "  One  thing  I  do." — T.  C. 

Vers.  8,  9. — The  advantage  of  true  godliness.  The  apostle  gives  a  reason  for  his 
exhortation  to  godliness. 

II.  The  superiority  or  godliness  to  any  mere  bodily  exercise.  "  For  bodily 
exercise  profiteth  to  a  small  extent."  1.  The  allusion  here  is  not  to  the  ascetic  discipline 
already  noticed,  because :  (1)  Though  it  might  apply  to  the  more  developed  austerities  of 
later  times — flagellations,  pilgrimages,  and  weary  vigils — it  cannot  fairly  apply  to  the 
disuse  of  marriage  and  of  certain  kinds  of  food.  There  is  no  bodily  exercise  implied  in 
such  a  quiescent  habit  or  aspect  of  life.  (2)  It  is  impossible  to  think  that  the  apostle 
should  even  concede  that  such  austerity  was  profitable  to  the  smallest  extent,  for  he 
is  opposed  to  the  whole  idea  of  it.  (3)  Besides,  this  was  not  the  immediate  subject  in 
hand,  which  was  the  excellence  of  true  piety.  2.  The  allusion  is  to  the  gymnastic 
training  which  occupied  so  much  of  the  time  and  energy  of  the  Greek  youth.  It  was 
profitable  for  the  healthful  development  of  bodily  life,  but  by  its  very  nature  it  was 
both  temporal  and  temporary  in  its  results  and  its  rewards. 

II.  The  ground  of  the  superiority  op  godliness.  "  But  godliness  is  profitable 
unto  all  things,  having  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come." 
It  has  the  profit  and  the  promise  of  a  double  life.  1.  It  has  the  profit  and  the  promis- 
of  this  present  life.  (1)  There  is  the  promise  of  length  of  days.  "  The  wicked  li<  j 
not  half  their  days.';  (2)  There  is  the  prophetic  promise  that  they  "  shall  inherit  the 
earth."  (3)  There  is  the  profit  (a)  of  a  good  name,  (6)  of  riches  and  honour ;  for  they 
will  want  no  good  thing.  (4)  Godliness  is  profitable  for  all  things  included  in  the 
scheme  of  a  holy  life.  2.  It  has  the  profit  and  the  promise  of  the  life  fo  come.  (1)  This 
does  not  signify  that  it  merits  eternal  life,  but  that  it  is  essentially  connected  with  it  in 
the  Divine  scheme  of  salvation.  (2)  Thus  godliness  is  "  great  gain  "  for  the  whole  life 
of  man  in  the  next  life.  It  involves  the  highest  blessedness  of  man.  (3)  Happy  is 
the  man  whose  future  is  provided  for  as  well  as  his  present. 

ni.  Corroboration  op  the  apostle's  assertion  respecting  godliness.  "  Faithful 
is  the  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation."  It  was  a  truth  of  universal  acceptance 
among  Christian  people,  because,  in  spite  of  all  the  drawbacks  of  a  persecuting  time, 
it  had  been  happily  realized  in  their  checkered  experience.— T.  0. 

Ver.  10. —  The  practical  effects  oftnts  truth  in  apostolic  experience.    Looking  to  the 


<«.  IT.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  77 

realization  of  this  promise,  the  apostle  reminds  Timothy  how  he  was  borne  up  by  it  is 
all  his  labour  and  suffering. 
L  Its  bustainino  efficacy.    "  For  to  this  end  do  we  labour  and  suffer  reproach." 

1.  The  apostle  did  not  regard  the  life  promised  to  godliness  as  one  of  mere  corporeal 
enjoyment.  2.  His  life  was  actually  one  of  severe  and  toilsome  labour  as  well  as  of 
trying  hut  unmerited  reproach.  3.  Yet  he  was  stimulated  to  increased  toil  and  supftrted 
under  the  infliction  of  unjust  reproach  by  the  thought  of  the  promise  involved  in  the 
life  of  true  godliness. 

II.  The  solid  basis  of  Christian  expectation  under  toil  and  shame.  "Because 
we  have  set  our  hope  upon  the  living  God,  who  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  especially  of 
those  that  believe."  1.  The  blessed  nature  and  continuity  of  this  hope.  (1)  It  is  the 
good  hope  through  grace  which  we  enjoy.  (2)  Life  would  be  a  blank  without  it.  "  If  in 
this  life  only  we  have  hope,  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  (3)  It  is  linked  with 
patience.  "  But  if  we  hope  for  that  which  we  see  not,  then  do  we  with  patience  wait 
for  it"  (Bom.  vii.  25).  (4)  It  is  a  permanent  and  continuous  hope,  as  the  tense  of  the 
verb  here  signifies.  2.  The  ground  or  basis  of  this  hope.  "Upon  the  living  God,  who 
is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  especially  of  those  that  believe."  (1)  This  hope  is  from  the 
"  God  of  hope  "  (Bom.  xv.  13),  who  is  the  living  God ;  that  is,  no  mere  God  of  imagina- 
tion, but  a  real  personal  Agent,  the  very  Fountain  of  life  in  infinite  sufficiency.  (2) 
It  is  a  hope  linked  to  salvation  in  its  widest  sense — both  "  the  life  that  now  is,  and  that 
which  is  to  come."  For  God  is  "  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  especially  of  those  that  believe." 
(a)  The  Saviourship  here  has  relation  to  the  two  lives  of  men,  as  expressed  in  the  con- 
text. In  the  one  sense,  Gud  is  a  Saviour  of  all  men,  since  by  his  watchful  and  sustain- 
ing providence  he  preserves  them  from  destruction ;  in  the  other,  he  offers  and  bestows 
eternal  life.  (6)  The  words  do  not  warrant  the  Universalist  conclusion  that  all  men 
will  be  ultimately  saved.  The  passage  makes  an  express  distinction  between  all  "  men  " 
and  "  believers  "  inconsistent  with  this  view. — T.  0. 

Vers.  11, 12. — A  series  of  admonitions  for  the  guidance  of  Timothy.  I.  Timothy  is 
enjoined  to  exercise  a  DUE  authority.  "  These  things  command  and  teach."  He 
is  to  instruct  the  Church  at  Ephesus  with  all  authority  in  all  that  concerned  the 
nature  of  true  piety,  the  dangers  to  be  guarded  against,  and  the  duties  to  be  faithfully 
discharged. 

IL  Timothy  is  enjoined  to  cultivate  a  gravity  of  deportment  that  would 
make  his  youth  bespeoted.  "  Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth."  1.  Timothy  was  only 
relatively  a  young  man.  It  is  highly  probable  that  he  was  very  young  when  he  first 
joined  the  apostle  (Acts  xvi.  1 — 3) — perhaps  nearly  twenty-five  years  of  age — and  as 
eleven  years  had  since  intervened,  he  would  probably  now  be  about  forty  years  old. 

2.  As  Timothy  had  to  give  counsel  to  persons  much  older  than  himself  (ch.  v.  1),  and 
even  to  call  them  to  account  (ver.  19),  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  cultivate  a  gravity 
of  manner  that  would  admit  of  his  age  being  forgotten.  Perhaps,  also,  as  he  was  of 
a  rather  timid  disposition — more  disposed  to  obey  than  to  command — the  counsel  of  the 
apostle  was  more  needed.  He  must  be  firm  and  manly,  and  destitute  of  every  aspect 
or  element  of  pretentious  assumption. 

HI.  Timothy  is  enjoined  to  become  a  pattern  to  all  believers.  "  But  become 
thou  a  pattern  of  the  believers  in  word,  in  behaviour,  in  love,  in  faith,  in  purity."  Thus 
would  he  counteract  any  disadvantage  arising  from  his  youth.  He  was  to  be  a  pattern 
in  all  the  leading  characteristics  of  the  Christian  minister.  1.  "  In  word."  (1)  As  to 
his  public  teaching,  which  must  be  according  to  God's  Word,  showing  in  it  uncorruptness, 
gravity,  sincerity,  sound  speech  that  could  not  be  condemned.  (2)  As  to  social  inter- 
course, which  must  be  (a)  not  corrupt,  vain,  or  foolish ;  (6)  but  always  with  grace, 
seasoned  with  salt — wise,  grave,  edifying.  2.  "  In  behaviour."  In  the  Church,  the  family, 
the  world,  he  must  maintain  a  deportment  becoming  the  gospel  of  Christ,  in  all  godliness 
and  honesty,  with  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity,  so  as  to  stop  the  mouths  of  gainsay ers 
and  earn  a  good  report  from  them  that  are  without.  3.  "  In  love,  in  faith."  These  are 
the  two  motive  forces  of  the  Christian  life  to  influence  both  the  speech  and  conduct  of 
the  minister.  The  one  is  set  in  motion  by  the  other ;  for  "  faith  worketh  by  love." 
(1)  He  is  to  be  a  pattern  in  love  to  God  and  man,  without  which,  even  if  he  has 
the  tongue  of  angels,  he  is  nothing.    (2)  In  faith,  in  the  grace  of  faith,  in  the  doctrine 


1%  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  iv.  1—18. 

of  faith,  in  the  profession  of  faith.     4.  "In  purity. n    The  minister  must  be  pure  in  life. 
In  thought,  in  language,  and  in  all  his  relations  to  the  world* — T.  C. 

Ver.  13. — The  duties  of  Timothy's  public  ministry.  The  apostle  urges  him  to  the 
diligent  exercise  of  his  calling.  "  Till  I  come  give  attention  to  the  reading,  the  exhor- 
tation, the  teaching." 

L  The  heading.  This  referred  to  the  public  reading  of  the  Scriptures  in  the  Church. 
The  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  and  probably  part  of  the  New  Testament,  would  thus  be 
read  at  such  meeting  of  the  saints.  This  reading  was  necessary  because  (1)  the 
Scriptures  were  the  sources  of  all  religious  knowledge;  (2)  the  test  or  standard  of 
doctrine  by  which  opinions  were  to  be  tried ;  (3)  the  means  of  sanctification  (John  xvii. 
17) ;  (4)  the  spring  of  Christian  hope  and  comfort  (Rom.  xv.  13). 

IL  The  exhortation.  This  refers  to  public  ministry.  Timothy  was  practically  to 
enforce  the  duties  of  Christian  life  out  of  the  Scriptures. 

III.  The  teaching.  This  refers  to  the  matter  of  doctrinal  instruction.  Thus  full 
provision  would  be  made  for  building  up  the  saints  in  their  most  holy  faith,  and  in  all 
the  graces  and  virtues  of  a  holy  life. — T.  C. 

Ver.  14.— The  duty  of  improving  the  Divine  gifts  of  exhortation  and  teaching. 
"  Neglect  not  the  gift  that  is  in  thee,  which  was  given  thee  through  prophecy,  with 
laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery." 

I.  The  spiritual  gift  conferred  on  Timothy.  1.  It  is  not  mere  intellectual 
equipment,  nor  the  mere  possession  of  Divine  grace,  hit  the  gift  which  qualified  Timothy 
for  preaching  the  gospel.  "  For  the  work  of  an  evangelist."  It  was  a  gift  of  interpreting 
the  Scriptures,  of  dispensing  the  mysteries  of  grace  with  edification,  of  bringing  forth 
things  new  and  old  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  a  holy  heart  informed  with  truth.  2. 
It  was  a  gift  conferred  by  means  of  prophecy.  The  Holy  Spirit  had,  by  one  or  more  of 
the  prophets,  declared  his  will  to  confer  this  gift  upon  Timothy.  The  prophecy  was  the 
Divine  assurance  as  to  Timothy's  qualifications.  3.  The  response  to  this  Divine  act  is 
signified  by  the  action  of  the  presbytery  in  formally  designating  him  to  his  special 
ministerial  work. 

II.  The  duty  of  exercising  and  improving  this  gift.  "Neglect  not  the  gift 
that  is  in  thee."  There  were  several  reasons  to  enforce  this  duty.  1.  The  prophetic 
declaration  accompanied  by  the  concurrence  of  the  whole  body  of  presbyters  would  fill  his 
mind  with  a  sense  of  his  high  privilege  and  great  responsibility  in  the  possession  of  such 
a  gift.  2.  The  exercise  of  a  gift  is  the  only  method  of  preventing  its  complete  lapse.  The 
disuse  of  a  limb  causes  it  to  decay.  All  faculties  must  be  kept  bright  and  vivid  by 
constant  exercise.  3.  Our  Lord,  by  the  parable  of  the  talents,  teaches  us  the  sin  and 
danger  of  hiding  our  talent  uselessly  in  the  ground. — T.  C. 

Vers.  15, 16. — The  necessity  of  a  minister  giving  his  whole  energies  to  hit  work.  The 
apostle  here  concludes  his  solemn  instructions  to  his  chosen  representative  at  Ephesus. 

I.  The  duty  of  being  mindful  and  devoted  to  one's  ministry.  "  These  things 
do  thou  care  for :  be  in  them."  1.  A  minister's  heart  ought  to  be  anxious  about  his 
work.  It  is  this  anxiety  that  secures  the  efficiency  of  work  in  this  world.  But  the 
minister's  concern  is  full  of  an  inspiring  zeal  for  God's  honour,  and  is  sustained  by 
encouraging  promises  of  help  from  on  high.  2.  A  minister  ought  to  devote  himself 
exclusively  to  his  work.  "  Be  in  them."  The  obstacles  to  this  devotion  are  (1)  sloth- 
fulness,  (2)  worldliness,  (3)  the  pressure  of  duties  right  in  themselves,  but  lying  outside 
the  sphere  of  the  ministry. 

II.  The  motive  fob- this  exclusive  devotion.  "That  thy  progress  may  appear  to 
all."  1.  This  does  not  imply  that  Timothy  woe  to  have  exclusive  regard  to  his  right 
standing  with  the  Church.  This  might  be  a  questionable  motive.  2.  It  implies  that 
hit  devotion  to  his  work  should  be  so  altogether  conspicuous  that  it  could  not  but  be  seen 
by  all. 

III.  The  connection  between  the  personal  life  and  the  official  work  of 
the  minister.  "  Take  heed  to  thyself  and  to  the  teaching ;  continue  in  them :  for  in 
so  doing  thou  shalt  save  both  thyself  and  them  that  hear  thee."  1.  The  direct  object  of 
the  minister  of  the  gospel  is  the  salvation  of  souls.    2.  This  salvation  comes  by  hearing 


oh.it.  1—18.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  7» 

the  gospel.  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing."  3.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  minister  to  persevere 
with  a  pious  insistency  on  all  the  objects  of  his  ministry.  "Continue  in  them."  4. 
Nothing  is  so  well  adapted  for  the  salvation  of  ministers  as  their  pious  labours  in  behalf 
of  the  salvation  of  others.  6.  There  is  to  be  a  double  service  in  this  ministry..  The 
minister  must  first  look  well  to  his  life,  exemplifying  the  holiness  of  the  gospel  in  word 
and  deed  (ver.  12) ;  and  then  his  teaching  must  be  good  (ver.  6)  and  salutary  (ch.  i.  10). 
Thus  he  will  be  the  instrument  of  much  good;  he  will  thus  cover  the  multitude  of  sins, 
and  save  a  soul  from  death  ( Jas.  v.  20). — T.  0. 

Ver.  4.— A  false  asceticism.  "  For  every  creature  of  God  is  good."  The  gospel 
stood  in  a  difficult  position.  On  the  one  hand  was  asceticism,  with  its  hermits  of  every 
creed,  and  its  retreats  in  Asia,  Africa,  and  Egypt ;  on  the  other  hand  was  Epicureanism 
with  its  philosophy  of  enjoyments,  which  ran  into  lawless  excess.  We  must  judge  a 
new  religion  by  its  first  teacher ;  for  Christ  was  his  own  religion  alive  and  in  action. 
John  the  Baptist  was  an  ascetic ;  but  Christ  came  eating  and  drinking,  and  his  enemies 
said,  "  Behold,  a  wine-bibber,  and  a  friend  of  publican  and  sinners."  His  first  miracle 
was  at  a  marriage  festival,  and  he  dined  with  the  Pharisees.  We  have  here  an  example 
in  morals.  Every  creature  or  creation — not  necessarily  a  living  thing — is  good.  Show 
that  it  is  from  God,  and  then  it  must  be  good.  In  the  story  of  Creation,  after  every 
new  day,  "  God  saw  that  it  was  good." 

I.  Asceticism  makes  a  false  world  of  its  own.  It  narrows  life,  it  empties  the 
fountains  of  joy,  it  destroys  the  hopes  of  youth,  it  degrades  the  body,  and  treats  matter 
as  though  it  were  evil.  God's' idea  of  life  is  that  body,  soul,  and  spirit  are  to  be 
redeemed. 

II.  The  Christian  faith  makes  a  true  world  of  men.  We  are  to  be  trained 
through  use,  even  when  use  is  dangerous ;  for  test  makes  manhood.  "  Blessed  is  the 
man  that  endureth  temptation."  We  are  to  have  the  analogy  in  Nature.  She  is  to 
stand  the  storm,  and  be  strengthened  by  it.  So  the  atmosphere  is  purified,  so  the  roots 
of  the  trees  take  faster  hold  of  the  soil.  What  a  world  of  disease  and  death  this  would 
be  without  currents  and  waves  and  storms ! 

III.  The  Christian  faith  had  false  interpreters.  It  could  but  be  that  the 
surrounding  tendencies  affected  the  Christians.  Just  as  there  were  Judaistic  Chris- 
tians, so  there  were  those  affected  by  the  old  Manichean  doctrine  "  that  matter  was 
evil."  Consequently  they  would  treat  the  body  as  corrupt  and  evil.  The  apostle, 
therefore,  is  not  only  general,  but  specific  in  his  statement,  "  Some  forbid  to  marry  and 
forbid  to  eat  meats ; "  and  he  repeats  the  expression,  "  which  God  hath  created."  The 
same  tendency  appeared,  and  was  fatally  developed,  in  the  monastic  life  of  the  Church. 
The  monk  and  the  nun  appeared  to  possess  a  special  sanctity,  but  it  was  not  really  so. 
The  forces  of  nature,  if  they  have  not  pure  avenues  of  enjoyment,  will  be  sure  to  find 
impure  channels ;  and  history  shows  that  monasteries  have  been  associated  with  hidden 
vice  and  criminal  deeds  of  shame,  though  softened  over  with  vesper  chants  and  morbid 
garments  of  melancholy  hue. — W.  M.  S. 

Yer.  4. — A  universal  use.  "  And  nothing  to  be  refused."  The  apostle  has  shown 
that  government  is  a  creation  of  God ;  we  are  to  pray  for  kings  and  all  in  authority, 
and  this  is  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  our  Saviour.  And  he  has  taught  us  to  obey 
the  powers  that  be;  for  they  are  ordained  of  God.  He  has  shown  that  the  place  of  man 
in  the  Creation  is  of  God.  A  woman's  lot  is  not  to  be  the  world's  leader  or  teacher, 
but  the  equal  companion  of  man.  All  social  economies  break  to  pieces  that  deny  God's 
ordinations  in  the  universe.    No  order  that  he  has  created  is  to  be  refused. 

TO    BEFU8E     IS    TO    IMPLY   A   SUPERIOR    JUDGMENT    TO    THAT   OF   GOD.      The  wisest 

must  know  best.  He  who  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting  has  given  a  revelation 
for  all  aspects  of  society  and  all  ages  of  men.  Individual  liberty  is  left.  We  are 
not  to  forbid  to  marry  or  to  command  to  abstain  from  meats ;  though,  if  any  thought 
the  meat  was  offered  to  idols,  and  that  they  sanctioned  idolatry,  they  might  refuse  it ; 
as  our  temperance  friends  think  that  when  use  runs  to  abuse,  and  is  a  stumbling- 
block,  they  have  a  perfect  right  to  use  liberty  of  abstinence.  "  Nothing  to  be  refused.'' 
Wonderful  words !  The  imagination  of  the  mind  is  a  creation  of  God.  Poetry,  affec- 
tion, and  art  alike  may  be  used  in  the  Christian  sphere.     The  intellect  of  the  wise  is  a 


80  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  it.  1— 1& 

creation  of  God ;  it  is  not  to  be  blindfolded.  We  are  not  to  say,  as  Rome  said  to 
Galileo,  "  Faith  does  not  inquire ; "  but  we  are  to  use  it  in  its  own  sphere,  reverently 
looking  up  to  God  for  more  light.  "  Come,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord." 
All  natural  beauty  is  of  God.  It  is  no  sign  of  religion  to  love  ugliness.  Only  let  your 
beauty  not  be  meretricious  beauty.  Let  it  be  pure,  as  God  is  pure.  "  Nothing  to  be 
refused."— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  4. — A  grateful  heart.  "  If  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving."  We  are  always 
to  be  conscious  of  dependence,  or  else  our  very  blessings  turn  to  curses.  We  become 
full,  and  we  deny  God.  There  is  a  prosperity  without  God  which  makes  men  proud 
and  hard.  Men  lose  the  consciousness  of  the  transitoriness  of  earthly  good,  and  of  their 
entire  dependence  upon  God.  We  are,  therefore,  to  live  in  an  atmosphere  of  gratitude. 
We  are  not  to  receive  mercies  as  though  we  had  a  right  to  them,  but  always,  as  Paul 
says,  "  Be  ye  thankful." 

L  Think  of  the  thought  manifested  in  these  gifts.  Every  student  of  nature 
becomes  surprised  that  beauty  is  born  out  of  such  strange  elements,  and  that  there 
should  be  such  harmony  of  forces  that,  taken  alone,  would  be  terribly,  destructive. 
God's  thoughts  are,  toward  us,  precious  thoughts,  spoken  in  all  ages  by  holy  men,  and 
symbolized  in  the  world  of  nature.  God  has  thought  out  all  that  is  needful  for  our 
life.  He  has  stored  the  earth,  interlaced  it  with  rich  metallic  veins,  filled  it  with 
limestone  and  coal,  that  all  might  be  ready  for  his  child.  And  in  grace  we  see  how 
God  promised  a  Saviour,  and,  when  his  Son  came  into  the  world,  "  all  things  are  now 
ready." 

IL  Think  of  the  forbearance  that  continues  them.  Men  have  abused  God's 
mercies.  If  men  destroy  the  nobleman's  shrubs,  he  closes  his  grounds.  If  men  deface 
the  pictures,  the  galleries  are  no  longer  free.  And  yet  God  bears  with  all  the  sin  and 
frailty  of  man ;  and  from  generation  to  generation  this  is  the  thought  that  should  move 
man  most — not  only  the  forgiveness,  but  the  forbearance,  of  God. 

HL  Thine  of  the  pleasures  received  from  them.  What  millionfold  minis- 
trations of  pleasure  there  are!  What  has  not  nature  been  to  you,  and  love,  and 
thought,  and  home!  There  is  no  more  wonderful  contemplation  than  the  varied 
pleasures  of  heart  and  mind. 

IV.  Think  of  the  uncreative  power  of  man.  We  cannot  create  an  atom ;  we 
can  only  readjust  and  combine.  And  the  artist  cannot  create  his  colours;  he  can  only 
m\v  them.  The  physician  cannot  create  his  remedies ;  he  can  only  find  them.  The 
builder  cannot  create  his  stones,  he  can  only  quarry  them.  The  child  can  gather  the 
flower ;  but  a  whole  universe  of  men  cannot  give  it  life  again.  Let  every  creation  of 
God  be  received  with  thanksgiving. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6. — Creation  sanctified.  "For  it  is  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God  and 
prayer."  Here,  then,  is  an  exquisite  harmony.  We  have  been  (Silking  of  creation,  and 
now  we  come  to  consider  the  Word  of  God.  And  these  creative  things  are  to  be 
"  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God  and  prayer."  Men  can  talk  with  God.  His  fellowship  is 
a  test  of  all  our  pleasures  and  companionships  and  associations — "  Would  the  Bible  be 
out  of  place  here  ?  "  It  is  never  out  of  place  in  nature's  gardens  and  groves.  The  best 
descriptions  of  nature  are  in  the  Bible.  It  is  never  out  of  place  in  pure  festivities.  It 
records  the  marriage  supper,  and  the  music  and  the  dance  when  the  prodigal  came 
home.  It  is  never  out  of  place  in  children's  joys;  for  it  gives  the  picture  of  a  glad  and 
happy  childhood.  The  prophet  says,  "  The  streets  of  the  city  shall  be  full  of  girls  and 
boys  playing ; "  and  Christ  took  up  little  children  in  his  arms,  and  blessed  them.  It  is 
never  out  of  place  in  pure  human  love ;  for  that  is  poetized  in  one  entire  book  of  the 
Bible.  It  is  not  out  of  place  in  the  earnest  pursuit  of  secular  things ;  for  the  proverbs 
appeal  to  personal  endeavour,  and  to  the  right  enjoyment  of  riches  and  honour.  The 
Bible  sanctifies  life  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  and  any  social  economy  apart  from  the 
Word  of  God  is  only  a  paper  deferce  against  tyranny  and  wrong.  "And  prayer." 
For  we  may  speak  to  God.  The  neutral  face  of  nature  is  ghastly  without  him. 
"  Speak,  Lord ;  for  thy  servant  heareth."  Can  I  ask  God  to  be  there  at  all  ?  Can  I  ask 
him  to  aid  me  in  my  work  ?  Can  I  ask  him  to  comfort  me  if  I  fail  ?  Can  I  ask  him  to 
quicken  my  powers  and  enlarge  my  opportunities?    Can  I  ask  him  to  sanctify  my 


ch.it.  1—16.]  THE  PIEST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  81 

associations  ?  These  are  vital  questions ;  for  nothing  is  sanctified  without  him,  and 
everything  is  "  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God  and  prayer." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6. — A  wise  reminder.  "If  thou  put  the  brethren  in  remembrance."  We 
cannot  create  truth,  any  more  than  the  artist  can  create  nature.  Revelation  is  not 
imagination.  A  teacher  can  combine,  harmonize,  reproduce,  and  call  to  remembrance. 
Timothy  cannot  add  to  the  gospel.  In  the  eleventh  verse  of  the  first  chapter  it  is 
called  "  the  glorious  gospel,  which  was  committed  to  my  trust."  A  trustee  does  not 
alter  the  will,  neither  does  he  add  to  it.  All  that  he  has  to  do  is  sacredly  to  carry 
out  the  last  wishes  of  the  testator.  And  when  Christ  had  finished  the  gospel  by  hia 
ascension,  then  he  sent  them  into  all  the  world  to  preach  it. 

I.  The  Church  a  beothbehood.  "  Put  the  brethren."  Here  is  no  priestly  domi- 
nation, no  hierarchical  pretension.  1.  Brotherhood  in  service.  We  may  have  different 
functions,  but  we  are  all  servants.  We  have  it  in  type  in  the  great  Servant,  "  who 
came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister."  We  ought  never  to  be  ashamed  of 
service.  The  old  guilds  in  England  were  beautiful  things.  It  is  a  pity  now  that 
retirement  is  thought  more  honourable  than  service.  2.  Brotherhood  in  sympathy.  The 
most  precious  element  in  life  is  the  sentiment  of  pity.  Some  men  despise  sentiment ; 
but  without  it  you  take  away  the  atmosphere  of  life,  as  in  nature  atmosphere  is 
the  drapery  of  the  hills  and  the  haze  of  the  mountains.  This  sympathy  is  subtle,  not 
merely  spoken,  but  breathed  in  tones  and  glances  at  us  in  looks  of  thoughtful  love.  It 
is  an  angel  of  help,  always  swift  to  help,  and  ready  to  fly  to  sorrow.  Shakespeare  calls 
it  "  Heaven's  cherubim  horsed."  3.  Brotherhood  in  pilgrimage.  In  Church  life  there 
will  be  absence  of  mere  etiquette  and  ceremony.  It  will  be  a  contrast  to  the  world. 
It  will  not  be  easy  to  come  and  go  from  a  true  pilgrim  Church.  Pride  may  not  care  for 
it ;  fashion,  in  its  novelistic  literature,  may  laugh  at  it ;  but  the  Christian  knows  that 
there  is  something  strengthening  in  the  fellowship  of  the  saints. 

II.  The  gospel  a  remembrance.  "  Put  them  in  remembrance ; "  because  of  their 
preoccupation.  Business  life,  the  cares  of  home,  make  us  forget  the  heavenly  Word. 
Too  often  the  angels  of  God  stand  outside  the  heart.  In  a  busy  age  like  the  present 
there  is  nothing  men  so"  much  need  as  quiet  hours  for  the  quickening  of  memory. 
"  Remembrance ; "  because  of  familiarity.  As  the  Swiss  mountaineer  thinks  little  of  the 
beauty  which  the  traveller  goes  miles  upon  miles  to  see,  so  the  gospel  has  been  round 
about  our  childhood  and  youth,  and  there  is  a  danger  lest  we  make  light  of  that  which 
is  so  familiar  to  our  thought.  "  Remembrance ; "  because  of  pride.  We  forget  that  we 
need  the  gospel,  and  once  felt  ourself  to  be  chief  of  sinners ;  forget  that  we  were  slaves, 
and  can  now  go  back  and  take  up  the  broken  chains  of  old  sins.  "  Remembrance ; " 
because  we  may  Beek  to  make  a  new  religion  for  ourselves.  Earnestness  may  take  the 
forms  of  Pharisaism  and  asceticism;  we  may  try  Emersonian  self-dependence.  We 
are  to  remember  that  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  is  what  we  all  need  unto  the 
end.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6. — Ministerial  vocation.  "Thou  shalt  be  a  good  minister  of  Jesus  Christ, 
nourished  up  in  the  words  of  faith  and  of  good  doctrine,  whereunto  thou  hast  attained." 
Taking  your  own  medicines.  Eating  the  bread  you  recommend.  A  good  horti- 
culturist will  show  you  his  own  garden.  The  test,  therefore,  of  Christian  faith  and 
good  doctrine  is — being  nourished  up. 

I.  It  makes  men  strong  to  endube.  Ministers  are  men  of  like  passions  with 
others;  as  Shakespeare  sayn — 

"  We  are  all  men  1 
In  our  own  nature,  frail,  incapable 
Of  our  flesh,  few  are  angels." 

Paul  realized  all  this  himself,  and  said,  "  We  are  men  of  like  passions  with  yourselves.'' 
In  the  daily  conflict,  the  soul  that  is  nourished  up  and  made  strong  in  Christ  can  "  endure 
as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible." 

II.  Made  strong  to  enjot.  Full  of  deep  and  quiet  joy.  It  is  a  poor  strength  that 
can  merely  show  self-denial !  There  must  be  self-exercise — the  ability  to  show  that  lift 
in  God  leads  to  a  ministry  of  service  that  shall  be  full  of  heart  and  hope. 

timothy.  • 


82  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  it.  1— 1& 

III.  Made  strong  to  testify.  "Nourished  up  in  the  words  of  faith,"  «o  **  not 
merely  to  expound  them  or  to  give  elaborate  exegesis  of  doctrine,  hut  to  live  out  the 
heavenly  truths.  Timothy  was  to  attain  unto  this,  and  to  let  no  man  despise  his  youth, 
because  age  alone  is  not  wisdom,  and  Paul  speaks  of  him  as  having  "attained." — W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  8. — Religious  recompense.  "Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having 
promise  of  the  life  that  now  is."  It  is  a  fair  charge  against  medievalism,  that  it  left 
out  of  sight  the  Christianization  of  this  present  life,  and  became  only  another-worldism. 
The  host  carried  to  the  dying  was  everything;  the  elevation  of  the  earthly  life  was 
nothing.  Marshes  might  remain  undrained,  habitations  unimproved,  knowledge  be 
imprisoned,  science  be  garotted,  and  this  earth  neglected,  provided  the  people  became 
true  sons  of  the  Church  and  possessed  the  priestly  passports  to  eternity  I  The  religious 
nature  (and  there  is  that  in  every  man)  was  perverted.  Man  became  the  subject-power 
of  those  who,  in  the  name  of  God,  darkened  the  moral  sense,  and  degraded  human 
nature  under  the  pretence  of  saving  it.  The  gospel  has  always  had  the  promise  of  the 
life  that  now  is ;  it  saves  men  from  selfishness  and  sin,  as  well  as  from  Gehenna. 

I.  The  life  that  mow  is  was  created  bt  God.  Human  life  and  human  history 
are  not  accidents.  God  created  us,  and  not  we  ourselves.  Better  to  be  born  and  to  die 
in  the  same  hour,  than  to  live  on  through  weary  years,  if  human  life  has  not  a  heavenly 
purpose  in  it.  God  thought  out  this  world.  God  designed  us  to  use  it ;  and  when  we 
mourn  over  sin  and  ignorance  and  darkness,  we  rejoice  that  Christ  came  to  put  away 
sin,  and  to  bring  in  an  everlasting  righteousness.  Nature  is  ours,  with  all  her  mountains 
and  seas,  her  pastures  and  flocks,  the  silvery  thread  of  her  rivers,  and  the  Gothic  arches 
of  her  forests,  richly  to  enjoy.  Christ  came  to  claim  humanity,  to  redeem  humanity. 
The  broken  harp  he  will  restring  and  set  to  divinest  music.  We  will  not  put  sepia 
into  all  the  pictures  of  earth's  to-morrow;  for  "  the  crooked  shall  be  made  straight,  and 
the  rough  places  plain :  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  see  it 
together." 

II.  The  life  that  now  is  is  to  be  moulded  by  gospel  influences.  We  read 
that  Paul  "  persuaded  and  turned  away  much  people."  If  the  gospel  has  the  promise,  we 
must  help  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  When  we  see  wrongs,  we  must  try  to 
remedy  them.  When  God  gives  us  the  remedy,  we  must  take  care  to  point  to  the  great 
Physician  alone.  We  need  not  be  afraid.  The  gospel  is  unique ;  it  stands  alone.  It 
has  done  more  for  this  sin-stricken  world  than  any  words  of  man  can  tell.  And  Christ 
still  lives  on,  and  his  Spirit  is  one  of  restraint  in  men,  even  when  it  is  not  a  salva- 
tion. If  caricature  could  have  crushed  Christianity,  it  would  have  been  silenced  long 
ago.  The  life  that  now  is  was  moulded  by  the  gospel,  so  that  men  who  were  once 
darkness  had  light  in  the  Lord.  Humanity  breathed  again;  slavery  felt  its  grasp 
grow  weaker;  polygamy  became  a  cruelty  and  a  shame;  and  as  we  look  at  its  beneficent 
progress,  and  see  orphanages  and  homes  and  refuges  rising  up  on  every  hand,  we  have 
abundant  evidence  that  the  gospel  is  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is.  Suicide,  that  had 
been  the  euthanasia  of  Borne,  ceased.  Men  who  had  lost  their  love  of  life  in  the  satiety 
of  its  pleasures,  and  to  whom  death  was  a  relief  from  its  ennui,  gave  place  to  a  race  who 
found  new  hope  and  new  joy  in  the  pursuit  and  pleasures  of  the  life  that  now  is,  under 
the  lordship  of  Christ.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  8. — The  great  beyond.  "And  of  that  which  is  to  come."  It  Is  not  too 
much  to  say  that  the  gospel  alone,  in  this  age,  is  the  witness  to  immortality — a  witness 
preserved  in  three  aspects :  it  is  taught  by  Christ's  words ;  illustrated  in  Christ's  life ; 
and  attested  by  Christ's  resurrection.  Outside  the  gospel  we  have  materialism,  which 
denies  it;  agnosticism,  which  Bays  it  does  not  know  about  it;  and  the  modern  school 
who  use  the  word  "  immortality,"  but  mean  immortality  of  influence,  or  a  life  which  has 
on  earth  its  permanent  pervasive  power  after  we  are  gone :  just  as  the  oak  is  immortal 
which  sends  on,  from  acorn  to  acorn,  its  being.  Before  Christ  came :  1.  Immortality 
had  its  place  as  an  instinct.  The  philosophers  admitted  that.  2.  It  had  its  place  as 
an  imagination.  The  poets  made  dreams  out  of  it.  3.  It  had  its  place  as  an  ancient 
revelation.  The  Hebrews  had  knowledge  of  it.  But  secularism,  in  the  fashionable 
school  of  Sadducees,  had  darkened  it.  Christ  came  to  bring  life  and  immortality  to  light 
by  the  gospeL    It  is  this  light  in  which  the  gospel  is  bathed;  the  perspective  behind 


oh.  nr.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  88 

all  its  picture-teachings ;  the  consolation  of  apostles,  confessors,  and  martyrs.  But  Paul 
links  it  with  the  life  that  now  is,  because  he  would  not  let  the  doctrine  of  immortality 
become  basely  used,  as  it  was  in  Persia.  There  slavery  and  wrong  were  unredressed. 
Persia  said  to  the  oppressed,  the  poor,  the  serf,  the  miserable,  "  Never  mind,  Ormuzd  will 
make  it  right  hereafter ! "  Not  so  says  Paul.  Religion  has  its  rectitudes  and  its  rewards 
here  as  well.  The  gospel  has  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is 
to  come. 

I.  Then  life  is  continuous  ;  there  is  no  break.  Death  is  not  a  dividing  power. 
It  is  a  dark  arch  through  which  the  river  flows.  If  a  pure  river,  then  he  which  is  holy 
shall  be  holy  still.  If  a  foetid  river,  then  he  which  is  filthy  shall  be  filthy  still.  This 
is  life  eternal— to  know  Christ ;  and,  having  him,  we  have  glory  and  immortality.  The 
insect  does  not  die  when  it  changes  its  garment  from  the  grub  to  the  winged  being,  when 
it  exchanges  earth  for  air.  Nor  do  we  die.  We  are  unclothed  that  we  may  be  clothed 
upon  with  our  house  which  is  from  heaven.  The  body  sheds  itself  often.  At  seventy 
we  have  had  ten  bodies ;  but  the  mind,  the  heart,  the  conscience,  the  memory,  have  a 
consciously  unbroken  continuity.  We  never  shed  them  I  The  road  is  seen  to-day  from 
the  child's  first  step ;  the  river  flows  through  town  and  city,  but  it  is  the  same  river. 
We  feel  this ;  it  is  the  mystery  of  personality ;  it  is  the  symbol  of  continuity.  Through 
all  the  years  we  have  had  one  being,  and  through  the  dark  arch  of  death  it  flows  on  into 
the  life  that  is  to  come. 

II.  Then  Lira  is  a  prophecy.  There  is  no  difficulty  here.  As  the  child  is  the 
prophecy  of  the  man,  so  the  man  is  the  prophecy  of  the  immortal.  In  a  mirror,  and  that 
mirror  himself,  man  may  read  the  future  world.  His  tastes,  desires,  pursuits,  pleasures, 
all  globe  themselves  in  the  microcosm  of  his  heart.  He  need  consult  no  augurs  about 
future  destiny.  Here  are  the  mystic  pages :  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  life ; " 
its  form,  shape,  colour,  quality.  Christ  has  changed  the  nature,  and  made  it  God-liko 
and  Divine.  The  Christian  life  may  be  shady,  imperfect,  and  stained  with  evil ;  but  it 
is  a  God-like  thing ;  its  pity,  purity,  righteousness,  holiness,  are  attested.  Perfect  it, 
and  you  have  heaven.  It  were  well  for  men  to  think,  not  only  of  what  is,  but  of  what 
is  to  come.  Even  bad  men  hope  to  alter.  Men  think  a  sudden  change  at  last  may 
come ;  a  turn  of  the  helm  just  as  the  vessel  nears  the  rapids  may  cause  it  to  glide  into 
the  river  of  life.  But  life  here  is  a  prophecy.  It  is  the  earnest  of  the  inheritance  of 
reward  or  shame — the  life  that  is  to  come,  with  its  advent  hour  so  quiet,  so  sure,  so 
solemn;  coming  but  once,  but  coming  to  all.  We  thank  God  for  the  great  sky  of 
immortality  above  us,  and  for  the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  10. — Adequate  reasons.  "For  therefore  we  [both]  labour."  To  understand 
a  man's  history,  we  must  understand  his  philosophy  of  life — that  is,  his  motives  and 
his  reasons.  For  no  life  has  unity  without  this.  It  may  have  spasmodic  activities 
and  instinctive  virtues,  but  no  completeness  or  consistency.    Here  is — 

I.  The  argument  of  a  true  faith — "therefore."  A  man's  thought  does  not 
always  rule  his  life,  even  though  conscience  enforces  truth  as  a  duty.  A  man's  conscience 
does  not  always  rule  his  life.  It  is  said  that  man  is  a  will ;  and  this  is  true,  for  it  is  ever 
the  supreme  power.  Man  is  made  up  of  three  things — "  I  can,"  "  I  ought,"  "  I  will." 
Christ  had  become  the  Master  of  Paul's  life ;  therefore  he  laboured  j  because  the  gospel  was 
a  fact,  not  a  fable  (ver.  7)  spun  out  of  Jewish  brains.  Men  like  Strauss  have  tried  to 
prove  it  a  myth — something  that  grew  up  in  the  minds  of  men.  Imagine  the  Jewish 
mind  that  had  grown  more  ritual  and  legal,  developing  into  the  simplicity  of  Christianity! 
Imagine  philosophy  that  had  grown  more  and  more  proud  and  exclusive,  developing  a 
religion  for  the  common  people !  The  gospel  was  a  faithful  saying,  and  St.  Paul  did  not 
alter  and  improve  his  doctrine  and  teachings ;  he  preaches  the  same  gospel  in  his  earlier 
and  later  Epistles.  He  was  a  man  of  sober  judgment  and  of  intellectual  power,  and  no 
mere  rhapsodist.  He  says,  "It  is  worthy  of  all  acceptation" — by  the  scholar  and  the 
peasant,  the  Jew  and  the  Gentile,  the  bond  and  the  free.  The  Jew  would  find  it  ful- 
filled his  Law,  his  symbols,'  his  prophecy.  The  Gentile  would  find  it  answered  to  his 
instinct,  his  hidden  desire,  his  deepest  intuition.  "  Therefore  "  is  the  argument  of  a 
true  faith.  We  are  not  the  disciples  of  a  new  sentiment  or  a  mere  romantic  embassy ; 
for  the  new  temple  is  built,  like  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  upon  a  rock. 

IL  The  toil  of  a  true  faith.    " Therefore  we  labour,"  not  simply  "  we  teach"  nor 


84  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  iv.  1—16. 

"formulate  opinions."  That  might  be  done  with  ease,  like  philosophic  teachers,  in 
the  garden  and  the  porch.  "  We  labour ! "  A  word  involving  pain  and  tears,  as  well  as 
toil.  The  tendencies  of  the  times  are  against  us.  The  corrupt  taste  of  a  degenerate  age 
is  against  us.  The  cross  is  to  the  Jew  a  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greek  foolishness. 
We  do  not  please  men,  like  the  rhetoricians.  We  do  not  amuse  men,  like  the  sophists. 
We  labour  in  journeyings,  in  perils,  in  hunger,  in  stripes.  Think  of  St.  Paul's  outcast 
condition,  so  far  as  his  own  countrymen  were  concerned.  Think  of  his  relation  to  the 
Roman  power — suspected  of  sedition ;  and  accusations  of  his  fellow-countrymen,  the  Jews. 
At  a  time  when  Borne  swarmed  with  spies,  he  was  labouring  in  the  face  of  certain 
danger  and  death. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  10. — Apostolic  endurance.  "  We  suffer  reproach."  This  is  hard  to  bear,  even 
when  it  is  not  deserved.  All  who  have  broken  old  ties  of  Church  or  home  know 
its  power.  Men  ever  brand  with  heresy  that  which  conflicts  with  their  own  opinions. 
Against  St.  Paul  men  brought  false  charges.  We  must  not  surround  the  gospel  then 
with  the  glory  associated  with  it  now.  We  put  the  nimbus  on  the  heads  of  the  saints 
and  martyrs ;  their  enemies  crowned  them  with  shame. 

I.  There  was  the  conscious  loss  of  all  that  the  world  holds  dear.  A  good  name 
and  a  fair  fame,  how  precious  these  are  to  us  all !  But  if  we  move  daily  in  an  atmosphere 
of  suspicion  and  false  accusation,  how  full  of  misery  the  outward  lot  becomes !  It  is  a 
proof  of  how  precious  Christ  was  to  Paul,  that  he  counts  all  things  but  offal  that  he  may 
win  Christ.  Reproach  itself  became  a  source  of  joy  when  he  felt  that  it  was  endured  for 
the  Master's  cause.     "  If  ye  be  reproached  for  the  Name  of  Christ,  happy  are  ye." 

II.  It  was  a  sure  proof  of  the  reality  of  theib  religion.  "Because  I  testify  of  it 
that  the  works  thereof  are  evil,"  said  Christ, "  therefore  they  have  hated  me."  The  Master 
was  reproached  as  a  blasphemer,  a  wine-bibber,  a  seditionist,  a  friend  of  publicans  and 
sinners.  It  was  a  testimony  to  his  earnest  character  that  Paul  suffered  reproach. 
Wolves  do  not  worry  a  painted  sheep,  and  the  world  does  not  persecute  a  mere  professor. 
In  every  age  of  religious  earnestness  reproach  has  had  to  be  endured.  The  Covenanters 
of  Scotland  in  their  wilderness-worship,  when  they  spread  the  white  communion  cloth 
on  the  yet  whiter  snow ;  the  Puritans  in  their  hidden  assemblies ;  and  missionaries  like 
Carey,  satirized  by  the  reviews !  Even  now  it  is  not  an  easy  thing  to  be  a  Christian ; 
but  we  find  in  the  gospel  that  which  no  secular  inspiration  can  give — the  power  to  livo 
in  the  face  of  an  antagonistic  world. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  10. — Sustaining  motive.  "  Because  we  trust  in  the  living  God."  One  remark 
able  fact  in  the  history  of  St.  Paul  was  that  nothing  damped  his  ardour.  It  was  not, 
so  with  such  men  as  Luther,  who  seemed  to  feel  at  last  that  all  is  vain.  There  were 
no  outward  forces  to  sustain  the  life  of  the  new  Church.  Well  may  the  ancient  words 
be  used  in  contrasting  the  cause  of  Mohammed  with  that  of  the  gospel :  "  Some  trust  in 
chariots,  and  some  in  horses,  but  we  trust  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  our  God." 

I.  "  In  the  living  God."  The  tendency  of  Judaism  v\  as  to  leave  God  in  the  past ! 
The  age  of  inspiration  had  passed,  the  prophetic  roll  had  closed,  and  the  Jews  became 
scribes  and  traditionists.  They  had  a  codex  of  finished  Law,  and  gathered  up  the 
opinions  of  the  rabbis  upon  the  minutest  matters  of  ceremonial  and  duty.  Paul 
preached  a  God  who  was  then  baptizing  men  with  fire — a  Holy  Spirit  that  was  working 
in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful. 

II.  "The  living  God;"  because  the  gospel  showed  all  the  harks  of  life.  It 
embodied  Divine  power,  it  manifested  a  living  purpose.  It  had  an  echo  in  the  con- 
science and  heart  of  men.  God,  who  in  times  past  had  spoken  to  the  fathers  by  the 
prophets,  had  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  them  by  his  Son.  God  was  manifest  in 
the  flesh.  The  Spirit  had  descended  after  Christ's  ascension,  and  Pentecost  had  already 
taken  its  place  in  history. 

III.  "  The  living  God  ''  had  shown  that  he  could  take  care  of  his  servants. 
He  had  opened  ways  for  them ;  he  had  touched  the  hearts  of  men.  As  they  preached, 
the  message  had  been  accompanied  with  power  from  on  high ;  and  Paul  in  his  imprison- 
ment had  received  grace  according  to  his  day. 

IV.  "The  living  God"  who  would  continue  his  work  if  his  servants  died. 
Empires  might  fall  •  <Awnasties  might  change ;  the  ancient  Jewish  Church  might  fulfil 


on.  iv.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  86 

its  day;  but  the  living  God  had  designed  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  wherein 
righteousness  should  dwell ;  and  thus  his  apostles  trusted,  not  in  an  arm  of  flesh,  but  in 
a  living  God.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  10. — The  universal  Redeemer.  "Who  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of 
those  that  believe."  Paul  had  no  limited  atonement  to  preach,  but  that  Christ  died  for 
all,  and  was  the  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  There  was  no  court"  of  the 
Gentiles ;  for  all  alike — Jew  and  Greek — were  included  under  sin,  that  the  grace  of  God 
might  appear  to  all  men.  In  Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  bond  nor 
free ;  all  are  one  in  the  provision ;  all  need  it ;  all  must  have  it.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the 
world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."    But 

I.  He  is  the  Saviour  specially  of  them  that  believe  ;  for  unless  faith  looks  up 
and  lays  hold  on  Christ,  the  virtue  will  not  come  out  of  him,  either  of  forgiveness  or  life. 
It  matters  not  that  the  lifeboat  is  provided  for  all  in  the  sinking  ship,  unless  men  will 
leap  into  the  lifeboat.  It  matters  not  that  the  electric  cord  conveys  the  current,  unless 
men  adjust  it  to  their  wants. 

II.  And  this  salvation  is  made  manifest  in  evebt  age.  In  that  age  it  stayed 
suicide,  it  raised  hospitals,  it  emancipated  Ephcsians  and  Corinthians  from  lust,  it 
uplifted  women,  it  purified  law,  and  it  created  brotherhood  between  Samaritan,  Gentile, 
and  Jew.  In  the  early  centuries  we  see  it  at  work  in  the  varied  peoples  that  united 
in  its  worship,  whilst  the  bishops  of  the  Church  were  African,  Greek,  Eoman,  and 
Armenian.  It  saved  men  in  the  catacombs  from  despair,  and  constrained  them  to 
write  on  their  epitaphs  words  that  breathed  of  hope ;  and  it  continues  to  save.  It  enlarges 
the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  it  breaks  up  the  heptarchy  of  evil  in  the  heart,  as  province  after 
province  becomes  loyal  to  God ;  and  it  redeems  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  "  Beside  me 
there  is  no  Saviour  "  is  as  true  to-day  as  ever.  The  love  of  beauty  often  ends  in  mere 
sensuous  aistheticism.  The  seeking  afier  righteousness  often  leaves  the  upas  tree  of  the 
heart  with  its  deadly  leaves  within.  New  ideals  of  social  economy  find  man's  selfishness 
supreme  in  every  new  adjustment  of  law.  Selfishness  never  has  been  slain,  save  at  the 
cross.  But  this  gospel  saves  them  that  believe  to-day.  Men  too  often  prefer  costly 
ritual  and  formal  ceremonial ;  but  a  new  heart  means  a  new  life,  and  the  gospel  saves 
them  that  believe.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  12. — A  young  teacher.  "Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth."  Apart  from  the 
direct  reference  of  these  words  to  the  Christian  apostolate,  they  are  appropriate  to 
us  all  in  the  season  of  youth.  Spring-time  is  so  different  from  autumn !  Nature  then 
is  full  of  promise.  As  in  spring  the  buds  are  bursting,  and  the  birds  building,  and 
Nature's  flower-show  preparing,  and  her  orchestra  tuning, — still  we  pause  to  think  what 
may  come.  Locusts  may  eat  up  all  green  things ;  the  hot  sirocco  winds  may  wither 
the  verdure,  and  the  fruit  of  the  vine  may  fail.  Still  there  is  a  blessed  promise  in  early 
days.  No  sane  man  will  be  found  to  despise  youth  in  itself.  As  well  despise  the  acorn 
because  it  is  not  an  oak,  or  the  orange  blossom  because  it  has  not  fruited.  The  spirit 
of  the  text  is  this-^-Do  not  act  so  as  to  lead  men  to  despise  you. 

I.  Men  despise  mere  word-heroism.  Be  an  example  in  word;  in  conversation, 
which  means  citizensliip;  in  charity,  which  means  every  aspect  of  love  to  God  and 
man ;  in  spirit,  which  means  the  atmosphere  that  surrounds  your  life  ;  in  faith,  which 
means  vital  obedience  to  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel ;  and  in  purity,  the  absence  of  which 
was  the  curse  of  Asia  Minor  and  the  cities  of  the  East.  Nothing  gives  greater  power 
than  conduct.    "  Character,"  says  Ossili,  "is  higher  than  intellect." 

II.  Men  despise  the  trifler  and  the  idler.  If  the  word  and  the  conversation  be 
frivolous ;  as  death  and  life  are  in  the  power  of  the  tongue ;  then  the  man  who  is  the 
rattle-brain  of  society  is  not  likely  to  be  the  ornament  of  the  Church  or  the  admira- 
tion of  the  world.  Men  will,  and  ought,  to  de-pise  such.  There  may  be  a  dignified 
youth  as  well  as  a  dignified  age.  It  is  not  necessary  to  have  a  formal  and  unnatural 
decorum,  but  it  it  necessary  for  those  who  speak  on  the  high  matters  of  religion  to  shew 
that  they  live  in  that  world  of  solemn  realities  of  which  they  speak. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  14. — Spiritual  negligence.  "  Neglect  not  the  gift  that  is  In  thee."  TUa  U  a 
counsel  specially  for  Timothy  m  a  teacher ;  but  it  applies  to  us  all. 


80  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  iv.  1—16. 


L  The  gift  is  a  responsibility.  We  are  not  merely  receptive  beings.  A  lake, 
unless  the  living  waters  flow  through  it,  is  stagnant  and  dangerous.  The  world  of 
youth  and  heauty  is  a  world  of  life.  The  sun  parts  with  its  beams.  The  ocean  exhales 
its  moisture.  The  tree  yields  its  fruit.  The  air  passes  through  the  lungs.  The  river 
makes  music  of  progress  as  it  passes  to  the  sea.  Here  in  nature  there  is  no  arresting 
hand,  no  force  of  self-restraint,  no  self-hood.  Goi!  has  "  set  in  order  "  the  courses  of  the 
rivers,  and  made  a  path  for  the  light ;  and  they  obey  his  will.  Man  can  say  "  No  "  to 
God's  moral  ordinations — hot,  of  course,  without  harm  and  penalty ;  but  he  can,  and  too 
often  he  does  (1)  pervert  the  gift,  and  turn  it  to  disloyal  uses ;  and  at  other  times  (2)  he 
neglects  it — he  lays  up  the  talent  in  a  napkin.  He  turns  selfish,  and  mars  the  use  of 
his  gift  by  misuse  and  by  personal  ease  and  indulgence.  The  world  is  no  better  for  his 
birth.    The  Church  finds  him  a  selfish  epicure  at  the  banquet  of  God's  grace. 

II.  The  gift  varies.  It  is,  however,  somewhere  within  us.  There  are  forces  of 
life  hidden  in  the  soul,  gracious  gifts  of  help  and  healing ;  but  man  neglects  them. 
Sometimes  he  undervalues  them  with  a  perilous  modesty,  which  forgets  that  the  weakest 
vessel  can  hold  some  water ;  the  simplest  speech  be  eloquent  for  its  Lord ;  the  slender 
time  be  rich  with  opportunities.  God  has  not  made  a  mistake  in  our  creation.  There 
are  gifts  of  service,  gifts  of  sympathy,  gifts  of  prayer,  which,  if  envy  were  angelic, 
angels  might  envy.  Neglect  not  thy  gift.  It  will  be  required  of  thee  again.  It 
needs  not  age  to  ripen  it  and  make  it  ready.  "  Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth ;  be  thou 
an  example  of  the  believers,  in  word,  in  conversation,  in  charity,  in  spirit,  in  faith,  in 
purity."  "  Be  great  in  act  as  you  have  been  in  thought,"  says  Shakespeare.  This  is 
our  danger — neglect.  We  know  what  it  means  in  education,  which  has  its  now ;  in  the 
dwelling,  which,  however  well  furnished,  soon  becomes  unhealthy  and  unlovely  through 
disuse  and  dust ;  in  exercise,  which,  neglected,  imperils  muscle  and  blood  and  nerve. 
So  in  religion  we  are  to  be  active  and  earnest,  not  resting  on  the  couch  of  personal 
comfort,  or  merely  enjoying,  from  the  observatory  of  revelation,  the  vision  of  the 
heavenly  shores. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  15.— Mental  absorption.  "  Meditate  upon  these  things."  They  need  and  will 
bear  meditation.  Divine  truths  are  too  awful  and  august  in  their  deep  significance 
to  be  exhausted  by  superficial  notice.  They  need  to  be  focused  to  the  eye,  and  studied 
in  all  their  central  depth  and  beauty. 

I.  Fob  meditation  is  the  vert  atmosphere  of  religion.  It  requires  the  silent 
study  that  we  may  enjoy  "  the  harvest  of  a  quiet  eye,"  and  see  deeply  into  the  "  wondrous 
things"  of  the  Divine  Law.  Meditate ;  for  thus  only  will  you  understand  your  real  self, 
and  so  know  better  the  adaptation  of  the  gospel  to  your  need  and  your  sin. 

II.  Fob  ik  meditation  we  are  studying  God's  thoughts;  these  require  on  ou 
part  time  and  insight.  This  is  the  fault  of  our  age — it  does  not  meditate.  It  is 
superficially  critical ;  apt  to  fly  off  at  some  tangent  of  mental  difficulty ;  and  is  so 
impatient  with  the  key  that  it  injures  the  lock.  We  cannot  think  well  in  a  hurry,  any 
more  than  we  can  work  well  in  a  hurry.  Many  of  the  worst  human  mistakes  of 
life  we  should  avoid  if  we  meditated  more. 

"  Evil  is  wrought  by  want  of  thought, 
As  well  as  want  of  heart." 

Our  prayers  would  be  wider  in  scope  and  richer  in  feeling  if  we  meditated  more  ; 
and  our  judgment  would  not  be  so  hard  about  the  dealings  of  God  with  us  if  we 
meditated  on  "the  way  the  fathers  trod,"  and  the  Divine  revelation  of  our  need  of 
discipline.  Meditate,  and  then  the  cross  will  stand  out  in  its  august  significance ;  the 
heart  will  feel  that  it  needs  a  Saviour  as  well  as  a  Teacher ;  and  instead  of  feeling  that 
you  know  all  about  that  wondrous  mystery  of  Divine  provision,  you  will  pray  that  you, 
like  Paul,  may  "  know  the  love  of  Christ,"  which  passeth  knowledge.  "  Meditate  on 
these  things."  They  are  pluralized;  for  they  are  many.  The  gospel  facts  and  the 
gospel  doctrines  constitute  a  wide  range  of  subjects  affecting  alike  our  temporal  and 
eternal  interest. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  16. — Observation  of  others.  "That  thy  profiting  may  appear  to  tSL"  The 
Christian  teachings  are  not  like  Eleusinian  Mysteries ;'  they  are  revelations  to  be  lived 


oh.  it.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  87 

oat  in  the  broad  daylight  of  history.  A  religion  that  ends  in  meditation  makes  the 
mystic  a  religion  that  confines  itself  to  tolitudes — makes  the  ascetic,  who  shuts  himself 
out  from  the  world. 

I.  The  profiting  is  not  to  be  a  matter  op  mere  peeling  ;  or,  in  other  words, 
is  no  mere  emotionalism  that  may  coexist  with  lax  character  and  feeble  morality.  Too 
often  this  has  been  the  case,  and  the  Church  has  been  apt  to  palliate  the  sing  of 
the  fraudulent  trader  or  the  bankrupt  trustee,  if,  though  he  has  wronged  others  and 
brought  whole  families  to  beggary  and  ruin,  he  has  still  preserved  his  spiritual  emotion-, 
his  seraphic  rhapsodies  of  expression,  and  his  fervent  interest  in  missionary  agencies. 

II.  The  profiting  must  appear  in  the  character.  It  must  come  to  the  touch- 
stone of  action  and  character.  It  must  energize  the  conscience,  quicken  the  passive 
virtues  of  humility  and  submission,  and  brace  the  will  for  the  stern  obedience  of  the 
soldier  and  the  faithful  obligations  of  the  steward.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  16. — A  dual  heed.  "  Take  heed  unto  thyself,  and  unto  the  doctrine."  These 
two  God  hath  joined  together,  and  let  no  man  put  them  asunder.  Let  not  self-hood 
become  a  self-righteousness,  which  ignores  the  doctrine  that  we  need  Christ  as  our 
Strength  and  our  Saviour,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  as  our  Sanctifier.  Taking  heed  to 
ourselves  must  not  make  us  daringly  self-confident.  Some  superficial  men  think  that 
they  can  go  this  warfare  on  their  own  charges.  The  whole  armour  of  God  is  needful, 
and  not  the  mere  equipment  of  personal  judgment  and  unaided  strength.  But  taking 
heed  to  the  doctrine,  let  us  remember  that  it  is  not  a  dead  dogma,  but  that  the  Christian 
verities  are  spirit  and  life.  We  must  not  be  hearers  for  others  or  critics  of  others, 
judging  one  another,  and  measuring  our  own  virtue  by  the  shock  produced  in  us  at  the 
inconsistencies  and  failings  of  others. 

L  Taking  heed  to  ourselves  as  having  stili,  the  weak  flesh  to  deal  with. 
Knowing  what  war  there  still  is  in  our  members.  Knowing  that  this  same  gospel 
says,  "The  spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak."  Remembering  that  the 
richest  lives  have  made  shipwreck,  and  the  loftiest  monuments  been  the  first  to  be 
shattered  by  the  storm.  We  must  remember  that  the  teacher  elevated  by  honour  may 
be  the  first  to  fall. 

II.  Taking  heed  to  ourselves,  because  none  can  do  this  for  us.  We  know 
more  of  ourselves  than  any  other  can  know.  •  Our  tastes,  our  tendencies,  our  secret 
desires,  our  constitutional  weaknesses.  We  see  how  the  "needle"  trembles  in  the 
presence  of  certain  loadstones  of  evil,  and  we  must  therefore  look  within,  and  be 
watchful.    "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  16. — The  life-endurance.  u  Continue  in  them."  There  must  be  perseverance 
or  pressing  forwari  And  this  is  the  great  point.  "  Ye  did  run  well "  applies  to  many 
who  were  first  in  the  Atalanta  race.  "That  your  fruit  may  remain,"  said  Christ. 
Permanence.  This  is  beautiful.  How  many  actual  blossoms  never  come  to  fruit  at 
all  I  and  how  much  fruit  becomes  the  subject  of  blight  and  withering !  Young  life, 
like  Timothy's,  is  lovely  in  its  enthusiasm ;  but — 

I.  What  a  world  is  before  him  !  How  little  he  knows  yet  of  the  perils  of  the 
way  1  Churches  may  become  corrupt  like  Ephesus,  or  divided  like  Corinth.  Demas 
may  desert ;  Hymenasus  and  Philetus  may  make  shipwreck.  Opposition  may  increase. 
Enemies  may  multiply.  The  work  may  grow  harder ;  and  the  atmosphere  in  which 
it  is  done  grow  colder.    Continue  in  them — 

II.  Because  this  is  the  test  of  all  true  heroism.  The  vessel  with  her  freshly 
painted  hull,  her  gay  bunting,  her  trim  sails,  her  beautiful  lines,  may  float  swan-like  in 
the  harbour,  and  then  skim  the  waters  like  a  thing  of  life.  But  she  is  nobler  when,  with 
battered  sides,  and  gaping  bulwarks,  and  rent  sails,  and  dismantled  rigging,  she  reaches 
her  destined  haven.  "  Continue  in  them."  The  sword  may  not  be  so  bright  with  the 
silvery  sheen  of  newness ;  the  helmet  may  not  be  so  undinted ;  the  apparel  may  not 
be  so  unstained ;  but  the  hero  has  won  the  war,  fought  the  good  fight,  and  finished  his 
course. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  16. — Saving  others.  "  For  in  doing  this  thou  shalt  both  save  thyself,  and  them 
that  hear  thee."    Not,  of  course,  as  providing  the  salvation  or  applying  it ;  the  first  is 


88  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ob.it.1— 1«. 

done  by  the  Saviour,  the  second  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  but  in  working  out  the  salvation 
— in  making  use  of  all  Divine  means  and  instrumentalities. 

I.  Person Aii  salvation.  "Save  thyself;"  for  in  the  heaven-voyage  the  captain 
is  not  to  be  lost  while  the  company  and  the  crew  are  saved.  In  this  war  the  enemy 
is  not  to  pick  off  the  sentinels  and  the  captains  alone.  No ;  Divine  grace  is  sufficient 
for  pastor  as  well  as  for  people ;  but  it  would  be  a  terrible  thing — alas !  not  an  unknown 
thing — that  the  minister  who  has  taught  others,  himself  should  be  a  castaway.  Next 
follows — 

II.  The  salvation  of  others.  "  Them  that  hear  thee."  A  simple  word,  "  hear." 
The  pulpit  must  not  be  the  place  for  the  airing  of  personal  crotchets,  or  the  use  of  arrows 
and  shafts  of  mere  wit,  or  the  discussion  of  mere  critical  themes.  "  The  things  that  ye 
have  heard"  are  such  as  the  apostle  defines— august  and  real,  vital  and  eternal  realities. 
To  hear  may  seem  a  light  thing,  and  so  it  is  if  the  message  be  light.  But  the  true 
minister  does  not  tremble  before  his  audience,  any  more  than  Paul  did  before  Felix. 
If  the  congregation  be  his  patron,  he  may  please  them  to  secure  his  living ;  if  they  are 
his  Sanhedrim,  he  may  be  heard  before  them  in  test  of  his  judgments ;  if  they  are  his 
guests,  and  not  the  Master's,  he  may  cater  for  a  banquet  suited  to  their  tastes;  but  if  he 
is  the  minister  of  God  to  them  for  good,  if  woe  is  his  if  he  preach  not  the  gospel,  if 
he  has  the  sacred  responsibility  of  one  who  is  put  in  trust  with  the  gospel, — then  hearing 
is  a  solemn  thing.  On  that  may  hang  character,  influence,  destiny.  He  is  not  there  as 
lord  over  God's  heritage.  He  is  not  there  to  have  dominion  over  their  faith.  He  appeals 
to  reason,  to  conscience,  and  all  that  we  mean  by  heart  and  soul.  But  he  does  not 
create  a  gospel  or  propound  some  new  philosophy — he  is  to  preach  (ch.  ii.  5,  6)  "  one 
God,  and  one  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,"  and  yet  Christ 
Jesus  the  Lord ;  the  God  who  was  "  manifest  in  the  flesh,  justified  in  the  Spirit,  seen 
of  angels,  preached  unto  the  Gentiles,  believed  on  in  the  world,  received  up  into  glory  " 
(ch.  iii.  16).  "And  them  that  hear  thee."  Ours  is  a  solemn  relationship;  but  it  may 
be  a  sweet  and  sublime  one  too.  In  the  far-away  land  we  may  greet  each  other  as  victors 
im  the  same  war,  winners  of  the  same  race,  companions  on  the  same,  pilgrimage.  Saved 
with  the  ancient  swords  stored  in  the  heavenly  armoury.  Saved,  with  the  great  sea 
behind  us  and  Canaan  in  possession,  with  sweeter  grapes  than  those  of  Eshcol,  and  more 
triumphant  strains  of  victory  than  those  of  Miriam.  I  say  it  may  be  so  with  us,  and 
with  some  who  have  heard  and  whispered  the  sacred  words  to  themselves  as  on  the 
last  pillow  they  went  home  to  God.  The  very  sentence,  "  them  that  hear  thee,"  has 
in  it  all  the  pathos  of  the  past,  as  well  as  all  the  realism  of  the  present.  The  lips  that 
speak  are  only  those  of  man,  but  the  message  is  the  Word  of  him  who  "  would  have 
all  men  to  be  saved,  and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  Is  it  true  of  us, 
as  we  face  each  other,  that  we  shall  see  one  another  again — yea,  years  to  come — and 
that  these  words  may  rise  up  against  preacher,  and  hearers,  or  both?  Is  it  true  that 
waiting  angels  will  bear  back  the  message,  "This  and  that  man  [woman,  child]  was  born 
there  "  ?  The  living  Church  of  God  is  holy  ground.  Then  truly  we  need  no  meretricious 
aids  to  make  our  ministry  pleasant,  or  to  make  the  Church  harmonize  with  the  age. 
Eternity  will  reverse  many  of  the  verdicts  of  time.  Much  of  our  judgment  now  is 
touched  and  tarnished  with  the  worldly  ideal.  The  hour  is  coming  when  he  who  said, 
"  Go,  .  .  .  and  speak  in  the  temple  ...  all  the  words  of  this  life,"  will  call  us  all 
alike  into  his  presence ;  and  then  it  will  be  seen  and  known  before  God  and  the  holy 
angels  whether  we  have  both  saved  ourselves  and  them  that  heard  us. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Timothy  warned.  L  Apostasy.  "But  the  Spirit  saith  expressly, 
that  in  later  times  some  shall  fall  away  from  the  faith."  This  was  to  be  properly  an 
apostasy,  or  movement  away  from  Christ  from  within  the  Church.  Some  who  were 
professed  believers  were  to  fall  away  from  the  faith.  They  were  unworthily  to  use  their 
Christian  position,  Christian  enlightenment  and  reputation,  against  Christ.  This  was 
to  take  place  in  "  later  times,"  not  in  the  times  before  the  completion  of  the  kingdom  oi 
God,  but  simply  in  times  subsequent  to  the  time  that  then  was,  not  all  in  one  time  but, 
as  pointing  to  more  than  one  anti-Christian  development,  in  times.  This  was  explicitly 
foretold,  the  prophecy  being  traced,  not  to  the  consciousness  of  the  apostle,  but  to  the 
in  flatus  of  the  Spirit.  The  prophecy  had  already  been  made  known,  but  we  may  under- 
stand that  it  was  still  already  witnessed  iu  the  consciousness  of  the  apostle.    It  the 


oh.  IT.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  69 

mystery  of  godliness  was  operating,  there  was  also,  as  announced  in  2  Thessalonians, 
already  operating  tbe  mystery  of  iniquity. 

II.  How  tub  apostasy  WAS  to  be  BROUGHT  ABOUT.  1.  Source.  "Giving  heed 
to  seducing  spirits  and  doctrines  of  devils."  The  apostle  points  to  the  apostasy  as 
having  its  origin  from  beneath.  There  is  the  agency  of  those  who  are  the  tools 
of  the  devil.  These  are  seducing  spirits,  their  object  being  to  lead  away  from 
Christ.  And  they  are  demons,  hostile  to  souls,  who  give  rise  to  soul-destroying 
doctrines.  This  is  the  quarter  from  which  the  apostates,  are  to  draw  their  inspiration 
and  their  faith.  It  has  been  remarked  here  how  we  cannot  stand  isolated.  If  we  are 
not  influenced  by  the  Hely  Spirit,  we  must  fall  under  the  power  of  one  or  other — 
for  they  are  a  plurality,  and  do  not  agree  unless  in  their  end — of  the  deceiving  spirits. 
If  we  do  not  give  heed  to  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour— one  and  thoroughly 
consistent  as  well  as  sublime — we  must  give  heed  to  one  or  other  of  the  doctrines  of 
devils,  many  and  inconsistent.  2.  Instrumentality.  "  Through  the  hypocrisy  of  men 
that  speak  lies,  branded  in  their  own  conscience  as  with  a  hot  iron."  The  evil  spirits 
are  to  be  thought  of  as  working  in  and  through  these  heretical  teachers.  They  are 
hidden  from  our  view  and  from  the  consciousness  of  the  teachers  themselves ;  but  there 
seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  those  who  pay  no  heed  to  the  leadings  of  the  Spirit  of 
truth  lay  themselves  open  to  be  possessed,  in  an  ordinary  way,  by  one  or  other  of  the 
spirits  of  falsehood  whose  instruments  they  become.  The  heretical  teachers  are  suitably 
described  as  speakers  of  lies.  They  were  to  give  forth  as  truth  what  were  lies — what 
did  not  agree  with  the  nature  of  things,  what  did  not  agree  with  the  nature  of  God, 
with  the  facts  of  human  nature,  that  for  which  they  were  without  evidence,  and  of 
which  they  had  no  clear  conviction.  They  were  to  be  like  men  wearing  a  mask,  laying 
claim  to  superior  sanctity  and  to  show  the  way  to  sanctity,  but  only  to  conceal  their 
own  turpitude.  For  they  were  to  be  branded  in  their  own  conscience,  branded  as 
criminals  were  branded,  and  branded  where  the  marks  of  their  crimes  could  not  be 
concealed  from  themselves. 

III.   TWO  POINTS  IN  THE  HERETICAL  TEACHING  THAT  WAS  TO   BE   THE   PRECURSOR  OF 

the  apostasy.  "  Forbidding  to  marry,  and  commanding  to  abstain  from  meats." 
This  asceticism  was  already  appearing  in  Essenism.  The  honourable,  and  even  exagge- 
rated, estimate  of  marriage  which  was  characteristic  of  the  Jew,  and  of  the  Pharisee  as 
the  typical  Jew,  found  no  favour  with  the  Essene.  Marriage  was  to  him  an  abomina- 
tion. Those  Essenes,  who  lived  together  as  members  of  an  order,  and  in  whom  the 
principles  of  the  sect  were  carried  to  their  logical  consequences,  eschewed  it  altogether. 
To  secure  the  continuance  of  their  brotherhood,  they  adopted  children,  whom  they 
brought  up  in  the  doctrines  and  practices  of  the  community.  There  were  others,  how- 
ever, who  took  a  different  view.  They  accepted  marriage  as  necessary  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  race.  Yet  even  with  them  it  seems  to  have  been  regarded  only  as  an 
inevitable  eviL  They  fenced  it  off  by  stringent  rules,  demanding  a  three  years'  proba- 
tion, and  enjoining  various  purificatory  rites.  The  conception  of  marriage  as  quickening 
and  educating  the  affections,  and  thus  exalting  and  refining  human  life,  was  wholly 
foreign  to  their  minds.  Woman  was  a  mere  instrument  of  temptation  in  their  eyes, 
deceitful,  faithless,  selfish,  jealous,  misled  and  misleading  by  her  passions.  But  their 
ascetic  tendencies  did  not  stop  here.  The  Pharisee  was  very  careful  to  observe  the 
distinction  of  meats  lawful  and  unlawful,  as  laid  down  by  the  Mosaic  code,  and  even 
rendered  those  ordinances  vexatious  by  minute  definitions  of  his  own.  But  the  Essene 
went  far  beyond  him.  He  drank  no  wine,  he  did  not  touch  animal  food.  His  meal 
consisted  of  a  piece  of  bread  and  a  single  mess  of  vegetables.  Even  this  simple  tare  was 
prepared  for  him  by  special  officers  consecrated  for  the  purpose,  that  it  might  be  free 
from  all  contamination.  Kay,  so  stringent  were  the  rules  of  the  order  on  this  point, 
that,  when  an  Essene  was  excommunicated,  he  often  died  of  starvation,  being  bound 
by  oath  not  to  take  food  prepared  by  defiled  hands,  and  thus  being  reduced  to  eat  the 
very  grass  of  the  field  (Lightfoot).  In  Gnosticism,  which  came  to  its  full  development 
after  the  apostle's  day,  these  points  had  great  prominence,  being  grounded  in  the  idea 
of  matter  as  being  the  principle  of  evil.  The  same  points  come  out  very  remarkably 
in  Roman  Catholicism.  The  ordinance  of  marriage,  which  our  Lord  honoured,  is  thu- 
depreciated  in  a  decree  of  the  Council  of  Trent:  "Whosoever  shall  say  that  the  marri  .: 
state  is  to  be  preferred  to  a  state  of  virginity  or  celibacy,  and  that  it  is  not  better  an.' 


M  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  nr.  1—16. 

more  blessed  to  remain  in  virginity  or  celibacy  than  to  be  joined  in  marriage,  let  him 
be  accursed."  In  the  same  line  superior  sanctity,  or  special  merit,  is  connected  with 
abstinence  from  meats.    Thus  the  prophecy  received  striking  fulfilment. 

IV.  Refutation  of  the  second  point  in  the  heretical  teaching.  1.  Position 
to  which  it  is  opposed.  "Which  God  created  to  be  received  with  thanksgiving  by  them 
that  believe  and  know  the  truth."  God  has  created  meats,  and  he  has  created  them  for 
the  use  of  all.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  true  that  the  purpose  of  creation  is  only  fulfilled 
in  the  case  of  them  that  believe  and  know  the  truth.  They  alone  can  appreciate  the 
condition  attached  to  the  use  of  meats,  viz.  receiving  with  thanksgiving.  "  A  brutish 
man  knoweth  not ;  neither  doth  a  fool  understand  this."  But  those  that  have  expe- 
rience of  the  truth  as  believers  are  sensible  of  their  mercies,  and  give  God  thanks  for 
them.  2.  Substantiation.  (1)  Broad  principle.  "  For  every  creature  of  God  is  good, 
and  nothing  is  to  he  rejected,  if  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving."  This  is  one  broad 
principle  on  which  practice  is  to  be  based.  "  And  God  saw  everything  that  he  had 
made,  and,  behold,  it  was  very  good."  We  must  lay  hold-r*gainBt  a  false  asceticism— 
of  the  essential  goodness  of  whatever  God  has  made  for  food.  It  may  have  to  be 
refused  on  the  ground  of  health,  on  the  ground  of  moral  discipline  as  expressed  in 
1  Cor.  ix.  27,  on  the  ground  of  benefit  to  others  as  expressed  in  1  Cor.  viii.  13.  But 
apart  from  such  considerations,  to  which  only  their  due  weight  must  be  attached,  a 
creature-comfort  as  good  in  itself  has  no  unholiness  to  us,  if  the  condition  is  fulfilled, 
viz.  receiving  with  thanksgiving.  It  is  a  very  important  consideration,  which  we  must 
not  lose  sight  of  in  feeling  the  claims  of  abstinence,  that  by  our  creature-comforts  God 
is  seeking  to  make  us  glad,  and  to  attach  us  to  himself  in  thankfulness.  (2)  Elucidation 
of  the  good  creature  of  God  having  no  unholiness  to  us.  "  For  it  is  sanctified  through 
the  Word  of  God  and  prayer."  By  conversing  with  God  through  his  Word  we  rise  above 
our  own  low  ideas  and  aims,  and  get  into  the  region  of  his  thoughts  and  purposes.  We 
get  at  the  principles  which  are  to  regulate  us,  and  the  feelings  which  are  to  animate  us, 
in  our  daily  life.  We  thereby  connect  God  with  our  daily  life,  and  are  prepared  for 
sitting  down  to  the  meals  of  the  day.  But  we  are  to  connect  God  more  immediately 
with  our  meals  by  prayer.  We  are  to  ask  God,  from  whom  our  table  mercies  come,  to 
bless  us  in  the  use  of  them,  and  to  accept  our  thankfulness  for  them.  Here  is  a  very 
old  form  of  grace  before  meat :  "  Blessed  be  thou,  0  Lord,  who  hast  fed  me  from  my 
youth,  who  givest  food  to  all  flesh.  Fill  our  hearts  with  joy  and  gladness,  that,  having 
always  what  sufficeth,  we  may  abound  unto  all  good  works,  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord, 
through  whom  be  unto  thee  honour,  glory,  and  power,  for  ever  and  ever."  By  such 
reasonable  acknowledgment  of  God  before  our  food  is  it  sanctified  to  us.  We  can 
partake  of  It  as  a  holy  thing,  as  that  which  we  have  as  a  covenant  privilege.  Nothing 
is  said  about  the  first  point  in  the  heretical  teaching.  But  it  can  be  refuted  on  much 
the  same  ground.  God  has  instituted  marriage  for  our  happiness.  The  end  of  the 
institution  is  carried  out  in  the  case  of  them  that  believe  and  know  the  truth,  by  their 
thanking  Goil  for  the  happiness  which  is  thus  ministered  to  them.  The  married  life 
is  made  holy  by  being  connected  with  the  Word  of  God  and  prayer. — R.  F. 

Vers.  6 — 10. — Guidance  of  Timothy.  I.  As  to  the  tbue  faith.  I.  Positively.  "If 
thou  put  the  brethren  in  mind  of  those  things,  thou  shalt  be  a  good  minister  of  Christ 
Jesus,  nourished  in  the  words  of  the  faith,  and  of  the  good  doctrine  which  thou  hast 
followed  until  now."  The  apostle  has  been  referring  more  immediately  to  the  principles 
of  asceticism  which  were  to  have  their  development  in  subsequent  times.  That  Timothy 
should  put  the  brethren  (not  excluding  holders  of  office  like  himself)  in  mind  of  these 
things,  was  the  condition  of  his  being  a  good  minister  of  Christ  Jesus.  Whereupon 
Paul  takes  occasion  to  give  his  idea  of  "  the  good  minister,"  under  a  particular  aspect. 
He  is  one  who  makes  the  Divine  words  his  continual  nourishment.  As  there  are  foods 
which  are  nutritive  for  the  body,  so  what  is  nutritive  for  the  soul  is  what  God  says  to 
us,  especially  about  himself  and  his  feelings  toward  us.  These  Divine  words  are  words 
of  faith,  or  words  which  require  faith  for  their  apprehension.  They  are  also  words  of 
good  doctrine,  or  words  in  which  instruction  is  given.  It  is  well  that  there  are  infallible 
words  for  faith,  and  that  we  are  not  left  to  the  unreliable  guidance  of  reason.  It  is 
upon  these  that  teaching  must  be  founded,  if  it  can  be  called  good.  The  good  minister 
is  one  who  has  his  own  soul  nourished  in  words  which  he  cordially  believes,  and  in 


oh.it.  1— 16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  91 

which  he  is  well  instructed.  Paul  had  been  the  instructor  of  Timothy,  and  he  testifies 
that  his  instructions  had  hitherto  been  followed  by  him.  2.  Negatively.  "But  refuse 
profane  and  old  wives'  fables."  The  apostle,  we  may  understand,  refers  to  such  doctrines 
of  the  current  philosophy  (mystic  in  its  character)  as,  mingling  with  Christianity, 
would  form  what  was  known  as  Gnosticism.  These  doctrines,  such  as  that  of  emana- 
tions (endless  genealogies),  were  myths,  or  what  had  no  foundation  in  reality.  They  were 
pro'ane,  or  fitted  to  shock  religious  feeling.  They  were  also  anile,  or  only  fit  for 
mindless  and  credulous  old  women.  Timothy  was  to  resist  all  tendency  to  incorporate 
Eastern  mysticism  with  Christianity.  And,  when  we  consider  the  danger  th  at  arose  to 
the  Church  from  this  quarter,  we  must  recognize  the  wisdom  of  the  apostolic  advice. 

II.  As  to  the  higher  otmnastio.  "  And  exercise  thyself  unto  godliness."  There 
was  a  straining  in  connection  with  ascetical  exercises.  Timothy  was  also  to  strain 
himself,  but  in  such  exercises  as  prayer  and  meditation,  which  lead  to  godliness,  or  the 
cherishing  of  right  feelings  toward  God  and  the  practice  that  is  pleasing  to  him.  1. 
Bodily  gymnastic.  "'For  bodily  exercise  is  profitable  for  a  little."  The  apostle  appa- 
rently has  in  his  eye  such  bodily  exercise  as  was  associated  with  asceticism ;  but  it  is  as 
separated  from  asceticism,  not  as  part  of  asceticism,  that  he  says  it  is  profitable  to  a 
small  extent.  Of  asceticism  in  this  century  the  most  notable  example  is  Lacordaire. 
"  Once  in  the  convent  at  Chalais,  after  having  delivered  an  affecting  sermon  on  humility, 
he  felt  irresistibly  impelled  to  follow  Up  precept  by  example.  He  came  down  from  the 
pulpit,  begged  the  assembled  brethren  to  treat  him  with  the  severity  he  deserved,  and, 
uncovering  his  shoulders,  received  from  each  of  them  twenty-five  strokes."  "  The  chapter- 
room  of  the  convent  at  Flavigny  was  supported  by  a  wooden  pillar ;  he  made  of  it  a 
column  of  flagellation,  to  which,  after  confession,  he  would  cause  himself  to  be  bound." 
"  In  the  ancient  church  of  the  Carmelites  at  Paris,  there  is  a  certain  crypt  or  subter- 
ranean chapel,  in  which,  one  Good  Friday,  he  raised  a  cross,  and,  bound  to  it  with  cords, 
remained  upon  it  three  hours."  The  apostle  views  asceticism  in  respect  of  bodily 
exercise.  For,  although  it  may  not  always  exalt  it  into  a  religion,  yet  it  lays  great 
stress'  on  it  as  a  means  of  suppressing  the  corruption  of  the  heart,  of  entering  into 
sympathy  with  the  crucified  Saviour,  and  of  making  atonement  for  the  sins  of  men. 
The  apostle  lays  hold  upon  this,  and  says  that  it  is  profitable  to  a  small  extent.  It  is 
profitable  for  the  health  of  the  body,  for  the  improvement  of  its  powers,  for  the  obtain- 
ing of  a  living.  It  may  even  be  allowed  to  have  a  bearing,  not  by  itsel  f,  but  in  connection 
with  right  principle,  on  holy  living  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  2.  The  gymnastic  that  is  universally 
profitable.  "But  godliness  is  profitable  for  all  things."  The  apnstlo  regards  it  as 
recommended  by  its  profitableness.  "  It  is  that  which  will  exceedingly  turn  to  account, 
and  bring  in  gains  unto  us  exceedingly  vast ;  in  comparison  whereto  all  other  designs, 
which  men  with  so  much  care  and  toil  do  pursue,  are  very  unprofitable  or  detrimental, 
yielding  but  shadows  of  profit  or  bringing  real  damage  to  us.  Godliness  enables  a  man 
to  judge  of  things  in  their  true  nature  and  proportions,  and  to  fulfil  his  duties  in  all  his 
relations.  It  enables  him  to  act  uniformly,  so  that  he  understands  what  he  is  doing, 
and  can  make  himself  uuderstood.  It  enables  a  man  to  act  in  his  own  best  interest." 
"  If  we  mark  what  preserveth  the  body  sound  and  lusty,  what  keepeth  the  mind  vigorous 
and  brisk,  what  saveth  and  improveth  the  estate,  what'upholdeth  the  good  name,  what 
guardeth  and  graceth  a  man's  whole  life, — it  is  nothing  else  hut  proceeding  in  our 
demeanour  and  dealings  according  to  the  honest  and  wise  rules  of  piety."  It  fits  a  man 
for  all  conditions,  makes  him  humble,  grateful,  and  faithful  in  prosperity,  makes  a  man 
trustful,  and  full  of  comfort  in  adversity.  It  furnishes  us  with  fit  employment,  "  alone 
fasteneth  our  thoughts,  affections,  and  endeavours  upon  occupations  worthy  the  dignity 
of  our  nature,  suiting  the  excellency  of  our  natural  capacities  and  endowments,  tending 
to  the  perfection  and  advancement  of  our  reason,  to  the  enriching  and  ennobling  of  our 
souls."  It  furnishes  us  with  the  best  friendships.  It  is  said  even,  "  Thou  shalt  be  in 
league  with  the- stones  of  the  field,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  at  peace  with 
thee."  It  unites  us  to  good  men  in  holy  communion.  It  makes  our  friends  doubly 
precious  to  us.  (1)  Its  profitableness  for  this  life.  "  Having  promise  of  the  life  which 
now  is."  Godliness  has  a  tendency  to  promote  a  man's  earthly  good,  in  making  him 
industrious,  temperate,  prudent.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  respects  in  which  it 
may  be  said  to  hinder  his  earthly  good.  It  keeps  him  back  from  that  greed  which 
would  lead  him  to  devote  his  whole  time  to  worldly  business,  which  would  forbid  him 


92  IHK  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  it.  1— 1& 

to  work  for  others.  It  debars  him  from  seeking  gain  by  unworthy  means.  It  may 
call  upon  him  to  make  liberal  contributions  from  his  income  for  benevolent  objects.  It 
may  brinji  him  into  a  position  in  which  his  health  is  injured.  It  may  call  upon  him  to 
give  up  all  his  goods,  and  even  life  itself.  Yet  it  is  true  that  it  has  the  promise  of  this 
life.  "  Although  God  hath  not  promised  to  load  the  godly  man  with  affluence  of  worldly 
things ;  not  to  put  him  into  a  splendid  and  pompous  garb ;  not  to  dispense  to  bim  that 
which  may  serve  for  pampering  the  flesh  or  gratifying  wanton  fancy;  not  to  exempt 
him  from  all  the  inconveniences  to  which  human  nature  and  the  worldly  state  are  sub- 
ject ;  yet  hath  he  promised  to  furnish  him  with  whatever  is  needful  or  convenient  for 
him,  in  due  measure  and  season,  the  which  he  doth  best  understand.  His  care  will  not 
be  wanting  to  feed  us  and  clothe  us  comfortably,  to  protect  us  from  evil,  to  prosper  our 
good  undertakings."  He  has  promised  that,  if  we  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  all 
things  that  pertain  to  this  life  shall  be  added  thereto.  With  Christ,  he  has  promised 
to  give  us  all  things.  He  has  promised  that  all  things  will  work  together  for  good  to 
those  that  love  God.  It  is  the  godly  who  stand  in  a  right  relation  to  this  life.  They 
put  the  right  value  upon  it.  They  regard  all  that  they  receive  as  a  gift  from  God,  as 
what  they  are  unworthy  of,  as  what  may  be  taken  away  from  them,  as  what  they  ought 
to  be  grateful  for,  as  what  they  are  faithfully  to  use  for  God.  (2)  Its  profitableness  for 
the  life  to  come.  "And  of  that  which  is  to  come."  If  the  godly  man  has  the  true 
enjoyment  even  of  this  life,  to  him  especially  belongs  the  life  to  come  with  its  incom- 
parably greater  blessings.  He  has  the  inheritance  uncorruptible,  undefiled,  never-fading. 
He  has  an  exceeding,  even  an  eternal,  weight  of  glory.  He  has  the  beatific  vision  of 
God,  the  satisfaction  of  awaking  with  God's  likeness.  Formula  of  confirmation. 
"  Faithful  is  the  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation."  This  calls  attention  to  what 
has  gone  before  as  deserving  of  our  best  consideration. 

III.  Upbearing  hope.  "For  to  this  end  we  labour  and  strive,  because  we  have  our 
hope  set  on  the  living  God,  who  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  them  that  believe." 
With  a  view  especially  to  the  promised  life  to  come,  the  apostle  placed  himself  at  worldly 
disadvantage.  Instead  of  consulting  his  ease,  be  toiled.  Instead  of  consulting  his 
popularity,  he  suffered  reproach,  as  the  true  reading  is.  Under  this  he  was  borne  up 
by  hope,  which  was  set,  not  on  a  dead  idol  which  could  do  nothing,  but  on  the  living 
God  who  could  do  all  things  for  him.  He  who  was  able  to  fulfil  his  promise  was  also 
disposed.  He  is  designated  "  the  Saviour  of  all  men."  There  is  a  universality  in  bis 
benevolence.  He  willeth  that  all  should  be  saved.  And  what  he  has  performed  in 
Christ  has  been  for  all  men.  He  has  provided  satisfaction  for  the  sin  of  all  men.  He 
has  entered  into  a  covenant  on  behalf  of  all  men.  He  has  procured  competent  aids 
for  all  men.  He  has  thus  made  all  men  salvabiles,  capahle  of  salvation,  and  salvandos, 
that  should  be  saved,  though  all  men  are  not  in  effect  saved.  "As  he  that  freely 
offers  a  rich  boon  is  no  less  to  be  accounted  a  benefactor  and  liberal,  although  his 
gift  be  refused,  than  if  it  were  accepted ;  as  he  that  opens  a  prison  is  to  be  styled  a 
deliverer,  although  the  captive  will  not  go  forth;  as  he  that  ministers  an  effectual 
reme  ly,  although  the  patient  will  not  use  it,  deserves  the  honour  and  thanks  due  to 
a  physician ;  so  is  God,  in  respect  of  what  he  has  performed  for  men  and  offered  to 
them,  to  be  worthily  deemed  and  thankfully  acknowledged  Saviour,  although  not  all 
men,  yea,  although  not  one  man,  should  receive  the  designed  benefit."  While  this  is 
true,  he  is  the  Saviour  specially  of  them  that  believe.  He  is  our  Saviour  before  we 
believe,  but  it  is  when  we  believe  that  we  realize  in  our  personal  experience  all  that  he 
is  and  has  done  for  us.  It  is  by  hoping  in  him  as  our  Saviour,  peculiarly,  that  we  are 
borne  up  under  toils  and  reproaches. — R.  F. 

Vers.  11 — 16. — Directions  to  Timothy.  I.  Direction  founded  oh  preceding  con- 
text. "  These  things  command  and  teach."  What  was  enjoined  on  him  he  was  to 
hold  up  before  the  community  over  which  he  presided  at  Kphesns.  He  was  to  command, 
or  hold  up  before  them,  an  authoritative  standard  of  conduct.  This  was  to  be  charac- 
teristically godliness;  not  a  working  on  the  mere  human  ground,  but  a  bringing  God 
into  connection  with  the  life,  cherishing  proper  feelings  towards  him,  and  observing  his 
rules.  He  was  also  to  teach,  or  hold  up  before  them,  revealed  views  of  truth.  While 
laying  down  faith  as  the  condition  of  salvation,  he  was  not  to  forget  to  set  forth  God  as 
the  Saviour  of  all  men. 


ch.it.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  83 

II.  Direction  with  reference  to  his  youth.  "  Let  do  man  despise  thy  youth  : 
but  be  thou  an  ensample  to  them  that  believe,  in  word,  in  manner  of  life,  in  love,  in  faith, 
in  purity."  Timothy  was  a  youth,  still  living  with  his  parents,  when  Paul  first  took 
him  as  his  companion.  After  the  lapse  of  perhaps  fifteen  years,  he  is  still  regarded  aa 
a  young  man.  We  may  understand  that  he  was  still  young  for  the  work  entrusted  to 
him;  he  was  young  to  instruct,  and,  it  might  be,  to  exhort  (ch.  v.  1)  elders  (many  of 
them  old  men).  A  young  minister  is  placed  in  the  same  position  ;  he  has  to  speak  to 
men  whose  experience  goes  far  beyond  his.  He  has  in  this  respect  a  difficult  position 
to  fill,  and  it  becomes  him  to  consider  well  the  course  he  takes,  and,  if  need  be,  to  take 
counsel  of  more  experienced  men  in  the  ministry,  so  that  he  shall  have  thus  the  gravity 
of  years,  and  shall  give  none  occasion  to  despise  him  on  account  of  his  youth.  The  idea 
of  a  minister  is  that  he  is  to  be  an  ensample  to  them  that  believe,  especially  to  them 
over  whom  he  is  placed.  There  are  five  things  in  which  he  is  to  lead  the  way.  The 
first  two  go  together.  There  is  the  external  life  of  word.  A  minister  is  to  have  the 
right  tone  in  his  private  utterances  (what  seem  principally  to  be  referred  to  as  public 
utterances  are  introduced  in  the  next  verse) ;  he  is  to  be  able  to  direct  the  minds  of 
others  away  from-  trifles  to  important  matters.  There  is  also  the  external  life  of  deed. 
His  actions  are  to  go  along  with  his  words ;  he  is  to  give  direction  by  the  very  way  in 
which  he  acts.  Word  and  deed  reveal  the  inner  life,  the  motive  forces  of  which  are 
next  expressed.  There  is  the  motive  force  of  love.  He  is  impelled  by  love  for  an  nnseen 
Saviour,  and  for  souls  purchased  by  him.  There  is  also  the  motive  force  of  faith.  He 
is  impelled  by  what  faith  reveals,  viz.  a  Master  to  whom  he  is  responsible,  whose 
honour  he  is  to  be  careful  of,  whose  reward  for  faithfulness  he  is  earnestly  to  covet. 
Thus  moved  in  his  inner  being,  then,  as  the  fifth  and  last  thing,  his  life  is  characterized 
by  purity.  He  does  not  receive  the  contamination  of  the  world,  but  a  pervading  holy 
influence  from  a  source  above  the  world.  The  young  minister  who  seeks  to  go  before 
his  people  in  these  five  things  is  taking  the  right  plan  of  placing  himself  above  being 
despised  for  his  youth. 

III.  Direction  as  to  his  use  of  the  Scriptures.  "Till  I  come,  give  heed  to 
reading,  to  exhortation,  to  teaching."  Timothy  was  not  so  much  a  resident  minister 
as  Paul's  assistant,  which  involved  his  moving  from  place  to  place.  The  special 
arrangement  by  which  he  presided  over  the  central  Church  of  Ephesus  was  to  continue 
in  force  until  Paul's  arrival,  which  was  expected  at  no  distant  date.  Meantime  he  was 
to  give  his  attention  to  his  public  duties.  There  was  first  of  all  the  reading  of  the 
Scriptures.  This  was  carried  down  from  the  Jewish  synagogue,-,  in  which  the  Old 
Testament  Scriptures  were  regularly  read.  And  the  Christian  Church,  in  the  lifetime 
of  the  apostles,  being  under  infallible  guidance,  we  can  understand  that  parts  of  the 
New  Testament  would  gradually  be  introduced  into  the  Christian  sanctuary.  This 
public  reading  of  the  Scriptures  served  a  purpose  then  beyond  what  it  does  now.  There 
were  very  few  copies  of  the  sacred  Books  to  be  obtained  then.  Members  of  Churches 
were,  therefore,  to  a  great  extent,  dependent  for  their  Bible  knowledge  on  what  was 
publicly  read.  Meetings  would  require  to  be  frequent,  and  a  large  place  in  these  meet- 
ings would  require  to  be  given  to  mere  readinj,  in  order  that  the  people  might  become 
familiar  with  the  exact  language  of  Scripture.  With  reading  was  associated  exhortation 
and  teaching.  We  are  to  understand  this  as  being  on  the  basis  of  what  was  read. 
"  Scripture  is  the  fountain  of  all  wisdom,  from  which  pastors  ought  to  draw  whatever 
l  hey  bring  before  their  flock"  (Calvin).  There  was  exhortation  to  duty,  or  an  appeal  to 
the  feelings,  conscience,  to  influence  men  to  be  decided  for  Christ,  and  to  keep  closely 
by  the  Law  of  Christ.  And  there  was  teaching  of  truth,  or  the  opening  up  of  Scripture 
in  its  facts  and  principles,  to  show  especially  what  Christ  was  and  had  effected  for  them. 
It  was  possible  to  combine  the  hortatory  and  instructive,  though  at  one  time  attention 
would  be  directed  more  to  appeals,  at  another  time  more  to  explanations. 

IV.  Direction  as  to  the  use  of  his  gift.  "  Neglect  not  the  gift  that  is  in  thee, 
which  was  given  thee  by  prophecy,  with  the  laying-on  of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery." 
There  is  reference  to  his  ordination1,  which  probably  took  place  years  before  he  was 
assigned  his  present  work  in  Ephesus.  At  that  interesting  time  the  ministerial  gift, 
or  the  power  of  governing  and  the  power  of  handling  the  Word,  was  imparted  to  him. 
Not  that  he  was  altogether  without  qualification  before;  for  there  were  prophecies  going 
before  on  him,  apparently  founded  on  the  proof  that  he  was  making  of  himself.    But 


M  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  it.  1—16. 

then,  in  all  its  authoritativeness,  and  in  the  fulness  of  the  qualification  in  a  special 
influence  of  the  Spirit,  the  gift  was  imparted  to  him.  There  were  two  coexistent  cir- 
cumstances which  entered  into  the  ordination.  The  first  was  extraordinary  in  its 
nature,  viz.  prophecy,  or  any  inspired  utterance.  Apparently  it  amounted  to  an 
intimation  to  the  assembled  congregation  that  Timothy  was  really  called,  and  there 
and  then  fully  endowed.  The  second  concomitant,  or  circumstance  entering  into  the 
ordinal  ion,  was  the  laying-on  of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery.  This  was  ordinary,  and 
therefore  continues  to  be  connected  with  ordination,  prophecy  being  represented  by  the 
ordination  prayer  and  address.  The  presbytery  then  apparently  consisted  of  the  elders 
of  the  particular  congregation  in  connection  with  which  the  ordination  took  place.  As 
we  learn  from  the  Second  Epistle,  Paul  was  associated  with  them.  It  is  to  be  noted 
that  ruling  elders  took  part  in  ordaining  a>  teaching  elder.  The  imposition  of  hands  is 
symbolic  of  the  impartation  of  a  gift.  Christ  employs  those  who  have  been  themselves 
gifted  by  him  to  be  the  medium  of  imparting  his  gift  to  others.  The  ministerial  gift 
Timothy  was  not  to  neglect  or  to  allow  to  be  unused.  We  have  read  of  fishes  inhabiting 
the  water  of  a  dark  cave  that,  never  needing  to  use  their  eyes,  eventually,  after  successive 
generations  of  them,  a  modification  has  been  produced  in  their  organism.  And  there 
not  being  the  need,  nature  has  ceased  to  make  provision  for  it,  the  strange  spectacle 
being  presented  of  an  eyeless  race.  So,  for  want  of  use,  pleading  for  Christ  would  become 
a  lost  gift  to  him. 

V.  Direction  as  to  his  applying  himself.  "Be  diligent  in  these  things;  give 
thyself  wholly  to  them ;  that  thy  progress  may  be  manifest  unto  all."  Paul  had  not 
the  idea  that  a  communication  of  the  Holy  Spirit  superseded  application.  After  saying 
that  the  gift  in  Timothy  was  not  to  lie  unused,  he  now  says  that  he  was  to  be  diligent 
in  these  things,  viz.  in  the  duties  of  his  calling,  as  set  down  in  the  thirteenth  verse. 
And,  in  the  way  of  strengthening  this,  he  adds  that  he  was  to  give  himself  wholly  to 
them.  A  minister  has  to  make  himself  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  meaning  of 
Scripture,  in  order  that  he  may  open  it  to  others.  He  has  to  know  how  to  apply 
Scripture  truth  to  the  wants  of  his  people,  that  he  may  incite  them  to  right  action. 
This  he  cannot  well  do  along  with  the  demands  of  a  secular  business.  He  needs  to 
have  his  whole  time  to  devote  to  it,  and  he  needs,  in  the  time  that  he  has,  to  put  out 
to  purpose  his  whole  strength.  Close  application  will  soon  tell.  His  profiting  will 
appear  in  a  more  skilful  handling  of  the  Word,  in  a  more  earnest  pleading  with  souls. 

VI.  Recapitulation  with  enforcement.  "Take  heed  to  thyself,  and  to  thy 
teaching.  Continue  in  these  things;  for  in  doing  this  thoushalt  save  both  thyself  and 
them  that  hear  thee."  He  first  recapitulates  what  was  said  in  ver.  12.  "Take  heed  to 
thyself."  A  minister  is  to  take  heed  to  himself,  that  he  is  really  a  subject  of  saving 
grace,  that  he  is  making  satisfactory  increase  in  grace,  that  his  conduct  does  not  run 
counter  to  his  teaching.  He  next  recapitulates  what  is  said  in  ver.  13.  "  And  to  thy 
teaching."  A  minister  is  to  see  that  he  makes  every  endeavour  to  bring  out  the  mean- 
ing of  the  Word  of  God,  and  to  bring  it  to  bear  upon  the  wants  of  his  hearers.  Having 
thus  recapitulated,  he  makes  it  stronger  by  adding,  "  Continue  in  these  things,"  viz. 
in  his  private  and  public  exercises.  And  a  minister  is  encouraged  to  do  this  by  the 
consideration  that,  in  doing  this,  he  shall  save  the  souls  of  them  that  hear  him.  He 
shall  reach  his  end ;  and  what  a  felicity  to  be  the  means,  under  God,  of  saving  souls ! 
He  can  only  expect  to  do  this  by  exacting  from  himself  a  high  standard  of  living  and 
of  preaching.  And,  through  this,  he  shall  reach  the  end  of  his  own  salvation.  He  has 
to  win  or  lose,  as  well  as  his  hearers.  "  And  many  shall  say  at  that  day,  Lord,  have  we 
not  prophesied  in  thy  Name  ?  "  who  shall  be  answered  with, "  I  never  knew  you ;  depart 
from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity."  He  has  the  same  evil  heart  to  contend  with.  "  Sin 
dwelleth  in  us  when  we  have  preached  never  so  much  against  it ;  one  degree  prepareth 
the  heart  for  another,  and  one  sin  inclineth  the  mind  to  more."  He  may  expect  to  be 
more  severely  tempted  than  others,  as  the  honour  of  Christ  lies  more  on  him  than  on 
others.— B.  V. 


OH.  T.  1—26.] 


THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


95 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  ▼. 


Ver.  1. — Exhort  for  intreat,  A.V. ;  and 
omitted.  Rebuke  not  (^  ^iriir\^Jj;») ;  only 
here  in  the  New  Testament  for  the  more 
usual  iwiTi/ida  (2  Tim.  iv.  2,  and  fre- 
quently in  the  Gospels)  or  *\iyx<*,  as  Titus 
i.  13;  ii.  15;  Bev.  iii.  19,  and  elsewhere. 
In  classical  Greek  it  expresses  a  sharp  casti- 
gation  witli  words.  Compare  the  "patruss 
verbera  linguae  "  (Hor., '  Od.,'  iii.  xii.  3).  It 
answers  to  the  Latin  objurgo.  An  elder 
(Kpeo&vrtpip).  The  context  shows  that  the 
meaning  ig  not  a  "  presbyter,"  but  "  an  old 
•man."  The  precept  has  relation  to  Timothy's 
youth  (oh.  iv.  12).  See  the  same  order  in 
respect  to  the  persons  to  be  admonished 
(TituB  ii.  1 — 6,  where,  however,  we  have  the 
forms  vpeirfivTat  and  TrpeafHridas  with  vias 
and  vearipous).  The  direction  is  an  instance 
of  that  admirable  propriety  of  conduct, 
based  upon  a  true  charity,  which  vital 
Christianity  produces.  A  true  Christian 
never  forgets  what  is  due  to  others,  never 
"  behaves  himself  unseemly."  Exhort  (irapa- 
«a\ei);  certainly  a  much  better  rendering 
than  intreat  in  the  A.V.  The  younger  men. 
This  and  the  other  accusatives  in  this  and 
the  following  verse  are  governed  by  irapa- 
icd\ei ;  the  prohibitive  fi)i  4imr\4i!tys  is  con- 
fined to  the  irpea&wepoi.  As  brethren.  This 
phrase  shows  that  Timothy  was  still  a  young 
man  himself.  Observe,  too,  how  even  in 
reproving  the  sense  of  love  is  to  be  main- 
tained. The  members  of  the  Church  over 
which  he  rules  are  either  fathers  and 
mothers,  or  brothers  and  sisters,  or,  it  may 
be  added,  as  his  own  children,  to  the  faithful 
pastor. 

Ver.  2. — In  for  with,  A.V.  Purity(&7«f»); 
see  oh.  iv.  12,  note.  See  how  jealously  the 
apostle  guards  against  any  possibility  of 
abuse  of  the  familiar  intercourse  of  a  clergy- 
man with  the  women  of  his  flock.  They  are 
his  sisters,  and  hyvelx  is  to  be  the  constant 
condition  of  his  heart  and  character. 

Ver.  3. — Honour  (rlpa).  The  use  of  the 
verb  ri/xda  in  the  comment  on  the  fourth 
commandment  in  Matt.  xv.  4 — 6,  where  the 
withholding  of  the  honour  due  consists  in 
saying,  "  It  is  corban,  by  whatsoever  thou 
mightest  be  profited  by  me,"  and  so  with- 
holding the  honour  due,  shows  clearly  that 
in  the  notion  of  honouring  is  included  that 
material  support  which  their  condition  as 
widows  required.  So  again  in  ver.  17  of  this 
chapter,  the  "  double  honour  "  due  to  elders 
who  labour  in  the  Word  and  doctrine  is 
dearly  shown  by  ver.  18  to  include  payment 
for  their  maintenance.  This  is  also  borne 
out  by  the  frequent  use  of  ri/rij  in  the  sense 


of  "  price  "  (Matt.  xxriL  8, »;  Aots  hr.  84 ; 
vii.  16;,xix.  19;  1  Cor.  vi.  20,  etc.).  The 
passage  might,  therefore,  be  paraphrased, 
"Pay  due  regard  to  the  wants  of  those 
widows  who  are  widows  indeed."  The 
"  honour"  here  prescribed  would  be  exactly 
the  opposite  to  the  "neglect"  (irape8ew- 
povtTo)  complained  of  by  the  Grecian  Jews 
(Aots  vi.  1).  The  same  idea  is  in  the  Latin 
honorarium,  foi  a  fee.  Widows  indeed;  i.e. 
really,  as  in  vers.  6  and  16,  desolate  and 
alone.  We  learn  from  this  passage  that  the 
care  of  widows  by  the  whole  Church,  which 
began  at  Jerusalem  in  the  very  infancy  of 
the  Churoh,  was  continued  in  the  Churches 
planted  by  St.  Paul.  We  find  the  same  in- 
stitution though  somewhat  different  in 
character,  in  subsequent  ages  of  the  Church. 
Widowhood,  as  well  as  virginity,  became  a 
religious  profession,  and  widows  were  ad- 
mitted with  certain  ceremonies,  including 
the  placing  on  their  heads  a  veil  consecrated 
by  the  bishop.  Deaconesses  were  very  fre- 
quently chosen  from  the  ranks  of  the  widows 
(Bingham, '  Antiq.,'  bk.  vii.  ch.  iv.). 

Ver.  4. — Bath  for  have,  A.V. ;  grand- 
children for  nephews,  A.V. ;  towards  their 
own  family  for  at  home,  A.V. ;  this  lor  that, 
A.  V. ;  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  for  good  and 
acceptable  before,  A.V.  and  T-B.  Grand- 
children 0icyomi  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  but  common  in  the  LXX.  and  in 
classical  Greek);  descendants,  children  or 
grandchildren  (as  on  the  other  hand,  irp6yovoi 
in  this  verse  includes  grandparents  as  well 
as  parents).  In  Latin  nepotes,  "  descend- 
ants ; "  noe  neveux  (in  French),  "  our  de- 
scendants ; "  and  so  the  English  word 
"  nephews  "  (derived  from  nepos,  through 
the  French  neveu)  properly  means,  and  is oom- 
monly  so  used  in  all  old  English  writers,  as 
e.g.  in  Holinshed  (Bichardson's  Dictionary), 
"  their  nephews,  or  sons'  sons,  which  reigned 
in  the  third  place."  Locke's  phrase,  "a 
nephew  by  a  brother,"  seems  to  show  the 
transition  to  the  modern  use  of  "  nephew." 
But  as  the  old  meaning  of  "  nephews  "  is 
now  obsolete,  it  is  better  to  substitute 
"  grandchildren,"  as  in  the  B.V.  let  them 
learn.  Clearly  "the  children  or  grandchil- 
dren" is  the  subject.  To  show  piety  towards 
(eh<re&t?i>).  In  the  only  other  passage  in 
the  New  Testament  where  this  word  occurs, 
Acts  xvii.  23,  it  has  also  an  accusative  of 
the  person — "whom  ye  worship."  In  classical 
Greek  also  tbo-efieiv  too  is  used  as  well  as 
els,  or  irep),  or  irpbs,  tivo.  Their  own  family, 
of  which  the  widowed  mothar  or  grand- 
mother formed  a  part.  The  force  of  rbv 
IBiov  olxov,  "  their  own  family,"  lies  in  the 
implied  contrast  with  the  Churoh.    As  long 


96 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  v.  1—25 


as  a  widow  has  members  of  her  own  house 
who  are  able  to  support  her,  the  Church 
ought  not  to  be  burdened  (see  ver.  16).  To 
requite  (ctpoijBcts  cmoSlSovat) ;  literally,  to 
give  back  the  return  or  exchange  due.  'A/ioi0ii 
is  only  found  here  in  the  New  Testament, 
but  is  not  uncommon  in  the  LXX.,  and  is 
much  used  in  the  best  classical  authors. 
The  irpoyavoi  had  nourished  and  cared  for 
them  in  their  childhood ;  they  must  requite 
that  care  by  honouring  and  supporting  them 
in  their  old  age.  This  is  acceptable  (a7r<!5eK- 
tov)  ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testament  or 
LXX.,  and  rarely  if  ever  in  classical  Greek. 
The  same  idea  is  expressed  in  ch.  i.  15,  by 
■niaiis  a-rroSoxos  Sfios,  and  in  1  Pet.  ii.  19, 
20,  by  x<fy»s.  ToBto  x<W  *»p4  ©*¥,  "  This 
is  acceptable  with  God." 

Ver.  5. — Hath  her  hope  set  on  for  trusteth 
in,  A.V.  A  ■widow  indeed  (see  ver.  3). 
Desolate  Qi.eij.ovafi.4i/ri ;  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  rare  in  Greek  versions  of  Old 
Testament,  frequent  in  classical  Greek) ; 
literally,  left  alone,  or  made  -solitary,  which 
is  also  the  exact  meaning  of  "  desolate," 
from  solus,  alone.  A  widow  with  children 
or  grandchildren  able  to  support  her  is  not 
altogether  desolate.  As  regards  the  connect- 
ing Se,  rendered  "now"  both  in  the  A.V. 
and  the  B.V.,  BiBhop  Ellicott  rightly  renders 
it  "but."  The  apostle  is  contrasting  the 
condition  of  the  forms  x^Pa>  wno  na8  only 
God  to  look  to  for  help,  and  who  passes  her 
time  in  prayer,  with  that  of  the  widow  with 
children  and  grandchildren.  The  second 
"but"  in  ver.  6  is  no  real  objection;  the 
widow  who  "  giveth  herself  to  pleasure  "  is 
contrasted  in  her  turn  with  the  devout 
prayerful  widow  whose  conduct  has  just 
been  described.  The  inference  intended  to 
be  drawn,  as  Ellicott  justly  remarks,  is  that 
the  one  is  eminently  fit,  and  the  other 
eminently  unfit,  to  be  supported  at  the  com- 
mon charge  of  the  Church.  Hath  her  hope 
set  on  God  (see  ch.  iv.  10).  Supplications 
and  prayers  (see  oh.  ii.  1,  note).  Night  and 
day.  Perhaps  by  night  and  by  day  would 
express  the  genitive  better  (Matt.  ii.  14; 
Luke  xviii.  7),  as  indicating  time  when, 
rather  than  time  how  long.  In  Luke  ii.  37, 
Anna  the  prophetess  is  said  to  worship 
"  with  fastings  and  supplications  night  and 
day  (yixra  leoX  ritUpav)"  where  the  accusa- 
tive conveys  rather  more  the  notion  of 
vigils  prolonged  through  the  night.  As 
regards  the  order  of  the  words,  "day  and 
night,"  or  "  night  and  day,"  there  seems  to 
be  no  rule.  St.  Mark  always  has  "  night 
and  day"  (iv.  7;  v.  5);  St.  Luke  uses 
both  (ii.  37 ;  xviii.  7 ;  Acts  ix.  24 ;  xx. 
31;  xxvi.  7).  St.  Paul  always  "night 
and  day,"  as  in  this  passage  (Acts  xx.  31 ; 
1  Thess.  ii.  9;  iii.  10;  2  Thess.  iii.  8;  2 
Tim.    i.    3).    St.  John  always  "day  and 


night"  (Rev.  iv.  8;  viL  15;  xii  10;  xiv. 
11;  xx.  10). 
Ver.  6. — Oiveth  herself  to  tot  liveth  in, 

A.V.  Giveth  herself  to  pleasure  (jj  a-na.ro.- 
Koitra.);  only  here  and  Jas.  v.  5  (eo-iroTaMj- 
(Tore,  "taken  your  pleasure,"  R.V.,  "been 
wanton,"  A.V.)  in  the  New  Testament,  but 
found  (as  well  as  ormr&Kn  and  oWto\os)  in 
Ecclus.  xxi.  1 5,  and  in  Polybius  (Liddell  and 
Scott).  Trench  ('  Synonyms  of  New  Testa- 
ment,' p.  191)  compares  and  contrasts  arpn- 
vidta,  TptHpaw,  and  (TTrara\a.Qi,  and  says  that 
the  latter  includes  the  idea  of  prodigality. 
The  word  brings  into  the  strongest  possible 
contrast  the  widow  who  was  like  Anna,  and 
those  whom  St.  Paul  here  denounces.  Is 
dead  while  she  liveth;  or,  has  died  (is  dead) 
in  her  lifetime.  She  is  dead  to  God,  and,  as 
Alford  suggests,  is  no  longer  a  living  mem- 
ber of  the  Church  of  Christ.  Compare  St. 
Jude's  expression  "twice  dead"  (ver.  12). 
The  expression  in  Rev.  iii.  1  is  different, 
unless  (aaa  here  can  have  the  same  mean- 
ing as  tvopa.  i%*1  *«  fif,  "  though  nominally 
alive  as  a  Christian,"  etc. 

Ver.  7. — These  things  also  command  for 
and  these  things  give  in  charge,  A.V. ;  with- 
out reproach  for  blameless,  A.V.  These 
things,  etc.  The  apostle  had  been  giving 
Timothy  his  own  instructions  concerning 
widows  and  their  maintenance  by  their  own 
relations.  He  now  adds  the  direction  that 
he  should  give  these  things  in  charge  to  the 
Ephesian  Church,  lest  they  should  be  guilty 
and  blameworthi  oy  acting  in  a  different 
spirit.  He  prob..oiy  was  aware  of  a  disposi- 
tion existing  in  some  quarters  to  throw  the 
burden  of  maintaining  their  widows  upon 
the  Church.  Without  reproach  (ave.rixr)- 
rrrot);  above,  ch.  iii.  2,  note.  Iftheydidnot 
so  they  would  be  liable  to  the  terrible  re- 
proach mentioned  in  ver.  8,  that,  Christians 
as  they  called  themselves,  they  were  in  their 
conduct  worse  than  unbelievers. 

Ver.  8. — Provideth  for  provide,  A.V.;  hit 
own  household  for  for  those  of  his  own  house, 
A.V.  and  T.B. ;  unbeliever  for  infidel,  A.V. 
Provideth  {vpovoeT).  Elsewhere  in  the  New 
Testament  only  in  Rom.  xii.  17  and  2  Cor. 
viii.  21,  where  it  has  an  accusative  of  the 
thing  provided ;  here,  as  in  classical  Greek, 
with  a  genitive  of  the  person ;  frequent  in 
the  LXX.,  and  still  more  so  in  classical 
Greek.  The  substantive  irpoyola  occurs  in 
Aets  xxiv.  2  and  Rom.  xiii.  14.  His  own 
household ;  because  in  many  cases  the  widow 
would  be  actually  living  in  the  house  of  her 
child  or  grandchild.  But  even  if  she  were 
not,  filial  duty  would  prompt  a  proper  pro- 
vision for  her  wants  He  hath  denied  the 
faith ;  viz.  by  repudiating  those  duties  which 
the  Christian  faith  required  of  him  (see  Eph. 
vi.  1—3). 

Var.  9.— Let  mom  to  enrolled  at  m  widow 


CH.  T.  1—25.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


97 


for  let  not  a  widow  be  taken  into  the  numher, 
A.V.  Let  none  be  enrolled,  etc.  The 
proper  translation  seems  certainly  to  be 
(Ellicott,  Alford,  Hutlier,  etc.),  let  a  woman 
be  enrolled  as  a  widow  not  under  sixty  years 
old;  i.e.  xwa  is  the  predicate,  not  the  sub- 
ject. It  follows  that  the  word  "  widow " 
here  is  used  in  a  slightly  different  sense 
from  that  in  the  preceding  verses,  viz.  in 
the  technical  sense  of  one  belonging  to  the 
order  uf  widows,  of  which  it  appears  from 
the  word  KwraKfy4<r8a>  there  was  a  regular 
roll  kept  in  the  Church.  We  do  not  Snow 
enough  of  the  Church  institutions  of  the 
apostolic  age  to  enable  us  to  say  positively 
what  their  status  or  their  functions  were, 
but  doubtless  they  were  the  germ  from 
which  the  later  development  (of  which  see 
Bingham,  bk.  vii.  ch.  iv.)  took  its  rise.  We 
may  gatlier,  however,  from  the  passage  before 
us  that  their  lives  were  specially  consecrated 
to  the  service  of  God  and  the  Church ;  that 
they  were  expected  to  be  instant  and  con- 
stant in  prayer,  and  to  devote  themselves  to 
works  of  charity;  that  the  apostle  did  not 
approve  of  their  marrying  again  after  their 
having  embraced  this  life  of  widowhood,  and 
therefore  would  have  none  enrolled  under 
sixty  years  of  age ;  and  generally  that,  once 
on  the  roll,  they  would  continue  there  for 
their  life.  Enrolled  (war a\iy4a6a);  only  here 
in  the  Now  Testament  or  (in  this  sense)  in 
the  LXX. ;  but  it  is  the  regular  classical 
word  for  enrolling,  enlisting,  soldiers,  eto. 
Hence  our  word  "catalogue."  In  like 
manner,  in  the  times  of  the  Empress  Helena, 
the  virgins  of  the  Church  are  described  as 
&.vaycypap.p.tvas  iv  t$  ttjs  4KK\ri<rias  «m/6vi 
(Socr.,  i.  17),  "registered  in  the  Church's 
"register,"  or  list  of  virgins.  Under  three 
score  years  old.  A  similar  rule  was  laid  down 
in  several  early  canons,  which  forbade  the 
Teiling  of  virgins  before  the  ageof  forty.  This 
care  to  prevent  women  from  being  en  tangled 
by  vows  or  engagements  which  they  had 
not  well  considered,  or  of  which  they  did 
not  know  the  full  force,  is  in  striking  con- 
trast with  the  system  which  allows  young 
girls  to  make  irrevocable  vows.  The  par- 
ticiple yeyovvla,  "being,"  belongs  to  this 
clause  (not  as  in  the  A.V.  to  the  following 
one),  as  Alford  clearly  shows,  and  ai  the 
R.V.  also  indicates,  by  putting  having  been 
in  italics;  though  it  does  not  translate 
yeyowta  in  this  clause,  unless  possibly  the 
word  "old"  is  considered  as  representing 
yeyovula.  It  should  be,  Let  none  be  en- 
rolled as  widows,  being  under  sixty  years  of 
age.  The  wife  of  one  man;  see  above, 
oh.  iii.  2,  the  similar  phrase,  "  the  husband 
of  one  wife  "(which  likewise  stands  without 
any  participle),  and  the  note  there.  To 
whioh  may  be  added  that  it  is  hardly  con- 
ceivable that  St.  Paul  should  within  the 

J.   TIMOTHY. 


compass  of  a  few  verses  (see  ver.  14)  reooni- 
mend  the  marriage  of  young  widows,  and 
yet  make  the  fact  of  a  second  marriage  an 
absolute  bar  to  a  woman  being  enrolled 
among  the  Church  widows. 

Ver.  10.— Hath  for  have,  A.V.  (Ave  times) ; 
used  hospitality  to  for  lodged,  A.V.  Well 
reported  of  (junprvpovntiin ;  see  ch.  iii.  7  and 
note).  This  use  is  frequent  in  the  Epistle 
tp  the  Hebrews  (vii.  8  ;  xi.  2,  4,  5,  39),  also 
in  3  John  G,  12.  Good  works  (tyyots  ko\o!s). 
The  phrase  occurs  frequently  in  the  pastoral 
Epistles,  both  in  the  singular  and  in  the 
plural  (ch.  ii.  10;  iii.  1;  in  this  Terse; 
ver.  25 ;  vi.  18  j  2  Tim.  ii.  21 ;  iii.  17 ;  Titus 
i.  16 ;  ii.  7, 14 ;  iii.  1, 8, 14).  Our  Lord  had 
first  used  the  phrase, and  taught  how  "good 
works"  were  to  be  the  distinctive  marks  of 
his  disciples  (Matt.  v.  16),  as  they  were 
evidences  of  his  own  mission  (John  x.  32, 
33).  It  denotes  all  kinds  of  good  actions  m 
distinguished  from  sentiments.  Love,  e.g.  is 
not  a  good  work.  Feeding  the  hungry  and 
clothing  the  naked  and  visiting  the  sick 
are  good  works  (see  Matt.  xxv.  35,  etc.). 
Brought  up  children  (traeyorpdipTiireir) ;  only 
here  in  the  New  Testament  or  LXX.,  but 
found,  as  well  as  TtKvorpo(f>ia,  in  Aristotl  ■■. 
The  word  must  mean  "  brought  up  children 
of  her  own,"  because  tckvov  does  not  mean 
"  a  child  "  with  reference  to  its  age,  but  "  a 
child"  with  reference  to  its  parent  who 
bare  it.  The  only  apparent  exception  in 
Holy  Scripture  is  1  Thess.  ii.  7,  where 
the  nurse's  alumni  are  called  "her  own 
children,"  but  obviously  this  is  no  real 
exception.  The  classical  usage  is  the  same. 
We  must,  therefore,  understand  the  apostle 
here  to  mean  "  if  she  hath  brought  up  her 
children  well  and  careful  ly,  and  been  a  good 
mother  to  them."  The  precept  corresponds 
to  that  laid  down  for  an  iitiaKonos  in  ch.  iii. 
4.  Possibly,  as  G-rotius  suggests,  a  contrast 
may  be  intended  with  the  conduct  of  some 
heathen  mothers,  who,  if  they  were  very 
poor,  exposed  their  children.  Ussd  hospi- 
tality to  (Qwol>6xna<:v) ;  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament  or  LXX.,  but,  as  well  as 
((vnSSicos  and  £evoSoxla,  not  uncommon  in 
classical  Greek.  The  common  form  in  the 
New  Testament  is  £tyl(tu>.  (For  the  in- 
culcation of  hospitality,  see  ch.  iii.  2,  note, 
and  3  John  5.)  Washed  the  saints'  feet  (see 
John  xiii.  5—8;  and  corap.  Luke  vii  44, 
where  the  omission  to  provide  water  to 
wash  the  feet  of  a  guest  is  reprobated  as 
inhospitable).  The  saints  (Rom.  xii.  13). 
Hath  relieved  (iTf/jpittatr) ;  only  here  and 
twice  in  ver.  16  in  the  New  Testament,  and 
in  1  Mace.  viii.  26  and  xi.  35 ;  but  common 
in  classical  Greek.  The  afflioted  (to?! 
0\i$oiiemis);  used  of  any  kind  of  trouble 
or  afflictions  (flAtyu) ;  compare,  for  the  pre- 
eept,  Rom.  xiii.   15.    Diligently  followed 


98 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  t.  1—25 


[lin)ito\oi6iiat\  comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  21).  The 
idea  is  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  "  press- 
ing on  toward  the  goal,"  in  Phil.  iii.  14 
(see  also  ver.  12,  where  Siukio  is  rendered  in 
A. V.,  **  I  follow  after  ").  Good  work.  Here 
ipyif  iyaStf,  as  in  Acts  ix.  36 ;  Bom.  ii.  7, 
10;  xiii.  3;  2  Cor.  ix.  8;  Eph.  ii.  10;  and 
frequently  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  (ch.  ii. 
10V 

Ver.  11. — Younger  for  the  younger,  A.V.; 
waxed  for  begun  to  wax,  A.Y. ;  desire  to  for 
will,  A.V.  Refuse.  Note  the  wisdom  of 
Paul,  who  will  not  have  the  young  widows 
admitted  into  the  roll  of  Church  widows, 
lest,  after  the  first  grief  for  the  loss  of  their 
husbands  has  subsided,  they  should  change 
their  minds,  and  wish  to  return  to  the  world 
and  its  pleasures,  and  so  incur  the  guilt  of 
drawing  back  their  hands  from  the  plough. 
Would  that  the  Church  had  always  imitated 
this  wisdom  and  this  consideration  for  the 
young,  whether  young  priests  or  young 
monks  and  nunsl  Waxed  wanton  against 
(KaTCHTTfnji'i&raOTi).  This  word  only  occurs 
here,  but  the  simple  tnpnviAia  is  found  in 
Rev.  xviii.  7, 9,  and  is  used  by  the  Greek  poets 
of  the  new  comedy  in  the  sense  of  rpvcpav,  to 
be  luxurious  (Schleusner,  'Lex.').  Trench 
('  Synonyms  of  New  Testament '),  comparing 
this  word  with  rpvQav  and  unm  a\av,  ascribes 
to  it  the  sense  of  "  petulance  "  from  fulness, 
like  the  state  of  Jeshurun,  who  waxed  fat 
and  kicked  (Deut.  xxxii.  15)  ;  and  30  Liddell 
and  Scott  give  the  sense  of  "to  be  over- 
strong."  The  sense,  therefore,  is  that  these 
young  widows,  in  the  wantonness  and  un- 
subdued worldliness  of  their  hearts,  reject  the 
yoke  of  Christ,  and  kick  against  the  widow's 
life  of  prayer  and  supplication  day  and  night. 
And  so  they  return  to  the  world  and  its 
pleasures,  which  they  had  renounced. 

Ver.  12. — Condemnation  for  damnation, 
A.V. ;  rejected  for  cast  off,  A.V.  Condemna- 
tion j  npl/ia,  variously  translated  in  the  A.V. 
"damnation,"  "condemnation,"  and  "judg- 
ment." The  word  means  a  "judgment," 
"  decision,"  or  "  sentence,"  but  generally  an 
adverse  sentence,  a  "  condemnation."  And 
this  is  the  meaning  of  the  English  word 
"damnation,"  which  has  only  recently 
acquired  the  signification  of  "  eternal  dam- 
nation." Rejected  (jideTna-ay) ;  literally,  have 
set  aside,  or  displaced,  and  hence  disregarded, 
an  oath,  treaty,  promise,  or  the  like.  In  the 
A.V.  variously  rendered  "  reject,"  "  despise," 
"  bring  to  nothing,"  "  frustrate,"  "  dis- 
annul," "oast  off."  The  Kpifia  which  these 
widows  brought  upon  themselves  was  that, 
whereas  they  had  devoted  themselves  to  a 
life  of  prayer  and  special  service  of  the 
Church,  they  had  now  set  aside  this  their 
first  faith,  and  returned  to  the  ordinary 
pleasures  and  avocations  of  the  world. 

Ver.  18.— Aim  to  be  for  to  be,  A. V. ;  aoi»g 


lor  wandering,  A.V.  Also  seems  unnecessary, 
as  "  withal "  seems  to  represent  8/ia  irai. 
Learn  to  be  idle  (ipyal  fiavBdvovtriv).  This 
1b  a  construction  which  has  no  similar 
passage  in  Greek  to  support  it,  except  one 
very  doubtful  one  in  Plato, '  Euthudemus ' 
(vol.  iv.  p.  105,  Bekker's  edit).  But  the 
other  constructions  proposed,  viz.  to  con- 
strue tiavBdvavai,  "  they  are  inquisitive,  or, 
curious,"  as  Grotius  and  substantially  Ben- 
gel  ;  or  to  take  ■ntpupx&v-ewu  after  imydivovot, 
"they  learn  to  go  about"  (Vulgate,  De 
Wette,  etc.),  cannot  be  justified  by  examples 
either,  as  navB&veiy  has  always  either  an 
accusative  case  or  an  infinitive  mood  after  it, 
unless  it  is  used  in  quite  a  different  sense,  as 
in  the  passage  from  Herod.,  iii.  1,  quoted  by 
Alford:  &ia0€$\vfievos . . .  oft  fiavBivas, "You 
are  slandered  without  being  aware  of  it" 
In  this  difficulty  it  is  best  to  take  the  sense 
given  in  the  A.V.  and  the  B.V.,  following 
Ohrysostom,  etc,  and  of  moderns  Winer, 
Ellicott,  Alford,  etc,  which  the  general  turn 
and  balance  of  the  sentence  favours.  Going 
about  (jepicpxo'iifvai) ;  copop.  Acts  xxix.  13, 
where  there  is  the  same  idea  of  reproach  in 
the  term.  It  is  used  in  a  good  sense  in 
Heb.  xi.  37.  Tattlers  (QKvapoi) ;  only  here 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  once  only  in  the 
LXX.  (4  Maco.  v.  10),  but  common  in  classical 
Greek.  It  means  "a  trifling  silly  talker." 
The  verb  <p\vap4a  occurs  in  3  John  10.  Busy- 
bodies  (wepUpyoi)  ;-only  here  and  Aots  six. 
19  in  the  New  Testament  or  LXX.,  but 
not  uncommon  in  classical  Greek,  in  the 
sense  in  which  it  is  used  here.  The  verb 
irepiepya(ta8tu  occurs  in  2  Thess.  iii.  11  in 
the  same  sense,  "meddling  with  what  does 
not  concern  you." 

Ver.  14. — Desire  for  will,  A.V. ;  widows 
(in  italics)  for  women,  A.V. ;  rule  the  house- 
hold for  guide  the  house,  A.V. ;  for  reviling 
for  to  speak  reproachfully,  A.V.  Widows. 
As  the  whole  discourse  is  about  widows,  it  is 
better  to  supply  this  as  the  substantive 
understood  in  vzayrepas.  In  ver.  11  we  have 
yearrtpas  xhpas-  The  oZv  which  precedes  is 
a  further  proof  that  this  direction  or  com- 
mand of  the  apostle's  springs  from  what  he 
had  just  been  saying  about  the  young 
widows,  and  therefore  that  what  follows 
relates  to  them,  and  not  to  women  generally. 
In  order  to  avoid  the  scandal  mentioned  in 
ver.  11  of  the  young  widows  first  dedicating 
their  widowhood  to  Christ,  and  then  drawing 
back  and  marrying,  he  directs  that  they 
should  follow  the  natural  course  and  marry, 
in  doing  which  they  would  be  blameless. 
Bear  children  (jtKvayovtiy);  here  only  in 
the  New  Testament  or  LXX.;  but  r«tw>- 
yovia  occurs  in  ch.  ii.  15  (where  see  note). 
Rule  the  household  {piKotemorfiv ;  here  only 
in  this  sense);  act  the  part  of  olxoUnoiva, 
the    mistress  of  a  family  (Plutarch  and 


.  *.  1—25.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


K9 


OiKoSeoTroVjjt  frequent  in  the 
New  Testament,  and  kindred  words  are 
used  in  classical  Greek.  For  reviling  ( A01S0- 
l>lai  x<W)  The  adversary  (4  ivmcd/ievas), 
the  opponent  of  Christianity,  was  always 
seeking  some  occasion  to  speak  reproach- 
fully of  Christians  and  revile  them.  Any 
misconduct  on  the  part  of  Christian  widows 
would  give  him  the  occasion  he  was  looking 
for.  They  must  be  doubly  careful,  there- 
fore, lest  they  should  bring  reproach  upon 
the  Name  of  Christ  (comp.  Jas.  ii.  7; 
1  Pet.  ii.  12;  iv.  4,  14,  15).  "AotSopias 
x<fy»"  is  added  ...  to  htpopp^v  SiSoVai  to 
specify  the  manner  in  which  the  occasion 
would  be  used  "  (Ellioott).  Do  not  give  the 
adversary  a  starting-point,  from  which  he 
may  be  able  to  carry  ont  his  desire  to  revile 
the  people  of  God. 

Ver.  15. — Already  tonm  are  for  some  are 
already,  A.V.  Some.  This  is  generally 
understood  of  some  widows  who  had  already 
given  occasion  to  the  adversary  to  speak 
reproachfully,  by  turning  aside  from  the 
path  of  Christian  virtue  which  they  had 
begun  to  walk  in,  and  following  Satan  who 
had  beguiled  them  into  the  path  of  vice  and 
folly.  But  the  words  are  capable  of  another 
meaning,  equally  arising  from  the  preceding 
verse,  viz.  that  some  have  already  followed 
the  example  of  Satan,  "  the  accuser  of  the 
brethren,"  and  have  begun  to  revile  Chris- 
tianity, taking  occasion  from  the  conduct  of 
some  who  were  called  Christians.  These 
revilers  might  be  not  unbelieving  Jews  or 
heathen,  but  apostate  or  heretical  Jews 
like  those  of  whom  the  same  verb  (Im-pe- 
7rf  o-floi)  is  used  in  oh.  i.  6  and  2  Tim.  iv.  4. 
In  something  of  the  same  spirit  St.  Paul 
called  Elymas  the  sorcerer  "  a  child  of  the 
devil,"  because  he  sought  to  turn  away 
Sergius  Faulus  from  the  faith,  probably  by 
speaking  evil  of  Barnabas  and  Saul. 

Ver.  16. — Woman  for  man  or  woman,  A.V. 
and  T.B. ;  hathtot  have,  A.V. ;  her  for  them, 
A.V. ;  burdened  for  charged,  A.V.  If  any 
woman,  etc  So  the  preponderance  of  the 
best  manuscripts,  and  the  texts  of  Lachmann, 
Buttmann,  Tisehendorf,  etc.  But  the  T.B. 
is  retained  by  Alford,  Ellicott,  '  Speaker's 
Commentary,'  and  others.  If  the  B.V.  is 
right,  the  woman  only  is  mentioned  as  being 
the  person  who  has  the  management  of  the 
house.  The  precept  here  seems  to  be  an 
extension  of  that  in  ver.  4,  which  relates 
only  to  children  and  grandchildren,  and  to 
be  given,  moreover,  with  special  referenee 
to  Christian  widows  who  had  no  believing 
relations  to  care  for  them,  and  so  were  neces- 
sarily cast  upon  the  Church.  Let  her  relieve 
them  (iirapKekw,  as  in  ver.  10).  Widows 
indeed  (reus  tvras  %4\ptus,  as  in  vers.  2  and  5). 

Ver.  17. —  Thou  for  they,  A.V.;  in  teach- 
ing tat  doctrine,  A.V.   The  elders  (nptvpi- 


repot);  here  in  its  technical  sense  o( 
"presbyters,"  which  in  the  first  age  were 
the  ruling  body  in  every  Church  (see  Acts 
xiv.  23 ;  xx.  2,  4,  6,  22),  after  the  analogy 
of  the  elders  of  the  Jews.  Bale  well  (of 
na\as  irpoeo-ToiTes).  The  presbyters  or 
elders  were  the  chiefs,  rulers,  or  presidents, 
of  the  Church  (see  Rom.  xii.  8;  1  Thess. 
v.  12 ;  and  above,  ch.  iii.  4,  5).  It  seems 
that  they  did  not  necessarily  teach  and 
preach,  but  those  who  did  so,  labouring  in 
the  Word  and  teaching,  were  especially 
worthy  of  honour.  Double  honour  (see 
note  on  ver.  3)  means  simply  increased 
honour,  not  exactly  twice  as  much  as  some 
one  else,  or  with  arithmetical  exactness. 
Si  i  the  word  Sm\ovs  is  used  in  Matt,  xxiii. 
15  ;  Bev.  xviii,  6;  and  by  the  LXX.  in  Isa. 
xl.  2 ;  Jer.  xvi.  18 ;  and  elsewhere  also  in 
classical  Greek.  And  so  we  say,  "  twice  as 
good,"  "  twice  as  much,"  with  the  same  in- 
definite meaning.  The  Word  and  teaching. 
The  "  Word  "  means  generally  "  the  Word  of 
God,"  as  we  have  "  preach  the  Word," 
"bear  the  Word,"  "the  ministry  of  the 
Word,"  "  doers  of  the  Word,"  etc.  And  al- 
though there  is  no  article  before  \6ytp  here, 
yet,  considering  the  presence  of  the  preposi- 
tion iv,  and  St.  Paul's  less  careful  use  of  the 
article  in  his  later  Epistles,  this  absence  is 
not  sufficient  to  counterbalance  the  weight  of 
those  considerations  which  lead  to  the  con- 
clusion that  "labouring  in  the  Word"  re- 
fers to  the  Word  of  God.  The  alternative 
rendering  of  "  oral  discourse  "  or  "  in  speak- 
ing" seems  rather  weak.  Teaching  would 
mean  catechetical  instruction  and  similar 
explanatory  teaching.  Labour  (of  mnriaiTes) ; 
a  word  very  frequently  used  by  St.  Paul  of 
spiritual  labours  (Bom.  xvi.  6,  12 ;  1  Cor. 
xv.  10  ;  Gal.  iv.  11 ;  Col.  i.  29,  etc.). 

Ver.  18. — When  he  for  that,  A.V. ;  hire  for 
reward,  A.V.  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle,  etc. 
This  passage,  from  Deut.  xxv.,  which  is 
quoted  and  commented  upon,  in  the  same 
sense  as  here,  in  ]  Cor.  ix.  9,  shows  dis- 
tinctly that  reward  was  to  go  with  labour. 
The  ox  was  not  to  bo  hindered  from  eating 
some  portion  of  the  grain  which  he  was 
treading  out.  The  preacher  of  the  gospel 
was  to  live  of  the  gospel.  The  labourer  is 
worthy  of  his  hire  (fijios  6  ipy&rris  tov 
fiio-QavavTov).  In  Matt.  x.  10  the  words  are 
the  same  as  here,  except  that  rrjs  rptHprjs  (his 
meat)  is  substituted  for  tov  iua6ov.  But  in 
Luke  x.  7  the  words  are  identical  with 
those  here  used,  even  to  the  omission  (in  the 
B.T.)  of  the  verb  limy.  The  conclusion  is 
inevitable  that  the  writer  of  this  Epistle  was 
acquainted  with  and  quoted  from  St.  Luke's 
Gospel;  and  further,  that  he  deemed  it,  or  at 
least  the  saying  of  the  Lord  Jesus  recorded 
in  it,  to  be  of  equal  authority  with  "$ 
yptvrf,"  the  Scripture.    If  this  Epistle  wag 


100 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  t.  1—26. 


written  by  St.  Paul  after  his  first  imprison- 
ment at  Borne,  we  may  feel  tolerably  cer- 
tain that  he  was  acquainted  with  the 
Gospel  of  St  Luke,  bo  that  there  is  no 
improbability  in  his  quoting  from  it.  His 
reference  to  another  saying  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  in  Acts  xx.  35  gives  additional  prob- 
ability to  it.  The  passage  in  2  Tim.  iv.  18 
seems  also  to  be  a  direct  reference  to  the 
Lord's  Pi  ayer,  as  contained  in  the  Gospels  of 
St.  Matthew  and  St.  Luke.  St.  Paul  does 
not  directly  call  the  words  r)  ypcupij,  only 
treats  them  aa  of  equal  authority,  which,  if 
they  were  the  words  of  Christ,  of  course 
they  were. 

Ver.  19. — Except  at  the  mouth  of  for  but 
before,  A.V.  An  elder;  here  clearly  a 
presbyter,  as  the  context  proves.  Eeceive 
(iropaScxou) ;  give  ear  to,  entertain;  as  in 
Acts  xxii.  18,  "  They  will  not  receive  thy 
testimony."  At  the  mouth  of,  etc.  There 
is  a  reference  to  the  law  in  Numb.  xxxv. 
30 ;  Deut.  xix.  15,  and  elsewhere  (to  which 
our  Lord  also  refers,  John  viii.  17),  and  St. 
Paul  applies  the  principle  of  the  law  to 
Timothy's  dealings  with  presbyters  who 
might  be  accused  of  not  "ruling  well." 
He  was  not  to  encourage  delatorei,  secret 
accusers  and  defamers,  but  if  any  one  had  a 
charge  to  make  against  a  ruler,  it  was  to  be 
done  in  the  presence  of  witnesses  (tirt  with  a 
genitive).  A  doubt  arises  whether  "  the  wit- 
nesses "  here  spoken  of  were  to  be  witnesses 
able  to  support  the  accusation,  or  merely 
witnesses  in  whose  presence  the  accusation 
must  be  made.  The  juxtaposition  of  the 
legal  terms  Karnyopta  and  iirl  itapripiov 
favours  the  strict  meaning  of  /lapripav, 
witnesses  able  to  support  the  xaTriyopla. 
And,  therefore,  the  direction  to  Timothy  is, 
"  Suffer  no  man  to  accuse  a  presbyter  unless 
he  is  accompanied  by  two  or  three  witnesses 
who  are  ready  to  back  up  the  accusation." 
The  italic  the  mouth  of,  in  the  R.V.,  is  not 
necessary  or  indeed  justified.  There  is  no 
ellipsis  of  ffr6fiaTos.  'EttI  SiJo  %  rpmv 
fiapTvpuv,  "before  two  or  three  witnesses," 
is  good  classical  Greek. 

Ver.  20. — Reprove  for  rebuke,  A.V. ;  in  (he 
sight  of  for  before,  A.V. ;  the  rest  for  others, 
A.V. ;  be  in  fear  for  fear,  A.V.  Eeprove ; 
e\ty%e,  not  ^i7.>Air,',  as  in  ver.  I  (see 
Matt,  xviii.  15).  There,  the  fault  being  a 
private  one,  the  reproof  is  to  be  adminis- 
tered in  private.  But  in  the  case  of  the 
sinning  presbyter,  which  is  that  here  in- 
tended, Timothy  is  to  reprove  the  offender 
"  before  all,"  that  others  also  may  fear,  and 
maybe  deterred  by  their  fear  from  commit- 
ting a  like  offence. 

Ver.  21. — In  the  sight  of  for  before,  A.V. ; 
Chrixt  Jesus  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  A.V. 
and  T.B. ;  prejudice  for  preferring  one  before 
another,  A  V.    I  charge  thee,  eto.    It  has 


been  well  remarked  that  the  solemnity  ot 
this  charge  indicates  the  temptation  which 
there  might  be  to  Timothy  to  shrink  from 
reproving  men  of  weight  and  influence — 
"rulers"  in  the  congregation,  and  "elders" 
both  in  age  and  by  office,  young  as  he  him- 
self was  (ch.  iv.  12).  Perhaps  he  had  in 
view  some  particular  case  in  the  Ephesian 
Church.  Charge  (Staiiapripo/iai;  not  irap- 
ayyeWw.as  ch.vi.  13);  rather,  I  adjure  thee. 
The  strict  sense  of  Sta/xapripofuu  is  "I  call 
heaven  and  earth  to  witness  the  truth  of 
what  I  am  saying ; "  and  then,  by  a  very 
slight  metonymy,  "I  declare  a  thing,"  or 
"I  ask  a  thing,"  "as  in  the  presence  of 
those  witnesses  who  are  either  named  or 
understood."  Here  th  e  witnesses  are  named : 
God,  and  Christ  Jesus,  and  the  elect  angels. 
In  2  Tim.  ii.  14  it  is  "  the  Lord ; "  in  2  Tim. 
iv.  1  God  and  Jesus  Christ,  as  also  in  ch.  vi. 
13.  In  the  passages  where  the  woi-d  has 
the  force  of  "testifying"  (Luke  xvi.  18; 
Acts  ii.  40 ;  x.  42 ;  xviii.  5  ;  1  Thess.  iy.  6, 
etc.),  no  witnesses  are  named,  but  great 
solemnity  and  earnestness  are  implied.  The 
elect  angels.  This  is  the  only  passage 
where  it  is  predicated  of  the  angels  that 
they  are  elect.  But  as  there  is  repeated 
mention  in  Holy  Scripture  of  the  fallen 
angels  (Matt.  xxv.  41 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  3;  2  Pet. 
ii.  4 ;  Jude  6 ;  Rev.  xii.  7,  9),  the  obvious 
interpretation  is  that  St.  Paul,  in  this  solemn 
adjuration,  added  the  epithet  to  indicate 
more  distinctly  the  "holy  angels,"  as  they 
are  frequently  described  (Matt.  xxv.  31  ; 
Luke  ix.  26,  etc),  or  "the  angels  of  God" 
or  "of  heaven"  (Matt.  xxii.  30;  xxiv.  36; 
Luke  xii.  8,  9;  John  i.  51).  Possibly  the 
mention  of  Satan  in  ver.  15,  or  some  of  the 
rising  Gnostio  opinions  about  angels  (Col. 
ii.  18),  may  have  suggested  the  epithet. 
The  reason  for  the  unusual  addition  of  "  the 
angels"  is  more  difficult  to  adduce  with 
certainty.  But  perhaps  2  Tim.  iv.  1  gives 
us  the  clue,  where  the  apostle  shows  that 
in  appealing  to  Jesus  Christ  he  has  a  special 
eye  to  the  great  and  final  judgment.  Now, 
in  the  descriptions  of  the  last  judgment, 
the  angels  are  constantly  spoken  of  as 
accompanying  our  Lord  (Matt.  xvi.  27 ;  xxv. 
31;  Mark  viii.  48;  Luke  ix.  26;  xii.  8,  9; 
2  Thess.  i.  7,  etc.).  If  St.  Paul,  therefore, 
had  in  his  mind  the  great  judgment-day 
when  he  thus  invoked  the  names  of  God 
and  of  Christ,  he  would  very  naturally  also 
make  mention  of  the  elect  angels.  And  so 
Bishop  Bull,  quoted  in  the  'Speaker's  Com- 
mentary.' Without  prejudioe  (x--»f>'s  irpo- 
Kpiptaros) ;  here  only  in  the  New  Testament, 
and  not  found  in  the  LXX.  or  classical 
Greek,  though  the  verb  vpoicpivu  occurs  in 
both.  Although  the  English  word  "pre- 
judice" seems  at  first  sight  an  apt  rendering 
of  wpitfuim,  it  doe*  not  really  give  the  sens* 


en.  v.  1—25.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


101 


so  accurately  u  "preference."  We  com- 
monly mean  by  "prejudice"  a  judgment 
formed  prior  to  examination,  which  prevents 
our  judging  rightly  or  fairly  when  we  come 
to  the  examination,  which,  however,  is  not 
the  meaning  of  the  Latin  prmjudicium.  But 
trpottpivu  means  rather  "  to  prefer  "  a  person, 
or  thing,  to  others.  And  therefore  irpo'icpijua 
means  "  preference,"  or  "  partiality,"  or,  as 
the  A.V.  has  it,  "preferring  one  before 
another."  The  two  meanings  may  be  thus 
expressed.  "Prejudice,"  in  the  English 
use  of  the  word,  is  when  a  person  who  has 
to  judge  a  cause  upon  evidence  prejudges  it 
without  evidence,  and  so  does  not  give  its 
proper  weight  to  the  evidence.  "Prefer- 
ence "  is  when  he  gives  different  measure  to 
different  persons,  according  as  lie  is  swayed 
by  partiality,  or  interest,  or  favour.  St. 
Paul  cliargeB  Timothy  to  measure  out 
exactly  equal  justice  to  all  persons  alike. 
By  partiality  (jcara  irp6(ncAurii>).  This  also 
is  an  &ra|  Keyi/i^i/ov  as  far  as  the  New  Tes- 
tament is  concerned,  and  is  not  found  in 
the  LXX.,  but  is  found,  as  well  as  the  verb 
wpo<nc\ipu,  in  classical  Greek.  It  means 
literally  the  "inclination"  of  the  scales  to 
one  side  or  the  other,  and  hence  a  "  bias  " 
of  the  mind  to  one  party  or  the  other.  The 
balance  of  justice  in  the  hands  of  Timothy 
was  to  be  equal. 

Ver.  22. — Hastily  for  suddenly,  A.V.  Lay 
hands,  etc.  Surely  if  we  are  guided  by  St. 
Paul's  own  use  of  the  phrase,  ini9ea-is  x^'P^t 
in  the  only  two  places  in  his  writings  where 
it  occurs  (ch.  iv.  14  and  2  Tim.  i.  6),  we 
must  abide  by  the  ancient  interpretation 
of  these  words,  that  they  mean  the  laying  on 
of  hands  in  ordination.  So  also  in  Acts  vi. 
6  and  xiii.  3,  iirirlBevtu  xe'Pas  is  "  to  ordain." 
And  the  context  here  requires  the  same 
sense.  The  solemn  injunction  in  the  pre- 
ceding verse,  to  deal  impartially  in  judging 
even-  the  most  influential  elder,  naturally 
suggests  the  caution  not  to  be  hasty  in 
ordaining  any  one  to  be  an  elder.  Great 
care  and  previous  inquiry  were  necessary 
before  admitting  any  man,  whatever  might 
be  his  pretensions  or  position,  to  a  holy 
office.  A  bishop -who,  on  the  spur  of.  the 
moment,  with  improper  ha3te,  should  ordain 
one  who  afterwards  required  reproof  as 
a/iaprdvav,  sinning  (ver.  20),  would  have  a 
partnership  in  the  man's  sin,  and  in  the  evil 
consequences  that  flowed  from  it.  And  then 
it  follows,  Keep  thyself  pure ;  i.e.  clear  and 
guiltless  (2  Cor.  vii.  11),  which  he  would 
not  bt>  if  he  was  involved  in  the  sin  of  the 
guilty  elder.  Observe  that  the  stress  is 
upon  "  thyself." 

Ver.  23. — Be  no  longer  a  drinker  of  for 
drink  no  longer  A.V.  Be  ...  a  drinker  of 
water  (u5poTr6rti);  here  only  in  the  New 
Testament.    It  is  found  in  gome  codices  of 


the  LXX.  in  Dan.  i.  12,  and  also  in  classical 
Greek.  We  learn  from  hence  the  interesting 
fact  that  Timothy  was,  in  modem  parlance, 
a  total  abstainer ;  and  we  also  leam  that,  in 
St.  Paul's  judgment,  total  abstinence  was 
not  to  be  adhered  to  if  injurious  to  the 
health.  The  epithet,  "a  little,"  should  not 
be  overlooked.  Was  Luke,  the  beloved 
physician,  with  St.  Paul  when  ho  wrote  this 
prescription  (see  2  Tim.  iv.  11)  ?  It  is  also 
interesting  to  have  this  passing  allusion 
to  Timothy's  bad  health,  and  this  instance 
of  St.  Paul's  thoughtful  consideration  for 
him.  Infirmities  (ferfferefai) ;  in  the  sense  of 
sicknesses,  attacks  of  illness. 

Ver.   24. — Evident    for  open   beforehand, 
A.V. ;  unto  for  to,  A.V. ;  men  also  for  men, 
A.V.    Some  men's  sins,  etc.    St.  Paul  is 
evidently  here  recurring  to  the  topic  which 
he  had  been  dealing  with  ever  since  ver.  17, 
viz.  Timothy's  duty  as  a  bishop,  to  whom 
waB  entrusted  the  selection  of  persons  for 
the  office  of  elder,  or  presbyter,  and  also  the 
maintaining  of  discipline  among  his  clergy. 
Alford  sees  the  connection  of  the  precept 
about  drinking  a  little  wine  with  what  went 
before,  and  with  this  twenty-fourth  verse,  in 
the  supposed  circumstance  that  Timothy's 
weak  health  had  somewhat  weakened  the 
vigour  of  his  rule;   and  that  the  recom- 
mendation to  leave  off  water-drinking  was 
given  more  with  a  view  to  the  firmer  dis- 
charge of  those  duties  than  merely  for  his 
bodily  comfort.    This  may  be  so.    But  there 
is  nothing  unlike  St.  Paul's  manner  in  the 
supposition  that  he  had  done  with  the  sub- 
ject in  hand  at  the  end  of  the  twenty-second 
verse,  and  passed  on  to  the  friendly  hint 
with  regard  to  Timothy's  health,  but  then 
subjoined  the  fresh  remarks  in  vers.  24  and 
25,  which  were  an  after-thought.    Evident 
(irp<i5>jAoi) ;  only  found  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, in  Heb.   vii.   14  besides  these  two 
verses,  and  in  the  apocryphal  books  of  the 
Old  Testament.     It  is  common,  with  the 
kindred   forms,  Trpo8-n\6in,  irpoS^Xaa-ts,  etc., 
in  classical  Greek.    It  is  doubted  whether 
irpb  in  this  compound  verb  has  the  force  of 
"beforehand,"  as  in  the  A.V.,  and  not  rather 
that  of  "  before  the  eyes  of  all,"  and  there- 
fore only  intensifies  the  meaning  of  Stj\6u. 
But  the  natural  force  of  wpb  in  composition 
certainly  is  "  before  "  in  point  of  time  ;  and 
hence  in  a  compound  like  irpi$ri\os  would 
mean  "  evident  before  it  is  examined,"  which 
of  course  is  equivalent  to  "very  evident." 
St.  Paul's  meaning,  therefore,  would  be : 
Some  men's  sins  are  notorious,  requiring  no 
careful  inquisition  in  order  to  find  them  out ; 
nay,  they  of  themselves  go  before — befoie 
the  sinner  himself— unto  judgment.    But 
there  are  also  some  whose  sins  follow  after 
them.     It  is  not  till  after  close  inquiry  thai 
they  are  found  out.    They  go  up  to  the 


108 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  t.  1—26. 


judgment-seat  apparently  innocent,  but  after 
a  while  their  sine  come  trooping  up  to  their 
condemnation.  This  enforces  the  caution, 
"  Lay  hands  hastily  on  no  man." 

Ver.  25. — In  like  manner  for  likewise, 
A.V. ;  there  are  good  works  that  are  evident 
for  the  good  works  of  some  are  manifest  before- 
hand, A.V. ;  8«o7»  as  for  they  that,  A.V. 
There  are  good  works,  etc.  It  is  much  best 
to  understand  rtvuv,  as  the  A.V.  does,  and 
render  the  good  works  of  some,  answering  to 
TtvUv  at  anapThu  ot  ver.  24.  Such  as  are 
otherwise — i.e.  not  manifest  beforehand — 


oannot  be  hid.  "They  will  be  seen  and 
recognized  some  time  or  other"  (Ellicott). 
Alford  seems  to  catch  the  true  spirit  of  the 
passage  when  he  says,  "The  tendency  of 
this  verse  is  to  warn  Timothy  against  hasty 
condemnation,  as  the  former  had  done 
against  hasty  approval.  Sometimes  thou 
wilt  find  a  man's  good  character  go  before 
him,  .  .  .  but  where  this  is  not  so,  .  .  .  be 
not  rash  to  condemn ;  thou  mayest  on  ex- 
amination discover  if  there  be  any  good 
deeds  accompanying  him:  for  they  . 
cannot  be  hidden." 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Propriety.  Propriety  of  conduct  in  the  different  relations  of  life  1b  the 
application  of  true  charity  to  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  case.  Charity,  while 
in  all  cases  it  has  the  same  essence,  seeking  the  real  good  of  the  person  with  whom  it 
is  dealing,  varies  its  mode  of  application  according  to  various  circumstances.  There  is 
in  charity  always  a  consideration  of  what  is  due  to  others,  a  scrupulous  and  delicate 
appreciation  of  the  difference  of  positions,  and  consequent  differences  of  feeling,  which 
may  be  expected,  in  different  persons.  In  the  natural  family  men  do  not  treat  their 
fathers  and  their  children  in  the  same  manner.  An  upper  servant  does  not  deal  out 
the  same  measure  to  his  master  and  to  the  servants  that  are  under  him.  There  may  be 
the  same  truth  and  the  same  charity,  but  there  is  a  different  outward  expression  of  them. 
It  is  a  great  and  serious  mistake  to  think  that  impartiality  requires  an  identity  of  pro- 
ceeding in  dealing  with  different  people.  A  wise  charity  knows  how  to  discriminate, 
and  to  avoid  the  risk  of  defeating  its  own  ends  by  wounding  the  just  susceptibilities  of 
those  with  whom  it  has  to  do.  It  is  in  accordance  with  this  view  that  St.  Paul  here 
gives  directions  to  the  youthful  Timothy  how  to  exercise  his  episcopal  authority  over 
the  different  persons  subject  to  it.  The  same  sharp  rebuke  that  might  be  suitable  for 
a  young  man  would  be  out  of  place  in  the  case  of  an  old  one.  Timothy  must  not 
forget  the  respect  that  is  due  from  a  young  man  to  an  old  one,  even  while  exercising  his 
episcopal  functions.  And  so  with  regard  to  the  elderly  women  of  his  flock,  he  will 
know  how  to  treat  them  with  filial  respect ;  and  with  regard  to  the  young  women,  he 
will  know  how  to  infuse  a  brotherly  spirit  into  his  intercourse  with  them,  avoiding 
every  approach  to  any  kind  of  familiarity  inconsistent  with  that  purity  of  thought 
which  regulates  the  intercourse  between  brothers  and  sisters.  Then  will  charity  have 
her  perfect  work. 

Vers.  3 — 16. — Church  charities.  One  of  the  most  difficult  problems  to  solve  in  any 
well-ordered  human  society  is  so  to  administer  charity  to  the  indigent  as  not  to 
encourage  indigence  which  might  be  avoided — not  to  injure  the  character  by  endeavours 
to  benefit  the  body.  It  is  certain  that  the  expectation  of  being  provided  for  by  others, 
without  any  efforts  of  his  own,  has  a  tendency  to  check  those  exertions  by  which  a  man 
may  provide  for  himself.  But  it  is  no  less  certain  that  there  is  room  in  the  world  for 
the  exercise  of  a  wholesome  charity,  and  that  to  dry  up  the  streams  of  benevolence 
would  be  as  great  an  injury  to  the  givers  as  to  the  receivers.  The  result  is  that  great  care 
and  much  wisdom  are  requisite  to  regulate  the  administration  of  all  charities  on  a  large 
scale.  The  early  Church,  with  an  instinctive  wisdom,  directed  its  chief  care  to  the 
support  of  widows.  Here  the  main  cause  of  the  indigence,  at  least,  was  one  which  no 
human  forethought  could  prevent — the  death  of  the  bread-winner.  But  even  in  their 
case  many  prudent  cautions  were  interposed.  The  widow  must  have  age  of  not  less  than 
threescore  years,  as  well  as  widowhood,  to  commend  her.  She  must  be  desolate,  with- 
out any  relations  or  friends  whose  natural  duty  it  would  be  to  support  her.  She  must 
have  established  a  good  Christian  character  in  the  days  of  her  prosperity,  and  shown 
ber  love  to  Christ,  and  the  people  of  Christ,  by  works  of  mercy  and  pity.  In  like 
manner  all  public  charities  should  be  administered  so  as  to  encourage  industry  and  to 


oh.  t.  1— 26.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  103 


check  idleness;  so  as  to  countenance  virtue  and  rebuke  vice;  so  as  to  prevent  the 
unworthy  from  appropriating  the  provision  that  was  intended  for  the  worthy  and 
unfortunate.  In  a  word,  in  the  administration  of  charitable  funds,  charity  and  wisdom 
must  work  hand-in-hand. 

Vers.  17 — 25. — Duties  and  privilege*  of  the  clergy.  The  duties  of  the  clergy  are  to  rule 
and  to  labour.  The  privileges  of  the  clergy  are  honour  and  pay.  The  clergy  are  rulers ; 
not  lords  and  tyrants,  not  domineering  over  conscience  or  deeds,  but  leaders  (itpoeararts, 
here ;  rryoii^voi,  Heb.  xiii.  7),  presidents,  officers  of  the  great  Church  army,  going  before 
them  in  every  hard  service  and  difficult  duty,  regulating  their  counsels  by  wise  advice, 
leading  their  worship,  ordering  their  discipline,  taking  the  lead  in  the  management  of 
their  common  affairs.  And  the  clergy  are  labourers.  Not  drones  doing  nothing,  and 
eating  the  fruit  of  other  men's  toil,  but  labouring  in  the  Word  and  doctrine  of  Christ. 
Theirs  is  a  double  labour :  they  labour  first  to  iearn,  and  then  they  labour  to  teach 
others  what  they  have  learnt  themselves.  They  study  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  give 
the  Church  the  benefit  of  their  studies.  Nor  are  their  labours  light  or  desultory.  It  is 
the  hard  toil  (KowiSvrts)  of  mind  and  body,  the  continuous  toil  of  a  lifetime.  These  are 
their  duties.  Their  privileges  are  honour  and  pay — honour  in  proportion  to  their  labours 
for  the  Church  and  the  fruit  of  those  labours ;  honour  due  to  their  spiritual  dignity  as 
those  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  has  set  over  the  flock  of  Christ.  And  with  this  honour — 
expressed  by  the  title  of  "  reverend  "  prefixed  to  their  names — is  also  due  pay,  support 
and  maintenance  at  the  Church's  charge.  The  ox  must  not  be  muzzled  while  he  treads 
out  the  corn  for  others,  nor  must  the  labourer  be  defrauded  of  his  hire  when  his  honest 
work  is  done.  They  that  preach  the  gospel  are  to  live  of  the  gospel.  The  Churches 
which  they  serve  must  set  their  miuds  free,  as  far  as  may  be,  from  worldly  cares,  by 
providing  for  their  maintenance  while  they  give  themselves  to  the  Word  of  God  and 
prayer.  It  is  obvious  how  entirely  in  accordance  with  these  apostolic  sayings  is  the 
setting  apart  of  endowments  for  the  permanent  support  of  those  who  are  engaged  in 
the  ministry  of  the  Word,  and  the  feeding  of  the  flock  of  Christ.  The  exhortation 
to  the  bishop  to  lay  hands  hastily  on  no  man,  and  to  be  impartial  in  all  his  dealings, 
follows  naturally  from  the  consideration  of  the  duties  and  the  privileges  of  the  priesthood. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1, 2. — Directions  how  to  treat  members  of  the  Church  according  to  the  distinc- 
tions of  age  and  sex.  I.  The  conduct  op  Timothy  tow  abd  elderly  men.  "  Reprimand 
not  an  elderly  person,  but  exhort  him  as  a  brother."  The  allusion  is  not  to  an  official 
elder  of  the  Church,  but  to  any  elderly  member  of  it.  1.  Such  persons  might  possibly 
be  guilty  of  serious  shortcomings,  warranting  private  admonition,  if  not  the  exercise  of 
discipline.  Their  conduct  would  have  a  worse  effect  than  that  of  more  youthful 
offenders.  2.  Timothy  must  not  use  sharpness  or  severity  in  dealing  with  such  persons, 
because  he  must  remember  what  is  becoming  ou  account  of  his  own  youth.  He  should 
rather  use  "  entreaty  "  on  a  footing  of  brotherly  equality.  H  is  zeal  ought  not  to  interfere 
with  the  reverence  due  to  age.     Let  the  old  be  treated  with  humility  and  gentleness. 

II.  The  conduct  of  Timothy  towabd  younger  men.  "The  younger  men  as 
brothers.''  He  may  use  greater  freedom  with  them,  as  being  on  an  equality  as  to  age. 
He  must  not  show  airs  of  assumption  toward  them,  but  may  use  more  freedom  in 
reproving  their  faults. 

III.  His  conduct  toward  elderly  women.  "  Elderly  women  as  mothers."'  He 
must  show  them  due  deference  and  respect.  If  they  should  err  on  any  point,  they 
must  be  entreated  with  all  tenderness,  as  children  entreat  their  mothers. 

IV.  His  conduct  toward  the  youngeb  women.  "  The  younger  as  sisters,  with  all 
purity."  There  must  be,  on  the  one  hand,  the  freedom  of  a  brother  with  sisters;  but, 
on  the  other  hand,  a  marked  circumspection  so  as  to  avoid  all  ground  of  suspicion  or 
KandaL— T.C. 

Vers.  3 — 7.— Directions  with  regard  to  widows.    The  gospel  provides  for  the  helpless. 
L  Thk  claims  of  widows.    1.  These  were  abundantly  recognized  in  Old  Testament 


104  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  |oh.  v.  1— 25- 

times.  The  fatherless  and  the  widow  were  commended  to  the  special  care  of  the 
Israelites.  The  garments  of  widows  were  never  to  he  taken  in  pledge.  The  man  was 
cursed  who  perverted  the  judgment  of  the  widow.  The  widow  was  never  to  he  afflicted 
or  made  a  prey  (Deut.  xvi.  11 ;  xxvii.  19 ;  Jer.  vii.  6 ;  Isa.  x.  2).  2.  The  claims  of 
widows  were  officially  recognized  in  New  Testament  times.  The  order  of  deacon  ship 
arose  out  of  the  necessity  of  widows  (Acts  vi.  1 — 7). 

II.  The  different  classes  of  widows  in  the  Chukot.  "  Honour  widows  that  are 
widows  indeed."  There  are  three  classes  of  widows  referred  to  hy  the  apostle.  1. 
There  are  widows  who  are  not  only  deeply  religious,  but  quite  destitute.  She  who  is  a 
widow  indeed  is  "desolate,  has  set  her  hope  in  God,  and  abides  in  supplications  and 
prayers  night  and  day."  (1)  There  are  widows  without  hushand,  without  children 
or  grandchildren,  and  without  means  of  living.  They  have  no  friends  to  cheer  the 
loneliness  or  relieve  the  necessities  of  their  widowed  life.  (2)  They  are  deeply  religious 
and  trustful.  "  She  has  set  her  hope  in  God,"  who  is  the  Husband  of  the  widow ;  and  is 
constant  in  prayers  like  Anna  the  prophetess,  to  that  God  who  gives  her  a  daily  supply 
of  comforts,  and  cheers  her  in  her  solitude.  2.  There  are  widows  who  are  not  so 
destitute,  for  they  have  children  and  grandchildren  to  provide  for  their  wants.  3. 
There  are  widows  who  are  fond  of  gaiety  and  pleasure,  and  destitute  of  religion.  "She 
that  liveth  in  pleasure  is  dead  while  she  liveth."  They  are  dead  spiritually,  like  those 
who  "  have  a  name  to  live,  but  are  dead  "  (Rev.  iii.  1).  *'  If  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye 
shall  die"  (Rom.  viii.  13).  This  class  of  widows  resembled  the  daughters  of  Sodom 
(Ezek.  xvi.  49).  There  was  in  their  case  the  union  of  soul  and  body,  but  no  quickening 
principle  of  spiritual  life.  They  savour  the  things  that  be  of  men  rather  than  the  things 
that  be  of  God. 

III.  The  doty  of  the  Chubch  in  relation  to  these  different  classes  of  widows. 
1.  The  Church  was  not  bound  to  support  or  assist  widows  with  children  or  grand- 
children, who  were  therefore  to  be  taught  "  to  show  piety  at  home,  and  to  requite  their 
parents."  The  Church  was  not  to  be  burdened  with  their  support.  Their  relatives 
were  not  exempt  under  the  gospel  from  the  necessity  of  providing  for  them.  The 
apostle  adds  that  the  discharge  of  this  oft-forgotten  duty  is  "  good  and  acceptable  before 
God "  (Eph.  vi.  2,  3 ;  Mark  vii.  10, 11).  2.  The  Church  owned  no  obligation  of  any 
sort  to  pleasure-loving  widows,  except  to  warn  them  of  the  sin,  folly,  and  danger  of  their 
life.  3.  The  Church  was  to  pay  due  regard  to  "  widows  indeed "  who  were  destitute 
of  all  resources.  "  Honour  widows  that  are  widows  indeed."  The  term  implies  more 
than  deference  or  respect;  such  widows  were  entitled  to  receive  relief  from  the  Christian 
community.     It  was  a  loving  duty  to  provide  for  such  sad- hearted,  friendless  beings. 

IV.  The  necessity  of  making  a  rule  for  the  Church's  guidance.  "  These  things 
command,  that  they  may  be  wilaout  reproach."  The  injunction  was  necessary  for  the 
Church's  sake,  that  it  might  not  neglect  its  proper  duty  to  this  destitute  class,  and  for 
the  sake  of  the  various  classes  of  widows  and  their  relatives,  who  needed  to  be  without 
reproach,  as  they  were  supposedly  members  of  the  Church. — T.  C. 

Ver.  8. — The  duty  of  providing  for  one's  own  household.  The  growth  of  the  Church 
necessitated  a  careful  regard  to  this  duty. 

I.  The  duty  here  enjoined.  "  If  any  provides  not  for  his  own,  and  especially  for 
those  of  his  own  house,  he  has  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  unbeliever."  1. 
This  passage  asserts  the  obligations  that  spring  out  of  family  relationship.  It  points  to 
the  duty  of  supporting  relatives,  and  all  who  live  under  one  roof,  who  through  poverty 
may  have  become  dependent  upon  us.  2.  The  gospel  does  not  relax,  but  rather 
stiengthens,  the  ties  of  natural  kinship.  The  Essenes  would  not  give  relief  to  their 
relatives  without  the  permission  of  their  teachers,  though  they  might  help  others  in 
need. 

II.  The  neglect  of  this  duty  involves  a  practical  denial  of  the  faith.  1.  It 
is  a  denial  of  the  faith,  not  in  words,  but  in  works,  for  it  is  a  denial  of  the  duty  of  love, 
which  is  the  practical  outcome  of  faith  ;  for  "  faith  worketh  by  love."  There  may  have 
been  a  tendency  at  Ephesus,  as  in  Churches  to  which  James  wrote,  to  rest  content  with 
a  mere  profession  of  the  truth,  without  the  habit  of  self-denial.  2.  Such  conduct  would 
place  the  Christian  professor  in  a  position  far  below  that  of  the  heathen  unbeliever,  who 
recognized  the  duty  of  supporting  relatives  as  one  of  his  best  principles.     It  would  be  a 


«H.v.  1— 25.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  105 

serious  dishonour  to  Christ  and  the  gospel  to  neglect  duties  held  in  highest  honour  by 
the  heathen.    The  light  of  the  gospel  greatly  aggravates  the  sin  of  such  persons. — T.  C. 

Vers.  9, 10. — Particular  directions  as  to  the  class  of  widows  commended  to  the  Church's 
sympathy  and  support.  These  persons  are  variously  regarded  by  commentators  as 
simply  destitute  widows,  or  as  deaconesses,  or  as  presbyteresses.  The  most  simple  and 
natural  explanation  is  that  they  belonged  to  the  first  class,  for  the  directions  here  given 
apply  to  what  the  Church  is  to  do  for  such  widows,  not  what  duty  is  required  of  them 
in  the  Church  administration. 

I.  The  enrolment  op  widows  in  the  almoner's  list  of  the  Church.  "Let  none 
be  enrolled  as  a  widow  under  threescore  years  old."  1.  The  existence  of  such  a  list  is 
implied  in  Acts  vi.  1,  where  a  murmuring:  is  said  to  have  arisen  because  "  the  widows 
were  neglected  in  the  daily  ministration."  There  are  also  traces  of  such  a  list  in  tlie 
earlier  Christian  writers.  2.  Such  a  class  would  be  recruited  from  the  ordinary  vicissi- 
tudes of  life,  from  the  special  persecutions  that  followed  the  gospel,  and  perhaps  also 
from  the  separations  from  polygamous  husbands  brought  about  through  the  influence  of 
Christianity. 

II.  The  qualifications  of  widows  for  a  place  in  the  Church's  list.  1.  As  to 
age.  "  Not  under  threescore  years  old."  As  this  age  marks  a  relatively  greater  degree 
of  senility  in  the  East  than  in  the  West,  the  widows  must  be  regarded  as  of  the  infirm 
class,  and  therefore  as  not  in  any  degree  able  for  the  active  duties  of  life.  This  one  con- 
sideration inclines  us  to  believe  that  they  did  not  belong  to  the  order  of  deaconesses  or 
presbyteresses.  If  widows  had  been  enrolled  at  a,  much  earlier  age,  they  must  have 
become  a  serious  burden  for  a  great  length  of  time  upon  the  Church's  liberality.  There- 
fore young  widows  were  not  to  be  enrolled  at  all.  2.  As  to  her  previous  married  life. 
"  The  wife  of  one  man."  (1)  This  does  not  mean  that  she  should  not  have  been  twice 
married,  because  (o)  the  apostle  counsels  the  younger  women  to  marry  again  (ver.  14), 
and  sanctions  second  marriages  (Rom.  vii.  1);  (V)  because  the  ascetic  idea  of  married 
life,  which  some  would  associate  with  widows  holding  a  certain  ecclesiastical  rank, 
received  no  sanction  from  the  apostle.  (2)  It  does  not  mean  that  she  should  not  have 
had  several  husbands  at  one  time,  for  polyandry  was  quite  unusual.  (3)  It  signifies 
that  she  should  never  have  stood  related  but  to  one  living  husband  ;  not  divorced  from 
one  husband  and  ihen  married  to  another — a  chaste  and  faithful  spouse,  true  to  her 
marriage  vow.  3.  As  to  her  reputation  for  good  works.  "  Well  reported  of  in  respect- 
to  good  works."  There  must  not  only  be  no  evil' spoken  of  her,  but  she  must  have  a 
reputation  for  good  works.  This  reputation  covers  five  facts  of  goodness.  (1)  "  If  she 
hath  brought  up  children."  This  would  imply  self-sacrifice,  sympathy  and  zeal  for 
youthful  training.  She  would  train  her  children  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the 
Lord,  commanding  them  like  Abraham  to  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord,  from  which  they 
would  not  so  easily  depart  in  after-life.  (2)  "  If  she  hath  lodged  strangers."  She  may 
have  seen  bet  ter  days,  and  had  frequent  opportunities  of  showing  hospitality  to  Christian 
travellers  moving  from  place  to  place.  The  readiness  to  welcome  strangers  was  most 
characteristic  of  the  early  Christians.  (3)  "If  she  hath  washed  the  saints' feet,"  in 
token,  not  only  of  conventional  hospitality,  but  of  deep  humility  after  the  highest  of  all 
examples.  (4)  "  If  she  hath  relieved  the  afflicted."  Not  by  mere  gifts,  but  by  matronly 
sympathy  and  encouragement,  implying  the  visitation  of  the  distressed  in  their  homes. 
(5)  "  If  she  hath  diligently  followed  every  good  work.".  She  must  not  have  wearied 
in  well-doing,  but  have  followed  that  which  was  good  with  eagerness,  constancy,  and 
true  fidelity  to  God  and  man. — T.  C. 

Vers.  11 — 15. — Directions  with  regard  to  young  widows.    I.  The  toungeb  widows 

WERE   NOT  TO  BE   ENROLLED   ON  THE   LIST  OF   THE  CHURCH'S   PENSIONERS.       "  Younger 

widows  decline."  This  did  not  imply  that  destitute  widows,  however  young,  would  be 
excluded  from  occasional  help  from  the  Church's  funds,  but  they  were  not  to  be  made 
a  permanent  charge  upon  the  resources  of  the  Church.  They  were  young  enough  to 
labour  for  their  own  living,  or,  as  the  apostle  advised,  they  might  marry  a  second  time, 
and  thus  obtain  a  provision  for  themselves. 

II.  The  reason  for  declining  such  widows.  "  For  when  they  shall  wax  wanton 
against  Christ,  they  desire  to  many."    1.  This  language  does  not  imply  that  they  haa, 


106  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ot.  v.  1-25. 

to  to  $peah,  taken  Christ  for  their  Bridegroom,  and  then  proved  shamelessly  unfaithful 
to  their  vows.  This  thought  belongs  to  the  ascetic  ideas  of  a  later  period,  as  if  the 
widows  in  question  had  taken  the  irrevocable  engagement  of  nuns  or  of  other  ecclesi- 
astical persons.  They  might,  indeed,  have  remarried  not  only  without  blame,  but  by  the 
direct  counsel  of  the  apostle  himself.  2.  Neither  does  it  imply  that  they  had  been  untrue 
to  the  memory  of  their  first  husbands.  3.  The  case  supposed  is  that  of  some  young 
widows,  who  had  taken  their  place  among  others  of  their  world-renouncing  class  in  the 
list  of  the  Church's  tvidows,  and  had  drawn  back  into  a  luxurious,  pleasure-loving  habit 
of  life.  _  There  is  no  breach  of  the  promise  of  widowhood  either  expressed  or  implied  in 
.  the  passage,  and  such  a  breach  could  not  be  interpreted  by  itself  as  equivalent  to  a 
renunciation  of  the  Christian  faith.  The  case  supposed  is  that  of  a  departure  from  the 
proprieties  of  widowed  life,  in  connection  with  a  Christian  profession,  which  only  too 
.surely  indicated  a  virtual  repudiation  of  the  faith.  4.  The  judgment  that  attached  to 
their  conduct  implied  this  virtual  renunciation  of  faith.  "  Having  condemnation  because 
they  set  at  nought  their  first  faith."  (1)  Not  their  faith  to  their  first  husbands ;  (2) 
not  their  vow  or  promise  to  remain  in  widowhood,  which  might  be  called  their  former 
faith,  but  not  their  first  faith ;  but  (3)  their  simple  faith  in  Christ,  when  they  were 
baptized  into  his  Name  and  devoted  themselves  to  his  service.  They  set  it  at  nought 
by  not  walking  according  to  it,  their  conversation  not  becoming  their  profession  of  it. 
Their  condemnation,  or,  rather,  their  judgment,  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  eternal,  because 
it  might  be  removed  by  a  timely  repentance. 

III.  The  injurious  and  scandalous  effects  of  such  a  life.  "  And  withal  they 
learn  also  to  be  idle,  going  about  from  house  to  house;  and  not  only  idle,  but  talkers 
and  busybodies,  speaking  things  which  they  ought  not."  These  young  widows,  being 
under  no  necessity  to  labour  for  their  living — for  they  were  supported  by  the  funds  of 
the  Church — used  their  leisure  badly.  1.  They  were  idle.  (1)  This  habit  of  life  is 
forbidden ;  for  Christians  are  to  be  "  not  slothful  in  business."  (2)  It  leads  to  mis- 
directed activity ;  for  such  widows  "  wander  from  house  to  house,"  because  they  have  no 
resources  within  themselves.  2.  They  become  loose  talkers,  babbling  out  whatever  comes 
into  their  minds.  "  Prom  leisure  springs  that  curiosity  which  is  the  mother  of  garrulity  * 
(CJalvin).  3.  They  become  busybodies,  with  a  perverted  activity  in  the  concerns  of 
others  which  implies  a  neglect  of  their  own.  This  meddling  spirit  leads  to  misunder- 
standings and  mischiefs  of  many  kinds.  4.  They  become  talkers  of  scandal,  "speaking 
things  which  they  ought  not" — things  which  may  be  false,  or,  if  true,  are  not  to  be 
repeated  from  house  to  house. — T.  C. 

Vers.  14, 15. — Directions  to  such  young  widows.  The  case  is  one  for  special  guidance. 

I.  A   RETURN   TO    THE    SPHERE    OF    DOMESTIC    DUTIES    18   ADVISED    BY   THE    APOSTLE. 

"I  wish,  therefore,  that  the  younger  widows  marry, .bear  children,  manage  the  house, 
give  no  occasion  for  the  adversary  to  reproach."  1.  There  is  nothing  in  this  counsel 
to  encourage  a  resort  to  ascetic  life,  or  an  escape  from  the  ordinary  obligations  of  society. 
The  over- valuation  of  ascetic  life  has  been  the  great  means  of  disparaging  and  dis- 
oouTaging  the  piety  of  common  life.  Religion  was  made,  not  for  an  idle,  but  for  a  busy 
world.  2.  The  return  to  home-ties  would  probably  break  the  force  of  temptations  to  loose 
living.  Idleness  would  thus  be  counteracted,  as  well  as  the  wantonness  against  Christ 
previously  censured.  The  woman  would  thus  be  "  saved  by  child-bearing,  if  she  con- 
tinui  d  in  faith  and  holiness  with  sobriety  "  (ch.  ii.  15).  3.  Mark  the  variety  of  her 
new  relations.  First  to  her  husband,  then  to  her  children,  then  to  her  servants.  She  is 
to  discharge  each  duty  faithfully,  so  as  to  avoid  the  reproach  of  the  adversary. 

II.  The  reason  why  such  counsel  is  given.  "Give  no  occasion  for  reproach  to 
the  adversary ;  for  already  some  have  been  turned  away  after  Satan."  1.  The  adversary  it 
not  necessarily  the  devil,  nor  any  particular  individual,  but  that  collective  society  around 
the  Church  which  is  always  watchful  for  the  halting  of  God's  servants.  For  good  cause 
or  bad  the  reproaches  will  come,  but  they  ought  not  to  be  justified  by  the  injurious, 
or  frivolous,  or  licentious  conduct  of  professors.  2.  Mischief  of  this  sort  had  already 
accrued  to  the  cause  of  Christ.  Some  widows  had  given  evidence  of  the  idle,  wanton, 
worliily  behaviour  already  condemned,  showing  a  distinct  swerve  toward  the  adversary 
of  souls  and  the  accuser  of  the  brethren.  "Christ  was  the  true  Spouse;  Satan  th« 
seducer."— T.  0 


ch.  v.  1—25.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  107 

Ver.  16. — Further  directions  as  to  the  support  of  widows.  There  is  here  a  return  to 
the  subject  of  private  beneficence. 

L  The  duty  op  Christian  women  to  support  their  widowed  relatives.  "  If 
any  woman  that  believes  hath  widows,  let  support  be  given  to  them."  The  allusion 
is  probably  to  the  younger  widows,  whose  future  would  be  very  uncertain  till,  at  least, 
they  should  marry.  The  apostle  had  already  provided  for  the  case  of  aged  widows.  It 
was  the  plain  duty  of  relatives  to  watch  over  the  welfare  of  the  younger  women,  who 
might  be  sisters,  sisters-in-law,  or  nieces.  The  apostle  founds  the  duty  upon  the 
principle  that  the  gospel  has  not  superseded,  but  rather  strengthened,  the  claims  of  kinship. 

II.  Reasons  for  the  discharge  of  this  private  duty.  "And  let  not  the  Church 
be  burdened,  that  it  may  relieve  those  that  are  widows  indeed."  1.  It  would  burden  the 
Church  greatly  to  increase  the  number  of  the  pensioners  on  its  generosity.  2.  The  exercise 
of  private  beneficence  would  allow  a  fuller  provision  to  be  made  for  those  aged  widows 
who  were  really  friendless,  homeless,  and  destitute. — T.  C. 

Vers.  17,  18. — Directions  respecting  the  honour  due  to  the  elders  of  the  Church. 
"  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well  be  counted  worthy  of  double  honour,  especially  those 
who  labour  in  the  Word  and  doctrine." 

I.  The  class  of  persons  here  referred  to.  1.  It  is  evident  that  the  apostle  knew 
of  no  officers  in  the  Church  at  Ephesus  hut  these  elders,  with  the  deacons.  2.  Their 
principal  duty  was  government.  It  was  at  least  the  prominent  element  in  their  calling. 
3.  The  passage  suggests  that,  while  all  the  elders  governed,  all  did  not  labour  in  the  Word 
and  doctrine.  Each  Church  in  that  day  had  its  band  of  elders  at  its  head,  but  the 
teaching  function  was  not.  universal,  though  by-and-by  it  assumed  greater  prominence 
and  commanded  greater  distinction  and  respect. 

II.  The  honour  due  to  elders.  They  were  to  be  counted  worthy  of  double  honour  j 
that  is,  they  were  to  be  libeially  provided  for  by  the  Church,  as  a  special  mode  of 
showing  respect  to  their  office. 

III.  The  ground  for  this  injunction.  "  For  the  Scripture  saith,  Thou  shalt  not 
muzzle  an  ox  while  treading  out  the  corn.  And,  The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire." 
These  two  sayings,  one  contained  in  Scripture  (Deut.  xxv.  4),  the  other  a  proverbial 
saying  used  by  our  Lord  himself  (Luke  x.  7),  affords  an  argument  for  the  support  of 
Christian  labourers.  1.  This  shows  that  both  the  Law  and  the  gospel  sanction  the  due 
support  of  the  ministry.  2.  It  shouts  that  the  minister's  support  is  a  matter  of  right, 
and  not  of  compassion  or  kindness.  The  animals  that  laboured  had  a  right  to  the  fruit 
of  their  labours. — T.  C. 

Ver.  19. — Directions  as  to  accusations  against  elders.  "  Against  an  elder  receive  not 
an  accusation,  except  it  be  upon  two  or  three  witnesses."  / 

I.  Elders  may  be  exposed  to  such  accusations  by  their  very  zeal  and  faith- 
fulness. 1.  Their  duty  being  to  convince  the  gainsayers  and  to  reprove  the  faults  of 
men,  they  would  be  exposed  to  the  risk  of  false  accusation.  Good  ministers 'would 
be  oftener  accused  if  their  accusers  could  but  find  judges  willing  to  receive  their  charges. 
2.  It  is  the  interest  of  the  Church  of  Christ  to  maintain  the  reputation  of  its  ministers 
unchallenged.  It  involv.es  a  sort  of  scandal  for  them  to  be  accused  at  all,  even  though 
they  should  afterwards  br  cleared. 

II.  The  course  recommended  in  cases  of  this  sort.  1.  It  diminishes  the  chances 
of  such  charges  being  made,  that  the  testimony  of  a  single  malicious  witness  will  not 
suffice  to  have  an  accusation  even  formally  considered.  2.  It  woidd  be  a  serious  dis- 
couragement to  a  good  minister  for  such  charges  to  be  entertained  upon  partial  or  defec- 
tive evidence.  3.  The  deference  due  to  the  position  of  a  man  chosen  by  the  Church  as 
its  pastor  demanded  a  wise  caution  in  the  reception  of  charges  against  him.  4.  Yet  it 
was  the  duty  of  Timothy  to  rnahe  an  investigation  supported  by  adequate  evidence.  There 
is  nothing  in  the  minister's  position  to  exempt  him  from  a  just  inquiry  and  its  due 
consequences. — T.  C. 

Ver.  20. — The  manner  of  public  rebuke.  The  apostle  refers  here,  not  to  offending 
elders,  but  to  members  of  the  Church  generally,  as  we  justly  infer  from  the  change 
of  number.    It  is  the  elder  in  the  one  case ;  it  in  "  those  who  sin"  in  the  other. 


108  THE  F1B8T  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  t.  1—25 

I.  The  publicity  of  rebuke.  "Those  that  sin  rebuke  before  all."  1.  The  class 
referred  to  consists  not  of  those  merely  overtaken  in  a  fault  (Gal.  vi.  1),  but,  as  the  tense 
of  the  word  signifies,  persons  given  to  sinning.  Thus  great  consideration  and  caution 
are  to  be  exercised.  The  casual  transgressor  might  be  dealt  with  privately,  and  would 
not  need  further  dealing  on  his  exhibiting  evidence  of  repentance.  2.  It  was  to  be  merely 
rebuke,  not  exclusion  from  the  Church.  If  the  rebuke  was  unheeded,  the  extreme 
sentence  would  follow.  3.  The  rebuke  was  to  be  public.  (1)  The  transgression  may 
have  been  very  public,  to  the  scandal  of  religion ;  (2)  the  publicity  would  involve  the 
full  disclosure  of  the  sin,  and  involve  shame. 

II.  The  design  of  public  rebuke.  "  In  order  that  the  rest  also  may  fear."  Such 
a  discipline  would  have  a  deterrent  influence  upon  others.  The  strictness  of  the  law 
would  not  be  without  effects  upon  conscience. — T.  C. 

Ver.  21. — A  solemn  charge  to  Timothy  to  be  conscientiously  impartial  in  these  cases. 

1.  The  solemnity  of  the  charge.  "  I  solemnly  charge  thee  before  God,  and  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  elect  angels."  1.  Timothy,  who  is  exhorted  to  faithfulness  in  judgment, 
is  himself  brought  face  to  face  with  his  Lord  and  Judge,  who  will  appear  along  with  the 
elect  angels  as  assessors  or  executors  of  the  Divine  commands.    (1)  God  is  omniscient 

•  and  he  is  righteous,  for  with  him  is  no  respect  of  persons,  and  Timothy  was  a  minister 
in  the  house  of  God,  answerable  for  his  discharge  of  all  ecclesiastical  duty.  (2)  Christ 
is  likewise  omniscient  as  well  as  righteous,  Head  of  the  Church  and  Judge  of  the  quick 
and  the  dead,  before  whose  judgment-seat  all  must  stand.  (3)  "  The  elect  angels."  (a) 
These,  who  left  not  their  first  estate,  but  have  been  preserved  in  their  integrity  by  Christ, 
who  is  the  Head  both  of  angels  and  of  men,  are  the  ministers  and  attendants  of  God. 
(6)  There  is  nothing  here  to  warrant  the  worship  of  angels,  because  they  are  not  here 
regarded  as  judges,  but  as  witnesses ;  neither  are  they  sworn  by  nor  appealed  to  by  the 
apostle.   The  heavens  and  the  earth  are  often  summoned  as  witn'sses  in  the  same  sense. 

2.  This  high  appeal  was  designed  to  elevate  the  mind  of  Timothy  above  all  sinister  motives, 
and  secure  him  against  the  dangers  of  a  timid  compliance  with  evil. 

II.  The  substance  of  the  charge.  "That  thou  keep  these  things  without  pre- 
judging, doing  nothing  by  partiality."  He  refers  to  the  judicial  inquiries  respecting 
elders  and  members  of  the  Church.  1.  There  was  to  be  an  absence  of  prejudice.  There 
must  be  no  prejudging  a  case  before  it  is  heard,  under  the  influence  of  party  feeling. 
Timothy  must  calmly  hearken  to  the  case  presented  by  both  sides,  and  weigh  the 
evidence  without  haste  or  favour  to  either  side.  2.  There  was  to  be  an  absence  of  all 
partiality.  "Doing  nothing  by  partiality."  There  must  be  no  leaning  to  one  side 
more  than  another.  The  scales  of  justice  must  be  held  evenly  in  Church  affairs. 
Elders  and  members  were  alike  to  be  judged  with  all  fairness. — T.  C. 

Ver.  22. — A  caution  against  hasty  induction  of  ministers.  If  such  judicial  inquiries 
are  to  be  avoided,  there  ought  to  be  great  care  in  the  original  appointment  of 
ministers. 

I.  There  must  be  due  care  in  ordaining  right  persons  to  the  ministry.  "  Lay 
hands  en  no  one  hastily."  1.  This  does  not  refer  to  the  practice  of  receiving  offenders 
back  into  the  Church  by  the  imposition  of  the  bishop's  hands.  No  such  practice  can  be 
identified  with  the  apostolic  age,  or  with  that  immediately  succeeding  it.  2.  It  refers, 
as  the  usage  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  suggests,  to  "the  laying  on  of  hands  in  ordination." 

(1)  Saul  and  Barnabas  were  thus  designated  to  their  missionary  tour  (Acts  xiii.  1). 
Timothy  was  thus  ordained  by  the  hands  of  the  presbytery.  It  was  the  solemn  recogni- 
tion by  the  Church  of  the  call  which  the  minister-elect  had  received  from  on  high. 

(2)  Timothy  was  to  guard  against  the  possibility  of  rash  appointments  to  the  ministry 
by  a  due  inquiry  beforehand  into  the  spiritual  character  and  pastoral  qualifications  of 
the  candidates  for  office.  The  glory  of  God,  the  salvation  of  man,  the  honour  of  religion, 
were  all  involved  in  such  appointments. 

IL  The  serious  consequences  of  slackness  in  the  discharge  of  such  a  duty. 
"  Neither  participate  in  other  men's  sins."  Timothy  would  "  adopt  the  sins  he  over- 
looked" If  he  did  not  rightly  distinguish  between  the  worthy  and  the  unworthy. 

IIL  The  necessity  of  perfect  purity  on  Timothy's  own  past.  "  Keep  thyself 
pure."    He  must  be  pure  who  is  called  to  Judge  ethers.    There  must  be  no  shadow  of 


OH,  ▼.1—25.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  109 

evil  attaching  to  his  character  or  conduct.    Any  impurity  of  character  would  utterly 
destroy  his  influence,  and  silence  his  rebukes  of  others. — T.  0. 

Ver.  23. — Direction  to  Timothy  to  be  careful  of  his  health.  "  No  longer  drink  water, 
but  use  a  little  wine  for  thy  stomach's  sake  and  thy  frequent  ailments. 

I.  The  apostle  lends  no  encouragement  to  an  asoetio  attitude  towaed  heats 
OB  drinks.  The  Essenes  abstained  altogether  from  wine,  and  as  there  was  a  close  con- 
nection between  Ephesns  and  Alexandria,  where  such  views  were  held  by  a  small  section 
of  Jews,  it  is  not  improbable  that  such  views  may  have  reached  Ephesus.  There  was 
no  harm  in  Timothy  abstaining  from  wine,  as  a  protest  against  excess  in  wine,  but 
rather  something  highly  praiseworthy.  It  was  not  through  any  deference  to  Essene 
asceticism,  but  through  such  a  consideration  as  is  here  suggested,  that  Timothy  was  an 
habitual  water-drinker. 

II.  The  afostle  has  exclusive  regard  to  Timothy's  health.  The  use  of  wine  was 
regarded  in  its  purely  medicinal  aspect,  and  not  as  a  mere  pleasant  beverage.  Timothy 
was  engaged  in  a  service  that  demanded  the  fullest  exhibition  of  all  mental  and  bodily 
hardihood,  as  well  as  an  iron  endurance  of  disappointment  and  opposition.  Under  such 
influences,  he  would  become  depressed  with  effects  most  prejudicial  to  his  health. 
The  counsel  shows  the  deep  interest  of  the  apostle  in  the  young  evangelist's  comfort 
and  welfare., — T.  0. 

Vers.  24, 25. — Final  directions  to  Timothy  respecting  his  attitude  toward  the  sins  and 
sinful  works  of  men.  I.  A  caution  against  his  being  too  pbecipitate  in  absolving 
men  from  censure.  "  The  sins  of  some  men  are  manifest,  going  before  to  judgment ; 
with  some  again,  they  follow  after."  The  judgment  is  God's,  without  excluding  man's. 
1.  One  class  of  sins  is  public  and  open.  They  reach  the  Judge  before  the  man  himself 
who  commits  them.  The  sins  are  notorious.  Timothy  will  have  no  excuse  for  absolving 
such  percons.  2.  Another  class  of  sins  is  not  so  manifest.  Unknown  for  the  time  to  all 
but  the  oil-seeing  eye  of  God,  yet  going  forward  notwithstanding  to  the  final  judg- 
ment, where  nothing  can  be  hid.  The  judgment  of  man  may  have  meanwhile  absolved 
such  a  sinner,  but  the  mournful  secret  comes  out  after  all. 

II.  A  caution  against  being  too  precipitate  in  his  CENSURES.  "  In  like  manner 
also  the  works  that  are  good  are  manifest,  and  those  that  are  otherwise  cannot  be  hid." 
Some  are  open  witnesses,  others  are  secret  witnesses ;  but  there  can  be  no  effectual 
suppression  of  their  testimony.  God  will  bring  works  of  all  kinds  into  light.  But  it 
is  the  duty  of  Timothy  and  ministers  in  general  to  use  due  diligence  to  have  the  truth 
brought  to  light  respecting  such  works.  Therefore  Timothy  was  not  to  be  rash  in 
condemning  where  hidden  worth  had  not  disclosed  itself  sufficiently  to  his  eye.  The 
good  tree  would  by-and-by  justify  itself  by  its  fruits. — T.  0. 

Ver.  1.— 'Reverence  for  age,  u  Rebuke  not  an  elder."  Comprehensive  indeed  Is 
Scripture.  Its  virtue  is  no  vague  generality,  but  is  definite  and  distinct.  It  is  this 
which  makes  the  Bible  a  daily  portion.  There  is  ever  in  it  some  special  counsel  and 
comfort.  With  the  cross  for  a  centre,  all  the  precious  jewels  of  truth  are  set  in  their 
places  around  it.  For  each  relationship  of  life  there  are  separate  behests  of  duty,  and 
he  must  read  in  vain  who  does  not  feel  that  it  was  written  for  him.  With  this  light 
none  need  go  astray ;  and  if  they  do,  it  is  because  they  love  the  darkness  rather  than 
the  light. 

I.  There  is  to  be  reverence  fob  age.  We  are  to  entreat  the  elder  rather  than  to 
rebuke  them.  Scolding  is  often  mistaken  for  fidelity ;  and  there  is  a  scoViiLg  preaching 
which  holds  up  mistake  and  error  to  scorn  rather  than  to  pity.  The  Bible  reverences 
age.  The  elder,  if  he  be  here,  must  have  seen  and  known  terrible  troubles  and  fierce 
temptations.  His  bark  has  been  in  many  seas.  Hjs  sword  has  been  almost  shivered 
in  many  fights.  His  countenance  tells  of  tears  and  tribulations.  He  has  known  defeat 
as  well  as  victory.  Bebuke  him  not.  With  the  soft  down  of  youth  on  your  cheek, 
deal  reverently  with  the  grey-headed  men.  If  evil  seems  to  be  getting  the  mastery, 
and  the  lingering  angels  are  about  to  leave,  entreat  age  by  the  memories  of  the  past 
and  the  great  hopes  of  the  reward  so  nigh  at  hand. 

IL  There  »  to  be  fellowship  with  youth.    Be  •  son  to  the  aged,  but  a  brother 


110  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  Loh.  ».  1— 25. 

to  the  young.  "  And  the  younger  men  as  brethren ; "  not  as  a  proud  priest  sent  to  rule 
them  and  to  shrive  them,  but  as  one  who  has  the  passions  and  the  hopes,  the  dutie» 
and  the  dangers,  of  a  brother. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  2. —  What  women  should  be.  "The  elder  women  as  mothers;  the  younger  as 
sisters,  with  all  purity."  Pull  of  the  power  wliioh  comes  from  feminine  pity.  Full  ot 
motherly  experiences  about  children.  Full  of  daily  care  and  the  diaconate  of  serving 
the  home-tables.  Full  of  a  great  heart-love  that  would  make  a  roof-tree  for  all,  as 
a  hen  that  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings.  Timothy  will  yet  learn  in  the 
Church  work  the  value  of  a  mother  in  Israel.  1.  Mothers  were  our  first  pastors. 
2.  Mothers  were  our  earliest  examples.  "  The  younger  as  sisters,  with  all  purity." 
Beautiful  is  the  holy  grace  of  purity,  and  sensitive  is  the  girl-heart  to  the  loveliness 
of  true  virtue !  Put  them  not  into  confessionals  to  suggest  sins  that  they  never  knew, 
and  deprave  the  nature  under  the  pretence  of  absolving  it. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  3. — Sympathy  with  widows.  "Honour  widows."  Let  them  have  a  special 
place  in  reverent  care  and  common  prayer,  as  they  have  a  lot  which  is  so  isolated  and 
so  hard — a  battle  so  keen  and  terrible,  and  as  they  find  that  the  slender  means  are  bo 
soon  spent.  The  lonely  hours  are  full  of  pictures  of  the  past :  as  wives  they  were  the 
first  to  be  thought  of  and  provided  for — the  best  was  for  them,  the  first  place  at  the 
table  and  in  the  heart  was  theirs ;  so  honour  them,  for  they  are  sensitive  to  slight  and 
indifference.    Let  the  Church  counteract  the  neglect  of  the  world. 

L  The  spirit  of  children.  If  they  have  children,  or,  as  sometimes  happens, 
nephews — or  sister's  children — who  lost  their  mother  in  life's  dawn  of  morning,  let  them 
show  piety  at  home — the  piety  of  gratitude,  the  piety  of  help,  the  piety  of  reverence, 
the  piety  of  requital.  How  large  a  word  "  piety  "  is !  An  ungrateful  child,  who  never 
thinks  on  a  parent's  past  self-denial  in  its  education,  a  parent's  watchfulness  in  times 
of  weakness  and  sickness,  a  parent's  interest  in  its  pleasures  and  counsels  as  to 
its  companionships,  and  a  parent's  long  inteiest  in  all  that  relates  to  mind  and  heart, — 
is  an  impious  child.  Quick,  oJever,  it  may  be  flattered  by  new  friends,  and  favoured 
by  fortune  with  pleasant  looks,  and  yet  be  selfish,  indifferent,  and  forgetful. 

IL  The  requital  to  be  given.  Eemember,  young  friends,  that  you  have  to  requite 
your  parents,  not  with  the  patronage  of  commercial  payment  when  you  succeed,  but 
with  the  requital  of  the  tender  inquiry,  the  watchful  love,  the  jealous  service,  the 
gracious  respect. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  4. — What  pleases  God.  "For  that  is  good  and  acceptable  before  God."  He 
looks  not  merely  on  the  great  heroisms  of  confessors  and  martyrs,  but  on  the  sublime 
simplicities  even  of  a  child's  character. 

L  Avoid  mistakes  in  child  training  and  teaching.  I  am  one  of  those  who 
think  that  it  is  a  monstrous  mistake  to  fill  their  hymns  with  rich  rhapsodies  about 
heaven,  about  wanting  to  be  angels,  and  about  superior  emotions,  wheu  the  very 
things  next  to  them  are  seldom  referred  to  at  all.  To  the  father  the  son  must  always 
be  a  boy,  and  the  daughter  to  the  mother  a  girl ;  so  that  all  manner,  even  which  is 
high-flown  and  independent,  or  brusque  and  irreverent,  is  painful,  and  brings  tears  to 
the  hearts  of  parents. 

H.  Remember  the  religiousness  of  home-life.  "  Piety  at  home,"  by  which  is  not 
meant  precocity  of  religious  opinion,  or  plentifulness  of  religious  phraseology,  but  the 
piety  of  respect,  attention,  obedience,  requital,  and  reverence.  This  is  "  good  and  accept- 
able before  God."— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  5. — Desolateness.  "  Now  she  that  is  a  widow  indeed,  and  desolate."  Here  the 
apostle  returns  to  widows  again,  showing  that  he  has  them  very  much  in  his  mind. 

I.  Desolate.  That  is  the  revealing  word.  "  Desolate."  She  may  be  poor  and  deso- 
late, or  she  may  be  competent  and  desolate,  or  she  may  be  rich  and  desolate — all 
surrounding  things  making  her  feel  more  the  loss  of  that  which  is  not ;  all  framing 
"  emptiness ; "  all  but  reminders  of  the  presence  which  gave  value  to  them  all. 

II.  Desolate  ;  fob  the  life-path  is  and  must  be  trodden  alone.  The  wakeful 
hours  find  her  alone;  the  hours  when  pain  and  weariness  come  to  her  find  her  alone; 


oh.*.  1— 2&j  the  ^iitsl1  EPISTLE  to  timothy.  Hi 

for  the  difficult  problem  of  thought  has  none  to  aid  in  its  solution  now — she  is  alone. 
So  desolate ;  for  other  fellowships  are  not  for  life ;  they  only  help  to  vary  her  life. 
Desolate ;  for  none  can  quite  understand  her  care  and  grief,  and  think  that  she  will  soon 
put  them  off  with  the  weeds  and  crape. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6.— Confidence  in  the  Father.  "Trusteth  in  God."  Let  Timothy  remember 
that  in  her  case  experience  hag  ratified  truth.  She  will  need  no  elaborate  arguments 
for  the  truth,  because — 

L  She  has  the  evidential  proof  within.  Did  she  not  in  the  dark  hours  fling  her 
arms  around  her  Father's  neck ;  did  she  not  tell  him  that  she  would  fear  no  want, 
though  she  felt  such  change  ?  Did  not  that  trust — simple  trust— do  her  more  good 
than  all  human  words,  all  kindly  letters,  all  change  of  place  and  scene?  Others 
wondered  at  her,  rising  up  in  her  poor  strength  to  arrange,  to  order,  to  readjust  life  to 
means  and  circumstances,  to  do  her  best  for  the  little  flock  that  she  was  shepherdess  to 
in  the  wilderness. 

II.  She  has  the  fellowship  of  prates.  Yes,  0  man  of  the  world,  0  scorner  of 
truth,  0  soft-spoken  atheist,  she  prays  I  Makes  the  air  quiver,  you  say.  Hears  the 
echo  of  her  own  cry,  you  say.  Bends  before  an  empty  throne,  you  say.  It  may  be 
you  have  never  felt  to  need  God  as  she  needs  him  now.  Her  need  is  an  instinct  and 
an  argument;  for  somehow  in  this  world  there  is  a  Divine  revealing,  call  it  what  you 
like,  that  satisfies  the  desire  of  every  living  thing.  And  she  has  prayed,  and  the  secret 
of  the  Lord  has  beeu  made  known ;  and  that  it  is  no  empty  experience,  is  now  to  be 
proven  in  this  way. 

III.  She  reveals  its  power  by  her  perseverance  in  it.  She  "continueth  in  prayers 
and  supplications  night  and  day."  Then  there  must  be  relief.  The  burden  must  be 
lighter,  the  load  must  be  easier,  the  vision  must  be  clearer.  None  of  us  continue  in 
that  which  mocks  us.  The  invisible  world  is  as  real  as  the  visible  one.  We  know 
when  there  is  a  whisper  within  us  and  an  arm  around  us,  and  so  does  she.  Surely 
you  would  not  rob  her  of  her  only  wealth — her  trust.  But  you  cannot.  "  Night  and 
day."  Mark  that.  She  finds  in  the  night  an  image  of  her  grief.  She  finds  in  the  night 
silence.  The  children,  if  any,  are  asleep.  She  whose  tears  have  watered  her  couch,  whose 
hand  has  reached  forth  into  the  empty  space,  whose  every  movement  would  once  have 
awakened  solicitude,  as  of  pain,  or  weariness,  or  sleeplessness,  is  now  alone.  But  not 
alone ;  for  the  lips  move  and  a  great  cry  goes  up :  "  0  God,  be  not  far  from  me !  Listen 
to  the  voice  of  my  cry,  my  King  and  my  God.  My  heart  within  me  is  desolate.  Hear 
me  out  of  thy  habitation,  thou  Father  of  the  fatherless,  thou  Judge  of  the  widow.  I 
mourn  in  my  complaint  and  make  a  noise.  Oh,  when  wilt  thou  come  to  me?"  And  God 
does  come ;  and  it  may  help  Timothy  to  know  that  this  gospel  which  he  has  to  preach 
is  a  Divine  living  seed,  bearing  its  harvests  in  the  hearts  and  homes  of  the  elders  and 
of  the  widows.  We  shall  see  in  our  next  exposition  that  St.  Paul  knows  that  there 
are  worldly  hearts  to  whom  affliction  brings  no  gracious  fruit ;  and  if  there  be  a  sight 
on  earth  more  appalling  than  another,  it  is  the  frivolous  widow  whose  very  mourning 
is  a  pride  and  a  study,  whose  manner  is  that  of  a  pleasure-seeker,  and  whose  heart  is 
unaffected  by  the  reverences  of  the  memories  of  love  and  death.  It  is  very  evident 
that  the  gospel  which  Timothy  was  to  teach  and  preach  was  no  mere  creed,  no  mere 
perfect  ritual  or  ceremonial,  but  a  religion  human  and" Di vino,  a  religion  that  anticipates 
tin  changes  and  sorrows  and  dangers  of  every  individual  life.  This  Book  is  a  vade- 
mecum.  Here  we  go  for  all  the  medicines  of  relief  and  hope  that  our  poor  humanity 
needs.  We  shall  never  outgrow  the  Book.  Its  leaves  are  still  for  the  healing  of  the 
nations,  and  it  makes  life  calm,  restful,  and  beautiful.  How  comes  it  that  we  have 
known  the  sweetest  angels  in  such  guises  as  these  afflictions  and  bereavements  bring? 
Yet  so  it  is.  Where  shall  we  go?  Oh,  life  has  many  roads;  banditti  lurk  here  and 
there,  and  there  are  swollen  rivers  to  be  forded,  and  dangerous  passes  to  be  entered. 
How  shall  we  go  ?  With  this  rod  and  staff  we  may  go  anywhere.  If  we  take  a  fable, 
let  it  be  the  ancient  stone :  if  you  look  therein,  strange  transformations  take  place — 
you  ask  me  what  I  seel  Now  a  sword ;  now  a  fountain ;  now  a  simple  loaf  of  bread ; 
now  a  touchstone  of  evil  and  of  good ;  now  a  rock  high  above  the  waters ;  now  a  pilot 
on  a  dangerous  sea;  now  a  pillar  rising  on  the  plain  of  time;  now  a  harp  from  which 
sweetest  music  breathes ;  now  a  pillow — a  simple  pillow.    Cowper  puts  aside  his  owl 


112  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  v.  1— 2& 


'  Task '  and  takes  God's  Testament;  so  will  we.    On  these  promises  of  God  we  will  fall 
asleep. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6. — Death  in  life.  "But  she  that  liveth  in  pleasure  is  dead  while  she 
liveth."  Christianity  purifies  and  harmonizes  the  whole  nature  of  man,  and  assimi- 
lates whatever  is  pure  in  humanity  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  docs  not  destroy  pure 
earthly  joys;  nay,  rather  it  plants  many  flowers  by  the  wayside  of  life.  But  pliasure 
is  often  perverted  by  man,  and  in  that  age  it  had  become  so  associated  with  what  was 
a 'arse  and  carnal,  that  the  very  word  "pleasure"  became  in  the  gospel  a  synonym 
for  sin.  We  have  here  death  in  the  midst  of  life-r-"  that  liveth  in  pleasure  is  dead 
while  she  liveth  * — or  death  and  life  side  by  side. 

I.  The  immobility  which  characterizes  the  dead  body  characterizes  the  dead 
soul.  There  is  no  movement  of  thought  towards  God ; '  no  feet  swift  to  do  his  will ;  no 
heart  that  heats  in  sympathy  with  his  Law.  Instinct  is  alive  ;  but  the  brightness  of 
the  eye,  and  the  music  of  the  voice,  and  the  activities  of  life,  are  like  flowers  upon 
graves. 

II.  The  insensibility  of  the  dead  body  characterizes  the  dead  soul.  All 
around  there  may  be  signs  of  outward  life.  As  the  body  lies  in  the  churchyard,  the 
murmuring  river  flows  by  its  banks,  the  birds  make  their  summer  music  in  the  trees, 
and  men,  women,  and  children  stay  to  rest,  and  to  read  the  inscriptions  on  the  graves ; 
but  to  all  these  things  the  sleepers  in  the  tombs  are  insensible.  So  the  dead  soul  is 
insensible  to  the  august  realities  of  religion,  to  the  voice  of  God,  and  to  the  visions  of 
the  great  day. 

III.  The  corbdption  op  the  dead  body  characterizes  the  dead  soul.  This  is  the 
dread  thought  in  connection  with  death,  that  we  must  bury  it  out  of  sight.  When  decay 
commences,  corruption  begins ;  and  he,  who  knows  all  that  is  in  man,  tells  us  that  out 
of  the  sepulchre  of  the  unrenewed  heart  of  man  come  evil  desires,  murrlers,  and  adulteries. 
"  They  that  sow  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption."  These  aspects  of  the 
case  show  us  that,  as  there  are  graveyards  in  the  crowded  cities  with  all  their  busy  life, 
so  in  the  unrenewed  heart  of  man  there  is  death  in  the  midst  of  life. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  8. — Care  for  the  home.  *'  But  if  any  provide  not  for  his  own,  and  specially  for 
tho^e  of  his  own  house,  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  infidel."  The 
gospel  does  not  leave  us  with  any  loose  ideas  of  responsibility.  There  is  often  a 
universal  sentiment  of  goodness  which  finds  no  particular  application. 

I.  Man  has  "  his  own."  He  is  to  care  for  his  own  soul.  He  is  accountable  for  his 
own  influence.  He  is  the  father  of  his  own  family,  and,  up  to  a  certain  age,  his  will  is 
their  law.  He  is  to  provide  for  his  own ;  his  thought  and  skill  and  care  are  all  to  be 
laid  upon  the  altar  of  the  household.  It  is  sad  to  see  nien  sometimes  flattered  by  the 
world,  and  welcomed  to  every  hearth,  who  yet  leave  "  their  own  "  slighted  and  neglected 
at  home.  The  gospel  says  that  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife ;  and  the  gospel 
evidently  understands  the  design  of  God,  that  man  should  be  the  hard  worker  and 
bread-winner  of  life. 

II.  He  has  a  faith  to  keep.  What  is  meant  here  by  denying  the  faith,  and  being 
worse  than  an  infidel?  Surely  this,  that  the  faith  is  meant  to  make  us  Christ-like ; 
one  with  him  who  pleased  not  himself,  who  ministered  to  others,  and  who  revealed 
to  us  that  great  law  of  love  by  which  every  Christian  life  must  be  inspired.  The  word 
"  infidel "  has  often  been  used  to  represent  mere  sceptical  unbelief.  It  really  means 
"  wanting  in  faith ; "  and  the  man  who,  whatever  he  professes,  does  not  live  out  the 
spirit  of  the  gospel  (which  sanctifies,  above  all  things  earthly,  the  marriage  life,  and 
makes  it  the  image  of  the  union  betwixt  Christ  and  his  Church),  that  man  is  wctm 
than  an  infidel,  if  by  infidel  we  mean  a  man  who  intellectually  has  not  accepted  the 
Christian  faith.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  13. — The  lusybody  life.  "And  withal  they  learn  to  be  idle,  wandering  about 
from  house  to  house ;  and  not  only  idle,  but  tattlers  also  and  busybodies,  speaking 
things  which  they  ought  not."  Indolence  is  the  parent  of  all  sins,  because,  with  evil 
so  active  in  the  world,  some  of  its  emissaries  are  sure  to  be  wanting  houseroom  in  our 

heart*. 


ot.  t.  1—25.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  113 

L  We  hat  learn  to  bb  idle.  There  is  no  life  so  undignified  as  that  which  is  busy 
in  trifles,  which  has  learned  to  enjoy  listless  hours.  For  tlie  wandering  thought  pro- 
duces the  wandering  life.  "Wandering  about  from  house  to  house;"  and,  having 
nothing  else  to  build  with,  too  often  build  aerial  structures  of  untruths  and  half-truths. 

II.  Not  only  idle,  but  tattlers.  The  harm  that  has  been  worked  in  this  world 
by  busybodies  cannot  be  over-estimated.  It  is  easy  to  send  an  arrow  into  the  air,  but 
not  to  gather  it  up  again.  It  is  easy  to  poison  the  river  of  good  reputation,  hut 
we  cannot  re-purify  the  stream.  It  is  easy  to  pluck  the  flower  of  a  good  man's  fame, 
but  we  cannot  restore  its  beauty.  "Speaking  things  which  they  ought  not."  How 
few  really  make  "  I  ought"  govern  their  lives!  Custom  and  convenience  and  pleasant- 
ness too  often  constrain  our  speech.  People  like  to  startle  others,  to  give  the  shock  of 
a  new  sensation,  to  amuse  them,  to  please  them.  And,  alas !  it  is  too  true  that  tattlers 
and  busybodies  know  how  to  gratify  thee  they  visit.  St.  Paul  thinks  in  this  next 
verse  (14)  that  marriage  and  care  of  children  and  housewifery  are  good  things  (which 
the  ascetic  Roman  Church  seems  not  to  think),  and  that  women  so  occupied  give  none 
occasion  to  the  adversary  to  speak  reproachfully. — W.  M.  S. 

Yer.  24. — Sins  that  go  before.  "  Some  men's  sins  are  open  beforehand,  going  before 
to  judgment ;  and  some  men  they  follow  after."  Primarily,  these  words  refer  to  the 
ministry.  Never  act  suddenly.  You  may  be  deceived,  and  lay  hands  on  unfit  men, 
damaging  the  Church  and  dishonouring  God.  Manner  may  deceive.  Latent  sins  may 
slumber  beneath  specious  appearances.  Some  sins  blossom  at  once,  and  evil  is  unveiled. 
At  times  the  poisonous  springs  send  forth  their  deleterious  waters  at  once.  Sometimes 
they  are  like  hidden  watercourses  flowing  beneath  the  surface  soil,  and  appearing  in 
unexpected  places.  Moral  government  always  exists,  but  diversity  characterizes  the 
methods  of  God.  Justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  his  throne.  Sometimes 
Cain  and  Ananias  are  punished  at  once;  the  one  is  outlawed,  the  other  dies.  But 
Herod  and  Pilate  waited  for  a  revealing  day.  Subject — bins  that  go  be/ore.  They 
have  outriders.  As  with  a  trumpet-peal  attention  is  called  to  their  advent.  We  sec 
the  evil-doers ;  vile  in  countenance,  shambling  in  gait,  dishonoured  in  mien.  These 
sins  are  revealed.  We  mark  lost  delicacy,  honour,  purity,  peace,  principle,  reputation, 
joyl 

I.  This  is  special  ob  exceptional.  "Some  men's  sins."  Do  not,  in  observing 
them,  draw  an  argument  for  the  necessary  goodness  of  others.  The  openness  of  some 
judgments  does  not  give,  necessarily,  fair  fame  to  others.  In  the  most  decorous  life 
there  may  be  secret  sins.  The  slumbering  fire  may  be  in  the  hold  of  the  stately  ship. 
The  hidden  vulture  may  be  waiting  for  the  carrion  of  the  soul.  But  here  there  is 
judgment.  We  look  around,  we  see  it.  Our  newspapers,  our  neighbourhoods  say, 
"Behold  the  hand  of  God  here."  Faith  is  departed;  hope  is  blighted;  beauty  is 
destroyed  ;  the  dark  outriders  are  here. 

II.  This  is  a  spectacle  to  hen.  "  They  are  open  beforehand,"  and  not  made  mani- 
fest merely  in  the  sense  of  being  sins,  but  their  judgment  is  with  them.  For  there 
are  two  ideas1— you  may  see  a  sin  to  be  a  sin,  but  you  need  not  have  its  judgment 
open.  But  the  translation  here  requires  that  we  should  understand  that  the  judgment 
is  open,  as  well  as  the  sin.  You  see  not  only  men's  corruption,  but  their  misery;  not 
only  their  guilt,  but  their  shame.  A  child  might  see  a  poison  berry,  and  know  that 
it  is  such ;  or  see  a  snake,  and  be  told  it  has  a  sting ;  but  how  clear  the  judgment  if, 
under  the  one  tree,  a  little  child  lay  dead ;  and  beside  the  serpent  a  man  was  struggling 
in  throes  of  agony  I 

III.  They  are  open  beforehand.  That  implies  they  are  hints  in  this  world  (where 
there  is  a  place  for  repentance)  of  troubles  yet  to  come.  They  do  not  exhaust  judg- 
ment; they  are  premonitions  of  it.  The  light  of  mercy  plays  all  around  even  the  paths 
of  judgment  here;  for  the  Saviour  of  men  is  able  to  deliver  from  every  prison-house. 
The  beforehand  judgment  may  be  a  merciful  thing,  but  let  no  man  deal  lightly  with 
it.  The  gathering  clouds  presage  the  fury  of  the  storm ;  the  pattering  drops  herald  the 
hail  and  rain;  the  reddening  light  of  the  volcano  tells  of  the  desolating  lava.  "Some 
men's  sing  are  open  beforehand." — W.  M.  S. 

V«r.  24. — Sim  that  follow  after.    "  Some  men  they  follow  after."   Here  is  a  revealed 

I.  TIMOTHY.  i 


1U  THE  FIfcSt  EPISTLE  tO  TIMOTHt.  [m.r.l'-'Zb. 

fact  with  no  comment  upon  it,  but  it  is  very  terrible.  A  smooth  comfortable  life,  and 
yet  a  life  of  respectable  sin !  No  blame,  no  opprobrium,  no  ostracism  from  society. 
Men  deceive  themselves.  They  go  into  the  streets  of  their  Nineveh,  but  no  prophet 
reproves  them.  The  waters  are  rising,  but  no  Noah  warns  them ;  all  is  placid  and  full 
of  repose. 

I.  The  connection  between  a  hah  and  his  bins.  "  And  some  men  they  follow 
after."  Our  sins  are  like  ub  ;  they  reflect  our  faces ;  they  are  mirrors  which  will  one 
day  show  us  ourselves ;  they  follow  after  us  by  a  moral  individuality ;  they  will  each 
fly  to  their  own  centre.  Our  sins  are  not  resolvable  into  some  generic  whole  as  the  sin 
of  man.  The  blight  in  the  summer-time  is  not  so  disastrous  in  defacing  beauty,  the 
locusts  of  the  East  are  not  so  devasting  in  their  all-devouring  flight,  a*  are  our  troops 
of  sins.     They  follow  after  us,  and  blight  our  immortality. 

II.  The  connection  between  shame  and  sin.  "  They  follow  after."  That  is  the 
reason  we  are  not  ashamed  of  them.  Shame  for  sin  is  not  sorrow  for  sin.  The  Hindoo 
is  only  ashamed  when  he  is  discovered.  That  is  not  grief  at  sin :  it  is  horror  at  being 
found  out.  Sins  that  follow  after  are  not  much  thought  about.  The  world  has  given 
us  carte  blanche  if  we  preserve  our  position  in  society.  What  men  shrink  from  is 
exposure  and  shame.  If  all  sins  were  revealed,  who  could  bear  it?  If  the  earth  were 
a  moral  mirror,  who  could  walk  upon  it?  But  detection  surely  comes  in  God's  way — 
in  Ood's  great  day  when  he  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1—16. — Dealing  with  certain  classes  in  the  Church.  I.  Behaviour  oir  Timothy 

TOWARD  THE  ELDER  AND  YOUNGER   CHURCH  MEMBERS  OF  BOTH  SEXES.      "  Rebuke  not  an 

elder,  but  exhort  him  as  a  father;  the  younger  men  aa  brethren:  the  elder  women  as 
mothers ;  the  younger  as  sisters,  in  all  purity."  A  minister  has  to  deal  with  people 
differing  in  age  and  sex.  If  he  is  a  young  minister  like  Timothy,  he  has  a  difficult  part 
to  act.  It  may  happen  that  one  who  is  very  much  his  elder  is  guilty  of  an  offence. 
How  is  he  to  conduct  himself  toward  him  ?  He  is  not  to  rebuke  him  sharply,  as  the 
word  means,  being  different  from  what  is  employed  in  2  Tim.  iv.  2,  where  authority  is 
given  to  rebuke.  Along  with  the  authority  that  belongs  to  his  office,  there  ia  to  be 
such  respect  as  is  due  by  a  child  to  a  father.  Entreaty  will  therefore  not  be  separated 
from  the  presentation  of  duty.  If  it  is  younger  men  that  offend,  there  is  not  to  be 
wanting  the  respect  that  is  due  to  brethren.  If  it  is  the  elder  women  who  are  faulty, 
they  are  to  be  addressed  as  mothers.  "  Plead  with  your  mother,  plead  "  (Hos.  ii.  2). 
If  it  is  the  younger  women  who  have  to  be  dealt  with,  there  is  to  be  sisterly  regard, 
without  the  slightest  departure  from  propriety. 

II.  The  Church  boll  of  widows.  "  Honour  widows  that  are  widows  indeed."  The 
honour  requires  to  be  restricted,  to  harmonize  with  the  definition  of  them  that  are 
widows  indeed.  It  comes  to  be  their  being  placed  (ver.  9)  on  the  special  roll  of  Church 
widows.  Let  the  honour  not  be  lowered  by  being  too  widely  extended ;  let  it  be  con- 
fined to  them  that  are  really  deserving.  1.  Exclusion  of  those  who  have  claims  on 
children  or  grandchildren,  "But  if  any  widow  hath  children  or  grandchildren,  let 
them  learn  first  to  show  piety  towards  their  own  family,  and  to  requite  their  parents : 
for  this  is  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  Cod."  The  Church  is  not  to  be  charged  with  the 
care  of  widows  who  have  children  or  grandchildren  able  to  care  for  them.  Upon  them 
the  duty  falls,  before  falling  upon  the  Church.  This  is  only  how  a  sacred  regard  for 
parents  should  show  itself.  It  is  a  duty  founded  on  natural  justice,  viz.  requital  for 
services  rendered  to  them  by  parents.  And  it  cannot  but  be  pleasiug  to  God,  who  has 
laid  the  foundations  of  it  in  nature,  and  who  is  represented  by  the  parents,  so  that  what 
is  rendered  to  them  is  regarded  as  rendered  to  him.  2.  Qualification  of  being  desolate. 
"  Now  she  that  is  a  widow  indeed,  and  desolate."  The  widow  indeed  is  defined  as 
desolate  or  left  alone,  i.e.  who,  needing  to  be  cared  for,  has  none  of  her  own  to  care  for 
her.  (1)  Religion  of  her  position.  "  Hath  her  hope  set  on  God,  and  continueth  in 
supplication  and  prayers  night  and  day."  Having  no  expectation  from  any  earthly 
helper,  she  hath  her  hope  set  on  God,  i.e.  primarily  for  earthly  blessings  that  she  needs. 
She  is  also  by  her  destitution  led  to  dwell  more  upon  the  future  than  upon  the  present. 
She  is  also  by  her  loneliness  led  to  be  much  with  God.  She  addresses  God  in  connec- 
tion with  her  own  requirements,  but  she  does  not  forget  the  requirements  of  others ;  for 
her  prayers  extend  from  day  into  the  uight,  from  night  into  the  day.    Thus  is  her 


ch.  *.  1— 25.  j  THE  JPlfiST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHt.  llfi 

position  made  helpful  to  her  religious  life.  (2)  Irreligion  of  a  desolate  position.  "Bui 
she  that  giveth  herself  to  pleasure  is  dead  while  she  liveth."  In  the  absence  of  children 
or  grandchildren  that  can  care  for  her,  the  temptation  is,  where  a  woman  has  not  a 
lawful  way  of  making  a  living,  to  seek  a  living  by  giving  herself  up  to  unlawful 
pleasure.  Such  a  one  necessarily  loses  any  Christian  status  that  she  had  entitling  her 
to  be  cared  for  by  the  Church.  It  can  be  said  of  her  more  radically,  that  she  makes  a 
contradiction  of  her  life.  While  living,  she  is  making  of  herself  moral  rottenness.  As 
in  this  state  she  is  a  fit  object  for  Christian  sympathy.  And,  if  she  comes  to  see  herself 
to  be  in  this  state,  there  is  hope  for  her  from  him  who  hath  said,  "  Him  that  cometh 
unto  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  But  that  is  the  true  reading  of  her  state  upon 
which  all  effort  after  her  salvation  must  proceed,  "  She  is  dead  while  she  liveth."  Season 
for  insisting  on  the  qualification.  "These  things  also  command,  that  they  may  be 
without  reproach."  The  requirement  was  to  be  laid  authoritatively  upon  the  Church, 
in  the  interest  of  the  widows  themselves.  There  was  their  character  as  a  class  to  be 
protected.  Let  none  be  admitted  into  their  number  who  were  not  fit  subjects  for 
Church  support.  General  principle  by  which  this  case  is  ruled.  "  But  if  any  providet  h 
not  for  his  own,  and  specially  his  own  household,  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse 
than  an  unbeliever.''  The  law  for  the  believer  is  that  he  is  to  provide,  more  widely, 
for  his  own  and,  less  widely,  for  those  who  belong  to  the  family.  He  who  does  not 
observe  this  is  virtually  unchurching  himself.  He  is  falling  below  the  unbeliever,  who 
is  taught  by  nature,  or  by  his  religion  which  is  wrong  on  so  many  points,  to  do  as 
much.  With  regard  to  caring  for  parents,  Plutarch  says  that  all  men,  though  some 
may  think  otherwise,  say  that  nature  and  the  law  of  nature  requires  that  parents  should 
have  the  highest  honour  next  the  gods ;  that  men  can  do  nothing  more  acceptable  to 
the  gods  than  by  readily  heaping  favours  upon  their  parents ;  and  that  nothing  is  a 
greater  evidence  of  atheism  <>r  impiety  than  to  despise  them.  On  the  other  hand,  there 
is  a  clear  obligation  also  founded  in  nature  for  parents  to  provide  for  their  children 
while  they  are  in  a  state  of  dependence.  This  obligation  is  violated  by  the  man  who 
spends  on  his  own  lusts  what  should  be  spent  on  his  family.  3.  Qualification  of  age. 
"  Let  none  be  enrolled  as  a  widow  under  threescore  years  old."  In  accordance  with 
what  has  gone  before,  we  are  to  think  of  a  roll  of  widows  supported  by  the  Church,  for 
which  the  minimum  requirement  of  age  is  here  laid  down  as  sixty.  4.  Qualification 
of  regularity  of  marriage.  "  Having  been  the  wife  of  one  man."  It  is  difficult  to  see 
how  such  second  marriage  as  is  sanctioned  in  ver.  14  should  exclude  from  the  roll.  It 
is  better,  therefore,  to  think  of  some  irregularity,  such  as  unlawful  divorce  from  a  first 
husband.  5.  Qualification  of  servictableness.  "  Well  reported  of  for  good  works ;  if 
she  hath  brought  up  children,  if  she  hath  used  hospitality  to  strangers,  if  she  hath 
washed  the  saints'  feet,  if  she  hath  relieved  the  afflicted,  if  she  hath  diligently  followed 
every  good  work."  Some  of  the  works  are  mentioned  for  which  she  is  to  be  well  reported 
of.  First,  what  she  has  done  for  children,  either  her  own  or  orphans.  To  bring  up 
children  well  implies  great  self-denial  and  power  of  management,  and  is  to  do  a  great 
service  to  the  Church.  Secondly,  what  she  has  done  for  strangers.  We  are  to  think  of 
their  being  entertained  for  the  Church.  If  they  were  not  Christians,  they  would  be 
sent  away  with  a  good  impression  of  Christianity.  Thirdly,  what  she  has  done  for  the 
saints.  The  washing  of  the  feet  is  common  in  the  East.  We  need  not  wonder  at 
stress  being  laid  on  her  performing  a  humble  service.  Humble  services  are  to  be  per- 
formed toward  the  members  of  the  Christian  circle,  for  the  sake  of  Christ  and  after  the 
example  of  Christ.  Fourthly,  what  she  has  done  for  the  afflicted,  or  hard  pressed  in 
any  way.  We  are  to  think  of  relief  being  afforded  by  a  visit  of  sympathy,  a  word  of 
encouragement,  the  undertaking  of  work  as  well  as  the  bestowal  of  charity.  It  is  added 
generally,  "  If  she  hath  diligently  followed  every  good  work."  It  is  evident  that  one 
who  had  been  so  serviceable  to  the  Church  would,  in  case  of  her  destitution,  have  a 
claim  to  be  supported  by  the  Church.  It  can  easily  be  seen,  too,  how,  with  such  qualifi- 
cations, she  would  be  expected,  in  lieu  of  the  support  rendered  to  her,  to  render  such 
service  to  the  Church  as  was  in  her  power.  Thus  the  roll  of  Church  widows  would  have 
the  honourable  character  of  a  roll  of  Church  workers.  And  we  can  think  of  widows 
being  admitted  upon  the  roll  who  did  not  need  Church  support,  but  wanted  to  do  Church 
work.  And  there  seems  to  have  been,  in  accordance  with  this,  in  the  early  Church,  an 
order  of  presbytery  widows,  who,  under  the  sanctions  of  the  Church,  attended  to  *-lie 


116  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [aa.r.  1— 25. 

sick  and  instructed  and  advised  the  younger  members  of  their  sex.  6.  Exclusion  of 
younger  widows.  "  But  younger  widows  refuse."  They  were  not  to  have  the  honour 
of  being  put  upon  the  roll,  though,  in  case  of  destitution,  not  beyond  Christian  help. 
(1)  Their  chmyedbleness.  "For  when  they  have  waxed  wanton  against  Christ,  they 
desire  to  many  ;  having  condemnation,  because  they  have  rejected  their  first  faith." 
Under  the  influence  of  grief,  their  first  thouuht  might  be  to  devote  thems<  Ives  to  Christian 
service,  and  with  that  view  to  apply  to  be  admitted  on  the  roll  of  Church  widows. 
But  there  would  be  danger  of  their  departing  from  that  idea  of  their  life.  The  fact  of 
their  desiring  to  marry  being  regarded  as  a  waxing  wanton  against  Christ  implies  that 
the  being  admitted  to  the  roll  was  a  coming  under  some  obligation  to  continue  in 
widowhood  for  the  sake  of  such  services  as  they  could  render.  Their  being  taken  off  the 
roll  implies  the  condemnation  of  their  rejecting  their  first  faith,  is.  departing  from  the 
idea  which,  at  the  first,  with  sacred  feelings,  they  had  adopted  for  their  future  earthly 
life.  (2)  Their  triviality.  "  And  withal  they  learn  also  to  be  idle,  going  about  from 
house  to  house ;  and  not  only  idle,  but  tattlers  also  and  busybodies,  speaking  things 
which  they  ought  not."  This  was  a  second  danger,  while  remaining  in  widowhood  and 
having  their  names  on  the  roll,  their  departing  from  the  seriousness  of  the  life  which  they 
had  chosen.  There  is  a  way  of  going  about  from  house  to  house  which  is  simply  a  wasting 
of  time.  This  leads  to  a  habit  of  gossiping,  and  a  habit  of  intermeddling.  Things  are 
said  which  ought  not  to  be  said — as  being  coloured  and  mischievous  in  their  consequences. 
(3.)  His  advice  to  them  confirmed  by  experience.  "  I  desire  therefore  that  the  younger 
widows  marry,  bear  children,  rule  the  household,  give  none  occasion  to  the  adversary 
for  reviling;  for  already  some  are  turned  after  Satan."  In  view  of  the  dangers  mentioned, 
the  apostle  appoints,  for  t  e  younger  widows,  marriage  and  its  duties.  That  would 
take  away  occasion  for  reviling.  Fome  who  bad  given  themselves  to  Christ  as  presbyter- 
widows  were  turned  after  Satan,  i.e.  married,  or  given  up  to  idle  habits.  (4)  Such  as 
needed  to  be  relieved.  "  If  any  woman  that  believeth  hath  widows,  let  her  relieve  them, 
and  let  not  the  Church  be  burdened ;  that  it  may  relieve  them  that  are  widows  indeed." 
This  touches  the  former  point  of  support.  If  they  married,  then  they  did  not  need 
Church  support.  But  what  was  to  be  done  with  lonely  and  destitute  young  widows 
who  remained  unmarried  ?  The  apostle  lays  the  burden  of  their  support  upon  a  believ- 
ing female  relative  (on  the  supposition  that  there  was  such).  She  is  to  undertake  the 
burden,  rather  than  that  the  Church  should  be  burdened.  It  is  implied  that,  in  the 
event  of  there  being  no  one  to  undertake  the  burden,  the  Church  is  to  step  in  and  act 
the  part  of  the  relative,  without,  however,  placing  her  meantime  upon  the  honourable 
roll  of  Church  widows. — R.  F. 

Vers.  17 — 25. — The  presbyterate.  I.  Honour  due  to  elders.  "  Let  the  elders  that 
rule  well  be  counted  worthy  of  double  honour,  especially  those  who  labour  in  the  word 
and  in  teaching."  As  associated  with  Paul,  Timothy  was  to  be  classed  as  an  extra- 
ordinary office-bearer  in  the  Church.  He  had  the  organizing  of  the  Ephesian  Church, 
but  it  was  intended  that  the  rule  should  permanently  reside  in  a  class  of  ordinary 
office-bearers  who  are  here  called  elders.  The  fact  is  plainly  stated  that  elders  were 
ordained  by  the  apostles  in  every  Church  (Acts  xiv.  23).  It  appears  that  the  organi- 
zation of  a  Church  was  regarded  as  defective  without  the  appointment  of  elders  (Titus 
i.  5).  In  the  Church  of  Bphesus,  as  in  all  other  Churches  that  we  read  of,  there  was 
a  plurality  of  elders.  All  the  elders  are  regarded  as  ruling  or  presiding,  i.e.  over  the 
brethren  who  composed  the  Church.  To  elders  it  belongs  to  administer  the  laws 
which  Christ  has  laid  down  for  the  government  of  his  Church,  and  to  take  the  general 
superintendence  of  the  affairs  of  the  congregation  over  which  they  are  placed.  It  is 
a  rule  in  which  good  qualities  may  be  evinced,  such  as  fidelity,  diligence,  impartiality, 
affectionateness,  a  habit  of  dependence  upon  Divine  grace.  EWers  as  such  are  to 
be  counted  worthy  of  honour,  but  those  that  rule  well  are  to  be  counted  worthy  of 
double  honour,  i.e.  the  honour  of  excellence  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties  added 
to  the  honour  belonging  to  their  office.  There  are  two  classes  of  elders — those  who 
merely  rule,  and  those  who,  besides  ruling,  are  charged  with  the  Word  and  with 
teaching.  It  is  an  honour  by  itself  to  have  to  do  with  the  Word,  and  especially  with 
the  teaching  of  it,  i.e.  to  be  teaching  elders  ;  but  those  who  have  not  only  the  office  but 
do  well  in  it — suggested  by  the  word  "labour" — are  to  be  counted  worthy  of  double  honour. 


oh.  t.  1—26.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  117 

II.  Their  maintenance.  "For  the  Scripture  saith,  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the 
ox  when  he  treadeth  out  the  corn.  And,  The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire."  Under 
the  honour  to  be  done  especially  to  the  laborious  teaching  elder,  is  brought  mainten- 
ance. This  is  enforced  by  a  reference  to  Deut.  xxv.  4.  The  Jewish  law  showed 
consideration  for  an  animal  that  had  to  labour.  The  ox  was  not  to  be  muzzled  when, 
in  Eastern  fashion,  treading  out  the  corn.  It  was  not  to  be  prevented  from  enjoying 
the  fruit  of  its  labours.  The  application  is  given  at  some  length  in  1  Cor.  ix.,  but 
it  is  simply  brought  out  here  by  a  proverb,  which  is  also  made  use  of  by  our  Lord. 
The  Christian  teacher  labours  as  really  as  the  ox  that  treads  out  the  corn.  Not  less 
than  the  ox  he  is  to  have  the  condition  of  labour,  viz.  maintenance.  He  is  to  have 
it  not  as  a  necessity,  but  on  the  principle  that  he  is  entitled  to  it  as  the  reward  of 
his  labour. 

III.  Theib  just  treatment  under  accusation.  "Against  an  elder  receive  not 
an  accusation,  except  at  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses."  There  is  reference 
to  a  well-known  regulation  of  the  Jewish  law.  It  was  especially  to  be  observed  in 
the  case  of  honoured  or  doubly  honoured  elders.  No  weight  was  to  be  attached  to 
unproved  private  complaints.  "It  might  easily  happen  in  a  Church,  so  large  and 
mixed  as  the  Ephesian,  that  one  or  another,  from  wounded  feelings  of  honour,  from 
mere  partisanship,  or  some  selfish  motive,  would  seek  to  injure  a  presbyter,  and  drag 
him  down  from  his  influential  position ;  and  against  this  the  precept  of  the  apostle 
was  the  best  safeguard." 

IV.  Discipline  if  shown  to  be  sinning.  "Them  that  sin  reprove  in  the  sight 
of  all,  that  the  rest  also  may  be  in  fear."  The  apostle  has  been  treating  of  elders; 
he  is  still  treating  of  elders  in  ver.  22.  If,  then,  ordinary  weight  is  to  be  attached 
to  the  context  in  interpretation,  the  conclusion  seems  certain  that  public  reproof  was 
only  enjoined  in  the  case  of  sinning  elders.  We  are  to  understand  that  the  accusation 
against  them  has  been  substantiated  by  two  or  three  witnesses,  and  that  by  continuing 
in  sin  they  exhibit  no  signs  of  repentance.  Let  such  be  publicly  reproved,  that,  if  the 
publicity  does  not  do  them  good,  it  may  at  least  cause  a  wholesome  fear  to  fall  upon 
others  of  their  class. 

V.  Solemn  adjuration.  "I  charge  thee  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  Christ  Jesus, 
and  the  elect  angels,  that  thou  observe  these  things  without  prejudice,  doing  nothing 
by  partiality."  The  form  of  the  adjuration  is  remarkable  for  the  proximity  in  which 
Christ  Jesus  stands  to  God.  If  we  are  led  to  think  of  God  as  being  omniscient,  we 
are  as  naturally  led  to  think  of  Christ  Jesus  as  being  omniscient,  i.e.  Divine.  The 
form  of  the  adjuration  is  also  remarkable  for  the  bringing  in  of  the  elect  angels, 
t.e.  honoured  to  be  the  chosen  objects  of  God's  love.  Their  omniscience  does  not 
belong  to  them  singly,  but  to  their  class,  which  is  frequently  represented  as  very 
numerous.  As  witnesses  of  what  is  now  done  on  earth  they  will  be  present  with  their 
Lord  on  the  day  of  judgment.  The  matter  of  the  adjuration  is  the  upholding  of  the 
presbyterate.  Let  none  of  the  order  be  prejudged  unfavourably;  let  none,  through 
favour,  be  spared,  if  their  sin  is  patent.  We  may  learn  from  the  solemnity  of  the 
adjuration,  how  highly  the  apostle  valued  the  honour  of  the  order. 

VI.  Care  in  appointing  to  the  order.  "Lay  hands  hastily  on  no  man,  neither 
be  partaker  of  other  men's  sins:  keep  thyself  pure."  The  laying  on  of  hands  in 
ordination,  which  is  clearly  referred  to  here,  is  symbolic  of  the  communication  of 
spiritual  gifts.  We  also  learn  from  the  language  here,  that  it  is  equivalent  to  recogni- 
tion on  the  part  of  those  ordaining.  They  are  accountable  thus  far,  that  if,  through 
hastiness,  they  have  admitted  unworthy  persons  into  the  order,  then  they  are  partakers 
of  their  sins.  .  As  having  to  pronounce  upon  others,  Timothy  was  to  keep  himself  pure ; 
his  own  conduct  was  to  be  above  suspicion. 

VII.  Timotht  cautioned.  "Be  no  longer  a  drinker  of  water,  but  use  a  little  wine 
for  thy  stomach's  sake  and  thine  often  infirmities."  Faley  makes  a  point  of  the  want 
of  connection.  "  The  direction  stands  between  two  sentences,  as  wide  from  the  subject 
as  possible."  He,  however,  puts  more  upon  this  than  it  will  bear.  There  is  a  certain 
Epistolary  negligence,  but  there  is  connection.  It  occurs  to  the  apostle  that  the 
command  to  keep,  himself  pure  might  be  too  strictly  interpreted  by  Timothy.  He 
was  not  to  be  regarded  as  enjoining  the  utmost  abstinence  on  him.  On  the  contrary, 
his  opinion  was  that  Timothy  was  abstinent  beyond  what  his  health  demanded.    He 


118 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  T.  40THY.  [oh.  vi.  1— 21, 


was  a  drinker  of  water,  i.e.  accustomed  to  the  exclusive  use  of  ater  m  a  drink. 
Whatever  his  reasons  for  adopting  this  course,  it  was  too  rigorous  for  him.  He  needed 
a  little  wine  for  his  stomach's  sake  and  his  often  infirmities.  This  is  not  certainly 
to  be  construed  into  a  licence  for  the  unlimited  use  of  wine.  He  is  only  recommended 
the  use  of  a  little  wine.  And  the  very  reason  which  is  given  for  its  use  is  against 
its  use  where  the  same  reason  does  not  exist.  It  is  only  too  obvious  that  alcohol 
is  destructive  to  the  stomach,  and  the  fruitful  cause  of  infirmities.  It  is  destructive 
to  the  brain  as  well  as  to  the  stomach.  "  There  is  quite  a  marked  type  of  mental 
degeneration  which  may  result  from  continuous  drinking  during  ten  years  without 
one  instance  of  drunkenness.  We  have,  as  a  statistical  fact,  that  from  fifteen  to  twenty 
per  cent,  of  the  actual  insanity  of  the  country  is  produced  by  alcohol."  In  the  name 
of  health,  then,  its  use  is  to  he  feared ;  but,  where  health  demands  the  use  of  wine, 
it  is  a  sin  not  to  use  it.  For  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  have  his  strength  of  body 
at  a  maximum  for  him. 

VIH.   A   POINT    TO  BE   CONSIDERED  IN  THE  JUDQINQ  OF    MEN    FOE  OFFICE.       "'  Some 

men's  sins  are  evident,  going  before  unto  judgment ;  and  some  men  also  they  follow 
after.  In  like  manner  also  there  are  good  works  that  are  evident ;  and  such  M  are 
otherwise  cannot  be  hid."  Present  judging  has  a  look  forward  to  future  judging. 
To  future  judgment  all  actions,  bad  and  good,  are  regarded  as  going  forward.  But 
there  is  a  difference,  both  in  the  case  of  bad  actions  and  of  good  actions.  Some  men's 
sins  are  notorious ;  and,  as  heralds,  go  before  them  to  judgment,  proclaiming  their 
condemnation.  With  regard  to  such,  judging  for  office  is  an  easy  matter;  but  it 
is  not  bo  with  others.  "  Their  sins  are  first  known  after  and  by  the  judgment,  not 
known  beforehand  like  the  first  named.  In  regard  to  those  whose  character  is  not 
yet  clear,  circumspection  in  our  judgment  cannot  be  too  strongly  urged."  The  same 
difference  applies  to  good  works.  Some  are  as  clear  as  noonday ;  and  therefore  there 
can  be  no,  hesitation  in  regard  to  the  doers  of  them.  There  are,  however,  other  good 
works  which  are  not  thus  clear;  these  cannot  be  hid  longer  than  the  judgment.  In 
view  of  the  discovery  of  good  deeds  at  present  unknown,  we  cannot  be  too  circum- 
spect in  our  judgment  of  men,  lest  by  our  hastiness  we  do  injury  to  any. — B,  ff. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VI 


Ver.  I. — Are  tenants  for  servants  a*  are, 
AT.;  (he  doctrine  for  his  doctrine,  A.V. 
Servants ;  literally,  slaves.  That  slaves 
formed  a  considerable  portion  of  the  first 
Christian  Churches  may  be  inferred  from 
the  frequency  wiih  which  their  duties  are 
pressed  upon  them  (see  X  Cor.  vii.  21 — 24 ; 
xii.  13 ;  Eph.  vi.  5—8 ;  Col.  iii.  11, 22 ;  1  Pet. 
ii.  18  (oi  otKerai) ;  see  also  1  Cor.  i.  27 — 29). 
It  must  have  been  an  unspeakable  comfort 
to  the  poor  slave,  whose  worldly  condition 
was  hopeless  and  often  miserable,  to  secure 
his  place  as  one  of  Christ's  freemen,  wi:h 
the  sure  hope  of  attaining  "the  glorious 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God."  Under  the 
yoke ;  t.e. "  the  yoke  of  bondage  "  (Gal.  v.  1). 
Perhaps  the  phrase  contains  a  touch  of  com- 
passion for  their  state  (com p.  Acts  xv.  10). 
How  beautiful  is  the  contrast  suggested  in 
Matt.  xi.  29,  SO!  Masters  (Seo-irtiras) ;  the 
proper  word  in  relation  to  SovAos.  The 
doctrine  (rj  5<5a<n«tAia);  equivalent  to 
"Christianity,"  as  taught  by  the  apostles 
and  their  successors  (see  the  frequent  use  of 
the  word  in  the  pastoral  Epistles,  though 


with  different  shades  of  meaning  (ch.  i  10 ; 
iv.  6,  13,  16;  v.  17;  2  Tim.  iii.  10;  iv.  3; 
Titus  i.  9 ;  ii.  10,  etc).  Blasphemed  (compare 
the  similar  passage,  Titus  ii.  5,  where  <S  \6yos 
toS  0€oC  answers  to  y  Si&acrKaXlt  here). 
BAa<r</>i)/ie(i'  does  not  necessarily  mean 
"blaspheme"  in  its  restricted  sense,  hut  as 
often  means  "  to  speak  evil  of,"  "  to  defame," 
and  the  like.  If  Christian  slaves  withheld 
the  honour  and  respect  due  to  their  masters, 
it  would  be  as  sure  to  bring  reproach  upon 
the  Christian  doctrine  as  if  it  taught  in- 
subordination and  rebellion. 

Ver.  2. — Let  them  serve  them  the  rather  for 
rather  do  them  service,  A.V. ;  that  partake  of 
the  benefit  are  believing  and  beloved  for  are 
faithful  and  beloved,  partakers  of  the  benefit, 
A.V.  They  that  have  believing  masters. 
The  direction  in  the  preceding  verse 
applied  to  all  slaves,  though  chiefly  to  what, 
as  Alford  says,  was  far  the  commonest  case, 
that  of  those  who  had  unbelieving  masters. 
But  now  he  adds  a  caution  with  regard  to 
the  Christian  slave  of  a  Christian  master. 
There  was  a  danger  lest  the  feeling  that 
slaves  and  masters  are  brothers  in  Ci  rist 
should  unduly  interfere  with  the  respect 


OH.  YI.  1 — 21.J 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


119 


which  he  owed  him  as  his  master.  And  so 
St  Paul  addresses  a  word  of  special  advice 
to  such.  Let  them  not  despise  them.  Let 
not  their  spiritual  equality  with  their 
masters  lead  them  to  underrate  the  worldly 
difference  that  separates  them ;  or  to  think 
slightly  of  the  authority  of  a  master  rela- 
tively to  his  slaves  (comp.  2  Pet.  ii.  10). 
But  let  them  serve  them  the  rather,  because 
they  that  partake  of  the  benefit  are  believing 
and  beloved.  There  is  a  good  deal  of 
obscurity  in  this  sentence,  but  it  may  be 
observed  first  that  the  grammatical  render- 
ing of  the  B.V.  is  clearly  right,  and  that  of 
the  A.Y.  clearly  wrong.  "They  that  par- 
take of  the  benefit"  is  beyond  all  doubt  the 
subject,  and  not  the  predicate.  Then  the 
construction  of  the  two  sentences  (this  and 
the  preceding  one)  makes  it  certain  that  the 
subject  in  this  sentence  (of  ttjj  tvepyeerlas 
ivriKaii.Pav6ntvoi)  are  the  same  persons  as 
the  SiaitoTou  in  the  preceding  sentence, 
because  it  is  predicated  of  them  both  that 
they  are  moW,  and  of  both  that  they  are, 
in  convertible  terms,  aymrriTot  and  &.$( \<poi.' 
And  this  leads  us,  with  nearly  certainty,  to 
the  further  conclusion  that  the  ebepyeo-la, 
the  beneficium,  or  "benefit,"  spoken  of  is 
that  especial  service — that  service  of  love  and 
good  will  running  ahead  of  necessary  duty, 
which  the  Christian  slave  gives  to  the 
Christian  master;  a  sense  which  the  very 
remarkable  passage  quoted  by  Alford  from 
Seneca  strikingly  confirms.*  The  only  re- 
maining difficulty,  then,  is  the  meaning 
"partake  of"  ascribed  to  avn\a/if)av6p.eiioi. 
But  this  is  scarcely  a  difficulty.  It  is  true 
that  in  the  only  two  other  passages  in  the 
New  Testament  where  this  verb  occurs,  and 
in  its  frequent  use  in  the  LXX.,  it  has  the 
sense  of  "helping"  (Lnke  i.  54;  Acts  xx. 
35);  bnt  there  is  nothing  strange  in  this. 
The  verb  in  the  middle  voice  means  to  "  lay 
hold  of."  You  may  lay  hold  of  for  the  pur- 
pose of  helping,  supporting,  clinging  to, 
laying  claim  to,  holding  in  check,  etc.  (see 
Liddell  and  Scott).  Here  the  masters  lay 
hold  of  the  benefit  for  the  purpose  of  enjoying 

1  Of  the  sixty-two  times  which  dytarnris  is 
used  in  the  New  Testament,  excluding  those 
in  which  it  is  applied  to  Jesus  Christ  as 
God's  beloved  Son  (ten  times),  it  is  applied 
thrice  to  the  love  of  Ood  to  man,  and  forty- 
nine  times  to  the  love  of  brother  to  brother. 

*  "  Quteritur  a  quibusdam  an  beneficium 
dare  servus  domino  possit,"  and  he 
resolves  the  inquiry  by  saying,  "Quicquid 
est  quodon  ex  imperio  sea  ex  voluntate 
prastatur,  beneficium  est"  (Seneca,  '  De 
Beneficiis,'  iii.  18).  This  similarity  of 
thought  is  undoubtedly  very  strong  evidence 
that  St.  Psuol  wai  acquainted  with  Seneca's 


It.  There  is  possibly  an  indication  in  the 
word  that  the  masters  actively  and  willingly 
accept  it— they  stretch  out  their  hand  to 
take  it.  There  does  not  seem  to  be  any 
sense  of  reciprocity,  as  some  think,  in  the 
use  of  dun.  The  sense  of  the  whole  passage 
seems  to  be  clearly,  "Let  not  those  who 
have  believing  masters  think  slightly  of 
their  authority  because  they  are  brethren ; 
but  let  them  do  them  extra  service,  beyond 
what  they  are  obliged  to  do,  for  the  very 
reason  that  those  whom  they  will  thus 
benefit  are  believing  and  beloved  brethren." 
Teach  (SlSaoice).  Observe  the  connection  of 
this  word  with  the  n  SiSturtcuKta  of  vers.  1,  3, 
and  elsewhere. 

Ver.  8. — Teaeheth  for  teach,  A.Y. ;  « 
different  doctrine  for  otherwise,  A.V. ;  eon- 
senteth  for  consent,  A.V. ;  sound  for  whole- 
some, A.V.  Teacheth  a  different  doctrine 
(eTcpoSiSoo-KoAei) ;  see  above,  ch.  i.  3,  note. 
Consenteth  (irpocrepxtTai);  very  common  in 
the  New  Testament,  in  the  literal  sense  of 
"coming  to"  or  "approaching,"  but  only 
here  in  the  metaphorical  sense  of  "  assenting 
to."  The  steps  seem  to  he,  first,  approaching 
a  subject  with  the  mind  with  a  view  of 
considering  it ;  and  then  consenting  to  it — 
coming  over  to  it.  The  term  irpoo~i)\vros,  a 
convert  to  Judaism,  and  the  phrase  from 
Irenaros  ('  Fragm.,'  ii. ),  quoted  by  Ellicott,  Ou 
rots  rav  'lovdaiav  d6yfiatri  irpoo'epxovTcu, 
"  They  do  not  fall  in  with,  or  agree  to,  the 
doctrines  of  the  Jews,"  sufficiently  illustrate 
the  usage  of  the  word  here.  Sound  (iyial- 
vovcri);  see  ch.  i.  10,  note.  Godliness 
(eucrf 0eia) ;  see  ch.  ii.  2,  note. 

Ver.  4. — Puffed  up  for  proud,  A.V. ; 
questionings  for  questions,  A.V. ;  disputes  for 
strifes,  A.V.  He  is  puffed  up  (rerttyoiTai) ; 
see  ch.  iii.  6,  note.  Doting  (vovmi);  here 
only  in  the  New  Testament,  but  found  occa- 
sionally in  the  LXX.  Applied  in  classical 
Greek  to  the  mind  and  body,  "  to  be  in  an 
unsound  state."  Here  it  means  "  having  a 
morbid  love  of  "  or  "  going  mad  about."  In 
this  morbid  love  of  questionings  and  disputes 
of  words,  they  lose  sight  of  all  wholesome 
words  and  all  godly  doctrine.  Questionings 
(fijT^o-eu) ;  see  ch.  i.  6,  note.  It  corresponds 
nearly  to  our  word  "controversies."  Dis- 
putes  of  words  (Aoyo/.iaxtas) ;  found  only 
here.  The  verb  A.o7oyuax«»  is  used  in  2 
Tim.  ii.  14.  Would  that  the  Church  had 
always  remembered  St.  Paul's  pithy  con- 
demnation of  unfruitful  controversies  about 
words  I  Surmisings  (vVoVoiai) ;  only  here  in 
the  New  Testament.  In  classical  Greek  it 
means  "suspicion,"  or  any  under-thought. 
The  verb  vitovoia  occurs  three  times  in  the 
Acts — "to  deem,  think,  or  suppose."  Here 
the  "surmisings"  are  those  uncharitable  in- 
sinuations in  which  angry  controversialists 
indulge  towards  one  another. 


120 


THE  FIRST    EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  yi.  1—21. 


Ver.  5. — Wranglingt  for  perverse  duput- 
ingi,  A.V.  and  T.B. ;  corrupted  in  mind  for 
of  corrupt  minds,  A.V. ;  bereft  for  destitute, 
A.V. ;  godliness  is  a  way  of  gain  for  gain  U 
godliness,  A.V.  Wranglings  (SiairaparpijSaE, 
K.T ;  irapaSiarpifat,  T.B.).  The  E.T.  has 
far  the  largest  weight  of  authority  in  its 
favour  (EUicott).  The  substantive  irapa- 
-rpifrh  in  Polybius  means  "provocation," 
"collision,"  "  friction,"  and  the  like.  Hence 
SiaTtapaTptfiii  (which  is  only  found  here) means 
"continued  wranglings."  The  substantive 
SiarpiQ-h  (English  diatribe)  means,  among 
other  things,  a  "  discussion  "  or  "  argument." 
The  addition  of  vdpa  gives  the  sense  of  a 
"perverse  discussion,"  or  "disputing." 
Bereft  (d-narrep-mxhoiv).  The  difference 
between  the  A.V.  "  destitute  "  and  the  B.V. 
"  bereft "  is  that  the  latter  implies  that  they 
once  had  possession  of  the  truth,  but  had  lost 
it  by  their  own  fault.  They  had  fallen  away 
from  the  truth,  and  were  twice  dead.  God- 
liness is  a  way  of  gain.  The  A.V.,  that  gain 
ii  godlinen,  is  clearly  wrong,  utterly  con- 
fusing the  subject  with  the  predicate,  and 
so  destroying  the  connection  between  the 
clause  and  ver.  6.  A  way  of  gain  (iro/uovuis); 
only  here  and  in  ver.  6  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, but  found  in  Wisd.  xiii.  19 ;  xiv.  2 ; 
Polybius,  etc.  It  signifies  "  a  source  of 
gain,"  "  a  means  of  making  money,"  or,  in 
one  word,  "a  trade."  The  same  oharge  is 
brought  against  the  heretical  teachers  (Titus 
i.  11).  The  cause  in  the  A.V.  and  T.B., 
from  such  withdraw  thyself,  is  not  in  the 
E.T. 

Ver.  6. — Godliness,  etc.  The  apostle 
takes  up  the  sentiment  which  he  had  just 
condemned,  and  shows  that  in  another  sense 
it  is  most  true.  The  godly  man  is  rich 
indeed.  For  he  wants  nothing  in  this  world 
but  what  God  has  given  him,  and  has  ac- 
quired riches  which,  unlike  the  riches  of 
this  world,  he  can  take  away  with  him 
(com  p.  Luke  zii.  33).  The  enumeration  of 
his  acquired  treasures  follows,  after  a  paren- 
thetical depreciation  of  those  of  the  covetous 
man,  in  ver.  11.  The  thought,  as  so  often 
in  St.  Paul,  is  a  little  intricate,  and  its  flow 
checked  by  parenthetical  side -thoughts. 
But  it  seems  to  be  as  follows :  "  But  godli- 
ness is,  in  one  sense,  a  source  of  great  gain, 
and  moreover  brings  conteutment  with  it — 
contentment,  I  say,  for  since  we  brought 
nothing  into  the  world,  and  can  carry 
nothing  out,  we  have  good  reason  to  be  con- 
tent with  the  necessaries  of  life,  food  and 
raiment.  Indeed,  those  who  strive  for  more, 
and  pant  after  wealth,  bring  nothing  but 
trouble  upon  themselves.  For  the  love  of 
money  is  the  root  of  all  evil,  etc  Thou, 
therefore,  O  man  of  God,  instead  of  reaching 
after  worldly  riches,  procure  the  true  wealth, 
and  become  rich  in  righteousness,  godliness, 


faith,"  etc.  (ver.  II).  The  phrase,  *E<m  U 
Ttopia/ibi  iityat  fi  tbffeficta  fieri  airapmtat, 
should  be  construed  by  making  the  furi 
couple  wopurp6s  with  avTapKeias,  so  as  to 
express  that  "godliness"  is  both  "gain" 
and  "contentment"  —  not  as  if  abrapxela 
qualified  ev<re0efa — that  would  have  been 
expressed  by  the  collocation,  it  /ura  abrap- 
Kelas    cbffe&ela.       Contentment    (aurap/fffa). 

The  word  occurs  elsewhere  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament only  in  2  Cor.  ix.  8,  where  it  is  ren- 
dered, both  in  the  B.V.  and  the  A.V., 
"sufficiency."  The  adjective  abripKns, 
found  in  Phil.  iv.  11  (and  common  in  clas- 
sical Greek),  is  rendered  "content."  It 
means  "  sufficient  in  or  of  itself  " — needing 
no  external  aid — and  is  applied  to  persons, 
countries,  cities,  moral  qualities,  etc.  The 
substantive  abrapicela  is  the  condition  of  the 
person,  or  thing,  which  is  airipKns. 

Ver.  7.— The  for  this,  A.V. ;  for  neither 
can  we  for  and  it  is  certain  we  can,  A.V.  and 
T.B. ;  anything  for  nothing,  A.V.  For  nei- 
ther, etc.  The  omission  of  SrjXov  in  the 
B.T.,  though  justified  by  many  of  the  best 
manuscripts,  makes  it  difficult  to  construe 
the  sentence,  unless,  with  Buttman,  we  con- 
sider Sri  as  elliptical  for  Srj\ov  Sri.  The 
B.V.  "  for  neither  "  seems  to  imply  that  the 
truth,  "  neither  can  we  carry  anything  out," 
is  a  consequence  of  the  previous  truth  that 
"  we  brought  nothing  into  the  world,"  which 
is  not  true.  The  two  truths  are  parallel, 
and  the  sentence  would  be  perfectly  clear 
without  either  SrjKov  or  tru 

Ver.  8. — But  for  and,  A.  V. ;  covering  for 
raiment,  A.V. ;  we  shall  be  for  let  us  be,  A.V. 
Food  QSiarpoipas);  here  only  in  the  New 
Testament,  but  common  in  the  LXX.,  rare 
in  classical  Greek.  Covering  {ffKeirdapuna); 
also  a  fiTrof  Kty6pLtvoi>  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, not  found  in  the  LXX.,  and  rare  in 
classioal  Greek.  The  kindred  words,  nntnn 
and  aictiras,  with  their  derivatives,  are  used 
of  the  covering  or  shelter  of  clothes,  or  tents, 
or  houses.  St.  Paul  may  therefore  have 
used  an  uncommon  word  in  order  to  com- 
prise the  two  necessaries  of  raiment  and 
house,  though  Huther  thinks  this  "  more 
than  improbable."  The  use  of  the  word 
"  covering  "  in  the  B.V.  seems  designed  to 
favour  this  double  application.  EUicott 
thinks  the  word  "probably  only  refers  to 
clothing."  Alford  says, "  Some  take  '  cover- 
ing' of  both  olothing  and  dwelling,  perhaps 
rightly."  If  one  knew  where  St.  Paul  got 
the  word  VKevdanara  from,  one  could  form 
a  more  decided  opinion  as  to  his  meaning. 
We  shall  be  therewith  content  (&pitt<r6i)<ro- 
fieBa).  The  proper  meaning  of  apKfi(r8<u 
followed  by  a  dative  is  "  to  be  content  with  " 
(Luke  iii.  14;  Heb.  xiii  5).  There  is  pro- 
bably a  covert  hortative  force  in  the  use  of 
the  future  here. 


OH.  VI.  1—21.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


121 


Ver.  9.  —  Desire  to  for  wiU,  A.V. ;  a 
temptation  for  temptation,  A.V. ;  many  for 
into  many,  A.V. ;  such  as  for  which,  A.V. 
A  temptation.  The  reason  of  the  insertion 
of  the  article  before  "  temptation "  in  the 
R.  V.  seems  to  be  that,  as  the  three  substan- 
tives all  depend  upon  the  one  preposition 
fls,  they  ought  all  to  be  treated  alike.  But 
if  so,  the  reasoning  is  not  good,  because 
"temptation  "  implies  a  state,  not  merely  a 
single  temptation.  The  prefixing  of  the 
article  is  therefore  improper.  It  should  be 
"  temptation,"  as  in  the  A.V.  and  in  Matt. 
vi.  13 ;  xxvi.  41 ;  Luke  xxii.  40,  etc  Snare 
(■xaylSa) ;  as  ch.  iii.  7,  note.  The  concur- 
rence of  the  two  words  ireipa<r/wjj  and  17017(5 
show  that  the  agency  of  Satan  was  in  the 
writer's  mind.  Several  good  manuscripts, 
Fathers,  and  versions,  add  the  words  toO 
Sia$6\ov  after  ^07(80  (Huther).  Drown 
(Bu8i£ovtn) ;  only  here  and  Luke  v.  7  in  the 
New  Testament.  Found  also  in  2  Mace 
xii.  4,  and  in  Polybius — "to  sink,"  tran- 
sitive. Destruction  and  perdition  (o\t8poy 
Kal  an tixaav).  The  two  words  taken  to- 
gether imply  utter  ruin  and  destruction  of 
body  and  soul.  "OAeflpos,  very  common  in 
classical  Greek,  occurs  in  1  Cor.  v.  5;  1 
Thess.  v.  3 ;  2  Thess.  i.  9,  and  is  limited  in 
the  first  passage  to  the  destruction  of  the 
body,  by  the  words,  rrjs  capitis.  'AiraAeJo, 
less  common  in  classical  Greek,  is  of  fre- 
quent use  in  the  New  Testament,  and,  when 
applied  to  persons,  seems  to  be  always  used 
(except  in  Acts  xxv.  16)  in  the  sense  of 
"perdition"  (Matt.  vii.  13;  John  xvii.  12; 
Eom.  ix.  22;  Phil.  iii.  19;  2  Thess.  ii.  3; 
Heb.  x.'39 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  7;  Eev.  xvii.  3,  etc). 
Ver.  10. — A  root  for  the  root,  A.V. ;  all 
kinds  of  for  all,  A.V. ;  some  reaching  after 
for  while  some  coveted  after,  A.V. ;  have  been 
led  astray  for  they  have  erred,  A.V. ;  have 
pierced  for  pierced;  A.V.  Love  of  money 
(<pt\apyvpla) ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, but  found  in  the  LXX.  and  in  clas- 
sical Greek.  The  substantive  <pi\&pyvpos  is 
found  in  Luke  xvi.  14  and  2  Tim.  iii.  2.  A 
root.  The  root  is  better  English.  Moreover, 
the  following  iravruy  t&v  kukHv  (not  ir6\\a» 
KaK&v)  necessitates  the  giving  a  definite 
sense  to  plfa,  though  it  has  not  the  article ; 
and  Alford  shows  clearly  that  a  word  like 
pi(a,  especially  when  placed  as  here  in  an 
emphatic  position,  does  not  require  it  (coin p. 
1  Cor.  xi.  3,  where  in  the  second  and  third 
clause  Ketpa\ii,  being  in  the  emphatic  place, 
has  not  the  article).  Alford  also  quotes  a 
striking  passage  from  Diog.  Laert.,  in  which 
he  mentions  a  Buying  of  the  philosopher 
Diogenes  that  "  the  love  of  money  (ft  <pi\ap- 
yvpta)  is  the  metropolis,  or  home,  axbrw  raiv 
KaKuy."  Beaching  after  (opcyineyoi).  It  has 
been  justly  remarked  that  the  phrase  is 
slightly  inaccurate.     What  some  reach  after 


is  not  "  the  love  of  money,"  but  the  mone\ 
itself.  To  avoid  this,  Hofmann  (quoted  by 
Huther)  makes  j>i(a  the  antecedent  to  ?j, 
and  the  metaphor  to  be  of  a  person  turning 
out  of  his  path  to  grasp  a  plaDt  which  turns 
out  to  be  not  desirable,  but  a  root  of  bitter- 
ness. This  is  ingenious,  but  hardly  to  be 
accepted  as  the  true  interpretation.  Pierced 
themselves  through  (TrspUvetpav') ;  only  here 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  rare  in  classical 
Grtek.  But  the  simple  verb  ireipw,  to 
"  pierce  through,"  "  transfix,"  applied  espe- 
cially to  "  spittiDg  "  meat,  is  very  common  in 
Homer,  who  also  applies  it  metaphorically 
exactly  as  St.  Paul  does  here,  to  grief  or 
pain.  *05i5j/$(ri  irenapfievos,  "pierced  with 
pain"  ('II.,' v.  399). 

Ver.  11. — 0  man  of  God.  The  force  of 
this  address  is  very  great.  It  indicates  that 
the  money-lovers  just  spoken  of  were  not 
and  could  not  be  "  men  of  God,"  whatever 
they  might  profess ;  and  it  leads  with  sin- 
gular strength  to  the  opposite  direction  in 
which  Timothy's  aspirations  should  point. 
The  treasures  which  he  must  covet  as  "a 
man  of  God"  were  "righteousness,  godli- 
ness, faith,  love,  patience,  meekness."  For 
the  phrase,  "  man  of  God,"  see  2  Tim.  iii. 
17  and  2  Pet.  i.  21.  In  the  Old  Testament 
it  always  applies  to  a  prophet  (Deut.  xxxiii. 
1;  Judg.  xiii.  6;  1  Sam.  ii.  27;  1  Kings 
xii.  22  ;  2  Kings  i.  9;  Jer.  xxxv.  4;  and  a 
great  many  other  passages).  St.  Paul  uses 
the  expression  with  especial  reference  to 
Timothy  and  his  holy  office,  and  here,  per- 
haps, in  contrast  with  the  robs  avOpdnrovs 
mentioned  in  ver.  9.  Flee  these  things. 
Note  the  sharp  contrast  between  "  the  men  " 
of  the  world,  who  reach  aftor,  and  the  man 
of  God,  who  avoids,  <pi\apyvpia.  The  ex- 
pression, "these  things,"  is  a  little  loose, 
but  seems  to  apply  to  the  love  of  money, 
and  the  desire  to  be  rich,  with  all  their 
attendant  "  foolUh  and  hurtful  lusts."  The 
man  of  God  avoids  the  perdition  and  mani- 
fold sorrows  of  the  covetous,  by  avoiding  the 
covetousness  which  is  tiieir  root.  Follow 
after  (Stance) ;  pursue,  in  direct  contrast  with 
<pfiye,  flee  from,  avoid  (see  2  Tim.  ii.  22). 
Meekness  (irpduwaBeiav).  This  rare  word, 
found  in  Philo,  but  nowhere  in  the  New 
Testament,  is  the  reading  of  the  B.T.  (in- 
stead of  the  irpadrriTa  of  the  T.B.)  and 
accepted  by  almost  all  critics  on  the  autho- 
rity of  all  the  older  manuscripts.  It  has 
no  perceptible  difference  of  meaning  from 
wpaihns,  meekness  or  gentleness. 

Ver.  12.— The  faith  for  faith,  A.V. ;  the 
-life  eternal  for  eternal  life,  A.V. ;  wast  for  art 
also,  A.V.  and  T.B. ;  didst  confess  the  good  con- 
fession for  hast  professed  a  good  profession, 
A.V. ;  in  the  sight  of  for  before,  A.V.  Fight 
the  good  fight.  This  is  not  quite  a  happy 
rendering.    'Ayciv  is  the  "contest''  at  the 


122 


THE  F1BST  El'ISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


(era.  vi  1—21. 


Olympic  assembly  for  any  of  the  prizes,  in 
wrestling,  chariot-racing,  foot-racing,  music, 

or  what  not.     'Ayaivl^aSai  Thy  aywva  is  to 

"earry  on  such  a  contest "  (oomp.  2  Tim.  iv. 
7).  The  comparison  is  different  from  that 
in  ch.  i.  18,  *'lva  CTpareirt  .  .  •  rjjv  koKtjv 
arpartiav, "  That  thou  mayest  war  the  good 
warfare."  Tbe  faith.  There  is  nothing  to 
determine  absolutely  whether  i)  wlarts  here 
means  faith  subjectively  or  "  the  faith  "  ob- 
jectively, nor  does  it  much  matter.  The 
result  is  the  same ;  but  the  subjective  sense 
seems  the  most  appropriate.  Lay  hold,  etc. ; 
as  the  fSpafieioy  or  prize  of  the  contest  (see 
1  Cor.  ix.  24,  25).  Whereunto  thou  wast 
called.  So  St.  Paul  continually  (Bom.  i.  1, 
6,  7 ;  viii.  28,  30 ;  1  Cor.  i.  29 ;  Eph.  iv.  1 ; 
1  These,  ii.  12 ;  and  numerous  olher  pas- 
sages). He  seems  here  to  drop  the  metaphor, 
as  in  the  following  clause.  Didst  confess 
the  good  confession.  The  connection  of  this 
phrase  with  the  call  to  eternal  life,  and  the 
allusion  to  one  special  occasion  on  which 
Timothy  "had  confessed  the  good  confes- 
sion "  of  his  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  seems  to 
point  dearly  to  his  baptism  (see  Matt.  x. 
32;  John  ix.  22;  xii.  42;  Heb.  x.  23). 
The  phrase,  "  the  good  confession,"  seems  to 
have  been  technically  applied  to  the  bap- 
tismal confession  of  Christ  (compare  the  other 
Church  sayings,  ch.  i.  15 ;  iii.  1 ;  iv.  9 ;  2 
Tim.  ii.  11 ;  Titus  iii.  8).  In  the  sight  of 
many  witnesses.  The  whole  congregation  of 
the  Church,  who  were  witnesses  ol  his  bap- 
tism (see  the  rubric  prefixed  to  the  Order  of 
"Ministration  of  Public  Baptism"  in  the 
Book  of  Common  Prayer). 

Ver.  13. — I  cliarge  thee  for  I  give  thee  charge, 
A.V. ;  o/ for.  oe/ore(  in  italics),  A. V.;  thefota, 
A.V.  I  charge  thee.  It  has  been  well  observed 
that  the  apostl  e's  language  increases  in  solem- 
nity as  he  approaches  the  end  of  the  Epistle. 
This  word  mtparyytMa  is  of  frequent  use 
in  St.  Paul's  Epistles  (1  Cor.  vii.  10 ;  I  Thess. 
iv.  11  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  4,  6,  10,  12;  and  above, 
ch.  i.  3;  iv.  11 ;  v.  7).  In  the  sight  of  God, 
etc.  (compare  the  adjuration  in  ch.  v.  21). 
Who  qniekeneth,  etc  The  T.B.  has  (uo-noi- 
uvvToi.  The  R.T.  has  faoyoyovvros,  with 
no  difference  of  meaning.  Both  words  are 
used  in  the  LXX.  as  tbe  rendering  of  the 
Pihel  and  Hiphil  of  n«n.  As  an  epithet  of 
"  God,"  it  sets  before  us  the  highest  creative 
act  of  the  Almighty  as  "  the  Lord,  and  the 
Giver  of  life ; "  and  is  equivalent  to  "  the 
living  God"  (Matt.  xxvi.  63),  "the  God  of 
the  spirits  of  all  flesh"  (Numb.  xvi.  22). 
The  existence  of  "life"  is  the  one  thing 
which  baffles  the  ingenuity  of  science  in  its 
. i  (.tempts  to  dispense  with  a  Creator.  The 
good  confession  refers  to  our  Lord's  confes- 
ion  of  himself  as  "the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God,"  in  Matt,  xxvii.  11;  Luke  xxiii.  3; 
John  XTUi.  36,  37,  which  is  analogous  to 


the  baptismal  confession  (Acts  viii.  37 
(T.R.);  xvi.  31;  xix.  4,  5).  The  natural 
word  to  have  followed  fiaprvpeiy  was  fiaprvplav, 
as  above  6/io\oyiav  follow*  v/xoASyqaai ;  but 
St.  Paul  substitutes  the  word  of  cognate 
meaning,  d/xokoylav,  in  order  to  keep  the 

formula,  1]  KaA}}  SnoAoyta. 

Ver.  11. — The  iorthis,  A.V.J  without  reproach 
for  unrebukable,  A.V.  The  commandment 
(tV  Ivroki^v).  The  phrase  is  peculiar,  and 
must  have  some  special  meaning.  Perhaps, 
as  Bishop  Wordsworth  expounds  it,  "the 
commandment "  is  that  law  of  faith  and  duty 
to  which  Timothy  vowed  obedience  at  his 
baptism,  and  is  parallel  to  "  the  good  con- 
fession." Some  think  that  the  command 
given  in  vers.  11,  12  is  referred  to;  and 
this  is  the  meaning  of  the  A.V.  "this." 
Without  spot,  without  reproaoh.  There  is 
a  difference  of  opinion  among  commentators, 
whether  these  two  adjectives  (acnriAov,  aveni- 
KriwTov)  belong  to  the  commandment  or  to 
the  person,  i.e.  Timothy.  The  introduction 
of  as  after  T-riprjatu ;  the  facts  that  Ti)pr\aai. 
Tttr  lvT&\as,  without  any  addition,  means 
"to  keep  the  commandments,"  and  that  in 
the  New  Testament,  tairiXos  and  ivcVi^irTos 
always  are  used  of  persons,  not  things  (Jas. 
i.  27;  1  Pet.  i.  19;  2  Pet  iii.  14;  ch.  iii.  2; 
v.  7);  and  the  consideration  that  the  idea  of 
the  person  being  found  blameless  in,  or  kept 
blameless  unto,  the  coming  of  Christ,  is  a 
frequent  one  in  the  Epistles  (Jude  24;  2 
Pet.  iii.  14;  1  Cor.  i.  8;  Col.  i.  22;  1  Thess. 
iii.  13;  v.  23), — seem  to  point  strongly,  if  not 
conclusively,  to  the  adjectives  Ha-niAov  and 
iveirlMiirTov  here  agreeing  witli  ai,  not  with 
ivrohfo.1  The  appearing  (rfy  iwi(pavflav). 
The  thought  of  the  second  advent  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  always  prominent  in  the  mind  of  St. 
Paul  (1  Cor.  i.  7,  8;  ir.  6;  xv.  23;  Col.  iii. 
4;  1  Thess.  iii.  13;  iv.  15;  2  Thess.  i.  9, 
etc.),  seems  to  have  acquired  fresh  intensity 
amidst  the  troubles  and  dangers  of  the 
closing  years  of  his  life,  both  as  an  object 
of  hope  ami  as  a  motive  of  action  (2  Tim. 
i  10;  ii.  12;  iv.  1,  8;  Titus  ii.  13). 

Ver.  15. — Its  own  for  his,  A.V.  This  cor- 
rection seems  to  be  manifestly  right.  The 
same  phrase  is  rendered  in  ch.  ii.  6  and 
Titus  i.  3  "  in  due  time,"  in  the  A.V. ;  but 
in  the  R.V.  ii.  6  ii  "its  own  timeB,"  and  in 
Titus  i.  3  "  his  own  seasons.  In  Gal  vi.  9 
Katpif  isiip  is  also  rendered  "  in  due  season," 
in  both  the  A.V.  and  the  B.V.  Such  a 
phrase  as  h  /taipois  iSlots  must  be  taken 
everywhere  in  the  same  sense.  It  dearly 
means  at  the  Jilting  or  proper  time,  and  cor- 
responds to  the  n\iipa>na  toC  x/kWu,  "the 
fulness  of  time,"  in  Gal.  iv.  4.    The  two 

'  Bishop  Ellicott,  Dean  Alford,  Huther, 
and  others,  with  De  Wette,  refer,  however, 

these  adjectives  to  r^y  lyrokiiv. 


oa  -n.  1—21.] 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


123 


ideas  arc  combined  in  Luke  i  20  (ir\iipu9fi- 
aomat  lis  top  aatphv  mn&y)  and  lit  24 
(comp.  Eph.  i.  10).  Shall  show  (8t(Jei). 
Aeucvieiv  (irupavetav,  "to  show  an  appear- 
ing," is  a  somewhat  unusual  phrase,  and  is 
more  classical  than  scriptural.  The  verb 
and  the  object  are  not  of  cognate  sense  (as 
"to  display  a  display,"  or  "to  manifest  a 
manifestation"),  but  the  invisible  God,  God 
the  Father,  will,  it  is  said,  display  the 
Epiphany  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The 
wonder  displayed  and  manifested  to  the 
world  is  the  appearing  of  Christ  in  his  glory. 
The  Author  of  that  manifestation  is  God. 
The  blessed;  A  paxAptos  (not  eiXoyjiros,  as 
in  Mark  xiv.  61),  is  only  here  and  in  ch.  i. 
11  (where  see  note)  applied  to  God  in  Scrip- 
ture. The  blessed  and  only  Potentate.  The 
phrase  is  a  remarkable  one.  Awda-r-ns 
(Potentate),  which  is  only  found  elsewhere 
in  the  New  Testament  in  Luke  i.  52  and 
A«ts  vm.  27,  is  applied  to  God  here  only. 
It  is,  however,  so  applied  in  2  Mace.  iii 
24 ;  xii.  15 ;  xv.  23,  where  we  have  nia-ns 
i£ovaias  Suvdffrris,  Toy  iiiyav  toC  koV^ou 
HwAffTqv,  and  Avvdffra  rav  obpavav ;  in  all 
which  places,  as  here,  the  phrase  is  used  to 
signify,  by  way  of  contrast,  the  superiority  of 
the  power  of  God  over  all  earthly  power.  In 
the  first  of  the  above-cited  passages  the  lan- 
guage is  singularly  like  that  here  nsed  by 
St.  Paul.  For  it  is  said  that  A  xdtrris  i£ov<rlas 
Swd-xTTis,  "the  Prince  (or  Potentate)  of  all 
power  made  a  great  apparition,"  or  "  appear- 
ing "  QimQovelw  iuyd\r\v  iirolritrev),  for  the 
overthrow  of  the  blasphemer  and  persecutor 
Heliodorus.  St.  Paul  must  have  had  this 
in  his  mind,  and  compared  the  effect  of  "  the 
appearing  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  in  over- 
throwing the  Nerns  of  the  earth  with  the 
overthrow  of  Heliodorus  (comp.  1  Thess.  i. 
7 — 10).  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords, 
etc.  (compare  the  slightly  different  phrase 
in  Rev.  xvii  14  and  zix.  16,  applied  to  the 
Son).  So  in  Ps.  exxxvi.  2,  3,  God  is  spoken 
of  as  "  God  of  gods,  and  Lord  of  lords." 

Ver.  16. — Light  unapproachable  tot  the 
light  which  no  man  can  approach  unto,  A.V. ; 
sternal  for  everlasting,  A.V.  Unapproachable 
(airpfWox) ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testament, 
but  found  occasionally  in  the  later  classics, 
corresponding  to  the  more  common  £/8otos. 
Whom  no  man  hath  Been,  nor  can  see  (comp. 
ch.  i.  17  (where  see  note)  and  Kxod.  xxxiii. 
20—23).  The  appearance  of  the  "God  of 
Israel"  to  Moses  and  Aaron,  Nadab  and 
Abihn,  and  seventy  of  the  elders  of  Israel, 
related  in  Exod.  xxxiv.  9 — 11,  was  that  of 
the  Son  in  anticipation  of  the  Incarnation. 
The  invisibility  of  the  essential  Godhead  is 
also  predicated  in  our  Lord's  saying,  "  God 
is  a  Spirit "  (John  iv.  24).  This  whole  pas- 
sage is  a  magnificent  embodiment  of  the 
attributes  of  the  living  God,  supreme  blessed- 


ness and  almighty  power,  universal  dominion, 
and  unchangeable  being,  insorutable  majesty, 
radiant  holiness,  and  glory  inaccessible  and 
unapproachable  by  his  creatures,  save  through 
the  mediation  of  his  only  begotten  Son. 

Ver.  17. — This  present  for  this,  A.  V. ;  have 
their  hope  set  on  the  uncertainty  of  for  trust 
in  uncertain,  A.V. ;  on  God  for  in  the  living 
God,  A.V.  and  T.K.  Charge  (irapdyycwe) ; 
as  in  ch.  i.  3 ;  ir.  11 ;  v.  7 ;  and  in  ver.  13, 
and  elsewhere  frequently.  Rich  in  this 
present  world.  Had  St.  Paul  in  his  mind 
the  parable  of  Dives  and  Lazarus  (comp. 
Luke  xvi.  19,  25)?  That  they  be  not  high- 
minded  (^7)  ityn\o(ppove7v) ;  elsewhere  only  in 
Bom.  xi.  20.  The  words  compounded  with 
tyiiXAs  have  mostly  a  bad  sense — "  haughti- 
ness," "  boastfulncss,"  and  the  like.  The 
uncertainty  (iSigAoVirri) ;  here  only  in  the 
New  Testament,  but  used  in  the  same  sense 
in  Polybius  (see  &5ijXot  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  8;  and 
&5tj  ao>  s  in  1  Cor.  ix.  26).  The  A.V.,  though 
less  literal,  expresses  the  tense  much  better 
than  the  B.V.,  which  is  hardly  good  English. 
Who  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy ; 
for  enjoyment.  The  gifts  are  God's.  Trust, 
therefore,  in  the  Giver,  not  in  the  gift.  The 
gift  is  uncertain ;  the  Giver  liveth  for  ever. 
(For  the  sentiment  that  God  is  the  Giver  of 
all  good,  comp.  J  as.  i  17;  Ps.  civ.  28;  oxlv. 
16,  etc.) 

Ver.  18 That  they  be  ready  for  ready,  A.V. 

So  good  (A,ya6ocpyth>;  here  only,  for  the  more 
common  iyaSoitoteTy).  That  they  be  rich  in 
good  works  (ch.  v.  10,  note);  not  merely  in 
the  perishing  riches  of  this  present  world — 
the  same  sentiment  as  Matt.  vi.  19 — 21; 
Luke  xii  33  and  21.  Beady  to  distribute 
(evutTaSirovs) ;  here  only  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, and  rarely  in  later  classical  Greek. 
The  opposite,  "  close-handed,"  is  oW/terd. 
Soto;.  The  verb  /lera&iSapu  means  *  to  give 
to  others  a  share  or  portion  of  what  one  has" 
(Luke  iii  11;  Bom.  i.  11;  xii  8;  Eph.  iv. 
28 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  8).  Willing  to  oommunioate 
(koipwIkovs);  here  only  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, but  found  in  classical  Greek  in  a 
slightly  different  6ense.  "Communicative" 
is  the  exact  equivalent,  though  in  this  wider 
use  it  is  obsolete.  We  have  the  same  precept 
in  Heb.  xiii.  16,  "To  do  good  and  to  com- 
municate forget  not."  (For  KoirmveTv  in  the 
sense  of  "  giving,"  see  Rom.  xii.  13 ;  Gal.  vi. 
6;  Phil.  iv.  15;  and  for  Kowuvla  in  the  same 
sense,  see  Bom.  xv.  26;  2  Cor.  ix  13;  Heb. 
xiii.  16.) 

Ver.  19.— The  lift  which  U  life  indeed 
for  eternal  life,  A.V.  and  T.B.  Laying  up 
in  store  (ino8-ri<yavpl$ovTts) ;  only  here  in 
the  New  Testament,  but  one*  in  Wisd. 
iii  8,  and  occasionally  in  classical  Greek. 
A  good  foundation  (ffep/Aior  koAoV).  The 
idea  of  a  foundatim  is  always  maintained 
in  the  use  of  *qt&»a>  whether  it  b  used 


124 


THE  FIEST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  yi.  1—21. 


literally  or  figuratively  (Luke  zl.  48 ;  Eph. 
ii.  20;  Bev.  xxi.  14,  etc.).  There  It,  at 
first  sight,  a  manifest  confusion  of  meta- 
phors in  the  phrase,  "  laying  np  in  store  a 
foundation."  Bishop  Ellicott,  following 
Wiesinger,  understands  "a  wealth  of  good 
works  as  a  foundation."  Alford  sees  no 
difficulty  in  considering  the  "foundation" 
as  a  treasure.  Others  have  conjectured  km* 
inijXiov,  "a  stored  treasure,"  for  Benihiov. 
Others  understand  Bep.iKiov  in  the  sense  of 
64/j.a,  a  deposit  Others  take  b.iroBr\<ravplfav 
in  the  sense  of  "  acquiring,"  without  reference 
to  its  etymology.  But  this  is  unlikely,  the 
context  being  about  the  use  of  money,  though 
in  part  favoured  by  the  use  of  QuieravpiCeiy  in 
2  Pet.  iii.  7.  The  reader  must  choose  for 
himself  either  to  adopt  one  of  the  above 
explanations,  or  to  credit  St.  Paul  with  an 
unimportant  confusion  of  metaphors.  Any- 
how, the  doctrine  is  clear  that  wealth  spent 
for  God  and  his  Church  is  repaid  with 
interest,  and  becomes  an  abiding  treasure. 
Life  indeed  (rrjs  foras  fans);  so  ch.  v.  3,  5, 
t4»  Svtus  xhpas*  V  for »s  xhp<b  "widows 
indeed ; "  and  (John  viii.  36)  tvras  iKeiBepot, 
"  free  indeed,"  in  opposition  to  the  freedom 
which  the  jews  claimed  as  the  seed  of 
Abraham. 

Ver.  20. — Guard  for  'keep,  A.V. ;  unto  thee 
{otto  thy  trust,  A.V. ;  turning  away  from  for 
avoiding,  A.  V. ;  the  profane  for  profane  and 
vain,  A.  V.;  the  knowledge  which  is  falsely  for 
science,  falsely,  A.Y.  Guard  that  which  is 
committed  unto  thee;  tV  TrapaS^Ktiv  (irapo- 
KaraBi]K7iv,  T.B.).  Guard  for  keep  is  hardly 
an  improvement.  The  meaning  of  "  keep," 
like  that  of  <pv\&rru>,  is  to  guard,  keep  watch 
over,  and,  by  so  doing,  to  preserve  safe  and 
uninjured.  This  meaning  is  well  brought 
out  in  the  familiar  words  of  Ps.  exxi.,  "He 
that  keepeth  thee  will  not  slumber.  .  .  . 
He  that  keepeth  Israel  shall  neither  slumber 
nor  sleep.  The  Lord  himself  is  thy  Keeper  " 
(so  too  Ps.  cxxvii.  1 ;  Gen.  xxviii.  15,  etc). 
TXapadJiKTj  or  TrapaKaraSiiKv,  occurs  elsewhere 
in  the  New  Testament  only  in  2  Tim,  i.  12, 
14,  where  the  apostle  uses  it  (in  ver.  12)  of 
his  own  soul,  which  he  has  committed  to  the 
safe  and  faithful  keeping  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  j  but  in  ver.  14  in  the  same  sense  as 
here.  "That  good  thing  which  was  com- 
mitted unto  thee  guard  ['keep,'  A.V.]." 
There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  difference 
between  irapa9i)icri  and  lraptntaraSiiKTi,  whioh 
both  mean  "a  deposit,"  and  are  used  in- 
differently in  classical  Greek,  though  the 
latter  is  the  more  common.  The  precept  to 
Timothy  here  it  to  keep  diligent  and  watch- 


ful guard  over  the  faith  committed  to  his 
trust;  to  preserve  it  unaltered  and  uncorrupt, 
so  as  to  hand  it  down  to  his  successors  exactly 
the  same  as  he  had  received  it.  Oh  that  the 
successors  of  the  apostles  had  always  kept 
this  precept  (see  Ordination  of  Priests)! 
Turning  away  from  (itcrpe^/ieifos');  only 
here  in  the  middle  voice,  "turning  from,". 
"  avoiding,"  with  a  transitive  sense.  In  the 
passive  voice  it  means  "to  turn  out  of  the 
path,"  as  in  ch.  i.  6;  t.  15;  2  Tim.  iv.  4. 
The  profane  babblings  (see  ch.  iv.  7;  2  Tim. 
ii.  16);  Kevotpavia;  only  here  and  2  Tim.  ii. 
16,  "the  utterance  of  empty  words,"  "  words 
of  the  lips  "  (2  Kings  xviii.  20).  Oppositions 
(acTifleWs) ;  here  only  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. It  is  a  term  used  in  logic  and  in 
rhetorio  by  Plato,  Aristotle,  etc.,  for  "op- 
positions" and  "antitheses,"  laying  one 
doctrine  by  the  side  of  another  for  compari- 
son, or  contrast,  or  refutation.  It  seems  to 
allude  to  the  particular  method  used  by  the 
heretics  to  establish  their  tenets,  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  statements  of  the  Church  on 
particular  points — such  as  the  Law,  the 
Besurrection,  etc  The  knowledge  whioh  is 
falsely  so  called.  There  is  a  very  similar 
intimation  of  the  growth  of  an  empty  philo- 
sophy, whoBe  teaching  was  antagonistic  to 
the  teaching  of  Christ  in  Col.  ii.  8,  and  with 
which  St.  Paul  contrasts  the  true  yv&ais  in 
ver.  3.  This  was  clearly  the  germ  (called 
by  Bishop  Lightfoot  "  Gnostic  Judaism  ")  of 
what  was  later  more  fully  developed  as  the 
Gnostic  heresy,  which,  of  course,  derived  its 
name  from  yv&tris,  knowledge  or  science,  to 
which  they  laid  claim  (see  Bishop  Light- 
foot's  able  'Introduction  to  the  Epistle  to 
Colossians,'  specially  p.  100 ;  and  his  notes 
on  oh.  ii.  8,  sag.). 

Ver.  21.—  You  for  thee,  A.V.  and  T.B. 
The  B.T.  omits  Amen.  Professing  (i-n-ayycK- 
Miisvoi);  see  ch.  ii.  10,  note.  Have  erred 
($iar6xt\(rav)',  ch.  i.  6,  note.  Grace  he  with 
you.  The  authorities  for  trot  and  Ofubr  re- 
spectively are  somewhat  evenly  balanced. 
The  T.B.  <rov  seems  in  itself  preferable,  as 
throughout  St.  Paul  addresses  Timothy  per- 
sonally, and  as  there  are  no  salutations  here, 
as  in  2  Timothy  and  Titus  (see  ch.  i.  18;  iii. 
14;  iv.  6,  etc;  vi.  11,  20).  This  shorter 
form,  t]  x&pis,  is  used  in  the  pastoral  Epistles 
(2  Tim.  iv.  22 ;  Titus  iii.  35)  for  the  fuller 
and  mure  usual  form,  'H  x&Pls  T0*>  Kvplov  fip&v 
'Irjo-oD  XpiffToC  (Bom.  xvi.  20 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  23 ; 
2  Thess.  iii.  18,  and  elsewhere).  The  short 
form  also  occurs  in  Ueb.  xiii.  25.  The 
words  are  a  gracious,  peaceful  ending  to  the 
Epistle. 


oa.Ti.1— 21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  125 


HOMILETICS. 

Ten.  1, 9. — The  doctrine  of  God.  Slaves,  led  doubtless  by  the  miseries  of  their 
condition  to  seek  the  ennobling,  comforting  privileges  of  the  gospel,  formed  a  con- 
siderable portion  of  the  first  congregations  of  disciples  (see  the  names  in  Rom.  xvi.  ; 
1  Cor.  i.  27, 28 ;  Eph.  vi.  6—8 ;  Col.  iii.  22—25 ;  Titus  ii.  9 ;  Philem.  10, 16 ;  1  Pet.  ii. 
18,  etc.).  Hence  so  many  exhortations  addressed  specially  to  them.  In  nothing, 
perhaps,  does  the  Divine  excellency  of  the  gospel  show  itself  more  strikingly  than  in 
the  adaptation  of  its  precepts  to  such  different  classes  of  society, and  in  the  wise  modera- 
:ion  with  winch  it  met  the  social  evils  of  life.  The  subjects  of  a  Nero  are  bid  to  honour 
:he  king,  the  slave  is  told  to  count  his  master  worthy  of  all  honour ;  and  the  motive 
for  this  self-denying  moderation  is  the  paramount  desire  not  to  bring  any  reproach  upon 
the  gospel  of  Christ.  The  world  shall  not  be  able  to  say  that  Christianity  is  a  breeder 
of  confusion,  or  that  the  peaceable  order  of  society  is  endangered  by  the  fanaticism  of 
the  servants  of  Christ.  And  yet  the  manly  self-respect  of  the  slave  is  wonderfully 
increased  by  being  reminded  that  he  is  the  servant  of  Christ ;  or,  again,  by  the  thought 
of  his  spiritual  freedom  as  a  child  of  God ;  or,  again,  by  his  brotherhood  with  his  master 
and  partnership  with  him  in  the  faith  and  love  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  He  has  before 
him  a  career  as  noble  and  as  dignified  as  his  master,  though  that  master  were  Cwsar 
himself.  And  while  he  patiently  submits  to  the  peculiar  trials  of  his  bodily  condition, 
he  is  transported  into  a  region  where  bodily  distinctions  are  of  no  account — where  the 
petty  differences  of  rich  and  poor,  bond  and  free,  are  swallowed  up,  and  melt  away, 
before  the  common  glory  of  the  children  of  God  and  the  common  privileges  of  Christian 
fellowship.  And  yet  all  the  while  he  maintains  the  respect  and  obedience  of  the  slave  to 
the  master.  Truly  the  doctrine  of  God  is  a  wise,  an  excellent,  and  a  worthy  doctriue, 
and  carries  with  it  its  own  credentials,  that  it  is  from  God. 

Vera.  3 — 6. — Heterodoxy.  It  is  a  great  mistake  to  limit  the  notion  of  heterodoxy  to 
the  holding  of  wrong  opinions  in  dogmatic  theology.  Heterodoxy  is  teaching  anything 
otherwise  than  as  the  Word  of  God  teaches  it.  Here  they  are  declared  to  be  heterodox 
who  depart  from  the  wholesome  teaching  of  Christ  concerning  the  duties  of  slaves  to 
their  masters,  and  use  language  in  speaking  to  slaves  which  is  provocative  of  strife  and 
envy,  of  railings  and  suspicions.  Such  men,  instead  of  being  guided  by  a  disinterested 
love  of  truth,  are  actuated  by  selfish  motives.  They  seek  to  curry  favour  with  those 
whose  cause  they  espouse,  and  receive  in  money  the  reward  of  their  patronage  of  the 
cause.  And  so  we  may  generally  discern  between  the  orthodox  and  the  heterodox  by  the 
methods  they  pursue,  and  the  results  they  attain.  The  one  seeks  to  promote  peace  and 
contentment  by  gentle  words  and  by  counsels  of  love  and  patience,  and  has  his  reward 
in  the  happiness  of  those  whom  he  advises.  The  other  flatters,  and  inflames  the  passions 
of  those  whom  he  pretends  to  befriend;  plays  upon  the  bad  parts  of  human  nature;  raises 
questions  which  tend  to  loosen  the  joints  which  bind  society  together ;  declaims  and 
fumes  and  agitates,  and  receives  in  money  or  other  selnsh  advantages  the  price  of  his 
mischievous  patronage.  Disinterested  love  is  the  characteristic  of  orthodox  teaching, 
selfish  gain  that  of  the  heterodox.  Peace  and  contentment  are  the  fruit  of  the  one,  strife 
and  suspicion  are  the  fruit  of  the  other. 

Vers.  6 — 21. — The  contrast.  There  is  no  more  effectual  way  of  bringing  out  the 
peculiar  beauties  and  excellences  of  any  system  or  character  than  by  contrasting  with 
it  the  opposite  system  or  character.  Let  us  do  this  in  regard  to  the  two  characters 
which  are  here  brought  before  us,  and  the  uses  of  money  by  them  respectively. 

I.  The  money-lover.  The  love  of  money  sits  at  the  helm  of  ins  inner  man.  It  is 
the  spring  of  all  his  thoughts,  desires,  and  actions.  Observe  what  is  his  ruling  motive, 
what  takes  the  lead  in  his  plans  and  schemes  of  life,  and  you  will  And  that  it  is  the 
desire  to  be  rich.  To  be  rich  ranks  in  his  «stimation  before  being  good  or  doing  good ; 
and  personal  goodness  and  benevolence  towards  others,  if  they  have  existed  before  the 
entering  into  the  heart  of  the  love  of  money,  gradually  fade  and  die  away  under  its 
-withering  influence.  As  the  thistles  and  rushes,  the  docks  and  the  plantains,  prevail,  the 
good  herbage  disappears.    A  hard  selfish  character,  indifferent  to  the  feelings  and  wants 


126  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  (oh.  yl  1—21. 

of  others,  and  ready  to  brush  on  one  side  every  obstacle  which  stands  in  the  way  of 
getting,  is  the  common  result  of  the  love  of  money.  But  in  many  cases  it  leads  on  into 
impiety  and  crime,  and  through  them  to  sorrows  and  perdition.  It  was  his  greed  for 
the  wages  of  unrighteousness  which  urged  Balaam  on  to  his  destruction ;  it  was  his  greed 
for  money  that  made  Judas  a  thief,  a  traitor,  and  a  murderer  of  his  Lord.  Many  an 
heresiarch  has  adopted  false  doctrines  an  1  led  schisms  merely  as  a  means  of  enriching 
himself  at  the  expense  of  his  followers ;  and  every  day  we  see  crimes  of  the  blackest  dye 
springing  from  the  lust  of  riches.  In  other  cases  the  coveted  posses-ion  of  wealth  is 
followed  by  inordinate  pride  and  contempt  of  those  who  are  not  rich,  by  a  feeling 
of  superiority  to  all  the  restraints  which  bind  other  men,  and  by  a  headlong  descent 
into  the  vices  and  self-indulgences  to  which  money  paves  the  way.  In  a  word,  then, 
the  lover  of  money  stands  before  us  as  at  best  a  selfish  man — a  man  of  low  and  narrow 
ends;  one  pandering  to  his  own  base  desires;  one  sacrificing  to  an  ignoble  and  futile 
purpose  all  the  loftier  parts  of  his  own  nature;  one  from  whom  his  fellow-men  get  no 
good,  and  often  get  much  harm ;  one  whose  toil  and  labour  at  the  best  end  in  empti- 
ness, and  very  often  lead  him  into  sorrow  and  destruction.  His  progress  is  a  continued 
debasement  of  himself,  and  moral  bankruptcy  is  his  end. 

IL  The  man  of  God  is  of  a  different  mould.  He  views  his  own  nature  and 
his  own  wants  in  their  true  light.  He  is  a  man,  he  is  a  moral  agent,  he  is  a  child  of 
God.  His  hunger  and  thirst  are  after  the  things  that  are  needful  for  l  he  life  and  the 
growth  of  his  immortal  soul,  big  very  self.  He  is  a  man ;  he  is  one  of  those  whom  the 
Lord  Jesus  is  not  ashamed  to  call  bis  brethren,  and  who  has  been  made  partaker  of  his 
Divine  nature,  and  therefore,  like  his  Divine  Lord,  he  wishes  to  live,  not  for  himself,  but 
for  hit  brethren,  whom  he  loves  even  as  Christ  loved  them  and  gave  himself  for  them. 
And  so,  on  the  one  hand,  he  lays  himself  out  to  enrich  himself  with  those  treasures 
which  make  a  man  rich  toward  God — righteousness,  godliness,  faith,-  love,  patience, 
meekness ;  and,  on  the  other,  he  uses  his  worldly  wealth  for  the  comfort  of  the  poor  and 
needy ;  doing  good,  distributing  freely  of  his  substance  for  every  good  work,  and  admit- 
ting others  to  a  share  of  the  wealth  that  God  has  given  him.  It  is  very  remarkable,  too, 
how  he  both  degrades  and  yet  elevates  wealth.  He  degrades  it  by  depriving  it  of  all 
its  false  value.  He  does  not  trust  in  it,  because  he  knows  its  uncertainty ;  he  does  not 
desire  it,  because  he  knows  its  dangers ;  he  does  not  boast  of  it,  because  he  knows  it  adds 
nothing  to  his  real  worth.  But  he  elevates  it  by  making  it  an  instrument  of  doing  good 
to  others,  and  by  making  it  a  provocative  of  love  to  man  and  of  thankfulness  to  God ; 
and  though  it  is  so  fleeting  and  so  uncertain  in  itself,  he  forces  into  it  an  element  of 
eternity  by  consecrating  it  to  God,  and  compelling  it  to  bear  witness  on  his  behalf  in 
the  great  day  of  judgment  that  he  loved  Christ  and  did  good  to  those  whom  Christ 
loves. 

To  sum  up,  the  money-lover,  by  putting  a  false  value  upon  money,  makes  it  a  snare 
and  an  instrument  of  hurt  to  himself  and  others,  and  an  eternal  loss  to  his  own  soul ; 
the  man  of  God,  by  putting  the  true  value  upon  money,  makes  it  a  joyful  possession  to 
himself  and  his  brethren,  a  nourisher  of  unselfish  virtue,  and  an  eternal  gain. 

Vers.  11 — 16. —  The  man  of  Qod.  The  character  of  the  man  of  God  is  here  portrayed 
with  a  master's  hand.  We  may  go  back  and  contemplate  it  with  a  little  more  exact- 
ness. He  is  covetous,  he  is  eager  in  the  pursuit  of  good  things ;  but  the  good  things 
which  he  covets  and  pursues  are  the  everlasting  possessions  of  the  soul.  And  what  are 
these?  Righteousness — that  great  quality  of  God  himself;  that  quality  which  makes 
eternal,  unchangeable,  right  the  sole  and  inflexible  rule  of  conduct.  Righteousness — 
that  condition  of  thought  and  will  and  purpose  which  does  not  fluctuate  with  the 
changing  opinions  and  fashions  of  inconstant  men,  which  does  not  vary  according  to 
the  outward  influences  to  which  it  is  subject,  which  is  not  overborne  by  fear,  or  appetite, 
or  persuasion,  or  interest;  but  abides  steadfast,  unaltered,  the  same  under  all  circum- 
stances and  through  all  time.  And  with  righteousness,  which  he  has  in  common  with 
God,  he  covets  godlineis,  the  proper  relative  condition  of  the  rational  creature  towards 
the  Creator.  Godliness  is  that  reverential,  devout  attitude  towards  God  which  we  some- 
times call  piety,  sometimes  holiness,  sometimes  devotion.  It  comprehends  the  senti- 
ments of  fear,  love,  and  reverence  which  a  good  man  entertains  toward  God ;  and  the 
whole  conduct,  such  as  worship,  prayer,  almsgiving,  etc.,  which  springs  from  those 


dB.Tfct— 2i.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  127 

sentiments.  And  though  it  cannot  be  predicated  of  God  that  he  is  cfcrejS^i,  it  is  an 
essential  feature  of  the  godly  man,  who  therefore  covets  it  as  an  integral  part  of  the 
wealth  of  the  soul.  And  then,  by  a  natural  association  with  this  reverential  attitude 
towards  God  described  by  "godliness,"  there  follows  faith;  the  entire  reliance  of  the 
soul  upon  God's  goodness,  and  specially  on  all  his  promises — those  promises  which  are 
yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus  \  faith  which  fastens  on  Jesus  Christ  as  the  sum  and 
substance,  the  head  and  completeness,  of  God's  good  will  to  man ;  as  the  infallible  proof, 
which  nothing  can  detract  from,  of  God's  purpose  of  love  to  man ;  as  the  immovable 
rock  of  man's  salvation,  which  may  not  and  cannot,  be  moved  for  ever.  And,  as  by  a 
necessary  law,  from  this  faith  there  flows  forth  lorn :  love  to  God  and  love  to  man  ;  love 
which,  like  righteousness,  is  an  attribute  which  the  man  of  God  has  in  common  with 
God;  love  which, in  proportion  to  its  pureness  and  its  intensity,  assimilates  the  man  ot 
God  to  God  himself,  and  is  therefore  the  most  prized  portion  of  his  treasures.  Nor  must 
another  essential  virtue  of  the  man  of  God  be  overlooked  by  him,  and  that  is  patience. 
Just  as  godliness  and  faith  are  qualities  in  the  man  of  God  relatively  to  God,  so  is 
patience  a  necessary  quality  relatively  to  the  hindrances  and  impediments  of  the  evil 
world  in  which  he  lives.  The  primary  idea  of  Inro/unrli  is  continuance — "  patient  conti  nu- 
ance," as  it  is  well  rendered  in  the  Authorized  Version  of  Rom.  ii.  7.  The  enmity  of  the 
world,  the  outward  and  inward  temptations  to  evil,  the  weariness  and  tension  induced  by 
prolonged  resistance,  are  constantly  pressing  upon  the  man  of  God  and  counselling  cessa- 
tion from  a  wearisome  and  (it  is  suggested)  a  fruitless  struggle.  He  has,  therefore,  need 
of  patience ;  it  is  only  through  faith  and  patience  that  he  can  obtain  the  promises.  He 
must  endure  to  the  end  if  he  would  grasp  the  coveted  salvation.  Patience  must  mingle 
with  his  faith,  patience  must  mingle  with  his  hope,  and  patience  must  mingle  with  his 
love.  There  must  be  no  fainting,  no  halting,  no  turning  aside,  no  growing  weary  in 
well-doing.  Tribulations  may  come,  afflictions  may  press  sore,  provocations  may  be 
multiplied,  and  labours  may  be  a  heavy  burden ;  but  the  man  of  God,  with  the  sure  hope 
of  the  coming  of  Christ  to  cheer  and  support  him,  will  go  steadily  forward,  will  endure, 
will  stand  fast,  unto  the  end.  And  as  regards  the  provocations  of  men,  he  will  endure 
them  with  meekness.  Not  only  will  he  not  turn  back  from  his  purpose  on  account  of 
them,  but  he  will  not  let  his  spirit  be  ruffled  by  them.  He  will  still  be  kind  to  those 
who  are  unkind,  and  gentle  with  those  who  are  rough.  He  will  render  good  for  evil, 
and  blessing  for  cursing,  if  so  be  he  may  overcome  evil  with  good,  ever  setting  before 
him  the  blessed  example  of  him  "  who,  when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again ;  when  he 
suffered,  threatened  not;  but  committed  himself  to  him  that  judgeth  righteously."  Thus 
lighting  the  good  fight  of  faith,  he  lays  hold  and  keeps  hold  of  eternal  life,  and  will  be 
found  without  spot,  unrebukable,  in  that  great  and  blessed  day  of  the  appearing  of  out 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  M  to  whom  be  honour  and  power  everlasting.    Amen." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  L—  The  duties  of  slaves  to  unbelieving  masters.  The  apostle  next  proceeds  to 
deal  with  the  distinctions  of  civil  duty,  and  takes  up  the  case  of  a  very  numerous  but 
miserable  class  which  appears  to  have  been  largely  attracted  to  the  gospel  in  primitive 
times. 

I.  The  honoub  dub  to  paq an  habtbbs.  "  Whoever  are  under  the  yoke  as  bond- 
servants, let  them  reckon  their  own- masters  worthy  of  all  honour."  1.  The  condition 
of  the  slaves  was  one  of  much  hardship.  There  was  practically  no  limit  to  the  power  of 
the  masters  over  the  slaves.  They  might  be  gentle  and  just,  or  capricious  and  cruel. 
The  slaves  had  no  remedy  at  law  against  harsh  treatment,  as  they  had  no  hope  of  escape 
from  bondage.  2.  Yet  their  liberty  had  not  been  so  restricted  that  they  had  not  the 
opportunity  of  hearing  the  gospel.  There  were  Christian  slaves.  Their  hard  life  was 
ameliorated,  not  merely  by  the  blessed  hopes  of  the  gospel,  but  by  the  privilege  of 
spiritual  equality  with  their  masters  which  was  one  of  its  distinguishing  glories.  3.  The 
gospel  did  not  interfere  with  the  duty  of  obedience  which  they  owed  to  their  masters. 
They  were  to  give  them  all  honour — not  merely  outward  subjection,  but  inward  respect. 
Christianity  did  not  undertake  to  overturn  social  relations.  If  it  had  done  so,  it  would 
have  been  revolutionary  in  the  last  degree ;  it  would  have  armed  the  whole  forces  of  the 


128  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  ▼*•  1—21 

Roman  empire  against  it ;  it  would  itself  have  been  drowned  in  blood ;  and  it  would 

have  led  to  the  merciless  slaughter  of  the  slaves  themselves.  Yet  Christianity  prepared 
the  way  from  the  very  first  for  the  complete  abolition  of  slavery.  The  fact  that  with 
the  great  Master  in  heaven  "  there  was  no  respect  of  persons,"  and  that  "  in  Jesus  Christ 
there  was  neither  bond  nor  free,  but  all  were  one  in  Christ,"  would  not  justify  th« 
slaves  in  repudiating  their  present  subjection,  while  it  held  out  the  ho[ieof  their  eventual 
emancipation.  They  must  not,  therefore,  abuse  their  liberty  under  the  gospel.  4.  Yet 
there  was  a  limit  to  the  slave's  obedience.  He  could  only  obey  his  master  so  far  as  was 
consistent  with  the  laws  of  God  and  his  gospel,  consenting  to  suffer  ra'her  than  outrage 
his  conscience.  Casesof  this  sort  might  arise,  but  they  would  not  prejudice  the  gospel, 
like  a  simple  revolt  against  existing  relationships. 

II.  The  reason  for  the  dub  honour  given  to  their  pagan  masters.  "That 
the  Name  of  God  and  his  doctrine  may  not  be  blasphemed."  1.  There  would  be  a  serious 
danger  of  such  a  result  if  slaves  were  either  to  withhold  due  service  to  their  masters  or  to 
repudiate  all  subjection.  God  and  his  doctrine  would  be  dishonoured  in  the  eyes  of  their 
masters,  because  they  would  be  regarded  as  sanctioning  insubordination.  Thus  a  deep 
and  widespread  prejudice  would  arise  to  prevent  the  gospel  reaching  their  pa  -an  masters. 
2.  It  is  thus  possible  for  the  meanest  members  of  the  Church  to  do  honour  to  God  and  the 
gospel.  The  apostle  contemplates  their  adorning  "  of  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Savidut 
in  all  things"  (Titus  ii.  10).  3.  The  same  considerations  apply  to  the  case  of  domestic 
servants  in  our  own  day.  The  term  translated  here  "  slaves  "  is  used  with  some  latitude 
in  the  Scripture.  It  applies  sometimes  to  persons  entirely  free,  as  to  David  in  relation 
to  Saul  (1  Sam.  xix.  4),  to  Christians  generally  (Rom.  vi.  16  ;  I  Pet.  ii.  16),  to  apostles, 
prophets,  and  ministers  (Gal.  i.  10;  2  Tim.  ii.  24),  and  to  the  higher  class  of  dependents 
(Matt,  xviii.  23;  xxi.  34).  Thus  the  term  implies  a  relation  of  dependence  without 
legal  compulsion.  Christian  servants  must  yield  a  willing  and  cheerful  service  that  they 
may  thus  honour  the  gospel. — T.  C.  • 

Ver.  2. — The  duties  of  slaves  to  Christian  masters.  This  relationship  would  be  lesi 
common  than  the  other. 

I.  The  respect  due  to  Christian  masters.  "And  they  that  have  believing 
masters,  let  them  not  despise  them  because  they  are  brethren,  but  the  rather  serve 
them."  The  duty  is  presented  in  a  twofold  form.  1.  Negatively.  "Let  them  not 
despise  them."  The  false  teachers  might  tell  the  slaves  that  their  servitude  was  incon- 
sistent with  Christian  liberty.  The  slaves  might  thus,  especially  in  the  case  of  Christian 
masters,  regard  them  as  fully  their  equals  on  the  ground  of  the  common  brotherhood  of 
believers,  and  refuse  them  the  respect  due  to  their  position.  2.  Positively.  "  But  the 
rather  serve  them."  The  beBt  way  of  effecting  a  partial  amelioration  of  their  condition 
was  by  rendering  a  service  all  the  more  faithful,  because  it  was  rendered  to  a  brother  in 
Christ.     Servants  must  never  under  any  circumstances  be  disrespectful. 

II.  The  reasons  for  this  command.  They  are  twofold.  1.  Because  their  masters 
are  brethren.  The  slaves  ought,  therefore,  to  treat  them  with  Christian  respect  and 
generosity,  knowing  that  such  a  service  is  showing  kindness  to  "  brethren."  2.  Because 
those  who  were  "  to  receive  the  benefit "  of  their  hearty  and  willing  service  were  "faithful 
and  beloved."  This  thought  ought  to  dignify  as  well  as  ameliorate  the  position  of  the 
slave.     Such  masters  were  willing  to  receive  such  service. 

III.  The  necessity  op  enforcing  these  duties.  "These  things  teach  and  exhort." 
1.  It  was  necessary  for  the  comfort  of  the  slave  himself  as  well  as  for  the  interests  of  the 
master.  2.  It  vias  necessary  for  the  credit  and  honour  of  the  govpel,  which  would  be 
gravely  compromised  by  restiveness  or  insubordination  on  the  part  of  the  great  subject 
class.  3.  The  gospel  is  not  vulgarized  by  such  counsel.  It  rather  dignifies  human  life 
in  its  meanest  respects  by  infusing  into  it  a  new  beaut  v  and  a  new  generosity  of 
feeling.— T.  0. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — A  warning  against  those  who  oppose  such  wholesome  teaching.  I.  The 
opposition  to  apostolic  teaching  on  the  duties  of  slaves.  "  If  any  one  teacheth 
other  doctrine,  and  does  not  assent  to  sound  words,  even  the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  to  the  doctrine  which  is  according  to  godliness."  1.  The  nature  of  this  false 
teaching.    It  points,  as  the  word  signifies,  to  "a  different  doctrine"  from  that  of  the 


ca.  vi.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  129 

apostle).  There  were  false  teachers  in  Ephesus  who,  from  a  pretended  interest  in  the 
class  of  Christian  slaves,  taught  them  that  the  gospel  was  a  political  charter  of  emanci- 
pation; for  the  yoke  of  Christ  was  designed  to  break  every  other  yoke.  They  must  have 
been  of  the  class  referred  to  elsewhere  who  "despised  government"  (2  Pet.  ii.  10; 
Jude  8),  and  encouraged  disobedience,  to  parents.  The  tendency  of  their  teaching  would 
be  to  sow  the  seeds  of  discontent  in  the  miuds  of  the  slaves,  and  its  effects  would  be  to 
plunge  them  into  a  contest  with  society  which  would  have  the  unhappiest  effects. 
2.  ihe  opposition  of  this  teaching  to  Divine  truth.  (1)  It  was  opposed  to  "  wholesome 
words,"  to  words  without  poison  or  taint  of  corruption,  such  as  would  maintain  social 
relations  on  a  basis  of  healthy  development.  (2)  It  was  opposed  to  the  words  of  Christ, 
either  directly  or  through  bis  apostles.  He  had  dropped  sayings  of  a  suggestive  character 
which  could  not  but  touch  the  minds  of  the  slave  class :  "  Bender  to  Caesar  the  things 
that  are  Caesar's ; "  "Blessed  are  the  meek  :  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth ; "  "Resist 
not  evil;"  "Love  your  enemies,  pray  fur  them  which  despitefully  use  you."  (3)  It 
was  opposed  to  the  doctrine  of  godliness.  It  was  a  strange  thing  for  teachers  in  the 
Church  to  espouse  doctrines  opposed  to  the  interests  of  godliness.  The  disobedience  of 
slaves  would  commit  them  to  a  course  of  ungodly  dishonouring  of  God  and  his  gospel. 

II.  The  moral  and  intellectual  chabacteb  of  tiikse  false  teachers.  1. 
They  were  "besotted  with  pride."  They  were  utterly  wanting  in  the  humi.ity  of 
spirit  which  the  gospel  engenders,  but  were  puffed  up  with  an  empty  show  of  know- 
ledge. 2.  Ytt  they  were  ignorant.  "Knowing  nothing."  They  had  no  true  under- 
standing of  the  social  risks  involved  in  their  doctrine  of  emancipation,  or  of  the  true 
method  of  ameliorating  the  condition  of  the  slaves.  3.  They  "  doted  about  questions 
and  disputes  about  words."  They  had  a  diseased  appetency  for  all  sorts  of  profitless 
discussions  turning  upon  the  meanings  of  words,  which  had  no  tendency  to  promote 
godliness,  but  rather  altercations  and  bad  feeling  of  all  sorts — "  from  which  cometh 
envy,  strife,  evil-speakings,  wkked  suspicions,  incessant  quarrels."  These  controversial 
collisions  sowed  the  seeds  of  all  sorts  of  bitter  hatred.  4.  The  moral  deficiency  of 
these  false  teachers.  They  were  "men  corrupted  in  their  mind,  destitute  of  the  truth, 
who  suppose  that  godliness  is  gain."  (1)  They  had  first  corrupted  the  Word  of  God, 
and  thus  prepared  the  way  for  the  debasement  of  their  own  mind,  leading  in  turn  to 
that  pride  and  ignorance  which  were  their  most  distinguishing  qualities.  (2)  They 
were  "deprived  of  the  truth."  It  was  theirs  once,  but  they  forfeited  this  precious 
treasure  by  their  unfaithfulness  and  their  corruption.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing  to 
tamper  with  the  truth.  (3)  They  heard  that  "  godliness  was  a  source  of  gain."  They 
did  not  preach  contentment  to  the  slaves,  or  induce  them  to  acquiesce  with  patience 
in  their  hard  lot,  but  rather  persuaded  them  to  use  religion  as  a  means  of  worldly 
betterment.  Snch  counsel  would  have  disorganizing,  disintegrating  effects  upon  society. 
But  it  was,  besides,  a  degradation  of  true  religion.  Godliness  was  not  designed  to 
be  a  merely  lucrative  business,  or  to  be  followed  only  so  far  as  it  subserved  the  promotion 
of  worldly  interests.  Simon  Magus  and  such  men  as  "  made  merchandise  "  of  the 
disciples  are  examples  of  this  class.  Such  persons  would  "  teach  things  which  they 
ought  not  for  the  sake  of  base  gain  "  (Titus  i.  11). — T.  C. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — The  real  gam  of  true  godliness.  The  apostle,  after  his  manner, 
expands  his  idea  beyond  the  immediate  occasion  that  led  to  it. 

I.  The  gain  of  godliness  with  contentment.  "  But  godliness  with  content- 
ment is  great  gain."  1.  Godliness  it  a  gain  in  itself,  because  it  has  "  the  promise  of 
the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  Godly  men  come  into  happy  and 
thriving  circumstances,  for  they  are  taught  to  pursue  their  callings  with  due  industry, 
foresight,  and  perseverance.  2.  Godliness,  allied  to  contentment,  is  great  gain.  (1) 
This  does  not  mean  that  contentment  is  a  condition  necessary  to  the  gainlul  character 
of  godliness,  but  is  rather  an  effect  of  godliness  and  part  of  its  substantial  gain.  It 
is  a  calm  and  sedate  temper  of  mind  about  worldly  interests.  It  is  God's  wisdom 
and  will  not  to  give  to  all  men  alike,  but  the  contented  mind  is  not  disquieted  by  this 
facts  i'  (2)  The  godly  man  is  content  with  what  he  possesses;  submits  meekly  to  God's 
will,  and  bears  patiently  the  adverse  dispensations  of  his  providence.  The  godly  heart 
is  freed  from  the  thirst  for  perishing  treasures,  because  it  possesses  treasures  of  a  higher 
and  more  enduring  character. 

I.  TIMOTHT.  ( 


1*>  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TtMOtHt.  [pa.  n.  i— ii 


IL  The  reason  fob  this  sentiment.  "  For  we  brought  nothing  into  the  world, 
because  neither  are  we  able  to  take  anything  out  of  it."  1.  We  ore  appointed  by  God 
to  come  naked  into  the  world.  We  may  be  born  heirs  to  vast  possessions,  but  they 
do  not  become  ours  till  we  are  actually  born.  Rich  and  poor  alike  bring  nothing 
into  the  world.  2.  This  fact  is  a  reason  for  the  statement  that  we  can  carry  nothing 
out  of  the  world.  It  is  between  birth  and  death  we  can  hold  our  wealth.  The  rich 
rtian  cannot  carry  his  estates  with  him  into  the  grave.  He  will  have  no  need  of  them 
in  the  next  life.  3.  There  could  be  no  contentment  if  we  could  take  anything  with 
us  at  death,  because  in  that  case  the  future  would  be  dependent  upon  the  present. 
i.  The  lesson  to  be  learned  from  these  facts  is  that  we  ought  not  eagerly  to  grasp 
such  essentially  earthly  and  transitory  treasures. 

III.  The  tbub  wisdom  op  contentment.  "  But  if  we  have  food  and  raiment, 
with  these  let  us  be  satisfied."  These  are  what  Jacob  desired,  Agur  prayed  for,  and 
Christ  taught  his  disciples  to  make  the  subject  of  dail ,  supplication.  The  contented 
godly  have  these  gilts  along  with  God's  blessing.  The  Lord  does  not  encourage  his 
people  to  enlarge  their  <:esires  inordinately. — T.  C. 

Ver.  9. — The  daw/ers  of  the  eager  haste  to  be  rich.  I.  The  eaqeb  pubbur  of  the 
wobld  is  to  be  shdnned.  "  But  they  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  temptation  and 
a  snare."  1.  The  apostle  does  not  condemn  the  possession  of  riches,  which  have, 
in  reality,  no  moral  character;  for  they  are  only  evil  where  they  are  badly  used. 
Neither  does  he  speik  of  rich  men;  for  he  would  not  condemn  such  men  as  Abraham, 
Joseph  of  Arimathasa,  Gaius,  and  others;  nor  such  rich  men  as  use  their  wealth 
righteously  as  good  stewards  of  God.  2.  tie  condemns  the  haste  to  be  rich,  not  only 
because  wealth  is  not  necessary  for  a  life  of  godly  contentment,  but  because  of  its 
social  and  moral  risks. 

II.  The  dangers  of  this  eager  pursuit  of  wealth.  They  "  fall  into  tempta- 
tion and  a  snare,  and  into  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts,  which  drown  men  in 
destruction  and  perdition."  1.  There  it  a  temptation  to  unjust  gam  which  leads 
men  into  the  mare  of  the  devil.  There  is  a  sacrifice  of  principle,  the  abandonment 
of  conscientious  scruples,  in  the  hurry  to  accumulate  wealth.  2.  The  temptation  in 
its  turn  makes  way  for  many  lusts  which  are  "  foolish,"  because  they  are  unreasonable, 
and  exercised  upon  things  that  are  quite  undesirable;  and  which  are  "hurtful,"  because 
they  injure  both  body  and  soul,  and  all  a  man's  best  interests.  3.  These  lusts  in  turn 
carry  their  own  retribution.  They  "  drown  men  in  destruction  and  perdition."  (1)  This 
is  more  than  moral  degradation.  (2)  It  is  a  wreck  of  the  body  accompanied  by  the 
ruin  of  the  immortal  soul. — T.  0. 

Ver.  10. — The  root  of  aU  evil.  "  For  the  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil." 
This  almost  proverbial  saying  is  intended  to  support  the  statement  of  the  previous 
verse. 

I.  The  love  or  money  as  a  boot  of  evil.  1.  The  assertion  is  not  concerning 
money,  which,  at  we  have  seen,  is  neither  good  nor  bad  in  itself,  but  concerning  the  love 
of  money.  2.  It  is  not  asserted  that  there  are  not  other  roots  of  evil  besides  covetous- 
ness.  This  thought  was  not  present  to  the  apostle's  mind.  3.  It  it  not  meant  that ' 
a  covetous  man  will  be  entirely  destitute  of  all  virtuous  feeling.  4.  It  means  that 
a  germ  of  all  evil  lies  in  one  with  the  love  of  money ;  that  there  is  no  kind  of  evil 
to  which  a  man  may  not  be  led  through  an  absorbing  greed  for  money.  It  is  really 
a  root-sin,  for  it  leads  to  care,  fear,  malice,  deceit,  oppression,  envy,  bribery,  perjury, 
contentiousness. 

II.  Unhappy  effects  of  tbb  wve  of  money.  "  Which  some  having  coveted  after 
have  wandered  away  from  the  faith,  and  pierced  themselves  through  with  many 
sorrows."  1.  It  led  to  apostasy.  They  made  shipwreck  of  their  Christian  principles. 
They  surrendered  the  faiih.  The  good  seed  of  the  Word  was  choked  by  the  deceitful- 
ness  of  riches,  and,  like  Demas,  they  forsook  the  Word,  having  loved  this  present  world. 
2.  It  involved  the  pangs  of  conscience,  to  the  destruction  of  their  own  happiness.  They 
felt  the  piercings  of  that  inward  monitor  who  forebodes  the  future  destruction. — T.  G. 

Yer.  IL— Personal  admonition  addressed  to  Timothy  himteff.    The  apostle  now 


tt.n.1- 21.]  TtiE  FlfiST  EttSTL*  tO  TliiOTHi".  i3l 

turns  from  his  warning  to  those  desiring  to  be  rich  to  the  practical  exhortation  to 
strive  for  the  true  riches. 

I.  The  title  by  which  Timothy  is  addressed.  "O  man  of  God."  1.  It  was 
the  familiar  title  of  the  Old  Testament  prophets,  and  might  appropriately  apply  to 
a  New  Testament  evangelist  like  Timothy.  2.  But  in  the  Mew  Testament  it  has 
a  more  general  reference,  applying  as  it  does  to  all  the  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus  (2  Tim. 
iii.  17).  The  name  is  very  expressive.  It  signifies  (X)  a  man  who  belongs  to  God ; 
(2)  who  is  dedicated  to  God ;  (3)  who  finds  in  God,  rather  than  in  riches,  his  true 
portion ;  (4)  who  lives  for  God's  glory  (1  Cor.  x.  31). 

II.  The  warning  addressed  to  Timothy.  "  Flee  these  things."  It  might  seem 
unnecessary  to  warn  so  devoted  a  Christian  against  the  love  of  riches,  with  its  destruc- 
tive results ;  but  Timothy  was  now  in  an  important  position  in  a  wealthy  city,  which 
contained  "  rich  "  men  (ver.  17),  and  may  have  been  tempted  by  gold  and  ease  and 
popularity  to  make  trivial  sacrifices  to  truth.  The  holiest  heart  is  not  without  its 
inward  subtleties  of  deceit. 

IIL  The  positive  exhortation  addressed  to  Timothy.  "And  follow  after 
righteousness,  godliness,  faith,  love,  patience,  meek-spiritedness."  These  virtues 
group  themselves  into  pairs.  1.  Righteousness  and  godliness;  referring  to  a  general 
conformity  to  the  Law  of  God  in  relation  to  the  duties  owing  respectively  to  God  and 
man,  like  the  similar  expressions — " live  righteously  and  godly"— -of  Titus  ii.  12. 
(1)  Righteousness  is  (a)  not  the  "  righteousness  of  God,"  for  that  had  been  already 
attained  by  Timothy ;  hut  (6)  the  doing  of  justice  between  man  and  man,  which  would 
be  for  the  honour  of  religion  among  men.  Any  undue  regard  for  riches  would  cause 
a  swerve  from  righteousness.  (2)  Godliness  includes  (a)  holiness  of  heart,  (ft)  holiness 
of  life,  in  which  lies  the  true  gain  for  two  worlds.  2.  Faith  and  love.  These  are  the 
two  foundation-principles  of  the  gospel.  (1)  Faith  is  at  once  (a)  the  instrument  of 
our  justification,  (6)  the  root-principle  of  Christian  life,  and  (c)  the  continuously 
sustaining  principle  of  that  life.  (2)  Love  is  (a)  the  immediate  effect  of  faith,  for 
"faith  worketh  by  love  "(Gal.  v.  6);  (ft)  it  is  the  touchstone  of  true  religion  and  the  bond 
of  perlectness  ;  (c)  it  is  the  spring  of  evangelical  obedience,  for  it  is  "  the  fulfilling  of 
the  Law  "  (Bom.  xiii.  8) ;  (d)  it  is  our  protection  in  the  battle  of  life,  for  it  is  "  the 
breastplate  of  love  "  (1  Thess.  v.  8).  3.  Patience,  meek-spiritedness.  These  represent 
two  principles  which  ought  to  operate  in  power  in  presence  of  gainsayers  and  enemies. 
— T.  C. 

Ver.  12.— The  good  fight  and  its  results.  Instead  of  the  struggle  of  the  covetous 
for  wealth,  there  ought  to  he  the  struggle  of  the  faithful  to  lay  hold  on  the  prize 
of  eternal  life. 

I.  The  Christian  struggle.  "Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith."  1.  The  enemies 
in  this  warfare.  The  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil ;  the  principalities  and  powers ; 
the  false  teachers,  with  their  arts  of  seduction.  2.  the  warfare  itself.  It  is  "  a  good 
fight."  (1)  The  term  suggests  that  Christian  life  is  not  a  mystic  quietism,  but  an 
active  effort  against  eviL  (2)  It  is  a  good  fight,  because  (a)  it  is  in  a  good  cause — 
for  God  and  truth  and  salvation ;  (ft)  it  is  under  a  good  Captain— Jesus  Christ,  the 
Captain  of  our  salvation ;  (c)  it  has  a  good  result — "  eternal  life."  3.  The  weapons 
in  this  warfare.  "Faith."  It  is  "  the  shield  of  faith"  (Eph.  vi.  16).  This  is  not  a 
earnal,  but  a  spiritual  weapon.  Faith  represents,  indeed,  "  the  whole  armour  of  God," 
which  is  mighty  for  victory.  It  is  faith  that  secures  "  the  victory  that  overcometh 
the  world"  (1  John  iv.  4,  5). 

II.  The  end  of  the  Christian  struggle.  "  Lay  hold  on  eternal  life."  1.  Eternal 
life  is  the  prize,  the  crown,  to  be  laid  hold  of  by  those  who  are  faithful  to  death,  2.  It 
is  the  object  of  our  effectual  calling.  "  To  which  thou  wast  called  "  by  the  grace  and 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  It  is  the  subject  of  our  public  profession.  "  And  didst 
confess  the  good  confession  before  many  witnesses."  Evidently  either  at  his  baptism, 
or  at  his  ordination  to  the  ministry,  when  many  witnesses  would  be  present.  4.  This 
eternal  life  is  to  be  laid  hold  of.  (1)  It  is  beld  forth  as  the  prize  of  the  high  calling 
of  God,  as  the  recompense  of  reward.  (2)  But  the  believer  is  to  lay  hold  of  it  even 
now  by  faith,  having  a  believing  interest  in  it  as  a  possession  jet  to  be  acquired  in 
all  its  glorious  fulness. — T.  C. 


132  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  vi.  1—21. 

Vera.  13 — 16. —  The  solemn  charge  pressed  anew  upon  Timothy.  As  he  nears  the 
end  of  the  Epistle,  the  apostle,  with  a  deeper  solemnity  of  tone,  repeats  the  charge  he 
has  given  to  his  young  disciple. 

I.  TlIK   NATURE   AND   RESPONSIBILITIES  OF   THE   CHARGE.      "  I  charge  thee  .  .   .  that 

thou  keep  the  commandment  without  spot  and  without  reproach."  1.  The  command- 
ment is  the  Christian  doctrine  in  its  aspect  as  a  rule  of  life  and  discipline.  2.  It 
was  to  be  kept  with  ail  purity  and  faithfulness — "  without  spot  and  without  reproach  " — 
so  that  it  should  be  unstained  by  no  error  of  life,  or  suffer  from  no  reproach  of  unfaith- 
fulness. He  must  preach  the  pure  gospel  sincerely,  and  his  life  must  be  so  circum- 
spect that  his  ministry  should  not  be  blamed  by  the  Church  here  or  by  Christ 
hereafter. 

II.  The  solemn  appeal  by  which  the  charge  is  sustained.  "I  give  thee 
charge  in  the  sight  of  God,  who  keepeth  all  things  alive,  and  Christ  Jesus,  who 
witnessed  the  good  confession  before  Pontius  Pilate."  The  apostle,  having  referred 
to  Timothy's  earlier  confession  before  many  witnesses,  reminds  him  of  the  more 
tremendous  presence  of  God  hiiriself,  and  of  Christ  Jesus.  1.  Ood  is  represented  here 
as  Preserver,  in  allusion  to  the  dangers  of  Timothy  in  the  midst  of  Ephesian  enemies. 
2.  Christ  Jesus  is  referred  to  as  an  Example  of  unshaken  courage  and  fidelity  to  truth 
in  the  presence  of  death. 

III.  The  charge  is  to  be  kept  without  spot  ob  bepkoaoh  till  Christ's  second 
coming.  "  Until  the  appearance  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  He  was  to  be  "  faithful 
unto  death,"  yea,  even  unto  the  second  advent.  1.  It  is  according  to  apostolic  usage 
to  represent  the  end  of  Christian  work  as  well  as  Christian  expectation  as  terminating, 
not  upon  death,  but  upon  the  second  advent.  The  complete  redemption  will  then 
be  fully  realized.  2.  It  is  not  to  be  inferred  from  these  words  that  the  apostle  expected 
the  Lord's  coming  in  his  own  lifetime.  The  second  Thessalonian  Epistle,  written 
many  years  before,  dispels  such  an  impression.  The  words  in  ver.  15,  "  in  his  own 
times,"  imply  a  long  succession  of  cycles  or  changes.  3.  The  second,  advent  it  to 
be  brought  about  by  Ood  himself.  "  Which  in  his  own  times  he  shall  manifest,  who 
is  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."  This  picture 
of  the  Divine  Majesty  was  designed  to  encourage  Timothy,  who  might  hereafter  be 
summoned  to  appear  before  the  little  kings  of  earth,  by  the  thought  of  the  immeasur- 
able glory  of  the  Potentate  before  whose  throne  all  men  must  stand  in  the  final 
judgment.  (1)  He  who  is  possessed  of  exhaustless  powers  and  perfections  is  essentially 
immortal — "  who  only  hath  immortality  " — because  he  is  the  Source  of  it  in  all  who 
partake  of  it ;  for  out  of  him  all  is  death.  (2)  He  has  bis  dwelling  in  the  glory  of 
light  ineffable — "  dwelling  in  light  unapproachable,  whom  no  man  ever  saw  or  can  see." 
(o)  God  is  light  (1  John  i.  5).  He  covereth  himself  with  light  as  with  a  garment 
(Ps.  civ.  4) ;  and  he  is  the  Fountain  of  light,  (6)  God  is  invisible.  This  is  true, 
though  "the  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God"  (Matt.  v.  8),  and  though  it  be  that 
without  holiness  "no  man  shall  see  the  Lord"  (Heb.  xii.  14).  God  is  invisible 
(a)  to  the  eye  of  sense,  (0)  but  he  will  be  visible  to  the  believer  in  the  clear  intellectual 
vision  of  the  supernatural  state.  4.  All  praise  and  honour  are  to  be  ascribed  to  Ood, 
"  to  whom  be  honour  anil  power  everlasting.  Amen."  The  doxology  is  the  natural 
ending  of  such  a  solemn  charge. — T.  0. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — A  word  of  admonition  and  encouragement  to  the  rich.  The  counsel 
carries  us  back  to  what  he  had  been  saying  in  previous  verses. 

I.  The  bioh  are  warned  against  a  twofold  danger.  "  To  those  who  are  rich 
in  this  present  world  give  in  charge  not  to  be  high-minded."  It  is  implied  that  there 
were  rich  men  as  well  as  poor  slaves  in  the  Church  at  Ephesus.  1.  The  danger  of 
high-mindednesi.  A  haughty  disposition  is  often  engendered  by  wealth.  The  rich 
may  be  tempted  to  loot  down  with  contempt  on  the  poor,  as  if  they,  forsooth,  were 
the  special  favourites  of  Heaven  because  they  had  been  so  highly  favoured  with 
worldly  substance.  2.  The  danger  of  trusting  m  wealth.  "Nor  to  set  their  hope 
upon  the  uncertainty  of  riches."  (1)  It  is  a  great  risk  for  a  rich  man  to  say  to  gold, 
"  Thou  art  my  hope ;  and  to  the  fine  gold,  Thou  art  my  confidence  "  (Job  xxxi.  24), 
(2)  Our  tenure  of  wealth  is  very  uncertain.  It  is  uncertain  (o)  because  riches  may 
take  to  themselves  wings  and  flee  away ;  (b)  because  we  may  be  taken  away  by  death 


CH.VI.  1— 21.]  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  133 


from  the  enjoyment  of  our  possessions ;  (c)  because  riches  cannot  satisfy  the  deep 
hunger  of  the  human  heart.  3.  The  safety  of  trusting  in  Qod.  "But  upon  the 
living  God,  who  giveth  us  all  things  richly  for  enjoyment."  (1)  Gud  is  the  sole  Giver 
of  all  we  possess.  (2)  He  giveth  to  us  all  richly  according  to  our  need.  (3)  He 
giveth  it  for  our  enjoyment,  so  that  we  may  take  comfort  in  his  rich  provision.  (4) 
As  the  living  God,  he  is  an  unexhaustible  Fountain  of  blessings,  so  that  no  uncertainty 
can  ever  attach  to  the  supply. 

II.  The    eich  abe    encouraged    to   make    a   right    usb  or   theik  wealth. 

1.  "  That  they  do  good."  (1)  Rich  men  may  do  evil  to  others  by  fraud  oi  oppression, 
and  evil  to  themselves  by  habits  of  luxury  and  intemperance.  (2)  They  art 
rather  to  abound  in  acts  of  beneficence  to  all  men,  and  especially  to  the  household 
of  faith,  after  the  examplo  of  him  who  "went  about  every  day  doing  good"  (Acts 
x.  38).  2.  "Sich  in  good  works,"  as  if  in  opposition  to  the  riches  of  this  world. 
They  are  to  abound  in  the  doing  of  them,  like  Dorcas,  who  was  "  full  of  good  works 
and  almsdeeds."  Wealth  of  this  sort  is  the  least  disappointing  both  here  and  here- 
after, and  has  no  uncertainty  in  its  results.  3.  "Beady  to  distribute."  Waling  to 
give  unasked ;  cheerful  in  the  distribution  of  their  favours ;  giving  without  grudging 
and  without  delay.  4.  "  Willing  to  communicate."  As  if  to  recognize,  not  merely 
a  common  humanity,  but  a  common  Christianity  with  the  poor.  The  rich  ought  to 
share  their  possessions  with  the  poor. 

III.  Encouragements  to  the  discharge  of  these  duties.  "  Laying  up  in  store 
for  themselves  as  a  treasure  a  good  foundation  against  the  time  to  come,  that  they  may 
lay  hold  upon  the  true  life."  1.  It  is  possible  for  rich  believers  to  lay  up  treasure 
in  heaven.  Tliis  treasure  is  a  foundation  against  the  time  to  come.  (1)  Not  a 
foundation  of  merit,  for  we  are  only  saved  by  the  merit3  of  Christ ;  (2)  but  a  founda- 
tion in  heaven,  solid,  substantial,  and  durable — unlike  uncertain  riches  of  earth ;  good 
in  its  nature  and  results — unlike  earthly  riches,  which  often  are  the  undoing  of  men. 
"Make  to  yourselves  friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness"  (Luke  xvl.  9). 

2.  Our  riches  may  have  an  influence  on  our  true  life  hereafter.  "  That  they  may 
lay  hold  on  the  true  life."  (1)  Not  in  the  way  of  merit ;  (2)  but  in  the  way  of  grace, 
for  the  very  rewards  of  the  future  are  of  grace ;  (3)  the  end  of  all  our  effort  is  the 
true  life,  in  contrast  to  the  vain,  transitory,  short-sighted  life  of  earth.— T.  0. 

• 
Vers.  20,  21. — Concluding  exhortation  and  benediction.     The  parting  counsel  of 
the  apostle  goes  back  upon  the  substance  of  all  his  past  counsels.     It  includes  a 
positive  and  a  negative  counsel. 

I.  A  positive  counsel.  "  0  Timothy,  keep  the  deposit  *'  entrusted  to  thee.  This 
refers  to  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel.  It  is  "  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints  " 
(Jude  3).  1.  The  doctrine  of  the  gospel  is  thus  not  something  discovered  by  man,  but 
delivered  to  man.  2.  It  is  placed  in  the  hands  of  Timothy  as  d  trustee,  to  be  kept 
for  the  use  of  others.  It  is  a  treasure  in  earthen  -vessels,  to  be  jealously  guarded  against 
robbers  and  foes.     3.  If  it  is  kept,  it  will  in  turn  keep  us. 

II.  A  negative  counsel.  "Avoiding  profane  and  vain  babblings,  and  oppositions 
of  knowledge  falsely  so  called :  which  some  professing  erred  concerning  the  faith." 
1.  The  duty  of  turning  away  from  empty  discourses  and  the  ideas  of  a  false  knowledge. 
(1)  Such  things  were  utterly  profitless  as  to  spiritual  result.  (2)  They  were  antago- 
nistic to  the  doctrine  of  godliness ;  for  they  represented  theories  of  knowledge  put  forth 
by  false  teachers,  which  ripened  in  due  lime  into  the  bitter  Gnosticism  of  later  times. 
It  was  a  knowledge  that  falsely  arrogated  to  itself  that  name,  for  it  was  based  on 
ignorance  or  denial  of  God's  truth.  2.  The  danger  of  such  teachings.  (1)  Some 
members  of  the  Church  were  led  to  profess  such  doctrines,  perhaps  because  they  wore 
a  seductive  aspect  of  asceticism,  or  pretended  to  show  a  shorter  cut  to  heaven.  (2) 
But  they  lost  their  way  and  "  erred  concerning  the  faith."  This  false  teaching  under- 
mined the  true  faith  of  the  gospel.  (3)  As  the  tense  implies  an  event  that  occurred  in 
the  past,  these  persons  were  not  now  in  the  communion  of  the  Ephesian  Church. — T.  C. 

Ver.  8. — The  health  of  religion.  "Wholesome  words."  There  is  no  word  more 
representative  of  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  than  this  word  "  wholesome."  It  shows  us 
that  the  gospel  means  health. 


134  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  vi.  1—21. 

I     II      I       III!      I' 

I.  They  are  wholesome  because  they  are  healing  words.  They  heal  breaches 
in  families;  they  heal  the  division  between  God  and  the  soul;  they  heal  the  heart 
itself.  And  in  the  vade-mecum  of  the  Bible  we  find  a  cure  for  all  the  diseases  of  the 
inner  man. 

II.  They  are  wholesome  words  as  contrasted  with  other  literatures.  With 
much  that  is  good  in  the  best  of  authors,  there  is  much  that  is  harmful.  All  is  not 
wholesome  in  Dante,  or  Goethe,  or  Shakespeare.  It  requires  an  infinite  mind  to 
inspire  words  that  shall  always  and  ever  be  wholesome;  and  it  would  be  difficult  to 
i  peak  of  any  human  literature  that  is  wholesome  every  way.  Some  has  in  it  too  much 
-omance  and  sentiment ;  some  has  too  great  a  power  upon  the  passions ;  some  feeds  the 
intellect  and  starves  the  heart. 

III.  These  words  are  wholesome  in  every  sphere.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  of 
he  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  that  it  saves  and  sanctifies  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  It  has  no 
vord  of  encouragement  to  the  unwashed  monk,  or  to  the  ascetic  who  neglects  the  care 
if  the  body.  It  supplies  a  true  culture  to  the  mind,  and  feeds  and  nourishes  all  the 
graces  of  the  heart.     So  it  becomes  a  doctrine  according  to  godliness.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6.  —  The  wealth  of  religion.  "But  godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain." 
We  learn  from  tliese  words — 

I.  That  men  are  rich  in  what  they  are.  It  is  a  mistake  to  think  of  riches  as 
belonging  merely  to  the  estate.  We  may  catalogue  the  possessions  of  the  outward  life, 
but  they  are  only  "  things."  How  many  men  learn  too  late  that  tbey  are  not  rich  in 
what  they  have  1  Godliness  is  the  truest  riches,  because  it  is  God-likeness ;  the  image 
which  no  earthly  artist  can  produce!    The  highest  good  conceivable  is  to  be  like  God. 

II.  Men  are  rich  in  what  they  can  do  withodt.  "  With  contentment."  Let  us 
study,  not  so  much  what  we  may  secure,  as  what  we  are  able  to  enjoy  existence  without. 
Men  multiply  their  cares  often  as  they  multiply  their  means ;  and  some  men,  with 
competency  in  a  cottage,  have  not  been  sorry  that'  they  lost  a  palace.  "  Contentment  is 
great  gain ;"  it  sets  the  mind  free  from  anxious  care ;  it  prevents  the  straining  after  false 
effect ;  it  has  more  time  to  enjoy  the  flowers  at  its  feet,  instead  of  straining  to  secure  the 
meadows  of  the  far-away  estate. 

III.  Men  must  leave  everything;  they  can  carry  nothing  away.  That  is 
certain;  and  yet  the  word  must  be  read  thoughtfully.  Nothing  save  conscience  ami 
character  and  memory.  Still  the  words  are  true,  that  we  can  carry  nothing  out ;  for 
these  are  not  "  things,"  but  part  of  our  personality.  The  body  returns  to  the  dust,  but 
the  spirit — to  the  God  who  gave  it.  Let  this  check  all  undue  anxiety,  and  cure  our 
foolish  envy  as  we  look  around  upon  all  the  coveted  positions  of  men.  "  We  brought 
nothing  into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  we  can  carry  nothing  out." — W.  M.  8. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Slaves  and  heretic*.  I.  Duties  or  Christian  slaves.  1.  Toward 
unbelieving  masters.  "  Let  as  many  as  are  servants  under  the  yoke  count  their  own 
masters  worthy  of  all  honour,  that  the  Name  of  God  and  the  doctrine  be  not  blasphemed." 
Paul  had  to  legislate  for  a  social  condition  which  was,  to  a  considerable  extent,  different 
from  ours.  In  the  early  Christian  Churches  there  were  not  a  lew  whose  social  condition 
was  that  of  slaves.  They  are  pointed  to  here  as  being  under  the  yoke  as  servants.  To 
service  there  was  added  the  oppressive  circumstance  of  being  under  the  yoke.  That  is, 
they  were  like  cattle  with  the  yoke  on  them — having  no  rights,  any  more  than  cattle, 
to  bestow  their  labour  where  they  liked,  but  only  where  their  masters  liked.  It  was  a 
degradation  of  human  beings,  for  which  mo  apology  could  be  made.  Under  Christianity 
the  eyes  of  Christian  slaves  could  not  be  altogether  closed  to  the  flagrant  injustice 
inflicted  on  them.  They  would  also  see  that,  in  this  sonship  and  heirship  of  glory, 
they  were  really  exulted  above  unbelieving  masters.  It  would  have  been  easy,  with 
such  materials,  to  have  inflamed  their  minds  against  their  masters.  But  Paul,  as  a  wise 
legislator,  understood  better  the  obligations  of  Christianity.  No  inflammatory  word 
doea  he  address  to  them ;  he  tells  them,  not  of  rights,  but  of  duties.  Their  masters, 
notwithstanding  their  being  identified  with  injustice,  were  still  their  own  masters,  i.e. 
men  to  whom  in  the  providence  of  God  they  were  subordinated.  Let  them  be  counted 
worthy  of  all  honour,  even  as  he  has  already  said  that  the  presbyters,  or  ecclesiastical 
rulers,  are  to  be  counted  worthy  of  honour.    And  we  need  not  wonder  at  this ;  for  still, 


oh.  vi.1— 2L]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  135 


at  the  basis  of  things,  they  are  the  representative!  of  Divine  authority.  As  such — and 
who  are  wholly  entitled  to  be  called  worthy  representatives? — let  them  be  counted 
worthy  of  all  proper  honour.  Let  them  be  treated  thus,  that  the  Name  of  God  and  the 
doctrine  be  not  blasphemed.  There  was  involved  in  their  conduct  the  Name  of  God,  i.e. 
of  the  true  God,  as  distinguished  from  the  false  gods  which  their  masters  worshipped. 
There  was  also  involved  the  teaching,  i.e.  what  Christianity  taught  about  things.  If 
they  were  insubordinate,  both  would  be  evil  spoken  of.  The  heathen  masters  would 
think  of  Christianity  as  upturning  the  fundamental  relations  of  things.  We  are  apt  to 
forget  how  much  the  Divine  honour  is  involved  in  our  conduct.  We  should  give  such 
a  living  representation  of  our  religion  as  will  give  none  occasion  to  blaspheme.  2. 
Toward  believing  matters.  "  And  they  that  have  believing  masters,  let  them  not 
despise  them,  because  they  are  brethren ;  but  let  them  serve  them  the  rather,  because 
they  that  partake  of  the  benefit  are  believing  and  beloved."  Men  might  be  despotic 
masters,  holders  of  slaves,  and  yet  be  Christians,  their  conscience  not  being  educated 
upon  that  point.  It  was  not  said  to  them  that  they  were  to  go  and  liberate  their  slaves. 
It  was  better  that  they  should  receive  the  essence  of  Christianity  without  their  pre- 
judices being  raised  on  that  pnint ;  correction  on  it,  from  the  working  of  Christian 
influences,  was  sure  to  follow,  with  a  slowness,  however,  that  might  leave  many  unen-' 
lightened  of  that  generation  of  tl  em.  It  seems  to  be  implied  that,  though  unenlightened, 
they  gave  their  slaves  Christian  treatment,  i.e.  treated  them  as  not  under  the  yoke,  in 
the  avoidance  of  harshness  and  unreasonable  exactions  often  associated  with  the  yoke. 
This  was  rightly  to  be  interpreted  as  a  homage  rendered  to  brotherhood  in  Christ. 
But  let  not  slaves  be  led  into  a  mistaken  interpretation  of  brotherhood.  It  did  not 
mean  that  respect  was  no  longer  due  to  their  masters.  The  earthly  relation,  though  not 
so  deep  as  the  new  relation  in  Christ,  still  stood,  as  giving  form  to  duty.  Let  them 
not  despise  them,  t'.e.  refuse  the  respect  due  to  superiors.  And,  instead  of  giving 
them  less  service,  let  it  be  the  other  way.  Give  more  service,  because  they  that  get 
the  benefit  of  it  are  of  the  same  faith,  and  beloved  as  masters  that  have  learned  from 
Christ  the  law  of  kindness.  Emphasizing  what  has  been  said.  "  These  things  teach 
and  exhort."    There  was  to  be  both  direction  and  enforcement. 

II.  Heretics.  1.  Standard  in  relation  to  which  they  are  heretic*.  "  If  any  man 
teacheth  a  different  doctrine,  and  consenteth  not  to  sound  words,  even  the  words  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  the  doctrine  which  is  according  to  godliness."  The  other 
doctrine  is  that  which  departs  from  the  standard.  This  is  contained  in  the  words  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  Truth,  and  has  the  right  to  rule  all  minds.  There  is 
a  healthy  vigour  in  his  words,  net  the  sickliness  that  there  was  in  the  words  of  the 
heretical  teachers.  The  doctrine  contained  in  the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
that  which  is  according  to  godliness.  There  is  grounded  in  our  nature,  apart  from  all 
teachings,  a  certain  religiosity.  That  is,  we  are  made  to  have  certain  states  of  our 
soul  toward  God,  such  as  reverence.  As  we  cherish  these  states  we  are  pious,  godly. 
What  our  Lord  taught  was  in  accordance  with  the  norm  of  godliness  in  our  original 
constitution,  and  was  fitted  to  effect  godliness  as  a  result.  The  condemnation  of  the 
heretics  was,  that  in  not  consenting  to  the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  they  were 
going  away  to  doctrines  which  were  not  fitted  to  promote  piety.  2.  Moral  characteriza- 
tion. (1)  From  the  injtatedness  of  ignorance.  "  He  is  puffed  up,  knowing  nothing." 
It  is  only  in  Christ  that  we  have  the  right  point  of  vievi.  If,  therefore,  we  are  not 
taught  by  him,  we  know  nothing  aright.  Those  who  have  true  knowledge  are  humbled 
under  a  sense  of  what  they  do  not  know.  The  heretics  who  had  not  even  a  smattering 
of  true  knowledge  were  puffed  up  with  conceit  of  the  multitude  of  things  which  they 
knew.  (2)  From  the  morbidness  of  sophistry.  "But  doting  about  questionings  and 
disputes  of  words,  whereof  cometh  envy,  strife,  railings,  evil  surmisings,  wranglings  of 
men  corrupted  in  mind  and  bereft  of  the  truth."  Not  consenting  to  sound  words,  they 
have  diseased  action.  That  in  which  they  show  themselves  diseased  is  in  busying 
themselves,  not,  like  Christian  inquirers,  around  realities,  but,  like  the  sophists  with 
whom  Socrates  had  to  do,  around  questionings  which  become  disputes  of  words.  This 
disease  of  hair-splitting  is  attended  with  various  evil  consequences  :  envy  toward  those 
who  evince  superior  skill,  strife  with  those  who  will  not  admit  the  value  of  the  distinc- 
tions, railings  where  there  is  not  reason,  evil  surmisings  where  there  is  not  charity,  and 
frequent  and  more  bitter  collisions  where  the  truth,  not  honestly  dealt  with,  is  forcibly 


136  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [can.  1—21. 

taken  away.  8.  The  special  obnoxiousness  of  their  teaching.  (1)  This  was  in  asserting 
that  godliness  was  a  way  of  gain.  "  Supposing  that  godliness  is  a  way  of  gain."  This 
wag  evidently  a  stratagem  on  the  part  of  the  heretics.  Suspected  of  a  worldliness  that 
was  unbecoming  their  religious  pretensions,  they  got  over  it  by  taking  up  the  position 
that  godliness  was  a  gainful  trade.  They  appealed  to  men  to  be  religious  for  the  sake 
of  the  worldly  gain  it  would  bring  to  them.  It  can  be  seen  that  the  apostle  regards 
the  heretical  maxim  with  contempt.  It  is  a  maxim  from  which  many  act  who  would 
not  like  to  admit  it  in  words.  They  keep  up  religious  appearances,  not  because  they 
have  any  love  for  religion,  but  because  it  would  be  damaging  to  them  to  appear 
irreligious.  (2)  Godliness  is  a  way  of  gain  if  associated  with  contentment.  "But  god- 
liness with  contentment  is  great  gain."  "Elegantly,  and  not  without  ironical  correction 
to  a  sense  that  is  contrary,  he  gives  a  new  turn  to  the  same  words"  (Calvin).  God- 
liness (what  we  have  in  relation  to  God)  is  great  gain ;  but  its  gain  lies  in  its  producing 
a  contented  mind  (in  relation  to  ourselves).  Where  a  man  is  contented  it  is  as  though  he 
owned  the  whole  world.  (3)  Reasons  for  contentment.  Our  natural  bareness.  "  For  we 
brought  nothing  into  the  world,  for  neither  can  we  carry  anything  out."  The  same 
thought  is  expressed  in  Job  i.  21  and  in  Eccles.  v.  15.  Viewed  at  two  points  we  are 
absolutely  poor.  There  was  a  time  when  earthly  good  was  not  ours,  and  there  will 
come  a  time  when  it  will  cease  to  be  ours.  We  are  not,  then,  to  make  an  essential  of 
what  only  pertains  to  our  earthly  state.  We  can  do  with  little.  "  Bat  having  food  and 
covering  we  shall  be  therewith  content."  Something  added  to  our  bare  natural  condi- 
tion we  need  while  we  are  in  this  world,  and  it  will  not  be  wanting ;  but  it  does  not 
need  to  be  much.  Food  and  covering,  these  will  suffice  for  us.  We  can  do  with  less 
than  we  imagine.    Shakespeare  tells  us  that 

"  The  poorest  man 
Is  in  the  poorest  thing  superfluous, 
Demands  for  nature  more  than  nature  claims." 

"The  rock  of  our  present  day  is  that  no  one  knows  how  to  live  upon  little;  the  great 
men  of  antiquity  were  generally  poor.  The  retrenchment  of  useless  expenditure,  the 
laying  aside  of  what  one  may  call  the  relatively  necessary,  is  the  high-road  to  Christian 
disentanglement  of  heart,  just  as  it  was  to  that  of  ancient  vigour.  A  great  soul  in  a 
small  house  is  the  idea  which  has  always  touched  me  more  than  any  other  "  (Lacordaire). 
The  sad  result  of  the  opposite  state.  "  But  they  that  desire  to  be  rich  fall  into  a  tempta- 
tion and  a  snare  and  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts,  such  as  drown  men  in  destruction 
and  perdition."  By  them  that  desire  to  be  rich  we  are  to  understand  those  who,  instead 
of  being  contented  with  what  they  can  enjoy  with  God's  blessing  and  what  they  can 
use  for  God's  glory,  make  riches  their  object  in  life.  They  fall  into  a  state  of  mind 
that  is  seductive  and  fettering.  And  this  unnatural  craving  for  possession  does  not  stand 
alone,  but  has  many  affiliated  lusts,  such  as  love  for  display,  love  for  worldly  company, 
love  for  the  pleasures  of  the  table.  Of  these  no  rational  account  can  be  given,  and  they 
are  hurtful  even  to  the  extent  of  drowning  men  in  misery,  expressed  by  two  very 
strong  words — destruction  and  perdition.  Confirmation  of  the  last  reason.  Proverbial 
saying.  "  For  the  love  of  money  is  a  root  of  all  kinds  of  evil."  The  proverb  is  in- 
tended to  have  a  certain  startling  nature.  Desire  of  money  is  not  certainly  the  only 
root  of  evils,  but  it  is  conspicuously  the  root  of  evils.  We  need  only  think  of  the  lies, 
thefts,  oppressions,  jealousies,  murders,  wars,  lawsuits,  sensuality,  prayerlessness,  that 
have  been  caused  by  it.  The  victims.  "Which  some  reaching  after  have  been  led 
astray  from  the  faith,  and  have  pierced  themselves  through  with  many  sorrows."  The 
apostle  thinks  of  the  ravages  wrought  on  some  he  knew.  Within  the  Christian  circle, 
they  unlawfully  reached  after  gain.  This  led  to  their  wandering  from  the  faith,  and  to 
their  being  pierced  through,  as  with  a  sword,  with  many  sorrows ;  bitter  reflections  on 
the  past,  disappointment  with  what  they  had  obtained,  apprehensions  of  the  future. 
These  he  would  point  to  as  beacons,  warning  off  the  rock  of  avarice. — B.  F. 

Vers.  11 — 16. —  The  Christian  gladiator.  The  gladiator  was  one  who  fought,  in  the 
arena,  at  the  amphitheatre  of  an  ancient  city,  such  as  the  Colosseum  at  Borne,  for  the 
amusement  of  the  public.  It  made  life  real  and  earnest  to  be  compelled  to  enter  the  lists, 
in  which  the  issue  was  generally  victory  or  death. 


dh.  vi.  1— 21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  Ml 

-  ■ 

'•  And  now 
The  arena  swims  around  him — he  is  gone  ? 
Ere  ceased  the  inhuman  shout  which  hailed  the  wretch  who  wom. 
He  heard  it,  but  he  heeded  not— his  eyes 
Were  with  his  heart,  and  that  was  for  away ; 
He  recked  not  of  the  life  he  lost  or  prize, 
But  where  his  rude  hut  by  the  Danube  lay  ; 
There  were  his  young  barbarians  all  at  play- 
There  was  their  Dacian  mother  I  he,  their  sire. 
Butchered  to  make  a  Bomau  holiday." 

I.  Need  of  preparation.  "  But  thou,  0  man  of  God,  flee  these  things ;  and  follow 
after  righteousness,  godliness,  faith,  love,  patience,  meekness."  We  know  what  can  be 
undergone  by  men  of  the  lowest  order,  when  they  put  themselves  in  training  for 
entering  the  prize-ring.  Accustomed  to  spend  the  greater  part  of  their  time  in  tht 
public-house,  they  are  found  rigorously  foregoing  their  pleasures  and  entailing  upoD 
themselves  hard  employment.  In  what  these  pugilists  forego  and  endure,  do  they  not 
put  to  blush  many  Christians,  who  cannot  be  said  to  forego  much,  or  to  give-  hard 
service  for  their  religion?  There  is,  we  are  here  taught,  what  becomes  the  man  of  God, 
i.e.  the  highest  type  of  man — the  man  who  tries  to  work  out  the  Divine  idea  of  his  life 
and  to  come  to  be  God-like  in  his  character.  "  0  man  of  God,  learn  from  these  men  of 
a  low  order.  They  flee  their  wonted  pleasures ;  flee  thou,"  snys  the  apostle  in  earnest 
address,  "  these  things,"  ».«.  as  appears  from  the  context,  those  habits  of  mind  which  we 
call  worldly,  tendencies  to  sink  higher  things  in  the  pursuit  of  worldly  ends,  money, 
enjoyment,  position  for  ourselves,  and  for  our  children.  Christians  who  may  have  no 
taste  for  what  are  regarded  as  coarse  pleasures,  may  yet  be  worldly  in  their  ideas  and 
habits^  Such  worldliness  is  unworthy  of  the  man  oi  God  ;  vulgar,  demeaning  in  him. 
O  man  of  God,  flee  thou  worldliness,  as  thou  wouldst  a  wild  beast.  Flee  it,  as  certain 
to  eat  up  thy  true  manliness.  It  may  be  said  that  more  havoc  has  been  wrought  in 
the  Church  by  worldliness  than  by  intemperance.  And  the  one  is  not  so  easily  dealt 
with  as  tlie  other.  The  intemperate  man  may  be  laid  hold  on,  and  aided  out  of  his 
intemperance.  But  the  worldly  man  may  be  in  pnsition  in  the  Church;  and  who  is 
likely  to  succeed  in  aiding  him  out  of  his  worldliness?  And  so,  while  the  one  may  be 
rescued,  the  other  may  continue  to  be  the  prey  of  destructive  habits  that  are  growing 
upon  him.  The  other  side  of  duty  refers  to  the  acquiring  of  good  habits  of  mind  that 
are  required  for  the  fight.  And  as  the  word  for  worldly  habits  U  flee,  so  the  word  for 
good  habits  is  pursue.  It  is  implied  that  worldliness  seeks  us,  and  we  need  to  get  out 
of  its  way,  to  flee  from  it  as  from  a  wild  beast.  Good  habits,  on  the  other  hand,  retreat 
from  us ;  they  are  apt  to  evade  us,  and  we  need  to  pursue  them  with  all  the  keenness  with 
which  a  ravenous  wild  beast  pursues  its  prey.  It  is  hard  for  us  to  come  up  to  them, 
and  to  have  them  as  our  enjoyed  possession.  The  good  habits,  so  ill  to  grasp,  which  are 
needed  for  the  fight  by  the  man  of  God  axe  particularized.  First  of  all  he  must  have 
righteousness,  or  the  habit  of  going  by  rule.  And  along  with  this  he  must  have  godli- 
ness, or  the  habit  of  referring  to  Qod.  Then  he  must  have  faith,  which  covers  his 
iefencelessness.  Along  with  this  he  must  have  love,  which  supplies  him  with  fere.  He 
must  also  have  patience,  which  enables  him  to  hold  out  to  the  end.  And  along  with  this 
he  must  have  meekness,  which  makes  his  spirit  proof  against  all  accumulation  of  wrong. 
In  the  eye  of  the  world,  these  habits  may  seem  unmanly ;  but,  0  man  of  God,  be  true 
to  thyself,  and  pursue  them;  let  them  not  escape  from  thee;  by  God's  decree  they  shall 
reward  thy  eager  pursuit. 

II.  Nature  of  the  fight.  "  Fight  the  good  fight  of  the  faith."  He  that  has  the 
faith  of  a  Christian  is  necessitated  to  fight.  There  is  revealed  to  his  faith  a  God  in  the 
heavens,  who  hates  sin,  and  who  also  seeks  the  salvation  of  souls.  In  the  lisiht  of  this, 
which  ought  to  be  an  increasing  light,  there  is  presented  an  exposure.  He  comes  to 
see  that  there  are  in  his  flesh  tendencies  which  are  against  God.  He  comes  also  to  see 
that  there  is  in  Um  world,  in  its  opinion  and  custom,  much  that  is  against  God.  As, 
then,  he  would  stand  by  God,  he  must  fight  against  the  flesh  and  the  world — against 
what  would  tempt  to  sin,  from  within  and  from  without.  It  is  a  good  fight,  being  for 
the  cause  of  God,  which  is  also  the  cause  of  man  in  his  establishment  in  righteousness 
and  love.    It  is  a  good  fight,  being  grounded  in  the  victory  of  Christ  and  carried  ou 


138  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  vi.  1— 21 

hopefully  under  his  leadership.  It  is  a  fight  into  which  the  man  of  God  can  throw 
his  undivided  energies,  his  warmest  enthusiasm.  Many  a  fight  which  receives  the 
plaudits  of  men  has,  in  the  strict  review,  only  a  seeming  or  superficial  goodness.  But 
the  fight  into  which  the  man  of  God  throws  himself  can  stand  the  severest  tests  of 
goodness.     Be  it  thine,  then,  0  man  of  God,  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  the  faith. 

III.  The  priceless  prize.  "Lay  hold  on  the  life  eternal,  whereunto  thou  wast 
called,  and  didst  confess  the  good  confession  in  the  sight  of  many  witnesses."  The 
prize  for  which  the  gladiator  fought  was  not  all  unsubstantial.  It  was  life.  It  meant 
the  enjoyment  of  liberty,  return  to  his  rude  hut,  his  young  barbarians,  and  their 
"  Dacian  mother."  Still  that  life  had  in  it  elements  of  unsatisfactoriness  and  decay. 
It  was  savage  life,  below  the  level  of  civilized  life.  Such  as  it  was  in  its  rude  delights, 
it  was  not  beyond  accident  and  death.  But  the  prize  for  which  the  Christian  gladiator 
fights,  is  life  eternal.  This  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  perpetuity  of  existence,  which 
may  be  felt  to  be  an  intolerable  burden.  The  importance  of  existence  lies  in  its  joyous 
elements,  experience  of  healthful  activity,  and  of  communion  with  those  we  love.  So 
the  life,  which  is  here  presented  as  the  prize,  is  that  kind  of  existence  in  which  there  is 
a  free,  unrestrained  play  of  our  powers,  and  in  which  we  have  communion  with  the 
Father  of  our  spirits  and  with  the  spirits  of  the  just.  And  the  life  has  such  a  principle 
in  it,  such  subsistence  in  the  living  God,  as  to  be  placed  above  the  reach  of  death,  as 
only  to  be  brought  forth  into  all  its  joyousness  by  death.  The  counsel  of  the  apostle 
is  to  lay  hold  on  this  priceless  prize.  0  man  of  God,  do  not  let  it  escape  thee.  Stretch 
forward  to  it  with  a  feeling  of  its  supreme  desirableness.  It  is  worthy  of  all  the  strain 
to  which  thon  canst  put  thyself.  The  counsel  of  the  apostle  is  supported  by  a  reference 
to  a  marked  period  in  the  past — apparently  entrance  on  the  Christian  life,  or  that  which 
was  expressive  of  it  to  Timothy,  viz.  his  baptism.  It  was  a  period  in  which  Divine 
action  and  human  action  met.  It  was  God  calling  him  to  life  eternal.  It  was  at  the 
same  time  Timothy  confessing  a  good  confession — apparently  saying  that  life  eternal 
was  his  aim.  Come  persecution,  come  death,  life  eternal  he  would  seek  to  gain.  This 
confession  he  made  in  the  sight  of  many  witnesses,  present  on  the  occasion  of  his 
baptism,  who  could  speak  to  the  earnestness  of  spirit  with  which  he  entered  on  his 
Christian  career.  0  man  of  God,  fight,  remembering  thy  Divine  calling  and  thy  solemn 
engagements. 

IV.  The  witnesses.  "  I  charge  thee  in  the  sight  of  God,  who  quickeneth  all  things, 
and  of  Christ  Jesus,  who  before  Pontius  Pilate  witnessed  the  good  confession;  that 
thou  keep  the  commandment,  without  spot,  without  reproach."  The  many  witnesses 
just  mentioned  call  up  such  a  scene  as  was  to  be  witnessed  in  the  Colosseum.  There 
was  an  assemblage  of  eighty-seven  thousand  people,  tier  above  tier  all  round.  As  the 
gladiator  stepped  into  the  arena,  he  might  well  be  awed  by  so  vast  and  unwonted 
a  crowd.  But  this  would  quickly  give  way  to  the  feeling  of  what  depended  on  the  way 
in  which  he  quitted  himself.  And  there  would  not  be  absent  from  his  mind  the 
thought  of  the  applause  which  would  reward  a  victory.  0  man  of  God,  thou  art  now 
in  the  arena,  and  there  are  many  onlookers.  They  are  watching  how  thou  art  quitting 
thyself  in  the  fight  of  the  faith — whether  thou  art  realizing  the  seriousness  of  thy 
position,  thy  splendid  opportunity.  Their  approval  is  worthy  of  being  considered, 
worthy  of  being  coveted  by  thee,  and  should  help  to  nerve  thee  to  the  fight.  But  there 
was  one  pre-eminent  personage  who  was  expected  to  grace  a  Roman  gladiatorial  festival, 
viz.  the  emperor.  As  the  gladiator  entered,  his  eye  would  rest  on  the  emperor  and 
his  attendants.  And  he  would  have  a  peculiar  feeling  in  being  called  upon  to  fight  under 
the  eye  of  the  august  Caesar,  to  whom  he  would  look  up  as  to  a  very  god.  So,  O  man 
of  God,  there  is  one  great  Personage  who  is  looking  down  on  the  arena  in  which  thou 
art,  and  under  whose  eye  thou  art  called  upon  to  fight.  It  is  not  a  Caesar — a  man  born 
and  upheld  and  mortal  like  other  men ;  but  it  is  God,  who  quickeneth  all  things— the 
Substratum  of  all  created  existence,  the  almighty  Upholder  of  men,  the  almighty 
Upholder  of  the  universe  with  all  its  forms  of  life.  There  is  another  Personage,  and  yet 
not  another.  This  is  Christ  Jesus,  who  before  Pontius  Pilate  witnessed  the  gooa 
confession.  "  Pilate  therefore  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  a  King  then  ?  Jesus  answered, 
Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  King.  To  this  end  was  I  born,  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into 
the  world,  that  I  should  bear  witness  of  the  truth.  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth 
heareth  my  voice."    "  In  these  words  we  see  the  majesty  and  fearless  exposure  of  Jesus 


oh.  w.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  189 

'  I  cannot  and  will  not  deny  that  I  am  a  King.  It  is  my  office  to  declare  the  truth ; 
it  is  by  the  influence  of  truth  that  I  am  to  reign  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and  I  cannot 
shrink  from  asserting  this  most  important  truth,  that  I  hare  the  power  and  authority 
of  a  sovereign  at  once  to  rule  and  to  defend  my  people.  Let  not  this  doctrine  offend. 
Every  one  who  is  of  the  truth,  who  loves  the  light,  and  whose  mind  is  open  to 
conviction,  heareth  and  acknou  ledgeth  this  and  all  my  doctrines.'  These  words,  spoken 
at  so  interesting  and  trying  a  period,  discover  to  us  the  elevation  of  our  Saviour  in 
a  very  striking  light.  We  see  his  mind  unbroken  by  suffering.  We  see  in  him  the 
firmest  adherence  to  the  doctrines  he  had  formerly  taught.  We  see  in  him  a  conscious 
dignity,  a  full  conviction  of  the  glory  and  power  with  which  he  was  invested.  He 
asserts  his  royal  office,  not  from  ostentation,  not  amidst  a  host  of  flatterers,  but  in  the 
face  of  enemies;  and  when  he  made  this  solemn  declaration  his  appearance  bore  little 
conformity,  indeed,  to  the  splendour  of  earthly  monarchs."  There  is  a  difference 
between  the  good  confession  of  Timothy  and  the  good  confession  of  Christ  indicated  in 
the  language.  Timothy  confessed  his  good  confession,  i.e.  in  the  way  of  saying  before- 
hand what  he  would  do  in  the  trial.  Christ  witnessed  his  good  coufession,  i.e. 
authenticated  it  by  making  it  in  the  immediate  prospect  of  death.  He  went  forth  from 
Pilate's  judgment- hall  and  sealed  his  confession  with  his  blood.  He  was  thus  the  first 
and  greatest  of  confessors.  It  adds  much  in  the  way  of  definiteness,  that  we  can  thus 
think  of  him.  It  also  adds  much  in  the  way  of  bracing.  There  is  a  halo  around  the 
great  Onlooker  from  his  past.  The  presence  in  a  battle  of  the  hero  of  a  hundred  fights, 
of  a  Napoleon  or  Wellington,  is  worth  some  additional  battalions.  So,  0  man  of  God, 
be  braced  up  to  the  fight,  by  the  thought  that  thou  art  fighting  under  the  eye  of 
thy  God,  under  the  eye  of  thy  Saviour.  Aud  do  not  think  of  getting  the  prize 
surreptitiously,  but  only  by  fair  means,  keeping  to  the  rules  of  the  contest,  what  is  here 
called  keeping  the  commandment,  so  that  no  little  spot  is  made  on  it,  no  little  dishonour 
done  to  it.  For,  however  little,  it  means  so  much  taken  away  from  the  value  of  the 
prize.  I  charge  thee,  then,  says  the  apostle,  in  these  great  presences  keep  the  com- 
mandment. 

V.  Final  event.  "  Until  the  appearing  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  which  in  its 
own  times  he  shall  show,  who  is  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  the  King  of  kings,  and 
Lord  of  lords ;  who  only  hath  immortality,  dwelling  in  light  unapproachable ;  whom 
no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see:  to  whom  be  honour  and  power  eternal.  Amen."  The 
final  event  of  the  day,  on  the  occasion  of  a  great  gladiatorial  show,  was  the  coming 
forward  of  Caesar,  in  circumstances  of  pomp,  to  crown,  or  otherwise  reward,  the  victors. 
So  the  final  event  of  time  will  be  the  coming  forward  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (as  from 
looking  on)  to  crown  the  victors  in  the  good  fight  of  the  faith.  There  is  reference  to 
the  same  event  in  2  Tim.  iv.  7, 8.  It  would  be  the  proudest  moment  of  a  man's  life 
when  he  was  called  forth  to  receive  the  prize  from  the  hand  of  his  emperor.  So  it  will 
be  a  moment  of  greatest  satisfaction  to  the  believer  when  he  is  called  forth  (as  by  the 
herald  proclaiming  his  name  before  a  great  assemblage)  to  receive  the  crown  from  the 
hand  of  his  Lord.  He  will  not  certainly  be  filled  with  self-satisfaction.  He  will  feel 
that  he  is  only  a  debtor  to  Christ,  and  his  first  impulse  will  be  to  cast  his  crown  at  the 
feet  of  his  great  Benefactor.  This  appearing  God  is  to  show,  i.e.  to  effect  and  to  bring 
.  forth  into  view.  He  is  to  show  it  in  its  own  times — at  present  hidden,  but  clear  to  the 
mind  of  God,  and  to  be  shown  when  his  purposes  are  ripe.  He  who  is  to  effect  the 
appearing  is  appropriately  adored  as  the  Potentate  (the  Wielder  of  power).  Not  less 
appropriately  is  he  adored  as  the  blessed  or  (better)  the  happy  Potentate,  i.e.  self-happy, 
having  all  elements  of  happiness  within  himself,  no  void  within  his  infinite  existence  to 
fill  up,  but  not  therefore  disposed  to  keep  happiness  to  himself,  rather  prompted,  in  his 
own  experience  of  happiness,  to  bestow  it  on  others,  first  in  creation  and  then  in 
redemption.  It  is  the  happy  Wielder  of  power  that  is  to  bring  about  an  event  that  is 
fraught  with  so  much  happiness  to  believers.  He  ihaU  show  it,  for  he  is  the  only 
Potentate ;  none  can  dispute  the  name  with  him.  There  are  powers  under  him  as  there 
were  rulers,  with  different  names,  under  the  emperor ;  but  he  is  the  King  of  kings  and 
Lord  of  lords — sovereign  Disposer  of  all  human  and  angelic  representatives  of  power. 
"The  king's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord  as  the  rivers  of  water:  he  turns  it 
[however  impetuous]  whithersoever  he  will."  He  shall  show  it  in  its  own  times ;  for, 
however  distant  those  times,  he  shall  live  to  do  it,  being  the  only  One  who  hath 


140  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  vi.  1— 2L. 

immortality  from  himself,  essential  imperviousness  to  decay.  He  shall  show  it,  who  is 
himself  inaccessible  within  a  circle  of  light,  and  not  only  never  seen  by  men  but 
necessarily  invisible  to  men,  i.e.  in  the  unveiled  brightness  of  his  glory.  All  honour 
and  power  eternal,  then,  be  to  this  God.  We  may  judge  of  what  the  appearing  is  to 
be  that  is  to  be  effected  by  One  in  whose  praise  the  apostle  breaks  forth  in  so  lofty 
a  strain.  We  may  conclude  that  it  is  to  be  the  grandest  display  of  the  honour  and 
power  of  God.  And  what  a  privilege  that  the  humble  believer — victor  in  the  battle  of 
life — is  to  be  called  forth  before  an  assembled  universe,  under  the  presidency  of  Christ 
and  by  the  hand  of  Christ,  to  be  crowned  with  the  life  eternal!  Let  every  one  add  his 
Amen  to  the  ascription  of  honour  and  power  to  God,  as  displayed  in  the  appearing  of 
Christ.— R.F. 

Vers.  17 — 21. — Parting  Affords.  I.  Warning  to  the  eich.  "Charge  them  that 
are  rich  in  this  present  world,  that  they  be  not  high-minded,  nor  have  their  hope  set 
on  the  uncertainty  of  riches,  but  on  God,  who  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy." 
The  apostle's  fear  of  worldliness  in  the  Church  still  possesses  him.  He  does  not 
now  regard  those  who  wish  to  be  rich,  but  those  who  are  rich.  He  at  once  reminds 
them  of  the  relative  value  of  their  riches,  as  extending  only  to  this  present  world.  He 
wains  them  against  the  danger  of  being  high-minded,  i.e.  lifted  up  above  others  under  a 
sense  of  their  importance  on  account  of  their  riches.  He  warns  them  also  against  the 
kindred  danger,  which  separates,  not  so  much  from  men  as  from  God,  viz.  their  setting 
their  hope  on  their  riches.  "Jesus  looked  round  about,  and  saith  unto  his  disciples, 
Mow  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  1 "  And  the 
disciples  were  astonished  at  his  words.  But  Jesus  answered  again,  and  said  unto  them, 
"Children,  how  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in  riches  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  1" 
The  difficulty  of  the  rich  is  that  they  are  tempted  to  set  their  hope  on  their  riches.  One 
reason  for  their  not  doing  so,  is  that  their  hope  should  not  be  set  on  an  uncertainty 
such  as  riches  is.  The  true  Object  of  our  hope  is  God,  who  is  of  a  liberal  disposition. 
He  giveth  us  not  merely  the  necessaries  of  life,  but  he  giveth  us  richly  all  things. 
In  his  disposition  we  have  a  better  guarantee  for  our  not  wanting,  than  in  clutching  to 
any  riches.  He  giveth  us  things  to  enjoy,  not  to  draw  us  away  from  our  fellow-men, 
not  to  draw  us  away  from  himself,  but  to  enjoy  as  his  gifts,  through  which  he  would 
tell  us  of  the  kindness  of  his  heart. 

II.  The  right  course  fob  thek.  "  That  they  do  good,  that  they  be  rich  in  good 
works,  that  they  be  ready  to  distribute,  willing  to  communicate."  They  were  to  seek 
to  promote  the  happiness  of  others.  As  they  were  rich,  they  had  it  in  their  power, 
above  others,  to  do  beautiful  actions.  They  were  to  be  free  in  making  distribution  of 
what  they  had.  They  were  to  be  ready  to  admit  others  to  share  with  them.  In 
a  word,  they  were  to  counteract  worldly  habits  of  mind  by  cultivating  habits  of 
benevolence.  There  is  the  duty  of  giving  the  Lord  the  firstfrnits  of  our  substance, 
a  proportion  of  our  income ;  there  is  here  inculcated  the  cultivation  of  the  disposition 
toward  others  that  is  to  go  along  with  that. 

III.  Advantage  of  the  eight  course.  "Laying  up  in  store  for  themselves  a  good 
foundation  against  the  time  to  come,  that  they  may  lay  hold  on  the  life  which  is 
life  indeed."  What  they  took  from  their  plenty  and  gave  for  others  they  were  not  to 
lose,  but  were  to  have  it  as  a  treasure  laid  up  for  them.  "Their  estates  will  not  die 
with  them,  but  they  will  have  joy  and  comfort  of  them  in  the  other  world,  and  have 
cause  to  bless  God  for  them  to  all  eternity  "  (Beveridge).  The  treasure  is  thought  of  as 
a  good  foundation,  by  resting  on  which  they  would  lay  hold  on  the  life  which  was  life 
indeed.  The  time  is  coming  when  this  world  will  be  taken  away  from  beneath  our 
feet.  What  have  we  sent  before  us  into  the  next  world,  so  as  to  keep  us  from  sinking 
in  the  new  condition  of  things,  to  bear  us  up  so  that  we  shall  not  earn,  but  receive,  from 
I  'hriat's  hand  and  through  Christ's  merit,  the  life  indeed  r  The  answer  here  is— what 
we  have  denied  ourselves,  what  we  have  unselfishly  sacrificed  for  others. 

IV.  Concluding  earnest  address  to  Timothy.  1.  What  he  was  to  hem.  "0 
Timothy,  guard  that  which  is  committed  unto  thee."  The  deposit  is  the  doctrine 
delivered  to  Timothy  to  preach,  as  opposed  to  what  follows.  "  We  have  an  exclamation 
alike  of  foreknowledge  and  of  fondness.  For  he  foresaw  future  errors,  which  he  mourned 
over  beforehand.    What  does  he  mean  by  guarding  the  deposit?    Guard  it,  says  he,  oa 


oh.  ti.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  141 

account  of  thieves,  on  account  of  enemies  who  while  men  sleep  may  sow  tares  amidst 
the  good  seed.  What  is  the  deposit?  It  is  that  which  was  entrusted  to  thee,  not 
found  by  thee ;  which  thou  hast  received,  not  invented ;  a  matter,  not  of  genius,  but  of 
teaching ;  not  of  private  usurpation,  but  of  public  tradition ;  a  matter  brought  to  thee, 
not  put  forth  by  thee;  in  which  thou  oughtest  to  be,  not  an  enlarger,  but  a  guardian;  not 
an  originator,  but  a  disciple;  not  leading,  but  following.  Keep,  saith  he,  the  deposit; 
preserve  intact  and  inviolate  the  talent  of  the  catholic  faith.  What  has  been  entrusted 
to  thee,  let  the  same  remain  with  thee ;  let  that  same  be  handed  down  by  thee.  Gold 
thou  hast  received,  gold  retvrn.  I  should  be  sorry  thou  shouldst  substitute  ought  else. 
I  should  be  sorry  that  for  gold  thou  shouldst  substitute  lead,  impudently,  or  brass, 
fraudulently.  I  do  not  want  the  mere  appearance  of  gold,  but  its  actual  reality. 
Not  that  there  is  to  be  no  progress  in  religion,  in  Christ's  Church.  Let  there  be 
so  by  all  means,  and  the  greatest  progress;  but,  then,  let  it  be  real  progress,  not 
a  change  of  faith.  Let  the  intelligence  of  the  whole  Church  and  its  individual 
members  increase  exceedingly,  provided  it  be  only  on  its  own  head,  the  doctrine 
being  still  the  same."  2.  What  he  was  to  avoid.  "  Turning  away  from  the  profane 
babblings  and  oppositions  of  the  knowledge  which  is  falsely  so  called;  which  some 
professing  have  erred  concerning  the  faith."  The  errors  are  called  profane  babblings, 
similarly  to  the  characterization  of  them  in  ch.  L  6  and  iv.  7.  They  are  also  called 
oppositions  of  a  falsely  named  gnosis,  i.e.  to  the  true  gnosis  in  the  gospel.  There  were 
some  defections  on  account  of  Gnostic  tendencies  even  in  the  apostle's  day ;  and  it  was 
very  much  the  design  of  this  letter  to  warn  his  pupil  against  them. 

V.  Benbdiotiow.  "  Grace  be  with  you."  It  seems  better  to  regard  the  benediction 
for  Timothy  alone.  He  has  been  so  busy  in  laying  down  ecclesiastical  rules  for  the 
direction  of  Timothy  as  superintendent,  that  he  has  no  space  left  for  prrrmal  Mearences, 
but  closes  abruptly  with  the  briefest  term  of  benodertfcia, — 1L  V. 


HOMILETICAL   INDEX 


ST. 


THE    FIRST    EPISTLE    OP 

PAUL   TO    TIMOTHY. 


CHAPTEB  L 

Church  Government            M            —  1 

The  Heretio          ...            «.            ~.  8 

The  Apostle          ...            ...            ...  8 

Apostolic  Address  and  Greeting       ...  8 
The  Object  of  Timothy's  Continued 

Sojourn  at  Ephesus          ...            ...  9 

Nature  of  the  Charge  connected  with 
the  Fulfilment  of  God's  Dispensa- 
tion     ...            ...            ...            ...  10 

The  Nature  and  Design  of  the  Law ...  11 
Ejaculation  of  Thankfulness  for  this 

High  Trust       ...            18 

The  Lord's  Mercy  contrasted  with  his 

own  Want  of  it ...            ...            ...  18 

The  Superabounding  Grace  of  the  Lord 

to  the  Apostle  ...           ....            ...  14 

The  Summary  of  the  Gospel              ...  14 
The  Apostle  an  Example  of  the  Divine 

Long-suffering  to  all  Ages            ...  14 

The  Solemn  Charge  to  Timothy       ...  15 

The  Divine  Benediction      ...            ...  16 

The  Vital  End  of  Religion               ...  17 

Life's  Inner  Springs           ...           ...  17 

The  Sense  of  Rectitude       ...            ...  18 

The  Absence  of  Hypocrisy ...            ...  18 

A  Gospel  of  Glory               ...            ...  19 

The  Nature  of  God             ...            ...  20 

Trustees  of  the  Truth        ...           ...  20 

Human  Wreckage                ...            „.  21 

Introduction          ...            ...            ...  21 


Personal  Digression 
Recurrence  to  Timothy 


»      81 


CHAPTER  IL 


Publio  Worship     ...  ...  ... 

The  Regulation  of  Public  Worship  ... 
The  Beneficial  and  Acceptable  Nature 

of  such  Catholic  Prayer  ... 
Reasons  for  this  Universality  of  Prayer 

in  the  Relation  of  all  Men  to  God 

and  Christ 
The  Conduct  of  Public  Prayer  by  Men 
The  Attire  and  Deportment  of  Women 

in  the  Christian  Assemblies 
The  Proper  Sphere  and  Behaviour  of 

Women  ...  ... 

"A  Quiet  Life"    .„  ^. 

"A  Peaceable  Life"  ...  „, 

Moral  Loveliness ...  _  ... 

The  Self-giving  of  Christ  ... 
Modest  Adornment  .„  „. 

Universalism         ...  ... 

The  Sexes  in  the  Christian  Assembly 


88 

n 

8$ 


88 
40 

40 

41 

42 
48 
43 
44 
44 
44 
48 


CHAPTER  HX 

The  Clergy           ...            ...  ...      M 

The  Christian  Pastorate  a  Good  Work      87 

The    Positive    Qualifications    of  the 

Christian  Pastor               ...  ...       flf 

The  Negative   Qualifications  of  the 

Christian  Pastnr              m  „      M 


INDEX. 


The  Christian  Pastor  in  his    Home 

Life 58 

The  Pastor  must  not  be  a  Novice      ...  59 
The  Pastor  must  have  an  Honest  Repu- 
tation before  the  World  ...            ...  59 

The  Qualifications  of  Deacons          ...  59 

The  Qualifications  of  Deaconesses    ...  60 

The  Domestic  Duty  of  Deacons        ...  61 
The  Importance  of  a  Due  Regulation 

cf  Church  Order              ...            ...  61 

The  Treasure  of  Truth  committed  to 

the  Church's  Guardianship            ...  62 

Behaviour  in  Church          ...            ...  62 

What  "Church  "means      ...            ...  63 

Qualifications    of    Three   Classes   of 

Offlce-Bearers    ...            ...            ...  63 

Upholder  of  the  Truth,  and  Grandeur 

of  Truth  upheld              ...            ...  65 


CHAPTER  IV. 


78 


Latter-Day  Apostasies 

A  Predicted  Apostasy  in  the  Christian 

Church  ...  ...  ...  74 

The  Practical  Features  of  the  Apostasy  75 
The  Due  Equipment  and  Duties  of  a 

Minister  of  Christ  ...  ...  75 

The  Advantage  of  True  Godliness    ...  76 
The  Practical  Effects  of  this  Trutli  in 

Apostolic  Experience      ...  ...  76 

A  Series  of  Admonitions  for  the  Guid- 
ance of  Timothy  ...  77 
The    Duties    of    Timothy's     Public 

Ministry  ...  ...  ...  78 

The  Duty  of  Improving  the  Divine 

Gifts  of  Exhortation  and  Teaching  78 
The  Necessity  of  a  Minister  giving  his 

whole  Energies  to  his  Work  ...  78 

A  False  Asceticism  ...  ...  79 

A  Universal  Use  ...  „  ...  79 

A  Grateful  Heart...  ...  ...  80 

Creation  Sanctified  ...  «.  80 

A  Wise  Reminder  ...  ...  81 

Ministerial  Vocation  ...  ...  81 

Religious  Recompense        ...  ...  82 

The  Great  Beyond  ...  ...  82 

Adequate  Reasons  ...  ...  83 

Apostolic  Enduranoe  ...  ...  84 

Sustaining  Motive  ...  ...  84 

The  Universal  Redeemer    ...  ...  85 

A  Toung  Teacher  ._  ...  85 

Spiritual  Negligence  m  85 

Meatal  Absorption  „.  ...  86 


THEMK 

Observation  of  Others 
A  Dual  Heed 
The  Life-Endurance 
Saving  Others 
Timothy  warned  ... 
Guidance  of  Timothy 
Directions  to  Timothy 


TA01 

86 
87 
87 
87 
88 
90 
82 


CHAPTER  V. 


Propriety  ...  ._  .^    102 

Church  Charities  ...  ...  ...     102 

Duties  and  Privileges  of  the  Clergy ...      103 
Directions  how  to  treat  Members  of  the 
Church  according  to   the   Distinc- 
tions of  Age  and  Sex       ...  ...     103 

Directions  with  regard  to  Widows     ...     103 
The  Duty  of  Providing  for  one's  own 
Household         ...  ...  ...     104 

Particular  Directions  as  to  the  Class 
of    Widows     commended     to    the 
Church's  Sympathy  and  Support  ...     105 
Directions    with    Regard    to    Young 
Widows  ...  ...  ...     105 

Directions  to  such  Young  Widows    ...     10«i 
Further  Directions  as  to  the  Support 
of  Widows         ...  ...  ...     107 

Directions  respecting  the  Honour  due 

to  the  Elders  of  the  Church  ...     107 

Directions  as  to  Acousations  against 
Elders  ...  ...  ...     107 

The  Manner  of  Public  Rebuke  ...     107 

A  Solemn  Charge  to  Timothy  to  be 
Conscientiously  Impartial  in  these 
Cases  ...  ...  ...  ...     108 

A  Caution  against  Hasty  Induction  of 
Ministers  ...  ...  ...     108 

Direction  to  Timothy  to  be  Careful  of 
his  Health         ...  ...  ...     109 

Final  Directions  to  Timothy  respect- 
ing his  Attitude  toward  the  Sins 
and  Sinful  Works  of  Men  ...     109 

Reverence  for  Age  ...  ...     109 

What  Women  should  be     .»  ...     110 

Sympathy  with  Widows      ...  ...     110 

What  pleases  God  ...  ^     110 

Desolateness         ...  ._  ...     110 

Confidence  in  the  Father    ...  m.     Ill 

Death  in  Life       ...  ...  M.    112 

Care  for  the  Home  _  m.    112 

The  Busybody  Life  m  ...    112 

Sins  that  go  before  M  m.    118 

Sins  that  follow  after  m*  —.    US 


INDEX. 


m 


THEMB  PAGE 

Dealing  wttn  Certain  Classes  in  the 

Church               ...            ...  ...  114 

The  Presbyterate  ...           ...  ...  116 


CHAPTER  VL 


The  Doctrine  of  Gud 

Heterodoxy 

The  Contrast         ... 

The  Man  of  God  ... 


125 
125 
125 

120 


The  Duties  of  Slaves  to  Unbelieving 
Masters  ...  ...  ...    127 

The  Duties  of  Slaves  to  Christian 
Masters  ...  ...  ...     128 

A  Warning  against  those  who  Oppose 
such  Wholesome  Teaching  ...    128 

Thfl  Real  Gain  of  True  Godliness     ...     129 


Til  1-  MR  PAGB 

The  Dangers  of  the  Eager  Haste  to  be 

Bich    ...           ...           ...           ...  180 

The  Boot  of  All  Evil          130 

Personal    Admonition    addressed    to 

Timothy  himself              ...            ...  180 

The  Good  Fight  and  its  Besulte       ...  131 
The  Solemn  Charge  pressed  anew  upon 

Timothy           ...           ...           ...  132 

A  Wi ..  <1  of  Admonition  and  Encourage- 
ment to  the  Bich              ...            ...  132 

Concluding  Exhortation  and  Benedio- 

tion      ...            ...            ...            ...  133 

The  Health  of  Religion       ...            ...  133 

The  Wealth  of  Religion      ...            ...  134 

Slaves  and  Heretics             ...            „.  134 

The  Christian  Gladiator     ...           m.  £86 

Parting  Words      ...            «,            M  140 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  REY.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,D.D., 


DE4.N  OF  GLOUCESTER  | 


AND   BY  THE 


REV.  JOSEPH    S.  EXELL,  MX 


II.  TIMOTHY. 

(Exposition  aiii)  fotniletics: 

Bt   THE    RIGHT   HON.    AND    RIGHT   REV. 
LORD  A.   C.   HERVEY,  D.D., 

LORD  BISHOP  OF  BATH  AND  WELLS. 

^omilies  bg  Nations  QUttbors : 

REV    PROF.  T.  CROSKERY,  D.D.  REV.  R.  FINLAYSON,  B.A 

REV.  W.  M.  STATHAM. 


FUNK    &    WAG-NALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yoke  and  Toronto. 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF 

PAUL    TO    TIMOTHY. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  L 


Ver.  1. — Christ  Jesus  for  Jesus  Christ, 
A.V.  and  T.E. ;  the  life  for  life,  A.V.  The 
>.ife  is  a  little  clearer  than  life,  as  showing 
that  "life"  (not  "promise")  is  the  ante- 
cedent to  "  which."  According  to  the  pro- 
mise denotes  the  subject-matter  with  which, 
ns  an  apostle,  he  had  to  deal,  viz.  the  pro- 
mise of  eternal  life  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  the 
end  for  which  he  was  called,  viz.  to  preach 
that  promise  (comp.  Titus  i.  2). 

Ver.  2. — Beloved  child  for  dearly  beloved 
son,  A.V. ;  peace  for  and  peace,  A.V.  My 
beloved  child.  In  1  Tim.  i.  2  (as  in  Titus  i. 
4)  it  is  "my  true  child,"  or  "my  own  son," 
A.V.  The  idea  broaohed  by  some  commen- 
tators, that  this  variation  in  expression  marks 
some  change  in  St.  Paul's  confidence  in 
Timothy,  seems  utterly  unfounded.  The 
exhortations  to  boldness  and  courage  which 
follow  were  the  natural  results  of  the  danger 
in  which  St.  1'aul's  own  life  was,  and  the 
depression  of  spirits  caused  by  the  desertion 
of  many  friends  (ch.  iv.  10—16).  St.  Paul, 
too,  knew  that  the  time  was  close  at  hand 
when  Timothy,  still  young,  would  no  longer 
have  him  to  lean  upon  and  look  up  to,  and 
therefore  would  prepare  him  for  it;  and 
possibly  he  may  have  seen  some  sympfc  mi 
of  weakness  in  Timothy's  character,  which 
made  him  anxious,  as  appears,  indeed,  in  the 
course  of  this  Epistle.  Graoe,  etc.  (so  1 
Tim.  i.  2 ;  Titus  i.  4,  A.V. ;  2  John  3).  Jude 
has  "  meroy,  peace,  and  love."  The  salutation 
in  Eph.  i.  2  is  "  grace  and  peace,"  as  also  in 
Rom.  i.  7 ;  1  Cor.  i.  3,  and  elsewhere  in  St. 
Paul's  Epistles,  and  in  Rev.  i.  4. 

Ver.  3. — In  a  pure  for  with  pure,  A.V.; 
how  unceasing  for  that  without  ceasing,  A.V. ; 
is  my  remembrance  for  I  have  remembrance, 
A.V. ;  supplications  for  prayers,  A.V.  For 
whim  I  servo  from  my  fathers  in  a  pure 
conscience,  cnmp.  Acts  xxiii.  1.    How  un- 

IL  TIMOTHY. 


_  „■,  etc.  The  construction  of  the  sen- 
tence which  follows  is  difficult  and  ambigu- 
ous. For  what  does  the  apostle  give  thanks 
to  God  ?  The  answer  to  this  question  will 
give  the  clue  to  the  explanation.  The  only 
thing  mentioned  in  the  context  which  seems 
a  proper  subject  of  thanksgiving  is  that 
which  is  named  in  ver.  5,  viz.  the  "  unfeigned 
faith  "  that  was  in  Timothy.  That  this  was 
a  proper  subject  of  thanksgiving  we  learn 
from  Eph.  i.  15,  where  St.  Paul  writes  that, 
having  heard  of  their  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus,  he  ceased  not  to  give  thanks  for  them, 
making  mention  of  them  in  his  prayers  (sei', 
too,  1  Thess.  i.  2).  Assuming,  then,  that 
this  was  the  subject  of  his  thanksgiving,  we 
notice  especially  the  reading  of  the  R.T., 
\a$<iv,  "  having  received,"  and  the  note  of 
Bengel  that  6r6fivTio"iv  Kan&6.v*iv  means  to 
lie  reminded  of  any  one  by  another,  as  dis- 
tinguished from  Avdiivrio-ty,  which  is  used 
when  any  one  comes  to  your  recollection 
without  external  prompting;  both  which 
fall  in  with  our  previous  conclusion.  And 
we  get  for  the  main  sentence  the  satisfactory 
meaning :  "  I  give  thanks  to  God  that  I  have 
received  (or,  because  I  have  received)  a 
most  pleasant  reminder  (from  some  letter  or 
visitor  to  whicli  he  does  not  further  allude) 
of  your  unfeigned  faith,"  etc.  The  main 
sentence  clearly  is :  "I  thank  God  .  .  . 
having  been  reminded  of  the  unfeigned  faith 
that  is  in  thee."  The  intermediate  words 
are,  in  Paul's  manner,  parenthetical  and 
explanatory.  Being  about  to  say  that  it  was 
at  some  special  remembrance  of  Timothy's 
faith  that  he  gave  thanks,  the  thought  arose 
in  his  mind  that  there  was  a  continual 
remembrance  of  him  day  and  night  in  his 
prayers ;  that  he  was  ever  thinking  of  him, 
longing  to  see  him,  and  to  have  the  tears 
shed  at  their  parting  turned  into  joy  at  their 
meeting  again.  And  so  he  interposes  this 
thought,    and   prefaces   it  with  us — not 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  j.  1—18. 


surely, "  how,"  as  in  the  E.V.,  but  in  the 
sense  of  KaSeSs,  "  as,"  "just  as."  And  so  the 
whole  passage  comes  out :  "  Just  a«  I  have 
an  unceasing  remembrance  of  you  in  my 
prayers,  day  and  night,  longing  to  see  you, 
that  the  tears  which  I  remember  you  shed 
at  our  parting  may  he  turned  into  joy,  so  do 

1  give  special  thanks  to  God  on  the  remem- 
brance of  your  faith." 

Ver.  4. — Longing  for  greatly  desiring,  A.V.; 
remembering  for  being  mindful  of,  A.V. 

Ver.  5.  —  Having  been  reminded  of  for 
when  I  call  to  remembrance,  A.V. ;  in  thee 
for  that  in  thee,  A.V.  Unfeigned  (avimoKpl- 
tou);  as  1  Tim.  i.  5  (see  also  Bom.  xii.  9j 

2  Cor.  vi.  6;  1  Pet.  i.  22;  Jas.  iii.  17). 
Having  been  reminded,  etc.  (see  preceding 
note).  Thy  grandmother  Lois.  Ma/in 
properly  corresponds  exactly  to  our  word 
"mamma."  In  4  Maco.  xvi.  9,  Ou  /ut/i/nj 
K\Ji8e!<ra  paKapto-8'litro/i.at,  "1  shall  never  be 
called  a  happy  grandmothei,"  and  here  (the 
only  place  where  it  is  found  in  the  New 
Testament)  it  has  the  sense  of  "grand- 
mother." It  is  hardly  a  real  word,  and  has 
no  place  in  Stephens'  '  Thes.,'  except  inci- 
dentally by  comparison  with  ir&mra.  It  has, 
however,  a  classical  usage.  The  proper 
word  for  a  "grandmother"  is  ri\%n.  Lois; 
a  name  not  found  elsewhere,  possibly  mean- 
ing "  good,"  or  "  excellent,"  from  the  same 
root  as  Aahepos  and  hiila-ros.  This  and  the 
following  Eunice  are  examples  of  the  fre- 
quent use  of  Greek  or  Latin  names  by  Jews. 
Eunice,  we  know  from  Acts  xvi.  1,  was  a 
Jewess  and  a  Christian,  as  it  would  seem 
her  mother  Lois  was  before  her. 

Ver.  6. — For  the  which  cause  for  wherefore, 
A.V. ;  through  the  laying  for  by  the  putting, 
A.V.  For  which  cause  (Si'  V  alrlav) ;  so  ver. 
12  and  Titus  i.  13,  but  nowhere  else  in  St. 
Paul's  Epistles,  though  common  elsewhere. 
The  clause  seems  to  depend  upon  the  words 
immediately  preceding,  "  I  am  persuaded  in 
thee  also;  for  which  cause,"  etc.  Stir  up 
(avaCairvpeiv) ;  here  only  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, but  found  in  the  LXX.  of  Gen.  xlv. 
27  and  1  Mace.  xiii.  7,  in  an  intransitive 
sense,  "  to  revive."  In  both  passages  it  is 
contrasted  with  a  previous  state  of  despon- 
dency (Gen.  xlv.  26)  or  fear  (1  Mace.  xiii.  2). 
We  must,  therefore,  conclude  that  St.  Paul 
knew  Timothy  to  be  cast  down  and  depressed 
by  his  own  imprisonment  and  imminent 
danger,  and  therefore  exhorted  him  to  revive 
"  the  spirit  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a 
sound  mind,"  which  was  given  him  at  his 
ordination.  The  metaphor  is  taken  from 
kindling  slumbering  ashes  into  a  flume  by 
the  bellows,  and  the  force  of  hva  is  to  show 
that  the  embers  had  gone  down  from  a  pre- 
vious state  of  candescence  or  flame— "to 
rekindle,  light  up  again."  It  is  a  favourite 
metaphor  in  classical  Greek.     The  gift  of 


God  (rh  x&puritn  rov  6eoD);  as  1  Tim.  It.  14 
(where  see  note).  The  laying  on  of  my  hands, 
together  with  those  of  the  presbytery  (1  Tim. 
iv.  14 ;  oomp.  Acts  xiii.  2,  3).  The  laying 
on  of  hands  was  also  the  medium  through 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given  in  Con- 
firmation (Acts  viii.  17),  and  in  healing 
(Mark  xvi.  18 ;  comp.  Numb,  xxvii.  18,  23). 

Ver.  7. — Gave  us  not  for  hath  not  given  us, 
A.V. ;  a  spirit  of  fear  fulness  for  the  spirit  of 
fear,  A.V. ;  and  for  of,  A.V. ;  discipline  for 
of  a  sound  mind,  A.V.  A  spirit  of  f earful- 
ness ;  or,  cowardice,  as  the  word  Sei\la  ex- 
actly means  in  classical  Greek,  where  it  is 
very  common,  though  it  only  occurs  here  in 
the  New  Testament.  &ei\6s  also  has  a 
reproachful  sense,  both  in  classical  Greek, 
and  also  in  the  LXX.,  and  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament (see  Matt.  viii.  26;  Mark  iv.  40; 
Rev.  xxi.  8).  It  seems  certain,  therefore, 
that  St.  Paul  thought  that  Timothy's  gentle 
spirit  was  in  danger  of  being  cowed  by  the 
adversaries  of  the  gospel.  The  whole 
tenor  of  his  exhortation,  combined  aa  it 
was  with  words  of  warm  affection,  is  in  har- 
mony with  this  thought.  Compare  with  the 
phrase,  irvevp.a  SeiXlas,  the  irvevfw.  Sov\elas 
els  (piliov  of  Eom.  viii.  15.  Of  power  and 
love.  Power  {Siva/us)  is  emphatically  the 
attribute  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Luke  iv.  14; 
Acts  x.  38 ;  Eom.  xv.  13 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  4,  etc.), 
and  that  which  he  specially  imparts  to  the 
servants  of  Christ  (Acts  i.  8 ;  vi.  8 ;  Eph. 
iii.  16,  etc.).  Love  is  added,  as  showing  that 
the  servant  of  Christ  always  uses  power  in 
conjunction  with  love,  and  only  as  the  means 
of  executing  what  love  requires.  Discipline 
(aoKfipovuriwG);  only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment; aufypoviCziv  is  found  in  Titus  ii.  4, 
"  to  teach,"  A.V. ;  "  to  train,"  E.V.  "  Dis- 
cipline" is  not  a  very  happy  rendering, 
though  it  gives  the  meaning ;  "  correction," 
or  "sound  instruction,"  is  perhaps  nearer. 
It  would  seem  that  Timothy  had  shown 
some  Bigns  of  weakness,  and  had  not  boldly 
reproved  and  instructed  in  their  duty  cer- 
tain offenders,  as  true  love  for  souls  required 
him  to  do.  The  phrase  from  Plutarch's 
•Life  of  Cato,'  quoted  by  Alford,  exactly 
gives  the  force  of  tn><ppovi<rp.6s :  'Eiri  Stop6d- 
trei  Hal  trutppovurfi^  twv  &\Au>r,  *'  For  the 
amendment  and  correction  of  the  rest." 

Ver.  8. — Be  not  ashamed  therefore  for  be 
not  thou  therefore  ashamed,  A.V. ;  suffer 
hardship  with  the  gospel  for  be  thou  partaker 
of  the  afflictions  of  the  gospel,  A.V.  Be  not 
ashamed,  etc.  The  exhortation  based  upon 
the  previous  statement.  The  spirit  of  power 
and  love  must  show  itself  in  a  brave, unflinch- 
ing acceptance  of  all  the  hardships  and 
afflictions  incident  to  a  faithful  execution  of 
his  episcopal  office  (comp.  Eom.  i.  16). 
Suffer  hardship  with  the  gospel.  This,  of 
course,  is  a  possible  rendering,  but  an  un- 


,1.1— 18.] 


THE  SECOND  BPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


natural  one,  and  not  at  all  in  harmony  with 
the  context.  The  force  of  <rbw  in  <rvyKaKoiri.Sn- 
aov  (only  found  here  in  the  New  Testament 
and  in  the  E.T.  of  eh.  it  3)  is  manifestly  to 
associate  Timothy  with  St.  Paul  in  the 
afflictions  of  the  gospel.  "Be  a  fellow- 
partaker  with  me  of  the  afflictions,"  which 
is  in  obvious  contrast  with  being  ashamed 
of  the  testimony  of  the  Lord  and  of  the 
apostle  his  prisoner.  The  got/pel  (rtp  <f bay- 
ye\Up);  i.e.  for  the  gospel,  as  Phil.  i.  27, 
'•  striving  for  the  faith  of  the  gospel "  (rp 
■n-larei),  and  as  C  hry sostom  explains  it :  "tirip 
toS  evayye\lov  (Huther).  Aooording  to  the 
power  of  God;  either  "according  to  that 
spirit  of  power  which  God  gave  you  at  your 
ordination,"  or  "according  to  the  mighty 
power  of  God  manifested  in  our  salvation 
and  in  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  The  latter  seems  to  be  what  St. 
Paul  had  in  hie  mind.  Timothy  ought  to 
feel  that  this  power  wag  on  his  side. 

Ver.  9. — Saved  for  hath  saved,  A.V. ;  a  for 
an,  A.V. ;  times  eternal  for  the  world  began, 
A.V.  Who  saved  us,  and  called  us.  The 
saving  was  in  the  gift  of  his  only  begotten 
Son  to  be  our  Saviour;  the  calling  is  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  drawing  indivi- 
dual souls  to  Christ  to  be  saved  by  him. 
(For  the  power  of  God  displayed  in  man's 
salvation,  comp.  Eph.  i.  19,  20.)  With  a 
holy  calling  (comp.  Bom.  i.  7;  1  Cor.  i.  2). 
Not  aooording  to  our  works  (see  Titus  iii.  5 ; 
Eph.  ii.  4 — 10).  His  own  purpose  and  grace. 
If  our  calling  were  of  works,  it  would  not  be 
by  grace  (Bom.  iv.  4,  5;  xi.  6),  but  it  is 
"  according  to  the  riches  of  his  grace  .  .  . 
according  to  his  good  pleasure  which  he 
purposed  in  himself"  (Eph.  i.  9,  11).  Be- 
fore times  eternal  (vpb  xp^"""v  aiavlav). 
The  phrase  seems  to  have  the  same  general 
meaning  as  irpb  Kara$o\7js  icia/iov,  "before 
the  foundation  of  the  world"  (Eph.  i.  4), 
where  the  general  context  is  the  same.  The 
phrase  itself  occurs  in  Bom.  xvi.  25  (xp6vois 
cuavlois)  and  Titus  i.  2,  in  which  last  place 
time  is  indicated  posterior  to  the  creation  of 
men.  In  1  Cor.  ii.  7  we  have  simply  irpb 
tuv  al&rav,  "  before  the  worldB,"  where  aliv 
is  equivalent  to  aiuvloi  xp^"0')  and  in  Eph. 
iii.  11,  irp69e<rtv  tuv  alivuv,  "the  eternal 
purpose."  In  Luke  i.  70  the  phrase,  air" 
ai&vos,  is  rendered  "  since  the  world  began," 
and  els  robs  aluvas  (Matt.  vi.  13), "for  ever." 
So  frequently  els  rbv  aluva,  "for  ever" 
(Matt.  xxi.  19;  John  vi.  SI,  etc.),  and  els 
robs  dl&vas  tuv  aldvuv  (Gal.  i.  5 ;  Eph.  iii. 
21 ;  1  Tim.  i.  17,  etc.),  "  for  ever  and  ever." 
The  usage  of  the  LXX.  is  very  similar, 
where  cot'  aiuvos,  eis  rbv  cuuva,  irpb  tuv  ald- 
vuv, alccv  tuv  aldvuv,  etc,  are  frequent,  as 
well  as  the  adjective  aldvtot.  Putting  all 
these  passages  together,  and  advrrting  to 
the  classical  meaning  of  aliv,  and  its  Latin 


equivalent,  ovum,  a  "  lifetime,"  we  seem  to 
arrive  at  the  primary  meaning  of  aldv  as 
being  a  "generation,"  and  then  any  long 
period  of  time  analogous  to  a  man's  lifetime. 
Hence  xptvot  aldviot  would  be  times  made 
up  of  successive  generations,  and  irpb  xpivuv 
aiuvivv  would  mean  at  the  very  beginning 
of  the  times  which  consisted  of  human 
generations.  Aiav  tuv  aldvuv  would  be  one 
great  generation,  consisting  of  all  the  suc- 
cessive generations  of  mankind.  The  whole 
duration  of  mankind  in  this  present  world 
would  be  in  this  sense  one  vast  aiiiv,  to  be 
followed  by  we  know  not  what  succeeding 
ones.  Thus  Eph.  i.  21,  Ir  t£  ai&vi  Toiru  is 
contrasted  with  iv  rip  piWovri,  the  idea 
being  that  the  world  has  its  lifetime  analo- 
gous to  the  lifetime  of  a  man.  The  same 
period  may  also  be  considered  as  made  up  of 
several  shorter  alaves,  the  prediluvial,  the 
patriarchal,  the  Mosaic,  the  Christian,  and 
such  like  (see  note  to  1  Tim.  i.  17). 

Ver.  10. — Hath  now  been  manifested  for  is 
now  made  manifest,  A.V. ;  Christ  Jesus  for 
Jesus  Christ,  A.V. ;  abolished  for  hath  abo- 
lished, A.V. ;  brought  for  hath  brought,  A.V. ; 
incorruption  for  immortality,  A.V.  Hath 
now  been  manifested  (qavepuieiaav);  a  word 
of  very  frequent  use  by  St.  Paul.  The  same 
contrast  between  the  long  time  during  which 
God's  gracious  purpose  lay  hidden,  and  the 
present  time  when  it  was  brought  to  light 
by  the  gospel,  which  is  contained  in  this 
passage,  is  forcibly  dwelt  upon  in  Eph.  iii 
1 — 12.  The  appearing  (tjjj  'eirvpavelas), 
applied  here,  as  in  the  name  of  the  Festival 
of  the  Epiphany,  to  the  first  advent,  but  in 
ch.  iv.  1  and  Titus  ii.  13  and  elsewhere  applied 
to  the  second  advent,  "  the  glorious  appear- 
ing of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ"  (Titus  ii. 
13).  Abolished  QcaTapyfio-avTos') ;  i.e.  "de- 
stroyed," or  "done  away,"  or  "made  of  none 
effect,"  as  the  word  is  variously  rendered 
(1  Cor.  xv.  26;  2  Cor.  iii.  11;  Gal.  iii.  17; 
comp.  Heb.  ii.  14).  Brought  ...  to  light 
(frurlaavTos);  as  in  1  Cor.  iv.  15.  Elsewhere 
rather  "to  give  light,"  or  "to  enlighten" 
(see  Luke  xi.  36;  Heb.  vi.  4;  x.  3i,  etc.). 
For  a  full  description  of  the  abolition  of 
death  and  the  introduction  of  eternal  life  in 
its  stead,  through  the  death  and  resurrection 
of  Jesus  "Christ,  see  Bom.  v.  and  vi.,  and 
especially  vi.  8 — 11.  Through  the  gospel; 
because  the  gospel  both  declares  the  death 
and-  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  calls  us  to 
share  in  them.  These  mighty  glories  of  the 
gospel  were  good  reasons  why  Timothy 
should  not  be  ashamed  of  the  testimony  of 
his  Lord,  nor  shrink  from  the  afflictions  of 
the  gospel.  They  were  signal  evidences 
of  the  power  of  God. 

Ver.  11. — Was  for  am,  A.V.;  teaeher  for 
teacher  of  the  Gentiles,  A.V.  and  T.B.  Was 
appointed  (ireiqv);  comp.  1  Tim.  i.  12,  6i- 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  l  1—18. 


fitvos  fit  Sttaeovitw,  "appointing  me  to  the 
ministry ;  **  and  ii.  7.  A  preacher,  and  an 
apostle,  and  a  teaoher  (bo  also  1  Tim.  ii.  7). 
Teacher  ($i$d(rica\os)  is  one  of  the  spiritual 
offices  enumerated  in  1  Cor.  zii.  28  and 
Eph.  iv.  11.  It  is  surely  remarkable  that 
neither  here  nor  elsewhere  does  St.  Paul 
speak  of  any  call  to  the  priesthood  in  a 
sacerdotal  sense  (see  Bom.  i.  1,  5 ;  xv.  16 ; 
1  Cor.  i.  1,  etc.). 

Ver.  12. — Suffer  also  for  also  suffer,  A.V. ; 
yet  for  nevertheless,  A.V. ;  him  whom  for 
whom,  A.V. ;  guard  for  keep,  A.V.  Tor  the 
which  oause  (ver.  6,  note)  I  suffer  also.  The 
apostle  adds  the  weight  of  his  own  example 
to  the  preceding  exhortation.  What  he  was 
exhorting  Timothy  to  do  he  was  actually 
doing  himself,  without  any  wavering  or 
hesitation  or  misgiving  as  to  the  result.  I 
know  him  whom  I  have  believed,  and  I  am 
persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  guard  that 
which  I  have  committed  unto  him.  The 
ground  of  the  apostle's  confidence,  even  in 
the  hour  of  extreme  peril,  was  his  perfect 
trust  in  the  faithfulness  of  God.  This  he 
expresses  in  a  metaphor  drawn  from  the 
common  action  of  one  person  entrusting 
another  with  some  precious  deposit,  to  be 
kept  for  a  time  and  restored  whole  and  un- 
injured. All  the  words  in  the  sentence  are 
part  of  this  metaphor.  The  verb  weTrio-Tevna 
must  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  "  entrusting  " 
(curst  ae  fidei  alicujus  committo),  as  Luke 
xvi.  11.  So  vHTTevdrivat  rh  fiiayy4\toi/t  "to 
be  entrusted  with  the  gospel "  (1  These,  ii. 
4)  ;  oiKovofilav  ireiruTTev/Aai,  "  I  am  entrusted 
with  a  dispensation"  (1  Cor.  ix.  17;  see 
Wisd.  xiv.  5,  etc.).  And  so  in  classical 
Greek,  frurreieiy  rivl  ti  means  "to  entrust 
something  to  another"  to  take  care  of  for 
you.  Here,  then,  St.  Paul  Bays  (not  as  in 
the  E.V.,  "I  know  him  wliom  I  have 
believed,"  which  is  quite  inadmissible,  but), 
"I  know  whom  I  have  trusted  [i.e.  in 
whom  I  have  plaeed  confidence,  and  to  whom 
I  have  committed  the  keeping  of  my  deposit], 
and  I  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep 
that  which  I  have  entrusted  to  him  (t7> 
■napaO^K-nv  /iov)  unto  that  day."  The  iropa- 
fljjKrf  is  the  thing  which  Paul  entrusted  to 
his  faithful  guardian,  one  who  he  knew 
would  never  betray  the  truBt,  but  would 
restore  it  to  him  safe  and  sound  at  the  day 
of  Christ.  What  the  irapaBiiKi)  was  may  be 
difficult  to  express  in  any  one  woid,  but  it 
comprised  himself,  his  life,  his  whole  treasure, 
his  salvation,  his  joy,  his  eternal  happiness — 
all  for  the  sake  of  which  he  risked  life  and 
limb  in  this  world,  content  to  lose  sight  of 
them  for  a  while,  knowing  that  he  should 
receive  them  all  from  tie  hands  of  God  in 
the  day  of  Christ.  All  thus  hangs  perfectly 
together.  There  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt 
that  wapa64)Kri>>  /too  means  "  my  deposit" — that 


which  I  have  deposited  with  him.  Neither 
is  there  the  slightest  difficulty  in  the  different 
applications  of  the  same  metaphor  in  ver.  14 
and  in  1  Tim.  vi.  20.  For  it  is  as  true  that 
God  entrusts  to  his  faithful  servants  the 
deposit  of  the  faith,  to  be  kept  by  them 
with  jealous  fidelity,  as  it  is  that  his  servants 
entrust  to  him  the  keeping  of  their  souls, 
as  knowing  him  to  be  faithful. 

Ver.  13. — Hold  for  holdfast,  A.V.; pattern 
for  form,  A.V.;  from  for  of,  A.V.  Hold 
OxO-  This  use  of  %xav  m  tne  pastoral 
Epistles  is  somewhat  peculiar.  In  1  Tim. 
i.  19,  ixav  "ftwus  "holding  faith;"  in  iii.  6, 
eX°>'Ta*  T&  It-vatiipiav,  "  holding  the  mystery 
of  the  faith ; "  and  here,  "  hold  the  pattern," 
etc.  It  seems  to  have  a  more  active  sense 
than  merely  "have,"  and  yet  not  to  have 
the  very  active  sense  of  "hold  fast."  It 
may,  however,  well  be  doubted  whether  fye 
here  is  used  in  even  as  strong  a  sense  as  in 
the  other  two  passages,  inasmuch  as  here  it 
follows  instead  of  preceding  the  substantive 
(see  Alford,in  loc).  The  pattern(uiroTiiira>a-u'); 
only  here  and  1  Tim.  i.  16  (where  see  note), 
where  it  manifestly  means  a  "  pattern,"  not 
a  "  form."  The  word  signifies  a  "  sketch," 
or  "outline."  St.  Paul's  meaning,  therefore, 
seems  to  be :  "  For  your  own  guidance  in 
teaching  the  flock  committed  to  you,  and  for 
a  pattern  which  you  will  try  and  always 
copy,  have  before  you  the  pattern  or  outline 
of  sound  words  which  you  have  heard  of  me, 
in  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus." 
Sound  words  (yyuuvirruv  \6yu>v) ;  see  1  Tim. 
i.  10,  note.  In  faith  and  love ;  either  hold 
the  pattern  in  faith  and  love,  or  which  you 
have  heard  in  faith  and  love. 

Ver.  14. — Guard  for  keep,  A.V.;  through 
for  by,  A.V.  That  good  thing  (tV  koAV 
Tta,poSi\«.T\v,  K.T.,  for  irapa.KaTaBiiitriv') ;  see  1 
Tim.  vi.  20,  and  note.  This  naturally 
follows  the  preceding  verse.  Faithfulness 
in  maintaining  the  faith  was  closely  con- 
nected with  the  maintenance  of  sound 
words. 

Ver.  15. — That  are  for  {hey  which  are, 
A.V. ;  turned  for  be  turned,  A.V. ;  Phygelus 
for  Phygellus,  A.V.  and  T.  R.  Turned  away 
from  (awearpdipriadv  /ac).  This  verb  is  used, 
as  here,  governing  an  accusative  of  the 
person  or  thing  turned  away  from,  in  Titua 
i.  14;  Heb.  xii.  25,  as  frequently  in  classical 
Greek.  The  use  of  the  aorist  here  is  im- 
portant, as  St.  Paul  does  not  mean  to  say 
that  the  Churohes  of  Asia  had  all  forsaken 
him,  which  was  not  true,  and  which  it  would 
be  absurd  to  inform  Timothy  of  if  it  were  true, 
living  as  he  was  at  Ephesus,  the  central  city 
of  Asia,  but  adverts  to  some  occasion,  pro- 
bably connected  with  his  trial  before  Nero, 
when  they  shrank  from  him  in  a  cowardly 
way.  TldvTfs  oi  iv  rij  'A&tif  means  "the 
whole  party  in  Asia"  conueLUd  with  the 


CH.  I.  1— 18.J 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


particular  transaction  to  which  Si  Paul  is 
nlluding,  and  which  was  known  to  Timothy 
though  it  is  not  known  to  us.  Perhaps  he 
had  applied  to  certain  Asiatics,  whether 
Christians  or  Jews  or  Grseco-Bomans,  for  a 
testimony  to  his  orderly  conduct  in  Asia, 
and  they  had  refused  it;  or  they  may  have 
been  at  Borne  at  the  time,  and  avoided  St. 
Paul;  and  among  them  Phygelus  and 
Hermogenes,  whose  conduct  may  have  been 
particularly  ungrateful  and  unexpected. 
Nothing  is  known  of  either  of  them. 

Ver.  16. — Grant  for  give,  A.V.  Grant 
mercy  (Sf>i)  sKeos).  This  connection  of  the 
words  is  only  found  here.  The  house  of 
Onesiphorus.  It  is  inferred  from  this  ex- 
pression, coupled  with  that  in  ch.  iv.  19, 
that  Onesiphorus  himself  was  no  longer 
living;  and  hence  ver.  18  (where  see  note) 
is  thought  by  some  to  be  an  argument  for 
prayers  for  the  dead.  The  inference,  further 
strengthened  by  the  peculiar  language  of 
ver.  18,  though  not  absolutely  certain,  is 
undoubtedly  probable.  The  connection 
between  this  and  the  preceding  verse  is  the 
contrast  between  the  conduct  of  Phygelus 
and  Hermogenes  and  that  of  Onesiphorus. 
They  repudiated  all  acquaintance  with  the 
apostle  in  his  day  of  trial ;  he,  when  he  was 
in  Rome,  diligently  sought  him  and  with 
difficulty  found  him,  and  oft  refreshed  him 
with  Christian  sympathy  and  communion, 
acting  with  no  less  courage  than  love.  He 
was  no  longer  ,on  earth  to  receive  a  prophet's 
reward  (Matt.  x.  41^,  but  St.  Paul  prays  that 
he  may  receive  it  in  the  day  of  Christ,  and 
that  meanwhile  God  may  requite  to  his 
family  the  mercy  he  had  showed  to  St.  Paul. 
Refreshed  me  (&v4tfiv^v);  literally,  revived 
me.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  but 
comp.  Acts  iii.  19.  Chain  (&Kvoiv) ;  in  the 
singular,  as  Eph.  vi  20;  Acts  xxviii.  20 
(where  see  note). 

Ver.  17. — Sought  for  sought  out,  A.V.; 
diligently  for  very  diligently,  A.V.  and  T.B. 


Ver.  18. — To  find  for  that  he  may  find, 
A. V.;  ministered  for  ministered  unto  me, 
A.V.  (The  lord  grant  unto  him).  The 
parenthesis  seems  only  to  be  required  on 
the  supposition  that  the  words  5<jjij  airi?  6 
Kvpws  fipeTv  eAeos,  k.t.a.,  are  a  kind  of  play 
on  the  e'ipev  of  the  preceding  verse.  Other-, 
wise  it  is  better  to  take  the  words  as  a  new 
sentence.  The  repetition  of  "  the  Lord  "  is 
remarkable,  but  nothing  seems  to  hang  upon 
it.  The  second  irapb.  Kvpiov  seems  to  suppose 
the  Lord  sitting  on  the  judgment-throne. 
As  regards  the  amount  of  encouragement 
given  by  this  passage  to  prayers  for  the 
dead  (supposing  Onesiphorus  to  have  been 
dead),  the  mere  expression  of  a  pious  wish  or 
hope  that  he  may  find  mercy  is  a  very  slender 
foundation  on  which  to  build  the  super- 
structure of  prayer  and  Masses  for  the 
deliverance  of  souls  from  purgatory.  In 
how  many  things,  etc.  St.  Paul  does  not 
say,  as  the  A.V.  makes  him  say,  that  Onesi- 
phorus "ministered  unto  him"  at  Ephesus. 
It  may  have  been  so,  but  the  words  do  not 
necessarily  mean  this.  "  What  good  service 
he  did  at  Ephesus  "  would  faithfully  repre- 
sent the  Greek  words;  and  this  might 
describe  great  exertions  made  by  Onesi- 
phorus after  his  return  from  Borne  to 
procure  the  apostle's  acquittal  and  release 
by  the  intercession  of  the  principal  persons 
at  Ephesus.1  This  would,  of  course,  be  known 
to  Timothy.  It  may,  however,  describe  the 
ministerial  labours  and  services  of  Onesi- 
phorus at  Ephesus  after  his  return  from 
Borne,  or  it  may  refer  to  former  ministra- 
tions when  Paul  and  Timothy  were  at 
Ephesus  together  (see  Introduction).  There 
seem  to  he  no  materials  for  arriving  at  abso- 
lute certainty  on  the  point. 

1  An  almost  identical  explanation  is 
suggested  by  Hofmann,  as  quoted  by 
Huther  in  a  note  to  this  passage. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 7. — Reminiscences,  A  ring  once  given  to  an  old  and  loved  friend,  who  in  later 
li  fe  had  been  cut  off  from  the  former  loving  intercourse  by  the  inevitable  course  of  events, 
bore  this  touching  inscription,  "  Cara  memoria  dei  primieri  anni "  (dear  memory  of  old 
times).  The  memories  of  a  happy  unclouded  youth,  of  youthful  friendships,  of  joyous 
days,  of  pursuits  lit  up  by  sanguine  hopes  and  bright  expectations,  are  indeed  often 
among  the  most  precious  treasures  of  the  heart.  And  in  like  manner  the  recollection 
of  former  triumphs  of  faith  in  days  of  dark  doubt  and  difficulty,  of  temptations  over- 
come, of  victories  gained,  of  grace  received,  of  work  done  for  God,  of  Christian  inter- 
course with  God's  saints,  and  happy  hours  of  prayer,  and  treading  underfoot  all  the 
powers  of  darkness,  are  not  only  bright  lights  illuminating  the  past  journey  of  life,  but 
are  often  among  our  strongest  incentives  to  perseverance,  aDd  our  best  encouragements 
to  hold  fast  the  profession  of  our  faith  without  wavering.  St.  Paul,  that  great  master 
in  the  knowledge  of  human  nature,  knew  this  well.  And  so  with  inimitable  skill— a 
•kill  heightened  and  set  off  by  the  warm  affections  of  a  tender  heart — he  calls  bae* 


6  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  (e&  «•  1— *«■ 

Ttaotfey*«  recollections  to  flu  days  of  Mi  early  faith.  That  there  had  been  anything 
like  a  falling  away  from  the  faith  in  Timothy,  any  real  declension  in  his  religious  life, 
there  is  no  reason  to  believe.  But  the  quick  eye  of  the  apostle  had  detected  some 
symptoms  of  weakness.  The  pulie  of  firm  resolution,  ns  dangers  thickened  around 
him,  had  not  beaten  so  steadily  as  he  would  have  wished.  He  did  not  see  the  symp- 
toms of  Christian  courage  rising  with  the  rising  flood  of  difficulty  quite  so  marked  as 
to  set  his  mind  at  ease  as  to  what  might  happen  if,  after  his  own  death,  which  he  felt 
was  near,  Timothy  were  left  alone  to  confront  the  perils  of  a  fierce  persecution,  or  to 
guide  the  wavering  purpose  of  timid  and  fainting  disciples.  And  so  he  calls  back  his 
dearly  beloved  son  in  the  faith  to  the  old  days  of  his  first  conversion.  The  lessons  of 
faith  and  obedience  learnt  on  his  mother's  knee  in  the  dear  home  at  Lystra,  whose 
blessed  fruit  had  attracted  St.  Paul's  notice ;  the  first  appearance  of  the  apostle  in  those 
regions  in  the  noonday  of  his  apostolic  zeal ;  the  bold  front  with  which  he  had  met 
the  storm  of  affliction  and  persecution ;  Timothy's'  own  warm  surrender  of  himself  to 
the  companionship  of  the  great  teacher,  and  his  exchange  of  a  happy,  peaceful  home 
for  the  wandering  life  and  incessant  peril  of  an  evangelist ;  then  the  solemn  time  of  his 
ordination — the  time  when,  with  prayer  and  fasting,  he  had  knelt  to  receive  the  laying 
on  of  hands,  and  had  exulted  in  the  new  gift  of  God  with  which  he  might  go  forth 
fearlessly  and  lovingly,  and  in  a  strength  not  his  own,  to  emulate  his  father  in  the  faith 
in  preaching  the  gospel  of  God's  saving  grace, — Oh,  let  Timothy  cherish  those  dear 
memories  of  former  times !  And  there  were  later  memories  still.  Their  last  meeting, 
and  their  last  adieu.  They  had  parted,  under  what  circumstances  we  do  not  know ; 
St.  Paul  hastening  on  to  his  crown  of  martyrdom,  Timothy  remaining  at  his  post  of 
work  and  of  danger.  And  Timothy  had  wept.  Were  they  tears  of  bitterness,  tears  of 
compunction,  tears  of  a  heart  broken  and  melting  under  a  gentle  loving  reproof,  or  were 
they  only  tears  of  sorrow  at  parting  ?  We  cannot  say  for  certain ;  but  St.  Paul  remem- 
bered them,  and  he  recalls  them  to  Timothy's  memory  too.  He  adds  the  hope  that,  as 
they  had  sown  in  tears,  they  would  reap  in  joy — the  joy,  perhaps,  of  a  healed  wound 
and  renovated  spiritual  strength,  or,  at  all  events,  the  joy  of  meeting  once  more  before 
the  fall  of  the  curtain  of  death  to  close  the  drama  of  Paul's  eventful  life.  The  lesson 
left  for  us  by  these  heart-stirring  words  is  the  value  of  the  memory  of  the  past  when 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  work  of  the  future.  "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  forget 
not  all  his  benefits,"  is  a  sentiment  which  continually  comes  up  in  the  varied  experi- 
ences of  the  psalmist.  He  quickened  hope  in  the  land  of  banishment  by  remembering 
the  days  of  happy  worship  in  the  house  of  God  (Ps.  xlii.) ;  he  added  depth  to  his  sorrow 
for  sin  by  recalling  the  memory  of  that  joy  of  salvation  which  he  had  forfeited  by  his 
fall  (Ps.  li.).  And  so  we  shall  do  well  in  times  of  weakness  to  remember  our  former 
strength;  in  days  of  darkness  to  call  to  mind  the  days  of  light  that  were  of  old;  in 
days  of  slackness  and  indolence  to  call  back  the  memory  of  the  time  when  we  were  all 
on  fire  to  do  God's  work ;  in  days  of  depression  to  think  of  old  mercies  shown  and  old 
graces  given  to  us  of  God ;  to  quench  the  fear  of  defeat  by  the  recollection  of  ancient 
victories ;  and,  in  a  word,  to  make  the  past  supply  the  present  with  incentives  to  an 
undying  zeal,  and  a  steadfast  courage  in  facing  all  the  afflictions  of  the  gospel  according 
to  the  unchanging  power  of  God. 

Vers.  8 — 18. — Constancyin  the  howr  of  danger.  There  are  great  differences  of  natural . 
temperament  in  different  men.  There  are  those  whose  courage  is  naturally  high.  Their 
instinct  is  to  brave  danger,  and  to  be  confident  of  overcoming  it.  They  do  not  know 
what  nervousness,  or  sinking  of  heart,  or  the  devices  of  timidity,  mean.  Others 
are  of  a  wholly  different  temperament.  The  approach  of  danger  unnerves  them. 
Their  instinct  is  to  avoid,  not  to  overcome,  danger ;  to  shrink  from  suffering,  not  to 
confront  it.  There  are  ever  in  the  Church  the  bold  and  dauntless  Gideons,  and  the 
wavering  and  timid  Peters.  But  the  grace  of  God  is  able  to  strengthen  the  weak  hands 
and  to  confirm  the  feeble  knees.  He  can  say  to  them  that  are  of  fearful  heart,  "  Be 
strong;  fear  not."  He  can  give  power  to  the  faint,  and  increase  strength  to  them  that 
have  no  might.  And  there  is  perhaps  no  more  edifying  sight  than  that  of  the  quiet 
■nboasting  courage  of  those  whose  natural  timidity  has  been  overcome  by  an  over- 
powering sense  of  duty  and  of  love  to  Christ,  and  who  have  learnt,  in  die  exercises  of 
prayer  and  meditation  on  the  cross  of  Christ,  to  endure  hardness  without  flinching,  as 


OLi.1— 18.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  7 

good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  to  yield  to  fear,  and,  undei  Its  influence,  to  be 
ashamed  to  confess  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  repudiate  fellowship  with  those 
who  are  suffering  for  Christ's  sake  and  the  gospel's,  lest  we  should  fall  into  the  same 
reproach  with  them,  is  sin,  and  sin  most  unworthy  of  those  for  whom  Christ  died,  and 
who  have  been  made  partakers  of  so  great  salvation.  No  plea  of  natural  timidity  can 
excuse  such  unworthy  conduct.  It  behoves,  therefore,  men  of  a  timid  and  gentle  spirit 
to  fortify  their  faith  by  frequent  contemplation  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  habitually 
to  take  up  that  cross,  and  by  it  crucify  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts.  Let 
them  think  often  of  their  holy  calling,  remember  that  they  are  the  servants  of  him 
who  "endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,"  and  look  forward  to  the  recompense  of 
reward.  Let  them  contrast  the  base,  unmanly  conduct  of  the  meu  of  Asia,  who  turned 
away  from  the  noble  Paul  in  his  hour  of  danger,  with  the  faithful,  generous  conduct 
of  Onesiphorus,  who  sought  him  out  in  his  prison  and  was  not  ashamed  of  his  chain. 
And  surely  they  will  come  to  the  conclusion  that  affliction  with  the  people  of  God 
is  better  than  immunity  from  suffering  purchased  by  shame  and  sin. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  apostles  address  and  greeting.  This  Epistle,  which  has  been  well 
described  as  "  the  last  will  and  testament"  of  the  apostle,  written  as  it  was  under  the 
very  shadow  of  death,  opens  with  a  touching  evidence  of  personal  interest  in  Timothy. 

I.  The  origin  and  design  of  the  apostleship.  "  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ 
by  the  will  of  God."  1.  He  was  an  apostle.  (1)  Not  by  the  will  of  man,  even  of 
other  apostles.  (2)  Nor  by  his  own  will ;  for  he  did  not  take  this  honour  upon  him- 
self. (3)  Nor  was  it  owing  to  his  personal  merits ;  for  he  always  speaks  of  it  as  "  the 
grace  of  apostleship."  (4)  He  was  an  apostle  by  the  will  of  God,  whose  "  chosen  vessel " 
he  was  for  this  purpose.  2.  The  design  of  his  apostleship  was  "  according  to  the  promise 
of  life  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  Its  design  was  to  make  known  this  promise.  (1) 
It  was  life  eternal ;  (2)  promised  in  Christ  Jesus,  because  (o)  it  was  "  promised  before  the 
world  began"  (Titus  i.  2);  (6)  in  Christ,  who  is  the  Prince  of  life,  who  procured  it, 
who  applies  it  by  his  Spirit, 

II.  The  person  addressed.  "  To  Timothy,  my  beloved  son."  Notj  as  in  the  former 
Epistle,  "  my  true  son,"  but  a  son  specially  dear  to  him  in  view  of  the  approaching 
severance  of  the  earthly  tie  that  bound  them  together. 

III.  The  greeting.  "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace."  (See  homiletical  hints  on  1  Tim. 
i.  2.)-T.  C. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — Thankful  declaration  of  love  and  remembrance  of  -Timothy's  faith. 
I.  The  apostle's  affectionate  interest  in  his  young  disciple.  "  I  give  thanks 
to  God,  whom  I  serve  from  my  forefathers  in  a  pure  conscience,  as  unceasing  is  the 
remembrance  I  have  of  thee  in  my  prayers  night  and  day ;  greatly  desiring  to  see  thee, 
being  mindful  of  thy  tears,  that  I  may  be  filled  with  joy."  1.  The  apostle  begins  all 
Epistles  with  the  language  of  thanksgiving.  God  is  the  Object  of  thanksgiving,  both 
as  God  of  nature  and  as  God  of  grace,  and  there  is  no  blessing  we  have  received  that 
ought  not  to  be  thankfully  acknowledged.  2.  It  is  allowable  for  a  good  man  to  take 
pleasure  in  the  thought  of  a  consistently  conscientious  career.  His  service  of  God  was 
according  to  the  principles  and  feelings  he  inherited  from  his  ancestors  "  in  a  pure  con- 
science" (Acts  xxiii.  1;  xxiv.  14).  3.  Ministers  ought  to  be  much  engaged  in  prayer 
for  one  another  so  as  to  strengthen  each  other's  hands.  4.  The  thought  of  approaching 
death  makes  us  long  to  see  the  friends  who  have  been  most  endeared  to  us  in  life.  (1) 
The  apostle  remembered  Timothy's  sorrow  at  their  last  parting.  (2)  Though  he  had 
commanded  him  before  to  stay  at  Ephesus,  he  now  desired  to  see  him,  because  he  was 
alone  in  prison,  with  Luke  as  his  only  companion.  (3)  The  sight  of  Timothy  in  Borne 
would  fill  him  with  joy  beyond  that  imparted  by  all  the  other  friends  and  companions 
of  his  apostolic  life. 

II.  The  apostle's  thanksgiving  for  Timothy's  faith.  "Being  put  in  remem- 
brance of  the  unfeigned  faith  that  is  in  thee,  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grandmother  Lois, 
and  thy  mother  Eunice ;  aud  I  am  persuaaed  that  also  in  thee."     1.  The  quality  of  this 


8  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  1. 1— 18. 

faith.  "Unfeigned."  Timothy  was  "an  Israelite  indeed,"  who  believed  with  th« 
heart  unto  righteousness,  his  faith  working  by  love  to  God  and  man,  and  accompanied 
by  good  works.  2.  Its  permanent  character.  "  It  dwelt  in  him."  Faith  is  an  abiding 
grace ;  Christ,  who  is  its  Author,  is  also  its  Finisher ;  and  salvation  is  inseparably  con- 
nected with  it.  3.  The  subjects  of  this  faith.  "  First  in  thy  grandmother  Lois,  and  in 
thy  mother  Eunice."  (1)  Lois  was  his  grandmother  by  the  mother's  side,  for  his  father 
was  a  Greek ;  and  Eunice,  his  mother,  was  probably  converted  at  Lystra,  at  no  great 
distance  from  Tarsus,  the  native  city  of  the  apostle  (Acts  xvi.  1 ;  xiv.  6).  (a)  It  is 
pleasant  to  see  faith  transmitted  through  three  generations.  It  is  sin,  and  not  grace,  that 
is  easily  transmitted  by  blood.  But  when  we  are  "  born,  not  of  blood,  but  of  God,"  wa 
have  reason  to  be  thankful,  like  the  apostle,  for  such  a  display  of  rich  family  mercy. 
(6)  We  see  here  the  advantages  of  a  pious  education,  for  it  was  from  the  persons  named 
lie  obtained  in  his  youth  that  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  wliich  made  him  wise  unto 
salvation  (ch.  iii.  15).  (c)  How  often  Christian  mothers  have  given  remarkable 
sons  to  the  ministry  of  God's  Church !  (Augustine  and  Monica.)  (2)  Timothy  was 
himself  a  subject  of  this  faith.  He  did  not  break  off  the  happy  continuity  of  grace  in 
his  family,  but  worthily  perpetuated  the  best  type  of  ancestral  piety. — T.  C. 

Ver.  6. — The  apostle's  admonition  to  Timothy  to  stir  up  the  gift  of  God  within  him. 
It  was  because  of  his  persuasion  of  Timothy's  faith,  and  perhaps  of  the  apprehension 
that  the  young  disciple  had  been  depressed  by  his  own  long  imprisonment,  that  he 
addressed  him  in  this  manner. 

I.  The  spiritual  gifts  possessed  bt  Timothy.  "  Wherefore  I  put  thee  in  remem- 
brance to  stir  up  the  gift  of  God  which  is  in  thee  by  means  of  the  laying  on  of  my  hands." 

1.  Be  refers  to  the  special  gift  received  by  Timothy  with  a  view  to  his  office  as  an 
evangelist.  It  was  not  anything  either  natural  or  acquired,  but  something  bestowed 
by  the  Spirit  of  God  which  would  fit  him  for  teaching  and  ruling;  the  Church  of  God. 

2.  It  was  conferred  by  the  hands  of  the  apostle  along  with  the  presbytery  (I  Tim.  iv.  14). 

II.  The  necessity  of  stirring  up  this  spiritual  gift.  1.  It  is  possible  there  may 
have  been  some  slackness  or  decline  of  power  on  Timothy's  part,  arising  from  various 
causes  of  discouragement,  to  make  this  injunction  necessary.  2.  The  gift  was  to  be  stirred 
up  by  reading,  meditation,  and  prayer,  so  that  he  might  be  enabled,  with  fresh  zeal,  to 
reform  the  abuses  of  the  Church  and  endure  hardship  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ. 
— T.C. 

Ver.  7. — The  Divine  equipment  for  arduous  service  in  the  Church.    The  apostle  here 

adds  a  reason  for  the  injunction  just  given. 

I.  Negatively.  "For  Goii  did  not  give  us  the  spirit  of  cowardice."  1.  This 
refers  to  the  time  qf  the  ordination  of  Timothy  and  of  the  apostle.  Courage  is  an  essen- 
tial qualification  for  ministers  of  the  gospel.  2.  Cowardice  is  unworthy  of  those  who 
have  received  the  gospel  in  trust.  The  fear  of  man  has  a  very  wide  dominion,  but  those 
who  fear  God  ought  to  know  no  other  fear.  (1)  This  fear  tends  to  unworthy  compli- 
ances. (2)  Trust  in  God  is  a  preservation  from  fear  (Ps.  xxvii.  1).  (3)  Our  Lord 
exhorts  us  strongly  against  such  fear  (John  xiv.  27). 

IL  Positively.  "  But  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  self-control."  1.  The  spirit  of 
power,  as  opposed  to  the  weakness  of  cowardice ;  for  the  servants  of  Christ  are  fortified 
against  persecutions  and  reproaches,  are  enabled  to  endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of 
Christ,  and  to  quit  themselves  like  men.  2.  The  spirit  of  love.  This  will  make  them 
earnest  in  their  care  for  souls,  indefatigable  in  labours,  fearless  in  the  midst  of  trying 
exigencies,  and  self-sacrificing  in  love.  3.  The  spirit  of  self-control.  This  will  enable 
the  servant  of  Christ  to  keep  his  whole  being  in  subjection  to  the  Lord,  apart  from  all 
the  solicitations  of  the  world,  and  to  regulate  life  with  a  due  regard  to  its  duties,  its 
labours,  and  its  cares. — T.  0. 

Ver.  8. — Warning  to  Timothy  not  to  be  ashamed  of  the  gospel,  nor  to  shrink  from 
afflictions.    This  exhortation  is  dependent  upon  the  previous  counsel. 

I.  The  minister  of  God  must  not  be  ashamed  of  the  gospel.  "  Be  not  thou  there- 
fore ashamed  of  the  testimony  of  the  Lord,  nor  of  me  his  prisoner."  1.  The  testimony 
of  the  Lord  is  that  borne  concerning  his  doctrine,  sufferings,  and  death  ;  in  a  word,  the 


oh.l1— 18. j  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  9 

gospel  itself.  2.  No  Christian  can  be  ashamed  of  a  gospel  of  such  power,  so  tru»,  so 
gracious,  so  useful.  3.  No  Christian  can  be  ashamed  of  its  confessors.  The  apostle 
was  a  prisoner  at  Rome  for  its  sake,  not  for  crime  of  any  sort.  The  gospel  then 
laboured  under  an  immense  load  of  pagan  prej  udice,  and  Timothy  needed  to  be  reminded 
of  his  obligations  to  sympathize  with  its  greatest  expounder. 

II.  The  minister  of  God  must  sn  are  in  the  afflictions  of  the  gospel.  "  But 
be  thou  partaker  of  the  afflictions  of  the  gospel  according  to  the  power  of  God."  1. 
Though  it  is  a  gospel  of  peace,  it  brings  a  sword  wherever  it  noes,  and  involves  its 
preachers  in  tribulations  arising  out  of  the  perveiseness  of  men  who  thwart  and  despise 
it.  2.  We  ought  to  suffer  hardship  for  the  gospel,  by  the  conspiration  that  the  God- 
who  has  saved  us  with  such  a  strong  hand  is  able  to  succour  us  under  all  our  afflictions. 
— T.  C. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — The  power  of  God  in  the  salvation  manifested  by  Jesus  Christ  to  the 
world.  He  now  proceeds  to  expound  in  a  glorious  sentence  the  origin,  conditions, 
manifesiatiims  of  the  salvation  provided  in  the  gospel. 

I.  The  manner  in  which  the  poweb  of  God  has  been  displayed  toward  us. 
'•Who  hath  saved  us,  and  called  us  with  an  holy  calling,  not  according  to  our  works, 
but  according  to  his  own  purpose  and  grace,  wlucli  was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  before 
the  world  began."  1.  The  power  of  God  has  been  displayed  toward  us  in  salvation. 
God  is  the  Author  of  salvation  in  its  most  comprehensive  sense,  as  including  both 
its  impetration  and  its  application.  The  salvation  may  be  said  to  precede  the  calling, 
as  (1)  it  has  its  origin  in  the  "purpose  of  God,"  (2)  as  Christ  has  procured  it  by  his 
death.  2.  It  has  been  displayed  in  our  calling.  (1)  The  call  is  the  act  of  the  Father 
(Gal.  i.  6).  (2)  It  is  a  "holy  calling,"  (a)  as  its  Author  is  holy ;  (b)  it  is  a  call  to 
holiness ;  (c)  the  called  are  enabled  to  live  holy  lives.  3.  The  principle  or  condition 
of  our  salvation.  "  Not  according  to  our  works."  (1)  Negatively.  Works  are  not 
(a)  the  moving  cause  of  it,  which  is  the  love  and  favour  of  God  (John  iii.  16) ;  (6)  nor 
are  they  the  procuring  cause,  which  is  the  obedience  and  death  of  Christ  (Bom.  iii. 
21 — 26) ;  (c)  nor  do  they  help  in  the  application  of  salvation  ;  for  works  done  before 
our  calling  are  not  good,  being  without  faith;  and  works  done  after  it  are  the  fruits 
of  our  calling,  and  therefore  not  the  cause  of  it.  (2)  Positively.  "  But  according  to 
his  own  purpose  and  grace,  which  was  given  us  in  Christ  before  the  world  began." 
Salvation  has  thus  a  double  aspect,  (a)  It  is  "  according  to  the  purpose  of  God."  It 
is  a  gift  from  eternity ;  for  it  was  "  before  the  world  began,"  and  therefore  it  was  not 
dependent  upon  man's  works.  (6)  It  is  according  to  "  his  grace,  which  was  given  us  in 
Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began."  Though  those  to  whom  it  was  given  were  not 
in  existence,  they  existed  in  Christ  as  the  covenant  Head  and  Representative  of  his 
people.     They  were  chosen  in  him  (Eph.  i.  4). 

II.  The  manifestation  of  this  purpose  and  grace  in  the  incarnation  and 
work  of  Christ.  "  But  manifested  now  by  the  appearing  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ." 
1.  The  nature  of  this  manifestation.  It  included  (1)  the  Incarnation  ;  for  the  Son  of 
God  appeared  in  the  fulness  of  time  to  make  known  the  "  mystery  hid  from  ages,"  even 
himself — "  the  Hope  of  glory  " — to  both  Jew  and  Gentile ;  (2)  the  work  of  Christ,  in  the 
obedience  of  his  life  and  the  suffering  of  his  death — in  a  word,  the  whole  work  of  redemp- 
tion. 2.  The  effects  of  this  manifestation.  "  Who  abolished  death,  and  brought  to  light 
life  and  incorruptibility  by  means  of  the  gospel."  (1)  Its  action  upon  death.  It  has 
abolished  or  made  it  of  none  effect.  Death  is  regarded  both  in  its  physical  and  its 
ethical  aspects,  (a)  In  its  physical  aspects,  Christ  has  (a)  deprived  it  of  its  sting,  and 
made  it  a  blessing  to  believers  (Heb.  ii.  14 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  55),  and  (jB)  secured  its  ultimate 
abolition  (Rev.  xxi.  4).  (6)  In  its  ethical  aspects,  as  working  through  a  law  of  sin  and 
death,  Christ  has  caused  us  "  to  pass  from  death  unto  life  "  in  regeneration  (1  John  iii. 
14),  and  secured  us  from  "the  second  death  "  (Rev.  ii:  11).  (2)  Its  revelation  of  life 
and  incorruptibility,  (a)  Life  here  is  the  true  life,  over  which  death  has  no  power — the 
new  and  blessed  life  of  the  Spirit.  This  was,  in  a  sense,  known  to  the  Old  Testament 
saints;  but  Chiist  exhibited  it,  in  its  nsurrection-aspect,  after  he  rose  from  the  dead. 
It  was  in  virtue  of  his  resurrection,  indeed,  that  the  saints  of  the  old  economy  had  life 
at  all.  But  they  did  not  see  it  as  we  see  it.  (5)  Incorruptibility.  Not  in  inference  to 
the  risen  body,  but  to  the  life  of  the  soul,  in  its  imperishable  qualities,  in  its  jwrfegtj 


10  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  1. 1—18. 

exemption  from  death  (1  Pet.  L  4 ;  Rev.  zxi.  4).  (e)  The  means  of  this  revelation  is 
the  gospel,  which  makes  this  life  perfectly  known  to  men,  as  to  its  nature,  as  to  the 
way  into  it,  as  to  the  persons  for  whom  it  is  prepared  or  designed. 

III.  The  connection  or  the  apostle  with  this  revelation  or  Lira.  "  For  which 
I  was  appointed  a  herald  and  an  apostle,  and  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles."  He  rehearses 
his  titles  of  dignity  at  the  very  time  that  he  point*  to  them  as  entailing  suffering  upon 
him.— T.  0. 

Ver.  12. — The  grounds  of  his  joyful  confidence  under  aU  his  sufferings.  L  His 
apostleship  was  the  cause  op  bis  sufferings.  "  Por  which  cause  I  also  am  suffering 
these  things  " — imprisonment,  solitude,  the  hatred  of  Jew  and  Gentile.  He  estranged 
the  Jews  by  preaching  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  and  he  offended  the  Gentiles  by 
denouncing  their  idolatries  and  undermining  their  lucrative  superstitions. 

II.  He  owns  no  shame  k  the  gospel.  It  may  be  an  offence  to  the  Greek  and  a 
stumbling-block  to  the  Jew ;  but  he  is  not  ashamed  of  it,  because  he  is  not  ashamed : 
1.  Of  its  Author.  2.  Of  .its  truths  and  ordinances.  3.  Of  his  own  faith  in  it.  4.  Of 
his  sufferings  for  it. 

III.  The  reason  why  he  is  not  ashamed  or  the  gospel.  "For  I  know  whom 
I  have  trusted,  and  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  my  deposit  till  that  day."  1. 
He  knows  his  Redeemer  through  faith  and  love  and  experience.  It  is  "  eternal  life  "  to 
know  him  (John  xvii.  3).  It  is  not  that  he  merely  knows  of  him,  but  he  knows  him — 
what  he  is,  what  he  can  do,  what  he  has  promised  to  do — and  therefore  he  can  trust 
him.  2.  His  trust  is  in  a  known  Person.  (1)  The  apostle  would  have  been  very  foolish 
to  trust  an  unknown  person.  We  distrust  strangers.  We  will  only  entrust  that  which 
ia  dear  to  us — our  children  or  our  money — to  those  known  to  us.  (2)  There  are  foolish 
people  who  think  it  a  wiser,  as  well  as  a  more  meritorious  thing,  to  believe  without 
knowledge ;  like  the  Spanish  Jesuit  who  said,  "  I  believe  in  this  doctrine,  not  in  spite 
of  its  impossibility,  but  because  it  is  impossible."  The  apostle  held  a  very  different 
view.  (3)  There  are  some  people  of  whom  we  may  say  that  the  more  they  are  known 
the  less  are  they  trusted.  A  fuller  experience  discovers  flaws  in  their  character  forbidding 
confidence.  But  our  Saviour  is  One  who  is  trusted  the  more  he  is  known,  in  all  the 
various  circumstances  of  human  life.  3.  The  apostle  has  placed  his  soul,  as  a  precious 
deposit,  in  the  hands  of  Christ,  with  the  assurance  of  its  perfect  safety.  "  I  am  per- 
suaded that  he  is  able  to  keep  my  deposit  till  that  day."  Several  circumstances  enhance 
the  significance  of  this  act  of  the  apostle.  (1)  The  value  of  the  deposit.  What  can  be 
more  precious  than  the  soul  ?  (Mark  viii.  37).  (2)  The  danger  of  its  loss.  The  soul  is  a 
lost  thing,  and  but  for  grace  eternally  so.  (3)  The  sinner  feels  the  deposit  is  not  safe 
with  himself.  Man  cannot,  any  more  than  man's  brother,  save  his  own  soul.  (4)  Who 
will  take  charge  of  this  deposit  ?  Many  shrink  from  responsibility  in  cases  of  a  difficult 
and  delicate  nature.  But  Jesus  Christ  has  undertaken  for  us ;  he  will  take  us  completely 
in  charge ;  he  will  keep  our  deposit  till  the  day  of  judgment.  (5)  Mark  the  limit  of 
time  as  to  the  safety  of  the  deposit — "  till  that  day."  No  day  short  of  that — not  even 
the  day- of  death  ;  for  the  completed  glory  is  reserved  for  the  day  of  judgment.  That 
will  be  the  day  lor  the  bestowal  of  the  crown  of  life.  4.  Mark  the  assurance  of  the 
apostle  as  to  the  safety  of  his  deposit.  "  I  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  my 
deposit."  This  shows  (1)  that  assurance  is  a  possible  attainment  (1  John  v.  13) ; 
(2)  that  it  ia  a  cheering  and  sustaining  experience. — T.  0. 

Ver.  13. — Importance  of 'the form  of sound  words.    "Hold  the  pattern  of  sound  words." 
I.  This  injunction  implies  that  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  had  been  already 

MOULDED    INTO    A    CERTAIN    SHAPE    OB   SYSTEM    WHICH    WAS    EASILY   GRASPED    BY   THE 

popular  mind.  As  necessity  arose,  there  was  a  restatement,  in  a  new  form,  of  the 
faith  once  professed  so  as  to  neutralize  false  theories.  Thus  tbe  Apostle  John  recast  the 
doctrine  of  Christ's  manifestation  in  the  world  in  his  Epistles.  There  are  other  examples 
of  such  restatement.  As  errorists  often  seduce  by  an  adroit  use  of  words,  it  becomes 
necessary  to  have  "  a  pattern  of  sound  words,"  not  merely  as  a  witness  for  the  truth,  but 
as  a  protest  against  error.  Timothy  was  in  this  case  to  adhere  to  the  form  of  what  he 
bad  heard  from  the  apostle,  and  received  with  such  "  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ 
Jeans." 


oh.  1. 1—18.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  11 

II.  The  use  of  such  A  form.  1.  It  was  a  centre  of  doctrinal  unity  to  the  Church. 
2.  It  exhibited  the  truth  in  a  consistent  light  to  the  world.  3.  It  afforded  a  rallying-point 
in  the  conflict  with  systems  of  error,    4.  It  tended  to  spiritual  stability. — T.  C. 

Ver.  14. — The  importance  of  preserving  the  precious  deposit  of  doctrine.    I.  Thbrb 

18  A  SYSTEM  OF  TRUTH  DEPOSITED  IN  THE  HANDS  OF  THE  CHURCH.      "  That  good  deposit 

keep  through  the  Holy  Ghost  who  dwelleth  in  us."  1.  The  truth  is  not  discovered  by 
the  Church,  but  deposited  in  its  keeping.  This  is  the  significance  of  the  words  of  Jude, 
uhen  he  speaks  of"  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints."  That  is  (1)  "the  faith" — a 
system  of  gospel  doctrines  recognized  hy  the  Church  at  large;  (2)  "delivered,"  not  dis- 
covered or  elaborated  out  of  the  Christian  consciousness;  (3)  "once"  delivered,  in 
reference  to  the  point  of  time  when  the  revelation  was  made  by  inspired  men ;  (4) 
deposited  in  the  hands  of  men — "  to  the  saints  " — as  trustees,  for  its  safe  keeping.  It 
is  "  a  good  deposit ; "  good  in  its  Author,  its  matter,  its  results,  its  end. 

II.    IT    IB   THE    DUTY   OF    MINISTERS   AND   MEMBERS   OF    THE    OhUHOH   TO    KEEP    THIS 

deposit.  1.  They  ought  to  do  it,  because  it  is  a  commanded  duty.  2.  Because  it  is  for 
the.  Church's  edification,  safety,  and  stability.  3.  Because  it  is  for  the  glory  of  Ood. 
4.  They  cannot  do  it  except  in  the  power  of  "  the  Eoly  Ghost  who  dwelleth  in  us." 
(1)  Because  he  leads  us  into  all  truth  ;  (2)  because  he  by  the  truth  builds  up  the  Church 
as  "  a  habitation  of  God ;  "  (3)  because  he  gives  the  insight  and  the  courage  by  which 
believers  are  enabled  to  reject  the  adulterations  and  mixtures  of  false  systems. — T.  C. 

Ver.  15. — The  Asiatic  desertion  of  the  apostle.  He  reminds  Timothy  of  a  fact  well 
known  to  him  already,  that  he  had  suffered  from  a  melancholy  desertion  of  friends. 

I.  The  nature  and  extent  of  his  loss.  "All  who  are  in  Asia  turned  away 
from  me."  1.  As  to  its  nature.  It  was  not  a  repudiation  of  Christianity.  It  was  a  deser- 
tion qf  the  apostle  himself,  either  through  fear  of  persecution,  or  through  a  repudiation 
of  his  catholic  ideas  on  behalf  of  the  Gentiles.  The  Christian  Jews  seem  everywhere 
to  have  forsaken  him.  In  one  of  his  prison-letters  he  can  only  name  two  or  three 
Jews  who  were  a  comfort  to  him  in  the  gospel  (Col.  iv.  11).  2.  As  to  its  extent.  The 
Asiatic  desertion  may  have  probably  taken  place  in  Rome  itself,  probably  at  a  time 
when  his  life,  and  that  of  all  Christians,  was  threatened  by  Nero ;  probably  at  the  time 
referred  to  in  the  end  of  this  Epistle,  when  he  could  say,  "  No  man  stood  by  me  ;  all 
men  forsook  me."  Those  who  would  identify  themselves  with  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles 
at  such  a  time  would  probably  be  Gentiles  rather  than  Jews.  Thus  the  number  of 
the  deserters  might  not  be  great.  If  the  desertion  took  place  in  Asia  Minor,  it  would 
only  suggest  a  widespread  falling  away  from  the  aged  prisoner  at  Borne,  but  not  from 
the  gospel.  The  apostle  singles  out  two  persons  quite  unknown  to  us — "  Phygelus  and 
Hermogenes  " — as  the  ringleaders  of  this  movement.  The  fact  that  go  few  names  are 
mentioned  tends  to  reduce  the  extent  of  the  sad  misfortune. 

II.  The  effect  or  this  desertion.  The  apostle  does  not  dwell  upon  it,  but  rather 
dismisses  the  deserters  in  a  single  sentence.  Yet :  1.  It  would  be  a  severe  trial  to  the 
faith  of  the  aged  apostle  in  his  dying  days.  The  desertion  of  friends  is  always  a  sore 
trial,  but  when  the  friendship  is  cemented  by  religion,  its  intensity  is  peculiarly 
enhanced.  2.  The  apostle  refers  to  it  with  the  view  of  stimulating  Timothy  to  still 
greater  courage  in  the  cause  of  the  gospel. — T.  0. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — The  praiseworthy  conduct  of  Onesiphorus.  In  contrast  with  the 
Asiatic  deserters,  he  dwells  upon  the  kindly  sympathy  of  one  Asiatic  Christian  whom 
he  had  long  known  at  Ephesus. 

I.  The  kindness  of  Onesiphorus.  "  He  oft  refreshed  me,  and  was  not  ashamed  of 
my  chain :  but,  when  he  was  at  Eome,  he  sought  me  out  very  diligently,  and  found 
me."  1.  The  apostle,  as  udl  as  Timothy,  had  had  an  earlier  experience  of  this  good 
man,  who  was  probably  an  Ephesian  merchant,  who  went  from  time  to  time  to  Borne 
to  do  business,  for  he  says,  "  In  how  many  things  he  ministered  at  Ephesus,  thou 
knowest  very  well."  2.  He  did  not  probably  come  to  Borne  from  Ephesus  for  the  special 
purpose  of  visiting  the  apostle,  but,  having  found  himself  there,  he  made  it  his  business 
to  visit  the  apostle.  (1)  He  took  pains  to  find  out  the  apostle.  "  He  sought  me  out  very 
diligently."    Why  was  it  so  difficult  to  discover  the  prison  in  which  the  apostle  was 


12  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  1 1—18 

confined?  There  were  many  prisons  in  Rome,  aud  he  may  have  been  transferred  from 
prison  to  prison.  But  where  were  the  Roman  Christians  who  met  the  apostle  on  his 
first  visit  to  the  city,  that  they  could  not  inform  Onesiphorus  of  the  place  of  the  impri- 
sonment? Had  they  too  turned  away  from  him?  Or  had  Nero  struck  an  unworthy 
terror  into  their  hearts  ?  Onesiphorus  persevered,  however,  in  his  search,  and  found 
him  in  his  prison.  (2)  He  "oft  refreshed  the  apostle,  and  was  not  ashamed  of  his 
chain."  This  implies  (a)  that  he  visited  him  more  than  once;  (6)  that  the  imprisonment, 
though  severe,  did  not  quite  debar  all  access  to  the  outside  world ;  (cl  that  the  Christians 
nt  Rome  were  impliedly  ashamed  of  the  apostles'  chain,  else  such  prominence  would 
not  have  been  given  to  the  kindness  and  courage  of  this  noble  Ephesian  saint. 

II.  The  return  which  the  apostle  makes  foe  the  kindness  op  Onesiphorus. 
"  The  Lord  give  mercy  to  the  house  of  Onesiphorus  .  .  .  the  Lord  grant  unto  him  that 
he  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day."  He  cannot  make  any  other  return  for 
kindness  than  a  fervent  prayer  for  Onesiphorus  and  for  his  family.  1.  The  prayer 
suggests  that  though  the  apostle  is  shut  up  from  the  world,  the  way  to  heaven  is  still  open. 
He  cannot  pay  his  visitor  the  compliment  of  seeing  him  to  the  door,  but  he  can  remember 
him  at  a  throne  of  grace.  2.  Be  remembers  the  household  of  this  good  man,  What 
blessings  descend  upon  householders  who  are  blessed  with  such  a  head  1  The  apostle 
prays  for  "mercy"  on  this  happy  household.  Every  blessing  is  included  in  the  term. 
3.  The  prayer  for  Onesiphorus  himself  is  likewise  a  prayer  for  mercy.  Some  have 
inferred  that  he  was  now  dead,  and  that  we  have  here  an  example  of  prayer  for  a  dead 
man.  The  supposition  is  entirely  gratuitous.  Onesiphorus  may  have  been  absent  from 
Ephesus,  as  he  necessarily  was  on  his  visit  to  the  apistle.  Besides,  his  visit  to  the  apostle 
must  have  occurred  only  a  very  short  time  previously,  for  it  is  admitted  on  all  hands 
that  the  apostle's  last  imprisonment  was  very  brief,  and  it  is  rather  improbable  that 
Onesiphorus  should  have  died  immediately  after  his  visit  to  Rome,  or  that  the  apostle 
should  have  heard  of  it.  Onesiphorus  would  have  the  blessing  promised  by  our  Lord 
in  the  memorable  saying,  "  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  visited  me." — T.  C. 

Ver.  1. — "  The  promise  of  life''  It  was  an  age  of  death  when  St.  Paul  wrote  this 
Epistle.  Beneath  all  the  gaieties  of  Roman  civilization  there  was  decay  of  morals,  and 
corruption  of  the  inner  life.  Suicidi',  as  we  have  seen,  was  common  in  Rome,  and  men, 
tired  of  themselves,  and  disbelieving  alike  in  present  or  in  future  joy,  put  an  end 
to  their  earthly  existence.  St.  Paul  was  now  enduring  his  second  imprisonment  at 
Rome.  In  the  year  a.d.  63  the  great  conflagration,  for  which  that  master  of  crime, 
Nero,  was  responsible,  took  place,  burning  half  the  city.  He  falsely  charged  his  own 
crime  on  the  Christians,  some'of  whom  were  covered  with  the  skins  of  beasts  and  thrown 
to  the  dogs;  some  were  covered  with  inflammable  materials,  and  burnt  as  human 
torches,  which  illuminated  the  gardens ;  while  the  bestial  Nero  drove  abroad  in  his 
chariot,  and  indulged  bis  base  delight  in  the  carnival  of  fire  and  blood.  St.  Paul, 
knowing  his  own  end  to  be  near  at  hand,  in  a  city  where  his  second  imprisonment  had 
become  much  more  severe  than  the  first  one  had  been,  had  now  no  opportunity  of 
preaching,  as  he  did  under  the  milder  treatment  he  was  subjected  to  before,  and  gives  this 
second  charge  to  Timothy,  whom  he  exhorts  to  be  courageous  and  earnest  in  the  defence 
and  proclamation  of  a  faith  which  the  imprisoned  apostle  could  proclaim  no  more. 

I.  The  promise  op  life  is  spoken  of  as  the  revelation  of  Christ.  It  is  in 
Christ  Jesus.  That  is  to  say,  we  as  believers  have  in  vital  union  with  him,  the  pledge 
and  promise  of  immortality.  No  power  of  earth  or  hell  could  touch  that  life.  St.  Paul 
feared  not  those  who  could  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  had  no  more  that  they  could 
do.  He  knew  that  the  life  within  no  sword  or  flame  could  slay,  and  he  rejoices  in 
the  triumph  of  faith  in  Christ. 

II.  The  promise  or  life  is  spoken  of  as  a  developing  power.  It  was  a  promise, 
an  earnest,  of  the  inheritance.  He  was  yet  to  have  life  more  abundantly.  He  looked 
forward  to  a  time  when  his  environment  would  be  heavenly  in  its  atmosphere,  and  ever 
without  the  blight  of  sin  or  the  blastings  of  temptation,  he  should  enjoy  the  fruition  of 
life  at  God's  right  hand  for  evermore. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  8. — The  inner  self.  "  With  pure  conscience."  There  is  no  music  in  the  world 
comparable  to  this.    It  is  "  the  voice  of  melody,"  and  it  enabled  Paul  and  Silas  to  sing 


oh.  i.l— 18.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  IS 

in  prison.     The  conscience,  "  that  sole  monarchy  in  man,"  was  supreme  in  his  nature 
under  the  Lordship  of  Christ. 

I.  It  was  a  cleansed  conscience,  and  bo  pure.  St.  Paul  is  never  weary  of  preaching 
the  great  doctrine  of  the  atonement — that  we  are  redeemed  and  renewed  through  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ ;  and  he  rejoices  to  know  that  the  blood  of  Jesns  Christ,  God's 
Son,  cleanseth  from  all  sin. 

II.  It  was  an  obeyed  conscience,  and  so  pure.  We  have  to  consider  that  the 
conscience  may  speak  truly  and  authoritatively,  and-  be  enlightened  by  the  truth, 
and  yet  we  may  not  obey  the  truth ;  for  duty  may  be  recognized  as  duty,  and  yet 
not  discharged  as  such.  Conscience  may  not  be  pure  as  regards  the  question  of 
accountability. 

III.  It  was  filled  with  the  Spirit,  and  so  pure.  "The  Holy  Ghost  which 
dwelleth  in  us"  is  an  expression  of  St.  Paul's;  and  only  so  far  as  we  have  the 
"indwelling  of  the  Spirit"  in  thought,  imagination,  conscience,  and  desire,  can  we  be 
said  to  be  pure  within. — W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  6. — A  holy  ancestry.  "  Thy  grandmother  Lois,  and  thy  mother  Eunice."  We 
were  constituted  to  be  influenced  through  the  family  relationship,  and  it  is  sad  indeed 
when  the  young  break  away  from  a  religious  ancestry,  and  forsake  their  fathers'  God. 

I.  Here  is  already  an  historic  pedigree  of  Christian  people.  The  gospel  had 
been  long  enough  in  the  world  to  have  a  history  in  families.  We  find  three  generations. 
here.    The  grandmother  Lois,  the  mother  Eunice,  and  "  thee  also." 

II.  Here  is  the  true  spirit  of  the  gospel  manifested.  Unfeigned  faith,  or 
undissembled  faith,  No  mere  creed.  No  mere  appearance  of  piety.  In  tliat  age  men 
of  education  despised  the  pagan  faiths  which  they  yet  professed  to  believe.  They 
kept  iip  their  actual  adherence  to  heathen  worship  because  of  custom  or  family 
tradition,  or  because  they  believed  religion  in  some  sort  to  be  the  protective  police  ol 
society,  without  which  there  would  be  revolution.  This  unfeigned  faith  was  the 
faith  of  conviction — the  faith  that  so  believed  in  the  risen  Christ  that  it  could  endure 
persecution  and  suffer  loss,  and  live  or  die  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  with  the  sure  hope  of 
eternal  Z#«.— W.  M.  B. 

Ver.  6. — Quickening  the  memory.  "I  put  thee  in  remembrance."  Timothy  wag  not 
to  create  a  gospel,  but  to  pnach  one.  The  facts  and  doctrines  were  matters  of  revelation, 
and  Timothy  had  the  humbler  task  of  expanding  and  applying  them.  All  through 
his  gospel  was  to  be  that  of  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints. 

I.  Remembrance  is  needed.  Why  ?  Memory  is  liable  to  slumber  and  to  sleep.  Do 
we  mourn  over  this  fact,  and  ask  why  this  precious  faculty  was  not  stronger  ?  Consider ! 
Could  you  live  in  peace  or  joy  at  nil,  if  all  your  sorrows  and  bereavements  kept  their 
clear  details  before  your  mind?  No;  their  harrowing  spectacles  would  deaden  all  the 
springs  of  life,  and  crush  the  heart.  If  those  past  griefs  preserved  their  fulness  life 
would  be  unendurable.  There  is  a  beautiful  side,  therefore,  even  to  for^etfulness. 
Memory  may  slumber,  but  it  does  not  die.  It  may  be  awakened  and  quickened  for 
high  and  noble  ends.  Thus  all  Christians  need  to  be  "put  in  remembrance,"  that  they 
may  hold  fast  the  Word  of  life. 

II.  Remembrance  is  comprehensive.  There  are  many  springs  to  be  touched.  We 
become  proud,  and  need  to  remember,  as  the  Hebrews  did,  that  we  "  were  slaves."  We 
become  self-dependent,  and  need  to  be  reminded  that  "without  Christ  we  can  do 
nothing."  We  become  so  interested  in  life  that  we  try  to  make  "  home "  here,  and 
forget  that  we  are  pilgrims  and  strangers.  We  become  negligent,  and  forget  that 
responsibility  is  great  and  time  is  short. — W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  6. — Stirring  the  fire.  "Stir  up  the  gift  that  is  in  thee.''  Literally,  " stir  up 
(ivafamptiv)  the  fire  I "  There  may  be  fuel — even  of  God's  Word — but  all  fires  die  out 
unless  from  time  to  time  they  are  stirred  up. 

I.  The  fire  was  there.  His  heart's  altar  fire  had  been  lighted.  It  had  descended 
as  a  Divine  flame  from  on  high.  But  in  the  best  of  men  there  is  danger  of  absence  of 
watchfulness,  for,  like  the  li^ht  on  the  Jewish  altar,  the  fire  is  not  to  die  out  night 
nor  day. 


14  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  i  1—18. 

II.  There  were  many  enemies  who  would  quench  the  fibe.  The  Judaizing 
teachers  would  have  put  out  the  true  gospel  light,  by  turning  the  gospel  into  a  merely 
refined  Judaism.  The  world  would  quench  it,  as  it  did  the  faith  of  Demas.  And 
there  is  in  us  all  the  danger  of  spiritual  slumber,  which  leaveB  the  fire  to  die  out  by 
indolence  and  sloth.  Therefore  by  meditation,  by  prayer,  and  by  earnest  endeavour, 
by  admiration  and  emulation  of  heroic  lives,  we  must  "stir  up  the  fire"  that  if  in 
us.— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — Address  and  salutation.  "  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Christ  Jesus  by  the 
will  of  God,  according  to  the  promise  of  the  life  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  to  Timothy, 
my  beloved  child :  Grace,  mercy,  peace,  from  God  the  Father  and  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord."  The  language  is  similar  to  what  is  found  in  other  of  Paul's  Epistles.  The 
peculiarity  is  that  his  apostleship  is  here  associated  with  the  promise  of  the  gospel, 
which  like  a  rainbow  spans  our  sky  in  this  dark  world.  It  is  the  promise  by  pre- 
eminence ;  for  its  object  is  life,  which  is  a  name  for  all  that  can  be  needed  here,  or 
manifested  under  better  conditions.  It  is  a  promise  which  has  actually  secured  sure 
footing  in  Christ  Jesus,  being  the  realization  of  the  sure  mercies  of  David.  But,  in 
order  that  this  promise  may  become  the  means  of  life  to  men,  it  must  be  proclaimed ; 
and  this  points  to  the  employment  of  an  instrumentality  by  God.  It  was  according  to 
the  promise  in  this  view  that  Paul  was  employed  as  an  apostle.  It  is  further  to  be 
observed  that  his  true  child  in  the  First  Epistle  is  here  his  beloved  child.  If  the  one 
points  to  the  possession  of  his  spirit,  the  other  poiuts  to  the  love  that  is  properly  founded 
on  it.     Good  past  to  be  followed  by  a  good  future. 

I.  Thanksgiving.  1.  Personal  association  in  giving  thanks.  "  I  thank  God,  whom 
I  serve  from  my  forefathers  in  a  pure  conscience."  He  implies  that  Judaism  was  the 
forerunner  of  Christianity,  and  lays  claim  to  the  possession  of  a  godly  ancestry.  The 
pure  conscience  (notwithstanding  Acts  xxiii.  1)  is  not  to  be  absolutely  applied  to  his 
whole  life.  He  did  turn  aside  from  the  godly  direction  in  an  unenlightened  and 
culpable  resistance  to  Christianity  as  seeming  to  threaten  the  existence  of  his  inherited 
and  beloved  Judaism.  But  in  the  Christian  position  which  he  had  so  long  maintained, 
as  he  had  been  indebted  to  godly  forefathers,  so  he  had  preserved  the  godly  continuity 
in  his  family.  It  is  in  view  of  what  he  has  to  say  about  Timothy  that  he  makes  this 
pleasing  and  interesting  reference  to  his  forefathers.  2.  Feelings  toward  Timothy  in 
giving  thanks  for  Mm.  "How  unceasing  is  my  remembrance  of  thee  in  my  supplica- 
tions, night  and  day  longing  to  see  thee,  remembering  thy  tears,  that  I  may  be  filled 
with  joy."  Always  in  the  underground  of  the  apostle's  consciousness,  the  thought  of  his 
beloved  Timothy  came  up  uninterruptedly  at  his  times  of  devotion.  Every  night  and 
morning  he  felt  the  spell — so  tender  was  this  strong  man's  heart — of  the  tears  shed  by 
Timothy  at  their  parting ;  and  the  desire  rose  within  him  that  he  might  be  filled  with 
the  joy  of  another  meeting.  3.  Matter  for  thanksgiving  in  Timothy's  faith  which  was 
hereditary.  "  Having  been  reminded  of  the  unfeigned  faith  that  is  in  thee ;  which  dwelt 
first  in  thy  grandmother  Lois,  and  thy  mother  Eunice ;  and,  I  am  persuaded,  in  thee  also." 
Something  had  come  to  the  apostle's  knowledge  which  reminded  him  of  the  reality  of 
Timothy's  faith.  It  was  not  feigned  faith,  that  fails  under  trial.  The  apostle  thinks 
of  it  as  a  kind  of  heirloom  in  the  family.  He  could  go  back  himself  to  two  ancestresses 
of  his  in  whom  it  dwelt.  There  was  first  Lois,  his  grandmother,  who,  we  can  believe, 
besides  being  godly  according  to  the  Jewish  type,  was  before  her  end  a  Christian 
believer.  She  had  to  do  with  her  daughter  Eunice  becoming  a  Christian  believer. 
We  are  told  of  Eunice,  in  Acts  xvi.  1,  that  she  was  a  Jewess  who  believed,  while  her 
husband  was  a  Gentile.  She  in  turn  had  to  do  with  her  son  becoming  a  Christian 
believer.  The  apostle  had  all  the  greater  confidence  in  the  reality,  and  also  vitality,  of 
Timothy's  faith  that  (apart  from  Jewish  influences  of  a  godly  nature)  he  was  a  Christian 
believer  of  the  third  generation.  We  have  the  promise  that  God  will  keep  covenant 
and  mercy  with  them  that  love  him  and  keep  his  commandments  to  a  thousand 
generations.  God's  intention  is  that  godly  and  Christian  influence  should  be  transmitted. 
He  made  one  generation  to  follow  another,  proceeded  on  a  principle  of  succession  and 
not  of  contemporaneousness,  that  he  might  thereby  have  a  godly  seed  (Mai.  ii.  15). 
The  best  established  Christians  are  among  those  who  are  of  a  godly  stock.  Therefore 
let  the  godly  upbringing  of  the  young  be  attended  to.    At  the  same  time,  let  those 


oh.  1. 1—18.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  15 

who  have  had  the  advantage  of  a  godly  upbringing  see  that  they  are  not  left  behind  by 
those  who  have  been  reclaimed  from  ungodly  society. 

II.  Exhortation.  1.  Timothy  is  to  stir  up  his  gift.  "  For  the  which  cause  I  put  thee 
in  remembrance  that  thou  stir  up  the  gift  of  God,  which  is  in  thee  through  the  laying 
on  of  my  hands."  Paul  is  an  adept  at  exhortation.  Timothy,  from  the  memory  of  Lois 
and  Eunice,  must  catch  fire.  Nay,  he  had  a  personal  association  with  Timothy,  in 
having  laid  hands  on  him  at  his  ordination.  On  that  ground  he  can  call  upon  him  to 
stir  up  the  gift  then  received,  viz.  the  ministerial  gift.  Let  him  be  true  to  his  duties 
as  a  minister  of  Christ.  2.  Confirmatory  reason  pointing  to  special  exhortation.  "  For 
God  gave  us  not  a  spirit  of  fearfulness ;  but  of  power  and  love  and  discipline.'7  Let 
him  stir  himself  up  against  cowardice  to  which,  as  persecuted,  he  was  exposed,  and  by 
this  consideration  that  the  imparted  spirit  in  its  amplitude  excludes  cowardice.  It  is  a 
spirit  of  power.  God  has  no  jealousy  of  us ;  he  wishes  to  be  served  with  our  strength 
and  not  with  our  weakness.  It  is  a  spirit  of  love ;  warmth  of  feeling,  and  not  coldness, 
God  would  put  into  our  service.  It  is  a  spirit  of  discipline.  So  far  as  this  is  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  other  two  words,  it  points  to  the  guidance  of  reason.  God 
wishes  to  be  served,  not  with  our  ignorance,  but  with  our  well-disciplined  thoughts. 
"With  more  ■power  m  our  wills,  with  more  glow  in  our  affections^  with  more  reason  in 
our  thoughts,  we  shall  not  cower  before  opposition.  3.  Timothy  is  called  upon  to  be 
specially  on  his  guard  against  false  shame.  "  Be  not  ashamed  therefore  of  the  testimony 
of  our  Lord,  nor  of  me  his  prisoner :  but  suffer  hardship  with  the  gospel.''  "  Shame 
attends  fear ;  when  fear  is  conquered  false  shame  takes  flight "  (Bengel).  He  had  no 
reason  for  being  ashamed  on  account  of  his  association  with  the  Lord  to  whom  he 
testified.  Neither  had  he  reason  for  being  ashamed  on  account  of  his  association  with 
Paul,  who  was  not  the  Lord's  servant,  but,  more  honourably  (Gal.  vi.  17),  the  Lord's 
prisoner,  i.e.  by  the  will  of  Christ,  more  than  by  the  will  of  Cassar — a  prisoner,  the 
disposal  of  him  extending  to  the  time,  and  all  the  circumstances,  of  his  imprisonment. 
To  suffer  hardship  with  the  gospel  involves  an  unusual  collocation  of  person  and  thing. 
It  is  usual  to  interpret  the  hardship  as  being  suffered  with  Paid  for  the  gospel.  But 
as  the  thought  requires  the  fixing  of  the  attention,  not  on  the  second,  but  on  both  of  the 
preceding  clauses,  it  is  better  to  leave  indefinite  with  whom  he  is  associated  in  suffering 
hardship.  4.  Season  against  false  shame  in  the  power  of  God.  "  According  to  the  power 
of  God."  The  idea  is  that  we  should  be  free  from  shame  in  suffering  for  the  gospel, 
according  to  the  power  on  which  we  have  to  rely.  (1)  It  is  a  saving  power.  "  Who 
saved  us,  and  called  us  with  a  holy  calling."  Power  has  already  been  displayed  toward 
us  in  salvation,  which  we  can  think  of  as  completed  outside  of  us.  It  has  also  been 
operative  within  us,  in  our  being  called.  When  our  unwillingness  to  accept  of  salvation 
was  broken  down,  then  we  were  called  of  God.  It  was  with  a  holy  calling  that  we 
were  called,  and  it  belongs  to  it  as  holy  that  we  should  be  above  shame  in  connection 
with  Christ's  cause.  The  power  that  has  already  been  displayed  toward  us  is  all  in 
the  direction  of  our  being  saved  from  this  shame.  (2)  It  is  a  free  power.  "Not 
according  to  our  works,  but  according  to  his  own  purpose  and  grace,  which  was  given 
us  in  Christ  Jesus  before  times  eternal."  It  is  a  power  that  is  not  determined  in  its 
exercise  by  our  works  or  deservings.  It  was  according  to  his  own  purpose,  »\e.  not 
from  outward  occasion,  but  arising  in  the  depths  of  his  own  being.  It  was  according 
to  a  purpose  of  grace,  i.e.  in  which  sinners,  or  the  undeserving,  were  contemplated  as  in 
need.  It  was  according  to  a  purpose  of  grace  in  Christ  Jesus,  i.e.  in  which  there  was  a 
looking  to  human  merit  only  as  in  Christ.  It  was  according  to  a  purpose  of  grace 
before  times  eternal,  i.e.  long  before  man  could  have  to  do  with  it.  Being  a  power  so 
entirely  pending  on  God,  we  can  have  confidence  that  it  will  go  out,  in  the  freest,  most 
gracious  manner,  toward  us.  (3)  It  is  a  glorious  power.  "But  hath  now  been 
manifested  by  the  appearing  of  our  Saviour  Christ  Jesus,  who  abolished  death,  and 
brought  light  and  incorruption  to  light  through  the  gospel."  Hidden  in  God  in  eternity, 
it  was  for  a  time  partially  manifested.  The  time  of  its  full  manifestation  corresponded 
with  the  appearing  of  Christ,  which  was  also  the  medium  of  the  manifestation.  This 
is  the  only  place  in  the  New  Testament  in  which  the  appearing  is  to  be  identified  with 
the  Incarnation,  or  the  whole  of  Christ's  appearance  in  flesh.  That  appearing  was  aa 
one  of  the  weak  things  of  the  world.  Especially  did  Christ  seem  to  be  the  very 
impersonation  of  weakness  when  he  was  on  the  cross.    And  yet  this  wag  the  grandest 


16  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [o*  *•  1— I8- 

display  of  power,  confounding  the  mighty ;  for  it  is  here  said  that  by  this  appearing  he 
abolished  death.     He  appeared  in  flesh,  and  endured  death  in  all  its  reality,  and,  by 
doing  so,  he  has  made  it  no  longer  a  reality  to  his  people.    He  has  made  it  of  none 
effect.    He  has  made  it  so  that  it  cannot  tyrannize  over  them.    And,  though  they  hare 
to  endure  death,  it  is  not  as  a  token  of  God's  displeasure,  but  as  his  wise  and  good 
arrangement,  and  introduction  into  a  state  from  which  death  is  for  ever  excluded.    The 
positive  side  of  the  benefit  derived  from  the  appearing  is  presented  under  a  slightly 
different  aspect.    It  is  regarded  as  presented  in  the  gospel.    And  as  death  is  a  dark 
power,  so  the  gospel  is  a  light-giving  power.    What  it  has  brought  to  light  is  of  the 
utmost  consequence.    It  is  life,  and  life  with  the  superlative  quality  of  imperishableness. 
Under  heathenism  men  had  no  right  conception  of  life.    Even  with  all  the  help  that 
philosophy  could  give  them,  the  meaning  of  life  was  dark  to  them.     The  gospel  has 
shown  it  to  consist  in  the  favour  of  God,  and  the  quickening  of  all  our  faculties  under 
the  breath  of  his  Spirit.    But  specially  are  we  to  think  of  life  in  its  imperishableness. 
We  know  that,  to  the  heathen  generally,  the  future  was  an  absolute  blank.    A  few  of 
them  had  glimmerings,  not  of  a  resurrection,  but  of  the  survival  of  the  thinking  part, 
with  some  reward  for  the  good.     The  gospel  has  brought  immortality  into  the  full 
clear  light.    It  has  given  us  the  certainty  of  our  existence  after  death.     It,  moreover, 
holds  out  before  us  the  prospect  of  a  life  that  is  to  be  spent,  without  intermission  or 
end,  in  the  sunshine  of  God's  love,  with  ever  increased  quickening  of  all  our  powers— a 
life  in  which  there  will  be  a  reunion  of  soul  and  body,  of  which  already  we  have  the 
earnest  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ.    It  is  our  great  privilege  that  we  live  under  this 
light  of  the  gospel.    It  is  the  imperishableness  of  the  life  of  God  that  is  here  begun 
that  has  power  to  nerve  the  soul,  even  to  martyrdom.    5.  Reason  against  false  shame 
in  the  example  of  the  apostle.    (1)  Suffering  connected  with  his  office.    "  Whereunto 
I  was  appointed  a  preacher,  and  an  apostle,  and  a  teacher.     For  the  which  cause  I 
suffer  also  these  things."    As  in  1  Tim.  ii.  8,  he  takes  a  threefold  designation  of  office. 
As  preacher  or  herald,  it  was  his  duty  to  cry  aloud.    As  apostle,  he  was  specially 
invested  with  authority.    As  teacher,  he  had  to  go  among  the  Gentiles.    It  was  a  glad 
message  in  relation  to  which  he  exercised  his  office,  and  it  should  have  brought  him 
many  a  welcome.    "  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet  of  him  that 
bringeth  good  tidings,  that  publisheth  peace  I "    But  it  brought  him  many  a  rebuff,  and 
much  outward  disgrace ;  for  at  this  time  he  was  suffering  his  second  imprisonment  in 
Borne,  and  was  nearing  his  martyrdom.    (2)  Triumph  over  shame.    "xet  I  am  not 
ashamed."    The  apostle  does  not  exhort  Timothy  without  setting  him  an  example. 
It  was  no  small  matter  to  him  to  be  counted  by  men  only  worthy  of  imprisonment, 
and,  very  soon,  of  death.     But  he  was  so  much  impressed  with  the  supreme  importance 
of  the  gospel,  that  he  heeded  not  the  shame.    (3)  fJis  personal  assurance.    Its  strength. 
"  For  1  know  him  whom  I  have  believed."    As  he  is  here  speaking  of  his  being  a 
prisoner,  we  naturally  take  the  reference  to  be  to  him  whose  prisoner  in  the  eighth 
verse  he  declared  himself  to  be,  vi«.  the  Lord.    He  had  lived  a  life  of  faith  on  Christ ; 
and  he  could  speak  confidently,  from  his  own  experience  of  him.     Not  I  think  I  know 
him,  but,  as  one  would  speak  of  a  friend  whom  he  has  long  and  intimately  lived  with, 
I  know  him.     Without  experience  we  cannot  have  the  assurance  that  excludes  doubt. 
Only  when  we  have  tried  Christ,  and  found  him  sufficient  for  us  in  all  positions  of  life, 
can  we  rise  above  the  language  of  hesitation.    Its  iveU-supported  nature.    "  And  I  am 
persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  guard  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  him  against  that 
day."    What  is  guarded  is  literally  my  deposit,  and,  as  in  the  thirteenth  verse  "  deposit " 
is  something  committed  to  Timothy,  so  some  would  think  here  of  something  committed 
to  Paul,  viz.  his  stewardship.     But,  as  the  guardian  is  also  naturally  the  holder,  we 
naturally  think  of  something  committed  by  Paul  to  Christ;  and  what  was  that  but  his 
interest,  his  stake  in  the  future  world,  dependent  on  his  faithfulness  in  this?    How 
did  Paul  know  that  it  would  not  turn  out  a  blank,  or  be  much  diminished  by  future 
failure?    The  explanation  was  that  he  had  put  it  into  Christ's  hands, and  he  trusted  in 
him  being  able  to  guard  it  for  him  against  thai  day,  viz.  the  day  of  judgment,  when  it 
would  become  irreversibly,  gloriously  his,  being  as  it  were  handed  back  to  him  by 
Christ.    One  who  has  this  well-grounded  assurance  can  meet  death  even  triumphantly. 
6,  Timothy  is  further  called  upon  to  attend  specially  to  his  orthodoxy.    (1)  The  pattern. 
t'  Hold  the  pattern  of  sound  words  which  thou  hast  heard  from  me,  in  faith  and  love 


ch.  1. 1—18.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  17 

which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.''  There  is  a  form  of  sound  words,  i.e.  there  is  a  correct 
expression  of  truth  wliich  is  to  he  coveted,  because  on  this  depends  the  healthfulness 
of  the  life.  To  this  form  Paul  had  shaped  his  preaching.  He  had  not  indulged  in 
logomachies,  or  private  speculations,  or  adaptations  to  other  systems,  but  he  had  kept 
himself,  as  a  well-disciplined  thinker,  to  a  plain,  rational,  forcible  statement,  and 
urging  of  what  he  believed  to  be  necessary  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  Timothy  was 
familiar  with  his  truthful  and  healthful  style;  let  it  be  the  pattern  to  which  he 
disciplined  his  thoughts  and  his  preaching.  He  could  only  hold  the  pattern  in  the 
Christian  element  of  faith  and  love.  (2)  The  good  deposit.  "  That  good  thing  which 
was  committed  unto  thee  guard  through  the  Holy  Ghost  which  dwelleth  in  us."  This 
is  the  same  thing  under  a  different  aspect,  viz.  the  talent  of  the  catholic  faith,  which  a 
preacher  has  to  guard.  It  is  good,  has  vast  blessings  connected  with  it ;  therefore  it  is 
not  to  be  neglected,  it  is  to  he  kept  from  all  mischances.  The  preacher  must  pray, 
think,  use  the  help  of  the  rule  of  faith,  practise  himself.  But  all  his  keeping,  to  be  of 
any  avail,  must  be  allowing  the  Holy  Ghost  to  keep,  who  is  not  far  to  seek,  but  is  an 
Indweller  in  our  souls.  "So  he  giveth  his  beloved  sleep,"  delivers  him  from  the 
consuming  restlessness  which  would  haunt  him,  if  the  keeping  simply  depended  on 
himself.— B.  F. 

Vers.  15 — 18. — Contrasts.  L  Phyqemxs  and  Hermohenes.  "  This  thou  knowest, 
that  all  that  are  in  Asia  turned  away  from  me ;  of  whom  are  Phygelus  and  Hermo- 
genes."  The  defection  here  referred  to  was  from  Paul  and  his  interests.  It  extended 
to  all  that  were  in  Asia,  i.e.  all  Asiatics  who  at  one  time  had  been  attached  to 
the  apostle,  and  whose  attachment  was  put  to  the  test  when  in  Borne  during  his 
imprisonment.  It  was  to  have  been  expected  of  them  that  they  would  have  found 
their  way  to  his  dungeon ;  but,  as  if  they  had  put  it  to  themselves  whether  they  would 
go  or  not,  they  chose  the  latter  alternative.  They  turned  away  from  him.  They 
probably  found  some  excuse  in  the  pressure  of  business ;  but  in  the  real  character  of 
their  action  it  was  turning  their  back  on  the  imprisoned  apostle.  In  this  not  very 
numerous  class  Phygelus  and  Hermogenes  are  singled  out  for  notice,  probably  because 
they  had  showed  the  greatest  unbrotherliness.  We  know  nothing  more  of  them  than 
is  mentioned  here.  It  has  been  their  destiny  to  be  handed  down  to  posterity  as  men 
who  acted  an  unworthy  part  toward  a  noble  man  in  his  extremity.  They  did  not  know 
that  such  an  evil  immortality  was  to  attach  to  their  action ;  but  their  action  was  on 
that  account  only  the  more  free.  Let  all  our  actions  be  upright  and  generous ;  for  we 
do  not  know  by  which  of  them  we  shall  be  known  among  men.  This  defection  is 
referred  to  Timothy  as  being  within  his  knowledge ;  for  by  their  example  he  was  to  be 
deterred  from  cowardice,  and  his  bravery  was  to  be  all  the  greater  that  these  men  were 
cowards. 

II.  Onesiphobds.  There  is  a  distinction  observed  between  the  house  of  Onesiphorus 
and  Onesiphorus  himself.  With  regard  to  the  house  of  Onesiphorus  they  are  objects  of 
present  interest.  Blessings  are  invoked  upon  them  in  the  sixteenth  verse,  to  the  mani- 
fest exclusion  of  Onesiphorus  himself.  At  the  close  of  the  Epistle  the  same  thing  is 
observable :  "  Salute  the  house  of  Onesiphorus."  With  regard  to  Onesiphorus  himself, 
nothing  is  said  about  his  present :  the  past  tense  is  used  of  him,  and  a  wish  is  expressed 
about  his  future.  It  may,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  certain  that  Onesiphorus  was  dead. 
1.  Interest  in  departed  friends  shown  in  kindness  to  beloved  ones  left  behind.  "Tne 
Lord  grant  mercy  unto  the  house  of  Onesiphorus."  There  are  around  us  the  three 
circles  of  lovers,  friends,  acquaintances  (Ps.  ixxxviii.  18).  Our  love  to  the  innermost 
circle  is  to  be  most  intense, "which  it  can  be  without  interfering  with  our  love  to  the 
second  circle  of  friends.  The  proper  cultivation  of  our  affections  in  our  homes  will  the 
better  qualify  us  for  loviDg  our  friends.  There  is  an  absence  of  reserve,  and  openness 
to  influence,  in  friendship,  which  makes  it,  when  properly  based,  a  great  blessing. 
There  are  duties  which  we  owe  to  our  friends  when  they  are  with  us,  and  our  duties  do 
not  end  with  their  death.  Onesiphorus  had  been  the  friend  of  Paul,  and,  now  that  he 
is  gone,  the  large-hearted  apostle,  in  writing  to  Timothy  from  his  dungeon,  breathes  a 
prayer  on  behalf  of  the  house  of  Onesiphorus.  The  Lord,  *.e.  Jesus  Christ,  the  great 
Overseer  of  the  Churches,  and  Appointer  lor  the  several  households  of  which  the  Churches 
are  composed,  grant  them  mercy.    They  were  objects  of  sympathy,  in  being  deprived 

IL  TIMOTHY.  0 


18  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  l  1— 1& 

of  their  earthly  head  on  whom  it  devolved  to  provide  for  them,  to  assist  and  counsel 
especially  the  beginners  in  life.  The  Lord  mercifully  make  up  for  them  what  they  had 
lost.  Would  this  prayer  return  from  heaven  unanswered?  Would  not  this  kindly 
remembrance  of  them,  read  in  their  desolate  home,  bring  good  cheer  to  their  hearts,  and 
be  an  influence  for  good  in  all  their  future  life?  Would  it  not  also  be  the  means  of 
raising  np  friends  for  them?  2.  Interest  in  the  living  founded  on  the  past  kindness  of 
the  dead.  "  For  he  oft  refreshed  me,  and  was  not  ashamed  of  my  chain ;  but,  when  he 
was  in  Borne,  he  sought  me  diligently,  and  found  me."  This  was  after  his  first  answer, 
apparently  during  his  second  imprisonment,  when  awaiting  his  second  answer.  Paul 
leaned  very  much  on  human  sympathy.  On  one  occasion  he  said,  "The  Lord  that 
comforteth  them  that  are  cast  down,  comforted  me  by  the  coming  of  Titus."  So  the 
Lord  refreshed  him  by  those  visits  of  Onesiphorus.  This  friend  was  true  to  his  name ; 
he  was  a  real  help-bringer — bringer  of  comfort  and  strength  to  the  great  warrior  whose 
battles  were  nearly  over.  He  was  a  helper  in  presence  of  difficulties.  He  was  not 
ashamed  of  his  chain,  i.e.  braved  all  the  dangers  connected  with  his  being  regarded  as 
the  prisoner's  friend.  There  was  difficulty  of  access  to  him,  such  as  there  had  not  been 
during  the  first  imprisonment,  when  he  had  his  own  hired  house,  and  received  all  that 
came  to  him ;  but  Onesiphorus  sought  him  all  the  more  diligently  that  he  knew  of  his 
unbefriended  condition,  and  overcame  all  official  hindrances.  In  the  strange  working 
of  providence,  Onesiphorus  came  to  his  end  before  Paul,  but  his  good  deeds  lived  after 
him,  and  caused  him  to  be  remembered  by  Paul,  and  in  that  form  which,  had  he  been 
conscious  of  what  was  taking  place  on  earth,  would  have  been  most  pleasing  to  Onesi- 
phorus. And  this  was  not  to  he  wondered  at.  Onesiphorus  loved  his  home  circle — this 
is  an  element  in  the  case ;  but  it  did  not  absorb  all  his  attention.  He  had  a  place  in 
his  heart  for  friends,  and  was  ready  to  render  them  services.  And  this  was  acting  more 
truly  for  the  interests  of  his  loved  ones  than  if  he  had  selfishly  confined  his  attention 
to  them.  For  when  he  was  gone — taken  away  at  a  time  when  he  was  greatly  needed 
by  his  children — there  were  those  who  were  their  well-wishers  for  the  lather's  sake. 
There  was  the  missionary,  by  whom  there  had  been  so  much  benefit,  invoking  his  bless- 
ing on  them.  The  psalmist  says,  "  I  have  been  young,  and  now  am  old ;  yet  have  I 
not  seen  the  righteous  forsaken,  nor  his  seed  begging  bread."  And  this  can  be  explained 
without  bringing  in  a  special  miracle.  Indeed,  the  psalmist  so  explains  it  in  the  follow- 
ing verse:  "He  is  ever  merciful,  and  lendeth ;  and  his  seed  is  blessed."  That  is  to  say,  by 
his  good  deeds  when  he  is  alive,  he  raises  up  friends  for  his  children  when  he  is  dead. 
3.  Interest  in  departed  friends  shown  in  pious  wishes  with  respect  to  their  future.  "The 
Lord  grant  unto  him  to  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day."  The  following  is  to  be 
noted  as  the  teaching  of  Luther:  "We  have  no  command  from  God  to  pray  for  the 
dead,  and  therefore  no  one  can  sin  who  does  not  pray  for  them.  For  in  what  God  has 
neither  commanded  nor  forbidden,  no  man  can  sin.  Yet  because  God  has  not  granted 
us  to  know  the  state  of  the  soul,  and  we  must  be  uncertain  about  it,  thou  dost  not  sin 
that  thou  prayest  for  the  dead,  but  in  such  wise  that  thou  leave  it  in  doubt  and  say 
thus, '  If  this  soul  be  in  that  state  that  thou  mayest  yet  help  it,  I  pray  thee  to  be  gracious 
unto  it.'  Therefore  if  thou  hast  prayed  once  or  thrice,  thou  shouldest  believe  that  thou 
art  heard,  and  pray  no  more,  lest  thou  tempt  God."  Beyond  that  Paul  does  not  go. 
He  follows  Onesiphorus  into  the  next  world,  and,  when  he  thinks  of  him  coming  to  the 
settling  for  what  his  earthly  life  had  been,  he  devoutly  breathes  the  wish  that  he  may  be 
mercifully  dealt  with.  Such  an  expression  of  feeling  is  not  to  be  forbidden  us  as  we 
think  of  departed  friends  going  forward  to  judgment ;  it  is  to  be  found  in  inscriptions 
in  the  catacombs.  But  it  has  no  connection  with  a  belief  in  purgatoiy,  and  is  very 
different  from  the  formal  inculcation  of  prayers  for  the  dead.  4.  Reference  to  Timothy 
as  to  services  rendered  by  Onesiphorus  at  Ephesus.  "And  in  how  many  things  he 
ministered  at  Ephesus,  thou  knowest  very  well."  This  was  additional  to  services 
rendered  by  Onesiphorus  to  the  apostle  at  Borne.  He  had  not  mentioned  it  before, 
because  it  had  been  within  the  sphere  of  Timothy's  own  observation.  But  he  brings 
it  in  now,  as  what  was  fitted  to  support  the  charge  of  constancy  he  is  laying  on 
Timothy.— R.  F. 


uh.  ii.  1—26.] 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


19 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IL 


Ver.  1. — Child  for  ton,  A.V.;  strengthened 
tut  strong,  A.V.  Be  strengthened  (ivtwaiiov) ; 
more  exactly  (as  Iluther),  become  strong,  or, 
which  is  the  game  thing,  strengthen  thyself; 
implying,  perhaps,  though  gently  expressed, 
some  previous  weakness,  as  in  Heb.  xi.  31, 
"  From  weakness  were  made  strong ; "  where 
the  image  seems  to  be  that  of  recovery  from 
siokness.  In  Eph.  vi.  10,  however  (ii/Swa/iov- 
a8i  iv  Kvplcft),  there  is  no  evidence  of  pre- 
ceding weakness,  but  only  a  call  to  use  the 
strength  they  had ;  and  it  may  be  so  here 
too.  The  strength,  Timothy  is  reminded,  by 
which  he  was  to  fight  the  good  fight,  was 
not  his  own,  but  that  which  would  come  to 
him  from  the  grace  and  love  of  Jesus  Christ 
(comp.  1  Cor.  xv.  10;  PhiL  iv.  13). 

Ver.  2.— Which  for  that,  A.V.;  from  tot 
of,  A.V.  The  things  whioh  thou  hast  heard, 
etc  Here  we  have  distinctly  enunciated 
the  succession  of  apostolical  doctrine  through 
apostolical  men.  We  have  also  set  before 
us  the  partnership  of  the  presbyterate,  and, 
in  a  secondary  degree,  of  the  whole  Church, 
with  the  apostles  and  bishops  their  succes- 
sors, in  preserving  pure  and  unadulterated 
the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.  There 
can  be  little  doubt  that  St.  Paul  is  here 
alluding  to  Timothy's  ordination,  as  in 
1  Tim.  iv.  14;  vi.  12;  ch.  i.  6,  7,  18,  14. 
Timothy  had  then  heard  from  the  apostle's 
lips  a  certain  "  form  of  sound'  words  " — some- 
thing in  the  nature  of  a  creed,  some  sum- 
mary of  gospel  truth,  which  was  the  deposit 
placed  in  his  charge ;  and  in  committing  it 
to  him,  he  and  the  presbyters  present  had 
laid  their  hands  on  him,  and  the  whole 
Church  had  assented,  and  confirmed  the 
same.  "  Thus  through  many  witnesses," 
whose  presence  and  assent,  like  that  of  wit- 
nesses to  the  execution  of  a  deed  of  transfer 
of  land  (Gen.  xxiii.  10, 16, 18),  was  necessary 
to  make  the  transaction  valid  and  complete, 
had  Timothy  received  his  commission  to 
preach  the  Word  of  God;  and  what  he  had 
received  he  was  to  hand  on  in  like  manner 
to  faithful  men,  who  should  be  able  to  teach 
the  same  to  others  also.  Commit  (irapaflou) ; 
identifying  the  doctrine  committed  to  be 
handed  on  with  the  deposit  (irapa9i\ieii)  of 
1  Tim.  vi.  20  and  ch.  i.  14.  It  is  important 
to  note  here  both  the  concurrence  of  the 
presbyters  and  the  assent  of  the  Church. 
The  Church  has  ever  been  averse  to  private 
ordinations,  and  has  ever  associated  the 
people  as  consentient  parties  in  ordination 
(Thirty-first  Canon ;  Preface  to  "  Form  and 
Manner  of  Making  of  Deacons,"  and  rubric 
at  close— "in  the   face   of  the  Church;" 


"  Form  and  Manner  of  Ordering  of  Priests  " 
— "  Good  people,"  etc.). 

Ver.  8. — Suffer  hardship  with  me  for  thou 
therefore  endure  hardness,  A.V.  and  T.B.; 
Christ  Jesus  for  Jesus  Christ,  A.V.  and  T.B. 
Suffer  hardship  with  me  (avyKaKorrd8nirov), 
which  is  the  reading  "supported  by  the 
weightiest  authorities"  (Huther), as  inch. 
i.  8.  The  simple  form  KaKoirdena-ov,  which  is 
the  reading  of  the  T.R.,  occurs  also  in  ver. 
9  of  this  chapter,  in  ch.  iv.  5,  and  in  Jas. 
V.  13,  and  Kaxotra8da  in  Jas.  v.  10.  Both 
these  simple  forms  are  classical.  But  the 
context  favours  the  compound  form,  and  is 
supported  by  ch.  i.  8,  12.  (For  the  senti- 
ment, see  the  "  Ministration  of  Public  Bap- 
tism " — "  We  receive  this  child,"  etc.) 

Ver.  4. — Soldier  on  service  for  man  that 
warreth,  A.V. ;  in  for  with,  A.V. ;  enrolled 
him  as  for  hath  chosen  him  to  he,  A.V. 
Soldier  on  service  (o-rpaTevi/ievos') ;  as  1  Cor. 
ix.  7  (see,  too,  1  Tim.  i.  18).  In  Luke  iii.  14 
o-Tparev6ufroi  is  rendered  simply  "  soldiers," 
with  margin,  "  Greek,  soldiers  on  service." 
There  is  no  difference  in  meaning  between 
the  "  man  that  warreth  "  in  the  A.  V.,  and 
the  "soldier  on  service"  of  the  B.V. 
Affairs  (nparyiMTftais) ;  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  but  common  in  the  LXX.  and  in 
classical  Greek,  where  it  means,  as  here, 
"business,"  "affairs,"  "occupation,"  "trade," 
and  the  like,  with  the  accessory  idea  of  its 
being  an  "  absorbing,  engrossing  pursuit." 
Enrolled  him,  etc.  (orpaToXoyiioavri) ;  only 
here  in  the  New  Testament,  not  found  in 
the  LXX.,  but  common  in  classical  Greek 
for  "  to  levy  an  army,"  "  to  enlist  soldiers." 
The  great  lesson  here  taught  is  that  the 
warfare  of  the  Christian  soldier  requires  the 
same  concentration  of  purpose  as  that  of  the 
earthly  warrior,  if  he  would  win  the  victory. 

Ver.  5. — Also  a  man  for  a  man  also,  A.V. ; 
contend  in  the  games  for  strive  for  masteries, 
A.V. ;  he  is  not  for  yet  is  he  not,  A.V. ;  have 
contended  for  strive,  A.V.  Contend  in  the 
games  (oOAjj) ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, and  not  found  in  the  LXX.,  but 
common  in  classical  Greek.  It  means  "  to 
contend  for  &8\ov"  tlie  prize,  to  be  an 
"  athlete."  This  is  also  the  meaning  of  the 
A.V.  "strive  for  masteries."  "To  strive," 
means  properly  to  contend  with  an  anta- 
gonist, and  "mastery"  is  an  old  English 
word  for  "  superiority,"  "  victory,"  or  the 
like.  Dryden  has  "mastership"  in  the 
same  sense — 

"  When  noble  youths  for  mastership  should 
strive, 
To  quoit,  to  run,  and  steeds  and  chariots 
drive." 

(Ovid, '  Met,'  bk.  i) 


20 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[ch.  ii.  1—26. 


Lawfully  (ropfpeu,  as  1  Tim.  i.  8);  accord- 
ing to  the  laws  and  usages  of  the  games.  So 
Timothy  must  conform  to  the  laws  of  the 
Christian  warfare,  and  not  shrink  from 
afflictions,  if  he  would  gain  the  great  Chris- 
tian prize. 

Ver.  6. — The  first  to  partake  for  first  par- 
taker, A.V.  That  laboureth  (rbv  kottioivto). 
Let  not  Timothy  think  to  shirk  labour  and 
yet  enjoy  its  fruits.  (For  xcmiiu,  see  note  on 
1  Tim.  v.  17.) 

"Ver.  7. — For  the  Lord  shall  give  for  and 
the  Lord  give,  A.V.  Consider  what  I  say. 
The  apostle's  lessons  had  been  given  in 
parables  or  similitudes.  He  therefore  begs 
Timothy  to  note  them  well,  lest  the  applica- 
tion to  himself  should  escape  him,  suggest- 
ing further  that  he  should  seek  the  necessary 
wisdom  and  understanding  from  God.  So 
our  Lord,  at  the  end  of  the  parables  recorded 
in  Matt,  xiii.,  says  to  his  disciples  in  ver.  51, 
"Have  ye  understood  all  these  things?" 
and  elsewhere,  "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear, 
let  him  hear."  Understanding  (trAvsmv) ; 
one  of  the  special  gifts  of  the  Spirit  (Isa. 
xi.  2,  LXX. ;  see  Col.  i.  9 ;  ii.  2). 

Ver.  8. — Jesus  Christ,  risen  from  the  dead 
for  that  Jesus  Christ . . .  teas  raised  from  the 
dead,  A.V. ;  of  the  seed  of  David  for  Jesus 
Christ  of  the  seed  of  David,  A.Y.  Eemember 
Jesus  Christ  The  A.V.  seems  to  give  the 
6ense  more  correctly  than  the  B.V.  The 
point  of  the  exhorlation  is  to  remember  that 
Jesus  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead,  and 
by  that  remembrance  to  be  encouraged  to 
face  even  death  courageously.  The  verb 
fivriiioviAu,  in  the  New  Testament,  usually 
governs  the  genitive  case  as  e.g.  Acts  xx.  35 ; 
Gal.  ii  10.  But  in  1  Thess.  ii.  9;  Matt. 
xvi.  9 ;  Rev.  xviii.  5,  it  has  an  accusative, 
as  here,  and  commonly  in  classical  Greek. 
There  seems  to  be  hardly  sufficient  ground 
for  the  distinction  mentioned  by  Bishop 
Ellicott,  that  with  a  genitive  it  means 
simply  "remember,"  with  the  accusative 
"keep  hi  remembrance."  It  is  more  diffi- 
cult to  determine  the  exact  force  and  intent 
of  the  clause,  "  of  the  seed  of  David."  It 
seems,  however,  to  point  to  Christ's  human 
nature,  so  as  to  make  the  example  of  Christ's 
resurrection  apposite  as  an  encouragement 
to  Timothy.  And  this  view  is  muoh 
strengthened  by  Bom.  i.  3,  where  the  addi- 
tion, ''according  to  the  flesh,"  as  contrasted 
with  "  the  Son  of  God  according  to  the  Spirit 
of  holiness,"  marks  the  clause,  "  of  the  seed 
of  David,"  as  specially  pointing  to  the 
human  nature  of  Christ.  The  particular 
form  which  the  reference  takes  probably 
arises  from  the  form  to  which  the  apostle 
refen  us  as  "my  gospel."  In  that  creed, 
whioh  was  the  epitome  of  the  gospel  as 
I  in  ached  by  St.  Paul,  there  was  no  doubt 
mention  made  of  Christ's  Davidio  descent. 


Others,  as  Huthcr,  think  the  clause  points 
to  the  Messianic  dignity  of  David.  Others, 
that  it  is  inserted  in  refutation  of  the 
Docetse,  and  to  show  the  reality  of  the  death 
and  resurrection  of  Christ;  or  that  it  is 
meant  to  mark  especially  the  fulfilment  of 
prophecy.  But  the  first  explanation  is  quite 
satisfactory,  and  the  general  purpose  of  the 
reference  to  our  Lord  as  intended  to  en- 
courage Timothy  to  endure  hardness  as  a 
good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  fully  borne 
out  by  the  "  faithful  saying"  in  vers.  11  and 
12,  "  If  we  died  with  him,  we  shall  also  live 
with  him  :  if  we  endure,  we  shall  also  reign 
with  him," 

Ver.  9. — Hardship  for  trouble,  A.V. ;  unto 
for  even- unto,  A.V. ;  as  a  malefactor  for  as 
an  evilrdoer,  A.V. ;  transposition  of  clause, 
unto  bonds.  Wherein  (iv  $) ;  i.e.  in  which 
gospel,  in  the  preaching  of  which.  Buffer 
hardship  (icaiccnrafti) ;  as  ver.  3,  T.B.  Unto 
bonds  (jiexpt  cW/iao).  So  /ie'xpi  Bav&Tov, 
Phil.  ii.  8;  jae'xpis  at/iaros,  Heb.  xii.  4;  but 
most  frequently  of  time,  "  until,"  as  Matt.  xi. 
23 ;  xiii.  30 ;  Acts  x.  30,  etc.  A  malefactor 
(jcaKovpyos) ;  as  Luke  xxiii.  32,  33,  39;  com- 
mon in  classical  Greek.  Bonds  (Bccr/ia-p) ;  as 
Acts  xxvi.  29;  Phil.  i.  7, 13,  etc. ;  Col.  iv.  18. 
So  St.  Paul  calls  himself  Slcr/uor,  in  respect 
of  these  bonds  (Eph.  iii.  1 ;  iv.  1 ;  ch.  i.  8 ; 
Philem.  1,  9).  The  Word  of  God  is  not 
bound.  A  beautiful  reflection  of  an  utterly 
unselfish  mind !  The  thought  of  his  own 
bonds,  likely  soon  to  be  exchanged  for  the 
bonds  of  a  martyr's  death,  awakens  the  com- 
forting thought, "  Though  they  bind  me  with 
an  iron  chain,  they  cannot  bind  the  gospel. 
While  I  am  here,  shut  np  in  prison,  the 
Word  of  God,  preached  by  a  thousand 
tongues,  is  giving  life  and  liberty  to  myriads 
of  my  brethren  of  the  human  race.  The 
tyrant  can  silence  my  voice  and  confine  it 
within  the  walls  of  my  dungeon ;  but  all 
the  while  the  sound  of  the  gospel  is  going 
through  all  the  earth,  its  saving  words  to  the 
ends  of  the  world ;  and  I  therein  rejoice,  yea, 
and  will  rejoice;  and  not  all  the  legions  of 
Borne  can  take  this  joy  from  me." 

Ver.  10. — Sake  for  sokes,  A.V. ;  also  may 
for  may  also,  A.V.  Therefore  (Sib.  toSto)  ; 
for  this  cause.  Some  (Wiesinger,  Alford, 
etc.)  refer  this  to  what  follows,  viz.  "that 
the  elect  may  obtain  the  salvation,"  etc., 
after  the  model  of  1  Tim.  i.  16  and  Philem. 
15,  where  5ii  tovto  clearly  refers  to  the 
words  which  follow.  But  the  interposition 
of  the  words,  Sick  robs  iKKeierois,  is  strongly 
ail  verse  to  this  view.  It  seems,  therefore, 
rather  to  refer  collectively  to  all  the  con- 
siderations whioh  he  had  just  been  urging 
upon  Timothy,  perhaps  especially  the  last, 
of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  which  he  now 
again  enforces  by  his  own  example  of  willing 
suffering  in  order  that  the  elect  may  obtain 


fH.  ii.  1—26.] 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


21 


the  eternal  salvation  which  is  in  Jesus 
Christ — adding,  in  vers.  11  and  12,  the  en- 
couragement to  suffering  derived  from  the 
"  faithful  saying."  I  endure  (jmop.ww) ;  the 
exact  force  of  which  is  seen  in  the  substan- 
tive faro/iovy,  patience,  so  frequently  attri- 
buted to  the  suffering  saints  of  God. 

Ver.  11.— Faithful  is  the  saying  for  it  is  a 
faithful  saying,  A.V. ;  died  for  be  dead,  A.V. 
Died ;  i.e.  in  baptism  (Eom.  vi.  8),  as  denoted 
by  tho  aorist,  But  the  death  with  Christ 
in  baptism  is  conceived  of  as  carrying  with 
it,  as  a  consequence,  the  daily  death  of  which 
St.  Paul  speaks  so  often  (Gal.  ii.  20 ;  1  Cor. 
xv.  31 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  10),  as  well  as  the  death 
to  sin. 

Ver.  12. — Endure  for  sufer,  A.V. ;  shall 
deny  for  deny,  A.V.  and  T.K.  Endure ;  as 
ver.  10.  Mark  the  present  tense  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  aorist  in  awe8a.vofj.ev, 
betokening  patient  continuance  in  suffering. 
If  we  shall  deny  him  (apv-riaiiieBa) ;  comp. 
Matt.  x.  30 ;  Luke  xii.  9 ;  ActB  iii.  13, 14, 
etc 

Ver.  13. — Are  faithless  for  believe  not,  A.V. ; 
he  for  yet  he,  A.V. ;  for  he  for  he,  A.V.  and 
T.K.  Are  faithless  (amo-Tovp.ev) ;  meaning 
the  same  as  the  A.V.  believe  not,  which  is 
everywhere  in  the  New  Testament  the  sense 
of  airurTfta  (Mark  xvi.  11;  Luke  xxiv.  11; 
Rom.  iii.  3,  etc.).  (For  the  contrast  between 
man's  unbelief  and  God's  faitli  fulness,  see 
Bom.  iii.  3.)  He  cannot  deny  himself,  by 
coming  short  of  any  promise  once  mude  by 
him  (comp.  Titus  i.  2;  Heb.  vi.  18;  x.  23, 
etc.).  This  and  the  two  preceding  couplets 
in  vers.  1 1  and  12  make  up  "  the  faithful 
saying  "  spoken  of  in  ver.  11  (see  1  Tim.  i. 
15,  note). 

Ver.  14. — In  the  sight  of  for  before,  A.V. ; 
to  for  but  to,  A.V. ;  them  that  hear  for  the 
hearers,  A.V.  Put  them  in  remembrance 
(uiroMf/wijOTre ;  John  xiv.  26;  Titus  iii.  1; 
2  Pet.  i.  12).  St.  Paul  skilfully  strengthens 
his-  preceding  exhortations  to  Timotny  by 
now  charging  him  to  impress  upon  others — 
referring,  perhaps,  especially  to  "  the  faithful 
men "  spoken  of  in  ver.  2,  but  generally  to 
the  whole  flock  committed  to  him — the  truths 
which  he  had  just  been  urging  upon  Timothy. 
Charging  (Sia/j.apTipop.evos^ ;  as  1  Tim.  v.  21 
and  ch.  iv.  1.  Strive  .  .  .  about  words  (Ao-yo/w 
X«");  only  here  in  the  New  Testament  or 
elsewhere.  But  Koyo/iaxia  occurs  in  1  Tim. 
vi.  4  and  in  late  Greek.  Another  reading 
is  \oyo/i&xe>t  &B  if  addressed  to  Timothy 
himself,  but  Koyofiaxdv  is  supported  by  the 
best  authorities,  and  agrees  best  with  the 
context.  To  no  profit;  literally,  useful  for 
nothing;  serving  no  sood  purpose.  Xpio-tfiov, 
which  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament, is  found  repeatedly  in  the  LXX., 
and  is  very  common  in  classical  Greek, 
where  it  is  followed  by  eh,  ivi,  and  irp6s.  The 


construction  is  "  not  to  strive  abont  words, 
a  thing  useful  for  nothing,  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, tending  to  subvert  those  who  hear 
such  strife."  To  the  subverting  (<M  xara- 
orpotpTJ) ;  elsewhere  only  in  2  Pet.  ii  6,  where 
it  is  used  of  a  material  overthrow,  as  it  is 
in  the  LXX.  of  Gen.  xix.  29,  to  which  St. 
Peter  is  referring.  The  history  of  itB  use 
here  of  a  moral  overthrow,  which  is  not  borne 
out  by  its  classioal  use,  seems  to  be  that  the 
apostle  had  in  his  mind  the  very  common 
metaphor  of  oikoSo/i^,  edification,  as  the 
proper  result  of  speaking  and  teaching,  and 
so  uses  the  contrary  to  "building  up,"  viz. 
an  "overthrowing"  or  "destruction,"  to 
describe  the  effect  of  the  teaching  of  those 
vain  talkers  and  deceivers  (comp.  ver.  18). 

Ver.  15. — Oive  diligence  to  present  for 
study  to  show,  A.V. ;  handling  aright  for 
rightly  dividing,  A.V.  Give  diligence.  The 
A.V.  "study,"  if  we  give  it  its  proper  force, 
as  in  the  Latin  studeo,  studium,  studiosus, 
expresses  the  sense  of  tmoiSaaoi/  exactly. 
Zeal,  earnest  desire,  effort,  and  haste,  are 
all  implied  in  it  (comp.  ch.  iv.  9,  21 ;  Titus 
iii.  12;  2  Pet.  i.  10,  15  ;  iii.  14).  To  present 
thyself  (TropaoTfjffai,  to  present) ;  as  in  Luke 
ii.  22;  Acts  i.  3;  ix.  41.  In  1  Cor.  viii.  8 
it  has  the  sense  of  "to  commend,"  nearly 
the  same  as  S6kiij.ov  vapavTrjo-ai.  The  render- 
ing, to  show  thyself,  of  the  A.V.  is  a  very 
good  one,  and  is  preserved  in  the  B.V.  of 
Acts  i.  3.  Approved  (B6kihov  ;  Bom.  xvi.  10 ; 
1  Cor.  xi.  19,  etc.);  one  that  has  been  tried 
and  tested  and  found  to  be  sterling ;  properly 
of  metals.  This,  with  the  two  following 
qualifications, "  a  workman  that  needeth  not 
to  be  ashamed,"  and  "one  that  rightly 
handles  the  Word  of  truth,"  is  the  character 
which  Timothy  is  exhorted  to  appear  in 
before  God.  The  dative  rtji  @e<f  is  governed 
by  vapao-TTjirai,  not  by  Sum/xov.  A  workman 
(ipydTqv).  How  natural  is  such  a  figure  in 
the  mouth  of  Paul,  who  wrought  at  his  trade 
with  Aquila  and  Priscilla  (Acts  xviii.  3), 
and  was  worlcing  night  and  day  at  Thessa- 
lonica,  that  he  might  earn  his  own  living! 
That  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed  (aveirai- 
a%vvTov) ;  not  found  anywhere  else,  either  in 
the  New  Testament  or  in  the  LXX.,  or  in 
classical  Greek.  Bengel  hits  the  right  force 
of  the  word  when  he  renders  it  "  non  pude- 
factum,"  only  that  by  the  common  use  of 
the  passive  participial  form  (compare  aveiy 
Xvlaffros,  ave^epeiivriTos,  b.va.pidp.i]ros,  etc.),  it 
means  further  "that  cannot  be  put  to  shame." 
The  workman  whose  work  is  skimped  is  put 
to  shame  when,  upon  its  being  tested,  it  is 
found  to  be  bad,  dishonest  work  ;  the  work- 
man whose  work,  like  himself,  is  S6kiimos, 
honest,  conscientious,  good  work,  and  more- 
over sound  and  skilful  work,  never  has  been, 
and  never  can  be,  put  to  shame.  St.  Paul 
shows  how  to  secure  its  being  good  work, 


22 


THE  SECOND  JiPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh.  n.  1—26. 


viz.  by  its  being  done  for  the  eye  of  God. 
Handling  aright  the  Word  of  truth  (ipBoTo- 
fiovvra  tJpc  \6yov  Ttjs  a\ri6elas).  The  verb 
bpOoToptiv  occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament. In  the  LXX.,  in  Prov.  iii.  6,  it 
stands  for  "he  shall  direct  [or,  'make 
straight ']  thy  paths ; "  and  so  in  Prov.  xi. 
5.  The  idea  is  the  same  as  that  in  Heb.  xii. 
13,  "Make  straight  paths  for  your  feet  (rpo- 
Xins  opflis  iroi^craTt)-"  But  this  does  not  at 
all  suit  the  context.  We  must  look,  there- 
fore, at  the  etymology  of  the  word.  'OpBo- 
t6iu(o  must  mean  "  to  cut  straight,"  and,  as 
the  apostle  is  speaking  of  a  good  workman, 
he  must  be  thinking  of  some  work  in  which 
the  workman's  skill  consists  in  cutting 
straight :  why  not  his  own  trade,  in  which 
it  was  all-important  to  cut  the  pieces  straight 
that  were  afterwards  to  be  joined  to  each 
other  (see  bpOoroiios  and  opBoro/ila)  ?  Hence, 
by  an  easy  metaphor,  "  divide  rightly,"  or 
"  handle  rightly,  the  Word  of  truth,"  pre- 
serving the  true  measure  of  the  different 
portions  of  Divine  truth. 

Ver.  16. — Profane  for  profane  and  vain, 
A.V.  j  proceed  further  in  ungodlinest  for  tn- 
create  unto  more  ungodlinest,  A.V.  Shun 
(ireptim-turo,  aB  in  Titus  iii.  9) ;  literally,  step 
out  of  the  way  of,  or  stand  away  from — an 
unusual  use  of  the  word,  found  also  in 
Josephus,  'Ant.  J  ml.,'  iv.  vi.  12.  Profane 
babblings  (see  1  Tim.  iv.  7  J  vi.  20).  They 
will  proceed  (Ttpoic6tyovaiv) ;  see  note  on  irpo- 
K07rij  in  1  Tim.  iv.  15.  Further  in  ungodli- 
ness (cirl  ir\tiov  atresias);  surely  better 
rendered  in  the  A.V.  to  more  ungodliness. 
It  maybe  questioned  whether  "  they  "  refers 
to  the  babblings  or  to  the  false  teachers. 
It  makes  very  good  sense  to  say,  "  Avoid 
these  profane  babblings,  for  they  won't  stop 
there — they  will  grow  into  open  impiety  and 
blasphemy."  But  ver.  17,  as  Alford  observes, 
is  in  favour  of  the  ''teachers"  being  the 
subject  of  "will  proceed;"  but  it  is  not 
conclusive.  If  a  full  stop  be  put  after  "  un- 
godliness," as  in  the  A.V.,  ver.  17  comes  in 
quite  naturally  with  the  further  statement 
that  "their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a  gan- 
grene." 

Ver.  17.— Gangrene  for  canker,  A.V.  Their 
word ;  as  opposed  to  "  the  Word  of  truth  " 
in  ver.  15.  Will  eat  (vojuV  c|«i);  i.e. 
spread,  like  »  gangrene,  which  gradually 
enlarges  its  area,  corrupting  the  flesh  that 
was  sound  before.  So  these  heretical 
opinions  spread  in  the  body  of  the  Church 
which  is  affected  by  them.  No/i^  is  literally 
"  pasture  "  (John  x.  9),  "  grazing  of  flocks," 
and  hence  is  applied  to  fire  (Polybius), 
which  as  it  were  feeds  upon  all  around  it, 
and,  in  medical  language  (Hippocrates), 
to  sores  and  gangrenes,  which  grow  larger 
dud  depasture  the  flesh.  Of  whom;  of  the 
number  of  those  pointed  at  in  the  phrase, 


"their  word."  Hymenaeus;  probably  the 
same  person  as  is  mentioned  as  a  blasphemer 
in  1  Tim.  i.  20.  Philetus.  Nothing  is  known 
of  him. 

Ver.  18. — Men  who  for  who,  A.V.  Have 
erred  (j)o-T6xn<rai>) ',  see  1  Tim.  i.,6  (note) 
and  vi.  21.  In  Matt.  xxii.  29  and  in  Mark 
xii.  24  our  Lord's  word  for  "erring"  is  ir\o- 
vaaOe.  It  is  remarkable  that  it  was  the 
subject  of  the  resurrection  which  was  so 
misunderstood  in  both  cases.  The  heretics 
to  whom  St.  Paul  here  alludes  probably  ex- 
plained away  the  resurrection,  as  the  Gnostics 
in  the  time  of  Irenseus  and  Tertullian  did 
(Huther),  by  spiritualizing  it  in  the  sense 
of  Kom.  vi.  4  ;  Eph.  ii.  1 ;  Col.  ii.  12 ;  iii.  1, 
etc.  It  is  the  usual  way  with  heresy  to 
corrupt  and  destroy  the  gospel,  under  pre- 
tence of  improving  it.  And  there  are  always 
some  weak  brethren  ready  to  be  deceived 
and  misled.  Overthrow  (avarpnoua i) ;  else- 
where in  the  New  Testament  only  in  Titus 
i.  11 ;  but  common  in  LXX.  and  in  classical 
Greek. 

Ver.  19. — Movbeit  for  nevertheless,  A.V. ; 
firm  foundation  of  God  standeth  for  founda- 
tion of  God  standeth  sure,  A.V. ;  this  for  the 
(1611  copy),  A. V.;  the  Lord  for  Christ,  A.V. 
and  T.  R. ;  unrighteousness  for  iniquity,  A.V. 
The  firm  foundation  of  God  standeth;  i.e., 
though  the  faith  of  some  is  thrown  down 
like  a  wall  built  with  untempered  mortar, 
the  foundation  which  God  has  laid  fast  and 
firm  stands  unmoved  and  immovable.  This 
is  equally  true  of  individual  souls  (the  ai 
o-repeal  tyvxat  of  Chrysostom),  and  of  the 
Ghurch,  against  which  the  gates  of  hell  shall 
not  prevail.  Compare  our  Lord's  saying, 
when  the  Pharisees  were  offended  at  him, 
"Every  plant  which  my  heavenly  Father 
hath  not  planted  shall  be  rooted  up  "  (Matt. 
xv.  13);  and  those  in  John  x.  28,  29;  and 
1  John  ii.  19.  Qepttoos  in  classical  Greek 
is  always  an  adjeotive  agreeing'  with  KlSoi 
expressed  or  understood.  In  the  New  Tes- 
tament it  is  used  only  as  a  substantive  (Luke 
vi.  48;  1  Cor.  iii.  10;  1  Tim.  vi.  19,  etc). 
Here  the  word  seems  to  be  employed,  not  so 
much  to  denote  a  foundation  on  which  a 
house  was  to  be  built,  as  to  denote  strength 
and  solidity.  The  elect  of  God  are  like 
foundation-stones,  which  may  not  be  moved. 
Having  this  seal.  Iu  Rev.  xii.  14  the  twelve 
foundation-stones  of  the  new  Jerusalem  were 
each  inscribed  with  the  name  of  an  apostle. 
In  like  manner  there  are  inscriptions,  of  the 
nature  of  seals,  on  God's  strong  foundations, 
showing  their  immutable  condition.  One 
is,  "The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  am 
his,"  taken  verbatim  from  the  LXX.  of 
Numb.  xvi.  5 ;  the  other  is,  "  Let  every  one 

THAT  NAMETH  THE  NAME  OF  THE  LORD  DE- 
PART from  unrighteousness."  This  is  no- 
where to  be  found  in  the  Old  Testament. 


en.  n.  1—26.] 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


23 


The  first  port  of  the  verse  is  indeed  equiva- 
lent to  Kipie  .  .  .  rb  ivofti  aov  wofiafrfiev  in 
Isa.  xxvi.  13,  but  there  is  nothing  to  answer 
to  the  second  part.  The  passages  quoted  by 
commentators  from  Numb.  xvi.  26  and  Isa. 
lii.  11  are  far  too  general  to  indicate  any 
particular  reference.  Possibly  the  motto  is 
one  of  those  "  faithful  sayings  "  before  re- 
ferred to.  The  two  inscriptions,  taken  to- 
gether, show  the  two  sides  of  the  Christian 
standing — God's  election,  and  man's  holiness 
(romp.  1  John  i.  6 ;  Hi.  7,  8). 

Ver.  20. — Now  for  but,  A.  V. ;  unto  for  to, 
A.V.  (twice).  Now  in  a  great  house,  etc. 
"  Now  "  is  hardly  the  right  conjunction.  It 
should  rather  be  "  howbeit."  The  object  of 
the  figure  of  the  various  vessels  in  the 
"  great  house  "  is  to  show  that,  though  every 
one  that  names  the  Name  of  the  Lord  ought 
to  depart  from  unrighteousness,  yet  we  must 
not  be  surprised  if  it  is  not  so,  and  if  there 
are  found  in  the  Church  some  professing 
Christians  whose  practice  is  quite  incon- 
sistent with  their  profession.  Perhaps  even 
the  vilest  members  of  the  visible  Church 
perform  some  useful  function,  howbeit  they 
do  not  mean  it.  With  this  mention  of  the 
vessels,  compare  the  enumeration  in  1  Cor. 
iii.  12.  Of  earth  (bo-rpimva) ;  only  here  and 
2  Cor.  iv.  7,  where  it  is  also  applied  to  a/cdy, 
"  earthen-  vessels ; "  as  it  is  in  the  LXX., 
e.g.  Lev.  vi.  28 ;  and  to  &yyos  (Numb.  v.  17). 
"Oo-Tpamwis  "a  tile."  (For  the  same  figure, 
see  Bom.  ix.  22,  23.) 

Ver.  21. — Meet  for  and  meet,  A.V.  and 
T.B. ;  prepared  for  and  prepared,  A.V. 
Purge  himself  from  these  (iicKuBapri);  stronger 
than  the  simple  KaBipri,  "  thoroughly  purge 
himself,"  as  in  1  Cor.  v.  7  (the  only  other 
place  in  the  New  Testament  where  it  occurs) 
and  as  in  classical  Creek.  It  is  used  also 
by  the  LXX.  in  Judg.  vii.  4,  as  the  render- 
ing of  epx,  to  try  metals.  The  idea,  there- 
fore, seems  to  be  that  of  separation,  aud,  if  so, 
"  from  these  "  may  certainly  mean  from  the 
false  teachers  described  under  the  image  of 
the  vessels  unto  dishonour,  as  usually  ex- 
plained. At  the  same  time,  the  image  is  better 
sustained  if  we  understand  "  from  these  "  to 
mean  the  babblings,  and  ungodliness,  and 
eating  words  of  the  heretics  denounced.  It 
is  hardly  natural  to  imply  that  one  vessel  in 
the  house  will  become  a  golden  vessel  by 
purging  itself  from  the  wooden  aud  earthen 
vessels.  Neither  is  separation  from  the  false 
teachers  the  point  which  St.  Paul  is  here 
pressing,  but  avoidance  of  false  doctrines. 
Meet  for  .  . .  use  (eSxpijoros) ;  only  here  and 
cb.  iv.  11  and  Philem.  11.  Also  Prov.  xxix. 
(xxxi.)  13,  LXX.  Common  in  classical 
G  reek.  The  master  (t^d  SeffirSrri) ;  the 
master  of  the  house,  the  o'Koieffiririis. 

Ver.  22. — But  flee  for  flee  also,  A.V. ;  and 
follow  after  for  but  follow,  A.V. ;   love  for 


charity,  A.V.  Youthful  (i/earrepuctis) ;  of  or 
belonging  to  vt&repoi,  young  men;  "cupi- 
ditates  adolescentise  "  (Tacit., '  Hist.,'  i.  15). 
The  word  only  occurs  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  never  in  the  LXX  ,  but  is  found 
in  Josephus,  who  speaks  of  auBaSela  v(um- 
piicfi,  "youthful  arrogance,"  and  is  common  in 
classical  Greek.  lusts  (iirieufiiaC)  include. 
besides  the  aapKiKaX  4iri0vfilai  of  1  Pet.  ii.  11, 
all  those  ill-regulated  passions  to  which 
yonth  is  peculiarly  liable,  such  as  intem- 
perance, love  of  company,  arrogance,  petu- 
lance, ambition,  love  of  display,  levity, 
vehemence  of  action,  wilfulness,  and  the 
like.  Timothy  at  this  time  was  probably 
under  forty  (see  note  on  1  Tim.  iv.  12, 
and  Ellicott  on  ditto).  Follow  after 
(8/awe);  as  1  Tim.  vi.  11,  where,  as  here,  it  is 
in  contrast  with  tpevye.  Eagerness  in  pur- 
suit, and  difficulty  in  attainment,  seem  to 
be  indicated  by  the  word.  With  them,  etc. 
(jUeri  tuv  imicahoviiiiiBiv,  K.T.A.).  "With 
them  "  may  mean  either  pursue  righteous- 
ness, etc.,  in  partnership  with  all  who  call 
upon  the  Lord;  i.e.  make  the  pursuit  of 
righteousness,  etc.,  your  pursuit,  as  it  is 
that  of  all  who  call  upon  the  Lord;  or  it 
may  be  construed  with  elpfipriv,  so  as  to 
limit  the  exhortation  to  peace  to  those  who 
call  upon  the  Lord,  elpfytiv  iuto.  rav  tirotdkow 
lt.ivav,  "peace  with  those  that  call,"  etc., 
which  is  the  construction  in  Heb.  xii.  14 
and  Eom.  xii.  18.  It  is,  however,  remarkable 
that  in  both  these  passages,  which  are  re- 
ferred to  for  the  grammar,  the  inference 
from  the  doctrine  goes  rather  the  other  way, 
as  they  teach  "  peace  with  all  men."  So 
does  the  balance  of  the  sentence  here. 

Ver.  23.— Ignorant  questionings  for  un- 
learned questions,  A.V. ;  refuse  tat  avoid, 
A.V. ;  gender  for  do  gender,  A.V.  Ignorant 
(aimiSefiTors)  ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, but  not  uncommon  in  the  LXX., 
applied  to  persons,  and  in  classical  Greek. 
Unlearned  is  quite  as  good  a  rendering 
as  ignorant.  It  is  a  term  applied  properly 
to  ill-educated,  ill-disciplined  people,  and 
thence,  by  an  easy  metonymy,  to  the  ques- 
tions such  persons  delight  in.  Questionings 
((riTfoets);  see  1  Tim.  i.  4,  note,  and  Titus 
iii.  9.  Refuse  (irapatrov) ;  "  have  nothing  to 
do  with"  (see  1  Tim.  iv.  7;  Titus  iii.  10). 
Gender  (yevvuo-i).  This  is  the  only  place 
in  the  New  Testament  where  ywv&a  is 
used  in  this  metaphorical  sense,  unless  Gal. 
iv.  24  is  included.  (For  the  sentiment,  see 
1  Tim.  vi.  4,  "  Whereof  cometh  envy,  strife," 
etc.)  Strifes  O^xus) ;  compare  /uc»x<k  vofuicds, 
"fightings  about  the  Law"  (Titus  iii.  9); 
and  "wars  and  fightings"  (Jas.  iv.  1,  2). 
Compare,  too,  the  verb  Koyu/iaxfiv,  in  ver.  14. 
Nothing  can  be  more  emphatic  than  St. 
Paul's  warnings  against  foolish  and  angry 
controversies  about  words,  and  yet  nothing 


24 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


[oh,  n.  1—26. 


has  been  more  neglected  in  the  Church,  in 
all  ages. 

Ver.  24. — The  Lord'*  servant  for  the  ser- 
vant of  the  Lord,  A.V. ;  towards  all  for  unto 
all  men,  A.V. ;  forbearing  for  patient,  A.V. 
The  Lord's  servant  (SovKov  Kup(ou).  So  St. 
Paul  repeatedly  describes  himself  (Rom. 
i.  1 ;  Gal.  i.  10 ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  Titus  i.  1), 
as  do  also  the  apostles  James,  Peter,  Jude, 
and  John  (Jas.  i.  1 ;  2  Pet.  i.  1 ;  Jude  1 ; 
Eev.  i.  1).  The  term  seems,  therefore,  espe- 
cially (though  not  exclusively,  Eph.  vi.  6; 
1  Pet.  ii.  16;  Eev.  xix.  2,  5;  xxii.  3)  to 
describe  those  whose  office  it  is  to  preach 
the  gospel,  either  as  apostles  or  as  ministers 
(Col.  iv.  12).  Must  not  strive  (fiix€,r6ai)  i 
a  conclusive  reason  against  eugaging  in 
those  foolish  and  ignorant  questionings 
which  necessarily  engender  strife.  Gentle 
(fimoti);  only  here  and  in  1  Thess.  ii.  7, 
where  we  see  how  St.  Paul  carried  this  pre- 
cept into  practice.  A  nurse  does  not  meet 
the  child's  waywardness  by  blows  or  threats, 
but  by  gentleness  and  love.  It  is  a  classical 
word.  Apt  to  teaoh  (see  1  Tim.  iii.  2,  note). 
Forbearing  (owel'icaKjj/);  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX., 
and  only  in  late  Greek.  It  means  literally 
"  bearing  up  against  ill  treatment,"  patiently 
enduring  it. 

Ver.  25. — Correcting  them  for  instructing 
those,  A.V. ;  peradoenture  God  for  God  per- 
adventute,  A-V. ;  may  for  will,  A.V. ;  unto 
the  knowledge  for  to  the  acknowledging,  A.V. 
Correcting  (irarHeiocTa),  iraiSfinv  means  pro- 
perly to  "  educate,"  "  bring  up,"  or  "  train  " 
a  child.  Hence  sometimes  the  idea  of 
teaching  predominates,  sometimes  that  of 
correcting  or  chastising.  Here  the  context 
shows  that  the  idea  of  teaching  is  pre- 
dominant— partly  because  the  word  suggests 
something  contrary  to  the  fanlfevroi  fnrv- 
aets  of  ver.  23,  and  partly  because  the  end 
of  this  iratticia  is  to  bring  them  to  the  know- 
ledge of  God's  truth.  The  A.V.  "  instruct- 
ing" is  therefore  the  right  word  here. 
Them  that  oppose  themselves  (tous  opT-iSion-i- 
Seiitvovs)  ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testament 
or  the  LXX. ,  or  in  classical  Greek.  Lite- 
rally, those  who  arrange  or  set  themselves  in 
opposition;  or,  in  one  word,  "opponents," 
referring,  no  doubt,  chiefly  to  such  avnAt- 
yovres  as  are  mentioned  in  the  very  Bimiiar 
passage,  Titus  i.  9  (see  too  Titus  ii.  S).  If  per- 
adventure(^TfoTe).  "  M^to",  in  later  Greek, 
loses  its  aversative  meaning  ('lest  at  any 
time '),  and  is  almost  equivalent  to  eiwore  " 
(Alford,  in  loc.) — equivalent  to  "  in  case  God 
should,"  etc.  Eepentanoe  (jier  avoid) ;  such 
a  change  of  mind  as  shall  lead  them  to 
embrace  the  truth.  Knowledge  (tirr/i/wim); 
almost  invariably  used  of  the  knowledge  of 
God  or  of  God's  truth  (oh.  iii.  7;  Bom. 
i.  28;  Eph.  i.  17;  i».  18;   Col.  i.  9,  10; 


iii.  10;  Titus  i  1 ;  Heb.  x.  26,  etc.).  The 
truth ;  that  truth  which  before  they  set 
themselves  to  oppose,  disputing  against  it 
and  resisting  it.  The  servant  of  the  Lord 
must  never  despair  of  any  one,  never  throw 
an  additional  obstacle  in  any  one's  way  by 
roughness  or  harsh  speech,  and  never  allow 
unkind  feelings  to  be  roused  in  his  own 
breast  by  the  perverseness  or  unreasonable- 
ness of  them  that  oppose  themselves  to  him. 
Ver.  26.— They  for  that  they,  A.V.; 
having  been  taken  captive  by  the  Lord's  ser- 
vant unto  the  will  of  God  for  who  are  taken 
captive  by  him  at  his  will,  A  V.  Having 
been  taken  captive,  etc.  This  is  undoubtedly 
a  difficult  passage.  We  will  first  take  the 
individual  words,  and  then  turn  to  the 
general  meaning.  Becover  themselves 
(avav^aiaiv) ;  only  found  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  never  in  the  LXX.  In 
classical  Greek,  where  it  is,  however,  uncom- 
mon, it  means  literally  "  to  recover  from 
drunkenness,"  hence,  "  to  come  to  one's  self," 
"to  come  to  a  right  mind"  (see  Steph., 
'Thes.').  Snare  (jrayls);  as  1  Tim.  iii.  7; 
vi.  9.  Compare  the  use  of  myiSevw  (Matt, 
xxii.  15).  Having  been  taken  captive 
Qiaypi\ii€voC) ;  only  found  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament in  Luke  v.  10  besides  this  place, 
but  common  in  the  LXX.  and  in  classical 
Greek,  in  the  sense  of  "  to  take  alive,"  of 
prisoners  of  war,  who,  if  not  ransomed, 
always  became  slaves  of  the  conqueror. 
Here,  therefore,  the  meaning  is  "having 
been  captured  and  enslaved."  By  him 
(margin),  (uir'  abrou);  i.e.  of  course  the 
devil,  who  had  just  been  named  as  having 
ensnared  them.  Unto  the  will  of  him 
(margin),  (iicelvov  dc\rifid).  The  difficulty 
of  the  passage  lies  in  the  word  iicelvov, 
which  at  first  sight  seems  to  indicate  a 
different  antecedent  from  the  antecedent  of 
auToO.  This  grammatical  difficulty  has  led 
to  the  strange  rendering  of  the  E.V.,  and  to 
the  wholly  unjustifiable  intrusion  into  the 
text  of  the  words,  "  the  Lord's  servant "  and 
of  "  God,"  producing  altogether  a  sentence 
of  unparalleled  awkwardness  and  grotesque- 
ness,  and  utter  improbability.  But  there  is 
no  real  difficulty  in  referring  iKtlvou  to  the 
same  person  as  outoO  (meaning in  both  cases 
the  devil),  as  in  the  passage  from  Plato'u 
'  Ci atylus,'  cited  by  Huther,  after  De  Wette 
the  cause  of  the  use  of  titeivov  being  that  St. 
Paul  was  at  the  moment  emphasizing  the 
fact  of  these  captives  being  deprived  of  their 
own  will,  and  made  subservient  to  the  will 
of  another.  The  passage  may  be  para- 
phrased :  "  If  peradventure  God  may  give 
them  repentance  unto  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth,  so  as  to  recover  themselves  out  of  the 
snare  of  the  devil,  after  they  had  been  led 
captive  by  him,  so  as  to  be  no  longer  their 
own  masters,  but  obliged  to  do  his  will." 


on.  a.  1—26.] 


THE  SECOND  EttSTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


25 


The  implied  contrast  is  uu  ro  kavTuv  a\\' 
ixslvov  6*\Tifi.a,  just  as  in  the  passage  from 
the  'Crutylus,'  p.  430  (vol.  iv.  p.  306,  Bek. 
ker's  edit.),  iueivov  is  contrasted  with  ywatit6s. 
The  full  passage  is  Aeijoi  airip  tiv  fuv  tvxh 
cKtivov  uKova,  hv  5e  T&XQ)  yvvamAs.  Another 
example  of  the  transition  from  avris  to  ixtivos 
is  in  John  i.  7,  8,  Outos  ^\6ev  els  naprvplav, 
'Iva  papTvp-fi<n]  irepl  rov  (pwrhs,  tvat  vdvres 
■marevffuifft  5i'  avrov'  ouk  fy  efcelvos  to  tpws, 
k.t.A.,  where  there  is  a  contrast  between 
John  as  the  witness  and  Christ  as  the  true 
Light  (compare,  too,  John  iv.  25,  where  ixeivos 
has  the  force  of  "  not  you,  but  he  ").•  For 
the  general  turn  of  phrase,  eomp.  2  Cor. 


x.  5,  "  Bringing  into  captivity  every  thought 
to  the  obedience  of  Christ,"  where  alx/iab-orl- 
(ovres  (see  ch.  iii.  6)  corresponds  to  ifaypn- 
fievot,  and  els  rriv  viraKorjv  rov  Xpiffrov  to 
els  to  iaelvav  OcAy/ia.  It  should  be  noted 
further  that  the  sentence  is  certainly  rather 
a  peculiar  one,  from  the  use  of  such  uncom- 
mon words  as  amvij<pai  and  £uypea,  and  the 
mixture  of  metaphors.  But  the  sense  of 
the  A.V.  is  fully  borne  out.  The  interpre- 
tation preferred  by  Bishop  Ellicott  is  "  they 
may  recover  themselves  from  the  share  of 
the  devil  unto  his  will  (viz.  God's),  having 
(previously)  been  led  captive  by  him  (vi». 
the  devil)." 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — Endurance  the  lot  of  Christ's  ministers.  Continual  endurance  of  evil, 
whether  directed  specially  against  himself,  or  generally  thwarting  the  cause  which 
he  has  most  at  heart,  is  the  ordinary  lot  of  the  minister  of  Jesus  Christ  exercising  his 
ministry  in  an  evil  world.  And  in  order  to  be  ready  to  encounter  this  evil,  actively 
or  passively,  as  the  case  may  require,  a  complete  concentration  of  purpose  on  the 
fulfilment  of  his  ministry  is  absolutely  required.  If  the  heart  is  divided  between  tho 
ministry  of  God's  Word  and  the  enjoyment  of  an  easy  life,  there  will  be  a  constant 
temptation  to  avoid  those  various  forms  of  "hardship"  which  properly  belong  to  the 
campaign  of  the  soldiers  of  Christ.  Troubles  will  be  shirked  rather  than  endured ; 
and  ministerial  duties  will  be  made  to  stand  on  one  side  when  they  interfere  with  the 
inclinations  of  the  moment.  Labour  will  be  evaded  when  the  soul  calls  for  ease.  The 
determined  struggle,  and  the  sturdy  stand  against  evil,  whether  in  his  own  heart 
or  in  the  world  around  him,  will  be  postponed  to  a  more  convenient  season,  while  weak 
compromises  and  sinful  compliances  take  their  place  in  the  immediate  present.  At 
the  same  time,  contradiction  and  opposition,  crooks  and  crosses  of  various  kinds,  untoward 
events,  troubles,  disappointments,  and  difficulties  of  all  sorts,  will  be  met,  not  in  the 
spirit  of  Christian  fortitude,  not  in  the  spirit  of  Christian  meekness  and  patience,  but 
with  petulant  complaints,  or  with  roughness  and  ill  temper,  as  running  against  the 
current  of  the  love  of  ease  in  the  soul.  It  is,  •therefore,  incumbent  upon  the  servant 
of  God  to  be  wholly  given  up  to  the  ministry  which  he  has  received.  He  must 
resolutely  shake  off  the  entanglements  of  the  affairs  of  this  life,  that  he  may  please 
him  who  called  him  to  be  a  soldier.  He  must  feel,  "  My  work  in  life,  my  mission, 
the  dispensation  committed  to  me,  is  to  advance  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  the  world. 
I  am  set  by  my  Lord  and  Master  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel — to  preach  it,  to  vindicate 
it,  to  uphold  it  against  all  gainsayers,  to  adorn  it  with  my  own  life,  to  use  my  utmost 
endeavour  for  its  maintenance,  its  propagation,  its  triumphs.  I  must  no  more  shrink 
from  obloquy,  from  labour,  from  suffering,  from  troubles,  or,  if  need  be,  from  bonds 
and  death,  in  the  fulfilment  of  this  work  and  ministry,  than  the  soldier  shrinks  from 
fatigue  and  exposure,  from  hunger  and  hardship,  from  wounds  and  from  death,  in 
bravely  discharging  the  duties  of  his  warfare."  For  his  encouragement  in  carrying 
out  this  resolve,  he  has  the  example  of  his  Lord  who  suffered  unto  death  and  was 
raised  again  from  the  dead.  He  has  the  example  of  the  apostles  who  endured  troubles 
and  bonds  and  imprisonment,  and  yet  saw  the  gospel  which  they  preached  triumphing 
over  all  opposition.  He  has  the  promises  of  God  assuring  life,  and  a  kingdom,  to  those 
who  suffer  and  die  with  Christ.  And  so,  accepting  endurance  as  the  portion  ojf  Christ's 
servants,  he  pursues  his  ministry  diligently,  joyfully,  and  steadfastly,  throws  his 
whole  strength  into  it,  and  looks  forward  with  an  unwavering  hope  to  obtain  the 
salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  with  eternal  glory. 

Vers.  15 — 26. — The  skilful  workman.    Besides  the  concentration  of  purpose,  and 
the  willingness  to  endure,  which  are  necessary  to  the  faithful  minister  of  Christ,  two 


26  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [Oh.  n,  1—26 

other  qualifications  are  no  less  needed.  The  one  is  skill  in  his  work ;  the  other  is 
gentleness  and  patience  in  dealing  with  those  that  oppose  themselves.  By  skill  in 
his  work  we  mean  both  the  knowing  what  to  avoid  and  shun,  and  the  effective 
handling  of  the  Word  of  truth.  The  minister  of  Christ  who  wastes  his  time,  and  spends 
his  strength  in  foolish  and  unlearned  questions  and  profane  babblings;  who  strives 
about  words  to  no  profit;  who  dabbles  with  philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  after  the 
traditions  of  men,  and  not  after  Christ;  who  intrudes  into  things  which  he  hath  not 
seen,  bringing  in  strange  doctrines  and  carnal  ordinances,  aivl  laying  burdens  upon 
the  consciences  of  his  hearers,  which  God  has  not  laid ; — however  earnest  he  may  be, 
.  and  however  willing  he  may  be  to  endnre  trouble  in  defence  of  his  teaching,  is  not 
a  workman  approved  unto  God,  or  one  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed  of  his  work. 
He  builds  upon  the  foundation  hay  and  stubble,-  instead  of  gold  and  costly  stones. 
But  the  skilful  workman  shuns  this.  He  will  not  allow  himself  to  be  enticed  into 
unprofitable  controversies,  or  fritter  away  his  zeal  upon  things  of  no  moment.  But 
he  bends  all  the  powers  of  his  mind  to  divide  rightly  the  Word  of  truth.  Holy  Scrip- 
ture is  his  model.  What  is  made  much  of  in  Scripture  he  makes  much  of  in  his 
teaching.  He  endeavours  to  preserve  the  relative  proportion  of  doctrines  which  he 
finds  in  the  inspired  pages  ;  to  treat  of  doctrine  and  of  practice  in  the  same  way  that 
they  are  treated  of  in  the  Word — to  speak  as  do  the  oracles  of  God.  His  aim  is  neither 
to  exaggerate  nor  to  attenuate ;  to  speak  soberly,  but  not  to  speak  coldly ;  to  say 
nothing  that  ought  not  to  be  said,  and  to  leave  unsaid  nothing  that  ought  to  be  said. 
Thus  will  he  be  a  workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  "  rightly  dividing  the 
Word  of  truth."  The  other  qualification  is  scarcely  less  important.  "The  Lord's 
servant  rmut  not  strive."  He  must  meet  contradiction,  opposition,  gainsaying,  with 
gentleness,  meekness,  and  love.  The  voice  of  his  Master  was  not  heard  in  the  street, 
lifted  up  in  anger,  or  crying  out  in  wrangling  and  disputes.  He  neither  reviled  his 
revilers  nor  threatened  his  persecutors.  His  servant  must  be  like  him.  Loving, 
forbearing,  patient,  apt  to  teach,  with  a  burning  desire  to  save  his  opponents,  he  must 
go  on  his  work,  despairing  of  none,  wearied  out  by  none,  praying  for  all,  if  God 
peradventure  will  give  them  repentance  to  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth,  and  bring 
them  out  of  the  captivity  of  Bin  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Yer.  1.— Exhortation  to  Timothy  to  be  strong.  The  apostle  founds  upon  the  fore- 
going examples  and  warnings  an  admonition  to  Christian  firmness  and  courage. 

I.  The  need  op  spiritual  strength.  "  Thou  therefore,  my  son,  be  strong  in 
the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  1.  Strength  was  necessary  to  meet  the  difficulties 
and  dangers  of  his  official  life  at  Ephesus.  2.  The  admonition  was  probably  needed 
on  account  of  the  discouragements  which  Timothy  himself  must  have  felt  at  the  conduct 
of  the  Asiatic  deserters.  3.  Strength  is  the  spring  of  happy  activity  in  any  sphere. 
"  The  joy  of  the  Lord  shall  be  your  strength." 

II.  The  source  of  this  spiritual  strength.  "  The  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus." 
It  seems  strange  to  say,  "  Be  strong,"  to  a  spiritually  discouraged  man,  as  it  would 
be  strange  to  say  the  same  thing  to  a  physically  weak  man.  The  injunction  is  reason- 
able, however,  when  we  consider  that  the  source  of  our  renewed  power  is  at  hand. 
The  grace  of  Christ  is  the  inward  power  which  enables  us  "to  will  and  to  do  of  his 
good  pleasure."  "  Be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might "  (Eph.  vi.  10). 
Here  lies  the  true  source  of  our  strength.  The  apostle  declared  he  could  do  all  things 
through  Christ  who  strengthened  him. — T.  C. 

Ver.  2.— Admonition  to  Timothy  respecting  the  appointment  of  faithful  preacher t. 
At  such  a  period  of  unfaithfulness  and  timidity,  it  was  necessary  to  provide  for  the 
continuous  wants  of  the  Church. 

L  Thr  trust  Timothy  is  to  deliver  to  faithful  men.  "  The  things  which 
thou  heardest  from  me  among  many  witnesses."  1.  Timothy  heard  these  things  from 
the  apostle  at  his  ordination,  but  oftener  still  during  his  long  missionary  travels,  when 
he  would  hear  the  apostle  discourse  to  large  and  varied  congregations  of  both  Jews 


oh.  u.  1— 26.J  THE  SECOJTt)  fiPISTLE  TO  tlMOtfHT.  27 

and  Gentiles.  2.  I%e  suJstorace  of  his  preaching  would  be  the  grand  outlines  of  Pauline 
theology,  as  they  are  exhibited  in  the  Epistles,  Jesus  Christ  being  the  central  theme. 
3.  There  i$  nothing  here  to  countenance  the  Roman  idea  of  tradition,  as  if  Timothy 
was  to  transmit  a  body  of  oral  instruction  to  the  latest  generations,  through  successive 
generations  of  teachers.  The  instructions  in  question  are  actually  contained  in  the 
Scriptures,  and  are  no  longer  committed  to  the  doubtful  custody  of  human  memory. 

If.  The  persons  to  whom  the  trust  was  to  be  committed.  "The  same  com- 
mit thou  to  faithful  men,  who  shall  he  able  to  teach  others  also."  1.  Timothy  was  to 
judge  of  their  qualifications.  They  were  not  to  judge  of  their  own  fitness ;  they  were 
not  to  find  their  pla^e  as  teachers  by  self-appointment.  2.  Their  ordination  in  itself 
was  to  be  no  qualification;  for  they  might  possibly  have  been  wholly  destitute  of 
teaching  gifts.  There  is  nothing  in  the  passage  to  justify  the  idea  of  apostolic  suc- 
cession. 3.  Their  qualifications  were  to  be  twofold.  (1)  Faithfulness  ;  for  "  a  steward 
of  the  mysteries  of  God  "  must  be  faithful,  not  betraying  the  charge  committed  to  him, 
decluing  the  whole  counsel  of  God,  and  keeping  back  nothing  that  is  profitable. 
(2)  Teaching  power.  "  Who  shall  be  able  to  teach  others  also."  The  bishop  must  be 
"  apt  to  teach,"  with  a  true  understanding  of  the  Scriptures,  a  gift  of  explication,  and 
a  faculty  of  edifying  speech. — T.  C. 

Vers.  3 — 7. —  The  apostle  bespeaks  from  Timothy  a  copartnership  in  affliction, 
which  would  have  its  due  reward.  I.  The  duty  of  suffering  hardship  in  the 
gospel.  "  Suffer  hardship  with  me,  as  a  good  soldier  of  Christ."  1.  The  minister 
is  a  soldier  of  Christ,  enrolled  by  him,  trained  by  him,  armed  by  him,  supported  by 
him,  as  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  The  ministry  is  a  warfare,  involving,  not  only 
the  "  good  fight  of  faith,"  but  an  increasing  struggle  against  false  teachers.  2.  As  a 
good  soldier,  he  must  be  prepared  to  suffer  hardships.  Like  the  soldier,  he  must  often 
leave  home  and  friends,  expose  himself  to  cold  and  hunger  and  fatigue  ;  he  must  fear- 
lessly meet  the  enemies  of  his  Lord,  and  die,  if  need  be,  in  the  arms  of  victory.  3.  The 
apostle  strengthens  his  admonition  by  an  appeal  to  his  own  hardships  and  sufferings. 
Timothy  took  a  sympathetic  interest  in  the  career  of  the  greatest  of  the  apostles.  The 
tried  veteran  appeals  to  the  young  soldier. 

II.  Encouragements  to  be  deawn  from  the  duties  and  rewards  of  the 
Christian  life.  There  are  three  pictures  presented  to  our  view — one  military,  another 
agonistical,  and  another  agricultural.  1.  The  supreme  unembarrassed  devotion  of  the 
soldier  to  hit  commander.  "  No  one  that  serveth  as  a  soldier  entangleth  himself  with 
the  affairs  of  this  life ;  that  he  may  please  him  who  enrolled  him  to  be  a  soldier."  The 
Roman  soldier  was  isolated  by  express  law  from  all  trades  and  interests  and  agencies 
that  would  interfere  with  the  discipline  of  his  profession.  (1)  The  minister  who  is 
supremely  concerned  about  the  affairs  of  the  next  life  must  stand  free  from  the 
entanglements  of  human  occupation,  so  as  to  devote  his  whole  energies  without  dis- 
traction or  dispersion  of  thought  to  the  business  of  his  Master.  The  apostle  had 
himself  occasionally  to  resort  to  industry  for  his  own  support,  under  circumstances 
of  a  purely  exceptional  nature ;  but  he  demands  an  extrication  of  the  ministry  from  all 
secular  engagements  in  his  elaborate  plea  to  the  Corinthians  (1  Cor.  ix.).  (2)  His 
sole  motive  is  to  please  the  Master  who  enrolled  him  in  this  service.  It  is  not  to 
please  himself,  or  to  please  men  by  seeking  ease,  or  emolument,  or  social  position, 
but  to  please  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  whose  book  of  life  his  name  is  written.  2.  The 
severe  training  and  lawful  striving  of  the  athlete  in  the  games.  "  But  if  any  one  also 
strive  in  the  games,  he  is  cot  crowned  unless  he  have  striven  lawfully."  The  figure 
was  a  familiar  one  to  the  people  of  that  age  who  dwelt  in  cities.  (1)  It  is  implied 
that  ministers,  in  striving  for  the  crown  of  life,  must  strip  off  all  encumbrances  — 
"laying  aside  every  weight" — that  they  may  the  more  easily  press  to  the  mark, 
looking  unto  Jesus,  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith.  (2)  It  implies  that  they 
must  undergo  the  discipline  of  severe  training  to  fit  themselves  for  the  work  of  ministry, 
and  carry  on  their  service  according  to  the  high  laws  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  3.  The 
reward  of  the  labouring  husbandman.  "  The  labouring  husbandman  must  needs  first 
partake  of  the  fruits  of  his  labour."  (1)  This  does  not  mean  that  the  husbandman 
would  be  the  first  to  partake  of  the  iruits,  but  that  he  must  first  labour  before  he 
obtained  the  reward.    There  is  evidently  an  emphasis  on  the  fact  that  a  laborious 


28  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  n.  1— 26. 

husbandman  was  the  most  fully  entitled  to  reward.  (2)  The  minister  of  Christ  mtist 
plough  and  sow  before  he  can  reap ;  he  must  use  all  laborious  diligence  in  his  calling, 
not  discouraged  because  he  does  not  at  once  see  the  fruits  of  his  labour,  for  the  seed 
may  not  sprout  up  quickly,  but  ever  looking  upward  for  the  dews  of  Heaven's  grace 
to  descend  upon  the  wide  field  of  his  ministry. 

III.  The  duty  op  giving  consideration  to  all  these  pacts.  "  Consider  what 
I  say,  and  the  Lord  will  give  thee  understanding  in  all  things."  1.  It  is  the  Lord 
only  who  can  give  us  a  trite  insight  into  both  doctrine  and  duty.  2.  Those  who  enjoy 
this  Divine  help  are  under  the  greatest  obligation  to  use  their  understandings  upon  tht 
highest  of  all  themes. — T.  C. 

Ver.  8. — The  contemplation  of  Christ  an  incentive  to  comfort  and  constancy. 
Timothy  was  to  think  of  Christ's  victory  for  himself  and  for  us  as  a  ground  of 
encouragement. 

I.  Christ  the  perpetual  Object  of  Christian  remembrance.  "Remember 
Jesus  Christ,  risen  from  the  dead,  of  the  seed  of  David,  according  to  my  gospel."  The 
two  great  facts  that  were  to  be  ever  present  to  Timothy's  mind  were  the  Incarnation 
and  the  Resurrection — the  two  miracles  that  stood,  respectively,  at  the  beginning  and 
the  end  of  his  earthly  history.  The  one  would  speak  of  the  hopes  of  the  race  of  man 
springing  from  the  Saviour's  assumption  of  our  nature  in  the  royal  line  of  David; 
the  other  of  the  completeness  of  the  redemption  sealed  by  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead.  Timothy  would  be  encouraged  to  bear  his  trials  by  the  thought  of  Christ's 
victory  over  death. 

II.  Christ  the  perpetual  Theme  op  the  gospel.  "  According  to  my  gospel." 
1.  These  two  facts  are  fundamental  in  the  gospel.  Take  them  away,  there  is  no  hope 
for  man,  no  atonement,  no  blessed  life  hereafter.  2.  These  two  facts  needed  to  be 
taught  in  an  age  when  false  teachers  denied  a  real  incarnation,  saying  that  the  Saviour 
had  a  phantom-body,  and  a  real  resurrection,  because  a  bodily  resurrection  was  not 
to  be  thought  of,  as  matter,  being  essentially  evil,  could  not  attach  to  a  Divine  being. 
— T.  0. 

Vers.  9,  10. —  The  example  of  the  apostle's  own  sufferings — their  spiritual  motive  and 
design.  I.  Timothy  was  to  be  encouraged  by  this  example.  "  Wherein  I  suffer 
hardship  unto  bonds  as  a  malefactor."  He  was  now  a  prisoner  at  Rome,  because  he 
preached  the  gospel  of  Jesus  and  the  resurrection,  and  suffered  as  much  as  if  he  had 
been  a  breaker  of  all  laws,  human  and  Divine. 

II.  The  apostle's  imprisonment  did  not  impose  petters  upon  the  gospel.  "  But 
the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound."  This  was  said  for  the  encouragement  of  Timothy,  who 
may  have  feared  that  the  Roman  imprisonment  would  be  fatal  to  the  progress  of  the 
gospel.  The  apostle,  though  a  prisoner,  had  liberty  to  add  many  pages  to  that  Word 
of  God  which  Nero  could  not  bind,  for  we  have  no  less  than  three  or  four  prison- 
Epistles  in  the  canon  of  inspiration.  The  imprisonment  of  John  Huss  in  a  fortress  on 
the  Rhine  gave  him  leisure  to  write  the  truth  he  could  no  longer  proclaim  with  fiery 
lips  to  the  Bohemians.  The  Wartburg  seclusion  of  a  year  gave  Luther  the  leisure  to 
translate  the  Scriptures  for  his  German  countrymen.  Verily  the  Word  of  God  is  not 
bound. 

III.  The  motive  or  design  of  the  apostle's  bufferings.  "Therefore  I  endure  all 
things  for  the  elect's  sake,  that  they  also  may  obtain  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  with  eternal  glory."  1.  The  zealous  minister  of  Christ  thinks  no  sufferings  too 
great  that  are  needed  for  the  sake  of  Cod's  elect.  The  apostle's  life  was  one  long  career 
of  labour  and  affliction  on  their  behalf.  2.  Ministers  must  labour  for  the  salvation  of 
the  elect.  Human  instrumentality  is  clearly  recognized  and  honoured  in  this  great  work. 
Paul,  Apollos,  and  Cephas  were  "  ministers  by  whom  the  Corinthians  believed."  3. 
There  is  a  salvation  provided  for  the  elect.  They  are  "chosen  in  Christ"  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world  "  unto  holiness  "  (Eph.  i.  4).  4.  The  salvation  is  only  to  b* 
obtained  in  and  through  Jesus  Christ.  6.  It  is  a  salvation  that  finds  its  true  termina- 
tion in  "  eternal  glory." — T.  0. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — A  faithful  saying  for  consolation  and  for  warning.     The  apostle 


oh.  n.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  29 

introduces  the  familiar  formula,  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,"  with  its  rhythmical  signi- 
ficance and  arrangement,  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  what  is  to  follow. 

I.  Familiar  truths  with  a  consolatory  aspect.  "If  we  died  with  him,  we 
shall  also  live  with  him ;  if  we  endure,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him."  There  is 
here  an  expressive  climax,  setting  forth  two  different  aspects  of  the  union  between 
Christ  and  his  people.  1.  Identification  with  Christ  in  his  death.  All  believers  died 
with  him,  as  their  Head  and  Representative,  and  thus  died  to  sin,  through  the  efficacy  of 
his  death,  so  as  to  be  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  his  death ;  and  thus,  being  made 
conformable  to  his  death,  they  have  fellowship  with  him  in  his  sufferings.  2.  But 
identification  with  Christ  in  his  life  follows  as  a  consequence  of  this  identification  in 
death,  because  we  rose  with  him  from  the  dead,  to  be  planted  in  the  likeness  of  his 
resurrection,  that  we  should  walk  in  newness  of  life ;  and  thus,  being  made  alive  unto 
God,  we  liye  a  life  of  holiness  and  sanctification  with  him  (Rom.  vi.  5 — 8).  3.  Identi- 
fication with  Christ  in  endurance  involves  identification  in  his  reigning  glory.  Believers 
who  suffer  shame  and  loss  and  outrage  for  Christ's  sake  shall  reign  with  him  in  glory 
hereafter,  as  they  reign  in  the  kingdom  of  grace  with  him  now ;  for  they  are  "  a  kingdom 
of  priests,"  destined  for  everlasting  glory  (Rev.  i.  6). 

.11.  Familiar  truths  with  a  threatening  aspect.  "If  we  deny  him,  he  also  will 
deny  us;  if  we  believe  not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful ;  for  he  cannot  deny  himself."  1.  The 
denial  of  Christ  is  fatal.  It  is  to  reject  the  only  Saviour.  Some  deny  his  Messiahship ; 
some  deny  his  Divinity ;  some  deny  him  by  their  works,  being  ashamed  of  him  and 
refusing  to  confess  him ;  some  deny  him  by  open  apostasy.  In  all  these  cases  the 
denial  involves  our  Lord's  denial  of  them  (Matt.  vii.  23 ;  x.  23).  2.  Our  unbelief  does 
not  affect  the  essential  faithfulness  of  Christ.  "  If  we  believe  not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful." 
1.  This  does  not  mean  that  he  will  save  us  whether  we  believe  in  him  or  not, ;  for  he  has 
just  said  that  if  we  deny  him  he  will  also  deny  us,  and  faith  is  always  an  essential 
condition  of  salvation.  3.  It  means  that  he  will  abide  faithful  to  his  word  of  threaten- 
ing, as  well  as  to  his  nature  and  perfections ;  for  he  cannot  falsify  his  declarations  that 
"he  that  belieyeth  not  shall  be  condemned"  (Mark  xvi.  16).  He  will  say  to  apostates 
in  the  last  day,  "  I  never  knew  you."  It  would  be  to  deny  himself  to  act  ptherwise. 
He  cannot  consistently  with  his  character  regard  faith  and  unbelief  as  the  same  thing. 
Thus  the  apostle  stimulates  Timothy  to  fidelity  by  an  exhibition  at  once  of  the  bright 
and  the  dark  sides  of  Divine  truth. — T.  C. 

Ver.  14. — An  injunction  to  put  Ephesian  believers  in  remembrance  of  these  truths. 
This  begins  a  new  portion  of  the  Epistle. 

I.  Christian  people  need  to  be  reminded  op  the  truth  in  all  its  aspects. 
"  Put  them  in  remembrance  of  these  things."  1.  We  are  apt  to  forget  the  consolatory 
aspect  of  truth  under  the  pressure  of  present  trial,  as  worldly  men  are  apt  to  forget  its 
threatening,  aspect  under  the  absorbing  world  liness  of  their  lives.  2.  The  Lord  has  made 
provision,  to  "put  us  in  remembrance,"  through  the  ministry  and  through  the  Word  of 
Godi  to  which  we  do  well  to  take  heed  as  to  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place. 

II.  Christian  people  need  to  be  warned  against  ruinous  stripes  about  words. 
"  Solemnly  charging  them  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  not  to  contend  about  words,  to  no 
profit,  to  the  subverting  of  them  that  hear."  1.  There  are  many  religious  controversies 
which  turn  rather  upon  words  than  upon  things,  and  thus  involve  a  waste  of  intellectual 
energy.  These  "  strifes  of  words  "  were  characteristic  of  the  false  teachers  (1  Tim.  vi. 
4).  2.'  There  is  nothing  in  the  passage  to  warrant  a  disregard  for  "  the  form  of  sound 
words,"  for  the  "  wholesome  words  "  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  which  cover  things  as  well  as 
thoughts.  3.  The  apostle  condemns  a  wrangling  about  terms  which  brings  no  advantage 
to  truth,  but  rather  tends  to  the  subversion  of  the  hearers,  misleading  their  judgments 
and  overturning  their  faith.  Simple-minded  people  might  begin  to  doubt  the  truth  of 
a  gospel  about  which  contending  controversialists  were  so  much  at  variance.  Dnsettle- 
ment  of  mind  is  dangerous,  while  it  lays  an  arrest  on  all  earnest  work. — T.  0. 

Ver.  16. — The  qualifications  of  the  gospel-preacher.  "  Give  diligence  to  present  thy- 
self approved  unto  God,  a  workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed." 

I.  He  must  be  laborious.  The  tei  m  "  workman  "  implies  this  fact  as  well  as  the  direct 
admonition  to  "  give  diligence  "  to  his'  ministry.  The  ministry  is  a  good  work,  demanding 


80  THE  SECOND  EPISTLff  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh  n.  1—28. 

industry,  study,  and  care,  and  no  man  is  sufficient  for  it  without  the  grace  of  God. 
It  is  a  comfort  as  well  as  an  honour  to  think  that  ministers  are  "workers  with  God" 
(1  Cor.  iii.  9). 

II.  They  must  seek  God's  approval  in  thbib  wobk.  They  must  not  study  to 
please  men,  else  they  will  not  he  the  servants  of  Christ ;  hut  they  must  approve  them- 
selves to  God,  showing  all  good  fidelity,  and  commend  themselves  to  every  man's 
conscience  in  the  sight  of  Cod. 

III.  They  must  work  with  a  sincerity  and  efficiency  that  will  not  bring 
shame  upon  themselves.  The  negligent, or  unskilled,  or  ignorant  workman  will  pro- 
duce work  which  may  well  put  him  to  shame.  But  the  true  workman  loves  to  produce 
good  and  abiding  work,  such  as  will  stand  the  fiery  test  of  the  last  day  (1  Cor.  iii.  13). 
He  may  often  feel  his  insufficiency ;  hut  he  will  never  he  ashamed  of  the  gospel,  nor  of 
his  still erings,  nor  of  his  faithful  ministrations  of  the  Word. 

IV.  He  must  have  skill  in  the  use  of  the  Word  of  God.  "  Handling  aright  the 
Word  of  truth."  1.  His  one  book,  his  one  weapon,  his  one  interest,  U  the  Divine  Word. 
His  mind,  his  heart,  his  will,  must  he  concentrated  upon  this  Word.  It  most  form  the 
matter  of  his  preaching,  the  mould  of  his  thoughts,  the  inspiration  of  his  imagination. 
2.  He  must  be  able  to  handle  it  aright,  with  due  regard  for  the  authority  of  God,  to  its 
*wn  intrinsic  claims,  and  to  the  welfare  of  the  souls  of  men.  He  must  he  able  to  "  divide 
it  aright,"  distributing  to  habes  in  Christ  and  to  full-grown  men  according  to  their 
capacities  and  their  circumstances ;  he  must  not  pervert  it  or  wrest  it  from  its  true  sense , 
he  must  not  keep  back  anything  that  is  profitable,  but  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God. 
He  must  not  wander  to  the  right  or  left,  but  keep  a  straight  course  forward  in  the  path 
of  truth.— T.O. 

Vers.  16 — 18.— .4  warning  against  vain  babblings,  with  their  tendency  to  heresy  and 
impiety.    "  But  shun  profane  babblings." 

I.  The  duty  of  the  minister  toward  buoh  babblings.  He  is  to  shun  them, 
because  they  are  profitless — a  mere  sound  of  words,  without  solid  meaning ;  great  swelling 
words  of  vanity,  not  only  unprofitable,  but  contrary  to  the  doctrine  that  is  according  to 
godliness. "  The  minister  must  shun,  discourage,  and  repudiate  them  in  the  interest*  of 
truth  and  piety. 

II.  The  tendency  of  such  babblings.  "  They  will  proceed  further  in  ungodliness." 
The  allusion  is  not  to  the  babblings,  hut  to  the  false  teachers.  1.  There  is  a  close  con- 
nection between  lax  doctrine  and  a  loose  life.  The  error  of  the  false  teachers  had  not 
yet  appeared  in  its  fully  developed  form,  hut  its  true  moral  tendency  was  clearly  fore- 
seen from  the  first.  2.  There  is  a  tendency  in  false  teachers  to  carry  their  principles  to 
their  last  logical  results.  They  have  thrown  off  the  checks  of  authority  and  conscience ; 
they  have  been  emboldened,  perhaps,  by  a  temporary  success ;  and  so  they  insist  on 
wresting  the  whole  Scripture  to  their  own  destruction  as  well  as  that  of  others. 

III.  The  effects  of  such  false  teaching.  "  And  their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a 
gangrene."  1.  It  will  spread  further  and  further.  (1)  Through  the  subtlety  of  seducers; 
(2)  through  the  unwary  simplicity  of  Christian  professors ;  (3)  and  as  a  judicial  inflic- 
tion upon  such  as,  possessing  no  love  of  the  truth,  receive  delusion  to  believe  a  lie. 
2.  It  will  have  corrupting  and  destroying  effects.  The  strong  figure  of  the  apostle  seta 
the  matter  in  an  impressive  light. 

IV.  The  ring-leaders  of  heresy.  "Of  whom  isHymenaeus  and  Philetus;  men  who 
concerning  the  truth  have  erred,  saying  that  the  resurrection  is  past  already,  and  over- 
throw the  faith  of  some."  1.  The  leading  apostles  of  error.  (1)  It  is  a  solemn  thought 
that  the  Spirit  of  inspiration  has  given  an  immortality  of  infamy  to  these  two  names. 
If  they  were  ambitious  of  notoriety,  they  have  gained  it  far  beyond  the  extent  of  their 
expectations.  (2)  Hymenasus  is  evidently  the  person  referred  to  already  (1  Tim.  i.  26), 
whom  the  apostle  had  "delivered  unto  Satan ;"  hut  he  seems  to  have  profited  in  no 
way  in  the  interval  by  the  severe  discipline  applied  to  him.  Of  Philetus  nothing  is 
known.  It  is  a  Greek  name,  but  it  occurs  in  Roman  inscriptions.  2.  The  nature  of 
their  error.  Their  principal  error,  which  is  mentioned,  was  a  denial  of  the  resurrection 
in  its  true  sense.  (1)  They  probably  perverted  the  words  of  the  apostle  himself  when 
he  spoke  of  a  spiritual  resurrection  (Rom.  vi.  4,  etc. ;  Col.  ii.  12),  of  which  they  could 
say  truly  enough  that  "  it  was  past  already;"  but  they  denied  a  resurrection  of  the  body, 


oh.  ii.  1—26.}  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  SI 

which  was  just  as  expressly  taught  by  the  same  apostle.  (2)  The  error  had  its  origin 
in  the  Greek  philosophy,  which  regarded  matter  as  essentially  evil,  and  as  therefore 
unworthy  to  share  in  the  ultimate  gloriBcation  of  the  redeemed.  3.  The  injurious  effects 
of  their  error.  "  And  overthrow  the  faith  of  some."  (1)  The  doctrine  of  the  resurrection 
is  founded  on  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  which  is  the  foundation-doctrine  of  Christianity. 
Those  errorists  seem  to  have  touched  with  unholy  hands  this  corner-stone  of  Christian 
hope.  (2)  The  influence  of  the  errorists,  evil  as  it  was,  was  only  partial.  It  only 
affected  "  some ; "  but  even  this  thought  was  a  sad  one  to  the  apostle.— T.  C. 

Ver.  19. — The  comfort  amidst  abounding  apostasy.  Though  some  turn  away  from 
the  truth,  God's  Church  stands  firm  in  its  grand  integrity. 

I.  The  Church  of  God  in  its  ever-during  stability.  "Howbeit  the  firm 
foundation  of  God  standeth."  1.  The  Church  is  very  properly  called  a  foundation, 
because  it  is  placed  in  the  world  as  the  platform  on  which  the  whole  future  household 
of  faith  is  to  rest  (Eph.  ii.  20).  Christ  is  the  Corner-stone  of  the  foundation.  2.  It 
stands  firm  from  age  to  age  on  its  unshaken  foundation,  notwithstanding  all  the 
efforts  made  to  destroy  it.  It  was  to  be  the  constant  witness  to  the  truth  amidst  all 
error  and  apostasy. 

II.  The  Church  of  God  with  its  twofold  inscription.  "  Having  this  seal,  The 
Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his ;  and,  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
depart  from  unrighteousness."  It  was  an  ancient  custom  to  engrave  upon  a  building 
an  inscription  which  told  of  its  origin  and  purpose.  The  names  of  the  apostles  were 
written  in  the  twelve  foundations  of  the  apocalyptic  city  of  God  (Rev.  xxi.  14).  The 
Church  has  a  seal  with  a  double  inscription,  which  displays  the  true  character  of  the 
edifice.  1.  One  inscription  is  the  legend  of  comfort  and  hope.  "  The  Lord  knoweth 
them  that  are  his."  What  a  comfort  there  is  in  the  thought  of  this  individualizing 
knowledge !  What  a  hope  there  is  in  the  thought  that  the  saints  are  God's  "  purchased 
possession "\  2.  Another  inscription  is  the  legend  of  duty.  "Let  every  one  that 
nameth  the  Name  of  the  Lord  depart  from  unrighteousness."  There  is  no  place  for 
unrighteousness  in  the  Church  of  God.  Therefore  believers  must  separate  themselves 
from  all  eviL— T.  C. 

Vers.  20,  21. — The  Church  in  its  visible  aspect  before  the  world.  The  apostle  seems 
to  be  answering  the  question  why  there  are  such  unworthy  members  in  the  visible 
communion  of  the  Church. 

I.  The  Church  is  like  a  great  house  with  various  sorts  of  vessels.  "  Now  in 
a  great  house  there  are  not  only  vessels  of  gold  and  silver,  but  also  of  wood  and  of  earth ; 
and  some  unto  honour,  and  some  unto  dishonour."  1.  It  is  contended  that  the  great 
house  here  is  not  the  Church,  but  Christendom,  that  is,  all  that  calls  itself  Christian,  because 
the  Church  consists  only  of  saints.  2.  It  is  the  Church,  however,  of  which  the  apostle 
is  speaking  in  the  context,  and  not  the  world ;  but  .whereas  in  the  last  verse  it  was 
the  invisible  Church,  it  is  here  the  Church  visible — that  is,  the  Church  in  the  aspect  it 
presents  to  the  world.  The  distinction  between  the  Church  visible  and  the  Church 
invisible  is  clearly  recognized  in  Scripture.  The  one  represents  the  Church  as  it  is 
seen  by  God ;  the  other,  as  it  is  seen  by  man.  The  one  represents  the  Church  as  to  its 
true  idea  and  constitution;  the  other,  as  it  has  appeared  in  the  worM  as  a  mixed  com- 
munion. The  Church  visible  appears  like  a  great  house  with  two  distinct  kinds  of 
vessels — some  very  precious  and  durable,  others  comparatively  valueless,  easily  and  soon 
broken.  There  are  vessels  for  honour  and  vessels  for  dishonour.  The  idea  is  much  the 
same  as  that  of  the  drag-net  in  the  parable  (Matt.  xiii.  47 — 49). 

II.  The  duty  of  separation  from  the  vessels  of  dishonour.  "  If  a  man  there- 
fore purge  himself  from  these,  he  shall  he  a  vessel  unto  honour,  sanctified,  meet  for  the 
Master's  use,  prepared  unto  every  good  work."  The  thought  of  separation  from  the 
false  teachers  was,  no  doubt,  uppermost  in  the  apostle's  mind,  but  it  has  a  wider  scope. 
1.  It  is  our  duty  to  withdraw  from  error.  This  withdrawal  may  be  effected  in  several 
ways.  The  apostle  says  to  Timothy,  "From  such  withdraw  thyself"  (1  Tim.  vi.  5); 
he  says  to  Titus,  "  A  man  that  is  a  heretic  avoid  "  (Titus  iii.  10).  The  separation 
may  take  place  by  the  heretic  being  cast  out  of  communion ;  or  avoided  in  the  inter- 
course of  life;  or,  in  the  last  resort,  the  believer  may  witliclaw  himself  from  the  society 


32  THE  SECOltft)  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  ii.  1—26. 

which  fails  to  cast  him  out.  Or  the  believer  may  be  called  upon  to  "purge  himself" — 
terms  which  seem  to  imply  personal  defilement  in  a  separate  walk  of  holiness  and 
I  urity.  He  must  purge  himself  from  heresy  and  impurity.  2.  Tjie  right  dedication 
and  destination  of  the  vessel  for  honour.  (1)  He  will  become  "sanctified,"  in  its  double 
sense — consecrated  to  God  and  walking  in  the  purity  of  a  separated  life.  (2)  He 
will  be  serviceable  to  the  Master  of  the  house  in  all  the  various  ministries  to  which 
he  may  be  called.  (3)  He  will  be  prepared  unto  every  a;ood  work.  Unlike  the 
unwise  and  the  evil  man,  who  is  to  all  good  works  reprobate,  he  is,  as  created  in 
Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works,  enabled  to  run  in  the  way  of  the  Lord's  command- 
ments.—T.  0. 

Ver.  22. —  The  importance  of  a  pure  and  circumspect  walk.  I.  Negatively.  "Flee 
youthful  lusts."  1.  Tliese  refer  to  those  passions  and  desires  which  are  so  tempting  to 
youth.  They  "war  against  the  soul,"  and  are  most  inimical  to  holiness  and  salvation. 
The  indulgence  of  corrupt  passions  would  also  lead  to  serious  scandals.  2.  They  refer 
likewise  to  those  vehement  and  headstrong  passions  which  often  lead  young  men  into 
foolish  courses,  or  to  the  rage  for  novelty  and  the  egotistic  vanity  which  so  often  lead  to 
religious  errors  like  those  of  Hymenaus  and  Philetus. 

II.  Positively.  "  Follow  after  righteousness,  love,  peace,  with  them  that  call  on 
the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart."  1.  Righteousness.  Fidelity  in  all  human  relations 
especially,  but  a  right  manner  of  life.  Believers  are :  (1)  To  yield  their  members  as  instru- 
ments of  righteousness  (Rom.  vi.  13).  (2)  To  be  armed  with  righteousness  as  a  breast- 
plate (Eph.  vi.  14).  (3)  Righteousness  tends  to  life  (Prov.  xi.  19).  (4)  It  brings  its  own 
reward  (Prov.  xi.  18).  (5)  Its  effect  is  quietness  and  assurance  for  ever  (Isa.  xxxii. 
17).  2.  Love.  Love  to  all  men.  (1)  It  is  of  God  (1  John  iv.  7).  (2)  It  is  taught  by 
God  (1  Thess.  iv.  9).  (3)  It  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22).  (4)  It  ought  to  be 
an  active  and  abiding  principle  (Heb.  vi.  10;  1  Cor.  viii.  13).  (5)  The  greatest  sacri- 
fices are  nothing  without  it  (1  Cor.  xiii.  3).  3.  Peace.  (1)  Its  nature  and  advantages 
(a)  It  springs  from  heavenly  wisdom  (Jas.  iii.  17).  (6)  It  is  necessary  to  the  enjoy- 
ment of  life  (1  Pet.  iii.  10,  11).  (c)  There  is  a  blessing  for  the  peacemaker  (Matt.  v. 
9).  (2)  Its  objects.  "  Them  that  call  upon  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart."  That  is, 
believers.  We  are  to  endeavour  to  have  peace  with  all  men  (Bom.  xii.  18).  But  we 
are  to  seek  the  peace  of  the  Church  (Ps.  cxxii.  6 — 8)— of  those  who  worship  Christ  with 
all  purity  of  heart,  as  contrasted  with  those  "  whose  mind  and  conscience  are  defiled  " 
(Titus  i.  15).— T.  0. 

Ver.  23. — A  warning  against  contentious  questionings.  I.  The  ministeb  of  Christ 
must  avoid  inapt  discussions.  "  But  foolish  and  ignorant  questions  avoid."  The 
false  teachers  wasted  their  energies  upon  questions  of  this  class,  because  they  had  no 
just  idea  of  the  relative  importance  of  truth,  taking  small  things  for  great  and  great 
things  for  small.  The  matters  in  dispute  were  useless  and  unedifying,  being  foreign  to 
the  true  wisdom  of  the  gospel.  Four  times  in  these  two  Epistles  does  the  apostle 
repeat  this  grave  warning. 

II.  The  tendency  of  such  discussions.  "  Knowing  that  they  do  gender  strifes." 
They  break  the  peace  of  Churches,  alienate  the  hearts  of  ministers,  and  impede  tho 
progress  of  the  gospel. — T.  C. 

Vers.  24: — 26. — The  importance  of  ministers  cultivating  a  peaceful  and  forbearing 
spirit.  I.  The  true  temper  of  the  minister  of  Christ.  1.  Negatively.  "  The  servant 
of  the  Lord  must  not  strive."  This  does  not  mean  that  (1)  he  is  not  to  contend  earnestly 
for  the  faith  (Jude  4);  but  (2)  that  he  is  not  to  fight  about  trifles,  nor  to  argue  with 
acerbity  of  temper,  nor  for  mere  victory.  The  "bond  of  peace  "  must  be  maintained  in 
controversy.  2.  Positively.  (1)  "But  be  gentle  unto  all  men;"  cultivating  a  spirit ol 
habitual  conciliation,  while  using  arguments  of  the  greatest  cogency.  (2)  "Apt  to 
teach ; "  showing  capacity  and  d  sposition  to  instruct  the  ignorant  and  the  obstinate. 
(3)  "  Patient ; "  bearing  with  the  infirmities  of  weak  brethren,  with  the  irritating  opposi- 
tions of  adversaries,  and  with  the  reproaches  of  evil  men  generally.  (4)  "  In  meekness 
instructing  those  that  oppose  themselves  "  to  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  thwarting  or 
perverting  the  gospel.     The  minister  must  be  ready  to  instruct  such  persons  in  a  meek 


ch.  H.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHT.  83 

and  humble  spirit,  because  they  may  be  ignorant,  or  ill-informed,  or  deeply  prejudiced 
from  the  circumstances  of  their  early  training. 

11.  The  benefits  that  will  accrue  from  such  methods  of  instruction.  *  If  God 
peradventure  will  give  them  repentance  unto  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  they  may 
recover  themselves  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  having  been  taken  captive  by  the 
Lord's  servant  unto  the  will  of  God."  1.  A  meek  and  gentle  address  may  bring  such 
errorists  to  repent  of  their  sin  and  accept  the  true  doctrine  of  faith.  It  is  possible  to 
repel  thom  by  our  harsh  reproaches.  We  ought  rather  to  show  them  the  truth  without 
passion,  and  enforce  it  with  all  the  kindly  urgency  of  true  affection.  The  necessity  of 
repentance  in  such  a  case  marks  the  essentially  sinful  character  of  opposition  to  the 
truth.  2.  The  servant  of  the  Lord  may  be  the  means  of  recovering  out  of  error  as  well 
as  sin.  (1)  Error  is  the  devil's  snare  as  well  as  sin,  for  it  leads  downwards  to  sin.  It 
acts  like  a  stupefying  drink.  (2)  Some  errorists  awake  out  of  their  intellectual  intoxi- 
cation, if  they  are  wisely  dealt  with,  and  open  their  eyes  to  the  blessed  truth  of  the 
gospel.  (3)  The  will  of  God  once  established  in  such  hearts,  as  the  guiding  principle  of 
life,  completes  the  recovery  from  error. — T.  0. 

Ver.  3. — Culture  of  strength.  "Endure  hardness."  We  are  all  endangered  by  ease 
and  self-indulgence.  The  soft  south  wind  of  worldly  comfort  enfeebles  us.  Dangerous, 
for  to  the  soldier  nerveless  strength  is  death ;  and  the  great  campaign  requires  on  our 
part  energy  and  courage  all  through. 

I.  It  is  hard  to  subjugate  the  present  world.  In  the  fourth  verse  Paul  speaks 
of  the  "  affairs  of  this  life,"  in  which  Timothy,  like  the  rest  of  us,  was  in  danger  of  "  being 
entangled;"  and  unquestionably,  apart  from  evil,  the-  innocent  side  of  the  present  life 
is  most  attractive  to  us,  in  all  its  forms  of  pleasure-seeking  and  outward  prosperity  and 
honour. 

II.  It  is  hard  to  suffer  reproach  and  shame.  How  hard  only  those  know  who 
have  felt  the  constant  irritant  of  a  relentless  peisecution  for  righteousness'  sake.  "I 
suffer  trouble,"  says  l'aul,  "  as  an  evil-doer."  And  this  was  the  great  trial  of  the  early 
Christians— not  merely  "  bonds  and  imprisonments,  but  the  calumnies  which  made  them 
the  scorn  of  men.  The  grace  of  Goil  can  sustain  us  in  all  our  tribulations  ;  but  it 
requires  "  hardness  "  to  "  endure  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible"  when  the  character  is 
subjected  to  human  scorn  and  hatred. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  21. — Fitness  for  service.  "  Meet  for  the  Master's  use."  Christ  is  our  Lord  as 
well  as  our  Saviour.  We  are  under  a  Master,  and  must  bring  our  thought  in  captivity 
unto  him. 

I.  Meetness.  For  in  man  there  is  a  power  that  grows  by  culture.  Not  so  with  the 
inferior  animals.  Take  the  bee :  the  first  cell  it  makes  is  as  geometrically  perfect  as  the 
last.  So  take  the  bird :  the  first  nest  it  makes  is  as  soft  and  complete  as  the  last.  But 
man  can  grow  in  meetness.  Self-discipline  meetens.  Sorrow  meetens.  Suffering 
u  eetens. 

II.  Ministrations.  Use.  This  characterizes  all  the  works  of  God.  The  river  is  not 
only  a  silver  thread  running  through  the  landscape;  it  brings  freshness  and  verdure, 
and  the  cattle  come  to  the  banks  to  drink,  and  there  is  emerald  verdure  by  the  river- 
side. Ships,  too,  float  on  its  waters.  We  are  to  be  of  use  to  ihe  Master.  He  deigns  to 
use  us.  -"  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."  Many  in  this  age  dislike  the  word 
"Master ;"  but  we  are  always  under  some  master,  consciously  or  unconsciously.  W« 
serve  God  or  Mammon,  and  we  cannot  serve  both.  We  are  to  attend  to  spiritual  means 
of  grace,  and  to  seek  out  modes  of  service,  so  as  to  be  of  use  to  the  Master. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 13. — Hardship  in  connection  with  the  Christian  ministry.  I.  Preliminary 
exhortation.  1.  As  to  personal  strength.  "Thou  therefore,  my  child,  be  strengthened 
in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  As  the  apostle's  power  of  working  was  already 
much  crippled  by  close  imprisonment,  he  naturally  felt  anxious  regarding  the  future  of 
Christ's  cause.  In  calling  Timothy  his  son,  he  does  not  formally  name  him  as  his 
successor.  At  the  same  time,  he  may  be  regarded  as  looking  to  him  as  one  like-minded, 
who  had  youth  on  his  side,  to  continue  the  work  which  he  felt  was  parsing  out  of  his 
hands.    While  Phygelus  and  Hermogenes  were  untrue  to  him,  ancLOnesiphorus  was 

II.  TIMOTHY. 


84  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  •         [oh.  il  ]— 26. 

dead,  Timothy  must  stand  forward.  For  this  he  would  require  a  liberal  supply  of 
strength.  With  paternal  anxiety,  then,  he  points  him  to  the  great  Source  of  strength, 
viz.  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  and  obtained  by  him  for  us,  or  the  lordly  power 
to  bless  without  respect  to  the  merit  of  the  recipient.  In  John  i.  14  he  is  said  to  be 
full  of  grace,  and,  in  the  sixteenth  verse  following,  it  is  said  that  it  is  out  of  his  fulness 
that  all  his  people  receive.  As  the  Fountain,  he  supplies  all  that  depend  upon  him 
with  all  that  is  necessary  for  the  proper  discharge  of  their  duties.  To  whom  else,  then, 
could  he  point  Timothy?  In  spiritual  work  there  is  a  giving-out  of  strength,  for 
which  there  is  needed  renewal.  There  are  also  occasions  for  which  there  are  needed 
special  supplies  of  strength.  At  all  times  there  is  a  tendency  to  a  culpable  and 
enfeebling  supineness,  against  which  there  is  needed  a  gracious  supply.  Let  the 
Christian  minister,  then,  find  his  empowering  for  his  work  in  the  grace  that  is  centred 
in  Christ.  2.  As  to  the  regular  transmission  of  the  truth.  "  And  the  things  which 
thou  hast  heard  from  me  among  many  witnesses,  the  same  commit  thou  to  faithful 
men,  who  shall  be  able  to  teach  others  also."  Paul  himself  heard  directly  from  Christ, 
who  is  as  full  of  truth  as  of  grace.  But  he  points  to  a  definite  and  solemn  occasion, 
when  he  was  the  speaker  and  Timothy  the  hearer,  viz.  the  occasion,  repeatedly  referred 
to,  of  Timothy's  ordination.  What  he  heard  then  was  by  the  mediation  of  many 
witnesses,  i.e.  the  presbyters  who  were  present  at  his  ordination,  and  laid  their  hands 
on  him,  and  who,  by  the  part  they  took  in  it,  gave  their  attestation  to  the  charge. 
What  Timothy  received  then  has  repeatedly  been  called  his  deposit,  or  talent  of  the 
catholic  faith.  This,  in  turn,  he  was  to  commit  to  trusty  men,  i.e.  men  who  could  be 
entrusted  with  the  keeping  of  the  deposit.  They,  in  their  turn,  were  to  teach  others, 
so  that  they  also  could  be  entrusted  with  the  deposit.  Thus  there  was  to  be  a  regular 
succession  of  .teachers  for  the  handing-down  of  the  truth.  There  is  a  place  assigned  to 
tradition  here ;  but,  as  it  is  made  to  depend  on  the  trustworthiness  of  each  individual 
in  the  chain  of  succession,  we  must  think  of  a  tradition  that  is  to  be  tested  by  Scripture. 
At  the  same  time,  there  is  a  handing-down  of  Scripture  truth  with  traditional  associa- 
tions embodying  the  Church's  thinking  out  of  the  truth,  and,  if  this  is  what  it  ought 
to  be,  then  it  is  important  that  it  should  be  handed  down  by  means  of  a  regular 
succession  of  teachers.  All  encouragement,  then,  is  to  be  given  to  the  proper  education 
of  young  men  for  the  ministry ;  and  yet  a  theological  institution  will  fail  of  its  end 
unless  there  is  the  proper  keeping  up  of  the  Church's  life,  which  is  needed  to  influence 
the  right  class  of  young  men  to  devote  themselves  to  the  ministry. 

II.  The  Christian  minister  is  to  be  prepared  for  hardship.  Three  figures 
suggestive  of  hard  service.  1.  The  soldier.  "Suffer  hardship  with  me,  as  a  gooc 
soldier  of  Christ  Jesus.  No  soldier  on  service  entangleth  himself  in  the  affairs  of  this 
life;  that  he  may  please  him  who  enrolled  him  as  a  soldier."  The  soldier, above  others, 
has  to  have  his  mind  made  up  to  experiencing  hardship.  He  has  to  leave  home  and 
friends.  He  may  have  to  encounter  hardships  on  the  march.  He  has  especially  to  face 
the  hardships  and  dangers  of  the  battle-field,  "  seeking  the  bubble  reputation,  even  in 
the  cannon's  mouth."  So  the  Christian  minister  is,  in  a  special  manner,  a  soldier  of 
Christ  Jesus.  He  is  one  whom  Christ  has  in  a  solemn  way  bound  to  himself.  He 
has  to  fight  under  Christ  and  for  Christ  in  an  unfriendly  world ;  and  he  need  not  be 
surprised  if  he  is  called  upon  to  experience  the  hardships  of  a  soldier.  Let  Timothy, 
then,  willingly,  nobly,  take  his  part  along  with  Paul  and  other  soldiers  of  Christ.  But 
the  apostle  draws  attention  to  a  special  condition  of  excellence  in  a  soldier.  He  does 
not  entangle  himself  in  the  affairs  and  businesses  of  this  life.  In  choosing  to  be 
enrolled  under  a  commander,  he  leaves  his  former  employment  behind.  He  is  hence- 
forth at  the  will  of  his  commander  for  whatever  hard  service  he  may  need  him. 
Especially  does  this  condition  apply  to  a  soldier  on  service.  Before  entering  on  a 
campaign,  he  would  need  even  to  have  family  affairs  arranged,  that  he  may  give  himself 
up  undistractedly  to  the  service  required  of  him.  Only  thus  can  he  expect  to  approve 
himself  to  his  commander.  The  Christian  minister  is  in  the  same  way  to  be  unen- 
tangled  with  businesses,  which  he  leaves  to  others.  Paul  was  not  always  able  to  free 
himself  from  the  necessity  of  making  his  own  bread  ;  but  it  is  advisable  that  a  minister 
should  be  left  free  in  this  respect,  and  it  is  wrong  for  him  unnecessarily  to  divide  his 
energies,  or  to  mix  himself  up  with  what  can  be  better  done  by  others.  For  it  is  only 
when  his  mind  is  thoroughly  undistracted  and  absorbed  in  service  that  he  can  approve 


«h.  n.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY:  85 

himself  to  the  great  Commander.  2.  The  athlete.  "  And  if  also  a  man  contend  in  the 
games,  he  is  not  crowned,  except  he  have  contended  lawfully."  The  Greeks  were 
great  admirers  of  physical  perfection.  Even  their  men  of  genius,  like  Plato,  engaged 
in  athletic  contests  on  public  occasions.  Great  encouragement  was  given  to  the 
athletio  art.  The  successful  athlete  was  crowned  under  very  inspiriting  circumstances. 
There  were  many  subordinate  rules  to  be  observed  by  the  athlete,  but  the  great  rule 
was  to  go  through  a  course  of  very  hard  preparation.  Only  thus  could  he  expect  to  be 
crowned  when  the  occasion  of  the  games  came  round.  The  minister  is,  in  the  same 
way,  to  aim  at  efficiency  in  his  art.  He  has  many  examples  of  this  placed  before  him. 
And  there  is  great  encouragement  given  by  that  royal  Personage  who  is  to  preside  on 
the  occasion  of  award.  The  successful  minister  is  to  be  crowned.  There  are  many 
subordinate  rules  to  be  observed  by  him,  but  the  great  rule  is  that  he  is  to  subject 
bimself  to  severe  discipline.  Only  thus  can  he  expect  to  have  a  fadeless  crown  for 
efficiency  in  the  ministerial  art.  8.  2*e  husbandman.  "The  husbandman  that 
laboureth  must  be  the  first  to  partake  of  the  fruits."  The  husbandman  has  to  extract 
bread  from  the  unwilling  ground;  and  he  may  have  to  do  this  under  un favouring 
conditions  of  weather.  He  has  need,  then,  for  hard  and  persistent  labour,  especially  in 
the  season  of  spring.  In  the  sweat  of  his  face  he  has  to  prepare  the  soil  and  put 
in  the  seed.  It  is  only  the  husbandman  that  thus  exerts  himself  that  comes  to  the 
front  in  the  time  of  fruit.  He  is  eating  of  the  new  corn,  when  the  husbandman  who 
has  not  exerted  himself  is  far  behind.  In  the  same  way  the  minister  has  to  extract 
good  products  from  unwilling  hearts,  and  not  always  under  favouring  conditions  from 
without.  Hard  work  is  needed  to  prepare  the  soil  and  to  put  in  the  seed.  If  he 
engages  in  hard  work,  he  has  the  prospect  of  the  fanner,  viz.  the  fruit  of  his  own 
labour.  He  will  have  joy  in  those  for  whom  he  has  laboured — partly  in  this  world, 
chiefly  in  the  next  world.  It  is  the  minister  who  does  not  grudge  hard  service  that 
comes  to  the  front  in  the  enjoyment  of  fruit,  while  he  who  gives  grudging  service  lags 
behind  in  the  reward.  Appended  call  to  attention.  "  Consider  what  I  say ;  for  the 
Lord  shall  give  thee  understanding  in  all  things."  What  Paul  said  was  easily  under- 
stood ;  but  it  needed  to  be  thoroughly  weighed  so  as  to  become  spiritual  strengthening 
to  Timothy.  It  plainly  meant  that  he  was  to  set  himself  to  hard  work,  and  that  he 
need  not  expect  easy  outward  conditions  of  working ;  when  the  mind  is  made  up  to  it, 
the  hardest  work  is  often  felt  to  be  light.  This  was  a  lesson  which  he  wished  Timothy 
to  learn,  with  the  Lord's  promised  and  all-sufficient  assistance. 

III.  Encouragements  under  hardship.  1.  Example  of  Christ.  (1)  Victorious 
aspect  of  Christ's  resurrection.  "  Remember  Jesus  Christ,  risen  from  the  dead."  Paul's 
principal  encouragement  is  to  go  back  in  memory  upon  the  historical  Jesus  at  the 
victorious  point  of  his  history.  He  seemed  to  be  utterly  defeated  in  death.  His  body 
was  laid  in  the  tomb,  a  stone  rolled  against  the  mouth  of  it  and  sealed,  and  a  watch 
set;  and  the  rulers  thought  they  had  conquered.  Could  he  be  released  from  the  power 
of  death  and  the  grave?  Let  not  the  most  distressed,  the  most  maltreated  of  men, 
despair;  for  it  was  when  Christ  seemed  to  be  utterly  defeated  that  he  victoriously  got 
for  his  people  victory  over  sin  and  over  death  and  the  grave.  (2)  His  resurrection 
culminating  in  his  present  mediatorial  dignity.  "  Of  the  seed  of  David,  according  to 
my  gospel."  As  of  the  seed  royal,  he  was  raised,  and  raised  to  sit  upon  the  throne 
of  his  father  David.  That  is  the  high  position  he  has  won  for  himself.  The  govern- 
ment of  the  universe  is  at  this  moment  upon  his  shoulders.  Under  all  outward  defeat, 
then,  let  us  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  victorious  termination  of  our  Lord's  career  of 
suffering.  2.  Example  of  Paul.  (1)  Appearance  of  defeat.  "Wherein  I  suffer 
hardship  unto  bonds,  as  a  malefactor."  He  had  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood.  But 
though  he  had  not  gone  the  length  of  the  Master,  he  had  gone  the  length  of  bonds, 
and,  with  his  Master,  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors.  (2)  Promise  of  victory. 
"  But  the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound."  Not  only  was  his  conviction  strong  that  the 
Word  proceeding  from  God  could  not  be  bound  by  any  tyrant,  but  he  had  tine  fact  to 
lay  hold  of  that  much  freedom  was  enjoyed  in  the  preaching  of  the  Word.  (3)  Victorious 
for  tke  take  of  the  elect.  "Therefore  I  endure  all  things  for  the  elect's  sake,  that  they 
also  may  obtain  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  with  eternal  glory."  God  has 
appointed  for  the  elect  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  a  salvation  which 
U  to  blossom  forth  under  a  sunnier  sky  into  glory.    This  glory  will  be  ample  com- 


36  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  n.  1— 26. 

pensation  for  present  sufferings,  not  only  in  its  quality,  but  in  its  being  eternal.  How, 
then,  was  he  to  help  forward  the  destiny  of  the  elect,  and  at  the  same  time  his  own 
ilcsliny  ?  He  could  not  preach  in  his  dungeon ;  but  he  could  follow  up  the  preaching 
of  others  by  a  brave  bearing.  He  could  show  that  he  could  act  what  ha  had  preached. 
And  did  not  much  depend  on  his  going  forward  bravely  to  martyrdom?  3.  A  saying 
of  the  martyr-times.  "Faithful  is  the  saying."  (1)  How  the  Christians  encouraged 
i me  another  to  constancy  I  Past  act.  "For  if  we  died  with  him,  we  shall  also  live 
with  him."  They  first  went  back  to  a  definite  act  in  the  past,  viz.  the  profession  of 
faith  with  which  they  commenced  their  Christian  career.  They  thus  in  obligation 
came  up  to  the  martyr-point.  They  said  they  were  willing,  should  the  Master  call 
them  to  it,  to  share  death  with  him.  If  this  was  the  true  reading  of  their  act,  the 
bright  side  of  it  was  that  they  would  also  be  called  to  share  life  with  Christ.  Abiding 
state.  "If  we  endure,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him."  They  next  thought  of  their 
present  suffering  calling  for  an  abiding  spirit  of  endurance,  and  they  used  to  say  to  one 
another,  that,  if  they  did  not  flinch,  their  future  would  be  brightened  to  them  by  their 
being  called  to  sit  with  Christ  on  his  throne.  (2)  How  the  Christians  discouraged  one 
another  against  apostasy !  Future  act.  "  If  we  shall  deny  him,  he  also  will  deny  us." 
They  next  thought  of  their  being  put  to  a  severe  test  in  the  future.  The  time  might 
come  when  their  choice  would  be  between  Christ  and  life.  Far  be  it  from  them,  for  the 
sake  of  life,  to  deny  Christ ;  for  that  act  of  denial  on  their  part  would  carry  with  it  an 
act  of  denial  on  his  part.  Abiding  state.  "If  we  are  faithless,  he  abideth  faithful; 
for  he  cannot  deny  himself."  They  next  thought  of  an  act  of  denial  followed  by  no 
penitence,  and  they  said  to  one  another,  that  if  that  was  their  permanent  state,  their 
future  would  be  darkened,  even  by  reason  of  the  unchanging  character  of  their  Saviour. 
It  was  impossible  for  him  to  contradict  himself,  and,  as  surely  as  he  shows  his  approval 
of  faith,  must  he  show  his  disapproval  of  unbelief.  The  martyr-times  had  already 
commenced.  The  first  persecution  was  under  Nero  in  the  year  64,  the  last  under 
Diocletian  in  the  year  303.  The  first  persecution  had  not  yet  ceased.  The  Christians, 
charged  with  setting  fire  to  Rome,  were  subjected  to  the  most  inhuman  treatment.  As 
the  historian  Tacitus  informs  us,  they  were  sewn  in  sacks  made  of  the  skins  of  wild 
beasts,  and  thrown  to  be  torn  by  dogs.  They  were  smeared  with  pitch,  and  set  on  fire 
as  torches  to  illuminate  the  imperial  gardens  at  night.  "This  persecution  extended 
beyond  the  walls  of  Borne,  and  continued  with  more  or  less  severity  to  the  end  of 
Nero's  reign,  four  years  afterwards."  It  was  in  the  last  year  of  Nero's  reign  that  Paul 
was  now  awaiting  his  martyrdom.  This  martyr-saying  may  be  viewed  as  the  fruit  of 
those  years  of  persecution.  As  here  incorporated  by  Paul  into  this  Epistle,  it  would 
be  a  precious  legacy  to  the  Church  in  the  many  years  of  persecution  to  come. — R.  F. 

Vers.  14 — 26. — Conduct  in  view  of  heresy  appearing  in  the  Church.  I.  Method  of 
the  heretics.  "  Of  these  things  put  them  in  remembrance,  charging  them  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord,  that  they  strive  not  about  words,  to  no  profit,  to  the  subverting  of  them 
that  hear."  The  method  of  the  heretics  called  for  solemn  warning  from  Timothy.  Its 
essential  character  was  word-fighting.  It  dealt  with  the  form,  and  not  with  the  reality; 
and  so  it  came  to  be  controversial.  The  word  is  not  unimportant,  but  it  has  no  impor- 
tance apart  from  its  being  the  vehicle  of  the  truth.  The  moral  defect  of  the  method 
was  its  want  of  regard  to  edification.  The  disputants  only  used  it  for  dialectic  display. 
There  was,  therefore,  no  good  result  to  be  laid  to  their  account.  The  only  result  to  be 
expected  was  the  subversion  of  any  who,  by  hearing,  placed  themselves  within  their 
influence. 

II.  The  trde  method.  "  Give  diligence  to  present  thyself  approved  unto  God,  a 
workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  handling  aright  the  Word  of  truth."  The 
heretics  sought  to  be  approved  unto  them  that  heard  them,  for  their  skill  in  word- 
fighting.  Timothy  was  to  follow  another  course,  and  to  display  his  zeal  in  quitting 
himself  so  as  to  be  approved  unto  God.  The  way  in  which  be  was  to  do  this  was  by 
•nswering  to  the  idea  of  a  workman.  He  was  not  to  amuse  himself  with  profitless  dis- 
putation, but  he  was  to  give  profitable  work.  He  was  to  work  with  such  rigorous 
regard  to  the  Divine  rule  that,  whether  he  met  with  approval  or  disapproval  from  men, 
he  did  not  need  to  be  ashamed.  Especially  was  he  to  show  the  better  way  of  dealiug 
with  the  Word.    He  was  to  cut  rightly,  or  cut  straight,  the  Word  of  truth.    Whatever 


OH.  n.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHT.  87 

the  metaphor  is,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  idea  is  that,  instead  of  trifling  with  the 
Word,  he  was  to  go  right  iato  and  lay  open  the  Divine  truth  it  contained. 

III.  Why  the  method  of  the  heretics  was  to  be  avoided.  "  But  shun  profane 
babblings :  for  they  will  proceed  further  in  ungodliness,  and  their  word  will  eat  as  doth 
•  gangrene."  The  method  of  the  heretics  is  characterized  in  keeping  with  what  has 
been  already  said.  It  was  using  empty  speech,  or  speech  without  reference  to  reality. 
That,  applied  to  Divine  things,  was  necessarily  profane.  Its  natural  association  was 
God-dishonouring  representations,  operating  against  devout  feelings  and  corresponding 
practice.  This  ungodly  tendency  had  not  taken  its  worst  form.  The  heretics  would 
yet  say  worse  things.  Their  word  was  of  the  nature  of  a  gangrene,  that  eats  into  the 
life,  and,  always  in  an  aggravated  form,  spreads  over  the  spiritual  body. 

IV.  Two  heretics  named.  "Of  whom  is  Hymenaeus  and  Philetus ;  men  who  con- 
cerning the  truth  have  erred,  saying  that  the  resurrection  is  past  already,  and  overthrow 
the  faith  of  some."  The  way  in  which  these  men  were  heretics,  or  darted  aside  from 
the  truth  as  the  mark,  was  by  applying  the  method  described  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
resurrection.  Under  the  influence  of  an  incipient  Gnosticism,  in  which  the  body  was 
regarded  as  evil,  they  got  rid  of  the  reference  of  the  resurrection  to  the  body  by 
quibbling  about  the  word.  The  word  was  simply  "rising  again,"  and  its  meaning  was 
sufficiently  met  by  what  had  already  taken  place  in  a  Christian  believer,  viz.  the  rising 
of  the  soul  to  newness  of  life.  With  their  verbal  skill,  they  were  succeeding  in  the 
case  of  some.  But  what  was  success  to  these  dialecticians  was  to  those  with  whom 
they  succeeded  nothing  less  than  the  subversion  of  their  faith,  so  essential  is  the 
resurrection  of  the  body  to  Christianity. 

V.  The  stability  of  the  Church.  "  Howbeit  the  firm  foundation  of  God  standetb." 
Though  the  faith  of  some  is  overturned,  the  Church  standeth.  The  Church  is  not 
thought  of  as  a  completed  structure,  which  it  will  not  be  till  ages  still  have  pas  ed.  But 
it  is  thought  of  as  a  substructure  in  a  satisfactory  state,  as  having,  indeed,  been  laid  by 
God.  It  had  that  firmness  which  is  essential  for  the  commencement  of  a  building.  As 
firm,  it  was  standing,  notwithstanding  the  strain  to  which  it  had  been  subjected.  As 
firm,  it  promised  to  stand  a  long  time,  and  the  promise  has  not  been  belied.  For  upon 
the  foundation  part  of  the  building  much  has  been  laid  since,  and  we  have  no  reason  to 
fear  its  overthrow,  but  rather  increased  reason  to  anticipate  its  completion.  The  Church 
is  a  structure  in  connection  with  which  there  is  solemn  engagement.  "Having  this  seal." 
The  seal  on  the  substructure  has  two  sides.  1.  The  obverse,  or  Divine  side.  "  The  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  his."  The  language  from  this  point  to  the  close  of  the  twenty- 
first  verse  seems  to  have  been  suggested  by  a  memorable  passage  in  Jewish  history, 
recorded  in  the  sixteenth  of  Numbers,  viz.  the  rebellion  of  Koran,  Dathan,  and  Abiram. 
These  men  charged  Moses  and  Aaron  with  taking  too  much  upon  them  in  acting,  the 
one  as  prophet  by  pre-eminence  and  the  other  as  priest  by  pre-eminence.  The  reply  of 
Moses,  as  given  in  the  Septuagint,  was  that  God  knew  them  that  were  his,  i.e  would 
maintain  their  cause  against  opposers,  as  he  did  signally  in  that  case,  in  causing  the  earth 
to  open  and  swallow  up  these  men  and  their  company.  2.  The  reverse,  or  human  side. 
"  And,  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  Name  of  the  Lord  depart  from  unrighteousness." 
The  Jewish  congregation  was  composed  of  them  that  named  the  Name  of  God,  i.e.  that 
professed  to  worship  him  as  the  Most  Holy  One,  and  to  obey  his  commai  ids.  In  the  case 
referred  to,  the  Divine  call  to  the  whole  congregation  was,  "Depart  from  the  tents  of  those 
wicked  men,  and  touch  nothing  of  theirs,  lest  ye  be  consumed  in  all  their  sins."  The 
application  is  the  following  :  Let  Timothy  be  comforted  by  the  thought  that  the  Lord 
would  judge  between  him  and  such  opposers  as  Hynienasus  and  Philetus,  who  would 
not  be  able  to  move  the  substructure  that  had  been  laid.  On  the  other  hand,  let 
Christian  congregations  be  warned.  They  are  composed  of  those  who  name  the  Name 
of  the  Lord,  i.e.  profess  faith  in  Christ  as  their  Saviour,  and  promise  obedience  to  his 
laws.  In  the  Christian  religion,  even  more  than  in  the  Jewish  religion,  unrighteousness 
appears  as  receiving  terrible  condemnation.  Let  not,  then,  a  Christian  have  anything  to 
do  with  departure  from  the  truth  and  fellowship  with  ungodliness. 

VI.  Mixed  society.  "Now  in  a  great  house  there  are  not  only  vessels  of  gold  and 
of  silver,  but  also  of  wood  and  of  earth ;  and  some  unto  honour,  and  some  unto  dis- 
honour." In  the  Jewish  Church  (which  is  called  the  house  of  God)  there  were  faithful 
and  unfaithful,  with  degrees  of  faithfulness  and  degrees  of  unfaithfulness,  compared  here, 


38  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  n.  1—26, 

the  one  class  to  vessels  of  gold  and  of  silver,  and  the  other  class  to  vessels  of  wood  and 
of  earth — vessels  put  to  honourable  uses  and  vessels  put  to  dishonourable  uses.  In  the 
former  class  were  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  in  the  latter  class  Eorah,  Dathan,  and  Ahiram, 
as  shown  in  the  day  of  trial.  The  Christian  Church  is  also  a  great  house,  presided  over, 
as  we  are  told,  not  by  a  servant,  but  a  Son.  "  And  Moses  indeed  was  faithful  in  all 
God's  house  as  a  servant,  for  a  testimony  of  those  things  which  were  afterward  to  be 
spoken  ;  but  Christ  as  a  Son,  over  God's  house ;  whose  house  are  we,  if  we  hold  fast  our 
boldness  and  the  glorying  of  our  hope  firm  unto  the  end."  The  Church  is  meant  to  be 
a  pure  society,  but  it  is  impossible  under  present  conditions  to  have  this  realized  to  the 
fullest  extent.  In  the  apostolic  circle  around  Christ  there  were  vessels  of  gold  and 
vessels  of  silver — of  superior  use  and  of  inferior  use  in  the  service  of  the  Master;  but 
there  was  also  shown  to  be  a  vessel  of  more  than  ordinary  baseness  of  material  put  to 
the  most  dishonourable  use.  In  the  Church  as  it  was  forming  there  were  men  and 
women  with  gold  and  silver  in  their  natures,  "  who  having  lands  or  houses  sold  them 
and  laid  the  prices  down  at  the  apostles'  feet ; "  but  there  were  also  Ananias  and  Sapphira, 
whose  tarthliness  moved  them  to  keep  back  part  ef  the  price.  So  while  Paul  was  of 
gold  use,  we  may  say,  at  that  period  of  the  Church's  history,  and  Timothy  compara- 
tively of  silver  use,  Hymenaeus  and  Philetus  belonged  to  the  other  category,  having 
nothing  better  than  wood  in  them,  and  put  to  no  honourable  use. 

VIL  Purgation.  "  If  a  man  therefore  purge  himself  from  these,  he  shall  be  a  vessel 
unto  honour,  sanctified,  meet  for  the  Master's  use,  prepared  unto  every  good  work." 
There  was  a  purgation  of  the  congregation  of  Israel  in  connection  with  the  rebellion 
that  has  been  referred  to.  Every  Israelite  was  to  get  up  from  the  tabernacle  of  Koran, 
Dathan,  and  Abiram;  that  was  the  condition  of  his  being  classed  among  the  pure — of 
his  being,  according  to  the  language  formerly  used,  a  vessel  unto  honour.  We  may 
think  of  the  censers  used  by  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  of  Koran's  company;  their 
sacredness  was  recognized  by  their  being  taken  out  of  the  fire,  and  put  to  another  sacred 
use.  "  The  censers  of  those  sinners  against  their  own  souls,  let  them  make  them  broad 
plates  for  a  covering  of  the  altar."  The  same  thing  has  to  take  place  in  the  Cnristian 
Church.  A  member  of  a  Christian  congregation  is  not  to  have  fellowship  with  such 
subverters  as  Hymenaaus  and  Philetus  were,  or  with  those,  whether  subverted  or  not  as 
to  creed,  who  engage  in  ungodly  practices.  He  is  not  even  to  throw  himself  into  the 
society  of  the  merely  indifferent.  Thus  only  can  he  be  a  vessel  unto  honour.  Three 
things  are  said  about  Mm  who  is  a  vessel  unto  Tumour.  They  turn  upon  the  idea  of 
usefulness ;  for  that  is  essential  to  a  vessel.  The  first  has  reference  to  an  act  of  con- 
secration. The  second  has  reference  to  a  use  the  Master  has  for  the  vessel.  The  third 
has  reference  to  a  course  of  preparation  for  the  use.  Christians  are  set  apart  to  holy 
uses.  This  is  partly  their  own  act,  in  the  dedication  of  themselves  to  God ;  and  partly 
the  Divine  act  in  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Christ  and  anointing  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  There  is  a  use  the  Master  has  for  every  Christian.  This  use  may  be  said  to  be 
(distributively)  every  good  work.  A  Christian  can  be  turned  to  more  uses  than  a  par- 
ticular kind  of  vessel.  It  rather  needs  all  kinds  of  sacred  vessels  to  express  his  useful- 
ness. His  preparation,  then,  is  no  simple  matter;  it  cannot  be  carried  through  in  a  day 
or  a  year.  In  and  through  experience,  embracing  our  own  exercise  of  toul  and  the 
Divine  blessing,  we  acquire  habitudes  for  various  kinds  of  service,  which  are  not  always 
in  actual  requisition,  but  may  at  any  time  be  in  requisition.  Let  us,  then,  be  in  such  a 
state  of  preparation  that  the  Master  of  the  house  can,  as  it  were,  take  us  up,  and  use  us 
for  whatever  work  he  has  to  be  d'  >ne. 

VIII.  Pure  fellowship.  "  But  flee  youthful  lusts,  and  follow  after  righteousness, 
faith,  love,  peace,  with  them  that  call  ou  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart."  In  this 
punctuation  peace  is  not  specially  connected  with  what  follows.  The  idea  is  certainly, 
even  from  the  context,  pure  fellowship.  Timothy  was  to  act  his  part  well  in  the 
Christian  society  with  which  he  was  connected.  He  had  yet  youth  on  his  side,  and, 
while  that  had  its  large  possibilities  of  service,  it  had  also  its  risks.  It  had  fiery 
impulses,  from  which  even  a  youthful  minister  was  not  exempt,  and  by  giving  way  to 
which  the  Christian  society  would  be  seriously  injured.  Let  him  flee  to  a  distance  from 
his  peculiar  temptations;  on  the  other  hand,  let  him  be  in  close  pursuit  of  the  virtues 
on  which  pure  fellowship  depends.  There  is  that  universal  virtue,  righteousness,  which 
may  be  thought  of  as  the  observance  of  the  Divine  rules.    Then  there  is  faith,  or  reliauc* 


oh.  m.  1—17.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


39 


on  promised  strength.  Then  there  is  love,  or  proper  regard  for  the  common  or  individual 
good.  There  is,  lastly,  peace,  or  the  keeping  up  of  cordial  intercourse  and  co-operation 
with  brethren.  The  society  by  which  he  has  to  do  his  duty  is  regarded  as  composed  of 
"  them  that  call  on  the  Lord  ont  of  a  pure  heart."  All  the  more  that  some  called  on  the 
Lord  without  the  pure  heart  must  he  be  faithful  to  the  terms  of  communion  with  all 
who,  in  good  faith,  were  servants  of  the  Lord. 

IX.  Treatment  of  opposers.  1.  Avoidance  of  controversy  with  them.  "But  foolish 
and  ignorant  questionings  refuse,  knowing  that  they  gender  strifes."  The  apostle  does 
not  say  all  questionings;  for  some  might  arise  from  honest  difficulties,  and  these 
deserved  to  be  met.  But  he  says  such  questionings  as  were  foolish,  i.e.  betrayed  no 
honest  struggle  after  the  truth,  and  such  as  were  ignorant,  i.e.  betrayed  ignorance  of 
the  position  questioned.  Such  questionings  as,  arising  from  egoism,  did  not  deserve  to 
be  met,  and  the  proper  course  was  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  them.  For  they  could 
not  gender  conviction,  but  petty  strifes,  in  which  the  contest  is  not  for  the  truth,  but  for 
personal  or  party  victory.  2.  The  arts  of  gentleness  with  them.  "  And  the  Lord's 
servants  must  not  strive,  but  be  gentle  towards  all,  apt  to  teach,  forbearing,  in  meek- 
ness correcting  them  that  oppose  themselves."  The  Lord's  servant,  such  as  Timothy 
was  in  a  special  sense,  was  not  to  strive.  For  how  in  that  way  could  he  be  the  servant 
of  him  who  did  not  strive,  nor  cry,  nor  let  his  voice  be  heard  in  the  streets  ?  What 
became  the  Lord's  servant  was  to  practise  the  arts  of  gentleness  towards  all.  His  part 
was,  not  to  fight  but  te  teach,  not  to  be  fiery  under  opposition,  but  to  be  patient.  In 
accordance  with  his  being  a  teacher  and  not  a  mere  disputant,  he  was  to  communicate 
knowledge  of  the  truth,  by  way  of  correcting  false  impressions  to  those  who  opposed 
themselves ;  and,  in  doing  so,  he  might  expect  provocation,  but  in  the  character  of  the 
Lord's  servant  he  was  to  exhibit  meekness.  3.  Object  aimed  at.  "  If  peradventure  God 
may  give  them  repentance  unto  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  they  may  recover  them- 
selves out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  having  been  taken  captive  by  the  Lord's  servant  unto 
the  will  of  God."  The  interpretation  which  is  introduced  into  the  Revised  Translation 
in  the  concluding  words  is  not  likely  to  find  acceptance.  There  is  a  strong  characteriza- 
tion of  the  opposers.  They  are  in  the  snare  of  the  devil,  having  been  taken  captive  by 
him  at  the  will  of  that  person  whose  will,  it  is  hinted,  is  decided  enough  for  evil.  The 
grammatical  objection  holds  no  more  in  Greek  than  in  English ;  the  thought  is  the 
badness  of  their  case,  for  whom  notwithstanding  he  asks  efforts  to  be  made.  In  con- 
nection with  these  efforts  it  was  not  impossible  for  God  to  grant  them  repentance,  that 
change  of  moral  disposition  which  was  necessary  to  the  right  appreciation  of  the  truth, 
and  thus  to  recover  them  as  from  a  state  of  spiritual  intoxication,  and  to  bring  them 
out  of  the  devil's  snare.  The  Lord's  servant  is  not  soon  to  give  up,  but  is  to  hope  on, 
even  with  those  who  seem  to  be  the  devil's  willing  tools.— B.  if. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  III. 


Ver.  1. — But  know  this  for  this  know  also, 
A.  V. ;  grievous  for  perilous,  A.V.  Grievous 
times  (icaipol  xaKel">'1)-  "  Grievous  "  is  not  a 
very  good  rendering.  "Perilous,"  though 
in  some  contexts  it  is  a  right  rendering,  is 
a  little  too  restricted  here.  "Difficult," 
"  trying,"  "  uneasy,"  or  the  like,  is  nearer  tl  le 
sense.  They  are  times  when  a  Christian 
hardly  knows  which  way  to  turn  or  what  to 
do.  He  has  to  live  under  a  eonstant  sense 
of  hindrance  and  difficulty  of  one  sort  or 
another. 

Ver.  2. — Self  for  their  own  selves,  A.V. ; 
lovers  of  money  for  covetous,  A.  V. ;  boastful 
for  boasters,  A.V. ;  haughty  for  proud,  A.V. ; 
raihrt   for    blasphemers,   A.V.      Hen   (oi 


Scflponroi);  men  In  general,  the  bulk  oi  men 
in  the  Church ;  for  he  is  speaking,  not  of  the 
world  at  large,  but  of  professing  Christians. 
Lovers  of  self  (<]>l\avToi) ;  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament,  and  not  found  in  the 
LXX. ;  but  used  by  Aristotle  in  a  striking 
passage  (quoted  by  Alford),  where  he  dis- 
tinguishes those  who  are  (piKavroi  in  a  good, 
sense,  and  those  who  are  justly  blamed  for 
being  4>t\avTot,  i.e.  selfish  and  greedy. 
The  Christian  character  is  exactly  the  oppo- 
site (see  1  Cor.  x.  24;  xiii.  5).  lovers  of 
money  (tjuKipyupoi) ;  elsewhere  in  the  New 
Testament  only  in  Luke  xvi.  14,  though  not 
uncommon  in  classical  Greek ;  <pi\apyvp(a  is 
found  in  1  Tim.  vL  10.  Boastful  (StKA&res); 
as  Bom.  i.  30,  and  in  classical  Greek.  If 
the  derivation  of  the  word  is  foq,  wander- 


to 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.        [oh.  ni.  1—17 


ing,  we  may  compare  the  trtpupxtfuni  of 
Acts  ix.  13,  "  vagabond  Jews."  Such  vaga- 
bonds were  usually  boasters.  Hence  b.\a£<bv 
came  to  mean  "a  boaster."  Haughty, 
raiJers.  'Tntpiicpavla  and  fi\a(rxf»}fiia  are 
coupled  together  in  Mark  vii.  22 ;  and 
{mfpriipdiiovs  and  aAafocas  in  Eom.  i.  30.  In 
the  New  Testament  fihiotyiinos  and  fSAaafii- 
pla.  are  most  commonly  used  of  evil-speaking 
against  God  and  holy  things;  but  not 
always  (see  Eph.  iv.  31 ;  Col.  iii.  8 ;  1  Tim. 
vi.  4).  Here  apparently  it  means  generally 
"evil-speakers."  Unthankful  (&x<ipio?o0 ; 
as  Luke  vi.  35.  Found  occasionally  in  the 
LXX.,  and  common  in  classical  Greek. 
The  ingratitude  which  they  showed  to  their 
parents  was  a  part  of  their  general  charac- 
ter. We  ought  to  take  special  note  of  this 
passive  sin — the  not  being  thankful  for  good 
received  from  God  and  man.  Unholy  (avi- 
irioi)  ;  as  1  Tim.  L  9  (where  see  note). 

Ver.  3. — Implacable  for  truce-breaJcert, 
A.V. ;  slanderers  for  false  accusers,  A.V.; 
without  self -control  for  incontinent,  A.V.; 
no  lovers  of  good  for  despisers  of  those  that 
are  good,  A.V.  Without  natural  affeotion 
(itrropyoi) ;  as  in  Bom.  i.  31,  where  in  the 
T.R.  it  is  coupled  with  &viroi>$oi,  as  here. 
The  verb  aripym  is  "  to  love,"  used  primarily 
of  the  natural  affection  of  parents  to  their 
I'hHdren  and  children  to  their  parents.  And 
|  is  that  natural  love.     These  persons 


were  without  this  aropyj,  of  which  Plato 
sayn  "  A  child  loves  his  parents,  and  is  loved 
by  them ; "  and  so,  according  to  St.  Paul's 
judgment  in  1  Tim.  v.  8,  were  "worse  than 
infidels."  Implacable  (&owov$oi) ;  only  here 
according  to  the  R.T.,  not  at  all  in  the 
LXX.,  but  frequent  in  classical  Greek. 
SnwS))  was  a  solemn  truce  made  over  a 
libation  to  the  gods.  "Ao-tiwSos  at  first 
merely  expresses  that  anything  was  done,  or 
any  person  was  left,  without  such  a  trace. 
But,  in  a  secondary  sense,  applied  to  a  war, 
it  meant  an  internecine  war  admitting  of 
no  truce;  and  thence,  as  here,  applied  to  a 
person,  it  means  "  implacable,"  one  who  will 
make  no  truce  or  treaty  with  his  enemy. 
The  sense  "  truce-breakers  "  is  not  justified 
by  any  example.  Slanderers  (Sid$o\oi) ;  as 
1  Tim.  iii.  11  and  Titus  ii.  8.  The  arch- 
slanderer  is  i  Sid$o\os,  the  devil,  "the 
accuser  of  the  breihren  (i  Karrfyopos  twv 
i.S(\(p&v)  "  (Kev.  xii.  10 ;  sec  John  vi.  70). 
Without  self-control  (aHpwreis);  here  only 
in  the  New  Testament,  not  in  the  LXX, 
but  frequent  in  classical  Greek,  in  the  sense 
of  intemperate  m  the  pursuit  or  use  of  any- 
thing, e.g.  money,  the  tongue,  pleasurej  the 
appetite,  etc.,  which  are  put  in  the  genitive 
case.  Used  absolutely  it  means  generally 
"  without  self-control,"  as  here  rendered  in 
the R.  V.  The  A.V.  " incontinent "  (comp. 
X  Cor.  vU.  5)  expresses  only  one  part  of  the 


meaning  (see  ixpairta,  Matt.  xxiiL  15). 
Fieroe  (from /eras,  wild,  savage);  luniucpm; 
only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  and  not 
found  in  the  LXX.,  but  frequent  in  the 
Greek  tragedians  and  others,  of  persons, 
countries,  plants,  etc. ;  e.g.  "  Beware  of  the 
Chalubes,  for  they  are  savage  (ai/if/uepoi), 
and  cannot  be  approached  by  strangers" 
0ffischylu8,'Prom.Vinct.,,734,edit.Scholef.). 
It  corresponds  with  &ve\eijiioi>es,  unmerciful 
(Bom.  i.  31).  No  lovers  of  good  (&<pih- 
iryaQoi) ;  only  here  in  the  Now  Testament, 
and  not  at  all  in  the  LXX.  or  in  classical 
Greek.  But  <pi\iya6os  is  found  in  Wisd. 
vii.  22,  and  in  Aristotle,  in  the  sense  of 
"  lovers  of  that  which  is  good ; "  and  in 
Titus  i  8.  The  R.V.  seems  therefore  to  be 
right  in  rendering  here  "no  lovers  of  good," 
rather  than  as  the  A.V.  "  despisers  of  those 
which  are  good,"  after  the  Vulgate  and  the 
new  version  of  Sanctes  PagninuB. 

Ver.  4. — Headstrong  for  heady,  A.V.; 
puffed  up  for  high-minded,  A.V. ;  pleasure 
for  pleasures,  A.V. ;  rather  for  more,  A.V. 
Traitors  (irpoSdroi);  Luke  vi.  16;  Acts 
vii.  52.  It  does  not  mean  traitors  to  their 
king  or  country,  but  generally  betrayers  of 
the  persons  who  trust  in  them,  and  of  the 
cause  of  the  trust  committed  to  them ;  per- 
haps specially,  as  Bishop  Ellicott  suggests, 
of  their  brethren  in  times  of  persecution. 
Headstrong  (/rpo7T6T6ls);  as  in  Acts  xix.  36. 
Neither  "  heady  "  nor  "  headstrong  "  gives 
the  exact  meaning  of  irpojreTris,  which  is 
"rash,""hasty," "headlong."  "Headstrong" 
rather  denotes  obstinacy  which  will  not  be 
influenced  by  wise  advice,  but  irpo7rcTj|j  is 
the  person  who  acts  from  impulse,  without 
considering  consequences,  or  weighing  prin- 
ciples. Puffed  up  (rervtpiDiifvoi) ;  see  1  Tim. 
iii.  6,  note.  Lovers  of  pleasure  (<j>iA>j5oyoi) ; 
only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  and  not 
found  in  the  LXX.,  but  occasionally  in 
classical  Greek.  "  Fond  of  pleasure  "  (Lid- 
dell  and  Scott).  It  is  used  here  as  an  anti- 
thesis to  loveTS  of  God  (<j>i\68eoi),  which  also 
occurs  only  here  eilher  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment or  the  LXX.,  but  is  used  by  Aristotle. 
Philo,  quoted  by  Bishop  Ellicott  (from 
Wetstein),  has  exactly  the  same  contrast: 
<l>i\rjBovoi'  .  .  .  fxaWoi'  $)  .  .  .  <pi\69cov.  It 
looks  as  if  the  men  spoken  of  claimed  to  be 
ipL\n0eoi.  A  somewhat  similar  paronomasia 
occurs  in  Isa.  v.  7,  where  nsro  is  opposed  to 
naty'D,  and  np^jx  to  nps- 

ver.  5. — Holding  for  having,  A.V. ; 
having  denied  for  denying,  A.V. ;  these  also 
for  such,  A.V.  Holding  (cxoktcs).  There 
is  no  reason  to  change  "  having."  Perhaps 
"indeed"  after  "having"  would  give  the 
emphasis  conveyed  by  lx°>'Ti  *  preceding  the 
object.  A  form  (ix6ptpaiaiv).  It  should  be 
the  form ;  i.e.  "  the  outward  semb  \ance,"  i. q. 
n6p<pona,  form,  shape,  figure  (Liddell  and 


oh.  in.  1— IT.]       THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


41 


Scott),  here  in  contrast  with  Mvapus,  the 
reality.  In  Eom.  ii.  20,  the  only  other  place 
in  the  New  Testament  where  p6p<puo-is 
occurs,  there  is  no  contrast,  and  so  it  has 
the  sense  of  a  "  true  sketch  "  or  "  delinea- 
tion." Having  denied  (ripvTtnivoi) ;  possibly 
more  correct  than  the  A.V.  "denying," 
though  the  difference,  if  any,  is  very  slight. 
The  meaning  is  that  by  their  life  and 
character  and  conversation  they  gave  the 
lie  to  their  Christian  profession.  Christianity 
with  them  was  an  outward  form,  not  an  in- 
ward living  power  of  godliness.  From  these 
also  does  not  give  the  sense  at  all  clearly. 
The  A.V.  does,  though  it  omits  the  tculj 
which  is  not  wanted  in  English.  In  the 
Greek  it  marks  an  additional  circumstance 
in  the  case  of  those  of  whom  he  is  speaking, 
viz.  that  they  are  to  be  turned  away- from  as 
hopeless.  Turn  away  (airoTp«rou) ;  only  here 
in  the  New  Testament,  or,  at  least  in  the 
middle  voice,  in  the  LXX. ;  but  frequent  in 
classical  Greek  in  different  senses.  St.  Paul 
uses  eVrfPEiro/iecos  in  the  same  sense  in 
1  Tim.  vi.  20.  "  This  command  shows  that 
the  apostle  treats  the  symptoms  of  the  last 
times  as  in  some  respects  present "  (Alford). 
With  this  catena  of  epithets  comp.  Bom. 
i.  29 — 31;  and,  though  of  an  opposite 
character,  the  string  of  adjectives  in  Wisd. 
vii.  22,  23. 

Ver.  6. — These  for  this  sort,  A.V.;  that 
for  which,  A.V. ;  take  for  lead,  A.V. ;  by  for 
until,  A.V.  Creep  into  (evBurowes);  here 
only  in  the  New  Testament.  It  has  the 
sense  of  "sneaking  into,"  "insinuating 
themselves  into,"  a»  in  Xenophon, '  Cyrop ,' 
2.  1.  13.  Take  captive  (alxfuAureiovTes); 
as  in  Eph.  iv.  3.  The  other  form,  aixf«i»*.«ori- 
CovTfs,  which  is  that  of  the  E.T.,  is  in  Luke 
xxi.  24;  Eom.  vii.  23;  2  Cor.  x.  5.  The 
word  well  describes  the  blind  surrender  of 
the  will  and  conscience  to  such  crafty 
teachers.  Silly  women  (t«  yvvamipia,  dimi- 
nutive of  -ywTf);  nowhere  else  in  the  New 
Testament  or  LXX.,  but  is  used1  by  some  late 
Greek  authors.  Itis  a  term  of  contempt — 
he  will  not  call  them  yvvaixas — they  are 
only  yvvaiK&pta.  In  the  passages  quoted  by 
Alford  from  Irenaeus  and  Epiphanius,  the 
women  made  use  of  by  the  later  Gnostics 
are  called  yvvaticdpia.  See,  too,  the  striking 
quotation  in  the  same  note  from  Jerome, 
specifying  by  name  the  women  whom  Nico* 
las  of  Antioch,  Maroion,  Montanus,  and 
others  employed  as  their  instruments  in 
spreading  their  abominable  heresies.  So 
true  is  St.  Paul's  forecast  in  the  text. 
Laden  with  sins  (/rumpmiUra  afiaprimi')', 
elsewhere  only  in  Bom.  xdi.  20,  "heap  coals  of 
fire."  It  occurs  in  Aristotle  and  other  Greek 
writers  in  the  sense  of  heaping  one  thing 
upon  another,  and  heaping  up  anything 
With  something  else.    The  last  is  the  sense 


in  which  it  is  here  used.  It  seems  to  con- 
vey the  idea  of  passive  helplessness.  Led 
away  (SLydpeva) ;  witli  a  strong  intimation  o/ 
unresisting  weakness  (comp.  1  Cor.  xii.  2 ; 
Acts  viii.  32 ;  Luke  xxiii.  32).  Lusts  (Ari- 
Oupiais);  all  kinds  of  carnal  and  selfish 
desires  (see  Matt.  iv.  19 ;  John  viii.  44 ; 
Bom.  i.  24;  vi.  12;  vii.  7,  8;  Gal.  v.  24; 
Eph.  ii.  3 ;  iv.  22 ;  Col.  iii.  5 ;  1  Tim.  vi. 
9;  ch.  ii.  22;  iv.  3;  Titus  ii.  12;  iii.  3; 
1  Pet.  i.  14,  etc. ;  2  Pet.  ii;  IS;  1  John 
ii.  16,  etc.). 

Ver.  7. — Ever  learning,  etc.  This  is  the 
crowning  feature  of  this  powerful  sketch  ol 
those  "silly  women,"  whose  thoughts  are 
busied  about  religion  without  theiraffections 
being  reached  or  their  principles  being  in- 
fluenced by  it.  They  are  always  beating 
about  the  bush,  but  they  never  get  posses- 
sion of  the  blessed  and  saving  truth  of  the 
gospel  of  God.  Their  own  selfish  inclina- 
tions, and  not  the  grace  of  God,  continue  to 
be  the  motive  power  with  them. 

Ver.  8. — And  like  for  now,  A.V. ;  with- 
stand for  resist,  A.V. ;  corrupted1  in  mind 
for  of  corrupt  minds,  A.V.  And;  out  would 
be  better.  Jannes  and  Jambres ;  the  tradi- 
tional names  of  the  magicians  who  opposed 
Moses ;  and,  if  Origen  can  be  trusted,  there 
was  an  apocryphal  book  called'  by  their 
names.  But  Theodoret  ascribes-  their  names 
to  an  unwritten  Jewish  tradition.  Their 
names  are  found  in  the  Targum  of  Jonathan 
on  Exod.  vii.  11 ;  xxii.  22 ;  and  are  also 
mentioned,  in  conjunction  with  Moses,  with 
some  variation  in  the  name  of  Jambres,  by 
Pliny  ('  Hist.  Nat.,'  xxxi.  2),  who  probably 
got  his  information  from  a  work  of  Sergius 
Paulus  on  magic,  of  which  the  materials 
were  furnished  by  Elymas  the  sorcerer 
(Acts  xiii.  6 — 8).  Withstood (^.miarnaav) ; 
the  same  word  as  is  used  of  Elymas  in 
Acls  xiii.  8  (so  ch.  iv.  15  and  elsewhere). 
Corrupted  in  mind  (jumttydapitiva  ritv  vovv) ; 
elsewhere  only  in  2  Pet.  ii.  12,  in  the  sense 
of  " perishing,"  being  "utterly  destroyed," 
which  is  the  proper  meaning  of  Kaxapiiipo- 
pai.  Here  in  a  moral  sense  KareQiapiUvot 
tov  vow  means  men  whose  understanding  is 
gone,  and  perished,  as  SttEtpQapucvos  tV  iuco^y 
means  one  whose  hearing  has  perished' — who 
is  deaf.  In  1  Tim.  vi.  5  St.  Paul  uses  the 
more  common  diecpOapfievw.  Reprobate 
£6156xip.a) ;  as  Titus  i.  16,  and'  elsewhere 
frequently  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles.  It  is  just 
the  contrarv  to  SAmpios  (ch.  ii.  15,  note). 

Ver.  9.— 'Evident  for  manifest,  A.V. ;  eame 
to  be  for  was,  A.V.  Shall  proeeed  (npoictyoii- 
aiv) ;  as  ch.  ii.  16  (where  see  note)  and  ver. 
13;  The  apostle's  meaning  here' is,  as  ex- 
plained by  the  example  of  the  magicians, 
that  heresies  shall  not  prevail  against  the 
truth.  'EttI  x\e7oi/  means  beyond  the  point 
indicated  in  his  description  of  their  futura 


42 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         foH.m.1— 17. 


progressive  evil.  They  would  "proceed 
further  in  ungodliness,"  as  he  said  in  cli.  ii. 
I C,  but  not  up  to  the  point  of  destroying  the 
gospel,  as  history  has  shown.  The  various 
forms  of  Gnosticism  have  perished.  The 
gospel  remains.  As  theirs  also  oame  to  be 
( Exod.  viii  18, 19).  Surely  the  A.V. "  was  *' 
is  better. 

Ver.  10. — Didst  follow  my  teaching  for 
had  fully  known  my  doctrine,  A.V.  and  T.B. ; 
conduct  for  manner  of  life,  A,  V. ;  tone  for 
charity,  A.V.  Didst  follow  (Trapi)Ko\oi9i)aas, 
which  is  the  B.T.  for  irapniKoXoiS-nKas,  in 
the  perfect,  which  is  the  T.B.).  The  evi- 
dence for  the  two  readings  is  nicely  ba- 
lanced. But  St.  Paul  uses  the  perfect  in 
1  Tim.  iv.  6  (where  see  note),  and  it  seems 
highly  improbable  that  he  here  used  the 
aorist  in  order  to  convey  a  rebuff  to  Timothy 
by  insinuating  that  he  had  once  followed, 
but  that  he  wus  doing  so  no  longer.  The 
sentence,  "  thou  didst  follow,"  etc.,  is  singu- 
larly insipid.  The  A.V.  "thou  hast  fully 
known  "gives  the  sense  fully  and  clearly. 
Timothy  had  fully  known  St.  Paul's  whole 
career,  partly  from  what  he  had  heard,  and 
partly  from  what  he  had  been  an  eye-wit- 
ness of.  My  teaohing.  How  different  from 
that  of  those  impostors !  Conduct  (iymyf) ; 
here  only  in  the  New  Testament,  but  found 
in  the  LXX.  in  Esth.  ii.  20  (tV  kyorftv 
abrTJs,  "  her  manner  of  life  " — her  behaviour 
towards  Mordecai,  where-  there  is  nothing  to 
answer  to  it  in  the  Hebrew  text);  2  Mace, 
iv.  16  (rets  iiyayii)  j  vi.  8  ;  xi.  24.  Aristotle 
uses  iryuyfi  for  "conduct,"  or  "mode  of 
life  "  ('  Ethics  *),  and  Polybius  (iv.  74,  14), 
quoted  by  Alford,  has  07017))  and  ayuiyai 
rod  ftlov, "  way  "  or  "  manner  of  life."  The 
A.V.  "  manner  of  life "  is  a  very  good 
rendering.  Purpose  ( irp66e<riv) ;  that  which 
u  person  sets  before  him  as  the  end  to  be 
attained  (Aots  zi.  .23;  xxvii.  13;  2  Mace, 
iii.  8;  and  in  Aristotle,  Polybius,  and 
others).  Used  often  of  God's  eternal  pur- 
pose, as  e.g.  oh.  i.  9;  Eph.  i.  11,  etc.  In 
enumerating  these  and  the  following, "  faith, 
long-suffering,  charity,  and  patience,"  St. 
Paul  doubtless  had  in  view,  not  self- 
glorification,  which  was  wholly  alien  to  his 
earnest,  self-denying  character,  but  the 
mention  of  those  qualities  which  he  saw 
were  most  needed  by  Timothy.  Long-suffer- 
frg  (JV  wpoOvpty  I  as  1  Tim.  i.  16,  of  the 
long-suffering  of  Jesus  Christ  towards  him- 
self, and  elsewhere  frequently  of  human 
patience  and  forbearance  towards  others. 
Fatienoe  (rp  virofiovtf).  This  is  exercised  in 
the  patient  endurance  of  afflictions  for 
Christ's  sake.  It  is  coupled,  as  here,  with 
naKooOufila,  long-suffering,  in  Col.  i.  11. 

Ver.  11. — Suffering  for  afflictions,  A.V. ; 
what  things  befell  me  for  which  came  unto 
me,  A.V. ;  and  for  but,  A.V.    Persecutions 


(oWy/ioT?) ;  as  Matt.  xiii.  21;  Acts  viii.l; 
xiii.  50;  2  Cor.  xii.  10,  etc.  Sufferings 
(tojs  Tra8tjiuurtv)  ;  usually  so  rendered  in  the 
A.V.  (Bom.  viii.  18  ;  2  Cor.  i.  5 ;  Col.  i.  24, 
etc.) ;  rendered  "  afflictions  "  in  Heb.  x.  32 ; 
1  Pet.  v.  9.  At  Antioch ;  in  Pisidia  (Acts 
xiii  14).  For  an  account  of  the  persecutions 
encountered  by  St.  Paul  at  Antioch,  Ico- 
nium,  and  Lystra,  see  Acts  xiii.,  xi  v.  It  was 
at  St.  Paul's  second,  or  rather  third,  visit  to 
Lystra  that  he  chose  Timothy  for  his  com- 
panion (Acts  xvi.  1 — 3).  I  endured  (i/W- 
M7/C0) ;  not  simply  "  suffered,"  but  "  under- 
went," willingly  and  firmly  suffered  (see 
1  Pet.  ii.  19).  As  regards  the  construction, 
the  antecedent  to  ota  is  irafi^/iao-if,  and  the 
difference  between  a  and  ofa  is  that  a  would 
limit  the  reference  to  the  actual  iraMj/iara  at 
Antioch,  Iconium,  and  Lystra,  but  oTa  ex- 
tends the  reference  to  all  similar  sufferings. 
The  proper  English  rendering  is  "  such  as 
befell  me."  But  the  clause  at  the  end  of 
the  sentence  should  be  rendered  "what 
great  persecutions  I  endured."  As  Bengel 
notes,  "  otos  demonstrat  rei  gravitatem,"  and 
otovs  preceding  the  substantive  with  which 
it  agrees  (Su&y/tovs),  cannot  be  construed  the 
same  as  ofa  the  relative.  The  sentence,  otovs 
Siiiynovs  imivtyna,  is  an  amplification  of  the 

E receding  8it&yfiots  '.  "  Thou  hast  fully 
nown  my  persecutions  . .  .  viz.  what  great 
persecutions  I  endured."  And  out  of  them 
all,  etc.  This  is  added  for  Timothy's  en- 
couragement, that  he  might  stand  fast  in 
the  face  of  persecutions  and  sufferings. 
Delivered  me  (jie  ifipitraTo).  Had  the 
apostle  in  his  mind  the  clause  in  the  Lord's 
Prayer, "  Deliver  us  from  evil "  (Matt.  vi.  13)  ? 
Comp.  ch.  iv.  18,  where  the  resemblance  is 
still  more  striking.  Observe  the  testimony 
to  Christ's  omnipotence  in  this  ascription 
to  him,  in  both  passages,  of  St.  Paul's  de- 
liverance (comp.  Aots  xviii.  10). 

Ver.  12.—  Would  for  will,  A.V.  Tea  and 
all  («a!  iraWej  5e).  As  though  he  had  said, 
"  Mine  is  not  a  solitary  example  ofa  servant 
of  God  being  persecuted ;  it  is  the  common  lot 
of  all  who  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  " 
(comp.  John  xv.  20  and  1  Pet.  iv.  1, 12, 13). 
Ver.  13. — Impostors  for  seducers,  A.V. 
Evil  men  (irovripof).  In  ch.  iv.  18  it  is  tmv- 
rbs  tyyov  wovnpov.  The  adjective  is  applied 
indifferently  to  persons  and  things — evil 
men,  evil  servants,  evil  persons,  evil  gene- 
ration, evil  spirits,' etc.,  and  evil  deeds,  evil 
fruits,  evil  eye,  evil  works,  etc.  Satan,  the 
embodiment  of  evil,  is  o  irovrip6s.  Impostors 
(70V") ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
In  classical  Greek  y&ns  is  a  juggler,  a  cheat, 
an  enchanter.  St.  Paul  still  had  the 
Egyptian  magicians  in  his  mind.  Shall  wax 
worse  and  worse  (Trpoit6^ov<rw  hr\  rb  x  «/>»>'); 
see  above,  ver.  9,  note. 
Ver.  U.— Abide  for  continue,  A.V.  Abide 


oh.  ilr.  i— it.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


43 


thou,  eto.  Be  not  like  these  juggling  heretics, 
blown  about  by  every  wind  of  doctrine,  and 
always  seeking  some  new  thing,  but  abide 
in  the  old  truths  which  thou  hast  learnt 
from  thy  childhood.  Hast  been  assured  of 
(iwiBTt&eris;)  j  only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, but  found  in  2  Maco.  vii.  24  and 
1  Kings  i.36.  In  classical  Greek  it  lias  the 
same  sense  as  here  (among  others),  "  to  be 
made  sure  of  a  thing."  Of  whom  thou  hast 
learned  them  (waph.  tIvos  £/»afles,  or,  according 
to  another  reading  of  nearly  equal  authority, 
iraph  tIvuv).  If  rfeos  is  the  right  reading, 
it  must  refer  either  to  God  or  to  St.  Paul. 
In  favour  of  its  referring  to  God  is  the  ex- 
pression in  the  Prophet  Isaiah  commented 
upon  by  our  Lord  in  John  vi.  45,  where  vapk 
tou  Tla-rpis  answers  to  ttapaflvos;  the  pro- 
mise concerning  the  Comforter,  "He  shall 
tench  you  all  things"  (John  xiv.  26,  etc.); 
and  the  very  similar  reasoning  of  St.  John, 
when  he  is  exhorting  his  "  little  children  "  to 
stand  fast  in  the  faith,  in  spite  of  those  that 
seduced  them :  "  Let  that  therefore  abide  in 
you  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning; " 
for  "  the  anointing  which  ye  have  received 
of  him,  abideth  in  you,  and  ye  need  not 
that  any  man  teach  you :  but  as  the  same 
anointing  teacheth  you  of  all  things, . . .  and 
even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  abide  in  him " 
(1  John  ii.  24 — 28) ;  and  other  similar  pas- 
sages. There  would  obviously  be  great 
force  in  reminding  Timothy  that  he  had 
received  the  gospel  under  the  immediate 
teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  that  it 
would  be  a  shameful  thing  for  him  to  turn 
aside  under 'the  influence  of  those  impostors. 
If  rfaos  does  not  refer  to  God,  it  must  refer 
to  St.  Paul.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  rli/aw  is 
the  true  reading  (which  is  less  probable),  it 
must  refer  to  Lois  and  Eunice,  which  seems 
rather  feeble. 

Ver.  15. — Babe  for  child,  A.V.;  sacred 
writings  for  Holy  Scriptures,  A.V.  And  that 
from  a  babe,  etc.  Another  consideration 
urged  as  a  reason  for  standing  fast.  He 
was  no  novice  in  the  Scriptures.  His  mother 
and  grandmother  had  been  careful  to  imbue 
him  with  that  sacred  literature  which  should 
make  him  wise  unto  salvation  through  faith 
in  Jesus  Christ,  from  his  very  earliest  yeais. 
Surely  he  would  not  throw  away  such  a 
precious  advantage.  The  saored  writings  (tA 
lepli  ypdnpara) ;  literally,  the  holy  letters,  or 
learning.  An  ordinarily  educated  child  learns 
yp&H/jurra  (John  vii.  15),  in  contradistinction 
to  the  uneducated,  who  are  aypi^aTot  (Acts 
iv.  13).  But  Timothy  had  learnt  t<1  Upa 
yp&fipuiTa,  whose  excellence  is  described  in 
the  next  verse. 

Ver.  16. — Every  Scripture  inspired  of  God 
is  also  profitable  for  all  Scripture  is  given  by 
inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable,  A.V. ; 
(caching  for  doctrine,  A.V.;  which  it  in  for 


in,  A.V,  Every  Scripture,  eto.  There  are 
two  wayg  of  construing  this  important  pas- 
sage: (A)  As  in  the  A. V.,  in  which  6c6irvev- 
<ttos  is  part  of  the  predicate  coupled  by 
icttl  with  the  following  a<p4\tftos ;  (B)  as  in 
the  R.V.,  where  fleidrccwrToj  is  part  of  the 
subject  (as  irav  ipyov  &ya96v,  "  every  good 
work,"  2  Cor.  ix.  8, and  elsewhere);  and  the 
following  ra!  is  ascensive,  and  to  be  rendered 
"  is  also."  Commentators  are  pretty  equally 
divided,  though  the  older  ones  (as  Origen, 
Jerome  (Vulgate),  the  versions)  mostly 
adopt  (B).  In  favour  of  (A),  however,  it 
may  be  said  (1)  that  such  a  sentence  as 
that  which  arises  from  (B)  necessarily  im- 
plies that  there  are  some  ypa(pal  which  are 
not  6e6wyeuffT0i,  just  as  TJav  epyov  dya96y 
implies  that  there  are  some  works  which 
are  not  good  ;  waara  evKoyia  wnevfiaTmii  (Eph. 
i.  3),  that  there  are  some  blessings  which 
are  not  spiritual ;  nav  ipyov  irovtipiv  (2  Tim. 
iv.  18),  that  there  are  some  works  which 
are  not  evil;  and  so  on.  But  as  ypcuprf  is 
invariably  used  in  the  New  Testament  for 
''Scripture,"  and  not  for  any  profane  writing; 
it  is  not  in  accordance  with  biblical  language 
to  say,  "  every  inspired  Scripture,"  because 
every  Scripture  is  inspired.  (2)  The  sen- 
tence, taken  according  to  (B),  is  an  ex- 
tremely awkward,  and,  as  Alford  admits, 
harsh  construction,  not  supported  in  its 
entirety  by  one  single  parallel  usage  in 
the  whole  New  Testament.  (3)  The  sen- 
tence, taken  according  to  (A),  is  a  perfectly 
simple  one,  and  is  exactly  parallel  with 
1  Tim.  iv.  4,  Tlav  KTla-pLa  @eov  ica\6v,  /col 
of-Bev  aTr6f}Ai)Top,  "Every  creature  of  God 
is  good,  and  nothing  to  be  refused."  (4) 
It  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  context. 
Having  in  the  preceding  verse  stated  the 
excellence  of  the  saored  writings,  he  accounts 
for  that  excellence  by  referring  to  their 
origin  and  source.  They  are  inspired  of 
God,  and  hence  their  wide  use  and  great 
power  (5)  This  interpretation  is  supported 
hv  high  authority:  Chrysostom,  Gregory 
uf  N'.is  u,  etc., among  the  ancients  (Alford); 
and  Bengel,Wiesinger,  DeWette, etc.,  among 
modern.  The  advocates  of  (B),  as  Bishop 
Ellicott,  Dean  Alford,  etc.,  speak  very 
doubtfully.  With  regard  to  the  rendering 
of  ttcura  ypa<p>h,  no  doubt,  strict  grammar,  in 
the  absence  of  the  article,  favours  the  render- 
ing in  the  K.V.,  "  every  Scripture,"  rather 
than  that  of  the  A.V.,  «  all  Scripture."  But 
Alford's  remark  on  Matt.  i.  20  applies  with 
full  force  here:  "When  a  word  or  an  ex- 
pression came  to  bear  a  technical  conven- 
tional meaning,  it  was  also  common  to  use 
it  without  the  article,  as  if  it  were  a  proper 
name,  e.g.  @eis,  vifios,  vlbs  ©eoC,"  eto.  There- 
fore, just  as  imaa  'Upoo-6\vpa  (Matt.  ii.  8) 
means  "all  Jerusalem,"  not  "every  Jeru- 
salem," so  here  rao-a  ypaipi  mean*  "all 


44 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.        [oh.  hi.  1—17. 


Scripture." '  What  follows  of  the  various 
uses  of  Holy  Soriptuve  is  not  true  of  "  every- 
Scripture."  One  Scripture  is  profitable  for 
doctrine,  another  for  reproof,  and  so  on. 
Examples  of  ypa<pii  without  the  article  are 
2  Fet.  i.  20  and  Bom.  i.  2;  and  of  iras 
not  followed  by  the  article,  and  yet  meaning 
"  all,"  are  in  Eph.  ii.  21  and  iii.  15.  Inspired 
of  God,  etc.  (eeSwvevo-Tos) ;  here  only  in  the 
New  Testament  or  LXX.,  but  occasionally 
in  classical  Greek,  as  Plutarch.  For  teach- 
ing, etc.  The  particular  uses  for  which 
Scripture  is  said  to  be  profitable  present  no 
difficulty.  Teaching,  of  which  Holy  Scrip- 
ture is  the  only  infallible  source.  Beproof 
(tKeyXov  or  4\eyn6v);  only  here  and  Hub. 
xi.  1 ;  but  in  classical  Greek  it  means  "  a 
proof,"  apeoially  for  the  purpose  of  "  refuta- 
tion" of  a  false  statement  or  argument. 
Here  in  the  same  sense  for  the  "  conviction  " 
or  "  refutation "  of  false  teachers  (comp. 
Titus  i.  9,  13),  but  probably  including  errors 
in  living  (compare  in  the  '  Ordering  of 
Priests,'  "  That  there  be  no  place  left  among 
you,  either  for  error  in  religion  or  for 
vicious ness  in  life").  Correction  (4mi>6p- 
fleocnj');  only  here  in  the  New  Testament, 
but  occasionally  in  the  LXX.,  and  fre- 
quently in  classical  Greek,  as  Aristotle, 
Plato,  etc.,  in  the  sense  of  "  correction,"  t.e. 
setting  a  person  or  thing  straight,  "  revisal," 
"  improvement,"  "  amendment,"  or  the  like. 
It  may  be  applied  equally  to  opinions  and 
to  morals,  or  way  of  life.  Instruction  which 
is  in  righteousness.  There  is  no  advantage 
in  this  awkward  phraseology.  "  Instruction 
iu    righteousness"    exactly  expresses    the 

1  Compare,  too,  itaaa  odp£,  "all  flesh  " 
(Luke  iii.  6);  was  o!kos  'lapa.r\\,  "all  the 
house  of  Israel"  (Acts  ii.  36);  iv  viay  4m- 
a-Tokrj,  "in  his  whole  Epistle"  (Ignat.,  'Ad 
Ephes.,'  xii.). 


meaning.  The  Greek,  r\v  tv  Sucatotrivrt, 
merely  limits  the  ntuSeia  to  the  sphere  oi 
righteousness  or  Christian  virtue.  By  the 
use  of  Holy  Scripture  the  Christian  is  being 
continually  more  perfectly  instructed  in 
holy  living. 

Ver,  17. — Complete  for  perfect,  A.V.  ;/ur- 
niehed  completely  for  throughly  furnished, 
A.V. ;  every  good  work  for  all  good  worhs, 
A.V.  Complete  (tfpTios);  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament,  but  common  in  classical 
Greek.  "Complete,  perfect  of  its  kind" 
(Liddell  and  Scott).  Tarnished  completely 
(iiriprurfievos,  containing  the  same  root  as 
iprios);  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament 
only  in  Acts  xxi.  5  in  the  sense  of  "com- 
pleting" a  term  of  days.  It  is  nearly 
synonymous  with  KaTaprl(v  (Matt.  xxi.  16 ; 
Luke  vi.  40;  2  Cor.  xiii.  11 ;  Heb.  xiii.  21 ; 
1  Pet.  v.  10).  In  late  olassical  Greek  Qap- 
t'6»  means,  as  here,  '*  to  equip  fully."  As 
regards  the  question  whether  the  man  of 
God  is  restricted  in  its  meaning  to  the 
minister  of  Christ,  or  comprehends  all 
Christians,  two  things  seem  to  decide  in 
favour  of  the  former :  the  one  that  "  the 
man  of  God"  is  in  the  Old  Testament  in- 
variably applied  to  prophets  in  the  im- 
mediate service  of  God  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  11, 
note);  the  other  that  in  1  Tim.  vi.  11  it 
undoubtedly  refers  to  Timothy  in  his  cha- 
racter of  chief  pastor  of  the  Church,  and 
that  here  too  the  whole  force  of  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  uses  ami  excellence  of  Holy 
Scripture  is  brought  to  bear  upon  the  ex- 
hortations in  ver.  14,  "  Continue  thou  in  the 
things  which  thou  hast  heard,"  addressed 
to  Timothy  as  the  Bishop  of  the  Ephesian 
Church  (see,  too,  ch.  iv.  I — 5,  where  it  is 
abundantly  clear  that  all  that  precedes  »oa 
intended  to  hear  directly  upon  Timothy's 
faithful  and  vigorous  discharge  of  his  office 
as  an  evangelist). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 17. — Holy  Scripture  the  strength  of  the  man  of  God.  There  is  marvellous 
lorce  in  the  application  to  the  Christian  bishop  and  evangelist  of  the  title  the  man  op 
God.  When  we  remember  the  course  of  faithful  and  untiring  labour,  and  patient 
unflinching  suffering,  which  was  run  by  those  to  whom  alone  this  title  was  given  in 
the  Old  Testament — Moses  and  Samuel  and  Elijah,  and  other  prophets  of  God — we 
feel  at  once  that  the  application  of  this  title  to  the  ministers  of  Christ  under  the  New 
Testament  teaches  them  with  incisive  power  that  the  like  spirit  must  be  found  in  them 
if  they  are  worthy  to  be  classed  with  the  men  of  God.  Evidently  the  "man  of  God" 
must  not  be  afraid  of  a  man  that  shall  die,  or  a  son  of  man  which  shall  be  made  as 
grass;  he  must  not  shrink  from  bearing  wituess  for  God  before  an  unbelieving,  and 
gainsaying  world ;  he  must  not  be  a  lover  of  ease  or  pleasure,  or  of  the  praise  of  men ; 
he  must  not  be  greedy  of  gain  or  covetous  of  rewa-d ;  he  must  not  be  a  man  of  strife 
and  brawls,  but  a  man  of  love  and  peace ;  he  maut  be  zealous  for  God's  honour  and 
glory ;  he  must  be  a  staunch  upholder  of  God's  truth  against  errors  and  false  doctrines ; 
and  he  must  be  a  man  of  prayer,  and  very  devout  towards  God ;  for  otherwise  how 
shall  he  be  called  a  "man  of  God"?    But  how  shall  this  unearthly  character  be  main> 


ttt  m.  1—1?.]        THli  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  4fi 

tained?  When  those  perilous  times  are  at  their  height  in  which  all  the  natural  affec- 
tions of  men  seem  to  be  blighted,  and  all  the  natural  safeguards  against  the  growth  of 
evil  seem  to  be  overborne  by  the  floods  of  ungodliness,  when  a  proud  boasting  spirit,  as 
empty  as  it  is  pretentious,  carries  men  into  all  kinds  of  unseemly  action,  and  when 
religion  itself,  far  from  guiding  men  in  holy  paths,  degenerates  into  hypocrisy  and 
faction  and  opposition  to  that  which  is  good,  how  shall  the  man  of  (rod  maintain  his 
integrity,  abide  in  the  true  doctrine  of  God,  and  hold  his  own  against  the  teachers  of 
lies,  and  the  seducers  of  weak  and  silly  souls?  God  has  provided  him  with  an  all- 
sufficient  weapon  of  attack  and  of  defence.  In  those  holy  Scriptures  which  were  given 
by  inspiration  of  God,  the  man  of  God  finds  a  spiritual  furniture  suitable  for  every  need. 
By  the  study  of  it  he  acquires  fresh  wisdom  for  his  task,  and  by  its  spirit  his  own  spirit 
is  nourished  and  refreshed.  In  the  light  of  its  bright  truth  the  pernicious  errors  of 
seducers  are  exposed ;  by  its  counsels  waverers  are  established,  the  weak  are  strength- 
ened, the  crooked  are  set  straight  again.  Conversant  with  its  heavenly  doctrine,  the 
man  of  God  is  never  at  a  loss  for  a  word  of  rebuke,  of  comfort,  or  exhortation.  And 
while,  on  the  one  hand,  he  is  able  to  refute  every  new  heresy  that  arises,  by  reference  to 
the  unchanging  Word  of  God,  on  the  other  he  daily  acquires  some  new  insight  into  the 
depths  of  revelation  for  his  own  edification  and  that  of  others.  He  finds  that  the 
manifold  and  many-sided  wisdom  of  the  Scriptures  is  as  able  to  cope  with  the  intellec- 
tual difficulties  of  the  nineteenth  century  as  it  was  with  the  Gnosticism  of  the  East  in 
the  first  centuries  of  Christianity.  And  so,  while  some  turn  away  their  ears  from  the 
truth,  and  turn  aside  unto  fables,  the  man  of  God  finds  his  faith  daily  strengthening 
and  increased,  and  looks  forward  fearlessly  to  the  time  when  the  folly  of  the  sceptic 
shall  be  evident  to  all  men,  and  the  truth  of  God's  Word  shall  be  vindicated  before  the 
whole  oreation  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  glory  of  his  kingdom. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — The  perilous  times  of  the  apostasy.  The  apostle  next  proceeds  to  predict 
a  further  progress  in  error,  with  the  view  of  putting  Timothy  on  his  guard  and  sharpen- 
ing his  diligence. 

I.  The  period  of  this  apostasy.  "  This  know  also,  that  in  the  last  days  perilous 
times  shall  come."  1.  The  language  does  not  point  to  the  closing  days  of  the  Christian 
dispensation,  for  it  resembles  the  language  of  the  Apostle  John — "  It  is  the  last  time  " 
— where  the  present  is  undoubtedly  referred  to,  and  not  the  future.  2.  The  contextual 
injunction,  "from  such  turn  away"  applies  to  the  present  rather  than  to  afar-distant 
future*  The  Christian  Church  has  in  all  ages  shown  a  condition  of  things  only  too 
closely  represented  by  the  moral  picture  in  the  context.  The  apostle  implies  that  there 
were  "vessels  of  dishonour"  in  the  "large  house"  in  his  own  day,  such  as  Hymenals 
and  Philetus,  as  well  as  "  vessels  unto  honour."  3.  The  language  has  a  wide  latitude, 
covering  the  whole  space  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  The  evil  had  begun  to  work  in 
the  age  of  Timothy,  but  the  worst  development  of  anti-Christian  apostasy  will  be  in  the 
closing  days  of  the  dispensation.  The  "days  of  the  Messiah  "are  often  alluded  to  in 
the  Hebrew  prophets  as  "  in  the  last  days;"  literally,  "the  end  of  days  "  (Isa.  ii.  2 ;  Hos. 
iii.  6 ;  Micah  iv.  1). 

II.  The  danqehotts  characteb  or  this  apostasy.  "  Perilous  times  snail  come." 
1.  It  will  be  a  time  of  danger  to  the  faith  of  God's  people.  2.  It  will  be  a  time  of  peril 
to  their  lives.    3.  It  will  be  a  time  of  abounding  wickedness  as  well  as  error. — T.  C. 

Vers.  2—5. — Characteristics  of  the  apostasy.  The  doctrinal  degeneracy  is  marked  by 
•  widespread  moral  decay.  The  apostle,  after  his  usual  manner,  groups  the  characters 
into  classes  for  more  distinct  consideration. 

L  The  selfish  class.  "  For  men  shall  be  lovers  of  self,  lovers  of  money."  Self- 
ishness heads  the  dreary  list.  It  is  regarded  by  many  theologians  as  the  root-principle 
of  all  sin.  As  the  opposite  of  love,  however,  is  not  selfishness,  but  hatred,  this  position 
cannot  be  maintained.  Yet  selfishness  is,  above  all  things,  the  hard  represser  of  love. 
The  "  love  of  money  "  has  been  called  "  the  daughter  of  selfishness." 

H,  The  class  of  abbooant  boastees.     "  Boasters,  arrogant,  railera."    The  first  are 


46  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHt.        [oh.  rtj.  i— 17. 

ostentatious  in  speech;  the  second,  full  of  pride  and  contempt  for  others;  the  third  are 
full  of  insults  to  men. 

III.  The  class  which  is  defiantly  begardless  op  human  relationships. 
"  Disobedient  to  parents,  unthankful,  unholy,  without  natural  affection,  implacable." 
He  who  is  regardless  of  filial  duty  will  be  ungrateful  to  others,  and  he  that  is  ungrate- 
ful will  have  do  regard  for  holiness  of  character;  for  he  will  keep  covenaut  with  no  one 
who  disregards  his  parent  or  his  benefactor. 

IV.  The  class  distinguished  by  reckless  and  passionate  defiance  of  good. 
"Slanderers,  without  self-control,  fierce,  no  lovers  of  good,  traitors."  The  first  tem; 
points  to  the  disposition  to  bring  the  good  down  to  the  level  of  the  base ;  the  second,  to 
the  absence  of  all  restraint  from  law,  human  or  Divine ;  the  third,  to  the  savage  temper 
that  delights  in  cruelty;  the  fourth,  to  the  spirit  that  "loves  darkness  rather  than 
light ; "  the  fifth,  to  the  class  of  men  who  could  betray  their  Christian  brethren  to  their 
persecutors,  or  behave  falsely  in  any  of  their  existing  relationships. 

V.  The  class  of  heady  and  conceited  actors.  "  Headstrong,  puffed  up."  Rash- 
ness and  conceit  are  often  allied. 

VI.  The  class  of  pleasure-seekers.  "Lovers  of  pleasure  rather  than  lovers  ot 
God."  It  represents  a  dissi|  ated  class  under  a  Chrisiian  profession,  who  have  no  serious 
pursuits,  and  prefer  the  friendship  of  the  world  to  the  friendship  of  God. 

Thus,  the  long  catalogue  of  moral  enormity  developed  by  the  apostasy  began  with 
"  the  love  of  self,"  and  ends  with  "  the  love  of  pleasure,"  to  the  utter  exclusion,  first 
and  last,  of  the  "  love  of  God."— T.  C. 

Ver.  6. — The  relation  of  the  apostasy  to  the  Christian  prof ession.  I.  The  external 
form  of  piety  is  to  exist  under  the  apostasy.  "  Having  a  form  of  godliness." 
The  picture  is  that  of  a  Christianized  paganism  in  the  Church.  There  was  to  be  a 
scrupulous  regard  for  all  ritualistic  regularity ;  an  outward  show  of  devoutness  under 
strict  forms,  and  the  mask  of  godliness  over  all  to  cover  a  heart  in  secret  enslaved 
by  sin. 

II.  There  will  be  a  repudiation  of  real  godliness.  "  But  denying  the  power 
thereof."  1.  The  power  of  godliness  consists  in  love  to  God  and  love  to  our  neighbour. 
These  were  both  repudiated.  The  class  referred  to  were  strangers  to  experimental  reli- 
gion, which  they  dishonoured  by  saying  one  thing  with  their  lips  and  another  thing 
with  the  ir  lives.  2.  Such  a  repudiation  involves  graver  sin  and  deeper  condemnation 
than  if  they  had  never  known  the  truth  or  heard  of  the  way  of  life. 

III.  The  duty  of  believers  in  the  apostasy.  "  Prom  such  turn  away.h  We 
ought  to  withdraw  from  their  fellowship,  avoid  all  familiarity  with  them,  hold  no  terms 
with  the  enemies  of  Christ  and  his  kingdom. — T.  C. 

Vers.  6,  7. — The  insidiously  proselytizing  habits  of  these  apostates.  I.  The  arts  of 
the  seducers.  "  For  of  this  sort  are  they  who  creep  into  houses,  and  lead  captive  silly 
women."  1.  They  were  of  a  most  proselytizing  spirit.  Like  the  Pharisees,  they  would 
compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte.  2.  They  practised  unworthy  arts.  They 
wormed  their  way  insidiously  into  the  confidence  of  families.  There  was  a  deceitful 
and  tricky  method  of  gaining  access  to  their  victims.  3.  They  used  their  stratagems  to 
snare  women  rather  than  men.  They  knew  that  women,  as  the  weaker  vessels,  were 
more  accessible  to  soft  blandishments  and  specious  pretences  of  piety.  They  counted 
upon  an  accession  of  female  converts  as,  above  all  things,  most  contributing  to  the 
success  of  their  propaganda. 

II.  The  character  of  their  victims.  "  Silly  women  laden  with  sins,  led  away  by 
divers  lusts,  ever  learning,  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth." 
These  victims  of  their  specious  arts  were  morally  and  intellectually  prepared  for  them. 
I.  They  were,  morally,  under  the  sway  of  evil  passions  and  desires,  full,  no  doubt,  of 
"  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life."  Such  women  would 
welcome  a  short  out  to  peace,  or  any  resonciliation  between  religion  and  worldliness 
that  could  be  devised  by  the  arts  of  apostasy.  The  words  seem  to  point  to  the  weight 
of  former  sins  burdening  the  conscience,  from  which  they  hoped  to  be  released  under 
easier  conditions  than  those  prescribed  by  the  gospel.  2.  They  were  incapable,  through 
their  sinful  life,  of  attaining  a  true  knowledge  of  the  truth.    They  were  "  silly  women," 


ea.  ni.  1—17.]        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  11 

with  light,  frivolous,  unbalanced  judgment* ;  "  ever  learning  " — with  a  morbid  love  of 
novelties  in  religion,  an  insatiable  curiosity  for  the  mysteries  promised  by  their  false 
guides,  and  a  constant  craving  for  an  adaptation  of  doctrinal  views  to  their  evil  desires 
— "and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  Because  their  hearts  had 
become  indurated  through  an  evil  life,  and  so  made  inaccessible  to  the  truth. — T.  0. 

Vers.  8,  9. — The  character  and  aims  of  the  false  teachers.  The  apostle  vividly 
depicts  their  attitude  toward  the  truth. 

I.  They  have  their  historical  prototypes.  "  As  Jannes  and  Jambres  withstood 
Moses,  so  do  these  also  withstand  the  truth."  1.  These  were  two  Egyptian  magicians, 
called  "wise  men  and  sorcerers"  (Exod.  vii.  11 — 22),  who  appeared  at  the  court  of 
Pharaoh  to  resist  the  wonder-working  power  of  Moses.  Their  names  do  not  occur  in 
the  Old  Testament,  but  they  are  found  in  the  Targum  of  Jonathan,  and  are  also  quottd 
by  heathen  writers.  What  was  more  natural  than  that  the  apostle  should  quote  to 
Timothy  one  of  the  two  traditions  of  his  country?  2.  These  magicians,  reported  to 
have  been  sons  of  Balaam,  were  thwarted  in  their  arts  by  the  superior  power  that  worked 
through  Moses.    The  parallel  was  therefore  in  a  double  sense  apt. 

II.  The  false  teachees  directly  withstood  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  1. 
They  may  have  used  occult  arts  like  their  Egyptian  prototypes  to  attract  disciples ;  for 
the  word  "  seducers,"  applied  to  them  in  the  context  (ver.  13),  has  this  signification. 
The  claim  to  possess  such  powers  was  not  unusual  in  that  day  (Acts  viii.  9—24;  xiii. 
6 — 12 ;  xix.  18 — 20).  2.  But,  like  Elyrms,  they  withstood  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  by 
representing  themselves  as  possessing  as  much  authority  as  the  apostle  himself,  and  thus 
neutralizing  its  exclusive  claims.    They  subverted  the  hopes  of  the  gospel. 

III.  The  explanation  of  their  anti-Christian  attitude.  "Men  of  corrupt 
minds,  reprobate  concerning  the  faith."  1/  Corrupt  affections  depraved  their  mental 
judgments.  Even  that  mind,  which  is  the  n.edium  through  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
makes  his  communications  to  man,  had  become  darkened.  "  A  corrupt  head,  a  corrupt 
heart,  and  a  vicious  life,  usually  accompany  each  other.''  2.  The  doctrines  of  these 
teachers  had  been  tested  and  discovered  to  be  worthless,  like  silver  which  was  to  be 
rejected  by  man.    They  had  nothing  but  the  name  in  comnmn  with  the  Christian  faith. 

IV.  The  check  that  would  be  given  to  their  progress.  "  But  they  shall  pro- 
ceed no  further ;  for  their  folly  shall  be  evident  to  all  men,  as  theirs  also  came  to  be." 
This  passage  seems  opposed  to  ch.  ii.  16,  where  it  is  said  that  "  they  shall  advance  to 
more  ungodliness ; "  but  in  that  place  (1)  the  apostle  is  speaking  of  an  immediate  diffu- 
sion of  error,  in  this  of  its  ultimate  extinction ;  (2)  in  that  place  the  advance  toward 
ungodliness  is  asserted,  here  there  is  a  denial  of  its  successful  advance  without  expo- 
sure. The  evil  would  advance,  but  only  to  a  certain  point,  and  the  true  character  of  its 
promoters — "  their  folly " — would  be  made  as  manifest  as  was  that  of  the  Egyptian 
magicians. — T.  C. 

Vers.  10 — 12. — The  career  of  the  apostle  commended  as  an  example  to  his  youthful 
disciple.  The  apostle  recalls  to  Timothy's  mind  the  facts  of  his  own  checkered  career, 
partly  to  mark  the  contrast  between  his  life  and  that  of  the  false  teachers,  partly  to 
stimulate  Timothy  to  like  faithfulness  and  endurance. 

I.  It  is  good  for  young  ministers  to  observe  and  follow  the  ways  of  their 
elder  brethren.  "  But  thou  didst  follow  my  teaching,  conduct,  purpose,  faith."  1. 
They  will  thus  be  stimulated  to  greater  effort.  2.  They  will  be  guided  by  wiser  counsels. 
3.  They  will  be  guarded  against  many  mistakes.  4.  They  will  be  better  able  to  endure 
persecutions  and  trials. 

II.  It  is  allowable  fob  a  Christian  minister  to  speak  of  what  God's  grace 
hab  enabled  him  to  do  and  to  suffer  for  the  sospel.  1.  It  glorifies  OooVs  grace. 
The  apostle  always  made  this  grace  the  supreme  factor  in  his  success.  "By  the  grace 
of  God  I  am  what  I  am; "  "  Yet  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  in  me  "  (1  Cor. 
xv.  10).     2.  It  is  an  encouragement  to  other  ministers  to  labour  with  equal  self-denial. 

III.  The  method  of  the  apostle's  ministry  and  life.  "My  teaching,"  in  allusion 
less  to  his  doctrine  than  to  his  manner  of  giving  instruction ;  "  conduct,"  or  manner  of 
life,  in  allusion  to  "  my  ways  which  be  in  Christ "  (1  Cor.  iv.  17) ;  "  purpose,"  for  he 
remained  true  to  the  spiritual  objects  of  his  life,  and,  above  all,  to  his  mission  to  the 


48  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  WMOTHY.        t<m.  ra.  1— It. 

Gentiles;  "faith,"  in  allusion  to  his.  belief  in  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the  gospel, 
linked  with  "long-suffering"  toward  his  bitter  adversaries,  whom  he  longed  to  lead  into 
truth — "the  faith  and  the  patience"  being  necessary  to  the  inheritance  of  the  promises 
(Heb.  vi.  12} ;  "love,"  which  seemed  never  to  fail,  "believing  all  things,  bearing  all  things, 
hoping  all  things;"  linked  with  "endurance,"  as  before  (1  Tim.  vi  11 ;  Titus  ii.  2), 
because  it  is  the  sustaining  element  of  this  endurance ;  "  persecutions,  afflictions,  which 
came  to  me  at  Antioch,"  in  Pisidia,  whence  he  was  expelled  by  the  Jews ;  "  at  Iconium," 
where  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  made  an  assault  upon  him ;  "  at  Lystra,"  where  he  was 
stoned  and  left  for  dead — the  three  cities  being  named  because  of  Timothy's  intimate 
acquaintance  with  them,  the  apostle's  sufferings  there  being  the  earliest  in  his  missionary 
life.  He  gratefully  records  his  deliverance  out  of  all  his  persecutions  by  the  good  hand 
of  the  Lord; 

IV,  The  attitude  of  the  world  toward  godliness.  "  Tea,  and  all  that  would 
live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution."  1.  The  persona  thus  described. 
(1)  Those  who  aim  at  a  godly  life — who  "  wish  to  live  godly."  This  is  the  highest  aim 
of  man  in  a  world  with  many  lofty  ideals.  (2)  They  are  not  merely  godly,  but  live  in 
all  the  outward  amenities  of  gospel-godliness.  "  As  ye  have  received  Christ  Jesus  the 
Lord,  so  walk  ye  in  him."  (3)  This  life  of  godliness  finds  its  source  and  spring  in  Jesus 
Christ.  It  is  "  in  Christ  Jesus."  2.  Their  lot  in  this  life.  "  Shall  suffer  persecution." 
(1)  This  was  Christ's  prediction.  "If  they  persecuted  me,  they  will  also  persecute 
you"  (John  xv.  20).  (2)  The  world  is  essentially  at  war  with  the  kingdom  of  God. 
"  Because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  yon"  (John  xv.  19).  (3) 
Better  to  suffer  as  Christians  than  as  evil-doers. — T.  0. 

Ver.  13. — The  downward  course  of  seducers.  The  apostle  connects  the  persecution 
with  the  ways  of  evil  men,  while  he  warns  Timothy  against  them. 

L  Theib  degenerate  course.  "  But  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse  and 
worse."  1.  The  persons  here  described.  (1)  Evil  men.  (a)  They  are  those  in  contrast 
with  the  men  who  "  would  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus."  (b)  They  are  not  simply 
sinners  as  all  men  are  by  nature  and  practice,  but  rather  wicked  men  who  wear  a  mask 
of  godliness,  yet  are  full  of  malice  against  the  saints  of  God.  (2)  Seducers,  literally 
magicians,  in  allusion  to  those  of  Egypt ;  men  who  are  full  of  sorceries  to  captivate  and 
betray  the  unwary  into  error.  2.  They  shall  go  from  bad  to  worse — both  in  principle 
and  in  practice,  in  the  use  of  their  seductive  arts,  and  in  the  gradual  depravation  of 
their  character.  There  is  nothing  to  arrest  their  downward  course ;  there  is  no  grace 
in  the:  heart ;  the  principles  of  evil  will  work  with  unchecked  energy  in  their  natures. 

II.  The  explanation  op  this  degeneracy.  "Deceiving  and  being  deceived." 
1.  The  method  of  mental  and  moral  debasement.  Let  men  repeat  falsities  with  sufficient 
frequency  and  deliberateness,  and  they  will  come  by-aud-by  to  believe  them  themselves. 
They  begin  by  deceiving  others.  They  cannot  deceive  God  nor  the  elect,  but  by  their 
good  words  and  fair  speeches,  their  lying  wonders  and  their  specious  arts,  they  may 
seduoe  the  simple  into  error.  2.  The  retribution  that  follows  upon  deception  is  self- 
deception.  Such  deceivers  have  become  sincere  in  their  error,  because  they  have 
blinded  their  spiritual  eyesight;  but  now  they  see  truth  as  error,  and  error  as  truth. 
— T.  0. 

Vers.  14, 15. — An  admonition  to  Timothy  to  abide  in  the  ways  of  truth.  Amidst  all 
the  seductions  of  the  false  teachers,  the  apostle  urges  Timothy  to  bold  fast  the  doctrines 
which  he  had  received  in  his  early  training. 

I.  The  duty  and  necessity  of  holding  past  by  the  Divine  verities.  "But 
do  thou  continue  in  the  things  which  thou  hast  learned  and  hast  been  assured  of." 
1.  The  strength  and  comfort  of  an  widoubting  persuasion.  Timothy  was  not  to  be 
moved  away  from  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  either  by  persecutions  or  seductive  arts. 
He  found  his  strength  and  peace  in  them.  2.  He  had  really  learned  them,  unlike  those 
ever  learning  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth ;  for  he  had  an 
experimental  knowledge  of  them.  He  was,  besides,  fully  assured  of  them,  with  "  the 
full  assurance  of  understanding."  It  is  a  very  unbecoming  attitude  for  a  teacher  of 
others  to  be  scepiical  in  his  opinions.  He  ought  to  affirm  with  certainty,  and  if  ha  is 
fully  assnrmi.  he  has  no  right  to  surrender  the  truth. 


oh.  m.  1—17.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  49 

II.  The  grounds  of  his  certainty  and  assurance.  "Snowing  of  whom  thou 
bast  learned  them ;  and  that  from  a  babe  thou  hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which 
are  able  to  make  thee  wise  to  salvation  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  1.  He 
had  been  taught  sound  doctrine  by  Lois  and  Eunice.  It  is,  therefore,  proper  for  parents 
to  instruct  children  in  doctrine  from  their  earliest  days.  2.  He  had  been,  trained  from 
his  very  infancy  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  It  was,  therefore,  a  right  thing  for  Mm  to  be 
instructed  in  the  Old  Testament,  since  it  was  all  the  Scripture  he  could  have  had  in  his 
childhood.  3.  The  Scripture  he  studied  was  sufficient  to  lead  him  to  Christ.  "  Through 
faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  (1)  This  marks  the  means  by  which  the  salvation 
can  be  attained ;  for  Christ  is  "  the  end  of  the  Law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that 
believeth"  (Rom.  x.  4).  (2)  The  effect  of  the  salvation  is  not  merely  to  instruct,  but 
to  make  wise  in  the  highest  sense — giving  spiritual  wisdom  and  understanding  in  the 
knowledge  of  God's  will ;  for  men  are  naturally  without  spiritual  discernment.  (3)  The 
salvation  cannot  be  enjoyed  without  faith,  resting  upon  the  person  of  the  Redeemer. 
— T.O. 

Vers.  16, 17. — The  authority  and  utility  *f  the  Scriptures.  The  apostle  is  led  to 
emphasize  the  value  of  the  Scriptures  generally  for  the  purposes  of  spiritual  life. 

I.  The  authority  of  Scripture.  "  Every  Scripture  inspired  of  God  is  also 
profitable."  1.  This  does  not  signify  that  there  may  be  Scripture  not  divinely  inspired, 
but  merely  asserts  that  the  Scripture  being  thus  inspired  is  profitable.  2.  The  words 
"  inspired  by  (hid  "  point  to  the  entire  agency  of  God  in  producing  that  Divine  element 
which  makes  the  Bible  differ  from  every  other  look.  The  inspired  person  was  the  organ 
nf  God  in  what  he  said,  so  that  his  words  were  the  words  of  God.  3.  Scripture  says 
nothing  concerning  the  mode  of  inspiration.  The  process  is  supernatural,  and  it  cannot 
be  explained.  It  is  not  with  the  mode  but  with  the  result  we  are  concerned.  4.  Inspi- 
ration differs  from  revelation — this  being  that  through  which  apostles  and  prophets 
came  into  possession  of  Divine  information,  inspiration  being  that  through  which  they 
were  able  infallibly  to  communicate  it  to  others.  5.  There  is  nothing  in  the  doctrine 
of  inspiration  inconsistent  with  the  idea  that  the  inspired  penmen  used  their  own 
peculiarities  of  verbal  expression  or  personal  idiosyncrasies.  6.  The  inspiration  extends 
to  words  as  veil  as  thoughts — to  the  form  as  well  as  the  substance  of  Scripture.  So  far 
as  the  record  is  inspired  at  all,  infallible  thought  must  be  definite  thought,  and  definite 
thought  implies  words.  The  apostle  claimed  that  the  Holy  Spirit  guaranteed  his  words 
as  well  as  his  thoughts  (1  Cor.  ii.  13,  "  Not  in  the  didactic  words  of  man's  wisdom,  but 
in  the  didactic  words  of  the  Holy  Ghost ").  Besides,  Clirist  and  the  apostles  argue  from 
the  very  words  of  Scripture  (Matt.  xxii.  45 ;  Gal.  iii.  16).  7.  The  term  "  every  Scrip- 
ture" in  the  text  seems  to  include  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New  Testament  so  far 
as  it  had  been  written ;  else  there  would  have  been  no  necessity  for  a  different  term 
from  that  used  in  the  fifteenth  verse,  "  Holy  Scriptures." 

IL  The  utility  of  the  Scripture  "Is  also  profitable  for  teaching,  for  reproof, 
for  correction,  for  discipline  in  righteousness."  1.  It  is  useful  for  teaching — as  a 
medium  for  communicating  instruction,  that  we  may  know  and  believe  what  is  neces- 
sary to  salvation.  2.  It  is  useful  for  reproof—  for  the  refutation  of  error,  for  convinc- 
ing a  man  of  his  error.  8.  It  is  useful  for  correction — as  to  what  is  practically  wrong 
in  life.  4.  It  is  useful  for  "  discipline  in  righteousness  "---righteousness  being  the 
element  in  which  this  discipline  is  to  take  effect,  through  the  agency  of  Scripture. 

HI.  The  result  ob  design  of  the  Scripture.  '*  That  the  man  of  God  may  be 
complete,  furnished  completely  unto  every  good  work."  1.  The  design  is  the  perfection 
of  the  believer  in  life  and  service.  The  description  supplies  the  man  of  God  with  all 
due  appliances  for  this  end.  They  help  to  make  us  perfect  in  knowledge,  faith,  and 
holiness,  as  well  as  to  furnish  us  with  wisdom  and  guidance  in  all  holy  service. 
2.  Inference  to  be  drawn  from  the  design  of  Scripture.  It  is  a  perfect,  a  plain, 
a  sufficient  rule  of  faith  and  life,  in  answer  to  Homan  Catholics.  If  it  can  make  wise  to 
salvation,  perfect  the  man  of  God,  and  furnish  him  for  all  holy  work,  then  there  ii  no 
need  for  tradition  to  supplement  its  imaginary  defects. — T.  C. 

Ver.  4. — The  love  of  pleasure.     "Lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God.' 
"  Pleasure  "  is  a  word  used  in  Scripture  to  denote,  not  lawful  and  wise  enjoyment, 
II.  timothy.  b 


50  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [ch.  hi.  1—17. 

but  a  carnal  Bensuousness  which  often  leads  to  sensuality.  We  see  what  an  absorbing 
power  pleasure  is,  and  how  by  degrees  it  destroys  the  sense  of  duty  and  ignores  the 
'voice  of  conscience. 

I.  Hebe  is  a  gbeat  force.  "  Lovers  1 "  Love  will  surely  be  exercised  In  some  form. 
Sin  is  perversion.  We  are  so  constituted  as  to  love  something.  There  m  an  enthusiasm 
of  evil.    Men  delight  in  sin ;  and  so  the  forces  of  the  soul  run  to  weeds. 

II.  Here  is  a  wrong  object.  Pleasure — instead  of  God.  What  a  contrast  I  We 
find  that  there  is  sometimes  an  assthetic  sensuousness  that  finds  pleasure  in  immoral 
"  art" — where  God  is  not,  where  there  is  no  reverence,  no  righteousness,  no  purity,  no 
goodness.  And  men  worship  before  the  shrine  of  pleasure  till  they  become  idolaters, 
worshipping  worldly  applause,  fleshly  satisfaction,  and  carnal  joy.  There  is  a  pleasure 
(hat  is  lawful  and  healthful;  without  it  brain  and  body,  mind  and  heart,  suffer;  but 
it  must  ever  be  subordinated  to  an  earnest  life  and  a  godly  devotion,  or  we  become 
"  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  5. — The  hypocrite's  garb.  "Having  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the 
power  thereof."  There  may  be  conscious  and  unconscious  hypocrisy.  Either  way 
godliness  is  "  feigned."  There  is  no  pulsing  heart  of  life  in  it.  Its  appearance  is  only 
like  phosphorus  on  the  face  of  the  dead ;  its  activity  is  only  the  galvanized  motion  of 
•  corpse. 

L  We  may  discover  the  signs  of  mere  formalism.  What  are  they  ?  See  vers. 
2,  3,  and  4,  in  which  men  who  are  "  covetous,  and  lovers  of  their  own  selves,1'  are  asso- 
ciated with  blasphemers  and  false  accusers,  unthankful  and  unholy.  All  alike  find 
their  hypocrisy  is  detected  by  the  Divine  insight.  We  may  well*  search  and  examine 
ourselves ;  for  do  not  men  think  lightly  sometimes  of  covetousness  and  selfishness,  or  of 
being  unthankful  or  high-mindtd  ?  Often,  indeed,  we  look  to  great  vices  only  as  our 
destroyers,  and  we  forget  that  hypocrisy  may  be  seen  in  masked  ingratitude.  Yet  here 
it  is  discovered,  not  under  the  cloak  which  hides  evil  enormities,  but  under  the  veil 
which  hides  from  our  eyes  the  presence  of  the  more  respectable  sins. 

H.  We  may  study  the  secret  of  this  formalism.  1.  Prayerless  habit  which 
leaves  the  spirit  unsupplied  wiih  the  nutriment  of  communion  with  God.  2.  Con- 
sciousness of  the  fact  that  in  the  world  appearances  are  enough,  and  that  religion  is  so 
respected  and  so  respectable  that  it  will  not  do  to  live  without  its  appearance.  3. 
Fellowship  with  the  woild,  which  denudes  us  of  all  earnest  endeavours  alter  the  Divine 
life.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  8. — Corruption  within.  "Men  of  corrupt  minds."  It  is  here  that  evil 
begins,  though  it  does  not  end  here.  "As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."  But 
he  does  not  show  in  himself  the  development  of  evil  at  once.  The  hour  of  revelation, 
however,  will  surely  come;  for  "  they  that  be  otherwise  [than  good]  cannot  be  hid." 

L  TflXY  bbsist  the  truth.  For  this  reason  the  truth  will  not  let  them  alone.  It 
is  an  active  searching  power.  It  is  "a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the 
heart,"  and  men  resent  the  intrusion  of  this  all-discovering,  all-judging  power.  Im- 
purity hates  purity.  Falsehood  hates  truth.  Worldly  minds  resist  the  claim  of  God's 
Word  to  supremacy  over  their  hearts  and  lives.  They  resist  its  right  to  reign,  and  its 
claim  to  dominate  thought  and  action  too. 

n.  They  become  reprobate.  Reprobation  is  no  hard  decree  of  God's  j  it  is  man's 
own  act  and  deed,  and  it  is  the  result  of  the  "  corrupt  mind."  This  breeding  cor- 
ruption spreads.  The  seeds  of  evil  are  scattered  here  and  there  till  the  soul  is  like  a 
wilderness,  and  the  mind  which  was  made  to  be  a  garden  of  holiness  becomes  a  grave- 
yard of  sin.     Moral  death  ensues,  and  with  death  always  comes  corruption. 

III.  They  become  revealed.  "Their  folly  shall  be  made  manifest"  (ver.  9).  Thi 
secret  sin  becomes  a  public  shame.  The  thought  incarnates  itself  in  deed,  and  retri- 
bution takes  the  form  of  disgrace. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 17. — Grievous  times.  "  But  know  this,  that  in  the  last  days  grievous  timet 
shall  come."  They  were  in  the  first  days  of  the  Christian  era  j  the  times  foretold  were 
to  be  in  the  last  days  of  that  era.  There  is  an  intended  indefiniteness  about  the  days ; 
nothing  is  said  about  their  commencement^  or  about  the  period  over  which  they  are  to 


oh.  m.  1—17.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  SI 


extend.  They  are  to  embrace  distinct  times,  but  all  characterized  by  grievousness. 
Prom  what  follows  we  may  infer  that  the  grievousness  of  the  times  will  consist  in  the 
prevalence  of  moral  evil,  and  in  the  strange  coexistence  of  moral  evil  with  Christian 
forms.  There  will  be  difficulty  in  knowing  how  to  act,  and  also  in  acting  according  to 
knowledge  in  the  face  of  strong,  quasi-Christian  solidarities  of  evil.  From  a  source  of 
revelation  open  to  him,  the  apostle  was  able  to  write  with  certainty  regarding  the 
coming  of  grievous  times  in  the  last  days.  There  is  not  excluded  the  ultimate  triumph 
of  religion  in  this  world  which  is  taught  elsewhere. 

I.  Characteristics  of  the  men  in  the  grievous  times.  •'  For  men  shall  be  lovers 
of  self."  "  Such  men  as  the  apostle  here  describes  there  have  been  at  all  times,  and  the 
apostle  does  not  say  that  they  will  be  then  such  for  the  first  time,  nor  that  all  men 
without  exception  shall  be  such,  but  he  describes  the  moral-spiritual  physiognomy  of 
the  times  which  he  beholds  approaching."  We  are  not  to  include  in  this  first  part 
of  the  description  all  who  are  influenced  by  self-love ;  for  it  is  only  right  before  God 
that  we  should  be  influenced  by  an  intelligent  regard  to  our  interest.  The  persons 
intended  are  the  selfish — a  word  which  was  only  brought  in  by  the  Puritan  divines 
tovard  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century.  They  are  those  who  exclude  God  from 
the  central  place  to  which  he  is  entitled  in  their  life.  They  are  those  who  exclude 
others  from  the  place  of  interest  to  which  they  are  entitled.  They  thus  put  self  in  a 
false  position — make  it  the  beginning  and  end  of  all  their  thoughts  and  actions.  They 
properly  take  the  place  of  pre-eminence  in  the  apostle's  list ;  for  all  classes  of  sinners 
are  after  the  selfish  type,  i.e.  put  forward  self  in  someway  or  other  that  does  not  accord 
with  eternal  truth.  In  the  grievous  times  will  be  large  developments  of  selfishness. 
"  Lovers  of  money."  From  similarity  of  composition  in  the  Greek  words,  the  apostle 
passes  on  from  lovers  of  self  to  lovers  of  money.  Under  this  head  are  not  to  be  included 
all  seekers  of  money ;  for  it  is  right  to  seek  money  for  good  ends.  Neither  are  there 
to  be  included  all  who  "seek  money  for  selfish  ends.  But  we  are  to  think  rather 
of  the  avaricious,  i.e.  those  who  seek  to  retain  money  in  a  selfish  way.  They  look 
upon  it  as  that  which  will  make  them  self-sufficient  in  the  future;  and  therefore 
they  grudge  to  spend  it  even  on  present  necessity.  The  times  will  be  grievous  when 
the  avaricious  increase.  "Boastful."  Derived  from  a  word  siguifying  "a  wandering 
about,"  this  word  designated  first  the  vagabond  mountebanks,  conjurors,  quacksalvers, 
or  exorcists,  "  full  of  empty  and  boastful  professions  of  cures  and  other  feats  which  they 
could  accomplish."  Men  do  not  need  to  go  about  crying  up,  advertising,  that  which  is 
of  great  value.  What  men  generally  boast  of  is  some  external  advantage  which  is  of  little 
consequence  in  comparison  with  the  moral  worth  which  should  be  associated  with  it. 
The  times  will  be  grievous  when  the  gift  is  exalted  above  the  moral  use  to  which  it  is 
put.  "  Haughty."  The  haughty  are  literally,  in  the  Greek,  those  who  show  themselves 
above  their  fellows.  In  the  glass  of  their  own  minds,  they  behold  themselves  standing 
along  with  others;  and  the  comparison  they  make  is  in  their  own  favour.  Their 
estimate  is  false  in  respect  of  the  importance  attached  to  that  in  which  they  pride 
themselves,  and  in  respect  of  the  importance  attached  to  that  for  which  they  despise 
others.  Birth  is  an  advantage,  but  not  the  only  advantage,  nor  the  greatest  advantage, 
and  must  be  taken  along  with  service  and  character.  In  the  grievous  times  there  will 
be  a  great  amount  of  pride.  "  Bailers."  The  word  is  "  blasphemers,"  but  it  would  be 
inconsistent  with  holding  the  form  of  godliness  to  think  of  blasphemers  in  the  usual 
sense  in  English.  It  is  better,  therefore,  to  think  of  those  who  use  evil  words  to  each 
other,  «'.«.  words  of  contempt,  or  words  of  bitterness.  There  is  to  be  a  large  development 
of  evil-speaking  in  the  grievous  times.  "Disobedient  to  parents."  Selfishness  is  early 
to  show  itself  in  the  form  of  self-wilL  The  young  generation  are  to  show  impatience  of 
being  ruled  by  their  parents,  which  is  sure  to  grow  intc  impatience  in  respect  of  all 
rightful  rule.  In  the  grievous  times  there  is  to  be  a  large  development  of  lawlessness, 
beginning  in  the  family  circle.  "  Unthankful,"  Those  who  are  allowed  to  have  their 
own  way  in  early  life  are  not  likely  to  grow  up  to  show  gratitude  to  parents  for  what 
they  have  sacrificed  for  them,  nor  are  they  likely  to  show  gratitude  in  the  ordinary 
intercourse  of  life,  nor  can  we  think  of  them  showing  gratitude  to  God  for  his  mercies. 
Ingratitude  is  to  be  a  striking  feature  of  the  grievous  times.  "  Unholy."  There  are 
certain  sanctities  which  are  everlasting,  which  are  anterior  to  all  law  and  custom,  which 
belong  to  the  Divine  constitution  of  things,  e.g.  the  sanctities  of  the  marriage  bond.    The 


St  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.        [ch.  m.  1— M. 

unholy  are  those  who  have  no  reverence  or  love  in  their  hearts  for  these  everlasting 
sanctities.     In  the  grievous  times  the  most  sacred  bonds  are  to  be  disregarded.    "  With- 
out natural  affection."     Affection  is  that  which  sweelens  life.     In  the  grievous  times 
affection  is  to  die  out,  even  for  those  for  whom  nature  'specially  claims  affection.     Parents 
will  act  unnaturally  toward  their  children.    "  Implacable."    The  word  supposes  a  state 
of  variance.    In  the  grievous  times  men  are  not  to  come  to  terms  with  those  who  hare 
given  them  offence,  but  are  to  pursue  them  with  all  the  might  of  their  vengeance. 
"  Slanderers."    They  are  not  to  be  content  with  pouring  contempt  and  bitterness  on  one 
another  in  ordinary  evil-speaking,  but  they  are  to  attack  one  another  with  falsehoods. 
Thus  the  diabolic  character  is  to  be  developed  in  the  grievous  times.     "  Without  self- 
control."     With  self-will  uncurbed  in  early  life,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the 
men  of  the  grievous  times  are  to  be  men  who  have  lost  self-control.    *'  Pierce."    In  the 
grievous  times  there  will  be  loss  of  self-control,  proceeding  to  deeds  of  violence.    "  No 
lovers  of  good."    In  keeping  with  the  personal  reference  before  and  after,  we  prefer  to 
translate,  "  no  lovers  of  good  men."    With  evil  so  active  in  them,  the  presence  of  good 
men  will  be  burdensome  to  them.    They  are  therefore  likely  to  make  the  times  grievous 
to  the  good,  by  unjustly  treating  them.    "  Traitors."    Fidelity  is  the  sacred  bond  that 
joins  friend  to  friend.    In  the  grievous  times  friend  will  be  often  found  betraying  friend. 
"  Headstrong."    In  the  grievous  times  men  will  go  to  daring  lengths.     "  Puffed  up." 
The  explanation  of  their  daringness  is,  that  they  have  no  right  sense  of  their  own  position 
before  God — their  insignificance,  impotence,  and  responsibility.    "  Lovers  of  pleasure 
rather  than  lovers  of  God."    Men  will  be  daring  especially  in  sensual  gratification. 
Pleasure  will  be  preferred  to  God.    "  Holding  a  form  of  godliness,  but  having  denied 
the  power  thereof."    The  remarkable  thing  is  that  the  men  who  have  been  described 
(we  do  not  need  to  think  of  the  characteristics  being  all  combined)  should  hold  a  form 
of  godliness.    The  relation  of  the  form  of  godliness  to  the  men  who  make  the  grievous 
times,  is  that  it  conceals  their  true  character.    It  is  self  throughout,  in  •  more  or  less 
hateful  form,  and  therefore  the  real  power  of  godliness  is  denied.    But  it  does  not  appear 
so  nakedly  and  hatefully  to  be  self  where  there  is  a  form  of  acknowledging  God.     The 
relation  of  the  form  of  godliness  10  the  grievous  times  is,  that  it  allows  evil  to  work  more 
insidiously.    It  is  not  so  difficult  to  meet  pure  heathenism  as  it  is  to  meet  a  Christianity 
that  has  become  heathenish.    Advice.   "  From  these  also  turn  away."    Paul  would  have 
things  put  on  a  basis  of  reality.     Between  Timothy  and  such  men  there  could  be  no 
sympathy.     Why  keep  up  a  semblance  of  fellowship?     Both  for  them  and  for  him  it 
was  better  that  the  line  of  demarcation  should  be  drawn,  and  that  all  fivrther  intercourse 
should  proceed  on  the  footing  that  they  did  not  belong  to  the  same  Christian  society. 

II.  The  men  of  the  gkievous  times  anticipated.  "  For  of  these."  The  apostle 
follows  up  his  description  of  the  men  of  the  evil  times  by  the  advice  to  turn  away  from 
them,  as  though  they  were  already  present.  The  explanation  he  gives  is  that  there 
were  forerunners  of  them,  men  of  tbe  same  spiritual  kith.  Characteristic*.  1.  Influ- 
ence with  women.  (1)  Manner  of  their  influence.  "  Are  they  that  creep  into  houses, 
and  take  captive  silly  women."  Their  converts  were  among  women,  which  was  not 
matter  of  reproach  to  them.  But  it  was  matter  of  reproach  that  it  was  women  so 
habitually  that  they  sought  to  influence,  and  that  they  did  not  go  openly  about  the  . 
work  of  influencing  them.  They  crept  into  houses,  as  though  they  did  not  wish  to  be 
seen.  And  that  mode  of  entrance  suggested  the  employment  of  other  methods  than  the 
direct  force  of  truth.  By  the  methods  employed  they  got  the  women  completely  into 
their  power.  It  was  matter  of  reproach  to  the  women  that  they  gave  themselves  up  to 
such  teachers,  and  therefore  they  are  called  silly  women.  (2)  Explanation  of  their  influ- 
ence. "  Laden  with  sins,  led  away  by  divers  lusts,  ever  learning,  and  never  able  to  come 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  They  were  not  women  of  the  right  stamp.  In  relation 
to  their  past  they  were  laden  with  sins.  In  relation  to  their  present  they  were  led  away 
by  divers  lusts — led  away  to  divers,  and  even  conflicting,  sources  of  gratification.  They 
needed  a  salve  for  their  conscience,  and  yet  a  salve  that  allowed  continued  gratification. 
This  salve  was  supplied  by  the  false  teachers.  They  were  always  getting  some  new 
point  from  them,  which  gave  satisfaction  for  the  time,  but  they  never  came  any  nearer 
testing  in  the  truth.  The  reason  was  that  they  had  not  the  right  moral  conditions. 
I'l.cir  object  was,  not  to  get  such  truth  (to  be  found  in  the  gospel)  as  would  have 
elivered  them  from  the  guilt  of  their  sins  and  the  power  of  their  lusts,  but  to  have 


ch.iii.1— 17.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  63 

lengthened  out  to  them  a  mingling  of  sensual  and  intellectual  gratification.  2.  With- 
itanding  the  truth.  (1)  Type  of  their  opposition.  "  And  like  as  Jannes  and  Jambres 
withstood  Moses,  so  do  these  also  withstand  the  truth ;  men  corrupted  in  mind,  repro- 
bate concerning  the  faith."  The  apostle  here  makes  use  of  Hebrew  tradition.  Jannes 
and  Jambres  are  not  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  Hebrew  tradition  identifies 
them  with  the  chief  of  the  magicians  who  withstood  Moses.  Aaron  cast  down  his  rod 
before  Pharaoh,  and  it  became  a  serpent ;  and  the  magicians  "  they  also  did  in  like 
manner  with  their  enchantments."  It  is  also  recorded  that  they  succeeded  in  imitating 
the  first  two  plagues.  They  thus  withstood  Moses — stood  between  him  and  the  effect 
which  his  miracles  were  intended  to  produce  on  Pharaoh.  So  the  false  teachers  produced 
a  spurious  imitation  of  the  truth,  teaching  what  resembled  the  gospel  without  being 
the  gospel.  As  the  gospel  teachers  had  also  to  a  late  period  (Gal.  iii.  5)  the  power  of 
working  miracles,  so  we  can  understand  that  these  teachers  made  use  of  magical  .arts  in 
confirmation  of  their  quasi-gospel  teaching.  They  thus  withstood  the  truth — came 
between  the  gospel  and  the  effect  it  was  fitted  to  produce.  In  thus  acting  they  were 
corrupted  in  mind ;  their  motives  were  not  good.  Their  object  was  not  to  advance  the 
truth,  or  to  benefit  those  whom  they  taught,  but  to  advance  themselves  and  to  obtain 
their  own  ends  with  their  female  converts.  They  were  also  reprobate  concerning  the 
faith ;  they  were  making  it  abundantly  clear  that  their  adherence  to  the  faith  was  a 
complete  failure.  (2)  Type  of  their  defeat.  "  But  they  shall  proceed  no  further :  for 
their  folly  shall  be  evident  unto  all  men,  as  theirs  also  came  to  be."  So  Luther  used  to 
say  of  the  priests  by  whom  he  was  opposed.  The  false  teachers  used  secret  and  spurious 
methods  with  success ;  but,  though  they  might  wax  worse  and  worse  themselves  (ver. 
13),  the  time  of  their  exposure  was  come.  So  was  it  with  Jannes  and  Jambres.  They 
were  in  undisturbed  possession  of  power  till  Moses  appeared  «n  the  scene.  They  seemed 
to  be  succeeding  when  they  turned  their  own  rods  into  serpents ;  but  they  suffered  defeat 
when  Aaron's  rod  swallowed  up  their  rods.  They  seemed  to  be  recovering  their  success 
when  they  imitated  the  first  plague,  and  again  when  they  imitated  the  second  plague; 
but  they  were  baffled  in  their  attempt  to  imitate  the  third  plague.  They  were  in  con- 
nection with  another  plague  shown  to  be  defeated,  when  they  could  not  stand  before 
Moses  because  of  the  boils.  Moses  succeeded  in  getting  the  children  of  Israel  out  of 
Egypt ;  and  Hebrew  tradition  tells  that  Jannes  and  Jambres  perished  in  the  Bed  Sea. 
This  is  the  history  of  all  false  teaching,  of  all  spiritual  trickery.  It  may  succeed  for  a 
time,  but  its  very  success  often  works  its  ruin.  The  time  comes  when  its  impostures 
are  found  out,  and  it  can  proceed  no  further.  So  we  can  believe  that  the  great  develop- 
ment of  evil  in  the  last  days  will  end  in  complete  exposure,  and  in  the  brilliant  triumph 
of  good. 

III.  Contrast  in  Timothy.  1.  Timothy  reminded  of  his  conduct  at  a  former  period, 
which  was  a  following  of  Paul  as  his  guiding  star.  (1)  A  leading  up  to  sufferings. 
"  But  thou  didst  follow  my  teaching,  conduct,  purpose,  faith,  long-suffering,  love, 
patience,  persecutions,  sufferings."  The  period  referred  to  is  Timothy's  early  ministry. 
He  then  acted  as  assistant  to  Paul,  and  what  Paul  gratefully  calls  to  mind  was  his  close 
following  of  him  as  a  disciple.  He  not  only  followed  him  so  as  to  be  familiar  with 
details,  but  followed  him  so  as  to  direct  his  course  by  what  he  saw  in  him.  The  great 
lines  of  his  teaching,  the  great  lines  of  his  conduct,  Timothy  made  his  own.  The 
special  purpose  of  his  life  (ruling  so  many  details),  which  was  to  spread  the  gospel  of 
Christ,  was  also  after  Paul.  So,  too,  was  his  disposition  towards  Christ,  viz.  faith, 
especially  in  his  power  to  make  his  gospel  to  tell  upon  men.  So,  too,  was  his  dispo- 
sition toward  opponents,  viz.  his  long-suffering  with  their  bitter  opposition.  So,  too, 
was  his  disposition  toward  those  in  whose  interest  he  laboured,  viz.  love  for  their  souls. 
So,  too,  was  his  disposition  under  all  the  adverse  conditions  of  his  ministry,  as  appointed 
for  him,  viz.  patience.  This  forms  a  point  of  transition  to  past  troublous  times  when 
Paul  was  persecuted,  and  persecuted  so  as  to  be  a  sufferer  in  many  ways.  Even  to  the 
apostle's  persecutions  and  sufferings  Timothy's  following  extended  ;  i.e.  he  thoroughly 
appreciated  the  fidelity  which  led  to  them  and  brave  bearing  under  tliem.  They  may 
have  had  to  do  with  his  joining  the  apostle,  and  determined  his  own  relation  to  perse- 
cutions and  sufferings.  (2)  Sufferings  specified.  "  What  things  befell  me  at  Antioch, 
at  Iconium,  at  Lystra ;  what  persecutions  I  endured."  At  Antioch  he  suffered  expul- 
sion.    At  Iconium  he  had  to  flee  from  maltreatment,  paiticularly  stoning.     At  Lysua, 


54  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [cH.ru.  1—17 

under  Jewish  instigation,  the  mob  stoned  Paul  and  dragged  him  out  of  the  city, 
supposing  that  he  was  dead.     Such  were  the  persecutions,  the  last  especially  sharp  and 
extreme,  under  which-  Paul  bore  up,  of  which  Timothy  had  a  distinct  impression,  and 
which  were  fitted  to  embolden  him  still.    (3)  Comfortable  issue  of  the  sufferings. 
"  And  out  of  them  all  the  Lord  delivered  me."    He  was  cared  for  by  the  great  Head  of 
the  Church,  to  whom  all  power  in  earth  had  been  committed,  to  whom  it  belonged  to 
order  the  earthly  destiny  of  his  servants.     The  Lord,  who  had  more  work  for  him  to  do, 
delivered  him  out  of  all  the  machinations  of  his  enemies — gave  him  up  to  sorrowing 
fi  iends  when  he  was  left  for  dead  by  his  enemies.    2.  Timothy  forewarned.    (1)  Regard- 
ing persecutions.    "  Yea,  and  all  that  would  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer 
persecution."    To  live  godly  is  to  take  the  rule  of  our  life  from  God.     This  can  only 
be  carried  out  in  communion  with  Christ  Jesus.    Were  all  living  according  to  the 
Divine  rule  around  us,  we  should  be  abundantly  encouraged.     But  seeing  we  live  in  the 
midst  of  so  many  who  hate  goodness  and  do  not  like  to  be  reminded  of  God,  we 
must  expect  to  suffer  persecution,  i.e.  to  be  misjudged,  to  be  opposed,  to  be  assailed, 
if  our  godliness  is  active  and  aggressive  against  evil,  as  it  should  be.    We  must 
have  a  mind  to  live  godly,  whatever  consequences  it  entails.    It  was  because  he  lived 
according  to  the  Divine  rule  that  Paul  was  stoned.    As  the  principle  involved  was 
universal,  Timothy,  in  proportion  to  the  vitality  of  his  godliness,  must  expect  to  suffer 
persecution.    (2)  Regarding  evil  men,  and  especially  one  class  of  them.    "  But  evil  men 
and  impostors  shall  wax  worse  and  worse,  deceiving  and  being  deceived."    Of  the  evil 
men  that  make  persecutions,  the  worst  specimens  had  not  yet  been  seen.    The  rule  is 
that  good  men  wax  better  and  better,  the  good  men  of  one  generation  outstripping  the 
good  men  of  former  generations.    This  may  not  apply  to  particular  specimens,  for  we 
do  not  find  any  to  outstrip  Paul.    But  it  is  true  of  good  men  as  a  class  that,  with  better 
helps,  more  experience  to  go  by,  better  education,  better  books,  better  methods,  better 
organization,  they  are  of  more  value  to  the  society  to  which  they  belong.    We  have  lay- 
men in  our  Churches  now  whose  Christian  enlightenment  and  activity  is  above  what 
any  previous  generation  has  seen.     While  the  good  are  better,  the  bad  are  worse.     This 
applies  especially  to  the  class  specified,  who,  with  reference  to  what  has  before  been  said, 
are  called  impostors,  or  tricksters  in  religion.  The  original  reference  of  the  word  is  to  those 
who  chanted  their  spells  in  a  sort  of  howl.    We  have  worse  specimens  of  withstanders 
of  the  truth  than  Jannes  and  Jambres  were,  or  their  successors  in  the  early  times  of 
Christianity.    Infidels  are  a  worse  class  of  men  now  than  they  were  half  a  century  ago. 
The  incantations  used  in  the  free-thinking  press  are  of  a  more  dangerous  nature  than 
any  potions  or  howlings  that  were  resorted  to  by  magicians  of  old.    Our  free-thinkers 
are  deceivers ;  tbey  habitually  subject  Scripture  to  the  most  unfair  treatment.     And 
deceiving,  they  are  also  deceived ;  conscious  of  their  own  trickery,  they  do  not  subject  the 
statements  of  their  friends  to  examination,  but  are  known  for  their  amazing  credulity. 
3.  Timothy  incited  to  present  duty  founded  on  past  early  training.    (1)  Early  teach- 
ing.   "  But  abide  thou  in  the  things  which  thou  hast  learned."    Timothy  was  no 
longer  in  the  position  of  the  child  taught,  but  in  tbe  position  of  a  teacher  of  others.   To 
one  in  that  position  it  might  have  been  thought  that  the  appropriate  thing  would  have 
been  advice  about  his  reading- — and  he  does  appear  to  have  had  books  and  parchments 
from  the  apostles — hut  the  advice  which  he  gives  him  here  is  to  continue  in  the  things 
which  he  had  learned,  i.e.  as  a  child.     And  there  was  really  nothing  better  for  him  ; 
nothing  except  this,  that  the  Messiah  whom  Lois  and  Eunice  taught  him  to  look 
forward  to  was  now  come,  and  that  there  had  been  done  to  him  and  by  hira  all  that  the 
Old  Testament  Scriptures  had  said  of  him.    And  so  to  those  who  are  grown  up,  and 
have  power  to  think  and  to  read  and  to  grasp  things  with  a  firm  grasp,  there  is  never 
anything  better  than  the  old  story  of  Jesus  and  his  love,  learned  at  a  mother's  knee. 
(2)  Early  teaching  along  with  early  convictions.    "  And  hast  been  assured  of."    We 
should  read, "  Thou  didst  learn,  and  wast  assured  of."    It  is  Timothy's  eariy  convictions 
that  we  are  to  think  of.     He  not  only  got  the  teaching  from  Lois  and  Eunice,' but  it 
became  matter  of  personal  conviction  to  him.    He  could  set  to  his  own  seal  to  what  he 
had  been  taught.     He  knew  the  worth  of  a  mother's  religion  in  the  peace,  restraint, 
hope,  it  brought  into  his  own  souL     It  was  a  legitimate  argument  for  Paul  to  use  with 
Timothy,  not  to  turn  his  back  on  his  early  convictions,  to  hold  to  the  God  of  his  child- 
hood.    Whet:  life  was  lived  according  to  God's  ideas,  such  as  Timothy's  was,  he  was  not 


oh.  in.  1—17.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  66 

to  be  inconsistent  and  to  make  the  latter  part  disagree  with  the  former.  "There  is  but 
one  way  of  making  all  our  days  one,  because  one  love,  one  hope,  one  joy,  one  aim,  binds 
them  all  together ;  and  that  is  by  taking  the  abiding  Christ  for  ours,  and  abiding  in 
him  all  our  days.  Our  true  progress  consists,  not  in  growing  away  from  Jesus,  but  in 
growing  up  into  him ;  not  in  passing  through  and  leaving  behind  the  first  convictions 
of  him  as  Saviour,  but  in  having  these  verified  by  the  experience  of  years,  deepened  and 
cleared,  unfolded  and  ordered  into  a  larger  though  still  incomplete  whole."  (3)  Per- 
sonal element  in  teaching.  "Knowing  of  whom  [what  persons]  thou  hast  learned 
them."  "  Timothy  was  supposed  to  have  a  complete  set  of  recollections  from  his  mother 
woven  into  his  very  feeling  of  the  truth  itself.  It  was  more  true,  because  it  had  been 
taught  by  her.  There  was  even  a  sense  of  her  loving  personality  in  it,  by  which  it  had 
always  been,  and  was  always  to  be  endeared.  On  the  other  hand,  it  will  be  always 
found  that  every  kind  of  teaching  in  religion  which  adds  no  personal  interest  or  attrac- 
tion to  the  truth,  sheds  no  light  upon  it  from  a  good  and  beautiful  life,  is  nearly  or 
quite  worthless.  And  here  is  the  privilege  of  a  genuinely  Christian  father  and  mother 
n  their  teaching,  that  they  pass  into  the  heart's  feeling  of  their  child,  side  by  side 
with  God's  truth,  to  be  for  ever  identified  with  it,  and  to  be,  themselves,  lived  on  and 
over  with  it,  in  the  dear  eternity  it  gives  him."  (4)  When  teaching  begins.  "  And 
that  from  a  babe  thou  hast  known."  Those  who  carry  the  idea  of  individual  respon- 
sibility through  everything  have  a  difficulty  here  in  the  dating  of  religious  instruction 
from  the  very  earliest  age.  James  Mill,  the  author  of  the  '  History  of  India,'  taking 
the  education  of  his  more  remarkable  son,  John  Stuart  Mill,  into  his  own  hands, 
proceeded  on  the  principle  that  a  religious  upbringing  would  be  an  interference  with 
free  development,  and  systematically  kept  all  religious  ideas  out  of  his  mind  till  he 
considered  him  able  to  form  an  independent  and  unbiassed  judgment  .upon  the  subject 
of  religion.  Our  objection  to  that  course  is  that  it  is  a  virtual  selling  of  the  child  to 
the  devil.  If  God  and  truth  are  not  presented  to  the  mind  till  a  matured  judgment  can 
be  formed,  it  is  not  as  though  there  had  not  been  experience,  but  the  mind  is  already 
warped  and  religion  is  placed  at  a  fearful  disadvantage.  Eunice  proceeded  on  the  right 
principle  when  she  seized  the  earliest  opportunity  of  influencing  the  mind  of  Timothy 
in  favour  of  religion.  (5)  Scriptural  teaching,  (a)  Name.  "  The  sacred  writings." 
The  name  is  suggestive,  in  the  first  place,  of  a  written  revelation,  which  has  the 
•idvantage  over  oral  tradition  (the  form  of  revelation  which  obtained  for  the  first  two  or 
three  thousand  years)  in  that  it  does  not  lie  so  open  to  the  action  of  prejudice.  Men 
may  come  with  all  manner  of  prejudices  to  it,  but  it  is  there  to  witness  for  itself  to 
every  unprejudiced  mind.  The  name  is  suggestive,  in  the  second  place,  of  many  writers 
being  employed  in  the  communication  of  Divine  truth,  which  is  much  better  than  one 
with  his  particular  idiosyncrasy  entering  into  his  writings,  inasmuch  as  all  classes  of 
minds  can  be  thus  suited,  and  if  they  are  not  attracted  by  one  mode  of  stating  the 
truth,  they  may  be  attracted  by  another.  The  name  is  suggestive,  in  the  third  place, 
of  writings  connected  with  religion,  such  as  there  do  not  seem  to  have  been  in  connec- 
tion with  the  religions  of  Greece  and  Eome.  The  Bible  can  be  employed  for  the 
instruction  of  children,  inasmuch  as  it  is  truly  a  child's  book  as  well  as  a  man's  book. 
What  is  needed,  at  the  first  stage  at  least,  is  truth  in  the  concrete  form  ;  and  this  is  to 
lie  found  in  the  Bible,  which,  with  some  things  hard  to  he  understood,  has  yet  many  a 
-imple  statement  and  story  that  is  fitted  to  fill  the  child's  imagination  and  to  touch 
i  he  child's  heart.  Eunice  had  only  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  to  draw  upon  :  the 
1  hristian  parent  has  now  an  immense  advantage,  in  the  addition  of  the  New  Testament, 
aud  especially  of  the  four  Gospels,  and  in  the  greater  facilities  which  a  printed  Bible 
gives  him  for  getting  Bible  images  and  lessons  into  the  mind  of  the  child.  (6)  Property. 
'  Which  are  able  to  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation."  They  form  a  directory  to  salva- 
'  ion,  containing  all  the  information  and  pleading  with  the  soul  which  are  necessary. 
To  one  inexperienced  in  the  ways  of  the  world  it  is  a  great  advantage  to  have  a  friend 
at  hand,  able  on  every  occasion  to  give  a  sound  advice,  to  expose  fallacies,  to  put 
forward  weighty  considerations.  Inexperienced  in  the  ways  of  the  world  we  certainly 
are,  liable  to  be  deceived  by  appearances,  to  be  buoyed  up  with  false  hopes.  In  giving 
us  the  Scriptures,  God  acts  the  part  of  a  friend,  giving  us  the  best  advice,  opening  our 
eyes  to  reality,  so  that,  with  all  our  inexperience,  it  is  as  though  we  possessed  boundless 
stores  of  wisdom.    They  are  able  to  make  wise  unto  salvation,  but  they  may  not ;  foi 


56  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [oh.  in.  1— 17. 

there  are  some  who  make  themselves  wiser  than  God's  Word,  and  think  they  know 
better  about  things  than  God  does,  and  so  perish  by  being  wise  in.  their  own  conceits 
and  refusing  to  be  guided,  (c)  Condition  of  efficiency.  "  Through  faith  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus."  The  Scriptures  cannot  do  more  than  make  us  wise  unto  salvation ; 
they  are  not  to  be  put  in  the  place  of  Christ,  whose  connection  with  salvation  is  more 
than  that  of  a  directory — is  of  the  most  intimate  nature,  who  is  really  the  efficient 
Cause  of  salvation,  the  Receptacle  of  salvation  ;  and  they  only  do  their  work  when  they 
bring  us  up  to  Christ,  and  also  induce  in  us  that  state  of  mind  which  is  here  called 
faith,  which  instrurnentally  appropriates  the  salvation  which  is  in  him. 

IV.  Sufficiency  of  Scripture.  1.  Ground  of  sufficiency.  "Every  Scripture 
inspired  of  God."  According  to  this  translation  the  inspiration  of  Scripture  is  taught, 
not  explicitly  but  implicitly.  We  are  to  regard  it  as  taken  for  granted  that  Scripture 
is  God-breathed.  Inspiration  extends  to  every  part  of  Scripture.  This  is  a  doctrine  of 
vital  importance  to  the  Church.  Its  bearing  is  that  there  is  not  only  the  absence  of 
error,  but  the  presence  of  positive  perfection  in  relation  to  the  whole  want  of  man  under 
the  present  order  of  things.  Th6  Divine  influence,  however  operating,  is  guarantee  that 
in  Scripture,  in  its  manifoldness,  we  have  all  fundamentally  that  needs  to  be  said  to  man 
on  the  subject  of  religion,  and  in  the  form  that  is  best  fitted  to  have  deep  and  lasting 
effect  upun  his  spiritual  nature  as  a  whole.  The  difference  is  very  perceptible  in  the 
post-apostolic  literature.  "  Even  where  we  recognize  a  lufty  flight  of  the  spirit  as  in  the 
Ignatian  Epistles,  the  inspiration  repeatedly  is  merely  a  religious  enthusiasm,  a  subjective 
romance,  showing  itself  in  an  almost  revelling  desire  for  martyrdom,  moving  and  even 
infectious  ;  so  that  many  who  read  an  Ignatian  Epistle  for  the  first  time  feel  themselves 
doubtless  more  excited  and  stirred  than  by  a  Pauline  one  ;  but  this  very  feature  proves 
that  it  is  not  really  inspired ;  for  the  Spirit  who  founded  the  Church  does  not  tolerate  the 
extolling  of  one  isolated  tendency  in  the  soul,  and  cannot  bear  such  subjective  partiality 
of  view,  be  it  ever  so  strong,  ever  so  apparently  admirable."  2.  Fourfold  use.  "  Is 
also  profitable."  In  reading  the  Scriptures  what  we  are  to  seek  above  all  things  is  that 
the  truth  contained  in  them  may  be  brought  into  contact  with  our  minds  for  our  profit, 
"  For  teaching."  There  is  first  a  revealing  power  in  the  Bible.  It  teaches  us  much 
that  we  could  not  otherwise  have  known.  It  supplies  us  with  what  is  necessary  not 
only  for  a  correct,  but  a  lofty,  conception  of  God.  It  acquaints  us  with  our  fallen  state, 
and  with  God's  dealings  with  us  for  our  salvation.  "  For  reproof/'  The  reproving 
puwtir  of  the  Bible  results  from  its  great  revealing  power,  along  with  the  state  in  which 
it  finds  us.  The  light  it  sheds  is  not  for  our  justification,  but  for  our  being  convicted 
of  departures  both  from  truth  and  righteousness.  "  For  correction."  The  corrective 
power  of  the  Bible  starts  from  our  being  convicted  as  out  of  the  straight  path.  By 
proper  directions,  admonitions,  warnings,  encouragements,  it  brings  us  back  into  the 
straight  path.  "  For  instruction  which  is  in  righteousness."  The  disciplinary  power 
of  the  Bible  is  specified  as  being  within  the  sphere  of  righteousness.  In  the  lofty 
demands  it  makes — the  loftier  the  further  we  advance — it  gives  us  the  spiritual  drill 
which  makes  for  right  habits.  3.  Completeness  aimed  at.  "  That  the  man  of  God  may 
be  complete,  furnished  completely  unto  every  good  work."  The  man  of  God  is  man 
according  to  the  Divine  idea.  Many  excellences  go  to  make  the  complete  man,  intel- 
lectual, emotional,  practical.  God  desires  to  see  the  complete  man ;  and  he  has  given 
the  Bible  for  that  end.  The  completeness  thought  of  is  that  of  man  as  a  worker, 
producing  good  thoughts,  good  words,  aood  actions.  God  desires  to  see  the  completely 
furnished  worker,  and  he  has  given  the  Bible  for  that  end.  It  is  true  that  we  come 
very  far  short  of  the  Divine  ideal  of  our  humanity ;  the  reason  will  be  found  to  be 
that  we  neglect  the  help'  provided  for  us.  We  do  not  consult  God,  but  our  own 
prejudiced  thoughts.  Let  us  go  back  to  the  Bible,  to  be  convicted  of  aur  error,  and 
corrected,  and  severely  exercised  toward  the  complete  man. — R.  F. 


oh.  iv.  1—22.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


67 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Ver.  1. — In  the  sight  of  God,  and  of  Christ 
Jesus  for  therefore  before  God  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  A.V.  and  T.K. ;  and  by  for  at, 
A.V.  and  T.K.  I  charge  thee  (Sia/wpTfSpOjitaO; 
as  ch.  ii.  14  and  1  Tim.  v.  21  (where  see 
note).  The  words  oZv  iyti,  wanting  in  some 
of  the  best  manuscripts,  are  "rejected  by 
Griesbach,  Tischendorf,  Lachmann,"  and  by 
Hnther,  Alford,  Ellicott,  and  others.  The 
chapter  opens  rather  abruptly  without  the 
connecting  "  therefore."  And  by  his  appear- 
ing and  his  kingdom.    The  reading  of  the 

T.B.,   Kara    T^v    (irupavtiav,    K.T.X.,  "at    his 

appearing  and  kingdom,"  makes  such  ex- 
cellent sense,  and  is  in  such  perfect  accord- 
ance with  the  usual  grammar,  and  with  the 
usual  connection  of  events,  that  it  is  difficult 
not  to  believe  that  it  is  the  right  reading 
(see  Matt,  xxvii.  15,  Kara  iap-rfyi,  "  at  the 
feast ; "  xat a  irav  aiBfrarov,  "  on  every  sab- 
bath ; "  Acts  xiii.  27,  /caret  t*)v  f,/j.4pav,  "  in 
the  day ; "  Heb.  iii.  8  for  the  grammar ;  and 
the  universal  language  of  Scripture  and  the 
Creeds  connecting  the  judgment  with  the 
Lord's  appearing  and  kingdom).  On  the  other 
hand,  the  reading  xa\  is  almost  impossible  to 
construe.  No  two  commentators  scarcely  are 
•greed  how  to  do  so.  Some  fake  tV  eViipa- 
velav  xat  tV  j8acrjAe(a»'  as  the  object  governed 
by  Sia/tapripofiai,  as  in  the  LXX.  of  Deut. 
iv._  26,  "I  call  to  witness  .  .  .  Christ's 
epiphany  and  kingdom,"  taking  Sut/iapTipo- 
imi  in  two  senses  or  two  constructions. 
Others  take  them  as  the  accusatives  of  the 
things  sworn  by,  "  I  charge  thee  before  God 
and  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  his  epiphany  and 
kingdom,"  as  Mark  v.  7,  thv  @e6v,  "by 
God ; "  Acts  xix.  13,  rhy  '\r\aovv, "  by  Jesus ;" 
1  Thess.  v.  27,  t&j>  Kipiov,  "by  the  Lord." 
But  how  awkward  such  a  separation  of  the 
thing  sworn  by  from  the  verb  is,  and  how 
unnatural  it  is  to  couple  with  ko\  the  two 
ideas,  "before  God"  and  "by  Christ's 
epiphany,"  and  how  absolutely  without 
example  such  a  swearing  by  Christ's 
epiphany  and  kingdom  is,  nobody  needs  to 
be  told.  Others,  as  Huther,  try  to  get  over 
part  at  least  of  this  awkwardness  by  taking 
the  two  mil's  as  "both:"  "by  both  his 
epiphany  and  his  kingdom."  Ellicott 
explains  it  by  saying  that  as  you  could  not 
put  "  the  epiphany  and  the  kingdom "  in 
dependence  upon  kvdmiov  (as  if  they  were 
persons  like  God  and  Christ),  they  "  natu- 
rally pass  into  the  accusative."  But  surely 
this  is  all  thoroughly  unsatisfactory.  The 
T.R.  is  perfectly  easy  and  simple.  Appear- 
ing (^TrKpavfia) ;  ver.  8;  ch.  i.  10;  2  Thess. 
ii.  8 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  14 ;  Titus  ii.  13.    Mis  king. 


dom.  So  in  the  Nicene  Creed  :  "  He  shall 
come  again  with  glory  to  judge  both  the 
quick  and  the  dead :  whose  kingdom  shall 
have  no  end"  (compi  Matt.  xxv.  31, 
followed  by  the  judgment). 

Ver.  2. — Teaching  for  doctrine,  A.V. 
Preach  the  Word  (K-S)pv\ov  rbv  \6yov).  It  is 
impossible  to  exaggerate  the  dignity  and 
importance  here  given  to  preaching  by  its 
being  made  the  subject  of  so  solemn  and 
awful  an  adjuration  as  that  in  ver.  1 
(compare  the  designation  of  irijpu£  which 
St.  Paul  gives  to  himself  in  1  Tim.  ii.  7; 
ch.  i.  11).  Be  instant  (iirlimiei).  The  force 
of  the  exhortation  must  be  found,  not  in  the 
verb  itself  taken  alone,  but  by  coupling  evicat- 
pus  cucatpas  closely  with*  it.  Be  at  your 
work,  attend  to  it  always,  in  and  out  of 
season;  let  nothing  stop  you;  be  always 
ready,  always  at  hand.  Reprove  ((\ey(oi>) ; 
see  ch.  iii.  16,  note  (comp.  Matt,  xviii. 
15;  Eph.  v.  11;  1  Tim.  v.  20).  Generally 
with  the  idea  of  bringing  the  fault  home  to 
the  offender.  Bebuke(eiriT//i7jcroj');  a  stronger 
word  than  cfAeygo^implying  moreof  authority 
and  less  of  argument  (Matt.  viii.  26 ;  xvii. 
18 ;  Luke  xix.  39 ;  Jude  9,  etc.).  Exhort 
(TrapaKo.Ae<roy).  Sometimes  the  sense  of 
"  exhort,"  and  sometimes  that  of  "  comfort," 
predominates  (see  1  Tim.  ii.  1 ;  vi.  2,  etc.). 
Every  way  of  strengthening  and  establishing 
souls  in  the  fear  and  love  of  God  is  to  be 
tried,  and  that  with  all  long-suffering  and 
teaching.  (For  nattpoBvuta,  see  ch.  iii.  10, 
note.)  For  "  teaching  "  or  "  doctrine " 
(SiSax^),  St.  Paul  more  frequently  uses 
$itia<rita\la  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  (1  Tim. 
i.  10;  iv.  6,  13,  16;  v.  17;  ch.  iii.  10,  16, 
etc.);  but  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  great 
difference  of  meaning.  Possibly  StSaxh 
points  more  to  the  act  of  teaching.  The  use 
of  it  here,  coupled  with  "  long-Buffering," 
directs  that  the  man  of  God,  whether  he 
preaches,  reproves,  rebukes,  or  exhorts,  is 
always  to  be  a  patient  teacher  of  God's 
Word  and  truth. 

Ver.  3.— The  sound  for  sound,  A.V.; 
having  itching  ears,  will  heap  to  themselves 
teachers  after  their  own  lusts  for  after  their 
own  lusts  shall  tltey  heap  to  themselves  teachers, 
having  itching  ears,  A.V.  The  sound  (t7Js 
iryiawoians).  Nothing  is  gained  by  the 
addition  of  the  article  in  English.  The 
phrase,  j;  {ryiaivovcca.  8itia<Tica\la,  is  character- 
istic of  the  pastoral  Epistles,  having  arisen, 
no  doubt,  from  the  growth  of  heresy  (see  1 
Tim.  i.  10 ;  vi.  3.  ch.  i.  13;  Titus i.  9, 13;  ii.  1 ; 
also  Titus  ii.  8).  In  classical  Greek,  iytifs 
is  frequently  applied  to  words,  sentiments, 
advice,  etc.,  in  the  sense  of  "sound,"  "  wise ; " 
and  iyiahatr  is  also  applied  to  the  mind  and 


68  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [oh.  iv.  1—22. 


character.  Endure  (cultural);  usually,  as 
Bishop  EUicott  observes,  applied  by  St. 
Paul  to  persons  as  the  object,  as  elsewhere 
in  the  New  Testament  (Matt.  xvii.  17 ;  Acts 
xviii.  14 ;  Eph.  iv.  2,  etc.) ;  but  not  invariably 
(see  2  Thess.  i.  4 ;  so  too  Heb.  xiii.  22).  In 
classical  Greek,  uv4xe<r9ai,  followed  by 
persons  or  things,  usually  governs  an 
accusative  caBe,  if  any,  but  a  genitive  fre- 
quently in  Flato.  Having  itching  ears 
(KvqOSfiti'ot  t$)»  axoijv);  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  The  phrase,  Kv-t\aim  &ruv, 
is  ascribed  by  Plutarch  to  Plato  (Alford), 
"  scratching  the  (itching)  ear ; "  nvatrQat  t£ 
(Sto,  "  to  tickle  the  ears  "  (Lucian) ;  faroKval- 
ova-iv  fi/nay  rh  «?to  (Pliilo,  ap.  Ellicott).  The 
verb  Kv/jBa  (i.q.  kvow)  means  "  to  scratch  ; " 
"  to  tickle,"  and  in  the  passive  "  to  itch." 
Will  heap  to  themselves  (4-m<rupiiaov(ri) ;  a 
contemptuous  word  (found  only  here  in 
the  New  Testament,  and  nowhere  in  early 
classical  Greek), implying  the  indiscriminate 
multiplication  of  teachers  (compare  our  use  of 
"  exaggerate").  The  simple  aapeieiv  occurs 
in  ch.  ill.  6.  After  their  own  lusts.  The 
measure  of  the  number  or  the  quality  of 
their  self-chosen  teachers  will  be  their  own 
insatiable  and  ever-varying  fancies  and 
mental  appetites,  not  the  desire  to  be  taught 
God's  truth  by  teachers  sent  from  God. 
Compare  Jeroboam's  conduct  in  ordaining 
a  feast  "  in  the  month  which  he  had  devised 
of  his  own  heart "  (1  Kings  xii.  33). 

Ver.  4. — Will  turn  for  they  shall  turn, 
A.V. ;  turn  aside  for  shall  be  turned,  A.V. 
Will  turn  away,  etc.  The  sober,  sound 
doctrine  of  the  Word  of  God,  teaching  self- 
discipline,  humility,  and  purity  of  heart  and 
life,  will  not  assuage  their  itching  ears,  and 
therefore  they  will  turn  away  from  it,  and  go 
after  more  congenial  fables— those  taught  by 
the  heretics.  Turn  aside  (eKTpair^ino'Tai); 
as  1  Tim.  i.  6,  note.  Fables  (jx68ovs);  see  1 
Tim.  i.  4;  iv.  7;  Titus  i.  14;  2  Pet.  i.  16 
(on  the  Jewish  origin  of  these  fables,  see 
Bishop  Ellicott's  note  on  1  Tim.  i.  4). 

Ver.  5. — Be  thou  sober  for  watch  thou, 
A.V. ;  suffer  hardship  for  endure  afflictions, 
A.V. ;  fulfil  for  make  full  proof  of,  A.V. 
Be  thou  sober  (vrjipe) ;  as  1  Thess.  v.  6,  8 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  13;  iv.  7;  v.  8.  The  adjective 
i/TfipaKios  occurs  in  1  Tim.  iii.  2  (where  see 
note),  11 ;  Titus  ii.  2.  Here  "  Be  sober  in 
all  things  "  clearly  does  not  refer  to  literal 
sobriety,  which  Timothy  was  in  little  danger 
of  transgressing  (1  Tim.  v.  23),  but  com- 
prehends clearness,  calmness,  steadiness, 
and  moderation  in  all  things.  Suffer  hard- 
ship (icaKOTrdOrioov) ;  as  eh.  ii.  3  (T.B.)  and  9. 
An  evangelist  (fvaryy(\i<rTov);  one  whose 
business  it  is  to  preach  the  gospel,  accord- 
ing to  Matt  xi.  S.  The  verb  eiiayy e\({ay, 
"  to  preach  the  gospel,"  and  tbayy4?uor, "  the 
gospel,"  are  of  very  frequent  use  in  the  New 


Testament.  But  evayyetetrrfis,  an  evangelist, 
occurs  elsewhere  only  in  Acts  xxi.  8  and 
Eph.  iv.  11.  Fulfil  thy  ministry.  This  ia 
rather  a  weak  rendering  of  the  Greek  uArjpo- 
(p6jnioov,  adopted  also  in  the  R.V.  of  Luke  i. 
i.  The  verb  occurs  elsewhere  in  Luke  i.  1 ; 
Bom.  iv.  21 ;  xiv.  5,  and  ver.  17  of  this 
chapter.  The  phrase  is  metaphorical,  but 
it  is  uncertain  whether  the  metaphor  is  that 
of  a  ship  borne  along  by  full  sails,  or  of  full 
measure  given.  If  the  former  isthe  metaphor, 
then  the  derived  meaning,  when  applied  to 
persons,  is  that  of  full  persuasion,  entire  and 
implicit  faith,  which  carries  men  forward  in 
a  bold  and  unwavering  course ;  or,  when 
applied  to  things,  that  of  being  undoubtedly 
believed.  But  if  the  metaphor  is  taken  from 
"  bringing  full  measure,"  then  the  sense  in 
the  passive  voice  when  applied  to  persons 
will  be  "  to  be  fully  satisfied,"  i.e.  to  have 
full  assurance,  and,  when  applied  to  things, 
"to be  fully  believed "  (Liddell  and  Scott). 
Applying  the  last  metaphor  to  the  passage 
before  us,  the  sense  will  be  "  discharge  thy 
ministry  to  the  full."  Let  there  be  no  stint 
of  ministerial  labour,  but  carry  it  out  in  its 
completeness,  and  to  the  end. 

Ver.  6. — Already  being  offered  for  now 
ready  to  be  offered,  A.V. ;  come  for  at  hand, 
A.V.  I  am  already  being  offered.  The  ty& 
is  emphatic,  in  contrast  with  the  <ru  of  ver. 
5 :  "  Thou,  who  hast  still  life  before  thee, 
suffer  hardship,  do  the  work  of  an  evangelist, 
make  full  proof  of  thy  ministry.  I  can  do 
so  no  longer,  for  my  martyrdom  has  already 
commenced,  and  my  end  is  close  at  hand. 
Thou  must  take  my  place  in  the  great  con- 
flict." Am  . . .  being  offered  (cnreVSonai) ;  am 
being  poured  out,  as  the  drink  offering,  or 
libation,  is  poured  out.  St.  Paul  uses  the 
same  figure  in  Phil.  ii.  17,  where  he  couples 
it  with  the  sacrifice  and  service  (or  offering 
up)  of  the  faith  of  the  Philippians  by  him- 
self as  the  priest,  and  looks  upon  the  pour- 
ing out  of  his  own  life  as  the  completion  of 
that  sacrifice  (see  Ellicott  on  Phil.).  "The 
libation  always  formed  the  conclusion  of  the 
sacrifice,  and  so  the  apostle's  martyrdom 
closed  his  apostolic  service  "  (Huther),  which 
had  been  a  continual  sacrifice,  in  which  he 
had  been  the  ministering  priest  (Bom.  xv. 
16).  So  that  the  use  of  o-ireVBoiuai  here 
exactly  agrees  with  that  in  Phil.  ii.  17. 
"  My  sacrificial  work,"  St.  Paul  says, "  being 
now  finished  and  ended,  I  am  performing 
the  last  solemn  act,  the  pouring  out  of  my 
own  life  in  martyrdom,  to  whioh  I  shall  pass 
out  of  the  prison  where  I  now  am."  The 
time  of  my  departure  (tjjs  ipHs  &va\iireas). 
The  word  is  found  nowhere  else  in  the  New 
Testament,  but  St.  Paul  uses  the  verb  ava- 
Avtrai,  "  to  depart,"  in  Phil.  i.  23,  where,  the 
verb  being  in  the  active  voice,  the  metaphor 
clearly  is  from  weighing  anchor,  as  in  com- 


oh.  iv.  1—22.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


69 


mon  use  in  classical  Greek;  hence  simply 
"  to  depart."  The  classical  use  of  &vd\v<ris 
rather  favours  the  sense,  ilther  of  "release  " 
or  of  "dissolution."  But  St.  Paul's  use  of 
avakiai  in  Phil.  i.  23  and  the  frequent  use  of 
the  same  verb  in  the  LXX.  and  by  Josephus, 
in  the  sense  of  "  to  depart,"  favours  the  ren- 
deri  igof  dvA-Kvais  by  "departure,"  as  in  the 
A.V.  and  R.V.  Is  come;  rather,  is  at  hand 
(itpeo-rnKe);  the  same  verb  as  iirltrmBt  in 
ver.  2.  (On  the  difference  between  tvear-qite 
("is  come")  and  e>e(TT7)/ce  (" is  at  hnnd"), 
see  Alford  on  2  Thess.  ii.  2,  and  comp.  Acta 
xxii.  20.) 

Ver.  7.— The  for  a,  A.V. :  the  for  my,  A.V. 
I  have  fought  the  good  fight;  as  1  Tim.  vi. 
12  (rbv  wy&va  rhv  Ka\6v),  meaning  that, 
however  honourable  the  contests  of  the 
games  were  deemed,  the  Christian  contest 
was  far  more  honourable  than  them  all. 
The  word  "  fight "  does  not  adequately  ex- 
press rbv  ayava,  which  embraces  all  kinds  of 
contests — chariot-race,  foot-race,  wrestling, 
etc.  "I  have  played  out  the  honourable 
game"  would  give  the  sense,  though  in- 
elegantly. The  oourse  (?bv  Spi/iov);  Acts 
xiii.  25 ;  xx.  24.  The  runner  in  the  race 
had  a  definite  tipi/ios,  or  course  to  run,  ma:  ked 
out  for  him.  St.  Paul's  life  was  that  course, 
and  he  knew  that  he  had  run  it  out.  I  have 
kept  the  faith.  St.  Paul  here  quits  metaphor 
and  explains  the  foregoing  figures.  Through 
his  long  eventful  course,  in  spite  of  all 
difficulties,  conflicts,  dangers,  and  tempta- 
tions, he  had  kept  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ 
committed  to  him,  inviolable,  unadulterated, 
whole,  and  complete.  He  had  not  shrunk 
from  confessing  it  when  death  stared  him  in 
the  face;  he  had  not  corrupted  it  to  meet 
the  views  of  Jews  or  Gentiles ;  with  courage 
and  resolution  and  perseverance  he  had 
kept  it  to  the  ei'd.  Oh  I  let  Timuthy  do  the 
same. 

Ver.  8. — Tlie  ir  a,  A.V. ;  to  me  for  me, 
A.V. ;  only  to  me  for  to  me  only,  A.V. ;  also 
to  all  them  for  unto  all  them  also,  A.V. ;  have 
loved  for  love.  Henceforth  (\onriv)  •  as  Heb. 
x.  13.  The  work  of  conflict  being  over,  it 
only  remains  to  receive  the  crown.  The 
crown  of  righteousness  means  that  crown 
the  possession  of  which  marks  the  wearer 
as  righteous  before  God.  The  analogous 
phrases  are,  "the  crown  of  glory"  (1  Pet. 
v.  4)  and  "the  crown  of  life"  (Jas.  i.  12; 
Eev.  ii.  10).  The  righteousness,  the  glory, 
and  the  life  of  the  saints  are  conceived  as 
displayed  in  crowns,  as  the  kingly  dignity 
is  in  the  crown  of  royalty.  The  righteous 
Judge  (k/ht^s)  In  Acts  x.  42  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  said  to  be  ordained  of  God  Kpniis 
£Jsvtuv  /col  vtitp&iv,  "  the  Judge  of  quick  and 
dead ; "  and  in  Heb.  xii.  23  we  read,  Kpntf 
@eip  it&vTav,  "God  the  Judge  of  all."  But 
nowhere  else,  either  »  the  Old  Testament  I 


or  the  New  Testament,  is  this  term  applied 
directly  either  to  God  or  to  Christ.  Surely 
its  use  here  is  influenced  by  the  preceding 
metaphor  of  the  ay&v  and  the  Bp6/ios  and 
the  o-rttpavos ;  and  "  the  righteous  Judge  "  is 
the  impartial  ppafievs,  or  "judge,"  who 
assigned  the  prizes  at  the  games  to  those 
who  had  fairly  won  them.  And  this  is  the 
proper  meaning  of  xpniis,  "the  umpire," 
applied, especially  at  Athens,  to  the  "judges" 
at  the  poetic  contests  (Liddell  and  Seott). 
Thucydides  contrasts  the  /cpmjs  and  the 
hytavwr^s :  Aristophanes  the  xpirai  and  the 
Bfarat,  the  "  spectators ;  "  and  the  word 
"critic"  is  derived  from  this  meaning  of 
kit^j  and  KpiTw6s.  The  whole  picture  is 
that  of  the  apostle  running  his  noble  race 
of  righteousness  to  the  very  end,  and  of  the 
Lord  himself  assigning  to  him  the  well- 
earned  crown  of  victory  in  the  presence  of 
heaven  and  earth  assembled  for  the  solem- 
nity of  that  great  day.  That  have  loved 
his  appearing.  It  will  be  a  characteristic 
of  those  who  will  be  crowned  at  that  day 
that  all  the  time  they  were  fighting  the 
good  fight  they  were  looking  forward  with 
hope  and  desire  for  their  Lord's  appearing 
and  kingdom.  "  Thy  kingdom  come  "  was 
their  desire  and  their  petition.  They  will 
be  able  to  say  at  that  day,  "  Lo,  this  is  our 
God ;  we  have  waited  for  him,  and  he  will 
save  us :  this  is  the  Lord ;  we  have  waited 
for  him,  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  his 
salvation"  (Isa.  xxv.  9).  His  appearing; 
as  iu  ver.  2. 

Ver.  9. — Do  thy  diligence  (<rirov$curov);  see 
ch.  ii.  15,  note.  St.  Paul's  affectionate  long- 
ing for  Timothy's  company  in  present 
danger  and  desertion  is  very  touching.  (For 
the  chronological  bearing  of  this  passage, 
see  Introduction.) 

Ver.  10. — Forsook  for  hath  forsaken,  A.V. ; 
went  for  is  departed,  A.V. ;  to  for  unto,  A.V. 
(twice).  Demas.  Nothing  more  is  known  of 
Demas  than  what  is  gathered  from  the 
mention  of  him  in  Col.  iv.  14  and  Philem. 
24.  We  learn  from  those  passages  that  he 
was  a  fellow-labourer  of  the  apostle,  and  it 
is  remarkable  that  in  them  both  he  is 
coupled,  as  here,  with  Luke  and  Mark  (Col. 
iv.  10).  (See  Introduction.)  Having  loved 
this  present  world.  It  would  appear  from 
this  that  Demas  had  not  the  faith  or  the 
courage  to  run  the  risk  of  sharing  St. 
Paul's  imminent  martyrdom  at  Home,  but 
left  him,  while  he  was  free  to  do  so,  under 
pretence  of  an  urgent  call  to  Thessalonica ; 
just  as  Mark  left  Paul  and  Barnabas  (Acts 
xiii.  13).  But  there  is  no  ground  to  believe 
that  he  was  an  apostate  from  the  faith. 
The  coupling  together  of  Demas  and  Aris- 
tarchus  in  Philem.  24  suggests  that  Demas 
may  have  been  a  Thessalonian,  as  we  know 
that  Aristarchus  was  (Aots  xx.  4).     Demai 


60 


THE   SECOND  Er/lcSXLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  iv.  1—22. 


is  thought  to  be  a  shortened  form  of  Demar- 
ehus.  If  bo,  we  have  a  Blight  additional 
indication  of  hia  being  a  Thessalonian,  as 
compounds  with  archos  or  arches  would 
seem  to  have  been  common  in  Thessalonica 
(compare  Aristarchus  and  itoMripxris,  Acts 
xvii.  6,  8).  Cresoens  (Kp^<nnjs) ;  only  men- 
tioned here.  It  is  a  Latin  name,  like  XloiSr/s, 
Pudens,  in  ver.  21.  There  was  a  cynio 
philosopher  of  this  name  in  the  second 
century,  a  great  enemy  of  the  Christians. 
The  tradition  (' Apost.  Const  it.,'  vii.  46) 
that  he  preached  the  gospel  in  Galatia  is 
probably  derived  from  this  passage.  Titus, 
etc.  The  last  mention  of  Titus,  not  reckon- 
ing the  Epistle  to  Titus,  is  that  in  2  Cor. 
xii.  18,  from  which  it  appears  that  St  Paul 
had  sent  him  to  Corinth  just  before  his  own 
last  visit  to  that  city.  How  the  interval 
was  filled  up,  and  where  Titus  passed  the 
time,  we  know  not.  He  is  not  once  named 
in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  nor  in  any  of 
St.  Paul's  Epistles  written  during  his  first 
imprisonment.  But  we  gather  from  Titus 
L  5  that  he  accompanied  St.  Paul  to  Crete, 
presumably  after  the  apostle's  return  from 
Spain ;  that  he  was  left  there  for  a  time  to 
organize  the  Church ;  that  later  he  joined  the 
apostle  at  Nicopolis  (Titus  iii.  1 2),  and,  doubt- 
less by  St.  Paul's  desire,  went  to  Dalmatia, 
as  mentioned  in  this  tenth  verse.  And  here 
our  knowledge  of  him  ends.  Tradition 
pretty  consistently  makes  him  Bishop  of 
Gortyna,  in  Crete,  where  are  the  ruins  of  a 
very  ancient  church  dedicated  to  St.  Titus, 
in  which  service  is  occasionally  performed 
by  priests  from  the  neighbourhood  (Dean 
Howson,  in  •  Diet  of  Bible : '  art.  "  Titus  "). 
Ver.  11.— Useful  for  profitable,  A.V.; 
ministering  for  the  ministry,  A.Y.  Luke; 
probably  a  shortened  form  of  Lucanut. 
Luke  was  with  St.  Paul  in  his  voyage  to 
Borne  (Acts  xxvii.  1;  xxviii.  11,  16),  and 
when  he  wrote  the  Epistles  to  the  Colossians 
and  Philemon  (Col.  iv.  14;  Philem.  4), 
having  doubtless  composed  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  during  St.  Paul's  two  years'  im- 
prisonment (Acts  xxviii.  30).  How  he  spent 
his  time  between  that  date  and  the  mention 
of  him  here  as  still  with  St.  Paul,  we  have 
no  knowledge.  But  it  looks  as  if  he  may 
have  been  in  close  personal  attendance  upon 
him  all  the  time.  If  he  had  been  permitted 
to  write  a  supplement  to  the  Acts,  perhaps 
the  repeated  "  we  "  would  have  shown  this. 
Take  Mark.  Mark  had  apparently  been 
recently  reconciled  to  St.  Paul  when  he 
wrote  CoL  iv.  10,  and  was  with  him  when 
he  wrote  Philem.  24.  We  know  nothing 
more  of  him  till  we  learn  from  this  passage 
that  he  was  with  or  near  to  Timothy,  and 
likely  to  accompany  him  to  Borne  in  his 
last  visit  to  St.  Paul.  He  is  mentioned 
again  in  1  Pet  v.  13,  as  being  with  St 


Peter  at  Babylon.  The  expression,  "  take  " 
(a.vaXafr<i>v),  seems  to  imply  that  Timothy 
was  to  pick  him  up  on  the  way,  as  the  word 
is  used  in  Acts  xx.  13, 14;  and,  though  less 
certainly,  in  Acts  xxiii.  31.  He  is  useful  to 
me,  eta  (tS-xp-qaros);  as  ch.  ii.  21  (where 
see  note).  This  testimony  to  Mark's  minis- 
terial usefulness,  at  a  time  when  his  faith- 
fulness and  courage  would  be  put  to  a  severe 
test,  is  very  satisfactory.  Tor  ministering 
(els  Siiacovlcw).  It  may  be  doubted  whether 
Stcucovia  here  means  "the  ministry,"  as  in 
the  A.  V.  and  1  Tim.  i  12,  or,  as  in  the 
B.V.,  more  generally  "  for  ministering,"  i.e. 
for  acting  as  an  assistant  to  me  in  my 
apostolio  labours.  The  words,  "to  me," 
favour  the  latter  rendering.  The  sense 
would  then  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  verb 
in  Acts  xix.  22,  where  we  read  that  Timothy 
and  Erastus  "ministered  onto  him,"  i.e. 
to  St.  Paul,  and  that  of  mrqplrris  applied  to 
Mark  in  Acts  xiii.  5. 

Ver.  12. — But  for  and,  A.V. ;  tent  for  have 
sent,  AV.  Tyohicus  was  with  St  Paul 
when  he  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians 
(Col.  iv.  7),  as  was  also  Timothy  (CoL  i.  1). 
The  presence  of  Luke,  Timothy,  Tychicus, 
Mark,  with  Paul  now,  as  then,  is  remark- 
able (see  ver.  10,  note);  I  sent  to  Ephesus. 
Theodoret  (quoted  by  Alford,  *Proleg.  to 
2  Tim.,'  ch.  ix.  sect.  1)  says,  "It  is  plain 
from  this  that  St  Timothy  was  not  at  this 
time  living  at  Ephesus,  but  somewhere  else." 
And  that  certainly  is  the  natural  inference 
at  first  sight  But  Bishop  Ellicott  suggests 
the  possibility  of  Tychicus  being  the  bearer 
of  the  First  Epistle  to  Timothy,  written  not 
very  long  before,  and  this  being  merely  an 
allusion  to  that  well-known  fact.  Another 
and  more  probable  idea  is  that  he  was  the 
bearer  of  this  Epistle,  that  the  object  of  his 
mission,  like  that  of  Artemas  (Titus  iii.  12), 
was  to  take  Timothy's  place  at  Ephesus 
during  Timothy's  absence  at  Borne,  and 
that  he  is  thus  mentioned  in  the  Epistle  in 
order  to  commend  him  to  the  reverent 
regard  of  the  Ephesian  Church  (Words- 
worth). It  is  argued  against  this  that 
■xp6s  ere  would  have  been  the  more  natural 
expression  after  the  analogy  of  CoL  iv.  7 
and  Titus  iii.  12.  But  this  objection  would 
be  removed  if  we  suppose  that  the  Epistle 
was  sent  by  another  hand,  and  that  it  was 
very  possible  that  Timothy  might  have 
started  for  Borne  before  Tyohicus  could 
arrive  at  Ephesus.  He  might  have  orders 
to  visit  Corinth  or  Macedonia  on  his  way. 
(For  the  arguments  for  and  against  Timothy 
being  at  Ephesus  at  this  time,  see  Alford' s 
'Proleg.,'  as  above.) 

Ver.  13. — Bring  when  thou  earnest  for  when 
thou  corned  bring  with  thee,  A.V. ;  especially 
for  bat  especially,  A.V.  The  oloke  (jar 
4>e\imy,  more  properly  written  f  oWXTjy); 


oh.  iv.  1—22.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


61 


the  Latin  pamula,  the  thick  overcoat  or 
cloke.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
Some  think  it  was  the  bag  in  which  the 
books  and  parchments  were  packed.  The 
parchments  (toi  fie/iPpivas).  This,  again,  is 
a  Latin  word.  It  occurs  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  They  would  probably  be 
for  the  apostle  to  write  his  Epistles  on. 
Or  they  may  have  been  valuable  manuscripts 
of  some  kind.  In  ver.  20  we  learn  that  St. 
Paul  bad  lately  been  at  Miletus;  and  in 
1  Tim.  i.  3  that  he  was  then  going  to 
Macedonia.  Troas  would  be  on  Ids  way 
to  Macedonia,  Greece,  and  Borne  (Acts  xvi. 
8,  9,  11),  as  it  was  on  the  return  journey 
from  Macedonia  to  Miletus  (Acts  xx.  5,  1 5). 
It  should  further  be  observed  that  the 
journey  here  indicated  is  the  same  as  that 
referred  to  in  1  Tim.  i  3,  which  confirms 
the  inevitable  inference  from  this  chapter 
that  St.  Paul,  on  his  way  to  Borne  from 
Miletus,  whither  he  had  come  from  Crete 
(Titus  i.  5),  passed  through  Troas,  Mace- 
donia, and  Corinth  (ver.  20),  leaving 
Timothy  at  Ephesus.    (See  Introduction.) 

Ver.  14. — Will  render  to  him  for  reward 
him,  A.Y.  and  T.B.  Alexander ;  apparently 
an  Bphesian,  as  appears  by  the  words,  "  of 
whom  be  thou  ware  also."  It  seems 
probable,  though  it  is  necessarily  uncertain, 
that  this  Alexander  is  the  same  person  as 
that  mentioned  in  1  Tim.  i.  20  as  "a 
blasphemer,"  which  agrees  exactly  with 
what  is  here  said  of  him,  "  he  greatly  with- 
stood our  words"  (comp.  Acts  xiii.  45, 
"  contradicted  the  things  which  were  spoken 
by  Paul,  and  blasphemed").  He  may  or 
may  not  be  the  same  as  the  Alexander 
named  in  Acts  xix.  33.  Supposing  the 
Alexander  of  1  Tim.  i.  20  and  this  place  to  he 
the  same,  the  points  of  resemblance  with  the 
Alexander  of  Acts  xix.  33  are  that  both 
resided  at  Ephesus,  that  both  seem  to  have 
been  Christians  (see  note  on  1  Tim.  i.  20), 
and  both  probably  Jews,  inasmuch  as  1 
Tim.  i.  relates  entirely  to  Jewish  heresies 
(vers.  4,  7,  8),  and  Acts  xix.  33  expressly 
states  that  he  was  a  Jew.  The  coppersmith 
(<5  xa*-Ke"s'<  onty  nere  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment); properly,  a  coppersmith,  but  used, 
generally  of  any  smith — silversmith,  or  gold- 
smith, or  blacksmith.  Did  me  much  evil 
(iroAXa  not  nana.  ive$fi£a.To).  This  is  a 
purely  Hellenistic  Mioin,  and  is  found  in 
the  LXX.  of  Gen.  i.  15, 17 ;  Song  of  the  Three 
Children,  19 ;  2  Mace.  xiii.  9.  In  classical 
Greek  the  verb  ivSeUyvftai,  in  the  middle 
voice,  "  to  display,"  can  only  be  followed  by 
a  subjective  quality,  as  "good  will,"  "virtue," 
"long-suffering,"  an  "opinion,"  and  the  like 
(see  Alford,  in  he.).  And  so  it  is  used  in 
1  Tim.  i.  16;  Titus  ii.  10;  iii.  2.  The 
question  naturally  arises — When  and  where 
did  Alexander  thus  injure  St  Paul?— at 


Ephesus  or  at  Rome?  Bengel  suggests 
Borne,  and  with  great  probability.  Perhaps 
he  did  him  evil  by  stirring  up  the  Jews  at 
Borne  against  the  apostle  at  the  time  of 
"his  first  defence;"  or  by  giving  adverse 
testimony  before  the  Boman  tribunal, 
possibly  accusing  him  of  being  seditious, 
and  bringing  up  the  riot  at  Ephesus  as  a 
proof  of  it ;  or  in  some  other  way,  of  which 
the  memory  has  perished.  'Will  render. 
The  B.T.  has  the  future,  SnroSibtrei  for  the 
optative  ImoStfv,  "  a  late  and  incorrect  form 
for  aroSotri"  (Kllicott,  in  loo.). 

Ver.  15. — Withstood  for  hath  withstood,  A.  V. 
Of  whom  be  thou  ware  (hv  <f>v\iaa-ov). 
This  is  the  proper  construction  in  classical 
Greek,  the  accusative  of  the  person  or  thing, 
after  <t>v\4<r<rofuu.  But  it  is  only  found  in 
Acts  xxi.  25.  In  Luke  xii.  15  the  equally 
correct  phrase,  $u\a.<ro-e<rBe  airb  Trjs  Tr\eove- 
£ias,  is  used.  The  inference  from  this  cau- 
tion to  Timothy  is  that  Alexander  had  left 
Borne  and  returned  to  his  native  Ephesus. 
The  Jews  were  always  on  the  move.  He 
greatly  withstood  our  words  (Juniarri).  For 
an  exactly  similar  use,  see  Acts  xiii.  8,  where 
Elymas  "withstood''  Paul  and  Barnabas; 
and  ch.  iii.  8,  where  Jannes  and  Jambres 
"  withstood  "  Moses.  In  this  case  we  may 
be  sure  that  Paul,  in  pleading  for  his  life,  did 
not  omit  to  preach  the  gospel  to  his  Gentile 
audience.  Alexander  tried  to  refute  his 
words,  not  without  effect.  The  apostle  says 
"our  words"  (not  "my  words"),  perhaps  to 
associate  with  himself  those  other  Chris- 
tians who  were  with  him.  It  certainly 
cannot  mean  "  yours  and  mine,"  as  Timothy 
was  not.  with  him  when  the  "  words  "  were 
spoken. 

Ver.  16. — Defence  for  answer,  A.V. ;  no  one 
took  my  part  for  no  man  stood  with  me,  A.V. ; 
all  for  all  men,  A.V. ;  may  it  not  for  I  pray 
God  it  may  not,  A.V. ;  account  for  charge, 
A.V.  Defence  (airo\oyi<f).  "  The  technical 
word  in  classical  Greek  for  a  defence  in 
answer  to  an  accusation ; "  as  Acts  xxii.  I 
(where  see  note  for  further  illustration),  and 
Phil.  i.  7.  Took  my  part ;  irapeyiveTo  B.T., 
for  (rv/jmapeyevero  T.B.,  which  occurs  else- 
where in  the  New  Testament  only  in  Luke 
xxiii.  48,  iu  a  somewhat  different  sense. 
The  simple  Ttapaytn/iai  is  very  common  in 
the  New  Testament,  but  nowhere  in  the 
technical  sense  in  which  it  is  used  here.  In 
classical  Greek  both  forms  are  common  in 
the  sense  of  "  coming  to  aid,"  "standing  by 
any  one,"  "  assisting."  Here  it  represents 
the  Latin  amstere  or  adeste  in  its  technic.il 
sense  of  "  standing  by  "  an  accused  person 
as  friend  or  assistant,  to  aid  and  abet  them 
in  their,  defence.  Powerful  men  sometimes 
brought  such  a  multitude  of  assistants  as  to 
overawe  the  magistrate,  as  Orgetorix  the 
Helvetian,  when  summoned  to  trial,  appeared 


62 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [oh.  vr.  1—22, 


with  ten  thousand  followers,  and  so  there 
was  no  trial.  Paul,  like  his  Lord  and  Master, 
of  whom  it  is  written,  "All  his  disciples  for- 
sook him  and  fled,"  had  no  one  to  stand 
with  him  in  his  hour  of  need. 

Ver.  17.' — But  for  notwithstanding,  A.V. ; 
by  for  with,  A.V. ;  through  for  by,  A.V. ; 
message  for  preaching,  A.V. ;  proclaimed  for 
known,  A.V.  Stood  by  me  (,uol  itapiarri); 
as  in  Acta  xxvii.  23 ;  Bom.  xvi.  2  (where  see 
also  the  use  of  n-poora-m,  a  helper).  Tlapi- 
ffra/xai  means  simply  to  stund  by  the  side  of  a 
person — to  be  present.  But,  like  irapa.ylpofi.ai, 
it  acquires  the  meaning  of  standing  by  for 
the  purpose  of  helping.  The  contrast  be- 
tween the  timid  faithless  friends  who  failed 
him  like  a  deceitful  brook  (Job  vi.  15),  and 
the  faithfulness  of  the  Lord  who  was  a  very 
present  Help  in  trouble,  is  very  striking. 
Strengthened  me  (l»e8W/ioi<r<=  «e);  see  1 
Tim.  i.  12,  note,  and  Acts  vi.  8.  The  message 
(idipvyna).  The  A.V.  preaching  is  far  better. 
St.  Paul  means  that  gospel  which  he  was 
commissioned  to  preach,  and  which  he  did 
preach  openly  in  full  court  when  he  was  on 
his  trial  (see  ver.  15,  note).  Might  he  fully 
proclaimed {■K\tipoipopi,Ori) ;  see ch. iv. 5, note; 
and  comp.  Bom.  xv.  19.  All  the  Gentiles 
might  hear  (comp.  Phil,  i  12—14).  The 
brave,  unselfish  spirit  of  the  apostle  thinking 
more  of  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  than 
of  his  own  life,  is  truly  admirable.  I  was 
delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion. 
Surely  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  as  Bengel 
says,  this  is  a  quotation  from  Ps.  xxii.  20,  21. 
The  verb  m>io-Br)v, "  I  was  delivered,"  comes 
from  the  twentieth  verse,  "Deliver  my  soul 
from  the  sword,"  and  the  phrase,  in  arifiaros 
Keovros,  is  found  verbatim  in  ver.  21.  The 
apostle  means  his  deliverance  from  theexeeu- 
tioner's  sword.  In  the  next  verse  we  find  both 
the  words  piaerai  and  a&att,  and  the  whole 
tone  of  the  psalm  breathes  the  same  spirit 
as  the  saying,  "The  Lord  stood  by  me." 
Dean  Alford's  suggestion  that  the  lion  here 
is  Satan,  as  in  1  Pet.  v.  8,  and  the  danger 
which  the  apostle  escaped  was  not  death, 
which  he  did  not  fear,  but  betraying  the 

fospel  under  the  fear  of  death,  is  ingenious, 
ut  rather  far-fetched,  though  not  impos- 
sible. It  may  possibly  have  been  part  of 
what  was  in  St.  Paul's  mind. 

Ver.  18. — The  Lord  for  and  the  Lord,  A.V. 
and  T.B. ;  will  for  shall,  A.V.;  save  for 
preserve,  A.V. ;  tht  glory  for  glory,  A.V. 
Deliver  me  .  .  .  save  me  (see  preceding 
note).  The  language  here  is  also  very  like 
that  of  the  Lord's  Prayer :  'Pvaai  rtinas  dwo 
Tovirovrtpov'  aovyap  havm  y  fSatriKela  .  .  .  <tal 
ri  5<j|a,  eis  robs  ai&ms.  'A^v  (Matt.  vi.  13). 
Every  evil  work.  Alford  goes  altogether 
astray  in  his  remarks  on  this  passage.  In- 
terpreted by  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and  by  its 
own  internal  evidence,  the  meaning  clearly 


is,  "  The  Lord,  who  stood  by  me  at  my  trial, 
will  continue  to  be  my  Saviour.  He  will 
deliver  me  from  every  evil  design  of  mine 
enemies,  and  from  all  the  wiles  and  assaults 
of  the  devil,  in  short,  from  the  whole  power 
of  evil,  and  will  bring  me  safe  into  his  own 
kingdom  of  light  and  righteousness."  There 
is  a  strong  contrast,  as  Bengel  pithily  ob- 
serves, between  "the  evil  work"  and  "his 
heavenly  kingdom."  A  triumphant  martyr- 
dom is  as  true  a  deliverance  as  escape  from 
death.  Compare  our  Lord's  promise, "  There 
shall  not  an  hair  of  your  head  perish" 
(Luke  xxi.  18  compared  with  ver.  16).  St. 
Paul's  confidence  simply  is  that  the  Lord 
would,  in  his  own  good  time  and  way,  transfer 
him  from  this  present  evil  world,  and  from 
the  powers  of  darkness,  into  his  eternal 
kingdom  of  light  and  righteousness. 

Ver.  19. — House  for  household,  A.V.  Frisoa 
and  Aqnila.  Prisca  is  elsewhere  always  called 
Priscilla  (Acts  xviii.  2,  18,  26;  Bom.  xvi. 
3 ;  1  Oor.  xvi.  19).  A  similar  variation  of 
names  is  seen  in  Drusa  and  Drusilla,  Lima 
and  Livella,  etc.  She  is  named  before  her 
husband,  as  here  in  Acts  xviii.  18 ;  Bom.  xvi. 
3.  The  mention  of  them  here  is  in  favour 
of  Timothy  being  at  Ephesus  at  this  time, 
as  Ephesus  is  one  of  the  places  where  they 
were  wont  to  sojourn  (Acta  xviii.  19,  26) 
The  house  (as  in  A.V.  ch.  i  16)  of  Onesi 
phorns  (see  eh.  i.  16, 18,  note).  This  repeti- 
tion of  the  "  house  of  Onesiphorus  "  is  almost 
conclusive  as  to  the  recent  death  of  Onesi- 
phorus himself. 

Ver.  20.— J  left  for  have  I  left,  A.V.; 
Miletus  for  Miletum,  A.V.  Erastus  abode  at 
Corinth.  We  learn  from  Bom.  xvi.  3  that 
Erastus  was  the  chamberlain  of  Corinth, 
which  accounts  for  his  abiding  there.  He 
was  one  of  St.  Paul's  companions  in  his 
missionary  journey,  and  we  learn  from  Acts 
xix.  22  that  he  was  sent  by  St.  Paul  with 
Timothy  into  Macedonia  just  before  the  great 
riot  at  Ephesus.  The  mention  of  him  here 
clearly  indicates  that  St.  Paul  had  gone 
from  Troas,  where  he  left  his  cloke,  to 
Corinth  on  his  way  to  Borne.  Trophimus  is 
first  mentioned  in  Acts  xx.  4,  where  we  learn 
that  he  was  an  Asiatic,  and  more  definitely 
in  Acts  xxi.  29,  that  lie  was  an  Ephesian. 
He  had  travelled  with  St.  Paul's  party  from 
Macedonia  to  Troas,  and  thence  to  Miletus 
and  Jerusalem,  where  we  lose  sight  of  him, 
till  we  find  him  again  in  this  passage  journey- 
ing towards  Borne  with  St.  Paul  and  others, 
but  stopped  at  Miletus  by  sickness.  Miletus, 
not  Miletum,  is  the  correct  form. 

Ver.  21.— Saluteth  for  greeteth,  A.V.  Do 
thy  diligence  (o-iroiSaow) ;  see  ver.  9  and  ch. 
ii.  15,  note.  Before  winter;  lest,  when  winter 
storms  come,  it  be  impossible  to  do  so.  St. 
Paul's  longing  to  have  Timothy  with  him  is 
i  apparent  throughout.    Eubulus ;  mentioned 


oh.  iv.  1—22.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY. 


63 


nowhere  else.  The  name  is  not  uncommon 
as  a  Greek  name,  and  appears  also  in  the 
patronymic  Eubulides,  and  the  female  name 
Eubule.  And  Pudens,  and  Linus,  and  Claudia. 
Of  these  persons  Linus  is  probably  the  same 
as  is  mentioned  by  Ireneeus  and  Eusebius  as 
the  first  Bishop  of  Borne.  Irenseus  (iii.  111,3) 
says,  "  When  the  apostles,  therefore,  had 
founded  the  Church  (of  Borne)  they  entrusted 
the  office  (\nrovpylav)  of  the  episcopate  to 
Linus,  of  whom  Paul  makes  mention  in  his 
Epistles  to  Timothy."  Eusebius  ('Ecc. 
Hist.,'  iii.  2)  says,  "  Linus  was  ordained  the 
first  Bishop  of  Borne  (vparos  Khrtpovrai  t^v 
4wi(TKoiriip)  after  the  martyrdom  of  Paul  and 
Peter"  (see,  too,  §  4  of  the  same  book). 
Some  identify  him  with  a  certain  Llin  in 
Welsh  hagiography,  said  to  be  the ,  son  of 
Oaractacus.  As  regards  Pudens  and  Claudia, 
nothing  is  known  about  them  unless  the 
Tery  ingenious  and  interesting  theory  of 
Archdeacon  Williams  is  true,  which  is  neces- 
sarily very  uncertain.  According  to  this 
theory,  Claudia  is  the  foreign  lady,  a  Briton, 
whose  marriage  with  Pudens  is  spoken  of  by 
Martial  in  two  epigrams,  and  who  also  bore 
the  cognomen  of  Bufina.  It  is  supposed  that 
she  was  the  daughter  of  the  British  king 
Cogidubnus,  the  ally  of  the  Bomans  and 
of  the  Boman  governor,  Aulus  Plautius, 
whose  wife  Pomponia  is  said  by  Tacitus  to 
have  been  impeached  of  the  crime  of  em- 
bracing a  "  foreign  superstition,"  which  was 
probably  Christianity.  Cogidubnus  appears 
by  an  ancient  inscription  now  at  Goodwood 
to  have  taken  the  name  of  the  Emperor 
Claudius,  being  called  Tiberius  Claudius 
Cogidubnus,  which  would  naturally  lead 
to  his  daughter  being  called  Claudia.  And 
if  further  she  was  adopted  by  the  wife  of 
her  father's  ally,  the  name  Bufina  would  be 
accounted  for,  as  a  distinguished  branch  of 
the  gens  Pomponia  bore  the  name  of  Bufus. 
And  Martial's  epigram  is  addressed  to 
"  Bufus,"  as  one  interested  in  the  marriage. 


Claudia  may  either  have  learnt  Christianity 
from  Pomponia,  or  may  have  conveyed  the 
knowledge  of  the  gospel  to  her.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  name  of  Pudens  appears  on 
the  Goodwood  inscription  as  having  given, 
while  still  a  heathen,  a  site  for  a  temple 
of  Neptune  and  Minerva,  which  was  built 
"  pro  salute  "  of  the  imperial  family  under 
the  authority  of  King  Cogidubnus— ouri- 
ously  connecting  him  with  the  British  king. 
It  is  probable  that  Pudens  and  Claudia  were 
not  yet  married.  Thus  it  will  be  seen  that, 
while  this  theory  is  borne  out  by  many 
coincidences,  it  cannot  by  any  means  be 
adopted  as  certain  (see  Dean  Alford's  ex- 
cussus  in  the  '  Proleg.  to  2  Tim. ; '  and  Cony- 
beare  and  Howson's  '  Life  of  St.  Paul,'  vol. 
ii.  p.  501).  Lewin  ('  Life  and  Epist.  of  St. 
Paul,'  vol.  ii.  p.  392)  warmly  espouses  the 
theory,  but  hesitates  between  Caractacus 
and  Cogidubnus  as  the  father  of  Claudia. 
Farrar  rejects  the  whole  theory  "  as  an 
elaborate  rope  of  sand  "  ('  Life  of  St.  Paul,' 
vol.  ii.  p.  569).  If  Linus  was  the  son,  and 
Claudia  the  daughter,  of  Caractacus,  they 
would  be  brother  and  sister. 

Ver.  22.— The  Lord  for  the  Lord  Jetut 
Christ,  A.V.  and  TB.  The  Lord  be  with 
thy  spirit,  etc.  The  manuscripts  vary.  The 
salutation  as  it  stands  in  the  B.T.  is  like 
the  veisicles,  "  The  Lord  be  with  you.  A. 
And  with  thy  spirit."  It  is  a  peculiarity  of 
the  salutation  here  that  it  is  double — one  to 
Timothy  personally,  /«t&  rov  iri/dfitxr6s  ffov ; 
the  other  to  the  Church,  r\  x<*pu  M6fl'  fy»»». 
1  Cor.  xvi.  24  exhibits  another  variety. 
Grace  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  21,  note).  The  E.T. 
omits  the  "  amen  "  at  the  end,  as  in  1  Tim. 
vi.  21.  Thus  closes  our  last  authentic  ac- 
count of  this  great  apostle ;  these  are,  per- 
haps, the  last  words  of  him  who  wrought  a 
greater  change  in  the  condition  of  mankind 
by  his  speech  than  any  man  that  ever  lived. 
All  honour  ba  to  his  blessed  memory  I 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1—8. — The  last  charge.  The  words  of  this  chapter  have  the  peculiar  interest 
which  attaches  to  the  last  words  of  one  who  was  prominent  above  his  fellow-men  and 
they  have  this  striking  character,  that  the  apostle,  knowing  that  the  time  of  his  departure 
was  at  hand,  when  the  great  work  of  his  life  must  cease  as  far  as  he  was  concerned,  was 
intensely  solicitous  that  the  work  should  go  on  after  his  death  with  uninterrupted 
course  and  with  undiminished  force.  It  is  one  of  the  features  of  the  holy  unselfishness 
of  St.  Paul's  character  that  he  was  not  anxious  for  the  success  of  the  gospel  only  as 
far  as  that  success  was  connected  with  his  own  labours,  and  was  the  fruit  of  his  own 
apostolic  energy ;  but  that  the  growth  of  Christ's  kingdom,  and  the  increase  of  Christ's 
Church,  and  the  salvation  of  souls,  were  things  that  he  intensely  longed  for  for  their 
own  sake,  and  without  the  slightest  reference  to  himself.  Accordingly,  in  the  words 
before  us,  he  throws  his  whole  soul  into  the  task  of  urging  Timothy  to  carry  on  the 
work  of  the  ministry  with  a  vigour  equal  to  his  own.    By  the  most  solemn  motive*. 


64  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [ch.  iv.  1—22, 

speaking  as  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  great  Judge  of  the  quick  and  the  dead, 
with  the  expectation  of  the  great  epiphany  in  full  view,  with  all  the  glories  of  the 
mediatorial  kingdom  spread  out  before  his  mind's  eye,  he  urges  him  to  the  work — the 
ministerial  work;  the  evangelistic  work;  the  work  in  which  Paul  had  spent  his 
strength,  and  ungrudgingly  used  his  splendid  faculties ;  the  work,  which  is  described 
in  three  words,  '-Preach  the  Word."  For  these  words  do  really  comprehend  all  the 
details  which  are  added.  Go  as  God's  herald,  and  deliver  to  the  people  God's  message 
— his  message  of  abounding  grace,  his  Word  of  pardon  and  forgiveness,  his  Word  ol 
love  and  reconciliation.  Preach  the  Word  which  tells  of  Jesus  Christ,  of  death  to  sin 
by  his  death  upon  the  cross,  of  life  to  God  by  his  resurrection  from  the  dead.  Preach 
the  Word  of  holy  obedience,  o('  charity,  and  purity,  and  patience,  and  gentleness,  and 
peace;  the  Won!  of  like-minded  ness  with  Christ,  of  conformity  to  the  will  of  God;  the 
Word  of  truth  and  righteousness ;  the  unerring  Word,  which  is  like  God,  and  cannot  lie. 
Preach  the  Word  as  one  who  knows  its  worth  and  its  power ;  as  one  who  knows  that 
the  issues  of  life  and  death  are  bound  up  with  it ;  as  one  who  will  brook  no  delay  in 
preaching  it.  Preach  it  with  special  application  to  the  varying  needs  of  those  who 
hear  it.  Eeprove  sin  by  its  searching  light.  Rebuke  offenders  by  its  sharp  two-edged 
blade.  Exhort  the  weak  and  sluggish  by  its  comforting  and  animating  truths. 
Exemplify  its  excellence  by  the  spirit  in  which  you  teach  it.  And  be  prepared  for 
hardships  and  opposition  and  contradiction  in  your  work.  You  may  have  to  stand 
alone.  You  may  see  popular  preachers  all  around  you,  leading  astray  silly  souls  by 
hundreds  and  thousands;  tickling  their  ears  with  foolish  fancies  ;  ministering  to  their 
idle  lusts ;  leading  them  away  from  the  truth.  But  do  thou  "  preach  the  Word." 
Flinch  not,  shrink  not,  wince  not.  Do  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  faithfully,  stead- 
fastly, boldly.  Fill  my  place ;  take  up  my  work ;  witness  for  Christ  as  1  have  witnessed ; 
suffer  for  Christ  as  I  have  suffered;  and  then  join  me  in  the  kingdom  of  glory.  Such 
is  the  tenor  of  the  last  apostolic  charge.  The  Lord  grant  to  his  Church  an  unfailing 
succession  of  men  to  carry  out  its  directions,  and  to  fulfil  it  in  its  spirit  and  in  its 
letter  I 

Vers.  9 — 22. — "Orpah  kissed  her  mother-in-law;  but  Ruth  clave  unto  her''  In  this 
little  social  incident  of  some  three  thousand  years  ago,  which  may  have  passed  at  the 
time  with  little  observation,  we  have  a  pithy  and  pregnant  example  set  before  us, 
with  the  usual  searching  wisdom  of  Holy  Scripture,  of  the  difference  between  friend- 
ship and  friendship,  religion  and  religion,  according  as  they  lie  deep  in  the  roots  of  the 
heart  or  merely  lie  on  the  surface.  The  contrast  between  Demas  and  Luke  affords 
another  example  of  this  important  difference.  We  may  believe  that  Demas  had  faith  in 
Christ,  and  also  that  he  had  a  measure  of  friendship  for  St.  Paul.  We  need  not  sup- 
pose that,  when  he  was  a  "  fellow-worker  "  with  St.  Paul  in  the  good  work  of  evangelizing 
the  world,  when  he  was  his  companion  with  Luke  and  others  during  his  first  impri- 
sonment at  Home,  and  travelled  with  him  again  Romewards,  he  was  playing  the 
hypocrite,  and  that  he  was  either  false  in  his  profession  of  faith  to  the  Lord  Jesus  or  of 
attachment  to  his  apostle.  But  neither  his  faith  nor  his  friendship  had  been  put  to  a 
severe  tsst.  The  force  of  St.  Paul's  character  had  hitherto  borne  him  along  like  an 
impetuous  torrent.  He  had  confidence  in  his  star ;  he  felt  sure,  perhaps,  that  the  cause 
which  Paul  espoused  would  triumph ;  and  no  difficulties  had  arisen  sufficient  to  make  hita 
waver  in  his  purpose.  But  suddenly  all  was  changed.  This  second  imprisonment,  with 
its  ominous  trial,  with  the  defection  of  the  Asiatic  Christians,  and  the  desertion  of 
friends,  had  altered  the  whole  aspect  of  affairs.  Instead  of  the  triumphs  of  the  faith 
and  the  supremacy  of  the  great  apostle,  he  saw  the  probability  of  a  cruel  death  for  St. 
Paul  and  his  nearest  companions.  The  trial  was  too  great  for  his  weak  faith  and  his 
superficial  friendship.  Without  denying  Christ,  and  without  withdrawing  from  his 
eutward  attachment  to  St.  Paul,  we  can  fancy  him,  perhaps,  with  protestations  of 
undiminished  love,  and  regrets  at  the  necessity  which  called  him  away,  hurrying  off  to 
Thwsalonica,  his  native  place.  But  Paul  felt  it  to  be,  what  it  was,  a  desertion. 
"  O.pah  kissed  her  mother-in-law ;  but  Ruth  clave  unto  her."  In  the  words,  "  Only 
Luke  is  with  tie,"  we  see  the  different  stamp  both  of  his  faith  and  of  his  friendship. 
Luke  the  physician  was  as  loving  as  he  was  loved.  With  admirable  fidelity  and 
unshaken  constancy,  he  had  followed  his  great  master  from  Philippi  to  Troas,  and  from 


CH.  nr.  1— 22.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  «5 

Troas  to  Jerusalem.  In  the  graphic  narratives  of  St.  Paul's  trials  before  the  Sanhedrim, 
before  Felix,  before  Festus  and  Agrippa;  in  his  account  of  the  shipwreck  and  of  the 
arrival  at  Borne, — we  trace  his  presence  at  all  those  eventful  scenes.  Through  the  two 
whole  years  of  imprisonment  he  had  never  left  him.  And  now  that  the  end  of  that 
Ijreat  career  was  drawing  nigh,  and  the  clouds  were  gathering  up  and  darkening  the 
evening  of  that  glorious  life,  and  various  sorrows  were  thickening  around  that  noble 
spirit,  we  read  still,  not  in  the  inferences  of  Luke's  modest  narratives,  but  in  the 
testimony  of  St.  Paul  himself,  "Only  Luke  is  with  me."  "Ruth  clave  unto  her." 
"  Whither  thou  goest,  I  will  go ;  and  where  thou  lodgest,  I  will  lodge :  thy  people  shall 
be  my  people,  and  thy  God  my  God.  .  .  .  The  Lord  do  go  to  me,  and  more  also,  if 
aught  but  death  part  me  and  thee."  We  see,  too,  how  he  who  had  recorded  in  such 
graphic  words  "  all  that  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and  teach,  until  the  day  in  which  he  was 
taken  up,"  had  imbibed  the  spirit  of  his  Divine  Master.  He  had  not  taught  others  to 
know  Jesus  Christ,  without  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  him  himself.  And  so  his  faith 
was  firm  in  that  day  of  shaking.  He  was  ready  to  lose  his  life  that  he  might  gain  it ; 
and  Be  stands  before  us,  not  only  as  the  evangelist  who  teaches  and  delights  us,  but  as 
the  strong  believer  and  the  faithful  friend,  whose  example  is  as  persuasive  as  his  words. 

HOMDLIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — A  solemn  charge  to  Timothy  to  make  full  proof  of  hi*  ministry.  The 
prospect  of  his  approaching  death  led  the  apostle  to  address  his  young  disciple  with  deep 
•nd  earnest  feeling. 

I.  The  solemn  adjuration.  "  I  charge  thee  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  of  Christ  Jesus, 
who  shall  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  and  by  his  appearing  and  his  kingdom."  The 
object  of  the  apostje  is  to  impart  to  Timothy  a  solemn  sense  of  responsibility  in  the 
discharge  of  his  ministry.  1.  All  preachers  must  one  day  give  an  account  of  their 
stewardship.  Such  a  thought  ought  to  stimulate  them  to  greater  faithfulness.  2. 
Their  responsibility  is  to  God  and  Jesus  Christ,  who  are  Witnesses  of  their  work,  as  they 
have  made  them  good  ministers  of  the  New  Testament.  3.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Judge  of 
the  two  classes  of  living  and  dead  saints,  who  in  the  last  day  shall  appear  before  hie 
judgment-seat.  All  judgment  is  committed  to  him,  and  he  will  exercise  it  righteously. 
4.  The  Judgment  viill  take  place  at  "his  appearing  and  his  kingdom;''  that  is,  at  his 
second  coming.  5.  The  reward  of  fidelity  is  also  held  out  to  faithful  servants  in  con- 
nection with  the  glory  of  "  his  kingdom." 

II.  The  duties  of  the  faithful  ministee.  "  Preach  the  Word ;  be  instant  in 
season,  out  of  season ;  reprove,  rebuke,  exhort,  with  all  long-suffering  and  teaching." 
1.  His  first  and  pre-eminent  duty  is  to  preach  the  gospel,  because  it  is  the  pcwer  of  God 
to  salvation.  There  is  no  injunction  to  administer  the  sacraments,  though  that  would 
be  included  in  his  duties.  There  is  nothing,  therefore,  to  justify  the  higher  place  which 
Tractarians  assign  to  the  sacraments  beside  the  Word.  It  is  a  significant  fact  that  the 
success  of  the  apostles,  as  recorded  in  the  Acts,  is  ntver  once  attributed  to  the  sacra- 
ments, but  always  to  the  Word.  2.  The  minister  must  have  an  earnest  urgency  in  every 
part  of  his  work.  He  must  create  opportunities  where  he  cannot  find  them  ;  he  must 
work  at  times  both  convenient  and  inconvenient  to  himself;  he  must  approach  the 
willing  opportunely  and  the  unwilling  inopportunely.  3.  He  must  reprove,  or  convince 
those  in  error  at  to  doctrine.  4.  He  must  rebuke  the  unruly,  or  immoral  in  life.  5. 
He  must  " exhort  with  all  long-suffering  and  teaching" — exercising  due  patience' and 
using  all  the  resources  of  a  sanctified  understanding,  to  encourage  men  to  keep  to  the 
ways  of  good  doctrine  and  holiness. — T.  0. 

Vers.  8,4.— The  waywardness  and  restiveness  of  so-called  Christians  a  fresh  incentive 
to  fidelity  in  ministers.  This  is  an  argument  from  the  future  to  tell  upon  present  dutv 

I.  The  reason  of  the  apostasy.  "  For  the  time  will  come  when  they  will  not 
endure  the  sound  doctrine."  1.  The  gospelrdoctrine  is  sound,  because  it  necessitates  a 
Kuly  life,  and,  holds  the  gratification  of  sinful  passions  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  hopes 
of  salvation.  2.  Evil  men  cannot  endure  it,  because  it  is  so  opposed  to  the  corruption 
of  human  nature,  and  therefore  treat  it  with  neglect,  if  not  with  contempt     8.  Th» 

IL   TLMOTHI.  j 


66  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  iv.  1— 22. 

apostle  foresees  the  growth  of  evil  in  the  Ohiirch,  and  therefore  seeks  to  prepare  ministers 
to  war  against  it. 

II.  The  effect  or  this  moral  disgust  at  the  gospel.  "But,  having  itching  ears, 
will  heap  to  themselves  teachers  after  their  own  lusts."  1.  They  will  not  discard  the 
ministry  absolutely.  They  will  only  exchange  one  class  of  ministers  for  another.  But 
they  will  vastly  multiply  the  number  of  their  religious  guides.  2.  The  itch  for  novelty 
led  to  the  multiplication  of  teachers.  They  were  fickle,  unsettled,  and  uneasy.  They 
wanted  to  hear  new  things  or  smooth  things,  such  as  would  reflect  the  caprices  of  a 
corrupt  nature.  3.  The  reason  for  the  whole  rabble  of  teachers  that  they  gathered  to 
themselves  is  to  he  found  in  their  wish  to  have  their  fancies  gratified — "  after  their  own 
lusts."  They  wanted  indulgent  guides,  who  would  flatter  the  pride  of  human  nature, 
and  not  lay  too  great  a  stress  upon  the  importance  of  a  holy  life.  The  sound  doctrine 
was  necessarily  allied  to  a  pure  morality. 

III.  The  retribution  that  awaits  on  such  a  perversion  of  judgment.  "  And 
will  turn  away  their  ears  from  the  truth,  and  turn  aside  unto  fables."  1.  It  is  a  solemn 
fact  in  Divine  providence,  that  when  men  do  not  like  to  return  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth,  God  gives  them  up  to  a  reprobate  mind,  so  that  they  lose  all  relish  for  sound 
doctrine.  2.  It  is  an  equally  solemn  fact  that,  if  the  truth  is  repudiated,  the  heart  will 
not  therefore  cease  to  exercise  itself  about  religious  concerns.  The  heart  cannot  long 
remain  empty.  Fables  rush  in  to  occupy  the  place  which  denies  a  footing  to  truth, 
just  as  infidelity  has  a  vacuum-creating  power,  which  superstition  immediately  rushes 
in  to  fill  up.  What  a  waste  of  soul  I — profitless  fables  taken  in  exchange  for  soul-saving 
truth  1— T.Q. 

Ver.  5. — The  duty  of  Timothy  in  trying  times.  I.  "  But  be  thou  sober  in  all 
things."  1.  The  presence  of  false  teachers  necessitated  a  wakeful  attitude,  a  constant 
presence  of  mind,  a  quick  discernment  of  opportunities  for  advancing  the  truth.  2. 
There  ought  to  be  a  consistently  sober  and  watchful  care  extending  through  the  whole  life 
of  the  minister,  who  has  to  "  give  account  of  souls." 

II.  "  Suffer  hardship."  1.  If  the  minister  fears  the  anger  of  men,  he  will  not  be 
faithful  to  Ood.  2.  There  is  a  reward  for  brave  suffering.  (1  Tim.  ii.  3 — 12.)  3.  The 
example  of  the  apostle's  life  was  ever  before  Timothy  as  a  powerful  incentive  to  endurance. 
(1  Tim.  id.  10—12.) 

III.  "  Do  the  work  of  an  evangelist."  1.  There  was  a  separate  class  of  officers 
called  evangelists  in  the  apostolic  Church  (Eph.  iv.  11),  whose  special  business  was  to 
break  new  ground  in  the  open  fields  of  heathenism  or  the  narrower  confines  of  Judaism. 
They  preached  the  gospel,  while  pastors  shepherded  the  flocks.  But  we  are  not  to  sup- 
pose that  pasters  did  not  also  "do  the  work  of  an  evangelist."  They  had  saints  and 
sinners  under  their  care  in  all  places.  2.  As  Timothy  had  been  lately  occupied  in  organ- 
izing the  Church-life  of  Ephesus,  the  admonition  was  not  needless  that  he  should  hence- 
forth devote  himself  to  the  direct  work  of  evangelization,  as  the  best  antidote  to  heresy 
and  impiety. 

IV.  "  Make  full  proof  of  thy  ministry."  This  was  to  be  done :  1.  By  constant 
labours.  2.  By  unswerving  faithfulness  to  God  and  man.  3.  By  efforts  to  save  sinners 
and  edify  saints,  which  were  seen  to  be  successful.  Such  a  man  fulfils  his  ministry,  for 
he  seeks  not  his  own  things,  but  the  things  of  Christ. — T.  0. 

Vers,  g — 8. — The  nearness  of  the  apostle's  death,  and  his  prospects  in  connection  with 
it.    He  urges  Timothy  to  increased  zeal  on  account  of  his  own  approaching  departure. 

I.  The  imminence  of  his  death.  "  For  I  am  already  being  offered,  and  the  time  of 
my  departure  is  at  hand."  1.  Mark  the  calmness  with  which  the  apostle  contemplates  a 
violent  death.  There  is  no  tremor,  or  hurry,  or  impatience  in  his  last  days.  The 
lancua^e  is  singularly  composed.  He  knew  that  Nero  would  soon  put  an  end  to  his 
life,  for  that  monster  of  cruelty  and  crime  was  even  then  striking  out  wildly  against 
the  Christians.  Nothing  but  an  assured  hope  and  a  living  faith  could  maintain  the 
spirit  in  such  trying  circumstances.  2.  The  apostle  is  not  too  preoccupied  with  his  own 
approaching  sufferings  to  forget  the  cause  for  which  he  is  now  about  to  surrender  his  life. 
He  is  now  more  urgent  than  ever  in  his  instructions  to  Timothy. 

II.  The  happy  iietkospkct  of  a  useful  life.    "I  have  fought  the  good  figh^ 


oil  it.  1—22.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  67 

I  have  finished  the  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith."  1.  The  good,  fight  ended.  (1) 
Every  Christian  is  a  soldier.  (2)  He  has  to  fight  against  the  threefold  enmity  of  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  (3)  He  overcomes  through  faith  as  his  sole  weapon 
(1  John  v.  4,  5).  (4.)  There  is  a  limit  to  the  duration  of  the  fight.  Death  ends  it. 
2.  The  race  ended.  (1)  It  is  a  long  race ;  (2)  a  wearying  race ;  (3)  yet  a  glorious 
race,  because  it  has  a  happy  ending.  3.  The  faith  preserved.  (1)  It  is  a  precious 
deposit  placed  in  our  hands  (ch.  i.  14).  (2)  Brrorists  of  all  sorts  are  continually 
striving  to  wrest  it  out  of  our  hands  by  their  specious  sophistries.  (3)  Believers  keep 
it  safest  who  treasure  it  in  their  hearts  as  well  as  their  minds. 

III.  The  blessed  prospects  m  store  foe  him.  "  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for 
me  the  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  shall  give  to  me 
at  that  day :  and  not  only  to  me,  but  also  to  all  them  that  have  loved  his  appearing." 

1.  The  reward.  "  The  crown  of  righteousness."  (1)  It  was  the  symbol  of  excellence 
and  glory.  (2)  It  was  a  recogniiion  of  the'righteousness  of  the  wearer.  It  was  not 
a  crown  of  ambition.     It  was  not  won  by  inflicting  miseries  on  the  human  race. 

2.  The  certainty  and  manner  of  its  bestowal.  (1)  It  is  laid  up  in  reserve  securely 
for  its  wearers.  (2)  It  is  conferred  (a)  as  matter  of  grace,  for  the  Judge  "  awards " 
it  of  grace;  and  (6)  as  matter  of  righteousness,  for,  as  righteous  Judge,  he  will  not  allow 
the  works  of  believers  to  go  unrewarded  (Rev.  xiv.  13).  3.  The  character  of  those 
receiving  the  reward.  "  Them  that  have  loved  his  appearing."  (1)  Believers  do  not 
dread  Christ's  appearance  in  judgment.  (2)  They  look  for  ward  with  hope,  satisfaction, 
and  joy,  to  the  day  of  final  account.  (3)  All  who  love  him  now  will  love  him  at  his 
appearing,  when  they  shall  tee  him  in  his  glory.  (4)  The  day  of  reward ;  the  day  of 
judgment. — T.  C. 

Vers.  9 — 12. — The  apostle's  loneliness  and  need  of  assistance  and  comfort.  The 
longing  for  sympathy  and  help  in  his  hour  of  trial  was  natural.  "  Do  thy  diligence 
to  come  shortly  unto  me."  There  were  several  reasons  for  his  desire  to  see  Timothy, 
apart  from  the  natural  anxiety  to  see  the  most  attached  of  his  faithful  disciples. 

I.  The  apostle  had  been  deserted  by  Demas.  "Demas  hath  forsaken  me." 
1.  This  brought  great  distress  to  the  apostle :  (1)  Because  Demas  had  been  a  fellow- 
labourer  and  friend  (Col.  iv.  14).  (2)  Because  he  forsook  him  at  a  critical  time  in  his 
personal  history,  when  he  was  already  disheartened  by  the  Asiatic  deserters  and  in 
the  near  prospect  of  death.  (3)  Because  there  was  a  special  need  for  such  as  Demas 
to  stand  by  the  gospel  in  the  city  which  was  the  heart  of  paganism,  and  to  show 
courage  and  constancy  in  persecution.  2.  The  cause  of  the  desertion  was  more  dis- 
tressing. "  Having  loved  this  present  world."  It  may  have  been  love  of  life  or  love 
of  ease,  or  the  desire  to  get  back  to  old  associations  at  Thessalonica  (probably  his  native 
place),  or  the  desire  for  pleasure  or  wealth.  But  it  was  a  fatal  pas-ion.  The  love  of 
this  world  is  inconsistent  with  the  true  life,  for  all  that  is  in  the  world  is  evil — "the 
lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life."  It  is  all,  in  the  present  order 
of  things,  opposed  to  God  and  destructive  to  man.  Nothing  but  Christ  can  deliver 
us  from  the  power  of  this  present  evil  world  (Gal.  i.  4). 

II.  The  apostle  was  now  almost  alone.  Other  fellow-labourers  had  gone  on 
their  errands  of  usefulness  to  various  quarters — no  doubt  with  his  heart's  consent: 
Crescens  to  Galatia ;  Titus  to  Dalmatia,  on  the  Adriatic  ;  Tychicus,  an  old  friend,  and 
once  before  sent  to  Kphesus,  goes  back  there  by  the  apostle's  directions.  Luke  alone 
of  all  the  ministers  of  Christ  keeps  the  aged  apostle  company;  for  though  such  brethren 
as  Eubulus,  Pudens,  Linus,  and  Claudia  now  dutifully  attend  upon  him,  yet  the 
apostle  is  anxious  to  see  Timothy,  and  begs  that  Mark  may  accompany  him,  for 
*'he  is  useful  to  me  for  ministering,"  both  in  evangelistic  and  in  personal  service. 
— T.  0. 

Ver.  13. — The  apostle's  directions  concerning  his  clolce.  It  has  been  considered 
beneath  the  dignity  of  inspiration  that  there  should  be  such  a  trivial  record.  But  the 
criticism  is  singularly  superficial. 

I.  The  apostle's  directions.  "  The  cloke  th»t  I  left  at  Troas  with  Carpus,  bring 
when  thou  comest,  and  the  books,  especially  the  parchments."  1.  There  is  no  evidence 
that  the  duke  was  an  ecclesiastical  vestment ;  for  there  is  no  evidence  of  vestments  being 


68  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [oh.  tv.  1—22, 

worn  at  all  in  the  primitive  Church.  It  was  a  thick  cloke  or  mantle  which  the  apostle 
needed  in  view  of  the  approaching  winter.  His  death  nvght  he  near  at  hand,  but, 
as  its  day  was  uncertain,  it  was  natural  he  should  provide  against  the  winter  cold. 
2.  It  was  a  precious  consignment  that  was  left  with  Carpus,  the  Christian  disciple, 
at  Trous.  It  included,  besides  his  cloke,  books  and  parchments.  (1)  Even  an  apostle 
could  not  do  without  books  for  his  ministry.  (2)  The  parchnients  were  more  valuable 
than  the  hooks,  containing,  as  they  did  probably,  some  of  his  own  writings,  if  not  the 
Holy  Scriptures. 

II.  The  significance  of  the  apostle's  directions.  1.  The  request  concerning 
his  cloke  impli'd  that  he  was  a  poor  man,  as  well  as  exposed  to  hardship  and  cold. 
2.  It  suggests  that  he  was  partially  deserted  by  the  Roman  Christians.  Why  could 
they  not  give  him  or  lend  him  «  cloke?  What  had  become  of  the  Roman  Christians 
who  met  him,  so  many  years  before,  fifty  miles  from  the  city,  and  gave  him  such  a 
hearty  welcome  ?  3.  It  proves  his  personal  independence.  He  will  not  ask  a  cloke 
from  any  one. — T.  C. 

Vers.  14,  15. — The  warning  against  Alexander  the  coppersmith.  I.  The  character 
of  this  man.  "  Alexander  the  coppersmith  did  me  much  evil  ...  for  he  greatly 
withstood  our  words."  This  implies  that  he  had  been  at  Rome,  and  was  still  an  enemy 
to  the  gospel  (1  Tim.  i.  20),  as  in  the  day  when  the  apo>-tle  delivered  him  and 
Hymenaus  over  to  Satan  at  Ephesus.  Probably  trade-interests  may  have  inspired 
the  fierceness  of  his  hatred  to  the  apostle,  for  he  may  have  been  an  idol-maker.  He 
was  insulting  and  spiteful  and  obstinate  in  his  gainsaying. 

II.  Thk  retribution  that  would  overtake  him.  "  The  Lord  will  render  to  him 
according  to  his  works.''  1.  This  is  to  state  a  fact  in  Divine  providence,  quite  irre- 
spective of  the  apostle's  wishes  or  feelings.  2.  Transgressors  against  the  cause  of  God 
have  to  reckon  in  the  last  resort,  not  with  humble  apostles,  but  with  God  himself. 

Ill  Warning  against  his  ways.  "Of  whom  be  thou  ware  also."  He  was  a 
heretic  and  a  blasphemer,  and  as  such  had  been  delivered  to  Satan,  and  was  still 
perversely  opposed  to  the  truth.  Timothy  was  warned  to  be  watchful  against  his 
devices.  It  was  no  personal  injury,  but  resistance  to  the  gospel,  that  dictated  this 
counsel. — T.  C. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — The  apostle's  trial  before  Nero,  with  it»  memorable  incidents.  I.  His 
desertion  by  man.  "  At  my  first  defence  no  one  took  my  part,  but  all  forsook 
me ;  may  it  not  be  laid  to  their  account."  1.  The  apostle  had  to  make  his  defence 
before  the  emperor.  There  is  no  record  of  the  nature  of  the  charge.  It  was  probably 
a  charge  of  sedition  or  disobedience  to  the  pagan  authorities,  which,  on  account  of 
the  close  complication  of  civil  and  religious  duties  in  the  state,  could  not  be  explained 
to  the  satisfaction  of  a  ruler  jealous  of  civil  obedience.  2.  The  saints  at  Home  deserted 
the  apostle  through  fear.  They  failed  to  support  him  either  by  their  presence,  their 
sympathy,  or  their  witness  in  his  favour.  Their  weakness  and  timidity  must  have 
been  a  sore  trial  to  the  apostle.  Yet  he  could  remember  that  his  Divine  Master  h;id 
been  similarly  deserted  in  his  last  hours.  3.  The  apostle's  prayer  for  these  timorous 
saints.  "  May  it  not  be  laid  to  their  account."  This  implies :  (1)  That  they  had  been 
guilty  of  a  grave  trespass  in  forsaking  the  apostle.  (2)  That  a  single  sin,  unpardoned, 
would  be  destructive  to  the  saints.  (3)  That  the  apostle  had  a  deep  interest  in  their 
welfare,  (a)  He  would  be  concerned  for  the  great  weakness  of  their  faith,  with  its 
accompanying  depression  and  discomfort ;  (6)  for  the  effects  of  their  weakness  on  the 
high  repute  of  the  gospel ;  (c)  and  he  would  seek  their  restoration  in  the  very  spirit 
of  his  Divine  Master. 

II.  If  man  forsook  him,  he  was  not  forsaken  by  God.  "  But  the  Lord  stood 
by  me,  and  strengthened  me ;  that  through  me  the  message  might  be  fully  proclaimed, 
and  that  all  the  Gentiles  might  hear."  Like  his  Divine  Master,  he  might  say,  "  Yet 
I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  me."  1.  The  Divine  support  accorded  to 
him.  The  secret  but  gracious  presence  of  the  Lord  delivered  him  from  all  unworthy 
fears  of  man.  He  would  feel,  "If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?"  He  was 
strengthened  inwardly  unto  all  long-suffering  with  joyfulnesB;  so  that  he  could  make 
his  defence  with  all  clearness  and  courage,  with  all  presence  of  mind,  and  with  all 


ch.it.  1—22.]         THE  SECOND   EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  60 

freedom  of  thought  and  expression.    2.  The  end  of  this  Divine  support  was  that  the 
gospel  might  be  still  more  fully  known  at  Borne  and  elsewhere  by  all  Gentiles. 

HI.  The  effect  of  bib  defence.  "  And  I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
lion."  He  had,  for  a  time,  escaped  condemnation.  Nero  was  the  cruel  lion  out  of 
whose  power  the  Lord  had  delivered  him. 

IV.  Tee  apostle's  anticipation  of  a  still  higher  deliverance.  "And  the 
Lord  will  deliver  me  from  every  evil  work,  and  will  save  me  unto  his  heavenly 
kingdom."  1.  This  is  no  declaration  that  the  apostle  shall  escape  death,  for  he  had 
already  spoken  of  himself  as  "  already  being  offered"  (Ver.  6.)  2.  It  is  a  declaration 
that  he  shall  be  carried  beyond  the  sphere  of  evil  in  every  form,  and  translated  securely 
into  the  heavenly  kingdom.  All  the  evil  influences  at  work  around  him  would  not 
affect  him.    There  is  not  a  note  of  fear  in  his  last  days. 

V.  Ascription  of  glory  to  his  Divine  Deliverer.  "  To  whom  he  the  glory  for 
ever  and  ever."  1.  Hit  glory  is  here  ascribed  to  the  Son  of  God,  an  express  evidence  of 
his  Divinity.  2.  There  it  no  time  more  appropriate  for  such  on  ascription  of  glory  as 
after  deliverance  from  death  and  evil. — T.  0. 

Vers.  19 — 22. — Salutations  and  personal  notices.  I.  Salutations.  "  Salute  Msca 
and  Aquila,  and  the  house  of  Onesiphorus."  1.  The  apostle  remembers  his  absent  friends 
in  his  solitude,  but  especially  those  who  gave  him  such  hearty  co-operation  at  Corinth 
or  Ephesus.  2.  He  likewise  transmits  to  Timothy  the  Christian  salutations  of  Eubulus, 
Pudens,  Linus,  and  Claudia,  Soman  saints,  of  eminence  and  grace  in  the  Church, 
yet  who  failed  to  stand  by  him  on  his  memorable  trial. 

II.  Notices.  "Erastus  abode  at  Corinth."  Probably  the  chamberlain  of  that  city 
(Rom.  xvi.  22),  who  once  showed  much  kindness  to  the  apostle,  and  afterwards  accom- 
panied Timothy  on  a  journey  into  Macedonia  (Acts  xix.  22).  "  Trophimus  I  left  at 
Miletus  sick."  This  was  a  Gentile  Christian  of  Ephesus,  whose  presence  with  the 
apostle  at  Jerusalem  caused  such  an  uproar  (Acts  xxi.  29).  Miletus  was  a  seaport 
of  Caria,  thirty  miles  from  Ephesus.  Trophimus  would  have  been  with  the  apostle 
at  Borne,  probably,  but  for  his  sickness.  The  apostle  left  him  at  Miletus,  probably, 
shortly  before  his  present  imprisonment. 

III.  Final  words  fob  Timothy.  "  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  before  winter."  We 
see  here  the  tender  anxiety  of  the  apostle  to  see  his  young  friend  before  death.  If  he 
did  not  come  at  once,  the  severities  of  the  winter  might  prevent  his  journey  altogether. 
"  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  thy  spirit.  Grace  be  with  you."  We  have  here  a 
double*  benediction— one  addressed  singly  to  Timothy,  the  other  to  Timothy  and  the 
Ephesian  Church.  The  presence  of  Christ  would  be  his  comfort  and  stay  in  every 
difficulty,  and  strengthen  him  for  every  duty. — T.  C. 

Ver.  2. — The  apostolic  injunction.  "  Preach  the  Word."  Timothy  had  not  to  create 
a  gospel,  but  to  preach  one ;  and  the  "  Word  "  is  broad  and  vast  enough  for  any  preacher. 
The  cross  has  for  its  circumference  all  truth,  and  is  to  be  carried  into  all  spheres  of  life. 

I.  Preach  it  with  instancy.  It  is  not  a  mere  philosophy  to  interest  students  as 
an  esoteric  study ;  nor  is  it  a  mere  elaborate  theological  thesis  to  be  proven  true.  It 
has  to  do  with  "  the  present  salvation  "  and  the  future  well-being  of  man.  Instancy ; 
for:  1.  The  season  may  be  only  now.  To-morrow  preacher  or  hearer,  or  both,  may  be 
gone.  2.  The  truth  can  never  be  out  of  season.  We  need  it  always — in  all  places,  in 
all  our  duties,  temptations,  and  trials. 

II.  Preach  it  with  authority.  That  is,  with  the  authority  of  truth,  not  your 
own  ex-cathedra  authority.  "  Meekly ; "  but  not  as  though  your  congregations 
were  patrons  to  be  pleased,  or  Sanli  drims  to  try  your  opinions.  Modestly;  but  with 
authority;  not,  as  I  said,  your  own  authority,  but  the  authority  of  truth,  which  has  its 
own  witness  within.  So  you  will  reprove  men  fearlessly,  never  hiding  them  from 
themselves  by  cunning  words  of  flattery.  And  you  will  "  rebuke  " — for  evil  soon  spreads 
if  it  be  not  exposed  and  condemned  at  once — just  as  Nathan  boldly  faced  David,  and 
said,  "  Thou  art  the  man." 

HI.  Preach  it  with  exhortation.  The  teacher  is  not  to  be  merely  a  scornful 
satirist  of  immorality — a  sort  of  Juvenal.  Nor  is  he  to  be  a  lightning-conductor  of 
Divine  wrath ;  he  is  to  seek  to  save  men.    He  has  not  done  his  work  when  he  has 


70  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [oh.  rv.  1—22. 

revealed  the  Law  of  God  against  eviL  He  is  to  remember  that  the  Christ  he  preaches 
is  the  Son  of  man  who  is  come,  "not  to  condemn  the  world,  but  that  the  world  through 
him  might  be  saved."  1.  Long-suffering  is  to  be  the  spirit  of his  method.  Remembering 
that  humanity  is  frail  and  fallen,  the  preacher  must  be  sympathetic,  as  himself  needing 
mercy.  2.  Doctrine  is  to  be  his  remedy.  The  great  revelation  of  a  Divine  Saviour  ana 
the  promised  Spirit,  the  Comforter. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6. — Life's  evening  hour.     "  For  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time 

of  my  departure  is  at  hand."  St.  Paul  felt  sure  that  the  enemies  of  the  gospel  would 
be  successful  in  their  designs  upon  his  life.  Sooner  or  later  he  knew  that  the  lions 
or  the  names,  the  executioner's  axe  or  the  cruel  cross,  would  complete  his  earthly 
course.  But  as  he  had  made  an  "offering"  of  his  life  to  Christ,  so  he  was  ready  in 
death  to  be  offered  up  for  the  Master's  sake. 

I.  The  apostolic  readiness.  Altbough  a  prisoner,  he  had  been  permitted  to  be 
a  preacher  in  the  neighbouring  camp  of  Cajsar's  palace  during  his  first  imprisonment  at 
Rome.  But  not  so  now.  Amid  the  Praetorian  Guard  alone  could  he  testify  now;  and 
as  the  soldier  to  whom  he  was  chained  by  the  wrist  would  often  be  changed,  he  had 
the  opportunity  of  speaking  to  each  one  in  turn  the  good  word  of  the  kingdom  of  God. 
His  imprisonments  had  been  preceded  by  missionary  journeys,  in  which  he  had  planted 
Churches  of  Christ  everywhere — Churches  which  had  become  centres  of  evangelization 
and  edification.  He  was  "ready;"  for  his  character  had  been  moulded  by  "great 
tribulation ;"  so  that  his  soul  was  purified  by  the  grace  of  God  working  there  the  self- 
conquests  of  his  nature.  The  righteous  indignation  of  a  strong  nature — which  we  know 
full  well  once  in  his  apostolate  would  have  been  aroused  at  his  adversaries — had  been 
softened  into  a  calm  submission  to  the  Divine  will,  and  he  was  conscious  that  God 
would  take  care  of  his  own  Church  in  the  perilous  times  which  had  come.  Moreover, 
Timothy  was  there  to  take  up  the  great  work  and  to  preach  the  Word.  Paul  was  ready 
for  the  "  rest ; "  and  the  " rest"  was  ready  for  him. 

II.  The  apostle's  time.  "  The  time  of  my  departure."  All  our  times  are  in  God's 
hand:  "the  time  to  be  born  and  the  time  to  die."  This  was  with  Paul  no  fatalistic 
creed;  he  did  not  forget  that  there  was  a  divinely  wise  will  ordering  all.  1.  Death  wot 
a  departure.  It  was  not  the  habit  of  St.  Paul  to  dwell  on  death  in  itself,  but  rather  on 
its  glorious  issues  to  the  Christian.  The  faith  was  strong  in  him.  The  motto — Mors 
jam.ua  vitas — "  Death  is  the  gate  of  life,"  was  the  spirit  of  his  creed.  2.  But  death 
was  not  the  departure  of  the  Christ.  He  was  here.  By  his  Spirit  he  was  still  working 
in  the  hearts  of  all  who  believed.  The  Christ  in  him  was  the  Christ  in  Timothy  too;. 
and  St.  Paul  well  knew  that  the  triumphant  chariot  of  the  Redeemer  stops  at  no  man's 
grave. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  7. — The  battle  finished.  "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight."  Nothing  in  nature 
is  more  beautiful  than  the  all-glorious  sunset ;  even  the  storm-clouds  make  it  a  more 
magnificent  scene.  So  it  was  with  St.  Paul.  Amid  the  threatening  clouds  of  perse- 
cution the  Saviour's  glory  shone  all  around  and  about  him,  and  lighted  up  the  dark 
firmament  of  the  martyr-experiences. 

I.  The  past  fight.  He  was  a  man  of  war  in  the  best  sense,  and  had  fought  a  good 
fight.  He  had  conflicts  in  himself — "  fightings  without,  and  fears  within."  He  had 
opposition  from  the  Jews  of  the  ancient  Church,  and  from  the  Judaistic  Christians,  who 
were  trying  to  pervert  the  gospel  1  Rome,  that  dreaded  sedition,  looked  upon  him  as 
a  stirrer-up  of  strife,  and  though  St.  Paul  was  not  an  enemy  of  Caesar,  this  gave  Caesar's 
enemies  an  opportunity  for  casting  opprobrium  on  him.  fie  had,  too,  as  we  all  have, 
invisible  enemies,  so  that  he  did  not  war  only  "against  flesh  and  blood."  The  past  fight 
was  a  lifelong  one  with  him,  for  he  had  at  first  to  withstand  even  his  Christian 
coadjutors  in  his  determination  to  proclaim  and  to  preserve  the  universality  and 
spirituality  of  the  gospel  kingdom ;  he  boldly  and  triumphantly  withstood  even  Peter  to 
the  face,  and  so  gave  to  the  Church  of  all  ages  the  Magna  Charta  of  its  Divine  freedom. 

II.  The  finished  coubse.  He  could  look  back  upon  the  racecourse  now,  and  he 
varies  his  imagery.  Now  he  introduces  the  idea  of  the  Grecian  games.  We  can  see 
the  eager  athlete  girding  his  loins  for  the  race — a  race  which  taxed  all  his  energies.  In 
heat  and  cold,  amidst  enemies  and  friends,  St.  Paul  "  pressed  toward  the  mark.      There 


oh.  w.  1—22.]        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  71 

is  no  tone  of  finality,  however,  about  his  language  in  the  strictest  sense.  The  end 
was  only  a  post  which  he  had  to  pass,  not  a  grave  in  which  he  had  to  sleep.  For  to  him 
to  live  was  Christ,  and  to  die  was  gain. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  8.— The  great  reward.  "Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of 
righteousness."  This  is  the  key-note.  Many  successful  Roman  generals  and  some 
of  the  philosophers  of  the  old  world  committed  suicide  in  weariness  and  disgust  of  life. 
To  live  was  ennui,  and  worse ;  for  all  was  "  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit." 

I.  The  future  is  provided  fob.  "  Henceforth  [or, '  as  to  the  rest ']  there  is  laid  up 
for  me."  Christ  will  not  let  any  one  of  his  faithful  servants  go  uncrowned ;  all  receive 
the  prize — only  their  crown  will  be  the  perfecting  of  character,  as  the  flower  blossoms  in 
its  summer  beauty.  Heaven  is  the  everlasting  summer  of  the  saints ;  and  there  "  the 
crown  of  righteousness,''  which  never  was  fully  attained  upon  earth,  will  be  given  to  all 
those  who  endure  unto  the  end.  Sometimes  it  is  called  "  the  crown  of  glory,"  sometimes 
"  the  crown  of  righteousness,"  and  sometimes  "  the  crown  of  life ; "  for  the  crowns  of 
God  are  not  the  tinsel  of  earth's  corruptible  gold,  but  crowns  of  conscience,  mind,  and 
character — in  one  word,  crowns  of  life. 

II.  This  righteous  Judge  will  be  there.  He  before  whom  all  hearts  are  open, 
he  whose  judgment  is  according  to  knowledge,  and  who  understands  all  the  unknown 
and  unnoticed  conflicts  of  every  earnest  soul.  He  is  the  righteous  Judge.  Human 
judgment  at  its  best  cannot  be  perfectly  righteous — it  may  approach  to  it,  but  "  What 
man  knoweth  the  things  of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  him?"  None, 
indeed,  but  himself  and  God. 

III.  The  universal  Church  will  share  in  the  coronation.  "And  not  to  me 
only,  but  unto  all  them  also  that  love  his  appearing."  Some  men  dread  that  appearing. 
They  never  have  liked  thoughts  of  God,  and  how  shall  they  like  the  presence  of  God? 
Those  who  have  lived  in  pleasure,  and  said  to  God,  "Depart  from  us!"  may  well  tremble  at 
his  appearing.  But  the  true  Christian,  who  has  walked  by  faith,  loves  Christ's  appearing. 
1.  We  long  to  see  equity  or  righteous  judgment  triumphant  in  the  universe.  So  much 
judgment  seems  to  miscarry  now.  2.  We  long  to  see  the  Saviour,  whom  not  having 
seen,  we  love;  for  at  his  appearing  "we  shall  be  like  him,  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he 
is."  St.  Paul  was  no  rhapsodist,  but  he  desired  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,  which  was 
far  better.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  21. —  Timothy's  presence  desired.  "Do  thy  diligence  to  come  before  winter." 
Travelling  would  be  difficult  then,  if  not  impossible,  and  perhaps  the  white  snow  would 
be  the  shroud  of  the  apostle.  Anyway,  he  has  been  delivered  once  for  a  brief  space  out 
of  the  mouth  of  that  lion — Nero.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  believe  that  this  ferocious 
lion,  satiated  for  the  time  with  blood,  should  seek  to  devour  him  no  more.  But  a 
Roman  prison  in  winter  is  a  very  desolate  place,  and  he  who  has  been  hurried  from 
place  to  place  by  his  keepers  has  left  even  his  warm  cloke  behind  him,  and  hopes  to 
cover  himself  with  tha-t  black  goat's-hair  skin  when  winter  comes.  Bring  the  cloke, 
Timothy,  and  the  papyrus  books— old  veWum  manuscripts,  perhaps  the  roll  of  Isaiah 
and  the  prophets;  let  not  Timothy  forget  them,  for  there  are  songs  of  prisoners  in 
those  inspired  prophetic  rolls.  And  let  Timothy  remember  that  St.  Paul  wants  to  see 
his  face  again. 

L  Here  is  absence  of  murmuring.  We  may  and  ought  to  learn  what  the  gospel 
c;an  achieve.  Here  is  Paul  prevented  from  preaching,  with  arrest  laid  on  all  his 
missionary  work.  In  a  dreary  Roman  dungeon  he  is  "  persecuted,  but  not  forsaken ; " 
"  struck  down,  but  not  destroyed."  Yet  mark  this — he  never  suffered  one  murmuring 
word  to  pass  his  lips. 

II.  Here  is  presence  of  greeting.  He  would  cheer  Timothy,  and  sends  him 
various  greetings,  from  the  Roman  saints,  as  we  may  see  by  their  names — Eubulus, 
Pudens,  Linus,  and  Claudia,  and  all  the  brethren — send  greeting.  What  sublime  self- 
abnegation  there  was  in  St.  Paul  1  Forgetful  always  of  himself  1  How  like  the  Master! 
In  the  hour  of  expected  dissolution  he  is  thinking  only  of  others. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Solemn  charge  to  Timothy.  I.  Charged  to  be  faithful  n?  the  pe*. 
fobmance  of  his  official  duties.    1.  Witnessing  the  charge.    (1)  Christ  associated 


72  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [oh.  iv.  1—22 

with  Ood.  "  I  charge  thee  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  of  Jesus  Christ."  Unseen  by 
Timothy,  they  were  really  present  as  Witnesses  of  the  charge  now  to  be  laid  on  him. 
The  first  Witness,  who  is  the  First  Person  of  the  Godhead,  is  simply  designated  Ood 
It  is  the  highest,  most  comprehensive,  of  names.  With  God  is  associated  the  historical 
Jesus  with  the  Divine  commission.  While  the  apostle  is  very  careful  to  place  himseli 
and  other  ministers  at  a  distance  from  Christ  (1  Cor.  iii.),  he  does  not  hesitate  to  bring 
him  into  the  closest  association  with  God.  The  spirits  of  the  departed  cannot  com- 
municate with  us ;  but  Jesus,  who  died  thirty-eight  years  before  the  writing  of  this 
Epistle,  is  thought  of  as  present  with  Paul  in  his  dungeon,  witnessing  to  the  charge  in 
all  its  particulars  that  is  to  be  sent  on  to  Timothy.  (2)  Christ  at  the  time  of  greatest 
solemnity  for  Timothy.  "  Who  shall  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead."  Timothy  is  not 
mentioned ;  but,  as  the  quick  and  the  dead  are  all-inclusive,  he  was  to  regard  himself 
as  included.  The  time  was  to  come  when  Christ  was  to  return  to  earth.  Before  his 
judgment-seat  were  to  be  gathered  the  quick  (suddenly  changed)  and  the  dead  (raised 
from  their  graves).  Timothy  (changed  or  awakened)  would  have  to  take  his  place 
along  with  others,  to  give  an  account  to  the  Judge  especially  of  his  official  work. 
(3)  Christ  at  the  time  of  greatest  joy  to  his  people.  "  And  by  his  appearing  and  his 
kingdom."  Christ  is  now  concealed  from  human  view,  and  men  may  dispute  his  being 
the  Son  of  God,  may  dispute  the  fact  that  he  died.  At  his  appearing,  his  relation  to 
the  Father  and  to  human  salvation  will  be  made  clear  beyond  all  possibility  of  doubt. 
Christ  is  now  reigning,  but  there  is  not  a  full  acknowledgment  of  his  power.  Many 
never  think  of  his  reigning  at  all.  The  time  is  to  come  when  his  kingdom  is  to  be 
established  as  it  is  not  established  now — established  in  the  full  acknowledgment  of 
his  power— established  to  know  neither  modification  nor  end.  On  his  return  to  heaven  . 
he  is  to  come  into  a  certain  subordination  to  the  Father,  and  yet  is  the  order  of  things 
that  is  to  last  through  eternity  called  hie  kingdom.  To  his  people  the  time  of  his 
appearing,  and  from  which  his  kingdom  dates,  will  be  full  of  joy  as  the  time  when 
their  Master  shall  be  publicly  honoured,  and  when  their  own  sharing  with  him  shall 
stand  out  in  its  full  meaning.  Timothy  must  not,  by  unfaithfulness,  take  from  the  joy 
of  the  future  disclosure  of  Christ  to  him.  2.  Particulars  of  the  charge.  These  are 
given  in  rapid  succession,  without  connecting  words,  by  which  there  is  gain  in  force. 
(1)  Duty  of  preaching.  "  Preach  the  Word."  The  Word,  ».«.  of  God,  was  what  he  was 
to  preach ;  but  the  stress  is  more  on  the  preaching.  That  was  his  work ;  let  him  preach, 
preach ;  let  him  utter  Divine  truth ;  let  him  utter  it  loudly  as  a  herald,  so  that  men 
may  hear.  (2)  Season  for  preaching.  "  Be  instant  in  season>  out  of  season."  He  was 
to  be  rtady  for  every  opportunity  of  preaching.  He  was  to  have  his*  stated  season  for 
preaching,  so  that  men  might  know  when  they  could  hear  the  Word ;  but  he  was  also 
to  preach  beyond  the  stated  season.  His  season  was  to  be  every  season,  i.e.  within 
natural  and  moral  limits.  He  was  to  preach,  strength  permitting,  whenever  an  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  good  thereby  was  presented  to  him.  (3)  Parts  of  preaching.  "  Beprove, 
rebuke,  exhort,  with  all  long-suffering  and  teaching.'  He  was  to  reprove,  i.e.  to  expose 
the  real  nature  of  sin.  He  was  to  rebuke,  i.e.  to  impute  blame  for  sin.  He  was  to 
exhort,  i.e.  to  use  persuasion  against  continuing  in  sin,  and  toward  leading  a  better  life. 
He  was  to  execute  the  three  offices  of  a  reprover,  rebuker,  exhorter,  with  all  long- 
suffering — not  vehemently,  but,  as  with  all  proper  restraint  on  himself,  so  with  all 
proper  consideration  for  others ;  and  with  all  teaching — not  unintelligently,  but  with 
repeated  instruction,  and  not  out  of  his  own  thoughts,  but  out  of  the  Word. 

H.  Argument  drawn  from  a  disturbed  future.  1.  The  intolerableness  of  sound 
doctrine.  "  For  the  time  will  come  when  they  will  not  endure  the  sound  doctrine." 
The  sound  or  healthful  teaching,  according  to  1  Tim.  iii.  16,  is  that  which,  founded  on 
the  facts  of  redemption,  leads  to  godliness.  Men  find  it  intolerable,  because  it  binds 
them  down  to  thoughts  and  courses  which  are  contrary  to  "  their  own  lusts."  2.  The 
teachers  that  spring  up  for  those  who  find  sound  doctrine  intolerable.  "  But,  having 
itching  ears,  will  heap  to  themselves  teachers  after  their  own  lusts."  Their  relief  i? 
not  to  get  rid  of  all  teachers  (which  would  be  too  drastic),  but  to  get  teachers  aftei 
their  own  lusts.  These  teachers  are  the  birth  and  reflection  of  their  own  depraved 
sentiments.  Those  who  strive  to  have  their  desires  regulated  by  the  Word  of  God  are 
satisfied  with  the  gospel  teachers;  those  who  have  their  desires  unregulated  (i.e.  in  the 
state  of  lush)  are  not  easily  satisfied.    "  Having  itching  ears,  they  heap  to  themselves 


oh.  iv.  1—22.]        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  73 

teachers."  They  have  a  constant  uneasy  feeling  which  seeks  to  be  gratified  with  new 
teachers,  both  many  and  indiscriminate.  3.  The  abandonment  of  those  who  have  itching 
tart  to  myths.  "  And  will  turn  away  their  ears  from  the  truth,  and  turn  aside  unto 
fables."  Their  duty  is  to  turn  their  ears  to  the  truth,  but,  as  they  have  itching  ears, 
they  turn  aside  to  listen  to  fables — not  truth,  but  inventions.  When  men  do  not  find 
the  truth  agreeable  to  the  ear,  they  may  take  the  wildest  fancies,  the  most  childish 
beliefs.  There  were  anticipations  of  these  myths  of  the  future  with  which  Timothy 
had  to  do. 

III.  Charge  resumed.  1.  Sobriety.  "But  be  thou  sober  in  all  things."  Those 
who  had  to  do  with  myths  had  not  clearness  and  caution  of  mind,  but  were  intoxicated 
with  their  own  wisdom.  Timothy  was  to  avoid  their  fault.  There  is  a  sobriety  which 
is  germane  to  the  truth.  It  does  not  flatter  a  man,  but  keeps  him  to  the  humility  of 
fact.  It  may  deeply  move  him,  but  does  not  take  away  his  clearness  and  caution.  It 
does  not,  like  many  myths  of  the  false  teachers,  morbidly  excite  the  imagination,  or 
leave  room  for  morbid  gratification,  but  acts  as  a  principle  of  self-restraint.  Timothy, 
in  seeking  to  influence  others,  was  to  exercise  all  self-restraint  in  manner  and  matter 
of  preaching  and  in  personal  dealing.  2.  Hardihood.  "  Suffer  hardship."  This  is 
not  the  first  time  that  he  has  been  thus  exhorted.  In  ch.  ii.  3  there  was  the  added 
idea  of  association  with  Paul.  The  exhortation  is  reintroduced  in  this  comprehensive 
charge,  again  and  more  impressively  to  remind  him  of  hardships  that  he  might  expect 
in  his  future  ministry.  3.  Sit  evangelistic  office.  "  Do  the  work  of  an  evangelist." 
There  was  need  to  remind  Timothy  of  this,  inasmuch  as  for  the  time  he  was  settled  in 
Ephesus.  Paul  had  been  very  much  of  an  evangelist,  i.e.  an  itinerant  preacher,  himself. 
However  important  the  establishing  of  congregations,  he  was  not  to  overlook  the 
importance  of  circulating  the  gospel,  with  a  view  to  new  congregations  being  formed. 
1.  AU  the  parts  of  his  ministry  to  be  attended  to.  "  Fulfil  thy  ministry."  He  has 
mentioned  one  part ;  in  the  concluding  direction  he  includes  all.  His  ministry  was 
partly  determined  by  his  talents  and  circumstances.  He  was  rightly  to  proportion 
between  the  various  parts  of  his  ministry,  giving  each  the  attention  to  which  it  was 
entitled,  though  one  might  be  attended  with  greater  hardship  than  another.  He  was 
to  fill  up  the  Divine  measure  in  all,  and  to  the  end  of  his  life. 

IV.  Consideration  drawn  from  the  apostle's  end.  1.  flits  end  approaching. 
First  mode  of  conceiving  of  his  end.  "  For  I  am  already  being  offered."  The  force  of 
the  connection  is  that  Timothy  was  to  be  faiihful,  because  Paul  was  no  longer  to 
remain  to  carry  on  Christ's  work.  Upon  him  the  mantle  of  his  master  was  to  fall. 
The  language  in  which  Paul  describes  his  end  is  Jewish,  and  sacrificial,  in  its  colouring. 
The  conclusion  of  the  sacrifice  was  the  libation,  or  pouring  out  of  the  drink  offering  of 
wine  around  the  altar.  His  service  of  Christ  had  been  all  of  the  nature  of  sacrifice. 
He  "counted  not  his  life  dear  unto  himself."  He  was  among  those  who,  for  Christ's 
sake,  were  killed  all  the  day  long,  who  were  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter. 
There  was  now  only  the  concluding  libation,  viz.  the  pouring  out  of  his  blood  as  a 
martyr  around  Christ's  altar.  The  concluding  ceremony  was  already  commenced,  in 
what  he  was  suffering  in  his  dungeon.  It  had  a  painful  significance,  and  a  rich  signifi- 
cance too ;  for  it  was  as  the  pouring  out  of  strong  wine  (Numb,  xxviii.  7).  Second 
mode  of  conceiving  of  his  end.  "And  the  time  of  my  departure  is  come."  The  word 
translated  "departure"  has  a  common  nautical  application,  viz.  to  the  loosening  of 
the  cable  that  binds  the  vessel  to  land,  that  it  may  speed  on  to  its  destination.  By 
his  martyrdom  the  connection  between  Paul  and  earth  was  to  be  let  loose,  that  he 
might  speed,  as  with  the  quickness  of  lightning,  to  the  haven  where  he  was  for  ever 
to  rest.  The  time  of  the  loosening  was  all  but  come ;  there  on  the  pier  was  the  man 
appointed  to  let  slip  the  fastenings.  2.  Feelings  with  which  he  regarded  his  approach- 
ing end.  (1)  Consciousness  of  faithfulness  in  view  of  the  past.  First  mode  of  con- 
ceiving of  his  faithfulness.  "I  have  fought  the  good  fight."  The  language  is  taken 
from  the  games.  The  fight  is  to  be  interpreted  as  the  fight  of  faith.  It  is  the  good 
fight,  being  on  behalf  of  Christ,  on  behalf  of  souls.  He  had  the  testimony  of  his  con- 
science that  he  had  "  fought  the  good  fight."  By  faithful  preaching,  by  holy  example, 
by  fervent  prayers,  by  patient  Bufferings,  he  had  sought  to  advance  Christ's  cause,  he 
had  sought  to  save  souls.  Now  the  end  of  the  conflict  was  come,  little  being  left  but 
id  •fleets,  these  effscU  partly  shown  in  his  own  wearied  frame.    Second  mode  of  con- 


74  THE  SECOND  EPifc>Tl,E  TO  TIMOTHY.         [oh.  iv.  1—22. 

eeiving  of  hit  faithfulness.  "  I  have  finished  the  course."  The  language  is  taken 
specially  from  the  racecourse.  At  one  point  we  find  him  nobly  anxious  to  finish  his 
coarse  (Acts  xx.  24).  At  another  point  we  find  him  conscious  of  the  space  that  lay 
between  him  and  the  goal  (Phil.  iii.).  Here  he  is  conscious  of  his  standing  at  the  goal 
He  had  finished  his  course,  not  in  the  sense  of  having  done  with  it,  but  in  the  sense 
of  having  done  what  properly  belonged  to  it.  He  had  followed  on  (after  the  Master), 
without  stopping,  without  abating  zeal,  till  he  now  had  come  up  to  the  goal.  Third 
mode  of  conceiving  of  his  faithfulness.  "  I  have  kept  the  faith."  He  had  been  specially 
entrusted  with  the  talent  of  the  Catholic  faith.  It  had  been  his,  to  let  it  be  known 
that  Christ  was  the  Friend  of  man,  that  as  Incarnate  God  he  had  made  infinite  satisfac- 
tion for  sin,  that  he  was  longing  to  embrace  all  in  his  saving  love.  Amid  all  tempta- 
tions to  lose  it,  to  substitute  something  else  for  it,  he  had  kept  it  inviolate.  He  had 
not  allowed  the  truth  to  suffer  in  his  hands;  nor  must  Timothy  allow  it  to  suffer  in 
his  hands  now  that  more  depended  on  him.  (2)  Full  assurance  of  hope  in  view  of  the 
future,  (a)  Present  laying  up.  "  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  the  crown  of 
righteousness."  There  is  the  idea  of  laying  up,  as  for  future  use  or  enjoyment.  What 
was  laid  up  was  the  crown  of  righteousness,  i.e.  the  reward  of  him  who  conquers,  and 
of  him  who  rightfully  conquers.  In  the  Christian  view  this  is  he  who  does  the  work 
which  is  appointed  for  him  by  Christ.  From  that  time  forth  the  crown  of  righteous- 
ness was  laid  up  for  him.  To  such  a  height  the  assurance  of  the  apostle  rose.  There 
was  no  self-exalting  element  in  his  assurance,  as  though  he  had  been  working  in  his 
own  strength,  or  as  though  he  had  the  deciding  of  what,  comparatively,  his  reward  was 
to  be.  But  that,  from  his  experience  of  assisting  grace  in  the  doing  of  his  work,  he 
was  among  those  who  were  to  be  crowned,  he  had  no  more  doubt  than  he  had  of  his 
own  existence.  (J)  Future  bestowal.  "  Which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  shall 
give  to  me  at  that  day."  The  Eewarder  is  the  Lord — whose  prerogative  is  indisputable. 
He  is  to  reward  at  that  day — the  day  of  the  future  by  pre-eminence.  He  is  then  to 
act  as  the  righteous  Judge — whose  judgments  are  all  to  be  founded  on  righteousness. 
From  his  reserved  treasures  he  is  to  bring  forth  the  crown  due  to  faithful  service,  and 
place  it  on  his  head,  (c)  General  occasion.  "  And  not  only  to  me,  but  also  to  all 
them  that  have  loved  his  appearing."  He  expressly  excludes  the  thought  of  his  being 
exceptionally  crowned.  His  being  crowned  would  not  prevent  others,  such  as  Timothy, 
from  being  crowned.  All  would  be  crowned  who  continued  to  love  Christ's  appearing. 
This  event  is  to  be  affectionately  regarded,  because  it  is  the  time  when  his  loveliness  is 
to  be  fully  displayed,  when  also  his  love  for  his  people  is  to  be  fully  displayed.  It  is 
an  event  which  is  fitted  to  purify  and  elevate  our  spiritual  life.  Let  it  be  the  test  by 
which  we  try  our  being  included  in  the  number  of  the  faithful.  Does  it  occupy  our 
thoughts?  does  it  inflame  our  affections? — B.  F. 

Vers.  9 — 22. — Personal.  L  Timothy.  1.  Requested  to  come  to  Rome.  "Do  thy 
diligence  to  come  shortly  unto  me."  His  formerly  expressed  longing  to  see  him 
(ch.  i.  4)  is  now  turned  into  a  formal  request  to  come,  and  to  come  shortly,  unto  him. 
In  the  diligence  he  was  to  show  in  this  there  is  not  the  idea  of  pure  haste,  but  of  the 
utmost  haste  that  was  compatible  with  the  interests  of  Christ  at  Ephesus.  Certain 
arrangements  would  require  to  be  made,  not  merely  for  his  journey,  but  for  the  carrying 
on  of  the  work  after  his  departure.  But  as  soon  as  these  arrangements  could  be  made 
he  was  to  hasten  to  him  at  Borne.  2.  Special  reason  in  Paul's  isolation.  "ForDemas 
forsook  me,  having  loved  this  present  world,  and  went  to  Thessalonica ;  Crescens  to 
Galatia,  Titus  to  Dalmatia.  Only  Luke  is  with  me."  The  fundamental  reason  for  the 
request  was  the  apostle's  approaching  martyrdom;  but  there  was  an  additional  and 
special  reason  in  his  isolation  at  Borne.  This  should  not  have  been  the  case;  for 
Demas,  who  bad  been  his  trusted  assistant,  had  been  there,  and  if  he  had  done  his 
duty  would  still  have  been  with  him.  But  he  forsook  him  in  his  hour  of  distress, 
which  may  probably  be  associated  with  his  first  defence  (ver.  16).  The  reason  for 
desertion  was  that  he  loved  the  present  world.  We  are  not  to  understand  world  in  the 
ethical  sense  in  which  it  is  sometimes  used;  the  world  as  it  has  become  by  the  entrance 
of  sin,  in  opposition  to  the  world  as  it  was  intended  to  be.  He  loved  the  good  things  of 
the  world — absence  from  the  scene  of  peril,  ease  in  his  own  home — in  preference  to 
what  wiH  have  advantaged  Urn  in  the  future  world— bravely  standing  by  Paul  and 


ml  iv.  1— 22.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  76 

lovingly  ministering  to  his  sufferings.  The  conduct  of  Demas  was  dastardly  and  cruel, 
calculated  to  destroy  his  influence  as  a  Christian  teacher.  We  are  not  warranted  in 
saying  that  it  excluded  after-penitence  and  wrecked  his  destiny.  It  has  been  his 
earthly  destiny  to  be  associated  with  a  black  act  done  to  one  of  the  noblest  of  men  at 
a  time  when  his  nobility  shone  forth  most  clearly.  In  explanation  of  his  isolation, 
Paul  mentions  without  comment  the  departure  of  Crescens  to  Galatia,  and  of  Titus  to 
Dalmatia.  In  their  case  we  may  understand  that  there  was  not  desertion  of  Paul,  but 
pressure  of  Christian  work  and  a  mission  from  Paul.  The  only  one  of  Paul's  assistants 
who  was  with  him  was  Luke,  so  often  mentioned  in  connection  with  Paul.  In  connec- 
tion with  the  mention  of  his  name  here,  it  is  remarkable  that  he  who  was  with  Paul 
during  his  second  imprisonment  in  Pome  only  brings  down  the  apostolic  history  to  the 
period  of  the  first  imprisonment  there.  With  the  exception  of  Luke  there  were  no 
Christian  workers  with  Paul  who  could  enter  intelligently  and  sympathetically  into 
his  plans  and  render  assistance  on  the  spot.  3.  Requested  to  take  Mark,  and  bring 
him  with  him.  "  Take  Mark,  and  bring  him  with  thee :  for  he  is  useful  to  me  for 
ministering.  But  Tychicus  I  sent  to  Bphesus."  After  what  had  happened,  the 
honourable  mention  of  Mark  in  Col.  iv.  16  and  again  here  is  honourable  to  Paul.  His 
opinion  of  him  had  undergone  great  change.  He  had  made  a  firm  stand  against  him 
as  an  unsuitable  companion  in  labour ;  now  he  bases  his  request  for  the  presence  of  the 
evangelist  at  Home  on  his  being  useful  for  ministering.  Tychicus,  who  is  warmly 
commended  in  Eph.  vi.  21,  had  been  thus  useful ;  but  he  had  been  under  the  necessity 
of  sending  him  on  a  mission  to  Ephesus.  The  ministering  to  be  thought  of  was  not 
so  much  to  Paul  the  prisoner  as  to  Paul  in  his  imprisonment  planning  for  the  future  of 
Christianity.  These,  then,  we  are  to  think  of  as  the  three  workers  who  surrounded 
the  apostle  in  Rome  as  he  neared  his  martyrdom — Timothy,  Mark,  Luke.  They  were 
men  of  like  spirit,  to  whom  he  could  freely  communicate  his  plans  and  also  the 
enthusiasm  necessary  for  carrying  them  out.  All  three  had  the  evangelistic  faculty. 
If  Timothy  had  more  of  the  administrative  faculty,  marking  him  out  as,  more  than 
the  other  two,  the  successor  of  Paul,  they  had  more  of  the  literary  faculty,  marking 
them  out  for  service  to  future  generations.  4.  Requested  to  bring  belongings  of  the 
apostle  with  him  from  Troas.  "  The  cloke  that  I  left  at  Troas  with  Carpus,  bring 
when  thou  comest,  and  the  books,  especially  the  parchments."  The  apostle  had  not 
lived  to  accumulate  property;  and  none  would  be  much  the  richer  by  what  he  left 
behind.  He  possessed  a  cloke,  which  some  friend  may  have  gifted  to  him — a  large 
warm  cloke  for  winter,  when  lately  at  Troas — since  the  previous  winter,  we  may 
suppose — he  had  not  been  able  to  bring  it  with  him,  but  had  left  it  with  Carpus.  As 
Timothy  would  pass  Troas  on  his  way  to  Borne,  he  is  requested  to  bring  it  with  him. 
Paul  did  not,  in  the  spirit  of  modern  monasticism,  court  suffering;  he  provides  against 
the  coming  winter,  even  when  that  winter  was  to  bring  his  martyrdom.  He  also 
possessed  books,  which  are  a  necessity  for  the  preacher.  He  who  has  influenced  so 
many  by  his  books  was  himself  influenced  by  the  books  of  others.  He  also  possessed 
'parchments,  on  which  he  laid  greater  stress  as  his  own  compositions,  containing  records 
and  statements  of  truth  in  which  he  was  deeply  interested,  as  fitted  to  keep  the 
current  of  Christianity  clear  and  pure.  Timothy,  who  in  the  First  Epistle  is  charged 
to  attend  to  reading,  would  find  in  these  books  and  parchments  good  pabulum  and 
companionship  on  his  journey  from  Troas  to  Borne. 

II.  Alexander.  1.  His  injurious  conduct.  "  Alexander  the  coppersmith  did  me 
much  evil."  The  fact  of  his  being  styled  the  coppersmith  seems  to  point  to  his  being 
distinguished  from  others  of  the  same  name.  We  would  not,  therefore,  identify  him 
with  the  Alexander  of  the  First  Epistle,  or  the  Alexander  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 
We  may  conclude,  from  the  language,  that  he  bore  personal  animosity  to  Paul.  2.  The 
Righter  in  heaven.'  "  The  Lord  will  render  to  him  according  to  his  works."  This  is 
very  different  from  invoking  a  curse  on  Alexander.  He  found  it  in  his  heart  to  make 
matters  much  worse  for  Paul.  The  Lord  would  judge  between  them.  This  would 
issue  in  evil  to  Alexander,  unless  his  present  spiteful  works  were  followed  by 
repentance.  3.  No  confidence  to  be  placed  in  him.  "Of  whom  be  thou  ware  also;  for 
he  greatly  withstood  our  words.''  Paul  had  good  reason  to  be  on  his  guard  against 
him.  We  can  understand  Ids  having  a  certain  connection  with  Christianity,  which 
would  give  him  all  the  mere  power  to  injure  Paul.    But  be  had  not  the  spirit  oi 


76  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [oh.  iv.  1—22. 

Christianity,  when  on  the  occasion,  we  may  suppose,  of  the  first  defence,  he  made 
injurious  statements  against  the  great  champion  of  Christianity.  If  he  still  professed 
to  be  a  friend  of  Christianity  at  a  distance  from  Borne,  he  was  to  be  regarded  with 
suspicion. 

III.  Paul.  1.  First  defence.  "At  my  first  defence."  This  first  defence  was  in 
connection  with  a  second  imprisonment,  of  which  there  can  be  no  doubt.  The  account 
of  Eusebius  is  that  "  after  defending  himself  successfully,  it  is  currently  reported  that 
the  apostle  again  went  forth  to  proclaim  the  gospel,  and  afterwards  came  to  Borne  a 
second  time,  and  was  martyred  under  Nero."  Some  would  place  an  interval  of  five 
years  between  the  first  and  second  imprisonments.  We  have  not  the  means  of  knowing 
the  precise  charge  against  which  he  had  to  defend  himself  on  this  second  occasion. 
There  is  apparently  this  fact  to  go  upon,  that,  after  the  conflagration  of  Borne  which 
was  attributed  by  Nero  to  the  Christians,  Paul  as  their  leader  was  liable  at  any  moment 
to  be  arrested.  The  supposition  is  adopted  by  some  that  on  this  ground  he  was 
arrested  at  Nicopolis,  where  Titus  was  to  join  him  (Titus  iii.  12),  and  taken  across 
the  Adriatic  to  Borne.  His  trial,  which  does  not  seem  this  time  to  have  been  long 
delayed,  was  yet  recent ;  for  Timothy  had  not  been  informed  of  it.  The  trial  would 
probably  take  place,  not  before  Nero,  as  on  the  previous  occasion,  but  before  the  city 
prefect,  who,  as  more  the  emperor's  creation,  was  supplanting  the  regular  judges.  The 
scene  of  the  trial  would  probably  be  in  one  of  the  basilicas  in  the  Roman  forum,  where 
a  large  audience  could  be  accommodated.  "  A  dense  ring,"  says  Pliny,  "  many  circles 
deep,  surrounded  the  scene  of  trial.  They  crowded  close  to  the  judgment-seat  itself, 
and  even  in  the  upper  part  of  the  basilica  both  men  and  women  pressed  close  in  the 
eager  desire  to  see  (which  was  easy)  and  to  hear  (which  was  difficult)."  We  may 
conclude,  from  the  language  here  (first  defence),  and  also  from  his  being  still  in  bonds 
as  a  malefactor  (ch.  ii.  9),  that  the  trial  resulted  neither  in  his  condemnation  nor  in 
his  full  acquittal.  Some  imagine  that  he  was  acquitted  on  a  first  charge;  bat  that 
there  was  a  second  charge  on  which  he  was  yet  to  be  tried.  The  more  probable 
supposition  is  that  there  was  a  postponement  in  consequence  of  the  case  not  being 
clear,  and  that  the  apostle  was  looking  forward  to  a  second  trial  when,  on  the  whole 
c  ase,  he  would  have  to  make  a  second  defence.  2.  Assistance  at  hit  trial.  "  No  one 
took  my  part,  but  all  forsook  me :  may  it  not  be  laid  to  their  account.  But  the  Lord 
stood  by  me,  and  strengthened  me ;  that  through  me  the  message  might  be  fully  pro- 
claimed, and  that  all  the  Gentiles  might  hear."  He  had  not  the  assistance  which  was 
usually  enjoyed  by  the  accused  on  his  trial.  No  stress  need  be  laid  on  the  absence  of 
a  professional  advocate ;  for  Paul  was  well  able  to  defend  himself.  But  there  was  no 
one  beside  him  to  give  him  countenance.  There  was  no  one — which  would  have 
rendered  great  assistance — to  come  forward  and  testify  that  his  relation  to  the  Roman 
law,  in  his  conduct  and  teaching,  had  been  all  that  Romans  could  have  desired.  It 
was  his  fortune  to  be  put  in  the  position  in  which  his  Master  had  been  put  before  him. 
"  All,"  he  says, "  forsook  me."  The  resemblance  extended  not  merely  to  his  position,  but 
to  his  gentleness  of  spirit.  The  Master  had  said  on  the  cross,  "  Father,  forgive  them ; 
for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  The  servant  echoes  this  sentiment  when  he  says, 
"  May  it  not  be  laid  to  their  account."  The  absence  of  earthly  friends  was,  however, 
more  than  made  up  by  the  presence  of  a  heavenly  Friend.  This  was  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  stood  by  him,  not  merely  as  his  Friend,  but  as  his  Advocate,  and  strengthened 
him  as  such.  That  is  to  say,  he  supplied  him,  in  matter  and  spirit,  with  all  that  was 
necessary  for  his  defence.  This  was  according  to  the  Master's  own  promise,  "And 
when  they  bring  you  before  the  synagogues,  and  the  rulers,  and  the  authorities,  be 
not  anxious  how  or  what  ye  shall  say :  for  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  teach  you  in  that  very 
hour  what  ye  ought  to  say."  We  learn  that  the  defence  of  himself  was  adroitly  turned 
into  a  defence  of  the  gospel.  If  there  was  a  charge  of  arson,  it  would  be  open  to  him 
to  show  that  the  gospel  did  not  encourage  crime  or  resistance  to  the  powers  that  be. 
It  would  also  fall  naturally  to  him  to  give  a  statement  of  the  points  on  which  he  laid 
greatest  stress  in  his  teaching.  The  assistance  he  received  was  of  the  highest  avail; 
for  it  brought  his  life-work  to  its  culmination.  He  had  been  proclaiming  the  gospel  in 
many  places,  and  in  many  places  the  Gentiles  had  heard.  Now,  when  his  opportunity 
had  come  before  Roman  officials  and  before  a  Roman  multitude,  as  apparently  it  had 
Bot  come  before,  he  could  say  that,  as  far  as  his  instrumentality  was  concerned,  hi* 


oh.iv.  1— «2.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  77 

proclamation  had  reached  its  climax,  and  the  last  of  the  Gentiles  had  heard.  3.  His 
description  of  the  result  of  the  trial.  "  And  I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
lion."  The  ancient  opinion,  that  the  lion  here  was  Nero,  may  be  taken  as  substantially 
correct.  We  are  not  to  understand  that  Paul  had  become  personally  obnoxious  to 
Nero  since  his  acquittal  by  him.  Away  from  Rome,  he  may  not  have  attracted  the 
attention  of  the  tyrant.  But  it  suited  Nero,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Tacitus, 
to  avert  the  rage  of  the  populace  from  himself  to  the  Christians.  As  the  result  of  that 
rage,  Paul,  as  the  ringleader  of  the  Christians,  was  apprehended,  and  put  on  his  trial. 
In  the  state  of  feeling  which  prevailed,  it  would  be  very  difficult  for  Paul  to  get  a  calm 
hearing.  He  was  more  likely  to  meet  with  fierceness  than  with  justice.  The  Boman 
power,  of  which  Nero  was  the  fit  embodiment,  was  like  a  lion  opening  its  mouth  to 
devour  him.  That  he  was  not  instantly  devoured  was  nothing  less  than  a  miracle. 
The  Lord  standing  by  him,  he  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion.  We  must 
not  put  more  meaning  into  this  than  it  will  bear.  It  simply  means  that  he  got  a 
respite.  Roman  fierceness  was  not  then  gratified;  the  lion  did  not  get  him  then 
between  its  teeth.  But  Roman  fierceness,  consequent  on  the  conflagration,  had  not 
died  out;  the  lion  might  again  open  its  mouth  on  him.  4.  Confident  hope  of  future 
and  everlasting  deliverance.  "The  Lord  will  deliver  me  from  every  evfl  work,  and 
will  save  me  unto  his  heavenly  kingdom."  His  respite  gave  him  this  confidence.  It 
did  not  make  him  self-confident;  but,  mindful  of  the  source  whence  his  respite  had 
come,  his  confidence  was  in  the  Lord,  that  he  would  deliver  him  still.  It  was  not 
a  deliverance  from  death  that  he  expected,  as  appears  from  the  second  clause.  But  it 
was  deliverance  from  all  that  would  intimidate  him  or  unfit  him  for  bearing  a  worthy 
testimony  on  the  occasion  of  his  second  trial.  A  wicked  attempt  might  be  made  to 
damage  Christianity  in  him,  as  may  have  been  made  by  Alexander  on  the  occasion 
of  the  first  trial.  The  Lord  would  not  allow  that  attempt  to  succeed.  Christianity 
would  come  forth  out  of  the  trial  untarnished.  The  issue,  so  far  as  he  was  concerned, 
would  be  his  being  placed  safely  in  Christ's  heavenly  kingdom.  This  would  be  his 
receptacle  after  and  through  death.  For  Christ's  kingdom  is  already  commenced  in 
heaven.  The  safe  placing  of  Paul  in  it  meant,  on  the  one  side,  removal  from  the 
sphere  of  all  evil,  and,  on  the  other  side,  the  coming  under  the  highest  conditions  of 
happiness  in  the  enjoyment  of  Christ — barring  what  is  associated  with  the  completing 
of  the  number  of  the  elect  and  the  reunion  of  soul  and  body.  5.  Doxology.  "To 
whom  be  the  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen."  Doxology  is  an  accompaniment  of 
the  highest  spiritual  mood.  It  is  offered  here  to  the  Son,  as  elsewhere  to  the  Father. 
For  it  was  the  Lord's  assistance  that  he  had  enjoyed,  and  still  expected,  and  into 
whose  kingdom  in  heaven  he  was,  by  the  same  assistance,  to  be  safely  brought.  It 
would  take  the  ages  of  ages  to  declare  all  that  Christ  had  been  and  was  still  to  be 
to  him. 

IV.  Salutations.  1.  The  distant  to  whom  salutations  are  sent.  "Salute  Prisca 
and  Aquila,  and  the  house  of  Onesiphorus."  Prisca  and  Aquila  were  workers  with 
Paul,  who  for  his  life  had  laid  down  their  own  necks.  Prisca  being  mentioned  before 
her  husband  would  seem  to  point  to  her  characteristics  being  more  remarkable.  The 
house  of  Onesiphorus  is  saluted,  apparently  for  the  reason  that  Onesiphorus  himself 
was  dead.  Appended  notices.  "  Erastus  abode  at  Corinth :  but  Trophimus  I  left  at 
Miletus  sick.  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  before  winter."  Erastus  and  Trophimus,  who 
were  associated  with  Ephesus,  he  did  not  salute,  because  they  were  not  at  the  time 
there,  as  far  as  he  knew.  His  feeling  with  regard  to  Timothy  himself  was  to  have  his 
immediate  fellowship.  Let  not  winter  come  on  and  prevent  his  coming;  for  his 
martyrdom  was  imminent.  2.  The  near  who  send  their  salutations.  "Eubulus 
galuteth  thee,  and  Pudens,  and  Linus,  and  Claudia,  and  all  the  brethren."  The 
brethren  in  Borne  all  sent  their  salutations.  They  were  numerous  enough  to  be  known 
as  Christians  by  Nero.  The  members  of  the  Boman  Church  whose  names  are  given 
would  be  specially  interested  in  Timothy. 

V.  Benediction.  "The  Lord  be  with  thy  spirit.  Grace  be  with  yon."  The 
peculiarity  of  the  benediction  is  that  it  is  twofold — first  to  Timothy  separately,  and 
then  to  Timothy  and  those  with  him.  What  Timothy  is  to  have  separately  is  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  with  hia  nobler  what  he  is  to  have  along  with  others  is 
undeserv-l  /avour. — R.  F. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 

TO 


ST. 


THE    SECOND    EPISTLE    OF 

PAUL   TO    TIMOTHY. 


CHAPTER  L 

rHEMK  tt.0% 

Reminiscences       ...  ...  •..        5 

Constancy  in  the  Hour  of  Danger  ...  6 
The  Apostle's  Address  and  Greeting  7 

Thankful    Declaration    of   Love  and 

Remembrance  of  Timothy's  Faith ...  7 
The  Apostle's  Admonition  to  Timothy 

to  stir  up  the  Gift  of  God  within  him  8 
The  Divine  Equipment  for  Arduous 

Service  in  the  Church     ...  ...        8 

Warning  to  Timothy  not  to  be  ashamed 

of  the  Gospel,  nor  to  shrink  from 

Afflictions         ..,  ...  ...        8 

The  Power  of  God  ui  the  Salvation 

manifested  by  Jesus  Christ  to  the 

World...  ...  ...  ...        9 

The  Grounds  of  his  Joyfnl  Confidence 

under  all  his  Sufferings  ...  ...      10 

Importance  of  the   Form  of   Sound 

Words...  ...  ...  ...      10 

The    Importance  of  Preserving   the 

Precious  Deposit  of  Doctrine  ...  11 
The  Asiatic  Desertion  of  the  Apostle  11 
The  Praiseworthy  Conduct  of  Onesi- 

phorus...  ...  ...  ...      11 

"  The  Promise  of  Life "      ...  ...      12 

The  Inner  Self     ...  ...  ...      12 

A  Holy  Ancestry  ...  ...  ...      13 

Quickening  the  Memory     ...  ...      13 

Stirring  the  Fire  ...  ...  .-      13 

Address  and  Salutation      m  „,      14 

Contrasts  ...  m  m     17 


CHAPTER  IL 
ram  1Mb 

Endurance  the  Lot  of  Christ's  Minis- 
ters    ...  ...  ...  ...      25 

The  Skilful  Workman         ...  ...      25 

Exhortation  to  Timothy  to  be  Strong         26 

Admonition  to  Timothy  respecting 
the  Appointment  of  Faithful 
Preachers         ...  ...  ...       26 

The  Apostle  bespeaks  from  Timothy 
a  Copartnership  in  Affliction,  which 
would  have  its  Due  Reward  ...      27 

The  Contemplation  of  Christ  an  Incen- 
tive to  Comfort  and  Constancy      ...      28 

The  Example  of  the  Apostle's  own 
Sufferings — their  Spiritual  Motive 
and  Design        ...  ...  ...      28 

A  Faithful  Saying  for  Consolation 
and  for  Warning  ...  ...      28 

An  Injunction  to  put  Ephesian  Be- 
lievers in  Remembrance  of  these 
Truths  29 

The  Qualifications  of  the  Gospel- 
Preacher  ...  ...  ...      29 

A  Warning  against  Vain  Babblings, 
with  their  Tendency  to  Heresy  and 
Impiety  ...  ...  ...      80 

The  Comfort  amidst  Abounding  Apos- 
tasy    ...  ...  ...  ...     SI 

The  Church  in  its  Visible  Aspect 
before  the  World  ...  ...      81 

The  Importance  ef  a  Pure  and  Oirooa- 
■pectWalk        ...  m  m      M 


INDEX. 


A  Warning  against  Contentions  Ques- 
tionings ...  ...  ...      82 

The  Importance  of   Ministers  culti- 
vating a  Peaceful  and  Forbearing 
Spirit  ...  ...  ...  ...      32 

Culture  of  Strength  m.  ...      83 

Fitness  for  Service  ...  ...      33 

Hardship  in  Connection  with  the  Chris- 
tian Ministry    ...  ...  ...      S3 

Conduct  in  View  of  Heresy  appearing 
in  the  Church    ...  ...  ...      86 

CHAPTER  m. 

Holy  Scripture  the  Strength  of  the 
Man  of  God       ...  ...  ...      44 

The  Perilous  Times  of  the  Apostasy  45 

Characteristics  of  the  Apostasy         ...      45 
The  Relation  of  the  Apostasy  to  the 
Christian  Profession        ...  ...      46 

The  Insidiously  Proselytizing  Habits 
of  these  Apostates  ...  ...      46 

The  Character  and  Aims  of  the  False 
Teachers  ...  ...  ...      47 

The  Career  of  the  Apostle  commended 
as  an  Example  to  his  Youthful  Dis- 
ciple   ...  ...  ...  ...      47 

The  Downward  Course  of  Seducers  ...      48 
An  Admonition  to  Timothy  to  abide 
in  the  Ways  of  Truth      ...  ...      48 

The    Authority  and    Utility  of   the 
Scriptures  ...  ...  ...      49 

The  Love  of  Pleasure  ...  ...      49 

The  Hvpoc rite's  Garb  ...  ...       50 


THEME 

Corruption  Within 
Grievous  Times    .., 


rAoa 
...      SO 

...      60 


CHAPTER  IV. 


The  Last  Charge  ...  ...  ...      63 

"  Orpah  kissed  her  Mother-in-law ;  but 
Ruth  clave  unto  her "     ...  ...      61 

A  Solemn  Charge  to  Timothy  to  make 

Full  Proof  of  his  Ministry  ...      65 

The  Waywardness  and  Restiveness  of 
So-called  Christians  a  Fresh  Incen- 
tive to  Fidelity  in  Ministers  ...      65 
The  Duty  of  Timothy  in  Trying  Times      66 
The  Nearness  of  the  Apostle's  Death, 
and  his   Prospects    in  Connection 
with  it               ...           ...           ...      66 

The  Apostle's  Loneliness  and  Need  of 
Assistance  and  Comfort  ...  ...      67 

The  Apostle's   Directions  concerning 
his  Cloke  ...  ...  ...      67 

The  Warning  against  Alexander  the 
Coppersmith      ...  ...  ...      68 

The  Apostle's  Trial  before  Nero,  with 
its  Memorable  Inoidents  ...  ...      68 

Salutations  and  Personal  Notices      ...      69 
The  Apostolus  Injunction    ...  ...      69 

Life's  Evening  Hour  ...  ...      70 

The  Battle  Finished  ...  ...      70 

The  Great  Reward  „  ...      71 

Timothy's  Presence  Desire  ...      71 

Solemn  Charge  to  Timothy...  ...      71 

Personal...  ...  ...  ...      74 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY  THE. 

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D.. 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 


AND  BY  THE 


REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


TITUS 


exposition  nnb  fomiletics : 

By  THE  RIGHT  HON.  AND  RIGHT  REV 
LORD  A.  C.  HERVET,  D.D., 

LORD  BISHOP  OF  BATH  AND  WELLS. 

Ijomilics  bg  bartons  &nth,ors : 

REV.  PROF.  T.  CROSKERY,  D.D.  REV.  R.  FINLAYSON,  B.A 

REV.  W.  M.  STATHAM. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
.New  Yoke  and  Toronto. 


THE   EPISTLE   OF 

PAUL   TO    TITUS. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  L 


Ver.  1. — Knowledge  for  acknowledging, 
V.V. ;  according  to  for  after,  A.V.  .A  ser- 
vant of  God  (SouXoj  &eov) ;  so  in  the  super- 
scriptions: Bom.  i  1;  Phil.  i.  1,  SoS\os 
lnaov  Xpiarov;  Jas.  i.  1;  2  Pet.  i.  1;  Jade 
1;  Rev.  i.  1.  St.  Paul  also  calls  himself 
"the  servant  of  Christ"  (Gal.  i.  10);  and 
the  phrase,  iovA.oi'  Kvplov,  occurs  in  2  Tim.  ii. 
24.  But  neither  "  servant  of  God"  nor  any 
equivalent  is  in  the  superscription  of  either 

1  or  2  Timothy.  "Servant"  is  a  better 
rendering  than  "slave,"  as  Farrar  renders 
it.  An  apostle,  etc.;  as  in  both  1  and  2 
Timothy,  and  also  in  Bom.  L  1 ;  1  Cor.  i  1 ; 

2  Cor.  i.  1,  etc.;  showing  that  this  is  not 
a  private  letter,  but  a  public  and  official 
document,  conveying  official  authority  to 
Titus  over  the  Church  in  Crete.  According 
to  the  faith  of  God's  eleot.  The  phrase  is 
peculiar  to  this  passage,  and  the  exact  force 
of  Kara  is  not  easy  to  determine  (see  Bishop 
Ellicott's  notes,  who  renders  xard  "for," 
and  explains  that  "the  faith  of  God's  elect 
is  the  destination  of  the  apostleship,"  with 
the  further  explanation  that  this  meaning 
of  Kara  is  about  equivalent  to  "  with  special 
reference  to,"  or  "destination  for,"  as  its 
object).  It  is  nearly  the  same  thing  to  say 
that  the  true  faith,  and  the  perfect  know- 
ledge of  the  truth,  and  the  hope  of  eternal 
life  promised  by  God,  are  the  sphere  in 
which  the  apostolic  office  moves  and  acts. 
"The  faith  of  God's  eleot,"  etc.,  seems  to 
imply  that  there  was  in  some  who  were  not 
elect  (1  John  ii  19,  20)  a  corruption  of  the 
faith,  a  departure  from  it — a  faith  that  was 
no  faith,  and  something  calling  itself  truth 
which  was  not  "according  to  godliness," 
and  so  to  point  to  rising  heresies.'     The 

1  Ohrvsostom,  however,  understands  the 
phrase,  iXndtiat  rijs  fear*  evtrcPetav,  to  denote' 
religious  truth  as  distinguished  from  any 
other  kind  of  truth. 

TITUS. 


authors  of  these  heresies  were  chiefly  Jews 
(ver.  10),  of  whom  there  was  a  considerable 
colony  in  Crete  (Conybeare  and  Howson, 
vol.  ii.  p.  475 ;  and  Lewin,  vol.  ii  p.  337).  Ao- 
oording  to  godliness  (for  the  use  of  einrcPeta 
in  the  pastoral  Epistles,  see  1  Tim.  U.  2; 
iii.  16;  iv.  7,  8;  vi  3,  5,  6,  11 ;  2  Tim.  iii. 
5,  and  notes). 

Ver.  2. — Who  for  that,  A.V.;  times  eternal 
for  the  world  began,  A.  V.  In  hope  of  eternal 
life.  This  seems  to  be  a  further  description 
of  the  scope  or  sphere  of  the  apostolate, 
which,  as  some  take  &r(,  is  bated  upon  the 
hope  of  eternal  life.  Who  cannot  lie 
(ii|/eu8r|s);  here  only  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, rarely  in  the  LXX.,  but  common  in 
classical  Greek.  The  epithet  is  here  used 
to  show  the  certainty  of  the  fulfilment  of 
the  promise  made  before  the  ages  (comp. 
Heb.  vi  18 ;  Numb,  xxiii.  19).  Before  times 
eternal  (see  2  Tim.  i.  9,  note).  The  trans- 
lation, "  before  times  eternal,"  conveys  no 
sense ;  xp^"°l  tu<&viot  are  "  the  times  of  ages 
past "  (Bom.  xvi.  25),  placed  in  opposition 
to  the  Kaipol  ISioi,  or  to  the  "  now  "  of  2  Tim. 
i.  10,  in  which  the  manifestation  of  the 
promise  took  place. 

Ver.  3. — In  his  oum  seasons  for  hath  in 
due  times,  A.V. ;  in  the  message  for  through 
preaching,  A.V. ;  wherewith  1  was  entrusted 
for  which  is  committed  unto  me,  A.V.  In 
his  own  seasons.  The  margin,  its  own  seasons, 
is  preferable  (see  1  Tim.  ii.  7,  note).  The 
phrase  is  equivalent  to  "the  fulness  of 
the  time"  (Gal.  iv.  4).  Manifested  his 
Word.  There  is  a  change  of  construction. 
"  The  relative  sentence  passes  almost  im- 
perceptibly into  a  primary  sentence  "  (Butt- 
mann  in  Huther),;  "his  Word"  becomes 
the  object  of  the  verb  "made  manifest," 
instead  of  "  eternal  life,"  as  one  would  have 
expected.  His  Word  is  the  whole  revela- 
tion of  the  gospel,  including  the  Person 
and  work  of  Jesus  Christ.  Compare  St. 
Peter's  address  to  Cornelius  (Acts  x.  36) 
This  "  Word,"  which  lay  in  the  mind  of  God 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS. 


[oh.  i.  1—16. 


through  the  agei,  and  was  only  dimly 
expressed  in  the  promises  given  from  time 
to  time  (1  Pet.  i.  10 — 12),  was  now  "  made 
manifest,"  and  proclaimed  openly  in  that 
preaching  of  the  gospel  of  God's  grace 
which  was  entrusted  to  St.  Paul.  ThiB 
same  idea  is  frequently  expressed  (see  Bom. 
xvi.  25 ;  Eph.  i.  9,  10;  mix.  3—11 ;  2  Tim.  i. 
9—11;  1  Pet.  i.  20).  In  the  message. 
Surely  a  poor  and  a  false  rendering.  'Ei> 
KJipiyftceri  means  "by  the  open  proclama- 
tion" which  St.  Paul,  as  God's  herald, 
ief)pv£,  was  commanded  to  make.  But  this 
is  better  expressed  oy  the  word  which  is 
appropriated  to  the  proclamation  of  the 
gospel,  viz.  "preaching."  So,  as  above 
quoted,  Bom.  xvi.  25;  2  Tim.  i.  11,  and 
elsewhere  frequently.  According  to  the 
commandment  {icaT*  iwrrayjv,  k.t.\.)  ;  Bom. 
xvi.  26;  1  Tim.  i.  1  (comp.  Gal.  i.  1). 
God  our  Saviour  (1  Tim.  i.  1 ;  ii.  3 ;  ch.  ii. 
10;  iii.  4;  Jude  25;  and  also  Luke  i.  47). 
Elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  the  term 
"  Saviour"  (Sorifp)  is  always  applied  to  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Ver.  4. — My  true  child  for  mine  own  son, 
A.  V. ;  a  common  for  the  common,  A.V. ; 
grace  and  peace  for  grace,  mercy,  and  peace, 
A.V.  and  T.B. ;  Christ  Jesus  for  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  A.V.  and  T.B.  Illy  true  ohild 
(yvncltf  TtKvtp  :  1  Tim.  i.  2)  after  a  oommon 
faith  (kot4  Koivriv  Trla-Tif).  In  1  Tim.  i.  2 
it  is  h  nUrrei  (where  see  note).  Beyond  all 
doubt,  Alford  is  right  in  both  cases  in 
rendering  "the  faith"  (see  his  note  on 
1  Tim.  i.  2).  The  "  common  faith  "  means 
the  faith  of  all  God's  elect.  Graoe  and  peaoe. 
So  the  B.T.,  omitting  eAeos,  mercy,  which 
is  fonnd  in  1  Tim.  i.  2  and  2  Tim.  i.  2. 
But  the  manuscripts  vary,  and  the  critics 
are  divided  as  to  whether  $\eo*  ought  to  be 
retained  here  or  not. 

Ver.  5. — Were  for  are,  A.V. ;  appoint  for 
ordain,  A.V. ;  gave  thee  charge  for  had 
appointed  thee,  A.V.  Left  I  thee  in  Crete. 
We  have  no  account  of  St.  Paul's  visit  to 
Crete,  nor  do  we  know  how  the  gospel  was 
first  brought  to  Crete.  It  may  have  been 
by  some  of  those  "  Cretes "  who  were  at 
Jerusalem  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  and 
heard  the  apostles  speak  in  their  tongue 
"  the  wonderful  works  of  God  "  (Acts  ii.  11), 
or  by  other  Christian  Jews  visiting  the 
Jewish  community  in  Crete  (note  to  ver.  1). 
If  St.  Paul  was  returning  from  Spain,  and 
travelling  by  ship  eastward,  Crete  would  be 
on  his  way.  The  importance  of  the  island, 
with  which  he  made  some  acquaintance  on 
his  voyage  from  CtBsarea  to  Borne  (Acts 
xxvii.  7,  8),  and  the  large  Jewish  colony 
there,  may  naturally  have  inclined  him  to 
visit  it.  How  long  he  remained  there  we 
do  not  know,  but  he  did  not  stay  long 
enough  to  organize  the  Church  there  com- 


pletely. There  were  still  things  "want- 
ing" (to  Xelirorra),  as  it  follows.  This 
mention  of  Crete  is  an  important  chrono- 
logical mark.  The  order  of  St.  Paul's  pro- 
gress, as  gathered  from  the  three  pastoral 
Epistles,  is  very  distinct — Crete,  Miletus, 
Troas,  Macedonia,  Corinth,  Nicopolis,  Borne. 
He  dropped  Titus  at  Crete,  and  left  Timothy 
behind  at  Ephesus.  The  Epistle  to  Titus, 
therefore,  is  the  first  of  the  three  pastoral 
Epistles,  and  this  is  borne  ont  by  another 
circumstance.  When  he  wrote  to  Titus  he 
had  not  made  up  his  mind  whether  he 
slioulil  send  Artemas  or  Tychicus  to  take 
his  place  in  Crete  when  he  rejoined  the 
apostle  (oh.  iii.  12).  But  when  he  wrote 
2  Timothy  he  had  sent  Tychicus  to  Ephesus 
to  replace  Timothy  (2  Tim.  iv.  12),  and 
Titus  had  already  joined  him,  and  been  sent 
on  by  him  to  Dalmatia,  presumably  from 
Nicopolis.  Set  in  order  (eViSiopewo-fj) ;  only 
here  in  the  New  Testament,  and  not  found 
in  the  LXX.  nor  in  classical  Greek,  except 
as  a  technical  word  in  the  art  of  rhetoric. 
But  $top$6a>  is  very  common  in  classical 
Greek  (see  l*cu>6f>Bnais,  2  Tim.  iii.  16). 
The  force  of  M  in  the  compound  here  is 
"  further,"  or  "  in  addition."  St.  Paul  had 
set  the  Church  in  order  up  to  a  certain 
point.  But  there  were  still  certain  things 
wanting,  rtt  Ktlwovra  (see  ch.  iii.  13 ;  Luke 
xviii.  22);  and  these  Titus  was  to  supply 
and  give  the  finishing  touch. to.  Appoint 
((caTao-Tijffjji).  This  is  a  better  rendering 
than  the  A.V.  "  ordain,"  because  it  is  a 
general  word  for  "  to  appoint,  make."  Pro- 
bably the  A.V.  "  ordain  "  was  not  intended 
to  be  taken  in  a  strictly  technical  sense, 
but  is  used  as  in  Heb.  v.  1 ;  viii.  3.  The 
technical  word  was  usually  "to  order." 
"  The  Ordering  of  DeaconB,"  or  "of  Priests," 
is  the  title  of  the  service  in  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer.  "Meet  to  be  ordered," 
"  shall  surcease  from  ordering,"  occur 
repeatedly  in  the  rubrics.  Elders  (?rpe<r- 
jSuTt'pous) ;  i.e.  presbyters,  or  priests  (comp. 
Acts  xiv.  23;  and  see  Acts  xi.  30,  note). 
In  every  oity  (Kara  iriKiv);  city  by  city. 
The  phrase  has  a  peculiar  significance  in 
Crete,  which  used  to  be  famous  for  its 
hundred  cities.  It  shows,  too,  that  Chris- 
tianity was  widely  spread  among  the  cities 
of  the  island.  The  germ  of  the  episcopal 
office,  one  bishop  and  many  presbyters,  is 
here  very  conspicuous. 

Ver.  6. — Any  man  is  for  any  be,  A.V. ; 
children  that  believe  for  faithful  children, 
A.V. ;  who  are  not  for  not,  A.V.  Blameless 
(i.viyK\nTos) ;  see  1  Tim.  iii.  10,  note.  The 
husband  of  one  wife  (see  1  Tim.  iii.  2,  note '). 

1  Tyndale  contends  that  St  Paul's  mean- 
ing is  that  every  priest  ought  to  have  a 
wife,  but  only  one  alive  at  the  same  time 


ca.  l  1—16.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITTO 


Having  children  that  believe  (see  1  Tim.  iii. 
4).  Mark  the  importance  given  to  the 
"  elder's  "  family  as  well  as  to  hie  personal 
oharaoter.  Not  aooused  (/ij)  iv  Karriyopiif 
k.t.X.);  literally,  not  under  an  accusation 
(see  1  Tim.  v.  19).  Eiot  (Sta-arias);  see 
Eph.  v.  18;  1  Pet.  iv.  4;  Luke  xv.  13. 
Used  in  Plato  and  Aristotle  for  "  debauchery  " 
or  "  profligaoy,"  with  the  kindred  words 
Haurros,  aaaireiofim,  etc.  Unruly  (dvvir6- 
tokto);  ver.  10  and  1  Tim.  i.  9,  note 
(eomp.  1  Tim.  iii.  4,  where  the  children  are 
required  to  he  iv  iTorayp,  "  under  rule,"  in 
subjection). 

Ver.  7.— The  for  a,  A.V. ;  God's  steward 
for  the  steward  of  God,  A.V. ;  no  brawler 
for  not  given  to  wine,  A.V.;  greedy  of  for 
given  to,  A.V.  Blameless  (see  ver.  6).  God's 
steward  (o!kov6/iov)  ;  comp.  1  Cor.  iv.  1,  2 ; 

1  Pet.  iv.  10.  (For  the  office  of  the  steward, 
see  Luke  xii.  42,  43.)  Self-willed  (a£0e£5jj) ; 
elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  only  in 

2  Pet.  ii.  10 ;  in  the  LXX.  Gen.  xlix.  3,  9 
and  Prov.  xxi.  24 ;  and  common  in  classical 
Greek.  It  is  always  used  in  a  bad  sense — 
stubborn,  harsh,  remorseless,  and  the  like. 
Soon  angry  (bpyiXov);  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament,  found  occasionally  in  the 
LXX.,  and  common  in  classical  Greek — 
■passionate,  quick-tempered,  irascible  (comp. 
Eph.  iv.  31 ;  Col.  iii.  8).  Brawler  (wdparov) ; 
see  1  Tim.  iii.  3,  note.  Striker  (1  Tim.  iii. 
3,  note).  Greedy  of  filthy  luore  (ojVx/jo- 
xegSij);  1  Tim.  iii.  3, 8,  note. 

Ver.  8.—  Given  to  for  a  lover  of,  A.V. ; 
good  for  good  men,  A.V. ;  sober-minded  for 
sober,  A.V.  Given  to  hospitality  (<pi\6£evov) ; 
1  Tim.  iii.  2,  note.  A  lover  of  good  (<pi\&- 
yaSoii) ;  see  2  Tim.  iii.  3,  note  on  dcpiAdyaBov. 
Only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  and  only 
once  in  the  LXX.,  Wisd.  vii.  22,  where  it 
seemB  to  mean  "a  lover  of  that  which  is 
good,"  and  where  the  long  string  of  adjectives 
is  very  similar  to  that  here ;  found  occasion- 
ally in  classical  Greek.  Sober-minded 
(a-axppovo.) ;  see  eh.  ii.  2,  5,  and  1  Tim.  iii.  2, 
note.  The  rendering  "  discreet "  in  oh.  ii. 
5  (A.V.)  expresses  the  meaning  very  well. 
Just,  holy.  A'ucaios  is  usually  considered 
as  describing  that  side  of  a  good  man's 
character  which  is  in  relation  to  his  fellow- 
men,  and  offms  that  side  which  has  respect 
to  God.  Joseph  was  Sixaios  (Matt.  i.  19)  in 
his  conduct  towards  Mary ;  the  Lord  Jesus 
was  God's  Holy  One  (jhv  iailn  trov).  In 
classical  Greek  the  words  are  more  com- 
monly applied  to  things.  "Oaia  not  Sl/com 
are  things  sanctioned  by-Divine  and  human 
laws  respectively.  Temperate  (iyxparri); 
only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  and  never 
in  this  sense  in  the  LXX.;   but  it  has 

('Answer  to  Sir  Thoa.  More,'  bk.  iii  oh. 
xiii.). 


exactly  the  same  meaning  in  Aristotle,  viz. 
"  master  of  one's  self,"  having  the  appetites 
under  control. 

Ver.  9.— Holding  to  for  holding  fast,  A.V. ; 
which  is  according  to  the  teaching  for  as  he 
hath  been  taught,  A.V. ;  both  to  exhort  in  the 
sound  doctrine  for  by  sound  doctrine,  both  to 
exhort,  A.V. ;  convict  for  convince,  A.V. 
Holding  to  (ivrexA/ievos).  Holding  fast  is 
a  better  and  more  forcible  rendering  than 
holding  to.  It  answers  to  the  Latin  ad- 
herere,  to  cling  to.  The  faithful  word 
which  is  aooording  to  the  teaching  is  awk- 
wardly expressed.  'H  SiSax^  is  "the  Christian 
truth  "  as  taught  by  the  apostles,  and  "  the 
faithful "  or  "  sure  word  "  to  which  Titus  is 
to  cleave  is  described  as  being  "  according  to 
that  truth"  (comp.  oh.  i.  1,  &\i)Se(aj  i-ijj 
(cot'  ivaePaav).  The  A.V.  gives  substan- 
tially the  apostle's  meaning.  The  result  of 
this  adhesion  to  the  faithful  word  is  that 
he  will  be  able  to  comfort  and  encourage 
believers  by  {iii)  his  wholesome  teaching, 
and  also  to  convict  the  opposers  of  the  truth. 
The  gainsayers ;  ox,  contradictors  (robs  h-v-ri- 
Xeyovras) ;  subh  as  those  Jews  described  in 
Acts  xiii.  45  and  xxviii.  19  as  "contradicting 
and  blaspheming." 

Ver.  10. — Unruly  men  for  unruly  and, 
A.V.  and  T.E.  Unruly  (avmoWaKToi) ;  see 
ver.  6.  Vain  talkers  (/iaToioA.1^01) ;  only 
here  in  the  New  Testament,  not  found  i*» 
the  LXX.,  and  rare  in  classical  Greek  (see 
piaTaioXoyla,  1  Tim.  i.  6).  YLevo\iyos  and 
KtvoXoyla.  are  used  in  the  same  sense  of"  vain, 
empty,  talking."  Deoeivers — (tppevairdrai) ; 
here  only  in  the  New  Testament,  not  found 
in  the  LXX.  or  in  classical  Greek — literally, 
soul-deceivers,  or,  as  some  take  it,  self- 
deceivers  (compare  tppeva.wa.Tda,  Gal.  vi.  3, 
and  for  the  sense  Jas.  i.  26;  but  in  both 
these  instances  the  idea  of  aeJAdeceiving  is 
imported  by  the  context,  iaurov  and  KapStav 
avTov).  Here  the  word  means  *'  deceivers," 
whoso  character  is  described  in  2  Pet.  ii.  14 
as  "  beguiling  unstable  souls."  They  of  the 
circumcision ;  Judaizing  Christians,  the  most 
obstinate  and  difficult  adversaries  with 
whom  St.  Paul  had  to  cope  (see  Gal. 
passim;  Phil.  iii.  2,  3,  etc.). 

Ver.  11. — Men  who  overthrow  for  who  sub- 
vert, A.V.  Whose  mouths  must  be  stopped 
(obs  Set  iwio-TO/itfai/) ;  here  only  in  the 
New  Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX.,  but 
common  in  classical  Greek.  "  To  curb " 
(comp.  Ps.  xxxii.  9;  Jas.  iii.  2,  3).  The 
meaning  is  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  x"*<- 
vayuyeai  in  Jas.  i.  26 ;  some,  however,  assign 
to  it  the  sense  of  "  to  muzzle  "  (Olshausen, 
etc.)  or  "stop  the  mouth,"  which  Bishop 
Ellicott  thinks  is  "perhaps  the  most 
common"  and  "the  most  suitable."1    So 

1  It  may  be  worth  noticing  that  the  horse* 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS. 


[OH.  I.  1—16. 


also  Huther.  It  often  means  simply  "to 
silence"  (see  Stephan,  'Thesaur.'),  and  is 
applied  to  wind  instruments.  Overthrow 
(hvarp&irovtri) ;  as  2  Tim.  ii.  18,  which  shows 
the  kind  of  overthrow  here  meant,  that  viz.  of 
the  faith  of  whole  families,  well  expressed  in 
the  A.V.  by  "  subvert."  The  phrase,  oliclas 
a.i'a.TpUw,  of  the  literal  overthrow  of  houses, 
occurs  in  Plato  (Alford).  For  filthy  luore's 
Bake;  contrary  to  the  apostolic  precept  to 
bishops  and  deacons  (1  Tim.  iii.  3,  8,  and 
above,  ver.  7).  Polybius  has  a  striking 
passage  on  the  alaxpoxepSela  of  the  Cretans, 
quoted  by  Bishop  Ellicott  ('  Hist.,'  vi.  146. 3). 

Ver.  12.— A  prophet  for  even  a  prophet, 
A.V. ;  Cretans  for  the  Cretians,  A.V. ;  idle 
gluttons  for  slow  bellies,  A.V.  A  prophet  of 
their  own ;  viz.  Epimenides,  a  native  either  of 
Phasstus  or  of  Gnossus  in  Crete,  the  original 
author  of  this  line,  which  is  also  quoted  by 
Callimachus.  Epimenides  is  here  called  a 
prophet,  not  simply  as  a  poet,  but  from  his 
peculiar  character  as  priest,  bard,  and  seer ; 
called  by  Plato  Beuts  ivlip,  and  coupled  by 
Cioero  with  Bacis  the  Boeotian  prophet,  and 
the  sibyl  (Bishop  Ellicott);  described  by 
other  ancient  writers  as  a  prophet  (Alford) ; 
"everything  we  hear  of  him  is  of  a  priestly 
or  religious  nature "  ('  Diet,  of  Or.  and 
Bom.  Biogr.  and  Mythol.').  Cretans  are 
always  liars,  etc.  So  truly  was  this  their 
characteristic,  that  Kpr\Ti(eiv  was  used  to 
denote  "  telling  lies" — "  to  lie  like  a  Cretan  " 
(Plutarch,  etc.).  From  their  general  bad 
character  arose  the  line,  KpijTes,  KawniSoxot, 
Kl\uces,  rpla  Kdwira  K&KitTTa ;  and  Livy,  Poly- 
bius, and  Plutarch  alike  bear  witnesB  to 
their  oovetousness  and  dishonesty:  Tts 
KprjTwv  oJfSe  SiKaioffiyrjjf ;  "  When  was  there 
ever  an  upright  Cretan?"  asks  Leonides  in 
an  •  Epigram '  (Farrar, '  St.  Paul,'  vol.  ii.  p. 
534).  Evil  beasts.  Q-hpiov  is  "  a  wild  beast ; " 
applied  to  men  as  a  term  of  reproach  (1  Cor. 
xv.  32),  it  implies  brutality,  stupidity,  un- 
reasonableness, and,  with  the  epithet  xcuci, 
mischief,  like  the  French  mechante  bete.  The 
'  Epigram '  above  quoted  calls  them  \i\iara\ 
not  iKi(pe6poi,  "  pirates  and  wreckers."  Idle 
gluttons ;  literally,  idle  bellies.  The  substan- 
tive denotes  their  gluttony  and  sensuality 
(comp.  Bom.  xvi.  18 ;  Phil.  iii.  19,  where  q 
KoiXla  is  equivalent  to  yturrhp '),  and  the 
adjective  their  sloth  (i.pyat,  i.e.  iepyaC) ;  in  old 
Greek  it  is  usually  of  the  common  gender. 

Ver.  13. — Testimony  tor  witness,  A.V.  j  for 
which  cause  for  wherefore,  A.V. ;  reprove  for 
rebuke,  A.V.    Sharply  (cutoto/i&s)  ;  elsewhere 


on  Etruscan  vases  are  usually  represented 
as  in  effect  muzzled  by  the  bridle,  and  have 
their  mouths  shut ;  so  that  the  two  senses  of 
the  word  would  really  be  only  one. 

1  In  the  New  Testament,  yarriip  is  applied 
exclusively  to  the  womb. 


only  in  2  Cor.  xiii.  10  (see  also  Bern.  xi. 
22).  That  they  may  be  sound  (see  oh.  ii.  2). 
The  faithful  pastor  must  use  severity  when 
it  is  necessary  to  the  spiritual  health  of  the 
flock,  just  as  the  skilful  surgeon  uses  the 
knife  to  save  the  patient's  life. 

Ver.  14. — Who  for  that,  A.V. ;  turn  away 
for  turn,  A.V.  Jewish  fables  (see  1  Tim. 
i.  4;  iv.  7 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  4,  where  the  Jewish 
origin  of  the  fables  is  implied,  though  not 
so  distinctly  stated  as  here).  Command- 
ments of  men  (trroXats  ivSpdirup) ;  so  in  Col. 
ii.  22  the  apostle  speaks  of  the  precepts 
"touch  not,"  "  taste  not "  (originating  with 
the  Judaizing  teachers),  as  ri  inTdK/mra  ml 
StSa(TKti\las  ran  avipdntav  (see  following 
note).  Turning  away  from  (Awoo-Tpetpopevuir); 
see  2  Tim.  L  15,  note. 

Ver.  15.— To  for  unto,  A.V.  (twice); 
nothing  is  for  is  nothing,  A.V. ;  both  for  even, 
A. V.;  their  conscience  for  conscience,  A.V. ; 
are  for  is,  -A.V.  To  the  pure,  etc.  This 
allusion  shows  clearly  that  the  "  command- 
ments of  men,"  here  condemned,  are  of  the 
same  kind  as  those  referred  to  in  the  above- 
quoted  passage  in  the  Colossians.  We  leam 
also  from  Bom.  xiv. ;  1  Cor.  viii. ;  and  else- 
where, what  were  the  kind  of  questions 
which  agitated  the  Judaizing  Christians. 
But  St.  Paul  in  a  few  wise  words  shows  the 
utter  worthlessness  of  such  controversies. 
"  To  the  pure  all  things  are  pure."  "  There 
is  nothing  from  without  a  man,"  said  our 
Lord,  "that  entering  into  him  can  defile 
him"  (Mark  vii.  15);  "Neither  if  we  eat 
are  we  the  better,  neither  if  we  eat  not 
are  we  the  worse  "  (1  Cor.  viii.  8) ;  "  The 
kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink, 
but  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in 
the  Holy  Ghost"  (Bom.  xiv.  17).  But 
unto  those  that  are  defiled  by  what  comes 
from  within  them,  and  have  no  faith 
(Bom.  xiv.  23),  nothing  is  pure.  Their 
mind  and  conscience,  being  defiled,  defile 
everything  they  do.  The  words  Ka.eap6v 
and  iualva  are  the  proper  words  for  cere- 
monial "cleanness"  and  "defilement"  re- 
spectively. 

Ver.  16. — By  their  for  fa,  A.V.  They  pro- 
fess that  they  know  God  (comp.  Bom.  ii.  17 
— 20).  The  arrogant  claim  to  be  God's 
people  and  to  superior  holiness,  while  all 
the  while  they  were  denying  God  by  their 
evil  deeds,  and  bringing  dishonour  upon 
his  Name  among  the  Gentiles,  was  a  marked 
feature  of  the  Jews  in  St.  Paul's  time  (comp. 
2  Tim.  iii.  5).  Abominable  (jSScAuktoI); 
objects  or  causes  of  disgust;  only  here  in 
the  New  Testament,  but  found  in  the  LXX. 
But  (StieKvy/ia  and  £5eA.u<r<ro,uai  are  not  un- 
common. Eeprobate  (iSifoipot) ;  as  2  Tim.  iii. 
8  (where  see  note).  This  picture  of  the 
circumcision  is  indeed  sad  (comp.  1  Thess 
ii  15, 16;  Acts  xxviii.  25— 28> 


0H.L1— 16.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Ten.  1 — 16.— Hie  ministry  of  character.  The  pastoral  Epf  sties,  and  this  chapter  in 
particular,  bring  prominently  before  us  the  Christian  ministry  as  of  commanding 
importance  in  the  scheme  of  Christianity.  Christianity,  the  sum  and  substance  of 
Christian  doctrine,  was  to  he  diffused  among  all  nations ;  and  the  great  instrument  for 
maintaining  it  in  efficiency  and  power  was  to  be  the  ministry.  But  in  describing  the 
ministerial  qualifications  the  apostle  lays  so  much  stress  upon  the  personal  character  of 
the  ministers,  as  to  make  us  feel  that  the  Christian  ministry  of  which  he  speaks  is  a 
ministry  of  character  as  much  as  of  preaching,  or  teaching,  or  any  other  ministration. 
Looking  at  this  side  of  the  ministry,  we  learn  that  it  is  the  purpose  of  the  great  Head 
of  the  Church,  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  that  his  doctrine  and  the  truth  which  he  brought 
down  from  heaven  should  be  presented  to  the  world  in  the  lives  and  characters  of 
his  accredited  servants  and  ambassadors.  Those  servants  of  his  were  to  be  scattered 
among  the  people,  "  in  every  city,"  and  every  village,  where  the  gospel  message 
had  been  brought,  and  the  people  were  not  only  to  hear  from  their  lips,  but  were 
to  see  in  their  lives,  the  nature  and  practical  effect  of  the  doctrine  delivered  to  them. 
And,  in  truth,  the  eloquence  of  holy,  loving,  and  self-denying  lives  is  more  persua- 
sive than  that  of  any  words,  however  good  and  however  beautiful.  We  feel,  even 
after  reading  the  words  of  the  Master  himself,  and  having  felt  their  power,  that 
there  is  a  still  greater  power  in  that  life  and  death,  wherein  were  embodied,  in  all  the 
beauty  of  love  and  goodness,  the  sublime  precepts  which  he  taught.  While,  therefore, 
we  see  the  importance  of  a  learned  clergy,  an  eloquent  clergy,  an  orthodox  clergy,  and 
withal  a  clergy  of  business  habits,  we  shall  do  well  to  keep'  steadily  in  view  the 
commanding  and  essential  quality  of  high  and  consistent  Christian  character,  showing 
Itself  in  all  the  details  of  the  daily  intercourse  of  life.  The  clergy  of  the  Church  should 
be  the  epistle  of  Christ,  known  and  read  of  all  men  in  every  place  where  they  are 
located,  as  bishops,  priests,  or  deacons.  In  their  manner  of  life  and  whole  conversation 
should  be  seen  worked  out  in  practice  what  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
intended  to  effect  in  the  renewal  of  human  nature.  Their  conduct  and  character  should 
be  a  living  commentary  on  the  Word  of  God  which  they  preach  to  the  people,  and  their 
silent  argument  for  pressing  it  upon  the  people's  acceptance.  And  hence  we  may 
deduce  the  importance  of  a  resident  ministry.  The  functions  of  preaching  and  minis- 
tering the  Sacraments  may  be  performed  by  strangers.  The  effectual  sermon  of  a  holy 
Christian  life  requires  "  elders  "  resident  amidst  the  community  to  whom  they  preach. 
The  pure  morals,  the  well-ordered  families,  the  meek  and  patient  behaviour  under 
provocation,  the  kindly  genial  sympathies,  the  fair  and  equitable  dealing,  the  sober 
gravity,  the  self-control  and  Eelf-mastery  of  the  servant  of  God,  must  be  seen  near  in 
the  daily  intercourse  of  life,  to  be  judged  of  and  appreciated.  It  is  the  glory  of  the 
English  Church  that,  by  means  of  her  endowments,  she  is  able  to  place  a  minister  of 
Christ  to  reside  in  every  parish.  Let  every  such  minister  remember  that  the  interests 
of  the  Christian  faith  are  bound  up  with  his  own  manner  of  life  and  that  of  his  house- 
hold, and  do  his  utmost  endeavour  that  that  life  may  he  a  faithful  reflection  of  the 
grace  of  God,  which  teaches  men  to  deny  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live 
soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world,  while  we  wait  for  the  appearing 
of  the  glory  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — i. — Apostolic  address  and  salutation.  The  full  representation  which  the 
apostle  gives  of  his  apostolic  office  is  designed  at  once  to  mark  the  authority  by  which 
he  gives  the  instructions  that  follow,  and  to  serve  as  an  index  to  the  contents  of  the 
whole  Epistle. 

L  The  claims  op  the  apostle.  "  Paul,  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  apostle  of  Jesus 
Christ."  1.  He  is  a  servant  of  Ood.  Not,  as  he  often  describes  himself,  "  a  servant  of 
Jesus  Christ."  The  title  seems  to  mark  the  relation  (1)  of  one  who  had  once  been  a 
slave  to  sin,  but,  having  become  free  through  Christ  Jesus,  was  still,  so  far  as  obliga- 
tion, service,  and  life  were  concerned,  a  servant  of  God;   (2)  his  devotion  to  God,  after 


0  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  1. 1—16. 

the  type  of  Old  Testament  service,  Moses  and  the  prophets  being  pre-eminently  called 
the  " servants  of  God ; "  (3)  his  ministry  in  the  service  of  a  royal  Master  (Matt,  xviii. 
23 — 32),  who  makes  him  a  member  of  his  household,  a  pillar  of  his  temple,  a  sharer  of 
his  throne  (Rev.  iii.  21).  2.  He  is  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  a  more  exact 
definition  of  his  office.  (1)  He  had  his  commission  and  his  doctrine  from  him.  (2)  He 
had  all  the  signs  and  proofs  of  an  apostle  in  him,  for  he  had  received  power  to  work 
miracles  as  well  as  to  declare  Divine  truth.  (3)  It  is,  therefore,  vain  and  deceptive  for 
any  to  assume  the  name  who  cannot  show  the  signs  of  an  apostle. 

H.  The  end  op  the  apostolic  office.  "  For  the  faith  of  God's  elect,  and  the  full 
knowledge  of  the  truth  which  is  after  godliness."  It  was  designed  for  the  furtherance 
of  the  faith  and  knowledge  of  believers.  1.  The  apostle  felt  that  he  was  appointed  to 
preach  the  doctrine  of  faith,  and  to  he  the  instrument  of  bringing  men  to  the  obedience  of 
faith.  (Rom.  i.  5 ;  x.  17.)  (1)  Therefore  all  claims  to  apostolic  authority  by  men 
who  have  abandoned  the  faith,  or  overlaid  it  with  error  and  superstition,  are  to  be 
rejected  by  the  Church  of  God.  (2)  All  true  faith  rests  on  the  Divine  foreordination ; 
for  it  is  "  the  faith  of  God's  elect."  Election  is,  therefore,  not  to  be  regarded  as  equi- 
valent to  faith,  much  less  as  its  consequence  (Eph.  i.  4) ;  for  it  is  its  true  cause.  The 
Father  is  the  Elector,  as  the  Son  is  the  Redeemer,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  the  Sanctifier. 
2.  The  apostolic  office  was  designed  likewise  to  impart  the  full  knowledge  of  the  trufli 
which  is  after  godliness."  (1)  Truth  is  the  object — the  Word  of  truth,  which  comes 
from  him  who  is  the  God  of  truth,  who  is  Christ  the  Truth  itself,  who  is  the  Spirit  of 
truth.  It  was  this  truth  that  the  apostle  preached  with  all  faithfulness  and  clearness. 
(2)  Knowledge  is  the  subjective  aspect  of  it,  and  becomes  ours  through  faith.  (3)  The 
fruit  of  this  truth  is  "godliness."  It  is  designed  to  promote  holiness  of  life  and 
character.    It  is  impossible  that  this  knowledge  can  be  morally  unfruitful. 

III.  The  basis  of  this  truth.  "  In  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  that  cannot  lie, 
promised  before  eternal  times."  The  ground  and  condition  of  this  truth  is  the  hope  of 
eternal  life,  which  is  the  animating  principle  at  once  of  the  apostle  and  of  the  Church 
of  God.  1.  The  principle  of  hope.  The  word  occurs  fifty-two  times  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  is  always  connected  with  God,  with  the  Mediator,  and  with  believers. 

(1)  Its  author  is  God,  who  is  "the  God  of  hope"  (Rom.  xv.  13),  who  has  given  us  "a 
good  hope  through  grace "  (2  Thess.  ii.  16),  and  given  us  Christ  as  "  our  Hope,"  even 
"  the  Hope  of  glory."  (2)  Hope  connects  us  with  the  future  as  memory  with  the  past, 
and  is  intended  to  neutralize  the  materializing  influence  of  earthly  life  around  us. 
Thus,  God  has  given  us  prophecy  and  promise  to  gratify  the  wants,  the  longings,  and 
the  anticipations  of  the  human  soul.  2.  The  object  and  sum  of  Christian  hope. 
"  Eternal  life,  which  God,  that  cannot  lie,  promised  before  eternal  times."  (1)  This  life 
is  in  Christ  Jesus ;  "  for  the  free  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  " 
(Rom.  vi.  23).  But  it  includes  (a)  the  full  fruition  of  God  to  all  eternity ;  (&)  the 
fellowship  of  the  Redeemer's  throne;  (c)  the  fulness  of  joy;  (<2)  likepess  to  Christ. 

(2)  It  is  eternal  life,  without  a  break  in  the  happy  continuity  of  bliss ;  for  it  is  life  with- 
out sin  or  death  to  mar  its  perfectness.  It  is  eternal,  because  he  is  at  once  its  Author 
and  Support,  as  being  that  "  Eternal  Life  that  was  with  the  Father"  (1  John  i.  2). 

(3)  The  age  of  this  promise.  "  Before  eternal  times."  (a)  This  is  not  merely  before  the 
times  of  the  world,  or  (6)  before  the  world  began,  (c)  but  really  in  the  eternity 
past ;  because  the  reference  is  not  to  the  covenants  of  Adam  or  Abraham,  but  to  the 
covenant  of  redemption  in  Christ  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  (2  Tim.  i.  9 — 11). 
The  apostle  does  not  merely  say  that  the  promise  of  eternal  life  was  the  result  of  & 
Divine  purpose  fixed  from  eternity,  but  that  it  was  made  from  eternity  to  believers, 
because  it  was  made  to  Christ,  whose  members  they  are.  It  is  impossible  to  under- 
stand the  meaning  of  these  words  without  reference  to  the  federal  transaction  between 
the  Father  and  the  Son  (Zech.  vi.  13).  This  was  the  very  "  promise  of  life  in  Christ 
Jesus  "  of  which  the  apostle  speaks  to  Timothy  (2  Tim.  i.  1).  (4)  The  guarantee  for 
the  fulfilment  of  this  promise.  "  God,  that  cannot  lie,  promised  "  it.  God  gave  both  a 
promise  and  an  oath  to  Abraham,  that  "  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was 
impossible  that  God  should  lie,"  we  should  have  a  sure  hope  (Heb.  vi.  18). 

IV.  The  manifestation  of  this  ancient  pkomise.  "  But  in  his  own  seasons  mani- 
fested his  Word  in  the  message  wherewith  I  was  entrusted,  according  to  the  command- 
ment of  God  our  Saviour."     1.  The  manifestation  was  made  in  God?*  own  season*. 


oh.  1. 1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITU&  » 

(1)  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  it  was  made  only  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  for  it  was  made 
by  the  other  apostles ;  and  ages  before  their  day  it  was  manifested,  with  more  or  less 
clearness,  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation.  (2)  But  the  Apostle  Paul  was  one  of 
those  specially  entrusted  with  the  Word,  and  specially  with  "the  revelation  of  the 
mystery  hid  for  ages"  (Rom.  xvi.  25).  2.  The  Word  of  God,  and  the  whole  order  and 
fulness  of  the  Church,  are  to  oe  regarded  as  the  unfolding  of  the  ancient  promise  of 
eternal  life.  3.  The  Word  is  made  manifest  by  prea-hing.  (Rom.  x.  17.)  Preaching 
is  an  institute  peculiar  to  Christianity,  which  it  formed  for  itself  as  its  chosen  mode 
of  utterance.  Christianity  is  not  a  philosophy  or  a  thaumaturgy.  It  is  propagated, 
not  by  priests,  but  by  preachers.  There  are  no  priests  in  Christianity  but  the  one  High 
Priest  of  our  profession,  who,  if  he  were  on  earth,  would  not  be  a  priest  (Heb.  viii.  4). 
4.  The  preaching  is  done  in  virtue  of  a  Divine  call  or  commission.  "  Wherewith  I  was 
entrusted  according  to  the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour."  All  the  ministries  of  the 
New  Testament,  high  and  low,  are  committed  as  trusts  to  the  Church.  Therefore  a 
minister  ought  to  have  a  true  call  from  on  high  before  accepting  the  responsibilities 
of  office.  The  apostle  was  very  emphatic  in  announcing  his  call  to  the  apostleship, 
not  as  in  any  way  due  to  his  own  will  or  wish,  but  to  Divine  command.  It  was  the 
command  of  "  God  his  Saviour ;  "  not  the  Son,  but  the  Father — the  usual  phrase  of 
the  apostle  being  "  according  to  the  will  of  God  "  (2  Tim.  i.  1). 

V.  The  apostolic  salutation.  "  To  Titus,  my  true  son  after  the  common  faith." 
1.  The  person  thus  addressed.  (1)  Titus  was  a  pure  Gentile.  It  is  interesting  to  remem- 
ber that  the  dearest  friends  and  companions  of  the  apostle's  life  were  Gentiles,  and 
not  Jews — such  as  Luke,  Titus,  and  Timothy,  who  was  half-Gentile.  Was  this  leaning 
caused  in  any  degree  by  the  distrusts  and  enmities  with  which  he  was  pursued  through 
life  by  his  Jewish  countrymen  ?  (2)  Titus  was,  like  Timothy,  one  of  the  apostle's 
converts.  This  fact  would  endear  him  to  the  apostle's  heart.  He  was  a  genuine  son 
of  the  apostle  in  virtue  of  the  faith  common  to  all  Christians ;  implying  that  (a)  there 
is  but  one  faith  (Eph.  iv.  5) ;  (6)  one  Object  of  faith,  Jesus  Christ ;  (c)  one  end  of  faith, 
eternal  life.  (3)  Titus  was  evidently  one  of  the  apostle's  most  trusty  disciples,  though 
he  was  less  a  corn  pardon  than  Timothy,  and  less  allied  to  him  on  the  terms  of  an 
affectionate  intimacy.  Titus  was  firm,  strong,  and  capable,  with  adaptability  in  the 
way  of  administration  and  of  repressing  moral  disorders  among  distracted  or  disturbed 
communities.  2.  The  greeting.  "  Grace  and  peace  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour."  (1)  The  blessings  sought  for  Titus.  "  Grace  and  peace." 
(<*)  Grace  is  the  full  and  eternal  fountain  of  the  goodness  of  God,  opened  to  the  wants 
of  men  in  the  blessed  gospel;  (6)  peace  is  the  blessing  of  the  saints,  to  which  they  are 
called  in  one  body,  and  the  safeguard  of  heart  and  mind  through  him  who  is  their 
Peace  (Phil.  iv.  7).  (2)  The  source  of  these  blessings,  alike  God  the  Father  and  God 
the  Son,  as  being  equally  the  Author  and  Giver  of  all  spiritual  blessings.  The  whole 
structure  of  the  Epistle  is  based  on  the  doctrine  of  the  Deity  of  Christ. — T.  0. 

Ver.  5. — Titus's  commission  in  Crete.  Its  object  was  principally  to  supply  the 
deficiencies  in  the  Church  organization  of  the  island. 

I.  The  scene  of  Titus's  laboubs — Ceete.  1.  Its  situation  and  history.  It  lies 
almost  equidistant  from  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa;  a  large  and  populous  island  of  the 
Mediterranean ;  the  Caphtor  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  now  known  as  Candia.  It  was 
a  place  of  ancient  civilization,  noted  for  its  hundred  cities,  and  became  a  Roman  posses- 
sion about  seventy  years  before  Christ.  2.  The  foundation  of  the  Cretan  Church. 
This  probably  occurred  immediately  after  Pentecost,  for  it  is  said  that  men  of  Crete 
were  present  on  that  occasion  (Acts  ii.  11),  and  we  know  that  the  island  abounded  with 
Jews  of  wealth  and  influence.  The  false  teachers  in  Crete  were  Judaists.  There  are 
several  reasons  for  believing  that  the  Church  must  have  been  a  considerable  time  in 
existence.  Time  must  be  allowed  for  the  development  of  heresy.  Time  must  likewise 
be  allowed  for  the  growth  of  character  and  reputation,  so  that  Titus,  guided  by  the 
Church,  might  have  no  difficulty  in  selecting  the  right  class  of  office-bearers.  The 
fact,  likewise,  that  the  bishops  were  to  "  have  believing  children  "  affords  a  strong  pre- 
sumption that  the  Church  must  have  been  in  existence  at  least  twenty  or  thirty  yetrs. 
3.  Its  existence  without  organization.  The  Church  in  Crete  seems  to  have  had  no 
regular  parties,  the  ordinances  were  probably  in  confusion,  and  though  the  power  of 


•  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  i  1—16. 

heathenism  had  been  broken  in  one  of  its  qnasi-strongholds,  the  Christians  had  not 
utterly  escaped  contamination.  The  state  of  matters  in  this  interesting  island  proves 
(1)  that  there  may  he  a  true  Church  where  there  is  no  regular  ministry.  Thus  there 
is  no  foundation  for  the  theory  that  the  clergy  are  the  Church,  or  even  essential  to  its 
existence,  though  they  are  necessary  to  its  edification.  (2)  It  proves  also  that  a  regular 
ministry  is  necessary.  Therefore  the  arguments  of  Darbyites  go  for  nothing.  A 
ministry  was  specially  needed  to  check  the  unruly  and  vain  talkers  in  Crete,  as  well  as 
to  apply  the  sanctifying  influence  of  the  gospel,  as  well  as  a  wholesome  Christian 
discipline  to  the  cure  of  moral  disorders. 

II.  The  scope  of  Titus's  labours.  "  For  this  cause  left  I  thee  in  Crete,  that  thou 
mightest  set  in  order  the  things  that  were  wanting,  and  ordain  elders  in  every  city." 
The  apostle  had  himself  successfully  laboured  in  the  island,  and  the  gospel  had  in  con- 
sequence spread  among  many  of  its  cities.  But  he  had  been  summoned  away  from  the 
scene  before  he  could  do  anything  to  organize  the  community  or  regulate  its  varied 
Church  life.  He  therefore  sent  Titus  as  his  delegate  to  discharge  this  duty.  1.  Titus 
was  to  set  in  order  the  things  that  were  wanting.  As  Crete  was  a  most  luxurious 
and  corrupt  place,  as  heathenism  affected  its  whole  family  and  public  life,  as  the 
Church  had  got  into  disorder  through  its  contiguity  to  paganism,  or  was  unable  to 
organize  itself  strongly  in  the  face  of  a  hostile  world,  Titus  was  left  behind  to  fix  the 
order  and  circumstances  of  public  worship,  including  the  celebration  of  Christian 
ordinances,  to  establish  a  godly  discipline  which  would  purify  family  life,  to  instruct 
the  Cretans  more  fully  in  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  which  were  attacked  by  design- 
ing Judaists,  and  generally  to  superintend  the  development  of  all  matters  affecting 
Christian  faith  and  practice.  2.  He  was  to  ordain  '  lers  in  every  city.  (1)  The  elders 
were  the  pastors  or  teachers  of  congregations,  and  were  so  called  on  account  of  their 
age  and  gravity  of  manner.  They  were  also  called  "bishops"  (ver.  2;  Acts  xx. 
17, 28),  on  account  of  their  office  as  overseers  of  the  flock.  It  is  now  universally 
conceded  that  these  names  are  but  different  designations  of  the  same  office-bearers. 
We  read  in  Scripture  of  "  bishops  and  deacons  "  (Phil.  i.  1),  but  never  of  "  bishops  and 
elders,"  simply  because  bishops  and  deacons  represent  two  different  orders,  but  bishops 
and  elders  do  not.  These  bishops  were  simply  the  pastors  of  congregations.  (2)  There 
were  several  elders  in  each  congregation.  Titus  was  "  to  ordain  elders  in  every  city," 
that  is,  a  plurality  of  elders  for  each  Church.  There  was  certainly  a  plurality  in 
several  Churches  (Acts  xiv.  23 ;  xv.  22).  (3)  These  elders  were  to  be  ordained  or 
solemnly  set  apart  to  their  office,  (o)  The  word  "  ordain  "  throws  no  light  on  the 
question  whether  the  appointment  took  place  with  or  without  the  co-operation  of  the 
Church.  But  the  same  word  is  used  in  the  account  of  the  ordination  of  the  deacons 
who  were  chosen  by  the  Christian  people  (Acts  vi.  3).  In  another  case  (Acts  xiv. 
23)  the  ordination  of  elders  did  not  take  place  without  the  co-operation  of  the 
Church,  which  selected  by  a  show  of  hands,  as  the  word  signifies,  the  candidates 
for  ordination.  The  directions  given  by  the  apostle  to  Titus  with  regard  to  the  quali- 
fications of  elders  imply  that  the  choice  lay,  not  with  Titus,  who  was  a  complete 
stranger  to  Crete,  but  with  the  body  of  the  Christian  people  who  were  familiarly 
acquainted  with  the  private  work  and  public  gifts  of  believers.  (6)  The  ordination  was 
the  act  of  Titus,  who  was  the  delegate  of  the  apostle.  It  is  not  improbable  that  Zenas 
and  Apollos,  who  were  then  in  Crete,  were  associated  with  him  in  the  act  of  ordination. 
It  is  now  generally  admitted  that  he  was  not  appointed  permanent  Bishop  of  Crete, 
for  his  stay  was  designed  to  be  short  (ch.  iii.  12).  This  whole  passage  proves  the 
importance  of  Church  organization,  while  it  presupposes  a  certain  amount  of  Christian 
knowledge  and  feeling  among  the  members  of  the  Cretan  Church. — T.  0. 

Vers.  6,  7. — The  character  of  bishops — their  negative  qualifications.  The  apostle  first 
mentions  their  qualifications  in  a  moral  point  of  view  before  he  speaks  of  their  duties  as 
teachers. 

I.  Blamelessnesb.  The  minister  must  be  one  against  whom  no  charge  can  be 
brought.  His  name  must  be  spotless  (1  Cor.  i.  8 ;  Col.  i.  22).  The  Church  must  be 
able  to  respect  him.  1.  Because  he  must  be  an  example  to  the  believers.  2.  Because 
he  could  not  otherwise  consistently  check  or  reprove  the  blameworthy  ways  of  others. 
(Ch.  i.  13.)   Christian  life  in  Crete  was  unsound  both  as  to  morals  and  doctrine.    3. 


oh.  1. 1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITD8  • 

Because  as  "  a  steward  of  ffod "  he  has  grave  responsibilities,  both  to  God  and  to  th« 
flock.  He  must  be  both  wise  and  faithful  in  relation  to  the  "  house  of  God,  .  .  -  the 
Church  of  the  living  God"  (1  Tim.  iii.  15),  which  is  entrusted  to  his  keeping. 

II.  The  husband  or  one  wife.  His  family  relationships  are  of  much  moment,  for 
polygamy  was  the  established  rule  of  heathenism.  1.  This  passage  does  not  make  the 
marriage  of  ministers  compulsory,  as  it  is  in  the  case  of  priests  in  the  Greek  Church. 
2.  It  is  totally  inconsistent  with  the  principle  of  the  celibacy  of  ministers  in  the 
Church  of  Rome.  3.  It  does  not  prevent  the  second  marriage  of  a  minister,  which  is 
sanctioned  by  Scripture.    (Eom.  vii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  8,  9,  39.)    4.  It  simply  condemns 


III.  The  conduct  of  his  children.  "Having  believing  children,  who  are  not 
accused  of  riot  or  unruly."  1.  The  bishop  will  be  judged  by  his  family  life.  The 
family  is  the  nursery  of  the  Church,  and  these  two  societies  act  and  react  upon  each 
other  reciprocally,  so  that  a  bad  or  weak  or  injudicious  father  can  never  be  an  efficient 
or  respected  minister.  If  he  cannot  rule  his  children,  how  can  he  rule  the  Church  of 
God  (1  Tim.  iii.  5)?  2.  His  children  ought  to  be:  (1)  Believers,  adorning  the  doctrine 
of  the  gospel  by  purity  and  obedience.  There  must  be  evidence  that  they  have  been 
brought  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  (2)  They  ought  to  be  free 
from  the  imputation  of  dissoluteness.  There  must  be  no  ill  reports  concerning  pro- 
fligacy. (3)  They  must  not  be  unruly,  that  is,  disobedient  to  parents.  Those 
ministers  would  be  unfit  to  govern  the  Church  whose  authority  was  disregarded  by 
their  own  children.  The  minister's  home  in  Crete  was,  therefore,  to  be  a  pattern  of 
order,  purity,  and  piety. 

IV.  Not  self-willed.  The  elder  ought  not  to  cherish:  1.  A  self-loving  spirit, 
which  leads  to  the  disregard  of  the  rights,  or  claims,  or  feelings  of  others.  2.  A 
haughty  and  imperious  temper.  One  who  is  both  obstinate  and  proud  can  have  no 
influence  over  his  flock.  He  ought  to  be  humble,  easy  to  be  entreated,  able  to  rule 
his  own  spirit,  and  considerate  to  others. 

V.  Not  soon  angry.  .  1.  He  ought  to  have  a  temper  not  quickly  provoked  by  con- 
tradiction or  evil-speaking.  Many  tongues  will  be  busy  with  him,  as  many  eyes  will 
he  watchfully  turned  upon  his  walk.  2.  He  ought  to  remember  the  temper  of  his 
Master,  "  who,  when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again."  He  ought  to  be  "  slow  to 
wrath,"  and  imitate  the  Divine  long-suffering  and  patience. 

VI.  No  brawler.  The  word  suggests  the  conduct  of  one  insolent  through  wine, 
quarrelsome  and  furious.  The  minister  must  not  only  abstain  from  drunkenness,  but 
a-oid  the  passionate  folly  of  men  carried  away  by  this  sin. 

VII.  No  striker.  He  must  never  lift  his  hand  against  his  fellows.  1.  Be  is  the 
peacemaker  of  his  parish.  2.  How  can  he  restrain  the  violence  of  others  if  he  cannot 
hold  his  own  hands  ? 

VIII.  Not  given  to  filthy  lucre.  1.  Covetousness  is  idolatry  in  a  minister  as 
well  as  in  the  members  of  his  flock.  It  implies  the  existence  of  a  divided  heart.  2. 
An  avaricious  temper  is  condemned  by  the  example  of  Christ,  who,  "  though  he  was 
rich,  became  poor "  to  make  many  rich.  3.  It  is  a  peculiarly  heinous  sin  to  make 
a  gain  of  godliness.  4.  A  covetous  minister  win  seek  his  own  things,  not  the  things  of 
Jesus  Christ. — T.  0. 

Ver.  8. — The  bishop's  positive  qualifications.  I.  But  a  lover  of  hospitality.  1. 
This  trait  was  specially  suitable  to  a  time  when  Christians,  travelling  from  one  place  to 
another,  were  in  the  habit  of  receiving  kindly  entertainment  from  brethren.  2.  This 
habit  may  bring  blessing  to  our  houses.  Some  have  thereby  "  entertained  angels 
unawares"  (Heb.  xiii.  2).  3.  It  recommends  the  gospel  to  find  its  ministers  ready  at 
all  times  to  feed  the  hungry,  opening  heart  and  house  to  the  poor  and  needy  (Luke 
xiv.  13).    4.  Yet  the  hospitality  is  not  to  be  that  of  luxury  or  sensuality. 

II.  A  lover  of  good.  It  points  to  a  heart  in  sympathy  with  everything  good  and 
noble  and  of  good  report,  as  opposed  to  the  corrupt  tendencies  at  work  in  Cretan 
society. 

III.  Sober.  1.  The  word  points  to  the  self-restraint  which  controls  the  passions,  Id 
accordance  with  the  dictates  of  conscience,  reason,  and  the  gospel  of  Christ.  It  is 
opposed  to  the  irascibility  already  condemned  in  ministers  (ver.  7).    2.  It  points  to 


10  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [en,  1. 1—16. 

sobriety  of  intellect ;  for  the  minister  must  not  be  led  away  by  false  enthusiasm,  or 
entangled  with  spiritual  fanaticism.  He  is  to  follow  quietly  the  even  tenor  of  his 
way,  under  the  guidance  of  truth. 

IV.  Just.  1.  There  must  he  the  full  recognition  of  the  rights  of  others.  2.  There 
must  be  such  a  management  of  pastoral  duty  that  poor  and  rich,  ignorant  and  learned, 
will  be  treated  with  the  most  impartial  fairness.  There  must  be  "no  respect  of 
persons."  3.  There  must  be  no  casting  of  stumbling-blocks  in  the  way  of  others.  4. 
There  must  be  sincerity,  uprightness,  and  faithfulness  in  admonitions  and  counsels. 

V.  Holt.  The  minister  must  be  true  in  his  relations  to  God.  1.  He  rejoices  to  be 
numbered  with  the  company  of  the  saints.  2.  Sis  conduct  must  flow  from  a  holy  heart, 
as  the  effect  of  a  new  heart.  3.  Sis  holiness  must  rebuke  the  ungodly,  and  make  his 
words  like  ointment  poured  forth.  4.  If  implies  a  separateness  of  walk,  like  him  "  who 
was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners." 

VI.  Temperate.  This  word  points  to  eating  and  drinking,  to  lusts  of  the  flesh,  to 
abstinence  even  from  things  lawful  for  the  sake  of  peace  and  the  glory  of  God. — T.  C. 

Ver.  9. — The  bishop's  qualification  as  to  doctrine.  The  apostle  reserves  to  the  last 
place  the  most  important  of  all  the  qualifications  needed  by  elders. 

I.  The  duty  of  adhering  to  the  truth.  "  Holding  fast  the  faithful  Word  which 
is  according  to  the  teaching."  1.  The  doctrine  of  the  gospel  is  "  the  faithful  word:  "  (1) 
Because  it  contains  nothing  but  the  truth.  (2)  Because  it  never  deceived  any  that 
trusted  in  it.  (3)  Because  it  truly  displays  the  faithfulness  of  God.  2.  .ft  is  no  mere 
subjective  opinion  of  the  preacher,  but  is  based  upon  or  in  agreement  with  the  teaching 
of  the  apostles.  "  Which  is  according  to  the  teaching."  The  truth  is  not  to  be  dis- 
covered by  the  preacher,  but  delivered  to  him.  3.  It  is  to  be  steadfastly  maintained. 
The  preacher  is  not  to  allow  it  to  be  wrested  from  his  grasp  by  false  teachers.  The 
apostle  was  always  emphatic  as  to  the  importance  of  this  duty.  "Hold  fast  the  form 
of  sound  doctrine,  which  thou  heardest  from  me "  (2  Tim.  i.  13) ;  "  Continue  thou  in 
the  things  thou  hast  learned  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  14).  It  was  a  powerful  lever  in  his  hands 
for  moving  the  hearts  of  men. 

II.  The  design  or  this  qualification.  "  That  he  may  he  able  both  to  exhort  in 
the  sound  doctrine  and  to  convince  the  gainsayers."  1.  The  preacher  must  be  qualified 
for  exhortation  in  the  sphere  of  a  sound,  healthy,  practical  teaching.  This  implies  that 
men  had  some  knowledge  of  the  truth,  but  they  need  to  be  persuaded  to  follow  it 
rather  than  a  morbid  and  unpractical  teaching  that  can  in  no  way  minister  to  edifica- 
tion. 2.  Se  must  be  qualified  to  refute  the  arguments  of  false  teachers.  And  nothing 
is  so  powerfully  conducive  to  this  end  as  sound  doctrine  firmly  held  and  wisely 
applied.— T.  C. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — The  character  of  the  adversaries  at  Crete.  They  were  within  the  com- 
munion of  the  Christian  Church.  It  was,  therefore,  all  the  more  necessary  that  the 
ministers  should  be  holy,  laborious,  and  uncorrupt. 

I.  The  moral  and  intellectual  characteristics  of  these  adversaries. 
"  For  there  are  many  unruly  men,  vain  talkers  and  deceivers,  especially  they  of 
the  circumcision."  1.  They  were  refractory.  Though  standing  in  Church  relation- 
ships, they  refused  all  obedience,  and  pursued  purely  factious  and  divisive  courses,  that 
led  to  the  subversion  of  discipline  and  the  distraction  of  families.  Such  persons  mar 
the  prosperity  of  many  a  Church.  2.  They  were  vain  talkers.  Corruption  quickly 
makes  its  way  from  the  heart  to  the  lips,  and  flows  forth  in  glib  and  empty  babbling. 
(1)  There  is  no  allusion  here  to  heresy,  for  the  vain  talking  is  merely  opposed  to  useful 
and  solid  doctrine.  The  teachers  were  fluent  and  superficial,  speaking,  perhaps,  great 
swelling  words  of  vanity,  which  were  of  no  profit  to  the  hearers.  (2)  The  tongue  was 
made  for  speaking,  but  it  is  the  Lord's  will  that  it  should  always  be  used  for  his  glory. 
It  ought  to  be  the  utterer  of  the  "  wisdom  that  is  from  above,"  which  is  "  first  pure, 
then  peaceable."  (3)  Vain  talkers  are  the  pest  of  Churches  and  families,  sowing  the 
seeds  of  distrust  and  turning  men's  minds  against  the  gospel.  3.  They  were  deceivers. 
They  deceived  others  by  their  good  words  and  fair  speeches,  their  vain  speculations  aDd 
their  dexterous  arguments,  and  thus  became  very  dangerous  persons.  4.  They  were 
tf  "  the  circumcision  "  party  in  the  Church.     (1)  They  were  members  of  the  Church, 


oh.  1. 1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  11 

and  therefore  in  a  position  to  do  much  mischief.  (2)  They  were  Judaizing  Christians, 
who  blended  the  Law  and  the  gospel,  teaching  that  circumcision  was  necessary  to  salva- 
tion. (3)  They  were  the  persistent  enemies  of  the  Apostle  Paul  through  his  whole  life, 
and  thwarted  him  in  his  labours  in  every  part  of  Asia  and  Europe. 

II.  The  effect  of  theib  seduction.  "  Subverting  whole  houses."  They  pursued 
a  process  of  sapping  and  mining,  subverting  the  faith  (2  Tim.  ii.  18),  and  bringing 
whole  families  to  disorder  and  ruin.  It  was  not  a  case  of  mischief  done  to  a  few 
isolated  individuals.  Thus  they  undermined  the  peace  and  stability  of  the  Church 
itself. 

III.  The  motive  of  theib  teaching.  "  Teaching  things  which  they  ought  not,  for 
filthy  lucre's  sake."  The  real  root  of  the  evil  is  laid  bare  by  the  apostle.  It  was  a 
sordid  love  of  gain.  Therefore  the  teaching  was  such  as  would  accommodate  itself  to 
the  prejudices  of  men.  These  men  had  no  regard  for  God's  honour,  for  the  interest  of 
Christ,  or  for  the  welfare  of  souls ;  they  only  sought  to  increase  their  worldly  substance 
by  gaining  porMlar  applause.  1.  Money  in  itself  is  no  evil,  for  it  has  no  moral  character. 
It  is  only  a  blessing  or  a  curse  according  to  the  use  that  is  made  of  it.  2.  "  The  love  of 
money  is  the  root  of  all  evil."  It  leads  men  to  dishonour  God,  to  ignore  the  claims  of 
truth,  to  sacrifice  the  peace  of  the  Church.  The  Pharisees  in  our  Lord's  time  devoured 
widows'  houses.  How  many  people  still  sacrifice  religion  so  far  as  they  imagine  it  to 
conflict  with  their  worldly  advancement  I  3.  The  motive  of  these  Cretan  adversaries 
was  baser  than  if  it  had  been  mere  fanaticism  or  the  love  of  proselytism.  (Matt. 
xxiii.  15.) 

IV.  The  justification  of  the  apostle's  strong  language  concerning  them. 
"  One  of  themselves,  a  prophet  of  their  own,  said,  Cretans  are  always  liars,  evil  beasts, 
idle  gluttons."  This  testimony  is  true.  These  words  refer  not  to  "  those  of  the  circum- 
cision," but  to  the  inhabitants  of  Crete,  who  had  generally  welcomed  the  injurious 
teaching  referred  to.  1.  The  apostle's  quotation  of  a  heathen  poet,  Epimenides,  shows 
that  it  is  not  improper  for  Christians  to  study  the  literature  of  heathen  nations.  Classical 
studies  were  once,  on  moral  grounds,  discouraged  by  the  Church.  Calvin  says  that 
nothing  learned  ought  to  he  rejected,  even  though  it  should  proceed  from  "the  god- 
less." 2.  The  quotation  is  the  unbiassed  judgment  of  a  Cretan  poet,  held  in  high 
honour  for  so-called  prophetical  gifts.  It  represents  the  character  of  the  Cretans  in  the 
darkest  light,  as  if  to  justify  a  heathen  proverb,  "  The  three  worst  C'e  in  the  worli 
are  Cappadocia,  Crete,  and  Cilicia."  (1)  "Cretans  are  always  liars."  Thai  estimate  U 
fully  borne  out  by  profane  writers,  as  well  as  by  the  proverb  that  makes  "  Cretizing '' 
synonymous  with  "deception."  (2)  They  were  "evil  beasts."  In  allusion  to  their 
fierceness,  their  wildness,  their  cruelty.  (3)  They  were  "  idle  gluttons."  They  were 
sensual  and  slothful,  corpulent  and  idle,  and  therefore  fit  disciples  of  teachers  whose 
"  god  was  their  belly,"  and  were  content  to  eat  the  bread  of  others  without  working. 

3.  The  apostle  endorses  this  heathen  testimony,  showing  that  the  Cretans  had  not 
changed  their  national  character  in  six  hundred  years. 

V.  The  true  method  of  dealing  with  the  Cretan  adversaries.  "Whose 
mouths  must  he  stopped."  1.  This  does  not  warrant  civil  persecution.  2.  It  warrants 
the  use  of  cogent  arguments  to  silence  gainsayers,  such  as  those  by  which  our  Lord 
silenced  the  Sadducees  and  the  Pharisees,  as  well  as  the  use  of  faithful  and  stringent 
discipline  to  repress  ecclesiastical  and  moral  disorders.  The  adversaries  were  to  be 
opposed  by  reason,  faithfulness,  and  love,  above  all,  by  the  faithful  preaching  of  the 
gospel  in  its  positive  as  well  as  its  negative  aspects. — T.  C. 

Vers.  13, 14. — The  necessity  of  godly  rebuke.  At  this  point  the  apostle  drops  the 
reference  to  bishops,  and  lays  upon  Titus  himself  the  duty  of  applying  the  proper 
remedy. 

L  The  utility  of  rebuke.  "  Wherefore  rebuke  them  sharply,  that  they  may  be 
sound  in  the  faith."  The  nature  of  the  people  demanded  sharp  treatment.  "Sharpness 
and  severity  are  but  the  other  side  of  love  itself,  when  the  wounds  can  only  be  healed 
by  cutting."  Ministers  are  sent  to  give  rebuke  (Jer.  xliv.  4 ;  Micah  Hi.  8).  1.  They 
may  give  it  privately.    2.  Or  publicly  (1  Tim.  v.  20).    3.  Fearlessly  (Ezek.  ii.  3 — 7). 

4.  With  all  authority  (ch.  ii.  15).     5.  With  long-suffering  (2  Tim.  iv.  2).     6.  If 
sharply,  yet  with  Christian  love  (2  Thess.  iii.  15).     7.  The  good  receive  rebuke 


12  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [on.  1 1—16. 

(1)  kindly  (Ps.  cxli.  5);  (2)  with  love  to  those  who  administer  it  (Prov.  ix.  8;  xxiv. 

25) ;  (3)  they  attend  to  rebuke  (Prov.  xv.  5). 

II.  The  design  of  the  rebuke.  "  That  they  may  be  sound  in  the  faith."  It  was : 
1.  That  they  might  be  recovered  from  their  errors,  and  receive  sound  doctrine,  and  use 
sound  speech  that  cannot  he  condemned.  2.  That  they  may  he  sound  in  the  grace  of 
faith,  and  manifest  it  by  departing  from  their  evil  works.  This  soundness  of  faith  is 
described  negatively  by  their  "  not  giving  heed  to  Jewish  fables,  and  commandments 
of  men,  that  turn  from  the  truth."  (1)  Jewish  fables.  These  are  mentioned  in 
1  Tim.  i.  4;  iv.  7;  2  Tim.  iv.  4.  They  were,  no  doubt,  rabbinical,  and  ultimately 
crystallized  into  the  Talmud.  Our  Lord  condemned  them  (Matt.  xv.  3).  The  tra- 
ditionary principle  has,  in  spite  of  this  warning,  spread  widely  in  the  Church.  We  see 
it  in  the  Latin  Church,  in  the  Greek  Church,  in  Islamism.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  ruling 
principle  of  all  these  communities,  which  have  no  real  love  for  the  Scriptures.  (2)  The 
commandments  of  men.  (a)  They  stand  in  antithesis  to  the  commandments  of  God 
(Matt.  xv.  9 ;  Col.  ii.  22).  (6)  They  evidently  were  of  a  ceremonial  character,  and 
involved  ascetic  peculiarities,  touching  the  question  of  abstinence  from  meats,  and  from 
other  things  created  by  God  for  man's  enjoyment,  (c)  Their  origin  was  evil,  for  they 
sprang  from  men  turning  away  from  the  truth.  It  was  not  merely  Mosaical  prohibi- 
tions with  regard  to  food  that  they  enforced,  but  ascetic  additions  and  exaggerations  in 
the  spirit  of  the  later  Gnosticism.  The  course  of  these  men  was  downward.  They 
were  departing  fast  from  the  gospel. — T.  0. 

Ver.  15. — A  great  counter-principle  against  thin  ascetic  tendency.  "  Unto  the  pure 
all  things  are  pure :  but  to  the  defiled  and  unbelieving  is  nothing  pure;  but  even  their 
mind  and  conscience  are  defiled." 

I.  The  privileges  op  the  pure.  1.  The  pure  are  not  those  ceremonially  pure, 
but  those  (1)  justified  from  all  sin  by  Christ's  righteousness ;  (2)  clean  through  the 
Word  spoken  to  them  ;  (3)  with  hearts  purified  by  faith ;  (4)  with  the  graces  of  faith 
unfeigned,  love  without  dissimulation,  and  hope  without  hypocrisy.  2.  Their  privilege, 
purchased  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  was  the  lawful  liberty  of  using  all  meats  under  the 
gospel  which  were  forbidden  by  the  ceremonial  law.  (1)  Jesus  had  taught  that  defile- 
ment comes  from  the  heart,  not  from  the  shambles  (Luke  xi.  39 — 41).  (2)  The  Church 
solemnly  at  Jerusalem  decreed  the  abolition  of  this  old  distinction  of  meats  (Acts  xv.). 
3.  The  apostle  elsewhere  teaches  the  same  truth.  "  For  meat  destroy  not  the  work  of  God. 
All  things  indeed  are  pure,  but  it  is  evil  for  that  man  that  eateth  with  offence"  (Rom. 
xiv.  20).  All  meats  are  pure  to  the  pure  in  heart.  4.  The  distinction  of  meats  among 
Roman  Catholics  tends  to  the  neglect  of  the  Divine  Law  altogether.  People  on  the  Con- 
tinent go  to  balls  on  the  Lord's  day  who  will  feel  their  souls  in  danger  from  eating  an 
egg  on  Friday.  5.  The  saying  of  the  apostle  has  an  almost  proverbial  cast ;  for  it  asserts 
that  "all  things" — that  is,  more  than  mere  food — may  have  a  purifying  tendency  in 
the  case  of  the  pure.  Nothing  is  unclean  of  itself,  but  good,  and  to  be  received  with 
thanksgiving  (1  Tim.  iv.  3 — 5). 

II.  The  moral  retribution  of  the  impure.  It  is  that  they  pollute  all  they  touch, 
nnd  everything  becomes  the  means  of  increasing  their  depravity.  1.  There  is  nothing 
impure  or  evil  in  creation ;  it  is  in  the  mind  and  heart  of  men ;  these  can  turn  the 
choicest  gifts  of  God  into  the  means  of  moral  defilement.  2.  Unbelief  is  the  fountain 
from  which  all  the  evil  flows ;  for  to  the  "  defiled  and  unbelieving  is  nothing  pure."  The 
worshippers  may,  by  their  distinctions  of  food,  only  foster  pride  and  self-righteous- 
ness ;  tut  all  alike  springs  from  unbelief,  which  disregards  the  authority  of  the  Word 
of  God.  3.  The  impurity  is  not  merely  external,  such  as  many  dread,  but  internal ;  for  it 
extends  to  "  the  mind  and  conscience,"  to  the  whole  intellectual,  volitional,  and  moral 
nature  of  man.  Thus  the  last  safeguard  of  the  soul  disappears,  as  the  retribution  upon 
man's  neglect  of  God,  truth,  and  purity.  There  is  no  longer  a  taste  for  the  simple  truth 
of  the  gospel,  but  a  frightful  facility  for  self-deception. — T.  C. 

Ver.  16. — The  great  contradiction.    The  apostle  here  describes  their  moral  deficiency. 

"  They  confess  that  they  know  God,  but  in  works  they  deny  him." 

I.  They  were  mere  professors  of  religion,  possessing  its  form  but  denting  its 
ioweb.     1.  Their  knowledge  of  God  was  purely  theoretical  or  speculative,  but  they  were 


oh.  1. 1— 16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  13 

practical  atheists.  2.  Hypocrites  often  profess  great  knowledge  of  God.  3.  Even  in 
apostolic  times  the  communion  of  the  Church  was  considerably  mixed.  There  is  nc  trace 
of  a  pure  Church  anywhere  on  earth.  The  Church  in  Crete  had  unbelievers  in  its 
visible  membership. 

II.  Their  denial  of  God  took  a  most  practical  shape.  Their  conduct  gave  the 
lie  to  their  profession.  They  were:  1.  Abominable  in  the  sight  of  God.  They  were 
morally  abandoned.  They  were  as  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God  as  the  idols  of  the 
nations.  2.  Disobedient.  They  were  refractory  and  incorrigible,  despising  all  order 
and  repudiating  obligation.  3.  Beprobate  unto  every  good  work.  They  were  as  useless 
for  the  service  of  God  as  reprobate  silver,  which  cannot  bear  the  fire  of  the  refiner. 
(1)  They  did  no  good  works.  (2)  They  had  neither  knowledge  nor  inclination  to  do 
good  works.  (3)  Therefore  they  were  quite  useless  in  the  service  of  God  and 
man— T.  C. 

Ver.  1. — Christian  ministry.  "  A  servant  of  God."  One  of  the  great  revelations 
of  the  gospel  is  the  dignity  of  service.  "  To  be  ministered  unto  "  was  the  end  of 
Roman  ambition.  Pride  and  precedence  ruled  supreme.  The  Jews  sought  to  be 
"Herods ;"  the  Gentiles  sought  for  consulships  and  praetorships.  Everywhere  we  see 
patrician  selfishness  in  proud  palaces,  and,  as  a  dark  opposite,  whole  colonies  of  slaves. 
The  words  that  fell  from  the  lips  of  the  Master  were  illustrated  in  his  life :  "  The  Son 
of  man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom 
for  many." 

I.  A  servant  op  A  strong  Master.  God  1  None  can  stand  against  him.  In  the 
end  sin  will  reveal  its  weakness.  It  may  storm  and  plot  and  fume  against  his  will, 
but  it  is  impotent  at  heart.  "  The  Lord  reigneth."  The  dominion  of  sin  is  undermined, 
and  through  the  cross  its  leadership  in  the  prince  of  this  world  is  destroyed.  Christ  is 
"  henceforth  expecting  till  his  enemies  be  made  his  footstool."    He  must  reign  1 

II.  A  servant  of  a  kind  Master.  One  who  will  not  expect  more  service  than  we 
can  render,  and  who  knows  and  appreciates  the  kind  of  service  we  can  render,  and  who 
will  "  reward  every  man  according  to  his  works."  Kind  in  the  law  of  service,  which 
is  a  law  of  blessedness ;  causing  it  to  be  not  a  yokedom,  but  the  joy  of  a  child's  freedom. 
"Blessed  are  they  that  do  his  will."  Happiness  never  to  be  attained  when  sought  as 
an  end :  is  here  found  in  the  highway  of  duty. 

III.  A  servant  of  a  faithful  Master.  One  who  will  stand  by  his  servants  in  all 
times  of  disheartenment,  obloquy,  and  difficulty.  One  who  keeps  his  promises,  so  that 
they  are  all  "  Yea  and  Amen  in  Christ  Jesus."  Ever  faithful  to  his  holy  tryst.  "  Draw 
nigh  unto  God,  and  he  will  draw  nigh  unto  you."  Faithful  to  his  vouchsafed  protection. 
"  Giving  the  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways."  Faithful  to  the 
great  Messianic  promise,  that  to  his  Son  "  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be."  Paul 
gloried  in  such  a  service,  and  he  would  have  Titus  know  him  by  no  higher  name  than 
"  a  servant  of  God."— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  1. — Truth  and  life.  "The  truth  which  is  after  godliness."  This  was  to  be 
"  acknowledged  "  or  obeyed.  For  truth  is  not  a  library  for  the  leisurely,  or  a  mine  for 
the  curious.  It  is  the  present  truth — the  practical  truth;  a  truth  that  is  always  to  be 
translated  into  life. 

I.  This  is  a  Divine  test  of  truth.  "After  godliness."  Like  inspiration,  it  is  profitable 
for  instruction  in  righteousness.  It  is  a  seed  whose  preciousness  is  tested  by  the  golden 
grain  in  its  ripened  ear.  Itdoes  not  produce  a  mere  "pietism"  or  sentimental  emotion- 
alism; it  produces  godliness.  Some  are  valiant  for  theoretical  and  doctrinal  truths 
who  bring  forth  no  "  fruit  unto  holiness."  We  are  able  to  take  the  vantage-ground  of 
Christian  history,  and  to  argue  that  there  are  no  lives  like  Christian  lives :  that  in  this 
type  of  character  are  all  the  essentials  of  godliness — a  life  within,  which  cleanses  the 
heart,  energizes  the  will,  quickens  the  conscience,  elevates  the  taste,  and  purifies  and 
sanctifies  the  life.  This  is  the  Divine  test  of  truth:  "By  their  fruits  ye  shall 
know  them." 

IL  This  is  a  Divine  mark  of  thk  apostolate.  Paul  claims  to  be  "an  apostle 
of  Christ,  according  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect."  He  does  not  say  that  the  evangelists, 
Matthew,  Mark,  Lake,  wad  John,  gave  sacred  and  special  commission  to  him;  for 


14  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  1. 1—16, 

there  is  no  record  that  they  did.  He  does  not  claim,  like  Peter,  to  have  been  with 
Christ  on  the  holy  mount ;  or  to  have  been  with  those  disciples  who  were  with  Christ  at 
his  ascension,  when  "  he  led  them  out  as  far  as  to  Bethany,  and  lifted  up  his  hands  and 
blessed  them,"  or  to  have  heard  the  command  then  given,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world, 
and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  Nor  does  he  rest  his  apostolate  on  anything 
ceremonial  or  formal  alone.  By  the  manifestation  of  the  truth  he  commended  himself 
to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  truth  of  his  message  was  one  ground 
of  authority  and  the  godliness  of  it  another,  and  those  two  bases  of  authority — truth 
and  goodness— are  strong  and  eternal.  None  can  shake  the  temple  built  on  such  granite 
foundations  as  these.  Philosophies  may  change  and  councils  may  err,  but  these  abide 
for  ever.  So  Titus  had  to  learn  that  his  ministry  was  connected  with  a  truth  that  must 
be  lived,  as  well  as  a  truth  that  must  be  taught. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  2. — The  immortal  hope.  "In  hope  of  eternal  life.*  How  often  these  words 
have  been  inscribed  over  the  resting-place  of  the  dead  I  How  restful  they  are! 
How  such  inscriptions  in  the  dark  catacombs  tell  of  the  new  and  blessed  era  that 
Christianity  introduced !  But  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  connect  them  only  with  heaven. 
"  This  is  life  eternal,"  we  read,  "  to  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom 
.thou  hast  sent" 

I.  Hope  and  mfe  abb  hbeb  connected.  It  was  not  so  in  paganism.  Men  lost 
hope.  They  lived  in  and  for  the  present  day,  and  when  tired  of  life  committed  suicide. 
Hope,  such  as  the  great  Christian  hope,  brightens  all  human  duties  and  joys.  Life  is 
real  and  earnest,  all  through  the  years.  Age  does  not  dim  the  brightness  of  the  eye 
of  the  soul.  So  "we  are  saved  by  hope" — saved  from  ennui,  disheartenment,  and 
misery.  We  find  Paul  rejoicing  in  hope  and  patient  in  tribulation  because  of  the  life 
within,  that  was  hid  with  Christ  in  God. 

II.  Service  re  associated  with  eteknal  life.  Paul  is  a  servant  of  God,  and 
that  service  is  quickened  by  faith  and  sustained  by  hope.  The  Christian  teacher  sees 
not  only  man  in  his  fall  and  misery,  but  he  sees  the  ideal  man  in  him — one  who  may 
be  re-created  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  desert  blossoms  as  the  rose,  as  hope  cheers  the 
sower  who  plants  the  immortal  seed  of  the  kingdom  in  human  hearts.  The  measure 
of  our  life  is  the  measure  of  (1)  the  cheerfulness  and  (2)  the  continuance  of  our  service. 
And  what  hope  I    It  includes  glory,  honour,  immortality,  and  eternal  life. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  2. — The  Divine  veracity.  "  God,  who  cannot  lie."  Man  can  lie.  Man  does 
lie.  His  word  is  not  always  his  bond.  He  indulges  in  exaggeration.  He  tells  half- 
truths,  which  are  ever  the  worst  of  lies. 

I.  Some  things  God  cannot  do.  He  who  gave  the  moral  Law  embodies  in  himself 
that  Law.  He  cannot  do  that  which  is  untrue,  unrighteous,  unjust  I  "  God  is  not  a 
man,  that  he  should  lie ;  neither  the  son  of  man,  that  he  should  repent."  This  is  our  con- 
solation in  trouble.  God  is  faithful,  who  hath  promised — faithful  in  all  that  is  exquisitely 
minute  as  well  as  all  that  is  magnificently  great.  And  in  the  wide  sweep  of  the  Divine 
promises  we  may  find  our  rest  in  all  times  of  tribulation.  "  All  the  promises  of  God  in 
him  [in  Christ]  are  Yea  and  Amen,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father."     He  cannot  lie. 

II.  Some  things  that  we  too  often  do.  1.  Carry  our  own  cares,  because  we  will 
not  trust  our  Father,  and  cast  all  our  care  on  him.  2.  Recall  our  past  sins,  and  so 
torture  our  hearts  with  remembrance  of  them,  when  God  has  said  that  he  has  blotted 
them  all  out,  and  will  remember  them  against  us  no  more.  3.  Lose  the  bright  vision  of 
heaven,  and  so  become  cast  down  in  old  age,  forgetting  that  there  can  be  no  suppressio 
veri,  or  suppression  of  truth,  with  our  Saviour.  "I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you;  (f  it 
were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you."  This  should  be  the  rest  of  our  hearts,  if  we  have 
believed  in  Christ  to  the  salvation  of  our  souls,  M We  are  in  him  that  is  true" — 
W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  2. — The  Divine  foresight.  "  Before  the  world  began."  This  is  one  of  the 
glories  of  the  gospel.  It  foresees  all  events  in  history,  and  provides  for  all  the  necessities 
of  a  being  who  is  born  to  be  redeemed. 

L  There  aee  no  afteb-thoughts  with  God.  Our  vision  is  imperfect.  Our  plans 
miscarry,  because  we  have  not  taken  in  all  aspects  of  the  future.    Sometimes  our  pro- 


bh.i.1— 18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  15 

vision  for  that  future  is  too  limited ;  sometimes  it  is  ill  adapted,  and  we  say,  had  we 
foreseen,  we  could  have  avoided  disappointment,  disaster,  and  defeat.  All  the  future 
lies  clearly  before  the  omniscient  gaze  of  God.  "  The  Lamb  was  slain  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world." 

II.  God's  purposes  ake  revealed  in  his  pbomisbs.  Not  before  the  earth  began, 
but  before  the  world  began — the  world  of  busy  men  and  women ;  the  world  of  toil  and 
strife,  of  sin  and  sorrow,  and  the  developments  of  guilt  and  grief.  Then  it  was  that 
God  declared  that  "the  Seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head."  This 
involves  all.  Sin  would  have  involved  death ;  but  the  eternal  life  which  St.  Paul  speaks 
of  here  was  the  gift  of  God  in  the  incarnate  Saviour.  "  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee 
the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  3. — The  Divine  proclamation.  "But  hath  in  due  times  manifested  his  Word 
through  preaching,  .  .  .  according  to  the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour."  The 
entire  dispensation  of  Divine  mercy  from  the  earliest  ages  is  a  manifestation,  or  a 
"  showing  forth."  This  takes  place  in  God's  own  way  and  in  God's  own  time.  We 
who  are  Christians  now  wait  for  "  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God." 

I.  There  is  always  a  due  time.  The  clock  of  time  is  set  to  the  order  of  Divine 
events.  Generations  give  place  to  the  age,  and  the  age  to  the  day,  and  the  day  to  the 
hour.  "  Father,  the  hour  is  come."  This  was  the  fulness  of  time.  Then  the  Romans 
had  prepared  the  roads  for  the  ambassadors  of  Christ  to  travel ;  and  the  Greeks  had 
provided  a  perfect  language  for  the  written  record  of  the  revelation ;  and  the  dispersed 
Jews  had  circulated  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  and  had  settled  in  foreign  lands 
and  planted  synagogues ;  and  Philosophy  had  confessed  her  failures  in  the  opinion  of 
her  leaders,  that  there  must  be  a  Divine  Deliverer,  if  deliverance  comes  at  all ;  so  that 
when  men  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  it  pleased  God  in  such  a  fulness  of  time  to  send 
forth  his  Son. 

II.  These  will  always  be  the  pbeacheb.  Truth,  like  the  gospel,  needs  a  loving 
heart  and  a  living  voice  and  a  living  experience  to  utter  its  sweet  enchantments.  It 
has  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  such  as  believe.  That  is  to 
say,  what  the  world  calls  foolishness.  But  men  will  always  listen  to  and  love  the 
human  voice  when  charged  with  truth  and  tenderness  and  pity.  The  press  is  doing 
a  ni.ble  work,  but  it  will  not  supplant  the  pulpit.  Style  changes,  and  methods  change ; 
but  God  *  fashioneth  their  hearts  alike."  Dickens  spoke  his  own  works,  and  thousands 
nocked  to  hear.  Carlyle  and  Emerson  both  acknowledge  the  mighty  and  immortal 
power  of  speech.  A  preaching  which  has  intellect,  conscience,  and  heart  in  it,  and 
which  is  rilled  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ  and  the  cross,  will  never  become  effete.  It  is 
God's  own  way,  and  his  ways  are  higher  than  our  ways. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  4. — Believed  in  everywhere.  "  The  common  faith."  Amid  all  diversities  there 
is  unity.  In  this  sense  we  know  that  what  is  called  "Catholic"  authority  rests  on  what 
was  believed  "always,  everywhere,  and  by  all."  Theories  of  religion  vary,  but  the 
great  facts  and  doctrines  are  the  things  which  cannot  be  shaken,  and  still  remain.  The 
word  "  faith  "  is  sometimes  used  for  that  experience  of  the  soul  which  we  call  trust, 
and  as  such  is  an  inward  reception  of  Christ  and  his  cross;  but  it  is  also  used,  and  is 
so  used  here,  as  descriptive  of  the  gospel  revelation  itself. 

I.  The  apostles  die,  but  the  faith  bemains.  We  are  not  disciples  of  Paul,  or 
Barnabas,  or  Timothy,  or  Titus,  but  of  Christ.  These  apostles  did  not  draw  men  to 
themselves,  but  to  Christ.  They  were,  as  Paul  declares,  "  ministers  by  whom  ye  believed.'- 
To  be  in  the  true  succession  is  to  have  the  spirit  of  the  apostles,  and  to  hold  the  faitk 
of  the  apostles.  So  far  as  the  gospel  has  been  perverted  by  mediaeval  superstition  oi 
the  earlier  traditions  of  the  fathers,  it  is  not  the  common  faith.  An  inspired  revelation 
of  truth  enables  us  in  every  age  to  preserve  the  common  faith.  As  the  philosophic 
Coleridge  said, "  It  is  evident  that  John  and  Paul  held  Christ  to  be  Divine."  The 
glorious  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  is  preserved  to  us  intact  by  the  holy  Gospels  and 
the  Epistles,  and  men  true  to  the  Bible  harmonize  in  their  acceptance  of  "the 
common  faith." 

II.  The  life  of  the  true  Chuboh  is  the  same  in  every  age.  The  root  must 
be  the  same,  beoiuse  the  fruit  is  the  same.     First  truth  and  then  life.     The  cry  for 


16  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  l  1—16. 

forgiveness,  and  the  peace  that  comes  through  the  cross.  The  power  of  the  atonement 
to  crucify  selfishness,  and  to  lead  men  to  live  as  not  their  own.  The  consciousness  of 
human  impotence,  and  of  the  might  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  inner  man.  All  these 
are  inward  experiences  of  life,  resulting  from  a  common  faith.  Added  to  these  are  the 
experiences  which  attest  life  in  conduct.  We  know  the  same  artist's  touch  in  the 
picture,  the  same  sculptor's  hand  in  the  moulding  of  a  figure,  the  same  architect's 
design  in  the  buildings ;  and  we  know  Christians  by  the  "  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God," 
producing  those  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit "  which  attest,  in  their  beauty  and  their  purity, 
the  energy  and  the  sanctity  of  the  Divine  life.  It  is  "  the  common  faith  "  which  gives 
to  Christians,  in  every  land  and  every  age,  the  same  likeness  to  their  Lord. — W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  5. — Apostolic  preparation.  "  Set  in  order  the  things  that  are  wanting."  Chris- 
tian life  is  destined  for  development  and  for  continuance.  To  this  end  the  Church  is  to 
be  the  centre  alike  of  evangelistic  effort  and  of  Christian  culture.    Here  is — 

L  The  justification  or  the  Ecclesia,  or  the  "  Church."  "  And  ordain  elders  in 
every  city."  The  New  Testament  gives  no  sanction  to  the  idea  that  an  unorganized 
Christianity  is  the  simplest  and  the  best.  The  precedents  of  the  early  Christian  Church 
were  to  be  faithfully  adhered  to.  Whether  the  organization  of  the  Church  was  to  be  a 
growth  conditioned  by  the  circumstance  of  every  age,  is  a  question  we  do  not  here 
discuss ;  but  that  there  was  to  be  organization  is  here  settled  for  ever.  The  expression, 
"  in  every  city,"  shows  that  the  life  of  the  Church  was  not  to  be  spasmodic,  but  settled. 

II.  There  must  be  life  as  well  as  organization.  This,  too,  is  manifest  here. 
Christians  were  enjoying  "  grace,  mercy,  and  peace ; "  were  "  renewed  in  the  spirit  of 
their  minds."  Divine  life  comes  from  faith  in  Christ  alone,  and  is  not  dependent  upon 
aught  else.  The  declaration  of  Paul  is  there  always  and  everywhere,  "Believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  We  are,  therefore,  to  recognize  the  fruits 
of  the  Spirit  everywhere,  whether  the  gardens  in  which  they  grow  be  according  to  our 
plan  and  ideal  or  no.  But  as  all  Christian  life  needs  constant  care  and  discipline,  as 
the  disciple  needs  teaching,  and  the  justified  need  sanctification,  so  there  was  to  be  the 
"  setting  in  order "  of  all  that  we  mean  by  the  organized  Christian  Church ;  not  that 
every  detail  is  to  be  binding,  or  to  be  reproduced  by  every  Church  in  every  age. — 
W.M.S. 

Vers.  7 — 9. — The  overseen.  "  For  a  bishop,"  etc.  Here  we  have  the  moral  qualifi- 
cation necessary  for  an  overseer  or  bishop  of  the  Churches.  These  bishops  were 
to  be  an  order  by  themselves,  not,  as  Baxter  would  have  them, "  Primus  inter  pares," 
or  "  first  among  equals."  Each  overseer  who  was  naturally  placed  in  a  leading  city 
ought,  from  his  prominence  as  overseer  of  the  district,  to  be  a  ministerial  example  to  his 
brethren.  The  practical  counsels  here  given  apply  equally  to  all  aspects  of  the  "  over- 
seer," or  bishop. 

L  The  bishop  at  home.  Polygamy  was  so  widespread  that  it  could  not  be  arrested 
and  done  away  with  at  once.  But  the  bishops,  as  leaders  of  men,  were  to  set  the 
example.  Polygamy,  like  slavery,-  was  to  be  destroyed  by  the  influence  of  the  cross — 
by  the  crucifixion  of  human  selfishness,  and  the  realization  of  God's  ideals  in  the 
dignity  of  woman  and  in  the  sacredness  of  human  life.  "  Having  faithful  children,"  to 
whom  "riot,"  or  the  indulgence  of  unruly  appetites  and  habits,  was  unknown. 

H.  The  bishop  as  a  steward.  Having  elevated  position  and  large  opportunity  for 
"ood.  We  must  remember  that  character  makes  the  good  steward,  not  ex-cathedra 
commands  and  exhortations.  "  Not  self-willed ; "  but  remembering  that  the  measure  of 
his  power  is  to  be  the  measure  of  his  humility.  "  Not  soon  angry ; "  for  if  there  be  no 
self-repression,  if  the  volcanic  fires  of  the  heart  be  not  subdued,  it  will  be  of  no  use 
for  him  to  preach  about  the  cross  which  crucifies  self.  "Not  given  to  wine;"  for 
intemperance  bereaves  a  man  alike  of  reason  and  of  religion.  "  No  striker ; "  for  although 
the  Romans  of  that  day  used  their  power  over  slaves  and  dependents  by_  buffeting  them, 
and  sometimes  killing  them,  the  servant  of  Christ  must  be  gentle'  unto  all  men. 
"  Not  given  to  filthy  lucre ; "  for  covetousness  kills  other  virtues,  and  draws  by  its 
tap-root  all  nourishment  from  the  plants  of  grace. 

III.  The  bishop  as  a  brother.  "  A  lover  of  hospitality."  Remembering  how  many 
would  like  to  share  his  counsels,  to  walk  in  the  light  of  his  influence,  and  to  be  refreshed 


oh.  i.  1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  17 

by  Ms  sympathies.  "  A  lover  of  good  men."  Not  great  men,  merely  as  men  of  gtniut 
and  power}  but  men  whose  hearts  were  true  and  pure.  "  Sober,  just,  holy,  temperate  * — 
•  "  city  that  lieth  four-square." 

IV.  The  bishop  as  a  teacher.  Not  indulging  in  novelties  or  new  philosophies. 
Not  a  creator  of  truth,  but  a  teacher  of  it,  remembering  that  he  is  a  trustee  of  truth. 
"  Holding  fast  the  faithful  Word  as  he  hath  been  taught." 

Finally,  we  see  that  all  was  not  so  harmonious  and  peaceful  even  in  theearly  Church ; 
for  the  bishop  is  to  exhort  and  convince  the  gainsayers,  which  show  that  he  must  be 
"  able  "  as  well  as  "  good."— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  15. — Pure-heartedness.  "Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure."  The  gospel 
centres  morality  as  well  as  religion  in  the  heart.-  Men  of  corrupt  tastes  cannot  have 
correct  morals,  because  a  man  may  sin  against  himself  as  well  as  against  society. 
An  impure  heart  makes  an  impure  world  of  its  own  within ;  and  that,  if  it  hurts  none 
else,  hurts  the  man  himself,  wrongs  his  own  soul.  Here  we  see  that  the  eye  sees  what 
it  wishes  to  see,  or  what  the  inward  taste  desires  to  see.  A  pure  man  does  not  under- 
stand the  double  entendre ;  does  not  see  the  vision  of  evil  beneath  the  veil  of  words 
or  the  disguise  of  art. 

L  The  first  requirement.  "  A  pure  heart."  Hake  the  tree  good.  A  bad  man 
will  find  impure  suggestion  anywhere  and  everywhere — even  in  religious  literature,  even 
in  the  unsuspecting  words  of  holy  men — for  his  heart  is  not  renewed.  So  possible  is  it 
for  men  to  find  evil  even  in  things  good. 

II.  The  great  safeguard.  "  All  things  are  pure."  There  is  no  false  delicacy.  No 
prudery,  no  affectation.  In  meditation  or  conversation  they  catch  no  stain  of  defile- 
ment from  the  subjects  they  are  mentally  brought  into  contact  with.  Their  safety  is 
from  within ;  for  "  out  of  the  heart  are  the  issues  of  life." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  15. — Inner  defilement.  "But  unto  them  that  are  defiled  and  unbelieving  is 
nothing  pure;  but  even  their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled."  This  is  the  worst 
Nemesis  of  evil ;  it  hurts  the  man.  We  can  injure  the  physical  senses — the  eye, 
the  ear ;  so  we  can  injure  the  mind  and  the  moral  senses. 

I.  The  description  of  character.  Why  this  couplet?  " Defiled  and  unbelieving '' 
seems  at  first  a  strange  combination  of  ideas.  Not  so.  To  defile  is  to  march  off — to 
file  away  from.  So  men  leave  the  King's  highway  of  holiness,  purity,  truth,  and  righteous- 
ness ;  and  they  do  this  because  they  are  unbelieving.  They  will  not  accept  the  revelation 
of  God,  that  sin  is  loss,  shame,  misery,  death ;  and  that  holiness  is  happiness  and  life 
eternal. 

II.  The  dread  issue.  Nothing  is  pure.  All  waters  take  the  colour  of  the  soil  over 
which  they  pass.  The  stained  windows  make  a  stained  light.  An  impure  heart  colours 
everything — thought,  imagination,  observation,  conversation,  and  common  life.  And 
this  is  the  doom!  Their  mind  and  conscience  are  defiled.  They  feel  it.  They  know  it, 
and  at  times  they  confess  it.  Many  shrink  from  themselves  who  have  never  had 
resolution  to  seek  him  who  can  "  create  a  clean  heart  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within 
them."— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — Redemptive  truth.  "  Paul,  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  apostle  of  Jesus 
Christ,"  etc.  These  words  direct  our  attention  to  certain  phases  of  redemptive  truth. 
The  substratum  of  the  gospel  is  not  merely  truth,  but  redemptive  truth.  Truth,  not 
merely  to  enlighten  the  intellect  and  to  discipline  the  mental  faculties,  but  to  raise  the 
human  soul  from  spiritual  ignorance  to  intelligence,  from  spiritual  bondage  to  liberty, 
from  selfishness  to  benevolence,  from  materialism  to  spirituality,  from  the  "  prince  of 
darkness  "  to  the  true  and  living  God.     Here  it  appears — 

1.  As  A  grand  enterprise.  1.  An  enterprise  devoted  to  the  highest  purpose.  What 
is  the  purpose  ?  It  is  here  described :  (1)  As  the  promotion  of  the  faith  of  God's  elect. 
"  According  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect."  The  idea  is,  perhaps,  the  furtherance  of  true 
faith  amongst  those  to  whom  God  had,  in  the  exercise  of  his  sovereignty,  sent  the 
gospel.  As  a  fact,  all  men  have  not  had  the  opportunity  of  receiving  the  gospel ;  indeed, 
only  an  insignificant  fraction  of  the  race  have  had  it  brought  to  them.  This  fraction 
is  a  class  so  highly  privileged  that  they  may  be  designated  the  "elect."    Why  should 

TITUS.  c 


18  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  1. 1—16. 

they  have  the  gospel  sent  to  them,  and  not  others  ?  Ask  why  some  should  inherit 
health,  others  disease ;  some  wealth,  others  poverty ;  some  intellectual  powers  of  a  high 
order,  others  minds  hut  little  removed  from  brute- intelligence.  "All  these  worketh 
the  selfsame  Spirit,  devising  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will."  Now,  to  further  and 
promote  faith  among  those  to  whom  the  gospel  goes  is  one  of  its  grand  purposes.  (2) 
As  the  promotion  of  the  knowledge  "  of  the  truth  which  is  after  [according  to]  godli- 
ness." More  accurately  rendered,  "The  knowledge  of  the  truth  which  is  beside,  or 
which  leadeth  to  godliness "  (Ellicott).  The  grand  purpose  here  indicated  seems  to 
be  that  all  who  are  divinely  favoured  with  the  gospel  should  so  believe  it,  and  practise 
it,  that  they  may  become  godly  in  their  lives.  What  a  sublime  design  is  this,  to  make 
men  God-like !  Or,  as  it  is  expressed  in  the  next  chapter,  "  The  grace  of  God  hath 
appeared  to  all  men,  teaching  us  that,  denying  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberly, 
righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world."  2.  An  enterprise  employing  the  highest 
human  agency.  "Paul,  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ."  "Paul's 
mode  of  designating  himself  here,"  says  Dr.  Fairbairn,  "does  not  exactly  coincide  with 
his  form  of  expression  in  any  other  Epistle.  Elsewhere  he  calls  himself  a  servant, 
a  bondman  of  Christ  (Rom.  i.  1 ;  Gal.  i.  10 ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  Col.  iv.  12),  but  here  only  of 
God.  A  noteworthy  variation,  not  on  its  own  account,  but  as  a  mark  of  genuineness ; 
for  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  what  motive  could  have  induced  any  imitator  to  depart 
in  such  a  manner  from  the  apostle's  usual  phraseology.  The  S4  coupling  his  calling  as 
an  apostle  of  Christ  with  his  relation  to  God  as  a  servant,  cannot  be  taken  in  an  adver- 
sative sense,  for  there  is  really  no  opposition ;  but  it  is  used,  as  not  unfrequently,  to 
subjoin  something  new,  different  and  distinct  from  what  precedes,  though  not  strictly 
opposed  to  it."  Paul  was  one  of  the  greatest  of  men.  In  natural  endowments,  pene- 
trating insight,  vigour  of  thought,  logical  force,  and  rhetorical  aptitude,  he  had  in  his 
age  but  few  equals.  His  acquirements,  too,  were  great.  Brought  up  at  the  feet  of 
Gamaliel,  acquainted  with  Grecian  culture,  and  master  of  rabbinic  law,  he  could  stand 
side  by  side  with  the  greatest  reasoners,  sages,  and  orators  of  his  time.  But,  beyond 
all  this,  he  was  specially  called  and  qualified  by  God  for  propagating  the  gospel  of  his 
Son.  There  is  no  enterprise  on  this  earth  demanding  a  higher  kind  of  human  agency 
than  the  gospel,  nor  (notwithstanding  the  mental  feebleness  and  the  moral  meanness 
of  the  thousands  in  every  age  who  have  worked,  and  are  working,  in  connection  with 
it)  can  there  he  found  a  higher  class  of  men,  both  intellectual  and  moral,  than  some 
who  have  been,  and  still  are,  employed  in  indoctrinating  men  with  the  truths  of  the 
gospel. 

IL  As  A  transcendent  peomise.  "  In  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  that  [who] 
cannot  lie,  promised  before  the  world  began  [times  eternal]."  This  promise  is:  1. 
Transcendent  in  value.  "  Eternal  life."  This  means  something  more  than  an  endless 
existence.  An  interminable  existence  might  be  an  interminable  curse.  It  means  not 
only  an  existence  without  end,  but  an  existence  without  evil,  without  sin,  error,  sorrow, 
misery.  Ay,  and  more  than  this,  an  endless  existence  in  connection  with  good,  and 
with  good  only,  with  knowledge,  holiness,  liberty,  and  companionship  with  the  best 
created  spirits,  and  with  the  great  God  himself.'  Eternal  life  is  eternal  goodness. 
2.  Transcendent  in  certitude.  It  is  made  by  God,  "  that  cannot  lie."  Are  not  all 
things  possible  with  him?  Yes,  in  what  may  be  called  a  physical  sense.  It  is  possible 
for  him  to  destroy,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  the  present  creation,  and  to  produce 
a  new  one.  But,  in  a  moral  sense,  there  is  an  impotency.  His  *'  cannot"  here  is  his 
will  not,  and  his  "  will  not "  is  his  glory.  A  higher  eulogy  you  cannot  pronounce  on  any 
man  than  to  say  he  cannot  be  ungenerous,  he  cannot  be  false,  he  cannot  be  unjust,  he 
cannot  be  dishonourable.  Inability  to  do  wrong  is  the  glory  of  the  Infinite.  This 
promise,  then,  cannot  fail ;  it  must  be  realized.  "  Till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot 
or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  away."  3.  Transcendent  in  age.  "  Promised  before 
the  world  began  [times  eternal]."  When  was  that  ?  Before  the  foundation  of  the 
earth  was  laid,  or  the  wheels  of  time  began  their  revolutions.  When  he  occupied  the 
boundlessness  of  immensity  alone.  The  gospel  is  an  old  promise :  the  Lamb  was 
slain  "  before  the  foundation  of  the  world"    The  gospel  is  not  a  threat,  but  a  promise. 

III.  As  a  gbadual  KEVELATION.  "  But  hath  in  due  times  [in  his  own  seasons] 
manifested  his  Word  through  preaching,  [in  the  message]  which  is  committed  unto  me 
[wherewith  I  was  entrusted]  according  to  the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour." 


ch.l1— 16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUa  19 

There  are  three  thoughts  here  suggested  concerning  the  revelation  of  this  promise  of 
eternal  life.  1.  It  was  manifested  at  a  proper  time.  "In  due  times  [in  his  own 
seasons]  manifested  his  Word."  God  has  a  season  for  everything,  everything  in  the 
material  and  the  moral.  Nothing  but  sin  appears  in  his  universe  that  does  not  come 
"according  to  his  time."  Oceans  ebb  and  flow,  planets  perform  their  revolutions, 
kingdoms  rise  and  fall,  generations  come  and  go  "according  to  his  time."  He  had 
a  time  for  the  revelation  of  his  redemptive  truth,  and  when  the  time  dawned  it  beamed 
on  the  world.  2.  It  was  manifested  by  apostolic  preaching.  "Through  preaching.' 
Redemptive  truth  came  into  the  world  through  man,  and  it  is  Heaven's  design  that  it 
should  be  propagated  through  the  world  by  man.  It  is  to  be  preached,  not  only  with 
the  lips,  but  by  the  life.  The  true  preacher  must  incarnate  it.  His  life  must  illustrate 
and  confirm  the  doctrine  that  his  lips  declare.  It  was  before  the  gospel  came  to  men 
in  written  documents  that  it  won  its  greatest  victories.  Some  think  that  too  much 
importance  is  attached  to  the  Bible  in  this  work,  and  that  it  is  vain  to  expect  that  the 
circulation  of  the  Scriptures  will  answer  the  end.  History  shows  it  has  not  done  se, 
and  the  philosophy  of  the  work  explains  the  reason ;  hence  it  must  be  revealed  in  the 
voice  and  the  life.  3.  It  was  manifested  by  the  Divine  command.  "  Which  was  com- 
mitted unto  me  [wherewith  I  was  entrusted]  according  to  the  commandment  of  God 
our  Saviour."  The  Divine  command  came  to  the  apostle  to  preach  the  gospel  at 
various  times — came  to  him  on  the  road  to  Damascus,  came  to  him  in  the  temple  at 
Jerusalem,  came  to  him  in  the  ship  on  the  Adriatic.  Yes ;  the  Divine  command  comes 
to  all :  "  Go  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel."  Not  only  was  it  by  command 
that  Paul  preached  to  mankind,  but  now  to  Titus. 

IV.  As  a  love-begetting  powEB.  "To  Titus,  mine  own  son  [my  true  child]  aftei 
the  common  faith."  "  Mine  own  son."  What  an  endearing  expression !  The  gospel 
converter  becomes  the  father  in  the  highest  and  divinest  sense  of  the  converted.  No 
relation  bo  close,  vital,  and  tender  as  the  spiritual  relation  of  souls.  Paul's  desire  is, 
for  Titus,  "Grace,  mercy,  and  peace,  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  our  Saviour."  Here  is  the  wish  of  heavenly  philanthropy,  a  philanthropy  that 
embraces  the  complete  and  everlasting  well-being  of  its  object.  Having  the  "  grace, 
peace,  and  mercy  "  of  God,  we  have  everything  we  require ;  we  have  "  all  and  abound." 

Conclusion.  Prize  this  redemptive  truth,  practise  this  redemptive  truth,  preach 
this  redemptive  truth.    It  is  the  "power  of  God  unto  salvation." — D.  T. 

Vers.  (5 — 9. — Church  order.  "  For  this  cause  left  I  thee  in  Crete,  that  thou  shouldest 
set  in  order  the  things  that  are  wanting,"  etc.  Titus  was  now  at  Crete.  "Crete,  over 
whose  Christian  population  Titus  had  been  placed  by  Paul,  was  a  well-known,  large, 
and  populous  island  in  the  Mediterranean.  It  lies  geographically  further  south  than 
any  of  the  European  islands,  and,  roughly  speaking,  almost  at  an  equal  distance  from 
each  of  the  three  Old  World  continents,  Europe,  Asia,  Africa.  We  identify  it  with  the 
Caphtor  of  the  Old  Testament  (Dent.  ii.  23 ;  Jer.  xlvii.  4 ;  Amos  ix.  7).  In  modern 
times  it  is  known  by  us  as  Candia.  Very  early  it  was  the  scene  of  an  advanced 
civilization.  In  the  'Odyssey'  it  is  mentioned  as  possessing  ninety  cities;  in  the 
'  Hiad '  as  many  as  one  hundred.  Metullus  added  it,  b.o.  69,  to  the  Soman  dominion. 
In  the  days  of  Augustus  it  was  united  into  one  province  with  Cyrene.  It  abounded 
with  Jews  of  wealth  and  influence ;  this  we  learn  from  the  testimony  of  Philo  and  of 
Josephus.  It  probably  received  the  gospel  from  some  of  those  of  Crete  who,  we  are 
expressly  told,  were  present  when  the  Spirit  was  poured  on  the  apostles  on  the  first 
Pentecost  after  the  Resurrection  (Acts  ii.  11).  The  apparently  flourishing  state  of 
Christianity  on  the  island  at  this  time  was  in  great  measure,  no  doubt,  owing  to  the 
residence  and  labours  among  them  of  the  Apostle  St.  Paul,  whose  work  appears  to  have 
been  mainly  directed  to  preaching  the  gospel,  and  to  increasing  the  number  of  the 
converts,  which,  from  the  wording  of  ver.  5,  was  evidently  very  great,  elders  being 
required  in  every  city."    The  following  thoughts  are  deducible  from  these  words. 

L  That  ik  jsveby  Christian  community,  these  should  be  the  maintenance  of 
obdeb.  "  Thou  shouldest  set  in  order  the  things  that  are  wanting."  "  The  words," 
says  Dean  Spence,  "  explain  the  cause  of  Titus's  appointment  in  Crete.  The  '  things 
that  are  wanting '  were  what  Paul  meant,  no  doubt,  to  have  done  himself,  but  was 
prevented  by  being  hurried  away ;  for  him  the  end  was  nigh  at  hand.    These  '  things ' 


20  THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  L- 1—16. 


were  want  of  Church  officials,  lack  of  Church  government,  want  of  cohesion  between 
the  Churches  of  the  island ;  in  a  word,  there  was  plenty  of  Christian  life,  but  no  Christian 
organization  as  yet  in  Crete.  It  was  rather  a  number  of  Christian  brotherhoods  than 
one."  "Set  in  order."  God  is  the  God  of  order,  as  witnessed  in  the  harmonious 
operations  of  nature.  Disorder,  both  in  the  mental  and  moral  domains,  is  abnormal 
and  pernicious;  it  implies  evermore  a  deviation  from  the  established  law  of  Almighty 
love.  A  disordered  body  is  diseased,  so  is  a  disordered  soul.  A  disordered  family  lacks 
the  condition  both  of  peace  and  prosperity.  A  disordered  Church,  for  many  reasons,  ia 
the  greatest  of  all  evils.  Confusion  in  a  Church  is  a  calumny  of  Christ,  and  obstructive 
at  once  to  its  peace,  power,  prosperity,  and  usefulness.  "  Order,"  says  Southey,  "  is  the 
sanity  of  the  mind,  the  health  of  the  body,  the  peace  of  the  city,  the  security  of  the 
state.  As  the  beams  to  a  house,  as  the  bones  to  the  microcosm  of  man,  so  is  order  to 
all  things." 

II.  That  the  maintenance  of  Church  order  may  require  the  ministry  of 
special  superintendents.  The  words  "  elder,"  *'  bishop,"  "  pastor,"  etc.,  all  refer  to 
the  same  office,  and  that  office  means  "superintendent,"  or  "overseer."  "These  pres- 
byters were  to  be  most  carefully  selected,  according  to  the  instructions  Titus  must 
remember  Paul  had  given  him  on  some  previous  occasion."  There  was  to  be  some  one 
to  overlook  all.  Such  a  one  is  to  maintain  order,  not  by  legislating  but  by  loving ; 
not  by  the  assumption  of  authority,  but  by  a  humble  devotion  to  the  spiritual  interests 
of  all.  The  ministry  of  such  a  man  is  needed  because  of  the  many  elements  of  discord 
that  exist,  even  in  the  best  communities,  such  as  temper,  self-will,  pride,  etc. 

III.  That  the  superintendents  should  be  men  of  distinguished  excellence. 
"Blameless,"  etc.  The  highest  offices  in  Church  and  state  should  always  be  filled  by 
the  highest  characters.  The  morally  small  man,  elevated  to  a  high  office,  is  an  incon- 
gruity and  a  curse;  and  yet  how  common  is  such  a  sight!  Moral  serfs  on  thrones, 
moral  rogues  on  the  bench,  moral  sycophants  in  the  ecclesiastical  world !  Here  Paul 
denotes  the  style  of  men  required  to  superintend  the  Church.  "  If  any  be  blameless, 
the  husband  of  one  wife,  having  faithful  children  not  accused  of  riot  or  unruly,"  etc. 
"  The  expressions,"  says  Dr.  Fairbairn,  "  indicate  one  possessed  of  that  prudence  and 
self-control,  that  uprightness  of  character,  that  kind,  generous,  disinterested,  gracious 
disposition,  which  were  fitted  to  command  the  respect  and  secure  the  confidence  and 
affection  of  a  Christian  community — one  altogether  such  as  might  serve  for  a  pattern 
to  a  flock  over  whom  he  was  appointed  to  preside,  and  guide  their  affairs  with 
discretion."  The  qualifications  of  this  office  are  here  given  in:  1.  A  negative  form. 
"  Not  self-willed,  not  soon  angry,  not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  given  to  filthy 
lucre."  2.  A  positive  form.  "The  husband  of  one  wife,  having  faithful  children, 
a  lover  of  hospitality,  a  lover  of  good  men,  sober,  just,  holy,  temperate,  holding  fast  the 
faithful  Word  as  he  hath  been  taught"— D.  T. 

Vers.  10 — 14. — TJie  sins  of  the  sect  and  the  sins  of  the  tribe.  "  For  there  are  many 
unruly  and  vain  talkers  and  deceivers,  specially  they  of  the  circumcision,"  etc.  In  the 
preceding  verses  Paul  stated  one  purpose  for  which  he  left  Titus  in  Crete,  viz.  to  set 
in  order  "  the  things  that  are  wanting,"  and  to  ordain  elders  in  every  city.  He  recog- 
nized at  once,  not  only  the  importance  of  order  in  the  new  community,  but  also  the 
importance  of  appointing  men  who,  intellectually  and  morally,  were  qualified  lor  its 
establishment  and  continuance.  In  these  verses  he  gives  Titus  directions  as  to  his 
aggressive  work  in  Crete.  He  was  to  do  battle  with  sin.  "  For  there  are  many  unruly 
[men]  and  vain  talkers  and  deceivers,  specially  they  of  the  circumcision:  whose  mouths 
must  be  stopped,  who  subvert  [overthrow]  whole  houses,  teaching  things  which  they 
ought  not,  for  filthy  lucre's  sake."  The  great  work  of  the  gospel  minister  is  to  do  battle 
with  sin.  In  the  text,  sin  is  referred  to  as  appearing  in  two  aspects,  in  religious  sect 
and  in  national  character. 

I.  In  religious  sect.  "  Specially  they  of  the  circumcision."  These,  undoubtedly, 
are  Judaizing  Christians,  men  who  pretended  to  be  converted  to  Christianity,  men  who 
sought  not  only  to  mingle  Judaic  elements  with  the  new  religion,  but  to  inculcate  and 
disseminate  it  in  that  form.  Observe  the  description  of  sin  as  it  appeared  in  this 
religious  sect — these  men  of  the  circumcision.  Here  is :  1.  Factiousness.  "  Unruly." 
Not  only  would  they  not  bow  to  the  established  order  of  the  Church,  but  not  to  tha 


ch.  1. 1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  21 

spirit  and  principles  of  the  new  religion.  They  would  not  yield  to  the  masterhood  of 
Christ,  the  Author  and  Substance  of  the  gospel ;  they  were  self-willed.  They  would  have 
a  sect  of  their  own.  2.  Ostentation.  "  Vain  talkers."  Vain,  not  merely  in  the  sense 
of  proud,  but  in  the  sense  of  emptiness.  In  truth,  as  a  rule,  the  emptiest  men,  intel- 
lectually, are  at  once  the  most  conceited  and  loquacious.  They  talk,  not  for  the 
edification  of  others,  but  for  the  gratification  of  themselves.  Their  fluency,  whilst  it 
wins  the  admiration  of  fools,  deludes  the  ignorant,  and  disgusts  the  thoughtful.  3. 
Falsehood.  "Deceivers."  All  merely  nominal  Christians  are  deceivers.  They  prac- 
tically misrepresent  the  doctrines  they  profess  to  hold.  4.  Mischievousness.  "  Whose 
mouths  must  be  stopped,  who  subvert  [overthrow]  whole  houses."  "The  translation 
should  run, '  seeing  they  subvert,'  etc.  There  was,  indeed,  grave  cause  why  these  men 
should  be  put  to  silence :  the  mischief  they  were  doing  in  Crete  to  the  Christian  cause 
was  incalculable.  It  was  no  longer  individuals  that  their  poisonous  teaching  affected, 
but  they  were  undermining  the  faith  of  whole  families.  For  an  example  how  Titus 
and  his  presbyters  were  to  stop  the  mouths  of  these  teachers  of  what  was  false,  comp. 
Matt.  xxii.  34 — 46,  where  the  Lord,  by  his  wise,  powerful,  yet  gentle  words,  first  put 
the  Sadducees  to  silence,  and  then  so  answered  the  Pharisees  '  that  neither  durst  any 
man  from  that  day  ask  him  any  more  questions '"  (Dr.  Ellicott).  5.  Greed.  "  Teaching 
things  which  they  ought  not,  for  filthy  lucre's  sake."  All  the  speeches  they  made,  all 
the  influence  they  exerted,  sprang  from  sordid  motives.  Sin  has  a  thousand  branches 
and  but  one  root,  and  that  root  is  selfishness.  How  many,  in  what  we  call  the  religious 
world,  are  found  teaching  things  which  they  ought  not,  for  "  filthy  lucre's  sake  "— 
things  that  gratify  popular  taste,  that  agree  with  popular  prejudice,  chime  in  with  the 
popular  thought  I  All  this  to  fill  their  pews  and  to  enrich  their  coffers.  Now,  these 
gins  which  are  discovered  in  the  religious  sect  are  prevalent  outside  of  all  religions ; 
but  they  receive  a  peculiar  colour,  shape,  enormity,  and  mischievousness  when  we  find 
them  in  the  religious  realm.  The  devil  is  less  hideous  amongst  his  fellows  in  hell  than 
he  is  amongst  the  sons  of  God.  Hence,  to  do  battle  with  sin  in  these  religious  forms  is 
the  grand  work  of  a  true  preacher ;  and  truly,  in  this  age,  and  here  in  England,  he  will 
find  these  sins  on  every  hand.  He  will  see  factiousness  building  up  sects,  and  little 
sects  within  sects;  ostentation — vain  speaking,  braggardism,  sometimes  cooing  and 
sometimes  bawling,  everywhere ;  falsehood — rogues  robing  themselves  in  the  garb  of 
sainthood,  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing;  mischievousness — by  their  empty  words  and 
pernicious  example  subverting  "  whole  houses,"  filling  the  domestic  air  with  poisonous 
cant ;  greed — the  gospel  itself  made  a  trade,  and  vested  interests  created  in  connection 
with  doctrines  and  doings  antagonistic  to  the  life  and  spirit  of  him  whom  they  call 
Master.  Ah  me  I  conventional  religion  is  a  calumny  on  the  religion  of  Christ.  Never 
was  a  Luther  wanted  in  Christendom  more  than  now.  He  is  wanted  to  substitute  the 
pure  gospel  of  Christ  for  the  denominationalized  gospel. 

II.  In  national  character.  "One  of  themselves,  even  a  prophet  of  their  own, 
said,  The  Cretans  are  alway  liars,  evil  beasts,  slow  bellies  [idle  gluttons]."  There  are 
three  sins  mentioned  here  which  seem  to  have  prevailed  amongst  the  Cretans  as  a  race. 
1.  Lying.  "  The  Cretans  are  alway  liars."  Who  made  this  charge  against  the 
Cretans  ?  Paul  says, "  One  of  themselves,  even  a  prophet  of  their  own."  The  quotation 
is  from  a  poem  on  '  Oracles,'  by  Epimenides,  of  Phoestus,  who  flourished  b.o.  600,  lived 
to  the  age  of  a  hundred  and  fifty,  and  was  supposed  to  have  been  a  sleeper  in  a  cave 
for  fifty-seven  years.  He  appears  to  have  deserved  the  title  prophet  in  the  fullest 
sense.  Plato  speaks  of  him  as  a  Divine  man.  The  Cretans  were  characterized  by  the 
sin  of  lying — "alway  liars."  This  expression  was  quoted  by  Callimachus  in  his 
•  Hymn  to  Zeus,'  and  well  known  in  antiquity.  "  The  very  word  'to  Cretize'  (Kretizein), 
or  to  play  the  part  of  a  Cretan,  was  invented  as  a  word  synonymous  with  '  to  deceive,' '  to 
utter  a  lie ; '  just  as  Corinthiazein, '  to  play  the  part  of  a  Corinthian,'  signified  '  to  commit 
a  still  darker  moral  offence.'  Some  writers  suggest  that  this  despicable  vice  of  lying 
was  received  as  a  bequest  from  the  early  Phoenician  colonists."  2.  Sensuality.  "  Evil 
beasts."  Not  only  liars,  but  gross  and  sensual,  living  in  animalism  and  for  it.  All 
men  may  be  called  "  beasts  "  who  attend  to  their  animal  appetites  as  means  of  gratifica- 
tion rather  than  of  relief.  He  who  seeks  happiness  from  his  senses  rather  than  from 
his  soul  is  a  beast ;  he  who  seeks  it  from  without  rather  than  from  within  is  not  better 
than  a  beast.    The  happiness  of  a  true  man  cannot  stream  into  him  from  without ;  it 


22  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TTTUi.  [<n.  1. 1—16, 

must  well  up  from  the  depths  of  his  own  high  thinkings  and  pure  affections.  Gluttony. 
"  Slow  bellies  [idle  gluttons]."  Their  gluttony  made  them  dull,  heavy,  and  indolent. 
Such  are  what  may  be  called  tribal  or  national  sins.  They  were  not  confined  to  the 
Cretans,  but  for  them  the  Cretans  were  notorious.  These  are  national.  But  are  these 
sins  extinct  in  England?  Have  we  no  lying  here?  Our  social  air  is  impregnated  with 
falsehood.  Have  we  no  sensuality  and  gluttony?  Yes,  alas!  tens  of  thousands  are 
every  day  pampering  themselves  with  luxuries,  whilst  millions  are  being  starved  to 
death.  Here,  then,  are  common  sins  with  which  the  preacher  has  to  do  battle.  He  has 
to  "rebuke  them  sharply,  that  they  may  be  sound  in  the  faith." 

Conclusion.  A  true  preacher,  then,  has  no  easy  task.  He  has  to  wage  fierce  battle 
with  the  sins  that  are  around  him — the  sins  of  the  sect  and  the  sins  of  the  tribe.  He 
is  not  to  pander  to  men's  tastes,  nor  to  battle  with  mere  opinions  and  theories,  but  with 
sins;  he  must  "resist  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin."  "For  this  purpose  the  Son  of 
God  was  manifested,  that  he  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil." — D.  T. 

Vers.  15,  16. — The  supreme  importance  of  moral  character.  "Unto  the  pure  all 
things  are  pure :  but  unto  them  that  are  defiled  and  unbelieving  is  nothing  pure,"  etc. 
We  notice,  at  the  outset,  two  facts  suggested  by  the  passage.  1.  That  there  is  an 
essential  difference  in  the  moral  characters  of  men.  There  are  some  "pure"  and  some 
"defiled,"  some  holy  and  some  unholy.  What  is  the  underlying  inspiring  principle 
that  makes  this  difference?  The  predominant  disposition.  Perhaps  there  is  no  moral 
being  in  the  universe  who  is  not  under  the  masterhood  of  some  one  sentiment  or  passion, 
to  which  can  be  traced,  as  to  a  mainspring,  all  the  motions  of  his  being.  This  con- 
trolling tendency  is  the  moral  monarch  of  souls,  or,  in  Scripture  language,  is  the  moral 
"  heart  of  the  man."  This  supreme  disposition  exists  in  all  men  in  two  distinct  and 
opposite  forms,  either  in  sympathy  with  the  true,  the  right,  and  the  spiritual,  or 
in  sympathy  with  the  false,  the  wrong,  and  the  material.  That  soul  alone  is  pure 
whose  governing  sympathy  is  God  and  the  true.  Supreme  love  for  the  supremely  good 
is  the  true  life  of  the  soul,  and  the  fountain  of  all  its  virtues.  He  whose  controlling 
sympathies  run  not  thus,  is  impure  and  corrupt.  2.  That  the  outward  world  is  to  men 
according  to  this  difference.  The  whole  external  universe  is  to  a  man  according  to  the 
moral  state  of  his  soul.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he  " — so  is  he  in 
relation  to  himself,  to  all  without,  and  to  God.  This  being  so,  the  text  teaches  the 
supreme  impoi  tance  of  moral  character.     Let  us  look  at — 

I.  The  morally  puke  in  relation  to  all  things.  "  Unto  the  pure  all  things 
are  pure."  This  is  true  in  relation  to  three  things.  1.  In  relation  to  appearance. 
The  proverb  goes  that  the  greatest  rogues  are  ever  the  most  suspicious.  A  thoroughly 
selfish,  ungodly  soul  will  see  but  little  good  even  in  the  best  men.  It  is  a  law  that 
man  judges  his  fellow  by  himself,  and  the  more  corrupt  a  man  is,  the  more  severe  his 
judgment  on  others.  A  good  man  is  neither  given  to  suspicion  nor  censoriousness ;  he 
sees  some  good  in  all  men.  2.  In  relation  to  influence.  The  influence  of  all  outward 
things  upon  men  is  dependent  on  their  moral  character.  Our  Lord  says,  "  Not  that 
which  goeth  into  the  mouth  defileth  a  man,  but  that  which  cometh  out  of  the  mouth 
rlefileth  a  man."  The  moral  character  is  an  all-transformative  power  in  the  centre 
of  man's  being.  It  turns  the  unclean  into  the  clean,  and  the  reverse.  A  good  man, 
like  the  bee,  can  extract  honey  from  the  bitterest  plant;  or,  like  the  iEolian  harp,  can 
turn  the  shrieking  wind  into  music.  3.  In  relation  to  appropriation.  As  the  body 
lives  by  appropriating  the  outward,  so  does  the  soul ;  and  as  the  effects  of  the  appro- 
priation, whether  universal  or  otherwise,  depend  on  the  condition  of  the  body's  health, 
as  the  appropriation  of  a  diseased  body  only  increases  the  physical  ailment ;  so  with 
the  soul.  A  corrupt  soul  appropriates,  even  from  the  most  strengthening  and  refreshing 
means  of  spiritual -improvement,  that  which  weakens  and  destroys.  Pharaoh  and  his 
Lost  got  moral  mischief  out  of  the  ministry  of  Moses ;  and  the  men  of  Capernaum  were 
pressed  into  a  deeper  and  darker  hell  through  the  elevating  and  enlightening  ministry 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.    Mark,  then,  the  supreme  importance  of  moral  character. 

II.  The  morally  defiled  in  relation  to  all  things.  "  Unto  them  that  are 
defiled  and  unbelieving  is  nothing  pure;  but  even  their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled." 
Here  is  the  converse.  Mark,  in  passing,  three  things.  1.  The  sphere  of  the  defilement. 
"  The  mind  and  conscience."    "  The  mind,"  says  a  modern  expositor,  "  is  the  willing  as 


as.  1. 1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TEF0&  13 

well  as  the  thinking  part  of  man,  as  it  has  been  well  defined  the  human  spirit  (pneuma) 
in  one  of  its  aspects,  not  simply  quatenus  cogitat,  et  mteUigit,  but  also  quatenus  wilt. 
Defilement  of  this  mind  (nous)  means  that  the  thoughts,  wishes,  purposes,  activities, 
are  all  stained  and  debased.  The  second  of  these,  the  conscience  (suneidesis),  is  the 
moral  consciousness  within,  and  that  which  is  ever  bringing  up  the  memory  of  the 
past,  with  its  omissions  and  commissions,  its  errors,  its  cruel,  heartless  unkindness,  its 
selfish  disregard  of  others.  When  this  is  defiled,  then  this  last  safeguard  of  the  soul  is 
broken  down.  The  man  and  woman  of  the  defiled  conscience  is  self-satisfied,  hard, 
impenitent  to  the  last.  Every  part  and  faculty  of  the  soul  is  stained  with  sin.  The 
body  may  be  cleansed  by  ceremonial  ablutions,  and  the  external  manners  and  speech 
kept  pure  by  culture  and  civilization,  but  the  soul  be  black;  the  outside  of  the  "cup 
and  of  the  platter  clean,"  but  inside  full  of  corruption.  2.  The  cause  of  the  defilement. 
"  They  profess  that  they  know  God,  but  in  works  they  deny  him."  There  is  nothing, 
perhaps,  so  morally  defiling  to  the  soul  as  religious  hypocrisy.  The  man  who  with  the 
lip  professes  to  know  God,  and  who  in  the  life  denies  him,  gets  deeper  stains  upon  his 
soul  than  the  agnostic  who  professes  that  he  knows  nothing  about  him.  What  millions 
in  our  churches  every  Sunday  publicly,  at  each  service,  avow  with  their  lip  their  belief 
in  God,  but  in  their  week-day  life  "he  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts "1  Thus  souls  get 
deeply  dyed  in  corruption  in  Christian  churches.  3.  The  hideousness  of  the  defilement. 
"  Being  abominable  and  disobedient,  and  unto  every  good  work  reprobate."  However 
fair  their  conduct  in  the  religious  observances,  they  are  "  abominable  "  within,  hideous 
to  the  eye  of  God.  However  rigorous  in  their  observances  and  religious  ordinances, 
they  are  "disobedient"  in  heart,  they  outrage  moral  laws;  however  useful  they  regard 
themselves  and  appear  to  others,  they  are  "  reprobate,"  they  are  rejected  and  worthless. 
These  "  defiled  "  in  soul  defile  everything  without ;  all  outward  things  in  their  appear. 
ance,  influences,  and  appropriation  are  to  them  corrupt. 

Conclusion.  Mark :  1.  The  natural  sovereignty  of  the  human  soul.  We  are  not 
necessarily  the  creatures  of  the  outward ;  we  have  within  the  power  to  bend  circum- 
stances to  our  will,  to  get  good  out  of  evil,  to  turn  outward  dissonance  into  music, 
deformity  into  beauty,  poison  into  nourishment.  Let  us  adore  our  Maker  for  this 
wonderful  endowment— an  endowment  which  guards  us  from  the  coercion  of  outward 
forces,  secures  to  us  an  inward  freedom  of  action,  and  enables  us  to  put  all  outward 
things  in  subjection  to  our  own  spiritual  selves.  2.  The  dependency  of  the  souTs  destiny 
on  itself.  A  man's  destiny  depends  upon  his  moral  character,  and  his  character  depends 
upon  himself.  As  food,  however  nutritious,  cannot  administer  strength  to  a  man's  body 
without  the  digestive  and  appropriative  power,  so  no  external  influences,  however  good 
and  useful  in  themselves,  can  raise  a  man's  soul  without  the  right  action  of  its  faculties. 
Man  cannot  be  made  good.  His  body  may  be  borne  to  the  summit  of  a  lofty  mountain 
without  the  use  of  his  limbs,  but  if  his  soul  is  to  ascend  "  the  holy  hill  of  the  Lord," 
he  must  climb  it  every  inch  himself.  Fortune  or  patronage  may  raise  him  to  some 
eminent  social  position,  but  he  cannot  reach  a  single  stage  of  moral  dignity — the  true 
dignity  of  man — apart  from  his  own  earnest  endeavours.  The  transformative  power  of 
the  soul  is  to  external  circumstances  what  the  builder  is  to  the  materials  out  of  which 
he  rears  his  edifice.  The  choicest  materials  may  be  brought  together — gold,  marble, 
and  cedar — but  unless  the  builder  use  them  with  artistic  skill  they  will  .never  take  the 
form  of  a  beautiful  structure.  So  the  providence  of  God  may  gather  around  man  all 
the  facilities  and  elements  for  the  raising  of  a  noble  character,  but  unless  he  use  them 
with  his  own  spiritual  hand,  he  will  never  produce  such  a  structure.  3.  The  grand  end 
of  true  teaching.  What  is  that?  The  supreme  importance  of  every  man  obtaining 
a  true  moral  character.  "  Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  thee,  Ye  must  be  born  again. 
In  moral  goodness  of  soul  alone,  can  we  not  only  find  our  heaven,  but  find  our  way 
safely  and  happily  through  this  life.  We  live  in  a  world  of  evil.  We  cannot  escape 
its  sinful  influence  by  endeavouring,  like  the  anchorite,  to  avoid  its  touch.  Whilst 
so  man  should  put  himself  in  the  way  of  temptation,  no  man  should  be  afraid  to 
confront  evil,  to  go  into  its  most  malarial  regions  if  duty  call.  In  truth,  if  man's  well- 
being  depended  upon  escaping  outward  evil,  it  could  never  be  realized,  because  to  live 
in  the  world  he  is  bound  to  live  in  its  midst,  and  evil  must  stream  into  him  every  day. 
How,  then,  is  he  to  reach  a  blessed  destiny  ?  Not  merely  by  endeavouring  to  tram* 
his  life  according  to  the  outward  rules  of  morality  and  religion,  but  by  a  right  use 


24 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS. 


[oh.  n.  1 — 16. 


of  his  own  spiritual  powers.  There  is  a  power  in  the  body,  when  in  a  healthy  state, 
to  appropriate  whatever  goes  into  it  from  external  nature  that  is  wholesome  and  neces- 
sary, and  to  expel  that  which  is  noxious  and  superfluous.  The  soul  has  a  power 
analogous  to  this ;  a  power  to  appropriate  the  wholesome  and  to  expel  the  injurious. 
This  power  we  call  the  transformative.  Let  us  use  it  rightly— use  it  as  Noah  used  it, 
who,  amidst  the  blasphemy  and  ridicule  of  a  corrupt  generation,  walked  with  God,  and 
fulfilled  a  noble  destiny ;  as  Paul  used  it  at  sceptical  Athens,  in  dissolute  Corinth,  and 
in  pagan  Borne,  who  from  experience  left  the  world  this  testimony:  "All  things  work 
together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God." — D.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IL 


Ver.  1. — Befit  for  become,  A.V. ;  the  sound 
for  sound,  A.V.  But  speak  thou,  etc.  Tlie 
apostle  now  brings  out,  in  full  contrast  with 
the  vain  talk  of  the  heretical  teachers,  the 
solid,  sober  teaching  of  a  true  man  of  God,  in 
harmony  with  the  sound  doctrine  of  the 
gospel  of  Christ.  The  sound  doctrine  (rfi 
uyian'ov<TTi  SititurKaKia);  as  in  1  Tim.  i  10 
(where  see  note).  In  1  Tim.  vi.  1  q  SiSa- 
a-Ka\ia  by  itself  means  "the  Christian  faith," 
"  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel."  The  varying 
phrases,  r/  KaX-ij  StSavtcaKia,  tj  kclt1  evtrefSelav 
&t8axrKa\ta,  and  rj  vytaivovtra  SiSatncoAfa,  all 
mean  the  same  thing,  with  varying  descrip- 
tive qualifications  (see  ver.  10).  The 
article  "  the  "  is  not  required. 

Ver.  2. — Aged  for  the  aged,  A.V. ;  tem- 
perate for  sober,  A.V. ;  sober-minded  for  tem- 
perate, A.V. ;  love  for  charity,  A.V.  Tem- 
perate (yT)<j>i\ios) ;  as  1  Tim.  iii.  2  (where  see 
note).  Grave  (tre/xvois);  as  1  Tim.  iii.  8,  11 
(see  too  1  Tim.  ii.  2 ;  iii.  4).  Sober-minded 
(autypovas) ;  as  ch.  i.  8,  note.  Sound  (Jryurii/ov- 
Tar):  see  ver.  1,  note,  and  ch.'i.  13,  where, 
as  here,  the  word  is  applied  to  persons,  as  it 
is  in  its  literal  sense  in  3  John  2.  Faith,  .  . . 
love, . . .  patience.  We  have  the  same  triad 
in  1  Tim.  vi.  11.  In  1  Cor.  xiii.  13  we  find 
"  faith,  hope,  love."  In  1  Thess.  i.  3  the 
apostle  joins  "work  of  faith, labour  of  love," 
and  "  patience  of  hope,"  which  last  phrase 
seems  almost  to  identify  patience  and  hope 
(comp.  too  Rom.  viii.  25 ;  xv.  4).  We  must 
not  miss  the  important  warning,  not  only  to 
have  some  kind  of  faith,  love,  and  patience, 
but  to  be  healthy  and  vigorous  in  our  faith, 
love,  and  patience.  There  is  a  puny  faith, 
a  sickly  love,  and  a  misdirected  patience. 

Ver.  3. — That  for  the,  A.V. ;  be  reverent  in 
demeanour  for  that  they  be  in  behaviour  as 
becometh  holiness,  A.V. ;  slanderers  for  false 
accusers,  A.V. ;  nor  for  not,  A.V. ;  enslaved 
for  given,  A.V. ;  that  which  is  good  for  good 
things,  A.V.  Reverent  (ieponpeirels) ;  only 
here  in  the  New  Testament,  twice  in 
4  Maccabees  (in  ix.  25,  where  the  eldest  of 
the  seven  brothers  who  suffered  martyrdom 
nndor  Antiochns  Epiphanes  is  called  t  Upo- 


Trpeirir  vtwfosi  and  in  xi.  20,  where  it  is 
coupled  with  aid>v,1  "  age,"  or  "  generation"); 
it  is  not  uncommon  in  classical  Greek.  The 
word  means  "becoming  a  holy  person, place, 
or  matter ; "  otherwise  expressed  in  1  Tim. 
ii.  10,  "which  becometh  women  professing 
godliness;"  and  Eph.  v.  3,  "as  becometh 
saints."  In  demeanour  (eV  Karao-T^iari ;  of 
much  wider  meaning  than  kutcutto^  in 
1  Tim.  ii.  7);  here  only  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, once  in  3  Mace.  v.  45,  "a  state"  or 
"  condition,"  spoken  of  elephants ;  and  so 
in  classical  Greek,  applied  to  a  man,  to 
health,  to  the  air,  or  the  body  politic.  Here 
mien,  demeanour,  or  deportment,  including, 
as  St.  Jerome  expounds  it,  the  movements 
of  the  body,  tlie  expression  of  the  counte- 
nance, what  is  paid,  and  what  is  left  unsaid. 
The  whole  habit  and  composition  or  structure 
of  mind  and  body  is  to  be  itf  6irpares,  what 
becomes  a  holy  woman.  Slanderers  (Sia.06- 
Aovs);  as  1  Tim.  iii.  (</».).  Nor  enslaved  to 
much  wine  (comp.  1  Tim.  iii.  8).  Observe 
the  fitness  of  the  phrase  "enslaved."  The 
drunkard  is  thoroughly  the  slave  of  his 
vicious  appetite  (comp.  ch.  iii.  3 ;  Rom.  vi. 
16;  2  Pet.  ii.  19).  Teachers  of  that  whioh 
is  good  (Ka\oSiSa<rKa\ovs) ;  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX.,  or 
in  classical  Greek ;  teachers,  by  their  holy 
demeanour  as  well  as  by  their  words.  For 
as  Ignatius  (quoted  by  Ellicott)  says  of  the 
Bishop  of  the  Trallians,  "  His  very  demean- 
our (abrb  to  KardariifLa)  was  a  great  lesson 
(jiodriTclay 

Ver.  i.-r-Train  for  teach  .  .  .  to  be  sober, 
A.V.  Train  (auxypovlfaat) ;  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX., 
but  common  in  classical  Greek  in  the 
sense  of  to  "  correct,"  "  control,"  or  "  mode- 
rate," which  is  its  meaning  here.  Ellicott 
renders  it  "school"  (comp.  1  Tim.  v.  14). 
The  A.V.  "  teach  to  be  sober  "  is  manifestly 
wrong.  To  love  their  husbands  (<pi\ai>Zpovs 
thai) ;  here  only  in  the  New  Testament,  not 
found  in  the  LXX.,  but  occasionally,  in  this 
sense,  in  classical  Greek.    To  love   their 

1  But  another  and  more  probable  reading 

Is  kydv,  conflict,  struggle. 


oh.  n.  1 — 15.] 


THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITUS. 


215 


children  ((piXoreHvovs);  here  only  in  the 
New  Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX. 
except  in  4  Maoo.  xv.4,  but  not  uncommon 
in  classical  Greek. 

Ver.  5. — Sober-minded  for  discreet,  A.V. ; 
workers  for  keepers,  A.V.  and  T.E. ;  kind 
for  good,  A.V. ;  being  in  subjection  for 
obedient,  A.V.  Sober-minded  (<rui<ppovas); 
as  in  ver.  2  and  ch.  i.  8;  1  Tim.  iii.  2. 
"  Discreet "  is  nearer  the  Bense  than  "  sober- 
minded."  Perhaps  the  French  sage  is  nearer 
still.  Workers  at  home  (olieovpyois,  for  the 
T.R.  oliampois).  Neither  word  occurs  else- 
where in  the  New  Testament  or  in  the 
LXX.,  nor  does  oiicovpy6s  in  classical  Greek. 
But  omovp6s,  which  is  probably  the  true 
reading  (Huther),  is  common  in  good  clas- 
sical Greek  for  "stayers  at  home."  It  is 
derived  from  oIkos  and  oZpos,  a  "keeper." 
Kind  (dyaOds).  The  idea  of  kindness  or 
good  nature  seems  to  be  the  side  of  goodness 
here  intended;  as  we  say,  "He  was  very 
good  to  me  "  (so  Matt,  xx  15  and  1  Pet.  ii. 
18).  Kindness  is  the  leading  idea  in  aya86s. 
Obedient  ({nroTa<rfr6/i.evas).  These  identical 
words  occur  in  1  Pet.  iii.  1  (see  too  Eph.  v. 
22 ;  Col.  iii.  18).  That  the  Word  of  God  be 
not  blasphemed  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  1).  St. 
Paul  complains  that  the  Name  of  God  was 
blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles  on  account 
of  the  evil  deeds  of  the  Jews  (Bom.  ii.  24 ; 
see  Ezek.  xxxvi.  20 — 23).  Our  Lord,  on  the 
other  hand,  exhorts  that  Christians,  by 
their  good  works,  should  lead  men  to  glorify 
their  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  The  pas- 
sage before  us  shows  how  much  the  honour 
of  Christianity  is  bound  up  with  the  faithful 
discharge  by  Christians  of  the  simple 
domestic  duties  of  life.  In  truth,  the  family 
is  the  chief  seat,  and  often  the  main  test, 
of  Christian  virtue,  as  it  is  the  distinctive 
feature  of  humanity  as  ordained  by  God. 

Ver.  6. — The  younger  for  young,  A.V.  The 
younger  (see  1  Pet.  v.  5,  where,  however, 
the  vetbrepoi  are  contrasted  with  the  irparfii- 
repot,  as  in  1  Tim.  v.  1 ;  here  with  irpeo-0v- 
tcm  in  ver.  2). 

Ver.  7. — An  ensample  for  a  pattern,  A.V. ; 
thy  doctrine  for  doctrine,  A.V. ;  B.T.  omits 
sincerity  (cupSaptrlav),  which  is  in  the  T.B. 
In  all  things  (irepl  irdyra);  as  1  Tim.  i.  19 
(rap!  tV  Ttiarai)  ;  "  concerning,  in  the  matter 
of"  (Ellieott  on  1  Tim.  i.  19).  St.  Jerome 
and  others  connect  these  words  with  the 
preceding  clause,  "  to  be  sober-minded  in  all 
things."  But  it  is  usually  taken  as  in  the 
text,  "in  all  things  showing  thyself,"  etc. 
Showing  thyself,  etc.  With  regard  to  the 
somewhat  unusual  addition  of  the  reflexive 
pronoun  to  the  verb  in  the  middle  voice, 
Bishop  Ellieott  remarks,  -  " Emphasis  and 
perspicuity  are  gained  "  by  it.  An  ensample 
(jvirov).  Huther  remarks  thai  this  is  the 
only  passage  in  the  New  Testament  where 


ti'itoi  is  followed  by  a  genitive  of  the  thing. 
In  1  Tim.  iv.  12  the  genitive  is  of  the 
person  to  whom  the  example  is  given,  in 
word,  in  conversation,  etc.,  and  in  1  Pet.  v.  3, 
riiros  row  iroifivlov.  Of  good  works  (comp. 
ch.  iii.  8).  Note  the  stress  laid  by  St.  Paul 
upon  Christian  practice  as  the  result  of 
sound  doctrine.  Mere  talk  is  absolutely 
worthless.  TJncorrnptness  (iupeopiav,  or,  as 
T.B.,  bSuupBoplav);  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  not  in  the  LXX.  or  in 
classical  Greek.  'A<p$opla  has  the  best 
manuscript  authority;  but  the  sense  of  aSia- 
(pBopla  as  deduced  from  the  good  classical 
word  a$ut<p8opos,  which  means  among  other 
things  "  incorruptible" — not  to  be  influenced 
by  entreaties  or  bribes — seems  to  make  it 
preferable.  The  word  describes  the  quality 
of  the  teacher  rather  than  of  his  doctrine. 
He  is  to  preach  the  truth  without  fear  or 
favour.  Gravity  (aenvATnTci);  as  1  Tim.  ii. 
2 ;  iii.  4.  This,  again,  is  a  quality  of  the 
teacher.  These  accusatives  depend  upon 
7rapex<W>'os-  But  the  construction  of  the 
sentence  is  somewhat  irregular  for  brevity's 

Ver.  8.— Us  for  you,  A.V.  and  T.B. 
Sound  speeoh  (\6yov  vyiy) ;  still  depending 
upon  mptxfawos.  Besides  his  personal 
qualities  as  a  teacher,  his  speech,  or  doc- 
trine, must  be  sound.  The  word,  common 
of  bodily  health,  is  only  here  applied  to 
speech  or  doctrine ;  the  common  phrase  in 
the  pastoral  Epistles  is  iyuuvoi&n  StticuriccAia, 
iyiaivovat  Adyots,  and  the  like.  That  cannot 
be  condemned  (dimT&yvaaTov) ;  only  hero  in 
the  New  Testament,  once  in  2  Mace.  iv.  27. 
This  marks  the  care  that  the  Christian 
teacher  must  take  not  to  say  anything  in 
his  teaching  rash,  or  reprehensible,  or  that 
can  give  offence  or  cause  the  ministry  to  be 
blamed  (comp.  1  Tim.  v.  14).  May  be 
ashamed  QvTpairf).  In  the  active  voice 
ivrpdireiv  is  "  to  put  to  shame "  (1  Cor.  iv, 
14),  and  in  classical  Greek.  In  the  middle 
voice  ivrpsTTo/iat,  followed  by  a  genitive  of 
the  person,  or  an  accusative  in  later  Greek, 
means  to  "respect,  reverence"  (Matt.  xxi. 
87 ;  Luke  xviii.  2,  etc.).  In  the  passive,  as 
here  and  2  Thess.  iii.  14,  it  means  '•  to  be 
put  to  shame,"  "to  be  ashamed"  (comp. 
Ps.  xxxiv.  4  [LXX.,  xxxv.  4]).  (Compare,  for 
the  sentiment,  1  Pet.  ii.  15 ;  iii.  16 ;  and  note 
the  frequent  resemblances  between  the  pas- 
toral Epistles  and  those  of  St.  Peter.)  The 
shame  of  the  detractors  consists  in  their 
being  put  to  silence,  having  nothing  to  say, 
being  proved  to  be  slanderers.  No  evil  thing 
(jj.T)$li>  (pavhav) ;  as  Jas.  iii.  16 ;  John  iii.  20 ; 
v.  29.  The  word  means  "  mean,  worthless, 
paltry,"  and  is  hence  synonymous  with 
Katc6s. 

Ver.  9. — In  subjection  to  for  obedient  unto, 
A. V.;    be  well-pleasing  to  them  for  please 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS. 


[oh.  n.  1 — 15 


them  well,  A.V. ;  gainsaying  for  answering 
again,  A.V.  Servants ;  i.e.  slaves  (SoiAovs), 
the  correlative  to  which  is  tariroWais,  masters, 
who  had  absolute  power  over  their  slaves, 
and  property  in  them  (comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  18, 
where  they  are  called  by  the  name  of 
oike'toi,  house-slaves).  The  construction  is 
carried  on  from  the  "exhort"  of  ver.  6. 
Well-pleasing  (cuapeVrous);  elsewhere  spoken 
with  reference  to  God  (Bom.  xii.  1 ;  2  Cor. 
v.  9;  Eph.  v.  10,  etc.).  In  all  things 
(<!i/  vairiv) ;  nearly  the  same  as  irtp\  ttivra  in 
ver.  7 ;  to  be  taken  with  euapeorovs.  Some, 
however,  connect  the  words  with  imrrdairea-Bai, 
"  to  be  obedient  in  all  things."  Gainsaying 
(avTi\4yorras);  as  in  ch.  i.  9  (see  note). 
Here,  however,  the  "  answering  again  "  of  the 
A.V.  is  a  better  rendering.  It  implies,  of 
course,  a  resistance  to  the  will  of  their 
master,  and  impatience  of  any  rebuke 
(comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  18—20). 

Ver.  10. — Purloining  (iw4>i£o/ueVovs);  lite- 
rally, separating  for  their  own  use  what 
does  not  belong  to  them.  So  Acts  v.  2,  3, 
"to  keep  back  part."  It  is  used  in  the  same 
sense  by  the  LXX.  Josh.  vii.  1  of  Achan, 
and  2  Mace.  iv.  32  of  Menelaus,  and  occa- 
sionally in  classical  Greek  (Xenophon, 
Polybius,  etc.).  Showing  (IvBeucvvpivovs). 
It  occurs  eleven  times  in  the  New  Testament, 
viz.  twice  in  Hebrews,  and  nine  times  in 
St.  Paul's  acknowledged  Epistles.  All  good 
fidelity.  All  fidelity  means  fidelity  in  every- 
thing where  fidelity  is  required  in  a  faithful 
servant — care  of  his  master's  property,  con- 
scientious labour,  keeping  of  time,  acting 
behind  his  master's  back  the  same  as  before 
his  face.  The  singular  addition  ayaOiiv, 
coming  after  lvtieucvvp.4vovs,  must  mean,  as 
Bengel  says,  "in  all  good  things."  The 
duty  of  fidelity  does  not  extend  to  crime  or 
wrong-doing.  The  word  "  good  "  is  like  the 
addition  in  the  oath  of  canonical  obedience, 
"  in  all  honest  things,"  and  is  a  necessary 
limitation  to  the  preceding  "  all "  (see  ch. 
iii.  1,  and  note).  The  dootrine  (tV  SiSmrica- 
Klav);  as  in  ver.  1  (where  see  note).  In  ch. 
i.  9  (where  see  note)  r\  Sitiaxj  is  used  in  the 
same  way.  This  use  of  SiSaaicaAta  is  con- 
firmed by  the  reading  of  the  E.T.,  which 
inserts  a  second  rijv  before  toS  <ra>T7jpos. 
Adorn  the  doctrine.  The  sentiment  is  the 
same  as  that  in  1  Pet.  ii.  12;  iv.  11.  Chris- 
tians are  exhorted  to  give  glory  to  God,  and 
support  and  honour  to  the  gospel  of  God's 
grace,  by  their  good  works  and  holy  lives. 
God  our  Saviour  (see  1  Tim.  i.  1;  ii.  3; 
iv.  10 ;  and  above,  oh.  i  3,  note).  In  all 
things  (iv  -Kaatv);  as  1  Pet.  iv.  11. 

Ver.  11. — Hath  appeared,  bringing  salva- 
tion to  all  men,  for  that  bringeth  salvation, 
hath  appeared  to  att  men,  A.V.  and  T.B. 
Bringing  salvation  to  all  men  (o-uTijpios). 
The  B.T  omits  the  artiste  4  before  rar^piot, 


which  necessitates  construing  rtatrtv  Mpd- 
wow  with  <rar jpios,  "saving  to  all  men" 
"  bringing  salvation  to  all  men."  With  the 
article  y  as  in  the  T.B.,  it  may  be  taken 
either  way,  but  it  is  rather  more  natural  to 
construe  nwriv  aBp&itois  with  iireQivri,  "hath 
appeared  to  all  men."  The  meaning  of  the 
phrase,  "hath  appeared  to  all  men,"  is  the 
same  as  the  saying  in  the  song  of  Simeon, 
"Mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation,  which 
thou  hast  prepared  before  the  face  of  all 
people"  (Luke  ii.  30,  31;  comp.  CoL  i.  6). 
The  gospel  is  not  a  hidden  mystery,  but  is 
proclaimed  to  the  whole  world.  Scrnfpios  as 
an  adjective  is  found  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  in  Wisd.  i.  11  and  3  Mace  vii. 
18,  and  frequently  in  classical  Greek. 

Ver.  12. — Instructing  for  teaching,  A.V.J 
to  the  intent  that  for  that,  A.V. ;  and  righU 
eously  for  righteously,  A.  V.  Instructing  us, 
to  the  intent  that.  This  is  an  unnecessary 
refinement.  Huther  is  right  in  saying  that 
the  sentenoe  beginning  with  W  might  have 
been  expressed  by  the  infinitive  mood,  as  in 
1  Tim.  i.  20,  and  that  we  ought  to  render  it 
not  "in  order  that,"  but  simply  "that." 
The  phrase  in  1  Tim.  i  20,  tva  iraiSev0u<rt 
/ij)  PXaaipnixeiv,  manifestly  would  justify  the 
phrase,  xoiSe&wffa  r)p.as  Cn"  Sucatas,  "teaching 
us  to  live  righteously."  Alford  surely  is 
wrong  in  saying  that  the  universal  New 
Testament  sense  of  itaiSeietv  is  "to  disci- 
pline," «'.«.  teach  by  correction.  In  Acts 
vii.  22 ;  xxii.  3 ;  1  Tim.  i.  20 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  25, 
the  idea  of  teaching,  not  of  correcting,  is  pre- 
dominant. But  even  if  it  was  so,  the  pastoral 
Epistles  are  so  decidedly  classical  in  their 
use  of  words,  that  the  classical  use  otrmSeiav 
in  such  phrases  as  mibtieiv  rtva  KtBaplfctv 
or  a&ippova  efrai  (Liddell  and  Scott)  is  an 
abundant  justification  of  a  similar  rendering 
of  this  passage.  And  as  regards  the  use  of  iva, 
such  phrases  as  Eiire  tva  oi  \lBot  oStoi  Sproi 
ywuvrcu, "  Command  that  these  stones  be- 
come biead  "  (Matt.  iv.  3 ;  xx.  21 ;  Luke  iv. 
3 ;  x.  40) ;  Ait areiXaro  . . .  tva  p.n5ev\  d-noxjiv, 
"He  commanded  them  not  to  tell"  (Matt, 
xvi.  20) ;  Svfuptpu  aim?  tva,  "  It  is  profitable 
for  him  that "  (Matt,  xviii.  6) ;  Xlpoaeix^Bt 
tva,  "  Pray  that "  (Matt.  xxiv.  20) ;  rian««fA« 
abrov  tva  pjf,  "He  besought  him  not  to  send 
them  away"  (Mais:  v.  10);  UapcacaKoiirtv 
avToe  tva  aifnrrai,  "  They  beseech  him  to 
touch"  (Mark  viii.  22,  30;  ix.  9;  x.  37; 
xiii.  34;  Luke  L  43;  vii.  36);  "ESdjflTjv  -  •  . 
tva,  "I  asked  ...  to"  (Luke  ix.  40); 
'EpaiTu  <re  tva  vlptyns,  "I  intreat  thee  to 
send  "  (Luke  xvi.  29 ;  Coi  iv.  16,  etc) ; — 
prove  that  the  sense  "  in  order  that "  is  not 
necessarily  attached  to  'tva,  but  that  we  may 
properly  render  the  passage  before  us 
"  teaching  us  ...  to  live  soberly,"  eto. 

Ver.  13. — The  for  that,  A.V.;  appearing 
•/  Ike  glory  of  our  great  Qod  and  Saviour 


c«.  n.  1 — 15.] 


THE  EPISTLE   TO  TITOS. 


for  the  gloriout  appearing  of  the  great  God, 
and  our  Saviour,  A.V.  Looking  foriVpoaSex^- 
pewu);  the  word  commonly  applied  to  wait- 
ing for  the  kingdom  of  God  (Mark  xv.  43 ; 
Luke  ii.  25,  38;  xii.  36;  xxiii.  51;  Jude 
21).     The  blessed   hope.     The  hope  here 
means  the  thing  hoped  for,  as  in  Acts  xxiv. 
14  (where  both  the  subjective  hope  and  the 
thing  hoped  for  are  included);  Gal.  v.  5; 
Col.  i.   5  (comp.  too  Bom.   viii.   24,   25). 
Here  the  hope  is  called  emphatically  "  the 
blessed  hope,"  the  hope  of  Christ's  second 
coming  in  glory,  that  hope  which  is  the  joy 
and  life,  the  strength  and  comfort,  of  every 
Christian  soul.    This  is  the  only  place  in 
the    New    Testament    where    luatipios    is 
applied  to  an  object  which  does  not  itself 
enjoy  the  blessing,  but  is  a  source  of  bless- 
ing to  others.    Of  the  fifty  passages  where 
it  occurs  it  is  applied  in   forty-three  to 
persons,  twice  to  God,  three  times  to  parts 
of  the  body  (the  Virgin's  womb,  and  the 
eyes  and  ears  of  those  who  saw  and  heard 
Christ),  once   impersonally  ("It   is    more 
blessed  to  give,"  etc.,  Acts  zz.  35),  and  once, 
in  this  passage,  to  the  hope.   And  appearing 
of  the  glory.    In  construing  this  clause,  as 
well  as  the  following,  the  same  difficulty 
occurs.     There  is  only  one  article  to  the 
two  subjects.      The  question  arises — Can 
two   different   subjects    stand    under   one 
article  ?    Huther  affirms  that  they  can,  and 
refers  for  proof  to  Buttman  and  Winer ;  and, 
indeed,  it  is  impossible  to  treat  "  the  hope  " 
and  the  "appearing"  as  one  subject.     Ac- 
cepting this,  the  clause  before  us  should  be 
rendered,  Looking  for  the  blessed  hope,  and 
the  appearing  of  the  glory  of  the  great  God. 
This  is  a  description  of  the  second  coming 
of  the  Lord,  of  whom  it  is  expressly  said 
that  he  will  "come  in  the  glory  of  his 
Father"  (Matt.  xvi.  27;   Mark  viii.  38). 
The  appearing  of  Christ  will  be  the  appear- 
ing of  the  glory  of  the  great  God,  not  the 
appearing  of  God  the  Father,  to  whom  the 
term    iirupavela  is   never   applied,  but  of 
the   Son,  who    is  the   Brightness   of   his 
Father's  glory.    Our  great  God  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ.     No  doubt  the  Greek  words 
can  be  so  rendered,  and  perhaps  (grammati- 
cally) most  naturally,  as  e.g.  in  2  Pet.  i.  11, 
where  we  read,  "  The  kingdom  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ; "  and  so  2  Pet. 
iii.  18.    But,  on  the  other  hand,  according 
to  what  is  said  above,  they  need  not  be  so 
rendered.     "The   great    God"  and  "our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ"  may  be  two  separate 
subjects,  as  "the  blessed  hope"  and  "ap- 
pearing of  the  glory  "  axe.    And  we  have  to 
inquire,  from  the  usual  language  of  Scrip- 
ture, which  of  the  two  is  most  probable. 
Alford,  in  a  long  note,  shows  that  trarijp  is 
often  used  without  the  article  (1  Tim.  i  1 ; 
lr.  10;  Phil.  iii.  20);  that  in  analogous 


sentences,  where  Kipws  is  used  as  our  Lord's 
title,  an  exactly  similar  construction  to  that 
in  the  text  is  employed,  as  2  Thess.  i.  12 ; 
2Pet.i.l;  2Cor.i.2;  Gal.i.3;  Bph.i.2; 
vi.  23,  etc.  He  also  observes,  after  Winer, 
that  the  insertion  of  fi/ucv  after  Sarrjpos  is 
an  additional  reason  for  the  omission  of  the 
article  before  Sarrjpos,  as  in  Luke  i.  78; 
Bom.  i.  7;  1  Cor.  i.  3,  and  elsewhere;  and 
that  the  epithet  /irydKou  prefixed  to  0e<w 
makes  it  still  more  difficult  to  connect  0eo5 
with  SuiTTJpos  finuv  'lri<rov  Xpurrov;  and 
lastly,  he  compares  this  passage  with  1  Tim. 
ii.  3,  5,  6,  and  thinks  the  conclusion  inevi- 
table that  the  apostle,  writing  two  sentences 
so  closely  corresponding — written,  it  may  be 
added,  so  near  to  one  another  in  time — 
would  have  had  in  view,  in  both  passages, 
the  same  distinction  of  persons  which  is  so 
strongly  marked  in  1  Tim.  iii.  3,  5.  On 
these  grounds  he  pronounces  against  the 
rendering  which  is  adopted  by  the  Revised 
Version.  Huther's  conclusion  is  the  same ; 
partly  from  the  grammatical  possibility  of 
two  subjects  (here  &eov  and  '1-qaou  Xpurrov) 
having  only  one  article,  which  leaves  the 
question  of  whether  there  are  here  one  or 
two  subjects  to  be  decided  on  other  grounds 
than  simple  grammar;  and  partly  and 
chiefly  from  the  double  consideration  that 
(1)  nowhere  in  Scripture  is  ®e6s  connected 
directly  with  'Ij)<ro£s  XpurrAs,  as  Kipios  and 
2&>T7Jp  so  often  are;  and  (2)  that  the  colloca- 
tion of  God  (®e6s)  and  Christ  as  two  subjects 
is  of  constant  occurrence,  as  e.g.  1  Tim.  i. 
1,2;  v.21;  vi.  13 ;  2  Tim.  i.  2 ;  iv.  1 ;  Titus 
i.  4;  to  which  may  probably  be  added  2 
Pet.  i.  1 ;  Jude  4 ;  2  Thess.  i.  12 ;  he  de- 
cides, surely  rightly,  that  the  clause  should 
be  rendered,  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ.  Another  question  arises  whether 
the  glory  belongs  to  both  subjects.  Pro- 
bably, though  not  necessarily,  it  does,  since 
we  are  told  in  Matt.  xvii.  27  that  "  the  Son 
of  man  shall  come  in  the  glory  of  the 
Father ; "  and  in  Matt.  xxv.  31,  "  the  Son  of 
man  shall  come  in  his  glory"  (comp.  Matt, 
xix.  28).  The  whole  sentence  will  then 
stand  thus:  Loohing  for  the  blessed  hope, 
and  for  the  appearing  of  the  glory  of  the 
great  God  and  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
etc.  The  great  God  (toS  fteyd\<ni);  not  else- 
where in  the  New  Testament  (except  in  the 
T.B.  of  Rev.  xix.  17),  but  familiar  to  us 
from  Ps.  xcv.  3,  "  The  Lord  is  a  great  God," 
and  elsewhere,  as  Deut.  x.  17;  vii.  21;  Ps. 
lxxvii.  14,  etc.  In  Matt.  v.  35  we  read 
"the  great  King"  of  God.  This  grand 
description  of  rod  /ifWoyros  alums,  "the 
world  to  come,"  is  in  contrast  with  t£  vvv 
aluvi,  "this  present  world,"  in  which  our 
present  life  is  passed,  but  which  is  so  deeply 
influenced  by  "the  blessed  hope"  of  that 
future  and  glorious  world, 


28 


THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITUS. 


[ch.  n.  1—15. 


Ver.  14. — A  people  for  Ms  own  possession 
for  a  peculiar  people,  A.V.    Who  gave  him- 
self for  us.    The  resemblance  in  thought 
and  diction  to  1  Tim.  ii.  3 — 6  has  been 
already  pointed  out.     "Who  gave  himself " 
(t»  Uaxev  &b.vt6v)  is  there  expressed  by  6  Soiis 
iavTiv,  and  "  that  he  might  redeem  us  "  (Iva 
Avrp&ffTiTai  Tifias)  by  avriXvTpov  inrep  ttAvtojv. 
(For  the  great  truths  contained  in  the  words 
"  who  gave  himself,"  comp.  John  x.  11,  17, 
18;  Gal.  i.  4;  Bph.  v.  2,  25;  1  Pet.  ii.  24; 
Heb.  ix.   14.)     The  voluntary  offering  of 
himself  is  also  implied  in  the  office  of  our 
Lord  as  High  Priest  (Heb.  ix.  11 — 14).    For 
us  (far cp  Ti/iwp) ;  on  our  behalf;  not  exactly 
synonymous  with  ayr\  riiiav,  "  in  our  stead." 
Both  phrases,  however,  are   used  of  our 
redemption  by  Jesus  Christ.    We  find  fmip 
in  Luke  xxii,  19,  20 ;  John  vi.  51 ;  x.  11, 
15;  xi.  50 — 52;  xv.  13;  xviii.  14;  Eom.  v. 
6,  8 ;  viii.  32 ;  1  Cor.  v.  7 ;  2  Cor.  v.  14,  15, 
21 ;  Gal.  i.  4 ;  Eph.  v^2,  25 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  10  ; 
Heb.  ii.  9 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  21 ;  iii.  18 ;  iv.  1 ;  1 
John  iii.  16 :  and  we  find  So>tI  in  Matt.  xx. 
28  and  Mark  x.  45,  and  in  avrlXvTpov,  1  Tim. 
ii.  6.    The  literal  meaning  of  vitip  is  "in 
defence  of,"  and  hence  generally  "on  be- 
half of,"  "  for  the  good  of."    The  primary 
idea  of  &vti  is  "standing  opposite,"  and 
hence    it    denotes    "exchange,"    "price," 
" worth,"  "instead,"  etc.    Bedeem  (KvTpdxrri- 
■rai) ;  as  Luke  xxiv.  2 1 ;  1  Pet.  i.  18 ;  com- 
mon in  classical  Greek.     In  the  middle 
voice,  as  here,  it  means  "to  release  by  pay- 
ment of  a  ransom ; "  in  the  active  voice,  "  to 
release  on  receipt  of  a  ransom."    In  1  Pet. 
i.  18  the  ransom  price  is  stated,  viz.  "the 
precious  blood  of  Christ ; "  as  in  Matt.  xx. 
28  it  is  "  the  life  of  the  Son  of  man."    The 
effect  of   this    redemption  is  not    merely 
deliverance  from  the  penalty  of  sin,  but 
from  its  power   also,  as   appears   by  the 
following  words :  *  a  peculiar  people,  zealous 
of  good  works,"  and  by  the  passage  in  St. 
Peter  above  referred  to.     Purify  (tcaSaptari) ; 
as  very  frequently  in  the  New  Testament  of 
cleansing  lepers,  the  outside  of  the  platter, 
etc.,  cleansing  the  Gentiles  (Acts  x.  15), 
putting  away  all  sin  (2  Cor.  vii.  1),  cleans- 
ing the  Church  (Eph.  v.  26),  purging  the 
conscience  (Heb.  ix.  14),  etc    The  iniquity 
just  spoken  of  was  a  defilement ;  the  redemp- 
tion from  iniquity  removed  that  defilement. 
The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  price  paid 
for  the  redemption,  was  the  instrument  of 
cleansing  (1  John  i.  7,  9).    A  people  for  his 


own  possession  (\o.bv  irepioiaiov) ;  only  here 
in  the  New  Testament,  but  frequent  in  the 
LXX.,  coupled,  as  here,  with  \a6s  (Exod. 
xix.  5;  Deut.  vii.  6^  xiv.  2;  xxvi.  18),  to 
express  the  Hebrew  rrjjp  or  rhyot  n!?,  a 
people  the  peculiar  property,  or  treasure,  of 
God;  "peculiar"  being  derived  from  the 
Latin  peculium,  one's  own  private  property, 
reserved  for  one's  own  private  use.    The 
Authorized  Version  "peculiar"  expresses 
the  sense  exactly,  and  the  Tepioiaios  of  our 
text  and  of  the  LXX.,  from  whom  it  is 
borrowed,  ia  meant  to  define  either  that 
special  reserved  portion  of  a  man's  pro- 
perty over  and  above  what  he  spends  for 
ordinary  expenses,  which  nobody  can  in- 
terfere with,  or  those  jewels  on  which  he 
sets  a  special  value,  and  places  safely  in 
his  treasury.    In  1  Pet.  ii.  10  AaJs  els  irepi- 
iroii\oiv  ("a  peculiar  people,"  Authorized 
Version)  means  the  same  thing,  that  being 
the  LXX.  translation  of  the  same  Hebrew 
word,    rbiD,   in   Mai.    iii.    17  ("jewels," 
Authorized  Version),   "  They  shall  be  my 
reserved  portion  or  possession."    The  ap- 
plication  of   the   phrase,  \abv   irepwiaiov, 
descriptive    in    the    Old    Testament    of 
Israel,  to  the  Church  of  Christ,  is  very  in- 
structive.   The  passage  in  1  Pet.  ii  10  ia 
exactly  analogous,  as  is  the  phrase,  "  the 
Israel  of  God  "  (Gal.  vi.  16).    Zealous  (fijAco- 
t^s);  as  Acts  xxi.  20;  xxii.  3;  1  Cor.  xiv. 
12;  Gal.  i.  14.    From  its  special  applica- 
tion to  those  who  were  zealous  for  the  Law 
of  Moses  it  became  the  name  of  the  sect  or 
party  of  the  Zealots  who  played  such  a 
terrible  part  in  the  Jewish  war  (see  Luke 
iv.  15).     Cananite  (Matt.  x.  4;  Mark  iii. 
18)  is  the  Hebrew  for  ZtjXutvs.    Zeal  for 
good  works  is  the  indispensable  mark  of 
God's  peculiar  people,  the  inseparable  fruit  of 
the  redemption  and  purification  which  is  by 
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  (comp.  1  Pet.  i.  2). 
Ver.   15.  —  Reprove     for    rebuke,    A.V. 
Authority  (AriTir/ijs);  see  1  Tim.  i.  1  and 
above,  ch.  i.  3,  "authoritative  command- 
ment."   Let  no  man  despise  thee  (mpuppo- 
retro) ;  here  only  in  the  New  Testament ; 
used  in  a  different  sense  by  the  LXX.  in 
Wisd.  i.  1,  but  in  the  same  sense  as  here  in 
4  Maco.  vi.  9,  and  also  in  classical  Greek. 
In  1  Tim.  iv.  12  and  vi.  2  St.  Paul  uses 
the  more  common  word,  Ka.TOKppovi'a.    The 
apostle  thus  winds  up  the  preceding  portion 
of  his  Epistle. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — Practical  godliness  the  end  of  spiritual  doctrine.  The  teaching  of  St. 

Paul  soars  very  high  in  respect  of  the  hidden  things  of  God.    Tc  none  of  the  apostles 

were  given  more  abundant  revelations  of  heavenly  mysteries.  Caught  up  into  the 


OH.n.  1— 15.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  29 

third  heaven,  hearing  unspeakable  words,  saturated  with  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he 
was  able  to  lead  men's  souls  into  depths  and  heights  of  unseen  things  as  no  other 
teacher  was.  His  eloquent  tongue,  pouring  forth  the  riches  of  knowledge  of  an 
enlightened  heart,  could  speak  of  God's  love  to  man,  of  his  eternal  purposes,  of  his  pre- 
destinating grace,  of  the  coming  and  kingdom  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  of  the  resurrection  of 
the  dead,  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light,  in  words  of  wisdom  and  power 
certainly  not  inferior  to  those  of  the  very  chiefest  apostles  of  Christ.  And  yet,  in 
dealing  with  the  practical  duties  of  Christian  men  and  women,  and  in  teaching  morality 
as  an  essential  part  of  Christianity,  there  is  a  particularity  of  detail,  a  searching  appli- 
cation of  truth,  an  earnest  tone  of  warning  and  of  exhortation,  which  could  not  be 
exceeded  by  any  teacher  of  ethics  who  knew  of  nothing  else  but  human  conduct  and 
the  present  interests  of  society.  With  St.  Paul,  familiarity  with  the  highest  doctrines 
of  revelation  does  not  depreciate  the  importance  of  the  humblest  duties  of  daily  life;  it 
rather  magnifies  it,  and  raises  those  duties  from  an  earthly  to  a  heavenly  platform. 
If  St.  Paul's  sole  end  and  aim  in  his  apostolic  labours  had  been  to  bring  the  daily  life 
of  every  class  of  the  community  to  whom  he  wrote  into  accordance  with  the  law  of 
righteousness,  and  to  make  human  life  on  earth  pure  and  happy,  he  could  not  have 
dwelt  upon  those  details  of  practice,  on  which  the  economy  of  society  depends  for  its 
comfort  and  happiness,  with  more  earnestness  and  particularity  than  he  has  done. 
The  demeanour  of  old  men,  the  behaviour  of  old  women,  the  influence  of  the  aged  upon 
the  young,  the  innermost  domestic  duties  of  the  wife  and  the  mother,  words,  deeds, 
looks,  dress,  temper,  disposition,  affections,  all  comes  under  the  constraining  influence 
of  the  gospel  as  preached  by  St.  Paul.  In  like  manner  that  degraded  portion  of  man- 
kind whose  condition  was  so  pitiable  in  the  Eoman  empire,  the  slaves,  of  whom  there 
were  such  numbers  in  every  considerable  household,  is  brought  under  the  elevating 
influence  of  Christian  motive.  Relations  and  duties  full  of  nought  but  pain  and 
humiliation  in  themselves,  and  leading  naturally  to  the  vices  which  are  born  of 
degradation,  are  elevated  at  once  into  platforms  of  eminent  virtue.  Under  the  holy 
influences  of  Christian  faith  new  principles  are  called  into  life,  new  motives  of  thought 
and  action  are  awakened,  and  the  low  life  of  the  dishonest,  insolent,  and  deceitful  slave 
becomes  the  arena  for  the  exercise  of  some  of  the  highest  virtues  of  the  saiut.  What 
a  lesson  we  have  here  for  the  Christian  teacher !  If  the  parish  priest,  whose  intercourse 
with  his  flock  brings  him  into  contact  with  the  infirmities  and  sins  of  the  various 
classes  of  his  parishioners,  would  bend  his  strength  in  this  direction,  and  upon  the 
basis  of  the  doctrine  of  grace  would  build  the  superstructure  of  a  severe  and  minute 
instruction  in  the  details  of  a  really  holy  life,  the  value  of  a  parochial  ministry  would 
be  seen  to  the  full.  Christianity  in  the  family,  Christianity  in  the  shop,  Christianity 
in  the  daily  intercourse  of  man  with  man,  would  be  a  preaching  of  Christ  to  the  world 
which  would  put  the  caviller  to  shame,  and  which  no  adversaries  would  be  able  to 
gainsay  or  to  resist. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — Special  instructions  as  to  Titus's  own  preaching.  "  But  speak  thou  the 
things  which  become  sound  doctrine  " — respecting  the  special  deportment  of  Christians 
of  every  age,  sex,  and  rank. 

I.  Christianity  is  a  system  of  dootkinb  as  well  as  life.  It  is  a  doctrine  that 
it  may  be  a  life.  1.  The  doctrine  is  contrasted  with  the  fables  of  the  false  teachers,  who 
did  nothing  by  their  speculations  but  lower  the  tone  of  Christian  life.  A  true  moral 
life  was  only  possible  on  the  basis  of  the  facts  of  the  gospel  plan  of  salvation  (ver.  11). 
2.  Its  soundness  contrasts  with  the  unhealthy  teaching  of  the  false  teachers.  It  is  called 
"  the  good  doctrine"  (1  Tim.  iv.  6),  and  the  "doctrine  according  to  godliness"  (1  Tim. 
vi.  3).  Every  other  system  corrupts;  the  sound  doctrine  renovates,  elevates,  purifies; 
for  our  Lord  said,  "  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth."  It  ii  milk  for  babes  and  meat 
for  strong  men. 

II.  It  is  the  duty  of  ministers  to  preach  this  sound  doctrine.  It  ought  to 
be  preached :  1.  Publicly  and  plaMy,  since  there  are  so  many  "  vain  teachers."  2.  With 
certainty,  as  being  the  undoubted  truth.    3.  With  all  boldness,  as  without  fear  of  man 


80  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  n.  1—16. 

or  seeking  to  please  man.    4.  At  all  times,  in  season  and  out  of  season.    6.  In  it§  due 
relation  to  the  duties  of  religion,  as  the  spring  of  obedience. — T.  0. 

Ver.  2. — The  duties  of  aged  men.  The  apostle  begins  with  the  most  important  class 
in  the  Church — those  who  are  the  leaders  of  the  young.  Their  characteristic  deport- 
ment is  to  be  fourfold. 

I.  Sobriety.  1.  This  habit  of  mind  is  contrasted  with  the  thoughtlessness  and  levity 
of  youth.  2.  It  is  combined  with  (1)  watchfulness  (1  Thess.  v.  6)  and  (2)  prayer 
(1  Pet.  iv.  7).    3.   There  are  lofty  motives  to  sobriety.    (1  Pet.  iv.  7 ;  v.  8.) 

II.  Gravity,  in  the  sense  of  a  dignified  deportment.  1.  Old  men  ought  not  to  lend 
themselves  to  the  levity  and  flippancy  of  the  young.  2.  If  they  are  grave  in  speech  and 
gait,  they  will  have  more  weight  in  the  community.  There  must  be  no  undue  excita- 
bility. 

III.  Temperance,  ob  self-restraint.  1.  The  aged  ought  to  show  an  example  of  self- 
government  in  regard  to  the  passions,  the  appetites,  and  the  will.  The  pleasures  of 
sense  ought  not  to  allure  them,  or  the  love  of  the  world  to  carry  them  away. 

IV.  Soundness  in  faith,  love,  and  patience.  Here  is  the  trilogy  of  graces  once 
more,  only  that  patience  takes  the  place  of  hope,  to  which  it  is  nearly  allied.  1.  There 
is  to  be  a  healthy  action  of  these  graces  in  old  age.  As  if  in  contrast  with  the  diseases, 
weakness,  and  age  of  the  hody.  The  aged  have  seen  their  best  days,  and  they  ought 
to  reconcile  the  decay  of  nature  with  the  increase  of  grace,  so  as  to  make  human  life  to 
its  extreme  limit  resplendent  with  beauty  and  truth.  2.  Each  of  the  graces  has  its 
appropriate  place  in  the  character  of  the  aged.  (1)  Faith.  It  is  the  subjective  condi- 
tion of  it.  The  old  have  their  hopes  sustained  by  faith ;  their  hearts  are  cheered  by 
faith ;  they  remain  steadfast  through  faith.  It  must  be  at  once  the  principle  of  their 
worship,  their  piety,  and  their  endurance.  (2)  Love.  The  old  are  apt  to  become 
contracted  and  cold  in  their  sympathies.  But  Christian  love  keeps  the  heart  young 
and  tender  and  sincere,  and  the  old  illustrate  its  power  in  growing  tolerance,  wisdom, 
and  kindliness.  (3)  Patience.  They  have  to  bear  with  many  infirmities  of  body,  with 
declining  faculties,  with  growing  decrepitude.  But  Christian  patience  must  be  more  than 
a  dull  acquiescence  with  the  inevitable ;  it  must  be  a  cheerful  acceptance  of  suffering, 
that  patience  may  have  her  perfect  work  in  the  closing  days  of  life. — T.  0. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — The  duties  of  aged  women  and  young  women.  As  woman  had  attained 
through  Christianity  a  position  of  equality  beside  man,  it  was  necessary  to  remind 
her  that  her  new  position  involved  serious  responsibilities. 

I.  The  duties  of  aged  women.  1.  In  demeanour  as  becometh  holiness.  (1) 
There  is  an  appeal  to  their  own  judgment  as  to  what  is  decorous  and  beautiful  in  the 
Christian  character.  They  had  an  experimental  knowledge  of  the  gospel,  and  they 
understood  the  nature  and  extent  of  its  obligations  as  affecting  their  sex.  (2)  There 
was  to  be  a  harmony  between  their  position  and  their  character  as  godly  women — 
"women  professing  godliness"  (1  Tim.  ii.  10).  Their  holy  calling  should  manifest 
itself  in  their  deportment,  dress,  speech,  silence,  and,  above  all,  "  in  a  meek  and  quiet 
spirit."  2.  Not  slanderers.  (1)  Old  age  has  no  active  employment,  but  it  has  an 
active  memory  and  a  busy  tongue.  Thus  there  is  a  temptation  for  the  old,  unless  the 
grace  of  God  has  given  the  tongue  of  kindness,  to  become  censorious,  malignant,  and 
bitter,  avenging  themselves  the  more  with  their  tongues  for  their  very  incapacity  to 
avenge  themselves  in  other  ways.  (2)  There  is  nothing  more  beautiful  or  saintly  in 
this  world  than  a  true  mother  in  Israel,  the  presiding  genius  of  her  family  circle, 
speaking  the  words  of  charity,  softness,  and  kindness  to  all  within  her  reach.  (3)  It 
would  be  an  utter  travesty  of  the  gospel  for  aged  Christian  women  to  be  slanderers, 
because  they  would  thus  (a)  separate  friends  (Prov.  xvi.  28) ;  (6)  inflict  deadly  wounds 
in  character  (Prov.  xviii.  18) ;  (c)  bring  dishonour  on  the  gospel ;  (d)  and  cause  discords 
in  the  Church.  3.  Not  enslaved  to  much  wine.  (1)  The  warning  was  needed  on 
account  of  the  national  habits  of  the  Cretans.  (2)  It  was  a  moderate  demand  that 
they  should  give  up  the  slavish  addictedness  to  wine  so  common  in  Crete.  She  who 
follows  the  habit  is  a  slave,  and  would  soon  lose  the  sense  of  her  degradation.  The 
early  converts  would,  perhaps,  plead  the  privileges  of  their  age  and  country,  and  use 
wine  m  a  solace  in  old  age;  but  Titus  u  to  teach  them  that  hoary  hain  give  no 


oh.  n.  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  81 

liberty  to  sueh  a  habit.  (3)  We  see  how  the  gospel  purifies  the  habits  and  usages  of 
social  life.  4.  Teachers  of  good  things.  (1)  The  apostle  thus  prescribes  the  right 
use  of  the  tongue  to  those  who  were  to  be  "  no  slanderers."  (2)  Their  teaching  was 
not  to  be  in  public  addresses,  which  were  forbidden  (1  Tim.  ii.  12),  but  in  private  life. 
(3)  The  substance  of  their  teaching  was  not  to  be  "  old  wives'  fables,"  not  superstitious 
ceremonies,  or  things  of  evil  report,  but  things  sound,  pure,  and  honest. 

II.  The  duties  of  young  women.  They  are  regarded  as  under  the  instruction  and 
guidance  of  the  aged  women.  In  Ephesus,  Timothy  was  exhorted  to  teach  the  younger 
women,  but  it  is  probable  that  the  state  of  the  Cretan  community  required  that  the 
instructions  of  Titus  should  be  supplemented  by  the  more  practical  and  continuous 
guidance  of  the  elderly  women.  The  young  women  were  to  be  schooled  to  their  duties 
in  a  wise  manner.  1.  They  were  to  he  lovers  of  their  husbands.  (1)  The  wife  would 
find  in  this  love  the  source  of  her  strength,  the  husband  the  solace  for  his  cares,  and 
the  children  the  guarantee  for  their  happiness  and  welfare.  (2)  A  loving  wife  is 
(a)  a  blessing  to  her  husband  (Prov.  xii.  4);  (6)  brings  him  honour  (Prov.  xxxi. 
23);  (c)  secures  his  confidence  (Prov.  xxxi.  11);  (d)  earns  his  praises  (Prov.  xxxi. 
28).  2.  Lovers  of  their  children.  (1)  The  love  of  a  mother  may  be  instinctive,  but 
religious  fanaticism  and  brutal  separation  can  make  her  more  unfeeling  than  the  brutes. 
Rousseau  would  not  keep  his  children  in  his  house,  but  sent  them  to  a  public  hospital ; 
a  sign,  said  Burke,  that  "  bears  love  their  young  and  lick  them  into  shape,  but  bears 
are  not  philosophers."  In  India  infants  are  often  destroyed  by  a  mother's  hands,  under 
the  influence  of  religious  delusion.  (2)  The  first  duty  of  a  Christian  woman  is  to  make 
her  home  happy,  which  is  impossible  except  on  a  basis  of  love  to  husband  and  children. 
(3)  Eeligion  revives  natural  affection  as  it  revives  all  the  weakened  faculties  of  our 
nature,  and  gives  it  new  power  for  good.  The  religious  training  of  the  young  is 
impossible  without  the  experience  of  a  mother's  love.  3  Discreet.  Young  women,  in 
a  new  position  of  Christian  privilege,  might  be  tempted  to  rashness,  enthusiasm,  and 
impulsive  conduct.  They  were  to  be  wise  and  careful  in  their  conduct  both  at  home 
and  abroad.  4.  Chaste.  In  act,  speech,-  thought,  and  dress,  finding  their  true 
happiness  in  their  husband's  society.  There  are  many  high  motives  for  a  pure  woman- 
hood (1  Cor.  vi.  19 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  7).  5.  Workers  at  home.  (1)  The  wife's  business  is 
in  her  household,  not  in  the  great  world  of  society.  Eeligion  gains  no  honour  when 
home  duties  are  neglected.  (2)  Her  husband's  interests  are  preserved  by  her  industry 
at  home.  (3)  Gadding  abroad  and  busying  one's  self  in  other  people's  affairs  tends  to 
the  spreading  of  evil.  6.  Good.  Such  women  are  to  be  kindly  and  thoughtful  in 
their  family  relationships,  especially  to  servants,  and  not  niggardly  or  exacting. 
"Their  thriftiness  must  not  degenerate  into  avarice."  7.  Obedient  to  their  own 
husbands.  (1)  This  is  their  great  duty,  and  thus  they  become  types  of  the  Church's 
submission  to  Christ.  (2)  Obedience  would  recommend  the  gospel  to  unbelieving 
husbands,  for  attention  to  this  precept  would  prevent  "  the  Word  of  God  from  being 
blasphemed."  Grace  does  not  deliver  us  from  the  obligations  of  nature  (1  Cor.  vii. 
4— 16).— T.  C. 

Ver.  6. — The  duty  of  young  men.  The  apostle  next  thinks  of  those  who  are  to  be 
the  strong  stays  of  the  Church  in  the  coming  generation.  "Young  men  exhort  to 
be  gober-minded." 

I.  The  natube  op  this  duty.  1.  Young  men  ought  to  be  thoughtful,  not  rash  and 
impulsive.  The  Lord  says  to  them,  "  Consider  your  ways."  2.  They  should  be  circum- 
spect, not  heady  and  reckless,  using  that  Word  which  "giveth  to  the  young  man 
knowledge  and  discretion."  3.  They  should  not  be  self-indulgent,  but  self-denying. 
Nut  "  lovers  of  pleasure,  but  lovers  of  God."  "  Turn  away  mine  eyes  from  viewing 
vanity."  4.  They  should  be  settled  in  feeling  and  conduct,  not  vacillating  or  giddy.  "  Let 
your  hearts  be  fixed  "  (Ps.  cviii.  1).     "  He  that  wavers  is  as  a  wave  of  the  sea  "(Jas.  i.  6). 

II.  Seasons  fob  sober-mindedness.  1.  It  is  according  to  the  dictates  of  right 
reason.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  receive  the  spirit  of  a  "  sound  mind."  Young  men  are 
never  in  a  right  mind  till  they  sit  clothed  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  2.  Consider  the  snares 
and  sorrows  and  drawbacks  of  life.  3.  Consider  that  death  may  early  reach  the  young. 
4.  Consider  the  number  of  young  men  who  are  mined  by  the  want  of  sober-mindedness. 
6.  Th»  young  must  answer  in  the  judgment  for  their  follies  in  this  life. — T.  0. 


32  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [en.  n.  1—15, 

Vers.  7,  8. — Titus  himself  a  pattern  of  good  works.  As  a  faithful  minister  of  God, 
he  was  to  mirror  forth  in  his  life  and  teaching  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel. 

I.  The  minister  ought  to  be  a  pattern  of  good  works.  1.  His  teaching  is  useless 
unless  it  is  enforced  by  the  power  of  a  holy  example.  There  must  be  a  harmony 
between  his  doctrine  and  his  life.  2.  Good  works  are  the  natural  proofs  of  good 
principles,  and  can  only  issue  from  the  fountain  of  a  purified  heart.  The  very  principles 
are  tested  by  the  preacher's  life.  3.  Sis  whole  life  is  to  be  an  ensample.  "In  all 
things."    This  implies  consistency  in  toil,  endurance,  and  teaching. 

II.  The  minister  must  be  a  pattern  both  in  the  substance  and  in  the  spirit 
of  his  teaching.  Teaching  is  his  special  sphere.  1.  It  must  be  imparted  in  a  right 
spirit.  "  In  doctrine  showing  uncorruptness  and  gravity."  (1)  He  must  exhibit  an 
example  of  personal  sincerity,  not  like  one  either  seeking  for  applause  or  influenced  by 
interested  motives — like  the  false  teachers  who  were  in  quest  of  filthy  lucre.  Sincerity 
has  a  very  penetrative  force  among  a  people.  (2)  He  must  have  a  dignified  gravity  of 
manner,  to  indicate  his  profound  seriousness  of  purpose  and  spirit.  Foolish  jesting 
and  vain  talking  are  very  inconvenient  in  a  minister  of  the  gospel.  2.  The  doctrine 
imparted  must  be  sound  and  convincing.  "  Sound  speech,  that  cannot  be  condemned." 
(1)  It  must  be  wholesome  doctrine,  as  contrasted  with  a  sickly  pietism ;  free  from  error, 
because  drawn  from  "  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word,"  conveyed  not  in  the  "  enticing 
words  of  man's  wisdom,"  but  as  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth.  (2)  It  must  have  convincing 
power.  "  That  cannot  be  condemned."  (a)  Ministers  must  expect  their  words  to  be 
sharply  criticized  as  well  as  their  lives.  (6)  The  truth  ought  to  be  conveyed  in  such 
a  spirit  and  with  such  a  regard  to  the  analogy  of  faith  that  it  cannot  be  justly  found 
fault  with,  (c)  It  must  effectually  silence  gainsayers.  "  That  he  that  is  of  the  contrary 
part  may  be  ashamed,  having  no  bad  thing  to  say  of  us."  Whether  the  adversary  be 
a  false  teacher  or  a  pagan,  the  sound  speech  ought  to  reduce  him  to  shame  and  silence. 
— T.O. 

Vers.  9,  10. — The  duties  of  servants.  The  class  of  servants,  or  rather  slaves,  had 
received  a  wonderful  elevation  through  the  gospel.  They  were  an  oppressed  class,  and 
may  have  been  tempted  to  imagine  that  their  religious  emancipation  would  necessarily 
change  their  relations  to  their  old  masters.  Thus  we  account  for  the  large  body  of 
practical  counsel  that  is  addressed  by  the  apostle  to  this  class  of  believers. 

I.  The  duties  of  servants.  1.  Obedience.  "Exhort  servants  to  be  obedient  to  their 
own  masters."  This  was  a  manifest  obligation  which  the  gospel  did  not  annul.  It 
may  have  been  a  hard  duty,  but  the  gospel  supplied  grace  for  the  faithful  discharge  of 
it.  It  mattered  not  whether  the  master  was  a  Christian  or  a  pagan ;  the  gospel  did  not 
destroy  his  claims  to  obedient  service.  But  the  obedience  was  necessarily  limited  by 
the  Divine  Law,  for  a  servant  could  not  sin  at  a  master's  command.  He  must  in  that 
case  willingly  suffer  the  consequences  of  disobedience.  2.  A  cheerful  compliance  with  a 
master's  will.  "  And  to  please  them  well  in  all  things ;  not  answering  again."  It  denotes 
that  temper  which  anticipates  a  master's  pleasure,  rather  than  the  disposition  to  thwart 
it  by  sullen  and  capricious  ways.  Thus  they  would  be  doing  the  will  of  God  and 
serving  the  common  Master  of  all,  Jesus  Christ,  who  gave  them  an  example  of  meek- 
ness and  submission.  3.  Honesty  and  fidelity.  "Not  purloining,  but  showing  all 
good  fidelity."  Many  slaves  in  ancient  times  were  entrusted  with  the  property  of  their 
masters,  as  merchants,  physicians,  and  artists.  Thus  they  had  many  ways  of  showing 
their  honesty.  It  was  in  their  power  to  defraud  them  by  embezzbment,  or  to  waste 
the  property,  or  to  allow  it  to  be  wasted  without  check  or  rebuke.  Servants  were  to 
have*  family  interests  at  heart,  and  they  were  thus  to  commend  themselves  to  the 
love  and  confidence  of  their  masters. 

II.  The  design  or  motive  of  this  faithful  and  ready  obedience.  "  That  they 
may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things."  1.  The  Saviour  is  as  fully 
glorified  in  the  servant  as  in  the  master,  in  the  poor  as  in  the  rich,  in  the  peasant  as  iu 
the  king.  Indeed,  the  adornment  of  the  gospel  seems  more  manifest  in  the  obedience 
of  the  lowest  class ;  for  of  the  other  classes  specified  it  was  only  said  "  that  God's  Name 
might  not  be  blasphemed."  Calvin  says  God  deigns  to  receive  adornment  even  from 
slaves.  2.  The  Lord  lifts  the  slave  out  of  his  mean  conditions  when  he  seats  him  on 
equal  conditions  of  blessing  and  honour  at  the  same  holy  table.    3.  The  spectacle  of 


oh.  n.  1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  38 

cheerful  and  self-denying  obedience  on  the  part  of  this  class  would  have  an  arresting 
influence  upon  an  age  of  self-love  and  cynicism,  such  as  that  which  influenced  the 
world  at  that  time. — T.  0. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — The  grace  of  God  the  true  ground  of  all  sanctification.  The  apostle 
now  sets  forth  the  real  foundation  on  which  this  exhortation  to  practical  duty  on  the 
part  of  servants,  and,  indeed,  of  people  of  every  age  and  sex,  is  based. 

I.  The  grace  op  God.  "  For  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation  to  all  men 
hath  appeared."  1.  This  grace  is  from  God,  as  its  eternal  Fountain,from  which  it  flows 
to  men.  (1)  He  was  not  made  gracious  by  the  work  of  the  Son,  for  he  was  the  God  of 
jirace  from  the  beginning.  The  work  of  the  Son  only  manifested  it  (John  iii.  16) 
(2)  The  grace  is  from  the  Son  as  well  as  the  Father.  Grace  is  in  every  ponceivable 
way  connected  with  the  Person  of  the  Mediator  in  Scripture  (1  Cor.  xvi.  23 ;  Gal.  i.  6 ; 
1  Thess.  v.  28).  The  Father  and  the  Son  are  one  in  the  freeness  of  their  love  to  man- 
kind. (3)  Grace  is  also  connected  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  called  "  the  Spirit  of 
grace™  (Heb.  x.  29),  because  he  applies  it  and  seals  us  to  the  day  of  redemption.  Thus 
grace  has  its  origin  in  the  Father,  its  manifestation  in  the  Son,  its  end  in  the  Holy 
Ghost.  2.  The  nature  of  this  grace.  (1)  It  is  the  free  gift  of  God  to  mankind  in  the 
gospel  of  Christ.  It  is  thus  opposed  to  the  idea  of  merit  in  man.  Works,  therefore,  do 
not  procure  our  salvation.  (2)  The  grace  must  necessarily  be  worthy  cf  the  character 
of  God.  (o)  The  gift  is  worthy,  for  it  is  his  own  Son.  (6)  The  end  is  worthy,  for  it 
is  his  own  glory  and  man's  salvation,  (c)  The  instrumental  condition  is  worthy,  for 
it  is  faith.  3.  The  scope  of  this  grace.  "  That  bringeth  salvation  to  all  men."  (1)  It 
is  the  only  thing  that  can  bring  salvation  to  man.  He  cannot  be  saved  by  works,  nor 
by  philosophy,  nor  by  man.  (2)  It  has  a  wide  scope.  It  "  bringeth  salvation  to  all 
men."  (a)  This  does  not  imply  that  all  men  will  eventually  be  saved,  for  Scripture 
expressly  asserts  the  very  contrary.  (5)  The  connection  of  the  passage  explains  the 
universality  of  the  reference :  "  Servants,  be  obedient  to  your  masters,  that  you  may 
adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  your  Saviour ;  for  his  grace  is  for  slave  and  master  alike." 
There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  him.  (c)  It  signifies  that  grace  is  the  only  means 
by  which  salvation  is  possible  for  the  race  of  man.  4.  The  manifestation  of  grace.  (1) 
In  the  Incarnation.  (2)  In  the  work  of  Christ.  (3)  In  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
"  The  darkness  is  past ;  the  true  light  now  shineth  "  (1  John  ii.  8). 

II.  The  effects  of  the  grace  of  God.  "Teaching  us  that,  denying  ungodliness 
and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world." 
1.  This  grace  first  manifests  itself  by  teaching,  just  as  the  first  thing  in  creation  was 
light.  It  must  begin  with  teaching,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  is  given  "  to  teach  us  all 
things"  (John  xiv.  26).  The  original  word  implies  the  idea  of  a  disciplining  process, 
effected  by  the  grace  of  God  to  correct  the  inherent  naughtiness  of  the  heart.  2.  The 
grace  of  God  works  toward  the  rejection  of  evil,  for  it  teaches  us  "  to  deny  ungodliness 
and  worldly  lusts."  (1)  The  denial  is  in  heart  and  deed.  It  involves  the  denial  of  self 
(Luke  ix.  23).  (2)  It  is  the  repudiation  of  ungodliness  in  heart  and  life,  (a)  Ungodli- 
ness includes  impiety,  blasphemy,  and  infidelity. ,  (6)  It  includes  all  living  without 
relation  to  God,  whether  we  are  blasphemers  or  not.  Thus  a  man  may  be  ungodly 
who  seeks  his  own  pleasure,  or  distinction,  or  happiness  in  the  world,  (c)  It  implies 
the  deeper  enmity  of  the  heart  to  God  (Eom.  viii.  7).  (3)  It  is  the  denial  of  worldly 
lusts ;  including  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  vain  glory  of  life — "  all 
that  is  in  the  world  " — which  embody  the  enmity  to  God.  Thus  it  denies  (o)  sensual 
lusts  (2  Tim.  ii.  22);  (6)  the  inordinate  desire  of  worldly  things,  which  may  be  lawful 
in  themselves.  3.  The  grace  of  God  produces  certain  positive  effects.  "  We  should  live 
soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world."  (1)  It  secures  the  due  regula- 
tion of  individual  life.  "  Soberly."  This  refers  to  the  duties  we  owe  to  ourselves,  (a) 
In  keeping  a  fair  balance  of  judgment  intellectually;  (6)  in  keeping  a  due  mastery 
over  our  passions — "a  sobriety  in  speech,  in  behaviour,  in  apparel,  in  eating  and 
drinking,  in  recreations,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  lawful  satisfactions.''  (2)  It  secures 
the  faithful  discharge  of  all  duties  to  our  fellow-men.  "  Righteously."  Justice  is  an 
exact  virtue,  which  can  be  easily  measured,  and  is  therefore  the  basis  of  commercial 
and  civil  life.  A  single  failure  in  justice  makes  a  man  unjust.  Therefore  it  is  mosfi 
necessary  we  should  give  our  neighbour  his  due,  and  not  compromise  ourselves  by 

TITUS.  D 


34  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [can.  1—15. 

conduct  redounding  to  the  injury  of  the  gospel.  (3)  It  secures  godliness.  "Godly;" 
that  is,  with  God,  in  God,  for  God.  This  godly  life  is  a  life  dedicated  to  God  and  spent 
in  his  fear. 

III.  The  sphere  in  which  this  grace  of  God  produces  its  extensive  and 
intensive  effects.  "  In  this  present  world."  1.  True  piety  does  not  disregard  or 
despise  the  duties  of  common  life.  2.  It  is  in  a  hostile  world  this  grace  is  to  operate 
with  such  purifying  results.  It  is  called  "  this  wicked  world  "  (Gal.  i.  4) ;  for  the  devil 
is  its  god,  and  sin  is  its  prevailing  character.  3.  It  is  a  world  that  cannot  be  overcome 
but  by  faith.  (1  John  iv.  4,  5.)  4.  It  is  a  transitory  world,  in  contrast  with  the  world 
to  come,  of  which  the  apostle  immediately  speaks. 

IV.  The  attitude  of  the  believer  in  relation  to  the  future  glory. 
"  Looking  for  the  blessed  hope  and  manifestation  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ."  This  attitude  of  blessed  expectation  tells  powerfully  upon  the  life  of  grace. 
The  believer's  position  is  that  of  waiting  for  and  looking  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord. 
The  patriarchs  waited  for  his  first  coming ;  we  wait  for  his  second  coming.  1.  The 
believer's  waiting  attitude  is  lit  up  by  a  blessed  hope.  (1)  This  is  "the  hope  of  glory" 
laid  up  for  us  in  heaven,  which  is  associated  with  the  Son  of  God,  when  we  shall  see 
him  as  he  is.  (2)  It  is  a  blessed  hope,  because  of  all  the  blessings  it  brings  to  the 
believer.  2.  The  believer's  waiting  attitude  has  respect  to  the  ■manifestation  of  the 
Lord's  glory.  This  is  connected  with  his  second  coming.  It  is  the  glory  of  "our 
great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  and  not  of  the  Father,  because :  (1)  Io  all  the  Ave 
places  in  which  the  manifestation  is  spoken  of,  it  is  Christ,  not  the  Father,  who  is 
referred  to.  The  term  "  Epiphany  "  is  never,  indeed,  applied  to  the  Father.  (2)  This 
is  the  grammatical  interpretation  of  the  sentence,  and  is  accepted  by  the  Greek  fathers 
generally.  (3)  The  immediate  context  applies  only  to  the  Son.  (4)  The  term  "  great 
God"  would  seem  to  be  uncalled  for  as  applied  to  the  Father,  but  stands  in  Scripture 
the  perpetual  and  emphatic  witness  of  the  Deity  of  Christ. — T.  C. 

Ver.  14. — The  purport  and  extent  of  Christ's  Saviourship.    Mark — 

I.  The  Person  who  gave  himself  for  us.  "Our  great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ."  Here  the  atonement  is  connected  with  the  Deity  of  the  Saviour,  as  if  to  show 
that  the  true  Godhead  of  the  Son  gave  infinite  value  to  his  sufferings. 

II.  The  atoning  work.  "Who  gave  himself  for  us."  Two  things  are  here 
implied.  1.  Priestly  action.  For  he  "gave  himself"  freely,  the  language  being 
borrowed  from  Levitical  worship.  That  typical  economy  could  not  unite  priest  and 
victim  as  they  were  united  in  Christ.  The  Father  is  often  said  to  have  given  his  Son ; 
but  the  Son  here  gives  himself,  the  priestly  action  exhibiting  at  once  immeasurable 
love  and  voluntary  obedience.  He  is  himself  "  the  unspeakable  Gift " — the  best  of  all 
gifts  to  man.  2.  It  was  a  vicarious  action.  For  he  "  gave  himself  for  us,"  the  words 
in  the  original  signifying  rather  for  our  benefit  than  in  our  stead ;  but,  from  the  nature 
of  the  case,  the  gift  was  substitutionary,  that  it  might  be  for  our  benefit.  When  we 
were  "  in  all  iniquity,"  and  so  exposed  to  Divine  wrath,  our  Surety  permitted  that 
iniquity  to  be  charged  to  himself. 

III.  The  design  of  the  atoning  work  of  Christ.  "  To  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity, 
and  purify  us  to  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works."  It  was  a  two- 
fold design.  1.  A  redemption  from  all  iniquity.  (1)  The  redemption  signifies  deliver- 
ance by  the  payment  of  a  price.  Here  there  is  a  clear  causal  connection  between 
Christ's  blood  as  the  ransom  price  and  the  redemption.  This  is  Scripture  usage  (1  Pet. 
L  18 ;  Eev.  v.  9 ;  Gal.  iii.  13).  (2)  The  scope  of  this  redemption.  It  is  "  from  all 
iniquity."  This  is  to  be  understood  under  a  double  aspect,  (a)  The  iniquity  includes 
all  sin,  considered  as  guilt  and  as  entailing  the  curse  of  the  Divine  Law.  His  redeeming 
sacrifice  dissolved  the  connection  between  our  sin  and  our  liability  to  punishment  on 
account  of  it.  (J)  The  iniquity  includes  all  sin  as  morally  evil,  and  in  this  sense  the 
redemption  delivers  his  people  from  all  impurity.  2.  The  purification  of  a  peculiar 
people  for  himself.  (1)  The  primary  signification  is  sacrificial ;  for  the  term  "  purify," 
like  the  cognate  terms  "  sanctify,"  '*  sprinkle,"  "  wash,"  "  cleanse,"  points  to  the  effect 
produced  by  sacrifice  upon  those  defiled  by  sin.  These  are  now,  by  the  blood  of  Christ, 
readmitted  to  fellowship  with  God.  Thus  believers,  like  Israel  of  old,  obtain  a  new 
standing.     (2)  The  design  of  redemption  is  to  consecrate  a  people  for  holy  service,  flat 


oh.  n.  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  35 


priestly  worship,  in  separation  from  the  world.  Thus  they  are  "  •  peculiar  people," 
not  singular  or  eccentric,  but  his  peculiar  treasure,  held  to  be  most  precious,  and  kept 
with  all  Divine  care.  (3)  This  people  is  separated  to  good  works — "  zealous  of  good 
vorks,"  because  partakers  of  the  Spirit  of  holiness  (Rom.  i.  4),  and  of  the  sanctification 
uf  the  Spirit  (1  Pet.  i.  2).  This  blessed  fruit  is  worthy  of  a  dedicated  people.  They 
must  be  zealots  for  practical  holiness,  for  they  find  their  best  motives  in  two  advents. 
-T.O. 

Ve.-.  15. — Pastoral  work  and  authority.  "These  things  speak,  and  exhort,  and 
rebuke  with  all  authority."  The  business  of  the  minister  is  concerning  all  the  things 
commanded  in  this  chapter  both  as  to  doctrine  and  duty. 

I.  These  doctrines  and  duties  were  to  be  "  spoken  of,"  so  as  to  be  brought  to 

BEAB   WITH  POWEB  ON   THE   HEABTS   AND   MINDS   OF   THE   PEOPLE. 

II.  They  webe  to  be  made  mattebs  of  obligation  in  the  conscience  ;  for  Titus 
was  to  practise  exhortation. 

III.  Rebuke  was  to  be   applied  with  all   authobitt   whebk   exhortation 

FAILED  OF   KS  EFFECT. 

IV.  Titus  was  to  live  so  circumspectly  that  the  Cbetanb  could  not 
despise  him.  "  Let  no  man  despise  thee."  Contempt  would  be  the  natural  effect  of 
observed  inconsistency  in  the  life  of  the  young  evangelist. — T.  C. 

Ver.  2. — Aged  Christian  men.  "  That  the  aged  men  be  sober,  grave,  temperate,, 
sound  in  faith,  in  charity,  in  patience."  There  are  appropriate  fruits  for  every  time  of 
life,  and  the  Christian  man  bringeth  forth  fruit  in  his  season.  A  frivolous,  fantastical 
age  is  a  distasteful  spectacle.  Old  age  should  be  cheerful ;  but  fun  should  be  without 
frivolity,  and  laughter  without  levity. 

I.  The  beverenoe  due  to  age.  We  look  for  sobriety  of  character  as  the  result  of 
the  experience  of  a  man  who  has  found  that  there  are  limits  to  all  expectations; 
gravity  in  one  who  is  nearing  his  great  account;  and  temperance  in  one  who  is 
supposed  to  have  trampled  down  the  fierce  passions  of  youth.  We  reverence  age  for 
the  consistency  of  the  long  years  of  life,  and  for  fidelity  to  conscience  and  to  Christ. 

II.  The  fbuits  that  may  BiPEN  in  age.  They  are :  1.  Faith,  which  is  a  grace 
that  grows.  As  men  know  more  of  Christ  by  heart-experiences  and  life-experiences,  so 
ought  their  faith  to  increase  in  him  whose  promises  have  all  been  "  Tea  and  Amen." 

2.  Charity,  alike  in  kindly  estimate  of  others,  in  less  bigotry,  and  in  more  compre- 
hensiveness of  embrace  to  all  who  may  belong  to  other  folds  under  the  great  Shepherd. 

3.  Patience.  For  while  manhood  has  to  work,  age  at  eventide  has  to  wait,  sometimes 
in  pain  or  in  weakness.  Still  "  they  serve "  while  they  wait,  by  prayer  and  quiet 
submission  to  the  great  will,  the  Lord's  will.  They  are  "  examples  to  the  flock." — 
W.M.S. 

Ver.  3. — Aged  Christian  women.  "  The  aged  women  likewise."  Our  "  behaviour  " 
is  a  sign  of  our  character.  We  cannot  hide  the  "  roots  "  of  our  life.  Weeds  or  flowers 
soon  appear  upon  the  earth. 

L  Holy  women.  Not  sanctimonious,  or  stiff,  or  prudish ;  but  holy.  Never  suffering 
irreverence  to  characterize  their  speech,  levity  to  mark  their  looks,  or  folly  to  appear  in 
their  dress  or  demeanour.  Holy,  so  that  their  quiet  fellowship  with  God  may  affect 
their  influence,  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  "  earnest  of  the  heaven  "  they  are  approaching 
in  their  old  age  may  be  known  by  their  conversation. 

II.  Tbue  women.  "  Not  false  accusers."  This  does  not  apply  to  courts  of  law,  but 
to  common  life.  The  word  is  expressive ;  it  is  "  make-bates,"  from  which  our  wonl 
"abate."  They  do  not  lessen  the  honour,  the  reputation,  the  good  report  of  others  by 
accusations  which  are  unworthy  and  untrue. 

III.  Tempebate  women.  "Not  given  to  much  wine."  Never  flushed  with  the 
semi-intoxication  of  indulgence.  Never  made  frivolous  and  foolish  in  speech  through 
strong  drink.  Avoiding  this  as  the  tyranny  of  a  habit  which  may  become  with  them 
a  second  nature.     "  Not  given  to  much  wine." 

IV.  Useful  women.  "  Teachers  of  good  things.''  Of  the  highest  truths  that  ma«a 
for  salvation,  and  of  all  the  truths  which  they  have  learned,  that  minister  to  industry,  to 


36  THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITOS.  [oh.  n.  1—15. 

household  economy,  to  thrift  and  piety  and  prosperity.  Every  aged  woman  has  a  large 
ministry  to  fulfil  when  she  remembers  how  large  is  the  category  of  "  good  things."— 
W.M.8. 

Vers.  4,  5. — Counsels  to  young  women.  Here  there  are  what  may  be  termed 
"  instructions"  to  the  aged  women  as  to  the  counsels  to  be  given  by  them  to  the  young 
.vomen.  Such  authority  does  the  gospel  give  to  age ;  such  reverence  and  respect  for 
age  does  it  expect  from  young  women.  Nations  deteriorate  in  character  whenever 
youth  becomes  insolent  in  its  own  independence,  and  resentful  of  authority. 

I.  Sobriety,  or  wisdom ;  that  calm  quietude  of  heart  and  mind  which  is  not  intoxi- 
cated by  vanity,  or  carried  away  with  the  sensationalism  of  pleasure. 

II.  Chastity.  Alike  in  thought,  in  speech,  and  in  manner  and  conduct.  Purity 
makes  queenly  women.  One  stain  spoils  the  most  exquisite  sculpture.  The  beauty  of 
marble  is  its  purity,  and  the  beauty  of  womanhood  is  chastity. 

III.  Home-keepers.  Making  home  first  of  all  a  centre  of  attraction  by  its  order  and 
cleanliness  and  comfort ;  then  by  its  harmonies  of  peace  and  love,  so  that  no  discordant 
notes  may  mar  the  music  of  its  joy;  and  then  by  avoiding  gossiping  visits,  and  the 
excitements  of  habitual  restlessness,  and  a  too  great  love  of  shopping,  securing  the 
safety  of  economy  and  the  honour  of  a  wife  who  "weaves"  all  into  beauty  and  order 
at  home. 

IV.  Obedience.  Not  slavish  submission  to  man ;  for  woman  is  his  equal,  and  "  was 
not,"  as  an  old  divine  says,  "  taken  from  his  feet,  to  be  beneath  him,  or  his  head,  to  be 
above  him  ;  but  from  his  side,  to  be  equal  with  him."  Still,  there  is  the  obedience 
which  consists  in  consulting  him,  judging  and  conforming — where  conscience  is  not 
offended — to  his  judgment  and  his  wishes. 

All  this  that  "  the  Word  of  God  be  not  blasphemed,"  or  its  fame  injured,  which  is 
the  true  meaning  of  blaspheme,  viz.  to  blast  the  fame  of  it. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6. — Counsels  to  young  men.  "  Young  men  likewise  exhort  to  be  sober-minded," 
so  that — 

I.  They  may  take  such  a  view  of  life  as  to  include  its  difficulties  and 

RESPONSIBILITIES. 

II.  They  may  be  kept  fbee  from  the  undue  disappointment  of  too  enthusi- 
astic MINDS. 

III.  They  may  be  kept  from  the  wine-cup  and  all  harmful  stimulants. 

IV.  They  may  remember  that  life  is  a  solemn  thing,  full  of  accountability. 

V.  They  may  keep  their  minds  open  to  counsel  from  age  and  experience. 
— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  7,  8. — A  teacher's  influence.  Titus  is  to  remember  that  personal  character  is 
the  most  eloquent  counsel  and  the  most  convincing  argument  of  the  gospel. 

I.  Pattern.  Not  a  slavish  example  of  mere  deeds.  For  this  is  not  the  gospel  ideal. 
We  are  not  to  copy  mere  actions,  but  to  catch  the  spirit  of  the  teacher.  This  makes 
true  art,  and  it  makes  also  true  religion.  We  admire  the  pattern,  but  we  do  not  copy 
it  by  "  the  rule  of  thumb,"  but  by  the  adoption  of  the  same  spirit.  Christ  in  us !  The 
mind  of  Christ. 

II.  Doctrine.  Not  mere  dogma,  which  is  an  artificial  thing,  and  may  or  may  not 
be  true,  according  as  the  authority  which  gives  it  may  be  wise  and  enlightened,  or 
ignorant  and  superstitious.  Doctrine  is  different.  It  is  a  revealed  truth  which  has  its 
response  in  the  heart  and  conscience,  and  its  attestation  in  life.  This  the  gospel  has. 
And  he  is  to  show  "  uncorruptness ;  "  that  is,  he  is  not  to  defile  it  with  worldly  com- 
promises. And  "  gravity ; "  for  it  is  not  meant  to  be  the  light  theme  of  intellectual 
discussion,  but  the  gravest  matter  of  obedience.  And  "  sincerity."  It  is  not  to  be 
preached  for  expedient  reasons,  as,  for  instance,  the  security  of  life,  or  the  safety  of  the 
state,  or  the  ways  in  which  even  Socrates  would  have  men  honour  the  gods,  although 
inwardly  he  disbelieved  in  them  ;  but  with  sincerity  of  conviction  as  to  their  reality 
and  truth. 

III.  Sound  speech.  No  hollow  rhetoric.  No  statements  In  excess  of  fact  for  the  sake 
til  impression;  but  sound  all  through  in  argument,  illustration,  and  attestation. 


oh.  n.  1—15.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  »? 

Such  conduct  and  speech  will  shame  those  who  "see  the  fruits,"  Mid  can  say  no 
"evil  "of  us.— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  9, 10. — Counsels  to  slaves.  This  Epistle  was  circulated  in  Asia  Minor,  where 
there  were  some  eighty  thousand  slaves.  "Exhort  slaves,  or  bond-servants,"  etc. 
The  gospel  cured  slavery,  as  it  cured  polygamy,  by  a  slow  and  steady  development  of 
the  doctrine  and  spirit  of  the  cross — that  we  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  we  are 
not  our  own,  and  that  we  ought  to  love  others  even  as  ourselves.  And  no  man  would 
like  to  be  a  slave  himself. 

I.  Obedience.  They  were  slaves,  and  they  had  masters.  While  that  relationship 
remained,  let  them  show  the  conquests  of  the  gospel  in  their  endeavours  to  please, 
and  in  their  not  "  gainsaying,"  or  answering  again.  Masters  would  see  in  such  conduct 
the  divinity  of  the  gospel ;  and  slaves  would  not  suffer  in  vain — it  would  give  the  dignity 
of  "  ministry  "  even  to  their  lives. 

II.  Beauty.  Not  "  purloining,"  which  slaves  are  tempted  to  do.  Having  been 
purloined  or  "  stolen "  themselves,  it  would  not  seem  very  harmful  to  them  to  steal 
things  from  their  masters.  But  they  were  to  "adorn  the  gospel" — to  show  how 
"  beautiful "  it  could  make  their  rude  life,  and  the  rough,  hard  lot  of  a  slave. 

So  we  all  have  here  the  gospel  in  its  beauty.  "  Adorn,"  and  in  its  breadth,  "  all 
things."— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  11. — Christ  for  every  man.  The  gospel  is  universal  It  knows  nothing  of 
race,  or  country,  or  clime.  It  is  the  grace  of  the  Father  to  every  child.  It  reveals 
the  nature  of  God  himself,  which  is  love. 

I.  Hebe  is  a  question  to  be  considebed.  It  is  said  by  the  apostle  that  it  "  has 
appeared  unto  all  men."  Is  this  so?  Are  there  not  multitudes  ignorant  of  the  gospel 
— multitudes  who  have  never  heard  the  joyful  sound  ?  Unquestionably.  But  for  all 
that,  it  has  appeared  for  all  men,  and  this  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  expression.  Its 
invitation  is  to  all.  Its  provisions  are  for  all,  and  it  rests  with  us  to  go  into  all  the 
world  and  preach  a  gospel  which  has  room  yet  for  the  world  at  its  banquet-table  of 
grace. 

II.  Hebe  is  a  salvation  to  be  bbodght.  This  explains  everything.  It  brings 
salvation.  Some  will  not  accept  it.  Some  will  only  use  it  as  a  miraculous  charm, 
without  applying  it  to  the  conscience  and  the  character.  What  is  it,  then,  to  be  saved? 
To  be  delivered  from  the  condemnation  of  the  Law  is  not  all.  We  are  to  be  saved  from 
ourselves,  from  every  tyrannous  yoke  of  habit,  every  corrupting  cancer  of  evil,  every 
relic  of  selfishness  and  sin ;  and  this  is  illustrated  and  explained  in  the  succeeding  verses. 
So  that  salvation  is  as  broad  in  its  application  as  it  is  beautiful  in  its  results. — 
W.M.S. 

Ver.  12. — True  self-denial.  Here  we  see  that  the  cross  of  Christ  has  its  influence 
within  ourselves  as  well  as  on  the  moral  government  of  God.  We  are  not  left  passive 
in  a  mere  receptivity  of  blessing ;  we  are  actively  to  co-operate  with  the  Spirit  of  God 
in  working  out  our  salvation. 

I.  Hebe  is  self-denial.  But  what  are  we  to  deny  ?  Our  better  selves  ?  No ;  we 
are  to  please  our  conscience,  to  satisfy  our  sense  of  moral  order  and  beauty,  to  gratify 
the  spiritual  being.  All  depends,  in  our  consideration  of  self-denial,  upon  which  self 
we  are  to  deny,  the  lower  self  or  the  higher  self.  Ungodliness  is  to  be  denied ;  for 
nothing  can  minister  to  the  true  ends  of  our  being  that  is  not  of  God.  Without 
"godliness"  we  are  graceless,  and  all  seeming  beauty  is  meretricious  and  unreal. 
Worldly  lusts  are  numerous.  Lust  is  love  in  wrong  directions.  It  is  not  merely  excess 
or  a  question  of  degree ;  it  is  a  question  of  kind.  Love  may  be  pure,  or  it  may  be  the 
Inst  of  the  eye,  which  is  sensuality.  The  pride  of.  life  is  the  lust  of  pride  in  mere  carnal 
enjoyment  and  ambitious  aim.  We  must  deny  the  thorns  and  the  tares  of  the  one  to 
leave  room  for  the  harvest  of  holiness.    But — 

U.  Negations  abb  not  enough.  We  are  not  good  by  what  we  give  up  simply, 
but  by  what  we  take  up.  The  cross  has  its  creative  as  well  as  its  destructive  influence. 
"I»m  crucified  with  Christ :  nevertheless  I  live ; "  and  how t  "  Soberly ; "  givin<*  room 
for  reason  to  take  the  place  of  passion,  and  for  conscience  to  conquer  the  excitements  of 


SS  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  n.  1—16. 

intoxicated  desire.  "  Righteously ;  "  so  that  it  may  be  seen  that  wickedness  is  wrong — 
our  life  "  wrung,"  that  is,  twisted  from  the  "  straight."  "  Godly ; "  that  is,  not  governed 
by  laws  of  custom,  or  expediency,  or  self-pleasing,  but  by  God's  will,  and  the  Spirit  of 
God  in  the  heart.  For  as  nature  is  beautiful  because  therein  we  see  the  ideal  of  God- 
no  art  being  really  beautiful  that  is  not  true  to  nature — so  no  life  is  pure  and  holy  that 
has  not  God's  thought  and  purpose  in  it.  And  we  are  to  do  all  this  amid  temptation 
and  hesitation,  in  "  this  present  world." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  13. — The  coming  day.  We  are  to  live  with  a  great  sky  of  immortality  above 
us ;  for  no  mere  secularism  has  motive  power  enough  to  sustain  a  noble  life.  It 
breaks  down  always  through  the  consciousness  that  nothing  matters  much,  for  death 
ends  all ;  as  the  sceptic  in  Ecclesiastes  is  supposed  to  feel  when  he  says,  "  All  things 
come  alike  to  all :  there  is  one  event  to  the  righteous,  and  to  the  wicked." 

I.  The  upward  look.  "Looking  for  that  blessed  hope."  What  is  that  hope? 
This — that  one  day  all  inequalities  will  be  adjusted,  all  wrong  redressed,  all  faithful 
service  rewarded,  and  all  true  character  revealed. 

II.  The  revealing  day.  "  At  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  How  his  appearing  will  take  place  we  know  not.  Nor  when. 
Nor  where.  But  all  Scripture  teaches  that  there  is  a  day  for  "  the  manifestation  of  the 
sons  of  God,"  and  for  the  judgment  on  worldly  and  wicked  men.  Our  apostle  prays 
that  "  we  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day."  The  exile  has  the  hope  of  seeing 
his  native  land.  The  child  at  school  looks  for  and  longs  for  home.  And  this  with  us  is 
a  blessed  hope,  because  it  makes  us  happy  and  restful  here  and  now,  and  makes  us 
joyful  even  in  tribulation;  for  we  look  for  "a  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose 
Builder  and  Maker  is  God."— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  14. — The  giving  of  the  self.  This  is  the  most  beautiful  of  the  sentences  in  this 
Epistle.  Christ  came  not  nrerely  to  teach,  or  to  reveal  the  fatherhood  of  God,  but  to 
give  himself. 

I.  He  did  this  in  his  life.  All  his  exquisite  sensibilities  were  bruised  in  a  world 
of  selfishness  and  sin.  The  sorrows  and  griefs  of  men  hurt  him.  He  did  not  merely 
give  his  thoughts,  or  give  his  time,  or  give  his  infinite  help.     He  "gave  himself." 

II.  He  did  this  in  his  death.  As  our  Sacrifice  he  gave  himself,  "  that  he  might 
redeem  us  from  all  iniquity ; "  not  from  guilt  alone,  but  from  every  form  of  eviL  The 
perfectly  voluntary  character  of  our  Saviour's  redemptive  mission  is  seen  in  such 
expressions  as  "  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  O  God,"  and  when  concerning  his  life  he  says, 
"  No  man  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  myself."  This  voluntaryism  on  his  part 
itself  destroys  all  those  critical  objections  to  the  atonement  which  were  once  raised 
against  the  suffering  of  the  innocent  one  for  the  guilty;  for,  in  the  first  place,  Christ 
"  gives  himself,"  and,  in  the  second  place,  he  does  it  for  a  worthy  end ;  not  that  he  may 
appease  the  wrath  of  his  Father,  but  that  he  may  honour  his  moral  government  by  his 
perfect  obedience  unto  death,  and  that  he  may  redeem  men  from  more  than  the  curse 
of  the  Law,  viz.  from  all  iniquity.  Thus,  again,  the  end  of  the  gospel  is  character — that 
this  earth  may  be  as  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  in  which  all  iniquity  may  be  down- 
trodden and  destroyed. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  15. —  Cultivation  of  respect.  "Let  no  man  despise  thee."  For  through  the 
personal  influence  even  the  first  apostles  and  teachers  had  to  win  their  way. 

I.  Religious  teachers  need  especially  to  remember  that  even  worldly  men 
despise  hypocrites.  If  men  recommend  a  medicine  they  do  not  take,  or  exhort  to 
obedience  of  a  law  which  they  do  not  themselves  obey,  or  seek  to  inspire  admiration 
for  a  virtue  which  they  only  wear  as  a  cloak,  or  affect  a  love  to  the  Saviour  which  ends 
in  no  self-denial  or  sacrifice,  they  are  hypocrites,  and  men  despise  them. 

II.  Religious  teachers  need  especially  to  remember  that  men  who  are 
despised  have  no  real  power.  That  is,  of  course,  rightly  despised ;  for  they  may  be 
wrongly  despised.  It  is  written  of  our  Lord,  "  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men." 
So  that  we  must  keep  in  remembrance  the  fact  that  what  St.  Paul  means  is  "  deservedly 
despised."  No  rhetoric,  no  argument,  no  brilliancy  of  thought,  no  ability  of  application 
or  illustration  can  make  any  minister  of  Christ  really  useful  and  effective  if  his  oha- 


oh.il  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  38 

raoter  and  reputation  are  justly  despised.    As  "  Ossili "  says,  "  character  is  higher  than 
intellect."— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1— 10.— Genuine  morality.  "But  speak  thou  the  things  which  hecome 
sound  doctrine,"  etc.  Paul,  having  given  Titus  directions  as  to  the  organization  of  a 
Christian  Church  in  Crete, and  charged  him  to  conteii'l  against  those  who,  in  the  name 
of  Christianity,  propagated  doctrines  at  variance  both  with  the  truths  and  the  spirit  of 
the  gospel,  here  urges  that  genuine  morality  which  should  he  the  grand  aim  and 
tendency  of  all  gospel  preaching.  The  grand  *  subject  presented  in  this  passage  is 
genuine  morality.  There  have  been,  and  still  are,  those  who  regard  morality  and 
religion  as  two  distinct  subjects  or  lines  of  conduct.  But  they  are  essentially  one ;  one 
cannot  exist  without  the  other.  The  essence  of  both  consists  in  supreme  regard  to  the 
Divine  will  as  the  only  standard  of  character  and  rule  of  life.  From  these  verses  we 
may  draw  three  general  truths  in  relation  to  this  subject. 

I.  Genuine  morality  legislates  alike  fob  all  mankind.  It  speaks  to  man 
authoritatively,  whatever  his  personal  peculiarities,  adventitious  distinctions,  social 
relations,  secular  circumstances,  official  position,  the  number  of  his  years,  or  the  charac- 
teristics of  his  country.  Moral  law  meets  him  everywhere;  he  can  no  more  escape  it 
than  he  can  the  atmosphere  he  breathes.  In  these  words  persons  are  mentioned  dis- 
tinguished by  three  fundamental  facts.  1.  The  fact  of  age.  Amongst  the  millions  of 
the  race,  not  many  in  any  generation  can  be  found  that  came  into  existence  exactly  at 
the  same  minute.  Hence  there  are  those  differing  in  age  from  one  year  to  a  hundred 
or  more.  Hence  Paul  speaks  here  of  "  aged  men  "  and  "  aged  women,"  "  young  men  "  and 
"  young  women."  At  the  first  dawn  of  moral  consciousness,  up  to  the  last  breath  of 
earthly  existence,  the  voice  of  duty  speaks — "Thus  saith  the  Lord."  No  one  has 
strength  enough  to  extricate  himself  from  the  ties  of  moral  obligation.  Not  even  that 
mighty  spirit  who  leads  the  "  world  captive  at  his  will "  can  break  the  shackles  of 
moral  responsibility.  2.  The  fact  of  sex.  Here  are  "men"  and  "women,"  both  the 
aged  and  the  young.  However  closely  identified  in  affection  and  interest,  moral  duty 
treats  each  as  a  distinct  personality.  In  human  legislation  the  obligation  of  the  woman, 
in  some  cases,  is  absorbed  in  that  of  the  man.  Not  so  with  the  moral  legislation  of 
Heaven.  Each  must  bear  its  own  burden.  Inasmuch  as  the  woman  is  as  bound  to 
follow  the  will  of  God  as  the  man,  no  man  has  a  right  to  interfere  with  the  freedom 
of  her  thought,  the  dictates  of  her  conscience,  or  the  independency  of  her  devotions. 
For  long  ages  men  have  not  recognized  this  fact,  and  they  have  treated  women  as  their 
toys  of  pleasure  and  instruments  of  gratification.  Women  are  beginning  to  wake  up  to 
their  rights,  and  the  day  of  man's  tyranny  is  drawing  to  a  close.  3.  The  fact  of  rela- 
tionship. Paul  says,  "  Exhort  servants  to  be  obedient  unto  their  own  masters."  Why 
the  duty  of  servants  should  be  here  referred  to  and  not  that  of  masters,  is  not  because 
masters  have  not  their  duty,  but  perhaps  at  this  time  in  Crete  there  were  slaves  who 
were  disloyal  and  rebellious.  Whilst  the  duty  of  servants  is  here  referred  to,  the  fact ' 
must  not  oe  overlooked  that  morality  is  binding  on  men  in  every  social  relationship,  on 
the  rulers  as  well  as  the  ruled,  the  judges  as  well  as  the  criminals,  the  parents  as  well 
as  the  children,  the  employers  as  well  as  the  employes.  What  is  wrong  for  one  is 
wrong  for  all,  and  the  reverse. 

II.  Genuine  morality  reaches  to  the  springs  of  the  heabt.  It  does  not  con- 
cern itself  with  the  external  conduct.  "  Bodily  exercise  profiteth  but  little."  But  as  it 
regards  external  conduct  as  the  evolutions  of  the  states  of  the  heart,  it  legislates  for  those 
states.  It  says,  "  Keep  the  heart  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life." 
Glance  at  the  virtues  here  inculcated.  "  That  the  aged  men  be  sober  [sober-minded], 
grave,  temperate."  The  exhortation  to  sobriety  is  also  addressed  to  aged  women :  "  That 
they  be  not  given  to  much  wine."  Also  to  the  young  women :  "  Teach  the  young  women 
to  be  sober."  And  to  the  young  men :  "  Exhort  to  be  sober-minded."  Although  physical 
sobriety  is  undoubtedly  referred  to,  moral  sobriety,  serious  though  tfulness,  and  self- 
restraint  are  evidently  included  and  regarded  as  fundamental.  Moral  sober-mindedness 
is  the  effective  preventative  and  cure  of  all  physical  intemperance.  No  argument,  either 
for  total  abstinence  or  against  it,  can  be  sustained  by  the  phrase,  "  Not  given  to  much 
wine."  All  the  words  convey  is — Do  not  get  drunk.  '' Sound  in  faith,  in  charity  [love], 
in  patience."    This  means — Have  a  healthy  faith,  a  faith  well  founded;  a  healthy  love, 


40  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  n.  1—15. 

a  lore  fastened  on  the  supremely  lovable;  a  healthy  patience,  a  patience  that  shall 
bear  up  with  fortitude  and  magnanimity  under  all  the  trials  of  life.  "  As  becometh 
holiness  " — reverent  in  demeanour.  Let  the  whole  life  be  full  of  that  "  holiness  without 
which  no  man  can  see  the  Lord."  "  Not  false  accusers  " — not  slanderers.  It  has  been 
observed  that  old  women  are  specially  tempted  to  garrulity  and  querulousness ;  hence 
the  exhortation  here.  "  Teachers  of  good  things  "—of  that  which  is  good.  Things  good 
in  themselves  as  well  as  in  their  tendencies  and  issues ;  teachers,  not  merely  by  words, 
but  by  example.  "  That  they  may  teach  [train]  the  young  women  to  be  sober."  The 
expression,  "  to  be  sober,"  should  be  omitted.  "  To  love  their  husbands."  The  duty 
implies  that  the  husband  is  loveworthy ;  there  are  some  men  who  are  called  husbands 
ao  morally  abhorrent  and  disgusting,  that  to  love  them  would  be  impossible.  The  ideal 
husband  must  be  loved.  "  To  love  their  children."  A  mother's  love,  of  a  certain  kind, 
is  proverbial.  Maternal  love,  wrongly  directed,  has  been  one  of  the  chief  curses  of  the 
race.  "  To  be  discreet " — sober-minded.  A  proper  cheerfulness  in  mothers  is  a  precious 
virtue,  but  volatile  frivolousness  is  a  serious  evil.  "  Chaste  " — purity  of  the  body,  free- 
dom from  obscenity  in  language  and  life.  Nothing  in  society  is  more  beautiful  than  a 
thoroughly  chaste  woman — chaste  in  language,  chaste  in  dress,  chaste  in  movement; 
and  nothing  is  more  disgusting  than  the  reverse — a  woman  unclean  in  appearance,  in 
costume,  in  language,  in  manners.  "  Keepers  [workers]  at  home."  Wives  must  work 
as  well  as  husbands.  Work  is  a  condition  of  health  and  of  true  enjoyment.  An  idle  wife 
is  a  bane  both  to  herself  and  her  family.  "  At  home."  This  may  not  mean  entirely  in 
her  own  house,  but  in  her  own  sphere,  it  may  be  in  the  garden,  the  field,  the  school- 
room, the  Church,  etc.  "Good" — kind,  amiable,  sympathetic,  generous,  free  from  all 
that  is  malign,  envious,  and  jealous.  "  Obedient  [being  in  subjection]  to  their  own 
husbands."  This  implies,  of  course,  that  the  husband's  commands  are  wise,  right,  and 
useful.  "  That  the  Word  of  God  be  not  blasphemed."  This  refers,  perhaps,  to  all  the 
previous  exhortations,  and  expresses  a  grand  reason  for  the  cultivation  of  all  virtues. 
Our  conduct  in  all  things  should  be  such  as  to  bring  honour  rather  than  dishonour  on 
our  Lord  and  Master.  "  Let  your  light  also  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see 
your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  "  Young  men  likewise 
exhort  to  be  sober-minded."  Youth,  in  the  swelling  streams  of  its  passions,  the  wild 
play  of  its  fancy,  and  its  craving  for  the  romantic,  is  fearfully  exposed  to  mental  inso- 
briety. Hence,  no  duty  for  the  young  is  more  urgent  than  that  of  obtaining  a  self- 
masterhood.  Titus,  whom  Paul  commands  to  exhort  young  men  to  this  duty,  was 
himself  a  comparatively  young  man.  He  could  scarcely  have  been  more  than  forty 
years  of  age.  "Brought  up  in  a  pagan  home,  not  improbably  in  the  luxurious  and 
wicked  Syrian  Antioch,  drawn  to  the  Master's  side  in  the  fresh  dawn  of  manhood,  tried 
in  many  a  difficult  task  and  found  faithful,  the  words  of  Titus  exhorting  the  youth  of 
Crete  to  be  sober-minded  or  self-restrained  would  be  likely  to  have  great  weight." 
"  In  all  things  showing  thyself  a  pattern  [ensample]  of  good  works,  in  doctrine  showing 
•  uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity, sound  speech  that  cannot  be  condemned;  that  he  that 
is  of  the  contrary  part  may  be  ashamed,  having  no  evil  thing  to  say  of  you  [us]."  In 
order  that  the  exhortations  of  Titus  might  have  full  force,  Paul  here  addresses  an 
admonition  to  him.  He  is  to  show  himself  a  "  pattern  of  good  works  "  in  all  things ; 
lie  is  to  be  a  model  of  excellence  in  all  his  relations  to  the  men  and  women  of  Crete, 
both  the  aged  and  the  young.  He  must  be  pure,  grave,  and  sincere.  His  preaching, 
too,  should  be  such  that  could  not  be  "condemned" — sound,  healthy,  practical,  not 
fanciful,  sentimental,  and  morbid.  Ah  1  how  many  sermons  preached  every  Sunday 
men  of  reason,  thoughtfulness,  conscience,  recoil  from  and  condemn  I  "  Exhort  servants 
to  be  obedient  [in  subjection]  to  their  own  masters,  and  to  please  them  well  [to  be  well 
pleasing  to  them]  in  all  things;  not  answering  again  [not  gainsaying];  not  purloining, 
but  showing  all  good  fidelity."  Herein  is  enjoined  on  servants  obedience,  acquiescence, 
honesty,  faithfulness.  All  this  implies,  of  course,  that  the  master  is  what  he  ought  to 
be,  that  his  commands  are  righteous,  that  his  words  are  truthful,  and  that  the  work  he 
enjoins  is  lawful  and  right.  "  That  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour 
in  all  things."  Prom  this  it  would  seem  that  even  slaves,  in  righteously  serving  their 
masters,  may  even  honour  God  in  their  humble  service.  Thus  from  this  passage  we 
learn  that  genuine  morality  reaches  the  very  springs  of  the  heart,  the  fountain  of  all 
actions.    He  is  not  a  moral  man  who  only  acts  in  strictest  conformity  to  the  conven- 


can.  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  41 

tional  rules  of  society,  nor  is  he  even  a  moral  man  who  merely  fulfils  the  letter  of  the 
Divine  commands.  "All  these  commandments  have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up.  .  .  .  Tet 
one  thing  thou  lackest,"  etc.  He  only  is  the  true  man  whose  governing  sympathies 
flow  in  the  channels  of  eternal  right,  and  whose  activities  are  ever  engaged  in  endeavour! 
to  please  the  mighty  Maker  of  his  being.  The  will  of  God,  and  that  only,  is  the  datum 
of  true  ethics. 

III.  Genuine  morality  is  the  grand  purpose  op  gospel  teaching.  "  But  speak 
thou  the  things  which  become  [befit]  sound  doctrine,  that  the  aged  men,"  etc.  His 
teaching  is  to  be  in  contrast  with  that  of  the  false  teachers  mentioned  in  the  previous 
verses,  and  which  led  to  immorality  of  conduct.  This  verse  and  the  seventh,  urging 
Titus,  as  a  pieacher,  to  be  a  pattern  in  all  things,  both  in  his  teaching  and  his  conduct, 
justifies  the  inference  that  the  grand  end  of  gospel  teaching  is  the  promotion  of  genuine 
morality.  In  the  eighth  verse  of  the  next  chapter,  Paul  distinctly  states  that  Titus 
was  so  to  teach  that  his  hearers  might  be  "  careful  to  maintain  good  works."  This  is  a 
point  which  what  is  called  the  "  Church  "  has,  in  its  teachings,  practically  ignored.  The 
gospel  has  been  preached  to  sustain  theologies,  to  establish  sects,  and  to  maintain  certain 
institutions,  ecclesiastical  and  political,  instead  of  making  men  morally  good,  honest, 
faithful,  and  heroically  loyal  to  the  "  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  Here,  then,  we  have  the 
only  infallible  test  of  pulpit  usefulness.  In  what  does  the  real  utility  of  the  pulpit  con- 
sist ?  In  gathering  large  audiences  ?  Any  charlatan  can  do  this ;  and,  frequently,  the 
greater  the  charlatan  the  most  successful.  In  generating  in  the  congregation  the  largest 
amount  of  superficial  religious  sentiment?  This  often  emasculates  the. reason,  diseases 
the  conscience,  enervates  the  will,  and  renders  the  whole  atmosphere  of  the  soul  insalu- 
brious and  depressing.  No;  but  in  making  men  moral,  the  living  agents  evermore  of 
good  works.  I  estimate  a  true  Church,  not  by  the  number  of  its  members,  the  apparent 
earnestness  of  its  devotions,  or  the  amount  of  its  contributions,  but  by  the  number  of 
its  professors  who  are  too  truthful  to  lie,  too  honest  to  defraud,  too  morally  noble  to  do 
or  to  countenance  a  mean  or  a  dishonourable  act — to  whom,  in  short,  all  worldly  wealth 
and  power,  and  life  itself,  are  held  cheap  as  dirt  compared  with  the  right.  When 
Churches  are  made  up  of  such  members,  then,  and  not  until  then,  they  will  command 
the  confidence,  the  sympathy,  the  trade,  and  the  influence  of  the  world.  Well  does 
Emerson  say,  "  There  is  no  morality  without  religion,  and  there  is  no  religion  without 
morality.  '  This  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  his  commandments.'  He  who  loves 
God  keeps  the  commandment,  loves  God  in  action.  Love  is  obedience  in  the  heart, 
obedience  is  love  in  the  life.  Morality  is  religion  in  practice,  religion  is  morality  in 
principle."— D.  T. 

Vers.  11 — 15. — The  soul-culture  of  the  world.  "  For  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth 
salvation  hath  appeared  to  all  men,"  etc.  "  Taking  occasion  from  what  he  had  just 
said  of  the  connection  between  the  conduct  of  Christians  and  the  doctrine  they  pro- 
fessed to  have  received,  and  the  connection  of  both  with  the  glory  of  God,  the  apostle 
proceeds  in  these  verses  to  ground  the  whole  of  his  exhortations  respecting  the 
behaviour  of  Christians  in  the  essentially  moral  nature  and  design  of  the  grace  of 
God,  as  now  manifested  in  the  gospel  "(Dr.  Pairbairn).  As  if  the  apostle  had  said, 
"  Tou  must  exhort  all  orders,  those  of  every  age  and  condition,  of  each  sex,  bond  as  well 
as  free,  to  struggle  after  spiritual  goodness  because  the  'grace  of  God,'  or  the  gospel, 
has  come  to  you."  Our  subject  is  the  soul-culture  of  the  world.  Man  requires  training. 
He  needs  physical  training,  intellectual  training,  and,  above  all,  spiritual  training, 
the  training  of  the  soul  into  a  higher  life.  We  have  here  the  instrument,  the  process, 
and  the  end  of  true  soul-culture. 

I.  The  instrument  op  true  soul-culture.  What  is  it?  Not  science,  legisla- 
tion, philosophy,  poetry,  or  any  of  the  arts.  What,  then  ?  "  The  grace  of  God.'' 
What  is  that?  Undoubtedly  God's  merciful  plan  and  ministries  to  restore  the  fallen 
world.  The  Epiphany,  or  manifestation  of  this  redemptive  love  of  God  for  the  world, 
we  have  in  the  advent  and  ministry  of  Christ  to  this  earth.  "  The  grace  of  God  " 
stands  for  the  gospel.  Concerning  this  instrument,  observe :  1.  It  is  the  love  of  God. 
Divine  love  is  the  cause,  the  essence,  and  the  effective  energy  of  all  God's  redemptive 
ministries.  2.  It  is  the  love  of  Ood  to  save.  "  That  bringeth  [bringing]  salvation."" 
Salvation,  that  is,  the  restoration  of  man  to  the  knowledge,  the  image,  and  the  friend- 


4*  THE  EPISTLE  TO   TITUS.  [oh.  n.  1— Ik 

ship  of  God.  This  is  the  aim  and  the  work  of  the  "grace  of  God."  Without  this 
grace  there  would  be  no  salvation.  3.  It  is  the  love  of  God  revealed  to  all.  "  Hath 
appeared  to  all  men."  The  gospel  is  not  for  a  tribe  or  a  class,  but  for  man  as  man. 
Like  the  concave  heavens,  it  embraces  the  wide  world ;  it  is  for  _"  all  men." 

II.  The  pbocess  of  tkub  soul-cultube.  This  process  involves  three  things. 
1.  The  renunciation  of  a  wrong  course.  "  Denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts." 
These  expressions  are  an  epitome  of  all  that  is  sinful  and  wrong  in  human  life.  Are 
they  not  all-prevalent  and  all-potent?  "Ungodliness,"  or  practical  atheism,  where  is 
it  not?  "  Worldly  lusts,"  the  impulses  of  sensuality,  selfishness,  pride,  and  ambition, 
they  are  the  springs  of  worldly  action  the  world  over.  Now,  these  are  not  only  to  be 
renounced,  repudiated,  but  they  are  to  be  defied,  resisted,  and  renounced ;  they  must 
be  given  up.  "Ungodliness"  must  give  way  to  true  piety,  "worldly  lusts"  must  be 
renounced  for  impulses  spiritual  and  Divine.  2.  The  adoption  of  a  right  course. 
"  We  should  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world."  It  is  not 
enough  to  renounce  the  evil ;  the  good  must  be  adopted.  Negative  excellence  is  not 
holiness.  Strip  the  soul  of  all  evil,  and  if  it  has  not  goodness  in  it,  it  "  lacks  the  one 
thing  "  without  which,  Paul  says,  "  I  am  nothing."  We  must  live  "  soberly,"  holding 
a  mastery  over  our  own  passions  and  impulses ;  "  righteously,"  rendering  to  all  men 
their  due ;  *'  godly,"  practically  realizing  the  presence,  the  claims,  and  the  love  of  God 
in  our  every-day  life.  All  this  "  in  this  present  world,"  or  in  the  present  course  of 
things.  This  "  present  world"  urgently  requires  such  a  course  of  life,  for  it  is  dan- 
gerous and  transitory  withal  3.  The  fixing  of  the  heart  upon  a  glorious  future. 
"Looking  for  that  blessed  hcpe  and  the  glorious  appearance  of  the  [appearing  of  the 
glory  of  our]  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  Are  there  two  personalities 
here,  or  one  ?  One,  I  think.  "  The  great  God  our  Saviour,"  or  our  great  God  aud 
Saviour.  The  object  of  hope  is,  then,  the  future  epiphany  of  the  Divine,  all  glorious 
to  behold.  To  see  the  redemptive  God  as  we  have  never  yet  seen  him  in  this  morally 
hazy  scene,  this  is  the  "blessed  hope."  Such  a  hope  implies:  (1)  A  vital  interest 
in  the  epiphany.  We  never  hope  for  that  for  which  we  have  not  a  strong  desire. 
(2)  An  assurance  that  such  an  epiphany  will  take  place.  Desire,  of  itself,  is  not 
hope.  We  desire  many  things  we  cannot  hope  for.  It  becomes  hope  when  it  is  com- 
bined with  expectation,  and  expectation  implies  the  existence  of  grounds  or  reasons. 
That  there  will  be  such  a  manifestation,  there  are  abundant  reasons  found  in  the 
apparent  irregularities  of  Divine  Providence  in  its  operations  here,  in  the  instinctive 
longings  of  the  human  soul  throughout  all  lands  and  ages,  as  well  as  in  the  clear  aud 
frequent  declarations  of  the  written  Word. 

EEL  The  end  of  true  soul-culture.  "  Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might 
redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good 
works."  Observe:  1.  The  end  is  moral  redemption.  "  Redeem  us  from  all  iniquity." 
Redemption  is  not  something  thai  takes  place  outside  of  a  man ;  its  achievement  is 
within.  It  is  a  raising  of  the  soul  from  ignorance  to  knowledge,  from  vice  to  virtue, 
from  selfishness  to  disinterestedness,  from  materialism  to  spirituality,  from  the  mastery 
of  the  devil  to  the  reign  of  God.  2.  The  end  is  spiritual  restoration  to  Christ. 
"  Purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people  [a  people  for  his  own  possession]."  Restoration 
to  his  likeness,  his  friendship,  his  service.  3.  The  end  is  complete  devotedness  to  holy 
labour.  "  Zealous  of  good  works."  What  are  good  works?  Not  any  particular  class 
of  works.  All  works  are  good  that  spring  from  a  good  motive ;  and  the  good  motive 
is  supreme  love  for  the -Supremely  Good.  Works  springing  from  this  motive,  whether 
manual  or  mental,  social  or  personal,  civil  or  ecclesiastic,  public  or  private,  all  are 
good.  4.  The  end  involves  the  self-sacrifice  of  Christ.  "  Who  gave  himself."  Here 
is  the  grandest  sacrifice  ever  made  in  the  universe.  Nothing  grander  could  be.  (1) 
The  greatest  possession  a  man  has  is  himself.  What  are  millions  of  acres,  or  the  rule 
of  kingdoms,  in  the  estimation  of  the  owner  as  compared  to  himself?  "  Skin  for  skin," 
etc.  (2)  The  greatest  self  in  the  whole  creation  is  Christ.  He  was,  in  some  speckl 
sense  impenetrable  to  us,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  and  he  gave  himself.  If  he 
had  given  a  universe,  his  gift  would  not  have  been  equal  to  this.  His  gift  teacbea 
the  enormity  of  moral  evil. — D.  T. 


oh.  in.  1—15.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITU& 


<B 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  lit 


Ver.  1. — In  subjection  for  subject,  A.V.; 

f  ultra  for  principalities,  A.V. ;  to  authoritiea 
for  and  powers,  A.V.  and  T.B.  j  to  be  obedient 
for  to  obey  magistrates,  A.Y. ;  unto  for  to,  A.V. 
Put  them  in  mind  (uiro/ii/urprKe) ;  aa  2  Tim.  ii 
14.  To  rulers,  to  authorities.  Many  uncials, 
which  the  K.T.  follows,  omit  the  nal,  but  it 
seems  necessary  to  the  sense.  The  change 
from  "principalities  and  powers"  to  "  rulei-B" 
•mj  "  authorities  "  does  not  seem  desirable. 
'Apxiii  and  tfyvaiai  is  a  favourite  juxta- 
position of  St  Paul's  (1  Oor.  xv.  24;  Eph. 
i.  21 ;  iii.  10 ;  vi.  12  ;  Col.  i.  16;  ii.  10, 15). 
It  occurs  also  in  1  Pet.  iii.  22.  In  all  the 
above  examples  the  words,  it  is  true,  apply 
to  the  angelic  hosts,  but  the  words  are  else- 
where applied  separately  to  human  govern- 
ment, and  in  Luke  xx.  20,  they  are  applied 
together  to  the  authority  of  the  Roman 
governor.  To  he  obedient  (weteapx*'")  I  only 
here  and  in  Acts  v.  29,  32;  xxvii.  21.  It 
follows  here  its  classical  use,  "  to  obey  a 
superior,"  well  expressed  in  the  Authorized 
Version  "  to  obey  magistrates."  The  simple 
"to  be  obedient"  of  the  Revised  Version 
does  not  express  the  sense.  To  be  ready 
unto  every  good  work.  St.  Paul  is  still 
speaking  with  especial  reference  to  magis- 
trates and  the  civil  power.  Christians  were 
to  show  themselves  good  citizens,  always 
ready  for  any  duty  to  which  they  were 
called.  Christianity  was  not  to  be  an 
excuse  for  shirking  duties,  or  refusing 
obedience  where  it  was  due.  The  only 
limit  is  expressed  by  the  word  "good." 
They  were  to  give  tribute  to  whom  tribute 
was  due ;  custom  to  whom  custom ;  fear  to 
whom  fear;  honour  to  whom  honour;  but, 
if  ordered  to  do  evil,  then  they  must  resist, 
and  obey  God  rather  than  man  (Acts  iv.  19). 
(See  the  similar  limitation  in  ch.  ii.  10,  note, 
and  compare,  for  the  whole  verse,  the  very 
similar  passage,  Bom.  xiii.  1 — 7.) 

Ver.  2. — Not  to  be  contentious  for  to  be  no 
brawlers,  A.V. ;  to  be  for  but,  A.V. ;  toward 
for  unto,  A.V.  To  speak  evil  of  no  man 
(unSeva  0\a(r<p7iiitiv).  Probably  especially 
pointed  in  the  first  place  at  a  natural  ten- 
dency of  oppressed  Christians  to  speak  evil 
of  their  rulers  (2  Pet.  ii.  10;  Jude  10),  but 
extended  into  a  general  precept  which  might 
be  especially  needful  for  the  rough  and 
turbulent  Cretans.  Not  to  be  oontentious 
(audxovs  etvai) ;  as  1  Tim.  iii.  3,  note.  To 
be  gentle  (ImeiKew);  coupled,  as  here,  with 
dp.dxovs  in  1  Tim.  iii.  3.  Showing  (&£«• 
wvpivovs) ;  a  word  of  frequent  occurrence  in 
St.  Paul's  vocabulary  (Rom. ii.  15;  ix.  17,22; 
Eph.  ii.  7,  etc. ;  see  above,  oh,  M,  10,  xttol 


Meekness  (irpahnTa) ;  another  Pauline  word 
(1  Cor.  iv.  21 ;  2  Cor.  x.  1 ;  Gal.  v.  2i,  etc. ; 

1  Tim.  vi.  11 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  25).  The  precept 
is  given  its  widest  extension  by  the  double 
addition  of  "all"  and  "to  all  men."  The 
roughness,  or  want  of  courtesy,  of  others  is 
no  excuse  for  the  want  of  meekness  in  those 
who  are  the  disciples  of  him  who  was  meek 
and  lowly  in  heart  (Matt.  xi.  29).  All  men, 
whatever  their  station,  the  highest  or  the 
lowest,  are  to  receive  meek  and  gentle 
treatment  from  the  Christian. 

Ver.  3. — We  for  we  ourselves,  A.V. ;  afore- 
time for  sometimes,  A.V. ;  hating  for  and 
hating,  A.V.  Foolish  (jivArrroi);  a  Pauline 
word  (Gal.  iii.  1, 3),  found  also  in  Luke  xxiv. 
25  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  9);  of  frequent  use  in 
classical  Greek.  Disobedient  (dweiBeU) ;  as 
ch.  i.  16.  In  Luke  i.  17  it  stands,  as  here, 
absolutely,  meaning  disobedient  to  God  and 
his  Law.  Deceived  (ir\ca>t&)ievoi) ;  led  astray, 
made  to  wander  from  the  path  of  truth  and 
right,  either  by  false  systems  of  religion,  or 
by  our  own  evil  affections  and  appetites 
(see  2  Tim.  ii.  13 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  25 ;  2  Pet.  ii. 
15,  etc).    Serving;  slaves  to  (5«tAf  iovres) ; 

2  Pet.  ii.  19  (see  above,  ch.  ii.  2).  Lusts 
(jTtiOvitiaa);  not  always  in  a  bad  sense,  as 
here,  though  usually  so  (see  Luke  xxiL 
15;  Phil.  i.  23;  1  Thess.  ii.  17;  Bev.  xviii 
14).  Pleasures  (rfloyuis);  always  in  a  bad 
sense  in  the  New  Testament  (Luke  viii.  14 ; 
Jas.  iv.  1,  3;  2  Pet.  ii.  13).  Living  (5tt£- 
7oj>tcs)  ;  see  1  Tim.  ii.  2,  where  it  is  followed 
by  plan,  which  is  here  understood.  Aid-yew 
rhp  filov,  aiava,  xp^v0vt  o-dpftaroy,  etc.,  are 
common  phrases  both  in  the  LXX.  and  in 
classical  Greek  for  passing  or  spending  one's 
life,  time,  age,  etc.  But  it  is  only  found 
in  the  New  Testament  here  and  in  1  Tim. 
ii.  2.  Malice  (icaiciif).  This  word  is  some- 
times used  of  wickedness  generally,  as  Acts 
viii.  22 ;  Jas.  i.  21 ;  1  Cor.  v.  8 ;  and  pro- 
bably Bom.  i.  29;  and  even  of  badness  in 
things,  as  Matt.  vi.  34.  But  it  frequently 
in  the  New  Testament  denotes  malice,  the 
desire  to  do  harm  to  others,  as  Eph.  iv.  31 ; 
Col.  iii.  8,  etc.  Envy  ($B6vip);  almost 
always  found  in  St.  Paul's  enumeration  of 
sins  (Bom.  i.  29 ;  Gal.  v.  21  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  4, 
etc.).  Hateful  (o-t^tjtoi)  ;  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX. 
(though  the  verb  arv-yiw  occurs  once  or 
twice  in  the  Maccabees),  but  used  in  good 
classical  Greek.  The  above  is  a  sad  but 
too  true  picture  of  human  life  without  the 
sweetening  influences  of  God's  Holy  Spirit. 

Ver.  i.—When  for  after  that,  A.V.;  the 
kindness  of  God  our  Saviour;  and  his  love 
toward  man  for  the  kindness  and  love  of  God 
our  Sanfaur  toward  man,  A.V.     Kindness 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS. 


[ch.  m.  1—15. 


(xp^o'tA-ij?)  ;  tised  by  St.  Paul  only  in  the 
New  Testament,  and  by  him  frequently  in 
the  sense  of  "  kindness,"  whether  of  God  (aa 
Bom.  ii.  4 ;  xi.  22 ;  Eph.  ii.  7)  or  of  man 
(as  2  Cor.  vi.  6;  Gal.  v.  22;  Col.  iii.  12). 
In  Rom.  iii.  12,  where  it  has  the  wider  sense 
of  "  good  "  or  "  right,"  it  is  the  phrase  of  the 
LXX.,  who  use  xpi<rT^TTs  f°r  the  Hebrew 
3iB  In  like  manner,  XPI0"1-^*  'B  frequently 
used  in  the  sense  of  "  kind  "  (Luke  vi.  35 ; 
Kom.  ii.  4 ;  Col.  iii.  12 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  3).  This 
is  exactly  analogous  to  the  use  of  xaitis  and 
KOKia,  in  the  limited  sense  of  "malicious," 
"malice"  (see  preceding  note  to  ver.  3). 
Love  toward  man  (ipi\avBpamla)\  only  here 
and  Acts  xxviii.  2  in  the  New  Testament. 
It  occurs  repeatedly  in  the  Books  of  the 
Maccabees,  and  is  common  in  good  classical 
Greek.  God  our  Saviour  (see  1  Tim.  i.  1 ; 
ii.  3;  ch.  ii.  10,  etc.).  Appeared  (ch.  ii.  11). 
Ver.  5. — Done  in  for  of,  A.V. ;  did  our- 
$elve»  for  have  done,  A.V. ;  through  for  by, 
A.V.  By  works  (ej  ipyav);  i.e.  in  conse- 
quence  of.  God's  kindness  and  love  to  man 
did  not  spring  from  man's  good  work  as  the 
preceding  and  producing  conditions  (comp. 
Gal.  ii.  16,  and  the  notes  of  Bishops  Ellicott 
and  Lightfoot).  Done  in  righteousness  (t&v  iv 
StKtaouipri)  ;  the  particular  description  of  the 
works  wrought  in  a  sphere  or  element  of 
righteousness  (Alford  and  Ellicott).  Which 
we  did  ourselves;  emphasizing  that  they 
were  our  good  works,  done  by  us  in  a  state 
of  righteousness.  All  this,  as  the  cause 
of  our  salvation,  the  apostle  emphatically 
denies.  Not,  etc.,  hut  according  to  his  mercy 
he  saved  us.  The  predisposing  cause,  the 
rule  and  measure  of  our  salvation,  was  God's 
mercy  and  grace,  originating  and  completing 
that  salvation.  Through  the  washing  of 
regeneration  (Slot  Kovrpov  iraWiyevearlas'). 
Here  we  have  the  means  through  or  by 
which  God's  mercy  saves  us.  The  washing 
or  rather  laver  of  regeneration  (\ovrp6y) — 
found  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament 
only  in  Epli.  v.  26,  in  exactly  the  same 
connection — is  the  laver  or  bath  in  whicli  the 
washing  takes  place.  The  nature  or  quality 
of  this  bath  is  described  by  the  words,  "  of 
regeneration"  (tjjs TraKeyyevtatas);  elsewhere 
in  the  New  Testament  only  in  Matt.  xix.  28, 
where  it  seems  rather  to  mean  the  great 
restoration  of  humanity  at  the  second 
advent.  The  word  is  used  by  Cicero  of  his 
restoration  to  political  power,  by  Josephus 
of  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  under 
Zerubbabel,  and  by  several  Greek  authors; 
and  the  LXX.  of  Job  xiv.  14  have  the 
phrase,  etas  iraXiv  yera/uu,  but  in  what  sense 
is  not  quite  clear.  XlcAiyycveata,  therefore, 
very  fitly  describes  the  new  birth  in  holy 
baptism,  when  the  believer  is  put  into 
possession  of  a  new  spiritual  life,  a  new 
nature,  and  a  new  inheritance  of  glory.  And 


the  laver  of  baptism  is  called  "  foe  laver  of 
regeneration,"  because  it  is  the  ordained 
means  by  or  through  which  regeneration  is 
obtained.  And  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
It  is  doubtful  whether  the  genitive  &raj«u- 
vtaaeus  depends  upon  Bt&  or  upon  Xovrpov. 
Bengel,  followed  by  Alford,  takes  the  former, 
"  per  lavacrum  et  renovationem  ;  "  the 
Vulgate  (lavacrum  regenerationit  et  renova- 
tionis  Spiritus  Sancti),  the  latter,  followed 
by  Hutner,  Bishop  Ellicott,  and  others.  It 
is  difficult  to  hit  upon  any  conclusive  argu- 
ment for  one  Bide  or  the  other.  But  it  is 
against  the  latter  construction  that  it  gives 
such  a  very  long  rambling  sentence  depen- 
dent upon  Aoirpov.  "  The  laver  of  regenera- 
tion and  of  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour."  And  it  is  in 
favour  of  the  former  that  the  "laver  of 
regeneration"  and  "the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost "  seem  to  describe  very  clearly 
the  two  parts  of  the  sacrament,  the  outward 
visible  sign  and  the  inward  spiritual  grace ; 
the  birth  of  water  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
So  that  Bengel's  rendering  seems  on  the 
whole  to  be  preferred.  Renewing  (ii/cucai- 
vd>aeais);  only  here  and  Bom.  xii.  2,  and 
not  at  all  in  the  LXX.  or  in  classical  Greek. 
But  the  verb  &,micaui6a  is  found  in  2  Cor.  iv. 
16;  Col.  iii.  10.  The  same  idea  is  in  the 
natvii  kthtis,  the  "  new  creature  "  of  2  Cor.  v. 
17  and  Gal.  vi.  15,  and  the  kmv6ti)s  (a>rjs  of 
Bom.  vi.  4,  and  the  KaivSnjs  irveijiaTos  of 
Bom.  vii.  6,  and  in  the  contrast  between 
the  "  old  man  "  (the  ira\atbs  HvBpamos)  and 
"the  new  man"  (the  xaivbs  &v8panrot)  of 
Eph.  iv.  22—24.  This  renewal  is  the  work 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  new  birth,  when 
men  are  "  bom  again  "  of  the  Spirit  (John 
iii  5).  Alford  is  wrong  .in  denying  its 
application  here  to  the  first  gift  of  the  new 
life.  It  is  evidently  parallel  with  the 
TraAiyyeaia.  The  connection  of  baptism 
with  the  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  fully 
set  forth  in  Acts  it  (see  especially  ver.  38 ; 
comp.  Matt.  iii.  16,  17). 

Ver.  6. — Poured  out  upon  us  richly  for  shed 
on  us  abundantly,  A.V.  Which  (oS);  viz. 
the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  in  the  genitive  (in- 
stead of  the  accusative  S,  which  is  another 
reading),  by  what  the  grammarians  call 
attraction.  Poured  out  (<^xE<") ;  the  same 
word  as  is  applied  to  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
Acts  ii.  17, 18,  33,  and  in  the  LXX.  of  Joel 
ii.  28,  29.  Kiohly  (irAowrtas) ;  as  1  Tim.  vi. 
17;  Col.  iii.  16;  2  Pet.  i  11  (compare  the 
use  of  it\oDtos  in  Eph.  i.  7 ;  ii.  7).  Through 
Jesus  Christ.  It  is  our  baptism  into  Christ 
which  entitles  us  to  receive  the  Holy  Spirit, 
which  we  have  only  in  virtue  of  our  nnion 
with  him.  The  Spirit  flows  from  the  Head 
to  the  members.  In  Acts  ii.  33,  34  Christ 
is  said  to  have  received  the  promiso  of  the 


oh.  in.  1 — 15.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITD8. 


45 


Holy  Spirit  from  the  Father,  and  to  have 
poured  it  forth  upon  the  Church. 

Ver.  7.— Might  for  should,  A.V.  Being 
justified  by  his  graoe ;  showing  very  clearly 
that  righteousness  in  man  did  not  precede 
and  cause  the  saving  mercy  of  God,  but 
tliat  mercy  went  before  and  provided  the 
justification  which  is  altogether  of  grace, 
and  which  issues  in  the  possession  of  eternal 
life.  Heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal 
life.  This  seems  to  be  the  right  rendering 
rather  than  that  in  the  margin,  heirs, 
according  to  hope,  of  eternal  life,  making 
"eternal  life"  depend  upon  "heirs."  The 
passage  in  ch.  i.2,  "In  hope  of  eternal  life," 
is  a  very  strong  reason  for  taking  the  same 
construction  here.  The  answer  in  the 
Church  Catechism,  "Wherein  I  was  made 
a  member  of  Christ,  a  child  of  God,  and  an 
inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  follows 
very  closely  St.  Paul's  teaching  in  the  text 
(see  Rom.  iv.  13, 14;  viii.  17:  Gal.  iii.  29, 
iv.  7). 

Ver.  8. — Faithful  is  (he  saying  for  this  is  a 
faithful  saying,  A.V. ;  concerning  these  things 
for  these  things,  A.V. ;  confidently  for  con- 
stantly, A.V. ;  to  the  end  that  for  that,  A.V. ; 
God  for  t'n  God,  A.V. ;  may  for  might,  AV. ; 
full  stop  after  good  works,  and  colon  after 
men.  Faithful  is  the  saying;  as  1  Tim. 
i.  15  (where  see  note).  Here  the  faithful 
saying  can  only  be  the  following  maxim: 
"That  they  which  have  believed  in  God  may 
be  careful  to  maintain  good  works;"  the 
words, "  These  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm 
confidently,"  being  interpolated  to  give  yet 
more  weight  to  it.  Concerning  these  things ; 
i.e.  with  respect  to  the  things  or  truths 
which  are  the  subject  of  the  faithful  saying. 
I  will  that  thou  affirm  confidently  (8iaj6ej8a<- 
ovo-Bat);  see  1  Tim.  i.  7.  "Never  be  weary 
of  dwelling  on  these  important  truths,  and 
asserting  them  with  authority.  For  such 
doctrine  is  really  good  and  profitable  for 
those  whom  you  are  commissioned  to  teach. 
But  leave  alone  the  foolish  and  unprofitable 
controversies."  To  the  end  that  (iW)-  It  is 
not  necessary  to  give  to  iva  the  meaning 
"to  the  end  that,"  in  such  a  sentence  as 
this  (Bee  note  on  ch.  ii.  12).  After  words  of 
commandespecially.Wf  requently,  has  simply 
the  force  of  "  that."  So  here,  "  lay  it  down 
as  a  rule  that  they  which  have  believed  God 
must  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works." 
If  the  sentence  had  run  on  without  inter- 
ruption, it  would  have  been  marls  &  \6yos 
oVi,  k.t.A.  Bnt  the  interposition  of  the 
8iai8ej8aioE<r0ai,  with  the  idea  of  commanding 
obedience,  has  caused  the  use  of  iW.  Be- 
lieved God  (of  irdriffTeuKoVes  @eif,  or  Ty  ©eijj). 
The  meaning  is  not  the  same  as  vurreit  ii> 
iv,  or  M,  "to  believe  in,"  or  "  on,"  but  "to 
believe"  (as  Rom.  iv.  3, 17  and  1  John  v.  10, 
when  the  context  shows  that  it  is  the  aet  of 


believing  God's  promise  that  is  meant).  And 
so  here,  the  believing  refers  to  the  promises 
implied  in  the  preceding  reference  to  the 
hope  and  the  inheritance.  Hay  be  careful 
(QpovTlfoo-i);  only  here  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, but  common  in  the  LXX.  and  in 
classical  Greek.  The  word  means  "  to  give 
thought "  about  a  thing,  "  to  be  careful "  or 
"  anxious  "  about  it.  To  maintain  (vpotora- 
<r0ai);  usually  iu  the  sense  of  "presiding 
over "  or  "  ruling "  (as  Rom.  xii.  8 ;  1 
Thess.  v.  12 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  4,  5,  12 ;  v.  17). 
Here,  after  the  analogy  of  the  classical  use, 
vpoiaTaaSat  -ri%vi\s,  to  "  undertake,"  toj"carry 
on,"  or  the  like,  fairly  expressed  by  to 
"  maintain."  The  idea  does  not  seem  to  be 
"to  stand  at  the  head  of,"  or  "to  be  fore- 
most in."  Good  works ;  i.e.  practical  godli- 
ness of  all  kinds  (see  ver.  It).  These 
things  are  good,  etc  If  the  reading  of  the 
T.R.,  t&  KaAcb,  k.t.K.,  is  retained,  the  render- 
ing ought  to  be,  "  These  are  the  things  that 
are  really  good  and  profitable  unto  men,  not 
foolish  questions,  etc.,  they  are  unprofitable." 
But  the  R.T.  omits  the  ri.  With  regard  to 
the  interpretation  above  given  of  ver.  8,  it 
must  be  admitted  that  it  is  very  doubtful. 
But  the  great  difficulty  of  the  other  way  of 
rendering  it,  as  most  commentators  do,  is 
that  it  is  impossible  to  say  which  part  of 
what  precedes  is  "the  faithful  saying" 
alluded  to ;  and  that  the  "  care  to  maintain 
good  works"  is  not  that  which  naturally 
springs  from  it ;  whereas  the  reiteration  in 
ver.  8  implies  that  "good  works"  is  the 
special  subject  of"  the  faithful  saying." 

Ver.  9. — Shun  for  avoid,  A.V. ;  question- 
ings for  question*,  A.V.;  strifes  for  conten- 
tions, A.V. ;  fightings  for  strivings,  A.V. 
Shun  (jrepiUrraao) ;  see  2  Tim.  ii.  16.  Foolish 
questionings ;  as  2  Tim.  ii.  23.  Genealogies ; 
as  1  Tim.  i.  4.  Strifes  (?/>e»);  as  1  Tim. 
vL  4.  Fightings  about  the  Law  (jidxas 
vofunis);  such  as  St.  Paul  alludes  to  in 
1  Tim.  i.,  and  are  probably  included  in  the 
\oyo/j.axlai  of  1  Tim.  vi.  4.  Unprofitable 
(ava><pe\eis) ;  only  here  and  Heb.  vii.  18; 
but  it  is  found  in  the  LXX.  and  other 
Greek  Versions,  and  in  classical  Greek 
(compare,  for  the  sense,  2  Tim.  ii.  14).  Vain 
(fidraioi) ;  compare  the  use  of  ncmuoXiyoi, 
"  vain  talkers  "  (oh.  i.  10),  and  paTcuoKoyia, 
"vain  talking"  (1  Tim.  L  6).  The  whole 
picture  is  unmistakably  one  of  the  perverse 
Jewish  mind. 

Ver.  10. — Heretical  for  an  heretick,  A.V. ; 
a  for  the,  A.V. ;  refuse  for  reject,  A.V.  He- 
retioal  (alperiKiv);  only  here  in  the  New 
Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX.,  but 
used  in  classical  Greek  for  "intelligent," 
i.e.  able  to  choose.  The  use  of  it  here  by 
St.  Paul  is  drawn  from  the  use  of  alparis 
for  "  a  sect"  (Acts  v.  17;  xv.  5;  xxiv.  5, 14; 
xxvi.  5;  xxviii.  22;  1  Oor.  xi.  19;  Gal  v. 


46 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS. 


[ch.  nr.  1—15. 


20 ;  2  Pel  ii.  1),  or  the  doctrines  taught  by 
a  sect  The  heretic  is  one  who  forsakes  the 
truth  held  by  the  Church,  and  eltooses  some 
doctrine  of  his  own  devising  (atpe<ris).  The 
tendency  of  such  departures  from  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Church  to  assume  more  and 
more  of  a  deadly  character,  and  to  depart 
wider  and  wider  from  the  truth,  gave  to  the 
name  of  heretic  a  darker  shade  of  condem- 
nation in  the  mouth  of  Church  writers  as 
time  advanced.  But  even  in  apostolic  times 
some  denied  the  resurrection  (2  Tim.  ii.  11, 
12);  others  denied  the  Lord  that  bought 
them  (2  Pet.  ii.  1);  and  there  were  some 
who  were  of  the  synagogue  of  Satan  (Eev. 
ii.  9) ;  so  that  already  an  heretical  man, 
drawing  away  disciples  after  him,  was  a 
great  blot  in  the  Church.  Admonition  (yov 
Ofo-ia);  as  1  Cor.  x.  11;  Eph.  yi.  4.  After 
a  first  and  second  admonition  refuse  (irapai- 
tiiE);  see  1  Tim.  iv.  7;  v.  11.  It  does  not 
clearly  appear  what  is  intended  by  this 
term.  In  I  Tim.  v.  11  it  meant  refusing 
admission  into  the  college  of  Church  widows. 
If  these  had  been  persons  seeking  admission 
into  the  Church,  or  ordination,  it  would  mean 
"  refuse  them."  Vitringa  (Huther)  thinks  it 
means  "  excommunication."  Beza,  Ellicott, 
Huther,  Alford,  etc.,  render  it  "  shun,"  "  let 
alone,"  "  cease  to  admonish,"  and  the  like. 

Ver.  11. — Such  a  one  for  he  that  is  such, 
A.V. ;  perverted  for  subverted,  A.V. ;  self- 
condemned  for  condemned  of  himself,  A.V. 
Is  perverted  (eJeVTpmrrai) ;  only  here  in  the 
New  Testament,  but  common  in  the  LXX., 
and  found  in  classical  Greek  in  a  material 
sense,  "to  turn  inside  out,"  "to  root  up," 
and  the  like.  Here  it  means  the  complete 
perversion  of  the  man's  Christian  character, 
so  as  to  leave  no  hope  of  his  amendment. 
But  this  is  not  to  be  presumed  till  a  first 
and  second  admonition  have  been  given  in 
vain.  Self  •  condemned  (auTo/coTttapiTos) ; 
only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  not  found 
in  the  LXX.  nor  in  classical  Greek.  It 
means  what  Cicero  (quoted  by  Schleusner) 
■ays  of  C.  Fabricius,  that  he  was  suojudicio 
condemnatus,  condemned  by  his  own  judg- 
ment, which,  he  says,  is  a  heavier  condemna- 
tion than  even  that  of  the  law  and  of  the 
judges  ('Fro  Cluentio,'  21,  at  the  end). 
Fabricius  was  self-condemned  because  he 
had  left  the  court  in  confusion  at  a  oritical 
part  of  his  trial.  So  the  heretics  were  self- 
condemned  by  the  very  fact  that  they  con- 
tinued to  head  the  schism  after  repeated 
admonitions. 

Ver.  12. — Give  diligence  for  be  diligent, 
A.V. ;  there  I  have  determined  for  I  have 
determined  there,  A.V.  When  I  shall  send 
Artemas,  etc.  The  action  of  St.  Paul  in 
sending  Artemas  or  Tychicus  to  take  the 
place  of  Titus  in  Crete  is  exactly  the  same 
as  he  pursued  with  regard    to  Ephesus, 


whither  he  sent  Tychicus  to  take  Timothy's 
place  (2  Tim.  iv.  11,  12).  He  would  not 
leave  the  presbyters  in  either  place  without 
the  direction  and  superintendence  of  one 
having  his  delegated  apostolic  authority. 
This  led  to  the  final  placing  of  a  resident 
bishop  in  the  Churches,  such  as  we  find  in 
the  second  century.  We  may  conclude  that 
Artemas  (otherwise  unknown)  was  the  per- 
son eventually  sent  to  Crete,  as  Tychicus 
(Col.  iv.  7)  we  know  went  to  Ephesus  (2 
Tim.  iv.  12).  We  have  also  an  important 
note  of  time  in  this  expression,  snowing 
clearly  that  this  Epistle  was  written  before 
the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  (as  it  pro- 
bably also  was  before  1  Timothy) — an  infer- 
ence abundantly  corroborated  by  2  Tim.  iv. 
10,  by  which  it  appears  that  Titus  had  then 
actually  joined  St.  Paul,  either  at  Nicopolis 
or  elsewhere,  and  had  started  off  again  to 
Dalmatia.  Give  diligenoe  (airoiSturov) ;  2 
Tim.  ii.  15,  note;  iv.  9,  21.  Nicopolis,  in 
Epirus.  The  most  obvious  reason  for  St. 
Paul's  wintering  at  Nicopolis  is  that  it  was 
near  Apollonia,  the  harbour  opposite  Brin- 
disium,  which  would  be  his  way  to  Borne, 
and  also  well  situated  for  the  missionary 
work  in  Dalmatia,  which  we  learn  from  2 
Tim.  iv.  10  was  in  hand.  Nicopolis  (the  city 
of  victory)  was  built  by  Augustus  Cessar 
to  commemorate  the  great  naval  victory 
at  Actium  over  Antony.  It  is  now  a  com- 
plete ruin,  uninhabited  except  by  a  few 
shepherds,  but  with  vast  remains  of  broken 
columns,  baths,  theatres,  etc  (Lewin,  vol. 
ii.  p.  253).  To  winter  (irapuxfiii&rai);  Acts 
xxvii.  12;  xxviii.  11;  1  Cor.  xvi.  6.  (On 
the  question  whether  the  winter  here  re- 
ferred to  is  the  same  winter  as  that  men- 
tioned in  2  Tim.  iv.  21,  see  Introduction.) 

Ver.  13.— Set  forward  for  bring,  A.V. 
Set  forward  (irf  (brE/ufw) ;  the  technical  ex- 
pression both  in  the  New  Testament  and 
the  LXX.,  and  also  in  classical  Greek,  for 
helping  a  person  forward  on  their  journey 
by  supplying  them  with  money,  food,  letters 
of  recommendation,  escort,  or  whatever  else 
they  might  require  (see  Acts  xv.  3;  xx.  38; 
xxi.  5;  Bom.  xv.  24;  1  Cor.  xvi.  6;  2  Cor. 
i.  16;  3  John  6).  Zenas  the  lawyer.  He  is 
utterly  unknown.  His  name  is  short  for 
Zenodorus,  but  whether  he  was  "a  Jewish 
scribe  or  Boman  legist "  can  hardly  be  de- 
cided. But  his  companionship  with  Apollos, 
and  the  frequent  application  of  the  term 
vo/wciiv  in  the  New  Testament  to  the  Jewish 
scribes  and  lawyers  (Matt.  xxii.  35;  Luke 
vii.  30 ;  x.  25 ;  xi.  45,  48,  52 ;  xiv.  3),  makes 
it  most  probable  that  he  was  »  Jewish 
lawyer.  Apollos;  the  well-known  and  emi- 
nent Alexandrian  Jew,  who  was  instructed 
in  the  gospel  by  Aquila  and  Piiscilla  at 
Ephesus,  and  became  a  favourite  teacher  at 
Corinth  (Acts  xviii.24;  xix.  1;  1  Cor.  i  12, 


oh.  in.  1 — 16.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS. 


47 


and  the  following  chapters,  and  xvi.  12). 
It  is  a  probable  conjecture  of  Lewin's  that 
A  polios  was  the  bearer  of  this  letter,  written 
at  Corinth,  and  was  on  his  way  to  Alexan- 
dria, his  native  place,  taking  Crete  on  the 
way. 

Ver.  14. — Our  people  for  ours,  A.V.  Our 
people  also.  The  natura?  inference  is  that 
Titos  had  some  fund  at  his  disposal  with 
which  he  was  to  help  the  travellers,  but  that 
St.  Paul  wished  the  Cretan  Christians  to 
contribute  also.  But  it  may  also  mean,  as 
Huther  suggests,  "  Let  our  Christians  learn 
to  do  what  Jews  do,  and  even  heathens  too, 
viz.  provide  for  the  real  wants  of  their  own." 
To  maintain  good  works  (ver.  8,  note)  for 


neoessary  use!  (e/$  ras  itvayxalas  xpctai); 
such  as  the  wants  of  the  missionaries  (comp. 
3  John  5,  6;  see  also  Rom.  xii.  13;  Phil.  ii. 
25 ;  iv.  16,  etc.).  The  phrase  means  "  urgent 
necessities,"  the  "  indispensable  wants." 
In  classical  Greek  t&  &.v<iyKqta  are  "the 
necessaries  of  life."  That  they  be  not  un- 
fruitful (£/rap7n>i);  comp.  2  Pet.  i.  8  and 
Col.  i.  6, 10. 

Ver.  15. — Salute  for  greet,  A.V. ;  faith  for 
the  faith,  A.V.  That  love  us  in  faith  has  no 
sense.  "The  faith"  is  right  (see  1  Tim.  i. 
2,  note).  Grace  be  with  you  all.  So,  with 
slight  varieties,  end  St.  Paxil's  other  Epistles. 
The  T.R.  has  Amen,  as  have  most  of  the 
other  Epistles 


HOMILETICSw 

Vers .  1 — 7. — Mercy  begetting  mercy.  The  practical  lessons  of  the  gospel  were  not 
exhausted  in  the  preceding  chapter,  nor  the  motives  which  urge  believers  to  godliness. 
The  call  to  holiness  in  the  last  chapter  was  based  upon  the  holy  character  of  God's 
saving  grace  and  the  purpose  of  Christ's  redeeming  love.  In  these  verses  the  grace 
and  love  of  God  are  still  the  basis  of  the  exhortation,  but  it  takes  its  peculiar  colouring 
from  the  thought  of  what  we  were  ourselves.  Tenderness,  indulgence,  and  meekness 
toward  our  fellow-men  are  the  duties  to  which  these  verses  call  us ;  and  it  is  supposed 
that  those  fellow-men  may  be  rough  and  evil-minded  toward  us,  and  provoking  in  their 
ways,  and  perhaps  obstinate  in  evil-doing.  The  natural  heart  might  be  ready  to  speak 
evil  of  them,  to  contend  fiercely  with  them,  utterly  to  reject  them  as  reprobates,  to 
thrust  them  beyond  the  pale  of  hope  and  kindness.  But  stay  I  What  were  you  your- 
selves when  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  first  appeared  unto  you?  Were  you  walking 
in  righteousness?  Were  your  works  the  things  which  attracted  God's  love  toward 
you  ?  Nay !  you  were  living  in  that  folly  which  you  now  condemn  in  others ;  you 
were  children  of  disobedience  then  as  truly  as  they  are  now ;  you  were  deceived  by  sin 
then  as  they  are  now ;  you  were  the  slaves  of  your  own  lusts  then  even  as  they  are 
now ;  you  lived  in  malice  and  envy  then,  both  hateful  and  hating  one  another.  But 
God's  mercy  found  you  out;  God's  love  threw  a  veil  Over  your  sins;  he  provided  a 
fountain  to  wash  away  your  guilt ;  he  sent  his  Holy  Spirit  to  create  in  you  a  clean 
heart,  and  to  renew  a  right  spirit  within  you ;  he  justified  you  by  his  grace ;  he  made 
you  his  heirs,  and  gave  you  the  hope  of  eternal  life.  And  will  not  you  have  mercy 
upon  your  fellow-men  ?  Will  not  you,  for  whom  the  Divine  gentleness  and  patience 
has  done  so  much,  be  gentle  and  patient  too  ?  Will  not  you  humble  in  the  remem- 
brance of  your  own  sins,  and  abashed  at  the  thought  of  your  own  unworthiness,  deal 
meekly  and  kindly  even  with  unruly  and  sinful  men,  and  cherish  the  hope  that  God's 
boundless  grace  may  at  last  reach  them,  even  as  it  reached  you  ?  Thus  the  doctrine  of 
God's  mercy  toward  men  begets  mercy  from  man  to  man,  and  the  doctrine  of  grace  is 
the  strongest  conceivable  motive  to  charity. 

Vers.  8 — 15.— Pearls  before  swine.  There  is  in  some  a  habit  of  mind  utterly  out  of 
harmony  with  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  not  that  dogmas,  or  creeds,  or  ceremonies  are 
despised  and  forgotten  by  them,  as  they  usually  are  by  the  pleasure-seeking  or  money- 
making  world.  On  the  contrary,  these  things  are  often  in  their  minds  and  upon  their 
lips.  But  they  handle  everything,  not  with  a  view  to  growth  in  goodness,  not  with 
a  view  to  the  formation  within  of  a  humble,  pure,  and  holy  character,  but  merely  as 
matters  of  disputation.  They  raise  questions,  the  solution  of  which  has  no  bearing 
upon  onr  duty  to  God  or  man,  but  which  only  give  occasion  for  strife  of  words,  and 
utterly  unprofitable  contentions.  The  most  solemn  truths,  the  most  sacred  mysteries 
of  the  Christian  faith,  are  only  food  for  a  wrangling,  disputatious  spirit.  They  are 
always  ready  to  start  difficulties,  to  suggest  doubts,  or  to  propose  new  forms  of  doctrine 


48  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ch.  m.  1—15. 

in  lieu  of  those  once  delivered  to  the  saints.  Strong  in  their  own  conceits  and  wise  in 
their  own  esteem,  they  will  not  learn,  no,  not  from  Christ  himself,  but  are  always 
forward  to  teach  some  new  thing.  They  value  nothing  which  they  have  not  invented 
themselves.  They  accept  no  truth  which  they  have  not  adulterated  with  their  own 
imaginations.  Disciples  they  will  not  be.  Masters  they  must  be.  When  this  habit 
of  mind  has  clearly  developed  itself,  the  servant  of  God  has  only  to  withdraw  from 
such.  He  must  not  be  drawn  into  the  whirlpool  of  vain  jangling  and  unprofitable 
disputes.  He  must  not  go  on  casting  his  pearls  before  the  swine.  Silence  is,  in  such 
cases,  the  best  rebuke.  When  honest  and  gentle  efforts  to  bring  home  to  such  persons 
the  truths  of  God's  Word  in  a  reverential  and  practical  way  have  utterly  failed,  and  it 
is  become  evident  that  there  is  no  desire  in  their  hearts  for  Christ  and  his  Word,  it  is 
time  to  cease  from  such  efforts.  "  From  such  turn  away  "  is  the  authoritative  advice 
of  St.  Paul.  Nothing  can  be  in  sharper  contrast  with  the  "  unprofitable  strivings  "  here 
condemned  than  the  unobtrusive  works  of  kindness,  and  active  help  to  the  furtherance 
of  the  gospel,  inculcated  upon  Titus.  Zenas  and  Apollos  are  to  be  brought  on  their 
way.  Care  is  to  be  taken  that  they  want  for  nothing.  The  Church  in  Crete  is  to  be 
fruitful  in  good  works  for  the  wants  of  their  brethren  ;  and  even  the  closing  salutation 
is  redolent  of  love  and  kindness.  When  Christians  feel  that  the  very  essence  of  Chris- 
tianity is  unobtrusive  love  and  kindness,  shown  in  unselfish  acts,  and  a  readiness  to 
help  wherever  help  is  needed,  then  will  the  Church  be  Christ's  true  witness  upon  earth ; 
witnessing  to  Christ  as  the  embodiment  of  the  law  of  love,  and  witnessing  to  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  as  dwelling  in  her  of  a  truth. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Yer.  1. — Political  duties.  The  apostle  now  turns  to  the  duties  which  Christians  owe 
to  the  pagan  world  around  them. 

L  The  Secessity  of  the  injunction  to  political  submission.  "Put  them  in 
mind."  The  words  imply  that  the  duty  was  already  known,  but  needed  to  be  recalled 
to  Cretan  memory.  It  is  but  too  certain  that  the  injunction  was  needed.  Once  a 
democratic  state,  now  for  over  a  century  under  Roman  law,  and  always  remarkable  for 
a  factious  and  turbulent  spirit,  the  Cretan  impatience  of  authority  was  reinforced  by 
the  spirit  of  insubordination  which  was  such  a  characteristic  of  the  Jewish  part  of  the 
community. 

H.  The  duty  of  submission  to  constituted  authority.  "  Put  them  in  mind  to 
be  subject  to  authorities,  to  powers,  to  obey  the  magistrate,  to  be  ready  towards  every 
good  work."  The  very  redundancy  of  words  used  here  is  significant,  as  if  to  exclude 
the  possibility  of  an  evasion  of  the  command.  1.  Government  is  of  God.  "  The  powers 
that  be  are  ordained  of  God"  (Rom.  xiii.  1 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  13).  2.  The  form  of  government 
does  not  affect  the  duty  of  obedience.  Monarchies,  republics,  oligarchies,  have  in  them 
alike  the  ordination  and  power  of  God  for  the  welfare  of  society.  3.  There  are  limits  to 
this  obedience,  but  the  apostle  does  not  fix  them.  The  exceptional  cases  are  not  men- 
tioned, because  they  are  summed  up  either  in  the  primary  law  of  self-preservation, 
which  is  antecedent  to  all  government,  or  in  the  supremacy  of  conscience,  which  must 
always  obey  God  rather  than  men.  A  king  may  become  insane  and  murder  his  subjects, 
but  the  first  principles  of  nature  justify  their  resort  to  force  in  self-protection  (Acts 
v.  29 ;  iv.  9,  20).  The  king  may  command  his  subjects  to  practise  idolatry.  In  that 
case,  if  the  Christian  cannot  resist,  he  must  die. 

HL  Political  duty  in  the  case  of  Christians  inoludes  moke  than  submission. 
They  must  be  "  ready  toward  every  good  work."  As  the  magistrate  is  appointed  to  be 
a  terror  to  evil-doers  and  the  praise  of  them  that  do  well  (Rom.  xiii.  3),  the  disposition 
of  Christian  subjects  to  every  good  work  has  a  tendency  to  make  government  easy  and 
light— T.  C. 

Ver.  2. — The  right  deportment  of  Christians  toward  all  men.  It  is  described  first 
negatively,  then  positively. 

I.  They  must  not  be  revtlers.  "  To  speak  evil  of  no  man."  1.  What  evils  spring 
from  the  wrong  use  of  the  tongue  I    "  It  is  an  unruly  evil"  (J  as.  iii.  8).    2.  If  the  evil 


oH.m.1— IB.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  49 

we  speak  of  others  is  false,  we  are  slanderers ;  if  it  is  true,  we  sin  against  charity. 
It  usually  betokens  a  malignant  spirit.  3.  It  is  to  forget  the  example  of  Christ^-"  who, 
when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again ; "  and  the  precepts  of  Christ,  who  taught  us 
"to  love  our  enemies."  Let  Christians,  therefore,  guard  their  tongues,  and  let  their  words 
be  few  and  well-ordered. 

IT.  They  must  not  be  contentious.  "  No  brawlers."  1.  Such  a  disposition  mart, 
the  influence  of  Christian  people.  2.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  spirit  of  him  who  did 
not  strive,  nor  was  his  voice  heard  in  the  streets.  3.  It  leads  to  unseemly  retaliations 
from  the  world,  to  the  dishonour  of  Christ. 

III.  They  must  be  forbearing.  "  But  gentle."  It  suggests  the  idea  of  giving  way, 
of  taking  wrong  rather  than  of  revenging  the  injuries  we  receive. 

IV.  Ihey  must  be  meek  to  all  men.  "Showing  all  meekness  to  all  men."  1, 
Meekness  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  (Gal.  v.  22.)  2.  It  is  precious  in  God's  sight. 
(1  Pet.  iii.  4.)  3.  It  is  a  characteristic  of  true  wisdom.  (Jas.  iii.  17.)  4.  It  is  neces- 
sary to  a  Christian  walk.  (Eph.  iv.  1,  2.)  5.  It  is  specially  needed  in  our  conduct 
toward  our  fellow-men  (Jas.  iii.  13) ;  in  our  efforts  to  restore  the  erring  (Gal.  vi.  lx 
and  to  instruct  opposers  (2  Tim.  ii.  24,  25). — T.  C. 

Ver.  3. — An  humiliating  retrospect.  The  apostle  adds,  as  a  reason  for  the  duties  first 
specified,  that  "  we  also,"  including  himself  with  the  Gentile  Christians,  were  once  in 
a  similar  condition  to  the  heathen,  and  had  received  mercy.  It  is  a  dark  picture  of  men 
in  their  natural  state,  proceeding  from  a  description  of  the  inward  source  to  the  outward 
facts  of  this  evil  life. 

I.  Human  nature  depicted  as  to  its  mobe  inward  character.  "  For  we  our- 
selves "  were  once  foolish.  1.  It  is  foolish.  As  wisdom  is  the  choice  of  proper  means 
of  attaining  our  ends,  so  folly  must  be  the  direct  contrary.  (1)  The  fool  despises 
instruction  and  wisdom,  and  hates  knowledge  (Prov.  i.  7,  22).  (2)  He  walks  in  the 
darkness  of  a  false  education  (Eccles.  ii.  14).  (3)  He  is  self-sufficient  and  self-confident 
(Prov.  xiv.  8,  16).  (4)  He  is  a  self-deceiver  (Prov.  xiv.  8).  (5)  He  makes  a  mock  at 
sin  (Prov.  xiv.  9).  2.  It  is  disobedient.  The  word  implies  that  the  root  of  all  true 
obedience  is  faith.  Human  nature  is  without  faith,  and  is  therefore  disobedient.  (1) 
Disobedience  forfeits  God's  favour  (1  Sam.  xiii.  14).  (2)  Provokes  his  anger  (Pa. 
lxxviii.  10,  40).  (3)  Forfeits  promised  blessings  (Josh.  v.  6).  (4)  Brings  a  curse 
(Deut.  xi.  28).  (5)  There  are  many  warnings  against  it  (J»r.  xii.  17).  3.  It  is 
deceived.  Because  it  is  separated  from  Christ,  who  is  the  Light  of  the  world.  It  is 
easily  led  astray  by  all  sorts  of  delusion.  It  has  no  pole-star  or  compass  to  Bteer  by, 
and  is  therefore  in  constant  danger  of  shipwreck.  It  is  deceived  by  itself  as  well  as  by 
the  devil. 

II.  Human  nature  depicted  as  to  its  more  outward  character.  1.  Its  service 
was  impure.  "  Serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures."  This  was  the  character  of  heathen 
life  in  an  island  like  Crete,  where  the  propensities  of  human  nature  would  have  free 
scope.  The  pleasures  of  this  life  were  of  a  sinful  and  debasing  nature.  Such  a  service 
was  bondage  (Bom.  vi.  6,  16;  xvi.  18).  2.  It  implied  a  life  of  malice.  (1)  The 
wicked  speak  with  malice  (3  John  10).  (2)  Are  filled  with  it  (Rom.  i.  29).  (3) 
Visit  the  saints  with  it  (Ps.  lxxSiii.  3).  (4)  God  requites  it  (Isa.  x.  14).  3.  It 
implied  a  life  of  envy.  (1)  Envy  is  aVork  of  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  21).  (2)  The  wicked 
are  full  of  it  (Rom.  L  29).  (3)  It  leads  to  every  evil  work  (Jas.  iii.  16).  (4)  It  is 
hurtful  to  its  possessors  (Job  v.  2).  (5)  It  will  be  punished  (Ps.  cvi.  16,  17).  4.  It 
implies  hatefulness.  "Hateful;"  that  is,  possessing  the  qualities  that  excite  hatred 
and  dislike.  5.  It  implies  a  return  of  hate  for  hate.  "  Hating  one  another."  (1) 
It  is  characteristic  of  those  without  love  to  God  (1  John  ii.  9,  11).  (2)  It  is  a  work 
of  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  21).  (3)  It  stirs  up  strife  (Prov.  x.  12).  (4)  It  embitters  life 
(Prov.  xv.  17).    (5)  It  will  be  punished  (Ps.  xxxiv.  21).— T.  0. 

Vers.  4 — 7. — The  origin,  nature,  means,  and  end  of  salvation.  The  apostl*  reflect! 
that  he  and  other  believers  had  no  excuse  for  treating  the  heathen  with  haughtiness, 
since  it  was  owing  to  no  merit  of  his  or  theirs  that  their  own  lives  had  become  purer. 

I.  The  manifestation;  of  the  Divine  goodness  and  love  to  man.  "But  when 
the  kmdness  of  God  our  Saviour  and  his  love  to  man  appeared."    1.  The  time  of  this 

TITUS,  ■ 


50  THE   EPISTLE  TO  TTTUS.  [oh.  ra.  1—15 

■manifestation.  The  expression  implies  a  definite  point  of  time.  It  was  "  the  fulness 
of  the  time "  (Gal.  iv.  4).  (1)  It  was  the  period  fixed  in  the  Divine  purpose  from 
eternity.  (2)  It  was  the  time  of  the  probation  of  the  Jews,  ending  in  the  most  awful 
series  of  judgments  that  ever  befell  a  people.  (3)  It  was  a  time  when  the  Greek  tongue 
and  the  Roman  arms  made  a  highway  for  the  gospel.  (4)  It  was  a  time  when  pagan 
thought  had  exhausted  every  experiment  in  the  art  of  living,  to  find  that  all  was 
"  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit."  (5)  Yet  it  is  not  implied  that  the  manifestation  of 
Divine  kindness  had  not  been  enjoyed  already  in  pre-Christian  ages ;  for  it  was  in  virtue 
of  this  manifestation,  in  the  fulness  of  times,  that  God's  love  flowed  forth  in  blessing 
during  Jewish  ages.  2.  The  nature  of  this  manifestation.  (1)  It  was  a  manifentation 
of  kindness  and  love  to  man.  (a)  Kindness  is  the  more  general  term,  unlimited, 
undefined,  all-embracing,  touching  the  whole  creation.  (V)  Love  to  man  is  his  special 
and  distinguishing  love  to  the  children  of  men  as  distinct  from  angels.  (2)  It  was  the 
love  of  the  Father — "  our  Saviour-God."  (a)  The  title  "  Saviour,"  so  often  given  to  the 
Son,  is  here  given  to  the  Father,  because  he  is  the  Fountain  from  whence  flow  all 
the  streams  of  Divine  mercy.  The  Son  is  "  the  Unspeakable  of  the  Father ; "  for  he 
"  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son  "  (John  iii.  16).  The  atone- 
ment was  not,  therefore,  the  cause,  but  the  effect,  of  the  Father's  love.  (6)  This  fact, 
exhibiting  the  mine  of  power  and  love  in  the  Creator,  greatly  enhances  the  certainty 
and  glory  of  redemption,  (c)  It  is  our  Father  who  is  our  Saviour.  Mark  the  clear 
relationship,  in  spite  of  all  our  waywardness  and  sin. 

II.  The  method  of  this  Divine  manifestation.  "  Not  by  works  of  righteousness 
we  did,  but  according  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us."  The  Divine  goodness  and  love  were 
manifested  in  salvation.  "  He  saved  us."  This  salvation,  procured  by  the  obedience 
and  death  of  Christ,  has  its  origin,  not  in  works  of  righteousness  done  by  man,  as 
entitling  him  to  it,  but  solely  in  Divine  mercy.  Mark  the  conditions  and  the  means 
of  this  salvation.  1.  The  conditions  of  salvation.  (1)  Not  by  works  of  righteousness. 
(o)  We  are  Dot  saved  by  our  own  works,  even  though  they  should  be  done  in  obedience 
to  a  righteous  law  (Rom.  iii.  20 ;  Gal.  ii.  16 ;  Eph.  ii.  4,  8,  9;  2  Tim.  i.  1,  9).  (5)  If 
wc  were  saved  in  this  way,  Christ  should  have  died  in  vain  (Gal.  ii.  21).  His  death 
would  have  been  quite  unnecessary,  (c)  Experience  proves  the  impossibility  of  our 
being  able  to  do  the  works  of  perfect  righteousness  (Rom.  iii.  23).  (2)  The  condition 
of  salvation  is  Divine  mercy.  "According  to  his  mercy."  (a)  God  is  rich  in  mercy 
(Eph.  ii.  4).  (b)  It  streams  forth  from  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ  (Rom. 
iii.  24,  25 ;  vi.  23).  (c)  It  was  through  the  tender  mercy  of  God  that  Christ,  as  the 
Dayspring  from  on  high,  visited  the  earth  (Luke  i.  78).  (d)  The  pardon  of  sin  is 
according  to  the  multitude  of  his  tender  mercies  (Ps.  Ii.  1,  2).  (e)  Eternal  life  is  the 
effect  of  God's  mercy.  2.  The  means  of  salvation.  "By  the  washing  of  regeneration 
and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  he  poured  on  us  abundantly  through  Jesns 
Christ  our  Saviour."  The  Greek  word  is  "  laver,"  as  if  to  show  that  the  reference  is  to 
baptism.  (1)  The  washing  of  regeneration  refers  to  the  beginning  of  the  spiritual 
process  in  the  soul,  as  it  is  the  Spirit  who  regenerates  the  soul.  There  is  nothing  in 
the  passage  to  support  the  doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration,  (a)  The  connection  of 
baptism  with  regeneration"  no  more  proves  that  all  the  baptized  are  regenerated  than 
the  expression,  "  we  are  sanctified  by  the  truth,"  implies  that  the  truth  in  all  cases  has 
this  effect,  or  that  "the  gospel  of  your  salvation"  implies  that  salvation  always 
follows  the  hearing  of  the  gospel.  (6)  As  a  matter  of  fact,  believers  in  apostolic  times 
were  regenerated  before  they  were  baptized ;  therefore  they  were  not  regenerated  by 
baptism.  This  was  the  case  with  the  three  thousand  at  Pentecost  (Acts  ii.),  with 
Lydia  and  the  Philippian  jailor  (Acts  xvi.).  (c)  There  is  no  necessary  connection 
between  baptism  and  regeneration,  for  Simon  Magus  was  baptized  without  being, 
regenerated  (Acts  viii.  9 — 24).  (d)  It  is  strange  that,  much  as  John  speaks  of  regene- 
ration in  his  First  Epistle,  he  never  connects  baptism  with  it.  He  says  that  those  who 
are  "  born  of  God  "  do  righteousness,  and  overcome  the  world.  Why  should  he  mention 
these  tests  at  all,  when  he  might  have  known  that,  had  they  been  baptized,  they  must 
have  been  regenerated  ?  («)  The  Apostle  Peter  shows  us  the  meaning  of  baptism  when 
he  says  that  "  baptism  doth  now  save  us  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  21).  How  ?  "  Not  by  putting 
away  the  filth  of  the  flesh  " — which  is  easily  done  by  the  external  application  of  water 
— "  but  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God ; "  as  if  to  show  that  such  an  answer. 


CH.  in.  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  51 

representing  the  reality  and  sincerity  of  our  profession,  was  separable  from  the  putting 
away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh.  (J)  The  expression,  "baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins,* 
does  not  imply  that  baptism  is  the  cause  of  their  remission,  for  in  all  the  cases  referred 
to  the  remission  had  already  taken  place  before  baptism  (Acts  ii.  38 ;  xxii.  16).  The 
baptism  was  a  sign  or  seal  of  a  remission  already  accomplished.  Saul  was  a  true 
believer  before  Ananias  said  to  him,  "Arise,  and  be  baptized,  and  wash  away  thy  sins, 
calling  on  the  Name  of  the  Lord."  Besides,  it  was  by  calling  on  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
that  his  sins  were  washed  away.  .This  is  the  force  of  the  Greek  construction.  (2)  The 
renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  refers  to  the  continuance  of  the  spiritual  process  in  the 
souL  Thus  "  the  inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  This  points  to 
progressive  sanctification.  (a)  The  renewed  are  the  children  of  God,  the  heirs  of  the 
eternal  inheritance.  (6)  The  effects  are  the  fruits  of  righteousness  in  our  life  and  con- 
versation. Thus  there  is  a  firm  connection  between  the  regeneration  and  the  renewal, 
which  cannot  be  said  of  baptism  and  renewal.  Christendom  is  baptized,  yet  how  little 
grace  is  manifest  among  its  millions  I  (c)  The  source  of  this  renewal  is  the  Holy  Ghost, 
who  has  been  poured  out  upon  us  richly  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour.  It  was  in 
virtue  of  the  mediatorship  that  the  Spirit  was  given,  and  still  works  in  the  Church  of 
God.  For  (a)  all  salvation  is  by  him ;  ($)  the  grace  of  regeneration  is  out  of  his 
fulness ;  (y)  the  gift  of  God,  which  is  eternal  life,  is  through  him. 

III.  The  end  of  this  manifestation  of  Divine  goodness  and  love.  "  That  being 
justified  by  his  grace,  we  should  be  made  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life." 
God  saves  us  according  to  his  mercy  by  regeneration  ;  but  the  first  effect  of  regenera- 
tion is  faith,  and  faith  is  the  instrument  of  our  justification.  There  is  no  difference  in 
the  order  of  time  between  regeneration  and  justification,  but  regeneration  must  precede 
justification  in  the  order  of  nature.  Therefore  the  apostle  here  goes  upon  the  order  of 
nature.  1.  The  nature  of  justification.  It  includes  pardon  of  sin  and  acceptance  into 
God's  favour.  2.  The  ground  of  justification.  "  Being  justified  by  his  grace."  (1)  Not 
by  works ;  (2)  but  by  the  grace  of  the  Father,  who  is  the  Justifier.  It  is  by  grace, 
because  (a)  it  is  of  faith  (Bom.  v.  1 ;  iii.  28) ;  (V)  it  is  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God. 
3.  The  privileges  of  justification.  "That  we  should  be  made  heirs  according  to  the 
hope  of  eternal  life."  (1)  Eternal  life  is  an  inheritance;  it  is  not  earned  by  our 
obedience  and  our  righteousness ;  it  is  a  free  gift.  (2)  We  are  predestinated  to  this 
inheritance  in  Jesus  Christ  (Eph.  i.  5, 11).  (3)  The  grace  of  adoption,  which  is  linked 
with  our  justification,  opens  the  way  to  our  enjoyment  of  the  inheritance.  (4)  It  is 
an  inheritance  which  is  not  yet  fully  enjoyed ;  for  we  are  heirs  "  according,  to  the 
hope  of  eternal  life."  (a)  There  are  "  things  hoped  for  "  held  out  to  us  through  faith 
(Heb.  xi.  1).  (5)  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be ; "  but  when  "  we  shall  be 
for  ever  with  the  Lord,"  we  shall  actually  possess  and  enjoy  our  inheritance. — T.  0. 

Ver.  8.— The  necessary  connection  between  gospel  doctrine  and  good  works.  I.  The 
importance  of  gospel  doctrine.  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  these  things  I  will 
that  thou  affirm  constantly."  He  refers  here  to  the  sum  of  the  doctrine  of  Christian 
salvation  contained  in  the  three  preceding  verses.  1.  The  doctrine  of  salvation  is 
worthy  of  all  acceptance.  "This  is  a  faithful  saying."  This  formula,  contained  only 
in  the  pastoral  Epistles,  points  to  some  weighty  truth  which  had  become  a  watchword 
among  the  Christian  brotherhood  of  early  times.  (1)  There  is  a  tendency  in  our  days 
to  decry  dogma.  The  apostle  always  insists  on  its  importance  as  the  root-principle 
and  moving  spring  of  morality.  (2)  The  saying  implies  that  the  heavenly  inheritance 
just  spoken  of  is  no  figment  of  the  imagination,  but  ought  to  be  accepted  as  one  of 
the  commonplaces  of  Christian  belief.  2.  It  ought  to  be  confidently  put  forth  at  all 
times  by  Christian  ministers.  "  And  these  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm  constantly." 
This  was  the  strain  of  all  apostolic  preaching,  and  it  ought  to  be  ours  also.  There  is 
no  true  practical  preaching  which  does  not  involve  the  exhibition  of  God's  character 
and  our  relations  to  him  in  grace — the  glorious  Person  of  the  Mediator  in  his  various 
offices,  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  applying  Divine  salvation.  "  These  things 
are  good  and  profitable  to  men ; "  that  is,  these  doctrines,  for  they  lead  to  good  works, 
and  benefit  men  spiritually  and  morally. 

II.  The  design  of  gospel  doctrine.  "  In  order  that  they  which  have  believed  God 
might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works.''    The  faithful  saying  of  the  apostle  was  not 


59  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  m.  1—15. 

the  necessity  of  good  works,  but  the  necessity  of  the  doctrines  of  grace  being  preached 
m  the  only  method  of  producing  good  works.  1.  The  apostle  seems  to  anticipate  a 
tendency  of  later  times  to  exalt  morality  at  the  expense  of  faith.  The  doctrines,  ha 
says,  'are  the  true  fountains  from  which  all  good  works  flow.  These  are,  therefore, 
probably  ealled  doctrines  according  to  godliness  (ch.  i.  1);  the  wholesome  doctrine 
(eh.  i.  9).  2.  He  sets  forth  the  duty  of  all  believers  to  be  careful  about  good  works. 
It  ought  to  be  a  matter  of  earnest  striving,  because  (1)  God  is  glorified  thereby  (John 
xv.  8);  (2)  because  they  are  means  of  blessing  to  man  (Jas.  i.  26);  (3)  because  God 
remembers  them  (Heb.  vi.  9, 10) ;  (4)  because  they  will  be  an  evidence  of  faith  in  the 
judgment  (Matt.  xxv.  34 — 40).  3.  He  insists  on  their  maintaining  good  works.  The 
word  signifies  that  they  must  be  excelling  in  them.  (1)  They  must,  therefore,  be 
zealous  of  them  (ch.  ii.  14);  (2)  furnished  unto  them  (2  Tim.  ill.  17);  (3)  rich  in 
them,  and  stablished  in  them  (1  Tim.  vi.  18 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  17) ;  (4)  ready  for  all  good 
works  (ch.  iii.  1) ;  (5)  provoking  each  other  unto  them  (Heb.  x.  24). — T.  0. 

Yer.  9. — A  warning  against  frivolous  and  disputative  teaching.  This  is  in  contrast 
to  the  sound  teaching  just  referred  to.  "  But  avoid  foolish  questions,  and  genealogies, 
and  contentions,  and  strivings  about  the  Law ;  for  they  are  unprofitable  and  vain." 

I.  Tee  things  which  are  to  be  placed  outside  the  sphere  of  ministerial 
thought  and  conoern.  1.  Foolish  questions.  Questions  not  easily  answered,  yet  if 
answered  without  practical  bearing  upon  Christian  life.  Such  were  many  of  the 
Jewish  discussions  about  the  oral  Law,  the  nature  of  God  and  the  angels,  the  power  of 
the  Name  Jehovah.  In  Christian  times  papists  have  discussed  for  a  whole  century 
"which  side  of  Jesus  was  pierced  by  the  spear?"  Such  are  "foolish  questions." 
2.  Genealogies.  Jerome  tells  us  the  Jews  were  as  well  acquainted  with  the  genealogies 
from  Adam  to  Zerubbabel  as  with  their  own  names.  It  is  possible  that  the  Jewish 
Christians  attached  great  importance  to  their  family  registers.  The  genealogies,  how- 
ever, are  significantly  linked  by  the  apostle  with  fables.  3.  Contentions  and  strivings 
about  the  Law.  There  were  many  disputed  and  disputable  points  in  the  Law,  especially 
respecting  the  authority  and  confirmation  of  the  commandments  (ch.  i.  14). 

II.  The  attitude  op  the  minister  towabd  such  things.  "Avoid  them."  L 
This  implies  that  he  is  not  even  to  discuss  them,  on  account  of  their  utter  frivolousness. 
2.  The  reason  is  that  they  are  "  unprofitable  and  vain,"  and  therefore  exactly  opposed 
to  the  things  "  good  and  profitable  to  men."  The  apostle  would  deliver  all  ministers 
from  such  folly  and  trifling,  by  placing  before  them  Jesus  Christ,  the  one  glorious 
Object  of  the  Church's  love  and  adoration,  leaving  questions  of  another  sort  to  the  dead. 
Such  questions  had  eaten  the  heart  out  of  Judaism.  They  must  not  be  allowed  in 
Christianity.— T.  C. 

Vers.  10,  11. — The  right  attitude  of  Christian  ministers  toward  divisive  errorists. 
"A  man  that  is  an  heretic  after  a  first  and  second  admonition  avoid." 

L  The  true  nature  of  his  offence.  1.  It  is  not  a  case  of  fundamental  or 
doctrinal  error,  such  as  the  words  "heretic"  and  "heresy"  came  to  imply  in  after- 
ages.  Yet  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  separatist  ways  are  not  caused  by  diver- 
gences of  judgment  on  some  points  from  the  settled  belief  of  the  Christian  community. 
2.  It  was  a  case  of  a  turbulent  sectary,  dissatisfied  with  the  Church,  who  withdrew  from 
her  communion  to  the  disturbance  of  her  peace.  He  would  try  to  justify  his  course  by 
a  difference  of  opinion  upon  matters  of  doctrine,  worship,  or  organization. 

II.  The  method  of  dealing  with  the  offender.  1.  He  was  to  receive  two 
admonitions  in  succession.  He  was  to  be  twice  warned  not  to  pursue  his  divisive  courses ; 
he  was  not  to  be  contended  with,  but  rebuke  was  to  be  employed  to  recover  him  from 
his  error.  2.  If  his  pride  or  his  ambition  would  not  allow  him  to  yield  to  admonition, 
he  was  to  be,  not  excommunicated — the  course  adopted  by  the  apostle  himself  in  another 
case  (1  Tim.  i.  20) ;  but  simply  avoided.  There  must  be  no  intercourse  with  him. 
This  was  a  virtual  excommunication,  for  he  no  longer  held  the  place  of  a  Christian 
brother. 

HI.  The  justification  of  this  method.  "Knowing  that  he  that  is  such  is 
perverted,  and  sinneth,  being  self-cowdemned."  The  case  is  an  utterly  hopeless  one. 
You  must  have  done  with  the  divisive  sectary;  let  him  alone.    1.  For  he  is  perverted; 


oh.  in.  1—16.]  THE  BPI8TLB  TO  TITUS.  08 

implying  an  inward  corruption  of  character,  which  steels  him  against  all  official  admoni- 
tion of  the  Church.  2.  He  sinneth.  He  errs  knowingly,  for  his  course  has  been 
authoritatively  condemned  by  the  messenger  of  God.  3.  He  is  self-condemned.  This 
does  not  mean  that  he  consciously  acts  a  part  he  knows  to  be  wrong,  but  that  he  has 
condemned  himself  by  his  own  practice,  practically  consenting  by  his  separation  that 
he  in  unworthy  the  fellowship  of  the  Church,  and  thus  justifying  the  Church  in  its 
rejection  of  him,  or  that  he  stands  condemned  by  the  Scriptures  which  he  himself 
accepts  as  his- rule  of  faith  and  life. — T.  0. 

Vers.  12,  13.  —  Personal  directions.  The  connection  of  Titus  with  the  Cretan 
Church  was  to  be  but  temporary ;  therefore  the  apostle  gives  him  two  commands. 

L  A   COMMAND    FOB  TlTUS  TO  JOIN  THE    APOSTLE   AT  NlCOPOLlS.       1.     The  apostle 

needed  hit  services,  either  at  this  city  in  Epirus,  where  he  determined  to  spend  the 
winter — no  doubt  in  apostolic  labours— or  to  ascertain  from  him  the  exact  condition 
of  the  Church  at  Crete,  or  to  send  him  forth  on  an  errand  to  some  of  the  other  Churches. 
2.  But  the  place  of  Titus  was  not  to  be  left  unsupplied.  Two  brethren,  Artemas  and 
Tychicus,  were  to  go  to  Crete — one  altogether  unknown  by  us,  but,  as  he  is  first 
mentioned,  probably  a  minister  of  high  distinction  and  zeal;  the  other,  Tychicus,  one 
of  the  most  esteemed  of  the  apostle's  friends  (Acts  xx.  4 ;  Col.  iv.  7 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  12). 

IL   A    COMMAND    FOB    TlTUS    TO   HASTEN   THE    DEPARTURE    OF    ZeNAS    AND    APOLLOS 

fbom  Cbetb.  These  brethren  had  been  labouring  in  the  Church  there,  probably,  before 
Titos  was  left  behind  by  the  apostle.  Zenas,  the  lawyer,  was  probably  a  Jewish  scribe 
converted  to  Christianity,  who  had  been  acting  as  an  evangelist'  in  Crete.  Apollos  was 
the  eloquent  preacher  of  Alexandria,  and  now  as  always  in  perfect  sympathy  with  the 
apostle,  though  there  seemed  a  rivalry  between  them  at  Corinth.  The  apostle  implies 
that  the  Cretan  Christians  were  to  provide  the  necessary  help  for  such  a  journey. — T.  C. 

Ver.  14. — A  last  reminder  concerning  good  works.  The  suggestion  just  made  leads 
to  this  adjunction :  "  And  let  ours  also  learn  to  maintain  good  works  for  necessary  uses, 
that  they  be  not  unfruitful.'' 

L   IT  IS  AN  INJUNCTION  TO  THE  BBETHBEN  GENERALLY.     "  OuTS  also."      It  is  the  duty 

of  all  believers,  sharers  in  the  common  faith,  and  heirs  of  the  grace  of  life,  to  learn  to 
do  good  works. 

II.  Believers  need  to  be  trained  to  this  service.  "  Let  ours  also  learn."  They 
will  learn  it  from  the  Scriptures,  which  tell  us  what  is  the  good  and  perfect  and 
acceptable  will  of  God ;  and  from  the  doctrines  of  grace,  which  teach  us  to  follow  as  an 
example  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  went  about  every  day  doing  good. 

III.  These  good  works  abe  to  have  a  practical  bearing  upon  the  wants  of 
others.  They  are  "  for  necessary  wants."  1.  Not  to  atone  for  sin,  or  recommend  as 
as  sinners  to  God's  favour.  2.  But  to  glorify  God  by  doing  for  others  what  he  so 
abundantly  does  for  us.  By  adorning  the  doctrine  of  Christ  by  our  beneficence ;  by 
putting  to  silence  the  gainsaying  of  foolish  men,  because  they  see  we  are  "  not  unfruit- 
ful." We  are  thus  seen  to  be  trees  of  righteousness,  bearing  all  manner  of  fruits.  It  is 
an  interesting  fact  that,  in  the  last  inspired  teachings  of  the  apostle,  he  should  have 
eight  times  enforced  the  duty  of  maintaining  good  works. — T.  C. 

Yer.  15. — Salutation  and  conclusion.  "  All  that  are  with  me  salute  thee.  Greet 
them  that  love  us  in  the  faith.    Grace  be  with  you  all.    Amen." 

I.  Mask  how  the  Epistle,  which  began  with  the  faith  of  God's  elect,  ends 
with  grace  and  love. 

IL  Mark  the  close  relationships  established  by  grace  between  the  widely 
scattered  members  of  the  Church.  They  are  one  holy,  happy  family,  united  by 
love.  The  threefold  repetition  of  the  word  "all "  suggests  the  deep  unity  of  the  body 
of  Christ,  in  spite  of  its  inward  distractions  and  errors  and  sins. 

111.  The  salutation  implies  that,  though  addressed  to  Titus,  the  Epistle 

WAS  TO  BE  COMMUNICATED  TO  THE   WHOLE  ChUBCH   IN  CBETE. — T.  C. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Subjection  to  the  state.  Society  has  reached  no  ideal  perfection  in 
government,  nor  has  God  himself  laid  down  any  outward  form  as  an  ideal     All 


54  THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  m.  1—15. 

nations  are  justified  in  variety  of 'choice.  There  has  been  government  by  judges,  and 
governments  monarchical,  republican,  autocratic,  and  constitutional.  All  that  we  need 
to  notice  is  that  society  needs  to  be  governed.  Lawlessness  always  ends  in  anarchy, 
misery,  and  desolation. 

L  Lbabn  subjection  to  the  state.  -  This  is  beautiful.  Restraint  is  better  than 
the  liberty  of  licentiousness.  Compare  a  river  that  keeps  its  bounds  to  one  that  over- 
flows its  banks.  Men  are  justified  in  resisting  tyrannies,  whether  of  autocrats  or  mobs ; 
but  they  must  not  forget  that  all  well-ordered  societies  exist  only  by  subjection. 

II.  Learn  self-conquest  in  yourselves.  Controlling  the  tongue,  avoiding  all 
bitterness  and  "  brawling,"  and  showing  that  there  is  a  magistracy  of  the  heart  as  well 
as  a  magistracy  of  the  state. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  5. — The  mercy  of  God.  "  According  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us."  Mercy  is 
the  key-note  of  redemption.  It  is  the  music  of  the  Psalms ;  the  spirit  of  Christ's 
ministry,  and  the  motive  of  the  atonement.  It  is  the  very  heart  of  God — as  permanent 
as  his  justice  and  his  righteousness;  "for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever." 

I.  Salvation  is  not  a  superstructure  of  man's.  "Not  according  to  works  of 
righteousness  which  we  have  done."  Good  actions  do  not  make  a  good  man ;  it  is  the 
good  man  that  makes  the  good  actions.  If  man  is  to  be  saved,  he  must  have  new 
life  from  within.  Mercy  meets  his  case.  God's  pity  and  compassion  are  seen  in  this. 
He  gives  the  new  heart  that  makes  the  new  life,  and  so  he  saves  us  from  self  and  sin. 

II.  Salvation  is  a  dual  work.  This  is  "  the  washing  of  regeneration,"  the  redemp- 
tion that  comes  to  the  heart  through  the  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness.  But 
the  removal  of  the  stain  of  sin  is  not  all.  The  heart,  however  clean,  is  not  to  be  a 
blank.  A  new  likeness  is  to  be  brought  out.  So  there  is  to  be  the  "  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  We  are  made  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.  God's  likeness  comes  out 
again  in  the  soul.  We  are  made  holy  with  God's  holiness,  and  beautiful  with  God's 
beauty.— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  8, 14. — Christian  character.  "  To  maintain  good  works.*  This  is  a  repeated 
counsel,  and  shows  how  much  need  there  was  of  showing  that  the  "  belief"  spoken 
of  in  the  eighth  verse  should  not  be  a  mere  speculative  creed.  This  Titus  is  to 
"  affirm  constantly,"  showing  that  there  were  those  then  who  had  a  tendency  to 
antinomianism,  or  neglect  of  the  Law  of  moral  order  and  beauty. 

L  Permanence.  "  Maintain."  Men  weary  of  their  efforts  after  the  attainment  of  a 
Divine  ideal.  Holiness  is  not  a  gift,  it  is  a  growth ;  and  a  growth,  not  like  that  of  a 
plant,  which  is  unconscious,  but  a  growth  that  involves  obedience.  Maintain  "  works" 
— give  them  continuance,  by  aliment  and  nurture. 

II.  Comprehensiveness.  "Works."  For  life  covers  a  large  sphere.  We  are  apt 
to  forget  that  Christianity  covers  all  spheres — the  civil,  social,  moral,  spiritual.  For 
ages  the  Church  was  merely  ecclesiastical.  "  The  religious  "  were  such  as  shut  them- 
selves out  from  the  world,  deeming  its  pursuits  and  duties  below  the  dignity  of  a 
spiritual  religion,  which  made  the  soul  and  its  feelings  and  devotions  everything.  Now 
we  have  moved  into  a  wider  inheritance ;  we  believe  in  the  Christianization  of  common 
life ;  the  consecration  of  art  and  science  and  common  duty  to  Christian  ends.  We  are 
simply  to  ask  if  the  work  given  us  to  do  is  a  good  work,  and  we  are  to  be  earnest  in 
"every  good  work."  And  we  have  seen  that  the  tree  must  first  be  made  good;  for  it  is 
"  the  good  man  that,  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart,  brings  forth  good  things." 
— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Duty.  "  Put  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  to  principalities  and  powers," 
etc.  "Very  careful,"  says  Dean  Spence,  "and  searching  have  been  the  apostle's 
charges  to  Titus  respecting  the  teachers  of  the  Church,  their  doctrine  and  their 
life;  very  particular  have  been  his  directions,  his  warnings  and  exhortations,  to 
men  and  women  of  different  ages,  on  the  subject  of  their  home  life.  But  with  the 
exception  of  a  slight  digression,  in  the  case  of  a  slave  to  a  pagan  master,  his  words  had 
been  written  with  a  reference  generally  to  Christian  life  among  Christians.  But  there 
was  then  a  great  life  outside  the  little  Christian  world :  how  were  the  people  of  Christ 
to  regulate  their  behaviour  in  their  dealings  with  the  vast  pagan  world  outside?    Paul 


oh.  m.  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  65 


e 


ies  to  the  root  of  the  matter  at  once  when  he  says,  '  Put  them  in  mind,'  etc.''    We 
ive  here  duty  in  a  threefold  relation— ?n  relation  to  civil  government,  in  relation  to 
general  society,  and  in  relation  to  moral  self.    Here  is  duty — 

L  In  relation  to  civil  government.  "Put  them  in  mind  to  he  subject  [in 
subjection]  to  principalities  [rulers]  and  powers  [authorities],  to  ohey  magistrates  [to  be 
obedient].  It  is  here  implied,  and  fully  taught  elsewhere  (Bom.  xiii.  1 — 7),  that 
civil  government  is  of  Divine  appointment.  "  There  is  no  power  but  of  God,"  says 
Paul.  That  the  principle  of  civil  government  is  Divine  is  not  only  revealed  hut 
Implied  in  the  very  constitution  of  society.  1.  Man's  social  tendencies  indicate  it. 
Some  men  are  royal  in  their  instincts  and  powers,  and  are  evidently  made  to  rule. 
Others  are  servile,  cringing  in  tendency,  feeble  in  faculty,  and  made  to  obey.  There  is 
a  vast  gradation  of  instinct  and  power  in  human  society,  and  it  is  an  eternal  principle 
in  God's  government  that  the  lesser  shall  serve  the  greater.  2.  Man's  social  exigencies 
indicate  it.  Every  community,  to  be  kept  in  order,  must  have  a  recognized  head — one 
who  shall  be  allowed  to  rule,  either  by  his  own  will  or  the  organized  will  of  the  whale. 
Hence  man,  in  his  most  savage  state,  has  some  recognized  chief.  The  principle  of 
civil  government  is,  therefore,  manifestly  of  Divine  appointment.  We  may  rest 
assured  that,  civil  government  being  of  Divine  appointment,  it  is  for  good  and  good 
only.  Indeed,  we  learn  that  Paul's  idea  of  a  civil  ruler  is  that  he  is  a  "minister  of  God 
to  thee  for  good."  But  what  is  good?  The  answer  in  which  all  will  agree  is  this — 
obedience  to  the  Divine  will.  What  is  the  standard  of  virtue  ?  Not  the  decree  of  an 
autocrat,  not  public  sentiment,  even  when  organized  into  constitutional  law ;  but  the 
will  of  God.  "  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God  to  hearken  unto  you  more  than 
unto  God,  judge  ye."  The  civil  government,  therefore,  that  does  not  harmonize  with 
his  will,  as  revealed  by  Christ  the  infallible  Logos,  is  not  the  government  of  which  Paul 
speaks.  Taking  Christ  as  the  Bevealer  of  God's  will,  we  may  infer  that  the  infringe- 
ment of  human  rights  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God,  and  therefore  not 
good.  Also  that  the  promotion  of  injustice,  impurity,  and  error  is  not  according  to  the 
will  of  God,  and  therefore  not  good.  The  Bible  never  teaches,  nor  does  moral 
philosophy,  that  we  are  bound  to  obey  laws  that  are  not  righteous,  to  honour  persons 
that  are  not  honourworthy.  If  we  are  commanded  to  honour  the  king,  the  precept 
implies  that  the  king's  character  is  worthy  of  his  office.  Some  kings  it  is  religious  to 
despise  and  loathe.  If  we  are  commanded  to  honour  our  parents,  the  language  implies 
that  our  parents  are  honourworthy.  Some  parents  display  attributes  of  character 
suited  to  awaken  the  utmost  hatred  and  contempt.  In  like  manner  we  are  commanded 
to  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers,  and  the  injunction  implies  that  what  these  higher 
powers  enact  is  right.  The  obligation  of  obedience  is  ever  dependent  upon  the 
righteousness  of  the  command. 

II.  In  bet.ation  to  oenebal  society.  There  are  three  duties  here  indicated  which 
every  man  owes  to  his  fellows.  1.  Usefulness.  "  Be  ready  to  every  good  work."  The 
law  of  universal  benevolence  which  we  see  in  nature,  our  own  instincts  and  faculties, 
as  well  as  the  written  Word,  teach  us  that  man  was  made  to  serve  his  brother ;  the 
grand  end  of  each  is  to  promote  the  happiness  of  others.  No  man  fulfils  his  mission  or 
realizes  his  destiny  who  is  not  an  altruist,  who  is  not  ever  actuated  by  regard  for  the 
happiness  of  others.  Altruism  is  God's  social  law  and  is  binding  on  every  one; 
disregard  to  it  is  the  source  of  all  social  disorders  and  miseries.  "  The  soul  of  the  truly 
benevolent  man  does  not  seem  to  reside  much  in  its  own  body.  Its  life,  to  a  great 
extent,  is  a  mere  reflex  of  the  lives  of  others.  It  migrates  into  their  bodies,  and, 
identifying  its  existence  with  their  existence,  finds  its  own  happiness  in  increasing  and 
prolonging  their  pleasures,  in  extinguishing  or  solacing  their  pains."  2.  Charitableness. 
"To  speik  evil  of  no  man."  "This,"  says  a  modern  author,  "imports  more  than  to 
speak  evil  in  the  ordinary  sense :  it  is  to  act  the  part  of  a  reviler  or  slanderer ;  and 
when  used  of  conduct  from  one  man  towards  another,  always  betokens  the  exercise  of  a 
very  bitter  and  malignant  spirit.  Titus  was  to  charge  the  Christians  of  Crete  to  give 
no  exhibition  towards  any  one  of  such  a  spirit,  nor  to  show  a  quarrelsome  disposition, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  to  cultivate  a  mild,  placable,  and  gentle  temper."  There  are 
evils  of  some  sort  or  other  attaching  to  all  men,  and  in  some  men  they  are  of  the  most 
hideous  and  heinous  character.  To  ignore  them,  if  possible,  would  be  wrong ;  to  feel 
}hem  is  natural  to  the  pure,  and  to  denounce  them  is  right    But  to  speak  of  then 


6«  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  m.  1—16. 

before  others,  to  parade  them  before  the  eyes  of  others,  argues  a  base  and  malignant 
nature.  Should  occasion  require  us  to  speak  of  them,  it  should  be  in  the  saddest  tones 
of  tenderness,  and  even  with  compassionate  indignation.  3.  Courteousness.  "  To  be  no 
brawlers  [not  to  be  contentious],  but  gentle,  showing  all  meekness  unto  all  men."  How 
much  there  is  in  society,  how  much  in  erery  department  of  life — mercantile,  mechanical, 
and  mental — one  meets  with  to  annoy  and  irritate,  especially  those  fated  with  an 
irascible  nature  1  Still,  amidst  the  strongest  provocations,  courtesy  is  our  duty,  job, 
and  our  dignity  too. 

III.  In  relation  to  odr  moral  self.  The  apostle  urges  the  duty  of  forbearance 
to  what  was  wroug  in  government  and  society,  by  reminding  them  of  the  wrong  in 
their  own  past  lives.  "We  ourselves  also  were  sometimes  foolish" — we  had  no  proper 
understanding  of  the  true.  "  Disobedient " — indisposed  to  do  what  is  right.  "  Deceived  " 
— swerving  from  the  true  mode  of  life.  "  Serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures  " — slaves  of 
impure  passions,  revelling  in  the  sensual  and  the  gross.  "  Living  in  malice  and  envy, 
hateful,  and  hating  one  another  " — we  once  spent  our  days  in  the  atmosphere  of  hate 
and  malign  passions.  It  is  a  duty  which  every  man  owes  to  himself  to  remember  all 
the  wrong  of  his  past  life — remember  it :  1.  That  he  may  be  charitable  towards  others. 
2.  That  he  may  be  stimulated  to  efforts  of  self-improvement.  3.  That  he  may  adore 
the  forbearance  of  Ood  in  his  past  dealings,  i.  That  he  may  devoutly  appreciate  the 
morally  redemptive  agency  of  Christ.  5.  That  he  may  realize  the  necessity  of  seeking 
the  moral  restoration  of  others.  Two  things  may  be  inferred  from  Paul's  language 
concerning  the  past  moral  condition  of  himself  and  others.  (1)  The  possibility  of  the 
moral  improvement  of  souls.  The  rough  stone  can  be  polished,  the  unfertile  soil  can 
be  made  fertile,  the  wilderness  can  blossom  as  the  rose.  (2)  The  obligation  of  the 
moral  improvement  of  souls. 

Conclusion.  Let  us  find  out  our  duty  and  follow  it,  through  storm  as  well  as  sun- 
shine, even  unto  death.  "  After  all,"  says  Canon  Kingsley,  "  what  is  speculation  to 
practice  ?  What  does  God  require  of  us  but  to  do  justly,  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk 
numbly  with  him  ?  The  longer  I  live  this  seems  to  me  more  important,  and  all  other 
questions  less  so.  If  we  can  but  live  the  simple,  right  life,  do  the  work  that* s  nearest, 
though  it's  dull  at  whiles,  helping,  when  we  meet  them,  lame  dogs  over  stiles."  In 
the  realization  of  our  duty  is  our  strength,  our  nobleness,  our  heaven, 

"  Yet  do  thy  work :  it  shall  succeed 
In  thine  or  in  another's  day ; 
And  if  denied  the  victor's  meed, 
Thou  shalt  not  lack  the  toiler's  pay. 

"Then  faint  not,  falter  not,  nor  plead 
Thy  weakness :  truth  itself  is  strong: 
The  lion's  strength,  the  eagle's  speed. 
Are  not  alone  vouchsafed  to  wrong." 

(Whittier.) 

D.T. 

Vera.  4 — 7. — Salvation,  not  of  works,  but  of  grace.  "  But  after  that  the  kindness 
and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  man  appeared,"  etc.  The  great  subject  here  is 
salvation.  This  includes  the  restoration  of  the  soul  to  the  knowledge,  the  image,  the 
fellowship,  and  the  service  of  the  great  God.  The  passage  leads  us  to  offer  two  remarks 
on  the  words. 

L  That  works  of  biohteousness  we  cannot  pebfobm,  and  thebefobe  they 
cannot  save  us.  "Not  by  works  of  [done  in]  righteousness  which  we  have  done 
[which  we  did  ourselves]."  What  are  righteous  works  ?  Condensely  defined,  works 
inspired  ever  by  supreme  sympathy  with  the  supremely  good.  No  other  works,  what- 
ever their  sacred  semblance,  whatever  their  popular  appreciation,  are  righteous.  Now, 
such  righteous  works  we  cannot  render  in  our  unrenewed  state,  because  we  have  lost 
this  affection,  and  the  loss  of  this  is  the  death  and  damnation  of  the  soul.  1.  Could 
we  render  such  works  they  would  save  us.  They  secure  the  blessedness  of  the  unfallen 
angels.  2.  Without  rendering  such  works  we  cannot  be  saved;  Moral  salvation  con- 
sists in  holiness  of  character.  Character  is  made  up  of  habits,  habits  made  up  of  i 
and  the  acts,  to  be  of  any  worth,  must  bo  righteous. 


CH.ra.  1— 15.]  THE    EPISTLE  TO   TITUS.  57 

IL  That  kedemfttve  mercy  has  been  vouchsafed  to  us,  and  therefore  we 
hat  be  sated.  "According  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us."  Observe:  1.  The  special 
work  of  this  redemptive  mercy.  What  is  the  work  ?  (1)  Cleansing.  "  The  washing 
of  regeneration,"  or  the  "  laver  of  regeneration,"  as  some  render  it.  Sin  is  represented 
as  a  moral  denier,  and  deliverance  from  sin,  therefore*,  is  a  cleansing.  (2)  Renewal. 
"Renewing."  Sin  is  represented  as  death,  and  deliverance  from  it  is,  therefore,  a 
quickening,  a  renewal.  2.  The  Divine  Administrator  of  this  redemptive  mercy.  "The 
Holy.Ghost."  No  agency  but  that  of  God  can  either  morally  cleanse  or  renew.  That 
Divine  Agent  which  of  old  brooded  over  the  face  of  the  deep  can  alone  morally  recreate. 
3.  The  glorious  Medium  of  this  redemptive  mercy.  "  Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour." 
Christ  our  Saviour  is  the  Medium.  Through  him  the  Spirit  came,  by  him  the  Spirit 
works,  in  him  the  Spirit  is  abundant.  4.  The  sublime  result  of  this  redemptive  mercy. 
"  That  being  justified  by  his  grace,  we  should  [might]  be  made  heirs  according  to  the 
hope  of  eternal  life."  The  word  "justified"  means  to  be  made  right — right  in  heart, 
right  in  life,  right  hi  relation  to  self,  the  universe,  and  God.  What  is  it  to  be  made 
right?  To  be  put  in  possession  of  that  spirit  of  love  to  God  which  is  the  spring  of 
all  "  works  of  righteousness."  This  rectitude :  (1)  Inspires  with  the  highest  hope. 
"  Hope  of  eternal  life."  What  a  blessing  is  hope !  But  the  "  hope  of  eternal  life,"  what 
hope  like  this  ?  (2)  Inaugurates  the  highest  relationship.  "  Heirs."  We  are  "  heirs  of 
God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ." — D.  T. 

Yen.  7,  8. — Justification ;  faith ;  works.  "That  being  justified  by  his  grace,  we 
should  be  made  heirs,"  etc.  There  are  three  subjects  in  these  verses  of  vital  interest 
to  man  which  require  to  be  brought  out  into  prominence  and  impressed  with  indelible 
force. 

L  The  moral  beotifioation  of  the  soul.  "Being  justified  by  his  grace,  we 
should  be  made  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life."  This  means,  I  presume, 
not  that  being  pronounced  right,  but  that  being  made  right.  Forensic  justification  is 
an  old  theological  fiction.  Those  who  have  held  it  and  who  still  hold  it  have  ideas  of 
God  incongruous  and  debased.  They  regard  him  as  such  a  one  as  themselves.  "  To 
be  justified  "  here  means  to  be  made  right.  There  are  three  ideas  here  suggested  in 
relation  to  this  moral  rectification  of  the  soul.  1.  All  souls  in  their  unrenewed  state 
are  unrighteous.  We  do  not  require  any  special  revelation  from  God  to  give  us  this 
information.  Man's  moral  wrongness  of  soul  is  revealed  in  every  page  of  human  history, 
is  developed  in  every  scene  of  human  life,  and  is  a  matter  of  painful  consciousness  to 
every  man.  We  have  all  "erred  and  strayed  from  the  right  like  lost  sheep."  2. 
Restoration  to  righteousness  is  the  merciful  work  of  God.  "  Being  justified  by  his  grace  " 
— "his  grace,"  his  boundless,  sovereign,  unmerited  love.  Who  but  God  can  put  a 
morally  disordered  soul  right  ?  To  do  this  is  to  resuscitate  the  dead,  to  roll  back  the 
deep  flowing  tide  of  human  sympathies  into  a  new  channel  and  a  new  direction,  to 
arrest  a  wandering  planet  and  plant  it  in  a  new  orbit.  He  does  it  and  he  alone.  He 
does  it  by  the  revelation  of  his  Son,  by  the  dispensations  of  life,  the  operations  of  con- 
science. "  Lo,  all  these  things  worketh  God  oftentimes  with  man,  to  bring  back  his 
soul  from  the  pit,  to  be  enlightened  with  the  light  of  the  living."  3.  There  is  the  heir- 
ship of  eternal  good.  "  Being  justified  by  his  grace,  we  should  be  made  heirs  according 
to  the  hope  of  eternal  life."  Eternal  life  must  mean  something  more  than  endless 
existence ;  for  mere  endless  existence,  under  certain  conditions,  might  be  an  object  of 
dread  rather  than  hope.  It  might  mean  perfect  goodness.  Goodness  is  eternal,  for 
God  is  eternal.  Goodness  is  blessedness,  for  God  is  blessed.  A  virtuous  hope  is  not 
hope  for  happiness,  but. a  hope  for  perfect  goodness.  He  whose  soul  is  made  morally 
right  becomes  an  heir  to  all  goodness.  This  heirship  is  not  something  added  to  this 
inner  righteousness.  It  is  in  it  as  the  plant  is  in  the  seed.  Man's  heaven  is  in 
righteousness  of  soul  and  nowhere  else.  No  man  can  be  happy  who  is  merely  treated 
as  righteous  if  he  is  not  righteous.  Such  treatment,  even  by  God  himself,  would  only 
enhance  his  misery.  To  be  treated  as  righteous  if  you  are  not  righteous,  is  an  outrage 
on  justice  and  a  revulsion  to  moral  nature. 

H.  The  essential  foundation  of  all  true  faith.  "And  they  which  have 
believed  in  God  might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works.  These  things  are  good  and 
profitable  unto  men."    The  basis  of  all  true  faith  is  faith  in  God.    In  Mm,  not  in  it. 


68  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ch.  hi.  1-15. 

In  him,  not  in  men's  representations  of  him.  "  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believo 
that  he  is."  To  believe  in  him  implies:  1.  To  believe  in  what  he  is  in  himself.  The 
only  absolute  existence,  without  beginning,  without  succession,  without  end,  who  is 
in  all  and  through  all,  the  all-mighty,  the  all-wise,  the  all-good  Creator  and  Sustainer 
of  the  universe.  This  faith  in  "him  is  the  most  philosophic,  the  most  universal,  and 
the  most  blessed  and  ennobling  faith.  2.  To  believe  in  what  he  is  to  us — the  Father, 
the  Proprietor,  and  the  Life.  "  Not  willing  that  any  should  perish."  This  is  the  faith 
that  is  enjoined  upon  us  everywhere  in  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New ;  not  faith  in 
infallible  propositions,  in  infinite  personality ;  not  faith  in  man's  ideas  of  God,  but  in 
God  himself,  as  the  Source  of  all  life,  the  Fountain  of  all  virtue,  the  Standard  of  all 
excellence,    "Trust  in  him  that  liveth  for  ever." 

"Not  in  priesthoods,  not  on  creed, 

Is  the  faith  we  need,  O  Lord; 
These,  more  fragile  than  the  reed, 

Can  no  rest  for  souls  afford. 
Human  systems,  what  are  they  1 

Dreams  of  erring  men  at  ben, 
Visions  only  of  a  day, 

Without  substance,  without  teak 
Firmly  fix  it,  Lord,  on  thee, 

Strike  its  roots  deep  in  thy  love) 
Growing  ever  may  it  be, 

Like  the  faith  of  these  above. 
Then  though  earthly  things  depart. 

And  the  heavens  pass  away, 
Strong  in  thee  shall  rest  the  heart, 

Without  fainting  or  decay." 

(•Biblical  Liturgy.1) 

HI.  Trk  srrrBXMi!  purpose  of  a  TRUE  lifb.  "  To  maintain  good  works."  What 
are  good  works  ?  1.  Works  that  have  right  motives.  Works  that  society  may  con- 
sider good,  that  Churches  may  chant  as  good,  are  utterly  worthless  unless  they  spring 
from  supreme  love  to  the  Creator.  "Though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned,  if  I  have 
not  love,  I  am  nothing."  "Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law."  2.  Works  that  have  a  right 
■  standard.  It  is  conceivable  that  man  may  have  a  right  motive  and  yet  his  work  be 
bad.  Was  it  not  something  like  this  with  Saul  of  Tarsus  when  he  was  persecuting 
the  saints  ?  We  make  two  remarks  in  relation  to  these  good  works.  (1)  The  main- 
tenance of  these  works  requires  strenuous  and  constant  effort.  "  I  will  that  thou  affirm 
confidently,  to  the  end  that  they  which  have  believed  in  God  may  be  careful  to 
maintain  good  works."  There  are  so  many  forces  within  and  without  us  to  check  and 
frustrate  the  maintenance  of  good  works,  that  we  require  to  be  constantly  on  our  guard 
to  see  that  our  motives  are  right.  It  may  be  that  good  works  flow  from  angelic  natures 
as  waters  from  a  fountain,  as  sunbeams  from  the  sun ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  us.  Their 
light  in  us  is  the  light  of  the  lamp,  and  to  be  clear  and  useful  there  must  be  constant 
trimming  and  feeding  with  fresh  oil ;  for  the  streams  to  be  pure,  the  fountain  must  be 
kept  clean.  We  must  "  watch  and  pray,  lest  we  enter  into  temptation."  (2)  The  great 
work  of  the  Christian  ministry  is  to  stimulate  this  effort.  "  I  will  that  thou  affirm 
confidently,  to  the  end  that  they  which  have  believed. God  may  be  careful  to  maintain 
good  works."  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  these  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm  con- 
stantly, that  they  which  have  believed  in  God,"  etc.  In  four  other  texts  of  Scripture 
we  have  "  a  faithful  saving."  The  first  is  1  Tun.  i.  15,  "  That  Jesus  Christ  came  into 
the  world  to  save  sinners.  The  second  is  1  Tim.  iv.  8,  9,  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying, 
Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things."  The  third  is  2  Tim.  ii.  11 — 13,  "  It  is  a  faithful 
saying,  If  we  be  dead  with  him,  we  shall  also  live  with  him."  The  fourth  is  our  text, 
"  This  is  a  faithful  saying."  What?  That  God  makes  men  morally  right  by  his  grace. 
This  is  an  undoubted  fact.  That  God  is  the  essential  Foundation  of  all  true  faith. 
Who  can  question  this  ?  Or  that  the  supreme  purpose  of  moral  existence  is  to  maintain 
"good  works."  Who  will  gainsay  this?  Or  that  all  ministers  of  the  gospel  should 
faithfully  and  constantly  exhort  their  hearers  to  maintain  good  works.  These,  indeed, 
are  all  faithful  sayings,  and  should  be  practically  realised  by  every  man. — D.  T, 


oh.  in.  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TlTtJS.  68 

Vera.  9 — 15. — The  worthless,  the  pernicious,  and  the  desirable  in  social  life.  "Bat 
avoid  foolish  questions,"  etc.    The  text  brings  under  our  attention  three 'things. 

I.  The  avoidance  of  the  worthless  in  social  life.  "  Avoid  foolish  question! 
and  genealogies."  The  "  questions  "  and  "  genealogies  "  are  referred  to  in  1  Tim.  i.  4. 
The  apostle  characterizes  them  as  foolish  because  they  were  of  an  utterly  impractical 
nature,  and  consumed  time  and  powers  which  were  needed  for  other  and  better  things. 
"  Genealogies  as  found  in  the  Books  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  to  which  wild  allegorical 
interpretations  had  been  assigned.  Such  purely  fanciful  meanings  had  been  already 
developed  by  Philo,  whose  religious  writings  were  becoming  at  this  time  known  and 
popular  in  many  of  the  Jewish  schools.  Such  teaching,  if  allowed  in  the  Christian 
Churches,  Paul  saw,  would  effectually  put  a  stop  to  the  growth  of  Gentile  Christendom. 
It  would  inculcate  an  undue  and  exaggerated  and,  for  the  ordinary  Gentile  convert, 
an  impossible  reverence  for  Jewish  forms  and  ceremonies."  Old  was  the  habit  and 
strong  was  the  tendency  of  the  Hebrews  to  concern  themselves  about  their  ancestry  or 
genealogy.  A  truly  contemptible  state  of  mind,  this !  What  matters  fy  whether  we 
were  born  of  kings  or  of  paupers?  "And  contentions,  and  strivings  about  the  Law." 
The  ceremonial  law  is  here  meant,  evidently — the  law  concerning  meats  and  drinks  and 
holy  days.  "  For  they  are  unprofitable  and  vain."  How  rife  in  Christendom  have 
been  in  past  ages,  and  still  are,  these  miserable  discussions,  which  are  generated  for  the 
most  part  by  the  most  ignorant  and  narrow-minded  of  the  human  race — mere 
"unfeathered  bipeds"  that  Christianity  has  not  converted  into  true  manhood  1  The 
grand  end  of  every  member  of  the  social  realm  should  be  "charity,  that  of  a  pure  heart 
and  of  a  good  conscience."    The  only  true  Christianity  in  social  life  is  altruism. 

II.  The  excommunication  of  the  febnicious  from  social  life.  The  former  class 
— the  irritating  disputants  about  genealogies  and  ceremonies — are  described  as  "unpro- 
fitable and  vain."  They  are  a  worthless  class,  doing  no  good  whatever,  but  otherwise. 
The  class  we  have  here,  however,  is  represented  as  pernicious,  and  to  be  rejected.  "  A 
man  that  is  an  heretic  after  the  first  and  second  admonition  reject."  The  word 
"  heretic  "  (af/KTimfe)  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  All  heretics  may  be 
divided  into  three  classes.  1.  The  theoretical  unbeliever.  They  do  not  believe  what 
others  believe  to  be  true  and  orthodox.  Though  bigots  denounce  this  as  the  worst  of 
sins,  true  wisdom  justifies  it.  It  says  that  uniformity  of  opinion  is  an  impossibility — 
an  impossibility  arising  from  a  variety  in  the  faculties,  education,  and  external  circum- 
stances of  men.  And  not  only  an  impossibility,  but  an  inexpediency.  Did  all  men 
think  alike,  all  minds  would  sink  into  a  dead  monotony.  "  Every  man  should  be  fully 
persuaded  in  his  own  mind."  That,  therefore,  which  the  Church  most  fiercely  denounces7 
it  should  encourage  and  develop.  There  is  more  good  in  honest  doubt  than  in  half 
the  creeds.  2.  The  professional  believer.  A  heretic  more  execrable  know  I  not  than 
he  who  every  Sunday  in  the  great  congregation  declares  his  faith  in  creeds,  and  every 
day,  not  only  ignores  them,  but  denies  them  in  his  life.  These  heretics  make  our  laws, 
rule  our  commerce,  fill  our  temples,  create  wars,  and  swindle  the  millions.  3.  The 
practical  disbeliever.  These  are  insincere.  They  do  not  act  according  to  their  innate 
convictions,  their  intuitive  beliefs.  They  believe — and  they  cannot  help  it — that  the 
greatest  Being  should  have  the  most  reverence,  the  best  Being  the  most  love,  the 
kindest  Being  the  most  gratitude;  and  yet,  forsooth,  they  live  lives  of  irreverence, 
unlovingness,  and  ingratitude.  These  are  the  worst  kind  of  heretics.  And  how  are  they 
to  be  treated  ?  They  are  to  be  excommunicated.  "  After  the  first  and  second  admoni- 
tion reject."  They  should  be  morally  ostracized.  *'  Knowing  that  he  that  is  such  is 
subverted,  and  sinneth,  being  condemned  of  himself."  They  are  insincere  men,  and  not 
to  be  accepted  or  continued  in  the  circle  of  brotherhood.  Whilst  you  have  no  authority 
to  persecute  them  or  crush  them  by  force,  you  are  bound  to  treat  them  as  insincere 
men.     Their  own  conscience  condemns ;  they  are  self-condemned. 

III.  The  supeemact  of  purpose  in  social  life.  In  all  the  changes  in  social  com- 
panionship and  scene  of  residence  to  which  the  apostle  here  points,  he  urges  the 
aiming  at  one  thing,  viz.  to  "  maintain  good  works  for  necessary  uses,  that  they  be 
not  unfruitful."  What  the  "good  works"  are  I  have  intimated  in  my  remarks  on 
the  preceding  verses.  They  are  works  that  have  a  right  motive,  a  right  standard,  and  a 
right  influence.  The  grand  end  in  the  life  of  all  rational  and  moral  beings  should  be 
the  maintenance  of  good  works.    The  apostle  intimates  that  this  should  be  the  aim ; 


60  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [oh.  m.  1—16. 


1.  In  aM  the  events  *f  life.  He  was  now  despatching  to  Titus  from  his  society  two 
dear  Mentis  and  fellow-workers,  Artemas  and  Tychicus,  inviting  him  to  come  at  once 
to  Nicopolis,  w  lere  he  had,-  in  the  use  of  his  discretionary  power,  determined  to  remain 
through  the  winter.  Moreover,  he  had  requested  Titus  to  bring  with  him  Zenas  the 
lawyer  and  Apollos.  Apollos  was  a  man,  not  only  of  distinguished  learning  and 
influence,  but  Paul's  intimate  friend  and  fellow-labourer.  In  all  this  Paul  keeps  the 
one  end  in  view,  viz.  that  they  should  maintain  good  works.  "Good  works,"  the 
culmination  of  all  good  ideas,  good  impressions,  good  emotions,  and  good  resolves. 
"  Show  me  your  faith  by  your  works."  "'In  a  good  character  man  can  alone  find  his 
heaven  and  from  good  works  alone  can  man  produce  a  good  character.  2.  In  the 
presiding  spirit  of  life.  "All  that  a»  with  me  salute  thee,"  etc.  Brotherly  love  was 
to  animate,  direct,  and  rule  all  their  social  movements  and  activities. — D.  T. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 

TO 

THE  EPISTLE    OF 

PAUL    TO    TITUS. 


OHAPTEB  L 

PAGE 

The  Ministry  of  Character...           M<  5 

Apostolic  Address  and  Salutation     ...  5 

Titus's  Commission  in  Crete             ...  7 
The   Character   of    Bishops  —  their 

Negative  Qualifications  ...'           ...  8 

The  Bishop's  Positive  Qualification ...  9 
The    Bishop's    Qualification    as    to 

Doctrine            ...            ...            ...  10 

The  Character  of  the  Adversaries  at 

Crete  ...            ...            ...            •■•  10 

The  Necessity  of  Godly  Rebuke        ...  11 
A    Great   Counter-Principle    against 

this  Ascetic  Tendency    ...            ...  12 

The  Great  Contradiction    ...           ...  12 

Christian  Ministry              ...            ...  13 

Truth  and  Life    ...            ...            ...  13 

The  Immortal  Hope           .„           ...  14 

The  Divine  Veracity          ...           ...  14 

The  Divine  Foresight        ...           ...  14 

The  Divine  Proclamation  ...           ...  15 

Believed  in  Everywhere     ...            ...  15 

Apostolus  Preparation         ...           ...  16 

The  Overseers      ...           ...            ...  16 

Pure-heartedness ...           .»           ...  17 

Inner  Defilement ...           m.           ...  17 

Bedemptive  Truth              ...           ...  17 

Church  Order      ...           ...           ...  19 

The  Sins  of  the  Seot  and  the  Sins  of 

the  Tribe          20 

The  Supreme  Importance  of  Moral 

...           —          •••  23 


OHAPTEB  IL 

THEKC  PASS 

Practical  Godliness  the  End  of  Spiritual 

Doctrine           ...           ...           ...  28 

Special  Instructions  as  to  Titus's  own 

Preaching         ...           ...           ...  29 

The  Duties  of  Aged  Men  ...           ...  30 

The    Duties   of  Aged  Women    and 

Young  Women  ...            ...            ..;  80 

The  Duty  of  Young  Men 81 

Titus  himself  a  Pattern  of  Good  Works  82 

The  Duties  of  Servants      ...            ...  32 

The  Grace  of  God  the  True  Ground 

of  all  Sanctifioation         ...            ...  33 

The  Purport  and  Extent  of  Christ's 

Saviourship       ...           ...           ...  34 

Pastoral  Work  and  Authority           ...  85 

Aged  Christian  Men          ...           ...  85 

Aged  Christian  Women      ...           ...  35 

Counsels  to  Young  Women              ...  36 

Counsels  to  Young  Men     ...           «.  36 

A  Teacher's  Influence        ...           ...  36 

Counsels  to  Slaves              ...           ...  37 

Christ  for  Every  Man         ...           ...  37 

True  Self-Denial  ...           ...           ...  37 

The  Coming  Day ...           ...           M  38 

The  Giving  of  the  Self      .„           «.  38 

Cultivation  of  Bespect       ...           m.  33 

Genuine  Morality  ...  m  89 
The  Soul-Culture  of  the  World 


OHAPTEB  UL 
Mercy  begetting  M«oy      ,„ 


~     41 


~     47 


INDEX. 


THEMB  f  PAGE 

Pearls  before  Swine  ...  ...      47 

Political  Duties    ...  ...  ...      48 

The  Bight  Deportment  of  Christians 
toward  all  Men  ...  ...       48 

An  Humiliating  Retrospect  ...      49 

The  Origin,  Nature,  Means,  and  End 
of  Salvation       ...  ,,.  ...      49 

The  Neoessary   Connection  between 

Gospel  Doctrine  and  Good  Works ...      51 
A  Warning   against    Frivolous   and 
Disputative  Teaching     ...  ...      52 

The  Bight  Attitude  of  Christian  Minis- 
ters toward  Div»«*ve  ^rrorists  .      52 


THEME  PA<» 

Personal  Directions            ...           ...  53 

A  Last  Reminder  concerning  Good 

Works                53 

Salutation  and  Conclusion  ..,            ...  53 

Subjection  to  the  State       ...           ...  53 

The  Mercy  of  God              ...           ...  54 

Christian  Character             ...            ...  54 

Duty       ...           ...           ...           ...  54 

Salvation,  not  of  Works,  but  of  Grace  56 

Justification;  Faith;  Works  ...  57 
The  Worthless,   the   Pernicious,  "and 

the  DesnrMe  m  Social  life          ~.  59 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 

EDITED  BY  THE 

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D., 

DEAN  OP  GLOUCESTER  J 
AND  BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH    S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


PHILEMON. 

(Exposition  anb  <I)omiletits : 
Br    REV.    S.    J.    EALES,   M.A.,  D.C.L., 

SOMETIME  PRINCIPAL  OF  ST.  BONIFACE  MISSION  COLLEGE. 

fomilies  bji  bartons  Sltttljors : 

llEV.  PROF.  T.  CROSKERY,  D.D.  REV.  W.  M.  STATHAM 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE    EPISTLE    OF 

PAUL   TO    PHILEMON. 

INTRODUCTION. 


This  brief  letter  is  the  only  specimen  preserved  to  us  of  St.  Paul's  private 
correspondence.  It  is,  perhaps,  surprising  that  no  more  of  St.  Paul's  private 
letters  have  come  down  to  historio  times ;  for  it  hardly  admits  of  doubt  that 
he  must  have  written  very  many.  His  vigour  and  activity  of  mind  were 
so  great,  his  affections  were  so  -warm  and  tender,  and  his  acquaintances 
(not  to  say  friends)  throughout  Asia  Minor,  Greece,  and  Syria  were  so 
numerous,  that  he  could  hardly  fail  to  have  correspondents  in  many  lands ; 
and  we  may  be  permitted  to  wonder  that  only  a  single  letter  should  have 
remained  out  of  so  many. 

Philemon  (i.e.  "  a  friend ; "  but  the  word  occurs  only  as  a  proper  name), 
to  whom  this  Epistle  was  addressed,  was  a  Greek  Christian,  who  owed  his 
conversion,  it  is  inferred  from  ver.  19,  to  St.  Paul  himself.  He  was  pro- 
bably a  native  of  Colossse,  in  Phrygia,  or  at  all  events  was  settled  there 
at  the  time  when  St.  Paul  wrote  this  letter  to  him.  This  appears  (1)  from 
comparing  ver.  1  with  Col.  iv.  17,  whenoe  it  appears  that  Philemon  was  of 
the  same  place  as  Archippus,  and  that  the  "  ministry  "  of  Archippus  was  in 
Colossse ;  (2)  because  Onesimus,  who  was  (ver.  16)  a  slave  of  Philemon,  is 
referred  to  as  "  one  of  you  "  in  the  same  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  (iv.  9). 

It  is  an  inconclusive  argument  that  is  used  by  "Wieseler  (•  Chronologie '), 
that  Col.  iv.  17,  where  Archippus  is  mentioned,  should  be  conneoted  with 
Col.  iv.  15,  16,  and  that  therefore  Archippus  belonged  to  Laodicea;  for 
these  verses  are  evidently  a  digression  or  parenthesis.  Yet  it  would  seem 
that  St.  Paul  himself  had  never  been  to  Colossse,  and  that  his  meeting  with 
Philemon,  and  the  conversion  of  the  latter,  must  have .  taken  place  else- 
where (Col.  ii.  1). 

In  any  case,  the  question  is  one  of  small  import,  since  Laodicea  and 
Colossse  were  neighbouring  places,  perhaps  no<.  ^iore  than  ten  miles  apart 

PHILEMON.  B 


fi  INTRODUCTION  TO 


Philemon  was  evidently  a  man  of  wealth  and  importance,  whose  house- 
hold was  large,  and  who  was  accustomed  to  exercise  hospitality  on  a  liberal 
scale.  This  is  the  only  occasion  upon  which  he  is  mentioned  in  the  Epistles, 
bnt  tradition  asserts  that  he  became  Bishop  of  Colossse  ('  Apost.  Constit.,' 
vii.  46).  Theodoret,  Bishop  of  Cyrus  in  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century 
a.d.,  states  that  the  house  of  Philemon  remained  entire  at  Colossaa  in  his 
day  (« Proem,  in  Epist.  Phil.'). 

It  is  probable  that  Philemon  was  a  layman.  The  apostle,  indeed,  addresses 
him  in  ver.  1  as  "  fellow-labourer ; "  but  o-wepyos  is  not  in  any  sense  an 
official  designation.  It  is  used  in  this  very  Epistle  (ver.  24)  of  several 
persons, "  Marcus,  Aristarchus,  Demas,  Lucas,"  respecting  whom  it  is  uncer- 
tain whether  they  or  all  of  them  held  ecclesiastical  offices  of  any  kind; 
while  in  other  passages  it  unquestionably  denotes  laymen  (but  see  Exposi- 
tion on  ver.  2).  It  was  rather  a  favourite  word  with  St.  Paul,  and  he  uses 
it  and  its  cognates  sixteen  times  in  his  Epistles. 

Onesimus,  the  slave  of  Philemon,  on  whose  account  the  Epistle  was 
written  to  him,  was,  as  it  would  seem  from  the  expression  in  Col.  iv.  9, 
in  which  he  is  spoken  of  as  "  one  of  you,"  a  native  of  that  city.  And  this 
is  probable  on  other  grounds,  since  Colossse  was  a  city  of  Greater  Phrygia, 
and  the  name  of  "  Phrygian  "  was  long  a  synonym  for  "  slave."  Its  popu- 
lation had  the  reputation  of  being  sullen  and  intractable,  only  to  be 
governed  by  blows ;  and  there  was  a  proverb,  Phryx  plagis  melior  fieri  solet, 
to  which  Cicero  refers:  "Utrum  igitur  nostrum  est  aut  vestrum,  hoc  pro- 
verbium,  Phrygem  plagis  fieri  solere  "meliorem "  ('  Pro  Flacco,'  cap.  27). 
Onesimus  means  "  useful,"  or  "  profitable  "  (Eevised  Version  renders  "  help- 
ful ").  It  is  rather  an  epithet  than  a  name,  and  in,  at  all  events,  such  an 
appellative  as  would  be  easily  bestowed  upon  a  slave. 

The  notices  in  ecclesiastical  writers  referring  to  the  subsequent  life  of 
Onesimus  are  few  and  brief.  The  'Apostolic  Canons'  (lxxiii.)  state  that 
he  was  made  free  by  Philemon,  according  to  the  request  of  St.  Paul ;  and 
the  '  Apostolic  Constitutions '  (vii.  46)  add  to  this  the  further  statement 
that  he  was  consecrated  Bishop  of  Berrea  by  St.  Paul,  and  that  he  was 
finally  martyred.  An  Onesimus,  referred  to  in  the  first  epistle  of  St. 
Ignatius  to  the  Ephesians  as  their  bishop  (ch.  i.  Fr.  Xav.  Funk.,  '  Patr. 
Apostol.  Opera,'  p.  174),  is  in  all  probability  another  person. 

fl.  Date. 

We  learn  from  Col.  iv.  7 — 9  that  that  Epistle  was  brought  to  Colossae  by 
Tychious  and  Onesimus;  and  our  Epistle  suggests  in  almost  every  line, 
though  there  is  no  distinct  statement  on  the  subject,  that  the  same  persons, 
or  possibly  Onesimus  alone,  were  the  bearers  of  it  also.  The  date  of  this 
Epistle  will  therefore  be  determined  by  that  to  the  Colossians  (Introduction 
to  which,  see);  and  it  will  be  sufficient  to  notice  here  that  it  must  in  all 
probability  be  assigned  to  the  very  end  of  St.  Paul's  first  imprisonment  at 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  iM 

Rome,  vis.  (the  spring  of)  A.d.  62  to  (the  spring  of)  a.d.  64,  i.e.  the  autumn 
of  a.d.  63. 

Some  notice  should  here  be  taken  of  the  theory  (supported  by  Schulz, 
Sohott,  Bottger,  "Wiggers,  Thiersch,  Reuss,  Schenkel,  Zockler,  Meyer)  that 
this  Epistle,  with  those  to  the  Epbesians  and  Culossians,  was  written,  not 
from  Rome,  but  from  Csesarea. 

The  evidence  for  or  against  this  opinion  is  not  very  abundant,  but,  such 
as  it  is,  it  mostly  looks  in  one  direction.  It  is  clear  from  vers.  9  and  10 
that  the  Epistle  was  written  during  a  long  imprisonment  of  the  writer. 
Now,  the  outline  of  St.  Paul's  career  up  to  about  a.d.  62  is  clearly  known 
from  the  account  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  there  are  in  it  only  two 
long  imprisonments — at  Caesarea,  and  that  (the  first)  at  Rome  If  it  does 
not  date  from  the  one  of  these,  then  it  must  from  the  other. 

1.  But  (ver.  1)  Timothy  was  with  him  when  he  wrote.  Now,  it  would 
appear  from  Phil.  i.  1  that  Timothy  was  with  St.  Paul  at  Rome,  but  there 
is  no  trace  of  his  ever  having  been  at  Csesarea. 

2.  He  was  at  Caesarea  kept  in  a  confinement  (Acts  xxiv.  23)  which, 
during  the  latter  part  of  the  time,  was  a  close  and  severe  one  (Acts  xxiv.  27), 
and  this  would  at  once  hinder  him  from  preaching  the  gospel,  and  render  it 
improbable  that  Onesimus  would  come  under  his  notice.  No  such  difficulty 
existed  at  Rome  (Acts  xxviii.  30,  31). 

3.  There  is  not  the  slightest  indication  that  at  Coesarea  the  apostle  could 
have  had  any  such  expectation  of  speedy  relexse  as  is  implied  in  ver.  22 
(Acts  xix.  21 ;  xxiii.  11 ;  Rom.  i.  13,  15).  His  imprisonment  steadily 
deepened  in  severity  towards  the  end.  At  Rome,  on  the  contrary,  the  mild- 
ness of  his  treatment  (Acts  xxviii.  30,  31)  might  well  encourage  such  a  hope. 

All  the  indications,  therefore,  point  steadily  towards  Rome,  as  the  place 
where  the  Epistle  was  written,  and  are  thus  in  favour  of  the  traditional 
view.  Meyer's  argument  from  the  presumed  order  of  the  journey  (Rome, 
Ephesus,  Coloss83;  or  Csesarea,  Colossee,  Ephesus)  is  ingenious,  but  so  pre- 
carious that  nothing  can  be  founded  upon  it.  Coloss*  was  about  midway 
from  the  sea,  from  one  end  of  the  road  at  Ephesus,  from  the  other  at  Attalia; 
and  it  does  not  appear  but  that  either  might  have  conceivably  been  the 
route,  even  from  Rome. 

§  2.  Occasion  and  Circumstances. 
These  are  entirely  a  matter  of  inference,  and  the  essentially  private 
nature  of  the  entire  incident  renders  it  by  no  means  surprising  that  no 
historical  corroborations  of  them  can  be  adduced.  Onesimus  had,  it  is 
not  obscurely  intimated,  escaped  from  the  rule  of  his  master,  and  fled. 
Whither  he  went  at  the  time  must  be  doubtful ;  but  at  length  he  found 
his  way,  as  it  seems,  to  Rome.  The  number  of  slaves  in  Asia  Minor,  as 
in  Attica,  was  very  large.  The  Greek  colonies  in  Asia  Minor  were  long 
the  chief  sources  of  the  supply  of  slaves,  and  they  were  chiefly  obtained,  no 
doubt,  from  the  interior  of  Asia,  which  lay  behind  these  colonies;  just  aa 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


even  up  to  the  present  day  Egypt  has  been  the  ehief  slave-market,  because 
the  breadth  of  the  continent  of  Africa  lies  behind  it,  and  affords,  or  did 
afford,  an  inexhaustible  supply  of  this  human  merchandise. 

Then,  as  now,  the  trade  of  the  slave-dealer  was  disreputable,  but  large 
fortunes  were  frequently  amassed  by  it.  It  was  customary  to  carry  on 
workshops  and  manufactories  by  slave-labour,  and  as  a  mere  investment 
of  capital  (Demosth.,  '  In  Aphob.,'  i.).  The  form  of  slavery,  therefore,  was 
somewhat  more  severe  in  Greece  and  Asia  Minor  than  in  Borne  and  Italy, 
where  it  was  principally  praedial  or  domestic,  and  on  the  whole  milder  in 
character.  Hence  escapes  of  slaves,  and  even  insurrections  among  them, 
were  not  unfrequent;  and  manumissions  were  more  seldom  granted  than 
at  Eome.  It  was  contrary  to  law  to  receive  or  assist  a  fugitive  slave.  He 
could  not  be  legally  sold  by  a  new  possessor,  and  to  conceal  him  from 
pursuit  was  equivalent  to  theft  (kXottjj,  furtum).  It  is  not,  therefore,  so 
improbable  a  circumstance  as  Baur  seems  to  have  thought  ('Paul:  his  Life 
and  Works,'  vol.  ii.  ch.  6)  that  Onesimus  should  have  escaped  from  hie 
slavery,  which  it  was  a  common  occurrence  for  a  slave  to  do,  or  at  least  to 
attempt ;  or  that,  succeeding,  he  should  have  then  directed  himself  towards 
Rome.  There  may,  too,  have  been  momentary  circumstances  which  deter- 
mined the  direction  of  his  flight,  of  which  we  can  now  learn  nothing.  He 
may  have  been  to  Eome  on  some  former  occasion,  or  even  have  been  sent 
there  upon  his  master's  affairs,  and  have  absconded  instead  of  returning. 
And  it  is  not  to  be  overlooked  that  a  Roman  connection  is  at  least  sug- 
gested by  the  name  of  the  wife  of  Philemon  (Apphia,  i.e.  Appia).  Com- 
mentators generally  assume  the  identity  of  the  two  names.  But  this 
conclusion  is  weakened,  if  not  destroyed,  by  the  fact  that  Apphia  is  a 
native  Phrygian  name,  as  Bishop  Lightfoot  has  shown  ('  Introduction," 
p.  372). 

"  All  roads  lead  to  Eome,"  said  a  mediseval  proverb,  and  it  is  probable 
that,  while  travelling  would  be  comparatively  easy  and  unobserved  on  the 
main  lines  of  communication,  and  among  the  crowds  that  used  them,  a 
runaway  slave  would  have  been  noticed  and  stopped  instantly  had  he 
turned  aside  into  less-frequented  towns.  The  stream  flowed  forward  and 
backward  from  the  provinces  to  Rome,  and  fugitives  naturally  go  with  the 
stream.     So  Onesimus.     . 

Onesimus,  however,  whether  he  were  oikctijs  (purchased)  or  oiKorpufi 
(born  in  the  master's  house),  must  have  been  of  considerable  value  to  his 
master,  and  his  flight  must  have  occasioned  a  certain  loss  to  Philemon, 
though  it  hardly  seems  a  damage  which  the  apostle  would  think  it  .right 
to  assess  or  offer  to  make  good,  as  he  does  in  vers.  18,  19. 

It  would  be  otherwise  if  Onesimus  had,  at  the  time  oi  his  flight,  appro- 
priated funds  or  property  belonging  to  his  master,  and  it  is  not  altogether 
clear  how  he  could  have  made  his  way  from  his  home  in  or  near  Colossa?  to 
Rome — a  journey  of  probably  a  thousand  miles — without  any  funds  at  all, 
or  even  by  the  help  of  any  peculium  whioh  he  might  have  acquired.     It  hat 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON. 


not  unnaturally,  therefore,  been  supposed  by  commentators  (Chrysostom, 
Soipio  Gentilis,  GTotius,  Conybeare  and  Howson,  '  Life  and  Epistles  of  St. 
Paul')  that  Onesimus  had  robbed  his  master j  and  the  inference  would 
seem  to  be  well  founded.  St.  Paul  speaks  as  one  in  possession  of  the  whole 
of  the  circumstances,  in  his  two  phrases  "  wronged  "  and  "  owes,"  and  dis- 
tinguishes accurately,  no  doubt,  between  various  offences  against  his  master 
which  the  repentant  Onesimus  may  have  confided  to  him.  As  a  slave,  he 
could  not,  indeed,  in  strict  law,  owe  anything  to  his  master,  as  the  master 
could  not  owe  anything  (even  the  pemlium)  to  his  slave  (•  Gams,'  i.,  ii., 
iv.).  But  he  might,  of  course,  steal  from  him,  and  then  would  be  liable 
for  the  theft. 

«  In  some  way,  St.  Paul  does  not  mention  how,  he  and  Onesimus  met  in 
Borne,  and  the  latter  yielded  to  the  truths  of  the  gospel.  He  was,  perhaps, 
attracted  by  the  winning  earnestness  of  the  great  preacher's  manner  and 
conversation,  and  entered  into  personal  and  confidential  relations  with  him. 
Very  soon  the  apostle  knew  all  the  events  of  the  young  man's  brief.history, 
and  had  counselled  him  to  make  such  amends  for  his  wrong-doing  as  might 
be  possible.  Onesimus  seems  to  have  put  himself  entirely  into  the  hands 
of  St.  Paul,  whOj  on  his  part,  must  have  felt  all  the  responsibility  of  his 
decision.  It  was  evident  that  Onesimus  had  ability  which  might  be  of 
great  service  to  the  Church  and  to  St.  Paul  himself.  A  strong  attachment 
had  sprung  up  between  the  aged  man  and  the  youth,  and  St.  Paul  calls 
him  by  the  unusual  appellation,  betokening  very  strong  feeling  (but  it  was 
St.  Paul's  custom  to  use  strong  and  vivid  expressions),  of  "  my  bowels,"  i.e. 
"my  son"  (Revised  Version,  "my  very  heart").  Yetf  before  all  things, 
what  was  'right  must  be  done.  The  law,  as  it  stood,  gave  certain  rights  to 
Philemon,  and  St.  Paul  would  have  been  the  last  man  to  wish  to  violate 
the  law.  Onesimus,  therefore,  must  return  to  his  master;  and  his  consent 
to  do  so  is  no  small  proof  of  the  respect  and  affection  which  St.  Paul  had 
inspired  in  him.  The  resentment  of  a  master  towards  a  runaway  slave 
would  be  hard  to  endure.  St.  Paul  had  no  intention  of  exposing  his 
penitent  to  this  considerable  danger  without  taking  every  means  in  his 
power  to  ensure  to  him  a  full  and  ready  forgiveness.  The  sum  of  which, 
possibly,  Onesimus  had  defrauded  his  master,  the  apostle  gave  his  personal 
undertaking  to  repay.  An  opportunity  was  found,  or  made,  for  his  return, 
in  the  approaching  visit  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Ephesian  Tychicus, 
who  was  a  well-known  and  trusted  brother,  and  had  several  times  (Col.  iv. 
7,  8  ;  Eph.  vi.  21,  22 ;  Titus  iii.  12  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  12  j  Acts  xx.  4, 17)  been  the 
messenger  of  St.  Paul. 

The  "  letter  of  introduction "  which  was   put  into  his  hands  is  that 
which  later  ages  have  known  as  the  Epistle  to  Philemon. 

§  3.  Contents. 

To  analyze  minutely  so  brief  and  private  a  letter  may  well  seem  super, 
fluous.    It  falls,  however,  naturally  into  five  divisions. 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


1.  Vers.  1— -A:  The  superscription,  comprising  salutations  to  Philemon 
himself,  to  Apphia  (probably  his  wife),  to  Arohippus,  and  either  to  the 
whole  family,  or  to  a  small  assembly  which  met  in  the  house  of  Philemon. 

2.  Vers.  5 — 7 :  The  apostle  thanks  God  for  the  good  report  of  Philemon 
which  he  has  heaid,  concerning  his  faith  towards  Godi  and  kindness 
towards  all  his  fellow-Christians.  After  this  exordium,  he  introduces  the 
specific  occasion  of  his  letter,  viz. 

3.  Vers.  8 — 21 :  His  intercession  on  behalf  of  Onesimus,  which  (vers. 
8,  9)  he  has  a  right  to  make  with  much  authority,  because  of  his  reverend 
age,  and  his  sufferings  for  Josus  Christ ;  but  (ver.  9)  he  does  not  command, 
he  entreats  as  a  favour,  the  granting  of  his  request.  Ver.  10  explains  what 
it  is,  viz.  a  kind  and  forgiving  reception  of  Onesimus,  whom  (vers.  11 — 14) 
he  wonld  have  wished  to  retain  with  himself,  but  would  not  do  this  without 
the  leave  of  Philemon.  Vers.  15 — 17  :  The  hopes  there  were  of  the  young 
man's  reformation  and  future  usefulness.  Vers.  18,  19  :  The  apostle's  pro- 
mise that  he  will  make  good,  if  desired,  whatever  sum  of  money  Onesimus 
may  have  wronged  his  master  of.  Vers.  20,  21  :  He  expresses  a  friendly 
confidence  in  Philemon's  ready  compliance  with  his  request,  and  that  he 
would  even  go  beyond  it. 

4.  Ver.  22 :  He  states  bis  intention  (which,  however,  it  would  seem  was 
never  fulfilled)  of  paying  a  visit  to  Colossas,  and  asks,  with  the  frankness  of 
one  who  knows  that  his  presence  will  be  esteemed  an  honour  and  a  pleasure, 
that  a  lodging  (se.  in  Philemon's  own  house)  may  be  prepared  for  him. 

5.  Vers.  23 — 25  :  The  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  staff  engaged  in  the 
mission  at  Borne  appears  to  have  joined  in  the  concluding  salutations ; 
Paul  and  Timothy  at  the  beginning;  Epaphras,  Marcus,  Aristarchus,  Demas, 
Lucas,  at  the  close ;  and  thus  associated  themselves  with  the  apostle's 
request.     Ver.  25 :  It  closes  with  the  apostolic  benediction. 

§  4.  The  Authenticity  of  the  Epistle,  and  its  Special  Characteristics. 

That  this  brief  Epistle  was  written  by  the  Apos  le  Paul  seems  the 
clearer  the  longer  it  is  studied.  Meyer  does  not  at  all  exaggerate  when  he 
declares  that  it  bears  "directly  and  vividly  the  stamp  of  genuineness." 
And  it  is  so  brief  that  it  enters  not  at  all  upon  debatable  ground.  It  has 
no  directions  for  Church  organization,  such  as  are  found  in  the  Epistles  to 
Timothy ;  nor  warnings  against  Gnosticism,  which  are  objected  to  as  anachro- 
nisms belonging  to  a  later  age.  Slavery  belongs  to  all  ages  of  the  ancient 
world,  and  it  is  an  incident  in  the  life  of  a  Phrygian  slave  that  occasioned 
the  writing  of  this  Epistle.  Nor  does  it  travel  scarcely,  if  at  all,  out  of  the 
sphere  of  the  household,  and  of  the  simpler  moral  principles  and  human 
emotions.  It  moves  in  the  plane  of  practical  life ;  the  doctrinal  or  devo- 
tional it  barely  enters. 

It  follows  that  the  Epistle  presents  the  least  possible  surface  for  attack ; 
and  even  that  it  partially  disarms  the  habitual  objector.  So  persistent  a 
critic  even  as  Banr  ('Paulus,'  in  loc.}  acknowledges,  with  a  touch  of  unusual 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  rii 

frankness,  "  In  the  case  of  this  Epistle,  more  than  any  other,  if  criticism 
should  inquire  for  evidence  in  favour  of  its  apostolio  name,  it  seems  liable 
to  the  reproach  of  hypercriticism,  of  exaggerated  suspicion,  trustless  doubt, 
from  the  attacks  of  which  nothing  is  safe.  What  has  criticism  to  do  with 
this  short,  attractive,  and  friendly  letter,  inspired  as  it  is  by  the  noblest 
Christian  feeling,  and  which  has  never  yet  been  touched  by  the  breath  of 
suspicion?"  It  is  evident  throughout  his  treatment  of  this  Epistle  (pt.  ii. 
ch.  6)  that  he  is  being  driven  by  the  exigencies  of  his  preconceived  theory 
to  deny  a  genuineness  which  he  secretly  acknowledges. 

It  is  the  importance  of  the  niche  which  this  Epistle  fills  in  the  general 
scheme  of  St.  Paul's  life,  as  handed  down  by  the  Christian  tradition,  in 
"  its  historical  and  critical  connection  with  the  other  Epistles  which  stand 
nearest  to  it,"  that  arouse  his  hostility.  He  holds  that  the  entire  group  of 
Epistles,  which  consists  of  those  to  the  Colossians,  Ephesians,  and  to  Phile- 
mon, is  un-Pauline ;  and  since  the  testimony  of  each  of  these  supports  the 
rest,  he  dares  admit  of  no  exceptions  from  the  sentence  of  rejection.  There- 
fore he  must  regard  Philemon  as  "  a  Christian  romance,  serving  to  convey  a 
genuine  Christian  idea."  No  introduction  to  the  Epistle  can  be  said  to  be 
complete,  therefore,  which  does  not  reckon  with  his  doubts  and  those  of  his 
school,  though  his  reasoning  is  somewhat  forced. 

1.  External  evidence.  The  character  of  its  contents  fitted  it  but  little 
for  quotation.  The  apostolic  Fathers,  therefore,  present  no  reference  to  it ; 
for  the  Onesimus  referred  to  in  Ignatius, '  Ad  Ephes.,'  ii.  and  '  Ad  Magnes.,' 
xii.  is  probably  another  person,  and  in  '  Ad  Polycarp.,'  vi.  the  resemblance  of 
phrase  is  too  vague  to  rest  upon.  It  is  included  in  the  Muratorian  Canon, 
and  Eusebius  classes  it  with  the  received  books  (6/xoA.eyov/iei'a).  Marcion 
received  it  as  Paul's,  and  that  without  altering  or  modifying  it — a  circum- 
stance which  drew  forth  the  criticism  of  Tertullian  that  its  brevity  had 
been  of  advantage  to  it  in  one  respect  at  least,  that  it  had  escaped  the  cor- 
rupting hands  of  Marcion.  "  Yet  I  wonder,"  he  adds,  "  that,  since  he  has 
received  a  letter  to  one  man,  he  should  have  rejected  the  two  to  Timothy 
and  one  to  Titus,  which  treat  of  the  organization  of  the  Church.  He 
affected,  I  suppose,  to  alter  even  the  number  of  the  Epistles"  ('Adv. 
Marcion.,'  lib.  v.  c.  21).  It  was  sometimes  placed  thirteenth  in  order, 
before  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  but  in  other  copies  last  of  all. 

Origen  has  repeated  references  to  this  Epistle  (see  '  Homil.  in  Jerem. 
xix. ; '  '  in  Matt.  Tract.,'  xxxiii.  and  xxxiv.). 

We  find,  nevertheless,  by  the  time  of  St.  Jerome,  that,  there  were  already 
persons  who  argued  against  this  Epistle,  that  either  it  was  not  written  by 
Paul  at  all,  or  that,  if  it  were,  it  contained  nothing  edifying.  "  Aut  Epistolam 
non  esse  Pauli  .  .  .  aut  etiam,  si  Pauli  sit,  nihil  habere,  quod  sedificare 
nos  possit." 

Baur,  unlike  most  commentators,  argues  that  either  the  circumstance* 
are  altogether  fictitious,  or  that,  if  they  rest  on  a  basis  of  fact,  they  have 
been  freely  treated  in  order  to  embody  dramatically  the  idea  "  that  what  one 


vili  INTRODUCTION  TO 


loses  in  the  world,  one  recovers  in  Christianity,  and  that  for  ever ;  that  th« 
world  and  Christianity  are  related  to  eaoh  other  as  separation  and  reunion, 
as  time  and  eternity;"  and  this  he  thinks  is  expressed  in  ver.  15.  His 
arguments  on  the  improbability  of  what  he  calls  "  a  very  remarkable  con- 
currence of  chances  "  are  so  evidently  without  serious  weight  that  we  shall 
not  linger  upon  them.1 

But  he  further  objects  to  the  style  as  un-Pauline.  The  instances  he 
gives,  however,  are  not  very  substantial.  When  he  says  that  owTyxmwrijs 
(ver.  2),  in  the  figurative  sense,  belongs  to  later  writings,  he  means  appa- 
rently that  it  is  found  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  once  (2  Tim.  ii.  3,  arpari- 
iotijs).  The  word  appears  to  be  somewhat  rare  even  in  classical  literature. 
But  it  is  found  in  Xenophon  ('  Anab.,'  i.  2,  26),  Plato  ('  Bepub.,'  556  a),  and 
precisely  in  this  metaphorical  sense  as  here  in  Josephus  ('  Bell.  Jud.,'  vi. 
9.  1).  And  as  far  as  we  can  discover  after  search,  the  metaphorical  sense 
cannot  be  said  to  be  popular  until  a  very  much  later  age  (see  Eusebius, 
'Prseparat.  Evangel.,'  lib.  xiii.  c.  7)  than  it  is  possible  to  name  for  this 
Epistle.  In  ver.  15  dirt\u>  has  not  the  sense  of  "  have  back,"  as  Baur  argues, 
which  would  be  unexampled,  but  of  "  have  fully,"  as  in  Phil.  iv.  18  (see 
Lightfoot's  note  here).  The  fact  that  it  was  a  having  back  again  in  the 
case  of  Onesimus  is,  so  to  speak,  an  accidental  circumstance  in  this  case. 
*AiroT6<D,  irpo<ro«^€i\(i)  (ver.  19)  and  ovrjfiai  (ver.  20)  are,  it  is  true,  peculiar  to 
the  places  where  they  occur ;  and  while  it  is  curious  that  so  many  aira£ 
keyo/jLeva  should  cluster  in  this  brief  Epistle  of  twenty-five  verses,  the 
character  of  its  subject-matter,  which  is  different  from  the  usual  subjects 
treated  in  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  fully  accounts  for  this.  It  is  a  letter 
upon  business,  and  as  such  it  naturally  contains  business  terms,  such  as  these 
words  are. 

(2)  In  the  consideration  of  the  internal  characteristics  of  this  Epistle,  the 
same  over-subtle  analysis  and  excessive  suspicion  of  "  tendency  "  seems  to 
cloud  and  disturb  the  judgment  arrived  at  by  Baur  and  those  of  his  school. 
It  does  not  appear  to  us  that  to  praise  the  Epistle  as  "  invaluable  "  because 
it  exhibits  "  the  apostle's  cheerful  and  amiable  personality  "  is  in  any  wise 
an  accurate  or  closely  fitting  description. 

Surely  St.  Paul's  temperament  was  fervid,  emotional,  mobile,  snbjeot  to 
great  heights  and  depths  of  mood,  and  not  what  would  be  called  equable 
or  "  cheerful."  This  characteristic  is  faithfully  reflected  in  the  Epistle 
before  us. 

It  is  a  courteous  and  even  affectionate  communication  from  the  apostle 

to  one  who,  though  bound  to  respect  his  official  position,  and  under  great 

personal  obligations  to  him,  was  yet  not  familiarly  known  to  him.    He  had 

to  do  a  very  difficult  thing — to  come  between  a  master  and  his  slave,  to 

take  what  by  some  men  and  in   some  circumstances  might  have  been 

1  For  those  who  can  accept  it,  a  very  easy  way  of  avoiding  these  "  impossibilities,"  such 
as  they  are,  is  presented  by  that  hypothesis,  upheld  by  Schulz,  Schneokenburger,  Reuss, 
Boheukel,  Zookler,  Meyer,  whioh  assigns  this  Epistle,  with  those  to  the  Ephesians  and 
Ooloesians,  to  the  imprisonment  at  Otesarea  instead  of  at  Rome. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  Ix 


thought  a  great  and  unwarranted  liberty.  Did  he  demand  the  freedom 
of  Onesimus  by  his  apostolic  authority,  it  might  appear  that  he  was  magni- 
fying his  office  overmuch.  If  he  should  put  into  too  great  prominence  the 
spiritual  obligations  under  which  Philemon  lay,  the  act  would  be  ungene- 
rous, and  would  go  far  to  cancel  them.  Yet  he  could  not  send  back  the 
young  man  Onesimus  to  meet  the  punishment  of  a  runaway — ■flagellit  ad 
mortem  casus. 

The  tact  and  skill  with  which  all  these  opposite  dangers  are  avoided  in 
the  letter  before  us  is  remarkable.  The  writer  persuades  without  alien- 
ating, and  wins  his  correspondent  to  obedience  without  seeming  to  demand 
it.  At  once  the  reverend  senior,  the  confiding  friend,  and  the  persuasive 
suppliant,  he  requests  on  behalf  of  his  protSgS  a  favour  which  we  can 
hardly  doubt  was  as  willingly  and  gladly  granted  as  it  was  gratefully 
received.  ' 

The  letter  of  Pliny  to  Sabinianus  on  behalf  of  the  offending  servant  of 
the  latter,  has  often  been  referred  to  as  an  exaot  parallel  to  the  Epistle  to 
Philemon,  and  is  at  all  events  a  useful  oontrast  to  it.  It  is  given  below 
for  the  purpose  of  comparison : — 

"  To  Sabinianus. 

"  Tour  freedman,  whom  you  lately  mentioned  to  me  with  displeasure, 
has  been  with  me,  and  threw  himself  at  my  feet  with  as  much  submission 
as  he  could  have  done  at  yours.  He  earnestly  requested  me,  with  many 
tears,  and  even  with  all  the  eloquence  of  silent  sorrow,  to  intercede  for 
him ;  in  short,  he  convinced  me  by  his  whole  behaviour  that  he  sincerely 
repents  of  his  fault.  I  am  persuaded  he  is  thoroughly  reformed,  because 
he  seems  deeply  sensible  of  his  guilt.  I  know  you  are  angry  with  him, 
and  I  know  it  is  not  without  reason ;  but  clemency  can  never  exert  itself 
more  laudably  than  when  there  is  the  most  cause  for  resentment.  You 
once  had  an  affection  for  this  man,  and,  I  hope,  will  have  again ;  in  the„ 
mean  while,  let  me  only  prevail  with  you  to  pardon  him.  If  he  should 
incur  your  displeasure  hereafter,  you  will  have  so  much  the  stronger  plea 
in  excuse  for  your  anger,  as  you  show  yourself  the  more  exorable  to  him 
now.  Concede  something  to  his  youth,  to  his  tears,  •  and  to  your  own 
natural  mildness  of  temper;  do  not  make  him  uneasy  any  longer,  and  I 
will  add,  too,  do  not  make  yourself  so;  for  a  man  of  your  benevolence  of 
heart  cannot  be  angry  without  feeling  great  uneasiness.  I  am  afraid,  wero 
I  to  join  my  entreaties  with  his,  I  should  seem  rather  to  compel  than 
request  you  to  forgive  him.  Yet  I  will  not  scruple  even  to  unite  mine 
with  his ;  and  in  so  much  the  stronger  terms,  as  I  have  very  sharply  and 
severely  reproved  him,  positively  threatening  never  to  interpose  again  in 
his  behalf.  But  though  it  was  proper  to  say  this  to  him,  in  order  to  make 
him  more  fearful  of  offending,  I  do  not  say  so  to  you.  I  may,  perhaps, 
again  have  occasion  to  entreat  you  upon  his  account,  and  again  obtain  your 
forgiveness ;  supposing,  I  mean,  his  fault  should  be  such  as  may  become  me 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


to  intercede,  and   you    to  pardon.     Farewell "   (Pliny'B  '  Letters,'  bk.  ix. 
No.  21,  edit.  Melmoth). 

Pliny  was  a  man  of  high  rank  and  considerable  culture;  he  was  a  pro- 
fessed letter- writer ;  he  regarded  it  as  an  accomplishment  to  compose 
elegant  epistles  to  his  friends.  But  even  so,  how  far  is  the  letter  to 
Philemon  superior  !  The  other  haughty,  curt,  and  frigid,  not  so  much 
persuades  his  correspondent  as  a  favour  to  what  he  asks,  as  demands  it 
as  a  thing  due  to  his  condescension  in  asking.  The  one  is  based  through- 
out on  a  religious  motive ;  the  other,  on  a  casual  and  somewhat  contemptuous 
feeling  of  kindliness.  In  fact,  the  two  letters  are  apt  types  respectively  of 
the  "  friendship  of  the  world  "  (Jas.  iv.  4)  and  of  the  Christian  charity 
that  "  seeketh  not  her  own  "  (1  Cur.  xiii.  5).  Erasmus  aptly  observes, 
"Quid  festivius  etiam  dici  poterat  vel  ab  ipso  Tullio  in  bujusmodi  argu- 
mento  ?  "  • 

It  has  been  well  said  by  Bishop  Wordsworth  that  the  gospel,  "  by 
Christianizing  the  master,  enfranchised  the  slave."  It  did  not  pursue  the 
method  (far  more  imposing  and  showy  indeed,  but,  as  all  history  would 
teach,  one  sure  to  purchase  temporary  success  by  eventual  failure)  of  at 
once  declaring  slavery  unlawful.1  That  would  have  been  to  excite  a 
servile  war,  to  uproot  existing  institutions  of  society,  and  to  make  itself 
the  occasion  of  unnumbered  atrocities.  Another  was  adopted  which,  if 
slow  and  gradual  in  the  extreme,  created  no  disturbance  at  the  time,  and 
brought  about  a  permanent  elevation  of  the  class  of  slaves.  To  benefit  the 
slave,  it  filled  the  heart  of  the  master  with  the  love  of  Christ. 

For  a  long  time,  therefore,  the  ownership  of  slaves  was  not,  in  the 
Christian  Church,  held  to  be  unlawful.  As  late  as  the  time  of  Theodosius, 
as  we  learn  from  St.  Chrysostom,  there  were  wealthy  persons  who  held  as 
many  as  two  or  three  thousand  slaves.  But  Christian  writers  were  con- 
stant in  inculcating  the  duty  of  behaving  considerately  and  humanely 
towards  them  (Clem.  Alex.,  '  Paedagog.,'  iii.  12).  The  laws  of  Justinian 
also  introduced  many  ameliorations  into  the  treatment  of  slaves,  or  more 
probably  recognized  those  already  accepted  by  Christian  society.  The 
barbarian  incursions  which  brought  about  the  fall  of  the  Eoman  empire 
threw  back  the  cause  of  the  slave  for  a  time,  since  these  new-comers  not 
only  brought  with  them  great  numbers  of  slaves,  principally  Sclaves 
(whence  our  word  "slave"),  but  brought  into  bondage  many  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  conquered  provinces  But  at  length  'slavery  became 
altogether  transformed  into  the  milder  form  of  serfdom — at  least  in  Europe. 

We  may  see  in  this  letter  before  us  the  first  stage  of  this  beneficent 
process. 

'  «  The  word  « emancipation,' "  says  Bishop  Lightfoot,  -  seems  to  be  trembling  on  hia  Una. 
and  yet  be  does  not  onoe  utter  it  "('Introduction,'  p.  389> 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON. 


|  5.   LlTERATUBE  OH   PHILBMOF 

William  Alexander,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Deny  and  Raphoe, '  Philemon :  Introduction, 
Commentary,  and  Critical  Notes,'  'Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol.  iii.  (Loud. :  1881). 
William  Attersoll,  minister  of  the  Word  of  God  at  Isfield,  Sussex,  'A  Commentary 
of  the  Epistle  to  Philemon,*  2nd  edit.,  fol.  (Lond. :  1633).  John  Calvin,  « Com- 
mentarius  in  Epist.  ad  Philem.,'  '  Opera,'  xii.  (Gen. :  1617).  St.  Chrysostom,  '  Com- 
mentarius  et  Homilise  in  Epist.  ad  Philem.,' '  Opera,'  xi.  J.  L.  Davies,  Rector  of  Christ 
Church,  Marylebone,  '  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Ephesians,  the  Colossians,  and 
Philemon,  with  Introductions  and  Notes '  (Lond. :  1867).  C.  J.  Ellicott,  D.D.,  Bishop 
of  Gloucester  and  Bristol, '  Critical  and  Grammatical  Commentary  on  St.  Paul's  Epistles 
to  the  Ephesians,  Colossians,  and  Philemon,  with  a  Revised  Translation '  (Lond. :  1857). 
Scipio  Gentilis,  professor  of  law  at  Altdorf,  '  Commentarius  in  Epistolam  ad  Phile- 
monem.  Norimb.'  (1610).  Paton  J.  Gloag,  D.D., '  Introduction  to  the  Pauline  Epistles  : 
Philemon '  (Edinb. :  1874).  St.  Hieronymus,  '  Comment,  in  Epist.  ad  Philem.,' '  Opera,' 
(vii.  741).  William  Jones,  D.D.,  '  A  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  to  Philemon  and  the 
Hebrews '  (Lond. :  1635).  Cornelius  a  Lapide, '  Commentarius  in  Epistolam  ad  Phile- 
monem '  (Antverpue :  1635).  J.  B.  Lightfoot,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Durham,  '  St.  Paul's 
Epistles  to  the  Colossians  and  Philemon :  a  Revised  Text,  with  Introductions '  (Lond. : 
1875).  H.  A.  W.  Meyer,  Th.D.,  Oberconsistorialrath,  Hanover,  '  Critical  and  Exege- 
tical  Handbook  to  the  Epistle  to  Philemon '  (1848),  English  edit.  (Edinb. :  1880). 
J.  J.  van  Oosterzee,  professor  of  theology  at  Utrecht,  '  Die  Pastoralbriefe  und  der  Brief  an 
Philemon,'  Lange's  '  Bibelwerk,'  xi.  (Bielefeld :  1861).  Bishop  Parry, '  Exposition  on 
Philemon '  (Lond. :  1834).  Matthew  Poole,  D.D.,  '  Synopsis  Criticorum  in  Epist.  ad 
Philem.,'  vol.  v.  (Prancofurti:  1694).  Bishop  Smalridge,  "The  Epistle  to  Philemon 
explainea,'  'Sermons,'  399.  Chr.  Wordsworth,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  'Epistle  to 
Philemon,  witi»  Introduction  and  Notes,'  Gr.  Test.,  vol.  iii.  (Lond. :  1876). 


THE    EPISTLE    OF 


PAUL   TO   PHILEMON. 


EXPOSITION. 


>«.  1. — A  prisoner  of  Christ  Jesus.  He 
writes  a  private  letter,  m  friend  to  friend, 
and  therefore  does  not  describe  himself  by 
his  official  title  of  apostle.  Having  to 
plead  the  cause  of  a  slave,  he  begins  by 
putting  himself  into  a  similar  position  as 
the  "  bondman  of  Jesus  Christ " — "  to  obtain 
thereby  the  more  ready  compliance  "  (Chry- 
•ostom).  By  such  a  reverend  bondage  he  be- 
seeches Philemon, "  and  the  bondage  of  Paul 
waB  liberty  to  Onesimus"  (Scipio  Gentilis). 
Timothy,  etc.  He  was,  then,  with  St.  Paul 
at  the  time  of  writing ;  therefore  at  Borne ; 
and  this  fixes  the  date  of  composition  at  all 
events  before  that  of  the  Second  Epistle  to 
Timothy,  when  the  apostle  was  again  at 
Borne  (2  Tim.  i.  17;  iv.  6,  16).  Fellow- 
worker  with  St.  Paul  in  promoting  the 
spread  of  the  gospel,  either  by  his  wealth 
and  influence,  less  probably  by  preaching. 
The  time  when  would  be  that  of  St.  Paul's 
long  stay  at  Ephesus  and  its  neighbourhood 
(Acts  xix.  8—22). 

Yer.  2. — Our  beloved  Apphia.  Codices 
A,  D',  E*,  F,  G,  and  N  (Sinaiticus)  read 
adelphi (sister)  for  agapele  (beloved),  and  also 
Jerome,  Griesbach,  Meyer;  which  also  has 
been  adopted  in  the  Revised  Version.  The 
name  Appia,  or  Apphia,  is  either  the  Boman 
Appia  Hellenized,  which  was  the  conjecture 
of  Grotius  (see  Introduction),  or  more  pro- 
bably a  native  Phrygian  name,  from  Appa  or 
Appha,  a  term  of  endearment.  The  name  does 
not  occur  elsewhere  in  Scripture.  The  word 
a^t\<fnj  is  not  unlikely  to  have  been  added 
by  way  of  explanation.  St.  Paul  has  used 
it  in  five  other  places,  and  always  in  the 
same  sense,  viz.  Bom.  xvi.  1, 15 ;  1  Cor.  vii. 
15 ;  ix.  5  ;  1  Tim.  v.  2.  Most  commentators, 
and  particularly  Chrysoetom,  Theodoret,  and 
Theophylaot,  among  the  ancients,  infer  that 
Apphia  was  the  wife  of  Philemon.  Other- 
wise, why  mention  her  name  here  ?  Arohip- 
pui;  oomp.  Ooi  iv.  17,  where  he  is  said  to 


have  received  a  tiaxaria,  <■«.  •  ministry  or 
service,  in  the  Church.  This  word,  when 
used  without  a  determining  genitive,  denotes 
service  to  others  in  a  general  and  undefined 
sense.  But  more  commonly  with  some 
limiting  word;  as  Suncovia  Kiyov,  office  of 
teaching  (Acts  vi.  4) ;  tuacovla  tov  Bavirov, 
office  or  function  of  death  (2  Cor.  iii  7). 
The  general  view  is  that  Archippus  was 
the  presbyter  who  ministered  to  that  con- 
gregation which  assembled  at  the  house  of 
Philemon,  though  Ambrose  and  Jerome, 
with  other  commentators  ancient  and  modern, 
think  that  he  was  the  bishop.  Grotius,  how- 
ever, takes  him  to  have  been  a  deacon.  (It 
is  a  very  precarious  inference  that  he  was 
a  son  of  Philemon  and  Appia.)  Probably 
he  was  fulfilling  a  temporary  mission  only 
in  Colossm,  and  that  would  be  the  *iartovla 
in  the  passage  cited.  Epaphras,  a  Resident 
in  Colossse  (Col.  iv.  12),  is  spoken  of  ai 
having  been  the  founder  of  the  Church 
there  (Col.  i.  7,  8),  and  as  still  being  respon- 
sible for  it  (Col.  iv.  13).  Primasius  calls 
Epaphras  bishop  and  Archippus  deacon ;  and 
so  Grotius.  It  may  be  that  these  theories  err 
in  ascribing  too  rigid  and  technical  a  meaning 
to  the  terms  of  ecclesiastical  service  fct  this 
early  stage  of  their  employment.  Epaphras 
was,  however,  at  this  time  in  Borne  with  St. 
Paul  (Col.  iv.  12, 13),  and  it  is  possible  that 
Archippus  was  filling  his  place  temporarily. 
It  will  be  safer  to  call  him  (with  Bishop 
Wordsworth)  a  presbyter.  It  is,  as  we  have 
said,  an  unsupported  idea  of  some  writers 
ancient  and  modern  (Theod.  Mopsuest., 
Michaelis,  Bosenmiiller,  Olshausen,  Light- 
foot)  that  he  was  the  son  of  Philemon  (but 
Bee  below).  Our  fellow-soldier ;  i.e.  of  him- 
self and  St.  Timothy,  as  engaged  in  the 
same  warfare  for  Christ  (l.Oor. ix. 7;  2  Cor. 
x.  4;  1  Tim.  i.  18).  The  same  term  is  ap- 
plied in  Phil.  ii.  25  to  Epaphroditus,  and 
also  the  ewtp/t*  <<  *•*.  *■    And  to  the 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON. 


[1—26, 


Chnroh  in  thy  house.  Mede  (so  Chrysostom 
and  Theodoret  also)  understands  this  as 
meaning  "  and  to  the  whole  of  thy  family  " 
(which  is  a  Christian  one)— a  suggestion 
quite  worth  considering.  For  a  separate 
letter  "to  the  saints  and  faithful  brethren 
in  Christ  which  are  at  Colossffi"  (Col.  i.  2) 
was  brought  by  the  same  messengers,  and 
it  would  seem  natural  that,  in  a  matter  so 
personal  to  Philemon,  salutations  should  be 
confined  to  his  own  family.  The  phrase  is 
used  more  than  once  (see  Eom.  xvi.  5;  1 
Cor.  xvi.  19,  which  seems  rather  to  point 
the  other  way;  but  especially  Col.  iv.  15, 
"  Nymphas  and  the  Church  which  ig  in  his 
house,"  which,  since  it  was  in  Colossm  itself, 
seems  almost  .crnclusivs  for  that  meaning). 
The  Ecclesia  domestica  was  very  familiar  in 
the  apostn*:3  times.  Theodoret  states  that 
the  house  of  Philemon  was  still  pointed  out 
as  late  as  the  fifth  century. 

Ver.  3.— Graoe  to  yon,  and  peace.  The 
secular  formula  of  salutation  was  xalP(i" 
(Acts  xxiii.  26) ;  in  Latin,  multam  or  pluri- 
mam  salutem  out  plenissimam.  St.  Paul's 
formula  was  almost  invariably  as  above, 
"  Graoe  to  you,  and  peace  "  (Bom.  i.  7 ;  1 
Cor.  i.  3 ;  Gal.  i.  3 ;  and  others).  To  Timothy 
(1  Tim.  i.  2 ;  2  Tim.  i.  2)  and  Titus  (i.  4), 
"  Graoe,  mercy,  and  peace." 

Ver.  4. — I  thank  my  God  always.  We 
ought,  therefore,  to  thank  God,  not  only  for 
gifts  bestowed  upon  ourselves,  but  also  for 
those  bestowed  upon  others.  This  is  an 
habitual  phrase  of  St.  Paul  (comp.  Bom. 
i.  8;  1  Cor.  i.  4;  Eph.  i  16;  Phil.  i.  3; 
1  TheBs.  L  2;  2  Thess.  i.  3;  2  Tim.  i.  3). 
"It  is  to  be  noted  that  for  the  thing  on 
account  of  which  he  gives  thanks,  he  at 
the  same  time  prays"  (Calvin).  For  no 
good  work  is  ever  so  complete  in  us  that 
it  does  not  need  to  be  "continued  and 
ended  "  in  us  by  God.  Making  mention  of 
thee  in  my  prayers.  The  foregoing  remark 
again  applies.  Grotius  observes  that  "  we 
learn  from  this  that  all  addresses  to  God 
may  be  called  prayers  (rpocrevxas), even  those 
in  which  nothing  is  asked  but  thanks  are 
given."  But  this  is  apparently  not  such  a 
case;  the  petition  which  St.  Paul  offered 
for  Philemon  being  stated  in  ver.  6.  And 
thus  Chrysostom  explains  the  passage. 
"  Always  "  may  be  conneoted  with  "  I  thank," 
or  with  "making  mention,"  preferably  the 
former  (Chrysostom,  Theophylaot,  Calvin, 
Lightfoot). 

Ver.  5. — Hearing  of  thy  love,  and  of  the 
faith  .  .  .  saints.  He  would  hear  of  these 
instances  of  Philemon's  faith  and  love  na- 
turally through  Epaphras  (see  on  ver.  2). 
Eefer  "faith"  to  "the  Lord  Jesus"  and 
"love"  to  "all  the  saints"  (a  chiasmus,  or 
oross-reference).  Note  that  the  phrase  is 
»(*!>»  (•>  erga,  towards)  rbr  Kfyioi-,  but  tit 


(i.e.  upon)  robs  ay  lavs;  perhaps  because 
Christ  cannot  now  be  reached  by  bodily 
efforts,  but  only  aspired  towards  by  the  soul; 
while  the  poor  can  actually  be  reaohed  and 
ministered  unto.  "Ye  have  the  poor  al- 
ways with  you,  but  me  ye  have  not  always" 
(Matt,  xx vi.  11).  All  Christians  are  called 
"  saints  "  in  the  Scriptures,  as  Eph.  i.  1,  and 
invariably.  What  a  reminder  to  the.ia  of 
their  "holy  calling"  (2  Tim.  i.  9)!  Meyer 
notes,  however,  that  it  is  not  uncommon 
with  St.  Paul  to  vary  the  preposition  (Bom 
iii.*20;  Gal.  ii.  16). 

Ver.  6. — Render  thus:  So  that  the  eom 
munity  of  thy  faith  [with  other  Christians, 
whom  you  may  be  able  to  serve]  may  show 
itself  in  act,  oausing  full  acknowledgment 
[from  the  world  without]  of  every  good 
work  for  Jesus  Christ  that  is  in  you  (Re- 
vised Version  is  not  clear  here);  literally, 
may  become  working.  Not  a  theoretical  or 
merely  quiescent  faith.  He  was  to  confess 
Christ  before  men  (and  see  Jas.  ii.  22).  "  For 
whatever  good  thing  is  in  us  makes  manifest 
our  faith  "  (Calvin).  In  you.  Bishop  Words- 
worth reads  yfuii,  "m"  —  the  body  of 
Christians,  following  A,  C,  D,  E,  K,  L,  with 
many  Fathers  and  versions. 

Ver.  7. — We  have  great  joy  and  consola- 
tion. The  preferable  reading  is,  as  in  A, 
C,  F,  G,  N,  and  Revised  Version,  I  had 
much  joy  and  comfort  (see  ver.  5).  "  Plenius 
inculcat  et  edocet,  qnare  dixerit,  gratias 
ago,"  etc.  (Jerome).  The  bowels  of  the 
saints;  hearts  (Revised  Version).  Either 
(1)  their  bodily  wants,  the  oravings  of  their 
hunger;  or  (2)  their  hearts  and  affections, 
supplied  and  satisfied  by  the  good  deeds  of 
Philemon.  This  is  another  peculiarly  Fan- 
line  expression  (see  2  Cor.  vi.  12 ;  vii.  15 — 
these  two  are  very  similarly  used  in  vers. 
7,  12,  20— and  three  other  places).  "Tc 
refresh  the  bowels  is  (in  Paul)  to  be  taken 
as  meaning  a  lightening  of  troubles,  so  that 
they  may  rest  with  minds  free  from  all  sor- 
row and  annoyance"  (Calvin).  Brother. 
How  persuasively  the  sentence  is  turned  1 
An  old  commentator  remarks,  "  Paul  does 
not  yet  come  to  his  request,  but  prepares 
and  softens  beforehand  the  mind  of  Phile- 
mon" (Soipio  Gentilis).  This  course  of 
proceeding  is  exactly  what  Quintilian  pre- 
scribes to  an  advocate,  "  His  veluf  fomentis, 
si  quid  erit  asperum,  promolliemus,  quo 
facilius  aures  judioum  admittant"  («De 
Institut.  Orat.,'  iv.  3). 

Ver.  8. — Bender:  Although  I  have  abun- 
dant freedom  [boldness,  or  even  license]  in 
Christ  to  enjoin  upon  thee  that  which  is 
fitting.  It  was  only  in  Christ,  and  by  his 
authority  as  an  apostle,  that  he  could  claim 
to  come  between  a  slave  and  his  master. 
Secular  warrant  for  doing  so  he  had  none. 
Such  authority  and  licence,  however,  he 


1-25.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON. 


would  not  use  on  this  occasion.  He  prefers 
to  rely  wholly  on  the  respect  and  personal 
attachment  felt  towards  him  by  Philemon, 
for  the  granting  of  his  request,  which  he 
now  proceeds  to  state. 

Yer.  9. — Being-  such  a  one  as  Paul  the 
aged;  a  veteran.  Theodoret  comments  thus: 
"  For  he  who  hears  Paul,  hears  the  preacher 
of  the  whole  world,  the  traverser  of  land 
and  sea,  the  chosen  vessel,  and  other  things 
besides  he  is.  .  .  .  He  adds  also  '  the  aged,' 
showing  the  grey  hairs  which  have  grown 
during  his  labours."  "  Non  setatem,  sed 
offici  um  "  (Calvin).  Presbutes  may  mean  "  an 
ambassador" — "the  ambassador  of  Christ 
Jesus,  and  now  also  his  prisoner,"  as  in 
Eph.  vi.  20  (and  see  iii.  1  and  iv.  1  of  the 
same  Epistle.  A  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ ;  i.e. 
for  his  cause.  The  apostle  was  in  custody 
at  Borne,  owing  to  a  long  suspension  of  his 
trial,  for  causes  not  known  to  us.  "  Have 
regard  for  Paul ;  have  regard  for  my  bonds, 
which  I  wear  as  a  preacher  of  the  truth  " 
(Theodoret).  "Great  reverence  is  due  to 
those  who  endure  sufferings  for  the  most 
honourable  causes  "  (G  rotius). 

Vet.  10. — I  beseech  thee  for  my  son  .  .  . 
Onesimus ;  my  child  (Revised  Version).  The 
name  of  Onesimus  could  not  have  been  a 
pleasing  one  in  the  ears  of  Philemon.  Note 
with  what  caution  and  almost  timidity  it  is 
at  length  introduced.  He  does  not  interpose 
for  the  ingrate  with  apostolic  dignity,  but 
pleads  for  him  with  fatherly  love.  He  puts 
himself  side  by  side  with  him,  and  calls  him 
his  son.  Some  of  the  old  commentators  con- 
clude, from  Col.  iv.  9,  that  Onesimus  was  a 
native  of  Colossal,  and  thence  discuss  whether 
he  could  have  been  a  slave  born  in  Phile- 
mon's house  of  a  slave-mother,  or  whether 
he  was  sold  in  his  youth  by  his  father — a 
custom  so  common  to  the  Phrygians  (as  to 
the  Circassians  in  later  times)  as  to  have 
been  noticed  by  Cicero. 

Ver.  11. — Who  was  aforetime  unprofitable 
...  to  me.  The  play  upon  words  seems 
unmistakable,  and  is  peculiarly  Pauline. 
Onesimus  means  "  useful,"  or  "  profitable ;  " 
ixpqoTos,  "  unprofitable,"  and  cBxpio-tos  is 
emphatic,  "  very  profitable."  "  Useful  he  is 
named,  but  in  time  past  he  was  (I  confess 
it)  not  useful,  but  useless ;  in  future,  how- 
ever, he  will  be  of  great  use  to  us  both." 
Compare  with  this  the  corresponding  pas- 
sage of  Pliny's  '  Letter  to  Sabinianus,'  given 
in  the  Introduction.  "  Unprofitable  "  is  a 
figure  of  speech,  a  euphemism,  for  "  useless 
and  even  injurious."  St.  Paul  makes  the 
best  of  Onesimus's  fault  that  it  will  in  justice 
allow.  But  an  old  commentator  says  bluntly 
that  Onesimus  was  "  damnosus  fuga  et  furto." 
How  could  he  have  been,  in  bis  unconverted 
state,  otherwise  than  "unprofitable''  to  bis 
master?    "Olim  paganus,"  says  a  Lapide, 


"jam    Christianus;   olim   fur,  jam  fidelis 
servus ;  olim  profugus,  jam  redux." 

Ver.  12. — Whom  I  sent  baok  [to  thee, 
according  to  A,  0,  D*,  E,  K*]  (aorist  for 
present) ;  but  the  decision  reflects  the 
struggle.  It  had  not  been  altogether  easy 
for  the  apostle  to  part  with  the  youth,  whom 
he  might  not  see  again.  The  whole  Epistle 
is  full  of  this  strong  and  yearning  affection. 
Thou  therefore  receive  him.  Do  thou  also 
act  as  becomes  a  Christian ;  receive  him 
as  my  son.  "  Wonderfully  efficacious  this 
method  for  appeasing  the  anger  of  Phile- 
mon 1  For  he  was  not  able  to  rage  or  to 
do  anything  harshly  against  one  whom  Paul 
had  called  his  own  bowels  "  (Estius).  A,  F, 
(i,  and  N*  omit  "  receive,"  as  also  Tischen- 
dorf.    The  Revised  Version  omits  this  clause. 

Ver.  13. — I  was  wishing;  I  would  fain 
have  Jiept  (Revised'  Version).  The  story 
tells  itself  if  we  read  between  the  lines. 
What  steadfast  adherence  to  principle  on  the 
part  of  the  apostle,  when  the  help  of  Onesi- 
mus would  have  been  so  welcome  to  him  in 
his  weak  health,  and  his  position  as  a  prisoner  1 
Philemon  could  hardly  fail  to  think  more 
favourably  of  Onesimus,  when  be  saw  how 
much  importance  the  apostle  attached  to 
his  services.  In  the  bonds  of  the  gospel. 
"  Which  I  am  enduring  for  the  sake  of  the 
gospel "  (see  ver.  9) — a  variation  of  phrase 
from  ver.  9  (and  of.  our  Lord's  words,  Mark 
viii.  35;  x.  29). 

Ver.  14.— But  without  thy  mind  I  would 
do  nothing.  The  "would"  of  ver.  13  is 
4$ovK6nriv ;  the  "  would  "  here  is  <)W\ij<ra. 
The  former  denoted  natural  but  indetermi- 
nate impulse;  the  latter  deliberate  conclu- 
sion of  the  will  (of.  Rom.  vii.  15, 16).  Mind ; 
i.e.  knowledge  and  decision.  "Why  was  he 
unwilling?  For  many  causes.  (1)  Because 
grave  penalties  were  denounced  by  Roman 
law  upon  those  who  received  or  retained 
fugitive  slaves.  (2)  That  he  might  not 
seem  to  keep  back  something  which  was 
due  to  Philemon,  perhaps  to  his  injury ;  of 
which,  perhaps,  Philemon  might  have  com- 
plained. (3)  Because  Onesimus  himself 
chose  to  go  back,  in  order  that  he  might 
show  conclusively  that  he  had  not  embraced 
the  Christian  religion  that  he  might  with- 
draw himself  from  the  power  of  his  lawful 
lord.  (4)  That  the  gospel  might  not  be  by 
this  means  slandered,  as  if  under  the  pre- 
text of  it  slaves  might  withdraw  themselves 
with  impunity  from  their  lords"  (Estius  and 
others).  Thy  benefit — goodness  (Revised 
Version) — as  it  were  of  necessity,  but  will- 
ingly. Philemon  would  not  really  have 
had  the  choice  of  granting  or  refusing  given 
to  him,  had  St.  Paul  kept  Onesimus  still  at 
Rome,  and  merely  written  to  inform  him  ol 
the  fact.  His  consent  might  then  fairly  have 
been  said  to  be  extorted,  not  freely  given. 


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON. 


[1— 25. 


This  latter  word  la  an  Swat  \ry6fitrov 
(unique  phrase)  bo  far  as  the  New  Testa- 
ment is  concerned,  though  it  is  found  in 
Numb.  XT.  S  of  the  LXX.,  as  in  Xeuophon 
and  other  classical  writers.  In  Heb.  x.  26 
and  1  Pet.  v.  2  the  adverb  inovalas  is  found. 

Ver.  15. — Therefore;  for  this  purpose 
(final  cause).  Departed  for  a  season.  He 
was  therefore  parted  from  thee  for  a  time 
(Revised  Version).  For  ever ;  everlastingly 
(accusative,  not  an  adverb).  The  relation 
of  master  and  slave  would  have  been  in  any 
case,  and  would  still  be,  terminated  by  death. 
But  it  was  now  replaced  by  a  new  relation 
of  Christian  brotherhood,  which  would  be 
permanent — a  great  advantage.  So  Calvin, 
Grotius,  and  many  others.  Meyer's  objec- 
tion does  not  seem  of  much  weight  (compare 
the  lJerpetua  mancipia  of  Esod.  xxi.  6 ; 
Deut.  xv.  17).  Baur  thinks  that  in  this 
verse  he  has  reached  the  core  of  the  Epistle — 
the  ethical  truth  whioh  it  seeks  to  embody 
(but  see  Introduction :  "  Authenticity  and 
Characteristics  "). 

Ver.  16. — Not  now  as  a  servant,  but  above 
a  servant,  a  brother  beloved.  So  great  a 
difference  had  his  Christian  calling  and 
profession  made  to  him  and  to  others.  Both 
in  the  flesh  and  in  the  Lord.  A  hyeteron 
proteron.  The  apostle  is  pleading  on  behalf 
of  Onesimus  this  new  bond  of  Christian 
relationship,  which  was  »'»  the  Lord,  that  it 
should  bring  about  a  renewed  fulness  of 
personal  relation.  In  the  flesh,  because  "  in 
the  Lord." 

Ver.  17. — If  thou  oount  me  therefore  a 
partner ;  if  thou  boldest  me  for  a  friend — by 
our  friendship  I  entreat  this.  The  strongest 
form  of  entreaty  possible  to  be  used.  Koi- 
tmvla  in  Acts  ii.  42  refers  to  the  Holy 
Communion,  and  in  1  Cor.  x.  16 — 21  par- 
takers of  it  are  plainly  called  by  implication 
koivwvoI — partakers,  or,  as  we  should  say, 
"communicants."  But  here  the  sense  is 
apparently  as  above ;  literally,  a  partner. 

Ver.  18.— [But]  if  he  hath  wronged  thee 
Tat  all].  It  would  have  beeu  needlessly 
irritating  to  Philemon  to  go  into  the  details 
of  Onesimus's  offences.  No  doubt  St.  Paul 
had  had  an  account  of  them  from  the  re- 
pentant youth,  but  he  had  far  too  much 
tact  to  occupy  himself  and  Philemon  in  the 
discussion  of  details.  The  hypothetic  form 
avoids  the  whole  of  these.  It  suffices  that 
he  assumes  the  responsibility  of  repayment. 
Owes  thee  anything.  As  a  matter  of  moral 
right  at  the  bar  of  conscience.  For  in  a 
secular  court  the  slave  could  be  neither 
debtor  nor  creditor,  properly  speaking,  as 
against  his  master.  This  offence  was  pro- 
bably embezzlement  or  purloining  while  in 
service.  A,  C,  D*,  F,  G,  N,  read  (elloga), 
reokon  it  to  me. 

Tor.  19.— I  Paul  hare  written— vriU  it 


(Revised  Version) — with  my  own  hand,  I  will 
repay  it.  Thus  St.  Paul  took  upon  himself 
legally  the  repayment  of  the  debt  "  Priori- 
bus  verbis  proprie  cautio  [a  bail  or  security] 
continetur:  his  autem  oonstituti  obligatio. 
Hoo  Latine  dicitur  pecuniam  conatituere: 
de  quo  titulus  est  in  Digestis  ('Am54xe<r6ai) 
dicunt  Grseoi"  (Soipio  Gentilis).  Alheit  I 
do  not  say  to  thee,  etc. ;  "  though  I  do  not 
remind  thee  [while  so  saying]  that  thou 
owest  even  thyself  to  me  I "  Philemon  owed 
to  the  apostle  that  debt  of  which  the  obli- 
gation outweighed  every  other — the  help  by 
which  he  had  been  led  out  of  spiritual 
darkness  and  brought  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  truth.  St.  Paul  was  (as  we  must  con- 
clude from  this  allusion)  the  "spiritual 
father"  of  Philemon — a  phrase  he  himself 
uses  in  1  Cor.  iv.  15. 

Ver.  20. — Yea,  indeed,  brother,  let  me 
have  joy  of  thee.  This  word  (bvaliaiv)  is 
from  the  same  root  as  the  word  "  Onesimus," 
and  the  apostle,  more  suo,  relaxing  into  his 
friendly  familiar  manner  after  the  grave 
and  touching  language  of  the  last  few  verses, 
plays  upon  the  word.-  Let  me  have  profit 
of  thee — let  me  have  Onesimus  of  thee.  In 
the  Lord  (comp.  1  Cor.  x.  31).  The  phrase 
is  twice  repeated  in  this  veree,  and  is  very 
characteristic  of  St.  Paul.  But  A,  0,  D*, 
F,  G,  I,  read  en  Christo  in  the  second  clause. 
N  has  been  altered,  x<° f°r  «<■>.  leeund. ;  " re- 
fresh my  heart  in  Christ "  (Revised  Version). 

Ver.  21. — I  wrote  unto  thee;  write  (Re- 
vised Version ;  see  ver.  19),  or  perhaps  re- 
ferring back,  as  in  ver.  19,  to  the  request  in 
ver.  17.  The  strong,  fervid,  and  repeated 
appeals  of  the  apostle  had  not  been  caused 
by  distrust  of  Philemon,  nor  of  their  own 
efficacy,  but  were  the  natural  outcome  of 
the  strong  interest  he  felt  in  the  case  of 
Onesimus,  and  the  desire  he  felt  to  replace 
him  in  the  favour  of  his  master;  partly 
also,  perhaps,  to  the  warmth  and  fervour  of 
his  natural  character,  whioh  uttered  itself 
involuntarily  in  forcible  expressions. 

Ver.  22. — Lodging.  There  was  this  one 
additional  inducement  that  could  be  brought 
to  bear  upon  the  mind  of  Philemon,  viz. 
the  expectation  of  speedily  seeing  him  in 
person,  and  this,  in  conclusion,  he  uses. 
"I  do  not  think  that  the  apostle  was  so 
rich  or  encumbered  with  such  great  pack- 
ages that  he  needed  a  lodging  prepared 
beforehand,  and  was  not  content  with  a 
narrow  dwelling-place,  but  thought  the  most 
spacious  houses  scanty  for  the  accommo 
dation  of  his  small  body;  but  that,  while 
Philemon  was  expecting  [the  apostle]  to  come 
to  him,  he  would  the  more  do  what  he  had 
requested"  (Jerome).  Meyer  makes  much 
of  the  improbability  that  St.  Paul,  starting 
from  Borne,  should  bespeak  a  lodging  in 
Colossaj.    Yet  he  suggest*  that  it  was  per- 


1-86.] 


THE  EPISTLE  TC   PHILEMON. 


fectly  natural  that,  starting  from  Ctssarea, 
the  apostle  should  take  Cohssm  on  the  road 
to  Borne.  But  the  one  seems  almost  as  pro- 
bable as  the  other.  The  apostle,  on  his 
release,  had,  so  far  as  we  know,  no  definite 
plans ;  the  cities  of  Asia  Minor  were  familiar 
to  him,  and  he  would  naturally  prepare  to 
go  wherever  the  first  pressing  occasion,  that 
of  Onesimus,  called  him.  K  reads  <i<nnS{eTai, 
"salutes." 

Vers.  23,  24. — Salute.  The  salutations 
correspond  generally  to  those  with  which 
the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  closes,  but 
they  are  fuller,  as  is  natural,  in  the  longer 
Epistle.    The  order  is  in — 


Cofostians : 

Philemon: 

Tychicus 

Epaphras 

Onesimus 

Marcus 

Aristarchug 

Aristarchus 

Marcus 

Demas 

Jesus  Justus 

Lucas 

Epaphras 

Lucas 

Demag 

My  fellow-prisoner.    The  word  occurs  else- 
where only  in  Bom.  xvi.  7,  besides  the  paral- 


lel passage  in  Col.  iv.  10.  As  to  Epaphras, 
see  above.  Marous,  having  once  forsaken 
the  apostle  (Acts  xiii.  13 ;  xv.  37—39),  had 
now  returned,  and  was  with  him  in  Rome. 
Aristarchus  was  "  a  Macedonian  of  Thessa- 
lonica,"  and  had  accompanied  St.  Paul  in 
his  memorable  voyage  to  Borne  (Acts  zzvii. 
2).  Demas  was  now  the  "co-worker"  of 
the  apostle  at  Borne,  but  at  a  later  period 
he  had  departed  unto  Thessalonica  (2  Tim. 
iv.  10),  and  we  know  nothing  of  his  subse- 
quent history.  Tradition  (Epiph.,  'Iter.,' 
xli.  6)  relates  that  he  also  apostatized  from 
Christianity;  but  the  apostle's  phrase,  though 
a  strong  one,  does  not  necessarily  mean  this. 
Lucas  (see  2  Cor.  viii.  18). 

Yer.  25. — The  grace,  A  omits  4/4" 
Theodoret  has  appended  the  following  to 
his  commentary:  "It  is  fitting  that  those 
who  have  obtaiued  the  privilege  of  handing 
on  the  holy  doctrine  should  so  teach  ser- 
vants to  submit  themselves  to  their  lords, 
that  through  all  things  Jesus  Christ  may  be 
praised,  to  whom  with  the  Father  and  the 
most  Holy  Spirit  belong  glory  and  greatness 
now  and  always  and  for  ever.    Amen." 


HOMILETICa 

Yen.  IS.— The  hallowing  of  the  ordinary  intercourse  of  life.  The  talutation. 
Philemon's  house  had  become  a  church,  and  the  Church  was  in  his  house ;  thereby  the 
household  was  made  holy.  Every  household  should  likewise  be  made  holy  by  the 
Christian  profession  and  practice  of  its  heads — the  master  and  mistress.  A  profession 
of  religion  alone  will  not  have  this  effect ;  there  must  be  the  daily  practice  of  self- 
restraint,  forbearance,  Christian  charity,  and  mutual  love.  Religion  not  wholly  or 
chiefly  an  intellectual  or  doctrinal  belief,  though  it  is  founded  upon  historical  facts 
and  shaped-  by  the  truths  of  the  Creed.  It  is  essentially  practical ;  belief  issuing  in 
action—"  faith  which  worketh  by  love  "  (Gal.  ▼.  6 ;  Jas.  ii.  20—22). 

I.  NO  KIND  OF  INTERCOURSE  BETWEEN  CHRISTIANS   BUT    IS  CAPABLE   OF  BEING  THUS 

hallowed.  As  e.g.  that  arising  from  the  relations  of  husband  and  wife  (Eph.  v. 
25—31 ;  Titus  ii.  4) ;  of  parents  and  children  (Eph.  vi.  1 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  4) ;  of  masters 
and  servants  (Eph.  vi.  5—9 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  21,  22) ;  of  citizens  bound  to  obey  the  govern- 
ing power  of  the  state  in  all  things  lawful  (1  Pet.  ii.  13, 14) ;  of  friends  and  equals 
(John  xiii.  34 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  13) ;  of  rich  persons  and  poor  persons,  unequal  in  worldly 
station,  but  brethren,  nothing  less  than  brethren,  as  they  can  be  nothing  more,  in 
Christ  (Jas.  ii.  6—9). 

II.  How  these  BELATION8  abb  to  be  hallowed.  1.  Speaking  generally,  by  the 
practice  of  religious  principles.  But  specifically,  by  restraining  the  natural  selfishness 
of  human  hearts.  Love  draws  people  together ;  selfishness  separates  them — isolates 
each  in  the  pursuing  of  his  own  objects :  "  All  seek  their  own,  and  not  the  things  which 
are  Jesus  Christ's."  2.  By  the  endeavour  to  restrain  the  tongue  from  speaking  evil 
(Ps.  xxxiv.  13).  Angry  words,  retorts  reckless  of  truth  and  only  meant  to  wound  the 
hearer,  scandal,  angry  and  inconsiderate  words  to  dependents, — what  frequent  occasions 
of  sin  are  these!  The  tongue  is  the  great  medium  of  social  intercourse,  and  it  must 
be  brought  under  control,  if  that  is  to  be  hallowed  (Jas.  iii.  5,  6).  3.  The  family 
relation  is  hallowed  especially  by  family  prayer.  God  dwells  in  an  especial  manner 
in  the  homes  where  he  has  been  thus  invoked  by  the  family  as  a  whole.  Family 
prayer  at  once  the  expression  of  the  Christian  character  and  the  means  of  preserving 
it  and  making  it  purer. 

PHIUSMOS. 


6  THE   EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  p— 36. 

Ver.  3. — The  Christian  family.  The  family  of  Philemon  was  Christian,  doubtless, 
both  in  profession  and  practice.  Many  families  at  the  preseat  day  are  Christian  in 
profession,  but  not  in  practice.  The  family  really  Christian  may  be  known  (like 
the  individual)  by  its  fruits  (Matt.  vii.  20). 

I.  In  it  God's  Name  is  honoubed.  He  is  habitually  regarded  and  spoken  of 
as  the  Giver  of  all  the  family  happiness,  and  of  whatever  measure  of  prosperity  it 
enjoys.  The  parents  have  received  from  him  their  children  as  a  charge  to  be  brought 
up  "  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord."  Children  recognize  without  hesita- 
tion the  duty  of  obedience  as  paramount  to  all  self-pleasing  (Eph.  vi.  1). 

II.  In  it,  therefore,  the  Law  of  God  is  becoqnized  as  the  guide  of  life 
by  both  parents  and  children. 

III.  In  it  (that  is,  by  its  members)  the  public  observances  of  religion  abb 
diligently  kept.  The  habits  of  the  household  are  so  arranged  as  not  to  put  unneces- 
sary hindrance  in  the  way  of  either  the  family  or  servants  attending  public  worship 
at  the  proper  times.  Unnecessary  labour  on  Sunday  is  not  required,  nor  even 
permitted. 

IV.  In  it,  furthermore,  God  is  willingly  entrusted  with  its  destinies.  "  In 
everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made 
known  unto  God  "  (Phil.  iv.  6),  and,  as  the  correlative  of  this, "  be  careful  for  nothing ; " 
that  is,  anxious  and  distressed  about  it.  These  are  the  rules  which  have  been  found 
<*f  sovereign  power  in  the  Christian  family. 

V.  As  the  law  of  God  is  in  it  the  restraining  rule,  so  the  love  of  Go»  is  the 
inspiring  motive.  "  Followers  of  God,  as  dear  children  "  (Eph.  v.  1),  not  performing  the 
mechanical  and  enforced  obedience  of  the  slave,  nor  even  merely  the  habitual  obedi- 
ence which  can  be  instilled  by  education  and  training ;  but  the  free,  unforced,  willing, 
elastic  service  which  is  prompted  by  the  love  of  a  child. 

VI.  Lastly,  in  the  Christian  family  charity  is  taught  by  precept  and  by 
example.  The  voice  of  slander  is  not  heard  in  it.  The  elders  are  not  "  weary  in  well- 
doing," and  the  younger  learn  (1  John  iii.  17)  that  to  help  those  who  have  need  is  to 
have  something  of  the  likeness  of  God,  and  to  act  under  the  direction  of  God's  good 
Spirit. 

Vers.  4,  5. — The  constituent  parts  of  acceptable  prayer:  thanksgiving,  intercession, 
personal  petitions.  1.  An  example  of  these  here,  incidentally  given,  not  purposely,  in 
St.  Paul's  practice  with  regard  to  Philemon.  He  was  not  familiarly  known  to  the 
apostle.  Perhaps  it  was  with  a  certain  surprise  he  learned  that  the  great  apostle 
habitually  "  made  mention  of  him  "  in  his  prayers.  In  like  manner,  many  Christians 
are  being  helped,  without  their  own  knowledge,  by  the  prayers  of  others.  The  apostle's 
example  to  be  followed.  2.  Thanksgiving  a  necessary  part  of  prayer.  "  I  thank  my 
God."  If  this  be  omitted,  we  are  ungrateful,  and  so  our  devotion  will  not  be  acceptable 
to  God.  We  must  thank  God  for  past  mercies  bestowed  upon  us  and  upon  others. 
Our  service  is  not  really  devotion  without  this,  but  the  reverse.  A  want  of  duty 
towards  God  therefore  a  sin  (Ps.  cix.  7).  3.  Intercession  for  others.  "  Making  men- 
tion of  thee  always  in  my  prayers."  This  the  duty  thrown  upon  us  by  our  Christian 
fellowship.  In  this  the  "communion  of  saints"  is  shown  forth.  It  is  not  to  be  con- 
fined to  our  immediate  connections  and  friends.  Philemon  was  not  intimately  known 
to  St.  Paul,  yet  he  was  remembered  by  him.  Prayer  without  intercession  is  selfish, 
and  therefore  unacceptable  to  God.  It  may  be  that  their  too  manifest  selfishness 
of  tone  is  the  reason  that  many  of  our  prayers  do  not  obtain  from  God  the  answer  they 
crave  (Isa.  i.  15).  It  ought  always  to  embrace  the  whole  Church  of  Christ,  not  merely 
that  part  of  it  in  which  we  are  immediately  interested.  This  would  have  a  reflex 
action  upon  ourselves,  and  would  tend  towards  eventual  union  among  us ;  for  when 
the  sympathies  of  the  heart  are  wide,  the  sympathies  of  the  intellect  will  hatdly 
remain  narrow.  4.  Petitions  for  our  personal  needs  are  never  likely  to  be  absent  from 
our  prayers.  The  danger  will  be  that  they  should  form  too  large  a  part  of  them. 
They  need  to  be  restrained  and  regulated,  not  indulged.  As  the  Christian  grows  in 
saintliness,  his  prayers  for  self  will  come  to  be  more  and  more  for  spiritual  blessings 
instead  of  temporal.  At  length  they  will  be  merged  in  the  comprehensive  petition  that 
Gud's  will  may  he  done  in  the  petitioner,  and  his  Name  glorified.    5,  To  cease  analysis. 


1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  1 

and  take  a  complete  view  of  prayer,  we  find  it  to  gam  up  in  itself  all  the  sentiments 
which  the  human  foal  should  entertain  towards  its  Divine  Creator. 

"  Prayer  is  the  foul's  sincere  desire, 
Uttered  or  unexpressed.'' 

Therefore  gratitude,  confidence,  affection,  hope,  anxiety  for  other*  or  for  ourselves, 
penitence,  should  all  in  their  degree  enter  into  our  prayers.    But  none  of  these  should 

monopolise  them. 

i 

Yen.  5, 6. — Mem  glorifying  God.  Man  is  created  for  God's  glory,  and  finds  the 
highest  end  of  his  being,  therefore,  in  glorifying  him.  Four  ways  may  be  dis- 
tinguished in  which  he  does  this. 

£  The  wat  or  good  deeds  done  in  his  strength,  which  cause  others  to  glorify 
him.  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and 
glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven "  (Matt.  y.  16).  This  is  the  mode  referred 
to  here :  "  That  thy  faith  may  become  effectual  by  the  acknowledging  of  every  good 
thing  which  is  in  you."  The  mutual  benevolence  of  Christians  was  thus  to  God's  glory, 
and  tended  to  bring  others  into  the  fold. 

II.  The  wat  of  worship — an  ancient,  universal,  and  proper  way.  Acts  of  worship 
are  directed  to  God.  That  they  may  be  really  to  his  glory,  they  must  be  for  God ; 
that  is,  he  must  be,  not  their  object  merely,  but  their  end  (Man ton).  As  far  as 
secondary  motives  prevail  in  our  worship,  so  far  it  is  for  those  motives,  and  not  purely 
to  God's  glory.  The  sole  element  to  be  reckoned  in  worship  is  the  earnestness,  piety, 
and  sincerity  of  the  worshipper.  God  is  no  more  glorified  of  necessity  by  great  outward 
beauty  and  splendour ;  he  is  no  less  glorified  by  the  barest  simplicity,  if  the  devotion 
be  equal.  The  accessories  of  worship  are  for  man's  help,  and  to  assist  man's  feeble  and 
purblind  view  of  eternal  realities ;  and  are  not  otherwise  to  God's  glory  than  as  they 
are  fit  vehicles  of  man's  devotion. 

III.  The  third  wat  of  obedience.  Man  glorifies  God  when  he  becomes  that 
which  God  intended  him  to  be.  He  realizes  by  obedience  the  thought  of  God  when  he 
said,  "Let  us  make  man  in  our  image."  This  was  lost  through  the  sin  of  Adam,  and 
it  is  in  process  of  restoration  through  the  obedience  of  Christ,  in  individual  Christians 
as  they  successively  live  upon  the  earth. 

IV.  God  is  best  glorified,  therefore,  bt  the  obedience  of  the  soul  and 
life.  Hooker  says,  "Should  you  erect  to  him  a  temple  more  magnificent  than 
Solomon's,  and  load  his  altars  with  hecatombs  of  sacrifices,  and  make  it  perpetually 
ring  with  psalms  and  resounding  choirs  of  hallelujahs,  it  would  not  be  comparably 
so  great  an  honour  to  him  as  to  convert  your  own  souls  into  living  temples,  and  make 
them  the  habitations  of  his  glory  and  perfection.  For  he  values  no  sacrifices  like  that 
of  an  obedient  will,  delights  in  no  choir  like  that  of  pure  and  heavenly  affections,  nor 
hath  he  in  all  his  creation  an  ensign  of  honour  so  truly  worthy  of  him  as  that  of  a 
Divine  and  God-like  soul,  a  soul  that  reflects  his  image,  and  shines  back  his  own  glory 
upon  him." 

Vers.  8 — 10. — 27le  religion  of  Christ  a  defence  of  social  order,  not  a  disturbing  force. 
There  have  been  religions  which  have  been  simply  forces  of  destruction.  Moham- 
medanism, when  it  was  first  preached,  and  even  to  this  day,  as  far  as  its  power  extends, 
has  the  Koran  in  one  hand  and  the  scimitar  in  the  other,  and  offers  but  the  alternatives 
of  conversion,  slavery,  or  death.  The  actors  in  the  French  Revolution  of  1789  strove 
to  spread  their  new  gospel  of  liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity  at  the  point  of  the  sword. 
Communism  in  1870,  and  Nihilism  since,  make  war  upon  all  that  is  old,  and  desire  to 
destroy  all  existing  social  organizations  to  make  room  for  their  own  schemes.  These 
are  destructive  forces  in  human  nature,  and  nothing  more. 

-L  The  religion  of  Christ  is  not  itself  a  secular  polity  or  form  of 
government.  It  does  not,  therefore,  seek  to  uproot  the  social  order  which  exists 
in  any  country.  It,  indeed,  acts  upon  the  individuals  which  compose  the  nation,  and 
so  in  course  of  time  transforms  from  within  the  institutions  of  the  country.  But  it 
does  not  attack  them  from  without ;  and  therefore  it  is  compatible  with  any  form  of 
government. 


•  THE  BHBTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  [1—25, 

II.  It  exercises  ho  compulsory  power,  no  physical  force.  It  works  through  the 
tetfl  of  the  person  addressed,  and  leads,  but  does  not  compel.  That  is  the  characteristic 
method  of  Christianity.  Thus  St.  Paul  would  not  force  the  will  of  Philemon.  His 
apostolic  authority  would  have  warranted  his  speaking  in  a  tone  of  command :  "  I  might 
be  much  bold  in  Christ  to  enjoin  thee  that  which  is  convenient."  But  he  preferred 
to  persuade :  "  For  love's  sake  I  rather  beseech  thee." 

III.  The  Christian  religion,  therefore,  hakes  good  citizens.  "Fear  God. 
Honour  the  king"  (1  Pet.  ii.  17).  It  expressly  recognizes  the  ruling  powers  de  facto 
as  entitled  to  obedience,  and  as  the  representatives  of  tbe  Divine  principle  of  authority 
and  government  (1  Pet.  ii.  13) ;  as  having  the  right,  therefore,  to  be  legally  obeyed. 
It  inculcates  quiet  and  peaceful  conduct,  harmless,  law-abiding,  observant  to  perform 
contracts  and  obligations  (1  Thess.  iv.  11,  12),  and  directs  each  to  be  careful  of  the 
rights  of  others  (1  Thess.  v.  15  ;  Phil.  ii.  4).  These  are  the  characteristics  of  its  true 
followers;  and  in  all  its  system  it  keeps  in  mind  the  great  objects  of  promoting  peace 
and  unity,  of  qualifying  its  people  by  the  elevation  of  their  personal  characters  for  the 
fullest  measure  of  liberty,  and  at  length  of  eternal  happiness.  It  is  the  surest  defence 
of  nations. 

Ver.  11. — Ungodly  men  are  unprofitable  to  themselves  and  to  othert.  I.  Is  sin, 
then,  profitable  to  the  sinner  ?  Whether  the  pleasures  of  sense  or  the  possessions 
and  honours  of  the  world  have  prompted  him  to  sin,  it  will  be  found  that  they  alike 
issue  in  vanity  and  vexation.  Should  the  desires  not  he  satisfied,  then  the  discontented 
appetite  thirsts  for  more,  and  renders  the  man  unhappy.  If  it  be  satisfied,  yet  it  is  a 
satisfaction  of  weariness,  not  contentment  (Bom.  vi.  21),  and  there  is  a  sting  of  shame 
in  the  recollection  of  such  pleasures. 

IL  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death  "  (Rom.  vi.  23) — a  penalty  which  must  neces- 
sarily outweigh  any  apparent  profit  or  pleasure  arising  from  sin,  however  great  it  can 
be  supposed  to  be.  "  What  shall  a  man  give  [or,  '  receive ']  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ?  " 
(Mark  viii.  36,  37).  Sin  were  unprofitable  if  we  should  only  consider  the  ultimate 
consequences  of  exhaustion  and  satiety  which  it  has  on  the  sinner.  When  the  judg- 
ment of  God  is  taken  into  account,  it  becomes  absolute  and  manifest  folly.  Two  facts 
to  be  borne  in  mind  :  (1)  man  is  accountable  for  what  he  does ;  and  (2)  he  has  an  immor- 
tality of  future  existence  in  which  to  bear  the  penal  consequences  of  his  doings.  Could 
the  sinner  have  but  a  single  sight  of  the  awful  fires  of  hell,  he  could  never  again  doubt 
whether  the  sin  which  leads  men  thither  were  in  any  sense  of  the  word  profitable  to 
any  human  being. 

III.  Is  the  sinner,  then,  profitable  to  others?  He  is  rendered  unprofitable  to 
others  in  so  far  as  he  is  given  up  into  the  power  of  sin.  Onesimus  had  been  "  unprofit- 
able "  (ver.  11)  in  time  past  to  Philemon,  because,  under  the  influence  of  sinful  motives 
(we  do  not  know  of  what  precise  kind),  he  had  sought  dishonestly  his  own  interest,  not 
his  master's.  The  dishonest  person  will  cheat  his  master  or  employer ;  the  deceitful 
person  will  deceive  others;  and  they  are  thus  "  unprofitable"  in  various  ways  to  those 
who  are  brought  into  communication  with  them.  Onesimus  had  become  Christian,  and 
his  unprofitableness  had  disappeared.  He  was  transformed  by  the  grace  of  God.  Self- 
seeking,  dishonesty,  untruthfulness,  need  not  thenceforth  be  looked  for  from  him 
(although  these  were  the  usual  vices  of  the  slave).  Be  would  be  able  to  be  trusted,  and 
therefore  he  was  profitable.  See  the  influence  of  Christian  motives.  He  would  be 
faithful  to  Philemon  as  to  others,  kind,  preferring  others  to  himself  (Phil,  ii  3,  4). 

Ver.  15. — Treasures  in  heaven.  I.  Christians  have  the  promise,  not  only  of  the 
life  that  now  is,  but  of  that  whioh  is  to  come.  (1  Tim.  iv.  8.)  Philemon  had  had 
before  a  legal  property  in  Onesimus,  which  was,  however,  temporary,  because  it  neces- 
sarily ended  at  latest  with  the  life  of  either  man.  But  in  gaining  the  tie  of  Christian, 
fellowship  with  him,  he  obtained  an  interest  in  him  which  would  endure  permanently ; 
and  so  Philemon  had,  in  a  sense,  "  received  him  for  ever." 

XL  This  is  therefore  a  typical  instance.  The  world  has  only  temporal  and 
temporary  treasures  to  offer ;  religion  has  eternal  and  abiding  ones.  "  The  things  that 
am  seen  are  temporal,  but  the  things  which  are  not  seen  are  eternal "  (2  Cor.  iv.  18) ; 
the  me  has  time  tor  its  sphere  of  action,  and  is  bounded  by  time ;  the  other  has  eternity. 


1—25.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  9 

m.  Spiritual  guts  abb  blessings  abb  begun  nr  Tan  world,  but  will  not  be 
fully  possessed  by  the  blessed  until  after  the  final  judgment.  They  are  an  inheritance — 
"treasures  in  heaven."  The  Christian,  as  he  "grows  in  grace,"  possesses  more  and 
more  completely:  1.  Love  and  subjection  towards  God.  2.  Love,  sympathy,  and  for- 
giveness towards  his  neighbour.  3.  Watchfulness  and  self-control  over  himself.  The 
apostle  enumerates  these  spiritual  blessings  without  classification  (Gal.  v.  23),  as  "love, 
joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance."  The 
sum  and  substance  and  crown  of  them  all  is  righteousness — an  approximation,  by  the 
transforming  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  to  the  ideal  of  perfect  manhood ;  that  is, 
"  to  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ "  (see  Eph.  iv.  13).  And  this 
righteousness  prepares  the  soul  for  the  presence  of  God  (Luke  xvii.  21).  While  other 
treasures,  therefore,  are  possessions  of  the  body,  or  at  most  of  the  mind,  "  treasures  in 
heaven  "  belong  to  the  soul,  that  is,  to  the  immortal  and  permanent  part  of  man's 
nature,  and  are  to  be  valued  accordingly. 

IV.  HOW  ETEBNAL  BLESSINGS  ABE  TO  BE  DESIBED  AND  BOUGHT  FOB.  1.  In  prefer- 
ence to  all  other  things,  because  of  their  greater  importance.  "Seek  ye  first  the 
kingdom  of  God  "  (Matt.  vL  33),  and  also  vers.  19, 20,  "  Lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures 
in  heaven,"  etc.  2.  With  all  earnestness.  "  Strive  to  enter  in  "  (Luke  xiii.  24),  as  men 
who  are  so  much  in  earnest  as  to  be  "  violent "  (Matt.  xL  12).  3.  By  the  practice  of 
graces  given :  of  faith  (2  Pet  L  5),  of  charity  and  almsgiving  (1  Tim.  vi.  18, 19),  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  Saviour  and  of  heavenly  things  (2  Pet.  iii.  18). 

V.  The  Ohbistian  has  the  guarantee  or  God  himself  that  his  hopes  for  eternal 
happiness  shall  not  be  disappointed  (2  Tim.  i.  12 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  19). 

Ver.  16. — Christianity  not  permanently  compatible  with  slavery  as  an  institution. 
L  It  follows  from  the  consideration  of  Christian  brotherhood  that,  although  it 
finds  many  slaves,  yet  it  shall  gradually  raise  them  to  a  state  of  freedom.  It  frees 
their  souls  at  once.  They  become  "the  Lord's  freemen"  (1  Cor.  vii.  22),  and  the 
body  cannot  always  remain  bound  when  the  soul  is  free.  Thus,  though  it  does  not  cut 
down  the  tree  (of  slavery),  it  severs  the  roots,  and  a  state  of  slavery  cannot  therefore 
permanently  flourish  among  Christians. 

IL  This  is  also  the  teaching  of  history.  It  was  an  age  of  slavery  in  which  this 
Epistle  was  written.  Europe  and  Asia  were  occupied  by  an  immense  population  of 
slaves,  far  outnumbering  the  free  persons.  In  the  province  of  Attica  alone  there  were 
four  hundred  thousand  slaves  and  only  thirty-one  thousand  freemen.  In  Corinth 
there  were  four  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  slaves.  It  was  not  uncommon  in  Rome 
(where  the  apostle  was  at  the  time  of  writing)  for  one  rich  man  to  possess  as  many  as 
ten  or  even  twenty  thousand  slaves.  They  cultivated  the  fields;  they  monopolized 
all  the  trades.  It  was  an  age  of  slavery.  Into  this  state  of  society  the  gospel  of  Christ 
came.  It  did  not,  indeed,  propose  to  break  the  bonds  of  all  slaves,  and  reach  the  king- 
dom of  God  through  social  convulsion  and  much  bloodshed.  Its  propagators  did  not 
preach  a  servile  revolt. 

III.  It  proposed  not  A  tehpobsx.  but  a  spiritual  freedom:  to  its  followers.  It 
recognized  all  alike  as  immortal  beings.  There  was  one  Church  for  all,  whether  bond 
or  free;  and  the  same  sacraments  in  which  all  should  participate.  Other  forms  of 
religion  had  treated  the  slave  as  a  chattel;  this  alone  regarded  him  as  a  man.  It 
raised  into  activity  the  moral  powers  of  his  nature.  He  had  been  managed  by  the  fear 
of  punishment  merely.  But  the  gospel  spoke  to  him  of  moral  differences  in  conduct — 
of  right  and  wrong;  it  awoke  in  his  soul  an  inspiring  hope.  It  predicted  a  day  of 
judgment,  in  which  the  difference  between  a  good  and  evil  life  should  have  the  most 
momentous  consequences  to  each  individual.  Thus  it  transformed  the  slave  altogether. 
He  began  to  look  before  and  after ;  to  raise  his  thoughts,  his  hopes,  and  his  voice  to 
heaven;  and  to  understand  what  was  the  "liberty  wherewith  Christ  had  made  him 
[though  a  slave]  free  "  (Gal.  v.  1),  even  "  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God" 
(Bom.  viii.  21). 

IV.  TO  THE  MASTER  ALSO  THE  VERT  SAME  ENDS  WEBB  PROPOSED.      He,  tOO,  WM  to 

run  the  same  Christian  course  with  his  slave,  guided  by  the  same  principles,  helped 
by  the  same  hopes,  and  constrained  by  the  same  sanctions.  A  similar  object  soon  pro- 
duced a  similarity  of  character;  and  a  similarity  of  (Christian)  character  brought  about 


10  THE   EPISTLE   TO   THILEMON.  [1—26. 

sympathy  of  feeling.  In  the  rising  tide  of  Christian  fellowship  the  worst  hardships  of 
slavery  melted  away,  even  long  before  it  was  formally  abolished.  It  became  an 
anachronism,  a  relic  of  a  vanished  and  gone-by  condition  of  things. 

V.  And  ab  it  was  dc  the  fibst  period  of  the  gospel,  so  it  has  been  since. 
There  have  been  periods  when  circumstances  had  brought  about  partial  revivals  of  the 
spirit  of  slavery.  But  the  working  of  the  principles  of  the  gospel  have  proved  irrecon- 
cilable as  ever  with  slavery,  and  has  either  brought  it  to  an  end  or  cast  it  out.  Tike, 
for  example,  the  civil  war  in  America. 

Ver.  16. — The  brotherhood  of  all  Christians.  Onesimus,  before  his  conversion  to  the 
faith,  was  the  servant  of  Philemon;  and  afterwards,  though  he  did  not  cease  to  be  his 
servant,  yet  he  became  something  more,  viz.  his  brother  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  may 
learn  from  this — 

I.  That  the  Christian  religion  does  not  take  away  the  difference  of  banks 
and  conditions,  nob  regard  them  ab  unlawful.  The  Apostle  Paul  instructs 
masters  how  to  behave  towards  servants,  and  servants  towards  masters  (Eph.  vi.  6,  9) ; 
governors  how  to  conduct  themselves  towards  the  governed  (Rom.  xii.  8),  and  the 
governed  towards  their  superiors;  and  thereby  acknowledges  each  state  as  lawful. 

II.  Yet  these  differences  are  accidental,  and  consistent  with  an  essential 
equality  of  all  Christians.  The  gospel  considers  all  Christians  (as  they  are  in  the 
sight  of  God)  without  reference  to  their  rank  and  station,  their  wealth  or  poverty,  and 
classes  them  on  moral  considerations  alone.  "  The  poor  man  hath  the  Word  of  God 
offered  unto  him,  read  unto  him,  and  preached  unto  him  as  well  as  the  rich ;  he  hath 
the  sacraments  of  God  provided  for  him  as  well  as  for  them  that  are  of  high  place ; 
he  may  pray  unto  God  as  freely,  as  comfortably,  as  cheerfully,  as  the  great  men  of 
the  earth ;  and  he  hath  a  gracious  promise  to  be  heard  and  respected  as  well  as  they. 
Though  thou  farest  hardly  and  meanly  at  home,  yet  God  hath  prepared  thee  a  feast,  and 
biddeth  thee  to  his  table  richly  furnished  and  plentifully  stored  with  all  provision. 
Though  thou  do  not  get  up  and  down  in  silks  and  velvets,  and  hast  no  gorgeous  attire 
to  put  on,  yet  God  hath  provided  thee  a  better  garment— he  giveth  thee  his  own  Son  to 
put  on,  and  clotheth  thee  with  his  righteousness  "  (W.  Attersoll). 

III.  The  consideration  that  their  servants  and  inferiors  in  station  have  an  equal 
portion  in  Christ  and  in  the  means  of  salvation  ought  to  be  an  instruction  to  those 
highly  placed  in  this  world  to  show  mildness  and  consideration,  patience,  and  even 
meekness  to  THEIR  inferiors  and  servants.  Their  advantages  are  great;  they 
ought  not  to  abuse  those  advantages  by  treating  unfairly  those  who  are  committed  to 
their  charge  (Jas.  v.  3,  4). 

IV.  The  responsibility  of  the  rich  man  for  the  poor.  The  higher  his  rank 
above  others,  the  more  humble  and  unassuming  should  he  be ;  for  his  obligation!  also 
are  great :  "  For  unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much  required " 
(Luke  xii.  48).  His  authority,  his  influence,  his  example,  must  needs  produce  good  or 
evil  effects  on  others,  and  for  these  he  will  be  held  responsible  in  the  judgment. 

Ver.  19. — Spiritual  benefits  the  most  valuable  of  all.  Since  St.  Paul  had  (as  it 
appears)  won  to  the  embracing  of  the  faith  of  Christ  as  well  Philemon  himself  as 
Onesimus  his  slave,  he  rightly  reminds  him,  as  his  first  and  most  powerful  argument, 
that  Philemon  owes  himself  and  his  very  life  (that  iB,  the  life  of  his  soul)  to  him. 

1.  He  does  not  sum  up  this  obligation.  He  leaves  it  to  the  conscience  of  Philemon 
to  consider  how  much  he  Was  indebted.  It  was,  perhaps,  incommensurable  with  the 
favour  he  was  asking.  But  it  is  clear  that  such  an  obligation  must  exceed  every  other. 
A  man's  self  is  more  valuable  than  his  lands  or  his  goods  (Job  ii.  4).  It  is  therefore  a 
lifelong  obligation  that  men  are  under  to  those  who  have  been  to  them  the  instruments 
of  great  spiritual  benefits,  and  one  not  capable  of  being  fully  discharged.  So  it,  is  said, 
"  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings, 
that  publisheth  peace  1"  (Isa.  Hi.  7;  Rom.  x.  16).  St.  Paul  bears  witness  that  the 
Galatians,  whose  spiritual  father  he  was,  regarded  nothing  as  being  too  good  or  too 
costly  to  show  their  affection  for  him  (iv.  14, 16);  and  he  lays  down  in  1  Cor.  ix.  11 
that  the  spiritual  benefits  of  which  he  had  been  the  means  were  supreme  in  kind  to 
•ay  possible  carnal  recompense. 


1— M.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  11 

IL   SPIRITUAL  BENEFITS  ABE   INDEED  THE  GIFTS  OF  GOD  AND  THE  EFFECTS  OF    HI9 

8EA0E ;  but  lie  uses  the  services  of  men,  and  particularly  of  his  ministers,  in  the  dis- 
pensing of  them.  "  It  is  better  to  help  our  friends  to  recover  lost  grace  than  lost 
money " (Thomas  Aquinas).  And  those  who  receive  them  rightly  will  be  suitably 
grateful. 

ILL  Spiritual  benefits  the  most  valuable,  because  the  soul  of  man  is  his  most 
precious  possess  ion  (Mark  viii.  36,  37).  The  life  of  the  soul  is  impaired  and  at  length 
wholly  lost  by  sin ;  but  is  regained  and  strengthened  by  Divine  grace.  1.  The  sold  it 
more  noble  than  earth  or  heaven ;  for  of  these  the  one  is  for  its  temporary  habitation, 
the  other  for  its  eternal  one.  2.  It  bears  the  image  of  God.  It  is  like  the  piece  of 
silver  in  the  parable  (Luke  xv.  8),  for  which,  when  lost,  such  diligent  search  was  made. 
The  heavens  were  created  with  a  word,  but  the  redemption  of  the  soul  needed  the 
incarnation  of  Christ,  and  his  death  upon  the  cross.  3.  Hence  its  value,  and  the 
corresponding  value  of  a  service  rendered  to  it — a  value  so  great  as  not  to  be  capable 
of  being  expressed  (e.g.)  in  money. 

IV.  It  is  inoommensubate  with  temporal  things.  So  St.  Paul  does  not  give  the 
sum  of  it.  The  freedom  of  Onesimus  was  a  service  in  the  spiritual  sphere.  It  was  a 
benefit  to  Onesimus  himself;  and,  if  he  were  employed  as  St.  Paul  proposed  (ver.  13), 
in  the  service  of  the  Church,  might  be  the  means  of  good  to  many  other  souls. 

Y.  It  was  a  fitting  pledge,  therefore,  of  the  gratitude  of  Philemon. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  sceptre  of  love.  "  Fellow-labourer  .  .  .  fellow-soldier."  These  are 
terms  expressive  of  the  spirit  of  St.  Paul.  He  was  not  only  an  ecclesiastic,  speaking 
ex-cathedra,  so  as  to  have  dominion  over  men's  faith.  He  was  a  brother  amongst 
brethren ;  he  ruled  by  force  of  character  and  by  depth  of  love ;  he  addresses  them  in 
words  which  had  not  then  degenerated  into  a  formula:  "Dearly  beloved." 

L  Common  work.  "  Fellow-labourer."  For  Paul  believed  in  work — in  hard  work. 
He  had  "journeys  oft ; "  he  returned  to  confirm  the  faith  of  the  disciples.  He  worked  in 
sorrow  of  brain  and  sweat  of  heart,  and  sometimes  in  sweat  of  brow. 

II.  Common  conflict.  "Fellow-soldier."  For  all  through  the  ages  the  Christian 
has  a  battle  to  fight — within  himself,  and  with  the  world  and  the  flesh  and  the  devil. 
Men  are  sustained  by  the  sight  of  men  nobler  than  themselves  risking  life  and  health. 
In  the  Crimean  War,  when  a  young  officer  headed  his  troops,  running  by  their  side  in 
the  heat  of  the  conflict,  a  private  remarked,  "  There  runs  ten  thousand  a  year ! "  Paul 
did  not  direct  a  campaign  from  afar ;  he  did  not  do  the  dainty  work,  and  leave  others 
to  hard  fare  and  dungeons.  He  "fought  a  good  fight,"  and  in  that  fight  he  fell,  to  be 
crowned  with  honour  hereafter.  How  inspiring,  therefore,  would  such  a  man  be  to 
other  apostles — "  a  fellow-soldier  " !  — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  4. — Love's  outcome  in  prayer.  "  Making  mention  of  thee  always  in  my  prayers." 
We  may  judge  of  the  reality  of  our  affection  by  the  current  of  our  thoughts.  Do 
we  find  them  tending  towards  some  absent  friends  daily?  Then  we  have  evidence 
that  ours  is  not  the  superficial  love  that  can  live  only  in  the  presence  of  its  object. 
With  the  Christian  thought  turns  to  prayer.  There  on  the  throne  of  the  universe  is 
One  who  can  best  befriend  our  dearest  friends. 

I.  There  was  blessedness  in  the  experience.  "I  thank  my  God,  making 
mention,"  etc.  It  was  not  a  prayer  touched  with  sorrow  for  Philemon,  Apphia,  and 
Archippus,  or  with  anxiety  about  their  faith  and  character.  It  was  the  prayer  of  one 
who  rejoiced  that  the  Christ  above  could  keep  them  from  falling. 

H.  There  was  purpose  in  the  prayer.  Paul  remembers  its  subject-matter. 
When  he  heard  of  their  love  and  faith  towards  the  Lord  Jesus,  he  prayed  that  their 
faith  might  not  be  merely  personal  or  selfish,  but  that  their  religion  might  be,  in  the 
modern  speech,  "altruistic,"  which  is  "otherism"  as  opposed  to  "selflsm."  Paul 
prayed  that  the  communication  of  their  faith  might  be  effectual,  that  the  light  might 
shine  on  others  so  as  to  guide  then,  that  the  fountain  might  flow  into  other  hearts  so 
as  to  refresh  them.— W.  M.  S. 


12  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  [1—26. 


Vera.  9,  10. — Love's  motive-power.  "For  love's  sake  I  rather  beseech  thee  .  .  . 
for  my  son  Onesimus."  Onesimua  was  a  slave — one  who  in  past  times  had  been,  as 
was  natural,  unmoved  by  any  inspiration  to  good  service — and  was  "unprofitable." 
He  had  been  begotten  again  through  the  ministry  of  Paul,  and  now  that  he  sends  him 
back,  he  tells  Philemon  that  the  new  Divine  life  in  him  will  make  him  faithful,  earnest, 
and  "profitable." 

.  I.  Truth  triumphs  in  time.  Slavery  did  not  fall  at  once,  nor  was  polygamy 
destroyed  at  once.  Revolution  would  have  been  the  cost  of  any  such  attempt.  Paul 
left  the  cross  to  do  its  mighty  work.  The  spirit  of  the  gospel  made  slavery  and 
polygamy  alike  impossible,  because  the  cross  destroys  self,  teaches  us  that  we  are  not 
our  own,  and  emancipates  all  who  are  oppressed  through  a  love  which  gives  itself  for 
others  instead  of  holding  them  in  bondage. 

II.  Love  is  the  supreme  command.  He  will  not  enjoin.  Men  resist  orders  and 
commands.  They  find  excuses  for  inaction,  and  their  pride  is  hurt. '  But  when  love 
intreats,  and  when  that  love  is  like  that  of  Paul  the  aged,  and  Paul  a  prisoner,  and 
Paul  to  whom  Philemon  owed  his  own  self  (ver.  19),  we  need  not  wonder  that  love  won 
the  day ;  so  Onesimus  would  be  received  back  as  a  servant  (a  bond-servant),  "  but  above 
a  servant,  a  brother  beloved." — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  19,  20.— Personal  obligation.  "Thine  own  self."  This  is  more  than  all 
else.  We  can  call  nothing  "our  own"  but  "the  self."  We  are  not  rich  in  what  we 
have,  but  in  what  we  are.  All  things,  houses,  estates,  lands,  are  outside  us.  The  self 
is  all. 

I.  Indebtedness  or  Philemon.  Philemon  owed  his  spiritual  conversion,  all  the 
rich  inheritance  in  the  soul,  to  the  ministry  of  Paul ;  and  he  delicately  enough  reminds 
hira  of  this  in  an  indirect  form  of  speech,  "  Albeit  I  do  not  say  to  thee  how  thou  owest 
unto  me  even  thine  own  self."  It  is  one  of  those  touches  which  show  what  a  true 
gentleman  St.  Paul  was.  There  is  more  than  claim  of  right  to  counsel  him,  viz.  the 
modest  reminder  that,  if  need  be,  he  would  repay  any  loss  that  Philemon  might  have 
sustained  through  the  detention  by  Paul  of  Onesimus. 

II.  Expectation  concerning  him.  "Let  me  have  joy  of  thee  in  the  Lord." 
"  Refresh  me."  What  by  ?  That  which  alone  can  rejoice  the  heart  of  a  true  father  in 
the  gospel,  viz.  Christ's  own  Spirit  in  Christ's  disciples.  The  gospel  was  to  be  spread, 
not  alone  by  eloquence  or  erudition,  but  by  Christ's  own  religion  alive  and  in  action 
in  all  who  confessed  his  Name. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  22. — Needful  preparation.  "  Prepare  me  ...  a  lodging."  Their  prayers  he 
hoped  would  open  the  door  for  him  to  come  and  see  them.  He  knew  that  the  golden 
key  of  prayer  had  opened  many  doors  closed  as  fast  as  bis  own. 

I.  A  lodging  seems  all  he  ever  had.  And  not  always  had  he  that.  A  prison 
can  scarcely  be  called  a  lodging — for,  in  one  sense,  when  we  lodge  we  have  protection 
and  rest,  and  are  at  liberty  in  our  onward  journey  in  life.  This  man  gave  up  friends, 
country,  home,  for  Christ's  sake,  and  now  be  is  completing  his  course  and  gives  up  dear 
life  itself.  Will  he  ever  have  this  lodging  ?  No ;  it  is  the  time  of  his  first  imprison- 
ment ;  he  is  treated  as  a  malefactor,  and  we  know  what  his  end  will  be. 

II.  His  next  lodging-place  will  be  the  grave.  But,  in  one  sense,  the  idea  that 
we  associate  with  this  resting-place  was  not  fulfilled  in  his  life.  His  death  was  probably 
one  by  the  lions,  or  the  executioner's  axe,  or  the  cross,  which  would  leave  even  his 
poor  body  a  prey  to  cruel  hands. 

HI.  His  lodging  was  to  give  plaoe  to  home.  Soon  now,  very  soon,  his  words 
were  fulfilled,  "I  have  finished  my  course, .  .  .  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a 
crown  of  righteousness."  Here  the  volume  of  his  life,  illustrated  with  so  many  etchings 
from  his  own  hands  of  his  pains,  forsakements,  temptations,  and  tribulations,  now  comes 
to  a  close.  "Finis"  is  written  upon  all.  Yet  it  is  not  Vale,  vale,  in  externum  vale! 
that  we  inscribe  upon  his  aims  and  hopes.  No;  it  is  the  catacomb  motto,  In  pace; 
for  henceforth  he  enjoys  the  immortal  reward,  the  great  peace ;  he  is  at  rest  in  Ood.— 
W.  M.8. 

Yen.  1— 8.— The  address  and  salutation.    This  strictly  private  letter,  whkh  au 


1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  18 

been  well  called  "  the  polite  Epistle,"  carries  upon  the  face  of  it  a  clear  explanation  of 
its  contents. 

L  The  writes  of  the  Epistle.  "  Paul,  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  does  not 
describe  himself  as  an  apostle,  for  there  was  no  need  here  to  assert  his  authority,  but 
as  a  prisoner,  to  bespeak  the  sympathy  of  Philemon.  He  was  not  a  prisoner  for  crime, 
but  for  the  cause  of  Christ,  and  therefore  "  not  ashamed  of  his  chain."  Several  of  his 
weightiest  Epistles  were  written  in  prison,  as  if  to  show  that  "  the  Word  of  God  was 
not  bound."  He  associates  with  himself  in  the  address,  but  with  a  separate  title,  th6 
name  of  "  Timothy  our  brother,"  who  was  known  to  the  Colossians  (CoL  i.  1),  and 
now  in  sympathy  with  himself  respecting  the  object  of  this  Epistle. 

II.  The  persons  to  whom  the  Epistle  was  addressed.  1.  "  Unto  Philemon  our 
beloved,  and  fellow-worker."  (1)  He  was  probably  a  native  of  CoIosssb,  for  his  slave 
Onesimus  belonged  to  it  (Col.  iv.  9).  (2)  He  was  a  convert  of  the  apostle  (ver.  19). 
(3)  He  was  an  evangelist.  (4)  He  was  a  person  of  mark  at  Colossse ;  for  the  Church 
gathers  in  his  house ;  he  is  able  to  "  refresh  the  hearts  of  the  saints  "  both  with  temporal 
and  spiritual  mercies.  (5)  It  is  a  sign  of  the  apostle's  humility  that  he  places  Philemon 
on  an  equality  with  himself  as  "  a  fellow -worker."  Love  bound  the  two  servants  of 
Christ  closely  together.  2.  "  Apphia  our  sister."  This  name  occurs  in  many  Phrygian 
inscriptions.  (1)  She  was  probably  the  wife  of  Philemon.  The  apostle  addresses  her 
because,  as  the  mistress  of  the  household,  her  consent  would  be  necessary  to  the 
reception  of  Onesimus  on  a  new  footing.  (2)  She  was  a  true  child  of  God ;  for  she  is 
addressed  as  "  a  sister "  of  the  apostle.  Therefore  Philemon  and  Apphia  were  not 
unequally  yoked  together.  (3)  Mark  how  ready  the  apostle  is  to  recognize  the  graces 
of  the  saints,  and  especially  to  acknowledge  the  true  place  of  woman  in  her  household. 
3.  "  Archippus  our fellow-soldier"  (1)  He  was  probably  the  son  of  this  worthy  pair. 
(2)  He  was  a  minister  of  the  gospel  either  at  Colossse  or  Laodicea  (Col.  iv.  7) ;  for  he  is 
called  "  our  fellow-soldier,"  as  Epaphroditus  is  called  "a  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ."  The 
title  suggests  the  idea  of  conflict  and  hard  service  for  the  truth,  with  a  view  to  final 
victory.  4.  "  The  Church  in  thy  house."  This  does  not  mean  merely  the  private 
family  of  Philemon,  though  the  object  of  the  Epistle  has  the  look  of  being  a  matter  of 
strictly  private  concernment;  but  the  assembly  of  Christians  who  met  for  worship 
under  Philemon's  roof.  The  restoration  of  Onesimus  to  his  home  under  new  relations 
would  be  a  matter  of  profound  interest  and  significance  to  the  whole  Church  at  Colossse. 

ILL  The  salutation.  "Grace  to  you,  and  peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (see  homiletical  hints  on  Eph.  L  2). — T.  0. 

Vers.  4 — 7. — Recognition  of  the  Christian  character  and  services  of  Philemon.  This 
is  after  the  apostle's  usual  manner. 

I.  The  thanksgiving.  "  I  thank  my  God  always,  making  mention  of  thee  in  my 
prayers."  1.  Though  it  is  not  unlawful  to  praise  men  for  their  graces  or  virtues,  God 
is  first  to  be  thanked  as  the  Author  of  these  dispositions.  "  We  rejoice  [or, '  boast ']  in  God 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (Rom.  v.  11).  It  is  the  privilege  of  the  believer  to 
speak  of  God  as  "my  God,"  according  to  the  tenure  of  the  covenant:  "I  will  be  thy 
God."  Therefore  the  apostle  says, "  Whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve"  (Acts  xxvii.  23). 
2.  The  occasion  of  his  thanksgiving.  "  Making  mention  of  thee  in  my  prayers."  It 
mingled  with  his  daily  prayers.  (1)  Though 'a  prisoner,  the  apostle  had  constant 
opportunities  for  secret  devotion.  (2)  He  was  always  mindful  of  others  in  his  supplica- 
tions. Many  have  no  secret  prayer;  others  pray  only  for  themselves;  the  apostle  prays 
for  others.  The  saints  had  an  individual  place  in  the  apostle's  heart.  (3)  It  is  right 
to  pray  even  for  those  who  are  the  subjects  of  thanksgiving.  The  saints  are  not 
perfect,  and  therefore  need  to  be  prayed  for,  that  they  may  enjoy  a  more  abundant  life 
in  Christ  Jesus  (John  x.  10). 

II.  The  cause  or  reason  op  the  thanksgiving.  "  Hearing  of  thy  love  and  of  the 
faith  which  thou  hast  toward  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  toward  all  the  saints."  1.  A  good 
report  extols  God's  Name  and  recommends  religion.  "  By  it  the  ancients  obtained 
a  good  report "  (Heb.  xi.  3).  2.  Good  men  love  to  hear,  as  well  as  report,  the  praises  of 
good  men.  3.  We  ought  to  pray  fervently  for  those  who  enjoy  the  greatest  graces.  4. 
The  graces  of  Philemon  were  faith  in  Christ  and  love  to  the  saints.  (1)  These  graces, 
though  distinguished  from  one  another,  never  exist  separately.    "Faith  worketh  by 


14  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  [1—25 


love,"  and  never  without  it.  Love  proceeds  from  faith,  even  love  to  the  saints  (1  Thess. 
ii.  3).  (2)  The  Object  of  faith  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  therefore  it  is  called  the  faith 
of  Jesus  Christ  (Bom.  iii.  26).  Faith,  as  an  act  of  the  understanding,  sees  Christ,  and, 
as  an  act  of  will,  trusts  in  him  for  eternal  life.  (3)  The  objects  of  love  are  the  saints. 
Christ  is  to  be  loved  in  the  saints,  who  are  to  be  loved  next  to  Christ.  All  the 
saints  are  to  be  loved,  no  matter  what  their  character,  disposition,  or  talents. 

III.  The  object  ob  purport  of  the  apostle's  prayer.  "That  the  fellowship  of 
thy  faith  may  become  effectual  in  the  knowledge  of  every  good  thing  which  is  in  you 
unto  Christ."  1.  The  fellowship  referred  to  the  kindly  offices  of  sympathy  and  charity 
which  were  the  offspring  of  Philemon's  faith.  The  apostle's  prayers  had  in  view  the 
furtherance  of  Philemon's  faith  on  its  practical  side.  Faith  is  a  bountiful  grace,  and  is 
communicative  in  its  very  nature.  2.  The  energetic  operation  of  faith  (1)  glorifies 
God ;  (2)  refreshes  the  saints ;  (3)  stops  the  mouths  of  malicious  men ;  (4)  and  attests 
the  true  character  of  the  saints  even  in  the  society  of  hypocrites.  3.  The  drift  of  a 
practical  faith  is  towards  a  fuller  knowledge  and  appreciation  of  good  in  Christian  men. 
"  The  knowledge  of  the  result  and  the  reward  of  faith  manifesting  itself  in  deeds  of 
love."  Insight  springs  from  obedience.  4.  The  growth  of  faith  in  its  upward  tendency 
is  "unto  Christ,"  as  its  Goal  and  final  Resting-place,  depending  as  it  doe*  upon  union 
with  him,  and  tending  to  intensify  the  experience  of  that  union. 

IV.  The  motive  fob  the  apostle's  thanksgiving.  "For  I  had  great  joy  and 
consolation  in  thy  love,  because  the  bowels  of  the  saints  have  been  refreshed  by  thee, 
brother."  1.  Whatever  causes  joy  and  consolation  is  just  ground  for  thanksgiving. 
"  For  what  thanksgiving  can  we  render  again  unto  God  for  you,  for  all  the  joy  where- 
with we  joy  for  your  sakes  hi. fore  our  God?"  (1  Thess.  iii.  9).  Thanks  ever  be  to  that 
God  who  fills  our  hearts  "  with  food  and  gladness."  The  Apostle  John  found  hia  joy  in 
learning  that  his  children  walked  in  truth  (2  John  4).  2.  The  proofs  of  Philemon's 
love  to  the  saints.  (1)  The  apostle  rejoices  in  a  love  which  carries  blessings  to  others 
rather  than  himself.  (2)  The  saints  ought  to  be  refreshed  in  several  ways,  (a)  By 
words  of  consolation,  which  we  can  easily  extract  from  the  promises  of  our  Lord  in  the 
Word.  (6)  By  our  deeds  of  charity.  So  the  apostle  himself  was  "  oft  refreshed "  by 
Onesiphorus  during  his  long  imprisonment,  (c)  By  our  prayers  for  the  afflicted  saints. 
(!j)  The  motives  that  prompt  to  this  compassionate  dealing  with  the  saints  are  (a) 
that  we  herein  imitate  God,  "  who  comforteth  those  who  are  cast  down"  (2  Cor.  i.  4); 
(b)  we  refresh  the  bowels  of  Christ  himself;  (e)  God  will  not  forgot  our  labour  of 
love  (1  Thess.  i.  3).— T.  0. 

Vers.  8 — 11. — Appeal  by  entreaty  rather  than  command.  The  apostle  here  enters 
on  the  main  subject  of  his  letter,  and  introduces  it  with  a  singular  mixture  of  courtesy, 
affection,  and  authority. 

I.  It  is  sometimes  wise  to  forego  the  exercise  of  authority.  "  Wherefore, 
though  I  have  all  boldness  in  Christ  to  enjoin  thee  that  which  is  befitting,  yet  for  love's 
sake  I  rather  beseech  thee."  1.  Ministers  possess  authority.  They  are  required  to 
speak  with  authority.  "  Charge  them  that  are  rich  that  they  be  not  high-minded." 
2.  Their  authority  is  not  in  their  own  name,  but  in  that  of  Christ.  "  I  have  all 
boldness  in  Christ."  They  are  but  servants  in  the  Church,  as  Moses  was  (Heb.  iii.  5) ; 
"not  having  dominion  over  our  faith,  but  helpers  of  our  joy"  (2  Cor.  i.  24);  for  it  is 
the  authority  of  ambassadors  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  3.  There  are  limits  to  this  authority. 
"  To  enjoin  thee  that  which  is  befitting."  This  follows  from  the  fact  that  Christ  gives 
the  command.  He  can  only  command  that  which  is  befitting.  Thus  it  is  right  Ifor  a 
believer  to  do  even  more  than  strict  law  would  demand,  for  he  must  do  what  reason 
and  propriety  dictate. 

IL   IT  IB  THE   DELIGHT   AS   WELL   AS  THE   WISDOM   OF   MINISTERS   TO  USE   ENTBEATT 

ratheb  than  command.  1.  Ministers  often  wisely  forego  their  right  in  prosecuting 
their  Master's  work.  Christians  likewise  find  it  needful  to  forego  the  use  of  things 
lawful,  because  their  use  would  be  inexpedient.  They  must  not  "abuse  their  liberty  " 
or  "binder  the  gospel"  (1  Cor.  ix.  12,  18).  2.  Love  is  the  principal  motive  to  prompt 
to  this  action.  "  Yet  for  love's  sake  I  rather  beseech  thee."  Not  the  love  of  the  apostle 
to  Philemon,  nor  the  love  of  Philemon  to  him,  but  love  absolutely  as  a  principle  held 
in  highest  regard  by  all  Christiaus.    It  is  lev*  thai  "seoketh  not  her  otto."    3.  A*> 


1— SB.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  15 

entreaty  derives  added  weight  from  the  age  and  sufferings  of  him  who  ofers  it.  "  Being 
such  a  one  as  Paul  the  aged,  and  now  a  prisoner  also  of  Jesus  Christ."  (1)  Reverence 
is  due  to  age.  It  is  "a  crown  of  glory  when  it  is  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness." 
The  apostle  was  not  now  old,  as  the  years  of  a  life  are  reckoned,  hut  he  bore  the  signs 
of  age  in  exhaustion  and  weariness  and  cares.  (2)  Ministers  are  to  be  regarded  with 
peculiar  respect  and  sympathy  on  account  of  their  afflictions.  The  apostle  was  now  a 
prisoner  at  Rome  for  the  sake  of  Christ — "  an  ambassador  in  bonds." 

III.  The  object  of  the  apostle's  entreaty.  "  I  beseech  thee  for  my  child  whom 
I  have  begotten  in  my  bonds,  Onesimus."  1.  Onesimus  was  the  runaway  slave  of 
Philemon  of  Golossm,  who  had  made  his  way  to  Borne,  and  come  into  contact  with  the 
apostle  during  his  imprisonment.  2.  He  was  a  convert  of  the  apostle.  (1)  The  apostle 
was  the  instrument  of  his  conversion  at  Rome.  (2)  Ministers  ought  to  use  private  and 
casual  opportunities  of  doing  good  to  others.  (3)  Though  the  apostle  was  a  prisoner, 
the  Word  of  God  was  not  bound.  (4)  God  often  sweetens  the  afflictions  of  his  ministers 
by  special  favours.  3.  His  conversion  became  manifest  by  his  better  life.  "  Who  was 
aforetime  unprofitable  to  thee,  but  now  is  profitable  to  thee  and  to  me."  (I)  Good  men 
may  have  bad  servants.  This  Onesimus  had  been  unprofitable,  not  only  as  a  pilferer, 
but  as  an  idler.  The  example  of  his  godly  master  and  mistress  had  no  influence  upon 
his  conduct.  (2)  Conversion  always  results  in  a  change  of  social  character.  It  makes 
people  conscientious  in  the  discharge  of  all  duties  incident  to  their  calling.  Onesimus 
was  henceforth  "profitable "  both  to  Philemon  and  the  apostle,  (a)  He  was  profitable 
to  the  apostle.  Religious  servants  are  the  most  profitable.  Onesimus  gave  new  joy 
to  the  apostle  by  his  conversion,  while  he  waited  on  him,  no  doubt,  in  the  ministry  of 
private  service  and  kindness.  It  is  not  enough  that  a  sinner  cease  to  do  evil ;  he  must 
learn  to  do  well.  We  see  in  Onesimus  the  practical  side  of  the  apostle's  counsel,  "Let 
him  that  stole  steal  no  more,  but  let  him  rather  work  with  his  hands  that  which  is 
good  "  (Eph.  iv.  28).  (i)  He  was  profitable  to  Philemon,  in  so  far  as  he,  in  Philemon's 
stead,  did  that  service  to  the  apostle  which  his  master  would  have  readily  done  if  it 
had  been  in  his  power.  He  would  be  yet  more  profitable  to  his  master  in  the  spirit  and 
conditions  of  his  new  service,  on  his  return  back  to  Colossas. — T.  0. 

Vers.  12 — 16. — The  motives  that  prompted  the  apostle  to  send  back  Onesimus  to  his 
master.  I.  He  did  send  him  back.  "Whom  I  have  sent  back  to  thee  in  his  own 
person,  that  is,  my  very  heart."  1.  Onesimus  did  not  return  of  his  own  accord.  He 
might,  perhaps,  have  had  some  not  unnatural  misgivings  as  to  the  character  of  the 
reception  he  would  meet  with  as  a  returned  slave  who  had  acted  a  dishonest  part,  and 
might  have  been  ashamed  besides  to  appear  again  in  a  community  where  his  misdeeds 
had  been  made  known.  2.  The  apostle  recognized  Philemon's  right  to  the  restored 
services  of  his  fugitive  slave.  The  gospel  does  not  abolish  civil  rights.  The  conversion 
of  Onesimus  did  not  secure  his  manumission.  Yet  the  gospel  planted  principles  in 
society  which  in  due  time  abolished  slavery  everywhere.  "  Wast  thou  called  being  a 
bond-servant?  care  not  for  it:  but  if  thou  canst  become  free,  use  it  rather"  (1  Cor. 
vii.  21).  3.  He  did  not  even  wait  till  he  had  received  an  answer  from  Philemon  as  to 
the  terms  in  which  Onesimus  would  be  received  back  into  the  Oolossian  household.  He 
sent  Onesimus  at  once  in  charge  of  his  two  letters,  namely,  that  to  the  Colossian  saints 
and  that  to  Philemon  himself.  4.  Yet  the  apostle  acted  in  the  whole  matter  with  the 
deepest  affection  for  the  poor  bond-servant.  He  speaks  of  him  as  "his  own  heart." 
What  account  Christianity  makes  of  the  meanest  classes  of  society  I 

II.  The  apostle's  explanation  op  his  conduct  and  motives  in  the  whole 
teansaction.  1.  His  first  feeling  was  to  retain  Onesimus  about  his  person  to  do  him 
the  service  that  Philemon  himself  would  have  gladly  done.  He  had  now  become 
profitable,  according  to  the  happy  significance  of  his  name.  But  it  was  not  for  the 
apostle  to  interfere  with  another  man's  servant.  2.  The  true  cause  of  his  sending 
Onesimus  was  that  he  would  do  nothing  without  the  consent  of  his  master.  "But 
without  thy  mind  would  I  do  nothing."  But  the  motive  that  prompted  this  determina- 
tion was  that  "  thy  goodness  should  not  be  as  of  necessity,  but  of  free  wilL"  If  the 
apostle  had  kept  Onesimus  for  the  sake  of  the  benefit  to  be  derived  from  his  personal 
ministration,  the  whole  transaction  would  have  worn  a  semblance  of  constraint.  We 
jMve  no  right  to  extort  benefits  from  our  friends  against  their  will.    8.  The  providential 


16  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  [1—25. 

aspect  of  the  matter.  "  For  perhaps  he  was  therefore  parted  from  thee  for  a  season, 
that  thou  shouldest  have  him  for  ever."  (1)  Nothing  in  this  statement  extenuates 
the  misdeeds  of  Onesimus,  which  God  overruled  for  good.  (2)  The  acts  of  the  meanest 
individual  in  society  are  included  in  the  sphere  of  Divine  providence.  (3)  God  makes 
up  for  the  losses  of  his  saints  in  his  own  time  and  way.  Philemon  has  his  once 
unfaithful  servant  restored  to  him  on  an  entirely  new  footing  of  advantage.  (4)  The 
restoration  of  the  fugitive  slave  is  to  an  eternal  relationship.  The  earthly  tie  is 
sundered  by  death,  but  grace  gives  an  eternity  to  the  holy  relationships  of  earth. 
4.  The  new  relation  established  between  master  and  servant,  "  Not  now  as  a  servant, 
but  above  a  servant,  a  brother  beloved,  most  of  all  by  me,  but  more  than  most  of  all 
by  thee,  in  the  flesh  and  in  the  Lord."  The  apostle  does  not  say,  "  not  a  servant," 
but  "not  as  a  servant;"  for  grace  did  not  abrogate  the  old  tie  of  master  and  servant. 
(1)  The  brotherhood  of  saints  is  common  to  all  the  relationships  of  life.  Philemon  and 
onesimus  are  now  brethren  beloved.  (2)  Pious  servants  are  to  be  more  regarded,  as 
they  are  more  faithful,  than  servants  without  religion.  (3)  There  are  none  dearer  to 
ministers  than  their  converts.  (4)  There  was  a  double  obligation  to  duty  on  Philemon's 
part  corresponding  to  the  double  tie — that  of  the  flesh  and  that  of  the  Spirit — by  which 
lie  was  now  connected  with  Onesimus. — T.  0. 

Ver.  17. — The  plea  of  Christian  fellowship.  The  apostle  here  directly  puts  his 
request,  "  If  then  thou  countest  me  a  partner,  receive  him  as  myself."  He  regards 
Philemon  as  a  partner  in  faith  and  love  and  life.  It  is  a  recurrence  to  an  old 
argument,  "  If  there  be  any  fellowship  of  the  Spirit,  .  .  .  fulfil  ye  my  joy." 

I.  The  fellowship  of  believers.  It  subsists  in  the  fellowship  with  the  Father  and 
the  Son,  and  derives  all  its  force  therefrom.  (1  John  i.  3.)  That  fellowship  implies 
that  all  saints  have  a  common  Father  (Eph.  iv.  6),  a  common  elder  Brother  (Heb.  ii.  11), 
i  common  inheritance  (Eph.  ii.  19 ;  Rev.  i.  9),  a  common  grace  (Phil.  i.  7),  a  common 
suffering  (1  Cor.  xii.  26 ;  Heb.  x.  33,  34).  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Author  and  the 
Power  of  this  fellowship  (2  Cor.  xiii.  13),  as  love  is  the  "  bond  of  perfection  "  (Col.  iii. 
14).    Thus  believers  become  of  "  one  heart  and  one  soul." 

II.  The  plea  founded  upon  this  fellowship.  "  Receive  him  as  myself."  L  It 
is  a  genuine  plea;  for  the  apostle  elsewhere  says,  "If  there  be  any  fellowship  of  the 
Spirit  .  .  .  look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of 
others  "  (Phil.  ii.  4).  "  Love  seeketh  not  her  own."  2.  Onesimus  was  now  a  partner 
as  well  as  the  apostle.  Therefore,  as  the  old  Puritan  says,  "  Love  me,  love  my  partner : 
one  partner  receives  another,  even  for  a  partner's  sake."  If  Philemon  loves  Christ  in 
the  apostle,  why  not  in  Onesimus?  "Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  to  one  of  these 
little  ones,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me"  (Matt.  xxv.  40).  We  are  to  love  Christ  in  the 
meanest  of  his  servants. — T.  0. 

Vers.  18, 19. — The  apostle's  frank  acceptance  of  pecuniary  responsibility  for  Onesimus. 
The  injured  master  might  plead  that  it  was  enough  for  him  to  forbear  punishing  his 
unfaithful  servant,  but  the  injuries  he  had  received  put  it  out  of  his  power  to  replace 
him  in  his  household. 

I.  There  is  here  an  acknowledgment  of  the  wrong  done  by  the  now  penitent 
slave.  "  If  he  hath  wronged  thee,  or  oweth  thee  aught,  put  that  to  mine  account." 
It  is  evident  that  Onesimus  had  frankly  confessed  his  misdeeds  to  the  apostle.  1.  Mark 
the  mild  language  in  which  the  apostle  describes  them.  He  does  not  say  that  Onesimus 
robbed  his  master,  as  he  did  not  wish  either  to  hurt  the  feelings  of  the  slave  or  to 
irritate  the  feelings  of  the  master;  but  simply  speaks  of  a  wrong  done,  of  a  possible 
debt  incurred.  If  a  sinner  is  penitent,  why  should  his  old  sins  or  follies  be  thrown  in 
his  teeth  ?  2.  Restitution  in  case  of  civil  injury  is  a  first  thing.  It  is  one  of  the  most 
practical  proofs  of  repentance. 

II.  There  is  a  responsibility  assumed  fob  the  debt  of  Onesimus.  "  Put  that  to 
mine  account :  I  Paul  write  it  with  mine  own  hand,  I  will  repay  it."  The  apostle  here 
puts  his  name,  as  it  were,  at  the  foot  of  the  bond.  1.  It  was  an  act  of  self-sacrificing 
consideration  for  Onesimus,  as  if  the  apostle  would  remove  every  possible  obstacle  to 
the  restoration  of  the  penitent  slave  to  his  Colossian  home.  2.  Yet  it  is  to  put  as  to 
imply  that  FhiUmentsmid  hardly  etatt  tfa  debt. 


1—26.]  THE   EPISTLE   TO   PHILEMON.  17 

III.  There  is  the  statement  of  a  much  larger  counter-claim.  "  Not  to  say  to 
thee  that  thou  owest  to  me  even  thine  own  self  besides."  1.  It  was  a  true  claim.  The 
apostle  had  been  the  instrument  of  Philemon's  conversion.  2.  It  was  an  overpowering 
claim.  The  blessing  that  accrues  to  a  man  from  his  conversion  cannot  be  weighed  in 
the  balance  against  all  a  man's  property.  3.  There  ought  to  be  mercy  in  the  exaction  of 
debts.  This  is  implied  in  the  nature  of  the  apostle's  appeal.  Onesimus  was  utterly 
unable  to  make  restitution,  and,  if  the  apostle  became  his  surety,  it  was  with  an 
implied  wish  that  Philemon  would  take  a  liberal  view  of  his  duty  in  the  matter. — T.  0. 

Ver.  20. — A  plea  for  personal  consideration.  The  apostle  now  becomes  more 
personal  in  his  urgency.  "  Yea,  brother,  let  me  have  joy  of  thee  in  the  Lord :  refresh 
my  heart  in  Christ." 

I.  Christians  ought  to  aim  at  the  spiritual  gratification  of  each  other. 
It  is  not  well  to  make  the  hearts  of  the  righteous  sad  (Ezek.  xiii.  22).  The  apostle 
had  care  and  anxiety  and  sadness  enough  to  depress  him,  and  it  was  natural  he  should 
seek  some  fresh  joy  from  the  obedience  of  hj.9  disciples. 

II.  The  obedience  of  Christians  is  a  great  source  of  refreshing  to  ministers. 
The  ready  obedimce  of  Philemon  would  revive  the  drooping  spirit  of  the  apostle,  and 
inspire  him  with  fresh  vigour.  As  the  refreshing  was  to  be  "  in  the  Lord  "  as  the  aim 
of  all  a  Christian's  actions,  so  we  see  how  constantly  the  apostle  rejoiced  and  gloried 
in  the  Lord,  and  commended  his  example  to  his  converts  and  to  Christians  generally. 
— T.  C. 

Vers.  21,  22. — The  apostle's  concluding  appeal.  He  now  glides  insensibly  into  the 
language  of  authority,  which  all  along  he  had  a  right  to  assume.  "Having  confidence 
in  thine  obedience,  I  write  unto  thee,  knowing  that  thou  wilt  do  even  beyond  what 
I  say." 

I.  The  most  willing  mat  be  fairly  urged  to  the  course  of  duty.  The  apostle 
assures  Philemon  that  he  does  not  doubt  his  obedience,  yet  he  thinks  it  necessary  to 
stir  up  his  pure  mind  to  a  remembrance  of  his  obligations.  1.  An  obedient  people 
make  zealous  ministers.  2.  A  good  conscience  ensures  confidence  in  the  wise  and  zealous 
conduct  of  life.  "  Credit  and  a  good  conscience  are  shipped  both  in  one  bottom."  3.  A 
good  heart  entitles  us  to  expect  a  liberal  construction  of  the  extent  of  our  duty.  The 
apostle  seems  here  to  hint  that  Philemon  might  possibly  manumit  his  slave.  That 
the  apostle  had  not  demanded ;  yet  it  was  within  the  possible  scope  of  Philemon's  liberal 
understanding  of  his  duty  to  Qnesimus. 

II.  The  apostle  bespeaks,  on  his  approaching  visit  to  Colossi,  a  favourable 
reception  to  Onesimus.  "But  withal  prepare  me  also  a  lodging:  for  I  hope  that 
through  your  prayers  I  shall  be  granted  to  you."  1.  The  presence  of  the  apostle  at 
Colossx  would  enable  him  to  see  that  his  expectations  had  not  been  disappointed.  A 
Puritan  writer  says,  "Who  would  not  willingly' receive  Onesimus,  coming  as  Paul's 
harbinger,  to  provide  him  lodging?"  2.  The  most  eminent  servants  of  God  need  the 
prayers  of  the  humblest  in  his  Church.  (1)  Because  they  are  exposed  to  many  dangers 
and  temptations.  (2)  Because  they  have  a  responsible  charge  in  God's  kingdom. 
(3)  Because  their  liberty  to  preach  the  gospel  is  often  threatened,  if  not  temporarily 
destroyed,  by  wicked  men.  (4)  The  apostle  believed  in  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  The 
prayers  of  the  Colossian  household  would  or  might  unlock  his  prison-doors.  "The 
effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much"  (Jas.  v.  16). — T.  0. 

Vers.  23 — 25. — Salutations  and  prayer.  I.  Salutations.  These  are  the  expressions 
of  Christian  sympathy  and  kindness.  1.  They  are  the  salutations  of  the  apostle's  fellow- 
prisoner.  "There  salute  thee  Epaphras  my  fellow-prisoner  in  Christ  Jesus."  (1) 
Epaphras  was  a  Colossian  evangelist  (Col.  i.  7 ;  iv.  12).  (2)  He  was  imprisoned  at 
Borne  in  the  immediate  society  of  the  apostle,  (o)  This  was  an  alleviation  to  both 
prisoners,  on  account  of  their  common  faith,  their  common  hopes,  and  their  common 
interests.  Epaphras,  as  probably  the  younger  man,  would  be  very  helpful  to  the 
apostle,  (b)  The  cause  of  the  imprisonment  in  both  cases  was  "in  Christ  Jesus." 
They  suffered  for  the  preaching  of  his  gospel.  2.  They  are  the  salutations  of  the 
apostle's  fellow-labourers.    "Marcus"  (Acts  xii.  12),  once  temporarily  estranged  from 


18  THE  El'ISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  [1—25. 

the  apostle,  but  now  at  his  side;  "Aristarchus"  (Acts  xix.  29,  30;  Col.  iv.  10); 
"Demas,"  whose  apostasy  was  yet  future  (2  Tim.  iv.  10);  "Luke,"  the  beloved 
physician  and  evangelist  (Col.  iv.  14).  The  apostle  was  happily  circumstanced,  even 
as  a  prisoner,  through  the  constant  or  occasional  society  of  these  men. 

II.  Prater.  "The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  your  spirit."  It  is 
curious  to  find  no  allusion  to  God  the  Father  in  this  prayer.  If  Christ  is  not  God, 
how  can  we  account  for  such  a  prayer?  It  is  a  simple  but  beautiful  prayer  addressed 
to  the  whole  Philemon  household. — T.  0. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 

TO 

THE    EPISTLE    OF 

PAUL   TO    PHILEMON". 


The  Hallowing  of  the  Ordinary  Inter- 
course of  Life    ... 

The  Christian  Family 

The  Constituent  Parts  of  Acceptable 
Prayer :  Thanksgiving,  Intercession, 
Personal  Petitions  ... 

Man  glorifying  God 

The  Religion  of  Christ  a  Defence  of 
Social  Order,  not  a  Disturbing  Force 

Ungodly  Men  are  Unprofitable  to 
themselves  and  to  others  ... 

Treasures  in  Heaven 

Christianity  not  permanently  Com- 
patible with  Slavery  as  an  Institu- 
tion    ...  ...  ... 

The  Brotherhood  of  all  Christians    . . . 

Spiritual  Benefits  the  most  Valuable 
ofoll 

The  Sceptre  of  Love 


9 
10 

10 
11 


Love's  Outcome  In  Prayer  ...  ... 

Love's  Motive-Power  ...  ... 

Personal  Obligation  ...  ... 

Needful  Preparation  ...  ... 

The  Address  and  Salutation 

Becognition  of  the  Christian  Character 
and  Services  of  Philemon 

Appeal  by  Entreaty  rather  than  Com- 
mand ... 

The  Motives  that  prompted  the  Apostle 
to  send  back  Onesimus  to  his  Master 

The  Plea  of  Christian  Fellowship    ... 

The  Apostle's  Frank  Acceptance  of 
Pecuniary  Responsibility  for 
Onesimus  ...  ...  ... 

A  Flea  for  Personal  Consideration   ... 

The  Apostle's  Concluding  Appeal    ... 

Salutations  and  Prayer       ...  ... 


11 

12 
12 
12 
12 

13 

14 

19 
16 


1« 
17 
17 
W 


illSISHllll 

IfflW 

is 


