COHNELL    UNIVERSITY    LIBRARY 

iiiiii«niii 


IllllllllllllJIiJIIillll'lillllllll!! 

3    1924    101 


04   853 


Hfiiiiiii 


CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104853 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 

AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VEN.  ARCHDEACON   F.   W.    FAHRAE,   D.D.,   F.E.S.— EIGHT  HEV.  H.    COTTEEILL,   D.D, 
F.E.S.E.— VEET  EEV.  PEINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.— EEV.  CANON  G. 
RAWLINSON,  M.A.— KEY.  A.  PLTJMMEE,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED    BY  THE       , 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 
AND    BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

N  AHUM. 

By -REV.  W.   J.   DEANE,  M.A., 

RECTOR  OF   ASHEN  ; 

f  omilftics : 
By   rev.    T.   WHITELAW,  D.D. 

f  omilies  bij  l)arious  !^utl)ors : 

REV.  S.  D.  HILLMAN,  B.A.  REV.    D.   THOMAS,    D.D. 


TrUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE  BOOK  OF  ISTAHUM. 


INTRODUCTION. 


§  I.   Subject  of  the  Book. 

Thb  prophecy  of  Natum,  as  the  title  asserts,  is  concerned  with  one  snb]"ect 
a.Ione.  It  is  "the  burden  of  Nineveh ;  "  it  annotinces  the  fate  of  that  evil 
city.  In  the  Greek  Bible  it  is  placed  immediately  after  Jonah,  as  being 
the  complement  of  that  book.  Jonah  had  preached  repentance  to  Nineveh, 
and  the  people  had  hearkened  to  his  voice,  but  had  soon  relapsed  into  their 
old  sins ;  and  now  Nahum  pronounces  their  sentence.  Their  pride,  oppres- 
sion, idolatry,  and  especially  their  defiance  of  God's  sovereignty,  are 
severely  rebuked,  and  the  certain  and  complete  destruction  of  the  nation  is 
plainly  announced. 

The  prophecy  is  composed  of  three  strophes,  answering  almost  exactly  to 
the  three  chapters  into  which  it  is  divided.  It  begins  (ch.  i.)  with  stating 
God's  purpose  to  inflict  punishment  on  Nineveh.  The  Lord  is  just  and 
severe,  long-suffering,  indeed,  as  the  continued  existence  of  Assyria  proves, 
yet  the  certain  Avenger  of  wrong- doing.  Who  has  ever  withstood  his 
power  P  Earth  and  sea,  and  all  the  inhabitants  thereof,  bear  witness  to 
his  irresistible  might.  And  Nineveh  must  perish,  in  spite  of  its  riches  and 
its  armies,  because  it  has  exalted  itself  against  God  and  his  people.  Thus 
the  Lord's  justice  shall  be  revealed  and  established,  when  be  brings  ruin 
on  his  enemies  and  happiness  to  his  children.  Then  (ch.  ii.)  the  prophet 
announces  more  in  detail  the  destruction  of  Nineveh.  She  shall  be 
besieged,  she  shall  struggle  in  vain,  she  shall  be  taken  and  plundered 
and  utterly  wasted.  Comparing  her  future  ruin  with  her  past  splendour, 
the  prophet  is  lost  in  admiration  of  the  equity  and  wisdom  of  God,  who 
doeth  all  these  things.  What  is  the  cause  of  this  calamity  he  then  pro- 
ceeds to  state  (ch,  iii.).  Assyria  had  become  notorious  for  cruelty,  treachery, 
rapine,  idolatry.  It  had  seduced  other  nations  to  follow  its  steps.  And 
now  its  might  should  save  it  no  more  than  its  strength'had  saved  Thebes, 
BO   lately   captured.      Its   towers  and  fortresses  should  fall,    its   soldiers 

HAHUIf.  I 


INTRODUCTION   TO 


sbonld  lose  heart,  its  palaces  be  consumed  with  fire,  its  inhabitants  be 
put  to  the  sword,  and  the  Assyrian  empire,  lately  so  formidable  and 
strong,  should  become  a  byword  of  derision  among  all  people. 

This  prophecy,  so  precise  and  assured,  was  the  result  of  no  hnman  pre- 
vision ;  it  was  the  outcome  of  no  glance  of  a  far-seeing  statesman's  eye. 
It  was  something  more  definite  than  a  general  confidence  in  God's  moral 
government,  and  the  ultimate  triumph  of  righteousness.  When  Nahum 
prophesied  Assyria  was  at  the  height  of  its  prosperity.  No  enemy  in  its 
neighbourhood  was  left  unsubdued ;  the  distant  Egypt  had  submitted  to 
its  arms ;  Phtenicia  and  Cyprus  owned  its  sway ;  Judsea  paid  annual 
tribute ;  commercial  enterprise  had  drawn  unto  it  the  riches  of  all  nations. 
No  one  at  this  epoch  could  have  foreseen  the  speedy  end  of  this  prosperity. 
Nahum  needed  a  single-hearted  courage  and  a  full  persuasion  of  the 
truth  of  his  mission  to  denounce  the  crimes  of  this  flourishing  kingdom, 
and  to  proclaim  its  coming  downfall.  In  fifty  years  the  end  came.  A 
combination  of  enemies  overthrew  this  mighty  empire.  On  the  death  of 
Assnrbanipal  matters  began  to  assume  a  dangerous  attitude.  Egypt  rose 
against  its  former  conqueror ;  Babylon  revolted ;  the  Medes,  now  become  a 
powerful  monarchy,  prepared  to  attack  Nineveh.  The  reigning  monarch 
(whose  name  is  uncertain),  the  successor  of  Assurbanipal,  himself  marched 
against  the  latter,  sending  Nabopolassar  to  recover  Babylon.  The  Medes 
were  defeated,  and  for  a  time  driven  back.  Nabopolassar  also  was  success- 
ful, and  received  as  a  reward  for  his  services  the  title  of  King  of  Babylon. 
Here  he  managed  affairs  so  skilfully,  and  strengthened  himself  so  effectually, 
that,  after  fifteen  years,  he  found  himself  able  to  throw  off  the  Assyrian 
yoke,  and  to  establish  his  own  independence.  The  Medes,  meantime,  under 
Cyaxares,  had  recovej'ed  from  their  late  defeat,  and  were  only  deterred 
from  attacking  Nineveh  by  an  inroad  of  the  Scythians  into  their  own 
country.  In  order  to  strengthen  his  position,  Nabopolassar  made  alliance 
with  all  the  enemies  of  Assyria,  and  became  the  ruling  spirit  of  a  stronc 
confederacy,  which  comprised  Medes  and  Persians,  Egyptians,  Armenians 
and  other  nations,  all  animated  with  the  fierce  desire  of  revenging  them- 
selves on  Assyria.  Josiah  of  Judab,  as  a  tributary  prince,  was  drawn  into 
the  contest,  and  fell  at  Megiddo,  while  endeavouring  to  arrest  the  advance 
of  the  Egyptian  army.  About  B.C.  612  the  allied  forces  attacked  Nineveh 
bat  were  repulsed  with  loss.  Victory  for  some  time  hovered  over  the 
Assyrians  ;  but  the  enemy,  reinforced  from  Bactria,  proved  irresistible. 
The  Ninevites,  fearing  for  their  final  safety,  attempted  to  escape  from  the 
city.  They  were,  however,  overtaken,  and  again  shut  up  within  their 
walls.  Here  they  valiantly  defended  themselves  for  more  than  two  years 
•when  a  circumstance,  against  which  no  remedy  availed,  laid  them  at  the 
mercy  of  the  besiegers.  An  unusually  heavy  and  long-continued  flood 
of  the  river  Tigris  carried  away  a  large  section  of  the  huge  rampart  that 
surrounded  the  city.  Through  the  gap  thus  formed  the  enemy  forced  their 
way  within  the  walls  and  captured  the  place.     The  king,  rather  than  faU 


THE  BOOK  OP  NAHDM.  iU 


into  the  hands  of  his  implacable  foes,  gathered  his  wives  and  his  treasnr* 
into  the  -palace,  and  burned  himself  with  them  there ;  the  town  was  sacked, 
and  a  great  number  of  the  inhabitants  were  massacred.  Thus  fell  Nineveh, 
B.C.  608,  according  to  the  prophecy  of  Nahnm,  so  that,  a  few  years  afterwards, 
Ezekiel  could  say  (xxxii.  22,  23),  "  Assyria  is  there  and  all  her  company : 
his  graves  are  about  him  :  all  of  them  slain,  fallen  by  the  sword :  whose 
graves  are  set  in  the  sides  of  the  pit,  and  her  company  is  round  aly>ut  her 
grave:  all  of  them  slain,  fallen  by  the  sword,  which  caused  terroT-  in  the 
land  of  the  living." 

§  II.     A0THOB. 

Of  the  Prophet  Nahum  nothing  definite  is  known  but  what  he  himself 
says.  His  name,  which  means  "  Comforter,"  does  not  occur  elsewhere  ia 
the  Bible,  but  is  found,  according  to  Gesenius  ('  Mon.  Phoen.,'  pp.  134,  137), 
in  Phoenician  inscriptions,  and  under  the  form  Naou/«)9  in  one  of  Bceckh's 
Greek  inscriptions  ('  Corp.  Inscript.,'  iv.  3).  He  calls  himself  "  the  El- 
koshite  "  (o  "EXKEo-aios).  This  is  not  a  patronymic,  but  signifies  "  a  native 
of  Blkosh,"  or  Elcesi,  which,  as  Jerome  says  ('  Prol.  in  Nah.'),  was  a  small 
village  in  Galilee,  well  known  to  the  Jews,  but  in  his  time  showing  very 
few  traces  of  ancient  buildings.  It  is  supposed  to  be  represented  by  the 
modern  El-Kauzeh,  a  village  a  little  eastward  of  Ramah  in  Naphtali.  That 
Nahum  was  a  native  of  Galilee  is  perhaps  intimated  by  the  name  Capei'- 
naum,  which  is  interpreted,  "  village  of  Nahum,"  and  by  the  fact  that  ha 
shows  special  interest  in  the  northern  portion  of  the  Holy  Land,  in  bia 
mention  of  Carmel,  Lebanon,  and  Bashan,  as  languishing  under  the 
rebuke  of  God.  It  is  probable  that,  when  Esarhaddon  repeopled  the 
northern  province  with  a  mixed  population  imported  from  his  own 
dominions,  Nahum  with  many  of  his  countrymen  removed  to  Jndsaa.  Thia 
may  have  given  direction  to  his  oracle.*  There  is,  however,  nothing  pro- 
vincial in  his  language  to  serve  as  an  indication  of  his  locality,  but  we 
should  judge  that  he  must  have  removed  from  Galilee  to  Judaea,  and  uttered 
his  prophecy  in  the  latter  province.  A  late  tradition,  mentioned  by 
Asseman  ('  Bibl.  Orient.,''  i.  525 ;  iii.  352),  and  adopted  by  some  modern 
writers,  maintains  that  Nahum  was  born  in  Assyria  of  parents  who  had 
been  carried  thither  after  the  capture  of  Samaria,  and  that  his  sepulchre 
was  to  be  found  at  Alkush,  ten  miles  north  of  Mosul,  on  the  left  bank 
of  the  Tigris,  in  which  spot  also,  as  the  story  goes,  were  buried  Jonah, 
Obadiah,  and  Jephthah.  "  It  is  a  place,"  says  Layard  ('  Nineveh,'  i.  233), 
"  held  in  great  reverence  by  Mohammedans  and  Christians,  but  especially 
by  Jews,  who  keep  the  building  in  repair,  and  flock  here  in  great  numbers 
at  certain  seasons  of  the  year.  The  tomb  is  a  simple  plaster  box,  covered 
with  green  cloth,  and  standing  at  the  upper  end  of  a  large  chamber.  The 
house  containing  the  tomb  is  a  modern  building.  There  are  no  inscriptions, 
nor  fragments  of  any  antiquity  about  the  place."  The  story  arose  some 
two  thousand  years  after  the  prophet's  time,  and  was  probably  invented  to 


nrrRODucnoN  to 


account  for  his  knowledge  of  Assyrian  affairs,  wliioli  was  snppoBed  to  denote 
a  resident  and  eye-witness,  or  else  was  founded  simply  on  the  similarity 
between  the  name  of  the  village  and  that  of  his  birthplace.  Elkosh  and 
Alkush  were  near  enough  in  sound  to  suggest  identity,  and  na-ediaaval 
tradition,  credulous  and  uncritical,  fastened  npon  the  Assyrian  village  as 
the  scene  of  Nabum's  birth  and  labours,  and  it  became  a  shrine  for 
pilgrims'  honour,  with  no  more  reason  than  in  the  case  of  Jonah  and 
Obadiah.  And  as  to  Ewald's  opinion  that  Nahum  was  bom  of  parents 
living  in  captivity  there,  we  have  only  to  say  that  the  Israelites  were  not 
deported  to  Assyria  under  Tiglath-Pileser,  but  into  Media,  Babylon,  and 
Mesopotamia.  That  no  one  living  in  Canaan  at  that  time  could  have 
exhibited  Nahnm's  acquaintance  with  Nineveh  and  its  people,  is  an 
assertion  utterly  groundless.  The  knowledge  displayed  is  not  necessarily 
that  of  an  eye-witness,  and  was  doubtless  also  possessed  by  many  Jews  who 
had  mixed  with  Gentiles,  or  had  become  acquainted  with  the  foreign 
Boldiers  who  had  too  often  forced  their  way  into  the  Holy  Land.  And  if 
it  be  said  that  the  prophecy  is  concerned  wholly  with  Assyria,  and  contains 
little  or  no  mention  of  Judaa,  which  could  scarcely  have  been  the  case  if 
the  writer  had  been  resident  in  the  latter  country,  it  must  be  answered  that 
the  whole  tenor  of  the  utterance  is  to  demonstrate  the  destruction  of  the 
power  hostile  to  Judah,  the  type  of  the  most  brutal  form  of  heathendom, 
and  to  comfort  the  Hebrews  with  the  assurance  of  final  victory.  But,  say 
the  critics,  Nahum  employs  Assyrian  words,  which  a  Judaan  could  never 
have  used.  It  is  true  that  three  such  expressions  have  been  found  in 
ch.  ii.  7  and  iii.  17,  but  they  prove  nothing  in  favour  of  the  assumption. 
The  first,  huzxah,  as  it  is  given  in  our  version,  may  be  considered  a  Hebrew 
word  taken  as  a  verb,  and  rendered,  "  it  is  decreed,"  or  "  it  is  decided," 
but  is  more  probably  an  appellative,  as  shown  in  the  Exposition ;  the 
second  is  probably  also  a  Hebrew  word,  derived  from  nazar,  "  to  geparate," 
and  meaning  "  the  crowned,"  or  "  the  levied  for  war ;  "  the  third,  taphsar, 
occurs  in  Jer.  IL  27,  and  is  an  Assyrian  official' iitle,  which  might  well  be 
known  in  Judaea,  and  is  here  used  most  appropriately.  There  is  nothing, 
therefore,  to  negative  the  general  opinion  that  N&hnm  was  a  native  of 
Palestine,  and  exercised  his  prophetical  office  in  that  oountrj. 

§  ni.  DiTK. 

The  time  when  Nahum  prophesied  has  mlways,  till  quite  lately,  been 
considered  most  uncertain,  and  critics  have  Tarionsly  assigned  it  to  dates 
differing  as  widely  as  those  of  Jehu  and  Zechariah.  Ewald  regards  him  as 
a  prophet  of  the  Captivity,  arguing  that  the  prominence  given  to  Assyria, 
and  the  merely  cursory  mention  of  Judah,  could  have  proceeded  only  from 
»  seer  who  was  himself  an  exile  from  the  promised  land,  and  probably 
resident  in  the  country  which  he  denounces.  It  is  obvious  to  remark  that, 
commissioned  as  he  was  to  prophesy  against  Nineveh,  he  must  necessarily 
make  this  the  chief  subject  of  his  ntterancea :  and.  in  reality,  comfort  and 


THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM. 


encoaragement  to  Jadah  from  the  central  part  of  hie  prophecy,  to  which  all 
the  denunciations  of  the  enemy  converge.  A  majority  of  critics  have  con- 
sidered him  to  have  prophesied  during  the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  and  to  have 
been  a  contemporary  of  Micah  and  Isaiah.  The  place  assigned  to  his  work 
in  the  Hebrew  canon  afEords  support  to  this  opinion,  which  is  supposed  to 
be  further  confirmed  by  the  language  of  ch.  i.  11,  12,  which,  it  is  said, 
alludes  to  the  invasion  of  Judsea  by  the  Assyrians  ;  and  that  of  ch.  ii.  13, 
which,  it  is  affirmed,  hints  at  the  mission  of  Rabshakeh  (Isa.  xxxvi.).  It 
must  be  allowed  that  the  allusions  are  most  obscure  if  regarded  as  con- 
cerned with  those  facts  (see  the  Exposition,  in  Zoc).  One  thing  is  certain, 
viz.  that  Nahnm  prophesied  after  the  deportation  of  the  ten  tribes.  The 
words  of  ch.  ii.  2  ("  The  Lord  hath  turned  away  the  excellency  of  Jacob,  as 
the  excellency  of  Israel,"  etc.)  can  refer  to  nothing  else  than  that  event. 
Another  point  is  that  there  are  many  passages  in  Ifahnm  and  Isaiah  which 
are  so  similar  that  one  prophet  must  have  copied  from  the  other;  but 
which  was  the  original,  which  the  borrower,  cannot  be  settled  by  a  mere 
comparison  of  the  writings.  But  all  surmises  as  to  the  prophet's  date  have 
been  set  at  rest  of  late  years  by  certain  discoveries  in  the  Assyrian  inscrip- 
tions (see  Schrader,  p.  450,  etc.).  Inch.  iii.  8  our  prophet  speaks  of  the 
capture  and  destruction  of  E"o-Amon,  and  the  deportation  of  its  inhabitants, 
as  a  recent  and  well-remembered  event.  No  is  Thebes,  in  Upper  Egypt, 
called  by  the  Greeks  Diospolis,  the  capital  of  that  part  of  the  kingdom ; 
and  we  now  learn  from  the  cuneiform  records  that  Assurbanipal,  the  son 
and  successor  of  Esarhaddon,  took  that  city  in  his  second  expedition  against 
TJrdamani,  or  Rud-Amon,  the  successor  of  Tirhakah,  and  carried  the  inha- 
bitants away.  This  invasion  took  place  soon  after  the  death  of  Tirhakah, 
which  occurred  b.c.  664.  So  we  may  reckon  the  date  of  Nahum's  prophecy 
to  have  been  within  ten  years  of  the  fall  of  Thebes,  during  the  reign  of 
Manasseh,  whose  name  was  suppressed  in  the  title  of  the  book,  owing  to 
that  king's  evil  reputation. 

As  an  instance  of  destructive  criticism,  we  may  note  that  Hitzig  and 
others,  knowing  no  corroborative  evidence  concerning  the  capture  of  No, 
at  once  concluded  that  the  passage  in  Nahum  which  asserted  this  fact  was 
an  interpolation  deserving  of  no  credit.  The  inscriptions  have  happily  proved 
the  veracity  of  the  prophet,  and  the  rashness  of  his  critics. 

§  TV.  Gkneeal  Charactbb. 

Among  the  minor  prophets  Nahum  holds  the  highest  place.  His 
prophecy  is  a  poem,  stately,  orderly,  and  impressive,  all  the  parts  of  which 
are  well  arranged  and  mutually  conducive  to  the  unity  of  the  whole.  It  is 
eminently  tuneful  and  rhythmical,  the  words  "  re-echoing  to  the  sense," 
and  hurrying  the  hearer  awajr  with  the  speaker  in  complete  sympathy. 
The  style  is  full  of  force,  the  colouring  brilliant,  the  picturing  lifelike. 
The  majestic  opening,  in  which  are  described  the  attributes  of  God,  his 
meroT  and  justice,  is  equalled  by  the  vivid  representation  of  the  sack  and 


INTEODUCTION  TO  TUE  BOOK  OP  NAHUM. 


ruin  of  Nineveh,  which  he  paints  as  if  passing  before  his  own  ejes.  The 
language  is  pare  and  classical,  with  a  certain  originality  in  words  and 
forms  which  separates  it  from  other  writings.  It  is  true  that  here  and 
there  may  be  found  remembrances  of  Joel  and  Isaiah ;  but  these  expres- 
sions may  be  derived  from  sources  common  to  all  the  prophets,  and  from 
which,  unconsciously  as  it  may  be,  they  drew  some  materials.  And  this 
incidental  indebtedness  does  not  diminish  the  character  of  originality  in 
treatment  and  execution  which  is  claimed  for  Nahum's  work.  The  variety 
of  illustration,  the  force  of  imagery,  the  elegance  of  diction,  the  clearness 
of  stjle,  in  spite  of  rapidity  of  transition,  give  a  unique  character  to  this 
poem,  and  difEerentiate  it  from  all  others  in  the  collection.  There  are  no 
Messianic  references ;  nor  is  there  room  for  any  lengthened  array  of  moral 
aud  religious  ideas ;  but  these  are  entwined  in  forcible,  if  concise,  terms> 
God's  existence,  justice,  and  providence  are  everywhere  asserted,  witnessed 
to  by  the  past,  expected  in  the  future ;  and  from  the  coming  jadgment  is 
drawn  a  lesson  of  comfort  for  the  chosen  people. 

§  V.    LiTEBATUBB. 

The  special  commentaries  on  Nahum  are  chiefly  these:  Bibliander  (Zurich,  1534); 
Peritus  (Coimbre,  1582,  etc.);  Gesner,  '  Explicatio'  (Wittemberg,  1565);  Augustin  da 
Quiros  (Seville,  1622);  Crocius  (Br6me,  1620);  Ursin,  '  Hypomnemata '  (Franofort, 
1652) ;  Hiifeareffer  (S^utga^d,  1663) ;  Tarnovius  (Rost.,  1623) ;  Van  Hoke,  •  Explicatio* 
(1709);  Kalinsky,  'Observationes'  (Breslau,  1748);  Agrek  (Upsal,  1788);  Greve(1798); 
Grimm,  'BrklaiuDg '  (Diisseldorf,  1790);  Svanborg  (1806);  Budin  (Upsal,  1806);  FriUin, 
'  Curse  '  (Rostoch,  1806) ;  Justi  (Leipzig,  1820);  Holemann  '  Illustratio '  (Leipzig,  1842) ; 
0.  Strauss,  '  Nahumi  de  Nino  Vaticinium '  (Berlin,  1853) ;  also  G.  Strauss,  '  Nineveh 
iind  das  Wort  Gottes'  (Berlin,  1855);  Vance  Smith,  'The  Prophecies  relating  to 
Nineveh  and  the  Assyrians  '  (London,  1857) ;  Breiteneicher, '  Nineveh  und  Nahum ' 
(Munich,  1861) ;  Reinke,  '  Aelt  Version'  (Munster,  1867);  B.  B.  Edwards,  'Translation 
of  Nah.,'  in  Biblioth.  Sacra,  v.  651. 

§  VL  Abbanqement  ih  Sections. 

Part  I.  (Ch.  i.  1 — 15.)    The  judgment  upon  Nineveh  decreed  by  God. 
§  1.  (Ch.  i.  1.)    The  heading  of  the  book. 
§  2.  (Ch.  i.  2 — 6.)    The  Divine  justice  is  described,  and  the  irresistible  power  of 

God  illustrated  by  his  control  of  the  material  world. 
I  3.  (Ch.  i.  7 — 11.)    But  the  wrath  of  God  falls  not  on  those  who  trust  in  him  ; 

it  is  reserved  for  his  enemies  generally. 
f  4.  (Ch.  i.  12 — 15.)    And  especially  for  Nineveh,  which  shall  be  utterly  destroyed, 

while  Zion  shall  rejoice  at  the  joyful  news  of  its  ruin,  and  keep  her  feasts  in 

safety. 
Part  II.  (Ch.  ii.  1 — 13.)    The  execution  of  the  decree ;  the  destruction  of  Nineveh. 
§  1.  (Ch.  ii.  1—8.)    Nineveh  shall  be  besieged,  because  God  is  about  to  exalt  his 

people  by  taking  vengeance  on  the  enemy,  whuse  delenoe  is  of  no  avail. 
§  2.  (Ch.  ii.  9 — 13.)    The  city  is  plundered,  and  lies  waste  in  terrible  contrast  with 

its  former  excellency. 
Part  III.  (Ch.  iii.  1—19.)    The  cause  of  the  judgment — the  sins  of  the  city,  wliioh 

bring  Inevitable  punishment. 
§  1.  (Ch.  iii.  1—7.)    The  crimes  that  have  brought  this  fate  upon  Nineveh. 
§  2.  ^Ch.  iii.  8 — 13.)    The  ruin  can  be  no  moic  averted  than  was  that  of  No-Amon. 
§  3.  (Ch.  iii.  14 — 19.)     In  spite  of  all  its  efforts  and  all  its  resources,  it  will  meet 

with  a  terrible  end. 


THE    BOOK    OF    NAHUM. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  L 

Vers.    1 — 15.— Part    I.  Thb   Judgment 
DPON  Nineveh  deckbed  bt  God. 

Ver.  1. — §  1.  The  heading  of  the  book. 
The  book  has  a  double  title,  the  first  giving 
the  object  of  the  prophecy,  which  other- 
wise would  not  be  evident ;  the  second,  its 
author,  added  to  give  confidence  in  Its 
contents.  The  burden;  massa  (Hab. i.  1)— a 
term  generally  used  of  a  weighty,  threaten- 
ing prophecy  (Isa.  xiii.  1),  though  translated 
by  the  LXX.  A^jn/aa  here,  and  elsewhere  Upa- 
<n  J  and  ^rjiia.  Some  prefer  to  render  it  "  utter- 
ance," or  "  oracle."  The  word  is  capable  of 
either  meaning.  It  almost  always  (except, 
perhaps,  in  Zech.  xii.  1)  introduces  a  threat 
of  judgment.  Of  Nineveh.  The  denuncia- 
tion of  this  city  is  the  object  of  the  pro- 
phecy. The  effect  of  Jonah's  preaching 
had  been  only  temporary;  the  reformation 
was  partial  and  superficial ;  and  now  God's 
long-suffering  was  wearied  out,  and  the 
time  of  punishment  was  to  come.  (For  an 
account  of  Nineveh,  see  note  on  Jonah  i. 
2.)  Some  critics  have  deemed  one  part  of 
the  title  an  inturpolation;  but  the  connec- 
tion of  the  two  portions  is  obvious,  and 
without  the  former  we  should  not  know  the 
object  of  the  prophet's  denunciation  till 
oh.  ii.  8.  The  hook  of  the  vision.  This  ia 
the  second  title,  in  apposition  with  the 
former,  and  defining  it  more  closely  «s  the 
book  in  which  was  written  the  prophecy 
of  Nahum.  It  is  called  a  "  vision,"  because 
what  the  prophet  foretold  was  presented  to 
his  mental  sight,  and  stood  plainly  before 
him  (comp.  Isa.  i.  1).  The  Elkoshite;  i.e. 
native  of  Ellrosh,  for  which,  see  Introduc- 
tion, §  II. 

Vers.  2— 6.— §  2.   The   prophet  describe! 
Ote  inflexible  justice  of  Ood,  and  illustrates 
NAHUU. 


hit  irresistible  power  by  the  control  which  \» 
exercises  over  the  material  world. 

Ver.  2. — God  is  jealoas,  and  the  Lord 
revengoth  ;  better,  Jehovah  is  a  jealous  and 
avenging  God,  as  Exod.  xx.  5 ;  Cent.  iv.  24 ; 
Josh.  xxiv.  19.  The  threefold  repetition  of 
the  name  of  Jehovah  and  the  attribute 
"  avenging  "  gives  a  wonderful  force  to  thii 
sublime  desciiption  of  the  Divine  character. 
God  is  here  called  ^VaZoKS  (fr;A.w'T)|s,  Septua- 
gint)  anthropopathioally,  as  ready  to  defend 
his  honour  against  all  who  oppose  him,  as 
One  who  loves  his  people  and  pimishes  their 
oppressors.  Is  furious ;  literally,  master  of 
fury,  as  Gen.  xxxvii.  19,  "  master  of 
dreams."  The  Lord  is  full  of  wrath  (comp. 
Prov.  xxii.  24 ;  xxix.  22).  The  word  uaed 
Implies  a  permanent  feeling,  like  the  Greek 
liTivis.  He  reserveth  wrath.  The  Hebrew 
is  simply  "  watching,"  "  observing  "  for 
punishment.  Septuagint,  e^atpav  atirbs 
Totis  ix^pois  avTov,  "  himself  cutting  off  his 
enemies ; "  Vulgate,  irascens  ipse  inimicis 
ejus.  God  withholds  hig  hand  for  a  time, 
but  does  not  forget.  All  this  description 
of  God's  attributes  is  intended  to  show  that 
the  destruction  of  Assyria  is  his  doing,  and 
that  its  accomplishment  is  certain. 

Ver.  3. — Slow  to  anger  (Exod.  ixxiv.  6, 
7).  Nahum  seems  to  take  up  tlie  words  of 
Jonah  (iv.  2)  or  Joel  (ii.  13).  God  is  long- 
sufftiring,  not  from  weakness,  but  because  he 
is  great  in  power,  and  can  punish  when  ha 
will.  Will  not  at  all  acquit  the  wicked; 
literally,  holding  pure  will,  not  hold  pure; 
i.e.  he  will  not  treat  the  guilty  as  innocent. 
'KBwSiv  [Alex.,  aBaJoy]  oiiK  iSaiiiTfi  (Septua- 
gint) ;  Mundans  non  faciei  innoc.entem  (comp, 
Exod.  XX.  7  ;  xxxiv.  7).  The  Lord  liath  his 
way,  etc.  The  prophet  grounds  his  descrip- 
tion of  the  majesty  and  might  of  God  upon 
the  revelation  at  thcExodna  and  at  Sin»v  (see 
Exod.  xix.  Ill — 18;  I's.  xviii. ;  xevii.).  Th« 
clouds  are  the  dust  of  his  feet.     Large  and 


THE  BOOK  OF    NAHUM. 


[oh.  l  1 — 16. 


granrl  aa  the  clouds  look  to  us,  they  are  to  God 
but  as  the  dust  raised  by  tho  feet  in  walking. 
As  an  illii  tration  of  this  statement  (though, 
of  course,  the  fact  was  utterly  unknown  to 
Nahum),  it  has  been  remarked  that  recent 
Bcientilio  discoYery  asserts  that  clouds  owe 
their  beauty,  and  even  their  very  existence, 
to  the  presence  of  dust-particles  in  the  atmo- 
sphure..  The  aqueous  yapour,  it  is  said, 
condenses  on  these  paiticles,  and  thus 
becomes  \isible. 

Yer.  4. — The  great  physical  changes  and 
convulsions  in  the  world  are  tokens  of  God's 
wrath  on  sinful  nations.  He  rebuketh  the 
sea,  as  at  the  passage  of  the  Bed  Sea  (Exod. 
xiv.  21 ;  Ps.  ovi.  9).  This  is  a  sign  of 
omnipotence  (comp.  Luke  viii.  24).  All  the 
rivers.  A  generalization  from  the  miracle 
at  the  Jordan  (Josh.  iii. ;  comp.  Ps.  ovii.  33 ; 
Isa.  1.  2).  Septuagint,  itorap-ohs  i^eptjfi&v, 
"  making  rivers  desolate ;  "  ■Vulgate,^M)«j»a 
ad  desertum  dediuiens.  Bashau  (see  note  on 
Amos  iv.  1).  Carmel  (see  on  Amos  i.  2). 
riower  of  Lebanon.  This  district  was 
famous,  not  only  for  its  cedars,  but  also  for 
its  vines  and  flowers  (comp.  Hos.  xiv.  7; 
Cant.  iv.  11).  These  three  regions  are  men- 
tioned as  remarkable  for  their  fertility,  and 
they  occur  most  naturally  to  the  mind  of  a 
native  of  Galilee,  as  was  Nahum.  They 
also  geographically  are  the  eastern,  western, 
and  northern  boundaries  of  the  land.  They 
are  used  here  proverbially  to  express  the 
truth  that  God  can  cause  the  most  luxuriant 
regions  to  wither  at  his  word. 

Ver.  5.  —  The  mountains  quake.  The 
mountains,  the  very  emblems  of  stability, 
tremble  before  him  (Amos  viii.  8).  The 
hills  melt;  Oi  $ovm\  iaaXeieiiaav,  "The hills 
were  shaken  "  (Septuagint).  The  hills  dis- 
solve like  wax  or  snow  at  his  presence  (see 
Amos  iv.  13;  Micali  i.  4).  Burned;  Sep- 
tuaj^int,  di/Eo-TtiAT),  "recoils,"  '-is  upheaved," 
as  by  an  earthquake.  This  rendering  has 
the  greatest  authority.  The  world;  i.e.  tlie 
habitable  world,  and  all  living  creatures 
therein  (Joel  i.  18 — 20).  Nature  animate 
and  inanimate  is  represented  as  actuated  by 
the  terjor  of  conscious  guilt. 

Ver.  6. — Who  can  stand?  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  7; 
Joel  ii.  11;  Mai.  iii.  2;  comp.  Rev.  vi.  17). 
His  fury  is  poured  out  Uie  fire  (Deut.  iv.  24) ; 
like  the  brimstone  and  fire  that  destroyed 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (Gen.  xix.  24),  or 
like  the  molten  lava  that  issues  from  a 
volcano  (Jor.  vii.  20).  Septuagint  (reading 
dififeiently),  i  Bufiiss  ahrov  r^/cei  itpxAs  :  am- 
tumit  prindpatus  (Jerome).  Are  thrown 
down;  rather,  are  rent  asunder  (oomp.  1 
Kings  xix.  11 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  29).  If  such  is  the 
power  of  God,  how  shall  Assyria  resist  it  ? 

Ver».  7 — II. — §  3,  The  prophd  prepares 
Ike  way  for  proclaiming  the  punithmeiU  of 


Nineveh  by  dedaring  that  the  wrath  of  Ood 
falls  not  on  those  who  trust  in  him,  but  it 
reserved  for  his  enemies. 

Ver.  7. — The  lord  is  good.  The  Targnm 
adds  unnecessarily,  "  for  Israel "  (Ps.  xxv.  8). 
He  is  "  good,"  in  that  he  is  a  strong  hold  in 
the  day  of  trouble,  as  in  the  perilous  time 
when  the  Assyrians  attacked  Judaea  (comp. 
Ps.  xxvii.  1 ;  Jer.  xvi.  19).  He  knoweth ;  loves 
and  cares  for  (Ps.  i.  6;  xxxvii.  18;  comp. 
2  Tim.  li.  19 ;  and  see  note  on  Amos  iii.  2). 

Ver.  8. — With  an  overrunning  flood.  This 
may  be  merely  a  metaphor  to  express  the 
utter  devastation  which  should  overwhelm 
Nineveh,  as  the  invasion  of  a  hostile  army 
is  often  thus  depicted  (comp.  Isa.  viii.  7; 
Dan.  xi  26, 40) ;  or  it  may  be  an  allusion  to 
the  inundation  which  aided  the  capture  of 
the  city  (sue  note  on  cb.  ii.  6).  Of  the  plaoe 
thereof;  i.e.  of  Nineveh,  not  named,  but 
present  to  the  propliet'a  mind,  and  under- 
stood from  the  heading  (ver.  1).  (For  the 
utter  destruction  of  Nineveh,  comp.  Zeph. 
ii.  13,  etc.)  The  LXX.  has,  roiis  eVeyei- 
po/ierom  ("  those  that  rise  up ").  The 
Chaldee  has  a  similar  reading,  with  the 
meaning  that  God  would  exterminate  those 
who  rise  up  against  him.  Darkness  shall 
pursue  his  enemies.  So  the  Septuagint  and 
Vulgate.  But  it  is  better  rendered,  He 
shall  pursue  his  enemies  into  darkness,  so 
tliat  they  disappear  from  tlie  earth.  If  fliia 
is  the  meaning  of  the  clause,  it  resemblea 
the  termination  of  many  Assyrian  inscrip- 
tions which  record  the  defeat  of  a  hostile 
chieftain  :  "  and  no  one  has  seen  any  trace 
of  him  since." 

Ver.  9. — The  prophet  suddenly  »ddre3ae8 
both  Jews  and  Assyrians,  encouraging  the 
former  by  the  thought  that  God  can  perform 
what  he  promises,  and  warning  the  latter 
that  their  boasting  (comp.  Isa.  x.  9,  etc ; 
xxxvi.  20)  was  vain.  What  do  ye  imagine 
against  the  Lord]  Quid  cogitatis  contra 
iJominumt  (Vulgate).  This  rendering  re- 
gards the  question  as  addressed  to  the 
Assyrians,  demanding  of  them  what  it  is 
that  they  dare  to  plot  against  God ;  do  they 
presume  to  tight  against  him,  or  to  fancy 
that  liis  threats  will  not  be  accomplished? 
But  the  sentence  is  best  translated,  What 
think  ye  of  the  Lordi  Tl  \oyi(iaee  M  rh* 
Kipiov ;  "  What  devise  ye  against  the  Lord?" 
(Septuagint).  This  is  addressed  not  only 
to  the  Jews  in  the  sense,  "  Do  ye  think  that 
he  will  not  accomplish  his  threat  against 
Nineveh  ?  "  but  to  the  Assyrians  also.  He 
will  make  an  utter  end.  This  denunciation 
is  repeated  from  ver.  8  to  denote  the  absolute 
certainty  of  the  doom.  Affliction  shall  not 
rise  up  the  second  time.  The  Assyrians 
shall  never  again  have  the  power  of  oppress- 
ing  Judah   as   they  have  ruined   Israel' 


CH.  I.  1—15.] 


THE  BOOK  OF   NAHUM. 


there  shall  be  no  repetition  of  Sennacherib's 
invasion.  Septuagint,  Om  fKSm'fitrei  Sis 
iiriToaurh  h  d\i<f/ei :  Non  vindicabit  hU  in 
idipsum  (Jerome).  From  tliis  text  the 
Fathers  take  occasion  to  discuss  the  question 
how  it  is  that  God  does  not  pnnish  twice 
for  the  same  sin. 

Ver.  10.-  -While  they.be  folden  together 
as  thorna.  The  clause  is  conditional: 
"  Though  they  be  Interwined  as  thorns." 
Though  the  Assyrians  present  an  impene- 
trable front,  wh  ioh  see  m  s  to  defy  attack.  (  For 
the  comparison  of  a  hostile  army  to  briers 
and  thorns,  see  Is.i.  x.  17 !  xxvii.  4 ;  Hea- 
derson.)  And  while  they  are  drunken  og 
drunkards ;  and  though  they  he  drunlcen  with 
their  drink,  regarding  themselves  as  in- 
vincible, and  drenched  with  wine,  and 
given  up  to  luxury  and  excess.  There 
may  be  an  allusion  to  tlie  legend  current 
concerning  the  destruction  of  Nineveh. 
DiodoruB  (ii.i  26)  relates  that,  after  the 
enemy  had  been  thrice  repulsed,  the  King 
of  Nineveh  was  so  elated  that  ho  gave  him- 
self up  to  festivity,  and  allowed  all  his 
army  to  indulge  in  the  utmost  licence,  and 
that  it  was  while  they  were  occupied  in 
drunkenness  and  feasting  they  were  sur- 
prised by  the  Medes  under  Cyaxares,  and 
their  city  taken.  An  account  of  such  a 
feast,  accompanied  with  sketches  from  the 
monuments,  ia  given  in  Bonomi,  '  Nineveh 
and  its  Discoveries,'  p.  187,  etc.  We  may 
compare  the  fate  of  Belslinzzar  (Dan.  v.  1, 
etc.).  They  shall  be  devoured  as  stubble 
fully  diy;  like  worthless  refuse,  fit  only  for 
burning  (Exod.  xv.  7 ;  Isa.  v.  24 ;  Joel  ii. 
5;  Obad.  18).  The  LXX.  renders  this 
verse  differently,  "  Because  to  its  founda- 
tion it  shall  be  dried  up  (xepo-wfl^ia-eToi :  redi- 
gentur  in  vepres,  Jerome),  and  as  bind-weed 
(flr^iXol)  intertwined  it  shall  be  devoured, 
and  as  stubble  fully  dry." 

Ver.  11. — The  reason  of  the  destruction 
and  of  the  punishment  is  told.  There  is  one 
oome  out  of  thee.  Nineveh  is  addressed; 
•nd  we  need  not  refer  the  words  entirely  to 
Sennaolierib  and  his  impious  threats,  but 
may  take  them  generally  as  expressing  tlie 
arrogant  impiety  of  the  Assyrians  and  their 
attitude  towards  Jehovah,  A  wicked  coun- 
sellor; literally,  a  counsellor  of  Belial;  i.e. 
of  worthlessuess.  The  expression,  perhaps 
primarily  applied  to  Sennacherib,  also 
regards  the  plans  prepared  by  the  Assyrians 
for  destroying  the  people  of  God,  a  type  of 
the  world  arrayed  against  piety. 

Vers.  12— 15.— §  4.  The  dettruetion  of 
Nineveh  is  emphatically  announced,  and  Zion 
<i  depicted  as-  rejoicing  at  the  news  of  its 
ruin,  and  celebrating  her  feasts  in  safety- 

Ver.  12. — Thus  saith  the  Lord.   An  expres- 


sion used  to  introduce  a  solemn  declaration. 
Though  they  (the  Assyrians)  be  quiet. 
Slialem  has  this  meaning  elsewhere,  ua 
Gen.  xxxiv.  21 ;  but  this  is  unsuitable  hero, 
where  it  must  be  translated,  "in  full 
strength,"  "unimpaired,"  "complete,"  like 
the  thorn-hedge  in  ver.  10.  Vulgate,  tii 
perfecti  fuerint.-  Though  they  be  unbroken 
in  strength,  and  likewise  (on  that  account) 
many  in  number.  Septuagint,  TdSs  xiyei 
Kvpios,  Karapxwj/  vddrav  TroWatv,  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord,  ruling  over  many  waters."  So 
the  Syriac  and  Arabic.  Jerome  interprets 
"the  waters"  to  mi  an  tlie  heavenly  powers 
(Ps.  cxlviii.  4).  Yet  thus  (though  such  ia 
their  state)  shall  they  be  out  down.  The 
verb  is  used  of  the  mowing  of  a  field  or  the 
shearing  of  sheepi  and  implies  complete 
destruction.  When  he  shall  pass  through; 
better,  and  he  shall  pass  away.  The  number 
is  changed,  but  the  same  persons  are  meant, 
spoken  of  as  one  to  show  their  insignificance 
and  complete  annihilation.  Septuagint, 
"  Thus  shall  they  be  dispt  rsed  [5iao-Ta\^- 
crovTai :  divldenfur,  Jerome],  and  the  repor* 
of  thee  shall  no  more  be  heard  therein." 
Tlie  following  clause  is  not  translated. 
Though  1  have  afflicted  thee.  The  Lord 
addresses  Judah,  referring  to  the  oppression 
of  Judaea  by  the  Assyrians  in  the  times  of 
Ahaz  and  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xvi.  18;  2 
Chron.  xxviii.  20,  etc. ;  xxxii.).  I  will 
afflict  thee  no  more;  according  to  the  promise 
in  ver.  9.  This  is  further  confirmed  in  what 
follows. 

Ver.  13. — His  yoke.  The  yoke  of  Assyria, 
probably  referring  to  the  vassalage  of  Judah 
(2  Kings  xviii.  14;  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11).. 
(For  the  metaphor  of  "yoke"  denoting 
subjugiition,  oomp.  Lev.  xxvi.  13 ;  Jer.  xxvii. 
2;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  27.)  Jeremiah  (xxx.  8) 
seems  to  use  these  words  of  Nahum  to 
announce  the  deliverance  of  Israel  from 
captivity.  Burst  thy  bonds  in  sunder;  by 
the  final  overthrow  of  the  Assyrian  power 
(Ps.  ii.  3;  Jer.  ii.  20). 

Ver.  14. — Concerning  thee.  The  prophet 
addresses  the  Assyrian,  and  announces  God's 
purpose  concerning  him.  That  no  more  of 
thy  name  be  sown.  There  is  no  special 
reference  to  Sennacherib  in  this  or  the  next 
clause,  but  the  prophet  means  that  the 
Assyrian  people  and  name  shall  become 
extinct.  Out  of  the  house  of  thy  gods 
(Isa.  xxxvii.  38,  where  the  murder  of  Sen- 
nacherib in  the  temple  of  Nisroch  is  men- 
tioned). An  account  of  the  religion  of  the 
Assyrians  will  be  found  in  Layard, '  Nineveh 
and  its  .Itemains,'  vol.  ii.  oh.  7.  Graven 
image ;  carved  out  of  wood  or  stone.  Molten ; 
cast  in  metal .  The  two  terms  comprise  every 
kind  of  idol,  as  in  Deut.  xxvii.  15;  Judg. 
xvii.  3.  The  Assyrians  used  to  destroy  the 
images  of  the  gods  worshipped  by  conquered 


THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM. 


[CH.  1. 1—15. 


nations  (2  Rings xix.  18).  Bonomi  ('Nineveh 
find  its  Palaces,'  p.  163)  gives  a  picture  of 
soldiers  cntting  up  the  image  of  some  foreign 
deity,  and  currying  away  the  pieces.  So 
should  it  now  be  done  unto  their  gods.  I 
will  make  thy  grave.  I  will  consign  thee, 
O  Assyrian,  and  thy  idols  to  oblivion  (Bzek. 
xxxii.  22,  etc.).  It  is  not,  "I  will  make  it, 
the  temple,  thy  grave,"  as.  those  who  see  a 
reference  to  the  death  of  Sennacherib  (2 
Kings  xix.  37)  render  it ;  but, ."  I  prepare 
thy  grave" — I  doom  thee  to  destruction. 
The  reason  is  given :  Tor  thou  art  vile ;  quia 
inlwnoratut  e>  (Vulgate);  SriTaxeir,  "for 
they  are  swift"  (Septuagint).  The  word  is 
also  translated  "light,"  weighed  in  the 
balances,  and  found  wanting,  as  Dan.  v.  27. 
Ver.  15. — The  second  chapter  commences 
here  in  the  Hebrew  and  Syriac ;  the  Angli- 
can follows  the  Septuagint,  Vulgate,  and 
Chaldee  Versions.  This  seems  most  agree- 
able to  the  method  of  the  prophecy,  wherein 
threat  is  succeeded  by  promise,  denuncia- 
tion of  the  enemy  by  declaration  of  com- 
fort to  Judah  (oomp.  oh.  i.  6,  7,  12,  and 


13  ;  so  here  vers.  14  and  15).  The  prnphel 
announces  the  joy  with  which  Judah  re- 
ceives the  news  of  the  overthrow  of  Nineveh. 
Behold  upon  the  monntaiss,  etc.  Isaiah 
(lii.  7)  uses  these  words  to  proclaim  the 
coming  of  Messiah  (comp.  Isa.  xl.  9 ;  Rom. 
X.  15).  The  messengers  come  from  the  East 
across  themountainsof  Palestine,  announcing 
the  fall  of  Nineveh  and  the  consequent 
peace  and  security  of  Judah — a  type  of  the 
overthrow  of  God's  enemies  and  the  safety 
of  his  Church.  There  may  be  an  allusion  to 
the  custom  of  spreading  tidings  by  beacon 
fires.  Keep  thy  solemn  feasts.  Judah  is 
exhorted  to  resume  the  observation  of  her 
Bolemnities,  which  were  interrupted  during 
the  enemy's  occupation  of  the  country,  or 
which  could  not  be  properly  attended  by  the 
distant  inhabitants.  Judah  must  offer  her 
praises  and  thanliBgivings  for  deliverance, 
and  perform  the  vows  which  she  made  unto 
the  Lord  in  the  time  of  peril.  The  wicked 
(Hebrew,  Belial)  shall  no  more  pass  through 
thee.  Belial  is  here  the  adversary,  the 
opposing  army  (see  ver.  11). 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver,  1. — A  vision  and  a  burden.  I.  The  vision  of  Nahum.  1.  ITie  person  of  the 
prophet.  (1)  His  name.  Nahum, "  Consolation  " — fitly  borne  by  one  whose  mission  was 
to  be  the  comforter  of  God's  people.  That  so  many  in  the  Hebrew  Church  and  nation 
possessed  names  prophetic  of  their  future  destinies  points  as  its  explanation  to  an  over- 
ruling providence,  which  in  this  way  kept  alive  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  a  strongly 
operative  belief  in  a  Divine  interposition  in  human  affairs.  That  names  are  not  now  in 
this  fashion  significant  does  not  prove  that  God  is  less  cognizant  of  or  interested  in  mundane 
matters,  but  merely  shows  that  such  devices  are  not  now  required  to  enable  thoughtful 
persons  to  detect  God's  finger  in  the  progress  of  history.  (2)  His  birthplace.  ElUosh ; 
not  to  be  sought  for  in  Assyria,  as  e.g.  in  the  modern  Christian  village  of  Elkosh,  east 
of  the  Tigris  and  north-west  of  Khorsabad,  two  days'  journey  from  Mosul,  where  the 
tomb  of  the  prophet  is  still  shown,  in  the  form  of  a  simple  alabaster  box  of  modern 
style  (Michaelis,  Eichhom,  BwaW,  etc.);  but  in  Galilee,  perhaps  in  the  present-day 
village  of  Helcessei  (Jerome,  Hitzig,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  etc.).  (3)  His  parentage.  Unknown. 
That  his  father's  name  was  Elkosh  (Strauss)  could  only  be  maintained  by  regarding 
"  the  Elko>hite  "  as  a  patronymic,  and  the  Elkoshites  as  a  distinct  family.  Ot  this, 
however.  Scripture  affords  no  trace.  (4)  His  time.  Uncertain.  According  to  Josephus 
('  Ant.,'  ix.  11.  3),  Nahum  prophesied  in  the  reign  of  Jotham.  But  the  prophecy  itself 
rather  points  to  a  later  date — not  to  the  earlier  years  of  Hezekiah,  before  the  destruc- 
tion of  Sennacherib's  army  (Jerome,  Fausset),  but  to  a  point  of  time  after  that  event, 
and  consequently  a'ter  the  conquest  of  Samaria  and  the  deportation  of  the  ten  tribes 
(Vitringa,  Hitzig,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Nagelsbach  in  Herzog),  more  partacularly  to  an  age 
after  the  destruction  of  No-Amon,  or  Thebes  (ch.  iii.  8),  which  took  place  soon  after 
Tirhakah's  death,  in  b.o.  664.  Hence  b.o.  660,  or  the  last  years  of  Manasseh,  may  be 
accepted  as  the  most  probable  date  for  Nahum's  prophecy  (Schrader,  'Die  Keilinschriften,' 
p.  452  ;  Kleinert,  in  Riehm ;  Sayce, '  Fresh  Light,'  etc.,  p.  154).  2.  The  nature  of  his 
vision.  (1)  Not  political  foresight  merely,  since  the  destruction  of  Nineveh  occurred 
in  B.C.  609 — 606  (Schrader),  t.«.  a  full  half-century  later  than  the  days  of  Nahum, 
which  is  too  broad  a  chasm  to  be  spanned  by  purely  human  sagacity.  If  the  Preacher 
is  not  in  error  (Bccles.  iii.  11 ;  viii.  7),  Nahum  required  more  than  mere  natural  ability 
to  enable  him  to  predict  the  downfall  of  the  great  Assyrian  capital  fifty  years  before  it 
happened.     (2)  Divine  inspiration  alone  can  explain  the  utterance  of  Nahum.      "  The 


OH.  L 1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  6 

Lord  God  will  do  nothing  but  he  revealeth  his  secret  unto  his  servants  the  prophets  " 
(Amos  iii.  7).  Compare  the  examples  of  Abraliam  (Gen.  xviii.  17),  Moses  (Numb.  xii. 
6),  Samuel  (1  Sam.  iii.  II),  Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii.  36),  Jeremiah  (xi.  18),  Daniel  (ii.  19), 
etc.  The  details  given  in  Nahum's  prophecy  concerning  Nineveh  are  such  that  they 
must  have  been  obtained  either  by  direct  personal  knowledge  or  by  Divine  revelation. 
But  inasmuch  as  the  former  hypothesis — the  ground  upon  which  some  scholars  and 
critics  locate  Elkosh  in  Assyria — is  rendered  impossible  by  the  time  when  Nahum  lived 
(shortly  after  the  destruction  of  No-Amon),  it  can  only  have  been  by  the  latter 
method  that  he  acquired  his  information. 

II.  The  BUKDBN  or  NiiTEVEH.  1.  The  city.  Nineveh;  va  Ksajnsta.  Ninita, or  Nina, 
equivalent  to  "Station,"  "Dwelling,"  if  the  word  be  of  Semitic  origin;  equivalent  to 
"  Fish-house "  if  derived  from  the  Accadian  (Delitzsch).  A  city  remarkable  for : 
(1)  Its  antiquity.  Founded  by  Asshur,  who  went  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Shinar,  or 
Babylon,  and  builded  Nineveh,  the  present-day  Kouyunjik  and  NMi  Yunrts,  opposite 
Mosul  on  the  Tigris  (Layard,  Smith,  Schrader) ;  Behoboth  Ir,  the  site  of  which  is 
unknown ;  Calah,  represented  by  the  mounds  of  Nimrud  (Layard,  Smith,  Schrader) ; 
and  Resen,  or  Selamiyeh  (Layard,  Smith,  Schrader),  between  Oalah  and  Nimroud 
(Qen.  X.  11, 12).  "  The  foundation  of  Nineveh,  the  modem  Kouyunjik,  probably  goes 
back  to  as  early  an  age  as  that  of  Assur  (Ealah  Shergat,  the  original  capital),  but  it 
was  not  until  a  much  later  period  that  it  became  an  important  city,  and  supplanted  the 
older  capital  of  the  kingdom  "  (Sayce, '  Assyria :  its  Princes,'  etc.,  p.  22).  (2)  Its  size. 
Even  from  earliest  times  it  was  regarded  as  a  great  city,  including  Calah,  Behuboth  Ir, 
and  Besen,  as  well  as  Nineveh  proper.  In  Jonah's  day  it  was  "  a  great  city  "  (i.  1), 
"  an  exceeding  great  city  of  three  days'  journey "  (iii.  3).  This  accords  both  with 
the  statements  of  classical  writers — one  of  whom  gives  its  circumference  as  four  hundred 
and  eighty  stadia,  or  twelve  geographical  miles — and  with  the  discoveries  of  moderu 
research,  according  to  which  Nineveh  appears  to  have  been  used  to  designate  at  one 
time  Nineveh  proper,  at  another  time  the  four  large  prominent  cities — Nineveh, 
equivalent  to  Kouyunjik  and  Nehbi  Yunus  ;  Calah,  Nimroud ;  Resen,  Selamiyeh ;  and 
Dur-Sargina  of  the  inscriptions,  Khorsaibad.  These  four  cities  "  formed  a  trapezium, 
the  sharp  angles  of  which  lay  towards  the  north  and  south,  the  long  sides  being  formed 
by  the  'Tigris  and  the  mountains,  th«  average  length  being  about  twenty-five  English 
miles,  and  the  average  breadth  fifteen"  (Delitzsch,  on  Jonah  i.  1).  "The  circum- 
ference of  these  four  quarters  or  towns  has  been  given  by  the  English  Jones  at  almost 
ninety  English  miles,  which  may  correspond  to  a  circuit  of  three-  days'  journey " 
(Schrader,  'Die  Keilinschriften,'  p.  448).  (3)  Its  population.  In  Jonah's  time  it 
contained  over  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  young  persons  at  and  under  seven  years 
of  age  (Jonah  iv.  11),  which  would  give  a  population  of  six  hundred  thousand 
(Niebuhr,  Delitzsch,  Keil)  or  seven  hundred  thousand  (Schrader)  souls — a  number 
exceeded  by  many  modern  cities.  (4)  Its  wealth.  Nahum  speaks  of  Nineveh  as  having 
multiplied  her  merchants  above  the  stars  of  heaven  (ch.  iii.  16) ;  and  that  this  was  so 
her  situation  "at  the  culminating  point  of  the  three  quarters  of  the  globe,  Europe, 
Asia,  and  Africa  "  (0.  Strauss),  might  naturally  Uad  one  to  expect.  That  Ninei/eh  con- 
tained immense  stores  of  gold  and  silver  (ch.ii.  9)  accords  with  the  statements  of  ancient 
writers,  which  represent  the  spoil  of  Nineveh  as  having  been  unparalleled  in  extent. 
So  completely  also  was  it  plundered  that  "  scarcely  any  fragments  of  gold  and  silver 
have  been  found  in  its  ruins "  (Kitto's  '  Oyolopsedia,'  iii.  334),  thus  verifying  the 
prediction  that  she  should  be  "  empty,  and  void,  ami  waste  "  (ch.  ii.  10).  (5)  Its  power. 
The  crowned  ones,  i.e.  nobles,  and  the  marshals,  i.e.  the  captains,  of  Nineveh  were  as 
plentiful  as  the  locusts  and  great  grasshoppers  (ch.  iii.  17) ;  in  which  case  what  must 
have  been  the  number  of  the  common  soldiers  ?  To  these — the  levied  and  selected  ones 
(for  war)  and  the  soldiery — rather  than  to  the  princes  and  commanders,  according  to 
another  interpretation  (Keil),  the  prophet's  language  refers.  The  shields  and  scarlet 
coats  of  her  mighty  men,  the  rattling  of  her  war-chariots,  and  the  prancing  of  her 
horses  are  vividly  depicted  (ch.  ii.  3;  iii.  1);  as  well  as  the  fierceness  and  destructiveness 
of  her  warfare  (oh.  ii.  11,  12).  (6)  Its  wickedness.  This,  which  in  Jonah's  time  was  so 
aggravated  as  to  call  forth  against  it  a  threatening  of  Divine  punishment  TJonah  i.  2  ; 
iii. 4,  8,  10),  was  not  less  conspicuous  in  the  days  of  Nahum.  The  "  bloody  city,  full 
of  lies  and  rapine  "  (ch.  iii.  1),  had  fully  justified  her  designation  by  the  manner  in  w  hich 


t  THE  BOOK  OF  NAUCM.  [oh.  i.  1— 1& 

she  bad  deceived  and  destroyed  the  nations,  Syria,  Pkoenioia,  Philistia,  Israel,  and  even 
Egypt.  2.  The  burden.  This,  which  refers  to  Nahum's  oracle  concerning  Nmeveh, 
appropriately  describes:  (1)  Its  momentous  character.  A  burden  on  the  prophet's 
soul  until  it  was  uttered,  it  forthwith  became  a  weight  of  doom  upon  the  city  against 
which  it  was  pronounced.  (2)  Its  certain  fulfilment.  Laid  upon  the  bloody  city  by 
Jehovah's  hand  (ch.  ii.  13 ;  lii.  5),  it  would  inflict  a  grievous  wound  and  cause  a  bruise 
for  which  there  should  be  no  healing  (ch.  iii.  19).  ,     ci    • 

Lessons.     1.  The  argument  from  prophecy  for  the  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures.     2. 
The  superiority  of  the  Christian  dispeasation,  whose  messenger  was  not  a  prophet  of 
Jehovah,  but  the  Son  of  God  (Heb.  L  1).    3.  The  excellence  of  the  gospel,  which  con 
tains  a  burden,  not  of  wrath,  but  of  mercy. 

Vers.  2 — 6. — The  wrath  of  God— a  warning.  L  Necessary  as  to  its  bxistknob. 
Based  upon  the  charaotei-  of  God  as  a  jealous  God.  Jealous :  1.  For  his  own  glorif, 
and  therefore  admitting  of  no  rival  claimant  to  man's  worship  and  homage  (Exod. 
xxxiv.  14 ;  Deut.  iv.  24).  2.  For  his  holy  Law,  and  therefore  sliut  up  to  punish 
iniquity  (Exod.  xx.  5 ;  Deut.  v.  9 ;  xxix.  20 ;  Josh.  xxiv.  19).  3.  For  his  own  people, 
»nd  therefore  impelled  to  take  vengeance  on  their  adversaries. 

II.  Righteous  as  to  its  chabacter.  Directed  only  and  always :  1.  Against  his 
adversaries;  i.e., against  those  who  decline  to  do  him  homage,  and  show  this  by  wor- 
shipping idols.  2.  Against  those  who  dishonour  his  holy  Law  by  their  disobedience 
and  unrighteousness.  3.  Against  those  who  oppress  and  tyrannize  over  his  people,  as  the 
Assyrians  had  done  and  were  doing. 

III.  FuKious  as  to  opebation.  The  wrath  of  Jehovah  is  not  a  trifle.  Nahum 
speaks  of  it  as  something  that  has  fury  in  it  (vers.  2,  6).  The  prophets  generally  repre- 
sented it  as  terrible  in  its  forth-flashing  against  sin  and  sinners  (Deut.  xxix.  28 ; 
a  Chron.  xxviii.  13  ;  Isa.  xiii.  9  ;  Jer.  xxi.  5 ;  Zeph.  i.  18 ;  Zech.  vii.  12).  Christ  did 
not  view  it  as  of  small  moment  (Luke  xxi;  23;  xxii.  22).  Season  does  not  warrant 
the  idea  that  it  will  be  slight  and  easy  to  bear,  it  being  the  anger  of  a  great  and 
holy  God. 

IV.  Slow  as  to  manifestation.  It  does  not  spring  forth  readily.  Scripture  dis- 
tinctly testifies  that  God  is  slow  to  anger  (ver.  3).  1.  Jehovah  himself  claimed  that 
tuch  was  his  character,  (1)  when  he  spake  to  the  people  at  Mount  Sinai  (Exod.  xx.5); 
and  (2)  when  he  declared  his  Name  to  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6).  2.  2%e  Bible  through- 
out concedes  to  him  this  character.  Moses  (Numb.  xiv.  18),  David  (Ps.  Ixxxvi.  15), 
Jonah  (iv.  2),  Micah  (vii.  18),  Nehemiah  (ix.  17),  alike  proclaim  it.  In  the  New 
Testament,  Paul  (Rom.  ix.  22)  and  Peter  (2  Pet.  iii.  9,  1 5)  entertain  the  same  ideh. 
8.  Experience  sufficiently  confirms  the  Divine  claim  and  the  Scripture  representation. 
The  providential  treatment  of  the  world,  of  the  antediluvian  race,  of  Israel  and  Judah, 
of  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  of  unbelievers  in  Christendom  and  of  idolaters  in  heathendom, 
— the  best  evidence  that  God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish. 

V.  Certain  as  to  incidence.  1.  His  character  such  aa  to  demand  this.  "  He  will  by 
no  means  clear  the  guilty."  If  he  did  he  would  contradict  the  representations  of  his 
character,  falsify  his  word,  and  endanger  his  government.  Hence  his  long- suffering 
cannot  arise  from  any  secret  sympathy  which  ho  has  with  sin,  but  must  spring  solely 
from  his  own  inherent  mercifulness.  2.  Eis  power  sufficient  to  secuie  this.  If  Jehovah  is 
slow  to  anger,  this  proceeds  not  from  any  defect  in  his  ability  to  execute  wrath  upon 
his  adversaries.  He  is  of  great  power — a  truth  explicitly  set  forth  in  Scripture  (Gen. 
xviii.  14  ;  Exod.  xv.  11 ;  Deut.  vii.  21 ;  Job  ix.  4 ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  8,  etc.),  and  amplified 
and  illustrated  by  Nahtim,  who  depicts  that  power  in  a  threefold  way.  (1)  By  its 
character  as  supernatural.  "  The  Lord  hath  his  way  in  the  whirlwind  and  in  the  storm, 
and  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of  his  feet "  (ver.  3).  As  such  it  is  mysterious,  violent, 
and.  swift,  inscrutable  as  to  origin,  immeasurable  as  to  vehemence,  incalculable  as  to 
Telocity.  (2)  By  its  effects  as  irresistible.  Nothing  can  stand  before  it ;  not  the  most 
uncontrollable  element  in  nature,  the  sea,  which  with  its  dashing  billows  and  moaning 
waters  is  to  the  human  mind  a  striking  emblem  of  power.  "  He  rebuketh  the  sea  and 
maketh  it  dry,  and  drieth  up  all  the  rivers  "  (ver.  4) — an  allusion  to  the  drying  up  of 
the  Bed  Sea  and  of  the  Jordan  for  the  Israelites  to  pass  over  (Exod.  xiv.  22  ;  Josh,  iiu 
17).    Jehovah's  supremacy  over  the  sea  a  frequent  theme  with  Scripture  writers  (Job 


OH.  1. 1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  T 

ix.  8 ;  xxxviii.  8, 11 ;  Ps.  ixix.  3  ;  Ixv.  7 ;  Ixxiv.  15 ;  Isa.  xliv.  27 ;  li.  10).  Not  tht 
freshest  and  most  vigorous,  of  which  Bashan,  Garmel,  and  Lebanon  are  cited  as  examplei 
— these  languish  and  fade,  their  beauty  decaying  and  their  fruitfulness  departing  when 
he  directs  against  them  the  fury  of  his  wrathful  power  (ver.  4 ;  cf.  Ps.  cvii.  34).  Not 
the  most  solid  and  stable,  the  mountains,  the  hills,  the  earth,  the  world,  all  of  which 
quake,  melt,  and  bum  at  his  presence  (ver.  5 ;  cf.  Ps.  Ixviii.  8 ;  Micah  i,  4 ;  Isa.  Ixiv. 
1).  Not  the  most  exalted  and  wise,  the  living  creatures  that  dwell  upon  the  surface 
of  the  globe,  beasts  and  men,  both  of  which  are  upheaved  with  terror  before  the  mani- 
festations of  Jehovah's  power  (Joel  i.  18,  20 ;  Hos.  iv.  8  ;  Ps,  Ixv.  8). 

Application.  "  Who  can  stand  before  his  indignation  ?  and  who  can  abide  in  the 
fierceness  of  his  anger  'i  "  (ver.  6). 

Vers.  7,  8. — Consolation  in  Ood.  L  Ih  his  lovb.  "The  Lord  is  good."  1.  Bevealed 
in  his  Word.  (1)  Made  known  to  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiii.  19 ;  xxxiv.  6) ;  (2)  proclaimed 
by  David  (Ps.  lii.  1 ;  o.  6 ;  cxix.  68) ;  (3)  announced  by  Jeremiah  (Lam.  iii.  25) ; 
(4)  confirmed  by  Christ  (Matt.  xix.  17).  2.  Attested  by  his  works.  (1)  In  creation, 
Q-od  having  made  the  earth  to  be  an  abode  of  happiness  for  innumerable  myriads  of 
creatures :  "  the  earth  is  full  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  xxxiii.  6).  (2)  In 
providence,  by  his  being  good  unto  all  (Ps.  cxlv.  9),  and  making  all  things  work  together 
for  good  to  his  people  (Rom.  viii.  28).  (3)  In  grace,  by  the  gift  of  his  Son  to  be  maa's 
Redeemer  (Rom.  viii.  32 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  IS),  and  by  the  various  blessings  of  salvatioa  h« 
for  Christ's  sake  bestows  upon  them — pardon,  peace,  adoption,  holiness,  light,  strength, 
liCe,  heaven.  3.  Experienced  by  his  saints,-  From  the  beginning  of  time  downwards, 
gooid  men  have  been  partakers  of,  and  delighted  to  bear  testimony  to,  the  goodness  of 
God,  saying,  like  David,  " The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxiii.  1) ;  "He  hath 
dealt  bountifully  with  me  "  (Ps.  xiii.  6) ;  confessing,  like  tjolomon,  "  There  hath  not 
failed  one  word  of  all  his  good  promise"  (1  Kings  viii.  56) ;  acknowledging,  like  Jacob, 
"  He  hath  fed  me  all  my  life  long  unto  this  day  "  (Gen.  xlviii.  15).  4.  Illustrated  by 
his  Son.  The  highest,  clearest,  and  fullest  evidence  that  God  is  good  was  furnished 
by  Jesns  Christ,  who  was  good  in  himself  (John  x.  11),  and  went  about  continually 
doing  good  (Acts  x.  38). 

II.  Is  HIS  powEE.  "He  is  a  Stronghold  in  the  day  of  trouble."  1.  Accessible, 
(1)  To  all  troubled  ones,  amongst  his  believing  people  (Ps.  xlvi.  1 ;  Prov.  xiv.  26 ; 
Isa.  XXT.  4),  and  amongst  mankind  generally,  if  they  care  to  avail  themselves  of  it 
(Ps.  xci.  9).  (2)  From  every  quarter  of  the  globe,  from  every  rank  and  condition  of 
society.  Jehovah  the  GtoA,  not  of  the  Jew  only,  but  also  of  the  Gentile  (Rom.  iii.  29); 
not  of  the  rich  and  learned  and  outwardly  virtuous,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  poor, 
^orant,  and  degraded,  nor  of  these  to  the  disadvantage  of  those — with  him  is  no 
respect  of  persons  (2  Chron.  xix.  7;  Rom.  ii.  11;  Eph.  vi.  9;  Col.  iii.  25).  (3)  In 
every  form  of  calamity — in  the  day  of  national  adversity,  such  as  had  often  befallen 
Israel  undivided  (Exod.  xiv.  10 ;  Judg.  vi.  1,  2 ;  xv  9 ;  1  Sam.  iv.  2),  and  Judah  in 
separation  (2  Chron.  xiv.  9 ;  xx.  1 ;  xxxii.  1),  and  such  as  was  soon  to  threaten  the 
latter  again,  if  not  from  the  Assyrian,  from  the  Babylonian  power;  in  the  day  of 
domestic  tribulation,  such  as  overtook  Job  (i.  13 — 19),  David  (2  Sam.  xv.  ■ -xviii.), 
Jacob  (Gren.  xlii.  36),  Jairus  (Matt.  ix.  18),  the  centurion  (Luke  vii.  2),  the  widow  of 
Nain  (Luke  vii.  12),  the  nobleman  (John  iv.  46),  and  the  household  of  Bethany  (John 
xi.  1) ;  in  the  day  of  personal  affliction,  which  may  be  either  spiritual  like  the  distress 
which  fell  on  David  (Ps.  xxxviii.  3),  or  material  like  that  which  overtook  Lot 
(Gen.  xix.  29),  bodily  like  that  which  struck  Eezekiah  (Isa.  xxxii.  1),  or  mental  like 
that  which  crushed  Jeremiah  (ix.  1),  occasional  like  that  which  happened  to  Manasseh 
(2  Chron.  xxxiii.  12),  or  perpetual  like  that  which  was  the  lot  of  Paul  (2  Cor.  iv.  10). 
2.  IrnpregntAle,  This  inevitable,  considering  what  kind  of  a  fortress  it  is — Divine,  and 
by  what  mimitions  it  is  guarded,  the  royal  battalion  of  the  Divine  attributes,  by 
Jehovah's  omnipotence,  omniscience,  omnipresence,  faithfulness,  wisdom,  holiness,  love. 
Against  this  manifestly  no  weapon  can  prevail.  "Mine  omnipotency  shall  be  your 
guard.  I  am  (Jod  Almighty,  your  Almighty  Protector,  yonr  Almighty  Benefactor. 
What  though  your  enemies  are  many  ?  More  are  they  that  are  with  you  than  they  that 
are  against  you;  for  I  am  with  you.  What  thongh  they  are  mighty?  they  are  not 
idmighty,"  etc.  (AUeine's  '  Heaven  Opened,'  pp.  256,  257).     3.   Sufficient.    Every 


THB  BOOK  OP   NAHUM.  [ob.  i.  1—16. 


succour  the  soul  needs  in  its  day  of  trouble  1«  found  in  God,  and  found  completely — for 
the  soul's  guilt,  pardon  (Isa.  i.  16;  xliiL  26);  for  its  ppllution,  cleansing  (Ezek. 
xxitI.  25);  for  its  anxiety,  peace  (Isa.  xxTi.  3;  Matt.  xL  28);  for  its  weakness, 
strength  (Isa.  xlv.  24) ;  for  its  darkness,  light  (Ps.  cxviiL  27 ;  1  Pet.  iL  9 ;  1  John  L  6) ; 
for  its  death,  life  (Isa.  xxv.  8 ;  Bom.  iv.  17).  .     , ,     -    „ 

III.  In  his  kkowlbdgk.  "  He  knoweth  thorn  that  put  their  trust  In  him."  He 
knoweth  them :  1.  Collectively.  All  that  belong  to  the  body  of  his  believing  people 
he  exactly  and  always  knows,  so  that  he  can  think  and  speak  of  them  as  his  people 
(Isa.  ixxii.  18;  2  Tim.  ii.  19),  as  Christ  does  of  those  who  are  his  (John  x.  14).  2. 
Individually.  Not  In  the  mass  merely,  but  separately  and  singly,  he  knows  them 
(2  Sam.  viL  20 ;  Ps.  cxxxix.  1 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  3 ,  Heb.  iv.  13),  as  Christ  also  oalla  his 
own  sheep  by  name  (John  x.  3).  3.  ThormtgMy.  (1)  Their  characters— seeing  that 
he  searches  the  heart  (1  Kings  viii.  89 ;  Jer.  xvii.  10 ;  Ps.  cxxxix.  2 ;  Luke  xvL  15 ; 
Acts  i.  24 ;  XV.  8 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  4).  Hence  he  can  never  err  as  to  their  persons.  (2) 
Their  conditions — since  nothing  can  be  hid  from  him,  neither  person  (Jer.  xxiiL  24 ; 
Hos.  V.  3)  nor  thing  (Ps.  cxxxix.  16 ;  Jer.  xvi.  17),  but  both  aUke  are  manifest  ia 
his  sight  (Heb.  iv.  13).  Hence  he  can  never  mistake  as  to  their  circumstances,  but 
must  always  understand  precisely  what  they  need.  4.  Efficiently.  Different  from  the 
wicked,  whom  he  knows  afar  off  (Ps.  cxxxviii.  6),  t.e.  as  persons  estranged  from 
Ukd  hostile  to  him  elf,  them  that  put  their  trust  in  him  he  knows  appreciatively 
and  helpfally,  so  as  to  love,  cherish,  protect,  and  assist  them.  "  Though  the  Lord 
be  high,  yet  hath  he  respect  unto  the  lowly" — to  their  persons  to  love  them,  to 
their  characters  to  admire  them,  to  their  wants  to  supply  them,  to  their  soula  to 
save  them. 

OoHOLnBioN.  Note :  1.  The  characters  of  those  for  whom  this  consolation  exist! — 
they  put  their  trust  in  God.  Bemark  upon  the  simplicity  and  efficacy  of  faith.  2. 
The  evil  fate  of  them  who,  being  destitute  of  faith,  are  his  enemies — they  shall  be 
destroyed  by  an  overrunning  flood,  their  habitations  swept  away,  their  persons  engulfed, 
their  hopes  disappointed,  their  projects  defeated,  their  ambitions  scattered  to  the  winds ; 
they  shall  be  pursued  by  (or  into)  darkness  (see  next  homily). 

Ver.  8. — Pursued  hy  (Authorized  Version),  into  (Bevised  Vermon),  darleneu.  L  A 
WOKTUL  rATE.  1.  The  picture.  That  of  a  defeated  enemy  pursued  by  a  victorious 
general  who  comes  up  behind  his  foes  like  the  shades  of  night  upon  a  wearied  and 
disphrited  traveller  stumbling  forward  upon  an  uncertain  and  perilous  way,  as  Abraham 
fdl  upon  the  kings  by  night  and  smote  them,  and  pursued  them  unto  Hobah  (Oen. 
xiv.  15) ;  or,  who  drives  them  on  before  him  into  the  gloom  of  night,  where  they 
encounter  unforeseen  dangers  and  perish,  as  the  kings  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  did 
when  chased  by  Chedorlaomer's  troops  (Gen.  xiv.  10).  2.  The  interpretation.  The 
defeated  enemy  is  the  sinner ;  the  pursuing  conqueror  is  either  darkness,  meaning  those 
calamities  which  God  has  ordained  to  foUow  sin,  or  God  himself,  by  whom  the  sinner 
shall  be  chased  into  such  disastrous  overthrow.  In  either  case,  with  darkness  behind 
or  darkness  before — and,  in  reality,  it  is  both  behind  and  before — ^the  condition  of  Qod'a 
enemy  is  pitiful  indeed. 

11.  A  OEBTAiN  noou.  PuTSued  by  or  into  darkness.  There  is  no  "  peradventure  " 
about  the  lot  of  the  ungodly.  What  is  here  predicted  is  not  contingent,  but  absolute ; 
not  what  ought  to  be  merely,  or  what  may  be  only,  but  what  shall  be.  1.  OocPi  Word 
hath  declared  it.  "The  wicked  shall  be  silent  in  darkness,"  etc.  (1  Sam.  ii.  9);  "The 
eyes  of  the  wicked  shall  fail,"  etc.  (Job  xi.  20) ;  "  He  shall  be  driven  from  light  into 
darkness"  fJob  xviii.  18);  "Let  their  way  be  darkness  and  slippery  places" 
(Ps.  XXXV.  6);  "The  candle  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out "  (Prov.  xxiv.  20) ;  "  The 
children  of  the  kingdom  [who  have  become  God's  enemies]  will  be  cast  into  outer  dark- 
ness," etc.  (Matt  viii.  12)—"  And  the  Scripture  cannot  be  broken "  (John  x.  36). 
2.  0<kP$  character  requires  it.  If  his  love  and  mercy  make  it  sure  that  none  who 
return  to  him  will  be  rejected  (Isa.  Iv.  7 ;  Jer.  ill.  22 ;  Hos.  xiv.  4),  his  holiness  and 
justice  render  it  equally  imperative  that  the  impenitent  and  unbelieving,  the  rebellious 
and  disobedient,  should  be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of 
God  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power  (Bom.  i.  18  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9  ;  1  Pet.  lii.  12).  8.  Sin 
Unlf  emuru  it.    Every  action  that  a  man  performs  carries  in  iu  own  bosom  Iti  reward 


OH.  J.  1—15.]  TH£  BOOK  07  NAHUliL  t 

or  gunisliment.    "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death,"  just  as  certainly  as  "  the  frnit  of  hoU- 
neas"  is  "everlasting  life"  (Bom.  vL  21—23). 

m.  A  3TJ6X  BGTBiBUTiOH.  To  be  porsued  by  or  into  darkness  is  a  fitting  lot  for 
those  who  in  their  lifetime  have  loyed  the  darkness  rather  than  the  light.  1.  The  low 
vfmaraX  retribution  demands  tliat  this  shall  le  so.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that 
'  shall  he  also  reap  "  (Gal.  vL  7).  He  that  walks  in  darkness  here  cannot  hope  to  walk 
in  light  yonder ;  he  who  does  the  deeds  of  darkness  on  earth  will  not  likely  begin  to  do 
deeds  of  light  in  heaven.  2.  The  character  of  the  wicked  makes  it  certain  that  this  shaU 
ie  so.  No  being  can  act  otherwise  tlian  in  accordance  with  its  nature.  Mere  change 
of  place  suffices  not  to  alter  one's  nature.  No  reason  to  think  that  passing  from  one 
form  of  existence  to  another  will  effect  any  radical  transmutation  of  one's  being. 
Hence  they  who  have  died  in  darkness  will  (ia  all  probability)  continue  to  dwell  in 
darkness. 

Lebsonb.  1.  Forsake  sin.  "  Have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  dark* 
neas."    2.  Follow  holiness.    "  Walk  as  children  of  the  light." 

Vers.  9 — ^14. — A  wicked  counsellor.  L  His  febsok.  1.  The  Assyrian  poioer.  Repre- 
sented In  Hezekiah's  reign  by  Sennacherib ;  in  Manasseh's  (Nabum's  time)  by  Esar- 
haddon  or  Assurbanipal ;  in  each  successive  reign  by  the  ruling  sovereign.  2.  Ute 
unbeliettimg  world.  Of  this  Assyria  was  now  the  symbol,  as  in  former  times  Egypt  had 
been,  as  in  later  days  Rome  was  (John  zv.  18 ;  Jas.  iv.  4).  8.  The  vmrenewed  heart. 
The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God  (Rom.  viii.  7). 

n.  His  OEABAOTEB.  1.  Powerfid.  The  Assyrian  in  Nahum's  age  was  "in  fiiU 
strength "  (ver.  12),  a  well-organized  and  finaly  knit  confederacy  like  "  tangled 
thorns  "  (ver.  10),  which  were  dangerous  to  touch,  and  a  multitudinous  people  (ver.  12) 
in  comparison  with  which  Judah  was  but  a  handful.  The  same  elements  of  power 
coexist  in  the  unbelieving  world — force  (Eph.  ii.  2),  order  (Eph.  vL  12),  numbers 
(1  John  V.  19) — in  comparison  with  which  the  Church  of  God  is  weak,  disunited,  and 
small.  The  individual  transgressor  also  not  unfrequently  exhibits  an  energy,  a  deter- 
mination, and  a  capacity  to  enlist  others  upon  his  side  which  are  wanting  in  the 
followers  of  God  and  Christ.  2.  Self-reliant.  Like  drunkards  drenched  in  drink 
(ver.  10),  the  Assyrians  were  foolishly  confident,  and  believed  themselves  to  be 
invincible.  In  like  manner,  the  unbelieving  world  in  general  and  the  individual  sinner 
in  particular,  are  of  opinion  that  they  are  more  than  sufficient  to  cope  with  any  form 
of  calamity  that  may  assail  them,  and  to  ensure  their  own  safety  against  any  foe, 
bodily  or  ghostly,  earthly  or  unearthly,  human  or  Divine.  3.  Vile.  (1)  The  Assyrian 
court  was  notorious  for  its  gluttony  and  revelry,  especially  in  the  days  of  Assurbanipal. 
The  world  also  runs  to  itrange  excess  of  riot  in  eating  and  drinking  (Rom.  xiii.  13 ; 
1  Pet.  iv.  4).  (2)  The  Assyrian  people  were  worshippers  of  idols  (ver.  14) ;  and  the 
world  of  to-day  has  its  idols  before  which  it  delights  to  prostrate  itself  and  present 
homage.  (3)  The  Assyrian  kings  were  tyrannical,  cruel,  and  oppressive;  and  so  also 
is  the  world. 

m.  His  DEBIONS.  L  Evil.  "He  counselleth  wickedness"  (ver.  11) — ^In  particular 
oppression  of  the  people  of  Jehovah  (ver.  13).  Such  was  the  aim  of  Assyria  towards 
Judah ;  such  is  the  aim  of  the  world  towards  the  Church ;  and  of  the  unbeliever 
towards  the  believer.  2.  Impious.  His  wicked  counsels  are  also  directed  "  against  the 
Lord  "  (vers.  9, 11).  This  was  the  spirit  of  Assyria  as  represented  by  Rabshakeh  in  the 
time  of  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xviii  28—35 ;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  11 — 17 ;  Isa.  xxxvi.  7, 14, 16, 
18—20;  xxxvii.  10 — 13);  and  of  Herod,  Pontius  FUate,  the  Gentile  world,  and  the 
unbelieving  Jews  in  the  days  of  Christ  (Ps.  ii.  1 ;  Acts  iv.  26 — 28) ;  and  is  the  spirit 
still  of  the  unrenewed  heart  (Rom.  viii.  7).  3.  Vain.  Thefiiiitsof  a  corrupt  "imagi- 
nation "  (vers.  0, 11),  they  will  prove  idle  and  worthless.  Assyria's  schemes  for  the 
subjugation  of  Judah  came  to  nought ;  so  resulted  in  defeat  those  of  Herod  and  of 
Pilate,  of  the  Jews  and  of  the  Gentiles  against  the  holy  Child  Jesus ;  and  so  will 
terminate  in  shame  those  of  wicked  men  generally  against  the  truth. 

rv.  HiB  Doou.  1.  Certain.  The  decree  had  gone  forth  against  Assyria  when 
Kahum  spoke.  "  The  Lord  hath  given  commandment  concerning  thee,  that  no  more 
of  thy  seed  he  sown  "  (ver.  14).  A  similar  decree  has  gone  forth  agunst  the  ungodly 
world  (2  Pet.  iiL  7;    1  John  ii.  16 — 17),  and  against  unbelievers  as  individual* 


10  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  [oh.  1 1—15. 


(Phil.  iii.  19 ;  1  These,  i.  9).  2.  Complete.  Of  Nineveh  Jehovah  was  to  make  "  a 
full  end,"  80  that  no  second  affliction  should  be  required  to  destroy  them  (Calvin, 
Hitzig),  or  should  be  able  to  proceed  from  them  (Keil,  Fausset)  against  Judali  (ver.  9); 
the  Assyrians  were  to  be  "  destroyed  utterly  as  dry  stubble  "  (ver.  10),  "  to  be  cut  down 
and  pass  away,"  so  that  Jehovah  should  no  more  (at  least  by  their  hand)  afflict  his 
people  (ver.  12) ;  the  royal  house  was  to  come  to  an  end,  no  more  of  that  name  being 
sown  (ver.  14);  the  very  divinities  of  Assyria  and  Nineveh  were  to  be  exterminated 
(ver.  14).  More  complete  ruin  was  inconceivable  j  so  will  all  the  enemies  of  God  and 
Christ  be  utterly  destroyed  (Jer.  xii.  17 ;  Ps.  xxzvii.  38 ;  Matt.  zxi.  41 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  12). 
LKBSONg.  1.  The  danger  of  forming  designs  i^ainst  either  God  or  his  people.  2.  The 
wisdom  of  taking  warning  in  time  before  it  is  too  late.  3.  The  certainty  that,  wjien 
God  begins  the  work  of  judgment,  he  will  also  make  an  end. 

Ver.  15. —  Olad  tidings  for  God's  people.-  I.  The  destbdotion  of  a  powbeful  fob. 
1.  27ie  historical  allusion.  The  "  wicked  one  "  whom  Nahum  represents  as  "  utterly  cut 
off"  was  the  power  of  Assyria,  whose  certain  and  complete  annihilation  he  has  just 
predicted  (ver.  14),  and  now  depicts  as  accomplished.  2.  ITie  spiritual  application. 
Capable  of  being  applied  to  every  deliverance  wrought  by  Jehovah  for  Judah,  in 
particular  to  her  deliverance  from  Babylonian  captivity,  it  is  specially  true  of  that 
emancipation  which  was  wrought  for  mankind  sinners  by  the  destruction  of  the 
Church's  greatest  foe,  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  over  whom  Christ  triumphed 
through  bis  cross.  This  the  first  note  of  the  gospel  message  that  Christ  hath  destroyed 
death,  and  him  that  hath  the  power  of  death,  the  devil  (Heb.  iL  14). 

IL  The  fboclamation  of  a  blgssed  peace.  1.  Tke  scene  depicted.  The  prophet 
represents  heralds  as  appearing  on  the  mountains  encircling  Jerusalem  with  the  joyoui 
announcement  that  the  ancient  and  terrible  enemy  she  feared  was  overthrown,  and 
could  no  more  invade  her  land  or  oppress  her  people,  and  that  henceforth  she  might 
dismiss  all  anxiety  and  be  at  peace.  2.  The  sense  intended.  The  prophet  wished  to 
convey  the  thought  that  when  once  the  power  of  Assyria  was  broken  there  would  be 
no  cause  of  alarm — that  Judah  might  rest  at  ease,  and  prosecute  her  national  career 
without  fear  of  being  disturbed  by  hostile  invasion.  3.  The  syrnbol  interpreted.  Ai 
the  destruction  of  Nineveh  meant  peace  for  Judah,  so  the  overthrow  of  Satan  and  the 
powers  of  darkness  means  peace  for  God's  believing  people.  This  the  second  note  of 
the  gospel  message.  After  the  work  of  redemption  the  publication  of  peace  (Acts  x. 
36 ;  Bph.  ii.  14 — 17).  As  Judah's  duty  was  to  behold  the  peace-messengers  upon  the 
mountains  of  Judah,  and  to  believe  their  message,  so  the  duty  of  the  New  Testament 
Church  is  to  recognize  him  whom  God  hath  sent,  and  to  receive  his  gospel  of  peace. 

III.  An  invitation  to  a  joyous  feast.  1.  The  feasts  referred  to.  These  were 
the  three  principal  feasts  enjoined  upon  the  Hebrew  Church  by  Moses — the  Feast  of 
the  Passover,  commemorative  of  the  nation's  deliverance  from  Egypt ;  the  Feast  of 
Harvest,  in  which  the  firstfruits  of  the  field  were  presented  to  the  Lord ;  and  the  Feast 
of  Ingathering,  when  the  labours  of  the  year  were  happily  concluded  by  the  safe 
storing  of  the  well-filled  sheaves.  In  addition  were  other  feasts  which  need  not  now 
be  mentioned.  The  above-named  three  were  pre-eminently  gladsome  in  their  causes 
and  their  forms.  They  gave  expression  to  the  nation's  thankful  joy  in  thinking  of  the 
Divine  mercifulness,  the  Divine  faithfulness,  and  the  Divine  goodness — ^first,  in  sparing 
them  and  making  them  a  nation  ;  next,  in  faithfully  keeping  with  them  his  covenant 
of  seed-time  and  harvest ;  a.nd,  thirdly,  in  making  such  abundant  provision  for  their 
wants,  of  all  which  they  had  been  made  partakers.  Hence  they  fitly  stood  as  types  of 
the  great  feast  of  salvation  to  which  God's  believing  people  are  invited  in  consequence 
of  Christ's  atoning  and  redeeming  work,  and  in  which  God's  mercy,  faithfulness,  and 
goodness  are  expressed — that  feast  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow,  and  of  wines  on  the 
lees  well  refined,  of  which  Isaiah  speaks  (xxv.  6),  that  feast  to  which  Christ  alluded 
in  his  parables  of  the  wedding  banquet  (Matt.  xxii.  2)  and  of  the  great  supper  (Luke 
xiv.  16),  and  that  feast  which  is  symbolized  in  the  Lord's  Supper  (1  Cor.  v.  8).  2.  Th« 
invitation  given.  (1)  To  whom  addressed?  To  Judah,  God's  ancient  people;  and, 
while  in  one  sense  the  overtures  of  the  gospel  are  extended  to  all,  in  another  they 
belong  only  to  them  who  believe  and  are  God's  people  through  faith  in  Ohriit 
Jesus.     (2)  On  what  based?    Not  on  any  merit  or  good  works  on  the  part  of  Judah 


CH.1. 1— 15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM,  U 

as  e.g.  on  Judah'g  prowess  in  defeating  her  ancient  enemy,  but  solely  on  the  fact  that 
Jehovah  had  done  so  ;  and  the  people  of  God  in  the  Church  of  Christ  are  invited  to 
participate  in  the  joyous  banquet  of  salvation,  and  to  celebrate  their  New  Testament 
feast,  not  because  of  any  worthiness  in  themselves,  or  because  of  any  share  they  have 
bad  in  overthrowing  their  arch-foe  (since  they  have  had  none),  but  exclusively  because 
their  adversary  hath  been  destroyed  for  them — because  God's  right  hand  alone  hath 
gotten  him  the  victory  (Ps.  xcviii.  1). 

IV.  A  SUMMONS  TO  A  PLEASANT  DUTT.  1,  A  lecoming  duty.  The  payment  of 
Judah's  vows  meant  her  performance  of  the  engagements  she  had  come  under  to  be 
faithful  and  obedient  to  Jehovah,  observing  his  worship,  and  keeping  his  command- 
ments. To  do  this  had  been  her  duty  from  the  first,  though  she  had  often  failed  in  it ; 
to  return  to  it  now  after  experiencing  Jehovah's  mercy  was  in  the  highest  degree 
proper.  2.  A  necessary  duty.  Without  this  Judah  would  not  be  truly  grateful  for 
her  deliverance,  her  outward  observance  would  be  insincere  and  hypocritical,  and  her 
inner  life  would  be  practically  unchanged.  So  the  highest  evidence  a  soul  can  gir*  of 
its  thankfulness  for  Divine  mercy,  of  its  own  heartfelt  sincerity,  and  of  its  genuine 
conversion  and  regeneration,  is  obedience.  3.  An  agreeable  duty.  What  should  be 
easier  or  more  delightful  than  service  which  springs  from  love  ?  So  to  gracious  souls 
God's  commandments  are  not  grievous,  and  hearts  constrained  by  the  love  of  Christ 
find  that  his  yoke  is  easy  and  his  burden  is  light. 

Learn  :  1.  The  possibility  of  extracting  gospel  truths  from  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 
2.  The  clearer  light  which  shines  in  the  Christian  records  concerning  Otod's  gracioua 
work  of  redemption.  3.  The  larger  responsibilities  that  rest  upon  luch  M  haT* 
experienced  the  salvation  of  Christ, 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Ver.  1. — The  messenger  of  judgment.    Notice  here — 

I.  The  messbnobb  :  his  peksonalitt.  "  Nahum  the  Elkoshite."  1.  nu  name. 
"Nahum,"  signifying  "Consolation;"  and  whilst  this  scarcely  accords  with  the 
character  of  bis  mission  as  the  proclaimer  of  Divine  judgments,  yet,  interspersed  with 
the  heavy  tidings  concerning  Nineveh,  we  have  here  very  tender  and  consolatory  words 
addressed  by  him  to  his  own  afflicted  nation  (vers.  7,  12,  13—15).  2.  Eis  birthplace. 
He  was  "  the  Elkoshite,"  a  native  of  Blkosh,  a  village  of  Galilee.  This  has  been 
questioned,  and  a  tradition  has  been  appealed  to  representing  that  he  belonged  to  the 
Captivity,  and  was  born  at  Alcosh,  a  town  near  Mosul.  It  has  been  urged,  however, 
that  much  of  the  phraseology  he  employs,  together  with  certain  familiar  references  to 
places,  connects  him  unmistakably  with  North  Palestine. 

IL  The  ohabaotbb  of  his  message.  "The  burden  of  Nineveh."  1.  It  was  a 
message  to  be  delivered  to  a  heathen  nation.  Like  the  message  of  Jonah,  to  which  it 
has  been  fittingly  described  as  being  "  the  complement  and  the  counterpart,"  it  indi- 
cates that  God  holds  wider  relations  with  mankind  than  the  Jews  were  prepared  to 
admit ;  and  that  all  nations  and  peoples  lie  within  the  lange  of  his  providence  and 
power.  2.  It  was  a  message  full  of  dark  forebodings.  It  told  of  impending  judgment 
and  of  national  destruction  and  desolation.  The  sombre  announcements  were  unre- 
lieved even  by  a  single  word  of  hope  being  addressed  to  the  guilty  nation.  The 
Ninevites  had  previously  recognized  the  Divine  riohteoUsness,""  and  upon  their  repent- 
ance had  experienced  the  Divine  clemency  ;  but  this  had  been  followed  by  relapse  into 
the  grossest  iniquity,  and  there  remained  now  only  the  experience  of  the  threatened 
ruin— tha  nation  should  be  "  utterly  cut  off."  "  The  burden  of  Nineveh  "  was  also  the 
burden  of  Nahum.  His  few  words  recorded  here  addressed  to  his  own  people  are  suffi- 
cient to  indicate  that  he  was  a  man  of  refined  susceptibilities ;  and  to  such  a  man  his 
commission  must  have  been  indeed  oppressive.  Yet  he  would  not  shrink,  but  would 
faithfully  fulfil  his  trust.  Whilst  the  mercy  and  love  of  God  should  be  the  constant 
theme  of  the  modem  teacher,  yet  the  great  and  solemn  fact  of  his  retributive  justice 
must  not  be  ignored.    There  is  to  be  declared  "all  the  counsel  of  God  "  (Acts  xx.  27). 

lEL  "The  Divinb  authobitt  with  which  he  was  invested.  A  plain  man 
unfolding  such  teachings  respecting  a  mighty  heathen  power  might  well  be  req aired  to 


12  THE   BOOK   OF   NAHaM.  [oh.  i.  1—15. 

(urnish  hig  credentials.  And  we  have  his  authority  expressed  in  the  words, "  the  viiion 
of  Nahum."  A  Divine  insight  had  been  imparted  unto  him ;  there  had  been  given 
him  "visions  and  revelations  of  the  Lord,"  and  of  hia  terrible  doings  about  to  be 
wrought.  Such  apprehension  of  spiritual  realities  is  absolutely  essential  in  order  to 
constitute  any  man  a  messenger  of  God  to  his  age  (1  Cor.  ii.  10 — 16  ;  1  Pet.  i.  12  ; 
1  John  iv.  14). 

IV.  The  pebuangnt  beoobd  op  his  solbmn  TEAOHiNa.  "The  book  of  th© 
vision,"  etc.  (ver,  1).  This  is  the  only  form  in  whioh  mental  thoughts  and  conceptions 
can  be  lastingly  perpetuated.  The  matchless  works  of  the  great  masters  in  painting, 
sculpture,  and  •rchiteoture,  whioh  have  excited  the  admiration  of  the  whole  world,  can 
have  but  a  limited  existence ;  no  copy  equal  to  the  originals  can  be  made ;  and  in  the 
waste  and  wear  of  time  these  must  inevitably  pass  away ;  whereas  the  literary  produc- 
tions of  men  of  genius  will  continue  to  live  on;  for  time  does  not  impair  that  art  by 
whioh  books  are  reproduced  and  the  circle  of  their  influence  extended.  The  Bible  is  a 
collection  of  books ;  and  the  remarkahle  unity  combined  with  progressiveness  traceablft 
therpin  furnish  a  very  convincing  evidence  of  its  Divine  origin.  Written  prophecy 
forms  a  most  important  feature  in  this  development  of  truth.  It  was  not  only  neces- 
sary that  the  prophets  should  labour  (as  they  did  so  earnestly)  to  maintain  religion 
amongst  the  people  who  had  been  chosen  of  God  and  separated  to  his  praise,  but  also 
that,  as  the  work  of  prophecy  advanced,  there  should  be  indicated  and  recorded  how 
that  the  Lord  was  working  among  the  nations,  Hebrew  and  heathen  alike,  and  bringing 
about  the  fulfilment  of  his  all-wise  and  gracious  purposes.  And  viewed  under  this 
aspect,  "the  book  of  the  vision  of  Nahum  the  BIkoshite"  fills  an  important  niche, 
whilst  its  grave  words  of  admonition  and  warning  may  well  lead  evil-doers  to  reflection 
and  penitence,  and  its  occasional  words  of  hope  to  the  pious  and  God-fearing  may  serve, 
in  troublous  times,  to  keep  their  hearts  in  quietness  and  assurance. — S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  2 — 6. — The  Divine  vengeance.  In  engaging  in  work  for  God,  the  worker 
must  not  be  unmindful  of  the  terrible  consequences  resulting  from  despising  the  riches 
of  Divine  mercy  and  grace.  There  is,  assuredly,  such  a  thing  as  retribution  following 
a  course  of  alienation  from  God's  ways.  It  must  be  so.  The  very  love  of  God  renders 
the  punishment  of  the  ungodly  absolutely  essential.  Objectors  sometimes  point  to  the 
scriptural  teaching  concerning  the  future  of  the  impenitent  as  indicating  that  the  God 
of  the  Bible  is  unlovely  and  severe.  But  surely,  where  there  is  love  there  will  also  be 
found  regard  for  justice.  There  is  a  mawkish  sentimentalism  about  the  teaching  which 
dwells  upon  the  love  of  God  to  the  exolnsinn  of  all  regard  for  his  reetoral  character. 
There  is  much  of  this  teaching  prevalent  to-day.  It  is  the  recoil  from  extreme 
Calvinism,  and,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases,  the  very  opposite  extreme  is  reached.  It  is 
impossible  to  indicate  the  extent  to  which  the  intense  sense  of  God  possessed  by  the 
Reformer  of  Geneva  gave  strength  to  bis  work;  and  let  God  be  realized  by  us  as  "  infinite 
Justice,  infinite  Love,  and  infinite  Truth,  blended  in  one  indivisible  ray  of  whitest 
light,"  and  the  thought  of  his  all-embracing  sovereignty  and  wise  and  perfect  adminis- 
tration will  be  found  full  of  comfort  and  inspiration  to  our  hearts.  And  so  long  as  he 
is  righteous,  sin,  unrepented  of  and  unabandoned,  must  be  followed  by  bitter  results ; 
and  hence,  whilst  joyfully  proclaiming  "  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,"  we  must 
also  declare  the  coming  of  "  the  day  of  Vengeance  of  our  God."     In  these  verses — 

I.  Light  iboast  upon  the  nature  op  the  Divine  vengeance.  Our  conceptions  of 
the  Divine  Being  are  sometimes  assisted  by  our  ascribing  to  him  certain  characteristics 
belonging  to  the  children  of  men.  Analogy,  however, In  this  direction  must  not  be 
pressed  too  far,  or  we  may  be  led  to  form  veiy  erroneous  views  concerning  our  God. 
We  have  in  these  verses  a  case  in  point.  Nothing  is  more  strongly  to  be  condemned 
in  men  than  the  cherishing  by  them  of  the  spirit  of  jealousy  and  of  vengeance;  yet 
this  is  here  ascribed  to  God.  "  The  Lord  is  jealous,  and  the  Lord  revengeth,"  etc.  (ver. 
2).  Bnt  then  "jealousy"  and  "vengeance"  mean  something  very  different  when 
applitd  to  man  from  what  is  intended  when  the  same  terms  are  used  in  reference  to 
God.  By  jealousy  on  the  part  of  man  we  understand  envy,  but  by  the  same  word  in 
reference  to  God  we  are  reminded  of  his  regard  for  the  maintenance  of  truth,  his  holy 
concern  for  the  upholding  of  righteonsness.  And  by  vengeance  on  the  part  of  man  we 
understand  revenge,  a  determination  that  satisfaction  shall  be  given  for  the  injury  we 


0H.1. 1— 15.J  THE   BOOK  Off  NAHUM.  U 

consider  has  been  done  to  us ;  whereas  the  same  word  as  applied  to  Ood  carries  with 
it  no  such  idea  of  vindictiveness,  but  simply  a  pure  desire  that  the  cause  of  justice  and 
rectitude  may  be  established  and  secure  complete  vindication.  Since  this  brief  book 
of  prophecy  has  almost  exclusive  reference  to  the  Divine  judgments  to  fall  upon  the 
Assyrians,  it  is  all-important  that  we  clearly  understand  at  the  outset  that  Divine 
vengeance  has  absulutely  no  malice  in  it,  and  is  ever  exercised  in  the  maintenance  of 
righteousness.  This  is  indicated  in  the  next  verse  in  three  particulars  (ver.  3).  1. 
The  Divine  slowness.  "  The  Lord  is  slow  to  anger."  Vindiotiveness  will  not  brook 
delay ;  human  vengeance  reckons  with  its  victims  at  the  earliest  moment ;  revenge 
bums;  passion  rages;  but  the  Divine  vengeance  delays,  that  perchance,  through 
penitence,  the  blow  may  not  be  required  to  fall.  2.  The  restraining  of  Divine  power. 
Man,  cherishing  the  spirit  of  vindictiveness,  sometimes  lingers  because  conscious  of  his 
want  of  power  to  inflict  the  penalty ;  but  God  "  great  in  power  "  (ver.  3)  restrains  his 
might,  holds  back  his  avenging  hand,  that  "  space  for  repentance  may  be  given,  and 
the  fact  be  made  manifest  that  he  "  desires  not  the  death  of  the  wicked."  3.  Z%e  Divine 
concern  for  the  maintenance  of  his  pure  Law.  "  And  will  not  at  all  acquit  the  wicked  " 
(ver.  3).  His  vengeance  is  not  vindictive,  but  is  exercised  in  order  that  the  supremacy 
of  his  holy  Law  may  be  asserted.  He  has  graciously  made  provision  for  the  forgiveness 
of  sin  and  the  salvation  of  transgressors  from  condemnation  (Rom.  viii.  1),  and  they  who 
wilfully  persist  in  iniquity  must  bear  the  consequences,  which  will  light  upon  them, 
not  because  Ood  is  vindictive,  but  because  the  honour  of  his  pure  Law  must  be  sustained. 

n.  This  aspect  of  thb  Divine  ohabaoteb  is  bet  fobth  in  obafhio  imaoebt. 
(Vers.  3 — 6.)  For  sublimity :and  grandeur  this  passage  stands  unrivalled.  The  Divine 
vengeance  is  presented  to  us  here :  1.  In  its  irresistibleness.  Like  the  whirlwind,  it 
sweeps  everything  before  it  (ver.  3).  2.  In  its  terrihleness.  In  vivid  symbolical 
language  all  nature  is  represented  as  full  of  terror  at  the  Divine  manifestations  (ver.  6). 
3.  In  its  destructiveness.  Desolation  is  brought  about — the  sea  aud  the  rivers  are 
dried  up  at  the  rebuke  of  the  Lord ;  the  rich  pastures  of  Bashan,  the  beautiful  gardens 
of  Carmel,  and  the  fragrant  flowers  and  fruitful  vines  and  stately  trees  of  Lebanon 
languish  (ver.  4);  as  a  devouring  fire  this  vengeance  consumes  in  every  direction 
(vers.  5,  6) ;  yea,  so  mighty  is  it  that  the  very  rocks  crumble  to  pieces  when  it  is  put 
forth  (ver.  6). 

in.  This  view  of  oub  Ch>D  is  pbessed  home  upon  oub  heabts  by  eabnest  inquibt. 
"  Who  can  stand  before  his  indignation?  and  who  can  abide  in  the  fierceness  of  his 
anger  ?  "  (ver.  6).  The  design  of  the  questions  is  to  quicken  conscience.  They  contain 
and  suggest  the  answers.  Humbled  in  the  very  dust  of  self-abasement,  we  cry,  "  Enter 
not  into  judgment  with  tliy  servants,  0  Lord;  for  in  thy  sight  shall  no  man  living  be 
justified"  (Ps.  cxliii.  2).— S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  7. — The  Divine  goodness,  "The  Lord  is  good."  The  word  "good"  is  used 
here  in  the  sense  of  the  desire  to  promote  happiness.  The  prophet  affirms  that  "  the 
Lord  "  possesses  this  disposition — ^that  whilst  he  is  powerful  he  exerts  this  power  in 
saving,  not  in  destroying,  "judgment"  being  "his  strange  work;"  that  whilst  his 
presence  fills  all  space,  and  his  omniscient  eye  penetrates  all,  he  is  concerned,  in  his 
watchfulness,  that  none  of  the  creatures  he  has  formed  should  lack  the  blessings 
his  bounteous  band  has  to  bestow ;  and  that  as  he  is  eternal  in  his  duration,  so  the 
streams  of  his  bounty  shall  ever  continue  to  flow.  "  The  Lord  is  good."  This  inspiring 
truth  was  revealed  even  from  the  earliest  times,  and  is  inscribed  in  Scripture  upon 
every  page.  Abram  in  the  vision  by  night  (Gen.  xv.),  Jacob  in  his  weary  wanderings 
(Gen.  xxviii.  10 — 22),  and  Moses  in  "  the  holy  mount "  (Exod.  xxxiii.  19),  were  alike 
favoured  with  special  revelations  of  it.  The  very  thought  of  God  thus  woke  up 
within  the  psalmist  the  faculty  of  song,  and  led  him  to  strike  his  lyre  and  to  sing  with 
holy  fervour,  "  Thou,  Lord,  art  good  and  ready  to  forgive "  (Ps.  Ixxxvi.  5) ;  "  They 
shall  abundantly  utter  the  memory  of  thy  great  goodness,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxlv.  7) ;  "Oh, 
taste  and  see,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxxiv.  8).  And  prophets  unite  with  psalmists  in  bearing  this 
testimony  (Jer.  xxxiii.  11 ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  7).  Very  different  was  the  conception  formed  by 
the  heathen.  We  think  of  the  tyranny,  caprice,  and  revenge  supposed  to  characterize 
heathen  deities,  the  acts  of  cruelty  ascribed  to  them,  the  impurity  of  heathen  rites,  and 
the  wearisomeness  of  heathen  penances,  and  we  rejoice  that  the  voice  from  heaven  has 


U  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  [oh.  1. 1—15, 

spoken  unto  us,  and  that  the  truth  which  heathen  worshippers  did  not  know  has  beep 
BO  clearly  revealed  to  us  in  the  bright  assurance,  "  The  Lord  is  good."  "  The  Lord  is 
good."  Nature,  with  her  ten  thousand  voices,  bears  emphatic  testimony  here.  Benevo- 
lence "marks  all  the  operations  of  the  Creator's  hands.  All  his  works  declare  his  good- 
ness. The  majestic  sun,  the  full-orbed  moon,  the  stars  countless  in  number  and 
sparkling  in  the  vault  of  heaven,  the  refreshing  and  fertilizing  shower,  the  gentle 
breeze,  the  woods  re-echoing  with  the  notes  of  little  songsters,  the  varied  landscape,  the 
carpeted  earth,  the  tinted  flowers,  all  seem  to  speak  and  to  say,  "  The  Lord  is  good." 
"  0  Lord,  how  excellent  is  thy  Name  in  all  the  earth !  "  (Ps.  viii.  1) ;  "0  Lord,  how 
manifold,"  etc.  I  (Ps.  civ.  24).  "  The  Lord  is  good."  As  in  creation  so  in  providence,  the 
same  testimony  is  borne.  Specially  is  this  so  in  the  Divine  dealings  with  man,  supply- 
ing his  wants,  ministering  to  his  necessities,  scattering  blessings  in  his  path,  and  daily, 
yea,  hourly,  sustaining  and  preserving  him  from  peril  and  danger.  His  goodness,  too, 
is  seen  in  that  he  is  "  kind  even  to  the  unthankful,"  and  bestows  his  favours  not  only 
upon  "  the  just "  but  also  upon  "  the  unjust,"  sustaining  even  those  who  live  in  rebellion 
against  him.  Nor  does  the  fact  that  whilst  the  ungodly  often  seem  to  "  prosper  in 
their  way,"  "  waters  of  a  full  cup  are  wrung  out  to  his  people,"  militate  against  the 
declaration  of  this  text ;  for  God's  providence  takes  into  account  the  entire  welfare  of 
his  servants,  and  adverse  scenes  may  be  necessary  in  order  to  the  promotion  of  this ; 
and,  the  discipline  accomplished,  deliverance  shall  be  theirs,  whilst  the  arm  of  the 
oppressor  shall  be  broken  (vers.  12,  13).  "  The  Lord  is  good."  This  truth,  impressed 
upon  the  pages  of  the  Old  Testament,  receives  its  highest  exemplification  in  the  records 
of  the  Now.  In  him  whose  advent  prophets  predicted,  and  whose  work  was  shadowed 
forth  in  type  and  symbol,  and  in  the  free  redemption  he  has  wrought ;  in  the  seeking 
and  self-sacrificing  loveand  the  compassionate  inercy  and  grace  of  God  as  thus  expressed, 
we  see  the  noblest,  purest,  brightest  token  that  "  the  Lord  is  good."  In  this  Divine 
goodness,  ever  watchful  to  guard  us ;  almighty,  and  hence  equal  to  every  emergency  of 
our  life ;  immutable  too,  and  therefore  an  unfailing  dependence  amidst  the  mutations 
and  fluctuations  of  our  earthly  lot, — ^let  us  rest  with  unswerving  trust,  until  at  length, 
every  bond  sundered,  we,  as  "  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord,  come  to  Zion  with  songs  and 
everlasting  joy  upon  our  heads,"  there  with  adoring  gratitude  to  reflect  upon  the 
memory  of  his  great  goodness,  and  to  praise  him  for  his  mercy  and  grace  and  love  for 
evermore. — S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  7. — Ood  our  Stronghold.  Great,  indeed,  is  the  honour  sustained  by  the  man 
who  fulfils  the  mission  of  being  a  comforter  to  others,  who  is  enabled  to  minister  to 
sorrowing  and  stricken  ones,  who  watches  with  them  in  their  Gethsemanes,  and  by  his 
gentle  words  and  tender  sympathy  imparts  consolation  to  their  wounded  hearts.  "  I 
dwelt  as  a  king  in  the  army ;  as  one  that  com/orteth  the  mourners  "  (Job  xxix.  25).  No 
service  makes  a  greater  demand  upon  a  man  than  this,  yet  he  has  an  abundant  reward 
for  the  self-sacrifice  involved,  in  beholding  the  objects  of  his  regard  no  longer  in 
"  ashes,"  but  raised  out  of  the  dust  and  made  comely ;  no  longer  with  disfigured 
countenance  through  grief,  but  radiant  with  joy;  no  longer  arrayed  in  gloom,  but  clad 
in  the  beautiful  garments  worn  on  festal  days  (Isa.  Ixi.  2,  3).  Nahum,  whilst  the 
minister  of  condemnation  to  the  Ninevites,  was  also  the  minister  of  consolation  to  his 
own  people  in  their  sadness  and  sorrow.  Only  a  few  of  his  words  to  Israel  are  recorded, 
but  they  are  words  full  of  consolation  and  hope.  Here  he  pointed  to  God  as  the  Strong- 
hold of  his  servants.  "  He  is  a  Stronghold  in  the  day  of  trouble  "  (ver.  7).  We  have 
here — 

I.  A  COMMON  UNIVERSAL  EXPEBIENOE.  "Trouble."  Man  is  born  to  this.  Trials 
arise ;  conflicts  must  be  engaged  in  ;  the  cares  and  anxieties  of  life  press ;  hopes  are 
frustrated;  injustice  triumphs;  slander  blights;  sickness,  disease,  death,  prevail ;  our 
best  and  dearest  pass  away  from  our  view ;  graves  are  opened ;  the  tears  fall  fast  j  and 
immunity  from  all  this  is  granted  to  none,  each  must  pass  through  dark  experiences 
and  encounter  adverse  influences :  this  is  the  discipline  of  life. 

» In  this  vain  world  the  days  are  not  all  fair  j 
To  suffer  is  the  work  we  have  to  do ; 
And  every  one  has  got  a  cross  to  bear, 

And  every  one  some  secret  beart-aobe  too." 


OH.  1. 1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM. 


II.  A  DEBF  INWARD  NEED  ABisiNG  OCT  OF  THIS  EZPEBIENOB.  It  ii  implied  here 
that  man  circumstanced  thus  needs  help.  He  knows  not  how  to  bear  the  ills  of  life 
unaided  and  alone.  He  who  has  to  face  the  pitiless  storm  needs  to  be  robed  to  resist 
the  stress  of  adverse  weather,  and  he  who  has  to  confront  the  foe  requires  to  be  armour- 
clad.  This  need  of  the  sorrowing  heart  cannot  be  supplied  by  earthly  sources.  The 
world's  cheer  then  comes  to  the  man  like  songs  to  a  heavy  heart,  and  he  has  no  taste 
for  its  music.  Scepticism  can  cast  no  bow  of  promise  across  the  cloud ;  whilst  human 
philosophy  may  counsel  the  cheriahing  of  the  spirit  of  indifference,  but  which  under 
the  pressure  it  is  impossible  to  cultivate. 

III.  This  need  amplt  met  in  God.  "  He  is  a  Stronghold  in  the  day  of  trouble." 
The  figure  is  a  very  striking  one.  There  stands  the  castle  with  its  thick  walls  and 
buttresses  and  its  brave  defenders  ready  to  resist  any  attack.  The  foes  attempt  a 
landing,  and  the  inhabitants,  old  and  young,  hasten  to  the  fortress.  The  drawbridge 
is  lifted,  the  moat  is  filled  with  water,  and  all  are  safely  lodged  in  the  stronghold,  and 
in  the  day  of  visitation  are  securely  guarded  and  safely  kept.  Even  thus  is  it  with 
the  good  in  "  the  day  of  trouble."  So  David  cried,  "  Thou  hast  been  a  Shelter  for  me 
and  a  Strong  Tower  from  the  enemy  "  (Ps.  Ixi.  3,  4).  God  was  his  "  Light  and  his 
Salvation  "  (Ps.  xxvii.  1),  his  "  Pavilion  "  (Ps.  xxvii.  5),  the  Solace  of  his  every  grief 
as  well  as  the  Centre  of  his  every  joy.  He  loved  him,  he  trusted  him,  he  knew  that 
the  dearest  experience  in  life  Is  the  experience  of  God's  love  and  care.  So  Hezekiah 
and  his  people  when  threatened  by  Sennacherib.  The  Assyrian  army  gathered  in  all 
its  strength  around  "  the  city  of  God,"  and  Jerusalem  became  as  a  mountain  shaken 
by  the  swelling  of  the  sea,  portions  of  which  were  crumbling  and  falling  through  the 
violence  of  the  waves,  and  the  whole  of  which  seemed  ready  to  be  borne  entirely  away  ; 
yet  the  king  and  his  subjects  were  calm  and  tranquil ;  they  committed  their  cause  to 
"  the  Strong  One,"  and  rested  in  his  protection,  and  cried  with  holy  fervour,  "  God  ii 
our  Kefuge  and  Strength,"  etc.  (Isa.  xxxvi.;  xxxvii. ;  Ps.  xlvi.).  And  let  us  only  realize 
that  Jehovah  is  to  us  a  living  Presence,  the  Source  of  our  inspiration,  the  Strength  of 
our  hearts  and  our  abiding  Portion,  and  we  shall  give  to  the  winds  all  craven  fear,  and 
in  our  darkest  seasons  shall  sing — 

"A  sure  Stronghold  our  God  is  he, 

A  timely  Shield  and  Weapon ; 

Our  Help  he'll  be,  and  set  us  free 

From  every  ill  can  happen. 
And  were  the  world  with  devils  filled 

All  eager  to  devour  us, 
Our  souls  to  fear  shall  little  yield. 
They  cannot  overpower  us." 

B.D.  H. 

Ver.  7. — The  Divine  regard  for  trusting  hearts.  "  And  he  knoweth  them  that  trust 
In  him."  Something  more  than  mere  acquaintance  is  involved  here;  the  meaning 
undoubtedly  is  that  he  intimately  and  lovingly  regards  those  who  commit  themselves 
and  their  way  unto  him,  and  will  tenderly  care  for  them  and  promote  their  weal ;  yea, 
still  more,  even  that  he  knows  and  cares  thus  for  such  personally  and  individually, 
not  overlooking  any  of  them  in  the  multitude,  but  regarding  thus  each  and  every  such 
trusting  heart. 

I.  This  tbdth  admits  of  amplk  confirmation.  There  is  something  very 
wonderful  in  this  thought.  Is  it  not  almost  past  conception  that  he  who  has  the 
direction  of  all  worlds  dependent  upon  him,  and  whose  dominions  are  so  vast,  should 
look  upon  his  servants  in  this  small  world  of  ours,  separately  and  with  loving  regard, 
and  should  interest  himself  in  our  personal  concerns  ?  So  too,  awed  and  humbled  as 
we  stand  in  the  midst  of  the  vast  and  mighty  works  of  God,  we  feel  impelled  to  cry, 
"  When  I  consider  thy  heavens,"  etc.  (Ps.  viii.  3).  Yet  that  it  is  so  is  abundantly 
confirmed  in  the  teachings  of  Scripture.  1.  See  this  truth  taught  in  type.  Call  to 
remembrance  the  breastplate  of  the  Jewish  high  priest,  that  splendid  embroidered 
cloth  which  covered  his  breast,  and  in  which  were  set  precious  stones  bearing  the 
names  of  the  tribes  of  Israel.  And  did  not  those  precious  stones,  worn  so  near  the 
heart  of  the  high  priest,  symbolize  the  truth  that  all  sincere  servants  of  God  are  deai 


1«  THE  BOOK  OP  NAHUM.  [oh.  1. 1— !& 

unto  him ;  that  he  not  only  bears  them  up  in  his  arms  with  an  almighty  strength,  but 
bears  them  also  upon  his  heart  with  the  most  tender  affection?  2.  See  this  truth 
taught  in  prophecy.  It  is  therein  declared  that  there  is  nothing  so  impossible  as  that 
God  should  forget  his  trusting  children.  "  Zion  said,  The  Lord  hath  forgotten  me,  and 
my  Lord  hath  forsaken  me  "  (Isa.  xlix.  14,  15).  And  in  response  to  this  fear  the  Lord 
declared  that  this  could  never  be,  and  that  his  love  and  care  are  even  more  enduring 
than  that  of  mothers.  "  Can  a  woman,"  etc.  ?  (Isa.  xlix.  15) ;  "  1  have  graven  thee 
upon  the  palms  of  my  hands  "  (Isa.  xlix.  16).  Undying  remembrance  surely  1  The 
name  is  inscribed  there,  never  to  be  obliterated,  a  ceaseless  memorial  before  his  face. 
3.  The  New  Testament  unites  with  the  Old  in  bearing  this  bright  testimony ;  for  does 
not  Christ,  as  the  good  Shepherd,  declare  that  "  he  calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name,  and 
leadeth  them  out "  ?  do  we  not  read  also  the  assurance,  "  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that ' 
are  his"  (2  'llm.  ii.  19)?  yea,  is  it  not  even  affirmed  that  this  Divine  knowledge 
and  care  respecting  the  good  shall  be  perpetuated  evermore  (Rev.  vii.  16—17; 
xxi.  3,  4)? 

IL  This  tbuth  is  oalculated  to  exebt  a  btbenothekino  asd  STtuniiATiiira 
INFLUENCE.  This  thought,  if  more  intensely  realized  by  us,  would  prove  helpful  in 
many  ways.  1.  It  would  render  us  less  dependent  than  we  are  upon  human  support*. 
What  over-anxiety  is  felt  by  us  at  times  in  reference  to  the  success  of  our  plans  and 
projects,  or  for  the  continuance  to  us  of  those  in  whom  our  prosperity,  humanly 
speaking,  centres  1  But  if  we  grasped  fully  the  assurance  here  expressed,  we  should  be 
led  to  depend  less  upon  earthly  sources  and  more  upon  him  who  has  loved  us  with  an 
everlasting  love ;  who,  though  unseen  by  us,  ever  encompasses  our  path,  and  who,  in 
the  season  of  their  deepest  extremity,  will  guide  and  strengthen  all  who  stay  them- 
selves on  him.  2.  It  would  give  increased  reality  to  the  sacred  exercise  of  prayer.  We 
too  often  draw  nigh  unto  Qod  as  though  we  were  seeking  One  who,  because  he  is 
invisible,  is  necessarily  at  an  infinite  distance  from  us,  and  who  may  or  may  not 
regard  oui  cry,  and  perhaps  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  we  sometimes  draw  nigh 
without  any  distinct  apprehension  of  the  Being  to  whom  we  profess  to  come,  and  whose 
aid  we  invoke;  but  then  we  should  indeed  feel  prayer  to  be  a  reality  and  not  a  merely 
formal  exercise,  and  by  such  intimate  and  hallowed  communion  should  renew  our 
spiritual  strength.  3.  It  would  strengthen  and  aid  us  in  our  conflicts  vnth  sin.  In 
this  strife  we  sometimes  suffer  defeat;  and  in  our  endeavours  after  the  Christian 
character  and  life  we  are  painfully  conscious  at  seasons  of  failure.  How  cheering  in 
such  circumstances  is  the  thought  that  all  our  aspirations  after  truth  and  purity  and 
goodness  are  known  unto  our  God ;  that  he  is  acquainted  with  all  the  circumstances  of 
our  case ;  that  he  is  conscious  we  have  not  designedly  strayed  from  him ;  and  that  hs 
follows  us,  with  loving  regard,  in  all  our  wanderings,  with  a  view  to  brinsdns  us  back 
to  his  fold  I— 8.  D.H. 

Vers.  8 — 15. — Antagonism  to  God  and  his  rule.  Nahum  doubtless  prophesied 
during  the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  and  shortly  after  the  defeat  of  Sennacherib  by  the 
destroying  angel  of  the  Lord  (Isa.  xxxvii.  36).  That  memorable  event,  it  would 
appear,  was  present  to  his  mind  and  is  referred  to  in  these  verses,  although  his  thoughts 
were  also  carried  on  to  the  future  and  to  the  complete  and  final  overthrow  of  the 
Assyrian  power  in  the  destruction  of  the  capital,  and  which  forms  the  theme  of  the 
succeeding  chapters.  The  latter  part  of  this  first  chapter  may  be  regarded  aa 
introductory  to  the  description  to  be  given  of  the  ruin  of  Nineveh ;  and  in  the  mind  of 
the  seer,  as  he  wrote  these  verses,  the  events  which  had  recently  transpired  and  darker 
events  yet  to_  come  were  associated  together.  The  significance  of  the  conflicts  waged 
by  Sennacherib  against  Hezekiah  lies  very  materially  in  the  fact  that  his  enterprises 
were  designedly  antagonistic  to  the  Ood  of  the  Hebrews.  It  is  not  simply  an  ambitious 
sovereign  seeking  to  extend  his  dominions  and  to  spread  his  conquests  that  is 
presented  to  us  here,  but  a  mortal  man,  invested  with  regal  honour,  resolved  upon 
measuring  his  strength  with  that  of  the  Supreme  Ruler.  The  historical  records  we 
possess  bearing  upon  the  career  of  this  Assyrian  king  present  him  to  us  as  one  who 
thought  he  could  "  outwit  Divine  wisdom,  and  conquer  omnipotence  itself  "  (2  Kings 
xix.  10 — 13 ;  Isa.  xxxvi.  13 — 20) ;  and  viewed  thus  they  become  suggestive  to  us  of 
important  teachings  bearing  upon  that  moral  antagonism  to  God  and  hi*  authority 


OH.  1. 1— 15.J  THE  BOOK  OP  NAHUM.  17 

which  unhappily  prevails  ia  every  age.  Concerning  this  opposition  to  the  Most  High 
and  his  rule,  note — 

I.  Antagonism  to  God  has  its  origin  in  a  depbayed  heaet.  Evil  thoughts 
and  vain  imaginings,  self-su£Sciency  and  self-conceit,  revellings  and  drunkenness,  all 
betoken  an  evil  heart,  and  these  are  here  associated  with  the  action  of  Assjrria.  "  For 
thou  art  vile "  (ver.  14) ;  "  a  wicked  counsellor "  (ver.  11),  etc.  So  in  every  age. 
Men  with  hearts  alienated  from  all  that  is  true  and  right  desire  not  the  knowledge  of 
his  ways,  and  say  unto  him,  "  Depart  from  nsj"  and  "they  set  themselves  against  the 
Lord,  and  against  his  anointed,  saying.  Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder,  and  let  ns 
cast  away  their  cords  from  us  "  (Ps.  ii.  2,  3). 

IL  Antagonism  to  God  reveals  itself  openlt  in  the  active  operations  of 
EVIL  MEN.  As  here :  1.  Unprincipled  leaders  are  forthcoming  (ver.  11).  2.  Com- 
binations are  formed.  "  Though  they  be  entire,  and  likewise  many "  (ver.  12)  ; 
"While  they  be  folden  together"  (ver.  10).  3.  Plots  are  conceived.  "They  imagine 
evil  against  the  Lord  "  (ver.  11).  4.  Mischief  is  wrought.  "  The  yoke  "  of  Assyria  was 
upon  Judah,  and  because  of  the  threatened  invasion  the  hearts  of  the  good  Hezekiah 
and  his  subjects  failed,  and  were  in  sore  distress.  The  Assyrians  were  as  "  thorns  "  to 
Judah  (ver.  10).  Ami  so  evil  men,  antagonistic  to  God  and  to  the  principles  of  hit 
rule,  are  ever  a  blight  and  a  curse. 

III.  Antagonism  to  God  can  only  end  in  defeat  and  dishonoub.  In  the 
case  of  Assyria  this  discomfiture  was:  1.  Divinely  inflicted.  "I  will  make  thy 
grave"  (ver.  14).  2.  Sudden — so  far  as  the  proud,  vaunting  Sennacherib  and  his  hosts 
were  concerned  (Isa.  xxxvii.  36).  3.  Complete.  "  He  will  make  an  utter  end  "  (ver.  9). 
4.  Permanent.  "The  Lord  hath  given  a  commandment  concerning  thee,  that  no 
more  of  thy  name  be  sown"  (ver.  14).  "So  let  all  thine  enemies  perish,  0  Lord; 
but  let  them  that  love  him  be  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his  might" 
(Judg.  V.  31).— S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  8 — 15. — Spiritual  redemption  tymbolized.  The  expression  in  ver.  11,  "a 
wicked  counsellor,"  is  rendered  in  the  margin  "counsellor  of  Belial."  "Belial"  is  used 
in  the  Old  Testament  to  indicate  sensual  profligacy  (Judg.  xix.  22 ;  xxii.  13 ;  1  Sam.  ii. 
12) ;  and  in  the  New  Testament  as  a  synonym  for  Satan  (2  Cor.  vi.  15).  The  term  was 
here  (ver.  11)  applied  to  Sennacherib ;  and  the  deliverance  of  Judah  from  the  vauntingg 
and  oppressions  of  this  mighty  and  evil  Assyrian  monarch  described  in  these  verses 
(8 — 15)  may  be  taken  as  serving  to  illustrate  the  spiritual  deliverance  of  men.  There 
is  thus  suggested — 

I.  Deliverance  from  servitude.  Assyria  had  been  a  bitter  scourge  to  Judah. 
Through  the  action  of  his  predecessors,  Hezekiah  found  himself  the  vassal  of  this 
heathen  power,  and  his  attempts  to  free  himself  from  the  yoke  had  only  resulted  in 
his  fetters  being  fastened  the  more  securely ;  until  now,  by  Divine  interposition,  the 

fewer  of  the  oppressor  was  broken  (ver.  13).  So  sin  yielded  to  becomes  a  tyranny, 
t  gains  an  ever-increasing  power  over  its  subjects.  The  fetters  of  habit  become 
forged  about  them  that  they  cannot  release  themselves.  There  is  no  slavery  like  that 
of  sin — only  the  grace  of  God  can  sunder  the  fetters  and  free  us  from  the  galling  yoke; 
but  "  made  free  "  thus,  we  become  "  free  indeed  "  (John  viii.  34 — 86). 

II.  Deliverance  from  sorrow.  "Affliction  shall  not  rise  up  the  second  time" 
(ver.  9);  "Thougli  I  have  afflicted  thee,  1  will  afflict  thee  no  more"  (ver.  12).  The 
promise  was  conditional.  The  people  humbled  themselves  before  God  in  penitence,  and 
it  was  implied  that  they  should  not  be  afflicted  again  if  they  continued  in  God's  ways. 
In  this  they  failed — the  reformation  proved  but  partial ;  still,  God  never  afflicted  them 
again  through'Assjria.  So  suffering  is  disciplinary,  and  "made  free  from  sin"  there 
accompanies  this  deliverance  from  sorrow.  The  character  of  life's  trials  become 
changed  to  the  good ;  they  are  not  looked  upon  as  harsh  inflictions,  but  as  lovingly 
designed  by  the  All-wise  and  All-gracious. 

III.  Deliverance  bbsultino  in  privileqb.  "  0  Judah,  keep  thy  solenm  feasts, 
perform  thy  vows  "(ver.  15).  Whilst  under  the  yoke  of  Assyria,  there  had  been  the 
restriction  of  their  religious  privileges,  but  now  these  could  be  renewed  and  enjoyed 
without  restraint,  and  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  could  return  to  Zionwith  songs,  and 
pay  their  vows  unto  the  Lord,  and  keep  the  sacred  festivals!     Spiritual  freedom  is 

BAHUll.  « 


18  THB  BOOK  Of  MAHUM.  [oh.  i.  1—16 

with  k  view  to  holy  and  joyous  service.  The  Emancipator  becomes  enthroned  in  the 
hearts  of  the  enfranchlBed ;  they  love  him  supremely ;  his  service  is  their  delight ; 
they  become  bound  to  him  in  loving  loyalty  and  devotion  for  ever. 

IV.  Delivebasok  pboolaimed  i»  the  spibit  op  holt  gladness.  (Ver.  16.)  Let 
the  countenance  be  lighted  up  with  joy  as  the  aauouncement  of  the  "good  tidings  "  ii 
made.  With  a  glad  heart  let  the  proclamation  be  published  that,  through  the 
abounding  mercy  and  grace  of  God,  it  is  possible  for  sinful  men  to  become  delivered 
from  condemnation  and  freed  from  the  slavery  of  sinful  habit,  and  to  soar  to  that  higher 
and  holier  realm  where  God  is,  and  to  exchange  the  miserable  chains  of  evil  for  those 
golden  fetters  which  only  bind  to  the  holy  and  the  heavenly.  There  can  be  no  more 
exalted  or  joyous  service  than  that  engaged  in  by  the  mau  who  stands  upon  the 
mountains  ringing  this  great  bell,  that,  guided  by  its  sound,  the  imperilled  traveller 
may  make  his  way  across  the  snowy  wastes,  to  find  in  Christ  a  sure  and  safe  retreat 
from  the  storm  and  tempest.  "Behold  upon  the  mountains,"  etc.  (ver.  15;  Isa. 
il.  9).— S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  1,  2.~0reat  sins  bringing  great  ruin.  "  The  burden  of  Nineveh.  The  book 
of  the  vision  of  Nahum  the  Elkoshite.  God  is  jealous,  and  the  Lord  revengeth;  the 
Lord  revengeth,  and  is  furious ;  the  Lord  will  take  vengeance  on  his  adversaries,  and 
he  reserveth  wrath  for  his  enemies."  But  little  is  known  of  Nahum,  whose  name 
signifies  "  Comfort."  He  was  a  native  of  Elkosh  ;  generally  supposed  to  be  a  Galilsan 
vfllage.  He  lived  probably  in  or  about  the  year  B.C.  650.  The  burden  of  his  prophecy 
is  the  destruction  of  Nineveh,  which  destruction  was  predicted  by  Jonah  a  century 
before.  Nineveh  was  debtroyed  about  fifty  years  after  this  prophecy  was  uttered,  and 
so  complete  was  its  overthrow  that  the  very  site  where  it  stood  is  a  matter  of 
conjecture.  The  prophecy,  though  divided  into  three  chapters,  is  a  continuous  poem 
of  unrivalled  spirit  and  sublimity,  and  admirable  for  the  elegance  of  its  imagery, 
"  The  third  chapter  is  a  very  striking  description  of  a  siege — the  rattle  of  the  war- 
chariot,  the  gleam  of  the  sword,  the  trench  filled  with  corpses,  the  ferocity  of  the 
successful  invaders,  the  panic  of  the  defeated,  the  vain  attempts  to  rebuUd  the 
crumbling  battlements,  final  overthrow  and  ruin."  The  opening  words  suggest  two 
remarks. 

L  That  the  obeat  sins  of  a  people  must  eveb  bbing  upon  them  gbeat  buin. 
The  population  of  Nineveh  was  pre-eminently  wicked.  It  is  represented  in  the 
Soriptiwes  as  a  " bloody  city,"  a  "city  full  of  lies  and  robberies; "  its  savage  brutality 
to  captives  is  portrayed  in  its  own  monuments,  and  the  Hebrew  prophets  dwell  upon 
its  impious  haughtiness  and  ruthless  fierceness  (Isa.  x.  7,  8).  In  this  book  we  have  its 
"burden,"  that  is,  its  sentence,  its  doom;  and  the  doom  is  terrible  beyond  description. 
It  is  ever  so.  Great  sins  bring  great  ruin.  It  was  so  with  the  antediluvians,  with  the 
inhabitants  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.  It  was  bo  with  the  Jews  in  the  time  of  Titus. 
Thirty-seven  years  after  the  crucifixion  of  our  Lord,  the  Roman  general,  with  a 
numerous  army,  laid  siege  to  their  city,  and  converted  it  into  a  scene  uf  the  greatest 
horrors  ever  witnessed  on  this  earth.  The  jirinciple  of  moral  causation  and  the 
eternal  justice  of  the  universe  demand  that  wherever  there  is  sin  there  shall  he- 
suffering;  and  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  sin  shall  be  the  amount  of  suffering. 
"  Unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much  required." 

II.  That  the  gbeat  ruin  that  comes  upok  great  sinners  peesbnts  God  to  the 
"  VISION  "  OF  MAN  AS  TEEKiBLT  INDIGNANT.  «  God  is  jealous,  and  the  Lord  revengeth ; 
the  Lord  revengeth,  and  is  furious ;  the  Lord  will  take  vengeance  on  his  adversaries, 
and  he  reserveth  wrath  for  his  tnemies."  The  passions  of  man  are  here  ascribed  to 
God.  In  this  form  of  speech  the  Eternal  Spirit  is  often  represented  in  the  Bible  as 
havmg  feet,  hands,  ears,  mouth ;  but  as  he  has  none  of  these,  neither  has  he  any  of 
these  passions.  It  is  only  when  terrible  anguish  comes  upon  the  sinner  that  God 
appears  to  the  observer  as  indignant.  The  God  here  was  the  God  who  only  appeared 
in  the  "  vision  "  of  Nahum— the  God  as  he  appeared  to  a  man  of  limited  capacity  and 
imperfect  character.  Jesus  alont  saw  the  absolute  God.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at 
J'.'y  ,',™2,!  ^^^  ""^y.  tegotten  Son  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  declared 
him.  The  God  ot  Jesus  of  Nazareth  had  no  jealousy,  no  vengeance,  no  fury.  Ha 
was  love.     "  Fury  is  not  in  me,  saith  the  Loixl "  (Isa.  xxvii.  4)     If  God  has  anger 


OT.  1.1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  19 

it  is  the  aDger  of  principle,  not  passion — the  anger  of  love,  not  malevolence.  It  is 
indeed  but  another  form  of  lore :  love  opposing  and  crushing  whatever  is  repugnant 
to  the  virtue  and  the  happiness  of  the  universe. 

CoHOLUBiON.  Beware  of  sin.  Buin  must  follow  it.  "  Be  sure  your  sins  will  find 
you  out."— D.  T. 

Ver.  3. — The  patiemx  of  Ood.  "  The  Lord  is  slow  to  anger,  and  great  in  power, 
acd  will  not  at  all  acquit  the  wicked."  These  words  suggest  two  thoughts  concerning 
Ood's  patience. 

L  Hia  FATiBKOG  ALWAYS  IMPLIES  OBEAT  FOWEB.  "  The  Lord  is  slow  to  anger,  and 
great  m  power."  This  is  a  remarkable  expression.  It  seems  as  if  the  prophet  mean^ 
God  is  "  slow  to  anger  "  because  he  is  "  great  in  power ; "  if  he  had  lew  power  be 
would  be  less  patient.  A  man  may  be  "  slow  to  anger,"  slow  to  deal  out  vengeance, 
because  he  lacks  power  to  do  bo.  But  God  is  "slow  to  anger"  because  he  has 
abundance  of  power.  In  order  to  see  the  power  revealed  in  his  forbearance  towards 
sinners  in  this  world,  think  "of  four  things.  1.  His  exquisite  sensibilitt/.  There  are" 
some  men  "slow  to  anger"  because  they  have  not  the  susceptibility  of  feeling  an 
insult  or  offence;  their  patience,  such  as  it  is,  is  nothing  but  a  natural  stoicism.  Many 
men  are  lauded  for  their  calmness  under  insults,  who  are  rather  to  be  pitied  for  their 
natural  insensibility,  or  denounced  for  their  moral  callousness.  But  the  great  God  is 
ineffably  sensitive.  He  is  sensibility  itself.  He  Is  love.  He  feels  everything.  Every 
immoral  act  vibrates,  so  to  speak,  on  his  heart-chord ;  and  yet  he  ii  "  slow  to  anger." 
2._  His  abhorrence  of  sin.  It  is  the  "  abominable  thing"  which  he  emphatically  hates. 
His  whole  nature  revolts  from  it.  He  feels  that  it  is  antagonism  to  his  will  and  to  the 
order  and  well-being  of  the  universe.  3.  His  provocation  hy  the  world.  Multiply  the 
sins  of  each  man  in  one  day  by  the  countless  millions  of  men  that  populate  the  globe ; 
then  you  will  have  some  conception  of  the  provocation  that  this  God  of  exquisite 
sensibility,  of  an  ineffable  hatred  to  sin,  receives  every  day  from  this  planet.  One 
insult  often  sets  man's  blood  ablaze.  Surely,  if  all  the  patience  of  all  the  angels  in 
heaven  were  to  be  embodied  in  one  personality,  and  that  personality  were  entrusted 
with  the  government  of  this  world  for  one  day,  before  the  clock  struck  the  hour  of 
midnight  he  would  set  the  globe  in  flames.  4.  His  right  to  do  whatever  he  pleases 
He  could  show  his  anger  if  he  pleased,  at  any  time,  anywhere,  or  anyhow.  He  is 
absolutely  irresponsible.  He  has  no  one  to  fear.  When  men  feel  anger  there  are  many 
reasons  to  prevent  them  from  showing  it ;  but  he  has  no  such  reason.  How  great,  then, 
must  be  his  "power"  in  holding  back  his  anger  1  His  power  of  self-control  is  infinite. 
"  He  is  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  power,"  "  The  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his 
promise,  as  some  men  count  slackness;  but  is  long-suffering  to  usward,  not  willing  that 
any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  9). 

II.  His  patience  pbecludes  not  the  punishment  of  the  impenitent.  "And 
will  not  at  all  acquit  the  wicked."  That  is,  the  impenitent  wicked.  However  wicked 
a  man  is,  if  he  repents  he  will  be  acquitted.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  ways,  and 
the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts,"  etc.  (Isa.  Iv.  7).  1.  To  "acquit"  the  impenitent 
would  be  an  infraction,  of  his  law.  He  has  bound  suffering  to  sin  by  a  law  as  strong  and 
as  inviolable  as  that  which  binds  the  planets  to  the  sun.  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death ; " 
"  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  Sin  leads  to  ruin :  this  is  a  law. 
2.  To  "  acquit "  the  impenitent  would  be  a  violation  of  his  vwrd.  "  The  wicked  shtdl 
be  turned  into  hell,  with  all  the  nations  that  forget  God ; "  "  Unless  ye  repent,  ye 
shall  all  likewise  perish ; "  "I  will  Jaugh  at  your  calamities,  and  mock  when  your  fear 
Cometh."  3.  To  "acquit"  the  impenitent  would  be  to  break  the  harmony  of  his 
universe.  If  inveterate  rebels  and  incorrigible  sinners  were  acquitted,  what  an  impulse 
there  would  be  given  in  God's  moral  empire  to  anarchy  and  rebellion  1 

CoNOLtrsiON.  Abuse  not  the  patience  of  God;  nay,  avail  yourselves  of  it.  WhiU 
he  forbears,  and  because  he  forbears,  repent!  "Despisest  thou  the  riches  of  his 
goodness  and  forbearance  and  long-suffering ;  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God 
leadeth  thee  to  repentance  ?  "  (Bom.  ii.  4:), — D.  T. 

Vers.  3 — 6. — QotPs  power.  "  The  Lord  hath  his  way  in  the  whirlwind  and  in  the 
storm,  and  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of  his  feet.     He  rebuketh  the  sea,  and  m«keth  it 


20 


THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  [oh.  1. 1—16. 


dry,  and  drieth  up  all  the  riverB,"  etc.    Here  is  a  description  of  God's  power  unnvalled 
in  its  sublimity  and  soul-stirring  force.    "  Power  belongeth  unto  God.  _    It  is  absolute, 
inexhaustible,  ever  and  everywhere  operative.    "He  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary. 
His  power  is  here  presented  in  two  aspects.  ,     .     ^r      i       « rrv,     t     j 

I.  As  OPERATING  IBRE8IBTIBLY   IN  NATDKB.      1.   It  WOTlM   in   the   O/lT.  IM    ijOTO 

hath  his  way  in  the  whirlwind  and  in  the  storm,  and  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of  his  feet. 
He  is  in  the  "whirlwind"  and  in  the  "storm,"  and  has  his  way  in  the  clouds.  As 
men  walk  on  the  dust  of  the  earth,  he  walketh  upon  the  clouds  of  heaven.  He  creates 
the  whirlwind  and  the  storm;  he  controls  the  whirlwind  and  the  storm;  he  uses  the 
whirlwind  and  the  storm.  "He  maketh  the  clouds  his  chariot,  and  ndeth  upon  the 
wings  of  the  wind."  He  awakes  the  tornado  and  simoom,  he  forges  the  thunderbolts, 
and  he  kindles  the  lightnings.  2.  It  works  in  the  sea.  "  He  rebuketh  the  sea,  and 
maketh  it  dry,  and  drieth  up  all  the  rivers."  There  is  undoubtedly  an  allusion  to  the 
Red  Sea  and  the  Jordan.  «  He  holdeth  the  winds  in  his  fists,  and  the  waters  in  the 
hollow  of  his  hands."  His  "  way  is  in  the  sea,"  and  his  "  path  in  the  great  waters. 
The  billows  that  rise  into  mountains,  as  well  as  the  smallest  wavelets  that  come 
rippling  softly  to  the  shore,  are  the  creatures  of  his  power  and  the  servants  of  his  will. 
3.  It  works  on  the  earth.  "  Bashan  languisheth,  and  Carmel,  and  the  flower  of  Lebanon 
languisheth,"  No  spots  in  Palestine  were  more  fruitful  than  these  three;  they 
abounded  in  vigorous  vegetation  and  majestic  forests.  But  their  life  and  their  growth 
depended  on  the  results  of  God's  power.  All  the  blades  in  the  fields,  all  the  trees  in 
the  forest,  would  languish  and  wither  did  his  power  cease  to  operate.  Nor  is  his 
power  less  active  in  the  inorganic  parts  of  the  world.  "The  mountains  quake  at  him, 
and  the  hills  melt,  and  the  earth  is  burned  at  his  presence,  yea,  the  world,  and  all  that 
dwell  therein."  "  He  looketh  on  the  earth,  and  it  trembleth :  he  toucheth  the  hills,  and 
they  smoke."  He  piles  up  the  mountains,  and  again  makes  them  a  plain;  he  kindles 
the  volcanoes  and  quenches  them  at  his  pleasure.  God's  power  is  seen  in  all  the 
phenomena  of  the  material  world.  How  graphically  and  beautifully  is  this  presented 
in  Ps.  civ.  1  The  fact  that  God's  power  is  ever  acting  in  the  material  universe  is : 
(1)  The  most  philosophic  explanation  of  all  its  phenomena.  The  men  who  ascribe  all 
the  operations  of  nature  to  what  they  call  laws  fail  to  satisfy  my  intellect.  For  what 
are  those  laws  1  (2)  The  most  hallowing  aspect  of  the  world  we  live  in.  God  is  in 
alL  "  How  dreadful  is  this  place  1  it  is  none  other  than  the  house  of  God."  Walk 
the  earth  with  reverence.  "  Take  your  shoes  from  off  your  feet,  for  the  place  whereon 
thou  standest  is  holy  ground." 

II.  As  IBRBSISTIBLT  OPPOSED  TO  THE  WICKED.  "  Who  Can  Stand  bsfore  his  indigna- 
tion ?  and  who  can  abide  in  the  fierceness  of  his  anger  ?  his  fury  is  poured  out  like 
fire,  and  the  rocks  are  thrown  down  by  him."  The  mightiest  rocks  are  but  as  pebbles 
in  his  hands.  "  He  taketh  up  the  isles  as  a  very  little  thing ;  he  weigheth  the 
mountains  in  scales,  and  the  hills  in  a  balance  "  (Isa.  xl.  12, 15)  His  anger,  as  we  have 
said,  is  his  determination  to  crush  the  wrong ;  and  there  is  no  power  in  the  universe 
that  can  thwart  him  in  this.  Who  can  stand  before  this?  Were  all  the  creatures  in 
the  universe  to  stand  up  against  it,  the  attempt  would  be  as  feeble  and  as  futile  as  the 
attempt  of  a  child  to  turn  back  the  advancing  tides  with  his  little  spade.  Sinner,  why 
attempt  to  oppose  him?  You  must  submit,  either  against  your  will  or  by  your  wUl. 
If  yon  continue  to  resist,  the  former  is  a  necessity.  He  will  break  you  in  pieces  like 
a  potter's  vessel.  The  latter  is  your  duty  and  your  interest.  Fall  down  in  penitence 
before  him,  yield  yourselves  to  his  service,  acquiesce  in  his  will,  and  you  are  saved. — ^D.  T. 

Vers.  7, 8. — Opposite  types  of  human  character,  and  opposite  linet  of  Divine  procedure. 
"  The  Lord  is  good,  a  Stronghold  in  the  day  of  trouble ;  and  he  knoweth  them  that 
trust  in  him.  But  with  an  overnmning  flood  he  will  make  an  utter  end  of  the  place 
thereof,  and  darkness  shall  pursue  his  enemies."  The  previous  verses  were  intro- 
ductory to  the  subject  which  the  prophet  now  takes  up,  namely,  the  safe  keeping  of 
the  Jews  by  Jehovah,  in  view  of  the  tremendous  attack  the  King  of  Nineveh  was 
about  making  on  their  country  and  their  city,  and  also  to  announce  the  terrible  doom 
of  Nineveh,  the  capital  of  the  Assyrian  foe.  .  In  these  verses  there  is  a  very  striking 
and  significant  contrast  (1)  between  the  characters  of  men,  and  (2)  between  the  lines 
of  Divine  procedure  in  relation  to  them.     Here  we  have— 


OH.  1.1—15.]  THE    BOOK   OF   NAUUM.  21 

L  Two  OPPOSITE  TYPES  OP  HCMAN  CHAKACTEE.  1.  Ewt  We  have  the  friend fof  Qod. 
There  is  here  a  twofold  description  of  them.  (1)  "  They  trust  in  him."  This  is  tha 
universal  character  of  the  good  in  all  ages.  Instead  of  placing  their  chief  confidence  in 
the  ever-changing  creature,  they  centre  it  in  the  immutable  Creator.  They  trust  his 
love  ever  to  provide  for  them,  his  wisdom  as  their  infallible  guide,  and  his  power  as 
their  strength  and  their  shield.  "Blessed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  iu  the  Lord." 
(2)  He  acknowledges  them.  "  And  he  knoweth."  This  means  that  he  recognizes  them 
as  his  loyal  subjects  and  loving  children,  his  people.  In  Hos.  xiii.  6  he  saith,  "  I  did 
know  thee  in  the  wilderness,"  which  means,  "  I  did  acknowledge  thee,  and  took  care  of 
theel"  The  words  imply  the  cognizance  of  special  sympathy  with  the  just.  He 
knows  them;  they  are  always  in  his  mind,  his  heart.  "Can  a  mother  forget  her 
sucking  chUd,"  etc.  ?  2.  Here  we  have  the  enemies  of  God.  "  Darkness  shall  pursue 
his  enemies."  The  men  who  misrepresent  our  characters,  oppose  our  expressed  wishes, 
seek  to  undermine  our  influence,  and  are  ever  in  association  with  those  who  are  opposed 
to  us — such  men,  whatever  may  be  their  professions  of  regard  and  friendship,  we  are 
bound  to  regard  as  enemies.  Is  it  not  so  with  men  in  relation  to  God  ?  Those  who 
pursue  a  course  of  life  directly  opposite  to  the  moral  laws  of  Heaven,  whatever  they 
may  say,  are  his  enemies.  How  numerous  are  God's  enemies  1  These  two  great  classes 
comprehend  the  human  race  to-day.  The  race  may  be  divided  into  very  numerous 
classes  on  certain  adventitious  principles,  but  on  moral  grounds  there  are  but  two- 
God's  friends  and  God's  enemies. 

IL  Two  OPPOSITK  LINES  OF  DxviNB  PBOOBDURB.  Qod's  procedure  is  very  different 
towards  these  two  opposite  classes  of  men.  1.  He  affords  protection  to  the  one.  When 
the  hosts  of  Sennacherib  were  approaching  Jerusalem,  Hezekiah  the  king,  under 
Divine  inspiration,  said  to  the  people,  "  Be  strong  and  courageous,  be  not  afraid  nor 
dismayed  for  the  King  of  Assyria,  nor  for  all  the  multitude  that  is  with  him :  for  there 
be  more  with  us  than  with  him :  with  him  is  an  arm  of  flesh ;  but  with  us  is  the 
Lord  our  God  to  help  us,  and  to  fight  our  battles.  And  the  people  rested  themselves 
upon  the  words  of  Hezekiah  King  of  Judah  "  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  7,  8).  Thus  it  is  ever. 
God  is  always  the  Befuge  and  Strength  of  his  people  in  times  of  tribulation.  As  a 
Befuge,  he  is :  (1)  Ever  accessible.  However  suddenly  the  storm  may  come,  the  refuge 
is  at  your  side,  the  door  is  open.  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,"  etc.  (2)  Ever  secure. 
The  sanctuary  once  entered,  ho  injury  can  follow.  Amidst  the  most  violent  convulsions 
of  nature,  the  wreck  of  worlds,  the  shatterings  of  the  universe,  there  is  no  eudangering 
the  security  of  those  who  avail  themselves  of  this  refuge.  2.  He  sends  destruction  to 
the  other,  "  But  with  an  OTerrunning  flood  he  will  make  an  utter  end  of  the  place 
thereof,  and  darkness  shall  pursue  his  enemies.''  The  image  of  a  flood  which  breaks 
through  every  barrier  is  not  unfrequently  used  in  the  Bible  to  represent  overwhelming 
armies  of  invasion.  The  primary  allusion  here,  no  doubt,  is  to  the  way  which 
Nineveh  was  captured  by  means  of  the  Medea  and  Babylonians.  A  flood  in  the  river, 
we  are  told,  broke  down  the  wall  for  twenty  furlongs.  The  rolling  tide  burst  its 
barriers,  bore  away  the  defences  of  the  city,  and  opened  an  easy  and  unexpected  way 
for  the  invading  armies.  On  all  finally  impenitent  men  destruction  must  come  as 
irresistibly  as  a  flood.  The  destruction,  however,  of  existence,  conscience,  or  mortd 
obligations  would  be  the  destruction  of  all  that  would  make  existence  worth  having. 

Conclusion.  The  grand  question  of  every  man  is — How  do  I  stand  rin  relation  to 
God  ?  If  I  am  his  friend,  his  procedure  is  in  my  favour,  it  guards  me  and  blesses  me 
every  step.  If  I  am  his  enemy,  his  procedure  is  not  in  my  favour,  not  because  he 
changes,  but  because  I  put  myself  against  him,  and  it  must  be  my  ruin  if  I  change  not. 
As  he  proceeds  in  his  beneficent  and  undeviating  march,  he  showers  blessings  on  the 
good,  and  miseries  on  the  evil,  and  this  for  ever. — D.  T. 

Veri.  9,  10. — Sin.  "What  do  ye  imagine  against  the  Lord?  He  will  make  an 
utter  end:  affliction  shall  not  rise  up  the  second  time.  For  while  they  be  folden 
together  as  thorns,  and  while  they  are  drunken  as  drunkards,  they  shall  be  devoured 
as  stubble  fully  dry."    These  words  suggest  a  few  thoughts  concerning  sin. 

I.  The  essence  or  sin  is  sugqebted:  it  is  hostility  to  Goo.  It  Is  something 
directed  against  the  Lord ;  it  is  opposition  to  the  laws,  purposes,  spirit  of  God.^  "  The 
carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God ;  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither 


22  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  [oh.  1. 1—15. 

indeedcan  be  "  (Eom.  viii.  7).  It  involves :  1.  The  basest  tngratitude ;  for  to  him  we 
owe  everything.  2.  The  greatest  injustice;  for  he  has  supreme  claims  to  cm"  devotion 
and  obedience.  3.  Impious  presumption.  Frail  worms  raising  their  heads  against 
the  Infinite  I 

II.  The  beat  of  bin  ib  siraaBSTBD:  it  is  in  the  mind.  "What  do  ye  imagine 
against  the  Lord  ?  "  Sin  is  not  language,  however  bad ;  not  actions,  however  apparently 
wicked.  Words  and  deeds  are  no  more  sin  than  branches  are  the  sap  of  the  tree. 
They  are  the  mere  effects  and  expression  of  sin.  Sin  is  in  the  mind — in  the  deep, 
secret,  mute  thoughts  of  the  heart.  Q-od's  legislation  extends  to  thought,  reaches  it  in 
the  profoundest  abyss.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he  "  (Prov.  xxiii.  7). 
Christ,  in  his  sermon  on  the  mount,  taught  this.  Adultery,  robbery,  murder,  are  all 
perpetrated  on  the  arena  of  the  heart.  How  necessary  the  prayer,  "  Create  within  us 
clean  hearts,  0  God  "  1 

III.  The  folly  of  sin  ib  suogested  :  it  ib  opposition  to  Omnipotence.  "  What 
do  ye  imagine  against  the  Lord  ?  He  will  make  an  utter  end :  affliction  shall  not  rise 
up  a  second  time."  "  How  mad  is  your  attempt,  0  Assyrians,  to  resist  so  powerful  a 
Gfod  1  What  can  ye  do  against  such  an  Adversary,  successful  though  ye  have  been 
against  all  other  adversaries  ?  Ye  imagine  ye  have  to  do  merely  with  mortals,  and 
with  a  weak  people,  and  that  so  you  will  gain  an  easy  victory;  but  you  have  to 
encounter  God,  the  Protector  of  his  people  "  (Fausset).  In  opposing  him :  1.  Me  will 
completely  rwin  you.  "  He  will  make  an  utter'  end :  affliction  shall  not  rise  up  the 
second  time."  The  literal  meaning  of  this  is  that  the  overthrow  of  Sennacherib's 
host  was  so  complete  that  Judah's  affliction  caused  by  this  invasion  would  never  be 
repeated.  The  man  who  opposes  God  will  be  utterly  ruined.  2.  Se  will  completely 
ruin  you,  whatever  the  kind  of  resistance  you  may  offer.  "  For  while  they  be  folden 
together  as  thorus,  and  while  they  are  drunken  as  dnmkards,  they  shall  be  devoured 
as  stubble  fully  dry."  You  may  be  combined  like  a  bundle  of  thorns,  offering  resistance ; 
you  may  have  all  the  daring  and  temerity  of  drunkards,  albeit  you  "  shall  be  devoured 
as  stubble  fully  dry."  All  this  was  realized  in  the  destruction  of  his  enemy.  Oh 
the  folly  of  sinl  Fighting  against  God  is  a  mad  fight.  "  What  do  ye  imagine  against 
the  Lord,"  then?    Sinners,  submit. — D.  T. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — Corrupt  Mngi.  "  There  is  one  come  out  of  thee,  that  imagineth 
evil  against  the  Lord,  a  wicked  counBellor.  Thus  saith  the  Lord ;  Though  they  be 
quiet,  and  likewise  many,  yet  thus  shall  they  be  cut  down,  when  he  shall  pass 
through,"  etc.  These  words  suggest  a  few  thoughts  concerning  human  kings  and 
kingdoms. 

I.   HUIIAN  KINGS  ABB   SOMETIMES  TBBBIBLT   OOBEUPT.      "  There  iS  One  COmO  OUt  of 

thee,  that  imagineth  evil  against  the  Lord,  a  wicked  counsellor."  This  evidently 
means  Sennacherib,  the  King  of  Nineveh.  He  was  one  of  the  great  moral  monsters  of 
the  world.  "  He  invaded  the  land  of  Judah  with  an  immense  army,  besieged  Lachish, 
and  having  reduced  that  city,  threatened  to  invade  Jerusalem  itself.  Hezekiah, 
dreading  his  power,  sent  him  an  obsequious  embassy,  and  by  paying  three  hundred 
talents  of  silver  and  thirty  talents  of  gold,  purchased  an  inglorious  peace.  But  no 
sooner  had  Sennacherib  received  the  money  than,  disdaining  his  engagements,  he 
prosecuted  the  w.ir  with  as  much  vigour  as  if  no  treaty  had  been  in  existence,  sending 
three  of  his  gSnerals  and  a  powerful  army  to  besiege  Jerusalem.  Being  informed  that 
Tirhakah  King  of  Ethiopia  joined  by  the  power  of  Egypt,  was  advancing  to  assist 
Hezekiah,  he  marched  to  meet  the  approaching  armies,  defeated  them  in  a  general 
engagement,  ravaged  their  country,  and  returned  with  the  spoil  to  finish  the  siege  of 
Jerusalem.  Hezekiah,  in  the  extremity  of  his  distress,  implored  the  succour  of 
Heaven ;  and  the  insolence  and  blasphemy  of  Sennacherib  drew  upon  the  Assyrians 
the  vengeance  of  God.  And,  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  the 
sacred  historian  informs  us  that  the  angel  of  the  Lord  slew,  in  one  night,  one  hundred 
and  eighty-five  thousand  of  the  Assyrian  army."  Such  is  a  brief  and  very  partial 
sketch  of  this  monster.  Alas  I  he  is  only  a  type  of  the  vast  majority  of  men  who  have 
found  their  way  to  thrones  1  They  have  been  in  all  ages  the  chief  devils  of  the  world. 
There  are  kings  that  have  powers  ordained  of  God ;  but  such  kings,  and  those  only, 
are  •'  a  terror  to  evil-doers  and  a  praise  to  those  that  do  well."     We  are  commanded 


OH.  L  1— 15.J  THE  BOOK  OP  NAHUM.  SS 


to  honour  the  king;  but  such  a  king  as  this  Sennacherib,  who  can  honour?  A 
king,  to  be  honoured,  must  be  honourworthy ;  he  must  be  just,  ruhng  in  the  fear  of 
the  Lord. 

n.  Corrupt  kinob  often  buin  theib  KivaDOMS.  "  Though  they  be  quiet,  and  like- 
wise many,  yet  thus  shall  they  be  cut  down,  when  he  shall  pass  through.  Though 
I  have  afflicted  thee,  I  will  afflict  thee  no  more."  These  words  seem  to  be  addressed 
to  Judah  concerning  the  utter  destruction  that  will  befall  their  enemies,  and  their 
consequent  deliverance  from  all  fear  from  that  quarter.  It  was  here  said  they  should 
be  destroyed :  1.  Notimthstanding  their  miKtary  completeness.  "  Though  they  he 
quiet."  The  word  "quiet"  means  complete.  No  doubt  the  military  organization, 
discipline,  and  equipment  of  Sennacherib's  mighty  army,  as  he  led  them  up  to  attack 
Jerusalem,  were  as  complete  as  the  intelligence,  the  art,  and  the  circumstances  of  the 
age  could  make  them.  Notwithstanding  this,  luia  befell  them.  2.  Notwithstanding 
their  nwmericai  force.  "Likewise  many."  Their  numbers  were  overwhelming,  yet 
how  complete  their  destruction  I  They  were  "  cut  down,"  and  their  name  ceased. 
Nineveh  has  been  long  since  blotted  from  the  earth.  The  account  given  of  the  destruc- 
tion you  have  in  2  Kings  xix.  35,  "  And  it  came  to  pass  that  night,  that  the  angel  oi 
the  Lord  went  out,.aBd  smote  in  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians  an  hundred  fourscore  and 
five  thousand :  and  when  they  arose  early  in  the  morning,  behold,  they  were  all  dead 
corpses."  Then  followed,  in  due  course,  the  complete  destruction  of  Nineveh  itself  by 
the  forces  of  the  Medes  and  Babylonians.  So  utterly  was  it  destroyed,  that  even  the 
references  of  classical  writers  to  it  are  to  a  city  that  is  long  since  extinct.  It  was  a 
wonderful  city;  it  stood,  according  to  the  account  of  some,  on  an  area  ten  times  the  size 
of  London ;  its  walls  a  hundred  feet  high,  and  so  broad  that  three  chariots  could  be 
driven  on  them  abreast.  It  had  fifteen  hundred  towers,  each  two  hundred  feet  in  height. 
In  1842  Botta  began  to  excavate,  and  three  years  afterwards  Layard  commenced  his 
interesting  and  successful  explorations.  The  remains  which  were  discovered  by  these 
excavators  filled  the  world  with  astonishment.  "  A  city,  an  empire,  had  risen  from 
the  silent  slumber  of  ages ;  its  kings  could  be  numbered,  and  its  tongue  mastered ; 
while  its  history,  manners,  customs,  and  dwellings  formed  an  unexpected  revelation, 
wondrous  in  its  variety  and  fulness."  Who  brought  all  this  ruin  on  this  grand  old 
city?  Sennacherib,  a  ruthless  despot  and  a  bloody  warrior,  and  his  successors,  as 
savage  as  himself.  And  what  cities  and  empires  have  been  ruined  by  such  men  in  all 
agesl  Who  broke  up  ancient  dynasties?  Despots,  And  in  modern  times  who  has 
brought  all  the  suffering,  the  disorder,  and  the  spoliation  that  has  befallen  France 
during  the  last  sixty  years  ?  Despots,  Until  despotism  is  put  down,  such  will  con- 
tinue to  be  the  case. 

III.  The  KiriN  of  ooebuft  KiNanoMS  is  a  blessino  to  the  oppbessxd.  "  For  now 
will  I  break  his  yoke  from  off  thee  [that  is, '  thee,  Judah "],  and  will  burst  thy  bonds  in 
sunder."  "  Yoke  "  here  refers  to  the  tribute  imposed  upon  Hezekiah  King  of  Judah 
by  Sennacherib  (2  Kings  xviii.  14).  And  so  it  ever' is — when  despotism  has  fallen,  the 
oppressed  rise  to  liberty.  What  teeming  millions  of  men  are  groaning,  not  only  in 
Asiatic  countries,  but  in  European  countries,  under  the  tyranny  of  despots  I  These 
arrogant,  haughty  autocracies  must  fall,  as  Assyria  and  other  ancient  despotisms  fell, 
before  the  yoke  shall  be  taken  from  the  neck  of  the  oppressed,  and  their  bands  burst 
asunder. 

Conclusion.  1.  Bealize  the  truth  of  prophecy.  When  Nahum  uttered  these  fearfid 
predictions  in  relation  to  Nineveh,  Nineveh  shone  in  unabated  splendour,  and  stood  in 
unabated  strength ;  but  after  a  very  few  generations  had  passed  away  the  predicted  ruin 
came,  and  Nineveh  has  long  since  been  buried  in  the  oblivion  of  centuries.  Have  faith 
in  the  Word  of  God.  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  his 
Word  shall  fail  to  be  accomplished.  2.  Bealize  the  importance  of  pi-Omoting  education 
among  the  people.  By  education  I  do  not  mean  what  is  merely  technical  or  scientific, 
but  chiefly  moraL  The  education  that  teaches  the  people  the  sense  of  personal 
independency  and  responsibility,  the  duty  of  self-respect,  the  inalienable  right  of  private 
judgment,  and  a  liberty  of  action  circumscribed  only  by  the  rights  of  others.  It  is 
when  snch  an  education  as  this  spreads  among  the  peoples  of  the  world  that  despotisms 
will  moulder  to  dust.  When  men  shall  know  the  moral  truth,  the  moral  reality,  then 
the  truth  shall  make-  them  free. 


24  THE    BOOK   OF   NAHUM.  [oh.  L  1—15. 

"  It's  coming  yet  for  a'  that, 
That  man  to  man  the  warld  o'er 
Shall  brlthers  be  for  a'  that." 

D.  T. 

Ver.  15. — Thrte  thtngs  worthy  of  note.  "  Behold  upon  the  mountains  the  feet  of  him 
that  bringeth  good  tidings,  that  publisheth  peace !  0  Judah,  keep  thy  solemn  feasts, 
perform  thy  vows :  for  the  wicked  shall  no  more  pass  through  thee  ;  he  is  utterly  cut 
off."  A  mighty  army  has  gone  up  against  Nineveh,  and  so  certain  it  is  that  it  will  be 
utterly  destroyed  that  the  prophet  speaks  of  it  as  past.  He  has  seen  the  '  messenger  " 
upon  the  mountain  proclaiming  deliverance  to  Jurlah.  The  "  mountains  "  are  those 
round  Jerusalem,  on  which  the  hosts  of  Sennacherib  had  lately  encamped,  and  the 
messenger  of  peace  scales  the  mountains  that  his  welcome  presence  may  be  seen.  How 
transporting  the  message  must  have  been!  Sennacherib,  the  disturber  of  the  nations, 
is  no  more,  and  Jerusalem  is  delivered.  The  first  clause  of  this  verse  is  applied  in 
Isa.  lii.  7  to  the  message  of  peace  brought  to  the  world  through  Jesus  Christ.  There 
are  three  things  here  worthy  of  note. 

I.  Peace  proclaimed.  "  Behold  upon  the  mountains  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth 
good  tidings,  that  publisheth  peace."  Glorious  to  the  ears  of  the  men  of  Jerusalem  must 
have  been  the  intelligence  that  their  great  enemy  was  destroyed,  that  the  Assyrian 
hosts  were  crushed,  and  now  peace  was  come.  A  proclamation  of  peace  is  indeed  "  good 
tidings."  A  proclamation  of  national  peace  is  "  good  tidings."  What  country  that  baa 
been  engaged  in  a  bloody  campaign,  in  which  its  commerce  has  been  all  but  ruined,  the 
flower  of  its  manhood  destroyed,  and  its  very  existence  imperilled,  does  not  hail  with 
rapture  the  proclamation  of  peace  ?  But  the  proclamation  of  moral  peace  is  still  more 
delightful.  Paul  quotes  these  words,  and  applies  them  to  the  ministers  of  the  gospel, 
*'  How  beautiful  are  the  feet  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel  of  peace,  and  bring  glad 
tidings  of  good  things  1 "  (Rom.  x.  15).  As  there  is  no  war  so  painful,  so  terrible,  as  a 
moral  war,  the  war  of  a  soul  with'  itself,  with  the  moral  instincts  of  the  universe,  and 
with  the  will  of  its  God  ;  so  no  tidings  are  so  delightful  to  it  as  the  tidings  of  peace, 
peace  brought  through  Jesus  Christ,  the  "peace  that  passeth  all  understanding."  "  My 
peace  I  give  unto  you,  .  .  .  not  as  the  world  giveth  give  I  unto  you." 

II.  Worship  enjoined.  "  O  Judah,  keep  thy  solemn  feasts,  perform  thy  vows." 
"  During  the  Assyrian  invasion  the  inhabitants  of  Judah  were  cut  off  from  eH  access  to 
the  metropolis ;  now  they  would  be  at  liberty  to  proceed  thither  as  usual,  in  order  to 
observe  their  religious  rites,  and  they  are  here  comrnanded  to  do  so."  Observe :  1.  War 
dittwrhs  religion)  observances.  War,  which  has  been  called  the  totality  of  all  evil,  is  an 
enemy  to  the  progress  of  religion.  It  not  merely  arrests  the  march  of  the  cause  of 
truth  and  godliness,  but  throws  it  back.  It  is  said  in  Acts  ix.  31,  "Then  had  the 
Churches  rest  throughout  all  Judsea  and  Galilee  and  Samaria,  and  were  edified ;  and 
walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  were  multiplied." 
The  storm  of  persecution  which  Stephen  had  invoked  and  Saul  aided  had  abated,  and 
the  Christian  religion  advanced.  As  peace  in  nature  is  the  time  to  cultivate  your 
ground  and  sow  your  seed,  peace  in  the  nation  is  the  time  to  promote  growth  iu 
religion  and  virtue.  2.  In  war  men  are  disposed  to  make  religious  vows.  When 
dangers  thicken  around,  and  death  seems  close  at  hand,  the  soul  naturally  turns  to 
Heaven,  and  vows  that,  if  life  is  preserved,  it  shall  be  devoted  to  God.  When  peace 
comes  they  are  called  upon  to  "  perform  "  their  "  vows."  But  alas  1  how  often  are  such 
vows  neglected  1  and  we  are  told  (Eccles.  v.  5)  it  is  better  not  to  vow,  than  to  vow 
and  not  pay.     Worship  is  a  duty  ever  binding. 

III.  Enemies  VANQUISHED.  "For  the  wicked  shall  no  more  pass  through  thee;  ho 
is  utterly  cut  off."  Here  is  encouragement.  Sennncherib  is  gone ;  Nineveh  is  in 
desolation.  They  will  "no  more  pass  through  thee."  The  time  will  come  with 
all  good  men  when  their  enemies  shall  be  utterly  vanquished.  "  The  God  of  peace  shall 
bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly."  What  a  blessed  time  for  the  world,  when  the 
wicked  shall  no  more  "  pass  through  "  it  I     This  will  be  its  millennium. 

"  Peace  is  the  end  of  all  things  —tearless  peace ; 
Who  by  the  immovable  basis  of  God's  throne 
Takes  her  perpctuul  stand;  and,  of  henelf 


vm.  n.  1—13.] 


THE   BOOK   OF  NAFIUM. 


2S 


Prophetic,  lengthens  age  by  age  her  Bceptn. 
The  world  shall  yet  be  subjuj^ate  to  love, 
The  final  form  religion  mnst  assame ; 
Led  like  a  Uon,  rid  with  wreathed  reino, 
In  nme  enohjinted  island,  b;  a  ohild." 

(Balle,.) 


CT, 


KXPOSmON. 


CHAPTER  n. 
Vers.  1—18. — Part   11.    Tub  Ezkoutioh 

OF  TB£  DeOREB  ;    THE  DbSTBUOTIOK  OV  Ni- 
ITBTBH  OESOBIBBO. 

Yer8.  1—8.-1  1.  Nineveh  iMU  he  ie- 
tieged,  beeaate  God  I'l  aboitt  to  exalt  hit  people 
(y  taking  vengeanee  on  the  enemy,  whoie  de- 
fence, howioever  formidable,  it  of  no  avail. 

Yer.  1. — Nahnm  addreBses  Nineveh,  and 
foiewama  her  of  the  siege  she  was  abont  to 
undergo  (see  Intiodnotion,  §  L).  He  that 
daiheth  in  pieces;  the  dispener;  qui  dii- 
pergiKl  CVnlgate) ;  iiupuauv,  "  panting " 
<8eptuagint).  The  mixed  army  that  in- 
vested Nineveh  is  so  called  from  its  effect 
on  the  inhabitants  of  the  neighbouring 
lands.  Others  translate  it,  "  the  maul,"  or 
"  hammer  "-^-^n  appellation  of  Cyaxares, 
which  reminds  one  of  Charles  Martel  and 
Jndas  MeMscabseus.  Is  come  np  before  thy 
fa«e.  Placing  his  forces  in  thy  sight,  that 
thou  mayest  see  his  power  and  thine  own 
danger.  Keep  the  munition.  The  prophet 
urges  the  Ninevites  to  guard  their  fortress 
well.  Some  connect  this  clause  with  the 
preceding :  "  the  disperser  is  come  to  main- 
tain the  siege ; "  as  the  Yulgate,  qui  euitodiat 
obsidionem.  But  the  other  interpretation  is 
more  forcible,  and  suits  the  rest  of  the  verse. 
The  LXX.,  reading  differently,  gives,  i^ai- 
poi/iivos  [-1-  <re,  Alex.]  ex  dKiif/eas,  "  one  de- 
livered from  afSiction."  Watohthe  way,  by 
which  the  enemy  approaches.  Make  thy 
loins  strong^.  Gather  up  tliy  strength,  the 
loins  being  regarded  as  the  seat  of  strength 
(2  Ohron.  x.  10;  Job  xl.  7;  Ezek.  xxix.  7; 
1  Pet.  i.  13).  So  weak,  effeminate  people 
were  called  in  Latin  dunAes,  "loinless." 
Fortify  thy  power  mightily;  "AvSpurat  ry 
i<rxit  <r<p6Spa  (Septuagint).  Make  yourselves 
as  strong  as  possible  (comp.  Amos  ii.  11). 

Yer.  2. — This  ruin  shall  fall  on  Nineveh 
because  God  is  mindful  of  his  chosen  people, 
whom  Assyria  has  oppressed.  Hath  turned 
away.  It  should  be  rendered,  retumeth  to, 
or  reetoreth,  bringeth  back;  reddidit  (Vul- 
gate); Isa.  lii.  8;  Hos.  vi.  11.  The  excel- 
lency of  Jaoob,  as  the  excellenoy  of  Israel. 
The  Lord  restores  the  glory  and  honour  of 
Jacob,  the  nation  in  its  political  aspect,  and 


the  high  privileges  of  the  spiritual  Israel, 
the  chosen  people  of  God  (comp.  Obad.  18). 
Per.  Assbur  is  visited  because  Judah  has 
had  its  full  measure  of  punishment.  The 
emptiars  have  emptied  them  out.  The 
plunderers  (the  enemy)  have  plundered  the 
Jews.  And  marred  their  vine  branches.  The 
heathen  have  out  off  the  members  of  Israel, 
the  Lord's  vineyard.  (For  the  metaphor 
"vine,"  comp.  Ps.  Ixxx.  8,  etc. ;  Isa.  v. ;  Jer. 
xii.  10.)  Not  only  from  what  is  read  in  the 
Bible  (e.g.  2  Kings  xv.  19;  xvi.  7,  etc.; 
xvii  3;  xvUi.  14),  but  from  the  details  in 
the  cuneiform  inscriptions,  we  learn  that  the 
Assyrians  were  a  constant  danger  and  an- 
noyance to  Israel,  and  harassed  continually 
both  the  southern  and  northern  provinces. 

_Yer.  3. — The  prophet  describes,  as  though 
himself  an  eye-witness,  the  army  advancing 
against  Nineveh.  The  shield  of  his  mighty 
men  is  made  red.  "His  heroes"  may  b« 
either  God's  heroes,  as  sent  by  him  to  war 
against  the  evil  city,  or  those  of  the  "  dasher 
in  pieces"  of  ver.  1.  The  shields  of  the 
early  Assyrians  were  usually  circular  or 
oval  in  shape,  formed  of  wicker-work,  with  a 
central  boss  of  wood  or  metal.  In  the  latest 
period  they  were  made  straight  at  bottom 
and  rounded  only  at  top  (Bawlinson's  '  Ano. 
Mon.,'  i.  440).  Some  bronze  shields  have 
been  brought  to  England  from  Nineveh; 
these  are  ciroalar,  about  two  feet  and  a 
half  in  diameter,  the  rim  bending  in- 
wards, and  forming  a  deep  groove  round 
the  edge.  The  handles  are  of  iron,  and 
fastened  by  six  bosses  or  nails,  the  headi 
of  which  form  an  ornament  on  the  outer 
face  of  the  shield  (Layard,  '  Diaouveries,' 
p.  194).  There  were  used  also  in  sieges  tall 
oblong  shields,  sufficient  to  protect  the 
entire  body,  constructed  of  wicker-work  or 
the  liides  of  animals  (Bonomi, '  Nineveh  aad 
its  Discoveries,'  p.  320,  etc.).  The  shields 
are  said  to  be  "  made  red,"  either  because 
tbey  were  really  so  coloured  (though  the 
monuments  have  not  confirmed  this  opinion), 
or  else  because  of  the  polished  copper  with 
which  they  word  sometimes  covered  (Jose- 
phus,  'Ant.,'  xlii.  12.  5).  Septuagint,  point- 
ing differently,  S^rAa  Swatrrflas  a^rSov  e{ 
avepdmav,  "the  arms  of  their  power  from 
among  men."  Are  in  scarlet.  The  word 
rendered  "  scarlet "  is  found  nowhere  else. 


26 


THE   BOOK   OF   NAHUM. 


[oh.  n.  1—13. 


Scptuagint,  mistaking  the  word,  ifiirat^ovTas 
IV  TTvpl,  "sporting  in  Are;"  Vulgate,  in 
enedTieiB.  It  is  derived  from  the  term 
Bpplied  to  the  coccttt^  or  worm  which  was 
used  in  dyeing  to  giye  to  cloth  a  deep 
scarlet  colour  (Henderson).  Some  have 
seen  in  the  colour  of  the  soldiers'  garments 
an  emblem  of  the  Divine  wrath  of  which 
they  were  the  appointed  ministers.  This 
colour  was  much  affected  by  combatants  in 
old  times  as  in  modem  days.  Professor 
Edwards  quotes  .^lian, '  Var.  Hist.,'  vi.  6, 
"  It  was  necessary  to  enter  into  battle 
clothed  in  purple,  that  the  colour  might 
denote  a  certain  dignity,  and  if  drops  of 
blood  from  wounds  were  sprinkled  on  it,  it 
became  terrible  to  the  enemy  "  (comp.  Xen., 
'  Cyrop.,'  i.  S.  2).  Red  or  purple  seems  to 
have  been  the  favourite  colour  of  the  Medea 
and  Babylonians  (Ezek.  xxiii.  J  4),  blue  or 
violet  that  of  the  Assyrians  (Ezek.  xxiii.  6; 
xxviii.  23,  etc.)  (Orelli).  The  chariots  shall 
be  with  flaming  torches ;  literally,  are  with 
fire  of  iteeU ;  i.e.  flash  with  steel,  and  so 
the  clause  should  be  translated,  as  in  the 
Bevised  Version.  Oommentators  generally 
refer  the  description  to  the  steel  bosses  of 
the  wheels ;  but  the  Assyrian  chariots  (and 
those  of  the  Modes  and  Chaldeans  were  not 
dissimilar)  were  conspicuous  for  shining 
metal,  hung  round  with  gleaming  weapons 
and  figures  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  carrying 
bright-armed  warriors,  the  horses  covered 
with  trappings,  which  flashed  under  the  sun- 
shine, and  fastened  to  poles  of  glittering 
steel.  There  is  no  trace  in  the  monuments 
of  chariots  armed  with  scythes,  which  seem 
to  have  been  unknown  before  the  time  of 
Cyrus.  They  are  first  mentioned  in  2  Mace, 
xiil.  2  (see  Livy,  xxxvii.  41).  The  word 
peladoth,  translated  "torches,"  is  an  aira| 
Kfy6fiivov,  The  LXX.  renders  it,  ai  rivlai, 
"the  reins,"  whence  Jerome  obtained  his 
version,  ignex  habeme  curruum;  but  it  means, 
"  things  made  of  iron  or  steel,"  and  by  critics 
uninstruoted  in  monumental  discoveries  was 
naturally  referred  to  the  scythes  with  which 
chariots  were  armed  in  later  times,  instead 
of  to  the  gleaming  metal  with  which  they 
were  adorned.  In  the  day  of  his  preparation. 
When  the  Lord  marshals  the  host  for  battle, 
as  Isa.  xiii.  4.  The  fir  trees  shall  be  terribly 
shaken;  i.e.  the  spears  with  their  fir  or 
cypress  shafts  are  brandished.  So  Homer 
often  calls  the  spear  "the  ash,"  from  the 
material  of  which  the  handle  was  made 
(comp.  'IL,'xvi.  143;  xxii.  225,  etc.).  The 
Septuaglnt  rendering  is' very  far  from  the 
present  text,  Of  JirTreij  BopufiriBiiirovTai,  "  The 
horsemen  shall  be  thrown  into  confusion." 
Nor  is  the  Vulgate  any  better,  Agitatoret 
consopiti  sunt,  which  is  explained  to  mean 
that  the  invaders  are  so  carried  away  by 
their  courage  and  fury,  that  they  act  as  if 


intoxicated.  "Sensus  ntiqne  non  sper- 
nendus,"  says  a  Boman  Oatholic  commen- 
tator, "  at  unum  desidero,  nt  soil,  ex  verbo 
ipso  fluat" — which  is  certainly  not  the  case. 
The  text  is  possibly  corrupt,  and  might  be 
oorrected  from  the  Septuagint.  Certainly 
there  seems  to  be  no  other  passage  in  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures  where  the  metaphor  of 
"  cypress  "  is  used  for  "  a  spear."  After  the 
mention  of  the  chariots,  it  is  not  unnatural 
that  the  writer  should  proceed,  "and  the 
riders  are  in  active  motion,"  urging  their 
horses  with  hand  and  whip  and  gesture  (gee 
Knabenbauer,  in  Iqc). 

Ver.  4. — The  chariots  shall  rage  in  the 
■tieets.  The  chariots  rave,  dash  madly 
(Jer.  xlvi.  9)  about  the  open  ways  in  the 
suburbs,  or  in  the  plains  of  the  country. 
The  description  still  appertains  to  the 
besiegers,  who  are  so  numerous  that  to  the 
Ninevites,  looking  &om  their  walls,  their 
chariots  seem  to  dash  against  one  another. 
They  shall  seem — ^their  appearance  is — ^like 
torches.  Thus  is  described  the  gleaming  of 
the  chariots  and  the  armour  (see  on  rer.  3 ; 
1  Mace.  vi.  39,  "Now  when  the  sua  shone 
upon  the  shields  of  gold  and  brass,  the 
mountains  glistered  therewith,  and  shined 
like  lamps  of  fire  "). 

Ver.  5. — The  prophet  turns  to  the  Nine- 
vites  and  their  preparations  for  defence.  He 
shall  reconnt  his  worthies;  Ae  rememiert 
%{<  nohlei.  The  King  of  NineTeh  calls  te 
mind  the  mighty  captains  who  have  often 
led  his  armies  to  victory,  and  sends  them  to 
defend  the  walls  (comp.  ch.  iii.  18).  The 
LXX.,  anticipating  the  next  clause,  adds 
here,  KtA  tpei^ovrat  fififpas,  "  and  they  shall 
flee  by  day."  They  shall  stnmble  in  their 
walk.  In  their  fear  and  haste,  or  half- 
drunken,  they  totter  and  stumble  as  they 
hasten  to  the  walls  of  the  city.  The  defence 
shall  he  prepared;  literally,  (he  eovering  <• 
prepared.  If  this  refers  to  the  operations  of 
the  Ninevites,  it  means  some  kind  of  breast- 
work or  fascine  erected  between  the  towers; 
but  it  most  probably  depicts  the  sight  that 
meets  their  eyes  from  the  walls.  They  see 
the  besiegers  bringing  up  their  mantelets 
and  towers.  As  used  by  the  Assyrians,  the 
machine  called  "the  covering"  is  either  a 
wooden  tower  or  a  wicker  mantelet  in  which 
was  suspended  a  battering-ram.  It  stood 
on  four  or  six  wheels,  and  the  larger  sort  had 
archers  posted  in  the  various  stories,  both  to 
annoy  the  enemy  and  to  defend  the  engine. 
The  rams  were  provided  with  lance-headed 
extremities,  and  must  have  rather  picked  at 
and  loosened  the  courses  of  bricks  of  which 
the  walls  were  composed  than  battered  them 
down  (see  Bonomi,  'Nineveh  and  ita 
Palaces,'  pp.  160,  234,  243,  etc.;  Layard, 
'  Nineveh,'  oh.  v.  p.  376,  etc.,  flgg.  57,  68). 
The  Septuagint  rendering  applies  rather  to 


OH.  u.  1—13. 


THE  BOOK  OF  NaHUM. 


27 


the  beiieged,  'Eroi/wttrauo'i  rks  npopuKaKhs 
airSv,  "  They  shall  prepare  their  defences." 
Vor.  6. — All  defence  is  vain.  The  prophet 
describes  the  last  scene.  The  gates  of  the 
riyers  shall  be  {are)  opened.  The  simplest 
explanation  of  this  much-disputed  clause  is, 
according  to  Strauss  and  others,  the  follow- 
ing :  The  gates  intended  are  those  adjacent 
to  the  streams  which  encircled  the  city,  and 
which  were  therefore  the  best  defended  and 
the  hardest  to  capture.  When  these  were 
carried,  there  was  no  way  of  escape  for  the 
besieged.  But,  as  Bosenmiiller  remarks, 
it  would  hare  been  an  act  of  folly  in  the 
enemy  to  attack  just  that  part  of  the  city 
which  was  most  stoongly  defended  by  nature 
and  art.  We  are,  therefore,  induced  to  take 
"  the  gates  of  the  rivers,"  not  literally,  but  as 
a  metaphorical  expression  (like  "the  windows 
of  heaven,"  Gen.  vii.  11 ;  Isa.  xxiv.  18)  tor  an 
overwhelming  flood,  and  to  see  in  this  a 
reference  to  the  fact  mentioned  by  Diod. 
Sio.  (ii.  27X  that  the  capture  of  Nineveh  was 
owing  to  a  great  and  unprecedented  inunda- 
tion, which  destroyed  a  large  portion  of  the 
fortifications,  and  Imd  the  city  open  to  the 
enemy.  "  At  the  north-west  angle  of 
Nineveh,"  says  Professor  Bawlinson,  "  there 
was  a  sluice  or  flood-gate,  intended  mainly 
to  keep  the  water  of  the  Khosr-su,  which 
ordinarily  filled  the  oity  moat,  from  flowing 
off  too  rapidly  into  the  Tigris,  but  probably 
intended  also  to  keep  back  the  water  of  the 
Tigris,  when  that  stream  rose  above  its 
common  level.  A  sudden  and  great  rise  in 
the  Tigris  would  necessarily  endanger  this 
gate,  and  if  it  gave  way  beneath  the  pressure, 
a  vast  torrent  of  water  would  rush  up  the 
moat  along  and  against  the  northern  wall, 
which  may  have  been  undermined  by  its 
force,  and  have  fallen  in"  (Bawlinson, 
'  Ancient  Monarchies,'  ii.  p.  397,  edit.  1871). 
The  suggestion  that  the  course  of  its  rivers 
was  diverted,  and  that  the  enemy  entered 
the  town  through  the  dried  obannels,  has  no 
historical  basis.  Dr.  Pusey  explains  the 
term  to  mean  the  gates  by  which  the  in- 
habitants had  access  to  the  rivers.  But 
these  would  be  well  guarded,  and  the  open- 
ing of  them  would  not  involve  the  capture 
of  the  oity,  which  the  expression  in  the  text 
seems  to  imply.  The  LXX.  gives,  n^Xai  ray 
ir6\eav  SirivolxSvirav,  "The  gates  of  the 
cities  were  opened."  The  palace  shall  be 
(is)  dissolved ;  or,  melteth  aimay.  Some  take 
this  to  signify  that  the  hearts  of  the  in- 
habitants melt  with  fear,  or  the  royal  power 
vanishes  in  terror.  That  the  clause  is  to  be 
taken  literally,  to  denote  the  destruction  of 
the  royal  palace  by  the  action  of  the  waters, 
seems  to  be  negatived  by  the  fact  that  the 
Assyrian  palaces  were  built  on  artificial 
mounds  of  some  thirty  or  forty  feet  in  eleva- 
tion, composed  of  sun-dried  bricks  united  into 


a  solid  mass,  and  were  thus  secured  from  the 
effects  of  an  inundation  (see  Bonomi, 
'  Nineveh  and  its  Discoveries,'  p.  129,  etc.). 
There  is  evidence,  too,  that  fire  played  a 
great  part  in  the  destruction  of  the  temples 
and  palaces  (see  note  on  ch.  iii.  13). 

Ver.  7. — ^And  Huzzab.  The  Anglicaji 
rendering  (which  has  the  authority  of  tha 
Jewish  commentators,  and  is  endorsed  by 
Ewald  and  Biiukert)  takes  Huzzah  as  an 
appellative,  either  the  name  of  the  Queen 
of  Nineveh,  or  a  symbolical  name  for  Nineveh 
itself,  as  Sheahach,  Pekod,  and  Merathaim 
were  for  Babylon  (see  Jer.  xxv.  26;  1.  21; 
Ii.  41;  Ezek.  xxiii.  23),  which  was  formed 
or  adopted  by  Nahum  for  the  purpose  of 
describing  its  character.  Huzzab  may  mean 
"  established,"  "  set  firm  "  (Gen.  xxviii.  12), 
and  confident  in  its  strength;  pual  from 
nat$ah, "  to  set,"  "  to  lii"  (Wordsworth).  We 
may  dismiss  the  idea  that  Httzzab  is  the  name 
of  the  queen.  Such  a  personage  is  unknown 
to  history ;  and  there  is  no  reason  why  she 
should  be  mentioned  rather  than  the  king; 
and  persons  are  not  introduced  by  name  in 
prophecy  except  for  some  very  special  reason, 
as  Cyrus  (Isa.  xliv.  28).  The  alternative 
rendering,  "  it  is  decreed,"  adopted  by  Eeil, 
Pusey,  and  many  modern  commentators,  is 
unexampled,  and  comes  in  baldly,  and  not 
at  all  according  to  the  prophet's  manner. 
Henderson  joins  the  clause  with  the  pre- 
ceding, thus:  "The  palace  is  dissolved, 
though  firmly  established."  The  Septuagint 
gives,  'H  uir6<rTa(ns  ajreKa\v(pBn, "  The  hidden 
Measures  are  revealed,"  or, "  The  foundation 
is  exposed ; "  Vulgate,  Miles  captivus  ab- 
ductus  est.  It  seems  best  to  take  Huzzab  as 
an  appellative  representing  either  Nineveh 
or  Assyria,  as  the  country  between  the  Upper 
and  Lower  Zab  (Bawlinson,  in  '  Dictionary 
of  the  Bible '),  or  as  meaning  "  firm," 
"bold."  Thus  Egypt  is  called  Bahah, 
"arrogant"  (Isa.  xxx.  7);  the  King  of 
Assyria,  Jareb,  "  contentious  "  (Hos.  v.  18) ; 
Jerusalem,  Arid,  "God's  lion"  (Isa.  xxix. 
1).  Shall  be  led  away  captive;  better,  is 
laid  bare.  She,  the  queen  of  nations,  is 
stripped  of  her  adornments  and  iguo- 
mlniously  treated.  She  shall  be  brought 
up.  She  is  carried  away  into  captivity. 
"Brought  up"  may  mean  brought  up  to 
judgment,  as  oh.  iii  S;  Isa.  xlvii.  2,  3 
(Pusey).  Her  maids  shall  lead  her;  rather, 
her  handmaids  moan.  The  inhabitants  of 
Nineveh,  personified  as  a  queen,  or  the 
lesser  cities  of  her  empire,  follow  their 
mistress  mourning.  As  with  the  Toice  of 
doves  (oomp.  Isa.  xxxviii.  11 ;  lix.  11 ;  Ezek. 
vii.  16).  They  shall  not  only  show  the  out- 
ward tokens  of  sorrow,  but  shall  mourn  in- 
wardly in  their  hearts,  aa  the  LXX.  renders 
the  whole  clause,  xafldii  xefurrtpsA  <l>Sfyy6- 
fitvai  iv  Kapilats  aircevt  **  as  doves  moaning 


28 


THE   BOOK   OF  NAHUM. 


[oh.  n.  1—13, 


in  their  hearta."  Tabering;  beatiog  on  a 
iabret.  (For  smiting  the  breast  in  token  of 
Borrow,  oomp.  Luke  xviiL  13 ;  xiiii.  48 ; 
Homer,  'II.,'  xviii.  31,  XepaX  Si  irScroi  Sr^Seo 
venK'lyyovTO,') 

Ver.  8. — The  prophet  compares  the  past 
and  present  condition  of  Nineveh.  Bnt 
Nineveh  is  of  old  like  a  pool  of  water ;  and 
(or,  ffiough)  Nineveh  hath  been  like  a  pool  of 
water  all  her  dayi.  Others,  altering  the 
points  in  accordance  with  the  Septuagint 
and  Vulgate,  translate,  "But  as  for  Nineveh, 
her  waters  are  like  a  pool  of  water."  This 
is  what  she  has  come  to,  for  "  her  waters  " 
represent  herself.  She  is  compared  to  a 
pool  or  reservoir  (Neh.  ii  14 ;  iii.  15)  from 
the  multitude  of  her  inhabitants  gathered 
from  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  streaming 
unto  her,  both  as  tributary  and  for  com- 
mercial purposes  (comp.  Jer.  li.  13;  Eev. 
xvii.  1, 15).  Yet  they  shall  flee  away.  In 
spite  of  their  numbers,  the  multitudes  repre- 
sented by  "the  waters"  fly  before  the 
enemy.  In  vain  the  captains  cry.  Stand, 
stand.  They  pay  no  attention.  None  shall 
look  back.  No  one  of  the  fugitives  turns 
rounder  gives  a  thought  to  anything  but  his 
own  safety. 

Vers.  9 — 13. — §  2.  The  city  is  plundered, 
and  henceforth  liet  waste,  in  terrible  contrast 
with  its  former  excellency. 

Ver.  9. — The  prophet  calls  on  the  in- 
vaders to  come  and  gather  the  spoil  of  the 
city,  which  God  gives  into  their  hands. 
Take  ye  the  spoil  Fabulous  stories  are  told 
of  the  amount  of  the  precious  metals  stored 
in  Nineveh  and  Babylon.  "  Sardanapalus 
is  said  to  have  placed  a  hundred  and  iifty 
golden  beds,  and  as  many  tables  of  the  same 
metal,  on  his  funeral  pile,  besides  gold  and 
silver  vases  and  ornaments  in  enormous 
quantities,  and  purple  and  many-coloured 
raiments  (Athen.,  lib.  xii.).  According  to 
Diodorus,  the  value  of  the  gold  taken  from 
the  temple  of  Belus  alone  by  Xerxes 
amounted  to  above  7350  Attic  talents,  or 
£21,000,000  sterling  money"  (Layard, 
'  Nineveh,'  ii.  416,  etc. ;  comp.  Dan.  iii.  1, 
where  the  size  of  the  golden  image  or  pillar, 
sixty  cubits  high  and  six  cubits  bruad,  shows 
how  plentiful  was  gold  in  these  countries). 
Bonomi :  "  The  riches  of  Nineveh  are  inex- 
haustible, her  vases  and  precious  furniture 
are  infinite,  copper  constantly  occurs  in  their 
weapons,  and  it  is  mo^t  probable  a  mixture 
of  it  was  used  in  the  materials  of  their  tools. 
They  had  acquired  the  art  of  making  glass. 
.  .  .  The  well-known  cylinders  are  a  sufB- 
cient  proof  of  their  skill  in  engraving  gems. 
Many  beautiful  specimens  of  carving  in 
ivory  were  also  discovered.  .  .  ,  The  con- 
dition of  the  luins  is  highly  corroborative  of 


the  sudden  destruction  that  came  upon 
Nineveh  by  fire  and  sword. .  .  .  It  is  evident 
from  the  ruins  that  both  Khorsabad  and 
Nimroud  were  sacked  and  then  set  on  fire. 
Neither  Botta  nor  Layard  found  any  of  that 
store  of  silver  and  gold  and  '  pleasant  furni-T 
ture '  which  the  palaces  contained ;  scarcely 
anything,  even  of  bronze,  escaped  the 
spoiler"  ('  Nineveh  and  its  Discoveries,'  pp. 
334,  336).  There  is  none  end  of  the  store ; 
Vulgate,  Non  finis  est  divitiarum ;  Septua- 
gint, OuK  ^v  irepas  rod  Kiffnov  airris,  "  There 
was  no  end  of  her  ornament."  And  glory 
out  of  all  the  pleasant  furniture  ;  literally, 
vessels  of  desire.  It  is  plainer  to  translate. 
There  is  abundance  of  all  precious  furniture. 
Ver.  10. — She  is  empty,  and  void,  and 
waste.  Bukahum'  bukah,  um'  bulakah.  The 
three  words  are  of  very  similar  meaning 
and  sound,  and  express  most  forcibly  the 
utter  ruin  of  the  city.  A  Latin  com- 
mentator has  endeavoured  to  imitate  the 
Hebrew  paronomasia  by  rendering  them, 
"  vacuitas,  evacuatio,  evanidatio  " — a  trans- 
lation more  ingenious  than  classical.  The 
paronomasia  is  better  rendered  by  "  vastitas, 
vastitia,  vacuitas,"  and  the  German,  "  leer 
und  ausgeleert  und  verheert."  "  Sack  and 
sacking  and  ransacking "  (Gandell).  An 
analogous  combination  of  words  is  found  in 
Isa.  xxiv.  3,  4;  xxix.  2,  3;  Ezek.  xxxiii 
29;  Zeph.  i.  15.  Septuagint,  iKTivayiiis, 
Kal  iimTivayfihs,  Koi  ^K;8pa<r/uJs,  "thrusting 
forth  and  spuming  and  tumult."  The  heart 
meltsth.  A  common  expression  for  fear  and 
despondency  (Josh.  vii.  5 ;  Isa.  xiii.  7 ; 
Ezek.  xxi.  7).  The  knees  smite  together 
(Dan.  V.  6).  So  in  Homer  continnally,  \vro 
•foivara.  Much  pain  is  in  all  loins.  The 
anguish  as  of  childbirth.  Septuagint, 
aiBiwr,  "  labour-pains,"  in  contrast  with  the 
injunction  in  ver.  1  (comp.  Isa.  xiii.  8 ;  xxi.  3  } 
Jer.  XXX.  6).  Gather  blacknesB  (Joel  ii.  6) ; 
or,  withdraw  their  colour;  i.e.  wax  pale. 
But  the  Hebrew  rather  implies  that  the 
faces  assume  a  livid  hue,  like  that  of  coming 
death.  Hence  the  LXX..  renders,  iis  Ttp6<r- 
Kau/ia  x^'rpas,  as  the  burning  of  an  earthen 
vessel,  which  is  blackened  by  the  fire ;  and 
Jerome,  stout  nigredo  dUx  (comp.  Jer. 
XXX.  6). 

Ver.  11. — The  prophet  asks,  as  if  in  con- 
sternation at  the  complete  collapse  of  the 
great  city — Where  is  the  site  of  Nineveh  ? 
Where  is  the  dwelling  (den)  of  the  lions  1 
The  lion  is  a  natural  symbol  of  Assyria, 
both  from  that  animal's  cruel,  predatory, 
ravenous  habits,  and  from  its  use  as  the 
chief  national  emblem.  Nergal,  the  war- 
god,  has  a  winged  lion  with  a  man's  face  as 
his  emblem.  See  the  figure  in  Eawlinson, 
'  Ano.  Mon.,'  i.  173,  who  adds  (p.  308)  that 
the  lion  is  accepted  as  a  true  type  of  the 
people,  blood,  ravin,  and  robbery  being  theil 


OH.  n.  1—13.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM. 


29 


charaoteiistios  in  the  mind  of  the  prophet. 
The  feeding-plaoe  of  the  young  lions  may 
mean  the  subject  lands  whence  they  took 
their  prey.  And  the  old  lion;  rather,  the 
lionesi.  The  lion  is  designated  by  different 
names,  which  may,  perhaps,  refer  to  the 
various  satraps  and  chieftains  of  the  Assyrian 
kingdom.  There  are  the  full-grown  male 
lion,  the  lioness,  the  young  lion  able  to  seek 
its  own  food,  and  the  whelp  too  young  to 
find  its  own  living.  Instead  of  "the  lioness," 
the  LXX.,  Yulgate,  and  gyriao,  reading 
differently,  give,  TodtirASciy,  ut  ingrederetwr, 
"  that  the  lion's  wh6lp  should  enter  there." 
And  none  made  them  afraid.  They  lived 
in  perfect  security,  without  fear  or  care, 
irresistible  in  might  (Lev.  xxvi.  6 ;  Micah 
iv.  4 ;  Zeph.  iii.  13).    * 

Ver.  12. — The  figure  of  the  lion  is  con- 
tinued, and  this  verse,  in  loose  apposition  to 
the  preceding,  may  be  best  explained  by 
continuing  the  interrogation  in  thought— 
Where  is  now  the  lion  that  used  to  tear  in 
pieces,  etc.  7  The  lion  did  tear  in  pieces 
enough  for  his  whelps.  The  Assyrian 
monarch  provided  for  his  children  and  de- 
pendents by  plundering  other  nations.  His 
Uonesses  may  mean  his  wives  and  concu- 
bines. It  was  the  custom  both  with  the 
Persians  and  Assyrians  to  assign  towns  and 
provinces  to  their  favourites.  Xenophon 
('  Anab.,'  i.  4.  10)  mentions  certain  villages 
as  set  apart  for  the  girdle  of  Queen  Pary- 
satis.  A.  Lapide  quotes  Cicero, '  Verr.,'  ii. 
3.  33,  "They  say  that  the  barbarian  kings 
of  the  Persians  and  Syrians  [t.e.  Assyrians] 


are  wont  to  have  many  wives,  to  whom  they 
assign  cities  in  this  fashion— this  city  is  to 
provide  a  girdle  for  her  waist,  that  a  neck- 
lace, that  again  to  dress  her  hair ;  and  so 
they  have  whole  nations,  not  only  privy  to 
their  lusts,  but  also  abettors  of  them  "  (see 
Arnold's  note  on  Thuoydides,  i.  138 ;  oomp. 
2  Mace  iv.  30). 

Ver.  13. — I  am  against  thee.  The  destruc- 
tion shall  be  surely  accomplished,  because 
God  himself  directs  it  Literally,  1  to  thee 
(ch.  iiL  5;  Jer.  11,  25;  Ezek.  zxxviii.  3). 
The  Lord  of  hosts  (tabaoth).  Lord  of  the 
forces  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  therefore 
omnipotent.  Kipios  iravTOKpi.Twp  (Septua- 
gint).  I  will  bum  her  chariots  in  the 
smoke.  "Chariots"  stand  for  the  whole 
apparatus  of  war  and  military  power.  8ep- 
tuagint  for  "  chariots  "  gives  ir\ri9os, "  multi- 
tudes." Thy  young  lions.  Thy  fighting  men, 
the  metaphor  being  continued.  Cut  off  thy 
prey.  Thou  shalt  no  more  be  able  to  pillage 
other  countries.  Thy  messengers.  These 
are  the  heralds  who  carried  the  king's  com- 
mands to  his  lieutenants,  or  those,  like  the 
imperious  Babshakeh  (2  Kings  xviii.  17,  eto. ; 
xis..  23),  who  summoned  nations  to  sur- 
render, and  imposed  tributes.  "  O  Nineveh," 
writes  St.  Jerome,  "thou  shalt  suffer  all 
that  has  been  spoken.  I  the  Lord  will  bum 
to  ashes  thy  chariots,  and  will  cause  thy 
nobles  and  satraps  to  be  devoured  by  the 
sword ;  never  again  shalt  thou  lay  countries 
waste,  nor  exact  tribute,  nor  will  thy 
emissaries'  voice  be  heard  throughout  thy 
provinces." 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — A  predicted  invasion,  I.  The  enemy  described.  1.  Ei$  vtolenee. 
Nahum  calls  him  "  a  dasher  in  pieces  "  (ver,  1),  and  represents  his  virar'riors  as  "mighty  " 
and  "valiant"  (ver.  3) — epithets  which  apply  with  fitness  and  force  to  the  Medo- 
Babylonian  aimy  under  C^axares  and  Nabopolassar.  2.  Bis  boldness.  He  comes  up 
against  Nineveh,  not  stealthily  and  under  cover  of  darkness,  but  openly,  pitching  his 
tent  opposite  the  city  gates.  His  fearless  attitude  was  a  proof  that  God  was  secretly 
impelling  him,  using  him  against  Assyria  as  formerly  Assyria  had  been  used  against 
other  nations.  3.  His  invincibility,  Nineveh  may  "  keep  the  munition,  watch  the  way, 
make  her  loins  strong,  fortify  her  power  mightily," — all  will  be  in  vain.  The  onset  of 
this  terrible  assailant  will  be  practically  resistless.  Whether  irony  (Fausset)  or  poetry 
(Keil),  the  meaning  is  the  same,  that  Nineveh's  utmost  exertions  will  not  be  able  to  ward 
oS  her  ruin.  4.  His  fierceness.  With  crimson-coated  soldiers,  bearing  red-coloured 
shields  and  shaking  terribly  tall  spears  of  fir,  and  with  chariots  flashing  with  the  gleam 
of  steel  plates,  his  appearance  was  fitted  to  inspire  terror  (ver.  3).  "  The  chariots  of  the 
Assyrians,  as  we  see  them  on  the  monuments,  glare  with  shining  things  made  either 
of  iron  or  steel,  battle-axes,  bows,  arrows,  and  shields,  and  all  kinds  of  weapons" 
(Strauss).  5.  Eis  impetuosity.  The  swiftness  and  the  fury  of  his  attack  are  vividly 
described  (ver.  4).  His  chariots  the  prophet  represents  as  raging,  driving  on  madly, 
through  the  streets,  as  crowding  the  broad  spaces  in  such  a  fashion  as  to  jostle  against 
and  threaten  to  run  down  one  another,  as  flashing  to  and  fro  like  torches,  as  running 
hither  and  thither  with  the  celerity  of  lightning. 

II.  The   attack    explained.      1.  The   Assyrian    oppression  of  Israel.     "Ths 


80  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  [oh.  n.  1—13. 

emptieiB,"  t.e.  the  Assyrians,  "  have  emptied  out "  the  Israelites,  and  "  marred  their 
vine  hranches."  They  had  done  so  by  their  devastation  and  depopulation  of  the 
northern  kingdom  (2  Kings  xviL  6),  and  by  their  repeated  invasions  of  the  southern 
(Isa.  X.  6 — 11 ;  2  Chron.  xzxii.  1).  Now  the  time  was  come  when  they  themselves 
should  be  emptied  (ver.  10)  and  their  branches  marred  (Bzek.  ixxi.  12).  Jehovah  had 
employed  the  Assyrian  as  the  rod  of  his  anger  to  punish  Israel  and  Judah ;  but  he 
had  never  concealed  his  purpose,  when  this  was  done,  "  to  punish  the  fruit  of  the  stout 
heart  of  the  King  of  Assyria,  and  the  glory  of  his  high  looks  "  (Isa.  x.  12).  2.  2%« 
Divine  remembrcmee  of  Israd.  Having  promised  never  to  forget  her  or  finally  cast  her 
ofi'  (Isa.  xliv,  21 ;  xlix.  16 ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  33,  34),  he  had  returned  to  the  excellency 
of  Jacob  as  to  the  excellency  of  Isiael  (Keil),  or  had  brought  again  the  excellency  of 
Jacob  as  the  excellency  of  Israel  (Ee vised  Version).  Both  renderings  are  admissible, 
and  both  conduct  to  the  same  goal.  The  doom  of  Nineveh  was  certain  because  Jehovah 
was  about  to  restore  Judah  to  her  ideal  excellence  as  "  Israel,"  and  this  he  was  to  do 
by  himself,  returning  to  her  as  if  she  were  an  ideal  Israel. 

m.  The  KBSI8TAKCE  BEGUN.  1.  Suddenly.  Nineveh  at  length  realizes  her  danger 
and  bethinks  herself  of  her  warriors :  "  He  remembereth  his  wortmBs  "  (ver.  5).  Assyria 
had  good  generals  and  valiant  troops;  to  these  she  now  turns.  2.  HastUy.  Not  a 
moment  is  lost.  Men  and  marshals  hurry  to  the  wall.  No  time  to  trifle  when  such 
enemies  as  Oyaxares  and  Nabopolassar  thunder  at  the  gatei  3.  Vigorously.  The 
defence  (Authorized  Version),  mantelet  (Revised  Version),  or  movable  parapet, 
literally,  the  covering  one,  the  testudo  or  tortoise  (Keil),  is  prepared — probably  "  either 
a  movable  tower  with  a  battering-ram,  consisting  of  a  light  framework  covered  with 
basket-work,  or  else  a  framework  without  any  tower,  either  with  an  ornamented 
covering  or  simply  covered  with  skins  and  moving  upon  four  or  six  wheels "  (Keil). 
4.  Blindly.  Their  energy  and  haste  only  lead  to  confusion :  "  They  stumble  in  their 
march."    The  more  haste,  the  less  speed. 

IV.  The  conquest  completed.  1.  The  capture  of  the  city.  This  was  effected  by 
forcing  the  gates  in  the  city  wall :  "  The  gates  of  the  rivers  are  opened "  (ver.  6). 
These  were  the  gates  leading  from  the  river  into  the  city  (Luther,  Keil),  rather  than 
the  dams  or  sluices  through  which  the  waters  of  the  river  were  admitted  into  the 
canals  which  protected  the  palace.  2.  The  demolition  of  the  palace,  "  The  palace  is 
dissolved,"  not  by  the  inundation  of  water  from  the  river  (FaussetX  since  the  palaces 
were  usually  "  built  in  the  form  of  terraces  upon  the  tops  of  hills,  either  natural  or 
artificial,  and  could  not  be  flooded  with  water  "  (Keil) ;  but  by  the  inrush  of  enemies 
against  it.  The  prophet  means  that  "  there  will  be  no  impediment  to  hinder  the 
approach  of  enemies,  for  all  the  fortresses  will  melt  away,  and  that  of  themselves,  as 
though  they  were  walls  of  paper,  and  the  stones  as  though  they  were  water"  (Calvin). 
3.  The  deportation  of  the  queen.  "  And  Huzzab  is  uncovered,"  etc.  (ver.  7).  This  may 
signify  either  that  the  consort  of  the  king  is  seized,  degraded,  and  borne  off  into 
inglorious  exile  (Ewald),  or  that  Nineveh,  personified  as  a  queen,  is  now  covered  with 
shame,  and  that  she  who  had  formerly  been  established  is  now  swept  off  into  captivity 
(Keil,  Fausset,  Calvin).  In  the  former  case  the  handmaids  who  accompany  her, 
mourning  with  the  voice  of  doves  and  beating  on  their  breasts  (literally,  "  hearts")  are 
the  ladies  of  her  court ;  in  the  latter,  they  are  most  probably  the  inhabitants  who 
bewail  the  fate  of  their  once  famous  city  and  kingdom  (Calvin,  Keil).  4.  The  flight 
of  the  inhabitants.     "  They,"  t.e.  the  masses  of  the  people,  « flee  away  "  (ver.  8). 

(1)  Most  unexpectedly,  since  "  Nineveh  hath  been  of  old  like  a  pool  of  water,"  so 
strong,  impregnable,  and  inaccessible  to  any  foe,  as  well  as  so  prosperous  and  flourishing 
that  the  thing  least  to  be  anticipated  was  that  its  inhabitants  should  flee  from  it. 

(2)  Most  determinedly,  however,  they  do  so,  giving  no  heed  to  the  few  patriotic  men 
who  call  upon  them  to  remain.  "  Stand,  stand,  they  cry ;  but  no  one  looketh  back  " 
(ver.  8).  5.  The  spoliation  of  the  treasure.  (1)  The  quality  of  the  treasure— silver, 
gold,  pleasant  furniture.  "  The  Assyrians  were  celebrated  for  their  skill  in  working 
metals.  Their  mountains  furnished  a  variety  of  minerals— silver,  iron,  copper,  and 
lead,  and  perhaps  even  gold  "  (Layard's  '  Nineveh,'  ii.  415).  (2)  The  quantity  of  the 
treasure :  "  none  end  of  the  store."  That  gold,  silver,  and  precious  vessels  should  have 
been  abundant  in  Nineveh  is  sufficiently  explained  by  remembering,  in  addition  to  the 
mines  just  mentioned,  the  enormous  tribute  received  and  rich  spoils  carried  off  from 


OH.  n,  1— 13.J  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  81 

conquered  nations  ('  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  i.  37,  etc.,  69,  etc.).  6.  The  desthctian 
of  the  scene.  "  She  is  empty,  and  void,  and  waste  "  (ver.  10)— the  effect  of  this  deseription 
being  heightened  in  Hebrew  by  the  combination  of  three  synonymous  and  similarly 
sounding  words,  huqdh  utnebhuqdA  umebulldqdh.  Emptied  of  her  population  and 
despoiled  of  her  treasure,  she  became  a  total  ruin.  Accordiag  to  Strabo,  when  Cykxares 
and  his  allies  took  the  city,  they  utterly  destroyed  it  (Layard's  '  Nineveh,'  ii.  169, 204). 
7.  The  horror  of  the  vanquished.  "  The  heart  melteth  and  the  knees  smite  tog«ther, 
and  anguish  is  in  all  Iwna,  and  the  faces  of  them  all  are  waxed  pale "  (ver.  10). 
"  Hence  we  may  learn  how  foolishly  men  boast  of  their  courage,  while  they  seem  to  b« 
like  lions ;  for  God  can  in  a  moment  so  melt  their  hearts  that  they  lose  all  firmness  * 
(Calvin). 

Lessons.  L  The  retributions  of  Divine  providence  (ver.  1).  The  destroyers  of  others 
may  expect  themselves  to  be  destroyed  (Isa.  xxxiii.  1).  2.  The  hopelessness  of 
defending  one's  self  against  the  invasions  of  Heaven  (ver.  1).  "  Who  would  set  the  thorns 
and  briars  against  me  in  battle  ?  "  (Isa.  xxvii.  4 ;  of.  '  Herod.,'  ix.  16,  "  Whatever 
necessarily  comes  from  God,  it  is  impossible  for  man  by  any  contrivance  to  turn  aside  "). 
3.  The  true  ideal  of  a  nation's  greatness  (ver.  2)— the  dwelling  of  Jehovah  in  her  midst 
(Ps.  ilvi.  5).  4.  The  utter  vanity  of  all  earthly  glory  (ver.  8).  The  world's  strength, 
riches,  honours,  are  all  destined  to  perish  (1  John  ii.  17).  6.  The  horrors  of  the  wicked 
when  the  terrors  of  judgment  come  upon  them  (ver.  10).  "  Then  shall  they  say  to 
the  mountains  and  the  rocks.  Fall  on  us,"  etc.  (Bev.  vi.  16). 

Vers.  11 — -IS.— Z%e  parable  of  the  Uon'$  den.  I.  The  dbsobiption  of  the  dbn. 
1.  Its  eite.  Nineveh,  the  capital  of  the  Assyrian  empire.  (1)  Old,  extending  over 
c.enturies  at  least.  (2)  Capacious,  having  caves  in  it  for  its  prey,  and  room  in  it  for 
the  lion,  lionesses,  and  lion's  whelps  to  walk  about.  (3)  Strong,  surrounded  on  two 
sides  by  water  and  seemingly  impregnable — a  secure  retreat,  in  which  its  inhabiting 
wild  beasts  felt  themselves  safe.  2.  Its  occupants.  The  lions  above  referred  to. 
(1)  The  old  lion — the  King  of  Assyria.  (2)  The  lionesses — the  queens  and  concubines 
of  the  reigning  prince^  (3)  The  lion's  whelps,  or  young  lions — his  sons,  princes, 
nobles,  and  warriors.  '^3.  Its  prey.  The  spoils  of  the  nations,  Syria,  Phcanicia, 
Philistia,  Israel,  Judah,  and  even  Egypt  had  felt  the  might  of  Assyria  and  contributed 
to  swell  the  ravin  she  had  stored  in  her  cities. 

II.  The  dbsteuotiok  of  the  den.  1.  Its  certainty.  According  to  Kahum, 
Jehovah  was  against  Nineveh,  and  that  was  enough  to  secxu-e  its  overthrow.  "  The 
face  of  the  Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxxiv.  16).  Besides,  his  uttered 
thTeatening,  "  I  will  burn  her  chariots  [i.e.  all  her  military  armament]  in  the  smoke," 
rendered  her  doom  inevitable.  The  word  of  Jehovah  can  as  little  fail  in  threatening  as 
in  promise.  2.  Its  celerity.  So  little  difficult  would  be  the  task  to  Jehovah,  that  he 
would  not  need  Are,  but  only  smoke,  to  consume  the  power  of  Nineveh.  "  In  short, 
the  prophet  shows  that  Ninevih  would  be,  as  it  were  in  a  moment,  reduced  to  nothing, 
as  soon  as  it  pleased  God  to  avenge  its  wickedness"  (Calvin).     3.  Its  completeness. 

(1)  Her  warriors  should  be  destroyed:  "The  sword  shall  devour  thy  young  lions." 

(2)  Her  spoliations  should  cease  :  "  I  will  out  oflf  thy  prey  from  the  earth."  (3)  Her 
emissaries  should  be  silent :  "  The  voice  of  thy  messengers  shall  no  more  be  heard," 
exacting  tiibute  from  the  nations  thou  hast  conquered. 

Learn :  li  That  Jehovah  is  against  sin  in  nations  no  less  than  in  individuals. 
2.  That  national  wickedness  is  the  certain  prelude  to  national  ruin. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1  2. Ood  the  Vindicator  of  the  oppressed.     I.  The  oppbession  of  the  ohosxk 

people'  bt  the  Assybians.  1.  This  is  expressed  figuratively.  "  The  emptiers  have 
emptied  them  out "  (ver.  2),  had  exhausted  their  resources,  as  the  contents  of  a  vessel 
poured  out  until  every  drain  had  been  withdrawn,  so  had  both  Israel  and  Judah  been 
impoverished  by  the  Assyrians.  "And  marred  their  vine  branches."  Ancient  Israel 
was  often  described  as  God's  vineyard  (Isa.  v.  1 ;  Ps.  Ixxx.  9).  This  vineyard  the  foe 
had  ruthlessly  invaded,  casting  down  and  injuring  its  fruit-bearing  trees.     2.   Then 


32  THE   BOOK  OF  NAHOM.  [oh.  n.  1—13. 

figurative  representations  are  sustained  hy  historical  /act.  The  more  familiar  we 
become  with  Assyrian  history  the  more  do  we  trace  in  that  vast  heathen  power  the 
prevalence  of  the  haughty,  overbearing  spirit.  Its  rulers  and  people  vainly  supposed 
that  national  greatness  consisted  in  the  possession  of  might  to  be  used  in  oppressing 
other  nations  and  peoples.  To  be  able  to  depict  upon  the  walls  of  the  palaces  of 
Ninus  battle-scenes  indicative  of  military  triumph,  accompanied  by  great  spoil  and 
cruel  chastisement  inflicted  upon  their  adversaries,  seems  to  have  been  their  highest 
ambition.  Their  whole  relationship  to  Israel  and  Judah  was  based  upon  this  principle. 
The  favoured  of  Heaven,  having  forsaken  their  God,  and  hence  lost  his  protecting  care, 
turned  in  their  exigencies  to  Assyria  for  aid,  but  only  to  find,  in  this  supposed  helper 
against  their  foes,  a  more  powerful  enemy.  In  this  way  the  kingdom  of  Israel  was 
first  made  tributary  to  Assyria  by  Pul  (2  Kings  xv.  17 — 20),  and,  soon  after,  its 
tribes  were  carried  away  into  captivity  by  Shalmaneser  (2  Kings  xvii.  3 — ^23),  whilst 
the  kingdom  of  Judah  in  like  manner  became  compelled  to  acknowledge  the  lordship 
of  Tilgath-Pilneser  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  16 — 21).  Hezekiah  sought  to  cast  off  the  Assyrian 
yoke,  but  this  only  resulted  in  the  nation,  in  Nahum's  time,  being  brought  into 
circumstances  of  extreme  peril  (2  Kings  xviii.  13 — 17),  and  from  which  eventually 
supernatural  help  alone  was  able  to  deliver  it  (Isa.  xxxvii.  36). 

II.  Divine  interposition  promised  on  behalf  op  the  oppbbssbd.  (Ver.  2.)  Such 
interposition  had  in  a  measure  but  recently  taken  place  (Isa.  xxxvii.  36).  "The 
angel  of  death  "  had  "  breathed  in  the  face  of  the  foe,"  and  had  caused  "  the  might 
of  the  Gentile"  to  "melt  like  snow,"  and  the  oppressor  to  return  humbled  to  his 
capital  (Isa.  xxxvii.  37).  The  time,  however,  for  the  complete  and  final  interposition 
of  Heaven  had  not  yet  arrived.  Still,  it  should  come.  The  seer,  in  rapt  vision  beheld 
it  as  though  it  had  been  then  in  operation,  and  for  the  encouragement  of  the  oppressed 
he  declared  that  the  Divine  eye  observed  all  that  was  being  endured,  that  the  Lord 
Almighty  still  regarded  them  with  favour  (ver.  2),  and  would  yet  make  them  "  an 
eternal  excellency,  a  joy  of  many  generations  "  (Isa.  Ix.  15). 

III.  This  Divine  interposition  eventually  to  be  experiknobd  vibwbd  as 

CAKRYINO  WITH  IT   THE    ENTIRE    OVERTHROW   OF    THE   OPPRESSOR.      (Ver.    1.)      AsshuT 

should  in  due  course  be  brought  low,  and  the  yoke  of  bondage  should  fall  from  off  the 
necks  of  the  captives.  In  "  the  day  of  visitation :  "  1.  Agents  should  not  be  wanting 
to  carry  out  the  Divine  behests.  The  defection  of  the  Assyrian  general,  the  forces  of 
the  King  of  Media,  and  the  overflowing  of  the  Tigris,  should  all  combine  to  bring 
about  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divine  purpose ;  and  these  forces  are  here  personified 
as  "the  dasher  in  pieces"  (ver.  1).  2.  Besistance  should  he  in  vain.  They  might 
"  keep  the  munition,  watch  the  ways,"  etc.  (ver.  1),  but  all  to  no  purpose.  The  proud 
power  must  inevitably  fall,  and  in  its  overthrow  proclamation  be  made  that  it  is  not 
by  means  of  tyranny  and  oppression  and  wrong-doing  that  any  nation  can  become  truly 
great  and  lastingly  established,  but  by  the  prevalence  in  its  midst  of  liberty,  virtue, 
and  righteousness.    Nineveh  in  her  downfall 

".  .  .  seems  to  cry  aloud 
To  warn  the  mighty  and  instruct  the  proud; 
That  ol  the  great,  neglecting  to  be  just. 
Heaven  in  a  moment  makes  a  heap  of  dust." 

S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  3 — 13. — The  downfall  of  Nineveh,  as  illustrative  of  the  Divine  and  the  human 
elements  in  revelation.  There  are  two  elements  in  the  Bible,  the  Divine  and  the 
human.  God  speaks  to  ua  in  every  pa2;e,  nor  does  he  speak  the  less  emphatically,  but 
all  the  more  so,  in  that  he  addresses  us  through  men  possessing  throbbing  hearts,  and 
who  were  passing  through  experiences  like  our  own.  We  honour  the  volume  as 
being  in  the  highest  sense  God's  Word,  nor  do  we  honour  it  the  less  in  this  respect 
because  we  rejoice  that  he  has  been  pleased  to  make  holy  men  the  medium  of  com- 
municating his  will.  The  account  given  in  these  verses  of  the  predicted  ruin  of 
Nineveh  must  be  taken  as  a  whole,  and  in  the  graphic  picture  here  presented  to  us  we 
have  strikingly  illustrated  this  twofold  character  of  the  Scriptures  of  eternal  truth. 

I.  The  account  contained  herb  op  the  predicted  overthrow  of  Nineveh 
SERVES  to  illustrate  THE  DiviNE  ELEMENT  IN  REVELATION.  Nahum  flourished  in  the 


OH.  II.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  33 


reign  of  Hezekiah  (b.o.  725 — 696),  and  Nineveh  was  destroyed  between  b.o.  609  and 
606).  He  lived  and  prophesied  thus  say  a  hundred  years  before  the  occurrence  of  the 
events  he  so  vividly  described,  and  when  the  Assyrian  power  was  in  the  zenith  of  itf 
prosperity.  His  announcements  were  very  distinct  and  definite,  and  by  placing  these 
and  the  records  of  secular  historians  given  at  a  subsequent  period  side  by  side,  we  see 
how  minutely  the  predictions  of  this  seer  have  been  fulfilled,  and  that  hence,  in 
making  these,  he  must  have  been  God's  messenger,  uttering,  not  his  own  thoughts,  but 
those  which  had  been  communicated  to  him  by  "  visions  and  revelations  of  the  Lord." 
In  cli.  i.  10  we  read,  "  For  while  they  be  folden  together  as  thorns,  and  while  they 
are  drunken  as  drunkards,  they  shall  be  devoured  as  stubble  fully  dry."  The  secular 
historian  writes,  "While  all  the  Assyrian  army  were  feasting  for  their  former 
victories,  those  about  Arbuces,  being  informed  by  some  deserters  of  the  negligence  and 
drunkenness  in  the  camp  of  the  enemies,  assaulted  them  unexpectedly  by  night,  and 
falling  orderly  on  them  disorderly,  and  prepared  on  them  unprepared,  became  masters 
of  the  camp,  and  slew  many  of  the  soldiers  and  drove  the  rest  info  the  city"  (Dio- 
dorus  Siculus,  bk.  ii.  p.  80).  In  ch.  ii.  6  we  read,  "  The  gates  of  the  rivers  shall  be 
opened,  and  the  palace  shall  be  dissolved."  The  secular  historian  writes,  "  There 
was  an  oracle  among  the  Assyrians  that  Nineveh  should  not  be  taken  till  the  river 
became  an  enemy  to  the  city ;  and  in  the  third  year  of  the  siege,  the  river,  being 
swollen  with  continual  rains,  overflowed  part  of  the  city,  and  broke  down  the  wall  for 
twenty  furlongs.  Then  the  king,  thinking  that  the  oracle  was  fulfilled,  and  the  river 
had  become  an  enemy  to  the  city,  built  a  large  funeral  pile  in  the  palace,  and  collect- 
ing together  all  his  wealth  and  his  concubines  and  eunuchs,  burnt  himself  and  the 
palace  with  them  all,  and  the  enemy  entered  at  the  breach  that  the  waters  had  made, 
and  took  the  city"  (Diodorus  Siculus,  bk.  ii.  p.  80).  In  ch.  ii.  9  the  prophet,  as 
though  addressing  the  adversaries  of  Nineveh,  said,  "  Take  ye  the  spoil  of  silver,  take 
the  spoil  of  gold :  for  there  is  none  end  of  the  store  and  glory  out  of  all  the  pleasant 
furniture ; "  and  the  same  secular  historian  already  quoted  informs  us  that  the 
conquerors  carried  many  talents  of  gold  and  silver  to  Ecbatana,  the  royal  city  of  the 
Medes.  No  language  could  be  more  explicit  than  that  in  which  Nahum  predicted  the 
total  destruction  of  the  city  (ch.  ii.  10 — 13 ;  iii.  7, 15 — 17).  The  Prophet  Zephaniah 
used  words  equally  plain  (ii.  13 — 15).  Their  utterances  would  have  appeared  very 
strange  to  the  Ninevites  at  the  time  they  were  spoken;  as  strange,  indeed,  as  similar 
utterances  would  appear  if  addressed  at  the  present  time  to  the  inhabitants  of  our  own 
metropolis ;  but  they  were  true  nevertheless,  and  the  facts  of  history  furnish  abundant 
confirmations.  For  upwards  of  two  thousand  years  after  its  overthrow,  Nineveh  lay 
buried  in  the  earth.  History  and  tradition  indicated  its  probable  site,  and  the  mounds 
to  be  found  in  the  supposed  districts,  and  out  of  which  the  Turks  obtained  materials 
for  building  purposes,  of  evident  antiquity,  invited  research ;  and  within  a  very  recent 
period  such  research  has  been  carried  on,  the  long-buried  palaces  of  the  kings  of 
Assyria  have  been  discovered,  huge  sculptures  have  been  carefully  dug  out  of  the 
mounds,  and  the  national  museums  both  of  France  and  England  are  now  enriched 
with  these  long-lost  works  of  art,  testifying  not  only  to  the  ancient  splendour  of  the 
Assyrian  empire  and  its  capital,  but  also  to  the  truthfulness  of  the  prophetical 
records,  and  to  the  prophets  as  speaking  and  writing  under  the  inspiration  of  the 
Almighty,  and  as  being  indeed  the  messengers  of  him  who  has  said,  "  I  am  God,  and 
there  is  none  like  me,  declaring  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  from  ancient  times 
the  things  that  are  not  yet  done  "  (Isa.  xlvi.  9,  10). 
n.  The  aooouitt  contained  heee  of  tee  predicted  overthrow  of  Nineveh 

BBRVE8   TO    ILLTTSTEATE   THE    HUMAN   ELEMENT    IN    REVELATION.        Holy    Scripture    is 

remarkable  in  its  variety — not  variety  in  purpose,  for  this  is  single  throughout,  but 
variety  in  expression.  History,  prophecy,  poetry,  parable,  proverb,  miracle,  biography, 
vision,  epistle,  are  all  laid  under  tribute.  As  there  is  a  Divine  element  in  the  Bible, 
so  also  there  is  a  human  element  therein.  Whilst  upon  the  writings  of  each  of  its 
contributors  there  is  unmistakably  the  impress  of-  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
there  is  likewise,  throughout  the  whole,  clear  indications  of  the  preservation  of  those 
natural  gifts  and  endowments  which  the  respective  writers  possessed.  There  was  no 
suspension  of  the  powers  of  the  men  who  were  honoured  of  God  in  communicating  ta 
their  fellow-men  a  knowledge  of  his  will;  but  rather  there  was  the  retention  of  their 

NAHUM.  " 


84  XHJS   BOOK.  OF   JSAHUM.  L<"»-  "•  ^— ^'*- 

own  indiyidual  peculiarities  and  natural  qualities,  whilst  the  Divine  Spirit  operated 
through  these  and  turned  these  to  the  most  useful  account.  Biblical  critics  are 
agreed  in  recognizing  "  the  classic  beauty  and  the  finished  elegance  "  of  the  style  of 
Kahum,  and  in  assigning  to  this  writer  a  place  in  the  first  rank  of  Hebrew  literature. 
"  The  variety  in  his  method  of  presenting  ideas  discovers  much  poetic  talent  in  the 
prophet.  The  reader  of  taste  and  sensibility  will  be  affected  by  the  entire  structure 
of  the  poem,  by  the  agreeable  manner  in  which  the  ideas  are  brought  forward,  by  the 
flexibility  of  the  expressions,  the  roundness  of  his  turns,  the  delicate  outlines  of  his 
figures,  by  the  strength  and  delicacy,  and  the  expression  of  sympathy  and  greatness, 
which  diffuse  themselves  over  the  whole  subject "  (De  Wette's  Introduction).  "  Nahum 
of  all  the  prophets  has  the  most  impassioned  style ;  and  in  none  is  found  the  change 
of  numbers,  of  persons  addressed,  and  of  BuflBx-relations,  with  such  frequentce«  and 
immediateness  as  in  him.  At  the  same  time,  his  language  has  wonderful  energy  and 
picturesque  beauty.  The  painting  does  not  embrace  merely  single  rhythms  and  groups 
of  words,  but  whole  series ;  and  in  coimecting  his  thoughts,  he  shows,  with  all  his 
vehemence,  great  and  varied  skill"  (Eleinert).  His  description  of  the  siege  and  fall 
of  Nineveh,  contained  in  this  chapter  (vers.  3 — 13),  is  wonderfully  vivid.  As  we 
read  the  account,  even  at  this  distant  date,  the  stirring  scenes  seem  to  live  again,  and 
to  pass  in  review  before  us.  We  see  the  attacking  warriors  in  their  scarlet  attire  and 
with  their  chariots  armed  with  sharp  instruments  of  steel  (ver.  3),  and  the  defenders 
of  the  city,  suddenly  startled,  hastening  their  preparations,  their  chariots  in  the 
hurry  jostling  against  each  other  in  the  streets,  and  the  gallants  summoned  by  the 
king  hastening  to  the  ramparts,  which  the  foe  is  seeking  with  battering-rams  to  cast 
down  (vers.  4,  6).  We  behold  the  overflowing  of  the  river,  facilitating  the  advance 
of  the  enemy,  and  paralyzing  the  people  by  reason  of  the  popular  tradition  now 
seemingly  being  fulfilled  (ver.  6).  We  witness  the  inhabitants  brot^ht  low  in  shame 
and  dishonour,  moaning  like  a  captive  woman  (ver.  7),  or  fleeing  for  their  very  life 
in  hopelessness  and  despair,  conscious  that  resistance  is  vain  (ver.  8).  We  view  the 
spoiling  of  the  city — the  conqueror  carrying  away  the  gold  and  the  silver  to  the 
Median  capital,  the  trophies  of  victory  (ver.  9).  Jinally,  we  picture  to  ourselves  the 
prophets  of  the  Lord  gazing  upon  the  waste  and  desolation,  reflecting  upon  the  proud 
being  abased,  their  offspring  cut  off,  their  gains  confiscated,  their  boastful  messengers 
silenced,  and  ascribing  all  the  terrible  reverses  thus  experienced  to  the  righteous 
retribution  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  (vers.  10 — 13) ;  and  we  feel,  as  we  linger  upon  the  scene 
thus  graphically  portrayed,  that  whilst  rejoicing  in  this  volume  of  revelation  as 
having  been  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  as  containing  Divine  lessons  abounding 
both  in  encouragement  and  warning,  we  may  well  prize  it  also  even  on  the  lower 
ground  |of  its  literary  merit,  and  heartily  rejoice  in  the  infinite  variety  of  human 
powers  and  endowments  here  consecrated  to  the  presentation  of  the  loftiest  and 
grandest  spiritual  teaching. — S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  13. — Man  ineurring  the  Divine  displecuure.  "  Behold,  I  am  against  thee,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts."     This  attitude  of  God  towards  man — 

I.  Implies  wbonq  doing  on  man's  paet.  God  is  not  thus  adverse  to  man  for 
naught.  "His  delights  are  with  the  sons  of  men"  (Prov.  viii.  31).  Sin  alienates 
man  from  God,  and  cau.ses  God  to  be  righteously  displeased  with  man. 

II.  Involves  man  in  peesbnt  distkess.  Man  cannot  be  at  ease  whilst  under  the 
ban  of  Jehovah.  "  In  his  favour  is  life"  (Ps.  xxx.  5).  Separation  from  him  through 
sm  means  disquietude  and  unrest.  "  The  worst  troubler  in  the  world  is  a  wilful  heart." 
"  Conscience  makes  cowards  of  us  all."  "  The  heart  melteth,  the  knees  smite  together  " 
(ver.  10).  ^ 

III.  Resulting  in  ultimate  ruin  to  such  as  wilfully  persist  in  sin.  God  is 
"the  Lord  of  hosts."  All  power  is  his.  "Who  shall  stand  when  he  is  angry?"  (Ps. 
Ixxvi.  7).  All  have  sinned,  and  hence  have  incurred  the  displeasure  of  him  who  "  is  of 
purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity  ;  "  but  in  Christ,  whose  day  the  seers  saw  afar  off, 
uod  18  reconciled  to  man  ;  so  that  the  distress  and  ruin  indicated  can  alone  result  from 
man  refusing  to  be  reconciled  unto  God.— S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  13  (with  ch.  L  15).— The  messengers  of  Nineeeh  and  the  messengers  of  Zion:  a 


OH.  u.  1—13.]  THE   BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  85 

comparison.  "  And  the  voice  of  thy  messengers  shall  no  more  be  heard  "  (ver.  13) ; 
"  Behold  upon  the  mountains  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings,  that  publisheth 
peace  1 "  (ch.  i.  16).  Messengers,  differing  very  materially  in  their  character  and  mission, 
are  referred  to  in  these  words.  The  messengers  of  Nineveh  and  the  messengers  of 
Zion  are  alluded  to  in  these  passages.  A  comparison  of  these  respective  messengers 
may  prove  suggestive  and  useful  in  its  application  to  certain  developments  in  these 
modern  times.  From  the  Second  Book  of  Kings  and  the  Second  Book  of  Chronicles  we 
learn  that  the  heralds  or  messengers  of  Nineveh  cherished  the  spirit  of  blasphemy  with 
reference  to  the  God  of  heaven.  The  faith  of  the  pious  Hebrews  consisted  in  the  recog- 
nition of  the  one  living  and  true  God,  and  of  his  providential  care  over  all  his  creatures ; 
and  it  was  against  this  bulwark  that  the  emissaries  of  Assyria  constantly  directed  their 
assaults  in  words  foul  and  filthy  (see  Eabshakeh's  appeal  to  the  Jews,  2  Kings  xviii. 
33 — 35  ;  and  his  letter,  2  Chron.  xxxii.  17).  The  great  and  distinguishing  charac- 
teristic of  the  messengers  of  Zion  was  loyalty  to  the  God  of  heaven.  Their  feet  stood 
upon  the  mountains,  and  their  voice  proclaimed  to  the  people,  "  Behold  your  God !  " 
(Isa.  xl.  9);  "Thy  God  reigneth!"  (Isa.  lii.  7).  In  the  present  age  there  are 
messengers  who  boldly  declare  their  non-acceptance  of  the  teaching  that  recognizes  the 
Divine  Being  and  his  working,  and  who  seek  to  disseminate  their  views,  and  in  doing 
so  are  not  particular  if  they  blaspheme  the  God  of  heaven.  And  whilst  there  are  such 
messengers  in  the  world  doing  their  injurious  work,  there  are  also  those  who  are 
thoroughly  loyal  to  the  King  of  kings,  who  delight  to  show  forth  his  praise,  to  tell  the 
story  of  his  love  in  the  gift  and  work  of  Christ,  and  to  seek  to  draw  men  in  loving 
obedience  to  his  authority  and  will.    Note  certain  contrasts,  then,  suggested ;  thus — 

I.  Captivity  in  contrast  with  fbbbdom.  The  messengers  of  Nineveh  approached 
Jerusalem,  to  which  Sennacherib  was  laying  siege,  but  they  bore  no  tidings  of  liberty. 
They  claimed /ti2?  submission,  and  declared  that  even  this  must  be  followed  by  captivity 
in  a  strange  land  (2  Kings  xviii.  31,  32).  The  assurance  of  ultimate  deliverance  came 
from  the  messengers  of  the  Lord  (ch.  i.  12,  13).  Sin  is  bondage.  Evil  passions, 
habits,  desires,  are  fetters ;  a  life  of  alienation  from  the  true  and  the  right  is  a  life  of 
hard  bondage.  Transgressors  are  slaves.  And  scepticism  has  nothing  to  offer  such  by 
way  of  helping  them  to  escape.  The  messengers  may  expatiate  to  such  a  one  upon 
the  nobleness  of  virtue,  may  sound  in  his  ears  some  wise  sayings  of  sages  and  philo- 
sophers, may  remind  him  of  the  injury  he  is  inflicting  upon  himself,  and  bid  him  "  ba 
a  man,"  and  "  turn  over  a  new  leaf."  But  he  is  down ;  he  is  conscious  of  moral 
inability;  he  lacks  inward  strength.  Lol  the  messengers  of  Zion  come.  They  tell 
him  of  the  great  Father's  unwearying  love,  the  Saviour's  obedience  unto  the  death 
of  the  cross,  the  energizing  and  sanctifying  Spirit  ready  to  gird  him  with  all-sufficient 
strength,  the  elder  Brother  who  has  prored  his  trials  and  his  tears,  and  who  is 
prepared  to  be  near  him  in  every  season  of  need  as  his  "  strong  siding  Champion."  He 
feels  the  tidings  to  be  "  good ; "  is  bowed  low  in  penitence ;  his  eye  of  faith  turns  to  the 
hill  called  Calvary,  and  rises  to  the  everlasting  hills  whence  cometh  help;  the  fettered 
soul  is  released,  is  free,  for  the  messengers  on  the  mountains  have  proclaimed  deliver- 
ance to  the  captive,  and  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  the  bound  (Isa.  Ixi.  1). 

II.  Stbifb  in  contbabt  to  pkaok.  The  messengers  of  Nineveh  to  Judah  had 
nothing  conciliatory  to  convey ;  they  told  only  of  contention  and  strife.  The  assurance 
that  peace  should  iiltimately  be  enjoyed  came  to  the  anxious  King  of  Judah  from  God'g 
messengers,  who  published  peace.  The  messengers  of  scepticism  have  no  proclamation 
of  peace  to  make ;  their  work  is  altogether  destructive ;  contumely  is  their  delight ;  to 
seek  to  unsettle  the  minds  of  men  and  to  shake  their  faith  is  their  poor  mission.  It  is 
the  privilege,  however,  of  the  messengers  of  Zion  to  proclaim  those  spiritual  and  eternal 
verities  in  which  the  heart  may  securely  and  tranquilly  repose,  and  to  point  to  him 
who  can  quell  every  storm  and  give  rest  unto  the  soul. 

III.  GiiOOM  m  contbabt  to  gladness.  Hezekiah  and  his  people  were  in  extremity ; 
it  was  to  them  a  time  of  "  trouble ; "  but  not  a  ray  of  hope  came  to  them  through  the 
messen<:'ers  of  Nineveh.  Their  worst  fears  were  confirmed ;  the  foe  was  unrelenting. 
Their  hope  was  in  God,  and  in  the  words  spoken  by  his  holy  prophets.  Bo  in  the 
extremities  of  life — in  sickness  and  sorrow,  and  specially  at  life's  close,  hope  springs  not 
from  unbelief,  but  from  the  words  God  has  addressed  to  us  through  his  servants.  The 
gospel  has  no  rival  in  such  seasons.     Scepticism  has  no  voice  then,  or,  if  it  speaks,  it 


86  THE   BOOK  OP  NAHUM.  [oh.  n.  1—13. 

but  deepens  the  prevailing  gloom ;  but  the  good  tidings  God  has  revealed  disjjels  our 
sadness  and  fills  the  soul  with  immortal  hopes.  Happy  messengers,  who  are  thus 
enabled  to  "  comfort  all  that  mourn,"  etc.  (Tsa.  Ixi.  2)  I 

IV.  Shame  in  contrast  to  honoub.  The  voice  of  all  messengers  who  blaspheme 
the  holy  Name  of  God  "  shall  be  no  more  heard,"  for  God  will  put  them  to  silence ;  but 
voices  publishing  his  love  and  grace  shall  go  sounding  on  through  the  ages — the  bright 
succession  of  proclaimers  shall  not  cease.  Growing  numbers  shall  be  raised  up  who 
shall  find  their  way  to  all  nations  and  kindreds  and  tribes,  until  the  glad  tidings 
shall  reach  every  shore,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  fill  the  earth  (Isa. 
xi.  9).— S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  1 — ch.  iii.  19. —  Wicked  nations :  1.  They  are  often  allowed  to  exist  on  this 
earth  until  they  reach  a  terrible  degree  of  wieJeeSnas.  "  He  that  dasheth  in  pieces  is 
come  up  before  thy  face :  keep  the  munition,  watch  the  way,  make  thy  loins  strong, 
fortify  thy  power  mightily,"  etc.  We  take  these  two  chapters  together,  (1)  because 
they  treat  of  one  subject,  viz.  the  destruction  of  Nineveh;  (2)  because  scarcely  any 
detached  verse  would  supply  suggestions  for  a  practical  discourse ;  and  (3)  because 
our  purpose  in  these  sketches  is  not  critical,  but  homiletio.  The  critical  part  has  been 
admirably  done  by  Henderson,  Keil,  and  others,  atid  is  found  in  the  Exposition.  We 
shall  therefore  endeavour  to  gather  up  all  that  is  practical  in  these  two  chapters  under 
three  general  headings.  1.  That  nations  are  often  allowed  to  exist  on  this  earth  until 
they  reach  a  terrible  degree  of  wickedness,  2.  TTiat  it  is  the  decree  of  Heaven  that, 
however  long  they  exist,  the  time  must  come  luhen  they  shall  be  utterly  destroyed,  3.  That 
Providence  often  employs  one  wicked  nation  to  inflict  ruin  upon  another.  We  shall 
devote  a  separate  sketch  to  each  of  these  propositions.  Our  subject  now  is  that  nations 
are  often  allowed  to  exist  on  this  earth  until  they  reach  a  terrible  degree  of  wickedness. 
Assyria,  the  nation  referred  to  here,  was  one  of  the  oldest  kingdoms  in  the  world;  it 
could  count  its  age  by  centuries.  Generation  after  generation  came  through  centuries, 
played  their  part,  and  passed  away,  whilst  Assyria  stood.  Its  beginning  is  so  far  back 
that  it  is  lost  in  obscurity.  An  early  reference  to  it  in  Scripture  will  be  found  in 
Numb.  xxiv.  22.  Beference  to  its  capital,  Nineveh,  and  its  founder,  Asshur,  we  have 
also  in  Gen.  x.  11.    Our  proposition  suggests  two  questions — 

I.  What  were  its  leading  obimbs?  Prom  these  chapters  we  can  infer  a  few. 
1.  Bapaeity.  The  city  is  described  as  the  dwelling-place  of  lions.  "  Where  is  the 
dwelling  of  the  lions?  "  etc.  (ch.  ii.  11,  12).  "The  point  of  comparison  is,"  says  Keil, 
"the  predatory  lust  of  its  rulers  and  warriors,  who  crushed  the  nations  like  lions, 
plundering  their  treasures  and  bringing  them  together  in  Nineveh."  As  lions  prowl 
about  with  ravenous  instincts  in  search  of  their  prey,  and  are  utterly  regardless  of  the 
sufferings  and  agonies  they  infiict,  so  long  as  they  gain  their  object,  so  the  King  of 
Assyria  and  his  minions  went  forth  to  rifle  and  to  ruin  distant  countries,  in  order  to 
augment  their  wealth  and  promote  their  aggrandizement.  This  rapacity  seems  to  have 
been  their  habit ;  the  city  was  a  dwelling-place  of  lions.  What  an  enormity  is  tlus  1 — 
man  preying  upon  man  like  predatory  beasts.  The  spirit  of  this  rapacity  lives  too 
strongly  in  modern  nations.  It  is  seen,  not  only  in  aggressive  wars,  but  in  trade  and 
commerce — the  strong  everywhere  preying  on  the  weak  for  the  sake  of  gain.  2.  Orudty. 
The  lion  instinct  was  so  prevailing  in  the  population,  that  the  very  city  is  called  "  the 
bloody  city  "  (oh.  iii.  1).  The  golden  rule,  "  Do  unto  others  as  you  would  have  others 
do  unto  yon,"  was  trampled  in  the  dust.  Instead  of  respect  being  paid  to  the  rights  of 
men,  life  itself  was  cheaply  held ;  their  feet  were  "  swift  to  shed  blood."  It  lived  by 
rapine.  _  Its  cruelty  is  handed  down  in  its  sculptures,  where  we  have  lions  of  every 
form,  winged  and  unwinged.  Cruelty  is  the  worst  stage  of  depravity.  When  all  social 
love  in  the  human  breast  gives  way  to  malevolence,  what  have  you  but  a  devil  ?  There 
are  men  in  every  age  and  country  whose  chief  pleasure  is  to  inflict  torture.  Atrocities 
are  being  perpetrated  to  a  greater  or  less  extent  in  all  ages  and  lands.  "Beasts," 
says  our  great  dramatist,  "  are  not  cruel  save  when  urged  by  hunger ; "  but  men  are 
oftea  so,  and  into  a  cruel  nature  it  is  impossible  to  work  the  humane  and  generous. 

"  You  may  as  well  use  question  with  the  wolf. 
Why  be  hath  made  the  ewe  bleat  for  the  lamb ; 
You  may  as  Wfll  forbid  the  mountain  pinea 


OH.  n.  1—13,]  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  87 

To  wag  their  high  tops,  and  to  make  no  noise 
When  they  are  fretted  with  the  gnats  of  heaven ; 
Yon  may  as  well  do  anything  most  hard, 
As  seek  to  soften  that  (than  which  what's  harder  7>— 
A  crnel  heart." 

8.  Imposture.  The  city  is  represented  as  "  fall  of  lies  and  robbery  "  (ch.  ill.  1),  or,  ai 
Keil  renders  it,  "  full  of  deceit  and  murder."  Falsehood  and  violence  were  rampant. 
The  imposture  or  falsehood  is  expressed  in  the  fourth  verse,  "  Because  of  the  multitude 
of  the  whoredoms  of  the  well-favoured  harlot,  the  mistress  of  witchcrafts,  that  selleth 
nations  through  her  whoredoms,  and  families  through  her  witchcrafts,"  "The 
idolatrous  practices  of  the  Ninevites,  and  the  means  which  they  employed  to  seduce 
others  to  worship  their  gods,  are  here  represented  as  the  principal  cause  of  their 
destruction.  At  the  same  time,  the  commerce,  luxury,  etc,  which  they  carried  to  the 
greatest  height,  are  not  to  be  excluded ;  for  in  making  contracts  and  treaties  with  the 
more  powerful  of  their  neighbours,  they  not  only  employed  these  as  inducements,  but 
did  not  scruple  to  deliver  into  their  power  nations  and  tribes  that  were  unable  to 
help  themselves  (comp.  Joel  iii.  3,  6,  8 ;  Amos  i,  6).  The  metaphor  of  an  unchaste 
female,  and  the  seductive  arts  which  she  employs,  is  not  unfrequent  in  the  prophets  " 
(Henderson),  The  cunning  and  deceptive  policy  is  here  called  whoring  or  love-making, 
because  it  was  that  selfishness  which  wraps  itself  up  in  the  dress  of  love,  but  under  tiie 
appearance  of  love  seeks  only  the  gratification  of  its  own  lust.  It  was  a  mistress  of  this 
art,  and  by  it  sold  nations,  deprived  them  of  their  independence  and  liberty.  Such  are 
some  of  the  crimes  here  referred  to,  of  which  the  Assyrians  were  pre-eminently  guilty 
— rapacity,  cruelty,  imposture.  These  imply  every  species  of  moral  evil,  and  moral 
evil  in  its  most  inhuman  and  ungodly  aspects.  Where  these  are  there  is  no  rectitude, 
no  benevolence,  no  moral  order,  no  true  religion, 

II,  Wht  was  buoh  a  nation  allowed  to  exist  so  LONG?  It  was  wicked  from  the 
beginning :  why  did  not  righteous  Heaven  crush  it  at  the  outset  ?  Why  was  such  a 
monster  of  iniquity  allowed  to  perpetrate  such  enormities  in  the  world  from  age  to  age? 
The  question  is  similar  to  that  which  Job  asked,  "  Wherefore  do  the  wicked  live, 
become  old,  yea,  are  mighty  in  power?  "  (Job  xxi.  7).  Without  presuming  to  penetrate 
the  mind  of  God,  or  give  the  reason,  we  can  see  some  important  purposes  which  the 
continuation  of  tiie  existence  of  wicked  men  in  this  world  answers.  It  serves  to  show : 
1.  ThR  freedom  of,  the  human  soul.  The  natural  tendency  of  all  the  blessings  and  beauty 
of  life,  the  spirit  of  grandeur  and  beneficence  that  runs  through  all  nature,  are  against 
wickedness  and  in  favour  of  virtue  and  holiness.  Notwithstanding  this,  men  are 
wicked.  They  have  a  power  to  resist  the  Divine,  to  pervert  the  good,  and  outrage 
their  own  natures.  Here  is  freedom  of  nature.  Men  are  not  bad  by  necessity ;  they 
are  bad  by  their  own  free  determination,  2,  The  wonderful  forbearance  of  Qod. 
Though  wickedness  is  to  the  last  degree  repugnant  to  his  holy  nature,  and  though  by 
a  volition  he  could  annihilate  a  universe  of  sinners,  through  his  infinite  love  he  forbears, 
"  The  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his  promise,  as  some  men  count  slackness,  but  is 
long-suffering  to  us-ward,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come 
to  repentance  "  (2  Pet,  iii.  9),  3.  The  existence  of  afuty/re  state  of  retribution.  Under 
the  righteous  government  of  God  such  a  state  of  things  cannot  go  on  for  ever.  There 
must  come  an  end,  a  balancing  of  the  world's  accounts,  and  an  administration  of  justica 
to  every  soul.  Human  society  is  in  an  abnormal  state ;  like  water  in  a  flood,  it  is  hurry- 
ing onward  to  a  more  settled  destination.     "  The  mills  of  God  grind  slowly." — D,  T. 

Ver,  1 — ch.  iii,  19. —  Wicked  nations :  2.  However  long  they  exist,  they  will  be  utterly 
destroyed.  "  He  that  dasheth  in  pieces,"  etc,  "  The  Scripture,"  says  Sherlock, "  takes 
notice  of  a  certain  measure  of  iniquity,  which  is  filling  up  from  one  generation  to 
another,  till  at  last  it  makes  a  nation  or  family  ripe  for  destruction.  And  although 
these  persons  on  whom  this  vengeance  falls  suffer  no  more  than  their  own  personal  sin 
deserved,  yet,  because  the  sins  of  former  generations,  which  they  equal  or  outdo,  make 
it  time  for  God  utterly  to  destroy  them,  the  punishment  due  to  the  .'^ins  of  many 
generations  is  said  to  fall  upon  them  "  (Gen.  xv.  16 ;  2  Kings  xxiv.  3,  4 ;  Matt,  xxiii. 
32 — 36).  So  thorough  was  the  destruction  of  Nineveh,  that  its  very  site  for  ages  was 
a  matter  of  conjecture.     The  wonderful  discoveries  of  Botta  in  18^,  followed  up  by 


38  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  [oh.  n.  1—18. 

Layard  in  1845,  not  only  determined  its  site,  but  disclosed  the  dwellings,  omamenti, 
history,  manners,  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  old  Assyrian  metropolis.  Now,  in  the 
proplieoy  which  Nahum  gives,  we  learn  that  its  destruction  reveals  several  things. 

I.    The    FEUITLBSSNES8  OF   THE   MOST   BTBENUOUS   EFFOBTS  OF    BESISTANCB.      "Keep 

the  munition,  watch  the  way,  make  thy  loins  strong,  fortify  thy  power  mightily  " 
(oh.  ii.  1).  This  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  ironical,  and  to  mean — ^Do  your  utmost  to 
resist,  concentrate  all  your  forces,  bring  them  into  vigorous  play,  it  will  be  utterly 
worthless.  No  doubt  Nineveh,  in  her  extremities,  strove  to  the  utmost  to  crush  the 
invader  and  to  preserve  her  own  existence.  But  all  efforts  failed ;  its  doom  was  sealed, 
its  time  had  come,  it  had  filled  up  the  measure  of  its  iniquity.  There  is  no  resisting 
God's  judgment  when  it  comes.  "There  is  no  discharge  in  that  warfare."  We  learn 
from  this  prophecy  that  its  destruction  reveals — 

II.  That  the  same  violence  with  which  it  destboted  othebs  was  now  employed 
FOB  its  own  destkuction.  Nineveh  was  a  city  of  blood,  full  of  lies  and  violence,  the 
dwelling-place  of  ravenous  lions,  which  had  preyed  upon  other  nations  and  ruined 
them.  Now  this  violence  is  brought  to  bear  upon  them.  "  With  what  measure  ye 
mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again."  See  the  description  given  of  its  conquerors 
(ch.  ii.  3 ;  iii.  2,  3),  "  The  shield  of  his  mighty  men  is  made  red,"  the  emblem  of 
slaughter.  "  The  chariots  shall  be  with  flaming  torches,"  their  wheels  rolling  with 
sucli  velocity  that  they  flash  lightning  from  the  stones.  They  "  rage  in  the  streets," 
jostle  against  each  other,  and  "  run  like  the  lightnings,"  and  there  are  the  "  noise  of  tlie 
whips,"  the  "  rattling  of  the  wheels,"  the  "  prancing  of  the  horses,"  the  flashing  of  the 
swords  and  the  glittering  spears.  Crowds  are  struck  down, "  a  great  number  of  carcases," 
there  is  "  none  end  of  their  corpses ;  they  stumble  upon  their  corpses,"  etc.  The  Bible 
is  full  of  the  doctrine  of  retributive  justice;  it  abounds  with  examples  of  sinners 
receiving  back  in  punishment  the  very  same  evils  that  they  have  inflicted  on  others. 
"  Every  man  shall  be  rewarded  according  to  his  works."  How  often  it  happens  in  the 
government  of  the  world,  that  the  deceiver  is  punished  by  deceit,  the  ambitious  by 
ambition,  the  avaricious  by  avarice,  the  violent  by  violence  1  "  His  mischief  shall 
return  upon  his  own  head,  and  his  violent  dealing  shall  come  down  upon  his  own 
pate."' 

III.  The  wobthlbssnbss  of  its  chief  method  op  dbfenok.  "The  gates  of  the 
rivers  shall  be  opened,  and  the  palace  shall  be  dissolved  "  (oh.  ii.  6).  "  The  river  wall 
on  the  Tigris  (the  west  defence  of  Nineveh)  was  4530  yards  long.  On  the  north, 
south,  and  east  sides  there  were  large  moats,  capable  of  being  easily  filled  with  water 
from  the  Khos-ru.  Traces  of  dams,  gates,  or  sluices,  for  regulating  the  supply,  are 
still  visible,  so  that  the  whole  city  could  be  surrounded  with  a  water  barrier.  Besides, 
on  the  east,  the  weakest  side,  it  was  further  protected  by  a  lofty  double  rampart,  with 
a  moat  two  hundred  feet  wide  between  its  two  parts,  cut  in  the  rooky  ground.  The 
moats,  or  canals,  flooded  by  the  Ninevites  before  the  siege  to  repel  the  foe,  were  made 
a  dry  bed  to  march  into  the  city,  by  the  foe  turning  the  water  into  a  difierent  channel, 
as  Cyrus  did  in  the  siege  of  Babylon"  (Maurer).  This,  however,  is  not  substantiated. 
"  In  the  earlier  capture  of  Nineveh  by  Arbaces  the  Mede  and  Belsis  the  Babylonian, 
Diodorus  Siculus  states  that  there  was  an  old  prophecy,  that  it  should  not  be  taken  till 
the  river  became  its  enemy ;  so,  in  the  third  year  of  the  siege,  the  river,  by  a  flood, 
broke  down  the  walls  twenty  furlongs,  and  the  king  thereupon  burnt  himself  and  his 
palace  and  all  his  concubines  and  wealth  together;  and  the  enemy  entered  by  the 
breach  in  the  wall "  (Fausset).  It  is  often  thus  with  the  sinner,  that  the  very  things 
on  which  he  relies  contribute  to  his  ruin.  It  may  be  wealth,  physical  strength,  genius, 
morality,  etc. ;  but  when  judgment  comes,  these,  like  the  Tigris,  "  flee  away." 

IV.  The  inevitableness  of  its  utter  buin.  The  reason  of  it  was,  "  I  am  against 
thee,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts"  (ch.  iii.  5).  "Art  thou  better  than  populous  No?" 
(ch.  iii.  8 — 10) — the  Egyptian  name  for  Thebes,  the  possession  of  Ammon.  The 
populousness  of  Thebes  and  its  wonderful  natural  productions  did  not  save  it.  from 
ruin.  Her  "strength  "  was  "  infinite,"  yet  she  was  "carried  away  into  captivity ;"  if 
she  could  not  resist,  neither  canst  thou.  "  How  vain,"  says  a  modem  expositor,  "  are 
all  the  defences  of  sinners  when  the  Lord  is  against  them !     No-Ammon,  or  Thebes, 

'  See  a  little  volume  entitled,  'The  Retributive  Justice  of  God  oommencing  in  tUa 
Life,'  by  Bev.  J.  Langley  (Hatobards  and  Co.). 


m.  II.1--13.]  THE   BOOK  OP  NAHUM.  39 

was  one  of  the  grandest  and  most  magnificent  cities  of  the  earliest  ages.  Yet  her 
rampart  and  sea-wall,  with  her  seemingly  infinita  strength,  were  of  no  avail  to  save 
her  young  children  from  being  dashed  in  pitces  and  all  her  great  men  from  being  bound 
In  chains.  Such  was  to  be  the  doom  of  Nineveh  likewise.  Q-od  acts  on  the  same 
unchanging  principle  in  all  ages,  and  in  the  case  of  all  nations.  Unrighteousness 
towards  man  and  impiety  and  idolatry  towards  God  bear  the  same  bitter  fruits  every- 
where, however  for  a  time  transgressors  may  seem  to  prosper.  Let  us  as  a  nation 
remember  that  our  safety  consists,  not  in  our  fleets  and  armies,  nor  even  in  tlie 
•multiplication  of  our  merchants  above  the  stars  of  heaven'  (ch.  iii.  16).  Riches, 
like  the  cankerworm  or  the  grasshopper  (ver.  17),  certainly  make  themselves  wings, 
they  fly  away  (Prov.  xxiii.  5).  The  strongholds  (ver.  12)  on  which  we  rely  would 
fall  before  the  invader  as  easily  as  the  ripe  fruit  into  the  mouth  of  the  eater,  if  God 
were  against  us.  The  nobles  and  captains  who  are  the  glory  of  England  would  soon 
be  abased  in  the  dust  (vers.  17, 18).  Our  security  therefore  depends  on  our  godliness. 
Wickedness  persevered  in  continually  (ver.  19)  would  bring  on  us  a  grievous  wound, 
not  to  be  healed,  and  the  very  nations  now  in  alliance  with  us  would  clap  their  hands 
over  us,  exulting  in  the  tidings  of  our  fall.  Let  us  therefore  repent  of  our  sins  as  a 
nation,  as  families,  and  as  individuals,  and  'bring  forth  worthy  fruits  of  repentance.'" 
— D.  T. 

Ver.  1 — ch.  iii.  19.—  Wicked  nations :  3.  Providence  often  employs  one  wicked 
nation  to  inflict  ruin  upon  another.  "  He  that  dasheth,"  etc.  "  He  that  dasheth  in 
pieces  is  come  up  before  thy  face."  "  The  disperser  hath  come  up  before  thee  "  (Hender- 
son) ;  "  A  dasher  in  pieces  comes  against  thee  "  (Keil).  Who  is  "  he  that  dasheth  in 
pieces"?  The  Medo-Babylonish  army.  This  mighty  army,  under  the  command  of 
Cyaxares  and  Nabopolassar,  composed  of  Medes  and  Babylonians,  wrought  the  terrible 
destruction  so  graphically  predicted  in  these  chapters.  And  beneath  its  triumphant 
power  Nineveh  fell,  between  b.o.  626  and  608 — fell  to  rise  no  more.  Both  these  powers 
— the  Medes  and  the  Babylonians — were  pre-eminently  wicked,  as  bad  in  every  respect, 
if  not  worse,  than  the  Assyrians.  These  were  the  battle-axe  with  which  God  broke 
in  pieces  the  Assyrian  power.  As  a  rule,  in  the  government  of  the  world,  God  employs 
one  wicked  nation  to  destroy  another.  Who  destroyed  Edom  and  Egypt,  and  Persia 
and  Moab,  and  Greece  and  Rome  ?  These  were  all  destroyed  by  the  hands  of  wicked 
men.  Why  this  ?  Why  does  not  the  Almighty  punish  wicked  nations  by  some  other 
way  ?  Why  does  he  not  destroy  them  without  any  instrumentality  whatever,  by  a 
mere  volition  ;  or,  if  he  employs  instrumentality,  why  not  the  blind  forces  of  nature, 
or  wild  beasts,  or  poisonous  re|jtiles?  Why  should  he  employ  wicked  men  as  his 
instruments  ?     The  method  clearly  answers  certain  purposes. 

I.  It  makes  the  punishment  appeab  mobb  terbiblr.  Who  would  not  sooner 
die  by  a  flash  of  lightning,  or  a  pestilential  blast,  or  a  predatory  beast,  than  in  deadly 
conflict  with  a  man  with  whom  he  has  measured  his  strength?  In  such  a  death 
passions  are  roused  that  burn  in  the  centre  of  the  soul,  and  a  terrible  humiliation  is 
felt.  A  wicked  man  can  have  no  greater  tormentor  than  a  wicked  man.  The  greatest 
tormentors  of  fiends  are  fiends.  In  punishing  wicked  men  in  this  way  the  Almighty 
declares  to  their  consciences  that  they  are  so  wicked  that  the  wicked  shall  destroy 
them.  Those  of  their  own  flesh  and  blood  and  character  sliall  wreak  vengeance  on 
their  head. 

"^L  It  bevbals  the  enobmity  of  sin.  Man  was  made  to  love  his  brother.  His 
social  instincts,  his  physical  relationships,  and  the  law  of  interdependence,  as  well  as 
the  laws  of  God,  demonstrate  this.  But  when  you  see  him  flaming  with  malign 
emotions  towards  his  fellows,  and  wrestling  in  a  deadly  conflict,  what  a  revelation  of 
the  enormity  of  sin !  The  battle-field  is  at  once  the  product  and  the  type  of  hell. 
Such  a  manifestation  of  sin  is  surely  hideous  enough  to  make  us  stand  aghast  with 
horror  and  hata 

III.  It  shows  God's  mabtebt  oveb  human  actions.  The  wicked  engage  in 
bloody  wars,  and  thus  become  the  instruments  in  administering  the  just  penalties  of 
sin ;  not  to  obey  the  Divine  will,  but  to  gratify  their  own  avarice,  ambition,  malice, 
and  greed.  They  do  not  serve  Providence  by  their  will,  but  against  it.  God  is  such  a 
Master  of  human  souls  that  he  "  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  tu  praise  him."     It  is  not 


10 


THE   BOOK   OF   NAHUM. 


[oh.  111.  1—19. 


Bptional  with  man  whether  he  shall  serve  God  or  not;  serve  Um  ho  must ;  the  option 
is  whether  ho  shall  serve  him  willingly  or  unwillingly,  as  an  agent  or  as  an  instrument. 
God  links  the  devil  himself  to  that  providential  chariot  which  is  hearing  on  his  great 
purposes  to  their  fulfilment,  .-.■.• 

CoNOLusiOH.  Two  things  should  he  rememhered  in  connection  with  this  subject. 
1.  That  the  wickedness  of  nations  does  not  necessarily  imply  wickedness  in  all  their 
members.  There  are  good  men  in  every  nation  under  heaven,  even  in  the  worst. 
There  are  Noahs,  Lots,  Daniels,  Jobs,  amongst  the  corruptest  people.  2.  That  the  ruin 
of  nations  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  ruin  of  all  their  members.  Nations  are  but 
assemblages  of  individuals— abstractions,  nothing  more.  They  have  no  future  exist- 
ence; there  is  no  Egypt,  Persia,  Assyria,  Babylon,  Greece,  Borne,  Germany,  Italy, 
England,  etc.,  in  eternity.  Nor  are  there  any  Churches  there.  Papal  or  Protestant, 
Conformist  or  Nonconformist.  "  Public  bodies  and  communities  of  men,  as  such,  can 
only  be  rewarded  and  punished  in  this  world.  This  world  is  the  only  season  for 
national  punishments." 

"  The  individual  culprit  may  sometimes 
Unpunished  to  his  after-reckoning  go. 
Not  thus  collective  man ;  for  public  crimes 
Draw  on  their  proper  punishment  below : 
When  nations  go  astray,  from  age  to  age 
The  effects  remain,  a  fatal  heritage." 

(B.  Southey.) 

D,  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  m. 


Vers.  1—19.— Part  III.  The  Cause  o» 
THE   Judgment — the  Sins  of  the  City, 

WHICH   BBING  INEVITABLE  PUNISHMENT. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — §  1.  The  prophet  specifies  the 
erimes  which  have  brought  this  ruin  upon 
Nineveh. 

Ver.  1. — The  Moody  city;  literally,  dip  of 
hloods,  where  blood  is  shed  without  scruple 
(oomp.  Bzek.  xxiv.  6,  9 ;  Hab.  ii.  12).  The 
cruelty  of  the  Assyrians  is  attested  by  the 
monuments,  in  which  we  see  or  read  how 
prisoners  were  impaled  alive,  flayed,  be- 
headed, dragged  to  death  with  ropes  passed 
through  rings  in  their  lips,  blinded  by  the 
king's  own  hand,  liung  up  by  hands  or  feet 
to  die  in  slow  torture  (see  Bonomi,  pp.  168, 
etc.,  190,  etc.,  225).  Others  have  their  brains 
beaten  out,  or  their  tongues  torn  out  by  the 
roots,  while  the  bleeding  heads  of  the  slain 
are  tied  round  the  necks  of  the  living,  who 
are  reserved  for  further  torture  (Layard, 
*  Nineveh  and  Babylon,'  p.  456  ;  Eawlinson, 
'Ancient  Monarchies,'  li.  503,  etc.,  edit. 
1864).  The  royal  inscriptions  recount  with 
exultation  the  number  of  the  enemies  slain 
and  of  captives  carried  away,  cities  levelled 
with  the  ground,  plundered,  and  burnt,  lands 
devastated,  fruit  trees  destroyed,  etc.  It  is 
all  full  of  lies;  iKij  ^evSiis, "  all  lie"  (Septua- 
gint).  The  Assyrians  used  treachery  in 
furthering  their  conquests,  made  promises 


which  they  never  kept,  to  induce  nations  to 
submit  to  their  yoke.  Such,  doubtless,  were 
those  of  Babshakeh  (Isa.  xxxvi.  16).  Eaw- 
linson, "  Falsehood  and  treachery  .  .  .  are 
often  employed  by  the  strong,  as  furnishing 
short  cuts  to  success,  and  even,  where  the 
moral  standard  is  low,  as  being  in  themselves 
creditable  (see  Thucyd.,  iii.  83).  It  certainly 
was  not  necessity  which  made  the  Assyrians 
covenant-breakers ;  it  seems  to  have  been  in 
part  the  wantonness  of  power — ^because  they 
'  despised  the  cities,  and  regarded  no  man ' 
(Isa.  xxxiii.  8) ;  perhaps  it  was  in  part  also 
their  imperfect  moral  perception,  which  may 
have  failed  to  draw  the  proper  distiuctiou 
between  craft  and  cleverness"  ('Ancient 
Monarchies,'  i.  305).  Bobbery;  rather, 
rapine,  or  rending  in  pieces.  The  figure 
applies  to  the  way  in  which  a  wild  beast 
kills  its  prey  by  tearing  it  to  pieces.  So 
the  three  crimes  of  Nmeveh  here  enume- 
rated are  bloodshed,  deceit,  and  violence. 
In  the  uncertainty  concerning  the  word 
^pereq)  rendered  "robbery,"  which  only 
occurs  in  Obad.  14,  where  it  means  "  cross- 
way,"  the  LXX.  translates,  ASikCos  irA^pjjs, 
''full  of  unrighteousness."  The  Vulgate 
is  correct,  dilaceratione  plena.  The  prey 
departeth  not.  They  go  ou  in  the  same 
way,  gathering  spoil  into  the  city,  never 
ceasing  from  this  crime.  The  monuments 
continually  record  the  booty  that  was 
brought  to  Nineveh  (see,  for  instance,  tho 
'Annals  of  Assurbnnipal,'  passim;  'Re- 
cords  of   the    Past,'    vol.    ix.;    Sohrader, 


OH.  in.  1— la.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM. 


41 


'  Keilinschr.,'  195,  ete.,  216,  233,  eto. ;  comp. 
I8a.  xxxiii.  1).  Septuagint,  Ou  }firi\a(prieiia-eTat 
tiipa,  which  gives  a  sense  contradictory  to 
the  text,  "  Prey  shall  not  be  handled." 

"Ver.  2.^-The  noise  of  a  whip.  The  prophet 
describes  the  advance  of  the  investing  army. 
He  hears  the  cracking  of  the  whips  of  the 
charioteers,  and  the  rattling  of  the  wheels 
of  the  chariots,  and  the  galloping  horses, 
and  the  chariots  bounding  over  the  plain. 
Probably  all  the  expressions  in  this  verse 
refer  to  chariots  and  to  horses  yoked  to 
them,  which  varied  in  number  from  one  to 
three.  The  whip  was  a  sl»ple  thong 
ftttaohed  to  a  short  handle.  Oomp.  Yirg., 
'  Georg.,'  iii.  106,  etc.— 

"...  illi  instant  verhere  torto 
Et  proni  dant  lora  ;  volat  vi  fervidus  axis ; 
Jamque  humiles,  jamque  elati  sublime  vi- 

dentnr 
Aera  per  vacuum  ferri,  atqne  adeurgere  in 

auras." 

Ver.  8. — The  horseman  liitetli  np.  The 
Hebrew  is  more  vivid,  the  words  standing  in 
pairs,  as  if  describing  the  successive  onsets 
of  the  enemy.  So  Pusey.  It  is  best  to 
render,  "horsemen  making  to  rear;"  or  as 
Septuagint,  hnr4as  hvafiahovTos,  "  horseman 
mounting ; "  so  the  Vulgate ;  Henderson. 
Horsemen  are  seen  in  the  most  ancient 
sculptures  of  Nimroud,  and  in  the  bas-reliefs 
of  Kouyunjik  (oomp.  Judith  ii.  15;  Ezek. 
xxiii.  6;  Layard,  'Nineveli,'  ii.  356).  Both 
the  blight  sword;  better,  and  the  flaming 
sword  (Gen.  iii.  24) ;  literally,  the  flame  of 
theeword.  Andthe  glittering  spear;  literally, 
the  lightning  flash  of  the  spear  (Hab.  iii.  11). 
These  are  the  arms  of  the  foot-soldiers,  A 
multitude  of  slain,  The  effect  of  the  assault 
is  described.  So  numerous  are  the  corpses 
that  one  cannot  help  stumbling  over  them  ; 
the  invaders  themselves  are  impeded  by  the 
heaps  of  dead  bodies  which  they  have  to 
mount.  The  LXX.  connects  this  verse  with 
the  following,  thus :  "  They  shall  grow  weak 
in  their  budies  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of 
their  fornications." 

Ver.  4. — The  cause  is  given  that  has 
brought  this  punishment.  Because  of  the 
multitude  of  the  whoredoms.  This  term  is 
commonly  applied  to  idolatry,  the  swerving 
from  the  true  God  and  turning  to  false 
deities ;  and  it  is  thought  that  it  cannot  be 
used  in  that  sense  here,  as  Assyria  had 
always  worshipped  idols,  and  could  not  be 
said  to  have  forsaken  or  proved  false  to  the 
Lord.  Hence  Hitzig,  Keil,  and  others  refer 
the  term  to  the  treacherous  friendship  and 
crafty  politics  by  which  Nineveh  ensnared 
rther  states,  seeking  really  only  her  own 
iuternsts  (comp.  Isa.  xxiii.  17).  But  this 
habit  of  treachery  has  been  already  men- 
tioned in  ver.  1  (where  see  note);  and,  as 


Knabenbauer  remarks,  the  Assyrians  used 
no  meretricious  blandishments  to  effect  their 
conquests,  but  the  cruel  arts  of  war  and  the 
stern  ordeal  of  the  sword.  It  is  scarcely 
probable  that  the  prophet  would  omit 
idolatry  among  the  crimes  of  the  Assyrians 
that  called  for  vengeance,  as  all  theii  wars 
were  carried  on  in  the  name  of  their  gods, 
and  the  monarchs  professed  to  be  under 
Divine  protection  and  influence.  The  term 
"  whoredom  "  is  applied  to  the  idolatry,  not 
only  of  the  Israelites,  but  to  that  of  Jezebel 
(2  Kings  ix.  22),  who  was  always  a  heathen. 
The  idolatry  of  the  Assyrians  may  very  well 
be  so  called,  because  it  was  a  wilful  ignoring 
of  the  light  of  nature  and  natural  religion 
(see  Wisd.  xiii.  1 ;  Bom.  i.  19,  etc.).  They 
were  careful,  too,  wherever  they  carried  their 
arms,  to  erect  there  symbols  of  their  deities, 
and  to  compel  conquered  nations  to  receive 
them  and  pay  them  Divine  honour.  With 
this  idolatrous  worship  was  associated  that 
gross  immorality  which  even  Herodotus  (i 
199)termed  utterly  disgraceful  (comp.  Baruch 
vi.  43).  Eightly  is  Nineveh  called  the  well- 
favoured  harlot;  for  her  splendour  and 
magnificence  were  unsurpassed,  dazzling  all 
beholders  and  hiding  the  rottenness  that  lay 
below  the  surface.  The  mistress  of  witch- 
crafts. She  was  skilful  in  employing  every 
art  to  seduce  nations  to  her  side.  We  hear 
much  of  magic  in  connection  with  Babylon 
and  the  Chaldeans,  but  not  in  reference 
especially  to  Assyria.  The  expression  here 
is  metaphorical,  alluding  to  the  secret 
practices  which  she  employed  to  gain  her 
ends  and  to  make  her  rule  attractive  (comp. 
Rev.  xviii.  2,  3).  That  seUeth  nationi. 
Depriving  them  of  freedom  and  making 
them  tributary,  or,  in  some  cases,  actually 
selling  the  inbabitants  as  slaves  (comp. 
Deut.  xxxii.  30;  Judg.  ii.  14;  Joel  iii.  3; 
Amos  i.  6, 7).  Families.  Xot  only  nation* 
in  the  aggregate,  but  smaller  bodies,  indi- 
viduals, so  that  none  escape.  Septuagint, 
\ttoijs,  "  peoples." 

Ver.  5. — I  am  against  thee  (see  note  on 
ch.  ii.  13).  The  Lord  will  punish  Nineveh 
with  the  utmost  ignominy,  treating  her 
("  the  whore,"  ver.  4)  like  a  harlot  or  adul- 
teress. Thy  skirts.  The  borders  of  the  long 
flowing  dress  which  added  to  her  pomp 
(comp.  Isa.  xlviL  2,  eto. ;  Jer.  xiii.  26 ;  Lam. 
i.  8).  TTpon  (before')  thy  face.  So  that  thou 
mayst  know  thine  own  shame.  I  will  show 
the  nations.  All  men  shall  see  what  thou 
really  art,  like  an  adulteress  haled  before 
the  congregation. 

Ver.  6.  —  The  metaphor  is  continued. 
Nineveh  shall  belike  a  vile  woman  exposed 
to  the  insults  and  ill  treatment  of  the 
rabble  (comp.  Ezek.  xvi.  37,  etc.).  A 
gazing-Btock.  That  all  may  see  thee  and 
take  warning.     LXX.,  els  tofiSetyna,  "  foi 


THE   BOOK   OF   NAHUM. 


[oh.  m.  1—19. 


%  pablio  example,"  which  recalls  Matt.  i. 
19. 

Ver.  7. — Shall  flee  from  thee.  As  an  object 
of  disgust,  01  fearing  to  be  involved  in  thy 
ruin  (Rev.  xviii.  10,  15).  Who  will  bemoan 
her  1  No  one  will  pity  her  for  her  well- 
deserved  chastieement  (Jer.  xv.  5).  Whence 
shall  I  seek,  etc.  ?  Truly,  nowhere  in  all 
the  world  (oomp.  Isa.  li.  19). 

Vers.  8— 13.— §  2.  The  ruin  of  Nineveh 
can  be  averted  no  more  than  wai  that  of 
No-Amon. 

Ver.  8. — Art  thon  better  than  popnlons 
No  1  "  Better  "  probably  means  here  more 
prosperous,  "  Populous  No "  ought  to  be 
rendered,  No-Amon,  i.e.  No  of  the  solar 
god  Amon.  This  is  the  celebrated  Thebes, 
in  Upper  Egypt,  called  in  Egyptian  Pa- 
Amun,  "  the  House  of  Amnn,"  and  in  the 
inscriptions  Ni,  which  is  the  same  word  as 
No.  The  name  Amon  is  attached  because 
that  god  was  particularly  worshipped  there. 
The  LXX.  has,  liepiSa  'Aju/w^c  ("  a  portion  of 
or  for  Ammon  "),  translating  the  word  "No." 
St.  Jerome,  misled  by  his  Hebrew  teacher, 
renders,  "  Alexandria  populorum,"  as  if 
Thebes  stood  on  the  site  of  the  much  later 
city  of  Alexandria;  whereas  we  see  from 
Assnrbanipal's  annals  that  he  was  forty 
days  marching  from  Mf  mphis,  where  he  de- 
feated Rndammon,  to  Thebes  (see  G.  Smitii, 
'  Assurbanipal,'  p.  55).  On  the  grandeur  and 
magnificence  of  this  city,  Denon  (quoted  by 
Bawlinson,  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  L  309, 
note  7),  writes,  "  On  est  fatigue  d'^crire,  on 
est  fatigud  de  lire,  on  est  ^pouvant^  de  la 
pensfe  d'une  telle  conception ;  on  ne  peut 
croire,  mfime  aprfes  I'avoir  w,  ^  la  realite  de 
I'existence  de  taut  de  constructions  re'unies 
Bur  un  meme  point,  ii  leurs  dimensions,  Ik  la 
Constance  obstinee  qu'a  exigee  leur  fabrica- 
tion, aux  de'penses  incalculaldes  de  tant  de 
soniptuosit^"('Egypte,'  ii.  226).  "In  the 
long  and  rich  valley  of  the  Lower  Nile,  wliioh 
extends  above  five  hundred  miles  from  Syene 
to  Memphis,  almost  any  situation  might 
furnish  a  site  for  a  great  city,  since,  except 
at  Silsilis  and  at  the  Gebelein,  the  valley 
is  never  less  than  two  miles  wide,  the  soil  is 
always  fertile,  good  quarries  are  always  at 
hanil,  and  lavisli  Nature  is  so  bounteous  with 
her  gifts  that  abundant  sustenance  can  at 
any  point  be  obtained  for  a  large  population. 
But  in  this  wealth  of  eligible  sites,  there 
are  still  degrees  of  eligibility — spots  wbich 
Nature  has  distinguished  by  special  favour, 
and,  as  it  were,  marked  out  for  greatness  and 
celebrity.  Such  a  position  is  that  which 
the  traveller  readies  when,  passing  through 
the  gorge  of  the  Gebelein,  he  emerges  upon 
the  magnificent  plain,  at  least  ten  miles  in 
width,  through  which  the  river  flows  with 
a  course  from  south-west  to  north-east  for  a 


distance  of  some  forty  miles  between  Erment 
and  Qobt.  Here,  for  the  first  time  since 
quitting  the  Nubian  desert,  does  the  Nile 
enter  upon  a  wide  and  ample  space.  On 
either  side  the  hills  recede,  and  a  broad 
green  plain,  an  alluvium  of  the  richest  de- 
scription, spreads  it.-elf  out  on  both  banks  of 
the  stream,  dotted  with  dom  and  date  palms, 
sometimes  growing  singly,  sometimes  col- 
lected into  clumps  or  groves.  Here,  too, 
there  open  out  on  either  side,  to  the  east 
and  to  the  west,  lines  of  route  ofiering  great 
advantages  for  trade,  on  the  one  hand  with 
the  Lesser  Oasis  and  so  with  the  tribes  of 
the  Afiican  interior,  on  the  other  with  the 
western  coast  of  the  Red  Sea  and  the  spice 
region  of  the  opposite  shore.  In  the  valley 
of  Hammam^t,  down  which  passed  the 
ancient  route  to  the  coast,  are  abundant 
supplies  of  breccia  verde  and  of  other  valuable 
and  rare  kinds  of  stone,  while  at  no  great 
distance  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  route  lie 
mines  of  gold,  silver,  and  lead,  anciently 
prolific,  though  exhausted  now  for  many 
ages.  Somewhat  more  remote,  yet  readily 
accessible  by  a  frequented  route,  was  the 
emerald  region  of  Gebel  Zabara,  where  the 
mines  are  still  worked  "  (Rawlinson,  'Ancient 
Egypt,'  ii.  124,  etc.).  Thebes  was  situated 
on  both  banks  of  the  Nile,  the  principal 
portion  lying  on  the  east;  tlie  Necropolis 
and  Memnonia  were  on  th^  west.  It  seems 
never  to  have  been  surrounded  with  a  wall 
(notwithstanding  its  "  hundred  gates  "),  the 
river  and  canals  forming  a  sufBcient  defence. 
At  the  present  time  the  ruins  are  some 
twenty-seven  miles  in  circuit,  including 
Luxor  and  the  remains  of  the  great  temple 
at  Karnak.  The  sea.  The  Nile  formed  its 
rampart.  Great  rivers  are  called  seas  in  the 
poetical  books.  Thus  Isa.  xix.  5;  xxvii, 
1 ;  Jer.  li.  36.  Her  wall  was  from  the  sea ; 
or,  of  the  $ea.  The  sea  was  her  wall.  Sep- 
tu;igint,  SSup  t4  retxv  out^s,  "  water  her 
walls." 

Ver.  9. — Ethiopia  and  Egypt  were  h«r 
strength.  Urdamaneh,  or  Rudammou,  in 
whose  time  this  capture  of  No-Amuu  took 
place,  was  son  and  i-uooessor  of  Tirhakah, 
who  is  called  expressly  King  of  Ethiopia 
(2  Kings  xix.  9;  Isa.  xxxvii.  9).  Egypt. 
The  Egyptians  proper,  combined  with  the 
Ethiopians,  formed  the  kingdom  of  Egypt 
under  the  twenty-fifth,  the  Ethiopian, 
dynasty.  And  it  was  iuSnite.  The  power 
of  Egypt  was  boundless,  its  forces  in- 
numerable (see  2  Ohron.  xii.  3).  Pusey 
notes  a  remark  of  Cato  (in  Steph.  Byzant 
ap.  Boch.,  iv.  27)  that  the  Egyptians  con- 
nected with  Thebes  amounted  to  seven 
millions.  In  Isa.  xviii. — xx.  Ethiopia  and 
Egypt  are  represented  as  combined  against 
Assyria,  and  conquered  by  it  (Wordsworth), 
Septuagint,    Ouk    (rrp    Hpas    t^i    ^vyqt, 


•H.  in.  1— la.] 


THE    BOOK   OF   NAUUIL 


4S 


•  There  was  no  limit  of  the  flight."  Thig 
is  thought  hy  Jerome  to  be  connected  with 
the  previous  verses,  and  to  refer  to  Nineveh. 
Fat  and  Lubim  were  thy  helpers.  No-Amon 
is  here  suddenly  addressed.  Put,  or  Punt, 
designates  either  a  part  of  Arabia  or  that 
part  of  the  coast  of  Egypt  opposite  to  it 
(see  Ebers,  '  Mgypt.  nnd  die  Biioh.  Mos.,' 
p.  64,  etc.).  Lubim  are  the  Lybians,  dwell- 
ing on  the  west  of  the  Canopic  mouth  of  the 
Nile.  Thus  tlie  enumeration  of  the  forces 
of  Thebes  is  regularly  arranged,  beginning 
with  the  south,  Ethii  'pia,  then  through  Egypt 
proper  to  the  north,  and  then  to  the  provinces 
on  the  east  and  west  (Knabenbauer).  The 
Vulgate  translates  the  two  terms,  Africa  el 
Libya.  The  LXX.  combines  them  in  one, 
Af^uEi.  These  peoples  are  named  together 
elsewhere;  e.g.  Jer.  xlvi.  9;  Ezek.  xxvlL 
10 ;  zxx.  5 ;  xxxviii.  5. 

Ver.  10. — Yet  was  she  carried  away.  In 
ipite  of  her  strong  position  and  infinite 
resources,  Thebes  was  captured  and  de- 
spoiled ;  and  shall  Nineveh  fare  better  ? 
Surely  not.  This  capture  of  Thebes  took 
place  B.C.  664,  and  must  have  been  in  men's 
minds  when  Nalium  wrote  his  prophecy. 
The  Assyrians  twice  took  Thebes  in  the 
days  of  Assurbanipal.  The  first  time  it  is 
merely  recorded  that  the  soldiers,  under  the 
commander  of  the  satraps,  made  a  slaughter 
in  the  city.  The  second  capture  is  thus 
described  in  the  monarch's  own  tablet 
(Brugsch, '  Egypt,'  i.  272—275,  Eng.  transl.) : 
"Urdaraaneli  fled  alone,  and  entered  Thebes, 
the  city  of  his  kingdom  ...  I  directed  my 
march  in  pursuit  of  him.  I  came  to  Thebes. 
He  saw  the  strength  of  my  army,  and  left 
Thebes,  and  fled  to  the  city  of  Kipkip.  Of 
that,  whole  city  (Thebes),  with  thanksgiving 
to  Asur  and  Istar,  my  hands  took  the 
complete  possession.  Silver,  gold,  metals, 
stones,  all  the  treasures  of  its  palace  what- 
soever, dyed  garments  of  berom  and  linen, 
great  horses  [elephants  ?J  men  and  women, 
great  ami  small,  works  of  zakah  [basalt?] 
and  marble,  their  kelal  and  manzas,  the 
gates  of  their  palace  ...  I  tore  away  and 
CHrried  to  Assyria.  I  made  spoil  of  the 
animals  of  the  land  without  nnmber,  and 
carried  them  forth  in  the  midst  out  of 
Tliebes.  I  caused  a  catalogue  to  be  made 
of  the  spoil.  I  returned  in  safety  to 
Nineveh  "  (see  a  different  version  in  G. 
Smith,  '  AisurbanipaV  p.  52,  etc.).  Were 
dashed  in  pieces.  The  prophet  describei 
the  usual  treatment  of  captured  cities 
(comp.  2  Kings  viii.  12;  Ps.  cxxxvii.  9; 
Iki.  xiii.  16).  At  the  top  of  all  the  streets. 
In  the  most  public  places,  where  many 
streets  converge  (Lam.  ii.  19).  Cast  lots. 
The  victors  divided  thenoUes  among  them- 
•elves  by  lot  (see  note  on  Obad.  11).  Were 
bound  in  ohaiiu.    W«  find  in  the  Assyrian 


monuments  delineations  of  captives  with 
theur  arms  bound  together  by  a  rope  held 
by  a  soldier,  sometimes  men,  sometimes 
women  and  children ;  the  women  are  tear> 
ing  their  hair  in  despair  (see  Bonomi, 
'  Nineveh  and  its  Palaces,'  pp.  226, 277).  In 
a  bas-relief  at  Ehorsabad  captives  are  led  hj 
a  rope  fastened  to  a  ring  in  the  Up  (comp, 
2  Kings  xix.  28;  see  Bawlinson,  *Ano. 
Mon.,'  i.  304;  Layard,  'Nineveh,'  fig.  60, 
and  vol.  L  p.  R76). 

Ver.  11. — Thou  also  shalt  be  drunken. 
Nahum  makes  the  application :  The  fate  of 
Thebes  shall  be  thine,  O  Nineveh.  Thou 
shalt  drink  to  the  full  the  cup  of  God's 
wrath  (see  note  on  Obad.  16;  and  comp. 
Jer.  XXV.  15,  17,  27).  The  metaphor 
indicates  the  effect  of  some  overwhelraing 
calamity  that  makes  men  reel  with  terror 
or  stupefies  them  with  amazement.  Thou 
shalt  be  hid ;  thou  ehalt  he  powerleis,  or  re- 
duced to  nothing ;  "Ea-j}  vwepea!paii4v7i,"Thon 
shalt  be  despised  "(Septuagint) ;  Erit  detpecta 
(Vulgate).  Nineveh,  which  was  taken  and 
destroyed  between  B.C.  626  and  608,  was  so 
eff  ctually  "hidden "  that  its  very  site  was 
discovered  only  in  late  years,  and  its  monu- 
ments have  only  been  partially  disinterred 
after  immense  labour.  Thou  also  shalt  seek 
strength  because  of  the  enemy ;  or,  thou  aUo 
shalt  seek  a  etronghold  from  the  enemy.  As 
the  Egyptians  fled  for  refuge  from  one  place 
to  another  (see  note  on  ver.  10),  so  shall  the 
Assyrians  attempt  in  vain  to  escape  the 
enemy.  History  records  that  tliey  en- 
deavoured to  effect  a  retreat  from  Nineveh 
during  the  siege  (see  Introduction,  §  I.). 

Ver.  12. — Shall  be  like  (are)  fig  trees 
with  the  first-ripe  figs.  The  Assyrians' 
fortresses  are  as  ready  for  destruction  and 
as  eaay  to  destroy  as  ripe  figs  are  ready  to 
fall  from  the  tree  at  the  leust  shake  of  the 
eater  (Isa.  xxviii.  4). 

Ver.  13. — The  reason  why  the  fortresses 
are  so  readily  taken  is  now  given.  Are 
women.  The  Assyrians  were  essentially  a 
brave  nation,  but  they  should  be  now  no 
more  able  to  resist  the  enemy  than  if  they 
were  women  (comp.  Isa.  xix.  16 ;  Jer.  1.  37 ; 
li.  80).  The  gates  of  thy  land.  The  varioui 
approaches  and  passes  which  lead  into 
Assyria  (comp.  Jer.  xv.  7;  Micah  v.  6).  So 
Strabo  (xi.  12. 13)  speaks  of  certain  mountain 
passes  as  "the  Caspian  gates,"  and  Xenophon 
C  Anab.,'  i.  4.  4)  mentions  "  the  gates  of 
Cilicia  and  Syria."  The  famous  defile  that 
led  into  Greece  was  culled  Thermopylse.  The 
fire  shall  devour  thy  bars.  Hitzig,  Keil, 
and  others  take  the  "bars"  metaphoric- 
ally, meaning  the  forts  and  castles  which 
defend  the  passes ;  but  the  literal  sense  ia 
the  most  natural,  as  in  the  parallel  passage, 
Jer.  li.  30  (see  note  on  Amos  i.  5).  It  wu 
the  Assyrians'  custom  to  set  fire  to  the  gates 


u 


THE  BOOK  OP  NAHT7M. 


[oh.  m.  1 — 19. 


of  any  city  that  they  attacked  (see  Bonomi, 
'Nineveh  and  its  Palaces,'  pp.  178,  185, 
192).  "It  is  incontestable,"  says  Bonomi, 
in  another  place,  "  that,  during  the  excava- 
tions, a  considerable  quantity  of  charcoal, 
and  even  pieces  of  wood  eithei  half-burnt 
or  in  a  perfect  state  of  preservation,  were 
found  in  many  places.  The  lining  of  the 
chambers  also  bears  certain  marks  of  the 
action  of  fire.  All  these  things  can  be  ex- 
plained only  by  supposing  the  fall  of  a 
burning  roof,  which  calcined  the  slabs  of 
gypsum,  and  converted  them  into  dust. .  .  . 
It  must  have  been  a  violent  and  prolonged 
fire  to  be  able  to  calcine  not  only  a  few 
places,  but  every  part  of  these  slabs,  which 
were  ten  feet  high  and  several  inches  thick. 
Bo  complete  a  decomposition  can  be  attri- 
buted bvt  to  intense  heat "  (ibid.,  p.  213). 

Vers.  14— 19.— §  3.  In  Bpite  of  all  its 
tffortt  and  aU  its  resources,  Nineveh  shall 
meet  with  a  terrible  end. 

Ver.  14. — Nahum  ironically  bids  the 
Ninevites  prepare  for  the  siege  they  were 
about  to  sustain.-  Draw  thee  waters  for  the 
Biege.  The  drinking  water  necessary  for  a 
long  siege  is  meant.  This  injunction  is  not 
particularly  applicable  to  Nineveh,  which 
from  its  situation  was  abundantly  supplied 
with  water,  unless  there  was  danger  that 
the  enemy  would  divert  the  courses  of  the 
rivers.  But  the  warning  would  come  home 
with  peculiar  force  to  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem,  among  whom  Nahum  prophesied 
^2  Kings  XX.  20;  Isa.  ixii.  11;  xxx.  20). 
Fortify  thy  strong  holds;  strengthen  thy 
fortresses.  Bepair  all  defects  in  thy  defences 
(2  Cbrou.  xi.  11).  The  mode  uf  doing  this 
in  the  Assyrian  fashion  is  then  denoted. 
Go  into  clay,  and  tread  the  mortar.  The 
Boil  round  Nineveh  was  of  a  tenacious 
quality;  and  when  moistened  with  water 
and  kneaded  either  with  feet  or  hands,  with 
the  addition  usually  of  a  little  chopped 
straw,  was  easily  formed  into  bricks.  These, 
even  without  the  aid  of  fire,  became  dry  and 
hard  in  the  course  of  a  tew  days.  But  it  is 
plain  from  the  investigations  of  ruins  that 
the  Assyrians  used  both  kiln-baked  and 
Bun-dried  bricks,  though  the  mass  of  the 
walls  was  usually  composed  of  tlje  latter, 
the  more  durable  material  being  employed 
merely  as  an  accessory  (see  Bonomi, '  Nine- 
veh and  its  Palaces,'  p.  9 ;  Layard,  'Nineveh,' 
ii.  252).  Xenophon,  '  Anab.,'  iii.  4.  11, 
Bpeaks  of  the  brick  wall  (wKlvBivov  reixos) 
of  a  town  he  calls  Mespila.  Make  strong 
the  brick-kiln.  There  is  an  uncertainty 
about  the  meaning  of  the  last  word  (malben), 
which  occurs  only  in  two  other  places  (2 
Bam.  xii.  31  and  Jer.  xliii.  9).  In  the  latter 
passage  it  may  possibly  mean  "a  square" 
or  "  open  quadrangle."    Jerome  has,  tene  la- 


terem  ;  the  LXX.,  KaTaKpirriaov  iirhp  icXlvBov, 
"make  them  strong  above  (equivalent  to 
'  stronger  than')  brick,"  connecting  it  with 
the  following  verse.  Some  translate  it, 
"  brick-mould."  If  the  Anglican  Version  ia 
correct,  the  prophet  bids  them  repair  their 
kilns,  unused  in  the  days  of  prosperity, 
when  they  had  no  need  to  look  to  the  security 
of  their  walls.  Virtually  the  same  sense  is 
elicited  by  rendering,  "lay  hold  of  the 
briek-mould." 

Ver.  15. — There.  In  the  very  place  where 
thou  hast  taken  all  these  precautions.  Shall 
the  fire  devour  thee.  That  fire  played  a 
great  part  in  the  destruction  of  Nineveh  is 
asserted  by  historians  and  proved  by  the 
remains  of  the  city  discovered  in  modem 
times  (see  note  on  ver.  13 ;  also  Herod.,  i. 
106;  Diod.  Sic,  ii.  25—28;  Athen.,  xii. 
529).  The  fate  of  the  last  king,  who  burnt 
himself  and  his  palace,  is  a  well-known 
Btory  (see  Justin,  'Hist.,'  L  3;  Eusebius, 
'Chron.,'  i.  9;  xiv.  3;  xv.  7;  Syncell., 
'  Ohron.,'  i.  396,  edit.  Dind.)  (Knabenbauer). 
The  sword  shall  cut  thee  off.  While  fire 
destroys  the  buildings,  the  sword  shall 
devour  the  inhabitants  of  the  city.  The 
caukerworm ;  literally,  the  licker  (Joel  i. 
4).  The  locust  in  its  earlier  stage  is  thus 
described  (see  ver.  16).  The  figure  implies 
that  the  destruction  of  Nineveh  should  be 
sudden  and  complete,  as  that  wrought  on 
vegetation  by  an  inroad  of  locusts.  Uake 
thyself  many.  Collect  thine  armies,  gather 
hosts  as  innumerable  as  the  locusts,  it  will 
be  all  in  vain.  The  "  caukerworm  "  repre- 
sented the  enemy ;  the  "  locusts  "  represent 
the  Assyrians  themselves. 

Ver.  16. — Its  extensive  commercial  rela- 
tions shall  not  save  it  Thou  hast  miiltiplied 
thy  merchants.  Nineveh  was  most  favour- 
ably situated  for  carrying  on  commerce  with 
other  countries.  Tlie  roads  from  Asia  Minor, 
Syria,  Egypt,  and  Phoenicia,  that  led  into 
Media,  Persia,  and  the  interior  of  Asia,  con- 
verged at  Nineveh,  and  brought  thither 
merchandise  from  all  lands;  and  the  As- 
syrians themselves  exported  their  own  pro- 
duce and  manufactures  to  the  far  West. 
Among  these  are  enumerated  textile  fabrics, 
carpets,  dyed  attire,  and  embroidered  work, 
carvings  in  ivory,  gems,  spices  (see  Eaw- 
linson,  '  Anc.  Mon.,'  ii.  179,  etc. ;  Layard, 
'  Niudveh,'  ii.  414,  etc.).  The  caukerworm 
spoileth;  or,  spreadeth  itself  for  plunder; 
Vulgate,  expanms  est ;  Septuagint,  ipp-riaev, 
"  attiicked.  The  caukerworm  (see  note  on 
ver.  15)  are  the  enemy,  whospread  themselves 
over  the  rich  produce  of  Nineveh,  and  then 
flee  away  laden  with  spoil.  Pusey  makes 
the  oankerworm  represent  Nineveh.  Sha 
spread  herself  everywhere  wasting  and 
plundering,  and  now  she  is  gone,  has  dig- 
But    the    former    explanation 


cfl.  m.  1—19.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM. 


46 


better  Bnits  the  comparison  in  ver.  15,  where 
"  tlie  licker  "  is  the  enemy ;  and  it  is  most 
natural  that  the  prophet  should  allude  to 
the  fate  of  that  commercial  wealth  which  he 
has  just  mentioned,  as  in  previons  Terses 
he  contrasts  the  riches  and  power  of  Nineveh 
with  the  ruin  that  awaits  them. 

Ver.  17. — Thy  crowned.  The  word  min- 
nezar  is  found  only  here,  and,  as  its  deriva- 
tion is  uncertain,  it  has  received  various 
interpretations.  The  Anglican  Version  de- 
rives the  word  from  nezer,  "  a  diadem,"  and 
"the  crowned"  are  the  ofSoials  of  upper 
rank.  "High  officers  of  state  in  Assyria 
were  adorned  with  diadems,  closely  re- 
(embling  the  lower  band  of  tlie  royal  mitre, 
separated  from  the  cap  itself.  Very  com- 
monly the  head  was  encircled  with  a  simple 
fillet  or  hoop,  probably  of  gold,  without  any 
adornment"  (Gosae,  'Assyria,'  p. 463,  quoted 
by  Strauss;  see  the  figures  in  Bonomi, 
p.  319).  Others  derive  it  from  nazar,  "to 
separate,"  in  the  signification  of  "those 
separated  or  selected  for  war."  Septuagint, 
6  ffvfifjtiKT6s  irov :  i^e.  the  band  of  mixed  mer- 
cenary troops — a  rendering  ia  which  Words- 
worth acquiesces.  Knabenbauer  (referring 
to  Strassmaier's  Assyrian  vocabulary)  con- 
siders the  word  to  be  a  transliteration  (si 
being  resolved  into  ne)  of  the  Assyrian 
ma-ai-sa-ru,  which  means  "guardian,"  or 
some  inferior  officer.  With  this  agrees  the 
Vulgate  cuitodes.  As  the  locusts;  i.e.  in 
multitude.  That  the  number  of  captains 
and  superior  officers  would  be  very  great 
may  be  conjectured  from  the  inscriptions 
which  sometimes  enumerate  the  captives 
carried  off  from  conquered  countries.  Thus 
in  the  account  of  the  capture  of  some  in- 
significant nation,  the  then  king  boasts  that 
he  took  away  13,000  fighting  men,  1121 
captains,  and  460  superior  ofiicers  (Strauss, 
in  loo.).  The  prophet's  meaning  is  that  if 
the  officers,  etc.,  are  so  numerous,  the  multi- 
tude of  soldiers  and  civilians  must  be  truly 
immense.  Thy  captains.  Taphsar  is  an 
Assyrian  word,  occurring  only  in  Jer.  li.  27. 
It  is  probably  the  same  as  dupsarru  or  dip- 
sarru  of  the  inscriptions,  and  is  taken  to 
signify  "  a  scribe "  (see  Schrader,  p.  424). 
Such  officials  are  often  represented  on  the 
monuments  (see  Layard,  ii  184),  and  seem 


sometimes  to  have  been  of  high  or  priestly 
rank.  Jerome  translates,  parvidi  tui,  though 
in  Jeremiah,  loe.  oil.,  he  retains  the  Assyrian 
word.  The  Septuagint  omits  it.  Great 
grasshoppers ;  iwarma  of  locusts  (Amos  vii. 
1).  Which  camp  in  the  hedges  in  the  oold 
day.  Locusts  become  torpid  in  cold  weather; 
so  the  captains  and  princes  of  Nineveh  are 
paralyzed  and  useless  in  the  day  of  calamity. 
They  flee  away.  Thus  the  Assyrian  army 
perishes  and  leaves  no  trace  behind.  The 
LXX.  adds.  "  Woe  unto  them  I " 

Ver.  18. — Thy  shepherds.  The  princes 
and  counsellors,  on  whom  the  safety  of  the 
state  depends.  Slumber.  Sleep  the  sleep  of 
death — slain  in  the  war  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  6).  0 
Sing  of  Assyria.  The  power  and  evil  of 
Nineveh  personified,  not  any  particular 
king.  Shall  dwell  in  the  dust ;  are  lying, 
or  are  at  rest,  in  death ;  Septuagint,  ''EKoliurt 
roits  Swdaras  trov,  "  Put  to  sleep  thy  mighty 
men  "  (comp.  Euripides,  '  Heo.,'  473,  where 
Koi/ii{eiv  is  used  in  the  sense  of  "to  slay ") ; 
Vulgate,  sepelientuT.  Is  scattered  upon  the 
mountains.  Their  shepherds  being  dead, 
the  fiock,  the  herd  of  common  people,  ia 
scattered  abroad  and  perishes,  because  no 
man  gathereth  them — ^there  is  no  one  to 
collect  them.  "  The  mountains  "  referred  to 
are  those  which  shut  in  Assyria  on  the  north. 

Ver.  19. — There  is  no  healing  of  thy 
braise;  there  it  no  assuaging  of  thy  hurt 
(Revised  Version ;  Jer.  x.  19).  The  ruin  ia 
irretrievable ;  no  one  shall  restore  the 
destroyed  kingdom  (see  Zeph.  ii.  13,  14). 
Thy  wound  is  grieTOUS ;  Pessima  est  plaga 
tua  (Vulgate) ;  'EpXey/iavei'  r)  irAriyii  irov, 
"  Thy  wound  is  inflamed."  The  "  wound  " 
is  the  stroke  or  plague  inflicted  by  God 
(Lev.  xxvi.  21).  Shall  clap  the  hands  over 
thee.  All  who  hear  of  thy  destruction  will 
rejoice  over  it  (Ps.  xlvii.  1 ;  Lam.  ii.  15). 
Thy  wickedness.  The  cruelty  and  oppres- 
sion of  Nineveh  have  been  imiversally  felt. 
If  Edom  is  the  type  of  insidious  foes  of  the 
Church's  own  household,  Nineveh  is  the 
emblem  of  open,  blaspheming  infidelity, 
arrayed  in  powerful  opposition  against  God's 
people.  In  the  overthrow  of  this  kingdom 
there  is  a  prophecy  of  the  destruction  of  all 
anti-Christian  powers,  wliich  shall  be  utterly 
crushed  in  the  latter  days. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  1—7. — Wot  to  Nineveh.  L  Threatened.  (Ver.  1.)  1.  By  the  prophet. 
Jonah  (iii.  4)  had  once  before  announced  the  destruction  of  the  Assyrian  capitsi,  which 
threatening,  however,  was  averted  by  the  repentance  of  its  inhabitants;  Nahum's 
prediction  was  literally  fulfilled,  because  Nineveh  in  due  time  filled  up  the  measure  of 
its  iniquities.  2.  7»  the  name  of  God.  Had  Nineveh's  doom  been  pronounced  only 
by  Nahum's  lips,  it  had  been  harmless;  but  Nahum  was  the  mouthpiece  of 
JehoTah,  who  already  had  declared  himself  against  the  great  and  wicked  city 
(ch.  ii.  13),  and  a  second  time  repeats  the  Tact,  "  Behold,  I  am  against  thee,  suth 


e; 


M  THE  BOOK  OF  .NAHUM.  [oh.  m.  1— la 

the  Lord  of  hosts "  (ver.  6).    There  Is  a  wide  difference  between  God's  threatenings 
nud  man's. 

II.  Dbpioted.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  1.  The  advance  of  a  hostile  form.  "  The  noise  of  the 
whip  [of  charioteers  urging  on  their  steeds],  and  the  noise  of  the  rattling  of  wheels 
[of  war-chariots  in  motion],  and  prancing  horses  [i.e.  horses  leaping  up  and  starting 
forward  as  they  feel  the  spurs  dug  into  their  sides],  and  jumping  chariots  [i.e. 
springing  up  as  they  dash  along  the  rugged  ground]."  2.  The  attach  upon  the  city. 
"  The  horseman  mounting  [or,  '  charging,'  i.e.  causing  his  steed  to  leap  up  and  advance 
against  the  city]  ;  and  the  flashing  sword  and  the  glittering  spear ;  "  rather  than  "  the 
horseman  lifteth  up  the  bright  sword  and  the  glittering  spear"  (Authorized  Version). 
3.  The  appearance  after  battle.  "  A  multitude  of  slain,  and  a  great  heap  of  carcases." 
So  numerous,  indeed,  are  the  fallen,  that  "  there  is  none  end  of  the  corpses,  and  they," 
the  Medo-Babylonian  invaders,  "  stumble  upon  their  corpses,"  i.e.  the  dead  bodies  of 
the  Assyrians. 

III.  JfusTiFiBD.  (Vers.  1,  4.)  By  the  character  of  Nineveh.  1.  A  city  of  blood ; 
literally, "  of  bloods,"  t.e.  of  liloodshed  or  murder,  alluiHng  to  the  barbarous  and  inhuman 
character  of  her  warfare.  2.  A  city  of  deceit.  Keferring  to  the  vain  promises  of 
protection  with  which  she  beguiled  the  nations  to  put  their  trust  in  her — promises 
which  she  never  kept  any  more  than  did  Egypt.  3.  A  city  of  oppression.  "  The  prey 
departeth  not."    She  is  never  done  rending  in  pieces  and  tearing   some   nation  or 

leople.    4.  A  city  of  seductions.    A  city  of  witchcrafts,  the  prophet  comparing  her 
irilliance  and  prosperity,  by  which  she  fascinated  surrounding  powers  and  secretly  drew 

them  to  seek  her  favour,  to  the  grace  and  beauty  with  which  a  harlot  attracts  and 

bewitches  passers-by. 

IV.  Emphasized.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  By  Jehovah,  who  declares  that  her  doom  will  be : 
1.  Certain ;  since  he,  Jehovah,  is  against  her :  "  Behold,  I  am  against  thee,  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts."  2.  khameful ;  since  he  will  treat  her,  not  as  a  chaste  matron,  but  as  a 
polluted  harlot,  whose  skirts  are  thrown  above  her  head,  that  her  person  may  be 
exposed  (Isa.  xlvii.  3;  Jer.  xiii.  22;  Ezek.  xvi.  37—41;  Hos.  ii.  3).  3.  Visible; 
since  he  will  cause  the  nations  to  see  her  nakedness,  and  the  kingdoms  to  behold  her 
shame. 

V.  Attested.  (Ver.  7.)  By  two  things.  1.  The  horror  of  the  nations.  "  It  shall 
come  to  pass  that  all  they  that  look  upon  thee  shall  flee  from  thee."  Not  so  much  in 
disgust  (Keil)  as  in  terror  (|Ezek.  xxxi.  16) ;  cf.  the  effect  produced  by  the  fall  of  Tyre 
(Ezek.  xxvi.  21 ;  xxvii.  35),  and  of  the  mystical  Babylon  (Rev.  xviii.  10).  2.  Tht 
absence  of  helpers.  Her  fate  was  so  richly  deserved  that  no  one  interposed  to  ward  off 
the  stroke.  In  her  hour  of  sorrow  no  one  bewailed  her ;  in  her  moment  of  weakness 
no  one  assisted  her  (Isa.  li.  19). 

Learn :  1.  That  greater  woes  have  been  pronounced  against  sinners  in  general  than 
were  uttered  against  Nineveh — ^read  the  woes  of  Christ  in  the  Gospels  (Matt,  xxiii.  13 
14, 15,  etc. ;  xxvi.  24 ;  Luke  vi.  24,  25,  26 ;  xi.  42,  46).  2.  That  these  woes  will  no 
more  fail  in  their  fulfilment  than  did  those  directed  against  Nineveh.  God's  word 
never  returns  to  him  void  (Isa.  Iv.  11).  3.  That  God's  judgments  upon  the  wicked 
will  eventually  vindicate  themselves  in  all  men's  eyes  as  just.  "  Salvation  and  honour 
and  power,"  etc.  (Rev.  xix.  1,  2). 

Vers.  8 — 13. — The  story  of  No-Amon.  I.  The  beilliakt  oitt.  1,  It$  sacred 
name.  No-Amon,  in  Egyptian,  Nu-Amun,  or  "  Dwelling  of  Amun  ; "  in  (jreek,  e^iSoi 
or  Thebes,  with  which  corresponded  the  Egyptian  Ta-ape,  or  "  City  of  Thrones.'' 
Originally  the  capital  of  a  nome,  it  subsequently  rose  to  be  a  royal  city.    It  became 


that  of  Thebes,"  writes  Stanley  Leathes.  At  Thebes  "  the  mountains  (Libyan  and 
Arabian)  open  out  a  great  amphitheatre,  such  as  a  king  would  choose  to  build  his 
capital  therein."  "  Nothing  more  lovely  than  this  great  amphitheatre,  with  its  bordej 
of  yellow  sand  and  rampart  of  cliffs,  can  be  seen  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt "  ('  Picturesque 
Palestine,'  etc.,  iv.  190, 191).  With  the  Nile  running  through,  and  canals  formed 
round  it,  the  city  enjoyed  a  strong  natural  position.    3.  Its  military  strength.    (1)  Its 


OH.  m.  1—19.]  THE   BOOK  OF  NAHDM.  47 

native  forces,  those  of  Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  were  practically  numberless.  (2)  Its 
foreign  auxiliaries,  Put  and  Lubim,  or  the  Libyans  in  the  north  of  Africa  and  those 
contiguous  to  Egypt,  were  reliable. 

II.  The  DiSABTBons  ovebtheow.  1.  Its  unexpected  occurrence.  "Yet  was  she 
carried  away."  Notwithstanding  her  regal  magnificence  and  boasted  strength,  she  was 
captured  and  destroyed.  Of  this  humiliation  of  Egypt's  proud  capital  the  monuments 
afford  express  information.  Rudammon,  the  nephew  (son  of  his  sister)  and  successor 
of  Tirhakah  of  Egypt,  sat  upon  the  throne.  In  an  expedition  against  Egypt  and 
Ethiopia,  Assurbanipal  of  Assyria  (b.o.  665)  marched  his  forces  first  against  Memphis, 
which  Kudammon  incontinently  left,  and  then  against  Thebes,  into  which  the  alarmed 
fugitive  had  fled  to  save  his  life.  The  Assyrian  king  thus  relates  the  issue  of  his 
campaign  :  "  After  Rudammon  the  road  I  took  ;  I  went  to  Thebes,  the  strong  city ; 
the  approach  of  my  powerful  army  he  saw,  and  Thebes  he  abandoned,  and  fled  to 
Kipkip.  That  city  (Thebes),  the  whole  of  It,  in  the  service  of  Assur  and  Ishtar,  my 
liands  took;  silver,  gold,  precious  stones,  the  furniture  of  his  palace,  all  there  was; 
garments  costly  and  beautiful,  great  horses,  people  male  and  female,  two  lofty  obelisks 
covered  with  beautiful  carvings  ...  a  hundred  talents  their  weight,  set  up  before  the  gate 
of  a  temple ;  with  them  I  removed  and  brought  to  Assyria.  Its  spoils  unnumbered  I 
carried  oflf.  Prom  the  midst  of  Thebes,  over  Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  my  servants  I  caused 
to  march,  and  I  acquired  glory.  With  the  tributes  peacefully  I  returned  to  Nineveh, 
the  city  of  my  dominion  "  ('  Records  of  the  Past,'  i.  67,  68  ;  cf.  Schrader,  'Die  Keilin- 
Bchriften,'  p.  449).  2.  Its  frightful  severity.  In  addition  to  the  information  supplied 
by  the  Assyrian  conqueror,  the  sacred  narrative  declares  that  it  was  accompanied  by 
heart-rending  excesses.  (1)  The  population  of  the  gay  capital  were  exiled.  "  She  went 
into  captivity."  The  deportation  of  conquered  peoples  into  strange  lands  was  then  a 
customary  practice,  and  seemed  the  only  means  that  sovereigns  like  Shalmaneser, 
Tiglath-Pileser,  Assurbanipal,  and  Nebuchadnezzar  had  for  keeping  them  in  subjection 
(2  Kings  xvii.  6).  (2)  The  young  children  were  ruthlessly  massacred — they  were 
"  dashed  in  pieces  at  the  top  of  all  the  streets."  These  were  probably  butchered  to 
avoid  trouble  and  inconvenience  upon  the  march.  This  inhuman  practice  was  likewise 
frequent  in  ancient  warfare  (2  Kings  viii.  12 ;  Isa.  liii.  16 ;  Hos.  xiii.  16).  (3)  The 
princes  and  nobility  were  degraded.  They  were  parted  among  their  conquerors  by 
"  lot "  and  "  bound  in  chains ; "  after  which  they  were  borne  off  into  slavery. 

III.  The  peophbtio  wabnino.  The  fate  of  No-Amon  will  one  day  overtake 
Nineveh.  1.  Righteously.  "  Thou  also  shalt  be  drunken."  Nineveh  will  be  made  to 
drink  of  the  cup  of  Jehovah's  wrath  on  account  of  her  sins  (Isa.  li.  17,  21 ;  Obad.  16). 
As  Jehovah  dealt  with  the  Egyptian  capital,  so  will  he  deal  with  the  Assyrian.  "  The 
particle  'also'  is  here  emphatical ;  it  was  introduced  that  the  Ninevites  might  know 
that  they  could  not  possibly  escape  the  punishment  which  they  deserved;  for  God 
continues  ever  like  himself"  (Calvin).  2,  Resistlessly.  "Thou  also  shalt  seek  a 
stronghold  because  of  [or, '  a  defence  against ']  the  enemy."  Nineveh  would  call  in  vain 
for  allies  to  help  her  against  the  terrible  Medo-Babylonian  power,  as  No-Amon  had 
fruitlessly  looked  to  surrounding  peoples  for  aid  against  Nineveh.  3.  Easily.  "All 
thy  fortresses  shall  be  like  fig  trees  with  the  first-ripe  figs ;  if  they  be  shaken,  they  fall 
into  the  mouth  of  the  eater."  The  ram  parts  of  Nineveh  will  go  down  at  the  first  touch 
of  the  foe.  "  Hence  a  useful  doctrine  may  be  deduced ;  whatever  strength  men  may 
seek  for  themselves  from  different  quarters,  it  will  wholly  vanish  away ;  for  neither 
forts,  nor  towers,  nor  ramparts,  nor  troops  of  men,  nor  any  kind  of  contrivances  will 
avail  anything ;  and  were  there  no  one  to  rise  against  them,  they  would  yet  fall  of 
themselves"  (Calvin).  4.  Surprisingly.  "Behold,  thy  people  in  the  midst  of  thee 
are  women  :  the  gates  of  thy  land  are  set  wide  open  to  thine  enemies."  The  very  last 
thing  Nineveh  would  ever  dream  of  would  be  that  her  warriors,  hitherto  invincible, 
would  become  'Wnt-hearted  as  women,  and  that  her  fortresses  would  be  as  easily 
passed  through  as  opened  gates.  Tet  exactly  these  two  things  were  what  should 
happen  to  Nineveh.  6.  Utterly.  "  The  fire  hath  devoured  thy  bars,"  and  "  thou  shalt 
be  hid."  Nineveh  should  perish  in  flames  and  pass  away  as  if  she  had  never  been,  her 
very  site  for  centuries  remaining  unknown. 

Lessons.  1.  The  worthlessness,  for  nations  and  cities,  as  for  individuals,  of  purely 
material  glory.    2.  The  certain  ruin  of  nations,  cities,  and  individuals  who  do  not 


18  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHOM.  [ch.  m.  1— 19. 

build  on  the  only  permanent  foundation  of  righteousness.  3.  The  frequency  with 
irhich,  in  the  history  of  nations,  no  less  than  of  private  persons,  coming  events  cast 
Iheir  shadows  before. 

Vers.  14 — 19. — The  fall  of  Nineveh.  I.  Prepaeations  fob  A  sikqb.  (Ver.  14.)  In 
anticipation  of  the  impending  attack  upon  their  capital,  the  inhabitants  of  Nineveh 
lire  exhorted  by  Nahum  (ironically)  to  provide  for  their  safety.  1.  For  their  susten- 
ance. This  they  should  do  by  laying  up  within  their  city  a  plentiful  supply  of  water 
for  drinking,  so  as  to  enable  them  to  withstand  a  prolonged  siege,  "  Draw  tbee  water 
for  the  siege."  This,  in  a  land  like  Assyria,  would  be  likely  to  give  way  earlier  than 
bread.  It  is  only  in  seasons  of  exceptional  scarcity  arising  from  long-continued  drought, 
or  from  such  calamities  as  occur  in  war,  that  men  come  to  estimate  correctly  the  value 
of  water.  2.  For  their  defence.  This,  on  the  other  hand,  they  should  do  by  strength- 
ening their  fortresses ;  for  which  again  they  would  need  an  abundant  store  of  bricks. 
Hence  the  prophet's  exhortation,  still  satirical  in  its  tone,  "  Strengthen  thy  fortresses ; 
go  into  the  clay,  and  tread  the  mortar,  make  strong  the  brick-kiln."  The  Assyrians, 
like  the  Egyptians,  as  the  monuments  attest,  prepared  their  bricks  with  clay,  which 
they  mixed  with-  straw,  and  sometimes  burnt,  at  other  times  merely  drying  them  in  the 
Bun  (Layard, '  Nineveh,'  ii.  252) ;  and  quantities  of  these  would  be  required,  when  the 
evil  day  arrived,  to  repair  the  breaches  that  might  be  made  in  the  walls,  or  to  construct 
an  inner  line  of  defence  when  the  outer  should  be  taken. 

II.  Ebsults  OF  THE  siBOE.  (Ver.  15.)  1.  Thelwrningofthecity.  "  There,"  in  the 
midst  of  thy  fortifications,  "  the  fire  shall  devour  thee."  That  Nineveh  perished  by 
fire  is  attested  equally  by  ancient  writers  and  by  the  state  of  the  ruins.  2.  The  slaughter 
of  its  inhabitants.  "  The  sword  shall  cut  thee  off,  it  shall  devour  thee  like  the  canker- 
worm."  The  thought  is  that,  even  should  the  people  of  Nineveh  be  as  numerous  as  a 
swarm  of  locusts,  yet  should  they  be  swept  away  as  completely  as  every  green  blade 
is  swept  away  by  the  "  cankerworm,"  or  "  licker,"  i.e.  by  the  locust  (Joel  L  4 ;  ii,  3). 
3.  The  pltmdering  of  its  treasures.  "  Thou  hast  multiplied  thy  merchants  above  the 
stars  of  heaven :  the  cankerworm  or  ['  licker,'  i.e.  the  army  of  the  enemy]  spoUeth, 
and  flieth  away,"  "As  soon  as  the  soldiers  entered  a  captured  city  they  began  to 
plunder,  and  then  hurried  away  the  spoil.  They  led  off  the  horses,  carried  forth  on 
their  shoulders  furniture,  and  vessels  of  gold,  silver,  and  other  metals;  and  made 
prisoners  of  the  inhabitants,  who  probably  became  the  property  of  those  who  seized 
them"  (Layard's  '  Nineveh,'  ii.  377).  That  Nineveh  was  a  rich  city  may  be  inferred 
from  the  spoils  she  had  taken  from  surrounding  nations  during  her  career  of  conquest, 
as  well  as  from  her  favourable  position  for  commerce.  The  costly  produce  of  India  was 
conveyed  through  Nineveh  and  Babylon  towards  the  West  (Layard, '  Nineveh,'  ii.  414), 
That  Nineveh,  who  had  so  often  despoiled  others,  should  be  herself  despoiled  was  an 
instance  of  just  retribution.  4.  2%e  annihilation  of  its  army.  "  Thy  crowned  are  as 
the  locusts,  and  thy  marshals  [or,  '  scribes ']  as  the  swarms  of  grasshoppers  which  camp 
in  the  hedges  in  the  cold  day,"  etc.  (ver.  17).  Whether  the  "  crowned  '  ones  should 
be  understood  as  signifying  the  princes  of  Nineveh  (Calvin,  Gesenius,  Fausset),  or  the 
warriors  in  general,  whom  it  represents  as  "  levied,"  "  selected,"  "  picked  "  (Keil) ;  and 
whether  the  "marshals"  here  spoken  of  should  be  regarded  as  "military  leaders,"  and 
thus  as  practically  synonymous  with  the  "crowned"  ones,  or  as  common  soldiers, 
though  of  a  special  excellence  (K.eil) ;— it  is  probable  that  the  destruction  of  the  army 
of  Assyria  is  that  which  the  language  is  designed  to  set  forth.  Though  the  war-force 
of  Nineveh  should  be  as  numerous  as  the  locusts,  or  as  swarms  of  grasshoppers,  which 
pitch  their  camps  in  the  walls  at  nights  and  in  cold  weather,  yet  they  would  as  com- 
pletely vanish  as  do  these  insects  when  the  sun  ariseth.  6.  7%e  destruction  of  its  noMity, 
"  Thy  shepherds  slumber,  0  King  of  Assyria :  thy  worthies  are  at  rest."  Assyria's 
princes  and  great  men,  her  "  royal  counsellors,  deputies,  and  generals  "  (Keil),  should 
be  slain  and  lie  in  still  death.  With  grim  satire  the  prophet  represents  them  as  having 
sunk  into  peaceful  slumber  after  the  labours  of  a  long  and  busy  day.  Perhaps  ho 
intended  to  recall  the  scene  which  had  once  been  witnessed  before  Jerusalem,  when  the 
stout-hearted  (of  Sennacherib's  army)  were  spoiled,  when  they  "  slept  their  sleep,"  ana 
"  none  of  the  men  of  might  found  their  hands,"  when  at  the  rebuke  of  Jacob's  God  "  both 
the  chariot  and  horse  were  cast  into  a  deep  sleep"  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  5,  6).     6.  The  dispersion 


en.  m.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  49 

of  ita  people ;  i.e.  of  such  of  them  as  had  escaped  the  sword,  "  Thy  people  are  scattered 
upon  the  mountains,  and  there  is  none  to  gather  them  "  (ver.  18).  Compare  the  lan- 
pnage  of  Micaiah  to  Ahab  with  reference  to  the  result  of  the  battle  of  Eamoth-Gilead 
(1  Kings  xxii.  17).  7.  The  exultation  of  the  nations.  "  All  that  bear  the  bruit  of  thee 
clap  the  hands  over  thee  "  (ver.  19).  Wherever  the  report  of  Nineveh's  overthrow 
should  penetrate,  it  would  awaken  no  compassion.  As  all  nations  had  suffered  from 
her  wickedness,  so  would  they  rejoice  in  her  humiliation.  None  would  seek  to  help 
her  or  raise  her  up.  Hence  her  downfall  would  be  final ;  there  would  be  no  assuaging 
of  her  hurt ;  her  wound  would  be  grievous,  would  be  dangerously  bad,  would  be 
incurable. 

Learn:  1.  That  the  day  of  doom  can  be  averted  as  little  by  ungodly  men  as  by 
wicked  nations.  2.  That  the  resources  of  civilization — commerce  and  gunpowder — are 
powerli'ss  defences  against  Heaven's  artillery.  3.  That  nothing  and  no  one  can  upraise 
what  God  has  overthrown.  4.  That  God's  righteousness  in  judging  the  wicked— 
whether  iudividuals  or  nations — will  ultimately  vindicate  itself  in  the  eyes  of  all. 


HOMILIES   BT  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 
Vers.  1 — 7. — 77ie  guilt  and  ruin  of  Nineveh.    We  have  here — 

I.  A    MOURNFUL    REVELATION    OF    NATIONAL    GUILT    AND   DEPRAVITY.      (Verg.  1,  4.) 

The  Assyrians  are  here  charged  with :  1.  Unrighteous  war.  (Ver.  1.)  There  may  be 
times  in  a  nation's  history  when  war  becomes  a  dire  necessity;  but  all  war  prompted, 
not  by  the  desire  to  defend  against  unworthy  aggression,  but  by  unholy  ambition, 
aggrandizement,  lust  of  conquest  and  glory,  deserves  the  severest  reprobation.  And 
sucti  were  the  wars  of  the  Assyrians,  and  which  secured  to  their  capital  the  unenviable 
appellation  here  used,  "  the  bloody  city,"  i.e.  "city  of  bloods,"  founded  and  built  up  by 
strife  and  bloodshed.  2.  Cunning  craftiness.  "  It  is  all  full  of  lies "  (ver.  1).  It 
gained  its  unrighteous  ends  by  deceit.  Like  "the  strange  woman"  (ver.  4),  who 
bedecks  herself  in  showy  attire,  puts  on  winsome  manners,  and  resorts  to  bewitching 
arts,  in  order  to  attract,  and  then  conducts  her  victim  to  the  very  "chambers  of 
death,"  so  Assyria,  under  show  of  friendship,  brought  other  powers  under  her  yoke,  and 
effected  their  overthrow.  With  ounninc;  craftiness  she  lay  in  wait  to  deceive,  so  as 
to  enrich  herself  at  the  expense  of  others.  3.  Continuous  spoliation.  "It  is  full 
of  robbery  "  (ver.  1)  ;  "  The  prey  departeth  not "  (ver.  1).  Nineveh  was  great  in 
barbaric  splendour,  and  abounded  in  costly  treasures ;  but  this  was  secured  by  spoils 
takeu  in  war  and  by  tribute  extorted  from  feebler  nations  unable  to  resist  her  encroach- 
ments; by  robbery  she  thus  continually  made  additions  to  her  stores.  This  iniquity 
was  perpetrated  despite  professed  penitence  and  reformation  resulting  from  the  ministry 
of  Jonah ;  and  now  the  cup  was  full.    Hence  we  have — 

II.  A     SOLEMN     DECLARATION     OF     IMPENDING     DiVINB     JUDGMENT     RESULTING    IN 

NATIONAL  RUIN  AND  SHAME.  Observe:  1.  The  intimate  connection  httween  the  sin 
and  the  shame.  "Because  of,"  etc.  (ver.  4).  The  war  so  graphically  described 
(vers.  2,  3)  was  declared  by  the  prophet  as  the  outcome  of  the  national  guilt.  2.  The 
marked  retributive  nature  <^  the  Divine  judgment.  (1)  Assyria  had  delighted  in  war : 
by  war  she  should  fall  (vers.  2,  3).  (2)  She  had  practised  deceit :  her  real  character 
should  be  exposed  to  her  confusion  and  disgrace  (ver.  5).  (3)  She  had  triumphed  over 
other  nations,  and  in  her  victory  had  shown  no  consideration  towards  the  vanquished: 
she  should  herself  now  be  humiliated,  and  be  made  a  gazing-stock  (ver.  6).  (4)  She 
had, blasphemed  the  God  of  Israel:  now  he  would  be  against  her,  and  would  bring  all 
this  ruin  upon  her  (vers.  6,  6).  3.  The  entire  absence  of  sympathy  towards  her  in  her 
rtverses.  (Ver.  7.)  No  regret  should  be  felt  at  her  fall.  No  sympathy  should  be 
expressed.  Prom  her  shades  men  should  flee  (ver.-7).  She  should  be  thought  of  only 
as  a  beacon  and  a  warning—"  to  point  a  moral."  She  should  be  utterly  "  desolate  " — 
"cut  off"  and  "laid  waste"  (ver.  7).  This  is  the  end  of  evil-doing  (Job  xvui.  17; 
xxvii.  23;  Prov.  x.  7;  Eocles.  viii.  10;  Jer.  xvii.  13). — S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  8 — 13. — No-Amon,  a  sign.    There  are  certain  great  principles  regulpiting  th« 
Divine  government,  and  these  are  abiding.    The  seer  spoke  in  harmony  with  these 

NAHUM.  ■ 


BO  THE   BOOK   OF   NAHUM.  ^o"- "i- ^— 1* 

when  he  declared  beforehand  the  ruin  of  Nineveh.  Men,  through  unbelief,  are  glow 
to  accept  these  principles  and  to  acknowledge  the  inevitable  results  of  their  working. 
They  are  deceived  by  present  appearances.  They  reason  from  things  as  they  are,  and 
conclude  that,  where  there  is  material  prosperity,  this  will  of  necessity  continue.  Such 
was  the  difficulty  with  which  Nahum  had  to  contend.  Assyria  in  his  day  was  the 
liomiuant  power,  acknowledged  and,  on  account  of  its  tyranny  and  ambition,  dreaded 
by  all.  How,  then,  could  the  Hebrews  credit  the  announcements  of  this  prophet? 
Nahum  felt  their  difficulty,  and  hence,  in  enforcing  his  teaching,  he  wisely  turned  from 
the  future  to  the  past,  and,  by  referring  to  what  God  had  done,  he  indicated  what 
might  yet  be  expected.    He  appealed  to  No-Amon  as  a  sign.     Consider — 

I.  No-Amon  a  sign  to  the  pkoplb  op  Jddah  conceeninq  Nineveh.  By  "  No " 
(ver.  8)  is  intended  the  renowne<l  city  of  Thebes,  the  capital  of  Upper  Egypt,  called 
No-Amon,  from  the  idol  Ammon  enshrined  there  and  represented  in  the  Egyptian 
monuments  by  a  ram  or  by  a  man  seated  on  a  chair  and  with  a  ram's  head.  The  sign 
thus  chosen  by  the  prophet  by  way  of  enforcing  his  teaching  was  singularly  appropriate. 
Could  Nineveh  boast  of  remarkable  natural  advantages  ?  So  could  No-Amon  (ver.  8). 
"  It  was  situate  among  the  rivers,"  etc.  It  was  surrounded  by  the  Nile  and  its  canals 
(rhetorically  here  called  "  the  sea,"  and  actually  so  called  still  by  the  Bedouins),  and 
which  served  as  a  natural  fortification  or  bulwark.  Could  Nineveh  pride  herself 
in  the  multitude  of  her  hosts  ready  to  do  her  bidding?  So  could  No-Amon.  In 
this  respect  "her  strength  was  infinite"  (ver.  9).  Cato  computed  the  number  of 
Egyptians  connected  with  Thebes  at  seven  millions.  Could  Nineveh  glory  in  her 
foreign  alliances?  So  could  No-Amon  (ver.  9).  Yet  despite  all  these  advantages, 
No-Amon  suffered  defeat,  and  experienced  the  cruelties  attendant  thereon  (ver.  10). 
The  rel'eience  is  not  to  the  complete  destruction  of  No-Amon  (which  was  mainly 
effected  by  Cambyses,  B.C.  525,  and  entirely  completed  by  Ptolemy  Lathyrus,  B.C.  81), 
but  to  the  expedition  of  Sargon  against  Egypt  (Isa.  xx.  3,  4),  B.C.  714.  Profane 
history  gives  no  record  of  this ;  but  the  inscriptions  on  the  monuments  found  in  the 
palace  at  Khorsabad,  built  by  Bargon,  mention  Egypt  in  connection  with  the  wars  of 
that  king,  and,  when  clearly  deciphered,  appear  likely  to  strikingly  confirm  the 
scriptural  representations  (see  Spiegel's  'Nineveh  and  Assyria'  in  Herzog's  'Cyclo- 
psedia ').  And  as  No-Amon,  despite  her  resources,  suffered  at  the  hands  of  Assyria,  so 
in  the  time  to  come  should  Assyria,  notwithstanding  her  present  glory,  suffer  through 
the  foes  who  should  rise  up  against  her.  Complete  destruction  should  overtake  her, 
and  the  records  of  her  past  triumphs  and  glories  lie  hidden  under  the  mounds  (ver.  11). 
No  power  enabling  her  to  withstand  the  enemy  should  be  available  (ver.  11).  Her 
strongholds  when  assailed  should  prove  like  fig  trees  with  the  first-ripe  figs,  which  fall 
without  effort  on  his  part  into  the  eater's  mouth  (ver.  12).  Her  proud  warriors  should 
be  in  her  midst  as  weak  and  timid  women,  their  hearts  failing  them  for  terror.  Her 
gates  should  be  thrown  wide  open,  and  their  bolts  consumed  by  fire  (ver.  13). 

II.  No-Amon  and  Nineveh  a  sign  to  modern  nations.  No-Amon,  which  in 
Nahum's  day  had  only  been  partially  subjugated  by  the  Assyrians,  subsequently  fell 
beneath  the  power  of  the  conqueror,  and  so  "  proud  Thebes,"  "  the  world's  great  empress 
on  the  Egyptian  plains,"  came  to  nought.  Nineveh,  too,  which  in  his  time  was  great 
indeed  in  worldly  glory,  has  likewise  passed  away,  and  is  no  more  seen.  Solemn 
impressions  must  be  excited  within  the  minds  of  reflecting  men  when  they  are 
privileged  to  visit  the  sites  of  these  ancient  despotisms,  and  to  gaze  upon  the  relics  of 
departed  greatness  (see  Stanley's  'Sinai  and  Palestine,' Introd.  xxxviii. — xlv. ;  Wil- 
kinson's 'Ancient  Egypt,"  iii.  266, 329,  330;  Layard's  ' Nineveh  and  its  Remains,' i. 
6, 7.  A  voice  comes  to  us  from  the  colossal  statues,  the  decorated  palace  halls,  and  the 
royal  tombs  of  No-Amon ;  and  from  the  uncovered  mounds  at  Nimroud  and  Khorsabad, 
and  which  seems  to  say  to  us :  1.  "  The  Word  of  our  Ood  shall  stand  for  ever." 
(Isa.  xl.  8.)  2.  National  stability  is  not  secured  merely  by  (1)  strong  natural 
defences ;  (2)  influential  foreign  alliances ;  (3)  vast  accumulated  treasure ;  (4)  great 
military  prowess  and  success.  3.  Permanent  influence,  whether  for  individuals  or  for 
nations,  lias  its  foundation  laid  in  righteousness  and  in  the  fear  and  love  of  Ood. 
(Ps.  cxliv.  15 ;  Ixvii.)— S.  D.  H.  J  v 

Vers.  14,  15.— /Zuman  efforts  as  directed  against  Vn  Divine  purpoee.     We  h»Tt 


OH.  ni.  1—19.]  THE   BOOK  OP  NAHUM.  61 

furnished  us  in  theae  Tenes  an  illustration  of  human  effort  aa  directed  against  ths 
accomplishment  of  the  purpose  of  God.  Sometimes  this  course  is  taken  by  men 
unconsciously,  but  it  was  scarcely  so  in  this  instance.  We  know  that  the  Assyrian 
power  in  the  time  of  Sennacherib  boldly  defied  the  God  of  heaven,  and  it  seems  with 
the  lapse  of  time  to  have  gone  from  bad  to  worse.  It  was  the  Divine  will  that  at 
length  the  arm  of  Assyria  should  be  broken,  and  that  its  haughty  and  oppressive  rule 
should  cease ;  and  the  prophet  here  set  forth  how  that,  in  the  day  of  trial,  human 
strength  should  do  its  best  in  order  to  avert  the  destruction  divinely  intended  to  be 
wrought.  Some  regard  ver.  14  as  simply  indicating  the  fact  that  the  Assyrian  power 
would  maintain  a  prolonged  defence;  whilst  others  view  the  prophet  as  speaking 
ironically,  and  as  mocking  the  vain  enrieavours  of  the  defenders  of  Niueveh,  just  sa 
Isaiah  ridiculed  the  makers  of  idols  (xliv.  9 — 20).  Be  this  as  it  may,  he  certainly 
declared  here  prophetically  that  human  effort  shoiUd  be  enlisted  against  the  overthrow 
divinely  purposed,  and  that  this  should  utterly  fail ;  the  fire  should  devour,  and  the 
sword  should  cut  them  off;  yea,  as  destructive  as  the  locusts  should  the  instruments 
of  the  Divine  vengeance  prove  (ver.  15).  We  may  find  all  this  suggestive  as  applied 
to  man's  hostile  action  in  relation  to  the  Divine  working  in  the  spiritual  realm. 

I.  It  is  an  ckdoubted  tact  that  humak  effobt  is  dibected  aoainst  Tn» 
ACCOMPLISHMENT  OF  THE  DivxNK  PURPOSE  IN  OEACB.  That  purpose  is  the  entire 
subjugation  of  evil— the  recovery  of  a  lapsed  world  to  allegiance  to  Heaven,  and  hence 
its  restoration  to  holiness  and  happiness.  This  benevolent  purpose  of  our  God  is 
repeatedly  expressed  in  his  Word  (Ps.  ii.  6 ;  Isa.  Hi.  10 ;  John  xii.  32 ;  Bev.  xi.  16). 
The  redemptive  plan  rests  upon  it,  the  unfailing  consciousness  that  he  was  fulfilling 
the  Divine  counsels  sustained  the  Christ  as  he  pressed  on  with  his  glorious  toU 
(Heb.  xii.  2),  and  the  mighty  hope  supports  his  followers  in  all  holy  service.  Yet 
such  is  the  aversion  of  the  hearts  of  men  by  nature,  that  against  this  glorious  and 
loving  will  of  our  God  human  effort  has  from  age  to  age  been  directed.  The 
antagonism  has  taken  various  forms — persecution,  idolatry,  scepticism,  worldliness ;  all 
these  forces  have  been  employed  in  order  to  bring  the  counsel  of  God  to  nought. 
Note— 

II.  The  weakness  of  human  effort  ab  thus  directed.  So  weak,  indeed,  are 
such  endeavours,  that  in  spite  of  them  the  Supreme  Ruler  sits  on  the  throne  of  hii 
majesty  in  perfect  repose.  He  views  with  calm  composure  and  without  even  a 
momentary  apprehension  and  with  scornful  contempt,  this  plotting  and  working  of 
evil-doers  (Ps.  ii.  4,  5). 

III.  The  vanity  of  all  such  endeavours.  They  must  inevitably  prove  ineffectual. 
So  has  it  been,  and  so  shall  it  be.  Monumental  pillars  were  raised  to  the  memory  of 
Diocletian,  in  that  "  he  had  everywhere  abolished  the  superstition  of  Christ,  and  had 
extended  the  worship  of  the  gods ; "  yet  to-day  this  "  superstition  of  Christ,"  as  they 
called  it,  is  everywhere  spreading.  The  crescent  shall  wane  before  the  cross;  and 
despite  the  baneful  influences  of  scepticism  and  worldliness,  the  Christ  shall  become 
enthroned  in  every  heart.  "  The  burial-place  of  Christianity  cannot  be  pointed  out ; 
it  is  not;  for  the  living  have  no  tomb."  Its  adversaries  may  "draw  waters  for  the 
siege,  fortify  their  strongholds,"  etCi  (ver.  14),  but  they  shall  surely  be  defeated  (ver. 
15),  for  "  the  Lord  Ood  omnipotent  reigneth." — S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — 2%«  instability  of  material  greatness.  We  have  vividly  described 
here — 

I.  Material  greatness.  This  coniisting  in ;  1.  Extensive  commercial  relations. 
"  Thou  hast  multiplied  thy  mercbants,"  etc.  (ver.  16).  "  The  point  at  which  Nineveh 
was  situated  was  certainly  the  culminating  point  of  the  three  quarters  of  the  globe- 
Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa ;  and  from  the  very  earliest  times  it  was  just  at  the  crossing 
of  the  Tigris  by  Nineveh  that  the  great  military  and  commercial  roads  met  which 
led  into  the  heart  of  all  the  leading  known  lands"  (Strauss,  quoted  by  Keil  and 
Delitzsch,  '  Commentaiy  on  Minor  Prophets,'  vol.  ii.  note  p.  38).  "  The  lists  of  plunder 
or  of  tribute  carried  off  during  the  world-empire  of  Egypt,  before  it  was  displaced 
by  Assyria,  attest  the  extensive  imports  or  manufactures  of  Nineveh ;  the  titles  of 
'  Assyrian  nard,  Assyrian  amomum,  Assyrian  odours,  myrrh,  frankincense,  involve  its 
trade  with  the  spice  countries;  domestic  manufactures  of  hers  apparently  were  purple 


»2  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  [oh.  m.  1—19. 

and  dark-blue  cloaks,  embroidery,  brocades,  and  these  conveyed  in  chests  of  cedar; 
her  metallurgy  was  on  principles  recognized  now ;  in  one  practical  point  of  combining 
beauty  with  strength  she  has  ever  been  copied  "  (Pusey  on  '  Nahum,'  p.  394).  2.  Vast 
military  resources.  (Ver.  17.)  "  Thy  crowned  are  as  the  locusts,  and  thy  captains  as  the 
great  grasshoppers."  By  the  term  here  rendered  "crowned"  some  have  understood 
subordinate  princes  (see  Sennacherib's  boast,  Isa.  x.  8),  and  by  "  captains  "  military 
oEBcers ;  but  it  has  been  urged  with  force  that  such  interpretations  hardly  agree  with 
the  comparison  to  locusts,  the  number  of  vassal  princes  and  military  officers  being 
comparatively  small ;  and  that  probably  the  terms  are  technical  for  certain  classes  of 
the  soldiery  (Keil  and  Delitzsch,  in  loc).  The  comparison  of  these  to  the  locusts  and 
grasshoppers  indicates  the  vast  hosts  of  warriors  Assyria  could  command  in  her 
expeditions.  3.  Influential  counsellors  and  commanders.  (Ver.  18.)  The  "  shepherds  " 
and  "nobles"  were  the  king's  counsellors,  and  the  commanders  of  his  armies,  the 
government  of  the  kingdom  devolving  upon  the  former,  and  its  defence  upon  the  latter. 
In  all  that  constitutes  the  material  strength  of  a  people  Assyria  was  great.     Notice — 

II.  The  DfSTABiLiTT  OP  MATERIAL  GREATNESS.  The  prophet,  looking  on  to  the 
future,  declared  tliat  these  material  tokens  of  greatness  would  all  fail  in  the  day  ol 
trial  which  was  inevitably  before  them.  All  these  outward  indications  of  prosperity 
and  power  would  then  fade  away.  The  merchants,  like  the  canlierworms  in  the  fields, 
would  remain  whilst  they  could  secure  any  gains,  but  would  seek  some  safe  retreat  in 
the  time  of  national  calamity  (ver.  16).  Their  military  forces  should  then  perish  and 
be  no  more,  even  as  the  locusts  with  the  shining  of  the  sun  depart,  leaving  no  trace 
behind  (ver.  17).  Their  counsellors,  too,  should  sleep  the  sleep  of  death  (ver.  18),  and 
their  commanders  lie  beneath  the  dust  of  the  earth  (ver.  18).  And  even  so  everything 
that  is  connected  with  material  glory  is  unenduiing.  Seneca  related  how  that  one 
known  to  him  was  raised  above  the  inordinate  love  of  the  world  by  the  sight  of  a 
Roman  triumphal  procession.  When  the  scene  ended  he  said,  "  I  have  seen  all  this 
pomp  and  magnificence  put  in  such  order  and  passing  slowly  along;  yet  it  is  all 
gone  :  why  should  I  esteem  that  which  is  so  momentary  ?  " 

"  For  all  that  in  this  world  is  great  and  gay 
Doth  as  a  vaponr  vanish  and  decay." 

III.  Thb  hopelessness  of  those  who  have  this  as  theib  bole  dependenoi. 
*'  Thy  people  is  scattered  upon  the  mountains,  and  no  man  gathereth  them."  Nothing 
remains  in  such  a  case  but  irretrievable  ruin.  They  only  are  safe  whose  repose  u 
placed  in  the  higher  and  heavenly  Source  of  help.  "  Put  not  your  trust  in  princes, 
nor  in  the  son  of  man,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxlvi.  3 — 6). — S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  19. — Hopelessness.  "  There  is  no  healing  of  thy  bruise ;  thy  wound  is  grievous." 
Nothing  can  be  more  distressing  than  the  consciousness  of  powerlessness  in  the 
presence  of  the  deepest  human  need ;  to  witness  from  the  seashore  the  wreck,  and  to 
be  utterly  unable  to  save  the  shipwrecked  mariners ;  to  be  sure  that  some  one  is  in 
the  burning  edifice,  and  yet  for  it  to  be  impossible  to  reach  him  and  to  bring  him  out ; 
to  stand  before  an  audience  alarmed  by  some  needless  cry,  and  to  see  the  rush  towards 
the  doors,  and  to  be  unequal  to  checking  it ;  or  even  to  be  by  the  bedside  of  one  in 
life's  youth  cr  manhood's  prime,  and  to  hear  that  disease  has,  humanly  speaking, 
prematurely  seized  its  victim,  and  that  medical  help  cannot  cure,  but  only,  and  that  for 
a  time,  alleviate.  This  position  is  occupied  by  many  an  earnest-hearted  worker  for 
God  and  the  good  of  souls,  in  relation  to  the  moral  salvation  of  men.  Nahum  sustained 
it  in  reference  to  the  Ninevites.  He  saw  in  them  a  people  wrecked  through  the 
adverse  winds  and  tempests  of  evil,  consumed  by  the  fires  of  unholy  passion,  on  the 
mad  rush  to  ruin  and  death,  disrased  through  and  through  so  that,  recovery  was 
Impossible ;  and  hence,  unable  to  heal,  he  cried  in  the  sadness  of  his  heart,  "  There  is 
no  healing  of  thy  bruise;  thy  wound  is  grievous"  (ver.  19).  So  Isaiah  said,  "Ye  will 
revolt  more  and  more :  the  whole  head  is  sick,"  etc.  (i.  5,  6).    So  stiU.     Note — 

I.  This  state  of  mobal  hopelessness  is  not  beached  all  at  onoe,  but  u 

BBOUOHT   about    BT    DEOBEES. 

II.  It  IB  not  bbouuht  to  pass  thbouqh  Ditinic  help  and  BTBKNOTH  BEIIia 

CNAVAILABLE. 


OH.  m.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NAHUM.  53 

III.  It  cannot  bk  bxocsed  on  the  qbound  of  there  BEEsra  a  lack  of  wabninob 

AND   expostulations. 

IV.  It  is  entirely  self-caused  ;  the  teansqbessoe  beinqs  himself  into  this 
state  of  hopelessness  ;  the  sinneb  is  his  own  destroyer.  "  Take  heed  lest  ye  be 
hardened  through  the  deoeitfulness  of  sin"  (Heb.  iii.  12, 13). — 8.  D.  H. 

Ver.  19. — The  overthrow  ofevU-doera  a  source  of  thankftd  Joy.  "  All  that  hear  the 
bruit  of  thee  shall  clap  the  hands  over  thee  :  for  upon  whom  hath  not  thy  wickedness 
passed  continnally?"  These  last  words  in  the  Book  of  Nahum  are  truly  Impressive. 
The  messenger  closes  his  brief  prophecy  in  the  same  tone  in  which  he  commenced  it, 
the  vengeance  of  God  being  still  his  theme.  At  the  outset  he  declared  the  solemn 
fact ;  at  the  end  he  applies  the  truth  thus  announced  to  the  particular  case  in  hand. 
"  The  magnificent  dirge  "  forming  this  third  chapter  "  is  one  sustained  shout  of  wild 
exultation  that  the  oppressor  has  fallen  at  last.  The  naked  discrowned  corpse  of  the 
glorious  city  is  cast  out  to  the  scoru  and  disgust  of  the  world.  No  spark  of  pity, 
mingles  with  the  prophet's  delight.  In  this  storm  of  indignation  and  vengeance  the 
spirit  of  prophecy  in  the  northern  kingdom  breathes  its  last.  Under  this  doom 
Nineveh  vanishes  from  view,  to  be  no  more  seen  till  in  our  day  the  discovery  of  her 
buried  remains  has  given  new  life  to  the  whole  of  this  portion  of  sacred  history " 
(Stanley's  '  Jewish  Church,'  il.  31^  316).  The  theme  suggested  by  this  final 
utterance  of  Nahum  is  the  overthrow  ^evil-doers  a  source  of  thankful  Joy.  Wherever 
tlie  report  of  the  fall  of  Nineveh  should  reach  it  should  occasion  a  sense  of  relief  and 
should  excite  rapturous  delight.  "All  that  hear  the  bruit  of  thee  shall  clap  the 
hands,"  etc.  (ver.  19).  This  satisfaction,  providing  it  does  not  arise  from  revenge,  may 
be  amply  justified.     See  this  in  that — 

I.  The  fall  of  weongh-dobrs  means  a  DiMnrorioN  of  buffeeino.  It  is  to  this 
that  the  prophet  specially  alludes  when  ho  says,  "  For  upon  whom  hath  not  thy 
wickedness  passed  continually  ?  "  meaning  that  through  her  guilt  she  had  proved  a 
bitter  scourge  to  all  who  had  come  under  her  influence,  and  that  hence  there  would  be 
general  thanksgiving  at  her  fall  in  that  the  tyranny  would  cease. 

II.  The  fall  of  weono-doees  means  the  triumph  op  eiohteoubnbss.  The 
true-hearted,  as  they  witness  the  prevalence  of  iniquity,  and  as  they  see  on  every  hand 
hollowness  and  insincerity,  treachery  and  malice,  envy  and  jealousy,  slander  and 
calumny,  tyranny  and  oppression,  are  led  ardently  to  long  for  the  time  when  sin  shall 
be  completely  vanquished,  and  when  right  shall  be  victorious ;  and  since  the  discomfi- 
ture of  wrong-doers  brings  on  the  final  triumph,  they  rejoice  in  this,  though  with  a 
chastened  joy,  thankfuluess  for  the  victory  of  the  right  being  blended  with  pity  for 
transgressors. 

III.  The  fall  of  wbono-doers  vindicates  the  Divine  beotitude.  The  honour 
of  their  God  is  very  precious  to  the  hearts  of  the  faithful  and  true.  This  is  often 
impugned  when  manifest  injustice  and  wrong  seems  to  pass  unpunished.  The  sceptical 
appeal  to  such  inequalities,  and  ask  tauntingly,  "  Where  is  now  thy  God  ?  "  "  Is  there 
a  God  that  judges  in  the  earth  ?  "  And  when,  in  the  history  of  men  and  of  nations, 
God  interposes  in  judgments  and  vindicates  his  rectitude,  his  servants  cannot  but  praise 
and  give  thanks. 

Note :  1.  From  the  discomfiture  and  defeat  which  must  eventually  be  the  outcome 
of  evil-doing,  God  would  save  men.  "  He  vrilleth  not  the  death  of  the  sinner."  2.  How 
benevolent  the  ministry  of  those  who  seek  men's  deliverance  from  evil  I  3.  How  great 
the  folly  of  not  heeding  the  call  to  righteousness  given  through  them  I  4.  How  intense 
will  be  the  joy  of  the  redeemed  Church  of  God  when  our  poor  sin-stricken  humanity 
■hall  be  completely  healed,  and  the  full  conquest  over  iln  be  gidned  by  "  the  Lord 
and  his  Christ "  1— S.  D.  H. 


HOMILETICAL   INDEX 


10 


THE   BOOK    OF   ISTAHUM. 


OHAPTBB  I. 

rtaxM  rxai 

A  Tiiion  and  a  Bnxden        ...  .„  4 

The  Wrath  of  God  i  a  Warning  ...  6 

Consolation  in  God              ,..  ...  7 

Pursued  by  Darkness           ...  ...  8 

A  Wicked  Conneellor           ...  ...  9 

Glad  Tidings  for  God's  People  ...  10 

The  Messenger  of  Judgment  ...  11 

The  Divine  Vengeance         ...  ...  12 

The  Divine  Goodness           ...  ...  13 

God  our  Stronghold               ...  .,,  14 

The  Divine  Eegard  for  Trusting  Hearta  15 

Antagonism  to  God  and  his  Bute  ...  16 

Spiritual  Redemption  symbolized  ...  17 

Great  Sins  bringing  Great  Buin  ...  18 

The  Patience  of  God            ...  ...  19 

God's  Power           ...             ...  ...  19 

Opposite  Types  of  Human  Oharaoter, 
and  Opposite  Lines  of  Divine  Pro- 
cedure                ...             ...  ...  20 

Sin           ...             ...             ...  ...  21 

Corrupt  Kings       ...             ...  ,.,  22 

Three  Things  Worthy  of  Note  ...  24 

CHAPTEB  n. 

A  Predicted  Invasion           .„  ...  29 

The  Parable  of  the  Lion's  Den  ...  81 

Sod  the  Yindioator  of  the  Oppressed  81 


The  Downfall  of  Nineveh,  as  illustra- 
tive  of  the  Divine  and  the  Human 
Slements  in  Bevelation    ...  ...     32 

Man  inourring  the  Divine  Displeasure     84 

The  Messengers  of  Nineveh  and  the 
Messengers  of  Zion  :  a  Comparison       34 

Wicked  Nations:  1.  They  are  often 
allowed  to  exist  on  this  Earth  nntil 
they  reach  a  Terrible  Degree  of 
Wickedness        ...  ...  ...     36 

Wicked  Nations:  2.  However  long  they 
exist,  they  will  be  utterly  destroyed    37 

Wicked  Nations;  3.  Providence  often 
employs  One  Wicked  Nation  to  inflict 
Bnin  npon  Another  ...  ...     89 

CHAPTEB  HL 

Woe  to  Nineveh    ...  ...  ...  45 

The  Story  of  No-Amon       «,  ...  46 

The  Fall  of  Nineveh  ...  ...  48 

The  Guilt  and  Buin  of  Nineveh         ...  49 

No-Amon,  a  Sign  ...  ...  ...  49 

Human  Efforts  as  directed  against  the 

Divine  Purpose  ...  ...  ...  50 

The  Instability  of  Material  Greatneat  51 

Hopelessness  ...  ...  ...  52 

The  Overthrow  of  Evil-doeri  a  Bonroe 

of  Thankful  Joy  ...  ...  53 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED    BY   THE 

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 
AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

HABAKKUK. 

®X})OBition : 
By  REV.  W.  J.   DEANE,  M.A., 

RECTOR  OF   ASHEN  ; 

l)omiletics : 
By  rev.   T.  WHITELAW,  D.D. 

jigomilics  bj)  iJarious  ^utl)ors : 

REV.  S.  D.  HILLMAN,  B.A.  REV.   D.  THOMAS,   D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK. 


INTRODUCTION. 


I L  SuBJior  or  thi  Book. 

NiHiw  had  comforted  Jndah  with  the  assnruioe  that  the  power  of  AsBjrna 
Bhoold  be  oTerthrown,  though  for  a  time  it  was  permitted  to  afflict  the 
people  of  God.  Habakknk  warns  Jndah  of  another  g^reat  empire  which 
was  commissioned  to  chastise  her  backslidings  (ia  spite  of  the  partial 
reformation  nnder  Josiah),  but  which  shonld  itself  suffer  the  vengeance 
which  its  iniquities  merited.  The  predicted  fate  of  Nineveh  had  lulled 
the  Judaeans  into  a  false  secnritj,  so  that  they  forgot  the  dangers  that 
threatened  them,  and,  thongh  they  were  no  longer  guilty  of  idolatry  or 
seMsh  luxury,  they  relapsed  into  carelessness,  forgetfulness  of  God,  and 
various  evil  practices.  Eabakkuk  is  commissioned  to  show  them  that 
punishment  was  waiting  for  them  at  the  hands  of  the  Chaldeans,  from 
whom  as  yet  they'  had  not  realised  their  danger,  thongh  Isaiah  (ixxix.  6, 
etc.)  had  forewarned  Hezekiah  that  his  treasures  should  be  carried  to 
Babylon  and  his  sons  be  servants  in  the  palace  of  the  king.  The 
Chaldeans  were  hitherto  little  known  in  Judssa,  and  prophecies  referring 
to  them  made  but  slight  impression  on  the  hearers.  It  was  not,  indeed, 
till  Nineveh  had  fallen  that  Babylon,  long  an  appanage  of  Assyria, 
secured  its  independence,  and  entered  on  its  short  but  brilliant  career  of 
conquest.  Nabopolaasar,  who  had  treacherously  joined  the  Medes  and 
aided  in  the  capture  of  Nineveh,  obtained  the  hand  of  the  Median  king's 
daughter  for  his  son  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  received,  as  the  reward  of  his 
treachery,  not  only  Babylonia  itself,  but  a  large  portion  of  the  Assyrian 
territory,  including  the  suxerainty  over  Syria  and  Palestine.  Thus  the 
way  was  prepared  for  the  interference  of  the  Chaldeans  in  Jewish  affairs. 
The  overthrow  of  Pharaoh-Necho,  King  of  Egypt,  at  Carchemish  by 
Nebuchadnezcar  left  the  Babylonian  monarch  free  to  punish  the  revolt  of 
Jehoiakim,  and  to  continue  the  hostile  measures  which  cBlmins^d  in  the 
destractio&  «i  Jerualeu  aad  the  deportation  of  the  Jews. 

&ASXKKVX.  ' 


INTRODUOTION  TO 


The  prophecy  of  Habakkak  is  aa  organio  whole,  divided  into  two  parts, 
the  first  of  which  is  a  colloquj  between  God  and  the  prophet,  in  which  is 
announced  the  jndgment  coming  npon  Jndah  through  the  instrumentality 
of  the  Chaldeans ;  the  second  is  a  magnificent  ode  celebrating  the  pnnish- 
ment  of  God's  enemies  and  the  salvation  of  the  pious.  After  announcing 
his  office  and  mission,  the  prophet  (ch.  i.)  expostulates  with  God  on  the 
iniquity  and  corruption  which  abounded  in  Judssa,  and  complainb  that  it 
has  not  sooner  been  checked  and  the  righteous  released  from  suffering  at 
the  hands  of  the  wicked.  God  answers  that  the  day  of  retribution  is  at 
hand,  for  he  commissions  the  Chaldeans,  a  fierce,  rapacious,  warlike  nation, 
to  punish  the  sinful  people.  Terrified  at  this  account  of  the  Chaldeans, 
the  prophet  besMches  the  Lord  not  to  punish  unto  death,  and  not  to  involve 
the  good  in  the  fate  of  the  evil,  and  asks  how  God,  in  his  holiness,  can  look 
calndy  on  the  wickedness  of  those  whom  he  uses  as  the  instruments  of  his 
vengeance.  The  prophet  (ch.  ii.)  waits  for  the  answer  to  his  expostulation ; 
and  Ood  graciously  replies,  and  bids  him  write  the  oracle  plainly  that  all 
may  read,  because,  though  the  fulfilment  may  be  delayed,  it  is  absolutely 
certain.  The  law  of  his  kingdom  is  that  the  just  shall  live  by  faith ;  that 
righteousness  has  the  promise  of  life  and  is  life,  but  the  proud  and  evil 
shall  perish.  This  asserts  the  doom  of  the  Chaldeans  in  general  terms ; 
and  then  their  fall  is  announced  in  more  particular  form,  under  five  special 
"  woes,"  arranged  strophically,  and  supposed  to  be  uttered  by  the  nations 
whom  they  had  oppressed.  They  are  thus  denounced  for  insatiate 
ambition,  covetousness,  cruelty,  drunkenness,  and  idolatry.  So  if  the  evils 
among  the  Jews  are  about  to  meet  with  chastisement,  yet  destruction 
awaits  the  oppressing  Chaldeans,  and  God's  justice  is  confirmed.  The 
psalm  that  follows  (ch.  iii.)  illustrates  and,  as  it  were,  recapitulates  the 
substance  of  the  previous  portion.  Habakkuk  professes  himself  greatly 
terrified  at  the  jndgment  announced,  and  prays  the  Lord,  while  carrying 
ont  his  threat,  to  remember  mercy.  Then  he  depicts  the  coming  of  the 
Lord  to  judge  the  world  and  to  bring  salvation  to  the  righteous.  He 
describes  the  theophany  wherein  God  showed  his  majesty  and  power,  and 
made  the  nations  and  inanimate  nature  to  tremble.  He  delineates  the 
jndgment  against  the  enemies  of  the  Church,  first  symbolically,  by  the 
agitation  of  material  things  at  the  Lord's  presence,  and  then  properly,  by 
its  efEect  on  the  ungodly  in  this  world.  And  through  all  runs  a  stream  of 
consolation  in  that  salvation  is  promised  to  the  righteous  amid  the  wreck 
of  evil  men.  He  ends  the  ode  by  describing  the  effects  of  this  manifesta- 
tion on  the  people  of  God,  viz.  fear  at  the  coming  chastisement,  and  hope 
and  joy  at  the  future  salvation. 


§  IL    AUTHOE. 

The  writer  of  this  book  oalh  himself  "  Habakkuk  the  prophet ; "  and 
that  ia  all  that  we  are  told  of  him  for  certain  in  Holy  Scripture.    Tlie 


THE  BOOK  OJT  UABAKKUK.  iii 

name  signifies  "  Embracing,"  and  is  taken  personally  to  mean  either  "  one 
who  embraces  "  or  "  one  who  is  embraced."  The  latter  seems  more  probable. 
St.  Jerome  explains  it  also  in  the  sense  of  one  who  wrestles  with  Ood,  as 
Jacob,  in  prayer.  Bat  this  sense  is  not  generally  allowed,  and  many  com- 
mentators assume  that  the  appellation  is  virtually  equivalent  to  Theophilns, 
"  Beloved  of  God."  The  name  is  written  by  the  LXX.  'A/i^Saxov/i.  Other 
forms  also  occur.  In  the  apocryphal  addition  to  Daniel,  entitled  '  Bel  and 
the  Dragon,'  a  prophet  in  Jewry,  named  Habakknk,  carries  food  to  Daniel 
in  the  den  of  lions ;  and  the  title  of  this  legend  in  the  Septoagint  itself 
(not  in  Theodotion)  is,  "  Part  of  the  prophecy  of  Habakkuk,  the  son  of 
Jesns,  of  the  tribe  of  Levi."  Bat  the  whole  account  is  plainly  onhistorical, 
and  its  connection  with  the  canonical  writer  cannot  be  maintained  for  a 
moment.  In  calling  himself  a  "  prophet "  Habakkuk  claims  Divine  inspira- 
tion and  mission,  and  to  have  exercised  his  o£Sce  in  his  appointed  sphere. 
Whether  he  was  called  from  some  other  occupation,  as  Amos,  or  whether 
he  was  trained  in  the  schools  of  the  prophets,  is  unknown.  Some  gronnd 
for  supposing  him  to  have  been  a  Levite  is  given  by  the  musical  direction 
in  oh.  iii.  1,  and  the  conclusion  of  the  psalm,  "  For  the  chief  mnsician  on 
my  stringed  instruments,"  which  would  perhaps  imply  that  he  was 
qualified  to  take  part  in  the  temple  services,  and  himself  accompanied 
his  hymn  with  instrumental  music.  But  recent  critics  have  thrown  grave 
doubt  on  this  inference  (see  Exposition).  Legend  has  supplemented  the 
silence  of  authentic  history  concerning  the  life  of  Habakkuk  by  certain 
details,  some  of  which  may  have  some  elements  of  truth.  Thus  rabbinical 
tradition  asserts  that  he  was  the  son  of  the  Shunammite  woman  whom 
Elisha  restored  to  life.  This,  of  course,  is  altogether  unfounded.  Christian 
writers,  too,  have  not  been  backward  in  developing  hints  into  facts. 
Pseudo-Epiphanius  ('  De  Vit.  Prophet.')  and  Pseudo-Dorotheus  ('  Ghron. 
Pasch.,'  p.  250)  assert  that  Habakkuk  was  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  and 
born  in  a  place  called  Bethitouchar,  perhaps  Bath-Zacharias,  famous  in  the 
history  of  Judas  Maccabsaus  (1  Mace.  vi.  32),  that  at  the  capture  of 
Jerusalem  by  Ifebuchadnezzar  he  fled  to  Ostracine,  a  town  on  the  sea-ooast 
of  Egypt,  some  sixty  miles  east  of  Pelnsium,  and  remained  there  till  the 
Chaldeans  departed,  when  he  returned  to  his  own  country,  and  died  two 
years  before  the  end  of  the  Captivity.  His  tomb  is  said  to  have  been 
long  shown  at  Keilah  in  the  hill-country  of  Judah,  and  at  Chukkok  in 
Naphtali. 

§111.   Dati. 

The  time  when  Habakkuk  prophesied  can  be  gathered  only  from  hinti 
scattered  in  the  book  itself;  and  the  limits  thus  obtained  are  a  period 
before  Babylon  had  obtained  its  independent  position  and  so  was  able  to 
menace  its  neighbours,  and  of  course  before  the  invasion  of  Judah,  b.o.  605, 
twenty  years  later.     Modern  critics  who  do  not  believe  in  the  poBsibility 


iy  INTBODUOTION  TO 


of  Bnpernattiral  prediction,  at  once  settle  the  qneation  of  the  prophet's  data 
by  aflBrming  that  hia  assertion  concerning  the  punishment  of  Jernsalem  at 
the  hands  of  the  Chaldeans  must  have  been  uttered  after  the  event,  or  else 
BO  short  a  time  previous,  that  natural  acuteness  could  foresee  the  result 
so  certain  to  occur.  But  this  does  not  dispose  of  his  prediction  touching 
the  overthrow  of  Babylon,  which  human  foresight  could  not  have  taught ; 
and  if  we  mnst  allow  the  predictive  element  in  one  case,  why  mast  we 
refuse  it  in  another  ?  But  neglecting  the  theories  of  these  critics,  as 
based  on  an  erroneous  principle,  we  find  very  great  difficulty  in  coming 
to  any  satisfactory  decision.  Two  theories  are  upheld  by  great  names 
respectively.  The  first  assigns  our  prophet  to  the  time  of  Manasseh, 
immediately  succeeding  Nahum — a  theory  which  is  countenanced  by  the 
position  of  the  book  in  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  canon.  The  general 
iniquity  of  which  Habakkuk  complains  may  certainly  be  predicated  of  that 
period  in  Jewish  history.  That  the  Chaldeans  had  not  yet  invaded  the 
land,  and  that  their  appearance  was  not  expected,  we  learn  from  ch.  i.  5, 
"  I  will  work  a  work  in  your  days,  which  ye  will  not  believe,  though  it  be 
told  you."  The  words,  "in  your  days,"  imply,  says  Pusey,  that  he  is 
■peaking  to  adults,  many  of  whom  would  survive  the  invasion  of  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakun,  and  who,  if  he  prophesied 
about  the  close  of  the  reign  of  Manasseh,  would  be  about  sixty  years  old  at 
the  time  of  the  Chaldean  attack.  Some  time  later,  when  the  Babylonian 
empire  was  well  established,  it  would  have  beea  nothing  incredible  that 
destruction  should  menace  Judffia  from  that  quarter.  It  seems  probable, 
too,  that  Zephaniah,  who  executed  his  ofBce  in  the  days  of  Josiah,  adopted 
some  of  the  words  of  Habakkuk  (comp.  ch.  Li.  20  with  Zeph.  i.  7).  Jeremiah 
likewise  made  use  of  his  prophecy  (Jer.  iv.  13 ;  Zeph.  iii.  3 ;  and  ch.  i.  8). 
Habakkuk,  on  the  other  hand,  employs  the  language  of  Isa.  xi.  9  in  ch.  ii.  14. 
These  arguments  would  apply  with  equal  force  to  the  earlier  part  of  Josiah's 
reign.  Thus  critics  would  place  our  prophet  between  b.o.  650  and  635, 
according  to  the  usual  reckoning,  or  about  B.C.  626  in  revised  chronology. 
And  this  seems  the  most  probable  opinion.  The  other  theory  makes  him  a 
contemporary  of  Jehoiakim,  between  B.C.  609  and  598,  grounding  the  opinion 
upon  the  idea  that  his  account  of  the  violence  and  oppression  committed 
by  the  Chaldeans  could  only  have  been  written  by  one  familiar  with  their 
proceedings,  and  that  it  would  have  been  injudicious  prematurely  to  fill  the 
minds  of  the  people  with  fear  of  these  foreign  invaders.  This  is  further 
supported  by  the  tradition  mentioned  above,  that  he  lived  to  see  the 
Babylonian  exile.  The  force  of  these  arguments  will  not  be  allowed  by 
any  one  who  believes  in  the  supernatural  inspiration  of  the  prophets  of  God. 

§  IV.   General  Cicabacteb. 

There  is  something  very  striking  in  the  style  of  Habakkuk.    In  grandeur 
and  magnificence  it  is  perhaps  equalled  by  other  of  the  prophets ;  language 


THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK. 


as  pnre,  power  as  concentrated,  may  be  found  elsewhere  ;  but  the  eztended 
colloquy  between  God  and  the  prophet,  and  the  exquisitely  beautiful  ode 
which  forms  the  conclusion  of  the  prophecy,  are  unique.  The  introduction 
of  the  majestic  theophany  is  as  bold  in  conception  as  it  is  sublime  in 
diction.  We  know  not  whether  most  to  admire  the  idea  set  forth,  or  the 
images  under  which  it  is  developed.  How  terrible  are  the  threatenings 
and  announcements !  how  bitter  the  derision !  how  sweet  and  tender  the 
promises  of  mercy  and  love  !  The  past,  the  present,  and  the  future  are  pre- 
sented in  vivid  colours.  Difficult,  almost  impossible,  as  it  was  for  a  prophet, 
confined  to  one  circle  of  ideas,  to  be  original,  Habakkuk  has  given  a  new 
form  to  old  conceptions,  and  brightened  the  notions  of  earlier  seers  with 
the  splendour  of  imagery  all  his  own,  and  with  harmonious  diction  which 
is  surpassed  by  no  other  sacred  poet.  The  final  ode  may  be  set  beside  the 
two  grand  psalms,  the  eighteenth  and  the  sixty-eighth,  and  will  not  suffer 
by  the  comparison. 

f  V.    LrrERATUBB. 

Among  the  works  specially  devoted  to  the  elucidation  of  the  prophecy  of  Habakkuk 
we  may  note  the  following :  The  Jew  Abarbanel,  whose  commentary  was  translated 
into  Latin  by  Sprecher  (1709) ;  Agellius  (1597) ;  De  Thou ;  Jansen  d'Tpres,  '  Analects 
in  Habac. ; '  Dugu6, '  Explication '  (1734).     The  above  are  Roman  Catholic  commenta- 
tors.   Among  Protestants  may  be  mentioned  Capito  (1526) ;  ChyrtaBUS,  '  Lectiones ' 
(1592) ;  Marbury,  '  A  Commentarie  '  (1650) ;  Tarnovius, '  Comm.'  (1623) ;  Kalinsky 
Monrad  (1759) ;  Kofod  (1792) ;  Faber  (1779)  ;  Wahl,  Translation  and  Notes  (1790) 
WolfiF  (1822);    Delitzsch,  '  Der   Proph.  Hab.  ausgelgt'  (1843);   Gumpach   (1860) 
Reinke,  'Der  Proph.  Hab.'  (1870). 

§  VI.   Aekangembnt  m  Sections. 

The  book  consists  of  two  parts. 

Part  I.  (Ch.  i.,  ii.)    Judgment  upon  the  evil,  in  the  form  of  a  colloquy  between  the 

prophet  and  God. 
f  1.  (Ch.  i.  1.)    The  inscription  of  the  book. 
I  2.  (Ch.  i.  2-— 4.)    The  prophet  complains  to  God  of  the  iniquity  rife  in  the  land, 

and  its  consequences. 
§  3.  (Ch.  i.  5 — 11.)    God  answers  that  he  will  send  the  Chaldeans  to  punish  the 

ill-doers  with  a  terrible  vengeance;  but  these,  his  instruments,  shall  themselves 

offend  by  pride  and  impiety. 
§  4.  (Ch.  i.  12 — 17.)     The  prophet  beseeches  the  Lord  not  to  suffer  his  people  to 

perish,  seeing  that  he  is  in  covenant  with  them,  but  to  remember  mercy  even 

during  the  affliction  at  the  hand  of  these  rapacious  oppressors. 
J  5.  (Ch.  ii.  1 — 3.)    The  prophet,  waiting  for  his  answer,  is  bidden  write  the 

oracle  in  plain  characters,  because  its  fulfilment  is  certain. 
§  6.  (Ch.  ii.  4.)    The  great  principle  is  taught  that  the  proud  shall  not  continue, 

but  the  just  shall  live  by  faith. 
J  7.  (Ch.  ii.  5.)     The  character  of  the  Chaldeans  in  some  particulars  is  intimated ; 

their  destruction  is  announced  under  the  form  of  five  "  woes." 
S  8.  (Ch.  ii.  6—8.)    For  raps^pity. 

§  9.  (Ch.  ii.  9 — 11.)    For  avarice,  violence,  and  cunning. 
$  10.  (Ch.  ii.  12 — 14.)    For  founding  power  on  blood  and  devastation. 
§  11.  (Ch.  ii.  16—17.)    For  base  treatment  of  subject  nations. 
{  12.  (Ch.  ii.  18—20.)     For  idolatry. 


INTIiODUUTlON   TO  THE   BOOK:  OJ/"  HABAKKUK. 


Part  II.  (Ch.  in.)    Psalm  or  prayer  of  Habakkuk. 
§  1.  rch.  iii.  1.)     The  title. 
§  2.  (Ch.  iii.  2.)    The  prooemium,  in  which  the  prophet  expresses  hia  fear  at  the 


coming  judgment,  and  prays  God  in  his  wrath  to  remember  mercy. 
§  3.  (Ch.  iii.  3 — 15.)    He  depicts  in  a  majestic  theophany  the  coming  of  God  to 

judge  the  world,  and  its  effect,  symbolically  on  material  nature,  and  properly  on 

evil  men. 
I  4.  (Ch.  iii.  16, 17.)    It  produces  in  the  people  of  God,  first,  fear  and  trembling  at 

the  proipect  of  chastisement. 
8  6.  (ChT  iii.  18, 19.)    And  next,  hope  of  salration  and  joy  in  Go^ 


THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKTJK. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  L 


Ver.  1— ch.  ii.  20. — Part  I.  JrDGJiENT 
UPON  THE  Evil,  in  the  Form  of  a  Colloquy 

BETWEEN    THE    PROPHET   AND   GOD. 

Ver.  I. — §  1.  The  inscription  of  the  booh. 
The  burden  (see  note  on  Nah.  i.  I).  The 
prophet  (ch.  iii.  1).  This  title,  which  is 
kdded  in  the  inBcriptionB  only  to  the  names 
of  Haggai  and  Zt'ch.iriah,  and  cursorily  to 
that  of  Jeremiah  (xlvi.,  xlvii.,  1.),  implies 
that  he  exercised  the  practical  oiBce  of 
prophet,  and  was  well  known ;  and,  as 
Pusey  thinks,  Habakknk  appended  it  here 
on  account  of  tlie  form  in  which  his 
prophecy  is  cast,  as  being  addressed  almost 
eutiruly  to  God  or  the  Chaldeans,  not  to  his 
own  people.  Did  sea.  In  prophetic  vision 
(gee  note  on  Amos  i.  1). 

Vers.  2 — i. — §  2.  The  prophet  eomplaint 
to  God  of  tht  iniquity  of  hit  own  nation,  and 
itt  eon»equence$. 

Ver.  2. — Shall  I  ory;  Septua^nt,  Kexpa- 
{o/iai.  The  Hebrew  is  takin  to  imply  that 
the  prophet  had  long  been  complaining  of 
the  moral  depravity  of  Judah,  and  calling 
for  help  against  it.  There  is  no  reference 
here,  as  Ewald  fanoiei,  to  acts  of  violence 
committed  by  the  Chaldeans,  who,  in  fact, 
are  announced  as  coming  to  chastise  the 
wickedness  of  the  chosen  people  (ver.  6). 
And  thou  wilt  not  hear !  The  continuance 
of  evil  unchecked  is  an  anomaly  in  the 
prophet's  eye;  and,  putting  himself  in  the 
position  of  the  righteous  among  the  people, 
he  asks  how  long  this  is  to  last.  Even  ory 
out  onto  thee  of  Tiolenoe ;  better,  I  ery  out 
%nto  thee.  Violence.  A  similar  oonstruction 
is  found  in  Job  xix.  7 ;  Jer.  xx.  8.  "  Vio- 
lence "  includes  all  manner  of  wrong  done  to 
one's  neighbour.  Septnagint,  Bo^(ro>tai  vpht 
ffi  dStKoiiitm,  "  I  wul  ory  unto  thee  being 
wtoDged,"  as  if  the  wrtmg  was  done  to  the 

BABAKKVK. 


prophet  himself.  So  the  Vulgate,  Toei- 
ferabor  ad  te  vim  patient.  ButHabakkuk 
doubtless  speaks  in  the  person  of  the 
righteous,  grieved  at  the  wickedness  he 
sees  around,  and  the  more  perplexed  as  the 
Law  led  him  to  look  for  temporal  rewards 
and  punishments,  if  in  the  case  nf  indi- 
viduals, much  more  in  that  of  the  chosen 
nation  (Lev.  xxvi.,  ^usstm). 

Ver.  3. — Why  dost  then  show  me — Why 
dost  thou  let  me  see  daily  with  my  own  eyes 
— ^inicinity  abounding,  the  very  evil  which 
Balaam  says  (Numb,  xxiii.  21)  the  Lord  had 
npt  found  in  Israel  ?  Cause  me  to  behold 
grievance.  This  should  be,  Vott  thou  look 
upon  perversenesB  1  He  asks  how  God  can 
look  on  this  evil  and  leave  it  unpunished. 
The  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate  translate  the 
word  amal  "trouble,"  or  "labour;"  Keil, 
"  distress."  In  this  case  it  means  the  trouble 
and  distress  which  a  man  inflicts  on  others, 
as  wrong-doing  seems  to  be  generally  spoken 
of.  Spoiling  and  violence  are  before  me. 
"  Spoiling "  is  robbery  that  causes  desola- 
tion. "  Violence "  is  conduct  that  wrongs 
one's  neighbour.  The  two  words  are  often 
joined;  e.gr.  Jer.  vi.  7;  Amos  iii.  10.  Vul- 
gate, prsedam  et  injustitiam.  These  are 
continually  coming  before  the  prophet's 
eyes.  There  are  that  raise  np  strife  and 
oontentiou ;  better,  there  it  strife,  and  con- 
tention it  raised.  This  refers  to  the  abuse 
of  the  Law  by  grasping,  quarrelsome  nobles. 
Septuagint,  "Against  me  judgment  hath 
gone,  and  the  judge  receiveth  bribes."  So 
the  Syriac  and  Arabic  The  Vulgate  gives. 
Factum  est  judicium,  et  eontradictiopotentior, 
where  judicium  is  used  in  a  bad  sense. 

Ver.  4. — Therefore.  Because  God  has 
not  interfered  to  put  an  end  to  this  iniquity, 
or  because  of  the  want  of  righteous  judges, 
the  following  consequences  ensue.  Kie  Law 
is  slacked.  The  Law,  Torah,  the  revealed 
code  which  governed  the  moral,  domestic, 
•nd  political  life,  "  is  chilled,"  is  beuumbal 


THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKDIL 


[oh-  I.  1 — 17. 


(Gen.  xIt.  26),  is  no  longer  of  any  foio« 
or  eflScaoy,  is  become  a  dead  letter.  Aiaffx^S- 
affrai, "  IB  dispersed  "  (Septuagint) ;  laeerata 
est  (Vulgate).  Judgment  doth  never  go 
forth ;  t'.e.  right  is  powerless,  as  if  it  had 
never  been;  justice  never  shows  itself  in 
inch  a  case.  Septuagint,  oli  Sie(iyeTai  eit 
T€\os,  "proceedeth  not  effectuilly ;  "  so  the 
Vulgate.  The  lendering,  "  goetii  not  furth 
unto  victory,"  given  by  the  Syriao,  is  not  so 
Buituble;  "unto  truth"  is  a  mibtake  arising 
from  rtferring  the  word  to  a  wrong  root. 
Doth  compass  about.  In  a  hostile  sense, 
with  threats  and  treachery  (Judg.  xx.  43 ; 
Pb.  xxii.  13).  Septuagint,  KaTaSvvmTTeitt, 
"prevails;"  Vulgate,  prievalet  advereru. 
Therefore.  Because  the  rigliteous  are  un- 
able to  act  as  they  desire,  being  opposed  by 
the  wicked.  Wrong  judgment  proceedeth ; 
rather,  Judgment  goeth  forth  perverted. 
Eight,  or  what  is  bO  called,  when  it  does 
come  forth,  is  distorted,  wrested,  so  as  to  be 
right  no  more. 

Vers.  5— 11.— §  3.  To  this  appeal  God 
antwerB  that  he  will  tend  the  Chaldeans  to 
punish  the  evil-doers  toith  a  terrible  vengeance; 
hut  these,  his  instruments,  shall  themselves 
offend  by  pride  and  impiety. 

Ver.  5. — Behold  ye  among  the  heathen; 
the  natioTU.  God,  in  answer,  bids  the 
prophet  and  his  people  look  among  the 
nations  for  those  who  shall  punish  the  ini- 
quities of  which  he  complains.  I  will  use  a 
heathen  nation,  he  says,  as  my  instrument 
to  chastise  the  sinners  in  Jndaaa ;  and  you 
shall  see  that  I  have  not  disregarded  the 
evil  that  is  rife  among  you.  Some  commenta- 
tors suppose  that  the  impious  are  addressed  ; 
but  Habatkuk  spoke  in  the  name  and  person 
of  the  righteous,  and  to  them  the  answer 
must  be  directed.  The  LXX.  gives,  'ISere, 
ot  KUTtuppoyriTal,  "Behold,  ye  despisers," 
which  is  justifiable.  St.  Paul  quotes  the 
Greek  Version,  Acts  xiii.  41,  in  his  sermon 
at  Antiooh  in  the  Jewish  synagogue,  warn- 
ing those  who  despised  the  gospel.  Thig 
was  sufficiently  close  to  the  Hebrew  for 
his  purpose.  And  regard,  and  wonder 
marvellously.  They  are  to  wonder  because 
the  work  is  as  terrible  as  it  is  unexp(  cted. 
The  LXX.  (quoted  by  St.  Paul,  loe.  oit.) 
adds,  Kol  &,(pavi(r8riTe,  "and  perish,"  or 
rather,  "  be  .stupefied  by  astonishment,"  die 
of  amazement.  I  will  work  j  I  work.  The 
pronoun  is  not  expressed,  but  must  be 
supplied  from  ver.  6.  It  is  God  who  sends 
the  avengers.  In  your  days.  The  prophet 
had  asked  (ver.  2),  "How  long?"  The 
answer  is  that  those  now  livinR  sliould  see 
the  chustisement  (see  Introduction,  §  III.). 
Which  ye  will  not  believe.  If  ye  heard  of 
It  OS  happening  elsewhere,  ye  would  not 


g^re  cndit  to  it ;  the  paniahment  itself  and 
its  executors  are  both  unexpected  (oomp. 
Lam.  It.  12). 

Ver.  6. — The   executors  of   the  Divine 

vengeance  are  now  plainly  announced.  I 
laise  up.  God  does  it ;  he  uses  the  power 
and  passion  of  men  to  work  out  his  designs 
(1  Kings  xi.  14,  23;  Amos  vi  14).  Ihe 
Chaldeans;  Kasidim.  By  this  appellatiaa 
the  prophets  signify  the  soldiers  or  inha- 
bitants of  Babylon,  which  won  its  indepen- 
dence and  commenced  its  wonderfully  rapid 
career  of  conquest  after  the  fall  of  Nineveh, 
between  b.o.  626  and  608.  At  the  time 
when  Habakkuk  wrote  the  Ohaldeans  had 
not  appeared  in  Judsea,  and  no  apprehension 
of  danger  from  them  was  entertained.  Bitter 
and  hasty.  The  former  epithet  refers  to 
their  cruelty  and  ferocity  (com  p.  Isa.  liv.  6 ; 
Jer.  vi.  23;  1. 42).  They  are  called  "  hasty," 
as  being  vehement  and  impetuous  in  attack 
and  rapid  in  movement.  Which  shall 
march  through  the  breadth  of  the  land; 
whieh  marcheth  through  the  breadths  of  the 
earth.  The  statement  explains  the  general 
character  of  the  Ohaldeans,  and  points  to 
the  foreign  conquests  of  Nebuchadnezzar. 
LXX,,  Ti  'iropev6iievov  iiA  rh  irXdrrj  t^s  yijs 
(comp.  Rev.  xx.  9). 

Ver.  7.— They.  The  Hebrew  is  singular 
throughout.  The  disposition  of  the  people, 
as  of  one  man,  is  depicted.  Terrible; 
exciting  terror,  as  Cant.  vi.  4,  10.  Their 
judgment  and  their  dignity  shall  proceed  of 
themselves  ;  his  judgment  and  his  eminence 
are  from  himself.  The  LXX.  translates  the 
two  nouns  xpl/ia  and  x^/i^ua :  Vulgate,  judi- 
cium and  onus.  The  meaning  is  that  the 
Olialdeans  own  no  master,  have  no  rule  of 
right  but  their  own  will,  attribute  their 
glory  and  superiority  to  their  own  power  and 
skill  (oomp.  Dan.  iv.  30).  They  are  like 
Achilles  in  Horace,  'Ep,  ad  Pison,'  121, 
etc. — 

"Impiger,  iracundua,  inexorabilis,  aoer. 
Jura  neget  sibi  nata,  nihil  non  arroget 
armis." 

Hitzig  quotes  .fflschyl.,  '  Prom.,'  186,  nop' 
iauT^  r6  SUatov  lx<"'t  "HoMing  as  justice 
what  he  deemeth  so." 

Ver.  8. — Their  horses,  eto.  Jeremiali 
(iv.  13)  compares  their  horses  to  eagles 
(oomp.  Job  xxxix.  19,  etc).  The  punish- 
ment predicted  in  Deut.  xxviii.  49,  etc.,  is 
to  come  upon  the  Jews.  We  often  read  of 
the  ca\alry  and  chariots  of  the  Ohaldeans 
(Jer.  iv.  29;  vi.  23;  Ezek.  xxiii.  23,  24). 
Evening  wolves.  Wolves  that  prowl  for 
food  in  the  evening,  and  are  then  fiercest 
(Jer.  V.  6 ;  Zeph.  iii.  3).  Septuagint  (with 
a  different  pointing),  *'  wolves  of  Arabia." 
Their  horsemen  shall  spread  themselves. 
The  verb  is  also  rendered,  "bear  themselves 


5H,  I.  1—17,] 


THE   BOOK  OF   HABAKKUK. 


proudly,"  or  "gallop."  Septnagint,  iin- 
rJurovTai.  The  Anglican  VersioQ  seems 
correct,  implying  that  the  caTaliy,  like 
CoB3acKi  or  Uhlans,  swept  the  wliole  country 
for  plunder.  The  verba  throughout  vers. 
8 — 11  should  be  rendered  in  the  present 
tense.  From  far.  From  Babylonia  (laa. 
zxxix.  8).  The  preceding  clause  was  of 
general  import ;  the  present  one  refers  to 
the  invasion  of  Judsea.  As  the  eagle  This 
ia  a  favourite  comparison  of  Jeremiah,  as 
quoted  above  (comp.  also  oh.  xlviii.  40; 
xlii.  22 ;  Lam.  iv.  19). 

Yer.  9. — They  fhall  come  all  for  violenoe. 
All,  every  one  of  the  invaders,  oome  for 
violence — to  repay  that  violence  of  which 
Habakkuk  complained  (ver.  2).  Beptuagint, 
SwT^AEia  CIS  iirePels  IS{ei,  "An  end  shall 
oome  upon  the  impious ; "  Vulgate,  Omnei 
ad  prsBdam  venient.  Their  faces  shall  sap 
up  as  the  east  wind.  Tlie  word  translated 
"  shall  sup  up"  occasions  perplexity,  being 
an  SttoI  \ey6ii.evoy.  The  Anglican  rendering 
is  virtually  supported  by  other  versions,  e.g. 
Symmaohua,  Chaldee,  and  Syriac.  The  Vul- 
gate, too,  gives,  facte*  eoram  ventus  urens, 
which  Jerome  explains,  "  As  at  the  blast  of  a 
burning  wind  all  green  things  dry  up,  so  at 
the  sight  of  these  men  all  sshall  be  wasted." 
This  is  the  meaning  of  the  Anglican  Version, 
which,  however,  might  be  improved  thus : 
The  aspect  of  their  faces  is  as  the  east  wind. 
The  Eevisers  have,  Their faees  are  set  eagerly 
a*  the  east  wind,  which  dots  not  seem  very 
intelligible.  Other  renderings  are,  "the 
endeavour,"  or  "desire  of  their  faces  is 
directed  to  the  east,"  or  "  forwards."  (This 
rendering  has  the  support  of  Orelli  and 
others.)  "The  crowd  of  their  faces,"  as 
equivalent  to  "  the  multitude  of  the  army," 
which  is  not  a  Hebrew  phrase  found  else- 
where. Septuagint,  oj/fleffTTjicdTos  (agreeing 
with  dircjScis  in  the  first  clause)  wpoa-dvois 
airay  eferayWoi,  "resisting  with  their 
adverse  front"  The  effects  of  the  east 
wind  are  often  noted  in  Scripture ;  «.^.  Gen. 
xli.  6,  23;  Job  ixvii.  21;  Hos.  liii.  15. 
They  shall  gather  the  oaptivity  as  the  sand. 
"  He  collects  the  captives  as  sand " — a 
hyperbolical  expression  to  denote  the 
numbers  of  captives  and  the  quantity  of 
booty  taken.  The  mention  of  the  east 
wind  brings  the  thought  of  the  terrible 
simoom,  with  its  columns  of  sand. 

Ver.  10. — And  they  shall  acoff,  etc. ;  it,  or 
he,  scoffeth  at  kings.  The  Chaldean  nation 
makes  light  of  the  power  and  persons"  of 
kings.  Compare  Nebuchadnezzar's  treat- 
ment of  Jehoiakim  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  6 ;  2 
Kings  ixiv.  1,  3;  Jer.  xxu.  19)  and  Jehoia- 
chin  (2  Kings  xxiv.  12,  15).  They  shaU 
deride  every  strong  hold.  The  strongest 
fortress  is  no  impudiinent  to  them.  They 
shall  haap  dnst.    This  refers  to  the  raising 


of  a  mound  or  embankment  for  the  purpose 
of  attacking  a  city  (comp.  2  Sam.  xx.  15 ;  2 
Kings  xix.  32;  xxv.  I).  In  the  Assyrian 
monuments  one  often  sees  representations 
of  these  mounds,  or  of  inclined  planes  con- 
structed to  facilitate  the  approach  of  the 
battering-ram  (see  Bonomi,  'Nineveh  and 
its  Palaces,*  pp.  181,  188,  etc.;  Layard, 
'Nineveh,'  etc.,  ii.  369). 

Ver.  11. — Then  shall  bis  mind  change; 
Tin  fifTafia\u  rh  vvfvixa  (Septuagint); 
Tuju)  mutaMtur  spiritus  (Vulgate).  From 
the  ease  and  extent  of  his  coiiquoots  the 
Chaldean  gains  fresh  spirit.  But  it  is  best 
to  tran.slate  differently,  Then  he  sweepeth 
on  as  a  wind.  Tlie  Chaldean's  inroad  is 
compared  to  a  tempestuona  wind,  which 
carries  all  before  it.  And  he  shall  pass  OTer. 
This  is  explained  to  mean,  he  exceeds  all 
limits  in  his  arrogancy,  or  he  passes  onward 
through  the  land.  The  former  interpre- 
tation regards  what  is  coming,  the  latter 
keeps  to  the  metaphor  of  the  wind.  And 
offend.  He  is  guilty,  or  offends,  as  the 
next  clause  explains,  by  attributing  his 
success  to  his  own  prowess  and  skUl.  Thus 
the  prophet  intimates  that  the  avenger 
himself  incurs  God's  displeasure,  and  will 
suffer  for  it.  Septuagint,  val  iii\i<rerai, 
which  St.  Cyril  interprets  to  mean  that  the 
Lord  will  change  his  purpose  of  punishing 
the  Jews,  and  will  have  mercy  on  them — a 
notion  quite  foreign  to  the  purport  of  the 
sentence.  Imputing  this  his  power  unto 
his  god ;  more  literally,  this  his  power  is  his 
god;  Revised  Version,  even  he  whose  might 
is  his  god.  He  defies  the  Lord,  and  makes 
his  might  his  god.  (For  such  pride  and 
self-glorification,  comp.  Isa.  xiv.  13;  xlvii. 
7,  eto. ;  Dan.  iv.  30.)  Thus  Mezentius,  the 
despiser  of  the  gods,  speaks  in  Virgil, 
'iEn.,'x.  773— 

"  Dextra  mihi  deus  et  telam,  quod  missile 
libro. 
Nunc  adsint ! " 

Comp.  Statins,  'ThebV  iil.  615— 

"  Virtus  mihi  numen,  et  ensis, 
Quem  teneo." 

Vers.  12 — 17. — §  4.  The  prophet,  in  reply, 
beseeches  the  Lord  not  to  suffer  his  people  to 
perish,  seeing  that  he  has  deigned  to  be  in 
covenant  with  them,  but  to  remember  mercy 
even  during  the  affliction  at  the  hand  of  their 
rapacious  enemies. 

Ver.  12.— Hibakkuk  calls  to  mind  God's 
immutability  and  his  covenant  with  Israel. 
Art  thon  not  from  everlasting,  etc.?  An 
affirmative  answer  is  expected.  This  is  one 
ground  of  confidence  in  the  corrective  nature 
of  the  chastisement.  God  is  Jehovah,  the 
covenant  God,  who  has  been  in  persona) 


THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK- 


[OH.  I.  1 — 17. 


relation  to  Israel  from  time  immemorial, 
and  is  himself  eteraal.  Uine  Holy  One.  He 
■pnaks  in  tlie  person  of  the  righteous  people, 
and  be  refers  to  God's  holiness  as  a  second 
ground  of  hope,  because,  although  God  must 
punish  sin,  he  will  not  let  the  sacred  nation, 
the  cliosen  guardian  of  the  faith,  perish 
utterly.  And  then  be  expreaaes  this  con- 
fiJeuue:  We  shall  not  die.  We  shall  be 
chastened,  but  not  killed.  The  Muaorites 
assert  that  tlie  present  reading  i»  a  correc- 
tion of  tlie  scribes  for  "thou  wilt  not  die," 
which  the  prophet  wrote  originally,  and 
which  was  altered  for  reverence'  sake.  But 
this  is  a  mere  assumption,  incapable  of  proof. 
Its  adoption  would  be  an  omission  of  the 
very  consolation  to  which  the  prophet's 
confidence  leads.  Thou  hast  ordained  them 
(him)  for  judgment.  Thou  hast  appointed 
the  Chaldean  to  execute  thy  corrective 
punishment  on  Israel  (oomp.  Jer.  xlvi.  28). 
Others  take  the  meaning  to  be— 'Thou  hast 
predestined  the  Chaldean  to  be  judged  and 
punished.  This  is  not  so  suitable  in  tbis 
place.  '0  mighty  God;  Hebrew,  0  Booh— 
an  appellation  applied  to  God,  as  the  sure 
and  stable  Eesting-place  and  Support  of  bis 
people  (Deut.  xxxii.  4,  15,  37  ;  Vs.  xviii.  2; 
xxxi.  3;  Isa.  xvii.  10).  Thou  hast  estab- 
lished them  Qiim)  for  correction.  Thou 
appointedst  the  Chaldean,  or  madest  him 
strong,  in  order  to  correct  thy  people.  He 
is,  like  the  Assyrian,  the  rod  of  God's  anger 
(Isa.  z.  5).  Septuagint,  'ETrAao'f  (le  roS 
4\eyx€iy  vaiSeiav  aOrov,  "  He  formed  me  to 
prove  his  instruction."  This,  says  St. 
Jerome,  is  spoken  in  the  person  of  the 
prophet  announcing  his  call  and  oflBce. 

Ver.  13. — Thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than 
to  behold  evil  (comp.  ch.  i.  3).  God  cannot 
look  with  complacency  on  evil  (Ps,  t. 
5,6).  Iniijuity;  Septuagint,  iri{>/oi;s  oSiyjij, 
"  labours  of  pain."  Injustice  and  the  dis- 
tress occasioned  by  it.  God's  holiness  can- 
not endure  the  sight  of  wickedness,  nor  his 
mercy  the  sight  of  man's  misery.  And 
yet  he  permits  these  evil  men  to  afflict  the 
holy  seed.  This  is  the  prophet's  perplexity, 
which  he  lays  befoje  the  Lord.  Them  that 
deal  treacherously.  The  Chaldeans,  so 
called  from  their  faithless  and  rapacious 
conduct  (Isa.  xxi.  2;  xxiv.  16).  More 
righteous.  The  Israelites,  wicked  as  they 
were,  were  more  righteous  than  the  Chal- 
deans (comp.  Ezek.  xvi.  51,  etc.).  Delitzsch 
and  Keil  think  that  the  persons  intended 
are  the  godly  portion  of  Israel,  who  will 
suffer  with  the  guilty. 


Ver.  14. — ^The  prophet  appeals  movingly 
to  God  by  showing  the  indignity  with  which 
the  people  are  treated.  As  the  fishes  of  the 
sea.  Dumb  and  helpless,  swept  off  by  the 
fisherman.  That  have  no  ruler  over  them. 
None  to  guide  and  protect  them  (comp. 
Prov.  tL  7 ;  xxx.  27).  So  the  Jews  seem 
to  be  deprived  of  God's  care,  and  left  to  be 
the  prey  of  the  spoiler,  as  if  of  little  worth, 
and  no  longer  having  God  for  their  King 
(comp.  Isa.  Ixiii.  19,  Revised  Version).  The 
"creeping  things"  are  worms,  or  small  fish 
(Ps.  civ.  25). 

Ver.  15. — They  take  np  aU  men  with  tha 
angle;  he  bringeth  up  all  together  with  the 
hook  (Amos  iv.  2).  'The  net.  Any  kind  of 
net.  Ssptuagint,  &iiipi$\ri(rTroy,  "  cast-net." 
The  drag  {a-ayiiint).  The  large  drag-net. 
At  their  own  pleasure,  unhindered,  the 
Chaldeans  make  whole  nations  their  prey, 
their  fishing  implements  being  their  armies, 
with  which  they  gather  unto  themselves 
countries,  peoples,  and  booty. 

Ver.  16. — Therefore  they  sacrifice  unto 
their  net.  This  is  spoken  metaphorically, 
implying  that  the  Babylonians  recognized 
not  God's  hand,  but  attributed  their  success 
to  the  means  which  they  employed  (oomp. 
ver.  11 ;  Isa.  x.  13  etc.).  There  is  no  trace 
in  the  monuments  of  the  Chaldeans  paying 
divine  honours  to  their  weapons,  as,  accord- 
ing to  Herodotus  (iv.  62),  the  Scythians  and 
other  nations  did  (see  Justin, '  Hist.,'  xliii. 
3 ;  and  Pusey's  note  here).  What  a  man 
trusts  in  becomes  a  god  to  him.  Their 
portion  is  fat;  hit  portion  it  rich.  He 
gains  great  wealth.  Theii  meat  plenteous ; 
his  meat  dainty.  He  is  prosperous  and 
luxurious. 

Ver.  17. — Shall  they  therefore  empty  their 
net?  Becanse  they  have  had  this  career 
of  rapine  and  conquest,  shall  God  allow 
them  to  continue  it?  Shall  they  be  per- 
mitted to  be  continually  emptying  their 
net  in  order  to  fill  it  again  ?  The  idea  is 
that  they  carried  off  their  booty  aud  captives 
and  secured  them  in  their  own  territory, 
and  then  set  out  on  new  expeditions  to 
acquire  fresh  plunder.  The  question  is 
answered  in  the  next  chapter,  where  the 
judgment  on  the  Chaldeans  is  pronounced. 
And  not  spare  oontinually  to  slay  the 
nations!  And  cease  not  to  send  forth  his 
armies  and  to  found  his  empire  in  the  blood 
of  conquered  nations.  The  Septnagint  and 
Vulgate  have  no  interrogation,  the  assertioo 
being  made  by  way  of  expostulation. 


HOMILETICa 

Var.  1. — A  prophtft  &«r(2en.     I.  The  pbophbt.     1.  Bit  namt.     Haliakkuk— 
"Embracing,"  which  might  signify  either  "one  who  embraces"  or   "one  who   is 


OLLl— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  I 

embraced."  Accepting  the  former  aense,  Luther  notes  the  suitability  of  the  prophet's 
name  to  his  ofiBce.  "  He  embraces  his  people  (in  his  prophecy),  and  takes  them  to  his 
arms ;  ^.e.  he  comforts  them,  and  lifts  them  up  as  one  embraces  a  poor  weeping  child  or 
man,  to  quiet  it  with  the  assurance  that,  if  God  will,  it  shall  be  better  soon;"  though 
probably  the  name  rather  points  to  the  character  of  the  prophet's  faith,  which  cleared 
fast  to  the  Lord  amid  the  perplexity  of  things  seen  (Pasey).  2.  Hit  person.  A  Jewish 
prophet,  belonging  to  the  tribe  of  Levi,  and  o£Scially  qualified  to  take  part  in  the 
liturgical  service  of  the  temple  (ch.  iii.  19).  Beyond  this  nothing  is  known  of  his  history, 
the  Jewish  legends  concerning  him  (consult  Introduction)  being  absolutely  worthless, 
3.  Hii  date.  Uncertain.  Before  the  arrival  of  the  Chaldeans  in  Judah  (ver.  6),  and 
therefore  before  the  third  year  of  Jeboiakim  (Dan.  i.  1) ;  but  whether  in  the  reign  of 
Manasseh  (Havernick,  Keil,  Pusey),  or  in  that  of  Josiah  (Delitzsch),  or  in  that  of 
Jehoiakim  (De  Wette,  Ewald,  Umbreit,  Hitzig,  Bleek,  Eleinert),  is  open  to  debate. 
That  the  Assyrians  are  not  mentioned  as  a  power  seems  to  indicate  that  by  this  time 
Nineveh  had  fallen  (b.o,  606),  which  speaks  for  the  third  of  the  above  dates ;  that  the 
predicted  judgment  (ver.  5)  was  to  be  so  unlikely  as  barely  to  be  credible  favours  a 
time  while  Babylon  was  yet  subject  to  Assyria,  and  therefore  a  date  in  the  reign  of 
Manasseh.    The  moral  and  spiritual  degeneracy  of  the  age  in  which  Habakkuk  lived 

Svers.  1 — 1)  harmonizes  less  with  the  reign  of  Josiah  than  with  that  of  Manasseh  or 
lehoiakim.  The  latter  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  the  Chaldeans  appear  to  be 
depicted  as  already  on  their  march  (ver.  6) ;  the  former  by  the  circumstance  that  the 
judgment  is  represented  as  not  immediately  at  hand,  but  only  as  certain  to  happen  in 
the  days  of  those  to  whom  the  prophet  spoke  (ver.  6). 

IL  The  bubden.  1.  Its  contents.  As  Nahum  had  predicted  the  destruction  of 
Nineveh  and  the  Assyrian  power,  which  had  carried  the  ten  tribes  into  captivity 
(2  Kings  zvii.  6),  so  Habakkuk  declares  (1)  the  judgment  about  to  come  upon  the 
degenerate  nation  of  Judah  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  Chiddeans ;  and  (2)  the 
overthrow  of  the  Chaldeans  for  their  insatiableness,  ambition,  cruelty,  treachery,  and 
idolatry.  2.  Its  form.  In  the  first  two  chapters  the  prophet  sets  forth  bis  message 
in  the  form  of  a  conversation  between  himself  and  Jehovah,  the  prophet  addressing 
Jehovah  in  the  language  of  complaint  (vers.  1—4)  and  challenge  (vers.  12 — 17),  and 
Jehovah  in  return  replying  to  his  complaint  (vers.  6 — 11)  and  to  his  challenge  (ch.  ii. 
2 — 19).  In  the  third  chapter  Habakkuk  appends  a  prayer,  which  begins  by  suppli- 
cating mercy  for  the  afSicted  people  of  God  (ch.  iii,  1,  2),  and  quickly  passes  into  a 
sublime  description  of  Jehovah's  coming  in  the  glory  of  the  Almighty  (ch.  iii.  3 — 11) 
for  the  destruction  of  his  foes  (ch.  iii.  12 — 15)  and  the  salvation  of  his  people  and  his 
anointed  (ch.  iii.  13).  "  The  whole  of  the  prophecy  has  an  ideal  stamp.  Not  even 
Judah  and  Jerusalem  are  mentioned,  and  the  Chaldeans  who  are  mentioned  by  name 
are  simply  introduced  as  the  existing  possessors  of  the  imperial  power  of  the  world, 
which  was  bent  upon  the  destruction  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  or  as  the  sinners  who 
swallow  up  the  righteous  man"  (Eeil).  3,  Its  style.  The  lofty  sublimity  of  this 
brief  composition,  as  regards  both  thought  and  expression,  has  been  universally  recog- 
nized. "  His  language  is  classical  throughout.  .  .  ,  His  view  and  mode  of  presen- 
tation bear  the  seal  of  independent  force  and  finished  beauty  "  (Delitzsch).  "  Habakkuk 
bears  not  merely  the  prophet's  mantle,  but  also  the  poet's  wreath  adorns  his  honourable 
bead.  He  is  a  Jeremiah  and  an  Asaph  in  one"  (Umbreit).  "As  regards  force  and 
fulness  of  conception  and  beauty  of  expression,  he  was  certainly  one  of  the  most 
important  among  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament "  (Kleinert).  4.  Its  origin.  No 
more  in  his  case  than  in  Nahum's  was  this  political  foresight,  but  inspiration.  If  this 
prophecy  proceeded  from  the  age  of  Manasseh,  political  foresight  is  simply  out  of  the 
question  as  its  explanation;  if  from  the  first  years  of  Jehoiakim,  it  will  be  time 
enough  to  admit  that  political  foresight  could  certainly  predict  a  Babylonian  invasion 
at  a  year's  distance  when  it  has  been  shown  that  modern  statesmen  can  infallibly  tell 
what  shall  be  on  the  morrow.  And^of  course,  if  political  foresight  could  not  certainly 
predict  the  Babylonian  invasion  at  one  year's  distance,  still  less  could  it  announce  • 
Babylonian  overthrow  at  a  distance  of  more  than  half  a  century.  Political  foresight, 
then,  being  an  insufficient  hypothesis,  Divine  inspiration  should  be  frankly  admitted. 
Like  Nahum,  Habakkuk  " saw"  the  burden  he  delivered.  In  the  New  Testament  th« 
book  is  cited  as  inspired  (Bom.  i.  17;  r;*!.  iii.  11  •  Acts  liii.  40.  41  \  Heb.  x.  38). 


6  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  [<w.  1. 1— 17. 

Learn:  1.  That  future  eTenti  are  known  to  Ood— Divine  foreknowledge.  2.  That 
God  can  reveal  these  to  men,  should  he  bo  please— the  possibility  of  revelation.^  3.  That 
those  whom  God  selects  to  be  his  messengers  nevertheless  retain  their  indlvidnal  and 
characteristic  modes  of  thought  and  expression — ^inspiration  not  mechanical  or  uniform. 

Ver.  2, — The  lamentation  of  a  good  man.  I.  Over  the  belioious  deoknebaot  or 
HIS  Aos.  Not  merely  for  himself,  but  as  the  representative  of  the  godly  remnant  of 
Judah,  Habakkuk  expostulates  with  Jehovah  concerning  the  wickedness  of  the  times  in 
which  he  lived.  The  picture  he  sets  before  Jehovah  is  one  of  deep  national  corruption, 
such  as  existed  in  the  days  of  Jehoiakim  (Jer.  xx.  8 ;  xxii.  3, 13 — 17).  A  picture 
of  wickedness.  1.  Oreat.  (1)  Violence  was  abroad,  as  it  had  been  in  the  days  before  the 
Flood  (Gen.  vi.  11),  in  the  time  of  David  (Ps.  Iv.  9),  and  even  later  in  the  relgni  of 
Jotham  and  Abaz  (Micah  ii.  2;  vi.  12),  practising  spoliation,  causing  distress,  and 
producing  devastation,  as  it  did  in  the  long-past  era  of  the  patriarch  of  Uz  (Job  xxiv. 
1 — 12),  evoking  strife  and  contention,  perhaps  partly  through  the  natural  resistance  of 
good  men  defending  their  property,  but  just  as  likely  through  the  spoliators  quarrelling 
over  their  prey,  leading  to  deceit  and  treachery  in  order  to  gain  its  unhallowed  end, 
"the  wicked  compassing  about  the  righteous,"  and  "plotting  against  the  Just" 
(Ps.  xxxvii.  12).  (2)  Iniquity  abounded,  and  that  amongst  a  people  whose  ideal 
vocation  was  holiness  (Numb,  xxiii.  21);  immoralities  whose  source  was  a  perverse 
heart  (Matt.  xv.  19);  such  practices  as  were  inconsistent  with  the  professions  and 
privileges  of  those  who  did  them ;  iniquity,  or  that  which  wsts  unequal,  and  therefore 
contrary  to  law  and  truth.  (3)  The  Law  of  God  was  fallen  into  disrespect.  The 
Torah,  or  Divine,  revealed  Law, "  which  was  meant  to  be  the  soul,  the  heart  of  political, 
religious,  and  domestic  life"  (Delitzsch),  was  slacked;  it  was  benumbed  or  chilled, 
paralyzed  through  the  moral  and  spiritual  apathy  of  the  nation,  which  gave  it  no 
response  and  yielded  to  it  no  obedience.  (4)  Human  justice  was  itself  perverted.  Just 
because  men's  hearts  had  declined  from  the  love  of  God,  and  had  ceased  to  respect  his 
Law,  judgment  seldom  or  never  proceeded  forth  against  evil-doers ;  or,  if  it  did,  it  went 
forth  perverted.  When  criminals  were  brought  to  trial,  they  could  always  secure  a 
verdict  in  their  favour.  2.  Public.  It  was  not  merely  a  degeneracy,  eating  its  way 
secretly  into  the  vitals  of  the  nation;  the  disease  had  already  come  to  the  surface. 
Yice  and  irreligion  were  not  practised  in  private.  Iniquity  flaunted  its  robes  openly 
in  the  eyes  of  passeri-by.  The  prophet  saw  it^  looked  upon  it,  felt  himself  surround^ 
by  it.  Spoiling  and  violence  were  before  him ;  and  sinners  of  every  description  around 
him.  3.  Presumptuovs.  It  was  wickedness  perpetrated,  not  merely  against  God's 
Law,  but  by  God's  covenanted  people,  in  the  face  of  remonstrances  from  God's 
prophets,  and  under  the  eye  of  God  himself.  The  prophet  states  that  Jehovah  as  well 
as  he  had  beheld  the  wickedness  complained  of.  4.  Inveterate.  It  was  not  a  sudden 
outburst  of  moral  and  spiritual  corruption,  but  a  long- continued  and  deeply  rooted 
manifestation  of  national  degeneracy,  which  had  often  sent  the  prophet  to  his  knees, 
and  caused  him  to  cry  for  Divine  interposition. 

.  II.  OvEE  THE  SEEMING  iNuiFFEEENOE  OF  God.  \.  A  frtqucnt phenomenon.  During 
the  long  antediluvian  period  Jehovah,  apparently  without  concern,  allowed  maukind  to 
degenerate;  though  he  saw  that  the  wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the  earth  (Gen.  vi. 
6),  it  was  not  till  one  man  only  remained  righteous  before  him  that  he  interposed  with 
the  judgment  of  a  flood.  From  the  era  of  the  Flood  downwards  he  "  suffered  all  nations 
to  walk  in  their  own  ways  "  (Acts  xiv.  16).  Job  (xxiv.  12)  observed  this  to  be  the 
method  of  the  Divine  procedure  in  his  day,  Asaph  in  his  (Ps.  1.  21),  Habakkuk  in  his ; 
and  to-day  nothing  can  be  more  apparent  than  that  it  is  not  a  necessary  part  of  Heaven's 
plan  that  "sentence  against  an  evil  work"  should  be  "executed  speedily."  2.  A  per- 
plexing mystery.  That  God  cannot  be  indifferent  to  sin,  to  the  wickedness  of  nations 
or  to  the  transgressions  of  individuals,  is  self-evident;  otherwise  he  could  not  be  God 
(Ps.  xi.  7 ;  cxi.  9 ;  cxlv.  17 ;  Isa.  IviL  15 ;  1  Pet.  i.  15 ;  Bev.  iv.  8).  But  that,  loving 
righteousness  and  hating  iniquity,  he  should  seem  to  make  no  effort  to  protect,  vindi- 
cate, strengthen,  and  diffuse  the  one,  or  to  punish,  restrain,  and  overthrow  the  other, — 
this  is  what  occasions  trouble  to  religious  souls  reflicting  on  the  course  of  providence 
(Job  xxL  7 ;  Ps.  Ixxiii.  2).  The  solution  of  the  problem  can  only  be  that,  on  the  one 
hand,  he  deems  it  better  that  righteousness  should  be  purified,  tested,  and  eatabliahad 


an.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK.  7 

by  contact  with  evil,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  seems  preferable  to  his  wisdom  and 
love  that  wickedness  should  have  free  scope  to  reveal  its  true  character,  and  ample 
opportunity  either  to  change  its  mind  or  t6  justify  its  final  overthrow  (see  homily  on 
vers.  12—19). 

III.  OVEB    THE    UANIFBST   FB(TITLESBNE3S    OF    HIS     FBATEB9.      An    experience;     1. 

Strange.  Habakkak  had  cried  long  and  earnestly  to  Jehovah  about  the  wickedness  of 
his  countrymen.  If  rivers  of  waters  ran  not  down  his  eyes  because  they  kept  not 
Jehovah's  Law,  as  the  psalmist  tells  us  was  the  case  with  him  (Ps.  oxix.  136),  and  Jere- 
miah (ix.  1)  wished  that  it  could  have  .been  with  him,  long  processions  of  groanings 
ascended  from  his  bosom  to  the  throne  of  (Jod  on  that  very  account.  Doubtless,  also, 
he  expostulated  with  Jehovah  about  his  weming  indifference,  saying,  "  How  long, 

0  Lord,  will  this  wickedness  prevail  ?  *n<i  now  long  wilt  thou  be  silent  ? "  Yet  was 
there  "  no  voice,  nor  any  that  answered  him,"  any  more  than  if  he  had  been  a  wor- 
shipper of  Baal  (1  Kings  xviii.  26);  and  this  although  Jehovah  was  pre-eminently  the 
Hearer  of  prayer  (Ps.  Ixv.  2),  and  had  invited  his  people  to  call  upon  him  in  the  day 
of  trouble  (Ps.  1.  15).  2.  Common.  It  is  not  wicked  men  alone  whose  prayers  are 
denied — men  like  Saul  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  6),  and  the  inhabitants  of  Judah  in  the  days  of 
Isaiah  (L  15)  and  of  Jeremiah  (xi.  14),  but  good  men  like  Job  (xxx.  20)  and  David 
(Ps.  xxii.  2)  as  well.  As  the  Syro-Phoenician  woman  cried  after  Jesus,  and  was  answered 
never  a  word  (Matt.  xv.  23),  so  many  prayers  ascend  from  the  hearts  of  God's  people 
to  which,  for  a  time  at  least,  no  response  returns.  3.  Valuable.  Fitted  to  test  the 
faith  and  sincerity  of  the  petitioner,  it  is  also  admirably  calculated  to  teach  him  th« 
sovereignty  of  God  in  grace  as  well  as  in  nature,  to  show  him  that,  while  God  distinctly 
engages  to  answer  prayer,  he  undertakes  to  do  so  only  in  his  own  time  and  way. 

Learn :  1.  That  no  good  man  can  be  utterly  indifferent  to  the  moral  and  spiritual 
character  of  the  age  in  which  he  lives.  2.  That  good  men  should  bear  the  highest 
interests  of  their  country  before  God  upon  their  hearts  in  prayer.  3.  That  good  men 
should  never  lose  faith  in  two  things — that  God  is  on  the  side  of  righteousness,  even 
when  iniquity  appears  to  triumph ;  and  that  God  hears  their  prayers,  even  when  he 
delays  to  answer  or  appears  to  deny  them. 

Vers.  5 — 11. — Judgment  on  the  wing.  L  Its  ohabaoteb  desobibbd.  (Ver.  6.) 
1.  Its  luhfectt.  The  land  and  people  of  Judah  (ver.  6).  These,  though  Jehovah's 
covenanted  people,  had  declined  from  his  worship,  departed  from  his  ways,  dishonoured 
his  Name.  It  was  in  the  covenant  that,  under  such  circumstances,  they  should  be 
chastised  (2  Sam.  vii.  14 ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  30) ;  and  Jehovah  is  never  unmindful  of  his 
covenant  engagements  (Ps.  cxi.  5),  if  men  are  of  theirs  (2  Tim.  ii.  12,  13).  2.  Its 
Author.  Jehovah.  "  The  Judge  of  all  the  earth  "  (Gen,  xviii.  20),  "  his  eyes  behold 
and  his  eyelids  try  the  children  of  men  "  (Ps.  xi.  4),  communities  and  nations  no  less 
than  individuals  (Ps.  Ixvii.  4).  As  "justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  his 
throne"  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  14),  so  "all  his  ways  are  judgment"  (Deut.  xxxii.  4),  and  "  the 
works  of  his  hands  are  verity  and  judgment "  (Ps.  cxi.  7).  As  the  least  significant 
occurrence  (Matt.  i.  29),  so  the  most  momentous,  cannot  happen  without  the  Divine 
permission.  The  Supreme  is  behind  all  second  causes.  He  regulates  the  rise  and  fall 
of  nations  and  kings  (Job  xii.  23 ;  Ps.  Ixxv.  7),  the  ebb  and  flow  of  ocean  (Job  xxxviii. 
11),  the  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies  (Job  xxxviii.  31 — 33),  the  growth  and 
decay  of  flowers  (Isa.  xl.  7).  When  Nineveh  is  overthrown  and  Babylon  raised 
up,  Jehovah,  unseen  but  all-powerful,  is  the  prime  Mover.  When  Judah  or  Israe^ 
is  chastised,  it  is  Jehovah's  hand  that  holds  the  rod.  3.  Its  certainty.  Being 
matter  of  clear  and  definite  promise  on  the  part  of  Jehovah :  "  I  will  work  a  work ; " 
"Behold,  I  raise  up  the  Chaldeans."  So  certain  is  Jehovah's  future  judgment  of 
his  enemies  (Mai.  iii.  5 ;  Acts  xvii.  31).  This,  like  that,  has  no  basis  but  Jehovah's 
announcement.  That  this  will  not  fail  may  be  inferred  from  the  accomplishment  of 
that.  4,  Its  vicinity.  Close  at  hand.  "  Behold,  I  work  a  work  in  your  days  "  obviously 
meant  that  within  a  generation  at  furthest  the  Divine  stroke  should  descend  on  Judah, 
and  that  every  person  in  the  nation  should  regard  it  as  near.  In  the  same  way  are 
Christians  directed  to  think  of  the  judgment  of  the  great  day  as  at  hand  (Jas.  v.  9 ; 

1  Pet.  iv.  7 ;  Rev.  xxii.  12),  though  of  that  day  and  of  that  hour  knoweth  no  man 
(Mark  xiv.  32)  more  than  this,  that  it  is  certain  (Job  xxi.  30:  Pa.  1.  4;  Dan.  vii.  10; 


8  THK   BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  [on.  1. 1—17 

Matt.  xxr.  32;  Heb.  ix.  27).  5.  Its  strangeness.  It  should  be  both  startling  and 
incredible.  (1)  Startling.  As  to  its  Author,  Jehovah ;  as  to  the  quarter  whence  it  should 
proceed,  from  among  the  heathen ;  as  to  the  power  by  which  it  should  be  inflicted,  the 
Chaldeans,  when  they  might  rather  have  expected  the  Assyrians  (if  Habakkuk 
prophesied  under  Manasseh)  or  the  Egyptians  (if  he  flourished  in  the  first  years  ot 
Jehoiakim) ;  as  to  the  suddenness  with  which  it  should  spring  forth,  there  being  at 
the  time  when  Habakkuk  wrote  no  tokens  of  its  coming  discernible  on  the  horizon. 
So  will  the  judgment  of  the  great  day  surprise  the  ungodly  world  and  a  sleeping  Church 
(Matt.  ixiv.  27—44;  xxv.  6;  1  Thess.  v.  2,  3;  Rev.  xvi.  15).  (2)  Incredible.  So 
unlikely  did  a  Chaldean  invasion  of  Judaea  seem,  that  Jehovah  felt  nothing  but  an 
actual  experience  of  the  same  would  ever  convince  his  people  of  it.  A  simple  fore- 
announcement  of  it  would  not  suffice  to  carry  conviction  of  its  reality  to  their  mind, 
although,  of  course,  it  should.  That  this  was  true,  the  reception  accorded  to  Jeremiah'a 
prediction  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  appearance  before  Jerusalem  showed  (Jer.  v.  12  ;  xx. 
7,  8;  xxvi.  8 — 11).  Up  to  the  moment  when  the  Chaldean  armies  arrived  neither 
Jehoiakim  nor  his  people  would  allow  that  a  Chaldean  conquest  was  so  much  as 
possible.  Events,  however,  proved  them  to  be  in  error.  So  the  antediluvians  knew 
not  till  the  Flood  came  and  took  them  all  away  (Matt.  xxiv.  39).  So  shall  the  coming 
of  the  Son  of  man  be  (2  Pet.  iii.  1 — 10). 

II,  Its  IN8TEU1IBNT  INDICATED.  (Vers.  6 — 11.)  This  was  the  Chaldean  or  Baby- 
lonian power,  at  the  time  subject  to  Assyria,  and  not  risen  to  the  ascendency  it  after- 
wards enjoyed  under  Nebuchadnezzar  and  his  successors.  The  prophet  depicts  it 
when  raised  up,  not  only  into  a  nation,  but  against  Judah  by  a  sevenfold  characteristic. 
1.  Its  natiiral  disposition.  He  calls  it  "  a  bitter  and  hasty  nation,"  i.e.  fierce  and 
rough,  heedless  ana  rash,  and  represents  it  as  marching  through  the  breadth  of  the 
earth,  impelled  by  covetousness,  and  making  a  way  for  itself  by  sh-eer  brute  force  and 
violence — taking  possession  of  dwelling-plaoes  not  its  own.  2.  Its  formidable  appear- 
ance, "  They  are,"  or  he,  i.e.  the  nation,  is,  "  teriible  and  dreadful,"  by  its  very 
name  and  much  more  by  its  aspect  and  actions  inspiring  terror  in  the  breasts  of 
beholders.  3.  Its  presumptuous  self-sufficiency.  "  Their  judgment  and  dignity  pro- 
ceed from  themselves ; "  i.e.  conscious  of  its  own  strength,  it  deteimines  for  itself  itr 
own  rule  of  right,  and  ascribes  to  itself  its  elevation  above  the  other  nations  of  thf 
earth.  This  putting  of  self  instead  of  God  in  the  place  of  honour  and  seat  of  authority 
is  the  essence  of  all  sin.  Wicked  men  walk  after  the  counsels  and  in  the  imaginations 
of  their  own  evil  hearts  (Jer.  vii.  24),  and  are  prone  to  arrogate  to  themselves  what 
should  be  rendered  to  God,  viz.  the  glory  of  their  successful  achievements  (Deut.  viii. 
17;  Judg.  vii.  2).  4.  Its  military  strength.  (1)  Its  horses  swifter  than  leopards, 
lighter  of  foot  than  panthers,  which  spring  with  the  greatest  rapidity  on  their  prey, 
and  fiercer  than  evening  wolves,  or  wolves  going  forth  at  eventide  after  having  fasted 
all  day — an  emblem  of  ferocity  applied  to  the  judges  of  Judah  (Zeph.  iil.  3),  (2)  Its 
horsemen  or  warriors  coming  from  afar  and  spreading  themselves  abroad — "Neither 
distance  of  march  shall  weary  nor  diffusion  weaken  them  "  (Pusey) — darting  upon  its 
foes  like  an  eagle  hasting  to  devour,  a  bird  to  which  Nebuchadnezzar  is  compared 
(Jer,  xlviii.  40;  Lam,  iv.  19;  Ezek.  xvii.  3;  Dan.  vii,  4),  (3)  Both  bent  upon 
violence  and  having  their  faces  set  eagerly  as  the  east  wind,  i.e.  either  set  towards  the 
front  with  determination,  or  like  the  east  wind  for  devastation.  Thus  the  character- 
istics of  Babylonian  warfare  were — swiftness  of  movement,  simultaneousnesg  of  action 
in  the  different  parts  of  the  army,  unanimity  of  purpose,  determination  and  ferocity, 
qualities  the  existence  of  which  in  them  the  monuments  sufBciently  attest.  5,  Itt 
warlike  achievements.  (1)  The  deportation  of  subjected  populations.  "  They  gather 
captives  as  the  sand,"  i.e.  "  countless  as  the  particles  which  the  east  wind  raises,  sweep- 
ing over  the  sand  wastes,  where  it  buries  whole  caravans  in  one  death  "  (Pusey).  (2) 
The  defiance  of  all  opposition.  "  Yea,  he  sooffeth  at  kings,  and  princes  are  a  derision 
unto  him."  So  Nebuchadnezzar  did  with  Jehoiakim,  Jehoiachin,  and  Zedekiah  (2  Kings 
xxiv,  15  ;  xxv.  6,  7 ;  2  Ohron.  xxxvi.  6—21).  (3)  The  capture  of  every  stronghold. 
No  fortress  coald  withstand  the  Babylonian  conqueror.  Not  even  Tyre,  "  whose  very 
name  (Rock)  betokened  its  strength  "  (Pusey).  The  most  impregnable  garrison  seemed 
only  to  require  that  he  should  heap  up  a  little  dust  against  it,  and  it  was  taken.  6,  Itt 
daring  impiety.    Rushing  on  like  a  twoUen  torrent,  like  his  own  Euphrates  when  it 


OII.1. 1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK.  f 

overflows  its  banks,  sweeping  across  tlie  land  like  a  tempestuous  wind  over  the  aandy 
desert,  it  overleaps  all  barriers  and  restraints  both  Divine  and  human,  and  stands  con- 
victed before  God  as  a  guilty  transgressor.  7.  Its  shameless  hlasphemy.  The  culmi- 
nation at  once  of  its  offence  and  of  its  guilt  is  that  it  deifies  its  own  might,  saying, 
"  fjo,  this  my  strength  is  my  god  I"  Such  was  the  spirit  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iv. 
30)  and  of  Belshazzar  (Isa.  xiv.  14);  such  will  be  that  of  the  future  antichrist 
(2  Thess.  ii.  4). 

Learn ;  1.  That  if  God's  people  sin  they  must  look  for  chastisement  (Deut.  li.  28 ; 
Ps.  Ixxxix.  32).  2.  That  if  God's  people  are  chastised  for  their  offences,  God's  enemies 
cannot  hope  to  escape  punishment  for  theirs  (1  Pet,  iv.  17,  18).  3.  That  God  can 
always  lay  his  hand  upon  an  instrument  wherewith  to  inflict  punishment  upon  his 
people  (Isa,  x.  5).  4.  That  wicked  men  and  nations  whom  God  employs  in  the 
execution  of  his  judgments  do  not  thereby  escape  responsibility  for  their  own  actions 
(Isa.  X.  12).  6.  That  the  deification  of  self  is  the  last  delusion  of  a  foolish  heart 
(Gen.  lii.  6). 

Vers.  12—17. — The  triumph  of  faith.  I.  Habakkuk'b  God.  (Vers.  12, 13.)  1. 
Eternal.  Prom  everlasting  (Ps.  xciii.  2),  and  therefore  to  everlasting  (Ps.  xc.  1) ; 
hence  immutable  (Mai.  iii.  6),  without  variableness  or  shadow  cast  by  turning  (Jas. 
i.  17),  in  respect  of  his  being  (1  Tim.  i.  17),  character  (Isa,  Ixiii.  16 ;  Ps.  cxi.  3), 
purpose  (Job  xxiii.  13),  and  promise  (Heb.  vi.  17).  2.  Holy.  In  himself  the  abso- 
lutely and  the  only  stainless  One  (Exod.  xv.  11 ;  Isa.  vi.  3),  and  in  all  his  self- 
manifestations  (Job  xxxiv.  10),  in  his  ways  and  works  (Ps.  cxlv.  17)  as  well  as  words 
(Ps.  xxxiii.  4),  equally  immaculate,  and  necessarily  so,  since  an  unholy  Divinity  could 
not  be  supreme,  he  is  "  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,"  and  "  cannot  look  upon 
iniquity  "  with  indifference,  and  far  less  with  favour  (Ps.  v.  4 ;  Jer,  xliv.  4).  3. 
Omniscient.  Inferred  from  the  fact  that  he  beheld  all  the  evil  that  was  done  beneath 
the  sun,  both  in  Judah  by  his  own  people  (ver.  3)  and  among  the  nations  by  the 
Chaldeans  (ver.  13).  Omniscience  a  necessary  attribute  of  the  Supreme,  and  one  much 
emphasized  in  Scripture  (Prov.  xv.  3 ;  Job  xxviii.  24 ;  2  Ohron.  xvi.  9 ;  Jer,  xxxii.  19 ; 
Heb.  iv,  13),  4.  Omnipotent.  This  implied  in  his  supremacy  over  the  nations,. 
raising  up  one  power  (the  Chaldeans)  and  putting  down  another  (Judah),  giving  the 
peoples  into  Nebuchadnezzar's  net,  and  again  hurling  down  Nebuchadnezzar's  grand- 
son from  his  seat  of  power.  Also  suggested  by  the  designation  "  Rock,"  given  him  by 
Habakkuk,  who  meant  thereby  to  teach  the  strength  and  steadfastness  of  Jehovah  in 
comparison  with  the  idols  of  the  heathen,  and  his  ability  to  shelter  and  defend  those 
who  trusted  in  him  (Deut.  xxxii.  4, 15, 18,  30,  31, 37 ;  Ps.  xviii.  2 ;  xxviii.  1 ;  xxxi.3, 
etc.).  6.  Gracious.  He  was  such  a  God  as  had  entered  into  covenant  with  the 
prophet,  who  accordingly  styled  him  "  my  God,"  "  mine  Holy  One."  "  My  "  is  faith's 
response  to  God's  grace  in  offering  himself  to  man  as  a  God  (Exod.  xx.  2). 

II.  Habakkdk's  pbbplexitt.  (Vers.  13 — 17.)  1.  A  great  mystery.  (1)  Concern- 
ing Judah.  Why  God,  being  what  he  was,  from  everlasting,  holy,  etc.,  should  suffer 
his  people,  who  with  all  their  faults  were  more  righteous  than  their  oppressors,  to  be 
trodden  down,  butchered,  and  driven  off  into  captivity  by  the  Chaldeans !  Why,  when 
he  saw  them  humiliated  and  destroyed,  he  held  his  peace !  Strange  inconsistency  of 
the  human  heart,  especially  when  touched  by  grace.  A  little  before  (ver.  3)  the 
prophet  had  been  concerned  at  God's  silence  about  the  wickedness  of  Judah;  now, 
when  God  has  spoken  of  raising  up  against  that  wickedness  the  Chaldean  army,  he  is 
troubled  that  Qfld  should  allow  such  cruelty  to  be  perpetrated  against  the  people  of 
whom  he  had  complained.  (2)  Concerning  the  Chaldeans.  Why  God,  being  what 
he  was,  unchangeably  pure  and  just  as  well  as  resistlessly  powerful,  should  permit 
the  heathen  warrior  to  work  such  havoc  among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  to  practise 
such  deception  towards  and  cruelty  against  them  (ver.  13),  to  angle  them  up  like 
fishes  out  of  the  sea  or  catch  them  in  his  net  (ver.  15),  to  deprive  them  of  their  heads 
by  carrying  away  their  kings,  and  so  to  make  them  like  the  finny  tribes  that  have  no 
rulers  over  them  (ver.  14) ;  and  not  only  so,  but  to  exult  in  his  conquests  and  depre- 
dations, as  if  these  were  exclusively  the  result  of  his  own  power  and  skill ;  to  "  sacri- 
fice unto  his  net,  and  burn  incense  unto  his  drag  "  (ver.  16),  thus  making  might  his 
god  (ver,  11),  and  practically  deifying  himself.    2.  An  old  problem.    Habakkuk'i 


10  THE   BOOK   OF   HABAKKUK.  [oh,  1. 1—17. 

perplexity  was  the  game  which  from  time  Immemorial  has  troubled  thonghtfol  men, 
the  dark  enigma  of  providence — why  good  men  should  so  frequently  be  crushed  by 
misfortune,  and  wicked  men  so  often  crowned  with  prosperity.  This  mystery  was  a 
source  of  anxiety  to  Job  (xii.  6;  xxi.  7 — 13),  David  (Ps.  xvi.  14,  15),  Asaph 
(Pi.  Ixxiii.  1 — 13),  Jeremiah  (xii.  1),  the  Preacher  (Eocles.  vii.  15;  viii.  14),  in  the 
olden  times ;  has  caused  much  stumbling  to  good  men  since,  and  probably  will  do  so 
while  the  world  lasts.  3.  A  valuable  discipline.  Distressing  as  this  mystery  is,  it  is 
nevertheless  not  without  its  uses  to  such  as  are  exercised  thereby.  It  assists  them 
to  understand  the  sovereignty  of  God,  that  he  giveth  not  account  of  any  of  his 
matters  (Job  xxxili.  13) ;  to  realize  their  own  limited  and  imperfect  vision,  which  can 
only  see  in  part,  not  in  whole  (Job  xxxvii.  21 ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  9),  only  the  middle  and 
neither  the  beginning  nor  the  end  of  God's  work  in  providence ;  to  cultivate  those 
virtues  of  patience,  humility,  trustfulness,  which  are  essential  elements  in  all  true 
goodness  (Ps.  xxxvii.  3 — 5) ;  and  to  seek  their  portion  in  God  himself  (Ps.  ivi  6)  rather 
than  in  earthly  things  (Ps.  xvii.  14),  in  the  future  world  rather  than  in  the  present  life 
(Ool.  iii.  2). 

III.  Habakkuk's  consolation.  (Vers.  12 — 17.)  1.  Concerning  the  righteous.  (1) 
Jehovah  being  what  he  was,  it  was  impossible  his  people  should  be  either  cut  or  cast 
off.  Habakkuk  argued  that  Judah  could  not  perish—"  We  shall  not  die  " — ^because  God 
lived  and  was  holy.  Jehovah  sustained  the  argument  by  answering,  in  Mai.  iii,  6, 
"  I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not ;  therefore  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed ; "  and 
Christ  acknowledged  its  validity  when  he  said  to  his  disciples,  "  Because  I  live,  ye 
shall  live  also"  (John  xiv.  19).  This  implies  not  exemption  from  physical  suffering 
or  death,  as  doubtless  many  Judseans  perished  in  the  Chaldean  conquest,  but 
protection  from  that  future  and  eternal  death  which  is  the  last  penalty  of  unrepented 
and  unforgiven  sin.  This  the  main  consolation  of  a  believer  under  suffering,  that  his 
covenant  God  hath  said,  "My  mercy  will  I  keep  for  him  for  evermore"  (Ps.  Lxxxix. 
28),  and  that  Christ  hath  declared,  "  My  sheep  shall  never  perish "  (John  x.  28). 
(2)  This  being  so,  their  sufferings  must  be  designed  only  for  their  correction,  not  for 
their  destruction,  and  accordingly  should  be  regarded  rather  as  fatherly  chastisements 
than  as  penal  inflictions.  Habakkuk  perceived  that  the  Chaldean  had  been  "  ordained 
for  judgment "  and  "  raised  up  for  correction,"  not  commissioned  for  extermination. 
So  the  Christian  discerns  that  "tribulation  worketh  patience,"  etc.  (Bom.  v.  3);  that 
"  our  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding, 
even  an  eternal  weight  of  glory"  (2  Cor.  iv.  17);  that  present  chastisements  ar« 
intended  for  our  future  profit,  "  that  we  might  be  partakers  of  his  holiness  "  (Heb.  xii. 
10),  and  that  they  might  yield  to  us  "the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness" 
(Heb.  xii.  11) ;  and  in  short,  that  suffering  is  the  royal  road  to  moral  and  spiritual 
perfection  (Heb.  ii.  10).  2,  Concerning  the  wicked.  Jehovah  being  what  he  is,  the 
wicked  cannot  be  allowed  to  go  on  always  as  they  are.  "  Shall  he,"  the  Chaldean, 
'•  therefore  empty  his  net "  to  till  it  again  ?  Is  this  process  of  angling  and  dragging 
for  men  and  nations  to  go  on  for  ever?  Shall  he  "not  spare  to  slay  the  nations 
continually"?  the  prophet  asks;  meaning  by  the  question,  "No,  verily,  this  must 
come  to  an  end."  And  those  who  have  reflected  deepest  on  the  problem  have 
perceived  that,  at  the  longest,  the  triumph  of  the  wicked  is  but  short  (Job  xx.  6 ; 
Ps.  xxxvii.  35,  36 ;  Ixxiii.  18—20),  and  that  their  experience  of  prosperity,  however 
long  it  may  be,  will  only  in  the  end  aggravate  their  misery,  unless  before  the  end  they 
repent  of  their  wickedness,  and  turn  to  God  in  faith,  humility,  love,  and  righteous- 
ness. "The  immortal  gods,"  wrote  Julius  Csssar,  in  his  'Gallio  War'  (i.  14),  "are 
accustomed,  the  more  heavily  to  pain  by  reverse  of  fortune  those  of  whom  for  their 
wickedness  they  wish  to  be  avenged,  to  grant  to  them  in  the  mean  while  a  larger  share 
of  prosperity  and  a  longer  period  of  impunity." 

Learn ;  1.  That  the  good  man's  best  comfort  in  affliction  and  stay  in  adversity  is 
the  character  of  God  (Deut.  xxxiii.  27;  Isa.  Iii.  21 ;  2  Cor.  i.  3).  2.  That  vrith  God 
silence  is  not  to  be  understood  as  equivalent  to  consent  (Ps.  1,  21).  3.  'That  it  is 
God's  custom  to  make  men  reap  as  they  have  sown,  to  reward  perverseness  with 
perverseness,  and  iniquity  with  iniquity  (Ps.  xviii.  26;  Matt.  vii.  2;  Gal.  vL  7). 
4.  That  governments  tend  to  the  good  order  of  society,  and  are  to  be  respected  and 
obeyed  even  when  not  perfect  (Rom.  xiii.  1,  2).  5.  That  the  reign  of  wickedness  will 
on*  day  terminate  (Ps.  cxlv.  20 ;  Matt.  xxi.  11 ;  1  Oor.  iv.  25). 


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  11 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — The  title.    This  introduces  us  to  the  writer  and  his  work.    Note — 

I.  His  NAME.  Sdbakkuk  s  i.e.  "One  who  embraces"  —  a  name  singularly 
appropriate  in  its  significance  to  the  man  who  "rested  in  the  Lord,  and  waited 
patiently  for  him  "  through  the  dark  days,  Luther  applied  the  name  to  the  prophet's 
regard  for  his  people,  "embracing  them,  taking  them  to  bis  arms,  comforting 
them,  and  lifting  tbem  up  as  one  embraces  a  weeping  child,  to  quiet  it  with  the 
assurance  that,  if  God  will,  it  shall  be  better  soon."  Jewish  tradition  has  identified 
him  with  the  son  of  the  Shunammlte  woman  (2  Kings  iv.  18),  and  with  the  watch- 
man sent  by  Isaiah  to  the  watch-tower  (zxi.)  to  look  towards  Babylon.  But  with 
these  and  other  merely  fanciful  and  utterly  unreliable  traditions  the  silence  of 
Scripture  veiry  favourably  contrasts.  It  makes  him  known  to  us  through  his  teaching. 
It  is  the  message  rather  than  the  messenger  that  is  presented  to  us  here ;  yet  through 
the  message  we  get  to  know  the  man  so  intimately  that  he  becomes  to  us  quite  a 
familiar  presence.  « 

II.  His  OFFIOE.  "  Habakkuk  tlte  prophet."  This  title  clearly  indicates  that  he  had 
been  appointed  to  the  prophetical  offlce.  Many  men  in  Old  Testament  times  uttered 
certain  prophecies,  as  for  instance  Moses,  David,  Solomon,  Daniel,  but  we  do  not  find 
the  title  "  the  prophet "  appended  to  their  names,  it  being  given  simply  to  such  as 
were  specially  chosen  and  set  apart  to  this  office.  The  closing  words  of  the  book 
(ch.  iii.  19)  have  led  some  to  regard  him  as  belonging  to  one  of  the  Levitical  families, 
and  as  appointed  to  take  part  in  the  liturgical  services  of  the  temple ;  but  of  thia  we 
cannot  speak  with  any  degree  of  certainty,  though  probably  it  was  so. 

III.  His  FBOPHECY.  This  is  described  as  "  the  burden  which  Habakkuk  the 
prophet  did  see."  The  phrase  is  peculiar,  but  the  meaning  is  clear.  He  saw  a  vision 
of  coming  events,  in  which  solemn  Divine  judgments  would  be  executed  both  against 
his  own  people  and  their  oppressors ;  and  the  scene  of  impending  woe  oppressed  his 
spirit  and  lay  as  a  heavy  weight  upon  his  bouL  Still,  dark  as  the  outlook  was,  and 
oppressed  in  heart  as  he  felt  himself  to  be  amidst  the  mysteries  of  life  viewed  in  rela- 
tion to  the  Divine  government,  he  maintained  throughout  unswervingly  his  trust  in 
Ood ;  and  which  so  clearly  pervaded  his  spirit  and  so  repeatedly  revealed  itself  in  his 
expressions  as  amply  to  justify  the  representation  that  he  is  "eminently  the  prophet 
of  reverential,  awe-filled  faith."  Viewed  from  a  literary  standpoint,  his  prophecy  may 
well  exlte  our  profoundest  interest.  Critical  writers  with  one  consent  bear  testimony 
to  the  beauty  of  his  contributions  to  these  sacred  oracles.  Ewald  calls  the  book 
"  Habakkuk's  Pindaric  Ode."  Delitzsch  says  of  it,  "  His  language  is  classical  through- 
out, fiill  of  rare  and  select  words  and  turns,  which  are  to  some  extent  exclusively  his 
own,  whilst  his  view  and  mode  of  presentation  bear  the  seal  of  original  force  and 
finished  beauty."  Pusey  observes,  "  Certainly  the  purity  of  his  language  and  the 
sublimity  of  his  imagery  is,  humanly  speaking,  magnificent;  his  measured  cadence  is 
impressive  in  its  simplicity."  But  valuable  as  this  composition  is  in  this  respect,  its 
great  charm  consists  in  the  spirit  of  holy  trustfulness  which  it  breathes.  As  we 
ponder  over  its  contents  we  feel  at  every  stage  our  lack  of  confidence  in  our  God 
reproved,  and  are  impelled  to  cry,  "Lord,  we  believe:  help  thou  our  unbelief"  (Mark 
ix.  24);  "Lord,  increase  our  faith"  (Luke  xvii.  5). — S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  2—4. — 2%«  eUgy.  In  this  brief  and  plaintive  strain  we  have — 
I.  An  earnest  heabt  eeflbotino  upon  the  prevailing  iniquity.  Whatever 
may  have  been  the  exact  date  of  this  prophecy,  it  is  clear  that  the  writer  stood 
connected  with  the  close  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  the  eve  of  the  Captivity,  and  that 
he  presents  to  us,  in  a  few  graphic  touches,  a  vivid  description  of  the  depravity  then 
prevailing  in  the  land.  He  bitterly  laments  over :  1.  The  insecurity  of  property. 
"  Spoiling  and  violence  are  before  me  "  (ver.  3).  2.  The  strifes  of  parties  and /actiont. 
"And  there  are  that  raise  up  strife  and  contention"  (ver.  3).  3.  Laxity  in  the 
udministratioa  of  the  Law.  "  The  Law  is  slacked,  and  judgment  doth  never  go  forth  " 
(ver.  4).  4.  2%«  good  suffering  unjtistly  at  the  hands  of  the  evil.  "  The  wicked  doth 
•nmpass  about  the  rij^teous  "  (ver.  4).     5.  ITie  openness  and  audacity  of  wrong-dowi 


12  THE  BOOK  .OP  HABAKKTJK.  [oh.  L 1—17. 

<n  thu  tvU  eowie.  fie  speaks  of  all  this  iniquity  as  being  patent  to  the  observer, 
tJometimes,  "  vice,  provoked  to  shame,  borrows  the  colour  of  a  virtuous  deed ; "  but  in 
this  instance  there  was  no  attempt  at  concealment  or  disguise,  and  no  sense  of  shame. 
"  Spoiling  and  violence  are  before  me  "  (ver.  3). 

n.   An    earnest    heart    yearning    tor   the   establishment    of    BiaHTBOnSNESS, 

AND  IMPATIENT  OP  DELAY.  The  life  of  piety  is  undoubtedly  the  happy  life  (Ps.  i.  1). 
Still,  it  is  not  always  sunshine,  even  with  the  good.  There  are  times  in  theii 
experience  when  the  sky  becomes  overcast,  and  when  they  become  depressed  and  sad 
at  heart.  Although  possessing  "  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit,"  the  pledge  and  the 
earnest  of  the  enjoyment  at  length  of  a  fulness  of  blessing,  they  often  "  groan  within 
themselves"  (Rom.  viii.  23).  And  a  very  large  ingredient  in  the  cup  of  sorrow  the 
good  have  to  drink  is  that  occasioned  by  beholding  the  blighting  effects  of  sin.  As 
they  witness  men  unprincipled  in  their  dealings,  impure  in  their  speech,  dishonourable 
in  their  transactions,  and  as  they  note  the  pernicious  influence  and  effects  of  such 
conduct,  their  hearts  are  rendered  sad,  and  they  are  constrained  to  long  ardently  for 
the  time  when  sin  shall  be  completely  vanquished,  when  it  shall  be  banished  from  this 
fair  vmiverse  of  God,  and  when  there  shall  come  in  all  its  perfection  the  reign  of  truth 
and  righteousness,  peace  and  love.  This  spirit  runs  through  the  prophet's  mournful 
strain  (vers.  2 — 4).  We  recognize  it  also  in  the  words  of  David,  "  Oh  let  the  wicked- 
ness of  the  wicked  1 "  etc.  (Ps.  vii.  9),  and  of  Jeremiah  (xiv.  8,  9),  and  impelled  by  it 
many  are  crying  to-day,  "  Why  is  his  chariot  so  long  in  coming  ?  Why  tarry  the 
wheels  of  his  chariot  ?  " 

IIL   An   BAKNEBT   heart   DIBBCTING   its   impassioned   appeal   to   Gk)D   IN    FBATBB. 

(Ver.  2.)  The  seer  did  not  question  the  Divine  rectitude,  but  his  spirit  was  perturbed 
at  the  delay,  and  he  yearned  with  a  holy  impatience  for  the  vindicntion  of  the  honour 
of  his  God.  And  under  such  conditions  no  course  is  so  commendable  as  that  of  pouring 
our  plaint  into  the  ear  of  Infinite  Love.  Prayer  at  such  seasons  will  be  found  helpful : 
1.  In  tranquillizing  the  spirit,  quieting  and  subduing  agitation,  and  imparting  a  sense 
of  restfulness  and  peace.  2.  In  linking  our  human  weakness  to  God's  almighty 
strength,  and  thus  fitting  us  for  renewed  service  to  him.  "  Toil,  pain,  doubt,  terror, 
difficulty, — all  retreat  before  the  recognition  of  a  great  life-purpose  wrought  out  in 
entire  dependence  upon  Heaven."  3.  In  causing  light  to  shine  through  the  dark  cloud 
of  mystery,  helping  us  to  understand  the  Divine  plan  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  16,  etc.),  and  so 
preparing  the  way  for  our  exchanging  the  mournful  elegy  for  the  rapturous  melody  of 
thankful  and  adoring  praise. — S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — The  Divine  working  against  evil  and  its  doers.  We  have  expressed 
here  God's  response  to  the  impassioned  appeal  addressed  to  him  by  his  servant.  There 
is  much  that  is  suggestive  in  these  words  as  bearing  upon  the  Divine  working  against 
those  who  practise  sin  and  who  persist  in  its  commission.     Note — 

I.  That  God  is  not  indiffebbnt  with  bespbct  to  pbbvailino  ungodliness.  The 
seer  had  asked,  "How  long?"  (ver.  2).  He  was  impatient  of  delay.  But  whilst  there 
is  this  lingering  on  the  part  of  God,  so  that  "judgment  against  an  evil  work  is  not 
executed  speedily "  (Ecoles.  viii.  11),  this  is  owing  to  the  Divine  long-suffering  and 
patience,  and  does  not  arise  from  indifference  and  unconcern  being  cherished  by  the 
Most  High  in  reference  to  iniquity.  Wrong-doing  is  ever  before  him,  is  closely 
observed  by  him.  It  is  the  source  of  displeasure  to  him  who  is  perfect  in  purity,  and 
the  requital  of  it  will  assuredly  be  experienced  by  transgressors.  Though  it  may  tarry, 
it  will  surely  come.     "  I  will  work  a  work,"  etc.  (ver.  5). 

II.  That  God,  in  the  order  of  his  providence,  in  executing  his  judgments, 
ovberdlbs  the  actions  op  evil  men,  and  causes  these  to  fulpil  his  righteous- 
ness. The  verses  contain  a  wonderfully  graphic  account  of  the  Chaldeans  who  were 
to  be  the  instruments  of  the  Divine  chastisement  of  Judah  (compare  with  them  Isa.  xiv. 
6, 16, 17),  and  whilst  in  reading  them,  so  vivid  is  the  portrayal,  that  we  seem  to  see 
the  Chaldean  horsemen  sweeping  through  the  land  like  the  simoom,  causing  death  and 
desolation  to  follow  in  their  track,  we  also  have  presented  to  us  certain  traits  most 
clearly  indicative  of  their  gross  wickedness.  (1)  Their  proud  ambition  to  possess  th« 
dwelling-places  that  were  not  theirs  (ver.  6)  ;  (2)  their  fierceness  and  cruelty  (ver.  7); 
(3)  their  self-sufficiency  (ver.  7):  (\)  their  ■"mrn  <ind  contempt  (var.  10)  and  tboir 


OH.  1, 1—17,]  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  II 

blasphemy  (ver.  11); — all  pass  in  review  before  us.  And  these  were  chosen  to  be  the 
executors  of  the  Divine  judgments!  "For,  lo,  I  raise  up  the  Chaldeans"  (ver.  6), 
The  meaning  is  that  God,  in  his  providence,  would  permit  "that  bitter  and  hasty 
nation  "  to  be  a  scourge  to  his  chosen  people  on  account  of  their  transgression.  The 
Chaldeans,  in  seeking  their  own  ends,  should  be  made  to  fulfil  the  Divine  behests. 
Man  is  wondrously  free  to  act ;  and  he  often  does  act  without  any  regard  to  truth  and 
righteousness.  The  world,  indeed^  is  full  of  evil-doers  acting  according  to  their  own 
devices;  but  "he  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens"  is  guiding  and  directing  all  to  the 
accomplishment  of  his  own  high  purposes  and  to  the  fulfilment  of  his  holy  and 
gracious  will. 

III.  That  God,  in  opebatinq  aoainbt  evil  and  its  doebb,  sometimes  employs 
DKEXFEOTED  AGENTS.  "  The  Hebrew  state  was  at  this  time  in  close  alliance  with  the 
Chaldean  state,  an  alliance  so  close  and  friendly  that  the  Hebrew  politicians  had  no 
fear  of  its  rupture.  Yet  it  was  in  this  wholly  unexpected  form  that  the  Divine 
judgment  was  to  come  upon  them.  The  Chaldeans  in  whom  they  trusted,  on  whom 
they  leaned,  were  to  give  the  death-blow  to  the  dynasty  of  David."  All  the  material  ■ 
and  moral  forces  of  the  universe  are  under  the  Divine  control,  and  in  ways  and  by 
means  little  anticipated  his  retributions  often  overtake  his  adversaries. 

IV.  That  this  Divine  wobkino  against  evil  and  its  doebs  bbcbives  but  tabdt 
BECOGNITION  AND  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  PBOM  MAN.  (Ver.  5.)  The  retributions  have  to 
light  upon  them  ere  they  will  believe.  "They  cry.  Peace  and  safety  :  till  sudden 
destruction  comes  upon  them "  (1  Thess.  v.  3).  So  has  it  been  in  the  past,  and  so, 
upon  the  authority  of  Christ,  will  it  be  in  the  future  (Matt.  xxiv.  27—29).  Still, 
amidst  this  unconcern  and  unbelief,  the  duty  of  the  messenger  of  God  is  clear.  He 
must  "  cry  aloud."  He  must  bid  men  "  behold,"  "  regard,"  and  "  wonder,"  and  then, 
"  whether  they  hear  or  forbear,"  "  he  has  delivered  his  soul." — S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  12. — The  inspiration  of  hope.  Hope  is  the  expectation  of  future  good.  The 
cherishing  of  this  spirit,  even  as  it  respects  the  affairs  of  everyday  life,  yields  strength 
and  courage,  whilst  the  centering  this  in  the  glorious  realities  God  has  revealed 
imparts  joy  and  gladness  to  the  heart.  To  the  man  of  piety  hope  is  the  helmet, 
serving  as  a  protection  and  defence  in  the  day  of  conflict,  and  the  anchor  rendering  his 
spirit  peaceful  and  secure  amidst  the  storms  of  life. 

I.  CONSIDEB  THE  PBOPHET'S  BBASONINO  IN  THIS  VEBBB  IN  ITS  APPLICATION  TO 
HIMBELJ  AND  HIS  NATION,  AND  NOTE  HOW   THE   IN8PIBATWN   OF   HOPE   FIBBD   HIS  SOtJI,. 

1.  The  seer  directed  his  thoughts  to  the  contemplation  of  the  character  of  his  God. 
Two  aspects  of  this  were  vividly  present  to  his  mind.  (1)  God's  eternal  duration. 
"  Art  thou  not  from  everlasting  ?  "  etc.  (ver.  12).  (2)  His  infinite  purity.  "  Mine  Holy 
One"  (ver.  12).  2.  Associated  with  these  thoughts  concerning  God  in  the  mind  of 
the  prophet  we  have  the  recognition  of  the  relationship  sustained  by  this  Eternal  and 
Holy  One  to  himself  and  the  nation  whose  interests  lay  near  and  pressed  with  such 
weight  upon  his  heart.  He  and  his  people  were  the  chosen  of  Heaven.  God  had 
entered  into  covenant  relations  with  them.  They  had  been  the  objects  of  his  ever- 
gracious  care  and  providential  working.  He  had  not  dealt  thus  with  any  other  peopleu 
They  could  call  him  theirs.  "0  Lord  my  God,  mine  Holy  One"  (ver.  12).  3.  And 
by  associating  together  these  thoughts  of  God  and  of  his  relationship  to  his  people  he 
gathered,  in  the  troublous  times  upon  which  he  had  fallen,  the  inspiration  of  hope. 
One  great  difficulty  with  him  arose  from  the  threatened  extinction  of  his  nation.  He 
had  mourned  over  the  national  guilt,  and  had  sought  earnestly  in  prayer  the  Divine 
interposition.  The  response,  however,  to  his  impassioned  cry  unto  God  was  different 
from  what  he  had  expected.  The  revelation  made  to  him  of  the  approaching  Chaldean 
invasion  of  his  country  seemed  to  carry  with  it  the  complete  annihilation  of  the 
national  anticipations,  and  the  utter  desolation  and  extinction  of  those  who  had  been 
specially  favoured  of  God.  Surely,  thought  he,  this  cannot  be.  God  is  eternal ;  his 
purposes  must  be  fulfilled.  Then  "  we  shall  not  die  "  (ver.  12).  God  is  holy.  Then 
evil  cannot  ultimately  be  victorious.  It  could  only  be  for  chastisement  and  correction 
that  the  threatened  trials  should  come.  "  0  Lord,  thou  hast  ordained  them  for 
judgment;  and,  0  mighty  God,  thou  hast  established  them  for  correction"  (ver.  12). 
And  by  such  reasoning  hop©  became  the  balm  of  healing  to  his  troubled  heart,  th« 


14  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  [oh.  L 1—17, 

bow  of  promise  cast  across  his  stormiest  cloud,  the  bright  star  kindled  in  his  darkest 
sky. 
n.  Obsebye  that  the  fbofhet'b  beasonino  admits  of  a   uobe  extended 

BAHOE  OF  application,  AND    HAS   AK  IMPOBTANT   BEABINO    UPON  THE   IMMOETALITT 

OF  MAN.  Jehovah  is  "  from  everlasting."  He  is  "  the  eternal  God ; "  hence,  our 
immortal  destiny  :  "We  shall  not  die."  Surely  the  Divine  Father  will  not  allow  his 
children  to  fade  away  and  be  no  more.  Certainly,  he  whose  tender  love  to  his 
children  the  love  of  human  parents  so  faintly  images,  will  not  dwell  through  ths 
eternal  ages  and  "  leave  himself  childless  when  time  shall  end." 

"  Souli  that  of  his  own  good  life  partake, 
He  loves  as  his  own  self;  dear  as  his  eye 
They  are  to  him ;  he'll  never  them  forsake; 

When  they  shall  die,  then  God  himself  shall  die : 
They  live,  they  live  in  blest  eternity." 

(Henry  More.) 

It  may  be  laid  that  this  reasoning,  however  concise  and  seemingly  conclusive,  is  after 
all  based  upon  probability.  We  grant  it,  and  whilst  refusing  to  undervalue  its  worth, 
we  thankfully  turn  even  from  these  beautiful  words  of  the  noble  prophet,  "  Art  thou 
not  from  everlasting,  0  Lord  my  God,  mine  Holy  One  ?  we  shall  not  die,"  and  fix  our 
thoughts  upon  the  ^surances,  so  authoritative  and  so  certain,  of  the  world's  Redeemer. 
"Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,"  etc.  (John  xiv.  1 — 3);  "  I  am  the  Resurrection," 
etc.  (John  xi.  25,  26) ;  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also"  (John  xiv.  19).— S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  12. — Thehenefits  of  lif^s  adversities.  "0  Lord,  thou  hast  ordained  them  for 
judgment ;  and,  0  mighty  God,  thou  hast  established  them  for  correction."  This  is  a 
second  inference  drawn  by  the  prophet.  He  not  only  inferred,  from  what  he  knew  of 
the  Divine  character,  that  his  people  should  not  be  utterly  destroyed  by  the  adversities 
which  were  about  to  overtake  them — "  We  shall  not  die  " — but  also  that  these  coming 
judgments  should  be  made  to  toork/or  thsir  good.  "  0  Lord,  thou  hast  ordained,"  etc. 
(ver.  12).  God's  chastisements  are  not  directed  to  the  overthrow  but  to  the  salvation 
of  those  upon  whom  they  are  inflicted.  He  chastens  men  sore,  but  does  not  give  them 
over  unto  death.  The  dark  scenes  through  which  the  frail  and  erring  children  of  men 
are  led  are  designed  to  contribute  to  their  weal.  How?  Well,  they  operate  in 
various  ways. 

L  Thbt  teach  us  that  we  are  not  to  Expect  to  have  ottb  own  will,  but 

THAT  THEBE  IB   OnE   HIGHBB    THAN  ODBSBLVES,   TO    WHOSE   WILL   WE   HUST    *T.T.  BOW. 

II.  They  lead  us  to  ebflection,  and  abe  the  means  of  beveauno  to  us  cub 

PAST   SHOBTOOMINQS   AND  FAILINGS. 

IIL  Thkt  bender  us  mobe  susceptiblb  to  becbivino  the  TEAOHINaS  OF  GoD'g 
OWN  Spibit. 

IV.  ThET  BAISB  OUB  THOUGHTS  FBOM  EARTH  TOWABDS   GoD  AND  HEAVEN. 

V.  They  being  us  back  when  we  have   wandered  fbom  cub  God,  and  abe 

THE  MEANS  OP  BESTOBINQ  TO  US  THE  WARMTH  AND  FERVOUR  OF  TRUE  PIETY.     Whilst, 

therefore,  suffering  considered  in  itself  is  not  good,  yet  instrumentally  it  is  desirable, 
and,  if  we  are  rightly  exercised  by  it,  will  help  us  to  attain  unto  a  holier  and  more 
heavenly  life.  So  David  (Ps.  cxix.  71,  67).  So  Manasseh  (2  Ohron.  xxxiii.  11 — 13). 
It  is  because  we  are  so  slow  to  learn  the  lessons  our  sorrows  are  intended  to  teach  us 
that  it  is  "through  much  tribulation  "  that  we  are  to  enter  the  kingdom  prepared  for 
the  saints  of  God.  We  need  these  threshings  of  the  inner  spiritual  man  in  order  that 
the  chaff  may  be  separated  from  the  wheat,  and  we  become  thus  prepared  for  the 
heavenly  gamer.  Let  us  accept  all  our  griefs  as  precious  tokens  of  the  Divine  Father's 
love,  and  make  them  our  convoy  to  bear  us  up  to  him. — S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  16. — The  pride  of  human  sufficiency.  The  reference  is  to  the  Chaldeans.  They 
would,  in  due  course,  invade  Judah,  and  should  be  successful  in  their  invasion.  The 
"sinful  nation"  should  fall  into  their  hands  as  fish  into  the  net  of  the  angler ;  and, 
intoxicated  by  their  success,  they  should  congratulate  themselves  upon  their  aobieve- 
mants  and  adore  their  military  prowess  and  skill,  and  their  wea))ons  of  war,  as  though 


C11.L1— 17.]  THE   BOOK  OF   HABAKKUK.  W 

these  had  won  the  victoiy.  "  Therefore  they  saoriice,"  etc.  (ver.  16).  They  should 
be  lifted  up  with  the  pride  of  human  sufBciency.    ObseiTe — 

I.   SrrOGEBB  IB  EVEB  8E0UBED  AS  THE  BEBTOWMENT  OB  BT  THE  FEBUIBSION  OF  GoD. 

1.  Temporal  sticcess  it  thus  gained.  The  age  in  which  we  live  is  an  age  of  earnest  toil, 
of  restless  activity.  It  is  becoming  more  and  more  felt  that  a  man  cannot  expect  to 
make  headway  apart  from  continuous,  energetic  work.  And  this  is  a  healthy  "  sign 
of  the  times."  It  reminds  us  that  life  is  too  valuable  a  gift  to  be  frittered  away.  It 
contrasts,  stiikingly  and  pleasingly,  with  those  periods  in  which  ease,  luxury,  and 
sloth  were  deified  and  adored.  There  is  dignity  in  labour.  The  danger  lies  in  the 
non-recognition  of  God  as  the  Bestower  of  the  prosperity  secured,  and  in  ascribing  the 
success  achieved  wholly  to  ourselves.  The  true  spirit  is  that  which  prompts  the  acknow- 
ledgment, "  All  things  come  of  thee "  (1  Chron.  xxix.  14).  The  Lord  is  "  Giver  of 
alL  Success  is  sometimes  achieved  by  bad  men.  By  fraud,  oppression,  reckless 
speculation,  and  by  taking  meau  advantage,  "  the  portion"  of  such  is  "made  fat "  and 
"  their  meat  plenteous ; "  and  in  such  cases  all  this  ia  through  the  all- wise  although 
often  inscrutable  permission  of  the  Most  High.  2.  Spiritual  success  is  also  thus  gained. 
In  holy  service  we  are  but  the  instruments  employed  by  God.  The  power  is  his,  and 
the  hononr  should  all  be  laid  at  his  feet.  Baxter,  when  complimented  at  the  close 
of  his  career  upon  the  usefulness  of  his  writings,  said,  "  I  was  but  a  pen  in  the  hand  ol 
my  God,  and  what  honour  is  due  to  a  pen  ?  " 

IL  Men,  foeoetful  of  this  and  TEAcma  to  themselves  the  suooebs  achisted, 
BECOME  EI.ATED  WITH  THE  PBisE  OF  HUUAN  BUFFiciEKOT.  "  Therefore  they  sacrifice 
unto  their  net,"  etc.  (ver.  16).  "  They  say  in  their  heart,  My  power  and  the  might  of 
mine  hand  hath  gotten  me  this  wealth  "  (Deut.  viii.  17).  So  Pharaoh  said,  "  My  river 
is  mine  own,  and  I  have  made  it  for  myself"  (Ezek,  xxix.  3).  So  Kebuchadnezzar 
said,  "  Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  I  have  built,"  etc.  (Dan.  iv.  30).  Fasey  refers 
in  illustration  of  this  to  certain  North  American  Indians,  "  who  designate  their  bow 
and  arrow  as  the  only  beneficent  deities  whom  they  know ; "  to  the  Bomans  sacrificing 
to  their  military  standards ;  and  to  the  French  referred  to  in  the  Times  during  the 
Frinco-German  War  as  "  almost  worshipping  the  mitrailleuse  as  a  goddess."  And  this 
is  still  our  periL  Because  our  possibilities  are  so  great,  we  think  that  we  can  win  all 
blessings  for  ourselves.  Everywhere  we  see  the  worship  of  our  human  powers  and 
means — the  workman  worshipping  the  strength  of  his  arm  and  the  deftness  of  his 
fingers,  the  man  of  business  worshipping  his  skill  and  acuteness,  and  the  man  of 
science,  human  knowledge.  Nor  is  the  Church  of  God  free  from  this  spirit :  for  there 
is  far  too  much  of  trusting  to  forms  and  ceremonies,  to  worldly  alliances,  to  machinery 
and  organization,  as  though  these  were  the  great  essentials,  and  far  too  little  of  "  look- 
ing up  unto  the  hills  whence  cometh  her  help." 

IIL  All  bcoh  slobtino  is  vain.  1.  It  reveals  self-ignorance.  For  no  one  who 
really  understands  himself  could  possibly  cherish  this  spirit.  2.  It  leads  to  oppression. 
Tfae  man  who  has  exalted  notions  of  his  own  powers  and  doings  is  likely  to  be  pruud 
and  overbearing  in  his  conduct  towards  others.  3.  It  is  offensive  to  Ood.  "He 
resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble  "  (Jas.  iv.  6).  "  In  all  our  ways, 
therefore,  let  us  acknowledge  him,"  and  as  we  prosper  in  our  course  ascribe  the  success 
gained  to  his  favour  and  blessing.    In  the  language  of  Keble,  let  us  say — 

"  Should  e'er  thy  wonder-working  graot 
Triumph  by  our  weak  arm, 
Let  not  our  sinful  fancy  trace 
Aught  human  in  the  charm : 

"  To  our  own  nets  ne'er  bow  we  down. 
Lest  on  the  eternal  shore 
The  angels,  while  our  draught  they  own, 
Bejeot  us  evermore." 

B.  D.  H. 

Vers.  13 — ^16, 17 ;  ch.  ii.  1 — 4. — Dark  probleme  and  man's  trite  attitude  in  relation 
to  t?iem.  I.  The  mtsteby  oonkegted  with  the  Divine  ofebations.  (Vers.  I'd— 
16.  17.)    The  prophet  in  these  words  expressed  the  perplexity  of  his  mind  and  the 


18  THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK.  [CH.  1. 1— 17 

consequent  sadness  of  his  heart.  He  had  bitterly  mourned  over  the  prevailing  guilt  of 
his  people,  and  had  earnestly  appealed  to  Heaven  to  vindicate  the  right.  The  Divine 
response,  however,  filled  him  with  distress.  That  Divine  chastisement  should  be 
inflicted  upon  his  country  he  understood  and  approved,  but  that  the  Chaldeans,  who 
were  still  greater  transgressors,  should  be  permitted  to  run  over  the  land,  and  to  lead 
his  people  into  captivity,  baffled  and  perplexed  him.  Yea,  more ;  whilst  the  good  in 
his  land  were  but  few,  yet  there  were  to  be  found  such ;  and  how  could  it  be  that  these 
should  suffer,  and  suffer  at  the  hands  of  the  heathen  who  were  so  gross  and  iniquitous  ? 
Surely,  thought  he,  this  scarcely  accorded  with  the  thought  of  the  Divine  purity,  and 
of  the  rectitude  of  God's  providential  government.  And  hence  he  cried  in  his  perplexity, 
"  Thou  art,"  etc.  (vers.  13 — 15, 17).  There  is  mystery  in  the  Divine  operations ;  dark 
problems  confront  us  as  we  reflect  upon  the  Divine  working.  "  How  unsearchable  are 
his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past  finding  out  1 "  (Rom.  xi.  33) ;  "  Thy  way  is  in  the 
sea ;"  i.e.  "  far  down  in  secret  channels  of  the  deep  is  his  roadway;  "  "  Thy  footsteps 
are  not  known;"  i.e.  "none  can  follow  thy  tracks"  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  19).  One  man  enjoys 
the  endowment  of  reason ;  another  is  left  a  lielpless  lunatic.  One  has  all  things  and 
abounds ;  anotlier  is  well-nigh  destitute  of  the  common  necessaries  of  life.  One  has 
"  no  changes ; "  another  is  being  continually  subjected  to  adverse  infiuences.  We  see 
the  mother  dying  just  after  she  has  given  birth  to  her  child ;  we  behold  the  young  and  the 
beautiful  passing  "  out  of  sunshiny  life  into  silent  death ; "  we  behold  the  earnest  toiler 
stricken  down  in  the  very  prime  of  life,  whilst  useless  and  injurious  lives  are  preserved 
and  "  burn  to  the  socket."  The  sceptic  asks  us  to  reconcile  all  this  with  the  thought 
of  God's  wise  and  loving  rulership,  and,  failing  this,  to  join  him  in  his  indifference  and 
practical  atheism  ;  but  to  do  so  would  be  to  go  contrary  to  the  deepest  convictions  of 
our  hearts,  and  to  the  clearest  testimony  of  our  consciences.  We  will  rather  seek  to 
cherish  a  faith  which  will  pierce  the  mists,  and  enable  us,  despite  such  anomalies,  to 
recognize  the  goodness  and  the  love  of  God. 

II.  The  true  attitude  in  belation  to  these  dark  pboblbms.  1.  The  attitude 
of  prayer.  Tiie  seer  took  all  his  fears  and  forebodings,  his  difficulties  and  discourage- 
ments, his  doubts  and  perplexities,  to  God  in  prayer  (vers.  13 — 15,  17).  As  we  pray 
light  often  is  cast  upon  the  hidden  path.  2.  The  attitude  of  expectancy.  "  I  will 
stand  upon  my  watch,"  etc.  (ch.  ii.  1).  We  are  to  "wait  patiently  for  the  Lord,"  and  there 
is  ever  to  enter  into  this  waiting  the  element  of  watchfulness.  We  are  to  look  for  further 
light,  even  here,  upon  the  works  and  ways  of  our  God,  and  we  shaU  assuredly  miss 
this  unless  we  cherish  the  spirit  of  holy  expectation.  "  Many  a  proffered  succour  from 
heaven  goes  past  us  because  we  are  not  standing  on  our  watch-tower  to  catch  the  far- 
off  indications  of  its  approach,  and  to  fling  open  the  gates  of  our  hearts  for  its  entrance  " 
(Maclaren).  Z.  The  attitude  of  trust.  "The  just  shall  live  by  his  faith  "(ch.ii.  4).  It 
is  not  in  the  process,  but  in  the  issue,  that  the  wisdom  and  rightness  of  the  Divine 
operations  will  be  fully  manifested,  and  for  the  issue  we  must  trustfully  wait, 
Tennyson  sings — 

"  Who  can  bo  forecast  the  years, 
And  find  in  loss  a  gain  to  match  ? 
Or  reach  a  hand  through  time  to  oatoh 
The  far-off  interest  of  tears  ?  " 

In  God's  economy  there  is  a  gain  to  match  every  loss.  Tears  do  bear  interest ;  only 
we  cannot  "  forecast  the  years,"  and  see  the  gain ;  we  cannot  reach  forth  and  seize  in 
advance  "  the  interest  of  tears."  But  however  far  off,  it  is  there.  We  shall  know 
more  and  more,  even  in  the  present  life,  as  God's  purposes  concerning  us  develop,  that 
all  things  are  working  together  for  our  good  (Rom,  viii.  28),  whilst  at  length  standing 
upon  the  heights  of  eternity,  and  gazing  back  upon  the  past  and  seeing  in  the  perfect 
light,  the  perfect  wisdom,  and  the  perfect  love,  we  shall  cry  with  adoring  eratituda. 
"He  hath  done  all  things  well  I "— S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  1 — i. — The  ery  of  a  good  man  under  the  perplexing  procedure  of  God.  "  Th« 
burden  which  Habakkuk  the  prophet  did  see.  0  Lord,  how  long  shall  I  cry,  and  thou 
wilt  not  hear  1  even  cry  out  unto  thee  of  violence,  and  then  wilt  not  save  1 "  etc.  Of 
Habakkuk  nothing  is  known  for  certainty.     The  fifth  and   lixth  v«rsaa  of  the  first 


OH  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK.  17 

chapter  tell  us  that  he  prophesied  before  that  series  of  invasions  by  the  Chaldeans 
which  ended  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  captivity  of  the  people — probably 
between  640  and  610  years  before  Christ.  He  was  therefore  contemporary  with 
Jeremiah  and  Zephaniah.  The  book  treats  of  the  wickedness  of  the  Jews,  the  infliction 
of  punishment  upon  the  Chaldeans,  and  the  destruction  of  the  latter  in  their  turn.  It 
has  also  a  splendid  ode,  composed  by  the  prophet  in  anticipation  of  their  deliverance 
from  Babylonish  captivity.  His  work  is  quoted  by  the  apostles  (Heb.  x.  37,  38  ;  Rom, 
i.  17  ;  QaL  iii.  11 ;  Acts  xiii.  41),  hence  it  was  regarded  as  having  Divine  authority. 
His  style,  in  dignity  and  sublimity,  is  not  surpassed  by  any  of  the  Hebrew  prophets. 
He  is  original.  His  utterances  are  bold  and  animated ;  his  descriptions  graphic  and 
pointed.  The  lyric  ode  contained  in  the  third  chapter  is  esteemed  by  most  biblical 
critics  as  one  of  the  most  splendid  and  magnificent  in  the  whole  compass  of  Hebrew 
poetry.  The  prophet  sets  forth  the  cause  of  the  Chaldean  invasion,  and  the  great 
wickedness  that  abounded  in  the  Jewish  nation  during  his  time.  This  was  the  burden 
of  his  discourse.  "  The  burden  which  Habakkuk  the  prophet  did  see."  What  was  the 
burden  ?  The  heavy  judgments  impending  over  his  nation.  He  saw  it  like  a  moun- 
tain with  his  prophetic  eye ;  nay,  he  felt  it  as  a  mountain  on  his  heart.  This  doom 
hanging  over  the  Jewish  people  was  indeed  an  intolerable  weight.  The  text  contains 
the  cry  of  a  good  man  under  the  ■perplexing  procedure  of  Qod — "  0  Lord,  how  long 
shall  I  cry  1 "    There  seem  to  be  two  elements  in  his  perplexity. 

I.  God's  afpabbnt  disreqabd  to  his  earnest  peater.  "  0  Lord,  how  long  shall 
I  cry,  and  thou  wilt  not  hear  1 "  Under  the  pressure  of  "  the  burden  "  that  was  resting 
on  his  heart,  viz.  the  moral  corruption  and  the  coming  doom  of  his  country,  it  would 
seem  that  he  had  often  cried  unto  the  Almighty  and  implored  his  interposition ;  but 
no  answer  had  come.  How  often  have  good  men  in  every  age  felt  that  God  disregarded 
their  supplications  1  They  cried  and  cried,  but  no  answer  came.  The  heavens  seemed 
like  brass ;  the  oracles  were  hushed.  It  was  thus  with  the  Syro-Phoenician  woman. 
Christ  for  a  time  not  only  treated  her  application  with  seeming  indifference,  but  he  even 
repulsed  her.  Why  are  not  the  prayers  of  good  men  immediately  answered?  In 
reply  to  this  question  three  undoulited  facts  should  be  borne  in  mind.  1.  That  impor- 
tunity of  sovi  is  necessary  to  qualify  for  the  appreciation  of  the  mercies  sought.  It  is 
not  until  a  man  is  made  to  feel  the  deep  necessity  of  a  thing  that  he  values  it  when  it 
comes.  If  we  obtained  from  the  Almighty  what  we  required  by  one  cry,  or  even  by  a 
series  of  mere  formal  applications,  the  boon  would  be  of  doubtful  service;  it  would 
scarcely  be  appreciated,  and  would  fail  to  fire  the  soul  with  the  sentiments  of  devout 
gratitude  and  praise.  It  is  not  what  God  gives  a  man  that  does  him  good ;  it  is  the 
state  of  mind  in  which  it  is  received  that  transmutes  it  either  into  a  blessing  or  a 
curse.  "  How  long  shall  I  cry ! "  How  long  ?  Until  the  sense  of  need  is  so  intensified 
as  to  qualify  for  the  reception  and  due  appreciation  of  the  blessing.  2.  That  the  exercise 
of  true  prayer  i*  in  itself  the  best  means  of  spiritual  culturt.  Conscious  contact  with 
God  is  essential  to  moral  excellence.  Tou  must  bring  the  sunbeam  to  the  seed  you 
have  sown,  if  you  would  have  the  seed  quickened  and  developed ;  and  you  must  bring 
Qod  into  conscious  contact  with  your  powers,  if  you  would  have  them  vivified  and 
brought  forth  into  strength  and  perfection.  True  prayer  does  this ;  it  is  the  soul 
realizing  itself  in  the  presence  of  him  "  who  quickeneth  all  things."  3.  That  prayers 
aire  answered  where  there  is  no  hestowment  of  the  Messing  invoked.  We  know  not  what 
to  pray  for ;  and  were  we  to  have  what  we  seek,  we  might  be  ruined.  Acquiescence 
in  the  Divine  will  is  the  highest  answer  to  all  true  prayer.  Christ  prayed  that  the  cup 
should  pass  from  him.  It  did  not  pass  from  him;  but,  instead,  there  came  to  him  the 
spirit  of  acquiescence  in  the  Divine  will :  "  Not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done."  This  is 
all  we  want.  Acquiescence  in  the  Divine  will  is  the  moral  perfection,  dignity,  and 
blessedness  of  all  creatures  in  the  universe.  With  these  facts  let  us  not  be  anxious 
about  the  apparent  disregard  of  God  to  our  prayers. 

II.  God's  apparent  disregard  to  the  moral  condition  of  bociett.  "Why  dost 
thou  show  me  iniquity,  and  cause  me  to  behold  grievance?  for  spoiling  and  violence 
are  before  me :  and  there  are  that  raise  up  strife  and  contention.  Therefore  the  Law  is 
slacked,  and  judgment  doth  never  go  forth :  for  the  wicked  doth  compass  about  the 
righteous ;  therefore  wrong  judgment  prooeedeth."  The  rendering  of  Delitzsch  is  both 
faithful  and  forceful,  "Why  dost  thou  let  me  see  mischief,  and  thou  lookeit  -xpon 

■  iiAiKtn. 


18  THE   BOOK   OF   HABAKKDK.  [oh.  1.  1—17 

dlBtrasB  ?  Devastation  and  violence  are  before  me ;  there  arises  strifa,  and  contention 
lifts  Itself  up.  Therefore  the  Law  is  benumbed,  and  justice  comes  not  forth  for  ever : 
for  sinners  encircle  the  righteous  man :  therefore  justice  goes  forth  perverted."  The 
substance  of  this  is  the  old  complaint, "  Wherefore  doth  the  way  6f  the  wicked  prosper  7 
wherefore  are  all  they  happy  that  deal  very  treacherously  ?  "  (Jer.  xii.  1).  Two  facts 
should  be  set  against  this  complaint.  1.  The  good  have  the  lest  of  it,  even  in  this  life. 
Goodness  is  its  own  reward.  Take  two  men — one  who  enjoys  the  love  and  fellowship  of 
God,  but  who  is  destitute  of  this  world's  good  and  lives  in  poverty ;  the  other,  in  whose 
heart  reigu  the  elements  of  wickedness,  but  who  has  an  abundance  of  the  things  of 
this  life.  Ask  which  of  the  two  is  the  happier.  The  former,  without  doubt.  Benevo- 
lence is  the  fountain  of  happiness,  and  selfishness  the  fountain  of  misery  in  both  worlds. 
In  this  world  give  me  poverty  and  piety  rather  than  riches  with  wickedness.  2,  That 
the  evil  will  have  the  worst  of  it  in  the  next  life.  There  is  no  doubt  about  this.  The 
parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus  teaches  this.  "  When  the  wicked  spring  as  the 
grass,  and  when  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  do  flourish,  it  is  that  they  shall  be  destroyed 
lor  ever  "  (Ps.  xcii.  7), 

Conclusion.  Pray  on,  brother.  "  Pray  without  ceasing.''  Thy  prayers  are  not  lost. 
Let  not  God's  apparent  disregard  to  the  supplications  of  his  people  and  the  moral 
condition  of  society  perplex  thy  judgment  and  disturb  thy  peace.  Wait  the  great 
explaining  day.     "  What  thou  knowest  not  now  thou  shalt  know  hereafter." — D.  T. 

Vers.  5 — 10. — The  doom  of  a  nation  of  conventional  religionists.  "  Behold  ye 
among  the  heathen,  and  regard,  and  wonder  marvellously :  for  I  will  work  a  work  in 
your  days,  which  ye  will  not  believe,  though  it  be  told  you.  For,  lo,  I  raise  up  the 
Chaldeans,  that  bitter  and  hasty  nation ;  which  shall  march  through  the  breadth  of  the 
land,"  etc.  In  these  verses  we  have  the  duom  of  a  nation  of  conventional  religionists. 
The  Jews  were  such  a  nation ;  they  prided  themselves  in  the  orthodoxy  of  their  faith, 
in  the  ceremonials  of  their  worship,  in  the  polity  of  their  Church.  "  To  them  pertained 
the  adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the  giving  of  the  Law,  and  the 
service  of  God,  and  the  promises  "  (Eom.  ix.  4).  But  they  had  now  become  abhorrent 
to  their  Maker.  He  was  weary  of  them,  and  he  threatens  them  with  a  terrible  doom; 
the  doom  was  so  terrible  that  "ye  will  not  believe,  though  it  be  told  you."  The 
doom  threatened  was  terrible  in  many  respects. 

L  It  was  to  be  wrouoht  by  the  instbumentalitt  of  a  wicked  nation.  "  I 
will  work  a  work  in  your  days,  which  ye  will  not  believe,  though  it  be  told  you.  For, 
lo,  I  raise  up  the  Chaldeans,  that  bitter  and  hasty  nation,  which  shall  march  througli 
the  breadth  of  the  land,  to  possess  the  dwelling-places  that  are  not  theirs."  "  Nabo* 
polassar  had  already  destroyed  the  mighty  empire  of  Assyria,  and  founded  the 
Chaldeo-Babylonian  rule.  He  had  made  himself  so  formidable  that  Necho  found 
it  necessary  to  march  an  army  against  him,  in  order  to  check  his  progress;  and,  though 
defeated  at  Megiddo,  he  had,  in  conjunction  with  his  son  Nebuchadnezzar,  gained  a 
complete  victory  over  the  Egyptians  at  Carchemish.  These  events  were  calculated  to 
alarm  the  Jews,  whose  country  lay  between  the  dominions  of  the  two  contending 
powers;  but,  accustomed  as  they  were  to  confide  in  Egypt  and  in  the  sacred  localities 
of  their  own  capital  (Isa,  ixxi.  1;  Jer.  vii,  4),  and  being  in  alliance  with  the  Chaldeans, 
they  were  indisposed  to  listen  to,  and  treated  with  the  utmost  incredulity,  any  pre- 
dictions which  described  their  overthrow  by  that  people"  (Henderson).  Observe  that  God 
employs  wicked  nations  as  his  instruments.  "  Lo,  I  raise  up  the  Chaldeans."  "  I  will 
work  a  work,"  lie  savs ;  but  how  ?  By  the  Chaldeans.  How  does  he  raise  up  wicked 
nations  to  do  his  wurk?  1.  Not  instigatingly.  He  does  not  inspire  them  with  wicked 
passions  necessary  to  qualify  them  for  the  infernal  woik  of  violence,  war,  rapine,  blood- 
shed. God  ci  luld  not  do  this.  The  diabolic  passions  are  in  them.  2.  Not  coerdvely. 
He  does  not  force  them  to  it ;  in  no  way  does  he  interfere  with  them.  They  are  the 
responaible  party.  They  go  forth  on  the  bloody  message  with  a  consciousness  of 
freedom.  How,  then,  does  he  "  raise  "  them  up  ?  He  permits  them.  He  could  prevent 
them;  but  he  allows  them.  He  gives  them  life,  capacity,  and  opportunities;  but  he 
does  not  inspire  or  coerce  them.  Now,  would  not  the  fact  that  the  destruction  of  the 
Israelites  would  come  upon  them  from  a  heathen  nation,  a  nation  which  they  despised, 
make  it  all  the  more  terrible  f 


OH.  1. 1—17.1  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  19 

II.  It  WA8  TO  BE  WROUGHT  WITH  EESisTLKss  TiOLBircB.  1.  Tkt  violence  would  he 
uncontrolled,  "  Their  judgment  and  their  dignity  shall  proceed  of  themselves."  They 
recognize  no  authority,  and  proudly  spurn  the  dictates  of  others.  "  They  recognize  no 
judge  save  themselves,  and  they  get  for  themselves  their  own  dignity,  without  needing 
others'  help.  It  will  be  vain  for  the  Jews  to  complain  of  their  tyrannical  judgments, 
for  whatever  the  Chaldeans  decree  they  will  do  according  to  their  own  will :  they  will 
not  brook  any  one  attempting  to  interfere  "  (Paugset).  2,  The  violence  would  be  rapid 
and  fierce.  "  Their  horses  are  swifter  than  the  leopards.''  A  naturalist  says  of  the 
leopard  that  it  runs  most  swiftly,  straight  on,  and  you  would  imagine  it  was  flying 
through  the  air.  "More  fierce  than  the  evening  wolves."  These  ravenous  beasts, 
having  skulked  all  the  day  away  from  the  light  of  heaven,  get  terribly  hungry  by  the 
night,  and  come  forth  with  a  fierce  voracity.  Like  the  swift  leopards  and  the  ravenous 
wolves,  we  are  here  told,  these  Chaldeans  would  come  forth.  Yes,  and  swifter  and 
more  ravenous  than  the  wolves,  like  the  hungry  eagle  on  its  pinions  that  "hasteth 
to  eat."  What  a  terrible  description  of  tlieir  doom  1  Alas  I  into  what  a  monster  sin 
has  transformed  man  !  he  becomes  leopard,  wolf,  eagle,  etc. 

III.  It  was  to  bb  wrotjoht  with  immense  havoo.  "  Their  faces  shall  sup  up  as 
the  east  wind,  and  they  shall  gather  the  captivity  as  the  sand.  And  they  shall  scoff  at 
the  kings,  and  the  princes  shall  be  a  scorn  unto  them :  they  shall  deride  every  strong- 
hold ;  for  they  shall  heap  dust,  and  take  it."  As  the  east  wind,  they  would  sweep 
through  the  country,  like  the  simoom,  spreading  devastation  wherever  it  passed;  and 
like  that  wind  woiild  bear  away  the  Jews  into  captivity,  thick  as  the  sand.  "They 
shall  scoff  at  the  kings,  and  the  princes  shall  be  a  scorn  unto  them."  They  would 
regard  all  the  great  magnates  of  Jud»a  with  a  haughty  contempt,  and  treat  them  with 
derision.  And  so  would  they  be  in  their  bloody  expedition.  They  would  regard  their 
very  conquering  power  as  their  god,  and  worship  their  success. 

CoNCLTTSlON.  All  this  was  to  come  upon  a  nation  of  conventional  reglionistt.  All 
peoples  whose  religion  is  that  of  profession,  letter,  form,  ceremony,  are  exposed  to  a 
doom  as  terrible  as  this. — D.  T. 

Vers.  12,  13. — 2%e  eternity,  providence,  and  holiness  of  Jehovah.  "  Art  thou  not 
from  everlasting,  0  Lord  my  God,  mine  Holy  One  ?  we  shall  not  die.  0  Lord,  thou 
hast  ordained  them  for  judgment ;  and,  O  mighty  God,  thou  hast  established  them  for 
correction,"  etc.  In  this  passage  the  prophet  refers  to  the  eternity,  the  providence, 
and  the  holiness  of  the  Jehovah  of  the  Jewish  people. 

I.  He  BsaARDS  his  eternity  ab  an  abodment  fob  thgib  fbksebvatiok.  "Art 
thou  not  from  everlasting,  0  Lord,  my  God,  mine  Holy  One?  we  shall  not  die." 
"However  terrible  and  prostrating  the  Divine  threatenings  may  sound,  the  prophet 
draws  consolation  and  hope  from  the  holiness  of  the  faithful  covenant  God,  that  Israel 
will  not  perish,  but  that  the  judgment  will  be  only  a  severe  chastisement "  (Delitzsch). 
"  Art  thou  not  from  everlasting  ? "  The  interrogatory  does  not  imply  doubt  on  his 
part.  The  true  God  is  essentially  eternal;  he  "  inhabiteth  eternity."  He  is  without 
beginning,  without  succession,  without  end.  The  loftiest  thoughts  of  the  loftiest 
intelligence  are  lost  in  the  idea  of  his  eternity.  From  his  eternity  the  prophet  argues 
that  his  people  will  not  perish :  "  We  shall  not  die."  There  is  force  in  this  argument. 
His  people  live  in  him.  Their  life  is  hid  in  God,  and  so  long  as  he  endures  they  may 
hope  to  continue.  Christ  said  to  his  disciples,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 
Man's  immortality  is  not  in  himself,  but  in  God.  If  he  has  purposed  that  we  shall 
live  for  ever,  he  is  eternal,  and  will  never  change  his  mind  or  die. 

II.  He  beoabds  his  peovidenok  as  a  source  of  comfobt.  "  0  Lord,  thou  hast 
ordained  them  for  judgment ;  and,  O  mighty  God,  thou  hast  established  them  for 
correction."  "  Jehovah,  for  judgment  thou  hast  appointed  it,  and,  0  Rock,  thou  hast 
founded  it  for  chastisement"  (Delitzsch).  Whatever  evU  of  any  kind,  from  any 
quarter,  comes  upon  the  loyal  servants  of  God,  comes  not  by  accident ;  it  is  under  the 
direction  of  the  All-wise  and  the  AU-bcneficent.  These  Chaldeans  could  not  move 
without  him,  nor  conld  they  strike  one  blow  without  his  permission ;  they  were  but 
the  rod  in  his  hand.  All  the  most  furious  fiends  in  the  universe  are  under  his  direction. 
He  says,  concerning  the  mighty  tide  of  wicked  passions,  "  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  and 
no  further."     Is  not  this  a  source  of  conifort,  under  suffering  and  oppression  ?     What- 


no  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  [ch.  1. 1— 17. 

ever  mischief  men  design  to  inflict  upon  his  people,  he  purposes  to  bring  good  out  of  it; 
and  his  counsel  shall  stand. 

IIL  He  regards  his  holiness  as  an  occasion  fob  pbeplbxity.  "Thou  art  ot 
purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  canst  not  look  on  iniquity  :  wherefore  lookest  thou 
upon  them  that  deal  treacherously,  and  boldest  thy  tongue  when  the  wicked  devoureth 
the  man  that  is  more  righteous  than  he  ?  "  Jehovah  is  the  Holy  One.  His  holiness 
is  essential,  underived,  indestructible,  reflected  in  all  consciences.  He  is  of  "  purer  eyes 
than  to  behold  evil."  His  eyes  do  behold  iniquity.  There  is  no  sin  that  comes  not 
within  his  glance.  What  the  prophet  means,  I  presume,  is — Thou  art  of  "  purer  eyes  " 
than  to  behold  iniquity  with  satisfaction.  It  is  that  "  abominable  thing "  which  God 
hates.  Now,  this  holiness  was  the  occasion  of  perplexity  to  the  prophet.  As  if  he 
had  said,  "  Since  thou  art  holy,  why  allow  such  abominations  to  take  place  ?  why 
permit  wicked  men  to  work  such  iniquities,  and  to  inflict  such  suffering  upon  the 
righteous?  "  This  has  always  been  a  source  of  perplexity  to  good  men.  That  a  holy 
God,  who  has  the  power  to  prevent  such  iniquities,  should  allow  them  to  occur, 
abound,  and  continue,  is  one  of  the  great  mysteries  of  life. 

Conclusion.  Let  us,  in  all  our  troubles,  like  the  prbphet,  look  to  the  Everlasting 
One,  and  hold  firmly  the  conviction  that,  notwithstanding  the  abounding  of  evil  in  th« 
world,  H«  is  the  Soly  One,  and  is  of  "  purer  eyes  "  than  to  approve  of  wickedness. 

'  Courage,  brother,  do  not  stumble ; 
Tliough  thy  path  be  dark  as  night, 
There's  a  star  to  guide  the  humble ; 
Trust  in  God,  and  do  the  right 

"Let  tlie  road  be  rough  and  dreary. 
And  its  end  far  out  of  sight; 
Foot  it  bravely,  strong  or  weary : 
Trust  in  God,  and  do  the  right 

"  Perish  policy  and  cunning. 

Perish  all  that  fears  the  light ; 

Whether  losing,  whether  winning. 

Trust  in  Gk>d,  and  do  the  right. 

Trust  no  party,  sect,  or  faction ; 

Trust  no  leaders  in  the  fight  j 
But  In  every  word  and  action 

Trust  in  God,  and  do  the  right. 

•*  Simple  rule  and  safest  guiding. 
Inward  peace  and  inward  might, 
Star  upon  our  path  abiding  : 
Trust  in  God,  and  do  the  right. 

•*  Some  will  hate  thee,  some  will  love  thee. 
Some  will  flatter,  some  will  slight ; 
Cease  from  man,  and  look  above  thee  : 
Trust  in  God,  and  do  the  right." 

(Norman  MoLeod.) 

D.  T. 

Vers.  14 — 17. — Bapacious  selfishness  in  power.  "  And  makest  men  as  the  fishes  ol 
the  sea,  as  the  creeping  things,  that  have  no  ruler  over  them.  They  take  up  all 
of  them  with  the  angle,  they  catch  them  in  their  net,  and  gather  them  in  their  drag : 
therefore  they  rejoice  and  are  glad,"  etc.  In  Nebuchadnezzar  you  have  rapacious 
selfishness  in  power.  He  is  here  represented  by  implication  as  treating  the  Jewish 
people  as  a  fisherman  treats  the  6sh  in  the  sea.  His  aim  is  to  catch  them  by  "angle," 
"  net,"  and  "drag,"  and  turn  them  to  his  own  vile  use.  "  These  figures  are  not  to  bo 
interpreted  with  such  speciality  as  that  the  net  and  fishing-net  answer  to  the  sword 
and  bow ;  but  the  hook,  the  net,  and  ihe  fishing-net,  as  the  things  used  for  catching 
fish,  refer  to  all  the  means  which  the  Chaldeans  employ  in  order  to  subdue  and  destroy 
the  natisus.  Luther  interprets  it  correctly.  '  These  hooks,  nets,  and  fishing-nets,'  he 
layi,  'are  nothing  more  than  his  great  and  powerful  armies,  by  which  he  gained 


OH.  Ll— 17.j  THE   BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK.  2] 

dominion  over  all  lands  and  people,  and  brought  home  to  Babylon  the  goods,  jewels, 
silver  and  gold,  interest  and  rent  of  all  the  world ' "  (Delitzsch).  In  these  verses  we 
have  a  specitoen  of  rapacious  selfisknest  in  power.  Selfishness  is  the  root  and  essence 
of  sin.  All  unregenerate  men  are  therefore  more  or  less  selfish,  and  rapacity  is  an 
instinct  of  selfishness.  Selfishness  hungers  for  the  things  of  others.  Whilst  this 
rapacious  selfishness  is  general,  mercifully  it  is  not  always  in  power,  otherwise  the 
world  would  be  more  of  a  pandemonium  than  it  is.  It  is  ever  tyrannic  and  ruthless 
in  the  measure  of  its  power.  Here  we  find  it  in  the  power  of  an  absolute  monarchy, 
and  it  is  terrible  to  contemplate.     Pour  things  are  suggested. 

I.  I-p  PBAOTIOALLT  IGNOBBS  THE  RIGHTS  OF  MAN  AS  MAN.  "  And  makest  man  as 
the  fishes  of  the  sea,  as  the  creeping  things,  that  have  no  ruler  over  them."  The 
Babylonian  tyrant  did  not  see  in  the  population  of  Judsa  men  possessing  natural 
endowments,  sustaining  moral  relationships,  invested  with  rights  and  responsibilities 
similar  to  his  own  fellow-men,  but  merely  "fishes;"  his  object  was  to  catch  them 
and  turn  them  to  his  own  use.  It  is  ever  so  with  selfishness :  it  blinds  man  to  the 
claims  of  his  brother.  What  does  the  selfish  landlord  care  for  the  man  in  the  tenants 
and  labourers  on  his  estate  ?  He  only  values  them  as  they  can  subserve  his  interests. 
What  does  the  selfish  employer  care  for  the  mem  in  those  who  work  in  his  service  and 
build  up  his  fortune  ?  He  treats  them  rather  as  fishes  to  be  used  than  as  brethren  to 
be  respected.  What  does  the  selfish  despot  care  for  the  moral  humanity  of  the  people 
over  whom  he  sways  his  sceptre  ?  He  values  them  only  as  they  can  fight  his  battles, 
enrich  his  exchequer,  and  contribute  to  his  pageantry  and  pomp.  What  were  men  to 
Alexander  ?    What  were  men  to  Napoleon,  etc.  ? 

II.  It  assiduoubly  works  to  torn  men  to  its  own  use.  "  They  take  up  all  of 
them  with  the  angle,  they  catch  them  in  their  net,  and  gather  them  in  their  drag ; 
therefore  they  rejoice  and  are  glad."  Thus  they  take  up  all  of  them,  some  with  the 
hook  one  by  one,  others  in  shoals  as  in  it  net,  others  in  a  drag  or  enclosed  net.  Ah 
me !  Human  life  is  like  a  sea — deep,  unresting,  treacherous ;  and  the  teeming  millions 
of  men  are  but  as  fishes,  the  weaker  devoured  by  the  stronger. 

"...  the  good  old  rule 
Sufficeth  them,  the  simple  plan 
That  they  should  take  who  have  the  power. 
And  they  should  keep  who  can." 

(Wordiworth.) 

The  mighty  ones  use  the  hook  to  oppress  individuals  one  by  one,  the  net  and  the  drag 
to  carry  multitudes  away.  To  a  rapacious  selfishness  in  power  the  man  is  lost  in  the 
labourer,  the  clerk,  the  employe,  the  sailor,  the  soldier,  the  subject,  etc.  Men,  what 
are  they?  To  its  eye  they  are  goods,  chattels,  beasts  of  burden,  "fishes  "—nothing 
more.  As  the  fisherman  works  by  various  expedients  to  catch  the  fish,  the  selfish  man 
in  power  is  ever  active  in  devising  the  best  expedients  to  turn  human  flesh  to  his 
own  use. 

III.  It  adores  self  on  account  of  its  success.  "  Therefore  they  sacrifice  unto 
their  net,  and  burn  incense  unto  their  drag  ;  because  by  them  their  portion  is  fat,  and 
their  meat  plenteous."  They  glory  even  in  their  crimes,  because  these  result  in  success. 
They  admire  their  own  dexterity  and  prowess.  The  selfish  man  says  to  himself,  "  My 
power  and  the  might  of  mine  hand  hath  gotten  me  this  wealth  "  (Deut.  viii.  17). 
According  to  the  measure  of  a  tnan's  selfishness  is  his  propensity  to  self-worship.  The 
more  selfish  a  merchant,  a  scholar,  a  religionist,  an  author,  a  preacher,  etc.,  is,  the 
more  prone  to  praise  himself  for  his  imaginary  success.  Because  men  are  everywhere 
selfish,  they  are  everywhere  "sacrificing  unto  their  net,  and  burning  incense  unto 
their  drag."  The  selfish  statesman  says,  "  There  is  no  measure  like  mine ;  "  the  selfish 
sectarian,  "  There  is  no  Church  like  mine ;  "  the  selfish  author,  "  There  ii  no  book  like 
mine  J "  the  selfiah  preacher,  "  There  is  no  sermon  like  mine." 

"  To  our  own  nets  ne'er  bow  we  down. 

Lest  on  the  eternal  shore 
The  angels,  while  our  draught  they  own, 
Eejeot  us  evermore." 

(Keble.) 


23 


THE  BOOK  OF   HABAKKDK. 


[oh,  n.  1— Za 


lY.  It  bwluhs  iNiATiABU,  HOTWiTHSTAKDiso  iTB  PBospBBrrT.  "  Shall  they  there- 
for* empty  their  net  ?  "  etc.  An  old  author  thua  paraphrases  the  language :  "  Shall 
they  earich  themseWes  and  fill  their  own  Teasels  with  that  which  they  have  b^ 
violence  and  oppression  taken  away  from  their  neighbours  ?  Shall  they  empty  their 
net  of  what  they  have  caught,  that  they  may  cast  it  into  the  sea  again  to  catch  more  ? 
And  wih  thou  suffer  them  to  proceed  in  this  wicked  course  ?  Shall  they  not  spare 
continually  to  slay  the  nations  ?  Must  the  number  and  wealth  of  nations  be  sacrificed 
to  their  net?  " 

Conclusion.  What  an  awfiil  picture  of  the  world  we  haye  here  i  All  unregenerate 
men  are  selfish.  Men  are  everywhere  preying  on  men ;  and,  alas  1  often  those  who 
most  lament,  the  universal  selfishness  are  the  most  selfish.  Like  the  ravenous  birds 
which  seem  to  bewail  the  sheep  when  dying,  they  are  ready  to  pick  out  their  eyes  when 
their  opportunity  comes.  "  Where  every  man  is  for  himself,"  says  an  old  author,  "  the 
devil  will  have  all."  This  selfishness  is  the  heart  of  stone  in  humanity,  which  must  be 
exchanged  for  a  heart  of  flesh,  or  the  man  will  be  damned.  What  but  the  gospel  can 
effect  this  change  ?  Oh  that  those  who  call  themselves  Obristians  would  cherish  and 
exemplify  that  disinterestedness  which  alone  gives  title  to  the  name !  "  I  would  so 
live,"  said  Seneca,  "  as  if  I  knew  I  had  received  my  being  only  for  the  benefit  of 
others."—©.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBB  n. 


Vmii  1 — 3.— §  5.  The  propJtet,  waiting 
f«r  an  anstmr  ta  hit  espoitulation,  i$  bidden 
to  mrite  the  oraeU  in  plain  eharaetert,  becaute 
it*  fulfilment  i*  eertain. 

Yer.  1. — ^Habakkok  speaks  with  himself, 
and,  mindful  of  his  offlce,  waits  for  the 
communication  wbioh  he  confidently  ex- 
pects (Jer.zxxiii.  3).  I  will  stand  upon  my 
watch  (Isa.  xxi.  6,  8).  As  a  watchman  goes 
to  a  high  place  to  see  all  around  and  dis- 
cern what  is  coming,  so  the  prophet  plaoes 
himself  apart  &om  men,  perhaps  in  some 
secluded  height,  in  readiness  to  hear  the 
voice  af  God  and  seize  the  meaning  of  the 
coming  event.  Prophets  are  called  "  watch- 
men" (comp.  Ezek.  iii.  17;  xxxiii.  2,  6; 
Micah  vii.  4).  The  tower;  ».«.  watch-tower, 
either  literally  or  metaphorically,  as  in  the 
first  clause.  Septuagint,  ir^rpoc,  "rook." 
What  he  will  say  nnto  me;  quid  dieatur 
mihi  (Vulgate);  rl  AoX^o-ei  iv  ^/laf,  "what 
he  will  speak  in  me"  (Septuagint).  He 
watches  for  the  inward  revelation  which 
God  makes  to  his  soul  (but  see  note  on 
Zeoh.  ii.  9).  When  I  am  reproved;  ad 
arguentem  me  (Vulgate);  M  rhv  i\tyxir 
fiov  (Septuagint);  rather,  to  my  complaint, 
referring  to  his  complaint  concerning  the 
impunity  of  sinners  (ch.  i.  13 — 17).  He 
waita  till  he  hears  God's  voice  within  him 
what  answer  he  shall  make  to  his  own  com- 
plaint, the  expostulation  which  he  had 
offered  to  Qod.  There  is  no  question  here 
concerning  the  reproofs  which  others  levelled 
against  him,  or  coneerning  any  rebuke  con- 
veyed to  him  by  God — an  impression  given 
by  the  Anglican  Version. 


Yer,  2.— Jehovah  answers  the  prophet's 
expostulation  (ch.  L 12,  eto.).  Write.  That 
it  may  remain  permanently  on  record,  and 
that,  when  it  comes  to  pass,  people  may  be- 
lieve in  the  prophet's  inspiration  (John  xiii. 
19;  comp.  Isa.  viii.  1;  xxx.  8;  Jer.  xxx. 
2;  Bev.  i.  11).  The  vision  (see  oh.  i.  1; 
Obad  1).  The  word  includes  the  inward 
revelation  as  well  as  the  open  vision.  Upon 
tables;  upon  the  tablet  (Deut.  xxvii.  8); 
i.e.  certain  tablets  placed  in  public  places, 
that  all  might  see  and  read  them  (see  Isaiab, 
loo.  eit.) ;  Septuagint,  els  w^ioy, "  a  lioxwood 
tablet."  The  summary  of  what  was  to  be 
written  is  given  in  ver.  4.  This  was  to  be 
"made  plain,"  written  large  and  legibly. 
Septuagint,  vaipas.  That  he  may  ran  that 
readeth  it.  The  common  explanation  of 
these  words  (unfortunately  perpetuated  by 
Keble's  well-known  hymn, "  There  is  a  book, 
who  runs  may  read  "),  viz.  that  even  the 
runner,  one  who  hastens  by  hurriedlv,  may 
be  able  to  read  it,  is  not  borne  out  by  the 
Hebrew,  which  rather  means  that  every 
one  who  reads  it  may  run,  t'.e.  read  fluently 
and  easily.  So  Jerome,  "  Scribere  jubetux 
planius,  ut  possit  lector  ourrere,  et  nnllo 
impedimento  velooitas  ejus  et  legendi  cupido 
teneatur."  Henderson,  comparing  Dan.  xii 
4,  "  Many  shall  run  to  and  fro,  and  know- 
ledge shall  be  increased,"  interprets  the 
olause  to  signify  that  whosoever  reads  the 
annonncement  might  run  and  publish  it  to 
all  within  his  reach.  »'  To  run,' "  he  adds, 
"is  equivalent  to  'to  prophesy'  in  Jer. 
xxiii.  21,"  on  the  principle  that  those  who 
were  charged  with  a  Divine  message  were 
to  use  all  despatch  in  making  it  knowB,  In 
the  passage  of  Daniel,  "to  ran  to  and  ika," 
is  explained  to  mean  "  ta  peroM." 


OH.  II.  1—20.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  HABAK.KUK. 


23 


Ver.  3. — For.  The  reason  is  given  why 
the  oracle  is  to  be  committed  to  writing. 
Is  yet  for  an  (the)  appointed  time,  Tlie 
vision  will  not  be  accomplished  immediately, 
but  in  the  period  fixed  by  God  (comp.  Dan. 
viii.  17,  19;  xi.  27,  35).  Others  explain, 
"  pointeth  to  a  yet  future  time."  But  at  the 
end  it  shall  speak.  The  verb  is  literally 
"  breathes,"  or  "  pants ; "  hence  the  clause 
is  bettor  rendered,  and  it  panteih  (equivalent 
to  hastetli)  towardt  the  end.  The  prophecy 
pereonilied  yearns  for  its  fulfilment  in  "  the 
end,"  not  merely  at  the  destruction  of  the 
literal  Babylon,  but  in  the  time  of  the  end — 
the  last  time,  the  Messianic  age,  when  the 
world-power,  typified  by  Babylon,  should 
be  overthrown  (see  Daniel,  loa.  cit.').  And 
not  lie ;  it  deceiveth  not ;  oDk  cii  kcvSv,  "  not 
in  vain"  (Septuagint).  It  will  certainly  come 
to  pass.  Wait  for  it.  For  the  vision  and  its 
accomplishment.  Beoanse  it  will  surely 
come.  The  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  (x.  37)  quotes  the  Septuagint 
Versiou  of  this  clause,  applying  it  to  the 
last  coming  of  Messiah :  "On  (pi  us  5,  Hebrew) 
ipX^fi^vos  l}|ei,  Kal  oh  fi-f]  xpov'-^V  (ot'  XP^^^^h 
Hebrew) ;  so  tlie  Vulgate,  Veniem  veniet,  et 
non  tardahit.  The  original  passage  does 
not  primarily  refer  to  the  coming  of 
Messiah,  but  as  the  full  and  final  accom- 
plishment of  the  prophecy  doubtless  belongs 
to  that  age,  it  is  not  a  departure  from  the 
fundamental  idea  to  see  in  it  a  reference 
hereto.  It  will  not  tarry ;  it  will  not  be 
behindhand;  it  will  not  fail  to  arrive 
(Judg.  v.  28 ;  2  Sam.  xx.  5). 

Ver.  4. — §  6.  The  great  principle  is  taught 
that  the  proud  shall  not  continue,  hut  the  just 
shall  live  by  faith.  The  prophecy  com- 
mences with  a  fundamental  thought,  appli- 
cable to  all  God's  dealings  with  man. 
Behold,  Ms  soul  which  is  iSted  up  is  not 
upright  in  him;  literally,  behold,  puffed 
up,  his  soul  is  not  upright  in  him.  This  is 
a  description  of  an  evil  character  (espe- 
cially T)f  the  Chaldean)  in  opposition  to 
the  character  delineated  in  the  following 
hemistich.  One  who  is  proud,  presump- 
tuous, thinks  much  of  liimself,  despising 
others,  and  is  not  straightforward  and  up- 
right before  God,  shall  not  live,  shall  not 
tiave  a  happy,  safe  life ;  he  carries  in  him- 
self tho  seeds  of  destruction.  The  result  is 
not  expressed  in  the  first  hemisticli,  but 
may  be  supplied  from  the  next  clause,  and, 
as  Knabenbauer  suggests,  may  be  inferred 
from  the  language  in  Heb.  x.  38, 39,  where, 
after  quoting  the  Septuagint  rendering  of 
this  passage,  'Eii'  fijroiTTfiATjToi,  ovk  eiSoicei 
V  ^"X^  i"""  ^^  «"''■?)  the  writer  adds,  ."  But 
we  are  not  of  them  that  shrink  back 
{fmoaToXtis)  unto  perdition."  Vulgate,  Ecce, 
qui  incredulus  est,  non  erit  recta  anima  ejus 
tn  semetipso,  which  seems  to  ooufiue  the 


statement  to  the  case  of  one  who  doubts 
God's  word.  But  the  just  shall  live  by  his 
faith.  The  "faith"  here  spoken  of  is  a 
loving  trust  in  God,  confidence  in  his 
promises,  resulting  in  due  performance  of 
his  will.  This  hemistich  is  the  antithesis 
to  the  former.  The  proud  and  perverse, 
those  who  wish  to  be  independent  of  God, 
shall  perish;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
righteous  shall  live  and  be  saved  through 
his  faith,  on  the  condition  that  he  puts  tjis 
trust  in  God.  The  Hebrew  accents  forbid 
the  union,  "  the  just  by  faith,"  though,  of 
course,  no  one  can  be  just,  righteous,  without 
faith.  The  passage  may  be  emphasized  by 
rendering,  "As  to  the  just,  through  his 
faith  he  shall  live."  This  famous  sentence, 
which  St.  Paul  has  used  as  the  basis  of  his 
great  argument  (Rom.  i.  17 ;  Gal.  iii.  11 ; 
comp.  Heb.  x.  38),  in  its  literal  and  eon- 
textual  application  implies  that  the  righteous 
man  will  have  perfect  trust  in  God's 
promises,  and  will  be  rewarded  by  being 
safe  in  the  day  of  tribulation,  with  reference 
to  the  coming  trouble  at  the  hands  Of 
the  Chaldeans.  When  the  proud,  greedy 
kingdom  shall  have  sunk  in  ruin,  the  faithful 
people  shall  live  secure.  But  tlie  applica- 
tion is  not  confined  to  this  circumstance. 
The  promise  looks  beyond  the  temporal 
future  of  the  Chaldeans  and  Israelites,  and 
unto  a  reward  that  is  eternal.  We  see  how 
naturally  the  principle  here  enunciated  is 
applied  by  the  apostle  to  teach  the  doctrine 
of  justification  by  faitli  in  Christ.  The 
liXX.  gives,  'O  5^  Sixaios  4k  iritrretis  fiov 
f^treroi,  i.e.  "  by  faith  in  me."  The  Speaker 
is  God.  St.  Paul  omits  /uov.  Habakkuk 
gathers  into  one  sentence  the  whole  prin- 
ciple of  the  Law,  and  indeed  all  true 
religion. 

Ver.  5. — §  7.  The  character  of  the 
0?uildeans  in  some  particulars  is  intimated. 
The  general  proposition  in  the  former 
hemistich  of  ver.  4  is  here  applied  to  the 
Chaldeans,  in  striking  contrast  to  the  lot  of 
the  just  in  the  latter  clause.  Yea  also, 
because  he  transgresseth  by  wine.  This 
should  be.  And  moreover,  wine  is  treacherous, 
A  kind  of  proverbial  saying  (Prov.  xx.  1). 
Vulgate,  Quomodo  vinum  potantem  deoipit. 
There  is  no  word  expressive  of  comparison 
in  the  original,  though  it  may  be  supplied 
to  complete  the  sense.  The  intemperate 
habits  of  the  Babylonians  are  well  attested 
(see  Dan.  v.  3,  4 ;  Quint.  Curt.,  v.  1, 
"  Babylonii  maxime  in  vinum  et  quss  ebrie- 
tatem  sequuntur  effusi  sunt ; "  comp.  Her., 
i.  191 ;  Xen., '  Cyrop.,'  vii.  5. 15).  They  used 
both  the  fermented  sap  of  the  palm  tree  as 
well  as  the  juice  of  the  grape,  the  latter 
chiefly  imported  from  abroad.  "  The  wealthy 
Babylonians  were  fond  of  drinking  to 
excetis;    their   banquets  were  magnificent. 


u 


THE  BOOK  OF   HABAKKUK. 


[oh.  n.  1— 2a 


but  generally  ended  in  drunkenness" 
(Eawlinson, '  Anc.  Mon.,'  iii.  450,  edit.  1865). 
Neither  the  Septuagint,  nor  the  Syriao,  nor 
the  Coptic  Version  has  any  mention  of 
wine  in  this  passage.  The  Septuagint 
gives,  6  Sh  KaToi6/j.fvos  Kot  KaraippovTiT'i)!, 
"the  arrogant  and  the  seorner."  He  is  a 
prond  man,  neither  keepeth  he  at  home; 
a  haughty  man,  he  resteth  not.  His  pride 
ia  always  impelling  him  to  new  raids  and 
conquests.  This  is  quite  the  character  of 
the  later  Clialdeans,  and  is  consistent  with 
tlie  latter  part  of  the  verse.  The  comparison, 
then,  is  this  :  As  wine  raises  the  spirits  and 
excites  men  to  great  efforts  which  in  the  end 
deceive  them,  so  pride  rouses  these  men  to 
go  on  their  insatiate  course  of  conquest, 
which  shall  one  day  prove  their  ruin,  Tiie 
verb  translated  "keepeth  at  hnme"  has  the 
secondary  sense  of  "  being  decorous ; "  hence 
the  Vulgate  gives,  Sie  erit  vir  luperbue,  et 
non  decorahitur  ;  i.e.  as  wine  first  exhilarates 
and  then  makes  a  man  contemptible,  so 
pride,  which  begins  by  exalting  a  man, 
ends  by  bringing  him  to  ignominy.  Others 
take  the  verb  in  the  sense  of  "continueth 
not,"  explaining  that  the  destruction  of 
Babylon  is  here  intimated.  But  what 
follows  makes  against  this  interpretation. 
The  LXX.  gives,  'Ay^p  &KaQ>v,  oiSiv  fiii 
irepivT),  which  Jerome,  combining  with  it 
his  own  version,  paraphrases,  "Sio  vlr 
superbus  non  decorahitur,  nee  voluntatem 
euam  perducet  ad  flnem;  etjuita  Symma- 
chnm,  oliK  eviropiiaet,  hoc  est,  in  rerum 
omnium  erit  penuria."  Who  enlargeth  his 
desire  as  hell;  Hebrew,  Sheol.  Hell  is 
called  insatiable  (Prov.  xxvii.  20 ;  xxx.  16 ; 
Isa.  v.  14).  Is  as  death,  which  seizes  all 
creatures  and  spares  none.  People ;  peopZea. 

Vers.  6— 8.— §  8.  The  dentruriion  of  the 
Bdbyloniant  it  announced  by  the  mouth  of 
the  vanquished  nationt,  who  utter  five  woet 
against  their  oppressor.  The  first  woe  :  for 
their  rapacity. 

Ver.  6, — All  these.  All  the  nations  and 
peoples  who  have  been  subjugated  and 
barbarously  treated  by  the  Babylonians 
(comp.  Isa.  xiv.  4).  A  parable.  A  senten- 
tious song  (see  note  on  Micah  ii.  4).  A 
taunting  proverb.  The  Anglican  Version 
combines  the  two  Hebrew  words,  which 
stand  unconnected,  into  one  notion.  So  the 
Vulgate,  loquelam  miigmatum.  The  latter 
of  the  two  generally  means  "riddle," 
"  enigma ;  "  the  other  word  (melitzah)  is  by 
some  translated,  "  a  derisive  satirical  song," 
or  "  an  ohscure,  dark  laying ; "  but,  as  Keil 
and  Delitzsch  have  shown,  is  better  under- 
stood of  a  bright,  clear,  brilliant  speech. 
So  the  two  terms  signify  "a  speech  con- 
taining enigmas,"    or  a  song  which    has 


double  or  ambiguous  meanings  (comp.  Prov. 
i,  6).  Septuagint,  TIp6p\riiia  els  Si-fiyjiaiv 
avTov.  Woe  (Nah.  iii.  1).  This  is  the  first 
of  the  five  "  woes,"  which  consist  of  three 
verses  each,  arranged  in  strophical  form. 
Xncreaseth  that  which  is  not  his,  He  con- 
tinues to  add  to  his  conquests  and  posses- 
sions, which  are  not  his,  because  they  are 
acquired  by  injustice  and  violence.  This  is 
the  first  denunciation  of  the  Chaldeans  for 
their  insatiable  rapacity.  How  long  t  The 
question  comes  in  interjectionally — Howlong 
is  this  state  of  things  to  continue  un- 
punished (comp.  Pa.  vi.  3 ;  lo.  13)  ?  That 
ladeth  himself  with  thick  clay ;  Septuagint, 
^ocpvvcov  rhv  K\othv  aVrov  tTTL^apSis,  "  who 
loadeth  his  yoke  heavily ; "  Vulgate,  aggra- 
vat  contra  te  densum  lutwm.  The  renderings 
of  the  Anglican  and  Latin  Versions  signify 
that  the  riches  and  spoils  with  which  the 
conquerora  load  themselves  are  no  more 
than  burdens  of  clay,  which  are  in  them- 
selves worthless,  and  only  harass  the 
bearers.  The  Greek  Version  seems  to  point 
to  the  weight  of  the  yoke  imposed  by  the 
Chaldeans  on  them ;  but  Jerome  explains  it 
differently, "  Ad  hoc  taiitum  ssevit  ut  devoret 
et  iniquitatis  et  prsedarum  onere  quasi 
gravissima  torque  se  depriraat."  The  diffi- 
culty lies  in  the  Sttq^  \iy6fi^vov  dbtit, 
which  forms  an  enigma,  or  dark  saying, 
because,  taken  as  two  words,  it  might  pass 
current  for  "thick  clay,"  or  "a  mass  of 
dirt,"  while  regarded  as  one  word  it  means 
"  a  mass  of  pledges,"  "  many  pledges." 
That  the  latter  ia  the  signification  primarily 
intended  is  the  view  of  many  modern  com- 
mentators, who  explain  the  clause  thus: 
The  quantity  of  treasure  and  booty  amassed 
by  the  Chaldeans  is  regarded  as  a  mass  of 
pledges  taken  from  the  conquered  nations 
a  burden  of  debt  to  be  discharged  one  day 
with  heavy  retribution.  Pusey,  "He  does 
in  truth  increase  against  himself  a  strong 
pledge,  whereby  not  others  are  debtors  to 
him,  but  he  is  a  debtor  to  Almighty  Gtod, 
who  oareth  for  the  oppressed  (Jer.  xvii.  11)." 
Ver.  7. — That  shall  bite  thee.  As  thou 
hast  cruelly  treated  others,  so  shall  they, 
like  herce  vipers  (Jer.  viii.  17),  bite  thee. 
Henderson,  Delitzsch,  Eeil,  and  others  see 
in  the  word  a  double  entendre  connected 
with  the  meaning  of  "  lending  on  interest," 
BO  the  "biting"  would  signify  "exacting  a 
debt  with  usury."  Such  a  term  for  usury 
is  not  unknown  to  classical  antiquity;  thus 
(quoted  liv  Henderson)  Aristoph.,  '  Nub.,' 
12— 

AaKv6fi,evos 
'Vwh  riis  Soir(ii/7|i  koI  rfjs  tpirviis  koI  rmv  xpeiic. 

"  By  the  expenditure  deep  bitten, 
And  by  the  manger  and  the  debts." 

Lucan.,  '  Phars.,'  i.  181,  "  Hinc  uaura  vorai. 


OH.  n.  1 — ^20.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK. 


86 


aridmnqne  in  tempore  tenns.''  The  "  biters  " 
rising  up  suddenly  are  the  Persians  who 
destroyed  the  Babylonian  power  as  quickly 
and  as  unexpectedly  as  it  had  ariseo.  Vex ; 
literally,  shake  violently,  like  SiocreJirriTe 
(Luke  ili.  14),  or  like  the  violent  arrest  of  a 
creditor  (Matt,  xviii.  28);  Septuagint,  ol 
inlPovKoi  ffov,  "  thy  plotters ;  "  Vulgato, 
laeerantet  te.  So  oi'  the  mystic  Babylon, 
her  end  comes  suddenly  (Bev.  xviii.  10, 17). 
Ver.  8. — The  law  of  retaliation  is  asserted. 
AU  the  remnant  of  the  people  (peoples)  shall 
spoil  thee.  The  remnant  of  thu  nations 
subjugated  and  plundered  by  the  Chaldeans 
shall  rise  up  against  them.  The  downfall 
of  Babylon  was  brought  about  chieily  by 
the  combined  forces  of  Media,  Fersin,  and 
Elam  (Isa.  xxi.  2 ;  Jer.  1.  9,  etc.) ;  and  it 
is  certain  that  Nebuchadnezzar,  at  one 
period  of  his  reign,  conquered  and  annexed 
Elam ;  and  there  is  every  probability  that 
he  warred  successfally  against  Media  (see 
Jer.  XXV.  9,  25 ;  Judith  i.  5,  13,  etc.) ;  and 
doubtless  many  of  the  neighbouring  tribes, 
which  had  sufliered  under  these  oppressors, 
joined  in  the  attack.  Because  of  men's 
blood.  Because  of  the  cruelty  and  blood- 
shed of  which  the  Babylonians  were  guilty. 
For  the  violence  of  (done  to)  the  land,  of  the 
oity  (see  ver.  17).  The  statement  is  general, 
but  with  special  reference  to  the  Chaldeans' 
treatment  of  Judtea  and  Jerusalem,  as  in 
Isa.  Xliii.  14 ;  xlv.  4;  Jer.  li.  4,  11.  Jerome 
takes  "the  violence  of  the  land,"  etc.,  to 
mean  tlie  wickedness  of  the  Jews  them- 
selves, whicli  is  to  be  punished.  He  is  led 
astray  by  the  Septuagint,  which  gives,  Sict 
.  .  .  ourePeias  yrjs,  "through  .  .  .  the 
iniquity  of  the  land." 

Vers.  9— 11.— §  9.  The  second  woe: /or 
their  avarice,  violence,  and  cunning. 

Ver.  9. — That  coveteth  an  evil  oovetons- 
ness  to  his  house ;  better,  gaineth  evil  gains 
for  his  house.  The  "  house  "  'is  the  royal 
family  or  dynasty,  as  in  ver.  10 ;  and  the 
Chaldean  is  denounced  for  thinking  to 
secure  its  stability  and  permanence  by 
amassing  godless  gains.  tDiat  he  may  set 
his  nest  on  high.  This  is  a  figurative  ex- 
pression, denoting  security  as  well  as  pride 
and  self-confidence  (comp.  Numb.  xxiv.  21 ; 
Job  xxxix.  27,  etc.;  Jer.  xlix.  16;  Obad. 
4),  and  denotes  the  various  means  which  the 
Chaldeans  employed  to  establish  and  secure 
their  power  (comp.  Isa.  xiv.  14).  Some  see 
in  the  words  an  allusion  to  the  formidable 
fortifications  raised  by  Nebucbaduezzar  for 
the  protection  of  Babylon,  and  the  wonder- 
ful palace  erected  by  him  as  a  royal  resi- 
dence (see  Bawliuson, '  Anc.  Mon.,'  iii.  340, 
etc.,  edit.  1865).  It  is  certain  that  Nebu- 
ehadnezzar  and  other  monarcbs,  after  suc- 
eessful  expeditions,  turned  their  attention 


to  building  and  enriching  towns,  templet, 
and  palaces  (see  Josephtt)),  'C}ont.  Ap.,'  i 
19.  7,  etc.).  Trom  the  po#er  of  evil  j  from 
the  hand  of  evil}  i.e.  from  all  calamity. 

Ver.  10.— The  very  means  he  took  to 
secure  his  power  shall  prove  his  ruin.  Then 
hast  consulted  shame  to  thy  house.  By  thy 
measures  thon  hast  really  determined  upon, 
devised  shame  and  disgrace  for  thy  family ; 
that  is  the  result  of  all  thy  schemes.  By 
cutting  off  many  people  (peoples).  This  is 
virtually  correct.  The  verb  in  the  present 
text  is  in  the  infinitive,  and  may  depend 
upon  the  verb  in  the  first  clause.  The 
versions  read  the  past  tense,  avyewjoavas, 
eoncidisti.  So  the  Chaldee  and  Syriao. 
This  may  be  taken  as  the  prophet's  expla- 
nation of  the  shameful  means  employed. 
Hast  sinned  against  thy  soul  (Frov.  viii.  36  ; 
XX.  2).  Thou  hast  endangered  thy  own  life 
by  provoking  retribution.  The  Greek  and 
Latin  Versions  have,  "Thy  soul  hath 
sinned." 

Ver.  11. — Even  inanimate  things  shall 
raise  their  voice  to  denounce  the  Chal- 
deans' wickedness.  The  stone  shall  cry  out 
of  the  wall.  A  proverbial  expression  to 
denote  the  horror  with  which  their  cruelty 
and  oppression  were  regarded ;  it  is  par- 
ticularly appropriate  here,  as  these  crimes 
had  been  perpetrated  in  connection  with 
the  buildings  in  which  they  prided  them- 
selves, and  which  were  raised  by  the  en- 
forced labour  of  miserable  captives  and 
adorned  with  the  fruits  of  fraud  and  pillage. 
Compare  another  application  of  the  expres- 
sion in  Luke  xix.  40.  Jerome  quotes  Cicero, 
'  Orat.  pro  Marcello,'  10,  "  Parietes,  medius 
fidius,  ut  mihi  videntur,  hujus  ourite  tibi 
gratias  agere  gestiunt,  quod  brevi  tempore 
futura  sit  ilia  auctoritas  in  his  majorum 
Buorum  et  suis  sedibus"  (comp.  Eurip., 
'Hippol.,'  418,  Tepe/ivd  t*  oXkoiv  Ili]  iron 
ipeoY/h"  ^<t>V'  Ovid,  'Metam.,'  ii.  696, 
"Tutus  eas:  lapis  iste  prius  tua  furta 
loquetur  ").  Wordsworth  sees  a  literal  ful- 
filment of  these  words  in  the  appalling  cir- 
cumstance at  Belsiiazzar's  feast,  when  a 
hand  wrote  on  the  palace  wall  the  doom  of 
Babylon  (Dan.  v.).  And  the  beam  out  of  the 
timber  shall  answer  it.  "  The  tie-beam  out 
of  the  timber  work  shall"  take  up  the 
refrain,  and  "  answer "  the  stone  from  the 
wall.  The  Hebrew  word  (kaphie)  rendered 
"  beam  "  is  an  Siral  ^eyifievov.  It  is  explained 
as  above  by  St.  Jerome,  being  referred  to  a 
verb  meaning  "  to  bind."  Thus  Symmachus 
and  Theodotion  translate  it  by  a-ivSeanos. 
Henderson  and  others  thiidi  it  means  "a 
half-briok,"  and  Aquila  renders  it  by  jua^o, 
"something  baked."  But  we  have  no 
evidence  that  the  Babylonians  in  their  sump- 
tuous edifices  interlaced  timber  and  half- 
bricks  (see   Fusey,  p.  419,  note  23).    The 


THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK. 


[oh.  n.  1— 2a 


LXX.  give*,  Kovdapos  ix  (v\ov,  a  beetle,  a 
worm,  from  the  wood.  Hence,  referring  to 
Christ  on  the  cross,  St.  Ambrose  ('Orat. 
de  Obit.  Theod.,'  46)  writes,  "Adoravit 
ilium  qui  pependit  in  ligno,  ilium  infjuam 
qui  sicut  scarabwug  cliimavit,  ut  perse- 
cutoribus  suis  peccata  condonaret."  St. 
Cyril  argues  that  tie-beams  were  called 
KdvBapot  from  their  cliiigiiig  to  and  support- 
ing wall  or  roof.  Some  reason  for  this 
supposition  is  gained  by  the  fact  that  the 
word  canterius,  or  cantherius,  i»  used  in 
Latin  in  the  sense  of  "  rafter." 

Ven.  12— 14.— §  10.  The  third  woe :  for 
fotmding  their  power  in  blood  and  devastation. 

Ver.  12. — The  Chaldeans  are  denounced 
for  the  use  they  make  of  the  wealth  ac- 
quired by  violence.  That  buildeth  a  town 
with  blood  (Micah  iii.  10,  where  »ee  note). 
They  used  the  riches  gained  by  the  mur- 
der of  conquered  nations  in  enlarging  and 
beautifying  their  own  city.  By  iniquity. 
To  get  means  for  these  buildings,  and  to 
carry  on  their  construction,  they  used  in- 
justice and  tyranny  of  every  kind.  That 
mercy  was  not  an  attribute  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar we  learn  from  Daniel's  advice  to  him 
(iv.  27).  The  captives  and  deported  in- 
habitants of  conquered  countries  were  used 
«8  slaves  in  these  public  works  (see  an  illus- 
tration of  this  from  Koyunjik,  Bawlinson'g 
'Anc.  Mon.,'  i.  497).  What  was  true  of 
Assyria  was  no  less  true  of  Babylon.  Pro- 
fessor Bawlinson  (ii.  528,  etc.)  tells  of  the 
extreme  misery  and  almost  entire  ruin  of 
subject  kingdoms.  Not  only  are  lands 
wasted,  cattle  and  effects  carrie>l  off,  the 
people  punished  by  the  beheading  or  im- 
palement of  hundreds  or  tbousandg,  but 
sometimes  wholesale  deportation  of  the  in- 
habitants is  practised,  tens  or  hundreds  of 
thousands  being  carried  away  captive.  "  The 
military  successes  of  the  Babylonians,"  he 
says  (iii.  332),  "were  accompanied  with 
needles*  violence,  and  with  outrages  not  un- 
usuaI  in  the  East,  which  the  historian  muit 
nevertheless  regard  as  at  once  crimes  and 
follies.  The  transplantation  of  conquered 
races  may,  perhaps,  have  been  morally 
defensible,  notwithstanding  the  sufferings 
which  it  involved,  But  the  mutilations  of 
prisoners,  the  weary  imprisonments,  the 
massacre  of  non-combatants,  the  refinement 
of  cruelty  shown  in  the  execution  of  children 
before  the  eyes  of  their  fathers, — these  and 
similar  atrocities,  which  are  recorded  of  the 
Babylonians,  are  wholly  without  excuse, 
since  they  did  not  so  much  terrify  as  ex- 
asperate the  conquered  nations,  and  thus 
rather  endangered  than  added  strength  or 
security  to  the  empire.  A  savage  and  in- 
human temper  is  betrayed  by  these  harsh 
punishments,  one  that  led  its  possessors  to 


sacriGce  interest  to  Tcngeanea,  and  the 
peace  of  a  kingdom  to  a  tiger-like  thirst  for 
blood  ...  we  cannot  be  surprised  that, 
when  final  judgment  was  denounced  agaiti-t 
Babylon,  it  was  declared  to  be  sent  in  a 
great  measure  '  because  of  men's  blood,  and 
for  the  violence  of  the  land,  of  the  city,  and 
of  all  that  dwelt  therein.' " 

Ver.  13. — Is  it  not  of  the  Lord  of  hosti  1 
Hath  not  Ood  ordained  that  this,  about  to  be 
mentioned,  should  be  the  issue  of  all  this 
evil  splendour?  That  the  people  shall 
labour  in  the  very  Are;  rather,  that  the 
peopUdlabourforthe  fire;  Le.  that  iheChakleea 
and  such  like  nations  expended  all  this  toil 
on  cities  and  fortresses  only  to  supply  food 
for  fire,  which,  the  prophet  sees,  will  be 
their  end  (Isa.  xl.  16).  Jeremiah  (11.  58) 
applies  these  and  the  following  words  to  the 
destruction  of  Babylon.  This  is  indeed  to 
weary  themselves  for  very  vanity.  Babylon, 
when  it  was  finally  taken,  was  given  over  to 
fire  and  sword  (comp.  Jer.  1.  32 ;  li.  30,  eto.). 

Ver.  14. — The  prophet  now  gives  the 
reason  of  the  vanity  of  these  human  under- 
takings. For  the  earth  shall  be  filled,  eto. 
The  words  are  from  Isa.  xi.  9,  with  some 
little  alterations  (comp.  Numb.  ziv.  21). 
This  is  one  of  the  passages  which  attests 
"  the  community  of  testimony,"  as  it  is  called, 
among  the  prophets.  To  take  a  few  out  ct 
many  cases  tliat  offer,  Isa.  ii.  2 — 4  compared 
with  Micah  iv.  1 — 4 ;  Isa.  xiii.  19 — 22  with 
Jer.  1. 39,  eto.;  Isa.  Iii.  7  with  Nab.  i.  ^5,;  Jer. 
ilix.  7—22  with  Obad.  X — 4;  Amos  ii.  13 
with  Joel  iii.  18  (Ladd,  'Doctrine  of  Scrip- 
ture,' i.  145).  All  the  earth  is  to  be  filled 
with,  and  to  recognize,  the  glory  of  God  as 
manifested  in  the  overthrow  of  ungodliness ; 
and  therefore  Babylon,  and  the  world-power 
of  which  she  is  a  type,  must  bo  subdued 
and  perish.  This  announcement  looks  for- 
ward to  the  establishment  of  Messiah's 
kingdom,  which  "  shall  break  in  pieces  and 
oonsume  all  these  kingdoms,  and  shall  stand 
for  ever  "  (Dan.  ii.  44).  We  must  remember 
how  intimately  in  the  minds  of  Ilastem 
heathens  the  prosperity  of  a  nation  was  con- 
nected with  its  local  deities.  Nothing  in 
their  eyes  could  show  more  perfectly  the 
impotence  of  a  god  than  his  failing  to  pro- 
tect his  worshippers  from  destruction  (comp. 
2  Kings  xviii.  33,  etc.).  The  glory  of 
Jehovah  and  his  sovereignty  over  the  earth 
would  1»  seen  and  acknowledged  in  the 
overthrow  of  Babylon,  the  powerful,  victori- 
ous nation.  As  the  waters  cover  the  sea. 
As  the  waters  fill  the  basin  of  the  sea  (Gen. 
1.  22;  1  Kings  vii.  23,  where  the  great 
vessel  of  ablution  is  called  "  the  sea  "). 

Vers.  15— 17.— S  11.  The  fourth  wot: 
for  hate  and  degradirtg  treatment  of  lubjeel 

nation*. 


OH.  u.  1—20.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK. 


27 


Yer.  15. — Not  only  do  the  Chaldeans  op- 
press and  pillage  the  peoples,  but  they 
expose  them  to  the  vilest  derision  and  con- 
tumely. The  prophet  uses  figures  taken 
from  the  ooiiduot  produced  by  intemperance. 
That  giveth  bis  neighbour  drink,  The 
Chaldeans  behaved  to  the  conquered  nations 
like  one  who  gives  his  neighbour  intoxicat- 
ing drink  to  stupefy  liis  faculties  and 
expose  him  to  shame  (comp.  ver.  5).  Tlie 
literal  drunkenness  of  the  Chaldeans  is 
not  the  point  here.  That  puttest  thy 
bottle  to  him.  If  this  translation  is  re- 
ceived, the  clause  is  merely  a  strengthened 
repetition  of  the  preceding  with  a  sudden 
change  of  person.  But  it  may  be  rendered, 
"  pouring  out,  or  mixing,  thy  fury,"  or,  as 
Jerome,  "mittens  fel  snum,"  "adding  thy 
poison  thereto."  This  last  version  seems 
most  suitable,  introducing  a  kind  of  climax, 
the  "poison"  beirig  some  drug  added  to 
increase  the  intoxicating  power.  Thus :  he 
gives  his  neighbour  drink,  and  this  drugged, 
and  in  the  end  makes  him  drnnken  also. 
For  the  second  clause  the  Septnagint  gives, 
dvaTpoTTJi  8o\€p^,  iubversioTie  turbida,  and 
the  versions  collected  by  Jerome  are  only 
unanimous  in  differing  from  one  another 
That  thou  mayest  look  on  their  nakedness. 
There  seems  to  be  an  allusion  to  the  case 
of  Noah  (Gen.  ix.  21,  etc.) ;  but  the  figure 
is  meant  to  show  the  abject  state  to  which 
the  conquered  nations  were  reduced,  when, 
prostrated  by  fraud  and  treachery,  they 
were  mocked  and  spurned  and  covered  with 
ignominy  (comp.  Nah.  iii.  5,  11).  So  the 
mystic  Babylon  is  said  to  have  made  the 
nations  drink  of  her  cup  (Rev.  xiv.  8; 
xvii.  2 ;  xviii.  3). 

Ver.  16. — Just  retribution  falls  on  Baby- 
lon. Thou  art  filled  with  shame  for  glory. 
Tliou  art  satiated,  indeed,  but  witii  shame, 
not  with  glory.  Thou  liast  revelled  in  thy 
shameless  conduct  to  the  defenceless,  but 
tliis  redounds  to  thy  dishonour,  and  will 
only  add  to  the  disgrace  of  thy  fall.  The 
Septuagint  joins  this  clause  with  part  of 
the  following :  "  Drink  thou  also  fulness  of 
shame  for  glory."  Drink  thon  also  the  cup 
of  wrath  and  retribution.  Let  thy  foreskin 
be  uncovered.  Be  thou  in  turn  treated 
with  the  same  ignominy  with  which  thou 
hast  treated  others,  the  figure  in  ver.  15 
being  here  repeated  (comp.  Lam.  iv.  21).  It 
is  otherwise  translated,  "Be  thou,"  or 
"  show  thyself,  uncircumoised."  This,  in  a 
Jew's  eyes,  would  be  the  very  climax  of 
degradation.  The  Vulgate  hag  eonsopire, 
from  a  slightly  different  reading.  The 
LXX.,  KapSla  <ra\fMriTt,  teal  aeiaenirt,  "  Be 
tossed,  O  my  heart,  and  shaken."  The 
present  text  is  much  more  appropriate, 
though  the  Syriac  and  Arabic  follow  the 
Greek  here.    The  oup  of  the  Lord's   right 


hand,  Retributive  vengeance  is  often  thus  ' 
figured  (comp.  Ps.  Ix.  3 ;  Ixxv.  8 ;  Isa.  h.  17, 
22;  Jer.  xxv.  15,  etc.).  Shall  be  turned 
unto  thee.  God  himself  shall  bring  round 
the  cup  of  sufieriug  and  vengeance  to  thee 
in  thy  turn,  and  thou  shalt  be  made  to 
drink  it  to  the  dregs,  so  that  shameful 
spewing  (foul  shame)  shall  be  on  thy  glory. 
The  oiraj  \ey6iifi/or  Ttikalon  is  regarded 
as  an  intensive  signifying  "the  utmost 
ignominy  "  (drtida,  Septuagint),  or  as  two 
words,  or  a  compound  word,  meaning  tomitui 
ignominix  (Vulgate).  It  was  probably  used 
by  the  prophet  to  suggest  both  ideas. 

Ver.  17.— For  the  violence  of  Lebanon 
shall  cover  thee;  LXX.,  ture^eia  tov  Aiffdvov: 
iniquitas  Libani  (Vulgate).  It  would  be 
plainer  if  translated,  "  the  violence  against," 
or  "  practised  on,  Lebanon,"  as  the  sentence 
refers  to  the  devastation  inflicted  by  the 
Chaldeans  on  the  forests  of  Lebanon  (comp. 
Isa.  xiv.  8;  xxxvii.  24).  Jerome  confines 
the  expression  in  the  text  to  the  demolition 
of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  in  the  construc- 
tion of  which  much  cedar  was  employed ; 
others  take  Lebanon  as  a  figure  for  Palestine 
generally,  or  for  Jerusalem  itself;  but  it  is 
best  understood  literally.  The  same  devasta- 
tion which  the  Chaldeans  made  in  Lebanon 
shall  "  cover,"  overwhelm,  and  destroy  them. 
And  the  spoil  of  beasts,  which  made  them 
afraid.  The  introduction  of  the  relative  is 
not  required,  and  the  passage  may  be  better 
translated.  And  the  de$trucHon  of  ieatU 
made  them  (others  read  "thee")  afraid. 
Septuagint,  "  And  the  wretchedness  of  the 
beasts  shall  aifright  thee."  Jerome,  in  his 
commentary,  renders,  "Et  vastitas  animalium 
oppriniet  fe."  The  meaning  is  that  the 
wholesale  destruction  of  the  wild  animals  of 
Lebanon,  occasioned  by  the  operations  of  the 
Chaldeans,  shall  be  visited  upon  this 
-people.  They  warred  not  only  against  men, 
but  against  the  lower  creatures  too ;  and  for 
this  retributive  punishment  awaited  them. 
Because  of  men's  blood,  etc.  The  reason 
rendered  in  ver.  8  is  here  repeated.  Of  the 
land,  etc.,  means  "toward"  or  "against" 
the  land. 

Vers.  18— 20.— §  12.  The  fifth  tcot:  for 
their  idolatry. 

Ver  18. — The  final  woe  is  introduced 
by  an  ironical  question.  The  Chaldeans 
trusted  in  tlieir  gods,  and  attributed  all  their 
success  to  the  divine  protection;  the  prophet 
asks — What  good  is  this  trust  ?■  What 
profiteth  the  graven  image  t  (comp.  Isa.  zliv. 
9,  10;  Jer.  ii.  11).  What  is  the  good  of  all 
the  skill  and  care  that  the  artist  has  lavished 
on  the  idol  ?  (For  "  graven  "  or  «  molten,"  see 
note  on  Nah.  i.  14.)  And  a  (even  the)  teacher 
of  lies.  '  The  idol  is  so  termed  becaui>e  it 
calls  itself  God  and  encourages  its   wor 


2S 


THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK. 


[oh.  h.  1 — 20i 


'  Bhippeis  in  lying  delusions,  in  entire  contrast 
to  Jehovah  who  is  Truth.  From  some  varia- 
tion in  reading  tlie  LXX.  gives,  (pavrcuriav 
iffcuS^,  and  Jerome,  "imaginem  falsam" 
(oomp.  Jer.  x.  14).  Tmsteth  therein.  The 
prophet  derides  the  folly  which  supptises 
that  the  idol  has  powers  denied  to  the  man 
who  made  it  (Isa.  xsix.  16).  Bamb  idols ; 
literally,  dumb  nothingt.  So  1  Cor.  xii.  2, 
eiSai\a  ra  &(pava  (OOmp.  1  Cor.  X.  19;  Ps. 
cxv.  5,  etc.).  There  is  a  paronomasia  in  the 
Hebrew,  elilim  illemim. 

Ver.  19. — The  prophet  now  denonnces 
the  folly  of  the  maker  and  worshipper  of 
idols.  With  this  and  the  following  verses 
compare  the  taunts  in  Isa.  xliv.  9—20. 
The  wood.  From  which  he  carves  the  image. 
Awake!  Come  to  my  help,  as  good  men 
pray  to  the  living  God  (comp.  Ps.  xxxv.  23 ; 
xliv.  23 ;  Isa.  li.  9).  Arise,  it  shall  teaoh ! 
The  Hebrew  is  better  rendered,  ArUel  it 
teach  I  Le.  shall  (Am  teaoh  ? — an  empbati . 


question   expressing  astonishment.     Vol- 

Eite,  Nnmquid  ip$e  doeere  poterit  1  The 
X.X.  paraphraaes,  koI  i^ri  ttrri  ^avraaia, 
"and  itself  is  a  phantasy."  It  is  laid, 
over.  "  It "  is  again  emphatic,  as  if  pointed 
at  with  the  finger.  Hence  the  Yulgate, 
EcKe  iete  coopertus  est;  and  Heuderson, 
"There  it  is,  overlaid,"  etc.  The  wooden 
figure  was  encased  in  gold  or  silver  plates 
(see  Isa.  xL  19 ;  Dan.  iii.  1).  .,.,    ,., 

Ver.  20. — The  prophet  contrasts  the 
majesty  of  Jehovah  with  these  dumb  and 
lifeless  idols.  His  holy  temple.  Not  the 
shrine  at  Jerusalem,  but  heaven  itself  (see 
Ps.  xi.  4,  and  note  on  Micah  i.  2).  Let  all 
the  earth  keep  silence  before  him.  Like 
subjects  in  the  presence  of  theii  king, 
awaiting  his  judgment  and  the  issue  to 
which  all  these  things  tend  (oomp.  ver.  14 ; 
Ps.  Ixxvi.  8,  etc.;  Zeph.  i.  7;  Zech.  ii  13). 
Septuagint,  KvXa^eitrBv  dirii  irpotrt^ou  aOroVf 
K.T.X.,  "  Let  all  the  earth  fear  before  him." 


H0MILETIC8. 

Ver».  1 — 3. — The  prophet  upon  his  watch-tower.  I.  Thk  out-lookino  pbophbt, 
(Ver.  1.)  Having  spread  out  before  Jehovah  bis  complaint,  Habakkuk,  determined  to 
stand  upon  his  watch-tower  or  station  himself  upon  his  fortress,  and  to  look  forth  to 
see  what  Jehovah  would  speak  within  him,  and  what  reply  in  consequence  he  should 
give  to  his  own  complaint.  The  words  indicate  the  frame  of  mind  to  be  cherished  and 
the  course  of  conduct  to  be  pursued  by  him  who  would  hold  communion  with  and 
obtain  communications  from  God.  There  must  be  :  1.  Holy  resolution.  No  soul  can 
come  to  speaking  terms  with  God  without  personal  effort.  Certainly  God  may  speak 
to  men  who  make  no  efforts  to  obtain  from  him  either  a  hearing  or  an  answer,  but  in 
general  those  only  find  Goii  who  seek  him  with  the  whole  heart  (Ps.  cxix.  2).  Prophets 
frequently  received  revelations  which  they  had  not  sought  (Gen.  xii.  7 ;  Exod.  iii.  2 ; 
xxiv.  1 ;  Isa.  vi.  1 ;  Ezek.  i.  1 ;  Dan.  vii.  1),  but  as  often  the  Divine  communications 
were  imparted  in  answer  to  specific  seeking  (Gen.  xv.  13  ;  Exod.  xzxiii.  18 ;  Dan.  ix.  2 ; 
Acts  X.  9)  In  the  same  way  may  God  discover  himself,  disclose  his  truth,  and  dis- 
pense his  grace  to  individuals,  as  he  did  to  Saul  of  Tarsus  (Acts  ix.  1 — 6),  without 
their  previous  exertions  to  procure  such  distinguished  favours ;  but  in  religion,  as  in 
other  matters,  it  is  the  hand  of  the  diligent  that  maketh  rich  (2  Pet.  i.  10).  2.  Spiri- 
tual elevation.  He  who  would  commune  with  God  must,  like  Habakkuk,  "stand 
upon  his  watch-tower,  and  station  himself  upon  his  fortress,"  not  literally  and  bodily, 
but  figuratively  and  spiritually.  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  Habakkuk  went 
up  to  any  steep  and  lofty  place  in  order  the  better  to  withdraw  himself  from  the' noise 
and  bustle  of  the  world,  and  the  more  easily  to  fix  his  mind  on  heavenly  things  and 
direct  his  soul's  eye  Godward.  Abraham  certainly  was  on  the  summit  of  Moriah 
when  Jehovah  appeared  to  him  ;  Moses  was  called  up  to  the  top  of  Sinai  to  meet  with 
God  (Exod.  xxiv.  1 ;  xxxiv.  2) ;  Jehovah  revealed  himself  to  Elijah  upon  the  mount  of 
Horeb  (1  Kings  xix.  II);  Balaam  went  to  "an  high  place  "  to  look  out  for  a  revelation 
from  God  (Numb,  xxiii.  3) ;  the  disciples  were  on  the  crest  of  Hermon  when  Christ 
was  transfigured  before  them  (Matt.  xvii.  1) ;  and  even  Christ  himself  spent  whole 
nights  in  prayer  with  God  among  the  hills  (John  vi.  15).  Local  elevation  and 
corporeal  isolation  may  be  usefully  employed  to  aid  the  heart  in  abstracting  itself  from 
mundane  things ;  yet  this  only  is  the  elevation  and  isolation  that  brings  the  soul  in 
contact  with  God  (Matt.  vi.  6).  When  David  prayed  he  retired- into  the  inner  chamber 
of  his  heart  (Ps.  xix.  14 ;  xlix.  3)  and  lifted  up  his  soul  to  God  (Ps.  xxv.  1).  3.  Cbn- 
fident  expectation.     Habakkuk  believed  that  his  prayers  and  complaints  would  not 


OH.  IL 1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  29 

pass  unattend'^  te  hy  Cr(A.  He  never  doubted  that  God  would  reply  to  hi»  supplica- 
tions and  interrogations.  So  he  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  he  is,  and  that 
he  is  the  Kewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him  (Heb.  zi.|  6).  It  was  David's 
habit,  after  directing  his  prayer  to  God,  to  look  up  expecting  an  answer  (Ps.  v.  3),  and 
4t  ought  to  be  the  practice  of  Christians  first  to  ask  in  faith  (Jas.  i.  6),  and  then  to 
confidently  hope  for  an  answer  (Matt.  xxi.  22 ;  Mark  xi.  24 ;  1  iTohn  v.  14).  4,  Patient 
atiention.  Though  Habakkuk  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  fact  that  God  would  speak  to 
him,  he  possessed  no  assurance  either  as  to  the  time  when  or  as  to  the  manner  in 
which  that  speaking  would  take  place.  Hence  he  resolved  to  possess  his  soul  in 
patience  and  keep  an  attentive  outlook.  So  David  waited  on  and  watched  for  God 
with  patient  hope  and  close  observation  (Ps.  Ixii.  5;  cxxx.  5).  So  Paul  exhorted 
Christians  to  "  continue  in  prayer,  and  watch  in  the  same  with  thanksgiving  "  (Col. 
iv.  2).  Many  fail  to  obtain  responses  from  God,  because  they  either  are  not  sufficiently 
attentive  to  discern  the  tokens  by  which  God  speaks  to  his  people,  or  lack  the 
patience  to  wait  till  he  chooses  to  break  silence.  5.  Earnest  introspection.  The  want 
of  this  is  another  frequent  cause  of  failure  on  the  part  of  those  who  would  but  do  not 
hear  God  speak.  Habakkuk  understood  that  if  God  answered  him  it  would  be  by  his 
Spirit  speaking  in  him,  and  that  accordingly  he  required  not  to  watch  for  "signs"  in 
the  firmament,  in  the  earth,  or  in  the  sea,  but  to  listen  to  the  secret  whisperings  that 
he  heard  within  himself.  So  David  exhorted  others  to  commune  with  their  own  hearts 
upon  their  bed  (as  doubtless  he  himself  did),  if  they  would  know  the  mind  of  God 
(Ps.  iv.  4);  and  Asaph,  following  his  example,  observed  the  same  godly  practice 
(Ps.  Ixxvii.  6).  While  God  has  furnished  lessons  for  all  in  the  pages  of  nature  and 
revelation,  it  is  in  the  domain  of  the  inner  man,  enlightened  by  his  Word  and  taught 
by  his  Spirit,  that  his  teaching  for  the  individual  is  to  be  sought. 

II.  The  in-spbakinq  God.    (Ver.  2.)    Habakkuk  had  not  long  to  wait  for  the 

oracle  he  expected ;  and  neither  would  modern  petitioners  be  long  without  answers  were 

their  waiting  more  like  Habakkuk's.    Three  things  were  announced  to  the  prophet.   1. 

2%o<  he  should  receive  a  vision.    Jehovah  would  not  leave  his  dark  problem  unsolved, 

would  afford  him  such  a  glimpse  into  the  future  of  the  Chaldean  power  as  would 

effectually  dispel  all  his  doubts  and  fears,  would  unveil  to  him  the  different  destinies 

of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  in  such  a  way  as  to  enable  him  calmly  to  endure  until 

the  end ;  and  exactly  so  has  the  Christian  obtained  in  the  Bible  such  light  upon  the 

mystery  of  Providence  as  helps  him  to  look  forward  to  the  future  for  its  full  solution. 

The  vision  about  to  be  granted  to  Habakkuk  was  (1)  definite,  i.e.  for  an  appointed 

time,  and  so  is  the  vision  now  granted  to  the  Christian  for  a  time  as  well  known  to 

God  (though  not  to  the  Christian)  as  any  moment  iu  the  past  has  been ;  (2)  distant, 

^.e.  to  be  fulfilled  after  a  longer  or  shorter  interval,  and  so  has  the  day  of  the  clearing 

up  of  the  mystery  of  providence  for  the  Christian  been  "after  a  long  time;  "  but  stiU 

(3)  certain,  i.e.  it  would  surely  come  to  pass,  and  so  will  aU  that  God  has  revealed  in 

Scripture  concerning  the  different  destinies  of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  come  to 

pass.    Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,  but  not  God's  Word  (Matt.  xxiv.  35).   2.  ITiat 

he  should  ivriie  the  vision.     Whether  a  literal  writing  upon  a  tablet  (Ewald,  Pusey) 

was  intended,  as   Isaiah  (viii.  1 ;   xxx.  8)  and  Jeremiah  (xxx.  2)  were  directed  to 

write  down  the  communications  received  by  them  from  God ;  or  whether  it  was  merely 

a  figurative  writing  (Hengstenberg,  Keil)  that  was  meant,  as  in  the  case  of  Daniel 

(xii.  4);  the  intention  manifestly  was  that  Habakkuk  should  publish  the  vision  he  was 

about  to  receive — publish  it  in  terms  so  clear  and  unambiguous  that  persons  who  only 

gave  it  a  casual  glance  would  have  no  difficulty  in  understanding  it.    This  has  been 

done,  not  with  reference  to  Habakkuk's  vision  merely,  but  as  regards  the  whole  Bible, 

which  is  not  only  "  all  plain  to  him  that  understandeth  "  (Prov.  viii.  9),  but  is  able  to 

"  make  wise  the  simple"  (Ps.  xix.  7),  and  gmde  in  safety  "  the  wayfaring  man,  though 

a  fool "  (Isa.  XXXV.  8).     The  object  contemplated  by  the  writing  (literal  or  figurative) 

of  Habakkuk's  vision  was  (1)  the  comfort  of  God's  people  in  Judah  during  the  period 

of  waiting  that  should  intervene  between  then  and  the  day  of  their  enemy's  overthrow ; 

and  (2)  the  interpretation  of  the  vision  when  the  incidents  occurred  to  which  it 

referred.     The  same  purposes  are  subserved  by  the  Word  of  God,  and  especially  by 

those  prophetic  parts  which  foretell  the  destruction  of  the  enemies,  and  the  salvation 

of  tfaa  people,  of  GkxL     3.  That  he  should  wait  for  the  vision.    It  might  be  delayed. 


30  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  [oh.  n.  1—20 

but  it  ihould  come.  Hence  he  should  possess  his  soul  in  patience.  Bo  should 
Christians  wait  patiently  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  for  their  final  redemption  and  for 
the  overthrow  of  all  the  Church's  foes  (Jas.  v.  8).  The  contents  of  the  vision  ar« 
narrated  in  the  verses  which  follow. 

Lessons.  1.  The  dignity  of  man,  as  a  being  who  can  converse  with  Rod ;  the  con- 
descension of  God  in  that  he  stoops  to  talk  with  man.  2.  The  duty  and  the  profit  of 
reflection  and  meditation ;  the  sin  and  loss  of  those  who  never  commune  with  their 
own  hearts.  3.  The  simplicity  of  the  Bible  a  testimony  to  its  divinity ;  had  it  been 
man's  book  it  would  not  have  been  so  easy  to  understand.  4.  The  certainty  that 
Scripture  prediction  will  be  fulfilled ;  the  expectation  of  this  should  comfort  the  saints ; 
the  realization  of  this  will  vindicate  God. 

Vers.  4,  6. — The  unjust  man  and  the  Just:  a  contrast.  L  Thbib  ceabaotebs. 
1.  The  unjust  man.  (1)  Proud  or  "puffed  up"  in  soul.  The  heart  the  seat  and 
source  of  all  sin  (Jer.  xvii,  9;  Mark  vii.  21);  pride  its  origin  and  essence  (Ps.  x.  4; 
lii.  7 ;  Prov.  xvi.  5 ;  Mai.  iv.  1).  Arrogant  haughtiness  and  self-sufficiency  charac- 
teristic of  the  carnal  heart  (Rom.  i.  30  j  Eph.  iv.  17),  These  qualities  had  marked  the 
Assyrian  (Isa.  x.  12),  and  were  to  distinguish  the  Chaldean  (ver.  5)  conqueror.  They 
discover  themselves  in  all  who  oppose  or  decline  fl:om  the  spirit  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  v.  2 ; 
Phil.  ii.  3;  3  John  9).  They  will  eventually  culminate  in  antichrist  (2  Tliess.  ii,  4). 
(2)  Wicked  or  ungodly  in  life.  His  soul,  being  thus  puffed  up  with  pride,  is  not 
"upright"  or  "straight"  within  him;  is  not  free  from  turning  and  trickery;  does  not  in 
its  thoughts,  feelings,  words,  and  actions  adhere  to  the  straight  path  of  integrity,  but 
loves  "crooked  ways"  and  devious  roads,  and  thus  turns  aside  unto  iniquity  (Ps.  cxxv. 
5).  Again  true  of  the  Chaldean,  whose  iniquities — drunkenness,  buasting,  restless 
ambition,  insatiable  lust  of  conquest,  relentless  oijpression — are  specifically  enumerated 
(ver.  5),  it  holds  good  also  of  the  natural  heart  and  carnal  mind  (Jer.  xiii.  10;  2  Tim. 
iii.  2).  (3)  Rejected  or  "condemned"  by  God.  This  implied  in  the  fact  that  he  is  not 
a  just  or  "justified"  man.  2.  jThe  Just  man.  (1)  Believing  in  soul.  As  pride  or 
trust  in  self  is  the  animating  principle  of  the  wicked,  so  is  faith  or  trust  in  God  that 
of  the  good.  Faith  the  root  of  all  moral  and  spiritual  excellence  in  the  soul.  As  the 
proud  soul  stands  aloof  from  God,  the  humble  heart  cleaves  to  God,  as  "that  which  is 
straight,  being  applied  to  what  is  straight,  touches  and  is  touched  by  it  everywhere." 
(2)  Upright  in  life.  As  pride  leads  to  disobedience,  faith  leads  to  obedience.  Hence 
Paul  speaks  of  "  the  obedience  of  faith "  (Rom.  i.  5),  i.e.  such  obedience  as  is  inspired 
by  faith.  The  soul  that  trusts  God,  walks  in  his  ways,  avoids  sin,  and  endeavours  to 
order  his  conversation  aright  (Ps.  1.  23 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  6).  Faith  and  holiness  are  in  the 
gospel  scheme  inseparably  connected  (John  xv.  8;  BonUjii,  13;  Eph,  iL  10;  Titus  iii. 
8).  (3)  Accepted  by  God.  Paul  in  Romans  (i.  17),  and  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews  (x. 
38),  by  quoting  this  statement  from  Habakkuk,  teach  that  the  "just"  and  the 
"justified"  are  one — that  the  just  in  the  Scripture  sense  of  that  expression  are  those 
legally  and  spiritually  righteous  before  God. 

II.  Theib  destinies.  1.  'JTiat  of  the  unjust — death.  Though  not  stated,  this  may 
\6  inferred.  (1)  The  soul  of  which  the  inward  essence  is  pride  and  self-sufficiency  is 
destitute  of  spiritual  life,  is  dead.  "  Swollen  with  pride,  it  shuts  out  faith,  and  with  it 
the  presence  of  God"  (Pusey);  and  "without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God" 
(Heb.  xi.  6).  (2)  The  man  who  lives  in  sin  is  dead  while  he  liveth  (1  Tim.  v.  6) — dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins  (Eph.  ii.  1),  and  so  long  as  he  remains  a  stranger  to  the  principle 
of  faith  which  the  breath  of  God's  Spirit  alone  can  awaken  in  the  unrenewed,  he  must 
continue  "  dead,"  *.«.  incapable  of  actions  spiritually  good.  (3)  The  sinner  not 
accepted  before  God  is  of  necessity  condemned  by  God ;  and  to  be  under  condemnation 
is  to  be  "legally  dead."  2.  That  of  the  Just—life.  Not  necessarily  life  physical  and 
temporal,  because  the  "justified"  die  no  less  than  their  neighbours  (Heb.  ix.  27);  but 
(1)  life  legal  and  judicial — "  he  that  believeth  shall  never  come  into  condemnation " 
(John  iii.  18;  v.  24;  Rom.  viii.  1);  (2)  life  moral  and  spiritual,  which  Scripture 
connects  with  faith  in  God  and  in  his  Son  Christ  Jesus  as  a  stream  with  its  fountain, 
as  a  tree  with  its  root,  as  an  effect  with  its  cause  (Acts  xv.  9;  xxvi.  18;  2  Thess.  L 
11;  Gal.  ii.  20);  and  (3)  life  indestructible  and  eternal,  this  being  always  s  quality 
ascribed  to  the  life  which  the  justified  man  receives  tlu'ough  his  faith  (John  iii.  36  ( 


OH.  n.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK   UF  HABAKKUK.  31 

T.  24;  xi.  26;  1  John  H.  25;  v.  11;  1  Tim.  i.  16;  vi.  12;  Titus  1.  2;  iii.  7).  All 
other  life  but  that  which  Christ  bestows  is  temporal  and  perishing. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — A  parable  of  woes;  1.  Woe  to  the  rapacious  I  I.  Thbib  pbesons 
IDEKTIFIED.  1.  The  Chaldean  nation,  in  its  kings  and  people,  who  were  animated  by 
a  lust  of  conquest,  which  impelled  them  upon  wars  of  aggression.  2.  The  enemies  of  the 
Church  of  Ood  and  of  Jesus  Christ,  whether  national  or  individual,  in  whom  the  same 
spirit  dwells  as  resided  in  the  Babylonian  power.  God's  promises  aad  threatenings  in 
the  Bible  have  almost  always  a  wider  sweep  and  a  larger  reference  than  simply  to  those 
to  whom  they  were  originally  addressed. 

II.  Theib  bin  bpeoifibd.  Spoliation,  robbery,  theft,  plunder.  A  wickedness  : 
1.  Unjust ;  as  all  theft  is.  In  heaping  up  the  spoils  of  plundered  nations,  the  Chaldean 
was  increasing  what  was  not  his ;  and  the  same  is  done  by  those  who  store  up  money 
or  goods  gotten  by  fraud  or  oppression.  What  men  acquire  by  violence  or  guile  is  not 
theirs.  How  much  of  the  wealth  of  modern  nations  and  of  private  persons  is  of  this 
character  may  not  be  told ;  to  assert  that  none  is  may  be  charity,  but  is  not  truth. 
The  practices  complained  of  by  James  (v.  4 — 6)  have  not  been  unknown  since  his 
day.  2.  Insatiable ;  as  the  lust  of  possession  is  prone  to  be.  The  plundered  nations 
are  depicted  as  asking — ^How  long  is  this  devastating  power  to  go  .on  despoiling 
peoples  weaker  than  himself?  Is  his  career  of  rapine  never  to  be  arrested?  Will  hia 
thirst  for  what  belongs  to  others  never  be  quenched  ?  So  "  he  that  loveth  silver  shall 
not  be  satisfied  with  silver,  nor  he  that  loveth  abundance  with  increase"  (Bccles.  v. 
10).  The  passion  for  heaping  up  ill-gotten  gains  grows  by  what  it  feeds  on.  Those 
who  determine  to  enrich  themselves  at  the  expense  of  others  seldom  know  when  to 
stop.  Almost  never  do  they  cry,  "  Enough  1 "  till  retribution,  overtaking  them,  strips 
them  of  all.  3.  Vain ;  as  all  sin  will  ultimately  prove  to  be.  The  foreign  property 
taken  by  the  Chaldean  from  other  nations,  the  prophet  characterizes  as  "pledges" 
exacted  from  them  by  an  unmerciful  creditor,  perhaps  intending  thereby  to  suggest 
that  the  Chaldean  would  be  "compelled  to  disgorge  them  in  due  time"  (Keil).  The 
idea,  true  of  all  man's  earthly  possessions  (Job  i.  21) — 

*  Whate'er  we  fondly  call  our  own 
Belongs  to  heaven's  great  Lord ; 
The  blessings  lent  us  for  a  day 
▲le  soon  to  be  restored," 

— !•  much  more  applicable  to  wealth  acquired  by  fraud  or  oppression  (Jer.  zvii.  11), 
The  day  will  come  when,  if  not  by  the  robbed  themselves,  by  G-od  the  rightful  Owner 
of  the  wealth  (Hag.  ii.  8)  and  the  strong  Champion  of  the  oppressed  (Fs.  x.  18),  it  will 
be  demanded  back  with  interest  (Job  xx.  15). 

m.  Theib  fukishment  debobibed.  1.  Certain.  "Shall  not  all  these  take  up  a 
parable  against  him  ? "  The  overthrow  of  the  Chaldean  is  so  surely  an  event  of  the 
future  that  the  very  nations  and  peoples  he  has  plundered,  or  the  believing  remnant 
amongst  them,  will  yet  raise  a  derisive  song  over  his  miserable  and  richly  merited  fall ; 
and  just  as  surely  will  the  rapacious  plunderer  of  others  be  destroyed,  and  his  destruc- 
tion be  a  source  of  satisfaction  to  beholders  (Prov.  i.  18,  19).  2.  Heavy.  The  wealth 
he  has  stolen  from  others  will  be  to  him  as  a  "  burden  of  thick  clay  "  that  will  first 
crush  him  to  the  earth,  making  the  heart  within  him  wretched  and  the  spirit  sordid 
and  grovelling,  and  finally  sink  him  into  a  hopeless  and  cheerless  grave  (Eccles.  ii. 
22,  23 ;  vi.  2 ;  Fs.  xlix.  14).  3.  Sudden.  Betribution  should  lall  upon  the  Chaldean 
in  a  moment-— his  biters  should  rise  up  suddenly,  and  his  destroyers  wake  up  as  from 
a  sleep  to  harass  him  (ver.  7) ;  and  in  such  fashion  will  the  end  be  of  "  every  one  that 
is  greedy  of  gain  and  taketh  away  the  life  of  the  owners  thereof"  (Frov.  i.  19);  he 
may  "spend  his  days  in  wealth,"  but  "in  a  moment  he  shall  go  down  to  the  grave" 
(Job  xxi.  13) ;  he  may  "  heap  up  silver  as  the  dust,  and  prepare  raiment  as  the  clay," 
but  he  shall  "lie  down  and  not  be  gathered;"  he  shall  "open  his  eyes,  and  behold  1 
he  is  not "  (Job  xxvii.  16, 19).  4.  Retributive.  The  Chaldean  should  be  spoiled  by 
th«  nations  he  had  spoiled.  So  will  violent  and  rapacious  men  reap  what  themselves 
have  sowed.  How  often  is  it  seen  that  money  goes  as  it  comes  1  Acquired  by 
speculation  or  gambling,  it  is  lost  by  the  same  means.  He  who  robs  others  by 
violence  or  fraud  not  unfrequently  is  himself  robbed  by  another  stronger  or  craftiei 
than  he.     "  Whatsoever  a  man  s^wpth."  etc.  (Gal   vi.  7). 


32  THE  BOOK  OF   HABAKKUK.  laa.u.l—20 

Lessons.  1.  "  Provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all  men*  (Eom.  xii.  17).  2.  "  Do 
violence  to  no  man"  (Luke  lii.  14).  3.  "  If  thou  do  that  which  is  evil,  be  afraid" 
(Eom.  xiii.  4). 

Vers.  9 — 11. — A  parable  of  woes;  2.  Woe  to  the  covetousi  L  Their  aim.  1. 
Personal  comfort.  Suggested  by  the  term  "nest,"  which  for  the  Chaldean  meant 
Babylon  with  its  palaces,  and  for  the  individual  signifies  his  mansion  or  dwelling-place 
(Job  xxix.  18).  Josephus  ('  Ant.,'  x.  11. 1)  states  that  Nebuchadnezzar  built  for  him- 
self a  palace  "  to  describe  the  vast  height  and  immense  riches  of  which  would  be  too 
much  for  him  (Josephus)  to  attempt ;  "  and  Nebuchadnezzar  himself  tells  us  in  his 
inscription  that  he  constructed  "  a  great  temple,  a  house  of  admiration  for  men,  a  lofty 
pile,  a  palace  of  his  royalty  for  the  land  of  Babylon,"  "  a  large  edifice  for  the  residence 
of  his  royalty,"  and  that  within  it  were  collected  as  an  adornment  "  trophies,  abundance, 
royal  treasures "  ('  Eecords  of  the  Past,'  v.  130,  etc.).  Men  who  set  their  hearts  on 
riohes  mostly  do  so  under  the  impression  that  these  will  add  to  their  comfort  and 
increase  their  happiness — to  them  comfort  and  happiness  being  synonymous  with  large, 
beautiful,  and  well-plenished  houses  (Ps.  xlix.  11).  2.  Social  distinction.  Pointed  at 
by  the  word  "high,"  in  which  notions  of  elevation  and  visibility  are  involved.  For 
one  rich  man  that  covets  wealth  to  augment  his  bodily  comfort  or  mental  gratification, 
ten  seek  it  for  the  lustre  in  others'  eyes  it  is  supposed  to  give.  The  upper  classes  in 
society  are  the  wealthy ;  the  under  or  lower  classes  are  the  poor.  None  notice  the 
wise  man  who  is  poor  (Eccles.  ix.  16) ;  the  rich  fool  stands  upon  a  pedestal  and  receives 
the  homage  of  admiring  crowds  (Prov.  xiv.  20).  The  same  delusive  standard  is 
employed  in  estimating  the  greatness  of  nations.  Wealth  is  commonly  accepted  by 
the  world  as  the  true  criterion  of  rank.  Eich  nations  take  precedence  of  poor  ones. 
In  God's  sight  money  is  the  smallest  distinction  that  either  country  or  person  can 
wear.  3.  Permanent  safety.  Stated  by  the  clause, "  that  he  may  be  delivered  from  the 
power  [or, '  the  hand ']  of  evil."  The  Babylonian  sovereigns  as  individuals  and  as  rulers 
held  the  delusion  that  the  best  defence  against  personal  or  national  calamity  was 
accumulated  treasure  (Prov.  x.  15 ;  xviii.  11).  Nebuchadnezzar  in  particular  used  his 
"  evil  gain  "  for  the  fortification  of  his  metropolis,  building  around  it  "  the  great  walls  " 
which  his  father  Nabopolassar  had  begun  but  not  completed,  furnishing  these  with 
great  gates  of  ikki  and  pine  woods  and  coverings  of  copper,  to  keep  off  enemies  from 
the  front,  and  rearing  up  a  tall  tower  like  a  mountain,  so  rendering  it,  as  he  supposed, 
"  invincible "  ('  Eecords  of  the  Past,'  v.  126,  etc.).  In  a  like  spirit  men  imagine  that 
"  money  is  a  defence  "  (Eccles.  viL  12),  and  that  he  who  has  a  large  balance  at  his  banker's 
need  fear  no  evil.  But  "  riches  profit  not  in  the  day  of  wrath  "  (Prov.  xi.  4) ;  and  just 
as  certainly  as  Nebuchadnezzar's  "eagle's  nest"  was  not  beyond  the  reach  of  the 
Persian  falconer,  so  neither  will  the  wicked  man's  silver  and  gold  be  able  to  deliver 
him  when  his  end  is  come  (Jer.  li.  13 ;  Ezek.  vii.  19  ;  Zeph.  i.  18). 

II.  Theib  8IN.  1.  Against  Ood.  This  evident  from  the  nature  of  the  offence,  which 
God's  Law  condemns  (Exod.  xx.  17),  as  well  as  from  the  evils  to  which  it  leads— oppres- 
sion, pride,  self-sufficiency,  and  self-destruction.  2.  Against  others.  In  carrying  out  its 
wicked  schemes  covetousness  usually  involves  others  in  ruin.  It  impelled  the  Chaldean 
to  cut  off  many  peoples.  It  drives  those  whom  it  inspires  to  deeds  of  violence,  robbery, 
oppression,  and  murder  (Prov.  i.  19 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  10).  3.  Against  ihemsdves.  The 
covetous  burden  their  own  souls  with  guilt ;  and  so,  while  professing  to  seek  their  own 
happiness  and  safety,  are  in  reality  accelerating  their  own  misery  and  destruction. 

III.  Theib  f^tb.  1.  Disappointment.  Whereas  the  covetous  man  expects  to  set 
his  house  on  high,  he  usually  ends  by  involving  it  in  shame  (Prov.  xv.  27) ;  instead  of 
promoting  its  stability,  as  the  result  of  all  his  scheming  he  commonly  accomplishes  its 
overthrow  (Prov.  xi.  28).  2.  Vengeance.  Likening  the  covetous  nation  or  man  to  a 
house-builder,  the  prophet  says  that  "  the  stone  shall  cry  out  of  the  wall,  and  the  beam 
out  of  the  timber  shall  answer  it,"  as  it  were  uniting  their  voices  in  a  solemn  cry  to 
Heaven  for  vengeance  on  the  avaricious  despoiler.  Almost  literally  fulfilled  in  the 
history  of  Belshazzar  (Dan.  vi.  24 — 28),  the  words  are  often  verified  in  the  experiences 
of  communitic^s  and  individuals  who  are  destroyed  by  that  very  prosperity  in  which 
they  have  tru;  ted  (Prov.  i.  32). 

Lesson.    "  Take  heed,  and  beware  of  covetousness  "  (Luke  xil.  15). 


ou.  IL  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  33 

Vers.  12 — 14. — A  parable  of  woes :  3.  Woe  to  the  ambitious  I  I.  The  criminaltt  of 
THEIR  AMBITION.  1.  The  object  aimed  at.  To  build  towns  and  establish  cities.  Not 
necessarily  a  sinful  project,  unless  the  motive  or  the  means  be  bad.  City-building  may 
have  originated  in  a  spirit  of  defiance  against  Jehovah  (Gen.  iv.  17),  though  this  is  not 
certain ;  but  cities  may  be,  as  they  often  are,  centres  and  sources  of  incalculable  blessing 
to  mankind.  If  they  help  to  multiply  the  forces  of  evil,  they  also  servo,  to  intensify 
those  of  good.  Cities  promote  the  good  order  of  society,  stimulate  intellectual  life, 
increase  the  privileges,  opportunities,  and  comforts  of  individuals,  and  so  tend  to 
accelerate  the  march  of  civilization,  by  quickening  movements  of  reform  and  com- 
bining a>;ainst  public  evils.  Hence,  though  "  God  made  the  country,"  and  "  man  made 
the  town  "  (Cowper),  it  need  not  be  assumed  that  city-fon  nding  is  as;ainst  the  Divine  will 
— it  can  hardly  be,  since  he  himself  has  prepared  for  us  a  city  (Heb.  xi.  16).  Only  aa 
there  are  cities  and  cities,  so  are  there  diversities  in  the  modes  of  their  construction. 
2.  The  means  resorted  to.  Blood  and  iniquity.  Murder,  bloodshed,  transportation,  and 
tyranny  of  every  kind  the  Babylonian  sovereigns  employed  to  enrich  their  capital  and 
strengthen  their  empire ;  ami  one  is  not  sure  whether  in  modern  times  cities  are  not 
sometimes  built  and  kingdoms  strengthened-  by  similar  methods,  viz.  by  wars  of 
aggression  against  foreign  peoples,  and  by  the  enforcement  of  sinful  treaties  upon 
unwilling  but  weak  governments.  With  regard  to  individuals,  there  is  no  room  for 
doubt  that  often  they  build  the  houses  of  which  a  city  consistg  in  the  way  here 
indicateii,  if  not  by  bloodshed  exactly,  at  least  by  iniquity,  paying  for  them  by  ill-gotten 
gains,  and  erecting  them  by  means  of  under-paid  labour. 

II.  The  vanitt  of  theib  ambition.  1.  The  fact  of  it.  They,  t.e.  the  peoples 
(nations  or  individuals),  who  build  towns  and  cities  as  above  described,  "  labour  for 
the  fire"  and  "  weary  themselves  for  vanity  ;"  i.e.  exert  themselves  to  erect  buildings 
that  the  fire  will  one  day  consume,  and  weary  themselves  in  producing  structures  that 
will  one  day  be  laid  in  ruins.  What  is  here  said  about  Babylon  is  true  of  all  earthly 
things  (2  Pet.  iii.  10),  and  ought  to  moderate  the  strength  of  men's  desires  in  running 
after  them.  2.  The  certainty  of  it.  It  is  already  determined  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  It 
is  part  of  his  counsel  that  permanence  shall  not  attach  to  anything  here  below  (1  John 
ii.  17),  and  least  of  all  tp  the  productions  of  iniquity.  Individuals  may  be  allowed  to 
wait  for  their  ultimate  overthrow  till  the  day  of  death  or  the  end  of  the  world,  but 
cities  and  nations,  having  no  future,  are  usually  visited  with  doom  in  the  present.  The 
overthrow  in  time  of  nations  and  empires  that  are  built  up  by  bloodshed  and  iniquity 
may  be  safely  counted  on.  Nineveh,  Babylon,  Rome,  are  examples.  3.  The  reason  of  it, 
"  The  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God."  That  is  to  say, 
because  this  is  the  destiny  of  the  world,  the  goal  towards  which  all  things  terrestrial  are 
moving,  it  is  impossible  that  the  ambitious  projects  of  man  should  be  allowed  per- 
manently to  succeed.  All  superstructures,  however  solidly  built,  must  be  overthrown, 
all  organizations,  however  compactly  formed,  must  be  broken  up,  that  hinder  the 
advancement  of  that  happy  era  which  Jehovah  has  promised.  Hence  the  triumph  of 
Babylon  will  come  to  an  end,  and  with  that  the  glory  of  Jehovah  will  shine  forth  with 
a  brighter  degree  of  effulgence.  Men  will  see  in  that  a  display  of  Jehovah's  character 
»nd  power  never  witnessed  before.  The  knowledge  of  his  glory  will  take  a  wider 
sweep  and  extend  over  a  larger  area  than  before.  The  same  principle  demanded  the 
overthrow  of  Borne,  and  demands  the  final  destruction  of  all  God's  enemies,  that  the 
knowledge  of  his  glory  may  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea. 

Learn :  1.  The  sin  and  folly  of  ambition.    2.  The  beauty  and  wisdom  of  humility. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — A  parable  of  woes ;  4.  Woe  to  the  insolent  J  I.  Wanton  wicked- 
ness. 1.  Symbolically  set  forth.  The  image  employed  is  that  of  giving  to  one's 
neighbour  drink  from ,  a  bottle  with  which  "  vengeance,"  "  fury,"  or  "  wrath,"  or, 
according  to  another  interpretation,  "  poison,"  has  been  mixed,  in  order  to  intoxicate 
him,  that  one  might  have  the  devilish  enjoyment  of  looking  on  his  nakedness,  as  Ham 
did  on  that  of  Noah,  or  generally  of  glorying  in  his  shame.  To  infer  from  this  that 
the  bare  act  of  giving  to  a  neighbour  drink  is  sinful,  is  not  warranted  by  Scripture 
(Prov.  xzxi.  6;  Eocles.  ix.  7  ;  1  Tim.  v.  23),  and  is  guing  beyond  the  intention  of  the 
prophet,  who  introduces  the  "  picture  from  life,"  not  as  an  instance  of  one  sort  of 
wickedness  in  itself,  but  as  a  symbol  of  another  sort  of  wickedness  on  the  part  of  tha 

HABAKKUK.  D 


84  THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK  [oh.  n.  1—20, 

Chaldean.  Still,  the  action  selected  by  the  prophet  has  in  it  several  elements  of 
wickedness  which  are  worthy  of  consideration.  If  the  mere  giving  of  drink  to  another 
is  not  sinful  (Prov.  xxii.  6),  the  doing  so  out  of  malice  ("  adding  venom  or  wrath 
thereto  ")  is,  while  the  sin  is  aggravated  by  practising  deception  in  connection  there- 
with ("  mixing  poison  therewith  " — "drugging  the  wine,"  as  the  modern  phrase  is),  and 
intensified  further  by  the  motive  impelling  thereto  (to  be  able  to  gloat  over  the  neigh- 
bour's degradation),  and  most  of  all  condemned  by  being  done  against  a  neighbour  to 
whom  one  ones  not  wrath  but  lovo,  not  casting  down  but  lifting  up,  not  exulting  in 
his  shame  but  rejoicing  in  his  welfare.  The  words  can  hardly  be  construed  into  a 
condemnation  of  those  who  give  and  take  wine  or  other  drinlts  in  moderation  and  to 
the  glory  of  God  ;  but  they  unquestionably  pronounce  him  guilty  in  God's  sight  who 
deliberately  and  maliciously  makes  his  fellow-man  drunk  in  order  to  enrich  or  amuse 
himself  at  that  fellow-man's  expense.  2.  Historically  acted  out.  (1)  By  the  Chaldean, 
who  drew  the  nations  of  the  earth  into  his  power  by  means  of  poisoned  flatterirs. 
Enticed  to  place  themselves  beneath  his  tutelage,  these  nations  ultimately  fell  into  his 
power,  and  were  by  him  oppressed,  degraded,  and  insulted.  (2)  By  modem  nations, 
who  to  enrich  themselves  enforce  upon  weaker  tribes  treaties  and  traffic  (whether  of 
opium  or  of  strong  drink)  which  lead  to  their  moral  enfeeblement.  (3)  By  private 
individuals,  who  for  their  own  gain  or  pleasure  hurl  their  neighbours  with  sublime 
indifference  into  gulfs  of  misery  and  shame. 

II.  Appropriate  pdnishment.  1.  Of  Divine  sending.  Jehovah's  goblet,  of  which 
he  had  caused  the  nations  to  drink,  should  he  handed  round  to  the  Chaldeans  and 
other  guilty  nations  and  individuals,  who  should  all  be  compelled  to  drink  of  it 
(Ps.  Ixxv.  8).  2.  Of  terrible  severity.  It  should  be  as  shameful  as  that  which  the 
Chaldeans  had  inflicted  upon  the  nations.  It  should  cause  him  also  to  be  drunken, 
and  should  expose  his  foreskin  to  others  (cf.  Isa.  xlvii.  3).  It  should  cover  his  glory 
with  shame  as  when  the  attire  of  a  drunken  man  is  bespattered  with  his  vomiting. 
Of  sinners  generally  it  is  written  that  "shame  shall  be  the  promotion  of  fools"  (Prov. 
iii.  35).  3.  Of  retributive  character.  The  wickedness  of  the  Chaldean  should  return 
upcn  his  own  pate.  The  violence  he  had  done  to  Lebanon  (the  Holy  Land  or  the  fair 
regions  of  the  earth  generally)  should  rebound  upon  himself.  The  destruction  of  the 
beasts',  i.e.  practised  upon  wild  animals  which,  by  their  incursions,  cause  men  to 
assemble  against  them,  should  crush  the  Chaldean  who  had  become  as  a  ferocious 
beast  (Pusey)  ;  or  the  destruction  inflicted  by  the  Chaldean  on  the  wild  beasts  of 
Lebanon  and  other  districts  by  cutting  down  the  wood  thereof  for  military  purposes  or 
for  state  buildings,  should  return  upon  them  with  avenging  fury  (Keil).  The  same 
law  of  retribution  obtains  in  the  punishment  of  sinners  generally  (Matt.  vii.  2). 

Learn:  1.  The  sin  of  drunkenness.  2.  The  greater  sin  of  making  others  drunk. 
S.  The  acme  of  sin,  exulting  in  the  moral  overthrow  of  others.  4.  The  ci  rtainty  that 
none  of  these  acts  of  sin  will  go  unpunished.     5.  The  fitness  that  this  should  be  so. 

Vers.  18,  19. — A  parable  of  woes :  5.  Woe  to  the  idolatrous  I  I.  Idolatry  an 
ABSURDITY.  It  must  cver  be  so.  The  notion  that  any  figure  fashioned  by  man  out  of 
wood  or  stone,  silver  or  gold,  however  carved  or  gilded,  can  either  be  or  represent 
the  Infinite  and  Eternal  One,  carries  the  stamp  of  unreason  on  the  face  of  it  (Ps.  cxv. 
4—8  ;  Isa.  xliv.  19 ;  Jer.  x.  5). 

II.  Idolatry  a  fraud.  Set  up  as  gods,  and  worshipped  as  such,  graven  and 
molten  images  are  a  hideous  imposition  upon  man's  credulity,  being  (1)  lifeless, — "  There 
is  no  breath  at  all  in  the  midst  of  them ; "  (2)  speechless, — the  carved  wood  and  graven 
stone  are  alike  "  dumb  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  2),  and  only  fools  would  say  to  them,  "  Aris'e,  and 
teach  1 "  (3)  truthless, — in  so  far  as  they  can  be  supposed  to  impart  instruction  hein" 
veritable  "  teachers  of  lies ;  "  and  (4)  valueless, — of  no  use  or  profit  to  any  one  on  earth 
and  beneath  the  sun  (Jer.  x.  5). 

III.  Idolatry  a  ruination.  It  brings  with  it  a  woe  upon  all  who  are  deluded  by 
it.  It  entails  upon  them  God's  curse  (Deut.  xxvii.  15)  and  endless  sorrow  (Ps.  xvi.  4) 
and  everlasting  death  (Rev.  xxi.  8). 

Lesson.     "  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols  "  (1  John  v.  21). 

Ver,  20. — The  temple  of  Jehovah.     I.  The  holy  temple.     1.  Its  material  dimen- 


OH.  11.1— 20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  M 

eions.  The  universe.  "  Do  not  I  fill  heaven  and  earth  ?  saith  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  xxiii.  24)k 
"  The  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands,"  but  in 
that  which  his  own  hands  have  fashioned  (Acts  xvii>  24).  He  "fiUeth  all  iu  alL" 
(Eph.  i.  23).  2.  Its  inner  shrine.  Heaven,  the  habitation  uf  his  holiness  (Deut.  xxvi. 
15 ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  15),  his  dwelling-place  (1  Kings  viii.  43 ;  2  Chron.  vi.  33),  the  throne  of 
his  glory  (Ps.  xi.  4 ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  1),  the  place  of  his  immediate  presence  (Fs.  xri.  11 ; 
xvii.  15),  the  abode  of  the  redeemed  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  24 ;  Bev.  iv.  4),  his  temple  proper 
(Rev.  vii.  15  ;  xvi.  1).  3.  Its  distinctive  designation.  Holy,  as  being  the  temple  of  a 
holy  God,  which  only  the  holy  in  spirit  can  enter,  and  iu  which  holy  services  alone 
can  be  performed. 

XL  The  iNDWELLma  Deitt.  1.  His  name.  Jehovah,  the  Self-existent  and 
Immutable  One.  "I  am  that  I  am"  (Exod.  iii.l4).  2.  His  attributes.  Omnipresence, 
since  he  is  in  his  holy  temple  (Exod.  xx,  24 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  24) ;  omniscience,  since  all  are 
before  him  (Ps.  Ixvi.  7 ;  Prov.  v.  21  j  xv.  3).  3.  His  character.  G-racious,  since  he 
condescends  to  receive  the  homage  of  worshippers,  and  to  hold  communication  and 
correspondence  with  them. 

ni.  The  silent  worshippeks.  1,  Their  persons.  "  All  the  earth ; "  i.e.  all  the 
inhabitants  thereof.  If  all  are  not  as  yet  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  20 ;  1  Cor.  x.  20),  all  ought  to 
be  (Exod.  xx.  3;  xxxiv.  14  ;  Matt.  iv.  10),  and  all  one  day  will  be  (Ps.  xxii.  27;  Isa. 
xi.  9 ;  ch.  ii.  14 ;  Rev.  iv.  4)  worshippers  of  the  one  living  and  true  God.  2.  Their 
attitude.  "  Before  him  " — in  his  presence,  beneath  his  eye,  before  his  throne,  at  his  foot- 
■tool.  God's  worshippers  should  strive  to  realize  the  immediate  presence  of  him  whom 
they  worship  (Ps.  li.  11 ;  xcv.  2 ;  c.  2);  3.  Their  devotion.  "  Silence ; "  expressive  of 
reverence  before  his  majesty  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  7),  of  submission  beneath  his  authority 
(Ps.  xxxi.  2),  of  trust  in  his  mercy  (Fs.  cxxx.  5),  of  expectant  waiting  for  his  utter- 
ances whether  of  commandment  or  promise  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  8). 

Learn :  1.  That  the  highest  glory  of  the  universe  is  God's  presence  in  it.  2.  That 
man's  truest  hope  springs  from  the  vicinity  of  God.  3.  That  the  finest  worship 
may  at  times  be  inaudible.  4.  That  God  oftenest  speaks  to  those  who  are  waiting  to 
hear  him. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  3. —  Waiting  /or  the  visum.    In  this  chapter  we  have  set  forth  the  doom  of 

Babylon.  The  prophet  had  given  to  him  glimpses  of  the  future  as  affecting  the 
adversaries  of  his  people.  The  Divine  voice  within  him  gave  assurance  that  the  power 
of  the  oppressor  should  at  length  be  broken.  He  saw  the  solution  of  the  dark  problem 
which  had  perplexed  him  so  much  concerning  the  victory  to  be  gained  over  his  people 
by  the  Chaldeans.  The  triunlpfaing  of  the  wicked  should  be  short,  and  should  be 
followed  by  their  utter  collapse.  Yet  there  would  be  delay  ere  this  should  come  to  pass. 
The  darkness  which  brooded  over  the  nation  should  not  be  at  once  dispersed ;  indeed,  it 
should  even  become  more  dense  in  the  working  out  of  the  Divine  purposes.  Defeat 
must  be  experienced,  the  Captivity  must  be  endured,  and  the  faithful  and  true 
must  suffer  in  consequence  of  sins  not  their  own.  Still,  ultimately,  "  light  should 
arise,"  and  meanwhile,  so  long  as  the  gloom  continued,  it  behoved  him  and  his  people 
to  trust  and  not  be  afraid,  assured  that  in  God's  time  the  vision  of  peace  and  prosperity 
should  dawn  upon  them.  "  Though  it  tarry,  wait  for  it,"  etc.  (ver.  3).  The  truth 
suggested  is  that  even  the  best  of  men  have  to  experience  seasons  of  darkness — times 
when  everything  appears  adverse  to  them,  but  that  it  shall  not  be  ever  thus  with 
them,  that  brighter  scenes  are  before  them,  and  that  hence  their  duty  in  the  present  is 
tranquilly  and  trustfully  to  wait  the  development  of  God's  all-wise  and  gracious 
purposes.     This  teaching  admits  of  various  applications. 

I.  Temporal  oibodmstances.  These  are  not  always  easy  and  prosperous.  Sources 
of  perplexity  may  at  any  moment  arise.  There  may  come  slackness  of  trade ;  new 
rivals  may  appear,  causing  sharp  and  severe  competition  ;  losses  may  have  to  be 
sustained ;  and  in  this  way,  from  a  variety  of  causes,  "  hard  times  "  may  have  to  be 
passed  through.  And  under  such  circumstances  we  should  trust  and  not  be  afraid, 
knowing  that  all  our  interests  are  in  our  loving  Father's  keeping.     He  has  promised  us 


86  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKEUE.  [oh.  n.  l-»2u 

a  sufficiency.  "  His  mercies  are  not  the  swift,  but  they  are  the  sure,  mercies  of  David.' 
We  must  not  be  less  hopeful  and  trustful  than  the  little  red-breast  chirping  near  our 
window-pane,  even  in  the  wintry  weather.  "  Behold  the  fowls  of  the  air,"  etc.  (Matt. 
vi.  26).    Then,  "  though  the  vision,"  etc. 

II.  Life's  soeeows.  These  have  fallen  upon  men  at  times  with  a  crushing  weight. 
All  has  appeared  dark ;  not  a  ray  of  light  has  seemed  to  penetrate  the  gloom.  Yet 
still  they  have  found  that,  whilst  the  vision  of  hope  has  been  deferred,  it  has  been 
realized  at  last,  filling  their  hearts  with  holy  rapture.  Jacob  lived  long  enough  to  see 
that  neither  Joseph  nor  Benjamin  had  been  really  taken  from  him,  and  that  those 
circumstances  which  he  regardecl  as  being  against  him  were  all  designed  to  work  out 
his  lasting  good.  Elijah  cast  himself  down  in  the  wilderness  and  slept.  And,  lo  ! 
angel-guards  attended  him  and  ministered  unto  him,  new  supplies  of  strength  were 
imparted,  the  sunshine  of  the  Divine  favour  beamed  upon  him,  and  he  who  thought  he 
ought  to  die  under  a  lonely  tree  in  the  desert  was  ultimately  altogether  delivered  from 
experiencing  the  pangs  of  the  last  conflict,  and  was  borne  in  triumph  to  the  realms  of 
everlasting  peace.  The  Sbunammite  had  her  lost  child  restored ;  the  exiled  returned  at 
length  with  songs  unto  Zion.  The  Egyptians  painted  one  of  their  goddesses  as  standing 
upon  a  rock  in  the  sea,  the  waves  roaring  and  dashing  upon  her,  and  with  this  motto, 
"  Storms  cannot  move  me."  What  that  painted  goddess  was  in  symbol  we  should 
seek  to  be  in  reality,  unmoved  and  uorufQed  by  the  tempests  which  arise  in  the  sea  of 
life,  assured  that  there  awaits  us  a  peaceful  and  tranquil  haven.  TheUt  "though  the 
vision,"  etc. 

III.  Spibitual  depbession.  The  Christian  life  is  not  all  shadow.  It  has  its  sunny 
as  well  as  its  shady  side.  The  good  have  their  seasons  of  joy— seasons  in  which, 
believing,  they  can  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  Yet  they  have 
also  their  seasons  of  depression.  There  is  "  the  midnight  of  the  soul,"  when  the  vision 
of  spiritual  light  and  peace  and  joy  tarries;  and  it  is  then  their  truest  wisdom  to  trust 
and  to  wait,  assured  that  in  due  time  God  will  make  them  glad  by  lifting  upon  them 
"  the  light  of  his  countenance."  "  Who  is  among  you  that  feareth  the  Lord  ?  "  etc. 
(Isa.  1. 10) ;  "  Though  the  vision,"  etc.  (ver.  3). 

IV.  Christian  woek.  The  great  purpose  of  this  is  the  deliverance  of  men  from,  the 
thraldom  of  sin.  The  vision  we  desire  to  behold  an  accomplished  reality  is  that  of  the 
dry  bones  clothed  afresh,  inspired  with  life,  and  standing  upon  their  feet,  an  exceeding 
great  army,  valiant  for  God  and  righteousness.  But  the  vision  tarries  I  Spiritual  death 
and  desolation  reign  1  What  then  ?  Shall  we  despair  ?  Shall  we  express  doubt  as  to 
whether  the  transformation  of  the  realm  of  death  into  a  realm  of  spiritual  life  shall 
ever  be  effected  ?  No ;  though  the  vision  tarry,  we  wiU  wait  for  it,  knowing  that  it 
will  surely  come ;  for  "  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."  So  Bobert  Moffat 
laboured  for  years  without  gaining  any  converts  from  heathenism,  but  at  length  a  few 
were  won,  and  he  commemorated  with  these  the  death  of  Christ.  "  Our  feelings," 
he  wrote,  "  were  such  as  pen  cannot  describe.  We  were  as  those  that  dreamed  while 
we  realized  the  promise  on  which  our  souls  often  hung  (Ps.  cxxvi.  6).  The  hour  had 
arrived  on  which  the  whole  energies  of  our  souls  had  been  intensely  fixed,  when  we 
should  see  a  Church,  however  small,  gathered  from  amongst  a  people  who  had  so  long 
boasted  that  neither  Jesus  nor  we  his  servants  should  ever  see  Bechuanas  worship 
and  confess  him  as  their  Eing."  And  so  shall  the  faith  and  patience  of  all  workers  for 
Ood  be  rewarded,  since  the  issue  is  guaranteed  and  the  harvest-home  of  a  regenerated 
world  shall  be  celebrated  amidst  rapturous  joy. — S.  D.  H. 

Yen  4  (last  clause).*—?^  l^e  of  faith.  There  are  two  forms  of  life  referred  te  in 
Scripture — the  life  of  sense,  and  the  life  of  faith.  These  differ  in  their  bent  (Rom.  viii. 
5),  and  also  in  the  issues  to  which  they  tend  (Bom.  viii.  13).  The  sincerely  righteous 
man,  "the  just,"  has  tested  both  these.  Time  was  when  he  lived  the  former,  but, 
satisfied  as  to  its  unreality,  he  now  looks  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen,  but  at 
those  which  are  unseen  (2  Cor.  iv.  18).  His  motto  is  Gal.  ii.  20.  "  The  just  shall  live 
by  his  faith."  These  words  are  quoted  by  St.  Paul  (Rom.  i.  17;  Gal.  iii.  11),  and  also 
by  the  writer  of  the  Epislle  to  the  Hebrews  (x.  38).  The  New  Testament  writers 
were  diligent  students  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  we  may  learn  from  their  example 
not  to  treat  those  more  ancient  writings  as  being  of  comparative  unimportance.    They, 


OH.  n.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKCJK.  87 

however,  use  this  expression  of  the  Prophet  Habakkuk  in  a  somewhat  different  senss 
from  that  in  which  he  employed  it,  and  apply  it  to  the  exposition  and  enforcement  of 
the  important  doctrine  of  "justification  by  faith."  The  thought  possessing  the  mind 
of  the  seer  was  that  the  righteous  man  exercises  an  implicit  confidence  in  God;  and 
adopting  this  course  is  preserved  and  protected,  and  experiences  tranquillity  and 
happinass  under  every  circumstance  of  life.  In  reflecting  upon  his  words  our  attention 
may  appropriately  be  directed  to  some  of  the  circumstances  in  which  "  the  just "  may 
be  placed,  with  a  view  to  indicating  how  that,  under  these,  their  faith  in  God  strengthens 
and  sustains  them,  and  enables  them  truly  to  live. 

I.  "  The  just  shall  live  by  their  faith  "  in  times  of  declension  m  ebligion.  Such 
dedension  prevailed  in  the  age  to  which  this  prophet  belonged.  The  mournful  words 
.with  which  his  prophecy  commences  indicate  this  (eh.  i.  2 — t).  Many  similar  times 
of  declension  have  risen  among  the  nations,  and  when  the  falling  away  from  the  true 
and  the  right  has  been  widespread.  So  also  has  it  been  with  Christian  communities. 
Watchfulness  has  been  neglected,  and  prayer  has  been  restrained ;  there  has  been  a  lack 
of  the  spirit  of  Christian  unity  and  concord  ;  there  has  been  the  fire  upon  the  altar,  but, 
alas  1  it  has  been  in  embers ;  the  lamp  has  been  burning,  but  it  has  given  only  a  flicker- 
ing light.  "  The  just,"  under  such  circumstances,  are  grieved  as  they  view  the  state 
of  religion  aropnd  them,  but  whilst  sad  at  heart  in  view  of  such  declension  and  of  the 
way  in  which  it  dishonours  God,  they  are  also  inspired  with  confidence  and  hope. 
Their  trust  is  in  him.  They  know  that  with  him  is  "the  residue  of  the  Spirit." 
Whilst  praying  the  prayer  of  this  prophet,  "  0  Lord,  revive  thy  work  "  (ch.  iii.  2),  they 
can  also,  like  him,  express  this  confident  assurance,  "  For  the  earth  shall  be  filled,"  etc. 
(ch.  iL  14).  And  so  it  comes  to  pass  that  in  the  season  of  declension  in  religion,  when 
many  around  Lave  lost  the  fervour  of  their  love  and  loyalty  to  God  and  to  righteous- 
ness, "  the  just  shall  live  by  his  faith." 

II.  "  The  just  shaU  live  by  their  faith  "  in  times  of  national  oalamitt.  Chastise- 
ment follows  transgressions  to  nations  as  well  as  to  individuals.  Judah  had  wandered 
Irom  God,  and,  lo  1  he  permitted  them  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Chaldeans ;  and 
it  was  the  mission  of  Habakkuk  to  foretell  the  approaching  Captivity.  National 
calamities  have  been  experienced  by  our  own  people.  Sometimes  it  has  come  to  us  in 
the  form  of  war.  The  appeal  has  been  made  to  the  arbitrament  of  the  sword ;  and  even 
althoLgh  we  have  been  victorious,  the  triumph  has  been  secured  at  an  enormous 
sacrifice  of  life,  with  all  the  bitter  suffering  to  survivors  thus  involved.  Or  pestilence 
has  prevailed.  The  destroying  angel  has  swept  over  the  land,  sparing  neither  the  old 
nor  the  young,  and  numbering  thousands  among  his  victims.  And  in  the  midst  of  these 
faith  grasps  the  rich  promises  of  God  and  rests  unswervingly  on  him.  Let  the 
Chaldean  warriors  come  on  horses  swifter  than  the  leopards  and  more  fierce  than  the 
evening  wolves,  let  them  in  bitterness  and  haste  traverse  the  breadth  of  the  land, 
resolved  to  possess  the  dwelling-places  that  are  not  theirs,  let  them  scoff  at  kings  and 
scorn  princes  and  gather  the  captivity  as  the  sand,  still  the  hearts  of  the  faithftd  shall 
be  upborne,  for  in  the  time  of  national  calamity,  and  when  hearts  uncentred  from  God 
are  breaking,  "  the  just  shall  live  by  his  faith." 

III.  Leaving  the  exact  connection  of  the  text,  the  truth  contained  in  it 

EECEIVES    ILLTJSTBATION  FEOM   THE   VABIED  OIECUMSTANOBS  IN    WHICH   THE  GOOD  ABB 

PLACED  HEBE.  Take  the  two  extremes  of  prosperity  and  adversity.  1.  Some  enjoy 
great  temporal  prosperity.  The  temptations  of  siich  are  (1)  pride,  (2)  worldliness, 
(3)  indolence,  (4)  selfishness,  and  yielding  to  which  they  lack  those  higher  joys  and 
nobler  aspirations  in  which  consists  the  true  life.  Walking  by  faith,  the  good  man  is 
preserved  from  yielding  to  the  influence  of  these  temptations.  Strong  iii/aith,h.e  will 
see  that  all  his  prosperity  is  to  be  ascribed  to  him  who  giveth  power  to  get  wealth,  and 
thus  pride  will  be  laid  low.  Strong  in  faith,  he  will  realize  that  there  are  other 
treasures,  incorruptible  and  imfading,  and  with  mind  and  heart  directed  to  the  securing 
of  these,  he  will  think  less  of  this  world's  pomp  and  vanity  and  show.  Strong  in  faith, 
he  will  feel  that  he  has  a  work  to  do  for  God,  and  that  the  additional  influence 
prosperity  has  secured  to  him  ought  to  be  held  as  a  sacred  trust  to  be  used  to  God's 
glory,  and  hence  he  will  be  preserved  from  seeking  merely  his  own  ease  and  enjoyment. 
And  strong  in  faith,  he  will  view  himself  as  a  steward  of  all  that  he  has,  and  will 
therefore  seek  to  be  God's  almoner  to  the  needy  around  him.     So  shall  he  live  by  hit 


38  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  [ch.  ii.  1— 20 

faith.  2.  Others  have  to  pass  through  adverse  scenes;  and  the  faith  that  streogthena 
in  prosperity  will  also  sustain  amidst  life's  unfavourable  influences.  Besting  in  the 
Lord  and  in  the  glorious  assurances  of  his  Word,  his  servants  can  outride  the  severest 
storm,  quietly  acquiescing  and  bravely  enduring,  Rimkin  remarks  that  there  is  good 
in  everything  in  God's  universe,  tliat  there  is  hardly  a  roadside  pond  or  pool  which 
has  not  as  much  landscape  in  it  as  above  it,  that  it  is  at  our  own  will  that  we  sea 
in  that  despised  stream  either  the  refuse  of  the  street  or  the  image  of  the  sky,  that 
whilst  the  unobservant  man  knows  simply  that  the  roadside  pool  is  muddy,  the 
great  painter  sees  beneath  and  behind  the  brown  surface  wiiat  will  t-ake  him  a  day's 
work  to  follow,  but  he  follows  it,  cost  what  it  will,  and  is  amply  recompensed,  and  that 
the  great  essential  is  an  eye  to  apprehend  and  to  appreciate  the  beautiful  which  lies 
about  us  everywhere  in  God's  world.  And  this  in  what  we  want  spiritually — the  eye 
of  faith,  and  then  shall  we  see,  even  in  the  most  opposite  of  the  experiences  which 
meet  us  in  life,  God's  gracious  operation,  and  the  vision  shall  thriil  us  with  holy  joy. 
"  The  just  shall  live  by  his  faith."  I'his  life  of  faith  is  a  life  characterized  by  true 
blessedness.  There  can  be  no  real  happiness  whilst  we  are  opposing  our  will  to  the 
will  of  God ;  but  if  our  will  is  renewed  by  his  grace,  if  we  are  trusting  in  the  Saviour 
and  following  him  along  the  way  of  obedience  to  the  Divine  authority  and  of  resigna- 
tion to  the  Divine  purpose,  then  amidst  all  the  changing  scenes  of  our  life  our  peace 
shall  flow  like  a  river,  and  we  shall  experience  joy  lasting  as  Good's  throne. — S.  D.  U. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — Covetousness.  In  the  remaining  portion  of  this  chRpter  the  prophet 
dwells  upon  the  sins  prevailing  amongst  the  Chaldeans,  and  indicates  the  misery  these 
should  entail.  His  utterances,  taken  together,  form  a  satirical  ode  directed  against  the 
Chaldeans,  who,  though  not  named,  are  yet  most  clearly  personified.  In  the  general 
statement  respecting  them  in  ver.  5  allusion  is  made  to  their  rapacity,  and  the  first 
stanza  in  the  song  is  specially  directed  to  this  greed,  which  was  so  characteristic  of 
that  nation.  The  words  of  the  prophet  suggest  to  us  respecting  the  sin  of  covetousness, 
that— 

I.  It  is  uirsATisTYiNa  in  its  natubg.  It  is  compared  (ver.  5)  to  Hades  and  death, 
that  crave  continually  for  more.  "  The  covetous  man  is  like  Tantalus,  up  to  the  chin 
in  water,  yet  thirsty."  Necessarily  it  must  be  so,  for  "  a  man's  life  consisteth  not  in 
the  abundance  of  the  things  that  he  possesseth  "  (Luke  xii.  15).  Wealth  can  only  yield 
satisfaction  in  proportion  as  it  is  acquired,  not  for  its  own  sake,  but  to  be  consecrated 
to  high  and  holy  purposes.     George  Herbert  sings — 

**  Be  thrifty,  but  not  covetous.    Qtet,  to  live  t 
Then  liveand  use  it :  else  it  is  not  true 
That  thou  hast  gotten." 

n.  It  leads  to  injustice  and  oppebssion.  The  covetous  man  "increaseth  that 
which  is  not  his  "  (ver.  6).  He  disregards  the  rights  of  others.  He  uses  all  who  come 
within  his  power  with  a  view  to  his  own  aggrandizement.  Self  is  the  primary  con- 
sideration with  him,  and  influences  all  his  movements.  "  He  oppresseth  the  poor  to 
increase  his  riches,"  and  out  of  their  grinding  poverty  and  want  he  grows  fat.  He  is 
ready  to  take  any  mean  advantage  so  as  to  add  to  his  own  stores.  He  demands  heavy 
security  of  the  debtor,  and  exacts  crushing  interest,  and  "  ladeth  himself  with  thick 
clay  "  (ver.  6),  i.e.  "  loadeth  himself  with  the  burden  of  pledges," 

IIL  It  incurs  sure  retribution.  Whether  this  sin  is  committed  by  individuals 
or  nations,  it  is  alike  "  woe  "  unto  such  ;  for  there  shall  assuredly  follow  Divine  judg- 
ments. Habakkuk  represents  the  Chaldeans  as  one  who  had  gathered  men  and 
nations  into  his  net  (ch.  i.  14 — 17),  and  as  having  "  spoiled  many  nations  "  (ver.  8),  and 
Jeremiah  confirms  these  representations  of  their  rapacity  by  describing  them  as  "  the 
hammer "  (1.  23)  and  the  destroyer  (li.  26)  of  the  whole  earth ;  and  they  also  declare 
that  there  should  overtake  them  certain  retribution  for  the  wrongs  they  had  thus  done 
and  the  sorrows  they  had  thus  occasioned,  and  that  the  spoiler  should  be  at  length 
spoiled  (vers.  7,  8).  In  the  destruction  of  the  Chaldean  empire  by  the  Modes  and 
Persians  we  have  the  fulfilment  of  the  threateiiings,  whilst,  at  the  same  time,  we  hear 
the  voice  of  God  speaking  to  us  in  the  events  of  history  and  saying,  "  Take  heed,  and 
baware  of  covetousness  1 " — S.  D.  H. 


OH.  n.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF   HABAKKUK.  39 

Vers,  9 — 11. — Corrupt  ambition.  Ambition  may  be  pure  and  lofty,  and  when  this 
is  the  case  it  cannot  be  too  highly  commended.  It  is  "the  germ  from  which  all 
growth  of  nobleness  proceeds."  "It  is  to  the  human  heart  what  spring  is  to  the 
earth,  making  every  root  and  bud  and  bough  desire  to  be  more."  Headway  cannot  be 
made  in  life  apart  from  it,  and  destitute  of  this  spirit  a  man  must  be  outstripped  in  the 
race.  Ambition,  however,  may  take  the  opposite  form,  and  it  is  to  ambition  corrupt 
and  low  in  its  nature  that  these  verses  refer.  Observe  indicated  here  concerning  such 
unworthj-  ambition — 

I.  Its  aim.  The  concern  of  the  rulers  of  Babylon  was  to  secure  unlimited  supremacy, 
to  reach  an  eminence  where,  secure  from  peril  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  ease  aud  luxury, 
they  might,  without  restraint,  exercise  despotic  control  over  the  nations.  "  That  he 
may  set  his  nest  on  high,  that  he  may  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  evil "  (ver.  9). 
False  ambition,  whether  in  individuals  or  nations,  is  directed  to  the  attainment  of 
worldly  distinction,  authority,  and  power,  and  has  its  foundation  in  pride  and  self- 
esteem. 

II.  Its  trNSORUPULOTJSNESS.  "  They  coveted  an  evil  covetousness  to  their  house  " 
(ver.  9),  totally  disregarding  the  sacredness  of  property  and  the  rights  of  man.  Their 
acts  were  marked  by  oppression,  plunder,  and  cruelty;  they  impoverislied  feebler 
nations  anr"  even  "  cut  off  many  people  "  (ver.  10)  in  seeking  the  accomplish  ment  of 
their  selfish  purposes.  So  is  it  ever  that  "  such  ambition  breaks  the  ties  of  blood  and 
forgets  the  obligations  of  manhood." 

III.  Its  ISSUE.  The  prophet  indicates  that  all  this  self-seeking  and  self-glorying 
must  end  in  disgrace  and  dishonour.  1.  The  very  monuments  reared  thus  in  the  spirit 
of  pride  should  bear  adverse  testimony.  In  the  language  of  poetry  he  represents  the 
materials  which  they  had  obtained  by  plunder  and  which  they  had  brought  from  other 
lands  into  Chaldea,  to  be  used  in  the  construction  of  their  stately  edifices,  as  protesting 
against  the  way  in  which  they  had  been  obtained  and  the  purposes  to  which  they  had 
been  applied  (ver.  11).  2.  Shame  and  ruin  should  overtake  the  schemers  aud  plotters 
themselves.  "  Thou  hast  sinned  against  thy  soul "  (ver.  10).  Whatever  their  material 
gain,  they  had  become  spiritually  impoverished  by  their  course  of  action.  They  had 
degraded  their  higher  nature  aud  had  incurred  guilt  and  condemnation.  3.  All 
connected  with  them  should  share  in  the  disgrace  and  dishonour.  "  Thou  hast  consulted 
shame  to  thy  house"  (ver.  10);  "God  visits  the  iniquities  of  the  fathers  upon  the 
children,  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  him  "  (Exod.  xx.  5) ; 
"He  that  is  greedy  of  gain  troubleth  his  own  house"  (Prov.  xv.  27).  Men  who  have 
sought,  by  grasping  and  extortion,  or  by  war  and  conquest,  to  establish  and  perpetuate 
a  high  reputation,  have,  through  their  uiirighteous  deeds,  passed  away  in  ignominy, 
leaving  to  their  posterity  a  tarnished  and  dishonoured  name.  "The  house  of  the 
wicked  shall  be  overthrown ;  but  the  tabernacle  of  the  upright  shall  flourish  "  (Prov. 
xiv.  11).— S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — The  two  kingdoms:  a  contrast.  Reference  is  made  in  these  verses 
to  two  kingdoms — the  kingdom  of  Babylon  and  the  kingdom  of  God ;  and  this 
association  serves  to  indicate  several  points  of  contrast. 

I.  The  olort  of  the  kinodoms  of  this  world  is  material  ;  the  glory  of  the 
KINGDOM  OF  GoD  18  SPIRITUAL.  The  glory  of  Chaldea  centred  in  its  magnificent  city 
of  Babylon,  so  grand  in  its  situation,  its  edifices,  it  defences,  and  in  the  stores  of  treasure 
it  contained,  its  greatness  consisting  thus  in  its  material  resources ;  but  the  glory  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  spiritual.  It  is  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  "  that  constitutes  its  excel- 
lence— all  moral  beauty  and  spiritual  grace  abounding  therein. 

II.  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  have  often  been  founded  and  established  bt 

MEANS  OP  wrongdoing  ;    THE  KINGDOM  OF  GoD   IS  FOUNDED  AND  ESTABLISHED  IN  PURE 

righteousness  and  TRUE  HOLINESS.  The  Chaldeans,  by  their  superior  might  and 
powers,  conquered  other  tribes,  and  with  the  spoils  of  war  and  the  forced  labour  of  the 
conquered  they  reared  their  cities.  They  "built  a  town  with  blood,  and  established  a 
city  by  iniquity "  (ver.  12) ;  but  "  a  sceptre  of  righteousness  is  the  sceptre  of  God's 
kingdom." 

III.  Human  toil  is  involved  in  the  interests  of  both  ;  yet  notice,  by  way  of 
contrast :  1.  Toil  in  the  interests  of  earthly  kingdoms  is  often  compulsory  and  is  rendered 


40  THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK.  [oh.  n.  1— Sft 

reluctantly — aliens  who  had  fallen  as  captives  into  the  power  of  the  Chaldeans  were 
made  to  labour  and  serve ;  but  toil  in  the  interests  of  God's  kingdom  is  ever  voluntary 
and  is  rendered  lovingly  and  without  constraint.  2.  Toil  in  the  interests  of  earthly 
kingdoms  is  often  toil  for  that  which  shaU  be  destroyed,  and  which  shall  come  to  nought. 
"  The  people  shall  labour  in  the  very  fire,  and  the  people  shall  weary  themselves  for  very 
vanity  "  (ver.  13),  i.e.  they  should  labour  in  erecting  edifices  which  should  be  consumed 
by  fire,  and  thus  their  toil  prove  in  vain ;  but  toU  in  the  interests  of  OocPi  kingdom 
shall  prove  abiding  and  eternal  in  its  results.  3.  The  workers  of  iniquity,  no  matter 
how  earnest  their  toil,  should  be  covered  eventually  with  dishonour  and  shame — "  Woe 
to  himl "  etc.  (ver.  12) — but  all  true  toilers  for  God  and  righteousness  shall  ha  divinely 
approved  and  honoured. 

IV,  The  prosperity  or  material  kingdoms  is  uncertain  j  whbrbas  the  triumph 
OF  God's  spiritual  kingdom  is  assured.  "  The  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
shall  cover  the  earth." 

V.  Earthly  kingdoms  are  limited  in  extent  ;  but  the  bpieitual  kingdom  of 
OUB  God  shall  attain  unto  universal  dominion.  "  The  earth  shall  be  filled  with 
the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea." — S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — God's  retributive  justice.  It  is  a  Divine  law  that "  whatsoever  a  man 
soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap  "  (Gal.  vi.  7).  God  is  just,  and  hence  will  cause  retribution 
to  be  experienced  by  evil-doers.  A  striking  illustration  of  the  operation  of  this  great 
law  Is  presented  in  these  verses.    Consider — 

I.  The  course  the  Chaldeans  had  adopted  toward  others.  (Ver.  16.)  The 
reference  in  this  verse  is  not  to  the  sin  of  drunkenness.  That  sin  is  a  distressing  and 
degrading  one,  and  they  are  true  lovers  of  their  kind  who  seek  to  lessen  its  ravages,  to 
deliver  men  from  its  thraldom.  It  has  proved  a  blight  to  the  children  of  men  all  down 
the  ages.  The  Chaldeans  were  notorious  for  it ;  revellings,  banquetings,  excess  of  wine, 
marked  them  all  through  their  history,  and  specially  signalized  the  close  of  their 
career.  The  prophet,  however,  here  simply  used  this  vice  as  a  symbol  in  order  to  set 
forth  vividly  the  course  the  Babylonians  had  adopted  towards  others,  and  specially  to 
indicate  their  deceitfulness.  Drink  drowns  the  reason,  and  places  its  victim  at  the 
mercy  of  any  who  are  mean  enough  to  take  advantage  of  him.  And  the  thought  the 
prophet  wished  to  convey  here  (ver.  16)  seems  to  be  that  as  a  man,  desiring  to  injure 
another,  persuades  him  to  take  stimulant,  and  thus,  whilst  professing  good  intentions, 
effects  his  evil  purpose,  so  had  the  Chaldeans  intoxicated  feebler  powers  by  professions 
of  friendship  and  regard,  drawing  them  into  alliance,  and  then  turning  upon  them 
to  their  discomfiture  and  ruin.    And  he  proceeds  to  indicate— 

IL  The  course  God  would  adopt  towards  them.  (Vers.  16, 17.)  And  in  thi» 
he  traced  the  Divine  retribution  of  their  iniquity.  He  saw  prophetically  that :  1.  As 
they  had  taken  advantage  of  others,  so  others  should  in  due  course  take  advantage  of 
them  (ver.  16)  and  bring  them  to  shame.  2.  As  they  would  lay  waste  his  country 
and  take  his  people  into  captivity,  so  subsequently  they  should  themselves  be  brought 
to  noufjht,  and  their  empire  pass  out  of  their  hands  (ver.  17 ;  comp.  Isa,  xiv.  8,  in  which 
the  fir  trees  and  cedars  are  made  to  rejoice  in  the  overthrow  of  Babylon).  Our  prophet 
had  been  perplexed  at  the  thought  of  the  Chaldeans  as  being  the  instruments  of  the 
Divine  justice  in  reference  to  his  own  sinful  people,  but  the  mystery  was  clearing 
away,  and  in  the  final  overthrow  of  Babylon  he  here  foreshadowed,  he  traced  another 
token  that  "  the  Lord  is  righteous  in  all  his  ways." — S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  18 — 20. —  Worship,  false  and  true.  The  prophet,  in  recounting  the  sins  of 
the  Chaldeans,  finally  recalled  to  mind  the  idolatry  prevailing  amongst  them.  He 
thought  of  the  temple  of  Bel,  "  casting  its  shadow  far  and  wide  over  city  and  plain," 
and  of  the  idolatrous  worship  of  which  it  was  the  centre,  and  he  broke  forth  in  words 
expressive  of  the  utmost  scorn  and  contempt,  and  then  closed  his  song  by  pointing  to 
him  who  alone  is  worthy  to  receive  the  devout  adoration  and  adoring  praise  of  all  the 
Inhabitants  of  the  earth.    Notice — 

I.  His  exposure  of  the  weakness  and  folly  of  idolatry.  (Vers.  18,  19.) 
1.  He  appealed  to  experience.  His  own  people  unhappily  had  been  betrayed  into 
Idolatry,  and  he  asked  them  whether  they  had  ever  profited  thereby  (ver.  18).    2.  He 


OL  XL  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKDK.  41 


appealed  to  reason.  The  maker  of  anything  must  of  necessity  be  greater  than  that 
which  he  fashions  with  his  own  hands  and  as  the  result  of  his  own  skill ;  hence  what 
greater  absurdity  could  there  be  than  for  the  maker  of  a  dumb  idol  to  be  reposing  his 
trust  in  the  thing  he  has  formed  (ver.  18)  ?  3.  He  denounced  the  idol  priests,  who,  by 
using  dumb  idols  as  their  instrument,  made  these  "  teachers  of  lies  "  (ver.  18).  4.  He 
declared  the  hopelessness  resulting  from  reposing  trust  in  these.  "  Woe  unto  him  1 " 
etc.  (ver.  19).  5.  He  indulged  in  scornful  satire  (ver.  19).  This  verse  may  be 
fittingly  compared  with  Elijah's  irony  of  speech  addressed  on  Carmel  to  the  prophets 
of  Baal  (1  Kings  xviii.  27).  The  verse  is  more  effectively  rendered  in  the  Revised 
Version — 

"Woe  unto  him  that  saith  to  the  wood,  Awake  I 

To  the  dumb  stone,  Arise  I 

Shall  this  teach  I    Behold,  it  is  laid  over  with  gold  and  silveit 

And  there  is  no  breath  at  all  in  the  midst  of  it." 

The  weakness  and  folly  of  idolatry  as  practised  in  heathen  lands  is  readily  admitted  by 
ua ;  yet  we  are  prone  to  forget  that  the  idolatrous  spirit  may  prevail  even  amongst 
those  who  are  encompassed  by  influences  eminently  spiritual.  Love  of  the  sesthetical 
may  lead  us  to  become  sensuous  rather  than  spiritual  in  worship.  Attachment  to 
Bcience  may  cause  us  to  slight  the  supernatural  and  to  deify  nature.  Desire  for  worldly 
success  may  result  in  our  bowing  down  in  the  temple  of  Mammon ;  so  that  the  counsel 
is  still  needed,  "Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols"  (1  John  v.  21). 

IL  His  pbesentation  of  Jehovah  as  being  supkemb  and  as  alonb  entitled  to 
THE  BBVEEBNT  HOMAGE  OF  HiTUAN  HEARTS.  "  But  the  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple ;  let 
all  the  earth  keep  silence  before  him."  1.  The  contrast  presented  here  is  truly 
sublime.  From  impotent  idols  the  seer  raises  his  thoughts  and  directs  attention  to 
the  living  God.  2.  The  temple  in  Jerusalem  was  the  recognized  dwelling-place  of 
God.  The  prophet  saw  looming  in  the  distance  the  invasion  of  his  country  by  the 
idolatrous  Chaldeans,  followed  by  the  destruction  of  the  temple  and  the  desecration  of 
all  he  held  so  sacred  in  association  with  it.  Still  he  was  assured  that  through  all  the 
coming  changes  Jehovah  would  remain  the  Supreme  Ruler  and  Controller.  TJnconfined 
to  temples  made  with  hands,  their  overthrow  could  not  affect  his  rnle.  "  His  throne 
is  in  the  heavens ; "  he  reigns  there  ;  and  fills  heaven  and  earth,  dominating  the 
universe,  and  guiding  and  overruling  all  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  alL-wise  and 
loving  purposes.  "The  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple."  3.  Our  true  position  as  his 
servants  is  that  of  reverentially  waiting  before  him,  acqviiescing  in  his  will,  trusting  in 
his  Word,  assured  that,  despite  the  prevailing  mysteries,  the  end  shall  reveal  his  wisdom 
and  his  love.  He  says  to  us,  "Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God."  Then  let  no 
murmuring  word  be  spoken,  even  when  clouds  and  darkness  seem  to  be  round  about 
him ;  the  processes  of  his  working  are  hidden  from  our  weak  view,  but  the  issue  is 
sure  to  vindicate  the  unerring  wisdom  and  infinite  graciousness  of  his  rule.  Happy 
the  man  who  is  led  from  doubt  to  faith,  who,  like  this  seer,  beginning  with  the 
complaint,  "  0  Lord,  how  long  shall  I  cry,  and  thou  wilt  not  hear  1 "  etc.  (ch.  i.  2),  is 
led  through  calm  reflection  and  hallowed  communion  to  cherish  the  conviction  that 
"  the  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple,  and  that  all  the  earth  should  keep  silence  before 
him."— S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Man's  moral  mission  to  the  world,  "  I  will  stand  upon  my  watch,  and 
set  me  upon  the  tower,  aud  will  watch  to  see  what  he  will  say  unto  me,  and  what  I 
shall  answer  when  I  am  reproved.  And  the  Lord  answered  me,  and  said.  Write  the 
vision,  and  make  it  plain  upon  tables,  that  he  may  run  that  readeth  it.  For  the  vision 
is  yet  for  an  appointed  time,  but  at  the  end  it  shall  speak,  and  not  lie :  though  it  tarry, 
wait  for  it;  because  it  will  surely  come,  it  will  not  tarry."  The  prophet,  after  his 
supplicatory  cry,  receives  a  Divine  command  to  write  the  oracle  in  plain  characters, 
because  it  was  certain,  although  it  would  not  be  immediately  fulfilled.  The  first  verse 
is  a  kind  of  monologue.  The  prophet  holds  conversation  with  himself ;  and  he  resolves 
to  ascend  his  watch-tower,  and  look  out  for  a  Divine  revelation.  It  is  thought  by 
many  critics  that  the  watch-tower  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  something  external,  some 
lofty  place  commanding  an  extensive  view  and  profound  silence,  but  the  recesses  of  his 
swn  mind,  into  which  he  would  withdraw  himself  by  devout  contemplation.    I  shall 


la  THE   BOOK   OF    ilABAKKUK.  [oh.  n.  1— Ztt 

use  the  words  of  the  text  to  illustrate  man's  moral  mission  to  the  tom-ld.  Wherefore 
are  we  in  this  world  ?  Both  the  theories  and  the  practical  conduct  of  mea  give  different 
answers  to  this  all-importaat  problem.    I  shall  take  the  answer  from  the  text,  and 

observe — 

I.  OUB  MISSION  HERB  IS  TO  BBOBIVB  00MMUNI0ATI0N8  FBOM  THE   EtBBNAL  MiND. 

"  I  will  stand  upon  mj  watch,  and  set  me  upon  the  tower,  and  will  watch  to  see  what 
he  will  say  unto  me."  That  man  is  constituted  for  and  required  to  receive  communi- 
cations from  the'  Infinite  Mind,  and  that  he  cannot  realize  his  destiny  without  this, 
appears  evident  from  the  following  considerations.  1.  From  his  nature  as  a  spiritual 
heing.  (1)  He  has  an  instinct  for  it.  He  naturally  calls  out  for  the  living  God.  As 
truly  as  the  eye  is  made  to  receive  light,  the  soul  is  made  to  receive  thought  from  God. 
(2)  He  has  a  capacity  for  it.  Unlike  the  lower  creatures  around  us,  we  can  receive 
the  ideas  of  God.  (3)  He  has  a  necessity  for  it.  God's  ideas  are  the  quickening  powers 
of  the  soul.  2.  From  his  condition  as  a  fallen  heing.  Sin  has  shut  out  God  from  the 
soul,  created  a  dense  cloud  between  us  and  him.  3.  From  the  purpose  of  Ohrisffs 
mediation.  Why  did  Christ  come  into  the  world  ?  To  bring  the  human  soul  and  God 
together,  that  the  Lord  might  "  dwell  amongst  men."  4.  From  the  special  manifesta- 
tions of  Ood  for  the  purpose.  I  say  special,  for  nature,  history,  heart,  and  conscience 
are  the  natural  orders  of  communication  between  the  human  and  the  Divine.  But  we 
have  something  more  than  these — the  Bible ;  this  is  special.  Here  he  speaks  to  man 
at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners,  etc.  5.  From  the  general  teaching  of  the  Bible. 
"  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,"  etc. ;  "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door,"  etc.  But 
how  shall  we  receive  these  communications  ?  We  must  ascend  the  "  tower  "  of  quiet, 
earnest,  devout  thought,  and  there  must  "  watch  to  see  what  he  will  say." 

II.  OUB   MISSION   HEBE   18   TO  IMPAET   COMMUNICATIONS   FBOM  THE   EtBBNAL   MiND. 

"Write  the  vision,  and  make  it  plain  upon  tables,  that  he  may  run  that  readeth 
it."  Prom  this  we  may  conclude  that  writing  is  both  an  ancient  and  a  divinely 
sanctioned  art.  Thank  God  for  books  I  That  we  have  to  impart  as  well  as  to  receive 
is  evident :  1.  From  the  tendency  of  Divine  thoughts  to  express  themselves.  It  is  of 
the  nature  of  religious  ideas  that  they  struggle  for  utterance.  What  we  have  seen  and 
heard  we  cannot  but  speak.  2.  From  the  universal  adaptation  of  Divine  thoughts. 
Thoughts  from  God  are  not  intended  merely  for  certain  individuals  or  classes,  but  for 
all  the  race  in  all  generations.  3.  From  the  spiritual  dependence  of  man  upon  man. 
It  is  God's  plan,  that  man  shall  be  the  spiritual  teacher  of  man.  4.  From  the  general 
teaching  of  the  Bible.  What  -the  prophets  and  apostles  received  from  God  they 
communicated,  "When  it  pleased  God  to  reveal  his  Son  in  me,  immediately  I 
conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood,"  etc.  (Gal.  i.  16). 

III.  OuB   MISSION   HEBE   IS-  TO    PBACTIOALLT   KEALIZB    COMMITNIOATIONg    FBOM    THE 

Eternal  Mind.  "  Though  it  tarry,  wait  for  it,"  etc.  The  Divine  thoughts  which  we 
receive  we  are  to  realize  in  our  daily  life,  practically  to  work  out.  Here,  then,  is 
our  moral  mission.  We  are  here,  brothers,  for  these  three  purposes ;  not  for  one  of 
them  only,  but  for  all.  God  is  to  be  everything  to  us ;  he  is  to  fill  up  the  whole 
sphere  of  our  being,  our  "  all  in  all."  We  are  to  be  his  auditors,  hearing  his  voice  in 
everything;  we  are  to  be  his  organ,  conveying  to  others  what  he  has  conveyed  to 
us ;  we  are  to  be  his  representatives,  manifesting  him  in  every  act  of  our  life.  All  we 
say  and  do,  our  looks  and  mien,  are  to  be  rays  reflected  from  the  Father  of  lights. 

Conclusion.  Prom  this  subject  we  may  learn :  1,  The  reasonableness  of  religion. 
What  is  it?  Simply  to  receive,  propagate,  and  develop  communications  from  the 
Infinite  Mind.  What  can  be  more  sublimely  reasonable  than  this  ?  2.  The  grandeur  of 
a  religious  life.  What  is  it?  The  narrowness,  the  intolerance,  the  bigotry,  the 
selfishness  of  many  religionists  lead  sceptics  to  look  upon  religion  with  derision.  But 
what  is  it?  To  be  a  disciple  of  the  all-knowing  God,  a  minister  of  the  all-ruling  God, 
a  representative  of  the  all-glorious  God.  Is  there  anything  grander  ?  3.  The  function 
of  Christianity.  What  is  it  ?  To  induce,  to  qualify,  and  enable  men  to  receive,  com- 
municate, and  to  live  the  great  thoughts  of  God. — D.  T. 

Ver.  4. — The  portraiture  of  a  good  min.  "  Behold,  his  soul  which  is  lifted  up  is  not 
upright  in  him :  but  the  just  shall  live  by  his  faith."  Whether  the  man  whose  soul 
is  represented  as  "  lifted  up  "  refers  to  the  unbelieving  Jew  or  to  the  Babylonian,  if 


«H.  n.  1— 20.]  THE   BOOK   OF  UABAKKUK.  « 

an  unsettled  question  amongst  biblical  critics;  and  a  question  of  but  little  practical 
moment.    We  take  the  words  as  a  portraiture  of  a  good  man. 

I.  A  GOOD  MAN  IS  A  HUMBLE  MAN.  This  Is  implied.  His  soul  is  not  "  lifted  up." 
Pride  is  not  only  no  part  of  moral  goodness,  but  is  essentially  inimical  to  it.  It  is 
said  that  St.  Augustine,  being  asked,  "  What  is  the  first  article  in  the  Christian 
religion?"  replied,  "Humility."  "  What  is  the  second?"  «' Humility."  "  And  the 
third?"  "Humility."  A  proud  Christian  is  a  solecism.  Jonathan  Edwards  describes 
a  Christian  as  being  such  a  "  little  flower  as  we  see  in  the  spring  of  the  year,  low  and 
humble  in  the  ground,  opening  its  bosom  for  the  beams  of  the  sun,  rejoicing  in  a  calm 
rapture,  suffusing  around  sweet  fragrance,  and  standing  peacefully  and  lowly  in  the 
midst  of  other  flowers."  Pride  is  an  obstruction  to  all  progress  and  knowledge  and 
virtue,  and  is  abhorrent  to  the  Holy  One.  "  He  resisteth  the  proud,  but  givetb  grace 
to  the  humble." 

"  Fling  away  ambition, 

By  that  sin  fell  the  angels;  how  can  man,  then. 

The  image  of  hia  Maker,  hope  to  win  by  't  ?  " 

(Shakespeare.) 

n.  A  GOOD  MAN  IS  A  JUST  MAN.  "  The  just  shall  live  by  his  faith."  To  be  good  is 
nothing  more  than  to  be  just.  1.  Just  to  ielf.  Doing  the  right  thing  to  one's 
own  faculties  and  affections  as  the  offspring  of  God.  2.  Just  to  otliers.  Doing  unto 
others  what  we  would  that  they  should  do  unto  us.  3.  Just  to  Qod.  The  kimlest 
Being  thanking  the  most,  the  best  Being  loving  the  most,  the  greatest  Being 
reverencing  the  most.     To  be  just  to  self,  society,  and  God, — this  is  religion. 

III.  A  GOOD  MAN  IS  A  CONFIDING  MAN.  He  lives  "  by  his  faith."  This  passage  is 
quoted  by  Paul  in  Eom.  L  17  and  Gal.  ill.  11 ;  it  is  also  quoted  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  (x.  38).  What  is  faith  ?  Can  you  get  a  better  definition  than  the  writer 
of  the  Hebrews  has  given  in  the  eleventh  chapter  and  first  verse  ? — "  Faith  is  the 
eubstance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  This  definition 
implies  three  things.  1.  That  the  things  to  which  faith  is  directed  are  invisible. 
"  Things  not  seen."  These  things  include  things  that  are  contingently  unseeable  and 
things  that  are  essentially  unseeable,  such  as  thought,  mind,  God.  2.  That  some  o( 
the  invisible  things  are  objects  of  hope.  "  Things  hoped  for."  The  invisible  has  much 
that  is  very  desirable  to  us — the  society  of  holy  souls,  the  presence  of  the  blessed 
Christ,  the  manifestations  of  the  Infinite  Father,  etc.  3.  That  these  invisible  things 
faith  makes  real  in  the  present  life.  "  The  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence 
of  things  not  seen."  The  realization  of  the  hopeable.  Now,  it  is  only  by  this  faith 
that  man  can  live  a  just  life  in  this  world ;  the  man  who  lives  by  sight  must  be 
unjust.     To  be  just,  he  must  see  him  who  is  invisible. — D.  T. 

Ver.  5. — Moral  wrong:  some  of  its  national  phases.  "Yea  also,  because  he  trans- 
gresseth  by  wine,  he  is  a  proud  man,  neither  keepeth  at  home,  who  enlargeth  his 
desire  as  hell,  and  is  as  death,  and  cannot  be  satisfied,  but  gathereth  unto  him  all 
nations,  and  heapeth  unto  him  all  people."  No  doubt  Habakkuk  was  reviled  like  the 
other  [irophets  on  account  of  his  terrible  predictions,  as  recorded  in  the  preceding 
chapter  (vers.  6  and  11).  From  this  verse  to  the  nineteenth  the  prophet  unfolds  new 
visions  concerning  the  national  crimes  committed  by  Babylon,  and  the  consequent 
national  calamities  approaching.  This  verse  gives  some  of  the  national  phases  of 
moral  wrong  as  they  appeared  in  Babylon.  Evil,  like  good,  is  one  in  essence,  but  it 
has  many  forms  and  phases.  The  braaohes  that  grow  out  of  the  root,  whilst  filled  with 
the  same  sap,  vary  widely  in  shape  and  hue.    In  this  verse  we  have  three  of  its  forms. 

L  DiiuNKENNESS.  "He  transgresseth  by  wine;"  or,  as  some  render  it,  "moreover, 
the  wine  is  treacherous."  This  is  one  of  the  most  loathsome,  irrational,  and  pernicious 
forms  which  it  can  assume.  Drunkenness  puts  the  man  or  the  woman  absolutely  into 
the  hands  of  Satan,  to  do  whatsoever  he  wills — lie,  swear,  rob,  murder,  and  luxuriate 
in  moral  mud.  "A  drunken  man  is  like  a  fool,  a  madman,  a  drowned  man;  one 
draught  too  much  makes  him  a  fool,  the  second  mads,  and  the  third  drowns  him  " 
(Shakespeare).  It  is  the  curse  of  England.  It  fills  our  workhouses  with  paupers,  our 
hospitals  with  patients,  our  jails  with  prisoners,  our  mad-houses  with  lunatics,  our 
tameteries  with  gravas.    Moral  wrong  took  this  form  in  ancient  Babylon,  and  it  takes 


a  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  [oh.  n.  1— 2a 

this  form  in  England  to-day  to  an  appalling  extent.    Woe  to  our  legislators,  if  thej 
do  not  put  it  down  by  the  strong  arm  of  the  law !     Nothing  else  will  do  it. 

II.  Haughtiness.  "  Is  a  proud  man."  Babylon  became  inspired  with  a  haughty 
insolenoe.  She  regarded  herself  as  the  queen  of  the  world,  and  looked  down  with 
Bupercilious  contempt  upon  all  the  other  nations  of  the  earth,  even  upon  the  Hebrew 
people,  the  heavenly-chosen  race.  Nebuchadnezzar  expresses  the  spirit  of  the  kingdom 
as  well  as  his  own,  when  he  says,  "  Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  I  have  built  lor  the 
house  of  the  kingdom  by  the  might  of  my  power,  and  for  the  honour  of  my  majesty  ?  " 
(Dan.  iv.  30).  It  is  suggested  that  the  Chaldeans'  love  of  wine  had  much  to  do  in 
the  developing  of  this  haughty  spirit.  We  read  (Dan.  v.)  that  Belshazzar  at  his  feast 
drank  wine  with  the  thousands  of  his  lords,  his  princes,  his  wives,  his  concubines. 
"  Wine  is  a  mocker ; "  it  cheats  a  beggar  into  the  belief  that  he  is  a  lord.  "  Strong 
drink  is  raging ; "  it  lashes  the  passions  into  furious  insolence.  It  is  fabled  that 
Accius  the  poet,  though  he  was  a  dwarf,  would  be  pictured  a  giant  in  stature.  Pride 
is  an  evil  that  leads  to  ruin.  "  Pride  goes  before  destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit 
before  a  falL" 

III.  Bapaoitt.  Two  things  are  suggested  concerning  the  rapaciotis  form  it  assumed 
in  Babylon.  1.  It  was  restkss.  "  Neither  keepeth  at  home."  Not  content  with  its 
own  grandeur,  wealth,  and  luxuries,  it  goes  from  home  in  search  of  others ;  goes  out 
into  other  countries  to  rifle  and  to  rob.  2.  It  is  insatiahh.  "  Who  enlargeth  his 
desire  as  hell  [that  is,  '  as  Sheol,  the  grave '],  and  is  as  death,  and  cannot  be 
•atisfled."  "Hell  and  destruction,"  that  is,  the  grave  and  death,  says  Solomon,  "are 
never  full."  The  grave  cries  for  more  and  more,  as  its  tenants  multiply  by  millions. 
The  earth  seems  to  hunger  and  to  gape  for  all  the  dust  that  enters  into  the  frames  ol 
men.  So  it  was  with  the  Babylonian  despot,  though  he  gathered  unto  him  all  nations, 
and  heaped  unto  him  all  peoples,  his  greed  and  ambition  remained  unsatiated  and 
insatiable.  "This,"  says  an  old  writer,  "is  one  of  the  crying  sins  of  our  land, 
insatiable  pride.  This  makes  dear  rents  and  great  fines ;  this  takes  away  the  whole 
clothing  of  many  poor  to  add  one  lace  more  in  the  suits  of  the  rich ;  this  shortens  the 
labourer's  wages,  and  adds  much  to  the  burden  of  his  labour.  This  greediness  makes 
the  market  of  spiritual  and  temporal  offices  and  dignities,  and  puts  well-deserving 
virtue  out  of  countenance.  This  corrupts  religion  with  opinions,  justice  with  bribes,, 
charity  with  cruelty;  it  turns  peace  into  schism  and  contention,  love  into  compliment, 
friendship  into  treason,  and  sets  the  mouth  of  hell  yet  more  open,  and  gives  it  an 
appetite  for  more  souls."  Such  are  some  of  the  forms  that  moral  wrong  took  in 
Babylon,  as  indicated  in  these  words.  But  these  are  not  the  only  forms,  as  we  shall 
see  in  proceeding  through  the  chapter.  Does  not  moral  wrong  assume  these  very 
forms  here  in  England?  Drunkenness,  haughtiness,  rapacity, — these  fiends  show  their 
hideous  shapes  everywhere,  and  work  their  demon  deeds  in  every  circle  of  life. — D.  T. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — National  wrongs  ending  in  national  woes.  No.  1.  "  Shall  not  all 
these  take  up  a  parable  against  him,  and  a  taunting  proverb  against  him,  and  say. 
Woe  to  him  that  increaseih  that  which  is  not  hisl  how  long?  and  to  him  that 
ladeth  himself  with  thick  clay!  Shall  they  not  rise  up  suddenly  that  shall  bite  thee, 
and  awake  that  shall  vex  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  for  booties  unto  them  ?  "  etc.  In 
these  verses,  up  to  the  nineteenth  inclusive,  the  prophet  denounces  upon  the 
Chaldeans  and  Babylonians  five  different  woes.  One  for  their  pride  and  insatiableness 
(vers.  6 — 8);  another  for  their  covetousness,  etc.,  which  would  become  the  cause  of 
their  corruption  (vers.  9—11) ;  another  for  the  bloody  and  cruel  means  which  they  had 
employed  for  gratifying  their  thirst  for  acquiring  possessions  not  their  own  (vers.  12 — 
14);  and  fourth,  for  their  wickedness,  etc.,  which  would  be  recompensed  to  them 
(vers.  16 — 17);  and  the  fifth,  for  their  trust  in  idols,  which  would  redound  to  their 
shame  (vers.  18,  19).  We  shall  take  each  of  the  five  sections  separately  under  the 
title,  National  wrongs  ending  4n  national  woes.     Notice — 

I.  The  national  wbongs.  1.  Dishonest  accumulation.  "'Wiie  to  him  that 
increaseth  that  which  is  not  his !  "  Babylon  grew  wealthy.  Its  treasures  were  varied 
and  all  but  inexhaustible.  But  whence  can.e  they  ?  Came  they  by  honest  industry? 
Were  they  the  home  produce  of  diligent  and  righttous  labour?  No;  from  other  lands. 
They  were  wrested  from  other  countries  by  violence  and  fraud.     Even  the  golden  and 


OH.  11,1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK,  45 

silver  vessels  used  at  the  royal  feast  were  taken  out  of  the  temple  which  was  at 
Jerusalem.  "  No  more,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  of  what  we  have  is  to  be  reckoned  ours 
than  what  we  came  honestly  by.  Nor  will  it  long  be  ours,  for  wealth  gotten  by  vanity 
will  soon  diminish."  Take  away  the  ill-gotten  wealth  of  the  nations  of  Europe — 
wealth  gotten  by  fraud  and  violence — and  how  greatly  will  they  be  pauperized  1  How 
much  of  our  national  wealth  has  come  to  us  honestly  ?  A  question  this  worth  the 
impartial  investigation  of  every  man,  and  which  must  be  gone  into  sooner  or  later. 
2.  Dominant  materialism.  "And  to  him  that  ladeth  himself  with  thick  clay." 
Although  some  render  this'Marleth  himself  with  many  pledges,"  our  versinn,  which 
gives  the  word  "  clay,"  will  coyer  all.  The  burning  and  insatiable  desire  of  Babylon 
was  for  material  wealth;  and  the  men  or  the  nation  who  succeed  in  this,  only  lade 
themselves  with  "  thick  clay."  It  is  a  bad  thing  for  moral  spirits  to  be  laden  with 
"  thick  clay."  See  the  individual  man  who  so  pampers  his  animal  appetites  until  he 
becqmes  a  Falstaff.  His  spirit  is  laden  with  "thick  clay."  See  the  nation  whose 
inspiration  is  that  of  avaricious  merchandise,  and  whose  god  is  mammon ;  its  spirit  is 
laden  with  "thick  clay."  Ah  mel  what  millions  are  to  be  found  in  all  civilized 
countries  who  are  buried  in  "  thick  clay  "  1  Clay  is  everything  to  them.  3.  Extensive 
plunder.  "  Thou  hast  spoiled  many  nations."  The  first  monarchy  we  read  of  in  Holy 
Scripture  is  that  of  the  Assyrians,  begun  by  Ninus,  of  whom  Nineveh  took  name,  and 
by  Nimrod,  whom  histories  call  Belus,  and  after  him  succeeded  Semiramis  his  wife. 
This  monarchy  grew,  by  continual  wars  and  violences  on  their  neighbours,  to  an 
exceeding  height  and  strength ;  so  that  the  exaltation  of  that  monarchy  was  the  ruin 
of  many  nations,  and  this  monarcliy  lasted,  as  some  write,  annos  1300.  4.  Ruthless 
violence.  "  Because  of  men's  blood,  and  for  the  violence  of  the  land,  of  the  city,  and  of 
all  that  dwell  therein."  "  The  terms  '  men,' '  land,' '  earth,  'city,' "  says  Henderson,  "  are 
to  be  understood  generally,  not  restricted  to  th^  Jews,  their  country  and  its  metropolis." 
What  oceans  of  the  blood  of  all  countries  were  shed  by  these  ruthless  tyrants  of 
Babylon ! 

II.  The  national  woes.  All  these  wrongs,  as  all  other  wrongs,  run  into  woes. 
Crimes  lead  to  calamities.  What  are  the  woes  connected  with  these  wrongs,  as  given 
in  these  verses  ?  1.  The  contempt  of  the  injured.  "  Shall  not  all  these  take  up  a 
parable  against  him,  and  a  taunting  proverb  against  him,  and  say.  Woe  to  him  that 
inoreaseth  that  which  is  not  his  I  how  long  ?  and  to  him  that  ladeth  himself  with  thick 
clay ! "  The  woe  comes  out  in  a  derisive  song,  which  continues  to  the  end  of  the 
chapter.  Dishonesty  and  low  animalism  must  ever  sink  the  people  amongst  whom 
they  prevail  into  bitter  contempt.  Scarcely  can  there  be  anything  more  painful  than 
the  contempt  of  others  when  it  is  felt  to  be  deserved.  To  be  sneered  at,  laughed  at, 
ridiculed,  scorned, — is  not  this  bitterly  afB  ctive  ?  Jeremiah  predicted  that  one  part  of 
the  punishment  should  be  that  he  should  be  laughed  to  scorn.  2.  The  avenging  of  the 
spoiled.  "  Because  thou  hast  spoiled  many  nations,  all  the  remnant  of  the  people  shall 
spoil  thee."  Here  is  retaliation — plunder  for  plunder,  blood  for  blood.  Divine  retribu- 
tion often  pays  man  back  in  his  own  coin.  "  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be 
measured  to  you  again." 

Conclusion.  Ever  under  the  righteous  administration  of  Heaven  woes  tread  closely 
on  the  heel  of  wrongs.  More  certainly  than  the  waves  of  the  ocean  follow  the  moon 
must  suffering  follow  sin.  To  every  crime  there  is  linked  a  curse,  to  every  sin  a 
suffering,  to  every  wrong  a  woe.     Be  sure  that  "  your  sins  will  find  you  out." — D.  T. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — National  wrongs  ending  in  national  woes.  No.  2,  "  Woe  to  him 
that  coveteth  an  evil  covetousness  to  his  house,  that  he  may  set  his  nest  on  high,  that 
he  may  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  evil  1  Thou  hast  consulted  shame  to  thy  house 
by  cutting  off  many  people,  and  hast  sinned  against  thy  soul.  For  the  stone  shall  cry 
out  of  the  wall,  and  the  beam  out  of  the  timber  shall  answer  it."     Notice — 

I.  The  national  wbonos  herb  indicated.  1.  Coveting  the  possessions  of  others. 
"  Woe  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  oovitousness  to  his  house  1 "  " An  evil  covetous- 
ness I "  There  is  a  good  covetousness.  We  are  commamied  to  "  covet  earnestly  the 
best  gifts  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  31).  But  to  hunger  for  those  things  which  are  npt  our  own,  but 
the  property  of  others,  and  that  for  our  own  gratification  and  aggrandizement,  is  the 
sin  which  is  prohibited  in  the  Decalogue,  which  is  denounced  in  the  Gospel  as  a  cardinal 


te  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  [oh.  n.  1—20 

sin,  and  which  is  repreBented  as  excluding  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  covetoug 
man  is  a  thief  in  spirit  and  in  reality.  2.  Trusting  in  false  securities.  So  "  that  he 
may  set  his  nest  on  high,  that  lie  may  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  evil."  The  image 
is  from  an  eagle  (Job  xxxix.  27).  The  royal  citadel  is  meant.  The  Chaldeans  built 
high  towers  like  the  Babel-founders,  to  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  evil.  They 
sought  protection,  not  in  the  Creator  but  in  the  creature,  not  in  moral  means  but  in 
material.  Thus  foolishly  nations  have  always  acted  and  are  still  acting ;  they  trust 
to  armies  and  to  navies,  not  to  righteousness,  truth,  and  God,  A  moral  character 
built  on  justice,  purity,  and  universal  benevolence  is  the  only  right  and  safe  defence 
of  nations.  "  Though  Ihou  exalt  thyself  as  the  eagle,  and  though  thou  set  thy  nest 
against  the  stars,  thence  will  I  bring  thee  down,  saith  the  Lord  "  (Obad.  4).  3.  Sinning 
against  the  soul.  "Arid  hast  sinned  against  thy  soul,"  or  against  thyself.  Indeed, 
all  wrong  is  a  sin  against  one's  self — a  sin  against  the  laws  of  reason,  conscience,  and 
happiness.  "  He  that  sinneth  against  me  wrongeth  his  own  soul."  Such  are  some  of 
the  wrongs  implied  by  these  verses.  Alas!  they  are  not  confined  to  Babylon  or  to 
any  of  the  ancient  kingdoms.  They  are  too  rife  amongst  all  the  modern  kingdoms  of 
the  earth. 

II.  The  national  woes  here  indicated.  "  Woe  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil 
oovetousness  to  his  house! "  etc.  What  is  the  woe  connected  with  these  evils?  It  is 
contained  in  these  words,  "  The  stone  shall  cry  out  of  the  wall,  and  the  beam  out  of 
the  timber  shall  answer  it."  Their  guilty  conscience  will  endow  the  dead  materials  of 
their  own  dwellings  with  the  tongue  to  denounce  in  thunder  their  deeds  of  rapacity  and 
blood.  Startling  personification  this !  The  very  stones  of  thy  palace  and  the  beams 
out  of  the  timber  shall  testify.  "  Note,"  says  Matihew  Henry,  "  those  that  do  wrong 
to  their  neighbour  do  a  much  greater  wrong  to  their  own  souls.  But  if  the  sinner 
pleads, '  Not  guilty,'  and  thinks  he  has  managed  his  frauds  and  violence  with  so  much 
art  and  contrivance  that  they  cannot  be  proved  upon  him,  let  him  know  that  if  there 
be  no  other  witnesses  against  him,  the  stone  shall  cry  out  of  the  wall  against  him,  and 
the  team  out  of  the  timber  in  the  roof  shall  answer  it,  shall  second  it,  shall  witness  it, 
that  the  money  and  materials  wherewith  he  built  the  house  were  unjustly  gotten 
(ver.  11).  The  stones  and  timber  shall  cry  to  Heaven  for  vengeance,  as  the  whole 
creation  groans  tinder  the  sin  of  man,  and  waits  to  be  delivered  from  that  bondage  of 
corruption."  Observe :  1.  That  mind  gives  to  all  the  objects  that  once  impressed  it  a 
mystic  power  of  suggestion.  Who  has  not  felt  this?  Who  does  not  feel  it  every  day? 
The  tree,  the  house,  the  street,  the  lane,  the  stream,  the  meadow,  the  mountain,  that 
once  touched  our  consciousness,  seldom  fail  to  start  thoughts  in  us  whenever  we  are 
brought  into  contact  with  them  again.  It  seems  as  if  the  mind  gave  part  of  itself  to 
all  the  objects  that  once  impressed  it.  When  we  revisit,  after  years  of  absence,  the 
scenes  of  childhood,  all  the  objects  which  impressed  us  in  those  early  days  seem  to 
beat  out  and  revive  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  our  young  hearts.  Hence,  when  we 
leave  a  place  which  in  person  we  may  never  revisit,  we  are  still  tied  to  it  by  an 
indissoluble  bond.  Nay,  we  carry  it  with  us  and  reproduce  it  in  memory.  2.  That 
miiid  gives  to  those  objects  that  impressed  us  when  in  the  commission  of  any  sin  a 
terrible  power  to  start  remorseful  memories.  This  is  a  fact  of  which,  alas !  all  are 
conscious.  And  hence  those  stones  and  timbers,  stolen  from  other  people,  that  went 
to  build  the  palaces,  temples,  and  mansions  in  Babylon,  would  not  fail  to  speak  in 
thunder  to  tiie  guilty  consciences  of  those  who  obtained  them  by  violence  or  fraud. 
No  intelligent  personal  witness  is  required  to  prove  a  sinner's  guilt.  All  the  scenes 
of  his  conscious  life  vocalize  his  guilt. — ^D.  T. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — National  vjrongs  ending  in  national  woes.  No.  S.  "  Woe  to  him 
that  huildeth  a  towa  with  blood,  and  stahlisheth  a  city  by  iniquity !  Behold,  is  it  not 
of  the  Lord  of  hosts  that  the  people  shall  labour  in  tlie  very  fire,  and  the  people  shall 
weary  themselves  for  very  vanity  ?  For  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge 
of  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."    Notice — 

I.  The  national  wrongs  indicated  in  these  verses.  The  great  wrong  referred 
to  in  these  verses  is  the  accumulation  of  gain  by  wicked  means.  "  Woe  to  him  that 
huildeth  a  town  with  blood,  and  stahlisheth  a  city  by  iniquity  I "  In  itself  there  is 
nothing  improper  in  building   towns,  establishing  cities,  and  accumulating  wealth. 


OH.  n,  1—20,]  THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK.  « 

Indeed,  all  these  things  are  both  legitimate  and  desirable.  But  it  is  stated  that  these 
Babylonians  did  it :  1.  By  violence.  "  With  blood."  Men's  lives  were  sacrificed  for 
the  purpose.  "By  iniquity."  Justice  was  outraged  in  the  effort.  2.  JBy  cruelty. 
"  Labour  in  the  very  fire."  These  wrongs  we  have  already  explained  in  the 
preceding  sections,  ^ut  see  a  different  explanation  of  "labour  in  the  flre"  in  the 
Exposition.) 

IL  The  national  woes  indicated  in  these  words.  What  is  the  woe  ?  Disap- 
probation of  God.  1.  These  wrongs  are  contrary  to  his  nature.  "  Is  it  not  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts?"  or,  as  Keil  renders  it,  "  Is  it  not  beheld  from  Jehovah  of  hosts  that 
the  people  weary  themselves  for  fire,  and  nations  exhaust  themselves  from  vanity?" 
He  does  not  desire  it.  Kay,  it  is  hostile  to  his  will,  it  is  di-ipleiising  to  his  nature. 
The  benevolent  Creator  is  against  all  social  injustice  and  cruelty.  His  will  is  that 
men  should  "do  nnto  others  as  they  would  that  men  should  do  unto  them."  2.  These 
wrongs  arc  contrary  to  his  pwrpose/or  the  world.  His  purpose  is  that  the  "  earth  shall 
be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord."  To  this  end  the  kingdom  of 
the  world  which  is  hostile  to  him  must  be  destroyed.  "  This  promise,"  says  Keil, 
"involves  a  threat  directed  against  the  Chaldean,  whose  usurped  glory  must  be  destroyed 
in  order  that  the  glory  of  the  universe  may  fill  the  whole  earth."  What  a  glorious 
prospect !  (1)  This  world,  in  the  future,  is  to  enjoy  the  greatest  hleasing.  What  is 
that?  The  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God.  Knowledge  in  itsell  is  a  blessing.  The 
soul  without  it  is  not  good  (Prov.  xix.  2).  It  is  not  the  mere  knowledge  of  the  works 
of  God.  This  is  of  unspeakable  value.  Not  merely  the  knowledge  of  some  of  the 
attributes  of  God.  This  is  of  greater  value  still.  But  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of 
Gk)d,  which  means  the  knowledge  of  God  himself,  "  whom  to  know  is  life  eternal." 
(2)  This  world,  in  the  future,  is  to  enjoy  the  greatest  Messing  in  the  greatest 
abundance.  "  As  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  He  shall  flood  all  souls  with  its  celestial 
and  transporting  radiance. — D.  T. 

Vers.  15 — ^17. — National  wrongs  ending  in  national  woes.  No.  4.  "  Woe  unto 
him  that  giveth  his  neighbour  drink,  that  puttest  thy  bottle  to  him,  and  makest  him 
drunken  also,  that  thou  mayest  look  on  their  nakedness  I  Thou  art  filled  with  shame 
for  glory :  drink  thou  also,  and  let  thy  foreskin  be  uncovered :  the  cup  of  the  Lord's 
right  band  shall  be  turned  unto  thee,  and  shameful  spewing  shall  be  on  thy  glory," 
etc.  "  'I'his,"  says  Henderson,  "  is  the  commencement  of  the  fourth  stanza. 
Though  the  idea  of  the  shameless  conduct  of  drunkards  here  depicted  may  have  been 
borrowed  from  the  profligate  manners  of  the  Babylonian  court,  yet  the  language  is  not 
to  be  taken  literally,  as  if  the  prophet  were  describing  such  manners,  but,  as  the  sequel 
shows,  is  applied  allegorically  to  the  state  of  stupefaction,  prostiation,  and  exposure 
to  which  the  conquered  nations  were  reduced  by  the  Chaldeans  (see  Isa.  li.  17 — 20 ; 
and  comp.  Ps.  Ixxv.  8  j  Jer.  xxv.  15 — 28 ;  xlii.  12 ;  li.  7  j  Ezek.  xxiii.  31,  32 ;  Eev. 
xiv.  10 ;  xvi.  19 ;  xviii.  6).     Notice — 

I.  The  national  wbonos.  What  are  the  wrongs  referred  to  in  this  passage  ? 
1,  The  promotion  of  drunkenness.  "Woe  unto  him  that  giveth  his  neighbour  drink!" 
The  Babylonians  were  not  only  drunkards,  but  the  promoters  of  drunkenness.  The 
very  night  on  which  this  prophecy  was  fulfilled,  Belshazzar  drank  wine  with  a  thousand 
of  bis  lords.  More  than  once  in  these  homilies  we  have  had  to  characterize  and 
denounce  this  sin.  Who  are  the  promoters  of  drunkenness?  Brewers,  distillers, 
tavern-keepers,  and,  I  am  sorry  to  add,  doctors,  all  of  whom,  with  a  few  exceptions, 
recommend  intoxicating  drinks.  In  doing  so  these  men  inflict  a  thousand  times  as 
much  evil  upon  mankind  as  they  can  accomplish  good.  2.  The  promotion  of  drunken- 
ness involves  indecency.  "  That  thou  mayest  look  on  their  nakedness."  It  is  the 
tendency  of  drunkenness  to  destroy  all  sense  of  decency,  A  drunkard,  whether  male 
or  female,  loses  all  sense  of  shame. 

II.  The  national  woes.  "  Woe  unto  him  that  giveth  strong  drink  1 "  What  will 
come  to  those  people  ?  1.  Contempt.  "  Thou  art  filled  with  shame  for  glory.  .  .  .  The 
cup  of  ths  Lord's  right  hand  shall  be  turned  unto  thee."  As  the  Chaldeans  had  treated 
the  natiofls  they  had  conquered  in  a  most  disgusting  manner,  so  they  in  their  turn 
should  be  similarly  treated.  "  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  ta 
you  again."    2.   Violence.     "  For  the  violence  of  Lebanon  shall  cover  thee."     Stripped 


48 


THE  BOOK   OP   HABAKKUK.  [oh.  n.  1—20, 


of  all  figure,  the  meaning  of  this  ia  that  the  sufferings  which  Babylon  inflicted  upon 
Palestine,  represented  here  by  Lebanon,  would  return  to  them.  Here  is  retribution. 
Babylon  had  given  the  cup  of  drunkenness,  and  in  return  should  have  the  cup  of  fury 
and  contempt. — D.  T. 

Vers.  18,  19. — National  wrongs  ending  in  national  woes.  No.  5.  "What  pro- 
fileth  the  graven  image  that  the  maker  thereof  hath  graven  it;  the  molten  image,  and 
a  teacher  of  lies,  that  the  maker  of  his  work  trusteth  therein,  to  make  dumb  idols? 
Woe  unto  him  that  saith  to  the  wood.  Awake;  to  the  dumb  stone,  Arise,  it  shall 
teach  1  Behold,  it  is  laid  over  with  gold  and  silver,  and  there  is  no  breath  at  all  in  the 
midst  of  it."  We  have  said  that  the  prophet  denounces  upon  the  Chaldeans,  in  vers. 
6 — 19  of  this  chapter,  five  different  woes  of  a  most  terrible  nature.  We  have  noticed 
four  of  them.  This  is  the  fifth  and  the  last ;  and  it  is  denounced  on  account  of  their 
idolatry.  We  have  seen  no  translation  of  the  text  more  faithful  to  the  original  than 
this,  the  Authorized  Version.  The  note  of  Henderson  on  the  text  deserves  quotation. 
"  These  verses  expose  the  folly  of  idolatry,  to  which  the  Babylonians  were  wholly 
addicted.  It  might  be  supposed,  from  all  the  other  stanzas  having  been  introduced  by 
a  denunciatory  in, '  woe! '  that  a  transposition  has  here  taken  place,  and  that  the  nine- 
teenth verse  ought  to  be  read  before  the  eighteenth ;  and  Green  has  thus  placed  them 
in  his  translation.  But  there  is  a  manifest  propriety  in  anticipating  the  inutility  of 
idols,  ill  close  connection  with  what  the  prophet  had  just  announced  respecting  the 
downfall  of  Babylon,  before  delivering  his  denunciation  against  their  worshippers  them- 
selves." Now,  idolatry,  as  it  prevails  in  heathen  lands,  idolatry  proper  as  we  may 
say,  is  universally  denounced  by  the  professors  of  Christianity  everywhere.  We  need 
not  employ  one  word  to  expose  its  absurdity  and  moral  abominations.  But  its  spirit 
is  rampant  in  all  Christendom,  is  ri/e  in  all  "  Christian  Churches,"  as  they  are  called ; 
and  it  is  the  spirit,  not  the  form,  that  is  the  guilty  and  damnable  part  of  idolatry.  Ws 
raise,  therefore,  three  observations  from  these  verses. 

L  That  men  often  orvB  to  the  wokks  oi'  theib  owh  hakds  the  devotions 
TELA.T  belonq  TO  GoD.  These  old  Chaldean  idolaters  gave  their  devotions  to  the 
"  graven  image  "  and  to  the  "  molten  image  "  that  men  had  carved  in  wood  and  stone 
or  moulded  from  molten  metals.  It  was  the  works  of  their  own  hands  they  worshipped. 
They  made  gods  of  their  own  productions.  This  was  all  they  did;  and  are  not  the 
men  of  England,  as  a  rule,  doing  the  same  thing?  They  yield  their  devotions  to  the 
works  of  their  own  hands.  It  may  be  wealth,  fame,  fashion,  pleasure,  or  power.  It 
is  all  the  same.  Are  men's  sympathies  in  their  strong  current  directed  towards  God 
or  towards  something  else  ?  Do  they  expend  the  larger  portion  of  their  time  and  the 
greater  amount  of  their  energies  in  the  service  of  the  Eternal,  or  in  the  service  of 
themselves?  This  is  the  question;  and  the  answer  is  too  palpable  to  the  eye  of  every 
spiritual  thinker.  Exeter  Hall  may  "  weep  and  howl "  over  the  idolatry  prevailing  in 
India,  China,  and  other  heathen  parts;  but  thoughtful  Christ-like  souls  are  showering 
in  silence  and  solitude  their  tears  on  the  terrible  idolatry  that  reigns  everywhere  in 
their  own  country. 

II.  That  men  often  look  to  the  works  ov  theis  own  hands  for  a  blebsino 
which  God  alone  can  bestow.  These  old  idolaters  said  to  the  "  wood,  Awake ;  to 
the  dumb  stone,  Arise  1 "  They  invoked  the  dead  forms  they  themselves  had  made,  to 
help  them,  to  give  them  relief,  to  render  them  happy.  Now,  it  is  true  that  men  do  not 
say  formal  prayers  to  wealth,  or  fashion,  or  fame,  or  power ;  yet  to  these  they  look 
with  all  their  souls  for  happiness.  A  man's  prayer  is  the  deep  aspiration  of  his  soul, 
and  this  deep  aspiration  is  being  everywhere  addressed  to  these  dead  deities ;  men  are 
crying  for  happiness  to  objects  which  are  as  incapable  of  yielding  it  as  the  breathless 
goids  of  heathendom.  "There  is  no  breath  at  all  in  the  midst  of  it."  Men  who  are 
lookin';  for  happiness  to  any  of  these  objects  are  like  the  devotees  of  Baal,  who  cried 
from  morning  to  evening  for  help,  and  no  help  came. 

m.  That  in  all  this  men  entail  on  themselves  the  woes  of  onTRAaED 
BIASON  AND  JUSTICE.  "  Woe  unto  him  that  saith  to  the  wood.  Awake ;  to  the  dumb 
stone.  Arise  I "  1.  It  ia  the  woe  of  outraged  reason.  What  help  could  they  expect  of 
the  "  molten  image,  and  a  teacher  of  lies  "  ?  What  answer  could  they  expect  from  th» 
"  dumb  idols  "  that  they  themselves  had  made  ?    What  relief  from  any  of  the  idols, 


OH.  n.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK.  « 

though  overlaid  with  gold  and  silver  ?  "  There  is  no  breath  at  all  in  the  midst  of  it." 
How  irrational  all  this!  Equally  unreasonable  is  it  for  men  to  search  for  happiness  in 
any  of  the  works  of  their  hands,  and  in  any  being  or  in  any  object  independent  of 
God.  2.  It  it  the  woe  of  insulted  Justice,  What  has  God  said?  "Thou  shalt  have 
no  other  gods  before  me ; "  "  Thou  shalt  worship  no  graven  image ; "  "  Thou  shalt  love 
me  with  all  thy  heart,"  etc.  All  this  devotion,  therefore,  to  the  works  of  our  own 
hands,  or  to  any  other  creature,  is  an  infraction  of  man's  cardinal  obligation.  "  Will 
a  man  rob  God?"  Go,  then,  to  the  men  on  'Change,  who  are  seeking  happiness  from 
wealth — to  the  men  in  scenes  of  fashionable  and  worldly  amusements,  who  are  seeking 
happiness  from  sensual  indulgences  and  worldly  applause — and  thunder,  "  Woe  unto 
him  that  saith  to  the  wood.  Awake ;  to  the  dumb  stone.  Arise  1  * 

"  And  still  from  him  we  turn  away. 

And  fill  our  hearts  with  worthless  things ; 
The  fires  of  avarice  melt  the  clay. 

And  forth  the  idol  springs  I 
Ambition's  flame  and  passion's  heat 
By  wondrous  alchemy  transmute 
Earth's  dross,  to  raise  some  gilded  bmta 
To  fill  Jehovah's  seat." 

(Clinch.) 

D.T. 

Ver.  20. — Silence  in  the  temple.  "  The  Lord  is  In  his  holy  temple ;  let  all  the  earth 
keep  silence  before  him."  "In  striking  contrast,"  says  Dr.  Henderson,  "with  th« 
utter  nihility  of  idols,  Jehovah  is  here  introduced,  at  the  close  of  all  the  prophecy,  as 
the  invisible  Lord  of  all,  occupying  his  celestial  temple,  whence  he  is  ever  ready  to 
interpose  his  omnipotence  for  the  deliverance  and  protection  of  his  people  and  the 
destruction  of  their  enemies  (comp.  Isa.  xxvi.  21).  Such  a  God  it  becomes  all  to  adora 
in  solemn  and  profound  silence  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  8,  9 ;  Zeph.  i.  7 ;  Zech.  ii.  13)."  We  take 
these  words^as  suggesting  three  great  subjects  of  thought. 

I.  The  UNivERSB  is  thb  templb  op  God.  Men  practically  ignore  this  fact.  To 
some  the  world  is  only  as  a  great  farm  to  produce  food ;  to  others,  a  great  market  in 
which  commodities  are  to  be  exchanged  in  order  to  amass  wealth ;  to  others,  a  great 
chest  containing  precious  ores  which  are  to  be  reached  by  labour,  unlocked  and  brought 
into  the  market ;  to  others,  a  great  ball-room  in  which  to  dance  and  play  and  revel  in 
sensuous  enjoyment.  Only  a  iew  regard  it  as  a  temple.  But  few  tread  its  soil  with 
reverent  steps,  feeling  that  all  is  holy  ground.  What  a  temple  it  is  I  how  vast  in 
extent  1  how  magnificent  in  architecture  I  how  stirring  are  its  natiouiil  appeals ! 

II.  The  temple  is  filled  with  the  Divine  pbesbnob.  "  The  Lord  is  in  his  holy 
temple."  He  is  in  it,  not  merely  as  a  king  is  in  his  kingdom  or  the  worker  in  his  works ; 
but  he  is  in  it  as  the  soul  is  in  the  body,  the  fountain  of  its  life,  the  spring  of  its 
activities.  Unlike  the  human  architect,  he  did  not  build  the  house  and  leave  it; 
unlike  the  author,  he  did  not  write  his  volume  and  leave  his  book  to  tell  its  own  tale ; 
unlike  the  artist,  he  did  not  leave  his  pictures  or  his  sculpture  to  stand  dead  in  tlie 
hall.  He  is  in  all,  not  as  a  mere  influence,  but  as  an  absolute,  almighty  Personality, 
"  Do  not  I  fill  the  heaven  and  earth  ?  saith  the  Lord." 

III.  His  prbsbnob  in  the  great  temple  demands  silence.  "Keep  silence 
before  him."  It  would  seem  as  if  the  Divine  nature  revolted  from  bluster  and  noise. 
How  serenely  he  moves  in  nature  I  As  spring  by  universal  life  rises  out  of  death 
without  any  noise,  and  as  the  myriad  orbs  of  heaven  roll  with  more  than  lightning 
velocity  in  a  sublime  hush.  How  serenely  he  moves  in  Christ  I  He  did  not  cause  his 
voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets.  His  presence,  consciously  realized,  will  generate  in 
the  soul  feelings  too  deep,  too  tender  for  speech.  Were  the  Eternal  to  be  consciously 
felt  by  the  race  to-day,  all  the  human  sounds  that  fill  the  air  and  deaden  the  ears  of 
men  would  be  hushed  into  profound  silence. 

"  Never  with  blast  of  trumpets 
And  the  chariot-wheels  of  fame 
Do  the  servants  and  sons  of  the  Highest 
His  oracles  proclaim ; 


50 


THE   BOOK   OF   HABAKKUK. 


Bnt  when  grandest  truths  are  uttered. 

And  when  holiest  depths  are  stirred, 
When  our  God  liimself  draws  nearest, 

The  still,  small  voice  is  heard. 
He  has  sealed  his  own  with  silence : 

His  years  that  come  and  go, 
Bringing  still  their  mighty  measure* 

Of  glory  and  of  woe — 
Have  you  heard  one  note  of  triumph 

Proclaim  tiieir  course  hegun? 
One  voice  or  hell  ^ve  tidings 

When  their  ministry  was  done? " 


[oh.  m.  I — I'J- 


D.T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  III. 


Vers.  1—19.— Part  II.    Psai.ji  ob  Pbateb 
J  I'  Habakkuk. 

Ver.  1.— §  1.  The  titU.  A  prayer. 
There  is  only  one  formal  prayer  in  the  ode, 
that  in  ver.  2 ;  hut  the  term  is  used  of  any 
devotional  composition  ;  and,  indeed,  the 
whole  poem  may  be  regarded  as  the  develop- 
ment of  the  precatory  sentences  in  the 
prooemium  (seethe  inscriptions  in  Ps.  xvii.; 
Ixxxvi. ;  xc. ;  cii. ;  cxlii. ;  and  the  last  verse 
of  Ps.  Ixxii.,  the  subscription  of  Book  II.)- 
(For  other  hymns  in  the  prophetical  books, 
see  lea.  xxxiv.  and  xxxv. ;  Ezek.  xix. ; 
Jonah  ii. ;  Mlcah  vi.  6,  etc. ;  and  as  parallel 
to  this  ode,  comp.  Dent,  xxxiii.  2,  etc.; 
Judg.  V.  4,  etc  ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  7,  etc. ;  Ixxvii. 
13—20;  cxiv. ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  11—14.)  Of 
Hahakknk  the  prophet.  The  name  and 
title  of  the  author  are  prefixed  to  sliow  that 
this  is  no  mere  private  effusion,  but  an  out- 
pouring of  prophecy  under  Divine  inspira- 
tion. Upon  Shigionoth  (eomp.  title  of  Ps. 
vii.);  Septuagint,  inerck  ^5?s,  "  with  song;  " 
Vulgate,  pro  ignorantiis.  For  this  latter 
rendering  Jerome  had  etymological  ground, 
but  did  not  sufficiently  consider  the  use  of 
shiggayon  in  Ps.  vii.,  where  it  indicates  the 
style  of  poetry,  nor,  as  Keil  shows,  the  fact 
tliat  all  the  headings  of  Psalms  introduced, 
as  the  present,  with  al,  refer  either  to  the 
melody,  or  accompaniment,  or  style  in  which 
they  were  to  be  sung.  The  Revised  Version 
gives,  "  set  to  Shigionoth ; "  and  the  ex- 
pression is  best  explained  to  mean,  in  an 
impassioned  or  triumphal  strain,  with  rapid 
change  of  emotion,  a  dithyiambio  song— a 
description  which  admirably  suits  this  ode. 

Ver.  2. — §  2.  Tlte  prooemium,  in  which 
the  prophet  expreesea  Ms  fear  at  the  coming 
judgment,  and  prayn  Ood  in  his  wrath  lo 
remember  mercy.  Thy  speech ;  or,  the  report 
of  thee;  the  declaration  made  by  God  in  the 
preceding  chapters  concerning  the  punish- 


ment of  the  Jews  and  the  destruction  of  the 
Chahleans.  The  LXX.,  regarding  the  am- 
biguity of  the  Hebrew,  gives  a  double  render- 
ing, eiiraKiiKoa  rijv  axoiiv  ffou,  and  Kareviritra 
TO.  ijiya  aov,  "  I  heard  thy  report,"  and  "  I 
considered  thy  works."  Pusey  considers  that 
both  meanings  are  intended,  viz.  both  what 
God  had  lately  declared,  and  all  that  might 
be  heard  of  God,  his  greatness  and  his  work- 
ings. Was  afraid.  The  revelation  of  God's 
interposition  makes  the  prophet  tremble. 
Revive  thy  work.  God's  work  is  the  two- 
fold judgment  spoken  of  above;  and  the 
prophet  prays  God  to  "  quicken  "  and  make 
it  live,  because,  though  it  brings  temporary 
distress  upon  his  countrymen,  it  will  also 
ciiuse  the  destruction  of  their  enemies,  and 
re-establish  (he  Jews  and  crown  them  with 
salvation,  and  make  the  glory  of  Gtod  known 
to  all  the  earth.  ,  Dr.  Briggs  ('Messianic 
Prophecy,'  p.  2i?4)  translates,  "Jaliveh, 
I  have  heard  the  report  of  thee;  I  fear, 
Jahveh,  thy  work.  In  the  midst  of  the 
years  revive  him  (Israel)."  He  explains 
God's  "  work  "  to  be  his  acts  in  theophany — 
his  judgment,  especially  as  in  ver.  16,  the 
cause  of  fear  to  the  psalmist.  In  the  midst 
of  the  years.  The  "  years  "  are  the  period 
between  the  announcement  of  the  judgment 
and  its  final  accomplishment  (ch.  ii.  3) ;  the 
prophet  prays  that  God  would  manifest  his 
power,  not  merely  at  the  extreme  limit  of 
this  epoch,  but  earlier,  sooner.  This  over- 
throw of  the  world-power  forms,  as  it  were, 
the  central  point  of  history,  the  beginning 
of  a  new  age  which  shall  culminate  in  the 
Messianic  kingdom.  Hake  known.  Let  all 
the  earth  know  and  acknowledge  thy  work. 
The  LXX.  have  given  two  or  more  versions 
of  this  passage,  one  of  which  is  remarkable. 
Thus  they  read,  "In  the  midst  of  two 
animals  (Sio  (<ia>v)  thou  shalt  be  known; 
when  the  years  draw  nigh  thou  shalt  be 
well  known ;  when  the  time  is  come  thou 
shalt  be  revealed."  The  rendering,  "two 
animals,"  arises  f'om  a  confusion  of  words: 


OH.  m.  1—19.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK. 


61 


but  many  of  the  Fathers,  who  were  conversant 
with  the  Greek  Scriptures,  saw  herein  a 
reference  to  the  incarnation  of  our  blessed 
Lord,  as  lying  in  the  stable  at  Betlileliem 
between  the  ox  and  the  ass,  which  was  the 
mystical  explanation  of  Isa.  i.  3,  "  The  ox 
knoweth  his  owner,  andtlie  ass  his  master's 
crib."  Others  interpreted  the  two  animals 
of  the  two  thieves  between  whom  Christ 
was  crucified ;  or  of  angels  and  men ;  or 
Jews  anil  Gentiles;  or  the  two  Testaments; 
or  Moses  and  Elias.  Others  again  accented 
the  word  (dai/  so  as  to  understand  "  two 
lives,"  the  present  and  the  future,  in  the 
midst  of  which  the  Judge  shall  appear;  or 
the  life  of  Christ  before  his  death  and  after 
his  resurrection.  There  is  a  great  truth 
underlying  most  of  these  interpretations, 
namely,  t]]at  this  magnificent  hymn  is  cnn- 
cemed  with  the  victories  of  Christ  and  his 
Church.  In  wrath  remember  mercy.  When 
thine  anger  is  displayed  by  sending  the  Cliiil- 
deans  against  us,  remember  thy  mercy,  and 
make  a  speedy  end  of  our  misery,  and 
mitigate  our  enemies'  cruelty  (comp.  oh.  i. 
13;  and  vers.  9,  13,  18,  19  of  this  chapter). 
The  LXX.  gives  a  double  version,  "  In  the 
troubling  of  my  soul,  in  wrath,  thou  wilt 
remember  mercy." 

Vers.  3— 15.— §  3.  The  prophet  or  the 
ixmgregati<m  depicts  in  a  majegtic  theophany 
the  earning  of  God  to  judge  the  world,  and 
it»  effect  symholically  on  material  nature,  and 
properly  on  evil  men. 

Ver.  3. — In  this  episode  Habakkuk  takes 
his  imagery  from  the  acoonnts  of  God's 
dealings  with  his  people  in  old  time,  in 
Egypt,  at  the  Bed  Sea,  at  Sinai,  at  the 
Jordan,  in  Canaan ;  he  echoes  the  songs  of 
Mnses  and  iTeborah  and  the  psalmist ;  and 
be  looks  on  all  these  mighty  deeds  as  antici- 
pative  of  God's  great  work,  tiie  overthrow 
of  all  that  opposes  and  the  establishment 
of  the  kingdom  of  Messiah.  God  {Eloah) 
came  from  Teman.  The  words  are  oou- 
neoted  with  Moses'  description  of  the 
Lord's  appearance  at  Sinai  (Deut.  xxxiii. 
2 ;  comp.  Judg.  v.  4).  As  he  then  came  in 
glory  to  make  a  covenant  with  his  people, 
so  will  he  appear  again  in  majesty  to  deliver 
them  from  the  power  of  evil  and  to  execute 
judgment.  The  verbs  throughout  are  best 
rendered  in  the  present.  The  prophet  takes 
his  stand  in  time  preceding  the  action  of 
the  .verb,  and  hence  uses  the  future  tense, 
thus  also  showing  that  he  is  prophesying  of 
a  great  event  to  come,  symbolized  by  these 
earlier  manifestations.  Habakkuk  here  and 
in  oh.  i.  11  uses  the  word  Eloah,  which  is 
not  found  in  Jeremiah,  Bzekiel,  or  the  other 
minor  prophets ;  it  occurs  once  in  Isaiah, 
twice  in  Deuteronomy,  and  frequently  in  Job. 


There  is  no  ground  for  the  contention  that 
its  employment  belongs  to  the  latest  stage 
of  Hebrew.  Teman  ;  i.e.  Edom ;  Vulgate,  ab 
Austro  (see  notes  on  Amos  i.  12  and  Obad.  9). 
In  Moses'  song  the  Lord  is  said  to  come  from 
Sinai.  Habakkuk  omits  Sinai,  says  Fusey, 
which  was  the  emblem  of  the  Law,  and 
points  to  another  Lawgiver,  like  unto  Moses, 
telling  how  he  who  spake  the  Law,  God, 
should  come  in  the  likeness  of  man.  The 
Holy  One.  A  name  of  God  (ch.  i.  12),  im- 
plying that  he  will  not  let  iniquity  pass 
unpunished,  and  that  he  will  preserve  the 
holy  seed.  Mount  F-aran.  The  mountainous 
district  on  the  unrtli-east  of  the  desert  of 
Et-Tih.  The  glory  of  the  Lord  is  repre- 
sented as  flashing  on  the  two  hilly  regions 
separated  by  the  Arabah.  They  both  lay 
south  of  Canaan;  anfl  there  is  propriety  in 
representing  the  redeemer  and  deliverer 
appearing  in  the  south,  as  the  Chaldean 
invader  comes  from  the  north.  The  LXX. 
adds  two  translations  of  the  word  "Pharan," 
viz.  "shady,"  "rough;  "  accordingto  its  ety- 
mology it  might  also  mean  "  lovely."  Selah ; 
Septuagint,  Sidyf/aX/io.  This  term  occurs  also 
in  vers.  9,  13,  and  frequently  in  the  Psalms, 
but  nowhere  else,  and  indicates  some  change 
in  the  music  when  the  ode  was  sung  in  the 
temple  service.  What  is  the  exact  change 
is  a  matter  of  great  uncertainty.  Some 
take  it  to  indicate  "  a  pause ; "  others,  con- 
necting it  with  lalah,  "  to  lift  up,"  render  it 
"elevation,"  and  suppose  it  means  the 
raising  of  the  voice,  or  the  strengthening  of 
the  accompaniment,  as  by  the  blast  of 
trumpets.  The  meaning  must  be  left  un- 
determined, though  it  must  be  added  that  it 
is  always  found  at  the  end  of  a  verse  or 
hemistich,  where  there  is  a  pause  or  brealc 
in  the  thought,  or,  as  some  say,  gome  strongly 
accented  words  occur.  His  glory  covered  tha 
heavens.  His  majestic  brightness  spread 
over  the  heavens,  dimming  the  gleam  of  sun 
and  stars ;  or  it  may  mean  his  boundless 
majesty  fills  the  highest  heavens  and  en 
compasses  its  inhabitants.  His  praise. 
This  is  usually  explained  to  signify  tliat 
the  earth  and  all  that  dwell  therein,  at  this 
glorious  manifestion,  utter  their  praise. 
But  there  is  no  allusion  as  yet  to  the 
manner  in  which  the  appearance  is  received, 
and  in  ver.  6  it  produces  fear  and  trem- 
bling ;  BO  it  is  best  to  take  "  praise "  in  the 
sense  of  "  matter  of  praise,"  that  glory 
"  which  was  calculated  to  caU  forth  uni- 
versal adoration  "  (Henderson). 

Ver.  4. — His  brightness  was  as  the  light; 
brightnes$  appeareth  like  light.  The  sun- 
light is  meant,  as  Job  xxxi.  26;  xixvii.  21; 
Isa.  xviii.  4.  He  had  horns  coming  out  of 
his  hand;  i.e.  rays  of  light  on  either  side. 
The  comparison  of  the  first  rays  of  light  to 
the  horns  of  the  gazelle,  according  to  Keil, 


52 


THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK. 


[oh.  m.  1—19, 


ia  common  in  Arabic  poetry  (comp.  Exod. 
xxxiv.  29,  30).  In  the  original  paflsage, 
Deut.  xxxiii.  2, we  read,  "At  liis  right  band 
was  a  fiery  Law  nnto  tbem" — a  reference  to 
the  two  tables  of  stone,  perhaps  resplendent 
with  light.  The  "hand"  in  our  text  is 
a  general  expression,  and  is  not  to  be  taken 
witli  any  special  reference  to  lightning 
launched  by  the  hand  (which  is  not  a 
sciiplural  expression),  nor  to  works  effected 
by  God's  agonoy,  but  simply  as  signifying 
that  the  light  of  his  presence  streamed 
forth  from  both  sides,  i.e.  everywhere. 
There  was  the  hiding  of  his  power.  There, 
in  that  ineffable  light,  was  the  hiding-place 
of  his  majesty.  He  clothes  himself  with 
light  as  with  a  garment  (Ps.  civ.  2),_aud 
the  splendour  is  the  mantle  of  that  presence 
which  eye  of  man  cannot  behold  (Exod. 
xxiv.  17 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  16).  Farrar  quotes  Ps. 
xviii.  11,  "He  made  darkness  his  secret 
place ;  "  and  Milton — 

"Dark    with    excess    of   light    his  skirts 
appear." 

Septuagint,  "EBero  iydin)iTiv  KparaAv  lirx>Sos 
aiiTov,  which  rendering  has  arisen  from 
taking  the  adverb  sham  as  a  verb  (<atn),  and 
mistaking  the  meaning  of  the  following  word. 

Ver.  5. — After  describing  the  splendour 
of  the  theopbany,  the  prophet  now  turns 
to  the  purpose  and  effects  of  Gtod's  appear- 
ing. Ho  comes  to  avenge  ani  judge,  there- 
fore before  him  went  the  pestilence.  Before 
him  stalks  plague,  to  punish  his  enemies 
and  the  <li8obedient,  as  in  Egypt,  in 
Canaan  (Exod.  xxiii.  27;  1  Sam.  v.  9,  11)  ; 
andamonghisown  people  (Numb.  xi.  33 ;  xiv. 
37,  etc. :  Lev.  xxvi.  25).  For  "  pestilence  " 
the  LXX.  reads  "word."  Burning  coals 
went  forth  at  his  feet.  "Fiery  bolts"  fol- 
lowed his  advance,  "hailstones  and  coals 
of  fire"  (Ps.  xviii.  12,  13);  as  in  Ps.  xovii. 
8,  "A  fire  goeth  before  him,  and  burneth  up 
his  enemies  on  every  side."  But,  regarding 
the  parallelisms  of  the  hemistiches,  it  is 
better  to  take  resheph  in  the  sense  of  "  fever 
heat,"  as  in  Deut.  xxxii.  24;  scorching 
fever  follows  in  his  train.  Jerome  trans- 
lates tlie  word,  diabolus,  looking  on  the 
evil  spirit  as  the  agent  of  the  Divine  ven- 
geance. The  Jews,  he  tays,  had  a  tradition 
that  Satan  was  called  Uesepli,  from  the 
speed  of  his  movements.  The  LXX.  has, 
"  It  (the  word)  shall  go  forth  into  the 
plains,"  which  Jerome  interprets,  "  shall 
make  the  crooked  straight  and  the  rough 
ways  smooth." 

Ver.  6.— He  stood,  and  measured  the 
earth.  God  takes  his  stand,  and  surveys 
the  earth  which  he  is  visiting  in  judgment. 
As  his  glory  filled  the  heavens,  so  now  ho 
with  his  presence  paces  the  earth,  measur- 
ing it,  as  it  were,  with  his  foot     He  con- 


siders, too,  all  the  doings  of  the  children  of 
men,  and  requites  them  accordingly.  Vul- 
gate, Stetit,  el  mensus  est  terram.  So  the 
Syriao.  On  the  other  hand,  the  LXX. 
gives,  'Eirrri  koI  iira\iuBri  ri  yrj,  "  The  earth 
stood  and  quaked."  Thus  the  Clialdee, 
and  many  modem  commentators,  "rocketh 
the  earth."  This  rendering  seems  to  antici 
pate  what  follows,  and  ia  not  so  suitable  as 
the  other,  though  it  is  quite  admissible. 
Drove  asunder.  Dispersed  and  scattered. 
Septuagint,  SteraKri  eSvi),  "nations  melted 
away."  Others  translate, "  made  to  tremble  " 
(Exod.  XV.  15,  etc.).  The  everlasting  moun- 
tains. Mountains  that  have  lasted  as  long 
as  creation,  and  are  emblems  of  stability  and 
permanence  (Deut.  xxxiii.  15).  Were  Boat- 
tered;  or,  were  shattered  (comp.  Mieah  i.  4; 
Nah.  i.  5).  His  ways  are  everlasting.  This 
is  best  taken  alone,  not  as  connected  gram- 
matically with  the  preceding  clause,  and 
epexegetical  of  the  "  hills  and  mountains," 
which  are  called  God's  "ways,"  i.e.  his 
chief  creative  acts,  as  Job  xl.  19 ;  Prov.  viii. 
22 ;  but  it  means  that,  as  God  acted  of 
old,  so  he  acts  now;  "The  ancient  ways 
of  acting  are  his"  (Prov.  xxxi.  27).  "He 
reneweth  his  progresses  of  old  time  "  (De- 
litzsch).  The  eternal,  unchangeable  pur- 
pose and  operation  of  Gcd  are  contrasted 
with  the  disruption  of  "  the  everlasting 
hills."  The  Greek  and  Latin  Versions  con- 
nect the  words  with  what  precedes.  Septua- 
gint, '£r(i/c7}(7ai/  ^ovvoX  ai^vioi  vopGias  alwvlas, 
"  Tlie  everlasting  hills  melted  at  his  ever- 
lasting goings;"  Vulgate,  Incurvati  sunt 
collet  mundi  ab  itineribui  aiternitatis  ejus, 
where  the  idea  seems  to  be  that  the  high 
places  of  the  earth  are  God's  paths  when  he 
visits  the  world. 

Ver.  7.^As  God  moves  in  his  majesty 
the  various  nations  are  struck  with  fear,  as 
of  old  were  the  peoples  that  heard  of  the 
Exodus  (see  Exod.  xv.  14 — 16).  I  saw.  In 
prophetic  vision  (1  Kings  xxii.  17).  The 
tents  of  Cushan;  LXX.,  a-x-nvcipittTa  Aiflio- 
iroji',  "  the  tents  of  the  Ethiopians ;  "  Vul- 
gate, tentoria  MOiioyiss.  "  Cushan  "  is  not 
Ohushan-Rishathaim,  the  Mesopotamian 
king  mentioned  in  Judg.  iii.,  but  is  a 
lengthened  form  of  Gush  (as  Lotan  for  Lot, 
Gen.  xxxvi.  20),  the  biblical  name  for  Ethi- 
opia. Here  the  African  country  is  meant, 
lying  ailing  the  west  coast  of  the  Red  Sea. 
In  affliction.  Panic-stricken.  The  prophet 
particularizes  what  he  had  said  above  gene- 
rally of  the  nations  hostile  to  the  people  of 
God.  The  curtains;  the  tent  curtains; 
Vulgate,  pelles.  Both  "  tents  "  and  "  cur- 
tains "  are  used  by  metonymy  for  their  in- 
hahitants.  Midian.  The  country  on  the 
Gulf  of  Akal  a,  the  eastern  arm  of  the  Bed 
Sea.  Ethiopia  and  Midian  are  named,  aa 
God  is  supposed  to  advance  from  the  south. 


CH.  m,  1 — 19.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK. 


68 


Ver.  8. — Interrupting  hia  description  of 
the  theophauy,  the  prophet  asks  the 
motive  of  this  wrathful  revelation.  This  is 
done,  not  with  expectation  of  an  answer, 
but  giving  life  and  vigour  to  the  composi- 
tion. Such  sudden  transitions  are  not  un- 
common (comp.  Judg.  V.  12 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii. 
19,  etc.).  Was  the  Lord  displeased  against 
the  rivers?  Was  it  against  the  rivers,  0 
Jehovah  ?  was  thy  wrath  kindled  againtt  the 
river)  i  Was  God  angry  with  inanimate 
nature,  when  he  showed  his  power,  for 
instance,  in  the  Xile  and  the  Jordan  and 
the  Bed  Sea?  God  meant  more  by  these 
acts.  He  showed  his  supremacy  over  all 
creation,  and  his  will  to  save  his  people  and 
to  crush  all  opposition  to  the  execution  of 
his  great  design  (see  Ps.  cvi.  9 ;  oxiv.  3, 
etc.).  That  thou  didst  ride  npon  thine  horses. 
The  prophet  speaks  of  the  Lord  as  a  Leader 
of  a  mighty  host  which  came  with  chariots 
and  horses  to  defend  the  Israelites  and  to 
crush  their  foes  (comp.  Ps.  iviii.  10).  And 
fhj  chariots  of  salvation.  "  And,"  which  is 
not  in  the  Hebrew,  is  better  omitted,  the 
clause  being  an  explanation  of  "thine 
horses."  The  chariots  come  for  the  salva- 
tion, t.e.  the  deliverance,  of  Israel  (ver.  13). 
Some  translate,  "  Thy  chariots  are  salva- 
tion;" as  the  Septuagint,  /tal  ^  linraaia. 
ffov  aanripla  :  and  Vulgate,  et  guadrigas  tu« 
talvatia.  It  comes  to  the  same' thing, 
whichever  rendering  we  adopt. 

Ver.  9. — The  prophet  continues  his  de- 
scription of  the  Lord  as  "a  man  of  war" 
(Bxod.  IV.  3).  Thy  bow  was  made  quite 
naked.  The  sheath  of  the  bow  was  laid 
aside  to  make  it  ready  for  use.  In  the 
Assyrian  monuments  the  bow-case  forms 
part  of  the  quiver,  and  holds  only  the  lower 
half  of  the  bow  (Kawlinson,  '  Anc.  Mon.,' 
ii.  55,  edit.  1864).  It  was  fastened  to  the 
side  of  the  chariot  or  carried  at  the  back  of 
the  archer.  (For  the  general  sense,  comp. 
Dent,  xxxii.  40,  etc. ;  Ps.  xlv.  5.)  In  the 
Bevelation  (vi.  2)  he  that  sits  on  the  white 
horse  has  a  bow.  According  to  the  oaths  of 
the  tribes,  even  thy  word;  i.e.  thou  doest 
all  this  to  confirm  the  promises  of  deliver- 
ance and  salvation  made  to  the  tribes  of 
Israel.  This  sense  is  satisfactory ;  but  the 
Hebrew  text  is  corrupt,  and  cannot  be  ex- 
plained with  any  certainty.  The  Revised 
Version  gives, "  The  oaths  to  the  tribes  were 
a  sure  word ; "  in  the  margin,  "  Sworn  were 
the  chastisements  (Hebrew, '  rods ')  of  thy 
word."  Thus  Dr.  Briggs  :  "  Sworn  are  the 
rods  of  thy  word."  Orelli  translates, "  Oaths, 
rods  of  the  word,"  and  explains  the  clause 
to  mean  that  the  Lord  comes  to  execute  the 
denounced  punishment,  which  proceeds 
from  his  mouth  like  chastising  rods.  The 
word  mattoth  is  translated  "tribes"  (asjn 
%  Ohron.  v.  2)  or  "rods."     Keil  contends 


for  the  latter,  as  instruments  of  chastise- 
ment, rendering, "  Rods  are  sworn  by  word." 
Henderson,  taking  the  words  as  a  military 
signal,  curiously  translates,  " '  Sevens  of 
spears'  was  the  word."  Pusey  supports 
the  Authorized  Version,  which,  indeed, 
gives  a  good  sense,  and  is  probably  correct. 
It  is  virtually  supported  by  Jerome,  who 
has,  "  Susoitans  suscitabis  arcum  tuum, 
juramenta  tribubus  quse  looutus  es,"  "  Thou 
wilt  awaken  the  oaths,"  which,  so  long  as 
the  evil  prospered,  seemed  to  be  forgotten 
and  sleeping.  The  LXX.  omits  the  word 
rendered  "oaths,"  and  translates  mattoth, 
ffKTJiTTpa,  thus  ;  ^Evrelyay  ii/ereivas  T6^oy  ffov 
ivX  (TKriTirpa,  Ae-yei  Kiptos,  "  Thou  didst 
surely  bend  thy  bow  ngainst  sceptres." 
Selah,  A  pause  ensues  before  the  introduc- 
tion of  a  new  series  of  natural  phenomena, 
accompanying  the  Lord's  epipljany  (see 
on  ver.  3).  The  next  clause  would  be  more 
fitly  joined  with  ver.  10.  Thou  didat  cleave 
the  earth  with  (or,  into)  rivers.  This  refers 
to  some  catastrophe  like  th^t  which  hap- 
pened at  the  Flood,  when  "  the  fountains  of 
the  great  deep  were  broken  up  "  (Gen.  vii. 
11 ;  comp.  Ps.  Ixxvii.  16).  Others  think 
that  the  allusion  is  to  the  miracles  at  the 
Red  Sea,  or  Sinai,  or  Rephidim  in  the 
wilderness,  as  in  Ps.  Ixxiv. ;  Ixxviii  ;  ov. 
But  though  the  prophet  glances  at  such 
particular  circumstances,  his  scope  is  more 
general. 

Ver.  10. — The  mountains  saw  thee,  and 
they  trembled ;  literally,  were  in  pain ; 
Septuagint,  aStviiaovin.  The  words  point 
to  the  phenomena  of  an  earthquake,  as 
Sinai  shook  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
(Exod.  xix.  18;  Ps.  cxiv.  6).  So  Virgil, 
•  Ma.,'  vi.  256— 

"  Sub  pedibus  mugire  solum,  et  juga  ooepta 
moveri 
Silvarum  .  .  . 
Adventante  dea." 

For  "  mountains,"  the  LXX.  reads, "  peoples." 
The  overflowing  of  the  water  passed  by; 
the  torrent  of  water  passed  along.  Cataracts 
of  rain  fell,  as  in  the  Deluge.  "  The  windows 
on  high  are  open,  and  the  foundations  of  the 
earth  do  shake  "  (Isa.  xxiv.  18).  Those  who 
confine  the  reference  to  past  events  see  here 
an  intimation  of  the  passage  of  the  Jordan 
(Josh.  iii.  15,  16).  The  deep  uttered  his 
voice.  The  mass  of  waters  in  the  ocean  and 
under  the  eartii  roars  mightily  as  it  bursts 
forth  (Gen.  xlix.  25 ;  Deut.  xxxiiL  13).  His 
hands.  Its  waves  (Ps.  xcviii.  8).  Septua- 
gint, 01//OS  ^avraaias  out^s,  "  the  height  of 
its  form." 

Ver.  11. — The  sun  and  moon  stood  still  in 
their  habitation;  or,  stand  still,  or  with 
draw  into  their  habitation.  They  hide  them- 
selves in  the  tabernacles  whence  they  are  said 


5i 


THE   BOOK   OF   HABAKKUK. 


[oh.  m.  1—19 


to  emerge  when  they  shine  (Ps.  xix.  4,  etc.). 
Overpowered  with  the  Bplendour  of  God's 
presence,  the  heavenly  luminaries  hide  their 
light  in  this  day  of  the  Lord  (comp.  Isa. 
xiii.  10;  Joel  ii.  2,  10,  31 ;  iii,  15;  Amos  v. 
20  ;  Matt.  xxlv.  29).    The  miracle  of  Josliua 
(Josh.  X.  12,  etc.)  may  have  suggetrted  some 
of  the  language  here,  but  the  idea  is  quite 
different.    At  the  light  of  thine  arrows  they 
went ;  i.e.  the  sun  and  moon  fled  away  dis- 
comfited at  the  glory  of  God's  weapons,  his 
arrows  gleaming  with  light.    The  idea  may 
be  that,  in  the  absence  of  the  sun  and  moon, 
the  terrific  scene  was  illuminated  only  by 
flashes   of   lightning.      "Lightnings"  are 
sometimes  called  God's  "  arrows,"  as  in  Ps. 
iviii.  14 ;  Ixxvii.   17,  etc. ;  but  the  image 
here  is  rather  of  the  arms  of  a  warrior. 
Many  supply  the  relative  in  the  sentence, 
and  render,  "  arrows  which  shoot  along." 
This  seems  to  be  unnecessary,  and  is  not 
supported  by  the  versions.     There  is  no 
special  reference  to  the  hailstorm  at  Beth- 
horon,  which  discomfited  the  Canaauites,  but 
enabled  the  Israelites  to  pass  on  to  victory 
(Joshua,  loc.  cit.).  It  is  the  terror  of  the  judg- 
ment that  is  adumbrated,  when  the  Lord 
shall  come  in  flames  of  fire  (2  Thess.  i.  8), 
and  the  heavens  shall  be  dissolved,  and  the 
elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat  (2  Pet. 
iii.  12). 

Ver.  12. — Thou  didst  march  through  the 
land  in  indignation ;  thou  treadest  the  earth 
in  fury.  The  mighty  Judge  stalks  over  the 
earth  (ver.  6 ;  comp.  Judg.  v.  4 ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  7). 
It  is  a  general  statement,  and  not  to  be  con- 
fined to  the  successes  of  Joshua  and  the 
destruction  of  tlie  Canaanites.  Septuagint.'Ei' 
oirejAp  o\tydti(reis  yriv,  with  the  alteration  of 
a  letter, "  Thou  wilt  bring  low  the  land  with 
threats."  Thou  didst  thresh  the  heathen 
{nations)  in  anger;  Septuagint,  %v  Bv/i,^ 
KUTcl^eis  ("thou  wilt  break  in  pieces") 
tfei).  Jerome  here  renders  the  verb,  oh- 
stupefades;  but  elsewhere,  as  Isa.  xxviii. 
28 ;  Hos.  X.  11 ;  Amos  i.  3,  he  uses  triturate, 
which  gives  the  best  meaning.  The  kindred 
figure  is  found  in  Micah  iv.  13;  Isa.  Ixiii.  1, 
etc. 

Ver.  13.— Thou  wentest  forth.  The  pro- 
phet specifies  the  end  which  these  mani- 
festations were  designed  to  effect.  God  is 
said  to  "  go  forth  "  when  he  intervenes  for 
the  aid.  of  his  people,  as  Judg.  v.  4;  2  Sam. 
V.  24 ;  Isa.  xlli.  13.  Tor  salvation  with  thine 
anointed ;  In  ecdutem  eum  Christo  tuo  (Vul- 
■  gate) ;  toC  (rairoi  Tbv  XP'""^^"  ""^  (joiis 
Xpurrois  aov,  Alex.,  Sin.),  "to  save  thine 
anointed  "  (Septuagint).  If  the  significa- 
tion of  the  word  "  with "  {eth)  be  pressed, 
the  passage  is  taken  to  mean  that,  as  God 
manifested  himself  in  old  time  for  the 
salvation  of  his  people  with  his  chosen 
"  Christ,"  Moses ;  so  he  will  hereafter  reveal 


his  power  for  the  destruction  of  the  Chal- 
deans with  his  chosen    "Christ,"  Cyrus. 
But  this  is  too  definite,  and  cannot  be  shown 
to    be   intended.      The    "anointed    one," 
again,  is  not  the  nation  of  Israel,  for  the 
term  is  always  applied  to  a  single  individual 
and  never  to  the  people  collectively ;  so  here 
it  is  the  theocratic  king  who  is  meant — first, 
the  representative  of  Uavid ;  and  secondly, 
the  Messiah.     God  reveals  himself  for  the 
salvation  of  his  people  in  union  with  the 
work  especially  of  his  anointed  Son,  Christ. 
"This  is  liow  the  passage  is  taken  by  Euse- 
bius  ('  Dem.   Bvang.,'  iv.  16),  Eis  aumtplav 
haoxi  trov  aifv  Xpiffr^  irov.     It  must  be  con- 
fessed, however,  that  most  modem  commen- 
tators translate,  "  for  the  salvation  of  thy 
anointed,"  taking  the  last  expression  (onn- 
trary  to  all  usage)  to  mean  the  Israelites,  as 
being  a  kingdom   and    nation    of  priests 
(Exod.  xix.  6).     In  this  case  the  present 
clause  is  merely  a  repetition  of  the  preceding 
one.    Thou  woundedst  the  head  out  of  the 
house  of  the  wicked ;  thou  dashest  in  pieces 
the  head.    As  in  the  following  clause  the 
metaphor  of  a  house  is  plainly  employed, 
"  the  head"  must  be  taken  for  tlie  gable  or 
topmost  ridge.    "  The  house  of  the  wicked  " 
is  an  allegorical  description  of  the  Chaldaio 
dominion  and  its  king ;   and  the  prophet 
declares  that  God  will  smite  with  destruc- 
tion both  the  ungodly  monarch  and  the 
kingdom  that  opposes  itself.     Some  com- 
mentators   see    here    an   allusion    to    the 
primeval  sentence  (Gen.  liL  15);  others  to 
the  destruction  of  the  Egyptians'  firstbomj 
others  to  the  incident  of  Jael  and  Sisera 
(Judg.  V.  26).     If  the  prophet's  language 
was  influenced  by  any  of  these  matters,  his 
view  and  his  oracle  are  concerned  with  the 
mighty  future.      The  LXX.   has,  "Thou 
wilt  cast  death  upon  the  heads  of  the  evil." 
By  discovering  (literally,  making  naked)  tlie 
foundations  unto  the  neok.     "  By  "  is  better 
omitted.    Keil  supposes  that  "  the  neck  "  is 
the  central  part  of  the  house,  looking  from 
the  gable  downwards;    though  why  this 
should  be  so  called  is  not  apparent ;  and  the 
wording  of  the  original,  "the  foundations 
even  to  the  neck,"  compels  us  to  connect  the 
two  words  together,  and  will  not  allow  us  to 
interpret  "  the  neck  "  of  some  higher  part 
of  the  building.    The  general  meaning  is 
plain — the  metaphorical  house  is  destroyed 
from  summit  to  base,  tlie  destruction  begin- 
ning at  the  gable  is  carried  on  to  the  very 
foundations.    According  to  this  view,  "  the 
neck"  should  mean  the  very  lowest  basis  of 
the  walls.     Henderson  (after  Capellus  and 
others)  suggests  that  we  should  read  "  rock," 
a  word  derived  fiom  the  same  root.    Sep- 
tungint,  'E^iiyeipas    Seir/iohs   ems   Tpax'h^ov, 
"Ti!0u  didst  raise  chains  unto  the  neck." 
It  is  possible  that  the  mention  of  "the 


jh,  ni.  1—19.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK. 


6u 


head,"  just  above,  has  led  the  prophet  to 
use  the  term  "neck"  in  order  to  express 
the  utter  destiuction  of  the  whole  body. 
Selah.    Another  solemn  pause  ensues. 

Ver.  14. — Thou  didst  strike  through  with 
his  staves ;  thou  didst  pieree  with  his  oisn 
spears.  Thou  dost  turn  on  the  Chaldeans 
and  all  thine  enemies  the  destruction  which 
they  intended  for  others.  The  people  meet 
with  the  same  fate  as  the  royal  house  (ver. 
13) ;  Vulgate,  maledixisti  scepiris  ejus,  which 
seems  to  be  a  mistranslation.  The  head  of 
his  villagBS  (onna).  There  is  a  difSculty 
in  arriving  at  the  meaning  of  this  last 
word.  The  LXX.  renders  it, "  mighty  men ; " 
Jerome, "  warriors ; "  Cbaldee,  "army ;"  De- 
litzsch  and  many  modem  critics,  "  hordes  " 
or  "  inhabitants  of  the  plain ;  "  others  again, 
"rulers"  or  "judges."  The  most  probable 
version  is  either  "  warriors  "  or  "  hordes. " 
The  head,  i.e.  collectively  the  heads  of  his 
warlike  troops.  They  came  out  (or,  who 
rush)  as  a  whirlwind  to  scatter  me  (see  the 
description  of  the  Chaldees,  ch.  i.  6,  etc.). 
The  prophet  identifies  himself  with  his 
people.  (For  the  figure  of  the  whirlwind, 
comp.  Isa.  zli.  16 ;  Jar.  xiii.  24 ;  Hos.  xiii.  3.) 
Dr.  Briggs  renders,  "  Thou  dost  pierce  with 
his  rods  the  chief,  when  his  rulers  are  rustl- 
ing in  to  scatter  me."  Their  rejoicing  was 
as  to  devour  the  poor  secretly;  or,  as  in 
anibush,  to  devour  the  helpless.  They  exult 
in  acting  the  part  of  robbers  and  murderers, 
who  lurk  for  the  defenceless  and  afflict  the 
poor  (Ps.  X.  8,  etc.).  As  is  equivalent  to 
"  as  it  were."  Vulgate,  Bieut  ejus  qui. 
"  The  poor "  are  primarily  the  Isiaelites, 
and  then  all  meek  worshippers  of  God. 

Ver.  15. — The  Exodus  is  the  type  of  the 
deliverance  of  God's  people.  Thou  didst 
walk  through  (didst  tread)  the  sea  with  thine 
horses ;  literally,  thou  treadest  the  sea,  thy 
horses,  the  horses  being  explanatory.  The 
prophet  takes  his  imagery  from  Exod.  xv. 
I — 19.  He  represents  God  as  a  warrior  in 
his  chariot,  leading  the  way  through  the 
waters  to  the  destruction  of  his  enemies 
and  to  the  salvation  of  his  own  people. 
Through  the  heap  of  great  waters;  or, 
upon  the  surge  of  mighty  waters.  The 
verse  may  also  be  rendered,  Thou  treadest 
ike  sea  —  thy  horses  (tread)  the  heap  of 
great  waters  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  19).  Past  mercies 
and  deliverances  are  types  and  pledges  of 
future. 

Vers.  16,  17. — §  4.  The  contemplation,  of 
the  Divine  judgments  produces  in  the  people 
of  God  at  first,  fear  and  trembling  at  the 
prospect  of  chastisement. 

Ver.  16.— When  I  heard.  "When"  is 
better  omitted.  "1  heard"  the  report  of 
thee  (ver.  2).    The  LXX.  refers  to  oh.  ii.  1, 


Tendering,  "I  watched."  If  the  former  part 
is  the  pssan  of  the  congregation,  the  pre- 
sent is  the  prophet's  own  utterance  ex- 
pressive of  his  dismay  at  the  prospect 
before  him.  My  belly  trembled.  My 
inmost  part,  my  inward  self,  trembled 
with  fear  (pomp.  Isa.  xvi.  11).  My  lips 
quivered  at  the  voice.  My  lips  quivered 
with  fear  at  the  voice  of  God  that  sounded 
in  me  (ch.  ii.  1),  proclaiming  these  awful 
judgments.  The  word  rendered  "  qui  vered  " 
(tsalal)  is  applied  to  the  tingling  of  the  ears 
(1  Sam.  iii.  11;  2  Kings  xxi.  12),  and 
implies  that  the  prophet's  lips  so  trembled 
that  he  was  scarcely  able  to  utter  speech. 
The  LXX..  renders,  "  from  the  voice  of  the 
prayers  of  my  lips."  BottennesB  entered 
into  my  bones.  This  is  an  hyperbolical 
expression,  denoting  that  the  firmest, 
strongest  parts  of  his  body  were  relaxed  and 
weakened  with  utter  fear,  as  if  his  very 
bones  were  cankered  and  corrupted,  and 
there  was  no  marrow  in  them.  And  I 
trembled  in  myself.  The  last  word  (tachtai) 
is  rendered  variously :  "  under  me,"  accord- 
ing to  the  Greek  and  Latin  Versions,  i.e.  in 
my  kuees  and  feet,  so  that  I  reeled  and 
stumbled ;  or,  "  in  my  place,'!  on  the  spot 
where  I  stand  (as  Exod.  xvi.  29).  That  I 
might  rest  in  the  day  of  trouble;  better, 
I  who  shall  rest  in  the  day  of  tribulation. 
The  prophet  suddenly  expresses  his  con- 
fidence that  he  shall  have  rest  in  this 
affliction ;  amid  this  terror  and  awe  he  is 
sure  that  there  remaineth  a  rest  for  the 
people  of  God.  This  sentiment  leads  natur- 
ally to  the  beautiful  expression  of  hope  in 
the  concluding  paragraph  (ver.  17,  etc.). 
Keil  and  others  render,  "  tjemble  that  I 
am  to  wait  quietly  for  the  day.  of  tribula- 
tion ; "  that  I  am  to  sit  still  and  await  the 
day  of  affliction.  But  Pusey  denies  that 
the  verb  (nuach)  ever  means  "  to  wait 
patiently  for,"  or  "  to  be  silent  about ; " 
its  uniform  signification  is  "  to  rest "  from 
labour  or  from  trouble.  Thus  the  Septua- 
gint,  ' Avumaiffoiiai  iv  rinep^f  BKlifieas,  "I 
will  rest  in  the  day  of  affliction ; "  Vul- 
gate, Ut  requiescam  in  die  tribulationis. 
When  he  cometh  up  unto  the  people,  he 
will  invade  them  with  his  troops.  'This 
should  be,  When  he  that  invades  with  bands 
comes  up  against  the  people ;  i.e.  in  the  day 
when  the  Chaldeans  attack  the  Israelites 
(comp.  2  Kings  xxiv.  2,  where  the  word 
"bands"  is  also  used).  Septuagint,  ToS 
iiva^rivai,  els  \ahv  irapoiKias  fiovl  "  To  go  up 
against  the  people  of  my  sojourning ;  "  Vul- 
gate, Ut  ascendam  ad  populum  aecinctum 
nostrum,  which  is  thus  explained:  "I  will 
bear  all  things  patiently,  even  death  itself, 
that  I  may  attain  to  the  happy  company  of 
those  blessed  heroes  who  fought  for  their 
country  and  their  God."    It  is  obvious  to 


66 


THE  BOOK   OP   HABAKKUK. 


[CH.  ni.  1—19. 


remark  that  this  is  a  gloss,  not  on  the 
original  text,  but  on  the  eironeous  version. 

Ver.  17. — ^The  prophet  depicts  the  effects 
of  the  hostile  inyasion,  which  are  such  as  to 
make  the  natural  heart  despair.  Althongh 
the  fig  tree  shall  not  blossom.  The  devasta- 
tions of  the  enemy  leave  the  country  bare 
and  uncultivated.  The  Chaldeans,  liJce  the 
Assyrians  and  Egyptians,  cut  down  and 
burnt  the  fruit-bi  aring  trees  of  the  countries 
which  they  invaded  (comp.  Deut.  ix.  19 ; 
Isa.  ix.  10 ;  xxxvii.  21 ;  Jer.  vi.  6).  The  trees 
most  useful  and  abundant  in  Palestine  are 
mentioned  (temp.  Deut.  vi.  11 ;  Hos.  ii.  12; 
Joel  i.  7 ;  Micah  iv.  4 ;  vi.  15,  etc.).  The 
labour  of  the  olive  shall  fail ;  literally,  ehaU 
lie.  The  "  labour  "  is  the  produce,  the  fruit. 
Though  the  yield  shall  disappoint  all  ex- 
pectation. The  use  of  the  verb  "  to  lie"  in 
this  sense  is  found  elsewhere ;  e.g.  Isa.  Iviii. 
11 ;  Hos.  ix.  2.  So  Horace,  'Carm.,'  ill.  1. 
30,  "  Fundus  mendax ; "  and  '  Epist.,'  i 
7,  87,  "  Spem  mentita  seges."  The  fields ; 
the  corn-fields  (Isa.  xvi.  8).  The  flock  shall 
be  out  off  from  the  fold.  There  shall  be  no 
flocks  in  the  fold,  all  having  perished  for 
lack  of  food.  "  Omnia  hsso,"  says  St. 
Jerome,  "auferentur  a  populo,  quia  inique 
egit  in  Denm  creatorem  Buum." 

Vers.  18, 19. — §  5.  In  spite  of  the  terror 
prodtuxd  by  these  judgments,  the  true  Israel- 
ite is  hlessed  with  hope  of  salvation  and  joy  in 
tht  Lord. 

Ver.  18.— Yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  lord. 
Unshaken  in  confidence,  the  prophet,  repre- 
senting the  faithful  Israelite,  expresses  his 
unbounded  joy  at  the  prospect  of  salvation 
which  opens  to  him  beyond  the  present 
affliction.  The  psalmist  often  thus  shows 
his  exulting  faith  (see  Pa.  v.  7;  xiii.  6; 
xvii.  14,  15  ;  xxxi.  19).  1  will  joy.  I  will 
shout  for  joy;  my  joy  shall  express  itself 
outwardly.  The  God  of  my  salvation  (see 
note  on  Micah  vii.  7).  The  God  who  judges 
the  nations  to  procure  the  final  salvation  of 
his  people.  Septuagint,  Tif  0e^  ry  <ruTrjpi 
fiov,  "  God  my  Saviour ; "  Vulgate,  In  Deo 


Jesu  meo.  From  this  gloss  of  St.  Jerome  some 
of  the  Fathers  have  argued  for  the  existence 
in  this  passage  of  a  revelation  of  the  incama> 
tion  of  Christ  and  the  redemption  wrought 
by  him. 

Ver.  19. — The  Lord  Ood  is  my  strength; 
mcie  accurately,  Jehovah,  the  Lord,  is  my' 
strength,  from  Ps.  xviii.  32 ;  comp.  Ps.  xxvii, 
1.    He  will  make  my  feet  like  hinds'  feet 
(Ph.  xviii,  33).    He  makes  me  uctive  and 
swift-footed    as    tlie    gazelle,    as    a    lusty 
warrior  (2  Sam.  i.  23;  ii.  18)  should  be. 
So  by  the  help  of  God  I  shall  be  superior  to 
my  enemies.    He  will  make  me  to  walk 
upon  mine  high  places.     The  expression 
is  used  properly  of  God  (Micah  i.  3),  and 
elsewhere,  says    Keil,  to   denote  the  vic- 
torious   possession   and   government   of  a 
country  (see  Dent,  xxxii.  13;  xxxiii.  29). 
Here  it  signifies  that  believing  Israel  shall 
overcome  all  opposition  and  dwell  in  safety 
in  its   own    land.     To   the   chief   singer 
(musician)    on    my    stringed    instruments 
(negijtothy.     This    is    a    musical  direction, 
answering  to  the  heading  in  ver.  1,  and 
implies  that  the  ode  is  committed  to  the 
conductor  of  the  temple  music,  to  be  by  him 
adapted  for  the  public  service  to  the  accom- 
paniment of  stringed  instruments.      Such 
directions  are  elsewhere  always  found  at 
the  beginning,  not  the  end,  of  psalms  (see 
Ps.  iv. ;   vi.  ;  liv. ;  Iv. ;   IxviL ;  Ixxvi).    It 
has  been  thought  that  the  suffix  of  the  first 
person,  "  my  stringed  instruments,"  denotes 
that  Habal^uk  had  a  right  to  take  part  in 
the  temple  servioe,  and  was  therefore  a 
Levite ;  but  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  this 
suffix  is  not  a  clerical  error,  as  Kuenen  and 
Ewald  suppose,  or  merely  paragogic.    Cer- 
tainly neither  the  Greek,  Latin,  nor  Syriao 
Versions  afford  it  any  confirmation.     These 
versions  make  the  subscription  part  of  the 
ode.     Thus  LXX.,  'Eirl  rit  iifinXit  ivt0i$fni, 
Tov  yiicrja-ai  ivr^aiS^  avrov,  "  He  maketli  me 
to  mount  upon  the"  high  places,  that  I  may 
conquer  by  his  song;"  Vulgate,  Super  ex- 
eelsa  mea  deducet  me  victor  (vietori.  Cod. 
Amiat.)  tn  psalmis  oanentem. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Ver.  2,— The  prayer  of  an  alarmed  prophet.  I.  The  prophkt'b  alabm.  1.  Its 
cause.  The  report  of  Jehovah ;  t.e.  the  communication  received  from  Jehovah  concern- 
ing the  punishment  of  Judah  and  the  destruction  of  Ohaldea.  Habakkak  not  the  first 
man  that  had  been  afraid  at  the- hearing  of  God's  voice  ((Jen.  iii.  10;  Bxod.  iii.  6)  at 
the  thought  of  his  presence  (Job  xxiii.  15),  at  the  manifestation  of  his  power  (Ps.  Ixv'  8) 
•t  the  contemplation  of  his  judgments  (Ps.  cxix.  120).  Nor  will  Siey  who  hear  the 
fame  of  his  doings  in  the  past  or  the  announcement  of  his  "  judgments  to  come  "  as 
both  of  these  are  unfolded  in  Scripture,  fail  to  be  similarly  affected.  Like 'the 
Canaanites  before  the  advance  of  Joshua  and  his  host,  their  hearts  will  melt  in  them 
for  fear  (Josh.  ii.  11).  What  excited  terror  in  the  breast  of  Habakkuk  was  the 
proipeot  Jehovah's  "report"  opened  up  before  himl     Though  a  pioue  man  and   • 


«H.in.  1— 19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  67 

prophet,  he  was  at  the  same  time  a  philanthropist  and  a  patriot,  who  could  not  con- 
template without  a  shudder  the  decimation  of  his  people  or  the  desolation  of  his 
country ;  and  neither  can  the  Christian  anticipate  without  apprehension  those  chas- 
tisements that  are  promised  to  himself  for  correction  of  his  backslidings,  and  to  the 
■Church  for  her  recovery  from  doctrinal  aberration  or  spiritual  declension.  It  may  be 
better  to  fall  into  God's  hands,  because  his  mercies  are  great,  than  to  fall  into  those  of 
man  (2  Sam.  xxiv,  14) ;  but  in  any  case  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  for  judgment  into 
the  hands  of  the  living  God  (Hob.  x.  31).  Again,  the  fierce  whirlwind  of  retributiom, 
■  which  in  the  end  should  throw  down  the  eagle's  nest  of  Chaldean  pride  and  blow  up 
the  cracklinj;  flames  in  which  its  palaces  and  temples  were  to  be  destroyed,  raised 
within  him  awe-inspiring  conceptions  of  the  omnipoteuoe  of  Jehovah  which  made  him 
tremble,  even  though  the  downfall  of  Chaldea  meant  the  deliverance  of  Judah ;  and  so, 
although  the  final  destruction  of  the  ungodly  will  be  to  the  saints  a  cause  of  rejoicing 
(Rev.  xviii.  20),  it  will  also  inspire  them  with  a  solemn  awe  of  the  Divine  holiness 
and  justice,  majesty  and  power.  2.  Its  cure.  Prayer.  Different  from  Adam,  who, 
having  heard  God's  voice,  ran  from  God,  Habakkuk,  in  his  alarm,  betook  himself 
to  God.  Hiding  from  God,  the  custom  of  sinners;  hiding  in  God,  the  comfort  of 
■aints  ^B.  cxliii.  9).  Suitable  for  all  times  (Bph.  vi.  18 ;  Phil.  iv.  6 ;  1  Thess.  v.  17), 
prayer  is  specially  appropriate  for  bad  times  (Ps.  1.  15).  In  addition  to  the  promise 
that  God  will  be  a  Refuge  for  the  oppressed,  a  Refuge  in  times  of  trouble  (Ps.  ix.  9), 
and  to  the  fact  that  good  men  in  all  ages  have  found  him  so  (Ps.  xlviii.  3 ;  xci.  2 ; 
Jer.  xvi.  19),  the  practice  of  pouring  one's  fears  (Ps.  xxxiv,  4)  as  well  as  complaints 
(Ps.  cxlii.  2)  and  requests  (Phil.  iv.  6)  into  the  ear  of  God  seems  justified  by  this,  that 
he  who  by  his  judgment  causes,  is  by  his  wisdom  and  mercy  best  able  to  remove, 
alarms. 

II.  The  prophet's  pbateb.  1.  Its  fervowr.  Intimated  by  the  repetition  of  the 
term  "  Jehovah,"  and  by  the  three  short  sentences  of  which  the  prayer  is  composed. 
Souls  labouring  under  strong  emotion  commonly  express  themselves  in  brief  and 
broken  ejaculations,  rather  than  in  long  and  polished  periods.  2.  Its  tenor,  A  three- 
fold petition.  (1)  For  the  acceleration  of  Jehovah's  work.  "  0  Lord,  revive  thy  work 
in  the  midst  of  the  years."  The  work  referred  to  was  the  purification  of  Judah  by 
means  of  the  Chaldean  exile,  and  the  salvation  of  Judah  by  the  ultimate  overthrow  of 
her  oppressor.  It  was  thus  a  picture  of  God's  work  in  all  ages — the  deliverance  of  the 
individual  believer  and  of  the  Church  in  general,  first  through  the  afflictions  and  trials 
of  life  from  the  moral  defilement  of  sin ;  and  second,  through  the  overthrow  (by  Christ's 
cross  and  rule)  of  the  enemies  of  both  from  the  legal  and  spiritual  bondage  of  sin.  The 
prophet  craved  that  Jehovah  might  not  defer  the  completion  of  Judah's  redemption 
till  the  end  of  the  time  which  had  been  appointed  for  this  purpose,  but  that  he  might 
oause  his  work  to  live  (not  suffer  it  to  go  to  sleep,  but  quicken  and  revive  it),  so  that 
it  might  be  finished  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  and  Judah's  reformation  and  emancipa- 
tion brought  about  long  before  the  stipulated  period  had  arrived.  Thus  his  prayer  was 
one  the  believer  might  offer  for  himself,  that  God  would  perfect  that  which  concerned 
him  (Ps.  cxxxviii.  8),  would  carry  on  his  work  of  grace  within  him  (Phil.  L  6),  making 
all  things  work  together  for  his  good  (Bom.  viii.  28),  causing  tribulation  to  work  in 
him  patience,  etc.  (Bom.  y,  3),  and  afflictions  to  yield  him  the  peaceable  fruits  of 
righteousness  (Ueb.  xii.  11),  as  well  as  to  work  out  for  him  a  far  more  exceeding,  even 
an  eternal  weight  of  glory  (2  Cor.  iv.  18) ;  and  would  crown  that  work  by  completely 
effecting  his  deliverance  from  the  curse  and  power  of  sin,  from  the  terror  of  death,  the 
darkness  of  the  grave,  the  misery  of  hell.  It  was  also  a  petition  which  the  Church 
might  present  for  herself,  that  she  might  be  purified,  extended,  completed,  glorified, 
not  after  long  waiting,  but  soon,  in  the  middle  of  the  years.  "  Even  so,  come  [quickly], 
Lord  Jesus"  (Rev.  xxii.  20).  (2)  For  the  manifestation  of  Jehovah's  glory.  "In  the 
midst  of  the  years  make  it  known."  Make  it  known,  the  prophet  meant,  that  the 
work  of  punishing  and  purifying  Judah  by  means  of  exile  in  Babylon  is  thy  work ;  so 
shall  it  comfort  Judah  and  awe  Babylon.  Make  it  known  that  the  deliverance  of 
Judah  by  means  of  the  overthrow  of  Babylon  is  thy  work ;  so  again  shall  Judah 
rejoice  and  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  afraid.  The  believer  and  the  Church  may  also 
ask  that  God's  work  in  dealing  with  them  should  be  manifest,  not  to  themselves  merely, 
but  to  the  world  at  large.    This  would  both  sustain  them  and  impress  the  world. 


58  THE    BOOK   OF   HABAKKUK.  [oh.  in.  1— 1&. 

Until  affliction  is  seen  to  be  God's  work,  it  does  little  good  to  the  soul ;  till  the  world 
perceives  that  God  is  in  the  Church,  it  will  not  cease  to  persecute  and  hinder  the 
Church.  (3)  For  the  dispensation  of  Jehovah's  mercy.  Habakkuk's  plea  was  not 
merit.    He  knew  well  that  what  he  asked  could  not  be  granted  on  the  score  of  justice. 

"  'Tis  from  the  mercy  of  onr  God 
That  all  our  hopes  begin." 

Lessons.  1.  That  God's  voice  should  excite  a]  arm  even  in  the  hearts  of  good  m^n. 
is  no  mean  proof  of  the  fallen  state  of  mankind  generally.  2.  It  is  a  good  sign  of  grace 
when  an  alarmed  soul  betakes  itself  to  God.  3.  The  pre-eminence  which  belongs  to 
reilemption  over  all  the  other  works  of  God.  4.  The  only  power  that  can  awaken 
dead  souls  or  revive  unspiritual  and  decadent  Churches  is  God,  6.  The  chief  hope  of 
man  lies  in  the  mercy  of  Heaven,  not  in  the  goodness  of  himself. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — An  ideal  theophany:  1.  The  onward  march  of  the  Deity.  L  His- 
Pbbson  designated.  1.  Ood,  or  Eloah,  the  Strong  or  Powerful  One,  A  name  for  the 
Supreme  used  for  the  first  time  by  Moses  (Deut.  xxxii.  15)  to  portray  God  as  the 
Creator  of  Israel,  and  employed  by  Habakkuk  "  to  designate  God  as  the  Lord  and 
Governor  of  the  whole  world  "  (Keil).  Omnipotence  an  essential  attribute  of  Divinity 
(Gen.  xvii.  1;  Josh.  iv.  24;  1  Ohron.  xxix.  12;  Job  xxxvi.  5;  xlii.  2;  Ps.  Ixii.  11); 
the  impotence  of  heathen  idols  was  the  best  proof  that  they  were  no  gods  (Isa.  xlv.  20 ;. 
Jer.  ii.  28).  2.  The  Holy  One.  An  appellation  given  to  God  at  least  three  times  in  the 
Psalter  (Ps.  Ixxi.  2 ;  Ixxviii.  41 ;  Ixxxix.  18),  twice  in  Jeremiah  (I.  29  ;  li.  5),  once  in 
Bzekiel  (xxxix.  7),  once  in  Hosea  (xi.  9),  twice  in  Habakkuk  (i.  12 ;  iii.  3),  and  occurring 
frequently  in  Isaiah.  Equally  with  strength  is  purity  an  indispensable  quality  in  the 
Supreme ;  and  this  no  less  than  that  in  an  infinite  measure  and  degree.  An  unholy 
God  could  not  be  all-powerful,  all-wise,  all-just,  or  all-good.  Holiness  the  guarantee 
and  guardian  of  the  other  attributes  of  his  nature.  Least  of  all  could  an  unholy  God 
be  either  a  Saviour  or  a  Judge  of  men. 

II.  His  globy  depicted.  1.  Its  extent.  All-pervading,  irradiating  the  entire 
universe,  covering  the  heavens  and  spreading  over  the  earth  (Ezek.  xliii.  2).  What  is 
here  declared  of  the  material  or  symbolic  presence  of  Deity  is  true  of  his  real,  though 
imseen,  presence  (Ps.  viii.  1 ;  xix.  1 ;  Isa.  vi.  3).  2.  lis  brightness.  Besembling  the 
liiiht,  i.e.  the  sun,  to  which  Scripture  likens  God  himself  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11),  and  Christ 
(Mai.  iv.  2 ;  John  ix.  5),  who  is  God's  Image  (2  Cor.  iv.  4),  the  Brightness  of  his 
Father's  glory,  and  the  express  Image  of  his  Person  (Heb.  i.  3).  In  exact  accordance 
with  the  prophet's  thought,  God  is  represented  as  covering  himself  with  light  as  with 
a  garment  (Ps.  civ.  2),  and  as  dwelling  in  the  light  which  no  man  can  approach  unto 
(1  Tim.  vi.  16);  while  Christ  is  ever  set  forth  as  the  highest  expression  of  the 
uncreated  glory  of  the  Supreme  (John  i.  14).  3.  Its  manifestation.  Emitting  rays  or 
shooting  forth  beams  on  all  sides,  like  the  rising  sun  (Keil,  Delitzsch),  an  emblem 
suggestive  of  the  partial  and  giadual,  though  universal,  manner  in  which  the  Divin* 
glory  unveils  itself  to  intelligent  spectators  on  earth  (Job  xxvi.  14).  4.  Its  power. 
F/maiiating  from  his  hand,  like  rays  darting  forth  from  the  sun's  disc,  or  like  horn* 
shooting  out  from  the  head  of  a  gazelle  (Pusey,  Pausset).  The  allusion  may  have  been 
to  the  lightnings  which  flashed  forth  from  the  cloud  upon  Mount  Sinai  (Exod.  xix.  16) ;, 
but  the  underlying  thought  is  that  one  principal  aspect  of  God's  glory  is  the  exhibition 
of  power  which  he  furnishes  to  men  in  the  material  creation  (Isa.  xl.  26,  28),  in  the 
phenomena  of  nature  (Job  xxxvi.  22,  etc.),  and  in  the  scheme  of  grace  (1  Cor.  i.  24). 
5.  Its  essence.  Hidden,  unsearchable,  unfathomable,  the  above-mentioned  coruscations 
of  his  glory  being  not  so  much  unveilments  as  concealments  of  his  ineffable  Personality, 
not  so  much  exhibitions  as  hidings  of  his  power.  That  which  may  be  known  of  God 
from  the  outHhinings  of  his  glory  is  the  fact,  not  the  fulness,  of  Ids  power  and  Godhead. 
The  grand  truth  symbolized  by  the  cloudy  pillar  infolding  brightness,  viz.  that  Israel's 
God  was  a  God  that,  while  discovering,  yet  hid  himself  (Isa,  xlv.  15),  was  in  the 
Incarnation  exemplified  and  emphasized  (cf.  John  i.  14  with  vii.  27),  and  is  receiving 

confirmation  by  every  ail vance  the  human  mind  makes  in  knowledge  (Job  xi.  7 9j 

xxvi.  9  ;  xxxvii.  23  ;  Ps.  cxlv.  3 ;  cxlvii.  5 ;  Isa.  xl.  28 ;  Rom.  xi.  33).     Agnosticism 
t  witness  to  the  truth  here  stated. 


«H.  ni.  1— 19.]  THE   BOOK   OP   HABAKKUK.  69 

III,  His  advance  described.  1.  The  qua/rter  whence  he  comes.  Teman  and 
Paran,  i.e.  the  country  south  of  Judah  or  Iduiuea,  and  Paran  the  desert  region  lying 
between  Judah  and  Sinai  (see  Exposition).  Separated  only  by  the  Wady-el-Arabah, 
the  two  localities  were  intended  to  indicate  the  Sinaitic  region  as  the  spot  whence  this 
sublime  theophany  of  the  future  should  proceed.  la  so  defining  its  starting-point,  the 
prophet  probably  wished  to  suggest  a  variety  of  thoughts,  as  e.g.  that  the  future 
glorious  manifestation  of  Jehovah  was  rendered  possible,  and  even  probable,  by  what 
had  in  the  past  occurred  at  Sinai ;  that  it  would  proceed  in  the  line  of  that  earlier 
thuophany,  and  he  a  carrying  out  of  the  Divine  policy  therein  revealed — a  policy  of 
mercy  and  judgment,  of  salvation  and  destruction ;  and  tliat  in  it,  as  in  the  ancient 
Apocalypse,  both  the  power  and  the  holiness  of  God  would  be  signally  displayed.  True 
of  the  Divine  advent  in  the  overthrow  of  Babylon,  these  thoughts  were  also  realized  in 
the  advent  of  the  fulness  of  the  times,  and  will  be  conspicuous  in  the  final  advent  at  the 
■close  of  human  history.  2.  The  •purpose  for  which  he  comes.  To  execute  judgment 
upon  the  ungodly  world,  and  so  to  effect  the  deliverance  of  his  people.  This  was  to  be 
the  object  of  his  interjiosition  in  the  overthrow  of  Babylon,  as  it  had  been  in  the 
destruction  of  Egypt ;  this  was  the  end  aimed  at  in  the  first  coming  of  the  iSaviour,  the 
Tedemption  of  his  Church  by  the  annihilation  of  her  foes ;  this  will  be  the  purpose  of 
his  appearing  at  the  end  of  the  world,  to  complete  the  redemption  of  his  people  by 
comjjleting  the  punishment  of  the  ungodly.  3.  The  attendants  by  whom  he  is  served. 
Pestilence  in  front,  and  fiery  bolts  in  the  rear,  signifying  that  God  will  be  accom- 
panied with  sufiicieht  instruments  to  efiect  his  purpose.  "  Death  and  destruction  of  all 
florts  are  a  great  army  at  his  command  "  (Pusey). 

Learn:  1.  The  certainty  of  a  future  manitestntion  of  Jehovah  in  the  Person  of  the 
_glorified  Christ.  2.  The  double  object  for  which  that  glorious  manifestation  of  Christ 
will  take  place. 

Vers.  6,  7. — An  ideal  theophcmy :  2.  The  wonderful  acts  of  the  Deity.  L  Measurino 
THE  EARTH,  AND  DRIVING  ASUNDER  THE  NATIONS.  1.  Mcaswring  the  ccuvth ;  i.e.  either 
surveying  it  with  his  all-seeing  glance  whereat  there  is  universal  consternation  (Fausset), 
or  measuring  it  out  among  the  peoples  ou  its  surface,  as  Joshua  partitioned  the  Holy 
Land  after  its  conquest  among  the  tribes  (Pusey).  Both  ideas  are  historically  true,  no 
Divine  interposition  of  any  magnitude  occurring  among  earth's  inhabitants  without 
bringing  with  it  to  thoughtful  minds  a  conviction  that  the  hand  and  eye  of  God  are  at 
work,  and  leaving  after  it,  as  a  result,  a  rearrangement  of  the  map  of  the  globe.  The 
marginal  reading,  "  shaking  the  earth,"  causing  it  to  reel  (Delitzsch,  Keil),  as  David 
says  it  trembled  on  the  occasion  of  Jehovah's  coming  down  on  Mount  Sinai  (Ps.  Ixviii.  8), 
presents  also  a  valuable  truth  that  the  Divine  providential  government  of  the  world, 
especially  when  it  takes  to  deal  with  long-established  iniquity  for  the  purpose  of 
punishing  and  destroying  the  same,  is  calculated  to  inspire  awe  among  earth's 
linhabitants  (Ps.  xcix.  1),  as  it  did  when  it  broke  the  pride  of  Egypt  (Exod.  xv.  14),  as 
it  was  to  do  when  it  overthrew  the  Chaldean  power,  and  as  it  will  do  when  it  hurls  the 
mystical  Babylon  to  the  abyss  (Rev.  xviiL  19).  This  the  thought  contained  in  the 
parallel  clause.  2.  Driving  asunder  the  nations.  "He  beheld  and  drove  asunder 
[or,  '  made  to  tremble*]  the  nations."  He  so  paralyzed  them  with  fear  that  he  drove 
them  asunder,  rendering  combination  amongst  them  impossible. 

IL   SCATTEBINO  THE  MOUNTAINS  AND  BOWINO  THE  HIIiLB.      Not  the  leSSer  heights  ot 

comparatively  recent  formation,  but  the  primeval  altitudes,  whose  hoary  peaks  have 
witnessed  the  passing  by  of  millenniums,  and  whose  roots  go  down  amid  the  granite 
bars  of  the  earth  (Ps.  xc.  2).  These  by  his  encampment  on  their  summits  he  causes 
to  crumble,  resolve  themselves  into  dust,  and  vanish  into  nought  (Nah.  i.  5 ;  Micah  i.  4). 
The  image  may  point  to  "  the  convulsions  on  Mount  Sinai  and  to  the  earthquake  which 
announced  the  descent  of  the  Most  High"  (Adam  Clarke),  but  it  signifies  the  utter 
impossibility  of  even  the  strongest  forces  of  nature,  whether  in  matter  or  in  man, 
resisting  the  advance  of  God,  and  that  because  his  ways  are  older  than  even  the  ever- 
lasting hills  (Ps.  xc.  2),  are  the  only  things  on  earth  to  which  evei'lastingness  belongs. 
"  The  everlasting  ways  of  the  everlasting  God  are  mercy  and  truth"  (St.  Bernard,  quoted 
by  Pusey). 

UL  Terrifying  thb  heathen  and  punishing  the  adversaries  of'  his  people. 


60  THE   BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  [oh.  m.  1— 1», 

In  prophetic  vision  Habakkuk  beheld  the  impression  made  upon  the  neighhounng 
nations  through  which  Jehovah  passed  on  his  march  from  Temaa  to  the  Bed  Sea — the 
Cushites  or  African  Ethiopians  on  the  west  "  in  afSiction,"  and  the  Midianites  towardt 
the  east,  "trembling."  A  different  interpretation  makes  Cushan  the  Mesopotamian 
king,  Chushan-Rishathaim,  who  oppressed  Israel  eight  years  in  the  time  of  the  Judges 
(Judg.  iil.  8 — 10),  and  Midian  the  last  enemy  who  seduced  Israel  into  sin  when  on  the 
borders  of  the  promised  land  (Numb.  xxv.  17),  and  came  up  against  them  after  they 
had  settled  in  it  (Judg.  vi.  4—11).  In  this  case  the  prophet  selects  the  judgments 
executed  upon  these — upon  the  first  by  Othniel,  upon  the  second  by  Gideon — as  typical 
of  the  inflictions  that  would  fall  upon  Jehovah's  enemies  at  his  future  coming. 

Learn :  1.  The  sovereignty  of  Q-od  over  men  and  kings.  2.  The  duty  and  wisdom 
ot  recognizing  God's  hand  in  the  movements  of  nations  and  in  the  phenomena  of 
nature.  3.  The  impossibility  of  defeating  the  ultimate  realization  of  God's  purposes, 
whether  of  judgment  or  of  mercy. 

Ver.  8. — An  ideal  theophany :  3.  Tht  terrible  wrath  of  the  Deity.  L  Its  visible 
MANIFESTATIONS.  The  prophet  conceives  Jehovah  as  "a  warlike  hero  equipped  for 
conflict,"  depicts  him  as  marching  forth  against  his  enemies,  and  throwing  all  nature 
(especially  its  rivers  and  seas,  emblems  of  the  earth's  populations)  into  consternation, 
and  inquires  of  bim  what  had  been  the  cause  of  his  vehement  displeasure.  The  form 
of  the  question  suggests  that  Jehovah's  anger  had  not  been  directed  against  inanimate 
nature,  but  that  the  commotions  visible  in  the  rivers  and  the  seas  were  only  symbols 
of  his  wrath  against  men. 

II.  Its  seokbt  destination.  It  was  aimed  at  a  threefold  purpose.  1.  The  destruc- 
tion of  hit  enemies.  Of  these  the  rivers  and  seas  were  merely  emblems  (ver.  14).  2.  Tht 
salvation  of  his  people.  Jehovah's  horses  and  chariots  were  horses  and  chariots  of  salva- 
tion (ver.  13).  "  The  end  of  God's  armies,  his  visitations  and  judgments,  is  the  salvation 
of  his  elect,  even  while  they  who  are  inwardly  dead  perish  outwardly  also  "  (Pusey)i 
3.  7%e  vindication  of  his  own  honov/r.  His  bow  had  been  6ind  was  to  be)  made  quite 
bare,  i.e.  drawn  from  its  scabbard  in  fulfilment  of  the  oaths  he  had  given  to  the  tribes 
— ^firat  to  Abraham,  then  to  Isaac,  next  to  Jacob,  and  afterwards  to  David — that  ho 
would  deliver  them  from  the  hand  of  their  enemies  (Luke  i.  73 — 75) ;  or,  accepting  the 
marginal  translation,  because  "  sworn  were  the  chastisements  [literally,  '  rods ']  of  his 
word,"  i.e..  because  the  threatenings  he  had  uttered  against  his  people's  enemies  (Deut. 
xxxii.  40 — 42)  were  as  sure  as  the  promises  of  deliverance  bestowed  upon  his  people 
themselves. 

Learn :  1.  That  the  wrath  of  God  is  as  much  a  reality  as  the  love  of  God  is. 

2.  That  the  destruction  of  God's  enemies  is  as  sure  as  is  the  salvation  of  his  friends. 

3.  That  in  both  God  will  be  glorified. 

Vers.  9 — 16. — An  ideal  theophany :  4.  The  glorious  interposition  of  the  Deity. 
I.  Nat0be'8  homage  to  the  Judge.  (Vers.  10,  11.)  Jehovah's  presence  on  that 
great  and  terrible  day  will  be  attested  by  a  succession  of  marvels,  1.  Wonders  in  the 
earth.  (1)  The  cleaving  of  the  earth  with  rivers  (ver.  9)  may  point  to  the  bursting 
forth  of  waters  from  the  deep  places  of  the  earth,  which  are  again  opened  as  at  the  Flood 
(Gen.  vii,  11)  through  violent  convulsions,  or  to  the  overflowing  of  the  land  by  the 
agitated  and  swollen  waters,  as  also  happened  on  the  occasion  of  that  appalling  catastrophe 
(Gen.  vii.  11, 17,  19).  (2)  The  trembling  of  the  mountains,  which  writhe  as  if  in 
pain,  may  contain  an  allusion  to  earthquakes  and  similar  cataclysms.  2.  Wonders  in 
the  sea.  "  The  tempest  of  waters  passed  by,  the  deep  uttered  his  voice,  and  lifted  up 
his  hands  on  high  "  (ver.  10).  These  words  possibly  allude  to  what  occurred  both  in 
the  Flood  and  in  the  dividinj;  of  the  Bed  Sea  and  the  Jordan.  3.  Wonders  in  the  sky, 
"The  sun  and  moon  stood  still  in  their  habitation :  at  the  light  of  thine  arrows  they 
weut,  at  the  shining  of  thy  glittering  spear "  (ver.  11),  as  they  did  in  the  time  ot 
Joshua,  when  Jehovah  fought  for  Israel  against  Gibeon  (Josh.  x.  13).  Compare  th« 
description  in  the  Apocalypse  of  the  great  day  of  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  (Rev.  vi. 
12—16). 

IL  The  wbathtul  pbooedure  of  the  Judge.  1.  Marching  through  the  land  A» 
indignation.    The  land  referred  to  is  in  the  foreground  Chaldea,  and  in  the  back* 


OH.  iru  1— 19.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK.  61 

ground  the  whole  earth,  which,  no  less  than  Bahylonj  will  have  become  an  object  of 
Divine  displeasure.  2.  Threshing  the  nations  in  anger.  Not  the  Chaldean  people 
only,  but  all  the  peoples  who,  like  them,  shall  have  become  the  oppressors  of  G-ud's 
heritage,  all  the  nations  that  have  not  known  or  served  God,  will  experience  the 
strokes  of  his  anger.  3.  Wounding  the  head  of  the  house  of  the  wicked,  laying  hare  the 
fowndation  even  to  the  neck.  The  wicked  one  is  first  the  Chaldean  king,  the  head  of 
the  Chaldean  power,  and  lastly  that  wicked  one  whom  Christ  will  destroy  with  the 
brightness  of  his  coming  (1  Thess.  iv.  8).  The  image  is  that  of  complete  destruction 
(see  Exposition).  4.  Piercing  with  his  own  staves  the  head  of  his  warriors  or  hordes. 
These  were  the  Chaldean  troops,  whom  the  prophet  saw  coming  up  against  himself  ami 
Israel  as  a  whirlwind  to  scatter  them,  as  highway  murderers  lying  in  wait  to  devour 
the  poor  secretly,  but  whom  be  also  beheld  falling  upon  and  destroying  one  another, 
wounding  themselves  with  their  own  swords  (cf.  1  Sam.  xiv.  20;  2  Chron.  xx.  23,  24). 
So  will  Q-od's  enemies  in  the  end  consume  and  devour  one  another.  5.  Overcoming 
every  obstacle  that  might  be  supposed  to  hinder  his  purpose,  viz.  the  execution  ol  wrath 
upon  his  foes,  or  the  deliverance  of  his  people. 

III.  The  mbkoifdl  purpose  op  the  Judoe.  This  was  (and  always  will  be)  the 
salvation  of  his  people  and  of  his  anoiated,  i.e.  of  his  people  Israel  and  Judah  with 
their  Davidic  king,  then  of  his  believing  Church  with  its  anointed  Head.  If  God 
executes  judgment  upon  the  imgudly,  it  is  because  otherwise  the  salvation  of  the 
godly  cannot  be  secured. 

Lessons.  1.  The  certainty  of  a  day  of  judgment.  2.  The  terrifying  aspect  to  the 
wicked  of  the  glory  of  God.  3.  The  infinite  fierceness  of  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty. 
4.  The  ability  of  God  to  execute  his  purposes  both  of  judgment  and  salvation.  6.  The 
graciousness  towards  believers  of  all  God's  interpositions. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — Sorrowing,  yet  rejoudngi  L  The  case  supposed.  A  complete 
failure  of  all  creature  comforts.  1.  Extremely  unusual.  Even  the  worst  are  seldom 
reduced  to  the  bare  boards  of  absolute  privation  (Ps.  cxlv.  9 ;  Matt.  v.  45).  David 
confesses  in  old  age  that  he  had  "  never  seen  the  righteous  forsaken,  nor  his  seed  begging 
bread"  (Ps.  xxxvii.  25).  2.  Not  impossible  or  tmknown.  Persons,  and  these  by  no 
means  always  the  ungodly,  but  sometimes  the  good,  the  excellent  of  the  earth,  the 
pious,  the  people  who  fear  God  and  keep  his  commandments,  who  believe  in  his  Word 
and  delight  in  his  ways,  have  been  known  to  be  placed  in  circumstances  of  utter 
destitution,  such  as  Habakkuk  so  touohingly  describes.  Whether  Habakkuk  himself 
was  in  it,  he  expected  that  he  might  be,  as  he  foresaw  that  many  of  his  countrymen 
would  be  when  the  terrible  Chaldean  invasion  came.  Job  had  experience  of  such  a 
situation  as  Habakkuk  portrayed  (Job  i.  13 — 22);  Paul  (2  Cor.  xi.  27)  and  many 
others  both  before  and  since  have  known  it.  3.  Always-sad.  No  blossom  on  the  fig 
tree,  no  fruit  upon  the  vine,  no  harvest  from^the  olive  trees  or  corn-fields,  no  flocks 
in  either  fold  or  stall.  Everything  gone.  Every  prop  and  stay  taken — money 
scattered  to  the  winds  by  unsuccessful  trading,  household  furniture  arrested  and  sold 
to  pay  debt,  means  of  earning  a  livelihood  gone,  friends  vanished  just  at  the  moment 
when  most  required,  children  laid  down  with  sickness  when  money  to  pay  for  medical 
relief  is  wanting,  health  precarious  through  age  or  infirmity.  When  a  case  like  this 
occurs  it  is  sad.  4.  Tet  it  might  be  worse.  It  would  be  if  a  Christian  were  to  lose 
not  the  creature  comforts  merely,  but  the  Creator  himself,  from  whom  these  comfortg 
flow.  Let  a  man  lose  what  he  may,  so  long  as  he  has  God  and  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Bible  and  the  throne  of  grace,  with  the  gift  of  forgiveness  and  the  hope  of  heaven,  he 
is  not  utterly  undone. 

II.  The  resolution  taken.  To  "  rejoice  in  the  Lord."  1.  Sensible.  If  a  man  loses 
three-fourths  of  his  fortune,  it  may  be  natural  to  grieve  over  what  is  lost,  but  it  cannot 
fail  to  strike  one  as  more  sensible  to  make  much  of  and  rejoice  in  what  remains.  So 
a  good  man,  when  he  sees  his  creature  comforts  taken  from  him,  will  show  himself  a 
wise  man  by  letting  these  go  without  too  great  indulgence  in  sorrow  and  cleavins;  to 
the  Creator,  who  is  infinitely  more  precious  than  all  besides.  2.  Satisfactory.  What 
remains  to  the  good  man  after  the  departure  of  creature  comforts  is  the  best  part  of  his 
estate.  It  is  the  part  he  can  least  want ;  he  might  do  without  his  fig  trees,  etc.,  but 
not  without  his  God;  and  the  part  that  is  most  satisfying — fig  trees,  etc.,  might  feed 


62  THE  BOOK  OP  HABA.KKUK.  [oh.  iii.  1— 1ft 

the  body,  but  only  God  can  support  a  soul ;  and  the  part  that  is  most  permanent — the 
only  part  that  is  permanent,  all  earthly  things  being  subject  to  decay.  3.  Scmctifying. 
No  man  can  make  and  keep  it  without  becoming  holier  and  better  because  of  it.  He 
who  rejoices  in  God  will  gradually  grow  like  God.  4.  Profitable.  It  will  come  back 
to  him  who  adopts  it  in  blessings  upon  his  head.  If  any  man  will  delight  in  God, 
God  will  delight  in  him,  will  rejoice  over  him  to  do  him  good. 

m.  The  chbbishbd  expeotation.  That  God  would  perfect  his  salvation.  1.  By 
imparting  to  him  strength.  "Jehovah,  the  Lord,  is  my  Strength."  The  man  who 
used  these  words  bad  made  three  great  discoveries :  (1)  that  man's  strength  at  the  best 
is  little  better  than  weakness — in  the  domain  of  the  body,  and  in  that  of  the  mind,  but 
chiefly  in  that  of  the  spirit;  (2)  that  the  source  of  all  strength,  whether  physical, 
intellectual,  or  spiritual,  for  the  human  being,  is  Gnd  (Zech.  x.  12;  2  Cor.  ilL  5;  ix.  8; 
X.  4;  Eph.  iii.  20;  Col.  i.  11);  and  (3)  that  this  Divine  strength  is  indispensable  for 
enabling  the  soul  to  cling  to  God  in  the  day  of  trouble  and  season  of  calamity  (Phil.  i. 
6 ;  ii.  13 ;  1  Pet.  i.  5).  2.  By  inspiring  him  with  alacrity  or  zeal.  '°  He  maketh 
my  feet  like  hinds'  feet ; "  i.e.  maketh  them  lithe  and  nimble,  active  and  steady,  skilful 
to  climb,  and  tenacious  to  hold  on  like  those  of  the  female  deer,  which  quickly  scents 
danger,  and  bounds  along  with-  safety  among  the  crags  and  cliffs  of  its  native  haunts. 
The  language  is  descriptive  of  one  who,  in  the  season  of  adversity,  in  the  hour  of  trial, 
temptation,  and  danger,  is  quick  to  discern,  eager  in  adopting,  and  steadfast  in  pursuing 
the  path  of  duty,  which  for  him,  as  for  all,  is  the  path  of  safety.  Moreover,  the  man 
who  rejoices  in  God  will  commonly  And  himself  advised  in  due  season  of  the  approach 
of  danger,  assisted  in  ascertaining  the  path  of  duty,  and  strengthened  both  to  enter 
upon  and  adhere  to  it.  3.  By  exalting  him  to  safety.  "  He  maketh  me  to  walk  upon 
mine  high  places."  The  man  who  can  rejoice  in  God  will  sooner  or  later  find  that  God 
has  begun  to  exalt  him  beyond  common  men :  (1)  has  set  him  on  a  high  place  of  safety 
beyond  the  reach  of  condemnation ;  (2)  is  setting  him  upon  a  high  path  of  moral  and 
spiritual  elevation ;  and  (3)  will  set  him  in  the  end  upon  a  high  throne  of  glory. 

Learn :  1.  The  vanity  of  creature  comforts.  2.  The  sweetness  of  Divine  comforts. 
S.  The  secret  of  true  happiness.    4.  The  certainty  of  final  glory. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — Prayer  and  praise.  This  chapter  records  the  remarkable  "  prayer "  or 
"ode"  of  Habakkuk.  The  superscription  contained  in  the  first  verse  and  a  cursory 
glance  at  the  chapter  as  thus  described  may  be  found  suggestive  of  important  teachings 
respecting  the  sacred  exercises  of  prayer  and  praise.    Note — 

I.  The  teachings  concerning  peatbe.  1.  We  do  well  to  solicit  present  blessings. 
"  In  the  midst  of  the  years  make  known"  (ver.  2) ;  i.e.  he  sought  the  Divine  manifes- 
tation in  mercy  to  be  granted  to  his  people  in  his  own  day.  2.  We  should  recount 
God's  goodness  in  the  past.  The  prayer  abounds  in  reminiscences  of  God's  favour  as 
bestowed  upon  his  chosen  in  the  days  of  yore.  3.  The  comprehensive  nature  of 
prayer.  This  prayer  of  Habakkuk  contains  (1)  petition;  (2)  adoration;  (3)  devout 
contemplation  of  God  in  his  character  and  works;  (4)  review  of  his  providential  doings; 
and,  (5)  pervading  the  whole,  the  spirit  of  confiding  and  joyous  trust. 

II.  The  tbaohings  concerning  praise.  1.  The  desirability  of  employing  in  this 
exercise  the  devout  compositions  of  God's  servants  in  past  ages,  which  have  been 
preserved  in  his  Word.  2.  The  appropriateness  of  the  language  of  prayer  as  the  medium 
of  expressing  praise  to  God.  "  The  prayers  of  David  the  son  of  Jesse  "  are  contained 
and  expressed  in  his  Psalms.  "The  prayer  of  Habakkuk"  is  also  "an  ode"  set  to 
music,  and  used  at  his  suggestion  in  the  liturgical  services  of  the  temple.  8.  The 
importance  of  cultivating  correct  musical  expression  in  the  presentation  of  the  sacrifice 
of  praise  to  God.  The  tones  should  be  in  harmony  with  the  character  of  the  thoughts 
and  sentiments  of  the  words  being  sung.  This  is  probably  the  meaning  of  the 
exr  ression,  "  upon  Shigionoth "  (ver.  1),  'al  shigydnoth  meaning  "  in  wandering 
measures,"  the  tones  to  be  varied  according  to  the  character  of  the  thoughts  and  words. 
The  term  "  Selah,"  used  by  him  (vers.  3,  9, 13"),  and  the  direction, "  To  the  chief  singer 
on  my  stringed  instruments,"  with  which  he  closes  his  book,  also  indicate  the  careful- 


0H.in.  1— 19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  tj3 

iiesB  in  execution  the  prophet  would  have  exercised.  All  true  worship  to  God  must 
proceed  from  humble  and  trusting  hearts,  and  be  presented  "in  spirit  and  in  truth,'' 
and  this  is  perfectly  compatible  with  regard  for  all  that  is  cultured  and  artistic  in 
method.     Our  motto  should  be,  "  The  best  for  the  Lord." — S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  2. — Prayer  fm  revival.  The  revival  of  God's  work  stands  intimately  connected 
with  prayer.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Author  of  all  true  quickening  of  the  Divine  lile 
in  the  souls  of  men,  and  his  renewing  and  sanctifying  influences  are  secured  in  response 
to  earnest  supplication  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  37;  Mai.  iii.  10;  Acts  i.  14;  ii.  1).  "It  is 
visionary  to  txpect  an  unusual  success  in  the  human  administration  of  religion  unless 
there  were  unusual  omens.  Now,  an  emphatic  spirit  of  prayer  .would  be  puch  an  omen. 
And  if  the  whole  or  greater  number  of  the  disciples  of  Christianity  were,  with  an 
earnest  unfailing  resolution  of  each,  to  combine  that  Heaven  should  not  withhold  one 
single  influence  which  the  very  utmost  eSbrt  of  conspiring  and  persevering  supplication 
would  obtain,  it  would  be  the  sign  of  a  revolution  of  the  world  being  at  hand  "  (John 
Poster).     Observe — 

I.  Pbatgb  for  revival  involves  an  intelligent  appebhension  of  the  state  of 

THE  AGE,  AND   THE   OhUBCH   IN   THE   AGE,  IN  WHICH   IT   IS"  OFFERED.      The  language  of 

the  prophet  in  the  former  part  of  his  prophecy  indicates  the  possession  by  him  of  an 
insight  into  the  character  and  needs  both  of  the  Hebrew  nation  and  Church  in  his  day ; 
and  this  acquaintance  prepared  his  mind  and  heart  for  pleading  so  earnestly  for  a 
revival  of  God's  work.  Our  own  age  and  the  state  of  religion  in  it  claims  our  thoughtful 
regard.  Beflection  upon  it  will  show  the  imperative  neud  there  is  for  the  possession 
of  a  higher  measure  of  spirituality,  consecration.  Christian  intelligence  and  courage,  and 
will  impel  the  utterance  of  the  earnest  cry,  "  0  Lord,  revive  thy  work  "  (ver.  2) 

II.  Prater  for  revival  will  be  prompted  by  anxious  concern  in  view  of  the 
Bviii  consequences  resulting  from  the  prevailing  degeneracy.  "  0  Lord,"  cried 
the  prophet,  "  I  have  heard  thy  speech,  and  I  was  afraid."  Jehovah  had  spoken  unto 
him  in  vision,  unfolding  the  terrible  judgments  which  should  overtake  his  people  in 
consequence  of  their  apostasy,  and  this  vision  of  coming  Divine  chastisement  filled  him 
with  terror ;  and  with  the  real  concern  of  a  true  patriot  in  view  of  the  disastrous  issue 
to  which,  through  the  prevailing  iniquity,  the  national  interests  were  tending,  he 
implored  Divine  interposition  and  help  ("0  Lord,  revive,"  etc.).  The  Christian 
patriot  in  our  own  land  has  reason  for  anxious  solicitude  as  he  views  the  present  in  its 
relation  to  the  future.  He  knows  that  there  is  danger  lest  the  temporal  prosperity 
enjoyed  in  this  age  should  result  in  the  cherishing  of  pride,  in  conformity  to  the  world, 
and  In  apathy  in  holy  service ;  and  lest  the  intellectual  activity  prevailing  should  lead 
to  the  weakening  of  conviction,  the  cherishing  of  doubt,  and  resulting  in  complete 
indifference  in  relation  to  spiritual  realities.  All  this  occasions  him  serious  concern, 
which  is  intensified  as  he  beholds  multitudes  in  whom  these  dire  effects  have  been 
already  wrought ;  and  in  this  spirit  of  solicitude  he  is  led  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and 
to  cry  with  impassioned  earnestness,  "  0  Lord,  revive  thy  work." 

III.  Prater  fob  revival  is  ever  dibeoted  to  the  SEOUBma  of  spiritual  results. 
"  In  wratb  remember  mercy  "  (ver.  2).  The  seer  knew  by  revelation  that  his  nation, 
owing  to  its  sinfulness,  should  be  overtaken  by  judgment,  and  should  fall  into  the 
power  of  the  Chaldeans;  and  in  his  prayer  he  did  not  ask  for  the  reversal  of  this. 
Divine  wrath  must  follow  transgression,  but  he  prayed  that  in  the  midst  of  this  God 
would  "  remember  mercy,"  in  other  words,  that  he  would  so  interpose  as  to  sanctify 
the  dark  experiences  looming  in  the  future,  drawing  his  erring  people  nearer  to  himself, 
so  that  they  might  trustfully  pass  through  the  painful  discipline  in  store  for  them,  and 
come  out  of  it  at  length  purified  as  gold.  And  so  ever  true  prayer  for  revival  seeks 
the  spiritual  renewal  of  men;  it  solicits  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  mercy  in 
delivering  the  plants  of  his  own  planting  from  the  blighting  effects  of  sin,  and  in 
causing  them  to  abound  in  all  holy  excellence  and  grace. 

IV.  Pbayeb  fob  bevivai.  is  impatient  of  delay.  It  seeks  a  present  blessing. 
"In  the  midst  of  the  years,  in  the  midst  of  the  years  make  known"  (ver.  2);  i^, 
without  lingering,  without  postponement,  forthwith,  in  the  seer's  own  time.  "  How 
long,  0  Lord,  how  long  ? "  "  Thy  kingdom  come ; "  "  It  is  time  for  thee  to 
work."— S.  D.  H. 


64  THE  BOOK  OF  UAliAKKUK.  [oh.  m.  1—19, 

Yers.  3 — 18. — Ood  in  history.  On  reading  these  verses  containing  the  ode  of 
Habakkuk  we  find  that  they  abound  in  historical  allusions.  The  prophet  recalled  to 
mind  the  Divine  interpositions  both  in  mercy  and  in  judgment  which  had  taken  place 
in  the  bygone  days,  and  in  the  light  of  them  contemplated  the  position  and  prospects 
■of  his  peofile  in  his  own  time.  This  course  was  a  very  customary  one  with  the  Hebrew 
bards.  They  were  eminently  riatriotic,  and  deliglited  to  touch  upon  the  national 
experiences  of  sorrow  and  conflict,  of  joy  and  triumph ;  and,  indeed,  to  such  an  extent 
did  they  carry  this,  that  an  acquaintance  with  the  facts  of  Jewish  history  is  essential 
in  order  that  we  may  apprehend  the  meaning  and  appreciate  the  beauty  of  their  poetic 
strains.  But  whilst  thus  national,  these  sacred  songs,  in  that  they  refer  to  principles 
which  are  of  general  application,  and  to  experiences  which  are  common  to  humanity, 
are  felt  by  us  to  be  universal  in  their  character,  and  to  belong  unto  us  as  well  as  to  the 
Hebrews,  that  in  reference  to  them  "there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,"  in  that  they  are 
calculated  to  instruct  and  edify,  to  stimulate  and  strengthen  us  all.  Viewing  in  this 
light  the  celebrated  "ode."  of  Habakkuk  here  recorded,  we  see  illustrated  in  it  the 
great  fact  of  God's  working  in  human  history,  together  with  the  design  and  influence 
of  this  Divine  operation. 

I.  See  illtjbtbated  hebe  the  fact  op  the  Divine  woekino  in  huuan 
HIBTOBY.  Looking  back,  the  prophet  traced  this  working :  1.  In  the  giving  of  the  Law 
on  Sinai  (comp.  vers.  3,  4,  with  Dent,  xxxiii.  2 ;  Judg.  v.  4,  6 ;  Fs.  Ixviii.  8 ;  Temon 
being  another  name  for  Seir).  The  manifestation  of"  the  eternal  light "  is  thus  fittingly 
compared  to  the  rising  of  the  sun,  heaven  and  earth  reflecting  his  glory.  The  coming 
of  God  in  judgment  was  the  thought  which,  in  the  circumstances,  was  necessarily  the 
most  vividly  present  to  the  prophet's  mind ;  and  his  allusion  here  to  the  manifestation 
of  God  in  his  infinite  purity  served  as  an  appropriate  prelude  to  this.  2.  In  the 
plagues  which  fell  upon  the  Israelites  in  the  desert,  as  the  result  of  their  disobedience 
(comp.  ver.  5  with  Deut.  xxxii.  24).  The  plague  is  referred  to  as  going  before  God, 
like  the  ancient  shield-bearer  before  the  warrior  (1  Sam.  xvii.  7),  or  the  courier  before 
the  man  of  rank  (2  Sam.  xv.  1) ;  and  pestilence  as  coming  after,  as  an  attendant  follow- 
ing his  master.  3.  In  the  efTects  produced  upon  the  Midianites  by  the  advance  of  the 
hosts  of  God's  chosen  (comp.  vers.  6,  7  with  Exod.  xv.  13 — 15).  4.  In  the  dividing 
of  the  Bed  Sea  and  the  passage  of  the  Jordan  (comp.  ver.  8  with  Exod.  xv.  8 ;  Pa. 
cxiv.  3 — 5).  Ver.  8  clearly  has  reference  to  these  Divine  interpositions,  although  the 
poet,  rising  with  his  theme,  looked  beyond  those  events  and  took  a  wider  sweep,  and 
beheld  God  as  going  forth,  the  Divine  Warrior  in  his  chariot  of  salvation,  to  put  his  foes 
to  confusion  and  to  effect  deliverance  for  his  own.  5.  Expressions  also  are  used  is 
vers.  11 — 15  which,  though  somewhat  veiled,  doubtless  suggested  to  the  Hebrews,  ai 
they  raised  this  song  of  praise,  the  sun  standing  still  in  Gibeon,  and  the  moon  in  the 
valley  of  Ajalon,  in  the  time  of  Joshua's  victory  over  the  Amorites  (ver.  11) ;  the 
tragedy  of  the  slaughter  of  Sisera,  the  representative  of  the  head  of  the  Canaanitish 
tribes  (vers.  13, 14) ;  and  the  complete  discomfiture  of  the  Canaanites  (ver.  12).  So 
that  the  "  ode  "  sets  forth  God's  hand  in  the  events  connected  with  the  Jewish  nation, 
and  in  this  way  illustrates  most  forcibly  the  great  fact  of  the  Divine  working  in  human 
history  through  all  the  ages. 

II,  See  bxpbbssed  hebe  the  desigh  of  the  Divine  working  in  human  histobt 
This  is  ever  wise  and  good  (ver.  13).  Gk)d  rules  over  all,  making  all  events  con- 
tribute to  the  working  out  of  his  purposes  of  love  and  mercy  in  the  interests  of  the 
whole  race.  Earthly  rulers  pursue  their  own  ends,  and  are  prompted  by  considera- 
tions of  glory  and  ambition,  but  their  working  is  in  subjection  to  the  Divine  control 
"  The  king's  heart,"  etc.  (Prov.  xxi.  1).  Nothing  can  befall  us,  whether  individually 
or  nationally,  without  the  permission  of  our  heavenly  Father — nothing,  too,  which  h« 
cannot  or  will  not  overrule  to  the  advancement  of  our  highest  interests. 

"  All  change  changing 

Works  and  brings  good ; 
And  tliough  frequent  storms,  raging. 

Carry  fire  and  flood  ; 
And  the  growing  corn  is  beaten  down, 

The  young  fruits  fall  and  monldar. 
The  vessels  reel,  the  mariners  drown 

Awing  the  beholder; 


OH.  m.  1—19.]  THE   BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  66 

Tet  in  evil  to  men  U  good  for  man. 

TheD  let  onr  heart  be  bolder, 
For  more  and  more  ehall  appear  the  plan 

As  the  world  and  vre  grow  older," 

(T.  T.  Lynch.) 

By  •  process  of  Divine  eTolution,  God  causes  the  upheavings  and  commotions  of  all 
kinds  which  occur  in  the  history  of  the  world  to  result  in  the  good  of  humanity ;  and 
whilst  there  is  occasion  for  us,  as  we  note  his  hand  in  human  history,  to  say  to  him 
with  reverence  and  awo,  "  In  anger  thou  marchest  through  the  earth ;  in  wrath  thou 
treadest  down  the  nations  "  (Revised  Version),  yet  we  find  abundant  reason  for  adding, 
in  the  spirit  of  true  adoration,  "  Thou  goest  forth  for  the  salvation  of  thy  people,  for 
the  salvation  of  thine  anointed  "  (ver.  13). 

Ill  See  suggested  herb  the  ihplubnob  this  thought  or  the  Divine  working 
IN  HITMAN  HisTOKY  EXERTS  UPON  LOTAL  HEARTS.  1.  In  view  of  Ood's  terriblencss 
in  judgment  which  marks'  his  working  in  human  history,  such  are  filled  with  sacred 
awe.  The  prophet  represents  his  whole  being  as  convulsed  with  terror  as  he  thought 
of  the  retributions  God  would,  in  righteousness,  inflict  (ver,  16).  2.  In  view  of  God's 
gracious  purpose,  in  all  his  interpositions  to  save,  restore,  and  bless  the  race,  such  are 
inspired  with  holy  joy.  Hence,  strange  paradox  I  whilst  oppressed  in  spirit  they  are 
also  glad  in  heart. ,  "  They  tremble  and  rejoice,"  and  this  is  their  rapturuus  song  in 
the  night,  expressive  of  their  whole-souled  trust  through  all,  "  Although  the  fig  tree 
shall  not  blossom,"  etc.  (vers.  17— 19).— S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  4  (last  clause). — The  Divine  concealments.    "  The  hiding  of  his  power." 

I.  In   the  CONTEMPLATION   OF   THE   NATURE   AND   OPERATIONS   OF   OUR  GoD   WB  AKI 

MET  BY  THE  DiviNE  CONCEALMENTS.  He  is  a  God  "  that  hideth  himself"  (Isa.  xlv.  16); 
"  He  doeth  great  things  past  finding  out,"  etc.  (Job  ix.  10) ;  "  He  giveth  no  account  of 
any  of  his  matters "  (Job  xxxiii.  13) ;  "  He  maketh  darkness  his  secret  place " 
(Ps.  xviii.  11);  "How  unsearchable,"  etc.!  (Bom.  xi.  33).  1.  We  realize  this  as  we 
think  of  his  Being  and  perfections.  "  Who  by  searching,"  etc.?  (Job  xi.  7).  He  is 
veiled  to  us  by  the  very  covering  of  his  splendour.  "Who  coverest  thyself,"  etc. 
(Fs.  civ.  2).  2.  And  we  also  realize  this  as  we  think  of  his  working.  Mystery  meets  us 
in  every  department  of  his  operations.  The  scientist  and  the  theologian  alike  become 
baffled  in  their  researches,  the  former  having  to  admit  his  partial  failure  as  he  strives 
to  penetrate  the  mystery  of  the  universe,  and  the  latter  being  perplexed  at  tie  seeming 
inequality  of  God's  ways  in  the  providential  government  of  the  world,  and  feeling 
himself  enclosed  as  with  a  veil  when  he  ventures  to  inquire  into  the  high  themes  of 
revelation.     "There  is  the  hiding  of  his  power."    Notice — 

II.  Certain  courses  are  open  to  us  in  view  op  this  great  fact.  1.  There 
is  that  which  is  pursued  by  the  sceptic.  He  reasons — God  cannot  be  known ;  therefore 
all  thought  on  the  part  of  man  concerning  him  is  needless  and  vain;  all  worship  of 
him  is  folly ;  all  structures  reared  by  his  servants  to  his  honour  mean  waste ;  his 
very  existence  is  but  a  possibility.  Here  we  have  the  old  atheism,  banishing  God 
firom  his  universe;  the  old  atheism,  only  arrayed  in  a  newer  and  more  subtle  guise. 
2.  There  is,  however,  "  a  more  excellent  way."  Though  our  God  is  infinitely  beyond 
our  poor  stretch  of  thought,  yet  he.may  be  known  by  us.  Beyond  the  compreheui-inn 
of  human  reason  he  is  nevertheless  present  to  faith,  and  deigns  to  reveal  himself  to  the 
pure  and  loving  heart.  And  we  do  well  to  remember  this,  and  to  repose  the  trust  of 
our  hearts  in  him,  and  then  to  set  ourselves  to  inquire  whether,  after  all,  the  partial 
obscurity  of  the  Divine  nature  and  operations  may  not  be  wisely  and  graciously  as  well 
as  necessarily  designed.  And  pursuing  this  course,  such  quieting  thoughts  as  the 
following,  bearing  upon  the  Divine  concealments,  will  be  suggested  to  us.  (1)  That 
our  personal  well-being  is  advanced  by  this  partial  concealment  which  characterizes 
our  God.  It  would  not  be  well  for  us  to  have  complete  knowledge  of  him  or  his 
purposes  and  plans,  since  then  there  would  be  no  room  for  the  exercise  of  faith, 
patience,  resignation  ;  life  would  cease  to  be  a  time  of  discipline ;  and  there  would  be 
no  scope  for  trial  and  no  stimulus  to  earnest  and  thoughtful  inquiry.  (2)  That  these 
Divine  concealments,  whilst  they  are  for  our  good,  also  contribute  to  the  ailvancement 
of  the  Divine  glory.     "  It  is  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing  "  (Prov.  xxv.  2).     It 

HABAKKUK.  V 


«6  THE   BOOK  OF  HABAKKDK.  [oh.  iil  1—19. 

is  in  this  way  that  he  makes  his  power  felt ;  that  he  indicates  his  superiority  to  man 
and  his  independence  of  him  (Isa.  xl.  13,  14).    (3)  That  whilst  much  is  thus  concealed, 
eyerything  essential  to  man's  salvation  is  clearly  unfolded. 
III.  God  sometimes  causes  lioht  to  fall  upon  his  hidden  wats  and  reveals 

HIMSELF   AND   HIS    OPERATIONS   MOBB    FTTLLY  TO    THE   VIEW.      1.    It    haS     been    SO    In 

reference  to  the  sacred  Scriptures.  During  the  lapse  of  ages  God  gradually  drew  back 
the  veil,  revealing  more  of  his  will  than  had  been  unfolded  before.  2.  It  has  been  so 
in  the  working  out  of  the  purpose  of  redeeming  mercy.  In  the  cross  of  Christ  there 
was  expressed  the  power  as  well  as  the  wisdom  of  Gud ;  but  there  was  the  hiding  of 
this  Divine  power.  The  spectators  of  the  scene  at  Calvary  saw  only  the  weakness,  and 
the  cross  was  suggestive  to  them  of  shame  and  reproach  and  dishonour ;  but  there 
was  power  there,  although  hidden,  which  soon  began  to  be  felt,  one  of  the  criminals 
crucified  at  the  side  of  the  Saviour  being  the  first  to  experience  it.  The  macerated 
body  of  the  Redeemer  was  taken  down  from  the  cross,  and  laid  in  the  sepulchre  hewn 
out  of  the  rock ;  and  again  there  was  the  hiding  of  God's  power,  and  it  seemed  as 
though  death  had  conquered ;  but  with  the  d  iwn  of  the  first  day  of  the  week  this 
power  became  revealed — the  mighty  Victor  roie,  despite  seal  and  guard,  the  earnest  and 
pledge  of  the  ultimate  resurrection  of  all  his  saints.  3.  And  it  has  been  so  in  human 
experience.  In  the  dark  days  of  sorrow  there  has  been  realized  "  the  hiding  of  God's 
power ; "  but  there  has  followed  the  revelation  of  his  loving  purpose  and  the  making 
clear  to  troubled  hearts  tliat  in  all "  his  banner  over  them  was  love."  And  this  shall 
be  made  still  more  manifest  hereafter,  for  the  eternal  day  shall  break,  and  the  shadows 
flee  away  for  ever  t — S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  17, 18. — "Songs  in  the  night"  The  thought  underlying  these  intensely  human 
words  is  that  of  holy  and  triumphant  joy  manifesting  itself  on  occasions  when  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  things  the  very  opposite  experience  might  naturally  have  been 
expected.  The  writer  was  under  the  elevating  influence  of  sincere  piety,  and  his 
rapturous  outburst  sets  forth  the  truth  that  true  religion  excites  within  its  recipients 
such  thoughts,  inspires  within  them  such  emotions,  and  imparts  to  them  such  con- 
fidence, as  to  enable  them,  even  when  all  is  adverse  in  their  experience,  to  rejoice  and 
shout  aloud  for  joy.  These  songsters  can  break  forth  in  song,  not  only  in  fair  weather, 
when  the  sun  is  shining  and  the  sky  is  clear  and  blue,  and  when  all  nature  is  full 
of  exhilaration,  but  also  when  the  sun  is  withdrawn,  and  when  no  rift  can  be  traced 
in  the  dark  clouds. 

L  The  good  in  oieoumstanoes  of  extkemitt.  1.  The  language  employed  is 
figurative,  and  strikingly  suggests  to  us  circumstances  of  the  deepest  human  need. 
The  fruit  of  the  fig  tree  was  an  extensive  article  both  of  food  and  commerce.  The  vine 
was  diligently  cultivated  from  the  earliest  times,  and,  with  its  rich  clusters  of  grapes 
and  its  refreshing  shade,  became  a  very  appropriate  symbol  of  prosperity ;  whilst  the 
olive,  living  from  age  to  age,  and  yielding  an  abundant  supply  of  oil,  was  also  typical 
of  abundance.  Hence  the  failure  of  all  these  indicates  the  deepest  affliction,  the  direst 
calamity  (Ps.  cv.  33),  and  the  picture  of  desolation  is  rendered  still  more  complete  when, 
in  addition  to  these,  the  bread-corn  is  represented  as  ceasing,  and  the  flocks  and  herds 
as  being  cut  off  (ver.  17).  2.  These  adverse  circumstances  befell  the  nation,  and,  as 
the  result  of  the  Chaldean  invasion,  the  direst  woes  had  to  be  experienced.  3.  The 
children  of  men  still  have  to  pass  through  such  daik  seasons.  There  is  extremity 
arising  from  (1)  temporal  want  occasioned  by  reverses  in  circumstances ;  (2)  slander, 
charges  having  no  foundation  in  truth,  being  made  and  resulting  in  mistrust  and 
alienation ;  (3)  mental  depression,  the  strong  man  being  brought  down  to  the  weakness 
of  the  child,  the  sturdy  oak  becoming  feebler  than  the  bruised  reed  ;  (4)  bereavement, 
home  being  rendered  "desolate  as  birds'  nests,  when  the  fleiiglings  have  all  flown." 

II.  The  good,  oieoumstanoed  thus,  staying  themselves  upon  God,  and  oh 
HIM  AS  woBKiNO  IN  ALL  FOR  THEIR  SALVATION.  "  In  God,"  "  the  God  of  my 
salvation  "  (ver.  18).  The  thought  which  appears  specially  to  have  been  present  to 
the  mind  of  the  prophet  was  that  of  adversity  as  being  God's  loving  discipline  to 
result  in  the  perfecting  of  the  tried,  and  resulting  in  their  salvation  :  "  the  God  of  my 
salvation."  A  picture  called  "  Cloudland,"  by  a  German  painter,  viewed  at  a  distance 
appears  a  mass  of  gloom  and  cloud,  but  on  closer  inspection  every  cloud  is  an  angel 


OH.  ni.  1—19.]  THE   BOOK  OF   UABAKKUK.  67 

or  an  angel's  wing;  and  so  our  sorrows,  when  interpreted  in  the  light  of  this  gracious 
design  of  our  God,  become  changed  into  blessings.  The  thought  that  God  is  with 
us  in  our  darkest  experiences,  working  for  our  salvation  and  to  secure  to  us  the 
highest  good,  that  the  narrow  path  through  which  he,  our  Captain,  causes  us  to  fight 
our  way  will  bring  us  to  "  the  prize  of  our  high  calling,"  is  indeed  inspiring,  and 
grasping  it  we  may  well  press  on,  raising  high  our  banners,  and  cheering  the  way  and 
the  coniiict  with  music  and  song. 
III.  The  good,  thus  resting  in  God  and  appbehending  his  gbacious  design, 

BEING   BENDEBED  TRANQUIL   AND   TBIUMPHANT  AND   INSPIEED   WITH   HOLT  JOT.      "Yet 

will  1  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy,"  etc.  (ver,  18).  The  joy  of  the  wicktd  ceases 
when  the  fig  trees  cease  to  blossom,  and  the  vines  to  yield  their  fruit  (Hos.  ii.  11, 12), 
for  it  lies  upon  the  smface ;  but  the  joy  of  the  holy  lies  deep  in  the  soul,  and  is  a  settled 
and  abiding  possession,  and  triumphs  under  the  darkest  circumstances  of  liie.  Illus- 
trations: David  (Ps.  xlii.  7 — 9);  Asaph  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  2,  24,  25);  Paul  and  Silas  (Acts 
xvi.  25).  Resting  in  God  and  apprehending  his  loving  workinu;  in  our  life-experiences, 
he  will  prove  himself  our  Strength  and  Song,  and  will  become  our  Salvation.— S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  19  (first  clause). — Ood  our  Strength.     "  The  Lord  God  is  my  Strength." 

I.  The  Lokd  God  is  odb  Strength  in  the  conflict  with  sin.  Men  are  drawn 
into  sin  in  the  hope  of  securing  some  personal  gratification;  they  yearn  after  some 
unattained  good,  some  unrealized  satisfaction,  and  they  yield  to  the  enticements  of 
evil  in  the  hope  of  securing  that  for  which  they  are  thus  craving.  But  the  man  whose 
hope  is  in  God,  and  to  whom  he  is  his  "  exceeding  joy,"  has  parted  with  these  earthly 
yearnings;  in  proportion  as  the  higher  and  the  eternal  has  gained  an  influence  over 
him,  this  fittaohment  to  the  lower  and  the  fleeting  has  been  rooted  out.  With  hearts 
uncentred  from  the  true  God,  the  Chaldeans  craved  worldly  dominion,  and  in  seeking 
this  " rejoiced  to  devour  the  poor  secretly"  (ver.  14),  whereas  Habakkuk  with  God 
as  his  Portion  was  as  unaffected  by  the  vanities  of  earth  as  dwellers  inland  are  by  the 
noise  of  the  distant  sea.  So  the  good,  lejoicing  in  God,  are  unallured  by  the  baits  of 
temptation,  and  are  rendered  strong  to  war  against  evil. 

II.  The  Lord  God  is  oub  Stbength  in  the  midst  of  the  advbese  scenes  of 
LIFE.  Man,  seeking  his  satisfaction  in  earthly  things,  must  be  feeble  indeed  when  these 
fail  him,  since,  with  thoughts  and  affections  centred  in  these,  as  they  depart  they  leave 
him  without  comfort  and  in  a  state  of  orphanage.  But  he  who  has  sought  and  found 
his  satisfaction  in  God  has  remaining  with  him,  when  things  seen  and  temporal  have 
taken  their  flight,  the  unseen  and  the  eternal  to  cheer  and  gladden  his  soul.  Hence 
he  is  strong,  and  in  the  light  of  the  Divine  teaching  and  the  Divine  love  can  calmly 
look  at  his  sorrows  until,  interpreted  thus,  they  become  to  him  light  afflictions  which 
are  but  for  a  moment,  and  which  work  for  him  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight 
of  glory. 

III.  The  Lord  God  is  oue  Stbength  in  holt  bervioe.  Such  service  is  ever 
attended  with  difBculties  and  discouragements,  and  it  is  only  as  we  lift  up  our  eyes  to 
the  everlasting  hills,  rejoicing  in  God  and  becoming  strengthened  by  him,  that  we  can 
grapple  with  these  and  overcome  them.  It  was  this  prophet's  strong  faith  and  delight 
in  his  God  that  enabled  him  to  prove  himself  so  true  a  witness  in  the  corrupt  age  in 
which  his  lot  was  cast.  It  has  ever  been  the  case  that  the  men  who  have  been  the 
most  effective  workers  for  God  have  been  the  men  to  whom  his  living  Presence  has 
been  an  intense  reality. 

IV.  The  Lobd  God  will  continue  to  be  the  Strength  of  his  people  when 
their  time  of  service  shall  close.  Whether  this  prophet  lived  to  see  the  devasta- 
tion of  his  country  which  he  predicted,  we  cannot  tell,  the  accounts  of  his  life  being  so 
meagre  and  for  the  most  part  apocryphal.  We  know,  however,  that,  from  the  state 
of  mental  doubt  and  distress  in  which  he  was  when  he  commenced  his  prophecy 
(ch.  i.  2),  he  fought  his  way  to  unswerving  trust  in  God ;  for  his  brief  prophecy,  opening 
with  the  expression  of  his  ardent  yearning  for  more  light  in  reference  to  the  mystery 
of  God's  ways,  closes  with  notes  of  triumphant  confidence  and  hope.  Often,  doubtless, 
as  his  faith  became  strengthened,  did  he  feel  himself  in  life  to  be  so  raised  and  elevated 
through  his  hope  and  joy  in  God,  as  to  be  like  the  hind  bounding  joyously  to  the  high 
places ;  and  raised  above  the  tumults  of  earth,  though  not  in  heaven,  yet  in  "  heaveidy 


68  THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK.  [oh.  ra.  1—19. 

places"  he  communed  with  his  Grod.  Even  so  we  should  believe  that,  as  his  life 
terminated,  he  calmly  departed  in  peace,  having  seen  God's  salvation.  And  all  faithful 
servants  of  Heaven  shall  find  that  when  heart  and  flesh  fail,  God  will  he  the  Strength 
of  their  hearts  and  their  Portion  for  ever.  Happy,  then,  in  life  and  in  death  such  as 
can  say  from  their  inmost  souls,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Strength." — S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Ood  devoutly  addressed,  "  A  prayer  of  HaUakkuk  the  prophet  upon 
Shigionoth.  0  Lord,  I  have  heard  thy  speech,  and  was  afraid :  0  Lord,  revive  thy  work 
iu  the  midst  of  the  years,  in  the  midst  of  the  years  make  known ;  in  wrath  remember 
msrcy."  This  chapter  is  considered  to  be  one  of  the  most  magnificent  compositions  of 
the  inspired  volume.  It  was  intended  undoubtedly  to  impart  consolation  in  view  of 
the  tremendous  calamities  which  were  approaching  from  the  Babylonian  invasion.  "  It 
exhibits,"  says  Dr.  Henderson,  "a  regular  ode,  beginning  with  a  brief  but  simple  exordium, 
after  which  follows  the  main  subject,  which  is  treated  in  a  manner  perfectly  free  and 
unrestrained,  as  the  different  topics  arose  one  after  the  other  in  the  excited  mind  of  the 
prophet,  and  finishes  with  an  epigrammatic  resumption  of  the  point  first  adverted  to 
in  the  introduction."  The  whole  chapter  presents  to  us  God  in  three  aspects — as 
devoutly  addressed,  as  poetically  portrayed,  and  as  triumphantly  enjoyed.  These 
two  verses  present  him  to  us  in  the  first  aspect — as  devoutly  addressed.  "  A  prayer 
of  Habakkuk  the  prophet  upon  Shigionoth."  Henderson  renders  the  word  "  shigionoth," 
"  with  triumphant  music,"  which  indicates  that  the  ode  was  in  all  probability  intended 
for  the  liturgical  service  in  the  temple,  but  to  be  set  to  the  freest  and  boldest  music. 
Perhaps  the  prophet  himself  was  an  accomplished  musician,  as  well  as  a  bard  of  the 
first  order.    Three  things  are  to  be  observed  in  relation  to  this  devout  address. 

I.  It  was  composed  tok  general  itsb.  It  is  not  an  extemporaneous  address ;  it 
is  a  settled  form  of  devotion.  Prearranged  forms  of  devotion  are  both  scriptural  and 
expedient.  There  is  a  set  form  given  to  the  priests  for  blessing  the  people  in  Numb, 
vi.  23 — 26.  Ps.  xcii.  is  called  "  a  psalm  for  the  sabbath,"  Ps.  cii.  "  a  prayer  for  the 
aflBicted."  Hezekiah  commanded  the  Levites  to  "praise  the  Lord  in  the  words  of  David, 
«nd  of  Asaph  the  seer,"  which  is  Ps.  cvi.  And. Christ  himself  gave  his  disciples  a 
form  of  prayer.  Whilst  it  is  scriptural,  it  is  also  expedient.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose 
that  a  minister  can  properly  lead  the  devotions  of  a  congregation  by  impromptu 
utterances.  The  well-known  apathy  of  congregations  under  the  influence  of  extem- 
poraneous prayers  shows  it  cannot  be  done.  For  the  individual  himself,  the  extem- 
poraneous prayer  is  all  that  is  needed,  for  it  is  the  "  soul's  sincere  desire,  uttered  or 
unexpressed."  But  to  get  a  whole  congregation  into  the  channel  of  devotion,  a  pre- 
arranged form  seems  desirable. 

n.  It  was  in  peospeot  of  a  terrible  calamity.  "  0  Lord,  I  have  heard  thy 
speech,  and  was  afraid."  Terrible  was  the  calamity  now  looming  on  the  vision  of  the 
prophet.  The  Chaldean  army  was  approaching ;  the  ruthless  troops  would  soon  be  in 
his  country,  sack  Jerusalem  its  metropolis,  and  bear  his  countrymen  away  into 
captivity.  In  view  of  this  calamity  the  prayer  is  addressed.  The  threatened  judgments 
of  hell  may  well  drive  men  into  the  presence  of  God  to  sue  for  mercy.  "  CaU  upon 
me  in  the  day  of  trouble,"  etc.  Surely,  if  men  fully  realized  the  predicted  judgments 
that  will  fall  on  this  world,  prayer  would  be  the  habitude  of  their  souls. 

III.  It  was  for  a  revival  of  Divine  work.  "Revive  thy  work  in  the  midst 
of  the  years,  in  the  midst  of  the  years  make  known ;  in  wrath  remember  mercy." 
Keil  thus  renders  the  passage :  "Jehovah,  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  thy  years  call  to 
life,  in.the  midst  of  the  years  make  it  known."  This  may  mean — Perfect  the  work  of 
delivering  thy  people;  let  not  thy  promise  lie  as  it  were  dead,  give  it  new  life  by 
performing  it.  Do  it  now,  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  when  our  calamities  are  at  their 
height,  when  thy  wrath  seems  to  be  at  high  tide  and  terrible.  Now,  "  revive  thy 
work."  Three  thoughts  are  suggested  :  1.  The  work  of  human  deliverance  is  the  work 
of  Ood.  This  is  true  of  all  deliverances— personal,  domestic,  national,  temporal,  and 
tpiritual.  He  alone  can  effectually  deliver  man.  2.  This  work  of  Ood  may  appear 
to  decline.  The  perils  may  thicken,  the  disease  grow  more  desperate,  and  all  things 
seem  as  if  Goi)  had  given  up  his  work.  This  is  often  the  case  with  religion  in  the  soul. 
8.  2%ts  decline  of  Ood's  work  can  only  be  overcome  by  hi$  intervention.  "  ReviTe  thr 
work." — ^D.  T.  ' 


OH,  ra.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  69 

Vers.  3 — 15. — Ood  poetically  portrayed  and  practicaMy  remembered.  "God  came 
from  Teman,  aad  the  Holy  Oae  from  Mount  Paran.  Selah,"  etc.  The  Bible  contains 
many  grand  songs  and  odes.  There  is  the  song  that  Moses  taught  Israel  to  sing 
(Bxod.  XV.  1).  There  is  the  triumphant  song  of  Deborah  and  Barak  (Judg.  v.). 
There  is  the  song  of  Hannah,  the  mother  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  ii.  1).  There  is  the  song 
of  David  bewailing  the  death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  (2  Sam.  i.  19),  and  his  song  of 
thanksgiving  after  the  communication  of  Nathan  respecting  the  building  of  the 
temple  (2  Sam.  vii.  18).  There  is  the  song  of  Hezekiah  after  he  had  received  comfort 
in  his  sickness  and  recovered  his  health  (Isa.  xixviii.  9 — 20).  There  is  the  song  of 
the  blessed  Virgin,  Magnificat ;  the  song  of  Zacharias,  Benedictws ;  the  song  of  Simeon, 
Nune  dimittis.  But  this  song  of  Habakkuk  stands  in  peerless  splendour  amongst 
them  all.  Here  the  majesty  of  God  in  Jewish  history  is  poetically  portrayed  and 
practically  remembered. 

I.  Poetically  portkated.  God  is  here  presented,  not  as  ho  is  in  himself — the 
Absolute  One,  whom  "no  one  hath  seen  or  can  see,"  nor  as  he  appears  to  philosophical 
or  logical  minds,  but  as  he  appears  to  a  lofty  imagination  diviuely  inspired.  To  the 
prophet's  imagination  he  appears  as  coming  from  Teman  and  Mount  Paran,  which 
refers  to  the  visible  display  of  his  glory  when  he  gave  the  Law  upon  Mount  Sinai 
amidst  thunders  and  lightnings  and  earthquakes.  Then,  indeed,  his  glory  covered  the 
heavens.  People  at  a  distance  witnessed  the  splendour  of  his  appearance  and  shouted 
his  praise.  He  seemed  encircled  in  surpassing  radiance;  his  brightness  was  as  the 
light;  he  "had  horns  coming  out  of  his  hand,"  and  there  was  the  "hiding  of  his 
power."  Henderson  renders  it,  "  Bays  streamed  from  his  hand,  yet  the  concealment  of 
his  glory  was  there."  The  idea,  perhaps,  is  that  the  brightness  that  was  seen  was  not 
his  full  glory,  but  mere  scintillations  or  emanations  of  those  infinite  abysses  of  his 
unrevealed  and  unrevealable  glory.  What  is  revealed  of  God  is  as  nothing  compared 
with  the  unrevealed.  "  Before  him  went  the  pestilence,  and  burning  coals  went  forth 
at  his  feet."  Or,  as  Keil  renders  it,  "  Before  him  goes  the  plague,  and  the  pestilence 
follows  his  feet."  The  reference  is,  perhaps,  to  the  plagues  which  he  brought  upon  the 
Egyptians  in  order  to  obtain  the  deliverance  of  his  people.  "  He  stood,  and  measured 
the  earth :  he  beheld,  and  drove  asunder  the  nations ;  and  the  everlasting  mountains 
were  scattered,  the  perpetual  hills  did  bow :  his  ways  are  everlasting."  "  He  stands, 
and  sets  the  earth  reeling :  he  looks,  and  makes  nations  tremble,  primeval  mountains 
burst  in  pieces,  the  early  hills  sink  down ;  his  are  the  ways  of  the  olden  time  "  (Keil). 
"  While,"  says  Henderson, "  Jehovah  is  marching  forth  to  the  deliverance  of  his  people, 
he  stops  all  of  a  sudden  in  his  progress,  the  immediate  effects  of  which  are  universal 
consternation  and  terror."  "  I  saw  the  tents  of  Cushan  in  atBiction ;  and  the  curtainj 
of  the  land  of  Midian  did  tremble."  "  When  he  drove  asunder  the  nations  of  Canaan,* 
says  an  old  writer,  "one  might  have  seen  the  tents  of  Cushan  in  affliction,  and  the 
curtains  of  the  land  of  Midian  trembling,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  neighbouring 
countries  taking  alarm.  He  struck  consternation  into  the  heart  of  his  enemies." 
"Was  the  Lord  displeased  against  the  rivers?  was  thine  anger  against  the  rivers? 
was  thy  wrath  against  the  sea,  that  thou  didst  ride  upon  thine  horses  and  thy 
chariots  of  salvation  ?  The  bow  was  made  quite  naked,  according  to  the  oaths  of  the 
tribes,  even  thy  word  ?  Thou  didst  cleave  the  earth  with  rivers."  " '  Was  it  against 
rivers,  0  Jehovah,  against  the  rivers,  that  thy  wrath  was  kindled?  that  thou  ridest 
hither  upon  thy  horses,  thy  chariots  of  salvation  ?  Thy  bow  lays  itself  bare.  Thou 
splittest  the  earth  into  rivers.'  The  ode,  taking  a  new  turn,  now  passes  from  the 
description  of  the  coming  of  God  to  an  address  to  God  himself.  To  the  mental  eye  of 
the  prophet  God  presents  himself  as  Judge  of  the  world,  in  the  threatening  attitude  of 
a  warlike  hero  equiiiped  for  conflict,  so  that  he  asks  him  what  is  the  object  of  hi« 
wrath.  The  question  is  merely  a  poetical  turn  given  to  a  lively  composition,  which 
expects  no  answer,  and  is  simply  introduced  to  set  forth  the  greatness  of  the  wrarh  of 
God ;  80  that  in  substance  it  is  an  affirmation.  The  wrath  of  God  is  kindled  over  the 
rivers,  his  fury  over  the  sea "  (Keil).  The  riding  upon  horses  is  a  figurative  repre- 
lentation  of  the  celerity  of  his  triumphant  progress.  "  The  mountains  saw  thee,  and 
they  trembled :  the  overflowing  of  the  water  passed  by :  the  deep  uttered  his  voice,  and 
lifted  up  his  hands  on  high."  "The  mountnins  saw  thee,  they  were  in  pain:  the 
Inundation  of  water  overflowed;   the  abyss  utiered  its  voice,  it  raised  its  hands  on 


70  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  [ch.  hi.  1—19. 

high."  "  The  mountains  heing  the  most  prominent  objects  on  the  surface  of  the  globe, 
Habakkuk  reiterates  in  a  somewhat  prominent  form  what  he  had  expressed  in  the  sixth 
verse  in  order  to  preserve  the  impression  of  the  tremendous  character  of  the  transactions 
to  illustrate  which  they  had  been  figuratively  introduced  "  (Henderson).  "  The  sun 
and  moon  stood  still  in  their  habitation :  at  the  light  of  thine  arruws  they  went,  and  at 
the  shining  of  thy  glittering  spear  "  (see  Josh.  x.  12,  13).  Some,  however,  suppose 
that  the  reference  here  is  to  the  surpassing  splendour  of  the  Divine  manifestation,  that 
the  heavenly  orbs  withdraw  altogether  from  the  fear  and  horror  that  pervade  all  nature, 
which  are  expressed  in  the  mountains  by  trembling,  and  in  the  waters  by  roaring,  an<i 
in  the  sun  and  moon  by  obscuration.  God  is  here  viewed  as  a  warrior  whose  darts  are 
so  brilliant  that  sun  and  moon  pale  before  them.  "  Thou  didst  march  through  the 
land  in  indignation,  thou  didst  thresh  the  heathen  in  anger."  The  special  reference  hei  e 
may  be  to  his  march  in  leading  the  children  of  Israel  through  the  wilderness,  and 
smiting  down  his  enemies.  "  Thou  wentest  forth  for  the  salvation  of  thy  people,  even 
for  salvation  with  thine  anointed ;  thou  woundedst  the  head  out  of  the  house  of  the 
wicked, by  discovering  the  foundation  unto  the  neck."  "Having  described,  in  language 
of  the  most  sublime  and  terrible  import,  the  manifestations  of  Jehovah  in  reference  to 
his  enemies,  Habakkuk  now  proceeds  to  specify  in  express  terms  the  end  which  they 
were  designed  to  answer,  viz.  the  deliverance  and  safety  of  the  chosen  people,  and  then 
depicts  their  fatal  effects  in  the  destruction  of  every  hostile  power"  (Henderson). 
"'Thou  didst  strike  through  with  his  staves  the  head  of  his  villages:  they  came  out 
as  a  whirlwind  to  scatter  me :  their  rejoicing  was  as  to  devour  the  poor  secretly.  Thou 
didst  walk  through  the  sea  with  thine  horses,  through  the  heap  of  great  waters.'  Thou 
goest  out  to  the  rescue  of  thy  people,  to  the  rescue  of  thine  anointed  one :  thou  dashest 
in  pieces  the  head  from  the  house  of  the  wicked  one,  laying  bare  the  foundation  even 
to  the  neck.  Thou  piercest  with  his  spears  the  head  of  his  hordes  which  storm  hither 
to  beat  me  to  powder,  whose  rejoicing  is  as  it  were  to  swallow  the  poor  in  secret.  Thou 
treadest  upon  the  seas :  thy  horses  upon  the  heap  of  great  waters.  The  Lord,  at 
whose  coming  in  the  terrible  glory  of  the  majesty  of  the  Judge  of  the  world,  all  nature 
trembles  and  appears  to  fall  into  its  primary  chaotic  state,  marches  over  the  earth,  and 
stamps  or  tramples  down  the  nations  with  his  feet  (compare  the  kindred  figure  of  the 
treader  of  the  wine-press  in  Isa.  Ixiii.  1,  6).  Not  all  nations,  however,  but  only  those 
who  are  hostile  to  him ;  for  he  has  come  forth  to  save  his  people  and  his  anointed  one. 
The  perfects  in  vers.  13 — 15  are  prophetic,  describing  the  future  in  spirit  as  having 
already  occurred "  (Keil).  Now,  all  this  sublime  representation  of  God  is  poetic, 
highly  poetic.  It  is  the  characteristic  of  poetry  that  it  ascribes  to  one  class  of  objects 
attributes  that  belong  to  another;  and  in  this  ode  we  find  attributes  ascribed  to  the 
Creator  which  belong  to  the  creature.  For  example,  he  is  here  represented  as  moving 
from  one  place  to  another,  from  Teman  and  from  Faran ;  as  standing, "  he  stood,"  etc. ; 
as  conquering  his  enemies  by  human  weapons ;  as  riding  upon  horses  and  driving  in 
chariots ;  and  as  fired  with  indignation.  AH  this  is  human.  The  Infinite  One  does  not 
move  from  place  to  place,  does  not  stand  in  any  one  spot,  knows  no  rage,  fury  is  not  in 
him.  Whilst  in  this  ode  the  attributes  of  the  creature  are  applied  to  the  Creator,  we 
find  also  the  attributes  of  the  living  ascribed  to  dead  and  insentient  existences.  The 
mountains  are  here  represented  as  writhing  and  in  pain,  the  deep  as  uttering  its  voice 
and  lifting  up  its  hands.  But  whilst  we  take  this  as  a  poetic  representation,  we  must 
not  fail  to  notice  some  of  the  grand  truths  which  it  con  tarns.  1.  That  Qod's  glory 
transcends  all  revelations.  The  brightness  of  the  Shechinah,  in  which  he  appeared  on 
Sinai  and  elsewhere  to  the  Jews,  however  effulgent,  was  but  a  mere  scintillation  of  the 
infinite  splendour  of  his  Being,  the  mere  "  hiding  of  his  power."  All  his  glory  as  seen 
in  nature,  both  in  the  material  and  spiritual  universe,  is  but  as  one  ray  to  the  eternal 
sun.  2.  That  Ood's  power  over  the  material  universe  is  absolute.  He  makes  the 
mountains  tremble,  and  the  seas  divide,  and  the  orbs  of  heaven  stand  still.  In  the 
Apocalypse  the  refulgent  glory  of  the  judgment-throne  is  represented  as  causing 
the  material  universe  to  melt  away  before  it.  And  before  a  full  manifestation  of  himself, 
what  are  mountains,  rivers,  sun,  and  stars  ?  Mere  vapours  on  the  wings  of  the  storm. 
3.  That  Ood's  interest  in  good  men  is  profound  and  practical.  All  his  operations,  as 
here  poetically  described,  are  on  belialf  of  his  chosen  people.  Though  he  is  high,  he  baa 
respect  to  the  lowly,  and  to  that  man  he  ever  luoks  who  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit. 


0H.m.  1— 19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK,  71 

II.  Pbaotioaixt  bemembered.  Why  did  the  prophet  recall  all  these  Divine 
manifestations  made  to  the  Hebrew  people  in  past  times  ?  Undoubtedly  to  encourage 
in  himself  and  in  his  countrymen  unbounded  confideDce  in  him  at  the  critical  and 
dangerous  period  in  which  they  were  placed.  The  Chaldean  hosts  were  threatening 
their  ruin,  the  political  heavens  were  black  with  thunder-clouds  under  which  his 
countrymen  might  well  shiver  and  stand  aghast.  Under  these  perilous  circumstances 
he  turns  to  God;  he  calls  to  mind  and  portrays  in  vivid  poetry  what  he  had  been  to 
his  people  in  ancient  times.  1.  He  recalls  the  fact  that  God  had  delivered  his  people  in 
ancimt  times  from  perils  as  great  as  those  to  which  they  were  now  exposed.  From  the 
Egyptians,  the  Canaanites,  the  Philistines,  etc.  2.  That  Ood  had  done  this  by 
stupendoris  manifestations  of  his  power.  Manifestations  of  his  power  in  the  sea,  in  the 
mountains,  in  the  orbs  of  heaven,  etc.  3.  That  what  God  had  done  for  his  people  he 
would  continue  to  do.  "  His  ways  are  everlasting,"  or,  as  Keil  renders  it,  "  His  are  ways 
of  the  olden  times."  The  idea,  perhaps,  is  that  he  has  an  eternal  plan,  fixed  and  settled. 
What  he  has  done  for  them  he  will  still  do.  Thus  the  prophet  remembered  the  days 
of  old,  and  took  courage. — D.  T. 

Ver.  16. — Horror  of  Ood.  "  When  I  heard,  my  belly  trembled ;  my  lips  quivered 
at  the  voice:  rottenness  entered  into  my  bones,  and  I  trembled  in  myself,  that  I 
might  rest  in  the  day  of  trouble :  when  he  cometh  up  unto  the  people,  he  will  invade 
them  with  his  troops."  "  Having  finished  the  poetic  rehearsal  of  the  mighty  acts  of 
Jehovah  on  behalf  of  his  people  in  ancient  times,  which  he  had  composed  in  order  to 
inspire  the  pious  with  unshaken  confidence  in  him  as  their  covenant  God,  Habakkuk 
reverts  to  the  fear  which  had  seized  him  on  hearing  of  the  judgments  that  were  to 
be  inflicted  upon  his  country  by  the  Chaldeans  "  (Henderson).  Our  subject  is  horror 
of  Ood  ;  and  we  offer  three  remarks  on  this  state  of  mind. 

I.  It  IB  AN  ABNOEMAL  STATE  OP  MIND.  The  benevolent  character  of  God,  and  the 
moral  constitution  of  the  soul  are  sufiScient  to  show  that  it  was  never  intended  that 
man  should  ever  dread  his  Maker  or  be  touched  with  any  servile  feelings  in  relation  to 
him.  Unbounded  confidence,  cheerful  trust,  loyal  love, — these  are  the  normal  states 
of  mind  in  relation  to  the  Creator.  How  has  the  abnormal  state  arisen  ?  The  history  of 
the  Fall  shows  this,  "  I  heard  thy  voice  in  the  garden,  and  was  afraid."  Having  sinned, 
a  sense  of  guilt  came  to  the  conscience,  and  conscience  under  the  sense  of  guilt  invested 
almighty  love  with  attributes  of  terror.     Horror  of  God  springs  from  a  sense  of  guilt. 

II.  It  18  AN  UNNBCESSAEY  STATE  OF  MIND.  God  IS  not  terrible.  There  is  nothing 
in  him  to  dread.  "  Fury  is  not  in  me."  He  is  love.  His  voice  to  man :  1.  In  all 
nature  is,  "  Be  not  afraid."  The  smiling  heavens,  the  blooming  earth,  the  warbling 
songsters  of  the  air,  in  all  he  says  to  man,  "  Be  not  afraid."  2.  In  all  true  philosophy 
is,  "  Be  not  afraid."  All  things  which  true  philosophy  looks  into  show  benevolence  of 
intention,  and  breathe  the  genius  of  love.  3.  In  all  true  Christianity  is,  "Be  not 
afraid."  Corrupt  Christianity,  it  is  true,  makes  him  horrific;  but  the  Christianity 
of  Christ  reveals  him  in  love  and  in  love  only.  In  Christ  he  comes  down  in  man  to 
man,  and  demonstrates  his  love. 

III.  It  is  a  pbrniciotts  state  of  mind.  Horror  is  a  pernicious  state  of  mind  in 
every  way.  It  is  pernicious  to  the  hody.  The  language  of  the  text  implies  this, 
"When  I  heard,  my  belly  trembled;  my  lips  quivered  at  the  voice:  rottenness 
entered  into  my  bones,  and  I  trembled  in  myself."  The  prophet's  alarm  drove  back 
the  blood  from  the  extremities  to  the  heart,  his  flesh  grew  cold,  contracted,  his  voice 
quivered,  and  his  very  hones  seemed  to  rot.  Horrific  feeling  is  inimical  to  physical 
health.  But  dread  of  God  is  even  more  pernicious  to  soul.  1.  It  destroys  its  peace. 
Pear  shakes  every  power  of  the  soul  as  the  winds  shake  the  leaves  of  the  forest.  2.  It 
depresses  its  powers.  All  the  faculties  of  the  soul  shrink  and  shiver  under  the  influence 
of  fear,  as  the  herds  of  the  mountain  at  the  approaching  thunder-storm.  3.  It  distorts 
its  views.  Fear  of  God  gives  men  horrid  ideas  of  him.  It  has  forged  all  the  theologies, 
both  in  heathendom  and  Christendom,  that  have  frightened  men.  It  is  fear  that  has 
given  men  that  Calvin  Deity  which  frightens  the  millions  away  from  the  glorious 
gospel  of  the  blessed  God. 

CoNOLnsiON.  Let  us  preach  to  men  the  God  of  Christ,  the  God  who  says  to  all  men, 
"  It  is  I :  be  not  afraid."— D.  T. 


73  THE  BOOK  OP  HABAKKUK.  [oh.  m.  1—19. 

Vers.  17 — 19.— 27ie  pouibilities  in  the  life  of  a  good  mem.  "  Although  the  fig  tree 
shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  be  in  the  vines ;  the  labour  of  the  olive  shall  fail, 
and  the  fields  shall  yield  no  meat ;  the  flock  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold,  and  there 
shall  be  no  herd  in  the  stalls :  yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the  Qod  of 
my  salvation,"  etc.  "The  desolation  here  so  graphically  and  forcibly  described  is 
that  which  was  to  be  effected  by  the  Chaldeans,  whose  army  would  consume  or  destroy 
the  best  and  most  oecessary  productions  of  the  land;  not  only  seizing  upon  the  cattle 
and  devouring  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  but  so  injuring  the  trees  as  to  render  them 
incapable  of  yielding  any  produce.  The  passage  contains  the  most  beautiful  exhibition 
of  the  power  of  true  religion  to  be  found  in  the  Bible.  The  language  is  that  of  a  mind 
weaned  from  earthly  enjoyments,  and  habituated  to  find  the  highest  fruition  of  its 
desires  in  Glod.  When  every  earthly  stream  is  dried  up,  it  has  an  infinite  supply  in 
his  all-su£5cient  and  ezhaustless  fulness."  Our  subject  is —  TJie  possibilities  in  the  life  of 
a  good  man. 

L  Thb  obeatebt  hatebial  destitution  IB  FOssiBiiS  TO  A  GOOD  MAN.  It  is  pouible 
for  the  fig  tree  not  to  blossom,  etc.  Man  lives  by  the  finits  of  the  earth.  These  may 
fail  from  one  of  two  reasons.  1.  From  human  neglect.  It  is  the  eternal  ordinance  of 
God,  that  what  man  wants  from  the  earth  for  his  existence  he  must  get  from  it  by 
labour — skilful,  timely,  persevering  labour.  The  earth  gives  to  the  brute  what  he 
wants  without  his  labour,  because  the  brute  is  not  endowed  with  qualifications  for 
agricultural  work.  But  man  must  labour,  and  this  arrangement  is  wise  and  beneficent. 
It  promotes  health,  imparts  vigour,  and  develops  faculties  both  intellectual  and  moral. 
Let  man  cease  to  cultivate  the  soil,  and  the  earth  will  fail  to  support  him  either  with 
.the  right  animal  or  vegetable  productions,  2.  From  Divine  visitation.  The  mighty 
Maker  can,  and  sometimes  does,  wither  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  destroy  the  cattle  of 
the  fields.  He  does  this  sometimes  without  instrumentality,  by  mere  volition;  some- 
times with  the  feeblest  instrumentality — ^locusts,  worms,  etc. ;  sometimes  with  human 
instrumentality — war,  etc.  We  say  the  greatest  material  destitution  ii  possible  to  a 
good  man.  Possible  ?  It  is  frequent.  In  all  ages  some  of  the  best  men  have  been 
found  in  the  most  destitute  circumstances.  Even  Christ  himself  had  nowhere  to  lay 
his  head ;  and  the  apostles,  what  had  they? 

n.  Tee  highest  bpieitual  jot  is  posbibls  to  a  oood  mast.  "I  will  rejoice  in 
the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation."  "  Spiritual  joy,"  says  Caleb  Morris, 
"  is  a  free,  full,  and  overflowing  stream,  that  takes  its  rise  in  the  very  depth  of  the 
Divine  essence,  in  the  immutability,  perfection,  abundance,  munificence,  of  the  Divine 
nature.  While  there  is  a  Qod,  and  that  God  is  happy,  there  is  no  necessity  that  there 
should  be  any  unhappy  Christians."  What  is  it  to  "joy  in  God"?  1.  It  is  the  jot/  of 
the  highest  contemplation.  The  joys  of  contemplation  are  amongst  the  most  pure  and 
elevating  which  intelligent  creatures  can  experience.  These  rise  in  the  character 
according  to  their  subjects.    The  highest  subject  is  God,  his  attributes  and  works. 

2.  It  is  the  Joy  of  the  most  elevating  friendship.  The  joys  of  friendship  are  amongst  the 
chief  joys  of  earth ;  but  the  joys  of  friendship  depend  upon  the  purity,  depth,  constancy, 
reciprocity  of  love;   and  friendship  with  God  secures  all  this  in  the  highest  degree. 

3.  It  ts  the  Joy  of  the  subUmest  admiration.  Whatever  the  mind  admires  it  enjoys, 
and  enjoys  in  proportion  to  its  admiration,  whether  it  be  a  landscape  or  a  painting. 
Moral  admiration  is  enjoyment  of  the  highest  kind,  and  this  in  proportion  to  the 
grandness  of  the  character.  Admiration  of  Divine  excellence  is  the  sublimest  joy. 
"  I  will  joy  in  God."  To  joy  in  (Jod  is  to  bask  in  sunshine,  is  to  luxuriate  in  abundance, 
is  to  revel  in  the  immensity  of  moral  beauty,  is  to  dwell  with  God. 

in.  The  highest  spikitual  jot  in  the  midbt  op  the  greatest  hatebial 
DESTITUTION  IS  POSSIBLE  TO  A  GOOD  MAN.  "Although"  every  material  blessing  is 
gone,  "  I  will  rejoice."  Good  men  have  always  been  enabled  to  do  so.  They  have 
been  happy  in  poverty,  exultant  in  prisons,  and  even  triumphant  in  the  martyr's 
flames.  Having  God  with  them,  they  have  had  the  reality  without  the  forms,  they 
have  had  the  crystal  fountain  rather  than  the  shallow  and  polluted  streams.  Like 
Paul,  they  have  "gloried  in  tribulation,"  etc.  All  things  have  been  theirs.  In 
material  destitution  they  felt :  1.  In  God  they  had  strength.  "  The  Lord  God  is  my 
Strength."  "As  thy  day,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  2.  In  God  they  had  svnftnes*. 
"He  will  make  my  feet  like  hinds'  feet."     The  reference  is  here,  perhaps,  to  the  swift- 


OH.  ni.  1— 19.J  THE  BOOK  OF  HABAKKUK.  '^3 

ness  with  which  God  would  enable  him  to  flee  from  the  dangers  which  were  overtaking 
his  country.  It  is,  however,  a  universal  truth  that  God  gives  to  a  good  man  a  holy 
alacrity  in  duty.  Duty  to  him  is  not  a  clog  or  a  burden,  but  a  delight.  3.  In  God 
they  had  elevation.  "  He  will  make  me  to  walk  upon  mine  high  places."  "  They  that 
wait  upon  God  shall  renew  their  strength ;  they  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles," 
etc.,  up  upon  the  mountains,  far  too  high  for  any  enemies  to  scale.  "  God,  willing  more 
abundantly  to  show  unto  the  heirs  of  promise  the  immutability  of  his  counsel,  con- 
firmed it  by  an  oath  :  that  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  impossible  for  God 
to  lie,  we  might  have  a  strong  consolation,  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon 
the  hope  set  before  ui"  (Heb.  vi.  17, 18).— D.  T. 


HOMILETIOAL   INDEX 


TO 


THE    BOOK    OP   HABAKKUK. 


OHAPTEB  I. 
tBEm  rAOB 

A  Prophet's  Bnrden             ...             ...  4 

The  Lamentation  of  a  Good  Man       ...  6 

Judgment  on  the  Wing        ...             ...  1 

The  Triumph  of  Faith         ...             ...  9 

The  Title               11 

The  Elegy              ...            ...             ...  11 

The  Divine  Working  against  Evil  and 

its  Doers            ...             ...             ...  12 

The  Inspiration  of  Hope     ...             ...  13 

The  Benefits  of  Life's  Adversities     ...  14 
The  Pride  of  Human  Sufficiency       ...  14 
Dark  Problems  and  Man's  True  Atti- 
tude in  Relation  to  them                ...  15 
The   Ory  of  a  Good  Man   under  the 

Perplexing  Procedure  of  God         ...  16 
The  Doom  of  a  Nation  of  Conyentional 

Beligionists        ...              ...              ...  18 

The  Eternity,  FroTidenoe,  and  Holiness 

of  Jehovah         ...             ...             ...  19 

Rapacious  Selfishness  in  Power         ...  20 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  Prophet  upon  his  Watch-tower  ...  28 
The  Unjust    Man    and    the  Jast:    a 

Contrast  ...  ...  ...     30 

A  Parable  of  Woes:    1.  Woe  to  the 

Bapaoionsl         ...  ...  ...     31 

A  Parable  of  Woes:    2.  Woe  to  the 

CovetousI  ...  ...  ...     32 

A  Parable  of  Woes:   8.  Woe   to  the 

Ambitious!         ».  „»  m.     33 


A  Parable  of  Woes:   4.  Woe  to  the 

Insolent  I  ... 

A  Parable  of  Woes:    5.  Woe  to  the 

Idolatrous!         ...            ...  ... 

The  Temple  of  Jehovah       ...  ... 

Waiting  for  the  Vision         ...  ... 

The  Life  of  Faith  ... 

Covetonsness          ...            ...  ... 

Corrapt  Ambition ...             ...  ... 

The  Two  Kingdoms :  a  Contrast  ... 

^God's  Retributive  Justice    ...  ... 

Worship,  False  and  True     ...  ... 

Man's  Moral  Mission  to  the  World  ... 

The  Portraiture  of  a  Good  Man  ... 
Moral  Wrong:    Some  of  its  National 


National  Wrongs  ending  in  National 

Woes.    No.  1     ...  ... 

National  Wrongs  ending  in  National 

Woes.    No.  2      ...  ...  ... 

National  Wrongs  ending  in  National 

Woes.    No.  3     ... 
National  Wrongs  ending  in  National 

Woes.    No.  4     ...  ... 

National  Wrongs  ending  in  National 

Woes.     No.  5     ...  ...  ... 

Silence  in  the  Temple  ...  ••• 

CHAPTER  in. 

The  Prayer  of  an  Alarmed  Prophet  ...     56 
An  Ideal  Theophany :  1.  The  Onward 
Haroh  of  the  Deity  «.  m.     68 


33 

34 
34 
35 
36 
38 
39 
39 
40 
40 
41 
42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

47 

48 
49 


UTDBX 


An  Ideal  Theophemj' :  8.  The  Wonder- 
ful Acts  of  the  Deity       ...  ...  69 

An  Ideal  Theophanj:  3.  The  Terriblp 

Wrath  of  the  Deity  ...  ...  60 

An  Ideal  Tbeophany :  4.  The  GlorioiiB 

Interposition  of  the  Deity  ...  60 

Sorroiring,  yet  rejoioing      ...  ...  61 

Prayer  and  Praise  ...  ...  62 

Prayer  for  RoTival  ...  ...  63 

God  ia  History      m.  ...  ».  64 


The  Dirine  Ooncaalmants   ...  ...  6& 

"Songs  in  the  Night"          ...  ...  66 

God  our  Strength  ...            ...  ...  67 

God  derontly  addressed       ...  ...  68 

God  poetioally  portrayed  and  practi- 
cally remembered              ...  ...  69 

Horror  of  God        ...            ...  ...  71 

The  Possibilities  in  the  Life  of  a  Good 

Hap.     M*            ■••            M*  •••  if 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 
AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL^  M.A. 

ZEPHANIAH. 

(Kjeposition : 
By  rev.  W.  J.   DEANE,  M.A., 

RECTOR  OF   ASHEN  ; 

i^omiletice : 
By  rev.   S.  D.  HILLMAK,  B.A. 

<§omilies  bj)  bariotts  !^utl)or0 : 

REV.  T.  WHITELAW,  D.D.  REV.  J.  S.  CANDLISH,  D.L 

REV.    D.   THOMAS,   D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yore  and  Toronto. 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH. 


INTRODUCTION. 


§  I.  Subject  op  the  Book. 

The  prophecy  of  Zephaniah  has  been  called  by  Kleinert  the  Dies  tree  of  the 
Old  Testament ;  and  there  is  much  truth  in  this  designation.  It  is,  indeed, 
replete  with  announcements  of  judgment  to  come ;  it  is  wholly  occnpied 
with  this  subject  and  its  consequences,  and  exhortations  founded  thereon ; 
not  that  this  is  the  final  object  of  the  prophecy,  but  it  is  introduced 
uniformly  as  being  the  means  of  establishing  righteousness  in  the  earth, 
making  God's  power  known,  purging  out  the  evil,  and  developing  the 
good.  The  prophet  is  inspired  with  the  idea  of  the  universal  judgment 
which  shall  afBect  the  whole  world ;  he  sees  this  anticipated  by  particular 
visitations  on  certain  heathen  nations ;  he  sees  heathendom  generally  over- 
thrown ;  he  warns  his  own  countrymen  of  the  punishment  that  awaits 
them  ;  and  he  looks  forward  to  the  salvation  of  Israel  when  all  these  things 
have  come  to  pass.  The  book  is  one  continuous  prophecy  divided  into 
three  parts;  it  contains,  perhaps,  many  utterances  condensed  into  one 
systematic  whole,  which  comprises  the  threat  of  judgment,  the  exhortation 
to  repentance,  and  the  promise  of  salvation. 

The  prophet  begins  abruptly  with  announcing  the  judgment  upon  the 
whole  world,  upon  idolaters,  and  specially  upon  Judah  for  its  iniquity ;  he 
describes  the  terrible  character  of  this  judgment,  and  upon  whom  it  shall 
fall,  viz.  the  chieftains  who  affect  Gentile  habits  and  oppress  others,  upon 
the  traders  who  exact  usury,  upon  the  faithless  who  have  no  belief  in 
Divine  providence  (ch.  i.).  Having  depicted  the  day  of  the  Lord,  he 
exhorts  the  people  to  repentance,  and  urges  the  righteous  to  persevere  that 
thev  may  be  protected  in  the  time  of  distress.  He  gives  a  reason  for  this 
exhortation  by  a  more  extended  announcement  of  the  Divine  judgment 
which  shall  fall  upon  nations  far  and  near — Philistines,  Moabites,  Ammonites, 
Ethiopians,  Assyrians,  yea,  and  upon  Jerusalem  herself,  whose  princes, 
judges,  and  prophets  shall  be  justly  punished.  This  display  of  vengeance 
shall  lead  to  a  reverential  awe  of  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  and  prepare  the 

ZBFHANIAH.  A 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


way  for  the  pure  worship  of  God  (ch.  ii.  1 — ^iiL  8).  This  introdaces  the 
annoancement  of  Messianic  hopes.  The  nations  shall  serve  the  Lord  with 
one  accord ;  Israel  shall  return  from  its  dispersion,  purified  and  humbled, 
the  eril  being  purged  away  ;  it  shall  be  safe  under  God's  special  care,  and 
shall  rejoice  in  happiness  undisturbed ;  the  oppressor  shall  be  destroyed, 
and  the  holy  nation  shall  be  "  a  name  and  a  praise  among  all  people  of  the 
earth  "  (ch.  iii.  9—20). 

The  prophecy  of  Zephaniah  k  in  some  respects  supplementary  to  that 
of  Habakkuk.  The  latter  had  foretold  the  punishment  of  Jndah  through 
the  Chaldeans ;  the  former  shows  how  the  judgment  will  afFect,  not  the 
Jews  only,  but  pagan  nations  also,  yea,  the  whole  earth ;  but  he  does  not 
name  nor  accurately  describe  the  instruments  of  this  vengeance.  This 
reticence  has  given  occasion  to  much  speculation  on  the  part  of  critics. 
Those  who  believe  in  the  predictive  element  of  prophecy,  and  acknowledge 
the  inspiration  of  Divine  foreknowledge  in  the  utterances  of  the  prophets, 
have  no  difiS.culty  in  seeing  ih.&  fulfilment  of  the  announced  judgment  in 
the  action  of  the  Chaldeans,  whom  Zephaniah,  in  agreement  with  the  gen^ 
ral  and  comprehensive  character  of  his  oracle,  does  not  specifically  name. 
But  Hitzig  and  those  who  reject  all  definite  prophecy  take  much  pains  to 
discover  an  enemy  to  whom  the  prophet  could  allude  without  resorting  to 
supernatural  knowledge.  They  find  this  convenient  invader  in  the  horde 
of  Scythians  who,  as  Herodotus  relates  (i.  103 — 106),  burst  into  Media, 
went  thence  towards  Egypt,  were  bought  off  by  Psammetichns,  and  on  their 
return  a  few  stragglers  plundered  a  temple  at  Ascalon.  This  inroad  is 
reported  to  have  happened  about  the  time  that  the  prophecy  was  nttered. 
But  Herodotns's  account  of  the  Scythians,  when  carefully  examined,  is  proved 
to  be  full  of  inaccuracies ;  and  even  this  gives  no  support  to  the  figment  of 
their  attack  on  the  Jews,  of  whose  existence  they  were  probably  unaware, 
nor  to  any  destruction  of  the  nations  mentioned  by  Zephaniah  efPected  by 
them.  Whether  it  was  revealed  to  the  prophet  that  the  Chaldeans  were  to 
be  the  executors  of  the  Divine  vengeance,  or  whether  the  exact  instruments 
were  not  identified  in  his  view  (the  law  of  moral  government  being  present 
to  his  mind  rather  than  any  definite  circumstances),  the  fact  remains  that 
he  announces  certain  events  which  we  know  were  not  fulfilled  by  any  pro- 
ceedings of  Scythians,  but  were  exactly  accomplished  by  the  Chaldeans  (see 
note  on  ch.  i.  7). 

The  peculiarity  in  Zephaniah's  prophecy  is  the  extension  of  his  view 
to  all  lands  and  nations,  their  spiritual  coneems,  their  future  condition. 
While  cursorily  announcing  the  fate  of  Jerusalem,  he  dwells  chiefly  upon 
the  exercise  of  God's  powef  upon  the  exterior  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and 
how  they  are  ordained  to  work  out  his  great  purposes. 

§  II.    AUTHOB. 

Of  Zephaniah  we  know  absolutely  nothing  but  what  he  himself  mentiona 
in  the  superscription  of  his  book.     No  information  can  be  gathered  from 


THE  BOOK  OP   ZEPHANIAH. 


the  contents  of  the  prophecy,  where  the  writer's  personal  history  is  wholly 
unnoticed.  He  calls  himself  "  the  son  of  Cnshi,  the  son  of  Gedaliah,  the 
son  of  Amariah,  the  son  of  Hizkiah."  As  it  is  usual  to  mention  only  the 
name  of  the  father,  it  has  been  inferred  that  the  genealogy  is  carried  up  to 
the  fourth  generation  because  Hizkiah,  i.e.  Hezekiah,  was  a  celebrated 
personage,  and  most  probably  the  famous  King  of  Judah.  But  the  infer- 
ence is  not  undoubted.  Hizkiah  is  not  called  "  King  of  Judah '"  in  the 
genealogy,  which  would  naturally  have  been  done  had  he  been  the  ancestor 
intended,  as  in  Prov.  xxv.  1 ;  Isa.  xxxviii.  9.  There  is  room  enough,  indeed, 
between  Hezekiah  and  Josiah  for  the  four  specified  descents,  though  only 
three  are  named  in  the  case  of  Josiah  himself;  but  the  name  Hezekiah 
was  not  unknown  among  the  Jews,  and  we  cannot  assume  without  further . 
support  that  the  person  here  mentioned  is  the  king.  It  is  fair  to  argue 
that  the  insertion  of  the  genealogical  details  shows  that  the  prophet  was 
of  distinguished  birth;  but  further  it  is  impossible  to  go  with  any 
certainty. 

The  name  of  the  prophet  is  variously  explained,  as  "  The  Lord  hath  hid," 
or  "The  Lord  hath  guarded,"  or  "The  Lord's  Watch-tower."  Keil  is 
generally  followed  in  interpreting  it  as  "  He  whom  Jehovah  hides,  or 
shelters."  The  LXX.  writes  it  So^ovias :  Vulgate,  jSop^MioA.  There  were 
others  who  bore  this  name  (see  2  Kings  xxv.  18 ;  I  Ohron.  vi.  36 ;  Zeoh.  vi. 
10,  14).  The  details  given  by  Pseudo-Dorotheus  and  Pseudo-Bpiphanius 
('  DeVit.  Proph.,'xix.),  among  which  is  the  assertion  that  he  was  a  member 
of  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  have  no  historical  basis. 

§ni.  Dam. 

Zephaniah,  in  the  inscription  of  his  book,  states  that  he  prophesied  "  in 
the  days  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Amon,  King  of  Judah ; "  and  this  assertion  has 
never  been  seriously  disputed.  The  only  question  is  in  what  part  of  that 
king's  reign  did  he  exercise  his  office.  Josiah  reigned  thirty-one  years, 
according  to  the  usually  received  dates — from  B.o.  640  to  B.C.  609.  The 
destruction  of  ^Nineveh,  which  Zephaniah  foretold,  took  place  quite  at  the 
end  of  Josiah's  reign,  and  his  prophecy  must  have  been  uttered  some  time 
before  this  event.  No  other  data  for  determining  the  question  exist  save 
what  may  be  gathered  from  internal  evidences.  And  these  are  most  uncer- 
tain, depending  chiefly  upon  inferences  drawn  from  the  great  reforma- 
tion effected  by  the  good  king.  Did  he  prophesy  before  this  reformation 
was  begun,  or  after  it  was  effected,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  first  or  second  half 
of  Josiah's  reign  ?  A  third  alternative  may  be  added — ^Was  it  during  the 
progress  of  this  religions  amelioration  ?  Those  who  assign  the  prophecy 
to  the  earlier  period,  before  the  king's  eighteenth  year,  when  his  vigorous 
measures  produced  their  happy  results,  rely  upon  the  fact  that  the  prophet 
speaks  as  though  idolatry  and  the  disorders  which  Josiah  repressed  were 
stiU  rampant,  even  the  members  of  the  royal  family  being  implicated  in  th« 


INTRODUCTION   TO 


peneral  iniquity.  It  is  inconceivable,  they  say,  that  Zephaniah  shonlrt 
Jiavo  taken  this  gloomy  view,  and  have  entirely  omitted  all  mention  of  the 
young  prince's  noble  efforts  to  effect  a  change  for  the  better,  had  this 
Attempt  already  been  commenced.  All  this  points  to  a  time  when  Josiah 
was  still  a  minor,  and  before  he  had  begun  to  assert  himself  in  the  direction 
of  affairs.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  contended  that  certain  statements  in  the 
body  of  the  work  prove  that  the  reformation  was  being  carried  on  at  the 
time  when  it  was  composed:  the  public  worship  of  Jehovah  existed  (ch.  iii. 
4,  5),  and  this  side  by  side  with  that  of  Baal  and  with  many  idolatrous 
practices  (ch.  i.  4,  5)  ;  there  were  priests  of  Jehovah  as  well  as  priests  of 
false  gods  at  the  same  time.  Nor  can  we  reason  from  Zephaniah's  silence 
concerning  reforms  that  none  had  been  essayed ;  for  Jeremiah,  who 
began  to  prophesy  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  Josiah,  is  quite  as  strong  as 
Zephaniah  in  his  denunciations  of  idolatry,  the  fact  being  that,  though  it 
was  publicly  abolished,  it  was  still  practised  extensively  in  secret.  Others, 
again,  claim  a  still  later  date  for  the  prophecy,  because  it  speaks  of  the 
extermination  of  the  remnant  of  Baal  (ch.  i.  4),  which  implies  that  the 
purification  had  already  been  effected,  and  that  only  isolated  instances  still 
existed ;  the  prophet  also  speaks  of  and  refers  to  the  Mosaic  books  as  well 
known  to  his  hearers  (comp,  ch.  i.  13,  15,  17 ;  ii.  2,  6,  7,  11 ;  iii.  5,  19,  20), 
which  could  only  have  been  after  the  discovery  of  the  "  book  of  the  Law  " 
in  Josiah's  eighteenth  year  (2  Kings  xxii.  8).  It  must  be  noted  that  on 
this  occasion  reference  was  made  to  the  Prophetess  Huldah,  not  to 
Zephaniah  (2  Kings  xxii.  14).  Hence  some  suppose  that  he  was  dead  at 
this  time. 

From  this  brief  recapitulation  of  arguments  it  will  be  seen  that  each  of 
the  three  theories  mentioned  above  has  much  to  be  said  in  its  favour ;  and 
that  the  only  safe  conclusion  to  adopt  is  this — that  although  the  present 
book,  as  now  displayed  in  the  sacred  canon,  forms  one  connected  whole,  it 
is  composed  of  prophecies  uttered  at  various  times  and  gathered  by  their 
author  into  a  volume  and  arranged  on  a  definite  plan.  Its  place  in  the 
canon  is  the  same  both  in  the  Hebrew  and  Greek,  and  coincides  with  the 
■chronological  order  to  which  it  is  assigned. 

§  IV.   General  Charaotbb. 

Some  critics  have  spoken  disparagingly  of  the  style  of  Zephaniah's 
prophecy,  as  being  prosaic  and  bearing  no  comparison  with  any  of  the  other 
Hebrew  poeta.  There  is  some  truth  in  this  criticism ;  but  the  censure  is 
exaggerated  and  unjust.  Of  the  remarkable  purity  of  his  language  there 
can  be  no  doubt ;  and  if  his  rhythm  is  at  times  faulty,  judged  by  the 
standard  of  the  highest  models,  and  sinks  into  prose ;  if  he  is  wanting  in 
sublimity  and  elegance ;  it  must  be  allowed  that  he  is  always  easy  and  full 
of  life,  often  vehement,  fiery,  and  severe,  and  that  the  force  and  conciseness 
■of  his  utterances  leave  a  definite  impression  on  the  mind  which  needs  no 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH. 


rhetorical  artifice  to  make  it  permanent.  Like  other  prophets,  he  connects- 
himself  with  his  predecessorB  by  employing  their  language,  not  from  poverty 
of  idea,  not  from  "  declension  in  the  originality  of  prophets  of  this  date,"' 
but  because  he  designs  to  give,  in  a  compendious  form,  "  the  fundamental 
thoughts  of  judgment  and  salvation  which  are  common  to  all  the  prophets  "■ 
(Keil).  He  predicts  judgment ;  the  partionlar  instrument  he  leaves  untold. 
The  destruction,  not  the  destroyer,  is  the  subject  of  his  oracle.  His  futnre 
is  vague,  and  extends  even  to  the  end  of  time  ;  particular  period  or  special 
agent  is  beyond  his  scope  to  name.  He  culls  isolated  expressions  and 
striking  words  from  his  predecessors,  Isaiah,  Joel,  Amos,  and  Habakkuk ; 
he  avails  himself  of  their  language  with  respect  to  judgment  to  come,  and 
God's  love  for  the  righteous  among  the  people,  and  applies  it  to  his  own 
purpose  (see  Pusey,  p.  441).  The  peculiar  nature  of  this  prophecy,  its 
comprehensiveness  and  universality,  has  been  well  intimated  by  Bucer,  who 
says,  "  Si  qnis  desiderat  secreta  vatum  oracula  brevi  dari  compendio,  brevem 
hunc  Zaphanjam  perlegat." 

§  V.     LiTEBATUKK. 

Of  special  commentaries  on  Zephaniah  the  most  noteworthy  are  tlie  following  ; 
M.  Bucer,  'Sophon.  Proph.'  (Argent.,  1528);  Laren,  'Tuba  Zeph.' (Magdeb.,  1653); 
Jansen.,  '  Analecta  in  Sophon. ; '  Tarnovius,  '  Comment.'  (Rost.,  1623);  Nolten, '  Dissert. 
Exeget.'  (1719);  'Comn.ent.'  (Franc,  1724);  Cramer,  'Scyth.  Denkraaler'  (1777); 
Von  Coeln,  '  Spicilegium  '  (Bresl.,  1819) ;  P.  Ewald,  '  Zeph.  iibersetzt '  (Erlang.,  1827) ; 
Strauss,  '  Vaticin,  Zeph.  Comment,  lllustr.'  (Berlin,  1843) ;  Eeinke, '  Der  Proph.  Zeph.*^ 
(Munst.,  1868). 

§  VI.   Arrangement  in  Sections. 

The  book  is  divided  into  three  parts. 

Part  I.  (Ch.  1.)    The  judgment  upon  all  the  world,  and  upon  Judah  in  particular. 
§  1.  (Oh.  i.  1.)    Title  and  inscription. 

§  2.  (Ch.  i.  2,  3.)     The  prelude,  announcing  the  Judgment  upon  the  whole  world. 
§  3.  (Ch.  1.  4—6.)    This  judgment  will  fall  specially  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem 

for  their  idolatry. 
§  4.  (Oh.  i.  7 — 13.)    The  judgment  is  described  as  regards  its  oly'eots,  viz.  the 

princes,  the  traders,  the  irreligious  and  profligate. 
§  6.  (Ch.  i.  14 — 18.)    The  near  approach  and  terrible  nature  of  this  judgment. 
Part  II.  (Ch.  ii.  1 — ili.  8.)    Exhortation  to  repentance  and  to  perseverance. 
S  1.  (Ch.  ii.  1 — 3.)    Let  all  examine'  their  ways  before  the  day  of  the  Lord  comes, 

and  let  the  righteous  specially  seek  the  Lord  more  earnestly,  that  they  may  be 

safe  in  the  judgment. 
%  2.  (Ch.  il.  4 — 7.)     The  exhortation  is  supported  by  the  announcement  of  the 

punishment  on  various  nations,  which  shall  prepare  the  way  for  the  acceptance 

of  true  religion ;  and  first  the  punishment  shall  fall  on  the  Philistines. 
S  3.  (Ch.  ii.  8 — 10.)    Then  upon  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites. 
§  4.  (Ch.  ii.  11.)    Jehovah  destroys  idolatry,  that  pure  religion  may  reign  over  all 

the  earth. 
§  5.  (Ch.  ii.  12 — 15.)    The  judgment  shall  fall  on  the  Ethiopians  and  Assyrians. 
§  6.  (Ch.  iii.  1 — 6.)     If  God  punishes  the  heathen,  he  will  not  spare  the  hardened 

sinners  in  Judah. 
f  7.  (Ch.  iii.  6 — 8.)    This  is  the  only  wty  left  to  secure  salvation  for  Israel  and 

the  whole  world. 


vl  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ZBPHANIAH. 

Part  in.  (Ch.  iii.  9 — 20.)  Promise  of  the  conversion  of  the  world  and  the  happiness 
of  Israel. 

S  1.  (Ch.  iii.  9,  10.)  The  heathen  shall  be  converted,  and  shall  help  in  the  restora- 
tion of  Israel. 

{  2.  (Ch.  iii.  11 — 13.)  Israel  restored  to  God's  favour  shall  be  cleansed  and 
sanctified. 

I  3.  (Ch.  iii.  14: — 20.)  She  shall  be  comforted  and  largely  blessed  by  the  preB«nc« 
eS  JabsTsh,  and  exalted  to  honotir  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  world. 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  I. 
Vera.    1—18.— Part   I.    The   Judgment 
upon  all  the  wobld,  asb  upon  judab  in 
Pabtioulab. 

Ver.  1.— §  1.  TiUe  and  inseripHon.  The 
word  of  the  Lord  (see  note  on  Micah  i.  1). 
Zephaniah,  "Whom  the  Lord  shelters" 
(see  Introduction,  §  II.).  The  son  oi;  etc. 
The  genealogy  thus  introduced  shows  that 
the  prophet  was  of  illustrious  descent;  or 
it  may  be  inserted  to  distinguish  him  from 
others  who  bore  the  same  name,  Hizkiah. 
The  same  name  which  is  elsewhere  written 
in  our  rersion  Betekiah.  Whether  the 
great  King  of  Judah  is  here  meant  may 
well  be  questioned  (see  Introduction). 
Other  prophets  have  prefised  their  genea- 
logies to  their  books  (see  Zech.  i.  1 ;  and 
in  tho  Apocrypha,  Baruch  i.  1).  In  the 
days  of  Josiah.  Zephaniah  here  gathers  into 
one  volume  the  denunciations  and  predictions 
which  he  had  uttered  during  tlie  reign  of 
Josiah,  both  before  and  after  the  great 
reformation  effected  by  that  good  king 
(2  Kings  zxiii.). 

Vers.  2,  3. — §  2.  The  prelude,  announcing 
the  judgment  upon  the  whole  world. 

Ver.  2. — I  will  utterly  consume ;  literally, 
taking  away  I  leill  make  an  end.  Jeremiah 
(viu.  13)  uses  the  same  expression.  The 
prophet  begins  abruptly  with  this  announce- 
ment of  universal  judgment  before  he 
warns  Judah  in  particular  of  the  punish- 
ment that  awaits  her,  because  his  position 
is  that  the  way  to  salvation  is  through 
chastisement.  Vulgate,  congregana  congre- 
gabo,  where  the  verb  must  be  used  in 
the  sense  of  "gathering  for  destruction." 
All  things.  More  expressly  deflned  in  the 
following  verse.  This  awful  warning  recalls 
the  judgment  of  the  Flood  and  the  pre- 

EEPHANIAH. 


liminary  monition  (Gen.  vl.  7).  From  ofl 
the  land ;  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  not 
the  land  of  Judah  alone.  Saith  the  Lord ; 
it  the  laying  of  Jehovah.  The  prophet  in 
this  is  merely  tlie  vehicle  of  the  Divine 
announcement. 

Ver.  8. — Man  and  beast,  etc.  This  is  not 
mere  hyperbole  to  express  the  utter  wasting 
and  destruction  that  were  impending,  but 
points  to  the  mysterious  connection  between 
man  and  the  lower  creation,  how  in  agree- 
ment with  the  primal  curse  even  material 
nature  suffers  for  man's  sin  (Gen.  iii.  17; 
Bom.  viii.  22).  If  we  expect  a  new  heavea 
and  a  new  earth,  we  know  that  God  will 
show  his  wrath  against  the  old  creation 
defiled  with  sin  (2  Pet.  iii.  10 ;  comp.  Jer. 
iv.  25 ;  ix.  9,  etc. ;  Hus.  iv.  3).  And  the 
Btumbling-blocks  with  the  wicked.  Kot 
the  sinners  only  shall  be  swept  away  by 
this  judgment,  but  also  all  offences,  all 
causes  of  stumbling,  whether  idols  or  other 
incentives  to  departure  from  truth  and 
right.  Septnagint,  koI  iurSev/iaovcnv  oi 
ia-ePiJs,  "  and  the  ungodly  shal^  be  weak ;  " 
Vulgate,  et  ruina  impiorum  erunt.  These 
versions  seem  to  have  missed  the  point.  I 
will  cat  off  man.  It  is  on  man's  account 
that  this  judgment  is  sent — a  truth  which 
the  prophet  enforces  by  reiteration. 

Vers.  4— 6.— §  3.  The  judgment  wiH  fall 
especially  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem  for 
their  idolatry. 

Ver.  4. — I  wiU  also  stretch  out  mine 
hand.  This  expression  is  used  when  God 
is  about  to  do  great  things  or  inflict  notable 
punishment  (see  Exod.  iii.  20;  xv.  12; 
Deut.  iv.  34;  Isa.  v.  25;  Jer.  li.  25,  etc.). 
Judah.  In  so  far  as  Judah  was  rebellious 
and  wicked,  it  should  incur  the  judicial 
punishment.  Judgment  was  to  begin  at 
the  house  of  God  (1  Pet.  iv.  17),  the  sin  of 
the  chosen  people  being  more  heinous  than 


TIJB  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH. 


[CH.  1. 1—18. 


that  of  heathens.  Hence  it  is  atlded,  upon 
all  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  because, 
having  in  tlieir  very  midst  the  temple  of 
God,  witi  I  its  services  and  priests,  they  ought 
especially  to  have  abhorred  idolatry  and 
maiutaiued  the  true  faith.  The  remnant  of 
Baal;  i.e.  tlie  last  vestige.  One  cannot 
argue  from  this  expression  that  the  reform 
was  already  curried  so  far  that  Baal-worship 
had  slmost  disappeared.  The  next  verse 
showi  that  idolatry  still  flourished ;  but 
the  term  implies  merely  that  God  would 
exterminate  it  so  entirely  that  no  trace  of 
it  should  ri'inain.  The  LXX.  lias,  "the 
names  of  Baal,"  t&  ov6fiaTa.  ttis  BtioA  (Hos. 
ii.  17).  (For  Josiah's  reform  of  these 
iniquities,  see  2  Kings  ^%m.  4,  etc.)  The 
name  of  the  Chemarims  {Cliemarim).  The 
word  means  "  black-robed,"  and  is  applied 
to  the  idolatrous  priests  whom  the  kings 
had  appointed  to  conduct  worship  in  high 
places  (2  Kings  xxiii.  5 ;  Hos.  z.  5). 
"  The  name,"  says  Dr.  Pusey,  "  is  probably 
the  Syriao  name  of  'priest,'  used  in  Holy 
Scripture  of  idolatrous  priests,  because  the 
Syrians  were  idolaters."  Not  only  shall 
the  persons  of  these  priests  be  cut  off,  but 
their  very  name  and  memory  shall  vanish 
(Zecli.  xiii.  2).  With  the  priests  (kuhanim). 
Together  with  the  legitimate  priests  who 
had  corrupted  the  worship  of  Jehovah  (oh. 
iii.  4;  Jer.  ii.  8;  Bzek.  viii.  11). 

Ver.  5. — That  worship  the  host  of  heaven 
upon  the  house-tops.  In  this  verse  two 
classes  of  false  worshippers  are  mentioned, 
viz.  star-worshippers,  and  waverers.  The 
worship  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  was  a 
very  ancient  form  of  error,  the  heavenly 
bodies  being  regarded  as  the  representatives 
of  the  powers  of  nature  and  the  originators 
of  events  on  earth  (see  Deut.  iv.  19 ;  xvii.  3; 
Job  xxxi.  26,  27:  2  Kings  xvii.  16).  It 
was  especially  prevalent  in  the  time  of 
Manasseh  (J  Kings  xxi.  8).  On  the  flat 
roofs  of  the  houses,  which  were  used  as 
places  of  meditation,  recreation,  or  confer- 
ence (comp.  Josh,  ii  6 ;  1  Sam.  ix.  25 ; 
2  Sam.  xi.  2 ;  Acts  x.  9),  they  erected  altars 
for  family  worship  of  the  heavenly  bodies. 
Here  they  both  burned  incense  (Jer.  xix. 
13)  and  offered  animal  sacrifices  (2  Kings 
xxiii.  12).  "In  Syrian  cities,"  sayg  Dr. 
Thomson,  "  the  roofs  are  a  great  comfort. 
The  ordinary  houses  have  no  other  place 
where  the  inmates  can  either  see  the  sun, 
smell  the  air,  dry  their  clothes,  set  out  their 
flower-pots,  or  do  numberless  other  things 
essential  to  their  health  and  comfort. 
During  s  large  part  of  the  year  the  roof 
is  the  most  agreeable  place  about  the 
establishment,  especially  in  the  morning 
and  evening.  There  multitudes  sleep 
during  the  summer"  ('The  Land  and  the 
Book,'   p.  39).    Them    that    worship    and 


that,  etc. ;  rather,  the  worsMppers  who,  etc. 
These  were  people  who  endeavoured  to 
blend  the  worship  of  God  with  that  of 
Baal,  or  halted  between  two  opinions 
(1  Kings  xviii.  21).  Swear  by  the  Lord ; 
rather,  swear  to  (he  Lord;  i.e.  bind  them- 
selves by  oath  to  him,  and  at  the  same 
time  swear  by  Halcham ;  awear  by  their  king, 
Baal,  or  Moloch ;  call  upon  him  as  god. 
Septuagint,  Karotrov  jSaffiAcws  avruv,  "by 
their  king."  But  it  is,  peihaps,  best  to 
retain  the  name  untranslated ,  in  which  case 
it  would  be  the  appellation  of  the  god 
Moloch,  who  could  hardly  be  omitted  in 
enumerating  the  objects  of  idolatrous 
worship  (see  Jer.  xlix.  1,  3;  and  notes  on 
Amos  i.  15 ;  v.  26). 

Ver.  6. — Them  that  are  turned  back  from 
the  Lord.  This  is  a  third  class,  viz.  apos- 
tates and  open  despisers.  Those  who  follow 
him  no  more,  renegades  who  have  left  his 
service.  The  Vulgate  reproduces  the  original 
by,  qui  avertuntur  de  post  tergum  Domini. 
Those  that  have  not  sought  the  Lord.  These 
are  the  indifferent,  who  do  not  trouble  them- 
selves about  religion.  The  chief  classes 
mentioned  in  these  two  verses  are  three, 
viz.  the  open  idolaters,  the  syncretists  who 
mingled  the  worship  of  Baal  with  that  of 
Jehovah,  and  those  who  despised  religion 
altogether. 

Vers.  7 — 13. — 4.  The  judgment  is  described 
with  regard  to  those  whom  it  will  affect,  viz. 
the  princes,  the  traders,  the  irreligious  and 
profligate. 

Ver.  7. — This  judgment,  so  fearful,  is 
near  at  hand,  and  must  needs  occasion  the 
utmost  terror  and  dismay.  Hold  thy  peace 
at  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God ;  liferally, 
Hush,  from  the  face  of  the  Lord  Jehovah  I 
euAo/Seitrfle  (Septuagint);  silete  a  facie 
Domini  Dei  (Vulgate).  The  expression  is 
like  Hab.  ii.  20.  The  reason  of  this  silent 
awe  is  next  given.  For  the  day  of  the  Lord 
is  at  hand.  The  day  of  judgment  is  thus 
called  (Joel  i.  15 ;  Isa.  xiii.  6 ;  Amos  v.  18, 
20 ;  Obad.  15).  The  Lord  hath  prepared  a 
saoriflce.  The  words  are  from  Isa.  xxxiv.  6 
(comp.  Jer.  xlvi.  10 ;  Ezek.  xxxix.  17, 19). 
The  sacrifice  is  the  guilty  Jewish  nation. 
The  punishment  of  the  wicked  is  regarded 
as  a  satisfaction  offered  to  the  Divine  justice. 
He  hath  bid  his  guests ;  he  hath  consecrated 
his  called.  The  "called  ones"  are  the 
strange  nations  whom  God  summons  to 
execute  his  vengeance.  Septuagint,  riyiaKt 
Toiis  K\riToiis  oOtoC.  These  are  said  to  be 
"sanctified,"  as  if  engaged  in  a  holy  war, 
when  summoned  to  punish  those  who  had 
become  as  heathen.  So  those  who  are 
called  to  chastise  Babylon  are  termed  "  my 
sanctified  ones"  (Isa.  xiii.  3),  as  being  the 
instruments  appointed    and  set    apart    to 


OH.  I.  1—18.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH. 


carry  out  this  purpose  (comp.  Jer.  nil.  7 ; 
li.  27,  28 ;  Micah  iii.  5).  The  particular 
agents  intended  are  not  specified  by  the 
prophet,  whose  missioa  was  not  directed 
to  any  such  definition.  He  has  to  speak 
generally  of  the  judgment  to  come,  not 
of  those  whom  God  should  employ  to 
inflict  it.  We  kuow  from  other  sources 
that  the  Chaldeans  are  meant,  they  or  the 
Assyrians  being  always  announced  as  the 
executors  of  God's  vengeance  on  his  rebel- 
lious people.  The  notion,  adopted  by  Ewald, 
Hitzig,  and  others,  that  the  prophet  refers 
to  some  supposed  invasion  of  Scythians 
which  took  place  about  this  time,  would 
never  have  been  started  had  not  such 
authors  desired  to  eliminate  the  predictive 
element  from  prophetic  utterances.  The 
vague  account  of  Herod.,  i.  105  gives  no  sup- 
port to  the  assertion  that  the  Scythians  in- 
vaded Palestine  in  Josiah's  reign ;  nor  is 
there  a  trace  of  any  knowledge  of  such 
irruption  in  Zephaniah  or  Jeremiah  (see 
lutriiduction,  §  I.). 

Ver.  8. — The  prophet  names  the  three 
classes  of  people  who  shall  be  smitten  in 
this  judgment.  First,  tlie  princes.  In  the 
day  of  the  Lord's  sacrifice  (see  note  on 
ver.  7).  God  is  speaking;  so  the  name  of 
the  liord  is  employed  instead  of  the  pro- 
noun (comp.  Lam.  iii.  66).  I  will  punish; 
literally,  visit  upon  (ver.  12  ;  Amos  iii.  14). 
The  princes.  The  heads  of  tribes  and  families, 
nobles  and  magistrates.  The  king's  children 
(sons) ;  Septuagint,  -rhv  oIkov  roi  j8a<riA.c'ais, 
"  the  house  of  the  king."  The  royal  family, 
not  specially  the  sous  of  Josiah,  who,  if  they 
were  then  in  existence,  must  have  beea 
mere  children,  but  princes  of  the  royal 
house.  The  reference  may  be  particularly 
to  tlie  sons  of  the  king  reigning  when  the 
judgment  fell  (see  2  Kings  xxv.  7).  The 
king  himself  is  not  mentioned  as  subject  to 
the  judgment,  inasmuch  as  he  was  pious  and 
obeJient  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  27,  etc.).  In  the 
mention  of  these  "  children  "  Keil  finds  proof 
of  the  late  origin  of  the  prophecy.  Such 
as  are  clothed  with  strange  apparel,  Tliis 
clause  must  represent  the  sin  for  which  the 
princes  are  "  visiteil."  "  Strange  "  apparel 
means  "  foreign  "  apparel,  and  this  implied 
foreign  manners  and  habits.  The  Israelites 
were  reminded  by  their  very  dress  that  they 
were  a  peculiar  people,  consecrated  to  God's 
service  (Numb.  xv.  37,  etc. ;  Deut.  xxii.  12). 
These  nobles,  however,  assumed  the  dn-ss  of 
the  Egyptians  and  other  nations  with  which 
they  came  in  contact,  and,  despising  their 
own  national  customs,  copied  the  manners 
and  vices  of  foreigners  (comp.  Isa.  iii. 
16—24;  Ezek.  xx.  32;  1  Mace.  i.  U— 15), 

Ver.  9.  —  Those  that  leap  on  {over)  the 
threshold.  These  are  the  retainers  of  the 
princes,  etc.,  named  in  vei.         There  is  no 


allusion  to  the  circumstance  of  the  priests 
of  Dagon  abstaining  from  treading  on  the 
threshold  of  their  temple  in  consequence  of 
what  happened  to  the  idol  at  Ashdod(l  Sam. 
T.  5).  It  is  inconceivable  that  this  merely 
local  custom,  which  demonstrated  the  im- 
potence of  the  false  god,  should  have  been 
imported  into  Judah,  where,  indeed,  the 
worship  of  Dagon  seems  never  to  have  made 
any  way.  The  following  clause  explains 
the  meaning  which  the  Latiu  version  inti- 
mates, Omnem  qui  arroganter  ingreditur 
Buper  limen — all  those  who,  carrying  out 
their  masters'  wishes,  violently  invade  the 
houses  of  others  and  pillage  them  of  their 
contents.  The  expression,  "to  leap  over 
the  threshold,"  seems  to  have  been  a 
common  term  for  burglary  and  stealing 
with  violence.  Which  fill  their  masters' 
houses.  These  retainers  plunder  and  steal 
in  order  that  they  may  increase  their 
masters'  treasures.  The  king  (tliough  not 
Josiah)  may  be  meant,  the  plural  being  the 
plural  of  majesty,  or  the  idol-temples.  The 
LXX.,  followed  by  Jerome,  renders,  "  who 
fill  the  house  of  the  Lord  their  God,"  This 
is  plainly  erroneous,  as  there  ia  no  question 
here  about  the  temple  at  Jerusalem. 
Violence  and  deceit ;  i.e.  the  fruits  of,  what 
they  have  extorted  by,  violence  and  fraud 
(Jer.  V.  27). 

Ver.  10. — The  second  class  which  shall  be 
smitten,  viz.  the  traders  and  usurers,  the 
enemy  being  represented  as  breaking  in 
upon  the  localities  where  these  persons 
resided.  The  fish  gate.  This  is  generally 
supposed  to  have  been  in  the  north  wall  of 
the  city  towards  its  eastern  extremity,  and 
to  have  been  so  called  because  through  it 
were  brought  the  fish  from  the  Jordan  and 
the  Sea  of  Galilee,  and  there  was  a  fish- 
market  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood  (see 
Neh.  iii.  3;  xii.  39;  2  Chron.  xxxili.  14). 
It  was  probably  on  this  side  that  the  Chal- 
deans entered  Jerusalem,  as  Zedekiali  seems 
to  have  escaped  from  the  south  (Jer.  xxxix.  4), 
The  LXX.  has,  a^r^  ttvXtjs  awoK^vTovvTuv. 
which  Jerome  notes  as  a  mistake.  From 
the  second  didlrict,  the  lower  city  upon  the 
hill  Acra,  to  the  north  of  the  old  town,  Zion. 
Thi3  is  so  called,  according  to  one  rendering, 
in  2  Kings  xxii.  14  and  Neh.  xi.  9.  A  great 
crashing.  Not  merely  the  crash  of  falling 
buildings,  but  the  cry  of  men  when  a  city 
is  taken  and  the  inhabitants  are  put  to  the 
sword.  The  hills,  on  which  the  greater  part 
of  the  city  was  built.  Keil  thinks  tliat  the 
hills  surrounding  the  lower  city  are  meant, 
viz.  Bezetha,  Gareb,  etc.,  as  the  hearer  of 
the  cry  is  supposed  to  be  ou  Zion. 

Ver.  11. — Maktesh;  the  Mortar;  Sep- 
tuagint, T^v  KaTaKeKofifjLePTjy,  "her  that  is 
broken  down."  The  word  is  found  in  Judg. 
XV.  19  of  a  hollow  place  in  a  rock,  and  it  is 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH. 


[oh.  I.  1—18, 


here  used  in  the  sense  of  "valley,"  and 
probably  refers  to  the  Tyropoeum,  or  part 
of  it,  the  depression  that  ran  down  the  city, 
having  Acra  and  Zion  on  its  west  side,  and 
Moriah  and  Ophel  on  its  east,  and  extended 
south  as  far  au  the  pool  of  Siloam.  It  does 
not  seem  a  very  appropriate  appellation  for 
a  lengthy  valley  like  the  Tyropoeum,  nor  is 
there  any  trace  of  such  a  name  being  ap- 
plied to  it  elsewhere.  It  may  have  been  a 
name  affixed  to  a  certain  locality  where  a 
bazaar  was  situated  or  certain  special  in- 
dustries had  their  seat ;  or  it  may  have  been 
inventerl  by  Zephaniah  to  intimate  the  fate 
that  awaited  tlie  evil  merchants,  that  they 
should  be,  as  it  were,  brayed  in  a  mortar 
by  their  enemies.  The  merchant  people; 
literally,  people  of  Canaan.  So  Septuagint 
and  Vulgate  (comp.  Hos.  xii.  7 ;  Hist,  of 
Susannah  56;  Zech.  xiv.  21).  The  iniqui- 
tous traders  are  called  "  people  of  Canaan," 
because  they  acted  like  the  heathens 
around  them,  especially  the  Phoenicians, 
who  were  unscrupulous  and  dishonest  in 
their  transactions.  Are  ont  down;  are 
lilenced ;  Vulgate,  contiouit  (Isa.  vi.  5 ;  Hos. 
z.  7).  They  that  bear  (are  laden  with) 
lilyer.  Those  who  have  ama-sed  wealth  by 
trade  and  usury.  The  LXX..  has,  oi 
4inipii4i/ot  dpyvpttj),  "tliose  who  are  elated 
with  silver; "  St.  Jerome,  involuti  argento. 
Ver.  12. — The  third  class  which  shall  be 
■mitten,  viz.  the  profligate  and  riotous.  I 
will  searoh  Jerusalem  with  candles  (lighW). 
No  evil-doer  shall  escape.  The  enemy 
whom  God  summons  to  execute  his  wrath 
shall  leave  no  comer  unsearched  where  the 
debauchees  hide  themselves  (comp.  Luke 
XV.  8).  Jerome  and  commentators  after 
him  refer  to  Josephus's  account  of  the  last 
siege  of  Jerusalem  for  a  parallel  to  these 
predicted  proceedings  of  the  Chaldeans. 
Here  we  read  how  princes  and  priests  and 
chieftains  were  dragged  from  sewers,  and 
pits,  and  caves,  and  tombs,  where  they  had 
hidden  themselves  in  fear  of  death,  and  were 
mercilessly  slain  wherever  they  were  found 
(Josephus,  '  Bell.  Jud.,'  vi.  9).  The  men 
that  are  settled  on  their  lees;  i.e.  confirmed, 
hardened,  and  inveterate  in  their  evil  habits. 
The  metaphor  is  derived  from  old  wine  not 
racked  off,  which  retains  all  its  flavour  and 
odour,  and  becomes  thick  and  viscid  (see 
Isa.  XXV.  6;  Jer.  xlviii.  11).  The  LXX. 
paraphrases,  Toiij  Kanuppovovyras  eVl  t4 
tpvKiy/xaTa  abruv,  which  Jerome  renders, 
qui  contemnunt  euetodiat  $uai.  That  say  in 
their  heart.  They  do  not  openly  scoff  at 
religion,  but  think  within  themselves  these 
inflilel  thoughts.  The  Lord  will  not  do 
good,  eto.  Just  what  God  says  of  idols  (Isa. 
xli.  23).  These  "  fools  "  (Ps.  xiv.  1)  deny 
God's  moral  government  of  the  world ;  they 
will  not  see  the  working  of  Divine  providence 


in  all  that  happens,  but,  secure  and  careless 
in  their  worldly  prosperity,  they  assign  all 
events  to  chance  or  natural  law,  placing 
Jehovah  In  the  same  category  as  the  idols 
worshipped  by  heathens  (comp.  Job  ixii. 
12,  etc. ;  P».  X.  4,  eto. ;  xciv.  7). 

Ver.  13.  —  Their  goods;  literally,  their 
gtrength ;  their  wealth  in  which  they  trusted 
shall  become  the  prey  of  the  enemy,  and 
thus  they  shall  learn  that  God  mleth  in 
the  affairs  of  men.  They  shall  also  build 
houses,  eto.  They  shall  prove  in  their 
own  case  the  reality  of  the  punishment 
threatened  in  the  Law  (Lev.  xxvi.  32,  eto. ; 
Deut.  xxviii.  30,  39 ;  comp.  Amos  v.  11 ; 
Micah  vi.  15). 

Vers.  14 — 18. — §  5.  To  arouse  the  self- 
confident  sinners,  the  prophet  here  enlarges 
upon  the  near  approach  and  terrible  nature 
of  this  coming  judgment. 

Ver.  14. — Having  signified  the  victims  of 
the  judgment,  Zephaniah  recurs  to  what  he 
had  said  in  ver.  7,  and  enforces  upon  his 
hearers  its  near  approach.  The  great  day  of 
the  Lord  (Joel  U.  1, 11).  Even  the  voice 
of  the  day  of  the  Lord.  The  day  is  so  close 
at  hand,  that  the  sQund  of  its  coming  can  be 
heard.  Some  translate,  "  Hark  I  the  day  of 
Jehovah."  The  mighty  man  shaU  cry  (crieth) 
there  bitterly.  There,  on  the  battle-field, 
the  hero  is  panic-stricken,  aud  cries  out  for 
fear.  The  Greek  and  Latin  Versions  con- 
nect "bitter"  with  the  former  clause. 
Thus  the  Vulgate,  Vox  dies  Domini  amara; 
Septuagint,  ^avi)  ri/iepas  Kvplov  irixpi  koI 
a-KKiipa  TEToKToi,  "  The  voice  of  the  day  of 
the  Lord  is  made  bitter  and  harsh." 

Ver.  15. — That  day  is  a  day  of  wrath ; 
Vulgate,  Dies  irss,  dies  Ula,  words  which 
form  the  commenoementof  the  famous  hymn. 
The  better  to  describe  the  terrible  nature  of 
the  judgment,  the  prophet  crowds  together 
all  available  expressions  of  terror  and 
calamity.  First,  it  is  a  day  when  God'i 
anger  shall  blaze  forth  (Isa.  ix.  18).  Of 
trouble  and  distress.  In  its  effects  upon 
sinners  (Job  xv.  24).  Of  wasteness  and 
desolation.  As  if  tilings  returned  to  tlie 
primeval  chaos  (Gen.  i.  2 ;  comp.  Job  xxx. 
3;  xxxviii.  27,  where  there  is  a  similar 
combination;  see  note  on  Nah.  ii.  10).  Of 
darkness  and  gloominess  (Joel  ii.  2 ;  Amos 
V.  18,  20).  Of  clouds  and  thick  darkness 
(Deut.  iv.  11 ;  comp.  Hab.  iii.  11). 

Ver.  16. — ^A  day  of  the  trumpet  and  alarm. 
"  Alarm "  means  "  the  sound  of  alarm." 
Among  the  Jews  trumpets  were  used  to 
announce  the  festivals  (Numb.  xxix.  1),  and 
to  give  the  signal  for  battle  or  of  the  ap- 
proach of  an  enemy  (Jer.  iv.  5,  19;  Ezek. 
xxxiii.  4).  Hero  it  is  the  signal  of  destruo- 
tion  (Amos  ii.  2).  The  fenced  cities.  The 
strongest  fortresses  shall  feel  the  irresistibla 


<M.  I.  1—18.] 


THE   BOOK  OF  ZBPHANIAH, 


attack  (Micah  v.  11).  The  high  towers. 
These  are  the  turrets  built  at  the  angles  of 
the  walls  for  the  better  defence  of  the  city, 
and  to  annoy  the  besiegers  (oh.  iii.  6). 
LXX.,  iwl  riy  yavlas  rets  inl/ri\d5,  "upon 
■tlie  lofty  angles;"  Vulgate,  luper  anguloa 
excelsoa.  Others  take  the  words  to  mean 
^  the  battlements "  on  the  walls.  Hendeisou 
quotes  Tacitus's  description  of  the  later  walls 
of  Jerusalem, "  Duos  ooUes  immensum  editos 
claudebant  muri  per  artem  obliqui  aut  in- 
4roi'Sus  sinuati,  ut  latera  oppugnantium  ad 
ictus  patesoerent "  ('  Hist.,'  v.  11) 

Ver.  17. — In  this  storming  of  cities  and 
universal  ruin,  sinners  shall  perish  witliout 
hope.  I  will  bring  distress  upon  men.  I 
will  drive  them  into  the  utmost  straits 
(comp.  Dent.  xxTiii.  52,  5.8).  They  shall 
walk  like  blind  men.  Not  knowing  where 
they  go  in  their  terror  and  confusion,  seeking 
a  way  of  escape  and  finding  none  (see  Deut. 
xxviil.  29,  op  which  this  passage  is  founded ; 
comp.  Job  V.  11;  Isa.  lix.  10).  Because 
they  have  sinned,  as  shown  in  vers,  i — 12. 
Their  blood  shall  be  poured  out  as  dust. 
The  point  of  comparison  is  rather  in  the 


worthlessness  than  in  the  abundance  of 
dust.  Bloodshed  is  as  little  regmUed  as 
dust  that  is  trodden  under  foot  (comp.  2 
Kings  xiii.  7).  The  coraporisou  with  water 
is  found  elsewhere  (of.  Ps.  Ixxix.  3).  Their 
flesh  as  the  dung.  The  verb  from  the  pre- 
ceding clause  may  be  taken  by  zeugma  with 
this  clause;  then  the  meaning  is  that  their 
dead  bodies  are  left  unburied  to  rnt  on  the 
ground  (Jer.  ix.  22).  Or  the  substantive 
verb  may  be  supplied  (comp.  Job  xx.  7). 

Ver.  18. — Keither  their  silver,  etc.  They 
cannot  bribe  this  enemy;  their  wealth 
cannot  win  for  them  immunity  (Isa.  xiii.  17 ; 
Ezek.  vii.  19).  The  fire  of  his  jealousy 
(oh.  iii.  8).  The  whole  earth  (for,  as  we 
have  seen  in  ch.  i.  2, 3,  the  judgment  is  uni- 
versal) shall  be  punished  in  the  wrath  of 
the  Lord,  who  will  not  have  the  honour 
which  is  due  to  him  given  to  any  other. 
He  shall  make  even  a  speedy  riddance; 
more  closely,  he  ahaU  make  an  end,  yea, 
a  speedy  end  (comp.  Nah.  i.  8;  Isa.  x. 
23,  which  our  text  imitates).  (For  the 
sudden  and  unexpected  arrival  of  the  day 
of  the  Lord,  see  Luke  xvii.  26,  eto.) 


HOMIEBTICS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — T%e  prophet  and  his  times.  I.  His  pediqbeb.  (Ver.  1.)  This  is  the 
«olitary  instance  in  which  the  lineage  of  a  prophet  is  traced  back  in  Scripture  four 
generations.  The  reason  would  seem  to  be  in  order  to  indicate  his  relationship  to 
Hezekiah,  the  pious  King  of  Judah.  Note :  1.  The  honour  connected  with  a  pious 
ancestry.     2.  The  perpetuity  of  the  influence  of  a  good  life. 

n.  His  authokity.  This  was  not  derived  from  his  royal  descent,  but  from  his 
being  under  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  unto 
Zephaniah  "  (ver.  1).  The  words  of  those  high  in  rank  are  often  invested  with  a  value 
they  do  not  intrinsically  possess,  but  the  utterances  of  this  prince  of  Judah  claim  our 
regard  as  the  words  of  one  taught  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 

III.  Hlfl  AGE.  He  prophesied  "in  the  days  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Amon,  King  of 
Judah  "  (ver.  1).  Unhappily,  the  reforms  instituted  by  the  good  Hezekiah  had  not 
been  sustained  during  the  succeeding  reigns,  so  that  the  nation,  both  politically  and 
spiritually,  had  relapsed  into  a  thoroughly  corrupt  state  by  the  time  that  the  boy-king 
Josiah  came  to  the  throne.  Consecrated  from  early  life  to  the  service  of  the  true  God, 
the  youthful  monarch  devoted  the  energies  of  his  early  manhood  to  the  rooting  out  of 
idolatry  from  his  land,  and  to  the  restoration  and  re-establishment  of  the  temple  and  its 
services.  Zephaniah,  doubtless,  prophesied  shortly  before  this  work  of  reformation 
commenced,  and  the  influence  of  his  faithful  ministry  would  be  helpful  to  the  royal 
reformer  in  carrying  out  his  noble  work. 

IV.  The  ohabacteb  of  the  message  with  which  he  was  divinelt  entbitsted. 
This  was :  1.  Very  dark.  He  was,  indeed,  a  messenger  of  judgment ;  the  solemn  respon- 
sibility devolved  upon  him  of  announcing  "  the  terrors  of  the  Lord"  (vers.  2,  3).  The 
anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Judah,  and  though  to  be  delayed  until  Josiah 
should  be  gathered  to  his  rest,  it  must  at  length  fall  (2  Kings  xxii.  3 — 20;  xxiiii. 
21 — 27 ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  8 — 33 ;  xxxv.  1 — 19).  2.  Very  comprehensive.  His  predic- 
tions of  judgment  were  not  limited  to  Judah,  but  were  directed  also  against  heathen 
nations — Philistia,  Moab  and  Ammon,  Ethiopia,  and  Assyria  (ch.  ii.).  3.  Yet  withal  not 
lacking  encouragement ;  for  whilst  he  told  of  impending  judgment,  he  called  to  repent- 
ance, unfolded  the  mercy  of  the  Most  High,  and  indicated  how  that  even  the  darkest 
events  impending  would  be  overruled  for  the  well-being  of  the  race. 


6  THE  BOOK  OP  ZBPHANIAH.  [oh.  1. 1—18. 

Vers.  4,  5. — A  corrupt  priesthood  and  its  pernicious  influence. '  The  work  of  refor- 
mation carried  on  by  Hezekiah  was  unquestionably  great,  yet  it  cannot  be  correctly 
described  as  having  been  complete.  The  weeds  of  idolatry  were  extensively  destroyed 
by  him,  yet  many  roots  remained,  and,  springing  up,  bore  a  fresh  harvest  of  evil  in  the 
succeeding  reigns,  so  that  the  godly  Josiah  found  himself  confronted  with  a  powerful 
remnant  of  idolatry.  In  dealing  with  this  he  must  have  been  materially  assisted  by 
the  bold  denunciations  of  Zephaniah;  and  these  were  fittingly  directed  first  of  all 
against  the  corrupt  priesthood  (ver.  4).    We  have  here — 

I.  As  EXALTED  OFFICE.  That  of  the  priest.  The  Jewish  priesthood  was  of  Divine 
appointment,  chosen  and  set  apart  by  God  to  the  most  sacred  duties,  and  the  whoie 
being  typical  of  the  character  and  mission  of  the  great  High  Priest  who  was  in  the 
fulness  of  time  to  appear.  And  whilst  in  his  work  these  functions  received  their  con- 
summation, and  the  Aaronic  priesthood  passed  away,  yet  Christ  when  he  ascended  upon 
high  "gave  gifts  unto  men,"  etc.  (Eph.  iv.  11 — 13).  The  work  of  the  ministry  is 
scriptural,  noble,  honourable.  Those  divinely  called  to  it  have  to  teach  the  truth  of 
God,  to  seek  to  win  men  to  righteousness  and  heaven,  to  lead  worshippers  to  the 
very  throne  of  the  Eternal,  to  direct  the  activities  of  the  Church,  and  to  shepherd 
the  flock  of  Christ.  The  work  is  "  a  good  work  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  1),  and  faithfully  to  do 
it  is  to  secure  present  and  eternal  honour. 

II.  This  high  office  oobeupted.  Those  here  styled  "the  Chemarims"  were 
Jewish  priests,  some  of  whom  were  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  and  others  chosen  from  the 
lowest  of  the  people,  who  sold  themselves  to  the  faithless  kings  of  Judah,  and  at  their 
bidding  offered  polluted  rites  at  the  altar  of  God,  and  joined  with  the  heathen  priests  in 
serving  the  altars  of  Baal  (2  Kings  xxiii.  6;  Hos.  x.  5).  The  highest  and  holiest 
functions  may  still  be  perverted.  This  is  the  case  when  motives  other  than  those  of 
love  to  God  and  to  the  souls  of  men  impel  to  engaging  in  ministerial  service,  or  when 
in  rendering  such  service  any  compromise  is  made  with  error  and  sin. 

III.  The  PERNICIOUS  influence  bbsultinq  from  such  corbuption,  "  Like  priests^ 
like  people."  Hence,  immediately  following  the  allusion  to  the  corrupt  priesthood,, 
reference  is  made  to  the  people  as  worshipping  the  host  of  heaven  upon  the  house-tops 
(ver.  5).  Luther  says,  "The  chemarim  produced  an  erroneous  opinion  among  the 
people  that  they  were  of  all  others  the  most  assiduous  in  religion  and  Divine  worship,"^ 
and  if  so,  their  influence  over  the  people  would  be  proportionately  increased  through 
their  zeal,  and  no  wonder  that,  following  these  false  guides,  idolatry  and  irreligion  so 
widely  prevailed  in  the  land.  A  faithless  and  disloyal  ministry  in  any  age  must  prove 
a  blight  and  a  curse. 

IV.  The  Divine  judqmbnts  pbonounobd  against  these  faithless  ones  and  their 
adherents.  Their  followers  should  be  visited  with  retribution,  whilst  as  to  these  false 
leaders,  they  should  be  "cut  off,"  and  their  very  name  be  blotted  out.  Their  fate 
speaks  silently  and  solemnly  to  all  who  claim  to  be  ministers  of  God.  His  charge  to 
all  such  is,  "  Son  of  man,  I  have  made  thee  a  watchman,"  etc.  (Ezek.  ii.  17 — 21),  and 
this  is  his  promise  attached  to  fidelity,  "Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give 
thee  a  crown  of  life  "  (Eev.  ii.  10). 

Ver.  5. — Divided  service.  "  That  worship  and  that  swear  by  the  Lord,  and  that 
swear  by  Malcham."  It  is  not  two  distinct  classes  of  persons  that  are  here  referred  to 
but  one  and  the  same  class.  The  allusion  is  to  such  as  sought  to  be  identified  both 
with  the  service  of  God  and  the  service  of  Malcham.  It  is  an  example  of  divided 
service  that  is  here  presented  to  us,  an  illustration  of  men  attempting  that  which  the 
great  Teacher  in  a  later  age  declared  to  be  altogether  impracticable,  even  to  serve  two 
masters. 

I.  An  impossible  task  attempted,  and  resulting  in  failure  and  shame.  1.  Tht 
task.  Malcham,  or  Malk&m,  or  "king,"  was  a  term  used  fur  Baal,  and  who  is  "thus 
described  on  the  Phosiiioian  inscriptions.  The  times  being  corrupt,  and  idolatry  being 
popular  in  the  land,  there  were  those  who,  from  considerations  of  policy  and  interest 
doubtless,  attempted  to  combine  the  worship  of  Jehovah  and  that  of  Baal,  or  Malcham. 
The  same  spirit  prevails  still ;  men  desire  to  serve  both  God  and  mammon,  and  too 
much  resemble  those  who  were  "  willing  to  serve  God  so  that  they  did  not  offend  the 
devil."    2.  The  task  is  an  impossible  one ;  it  cannot  be  accomplished.    (1)  Soriptur* 


OH.  1. 1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  7 

proclaims  this  -to  be  an  impossibility  (Josh.  xxir.  19 — 25 ;  1  Sam.  vii.  3 ;  1  Kings 
xviiL  21 ;  Ezek.  xx.  39).  (2)  Proverbial  sayings  of  different  nations  recognize  this. 
^' Lay  not  two  saddles  on  one  horse;"  "  A  true  subject  serves  not  two  sovereigns;" 
"  Ye  cannot  go  east  and  west  at  the  same  time."  (3)  Men  do  not  attempt  this  in  the 
ordinary  affairs  of  life,  but  concentrate  their  energies  upon  one  purpose.  (4)  One  plain 
reason  accounts  for  the  impossibility,  viz.  the  service  of  God  and  that  of  Malcham,  or 
mammon,  or  worldliness,  are  so  thoroughly  opposite  in  their  nature  that  there  can  be 
no  union.  "  You  cannot  be  heavenly  and  worldly  too.  If  I  am  heavenly  I  sanctify 
the  world,  and  if  I  am  worldly  I  debase  the  heavenly.  You  are  therefore  one  of  two 
things,  and  tliere  is  no  mixture  in  your  cliavaoter."  3.  To  attempt  it  can  only  result 
in  defeat  and  disgrace.  They  who  sought  to  worship  God  and  Malcham  were  to  be 
"  cut  off.''  Their  conduct  met  with  the  Divine  displeasure,  and  was  followed  by  such 
manifestations  of  his  disapproval  as  filled  them  with  confusion  and  shame.  Other 
instances :  Meroz  (Judg.  v.  23) ;  the  young  ruler  (Matt.  xix.  22) ;  Peter  in  the  high 
priest's  hall  (Matt.  xxvi.  75). 

II.  A  MOEE  EXCELLENT  COURSE  OF  ACTION.  1.  Weigh  Well  the  respective  claims  of 
<}od  and  of  Malcham,  Christ  and  mammon.  This  is  the  way  in  which  men  wisely  act 
in  reference  to  temporal  things,  and  they  should  also  act  thus  in  reference  to  religion. 

2.  Yield  yourself  laithfully,  wholly,  and  irrevocably  to  the  master  whose  claim  you  feel 
to  be  the  strongest.  "  If  the  Lord  be  God,  follow  him ;  but  if  Baal,  then  follow  him." 
Multitudes,  as  they  have  thus  reflected  upon  the  claims  of  Christ,  have  felt  these  to  be 
paramount;  as  they  have  thought  of  his  bright  and  beautiful  teaching,  his  wonderful, 
self-sacrificing  human  life,  and  as,  gathering  at  Calvary,  they  have  contemplated  his 
humiliation  unto  death,  they  have  been  constrained  to  acknowledge  bis  undoubted 
right  to  their  loving  confidence  and  entire  service,  and,  yielding  themselves  up  to  him 
without  reservation,  have  found  in  so  doing  happiness  and  peace. 

Ver.  6. — Hie  sin  of  apostasy.  "And  them  that  are  turned  back  from  the  Lord." 
Some  biblical  expositors  regard  the  whole  of  this  verse  as  referring  to  one  class,  even 
to  such  as  are  utterly  indifferent  and  unconcerned  in  reference  to  God's  claims ;  whilst 
other  commentators  regard  this  class  as  referred  to  in  the  latter  part  of  the  verse,  and 
view  the  expression,  "  And  them  that  are  turned  back  from  the  Lord  "  as  an  allusion 
to  those  who,  having  professed  loyalty  to  God  and  his  truth,  had  allowed  themselves 
to  be  drawn  away  and  to  walk  no  more  with  him.  Concerning  this  sin  of  apostasy, 
note — 

I.  The  causes  which  have  resulted  in  men  falling  into  this  sin.  1.  Temporal 
success.  Favourable  progress  in  the  affairs  of  this  life  has  proved  the  ruin  of  many 
spiritually.  They  have  set  their  hearts  upon  their  treasures,  and  have  bowed  down 
before  the  golden  image  (Deut.  xxxii.  15).  2.  Temporal  adversity.  "  The  cares  of 
life,"  as  well  as  "  the  deceitfulness  of  riches,"  will  often  choke  the  Word.  The  very 
troubles  which  should  unite  men  to  God  by  a  closer  bond  (for  if  all  else  fail,  he  abides) 
have  been  permitted  to  drive  them  away  from  the  Source  of  consolation  and  help. 

3.  Mental  difflci/lties.  Forgetful  that  Truth  is  boundless  and  immeasurable,  and  that 
after  the  most  earnest  research  there  must  remain  profoTmd  depths  yet  to  be  explored, 
the  inquirer  has  wanted  to  understand  fully  now,  and,  failing  in  this,  has,  through 
pride  of  intellect,  brought  himself  into  a  state  of  mental  unsettledness,  so  that  even 
the  plainly  declared  truths  of  revelation  have  lost  their  charm  to  him,  and  he  has  taken 
shelter  in  unbelief.  4.  Worldliness ;  by  which  term  is  meant  love  of  the  untrue  and 
unsubstantial;  regard  only  fur  the  outward,  the  transient,  the  unreal;  the  world 
becoming  invested  with  ruling  power  over  the  man,  instead  of  the  man  reigning  over 
it.     So  Paul  wrote  of  Demas,  that  he  had  yielded  here  (2  Tim.  iv.  10), 

II.  The  intense  sadness  associated  with  this  course  of  action.  1.  It  involves 
the  violation  of  the  most  solemn  and  sacred  vows.  2.  It  is  attended  by  separation 
from  the  most  holy  and  helpful  associations.  3.  It  hinders  the  progress  of  the  cause 
of  God.    4.  It  grieves  and  dishonours  the  Lord. 

III.  The  spirit  which  should  be  cherished  by  the  faithful  in  kbfebenob  to 
THOSE  THAT  ABE  TURNED  BACK  FROM  THE  LoRD.  1.  There  must  be  no  palliation  of 
their  sin.  Zephaniah  uttered  burning  words  of  condemnation  with  reference  to  these 
transgressors,  and  we  shall  not  really  help  such  by  making  light  of  their  sin.    2.  Yet 


8  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  i.  1— 1&, 

we  should  earnestly  seek  their  recovery.  We  should  endeavour  by  kindness  and 
gentleness  to  restore  these  erring  ones.  Although  they  may  be  darkly  stained  by  sin, 
they  are  still  our  brethren.  Whilst  they  have  stumbled  and  fallen  in  the  path,  it  i» 
in  very  weakness  that  we  ourselves  have  troddea  it.  The  tender,  loving  word  may 
perchance  win  them  back  to  holiness  and  to  God.  In  voyaging,  some  vessels  are 
completely  lost, — ^they  go  down  through  the  storm,  and  utterly  perish ;  others  arrive 
at  the  port,  but  with  masts  broken  and  sails  torn  through  battling  with  wind  and 
wave ;  whilst  others  outride  every  storm,  and  with  full  sail  enter  the  destined  haven. 
Thus  was  it,  one  has  pointed  oat,  with  the  three  associates  of  St.  Paul  who  are  specially 
referred  to  in  2  Tim.  iv. ;  and  thus  is  it  in  the  spiritual  life.  Demas,  wrecked ;  Mark, 
overpowered  by  adverse  gales  and  seemingly  crushed,  yet  rising  again  and  reaching  the 
harbour  at  length  in  safety ;  but  Luke,  "  the  beloved  physician,"  holding  peacefully  and 
tranquilly  on  his  course  all  through,  and  having  ministered  to  him  an  abundant 
entrance  to  the  heavenly  kingdom  (see  paper  by  Dr.  Maclaren,  Oood  Wordt,  1877, 
p.  595).  May  our  course  be  as  the  last-named  of  these  disciples,  unmarked  either  by 
failure  or  even  by  temporary  estrangement,  but  being  steadfast  and  immovable !  May 
no  place  be  found  by  us  amongst  those  "that  have  turned  themselves  back  from 
following  after  the  Lord"!  May  we,  escaping  the  perils  of  the  sea  of  life — all  its  Bhoal» 
and  quicksands — ^reach  at  last  the  haven  of  eternal  rest  and  felicity  I 

Ver.  6. — The  sin  of  indifference.  "And  those  that  have  not  sought  the  Lord,  nor 
inquired  for  him."  Yarious  classes  of  transgressors  are  alluded  to  in  these  verses 
(vers.  4 — 6).  The  corrupt  priests  and  their  followers,  those  dividing  their  allegiance 
between  God  and  Baal,  the  backsliders  in  heart,  are  all  spoken  of  in  brief  and  forcible 
sentences.  And  now,  in  the  expression  before  us,  allusion  is  made  to  the  unconcerned 
and  indifferent,  and  who  are  described  as  "  those  that  have  not  sought  the  Lord,  nor 
inquired  for  him."  This  class  is,  ia  some  respects,  the  most  hopeless  of  all.  An 
idolater  is  interested  in  worship,  and  may  become  convinced  of  his  folly  in  rendering 
this  to  "  the  work  of  his  own  hands."  The  divided  heart  is  partially  directed  to  God, 
and  may  be  won  over  to  complete  loyalty.  The  backslider  may  remember  the  joys  he 
haR  forfeited,  and,  by  the  sacred  memories  of  the  past,  which  even  his  estrangement 
ca'inot  obliterate,  may  be  constrained  to  return  unto  the  Lord.  But  in  proportiun  as  a 
man  is  callous  and  indifferent  to  the  claims  of  God,  he  places  himself  outside  the  circle 
within  which  holy  and  gracious  influences  operate.  Less  fear  need  be  cherished  of  the 
pernicious  influence  of  the  scepticism  of  the  age  than  of  the  fatality  attendant  upon  the 
spirit  of  indiflferentism  to  God  and  his  claims  which  so  widely  prevails.     Observe — 

L  The  pbbvalbnob  op  this  spieit  mat  bb  accounted  tor.  1.  The  reason  of  it  i» 
to  be  found  in  the  fact  of  possession.  Nothing  is  more  calculated  to  lead  a  man  to  be 
indifferent  in  reference  to  higher  claims  than  to  find  property  increasing  in  his  hands. 
The  consciousness  of  independence,  the  sense  of  self-sufficiency,  and  the  feeling  of 
comfort,  all  tend  to  lead  him  to  think  and  act  [as  though  he  had  "  need  of  nothing." 
"  A  certain  man  made  a  great  supper,  and  bade  many."  One  thus  invited  said,  "  I 
have  bought  a  piece  of  ground,  and  I  must  needs  go  and  see  it :  I  pray  thee  have  me 
excused"  (Luke  xiv.  16—18).  See  well  to  it,  ye  who  have  secured  the  possessions  of 
earth,  that  ye  do  not,  through  the  influence  of  these  material  things,  come  short  of 
participation  in  the  true  festal  joys.  2.  Another  reason  lies  in  the  fact  o{ familiarity. 
Is  it  not  so  that  our  very  familiarity  with  anything  is  likely  to  lead  us  in  a  sense  to  be 
somewhat  indifferent  to  it?  A  walk  may  appear  long,  and  may  be  long;  but  take  it 
frequently,  and  the  distance  will  appear  to  lessen,  and  in  time  it  will  cease  to  affect 
you.  View  constantly  the  scenery  of  some  charming  dale,  and  however  much  of  quiet 
enjoyment  you  will  get  out  of  it  perpetually  if  you  are  a  lover  of  natural  beauty,  .\  et 
you  will  not  be  so  enthusiastic  as  a  stranger  who  gazes  upon  it  for  the  first  time.  And 
much  of  the  prevailing  indifference  concerning  God  and  his  truth  may  be  traced  to  this 
cause.  When  King  Clovis  heard  for  the  first  time  the  story  of  Calvary,  it  is  said  he 
grew  excited,  and  cried  out,  "  I  wish  I'd  been  there  with  my  Franks ;  I'd  soon  have 
settled  those  Jews  1 "  The  novelty  charmed  the  rude  king ;  but  men  all  around  us 
are  so  familiar  with  the  story  that  they  are  not  moved  thus;  and  multitudes  are  so 
unconcerned  respecting  these  great  themes  as  that  they  may  be  described  as  "  those 
who  have  not  sought  the  Lord,  nor  inquired  for  him."     3.  This  indifference  may  alsa 


OH.  I.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZBPHANLAH.  • 

he  traced  to  custom.  The  power  of  habit  is  very  strong.  Men  became  confinned  in 
their  ways  (Jer.  xiii.  23). 

II.  They  who  cherish  this  spirit  b(jn  the  bisk  op  ingubring  infinite  loss. 
Lobs  may  be  incurred  unintentionally  and  through  indifference  and  nesleot.  You 
neglect  to  insure  your  property,  and  perchance  a  fire  breaks  out  and  destroys  it,  and 
you  find  yourself  thrown  back  for  years  to  come;  or  you  neglect  your  health  and  fail 
to  heed  the  first  symptoms  of  disease,  and  it  may  end  in  the  disease  gaining  too  firm  a 
hold  for  it  ever  to  be  eradicated  ;  and  so  spiritual  and  eternal  honour  may  be  forfeited, 
not  wilfully,  but  through  indifference  and  unconcern. 

m.    HbNOB   the   supreme   value   of   the   PEESENT   time   with    its  0PP0ETUNITIE8. 

Our  great  dramatist  has  it — 

"  There  is  a  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men, 
Which,  taken  at  the  flood,  leads  on  to  fortune 
Omitted,  all  the  voyage  of  their  life 
Ib  bound  in  shallows  and  in  miseries." 

And  it  is  bo  that  there  is  a  tide  in  the  spiritual  affairs  of  men.  Human  feelings,  senti- 
ments, desires,  ebb  and  flotv  like  the  sea;  and  there  are  seasons  in  which  this  tide  sets 
towards  piety ;  and  such  a  season,  if  only  improved,  "  is  the  accepted  time,"  "  the  day 
of  salvation."  Use  it,  and  it  shall  not  be  said  that  you  belong  to  those  "  that  have  not 
sought  the  Lord,"  etc.  (ver.  6). 

Vers.  7 — 18. — "  77ie  day  of  the  Lord."  The  reader  of  this  brief  book  of  Scripture, 
forming  his  conclusions  from  this  opening  chapter  exclusively,  is  likely  to  get  a  very 
false  impression  respecting  the  spirit  and  views  of  the  writer.  The  chapter  deals 
entirely  with  sin  and  its  punishment,  and,  taken  alone  and  apart,  conveys  undoubtedly 
a  very  strong  conviction  as  to  the  terribleness  and  severity  of  God.  The  seer  seems  to 
linger  in  thought  upon  the  coming  judgments,  and  to  reiterate  these  in  every  possible 
form,  and  even  to  exult  in  the  retributions  which  should  at  length  fall  upon  the  sinful 
nation.  His  "  song  "  appears  to  be  altogether  "  of  judgment."  That  we  may  rightly 
estimate,  however,  his  spirit  and  teaching,  we  should  remember :  1.  That  the  great  and 
solemn  fact  of  Divine  retribution  for  sin  ought  not  to  be  ignored.  Whatever  theory 
may  be  held  respecting  the  doom  and  destiny  of  the  impenitent,  the  fact  remains 
stamped  on  every  page  of  the  volume  of  revelation,  in  Old  and  New  Testament  alike, 
that  sin  shall  result  in  chastisement,  that  man  shall  reap  as  he  sows.  The  prophet  in 
this  respect  is  in.perfect  agreement  with  all  the  Bible  writers.  2.  That  the  prevailing 
corruption  of  his  times  necessitated  a  strong  insistance,  on  the  part  of  the  prophets, 
upon  the  approaching  judgments  on  account  of  national  transgression ;  and  this  also 
was  in  harmony  with  the  character  of  the  dispensation.  3.  That  whilst  sternly 
declaring  the  Divine  punishment  to  fall  upon  the  nation  because  of  its  sinfulness, 
Zephaniah  also,  as  he  proceeded,  dwelt  very  frequently  upon  the  Divine  intention  to 
purify  through  chastisement,  and  pointed  out  the  gracious  purpose  of  the  Most  High 
by  means  of  coming  tribulations  to  sanctify  and  save.  His  "  song  "  was  "  of  mercy  " 
as  well  as  "  of  judgment."  Here,  however  (vers.  7 — 18),  he  dwells  specially  upon  the 
Divine  judgments,  and  points  to  "  the  great  and  notable  day  of  the  Lord,"  "  the  day  of 
vengeance  of  our  God."    These  judgments  he  sets  forth — 

I.  In  bteikinq  symbol.  (Ver.  7.)  Sacrifice  was  well  understood  in  Jerusalem. 
Offerings  were  offered  on  Jewish  altars  to  the  true  God,  and,  when  the  people  had 
become  corrupt,  also  to  Baal.  Jehovah  now  declared  by  his  holy  prophet  that  the 
people,  having  proved  faithless,  should  themselves  be  sacrificed ;  they  should  be  the 
victims,  and  the  heathen  who  should  effect  their  overthrow  would,  in  so  doing,  be 
consecrated  to  his  service.  This  symbol  is  used  also  in  the  same  sense  by  other  prophets 
(Isa.  xxxiv.  6;  Jer.  xlvi.  10;  Bzek.  xxxix.  17), 

II.  In  vivid  DESCRIPTION.  (Vers.  10 — 13.)  The  prophet  witnesses  in  imagination, 
and  describes  with  realistic  power,  the  coming  siege  and  destruction  of  the  city  by  the 
Chaldeans.  He  sees  "  the  fish  gate  "  (ver.  10),  the  weakest  part,  assaulted,  and  hears  a 
loud  cry  (ver.  10),  telling  that  it  has  fallen,  and  that  the  invaders  have  gained 
admission ;  whilst  "  the  sound  of  wailing  "  coming  from  the  inhabitants  of  the  lower 
part  of  the  city  ("the  second,"  ver.  10)  intimates  that,  having  gained  an  entrance,  the 


10  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  l  1— la 

foe  is  carrying  on  the  work  of  destruction.  "  A  great  crashing  from  the  hills  "  (ver.  10) 
indicates  that  the  invaders,  with  their  engines  of  war,  are  striking  against  the  walls 
and  forts.  And  as  the  work  of  invasion  proceeds,  he  marks  how  it  becomes  concen- 
trated upon  the  mercantile  part  of  the  city,  "El-Wad,"  or  "The  Valley"  (called  by 
Zephaniah  "  Maktesh,"  or  "  The  Mortar,"  ver.  11) ;  the  merchants  being  destroyed, 
their  "  silver  "  and  "  their  goods  "  becoming  "  a  booty ; "  their  houses  rendered  a  deso- 
lation, and  their  vineyards  laid  waste  (vers.  11, 13). 

III.  In  moubnpol  bono.  (Vers.  14 — 18.)  Concerning  this  song  it  has  been  well 
said,  "  There  are  no  grander  verses,  none  more  sombre  and  tragic,  none  in  which  terror 
is  more  picturesque,  in  the  literature  of  the  world.  They  call  for  little  comment. 
They  are  to  be  felt  rather  than  critically  analyzed  and  explained"  (Cox,  in  'Bible 
Educator,'  vol.  ii.  257).  The  expression,  "  the  day  of  the  Lord,"  so  frequently  used  in 
this  chapter,  is  employed  in  the  New  Testament  with  reference  to  the  final  judgment 
(Jude  6).  That  day  will  be  a  day  of  wrath  to  those  who  persist  in  working  unright- 
eousness (Rom.  ii.  8,  9).  "  Knowing  therefore  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade 
men"  (2  Cor.  v.  11) ;  " Be  ye  reconciled  to  God  "  (2  Cor.  v.  20). 

Vers.  8,  9. — "  No  respect  of  persons."  I.  Society  is  composed  of  vabious  grades. 
There  are  royal  personages,  "  the  princes  "  and  "  the  king's  children  "  (ver.  8) ;  there 
are  "  the  merchant  people  "  (ver,  11) ;  there  are  masters  and  servants  (ver,  9) ;  there 
are  nobles  in  affluence,  who  can  clothe  themselves  with  "  strange  apparel "  (ver.  8) ; 
and  there  are  the  poor  and  needy.  Nor  would  it  be  advantageous  to  society  to  break 
down  these  distinctions.  An  equal  division  of  wealth  and  rank  would  be  found  both 
Impracticable  and  undesirable.  What  is  needed  is  the  cultivation,  amongst  all  sections 
of  society,  of  the  spirit  of  regard  and  good  will.  If  the  injunctions  of  God's  Word  were 
heeded,  wrong-doing  would  cease,  the  ruler  would  not  oppress  the  subject,  the 
employer  would  not  act  unjustly  towards  the  employed,  nor  the  employed  refuse  to 
abide  by  just  regulations.  It  is  not  by  breaking  down  the  social  distinctions  of  society 
that  the  existing  wrongs  are  to  be  redressed,  but  by  a  wider  diffusion  amongst  all 
classes  of  the  pure  teachings  of  the  religion  of  peace  and  love. 

IL  In  each  of  these  gbades  the  wobeing  of  evil  mat  be  tbaoed.  In  vers. 
8  and  9  this  is  indicated.  Princes,  nobles,  retainers,  menials,  alike  corrupted  their 
way.  Pride  in  bearing  and  in  attire,  the  emulating  of  the  vices  of  the  heathen, 
injustice  and  wrong,  "  violence  and  deceit,"  prevailed  amongst  all  classes.  Sin  is  a 
disease,  the  contagious  influence  of  which  spreads  through  society  at  large,  causing 
sickliness  and  ending^  in  moral  death.  It  has  been  fittingly  compared  to  the  Egyptian 
plague  of  frogs,  for  as  these  coming  up  from  the  river  afflicted  king,  nobles,  magicians, 
and  people  alike,  so  sin  in  its  varied  forms  and  hurtful  influence  has  been  felt  by  all, 

III,  The  Divine  judgments  on  account  of  sin  will  be  eightbouslt  awabded 
AND  WITHOUT  PARTIALITY.  Princes,  uoblcs,  merchants,  servants,  will  be  reckoned 
with  according  to  their  works  (vers.  8,  9).  With  God  there  is  "  no  respect  of  persons." 
Here  social  position  and  influence  screen  wrong-doers  at  times  from  reaping  the  just 
consequences  of  their  evil-doing.  However  justly  the  administrators  of  human  law 
may  desire  to  act,  and  to  remove  the  reproach  that  "  there  is  one  law  for  the  rich  and 
another  for  the  poor,"  the  fact  remains  that  the  former  class,  when  pursued  by  the  hand 
of  justice,  can  command  assistance  such  as  is  denied  to  the  latter,  and  the  employment 
of  which  has  often  moderated  the  sentence  inflicted.  But  the  "  righteous  Lord  who 
loveth  righteousness,"  will  "  give  to  every  man  according  as  his  work  shall  be," 

Ver.  12. — Searching  Jermalem  with  candles.  Jerusalem  here  stands  for  the  nation 
at  large.  The  whole  land  was  corrupt  and  was  to  fall,  and  the  prophet  singles  out 
Jerusalem  as  being  the  centre  of  Influence,  but  his  remarks  apply  to  the  people 
generally.     We  have  suggested  here — 

I,   PeOBPEEITY    in   WOBLDLY   AFFAIBS   BE8ULTING    IN   FALSE    SECUiUTT.      SuCCCSS    in 

secular  matters  is  to  be  desired.  Rightly  improved,  such  prosperity  becomes  a  source 
of  good  to  its  possessors,  and  through  them  to-  their  fellow-men.  The  danger  lies  in 
the  temptation  to  pride  and  self-sufficiency,  leading  men  to  "  think  more  highly  of 
themselves  than  they  ought  to  think."  In  proportion  as  men  grow  rich  are  they  in 
peril  of  feeling  themselves  to  be  "  full,"  and  to  ''  have  need  of  nothing." 


OH.  1. 1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  U 

II.  False  seourity  leading  to  indiffbrbnoe  to  God  and  his  claims.  Being 
"at  ease,"  "their  eyes  standing  out  with  fatness,"  "having  more  than  heart  could 
wish,"  they  "  lightly  esteem  "  the  Lord  and  ignore  his  claims.  They  are  not  atheists  in 
theory,  but  they  are  so  in  practice ;  they  do  not  trouble  to  deny  the  Divine  existence, 
but  they  live  in  total  disregard  of  him  to  wliom  they  are  indebted  for  all  that  they 
possess ;  they  say  in  their  hearts,  "  The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do 
evil"  (ver.  12). 

III.  Indiffbhenob  to  God  and  his  claims  followed  by  moral  corruption 
AND  iniquity.  Those  acting  thus  are  compared  to  wine  that  is  settled  on  its  lees. 
"  The  lees  are  the  refuse  of  the  wine,  yet  stored  up  with  it,  and  the  wine,  unremoved, 
rests  as  it  were  upon  them.  So  do  men  of  ease  rest  in  things  defiled  and  defiling." 
Taking  this  course,  Judah  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  had  become  corrupt  and 
full  of  iniquity. 

IV.  Moral  oorritption  and  iniquity  about  to  bb  brought  to  lioht  through 
THE  Divine  scrutiny.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  at  that  time,  that  I  will  search 
Jerusalem  with  candles  "  (ver.  12).  In  the  day  of  terrors  drawing  near,  "  he  would  go 
through  the  city,  making  diligent  search,  trying  house  by  house,  man  by  man.  As  tho 
vintner  goes  through  his  cellar,  torch  in  hand ;  or  as  the  head  of  the  household,  taper 
in  hand,  searches  every  nook  and  corner  of  his  house  before  Passover,  lest  any  morsel 
of  leaven  should  be  hidden  in  it ;  so  Jehovah  would  search  Jerusalem  with  candles, 
hunting  the  evil  out  of  every  dark  nook  in  which  they  have  concealed  themselves, 
suffering  none  to  escape." 

V.  Iniquity  thus  divinely  revealed  will  assuredly  bb  followed  by  Divine 
retribution.  "  And  I  will  punish,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  Sin  cannot  go  unpunished.  The 
Divine  revelation  of  sin  is  with  a  view  to  this  retribution,  and  serves  to  vindicate  the 
rectitude  of  the  Most  High. 

Learn  :  1.  To  guard  against  the  spirit  of  self-sufficiency  and  worldliness  engendered 
of  ease  and  luxury.  2.  To  scrutinize  your  own  conduct,  using  faithfully  with  a  view 
to  this  the  torch  of  (1)  conscience,  (2)  of  God's  holy  Word,  (3)  and  of  the  perfect 
example  presented  in  the  life  of  "  the  Man  Christ  Jesus."  3.  To  pray  earnestly  for 
deliverance  from  all  that  is  evil,  and  to  be  led  into  right  paths,  and  so  to  be  preserved 
from  being  at  last  condemned  with  the  world.  "  Search  me,  0  Gud,  and  know  my 
heart,"  etc.  (Pa.  cxxxix.  23,  24). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS 

Vers.l — 6. — A  prophet  of  doom.  L  The  meaning  of  his  name.  Zepnamah,  •' One 
whom  Jehovah  hides."  Hiding  in  the  day  of  calamity  a  blessing  promised  to  them 
that  fear  God  (Ps.  xxxi.  19,  20),  who  are  therefore  styled  God's  hidden  ones  (Ps. 
Ixxxiii.  4),  and  may  confidently  reckon  upon  God's  extending  to  them  his  protecting 
care  in  the  midst  of  peril  (Ps.  xxvii.  5),  yea,  may  even  boldly  flee  uuto  him  to  hide 
them  (Ps.  cxliii.  9), 

IL  The  dignity  of  his  person.  The  scion  of  a  kingly  house,  "  the  son  of  Cushi, 
the  son  of  Gedaliah,  the  son  of  Amariah,  the  son  of  Hezekiah."  Mentioned  here,  not 
because  they  had  been  prophets,  but  probably  because  they  had  been  celebrated 
persons,  perhaps  good  men,  these  ancestors  of  Zephaniah — three  of  them,  like  himself, 
with  Jehovah  in  his  name — ^may  have  been  introduced  to  show  that  the  prophet,  while 
descended  from  the  good  King  Hezekiah,  belonged  to  a  different  branch  of  the  family 
from  Manasseh  and  Amon ;  proceeded  from  the  line  in  which  Hezekiah's  goodness  was 
transmitted,  and  thus  had  more  than  royal  blood  in  his  veins  (not  always  an  advantage) 
— hereditary  piety  in  his  soul. 

III.  The  time  of  his  appearing.  1.  The  age  fixed.  .  (1)  "  The  days  of  Josiah,  the 
son  of  Amon,  King  of  Judah ;  "  i.e.  not  before  B.C.  640,  when  Josiah  began  to  reign. 
■  (2)  Before  the  fall  of  Nineveh  (oh.  ii.  13),  which  took  place  in  B.C.  625.  (3)  Piobably 
after  Josiah's  reformation  had  begun  and  before  it  was  completed,  since  the  prophet 
(peaks  of  a  "  remnant  of  Baal "  as  existing  at  the  time  when  he'  began  to  prophesy. 
(4)  Hence  the  date  of  Zephaniah  may  be  placed  between  Josiah's  twelfth  and 
wghteenth  years,  or  between  B.C.  628 — 622  (Hitzig,  Keil,  and  Delitzsch),  though  by 


12  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  i.  1— 18 

some  interpreters  (Evrald,  Havemiok,  Pusey)  it  has  been  fixed  earlier — to  wit,  prior 
to  Josiah's  twelfth  year.  2.  Its  character  declared.  (1)  Generally,  as  regards  the 
whole  land  of  Judah,  an  age  of  widely  spread,  "deeply  seated,  and  well-nigh  incurable 
wickedness,  of  deplorable  religious  apostasy,  of  intensely  debasing  idolatry,  of  shame- 
less hypocrisy,  and  of  gross  worldliness  and  indifference  to  Divine  things  (ver.  4). 
(2)  Particirlarly,  as  regards  Jerusalem,  an  age  of  rebellion,  disobedience,  irreligion, 
prayerlessness,  unbelief,  violence,  treachery,  desecration  of  Jehovah's  sanctuary, 
insensibility  to  correction,  and  deep-seated  immorality  (oh.  iii.  1 — i),  with  all  of  which 
the  metropolis  and  its  inhabitants  were  chargeable  (cf.  Jer.  v. ;  vi.). 

IV.  The  souncB  of  his  inspieation.  "  The  word  of  Jehovah."  Whether  this  came 
to  him  by  direct  revelation  through  voice  (Jer.  i.  4)  or  vision  (Isa.  i.  1 ;  ii.  1),  or 
indirectly  by  meditation  on  the  moral  and  political  condition  of  his  countrymen  as 
well  as  on  the  character  of  Jehovah  and  the  laws  of  righteousness  by  which  he  governs 
the  universe,  is  not  said  and  need  not  be  inquired  into.  It  suffices  to  know  that  the 
prophet  claimed  for  his  message  that  it  had  been  expressly  given  him — put  into  his 
heart  and  mouth — ^by  Jehovah;  while  his  prediotions  certainly  were  such  as  could  not 
have  been  announced  without  the  aid  of  Divine  inspiration. 

V.  The  bubdbn  op  his  pbophbot.  Judgment.  1.  Divine.  The  instrument  is 
not  mentioned ;  the  first  cause  alone  is  placed  in  the  foreground — "  I  will  utterly 
consume ; "  "  I  will  cut  off ; "  "  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand."  The  present-day  tendency 
is  to  set  God  in  the  background,  if  not  to  deny  his  agency  altogether,  alike  in  the 
production  of  material  phenomena  and  in  the  superintendence  of  the  social,  moral,  and 
political  worlds,  and  to  concentrate  attention  principally,  if  not  exclusively,  upon  what 
are  merely  God's  instruments.  The  prophet's  way  of  looking  at  men  and  things 
accorded  more  with  sound  philosophy  and  true  science,  not  to  say  sincere  religion,  than 
the  practice  prevailing  in  many  so-called  enlightened  circles  to-day.  2.  Universal. 
The  judgment  should  embrace  the  wide  earth.  "  All " — "  man  and  beast,  the  fowls  of 
the  heaven,  and  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  the  stumblitig-blocks and  the  wicked" — should  be 
arraigned  at  Jehovah's  bar.  If  the  language  pointed  not  to  a  general  judgment  of  men 
and  nations  at  the  end  of  the  world,  it  at  least  emphasized  the  thought  that  no  part 
of  the  world,  no  age  or  nation,  could  escape  the  ordeal  of  appearing  before  Heaven's 
tribunal  or  elude  the  grasp  of  Divine  retribution.  The  terms  in  which  Jehovah 
declares  his  purpose  to  visit  the  wicked  with  destruction  are  such  as  to  show  that  the 
complete  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  can  only  be  reached  in  the  great  and  terrible  day 
of  the  Lord  at  the  close  of  time  (cf.  Isa.  xxiv.  1 — 23).  3.  Particular.  While  enclosing 
the  whole  world  in  its  sweep,  the  threatened  judgment  should  fall  with  a  special  stroke 
upon  Judah  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem — as' it  were  beginning  with  the  house 
of  GKjd  (1  Pet.  iv.  17).  That  the  instruments  of  judgment  would  be  the  Scythians  of 
whom  Herodotus  (i.  15,  103,  106 ;  iv.  10,  12)  speaks  as  having  invaded  Upper  and 
Higher  Asia  (Hitzig,  Bwald,  Bertheau),  is  not  supported  by  suflBcient  evidence, 
whilst  the  fact  that  neither  Herodotus  nor  the  Old  Testament  reports  any  conquest  of 
Jerusalem  by  them  seems  decisive  against  their  being  considered  the  executors  of 
Jehovah's  wrath.  The  agents  actually  employed  were  the  Chaldeans  (2  Kings  xxv.  9), 
though  it  was  not  Zephaniah's  purpose  to  indicate  by  whom  the  judgments  should  be 
carried  out.  4.  Complete.  Thorough-going ;  upon  both  the  world  in  general  and 
Judah  in  particular.  "  I  will  utterly  consume  all  from  off  the  face  of  the  ground, 
saith  Jehovah."  (1)  As  regards  the  world,  the  destruction  should  be  as  wide-sweeping 
as  had  been  that  of  the  Deluge  (Gen.  vii.  21).  (2)  As  regards  Judah  and  Jerusalem, 
the  purgation  as  effective.  "  The  remnant  of  Baal  should  be  cut  off,"  ».e.  root  and 
branch  extirpated,  or  the  work  of  extirpation,  if  already  begun,  should  be  carried 
forward  till  not  a  vestige  of  the  hated  idol-worship  should  be  seen,  (a)  First,  the 
idolatrous  priests  of  both  kinds  should  be  swept  away — the  Chemarim,  or  "  the  priests 
whom  the  kings  of  Judah  had  ordained  to  burn  incense  in  the  high  places  in  the  cities 
of  Judah  and  in  the  places  round  about  Jerusalem  "  (2  Kings  xxiii.  5 ;  Hos.  x.  5) ;  and, 
the  priests,  not  "the  idolatrous  priests  in  the  stricter  sense  "  (KeU),  but  the  unworthy 
priests  of  Jehovah  who  had  either  secretly  or  openly  favoured  the  prevailing  Baal- 
worship  (Fausset,  Farrar).  (6)  Next,  the  idol-worshippers  of  both  kinds  should  be  out 
off — the  thorough-paced  devotees  of  the  heathen  cultus,  who  worshipped  the  host  of 
heaven  upon  the  house-tops,  and  the  temporizers  who  tried  to  combine  the  worship 


OH.  1. 1— 18.J  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  13 

of  Jehovah  with  that  of  Baal,  offering  oaths  of  allegiance  partly  to  Jehovah  and  partly 
to  their  king,  i.e.  Baal,  (c)  Ami  finally,  apostates  and  open  despisers  of  the  Jehovah- 
religion  should  be  punished — those  who  had  turned  back  from  serving  Jehovah,  and 
those  who  had  never  served  him  at  all  (ver.  6). 

Learn :  1.  The  value  of  an  honoured  and  pious  ancestry.  2.  The  light  the  Word  of 
God  (contained  in  Scripture)  can  oast  upon  the  future.  3.  The  certainty  of  a  day  of 
judgment  for  men  and  nations.  4.  The  impossibility  of  eluding  the  just  judgment 
of  God.  5.  The  inevitable  ruin  of  them  who  will  not  serve  God.  6.  The  impossi- 
bility of  trying  to  serve  God  and  idols.  ,  7.  The  danger  of  neglecting  religion  hardly 
less  than  that  of  apostatizing  from  it. — T.  W. 

Vers.  7 — 13. — "  27*e  day  of  the  LorcTs  saertfice."  I.  The  intended  victims.  1.  Their 
per$ons  catalogued.  (1)  The  royal  household.  Josiah  exempted  on  account  of  his 
piety  (2  Kings  xxii.  19,  20;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  27,  28) — a  testimony  at  once  to  Divine 
raithfulness  and  to  the  superior  advantage  of  godliness  (Ps.  xvii.  7;  xoi.  9,  10;  2  Pet. 
ii.  9  ;  Rev.  iii.  10).  But  included  were  the  princes,  or  "  the  heads  of  the  tribes  and 
families  who  naturally  filled  the  higher  offices  of  state"  (Keil);  the  king's  sons,  either 
Josiah's  children,  then  quite  young,  Jehoiakim  being  six  and  Jehoahaz  four  years  of 
age,  ani  Zedekiah  not  yet  born ;  or  Josiah's  brothers  and  uncles  who  were  also  king's 
sons ;  and  the  superior  servants  of  the  palace,  who  are  probably  referred  to  as  those 
who  "  leap  over  the  threshold  and  fill  their  masters'  house  with  violence  and  deceit " 
(ver.  9).  (2)  The  rich  merchants  of  Jerusalem.  Described  by  their  residence,  their 
occupation,  their  prosperity,  and  their  doom.  The  part  of  the  city  in  which  they  were 
located,  named  most  likely  by  the  prophet  himself,  Maktesh,  or  "  The  Mortar,"  was 
"  most  probably  the  depression  which  ran  down  between  Acra  on  the  west,  and  Bezetha 
and  Moriah  on  the  east,  as  far  as  the  fountain  of  Shiloah  "  (Keil),  "  the  cheese-makers' 
valley"  of  Josephus,  styled  by  the  present-day  inhabitants  El-Wad,  or  "The  Valley." 
There  they  traded,  lending  money  upon  usury,  and  were  called  by  the  prophet 
"  people  of  Canaan,"  because  of  their  resemblance  to  Canaanitish  or  Phoenician 
merchants.  With  such  success  had  they  carried  on  their  business,  that  they  were 
"  laden  with  silver."  Yet  were  they  doomed  to  be  destroyed,  ground  to  pieces,  and 
bruised  to  death,  by  the  Babylonian  conquerors,  like  corn  in  a  mortar  when  the  pestle 
descendeth.  (3)  The  irreligious  debauchees  and  rioters  of  the  metropolis  generally. 
Characterized  as  persons  who  had  settled  on  their  lees,  and  said  iu  their  hearts,  "  The 
Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do  evil."  (For  an  explanation  of  the  figure,  consult 
Exposition,  and  see  homily  on  ver.  12.)  The  language  pointed  to  those  whose  material 
prosperity  had  been  their  moral  and  religious  ruin,  who,  having  srown  wealthy  and 
luxurious,  had  also  become  atheistical  at  least  in  practice,  saying  in  their  hearts,  and 
acting  as  if  they  believed,  that  either  there  was  no  God  at  all,  or  if  there  were,  that  he 
was  perfectly  indifferent  to  their  characters  and  conduct — a  form  of  infidelity  that  has 
seldom  lacked  representatives  among  foolish  and  ungodly  men  (Job  xxii.  12 — li; 
Ps.  X.  4 ;  xiv.  1 ;  xciv.  6,  7).  2.  Their  sins  specified.  (1)  Of  the  royal  household, 
two — wearing  foreign  clothes  and  leaping  over  the  threshold.  The  former  referred  to 
the  custom  of  copying  the  dress  and  with  that  the  manners  and  luxuries  of  heathen 
peoples,  and  in  particular,  in  Josiah's  time,  of  Egypt  and  Assyria,  or  Babylon.  Among 
the  Egyptians  "  the  dress  of  the  king  was  most  gorgeous,  consisting  of  robes  of  the 
most  beautiful  stuffs^  and  the  richest  ornaments "  (Budge,  '  Dwellers  on  the  Nile,' 
p.  181).  Nahum  (ii.  3)  describes  the  Assyrian  soldiery  as  arrayed  "  in  scarlet ;  "  while 
Ezekiel  (xxiii.  12,  15)  depicts  the  Assyrian  warriors  as  "  clothed  most  gorgeously," 
and  speaks  of  the  Chaldeans,  as  "  girded  with  girdles  upon  their  loins,  exceeding  in 
dyed  attire  upon  their  heads."  Of  course,  the  sin  against  which  the  proohet  inveighed 
was  not  the  mere  adoption  of  Egyptian,  Assyrian,  or  Babylonian  habiliments,  but  the 
inclination  to  look  to  and  lean  upon,  to  follow  after  and  copy,  these  nations  in  their 
luxuries  and  idolatries  rather  than  to  remain  faithful  to  Jehovah's  Law  and  worship, 
which  the  imitation  of  their  dress  revealed.  Clothes,  according  to  Garlyle  ('  Sartor 
Resartus,'  i.  1),  are  "the  vestural  tissue  which  man's  soul  wears  as  its  outmost 
wrappage  and  overall,  wherein  his  whole  other  tissues  are  included  and  screened,  his 
who's  faculties  work,  his  whole  self  lives,  moves,  and  has  its  being."  Hence  a  person's 
dress  is  no  mean  indication  of  a  person's  inner  self.     "  Outward  dress,"  says  Pusey, 


14  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  i.  1—18. 

"  always  betokens  the  inward  mind,  and  in  its  turn  acts  upon  it."  In  Isaiah's  time 
tlie  Jeiusalem  ladies  were  distinguished  for  gay  attire  and  wanton  hearts  (Isa.  iii.  16 — 
23).  Peter  (1  Bpist.  iii.  3)  exhorts  Christian  women  to  adorn  themselves,  "  not  with  that 
outward  adorning  of  plaiting  the  hair,  and  of  wearing  of  gold,  or  of  putting  on  of  apparel, 
but  witli  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit."  The  latter  of  the  two  sins  charged 
against  the  royal  household,  that  of  leaping  over  the  threshold,  is  believed  (Calviu,  Keil, 
Ewald,  Pusey,  Farrar)  to  allude,  not  to  the  custom  of  leaping  over  the  threshold  of  the 
kirij's  palace  (Hitzig)  in  imitation  of  Dagon's  priests,  who,  when  they  entered  their 
idol's  temple  in  Ashdod,  trode  not  upon  its  threshold  (1  Sam.  v.  5) ;  but  to  the  practice, 
observed  probably  by  "dishonourable  servants  of  the  king,"  of  intruding  into  other 
people's  houses  in  order  to  deprive  them  of  their  property  through  violence  and  fraud, 
and  with  the  spoils  so  obtained  to  enrich  the  king,  whose  dependants  they  were,  and 
whose  favour  they  desired  to  retain.  Should  this  interpretation  be  correct,  it  suggests 
useful  thoughts  about  the  distribution  of  guilt,  or  the  mutual  responsibility  of  masters 
and  servants  for  each  other's  evil  deeds.  If  the  king's  servants  merely  carried  out  the 
orders  of  their  royal  master,  they  were  no  less  criminal  in  Heaven's  sight  than  he  ;  if 
they  acted  on  their  own  motion,  the  king  who  profited  by  their  plunder  became  a 
partner  of  their  guilt.  (2)  Of  the  merchants,  also  two — avarice  and  usury.  Had  they 
been  merely  successful  traders  who  had  prospered  through  honest  dealing,  they  had  not 
been  condemned;  but  they  were  "laden  with  silver,"  acquired  through  nefarious 
practices  such  as  deceit  and  usury.  Wealth  honourably  obtained  is  no  offence  against 
Heaven,  and,  if  righteously  employed,  may  contribute  to  the  happiness  and  influence 
of  both  the  individual  possessor  and  the  community  of  which  he  is  a  member ;  riches 
heaped  up  by  wicked  arts  are  a  curse  to  those  who  have  them,  and  often  go  as  they 
have  come  by  violence  and  fraud.  To  "  provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  ot  all  men  " 
(Bom.  xii.  17)  should  be  the  aim  of  all,  but  especially  of  Christians.  "On  the  bells  of 
the  horses  of  trade  and  commerce  should  be.  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  "  (Zeoh.  xiv.  20). 
Happy  the  nation  "  whose  traflSckers  are  the  honourable  of  the  earth"  (Isa.  xxiii.  8). 
(3)  Of  the  debauchees  and  rioters,  two — self-indulgence  and  infidelity.  "  Settled  upon 
their  lees,"  they  abandoned  themselves  to  the  gratification  of  their  sinful  desires  and 
corrupt  inclinations,  closed  their  minds  and  hearts  against  better  things,  and  proceeded 
to  daring  and  presumptuous  unbelief,  denying  the  Divine  providence  if  not  challenging 
the  Divine  existence.  All  sin  tends  to  lead  the  soul  away  from  God,  to  cause  it  first 
to  shut  out  thoughts  of  God,  and  finally  to  conclude  that  God  has  ceased  to  be. 
3.  Their  punishments  proclaimed.  (1)  The  sinners  of  the  royal  house  would  be  called 
to  account  for  their  iniquities.  Though  God  seemed  to  be  at  a  distance  from  them, 
like  a  man  upon  a  far  journey,  he  would  return  and  visit  upon  them  the  ^vil  deeds  of 
which  they  had  been  guilty.  Nations  no  more  than  individuals,  and  persons  in  high 
station  no  more  than  persons  in  low,  can  escape  the  just  judgment  of  God  (Bom.  ii.  3), 

(2)  The  merchants  would  be  despoiled  of  their  unjust  gains  (Isa.  xxxiii.  1),  and  them- 
selves overwhelmed  with  ruin  (Jer.  xvii.  11).  If  good  men  are  sometimes  deprived  of 
wealth  at  a  stroke,  as  Job  was,  and  thus  seem  to  have  no  advantage  above  their 
wicked  neighbours,  they  are  never,  as  these  are,  utterly  undone  by  the  loss  of  material 
possessions.  In  the  fall  of  their  houses  they  do  not  themselves  perish,  but  find  in  God 
a  Portion  larger,  more  satisfying  and  secure,  than  their  silver  or  gold  (Hab.  iii.  17, 18). 

(3)  The  debauchees  and  rioters  would  be  dragged  forth  from  their  darkest  retreats  and 
requited  for  their  sensuality  and  unbelief.  "  The  same  diligence  which  Eternal  Wisdom 
used  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost,  lighting' a  candle  and  searching  diligently 
till  it  find  each  lost  piece  of  silver,  the  same  shall  Almighty  God  use  that  no  hardened 
sinner  shall  escape"  (Pusey). 

II.  The  OFnoiATiNQ  priests.  1.  Jehovah  himself.  "I  will  punish;"  "I  will 
punish ; "  "  1  will  search ; "  and  "  I  will  punish,''  saith  the  Lord.  Whatever  subordinate 
agents  or  secondary  causes  may  be  employed  to  inflict  Divine  vengeance  upon  rebellious 
nations  and  wicked  men,  the  hand  that  directs  these  agents  and  wields  these  causes  is 
God's.  He  is  "  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  "  (Gen.  xviii.  25),  and  "  shall  judge  the  people 
righteously  "  (Ps.  Ixvii.  4),  rendering  to  every  man  "  according  to  his  work  "\Pe.  Ixii.  11). 
He  "  shall  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good 
or  whether  it  be  evil "  (Ecoles.  xii.  14).  "He  hath  appointed  a  day  in  which  he  will 
judge  the  world"  (Acts  xvii.  31).    2.  Jehovah's  ministers.    Described  as  his  called  and 


OH.  L 1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  15 

sanctified  ones ;  i.e.  not  personally  holy,  but  specially  consecrated  for  the  work  to 
which  they  were  appointed.  (1)  In  the  case  under  consideration  these  were  to  be  the 
Chaldean  armies,  which  in  little  more  than  thirty  years  were  to  fall  upon  Jerusalem, 
and  pour  out  upon  it  the  vials  of  Jehovah's  wrath  (2  Ohron.  xxxvi.  16, 17).  (2)  In 
the  world  generally  the  events  of  his  providence  are  the  instruments  selected  for  the 
execution  of  his  victims  (Ps.  cxi.  7).  (3)  The  last  minister  of  judgment  will  be  his 
Son,  into  whose  hands  he  hath  committed  all  judgment  (John  v.  22),  and  before  whose 
tribunal  all  must  appear  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  To  him  belong  the  epithets  "  called  "  and 
"  sanctified  "  in  their  highest  sense. 

III.  The  encompassing  spectatoks.  The  faithful  remnant  of  Israel,  those  who  still 
adhered  to  Jehovah  and  mourned  as  did  Josiah,  Jeremiah,  and  Zephaniah,  Huldah  the 
prophetess,  Hilkiah  the  priest,  and  others,  over  the  degenerate  condition  of  the  nation. 
So  in  the  world  still  are  God's  believing  people  called  to  witness,  and  often  actually  do 
witness,  the  execution  of  God's  judgments  upon  the  ungodly.  So  in  the  last  day, 
when  the  vials  of  Divine  indignation  will  be  outpoured  upon  the  finally  impenitent, 
the  saints  who  have  been  counted  worthy  to  attain  Christ's  kingdom  and  glory  will 
behold  the  appalling  scene,  as  Abraham  beheld  the  burning  of  the  cities  of  the  plain, 
and  will  say,  "  Hallelujah  I  salvation,  and  glory,  and  honour,  and  power,  unto  the  Lord 
our  God  ;  for  true  and  righteous  are  his  judgments  "  (Rev.  xix.  1,  2). 

IV.  The  eesulting  impbbssions.  Pointed  to  in  the  solemn  "  Hush !  be  still "  (ver. 
7),  with  which  the  prophet  opened  his  roll  of  woe.  When  he  summoned  the  spectators 
to  be  silent  before  the  face  of  Jehovah,  he  signified  that  silence  was  to  be  the  effect 
produced  upon  their  spirits  by  the  spectacle  they  were  about  to  witness.  And  this 
silence  would  be  one :  1.  Of  awe ;  as  they  contemplated  the  overpowering  revelation  of 
the  majesty  of  God,  of  his  holiness  and  justice,  of  his  power  and  fidelity,  which  would 
be  afforded  by  his  judgments  upon  the  wicked.  2.  0/  submission ;  as  they  recognized 
the  equity  of  those  judgments  by  which  sin  was  punished,  the  Divine  Law  vindicated, 
and  God's  glory  proclaimed.  3.  0/ amazement ;  as  they  marvelled  how  ever  they  who 
had  once  themselves  been  sinful,  had  through  grace  escaped  those  calamities  which 
they  saw  overtaking  the  wicked. 

Learn  :  1.  That  God  deals  with  men  and  nations  upon  the  principle  of  moral  retribu- 
tion. 2.  That  neither  national  nor  individual  wickedness,  if  unrepented  of,  can  evade 
its  just  recompense  of  reward.  3.  That  God's  judgments  upon  both  will  ultimately  be 
approved  by  all. — T,  W. 

Ver.  7. — The  souPs  silences  he/ore  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  I.  A  silence  or 
ADORATION.  As  bccomes  a  creature  in  the  presence  of  his  Creator  (Zech.  li.  13  ;  Hab. 
ii.  20),  and  a  sinner  in  the  presence  of  the  Holy  One  (Job  xl.  4). 

II.  A  SILENCE  or  CONTEMPLATION.  As  beflts  the  soul  in  those  moments  in  which 
God  reveals  himself  in  nature  (Job  xxxvii.  14)  or  in  grace  (Gen.  xvii.  3 ;  Exod.  xiv.  13). 

III.  A  SILENCE  OF  EXPECTATION.  •  As  a  praying  soul  maintains  when  looking  out  for 
a  response  to  his  supplications  (Ps.  Ixii.  1,  5,  margin),  or  a  perplexed  spirit  when 
waiting  for  God  to  clear  up  the  mystery  of  his  providence  (Ps.  xxxvii.  7,  margin). 

IV.  A  SILENCE  or  SUBMISSION.  As  they  preserve  who  recognize  the  ills  of  life  to 
proceed  from,  the  hand  of  God  (Ps.  xxxix.  2;  Lam.  iii.  28,  29). 

V.  A  SILENCE  OF  APPROBATION.  As  God's  judgments  will  enforce  upon  all  wha 
behold  them  (Ps.  xlvi.  10).— T.  W. 

Ver,  8. — Foreign  clothes.  I.  A  bond  of  international  union.  The  interchange 
of  commodities  among  the  dififerent  peoples  of  the  earth  one  of  the  surest  means  of 
promoting  peace  and  causing  wars  to  cease. 

II.  A  sign  of  advancing  civilization.  When  a  nation's  wants  multiply  beyond 
its  own  power  directly  to  meet  them,  it  naturally  draws  upon  the  resources  of  lands  and 
peoples  beyond  itself.  Thus  while  the  existence  of  these  wants  marks  the  upward 
progress  of  the  nation  itself,  the  effort  needed  to  supply  them  acts  as  a  stimulus  to  other 
peoples  to  join  in  the  onward  march. 

in.  A  SYMPTOM  OF  declining  PATRIOTISM.  No  truef  indication  that  the  national 
sentiment  amongst  a  people  is  becoming  feeble  than  the  slavish  imitation  of  tha 
manners  and  customs,  speech  and  dress,  of  a  stronger  neighbour. 


16  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  i.  1—18. 

IV.  A  SYMBOL  OF  BBHOI0U8  DECLENSION.  In  this  light  regarded  by  the  prophet. 
Egyptian  or  GhalHean  raiment  worn  by  JuHasan  princes  and  peasants  meant  that  their 
hearts  were  hankering  after  Egyptian  or  Chaldean  idolatry.  So  when  Christians  con- 
form to  the  world's  ways,  adopting  its  maxims  and  principles,  manners  and  customs, 
thoughts  and  feelings,  sentiments  and  practices — ^all  of  which  should  be  to  them  what 
foreign  clothes  were  to  Israel — there  is  reason  to  suspect  that  a  backward  movement  in 
religion  has  begun. — T.  W. 

Ver.  12. — Settled  on  one's  lees.  I.  A  piotubb  of  peosperous  base.  The  image — 
that  of  wine  which  has  been  allowed  to  settle  in  its  cask,  without  having  ever  been 
drawn  off  or  emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel — naturally  suggests  the  condition  of  one  who 
has  become  prosperous  and  affluent,  who  has  never  been  visited  by  misfortune,  agitated 
by  calamity,  or  disturbed  by  affliction,  but  who  through  long  years  has  been  left  to 
feast  and  fatten,  like  an  ox  in  his  stall,  or  (adhering  to  the  metaphor)  to  fill  and  settle 
like  a  cask  of  wine. 

II.  A  SYMBOL  OF  BELiaiOUB  (OB,  RATHER,  IRBELiaiOUS)  DEGENERATION.      As  wine,  left 

upon  its  lees,  retains  its  flavour — good  or  bad,  as  the  case  may  be — so  does  the  soul 
acquire  a  moral  flavour  from  the  things  in  which  it  delights,  and  on  which,  as  it  were, 
it  rests.  Nay,  as  good  wine  becomes  better  and  bad  wine  worse  from  being  allowed  to 
settle  on  its  lees,  so  do  pious  souls  become  stronger  and  more  fixed  in  goodness,  but 
ungodly  souls  more  confirmed  and  rooted  in  wickedness,  by  being  suffered  to  rest,  the 
one  on  the  holy  inclinations  and  the  other  on  the  sinful  lusts  which  form  the  lowest 
strata  respectively  of  their  beings. 

III.  A  PRECURSOR  OF  AppROACHiNO  DOOM.  As  bad  wino  allowed  to  settle  on  its  lees 
rapidly  deteriorates  and  reaches  such  a  state  of  badness  as  to  be  vmfit  for  use,  so  wicked 
men  that  settle  on  their  lees,  gratifying  their  sensual  desires  and  venting  their 
atheistical  opinions,  ultimately  sink  to  such  a  point  of  moral  degeneration  as  not  to 
admit  of  recovery,  and  as  allows  nothing  to  be  anticipated  for  them  but  swift  and 
sudden  destruction. 

Lessons.    1.  The  danger  of  prosperity.    2.  The  value  of  adversity. — ^T.  W. 

Vers.  14 — 18. — "The  great  day  of  the  Lord."  I.  Rapidly  appeoaohino.  "  The  great 
day  of  the  Lord  is  near,  it  is  near,  and  hasteth  greatly  "  (ver.  14).  This  was  true  of  the 
Chaldean  invasion,  then  little  more  than  one  generation  distant — so  near,  in  fact,  that 
the  prophet  could  hear  the  bitter  cry  of  the  mighty  man  who  saw  himself  confronted 
by  its  terrors ;  and  is  true  of  that  other  and  greater  day  of  the  Lord,  the  day  of  judg- 
ment (2  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  1  John  iv.  17 ;  Rev.  vi.  17),  which  the  Christian  is  directed  always 
to  consider  as  at  hand  (Phil.  iv.  5 ;  Jas.  v.  8,  9 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  7 ;  Rev.  xxii.  12),  because 
the  exact  moment  of  its  coming  no  one  can  tell  (Matt.  xxiv.  36 ;  xxv.  13,  42). 
_  II.  Tebmbly  ALARMING.  What  the  Chaldean  invasion  should  prove  to  the  guilty 
city  of  Jerusalem  and  nation  of  Judah  the  prophet  depicts  by  heaping  together  all  the 
images  of  horror  that  his  mind  can  conceive  or  his  language  express,  calling  the  time 
of  that  visitation  a  day  of  wrath  and  fury,  in  which  Jehovah  should  pour  out  his 
indignation  upon  the  land  and  its  inhabitants,  letting  loose  upon  them  the  ferocious 
warriors  of  Babylon ;  a  day  of  trouble  and  distress,  in  which  men  should  be  hemmed 
in  on  every  side  by  calamity  and  pressed  down  by  anguish,  walking  like  blind  men 
and  falling  like  wounded  and  dying  soldiers ;  a  day  of  wasteness  and  desolation,  in 
which  fields  should  be  devastated,  houses  overthrown,  and  men  and  women  put  to  the 
edge  of  the  sword  ;  a  day  of  darkness  and  gloominess,  of  clouds  and  thick  darkness,  in 
which  not  so  much  as  a  single  star  of  hope  should  appear  in  the  political  firmament ; 
a  day  of  the  trumpet  and  alarm  against  the  fenced  cities  and  against  the  high  battle- 
ments, in  which  their  fortified  towns  and  cities  should  experience  the  shock  of  pitiless 
assailants.  But  even  more  appropriately  will  these  images  apply  to  the  day  of  judg- 
ment, when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  be  revealed  in  flaming  fire  and  with  his  holv 
angels  (2  Thess.  i.  8).  ■' 

IIL  PiBECBLY  DESTROTINO.  1.  Absolutely  unavoidable.  "  The  mighty  man  crieth 
bitterly  there,"  "  because  he  cannot  save  himself,  and  must  succumb  to  the  power  of  the 
foe  "  (Keil).  So  would  it  be  in  the  hour  of  Babylon's  descent  upon  Judah  and  Jeru- 
salem ;  so  will  it  be  in  the  day  of  the  revelation  of  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty  (Bev. 


CH.  1.1— 18.]  THE   BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  17 

vi.  15 — 17).  2.  Utterly  consuming.  "Their  blood  shall  be  poured  out  as  dust,  and 
their  flesh  as  dung.  Neither  their  silver  nor  their  gold  shall  be  able  to  deliver  them 
in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  wrath ;  but  tlie  whole  land  shall  be  devoured  by  the  fire  of 
his  jealousy  :  for  he  shall  make  an  end,  yea,  a  terrible  end,  of  all  them  that  dwell  in 
the  land "  (oomp.  Ezek.  vii.  19).  The  same  doom  of  utter  extermination  will  over- 
take the  finally  impenitent  in  the  day  when  God  awakes  in  terrible  majesty  to  execute 
judgment  on  the  unsodly.  Of  these  "  God  shall  make  an  utter,  terrific,  speedy  destruc- 
tion, a  living  death,  so  that  they  shall  at  once  be  and  not  be ;  be,  as  continued  in 
being ;  not  be,  as  having  no  life  in  God,  but  only  a  continued  death  in  misery"  (Pusey). 
Lessonb.  1.  Gratitude  to  God,  who  hath  made  provision  through  the  gospel  of  his 
Son  for  delivering  men  from  the  wrath  to  come.  2.  The  duty  of  all  to  whom  that 
giispel  is  made  known  to  embrace  its  provisions  and  escape  from  impending  peril, 
while  yet  the  day  of  mercy  lasts.  3.  The  wisdom  of  living  in  constant  anticipation  of 
that  day,  and  of  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  4.  The  urgency  of  making 
known  10  men  the  gospel,  that  they  may  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come. — T.  W. 

Vers.  1 — 18. — The  Judgment  threatened.  We  learn  from  ver.  1  that  Zephaniah  received 
from  the  Lord  his  message  to  Judah  in  the  days  of  Josiah,  the  last  of  the  godly  and 
refirming  kings,  who,  after  the  gross  corruption  of  the  preceding  reigns  of  Manasseh 
and  Amon,  restored  to  a  large  extent  the  purity  of  the  worship  of  God,  and  was  the 
means  of  bringing  about  a  certain  kind  and  degree  of  repentance  and  amendment  in 
the  people.  Probably,  however,  the  major  part  of  Zephaniah's  prophecy  belongs  to 
the  early  part  of  Josiah's  reign,  before  his  greatest  public  reformation  was  begun ;  for 
there  is  no  allusion  to  that  hopeful  work  in  the  book  of  the  prophet,jtnd  there  is  no 
mention  of  Zephaniah  in  the  history,  where  Jeremiah  and  Huldah  the  prophetess  are 
described  as  aiding  and  guiding  the  kiug's  efforts  to  bring  the  people  back  to  godliness. 
But  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  to  Zephaniah  doubtless  prepared  the  way  for  the 
work  of  full  reformation,  though  the  messenger  may  not  have  been  spared  to  take  part 
and  rejoice  in  it.  His  message  is,  first,  an  announcement  of  the  judgment  of  Jehovah 
against  the  people,  which  occupies  the  whole  of  ch.  i. ;  and  ver.  7  may  be  taken  as  its 
central  point,  containing  the  lesson  of  duty,  on  which  all  that  precedes  and  follows 
it  converges.  We  shall  best  feel  the  force  of  this  lesson -if  we  begin  from  the  outside 
of  this  oracle,  the  more  obvious  and  manifest  appearance  of  the  judgment  of  Jehovah 
here  announced,  which  the  prophet  puts  at  the  beginning  and  end  (vers.  2,  3,  14 — 18). 

L  The  natoee  of  this  judgment.  At  the  very  outset  it  is  described  in  a  way 
fitted  to  startle  and  alarm ;  for  it  is  to  be  of  a  most  sweeping  and  universal  nature 
(vers.  2, 3).  The  words  remind  us  of  nothing  less  than  the  universal  deluge,  by  which 
the  old  world  was  swept  away.  A  destruction  like  that  is  impending  over  Judah. 
There  had  been  many  chastisements  sent  on  the  people  before ;  the  land  had  been 
invaded,  the  royal  treasuries  rifled,  the  country  laid  waste.  No  fewer  than  ten  of  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel  had  been  not  very  long  before  carried  away  into  Assyria.  Still, 
these  visitations  had  been  only  partial ;  a  remnant  had  always  been  left ;  and  many 
were  apt  to  trust  that  so  it  would  ever  be.  Because  God  had  given  Israel  the  land, 
they  thought  that  some  part  of  it  at  least  must  always  be  theirs.  But  now  they  are 
warned  that  this  is  a  false  confidence,  and  that,  in  spite  of  the  gift  of  the  land  to 
Abraham's  seed,  the  corrupt  race  that  now  inhabit  it  shall  be  utterly  cut  off. 
Moreover,  this  judgment,  that  is  to  be  so  sweeping,  is  also  very  near  at  hand.  In  the 
old  world  the  long-suffering  of  God  waited  in  the  days  of  Noah ;  but  now  he  has 
waited  long  and  sent  messenger  after  messenger ;  and  at  last  the  time  of  delay  is  nearly 
exhausted,  and  the  judgment  is  close  at  hand,  for  their  iniquity  is  all  but  full.  The 
day  of  the  Lord  is  represented  as  hasting  to  meet  them ;  the  sound  of  its  coming  is 
already  heard,  and  very  soon  it  will  be  here.  Have  not  all  these  lesser  judgments  been 
foretastes  of  it? — the  capture  of  Galilee  by  Tiglath-Pileser,  the  removal  of  the  whole 
northern  kingdom  by  Shalmaneser  or  Sargon,  the  invasion  of  Judah  by  Sennacherib  ? 
and  has  not  each  one  of  these  been  more  sweeping  and  far-reaching  than  the  former  ? 
Are  Bot  these  signs  and  harbingers  of  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  here  announced  ?  Then 
how  terrible  and  irresistible  is  this  judgment  (vers.  15 — 18)  1  Physical  strength  and 
power  shall  not  deliver  the  guilty  nation.  There  are,  indeed,  fortified  cities  in  the  land, 
and  high  towers  to  bar  the  entrance  of  an  enemy ;  and  it  may  seem  as  if  beUnd  these  they 

EEFEANIAH.  0 


18  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAU.  [ch.  i.  1—18. 


might  defy  the  invader ;  but  against  them  shall  be  raised  the  sound  of  the  war-trumpet, 
and  the  battle-shout  of  a  great  host,  before  which  they  shall  not  be  able  to  stand.  Skill 
and  wisdom  shall  not  be  able  to  save  them.  These  have  often  enabled  armies  very  much 
inferior  in  numbers  to  conquer  great  hosts ;  but  now  there  shall  be  perplexity  and 
dismay,  and  men  shall  be  groping  like  blind  men  in  the  dark,  unable  to  devise  any 
means  of  resistance  or  escape,  bewildered  and  disheartened.  Wealth  sometimes  may 
be  used  to  buy  off  an  invading  monarch  or  army.  So  in  former  days  kings  of  Judah 
had  repeatedly  obtained  relief  from  foreign  foes  by  giving  up  to  them  the  treasures  of 
the  palace  and  temple.  But  in  this  invasion  neither  silver  nor  gold  shall  be  of  any 
avail  to  deliver  them.  The  prophet  does  not  indicate  more  particularly  from  what 
quarter  this  terrible  invasion  shall  come — that  is  left  to>  be  made  manifest  by  the  event. 
For  the  teriibleness  of  the  judgment  did  not  arise  merely  from  the  fact  that  it  was  to 
be  inflicted  by  a  great  worldly  power,  which  would  be  overpowering  in  force  and  would 
not  care  for  bribes ;  but  from  this,  that  that  power,  whatever  it  might  be,  was  to  be 
the  instrument  of  Jehovah's  wrath  against  the  nation.  Israel  had  often  been  saved 
from  fierce  attacks  of  mighty  nations  before,  and  enabled  to  defy  their  rage ;  but  that 
had  not  been  because  of  their  wisdom  or  coinage,  but  because  they  trusted  in  God, 
and  had  his  proteciiou.  Now,  however,  there  was  coming  on  them  the  day  of  the 
Lord's  anger ;  he  was  to  hide  his  face  from  them,  and  therefore  it  would  be  to  them  a 
day  of  such  darkness,  dismay,  and  despair.  This  brings  us  somewhat  nearer  the 
centre  and  heart  of  this  prophecy,  and  leads  us  to  consider — 

II.  The  causes  of  the  judgmbnt,  aunounoed  as  bo  bwebpinq,  near,  and 
TEEBiBLB.  These  are  the  sins  of  the  land,  of  which  a  long  and  dark  catalogue  is 
unrolled  (vers.  4 — 12).  First  comes  what  was  the  great  besetting  sin  of  ancient  times, 
as  it  has  ever  been  of  men  who  possess  not  or  will  not  receive  God's  revelation  of  himself, 
idolatry,  the  worship  of  the  seen  and  earthly  as  Divine,  instead  of  the  only  true  God 
who  is  invisible  and  spiritual,  the  worshipping  and  serving  the  creature  more  than  the 
Creator.  The  invisible  things  of  God,  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead,  are  seen  and 
understood  by  the  things  that  are  made ;  for  "  the  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and 
the  firmament  showeth  his  handiwork."  But  men,  not  liking  to  retain  God  in  their 
knowledge,  keep  back  this  truth  in  unrighteousness,  and  come  to  regard  the  powers  of 
nature  as  themselves  Divine ;  and  worship  the  heavens,  the  earth,  the  sun,  the  stars, 
as  gods,  instead  of  regarding  them  as  the  works  of  the  true  God,  who  is  above  them 
all.  Thus  they  fall  into  a  religion  that  is  purely  sensuous,  requiring  no  elevation  of 
the  soul  above  what  can  be  seen  and  heard  and  felt — a  religion  also  that  is  divorced 
from  morality,  for  when  men  come  to  regard  the  processes  of  nature  as  the  highest 
thing  that  there  is,  they  can  see  in  them  no  moral  law  or  order.  Such  was  the  corrupt 
religion  of  the  heathen  world,  left  by  God  to  its  own  way,  and  against  this  his  revela- 
tion to  Israel  was  designed  to  testify,  declaring  him  to  be  a  Being  spiritual  and  holy, 
the  one  living  and  true  God.  But  the  chosen  people  were  ever  tempted  to  fall  back  to 
that  sensuous  and  immoral  conception  of  God  that  found  expression  in  the  idolatry 
of  the  surrounding  nations.  Various  forms  of  such  idolatry  as  was  then  common 
are  here  alluded  to.  There  was  the  Phoenician  worship  of  Baal,  which  had  been 
introduced  long  ago  by  Jezebel  into  the  northern  kingdom,  and  through  Athaliah  into 
Judah;  and  there  was  also  the  more  recently  imported  worship  of  the  stars  and 
hea,venly  bodies,  the  form  of  idolatry  that  prevailed  in  the  Eastern  countries  with 
which  Judah  was  now  beginning  to  be  acquainted.  This  worship  was  performed  by 
buriiing  incense  and  offering  sacrifices  on  the  flat  tops  of  the  houses,  looking  up  to  the 
sky  and  host  of  heaven.  But  along  with  these  gross  forms  of  idolatry  there  is  also 
condemned  the  corrupt  worship  of  Jehovah.  The  worship  at  the  high  places,  with 
which  the  kohanim  (ver.  4)  were  connected,  was  indeed  a  worship  of  Jehovah,  but 
had  become  in  course  of  time  thoroughly  idolatrous  in  its  character;  the  pillars  or 
groves  placed  beside  the  altars  came  to  be  worshipped  as  symbols  of  the  Deity,  and,  as 
in  Beihei  and  Dan,  idols  were  identified  with  liim.  Thus  the  true  invisible  God  was 
degraded  to  the  likeness  of  the  idols  of  the  heathen,  and  this  worship  at  the  high 
places  had  to  be  utterly  condemned  and  swept  away.  Anotlier  corruption  of  the  pure 
worship  of  Jehovah  was  the  combination  of  it  with  that  of  the  heathen  deities.  There 
were  those  who  worshipped  and  swore  to  Jehovah,  and  at  the  same  time  swore  by 
Malcham  (ver.  5)  their  king,  i.t.  Baal.     They  thought  that  they  could  preserve  theij 


BH.1. 1— 18.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAH.  19 

allegiance  to  the  God  of  Israel  while  yet  they  paid  homage  also  to  Bnal.  They  would 
thus  be  halting  between  two  opinions,  or  trying  to  make  a  compromise,  which  on  any 
view  of  it  must  degrade  the  true  God.  It  could  only  imply  either  that  Jehovah  and 
Baal  were  both  real  powers  over  their  several  nations,  and  so  Jehovah  would  he  merely 
a  local  or  national  deity ;  or  else  that  they  were  but  different  names  of  the  same 
supreme  power,  which  would  thus  be  made  a  mere  nature-power,  such  as  Baal  was 
conceived  to  be,  not  the  holy  God  who  had  revealed  himself  to  Israel.  Then  tho 
prophet  speaks  (ver.  6)  of  what  is  implied  in  all  this,  and  lies  at  the  bottom  of  it  all. 
These  corrupt  forms  of  worship  were  really  a  forsakin?  the  Lord;  and  the  beginning 
of  the  evil  lay  in  ungodliness ;  they  did  not  seek  the  Lord,  nor  inquire  for  him.  Many 
who  might  not  be  guilty  of  any  of  the  kinds  of  idolatry  that  prevaileii,  might  yet  be 
liable  to  this  reproach,  which  is  surely  the  severest  of  all.  They  professed  that  they 
knew  God,  but  they  did  not  look  to  him  in  their  times  of  trouble,  they  did  not  seek 
to  know  his  will  from  his  Law  or  his  prophets,  they  did  not  call  on  him  for  help  in 
time  of  need — he  was  to  them,  in  fact,  but  a  name  or  an  idea,  not  a  real,  living, 
personal  God.  If  this  was  all  their  religion,  it  was  no  wonder  that  ihey  should  be 
easily  led  to  adopt  some  visible  symbol  of  the  Deity,  or  to  cover  up  the  hoUowness  of 
their  profession  by  abundance  of  rites  of  worship,  or  to  associate  their  belief  in  one  Lord 
with  the  service  of  the  deities  of  neighbouring  countries',  which  seemed  to  be  more 
realities  to  their  devotees.  Such  were  the  corruptions  of  religion  in  Israel.  With 
these  were  associated  great  social  evils.  Along  with  the  foreign  religious  rites  there 
were  introduced  also  foreign  customs,  that  marred  the  simplicity  of  the  national 
character.  This  appeared  most  prominently  in  dress,  which  is  here  especially 
mentioned  (ver.  8) ;  but  that  was  doubtless  only  an  outward  symptom  of  much  more 
radical  evils.  According  to  the  Law,  Israel  was  to  be  distinguished  from  other  nations 
by  their  dress  as  well  as  by  their  religion.  Their  characteristic  dress  was  to  be  marked, 
on  the  one  hand,  by  simplicity  and  decency  (Lev.  xix.  19;  Deut.  xxii.  11,  12),  and 
on  the  other  hand,  by  having  fringes  as  a  memorial  of  Jehovah's  Law  (Numb,  xv,  38). 
But  now  they  were  growing  ashamed  of  this  outward  mark  of  their  religion,  and  came 
to  adopt  the  more  varied  and  splendid  costume  of  their  neighbours.  This  probably 
indicated  in  general  habits  of  luxury  and  ostentation,  which  would  naturally  begin  and 
be  most  prevalent  among  the  princes  and  courtiers,  though  from  them  they  would 
spread  to  other  classes.  Such  selfish  indulgence  was  especially  to  be  condemned  at  a 
time  when  the  nation  was  far  from  being  in  a  secure  or  prosperous  state.  It  had 
gutfered  serious  losses,  and  barely  escaped  from  imminent  dangers ;  and  even  now  the 
land  was  much  impoverished  compared  with  its  former  state,  and  the  great  empires 
around  were  becoming  more  powerful  and  threatening.  Surely  this  was  not  a  time  to 
imitate  foreign  luxurious  customs,  and  to  be  ashamed  of  the  ancient  and  godly  simplicity 
of  Israel's  manners.  Such  luxury  could  only  be  maintained  by  the  rich  and  the  princes 
by  means  of  oppression  and  extortion ;  and  this  is  another  evil  described  as  the  cause 
of  the  judgment  (ver.  9).  Those  who  leap  on  the  threshold  may  refer,  as  some  think, 
to  the  E'hilistines,  who  formed,  with  other  foreigners;  the  royal  body-guard ;  or  they 
may  simply  indicate,  as  others  think,  the  eagerness  with  which  the  satellites  of  the 
princes  intruded  into  the  houses  of  the  citizens,  in  order,  by  their  oppressive  exactions, 
to  fill  the  houses  of  their  masters.  Anyhow,  the  verse  indicates  that,  in  order  to  kee|) 
up  the  splendour  and  luxury  of  the  court,  the  people  were  oppressed,  and  exorbitant 
taxes  or  contribntions  levied  from  them  by  a  system  of  fraudulent  charges,  or  forcible 
domiciliary  visitation.  This  is  the  natnral  accompaniment  of  a  selfish  oligarchy  in  an 
impoverished  and  declining  state.  Then,  further,  the  merchant  people  in  Jerusalem, 
who  seem  to  have  had  as  their  place  of  business  the  valliy  between  the  hills  of  the  old 
and  new  city,  are  as  Canaanites  in  their  transactions ;  the  balances  of  deceit  are  in 
their  hand ;  they  have  laden  themselves  with  silver  by  usury  and  fraud.  Such  ill-gotten 
gains  .seem  to  be  alluded  to  in  ver.  11,  and  threatened  with  destruction  when  the 
enemy  shall  burst  into  the  city  by  the  fish  gate  at  the  north-west,  its  most  exposed 
side ;  when  the  cry  from  it  shall  only  be  answered  by  a  helpless  howling  from  the  new 
city  and  crashing  from  the  higher  parts,  and  the  hollow  valley  where  merchants  most 
did  congregate  shall  be,  as  it  were,  a  mortar  (Maktesh),  in  which  they  shall  be  trodden 
down  and  bruised  to  pieces  by  the  invailing  host.  At  least  there  is  described  a  prevail- 
ing avarice  and  hasting  to  be  rich,  as  one  of  the  causes  on  account  of  which  thi» 


20  TUE   BOOK   OF   ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  1. 1- 18, 


crushing  judgmeat  comes.  Finally,  we  have  set  before  ua  the  careless  self-indulgence 
of  those  who  are  at  ease  amid  aU  this  prevailing  evil,  who  have  had  no  changes,  and 
have  no  fear  of  change,  who  siy  or  think  that  neither  good  nor  evil,  blessing  nor 
judgment,  is  to  be  looked  for  from  God  (ver.  12).  All  things  continue  as  they  were; 
and  the  thought  of  a  present,  living  God,  the  Judge  of  the  earth,  and  the  Avenger  of 
wrong,  has  faiied  from  men's  minds.  Such  are  the  various  forms  of  evil  that  are 
indicated  by  the  prophet  as  the  cause  of  the  judgment  which  he  announces.  Can  it  be 
said  that  they  are  unknown  in  our  day  and  in  ourselves  ?  No  doubt  the  outward 
forms  of  idolatry  and  oppression  then  rampant  are  strange  and  repulsive  to  us ;  but 
are  we  free  from  the  tendency  to  degrade  the  living  God  to  a  mere  nature-power,  which 
is  the  essence  of  idolatiy  ?  And  are  not  ungodliness,  neglect  of  God's  spiritual  worship, 
selfish  ostentation  and  luxury,  neglect  and  oppression  of  the  poor,  love  of  money,  and 
careless  self-indulgence,  but  too  well  kuown  among  us  ?  The  picture  is  not  one  of 
mere  historical  or  antiquarian  interest,  but  of  ever-present  moral  significance.  It 
teaches  us  that  such  evils  always  lead  to  ruin,  that  they  lay  a  nation  helpless  at  the 
feet  of  its  enemies,  and  make  its  continued  existence  impossible.  AU  history  conflrms 
this  lesson ;  and  revelation  bids  us  look  beyond  all  merely  historical  catastrophes  to 
that  final  judgment  of  the  Lord  which  shall;  in  the  fullest  sense,  be  universal, 
embracing,  not  one  nation  only,  but  all  mankind,  and  searching  out  each  individual, 
to  be  confronted  with  his  Judge  and  with  the  fruit  of  his  own  doings, 

in.  The  lesson  or  all  this  is  bxpresskd  in  the  wobds,  "  Hold  thy  peace  at 
THE  PHESENCB  OF  THE  LoBD  GoD."  (Ver.  7.)  This  is  the  first  and  most  urgent  duty. 
The  prophet  has  further  directions  to  give  in  following  discourses;  but  this  is  the 
immediate  effect  that  the  announcement  of  judgment  should  have.  A  silence  of  awe  and 
humility  is  what  becomes  men  in  the  presence  of  God,  when  he  rises  up  to  judgment 
as  the  Lord  of  all  the  earth.  "  Bu  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God,"  is  his  voice  as  the 
day  of  the  Lord  approaches.  This  implies  a  recognition,  on  the  one  hand,  of  the  reality, 
and  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  justice,  of  God's  judgment.  It  should  be  received  as  a  real 
expression  of  God's  wrath  against  the  sins  of  men.  Let  not  the  evils  that  come  upon 
nations  or  individuals  in  consequence  of  their  sins  be  regarded  as  mere  accidents,  or  as 
only  due  to  the  operation  of  natural  laws.  They  may  be  brought  about  immediately 
by  such  second  causes,  but  behind  all  these  we  are  to  recognize  the  mind  and  will  of 
the  living  God.  He  speaks  to  us  as  truly  by  the  ordinary  courses  of  nature  as  by  the 
most  stupendous  miracle,  and  if  he  shows  us  that  earthly  conceptions  of  the  Divine 
degrade  and  brutalize  man,  that  selfishness  and  selfish  indulgence,  luxury  and  oppres- 
sion, bring  a  people  to  ruin  and  lay  them  helpless  at  the  feet  of  their  foes,  that  is  a 
real  and  most  solemn  judgment  of  God  against  these  things.  Let  us  be  silent  also  as 
recognizing  the  justice  of  this  judgment.  These  things  are  evil,  deserving  of  abhorrence 
and  destruction ;  and  God,  who  in  his  laws  of  nature  appoints  ruin  to  be  their 
consequence,  shows  himself  just  and  holy.  Let  us  humbly  acknowledge  this;  and  in 
s(i  far  as  these  evils  of  ungodliness  and  selfishness  have  found  place  in  us,  let  us  put 
our  hand  on  our  mouth,  acknowledging  that  we  have  nothing  to  answer  to  God,  and 
are  verily  guilty  in  his  sight.  There  is  hope  for  us  if  we  thus  confess  our  sin.  There 
IS  hope  in  the  very  fact  that  God  announces  his  judgment  against  our  sin.  For  what 
is  the  announcement?  It  is  that  God  will  utterly  sweep  away  the  evils  that  are  done 
in  the  land ;  it  is  against  those  that  the  fire  of  his  wrath  is  kindled ;  and  if  men  will 
cling  to  these  evils,  and  hug  their  sins  to  their  bosom,  he  will  sweep  away  the 
wicked  with  the  stumbling-blocks.  Both  together  shall  be  destroyed,  for  God  will  be 
rid  at  last  of  sin.  But  if  any  are  willing  to  be  separated  from  their  sins,  by  however 
humble  and  painful  a  pncess  that  may  be,  then  the  assurance  that  God  will  utterly 
sweep  away  the  evil  will  have  hope  for  them.  The  fire  that  is  to  devour  the  whole 
land  is  a  fire  of  jealousy  as  well  as  of  wrath.  Because  the  Lord  loves  his  people  with 
a  jealous  affection,  in  spite  of  all  their  unfaithfulness,  he  will,  if  they  but  silently 
trust  themselves  to  him,  make  the  fire  of  his  anger  against  their  sin  to  purify  and 
perfect  them.  Thus  this  coming  of  the  Lord  for  judgment  is  the  harbinger  of  final 
salvation  to  those  who  desire  to  be  purged  from  those  evils  against  which  his  wrath  is 
revealed.  Therefore  "  let  Israel  hope  in  the  Lord,  for  with  the  Lord  there  is  mercy, 
and  with  him  is  plenteous  redemption;  and  he  will  redeem  Israel  from  all  hit 
iniquity,"— 0. 


<!H.i.  1— 18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  21 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  Word.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  unto  Zephaniah  the 
Bun  of  Cushi,  the  son  of  Gedaliah,  the  son  of  Amariah,  the  son  of  Hizkiah,  in  the  days 
of  Josiah  the  son  of  Amon,  King  of  Judah.  I  will  utterly  consume  all  things  from  oflF 
the  land,  saith  the  Lord.  I  will  consume  man  and  beast,"  etc.  Of  Zephaniah  we  have 
no  information  hut  what  is  contained  in  his  prophecy.  His  genealogy  is  given  in  the 
first  verse  of  this  chapter.  He  prophesied  in  the  reign  of  Josiah,  probably  between 
the  twelfth  and  eighteenth  years  of  his  reign.  In  the  first  chapter  he  predicts  the 
utter  desolation  of  Judah.  In  the  second,  he  exhorts  his  countrymen  to  repentance  in 
view  of  the  approaching  judgments,  and  threatens  the  surrounding  nations,  Philistia, 
Moab,  and  Ammon.  In  the  third,  after  a  severe  rebuke  of  Jerusalem,  he  foretells,  in 
glowing  language,  its  future  purification  and  enlargement,  and  the  destruction  of  all  its 
enemies.  The  style  is  distinguished  neither  by  sublimity  nor  elegance.  He  resembles 
in  many  respects  his  contemporary,  Jeremiah.  He  borrows  some  of  the  language  of 
former  prophets  (comp.  ch.  ii.  14  with  Isa.  xiii.  21  and  xxxiv.  11 ;  ch.  ii,  15  with  Isa. 
xlvii.  8).  "  The  genealogy  of  Zephaniah  is  given  throuiih  Oushi,  Gedaliah,  and  Amariah 
to  Hezekiah;  for  in  the  original  Hebrew  the  words  'Hizkiah'  and  'Hezekiah'  are  the 
same.  As  it  was  unusual  that  the  descent  of  prophets  should  be  given  with  such 
particularity,  it  has  been  assumed  with,  some  probability  that  Hezekiah  was  the  king 
of  that  name ;  though  in  this  case  we  should  have  expected  the  addition,  '  King  of 
Judah.'  The  chemarim  are  the  idol-priests ;  that  is,  priests  devoted  to  idol-worship. 
In  2  Kings  xxiii.  5,  where  the  writer  is  speaking  of  the  reformation  under  Josiah,  the 
word  is  translated  idolatrous  priests ;  in  Hos.  x.  5,  simply  priests,  which  is  its  mean- 
ing in  the  Syriac  language.  Some  have  maintained  that  the  invasion  of  Judah  to 
which  Zephaniah  refers  was  that  of  the  Scythians  described  by  Herodotus ;  but  this  is 
very  improbable.  From  the  fact  that  the  king's  children  are  included  in  the  threatened 
invasion — ^in  the  Hebrew, '  I  will  visit  upon  the  princes  and  the  king's  children ' — some 
have  inferred  that  they  must  have  been  already  grown  and  addicted  to  idolatrous 
practices ;  consequently,  that  Zephaniah  wrote  later  than  the  eighteenth  year  of  Josiah. 
But,  as  Keil  and  others  have  remarked,  the  meniion  of  the  king's  children  may  have 
been  added  simply  to  indicate  the  universality  of  the  approaching  visitation;  not  to 
say  that  the  prophetic  vision  of  Zephaniah  may  have  anticipated  the  sin  and  the 
punishment  of  these  king's  children,  Jehoahaz  and  Jehoiakim  "  (Barrows).  In  these 
verses  we  learn  two  things. 

I.  The  distinguishinq  capacity  op  man,  and  the  wonderful  condescension 
OF  God.  1.  The  distinguishing  capacity  of  man.  What  is  that  ?  To  receive  the 
word  of  Jehovah.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  unto  Zephaniah  the  son  of 
Cushi,"  etc.  This  Zephaniah,  who  from  tl^e  fulness  of  his  genealogy  here  given,  was 
perhaps  a  person  of  note,  was,  however,  mainly  distiuguished  by  this— viz.  that 
he  received  a  word  from  Jehovah.  What  is  it  to  receive  a  word  from  another  ?  Not 
merely  to  hear  it,  to  remember  its  sound,  or  to  write  it  down,  but  to  appreciate  its 
meaning.  This  is  the  grand  distinction  of  man  as  a  mundane  existence.  It  is  not  the 
reasoning  principle  that  distinguishes  man  from  other  creatures  on  earth,  for  other 
creatures  possess  this  in  some  degree ;  not  the  durability  of  his  existence,  for  other 
creatures  may  live  as  long  as  he ;  but  the  capacity  of  taking  in  ideas  from  the  Infinite 
Mind,  to  understand  ani  realize  God's  thoughts.  In  a  sense,  there  is  a  greater  distance 
between  me  as  a  man  and  the  most  intelligent  animal  on  this  earth,  than  there  is 
between  me  and  my  Maker.  The  highest  animal  cannot  take  in  and  understand  my 
thoughts ;  but  I  can  take  in  and  understand  the  thoughts  of  my  Maker.  "  The  word 
of  the  Lord"  comes  to  every  man  at  times — comes  in  visions  of  the  night,  comes  in 
the  intuitions  of  conscience,  comes  in  the  impressions  that  nature  makes  on  the  heart. 
2.  The  wonderful  condescension  of  Ood.  How  amazing  the  condescension  of  God  to 
speak  to  man !  Many  of  the  poor  little  wretched  creatures  who  are  called  emperors 
and  empresses  would,  perhaps,  not  deign  to  speak  to  paupers,  to  hold  converse  with 
them ;  but  the  "  Lord,  though  he  be  high,  yet  hath  respect  unto  the  humble ; "  "  Thus 
saith  the  High  and  Lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity,  whose  name  is  Holy,  To  that 
man  will  I  look  who  is  of  a  contrite  heart."  ' 

II,  The  moral  coRRnpTiON  of  man,  and  the  exclusive  prerogative  of  God. 
1.  The  moral  corruption  of  man.  There  are  three  great  moral  evils  indicated  in  these 
verses.    (1)  Idolatry.    "  I  will  cut  off  the  remnant  of  Baal  from  this  place,  and  th« 


22  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  l  1— 18l 

uame  of  the  Gheniarims  with  the  priests;  and  them  that  worship  the  host  of  heaven 
upon  the  house-tops."  Tlie  remains  of  Baal-worship,  which  as  yet  Josiah  was  unable 
utterly  to  eradicate  in  remoter  places.  Baal  was  the  Phcenician  tutelary  god.  His 
name  means  lord ;  and  the  feminine  god  corresponding  and  generally  associated  with 
him  was  Ashtaroth.  As  he  was  represented  by  the  sun,  so  she  was  the  goddess 
answering  to  the  moon  and  the  rest  of  the  heavenly  host.  In  fact,  it  was  the  worship 
of  nature ;  a  worship  to  which  corresponds  the  pantheistic  and  scientific  exaltation  of 
Nature  and  her  laws  in  our  own  days,  as  if  God  were  the  slave  of  his  own  world  and  its 
laws,  instead  of  the  Lord,  Creator,  and  Sustainer,  who  can  and  will  modify,  alter,  and 
suspend  the  order  of  the  present  system  of  things,  according  to  his  own  sovereign 
pleasure,  and  in  furtherance  of  the  higher  moral  laws,  in  subserviency  to  which  the 
laws  of  nature  exist.  Prom  the  time  of  the  judges  (Judg.  ii.  13)  Israel  had  fallen  into 
this  idolatry ;  and  Manasseh  had  lately  set  up  this  idol  within  Jehovah's  temple 
itself  (2  Kings  xxi.  3 — 7) :  "  He  reared  up  altars  for  Baal,  and  made  a  grove  [symbol 
of  the  goddess  Ashtaroth]  .  .  .  and  worshipped  all  the  host  of  heaven.  .  .  And  he  built 
altars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  of  which  the  Lord  said,  In  Jerusalem  will  I  put  uiy 
Name.  And  he  built  altars  for  all  the  host  of  heaven  in  the  two  courts  of  the  house  of 
the  Lord.  And  he  set  a  graven  image  of  the  grove  [the  symbol  of  the  heavenly  host] 
that  he  had  made  in  the  house,  of  which  the  Lord  said  to  David,  and  to  Solomon  his 
son,  In  this  house,  and  in  Jerusalem,  which  I  have  chosen  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel, 
will  I  put  my  Name  for  ever."  Josiah  began  his  reformation  in  the  twelfth  year  of  his 
reign  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3,  4,  8),  and  in  the  eighteenth  had  as  far  as  possible  completed 
it.  "  And  the  name  of  the  Gheniarims  with  the  priests."  These  chemarim  were  in  all 
probability  subordinate  ministers  of  the  idolatrous  priests,  and  their  duty  was  to  assist 
them  at  the  altar.  "  Them  that  worship  the  host  of  heaven  upon  the  house-tops."  The 
houses  in  the  East  had  flat  roofs,  open  to  thelieavens,  and  there  the  worship  was  per- 
formed. Idolatry  is  one  of  the  great  sins  of  the  world ;  it  is  confined  to  no  age  or  land. 
Its  sijirit  is  loving  the  creature  movB  than  the  Creator.  (2)  Backsliding.  "  Them 
that  are  turned  back  from  the  Lord."  Indeed,  idolatry  is  an  apostasy,  and  so  is  all  sin. 
All  sin  is  a  going  back  from  the  Lord.  "My  people  have  committed  two  evils; 
they  have  forsaken  me  the  Fountain  of  living  waters,  and  hewed  them  out  cisterns, 
broken  cisterns,  that  can  hold  no  water"  (Jer.  ii.  13).  (3)  Indifferentism.  "And 
those  that  have  not  sought  the  Lord,  nor  inquired  for  him."  This  is  the  most 
prevalent  of  all  sins,  and  is  one  of  the  great  roots  of  all  immoralities — an  utter 
neglect  of  religion.  Beligious  indifferentism  is  the  great  sin  of  England  to-day.  God 
and  his  claims  are  everywhere  practically  ignored.  This  indifferentism,  like  a  vast 
pool  of  mud,  generates  all  that  is  morally  noxious,  pernicious,  and  vile  in  our  midst. 
2.  The  esodvsive  prerogative  of  Ood.  What  is  that  ?  To  destroy.  "  I  will  utterly 
consume  all  things  from  off  the  land,  saith  the  Lord.  I  will  consume  man  and  beast ; 
I  will  consume  the  fowls  of  the  heaven,  and  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  and  the  stumbling- 
blocks  with  the  wicked ;  and  I  will  cut  off  man  from  off  the  land,  saith  the  Lord?" 
(1)  No  one  can  really  destroy  but  God.  "  I  kill,  and  I  make  alive."  Annihilation  is 
as  far  behind  the  power  of  the  creature  as  is  the  work  of  creation.  Man  may  crush  the 
forms  of  things,  but  the  essences  lie  infinitely  beyond  his  touch.  (2)  God  has  a  right 
to  destroy  human  life.  He  has  a  right  because  it  belongs  to  him.  He  has  a  right 
because  through  sin  it  has  forfeited  its  existence.  (3)  His  destructive  work  is  as 
henejkent  as  his  sustaining  and  creating.  Destruction  is  a  principle  in  all  nature  • 
one  plant  destroys  another,  one  animal  destroys  another,  and  there  are  elements  in 
nature  whose  work  is  destruction.  From  destruction  new  life  and  beauty  come- 
destruction  keeps  the  universe  alive,  fresh,  and  healthy. D.  T.  ' 

YeTB.  7— 18.— The  day  of  war  the  day  of  horrors.  «  Hold  thy  peace  at  the  presence 
of  the  Lord.  These  verses  present  a  graphic  and  soul-stirring  description  of  the 
horrid  day  of  war  which  was  about  to  dawn  on  the  Hebrew  land.  It  is  called  a  "day 
of  wrath,"  a  "day  of  trouble  and  distress,  a  day  of  wasteness  and  desolation  a  day  of 
darkness  and  gloominess,  a  day  of  clouds  and  thick  darkness,  a  day  of  the  trumpet  and 
alarm  against  the  fenced  cities,  and  against  the  high  towers."  No  more  awful  day  than 
the  day  of  war.  It  is  a  day  when  fiends  are  released  from  prison  and  let  loose  on  earth 
The  war-day  is  represented  here — 


CH.  1. 1— 18.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAH.  23 

1.  As  A  DAT  OF  EN0BM0U8  8A0EIFI0B.  "  Hold  thy  peace  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
Olid :  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand:  for  the  Lord  hath  prepared  a  sacrifice."  A 
sacrifice !  1.  It  is  an  enormous  sacrifice  of  life.  Several  classes  are  referred  to  here 
as  the  victims  of  this  war.  (1)  Boycdty.  "  I  will  punish  the  princes,  and  the  king's 
children,  and  all  such  as  are  clothed  with  strange  apparel."  The  reference  is  here 
probably  to  the  princes  of  the  royal  house,  to  the  children  of  the  king  who  would  be 
on  the  throne  at  the  time  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy.  In  2  Kings  xxv.  7  it  is  said 
that  Nebuchadnezzar  slew  the  sons  of  King  Zedekiah  before  his  eyes.  When  the  savage 
Hiid  bloodthirsty  lions  of  war  are  let  loose,  they  are  regardless  of  all  social  distinction; 
tUey  seize  the  princes  as  well  as  paupers.  No  class  in  society,  perhaps,  as  a  rule,  deserve 
the  destruction  more  than  the  rulers  of  the  people.  They  for  the  most  part  create 
the  wars,  and  often  deserve  to  be  struck  down.  Through  all  history  they  have 
generally  been  the  war-makers.  War  is  their  own  child,  and  their  child  sometimes 
strikes  them  down.  (2)  Another  class  referred  to  is  the  nobility.  "  In  the  same  day 
also  will  I  punish  all  those  that  leap  on  the  threshold,  which  fill  their  masters'  houses 
with  violence  and  deceit."  Some  suppose  that  there  is  a  reference  here  to  the  Philistine 
custom  of  not  treading  on  the  "  threshold,"  which  arose  from  the  head  and  hands  of 
Dagon  being  out  off  on  the  threshold  before  the  ark  (1  Sam.  v.  5).  It  scarcely  matters ; 
reckless  men  in  power  are  referred  to — men  that  fill  their  masters'  houses  with  violence 
and  deceit.  "  The  servants  of  princes,"  says  Calvin,  "  who  have  gotten  prey  like  hounds 
for  their  masters,  leap  exultingly  on  their  masters'  threshold,  or  on  the  threshold  of  the 
houses  which  they  break  into."  War  sometimes,  and  insurrectionary  war  always, 
strikes  savagely  at  the  higher  classes.-  It  plays  sad  havoc  with  aristocracies;  it  sets 
manors  in  flames,  and  treads  coronets  in  the  dust.  (See  another  and  more  probable 
interpretation  in  the  Exposition.)  (3)  Another  class  referred  to  is  that  of  the  traders. 
"Howl,  ye  inhabitants  of  Maktesh,  for  all  the  merchant  people  are  cut  down:  all 
they  that  bear  silver  are  cut  off."  Some  translate  Maktesh,  "Mortar,"  a  name 
employed  for  the  valley  of  Siloam,  from  its  hollow  shape.  It  was  a  valley  at  the 
eastern  extremity  of  Moriah,  where  the  merchants  dwelt.  The  invading  arujy  seizes 
the  wealth  of  the  country.  Greedy  conquerors  have  always  had  a.  keen  eye  to  this. 
(4)  Another  class  referred  to  is  the  masses.  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass  at  that 
time,  tliat  I  will  search  Jerusalem  with  candles,  and  punish  the  men  that  are  settled 
on  their  lees :  that  say  in  their  heart,  The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do 
evih"  This  is  not  a  bad  description  of  the  masses  of  people  in  all  ages.  They  are: 
(a)  Unconspiontous.  Pretty  well  all  alike,  they  do  not  stand  out  in  the  country  from 
the  generality.  War  has  no  particular  aim  at  them,  though  it  strikes  them 
indiscriminately ;  still,  though  unconspicuous,  war  will  find  them  out.  "  1  will  search 
Jerusalem  with  candles."  (6)  Religiously  indifferent.  "  Settled  on  their  lees."  This 
means  crusted,  hardened,  like -wines  long  left  at  the  bottom  undisturbed,  "That 
say  in  their  heart,  The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do  evil."  Eeligious 
indifferentism  has  always  been  the  leading  characteristic  of  the  masses.  Note  the 
sacrifice  of  life  in  all  these  classes — the  rulers  and  the  ruled,  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the 
ignorant  and  the  learned,  the  innocent  and  the  giulty,  the  young  and  the  old,  all  in 
war  form  one  huge  sacrifice  of  blood.  It  is  overwhelmingly  awful  to  think  of  the  lives 
that  have  been  sacrificed  in  war  even  since  the  year  1852.  In  the  Crimean  War  (1854) 
it  is  estimated  that  750,000  fell;  in  the  Italian  War  (1859),  45,000;  in  the  war  at 
Sohleswig-Holstein,  3000;  in  the  American  Civil  War,  BO.^OOO;  in  the  war  between 
Prussia,  Austria,  and  Italy  (1866),  45,000;  expeditions  to  Mexico,  Cochin  China, 
Morocco,  Paraguay,  65,000 ;  in  the  Franco-German  War,  215,000;  Turkey  massacres 
in  Bulgaria,  25,000;  total,  1,948,000.  This  is  one  of  the  sacrifices  that  war  has 
made,  not  only  iti  civilized  lands,  but  even  in  Christendom  during  the  last  thirty-five 
years ;  and  the  perpetrators  of  these  enormities  call  themselves  Christians,  professed 
disciples  of  him  who  said,  "  I  came  not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them ; " 
*  If  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him."  2.  It  is  an  enormous  sacrifice  of  property, 
"Therefore  their  goods  shall  become  a  booty,  and  their  houses  a  desolation:  they 
■hall  also  build  houses,  but  not  inhabit  them;  and  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  but 
not  drink  the  wine  thereof."  Who  can  estimate  the  amount  of  property  that 
the  wars  during  the  last  thirty  years  have  utterly  destroyed  ?  The  Crimean  War 
cost  £340.(X)0,000 ;  the  Italian,  £60.000,000 ;  the  American  Civil  War,  £1,400,000.000 ; 


24  THE   BOOK   OF   ZBPHANIAH.  [oh.  i.  1— la 

the  Franco-Prussian,  £500,000,000;  and  the  comparatively  smaller  wars,  £1,000,000; 
ftD  amount  altogether  of  £2,400,000,000 — a  sufBcient  sum  to  su|)ply  every  inhabitant 
of  the  globe,  not  only  with  the  necessaries,  but  with  the  comforts  and  educational 
advantages  of  life.  "  GKve  me,"  says  Stebbins,  "  the  amount  that  has  been  spent  in 
war,  and  I  will  purchase  every  foot  of  land  of  the  globe.  I  will  clothe  every  man, 
woman,  and  child  in  an  attire  that  kings  and  queens  might  be  proud  of.  I  will  build 
a  school-house  upon  every  hillside  and  in  every  valley  over  the  habitable  earth,  I  will 
supply  that  school-house  with  a  competent  teacher.  I  will  build  an  academy  in  every 
town,  and  endow  it ;  and  a  college  in  every  state,  and  fill  it  with  able  professors.  I 
will  crown  every  hill  with  a  church  consecrated  to  the  promulgation  of  the  gospel  of 
peace.  I  will  support  in  its  pulpit  an  able  teacher  of  righteousness,  so  that  on  every 
sabbath  morning  the  chime  of  one  hill  shall  answer  to  the  chime  of  another  around 
the  earth's  broad  circumference ;  and  the  voice  of  prayer  and  the  song  of  praise  shall 
ascend  like  the  smoke  of  a  universal  holocaust  to  heaven."  To  talk  of  the  glories  of 
war  is  to  exult  in  the  horrors  of  hell.  I  confess  that  a  quivering  seizes  my  nerves, 
and  a  chilly  sadness  comes  over  my  spirits,  when  I  hear  men  calling  themselves 
Christians,  especially  ministers,  uttering  one  word  in  favour  of  war,  whether  defensive 
or  aggressive.    The  man  who  defends  war  defends  the  devil  himself. 

II.  Ab  a  DAT  OP  DiviKB  EETBiBUTioN.    All  these  horrors  of  war  are  here  repre- 
sented as  judgments  from  the  Almighty.     It  is  called  the  "  day  of  the  Lord."    He  is 
represented  as  having  "  prepared  a  sacrifice,"  referring  to  the  awful  sacrifice  of  life  and 
property;  as  having  summoned  his  guests — the  warriors,  men  of  blood — to  battle. 
Indeed,  it  is  called  the  "  Lord's  sacrifice."     He  is  represented  as  saying,  "  I  will  punish 
the  princes ; "  "I  will  search  Jerusalem  with  candles ; "  " I  will  bring  distress  upon 
men."    And  again,  "The  whole  land  shall  be  devoured  by  the  fire"  of  his  jealousy; 
"  for  h«  shall  make  even  a  speedy  riddance."    In  Bible  phraseology,  the  Almighty  is 
often  represented  as  the  Author  of  that  which  he  merely  permiU.     He  does  not 
originate  wars.    The  consciousness  of  warriors  attests  this.    All  the  passions  of  greedy 
revenge,  and  ambition,  whence  all  wars  spring,  are  self-generated  in  the  breast  of  th» 
man  of  blood.     His  moral  constitution  will  not  allow  him  to  ascribe  them  to  hift 
Maker ;  he  charges  them  on  himself.    He  feels  that  he  is  not  their  Author,  and  he 
knows  that  they  stand  in  awful  contrast  with  the  holy  and  beneficent  will  of  th« 
almighty  Maker  of  the  universe.     He  does  not  instigate  these  abominations,  but 
allows,  uses,  and  controls  them.    In  using  war  as  a  punishment  for  sin,  three  things 
are  to  be  observed.   1.   That  all  who  perish  in  vmr  righteomly  deserve  their  fate.    God 
says  here,  "I  will  bring  distress  upon  men,  that  they  shall  walk  like  blind  men, 
because  they  have  sinned."    War,  in  its  most  savage  recklessness,  does  not  strike  one 
man  down  who  has  not  sinned,  and  whose  sin  does  not  deserve  death.    The  penalty  of 
death  that  comes  to  men  in  war  would,  by  the  moral  laws  of  the  universe,  come  to 
theqi  sooner  or  later  in  some  other  form.     "It  is  appointed  to  all  men  once  to  die';" 
"  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."    2.  That  warriort,  in  executing  the  Divine  Juitice^ 
demonstrate  the  enormity  of  the  evil  requiring  punishment.     Where  can  sin  be  seen  in 
aspects  so  complete  in  all  that  is  morally  horrific,  outrageous,  and  infernal,  as  in  the 
battle-field?     No  thoughtful  man  can  gaze  on  it  there  without  feeling  that  th& 
righteous  Governor  of  the  universe,  for  the  happiness  of  his  creation,  is  bound  to  visit 
it  with  his  hot  displeasure.   3.   War,  at  an  officer  of  Divine  Justice,  reveals  the  amazing 
freedom  allowed  to  the  sinner  in  this  world,  and  God's  controlling  power  over  hostile 
forces.     Who  will  say  that  man  is  a  slave  when  he  sees  the  warrior  going  forth  with  a 
free  step  on  a  mission  directly  hostile  to  the  beneficent  laws  of  the  universe,  the  moral 
institutions  of  his  own  nature,  and  the  revealed  will  of  Heaven  ?    He  allowed  men 
even  to  put  to  death  his  own  Son  upon  the  cross.     Here  is  liberty.     Whilst  human 
freedom  is  revealed,  God's  controlling  power  is  also  most  strikingly  manifest.     "  He 
maketh  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him."    He  has  servants  who  serve  him  against 
their  will,  as  well  as  servants  who  serve  him  with  their  will.     Warriors  and  devils  are 
of  the  former  class.     "Ye  thought  evil  against  me;  but  God  meant  it  unto  good" 
(Gen.  I.  20) ;  "  I  have  raised  thee  up  for  to  show  in  thee  my  power  "  (Exod.  ix.  16)  • 
"  Let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  assuredly  that  God  hath  made  that  same  "jesut 
whom  ye  have  crucified  both  Lord  and  Christ."     Out  of  the  wars  and  tumults  of  his 
■nemies  he  will  bring  something  glorious,  a  Lord  anii  Christ. 


CH.  n.  1—15.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAH. 


26 


"  Patiently  receiTed  from  the«i 
Evil  cannot  evil  be; 
Evil  is  by  evil  healed, 
Evil  is  but  good  concealed." 

(Charles  Weiley.) 


UT. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  II. 


Ver.  1— «h.  iii.  8.— Part  II.  Exhorta- 
tion  TO    Repbntanob  and  to  Pkrseveb- 

ANCE. 

Vers.  1 — S. — §  1.  The  prophet  urges  all  to 
txamine  their  ways  before  the  day  ef  the 
Lord  come ;  and  he  praye  the  righteoui  to 
seek  the  Lord  more  eamettly,  in  order  that 
they  may  be  lafe  in  the  judgmetU. 

Ver.  1. — Gather  yonrselves  together.  8o 
the  Tersions ;  and  this  rendering  is  probably 
correct.  The  prophet  calls  upon  his  nation  to 
BBBemble  themselves  together  in  order  to  take 
mutual  counsel  or  to  make  general  confession 
and  supplication  to  God.  Another  rendering, 
based  on  some  alteration  of  letters  is,  "Set 
yonrselTes  to  be  ashamed ;  yea,  be  ashamed  " 
(comp..  Isa.  zItI.  8).  Yea,  gather  together. 
The  IiXX.  renders  the  two  words,  axivix^rirf 
xal  avvtiBriTf,  "be  ye  gathered  and  bound 
together;"  "Td  est,"  says  Jerome,  "estote 
vobis  caritatis  Tinoulo  copulati."  0  nation 
not  desired ;  Vulgate,  gena  non  amahilis — a 
litotes  for  abominable,  hated  for  its  sins,  un- 
worthy of  Ood's  love  and  care.  The  Septua- 
gint  rendering,  dTralSevrov,  "  unchastened," 
points  to  the  meaning  affixed  by  the  Chaldee 
paraphrase,  "that  dnes  not  wish  to  be  con- 
Terted,"  having  no  desire  for  amendment; 
like  what  is  said  in  Jer.  ii.  80,  "they 
received  no  correction."  Others  render, 
"  which  does  not  turn  pale,"  t.e.  which  is 
not  ashamed,  comparing  Isa.  xxix.  22.  The 
verb  kaeaph  seems  to  have  this  meaning  in 
niphal,  according  to  Talmudio  use ;  but  its 
usual  signification  is  "  to  pine  "  or  "  long 
for."  The  Revised  Version  gives  in  the 
margin,  "  that  hath  no  longing  " — a  render- 
ing adopted  by  Professor  Gandell,  im- 
plying that  the  people  are  quite  Batisfied 
with  their  present  condition,  and  have  no 
aspiration  for  anything  better  or  higher 
(comp.  Hos.  zii.  8).  This  is  a  very  apposite 
interpretation ;  hut  there  is  no  sufficient 
ground  for  rejecting  the  translation  of  the 
Authorized  Version,  which  is  supported  by 
high  authority,  is  agreeable  to  the  use  of 
the  word,  and  affords  a  satisfactory  sense. 

Ver.  2. — Before  the  decree  bring  forth. 
Before  the  result  follows  the  fiat.  The 
Divine  purpose  is  represented  as  a  woman 
labouring   with  child,   travailing  before  it 


comes  to  execution.  This  is  thrice  repeated 
in  substance,  to  show  the  certainty  and 
speed  of  its  arrivaL  Before  the  day  pass  as 
the  chaff,  "  Before  "  is  not  in  the  Hebrew, 
and  the  clause  is  parenthetical,  "  Like  chaff 
the  day  passeth."  "  The  day  "  must  be  still 
the  day  of  the  Lord,  not  the  day  of  life  or 
the  dny  of  repentance.  God  brings  on  the 
judgment  as  easily  and  as  quickly  as  the 
wind  carries  the  chaff  before  it.  The  Sep- 
tuagint  and  Syriao  join  the  two  olansei 
together;  thus  the  LXX.,  Tlph  tov  ytvitrBai 
(tfMs  its  ivBos  irapavoptv6/ieyoVf  "Before  ye 
become  as  a  flower  that  passeth  away. "  And 
Jeromegives, "  Priusquam  pariat  jussio  qnssi 
pulTerem  transeuntem  diem,"  "Before  the 
decree  beget  the  day  which  passeth  by  like 
the  dust."  The  present  Hebrew  text  doe* 
not  confirm  these  versions.  The  figure  of 
the  chaff  is  common  (see  Job  zxL  18;  Iia. 
xvii.  13;  xxix.  5). 

Ver.  3. — The  prophet  here  addressei 
especially  the  pious  among  the  people, 
urging  them  to  perseverance  in  the  right 
way.  Ye  meek  of  the  earth.  The  humble, 
peaceable,  religious,  among  the  Israelite! 
are  primarily  meant ;  whose  character  is  the 
direct  contrary  of  the  proud,  self-confident 
infidels  mentioned  above  (comp.  Isa.  zi.  4 ; 
Amos  ii.  7).  But  there  is  no  reason  why 
the  admonition  should  not  include  the 
heathen  who  are  striving  to  live  after  the 
light  of  conscience  (Isa.  xxiv.  5 ;  Bom.  ii.  14, 
etc.).  Which  have  wrought  his  judgment. 
Who  have  fulfilled  the  ordinances  of  God's 
Law.  Seek  righteousness.  This  and  the 
following  injunction  explain  what  is  meant 
by  "  seek  the  Lord  "  at  the  beginning  of  the 
verse  (Deut.  xvi.  20).  Seek  meekness.  Per. 
severe  in  showing  a  humble,  gentle  temper, 
Septuagint,  koI  ivoKplyaaBe  airi,  "and 
answer  them."  It  may  be.  Even  the 
righteous  shall  scarcely  be  saved  (comp. 
1  Pet.  It.  17,  18).  Ye  shall  be  hid.  Ye 
shall  be  preserved  in  the  time  of  judgment 
(Ps.  xxvii.  5 ;  xxxi.  20 ;  Isa.  xxxii.  2). 
This  recalls  the  prophet's  name,  wiiioh  U 
interpreted,  "  Whom  the  Loid  hides  "  (comp. 
Amos  T.  14,  15). 

Ven.  4  —  7.  —  §2.  The  admonUion  it 
enforced  by  the  announcement  of  the  punieh- 
ment  that  it  about  to  fall  on  various  nation*, 
v>hich  thall  prepare  the  uay  for  the  general 


26 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH. 


[CH.  IL  1 — 15. 


aeeepianee  of  true  religion ;    and  firtt  iTie 
lenience  ihdll  reach  the  Philiitinet. 

Ver.  4. — There  is  reason  enough  why 
Judah  shonld  tremble  when  the  nations 
around  her,  such  as  the  powerful  and  turbu- 
lent Philistines,  fall  before  the  invading 
host.  Foui  of  the  five  cities  of  the  Philis- 
tines are  mentioned,  as  denoting  the  whole 
territory,  which  again  is  the  representative 
of  the  heathen  world  more  definitely  par- 
ticularized later  on.  Thus  tlie  four  quarters 
of  the  world  are  virtually  specified :  the 
Philistines  representing  the  west,  the 
Moabites  and  Ammonites  (vers.  S — 10) 
the  east,  the  Oushites  (vers.  11,  12)  the 
Bouth,  and  the  Assyrians  (vers.  13 — 15)  tlie 
north.  Gaza  (see  note  on  Amos  i.  6)  shall 
he  forsaken;  depopulated  and  desolate. 
There  is  a  paronomasia  in  the  Hebrew : 
Atzah  will  be  aziAhah.  Some  of  the  other 
localities  are  treated  in  the  same  manner 
(comp.  Micah  i.  10 — 15,  and  notes  there). 
Asbkelon  a  desolation  (see  note  on  Amos  i. 
8).  They  shall  drive  out  Ashdod.  The  in- 
habitants shall  be  expelled.  (For  Ashdod, 
see  note  on  Amos,  loc.  cit.)  At  tl^e  noon  day. 
The  hottest  part  of  the  day,tlie  most  unlikely 
time  for  a  liostile  attack,  hence  the  expres- 
sion is  equivalent  to  "unexpectedly  and 
suddenly  "  (comp.  Jer.  xv.  8).  Ekrou  shall 
be  rooted  up.  In  the  Hebrew  paronomasia, 
Ekron  ("  the  Deep-rooted  ")  shall  be  teaker. 
(For  Ekron,  see  note  on  Amos,  Zoo.  ci<.,  wliere 
the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  concerning  that 
town  is  noted.)  Gaza  (see  note  on  Amos  i. 
7),  after  being  depopulated  and  again  re- 
peopled  by  Alexander  the  Great,  fell  into 
the  hands  of  Ptolemy,  and  was  destroyed  by 
Antiochns,  B.o.  19S  (Polybius,  'Heliq.,'  xvi. 
40 ;  Pusey,  p.  457).  Often  rebuilt,  it  was 
as  often  razed  to  the  ground;  and  the  pre- 
sent representative  of  the  ancient  town, 
Ghuzzeh,  stands  upon  a  hill  composerl  of 
the  accumulated  ruins  of  successive  cities. 
Of  the  condition  of  Ashkelon,  Dr.  Thomson 
writes,  "  There  are  no  buildings  of  the 
ancient  city  now  standing,  but  broken 
columns  are  mixed  up  with  the  soil.  .  .  . 
Let  us  climb  to  the  top  of  these  tall  frag- 
ments at  the  south-east  angle  of  the  wall, 
and  we  shall  have  the  whole  scene  of  deso- 
lation before  us,  stretching  terrace  after 
terrace,  quite  down  to  the  sea  on  the  north- 
west. .  .  .  No  site  in  this  country  has  so 
deeply  impressed  my  mind  with  sadness. 
.  .  .  They  have  stretched  out  upon  Ashkelon 
the  line  of  confusion  and  the  stones  of 
emptiness.  Thorns  have  come  up  in  her 
palaces,  and  brambles  in  the  fortresses 
thereof,  and  it  is  a  habitation  of  dragons 
and  a  court  for  owls  (Isa.  xxxiv.  11 — 13)" 
('The  Land  and  the  Book,'  p.  546).  "It 
was  for  ages,"  says  Dr.  Porter,  "  a  great  and 


strong  city.  Under  the  Philistines,  the 
Hebrews,  the  Greeks,  the  Romans,  the 
Saracens,  the  Crusaders,  it  was  a  place  of 
note.  The  shattered  walls  that  still  sur- 
round the  site  were  built  by  Bichard  C(aur 
de  Lion.  When  I  first  clambered  to  the  top 
of  a  broken  bastion,  a  scene  of  desolation 
burst  suddenly  upon  my  view  for  which  I 
was  not  prepared,  though  I  had  seen  Baal- 
bec  and  Palmyra,  Heliopolis  and  Memphis. 
The  whole  site  was  before  me,  and  not  a 
fragment  of  a  house  standing.  One  small 
section  was  covered  with  little  gardens ;  but 
over  the  rest  of  the  site  lay  smooth  rounded 
hillocks  of  drifting  sand.  Tlie  sand  is  fast 
advancing— so  fast,  that  probably  ere  the 
close  of  the  century  the  site  of  Asoalon  will 
have  been  blotted  out  for  ever  "  ('  Illust.  of 
Bible  Proph.,'  p.  21).  As  for  Ekron,  hod. 
Akir,  travellers  note  that  it  is  now  a  little 
village,  consisting  of  about  fifty  mud 
houses,  without  n  remnant  of  antiquity  ex- 
cept two  large  walls ;  its  very  ruins  have 
vanished.  The  omission  of  Gath,  a  town  at 
this  time  of  small  importance  (see  note  on 
Amos  i.  6),  is  probably  owing  to  a  feeling 
of  the  symbolism  of  numbers,  four  denoting 
completion,  or  the  whole,  like  "  the  four 
winds,  the  four  ends  of  the  earth,"  etc. 

Ver.  5. — Woe.  The  denunciation  extends 
to  all  Philistia.  The  inhabitants  of  the  sea 
coast.  Both  the  Greek  and  Latin  Versions 
retain  the  notion  of  the  Hebrew  word 
ehehel:  "Ye  who  inhabit  the  measured 
allotment  of  the  sea."  "  Philistia,"  says  Sir 
C.  Warren,  "  consists  of  an  undulating  plain 
from  fifty  to  a  hundred  feet  above  the  level 
of  the  sea,  reaching  thirty-two  miles  ftom 
Ekron  to  Gaza,  with  a  breadth  of  from  nine 
to  sixteen  miles.  To  the  east  of  this  the 
hills  commence,  not  the  hill-country,  but  a 
series  of  low  spurs  and  undulating  ground, 
culminating  in  hogs'  backs,  running  nearly 
north  and  south,  and  rising  iu  places  to 
twelve  hundred  ieet  above  the  ocean " 
('  Survey  Memoirs  :  Jerusalem,'  p.  436). 
The  nation  of  the  Cherethites.  So  in  Ezek. 
XXV.  16.  Zephaniah  calls  the  Philistines  by 
this  name  for  the  sake  of  a  play  on  the 
word,  Cherethites  meaning  "  Cutters-off,"  and 
they  were  devoted  to  being  "cut  off" 
(Itarath).  Part  of  David's  body-guard  was 
composed  of  the  same  people  (1  Sam.  xxx. 
14).  The  name  seems  to  have  belonged  to  a 
portion  of  the  Philistines  who  inhabited  the 
southern  part  of  the  district.  "  One  of  the 
principal  villages  of  Philistia  is  now  called 
Keretiya,  so  that  the  term  may  apply  to  the 
inhabitants  of  this  tovm — an  ancient  Cherith 
not  mentioned  in  the  Bible"  (Conder's 
'Handbook  to  the  Bible,'  p.  237).  They 
have  been  supposed  to  have  emigrated  from 
Crete,  but  there  are  no  reliable  grounds  for 
this  theory,  though  the  LXX.  in  the  present 


CH.  II.  1 15.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH. 


27 


passage  has,  niooMoi  KptiTui',  "sojourners 
of  the  Cretans;  ami  the  Syriac  gives  » 
similar  rendering.  St.  Jerome  renders,  "  gens 
perditorum,"  "nation  of  destroyers."  The 
word  of  the  Lord  is  against  yon.  The  sen- 
I tnie  is  pronounced  in  the  words  following. 
0  Canaan.  O  Philistia,  which  shall  be  as 
Canaan,  and  in  like  manner  exterminated. 
Canaan  means  "  Lowland,"  a  name  which 
originally  was  applied  to  the  Phoenician  and 
Philistine  tracts  on  the  sea-coast.  I  will 
even  destroy  thee.  The  like  threat  is 
uttered  by  Jeremiah  (xlvii.  4,  5)  and  Ezekiel 
(XXV.  15—17).  , 

Ver.  6. — Dwellings  and  cottages  for  shep- 
herds ;  better,  pastures  uith  eaveyfor  nhepherds. 
In  the  use  of  the  word  keroth,  "  diggings  " 
("cottages,"  Autliorized  Version)  there  is 
probably  intended  another  play  on  the 
"  Oherethites."  Neale,  "  The  road  from 
Gaza  to  Askalnn  lay  along  the  sea- 
shore. ...  In  the  winter  months  many 
parts  of  it  are  impiactioable,  owing  to  the 
encroachment  of  the  sea.  The  surf  then 
dashes  wildly  into  the  huge  caverns  worked 
out  of  the  endless  sand-hills  that  line  this 
coast.  These  caverns  were  tenanted,  when 
we  passed,  by  goatherds  and  their  Hocks. 
Thither  they  resort  for  shelter  from  the  fierce 
heat  of  the  noontide  sun ;  and  here  during 
the  night  the  goats  are  penned.  There  are 
wells  and  reservoirs  in  the  vicinity  which 
furnish  water  for  the  flocks  the  whole  year 
round,  and  the  brambles  and  thorn-bushes 
that  flourish  near  the  seaside  form  their 
pasturage"  (' Eight  Years  in  Syria,' i.  40,41). 
Septuagint,  eo"Tai  K^^ttj  vofi^  irot^vitav, "  Crete 
shall  be  a  pasture  of  flocks." 

Ver.  7. — And  the  coast  shall  be  for  the 
remnant,  etc.  ;  it  will  be  a  traot  for  the 
remnant.  The  district  will  be  the  possession 
of  the  Jews,  who  should  be  restored  to  their 
lanil  (Obad.  19).  Zeplianiah  virtually  pre- 
dicts the  Captivity  and  the  return,  and  inti- 
mates that  the  destruction  of  hostile  nations 
is  the  means  of  advancing  true  religion. 
They  shall  feed  their  flocks  thereupon. 
Where  the  Philistine  cities  stood  shall  be 
the  pasture-ground  of  the  Israelites'  flocks. 
Ashkelon.  One  city  is  mentioned  as  a  type 
of  all.  For.  This  is  the  reason  why  they 
are  permitted  to  triumph  thus.  Shall  visit. 
In  a  good  sense,  to  protect  and  cherish 
(Bxod.  iv.  31 ;  Ruth  i.  6;  Ps.  viii.4;  Zech. 
X.  3 ;  Luke  i.  68).  Turn  away  (reverse) 
their  captivity.  Bring  them  back  from  their 
exile  to  their  own  land  (oomp.  Joel  iii.  1 ; 
Micah  iv.  10).  The  phrase,  however,  is 
often  (and  possibly  here)  used  metaphori- 
cally for  the  abolishment  of  misery  and  the 
re!^toration  to  a  happy  condition  (comp. 
Deut.  XXX.  3 ;  Job  xlii.  10  (15) ;  Jer.  xxix. 
14).  The  full  accomplishment  of  this 
prophecy    concerning     the    overthrow    of 


Philistia  is  of  a  spiritual  nature,  and  must 
be  looked  for  in  the  Messianic  era,  when 
the  kingdoms  of  the  world  become  the 
kingdom  of  Christ ;  and  so  in  the  subse- 
quent predictions. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — §  3.  The  puniihment  shall 
fall  next  upon  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites, 
representing  the  east. 

Ver.  8. — The  reproach  of  Moab.  As  this 
refers  to  past  actions,  it  must  signify  the 
hostile  attitude  which  Moab  a!  way s  assujiied 
towards  Israel.  The  revilings  of  the  children 
of  Ammon.  Both  these  descendants  of  Lot 
proved  themselves  bitter  enemies  of  the 
Jews.  Keil  refers  to  Numb.  xv.  30  and 
Ezek.  XX.  27,  where  the  word  gadaph  in 
used  in  the  sense  "to  revile  or  blaspheme 
by  actions."  (For  the  persistent  hostility 
of  Moab,  see  note  on  Amos  ii.  1,  and  for  that 
of  Ammon,  the  note  on  Amos  i.  13.)  Mag- 
nified themselves  against  their  border. 
They  carried  themselves  haughtily,  showed 
their  pride  by  violating  the  territory  of  the 
Israelites.  •  This  pride  and  self-exaltation 
is  a  leading  feature  of  the  character  of 
these  two  nations  (comp.  Isa.  xvi.  6 ;  Jor. 
xlviii.  29,  etc.).  The  destruction  of  the 
kingdom  of  Israel  and  the  weaknesi  of 
that  of  Judah  gave  occasion  in  these 
neighbours  to  display  their  haughtiness 
and  independence.  The  LXX.  has,  "  my 
borders."  God  himself  assigned  its  bound- 
aries to  Israel,  as  to  other  nations  (Deut. 
xxxii.  8) ;  and  to  invade  these  was  an  offence 
agaiu&t  him. 

Ver.  9. — As  I  live.  This  is  a  common 
formulary  to  express  certainty,  God,>as  it 
were,  pledging  his  existence  to  the  truth  of 
his  declaration  (Deut.  xxxii.  40 ;  Isa.  xlix. 
18,  etc.).  God  calls  himself,  The  Lord  of 
hosts,  therefore  able  to  fulfil  his  threats; 
and  the  God  of  Israel,  and  therefore  ready 
to  punish  wrongs  done  to  his  chosen  people. 
As  Sodom.  This  threat  came  home  with 
particular  force  to  the  Moabites  and  Am- 
monites who  dwelt  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  Dead  Sea,  and  had  before  their  eyes 
this  awful  proof  of  the  chastisement  with 
which  sin  meets,  and  which  had  happened 
in  the  time  of  their  forefather  Lot.  "  There 
are  no  settled  inhabitants,"  says  Dr.  Porter, 
writing  of  Moab,  "but  the  hillsides  and 
glens  are  studded  with  the  ruins  of  ancient 
towns  and  villages.  We  at  length  pitched 
our  tents  by  the  lonely  fountain  of  Heshbon. 
The  site  of  this  rnyal  city  is  commanding — 
a  rounded  hill  on  the  edge  of  a  vast  plateau, 
which  extends  on  the  south  and  east  to  the 
horizon,  and  on  the  west  breaks  down  in 
steep  slopes,  jagged  cliifs,  and  wild  ravineg, 
to  the  Dead  Sea  and  Jordan  valley,  nearly 
four  thousand  feet  below.  The  hill  was  the 
nucleus  of  the  city.     Its  sides  are  covered 


28 


THE   BOOK   OF   ZEPUANIAH. 


[on.  II.  i — ^15 


with  ruins,  and  remains  of  honses,  temples, 
anil  other  buildings  are  strewn  over  a  con- 
siderable section  of  the  adjoining  plain. 
AU  is  desolate.  Xot  a  building,  and 
scarcely  a  fragment  of  a  vail,  is  standing ; 
yet,  though  deserted  for  centuries,  it  bears 
its  ancient  name.  I  looked  from  Heshbon 
far  and  wide  oyer  the  ancient  territory  of 
the  Moabites,  and  saw  desolation  every- 
where. The  old  towns  and  villages  are  all 
deserted  and  in  ruins.  In  fact,  there  is  not 
at  this  moment  n  single  inhabited  town  or 
village  in  Moab,  except  Kerak,  which  stands 
on  tbu  extreme  southern  border.  The  sites  of 
many  were  visible — grey  mounds  dotting  the 
plain"  («Illust.  of  Bible  Proph.,'  pp.  24, 25). 
"  The  cities,  towns,  villages,  are  all  in  ruins. 
.  . .  And  no  attempt  is  ever  made  to  rebuild 
or  repair ;  no  man  ventures  to  seek  even  a 
temporary  abode  among  the  ruined  cities 
of  Moab.  The  local  Arab  avoids  the  old 
sites,  and  seeks  rest  and  secnrity  amid  rocks 
and  ravines ;  the  powerful  desert  tribes 
sweep  over  the  country  periodically,  and 
devour  and  destroy  all  in  their  track" 
(ibid.,  p.  28).  Even  the  breeding  of  nettles ; 
rather,  a  poisession  of  nettles ;  a  place  where 
nettles  only  grow.  Vulgate,  siccitai  «j>/n- 
arum.  The  identification  of  the  plant 
kharul  is  uncertain.  In  Job  (zxz.  7)  it  is 
represented  as  of  sufficient  growth  to  con- 
ceal fugitives ;  hence  some  think  it  is  the 
wild  mustard.  Dr.  Pusey,  relying  on  a 
notice  of  Professor  Palmer,  considers  it  to 
be  the  mallow,  which  grows  in  rank  luxuri- 
ance in  Moab.  The  LXX.,  reading  daleth 
instead  of  mem  in  the  aitai  \ey6/i(yoy 
mimshaq,  rendered  "breeding,"  has  Ao/to- 
ffxhs  iK\e\eiiiiifvri,  "  Damascus  shall  be  left." 
Salt-pits.  All  travellers  note  the  abun- 
dance of  rock-salt  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
Dead  Sea  (see  Deut.  xxix.  23;  and  comp. 
Ps.  evil.  34 ;  Jer.  xvii.  6).  A  perpetual 
desolation.  The  prophecy  intimates  that 
this  country  should  never  recover  its  pros- 
perity (oomp.  Ezek.  xxv.).  The  residue 
of  my  people  shall  spoil  them.  A  partial 
fulfilment  of  this  proplicoy  occurred  when 
Judas  MaccabtBus  smote  Ammon  (1  Mace. 
v.  6,  etc.),  and  Alexander  Jaunaaus  sub- 
dued the  Moabites  (Josephus,  '  Aut.,'  xiii. 
13.  5) ;  but  the  prophet  looks  forward  to  a 
spiritual  fulfilment  under  the  Messiah,  as 
we  see  from  ver.  11  (comp.  Isa.  xiv.  1,  2 ; 
xlix.  23,  etc.).  Tlie  faithful  remnant  shall 
win  possession  of  the  heathen  strongholds, 
and  convej  t  the  nations  to  Olirist,  and  in- 
corporate them  in  the  Church. 

Ver.  10.  —This  shall  they  have,  All 
ttiese  calamities  mentioned  above  shall  fall 
on  the  Ammonites  and  Moabites  in  punish- 
ment of  their  pride  and  spite  and  insolence 
(see  note  on  ver.  8). 

Ver.   11. — §    4.     Before  passing  to   the 


judgment  on  the  nations  of  the  south  and 
north,  the  prophet  shows  the  object  of  all 
these  chastisements :  God  destroys  idolatry 
in  order  that  pure  religion  may  reign  over 
all  the  earth.  The  Lord  will  be  terrible 
unto  them.  The  Lord  shows  himself  as  a 
terrible  God  over  the  Moabites  and  Am- 
monites, but  only  as  parts  of  tlie  heathen 
world,  and  with  a  view  to  a  universal 
result  This  is  the  purpose  of  the  revela- 
tion of  himself  as  Judge.  Septuagint, '  £ti- 
ipavi}atrai  K6pios  iv*  abrois,  "  The  Lord 
will  appear  against  them."  7or  he  will 
famish  all  the  gods  of  the  earth.  The  verb 
means  literally,  "  to  make  lean,"  and  then 
"  to  destroy ; "  hence  the  LXX.,  4^o\o$pei- 
(TCI.  The  word  may  be  chosen  in  order  to 
express  the  idea  that  worshippers  will  no 
more  be  found  to  offer  sacrifices  and  drink- 
offerings  to  the  gods  (see  Bel  and  the 
Dragon  6,  12).  The  nations  being  de- 
stroyed, the  gods  reverenced  by  them  would 
vanish  and  be  heard  of  no  more.  Men  shall 
worship  him.  Idolatry  abolished,  men  shall 
learn  to  worship  Jehovah.  Every  one  from 
his  place.  Every  one  sliaU  worship  God  in 
his  own  place  and  country ;  the  Lord  shall 
be  universally  recognized,  and  bis  worship 
shall  no  longer  be  confined  to  one  temple  oi 
one  laud,  but  wherever  men  dwell  there 
shall  they  offer  their  homage  and  adoration 
(oomp.  Isa.  xix.  18,  19;  Mai.  i.  11,  where 
the  same  truth  is  signified).  Such  passages 
as  Micah  iv.  1  and  Zech,  xiv.  16,  which 
seem  to  imply  that  all  nations  are  to  oome 
up  to  the  material  Jerusalem  to  pay  their 
devotions,  require  evidently  a  spiritual 
interpretation,  and  denote  that  the  heathen 
converted  to  Christ  shall  be  received  into 
the  Church,  and  join  in  the  worship  of  the 
true  Israel.  The  isles  of  the  heathen ;  or, 
coasts  of  the  naUotti ;  the  most  distant 
couutries  that  lie  across  the  seas  (Gen.  x, 
5;  Ps.  Ixxii,  10;  Isa.  xi.  11,  etc.). 

Vers.  12— 15.— §  5.  The  judgment  slidll 
fall  upon  the  Ethiopians  and  Assyrians, 
representing  the,  south  and  north. 

Ver.  12. — Ethiopians ;  Cushites.  These  are 
named  as  the  most  lemote  inhabitants  of 
the  south  with  which  the  Israelites  were 
acquainted  (Ezek.  xxxviii.  5).  Ye  shall  be 
slain  by  my  sword ;  the  slain  of  my  sword  art 
they,  the  second  person  being  dropped,  as 
one  cannot  nddress  the  dead  (Orelli).  The 
Lord's  sword  is  the  instrument  which  he 
uses  to  effect  his  purpose  of  punishment 
(comp.  Isa.  xxvii.  1;  xxxiv.  5;  Ixvi.  16). 
Tlie  Ethiopians  are  reckoned  among  the 
forces  of  Egypt  (2  Ohron.  xii.  3  ;  Nah.  iii.9, 
etc.).  The  prediction  had  a  fulfilment  when 
the  Assyrians  conquered  Egypt,  and  again 
under  Nebuchadnezzar.  It  shall  have  a 
more  sublime  accomplishment   when    the 


CH.  II.  1 — 15.] 


THE   BOOK  OF   ZEPHANIAU. 


29 


sfforil  of  the  Spirit  shall  reduce  the  utmost 
south  to  the  dominion  of  Christ  (see  Isa. 
xlv.  H ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  31).  The  oominenoe- 
ment  of  this  conversion  is  seen  in  the 
chamberlain  of  Queen  Oandaoe  (Acts  viii. 
27,  etc.). 

Ver.  13.— The  noith,'  represented  by 
Assyria,  as  yet  nnconqiiered,  and  still  ap- 
parently flourishing.  Though  this  country 
lay  to  the  north-east  of  Palestine,  its  armies 
attacked  from  the  north,  and  it  is  generally 
represented  as  a  northern  power.  Its  de- 
struction was  foretold  (Isa.  x.  12 ;  Ezek. 
xxxi.  11,  etc. ;  Nah.  i.  14,  etc.).  In  this 
verse  the  Hebrew  verbs  are  not  in  the 
simple  future,  but  in  the  imperative  or 
optative  mood,  "  Let  him  stretch  out  his 
hand,"  etc  ,  as  though  the  prophet  were 
praying  that  the  enemies  of  his  people 
might  be  overthrown.  Nineveh.  St.  Jerome 
gives  speoiosam,  rendering  the  pioper  name 
accoi-ding  to  his  notion  of  its  Hebrew 
etymology.  Its  proper  meaning,  in  Acca- 
dian,  would  be  "  Fish-house,"  i.e.  house  con- 
secrated to  the  god  offish.  (For  a  description 
of  Nineveh,  see  note  on  Jonah  i.  2.  For 
the  destruction  of  Nineveh,  see  the  In- 
troduction to  Nahum,  §  I.)  Dry  like  a 
wilderness.  The  country  shall  become  an 
arid  desert.  Assyria  was  greatly  indelited 
for  its  remarkable  fertility  to  a  very  suc- 
cessful sjstem  of  artificial  irrigation,  and 
when  this  was  not  maintained,  great  tracts 
soon  relapsed  into  a  wilderness  (Layard, 
'  Nineveh,'  ii.  68).  "  Cultivation,"  says 
Professor  Eawlinson,  "is  now  the  excep- 
tion instead  of  the  rule.  '  Instead  of  the 
luxuriant  fields,  the  groves  and  gardens  of 
former  times,  nothing  now  meets  the  eye 
but  an  arid  waste '  (Chesny).  Large  tracts 
are  covered  by  unwholesome  marshes,  pro- 
ducing nothing  but  enormous  reeds ;  others 
lie  waste  and  bare,  parched  up  by  tlie  fierce 
heat  of  tlie  sun,'  and  utterly  destitute  of 
water;  in  some  places  sand-drifts  accumu- 
late, and  threaten  to  make  the  whole  region 
a  mere  portion  of  the  desert"  (' Ano.  Men.,' 
i.  41). 

Ver.  14.. — Flocks ;  herds.  '  The  prophet 
describes  graphically  the  desolation  men- 
tioned in  tlie  preceding  verse.  The  "herds" 
are  not  sheep  and  cattle,  as  in  parallel  cases 
(Isa.  xvii.  2 ;  xxvii.  10 ;  xxxii.  14),  but  all 
the  beasts  of  the  nations — all  the  wild  beasts 
that  infest  the  country.  Septuagint,  ndyra 
Tci  Biipta  Trjs  7^5.  The  Hebrew  will  hardly 
bear  Keil's  rendering,  "  all  kinds  of  beasts 
in  crowds."  (Compare  similar  predictions, 
Isa.  xiii.  21 ;  xxxiv.  11,  14).  The  cormorant 
(kaath);  probably  the  pelioan;  Vulgate, 
onocroialus;  the  Septuagint  gives,  x"/""- 
A.E01/TES,  which  word  S'  hleusner  thinks  to 
have  been  interotianged  with  KSpuKes  that 
follows  soon  afterwards.    But  in  the  latter 


place  Jerome  has  tsorvus.  The  pelican  is 
found  in  the  Assyrian  monuments  under 
more  than  one  appellation  (see  'Transact, 
of  Soo.  of  Bibl.  ArchsBol.,'  viii.  93,  etc.,  and 
141).  The  bittern  (kippod).  Most  recent 
critics  translate  this  by  "  hedgehog "  or 
"  porcupine."  The  Septuagint  has,  ex"'" : 
the  Vulgate,  eriaius.  But  neither  hedgehog 
ij  !■  porcupine  utters  cries  or  frequents 
pools  of  water,  and  it  may  well  be  doubted 
whether  some  marsh-loving  bird  is  not 
meant.  Certainly  the  following  clause  suits 
the  habits  of  a  bird  better  than  those  of  a 
hedgehog  (see  'Bible  Educator,'  iii.  312, 
where  Dr.  Tristram  is  quoted  saying,  "  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  bittern  is  very  abundant 
in  these  swamps  of  the  Tigris,  and  in  all  the 
marshy  grounds  of  Syria;  and  its  strange 
booming  note,  disturbing  the  stillness  of  the 
night,  gives  an  idea  of  desolation  which 
nothing  but  the  wail  of  the  hyena  can 
equal ").  No  notice  of  the  bittern  seems  to 
be  found  in  the  Assyrian  monnments, 
though  the  mention  of  the  heron  is  not 
uncommon.  The  kaath  and  kippod  are 
commonly  mentioned  together,  e.g.  Isa.  xxxiv. 
11.  The  "upper  lintels j  "the  capitals"  of 
the  columns  (see  note  on  Amosix.  1,  where 
the  same  word  kaphtor  is  used).  Their  Toioe 
shall  sing  in  the  windows ;  literally,  the 
voice  of  the  songster  in  the  window.  Birds 
shall  perch  and  sing  in  the  apertures  of  the 
ruined  palaces.  Vulgate,  Vox  cantantia  in 
fenestra;  the  LXX.  has,  Qripla  (paiyiiirei  iv 
Tois  Siopiyfiatrtv  atrrijs,  **  Wild  beasts  shall 
cry  in  the  breaches  thereof."  Others  trans- 
late, "Hark I  it  singeth  in  the  windows." 
There  are  no  traces  of  windows  in  any 
of  the  Assyrian  palaces,  even  in  the 
case  of  chambers  next  the  outer  walls.  If 
daylight  were  admitted,  it  must  have 
entered  through  openings  in  the  ceilings 
(Layard,  '  Nineveh,'  ii.  260).  Desolation 
shall  be  in  the  thresholds.  The  word 
rendered  "desolation"  (chorebh)  Jerome 
notes  may  be  read  as  meaning  "  sword," 
"drought,"  and  "raven;"  he  adopts  the 
last  sigiiifieation,  and  translates,  in  agree- 
ment with  the  LXX.,  corms.  But  it  seems 
best  to  take  the  term  as  signifying  "desola- 
tion;" no  human  creature  shall  be  found 
there,  only  ruin  and  rubbish.  Ewald 
renders,  "Owls  shall  sing  in  the  win- 
dows, crows  on  the  threshold,  '  shivered, 
crushed.'"  For  he  shall  uncover  (he  hath 
laid  hare)  the  cedar  work.  God,  or  the 
enemy,  has  so  destroyed  the  palaces  that 
the  cedar  panelling  is  exposed  to  the 
weather.  Jerome  has,  "  Attennabo  robur 
ejus."  We  see  by  Sennacherib's  boast 
(Isa.  xxxvii.  24)  that  the  Assyrians  im- 
ported cedars  for  building  pnrposes.  And 
we  have  monumental  evidence  of  the  em- 
ployment of  cedar  in  palaces  at  least  sinoa 


30 


THE   BOOK   OF   ZEPHANlAil. 


[CU.  IL   1- 


■15. 


the  time  of  Assiirnazirpal,  B.o.  860.  Esar- 
hufldnn  reports  that  he  received  cypress  and 
cedar  from  Lebanon  as  tribute  ;  and  Assur- 
banipal  states  that  in  erecting  his  palace  he 
used  cedar  pillars  from  Siijon  and  Lebanon 
(Sohrailer,' Die  Keilinsohrift.uiid  Alt. Test.,' 
pp.  183,  453).  Neriglissar,  King  of  Babylon, 
is.o.  559,  in  rebnMding  bis  palace,  records 
that  be  "arranged  tall  cedars  for  its  roof" 
<'  Records  of  the  Past,'  v.  142). 

\ei.  15. — This  is  the  rejoicing  city.  Such 
is  tlie  fate  of  this  once  exulting  city,  that 
dwelt  carelessly,  secure,  with  no  fear  of 
danger  at  hand  (Isa,  xlvii.  8,  on  which  this 


passage  is  founded).  I  am,  and  there  is  none 
beside  me.  Thus,  in  effect,  Nineveh  claimed 
for  herself  the  attributes  of  Almighty  God. 
She  stands  alone,  mistress  of  nations,  a  type 
of  the  powers  of  this  world,  which  deify 
themselves  and  defy  the  Lord.  Septuagint, 
OuK  cffTi  /i€T'  i/ii  £Ti,  "  Thcro  Is  no  more  any 
after  me."  Shall  hiss.  In  scorn  (Job  xxviL 
23;  Jer.  xix.  8;  MicaU  vi.  16).  Wag  his 
hand.  He  shall  shake  or  wave  his  hand 
with  the  gesture  of  dismissal,  as  if  saying, 
"Away  with  thee  I  get  tliee  gone  1"— a 
rehearsal  of  the  awful  "  Depart  ye  1 "  in  the 
final  judgment  (oomp.  Nah.  iii.  19). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  evil  summoned  to  repentance.  Having  declared  fully  and  faithfully 
the  Divine  judgments,  the  prophet  changed  his  tone,  and,  turning  to  another  aspect  of 
truth  and  blending  compassion  with  severity,  he  tenderly  entreated  those  who  had 
become  bo  estranged  Irom  God  to  return  to  him  with  all  their  hearts.  This  is  how  he 
appeals  to  his  godless  fellow-countrymen.  "  Gather  yourselves,"  etc.  (vers.  1,  2). 
Notice — 

I.  The  habdbnino  effect  of  bin.  Evil  hardens  those  who  indulge  in  it,  even  as 
the  fire  hardens  the  material  brought  under  its  influence.  You  read  such  words  as 
Jer.  ii.  25;  xviii.  12;  Zech.  vii.  12,  and  you  cannot  help  being  impressed  with  the 
hardening  tendency  of  sin.  So  here  (ver.  1)  note  the  words,  "  0  nation  not  desired." 
The  won!  rendered  "  desired  "  means  "  to  turn  pale,"  "  to  become  white  with  sbame." 
It  is  the  same  word  used  by  Isaiah  (xxix.  22),  "  Jacob  shall  not  now  be  ashamed,  neither 
shall  his  face  now  wax  pale."  Indulgence  in  sin  renders  men  stubborn  and  stiff-necked. 
There  is  a  spiritual  condition  expressively  described  as  "  past  feeling."  The  heart  may 
become  hardened,  and  the  conscience  seared.     "  Take  heed,"  etc.  (Heb.  iii.  13). 

II.  God's  infinite  condbscensiok  and  gbaoe  in  makin»  ant  approach  ob 
APPEAL  TO  THOSE  THUB  coNFiKMBD  IN  EVIL-DOING.  He  might  have  left  such  to  reap 
the  fall  c<msequences  of  their  transgressions,  whereas  in  truth,  all  down  the  ages  his 
seeking  love  has  been  going  out  after  such  with  a  view  to  their  restoration,  and  even 
his  chastisements  have  had  the  same  merciful  intention.  1.  We  see  this  seeking  love 
of  God  manifested  in  ancient  time  in  the  raising  up  of  these  prophets,  men  full  of  faith 
and  power ;  bold,  courageous,  daring ;  and  in  sending  these  forth  to  expostulate  with 
the  callous  and  impenitent,  if  perchance  they  might  be  led  "to  break  off  sin  by 
righteousness."  2.  In  the  Incarnation.  He  who  spake  in  time  past  to  the  fathers  by 
the  prophets,  subsequently  spoke  unto  them  by  his  Son  (Heb.  i.  1).  "  The  Son  of  man 
came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  3.  In  the  institution  of  the  Christian 
ministry,  sending  forth  his  ambassadors  to  proclaim  to  the  estranged  the  conditions  of 
reconciliation  and  peace  (2  Cor.  v.  20). 

III.  God's  call  addressed  to  evil-doers  is  a  call  to  repentance.  "  Gather 
yourselves  together,  yea,  gather  together"  (ver.  1);  t.e.  "Bend  yourselves,"  bend  low 
in  contrition  in  view  of  transgression — repent,  and  submit  yourselves  to  Gud.  The 
nature  of  lepentance  must  be  understeod  in  order  to  this.  There  enters  into  it  the 
element  of  sorrow ;  the  deep  humbling  of  the  soul ;  yet  sorrow  alone  does  not  con- 
stitute it ;  there  must  accompany  this  the  breaking  away  from  sin,  and  the  turning  unto 
God.  "  Repentance  towards  God,  and  faiili  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  are  sacred  and 
imperative  duties  and  obligations  ;  yet  there  is  no  merit  in  them,  but  the.  heart  must 
rest  entirely  in  the  mercy  of  God,  which  is  so  large  that  man  has  only  to  bend  his 
heart  before  God — to  be  willing — and  God's  all-regenerating  power  shall  be  experienced. 
Then  "  bend  yourselves,  bend,  ye  people,  that  do  not  grow  pale  "  (ver.  1). 

IV.  This  spirit  op  penitence  and  submission  to  the  Lobd  God  should  bk 
CHERISHED  WITHOUT  DELAY.  (Ver.  2.)  A  British  general,  on  being  asked  when  he 
could  be  ready  to  take  the  command  of  the  forces,  answered,  "  Now."     He  knew  aa 


CH.  n.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  31 

a  soldier  that  the  call  of  duty  did  not  admit  of  delay.  When  a  course  is  felt  by  u» 
to  be  right,  we  ought  at  once  to  pursue  it.  "  What  is  '  now'?  'A  bright  presence.* 
Wrestle  with  it,  and  say,  '  I  will  not  let  thee  go  except  thou  bless  me '  I  'A  sweet 
garden.'  Go,  gather  in  it  the  fruits  of  life !  '  A  true  temple.'  Bow  down  in  it,  and 
consecrate  yourself  to  him  who  has  placed  you  within  its  shrine  1  '  A  living  rescue.* 
Use  it,  that  you  may  run  into  the  ark  of  safety  !  'A  rich  banquet.'  Now  the  feast 
is  spread;  'Come,  eat,  0  friends,  drink,  0  beloved!  yea,  eat  and  live  for  ever'!" 
(Martin  Tupper's  '  Proverbial  Philosophy,'  p.  204).  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time ; 
behold,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation  "  (2  Cor,  vi.  2). 

Ver.  3. — The  good  stimulated  to  a  truer  life.  It  is  a  truth  admitting  of  abundant 
illustiation,  that  even  in  the  most  degenerate  times  God  has  had  a  people  to  sliow 
forth  his  praise.  He  has  not  left  himself  without  witnesses.  Whilst  in  this  prophet's 
day  there  was  "  the  remnant  of  Baal "  (ch.  i.  4),  there  was  also  "  the  remnant  of  the 
house  of  Judah  "  (oh.  ii.  7),  "  the  remnant  of  Israel,"  that  did  no  iniquity  nor  uttered 
lies  (oh.  iii.  13).  "The  meek  of  the  earth"  clothed  with  humility  and  working 
righteousness  (ver.  3). 

I.  True  piety  influences  both  the  chabaoteb  and  conddct  op  its  subjects. 
It  is  an  inward  grace,  manifesting  itself  outwardly  in  holy  excellence  and  holy  livings 

1.  Humility  is  the  token  referred  to  as  indicating  its  influence  upon  the  character. 
"  Te  meek  of  the  earth."  Meekness  is  power  tempered  with  gentleness — it  is  the  soul 
restraining,  holding  back  its  own  power.  (1)  It  manifests  itself  towards  God.  H» 
has  marked  out  to  man  the  true  way  of  life;  but  man  has  the  power  to  decline  to 
pursue  this  course.  "  The  meek  of  the  earth  "  are  such  as,  although  conscious  of  this 
power,  yield  themselves  up  in  passive  obedience  to  God,  to  receive  the  impress  of  hi» 
Spirit,  and  to  be  moulded  at  his  will.  (2)  And  it  manifests  itself  towards  man.  The 
possessor  of  this  heavenly  grace,  in  his  intercourse  with  his  fellow-men,  lays  aside  all 
parade  and  show  and  ostentation ;  whilst  under  wrong,  in  patience  he  possesses  his 
soul,  and  although  he  may  have  the  power  to  revenge  the  wrong  done,  he  holds  back 
this  power,  ruling  his  spirit,  and  proving  himself  mightier  than  he  who  taketh  a  city. 

2.  Rectitude  is  the  token  referred  to  as  indicating  the  influence  of  true  piety  upon  the 
conduct.  "  Which  have  wrought  his  judgment "  (ver.  3).  It  prompts  to  obedience  to 
God's  revealed  Law — to  righteousness  of  life — obedience  rendered  by  a  heart  thoroughly 
loyal  to  God  and  to  righteousness,  and  which,  becoming  the  very  habit  of  the  soul,  is 
rendered  easy  and  pleasant. 

II.  The  growth  of  the  soul  in  holt  charactee  and  conduct  is  qbadual. 
The  reiterated  counsels  and  exhortations  addressed  to  the  good  by  prophets  and 
apostles  indicate  that  the  goal  had  not  been  reached.  Such  are  to  "go  on  unto 
perfection  "  (Heb.  vi.  1),  to  seek  to  be  continually  advancing,  ever  to  be  aiming  after 
a  purer  and  holier  life.  "  Nearer,  my  God,  to  thee."  "  Not  as  though  I  had  already 
attained,"  etc.  (Phil.  iii.  12). 

III.  This  progress  is  to  be  secured  as  the  result  of  Divine  dtscipline  and 
PERSONAL  endeavour.  1.  Divine  discipline.  In  the  time  of  national  calamity 
described  by  this  prophet,  and  ere  long  to  befall  his  land,  the  good  as  well  as  the  evil 
would  suffer — the  sorowful  experience  would  be  passed  through  by  all,  whilst  the 
Divine  discipline  thus  designed  to  rouse  the  indifferent  was  intended  also  to  purify 
the  good,  and  to  contribute  to  the  perfecting  in  them  the  Divine  character  and  life. 
And  Bucli  being  ever  the  gracious  intention  of  God,  let  the  good  circumstanced  thus 
sing  — 

"  Great  Master,  touch  us  with  thy  skilful  hand, 
Let  not  the  music  tliat  is  in  us  die ; 
Great  ijculptor,  hew  ami  polish  us,  nor  let 
Hidden  and  lost  thy  form  within  us  lie. 
Spare  not  thy  stroke  ;  do  with  us  as  thou  wilt; 
Let  there  be  nought  unfinished,  broken,  marr'd; 
Complete  thy  purpose,  that  we  may  become 
Thy  perfect  image,  O  our  God  and  Lord  I  " 

2.  Personal  endeavour.  The  seer  here  stimulated  the  good  to  persevering  effoi  k  so  as 
to  attain  unto  a  truer  life.     "  Seek  ye  the  Lord ;  "  "  seek  righteousness ; "  "  seek  meek- 


32  THE  BOOK  OP  ZBPHANIAH.  [oh.  il  1—15 

ness."  By  earnest  prayer,  by  calm  reflection  and  meditation,  and  by  holy  service,  man 
is  to  co-operate  with  God  with  a  view  to  his  own  spiritual  growth.  "Work  out  yuui 
own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,"  etc.  (Phil.  ii.  12). 

IV.  They  who  thus  progbebs  in  the  Divine  life  shall  be  ebndered  secukk 
IN  THE  DAT  OF  CONFLICT  AND  JUDGMENT.  "  It  may  he  vo  shall  be  hid,"  etc.  (ver.  3). 
The  "  may  be ''  was  not  intended  to  express  uncertainty  with  reference  to  their 
security,  but  rather  to  keep  them  from  becoming  too  confident  and  self-reliant.  They 
who  continue  in  the  love  and  service  of  God  cannot  but  be  secure,  for  their  safety  la 
amply  guaranteed  (Isa.  xxvi.  20  ;  Ps.  xxxi.  20;  Isa.  xxxii.  2). 

Vers.  4 — 7. — The  doom  of  the  Philistines,  The  prophet,  having  declared  the  judgments 
to  come  upon  J udah,  turned  his  thoughts  to  the  surrounding  heathen  nations,  and 
proclaimed  the  doom  they  should  experience.  Several  reasons  probably  influenced  him 
in  taking  this  survey  and  in  calling  attention  to  the  chastisements  infficted  upon  other 
lands.  (1)  A  desire  to  make  it  clear  to  his  people  that  with  God  there  is  no  respect  of 
persons ;  (2)  that  wroug-doing  works  evil  issues  wherever  it  is  practised ;  (3)  to  make 
vivid  to  them  that  the  dark  clouds  of  retribution  were  gatherinj:,  and  so  to  rouse  them 
out  of  their  apathy  and  to  stimulate  them  to  return  to  righteousness  of  life.  In 
referring  thus  to  the  heathen,  he  began  with  the  Philistines,  the  natural  enemies  of 
his  nation.     We  have  here — 

I.  A  SOLEMN  DECLARATION  OF  DiVINB  JUDGMENTS  TO  BE  EXECUTED  AQAINST  EVIL- 
DOERS, 1.  The  nation  relerred  to  was  that  of  the  Philistines.  They  were  very 
influential  in  Palestine.  Occupying  the  coast,  they  were  in  possession  of  the  trade 
carried  on  with  Europe  and  Asia.  Besides  this  transit  trade,  they  had  vast  internal 
resources.  They  were  given  to  agriculture,  and  hence  we  read  that  the  Israelites 
had  to  go  to  the  Philistines  "  to  sharpen  every  man  his  share  and  his  coulter,  his  axe 
and  his  mattock."  In  their  prosperity  they  built  their  five  great  cities,  Gaza,  Ashdod, 
Ashkelon,  Gath,  and  Ekron.  They  were  warlike  and  idolatrous,  and  through  their 
self-sufiiciency  and  boast  fulness,  their  tyranny  and  oppression,  together  with  their 
idol-worship,  they  became  offensive  in  the  sight  of  Heaven.  2.  The  judgments  here 
declared  as  about  to  overtake  them.  Their  cities  should  be  destroyed,  their  land  rendered 
desolate,  their  inhabitants  should  be  removed,  the  busy  tract  by  the  sea,  where  once 
trade  and  commerce  flourished,  should  become  pastures  and  folds  for  sheep,  and  where 
ODCe  stood  the  abodes  of  prosperous  merchants,  the  humble  shepherds  should  construct 
their  huts  (vers.  4 — 6).  3.  The  fulfilment  is  unquestionable ;  the  word  of  the  Lord 
by  the  mouth  of  his  holy  prophet  has  been  amply  verified.  It  is  true  that  the  Gaza  of 
to-day  is  a  populous  town,  and  hence  those  ready  to  carp  and  cavil  have  urged  that 
Gaza  has  not  been  forsaken.  But  the  ruins  which  have  been  found  and  explored 
within  a  mile  or  two  of  modern  Gaza  indicate  the  site  of  the  ancient  city,  and  tell  how 
that  city  has  indeed,  like  the  others,  passed  away,  "  The  Word  of  our  God  shall  stand 
for  ever." 

II.  A  TENDER  ASSURANCE  OP  DiVINE  MEBOT  TO  BE  MANIFESTED  TOWARDS  THE  FAITH- 
FUL. In  terms  of  exquisite  beauty  and  gracious  tenderness  he  represents  the  faithful 
servants  of  Heaven,  "  the  remnant  of  Judah,"  as  visited  by  God  in  the  midst  of  their 
dark  experiences,  brought  by  him  out  of  captivity  and  conducted  by  his  guiding  hand 
to  the  green  pastures,  where  their  wants  are  fully  supplied  by  day,  and  to  quiet  resting- 
places,  where  by  night  they  may  lie  down  and  repose  in  perfect  security,  as  being 
under  the  Divine  Shepherd's  guardian  care  (ver.  7).  The  verse  has  been  taken  by 
some  literally,  and  they  have  either  seen  its  fulfilment  In  the  return  of  the  pious  Jews 
after  captivity  in  Babylon,  or  they  look  on  to  the  fulfilment  in  the  conversion  of  the 
Jews  and  their  restoration  to  their  own  land ;  whilst  others  are  content  with  recognizing 
in  the  words  a  confident  assurance  and  a  beautiful  symbolical  picture  of  that  ultimate 
peace  and  security  and.  abundance  which  all  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  enjoy. 
Certain  it  is  that  we  may  take  the  seer's  stern  words  pronouncing  the  doom  of  the 
Philistines  as  conveying  a  clear  intimation  that  evil-doing  shall  assuredly  be  followed 
by  Divine  retribution,  whilst  from  his  words  of  promise  to  the  faithful  we  may  draw 
the  encouraging  and  inspiring  consciousness  that  the  faithful  and  God-fearing  shall  be 
sustained  and  comforted  in  present  sorrow,  and  shall  at  length  emerge  out  of  the  gloom 
and  the  darkness  into  the  sunshine  of  a  true  prosperity. 


on.n.  1— 15.]  TIIK   BOOK  OF  ZEPIIANlAll.  33 

Vers.  8 — 10. — Hie  Divine  Judgment  upon  the  Moahites  and  Ammonites.  The 
Moabites  and  Ammonites  were  related  to  the  Israelites  by  kinship.  They  were  the 
descendants  of  Lot — the  Moabites  by  Moab,  the  elder  son  of  that  patriarch,  and  the 
Ammonitea  by  Ben-Ammi,  or  Ammon,  his  younger  son  (Gen.  xix.  37,  38).  With 
these  tribes,  in  view  of  this  blood-relationship,  the  Israelites  were  distinctly  forbidden 
to  wage  war  (Deut.  ii.  9,  19).  These  pastoral  tribes,  however,  did  not  act  thus  peace- 
ably toward  Israel.  They  cherished  the  spirit  of  hatred  in  reference  to  the  Israelites, 
which  manifested  itself  in  their  revilings  and  boastings,  and  also  in  the  incursions  they 
made  upon  their  territory  (Isa.  xvi.  6 ;  Jer.  xlviii.'  29).  The  prophet  here  proceeds 
to  declare  against  these  tribes  the  judgments  of  God.    Note' — 

I.  The  PRBVAiLina  sin  of  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites.  Pride  (ver.  10;  Jer. 
xlviii.  29).  This  spirit  manifested  itself  (1)  in  their  evil-speaking, — "  they  reproached 
and  reviled  God's  people  "  (ver.  8) ;  (2)  in  their  arrogant  and  insolent  bearing, — they 
"magnified  themselves  against  the  people  of  the  Lord  of  hosts"  (ver.  10)  ;  (3)  in  their 
deeds  of  oppression  and  cruelty, — they  "  magnified  themselves  against  their  border  " 
(ver.  8),  crossing  this  and  making  raids  upon  Judah,  and  taking  special  advantage  of 
those  seasons  when,  through  conflict  with  foreign  adversaries,  that  nation  had  become 
enfeebled.  This  sin  of  pride,  so  characteristic  of  these  tribes,  is  still  very  prevalent, 
and  lies  at  the  very  root  of  human  misery  ;  it  leads  to  the  cherishing  of  false  appear- 
ances, to  inconsiderateness  and  injustice  with  reference  to  the  rights  of  others;  it 
occasions  misunderstandings,  and  then,  standing  in  the  way  of  mutual  concession, 
causes  alienation.  It  inflicts  likewise  self-injury,  carries  with  it  its  own  chastisement 
in  the  unhappy  spirit  it  engenders;  it  is  its  own  condemnfition,  for  it  is  evident  to 
all  that  trees  whose  houghs  do  not  bend  to  the  ground  are  not  very  well  laden  with 
fruit ;  and  it  ends  in  ruin,  for  "  pride  goeth  before  destruction,"  etc.  (Prov.  xvi.  18). 

II.  The  sube  punishment  with  which  they  were  to  bb  overtaken  on  account 
thereof.  (Ver.  9.)  1.  Their  cities  were  to  he  destroyed.  Even  as  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  of  old  had  become  engulfed  in  the  Dead  Sea,  upon  which  these  haughty 
ones  constantly  gazed  without  recalling  the  past  and  laying  to  heart  its  lessons  of 
warning,  so  theirs  should  likewise  pass  away.  2.  Their  rich  pasture-lands  should 
become  barren,  and  the  fertile  region  changed  into  a  region  of  nettles  and  salt-pits  and 
a  perpetual  desert  (ver.  9).  3.  Israel,  so  often  oppressed  by  them  and  called  upon  to 
endure  their  scorn  and  contempt,  should  eventually  triumph  over  them,  and  take 
possession  of  their  territory  as  the  spoils  of  war  (ver.  9).  4.  This  fate  should  really 
come  to  pass,  since  Jehovah  was  against  them,  ami  was  pledged  to  its  accomplish- 
ment. "Therefore  as  I  live,"  etc.  (ver.  9).  All  that  his  people  had  suffered  through 
their  haughtiness,  he  had  known  (ver.  8),  and  would  duly  requite.  And  so  ever, 
since  he  reigneth,  shall  pride  be  subdued  and  the  haughty  oppressor  be  laid  in  the 
dust.  "He  scatters  the  proud  in  the  imagination  of  their  hearts.  He  puts  down 
the  mighty  from  their  seats,  and  exalts  them  of  low  degree  "  (Luke  i.  61,  62) 

"True  dignity  abides  with  him  alone 
Who,  in  the  silent  hour  of  inward  thought. 
Can  still  suspect  and  still  revere  himself 
In  lowliness  of  heart." 

Ver.  11. — The  Divine  purpose  in  reference  to  the  race,  and  the  way  of  its  fulfilment. 
A  very  erroneous  notion  has  been  widely  entertained  respecting  God's  relations  to  the 
peoples  of  the  earth.  The  representation  has  been  very  current  that,  in  selecting  the 
Jewish  tribes  and  constituting  these  his  "  peculiar  treasure,"  the  Most  High  left  all 
other  nations  to  their  own  resources,  and  that  they  became  practically  outcasts  from 
his  love  and  care.  We  have,  however,  abundant  evidence  that  such  is  by  no  means  the 
teaching  of  Scripture ;  that  whilst  with  a  view  to  the  revealing  and  developing  of  his 
plan  of  redeeming  mercy  he  did  select  the  Jewish  race,  imparting  to  them  special 
privileges  and  communicating  to  them  a  knowledge  of  his  will,  yet  that  all  the  nations 
were  likewise  under  his  government  and  nurture.  We  think  of  what  is  recorded  in  the 
Bible  respecting  Job  the  Chaldean,  Balaam  the  heathen  soothsayer,  the  mission  of 
Elisha  to  the  woman  of  Sarepta,  and  of  Jonah  to  Nineveh,  and  the  Divine  revelations 
made  to  heathen  monarchs,  and,  with  all  this  before  us,  we  cannot  foster  the  notion 
that  the  world  outside  the  pale  of  Judaism  was  disregarded  by  Heaven,  but  we  see 

ZEPHAV  ■    1  D 


?1  THE  BOOK   OF  ZEPHANIAH.  [cii.  ii.  1— 15. 

clearly  that,  wliilst  Q-od  was  working  out  his  special  purposes  of  love  to  the  race  through 
the  medium  of  "  the  chosen  people,"  he  was  also  in  various  ways  by  his  Spirit  striying 
with  all  tlie  children  of  men.  The  beauty  in  the  teachings  of  the  Hebrew  prophets 
consists  in  the  fact  that  they  were  so  ready  to  acknowledge. all  this  ;  that  they  broke 
through  the  narrow  boundary  of  exclusivenesa  which  the  Jews  guarded  so  jealously, 
and  told  of  the  Divine  working  in  all  lands,  and  of  the  Divine  intention  to  bless  the 
entire  race.  The  case  of  the  Prophet  Zephanlah  is  a  conspicuous  example  of  this. 
Whilst  declaring  the  Divine  judgments  to  light  upon  his  own"  people,  he  also  lookud 
north  and  south,  east  and  west,  and  saw  the  retributions  which  were  to  come  upon  the 
heathen  nations.  Nor  did  he  rest  here,  but,  peering  still  further  into  the  future  and 
apprehending  the  Divine  Ruler  as  bringing  order  out  of  chaos,  and  out  of  trial  and 
sorrow  working  good  for  the  race,  he  paused  in  the  midst  of  his  dark  announcements  of 
coming  woe  to  proclaim  this  loving  design  of  his  God  (ver.  11),  whilst  at  length,  having 
ended  his  predictions  of  impending  evil,  he  again  turned  to  this  cheering  theme,  and 
lingered  upon  it  even  to  the  very  end  of  his  prophecy  (ch.  iii.  8 — 20). 

I.  The  DrviNB  puepose  as  hebe  exprkssbd.  This  includes:  1.  The  complete 
extinction  of  idolatry.  This  is  most  expressly  referred  to  here  under  the  figure  of  star- 
vation. The  gods  of  the  heathen  should  die  through  want  and  neglect.  "  He  will 
famish  all  the  gods  of  the  earth"  (ver.  11).  2.  The  full  estabhshment  of  the  worship 
of  God.  "  And  men  shall  worship  him  every  one  from  his  place  "  (ver.  11).  3.  The 
universal  acknowledgment  of  him  by  Gentile  nations.  "Even  all  the  isles  of  the 
heathen  "  (ver.  11).  The  thought  of  the  universality  of  this  acknowledgment  of  the 
true  God  eventually  is  seen  to  be  the  more  decidedly  expressed  here  as  we  remember 
that  in  ancient  times  whole  countries  and  continents  were  described  as  "  the  isles." 

n.  This  Divine  purpose  is  to  be  wrought  out  through  the  outward  disciplihb 
OP  CONHLICT  AND  TRIAL.  "The  Lord  will  be  terrible  unto  them"  (ver.  11).  Men  are 
to  be  humbled  that  God  may  be  exalted.  They  pursue  their  own  designs,  and  often 
care  only  for  the  realization  of  their  own  selfish  ends,  but  "  the  Lord  sitteth  in  the 
heavens,"  ruling  over  all,  and,  through  all  the  conflicts  and  strifes,  the  turmoils  and 
trials  of  individuals  and  rations,  he  is  bringing  to  pass  his  loving  purposes,  and  is 
leading  on  to  the  glory  of  the  latter  day. 

IIL  The  thought  of  God  as  working  thus  yields  inspiration  and  strength  to 

TRUE   AND  LOYAL   HEARTS    AMIDST   THE  DIFFICULTIES   AND  DISCOURAGEMENTS  IN  HOLY 

SERVICE.  This  was  to  Zephaniah  the  source  of  strength.  Whilst  faithful  to  his  trust 
as  the  messenger  of  jvidgment  he  made  to  his  own  and  to  heathen  nations  the  stern 
announcements  of  coming  tribulation,  he  paused  again  and  again  to  reflect  upon  the 
thought  that  these  very  judgments  should  be  made  to  contribute  to  the  accomplishment 
of  God's  merciful  and  gracious  design  to  bless  and  save  the  race. 

Ver.  12. — The  doom  of  Ethiopia.  We  have  here  simply  a  passing  allusion,  yet  we 
do  well  to  pause  and  reflect  upon  it.  Every  word  of  God  is  "  profitable,"  and  even 
words  which  at  first  glance  seem  unimportant  are  found  on  reflection  to  be  suggestive 
of  holy  teaching.     We  are  reminded  here — 

I.  That  the  Divine  judgments  beach  even  to  bemote  places.  Ethiopia  wa» 
in  the  south,  and  at  the  extreme  south.  Now,  Judah  had  other  and  nearer  foes  in  that 
direction.  There  was  Bdom  and  there  was  Egypt ;  but  the  prophet,  in  his  announcement 
of  coming  Divine  judgments,  carried  his  thoughts  beyond  these,  and  fixed  his  mind 
upon  those  dwelling  at  the  remotest  point.  "Ye  Ethiopians  also,"  etc.  (ver.  12).^ 
Remoteness  will  not  screen  wrong-doers. 

II.  That  it  is  PEWLons  to  stand  in  association  with  tuose  who  engaob  in 
EVIL-DOING.  These  Ethio|iians  or  Cushites  had  no  direct  conflict  with  Judah,  but 
they  were  in  alliance  with  Egypt ;  and  through  this  alliance  they  would  have  to  suffer 
in  the  time  of  coming  retribution.  Egypt  was  specially  singled  out  for  judgment 
because  of  her  oppression,  and  Ethiopia,  as  one  of  her  allies,  her  "  helpers,"  would  fall 
under  the  retributive  chastisements  of  God  (Ezek.  xxx.  4,  5).  They  who  ally  them- 
selves with  transgressors  make  themselves  participators  in  their  crimes,  and  must 
sxpect  to  be  partakers  of  their  plagues. 

IIL  That  the  evil  passions  of  men  are  made  to  fulfil  the  Divine  behests. 
War  ia  a  terrible  evil.     In  no  way  are  the  evil  passions  of  men  more  surely  lot  looi» 


OH.  n.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  35 

than  in  such  conflicts ;  yet  by  these  military  conflicts  God's  purposes  have  at  timea 
been  accomplished.  Nebuchadnezzar  and  his  forces,  invading  Egypt  and  destroying 
the  Egyptians  and  their  allies  the  Ethiopians,  were  instruments  God  employed  to  work 
his  will.  Gk)d  through  his  holy  prophet  declared,  "  Ye  Ethiopians  also,  ye  shall  be 
slain  by  my  sword"  (ver.  12). 

Vers.  13 — 15. —  The  doom  of  Assyria.  It  was  very  natural  that  the  prophet,,  in 
nnfolding  the  Divine  judgments  upon  heathen  nations,  should  turn  his  thoughts  to 
the  north  and  to  the  Assyrian  empire.  That  power  was,  in  his  day,  at  the  very 
zenith  of  its  prosperity,  and  his  own  nation  was  peculiarly  exposed  to  its  tyranny  and 
oi^pression.  The  Hebrew  seers  frequently  referred  to  this  empire  and  to  the  ruin 
which  should  eventually  overtake  it;  and  whilst  Zephaniah's  allusion  is  very  brief, 
limited  indeed  to  three  verses,  it  is  nevertheless  remarkably  graphic  and  vivid. 
Observe — 

L  Thb  stern  sentence.  (Vers.  13,  14.)  1.  It  foretold  that  the  prevailing  power 
which  was  seeking  the  overthrow  of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  Judah  should  itself  be 
completely  destroyed.  Iq  a  few  descriptive  touches  he  set  forth  the  utter  ruin  which 
should  befall  the  haughty  Assyrian  nation.  She  should  be  destroyed,  and  her  capital 
become  a  dry,  desolate  waste  in  the  midst  of  which  the  beasts  of  the  desert  should  make 
their  home.  Her  temples  and  palaces  should  lie  broken,  pelicans  and  hedgehogs 
lodging  in  the  fallen  capitals,  whilst  instead  of  the  strains  of  the  men-singers  and 
women-singers,  no  more  to  be  heard  in  her  palaces,  the  notes  of  some  solitary  bird 
sitting  in  the  window  of  some  outer  wall  should  alone  sound  forth.  "  Desolation  " 
too  "  should  be  on  the  thresholds,"  and  heaps  of  sand  blown  from  the  desert  should 
mingle  with  the  wreck  of  the  city,  until  at  length  every  trace  of  the  former  magnificence 
should  have  disappeared.  And  the  acknowledgment  should  be  made  that  tbis  ruin 
was  merited;  the  pass^er-by  should  hiss  with  very  scorn,  and  move  his  hand  in 
token  of  supreme  contempt  (vers.  13 — 15).  2.  It  declared  this  ruin  to  be  the  result  of 
the  Divine  working.  "  And  he  will  stretch  out  his  hand,"  etc.  (ver.  13).  3.  This 
stern  doom  thus  pronounced  has  literally  come  to  pass.  Modern  research  has  been 
amply  rewarded  in  the  evidence  which  has  thus  been  supplied  of  the  fulfilment  to  the 
very  letter  of  God's  declarations  uttered  through  his  holy  prophets.  "  The  Word  of 
the  Lord  endureth  for  ever." 

II.  The  solemn  ebfleotion.  (Ver.  15.)  1.  In  reading  these  words  we  are  led  to 
feel  that  the  prophet  had  a  vivid  realization  of  the  future,  and  of  the  changes  which 
were  to  take  place.  He  saw  "  the  rejoicing  city  "  full  of  worldly  prosperity,  and  he 
saw  it  likewise  in  its  desolation,  and  his  heart  was  moved  as  he  reflected  upon  the 
instability  of  mere  earthly  greatness  and  might.  2.  He  tiaoed  the  coming  overthrow 
of  the  Assyrian  power  to  its  true  causes.  (1)  Pride.  "  That  said  in  her  heart,  I  wm, 
and  there  is  none  beside  me"  (ver.  15).  (2)  Selfishness.  "  There  is  none  beside  me." 
Her  interests  centred  in  herself.  There  was  no  regard  for  the  rights  of  others.  She 
sought  only  her  own  ends,  and  sought  by  oppression  and  cruelty  to  make  all  surround- 
in^;  nations  tributary  to  her  own  worldly  splendour  and  prosperity.  And  fostei'ing 
this  unholy  spirit,  she  "dwelt  carelessly,"  crying,  "  Peace  and  safety,"  wrapt  in  carnal 
security,  until  at  length  "  sudden  destruction  "  came  upon  her,  and  she  was  left  in  her 
desolation,  silently  yet  emphatically  to  proclaim  to  all  after-ages  that  true  prosperity 
for  nations,  as  for  individuals,  lies  not  in  material  greatness  and  worldly  aggrandizement, 
Vut  in  the  cultivation  of  the  fear  of  God  and  in  rectitude  and  righteousness  of  life. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — A  call  to  repentance,  addressed  to  the  nation  of  Judah.  I.  The  con- 
dition OF  THE  NATION  DESCBIBBD.  Not  its  physical  Or  material,  but  its  moral  or 
religious,  condition.  The  former  prosperous  and  fitted  to  inspire  vain  thoughts  of 
stability  and  permanence.  Its  upper  classes  devoted  to  money-making  and  pleasure- 
seeking  (ch.  i.  8,  12  ;  cf.  Jer.  iv.  30) ;  its  lower  orders,  here  not  the  victims  of 
oppression  (ch.  i.  9 ;  iii.  1 ;  ef.  Jer.  v.  27,  28 ;  vi.  6),  well-fed  and  comfortable  (Jer. 
V.  7, 17).    The  latter  degenerate  and  deserving  of  severe  reprehension.     1.  Irreligious. 


86  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAH.  [ch.  n.  1- -15. 


According  to  the  marginal  rendering  of  both  the  Authorized  and  Revised  Versions, 
the  nation  was  "  not  desirous,"  i.e.  possessed  no  longing  after  Jehovah,  his  Law,  or 
worship,  but  had  forsaken  him,  and  sworn  by  them  that  are  no  gods_(Jer.  v.  7),  offering 
up  sacrifices  and  pouring  out  drink  offerings  unto  other  divinities  in  tlie  open  streets, 
and  even  setting  up  their  abominations  in  the  temple  (Jer.  vii.  17,  18,  30).  For  a 
nation  no  more  tlian  for  an  individual  is  it  possible  to  remain  in  a  state  of  irreligious 
neutrality  or  indifference.  The  people  whose  aspirations  go  not  forth  after  him  who  is 
the  King  of  nations  as  well  as  King  of  saints  will  sooner  or  later  find  themselves  trust- 
ing In  "  lying  vanities,"  or  creating  divinities  out  of  their  own  foolish  imauinations 
(Kom.  i.  23).  Between  theism  and  polytheism  is  no  permanent  half-way  house  for 
either  humanity  as  a  whole  or  man  as  an  individual.  2.  Shameless.  'I'his  translation 
(Giotius,  GeseniuB,  Ewald,  Keil  and  Delitzsch,  Cheyne,  and  others)_  depicts  the  moral 
and  spiritual  hardening  which  results  from  sin  long  continued,  passionately  loved,  and 
openly  gloried  in,  as  Judah's  apostasy  had  been  (ch.  iii.  5).  A  whole  diameter  of 
moral  and  spiritual  being  lies  between  the  shamelessness  of  innocence  (Gen.  ii.  25)  and 
the  shamelessness  of  sin  (Phil.  iii.  19).  The  former  is  beautiful  and  excites  admira- 
tion ;  the  latter  is  loathsome  and  evokes  reprehension  and  pity.  "  A  generation," 
says  Fressens^,  "  which  can  no  longer  blush  is  in  open  insurrection  against  the  first 
principles  of  universal  morality "  ('  The  Early  Years  of  Christianity,'  iv.  392).  3. 
Hateful.  So  the  Authorized  Version,  followed  by  Pusey.  The  degenerate  nation, 
addicted  to  idolatry  and  sunk  in  immorality,  was  not  desired  or  loved  by  God ;  but,  on 
account  of  its  wickedness,  was  an  object  of  aversion  to  God.  No  contradiction  to  the 
truth  elsewhere  stated  that  God  still  loved  the  people  and  desired  their  reformation 
(Jer.  ii.  2 ;  iii.  14)  ;  neither  is  it  inconsistent  to  preach  that  "  God  is  angry  with  the 
wicked  every  day  "  (Ps.  vii.  11) ;  and  that,  nevertheless,  "  he  willeth  not  that  any 
should  perish,  but  that  all  should  turn  to  him  and  live  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  9). 

II.  The  duty  of  the  nation  DEriNED.  To  "  gather  themselves  together."  The 
figure,  derived  from  the  gathering  together  or  collecting  of  stubble  or  dry  sticks, 
"  which  are  picked  up  one  by  one,  with  search  and  care"  (Pusey),  points  to  that  work 
of  self-examination  which,  in  nations  as  in  individuals,  must  precede  conversion,  and 
must  be  conducted :  1.  With  resoluteness.  Being  a  work  to  which  their  hearts  were 
naturally  not  disposed,  it  could  not  be  entered  upon  and  far  less  carried  through  with- 
out deliberate  and  determined  personal  effort.  Hence  the  prophet's  reduplication  of 
his  exhortation.  To  make  one's  self  the  subject  of  serious  introspection,  never  easy,  is 
specially  difficult  when  the  object  is  to  detect  one's  faults  and  pronounce  judgment  on 
one's  deeds.  2.  With  inwardness.  A  merely  superficial  survey  would  not  suffice.  An 
action  outwardly  correct  may  be  intrinsically  wrong.  Hence  the  individual  that  would 
conduct  a  real  work  of  self-examination  must  withdraw  himself  as  much  as  possible 
from  things  eternal,  take  his  seat  on  the  interior  tribunal  of  conscience,  and  gather 
round  him  all  that  forms  a  part  of  his  being,  in  addition  to  his  spoken  words  and 
finished  deeds,  the  feelings  out  of  which  these  have  sprung,  the  motives  by  which  they 
have  been  directed,  the  ends  at  which  they  have  aimed,  and  subject  the  whole  to  a 
calm  and  impartial  review.  3.  With  minuteness.  The  things  to  be  reviewed  must  be 
taken  one  by  one,  and  not  merely  in  the  mass.  Words  and  deeds,  motives  and  feelings, 
when  only  glanced  at  in  the  heap,  seldom  reveal  their  true  characters ;  to  be  known  in 
their  very  selves  they  must  be  looked  at,  considered,  questioned,  weighed  separately. 
All  about  them  must  be  brought  to  light  and  placed  beneath  the  microscope  of 
conscientious  investigation.  4.  With  thoroughness.  As  each  word,  act,  feeling, 
motive,  so  all  must  be  taken.  None  must  be  exempted  from  scrutiny.  Nor  will  it 
suffice  that  they  be  passed  through  the  ordeal  of  examination  once ;  the  process  must  be 
lepeated  and  re-repeated  till  the  exact  truth  is  known.  "  For  a  first  search,  however 
diligent,  never  thoroi^hly  reaches  the  whole  deep  disease  of  the  whole  man ;  the  most 
grievous  sins  hide  other  grievous  sins,  though  lighter.  Some  sins  flash  on  the  conscience 
at  one  time,  some  at  another ;  so  that  few,  even  upon  a  diligent  search,  come  at  onc6 
to  the  knowledge  of  all  their  heaviest  sjns  "  (Pusey). 

III.  The  danoeb  or  the  nation  declared.  Unless  the  duty  recommended  and 
prescribed  were  immediately  and  heartily  entered  upon  and  carried  through,  the 
judgment  already  lying  in  the  womb  of  God's  decree  would  come  to  the  birth,  and  the 
day  of  his  fierce  an«er  would  overtake  them.     1.  The  evtnt  was  near.    Should  Judah 


<ni.  II.  1— 15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  37 

continue  unrepentant,  the  hour  of  doom  would  be  on  her  before  she  was  aware.  It 
was  rapidly  approaching,  like  chafif  driven  btifore  the  wind.  So  will  the  day  of  the 
Lord  come  upon  the  wicked  unawares  (Luke  xyi.  34).  2.  2%e  issue  was  certain. 
Like  chaff  before  the  wind,  too,  her  people  would  be  driven  away  to  pitiless  destruction. 
The  like  fate  is  reserved  for  ungodly  men  generally  (Ps.  i.  4;  Job  xxi.  18).  Nothing 
can  avert  the  final  overthrow  of  the  unbelieving  and  impenitent,  whether  nation  or 
individual,  but  repentance  and  reformation,  not  outward  but  inward,  not  seeming  but 
real,  not  temporary  but  permanent. 

Learn  :  1.  The  reality  of  national  no  less  than  of  individual  wickedness.  2.  The 
iesponsibility  that  attaches  to  nations  as  well  as  men.  3.  The  necessity  of  self-exami- 
nation for  communities  as  well  as  for  private  persons. — T.  W. 

Ver.  3. — An  txhortatvm  to  the  meek,  addressed  to  the  believing  remnant  of  Jttdah. 
I.  A  CHEEBQiG  TESTIMONY.     1.  To  the  existence  of  a  believing  remnant.    Dark  as  the 
outlook  for  Judah  was,  degenerate  as  the  mass  of  her  people  had  become,  there  were 
yet  those  belonging  to  her  community  who  either  had  not  apostatized  from  Jehovah  or 
had  reverted  to  their  allegiance  (see  2  Kings  xxii.,  xxiii. ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.,  xxxv.).   Since 
"  the  days  that  were  before  the  Flood  "  (Gen.  vi.  5 — 7,  12,  13),  God  has  never  wanted 
a  seed  to  serve  him,  though  oftentimes  it  has  been  small,  and  as  in  the  days  of  Elijah 
(1  Kings  xix.  10,  18)  scarcely  perceptible,  at  least  by  man.     Compare  the  times  after 
the  exile  (Mai.  iii.  16)  and  those  preceding  the  birth  of  Christ  (Luke  ii.  25).    "  Even 
so  at  this  present  time  also  there  is  a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace  " 
(Eom.  xi.  5).     However  discouraging  in  some  respects  the  present  aspect  of  society 
may  be — what  with  infidelity  in  the  upper  and  learned  classes,  indifference  towards 
religion  among  the  masses,  and  lukewarmness  on  the  one  hand  with  fanaticism  on  the 
other  in  the  Church  itself — there  are,  nevertheless,  those  who  fear  God  and  think  upon 
his  Name,  who  believe  in  Christ  and  seek  to  folli>w  in  his  steps,  who  sigh  and  cry  for 
the  irreligion  of  the  age,  mourn  over  the  deadness  and  divisions  of  the  Church,  and 
pray  for  the  coming  of  that  happy  era  when  "  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Lord,"  etc.  (Isa.  x-i.  9).     2.  To  the  beauty  of  their  characters.    Designated 
"  the  meek  of  the  earth.       Indicating  (1)  their  patience  in  enduring  the  disesteem, 
scorn,  ridicule,  and  perhaps  also  oppression,  spoliation,  and  persecution  heaped  upon 
them  for  their  nonconformity  to  general  custom  in  the  matter  of  religion,  and  for 
venturing  to  dissent  from  common  practice  in  serving  Baal  ;  and  (2)  their  humility  in 
maintaining  intercourse  with  others,  but  especially  in  communing;  with  God.    Such 
virtues  of  patience  and  humility  lie  at  the  root  of  all  religion  (Matt.  v.  3,  5),  were 
exemplified  by  Jesus  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  29  ;  xxvii.  12 ;  2  Cor.  x.  1 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  23),  and 
are  demanded  of  all  his  followers  (Eph.  iv.  2;  Col.  iii.  12;  1  Pet.  ii.  21).     3.  To  the 
piety  of  their  lives.    They  had  "wrought  Jehovah's  judgment,"  ».«.  had  honestly 
endeavoured  to  carry  o\it  what  Jehovah  had  prescribed  as  She  right  thing  to  do  in  the 
matter  of  worship  and  duty.     This,  after  all,  the  ultimate  test  of  sincerity  in  religion, 
which  signifies  not  the  mere  acceptance  of  certain  propositions  relating  to  God,  his 
worship,  and  his  commandment,  but  the  carrying  out  of  God's  will  in  respect  of  both. 
Compare  what  Samuel  said  to  Saul  (1  Sam.  xv.  22),  what  Christ  explained  to  his 
followers  (John  xiy.  15 ;  xv.  14),  and  what  Paul  wrote  to  the  Corinthians  (2  Cor.  x.  5). 
II.  An  urgent  admonition.     1.  Its  import.     Explained  by  two  clauses :  "  Seek 
righteousness,  seek  meekness."    Only  in  these  ways  could  Jehovah  be  sought — ^neither 
by  coveting  the  material  and  temporal  tokens  of  his  favour,  such  as  health,  comfort, 
protection,  prosperity,  nor  by  maintaining  the  external  forms  of  his  worship,  however 
elaborate  or  costly,  but  by  aspiring  after  inward  and  outward,  spiritual  and  moral 
conformity  to  his  Law  (righteousness)  and  character  (meekness).     The  same  sense 
attaches  to  the  phrase  when  addressed  to  Christians,  who  are  exhorted  to  follow  after 
righteousness  and  meekness  (1  'J'im.  vi.  11),  and  to  seek  both  in  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  29 ; 
Bom.  X.  4).    2.  Its  incidence..    Declared  by  the  words,  "  all  ye  meek."    Addressed  to 
the  humble-hearted,  first  in  Judah,  and  then  in  the  whole  world.     The  obligation  to 
seek  Jehovah  grounded  for  both  on  (1)  their  relations  to  Jehovah  as  his  creatures  and 
■ervants ;  (2)  their  own  free  choice  of  him  as  their  Lord  and  King ;  (3)  the  nature  of 
religion,  which  is  not  an  act  to  be  performed  once  for  all,  but  a  habit  of  soul  to  be 
maintained  throughout  life ;  and  (4)  the  necessity  of  attending  to  their  own  safety, 


38  TUE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAU.  [ch.  n.  1—15. 


which  could  not  otherwise  be  secured  than  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  (Matt, 
xxiv.  13;  Rom.  ii.  7j  Rey.  ii.  10).  3.  Its  urgency.  Proclaimed  by  the  threefold 
"  seek."  The  like  diligence  demanded  of  all  in  the  matter  of  religion.  (I)  Because  of 
the  majesty  of  him  whose  service  it  is  (2  Chron.  ii.  5 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  15).  (2)  Because  of 
its  intrinsic  excellence  as  a  purely  spiritual  service  (John  iv.  24;  Kom.  xii.  1).  (3) 
Because  of  the  momentous  issues  involved  in  it  according  as  it  is  sincere  or  insincere 
(Job  viii.  13 ;  Prov.  i.  28).  (4)  Because  of  the  shortness  and  uncertainty  of  man's 
opportunity  on  earth  to  make  his  calling  and  election  sure  (Ecoles.  ix.  10;  Eph.  v.  16 ; 
Phil.  iv.  6). 

III.  An  KNCODEAGINO  CONSOLATION.  I.  A  pTowdse  of  Safety  for  the  righteous.  Not 
a  doubtful  promise,  though  introduced  by  "  it  may  be."  Prom  this  phrase  it  cannot  be 
inferred  that  the  prophet  was  uncertain  whether  the  meek  in  the  laad  would  be  pro- 
tected in  the  day  when  Jehovah  poured  out  his  wiath  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem ;  or 
whether  the  meek  generally  would  be  sheltered  in  the  day  of  judgment.  Merely  he 
intimated  that  the  hiding  would  be  difficult ;  not  the  hiding  of  them  by  Jehovah,  with 
whom  nothing  could  be  hard  or  easy,  but  the  supplying  by  them  of  the  moral  and 
spiritual  conditions  without  which  God's  hiding  of  them  ooulil  not  come  to  pass.  The 
ultimate  salvation  of  the  meek  is  guaranteed  (Ps.  cxlix.  4 ;  Matt.  v.  5) ;  but  the  actual 
process,  in  time,  of  saving  them  is  attended  by  so  many  difficulties  that  there  is  need 
for  constant  watchfulness  against  the  danger  of  coming  short.  2.  A  threatening  of 
doom  for  the  ungodly.  If  the  difficulty  of  saving  the  righteous  be  so  great,  what 
possible  loophole  of  escape  can  theie  be  for  the  ungodly  (Luke  xxiii.  31 ;  1  Pet.  iv. 
17,  18)  ?  The  overthrow  of  the  wicked  an  additional  security  to  the  salvation  of  the 
righteous. — T.  W. 

Vers.  4 — 15. — Divine  judgments  upon  heathen  nations.  I.  Thk  nations  specified. 
1.  Philistia  in  the  west.  (1)  Its  situation.  "  The  sea-coaSt,"  "  the  region  of  the  sea," 
or  "  the  track  by  the  sea.  Extending  along  the  Mediterranean,  from  Graza  in  the 
south  to  Jaffa  in  the  north,  and  reaching  back  to  the  hiU-country  of  Judah  in  the 
west,  it  consisted  of  two  parallel  strips  of  land;  one  "of  undulating  plains,  about 
twelve  miles  in  breadth,  bordering  on  the  sea-coast,  elevated  from  fifty  to  a  hundred 
feet  above  the  sea-level,  without  distinctive  features,  and  composed  of  the  richest 
alluvial  deposit;"  and  another  "twelve  to  fifteen  miles  wide,  consisting  of  a  series  of 
hills  and  spurs  from  five  hundred  to  eight  hundred  feet  above  the  sea-level,  and  broken 
through  by  broad  vaUeys  "  ('  Picturesque  Palestine,'  iii.  151).  (2)  Its  names.  "  The 
land  of  the  Philistines,"  "  of  the  Cherethites,"  "  of  Canaan."  Of  these  the  first  describes 
it  as  a  land  whose  inhabitants  had  been  originally  "  immigrants,"  Philistia — ^in  Hebrew 
Felesheth,  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  Pilastu,  Pilasta,  and  Palastav — being  derived 
from  a  root  signifying  "to  wander  about."  The  second  depicts  these  inhabitants  from 
a  tribe  settled  in  the  south-west  of  the  country,  the  Cherethites,  a  race  of  "  Cutters," 
or  "  Executioners,"  who  had  achieved  their  settlements  by  means  of  the  sword  (Amos 
ix.  7).  Whether  they  came  originally  from  Crete  (Gesenius,  Hitzig,  Baur  m  Riehm's 
•  Handworterbuch '),  which  must  then  be  identified  with  Caphtor  (Deut.  ii.  23  ;  Jer. 
xlvii.  5),  settling  down  first  on  the  Egyptian  coast  (Gen.  x.  14),  and  gradually  creeping 
north  towards  the  Palestinian  coast,  though  extremely  probable,  is  still  a  matter  of 
debate.  The  names  of  Philistine  kings  preserved  in  Assyrian  inscriptions  and  bearing 
a  more  or  less  Semitic  character  suggest  that  the  people  must  have  been  of  Semitic 
origin  (Sohrader,  '  Die  Keilinschriften,'  2  auf.  167).  The  third  name,  Canaan,  "  Low- 
land," was  probably  given  to  it  because  that  had  been  its  primitive  designation,  although 
the  appellation  afterwards  was  transferred  to  the  whole  country,  just  as  Philistia  or 
Palestine  was.  (3)  Its  chief  cities.  Four  mentioned — Gaza,  Aslikelon,  Ashdod,  and 
Ekron — in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  Haziti,  Iskaluna,  Asdudu,  and  Amkaruna.  Their 
early  histories  may  be  learnt  from  Scripture.  Gaza,  the  modern  Guzzeh,  originally 
inhabited  by  the  Avim  (Deut.  ii.  23),  and,  prior  to  the  conquest  of  Palestine,  by  the 
Caphtorim  or  Philistines,  and  a  remnant  of  the  Anakim  (Josh.  xi.  22),  was  the  scene  of 
Samson's  feats  of  strength,  imprisonment,  and  destruction,  and  the  site  of  a  temple  of 
Dagon  (Judg.  xvi.  1 — 3, 21 — 30).  Ashkelon,  situated  on  the  sea  (Josh.  xiii.  3),  had  also 
been  the  scene  of  one  of  Samson's  feats  (Judg.  xiv.  19).  Ashdod  possessed  a  temple  of 
Dagon,  in  which  the  captured  ark  was  placed  (1  Sam.  v.).     Ekrcn,  the  most  northern 


CH.  u.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAH,  39 

of  the  five  chief  cities,  with  a  temple  of  Beelzebub  (2  Kings  i,  2),  was  the  city  from 
which  the  ark  was  sent  back  to  Israel  (1  Sam.  v.  10).  2.  Moab  and  Ammon  in  the  east. 
In  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  Ma'-ab,  Ma'aab,  Muaba,  and  Bit  Amman.  Here  conjoined 
probably  because  (1)  of  their  blood-relationship,  the  Moabites  having  been  descended 
from  Lot's  son  Moab  (Q-en.  xix.  37),  and  the  Ammonites  from  the  same  patriarch's  son 
Ben-Ammi  (Gen.  xix.  38) ;  (2)  of  their  geographical  contiguity,  their  territories  lying  east 
of  the  Jordan, — that  of  Moab  south  of  the  Arnon,  and  stretching  from  the  Dead  Sea  to 
the  Syrian  desert,  and  that  of  the  Ammonites  a  little  to  the  north-east, "  in  a  mountainous 
district  not  annexed  by  Israel "  (Conder) ;  and  (3)  of  their  mutual  hostility  to  Israel, 
liaving  more  than  once  joined  forces  in  an  attack  upon  the  latter  (Judg.  iii.  13; 
2  Chron.  xx.  1).  3.  Ethiopia  in  the  south.  The  land  of  Cush,  in  Assyrian  Kusu,  the 
furthest  south  territory  known  to  the  Hebrews,  was  probably  regarded  as  embracing 
Nubian  Ethiopia  and  Arabia  (Gen.  ii.  13;  2  Chron.  xxi.  16 ;  Esth,  L  1;  Isa.  xviii.  1 ; 
Ezek.  xxix.  10;  xxx.  5).  Its  inhabitants,  dark-skinned  (Jer.  xiii.  23),  were  of  a  war- 
like character  (Jer.  xlvi.  9).  Ethiopians  composed  part  of  Shishak's  army  (2  Chron. 
xii.  3).  Zerah  their  king  was  defeateil'by  Asa  (2  Chron.  xiv.  9 — 15;  xvi.  8).  "They 
were  a  race  cognate  with  the  Egyptians,  but  darker  in  complexi<in  and  coarser  in 
feature — not  by  any  means  negroes,  but  still  more  nemly  allied  to  the  negro  than  the 
Egyptians  were  "  (Rawlinson's  '  Egypt :  Story  of  the  Nations,'  p.  315).  4.  Assyria  in 
the  north.  Pounded  by  Asshur  (Gen.  x.  11),  who  appears  to  have  given  his  name  first 
to  the  city  he  founded,  and  then  to  the  empire  it  began,  Assyria  had  as  its  capital 
Nineveh,  the  modern  Koujunjik.  (On  the  history  of  Nineveh  as  detailed  by  the 
cuneiform  inscriptions,  see  Layard's  '  Nineveh ; '  Sayce's  '  Assyria,  its  Princes,  Priests, 
and  People ; '  and  Sohrader's  '  Keilinschiiften ').  "  The  Assyrians  were  allied  in  blood 
and  language  to  the  Hebrews,  the  Aramaeans,  and  the  Arabs ; "  "  were  a  military 
people,  caring  for  little  else  save  war  and  trade ; "  and  "  if  less  luxurious  than  their 
Babylonian  neighbours,  were  also  less  humane  "  (Sayce).  Israel's  contact  with  Assyria 
began  in  b.o.  853,  with  Ahab's  contribution  of  ten  thousand  infantry  and  two  thousand 
chariots  to  assist  liienhadad  II.  of  Damascus  against  Shalmaueser  II.  of  Assyria 
('  Records  of  the  Past,'  iii.  99),  and  ended  with  the  tall  of  Nineveh  in  b.o.  606. 

II.  Thbib  sins  beoobded.  1.  Idolatry.  All  alike  guilty  of  worshipping  false  gods 
— the  Philistines  of  doing  homage  to  Ashtaroth,  Dagon,  and  Beelzebub ;  the  Moabites, 
to  Baalpeor  and  Chemosh ;  and  the  Ammonites,  to  Moloch ;  the  Ethiopians,  most  likely 
to  the  gods  of  Egj  pt,  Amen-Ea,  Ftah,  Osiris,  Anubis,  Thoth,  Isis,  Hathor,  etc. ;  and  the 
Assyrians,  to  the  old  Babylonian  divinities,  Bel,  Anu,  and  Ba.  Idolatry  regarded  as  a 
flin  not  in  Israel  alone  (Exod.  xx.  3 — 5),  but  in  heathen  peoples  as  well  (Ps.  xcvii.  7  ; 
Rom.  i.  25).  2.  Enmity  against  Israel.  In  this  also  all  had  been  partakers — the 
Philistines  from  the  days  of  the  judges  (Judg.  x.  7);  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites 
from  the  same  period  (Judg.  iiL  13);  the  Ethiopians  in  the  times  of  Eehohoam  and 
Asa  (2  Chron.  xii.  3;  xiv.  9);  and  the  Assyrians  under  Tiglath-Pileser  II.,  who  first 
invaded  the  northern  kingdom  in  the  reign  of  Menahera  (2  Kings  iv.  19).  In  particular 
the  Philistines  of  Gaza,  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  II.,  had  sold  captive  Israelites  to 
Edom  (Amos  i.  6) ;  the  Moabites  under  Mesha  the  sheepmaster,  in  the  days  of 
Jehoram,  son  of  Anab,  not  only  revolted  against  Israel  (2  Kings  iii.  5),  but  carried  the 
torch  of  war  into  Israelitish  territory,  defeating  the  Israelitish  king  and  making  many 
prisoners  ('  Records  of  the  Past,'  2nd  series,  ii.  200) ;  while  the  Assyrians  invaded 
Judah  so  late  as  the  days  of  Manasseh,  and  even  deported  that  king  to  Babylon 
(2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11),  3.  Pride.  This  more  especially  the  sin  of  Moab  (ver.  10)  and 
of  Assyria  (ver.  15),  of  whom  the  former  despised  and  magnified  herself  against  Israel, 
and  the  latter  exulted  in  her  own  fancied  security  and  superlative  greatness. 

III.  Theik  judgments  peonounced.  1.  In  character  equally  severe.  (1)  Deporta- 
tion of  their  inhabitants.  The  Philistine  cities  will  be  overtaken  by  this  fate  (ver.  4). 
Moab  and  Ammon  shall  be  involved  in  a  like  doom.  The  former  "  shall  be  as  Sodom," 
and  the  latter  ''  as  Gomorrah  "  (ver.  9).  Ethiopia  shall  not  escape,  but  her  people  shall 
be  "slain  by  Jehovah's  sword"  (ver.  12).  Assyria  shall  suffer  similar  calamity. 
Nineveh  will  become  a  desolation,  etc.  (vers.  13,  14).  (2)  Desolation  of  their  lands. 
The  land  of  the  Philistines,  the  tract  by  the  sea,  shall  be  pastures  with  caves  for 
fhepherds'  huts,  and  folds  for  flocks  (ver.  6).  The  territories  of  Moab  and  Ammon 
shall  become  a  possession  of  nettles  and  salt-pits  and  a  perpetual  desolation  (ver.  9)i 


40  THE  BOOK  OF  ZBPHANIAH.  [oh.  n.  1—15 

Nineveh  will  become  dry  like  a  wilderness  (ver.  13),  and  desolation  shall  be  in  her 
thresholds  (ver.  14).  (3)  Occupation  of  tbeir  deserted  lands  by  Israel.  "  The  Philistine 
coast  shall  be  for  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Judah  "  (ver.  7).  Of  Moab  and  Ammon 
it  is  written, "  The  remnant  of  my  nation  shall  inherit  them  "  (ver.  9).  2.  In  incidence 
eipmlly  certain.  All  rested  on  a  common  ground,  and  were  pronounced  by  a  common 
voice,  that  of  Jehovah.  "  The  word  of  Jehovah  was  against  the  land  of  the  Philistines  " 
(ver.  5).  Unto  Moab  and  Ammon  Jehovah  had  undertaken  to  be  terrible  (ver.  11). 
Jehovah's  sword  was  to  slay  the  Ethiopians  (ver.  12).  He  should  also  stretch  out  his 
hand  against  the  north,  and  destroy  Assyria  (ver.  13).  What  God  directly  by  his  own 
voice,  or  indirectly  through  the  voice  of  another,  undertakes  to  do  is  as  good  as  dona. 
3.  In  result  equaily  good.  In  threatening  to  destroy  the  above-mentioned  nations — 
from  their  number  and  situation  obviously  designed  to  represent  the  whole  heathen 
world — Jehovah  practically  engaged  that  the  issue  of  his  judgments  would  be  to  famish 
all  the  gods  of  the  earth  (ver.  11),  i.e.  cut  off  their  worshippers,  and  so  starve  or  make 
them  lean,  and  in  this  way  cause  them  to  vanish  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  Thug 
the  ultimate  resvJt  of  his  punishing  the  heathen  would  be  (1)  to  reveal  the  nothing- 
ness of  idols,  whose  inability  to  protect  their  worshippers  would  thereby  be  revealed ; 
(2)  to  extinguish  idolatry,  since  men  would  no  longer  serve  divinities  that  were 
powerless  to  save  them;  and  (3)  to  hasten  the  conversion  of  the  world,  since  "  all  the 
isles  of  the  nations "  would  be  induced  by  what  they  saw  to  worship  Jehovah  "  every 
one  from  his  place." 

Learn  :  1.  That  God  sees  and  notes  the  attitudes  of  nations  towards  himself  and  his 
kingdom.  2.  That  God  is  as  much  against  nations  that  do  wickedly  as  he  is  against 
individuals  that  sin.  3.  That  the  strongest  and  most  flourishing  empires  can  be  easily 
overthrown  when  God  becomes  their  assailant.  4.  1'hat  social  and  political  convulsions 
are  all  hastening '  on  the  era  when  "  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth."  5.  That 
national  judgments  are  a  prelude  and  premonition  of  the  judgments  of  the  great  day 
when  "  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations." — T.  W. 

Ver.  3. — TTie  duty  of  seeking  the  Lord.  This  may  be  taken  as  the  key-note  of  the 
second  discourse  of  the  prophet  (ch.  ii.  1 — iii.  7),  in  which,  after  having  uttered  the 
solemn  threatening  of  judgment  in  the  former  discourse,  he  gives  more  explicit  directions 
as  to  what  is  the  duty  of  the  people  in  the  view  of  this  impending  calamity.  The  call 
in  ch.  i.  had  simply  been  "  Hold  thy  peace  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God,"  i.i.  to 
recognize  the  reality,  nearness,  and  justice  of  the  judgment  he  announced;  but  now 
the  prophet  gives  more  particular  and  express  admonitions  as  to  what  people  should  do. 
What  he  calls  upon  them  to  do  is,  in  one  word,  to  seek  the  Lord;  but  in  this  discourse 
lie  enlarges  at  some  length  on  the  grounds  and  the  way  of  doing  so. 

L  Why  ought  men,  in  view  of  buoh  a  judgment,  to  besk  the  Lobd? 
1.  Because  the  judgment  is  universal.  It  is  not  merely  a  local  visitation  on  the  land 
of  Israel,  in  which  it  alone  is  to  suffer  at  the  hands  of  some  powerful  and  successful 
invader.  In  that  case  prudence  might  dictate  the  propriety  of  seeking  escape  by 
allying  themselves  with  the  conquering  power,  or  taking  refuge  in  some  other  land  not 
exposed  to  its  invasion.  It  might  even  be  suggested  by  the  idolatrous  superstition  of 
those  days,  that  the  cause  of  the  triumph  or  safety  of  other  nations  was  the  power 
of  their  gods,  and  that  this  might  be  a  reason  for  worshipping  or  fearing  them.  But 
the  judgment  is  to  be  from  the  Lord,  the  only  living  and  true  God,  the  Creator  of 
heaven  and  earth,  and  it  is  to  show  itself  as  such  in  this  that  it  shall  include  all 
nations  in  its  sweep ;  it  is  to  be  on  the  covmtries  round  about,  as  well  as  on  Judah. 
The  inost  prominent  of  the  neighbouring  nations  are  mentioned  as  involved  in  the 
calamity — the  cities  of  the  Philistines  on  the  sea-coast  to  tlie  south-west  (vers.  4 — 7), 
Moab  and  Ammon  on  the  south-east  (vers.  8—10).  These  had  been  old  hereditary 
enemies  of  Israel,  and  were  inclined  to  rejoice  in  her  calamity,  and  boast  themselves  as 
if  their  old  hatred  was  now  to  be  gratified.  But  this  very  jealousy  and  pride  offend 
the  Lord  and  bring  down  his  judgment  on  them  too.  Then  even  the  more  distant 
nations  of  the  Ethiopians  far  to  the  south-west,  beyond  Egypt,  and  Assyria  in  the 
remote  north-east,  with  the  great  luxurious  and  proud  city  of  Nineveh,  were  to  b« 
visited  too ;  so  that  there  would  be  no  quarter  of  tlie  earth  to  which  Israel  could  turn 
for  safety  (vers.  12—15).    So  it  ever  is  when  God  visits  men ;  he  makes  it  to  be  felt 


CH.  II.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAfl.  41 

that  vain  is  the  help  of  man,  and  that  there  are  no  devices  of  human  power,  or  riches, 
or  wisdom,  by  which  his  hand  can  be  esca^jed.  It  does  not  always  need  universal  and 
sweeping  judgments  to  show  this ;  and  it  is  our  wisdom  to  learn  the  lessons  oven  from 
single  and  separate  manifestations  of  the  power  of  God's  wrath ;  or  from  the  records 
and  threatenings  of  these  old  judgments  and  their  lessons.  2.  But  this  is  only  a 
negative  motive ;  it  shows  us  in  what  quarters  we  are  not  to  turn — that  we  can  find 
no  help  in  man.  But  the  prophet  gives  also  positively  a  reason  why  we  should  seek 
the  Lord,  and  that  is  because  his  judgments  are  sent  with  a  view  to  mercy.  This  is 
pointed  out  both  in  regard  to  Judah  (ver.  7)  and  in  regard  to  the  Gentiles  (ver.  11) ; 
for  not  only  is  the  captivity  of  Judah  to  be  turned  back,  but  all  the  isles  of  the  heathen 
are  to  worship  the  Lord.  Such  is  ever  the  design  of  God's  judgments  against  sin  in 
this  world.  They  are,  indeed,  expressions  of  his  wrath  and  foretastes  of  his  cm-se 
against  sin,  and  as  such  they  are  fitted  and  intended  to  produce  fear,  and  to  lead  men 
to  hold  their  peace  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God,  and  to  humble  themselves  under 
his  mighty  hand.  But  the  design  of  them  never  is  simply  to  destroy.  It  may  be 
needful  ultimately,  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  that  the  sinners  be  consumed  out  of  the 
earth,  and  that  the  wicked  be  no  more;  and  that  utter  destruction  shall  surely  over- 
take the  impenitent,  when  the  Lord  shall  destroy  the  stumbling-blocks  with  the 
wicked,  when  "  the  Son  of  man  shall  send  forth  his  angels,  and  they  shall  gather  out 
of  his  kingdom  all  things  that  offend,  and  them  which  do  iniquity,  and  shall  cast  them 
into  a  furnace  of  fire "  (Matt.  liii.  41,  42).  That  is  the  doom  solemnly  denounced 
against  the  impenitent.  But  is  not  the  very  denunciation  of  it,'  stem  as  it  is,  an 
act  of  mercy  ?  It  is  a  warning  graciously  sent  in  time,  lest  that  doom  should  come 
upon  them  unforetold  and  unexpected — a  call  to  them  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come, 
a  signal  of  danger  ahead,  that  may  lead  siuneis  to  arrest  their  onward  and  downward 
course.  Now,  if  the  warning  in  words  is  thus  manifestly  merciful,  so  also  are  these 
foretastes  of  judgment  that  are  but  warnings  in  deed  given  when  those  in  words  have 
been  disregarded.  Had  Israel  listened  to  the  words  of  the  prophets,  and  turned  from 
their  evil  ways,  it  might  not  have  been  necessary  that  God  should  send  on  them  the 
judgment  of  the  Captivity ;  but  when  they  would  not  take  warning  from  the  solemn 
words  of  the  Lord  denouncing  judgment,  it  was  needful  that  they  should  be  made  to  feel 
that  these  were  not  mere  words,  and  be  taught  by  actual  inflictions  in  deed.  But  these 
were  also  sent  in  mercy,  like  the  famine  that  came  on  the  prodigal  son  in  the  far  land 
to  which  he  had  wandered  and  wherein  he  wasted  his  substance  in  riotous  living. 
Suffering  may  pierce  the  heart  which  the  mere  threat  of  suffering,  however  solemn  and 
earnest,  had  failed  to  touch ;  and  in  that  case  the  suffering,  as  well  as  the  warning  of 
it,  has  a  gracious  end.  Even  to  the  heathen  nations,  the  judgment  is  with  a  view  to 
mercy.  Had  Israel  been  faithful  to  their  God  and  their  calling,  they  would  have  been 
a  kingdom  of  priests  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  and  of  his  grace  and  mercy 
among  the  Gentile  nations  around.  But  since  they  would  not  do  this  willingly,  in  the 
way  of  faithfully  walking  in  the  covenant  of  their  God,  he  shall  bring  it  to  pass  that 
by  the  judgments  they  undergo  they  shall  be  the  means  of  making  known  his  way 
in  the  earth,  and  his  salvation  among  all  nations.  The  heathen  shall  learn  in  the 
ruin  of  Israel  to  recognize  the  justice  of  the  Lord,  and  the  very  nations  that  destroyed 
Israel  shall  be  taught  that  the  hand  of  God  is  on  them  too,  and  that  they  cannot 
escape  his  righteous  judgments.  "  The  Lord  will  be  terrible  to  them ;  for  he  will 
famish  all  the  gods  of  the  earth."  Wheu  he  sent  a  grievous  famine  on  the  far  country 
where  the  prodigal  was,  this  might  lead  some  of  the  citizeus  of  that  country,  as  well  as 
the  prodigal  himself,  to  see  how  vain  and  perishing  was  the  abundance  in  which  they 
had  been  trusting,  and  might  constrain  hiui  to  look  to  that  father's  house  from  which  he 
had  gone  away ;  when  the  heathen  mariners  in  the  ship  in  which  Jonah  was  fleeing  from 
the  Lord  found  that  none  of  their  gods  could  save  them  from  the  great  storm  sent  by 
the  Lord  against  his  disobedient  servant,  they  cried  to  the  Lord,  and  they  "  feared  the 
Lord  exceedingly,  and  offered  a  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord,  and  made  vows."  So  when  the 
heathen  nations  shall  find  that  the  judgments  of  God  against  his  people  for  their  siu 
come  upon  themselves  also,  and  that  none  of  their  gods  can  save  them,  they  too,  says 
the  prophet,  "shall  worship  him,  every  one  from  his  place,  even  all  the  isles  of  the 
heathen."  Thus  the  judgment,  even  tis  regards  them,  is  with  a  view  to  mercy ;  and 
this  is  the  strong  positive  reason  that  all  have  to  seek  the  Lord.     Are  you  suffering 


42  THE   BOOK  OF  ZBPHANIAH.  [ch.  u.  1—15. 


calamity  or  trouble  of  any  kind,  and  does  conscience  tell  you  that  this  affliction  is  not 
undeserved,  nay,  that  it  is  the  natural  conBeqiience  and  the  just  punishment  of  your 
sin  ?  Then  do  not  on  any  accouut  let  this  drive  you  to  despair ;  do  not  think  that  there 
is  no  hope  for  you ;  do  not  give  way  to  mere  idle  grief  or  vain  regret  of  the  past  that 
cannot  he  recalled ;  believe  and  be  assured  that  the  suffering  has  been  sent  in  mercy 
as  well  as  judgment,  that  it  is  a  proof  that  God  has  not  yet  pronounced  against  you 
that  most  awful  of  all  sentences,  "  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols :  let  him  alone  "  (Hos.  iv, 
17) ;  and  instead  of  hardening  your  heart  in  disobedience,  or  wringing  your  hands  in 
despair,  let  God's  judgments  move  you  to  "  seek  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found, 
and  to  call  upon  him  while  he  is  near." 

II.  But  the  prophet  not  only  sets  forth  the  strong  motives  which  the  impending 
judgment  affords  to  seek  the  Lord ;  he  also  indicates  the  way  in  which  this  is  to  bb 
DONE.  More  especially  there  are  two  i)arts  of  this  duty  that  he  emphasizes,  the  one 
religious  and  the  other  moral,  both  of  which  must  be  combined.  1.  The  more  directly 
religious  duty  is  humiliation  and  prayer  to  God  (vers.,  1 — 3a).  The  somewhat  obscure 
language  of  ver.  1,  in  the  exact  rendering  of  which  scholars  differ,  seems  to  indicate,  in 
the  v?ay  of  general  humiliation  before  God,  either  a  public  gathering  for  a  day  of  fasting, 
such  as  that  described  by  Joel  (ii.  15 — 17),  or  more  directly  the  leeling  of  shame  and 
humiliation  arising  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  had  before  been  strangers  to  it.  Then 
the  very  expression,  "  Seek  the  Lord  "  (ver.  3),  describes  religious  exercises  of  prayer 
and  veorship.  If  the  judgment  threatened  against  Israel,  or  any  Divine  judgment,  is  to 
have  its  right  and  designed  effect,  there  must  be  a  recognition  of  a  personal  God  and  of 
our  personal  relation  to  him.  "  Seek  righteousness,  seek  meekness."  There  is  something 
more  implied  here  than  merely  "  a  power  not  ourselves  that  makes  for  righteousness." 
Could  we  be  called  to  seek  such  a  power  in  any  oth,er  way  than  by  seeking  righteous- 
ness ?  Yet  seeking  the  Lord  is  here  spoken  of  as  something  distinct,  though  not  to 
be  separated,  from  seeking  righteoiisness ;  and  the  anger  of  the  Lord,  so  repeatedly 
and  emphatically  mentioned  in  vers.  2  and  3,  is  not  to  be  explained  away  as  a  mere 
figure  for  the  infliction  of  punishment.  The  "power  that  makes  for  righteousness" 
is  a  Person  in  whose  favour  lies  our  only  true  happiness.  Were  it  not  so,  the 
evils  that  follow  on  sin  would  be  no  call  to  humiliation  or  to  shame,  for  they  would 
be  the  result  of  a  mere  law  or  tendency.  But  since  we  hav«  to  do  with  a  living 
Person,  who  not  only  punishes  but  is  grieved  and  displeased  at  our  sins,  we  have 
reason  not  only  to  fear  but  to  be  humbled  and  ashamed  before  him.  Such  feelings 
are  essential  to  true  repentance;  they  find  expression  in  that  confession  of  sin 
which  everywhere  in  Scripture  is  made  a  requisite  for  its  forgiveness.  A  true  con- 
fession implies  grief  and  shame  for  sin,  and  an  acknowledgment  of  it,  and  expression  of 
these  feelings  to  God ;  and  without  this,  even  though  the  judgments  that  follow  on  sin 
could  be  removed,  God's  displeasure  and  wrath  would  not  be  turned  away — there  would 
be  no  reconciliation,  and  the  offender  would  be  no  nearer  to  God  than  before.  But  where 
there  is  this  humiliation  before  God  as  the  living  God  with  whom  we  are  in  a  personal 
relation,  then  there  can  be  also  prayer  to  him,  and  this  also  is  implied  in  the  call 
to  seek  the  Lord.  We  are  not  only  to  turn  to  him  for  refuge,  as  a  Power  that  will  save 
us ;  we  are  to  speak  to  him  as  a  Person,  and  ask  him  first  and  chiefly  to  forgive  us  for 
our  past  sins,  and  then,  if  it  is  his  will,  to  save  us  from  the  judgments  that  they  deserve. 
Such  is  the  religious  duty  to  which  the  prophet  here  calls  Israel,  and  this  movement  of 
heart-religion  must  ever  enter  into  the  exercises  of  soul  to  which  we  are  impelled  by 
God's  judgments,  if  these  are  to  have  a  salutary  effect.  2.  But  this  reli^iious  exercise 
must  never  be  separated  firom  the  moral  duty  here  enjoined  along  with  it.  Humilia- 
tion, confession,  and  prayer  can  never  be  sincere  if  they  remain  alone,  or  if  the  sense 
of  sin  prompts  to  nothing  more  than  these ;  for  the  religious  element  of  repentance, 
however  important  it  is,  cannot  be  made  to  supersede  the  moral.  There  must  be  a 
grief  for  sin,  not  only  because  it  has  offended  God  personally,  but  because  of  its  intrinsic 
evil ;  for  the  offence  that  it  gives  to  God  does  not  spring  from  any  mere  arbitrary 
command  on  his  part,  but  from  his  own  essential  nature  as  the  perfectly  and  unchange- 
ably Holy  One.  Therefore  that  is  no  real  approach  to  him  that  does  not  imply  a  hatred 
of  and  turning  from  siu  and  a  seeking  after  righteousness.  Hence  the  command,  "  Seek 
the  Lord,"  is  closely  connected  with  "  Seek  righteousness,  seek  meekness ; "  only  in  this 
way  can  the  God  of  Israel,  who  is  essentially  holy,  be  really  sought.     Bighteousness 


OH.  n.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  43 

and  meekness  are  the  virtues  here  specially  mentioned,  for  these  contain  the  sum  of 
moral  duty,  and  are  opposed  to  the  violence  and  deceit,  the  avarice  and  oppression,  that 
had  been  depicted  in  oh.  i.  as  the  evils  which  brought  down  the  judgment  of  the  Loid 
on  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  If  we  would  truly  seek  the  Lord,  we  must  turn  from  the  sins 
of  which  we  have  been  guilty,  and  set  about  those  duties  tliat  we  have  been  neglecting. 
This  may  be  no  easy  task.  It  may  imply  a  seeking,  a  searching  of  heart  with  great 
diligence  to  detect  the  hidden  roots  of  evil,  a  pursuit  of  holiness  with  labour  and  perse- 
verance in  order  to  overcome  inbred  habits  of  sin,  and  to  acquire  habits  of  goodness. 
The  character  is  not  to  be  renewed  or  changed  by  a  single  effort  or  in  one  day ;  it  requires 
a  lifelong  effort  to  "  put  off  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts ; 
and  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after  Gud  bath  been  created  in  righttousness  and 
holiness  of  truth."  But  the  work  can  and  ought  to  be  begun  at  once,  and  will  be  so  begun 
if  we  really  seek  tlie  Lord.  If  we  know  the  Lord  as  the  Holy  One,  and  feel  the  evil  of 
sin  as  it  is  in  his  sight,  then  our  turning  tu  him  in  repentance  really  implies  a  turnins; 
from  all  sin  and  a  seeking  righteousness  and  meekness.  This  too  must  be  prompt  and 
immediate.  There  is  no  time  to  be  lost ;  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand,  his  judgment 
is  announced,  his  wrath  has  almost  begun  to  burn,  the  dark  thunder-clouds  are  as  it  were 
big  with  the  approaching  storm.  Therefore  let  there  be  no  delay ;  make  haste,  and 
tarry  not,  before  the  decree  brings  forth  its  terrible  execution.  Judgment  is  stiU,  as  it 
were,  in  the  womb  of  the  Divine  law  and  order,  but  ere  long  it  must  break  forth,  and 
the  day  of  the  Lord's  wrath  will  sweep  away  all  the  wicked  of  the  earth  as  chaff. 
Before  that  day  comes,  yet  there  is  time,  time  enough  to  seek  the  Lord,  but  no  time 
to  waste  in  dallying  with  sin  or  halting  between  two  opinions.  Finally,  be  it 
remembered  that  this  call  is  addressed  to  all  alike,  to  the  godly  as  well  as  to  sinners. 
It  is  especially  addressed  to  all  the  meek  of  the  earth,  who  have  wrought  God's 
judgment,  as  well  as  to  those  who  have  still  to  seek  righteousness  and  meekness.  For, 
indeed,  those  who  have  most  earnestly  repented  will  most  feel  their  need  of  the  ever- 
fresh  and  repeated  call.  That  repentance  is  not  genuine  which  is  not  virtually  con- 
tinued and  actually  repeated  even  to  the  very  end  of  life,  is  a  principle  of  Protestant 
theology,  and  most  important  for  praotic»l  religion.  We  must  not  be  content  in  this 
matter  with  any  past  experience  or  exercises  of  suul ;  as  long  as  we  have  in  us  or  about 
US  anything  of  the  sins  that  provoke  God's  anger,  our  repentance  must  be  continual. 
The  whole  of  a  Christian's  life  should  be  a  tm-ning  from  sin  to  God.  In  view  of  the  sin 
that  dwells  in  us,  and  our  continual  shortcomings  of  the  righteousness  and  meekness 
required  by  God's  Law,  we  must  be  constantly  humbling  ourselves  before  God  and 
asking  his  forgiveness ;  and  we  must  also  be  striving  against  sin,  making  it  our  earnest 
effort  to  abandon  all  practices  and  habits  that  are  wrong,  to  eradicate  passions  and 
tempers  of  mind  at  vaHauce  with  God's  holy  Law,  and  to  acquire  and  cultivate  the 
qualities  required  by  it.  We  are  to  be  putting  off  the  old  man  and  putting  on  the 
new,  constantly  day  by  day.  Alas !  how  often  do  we  forget  this !  How  many  days 
do  we  spend  without  conscious  striving  against  sin  or  effort  after  holiness  1  Can  we 
wonder  that  we  should  need  rebuke  and  chastening  from  the  Lord  if  we  are  thus 
neglecting  what  is  an  essential  element  of  Christian  life?  Again,  this  repentance 
needs  not  only  to  be  constantly  going  on  as  to  the  principle  or  power  of  it,  but  there 
are  occasions  when  it. needs  to  be  actually  renewed.  One  such  occasion  is  when  a 
believer  falls  into  any  grievous  sin,  such  as  wounds  his  conscience  and  destroys  his  peace. 
Then  he  must  not  be  satisfied  with  a  mere  general  acknowledgment  of  sinfulness ;  he 
must  come  once  more,  as  he  came  at  first,  to  God  through  Christ  and  anew,  as  at  first, 
with  the  returning  prodigal  say,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned,"  etc. ;  anew,  as  at  first,  turn 
from  his  sin  to  God  with  full  purpose  of  heart  and  endeavour  after  new  obedience.  No 
fresh  burden  of  guilt  is  to  be  got  rid  of  in  any  other  way  than  that,  and  in  that  way  all 
may  be  removed.  Another  occasion  when  we  ought  actually  to  renew  our  repentance 
is  when  we  seek  to  enter  into  spiritual  communion  with  God.  Israel  of  old  was  com- 
manded to  keep  a  solemn  day  of  fast  and  humiliation  for  sins  just  before  the  joyful 
Feast  of  Tabernacles,  and  in  regard  to  the  New  Testament  feast  of  the  Lord's  Supper 
It  is  said,  "  Let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink 
of  that  cup."  There  cannot  be  faithful  self-examination  without  a  remembering  and 
bringing  to  light  of  much  sin,  and  that  must  needs  call  for  humiliation  and  prayer 
for  forgiveness,  and  renewed  efforts  after  holiness.     But  if,  thus  searching  and  trying 


44  THE   BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  n.  1—16, 


our  ways,  we  turn  unto  tlie  F^ord,  and  lift  up  our  heart  with  our  hands  unto  &od  in 
the  heavens,  we  shall  assuredly  find  him ;  we  shall  experience  that  mercy  which  he 
shows  to  those  who  confess  their  sins,  and  we  shall  be  made  more  and  more  ptrtakers 
of  his  holinesg.  Thus  we  shall  be  hid  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger,  for  we  shall  be 
able  to  say  to  him,  "  Thou  art  my  Hiding-place ;  thou  shalt  preserve  me  from  tioaUe; 
thou  shalt  compass  me  about  with  songs  of  deliveraQce."     " 


Vers.  1 — 3. — Sin  and  repentance :  the  bane  and  the  antidote.  "  Gather  yourselves 
together,"  etc.  Here  is  an  exhortation  to  the  men  of  Judah  to  repent  ere  the 
Chaldean  invaders  approach,  and  wreak  destruction  on  their  land.  Two  thoughts  are 
suggested. 

I.  Sis  exposes  uan  to  buin.  It  was  sin,  in  the  form  of  idolatry  and  gross 
immorality',  that  exposed  the  Jewish  people  to  the  terrible  doom  that  was  now 
hanging  over  them.  Sin  is  evermore  the  cause  of  all  human  suffering.  Corporeal 
sin  brings  corporeal  suffering ;  moral  sin  brings  moral  suffering ;  national  sin  brings 
national  suffering.  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  1.  2%e  suffering 
that/ollows  sin  is  sometimes  very  terrible.  It  was  so  now.  Sin  brings  upon  a  people 
famines,  pestilences,  wars,  perdition.  2.  2%«  suffering  expresses  &od's  antagonism  to 
sin.  "  The  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord,"  or,  as  Henderson  has  it,  "  the  burning  anger  of 
Jehovah."  God's  anger  is  not  a  passion,  but  a  principle;  and  the  principle  is 
antagonism,  not  to  the  happiness  of  his  creatures,  but  to  their  sin  and  their  wicked- 
ness. The  connection  between  sin  and  misery 'is  a  beneficent  arrangement.  It  is  well 
that  misery  should  pursue  wrong. 

II.  That  bepentanci:  delivebs  man  fbou  buin.  To  prepare  for  the  coming 
doom,  the  men  of  Judah  are  called  upon  to  repent.  "  Gather  yourselves  together, 
yea,  gather  together,  0  nation  not  desired,"  which  may  mean,  "not  worthy  of  the 
grace  or  favour  of  God."  Some  translate  it,  "not  waxing  pale,"  meaning,  "being 
dead  to  a  sense  of  sliame."  Others  regard  the  expression  as  meaning,  "  not  desiring 
to  repent."  1.  The  preparation  for  repentance.  "  Gather  yourselves  together,"  etc. 
"  Gather  yourselves  together  "  in  connection ;  deliberate  together  as  to  the  best  way  of 
securing  the  friendship  and  protection  of  God.  "  Gather  the  people, .  sanctify  the 
congregation,  assemble  the  elders  "  (Joel  ii.  16).  It  is  well  for  sinners,  in  the  prospect 
of  their  doom,  to  meet  and  confer  concerning  their  relations  to  Almighty  God.  2.  The 
nature  of  repentance.  It  is  here  represented  as  seeking  -the  Lord.  "  Seek  ye  the 
Lord,  all  ye  meek  of  the  earth ; "  or,  as  Henderson  renders  it,  "  Seek  ye  Jehovah,  all 
ye  humble  of  the  earth."  There  are  two  seekings  here.  (1)  The  seeking  of  Qod. 
Which  is  to  be  understood  in  a  moral  sense,  seeking  his  friendship ;  for  in  a  natural 
sense  he  is  "not  far  from  every  one  of  us."  But  we  are  all  away  from  him  in  sym- 
pathy. (2)  The  seeking  of  meehnesa.  "Seek  righteousness,  seek  meekness,'  etc. 
Indeed,  to  seek  moral  excellence  is  to  seek  God ;  and  to  seek  moral  excellence  is  repent- 
ance ;  it  is  a  turning  away  from  the  creature  to  the  Creator,  from  the  wrong  to  the 
right.  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  call  ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near." 
3.  The  wrgency  of  repentance.  Do  it  now.  "Before  the  decree  bring  forth,  before 
the  day  pass  as  the  chaff,  before  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  come  upon  you,  before 
the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger  come  upon  you."  It  will  be  too  late  to  repent  when  the 
judgment  comes.  "They  sJiall  call  upon  me,  and  I  will  not  answer;"  "Many  shall 
say  to  me  at  that  day,"  etc.  (Matt.  vii.  22). 

CoNOLUBiON.  As  sin  is  in  the  world,  judgments  are  in  the  world.  Retribution,  like 
an  mvadmg  army,  is  always  marching  toward  the  victim.  Repentance  is  the  only 
means  of  deliverance.     "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish."— D.  T. 

Vers.  4— 7.-2%*  sinner's  baleful  influence,  and  Qod's  disposed  of  all.  '•  For  Gaza 
shall  be  forsaken,  and  Ashkelon,"  etc.  Here  the  prophet  makes  the  punishment 
awaitmg  the  neighbouring  states,  which  he  goes  on  to  specify,  an  argument  for 
immediate  repentance.  "For  Gaza  shall  be  forsaken."  Gaza  was  one  of  the  five 
principalities  of  the  Philistines,  and  was  situated  on  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean  at 
the  southern  extremity  of  Canaan.  "  Ashkelon  a  desolation."  This  was  another 
of  the  tenced  cities  of  the  Philistines,  situated  on  the  shore  of  the  Mediterranean, 
between  Gaza  and  Ashdod.     "  Ekron  shall  be  rooted  up."    Another  Philistine  city 


OH.  iL  1  -15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHAN lAH.  46 

lying  north-west  of  Gath,  and  north  of  Aahdod.  "  Woe  unto  the  inhabitants  of  the 
sea-coast  I  "  The  Philistines  dwelling  on  the  sea-coast  south-west  of  Canaan.  "  The 
nation  of  the  Cherethites  " — the  Cretans,  the  name  applied  to  the  Philistines  that  sprang 
from  Crete.  "0  Canaan,  the  land  of  the  Philistines."  They  occupied  the  strip  of 
land  on  the  south  shore  of  the  Mediterranean  (Josh.  xiii.  3).  Two  facts  are  here 
suggested. 

I.  That  the  oalauities  faluno  upon  onk  binnbb  often  inyolvb  othebs. 
It  was  80  now.  The  ruin  that  was  approaching  the  Hebrew  nation  would  be  most 
calamitous  to  the  Philistine  cities,  and  indeed  to  the  neighbouring  states.  Gaza 
would  be  "  forsaken,"  Ashkelon  would  be  a  "  desolation,"  Ashdod  would  be  "  driven 
out,"  Ekron  would  be  "  rooted  up,"  the  inhabitants  of  the  seashore,  the  Cherethites, 
the  Canaanites,  all  would  be  involved.  So  vital,  strong,  and  numerous  are  the  ties  that 
connect  man  with  man  in  this  world,  that  the  condition  of  one  must  affect  the  condition 
of  others.  It  is  so:  1.  With  nations.  At  no  period  in  the  world's  history  was  it 
more  manifest  than  now.  No  one  state  or  kingdom  of  Europe  can  be  affected  without 
influencing  others.  What  was  called  "  the  Eastern  question,"  in  that  terrible  war 
between  the  sultan  and  the  czar,  affected  every  part  of  the  civilized  world.  2.  With 
individuals.  A  man  cannot  fail  in  health,  in  business,  or  in  character,  without 
jiainfully  affecting  others  in  some  way  or  other.  What  sufferings  the  failures  of 
the  Gumeys,  the  Petos,  and  the  Grants  have  brought  upon  thousands  in  this  coun- 
try 1  This  shows ;  (1)  The  social  connection  between  man  and  man.  No  man  can 
live  unto  himself.  Each  man  is  a  link  in  the  great  chain  of  human  life;  and  he 
cannot  move  without  influencing  others.  Each  man  is  a  link  in  the  great  human 
body ;  and,  if  one  suffers,  all  suffer.  (2)  The  duty  of  each  man  to  look  well  after  his 
own  conduct.  A  sinner  has  no  right  to  say  he  will  do  what  he  likes,  and  that  no  one 
may  properly  interfere  with  him.  If  his  actions  terminated  in  himself,  there  might 
be  some  reason  in  such  a  claim ;  but  as  they  cannot,  and  they  must  affect  others, 
every  man,  all  society,  the  whole  human  world,  have  a  right  to  protest  gainst  the 
sinful  conduct  of  any  individual  man. 

II.  That  the  lot  of  man  is  at  tm  disposal  of  Almighty  God.  "  And  the 
pea-coast  shall  be  dwellings  and  cottages  for  shepherds,  and  folds  for  flocks.  And  the 
coast  shall  be  for  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Judah;  they  shall  feed  thereupon;  in 
the  houses  of  Ashkelon  shall  they  lie  down  in  the  evening :  for  the  Lord  their  God 
shall  visit  them,  and  turn  away  their  captivity."  "  And  the  line  of  the  sea  shall  be 
pastures,  with  cisterns  for  shepherds  and  folds  for  sheep.  Yea,  the  line  shall  be  for 
the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Judah,  thereupon  shall  they  feed ;  in  the  houses  of 
Ashkelon  shall  they  lie  down  at  even ;  for  Jehovah  their  God  shall  visit  them,  and 
reverse  their  captivity  "  (Henderson).  Here  the  Almighty  is  represented  as  arrang- 
ing the  future  home  and  circumstances  of  "  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Judah."  Paul 
at  Athens  said  that  God  had  "  determined  the  times  before  appointed,  and  the  bounds 
of  their  habitation  "  (Acts  xvii.  26).  Though  we  are  free  and  conscious  of  our  freedom, 
we  are  at  the  dis])osal  of  One  above  us.  He  has  appointed :  1.  Our  place  in  the  world. 
He  has  set  bounds  to  our  habitation  "  that  we  cannot  pass."  2.  Our  period  iu  the 
world.  "  My  times  are  in  thy  hand."  The  periods  of  our  birth  and  death  are  all 
arranged  by  him.  "  Man's  days  are  determined ;  the  number  of  his  months  is  with 
thee  "  (Job  xiv.  5).  We  are  often  tempted  to  imagine  that  chance  rules  us.  We  are 
struck  with  the  apparent  contingency  when  we  look  at  men's  circumstances  in  con- 
nection with  their  choice.  None  of  us  has  any  choice  as  to  the  condition,  the  place, 
the  time,  in  which  we  are  to  be  born  or  brought  up.  We  are  struck  with  the  apparent 
contingency  also  when  we  look  at  men's  circumstances  in  connection  with  their  merits. 
How  often  do  we  find  feeble-minded  men  in  eminent  positions,  and  men  of  talents  and 
genius  in  obscurity  I  some,  by  what  is  culled  a  hit,  making  fortunes  and  earning  fame, 
whilst  honest  industry  plods  on  with  little  or  no  success ;  vice  in  mansions,  and  virtue 
in  the  pauper's  hut  I  Verily  the  race  is  not  always  to  "  the  swift,  nor  the  battle  to  the 
strong."  But  amidst  all  this  feeling  of  contingency,  and  over  all,  there  is  the  ruling 
plan  of  the  beneficent  God. — D.  T. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — The  persecution  of  the  good.  "I  have  heard  the  reproach,''  etc. 
"  The  threat  now  turns  from  the  Philistines  in  the  west  to  the  two  tribes  in  the  east, 


*o  THE  BOOK  OP   ZEPHANIAH.  [ch.  ii.  1—15. 

viz.  the  Moabites  and  the  Ammonites,  who  were  descended  from  Lot,  and  therefore 
blood-relations,  and  who  manifested  hostility  to  Israel  on  every  possible  occasion."  The 
passage  suggests  three  facts. 

I.  That  good  men  abb  often  subject  to  annoyances  fbom  the  unoodlt 
WORLD.  "  I  have  heard  the  reproach  [abuse]  of  Moab,  and  the  revilings  of  the  children 
of  Ammon,  whereby  they  have  reproached  my  people  [abnaed  my  nation],  and  magnified 
themselves  against  their  border."  These  people,  the  Moabites  and  the  Ammonites, 
were  constantly  annoying  and  abusing  the  chosen  people  in  the  time  of  Moses.  Balak, 
tlie  King  of  the  Moabites,  sought  to  destroy  the  Israelites  by  means  of  Balaam's  curses 
(Numb.  xxii.).  And  in  the  time  of  the  judges,  both  peoples  endeavoured  to  oppress 
Israel  (Judg.  iii.  12 ;  x.  7).  The  charge  here  probably  refers  to  the  hostile  attitude 
assumed  by  both  tribes  at  all  times  toward  the  people  of  God.  Both  Isaiah  and 
Jeremiah  accused  them  of  anuoying  them  (Isa.  ivi.  6 ;  Jer.  xlviiL  29).  The  hostile 
conduct  of  Moab  and  Ammon  towards  Israel  is  only  a  specimen  and  an  illustration 
of  the  antagonism  of  wicked  men  toward  s  the  truly  pious.  They  "  reproach " 
them;  they  charge  them  with  superstition,  fanaticism,  cant,  hypocrisy.  Their 
revilings  are  often  bitter  and  constant.  "  It  has  been,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  the 
common  lot  of  God's  people  in  all  ages  to  he  reproached  and  reviled  on  one  account 
or  another."  There  is  an  eternal  enmity  between  the  two  .seeds — the  seed  of  the 
serpent  and  the  seed  of  the  wuman.  The  conduct  of  a  truly  good  man  can  scarcely 
fall  to  exasperate  worldly  and  ungodly  people.  It  condemns  their  selfishness,  their 
greed,  their  falsehood,  their  pleasures.  "  If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that  it 
hated  me  before,"  etc. ;  "  If  they  have  called  the  Master  of  the  house  Beelzebub,  how 
much  more  shall  they  call  those  of  the  household ! "  "  Cain,  who  was  of  that  wicked 
one,  and  slew  his  brother ;  and  wherefore  slew  he  him  ?  because  his  own  works  were 
evil,  and  his  brother's  righteous."  In  corrupt  society,  we  may  lay  it  down  as  a  truth 
that  the  better  a  man  is,  the  more  pure,  honest,  true,  righteous,  the  more  he  will  be 
hated  and  annoyed  by  his  neighbours.  The  best  men,  the  men  of  whom  "  the  world 
is  not  worthy,"  are  always  persecuted. 

II.  That  these  annoyances  escape  not  the  notice  of  God.  "  I  have  heard  the 
reproach  of  Moab."  I  have  heard  the  whole,  all  their  calumnies,  reproaches,  revilings ; 
not  a  word  has  escaped  me,  not  a  syllable  has  been  lost.  Observe  :  1.  Ood's  attention 
to  the  minute  concerns  of  human  life.  He  who  is  the  Maker  and  Manager  of  the 
universe,  to  whom  the  creation  is  as  nothing  and  less  than  nothing,  is  not  indifferent 
to  the  utterances  of  little  human  creatures  on  this  earth,  which  is  itself  a  mere  speck  in 
space.    "  I  have  heard  the  reproaches." 

"  He  sees  with  eqnal  eye,  as  God  of  all, 
A  hero  perish,  or  a  sparrow  fall." 

2.  Ood's  special  interest  in  his  people.  Good  men  are  his  children,  as  dear  to  him  as 
the  apple  of  the  eye ;  and  whatever  happens  to  them,  even  a  reproachful  word,  affects 
him.  It  is  truly  consoling,  it  is  energizing,  to  know  that  the  great  Father  is  interested 
in  all  that  pertains  to  us.  "Thine  eyes  are  open  upon  all  the  ways  of  the  sons  of 
men  :  to  give  every  one  according  to  his  ways,  and  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings  " 
(Jer.  xxxii.  19). 

III.  That  God  will  not  fail  to  chastise  the  authobs  of  such  annoyances. 
"  Therefore  as  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel,  Surely  Moab  shall 
be  as  Sodom,  and  the  children  of  Ammon  as  Gomorrah,  even  the  breeding  of  nettles, 
and  salt-pits,  and  a  perpetual  desolation  :  the  residue  of  my  people  shall  spoil  them, 
and  the  remnant  of  my  people  shall  possess  them.  This  sliall  they  have  for  their 
pride,  because  they  have  reproached  and  magnified  themselves  against  the  people  of 
the  Lord  of  hosts."  Mark :  1.  The  doom  of  those  reproachers.  "  They  shall  be  as 
Soilorn  and  Gomorrah."  "This  simile,"  says  Keil,  "  was  rendered  a  very  natural  one 
by  the  situation  of  the  two  lands  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Dead  Sea.  It  affirms 
the  utter  destruction  of  the  two  tribes."  Their  land  is  to  abound  with  "  nettles  and 
salt-pits,"  the  products  and  proofs  of  utter  ruin.  2.  The  cause  of  their  doom.  "  This 
shall  they  have  for  their  pride."  All  the  persecutors  of  the  good  will  meet  with  a 
terrible  chastisement.  Sooner  or  later  God  will  avenge  his  own  elect.  Hence  let  th£i 
godly  victims  of  persecution,  when  they  are  "reviled,  revile  not  again;'*  "Vengeancs 


CH.  n.l— 15.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAH.  i1 

is  mine,  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord ; "  "  Blessed  are  they  which  are  persecuted," 
etc.  (Matt.  V.  10).— D.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Oood  things  in  the  future.  "  The  Lord  will  be  terrible  unto  them,"  etc. 
"  '  Jehovah  is  to  be  feared  above  all  the  gods  of  the  earth,  for  he  will  cause  them  to 
waste  away ;  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  maritime  regions  shall  worship  him,  each 
from  his  place.'  While  announcing  the  destruction  of  the  surrounding  idolatrous 
nations,  the  prophet  was  inspired  to  predict  the  gradual  but  certain  destruction  of 
idolatry  universally  throughout  the  earth.  The  period  predicted  should  be  one  in 
which  all  peculiarity  of  local  worship  should  cease,  and  Divine  worship  be  acceptable 
wherever  presented  in  sincerity  and  truth  "  (Henderson).  The  passage  reminds  us  of 
two  good  things  that  are  in  the  future  of  our  world. 

I.  The  destruction  of  idolatry.  What  is  idolatry?  It  is  the  giving  of  our 
supreme  affection  to  creature-objects.  It  is  not  confined  to  the  worship  of  heathen 
deities,  which  are  for  the  most  part  the  productions  of  human  invention  and  art.  The 
spirit  of  idolatry  often  exists  where  heathen  idolatry  is  denounced.  Whatever  objects 
a  man  loves  most  is  his  god.  In  our  England  and  throughout  Christendom  there  are 
gods  many,  although  they  have  no  recognized  temple.  Wealth  is  a  mighty  god,  power 
is  a  mighty  idol,  pleasure  is  a  mighty  idol,  fame  is  a  mighty  idol.  Before  these  idols 
the  vast  majority  of  the  civilized  world  prostrate  their  souls  in  the  ardour  of  devotion. 
The  destruction  of  idolatry,  therefore,  does  not  mean  the  beating  to  dust  or  the 
consuming  to  ashes  the  idols  that  fill  the  temples  of  heathendom,  but  means  the  with- 
drawal of  man's  supreme  love  from  every  object  short  of  God.  You  may  buin  up  all 
heathen  temples,  and  leave  idolatry  as  rampant  as  ever.  To  "  famish  all  the  gods  of 
the  earth"  is  to  draw  man's  supreme  sympathy  from  all  things  except  God.  This  is 
the  great  moral  famine  that  is  to  be  desired,  to  be  prayed  for  and  struggled  after.  The 
other  good  thing  in  the  future  of  our  world  is — 

II.  The  advancement  of  true  worship.  "  And  men  shall  worship  him,  every 
one  from  his  place,  even  all  the  isles  of  the  heathen."  Observe  :  1.  The  object  of  true 
worship.  "  Men  shall  worship  him,"  that  is,  Jehovah.  Him,  not  it — not  the  universe, 
but  the  infinite  Personality  that  created  it,  the  Fountain  of  all  existence,  all  energy, 
all  love,  all  blessedness.  Him — the  Creator  of  the  material,  the  Father  of  the  spiritual. 
2.  The  scene  of  true  worship.  "  Every  one  from  his  place."  Wherever  he  is.  The 
worshipper  need  not  go  to  any  particular  scene — no  temple,  chapel,  or  cathedral. 
"  From  his  place."  It  may  be  in  solitude  or  in  society,  on  the  moitntain  brow  or 
the  seashore.  "  Neither  in  this  mountain "  nor  on  that  mountain,  but  everywhere. 
"God  is  a  Spirit."  3,  The  extent  of  true  worship.  "Even  all  the  isles  of  the 
heathen." 

Conclusion.  What  a  glorious  future  awaits  the  world!  How  blessed  will  those 
ages  be  when  every  man  of  every  tribe  and  clime  shall  have  his  heart  centred  in 
supreme  love  upon  the  one  great  Father  of  all ! — D.  T. 

Vers.  13 — 15. — National  pride  and  national  ruin.  "  And  he  will  stretch  out  his 
hand  against  the  north,  and  destroy  Assyria;  and  will  make  Nineveh  a  desolation, 
and  dry  like  a  wilderness.  And  flocks  shall  lie  down  in  the  midst  of  her,  all  the  beasts 
of  the  nations,"  etc.  Dr.  Henderson's  translation  of  this  passage  is  not  only  beautiful, 
b'^t  Beems  so  faithful  and  clear  as  scarcely  to  require  any  exposition. 

"  And  he  will  stretch  his  hand  over  the  north. 
And  destroy  Assyria. 
He. will  also  make  Nineveh  waste, 
All  arid  region  like  the  desert. 
And  flocks  shall  lie  down  iu  tlie  midst  of  her. 
All  the  wild  beasts  of  the  nations  : 
Both  the  pelif^an  and  the  porcupine 
Shall  take  up  their  abode  iu  her  capitals : 
A  voice  shall  sing  in  the  windows, 
Desolation  shall  be  iu  the  thresiiolds, 
For  the  cedar  work  is  laid  bare. 
This  is  the  exulting  city  which  dwelt  securely. 
Which  said  in  her  heart. 


a  TEE  BOOK   OF  ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  ni.  1—20 

I  am,  and  beside  me  there  in  none. 
How  she  is  become  desolate  t 
A  resting-place  for  wild  beasts  I 
Every  one  that  passeth  by  her  shall  hiss, 
He  shall  shake  bis  bead. 

Two  facts  are  suggested. 

I.  That  mbk  abb  often  pbonb  to  pbidb  themsblvbs  on  thb  obbatness  oi 
THBIB  couNTBT.  The  men  of  the  city  of  Nineveh — the  capital  of  Assyria — were  proud 
of  their  nation.  It  is  called  the  "  rejoicing  city,"  and  represented  as  saying,  "  I  am, 
and  there  is.  none  beside  me."  This  was  the  voice  of  the  population.  There  was 
much  in  the  city  of  Nineveh  to  account  for,  if  not  to  justify,  the  exultant  spirit  of  its 
population.  It  was  the  metropolis  of  a  vast  empire ;  it  was  a  city  sixty  miles  in 
compass,  it  had  walls  a  hundred  feet  high,  and  so  thick  and  strong  that  three  chariots 
could  be  driven  abreast  on  them;  it  had  twelve  hundred  massive  towers.  The 
boasting  spirit  of  the  men  of  Nineveh  concerning  the  grandeur  of  their  country  is  by 
no  means  uncommon ;  it  beats  in  the  hearts  of  modem  nations.  Italy,  Austria,  Ger- 
many, America,  England,  each  says  in  its  spirit,  "I  am,  and  there  is  none  beside 
me."  Nations  are  egotistic,  they  exult  in  their  own  greatness,  they  sing  their  own 
praises.  This  spirit  of  national  boasting  is  unjustifiable.  There  is  nothing  in  a 
nation  of  which  it  should  be  proud,  except  moral  excellence ;  and,  alas  1  how  little 
moral  excellence  there  is  in  the  most  vu-tuous  kingdom  of  the  earth  1  On  the 
contrary,  how  much  ignorance,  sensuality,  worldliness,  intolerance,  impiety,  that 
should  humble  us  in  the  dustl  It  is,  moreover,  a,  foolish  spirit.  It  is  a  check  to  true 
national  progress,  and  its  haughty  swaggeiings  tend  to  irritate  other  countries. 

II.  That  the  gbbatbst  oountbt  must  sooneb  ob  lateb  fall  to  buin.  "He 
will  stretch  out  his  hand  against  the  north,  and  destroy  Assyria,"  etc.  This  great 
city,  peopled  with  pompous  boasters,  became  a  receptacle  for  beasts.  "  Flocks  shall  lie 
down  in  the  midst  of  her,"  etc.  "  ^1  the  beasts  of  the  nations :  both  the  cormorant 
rthe  pelican]  and  the  bittern  [the  porcupine]  shall  lodge  in  the  upper  lintels  of  it." 
The  wild  grim  birds  that  haunt  all  ruins.  Not  only  a  receptacle  for  beasts,  but  a 
derision  to  travellers.  "  Every  one  that  passeth  by  her  shall  hiss,  and  wag  his  hand." 
Such  was  the  doom  that  came  on  this  great  city  when  Oyaxares  and  Nabopolassar, 
600  years  B.O.,  struck  it  do?ni.  This  is  the  fate  that  awaits  all  the  nations  uader 
heaven,  even  the  greatest.  Egypt,  Syria,  Babylon,  Eome,  Greece,  have  risen,  pros- 
pered, and  decayed.  The  symptoms  of  decay  are  manifest  in  many  of  the  grandest 
nations  of  Europe.  The  more  thoughtful  amongst  us  discover  those  symptoms  in  the 
life  of  our  England,  England  has  nothing  more  to  become,  they  say ;  the  plum  is 
overripe,  and  it  must  rot;  the  tree  has  exhausted  all  its  latent  vitality,  and  it  must 
wither;  the  sun  has  passed  the  meridian,  and  it  must  go  down.  Thoughtful  men 
point  to  the  sad  lack  of  capacity  in  our  statesmen,  the  unscrupulous  greed  of  our 
traders,  the  grumbling  of  our  artisans,  the  weakness  of  otir  pulpits,  the  haughtiness  of 
our  ecclesiastics,  the  hollowness  of  our  religion,  the  inSdelities  of  our  scientists,  the 
diminution  of  our  revenue  and  the  increase  of  our  pauperism,  the  arrogance  of  one 
class  and  the  flunkeyism  of  another,  pampered  indolence  here  and  starving  toil  there, 
jobbery  in  politics,  swindling  in  commerce,  cant  in  religion,  and  strikes  in  trade,— and 
■ay  these  are  unmistakable  marki  of  national  corruption. — D.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  ra. 

Vers.  1—5.— J  6.  The  prophet  turns  to 
Jerusalem,  and  teams  her  that,  if  Ood 
punishes  the  heathen,  he  uiiU  not  spare  the 
hardened  sinners  in  Judah. 

Ver.  1.— Woe  to  herl  This  is  addressed 
to  Jerusalem,   aa   is    seen   by  vera.   2 — 4. 


Filthy ;  rather,  rebellioui.  I.e.  against  Goi 
The  LXX.,  mistaking  the  word,  renders, 
imipapiis,  "  notable."  So  the  Syriao.  Jerome 
has  provoeatrix.  The  true  sense  is  seen 
by  the  expansion  of  the  term  in  ver.  2. 
Foliated  by  her  many  sins.  Jerome,  follow- 
ing the  Septuagint  laroXtKvTpaiiivii,  "ran- 
somed," has,  red^mpta,  which  he  explain^ 
"  CaptivitatibuB    tradita,    et    rarsom    r» 


OH.  III.  1—20.] 


THE   BOOK  OF  ZEPUANIAH. 


4S 


dempta."  The  oppressing'  city,  that  acta 
unjustly  and  cruelly  to  the  weak  and  poor. 
So  the  three  gins  for  which  she  Is  here 
denounced  are  that  she  is  rebellious  against 
God,  defiled  with  sin  in  herself,  and  cruel 
to  others.  The  Septuagint  and  Vulgate 
translate  Jonah  ("oppressing")  "dove," 
which  seeins  singularly  inappropriate  here, 
though  some  try  to  explain  it  as  applied 
to  Jerusalem  in  the  sense  of  "  silly "  or 
"stupid"  (Hob,  vii.  11) 

Ver.  2. — The  voice ;  »'.«.  of  God,  as  heard 
in  tht  Law  and  at  the  mouth  of  his 
prophets  (comp.  Jer.  vii.  24,  etc.;  ix.  13). 
Eeoeived  not  correction,  They  took  not  to 
heart  the  chastisements  sent  upon  them, 
and  did  not  profit  by  them.  She  trusted  not 
in  the  Lord,  but  in  man.  When  danger 
threatened,  she  relied  on  human  aid,  made 
alliances  with  the  heathen,  or  else  had 
recourse  to  idols  and  prayed  for  help  to 
false  gods,  as  the  next  clause  complains. 
She  drew  not  near  to  her  Qod.  She  broke 
the  covenant  which  she  had  made,  would 
not  avail  herself  of  the  privilege  bestowed 
upon  her,  and  had  no  intercourse  with  the 
Lord  in  prayer  and  worship. 

Ver.  3. — ^Soaring  lions.  The  princes,  who 
ought  to  protect  the  people,  are  ready  to 
tear  them  in  pieces  and  devour  them  (Prov. 
xxviii.  15).  Probably  the  violence  and 
arrogance  of  the  chiefs  had  increased  during 
the  minority  of  the  king.  This  must  have 
been  written  before  the  great  reforma- 
tion. Evening  wolves  (see  note  on  Hab. 
i.  8).  The  jndges,  whose  duty  it  was  to 
administer  justice  and  to  set  an  example 
of  equity  and  virtue,  are  themselves  most 
cruel  and  rapacious.  They  gnaw  not  the 
bones  till  to-morrow ;  (hey  gnaw  no  bones  in 
the  morning  ;  that  is,  they  are  so  greedy  that 
they  eat  up  all  their  prey  at  once  and  leave 
nothing  till  the  morning.  The  versions 
drop  the  metaphor,  and  render,  "  They  leave 
not  to  the  morning  "  (comp.  Ezek.  xxii.  27). 

Ver.  i. — Her  prophets.  These  are  the 
false  prophets,  who  have  no  true  mission 
from  God  (comp.  Mioah.  ii.  11 ;  iii.  5). 
light ;  either,  frivolo^ii  or  empty  boasters. 
The  word  means  properly,  "  boiling  over," 
like  water.  Vulgate,  vesani ;  Septuagint, 
irysvfiaTO(l}6poif  which  means,  probably,  not 
"  inspired  by  an  (evil)  spirit,"  but  "  carried 
away  by  the  wind,"  "light"  (comp.  Matt. 
xi.  7).  Treacherous  persons ;  literally,  men 
of  treacheries,  who  uttered  their  own  fancies 
as  if  they  were  commissioned  by  God,  and 
to  really  opposed  him  whom  they  professed 
to  represent  (Jer.  xxiii.  32)!  Her  priests 
have  pollnted  the  sanctuary  (uAat  is  holy). 
Not  the  temple  only,  bnt  all  that  has  to  do 
with  God's  service,  worship,  rites,  sacrifices ; 
they  make  no  distinction  between  what  is 
aacred  and  what  is  profane  (Ezek.  xxii.  26). 

ZSPHANIAH. 


They  have  done  violence  to  the  Law.  Chiefly, 
doubtless,  by  distorting  its  meaning,  and 
neither  observing  it  themselves  nor  teaching 
others  to  keep  it. 

Ver.  5. — In  the  midst  of  this  congregation 
of  sinners  God  is  continnally  manifesting 
his  righteousness ;  he  leaves  not  himself 
without  witness ;  and  therefore  their 
iniquities  are  without  excuse.  The  just 
Lord  is  in  the  midst  thereof;  or,  the  Lord 
in  the  midst  of  her  is  righteous  (Deut. 
xxxii.  4).  His  presence  was  associated 
with  the  temple ;  his  moral  government 
was  always  being  manifested.  He  would 
not  be  "just "  if  he  left  sinners  unpunished. 
Every  morning ;  Hebrew,  "  in  the  morning, 
in  the  morning."  The  phrase  is  rightly 
explained  in  our  version  (oomp.  Exod. 
xvi.  21 ;  Ps.  Ixxxvii.  5).  Doth  he  bring 
his  judgment  to  light.  His  propht'ts  pro- 
claim his  perfect  justice;  his  juilgments  on 
the  heathen  manifest  it  (ver.  8;  Hos.  vi. 
5).  It  is  not  from  ignorance  of  the  Law 
that  the  people  sin.  He  faileth  not;  or, 
it  faileth  not;  Vulgate,  non  abscondetur, 
God  never  ceases  thus  to  act ;  or,  his 
justice  is  clear  as  day.  Bnt  the  nnjnst 
knoweth  no  shame.  In  spite  of  this  hourly 
manifestation  of  God's  justice,  and  the 
enactments  of  tlie  Law  so  well  known,  the 
perverse  nation  will  not  amend  its  ways, 
feels  no  shame  at  its  backslidings  (Jer. 
iii.  3;  vi.  15).  The  Septuagint  Version, 
according  to  the  Vatican  manuscript,  is 
onrious  here,  and  in  the  latter  part  some- 
what like  St.  Matthew's  rendering  of  Isa. 
xlii,  3,  Kal  obic  %yv(it  a^iKiav  it/  aira[T^(rct, 
KOI  ovK  (is  yeTKos  iZmlav  (comp.  Matt. 
xii.  20),  which  Jerome  translates,  "  Ni  scit 
iniquitatem  in  exactione,nec  insempiternum 
injustitiam,"  and  explains,  "When  Grod 
exacts  from  every  man  the  sum  he  has 
committed  to  him,  he  will  not  be  unjust, 
nor  allow  injustice  to  prevail." 

Vers.  6— 8.— §  7.  Obdttrate  and  blinded 
as  nations  are,  these  extreme  measures  are 
the  only  way  left  to  secure  salvation  for 
Israel  and  the  whole  world. 

Ver.  6. — God  speaks,  showing  why  he 
has  sent  these  judgments.  I  have  out  off 
the  nations.  The  reference  is  to  facts  well 
known  to  the  hearers  (though  not  specified 
here) ;  such  as  the  ruin  of  Pentapolis,  the 
destruction  of  the  Canaaniteg,  the  defeat 
of  the  Ckaldeans  in  Hezekiah's  time,  the 
conquest  of  cities  and  countries  by  the 
Assyrians,  and  the  devastation  of  Israel 
itself.  Their  towers  are  desolate.  Their 
towers  (see  note  on  ch,  i  16),  in  which  they 
trusted  for  defence,  are  overthrown  and  lie 
in  ruins.  Others  translate,  "  street-comers," 
where  people  most  do  congregate.  Streets ; 
perhaps,  roads ;  signifying  the  open  oountry. 


50 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZBPHANIAH. 


[cu.  III.  1—20. 


So    Keil.     None   inhabitant   (oomp.    Jot. 
iT.  7). 

Ver.  7. — Taught  by  «noh  examples,  the 
Jews  might  have  learned  to  repent  and 
amend  their  ways.  I  said.  God  repreBents 
himBelf  as  reasoning  as  a  man  would  reason. 
Surely  thou  wilt  fear  me;  Septnagint, 
"only  fear  me."  This  is  the  one  condition 
for  salvation.  Or,  according  to  our  version, 
Judah  must  learn  experience  from  my 
threats  and  visitations,  and  return  unto  me. 
Thou  wilt  .  .  .  receive  instructiou;  Sep- 
tnagint, "  receive  ye  discipline,"  accept 
the  correction  and  Icarn  tiie  lesson  which 
it  is  meant  to  teach  (Prov.  xxiv.  32). 
Their  (her)  dwelling.  Jeinsalem  or  Judsaa. 
The  temple  is  never  called  the  dwelling- 
place  of  the  people.  This  sudden  change 
of  person  is  very  common  in  tlie  prophets. 
Howsoever  I  punished  them;  rather,  accord- 
ing to  all  that  I  appointed  concerning  her. 
God  had  ordained  certain  punishment  for 
Jerusalem  if  she  reformed  not.  The 
Anglican  Version  means  that  God  would 
never  out  them  off  wholly,  however  severely 
he  might  chastise  them.  The  Hebrew  will 
not  carry  this;  nor  are  the  Greek  and 
Latin  Yersions  quite  correct.  Septnagint, 
Oft  /lii  6jo\o9peu6?T6  ^{  oijiBaKfuii'  aiirjs 
vapTa  'iaa  i\S\.K-t\aa,  Iti'  outV,  "And  ye 
shall  not  be  cut  off  from  the  face  thereof  for 
all  the  punishment  that  £  inflicted  upon  it ; " 
Vulgate,  Propter  omnia  in  quibus  visitavi 
earn.  But  they  rose  early.  Warning,  re- 
proof, and  chastisement  were  expended  in 
vain;  the  people  oily  j;ave  themselves  up 
more  ardently  to  their  evil  doings.  "To 
rise  early  to  do  a  thing,"  is  a  phrase  used  to 
signify  the  acting  with  Zealand  full  purpose 
(comp.  Jer.  vii.  13,  25 ;  xi.  7,  etc.).  Cor- 
rupted all  their  doings.  Like  the  in- 
habitants of  the  earth  before  the  Flood 
(Gen.  vi.  12 ;  comp.  Ps.  xiv.  1).  The 
Septnagint  rendering  is  peculiar,  "Etoi- 
fid^oVf  6pdpt(r0Vf  ietpdaprat  iraffd  ^  iiritpvWls 
miTav,  "  Prepare  thyself,  rise  early,  all 
their  produce  is  spoiled."  St.  Jerome, 
moralizing  on  this,  adds,  "  Nisi  praparati 
fuerimus,  non  nobis  orietnr  sol  justitis. 
Orto  autem  sole,  omnes  raoemi  de  vinea 
Sodoraorum  dissipantur  et  pereuut ;  nt  non 
solum  grandes  botri,  sedetiam  quod  parvum 
esse  videbatur  in  nobis,  Ohristi  luoerna 
radiante  dispereat." 

Ver.  8. — Therefore.  Because  of  the  out- 
rage done  to  God's  "long-suffering,"  he 
must  needs  punish.  Wait  ye  upon  me ;  wait 
ye  for  me.  The  exhortiition  is  addressed  to 
the  pious  among  the  Jews,  as  in  oh.  ii.  3, 
and  IS  used  in  a  good  sense  (Ps,  xxxiii.  20 ; 
Isa.  viii.  17),  urging  them  not  to  despair, 
but  to  be  patient  under  the  affliction,  in 
the  assured  hope  of  salvation.  The  same 
expression  ii  used  in  Hab.  ii  8.     I  rise 


up  to  the  prey.  This  is  a  phrase  denoting 
effort  and  the  effecting  of  some  great 
object.  Jehovah  seizes  the  prey  when 
the  nations,  roused  by  judgment  intlicted, 
are  converted  unto  him  (Isa.  liii.  12 ;  Ps. 
Ixviii.  18).  The  LXX.,  pointing  the  last 
word  differently  (nj;),'  renders,  c«  riiUpav 
avaariinis nov  lis  liapriptov.  "until  the  day 
of  my  rising  up  for  testimony."  Jerome, 
"In  die  resurreotionis  mfse  in  futurum." 
The  Fathers  interpreted  this  of  the  times  of 
Messiah— some,  of  Christ's  resurrection  from 
the  dead;  some,  of  his  rising  up  to  divide 
the  spoil  (Gen.  xlix.  9,  27.  See  St.  Augus- 
tine, '  De  Civit.,'  xviii.  33 ;  Eusebiua, '  Dem. 
Ev.,'  ii.  17;  and  Jerome  and  Cyril,  in  Joe). 
But  such  interpretations  are  alien  from  the 
intention  of  the  passage,  however  allowable 
as  glosses.  For  my  determination  is; 
literally,  my  judgment  (mishpat)  it.  My 
justice  is  displayed,  as  ver.  5.  The  wonl, 
according  to  Keil,  never  means,  "decree" 
or  "decision."  That  I  may  assemble  the 
kingdoms,  Not  for  utter  extermination,  but 
to  bring  them  to  a  better  mind  (Isa.  xxvi. 
9;  Joel  iii.  11,  otc).  fire  of  my  jealousy 
(oh.  i.  18).  God  will  allow  no  rival  any- 
where (Nah.  i.  2).  This  is  the  reason  of  the 
severity  and  universality  of  the  judgment. 
The  Masorites  note  that  this  is  the  only 
verse  in  the  Bible  which  contains  the  whole 
Hebrew  alphabet. 

Vers.  9 — 20. — Part  III.  Pbomise  of  thb 
convbbsiok  op  the  'world  and  tke 
Happiness  of  Ibbael. 

Vers.  9,  10.— §  1.  The  heathen  thatt  be 
converted,  and  shall  help  in  the  restoration  of 
Israel. 

Ver.  9. — Will  I  turn  to  the  people  (peoples!) 
a  pure  language  (lip).  When  his  judgments 
have  done  their  work,  God  will  bring  the 
heathen  to  the  knowledge  of  him.  He  will 
purify  their  lips,  which  have  been  polluted 
with  the  names  of  idols  and  the  worship 
offered  to  false  gods  (Ps.  xvi.  4 ;  Hos.  it  17) ; 
the  confusion  of  Babel  shall  be  done  away, 
and  all  shall  speak  the  language  of  faith  in 
one  God.  This,  of  course,  points  to  Messianic 
times.  For  "pnre  lip,"  the  Vulgate  has, 
labium  electum;  the  LXX.,  by  a  mistake  of 
a  letter  (bhedurah  for  bherurah),  yXaaaav 
fU  yevfitv  oir^t  (so.  yns)',  "a  tongue  for  her 
generation."  With  one  consent;  literally, 
with  one  shoulder;  Inrb  (vyhv  ^va,  "  under 
one  yoke  "  (Septuaglnt) ;  humero  uno  (Vul- 
gate), The  metaphor  implies  that  all  will 
help  to  carry  the  same  burden,  and  to 
accomplish  the  same  work,  bearing  the 
gospel  throughout  the  world,  and  being 
all  of  one  mind  in  the  service  of  Jehovah 
(Jer.  iixu.  89;  Isa.  xix.  aS,  24;  Eev. 
xi.  15). 


OH.  m.  1—20.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH. 


51 


Ver.  10.  —  From  beyond  the  rivers  of 
Ethiopia  (Ou8h) ;  t.e.  from  the  distant  south, 
a  type  of  the  remotest  parts  of  the  world  (ch. 
il.  12).  The  rivers  of  Oush  (Isa.  xviii.  1), 
nre  the  Nile,  the  Atbara,  and  their  affluents. 
My  suppliants,  even  the  daughter  of  my 
dispersed,  shall  bring  mine  offering.  From 
the  ends  of  the  earth,  the  Jews  who  have 
continued  faithful  to  Jehovah,  and  have  not 
lost  their  nationality  among  the  Gentiles, 
but  have  considered  themselves  as  belong- 
ing to  "the  dispersion,"  shall  be  again 
received  of  the  Lord,  and  bring  their  obla- 
tions unto  him.  This  may  be  the  sense 
intended ;  but  looking  to  the  thought  in 
Isa.  Ixvi.  20  (where  it  is  said  that  the  Gerttileg 
shall  bring  the  Israelites  out  of  all  nations 
as  a  meat  offering  unto  the  Lord),  we  had 
better  render  the  passage  as  the  Bevised 
Version  margin,  "They  shall  bring  my 
suppliants,  even  the  daughter  of  my  dis- 
persed, for  an  oifering  unto  me."  The 
remote  Gentiles  shall  show  their  faith  in 
God  by  aiding  the  Hebrews  among  them  to 
turn  to  the  Lord;  this  shall  be  their  offering 
to  the  true  God,  whom  they  have  learned  to 
adore.  When  they  themselves  are  con- 
verted, they  shall  be  evangelists  to  the 
Hebrews  of  the  Dispersion.  For  this 
work  of  the  Gentiles  in  converting  the 
Hebrews,  Wordsworth  compares  Cant.  iii.  4  ; 
viii.  8,  9;  Isa.  Ixi.  5,  6;  liv.  18—21.  St. 
Paul  speaks  to  the  same  effect  in  Bom.  xi. 
Offering  (minchah).  The  pure  meal  offering 
(Mai.  i.  10, 11,  where  see  notes  j  comp.  Bom. 
XV.  16;  Phil.  ii.  17).  Dr.  Briggs  renders, 
"  From  beyond  the  rivers  of  Cush  will  be  my 
incense  (aihar) ;  the  daughter  of  Phut  will 
bring  a  minchah."  This  brings  out  the 
parallelism.  The  universal  worship  of 
Messianic  times  is  expressed  in  the  cere- 
monial terms  of  the  old  dispensation,  but 
has  a  very  real  applicableness  to  the  Chris- 
tian religion  (see  note  on  Mai.  i.  11). 

Vers.  11— 13.— §2.  Iirael, reetored to  Ood'$ 
favour,  shall  he  cleansed  and  eanetijied- 

Ver.  11. — In  that  day.  When  the  Lord 
rises  to  seize  the  prey  (ver.  8),  when  the 
Gentiles  are  converted,  and  Judah  returns 
to  her  obedience.  Shalt  then  not  be 
ashamed  for  all  thy  doings.  God  addresses 
Israel  repentant  and  converted,  and  assures 
her  that  she  shall  not  have  to  reproach 
herself  any  more,  or  to  blush  for  her 
iniquities,  because  God  blots  them  out,  or 
because  she  sins  no  more  as  she  has  done. 
And  the  great  help  to  this  improvement  is 
the  abolition  of  the  cause  and  incitement  to 
sin.  I  will  take  away  out  of  tbe  midst  of 
thee  them  that  rejoice  in  thy  pride  (thy 
proud  trinmphers,  Isa.  xiii.  3).  God  will 
cut  off  all  those  who  gloried  in  their 
temporal  prosperity  without  thought  of  God, 


who  in  the  pride  of  their  heart  walked  as 
they  pleased,  deeming  themselves  account- 
able to  no  one,  subject  to  no  law.  Such 
shall  no  longer  be  found  in  the  holy  nation. 
Haughty  because  of  (in)  my  holy  mountain ; 
t.e.  in  the  temple  (Isa.  xi.  9).  They  shall 
no  longer  exult  in  the  exclnsiveness  of  their 
privileges,  or  feel  a  vain-glorious  confidence 
in  their  own  election,  or  the  sanctity  of 
their  temple  or  its  provision  of  woraliip. 
The  Gentiles  should  be  admitted  to  the 
covenant,  and  share  in  their  privileges. 
Here  we  see  adumbrated  the  nature  of  the 
Christian  Churcli,  an  organized  body  no 
longer  local,  insulated,  but  Catholic — a 
spiritual  temple  open  to  all  believtrs. 

Ver.  12. — A  further  characteristic  of 
Messiah's  kingdom  is  here  unfolded.  No 
worldly  pomp  or  splendour  shall  be  found 
in  it;  its  members  are  not  proud,  conceited, 
self-reliant.  I  will  also  leave  in  the  midst 
of  thee,  I  will  leave  over,  as  »  remnant 
saved  in  the  judgment  (comp.  Bom.  ix.  27 ; 
Micah  ii.  12,  and  the  note  there).  An 
afflicted  and  poor  people.  The  two  epithets 
are  elsewhere  joined  togetlier  (Job  xxxiv. 
28 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  6)  to  express  the  feeling  of 
patience  under  affliction  and  inability  to 
help  one's  self  by  one's  own  efforts.  The 
spirit  signified  is  just  the  contrary  of  the 
haughty,  complacent,  self-satisfied  temper 
previously  mentioned  (1  Cor.  i.  26 ;  Jas. 
ii.  5).  They  shall  trust  in  the  Name  of  the 
Lord.  All  self-confidence  shall  be  abolished, 
and  the  religion  of  the  remnant  shall  be 
characterized  by  quiet  trust  in  God. 

Ver.  13.— The  remnant  of  Israel  (see 
note  on  ver.  12).  Though  they  claim  no 
worldly  eminence,  tbe  true  Israelites  shall 
be  conspicuous  for  spiritual  graces.  Shall 
not  do  iniquity.  Their  acts  sliall  be  just 
and  holy;  their  daily  conduct  such  as 
becomes  the  children  of  God's  election 
(Lev.  xix.  2 ;  1  John  iii.  9).  Nor  speak  lies. 
There  shall  be  no  lying  propliets  there,  and 
all  fraud  and  double-dealing  shall  be 
abolished.  The  proof  of  their  righteous 
conduct  is  found  in  the  favour  of  the  Lord 
and  the  security  in  which  they  shall  live. 
For  they  shall  feed,  etc.  The  remnant  is 
compared  to  a  "  little  flock"  (Luke  xii.  32), 
of  which  the  Lord  is  the  Shepherd  (comp. 
Mioali  vii.  14).  The  blessing  Is  that 
promised  to  Israel  in  the  Law  if  she  kept 
the  comnnaudments  (Lev.  xxvi.  5,  6). 

Vers.   14— 20.— §  3.  Israel  shall  be  com 
Joirted  and  largely  blessed  by  the  presence  of 
Jehovah,  and  exalted  to  honour  in  the  eyes  of 
all  the  world. 

Ver.  14. — In  view  of  the  coming  blessing, 
the  prophet  bursts  forth  in  exultation,  yet 
with  a  vein  of  prophecy  running  through 
all  the  canticle.     After  the  late  denuncia- 


51 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH. 


[OH.  in.  1—20. 


tion  of  woe  and  judgment,  he  Boothes  the 
faithful  with  the  promise  of  the  grace  and 
peace  which  the  time  of  Messiah  shall  bring. 
Bing,  0  daughter  of  Zion  (Isa.  i.  8 ;  Zech. 
ii.  14 ;  ii.  9).  He  calls  on  the  restored 
remnant  of  Judah  to  show  its  joy  by  out- 
ward tokens.  0  Israel.  All  the  tribes  are 
to  unite  in  praising  God.  This  is  one  of 
the  passages  where  "Israel"  is  supposed 
to  have  been  written  by  uiistake  for  "  Jeru- 
salem." So  Jer.  ixiii.  6.  The  LXX. 
gives,  eiyaTcf  'UpovaaK-hii,  "daughter  of 
Jerusalem"  (see  note  on  Zech.  i.  19).  The 
prophet  enjoins  a  triple  note  of  exultation 
in  order  to  confirm  the  universal  joy.  (On 
the  use  of  the  number  "three"  in  this 
passage,  see  Dr.  Pusey's  note,  p.  480.) 

Ver.  15. — In  this  and  following  verses  the 
prophet  gives  the  reasons  why  Zion  should 
rejoice.  Thy  judgments.  The  chastisements 
inflicted  on  thee  in  judgment,  rendered 
necessary  by  thy  iniquity  (Ezek.  v.  8). 
These  God  has  removed ;  this  is  the  first 
ground  for  rejoicing.  Septuagint,  ra  dSiK^- 
fiara  ffov,  "  thine  iniquities."  When  God  re- 
moves the  punishments,  he  forgives  the  sin. 
He  hath  cast  out  (cleared  quite  away)  thine 
enemy.  The  enemies  who  executed  the 
judgment  are  utterly  dispersed.  The  King 
of  Israel,  even  the  Lord,  is  in  the  midst  of 
thee  (Chad.  21).  The  theocracy  is  restored. 
Under  the  judgments  which  fell  upon  Israel, 
Jehovah  seemed  to  have  left  his  people; 
now  he  is  in  the  midst  of  them  as  their 
King  (Isa.  xii.  6;  lii.  7;  Hos.  xi.  9).  The 
perpetual  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Church 
is  here  adumbrated.  Thou  shalt  not  see 
evil  any  more.  So  the  Septuagint.  Another 
reading  adopted  by  Jerome  is,  "  Thou  shalt 
not  fear."  In  view  of  the  following  verse, 
this  seems  rather  tautological.  With  God 
in  their  midst,  the  people  shall  see,  i.e. 
experience  (Jer.  v.  12),  no  evil  (Rev.  xxi.3,4). 
Ver.  16. — It  shall  be  said.  So  obvious  to 
all  men  shall  be  the  happy  and  secure 
position  of  Zion  under  God's  favour  and 
rule,  that  they  shall  join  in  bidding  her 
cast  away  fear  and  exult  in  the  Divine 
protection.  Fear  thou  not  (comp.  Matt.  xiv. 
27;  xxviii.  5,  10;  Luke  xii.  7,  32).  And 
to  Zion.  Probably  vocative,  0  Zion.  Let 
not  thine  hands  be  slack  Be  not  despair- 
ing or  faint-hearted,  but  work  with  energy 
and  confidence  (oomp.  Isa.  xiii.  7 ;  Heb.  xii. 
12);  or  the  sentence  may  be  rendered, 
"Jerusalem  will  be  called  Fear  not,  and 
Zion,  Let  not  thine  haridt  he  slack,"  In  this 
case  we  may  compare  the  names  Bephzibah 
and  Beulah  given  to  Jerusalem  (Isa.  Ixii  4), 
and  Jehovah-Ttidkenv,  (Jer.  xxxiii,  16). 

Ver.  17. — In  the  midst  of  thee ;  better, 
it  in  the  midst  of  thee  (see  note  on  ver.  15). 
Is  mighty ;  he  will  save ;  rather,  o  Mighty 
One  who  wiU  «a«« ;  LXX.,  'O  Sui^ar^t  aiiaei 


<re,  "The  Mighty  One  shall  save  thee." 
This  is  the  real  ground  of  confidence :  the 
Lord  wills  their  salvation.  He  will  rejoice 
over  thee  with  joy,  now  that  thy  iniquity  is 
purged,  and  thou  art  united  again  to  him, 
as  a  chaste  and  comely  bride  (Isa.  Ixii.  5 ; 
Jer.  xxxii.  41;  Hos.  ii.  19).  He  will  rest 
(Hebrew,  be  silent)  in  his  love.  This  is  a 
human  expression,  denoting  that  perfect  love 
which  needs  no  outward  demonstration. 
For  the  very  greatness  of  his  love  God  rests, 
as  it  were,  in  quiet  enjoyment  of  it.  Some 
take  it  to  mean  that  in  his  love  for  his 
people  he  is  silent  about,  makes  no  mention 
of,  past  sins ;  but  this  seems  less  suitable, 
as  this  clauoe  is  merely  an  expansion  of  the 
preceding  one.  The  Septuagint  and  Syriao 
Versions  render,  "  He  will  renew  thee  in  his 
love ; "  and  Ewald  has  proposed  to  alter 
the  present  reading  to,  "  He  will  do  a  new 
thing."  But  there  is  no  su£Scient  reasnn 
for  making  the  change.  With  singing. 
Again  he  gives  to  his  ineffable  love  out- 
ward expression.  The  LXX.  paraphrases 
accurately,  "  He  will  rejoice  over  thee  with 
delight  as  on  a  day  of  festival"  (Isa.  Ixv.  19). 

Ver.  18.— The  love  which  God  feels  he 
shows  in  action.  He  cares  for  the  exiled 
and  dispersed,  and  will  gather  them  again 
and  comfort  them  for  all  their  sorrows.  I 
will  gather  them  that  are  sorrowful  for  the 
solemn  assembly;  or, /or  removed  from  the 
solemn  assembly.  Those  who  grieve  because 
by  their  exile  from  the  Holy  Land  they  are 
debarred  from  duly  attending  the  periodical 
festivals,  these  God  will  restore,  and  enable 
them  again  to  participate  in  the  saoied 
feasts.  The  above  version  and  explanatiun 
are  undoubtedly  right,  as  the  Latin  Version 
is  certainly  wrong,  Nugas,  qui  u  lege  reces- 
seraid,  congregabo;  that  is,  the  light  and 
fickle  persons,  who  have  estranged  them- 
selves from  the  Law,  God  will  reclaim,  and 
join  them  to  the  congregation  of  the  true 
Israel ;  and  this,  quia  ex  te  erant,  for  their 
origin's  sake,  because  they  are  descend- 
ants of  the  chosen  people.  Who  are  of 
thee ;  they  are  of  thee,  0  Zion.  These  are  the 
true  Israelites ;  this  is  why  they  mourn  for 
the  cessation  of  the  festivals,  and  why  they 
shall  be  restored  to  the  Holy  Land.  To  whom 
the  reproach  of  it  was  a  burden;  i.e.  who 
felt  the  desolation  of  Zion  and  the  reproaches 
uttered  against  her  by  enemies  (Ps.  cxxxvii.) 
as  a  burden  grievous  to  be  borne.  The 
Vulgate  has,  Ut  non  ultra  habeas  super  eis 
opprobrium ;  i.e.  "  That  they  may  be  no  more 
a  disgrace  to  thee ; "  the  LXX.  reads  some- 
what differently,  O&ol,  tIs  l\a0ev  iif  outV 
oveiSuTfLiv ;  "  Alas  I  who  took  up  a  reproach 
against  her?" 

Ver.  19.— I  will  undo  all  that  afflict  thee ; 
IwiU  deal  with  in  punishment  (Jer.  xviii, 
23);  Vulgate,  "I  will  slay."    The  restor* 


AH.  m.  1 — 20.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  ZEPHANIAU. 


63 


tion  of  Israel  is  preceded  by  the  destruction 
of  tlie  enemies  of  God  and  the  Ghuroh. 
Septuagint,  noiu  iv  iral  %veKev  <rov  iv  r^ 
Kcupif  4Kelv(f!,  Keyet  Kipios,  "Dominus  dioet 
ad  Sion,  Ecoe,  ego  faciam  in  te  propter  te, 
id  est,  faoiam  ultionem  tuam  ".  (St.  Jerome). 
Her  that  halteth  (MioaU  iv.  6).  The  afflicted 
of  Israel,  here  compared  to  a  lume  and 
footsore  flock  of  sheep.  Septuagint,  rhv 
iKTr€TTiea/i4v7ii',  "  pressed,"  like  grapes  or 
olives,  to  extract  the  juice.  Her  that  was 
driven  ont.  The  exiled  and  dispersed.  I 
will  get  them  praise  and  fame ;  I  will  make 
{hem  to  he  a  praiie  and  a  name.  This  is  in 
ftcoordance  with  the  promise  in  Deut.  xxvi. 
19.  In  every  land  where  they  have  been 
put  to  shame ;  literally,  in  every  land  of  their 
tihame.  The  scene  of  their  shame  should  be 
the  scene  of  their  glorification.  The  prophet 
does  not  consider  that  the  restored  theocracy 
shall  be  confined  to  the  geographical  limits 
of  the  Holy  Land ;  he  looks  to  its  dissemina- 
tion throughout  the  world.  Wide  as  the 
dispersion  itself  shall  be  the  diffusion  of  the  | 


knowledge  of  Goil  and  the  admiration  of  hia 
doings  towards  Israel  (comp.  oh.  ii.  11  j  iii. 
9 ;  Ezek.  ix.  41 ;  xxviii.  25 ;  Zech.  viil.  23). 
Ver.  20.— Will  I  bring  yon  again  (in). 
He  repeats  the  promise  with  some  slight 
verbal  changes.  I  will  lead  you  like  a 
flock  to  the  pastures  of  Zion.  People; 
peoples.  When  I  turn  back  your  captivity ; 
i.e.  when  God  briugs  them  all  home  into 
the  spiritual  Ziou  from  which  they  were 
long  exiled  (but  see  note  on  oh.  ii.  7 ;  and 
comp.  Hos.  vi.  11;  Amos  ix.  14).  Before 
your  eyes.  Most  certainly  and  evidently,  so 
that  what  they  hoped  for  they  shall  plainly 
see  (Deut.  i.  30 ;  xxx.  3,  etc. ;  Isa.  Iii.  8, 10). 
Saith  the  Lord.  All  this  shall  assuredly 
come  to  pass,  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord 
hath  spoken  it.  In  the  prophet's  eye  the 
restoration  from  captivity  and  the  times 
of  Messiah  are  synchronous,  or  the  former 
is  so  closely  connected  in  idea  with  the 
latter  that  he  speaks  of  both  under  one 
set  of  terms,  applying  the  same'  imagery 
to  both. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Ouilt  and  retribution.  Having  taken  a  mental  survey  of  the  surround- 
ing heathen  nations,  the  seer  returns  again  in  thought  to  his  own  people.  It  was, 
indeed,  in  their  interest  that  he  had  been  led  to  take  this  wide  review  of  God's  dealings 
with  men.  He  desired  to  make  very  real  to  them  the  Divine  law  that  sin  cannot  go 
unpunished,  and  that  national  guilt  must  inevitably  be  followed  by  chastisement ;  yea, 
more,  that  if  this  law  operated  in  heathen  lands,  much  more  might  they  expect  to 
come  under  it  who  had  enjoyed  the  special  illumination  of  God's  Spirit,  to  whom  he 
had  given  his  holy  oracles,  and  amongst  whom  he  had  raised  up  a  succession  of  faith- 
ful men  to  guide  them  into  the  paths  of  truth  and  righteousness.  In  these  verses 
observe — 

I.  The  prophet  presents  a  hbatt  indictment,  settino  forth  the  odilt  of 
JuDAH  and  Jebusalem.  1.  This  indictment  contained  certain  counts  directed  against 
the  people  in  general.  They  were  charged  with  (1)  inward  defilement :  "  filthy  and 
polluted  "  (ver.  1) ;  (2)  outward  tyranny :  "  the  oppressing  city  "  (ver.  1) ;  (3)  practical 
atheism.  God  had  spoken  unto  them,  but  they  had  not  hearkened  unto  his  voice 
(ver.  2).  He  bad  corrected  them,  but  they  did  not  humble  themselves  under  his 
chastening  hand  (ver.  2).  He  had  offered  himself  to  them  as  the  Object  of  trust,  but 
they  withheld  their  confidence  from  him,  and  rested  in  an  arm  of  flesh  (ver.  2).  He 
had  intimated  his  willingness  to  enter  into  fellowship  with  them,  and  to  inspire  and 
strengthen  them,  but  "  they  drew  not  near  unto  him  "  (ver.  2).  He  had  frustrated  and 
brought  to  confusion  their  adversaries,  and  had  covered  with  confusion  and  shame  the 
godless  nations  around  them,  but  instead  of  being  warned  by  these  Divine  judgments, 
executed  in  their  sight  against  evil-doers,  they  had  themselves  wilfully  persisted  in 
their  iniquity  (vers.  6,  7).  2.  This  indictment  contained  also  certain  counts  directed 
against  the  leaders  of  the  nation  in  particular  (vers.  3,  4).  (I)  The  princes  were 
charged  with  cruelty,  devouring,  like  roaring  lions,  those  they  ought  to  have  protected 
(ver.  3).  (2)  The  judges  were  marked  by  greed  and  rapacity,  and  were  insatiable  as 
evening  wolves,  so  that  justice  was  perverted,  and  wrong  remained  unredressed 
(ver.  3).  (3)  The  prophets  of  the  people,  who  claimed  to  be  messengers  of  God  to 
them,  were  trifling  and  insincere,  so  that  no  reliance  could  be.  placed  upon  their  words 
(ver.  4).  (4)  The  priests  profaned  the  temple  and  its  services,  and  dishonoured  the 
Law  they  were  appointed  to  expound  and  enforce  (ver.  4). 

II.  Thk  prophet  declared  the  riohteoubnesb  of  God,  aitd  the  consequent 


54  TlIE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  [ch.  m.  1— 20. 

KETELBUTION  THAT  SHOULD  BE  EXPERIENCED  BY  THE  BVIL-D0EE8.     (VerS.  5,  1,  8.)     God 

is  righteous  (ver.  5).  He  is  so  absolutely  and  essentially.  His  perfections  are  all 
conformed  to  this,  and,  when  truly  contem[)lated  "by  us,  only  render  his  righteousness 
the  more  manifest  and  intense  to  us.  His  Law  is  distinguished  by  this,  and  all  his 
doings  are  guided  by  this.  "He  thinks,  and  feels,  and  purposes,  and  acts  always 
according  to  what  ought  to  be,  and  never  in  accommodation  tu  what  is ;  he  makes 
uncompromising  rectitude  the  rule  of  all  his  judgments  and  proceedings  in  all  his 
dealings  with  men.  He  is  not  facile  and  bending,  open  to  appeals  and  appliances  from 
without,  but  inherently  and  unalterably  righteous  "  (Candlish).  And  God  being  thus 
essentially  and  eternally  righteous,  iniquity  cannot  go  unpunii^hed ;  and  transgressors 
persisting  shamelessly  in  wrong-doing  must  reap  the  due  reward  of  their  deeds.  In 
no  spirit  of  vindictiveness,  but  in  strict  accordance  with  this  rectitude,  so  perfect  and 
entire,  by  which  he  is  characterized,  God  here,  by  "  the  mouth  of  his  holy  prophet," 
pronounced  "  woe "  unto  Jerusalem  (ver.  1),  and  declared  his  "  determination "  to 
gather  the  godless  nations  and  to  assemble  the  rebellious  kingdoms,  and  to  pour  upon 
them  his  indignation,  etc.  (ver.  8). 
m.  The  pbophbt  indicated  the  teue  attitude  op  the  good  in  the  land 

WHILST   the   PBEVAILINa    INIQUITY   WAS   BEACHING  ITS    CULMINATION    AND   WHEN  THE 

JUDGMENTS  OP  Heavbn  SHOULD  FALL.  They  should  wait  in  the  exercise  of  patience 
and  of  hope,  assured  that  out  of  the  chaos  wrought  by  sin  God  would  evolve  his  purposes 
of  love,  bringing  good  to  the  race.     "  Therefore  wait  for  me,  saith  Jehovah  "  (ver.  8). 

Ver.  9. — Symbols  of  the  final  prosperity  of  QocFs  spiritual  kingdom.  This  verse 
introduces  us  to  brighter  scenes.  The  writer  has  unfolded  the  guilt  of  his  own  and 
other  nations,  and  has  declared  the  terrible  judgments  which,  in  consequence  of  the 
prevailing  iniquity,  should  be  experienced ;  and  now,  in  the  closing  portion  of  his 
prophecy,  he  seeks  to  comfurt  the  true-hearted  in  such  troublous  times  by  lingering 
upon  the  glorious  future  of  the  Church  of  the  living  God.  His  fa.th  pierces  the  mists 
and  clouds,  and  apprehends  the  noble  victories  to  be  won  in  the  coming  time  by  the 
Lord  and  his  Christ,  and  the  halycon  days  that  lay  beyond.  We  are  not  to  imagine 
that  the  ancient  prophets  realized  the  full  significance  of  the  predictions  they  uttered 
respecting  the  glory  of  "  the  latter  day."  Tliey  wrote  under  the  inspiration  of  God's 
Spirit,  and  we  doubt  not  there  was  often  a  deeper  meaning  underlying  their  utterances 
than  even  they  supposed.  Unconsciously  they  "testified  beforehand"  of  a  "glory" 
sffch  as,  if  fully  seen  by  them,  would  have  dazzled  and  bewildered  them  by  its  very 
splendour.  We  must  avoid  placing  narrow  interpretations  upon  their  words  in  reference 
to  these  high  tliemes.  It  were  weak  indeed  to  seek  the  compltte  fulfilment  of  the 
glowing  predictions  which  form  the  closing  portion  of  this  prophecy  in  any  one  nation, 
and  still  less  in  any  particular  event  in  that  nation's  history.  The  prophets  them- 
selves, partial  although  the  light  they  possessed  was,  would  not  thus  have  restricted  their 
own  words,  for  they  recognized  and  rejoiced  in  the  thought  of  God  as  working  in  the 
interests  of  the  whole  race ;  and  we,  with  the  increased  light  possessed  by  us,  ought 
not  to  be  less  comprehensive  than  they.  Viewing  this  verse  (ver.  9)  in  this  spirit,  we 
may  see  set  forth  in  it  a  striking  symbol,  the  characteristics  of  the  sincere  and  genuine 
subjects  of  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  God.     Such  are  distinguished  by — 

L  Purity  in  heart  and  lipe.  "For  then  will  I  turn  to  the  peoples  a  pure 
language ; "  literally,  "  a  purified  life  "  (ver.  9).  Degeneracy  reveals  itself  in  a  marked 
manner  in  the  evil  utterances  of  men.  The  filthy  jest,  the  coarse  oath,  the  brutal 
curse,  the  foul  names,  which  have  often  offended  our  ears  as  we  have  walked  along  the 
public  streets,  indicate  the  depravity  of  hardened  hearts.  Equally  expressive  of  this  is 
uncharitable  speech,  whether  taking  the  form  of  open  reproaches  or  the  cowardly  and 
more  dangerous  form  of  secret  slander.  Double-tongued  utterances,  too,  reveal  the 
wickedness  of  the  human  heart — utterances  which  appear  to  convey  a  twofold  meaning, 
good  and  evil,  the  good  being  simply  a  kind  of  disguise  employed  for  the  purpose  of 
rendering  the  evil  the  more  effective.  And  vain  and  frivolous  speech  likewise  serves  to 
indicate  wrongness  of  heart;  "idle  words,"  useless  effectless  words,  words  which  some 
spend  so  much  time  in  dropping  from  house  to  house,  words  very  unsavoury  to  all 
sensible  minds,  and  which,  if  they  accomplish  anything,  only  work  mischief  and 
mistrust.     In  contrast  to  this,  and  as  indicating  the  opposite  disposition  of  mind  and 


cH.in.  ]— 20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAH.  56 

lieart,  we  place  true  speech.  "  The  mouth  of  a  righteous  man  is  a  well  of  life  "  (Prov.  i, 
1 1),  "  natural,  clean,  life-giving,  refreshing ; "  "  The  tongue  of  the  -wise  useth  knowledge 
aright "  (Prov.  xv.  2) ;  "A  wholesome  tongue  is  a  tree  of  life "  (Prov.  xv.  4) ;  "  The 
lips  of  the  wise  disperse  truth"  (Prov.  xv.  7).  Happy  they  who  resemble  the 
-character  portrayed  by  George  Eliot,  in  her  'Scenes  of  Clerical  Life,'  aiid  of  whom 
she  says,  "  He  was  the  man  to  give  me  help  and  comfort  when  everything  else  failed : 
every  word  he  says  seems  to  have  a  new  meaning.  I  think  it  must  be  because  he  has 
felt  life  more  deeply  than  others,  and  has  a  deeper  faith.  I  believe  everything  he  says 
at  once;  his  words  seem  to  come  like  rain  on  the  parched  ground.  It  has  always 
seemed  to  me  before  as  if  I  could  see  behind  people's  words  as  one  sees  behind  a  screen, 
but  in  this  man  it  is  his  very  soul  that  speaks."  And  since  speech  thus  reveals 
character,  no  more  appropriate  symbol  could  have  been  chosen  by  Zephaniah  than  this 
lor  the  purpose  of  setting  forth  the  Divine  renewal  in  man,  and  of  expressing  that 
purity  in  heart  and  life  which  should  characterize  the  members  of  the  true  Church  of 
(iod  in  the  happier  days  to  which,  despite  the  prevailinu  gloom,  he  looked  forward  so 
hopefully.     "  For  then  will  I  turn  to  the  peoples  a  pure  language." 

II,  Dbvoutness  in  bpibit  and  disposition.  Purified  in  lieirt,  they  should  be 
rendered  devout  in  spirit.  Fellowship  with  God  should  be  their  delight.  They  should 
no  longer  grovel  in  the  dust,  but  their  aspirations  should  tend  towards  Go'l  and  heaven. 
Delivered  from  idolatry  and  superstition  and  worldliness,  they  should  all  "  call  upon 
the  Name  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  9).  "  Prom  the  rising  of  the  sun  even  unto  the  going  down 
of  the  same  ray  Name  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles ;  and  in  every  place  incense 
shall  be  offered  unto  my  Name,  and  a  pure  offering  "  (Mai.  i.  11). 

IIL  Unity  in  purpose  and  aim.  "  To  serve  him  with  one  consent,"  literally  "  with 
one  shoulder."  The  symbol  was  suggested  by  the  thought  of  a  number  of  men  being 
■engaged  in  bearing  a  heavy  burden.  They  walk  in  step,  they  act  together,  they  stand 
shoulder  to  shoulder,  the  weight  is  proportionately  shared  by  each  ;  such,  indeed,  is  their 
agreement  and  concert  that  it  would  seem  as  though  there  were  but  one  shoulder 
among  them.  And  so  shall  it  be  with  the  Church  of  God  eventually.  The  time  shali 
come  when  all  divisions  and  strifes  shall  cease,  when  all  antagonisms,  whether  real  or 
seeming,  shall  be  no  longer  traceable  amongst  good  men,  when  that  true  unity  in  heart, 
in  life,  and  in  endeavour  shall  become  manifest,  for  which  the  great  Intercessor 
yearned,  and  for  which  he  prayed  as  he  cried,  "That  they  all  may  be  one"  (John  xvii. 
21 — 23).  Happy  era,  predicted  in  this  verse,  and  which,  since  "  the  mouth  of  the  Lord 
hath  spoken  it,"  shall  assuredly  come  at  length,  when  all  God's  servants  shall  "  with 
one  mind  and  one  mouth  glorify  God,  even  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ" 
(Rom.  XT.  6). 

Ver.  10. — The  restoration  of  the  Jews.  These  words  have  been  regarded  by  some 
biblical  expositors  as  having  reference  to  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles.  This  utterance 
of  Zephaniah  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  the  prophecy  of  Oaiaphas  recorded  in  the  New 
(John  xi.  61,  52),  have  been  associated  together  in  their  minds,  and  they  have  thought 
that  by  the  "  dispersed  "  Zephaniah  meant  the  Gentiles,  even  as  Caiaphas  described  the 
Gentiles  as  "the  children  of  God  that  were  scattered  abroad,"  and  that  when  the 
prophet  alluded  to  the  dispersed  "  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,"  he  meant  to  intimate 
that  the  Gentiles  even  from  the  remotest  parts  should  eventually  be  brought  home 
to  God.  Others,  including  many  of  the  ablest  interpreters,  take  the  opposite  view. 
They  regard  ver.  9  as  referring  to  the  Gentiles  in  their  relation  to  the  truth  and  the 
kingdom  of  God,  and  as  intimating  the  great  fact  of  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  who 
should  be  led  with  one  consent  to  serve  the  Lord,  and  then  refer  to  this  tenth  verse 
as  having  special  reference  to  the  spiritual  restoration  of  the  Jews,  who,  through  the 
agency  of  the  Gtentiles  thus  converted  to  God,  should  at  length  be  brought  in  (Rom.xi. 
30,  31).  Accepting  this  latter  interpretation,  we  have  here  declared  the  spiritual 
restoration  of  the  Jews  (ver.  10).    Note — 

L  Theib  pbbsent  position.  1.  Dispersed.  Scattered  over  the  face  of  the  whole 
earth.  "Can  you  find  a  country  which  they  can  call  their  own?  Can  you  find 
a  nation  in  which  they  are  not?  In  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  and  the 
furthest  islands  of  the  Southern  Sea,  among  bond  and  free,  copper-coloured  and 
yellow,  white  and  black,  wherever  there  are  men,  there  are  Jews."     2.  Teturning, 


56  THE   BOOK   OF   ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  iii.  1—20 


Crying  out  to  God,  longing  for  the  fulfilment  of  their  cherished  hopes.  In  exile 
they  are  itill  his  "suppliants,"  expecting  the  promised  Messiah,  and,  whilst  many  ol 
them  are  embittered  against  Christianity,  there  are  not  wanting  numbers  whp  havo 
embraced  it,  and  openly  avowed  tht-ir  faith  in  Christ,  whilst  mauy  are  his  disciples^ 
"  secretly,"  ready  to  avow  themselves  his,  only  shrinking  from  the  pains  and  penalties- 
involved,  whilst  a  stiU  larger  number  are  inquiring  concerning  him,  and  are  easily 
accessible  to  the  missionary  of  the  cross. 

II.  Thbib  tTLTiMATB  KBSTORATION.  1.  The  fact  of  their  spiritual  recovery  is  here 
emphatically  declared  (ver.  10).  From  the  remotest  parts  they  shall  come  and  sur- 
render themselves  as  an  offering  unto  God.  "  All  Israel  shall  be  saved."  They  shall 
be  brought  in  with  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles,  and  "  there  shall  be  one  flock,  oae 
Shepherd  "  (John  x.  16).  Their  restoration  to  their  own  land  is  a  question  of  compara- 
tive unimportance  iu  view  of  this  spiritual  recovery  which  is  so  frequently  declared  in 
the  unerring  Word  of  God  (Eom.  ix.  1—6,  8,  9;  x.  1—4;  xi.  1,  9,  11—15,  23— 32j 
2  Cor.  iii.  12 — 16).  2.  It  is  implied  here  that  this  spiritual  restoration  shall  be  effected 
through  the  agency  of  the  Gentiles.  The  offering  here  referred  to  as  to  -be  brought 
unto  the  Lord  was  "  the  meat  offering."  The  idea  expressed  here  is  that,  just  as  the 
children  of  Israel  presented  the  meat  offering  unto  God,  su  the  Gentiles  themselves, 
converted  to  him,  should  labour  for  the  conversion  of  the  Jews,  and,  crowned  with 
success  in  this  holy  service,  should  bring  these  Hebrew  converts  as  a  meat  offering 
unto  the  Lord.  And  the  meaning  is  still  more  clear  if  we  remember  the  signification 
of  the  meat  offering.  It  was  a  sacrifice  in  which  the  Jew  recognized  God's  goodmss 
and  grace  in  the  bounties  of  bis  hand,  and  acknowledged  that  these  gifts  were  his 
by  right,  and  ought  to  be  consecrated  unto  him.  And  even  so,  it  is  here  declared  that 
the  Gentiles  should  recognize  God's  mercy  in  bringing  home  to  himself  his  chosen  race, 
and  should  present  these  converts  to  him  as  those  who  were  his  in  virtue  of  all  he  had 
done  for  them,  and  who  ought  to  be  entirely  consecrated  to  his  service.  The  Church 
of  Christ  should  ever  prove  herself  a  missionary  Church,  and  in  these  enterprises  a 
conspicuous  place  should  be  assigned  to  work  for  the  spiritual  good  of  God's  ancient 
people,  whose  "  falling  away  "  shall  result  in  "  the  reconciling  of  the  world,"  and  the 
lestoration  of  whom  shall  be  "  as  life  from  the  dead"  (Bom.  xi.  15). 

Vers.  11 — 17. — Pictorial  representation  of  the  Ohwreh  of  God  in  the  latter  age.  Dark 
days  were  in  store  for  his  people  when  this  prophet  prophesied.  The  Captivity  was  in 
prospect,  and  there  would  soon  be  occasion  for  them,  by  "  the  rivers  of  Babylon,"  to 
"  weep  as  they  remembered  Zion."  Still,  he  would  have' them  remember  that  it  would 
not  be  ever  thus,  but  that  the  time  should  come  in  which  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord 
should  return  to  Zion  with  songs  and  with  gladness.  In  these  verses  he  draws  a 
beautiful  picture  of  the  Church  of  the  future.  How  far  his  description  has  been 
realized  in  the  past  in  the  experience  of  the  Hebrew  Church  in  connection  with  the 
rcDurn  from  captivity,  it  would  be  impossible  for  us  to  indicate ;  certain,  however,  is  it 
that,  for  the  fuU  realization  of  this,  we  must  turn  to  the  future,  to  the  Church  of  God 
in  the  latter  age.  We  do  well  to  unite  with  the  good  of  all  past  times  in  looking  ob 
by  faith  to  that  bright  day  of  God  which  shall  yet  dawn  upon  the  world  sin  has 
darkened  and  sorrow  blighted,  and  to  anticipate,  with  expectant  hearts,  its  glorious 
appearing.     Concerning  the  Church  of  the  future,  we  are  reminded  here  of — 

I.  Heb  perfected  character.  Her  members  are  represented  as  :  1.  Purified.  So 
pure  indeed  should  they  be  as  that  "  they  should  not  be  ashamed  for  all  their  doings 
wherein  they  had  transgressed  against  God  "  (ver.  11) ;  ».e.  they  should  have  "  uo  more 
conscience  of  sin  "  (Heb.  x.  2).  So  completely  should  they  be  delivered  from  the  old  life 
of  sin  that  even  the  remembrance  of  the  sinful  past  should  all  be  obliterated,  and  should 
no  more  rise  before  them  to  disturb  and  distress.  2.  Humble.  No  longer  puffed  up  with 
spiritual  pride,  boasting  of  themselves  as  being  the  favoured  of  Heaven,  and  glorying 
in  their  special  advantages  of  ancestry  and  country,  "they,  should  no  more  be 
haughty  because  of  God's  holy  mountain  "  (ver.  11),  but  should  be  lowly  in  heart,  and 
clothed  with  that  humility  and  meekness  which  is  in  the  sight  of  God  of  great  price. 

3.  Trustful.  Resting  wholly  in  "  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  which  is  a  strong  towe» " 
(Prov.  xviii,   10).     "  And  they  shall   trust  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord "  (ver.  11). 

4.  Sincere.    They  should  reach  unto  the  heights  of  holy  obedience,  and  which  ii, 


OH.  m.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  67 

indeed,  the  climax.      "  The  remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  do  iniquity,  or  speak  lies, 
neither  shall  a  deceitful  tongue  be  found  in  their  mouth  "  (ver.  13). 

II.  Heb  high  privilkoes.  1.  Deliverance  from  all  sorrow.  "Thou  shalt  not  gee 
evil  any  more "  (ver.  15).  2.  Enrichment  virith  peace  and  tranquillity.  "For  they 
shall  feed  and  lie  down,  and  none  shall  make  them  afraid"  (ver.  13).  3.  Safety  under 
God's  protecting  care.  "  The  King  of  Israel,  even  the  Lord,  is  in  the  midst  of  thee ; " 
"  Fear  thou  not "  (vers.  15,  16). 

III.  Hbb  Divine  rebodboes.  In  the  seventeenth  verse  the  love  of  God  towards 
his  servants  is  declared  in  words  of  exquisite  beauty  and  tenderness.  "  The  prophet 
speaks  of  the  eternal  love  and  joy  of  God  towards  his  people  as  an  exuberant  juj%  one 
which  boundeth  within  the  inmost  self,  and  again  is  wholly  silent  in  his  love,  as  the 
deepest,  tenderest,  most  yearning  love  broods  over  the  object  of  its  love,  yet  is  held 
still  in  silence  By  the  very  depth  of  its  love,  and  then  again  breaks  forth  in  outward 
motion,  and  leaps  for  joy,  and  uttereth  what  it  cannot  form  in  words ;  lor  truly  the 
love  of  God  in  its  unspeakable  love  and  joy  is  past  belief,  past  utterance,  past  thought " 
(Pusey).  And  since  he  who  thus  loves  is  "  mighty,"  the  objects  of  this  Divine  love 
need  not  fear  nor  grow  faint-hearted  ever,  for  their  resources  are  infinite  and  eternal. 

IT.  Her  bapturous  joy.  "  Sing,  0  daughter  of  Zion ;  shout,  0  Israel,"  etc.  (ver.  14). 
The  joy  of  the  redeemed  eventually  shall  be  full  and  all-sufficing,  and,  in  anticipation 
of  entering  into  this  experience  at  length,  all  Goii's  servants,  even  in  the  dark  days, 
may  well  lift  up  their  heads,  and  "  in  the  darkness  raise  their  carols  of  high  praise." 

Ver.  15. — The  abiding  presence  of  Qod  with  his  Church.  "  The  King  of  Israel,  even 
the  Lord,  is  in  the  midst  of  thee."  This  truth  was  constantly  affirmed  in  the  Old 
Testament  with  reference  to  the  Jewish  Church ;  and  as  the  Church  of  God  through 
all  ages  is  one  Church,  we  may  take  the  promises  of  God  to  Israel  of  old  as  having 
their  application  to  his  Church  still.  So  may  we  apply  to  her  to-day  those  assurances 
contained  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  (Ps.  xlvi. ;  xlviii.),  or  that  contained  in  the  text, 
or,  turning  to  the  New  Testament,  we  may  grasp  the  gracious  promise  of  the  God-Man, 
"  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  20). 

I.  Indicate  some  op  the  ways  in  which  God  has  established  this  truth  op 
HIS  ABIDING  PRESENCE  WITH  HIS  Chitbch  IN  ALL  AGES.  1.  By  having  "a  remnant " 
to  his  praise  even  in  the  darkest  times.  It  is  an  undoubted  fact  that,  whatever  dark 
clouds  of  persecution,  or  indifference,  or  declension  may  have  arisen,  God  has  had  all 
through  the  season  of  darkness  a  people  to  show  forth  his  praise.  These  Hebrew 
prophets,  amidst  their  emphatic  testimony  against  the  iniquity  prevailing  in  their  times, 
constantly  recognize  with  thankfulness  "  a  remnant "  as  remaining  true  to  God  and  to 
righteousness.  Elijah  at  Horeb  thought  himself  to  be  the  only  servant  of  Heaven 
remaining  in  his  corrupt  day ;  but  GxA  removed  the  veil  concealing  from  his  view  the 
secret  and  hidden  Church,  and,  lo,  he  beheld  "an  exceeding  great  army,"  where  he  had 
supposed  himself  to  be  the  solitary  warrior  for  the  truth.  "  Yet  have  I  left  me  seven 
thousand  in  Israel,"  etc.  (1  Kings  xix.  18).  In  "  the  dark  ages,"  when  the  light  of 
Christian  truth  had  become  well-nigh  extinguished,  there  were  not  wanting  those  who 
dared  to  maintain  the  truth  of  God  in  its  simplicity  and  purity.  Even  within  the 
pale  of  the  Church  of  Eome  in  those  days  there  were  some  who  deplored  the  prevailing 
corruptions,  and  who  longed  for  a  return  to  the  simplicity  in  teaching  and  the  purity 
of  life  by  which  the  early  Christians  were  characterized ;  whilst  outside  her  communion 
were  associations  of  Free  Christian  societies,  as  in  Lombardy  and  in  the  Alps,  who 
were  as  lights  shining  in  dark  places.  The  Nestorians,  "  the  Protestants  of  Asia," 
referred  to  by  Mr.  Layard,  serve  as  another  illustration,  and  who,  away  in  the  remote 
valleys  of  Kurdistan,  and  entirely  separated  from  intercourse  with  other  Christian 
communities,  have  preserved  through  so  many  centuries  a  knowledge  of  the  Christian 
faith  in  the  purity  of  its  character  and  the  simplicity  of  its  worship.  There  has  ever 
been  "  a  remnant "  true  to  God,  and  serving  as  a  clear  token  of  his  abiding  presence 
with  his  Church.  2.  By  raising  up  in  her  midst,  and  qualifying,  men  for  special  service. 
Whilst  we  may  not  "  glory  in  men,"  we  may  magnify  God's  grace  and  power  in  them ; 
and  it  is  intensely  interesting  to  note  how  he  has  in  every  emergency  raised  up  his 
agents  to  do  his  work.  Moses  and  Joshua,  in  relation  to  the  deliverance  of  the 
Iffivelites  and  their  settlement  in  Canaan ;  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  in  connection  with 


58  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIA.H.  [ch.  iil  1—20. 


the  return  from  the  Captivitj'  in  Babylon ;  the  faithtul  prophets  raised  up  to  declare 
the  judgments  of  Heaven  against  idolatrous  nations;  Lutlier,  Melancthon,  Zwingle, 
called  by  him  to  take  part  in  the  work  of  the  Beformation ;  and  Owen,  Howe,  Bunyan, 
Baxter,  Flavel,  and  others,  following,  to  wield  the  pen  effectively  in  support  of  the 
truth,  and  so  to  confirm  and  to  consolidate  the  work  of  their  predecessors.  And  by 
thus  raising  up  men  and  endowing  them  with  gifts  for  special  service,  Gfod  has 
confirmed  to  his  Church  the  assurance  of  his  abiding  presence.  3.  By  frustrating  and 
bringing  to  nought  the  evil  designs  of  her  enemies.  He  has  repeatedly  proved  that 
"  no  weapon  directed  against  his  Church  can  prosper,"  and  has  made  manifest  the  folly 
of  those  who  have  sought  to  overthrow  the  kingdom  of  truth  and  righteousness. 
"  The  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  him,"  etc.  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).  4.  By  opening  up  new 
fields  for  the  extension  of  her  influence.  India  has  been  placed  under  British  rule,  and 
the  opportunity  given  of  making  known  to  its  teeming  millions  "  the  unsearchable  riches 
of  Christ."  The  exolusiveness  that  prevented  access  to  the  empire  of  China  has  passed 
away,  lo  that  the  missionary  may  go  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land. 
The  heart  of  Africa  has  been  penetrated,  and  there  is  now  the  prospect  of  her  sable 
tribes  becoming  elevated  and  blessed  through  Christian  influence.  And  in  thus  open- 
ing up  the  world  for  Christian  enterprise  to  bestow  upon  it  all  its  energy  and  zeal,  God 
has  shown  himself  as  being  still  with  his  Church.    "  The  King  of  Israel,"  etc.  (ver.  15). 

II.   The    BNC0UEA6BMKNT    THIS    THOUGHT    OF    God's   ABIDING    PRESENCE    WITH  HIS 

PEOPLE  IS  CALCULATED  TO  AFFORD  TO  THEIB  HEABT8.  1.  In  view  of  the  character  of 
the  age  in  which  we  live,  as  related  to  Christian  truth.  Many  are  seeking  to  restore 
that  papal  supremacy  which  has  proved  such  a  blight  in  ages  that  are  past ;  many  are 
cherishing  the  spirit  of  scepticism,  and  would  have  us  even  banish  God  himself  from 
his  universe ;  and  there  is  also  a  widespread  spirit  of  indifference  abroad  in  relation 
to  the  highest  spiritual  realities.  Tet  still  we  will  not  despond,  for  "the  Lord  of  hosts 
is  with  us,"  and  as  he  caused  the  light  to  bum  and  to  prevail  even  in  the  darkest  ages, 
so  he  will  still  work  until  the  light  shall  shine  in  every  land,  and  all  flesh  see  together 
the  revealed  glory  of  the  Lord.  2.  In  view  of  apathy,  <K>ldness,  and  declension  in  holy 
service.  Such  seasons  do  occur,  and  such  lifelessness  and  deadness  at  times  falls 
upon  the  Church  of  God  and  upon  Christian  communities.  Tet  God  does  not  forsake 
us  even  when  we  thus  grow  lukewarm  in  his  service.  He  is  with  us  still,  and  will 
grant  us  renewal  and  revival  if  we  will  but  turn  to  him  with  all  our  hearts.  3.  In 
view  of  the  losses  the  Church  of  God  is  called  upon  to  sustain  through  the  ravages  of 
death.  The  last  foe  is  ever  active.  Beneath  his  unsparing  hand  the  useful  as  well  as 
the  useless  fall — the  true-hearted  worker  for  God  as  well  as  the  idler  whose  life  is 
altogether  barren  of  good.  But  amidst  these  changes  the  chief  Shepherd  liveth ;  all 
holy  gifts  and  heavenly  graces  are  his  bestowments,  and  he  will  not  fail  his  Church, 
but  will  raise  up  a  bright  succession  of  devoted  servants  to  do  his  bidding  and  to  help 
on  the  grand  consummation.  Hence  we  will  not  despair ;  for  "  God  is  in  the  midst  of 
her ;  she  shall  not  be  moved :  God  shall  help  her,  and  that  right  early  "  (Ps.  xlvi.  4). 

Vers.  18 — 20. —  Wwds  of  hdp  and  hope  to  the  exiled  and  hanishtd.  The  closing 
words  of  this  prophecy,  contained  in  these  verses,  are  amply  sufficient  to  indicate 
that  although  the  writer  was  a  messenger  of  judgment,  and  as  such  addressed  burning 
words  of  denunciation  to  evil-doers,  he  was  also  a  man  full  of  tenderness — a  Barnabas 
as  well  as  a  Boanerges.  Whilst,  being  commissioned  by  God  to  reprove  the  ungodly, 
he  did  not  spare  such,  yet  he  also  knew  how  to  speak  words  of  help  and  hope  to  the 
sorrowful  and  distressed ;  indeed,  we  find  him  here  anticipating  sorrow,  being  before- 
hand with  consolation,  and  providing  the  balm  for  wounds  yet  to  be  inflicted. 

I.  Thr  case  supposed.  The  prophet  had  spoken  of  captivity;  yet  he  was  conscious 
that  God  would  restore  his  people  at  the  close,  and  bring  them  from  Babylon  {»  their 
own  land.  But,  whilst  confident  as  to  this,  he  knew  that,  in  the  very  nature  of  the 
circumstances,  only  a  portion  of  God's  people  would  be  privileged  thus  to  return,  and 
that  many  of  them  would  be  dispersed  among  the  heathen  in  various  places,  and  would 
be  unable  to  come  back  with  those  who  should  he  restored  "  when  the  Lord  should 
turn  again  the  captivity  of  his  people."  And  he  also  knew  that,  amongst  these  scattered 
ones,  there  would  be  those  who,  in  their  remote  exile,  would  mourn  for  the  solemn 
assembly,  and  whose  hearts  would  be  burdened  in  view  of  their  banishment  (ver.  18). 


CH.  in.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZKPUANIAH.  5f 

II.  The  vfORDS  or  help  and  hope  addresskd  bt  the  prophet  to  those  thus 
ciECDMBTANOED.  1.  He  assuTed  them  that  the  Lord  their  God  would  bring  to  nought 
their  oppressors.  "  I  will  undo  all  that  afflict  thee  "  (ver.  19).  2.  That  the  Shepherd 
of  Israel  would  in  his  own  time  regather  every  member  of  his  flock,  however  scattered 
they  were,  and  however  feeble  some  of  them  might  be.  "And  I  will  save  her  that 
halteth,  and  gather,"  etc.  (ver.  19).  3.  And  that  in  the  very  lands  where  they  would 
be  put  to  shame  he  would  eventually  secure  to  them  lasting  honour  and  imperis1:iab1e 
renown  (vers.  19,  20). 

III.  The  prophet  an  example  to  teachers  of  religion  in  every  age.  There 
must  be  the  bold  denunciation  of  wrong,  but  there  should  ever  accompany  this  tender- 
ness of  spirit,  revealing  itself  in  the  endeavour  to  comfort  and  cheer  troubled  hearts. 
And  in  proportion  as  this  spirit  is  cherished  by  us  do  we  resemble  the  great  Prophet 
of  the  Church,  who  was  "  anointed  to  comfort  those  that  mourn,"  etc.  (Isa.  IxL  1 — 3). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Jerusalem  the  rebdlious  and  polluted ;  or,  the  wickedneit  and  woe  of  a, 
degenerate  city.  I.  The  number  and  variety  op  her  sins.  1.  Rebellion.  This,  mark- 
ing her  attitude  towards  God,  is  amplified  and  detailed  as  consisting  in  four  transgres- 
sions. (1)  Disobedience.  She  had  not  obeyed  Jehovah's  voice  speaking  to  her  througli 
the  Law  and  the  prophets,  eujoining  on  her  precepts  and  imposing  on  her  duties,  but, 
like  an  ordinary  heathen  nation,  had  said,  "  Who  is  Jehovah,  that  we  should  serve 
him,  or  that  he  should  reign  over  us  ?  "  (2)  Insubordination.  She  had  not  received 
correction,  t.e.  had  not  accepted  with  meek  submission  the  discipline  or  chastisement 
Jehovah  had  laid  upon  her  in  consequence  of  her  sins,  as  for  instance  when  he  brought 
against  her  Shishak  of  Egypt  (1  Kings  xiv.  25,  2b),  Jehoash  of  Israel  (2  Kings  xiv. 
13),  Sargon  or  Sennacherib  of  Assyria  (2  Kings  xviii.  17  ;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  1),  but  had 
resented  it,  not  only  adhering  to  her  disobedient  ways,  but  improving  on  them, 
"  rising  early  and  corrupting  all  her  doings."  (3)  Unbelief.  Not  trusting  in 
Jehovah,  she  hed  alternately  trusted  in  Assyria  and  Egypt.  Whereas  her  confidence  in 
Jerusalem's  stability  and  impregnability  ought  to  have  rested  on  the  fact  that  Jehovah 
had  chosen  it  to  place  his  Name  there,  had  entered  into  covenant  with  the  nation  of 
which  it  was  the  capital,  had  established  in  it  his  worship,  and  had  promised  to  protect 
it,  she  was  constantly  basing  her.hopes  on  a  political  alliance  either  with  the  northern 
power  against  the  southern,  or  with  the  southern  against  the  northern  (Isa.  xxxvi.  6 ; 
Hos.  xiv.  3).  (4)  Irreligion.  Having  renounced  all  faith  in  Jehovah,  she  had  scarcely 
maintaiued  the  pretence  of  observing  his  worship— had  not  drawn  near  to  him,  either 
externally  in  the  way  of  celebrating  those  rites  he  had  prescribed,  or  internally  by 
pouring  out  her  heart  before  him  in  supplication  of  bis  favour  and  help.  2.  Pollution. 
This  declares  what  the  city  was  in  herself.  The  completeness  of  her  defilement 
discovered  itself  in  the  wickedness  of  all  classes  of  her  population,  but  more  especially 
of  her  civil  and  spiritual  rulers.  Of  the  latter,  (1)  the  prophets  were  light  and  treacherous 
persons,  vain-glorious  boasters,  boiling  up  with  their  own  conceited  imaginings,  men  of 
treacheries  who  published  their  own  false  dreams  as  if  these  had  been  the  true  visions 
of  God  (Jer.  xxiii.  32),  and  thus  caused  the  people  to  err  (Isa.  ix.  16  ;  Micah  iii.  6). 
As  they  exercised  their  callings  without  having  themselves  been  called  to  these  by 
God  (Jer.  xiv.  14),  they  were  not  his  prophets,  but  hers.  Scarcely  less  polluted  were 
(2)  the  priests,  who,  as  Jehovah's  ministers,  ought  to  have  been  holy  (Lev.  xxi.  6 ; 
Numb.  xyi.  5),  but  who,  through  being  themselves  impure,  profaned  that  which  is 
holy,  or  defiled  the  sanctuary  and  all  connected  with  it — its  rites,  persons,  things, 
places,  sacrifices,  and  violated  the  Law  (Ezek.  xxii.  26)  "  by  treating  what  was  holy 
as  profane."  3.  Oppression.  Revealing  hei:  behaviour  towards  man :  Ler  civio 
dignitaries  practised  cruelties  ferocious  and  unprovoked  upon  those  over  whom  they 
ruled.  (1)  Her  princes  in  the  midst  of  her,  i.e.  her  kings  and  nobles,  like  roaring  lions 
rushing  on  their  prey  (Prov.  xxvii.  15),  ground  down  her  poor  and  unresisting  popula- 
tion by  excessive  taxations  and  labours.  (2)  Her  judges,  in  their  administration  of  law 
and  (so-called)  justice,  were  so  fixedly  bent  on  their  own  enrichment,  and  so  insatiably 
greedy  of  their  evil  gains,  that  they  seemed  like  hungry  and  rapacious  evening  wolves 


tiO  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH,  [ch.  m.  1—20. 

which  could  not  leave  a  bone  of  their  prey  till  the  morning,  but  must  deTOur  it  ere  the 
night  passed  (Hab.  i.  8 ;  Jer.  v.  6 ;  Ezek.  ixii.  27). 

II.  The  aoobavatiok  and  eeinousness  of  heb  sins.  1.  Against  Divine  grace. 
She  had  been  guilty  of  all  the  foregoing  wickednesses,  though  Jehovah  had  been  in  the 
midst  of  her.  That  he  chose  at  the  first  to  establish  his  presence  in  her  was  a  favour — 
a  special  favour ;  that  he  remained  in  her  after  she  had  become  rebellious,  polluted,  »nd 
opiressive,  was  more  than  a  special  favour — was  an  exceeding  great  mercy.  2.  Against 
Divine  example.  In  all  Jehovah's  dealings  with  her  he  had  shown  himself  "  righteous," 
f  ven  proved  that  he  would  not  and  could  not  do  iniquity ;  nevertheless,  she  had  not 
followed  in  Jehovah's  steps,  but  had  turned  aside  into  crooked  paths  and  unclean  ways. 
3.  Against  Divine  instruction.  Jehovah  had  brought  his  judgment  to  light  every 
moruiug  by  causing  his  Law  to  be  proclaimed  to  the  nation  daily  by  the  prophets.  Yet 
she  had  rebelled  against  the  light  and  done  the  works  of  darkness.  4.  Against  Divine 
wwrnings.  She  had  seen  Jehovah  cutting  off  the  nations  around,  throwing  down  their 
battlements,  and  rendering  them  desolate,  "  making  their  streets  waste,"  etc.  (ver.  6) ; 
and  still  she  bad  closed  her  ears  against  the  warnings  these  providential  judgments 
gave.  5.  Against  Divine  expectation.  Jehovah  had  hoped  she  would  fekr  him  and 
receive  the  instruction  and  correction  he  iiad  intended  for  her ;  but  she  had  not  done 
so.  Bather  she  had  risen  early  and  corrupted  herself,  thereby  proving  herself  one  of 
the  unjust  who  know  no  shame. 

IIL  The  becomfense  and  rewabd  of  heb  sins.  1.  A  severe  penalty.  Woe; 
and  the  cutting  off  of  her  dwelling.  Unless  she  repented  and  turned  from  her  evil 
ways,  she  would  be  overwhelmed  with  the  righteous  indignation  of  God,  and  her  place 
as  a  nation  wiped  out — an  impressive  symbol  of  the  doom  threatened  against  unbelieving 
and  unrepentant  sinners  under  the  gospel.  2.  A  contingent  penalty.  1i  she  feared 
Jehovah  and  accepted  correction,  her  dwelling  should  not  be  cut  off,  and  the  vials  of 
woe  should  not  be  outpoured  upon  her  (Jer.  xviii.  7).  So  are  God's  tfareatenings 
against  sinners  contingent  on  their  continued  impenitence.  But  this  presupposed,  it 
becomes :  3.  A  certain  penalty.  Nothing  could  avert  the  woe  and  the  cutting  off  in 
Jerusalem's  case  but  repentance  and  reformation,  neither  of  which  she  showed ;  and  so 
when  within  less  than  a  century  it  became  apparent  that  there  was  no  remedy,  the 
sluice-gates  of  wrath  were  opened,  and  she  was  cut  off  without  compassion  (2  Chron. 
xxxvi.  16, 17).  So  will  it  be  with  those  under  the  gospel,  who,  being  often  reproved, 
yet  harden  their  necks — they  shall  be  utterly  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy 
(Prov.  xxix.  1). 

Learn:  1.  The  danger  of  sin.    2.  The  certainty  of  judgment. — T.  W 

Ver.  5. — The  sharnelessness  of  sin.  I.  A  demonstbable  fact.  1.  Asserted  by 
Scripture.  In  addition  to  the  statement  of  the  text,  that  "  the  unjust  knoweth  no 
shame,"  may  be  cited  other  declarations  to  the  same  effect  from  both  the  Old  (Jer, 
iii.  3;  vi.  15;  viii.  12)  and  the  New  (Eph.  iv.  19;  Phil.  iii.  19)  Testaments. 
2.  Proved  hy  experience.  Besides  the  individuals  to  whom  the  above  passages  allude, 
persons  are  often  met  with  in  actual  life  who  not  only  seem,  but  so  far  as  can  be 
discovered  from  their  behaviour  actually  are,  insensible  to  shame. 

II.  A  PSYOHOLOGioAL  ENIQMA.  1.  Shame  the  fruit  of  sin.  Exemplified  in  the 
case  of  Adam  and  Eve  (Gen.  ii.  25 ;  iii.  7).  Shame  is  the  outward  sign  of  the  soul's 
inward  consciousness  of  guilt.  2.  Sin  the  death  of  shame.  If  shame  does  not  lead  to 
repentance,  and  so  to  the  destruction  of  sin,  sin  will  soon  assert  its  supremacy  over 
shame  and  lead  to  its  extinction. 

IIL  A  siqkifioant  phenomenon.  Teaching :  1.  The  possibility  of  complete  spiritual 
deterioration.  When  a  soul  can  no  longer  feel  ashamed  on  account  of  sin,  when  its 
moral  perceptions  have  become  darkened,  aud  its  consoiunce  is  deadened,  the  process  of 
spiritual  or  religious  degeneration  has  reached  its  lowest  point.  The  soul  is  practically 
dead  in  trespasses  and  in  sins.  It  has  become  essentially  and  permanently  unjust. 
2.  The  impossibility  of  ultimate  redemption.  The  soul  that  cannot  blush  is  at  least 
perilously  near  the  condition  of  thos«  of  whom  it  is  written,  "  It  is  impossible  to 
renew  them  again  unto  repentance  "  (Heb.  vi.  6). — T.  W. 

Vers.  8— 13.— 2%e  gracious  acts  of  Jehcvah;  or,  Israel't  glorious  future.    L  Thb 


OH.  m.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAH.  61 

RESTORATION  OF  Ibrabl.  (Ver.  8.)  1.  ITie  time  indicated.  The  day  that  Jehovah 
riseth  up  to  the  prey ;  i.e.  tc  take  for  himself  as  a  booty  or  spoil  out  of  the  nations 
he  visits  a  people  who  shall  desi'e  his  salvation  and  confess  his  Name.  Among  those 
who  shall  then  be  captured  by  Jehovah  will  be  Israel,  or  at  least  a  remnant  thereof, 
who  shall  be  brought  again  to  their  own  land.  The  time  thus  indicated  began  with 
I'ersia's  overthrow  of  Babylon,  to  which  doubtless  the  prophet's  language  primarily 
refers,  continued  till  the  advent  of  Christ,  in  whom  Jehovah  rose  up  not  merely  to 
bring  redemption  to  the  pious  remnant  of  Israel  (Luke  i.  68),  but  to  take  out  of  the 
Gentiles  a  people  for  liis  Name  (Acts  xv.  14),  and  will  not  terminate  till  the  close  of 
the  present  era,  during  which,  by  the  gospel,  is  being  gathered  out  of  all  nations  and 
kindreds,  peoples  and  tongues,  a  people  for  Jehovah,  of  whom  ancient  Israel  was  but 
a  shadow  and  a  type  (Matt.  viii.  11 ;  Luke  xiii.  29 ;  Eev.  vii.  9).  2.  The  instm- 
mentality  declared.  A  work  of  judgment  upon  the  nations  of  the  earth,  which  work 
again  commenced  with  the  destruction  of  Babylon,  and  will  only  be  finished  when 
Christ  appears  a  second  time  to  execute  judgment  upon  all  (Jude  15),  and  in  particular 
to  pour  out  his  wrath  upon  the  impenitent  and  unbelieving  (2  Thess.  i.  7,  8 ;  Heb. 
X.  27 ;  Rev.  vi.  17). '  As  in  Zephaniah's  time  Jehovah  declared  it  to  be  his  fixed 
purpose  to  hold  such  an  assize  of  the  nations,  so  has  he  revealed  his  intention  to  hold 
another  and  a  grander  at  the  end  of  time  (Acts  xvii.  31);  and  as  he  further  main- 
tained (to  a(iopt  another  rendering)  that  the  holding  of  such  an  assize,  with  what 
would  inevitably  result  from  it,  viz.  "  the  devouring  of  all  the  earth  with  the  fire  of  his 
jealousy,"  i.e.  the  destruction  of  his  enemies  by  his  judgments,  and  the  salvation  of 
his  people  by  his  grace,  should  be  a  clear  vindication  of  his  righteousness,  so  does  he 
in  rcispeot  of  the  final  judgment  claim  that  its  decisions  will  manifest  to  all  the 
righteous  character  of  himself  and  his  government  (Kom.  ii.  2,  5  ;  2  Thess.  1.  5 ;  Eev. 
xvi.  5).  3.  The  duty  prescribed.  To  wait  for  Jehovah.  Addressed,  not  to  the  whole 
wicked  and  corrupt  nation  (Hitzig),  but  to  its  pious  remnant  (Keil  and  Delitzsch, 
Pusey,  Pausset,  Farrar),  this  counsel  was  in  effect :  (1)  A  warning  against  apostasy. 
Though  Jehovah's  judgments  should  descend  upon  the  nation,  they,  the  meek  of  the 
land  (ch.  ii.  3),  were  not  to  discontinue  either  believing  in  Jehovah  or  practising  his 
religion,  but  were  to  steadfastly  adhere  to  both.  (2)  An  intimation  of  mercy.  Since, 
even  before  the  judgment  fell,  Jehovah  counselled  them  to  wait  for  him  after  it  had 
fallen,  the  sense  could  only  be  that  he  had  it  in  contemplation  to  interpose  in  his  own 
time  for  their  deliverance.  (3)  An  encouragement  to  hope.  In  the  darkest  hours  of 
their  despondency,  when  the  nation's  fortunes  should  be  at  the  lowest  ebb,  they  should 
not  yield  to  despair,  but  look  expectantly  forward  to  the  good  time  coming.  The 
duty  here  prescribed  that  of  God's  people  collectively  and  individually  at  all  tirues,  but 
especially  in  seasons  of  calamity  and  afSiction. 
II.  The  bnlarqembnt  of  Israel.    (Vers.  9, 10.)    1.  The  accession  of  the  Gentiles. 

(1)  The  outward  occasion  of  this  taming  of  the  nations  to  Israel.  The  visible, 
historical  instrumentality  by  which  it  should  be  brought  about  has  been  declared  to 
be  the  pouring  out  upon  them  of  Jehovah's  indignation.  When  God's  judgtnents  are 
abroad,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  learn  righteousness  (Isa.  xxvi.  9).  Nations  and 
communities  no  less  than  individuals,  and  these  no  less  than  those,  not  unfrequently 
require  to  be  whipped  into  obedience  and  chastised  into  submission.  Calamities  in  the 
shape  of  wars  and  pestilences  bring  powerful  kingdoms  and  haughty  empires  to  their 
knees,  when  nothing  else  will.  Prodigals  and  profligates  need  experience  of  servitude 
and  starvation  at  the  swine's  trough,  before  they  will  return  in  penitence  to  God. 

(2)  The  impelling  force.  Jehovah's  grace  in  turning  to  them  a  pui'e  language 
(literally, "  lip  ").  Not  imparting  to  them  instruction  through  his  servants  the  prophets 
(Luther,  Hofmann),  but  purifying  their  lips  defiled  by  the  worship  of  idols  (Hitzig, 
Keil,  and  Delitzsch).  This,  again,  was  only  possible  by  first  purifying  their  hearts,  or 
weaning  them  from  the  love  of  their  debasing  superstitions.  The  fountain  must  be 
cleansed  if  the  stream  running  from  it  is  to  be  pure ;  the  tree  must  be  good  if  it» 
fruit  is  to  be  good  (Matt.  xii.  33).  The  prime  mover  in  all  religious  awakenings  and 
reformations  is  God  (Bzek.  xxxvi.  27;  John  iii.  3,  5;  vi.  63;  Rom.  viii.  2;  1  Cor. 
XV.  10).  (3)  The  formal  expression.  Calling  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  A  phrase 
used  to  designate  the  worship  of  Jehovah  by  Abraham  (Gen.  xii.  8),  and  of  Christ  by 
believers  under  the  gospel  (Rom.  x.  13).    The  Name  of  God  signifies  his  manifested 


62  THE   BOOK   OF   ZEPHANIAU.  [ch.  hi.  1—20 

chanoter  (Exod.  iii.  15 ;  xx.  24 ;  xxiii.  21 ;  John  xvii.  6)  ;  to  call  upon  his  Name,  to 
invoke  the  help  that  Name  proffers  and  warrants  to  expect.  (4)  The  animating  Spirit. 
"  'I'd  serve  him  with  one  consent,"  or  "  one  shoulder ; "  signifying  that  their  adherence  to 
Jehovah  shall  not  be  purely  formal  but  essentially  spiritual,  not  of  outward  ceremonial 
alone  but  also  of  inward  devotion,  not  forced  and  constrained  but  voluntary  and  of 
personal  choice,  and  not  fragmentary  and  isolated  but  united  and  combined.  2.  The 
ingathering  of  the  dispersed  (Jews).  These  the  prophet  represents :  (1)  As  objects  of 
Jehovah's  affection,  even  in  the  countries  of  their  exile.  Jehovah  speaks  of  them  at 
his  dispersed  (men  may  forget  their  covenant  relationship  to  God;  he  never  forgets 
his  relationship  to  them),  and  as  the  daughter  of  his  dispersed  (of.  ver.  14V  a  designation 
of  Israel  shaped  after  similar  expressions  of  Isaiah  (ii.  8 ;  iv.  4  ;  xxii.  4)  and_  Jeremiah 
(iv.  11, 31 ;  vi.  2, 14), — God's  love  to  men  changes  not,  though  their  circumstances  and 
even  their  characters  may  change.  (2)  As  returning  to  Jehovah's  service.  From  the 
furthest  bounds  of  their  dispersion,  even  from  beyond  the  rivers  (the  Nile  and  the 
Astaboras)  of  Ethiopia  and  from  other  countries  into  which  they  may  have  been 
scattered.  No  spot  too  distant  or  condition  of  existence  too  abject  that  one  may  not 
find  his  way  back  from  it  to  God.  In  a  spirit  of  penitential  entreaty.  Jehovah  calls 
them  his  suppliants,  to  indicate  the  mood  of  mind  in  which  they  shall  return  (Zeoh. 
xii.  10).  In  so  doing  "  lie  describes  the  character  of  all  who  come  to  God  through 
Christ"  (Pusey).  To  offer  acceptable  worship.  What  Jehovah  styles  "  his  offering," 
was  the  minchah,  or  meat  offering  due  to  him  according  to  the  Law  of  Moses  (Exod. 
xxix.  41;  Lev.  ii.  8;  Numb.  iv.  16),  the  tribute  they  owed  him  as  their  Divine 
King  (1  Sam.  x.  27 ;  1  Kings  iv.  21).  According  to  another  rendering  (De  Wette, 
Keil  and  Delitzsch,  Fausset,  Eevised  Version  margin),  the  offerers  are  the  Gentiles, 
and  the  offering  the  Jews  of  the  dispersion,  whom  the  former  shall  bring  and 
present  to  Jehovah.  Though  favotured  by  Isaiah  (Ixvi.  20)  and  Paul  (Rom  xi.  25, 
26,  31),  it  is  doubtful  if  this  view  of  the  passage  was  in  the  prophet's  mind  (Hitzig, 
Piisey). 

III.  Thb  establishment  of  Israel.  (Vers.  11 — 13.)  1.  In  the  enjoyment  of 
spiritual  peace.  When  the  Lord  had  turned  again  her  captivity,  and  brought  her  back  to 
himself  with  weeping  and  with  supplication  (Jer.  xxxi.  9 ;  I.  4 ;  Joel  ii.  12),  she  should 
no  longer  be  ashamed  for  or  "on  account  of  her  past  inic[uities.  Not  because  these 
would  then  have  ceased  to  be  reprehensible  and  fitted  to  catise shame,  but  either  because 
they  would  then  have  ceased  to  be  (Keil  and  Delitzsch),  or  because  God  would  then 
have  forgiven  them  (Pusey).  A  new  heart  and  a  quiet  conscience — two  of  the  first 
gifts  bestowed  upon  returning  penitents.  2.  In  the  possession  of  heart-hwnility.  Then 
all  her  proudly  exulting  citizens  should  be  cut  off,  and  all  her  haughty  leaders  abased, 
so  that  none  should  remain  in  her  but  an  afflicted  and  poor  people,  who  should  no  more 
be  haughty  in  Jehovah's  holy  mountain.  Meekness  of  mind,  lowliness  of  heart, 
poverty  of  spirit,  an  indispensable  characteristic  of  true  religion  in  the  soul  (Matt.  v.  3 ; 
xi.  20;  xviii.  4;  Col.  iii.  12;  1  Pet.  v.  5,6).  3.  In  the  exercise  of  living  faith.  They, 
t.e.  the  inhabitants  of  restored  Jerusalem,  shall  trust  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  If  true 
religion  begets  a  spirit  of  lowliness  towards  one's  self,  it  inspires  a  feeling  of  calm  and 
confident  trust  in  Goi  (Ps.  ix.  10).  4.  In  the  pursuit  of  true  holiness.  The  members 
of  God's  spiritual  Israel  should  neither  commit  injustice  nor  tell  lies,  nor  practise 
deceit  of  any  kind.  These  again,  righteousness  and  truth,  are  absolute  requirements 
from  all  who  claim  to  be  possessed  of  sincere  religion  (Phil.  iv.  8).  5.  In  the  satisfac- 
tion of  all  her  needs.  Like  Jehovah's  flock,  she  (Israel)  should  want  nothing  (Ps. 
xxiii.  1).  She  should  have :  (1)  Fuod.  She  should  "  feed"  (Isa.  xl.  11).  (2)  Rest. 
She  should  "lie  down"  (Ps.  xxiii.  2;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  15).  (3)  Protection.  "None 
should  make  her  afraid  "  (Ps.  xci.  1—7 ;  cxxi.  3— 8).— T.  W. 

Vers.  14 — 17. — The  reciprocal  joy  of  Israel. and  Jehovah.  I.  The  joy  of  Israel  ik 
Jehovah.  (Vers.  14 — 16.)  1.  The  character  in  which  Israel  is  summoned  to  rejoice. 
Indicated  by  the  names  in  which  she  is  addressed.  (1)  Daughter  of  Zion.  Zion  meaning 
"  sunny,"  hence  "  arid,"  and  so  "  thirsty,"  or  thirsting  after  God.  (2)  Israel.  Signify- 
ing "  Prince  of  God,"  or  one  who  has  power  with  God,  and  can  prevail.  (3)  Daughter 
of  Jerusalem.  Equivalent  to  "  City  ci  peace."  At  all  events,  those  whom  God  calls  to 
rejoice  in  the  fulnoss  of  his  salvation  are  those  who  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteous- 


OH.  m.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  63 

nesB  (Matt.  V.  6),  those  who  seek  his  face  and  call  upon  his  Name  (Bom.  x.  12),  and 
those  who  are  possessed  of  a  spirit  of  peace  (Matt.  t.  9),  2.  The  enthusiasm  with 
which  she  is  invited  to  rejoice.  Suggested  by  the  threefold  call  to  sing,  shout,  and  be 
glad.  "  Sing, — ^it  is  the  inarticulate,  thrilling,  trembling  hurst  of  joy ;  shout, — again 
the  inarticulate,  yet  louder  swell  of  joy,  a  trumpet-blast;  and  then  too,  deep  within, 
he  glad, — the  calm  even  joy  of  the  inward  soul ;  exult,  the  triumph  of  the  soul  which 
cannot  contain  itself  for  joy  ;  and  this  with  the  whole  heart,  no  corner  of  it  not  pervaded 
with  joy  "  (Pusey).  3.  The  grounds  on  which  Israd  is  called  to  rejoice.  (1)  Judgments 
taken  away.  The  calamities  inflicted  on  her  because  of  her  iniquities  have  been 
removed  (Isa.  xl.  2),  Meaning,  her  sins  have  been  pardoned.  Believers  under  tlie 
gospel  have  the  same  cause  for  exultation.  For  them,  as  for  Israel,  is  no  condemna- 
tion more  (Rom.  v.  11 ;  viii.  1).  (2)  Enemies  cast  out.  In  the  case  of  Israel  this 
was  so  far  true  that  henceforth  she  was  no  more  seriously  harassed  as  a  nation  after  the 
restoration.  Of  believers  under  the  gospel  it  is  true  that  their  chief  enemy,  the  prince 
of  this  world,  has  been  cast  out  by  Jesus  Christ  (John  xii.  31),  while  sin,  which 
represents  his  power  in  them,  will  ultimately  be  expelled  from  their  renewed  natures 
(Gal.  i.  4  ;  Bph.  i.  4;  v.  27 ;  Titus  ii.  15).  (3)  Q-od  returned.  As  her  covenant  God, 
— "  the  Lord  thy  God ; "  rightful  King, — "  The  King  of  Israel,  even  the  Lord,  is  in  the 
midst  of  thee;"  powerful  Protector, — the  Lord  thy  God  is  "a  Mighty  One  who  will 
save  thee."  In  the  same  characters  God  abides  in  the  Church  and  dwells  in  the 
heart  of  the  believer.  (4)  Prosperity  secured.  With  Jehovali  in  her  midst  she 
shall  no  more  see  or  experience  evil  (Ps.  xci.  10).  The  same  true  of  the  Christian 
believer,  in  whose  heart  God  dwells  (2  Thess.  iii.  3;  1  Pet.  iii.  13).  4.  The  signs 
Israel  shows  that  she  does  rejoice.  (1)  No  more  fear.  "  In  that  day  it  shall  be  said  to 
Jerusalem,  Fear  thou  not."  So  Christ  says  to  his  little  flock,  "  Fear  not  1 "  (Luke  xii. 
32 ;  John  vi.  20).  (2)  No  more  despondency.  "  0  Zion,let  not  thine  hands  be  slack." 
Drooping  hands  are  the  sign  of  a  fainting  heart.  Believers  are  exhorted  to  faint  not 
(Luke  xviii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  16).  (3)  No  more  indolence.  Slack  hands  are  idle  hands ; 
and  no  greater  enemy  to  activity  in  Churches  or  individuals  exists  than  lack  of  joy,  as 
nothing  stimulates  to  religious  work  like  the  experience  of  religious  joy. 

II.  The  jot  of  Jehovah  in  Isbael.  (Ver.  17.)  1.  The  character  of  this  joy.  The 
joy :  (1)  Of  a  conqueror  over  the  prey  he  has  captured  (ver.  8)  ;  Israel  in  her  restoration 
being  a  trophy  of  his  prowess.  (2)  Of  an  artificer  in  the  work  of  his  hands  (ver.  11) ; 
Israel  in  her  purified  condition  being  a  production  of  bis  grace.  (3)  Of  an  owner  in  the 
value  of  his  possession  (ver.  10)  ;  Jehovah  speaking  of  Israel  as  "  his  dispersed." 
(4)  Of  a  lover  in  the  object  of  his  affection,  as  e.g.  of  a  bridegroom  in  his  bride  (Isa.  Ixii. 
5).  2.  The  tenderness  of  this  joy.  It  was  a  joy  springing  out  of  love  to  Israel,  the  joy 
of  one  who  seeks  the  happiness  of  another,  rather  than  of  one  who  glories  in  his  own 
felicity.  In  God's  jny  over  Israel  is  no  element  of  selfishness ;  it  is  all  sympathy  and 
affection.  3.  Th«  intensity  of  this  joy.  Marked  by  the  gradation  of  clauses.  Beginning 
with  an  inward  feeling  of  delight,  it  swells  in  volu.ue  and  deepens  in  tenderness  till  it 
becomes  too  great  for  utterance,  and  the  subject  of  it  is  "  silent  in  his  love,"  after 
which  it  keeps  on  rising  like  a  tide,  till  at  length  it  overflows  the  soul's  banks  and 
breaks  forth  into  song.  4.  The  spontaneity  of  this  joy.  It  is  not  meant  that  Jehovah's 
joy  in  Israel  is  occasioned  or  evoked  by  Israel's  joy  in  Jehovah,  but  rather  that 
Jehovah's  joy  in  Israel  should  prompt  and  sustain  Israel's  joy  in  Jehovah.  As  "  we 
love  him  because  he  first  loved  us  "  (1  John  iv.  19),  so  can  we  only  "  joy  in  God  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (Rom.  v.  11)  when  we  realize  that  he  for  Christ's  sake  is 
well  pleased  with  us. — T.  W, 

Ver.  17. — Ood  and  hispeople.  I.  God's  relation  to  his  peoplb.  1.  Their  covenant 
God.    2.  Their  rightful  King.     3.  Their  mighty  Saviour. 

II.  God's  presence  with  his  people.  He  is  in  their  midst.  1.  In  the  Spirit  of  Ms 
Son.     2.  In  the  Word  of  his  truth.     3.  In  the  ordinances  of  his  Church. 

IIL  God's  work  tob  his  people.  Salvation :  1.  From  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin. 
2.  From  the  danger  of  ignorance  and  error.  3.  From  the  temptations  and  corruptiong 
of  the  world.    4.  From  the  fear  of  death  and  the  dominion  of  the  grave. 

IV.  God's  delight  in  his  people.  1.  True  and  tender.  2.  Full  and  deep.  3.  Perfect 
utd  abiding.— T.  W. 


«4  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  m.  1—20. 

Vers.  18 — 20. — 2%e  turning  again  of  IsraeTs  captivity ;  or,  good  news  for  sin's 
exiles.  I.  Libektt  fob  the  captives.  "  I  will  deal  with  all  them  that  afflict  thee," 
etc.  Those  members  of  the  Israelitish  community  who  were  soon  to  be  carried  off  into 
exile  and  enslaved  in  a  foreign  land  were  to  be  eventually  (iq  the  day  when  (Jod  rose 
up  to  the  prey)  rescued  from  their  oppressors  and  set  free  from  the  reproach  of  slavery 
which  pressed  upon  them  like  a  heavy  burden.  So  were  the  members  of  the  human 
race  captives  of  sin  and  Satan,  and  bondmen  in  a  far-off  land  of  alienation'from  God, 
when  Christ  came  to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives  and  the  opening  of  the  prison 
to  them  that  were  bound  (Isa.  xli.  1 ;  Luke  iv.  18).  So  are  men  by  nature  sin's 
captives  still  (John  viii.  34),  and  the  burden  of  the  gospel  message  still  runs,  "If  the 
Son  shall  make  you  free,  then  are  ye  free  indeed  "  (John  viii.  36). 

II.  CoMFOBT  FOR  THE  SORROWFUL.  "  I  will  gather  them  that  sorrow  for  the  solemn 
assembly."  Those  about  to  be  exiled  in  Babylon,  especially  such  among  them  as 
should  preserve  their  piety,  would  regard  it  as  the  saddest  element  in  their  lot  that 
through  banishment  they  were  no  longer  permitted  to  take  part  in  the  festal  assemblies 
of  the  nation,  in  particular  in  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  the  most  joyful  of  all  their 
celebrations  (Hos.  xii.  10).  To  them,  therefore,  it  would  come  "  like  cold  water  to  a 
thirsty  soul,"  or  "  like  good  news  from  a  far  country,"  that  they  should  afterwards, 
"at  that  time,"  be  restored  to  their  religious  privileges,  and  the  fellowship  with 
Jehovah  which  these  signified.  So  men  "  in  sin,"  being  far  off  from  him  whose  favour 
and  fellowship  alone  is  life,  when  they  first  awake  to  this  thought,  are  filled  with 
sorrow,  and  mourn  after  God,  after  that  reconciliation  and  communion  with  him  in 
which  alone  true  happiness  can  be  found  (Ps.  xxxi.  16 ;  li.  8 — 12 ;  Ixxxv.  4,  6 ;  cxliii. 
7,  8).    To  all  such  the  gospel  promises  comfort  and  consolation  (Matt.  v.  4). 

III.  Gathekinq  FOR  THE  DiBPBRBED.  Many  of  Israel's  sons  and  daughters  should  be 
scattered  into  far-off  lands  when  Jehovah  rose  to  pour  his  indignation  on  the  nations 
(ver.  8).  But  into  whatsoever  region  they  should  have  wandered,  Jehovah  would 
re-collect  them  in  the  day  when  he  turned  again  Israel's  captivity.  So  have  men 
by  sin  been  driven  away  into  many  different  "  far  countries  " — into  conditions  of 
existence  where  their  material  environments,  dispositions  of  soul,  and  habits  of  life 
have  become  widely  divergent.  But  up  out  of  all  situations  and  from  all  characters  God 
by  his  grace  can  bring  men  who  have  departed  from  him  and  separated  from  each  other, 
and  can  form  them  again  into  a  united  community,  a  holy  brotherhood,  a  spiritual 
household,  a  redeemed  family.     To  do  this  is  the  aim  of  the  gospel  (Eph.  ii.  17 — 22). 

IV.  Glory  fob  the  shamed.  Whereas  the  approaching  exile  would  lead  to  Israel 
becoming  overwhelmed  with  dishonour,  when  the  Lord  turned  again  her  captivity  that 
dishonour  would  be  wiped  out,  and  she  should  once  more  acquire  a  name  and  a  praise 
among  all  the  peoples  of  the  earth.  This  certainly  was  true  of  the  Jewish  people,  who, 
for  all  their  humiliation,  rose  to  a  position  of  commanding  influence  because  of  her 
relation  to  Jehovah  and  the  Christian  Church,  to  which  no  nation  on  earth  has  ever 
attained;  while  Assyria,  Babylon,  Greece,  and  Bome,  her  great  world-rivals,  and 
frequently  her  oppressors,  have  passed  away  into  comparative  oblivion.  So,. if  sin  turns 
man's  glory  into  shame,  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  promises  to  reconvert  man's  shame 
into  glory ;  and  this  it  does  by  giving  to  the  Christian  Church  a  position  and  power 
possessed  by  no  other  human  institution,  and  by  conferring  on  the  individual  believer 
the  glory  (1)  of  a  good  name ;  (2)  of  an  influential  life ;  (3)  of  a  peaceful  end ;  and  (4) 
of  a  blessed  future. 

Lessons.  1.  •'  Blessed  are  the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  15). 
2.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature "  (Mark  xvi. 
15).— T.  W. 

Vera.  9— 20.— T^e  promise  of  restoration.  Very  remarkable  is  the  way  in  which  the 
most  gracious  promises  are  in  this  book  interwoven,  and,  as  it  were,  wrapped  up  in 
threatenings  of  judgment.  This  appears  in  ch.  ii,  11,  where  it  is  declared  that  the 
Lord  shall  be  terrible  to  the  nations  that  magnified  themselves  againt  his  people,  and 
shall  famish  all  the  gods  of  the  earth,  so  depriving  these  nations  of  their  fancied 
support  and  confidence;  and  then  it  is  added  that  men  shall  worship  him  every 
one  from  his  place,  even  all  the  isles  of  the  heathen.  "The  deserved  judgment  would 
really  prove   to  be  the.  greatest  blessing,  leading  them   £i:om  the  worship  of  dumb 


CH.  ru.  1—20.]  TUB   BOOK  OF  ZEPUANIAU.  85 

idols  that  could  not  save  to  that  of  the  living  and  true  God.  So  it  is  in  the  very 
similar  prophecy  given  here.  It  is  not  certain  whether  ver.  8  is  to  be  understood  as 
a  warning  ^iven  in  solemn  irony  to  the  ungodly  Jews,  or  an  encouragement  addressed 
to  the  faithful  remnant  among  them ;  and  so  the  precise  connection  of  ver.  9  "with  the 
preceding  context  is  not  quite  clear ;  but  in  general  it  is  plain  that  it  speaks  of  the 
conversion  of  the  peoples  to  God  as  the  result  of  the  terrible  revelation  of  his  judgments 
against  them.  Thus  we  see  how  true  it  is  that  the  Lord  delighteth  not  in  judgment, 
but  in  the  mifist  of  wrath  remembers  mercy.  Now,  this  is  no  isolated  or  exceptional 
case,  but  an  instance  of  the  general  principles  on  which  God  acts  in  his  dealings  with 
men.  It  may  therefore  be  taken  to  illustrate  the  conversion  of  sinners  to  God  at  any 
time  and  in  any  circumstances.  We  may  notice  two  things  that  it  shows  us :  (1)  the 
cause ;  (2)  the  results  of  conversion. 

I.  The  convebsion  or  the  PBOPiiBS  is  heeb  tbaoed  vert  dibectly  to  the  agency 
OF  God.  It  is  his  doing,  and  that  not  merely  indirectly,  by  the  influence  of  the 
judgments  that  he  has  been  threatening  to  send,  but  by  an  inward  work  of  renewal 
wrought  in  the  people.  The  judgments  of  God  may  convince  the  heathen  of  the 
vanity  of  their  idols,  or  even  show  them  that  they  should  call  on  the  Name  of  the 
Lord,  and  that  they  must  do  so  if  they  are  to  be  delivered ;  but  then  how  shall  they  do 
so  ?  The  Lord  is  revealed  as  the  just  God,  who  will  not  do  iniquity,  and  every  morning 
doth  he  bring  his  judgments  to  light ;  but  their  lips,  with  which  they  should  call  upon 
him,  are  impure,  they  have  taken  up  the  names  of  other  gods,  they  have  been  full  of 
cursing  and  bitterness.  May  they  not  well  feel  as  Isaiah  did,  when  he  saw  the  vision  of 
the  Holy  One,  that  they  are  undone,  for  they  are  men  of  unclean  lips,  and  dwell  among 
a  people  of  unclean  lips  ?  Who  can  enable  such  peoples,  whose  lips  are  accustomed  to 
falsehood  and  profanity  and  unclcanness,  to  worship  the  God  who  is  a  Spirit,  and 
Beeketh  such  to  worship  him  as  will  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth?  Who  but 
that  very  God  himself,  who  purged  Isaiah's  lips,  who  touched  the  lips  of  Jeremiah  and 
put  his  words  in  his  mouth  ?  It  must  be  he  himself  who  enables  them  to  call  on  him,  by 
an  act  of  gracious  will  and  mighty  power,  purifying  their  lips  and  opening  their  mouths. 
The  nature  of  this  act  of  Divine  power  and  grace  is  not  more  particularly  described, 
but  the  language  used  suggests  a  comparison  with  what  is  said  of  Saul  after  he  had 
been  anointed  by  Samuel  to  be  king  over  Israel, "  God  gave  [Hebrew,  '  turned  ']  him 
another  heart "  (1  Sam.  x.  9).  It  is  the  same  phrase  as  is  used  here,  and  so  the  meaning 
is  that  God  will  give  to  the  peoples  another  lip,  which  shall  be  pure,  instead  of  their 
former  unclean  lip.  But  a  change  of  lip  or  language  cannot  be  conceived  apart  from  a 
change  of  heart,  as,  on  the  other  hand,  the  new  heart  that  God  gave  to  Saul  showed 
itself  at  once  in  his  language,  for  when  a  company  of  prophets  met  him,  he  prophesied 
among  them  (1  Sam.  x.  10).  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh ; 
and  so,  if  the  lips  are  to  be  pure,  filled  with  the  praises  of  God  and  calling  on  his  Name, 
the  heart  must  be  changed.  Now,  this  renewal  of  heart,  showing  itself  in  the  utterance 
of  the  lips,  is  everywhere  in  the  Bible  traced  to  the  Spirit  of  God  as  his  special  work. 
So  it  was  with  Saul.  "  The  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  him,  and  he  prophesied."  This 
working  of  the  Spirit,  too,  is  of  God's  sovereign  and  free  grace.  It  comes  on  the  most 
unlikely  and  unworthy  objects.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest 
the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh  or  whither  it  goeth :  so  is 
every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit."  So  it  was  with  Saul.  He  seemed  an  unlikely 
person  to  receive  such  a  gift,  and  men  said  "  Is  Saul  also  among  the  prophets  ?  "  and 
the  answer  was,  "  But  who  is  their  father  ?  "  Men  receive  not  the  gift  by  descent  from 
any  human  ancestry,  but  by  the  direct  bestowal  of  God ;  and  so  it  may  come  upon 
any,  and  is  to  come  at  last,  as  Joel  prophesied,  on  all  flesh,  even  on  the  servants  and 
handmaidens.  Thus  this  prophecy  is  connected  with  those  that  point  to  the  gi-eat 
manifestation  of  the  grace  and  power  of  God's  Spirit  that  was  made  at  Pentecost,  when 
the  disciples  of  Jesus,  speaking  with  new  tongues  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance, 
testified  of  the  new  and  pure  language  that  the  Lord  was  to  turn  to  the  nations.  He 
will  pour  out  his  Spirit  on  all  flesh ;  and  even  those  nations  that  were  most  alienated 
from  him,  and  sunk  in  impurity  of  heart  and  life,  may  receive  the  heavenly  gift.  But 
this,  like  all  the  promises  of  God,  is  given  in  Christ.  He  it  is  that  sends  the  gift  of 
the  Spirit,  as  he  is  exalted  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of 
■ins.    Listen,  then,  to  him  as  he  graciously  and  freely  offers  it,  and  comply  with  his 

ZEFHANIAH.  y 


(36  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAH.  [ch.  in.  1—20. 

loving  call,  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me,  and  drink.  He  that  helieveth 
on  me,  as  the  Scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water. 
And  this  spake  he  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that  believe  on  him  should  receive" 
(John  vii.  37 — 39).  When  we  seek  to  determine  in  theory  the  exact  relation  of  order 
between  the  gilt  of  the  Spirit  and  our  faith,  we  run  into  difiSculties  that  we  cannot 
solve.  But  in  practice  these  difficulties  need  not  trouble  us,  or  are  solved  by  our 
actually  coming  to  Jesns  in  faith.  We  need  not  wait  till  we  are  conscious  of  the 
renewing  influence  of  the  Spirit  in  order  to  come  to  Christ ;  we  may  be  sure  that  any 
impulses  that  lead  us  to  Christ  are  from  him,  and  that  the  Lord's  own  gracious  call  is 
sufficient  warrant  for  us  to  believe  on  him,  that  we  may  be  fully  conscious  of  the 
indwelling  of  tlie  Spirit. 

II.  The  results  of  oonvbebion,  as  here  indicated,  abe  setbbal.  1.  "That 
they  may  all  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  9).  The  first  movement  of  the 
renewed  heart  is  towards  God  ;  the  first  utterance  of  the  pure  lip  is  prayer  to  him.  So 
it  was  said  of  Saul,  when  the  Lord  arrested  him  in  his  career  of  persecution,  "  Behold, 
he  prayeth."  The  tendency  of  the  natural  heart  is  away  from  God,  and  the  lips  are 
by  nature  slow  and  backward  to  call  upon  him.  But  when  the  Lord  chnnges  tiie  heart, 
and  turns  to  the  peoples -a  pure  lip,  then  they  call  upon  his  Name,  they  comply  with 
the  call  formerly  given  by  the  prophet,  to  seek  the  Lord.  Instead  of  endeavouring  to 
hide  themselves  from  his  presence,  or  to  find  some  refuge  or  defence  against  his  judg- 
ments, they  are  led  to  see  that  there  is  none  that  can  deliver  them  out  of  his  hand,  but 
that  he  himself  is  merciful  and  gracious,  and  that  if  they  turn  to  him  and  implore  his 
mercy,  they  shall  be  delivered.  For  his  name  is  "  the  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  merciful 
and  gracious,  long-sufifering  and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth,  keeping  mercy  for  thou- 
sands, forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression  and  sin,  and  that  will  by  no  means  spare  the 
guilty  "  (Bxod.  xxxiv.  6, 7) ;  and  that  affords  a  strong  encouragement  to  all  the  nations  to 
call  upon  him.  His  Name  is  just  the  expression  of  his  character,  and  that  is  one  of  grace 
and  love,  of  mercy  and  forgiveness ;  so  that  even  the  most  sinful  may  call  upon  him. 
2.  "  To  serve  him."  The  words  of  the  lips,  the  prayer  of  faith,  may  be  the  first  result  of 
the  change  wrought  by  God's  Spirit  in  the  soul ;  but  that  will  not  remain  alone,  but,  if 
it  is  sincere  and  genuine  at  all,  will  lead  to  service  in  deeds.  They  shall  not  merely 
honour  him  with  their  lips,  but  shall  serve  him.  He  is  the  Lord,  as  well  as  the  Saviour, 
of  the  world ;  and  when  they  call  upon  his  Name  as  their  Saviour,  they  will  further  give 
themselves  to  him  as  their  Lord.  They  have  been  refusing  to  serve  him  before,  saying, 
"  Our  lips  are  our  own ;  who  is  lord  over  us  ?  "  asserting  that  they  were  not  in  bondage 
to  any  man,  but  their  own  masters,  yet  really  serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures.  But 
now,  weary  and  heavy  laden  with  the  burden  of  the  service  of  self  and  sin  and  the  world, 
they  come  unto  Christ,  and  take  his  yoke  upon  them ;  they  ent«r  that  service  in  which 
alone  is  perfect  freedom.  It  is  a  most  essential  characteristic  of  the  converted,  that 
they  serve  the  Lord.  They  count  themselves  his  servants,  as  Paul,  for  example, 
speaking  of  Christ,  sa) s,  "  Whoso  I  am,  and  whom  I  seivo."  They  are  not  their  own, 
but  bought  with  a  price  j  and  they  seek  to  realize  this  by  living,  not  for  themselves, 
but  for  him  who  died  and  rose  again  for  them.  This  does  not  imply  that  they  go  out 
of  the  world  and  separate  themselves  from  its  active  work  and  affairs,  to  spend  their 
time  wholly  and  exclusively  in  exercises  of  worship.  The  service  that  the  Lord  would 
have  given  to  him  is  to  be  carried  on  in  the  world;  they  are  to  be  "not  slothful  in 
business,  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord."  By  diligence  in  the  duties  of  the  calling 
in  which  God  has  placed  them,  by  uprightness  and  sincerity  in  word  and  deed,  by 
letting  no  corrupt  communication  proceed  out  of  their  mouth,  but  that  which  is  good 
for  the  use  of  edifying,  that  it  may  minister  grace  to  the  hearers,  by  working  with 
their  hands  that  which  is  good,  that  they  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth ;  and, 
above  all,  by  walking  in  love,  after  the  example  of  Christ,  Gud's  servants  serve  him ; 
and  this  they  are  enabled  to  do  by  the  work  of  his  grace  in  their  hearts.  3.  Another 
result  here  indicated  as  flowing  from  conversion  is  unity  and  harmony  amon"  the 
nations.  "  They  shall  all  call  on  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  and  serve  him  with  one 
consent."  The  invocation  of  the  true  God  is  to  be  in  common,  and  the  service  rendered 
to  him  a  united  and  harmonious  one, "  with  one  shoulder,"  as  the  words  literally  mean, 
as  if  bearing  the  yoke  together,  and  equally  taking  part  in  the  work.  This  implies  a 
gathering  together  of  the  nations  in  peace  and  goo<i  will.     Idolatry  and  polytheism 


BH.ni.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  «7 

ever  go  haad-in-hand  vith  national  exolusirenesB  and  mutual  hostility.  Each  people 
is  supposed  to  have  its  own  patron  gods,  each  land  its  own  local  deities,  and  the 
servant  of  one  god  naturally  becomes  the  enemy  of  the  people  of  another.  Religion, 
in  this  corrupt  form,  tends  to  separate  men,  and  set  one  against  another.  UDgodliness, 
too,  has  much  the  same  tendency.  When  men  recognize  and  worship  no  god  or  power 
above  the  earth,  their  selfish  passions  and  interests  set  each  one  against  his  fellow. 
Bat  when  the  one  universal  Lord  and  Maker  of  all  is  recognized  as  Ood,  then  the 
consideration  that  we  have  all  one  Father,  and  that  one  God  created  us,  forms  a  tie  of 
brotherhood  among  all  nations.  And  this  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that,  when  his 
judgments  are  abroad  on  the  earth  against  all  nations  alike,  all  are  invited  and 
encouraged  to  trust  in  his  mercy  aad  call  on  his  Name.  "  For  the  same  Lord  over  all  is 
rich  unto  all  who  call  upon  him."  This  does  away  with  every  ground  of  separation,  as 
if  there  were  many  local  or  national  deities,  as  the  heathen  thought ;  it  does  away  even 
with  the  special  privileges  of  the  seed  of  Jacob,  which  the  Jews  were  apt  to  abuse,  so 
as  to  foster  a  selfish  and  exclusive  pride ;  for  "  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  Jew  nor 
Grreek,  Barbarian,  Scythian,  bond,  nor  firee,  but  Christ  is  all  and  in  all."  True  conver- 
sion, also,  by  taking  away  the  ungodliness  of  the  natural  heart,  removes  the  great  root 
of  selfishness,  and  gives  a  ground,  a  motive,  and  an  example  for  love  to  all  men.  In 
proportion  as  men  are  brought  nearer  to  Ood  are  they  brought  nearer  also  to  one 
another.  He  is  the  Centre  and  Sun  of  the  universe,  and  the  more  the  paths  of  any  of 
the  creatures  depart  from  him,  the  more  will  they  diverge  from  one  another ;  while  the 
nearer  they  come  to  God,  the  closer  will  they  find  themselves  drawn  to  their  fellows, 
who  may  have  started  from  very  distant  points  and  been  led  by  very  different  ways. 
These  things,  then — prayerfulness,  diligence  in  God's  service,  and  brotherly  love — may 
be  taken  as  genuine  and  sure  evidences  of  that  great  change  that  must  be  wrought  in 
every  mau  ere  he  can  see  the  kingdom  of  God — a  change  that  is  secret  and  mysterious 
in  its  own  nature,  though  known  and  recognized  by  its  fruits. — 0. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — A  religious  city  terribly  degenerate.  "  Woe  to  her  that  is  filthy  and 
polluted,  to  the  oppressing  city  I  She  obeyed  not  the  voice ;  she  received  not  correc- 
tion ;  she  trusted  not  in  the  Lord ;  she  drew  not  near  to  her  God,"  etc.  "  To  give  still 
greater  emphasis  to  his  exhortation  to  repentance,  the  prophet  turns  to  Jerusalem 
again,  that  he  may  once  more  hold  up  before  the  hardened  sinners  the  abominations  of 
this  city  in  which  Jehovah  daily  proclaims  his  right,  and  shows  the  necessity  for  the 
judgment,  as  the  only  way  that  is  left  by  which  to  secure  salvation  for  Israel  and  for 
the  whole  world  "  (Keil).     We  have  two  things  here  to  look  at. 

I.  A  FBOFESSEDLY  BELIOIODS  ciTT  TEBBIBLT  DKGENEBATED.  Jerusalem  is  dis- 
tinguished nut  so  much  for  the  beauty  of  its  architecture,  the  extent  of  its  population, 
the  measure  of  its  trade  and  resources,  as  by  its  being  religious.  There  the  one  temple 
stood;  there  the  worship,  with  its  imposing  ritual,  was  daily  performed;  there  the 
priests  lived  and  God  was  specially  manifested.  But  how  morally  degenerate  it 
became  !  She  is  here  represented  as  "  filthy,"  "  polluted,"  and  "  oppressing."  "  She 
obeyed  not  the  voice ;  she  received  not  correction ;  she  trusted  not  in  the  Lord ;  she 
drew  not  near  to  her  God."  In  this  degeneracy  all  classes  of  the  community  seemed 
to  be  involved.  1.  The  "  princee "  are  mentioned.  "  Her  princes  within  her  are 
the  roaring  lions."  Like  rapacious  beasts,  they  preyed  on  all  about  them,  they  lived  on 
people,  they  devoured  their  property.  As  a  rule,  "  princes  "  have  too  often  lived  upon 
the  people;  they  are  devourers  of  their  means ;  they  consume  everything,  and  produce 
nothing.  2.  2'Ae  "judges"  are  mentioned.  "Her  judges  are  evening  wolves;  they 
gnaw  not  the  bones  till  the  morrow."  Or,  as  Henderson  renders  it,  "  they  gnaw  no 
bones  till  the  morning."  So  insatiable  are  they,  that  they  leave  not  a  single  bone  till 
the  morning,  of  the  prey  that  they  have  caught  in  the  evening.  3.  The  "prophets" 
are  mentioned.  These  "  prophets  are  light  and  treacherous  persons."  In  their  Ufa 
and  teaching  there  was  no  truth,  gravity,  or  steadfastness.  They  were  "  treacherous," 
false  to  man,  and  false  to  God  (Jer.  xxiii.  32 ;  Ezek.  xiii.  28).  4.  The  "priests  "  are 
mentioned.  These  "  polluted  the  sanctuary  "  by  desecrating  the  sacred  place,  and  out- 
raged the  "Law"  by  distorting  its  meaning  and  misrepresenting  its  genius  and  aim. 
Like  Hophni  and  Phinehas,  their  wicked  lives  made  the  sacrifices  of  the  Lord  to  be 
abhorred.     Such  was  the  degenerate  condition  into  which  this  holy  city  is  represented 


68  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  ra.  1—20. 

as  having  fallen.  How  many  modem  cities  to-day,  which  call  themselves  Christian, 
have  sunk  into  a  similar  degeneracy  I  London,  Paris,  Rome,  St.  Petersburg,  etc.,  are 
all  highly  religious  in  profession,  and  have  religious  means  in  abundance.  What  is  the 
moral  condition,  not  only  of  their  masses,  but  of  their  "princes,"  their  "judges,"  their 
"  prophets,"  and  their  "  priests  "  ?  Ah  me !  under  the  cover  of  religion  there  rolls  the 
sea  of  putrescent  depravity.  Morally,  how  much  better  is  London  than  Bombay, 
Pekin,  or  Jeddo? 

IL    A  FB0FE8SBDLY   RELiaiOUS  CITY  TKEKIBLT  DBQENEBATKD,   ALTHOTTOH   GJOD  WAS 

SPECIALLY  woBKiNO  IN  ITS  MIDST.  "The  just  Lord  is  in  the  midst  thereof;  he  will 
not  do  iniquity  :  every  morning  doth  he  bring  his  judgment  to  light,  he  faileth  not ; 
but  the  UQJust  knoweth  no  shame."  In  every  city,  and  amongst  every  people,  the 
just  Lord,  the  righteous  Jehovah,  is  and  works — ^works  by  the  operations  of  material 
nature,  by  the  events  of  human  life,  by  the  suggestions  of  human  reason,  and  the 
dictates  of  human  conscience.  But  ia  Jerusalem  he  was  in  a  more  especial  sense,  and 
he  wrought  in  special  ways.  The  temple  was  his  dwelling-place,  and  the  gleaming 
Shechinah  was  the  symbol  of  his  presence ;  and  specially  did  he  reveal  himself  to  some 
of  its  noblest  men.  And  yet,  notwithstanding  all,  Jerusalem  sank ;  with  Grod  amongst 
them  working  to  raise  them,  they  fell  lower  and  lower.  What  does  this  teach  ?  1.  The 
vwnderful  freedom  which  the  Almighty  dUows  to  wicked  men  on  the  earth.  Though 
he  strives  to  improve  them,  he  does  not  coerce  them.  He  makes  no  invasion  of  their 
moral  agency.  2.  The  tremendous  force  of  human  depravity.  What  a  power  sin  gains 
over  man  1  It  binds  him  in  chains  often  stronger  than  adamant.  It  loads  him  with 
a  weight  which  he  cannot  shake  of^  but  which  sinks  him  deeper  and  deeper  into  the 
abysses  of  wickedness. 

CoNOLUsioN.  1.  Do  not  hinder  Christian  propagandism  from  entering  a  city  because 
it  is  nominally  Christian.  The  gospel  is  wanted  there,  perhaps,  more  than  anywhere 
else,  more  even  than  in  pagan  populations.  2.  Do  not  expect  that  the  world  will  be 
morally  renovated  by  miraculous  agency.  Almighty  Qoodness  does  not  coerce.  There 
is  no  way  by  which  mere  force  can  travel  to  a  man  s  soul. — D.  T, 

Vers.  6—8. — Terrible  calamities  in  human  history,  "  I  have  cut  off  the  nations  : 
their  towers  are  desolate ;  I  made  their  streets  waste,  that  none  passeth  by :  their 
cities  are  destroyed,  so  that  there  is  no  man,  that  there  is  none  inhabitant.  I  said, 
Surely  thou  wilt  fear  me,  thou  wilt  receive  instruction,"  etc.  In  these  verses  the 
prophet  sums  up  all  that  he  had  said  in  the  preceding  verses  of  this  chapter,  and  thus 
closes  his  admonition  to  repentance  with  the  announcement  of  tremendous  judgments. 
These  verses  remind  ns  of  three  great  truths  of  universal  importance,  claiming  the 
attention  of  men  wherever  they  exist. 

I.  That  thbbe  is  a  sense  in"  which  the  most  terrible  calamities  in  human 
HISTORY  MAY  BE  ASOEIBED  TO  QoD.  Here  he  is  represented  as  cutting  off  the  nations, 
destroying  their  "  towers,"  making  their  "  streets  waste,"  so  that  "  there  is  no  man," 
and  "  none  inhabitant."  What  particular  nation  is  here  referred  to  cannot  be  deter- 
mined with  certainty.  We  know  that  he  did  destroy  nations — the  Canaanitish  nations, 
also  Assyria  and  Babylon.  These  calamities  are  here  ascribed  to  God.  In  Bible 
language  he  is  frequently  represented  as  doing  that  which  he  only  permits.  Nations 
destroy  each  other,  he  allows  them  to  do  so.  Though  he  does  not  give  them  the 
disposition  for  the  work,  he  imparts  the  power  and  the  opportunities. 

II.  That  the  oeand  design  of  buoh  calamities  is  thb  promotion  of  moral 
IMPROVEMENT  AMONOST  MANKIND.  Why  did  he  permit  the  wreck  and  ruin  of  those 
nations,  and  all  the  dire  desolations  here  recorded?  Here  is  the  answer,  "I  said. 
Surely  thou  wilt  fear  me,  thou  wilt  receive  instruction."  The  grand  end  of  all  his 
dispensations  with  men  is  to  generate  within  them  the  right  state  of  mind  in  relation 
to  himself;  in  other  words,  to  make  them  "meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light."  "Lo,  all  these  things  worketh  God  oftentimes  with  man,  to  bring  back  his  soul 
from  the  pit,  to  enlighten  him  with  the  light  of  the  living"  (Job  xxxiii.  29,  30).  As 
the  storms,  the  snows,  the  frosts,  and  the  cutting  winds  of  winter  he^  to  bring  on  the 
luxuriant  spring,  so  the  calamities  in  human  life  contribute  to  the  moral  regeneration 
of  mankind. 

in.  That  thk  kon-bealization  of  this  debisn  amoncwt  a  fbople  xxfoses 


«itin.l— 20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAH.  6« 

THEU  TO  TEBBiBLB  BBTBiBTTTioH.  "  But  they  Fose  early,  and  corrupted  all  their 
doings."  The  men  of  Jerusalem,  instead  of  becoming  better  for  these  temble  calamitiei, 
grew  worse.  They  "corrupted  all  their  doings."  This  they  did  with  assiduity. 
They  "  rose  early."  They  began  their  morning  with  it.  "  Therefore  wait  ye  upon  me, 
laith  the  Lord,  until  the  day  that  I  rise  up  to  the  prey ;  for  my  determination  is  to 
gather  the  nations,  that  I  may  assemble  the  kingdoms,  to  pour  upon  them  mine 
indignation,  even  all  my  fierce  anger :  for  all  the  earth  shall  be  devoured  with  the  fire 
of  my  jealousy."  Or,  as  Keil  renders  it,  "  Therefore  wait  for  me,  is  the  saying  of 
Jehovah,  for  the  day  when  I  rise  up  to  the  prey ;  for  it  is  my  right  to  gather  nations 
together,  to  bring  kingdoms  in  crowds,  to  heap  upon  them  my  fury,  all  the  burning  of 
my  wrath ;  for  in  the  fire  of  my  zeal  will  the  whole  earth  be  devoured."  The  Almighty 
here  speaks  after  the  manner  of  men,  as  he  does  almost  everywhere  in  the  Bible,  in 
condescension  to  human  infirmities.  He  speaks  as  if  he  were  disappointed  in  the  mond 
results  of  the  calamities  which  he  had  sent,  and  as  if  his  nature  now  glowed  with  the 
fires  of  his  indignation.  There  is,  of  course,  really  no  disappointment  for  him,  for  he 
knows  the  future,  and  "  fury  "  is  not  in  him. — D.  T. 

Vers.  9,  10. — The  good  time  coming.  "  For  then  wiU  I  turn  to  the  people  a  pure 
language,  that  they  may  all  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  to  serve  him  with  one 
consent.  From  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia  my  suppliants,  even  the  daughter  of  my 
dispersed,  shall  bring  mine  offering."  Henderson  supposes  that  the  poem  from  this  verso 
to  the  end  of  the  book  relates  to  Messianic  times ;  that  the  prophet  points  to  that  dispen- 
sation of  remedial  mercy  under  which  we  live,  and  which  commenced  more  than  eighteen 
hundred  years  ago.  We  may  therefore  regard  these  words  as  pointing  to  at  least  two 
of  the  great  characteristic  blessings  that  will  come  to  the  world  during  the  continuance 
of  the  gospel  age ;  and  these  two  are  moral  purity  of  language  and  spiritual  unity  of 
worship. 

I.  MoBAL  PDBITT  OF  LASTOUAGB.  "  Then  will  I  tum  to  the  people  a  pure  language." 
Or,  as  Keil  renders  it,  "  a  pure  lip."  Human  language  is  looked  upon  in  different 
aspects  by  difi'erent  men.  Some  look  upon  it  grammatically,  trace  its  etymology,  and 
arrange  its  words  and  sentences  according  to  the  conventional  rules  of  speech ;  some 
look  at  it  logically,  study  it  in  its  relation  to  the  law  of  human  reasoning;  some  look 
upon  it  philosophically,  view  it  in  relation  to  the  nature  of  the  things  it  is  intended  to 
represent;  and  some  look  upon  it  morally,  contemplate  it  in  its  relation  to  the  law  of 
conscience  and  God.  Grrammatical  language  is  mere  conformity  to  acknowledged  rules 
of  speech ;  lo^cal  language,  conformity  to  recognized  principles  of  reasoning ;  philo- 
sophical language  is  conformity  to  the  order  of  nature ;  moral  language  is  conformity  to 
the  moral  law  of  dod.  The;re  is  a  regular  gradation  in  the  importance  of  these  aspectk 
of  language.  The  first  is  of  the  least  importance ;  the  second  and  third  come  next ;  and 
the  last  is  the  most  important  of  all.  It  is  strange  and  sad  to  see  that  the  amount  of 
attention  which  men  pay  to  these  aspects  is  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  their  importance. 
The  first,  the  least  important,  is  the  most  attended  to ;  the  second,  next ;  the  third,  next ; 
and  the  last,  the  most  important  of  all,  almost  entirely  neglected.  In  the  department 
of  speech  we  have  more  grammarians  than  logicians,  more  logicians  than  philosophers, 
more  philosophers  than  honest  saints.  It  is  moral  purity  of  language  that  is  wanted 
in  the  world,  and  that  is  here  promised.  Language  that  shall  be  used,  not  without 
meaning,  as  it  is  oftentimes  used  now,  nor  to  misrepresent  meaning,  as  is  often  the 
case.  A  "  pure  "  moral  language  implies  two  things.  1.  That  the  state  of  the  heart 
should  be  in  accord  with  Divine  reality.  2.  That  the  words  of  the  lip  should  be 
in  accord  with  the  state  of  the  heart.  In  other  words,  purity  of  soul  and  veracity 
of  expression. 

n.  Spiritual  unitt  op  woeship.  "  That  they  may  all  call  upon  the  Name  of  the 
Lord,  to  serve  him  with  one  consent."  "  That  they  may  serve  him  with  one  accord  " 
(Henderson).  Who  are  to  serve  him  with  one  accord?  The  nations,  partially  speci- 
fied in  the  tenth  verse.  "  From  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia  [Gush]  my  suppliants, 
even  the  daughter  of  my  dispersed,  shall  bring  mine  .offering."  The  glorious  point  to 
be  observed  is  not  that  all  nations  shall  worship,  for  worship  will  ever  belong  to  the  race  ; 
but  that  all  nations  wiU  worship  with  one  accord.  There  is  a  oneness  in  their  worship. 
Unity  of  worship  does  not  necessarily  mean  unity  of  theological  opinion  or  of  ritualistie 


70  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  ni.  1—20 


observances ;  but  unity  of  object,  the  w/me  God  in  the  same  spirit — reTerence,  gratitude, 
adoration. 

CoNOLnsioN.  What  a  glorious  future  awaits  the  world !  All  men  morally  pure  in 
speech,  all  men  heartily  one  in  worship.    Thrice  hail  the  day  ! — D.  T. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — A  sketch  of  a  morally  regenerated  city.  "In  that  day  shalt  thou  not 
DO  ashamed  for  all  thy  doings,  wherein  thou  hast  transgressed  against  me :  for  then  I 
will  take  away  out  of  the  midst  of  thee  them  that  rejoice  in  thy  pride,  and  thou  shalt 
no  more  be  haughty  because  of  my  holy  mountain,"  etc.  "  These  verses,"  says  Hender- 
son, "  contain  a  description  of  restored  and  regenerated  Israel.  The  being  not  ashamed 
of  their  sinful  practices  does  not  mean  their  not  feeling  a  compimctious  sense  of  their 
intrinsic  odiousness  and  demerits,  but  is  expressive  of  the  great  change  that  should  take 
place  in  the  outward  condition  of  the  Jews.  That  condition,  into  which  they  have 
been  brought  by  their  obstinate  rebellion  against  Jehovah  and  his  Messiah,  is  one 
of  disgrace.  When  recovered  out  of  it,  all  the  marks  of  shame  and  infamy  shall  be 
removed.  The  Pharisaic  spirit  of  pride,  and  the  vain  confidence  in  the  temple  and  the 
temple-worship,  which  proved  the  ruin  of  the  nation,  shall  be  taken  away.  The 
converted  residue  shall  be  a  people  humble  and  poor  in  spirit  (Matt.  v.  3 ;  xL  5),  and  of 
a  truly  righteous  and  upright  character ;  and,  having  fled  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set 
before  them  in  the  gospel,  they  shall  be  safe  under  the  protecting  care  of  their 
heavenly  Father."  These  verses  may  be  regarded  as  giving  a  sketch  of  a  morally 
regenerated  city.    It  is  marked  by — 

I.  The  UTTBB  ABSENCE  OF  THE  BAD.  There  is  an  absence  of :  1.  Painful  memories. 
"  In  that  day  shalt  thou  not  be  ashamed  for  all  thy  doings."  Thou  wUt  not  need  to  be 
ashamed  of  all  thy  iniquities,  (1)  because  they  are  all  forgiven ;  (2)  because  they  will 
occur  no  more.  Whilst  regenerated  souls  will  perhaps  ever  remember  their  past 
iniquities,  the  memories  will  not  be  associated  with  pain,  they  will  awaken  no  moral 
shame.  So  flooded  will  the  soul  be  with  new  loves,  hopes,  and  purposes,  that  every- 
thing painful  in  connection  with  the  past  will  be  buried  in  comparative  forgetfulness. 
Departed  saints  cannot  but  remember  their  old  sins,  but,  in  view  of  pardon  and  puri- 
fication, the  remembrance  of  them  is  associated  with  pleasure,  not  pain.  2.  Wicked 
citizens.  "  I  will  take  away  out  of  the  midst  of  thee  them  that  rejoice  in  thy  pride," 
or,  "  thy  proud  triumphers."  In  a  thoroughly  regenerated  city  there  will  be  no  proud 
vaunters,  no  blustering  pretenders,  no  arrogant  worldlings.  The  voices  of  such  men 
will  not  be  heard ;  they  will  not  be  seen  in  the  streets,  in  the  marts  of  commerce,  the 
chambers  of  legislation,  or  the  scenes  of  recreation.  3.  All  crimes.  "The  remnant 
of  Israel  shall  not  do  iniquity,  nor  speak  lies ;  neither  shall  a  deceitful  tongue  be  found 
in  their  mouth."  No  wrong  committed,  no  lies  spoken,  no  deceit  practised.  The  whole 
atmosphere  of  the  city  cleared  of  such  moral  impurities. 

II.  The  blessed  peesenoe  op  the  good.  "  I  wiU  also  leave  in  the  midst  of  thee  an 
afflicted  and  poor  people,  and  they  shall  trust  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord."  Who  will  be 
the  citizens  ?  1.  Men  of  humility.  Delitzsch  translates  the  word  "  afBicted,"  "  bowed 
down ; "  and  Henderson,  "  humble."  Humility  is  evidently  the  idea.  There  will 
be  men  who  are  "  poor  in  spirit."  Moral  humility  is  moral  nobility.  The.  humbler  a 
man  is,  the  nobler  and  the  happier  too.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit."  2.  Men  of 
piety.  "  They  shall  trust  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord."  Their  chief  confidence  will  be 
placed,  not  in  their  strength,  their  wealth,  or  their  wisdom,  but  in  God.  _  They  will 
centre  their  trust,  not  in  the  creature,  but  in  the  Creator,  3.  Men  of  concord.  "  They 
shall  feed  and  lie  down,  and  none  shall  make  them  afraid."  There  will  be  amongst 
them  no  acrimonious  disputations,  no  commercial  rivalries,  no  social  jealousies  or 
envyings,  no  painful  divisions  of  any  kind.  They  will  be  united  as  brethren,  one 
in  leading  thoughts,  loves,  and  aims. 

CoNOliUSlON.  This  is  indeed  a  model  city.  What  a  city  this  1  When  shall  such  a 
city  appear  on  this  earth  ?  Ah  1  when  ?  It  is  in  the  distant  future,  but  it  has  been 
gradually  rearing  from  the  dawn  of  the  Christian  era  to  this  hour.  It  will,  I  believe,  be 
one  day  completed,  the  "topstone"  will  be  put  on  with  shoutings  of  triumph. — D.  T. 

Vers.  14r  -17. — Joy,  human  and  Divine.  "  Sing,  0  daughter  of  Zion ;  shout  O 
Israel ;  be  glad  and  rejoice  with  all  the  heart,  0  daughter  of  J»."iHalem.    The  Lord 


OH.  m.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  71 

hath  taken  away  thy  judgments,  he  hath  cast  out  thine  enemy,"  etc.  Here  is  a  call  to 
the  regenerated  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  to  exult  in  the  mercy  of  God,  who  has  wrought 
their  deliverance,  at  the  same  time,  a  beautiful  description  of  the  sublime  delight  with 
which  Jehovah  will  regard  them  in  the  future.  The  words  bring  under  our  notice  joy, 
humnn  and  Divine. 

I.  Thb  joy  of  the  begbnbbatbd  man.  "  Sing,  0  daughter  of  Zion ;  shout,  0  Israel ; 
be  glad  and  rejoice."  What  is  the  joy?  1.  The  joy  of  gratitude  for  the  deliverance 
from  evil.    "  The  Lord  hath  taken  away  thy  judgments,  he  hath  cast  out  thine  enemy." 

What  is  the  joy  of  the  slave  in  the  hour  of  his  emancipation,  of  the  prisoner  on  leaving 
his  cell,  of  the  long-suffering  invalid  on  his  restoration  to  full  health  ?  Far  more  is  the 
^oy  of  the  man  who  feels  himself  morally  delivered — delivered  from  the  power  of  sin, 
anj  brought  into  the  "glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God."  Gratitude  is  always  an 
clement  of  joy.  2.  The  joy  of  conscious  security.  "  Even  the  Lord  is  in  the  midst  of 
thee :  tiiou  shalt  not  see  evil  any  more."  What  joy  breaks  forth  in  the  apostolic 
challenge,  ''  Who  shall  separate  ub  from  the  love  of  God  ?  "  etc.  1  Hei-e  is  the  joy  of 
regenerated  humanity,  the  joy  of  gratitude  for  the  greatest  deliverance,  the  joy  of 
conscious  security  from  all  possible  Angers. 

II.  The  jot  of  the  EEQBNBBATiNa  God.  "The  Lord  thy  God  in  the  midst  of 
thee  [within  thee]  is  mighty ;  he  will  save,  he  will  rejoice  over  thee  with  joy ;  he 
will  rest  in  his  love,  he  will  joy  over  thee  with  singing."  What  is  the  joy  of  God  ? 
It  is  the  joy  of  infinite  benevolence.  What  is  the  joy  of  the  genuine  patriot  when 
he  has  delivered  his  country  from  a  power  that  threatened  its  utter  destruction  ? 
What  is  the  joy  of  a  loving  physician  when  he  has  rescued  his  patient  from  the  very 
jaws  of  death  ?  What  is  the  joy  of  a  loving  parent  who  has  rescued  his  child  from 
ruin  ?  Some  such  joy  as  this— infinitely  superior — is  the  joy  of  God  over  regenerated 
humanity.  In  this  joy  the  redeemed  vnll  participate ;  indeed,  it  will  be  their  heaven. 
"  Enter  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  "  Rejoice  over  thee  with  singing."  Does  Ood 
ting  t  Yes ;  in  all  the  happy  voices  of  the  imiyerse,  especially  in  the  shouts  of  the 
redeemed. — D.  T. 

Vers.  18 — 20. — 2%e  morai  restoration  of  mankind.  "  I  will  gather  them  that  are 
sorrowful  for  the  solemn  assembly,  who  are  of  thee,  to  whom  the  reproach  of  it  was 
a  burden.  Behold,  at  that  time  I  will  undo  all  that  afSict  thee,"  etc.  "  The  salvation 
held  up  in  prospect  before  the  remnant  of  Israel,  which  has  been  refined  by  the  judg- 
ments and  delivered,  was  at  a  very  remote  distance  in  Zephaniah's  time.  The  first 
thing  that  awaited  the  nation  was  the  judgment  through  which  it  was  to  be  dispersed 
among  the  heathen,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Moses  and  all  the  prophets,  and  to 
be  refined  in  the  furnace  of  afSiction.  The  ten  tribes  were  already  carried  away  into 
«xile,  and  Jrdah  was  to  share  the  same  fate  immediately  afterwards.  In  order,  there- 
fore, to  offer  to  the  pious  a  firm  consolation  of  hope  in  the  period  of  suffering  that 
awaited  them,  and  one  on  which  their  faith  could  rest  in  the  midst  of  tribulation, 
Zephaniah  mentions,  in  conclusion,  the  gathering  together  of  all  who  pine  in  misery  at 
a  distance  from  Zion,  and  who  are  scattered  far  and  wide,  to  assure  even  these  of  their 
future  participation  in  the  promised  salvation"  (Delitzsch).  These  verses  may  bs 
taken  to  illustrate  the  morai  restoration  of  mankind.  Taking  them  for  this  purpose, 
we  have  the  restoration  and  the  Restorer.     We  have  here — 

I.  The  bebtobation.  What  is  the  restoration?  1.  From  the  deprivation  »/ 
religious  privileges  to  their  enjoyment.  The  Jews,  who  were  in  a  state  that  rendered 
it  impossible  to  celebrate  their  religious  festivals  at  Jerusalem,  are  here  represented  as 
filled  with  sorrow  or  grief  when  they  reflected  on  the  privileges  of  their  ancestors. 
"  By  the  rivers  of  Babylon  we  sat  down  and  wept,"  etc.  Though  unregenerate  men 
may  live  amidst  religious  privileges,  they  are  really  deprived  of  them,  for  they  do 
not  possess  and  enjoy  them.  Their  moral  restoration  brings  them  into  that  happy 
enjoyment.  Though  the  ungodly  man  holds  the  gospel  in  his  hand,  he  is  morally 
exiled  from  it.  It  is  more  distant  from  him  than  was  the  temple  irom  the  Jew  iu 
Babylon.  2.  From  the  sufferings  of  oppression  to  the  happiness  of  deliveranee. 
**  Behold,  at  that  time  I  will  undo  all  that  afflict  thee :  and  I  will  save  her  that  haltoth, 
and  gather  her  that  was  driven  out."  The  literal  reference  is  here,  of  course,  to 
Babylonian  tyrants.    By  the  providence  of  God  these  were  overcome.    Their  power 


71  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEPHANIAH.  [oh.  m.  1— 2a 

was  broken,  their  counsels  confounded,  so  that  they  were  forced  to  surrender  their  prey. 
"  I  will  save  her  that  balteth,  and  gather  her  that  was  driven  out."  The  Hebrew 
captiyes  were  deliyered,  and  brought  back  to  their  own  country  and  city.  In  moral 
restoration  the  power  of  the  oppressor  is  broken,  the  soul  is  delivered  from  the  power 
of  Satan  and  the  bondage  of  corruption.  "  Being  made  free  from  sin,  and  become 
servsoits  to  God,  ye  have  your  fruit  iinto  holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting  life."  What 
was  the  tyranny  of  Babylon  to  the  Jews,  compared  to  the  tyranny  of  evil  over  the 
soul  ?  3.  From  the  condition  of  reproach  to  that  of  true  honour.  "  I  will  get  them 
praise  and  fame  in  every  land  where  they  have  been  put  to  shame."  High  above  all 
nations  was  Israel  at  one  time.  The  "  reproach  "  broii^ht  on  them  was  one  of  their 
sorest  grievances ;  that  reproach  has  been  partially  wiped  away,  the  Jewish  people  are 
the  most  distinguished  of  the  races  of  the  earth,  for  of  them  Christ  came,  who  is 
the  glory  of  his  people  Israel.  When  a  man  is  morally  restored,  he  becomes  truly 
honourable,  not  before.  Ghjodness  is  moral  majesty.  There  is  no  true  royalty  which 
has  not  its  foundation  in  moral  excellence. 

n.  The  Bebtokeb.  All  the  restoration  sketched  in  these  verses  was  effected  by 
whom?  Not  by  Cyrus  and  his  battalions:  they  were  but  instruments.  It  was 
Jehovah.  "  /  will  gather ; "  "  /  will  save ; "  "  /  wil  1  get  them  praise ; "  "  /  bring  you 
again;  "  "  I  will  make  you  a  name  ;"  "/  turn  back  your  captivity."  So  in  moral 
restoration.  No  one  can  restore  a  soxd  but  God.  It  is  his  worl^  1.  A  work  which  h« 
does  by  moral  means.  By  the  gospel.  2.  A  work  which,  from  the  nature  of  th« 
case,  must  proceed  gradually.  3.  A  work  which  will  one  d»y  be  coniammttad. 
— D.  T. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 

TO 

THE  BOOK  OF  .ZBPHANIAH 


CHAPTER  I. 


THEME                                                                                        PAGE 

The  Prophet  and  his  Times  . . 

5 

A  Corrupt  Priesthood  and  its  Perni- 

cious Influence     . . 

6 

Divided  Service      .. 

6 

The  Sin  of  Apostasy 

7 

The  Sin  of  Indifference 

8 

"  The  Day  of  the  Lord "       . .               9 

16 

"  No  Respect  of  Persons  "     .. 

10 

Searching  Jerusalem  with  Candles     . . 

10 

A  Prophet  of  Doom 

11 

"  The  Day  of  the  Lord's  Sacrifice"     . . 

13 

Xhe  Soul's  Silences  before  the  Presence 

of  the  Lord 

15 

Foreign  Clothes 

15 

Settled  on  One's  Lees 

16 

The  Judgment  threatened    . . 

17 

The  Word 

21 

The  Day  of  War  the  Day  of  Horrors. . 

23 

CHAPTER  IL 

The  Evil  summoned  to  Repentance    . .    30 
The    Good    stimulated    to    a    Truer 
Life        ..  ..  ..  ..31 

The  Doom  of  the  Philistines  . .  . .     32 

The  Divine  Judgment  upon  the  Moa- 
bites  and  Ammonites         . .  . .    38 

The  Divine  Purpose  in  Reference  to 
the  Race,  and  the  Way  ol  its  Ful- 
filment ..  ..  ..  ..33 

The  Doom  of  Ethiopia  ..  ..34 


THEME  PAGE 

The  Doom  of  Assyria            . .             . .  35 

A   Call   to  Repentance,   addressed  to 

the  Nation  of  Judah           . .             . .  85 

An  Exhortation  to  the  Meek,  addressed 

to  the  Believing  Remnant  of  Judah  37 
Divine  Judgments  upon  Heathen  Na- 
tions      . .              . .              . .              . .  38 

The  Duty  of  seeking  the  Lord              . .  40 
Sin  and  Repentance:  the  Bane  and  the 

Antidote               . .             . .             . .  44 

The   Sinner's    Baleful    Infiuence,    and 

God's  Disposal  of  All           . .              . .  44 

The  Persecution  of  the  Good                . .  45 

Good  Things  in  the  Future   . .             . .  47 

National  Pride  and  National  Ruin      . .  47 


CHAPTER  III. 

Guilt  and  Retribution  . .  . .     53 

Symbols  of  the  Pinal  Prosperity  of 
God's  Spiritual  Kingdom    . .  . .     54 

The  Restoration  of  the  Jews. .  . .    55 

Pictorial  Representation  of  the  Church 
of  God  in  the  Latter  Age  . .  . .     56 

The  Abiding  Presence  of  God  with 
His  Church  ..  ..  ..57 

Words  of  Help  and  Hope  to  the  Exiled 
and  Banished        . .  . .  . .     58 

Jerusalem  the  Rebellious  and  Polluted ; 
or,  the  Wickedness  and  Woe  of  a  De- 
generate City       . .  . .  . .    59 

The  Shamelessness  of  Sin      . .  . .    60 


INDEX. 


TBcm  rAoi 

The   Oraeioni  Acts   of  Jehorah )    or, 
tarael's  Glorious  Fatnre  ...  ...     60 

Tbe    OMXfiooal    Joy    of    Iirael    and 
JehoTah  ,.  ...  ...     62 

God  mu6  his  People  ...  ...    63 

The  Turning  again  of  Israel' ■  Cap- 
tivity; or.  Good  News  for  Sin'a 
2ril«i    ..  ^  ^  ...     64 


The  FrotniBe  of  Restoration  ...  64 

A  Beligioua  Oity  terribly  Degenerate  67 

Terrible  Calamities  in  Hnman  History  68 

The  Good  Time  coming       ...  ...  69 

A  Sketch  of  a  morally  Begenerated 

Oity 70 

Joy,  Human  and  Divine      ...  ...  70 

The  Moral  Restoistion  of  Mankind   ...  71 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 
AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

HAGGAI. 

By  rev.  W.  J.   DEANE,  M.A., 

RECTOR  OF  ASHEN  ; 

l^omiletics : 
By  rev.   T.  WHITELAW,  D.D. 

i^omilies  bg  Uarions  !^utl)or6 : 

REV.  S.  D.  HILLMAN,  B  A.  REV.    D.   THOMAS,    D.D. 


FUNK   &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE    BOOK    OF   HAGGAL 


INTRODUCTION. 


§  I.  Subject  or  the  Book. 

Fboh  tbe  time  wlien  Zephaniah  prophesied  of  jadgment  to  come  to  the  day 
when  Haggai  lifted  up  his  voice,  some  hundred  years  or  more  had  elapsed. 
In  this  interval  Ood  had  not  left  himself  without  witness ;  the  prophets 
Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and  Daniel  had  carried  on  the  torch  of  prophecy,  and 
had  not  snSered  the  light  of  inspiration  to  be  eztingaished.  Meanwhile 
startling  events  had  happened.  That  which  earlier  seers  had  foretold  had 
come  to  pass;  warnings  unheeded  had  ripened  bitter  fruit.  Israel  had 
long  ago  been  carried  into  captivity  ;  Judah  had  suffered  a  similar  fate. 
For  seventy  years  she  had  sat  weeping  by  the  waters  of  Babylon,  learning 
a  hard  lesson  and  profiting  thereby.  But  the  period  of  punishment  came 
to  an  end  at  the  appointed  moment.  God  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus 
King  of  Elam,  to  allow  and  to  urge  the  return  of  the  Hebrews  to  their  own 
land  and  the  rebuilding  of  their  temple.  iNot  that  Gyrus  was  a  monotheist, 
who  believed  in  one  supreme  Qod.  This  idea,  which  has  long  obtained,  is 
proved  to  be  erroneous  by  the  inscriptions  which  have  been  discovered,  and 
which  maybe  read  in  Professor  Sayce's  <  Fresh  Light  from  the  Monuments,* 
pp.-  142,  etc.  From  these  it  is  clear  that  he  was  a  worshipper  of  Bel- 
Merodach,  the  patron  god  of  Babylon,  and  that,  as  it  was  his  first  care  on 
the  capture  of  that  city  to  reinstate  its  deities  in  their  shrines,  so  his  edict 
respecting  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  a  result  of  his 
usual  policy  to  adopt  the  gods  of  conquered  countries,  and  to  win  their 
favour  by  supporting  their  worship.  That  God  used  him  as  his  instrument 
for  the  restoration  of  the  Hebrews  proves  nothing  concerning  his  personal 
religion.  Unworthy  agents  often  perform  most  important  service.  Obey- 
ing the  king's  edict,  many  of  the  Jews,  assisted  by  donations  and  bearing 
with  them  the- rifled  treasures  of  the  temple,  b.o.  536,  prepared  to  return  to 
their  native  land  under  the  leadership  of  Zerubbabel,  a  prince  of  the  house 
of  David,  and  Joshua  the  high  priest     They  were,  indeed,  but  a  small  body, 

HAOOAI.  t 


INTBODUCTION  TO 


amounting,  according  to  the  enumeration  of  Ezra  (ii.  64,  65),  to  42,360, 
exclusive  of  menservants  and  maidservants  reckoned  at  7337.  But  they  set 
to  work  with  vigour  on  their  arrival  at  Jemsalem,  and  in  the  second  year 
of  Cyrus,  B.C.  634,  erected  the  great  altar  in  its  old  place,  and  established 
regular  worship  according  to  the  Mosaic  rituaL  They  then  proceeded  to 
lay  the  foundations  of  a  new  temple  in  the  second  year  after  their  arrival. 
The  prosecution  of  this  undertaking  met  with  unexpected  obstacles.  The 
mixed  population  which  had  been  settled  by  the  Assyrian  conquerors  in 
Central  Palestine  claimed,  on  the  score  of  brotherhood,  to  take  part  in  this 
sacred  work.  Such  a  claim  could  not  be  entertained.  These  Samaritans, 
as  they  are  named,  were  not  of  the  holy  seed,  did  not  worship  Jehovah 
with  pure  worship,  mixed  idolatrous  rites  with  their  devotions  to  the  true 
God.  It  would  have  been  an  abandonment  of  their  unique  position,  treason 
to  their  Lord,  for  the  Israelites  to  have  admitted  such  syncretists  to  a 
participation  in  the  erection  of  the  temple.  Zerabbabel,  therefore,  rightly 
declined  their  offered  assistance.  This  rejection  was  bitterly  resented. 
By  representations  made  at  court,  they  endeavoured  to  hinder  the  work, 
and  were  so  successful  in  their  opposition  that  the  building  was  stopped 
during  the  remainder  of  the  life  of  Cyrus,  and  during  the  reign  of  his 
successors,  Cambyses  and  Psendo-Smerdis  (Artaxerxes  I.).  Other  causes 
combined  to  bring  about  the  suspension  of  operations.  The  zeal  with  which 
the  labour  was  begun  grew  cold.  The  exiles  had  returned  with  high  hope 
of  happiness  and  prosperity ;  they  had  expected  to  enter  into  possession  of  a 
home  prepared  and  ready  for  their  reception ;  in  their  fervid  imagination 
peace  and  plenty  awaited  them,  and  the  blessings  promised  to  obedience  in 
their  old  Law  were  to  be  theirs  with  little  labour  or  delay.  A  very  diflferent 
state  of  things  awaited  them.  Cities  ruined  and  desolate,  a  land  sterilized 
by  want  of  cultivation,  neighbours  unfriendly  or  openly  hostile,  scantiness  of 
bread,  danger,  toU, — these  were  the  objects  which  they  had  to  contemplate. 
And  though  the  spirit  that  animated  their  first  enterprise,  and  the  enthusiasm 
that  accompanied  a  great  national  movement,  excited  them  to  commence 
the  work  with  earnestness  and  ardour,  their  hearts  were  not  sufficiently 
engaged  in  its  prosecution  to  enable  them  to  rise  superior  to  inward 
distraction  and  outward  opposition;  and  so  they  grew  less  interested  in  the 
completion  of  the  undertaking,  and  they  acquiesced  with  stolid  complacency 
in  its  enforced  cessation.  They  learned  to  look  on  the  ruins  of  their  holy- 
house  with  a  certain  desponding  equanimity,  and  turned  to  the  furtherance 
of  their  own  personal  concerns,  contentedly  leaving  the  restoration  of  the 
temple  to  other  times  and  stronger  hands  than  theirs.  But  a  happier  con- 
dition  of  afFairs  arrived  under  the  rule  of  Darius,  the  son  of  Hystaspes,  who 
succeeded  to  the  throne  of  Persia  io.  521.  The  interdict  which  had  stopped 
the  building  of  the  temple  was  removed,  the  original  decree  of  Cyrus  was 
discovered  and  re-enacted,  and  every  assistance  was  given  to  the  Jews  to 
carry  out  their  original  design.  Nothing  but  the  will  was  now  wanting. 
It  was  the  design  of  Haggai's  prophecy  to  inspire  this  will,  to  shame  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAI. 


people  into  a  display  of  energy  and  self-denial,  and  to  encourage  them  to 
continue  their  efforts  till  the  whole  work  was  satisfactorily  completed. 

Steiner  and  others  have  questioned  the  fact  that  the  rebuilding  of  the 
temple  was  begun  under  Cyrus.  They  say  that  no  genuine  passage  in  the 
Book  of  Ezra  gives  any  countenance  to  the  statement,  and  that  it  was  only 
in  consequence  of  the  interference  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah  that  the  work 
was  first  commenced  in  the  second  year  of  Darius,  being  then  carried  on 
without  interruption  till  it  was  completed  four  years  afterwards.  Haggai 
himself  does  not  expressly  mention  any  earlier  attempt  at  laying  the 
foundation,  and  indeed  places  this  event  in  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of 
the  ninth  month  of  the  second  year  of  Darius  (ch.  ii.  18).  But  this 
passage  is  capable  of  another  interpretation ;  and  the  direct  statement  of 
Ezra  iii.  8,  that  "  in  the  second  year  of  their  coming  .  .  .  they  began  to 
set  forward  the  work  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  and  "  the  foundation  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord  was  laid "  (ver.  11),  can  only  be  surmounted  by 
arbitrarily  denying  the  genuineness  of  this  chapter  and  the  authenticity 
of  its  details.  The  grounds  of  this  rejection  are  weak  and  inconclusive. 
When  we  consider  the  enormous  importance  attached  to  the  rebuilding  of 
the  temple — which,  indeed,  was  the  test  of  fidelity  to  the  Lord,  and  the 
desire  to  abide  by  the  covenant — it  is  inconceivable  that  the  good  men  who 
guided  the  nation  should  allow  some  sixteen  years  to  elapse  before  making 
any  attempt  to  set  in  hand  the  good  work ;  so  that  the  very  nature  of  the 
case  confirms  the  statement  of  Ezra,  while  nothing  in  the  books  of  Haggai 
and  Zechariah  really  militates  against  it.  On  the  contrary,  there  are 
passages  in  Haggai  which  distinctly  involve  its  truth.  Thus  in  ch.  ii.  14 
it  is  implied  that  formal  sacrifices  were  offered  before  Haggai's  public 
interference,  and  in  ch.  ii.  3  that  the  temple  was  already  so  far  built  that 
its  future  appearance  and  condition  could  be  conceived. 

The  book  comprises  four  discourses,  which  make  natural  divisions,  and 
are  accurately  dated.  The  first,  uttered  on  the  first  day  of  the  sixth 
month  of  Darius's  second  regnal.year,  contains  an  exhortation  to  Zerabbabel 
and  Joshua  to  take  in  hand  at  once  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple.  The 
people  are  sternly  reproached  for  their  indifference,  which  they  think  to 
excuse  by  affirming  that  the  time  for  this  work  has  not  yet  come,  while, 
they  expend  their  energies  in  increasing  their  own  material  comfort.  The 
prophet  shows  them  that  the  barrenness  of  their  land  and  the  distress  which 
they  suffer  are  a  chastisement  for  this  neglect.  He  concludes  with  an 
account  of  the  effect  of  this  expostulation,  how  that  the  chiefs  and  all  the 
people  listened  to  his  words,  and  "  came  and  did  work  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts  "  (ch,  i.).  The  following  month  witnessed  the  second  address, 
wherein  the  prophet  comfoi-ts  those  who,  contrasting  the  new  with  the 
former  temple,  depreciated  the  present  undertaking,  and  assures  them  that, 
although  its  appearance  is  humbler,  the  glory  of  the  latter  house  shall  far 
exceed  that  of  the  former,  because  of  the  splendid  donations  of  princes,  and 
because  of  Messiah's  presence  there  (ch.  ii.  1 — 9).     The  third  exhortatioit 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


was  uttered  in  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  month.  By  certain 
legal  questions  concerning  the  commnnication  of  holiness  and  pollution, 
Haggai  demonstrates  that  the  people's  tendency  to  rest  in  external  righteous- 
ness is  sinful,  and  that  their  lukewarmness  in  the  holy  work  before  them 
vitiated  their  worship  and  occasioned  want  and  misery,  which  would  only 
be  relieved  by  their  strenuous  efforts  to  finish  the  temple  (ch.  ii.  10 — 19). 
The  prophecy  ends  with  a  promise  to  the  scion  of  the  house  of  David,  that 
amid  tho  destruction  of  the  powers  of  the  world,  his  throne  should  be 
exalted  and  glorified, "  for  I  have  chosen  thee,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts " 
(ch.  ii.  20—23). 

The  reason  why  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  is  made  of  such  singular 
importance  is  found  in  the  light  in  which  the  house  of  God  is  regarded, 
and  the  opportnnity  thus  afforded  for  displaying  zeal  and  fidelity  towards 
God.  The  temple  is  the  visible  token  of  the  Lord's  presence  with  his 
people,  the  material  sign  of  the  covenant ;  its  restoration  showed  that  the 
Israelites  desired  to  maintain  this  relation  with  Jehovah,  and  to  do  their 
part  in  the  matter.  Here  alone  could  the  federal  relation  be  renewed  and 
sustained  ;  here  alone  could  the  daily  worship  be  duly  offered.  While  the 
temple  lay  in  ruins,  the  covenant  was,  as  it  were,  suspended ;  for  its 
re-establishment  the  Lord's  house  must  be  rebuilt  and  adapted  to  Divine 
service.  And  yet  this  covenant  was  not  simply  a  revival  of  the  old  one  in 
its  Sinaitic  form ;  it  was  a  new  one,  without  the  visible  cloud  of  glory, 
without  the  ark  and  mercy-seat  and  the  tables  of  the  Law,  but  one  attested 
by  the  very  presence  of  Messiah  himself,  and  the  laws  of  which  were 
written  in  the  heart  and  mind  of  the  faithful.  Of  this  the  material  build- 
ing was  a  symbol,  and  therefore  its  reconstruction  was  an  imperative  duty. 

§  II.  Author  and  Datb. 

Of  the  Prophet  Haggai  we  know  nothing  save  what  may  be  gathered  from 
his  book  and  a  few  words  in  Ezra.  The  name  Haggai,  in  Greek  'Ayyaios, 
is  explained  by  St.  Jerome  to  mean  "Festive;"  for,  he  says,  he  sowed 
in  tears  that  he  might  reap  in  joy,  when  he  witnessed  the  re-erection  of 
.the  ruined  temple.  Reinke  deems  that  he  was  so  named  because  he  was 
born  on  some  great  feast-day.  He  is  mentioned  with  Zechariah  in  Ezra 
(v.  I ;  vi.  14)  as  prophesying  unto  the  Jews  that  were  in  Jerusalem  in  the 
name  of  the  God  of  Israel,  urging  them  to  continue  the  work  of  rebuilding 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  It  has  been  conjectured,  from  ch.  ii.  3,  that  he  had 
seen  the  temple  of  Solomon,  that  he  was  one,  as  Dr.  Pusey  says,  "  who  had 
lived  among  the  outward  splendour  of  the  former  temple,  who  had  himself 
been  carried  into  captivity,  and  was  now  part  of  that  restoration  which  God 
had  promised."  But  this  idea  is  not  supported  by  the  language  of  the  passaga 
on  which  it  is  founded :  "  Who  is  left  among  you  that  saw  the  house  in 
her  first  glory  ?  "  If  the  conjecture  were  true,  he  would  have  been  at  least 
eighty  years  old  at  the  time  of  his  prophecy,  the  date  of  which  he  himself 


THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAL 


states  as  the  Becond  year  of  Darius  the  king,  i.e.  B.C.  520.  He  continued 
his  addresses  at  intervals  daring  four  months  of  that  year ;  but  whether  he 
lived  to  see  the  full  result  of  his  labours  by  the  completion  of  the  building 
in  the  sixth  year  of  Darius,  is  uncertain.  Jewish  tradition  makes  him  to 
have  been  a  member  of  the  great  synagogue,  and  other  accounts,  equally 
unsubstantiated,  assign  to  him  an  honoured  burial  in  the  sepulchre  reserved 
for  priests. 

Some  manuscripts  of  the  Septuagint  attribute  to  Haggai  and  Zechariah 
the  authorship  of  Ps.  oxxxvii.  and  cxlv. — cxlviii.  To  them,  too,  in  the 
Syriao  are  assigned  Ps.  cxxv.,  cxxvi.,  cxlv. — cxlvii.,  and  in  the  Latin 
Vulgate  Ps.  oxi.  and  cxlv.  "  It  may  be,"  says  Mr.  Wright  ('  Diet,  of 
Bible,'  sub  voce  "  Haggai "),  "  that  tradition  assigned  to  these  prophets 
the  arrangement  of  the  above-mentioned  psalms  for  use  in  the  temple 
service,  just  as  Ps.  Ixiv.  is  in  the  Vulgate  attributed  to  Jeremiah  and 
Ezekiel,  and  the  name  of  the  former  is  inscribed  at  the  head  of  Ps.  cixxvi. 
in  the  LXX."  Prom  certain  coincidences  in  style,  and  for  other  reasons 
connected  with  the  minnteness  of  details  given,  it  has  been  conjectured 
that  Haggai  is  the  author  of  that  part  of  the  Book  of  Ezra  which  extends 
from  ch.  iii.  2  to  the  end  of  ch.  vi.,  with  the  exception  of  the  fragment  in 
ch.  iv.  6 — 23.  The  grounds  for  this  opinion  are  given  in  Smith's  '  Diet, 
of  the  Bible,'  i.  607;  but  they  do  not  seem  very  conclusive.  Pseudo- 
Epiphanius  says  ('  De  Vit.  Proph.')  that  Haggai  and  Zechariah  were 
the  first  to  sing  "  Hallelujah  "  and  "  Amen  "  in  the  second  temple,  which 
probably  means  that  they  took  the  lead  in  chanting  the  Hallelujah  psalms. 
References  to  Haggai  occur  in  Heb.  xii.  26 ;  Ecclus.  xlix.  10,  11 ;  1  Bsdras 
vi.  1 ;  vii.  3 ;  2  Esdras  i.  40. 

§  III.   General  Oharactbb. 

The  language  of  Haggai  is  generally  considered  tame  and  featureless, 
indulging  in  unnecessary  repetitions,  and  rarely  rising  above  the  level  of 
ordinary  prose.  But  in  estimating  the  character  of  his  addresses,  we  must 
remember  that  in  their  present  form  they  are  probably  only  the  outline  of 
the  original  utterances,  and  that  what  may  seem  poor  and  curt  in  the 
_8ummary  may  have  been  telling  and  eloquent  in  its  fuller  form  when 
spoken.  Even  as  we  have  them,  the  addresses  in  their  simplicity  are  full 
of  force ;  outward  ornament  and  rhetorical  artifice  were  not  needed  in  order  ' 
to  set  forth  the  work  which  the  people  were  expected  to  perform.  Haggai 
had  one  distinct  message  to  deliver,  and  he  announced  it  in  plain, 
unvarnished  language,  which  came  home  to  the  hearts  of  his  hearers,  not 
only  with  conviction,  but  with  persuasive  force,  so  that  they  did  not  merely 
say,  "  How  true !  "  and  do  nothing  in  consequence,  but  they  put  their 
conviction  into  action,  and  began  at  once  to  build.  He  is  indeed  concise, 
antithetical,  and  impressive ;  hut  the  great  point  is  that  he  gained  the  end 
which  he  had  in  view.  The  highest  efforts  of  oratorical  power  could 
attempt  and  effect  no  more. 


Ti  INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGOAI. 


§  IV.    LiTBBATDBB. 

The  chief  commentaries  on  Haggai  are  these:  Aharbanel,  Heb.  cnm  Vers.  Lat. 
a  Sohers.  (Lips.,  1663)  ;  Melanchthon,  0pp.  ii. ;  Eckius  (Salignao,  1538) ;  Pilkingtou, 
'Exposition' (London,  1560);  Meroier  (Paris,  1581) ;  Grynseua  (Genev.,  1581),  trans- 
lated into  English  by  0.  Featherstone  (London,  1586);  Tamovius  (Rost.,  1624); 
Eaynolds  (London,  1649) ;  Pfeffinger  (Strasburg,  1703) ;  Kohler,  « Die  Weissag.  Hag.' 
(Erlangen,  1860) ;  Moore, '  The  Prophets  of  the  Restoration '  (London,  1858)  ;  Eeinke 
(1868);  McCurdy  (Edinburgh);  Pressel  (1870);  Archdeacon  Perowne,  in  'The 
Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools '  (Cambridge,  1886). 

§  V.  Abbangement  in  Sections. 

The  book  is  divided  into  four  addresses,  delivered  at  specified  dates. 
Part  I.  (Ch.  i.)    The  first  address :  Exhortation  to  build  the  temple,  and  its  result. 
§  1.  (Ch.  1.  1 — 6.)    The  people  are  reproved  for  their  indifference  with  regard  to 

the  erection  of  the  temple,  and  admonished^  that  their  present  distress  is  a 

chastisement  for  this  neglect. 
§  2.  (Ch.  i.  7 — 11.)    The  prophet  urges  them  to  work  zealously  at  the  building  as 

the  only  remedy  for  the  unfruitfulness  of  the  season. 
§  3.  (Ch.  i.  12 — 15.)    The  appeal  is  obeyed,  and  for  a  time  the  people  apply 

themselves  diligently  to  the  work. 
Part  II.  (Ch.  ii.  1—9.)    The  second  address :  The  glory  of  the  new  temple. 
§  1.  (Ch.  il.  1 — 5.)    The  prophet  comforts  those  who  grieve  at  the  comparative 

poverty  of  the  new  building,  with  the  assurance  of  the  Divine  protection  and 

favour. 
§  2.  (Ch.  ii.  6 — 9.)    He  foretells  a  future  time  when  the  glory  of  the  new  temple 

should  exceed  that  of  the  old,  adumbrating  the  Messianic  era. 
Part  III.  (Ch.  ii.  10 — 19.)    The  third  address :  The  cause  of  their  calamities,  and 

promise  of  blessing. 
§  1.  (Ch.  ii.  10 — 17.)    By  an  analogy  drawn  from  the  Law  Hasgai  shows  that 

residence  in  the  Holy  Land  and  offering  of  sacrifice  do  not  suffice  to  make  the 

people  acceptable,  as  long  as  they  themselves  are  unclean  through  neglect  of 

the  house  of  the  Lord.    Hence  comes  the  punishment  of  sterility. 
§  2.  (Ch.  ii.  18, 19.)     On  their  obedience  the  blessings  of  nature  shall  again  be 

theirs. 
Part  IV.  (Ch.  iL  20 — 23.)    The  fourth  address:   Promise  of  the  restoration  and 

establishment  of  the  house  of  David,  when  the  storm  bursts  on  the  kingdoms  oi 

the  world. 


THE    BOOK    OF   HAGGAL 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  I. 


Vera.  1—15.— Part  I.    The  First  Ad- 

DHE38 :  Exhortation  to  build  the  Tkmplb, 

AND  ITS  EbSULT. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — §  1.  The  people  are  reproved 
far  their  indifference  with  regard  to  the 
erection  of  the  temple,  and  admonished  that 
their  present  distress  is  a  chastisement  for 
this  negleot. 

Yer.  1. — ^In  the  second  year  of  Daiins  tbe 
king.  This  is  DariuaHystaspes,  who  reigned 
over  Persia  &oin  b.o.  521  to  B.o.  486.  He 
is  called  in  the  inscriptions  Daryavush, 
which  name  means  "  Holder,"  or  "  Sup- 
porter." Herodotus  (vi.  98)  explains  it  as 
"  Coercer  "  (IpJcfTji).  Hitherto  the  prophets 
have  dated  the  time  of  the  exercise  of  their 
ofBoe  from  the  reigns  of  the  legitimate 
Hebrew  monai  ohs ;  it  shows  a  new  state  of 
things  when  they  place  at  the  head  of  their 
oracles  the  name  of  a  foreign  and  a  heathen 
potentate.  The  Jews  had,  indeed,  now  no 
king  of  tlieir  own, "  the  tabernacle  of  David 
had  fallen "  (Amos  ix.  11),  and  they  were 
living  on  sufferance  under  an  alien  power. 
Tliey  had  returned  from  exile  by  permission 
of  Cyrus  in  the  &rst  year  of  his  occupancy 
of  the  throne  of  Babylon  sixteen  years 
before  this  time,  and  had  commenced  to 
build  the  temple  soon  after ;  but  the 
opposition  of  neighbours,  contradictory 
orders  from  the  Persian  court,  and  their 
own  lukewarmness  had  contributed  to 
hinder  the  work,  and  it  soon  wholly  ceased, 
and  remained  suspended  to  the  moment 
when  Haggai,  as  the  seventy  years  of  desola- 
tion drew  to  an  end,  was  commissioned  to 
arouse  them  from  their  apathy,  and  to  urge 
them  fo  use  the  opportunity  which  was 
afforded  by  the  accession  of  the  new  monarch 
and  the  withdrawal  of  the  vexations  inter- 
dict that  had  checked  their  opurations  in  the 

BAGOAI. 


previous  reign  (see  Introduction,  §  L  ;  and 
oomp.  Ezra  iv.  24).  The  sixth  month,  ac- 
cording to  the  saored  Hebrew  calendar, 
which  reckoned  fromNisau  to  Nisan.  This 
would  be  Elul,  answering  to  parts  of  our 
August  and  September.  In  the  first  day. 
This  was  the  regular  festival  of  the  new 
moon  (Numb.  x.  10;  Isa.  i.  13),  and  a 
fitting  time  to  urge  the  building  of  the 
temple,  without  which  it  could  not  be  duly 
celebrated.  Sy;  literally,  iy  the  hand  (as 
in  ver.  3),  the  instrument  whom  God  used 
(Exod.  ix.  35 ;  Jer.  xxxvii.  2 ;  Hos.  xii. 
11 ;  Acts  vii.  35).  Haggai  the  prophet  (see 
the  Introduction).  Zerubhabel  the  son  of 
Shealtiel ;  Septuagint,  Elviii/  Tphs  ZopoPi^eK 
rhv  Tofl  2aA.afli))\,  "  Speak  to  Zorobabel  the 
son  of  Salathiel."  The  temporal  head  of 
the  nation,  the  representative  of  the  royal 
house  of  David,  and  therefore  with  the  high 
piiest  jointly  responsible  for  the  present  state 
of  affairs,  and  having  power  and  authority 
to  amend  it.  The  name,  as  explained,  and 
rightly,  by  St.  Jerome,  means,  "Born  in 
Babylon,"  and  intimates  the  truth  concern- 
ing his  origin.  He  is  called  Shieshbazzar  in 
Ezra  i.  8 ;  V.  14,  which  is  either  his  name  at 
the  Persian  court,  or  is  an  erroneous  trans- 
literation for  a  synonymous  word  (see 
Knabenbauer,  in  loo.).  The  name  is  found 
in  the  cuneiform  inscription,  as  Zir-Babilu. 
Shealtiel  (or  Salathiel)  means,  "Asked  of 
God."  Tliere  is  a  difficulty  about  Zerub- 
babel's  parentage.  Here  and  frequently  in 
this  book,  and  in  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  as 
well  as  in  Matt.  i.  12  and  Luke  iii.  27,  he  is 
called  "  son  of  Shealtiel ; "  in  1  Ohron.  iii.  19 
he  is  said  to  be  the  son  of  Pedaiah  the 
brother  of  Salathiel.  The  truth  probably 
is  that  he  wan  by  birth  the  son  of  Pedaiah, 
but  by  adoption  or  the  law  of  the  levirate, 
the  son  of  Salathiel.  He  was  regarded  as 
tlie  grandson  of  Jehoiachin,  or  Jeconiah. 
Governor  (peoftafc).  A  foreign  word,  used 
in  I  Kiiiffs  X.  15.  in  Isaiah  (xxxvL  9).  anj 


THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAI. 


[CH.  I.  1—15. 


frequently  in  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  and  Esther, 
to  denote  an  inferior  satrap  or  subordinate 
governor.  Strassmaier  {ap.  Knabenbauer) 
notes  that  in  Assyrian  the  word  is  found 
in  the  form  pachu,  that  pichatu  means  ' '  a 
province," pacftai,  "a  district."  It  seems 
natural,  though  probably  erroneous,  to  con- 
nect it  with  the  Turkish  pashah.  But  see 
the  discussion  on  the  word  in  Pusey, '  Daniel 
the  Prophet,'  p.  566,  etc.  Instead  of  "Gov- 
ernor of  Judah,"  the  LXX.  here  and 
ver.  12  and  ch.  ii.  2  reads,  ' '  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah."  One  of  the  house  of  David  has 
the  government,  but  the  foreign  title  ap- 
plied to  him  shows  that  he  holds  authority 
only  as  the  deputy  of  an  alien  power.  Judah 
was  henceforward  applied  to  the  whole 
country.  The  prophecy  in  Gen.  xlix.  10 
still  held  good.  Joshua.  The  highest 
spiritual  officer  (Ezra  iii.  2,  8;  iv.  3).  This 
Joshua,  Jehoshua,  Jeshua,  as  he  is  variously 
called,  was  a  son  of  Josedech  who,  in  the 
time  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  had  been  carried 
captive  to  Babylon  (1  Chron.  vi.  15) ,  and 
grandson  of  that  Seraiah  who,  with  other 
princes  of  Judah,  was  slain  at  Riblah  by 
the  Babylonians  (2  Kings  xxv.  18,  etc.). 
The  parentage  of  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua  is 
specially  mentioned  to  show  that  the  former 
was  of  the  house  of  David  and  the  latter 
of  the  family  of  Aaron,  and  that  even  in 
its  depressed  condition  Israel  retained  its 
rightful  constitution  (see  note  on  Zech. 
iii.  1). 

Ver.  3. — The  Lord  of  hosts.  Haggai,  as 
the  other  prophets,  always  uses  this  formula 
in  enunciating  his  messages  (see  note  on 
Amos.  ix.  5) .  Trochon  justly  remarks  that 
this  expression  is  not  found  in  the  earlier 
books  01  the  Bible — th''  Pentateuch,  Joshua, 
and  Judges.  If  tkesti  books  were  con- 
temporary with  the  prophets,  the  phrase 
would  certainly  occur  in  them  (see  a 
valuable  note  in  the  Appendix  to  Arch- 
deacon Perowne's  Commentary  on  Haggai, 
in  'The  Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools'). 
This  people;  populus  iste  (Vulgate),  with 
some  contempt,  as  if  they  were  no  longer 
worthy  to  be  called  the  Lord's  people 
(ch.  ii.  14) .  It  looks  as  if  they  had  often 
before  been  admonished  to  proceed  with  the 
work,  and  had  this  answer  ready.  The 
time  is  not  come  ;  literally,  it  is  not  time  to 
come  (comp.  Gen.  ii.  5),  which  is  explained 
by  the  new  clause,  the  time  that  the  Lord's 
house  should  he  built.  The  versions  shorten 
the  sentence,  rendering, ' '  the  time  for  build- 
ing the  Lord's  house  has  not  come."  The  ex- 
cuse for  their  inaction  may  have  had  various 
grounds.  They  may  have  said,  reckoning 
from  the  final  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
(B.C.  586),  that  the  seventy  years'  captivity 
was  not  complete;  that  there  was  still 
danger  from  the  neighbouring  population- 


that  the  Persians  were  adverse  to  the 
undertaking;  that  the  unfruitful  season 
rendered  them  unable  to  engage  in  such  a 
great  work;  and  that  the  very  fact  of  these 
difficulties  existing  showed  that  God  did 
not  favour  the  design. 

Ver.  3. — Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
etc.  The  formula  of  ver.  1  is  repeated  to 
give  more  eflfect  to  the  Lord's  answer  to  the 
lame  excuses  for  inaction.  This  emphasis  by 
repetition  is  common  throughout  the  book. 

Ver.  4. — For  you,  0  ye ;  for  you  your- 
selves; such  as  ye  are  (see  Zech.  vii.  5). 
He  appeals  to  their  consciences.  You  can 
make  yourselves  comfortable;  you  have 
time  and  means  and  industry  to  expend  on 
your  own  private  interests,  and  can  you 
look  with  indiSerence  on  the  house  of  God 
lying  waste?  Your  cieled  houses;  your 
houses,  and  those  cieled — wainscoted  and 
roofed  with  costly  woods  (1  Kings  vii.  8,  7; 
Jer.  xxii.  14) ,  perhaps  with  the  very  cedar 
provided  for  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple 
(Ezra  iii.  7).  Septuagint,  if  oiicois  v/jSiv 
KoiXoo-ToSnois,  "your  vaulted  houses,"  or, 
as  St.  Cyril  explains,  "  houses  whose  door- 
posts were  elaborately  adorned  with  em- 
blems and  devices."  They  had  naught  of 
the  feeling  of  David  (2  Sam.  vii.  2),  "I 
dwell  in  an  house  of  cedar^  but  the  ark  of 
God  dwelleth  within  curtains." 

Ver.  5.— Consider;  literally,  set  your  heart 
upon  (so  ver.  7;  ch.  ii.  15,  18).  Your 
ways.  What  ye  have  done,  what  ye  have 
suffered,  your  present  projects,  and  the  con- 
sequences thereof. 

Ver.  6. — Their  labours  for  years  past  had 
lacked  the  Divine  blessing.  Though  they 
had  fine  houses  to  dwell  in,  they  had  been 
visited  with  scanty  harvests  and  weak 
bodily  health.  Ye  have  sown  much,  and 
bring  in  little;  but  to  bring  in  little 
(Hebrew) .  And  this  infinitive  absolute  is 
continued  in  the  following  clauses,  giving 
remarkable  force  to  the  words,  and  ex- 
pressing an  habitual  result.  We  see  from 
ch.  ii.  15 — 17  that  these  unfruitful  seasons 
had  visited  them  during  all  the  continuance 
of  their  negligence  (Deiit.  xxviii.  38) .  But 
ye  have  not  enou^^h,  The  food  which  they 
ate  did  not  satisfy  them ;  their  bodies  were 
sickly  and  derived  no  strength  from  the 
food  which  they  took  (Lev.  xxvi.  26;  Hos. 
iv.  10)  or  from  the  wine  which  they  drank 
(see  note  on  Micah  vi.  14).  But  there  is 
none  warm.  Perhaps  the  winters  were  un- 
usually rigorous,  or  their  infirm  health 
made  their  usual  clothing  insufficient  to 
maintain  their  bodily  heat.  To  put  it  into 
a  bag  with  holes.  Aproverblal  saying.  The 
money  gained  by  the  hired  labourer 
vanished  as  if  he  hadr  never  had  it,  and  left 
no  trace  of  benefit.  Comp.Plaut,,  'Pseudol.,' 
i.  3.  150— 


OH.  I.  1—15.] 


THE   BOOK  OF  HAGGAI. 


"  In   pertuaum   ingerimus   dicta    dolium ; 
operam  liidimuB." 

Vers.  7 — 11. — §  2.  Tlie  prophet  urges  the 
people  to  work  zealoudy  at  the  huilding ;  only 
thus  could  they  hope  for  the  removal  of  their 
present  disasters. 

Ver.  7. — (See  note  on  ver.  5.)  The 
repetitidn  of  t)ie  call  to  reflection  is  needed 
(coinp.  Pbil.  iii.^  1).  Former  experience 
opens  the  way  to  the  injunction  in  ver.  8. 

Ver.  8. — Go  up  to  the  mountain.  The  hill- 
<jonntry  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem, 
whence  by  their  own  personal  exertions  they 
might  procure  material  for  the  building. 
The  temple  mount  is  certainly  not  meant,  as 
if  they  were  to  bring  wood  from  it.  Nor  can 
Lebanon  be  inteniled,  as  in  Ezra  iii.  7 ;  for 
the  injunction  looks  to  an  immediate  actual 
result,  and  in  their  depressed  circum- 
Btances  they  were  scarcely  likely  to  interest 
the  Sidonians  and  Tyrians  to  provide  cedar 
for  them.  There  was  abundance  of  wood 
close  at  hand,  and  the  "  king's  forest "  (Neli. 
ii.  8)  was  in  the  immediate  neis;libourhood 
of  Jerusalem.  There  is  no  mention  of  stone, 
probably  because  the  foundations  liad  long 
been  laid,  and  the  ruins  of  the  old  temple 
supplied  material  for  the  new  one ;  and, 
indeed,  stone  was  to  be  had  in  abundance 
everywhere  ;  or  it  may  be  that  the  prophet 
names  merely  one  opening  for  their  renewed 
•otivity,  as  a  specimen  of  tlie  work  required 
&om  them.  Not  costly  offerings  were  de- 
sired, but  a  willing  mind.  I  will  he  glori- 
fied; I  will  glorify  myself  by  showering 
blessings  on  the  house  and  the  people,  so 
that  the  Hebrews  themselves  and  their 
neighbours  may  own  that  I  am  among  them 
(comp.  Exod.  xiv.  4 ;  Lev.  x.  3 ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  5). 

Ver.  9. — He  shows  the  real  cause  of  the 
calamities  that  had  befallen  them.  Ye 
looked  for  much,  and,  lo,  it  came  to  little. 
Emphatic  infinitive,  as  in  ver.  6,  "  To  look 
for  much,  and  behold  I  little."  They  fixed 
their  expectations  upon  a  rich  harvest,  and 
they  reaped  less  than  they  had  sown  (Isa. 
T.  10).  And  when  they  had  stored  this 
miserable  crop  in  their  bams,  I  did  blow 
upon  it ;  or,  did  hlow  it  away  {i^e<fii<rri<ra, 
Septuagint),  dissipated  it  as  if  it  were 
mere  chaff,  so  that  it  perished.  Doubtless, 
as  Dr  Puaey  observes,  they  ascribed  the 
meagreness  of  their  crops  tu  natural  causes, 
and  would  not  see  the  judicial  nature  of  the 
infiiction.  The  prophet  brings  the  truth 
home  to  their  conscience  by  the  stern  ques- 
tion, Why  t  And  he  answers  the  question 
for  them,  speaking  with  God's  authority. 
Secause  of  mine  house  that  is  waste.  The 
reason  already  given  in  ver.  4,  etc.,  is 
repeated  and  enforced.  And  (while)  ye  run. 
Ye  are  indifferent  to  the  miserable  condition 


of  the  bouse  of  God,  while  ye  haste  with  all 
diligence  to  your  own  houses  for  business 
or  pleasure,  being  entirely  absorbed  in 
worldly  interests,  or  eager  only  to  adorn 
and  beautify  your  own  habitations.  Or,  your 
zeal  is  all  expended  on  your  own  private 
dwellings. 

Ver.  10. — Over  you.  This  would  be  a 
reference  to  Dent,  xxviii.  23.  But  the  pre- 
position is  probably  not  local,  but  means 
rather,  "  on  your  account,"  i.e.  on  account 
of  your  sin,  as  Ps.  xliv.  22.  This  is  not 
tautologiortl  iifter  tlie  preceding  "  therefore," 
but  more  closely  defines  and  explains  the 
illative.  Is  stayed  from  dew ;  hath  stayed 
itself  from  dew ;  withhoMs  not  only  rain,  but 
even  dew  (comp.  Zeoh.  viii.  12).  On  the 
importance  of  clew  in  the  climate  of  Palestine, 
see  note  on  Mieah  v.  7.  The  dews  gene- 
rally are  remarkably  heavy,  and  in  the 
summer  mouths  take  the  place  of  rain.  Dr 
Thcmson  speaks  of  the  dew  rolling  in  the 
morning  off  his  tent  like  rain  ('Laud  and 
the  Book,'  p.  491).  The  earth  is  stayed 
from  her  fruit;  hath  stayed  her  fruit;  ac- 
cording to  the  threat  (Deut.  xi.  17). 

Ver.  11. — I  called  for  a  drought.  So 
Elisha  says  (2  Kings  viii.  1)  tliat  "the Lord 
hath  called  for  a  famine."  There  is  a  play 
of  words  in  the  Hebrew  :  as  they  had  let  the 
Lord's  house  lie  "  waste"  (cAore&)(vers.  4,9), 
so  the  Lord  punished  tliem  with  "  drought " 
{choreh).  The  Septuagint  and  Syriac,  point- 
ing dififerently,  translate  this  List  word 
"  sword,"  but  this  is  not  suitable  for  the 
context,  which  speaks  of  the  sterility  of  the 
land  only.  The  land,  in  contradistinction 
to  the  mountains,  is  the  plain  country. 
Nothing  anywhere  was  spared.  All  the 
labour  of  the  hands  (Ps.  oxxviii.  2,  etc.). 
All  that  they  liad  etlected  by  long  and 
wearisome  toil  in  the  corn-field,  the  vine- 
yard, etc  (comp.  Hos.  ii.  9  ;  Joel  i.  10). 

Vers.  12 — 15. — §  3.  The  appeal  meets  with 
respect  and  attention,  and  for  a  time  the 
people  apply  themselves  diligently  to  the  work. 

Ver.  12. — AH  the  remnant  of  the  people 
(oh.  ii.  2) ;  i.e.  the  people  who  had  returned 
from  the  Oaptiyity,  who  are  technically 
named  "the  remnant"  as  being  only  a 
small  portion  of  all  Israel  (Isa.  x.  21,  22; 
Zech.  viii.  6 ;  Micah  ii.  12).  Others,  not 
so  suitably,  understand  by  the  expression, 
all  the  people  beside  the  chiefs  (ver.  14). 
Obeyed;  rather,  listened  unto.  The  active 
obedience  is  narrated  in  ver.  14.  And  the 
words.  The  prophet's  words  are  the  voice 
of  the  Lord;  and  the  people  heeded  the 
message  which  the  Lord  had  commissioned 
him  to  give.  Did  fear,  They  showed  that 
true  religion  which  the  Bible  calls  "the 
fear  of  the  Lord."    They  saw  their  faults, 


THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAL 


[oh.  1. 1 — 15w 


perhaps  dreaded  some  new  chastisement, 
and  hastened  to  obey  the  prophet's  injunc- 
tion (Ezra  V.  1,  2). 

Yer.  13.  — Then  spake  Haggai.  God 
hastens  to  accept  their  repentance  and  to 
asBUxe  them  of  bis  protection.  The  Lord's 
messenger.  Haggai  alone  of  the  prophets 
uses  this  title  o(  bimeelt',  implying  that  he 
came  with  authority  and  bearing  a  message 
from  the  Lord  (comp.  Numb.  xx.  16,  where 
the  word  "angel"  is  by  some  applied  to 
Moses).  Malacbi's  very  name  expresses  that 
he  was  the  Lord's  messenger,  and  he  uses 
the  term  of  the  priest  (ii.  7),  and  of  John 
the  Baptist,  and  of  Messiah  himself  (iii.  1). 
In  the  Lord's  message  (1  Kings  xiii.  18).  In 
the  special  message  of  consolation  which  he 
was  commissioned  to  deliver.  The  Septua- 
gint  rendering,  iv  ayyfKots  Kupiov,  "  among 
the  angels  of  the  Lord,"led  some  to  fancy  that 
Haggai  was  an  angel  in  human  form,  which 
opinion  is  refuted  by  Jerome,  in  loc.  I  am 
with  you  (ch.  iii  4).  A  brief  message  com- 
prised in  two  words,  "  I  with  you,"  yet  full 
of  comfort,  promising  God'a  piesenoe,  pro- 
tection, aid,  and  blessing  (comp.  Gen.  xxviii. 
15;  xxxix.  2;  Josh,  t  5;  Jer.  i.  8;  Matt. 
xxviii.  20). 

Ver.  14.— The  Lord  stirred  up,  etc.  The 
Lord  excited  the  courage,  animated  the  zeal, 
of  the  chiefs  of  the  nation,  who  had  them- 
selves succumbed  to  the  prevailing  indiffer- 


ence, and  had  suffered  their  ardour  to  be 
quenched  (comp.  1  Chron.  v.  26 ;  2  Chron. 
xxi.  16;  Ezra  i.  1,  5).  They  oame  and  did 
work.  They  went  up  to  the  temple  and 
began  to  do  the  work  which  they  had  so 
long  neglected. 

Yer.  15. — In  the  four  and  twentieth  day 
of  the  sixth  month.  The  first  admonition 
had  been  made  on  the  first  day  of  this 
month ;  the  three  intervening  weeks  had 
doubtless  been  spent  in  planning  and  pre- 
paring materials,  and  obtaining  workmen 
from  the  neighbouring  villages.  The  note 
of  time  is  introduced  to  show  how  prompt 
was  their  obedience,  and  the  exact  time 
when  "they  came  and  did  work  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  14).  Some,  on 
insufficient  grounds,  consider  this  clause  tc 
be  an  interpolation  &om  ch.  ii.  10, 18,  with  a 
change  of  "ninth"  to  "sixth  month."  In  the 
Latin  Vulgate,  in  Tisohendorf's  Septnagint, 
and  in  many  editions  of  ttie  Hebrew  Bible, 
the  whole  of  this  verse  is  wrongly  annexed 
to  the  following  chapter.  St.  Jerome  ar- 
ranges it  as  in  the  Authorized  Yersion. 
It  is  possible  that,  as  St.  Cyril  takes  it,  the 
words,  in  the  ssoond  year  of  Darius  the 
king,  ought  to  begin  ch.  ii.  The  king's 
reign  has  been  already  notified  in  Ter.  1, 
and  it  seems  natural  to  a£Sx  the  date  at 
the  commencement  of  the  second  addreu. 


HOMILETICS. 

Yer.  1. — Divine  revelations.  I.  Select  their  own  times.  These  are :  1.  Often 
unexpected.  In  the  present  instance  this  was  probably  the  case.  The  band  of  exiles 
who,  availing  themselves  of  Cyrus's  permission  (Ezra  i.  3),  returned  to  Judah  and 
Jerusalem— nearly  50,000  persons  in  all  (Ezra  ii.  64,  65),  though  Pusey  estimates  the 
company  of  immigrants  at  212,000,  counting  free  men,  women,  children,  and  slaves- 
had  for  sixteen  years  at  least  not  heard  a  prophet's  voice.  The  last  that  had  fallen  on 
their  ears  had  been  Daniel's  in  Babylon  (Dan.  ix.  1),  which  had  predicted  the  going 
forth  of  a  commandment  to  build  and  restore  Jerusalem,  and  the  coming,  "  seven  weeks 
and  three  score  and  two  weeks"  thereafter,  of  Messiah  the  prince  (Dan.  ix.  25).  Now, 
in  the  second  year  of  Darius  the  king  (Ezra  iv.  24),  i.e.  about  b.o.  520,  the  interval  of 
silence  terminated,  and  the  lips  of  a  new  prophet  were  unsealed.  That  God  reserves 
in  his  own  hands  "  the  times  and  seasons  "  of  his  special  supernatural  interpositions  in 
human  history,  while  it  should  keep  meu  alive  to  every  movement  of  the  Divine 
presence  in  their  midst,  ought  to  guard  them  against  presumption  both  in  making  and 
in  interpreting  prophecy.  2.  Always  appropriate.  The  interpositions  of  Heaven  are 
nevetpost  horam.  The  clock  of  eternity  always  keeps  time.  When  the  hour  comes, 
80  does  the  man.  Man  often  speaks  at  an  inopportune  moment;  Gk>d,  never.  When 
Haggai  stood  forth  among  the  Jews  who  had  returned  from  Babylon,  they  were  in 
urgent  need  of  such  a  messenger  from  heaven  as  he  proved  himself  to  be.  Sixteen 
years  at  home  in  their  own  land,  for  a  year  and  a  half  they  had  been  disheartened 
about  the  building  of  their  temple,  and  liad  even  discontinued  work.  Some  had  even 
begun  to  lose  interest  in  the  restoration  of  the  sacred  edifice  (ver.  2).  Hen(e  they 
much  wanted  rousing  from  indolence  and  rebuke  for  unbelief,  as  well  as  comfort  in 
sadness  and  succour  in  weakness ;  and  all  this  they  received  from  the  new  monitor  from 
Jehovah  that  had  aiiseo  in  their  midst.  So  have  God's  revelations  ever  been  a» 
suitable  to  men's  necessities  as  to  time's  ui-gencies.    Notably  wa.s  this  the  case  with  hii 


OH.  1.1-16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HAGGAl.  S 

showing  of  himself  to  Moses  at  the  bush  (Exod.  iii.  2),  and  his  disclosure  of  himself  to 
mankind  in  the  Person  of  Christ  (Gal.  iv.  4).  3.  Sometimes  suggestive.  This  was  so_  in 
the  case  under  consideration.  First,  the  year  in  which  Haggai  appeared  waff  suggestive 
of  the  people's  sadness;  having  no  more  a  king  of  their  own  to  count  from,  they 
reckoned  the  date  as  that  of  the  second  year  of  Darius,  ».«.  of  Darius  Hystaspes 
{Ddrajavus  of  the  cuneiform  inscriptions),  who  reigned  from  B.C.  521  to  B.C.  486.  Next, 
the  month — the  sixth  of  their  ordinary  Jewish  year  (corresponding  with  our  August 
or  September),  and  therefore  towards  the  close  of  harvest — ought  at  least,  by  the 
cnmparatively  barren  fields  they  had  reaped,  to  have  reminded  them  of  their  chastise- 
ment (vers.  10,  11),  and  so  induced  in  them  a  spirit  of  humility.  Lastly,  the  day  of 
the  month,  the  new  moon's  day,  which  the  Law  had  directed  to  be  kept  as  a  day  of 
special  sacrifice  (Numb,  xxviii.  11),  which  their  forefathers  had  observed  as  a  popular 
festival  (Prov.  vli.  20,  mar^n  Authorized  Version),  and  marked  by  religious  gatherings 
at  the  local  sanctuaries  (Isa.  i.  13, 14 ;  2  Kings  iv.  23),  and  which  probably  they  also 
celebrated  as  a  holiday,  might  have  spoken  to  them  of  their  sin  in  preserving  the 
outward  forms  of  religion  while  neglecting  its  inward  spirit,  and  perhaps  also  of  their 
duty,  to  attend  with  true  docility  to  the  admonition  which  proceeded  from  the  new 
prophet's  lips. 

II.  Find  thgib  own  instruments.  These  also  are :  1.  Mostly  humhU.  Only  once 
did  Divine  revelation  find  an  organ  that  was  truly  exalted,  viz.  when  he  who,  as  the 
only  begotten  Son,  had  been  in  the  Father's  bosom,  made  him  known  (John  i.  18) — 
although  even  then  it  was  needful  that  that  Son  should  empty  himself  of  iiis  glory  and 
veil  his  Divinity  behind  a  gaiment  of  humanity  before  he  could  properly  aocomplisli 
his  work  (Phil.  ii.  6,  7).  But  in  all  other  instances  the  instruments  selected  by 
Jehovah  for  the  transmission  of  his  will  to  mankind  are  humble  and  lowly  in  comparison 
with  him  whose  will  they  bear  (Isa.  xl.  18),  even  when  they  are  angels ;  how  much 
more  when  men,  as  they  mostly  are  1  And  of  these  it  is  seldom  the  most  exalted  in 
rank  or  wisdom  that  he  selects,  but  most  frequently  the  lowliest — persons  in  obscure 
stations,  like  Moses  when  a  stranger  in  Midian  (Acts  vii.  29 — 31),  like  Elisha  when 
holding  the  plough  (1  Kings  six.  19),  or  like  Amos  when  amonx  the  herdsmen  of 
Tekoa  (Amos  i.  1) ;  and  persons  of  unknown  family,  like  Elijah  the  Tishbite,  or  Nahum 
the  Elkoshite,  or  Habakkuk,  of  whom  almost  nothing  is  known.  2.  Always  suitable. 
Men  frequently  err  in  choosing  instruments  to  execute  their  will;  God,  never.  He 
can  always  discern  spirits,  while  men  only  think  they  can.  Men  iudge  according  to 
appearance ;  he,  according  to  the  heart.  Haggai  was,  perhaps,  not  such  a  vehicle  as  man 
would  have  pitched  upon  to  be  the  medium  of  a  Divine  communication.  But  for  God's 
purpose  he  was  fitted  beyond  most.  Though  not  absolutely  certain,  it  is  most  probabla 
he  was  an  old  man  of  eighty  years  (Ewald,  Pusey),  who  hsid  seen  the  first  temple  in  its 
glory  (ch.  ii.  3),  and  who  could  therefore  speak  with  greater  emphasis  and  solemnity  as 
one  standing  on  the  confines  of  eternity,  who  knew  the  vanity  of  earthly  greatness, 
and  could  appreciate  the  superior  excellence  and  desirability  of  things  inward  and 
spiritual.  Besides,  his  very  name — Haggai,  or  "  Festive  " — fitted  him  to  be  the  bearer  of 
a  message  to  desponding  builders.  What  they  wanted  was  inspiriting  incitement, 
encouragement,  and  hope ;  and  of  that  there  was  a  promise  in  the  old  man's  designatioc 
— Haggai,  or  "  The  Festal  One  " — especially  if  this  only  expressed  the  habitual  disposition 
of  his  soul.  3.  Oenerally  efficient.  "  It  has  been  the  wont  of  critics,  in  whose  eyes  the 
prophets  were  but  poets,"  writes  Pusey,  "to  speak  of  the  style  of  Haggai  as  'tame'  and 
'  destitute  of  life  and  power ; ' "  but,  for  all  that,  it  was  adapted  to  the  object  sought  to 
be  accomplished.  Haggai  had  no  need  to  complain,  as  the  eloquent  Isaiah  (first  or 
second),  "  Lord,  who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord 
revealed?"  (Isa.  liii.  1);  of  him  it  is  recorded  that  his  words  awoke  an  immediate 
response  in  his  hearers'  hearts,  and  "  they  came  and  did  work  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  their  God"  (ver.  14).  Man  cannot  always  say  of  his  instruments,  however 
finely  polished,  that  they  will  never  fail ;  God  can  always  predict  of  his,  however  rude, 
that  they  wiU  certainly  succeed. 

III.  Choose  theib  own  recipients.  These  are  commonly  diverse,  as  in  the  present 
instance.  Haggai's  message  was  directed :  1.  To  Zerubbabel;  concerning  whom  may  be 
noted :  (1)  His  names.  Sheshbazzar  (Ezra  i.  8),  most  probably  Chaldean  or  Babylonian, 
wad  perhaps  signifying  "Worshipper  of  Fire"  (Gesenius);  Zerubbabel  (Ezra  ii.  1\ 


0  THE  BOOK  OF  HAQGAI.  [oh,  l  1— 1& 

obviously  Hebrew,  and  meaning  "  Bom  In  Babylon ; "  and  Tirsbatha  (Ezra  ii.  63 ;  Neh. 
vii.  65),  most  likely  Persian,  and  equivalent  to  "The  Feared."  (2)  His  descent.  Described 
in  the  text  as  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  who  was  the  son  of  Jeconiah  the  captive  (1  Chron. 
iii.  17,  Authorized  Version),  or,  if  Assir  be  taken  as  a  proper  name  (1  Chron.  iii.  17, 
Authorized  Version),  the  grandson  of  Jeconiah ;  or  again,  if  Luke's  register  be  followed 
(iii.  27),  the  son  ot  Neri ; — Zerubbabel  is  expressly  stated  by  the  chronicler  to  have  been 
a  son  of  Peflaiah,  a  brother  of  Sliealtiel  (1  Chron.  iii.  19).  Probably  as  good  a  solution 
of  the  difficulty  as  any  other  is  Keil's,  that  Jeconiah,  according  to  the  prophecy  of  Jere- 
miah (xxii.  30),  had  no  sons,  but  only  a  daughter,  who  married  Neri,  a  descendant  of 
David,  and  became  by  him  the  mother  of  Shealtiel  and  Pedaiah,  who  accordingly  were 
reckoned  sons  of  Jeconiah,  and  that  Shealtiel  having  died  without  issue,  his  brother 
Pedaiah  married  his  widow,  and  raised  up  for  him  a  son  named  Zerubbabel.  (3)  His 
office.  As  a  descendant  of  the  ro^al  house  of  Judah,  he  was  the  recognized  head  of  the 
Jewish  exiles  in  Babylon,  and  as  such  was  by  Cyrus  appointed  governor  of  the  pilgrim 
band  who  returned  to  their  native  land.  2.  To  Joshua ;  who  also  is  described  by  his 
ancestry  as  the  son  of  Josedeoh,  who  had  been  carried  away  by  the  Chaldeans  to 
Babylon  (1  Chron.  vi.  15),  when  his  father  Zeraiah  had  been  put  to  death  by  Nebuchad- 
nezzar (2  Kings  xiv.  18—21;  Jer.  Iii.  24 — 27),  and  by  his  office  as  the  high  priest  of 
the  young  community  that  had  returned  to  .Judaea  and  Jerusalem.  As  Zerubbabel  was  - 
their  civil,  so  was  Joshua  their  religious,  head ;  and  "  together  they  are  types  of  him, 
the  true  King  and  true  Priest,  Christ  Jesus,  who  by  his  resurrection  raised  again  the 
true  temple,  his  body,  after  it  had  been  destroyed  "  (Pusey).  3.  Tothepeople.  Though 
Haggai's  words  were  directed  in  the  first  instance  to  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua,  they  were 
in  the  second  instance  designed  for  the  whole  congregation;  and  that  the  whole 
congregation  received  them,  whether  directly  from  the  prophet's  own  lips  or  indirectly 
through  those  of  the  piince  and  the  priest,  is  expressly  stated  (vers.  12, 13). 

Lessons.  1.  The  possibility  of  revelation.  2.  The  human  medium  of  inspiration.^ 
3.  The  greater  privilege  of  the  Christian  Church,  in  having  as  a  revealer  of  the  Divine 
will,  not  a  human  prophet  merely,  but  the  incarnate  Son.  4.  The  higher  reBponsibility 
which  this  entails. 

Vers.  2 — 5. — The  mistakes  of  the  temple-builders ;  a  warning,  I.  Thet  failed  to 
DISCERN  THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  TIMES.  They  imagined  the  time  had  not  come  for  them 
to  build  the  Lord's  house,  whereas  it  had  fully  arrived.  1.  What  led  them  to  suppose  or 
say  so,  though  not  stated,  may  easily  be  in/erred.  (1)  They  were  disheartened  by  the 
opposition  they  encountered  (see  next  head).  (2)  The  original  grant  obtained  from 
Cyrus  (Ezra  iii.  7)  was  probably  then  exhausted.  (3)  They  had  been  interdicted  by 
a  decree  of  Artaxerxes,  or  of  pseudo-Smerdis  (Ezra  iv.  23,  24).  And  (4)  they  were 
suffering  from  bad  trade  and  worse  harvests  (ver.  6),  and  consequently  were  unable  to 
contribute  towards  the  expense  of  the  building.  2.  The  indications  that  the  time  had 
fully  come  were  so  plain  that  they  should  hardly  have  been  misread.  (1)  The  seventy 
years  during  which  the  whole  land  of  Judah  was  to  lie  desolate,  and  its  inhabitants 
should  serve  the  King  of  Babylon  (Jer.  xxv.  11, 12),  and  at  the  end  of  which  the  exiles 
should  return  to  their  own  land  (Jer.  xxix.  10),  had  manifestly  rolled  by.  (2)  The 
very  deliverer  of  whom  Isaiah  had  spoken  by  name,  Cyrus  (Isa.  xliv.  28 ;  xlv.  1),  had 
appeared,  and  opened  the  two-leaved  gates  of  Babylon  (Ezra  i.  2,  3).  (3)  The  sacred 
yessels  which  Nebuchadnezzar  had  carried  off  to  Babylon  (2  Kings  xxiv.  13),  and 
Jeremiah  (xxviii.  3)  predicted  would  again  be  brought  from  Babylon,  had  actually 
been  delivered  over  into  the  hands  of  Zerubbabel  by  Cyrus  (Ezra  i.  8).  (4)  The  bad 
harvests  and  depressed  trade  from  which  they  were  suffering  were  a  "manifest  token 
of  the  Divine  displeasure  on  account  of  their  negligence,  and  were  no  real  excuse  for 
their  illiberal  conduct,  since  they  could  obviously  find  money  enough  to  build  ceiled 
mansions  for  themselves.  (5)  The  decree  of  Artaxerxes  only  forbad  the  building  of 
thecity  (Ezra  iv.  21),  not  of  the  temple;  and  even  though  it  had  been  directed 
against  the  latter,  Artaxerxes  himself  no  longer  reigned,  having  been  driven  from 
the  throne  he  had  usurped,  and  his  place  having  been  occupied  by  Darius  Hystaspes 
so  that  the  repressive  edict,  had  they  been  anxious,  might  easily  have  been  revoked! 
This  mistake  of  the  builders  has  often  been  committed  ;  as  e.g.  by  Moses  in  Ec'ypt  who 
misread  the  signs  of  the  times,  and  thought  the  hour  had  struck  for  Israel's  deliverance. 


oa  L 1—15.]  '  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAl.  7 

when  it  had  not  (Exod.  ii.  11 — 15  ;  Acts  vil.  23) ;  by  the  Jewish  rulers  in  Christ's 
day,  who  failed  to  discern  in  the  Galilaean  Prophet  the  manifest  tokens  of  Messiah 

SMatt.  xvi.  3,  4) ;  by  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  which  knew  not  the  day  of  her  visitation 
Luke  xix.  42) ;  and  by  the  present-day  unbeliever,    who  cannot  see  that  "  now  is 
the  accepted  time,  and  now  is  the  May  of  salvation  "  (2  Cor,  vi.  2). 

II.  Thet  WEBB  TOO  BASILT  DAUNTED  BY  OPPOSITION.  1.  The  nature  and  source  of 
this  opposition  is  described  in  the  Booh  of  Ezra  (iv.).  Prevented  from  taking  part  in 
the  building  of  the  temple,  the  Samaritan  settlers  first  "  weakened  the  hands  of  the 
builders,"  next  "  hired  counsellors  against  them,"  and  ultimately  obtained  an  interdict 
commanding  them  to  cease.  It  was  certainly  annoying,  but :  2.  They  should  not  have 
been  so  easily  discouraged.  No  enterprise  of  any  moment  was  ever  carried  through 
without  encountering  difficulties  and  frequently  hostilities,  and  without  calling  for 
patient  perseverance  in  well-doing.  How  otherwise  would  Israel  have  been  brought 
ftom  Egypt  at  the  first,  or  Judah  from  Babylon  a  few  years  before?  3.  The  same 
mistake  is  committed  still  by  those  who  imagine  the  spiritual  temple  of  Jehovah,  either 
in  the  individual  soul  or  in  the  Church  as  a  whole,  can  be  built  without  difficulty, 
without  experiencing  resistance  from  enemies  within  and  without,  or  in  any  other  way 
than  by  indomitable  perseverance.  4.  "  Never  despair  "  and  "  Never  give  in  "  should 
be  the  tvnn  mottoes  of  every  one  engaged  in  temple-building  for  Ood — of  the  individual 
believer,  of  the  Christian  minister,  of  the  foreign  missionary. 

IIL  Thet  pbbfekred  the  material  and  temporal  to  the  bpibitual  and 
BELioiouB.  The  ordinary  occupations  of  life  had  more  attraction  for  them  than  the 
duties  of  religion.  To  assert  that  they  cared  nothing  for  religion  would,  perhaps,  be 
wrong,  since  what  had  brought  them  back  from  Babylon,  where  for  the  most  part 
they  had  comfortable  settlements,  was  a  true  feeling  of  piety  no  less  than  au  ardent 
spirit  of  patriotism.  Yet  were  they  not  long  back  upon  their  much-loved  ancestral 
soil  before  they  showed  they  had  brouglit  back  with  them  from  Babylon  a  passion 
stronger  than  even  their  love  for  religion,  namely,  devotion  to  the  earthly  and  material 
pursuits  of  life.  Their  zeal  in  temple-building  was  quickly  damped,  but  not  so  their 
enthusiasm  in  ploughing  and  sowing  their  fields,  in  working  for  wages,  in  erecting 
magnificent  mansions,  sumptuous  palaces  like  those  they  had  seen  and  perhaps  lived  in 
in  Babylon,  with  walls  of  polished  stone  and  roofs  of  cedar.  With  much  ease  they 
could  see  that  "  the  time  for  building  God's  house  was  not  come,"  as  they  supposed ; 
they  had  large  difficulty  in  perceiving  it  was  not  the  season  to  attend  to  their  ordinary 
avocations.  So  do  many  on  becoming  Christians  carry  over  with  them  into  their  new 
life  "passions  for  things  material  and  temporal,"  which,  while  religious  feeling  is  fresh, 
are  kept  in  abeyance,  but  which,  the  moment  this  begins  to  abate,  assert  themselves  to 
the  hindrance  of  what  is  properly  religious  work,  and  to  the  detriment  of  the  soul's 
religious  life.  This  constitutes  a  third  mistake  against  which  Christians  should  be  on 
their  guard. 

IV.  Thet  followed  theib  own  interests  bather  than  the  globt  op  God. 
One  cannot  help  thinking  that,  had  the  building  of  the  Lord's  house  been  a  matter  that 
concerned  their  own  glory,  comfort,  or  interest,  they  would  not  have  suffered  it  to  lie 
waste  as  they  did ;  but  only  the  honour  of  the  Deity  was  involved,  and  what  was  that 
to  their  material  advantage  and  temporal  felicity  ?  Was  it  not  of  greater  moment  that 
they  themselves  should  be  well  housed,  well  fed,  well  clothed,  than  that  even  God,  who 
dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands,  and  requireth  not  to  be  worshipped  as 
though  he  needed  anything,  should  be  well  lodged  ?  If  it  came  to  the  worst,  thi-y 
could  do  without  a  temple  altogether,  could  worship  in  the  open  air,  as  they  had  done 
since  coming  from  Babylon,  but  they  could  not  well  do  without  well-stocked  farms  and 
finely  ceiled  houses.  And  so  they  let  the  work,  which  had  only  God's  glory  as  its 
motive,  drop,  and  applied  themselves  to  that  which  contemplated  man's  or  their  own 
material  good.  Is  it  wrong  to  find  in  this  a  parable  for  Christians?  Is  not  the 
essence  of  Christianity  just  this— ;that  a  man,  like  Christ  whom  he  follows,  shall  seek, 
not  his  own  glory,  but  God's ;  shall  do,  not  his  own  will,  but  the  will  of  him  who  hath 
sent  him  into  the  world  ?  Yet  among  professing  Christians  are  those  who  cannot  see 
beyond  their  own  little  selves,  and  who  imagine  that  a  man's  chief  duty  upon  earth, 
evenafter  having  become  a  Chri-stian,  is  to  do  the  best  he  can  for  himself,  whereas  it  is  lo 
do  the  best  he  can  for  God.    Acting  on  the  former  principle  leads  to  spiritual  blindness, 


8  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAL  [oh.  1. 1—15. 

to  cowardice,  to  this-worldism,  all  of  which  are  deplorable  mistakes;  acting  on  the 
latter  principle  terminates  in  no  such  disastrous  results,  but  brings  with  it  to  the 
ludiTldual  bo  acting  spiritual  insight,  moral  courage,  and  heavenly-mindedness,  three 
qualities  which  ennoble  all  by  whom  they  are  possessed. 

Lessons.  1.  The  duty  of  discerning  the  signs  of  the  times.  2.  The  necessity  of 
combining  courage  with  forethought.  3.  The  propriety  of  guarding  agaiubt  the 
disturbing  influence  of  supposed  self-interest. 

Vers.  5,  7. — Considering  (m£»  ways.  I.  An  exalted  PBiviLEaE.  The  faculties  ol 
introspection  and  reflection,  which  enable  man  to  consider  his  ways,  constitute  a  loftj 
endowment,  which  places  him  incontestably  at  the  apex  of  creation.  1.  It  distinguishes 
him  from  the  lower  am,imals.  These  may  be  possessed  of  capabilities  which  enable  them 
to  perform  actions  in  some  degree  resembling  the  fruits  of  intelligence — it  may  even  be 
conceded  are,  in  some  instances  at  least,  endowed  with  faculties  of  memory,  imagination, 
and  judgment;  but  they  are  wholly  devoid  of  the  powers  of  self-introspection  and 
reflection  here  ascribed  to  man.  Of  the  noblest  of  brute  beasts  it  still  remains  to  be 
proved  that  it  ever  said  to  itself,  "  I  communed  with  mine  own  heart :  and  my  spirit 
made  diligent  search "  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  6) ;  or  "  I  thought  on  my  ways  "  (Ps.  oxix.  59). 
2.  n  sets  him  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Qod.  The  Hebrew  psalmist  conceived  the  ideal 
man  as  a  being  only  a  little  shoit  of  Divinity  (Ps.  viii.  5) ;  and  though  the  basis  on 
which  he  rested  this  conception  was  man's  manifest  dominion  over  the  creatures,  yet 
this  arose,  as  he  well  knew,  out  of  the  fact  that  man,  as  distinguished  from  the  lower 
creatures,  had  been  made  in  the  Divine  image  (Gen.  i.  26);  which  again,  in  part  at 
least,  consisted  in  his  capacity  to  consider  his  ways,  or  to  look  before  and  behind  in 
whatever  way  he  was  treading.  "Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world  "  (Acts  xv.  18) ;  "  He  declareth  the  end  from  the  beginning  " 
(Isa.  xlvi.  10) ;  and  though  the  Preacher  affirms  that  "  no  man  can  find  out  the  work 
that  God  maketh  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  "  (Eccles.  iii.  11),  yet  to  each  man  has 
been  granted  the  ability  to  consider  the  way  in  which  he  himself  goeth  (Eccles.  v.  1), 
and  in  this  high  capacity  of  pondering  the  path  of  his  feet  he  possesses  an  endowment 
that  in  him  a  finite  being  corresponds  to  the  omniscience  of  the  infiuite  God. 

n.  An  ubobnt  D0TT.    The  consideration  of  one's  ways  required  by  two  things. 

1.  Divine  comma/ndment.  In  addition  to  the  twice-repeated  exhortation  here  addressed 
to  the  builders,  the  admonition  frequently  occurs  in  Scripture  (Ps.  iv.  4 ;  Prov.  iv.  26  • 
1  Cor.  xi.  28 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  5 ;  GaL  vi.  4)  to  commune  with  one's  own  heart,  to  search 
and  try  one's  ways,  to  examine  carefully  into  one's  spiritual  condition.  And  this  to  • 
good  man  is  enough  to  constitute  an  imperative  obUgation.  "  Where  the  word  of  a 
king  is" — much  more  where  the  word  of  the  King  of  kings  is — "there  is  power," 

2.  Present  safety.  No  one  can  travel  long  securely  or  comfortably  along  the  path  of  life 
who  does  not  ponder  well  at  the  outset  from  what  point  the  course  he  is  pursuino-  starts 
who  does  not  frequently  pause  to  notice  whither  it  is  tending,  and  who  does  nof  always 
have  an  eye  upon  the  where  and  the  how  it  shall  terminate.  The  man  that  lives  purely  by 
haphazard,  that  rushes  on  blindfold  into  whatever  enterprise  he  takes  in  hand  whether 
in  business  or  religion,  is  sure  to  come  to  grief,  if  not  to  fall  into  the  ditch.  3.  Future 
responsibility.  There  might  be  less  need  for  attending  to  this  duty  if  the  issues  of  our 
ways  and  actions  always  exhausted  themselves  on  earth  and  in  time.  But  they  do  not 
"  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  and  give  an  account  of  the 
deeds  done  in  the  body,  whether  these  be  good  or  whether  they  be  bad  "  (2  Cor.  v  10) 
The  ways  of  every  man  project  themselves  into  the  unseen  beyond.  Every  man  is 
making  his  future  by  the  ways  he  is  travelling  and  the  deeds  he  is  doine  in  the 
present.  " 

'III.  A  PBOPrTABLB  EXBBOisE.  Apart  altogether  from  the  duty  of  it,  the  advantages 
to  be  denved  from  it  should  go  far  to  recommend  this  practice.  1.  Setf-knowleiie 
No  one  will  ever  attam  to  a  trustworthy  or  valuable  acquaintance  with  his  own  heart 
who  does  not  frequently  undertake  a  review  of  "  the  issues  of  life  "  (Prov  iv  23)  that 
proceed  from  It.  Yet  next  to  the  knowledge  of  God  and  Christ,  which  constitute  the 
essence  of  hfe  eternal "  ( John  xvn.  2),  the  knowledge  of  self  is  the  highest  attainment 
to  which  one  can  rise.  2.  Moral  discernment.  The  power  of  distinguishing  between 
right  and  wrong,  which  belongs  to  all  as  an  intuitive  endowment,  is  neverthelesi 


OH.  1. 1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HAGGAI.  3 

susceptible  of  improvement  or  deterioration,  according  as  it  is  exercised  or  neglected. 
It  may  be  clarified,  intensified,  quickened,  strengthened ;  or  it  may  be  dulled,  darkened', 
weakened,  deadened.  Through  diligent  personal  culture  the  soul  may  become  sensitive 
to  nicest  distinctions  of  right  and  wrong  as  an  aneroid  barometer  to  smallest  variations 
in  the  atmosphere;  or,  through  want  of  use,  it  may  become  hard  as  a  fossilized 
organism  or  as  a  petrified  log  of  wood.  3.  Spiritual  improvement.  No  one  is  likely 
to  make  progress  in  religion  without  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  his  own  ways. 
Without  this  one  may  even  not  suspect  that  his  religion  is  defective.  In  proportion 
as  ^one  knows  what  in  himself  is  dark  and  needs  illumining,  or  feeble  and  requires 
strengthening,  or  low  and  demands  upraising,  or  deficient  and  calls  for  supplementing, 
or  wrong  and  wants  correcting,  will  one  advance  in  moral  and  spiritual  attainment. 

Learn:  1.  The  dignity  of  man.  2.  The  responsibility  of  life.  3.  The  duty  of 
circumspection. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — Hard  times.  I.  A  frequent  occurrence.  Poor  harvests  and 
profitless  trade,  famine  and  idleness,  lack  of  bread  and  want  of  employment,  nothing  to 
eat  and  nothing  to  do.  The  two  commonly  go  together.  Examples  of  famines  were 
in  ancient  times  those  which  occurred  in  Canaan  (Gen.  xii.  10),  in  Egypt  (Gen.  xli.  54), 
in  Samaria  (1  Kings  xvii.  2;  2  Kings  vi.  25),  in  Jerusalem  (Jer.  lii.  6);  in  modern 
times  those  which  have  taken  place  in  India,  China,  and  other  parts  of  Asia. 

II.  A  BOEBOWPUL  BXPEKIENOK.  When  the  husbandman  has  laboured,  and,  perhaps 
through  long-continued  drought,  has  obtained  an  altogether  insufficient  return  for  his 
labours.  When  through  deficient  harvests  the  people  of  a  country  are  reduced  to  a 
state  of  semi-starvation.  When  through  this  failure  in  the  sources  of  wealth  the  wheels 
of  a  nation's  industry  are  stopped.  When  strong  men  who  would  willingly  work  can 
find  no  work  to  do.     When  wages  already  scanty  are  eaten  up  by  exorbitant  prices. 

ni.  A  PBOVIDBNTIAL  JUDGMENT.  Hard  times :  1.  Are  of  Ood's  sending.  To  say 
that  bad  harvests  and  dull  trade  are  the  results  of  natural  (physical  and  social)  laws 
does  not  show  them  to  be  disconnected  with  God.  The  Almighty  is  behind  both 
nature  and  society.  Jehovah  claimed  that  the  state  of  matters  in  Judah  after  the 
exile  was  his  doing.  2.  Have  their  occasions,  if  not  their  causes,  in  sin.  Haggai's 
ooxmtrymen  had  been  made  to  suffer  because  of  their  indifference  to  religion  and 
devotion  to  self-interest  (ver.  9).  Were  modern  nations  to  reflect  more  deeply,  they 
might  discover  connections  between  their  characters  and  their  conditions,  their  sins  and 
their  sufferings. 

IV.  A  SALUTAET  DISCIPLINE.  Intended  as  all  chastisement  is  :  1.  To  arrest  atten- 
tion. Inconsiderateness  a  principal  sin  of  men  and  nations.  2.  To  convince  of  sin.  A 
remarkable  proof  of  depravity  that  moral  perceptions  require  to  be  awakened  by 
physical  corrections.  3.  To  excite  repentance.  Though  confessions  under  the  lash  are 
not  the  same  thing  as  penitence,  yet  they  may  and  should  be,  and  often  are,  accom- 
panied by  penitence.  4.  To  promote  amendment.  Though  punishment  is  not 
exclusively  reformatory  in  its  character,  yet  it  is  mostly  (on  earth  at  least)  inflicted 
with  design  to  benefit  the  sufferer. 

Lessons.  1.  Beligion  in  individuals  and  nations  the  best  defence  against  hard  times. 
2,  Repentance  and  prayer  the  best  resort  in  bad  times. 

Vers.  12 — 15. — Ansient  temple-builders.  L  Untvbesal  activity.  "They  came 
and  did  work  " — all  of  them :  "  Zerubbabel  the  governor,  Joshua  the  high  priest,  and 
all  the  remnant  of  the  people."  There  was  not  an  idler  amongst  them.  Every  person 
was  engaged  at  something  in  connection  with  the  building.  The  spectacle  was : 
1.  The  reproduction  of  an  old  scene,  when  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai,  orders  having 
been  issued  for  the  construction  of  a  tabernacle,  "  as  many  as  were  willing-hearted 
came,  both  men  and  women,."  and  contributed  their  aid  to  the  work  (Bxod.  xxxv. 
20 — 29).  2.  The  foreshadowing  of  a  later  scene,  when  the  infant  Church  of  the  New 
Testament  was  assembled  in  the  upper  room,  and  "  thore  came  a  sound  from  heaven  as 
of  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  which  filled  all  the  house  where  they  were  sitting,"  and 
"  they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  all  began  to  speak  with  tongues  as  the 
Spirit  gave  them  utterance "  (Acts  ii.  1—4).  3.  The  picture  of  a  (possibly)  present 
scene.    What  is  wanted  is  the  carrying  over  of  this  scene  of  universal  activity  into  the 


10  THE   BOOK   OF  HAGQAI.  [oh.  I.  1—15, 

Christian  Church,  and  the  spectacle  of  every  professing  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ 
contributing  his  quota  of  work  to  the  building  of  that  spiritual  edifice  which  is  to-day 
being  erected  on  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  himself 
being  the  chief  Corner-stone,  for  the  inhabitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit  (Bph.  il. 
20 — 22).  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  as  a  man  taking  a  far  journey,  who  left  his 
house,  and  gave  authority  to  liis  servants,  and  to  every  man  his  work"  (Mark  xiii.  34). 

II.  Chberfui.  willingness.  "  They  all  camte."  Not  one  required  to  be  coerced  or 
in  any  way  dragged  forth  against  his  will.  Nobody  skulked  or  came  forward  with  a 
grudge,  but  each  was  readier  than  his  neighbour.  So  was  it  in  the  erection  of  the 
tabernacle;  so  should  it  be  in  the  building  of  the  Christian  Church.  Yet  how  to 
realize  this  ideal  in  the  latter  case  is  one  of  the  problems  of  the  day.  1.  The  back- 
wardness of  Christians  to  engage  in  specifically  Christian  work  is  a  too  evident  fact. 
It  may  arise  with  some  from  constitutional  timidity,  with  others  from  undue  deprecia- 
tion ot  their  own  ability,  with  a  few  from  inability  to  discern  a  sphere  suitable  to  their 
supposed  gifts,  but  with  most  (it  is  to  be  feared)  from  a  depressed  condition  of  religion 
in  the  soul.  The  cure  for  the  first  may  be  found  in  the  grace  of  God  (2  Cor.  xii.  9); 
for  the  second,  in  a  high  conception  of  God's  ability  (Phil.  iv.  13) ;  for  the  third,  in 
doing  the  first  thing  that  comes  to  hand  (Eocles.  ix.  10) ;  and  for  the  fourth,  in  a 
quickening  of  the  soul  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (Ps.  Ixxx.  18).  2.  The  forwardness  of 
Christians  to  engage  in  Christian  work  might  he  expected  on  many  grounds.  Gratitude 
to  God,  if  nothing  else,  should  constrain  them  (Ps.  cxvi-.  12).  Love  to  Christ  might 
impel  them  (2  Cor.  v.  14,  15).  The  nobility  of  the  work  might  attract  them ;  it  would 
be  walking  in  the  footsteps  of  Christ  (Acts.  x.  38).  The  splendour  of  the  reward  might 
induce  them  (Dan.  xii.  3 ;  Matt.  xxv.  40 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  58 ;  Rev.  ii.  10 ;  xiv.  13).  The 
clamant  need  there  is  for  such  work  might  move  them  (1  John  v.  19).  The  good  it 
would  do  might  urge  them  (Titus  iii.  8). 

III.  Akdbnt  enthusiasm.  They  came  and  did  work.  Not  merely  "  putting  in  the 
time,"  as  the  workmen's  phrase  is ;  or  simply  dragging  on  with  heartless  indifference ; 
or  hurrying  up  the  job  with  utmost  speed  and  in  careless  fashion,  anxious  to  get  it 
done,  no  matter  how ;  but  toiling  honestly  and  earnestly,  with  a  business-like  energy 
and  determination,  doing  good  work,  and  doing  it  with  a  will.  Such  had  been  the 
manner  in  which  the  tabernacle-makers  worked;  such  should  be  the  style  of  working 
in  the  Christian  Church.  1.  The  Founder  of  the  Christian  Church  was  an  enthusiastic 
Worker.  From  the  commencement  of  his  ministry  (Mark  iv.  23 ;  John  ii.  17)  to  its 
close  (Luke  ix.  51 ;  xii.  50),  Jesus  was  consumed  with  a  burning  devotion  to  his  work 
of  glorifying  God  and  blessing  men.  2.  The  apostles  and  early  preachers  of  the 
Christian  Church  were  enthusiastic  workers.  The  eleven  (Mark  xvi.  20) ;  the  twelve 
(Acts  V.  42) ;  Paul  (Phil.  iii.  13);  ApoUos  (Acts  xviii.  25);  Epaphroditus  (Phil.  ii.  27). 
3.  The  Christian  Church  has  in  almost  every  age  possessed  workers  of  a  like  spirit. 
Ministers,  like  Augustine,  Athanasius,  Chrysostom,  Cyril,  Calvin,  Knox,  Latimer, 
Baxter,  Wesley,  Chalmers ;  missionaries,  like  St.  Augustine,  St.  Columba,  St.  Aidan, 
St.  Mungo,  Brainerd,  Martyn,  Carey,  Williams,  Moffat,  Livingstone ;  private  Christians! 
like  the  late  Earl  of  Shaftesbury  and  others. 

IV.  Indomitable  pebsevebanob.  Too  soon  discouraged  on  the  first  occasion  by 
the  angry  speeches  and  malicious  threats  of  their  enemies,  on  this  occasion  the  temple- 
builders  met  their  adversaries  with  a  bold  front  (Ezra  v.  II),  and  rested  not  until  they 
brought  the  work  to  completion  (Zech.  iv.  7,  9).  Perseverance :  1.  A  characteristic  of 
all  fincere  Christian  workers.  Exemplified  in  the  history  of  Jesua,  of  Peter  and  John, 
of  Paul,  and  of  others  who  have  followed  in  their  steps.  2.  A  necessary  condition  of 
all.  true  success  in  Christian  working.  The  greater  the  work,  the  more  does  it  demand 
patient  perseverance.  Enterprises  that  can  be  carried  through  with  a  rush  and  an 
effort  are  seldom  of  moment.  3.  A  certain  guarantee  of  ultimate  success.  The  man 
who  persoven  s  wins— in  ordinary  life  sommonly,  in  religious  life  certainly. 

Conclusion.  The  Christian  worker's  encouragement.  "  I  am  with  you,  saith  the 
Lord"  (ver.  13;  cf.  Matt,  xxviii.  20).  1.  For  aid,  to  help  you  with  needed  strength 
in  your  labours  (Ps.  cxxvii.  1 ;  Isa.  xii.  10;  Zech.  xii.  1),    2.  For  protection,  to  defend 

you  against  the  machinations  of  your  adversaries  (Ezra  v.  5 ;  Ps.  xci  1 7  •  Prov  ii  7  • 

Zech.  ii.  5 ;  1  Pet.  iii    13;  Eev.  iii.  10).     3.  For  approbation,  to  accept  'your  servici 
when  It  IS  finished  (ch.  u.  9). 


OH.  1. 1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAl.  11 


HOMILTES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — The  introduction.  The  Bible  student,  with  a  view  to  the  clear  understand- 
ing of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  should  fix  in  his  mind  the  order  of  the  prophetical 
writings.  These  books  of  prophecy  may  appropriately  be  arranged  under  three  heads. 
1.  Thotie  which  stand  related  to  the  Assyrian  period,  including  the  books  of  Jonah, 
Joel,  Amoti,  Hosea,  Laiah,  Micah,  and  Nahum.  2.  Those  connected  with  the  Baby- 
lonian period,  including  Habakkuk,  Zephaniah,  Jeremiah,  Daniel,  Ezekiel,  and 
Obadiah.  3.  Those  associated  with  the  return  from  the  exile :  Haggai,  Zechariah, 
Malachi.     The  introduction  of  this  brief  prophecy  by  Haggai  suggests  to  us — 

I.'  The  changes  marked  by  the  revolving  wheel  of  time.  We  are  able, 
through  this  opening  verse,  to  fix  the  exact  date  of  this  prophecy.  It  was  "  in  the 
second  year  of  Darius  the  king  "  that  Haggai  fulfilled  this  special  mission,  i.e.  b.o.  521. 
Hence  upwards  of  a  century  had  passed  away  since  Zephaniah  had  declared  so  faithfully 
the  terrible  Divine  judgments  which  shoidd  overtake  the  nation  on  account  of  its 
guilt.  His  words  had  proved  strictly  true,  and  had  been  very  liierally  and  completely 
fulfilled.  The  land  had  been  rendered  utterly  desolate;  its  cities  had  been  entirely 
destroyed ;  its  temple  reduced  to  a  heap  of  ruins ;  and  its  people  carried  away  into  exile. 
No  King  of  Judah  was  referred  to  by  Haggai  in  commencing  his  book,  for  the  simple 
reason  that  the  throne  had  fallen,  and  he  had  to  recognize  the  authority  of  a  Persian 
sovereign,  and  to  speak  of  his  favoured  land  as  a  province  of  a  foreign  power  (ver.  1). 
The  dispersion,  however,  had  in  a  measure  been  followed  by  the  regathering.  Zepha- 
niah had  prophesied  respecting  the  return  of  "  a  remnant,"  and  his  prophecy  had,  in  a 
sense,  now  been  fiilfilled,  for  Cyrus  permitted  the  Jews  to  colonize  their  own  land,  and 
a  number  had  availed  themselves  of  this  permission,  and  had  now  spent  some  years  in 
the  land  given  to  their  fathers,  seeking  to  repair  the  waste  and  desolation  which  the 
march  of  events  and  the  lapse  of  time  had  wrought. 

II.  The  will  of  God  as  oommdkioatbd  through  human  instbtimentalitt.  The 
returned  exiles  commenced  well.  Their  first  concern  had  reference  to  the  rebuilding 
of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  with  all  possible  speed  they  laid  the  foundation  of  the 
second  temple.  They  were,  however,  weak  and  poor;  they  laboured  amidst  untold 
difficulties  and  discouragements,  and  it  is  not  surprising  that,  their  hearts  becoming 
downcast  and  depressed,  their  ardour  declined  and  their  zeal  languished.  They  needed 
stimulus ;  they  required  some  message  from  the  Lord  their  God  declarative  of  his  will 
and  purpose ;  and  this  need  was  supplied,  for  they  heard  "  a  "oice  from  heaven " 
speaking  unto  them  through  Haggai  and  Zechariah  (Hag.  i.  1,  2 ;  Zech.  i.  1).  In 
every  age  God  has  communicated  his  will  and  intention  through  the  instrumentality 
of  man.  He  has  made  holy  men,  full  of  human  sympathies,  the  me<iium  of  communi- 
cating his  purposes.  His  ageuts  in  this  instance,  as  ever,  were  admirably  chosen. 
Haggai  was  advanced  in  life ;  he  had  probably  seen  the  former  temple ;  he  was  a  link 
connecting  the  old  with  the  new,  and  brought  to  bear  upon  the  difficulties  of  the  times 
a  ripened  and  matured  experience;  whilst  Zechariah  was  young,  and  with  all  the 
enthusiasm  and  warmth  of  youth.  They  worked  together  in  perfect  harmony  and  lor 
the  common  good,  their  prophecies  being  at  times  admirably  interwoven.  There  are 
two  elements  in  the  Bible — the  Divine  and  the  human.  God  speaks  to  us  in  every 
page,  and  he  does  so  all  the  more  emphatically,  in  that  he  addresses  us  through  men 
who  possessed  throbbing  hearts  and  who  passed  through  experiences  like  our  own. 

III.  The  raising  up  in  the  order  of  providence  of  efficient  leaders  to 
DIRECT  great  MOVEMENTS.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  by  Haggai  the  prophet 
unto  Zeruhhahel  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  Oovernor  of  Judah,  and  to  Joshua  the  son  of 
Joaedech,  the  high  priest "  (ver.  1).  Zeruhhahel,  of  ro_\  al  descent  from  David,  and 
Joshua,  who  was  in  the  priestly  line,  had  secured  the  confidence  and  esteem  of  the 
Jewish  community  in  the  land  of  captivity;  and  the  former  had  won  the  regard  of 
Gyrus,  the  Persian  monarch;  so  that  when  the  time  for  the  return  came,  leaders, 
esteemed  alike  by  the  Jews  and  their  foreign  rulers,  were  prepared  to  guide  the  move- 
ment and  to  carry  it  through  successfully.  God's  work  shall  never  fail  through  lack 
of  suitable  agents  to  do  his  bidding,  but  he  will  raise  up  a  bright  succession  of  leaU 
heartud  men  to  carry  on  his  cause,  until  the  ruin  and  desolation  wrought  by  sin  hai 


12 


THE   BOOK  OP   HAGGAl.  [cii-  i-  ^—^^ 


be  en  completely  repaired,  and  the  top-gtone  of  the  temple  of  redeemed  humanity  be 
"  brought  forth  "  amidst  rapturous  praise. — S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  2.— Procrastination.  "  This  people  say,  The  time  is  not  come,  the  time  that 
the  Lord's  house  should  be  built."  There  are  several  ways  of  accounting  for  the  delay 
\ehich  occurred  in  the  work  of  re-erecting  the  temple  in  Jerusalem.  1.  In  part  it 
arose  from  the  returned  exiles  being  preoccupied  in  seeking  to  secure  to  themselvei 
material  prosperity.  2.  Then  thev  were  daunted  by  the  opposition  they  had  to 
encounter  as  they  engaged  in  this  work.  The  powerful  neighbouring  tribes,  being  alike 
antagonistic  to  the  restoration  of  Jerusalem  as  the  centre  of  the  pure  and  unadulterated 
worship  of  God,  combined  to  place  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  repairers  of  the  breaches. 
3.  Further,  they  had  grown  somewhat  accustomed  to  being  without  the  structure. 
Comparatively  few  of  them  had  seen  "  the  first  house."  4.  It  is  to  be  feared  also  that 
they  had  lost,  through  the  changes  they  had  experienced,  that  strong  sense  of  the  need 
of  the  Divine  abiding  presence  in  their  midst.  Influenced  by  such  considerations  a* 
these,  and  forgetful  that  "  good  is  best  when  soonest  wrought,"  they  kept  postponing 
carrying  out  the  great  undertaking  to  which  they  liad  pledged  themselves,  and  excused 
themselves  by  saying,  "  The  time  is  not  come,"  etc.  (ver.  2).  This  habit  of  delay  is  far 
too  general,  and  is  not  limited  to  any  age  or  race.  It  prevails  widely  to-day  as  in  all 
jiast  times;  and  in  no  respect  more  so  than  in  matters  affecting  man's  relation  to  God. 
Time  was  when  man  was  wholly  devoted  to  his  Maker's  praise.  God  formed  him  in 
his  own  image,  holy,  spotless,  pure ;  but  he  mournfully  fell.  He  who  had  been  the 
temple  of  God  became  a  moral  waste.  "Ichabod"  became  inscribed  upon  the  once 
consecrated  spiritual  man.  Every  power  of  the  soul  became  corrupt,  every  propensity 
became  drawn  to  that  which  is  evil.  "  The  gold  became  dim,  and  the  most  fine  gold 
changed."  And  the  voice  of  God  calls  us  to  the  glorious  work  of  rebuildLng  this 
temple.  He  has  presented  to  us,  in  the  perfect  life  of  his  own  Son,  the  pattern  after 
which  we  should  seek  to  raise  in  ourselves  the  superstructure  of  a  holy  life,  and  offer* 
us  his  gracious  aid  so  that  we  may  build  into  our  character  the  noble  materials  of  truth 
and  virtue,  wisdom  and  love.  And  it  is  just  at  this  point  that  the  temptation  to  delay 
meets  men.  1.  They  are  not  insensible  to  the  claims  of  God,  nor  are  they  altogether 
indifferent  about  attending  to  these,  but  they  say,  "The  time  is  not  come,"  etc. 
(ver.  3).  2.  'They  are  immersed  in  other  matters  at  present:  (1)  the  cares  of  the 
world ;  (2)  the  pursuit  of  riches ;  (3)  the  pleasures  of  life,  absorb  them ;  they  are  pre- 
occupied just  now ;  they  say,  "  The  time  is  not  come  "  (ver.  3).  3.  They  reason  that 
there  is  the  whole  future  yet  before  them,  and  that  ample  opportunity  will  be  g^ven 
them  in  due  course.  So  they  go  on  robbing  themselves  of  "aspirations  high  and 
deathless  hopes  sublime." 

"  Procrastination  ia  the  thief  of  time ; 
Year  after  year  it  steals,  till  all  are  fied, 
And  to  the  mercies  of  a  moment  leaves 
The  vast  concerns  of  an  eternal  scene." 

B.D.H. 

Vers.  3 — 11. — The  stirring  appeal.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that,  for  purposes  ol 
revelation,  there  was  any  suspension  of  the  powers  of  the  men  who  were  honoured  of 
€od  in  being  the  medium  of  communicating  a  knowledge  of  his  will ;  rather  there  was 
the  retention  of  their  own  individual  peculiarities  and  natural  gifts,  the  Divine  Spirit 
operating  through  these,  and  turning  them  to  the  most  profitable  account.  One  beauty 
of  the  Bible  lies  in  the  fact  that,  whilst  upon  the  writings  of  each  of  its  contributors  there 
is  unmistakably  the  impress  of  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  Gt)d,  there  is  likewise 
throughout  the  whole  clear  indications  of  the  preservation  of  those  natural  endowments 
which  the  respective  writers  possessed,  and  hence  the  remarkable  rariety  in  style  and 
form  of  presentation  meeting  us  in  the  Holy  Word,  and  which  constitutes  one  great 
charm  of  the  volume.  Viewing  this  particular  book  of  Scripture  from  this  human 
standpoint,  biblical  writers  have  described  it  as  being  inferior  in  respect  of  literary 
merit  as  compared  with  other  prophetical  writings ;  and  it  must  be  granted  that  we  find 
lacking  here  "the  poetical  swing"  and  "the  tinished  beauty"  characteristic  of  "the 
•f.-ulier  prophritical  diction."   The  circumstances,  however,  under  which  he  gave  utteranc* 


OH.  1. 1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HAOQAI.  1» 

to  bis  message  will  account  for  this.  It  did  not  devolve  upon  him  to  any  extent,  as  it 
had  done  upon  his  predecessors,  to  make  prophetic  announcements  concerning  the 
future  age ;  his  simple  mission  was  to  stimulate  and  stir  a  lethargic  people  to  renewed 
action,  to  reprove  them  for  their  neglect  of  solemn  duty,  and  to  impel  them  to  fulfil 
their  trust.  And  whatever  there  may  be  lacking  here  of  poetic  genius,  the  picture 
presented  to  us  of  this  noble-hearted  man  standing  "  in  grey-haired  might "  amidst  the 
ruins  of  Jerusalem,  and,  strong  in  conviction  that  the  favour  and  blessing  of  Jehovah 
was  the  great  essential  in  order  to  the  happiness  of  his  people,  urging  tliem  ta 
acknowledge  him  in  all  their  ways,  and  without  further  delay  to  rear  his  sanctuary, 
is  one  truly  beautiful,  and  which  we  could  have  ill  spared  from  these  holy  records. 
Consider  his  stirring  appeal. 

I.  His  summons  to  heflbction.  "  Consider  your  ways  "  (vers.  5,  7) ;  i.e.  "  Set  your 
heart  upon  your  ways  " — your  conduct,  actions,  designs,  purijoses.  Thoughtlessness  is 
the  source  of  so  much  evil.  Men  do  not  always  intend  to  do  wrong  or  to  fail  in  respect 
of  duty,  but  they  do  not  "  give  heed."  They  allow  their  minds  to  wander  into  other 
courses,  and  to  be  preoccupied  with  other  matters. 

"  Evil  is  wrought  by  want  of  thought. 
As  well  as  want  of  heart." 

It  is  in  view  of  men's  highest  interests,  then,  that  God  by  his  providential  dealings,  or 
the  ministry  of  his  servants,  or  the  inward  voice  of  conscience,  says  to  them  at  times, 
"Consider  your  ways."  We  should  consider:  1.  Whether  our  ways  are  true  and 
right.  2.  How  they  stand  affected  to  the  claims  which  God  has  upon  us.  3.  The 
motives  by  which  we  are  being  influenced.  4.  The  results  to  which  our  actions  are 
tending,  whether  the  sowing  is  such  as  will  yield  a  harvest  of  good.  The  momentous 
importance  of  the  admonition  is  seen  in  its  repetition  here.  Man  is  wondrously  free. 
He  can  choose  good  or  evil.  This  freedom  increases  his  responsibility,  and  the  sense 
of  this  should  lead  to  frequent  self-examination.  "Let  each  man  prove  his  own 
work"(Gal.  vi.  4). 

II.  The  weighty  considbkations  he  okobd  upon  their  arrested  attention. 
Their  great  excuse  for  the  unwarrantable  delay  which  had  taken  place  in  the  work  of 
rebuilding  the  temple  was  the  hardness  of  the  times ;  and  in  his  stimulating  address 
Haggai  ki'pt  this  excuse  before  his  mind,  and  completely  exposed  to  them  its  hollow- 
ness,  and  swept  it  away  by  setting  before  them  two  important  facts.  1.  He  brought 
home  to  them  a  sense  of  their  own  inconsistency.  Hard  though  the  times  were,  the 
fact  remained  that  in  these  hard  times  they  had  built  for  themselves  durable  dwellings, 
and  had  enriched  these  with  costly  adornments ;  and  surely  if  they  could  do  all  this 
for  themselves,  they  might  have  done  something  by  way  of  proceeding  with  the 
erection  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  (ver.  4).  Clearly  they  had  lacked  not  so  much  the 
ability  as  the  disposition  to  do  their  duty.  2.  Admitting  the  severity  of  the  times, 
Haggai  pointed  out  that  the  way  in  which  to  have  improved  these  would  have  been  by 
their  discharging  more  faithfully  their  duty  to  their  God.  In  vivid  language  he 
described  the  depressed  state  of  things  then  prevailing  (ver.  6),  but  his  contention  was 
that  God  had  visited  them  with  such  adverse  experiences  in  retribution.  They  had 
forgotten  his  claims,  and  had  selfishly  cared  only  for  their  own  interests;  and  he, 
knowing  their  hearts  and  observing  their  ways,  htid  withheld  from  them  the  dews  of 
heaven,  and  had  caused  drought  to  prevail,  that  by  failure  and  loss  they  might  be  led 
to  reflection  and  to  a  truer  and  more  devoted  life  (vers.  9 — 11).  When  the  times  are 
hard — trade  slack  and  commercial  depression  prevailing — men  too  often  begin  retrench- 
ment by  withholding  from  God  his  due,  and  long  before  they  sacrifice  a  single  luxury 
of  life  will  they  plead  inability  to  sustain  his  cause.  Wiser  far  would  it  be  for  them 
to  give  full  recognition  to  him  and  to  his  claims,  and,  whilst  thus  honouring  him,  to 
look  to  him  for  his  blessing  and  the  renewal  of  the  temporal  blessings  of  his  providence. 

III.  The  prompt  action,  in  view  or  these  thoughts,  upon  which  he  so 
stbonglt  insisted.  "  Go  up  to  the  mountain,"  etc.  (ver.  8).  This  stirring  appeal  of 
the  prophet  was  made  on  "the  sixth  month,  in  the  first  day  of  the  month"  (ver.  1), 
».«.  the  new  moon's  day.  That  day  was  a  special  day  amongst  the  people.  A  festal 
iaoiifice  was  offered  (Numb,  xxviii.  11 — 15),  and  a  solemn  assembly  of  the  people  at 
the  sanctuary  took  place  (Isa.  i.  13 ;  2  Kings  iv.  23).    On  thii  occasion,  therefore,  wb 


14  THE  BOOK  OP  HAGaAI.  [oh.  i.  1—15 

may  suppose  the  people  as  gathered  together  oa  the  site  of  the  temple,  the  bare 
foundations  of  which  silently  ttstified  against  their  inertness,  and  the  prophet  appearing 
amongst  them,  addressing  words  of  stein  reproof  to  them,  and  then  bidding  them 
without  longer  delay  go  to  the  mountains  and  fetch  the  cedars,  and  build  forthwith  the 
house  for  God.  Such  he  declared  to  be  the  will  of  God,  obedience  to  which,  on  their 
part,  would  yield  pleasure  to  the  Most  High,  and  bring  glory  to  his  Name,  and  would 
result  in  the  promotion  of  their  own  temporal  and  spiritual  well-being  (ver.  8). — 
S.  U.  U. 

Ver.  4. — The  house  of  the  Lord  lying  waste.  The  temple  was  designed  to  be  the 
centre  of  hallowed  influence  to  the  Jewish  nation.  It  was  the  recognized  dwelling- 
place  of  God,  the  shrine  where,  in  bright  symbol,  his  glory  was  specially  revealed.  The 
pious  Jew  rejoiced  to  repair  to  it,  and  wherever  his  lot  might  be  cast  he  looked  towards 
it  with  ardent  and  longing  desire.  The  desecration  of  it  by  the  introduction  of  idolatrous 
practices  into  its  courts  had  materially  contributed  to  the  nation's  collapse.  It  was  of 
the  utmost  importance,  therefore,  that  the  work  of  its  restoration  should  be  pressed 
forward  with  all  zest,  now  that  the  captives  had  been  permitted  to  return,  and  at  first 
it  seemed  as  though  this  course  would  have  been  pursued,  but  unhappily  they  soon 
allowed  their  zeal  to  flag,  and  year  after  year  passed  by  and  nothing  was  done.  The 
house  of  the  Lord  lay  "  waste."  The  Divine  Teacher,  when  he  came  to  usher  in  a  new 
dispensation,  declared  that  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  is'to  be  worshipped  "in  spirit  and  in 
truth  "  (John  iv.  23,  24).  He  taught  that  place  has  but  little  to  do  with  worship,  and 
that  there  is  no  spot  we  may  not  consecrate  by  our  praises  and  prayers,  and  render  to  us 
"  hallowed  ground."  Still,  he  constantly  resorted  to  the  temple,  and  we  read  of  hia 
apostles  how  that  they  went  up  to  the'  temple  "  at  the  hour  of  prayer  "  (Acts  iiL  1). 
The  erection  and  maintenance  of  Christian  sanctuaries  is  most  thoroughly  in  harmony 
with  his  will,  and  is  calculated  to  promote  the  truest  interests  of  the  race.  Close  all 
such  sanctuaries,  and  (1)  good  men  would  be  left  to  sigh  for  the  holy  fellowship  they 
had  lost ;  (2)  spiritual  darkness  would  steal  over  the  land ;  (3)  the  streams  of  true 
benevolence  would  rapidly  diminish ;  (4)  men  in  general,  losing  sight  of  the  common 
relationship  they  sustain  to  the  Eternal,  would  also  overlook  the  interest  they  ought 
to  feel  in  each  other's  weal ;  (5)  iniquity  would  pass  unreproved,  and  vice  unchecked. 
As  lovers  of  God,  our  country,  and  our  fellow-men,  we  do  well  to  sustain  Christian 
sanctuaries,  and  not  to  allow  them  to  "  lie  waste."  Notice,  "  the  house  of  the  Lord  " 
may  "  lie  waste  " — 

I.  In  the  sense  of  the  material  btruoture  beino  neglected.  There  should  be 
correspondence  in  respect  of  beauty  and  adornment,  comfort  and  cleanliness,  between 
the  houses  in  which  we  live  and  the  sanctuary  in  which  we  meet  for  worship,  and 
where  this  is  lacking,  the  want  indicates  a  wrong  state  of  mind  and  heart. 

II.  In  the  sense  op  its  peouniabt  bbsourcbs  being  overlooked,  and  there 

BEING  THUS  STBAITNESS  IN  RESPECT  TO  MEETING  THE   EXPENSES  NECESSARILT  INCURRED 

IN  ITS  MAINTENANCE.  Giving  should  be  regarded  as  an  act  of  worship.  "  Bring  an 
offering,  and  come  into  his  courts"  (Ps.  xcvi.  8).  Contributions  for  the  maintenance  of 
the  worship  of  God  ought  not  to  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  charitable  gifts,  but  as  the 
discharge  of  bounden  obligation. 

HI.  In  the  sense  of  its  beats  being  dnocoupied.  There  is  far  too  much  of 
"  waste  "  in  this  respect.  The  growing  habit  of  attending  only  one  of  the  services  on 
the  sabbath,  and  none  during  the  week-days,  needs  to  be  checked.  Personal  influence 
should  be  brought  more  to  bear  upon  the  inhabitants  of  a  locality  with  a  view  to 
securing  their  presence.     "  Come,  let  us  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  cxxii.  1). 

IV.  In  the  sense  of  the  exercises  conducted  therein  being  MARKED  BY  bald- 
ness AND  inefficiency.  The  services  should  be  marked  by  culture,  variety,  heart ; 
the  worshippers  should  throw  their  whole  souls  into  all  its  engagements,  and  render 
each  part  of  the  service  "  heartily  "  and  as  "  unto  the  Lord." 

V.  In  the  sense  of  paucity  of  spiritual  results.  With  a  view  to  the  prevention 
of  this,  let.us  "  pray  for  Jerusalem,"  that  its  services  may  yield  comfort  to  the  mourning 
and  guidance  to  the  perplexed,  and  that  through  these  the  cold  in  heart  may  regain  the 
fervour  of  their  "  first  love,"  and  "  the  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  "  be  quickened  to 
a  new  and  heavenly  life.    "  Save  now,  0  Lord ;  0  Lord,  we  beseech  thee  send  ug  now 


OH.  I.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAL  16. 

proiperity "  (Ps.  oxviii.  25) ;  "  Repair  the  waste  places  of  Zion "  (Isa.  Ivlii.  12) ; 
"  Biiild  thou  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  "  (Ps.  li.  18).— S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  12 — 15. — The  hearty  response.  The  human  spirit  is  so  baokwarl  la  respect  to 
the  performance  of  the  duties  and  the  fulftlmenfc  of  the  obligatioaa  it  is  under  in  rela- 
tion to  the  higher  life,  that  it  requires  stimulus,  and  acts  of  renewed  dedication  to  the 
service  of  God  cannot  fail  to  be  spiritually  helpful.  There  are  moments  in  life  when 
wo  become  specially  impressed  as  God's  servants  with  a  sense  of  his  claims  to  our  most 
devoted  service,  and  when  holy  emotions  rise  within  us,  moving  us  to  a  more  uure- 
served  consecration  of  ourselves  to  his  service.  And  we  do  well  to  make  these 
impressions  permanent  by  placing  upon  them  the  stamp  of  holy  resolution.  It  is 
wonderful  how  soon,  if  we  do  not  take  this  course,  these  impressions  and  emotions 
vanish.  We  should  therefore  foster  all  holy  impulses,  and  take  advantage  at  once 
of  all  emotions  and  aspirations  which  would  constrain  us  to  render  to  the  Lord  our 
God  a  truer  service  than  we  have  rendered  in  the  past.  Such  impressions  are  buds 
we  sh(puld  not  nip,  sparks  of  heavenly  Are  we  should  not  extinguish,  the  breathings 
of  God's  own  Spirit,  from  the  influence  of  which  it  is  at  our  peril  that  we  remove 
ourselves.  The  interest  in  these  closing  verses  (12 — 15)  lies  in  that  they  present 
to  us  a  bright  example  of  this  wise  course  being  pursued.  The  earnest  address  of 
the  aged  seer  touched  the  hearts  of  his  hearers ;  they  became  painfully  conscious  of 
past  omission  and  shortcoming  and  neglect  of  duty,  and  were  led  to  consecrate  them- 
selves anew  to  the  service  of  him  who  had  brought  them  up  out  of  captivity  and  to 
their  own  land. 

I.  The  spirit  that  was  chebished.  1.  It  was  the  spirit  of  obedience. .  "  They 
obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  their  God,  and  the  words  of  Haggai  the  prophet "  (ver.  12). 

2.  It  was  the  spirit  of  reverential  fear.  "  And  the  people  did  fear  before  the  Lord " 
(ver.  12).     "  Whom  God  would  make  strong  for  his  service  he  first  subdues  to  his  fear.'' 

3.  This  obedient  and  devout  spirit  was  cherished  by  all.  Zerubbabel  the  governor, 
Joshua  the  high  priest,  and  all  the  remnant  of  the  people  alike  made  this  full  surrender 
of  themselves  to  the  service  of  their  God  (ver.  14). 

II.  The  effects  that  followed.  1.  The  Divine  favour  was  experienced. 
Haggai  was  again  commissioned  to  speak  to  them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  to 
«ay  to  them  for  God,  as  his  messenger,  "  I  am  with  you,  saith  the  Lord  "  (ver.  13). 
The  abiding  sense  of  God's  presence  with  them  had  made  the  hetoes  of  their  nation 
the  men  they  were.  Moses  could  face  the  whole  Israelitish  tribes  when  they  were 
murmuring  against  him  and  against  Aaron ;  David  could  confront  the  mail-clad 
Goliath ;  Daniel  could  be  steadfast  in  the  performance  of  his  religious  duties  despite 
the  lions ;  Ezekiel  could  utter  burning  denunciations  against  ungodly  nations ; — because 
they  realized  in  their  inmost  hearts  the  consciousness  of  the  presence  and  power  of 
God.  And  now  this  same  presence  was  pledged  to  them,  and  in  the  Divine  might 
they  would  be  able  to  overcome  every  obstacle.  The  promptness  with  which  this 
assurance  was  given  is  instructive.  "  God  is  waiting  to  be  gracious,  and  will  meet  the 
returning  wanderer  even  before  his  hand  has  begun  the  work  of  service."  2.  The 
spiritual  life  tuas  quickened.  "  The  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Zerubbabel,"  etc. 
(ver.  14).  He  gave  new  life  to  them  all,  so  that  they  were  ready  with  zeal  and  alacrity 
and  with  holy  oom'age  to  do  his  bidding.  3.  The  good  work  was  advanced.  "  And 
they  came  and  did  work  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  their  God  "  (ver.  14). — 
S.D.H. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Duty  revealed.  "In  the  second  year  of  Darius  the  king,  in  the  sixth 
month,  in  the  first  day  of  the  month,  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Hagg;ai  the 
prophet  unto  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  ShealtieJ,  Governor  of  Judah,  and  to  Joshua  the 
son  of  Josedech,  the  high  priest,  saying.  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  saying. 
This  people  say,  The  time  is  not  come,  the  time  that  the  Lord's  house  should  be  built." 
Haggai  is  the  first  of  the  three  prophets  who  lived  and  taught  after  the  restoration  of 
the  Jews  from  the  Babylonian  captivity.  It  is  generally  supposed  that  he  returned  with 
the  Hebrew  exiles  under  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua  the  high  priest,  in  the  year  b.o.  536. 
He  prophesied  in  the  reign  of  Darius  Hystaspes,  who  ascended  the  Persian  throne 
B.C.  521.    He  and  Zecbariah  were  employed  by  Jehovah  to  excite  and  encourage  the 


16  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAl.  [oh.  i.  1—15 

Jews  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple.  This  book  consists  of  four  messages,  which  were 
delivered  in  three  months  of  the  year  b.o.  520,  and  all  refer  to  the  work  of  temple 
restoration.  His  style,  being  somewhat  interrogatory,  has  much  vigour  and  vehe- 
mence. The  grand  subject  of  this  whole  chapter  is  duty — duty  revealed,  duty 
postponed,  duty  vindicated.  These  two  verses  direct  us  to  the  revelation  of  duty. 
Here  we  bave :  1.  The  time  of  its  revelation.  Every  duty  has  its  time,  every  true 
work  has  its  hour.  Woe  to  us  if  that  hour  is  neglected !  2.  The  organ  of  its  revela- 
tion. "  Game  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Haggai."  Grod  speaks  to  humanity  through 
individual  men  whom  in  sovereignty  he  appoints.  In  all  ages  there  are  certain  great 
men  through  whom  God  speaks  to  the  world.  They  are  his  messengers.  3.  The 
order  of  its  revelation.  Haggai  had  to  deliver  the  message  to  men  neare^t  to  him, 
with  whom  he  was  most  identified,  and  the  men,  too,  who  had  the  most  power  in 
influencing  others.  To  the  greatest  man  in  the  state,  Zerubbabel ;  to  the  greatest 
man  in  the  Church,  Joshua.     I  make  two  remarks  as  suggested  by  this  subject. 

I.  DtTTY  IS  THE  BURDEN  OP  DiviNE  REVELATION.  The  great  purpose  of  Haggai'g 
mission  was,  in  the  name  of  God,  to  urge  his  countrymen  to  the  fulfilment  of  a  work 
which  was  morally  incumbent  on  them,  viz.  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple.  It  was  the 
purpose  of  God  that  the  temple  should  be  rebuilt,  and  he  required  the  Jews  to  do  that 
work.  He  could  have  restored  the  structure  by  a  miracle  or  by  the  hands  of  others ;  but 
he  imposed  the  building  of  it  on  the  Jewish  people  for  reasons  best  known  to  himself. 
What  was  the  burden  of  Haggai's  mission  is  in  truth  the  burden  of  the  whole  Divine 
revelation — duty.  It  contains,  it  is  true,  histories  of  facts,  effusions  of  poetry, 
discussions  of  doctrine ;  but  the  grand  all-pervading  substance  of  the  whole  is  duty ; 
its  grand  voice  teaches,  not  merely  to  believe  and  feel,  but  to  do ;  it  regards  faith  and 
feeling  as  worthless  unless  taken  up  and  embodied  in  the  right  act.  It  presents  the 
rule  of  duty,  it  supplies  the  helps  to  duty,  it  urges  the  motives  to  duty.  This  fact 
shows  two  things.  1.  That  the  Bible  studies  the  real  well-being  of  man.  According 
to  our  constitution,  our  strength,  dignity,  and  blessedness  consist,  not  merely  in  our 
ideas  and  emotions,  but  in  our  settled  character.  But  what  is  character  ?  Kot  an 
assemblage  of  beliefs  and  emotions,  but  an  assemblage  of  acts  and  habits.  2.  That 
unpractised  religion  is  spurious.  There  is  the  religion  of  creed,  of  sentimentality,  of 
sacerdotalism,  of  routine.  These  are  all  spurious ;  it  is  the  doer  of  the  Word  that  is 
blessed ;  it  is  the  doer  of  the  Divine  will  that  God  approves.  "  Every  one  that 
heareth  these  sayings  of  mine,  and  doeth  them  not,"  etc.  (Matt.  vii.  26). 

II.  Duty  is  ikobEased  by  social  elevation.  This  is  implied  in  the  circum- 
stance that  Haggai  went  directly  with  the  message  from  God  to  the  most  influential 
men  in  the  state,  to  "  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  Governor  of  Judah,  and  to 
Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech,  the  high  priest."  The  former  was  one  of  the  head  men  in 
the  state,  the  commander-in-chief  at  the  head  of  the  Jews  in  their  return  from  their 
captivity  in  Babylon ;  the  latter  was  the  head  man  in  the  Ghurch,  he  was  the  high 
priest.  It  was  the  duty  of  all  the  Jews  to  set  to  the  work  ;  but  the  obligation  of  these 
men,  on  account  of  their  high  position,  had  an  increased  force.  These  men  had  greater 
opportimities  of  knowing  the  Divine  will,  and  greater  facilities  for  carrying  it  out. 
The  influence  of  men  in  high  position  is  a  great  talent  that  God  requires  to  be  used. 
This  fact  serves  two  purposes.  1.  To  supply  a  warning  to  men  in  high  places.  The 
man  who  is  in  a  high  position,  and  disregards  his  great  responsibilities,  is  more  an 
object  of  pity  than  envy.  "  Unto  whom  much  is  given,  of  him  much  will  be  required." 
Elevated  positions  in  life  invest  men  with  an  immense  social  power — power  which  God 
intended  to  bless,  but  which  is  often  used  to  curse  men.  2.  A  lesson  to  ministers.  Let 
the  ambassadors  of  Heaven  carry  their  messages  first,  if  possible,  to  men  in  authority. 
Do  not  be  afraid ;  none  need  your  message  more ;  none,  if  they  receive  it  in  faith, 
can  lender  you  better  assistance  in  the  great  work  of  spiritual  reformation.  It  is 
common  to  lecture  the  poor  on  duty.  How  seldom  the  Divine  voice  of  duty  is  made  to 
ring  into  the  hearts  of  men  in  authority  and  power  I — D.  T. 


Vers.  3,  4. — Duty  adjourned.    "  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Haggai  the 
irophet,  saying.  Is  it  time  for  you,  0  ye,  to  dwell  in  your  ceiled  houses,  and  this  house 
ie  waste?"     The  seventy  years  of  the  Babylonian  captivity  had  passed  away.     The 
Babylonian  empire  had  fallen ;  and  Cyrus,  the  founder  of  the  Persian  empire,  gave  the 


e: 


OB.1.1— 16.j  THE  BOOK  OF  HAQOAL  17 

Jews  permission  to  return  to  their  land,  and  commanded  them  to  rebnild  the  temple 
of  Jehovah  in  Jerusalem.  Hence  fifty  thousand  captiyes,  with  their  menserTanti  and 
maidservants,  went  forth,  led  by  Zerubbabel  and  by  the  high  priest  Joshua,  to  their 
own  lands.  Forthwith  on  their  arrival  they  commenced  restoring  the  altar  of  burnt 
offering  and  re-establishing  the  sacrificial  worship,  and  began  to  lay  the  founda- 
tion of  the  new  temple.  The  Samaritans  speedily  interfered  and  impeded  their  progress. 
Because  the  chiefs  of  Judah  would  not  accept  their  co-operation  in  the  undertaking, 
they  set  themselves  to  the  work  of  obstruction.  They  made  the  hand  of  the  people  of 
Judah  idle,  as  we  read,  in  frightening  them  while  building,  and  hiring  counsellors 
against  them  to  frustrate  their  design,  so  that  the  work  at  the  house  of  God  at 
Jerusalem  ceased  and  was  suspended  until  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of  King  Darius 
of  Persia  (Ezra  iv.  24).  Hereupon  the  zeal  of  the  Jews  so  cooled  down  that  they  relin- 
quished the  work  altogether,  and  simply  began  to  provide  for  their  own  necessities  and 
to  build  their  own  houses.  Hence  Heaven  employs  Haggai  to  rouse  them  again  from 
.  their  wickedness.  The  subject  of  these  verses  is  the  adjournment  of  duty.  "  The  time  is 
not  come,  the  time  that  the  Lord's  house  should  be  built."  They  do  not  question  the 
desirableness  or  the  obligation  of  the  work.  This  indeed  seems  to  be  assumed.  During 
the  Captivity,  we  are  told  elsewhere  that  they  hanged  their  harps  upon  the  willows, 
and  wept  when  they  "  remembered  Zion."  Often,  perhaps,  in  those  circumstances  did 
they  resolve,  should  they  ever  bo  restored,  to  rebuild  that  temple  which  was  the  glory 
of  the  land ;  but  now  that  they  are  there  on  the  spot,  and  the  ruins  lying  before  them, 
their  ardour  is  cooled,  and  they  s^y,  "  The  time  is  not  come."  We  see  three  evils 
coming  out  here,  which,  perhaps,  are  always  connected  with  the  adjournment  of  duty. 

L  CowARDiOB.  They  did  not  say, "  We  will  not  build  the  temple,  we  will  leave  it  to 
remain  in  ruins ; "  they  were  too  cowardly  for  that.  Their  consciences  rendered  them 
incapable  of  making  such  a  decision.  Men  who  neglect  duty  are  too  cowardly  to  say, 
"  We  will  never  attend  to  it,  we  will  never  study  the  Scriptures,  worship  God."  1.  Sin 
is  cowardice,  2.  Sin  is  cowardice  because  conscience,  the  truly  heroic  element,  is  ever 
against  it. 

IL  SfiiiFisENESS.  What  was  it  that  prompted  them  to  adjourn  this  duty?  The 
answer  is  at  hand.  Selfishness.  "Is  it  time  for  you,  O  ye,  to  dwell  in  your  ceiled 
houses,  and  this  house  lie  waste  ?  "  They  set  to  work  for  their  own  private  interests. 
Virtually  they  said,  "We  must  build  houses  for  oiurselves  first,  for  all  is  in  ruin  about 
us ;  we  must  cultivate  our  own  land  first ;  we  must  attend  to  our  own  business,  and 
after  all  that  is  completed  we  will  see  to  the  temple."  1.  Selfishness  is  a  perversion  oj 
sdf-love.    2.  Selfishness  is  fatal  to  self-interest. 

III.  Pebsumption.  "The  time  is  not  come."  How  did  they  know  that?  Were 
they  judges  of  times  and  seasons  ?  Had  they  the  hardihood  to  suppose  that  circum- 
stances can  set  aside  or  modify  cur  obligations  T  Are  they  imperious  enough  to  plead 
Providence  as  a  patron  of  their  disobedience  ?  "  Go  to,  now,  ye  that  say.  To-day  and 
to-morrow  "  (Jas.  iv.  13).  1.  Such  presumption  is  always  guilty.  It  implies  that  we 
know  better  than  our  Maker  about  times  and  seasons.  2.  Such  presumption  is  always 
perilous.    It  treada  upon  an  awful  precipice. — ^D.  T. 

Vers.  5 — 11. — Duty  divinely  vindicated.  "  Now  therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts ;  Consider  your  ways.  Ye  have  sown  much,  and  bring  in  little ;  ye  eat,  but  ye 
have  not  enough ;  ye  drink,  but  ye  are  not  filled  with  drink ;  ye  clothe  you,  but  there 
is  none  warm;  and  he  that  eameth  wages  eameth  wages  to  put  it  into  a  bag  with 
holes,"  etc.  Their  efforts  to  improve  their  secular  condition  were  all  unsttccessful. 
The  ground  brought  forth  little,  etc.  Why  was  this?  Not  because  they  did  not 
work ;  not  because  either  the  soil  or  the  seed  was  bad.  The  reason  was  a  moral  one^ 
they  neglected  the  great  duty  that  Heaven  had  enjoined  upon  them,  the  rebuilding  of 
the  temple.  They  neglected  this,  and  the  curse  of  Heaven  rested  as  a  mildew  upon  all 
their  operations.  Had  they  rightly  discharged  this  duty,  prosperity  would  have 
attended  all  their  efforts.  Bedl  success  in  any  labovA-,  so  as  to  obtain  happiness,  depends 
upon  the  spiritual  state  of  the  soul.  This  is  a  point  which  has,  perhaps,  seldom 
occupied  your  attention ;  nevertheless,  it  is  a  point  of  overwhelming  moment.  It  is 
conmion  for  men  to  refer  success  to  industry,  ingenuity,  fortune,  luck,  or  some  such 
cause ;  the  real  cause  of  success  or  failure  is  to  he  referred  to  the  moral  state  of  the  souL 

HAOQAI.  c 


18  TUE   BOOK   OF   HAGGAl.  [cu.  u.  1— iS3 

They  were  selfish  motives  that  brought  secular  disasters  to  the  Jews  now.  The  verses 
teach  us  that  duty  h  vindicated  by  the  Divine  government.  We  offer  two  remarks 
here. 

L  That  the  Divinb  govebnmbnt  eeoognizbs  the  selfish  motives  that  actuate 
MEN.  Men  are  governed  in  everything  by  motive.  Motive  is  the  mainspring  that 
keeps  the  world  in  action ;  motive  is  the  fountain  from  which  all  the  streams  of  life 
proceed ;  motive  is  the  germ  from  which  springs  every  branch  and  leaf  of  the  great  tree 
of  character.  We  judge  each  other  from  appearance ;  God,  from  motives.  God  sees 
theft,  blasphemy,  and  all  other  crimes  where  they  have  never  been  expressed  in  words 
or  acts.  This  Divine  inspection  of  motives  argues  three  things.  1.  The  necessity  of 
moral  reformation  in  the  world.  If  all  per  taining  to  human  life  springs  from  motive, 
and  the  motives  of  the  world  are  depraved,  then  the  grand  necessity  of  the  world  is 
reformation.  Knowledge,  civilization,  refinement,  social  order,  mercantile  prosperity, 
wholesome  legislation, — these  wiU  be  of  no  real  service  where  the  motives  are  bad. 
Hence  the  great  Reformer  has  said,  "  Ye  must  be  born  again."  To  accomplish  this 
reformation  is  the  great  aim  of  the  gospel.  It  is  the  fire  to  bum  up  false  motives,  it  is 
the  axe  to  strike  the  upas  at  the  roots.  2.  The  necessity  for  attending  more  to  the  spiritual 
than  the  formal  in  the  Church.  It  is  not  conformity  to  standards  of  faith,  however 
scriptural,  attention  to  rituals,  however  eesthetic  and  impressive,  the  repetition  of 
prayers,  however  beautiful  in  language,  devout  in  sentiment,  and  correct  in  doctrine ; 
it  is  not,  in  fact,  in  any  externalism  that  religion  consists  or  that  God  dehghts;  it  is  in 
holy  motive.  "  Neither  circumcision  , . .  nor  uncircumoision,"  etc.  (Gal.  v.  6).  In  all 
true  worship  man  is  at  once  the  temple,  the  sacrifice,  and  the  priest.  When  will  tbe 
time  come  that  men  shall  regard  the  Church,  not  as  a  piece  of  timber  carved  into 
certain  forms  by  the  hand  of  art,  remaining  the  same  from  age  to  age,  but  as  a  living 
tree,  working  itself  by  the  power  of  its  own  life  into  living  forms  with  every  season 
that  passes  over  it?  3.  The  possibility  of  solemn  disclosures  on  the  last  day.  Here 
men  conceal  their  real  hearts  from  each  other.  We  only  know  each  other  after  the 
flesh.  Sometimes  here  Providence  takes  off  the  mask  from  those  whom  we  thought 
friends,  and  we  recoil  from  their  hideousnesa  with  horror.  At  the  last  day  all  will  be 
uncovered.  "  The  hidden  things  of  darkness  will  be  brought  to  light "  (1  Cor.  iv.  5). 
What  a  revelation  on  that  day  I 

11.  That  the  Divikb  Govbenob  avenges  the  selfish  motives  of  action.  "  Ye 
looked  for  much,  and,  lo,  it  came  to  little."  The  passage  shows  two  wa3<s  in  which 
God  opposes  the  labour  of  selfish  men.  1.  He  neutralizes  the  restdts  of  their  labour. 
"  I  will  blow  upon  it."  The  man  may  realize  the  means  which  he  thought  would  make 
him  happy;  God  will  hinder  it  from  doing  so.  One  selfish  man  may  get  wealth  in 
abundance;  another  may  acquire  vast  treasures  of  knowledge;  another,  immense 
power  in  society ;  yet  in  all  cases  there  may  be  unhappiness,  because  God  "  blows  " 
upon  the  whole.  In  fact,  nothing  can  make  a  selfish  man  happy.  2.  He  renders 
ineffective  the  materials  of  their  labour.  Labour  always  employs  three  things — agent, 
instrument,  and  materials.  The  materials  of  labour  are  here  specified — "  light,"  "  air," 
"  water,"  "  earth."  On  these  men  operate.  Out  of  these  we  weave  our  clothing,  of 
them  we  construct  our  dwellings.  God  acts  upon  these  and  renders  them  all  ineffective 
for  happiness.  "  Therefore  the  heaven  over  you  is  stayed  from  dew,  and  the  earth  is 
stayed  from  her  fruit.  And  I  called  for  a  drought  upon  the  land."  (1)  Ood  directs  the 
universe;  not  necessity,  not  chance.  (2)  God  directs  the  universe /or  mmd.  (3)  God 
directs  the  universe  so  as  to  meet  the  Btate  qf  every  heart.  "  To  the  pure  all  things  are 
pure."— D.  T.  re 

EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBB  IL 

Ver.  1— «h.  ii.  9 — Part  II.  Thk  Second 
Addbiss:  The  Globi  of  the  New  Temple. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — §  1.  The  prophet  comfortt 
thou  who  grieve  at  lh4  comparative  poverty 


of  the  new  building  uiith  the  aiiuranet  of  the 
Divine  prottetion  and  favour. 

Ver.  1. — la  the  seventh  month,  ia  the  one 
and  twentieth  day  of  the  month.  The 
seventh  month  is  Ethanim  or  Tisii,  answer- 
iug  to  parts  of  September  and  Ootober.    The 


<au  n.  1—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OK   HAGK3AL 


19 


twenty-flist  was  the  last  and  great  daj  of 
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (Lev.  iziii.  84, 
•tc.X  when  it  was  the  custom  to  celebrate 
the  ingathering  of  the  harvest.  The  joyous 
nature  of  this  festiral  was  sadly  marred  on 
this  occasion.  Their  crops  were  scanty, 
and  they  had  no  temple  in  whose  courts 
they  might  assemble  to  pay  their  tows  and 
offer  their  thank-offerings.  The  building 
which  had  begun  to  make  some  progress 
only  the  more  sliowed  its  poverty.  Every- 
thing tended  to  make  them  contrast  the 
present  with  the  past.  But  God  mercifully 
relieves  their  despondency  with  a  new 
message.  By  the  prophet  Haggai  (see 
note  oil  eh.  i.  1). 

Ver.  2. — Speak  now  to  Zerubbabel.  The 
message  is  addressed  to  the  heads  of  the 
nation,  temporal  and  spiritual,  and  to  all 
the  people  who  had  returned  (see  notes  on 
oh.  i.  1  and  12). 

Ver.  3. — Who  Is  left  among  you  1  etc.  It 
ia  quite  possible  that  there  should  be  some 
old  people  present  who  had  seen  Solomon's 
temple.  Many  have  tliought  that  Haggai 
himself  was  of  the  number.  It  was  sixty- 
eight  years  ago  that  the  temple  was  de- 
stroyed, and  we  can  well  believe  that  its 
remarkable  features  were  deeply  impressed 
on  the  mi  ids  of  those  who  as  boys  or 
youths  had  loved  and  admired  it.  Ezra 
tells  us  (iii.  12)  that  "  many  of  the  priests 
and  Levites  fwhen  the  foundation  first  was 
laid]  and  chief  of  the  fathers,  who  were 
•noient  men,  that  had  seen  the  first  house, 
.  .  -  wept  with  a  loud  voice."  This  house. 
I'he  prophet  identifies  the  present  with 
Solomon's  temple,  as  being  adapted  for  the 
same  purposes,  to  fill  the  same  place  in  the 
national  life,  built  on  the  same  hallowed 
spot,  and  partly  with  the  same  materials. 
In  the  Jews'  eyes  there  wm  one  only 
temple,  whatever  might  be  the  date  of  its 
erection  or  the  comparative  worth  of  its 
decorations  and  materials.  First ;  former, 
as  ver.  9.  How  do  ye  see  it  now  t  (Numb, 
xiii.  18).  In  what  condition  do  ye  see  this 
house  now  ?  Is  it  not  in  your  eyes  in  com- 
parison of  it  as  nothing?  The  words,  "in 
comparison  of  it,"  ought  to  be  omitted,  as 
not  required  by  the  Hebrew  idiom.  Does 
it  not  seem  in  your  eyes  as  if  it  had  no 
existence?  If  the  injunction  of  Cyrus 
(Ezra  i,  3,  etc.)  had  been  carried  out,  the 
dimensions  of  the  new  temple  would  have 
exceeded  those  of  the  old  ;  irat  Zerubbabel 
seems  to  have  been  unable,  with  the  small 
resources  at  his  disposal,  to  execute  the 
original  design,  though  even  bo  the  propor- 
tions were  not  greatly  inferior  to  those  of  the 
earlier  temple.  But  the  chief  inferiority 
lay  in  the  absence  of  the  splendour  and 
enrichment  with  whioh  Solomon  adorned 
his    edifice.     The    gold    which'  he    had 


lavished  on  the  house  was  no  longer  avai1< 
able;  the  precious  stones  could  not  be  had. 
Besides  these  defects,  the  Tulmudists 
reckon  five  things  wanting  in  this  second 
temple,  viz.  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  with 
the  cherubim  and  mercy-seat ;  the  holy  fire ; 
the  Shechinah  ;  the  spirit  of  prophecy  ;  the 
Urim  and  Thummim.  It  was,  according 
to  Josephus,  only  half  the  height  of  Solo- 
mon's— sixty  cubits  ('Ant.,'  xv.  11.  I),  and 
it  appears  to  have  been  in  many  respects 
inferior  to  the  first  building  ('  Ant.,'  iv.  2). 
HeoabsBus  of  Abdera  gives  the  dimensions 
of  the  courts  as  five  hundred  feet  in  length 
and  a  hundred  cubits  in  breadth  (double 
the  width  of  the  court  of  the  tabernacle), 
and  the  size  of  the  altar  as  twenty  cubits 
square  and  ten  cubits  high  (see  Josephus, 
'Cont.  Ap.,'  i.  22 ;  Conder, '  Handbook  to  the 
Bible,'  p.  370). 

Ver.  4. — Be  strong.  This  is  repeated 
three  times  for  emphasis'  sake.  The  same 
exhortation  was  given  by  David  to  Solomon 
before  the  buihiing  of  the  first  temple 
(1  Chron.  xxviii.  10 ;  comp.  Josh.  i.  6,  7,  9). 
Haggai  seems  to  suggest  comfort  in  the 
thought  that  such  admonition  was  needed 
at  that  time  as  well  as  now  when  they  are 
so  depressed  (comp.  Zeoh.  viii.  9).  And 
work;  literally,  and  do;  TroietTe:  facite. 
The  word  is  used  absolutely,  as  often  (comp. 
Isa.  xliv.  23 ;  Amos  iii.  6,  and  note  there).. 
Here  it  means,  "  Work  on  bravely,  finish 
what  you  have  begun."  I  am  with  you 
(see  ch.  i.  13,  and  note  there).  The  con- 
sciousness of  God's  presence  gives  confi- 
dence and  strength. 

Ver.  5. — According  to  the  word  that  I 
covenanted.  The  Hebrew  is  simply,  "the 
word  that  I,"  etc.  Hence  some  have  con- 
nected it  with  the  verb  "  do  "  in  the  preced- 
ing verse,  the  intervening  words  being 
parenthetical.  But  there  is  intended  no 
injunction  respecting  the  observation  of  the 
old  covenant,  but  a  consolatory  message 
under  present  despondency.  Others  take 
it  with  the  verb  that  follows :  "  the  word  and 
my  Spirit  remain  among  you."  But  it  is 
best  to  leave  the  clause  in  the  abrupt 
fashion  in  which  it  ia  introduced :  "  (Here 
is,  here  stands)  the  word  that  I  covenanted 
with  you."  If  anything  is  supplied,  we 
might  insert,  "I  will  confirm."  The 
promise  of  present  help  is  confirmed  by  the 
remembrance  of  God's  former  covenant  with 
Israel,  that  they  should  be  his  peculiar 
people,  and  possess  the  right  of  access  to 
him  and  a  claim  on  his  help  (Exod.  xix. 
5,  6 ;  xxix.  45,  46 ;  Deut.  vii.  6 ;  Jer.  vil. 
23).  This  clause  is  entirely  omitted  by 
the  Septuagint,  So  my  Spirit  remaineth 
among  yon;  Eevised  Version,  and  my 
Spirit  oibode  among  you.  But  the  clause 
refers  to  God's  presence  among  them  now. 


20 


THE   BOOK   OF   HAQOAL 


[oh.  n.  1 — 23. 


which  wae  shown  by  the  rerelationi  made 
to  the  prophets,  as  Uaggai  and  Zechariah, 
and  which  exhibits  itself  in  his  proTidential 
ordering  of  events,  the  removal  of  obstacles, 
the  furthering  of  the  good  work.  Words- 
worth notes  that  "Christ  was  with  the 
ancient  Church  in  the  wilderness  (see  1  Cor. 
X.  9;  Heb.  xi.  26);  and  now,  when  the 
eternal  Word  became  incarnate,  and  when 
the  Holy  Spirit  was  sent  to  be  in  the  midst 
of  God's  faithful  people,  then  this  prophecy 
was  fulfilled."  Fear  ye  not.  "If  God  be 
for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?"  (Bom.  viii. 
31 ;  and  comp.  Zech.  iv.  6). 

Yen.  6 — 9. — §  2.  ITtepropIiet,  to  reeonoile 
the  people  to  the  new  temple,  and  to  teach  them 
to  value  it  highly,  foreteUs  a  future  time, 
when  the  glory  of  this  house  shall  far  ex- 
ceed that  of  Solonton'i,  adumbrating  the 
Messianic  era. 

Ver.  6.— Yet  once,  it  is  a  little  while ;  erj 
oira|  (Septuagint) ;  Adhuo  unum  modicum 
tst  ("Vulgate),  The  writer  of  the  Epistle  to 
the  Hebrews  (xii.  26,  27)  quotes  and  founds 
an  argument  on  this  rendering  of  the  LXX. 
The  expression  is  equivalent  to  "  once  again 
witliin  a  little  time."  I  will  shake,  eta 
Some  difference  of  opinion  exists  as  to  the 
events  here  adumbrated.  All,  however, 
agree  in  seeing  an  allusion  to  tlie  promulga- 
tion of  the  Law  on  Mount  Sinai,  which  was 
accompanied  with  certain  great  physical 
oommotions,(see  Exod.  xix.  16;  Ps.  IxviiL  7, 
8),  when,  too,  the  Egyptians  were  "  shaken 
by  the  plagues  sent  on  them,  and  the  neigh- 
bouring nations,  Philistia,  Edom,  Moab, 
were  struck  with  terror  (Exod.  xv.  14 — 16). 
Tills  was  a  great  moral  disturbance  in  the 
heathen  world;  the  next  and  final  "shaking  " 
will  be  under  the  Messianic  dispensation 
for  which  the  destruction  of  heathen  king- 
doms prepares  the  way.  The  Israelites  would 
soon  see  the  beginnings  of  this  visitation, 
e.g.  in  the  fall  of  Babylon,  and  might  thence 
conclude  that  all  would  be  accomplished  in 
due  time.  The  prophet  calls  this  interval 
"a  little  while"  (which  it  is  in  God's  eyes 
and  in  view  of  the  vast  future),  in  order  to 
console  the  people  and  teach  them  patience 
and  confidence.  The  final  consunmiation 
and  the  steps  that  lead  to  it  in  the  prophet's 
vision  are  blended  together,  just  as  our 
Lord  combines  his  prediction  about  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  with  details  which 
concern  the  end  of  the  world.  The  physical 
convulsions  in  heaven  and  earth,  etc., 
spoken  of,  are  symbolical  representations  of 
political  revolutions,  as  explained  in  the 
next  verse,  "  I  will  shake  all  nations,"  and 
again  in  vers.  21,  22.  Other  prophets 
announce  that  Messiah's  reign  shall  be 
ushered  in  by  the  overthrow  or  conversion 


of  heathen  nations ;  a.g.    Isa.  U.  11,  etc, ; 
xix.  21,  22 ;  Dan.  ii.  44 ;  Micah  v.  9,  etc. 

Ver.  7. — All  nations  (Lake  zxi.  25, 
where  onr  Lord  refers  to  the  end  of  this 
world).  But  before  Christ's  first  advent 
there  was  a  general  shaking  of  empires. 
Persia  fell ;  Alexander's  dominion  was 
divided  and  gradually  shattered  before  the 
might  of  Borne ;  Borne  herself  was  torn  with 
civil  wars.  The  faitli  in  the  power  nf 
national  gods  was  everywhere  weakened, 
and  men  were  prepared  to  receive  the  new 
revelation  of  one  Supreme  Deity,  who  came 
on  earth  to  teach  and  save.  Now  is  men- 
tioned the  object  or  consequence  of  this 
shaking  of  nations.  The  desire  of  all 
nations  shall  come.  This  is  the  render- 
ing of  the  ancient  Jewish  expositors,  the 
Chaldee  Targum,  and  the  Vulgate,  which  - 
gives,  Veniet  desideratus  eunctis  gentibus. 
The  words  in  this  case  point  to  a  person, 
and  this  person  can  be  no  one  else  than  the 
Messiah,  for  whom  "all  nations  consciously 
or  unconsciously  yearn,  in  whom  alone  all 
the  longings  of  the  human  heart  find  satis- 
faction "  (Perowne).  But  there  is  difficulty 
in  accepting  this  view.  The  word  rendered 
"the  desire"  (phemdatK)  is  singular,  the  verb 
"shall  come"  (bau)  is  plural,  as  if  it  was 
said  in  Latin,  Venient  desiderium  omnium 
gentium.  The  LXX.  translates,  "HJei  ri 
^kAeictA  TToj'Tui/  ray  ^8vay,"  The  choice  things 
[or,  'portions']  of  all  the  nations  shall  come." 
The  plural  verb  seems  fatal  to  the  idea  of  a 
person  being  spoken  of;  nor  is  this  objec- 
tion answered  by  Dr.  Posey's  allegation 
that  the  object  of  desire  contains  in  itself 
many  objects  of  desire,  or  Bishop  Words- 
worth's refinement,  that  Messiah  is  regarded 
as  a  collective  Being,  containing  in  his  own 
Person  the  natures  of  God  and  man,  and 
combining  the  three  offices-  of  Prophet, 
Priest,  and  King.  Every  one  must  see  that 
both  these  explanations  are  forced  and  un- 
natural, and  are  conformed  rather  to  theo- 
logical considerations  than  to  grammatical 
accuracy.  Chemdah  is  used  for  "  the  object 
of  desire,"  as  2  Chron.  xxxii.  27,  where  it 
refers  to  Hezekiah's  treasures,  and  2  Chron. 
xxivi.  10,  "the  goodly  vessels"  of  the 
temple  (comp.  Jer.  xxv.  34;  Nah.  ii.  9). 
Nowhere  is  any  intimation  given  that  it  is 
a  name  applied  to  the  Messiah;  nowhere  is 
any  such  explanation  offered  of  the  term  so 
applied.  The  word  is  a  common  one ;  its 
meaning  is  well  ascertained ;  and  it  could 
hardly  have  been  understood  in  any  but  it» 
usual  acceptation  without  some  preparation 
or  further  definition.  This  acceptation  is 
confirmed  by  the  mention  of  "  the  gold  and 
silver"  in  ver.  8.  The  Bevised  Version 
outs  the  knot  by  rendering,  "  the  desirable 
things ; "  Perowne  affirms  that  the  plural 
verb  denotes  the  manifoldness  and  variety 


OH.  II.  1 — 23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAL 


21 


of  the  gifts.  This  Beeins  icaroely  satisfao- 
tory.  May  it  not  be,  b3  Knabenbauer  8Ug- 
gests,  that  "tbe desire  of  all  nations"  forms 
one  notion,  in  which  the  words,  "all  nations," 
have  a  predominating  influence,  and  so  the 
plural  ensues  by  constructio  ad  tensum  ? 
The  meaning,  then,  is  that  all  nations  with 
their  wealth  come,  that  the  Gentiles  shall 
devote  their  treasures,  their  powers,  what- 
ever they  most  highly  prize,  to  the  service 
of  God.  This  is  wliat  is  predicted  else- 
where (e.g.  Isa.  Ix.  5 — 7, 11,  13,  17),  and  it 
is  called,  metaphorically,  coming  with  trea- 
sures to  the  temple.  To  hear  of  such  a 
glorious  future  might  well  be  a  topic  of 
consolation  to  the  depressed  Israelites.  (For 
a  further  development  of  the  same  idea,  see 
Bev.  xzi.  24,  26.)  I  wiU  fill  this  house 
with  glory.  There  is  a  verbal  allusion  to 
tbe  glory  which  filled  Solomon's  temple  at 
the  dedication  (2  Chron.  vii.  1),  but  the 
especial  mode  in  which  it  is  to  be  manifested 
in  this  case  is  not  here  mentioned.  The 
previous  clause  would  make  the  reference 
rather  to  the  material  offerings  of  the 
Gentiles,  but  a  further  and  a  deeper  signifi- 
cation is  connected  with  the  advent  of 
Messiah  (as  Mai.  iii.  1),  with  which  the 
complete  fulfilment  commenced. 

Ver,  8. — The  eilver  is  mine.  All  the 
riches  of  the  world  are  the  Lord's,  and  he 
disposes  of  them  as  be  wills;  if  he  has 
promised  that  the  Gentiles  shall  offer  their 
treasures  for  his  service,  be  sure  he  will 
perform  his  word.  There  may  also  be  in- 
tended a  word  of  comfort  for  the  despond- 
ing ;  they  need  not  grieve  because  they  had 
but  poor  offerings  to  bring  to  th6  house; 
he  wanted  not  gold  or  silver,  for  all  was  his. 

Ver.  9. — The  glory  of  this  latter  honse 
■hall  be  greater  than  of  the  former.  Be- 
vised  Version,  following  the  Septuagint, 
"The  latter  glory  of  this  house  shall  be 
greater  than  the  former."  "This  house" 
means  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  regard  not 
being  paid  to  the  special  building  (ver.  3), 
whether  of  Solomon,  or  Zerubbabel,  or 
Herod.  As  understood  by  the  hearers,  this 
promise  referred  to  the  material  riches,  the 
precious  things  offered  by  the  Gentiles. 
To  us  it  speaks  of  the  presence  of  Christ, 
God  incarnate,  in  the  holy  city  and  in  the 
temple  Itself,  and  of  his  presence  in  the 
Church,  wherein  he  abides  for  ever.  Here 
is  the  complete  answer  to  the  complaint 
of  ver.  3.  In  this  place  will  I  give  peace. 
Primarily  this  means  in  Jerusalem,  the 
place  where  the  temple  stood,  God  would 
grant  peace  from  enemies,  freedom  from 
&nger,  and  qniet  enjoyment  of  promised 
blessings  (comp.  Isa.  Iz.  18 ;  Joel  ui.  17 ; 
Micah  V.  4,  5).  Bnt  the  promise  is  not 
fulfilled  by  this ;  the  peace  promised  to  the 
spiritual  temple  is  that  peace  of  heart  and 


conscience  which  is  given  by  him  who  is  the 
Prince  of  Peace  (Isa.  ix.  6),  and  which  in- 
cludes all  the  graces  of  the  Christian  cove- 
nant (Ezek.  xiiiv.  25).  The  first  temple 
was  built  by  the  king  whose  name  is 
"  Peaceful ;  "  the  second  is  glorified  by  the 
presence  of  the  "  Peace-bringer  "  (Gen.  xlix. 
10).  At  the  end  of  this  verse  the  LXX'. 
has  an  addition  not  found  in  the  Hebrew, 
"  even  peace  of  soul  for  a  possession  to  every 
one  who  buUdeth,  to  raise  up  this  shrine." 

Vers.  10  — 19.  — Part  III.  The  Third 
Address  :  The  Cadsb  op  the  Calamities 
which  bad  befallek  the  people,  akd  l 
Pbomise  of  Blessikq. 

Vers.  10 — 17. — §  1.  By  an  analogy  dravm 
from  the  Law,  Saggai  shows  that  reeidenee 
in  the  Holy  Land  and  the  offering  of  sacri- 
fice do  not  suffice  to  make  the  people  acceptable, 
as  long  as  they  themselves  are  unclean  through 
neglect  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.  Hence 
comes  the  punishment  of  sterility. 

Ver.  10. — ^In  the  four  and  twentieth  day 
of  the  ninth  month.  The  ninth  month  is 
Chisleu,  answering  to  parts  of  November 
and  December.  It  was  now  three  months 
from  the  time  the  people  had  commenced  to 
build,  and  two  from  the  day  when  the  second 
address  was  delivered.  On  the  weather  at 
this  time  depended  the  hope  of  the  yearly 
crops.  Between  the  second  and  third 
address  Zeohariah's  first  prophecy  was 
uttered  (Zeoh.  i.  2—6). 

Ver.  11. — Concerning  the  law.  Others 
translate,  "  for  instruction."  Ask  the  priests 
these  two  legal  questions,  such  as  they  were 
appointed  to  expound  (Deut.  xvii.  8,  etc. ; 
xxxiii.  10 ;  Mai.  ii.  7).  By  this  appeal  the 
prophet  makes  his  lesson  sink  deeper  into 
the  people's  mind. 

Ver.  12.— If  one  bear  j  literally,  hduM, 
tme  beareth,  which  is  equivalent  to  "  suppose 
a  man  bears."  Perowne  compares  Jer.  iii 
1,  "Lo,  a  man  puts  away  bis  wife;"  and 
2  Chron.  vii.  13.  Holy  flesh.  The  fiesh  of 
animals  sacrificed  to  God,  which  wa«  set 
apart  from  profane  uses,  and  might  be  eaten 
only  by  the  priests  or  persons  ritually  pure 
(Lev.  vi.  26 ;  vii.  15—20 ;  x.  13 ;  comp.  Jer. 
xi.  IS).  The  skirt  of  his  garment ;  literally, 
wirig  of  his  garment,  as  Deut.  xxU.  12 ;  1 
Sam.  XV.  27.  Any  meat;  iravThs  fip^fueresi 
anything  eatable.  And  said,  No.  The  priests 
answered  correctly  according  to  Lev.  vi.  27. 
Whatever  touched  the  hallowed  flesh  became 
itself  holy,  but  it  could  not  communicate 
this  holiness  to  anything  else. 

Ver.  13.— Unolean  hy  a  dead  body ;  Sep- 
tuagmt,  indBapTOS  ivl  t^uxp:  Vulgate, 
pollutus  in  anima.  These  versions  are  closer 
to  the  Hebrew,  "  unclean  by  a  soul,"  than 


22 


THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAL 


[CH.  n.  1—23. 


the  Anthorized  Version,  but  not  eo  intel- 
ligible. "  Soul"  (nepketk)  is  used  to  mean 
a  person,  and,  with  the  attribute  "  dead " 
understood,  a  corpse,  as  Lev.  xxi.  1.  The 
full  phrase  is  found  in  Numb.  vi.  6,  11. 
Contact  with  a  dead  body  produced  the 
gravest  ceremonial  nncleanness,  which 
iksted  seven  days,  and  could  be  purged 
only  by  a  double  lustration  and  other  rites 
(Numb.  xiz.  11,  etc.).  This  uncleanness 
was  doubtless  connected  with  the  idea  that 
death  was  the  result  of  sin.  Any  of  these. 
The  things  mentioned  in  the  preceding 
verse.  It  shall  be  unclean.  In  accordauce 
with  Numb.  xix.  22.  A  polluted  human 
being  communicated  his  pollution  to  all 
that  he  tonched.  It  was  owing  to  the 
defilement  that  accompanied  contact  with 
the  dead  that  the  later  Jews  used  to  whiten 
the  sepulchres  every  year,  that  they  might 
be  seen  and  avoided  (Matt,  xxiii.  27,  and 
Lightfoot, '  Hor.  Hebr.,'  in  Zoo.). 

Ver.  14. — Then  answered  Haggai,  and 
said ;  then  Haggai  contintied  and  said.  He 
applies  the  principles  just  enunciated  to 
the  case  of  the  Jews,  taking  the  communi- 
cation of  uncleanness  first.  So  is  this  people. 
Not,  my  people,  because  by  their  acts  they 
had  disowned  God  (ch.  i.  2).  This  people 
is  defiled  in  my  sight  like  one  who  has 
touched  a  corpse,  and  not  only  they  them- 
selves, but  so  is  every  work  of  their  hands ; 
all  their  labour,  all  that  they  put  their 
hands  to,  is  unclean,  and  can  win  no 
blessing.  Their  pollution  was  their  dis- 
obedience in  not  building  the  house  of  God. 
They  had  calmly  contemplated  the  lifeless 
symbol  of  the  theocracy,  the  ruined  temple, 
and  made  no  determined  effort  to  resuscitate 
it,  so  a  bligbt  had  rested  on  all  their  work. 
That  which  they  offer  there  (pointing  to  the 
altar  which  they  had  built  wben  they  first 
returned,  Ezra  iii.  2)  is  unclean.  They 
had  fancied  that  the  sanctifying  influence 
of  the  altar  and  its  sacrifices  would  extend 
to  all  their  works,  and  cover  all  their  short- 
comings; but  so  far  from  this,  their  very 
ofierings  were  unclean,  because  the  offerers 
were  polluted.  They  who  come  before  the 
Holy  One  should  themselves  be  holy. 
Neither  the  altar  nor  the  Holy  Land 
imparted  sanctity  by  any  intrinsic  virtue  of 
their  own,  but  entailed  upon  all  an  obliga- 
tion to  personal  holiness  (Wordsworth).  The 
LXX.  has  an  addition  at  the  end  of  the 
Terse,  'Evexiy  rav  \7\niMrav  avrav  ruv 
ipOpivuVt  dBvvTjd^ffoyrat  &irV  vpoffdiirov  irivav 
ttiirSl't  itol  ^yttifftiTC  iy  ir^\aii  4\4yxovTas, 
"On  account  of  their  morning  gains  [or, 
'Imrdens']  they  shall  be  pained  in  the 
presence  of  their  labours,  and  ye  hated 
those  who  reproved  in  the  gates."  This  is 
expounded  by  Theodoret  thus :  As  soon  as 
Boruing  dawned  ye  employed  yourselves  in 


no  good  work,  but  sought  only  how  (e 
obtain  sordid  gain.  And  ye  regarded  with 
hatred  those  who  reproved  you,  who  sitliiig 
at  the  gate  spake  words  of  wisdom  to  al) 
who  passed  by.  The  passage  is  found  in 
no  other  version, 

Ver.  15. — The  prophet  bids  the  people 
look  backwards,  and  consider  how  their 
neglect  had  been  visited  by  scanty  harvests ; 
their  own  experience  would  teach  them  this 
lesson.  From  this  day;  viz.  the  twenty- 
fourth  day  of  the  ninth  month,  when  this 
address  was  delivered  (ver.  10 ;  comp.  ver. 
18).  And  upward ;  I.e.  backward.  He  bids 
them  go  back  in  thouglit  fourteen  years 
when  they  first  intermitted  building. 
Before  a  stone,  etc.  This  does  not  mean 
before  the  building  was  first  begun,  but 
before  they  began  to  build  on  the  foundation 
already  laid 

Ver.  16. — Since  those  days  were.  The 
word  "days"  is  supplied.  Bevised  Vereion, 
"through  all  tliat  time,"  viz.  the  fourteen 
years  spoken  of  iu  vur.  15.  Septuagint,  nVes 
^T6,  "  what  ye  w  ere ; "  the  Vulgate  omits 
the  words.  When  one  came  to  an  heap  of 
twenty  measures.  The  word  "  measures  "  is 
not  in  the  Hebrew;  it  is  supplied  by  the 
LXX.,  trdra  (equivalent  io  seahs),  and  by 
Jerome,  modiorum.  But  the  particular 
measure  is  of  no  importance ;  it  is  the  pro- 
portion only  on  which  stress  is  laid,  Tho 
prophet  particularizes  the  general  state- 
ments of  ch.  i.  6,  9.  The  "heap"  is  the 
collection  of  sheaves  (Euth  iii.  7).  Thia 
when  threshed  yielded  only  half  that  they 
bad  expected.  There  were  (in  fact)  but  ten ; 
Kol  iytvero  KpiBrjs  ScKa  aira, "  and  there  were 
ten  measures  of  barley."  The  press-fat;  the 
wine-fat,  the  vat  into  which  flowed  the  juice 
forced  from  the  grapes  when  trodden  out  by 
the  feet  in  the  press.  A  full  account  of  thi» 
will  be  found  in  the  '  Diet,  of  the  Bible,' 
arts.  "  Wine-press  "  and  "  Wine."  Fifty 
vessels  out  of  the  press.  The  Hebrew  is 
"  fifty  pwfdh."  The  word  purah  is  used  in 
Isa.  Ixiii.  3  to  signify  the  "press"  itself, 
hence  the  Authorized  Version  so  translates 
it  here,  inserting  "out  of,"  and  supplying 
"  vessels,"  as  "  measures  "  above ;  but  it 
probably  here  denotes  a  liquid  measure  in 
which  the  wine  was  drawn.  LXX.,  iicrpnTdi 
(equivalent  to  Hebrew  haths).  Jerome, 
lagenas ;  and  in  his  commentary,  amphoras. 
They  came  and  examined  the  grapes  and 
expected  fifty  purahs,  "  press-measures," 
but  they  did  not  get  even  half  that  they 
had  hoped.  There  were  but  twenty.  Knaben- 
bauer  suggests  that  the  meaning  may  be — 
looking  at  the  crop  of  grapes,  they  expected 
to  draw  out,  i.e.  empty  (ohaiapK),  the  press 
fifty  times,  but  were  egregiously  deceived. 

Ver.  17. — I  smote  you  with  blasting  and 
with  mildew.    It  was  God  who  inflicted 


OH.  n.  1—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HAGQAL 


21 


these  calamities  upon  them  judicially,  ac- 
cording to  the  threats  in  Deut.  xxviii.  22 
(oomp.  Amos  iv.  9,  and  note  tljere).  These 
two  pests  affected  the  corn ;  the  vines  were 
smitten  with  hall  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  47).  In 
all  the  lahonrs  (worlt)  of  yoor  hands.  All 
that  you  had  cultivated  with  toil,  corn, 
vinfls,  fruit  of  every  sort.  Yet  ye  turned 
not  to  me.  The  clause  is  elliptical,  "  yet 
not  ye  to  me."  Tlie  LXX.  and  Syriao 
translate  as  the  Authorized  Version,  sup- 
plying the  verb  from  the  parallel  passage 
In  Amos  iv.  9.  The  Vulgate  (not  according 
to  precedent),  Non  fuil  in  viibis  qui  revertetur 
ad  me.  In  spite  of  these  visitations  there 
was  not  one  among  them  who  shook  off  liis 
idle  inaction  and  worked  for  the  Lord. 

Vers.  18,  19. — §  2.  On  their  obedience  the 
blesnings  of  nature  ehall  again  he  theirs. 

Ver.  18. — Consider  now  from  this  day  and 
npward  (see  note  on  ver.  15.)  For  '•  up- 
ward "  Jerome  has  here  in  futurum,  though 
he  translated  the  same  word  supra  in  ver.  15. 
Such  a  rendering  is  allowable,  and  affords  a 
good  sense,  the  prophet  direcling  the  people's 
attention  to  the  happy  prospect  in  the  future 
announced  in  ver.  19.  But  it  seems  best  to 
keep  to  the  same  interpretation  in  two 
passages  so  closely  allied.  The  prophet 
bids  the  people  consider  the  period  horn 
the  present,  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of 
the  ninth  month,  when  this  prophecy  was 
ottered  (ver.  10),  to  the  other  limit  ex- 
planatory of  the  term  "  upward  "  or  "  back- 
ward." Even  from  the  day  that  the  founda- 
tion, etc.;  rather,  since  the  day  that,  etc. 
This  is  obviously  the  same  period  as  that 
named  in  ver.  15,  after  the  foundation  was 
completed,  but  before  "stone  was  laid 
upon  stone"  of  the  superstructure  (comp. 
Zech.  viii.  9). 

Ver.  19. — ^Is  the  seed  yet  in  the  ham  1 
Is  there  any  of  your  poor  crop  still  left  in 
your  granaries  ?  Is  it  not  already  expended  ? 
"  The  seed  "  is  here  the  produce  of  the  seed, 
the  grain  (1  Sam.  viii.  15 ;  Job  xxxix.  12). 
The  corn  crop  is  mentioned  tirst,  then  the 
fruit  harvest.  The  Vulgate  has,  Numquid 
jam  semen  in  germine  esti  Has  the  seed 
begun  to  grow?  Is  there  any  sign  of  abun- 
dance? Yet  the  harvest  shall  be  prolific. 
But  there  is  no  doubt  that  megurah  means 
"  bam,"  not  "  sprout."  LXX.,  Ei  imyvaffOii- 
irerat  iirl  Tijs  aAo),  "  If  it  shall  be  known 
upon  the  threshing-floor."  Jerome  must 
have  read  yrjs  for  T?ir,  as  he  renders,  "  Si 
ultra  cognoscetur  super  terram  area."  He 
expounds  it  thus :  So  abundant  shall  be  the 
produce  that  the  threshing-floor  shall  not 
recognize  its  own  corn  or  that  the  threshers 
shall  be  forced  to  join  floor  to  floor  to  make 
room  for  aL  the  grain,  "et  arearum  separatio 
BMoiatur  in  terra."    Yea,  as  yet ;  xal  «'  In 


(Septuagint) ;  e«  adfc»e  (Vulgate) ;  as  Judg, 
iii.  26 ;  Job  i.  18.  Others  translate,  "  as  re- 
gards." Though  there  was  no  sign  of  loaf 
or  fruit  on  the  trees,  nothing  by  which  one 
could  judge  of  the  future  produce,  yet  the 
prophet  predicts  an  abundant  crop,  dating 
from  the  people's  obedience  (Lev.  xxvi.  3, 
etc. ;  Dent,  xxviii.  2,  etc.).  From  this  day 
wiU  I  bless  you.  "  This  day  "  is  the  twenty- 
fourth  day  of  the  ninth  month  (ver.  10). 
From  now  the  improvement  in  the  season 
should  begin  and  make  itself  evident. 
"Bless"  is  a  term  often  used  for  sending 
fruitful  seasons  (Deut.  xxviii.  8 ;  Mai.  iii. 
10). 

Vers.  20— 23.— Part  V.  The  Foubth 
Addbbss  :  Peomise  of  the  Kbstobation 
AND  Establishment  op  the  Houbb  op 
David,  when  the  Stobm  BnasTS  on  thi 
Kingdoms  op  the  Wobld. 

Ver.  20. — ^Temporal  blessings  had  been 
promised  to  the  people  generally;  now 
spiritual  blessings  are  announced  to  Zemb- 
babel  as  the  head  of  the  nation  and  the 
representative  of  the  house  of  David.  And 
again ;  and  a  second  time ;  4x  Sevrtpov 
(Septuagint).  This  revelation  took  place 
on  the  same  day  as  the  preceding  one. 

Ver.  21. — Zeruhbabel  (see  note  on  oh.  i. 
1).  I  will  shake  the  heavens  and  the  earth. 
He  repeats  the  prediction  of  ver.  6  in  this 
chapter  (where  see  note).  This  is  the 
generul  statement,  expanded  and  explained 
in  the  next  verse. 

Ver.  22. — I  will  overthrow  the  throne  of 
kingdoms.  No  events  in  Zerubbabel's  time 
satisfied  this  prediction,  which  waits  for  its 
fulfilment  in  the  Messianic  age  (Luke  i.  52). 
"  The  throne "  is  used  distributively  for 
"  every  throne  of  kingdoms  ;  "  Septuagint, 
"thrones  of  kings."  Of  the  heathen;  of 
the  nations.  Chariots,  eto.  Emblems  of  the 
military  power  by  which  the  nations  had 
risen  to  eminence  (Fs.  xx.  7 ;  Zech.  x.  5 ). 
Shall  come  down.  Be  brought  to  the  ground, 
perish  (Isa.  xxxiv.  7),  By  the  sword  of  his 
brother.  The  heathen  powers  shall  annihi- 
late one  another  (Ezek.  xxxviii.  21 ;  Zech. 
xiv.  13). 

Ver.  23. — ^Inthat  day.  When  the  heathen 
nations  of  the  earth  are  overthrown,  Israel 
sliall  be  safe,  and  be  the  more  exalted  by  the 
Divine  favour  and  protection.  Will  I  take. 
The  verb  simply  serves  to  introduce  the 
following  act  as  one  of  importance,  and  does 
not  signify,  "  take  under  my  protection " 
(comp.  Deut.  iv.  20 ;  2  Kings  xiv.  21 ; 
Keil).  My  servant.  An  honourable  title 
used  especially  of  David  (1  Kingfs  xi.  13, 
etc.;  Jer.  xxziii.  21,  etc.),  and  his  future 
successors  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  23,  eto.;  xxsrii. 
24).     Hake  thee  as  a  lignet    I  will  make 


24 


THE   BOOK  OF  HAGOAL 


[oh.  II.  1—23 


thee  most  precious  in  my  night  (comp. 
Cant.  viii.  6).  Among  Orientals  the  signet- 
ring  was  an  article  of  great  importance  and 
value  (see  Bev.  v.  1 ;  ix.  4  j  and  '  Diet,  of  the 
Bible,'  art.  "Seal").  The  allusion  is  par- 
ticularly appropriate  here,  because  Zerub- 
babel  is  set  at  the  head  ot  the  nation  in  the 
place  of  his  grandfather  (?)  Jeconiah,  whose 
rejection  from  the  monarchy  had  been 
couched  in  these  terms :  "  As  I  live,  saith 
the  Lord,  though  Coniah  the  son  of  Jehoia- 
kim  King  of  Judah  were  the  signet  upon 
my  right  hand^  yet  would  I  pluck  thee 
thence  "  (Jer.  xxii.  24).  The  Son  of  Sirach, 
in  his  praise  of  great  men,  refers  to  this 
promise, "  How  sh  aU  we  magnify  Zorobabel  ? 
eyen  he  was  ae  a  signet  on  the  right  hand  " 
(EccluB.  zlix.  11).  The  signet,  too,  is  the 
■Ign  of  authority  (Gen.  xli.  42;  Esth.  iii. 
10) ;  so  Zerubbabel  has  authority  delegated 
to  Mm  from  God,  the  type  of  hiiin  who  said, 
"AU  things  are  delivered  unto  me  of  my 
Father  "  (Matt.  xi.  27).  "  The  true  Zerub- 
babel, i.e.  Christ,  the  Son  and  Antitype  of 
Zerubbabel,  is  the  signet  in  the  hand  of  the 
Father,  both  passively  and  actively,  where- 
by Ood  impresses  his  own  majesty,  thought, 
•od  words,  and  his  own  image,  on  men. 


angels,  and  all  creatures  "  (Com.  it  Lapile 
ap.  Fusey).  I  have  chosen  thee.  Tms  ia 
not  a  personal  assurance  only  to  Zerubbabel, 
for  neither  he  nor  his  natural  seed  reigned 
in  Jerusalem,  or  rose  to  any  special  emi- 
nence in  the  kingdoms  of  this  world.  The 
fulfilment  must  be  looked  for  in  his  spiritual 
progeny  and  in  Christ.  Promises  are  often 
made  in  Scripture  to  individuals  which  are 
accomplished  only  in  their  descendants; 
witness  those  made  to  Abraham  and  the 
other  patriarchs,  the  prophecies  of  Jacob  to 
bis  sons,  and  many  others  of  a  similar 
nature  in  the  Old  Testament.  Those  large 
promises  made  to  David  in  old  time,  that 
his  seed  should  endure  for  ever,  that  his 
throne  should  be  as  the  sun  before  God  (Pa. 
Ixzxix.  36,  37 ;  2  Sam.  vii.  16),  were  now 
passed  on  to  Zerubbabel  and  to  his  Une, 
because  of  him  was  to  spring  Messiah,  in 
whom  alone  these  wide  predictions  find  their 
fulfilment.  "  He  shall  be  great,  and  shall  be 
called  the  Son  of  the  Highest :  and  the  Lord 
God  shall  give  unto  him  the  throne  of  his 
father  David :  and  he  shall  reign  over  the 
house  of  Jacob  for  ever ;  and  of  his  kingdom 
there  shall  be  no  end  "  (Lnke  i.  32, 33). 


H0MILETI(3a 

Ters.  8 — 6. — Patt  and  present.  L  A  suggestion— q^  the  continuity  vf  human 
hixtory,  Haggai's  question  assumes  that  the  structure  then  erecting  was  not  a  new 
edifice  (which_  it  really  was),  but  the  old  building  set  up  again,  though  in  faded 
splendour,  which  also  it  was,  inasmuch  as  it  was  based  on  the  foundations  of  the 
earlier  pile.  "  This  house  in  its  former  glory  "  meant  that  the  prophet  looked  on  the 
two  houses  as  one,  and  the  two  eras  represented  by  these  houses,  not  as  two  distinct 
and  separate  periods,  but  as  one  continuous  period.  As  it  were  the  national  life,  for 
seventy  years  interrupted  by  the  exile,  again  flowed  on,  restoring  the  temple, 
reinstituting  the  religion  of  Jehovah,  and  pervading  the  whole  fabric  of  society.  The 
present  was  not  so  much  a  fresh  commencement  as  a  prolongation  of  the  past.  And 
this  is  true  of  human  history  and  life  in  general.  No  age  or  individual  is  entirely  dis- 
connected from  and  independent  of  the  ages  and  individuals  that  have  gone  before.  A 
perfectly  new  beginning  in  human  history  or  in  individual  life  has  never  yet  taken 
place.  Even  in  the  Incarnation,  the  second  Adam  was  connected  with  the  first  through 
bis  human  nature.  The  civilization  of  the  nineteenth  century  is  built  upon  the' 
foundations  laid  by  preceding  centuries.  The  maturity  of  manhood  in  wisdom  or 
virtue  is  developed  from  the  gains  in  knowledge  and  goodness  made  in  youth 

II.  An  illdstkation— 0/  the  tendency  to  glorify  the  past  at  the  expense  of  th» 
present.  Who  is  left  among  you  that  saw  this  house  in  its  former  glory  ?  and  how 
do  you  see  it  now?  asks  the  prophet;  "is  it  not  in  your  eyes  as  nothing?  "  In 
certain  respects  this  depreciation  of  the  post-exilic  temple.  In  comparison  with  the 
Solomonic,  was  justifiable— the  material  splendour  of  the  second  building  was 
vastly  inferior  to  that  of  the  first ;  but  in  other  respects  the  glory  of  the  latter  house 
would  ultimately  far  echpse  that  of  the  former  (ver.  9)— it  would  be  the  centre  and 
scene,  the  instrument  and  support  of  a  purer  worship  than  had  been  maintained  in  the 
former,  and  would  be  honoured  by  the  visit  of  a  greater  potentate  than  Solomon 
himself,  even  by  the  Messenger  of  the  covenant  and  the  Lord  of  the  temple  after 
whom  were  going  out  the  desires,  not  of  Israel  alone,  but  of  all  nations  (ver  7)  '  And 
just  as  these  aged  temple-builders  were  inclined  to  disparage  the  meaner  edifiw  rising 


(ni.n.  1— 23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAI.  25 

upon  the  foundation  of  the  old  structure  of  cedar  wood  and  gold,  and  to  glorify  the  old 
which  seventy  years  before  had  perished  in  the  going  down  of  their  nation  before  the 
might  of  Babylon,  so  does  it  seem  to  be  a  tendency  in  human  nature  to  exalt  the  past 
and  to  depress  the  present,  to  extol  the  men  and  institutions,  the  characteristics  and 
occurrences  of  other  days  at  the  expense  of  the  present,  even  when  there  is  as  little 
ground  for  doing  so  as  there  was  for  the  depreciatory  remarks  of  the  builders.  It  is 
not  difBcult  to  account  for  either  this  laudation  of  the  past  or  this  disparagement  of  the 
present.  On  the  one  hand,  lapse  of  years  allows  the  memory  of  past  discomforts,  irrita- 
tions, deficiencies,  imperfections,  blemishes,  to  fade  away,  while  present  evils  obtrude 
themselves  upon  the  notice  and  press  upon  the  hearts  of  the  passing  generation ;  on 
the  other  hand,  the  present  is  too  near  for  its  peculiar  excellences  to  be  rightly 
gauged,  while  the  glories  of  the  past,  like  distant  mountains,  shine  out  with  augmented 
splendour.  Yet  the  verdict  which  prefers  the  past  to  the  present  is  incorrect  (Eccles. 
vii.  10).  Unless  the  world  is  a  hopelessly  bad  world,  which  it  is  not  (Bom.  viii.  20), 
and  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation  is  effete,  which  is  not  the  mind  of 
Scripture  (Titus  ii.  11);  unless  the  predictions  of  the  Word  of  God  are  to  be  falsified 
(Isa.  xi.  9 ;  Hab.  ii.  14 ;  Eev.  xi.  15),  which  cannot  be  (Isa.  Iv.  11 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  35), 
and  the  aspirations  of  good  men's  hearts  are  to  be  disappointed,  which  would  be  clean 
contrary  to  what  God  has  led  them  to  expect  (Ps.  cxlv.  19) ; — there  can  be  little  doubt 
that  the  world  ia  and  must  be  surely  but  slowly  becoming  better. 

"  For  I  doubt  not  through  the  ages  one  increasing  pm^se  mni ; 
And  the  thoughts  of  men  are  widened  by  the  process  of  the  suns." 

(Tennyson.) 

To  the  widening  of  the  thoughts  add  the  purifying  of  the  hearts  and  the  elevation  of 
the  lives  of  men. 

nL  An  bxhobtation — to  earnest  diligenoe  in  dischargeof  present  duty.  "Yet  now 
be  strong,  0  Zerubbabel,  saith  the  Lord,"  etc.  The  duty  of  the  builders  was  to 
prosecute  the  work  in  which  they  were  engaged,  the  erection  of  the  temple,  even 
though  the  temple  should  be  inferior  to  its  predecessor,  and  the  circumstances  for  its 

erection  less  favourable  than  had  been  those  for  the  construction  of  the  former 

perhaps  all  the  more  their  duty  on  that  account.  So  were  the  present  age  inferior  to 
ttke  ages  which  had  gone'  before,  the  same  duty  would  be  incumbent  on  all  ranks  and 
classes — the  duty,  viz.  of  working  with  earnest  diligence  at  one's  daily  calling,  "  the 
trivial  round,  the  common  task,"  if  assigned  by  God,  and  more  especially  at  the 
upbuilding  of  God's  spiritual  temple  in  the  individual  soul  and  in  the  world  at  large. 
Without  this  the  present  age  cannot  grow  better  than  the  past,  and  is  certain  to  grow  worse. 

IV.  A  CONSOLATION — in  the  gwiranteed  fellowship  of  Ood.  Jehovah  would  be  with 
them — always,  of  course,  conditionally  if  they  continued  with  hira  (2  Chron.  iv.  2). 
1.  Not  merely  externally,  as  through  his  immanent  presence  he  is  with  all,  but 
internally,  by  his  Spirit  abiding  amongst  them  as  a  community,  and  in  their  hearts  as 
individuals,  as  he  still  does  in  the  midst  of  his  Church  and  in  the  souls  of  believers, 
when  these  remain  true  to  him,  no  matter  how  degenerate  the  age  may  be  in  which 
their  lot  is  cast.  2.  Not  now  for  the  first  time,  but  as  he  had  ever  been  since  the  day 
when  they  came  forth  from  Egypt ;  without  which,  indeed,  they  had  never  become  a 
nation  having  access  to  Jehovah  through  their  priests  and  sacrifices,  and  receiving 
from  him  revelations  and  spiritual  quickenings  through  the  medium  of  their  prophets 
(Heb.  i.  1) ;  and  without  which  they  could  not  now  be  prospered  in  their  undertaking. 
God's  Spirit  is  the  secret  source  and  ultimate  cause  of  all  good  in  either  Church  or 
nation.  3.  Not  of  constraint,  but  willingly,  according  to  his  own  covenant  engage- 
ments, which  are  never  imposed  on  him  by  any  of  his  creatures,  but  always  freely 
proposed  and  executed  by  himself-r-whence  they  are  rightly  styled  covenants  of  grace. 
It  ia  the  existence  of  such  a  covenant  that  guanmtees  the  indestructibility  and 
perpetuity  of  the  Christian  Church.  4.  Net  as  an  unseen  presence  only,  hut  as  an 
actively  co-operating  power,  imparting  to  them  strength  for  their  work  as  well  as  bold- 
ness in  it  (seie  homily  on  ch,  i.  13, 14),  both  of  which  would  be  theirs  in  proportion  a§ 
they  realized  the  cheering  truth  that  they  were  fellow-labourers  with  God.  In  like 
manner  also,  and  for  similar  ends  and  purposes,  is  Christ,  by  his  Spirit,  present  with 
his  Church  (Matt,  zzviii.  20 ;  John  xiv.  6). 


28  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGQAL  [oh.  n.  1—28. 

Lebsonb.  1.  The  inheritance  of  the  past  a  cause  of  thankfulness.  2.  The  imper- 
fections of  the  present  a  stimulus  to  duty.  8.  The  glorious  times  of  the  future  a 
reason  for  cheerfulness  and  hope. 

Vers.  6,  7. — 2%«  shaking  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  L  Histobioal  xllustba- 
TIONS.  1.  At  Sinai,  when  Jehovah  manifested  himself  to  Israel  (Exod.  xix.  16 — 19 ; 
Ps.  Lzviii.  7,  8).  Preparatory  and  prophetical.  2.  At  the  birth  of  Christ,  when 
Jehovah  appeared  on  earth  in  the  Person  of  his  Son  (Joel  ii.  30, 31 :  Luke  ii.  8 — 14 ; 
Acts  ii.  19,  20).  Furthering  and  fulfilling.  3.  At  the  end  of  time,  when  Jehovah  will 
a  third  time  appear,  in  the  Person  of  the  glorified  Christ,  to  save  his  people  and  judge 
his  foes  (Isa.  zziv.  19,  20 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10).    Culminating  and  completing. 

n.  SoBiPTDBAL  iNTERPBETATioNS.  According  to  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews,  "  This 
word.  Once  more,  signifieth  the  removing  of  the  things  that  are  shaken,  that  those 
things  which  cannot  be  shaken  may  remain"  (Heb.  xii.  27).  In  other  words,  the  object 
of  each  successive  Divine  interposition  has  been  and  will  be  the  abrogation  of  institu- 
tions that  have  served  their  day,  the  correction  of  errors  that  have  hiudered  the  truth, 
the  alteration  of  circumstances  and  conditions  that  are  no  longer  suited  to  the  new  era 
about  to  be  introduced.  1.  At  Sinai  were  shaken  and  removed  (1)  the  polytheism 
which  Israel  had  in  large  measure  brought  with  her  from  Egypt;  (2)  the  individualism 
which  had  hitherto  prevented  Israel  from  forming  herself  into  a  nation ;  and  (3)  the 
serfdom  which  had  rendered  the  realization  of  Israel's  calling  impossible;  while  th« 
things  that  could  not  he  shaken  and  remained  were  (1)  the  unity  of  God,  or  the  mono- 
theistic element  which  still  survived  in  Israel's  religion ;  (2)  the  covenant  relationship 
in  which  Jehovah  stood  towards  Israel ;  and  (3)  the  capacity  for  religion  which  no 
amount  of  oppression  had  been  able  utterly  to  destroy.  2.  At  the  birth  of  Chiist 
were  shaken  and  removed  (1)  the  Mosaic  institute  which  had  then  served  its  day, 
and  was  even  ready  to  vanish  away  (Heb.  viii.  13) ;  (2)  the  partition  wall  between  Jew 
and  Gentile  (Eph.  ii.  14),  which  had  repelled  each  from,  rather  than  attracted  each  to, 
the  other;  and  (3)  the  extemalism  and  literalism  in  worship',  which  had  converted  it 
into  mere  mechanism;  while  the  unshakable  things  that  remained  were  (1)  the 
covenant  of  grace  which  imderlay  the  Mosaic  institute,  and  shone  the  brighter  when 
that  was  removed  which  for  centuries  had  been  superimposed  upon  it ;  (2)  the  brother- 
hood of  man,  which  was  henceforth  to  be  placed  in  the  forefront  of  the  gospel  message* 
(Acts  xvii.  26 ;  Rom.  ii.  11 ;  iii.  29 ;  Col.  iii.  11 ;  Gal.  iii.  26) ;  and  (3)  the  spirituality 
of  religion,  which  was  no  more  to  be  confined  to  either  places  or  seasons,  persons  or 
forms,  but  to  find  its  seat  in  the  heart  and  its  priest  in  the  renewed  soul  (John  iv. 
21 — ^24).  3.  At  the  end  of  time  mil  he  shaken  and  removed  (1)  the  present  state  and 
condition  of  things  (1  Cor.  vii.  31 ;  xv.  50—57 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10,  12 ;  1  John  ii.  17) ;  (2) 
the  presence  and  power  of  sin  (Eev.  xxii.  3) ;  and  (3)  the  mediatorial  sovereignty  of 
Christ  (1  Cor.  xv.  23) ;  while  as  things  that  cannot  he  shaken,  shall  remain  (1)  the 
new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  wherein  dweUeth  righteousness  (2  Pet.  iii.  13) ;  (2) 
the  redeemed  family  of  believers  (1  John  ii.  17) ;  and  (3)  the  eternal  supremacy  of 
God,  who  shall  then  be  all  in  all  (1  Cor.  xv.  23). 

Learn:  1.  That  nations  and  individuals  mostly  advance  by  means  of  struggle 
and  commotion.  2.  That  peace  and  quietness  may  often  mean  stagnation  and  death 
rather  than  progress  and  life.  3.  That  truth  and  right  will  eventually  prevail  over 
falsehood  and  wrong. 

Ver.  7. — "  The  desire  of  all  nations."  I.  all  nations  have  dbstbbd  a  tisiblb 
Diwnitt;  and  buch  a  manifested  ob  ebvbalbd  Divinity  has  been  given  to 
mankind  in  Chbist.  That  all  nations  from  the  beginning  downward  have  believed 
•XL  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being  has  been  sufBciently  demonstrated  by  the 
universality  in  man  of  the  instinct  of  worship.  Nor  have  all  nations  merely  wished  to 
possess  a  god,  but  the  Deity  they  have  longed  for  has  been,  not  a  god  remaining 
always  little  more  than  a  conception  of  the  mind,  an  infinitely  exalted  being  with 
whom  they  could  not  enter  into  fellowship,  but  a  God  whom  they  could  look  upon,  or 
at  least  think  of,  as  not  far  from  any  one  of  them,  a  God  who  could  not  only  come  near 
to  them,  but  to  whom  they  in  turn  could  come  near.  The  lowest  forms  of  religion 
that  have  existed  on  the  earth,  the  religions  of  men  in  most  degraded  conditions,  hava 


cu.  U.1— 23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGQAL  21 

made  this  perfectly  apparent  no  less  than  the  elaborate  rites  of  the  cultivated  and 
civilized  nations  of  antiquity.  What  the  savage  means  by  putting  a  spirit  into  the 
various  forms  of  nature  by  which  he  is  surrounded,  or  by  making  an  idol  of  wood  or 
stone,  and  setting  it  up  before  him  as  an  object  of  adoration  ;  what  the  untutored  child 
of  nature  thereby  means,  viz.  to  ekpress  his  belief  in  a  power  above  himself  and  above 
nature,  and  his  desire  to  bring  that  invisible  power  or  divinity  forth  into  visibility  or 
nearness ;  that  the  old  religions  of  Chaldea,  Egypt,  and  Phoenicia  did  when  they  deified 
the  hosts  of  heaven  and  the  forces  of  nature,  or  looked  upon  these  as  instruments  and 
embodiments. of  supernatural  powers.  In  their  case  it  was  one  more  effort  of  the 
human  mind  to  fetch  God  out  of  the  far  distance  and  make  him  a  distinct  object  of 
contemplation  and  worship.  Then  the  later  religions  that  prevailed  in  Persia,  India, 
Greece,  and  Rome,  with  their  "  incarnations,"  or  beliefs  in  gods  who  assumed  the  like- 
ness of  men,  evinced  the  same  longing  of  the  human  lieart  for  a  God  at  band  rather  than 
afar  off,  a  God  visible  rather  than  a  god  who  remained  always  unseen,  a  God  who  might 
be  approached  in  thought,  at  least,  if  not  in  space,  rather  than  a  god  who  so  tran- 
scended liis  worshippers  as  to  be  practically  inaccessible.  And  this  longing  Christianity 
— whether  it  be  true  or  no  may  meantime  be  left  undetermined — meets,  as  no  other 
religion  has  done  or  is  likely  to  do,  by  placing  before  man  as  an  object  of  religious 
contemplation  and  worship  One  who  claimed  to  be  the  Image  of  the  invisible  Gud, 
saying,  "  I  and  my  Father  are  One,"  and  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the 
Father." 
II.  All  nations  have  desired  an  atonement  fob  sin;  and  such  atonement 

HAS   BEEN   PKOVIDBD    AS    NOWHEEB    ELSE    BY   ChBIST    AND   ChEISTIANITT.       It     is   not 

meant  that  everywhere  and  always  men  have  possessed  the  same  clear,  definite,  exalted, 
and  correct  idfeas  on  the  subject  of  sin,  sacrifice,  propitiation,  atonement,  as  are 
presented  in  the  Hebrew  or  the  Christian  Scriptures.  The  most  affirmed  is  that  while 
everywhere  men  have  possessed  a  deep  instinctive  longing  after  God,  along  with  this 
they  have  always  been  more  or  less  conscious  of  unworthiness  and  unfitness  to  enter 
into  fellowship  with  him,  have  had  a  secret  conviction  that  the  Deity  whom  they 
wished  to  serve  was  displeased  with  them,  and  that  they  could  not  enjoy  his  favour 
without  the  intervention  of  some  atoaement  or  propitiation.  Hence,  wherever  man 
has  been  found  to  have  a  god,  there  also  he  has  owned  an  altar.  The  practice  begun 
at  the  gate  of  Eden,  of  worshipping  the  Deity  by  means  of  sacrifices,  and  carried  forward 
in  the  altar-building  of  Abraham  and  the  patriarchs,  and  finally  developed  in  the 
Mosaic  ritual  of  priest  and  victim,  has  been  discovered,  oa  investigation,  not  to  have 
been  confined  to  these,  but  to  have  been  followed,  with  more  or  less  closeness  of 
adherence  to  the  primitive  pattern,  by  every  nation  under  heaven  that  has  shaped  for 
itself  a  religion.  In  religions  of  the  most  rudimentary  type,  as  well  as  in  those  of  the 
highest  culture,  a  place  has  been  reserved  for  the  practice  of  sacrificing  and  for  the 
notion  of  expiation.  "  The  sense  of  impurity  and  of  the  need  of  expiation,"  writes 
Pressensfi,  "  are  manifested  in  the  most  barbarous  modes  of  worship.  We  admit  that 
the  atonement  to  which  they  have  recourse  is  often  as  cruel  as  the  wrath  of  the  deity 
whom  the  worshippers  seek  to  appease.  There  is  a  phase  in  which  sacrifice  is  nothing 
more  than  food  offered  to  the  gods.  But  a  higher  idea  soon  manifests  itself.  Bemorse 
comes  in,  the  consciousness  of  guilt  prompts  the  sacrifice,  and  the  priest  who  at  first 
was  regarded  in  the  light  of  an  enchanter  becomes  a  mediator  between  man  and  the 
deity  "  ('  The  Ancient  World  and  Christianity,'  p.  12).  In  addition  it  might  easily 
be  shown  that  the  same  ideas  of  sin,'  penitence,  forgiveness,  propitiation,  sacrifice, 
atonement,  were  present  in  the  religions  of  ancient  Chaldea  and  of  Egypt  (ibid., 
pp.  47,  87).  And  the  inference  from  all  is  that,  irrespective  of  age  or  country,  and 
however  overlaid  with  superstition,  the  deep  conviction  of  the  human  heart  is  that 
man  has  sinned  against  God  and  requires  the  assistance  of  a  Mediator  who  shall  in 
some  way  make  peace  with  the  offended  Deity,  and  secure  for  the  offender  forgiveness 
of  his  transgressions.  Well,  here  again  Christianity  steps  in  to  supply  this  demand  of 
the  human  heart,  to  answer  this  pathetic  wail  for  a  Deliverer,  for  One  who  can  make 
peace  and  bring  forgiveness — steps  in  as  no  other  religion  known  to  man  does,  by 
exhibiting  Jesus  Christ  as  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  man  (John  i.  49,  51),  and  therefore 
as  possessed  of  authority  to  act  as  Daysman  or  Mediator  between  God  and  man, 
laying  his  hand  upon  both  (Job  z.  33 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  6),  by  discovering  him  as  standing 


28  THE   BOOK   OF   UAGGAX  [0*1- u- 1—23 

in  the  room  of  sinful  man  (Bom.  v.  6),  and  as  making  peace  b^  the  shedding  of  his 
blood  (Eph.  il.  14),  by  presenting  him  to  view  as  One  whose  blood  is  able  both  to  wipe 
away  the  guilt  of  sin  and  to  break  its  enslaving  power.  And  this,  again,  is  a  high 
certificate  in  favour  of  Christianity  as  the  only  true  religion.  For  what  is  a  religion 
worth  if  it  cannot  or  dare  not  meet  the  demands  of  the  human  heart  and  conscience? 
in.  All  nations  have  desired  a  Divine  eevelation,  ob  an  authentic  com- 
munication OF  THE  DrVINE  WILL;   AND  THIS  ChEISTIANITT    MEETS  IN  A  WAT  THAT 

no  othbb  BELiGtoN  HAS  DONE  OB  CAN  DO.  Not  Only  have  men  in  every  age  and 
country  believed  that  God  is,  and  that  by  means  of  sacrifices  it  might  be  possible 
to  appease  his  anger  and  secure  his  favour ;  they  have  also  supposed  it  within  their 
reach  to  receive  trustworthy  information  from  God  as  to  his  will  and  their  duty.  In 
the  rudest  forms  of  religion,  the  media  through  which  such  Divine  communications 
have  been  conjectured  to  come  have  been  signs  in  the  sky  above  or  on  the  earth 
beneath.  In  unusual  phenomena  of  nature,  in  unaccustomed  sights  and  sounds,  in 
dreams  and  visions,  men  have  been  wont  to  see  indications  of  a  higher  will  than  their 
own  made  known  to  them  for  the  guidance  of  their  earthly  lives.  As  religion  has 
advanced  in  intelligence  and  refinement,  special  persons  have  come  to  be  regarded  as 
'oracles  through  whom  responses  from  the  heavenly  world  might  be  obtained,  and 
messages  from  the  unseen  received.  Priests  and  priestesses,  seers  and  sages,  have  been 
viewed  as  standing  in  immediate  connection  with  the  Deity,  and  as  serving  to  transmit 
to  men  the  utterances  he  might  wish  to  make  known.  Then,  too,  in  many  of  the 
world's  religions,  as  in  those  of  Egypt  and  Persia,  India  and  Arabia,  that  is  to  say,  in 
the  most  developed  religions  of  which  we  have  any  knowledge,  but  especially  in 
Parseeism,  Brahminism,  Mohammedanism,  there  have  been  sacred  books  in  which  the 
revelations  vouchsafed  to  mankind  through  the  founders  of  these  religions  have  been 
preserved.  Now,  in  all  this,  irrespective  of  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  these  religions, 
a  signal  testimony  arises  to  the  strength  and  depth  of  the  desire  on  the  part  of  man  to 
possess  some  authorized  expounder  of  the  Divine  will  in  the  shape  of  man,  or  book, 
or  perhaps  both ;  and  there  is  no  need  to  say  that  God  has  never  gratified  this  desire 
outside  of  the  Hebrew  or  the  Christian  Church ;  but  of  this  one  may  be  certain,  that 
the  longing  for  a  Heaven-sent  teacher  was  not  confined  to  the  Hebrews,  with  their 
Moses  who  spake  with  God  face  to  face  as  »  man  talketh  with  his  friend,  but  existed 
as  well  among  the  Greeks,  Plato,  in  one  of  his  dialogues,  putting  into  the  mouth  of 
one  of  his  disputants  the  ever-memorable  words,  "  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  wait 
until  one  teach  us  how  to  behave  towards  the  gods  and  men,"  and  into  that  of  another, 
"  And  when  shall  that  time  arrive  ?  and  who  shall  that  teacher  be  ?  for  most  glad 
would  I  be  to  see  such  a  man."  Just  such  a  man  was  felt  to  be  one  of  the  world's 
greatest  wants  before  Christ  came;  and  when  he  came  just  such  a  man  appeared. 
The  verdict  pronounced  by  the  officers  on  Jesus,  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man," 
has  never  been  reversed ;  nor  is  there  the  least  likelihood  that  it  ever  wiU. 
IV.  All  nations  have  desired   an  assubanoe  of   immobtalitt;  and  that 

A88UBANOB   HAS   BEEN     GIVEN     BY   ChBIST     IN    A   WAY   THAT    HAS     BEEN     DONE   BY   NO 

OTHBB.  Whether  apart  from  Divine  revelation  the  reality  of  a  future  Ufe  beyond  the 
grave  can  or  could  be  demonstrated,  may  be  doubtful ;  but  this  much  is  undoubted, 
that  in  all  ages  men  have  believed  in  the  existence  of  such  a  life,  and  have  expressed 
that  belief  in  their  religions.  The  lowest  races  by  their  worship  of  ancestors,  the 
Egyptians  by  their  elaborate  ritual  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  and  the  ancient  Chaldeans 
by  their  mythological  narrative  of  the  descent  of  Ishtar  into  Hades,  each  in  turn  showed 
that  they  clung  to  the  idea  of  the  persistence  of  the  human  soul  after  death.  But, 
indeed,  the  notion  that  death  ends  all,  though  the  assertion  of  some  philosophers,  and 
though  supposed  to  be  the  teaching  of  science,  has  never  at  any  period  been  the  faith 
of  the  generality  of  mankind,  and  has  never  won  the  assent-of  the  human  heart  in  its 
inmost  and  truest  convictions.  Nor  must  it  be  overlooked  that  this  universal  belief 
in  a  future  state  is  a  clear  testimony  to  the  heart's  longing  for  a  continued  existence 
beyond  the  grave,  and  to  the  heart's  wish  for  some  authentic  tidings  about  that 
unknown  land ;  and  nothing  surely  can  be  less  in  need  of  demonstration,  than  that 
Jesus  Christ  answers  man's  inquiries  about  the  future  life  with  a  clearness  and  fiilnesi 
of  information  in  comparison  with  which  the  teaching  of  all  other  religions,  the  Hebrew 
Scriptures  not  excepted,  is  as  darknesa. 


OH.  n.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAL  29 

Lessons.  1.  The  pre-eminence  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  the  Christian  religion. 
2.  Gratitude  for  God's  unspeakable  Gift.  3.  The  duty  of  seeking  in  Christ  satisfactioa 
for  the  soul's  true  desires. 

Ver.  8. — The  silver  and  the  gold:  a  sermon  on  money.  I.  A  fobootten  truth 
RESTATED.  That  God  is  the  sole  Proprietor  of  money :  "  The  silver  is  mine,  and  the 
gold  is  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (cf.  Joel  iii.  5).  The  proof  lies  in  three  things ; 
that  the  silver  and  the  gold  are  :  1.  0/  Ood't  making.  They  belong  to  him  as  part 
of  that  earth  and  its  fulness  which  he  hath  created  (Ps.  xxiv.  1 ;  L  12),  as  David 
acknowledged  in  his  prayer,  "  AU  that  is  in  the  heaven  and  in  the  earth  is  thine ; "  and 
again,  "  Of  thine  own  have  we  given  thee "  (1  Chron.  xxix.  12,  14).  2.  Of  OocPt 
giving.  God  claimed  that  he  had  multiplied  Judah's  silver  and  gold  (Hos.  ii.  6) ;  and 
David  owned  that  "  all  things,"  including  "  riches  and  honour,"  were  of  him  (1  Chron. 
xxix.  12).  The  same  sentiment  is  involved  in  the  words  of  the  Baptist  (John  iii.  27), 
in  those  of  Paul  (1  Tim.  vi.  17),  and  iu  those  of  James  (i.  17).  3.  0/  God's  keeping. 
As  no  man  can  obtain  wealth  from  other  than  God,  so  with  no  help  but  his  can  man 
retain  the  wealth  he  has  got.  "  Except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watchman  watcheth 
in  vain  "  (Ps.  cxxvii.  1).  Nor  can  any  one  keep  it  longer  than  God  chooses.  At  any 
moment  can  he  recall  what  he  has  given. 

IL  An  important  inference  deduobd.  That  no  man  is  the  owner  of  his  money, 
but  merely  its  selected  steward,  its  casual  recipient  and  temporary  holder.  What 
Benhadad  of  Syria  said  to  Ahab  of  Israel,  "  Thy  silver  and  thy  gold  is  mine  "  (1  Kings 
XX.  3),  expresses  God's  thought  concerning  mUlionaires  and  paupers  alike ;  while  the 
answer  of  Ahab,  "  My  lord,  0  king,  according  to  thy  saying,  I  am  thine,  and  aU  that 
I  have,"  exactly  utters  the  response  which  every  one  possessed  of  silver  and  gold, 
whether  much  or  little,  should  give  to  the  Divine  declaration.  Few  things  are  more 
difficult  for  men  to  realize  than  that  that  is  not  their  own  for  which  they  have  laboured, 
sometimes  like  galley-slaves,  and  not  unfiequently  sinned.  The  habitual  attitude  of 
men  towards  their  silver  and  their  gold  is  that  of  the  rich  farmer  in  the  Gbspels,  "  my 
fruits,"  "  my  barns,"  "  my  goods  "  (Luke  xii.  17, 18).  A  recognition  of  man's  steward- 
ship in  respect  of  silver  and  gold  would  secure  three  things  of  immense  consequence, 
both  for  the  religious  life  of  the  individual,  and  for  the  moral  welfare  of  the  world. 
1.  A  Just  estimate  of  money.  As  one  of  God's  gifts,  it  would  be  highly  valued,  but  as 
only  a  gift  it  would  never  be  regarded  as  a  permanent  endowment,  or  preferred  above 
the  Giver.  2.  A  proper  use  of  money.  As  a  trust  it  wovdd  be  carefully  kept,  wisely 
used  (Matt.  xxv.  16),  faithfully  administered  (1  Cor.  iv.  2),  and  correctly  accounted  for 
(Luke  xvi.  2).  It  would  not  be  prodigally  squandered  (Luke  xv.  13),  or  in  miser 
fashion  hoarded  (Matt.  xxv.  25),  or  selfishly  expended  (Hos.  x.  1),  but  skilfully, 
lovingly,  and  unweariedly  employed  for  the  Master's  glory.  3.  A  right  feeling  urith 
regard  to  money.  Neither  inordinate  desire  after  it  (1  Tim.  vl  10),  nor  over-esteem  of 
one's  self  on  account  of  it  (Hos.  xii.  8),  vpould  arise  in  one's  bosom ;  but  feelings  of  con- 
tentment with  what  one  has  received  (Phil.  iv.  11 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  6),  and  of  gratitude 
that  one  has  received  any  (Gen.  xxxii.  10). 

Ver.  9. — 77ie  latter  glory  of  "this  house;"  or,  "the  glory  that  exceCleth"  I.  Thb 
HOUSE.  1.  Tlie  temple  of  Zeruhhabel,  then  building,  which,  however,  was  regarded  as 
a  continuation  of  and  as  one  with  the  temple  of  Solomon  (cf.  ver.  3).  2.  The  (Christian 
Church,  which  on  a  similar  principle  of  interpretation  was  viewed  as  an  outcome  and 
development  of  the  Hebrew  temple  (cf.  John  ii.  20,  21). 

II.  The  glory.  Called  by  Haggai  "  the  latter  glory  "  of  this  house,  in  contradis- 
tinction to  the  earlier  or  former  glory  which  belonged  to  it  before  the  Captivity,  thia 
can  only  signify  the  glory  which,  in  Messianic  times,  should  pertain  to  the  temple  when 
it  should  have  reached  its  ideal  form  in  the  Christian  Church,  whose  "glory,"  in  com- 
parison with  that  of  the  Solomonic  structure,  should  be  a  glory  that  excelleth,  1.  The 
glory  of  spiritual  magnificence,  as  opposed  to  that  of  merely  material  splendour.  The 
temple  of  Solomon  was,  after  all,  but  an  "  earthly  house  "  of  polished  stone,  carred 
cedar,  and  burnished  gold ;  but  the  temple  of  Jesus  Christ  is  a  spiritual  house,  con- 
■tructed  of  lively  stones,  or  believing  souls  (1  Pet.  ii.  5),  "  an  holy  temple  "  erected  out 
«f  quickened  and  renewed  hearts  "for  an  habitation  of  God  throiigh  the  Spirit"  (Eph. 


80  TUB   BOOK  OF  HAOGAl.  [oh.  il  1—23. 

ii.  21).  2.  The  ghyry  of  an  indwelling  Divinity,  in  contrast  with  that  of  a  merelj 
symbolic  residence  therein.  The  ark  with  its  mercy-seat  overshadowed  by  the 
cherubim,  between  whose  outstretched  wings  shone  the  visible  glory  or  the  Shecbinah 
— this  ark  which  occupied  the  holy  of  holies  in  the  Solomonic  temple,  was  not  Jehovah, 
but  only  the  material  token  of  his  presence.  Though  in  the  Christian  Church  there  is, 
as  in  Zerubbabel's  temple  there  was,  no  ark,  yet  the  Divine  presence  fills  it.  Not  only 
does  Paul  describe  it  as  a  temple  which  God  inhabits  (see  above),  but  he  represents  it 
as  the  body  of  the  glorified  Christ,  the  fulness  of  him  that  fiUeth  all  in  all  (Bph.  L  23), 
and  even  speaks  of  individual  believers  as  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  vi.  9)  and 
of  the  living  God  (2  Cor.  vi.  16) ;  while  Christ  expressly  promises  to  his  Church  a 
perpetual  indwelling  in  their  midst,  not  collectively  alone,  but  individually  as  well  (Matt. 
xviii.  20 ;  xxviii.  20 ;  John  xiv.  17,  23 ;  xv.  4 ;  xvi.  7,  22).  3.  The  glory  of  diffusing 
spiritual  and  eternal  peace,  as  distinguished  from  a  peace  which  should  be  merely 
temporal  and  temporary.  The  Solomonic  temple  was  indeed  built  by  one  whose  name 
was  Peace,  whose  reign  was  undisturbed  by  foreign  or  domestic  wars,  and  whose  spirit 
was  neither  military  nor  aggressive ;  but  it  is  doubtful  if  the  wl  jole  period  during  which 
the  Solomonic  temple  stood  could  with  truthfulness  be  characterized  as  one  of  peace 
(see  the  books  of  2  Kings  and  2  Chronicles).  Nor  could  it  be  asserted  that  the  era  of 
the  temple  of  Zerubbabel  was  throughout  peaceful.  "Temporal  peace  they  had  now, 
nor  was  there  any  prospect  of  its  being  disturbed ;  .  .  .  (but)  in  later  times  they  had 
it  not.  The  temple  itself  was  profaned  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  .  .  .  Again  by 
Pompey,  by  Crassus,  by  the  Parthians,  before  It  was  destroyed  by  Titus  and  the 
Romans"  (Pusey).  But  the  temple  of  Jesus  Christ  was  the  building  of  One  who  was 
by  pre-eminence  the  Prince  of  Peace  (Isa.  ii.  6),  who  came  to  teach  men  the  way  of 
peace  (Luke  i.  79),  who  bequeathed  to  his  disciples  as  his  parting  legacy  his  own  peace 
(John  xiv.  27),  who  died  to  make  peace  between  God  and  man  through  his  cross 
(Eph.  ii.  14),  and  who  has  since  come  to  men  in  and  through  his  gospel,  preaching 
peace  (Acts  x.  36),  and  by  his  Spirit  shedding  peace  abroad  iu  the  hearts  of  them  who 
believe  (Rom.  v.  1;  viii.  6  ;  xiv.  17;  Gal.  v.  22;  Phil.  iv.  7;  Col.  iii.  15). 

ni.  The  lesson.  1.  ITie  certainty  of  God's  Word.  What  Haggai  predicted  has  at 
length  been  fulfilled.  So  will  all  God's  promises  reach  realization.  2.  The  superiority 
of  the  gospel  dispensation.  A  dispensation  not  of  letter  and  form,  but  of  spirit  and 
life ;  not  of  condemnation  and  death,  but  of  justification  and  glory ;  not  of  temporal 
duration,  but  of  eternal  continuance.  3.  2%e  perfectibility  of  the  race.  Human  history 
has  hitherto  progressed  according  to  the  law — "  first  that  which  is  natural,  and  after- 
wards that  which  is  spiritual ; "  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  it  will  do  otherwise  in  the 
future. 

Vers.  10—19. — ITie  parable  of  the  holy  and  the  unclean.  I.  The  lbtteb  of  the 
PAEABLB.  Directed  by  Jehovah,  Haggai  proposes  two  questions  to  the  priests.  1.  Con- 
cerning the  law  of  communicated  sanctity.  Supposing  the  case  of  a  man  carrying  in 
the  skirt  of  bis  garment  holy  flesh,  i.e.  flesh  of  animals  slain  in  sacrifice,  and  with" his 
skirt  touching  bread,  pottage,  wine,  oil,  or  any  meat,  the  prophet  desires  to  be  informed 
whether  the  holiness  which  according  to  the  Law  (Lev.  vi.  27)  was  imparted  to  the 
skirt  extended  further  so  as  to  reach  also  anything  with  which  the  skirt  might  come 
in  contact.  To  this  the  priests  properly  answer,  "  No."  2.  Concerning  the  law  of  legal 
defilement.  Stating  a  contrary  case,  that  of  a  person  defiled  by  having  himself  touched 
a  dead  body  (Lev.  xxi.  11;  Numb.  xix.  16),  Haggai  asks  whether  contact  with  such 
a  person  would  render  any  of  the  above  articles  unclean,  and  is  promptly  answered  that 
according  to  the  Law  it  would  (Numb.  xix.  22). 

II.  The  interpretation  of  the  parable.  "  So  is  this  people,  and  so  is  this  nation 
before  me,  saith  the  Lord."  1.  Any  samtity  possessed  by  t&  nation  could  not  pass 
beyond  themselves.  The  sanctity  which  they  possessed  arose  from  the  fact  of  their 
having  an  altar  in  Jerusalem,  which  had  been  built  immediately  on  their  return  from 
Babylon,  and  of  their  maintaining  in  connection  therewith  the  festal  and  sacrificial 
worship  appointed  by  the  Law  of  Moses  (Ezra  iii.  1 — 6).  Yet  this  could  not  transmit 
itself  to  the  soil  so  as  to  render  it  holy  and  cause  it  to  become  fruitful  in  com  and  wine 
•nd  oil,  notwithstanding  their  disobedience  in  neglecting  the  building  of  the  temple. 
On  the  other  hand :  2.   Whatever  defilement  was  on  the  nation  would  affect  ail  thcU 


OH.  II.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAl.  31 

helonged  to  the  nation.  But  the  nation,  through  its  disobedience  in  neglecting  to  build 
'the  temple,  was  defiled,  since  according  to  Jehovah  "  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice, 
and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams  "  (1  Sam.  xv.  22).  Hence  fheir  uncleanness  rendered 
all  about  and  around  them  unclean.  In  particular,  it  put  the  land  beneath  a  curse 
which  made  its  harvests  scanty. 

III.  The  application  op  the  parable.  1.  To  the  days  lefore  the  hdlding  of  the 
temple  was  resumed.  (1)  In  char.icter  those  were  days  of  scanty  harvests  and  bad 
trade  (ch.  i.  6),  of  fruitless  labours  and  disappointed  expectations.  Whereas  the  farmer 
might  have  anticipated  from  a  heap  of  sheaves  twenty  measures  of  wheat,  on  threshing 
it  out  he  found  only  ten ;  and  the  vine-dresser  who  hoped  to  draw  off  fifty  vessels  of 
wine  from  the  pressing-trough,  had  to  content  himself  with  twenty  (ver.  16).  (2)  The 
reason  of  all  this  was,  though  it  never  seemed  to  strike  the  people,  that  Jehovah  had, 
in  pnnishment  for  their  disobedience,  smitten  the  land  with  blasting  and  mildew  and 
hail  (ver.  17).  2.  To  the  days  since  the  temple  foundation  was  laid.  Not  at  the  first  (Ezra 
iii.  10),  but  then,  under  Haggai,  in  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  month  of 
the  second  year  of  Darius  (Ezra  v.  2 ;  Zech.  viii.  9).  As  yet  there  was,  comparatively 
speaking,  no  seed  in  the  barn,  and  only  a  small  supply  of  vines,  figs,  pomegranates,  aud 
olives,  since  the  preceding  harvest  had  been  bad,  so  that  no  evidence  as  yet  appeared 
that,  as  regards  their  condition,  any  change  for  the  better  had  begun,  nevertheless  they 
were  confidently  to  anticipate  that  from  that  day  forward  Jehovah  would  bless  them. 

Learn:  1.  The  limitations  of  personal  religion.  2.  The  greater  contagion  that 
belongs  to  sin.  3.  The  blindness  of  the  human  heart  to  Divine  judgments.  4.  The 
certainty  that  piety  will  be  rewarded.  5.  The  ability  of  God  to  do  beyond  what  reason 
warrants  or  sense  expects. 

Ver.  23. — Zerubhabel  the  son  of  Shealtiel.  I.  The  subject  or  A  special  Divinb 
CALLING.  This  alluded  to  in  the  words,  "  1  have  chosen  thee,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts." 
By  this  was  meant,  not  merely  that  his  birth  in  Babylon,  preservation  and  growth  to 
manhood,  high  esteem  and  favour  among  his  countrymen  and  with  Cyrus,  as  well 
as  obvious  natural  abilities,  had  all  come  about  in  accordance  with  that  general  provi- 
dence by  which  God  appoints  to  all  men  the  times  of  their  coming  into  life  and  of 
their  going  out  at  death  (Bcdes.  iii.  1,  2),  the  bounds  of  their  habitation  (Acts  xvii.  26), 
and  the  particular  circumstances  of  their  lot  (Ps.  xvi.  6) ;  but,  in  addition  to  this,  that 
God  had  specially  selected,  endowed,  and  trained  him  for  the  office  into  which  he  had 
been  thrust,  that  of  leading  the  people  forth  from  Babylon,  and  for  the  work  he  had 
now  to  do,  that  of  laying  the  foundations,  not  of  a  second  temple  merely,  hut  of 
a  second  empire.  What  Haggai  wished  to  impress  upon  Zerubhabel  was  that  the 
position  he  occupied  at  the  head  of  the  new  community  was  one  that  had  come  to  him, 
not  by  accident,  but,  as  in  the  earlier  cases  of  Abraham  (Isa.  xli.  2),  Moses  (Exod.  iiu 
10),  and  Cyrus  (Isa.  xliv.  28),  by  Divine  appointment.  One  can  imagine  the  inspira- 
tion a  thought  like  that  must  have  imparted  to  Zerubhabel,  the  stimulus  it  must  have 
given  to  every  good  impulse  of  his  heart,  the  elevation  and  dignity  it  must  have  lent 
to  even  the  least  significant  action  he  performed.  Similar  inspiration,  stimulus,  and 
dignity  might  be  enjoyed  by  all,  were  all  to  realize  that  "the  steps  of  a  good  man  are 
ordered  by  the  Lord"  (Ps.  xxxvii.  23),  and  that  for  each  man's  life  there  is  a  plan 
existing  in  the  mind  of  God,  into  which  each  will  be  surely  guided,  if  only  he  will 
meekly  put  himself  into  the  hand  of  God  (Ps.  xxv.  9). 

II.  The  possessor  of  a  lofty  faith.  This  distinction  may  be  claimed  for  Zerub- 
habel, though  not  assigned  a  place  in  the  magnificent  picture-gallery  of  Heb.  xi. ; 
because  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  Zerubhabel,  being  the  man  he  was,  a  descendant  of  the 
royal  line  of  David,  and  located  where  he  was  in  the  prosperous  city  of  Babylon,  and 
situated  as  he  was  in  the  manifest  enjoyment  of  the  Persian  monarch's  favour,  would 
have  acted  ag  he  did,  had  he  not  been  possessed  of  faith.  In  compaiison  with  those 
who  remained  behind  in  Babylon,  but  a  handful  set  forth  to  seek  the  land  of  their 
fathers;  and  it  is  little  probable  that  Zerubhabel  would  have  cast  in  his  lot  with 
the  pilgrims,  had  he  not  been  persuaded  that  the  movement  was  of  God,  that  the 
journey  upon  which  they  were  about  to  enter  had  been  marked  out  for  them  by 
Heaven,  and  that  the  insignificant  and  feeble  company  itself  was  a  true  representative 
of  JehoTah'8  Church  upon  the  earth.     That  spirit,  it  may  be  added,  which  was  present 


32  THE   BOOK   OF   HAGQAl.  t«n-  «-  1—23- 

in  Zerubbabel,  the  spirit  of  faith,  which  can  recognize  the  superiority  of  thing* 
spiritual  and  religious  to  things  earthly  and  secular,  that  is  not  ashamed  to  espouse  the 
cause  of  truth  and  righteousness  on  earth,  however  humble  and  obscure,  because  it  is 
the  truth  of  God,  and  that  is  always  ready,  when  the  voice  of  God  cries  within  the 
soul,  "  Who  will  go  for  us  ?  "  to  respond,  "  Here  am  I,  Lord ;  send  me  1 "  lies  at  the 
basis  of  all  true  greatness  in  the  soul. 

III.  An  example  op  indomitablb  courage.  Few  things  rarer,  even  among 
Christians,  than  a  fortitude  that  can  brave  all  difficulties  and  defy  all  Ofipositions, 
especially  in  matters  of  religion.  Yet  is  nothing  more  indispensable.  Thousands  of 
brilliant  schemes,  private  as  well  as  public,  in  Church  as  in  state,  have  come  to  nothing 
for  want  of  manly  resolution  to  go  on  with  them  and  carry  them  through.  Had 
Zerubbabel  been  a  craven,  he  never  would  have  done  so  outwardly  foolish  a  thing 
as  join  himself  with  a  handful  of  pilgrims  who  proposed  to  quit  their  comfortable  homes 
and  prosperous  estates  in  Babylon,  and  undertake  a  long  and  perilous  journey  to  a 
promised  land  on  the  other  side  of  the  Syrian  desert.  Nor,  had  he  been  a  weakling, 
would  he  have  succeeded  in  carrying  these  pilgrims  in  safety  to  their  destination. 
Traced  out  on  a  modern  map,  it  seems  not  a  far  journey  between  Babylon  and  Jeru- 
salem. Most  likely  Zerubbabel  took  the  road  that  Abraham  had  -travelled  by  when  he 
departed  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  moved  northwards  to  Haran,  rounded  the  head  of 
the  Syrian  desert,  and  came  down  upon  Palestine  by  Damascus.  Tet  to  Abraham, 
with  his  comparatively  small  company,  the  feat  must  have  been  immensely  easier  than  it 
could  have  been  to  Zerubbabel,  with  fifty  thousand  beads  of  families  and  nearly  a  quarter 
of  a  million  souls  in  all  to  take  charge  of.  But  with  the  help  of  God  and  bis  own  stout 
heart  he  did  it.  It  was  a  feat  only  second  to  that  of  Moses,  who  brought  their  fathers 
out  of  Egypt,  led  them  through  the  scorching  and  fiery  wilderness,  and  set  them  down 
at  the  gate  of  Canaan.  Nor  again,  unless  Zerubbabel  had  been  a  hero  who  was  not 
easily  discouraged,  could  he  have  brought  the  temple  to  completion,  working,  as  he 
did,  with  a  company  of  builders  who  became  alarmed  at  every  menace  uttered  against 
them  by  the  people  of  the  land,  and  who  threw  down  their  tools  on  encountering  the 
smallest  resistance.  So  difficult  was  the  task  to  keep  them  at  their  work,  and  so 
formidable  were  the  obstacles  he  had  to  encounter,  that  Zechariah,  a  younger  prophet 
than  Haggai,  likened  the  work  he  had  to  do  to  the  levelling  of  a  great  mountain, 
encoura^ng  him  at  the  same  time  with  the  assurance  that  it  would  be  levelled,  "  Who 
art  thou,  0  great  mountain?  before  Zerubbabel  thou  shalt  become  a  plain."  And 
become  a  plain  it  did.  Reinforced  by  a  fresh  company  or  builders  who  came  up  from 
Babylon  under  the  leadership  of  Ezra,  Zerubbabel  and  his  band  pushed  on  the  work 
till  it  was  finished, and  the  temple  received  its  top-stone  with  shoutings  of  "Grace,  grace 
unto  it "  (Ezra  vii.  6 — 8  ;  Zech.  iv.  7). 

IV. .  An  illustration  of  conspicuous  promotion.  A  great  honour  was  conferred  on 
Zerubbabel  when  chosen  by  Jehovah  to  be  his  servant,  and  as  such  appointed  the 
leader  of  his  people.  A  greater  when  assured  that  God  would  graciously  assist  him 
until  the  task  assigned  to  him  had  been  successfully  carried  through.  The  greatest 
when,  in  reward  for  his  faithful  service,  it  was  promised  that  he  and  his  would  be 
sharers  in  the  future  Messianic  glory  reserved  for  Israel ;  for  this  is  what  the  clause 
means,  "I  will  make  thee  as  a  signet-ring,  0  Zerubbabel,  my  servant."  It  lends 
a  remarkable  interest  to  this  verse  of  Haggai  to  be  told  that  in  recent  excavations  upon 
Temple  Hill,  a  ring  has  been  discovered  with  the  name  of  Haggai  inscribed  upon  it 
('  Recent  Discoveries  on  the  Temple  Hill,'  pp.  78 — 80).  In  the  eyes  of  Orientals  the 
finger-ring,  or  signet,  was  regarded  as  a  valuable  possession,  to  lose  which  was  esteemed 
a  dire  calamity.  To  speak  of  one  as  a  signet-ring  was  to  assure  him  of  tender  regard 
and  watchful  preservation.  Reversing  the  threat  pronounced  against  Jeconiah,  the  last 
King  of  Judah,  and  the  grandfather  of  Zerubbabel  (Jer.  xxii.  24),  Jehovah  promiser 
that  Zerubbabel  shajl  be  as  a  signet-ring  upon  his  own  finger,  i.e.  shall  be  indiasolubly 
associated  with  himself  and  regarded  with  sincere  affection ;  and  this  promise  may  bis 
said  to  have  been  fulfilled,  so  far  as  Zerubbabel  was  concerned,  in  that  he  was  henceforth 
inseparably  linked  with  the  history  of  God's  people,  and  in  fact  constituted  an  ancestor 
of  Messiah,  who  afterwards  sprang  from  his  line.  But  as  the  day  when  the  promised 
distinction  should  be  conferred  on  Zerubbabel  was  expressly  specified  as  the  day  when 
the  process  begun  by  Jehovah  of  shaking  the  heavens  and  the  earth  should  have  been 


CH.  n.  1— 2S.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAL  83 


fcrought  to  a  completion,  at  which  time  Zembbabel  should  have  been  long  dead,  it 
becomes  obvious  that  the  promise  must  be  understood  as  having  reached  its  highest 
I  ulfllment  irf  Zerubbabel's  distinguished  descendant,  who  should  then  be  made  Jehovah  s 
signet-ring,  in  reward  for  a  greats  work  of  emancipation  and  temple-building  than  had 
been  performed  by  Zembbabel.  And  in  this  reward  all  share  who,  whether  before  his 
coming  or  since,  have  been  fellow-workers  with  him  by  serving  the  will  of  God  in  their 
day  and  generation. 

Lessons.  1.  The  value  of  great  men  to  their  own  age  and  to  the  world  at  large. 
2.  The  certainty  of  a  Divine  fore-ordination  in  ordinary  life.  8.  The  Impossibility  of 
faithful  work  on  earth  losing  its  reward. ' 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  ATTTHOKa 

Yeri.  1 — 9. — Betwning  despondency  and  renewed  stimidut.  In  these  verses  wa 
have  the  third  of  the  earnest  addresses  delivered  by  the  devoted  seer  to  these  temple- 
builders.  In  the  first  (ch.  i.  3 — 11)  he  reproved  them  for  their  neglect  and  stimulated 
them  to  the  performance  of  their  duty.  In  the  second  (ch.  i.  13),  in  few  words,  a 
single  pregnant  sentence,  indeed,  he  assured  them  of  God's  presence  with  them  now 
that  they  bad  repented  of  their  negligence  and  were  prepared  to  consecrate  themselves 
to  the  important  enterprise.  In  this  third  address  (vers.  1 — 9)  he  expatiated  upon  the 
glory  of  the  second  temple.  The  people  had  again  become  discouraged  and  depressed, 
despondent  and  downcast,  and  he  sought  to  impel  them  to  fresh  endeavour  by  indicating 
the  brightness  and  blessedness  of  the  coming  times,    (consider — 

I.  Thk  causes  op  thbib  despondengy.  This  despondency  very  soon  again  took 
possession  of  them.  They  bad  been  less  than  a  month  engaged  in  earnest  endeavour  to 
carry  on  the  great  work  when  they  gave  way  once  more.  It  was  "  on  the  twenty-fourth 
day  of  the  sixth  month  "  that,  stirred  up  by  the  word  of  God  tlirough  the  prophet,  they 
devoted  themselves  afresh  to  the  service  of  rearing  the  sanctuary  for  the  Lord,  and  now 
on  the  twenty-first  day  of  the  seventh  month  their  hands  tired  and  their  hearts  grew 
faint.  Why?  1.  The  faUwre  of  their  harveaU.  This  was  brought  conspicuously  before 
them  by  the  fact  that "  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  "  was  now  going  on.  This  festival  stood 
out  amongst  the  Jews  as  "  the  feast,"  and  is  described  by  Jewish  writers  as  "  the  holiest 
and  greatest  feast "  of  the  nation.  It  served  a  double  purpose,  for  whilst  it  commemo- 
rated the  goodness  of  God  as  manifested  to  the  fathers  during  their  desert-wanderings, 
it  also  commemorated  his  goodness  in  the  harvest  just  gathered  in,  and  was  therefore 
not  only  called  "  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,"  but  likewise  'f  the  Feast  of  Ingathering." 
In  prosperous  times,  during  its  celebration,  the  holy  city  wore  quite  a  holiday  aspect. 
It  became  converted  into  a  vast  camp  for  all  the  people,  and,  with  a  view  to  make  more 
vivid  to  them  the  tent-life  of  their  ancestors  in  the  wilderness,  they  dwelt  for' the  time 
being  in  booths,  which  they  constructed  of  boughs  of  olive  and  palm,  pine  and 
myrtle ;  all  the  courses  of  the  priests  were  employed  in  the  religious  exercises,  bullocks 
were  offered  in  sacrifice,  the  Law  was  read,  the  trumpets  were  sounded  daily,  an(i  each 
who  took  part  in  the  commemoration  bore  in  the  left  hand  a  branch  of  citron,  and  in 
the  right  a  palm  branch  entwined  with  willows  and  mytde.  When  we  remember  how 
that  on  this  occasion,  in  celebrating  this  feast,  they  would  have,  of  necessity,  to  dispense 
with  many  of  the  usual  accompaniments,  and  also  that  the  blight  had  been  upon  their 
crops,  and  hence  the  ingathering  had  been  only  .scanty  (ch.  i.  6),  we  need  not  be 
surprised  at  the  depression  from  which  they  were  suffering.  2.  There  was,  however, 
another  cause  of  their  despondency,  viz.  the  unfavouraMe  contrast  presented  as  they 
compared  the  structure  they  were  rearing  with  the  first  temple.  (Ver.  3.)  There  were 
old  men  among  these  returned  exiles  who  had  seen  the  temple  of  Solomon,  and  who, 
when  the  foundations  of  this  second  temple  were  laid,  conscious  that  the  new  structure 
would  be  very  inferior  in  character  to  the  former  building,  gave  way  to  demonstrations 
of  grief  (Ezra  iii.  11 — 13).  And  it  would  seem  that,  as  the  work  of  reconstruction 
proceeded,  these  hoary-headed  men  continued  to  revert  to  the  glories  of  the  past,  and 
mstituted  so  many  unfavourable  comparisons  between  that  age  and  the  times  as  they 
were  now,  that  the  builders  grew  weary  asiA  faint-hearted  in  their  work. 

IL   ThX  OOKSIDBBATIOXS    tTnSBD    BT   TBE    FBOPHBT    SO    AS    TO    STBENGTHKN    THBIB 


84  THE    BOOK   OF   HAGOA.!.  [oh.  ii.  1—23. 


HBABT9   AND   TO   ENCOURAQE    THEM    TO    RENEWED    OON8B0RATI0N.      Eaggai    WaB   aged, 

yet,  unlike  his  contemporaries,  instead  of  dwelling  despondingly  upon  the  past,  he  looked 
on  hopefully  to  the  future.  With  prophetic  insight  he  saw  the  golden  age  as  lying,  not 
in  the  days  of  yore,  but  in  the  coming  time.  His  thoughts  were  centred  upon  Divine 
blessings  to  be  bestowed  richly  and  bountifully  upon  the  true  and  faithful,^  and  he 
sought  to  animate  the  drooping  faith  and  hope  of  the  workers  by  directing  their  minds 
to  these.  He  reminded  them  of :  1.  The  abiding  presence  with  them  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  in  fulfilment  of  the  covenant  made  with  their  fathers  (ver.  5).  2.  The  national 
upheavings  which  should  take  place,  and  which  should  be  overruled  to  their  good 
(vers.  6,  7).  3.  The  halo  of  glory  which  should  eventually  rest  upon  the  shrine  they 
were  rearing  (vers.  7,  9).  4.  The  Divine  proprietorship  of  all  material  resources 
(ver.  8).  6.  The  deep  and  durable  tranquillity  which  should  be  experienced  as  the 
result  of  the  development  of  the  Divine  purposes  (ver.  9).  The  sense  of  despondency 
is  experienced  still  by  those  engaged  in  holy  service,  and  the  way  to  get  roused  out  of 
this  is  by  anticipating  the  brighter  days  that  are  in  store,  when  rectitude  shall  mark 
every  character,  and  truth  be  on  every  tongue ;  when  holy  virtue  shall  adorn  every 
life ;  when  the  heavenly  fruits  of  "  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  kindness,  goodness, 
faithfulness,  meekness,  temperance,"  shall  everywhere  abound,  and  the  Lord  of  hosts 
shall  have  a  home  and  dwelling-place  in  every  heart. — S.  D.  H. 

Vera.  6—9. — The  prophePs  Messianic  prophecy.  In  studying  the  Old  Testament,  it 
is  deeply  interesting  to  trace  therein  the  gradual  development  of  the  Messianic  hope. 
Three  distinct  stages  are  observable.  1.  Prom  the  promise  made  at  the  Fall  (Gen. 
lii.  15)  until  the  death  of  Moses.  The  indefinite  promise  respecting  "  the  Seed  of  the 
woman  "  was  made  more  definite  in  the  promise  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xiL  3),  and  was 
revealed  still  more  explicitly  in  "  the  Prophet "  who  was  declared  by  Moses  as  at 
length  to  arise,  and  who  should  be  Law-giver,  Ruler,  and  Deliverer  (Deut.  xviii.  16). 
2.  During  the  reigns  of  David  and  Solomon,  the  idea  of  the  Kingship  of  the  Messiah 
was  developed,  and  this  Divine  royalty  was  the  theme  of  the  Messianic  psalms.  3. 
From  Isaiah  to  Malacbi  we  have  a  yet  further  unfolding,  the  Incarnation  and  Passion 
of  the  world's  Redeemer  being  declared  (see  Liddon's  Bampton  Lectures  on  'Our 
Lord's  Divinity,'  lect.  ii.).  The  mission  of  Haggai  had  special  reference  to  encouraging 
the  temple-builders  in  their  arduous  toil ;  but  the  verses  now  before  us  (vera.  6—9) 
connect  him  with  this  development  of  the  Messianic  anticipation,  since  only  in  the 
light  of  the  Christian  age  can  the  tidl  significance  of  his  teaching  as  contained  here  be 
realized. 

L   COMBIDEB   WHAT  THIS    PBOPHEOT    FBOBABLT    BUOaESTED    TO    THB    JeWS  OT    THIS 

beeb's  own  TIME.  1.  Freedom  from  the  yoke  of  servitude.  These  returned  exiles 
were  under  the  power  of  the  Persian  monarch ;  and  they  would  uuderstand  their  seer 
(vers.  6,  7)  to  mean  that  political  agitations  would  soon  occur  among  the  nations,  and 
which  their  God  would  overrule  to  the  effecting  of  their  enfranchisement.  2.  The 
temple  they  were  rearing  to  become  enriched  with  material  wealth.  "And  the 
desire  of  all  nations  shall  come,"  etc.  (vers.  7,  8).  "  Chemddh  signifies  desire,  then 
the  object  of  desire,  that  in  which  a  man  finds  pleasure  and  joy,  valuables.  Ghemdath 
haggoyim  is  therefore  the  valuable  possessions  of  the  heathen,  or,  according  to  ver.  8, 
their  gold  and  silver  or  their  treasures  and  riches.  The  thought  is  the  following ; 
That  shaking  will  be  followed  by  this  result,  or  produce  this  effect,  that  all  the 
valuable  possessions  of  the  heathen  will  come  to  fill  the  temple  with  glory  "  (Keil  and 
Delitzsch,  on  '  The  Minor  Prophets,'  vol.  ii.  193, 194).  3.  A  time  of  settled  peace  and 
prosperity  (ver.  9).  This  restricted  apprehension  of  the  meaning  underlying  the 
prophet's  words  would  cheer  the  hearts  of  the  builders  and  impel  them  to  renewed 
endeavour. 

II.  Consider  thi  pabtial  ruLFiLMENT  of  this  pbofheot  DUBiHa  thb  latbb 
Jewish  age.  We  know  that  the  national  convulsions  hinted  at  in  the  prophecy  did 
arise — that  Persia  was  subdued  by  Greece;  that  Greece  was  shaken  into  fragments  at 
the  death  of  Alexander  ;  and  that  the  Eastern  world  became  the  prey  of  Rome ;  and  we 
know  also  that  whilst  these  conflicts  were  going  on  the  Jews  prospered,  and  material 
wealth  flowed  into  their  temple,  the  heathen,  with  the  decay  of  their  systems,  ooming 
and  consecrating  their  possessions  to  the  Lord  of  hosts.     Nor  were  tokens  wanting 


<CH.  Ti.  1— 23.]  THE   BOOK   OF   HAGGAI.  38 

of  the  partial  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  in  its  spiritual  significance.  "  Rites  and 
ceremonies  retired  more  into  the  background ;  and  prayer  began  to  assume  its  true 
place  in  public  worship.  The  religious  knowledge  of  the  people  was  kept  up  through 
the  regular  public  reading  and  distribution  of  the  Scriptures,  which  were  early  collected 
into  their  present  canonical  form.  Synagogue!  were  established,  the  people  having 
learnt  at  Babylon  that  God's  presence  might  be  enjoyed  in  their  assemblies  in  any 
place  or  circumstances.  Thus  there  was  kept  alive  throughout  the  nation  a  higher 
and  purer  type  of  religion  than  it  had  known  in  the  days  when  the  first  temple  with 
its  outward  splendour  and  gorgeous  ritual  excited  the  admiration  of  the  people,  but 
too  seldom  led  their  thoughts  to  the  contemplation  of  the  truths  it  expressed  and 
prefigured"  (McGundy ;  see  Lange's  'Commentary  on  Haggai,'  p.  19). 

Ill,    CONSIDEB   THE   COMPLETE     FULFILMENT    OF    THE    PBOPHEOT   IN  THE   CHRISTIAN 

DISPENSATION.  The  prophecy  is  Messianic.  Underneath  its  letter  there  lies  a  deep 
spiritual  meaning.  The  prophet  saw,  afar  off,  the  day  of  Christ,  and  testified  before- 
hand of  the  latter-day  glory  of  the  Lord  and  his  Christ.  We  see  its  full  accomplish- 
ment :  1.  In  the  shaking  of  the  nations  by  the  power  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  2.  The 
consecration  by  the  good  of  all  their  gifts  and  endowments  to  the  service  of  the  Lord. 
3.  The  realized  spiritual  presence  of  God  in  Christ  with  his  Church,  and  which  con- 
stitutes her  true  glory.  4.  The  inward  rest  and  tranquillity  all  his  people  shall 
experience  as  his  bestowment. — 8.  D.  H. 

Vers.  4,  6. — 2%<  real  presence.  In  contrasting  the  house  the  builders  were  now 
raising  for  God  with  the  first  temple,  many  a  reference  was  doubtless  made  by  the 
"  ancient  men  "  to  "  the  ark  of  the  covenant "  and  "  the  Shechinah,"  which  had  been 
the  visible  symbols  of  the  Divine  presence.  What,  after  all,  they  would  urge,  could 
this  new  structure  be  without  these  precious  tokens  of  the  Lord,  as  being  with  them 
in  all  his  majesty  and  might?  Haggai  therefore  most  appropriately  laid  great 
emphasis  upon  the  glorious  fact  that  they  had  with  them  the  spiritual  presence  of  the 
Lord  Most  High,  who  would  remain  with  them,  and  would  faithfully  fulfil  to  them 
every  covenant  engagement  made  with  their  sires  (vers.  4,  6). 

I.  The  OLOBions  fact  of  the  beal  pbesenoe  of  the  Lobd  with  hib  Chttboh. 
1.  This  truth  is  constantly  declared  in  the  oracles  of  God.  2.  It  was  brought  home 
to  the  Israelites  in  the  olden  times  by  means  of  symbolical  representations.  3.  It  was 
impressed  upon  these  returned  captives  by  the  raising  up  of  faithful  men  to  declare  the 
Divine  will,  and  to  stimulate  them  to  renewed  devotion.  4.  It  is  made  manifest  to 
us  in  the  Incarnation  of  God  in  Christ.  Not  only  wiU  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with 
man  upon  the  earth,  but  he  has  even  taken  man's  nature  into  union  with  his  own.  He 
has  come  to  us,  aGfecting  us  not  only  with  the  glory  of  his  majesty,  but  revealing  to 
lU  his  very  heart,  and  unveiling  to  us  the  intensity  of  his  infinite  love. 

n.  The  infldenob  which  the  consciousness  of  this  obeat  tbuth  should 
BZEBT  UPON  HIS  SEBVANTS.  1.  It  should  be  to  them  in  times  of  depression  the  source 
of  strong  consolation.  "  Be  strong  "  (ver.  4) ;  i.e.  "  Be  comforted."  2.  It  should  take 
firom  them  all  craven  fear,  inspiring  them  with  holy  courage :  "  Fear  ye  not "  (ver.  5). 
3.  It  should  impel  them  to  renewed  consecrated  endeavour:  "and  work"  (ver.  4).— 
S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  7. — Ood't  temple  fitted  with  glory.  "And  I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory, 
saith  the  Lord  of  hosts." 

I.  View  this  Divtoe  pbomise  as  fulfilled  in  the  advent  of  Chbist  to 
THIS  fabtioulab  banotuabt  fob  God.  L  Thither  the  Child  Jesus  was  taken  in  his 
infancy  by  Joseph  and  Mary,  that  they  might  present  him  before  the  Lord.  So  far 
as  material  splendour  was  concerned,  no  trace  of  it  was  to  be  seen  in  this  introduction 
of  the  Child  Jesus  to  that  house.  The  rich  were  required  to  bring  a  lamb  as  an  offering 
when  they  came  to  present  their  children  thus,  but  Joseph  and  Mary  were  too  poor  to 
bring  so  costly  an  offering,  and  hence  they  brought  the  humbler  gift  the  Law  required. 
But  whilst  earthly  glory  was  lacking  on  this  occasion,  a  higher  glory  was  expressed. 
See  those  distinguished  lervants  of  God  I  And  as  you  behold  old  age  gazing  with  holy 
joy  upon  that  helpless  Babe,  regarding  him  as  the  Deliverer  of  Israel,  as  in  imagination 
you   witness  the  one,  Simeon,  taking  that  infant  form  into  his  arms,  exclaiming 


S8  THE   BOOK   OF   HAGGAL  [oh.  n.  1—23; 

"  Lord,  now  lettest,"  etc.  ^uke  ti.  29),  and  as  you  behold  the  other,  Anna,  "  giriiig 
thanks  to  God,  and  speaking  of  the  Redeemer  to  all  who  looked  for  redemption  in 
Jerusalem  "  (Luke  ii.  38),  do  you  not  see  the  promise  realized, "  I  will  fill,"  etc.  (ver.  7)  f 
2.  When  he  attained  the  age  of  twelve  years,  we  find  him  again  in  that  temple,  sitting 
as  a  learner,  hearing  those  who  gave  instruction  there,  and  asking  them  questions.  We 
can  form  no  idea  as  to  the  nature  of  the  questions  he  proposed  to  the  masters  in  Israel ; 
but  when  we  think  of  those  teachers  as  being  confounded  by  the  questions  and  answers 
of  that  Galilean  Touth,  when  we  remember  how  that  all  who  heard  him  were  astonished 
at  his  understanding,  and  when  we  reflect  upon  the  Divine  light  and  knowledge  which 
was  then  communicated,  we  see  how  that  on  the  day  when  the  sorrowing  parents  were 
searching  diligently  for  their  lost  Son,  God  was  fulfilling  the  promise  made  ages  before 
to  his  people,  "  I  will  fill,''  etc.  (ver.  7 ;  Luke  ii.  42 — 51).  3.  Whenever  he  entered 
that  temple  it  became  filled  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  This  was  so,  no  matter  whether 
he  approached  it  for  the  purpose  of  performing  some  of  his  mighty  works,  or  to  give 
utterance  to  his  wondrous  words,  or  to  drive  from  the  shrine  those  who  were  desecrating 
it  and  causing  it  to  become  a  den  of  thieves.  Never  did  he  enter  it  without  imparting 
to  it  a  glory  such  as  was  unknown  to  the  temple  of  Solomon.  That  temple  in  all  its 
glory  could  not  bear  comparison  with  this  second,  when  this  latter  house  was  favoured 
with  the  visits  and  the  holy  influence  of  the  Christ  of  God ;  and  it  was  not  until  they 
who  ought  to  have  rejoiced  in  the  light  he  imparted  and  in  the  halo  his  presence  shed 
had  rejected  and  crucified  him  that  the  glory  departed  from  this  temple  as  from  the 
former  one,  and  that  irreparable  ruin  was  brought  upon  the  house  which  had  been 
repeatedly  filled  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord. 

II.  View  this  Divine  pbomise  as  having  its  application  to  evebt  banctuabt 
IN  WHICH  God  is  wobshipfed  in  spibit  and  in  tbuth.  Every  such  structure  is  as 
much  God's  temple  as  the  Jewish  temple  ever  was.  The  Christian  worshipper  may 
adopt,  in  reference  to  the  sanctuary  to  which  it  is  his  happiness  to  repair,  such  utterances 
as  Fs.  Ixxxiv.  1 ;  Ixv.  1,  2 ;  cxxii.  1,  2 ;  and  he  can  apply  to  these  modem  sanctuaries 
the  grand  old  promise  of  his  God,  "  And  I  will  fill,"  etc.  (ver.  7).  There  i*  but  one 
essential  in  order  that  any  sanctuary  may  be  filled  with  glory,  even  the  presence  of 
Christ,  not  the  visible,  but  the  spiritual,  presence  of  the  Divine  Redeemer.  Let  this 
be  wanting,  and  it  is  immaterial  how  magnificent  may  be  the  structure  reared  or  how 
imposing  the  outward  form.  Vestments  may  be  worn,  the  whole  assembly  may  assume 
a  reverential  aspect,'  the  music  may  be  of  the  most  attractive  character,  the  pulpit  may 
be  occupied  by  one  who  may  charm  and  captivate  by  his  eloquence ;  yet  if  the  presence 
of  Christ  is  not  realized,  the  house  will  not  be  lighted  up  with  the  true  glory ;  whereas 
much  of  this  may  be  wanting,  but  if  Christ's  presence  is  realized,  glory  shall  fill  the  place. 
What  a  contrast  there  was  between  this  temple  and  the  upjier  chamber  in  which  the 
chosen  disciples  were  assembled,  waiting  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  their  risen 
Lord !  And  yet,  on  the  second  sabbath  after  the  Ascension,  a  glory  filled  that  upper 
chamber  such  as  was  unknown  to  the  Jewish  temple,  simply  because  he  who  had  been 
driven  from  the  temple,  and  who,  during  his  appearances  there,  had  been  invariably 
rejected  by  its  worshippers,  was  a  welcome  Guest  in  that  upper  room.  His  presence 
was  fully  realized  there,  and  hence  the  place  was  filled  with  the  Divine  glory,  and  was 
rendered  "the  very  gate  of  heaven."  The  spiritual  presence  of  the  Divine  Redeemer 
thus  constitutes  the  true  consecration  of  any  building  reared  for  Christian  worship  and 
teaching ;  this  is  what  is  needed  in  order  that  any  sanctuary  in  our  own  day  may  be 
filled  with  God's  own  glory.  Then,  clothed  with  true  sincerity  of  spirit,  partaking  of 
his  love,  his  purity,  his  spirituality,  his  consecration,  walking  as  he  walked,  honestly, 
uprightly,  consistently ,_  and  so  fulfilling  the  conditions  upon  which  his  manifestation 
depends,  may  we  feel  him  near,  as  in  the  sanctuary,  dear  to  us  by  hallowed  associations, 
we  engage  in  acts  of  worship;  near  us  the  Imparter  of  a  Divine  life,  the  Inspirer  of  all 
our  songs,  our  prayers,  our  words,  our  toils ;  the  Bestower  of  large  blessings  upon  us  and 
upon  all  who  come  within  the  range  of  our  influence.  "  Now  therefore  arise  0  Lord 
God,"  etc.  (2  Chron.  vi.  41).— S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  8.—  The  consecration  of  wealth.  "  The  silver  is  mine,  and  the  gold  is  mine,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts." 

L  The  Divine  bight  to  KVEBTTHrKO  we  possess.     God  is  our  Sovereign,  and  as 


cii.n.1— 23.]  THE  BOOK  OF   HAGQAI.  37 

such  he  exercises  dominion  over  us,  and  disposes  of  us  as  it  seemeth  him  good.  This 
sovereignty  is  exercised  by  liim  in  strict  accordance  with  the  principles  of  wisdom, 
rectitude,  and  goodness.  This  Divine  right  has  reference,  not  only  to  ourselves,  but 
extends  also  to  all  that  we  possess.  "  All  things  come  of  him  ;  "  we  are  but  stewards 
of  his  bounty.  The  recognition  of  this  fact  contributes  to  a  man's  real  welfare.  If  a 
man  views  his  possessions  as  being  his  own,  he  is  in  danger  of  that  love  of  money  which 
is  the  root  of  all  evil.  Hence  it  is  with  a  view  to  man's  spiritual  preservation,  as  well 
as  with  a  due  regard  to  the  benefit  of  the  race  and  the  progress  of  his  cause,  that  God 
insists  upon  his  right,  saying,  "The  silver  is  mine,"  etc.  (ver.  8). 

II.  The  impobtanob  op  the  kecognition  of  this  Divine  bight  on  the  part  of 

MAN,  AND  THE  C0N8ECBATI0N  OF  HIS  SUBSTANCE  TO  THE  SEBVIOB  OF  GOD.       1.  Neglect  of 

this  involves  loss.  The  young  ruler  an  example  (Matt.  xix.  16 — 22).  "  He  went  away 
sorrowful,  for  he  had  great  possessions."  He  kept  his  wealth,  but  at  a  terrible  sacrifice, 
for  he  forfeited  intercourse  with  Christ,  the  joys  of  the  Christly  life,  and  the  unfading 
treasures  with  which  the  Saviour  was  prepared  to  enrich  him. 

"  For  mark  the  change  t    Thus  saith  the  Lord, 
'  Gome,  part  with  earth  for  heaven  to-day.' 
The  youth,  astonished  at  the  word. 
In  silent  sadness  went  his  way." 

2.  Regard  to  this  ensures  gain.  Cornelius  an  example  (Acts  x.  1,  2).  He  viewed 
property  as  a  trust.  He  rendered  unto  God  his  due.  His  prayers  and  his  alms  "  came 
up  for  a  memorial  before  God."  And  the  result  was  that  God  blessed  him,  granting 
unto  him  the  ministry  of  angels,  guiding  him  into  truth  by  his  servant,  imparting  to 
him  the  consciousness  of  his  love,  and  filling  him  with  the  graces  of  his  Spirit.  Let  us 
readily  render  unto  God  his  just  claim  in  reference  to  the  possessions  of  earth  (1)  when 
help  18  required  in  order  to  the  maiutenance  of  his  worship;  (2)  when  the  cry  of 
distress,  occasioned  not  by  improvidence,  but  by  unavoidable  adverse  influences,  rises 
into  our  ears ;  (3)  when  fresh  openings  for  doing  the  work  of  God  both  at  home  and 
abroad  are  found,  and  call  for  increased  liberality  that  they  may  be  embraced,  let  God's 
voice  be  heard  in  these,  intimating  that  he  has  need  of  those  resources  which  have 
come  to  us  as  hia  gifts,  and  let  us  cheerfully  give  to  him  of  his  own.  For  who  has 
such  right  to  what  we  possess  of  this  world's  goods  as  he  whose  free  gifts  these  are, 
and  who  in  the  bestowment  of  them  has  blessed  the  work  of  our  hands  ? — S.  D.  H. 

Ver.  9. — The  peace  of  Ood.  "And  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts."  Various  theories  have  been  propounded  concerning  how  temporal  peace  and 
prosperity  may  be  secured  to  a  people.  One  will  tell  you  that  everything  turns  upon 
which  politicjd  party  happens  to  be  in  power;  a  second  will  cry,  "Free  Trade;"  a 
third  will  respond,  "Protection;"  a  fourth  will  dilate  upon  "the  reform  of  the  land 
laws ; "  a  fifth  will  enlarge  upon  the  importance  of  the  maintenance  of  our  military 
prestige,  affirming  that  peace  is  best  guaranteed  by  being  prepared  for  war ;  but  we 
may  rest  assured  that  the  foundations  of  national  peace  and  prosperity  lie  deeper  far, 
and  are  laid  in  rectitude  and  righteousness.  True  peace,  and,  as  a  consequence,  lasting 
prosperity,  come  to  a  people  only  in  a  secondary  sense  through  their  rulers  and 
legislators,  and  men  of  mark  in  the  various  departments :  they  come  primarily  through 
the  people  themselves.  In  proportion  as  they  become  God-fearing  and  Chriat-like, 
Bubmissive  to  the  Divine  authority  and  guided  by  the  principles  of  God's  Word,  will 
he  bless  them  and  make  them  prosperous  and  happy.  But  there  is  a  higher  form  of 
peace  than  that  which  is  denominated  temporal,  and  to  that  more  exalted  blessing  the 
Di'nne  promise  contained  in  this  text  referred.  Temporal  peace  was  now  being  enjoyed 
by  the  retnmed  from  exile.  They  dwelt  in  quietude,  although  the  subjects  of  a 
foreign  power.  But  the  Lord  of  hosts  promised  them  spiritual  peace,  and  assured  them 
that,  in  association  with  the  sanctuary  they  were  raising  to  his  honour,  they  should 
experience  inward  tranquillity  and  rest.     "  In  this  place  will  I  give  peace,"  etc.  (ver.  9). 

I.  gIod  ixtlfils  hib  obaoious  pbomise  to  his  sebvants  ab  thbt  oatheb  at  his 
■AKOTUABT  B0BDENED  WITH  A  SENSE  OF  SIN.  In  our  daily  life  we  are  continually 
contracting  fresh  sins.  We  stray  from  God's  ways,  undesignedly  we  err  from  his  precepts, 
and  as  the  result  are  rendered  restless  and  disquieted.     And  coming  thus  to  his  house, 


88  THE  BOOK  OP  HAQGAI.  [oh.  n.  1—21 

as  we  bow  in  worship,  and  aB  we  listen  to  the  story  of  redeeming  love,  we  become 
bumbled  in  spirit  and  filled  with  penitence,  and  we  find  peace  in  Christ.  He  who 
controlled  the  winds  and  the  waves  controls  also  the  passions  and  tumults  of  the  wilder 
human  spirit  as  he  says  in  gracious  tones,  "  Come  unto  me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 

II.  God  ruLPiLB  his  obaoious  pbomibb  to  hib  servants  as  they  gather  at  hib 
BANOTtJART  OPPRESSED  WITH  A  SENSE  OF  SORROW.  In  every- Congregation  assembled  for 
worship  there  are  to  be  found  sorrowing  hearts.  "  Every  heart  knoweth  its  own 
bitterness,''  and  we  little  know  how  many  and  varied  are  the  trials  being  experienced 
by  those  who  form  our  fellow-worshippers;  and  as  such  in  their  deep  need,  and 
oppressed  with  griefs  they  could  not  disclose  to  others,  turn  to  him  who  is  touched 
with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  they  feel  themselves  divinely  soothed  and  succoured, 
and  realize  the  fulfilment  of  the  ancient  promise,  "  And  in  this  place,"  etc.  (ver.  9). 

III.  God  fulfils  this  gbacioub  promise  to  his  servants  ab  they  gather  at  his 
banotcary  harassed  through  a  sense  op  misgiving  and  mistrust.  Doubts  arise 
within  the  mind,  problems  are  presented  concerning  God's  truth  and  his  providence 
that  baffle  and  perplex,  and  as  it  was  with  Asaph  in  the  olden  time,  so  has  it  been  with 
many  since — ^they  have  found  light  cast  upon  the  hidden  way  as  they  have  come  to  the 
sanctuary  of  God  (Fs.  Ixxiii.  16, 17).  And  so  at  all  times  and  under  all  our  experiences 
he  can  breathe  over  us  the  peace  that  calms  the  troubled  soul  and  makes  the  weary 
heart  at  rest. — 8.  D.  H. 

Vers.  10 — 19. — The  past  and  the  futwre.  Two  months  had  now  elapsed  since, 
stimulated  by  the  prophet's  glowing  words,  the  temple-builders  had  resumed  their 
labours  (comp.  ver.  1  with  ver.  10).  These  months  were  of  great  importance  with 
reference  to  agricultural  interests,  being  the  usual  season  for  sowing  the  seed  and 
planting  the  vines.  That  at  such  a  time  they  should  manifest  so  much  zest  in  the 
work  of  rebuilding  the  temple  proved  how  thoroughly  in  earnest  they  were;  and  this 
earnestness  is  the  more  evident  as  we  remember  that  the  previous  harvests  having 
failed,  the  people  must  at  this  time  have  been  in  very  straitened  circumstances.  It 
is  not  surprising  if,  whilst  engaged  in  these  combined  operations,  renewed  depression 
took  possession  of  their  hearts,  and  if  in  sadness  they  asked  themselves  what  they 
would  do  if  the  next  harvest  should  likewise  fail.  The  address  of  Haggai  recorded  in 
these  verses  (10 — 19)  was  designed  either  to  anticipate  or  to  meet  such  gloomy  appre- 
hensions; and  we  have  only  to  bear  this  design  in  mind,  and  the  meaning  of  his  words, 
otherwise  somewhat  ambiguous,  becomes  very  clear. 

I.  The  cause  of  past  adversity.  1.  He  traced  this  to  their  own  moral  defection. 
The  method  he  adopted  was  peculiar — ^it  was  by  means  of  parables  that  he  sought  to  make 
vivid  to  them  their  past  sinfulness,  and  which  had  caused  their  sorrow.  (1)  The  first 
parable  and  its  application.  He  referred  them  to  the  priests,  bidding  them  ask  whether, 
if  a  man  carries  holy  flesh  in  the  lappet  of  his  garment  (t.e.  flesh  of  animals  slam  as 
sacrifices),  and  he  happened  to  touch  any  food  with  the  lappet,  the  food  thus  touched 
would  become  consecrated.  The  priests,  in  accordance  with  the  ceremonial  Law  (Lev. 
vi.  27),  answered, "  No"  (vers.  11, 12),  contending  that  the  lappet  of  the  dress  was  made 
holy,  but  that  it  was  not  said  in  the  Law  that  it  could  communicate  this  holiness.  So, 
the  prophet  implied  (ver.  14),  was  it  with  his  nation.  God  had  chosen  their  land  to  set 
his  Name  there.  .  His  worship  had  been  established  in  their  midst,  they  had  been 
constituted  a  favoured  people,  and  their  land  had  been  consecrated  through  this  associa- 
tion with  the  Lord.  This,  however,  did  not  affect  that  which  had  been  planted  in  the 
soil ;  the  earth  was  not  bound  to  yield  an  abundant  increase  by  virtue  of  these  sacred 
associations.  It  was  only  by  their  being  faithful  to  their  high  calling,  diligently 
cultivating  the  soil,  and  looking  up  to  Heaven  for  the  blessing,  that  temporal  prosperity 
could  be  enjoyed,  and  the  lack  of  this  spirit  had  been  the  cause  of  all  their  sorrow. 
(2)  The  second  parable  and  its  application.  The  appeal  was  again  made  to  the  priests, 
to  know  whether,  if  one  who  had  been  defiled  by  contact  with  a  dead  body  happened  tc 
touch  anything,  the  thing  thus  touched  would  be  unclean.  The  priests  unhesitatingly 
replied  that  it  would,  the  declarations  of  the  ceremonial  Law  upon  this  point  bein"  very 
explicit  (Numb.  xix.).  So  the  prophet  affirmed  that  his  people,  neglecting  the  claim* 
of  Jehovah,  had  rendered  themselves  morally  unclean,  and  the  blight  had  consequently 
rested  upon  the  works  of  their  hands  (ver.  14).     Their  adversity  was  traceable  to  their 


OH.  u.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGQAI.  39 

sad  defection  from  holy  duty  and  devotedness  to  the  Lord  their  Qod.  2.  He  intimated 
that  because  of  this  defection  Qod  had  visited  them  in  judgment.  He  had  in  chastise- 
ment smitten  them  with  blasting  and  mildew  and  hail,  rendering  their  labour  so 
abortive  that  their  sheaves  had  yielded  but  a  scanty  return  (vers.  15 — 17).  3.  He 
recorded  the  fact  that,  despite  these  judgments,  they  bad  persisted  in  their  neglect  of 
duty.  "  Yet  ye  turned  not  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  "  (ver.  17).  The  prophet's  strong 
faithful  speech  indicates  that  there  had  been  amongst  these  returned  captives  much 
of  indifference,  coldness,  and  deadness  in  reference  to  the  work  of  God,  and  it  was  only 
right  that  they  should  be  reminded  of  this,  and  that  by  the  painful  memory  of  past 
failure  they  should  be  stimulated  to  more  thorough  and  entire  consecration  in  the 
future,  and  to  which  we  may  be  sure  the  devoted  seer  gladly  turned.  The  past  i» 
irrevocable  and  irretrievable.    No  tears,  no  regrets,  can  win  it  back  to  us. 

"  Thou  unrelenting  Past  1 
Strong  are  the  barriers  of  thy  dark  domain; 
All  things,  yea,  even  man's  life  on  earth. 
Slide  to  thy  dim  dominloos  and  are  bound." 

The  future,  however,  is  available,  and  hence,  leaving  the  past,  with  all  our  shortcomings 
in  relation  to  it,  and  rejoicing  in  God's  mercy  and  in  the  strength  he  is  so  ready  to 
impart,  let  us  "  go  and  sin  no  more." 

II.  'The  assubance  op  futube  prospbeitt.  (Ver.  19.)  Their  action  had  now  com- 
pletely changed.  They  fully  recognized  God's  claims ;  instead  of  seeking  their  own 
personal  and  selfish  ends,  they  now  consecrated  themselves  heart  and  soul  to  the  work 
of  €k)d,  striving  in  every  way  to  advance  his  glory.  The  temple  rose,  and  "  they 
finished  it  according  to  the  commandment,"  etc.  (Ezra  vi.  14).  And  their  attitude 
towards  God  and  his  work  being  thus  changed,  his  attitude  towards  them  became  like- 
wise changed.  They  must  still  for  a  while  experience  the  effects  of  their  past  neglect 
in  that  time  must  elapse  before  rich  fruitfnloess  should  appear  where  formerly  there 
had  been  dearth  and  barrenness,  but  they  might  rest  assured  of  the  returning  favour  of 
the  Lord ;  yea,  from  that  moment  this  joy  should  be  theirs.  "  From  this  day  will  I 
bless  you  "  (ver.  19).  So  is  it  in  our  life,  that  whilst  the  cherubim  with  the  flaming  sword 
sternly  guard  the  door  of  the  past,  so  that  there  is  no  possibility  of  our  return  (Gen.  iii. 
24),  there  is  also  the  angel  of  the  Lord  opening  up  the  path  before-  us  through  the 
wilderness,  and  prepared  to  guide  us,  if  we  will,  to  the  brighter  Eden  that  lies  beyond 
(Bxod.  xiiii.  21,  22).— S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  20 — 23. — The  final  message.  We  gather  from  this  last  recorded  message  of 
this  prophet,  and  addressed  to  Zerubbabel — 

I.  The  impossibility  of  judging  bbspbotinq  the  pnTtJEE  fbom  prbsbnt 
AFPEABANOES.  The  sccr  referred  to  coming  commotions  and  upheavings  in  national 
life  (vers.  21,  22) ;  but  at  the  time  he  gave  utterance  to  these  intimations  all  was 
peace  and  tranquillity.  Bawlinson  refers  to  the  Persian  empire  as  spreading  over  two 
millions  of  square  miles,  or  more  than  half  of  modern  Europe,  and  this  vast  power  was 
at  this  time  unassailed.  In  the  opening  vision  of  Zechariah,  having  reference  to  this 
time,  the  representation  made  was,  "Behold,  ill  the  earth  sitteth  still,  and  is  at 
rest"  (Zech.  i.  11).  We  cannot  forecast  the  future;  we  know  not  what  a  day  may 
bring  forth. 

IL  The  becognition  op  God  in  the  ovebtheow  op  nations.  Eepeatedly  in 
vers.  21,  22,  the  Most  Hi^h  refers  to  his  own  action  in  the  convulsions  and  revolutions 
to  take  place.  "  I  will  shake,"  etc.  Whilst  civil  broils  and  contentions  and  military 
conflicts  contribute  to  the  effecting  of  such  desolation,  these  are  but  agents  uncon- 
gciously  fulfilling  the  Divine  behests.  "  The  Lord  God  Omnipotent  reigneth ; "  "  Ha 
changeth  the  times  and  the  seasons:  he  removeth  kings  and  setteth  up  kings" 
(Dan.  ii.  21) ;  "  This  is  the  finger  of  God." 

ni.    The    8B017BITY   AUIDST    ALL    THESE   OHANQES   OF    BUOH   AS   ABB   TEULT    OONBE- 

obated  TO  THE  SERVICE  OP  THE  LoBD.  (Ver.  23.)  The  signet-ring  was  a  precious 
token.  It  was  worn  by  the  Eastern  prince  on  one  of  the  fingers  of  his  right  hand,  and 
was  prized  by  him  above  all  things.  The  symbol,  as  used  here,  suggests  that  Zerub- 
babel the  prince,  who  had  so  faithfully  fulfilled  his  trust,  should  be  loved  and  carad 


40  THE  BOOK  OF  HAGGAL  [oh.  n.  1—28. 

for  by  God ;  that  the  Lord  would  cherish  him  even  88  the  signet-ring  was  cherished  by 
its  owner.  Zerubbabel  is  regarded  by  some  as  a  symbolical  character,  as  typical  of 
Christ,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  who  was  to  come ;  and  such  regard  this  assurance  addressed 
to  him  as  having  its  application  to  the  Messiah,  and  as  setting  forth  the  Divine 
Father's  delight  in  him.  The  emblem  may  be  still  further  extended  in  its  application. 
All  true  and  loyal  hearts  are  cared  for  by  him  as  his  chosen  ones,  and  he  will  preserve 
them  unto  his  everlasting  kingdom. — S.  D.  H. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Qo^s  me$sage  to  hit  people  by  Haggai.  "  In  the  seventh  month,  in  the 
one  and  twentieth  day  of  the  month,  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  prophet 
Haggai,  saying,  Speak  now  to  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  Governor  of  Judah,  and 
to  Joshua  the  son  .of  Josedech,  the  high  priest,  and  to  the  residue  of  the  people,"  etc. 
Here  is  the  second  Divine  message  addressed  by  Haggai  to  Zerubbabel,  Joshua,  and  the 
residue  of  the  people.  Observe :  1.  The  Divine  message  often  comes  from  one  man  to 
many.  It  now  came  by  HaggaL  2.  All  temples  but  the  temple  of  nature  are  to  be 
buUt  by  man  himself.  God  could  have  studded  the  world  with  temples  ;  but  he  has 
honoured  human  nature  by  leaving  it  to  men  to  do.  3.  Any  postponement  of  duty  is 
opposed  to  the  will  of  God.  All  duty  requires  the  utmost  promptitude.  The  Jews 
were  now  dallying  with  duty.  The  subject  of  these  verses  is — Ood  requires  human 
lahour  purely  for  religious  chfects.  We  have  to  labour  for  many  things — for  material 
subsistence,  for  intellectual  culture  and  scientific  information,  but  in  aU  for  a  religion. 
True  labour  in  every  form  should  be  religious.  Whatsoever  we  do  in  word  or  deed,  we 
should  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God.  Three  thoughts  are  here  suggested  in  relation  to 
this  subject— 

I.  That  teib  laboub  bhottld  be  STmuLATED  bt  the  view  or  BEUOiotrs 
SEOASENOE.  ITie  temple,  once  the  glory  of  the  country,  was  now  in  ruins,  etc. 
"  Who  is  left  among  you  that  saw  this  house  in  her  first  glory  ?  and  how  do  ye  lee  it 
now?"  Into  what  a  low  state  has  genuine  religion  sunk  in  our  country  1  It  ia  cold, 
formal,  worldly,  conventional. 

n.  That  this  laboub  bhodu)  be  febfobhed  bt  the  most  yioobottb  exebtioh. 
"  Be  strong,  0  Zerubbabel, ...  be  strong,  O  Joshua, ...  be  strong,  all  ye  people  of  the 
land."  All  the  powers  of  our  nature  should  be  concentrated  in  thiB  work,  the  work  of 
resuscitation.  Why?  1.  Because  it  is  right,  and  therefore  you  may  throw  your 
conscience  into  it.  2.  Because  it  is  worthy  of  all  your  faculties.  Call  out  and  honour 
■11  the  faculties  of  your  nature.  3.  Because  it  is  wgent.  The  highest  interests  of 
your  countrymen  and  your  race  depend  upon  it. 

in.   TmB  LABOUB   SHOULD  ENLIST   THE   00-OFEBATION  OF  ALL.      All  are  Called  UpOU 

here  to  work.  The  men  in  ofiBce,  and  the  people.  All  should  unite  in  tMs  work.  It 
concerns  all — ^young  and  old,  rich  and  poor.  The  energies  of  all  should  be  enlisted  in 
this  grand  work  of  religious  revival. 

IV.  This  laboub  has  a  ouabamtee  of  Divnn  assistance.  "For  I  am  with 
you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  etc.  Those  who  are  engaged  in  this  work  are  labourers 
together  with  God.  He  is  with  them,  inspiring,  directing,  encouraging,  energizing. 
Christ  says  to  his  disciples,  "Lo,  I  am  with  you  alumy,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world."— D.  T.  »  y 

Vers.  6 — 9.— The  moral  progress  tf  the  world.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  Yet 
once,  it  is  a  little  while,  and  I  will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  the  sea,  and 

the  dry  land,"  etc.    Humanity  is  undoubtedly  progressing  in  certun  directions ^iu 

secular  information,  in  scientific  discoveries,  ia  useful  and  ornamental  arts,  in  the 
extension  of  commerce,  in  the  principles  of  legislation.  But  whether  it  is  progressing  In 
moral  excellence  is  undoubtedly  questionable,  and  yet  there  is  no  real  progress  without 
this.  The  real  progress  of  man  is  the  progress  of  moi»l  goodness,  l^ree  thoughts  are 
suggested  by  the  passage  in  relation  to  this  moral  progress. 

I.  It  bbquirbs  obgat  social  bevolutions  amongst  mankind.  "  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts ;  Yet  once,  it  is  a  little  while,  and  I  will  shake  the  heavens,  and  th« 
earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the  dry  land."  Perhaps  the  primary  reference  here  is  to 
the  changes  which  were  to  be  effected  in  the  Jewish  system  and  commonwealth, 
preparatory  to  the  Christian  dispensation.     Judaism  was,  as  we  know,  shaken  to  l** 


OH.  11,1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HAGQAL  •  41 

centre  by  the  appearance  of  Christ.  Bevolutions  in  society  seem  to  me  essential  to  the 
moral  progress  of  the  race.  There  must  be  revolutions  in  theories  and  practices  it 
relation  to  governments,  markets,  temples,  Churches.  How  much  there  is  to  be  shaken 
in  the  heaven  and  earth  of  Christendom  before  the  cause  of  true  moral  progress  can 
advance]  May  we  not  hope  that  all  the  revolutions  that  are  constantly  occurring  in 
governments  and  nations  are  only  the  removal  of  obstructions  in  the  moral  march  of 
humanity  ?  In  the  clash  of  arms,  in  the  fall  of  kingdoms,  one  ought  to  hear  the  words, 
"  Prepare  ye  the  way,"  etc. 

U.  It  involves  the  batibf action  of  the  mobal  oba vinos  of  uankind.  "  The 
desire  of  all  nations  shall  come."  Whether  this  refers  to  Christ  or  not  has  been 
questioned.  Still,  philosophy  and  history  show  that  he  meets  all  the  moral  longing  uf 
humanity.  The  moral  craving  of  humanity  is  satisfied  in  Christ,  and  in  Christ  only. 
1.  Man's  deep  desire  it  reconciliation  to  his  Creator.  2.  Man's  deep  desire  is  to  have 
inner  htirmony  of  sotd.  Christ  effects  this.  3.  To  have  brotherly  unity  with  the  race. 
Moral  socialism  is  what  all  nations  crave  for.  Christ  gives  this.  He  breaks  down  the 
middle  wall  of  partition.     He  unites  all  men  together  by  uniting  all  men  to  God. 

III.  It  EN8UBES  THE   HIOHE8T   MANIFESTATIONS   OF   GOD   TO   MANKIND.       "I  will  fill 

this  house  with  glory,  saith  the  Lord,"  1.  God  will  he  recognized  as  the  universal 
Proprietor,  "Silver  is  mine, and  gold  is  mine,"  etc.  In  the  good  time  coming,  njen 
will  feel  that  all  is  God's,  not  theirs.  They  will  act  as  trustees,  not  as  proprietors. 
God  will  be  all  in  all.  2.  Q-od  will  he  recognized  at  the  wniverial  Peace-giver.  "  I  will 
give  peace,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts." — ^D,  T, 

Vers.  10—14. — Suman  duty.  "In  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  month, 
in  the  second  year  of  Darius,  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Haggai  the  prophet,  saying. 
Thus  said  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  Ask  now  the  priests  concerning  the  Law,"  etc,  "  On  the 
twenty-iourth  day  of  the  ninth  month  of  the  same  year,  that  is  to  say,  exactly  three 
months  after  the  congregation  had  resumed  the  building  of  the  temple  (ch.  i.  15),  and 
about  two  months  after  the  second  prophecy  (ch.  iL  1),  a  new  word  of  the  Lord  was 
uttered  through  Haggai  to  the  people.  [This  is  the  prophet's  third  address,  extending 
over  vers.  10 — 19.]  It  was  now  time,  since  the  despondency  which  had  laid  hold 
•f  the  people  a  few  weeks  after  the  recommencement  of  the  building  bad  been 
dispelled  by  the  consolatory  promises  in  vera.  6 — 9,  and  the  work  was  vigorously 
pursued,  to  confirm  the  people  in  the  fidelity  which  they  had  manifested,  by  bestowing 
upon  them  the  blessing  which  had  been  withdrawn.  To  this  end  Haggai  received  the 
commission  to  make  it  perfectly  clear  to  the  people  that  the  curse,  which  had  rested 
upon  them  since  the  building  of  the  temple  had  been  neglected,  had  been  nothing  but 
a  punishment  for  their  indolence  in  not  pushing  forward  the  work  of  the  Lord ;  and 
•ad  that  from  that  time  forth  the  Lord  would  bestow  his  blessing  upon  them  again  " 
(DelitzBch).    The  passage  suggests  two  facts. 

I.  That  the  question  of  human  duty  is  to  be  dgcided  bt  an  appbal  to 
Divine  authobitt.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  ;  Ask  now  the  priests  concerning 
the  Law."  The  question,  of  course,  implies  two  things.  1.  That  there  is  a  Divine 
written  law  for  the  regulatimi  of  human  conduct.  Though  the  Law  here  refers  to 
ceremonial  institutes  which  were  contained  in  the  Levitical  code,  there  is  also  a 
divinely  written  law  of  a  far  higher  significance — ^that  moral  law  which  rises  out  of 
man's  relations,  and  is  binding  upon  man  as  man,  here  and  everywhere,  now  and 
for  ever.  2.  Thai  there  are  divinely  appointed  interpreters  of  this  law.  "  Ask  now 
the  priests."  Under  the  old  economy  there  were  men  appointed  and  quahfied  by 
God  to  expound  the  Law  to  the  people ;  and  in  every  age  there  are  men  endowed  with 
that  high  moral  genius  which  gives  them  an  insight  into  the  eternal  principles  of 
moral  obligation.  They  descry  those  principles,  not  only  in  the  words  of  Gud,  but 
in  hi*  works ;  they  have  that  ethical  and  spiritual  "  unction  from  the  Holy  One,"  by 
whica  they  know  all  things  pertaining  to  duty.  Thus,  then,  the  question  of  duty 
i*  to  be  decided.  It  cannot  be  decided  by  the  customs  of  the  age,  the  enactments  of 
governments,  or  the  decrees  of  Churches.  "  To  the  Law  and  to  the  testimony."  The 
will  of  God  is  the  standard  of  moral  obligation. 

IL  That  the  disohabqe  of  duty  ebquibks  the  spibit  op  obedience.  It  was 
the  duty  of  the  Jews  now  to  rebuild  the  temple ;  but  that  duty  they  discharged  not 


43  .  THE  BOOK  OF  HAQGAL  [oh.  n.  1—23 

by  merely  bringing  the  stones  and  timbers  together  and  placing  them  In  architectural 
order.  It  required  further  the  spirit  of  consecration.  The  prophet  sought  to  impress 
this  upon  the  mind  of  his  fellovr-countrymen  engaged  in  this  work  by  propoimding  two 
questions  referrii^  to  points  in  the  ceremonial  law.  The  first  had  reference  to  the 
communication  of  the  holiness  of  holy  objects  to  other  objects  brought  into  contact  with 
them.  "  If  one  bear  holy  flesh  in  the  skirt  of  his  garment,  and  with  his  skirt  do  touch 
bread,  or  pottage,  or  wine,  or  oil,  or  any  meat,  shall  it  be  holy  ?  "  In  other  words, 
whether,  if  a  person  carry  holy  flesh  in  a  lappet  of  his  garment,  and  touched  any  food 
with  the  lappet,  it  should  become  holy  in  consequence  ?  The  priests  said,  "  No;  "  and 
rightly.  Mere  ceremonial  holiness  cannot  impart  virtue  to  our  actions  in  daily  life ; 
cannot  render  our  efforts  in  the  service  of  God  acceptable  to  him.  Bitualism  without 
righteousness  is  morally  worthless.  The  second  question  was  this :  "  If  one  that  is 
unclean  by  a  dead  body  touch  any  of  these,  shall  it  be  nnclean  ?  "  The  priests  answered 
and  said,  "It  shall  be  unclean."  "The  sum,"  says  an  old  writer,  "of  these  two 
rvdes  is  that  pollution  is  more  easily  communicated  than  sanctification ;  that  is,  there 
are  many  ways  of  vice,  but  only  one  of  virtue,  and  a  difficult  one.  Bonum  oritur  ex 
integrii ;  malum  ex  quolibet  defectu, '  Good  implies  perfection ;  evil  commences  with 
the  slightest  defect.'  Let  not  men  think  that  living  among  good  people  will  recom- 
mend them  to  Qod,  if  they  are  not  good  themselves ;  but  let  them  fear  that  touching 
the  unclean  thing  will  defile  them,  and  therefore  let  them  keep  at  a  distance  from  it. 

GoHOLUBioK.  Mark:  1.  The  transcendent  importance  of  the  spirit  of  obedience. 
What  are  ceremonial  observances,  and  what  are  aU  intellectual  or  bodily  efforts,  in 
connection  with  religion,  apart  from  the  spirit  of  obedience?  Nothing,  and  worse. 
"  Behold,  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice ;  "  "  What  have  I  to  do  with  the  multitude  of 
thine  oblations,"  etc.  ?  2.  That  man  can  more  eas&y  communicate  evU  to  another  than 
good.  As  a  legally  unclean  person  could  impart  his  uncleanness  to  anything,  and 
a  legally  holy  person  could  not  impart  his  sanctity  to  anything,  so  it  is  suggested  that 
•Til  is  more  easily  communicated  by  man  to  man  than  good.  This  is  a  sad  truth,  and 
proved  by  universal  observation  and  experience.  Briars  will  grow  without  cultivation, 
but  not  roses.  A  man  can  give  his  fever  to  another  easier  than  he  can  give  hii 
health.— D.  T. 

Vers.  16^19. — Man's  temporalities.  "And  now,  I  pray  you,  consider  from  this 
day  and  upward,  bova  before  a  stone  was  laid  upon  a  stone  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord," 
etc.  The  subject  of  these  verses  is  man's  temporalities ;  or,  in  other  words,  his  earthly 
circumstances,  his  secular  condition.  And  the  passage  suggests  three  ideas  in  relation 
to  this  subject. 

I.  That  man's  tempobalities  aek  at  the  absolute:  disposal  of  Qob.  Here 
the  Almighty  is  represented  as  at  one  time,  namely,  the  period  during  their  neglect 
of  rebuilding  the  temple,  withholding  from  the  Jewish  people  temporal  prosperity. 
But  after  they  bad  commenced  the  work  in  earnest,  the  stream  of  prosperity  would 
begin  to  flow.  Here  are  the  words :  "  Before  a  stone  was  laid  upon  a  stone  in  the 
temple  of  the  Lord:  since  those  days  were,  when  one  came  to  an  heap  of  twenty 
measures,  there  were  but  ten :  when  one  came  to  the  press-fat  for  to  draw  oiit  fifty 
vessels  out  of  the  press,  there  were  but  twenty."  "  It  was  I  that  gave  you  only  ten 
instead  of  twenty  measures,  only  twenty  instead  of  fifty  vessels  in  the  vat.  It  was 
I  that  smote  you  with  blasting  and  with  mildew  and  with  hail."  So  it  ever  is. 
Man's  temporal  circumstances  are  at  the  disposal  of  God.  Out  of  the  earth  cometh  all 
man's  temporal  good;  but  he  can  make  the  earth  barren  or  fruitful  as  he  pleases. 
He  can  bind  it  with  frosts,  inundate  it  with  fioods,  or  scorch  it  with  heat.  Man,  cease 
to  pride  thyself  in  thy  temporal  prosperity  ! 

II.  That  God  sometimes  requijAteb  the  tempobalities  of  man  AoooBDina  to 
man's  mobal  ohaeaotee.  The  Almighty  here  teUs  the  Jewish  people  that  in  conse- 
quence of  their  neglect  of  his  command  to  rebuild  the  temple,  temporal  distress  would 
befall  them.  He  smote  them  with  "  blasting  "  and  with  "  mildew  "  and  with  "  hail " 
in  all  the  "  labours  of  their  hands.''  But  as  soon  as  they  commenced  in  earnest  he 
said,  "  From  this  day  will  I  bless  you."  The  fact  that  God  sometimes  and  not  always 
regulates  man's  temporalities  according  to  his  moral  obedience  or  disobedience 
suggests :  1.  7%ai  the  cultivation  of  a  high  morcA  character  is  important  to  man  even 


OH.  n.  1—23.]  THE   BOOK  OP  HAGGAI.  43 

a»  a  citizen  of  this  earth,  "  Godliness  is  profitable  to  all  things."  2.  That  even  thit 
occasional  expression  of  Ood?s  regard  for  moral  conduct  is  sufficient  to  justify  the 
belief  in  the  doctrine  of  a  future  and  universal  retribution.  Antecedently,  we  should 
infer  that,  under  the  government  of  an  all-wise,  all-powerful,  and  all-just  God,  man's 
secular  circumstances  would  be  according  to  his  moral  worth.  It  would  have  been  so, 
had  man  not  fallen,  no  doubt.  It  is  sometimes  so  now,  as  in  the  case  before  us.  It 
wiU  be  universally  so  one  day — the  great  day  that  awaits  humanity. 

III.  That  thesb  facts  oub  mightt  Makbb  bequibes  us  pbofodndly  to  study. 
"  Now,  I  pray  you,  consider  from  this  day  and  upward."  This  call  to  consider  the 
facts  is  thrice  repeated.  Consider  why  the  adversity  came  upon  you  in  the  first  case, 
and  why  the  blessing  is  promised  in  the  second  case.  It  was,  in  one  case,  because  you 
neglected  your  moral  duty,  and  in  the  second  because  you  began  to  discharge  it.  Why 
should  these  facts  be  studied  ?  1.  That  we  may  have  a  practical  consciousness  that  God 
is  in  the  world.  In  all  the  elements  of  nature,  in  all  the  seasons  of  the  year,  in  all  the 
varying  temperatures  and  moods  of  nature,  we  see  God  in  all  things.  "  The  place 
whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground." ,  2.  That  we  may  have  a  practical  conscious- 
ness that  God  recognizes  moral  distinctions  in  human  society.  Good  and  evil  are  not 
alike  to  him.  The  good  he  sees,  he  approves ;  the  evil  he  beholds,  he  loathes.  3.  That 
we  may  have  a  practical  consciousness  that  retribviion  i»  at  work  in  the  Divine 
government. — D.  T. 

Vers.  20 — 23. — Terrible  revolutions.  "And  again  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  untc 
Haggai  in  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  month,  saying.  Speak  to  Zerubbabel, 
Governor  of  Judah,  saying,  I  will  shake  the  heavens  and  the  earth ;  and  I  will  over- 
throw the  throne  of  kingdoms,"  etc.  This  is  the  fourth  address.  These  verses  remind 
UB — 

I.  That  the  beyolutions  auonost  hankiks  abe  bometiheb  tebt  tebbible. 
Here  we  read  of  the  V  shaking  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,"  the  "  crash  of  thrones," 
the  "  destruction  of  kingdoms,"  the  "  overthrow  of  chariots,"  etc.  What  the  particular 
revolutions  referred  to  here  are  cannot  be  determined.  Alas  1  we  know  well  enough 
that  such  terrible  catastrophes  have  been  too  common  in  every  age  and  land.  During 
the  last  forty  years  what  tremendous  revolutions  have  occurred  in  Europe  and  in 
America  I  The  political  heavens  and  earth  have  been  shaken  to  their  very  centre,  and 
even  now  the  political  world  throughout  Christendom  is  heaTOig  with  earthquakes 
and  thundering  with  volcanoes.  Such  revolutions  imply  the  existence  and  prevalence 
of  two  antagonistic  moral  principles  in  the  world — good  and  evil.  These  are  the 
Titanic  chieftains  in  all  the  battles,  the  elemental  forces  in  all  the  convulsions  of  the 
world.  It  is  truth  against  error,  right  against  wrong,  liberty  against  thraldom,  virtue 
against  vice. 

IL  That  God  has  to  do  even  with  thk  most  tebbible  of  these  eevolutions. 
"  I  will  shake  the  heavens, ...  I  will  overthrow  the  throne,"  etc.  "  I  will  destroy  the 
strength,"  etc.  Inasmuch :  1.  As  Qod  is  eternally  against  the  false  and  the  wrong 
and  the  tyrannic,  he  may  he  said  to  he  the  Author  of  these  revolutions.  2.  As  he 
can  prevent  them,  he  may  he  said  to  he  the  Author  of  these  revolutions.  He  does  not 
ordinate  them,  but  he  permits  them.  He  could  annihilate  all  wicked  doers  by  a 
volition ;  he  allows  them  to  fight  themselves  often  to  death  in  battling  against  the 
right  and  the  true.  Hence  God  permits  and  controls  all  human  revolutions.  This 
should  inspire  ua  with  confidence  in  the  most  terrible  scenes.  "  The  Lord  sitteth  upon 
the  flood."  He  sits  in  serene  majesty,  controlling  all  the  fury  of  the  battling  forces. 
He  "  holds  the  winds  in  his  fist," 

III.  That  the  good  man  is  safe  in  the  most  tbemendous  ebvolutions  of 
TIME.  "In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  will  I  take  thee,  O  Zerubbabel,  my 
servant,  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  saith  the  Lord,  and  will  make  thee  as  a  signet:  for  I  have 
chosen  thee,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (ver.  23).  What  is  here  said  of  Zerubbabel  suggests 
three  thoughts.  1.  That  good  men  sustain  the  highest  office.  Zerubbabel  was  not  only 
a  servant,  but  a  "  chosen  servant."  He  was  selected  for  the  work  of  rebuilding  the 
temple.  The  highest  honour  for  moral  intelligence  is  to  be  the  appointed  servant  of 
Jehovih.  2.  That  good  men  will  receive  the  highest  distinction.  "  I  will  make  thee 
aa  a  signet"    A  signet  indicates :  (1)  Worth.    It  was  a  ring  with  a  seal  on  it,  worn 


4«  THE   BOOK   OF  HAGGAI.  [oh.  n.  1— W. 

on  the  finger,  em  an  ornament  of  great  value.  Good  men  are  elsewhere  represented  m 
QodiB  jewels.  (2)  Authority.  The  signet  of  an  Eastern  monarch  was  a  sign  of 
delected  authority.  A  good  man  is  invested  with  the  highest  authority — ^the 
authority  to  fight  against  wrong  and  to  promote  right,  at  all  times  and  in  every  place. 
3.  That  good  men  will  always  be  safely  kept.  Jehovah  says  this  to  Zerubbabel. 
Amidst  aJl  evil,  "  God  ia  my  Befuge  and  Strength,  a  very  present  Help  in  trouble.* 
— IXT, 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 


THE   BOOK    OF    HAGGAI. 


CHAPTER  I. 

9Bmn  PAGE 

Divine  Eevelations                ,,,  .,,  4 
The  Mistakes  of  the  Temple-bnilders  ; 

a  Warning          ...             ...  ...  6 

Considering  One's  Ways      ...  ...  8 

Hard  Times           ...            ...  ...  9 

Ancient  Temple-bnilders     ,„  ...  9 

The  Introdnotion  ...             ...  ...  11 

Procrastination     ...            ...  ...  12 

The  Stirring  Appeal              ...  ...  12 

The  House  of  the  Lord  lying  Waste  14 

The  Hearty  Response          ...  ...  15 

Duty  revealed        ...             ...  ...  15 

Duty  adjourned     ...             ...  ...  16 

Duty  divinely  vindicated     ...  ...  17 

CHAPTER  IL 

Fast  and  Present                 ...  ...  24 

The  Shaking  of  the  Heavens  and  the 

Earth  ...             ...             ...  ...  26 

"  The  Desire  of  All  Nations "  ...  26 


the  Gold:   a  Sermon 


THBUR 

-The  Silver  and 

on  Money  ...  ...  ...  29 

The   Latter  Glory  of  "this  House;" 

or,  "the  Glory  that  excelleth  ''  ...  29 
The    Parable  of    the   Holy   and    the 

Unclean  ...  ...  ...  30 

Zerubbabel  the  Son  of  Shealtiel  ...  31 
Returning  Despondency  and  Renewed 

Stimulus  ...  ...  ...  33 

The  Prophet's  Messiamo  Prophecy    ...  34 

The  Real  Presence  ...  ...  35 

God's  Temple  filled  with  Glory  ...  35 

The  Consecration  of  Wealth  ...  36 

The  Peace  of  God...  ...  ...  37 

The  Past  and  the  Future     ...  ...  38 

The  Final  Message  ...  ...  39 

God's  Message  to  his  People  by  Haggai  40 

The  Moral  Progress  of  the  World      ...  40 

Human  Duty         ...  ...  ...  41 

Man's  Temporalities  ...  ...  42 

Terrible  Revolutions  ...  ...  43 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ; 
AND    BY   THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

ZECHARIAH. 

^Exposition : 
By  rev.  W.   J.   DEANE,  M.A., 

RECTOR  OF  ASHEN  ; 

igomiletics : 
Bt  REY.  W.   S.   lewis,  M.A., 

l^omilies  bg  l)ariou6  iantl)ors: 

REV.  W.  FORSYTH,  M.A.  REV.    D.   THOMAS,   D.U. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yokk  and  Toronto. 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEGHAEIAH, 


INTRODUCTION. 


§  I.   SUBJECT  OF  THJ  Book. 

The  propliecy  of  Zeohariah  (at  least  that  contained  in  the  first  elghi 
chapters)  continues  and  supplements  that  of  his  contemporaiy  Haggai. 
These  two  prophets  were  raised  np  and  inspired  to  animate  the  flagging 
energies  of  the  Jews,  who,  on  their  return  from  Babylon  (b.o.  636),  had 
begun  to  rebuild  the  temple,  but  were  soon  disheartened,  and  at  length, 
owing  to  opposition  of  neighbours  and  adverse  circumstances,  ceased  alto- 
gether from  the  work.  Now  after  sixteen  years'  intermission,  encouraged 
by  the  accession  of  Darius  Hystaspes,  who  looked  with  favourable  eyes  on 
their  undertaking,  the  Jews  had  an  opportunity  of  resuming  their 
operations.  Almost  simultaneously  with  Haggai,  Zeohariah  comes  forth  to 
enforce  the  same  lesson,  urging  them  to  restore  the  house  of  the  Loid,  and 
inspiring  them  with  hopes  of  a  glorious  future.  The  rest  of  the  pro- 
phecies, if  they  belong  to  the  same  age  and  author,  without  special  mention 
of  the  return  from  the  Captivity,  reach  to  far  distant  time;  they  are 
supposed  to  speak  of  the  preservation  of  the  temple  under  Alexander  the 
Great,  of  the  victories  of  the  Maccabees;-  they  certainly  speak  of  the 
rejection  of  Christ;  they  spe&k  of  the  repentance  of  the  Jews  for  this 
rejection,  and  the  final  conversion  of  them  and  of  the  Gentiles. 

The  temple  was  finished  in  the  sixth  year  of  Darius  (b.o.  615) ;  and 
the  latter  part  of  Zechariah's  prophecies  may  have  been  spoken  after  that 
«vent,  and  possibly  many  years  subsequent. 

The  book  consists  of  three  parts.  The  first,  after  »  brief  prelude, 
describes  certain  visions  revealed  to  the  prophet,  and  ends  with  a  sym- 
bolical action  typifying  the  completion  and  glory  of  the  new  temple.  The 
second  part  comprises  an  answer  to  certain  questions  about  the  observance 
of  fasts,  and  a  comfortable  assurance  of  the  future  happiness  of  Jerusalem. 
In  the  final  portion  the  prophet  foretells  the  struggle  of  God's  people 
Against  the  powers  of  the  world,  and  Messiah's  Tiotory,  and  uinonnoea  the 

ESCHAMAH.  ) 


INTBODUOTION  TO 


eonvsTsion  of  Israel,  the  destmotion  of  the  enemiM  of  the  theoonoy,  and 
the  final  exaltation  of  God's  kingdom. 

The  foUowiog  is  a  brief  analysis  of  the  book,  considered  as  one  harmo- 
aions  whole,  applying  to  the  condition  of  the  chosen  people,  their  dang«ra 
and  errors,  their  connection  with  the  powers  of  the  world,  God's  purposes 
towards  them,  and  the  future  that  awaits  the  Church.  The  first  part,  con- 
sisting of  oh.  i. — vi.,  commences  with  an  introduction,  giving  the  title, 
date,  and  author's  name,  followed  by  a  warning  from  the  past  and  a  call 
to  repentance  and  renewed  energy.  Then  the  prophet  describes  eight 
visions  which  came  to  him  on  the  same  night,  descriptive  of  events  near  at 
hand  and  far  distant,  the  interpretation  of  which  is  imparted  by  an  angel. 
In  the  first  vision  (oh.  i.  7 — 17)  the  prophet  sees,  in  a  myrtle  grove,  a  rider 
upon  a  red  horse  with  attendants.  These  announce  that  the  whole  earth  is 
quiet  as  yet,  unshaken  by  the  storm  that  is  to  fall  upon  it ;  but  God  assures 
the  angel  that  the  temple  shall  be  completed,  the  oities  of  Judah  restored, 
and  Ziou  comforted.  To  confirm  and  explain  this  promise  a  second  vision 
is  gianted  (oh.  i.  18 — 21).  Four  horns,  symbols  of  hostile  powers,  are 
destroyed  by  four  craftsmen  ("carpenters,"  Authorized  Version).  All 
impediments  being  thus  removed,  the  various  steps  to  the  restoration  of 
the  theocracy  are  revealed.  The  prophet  is  shown,  in  the  third  vision  (oh. 
ii,  1 — 13),  a  man  with  a  measuring-line,  who  is  checked  in  marking  out  the 
ground-plan  of  Jerusalem  by  an  intimation  that  the  city  of  the  future  shall 
be  too  large  to  be  compassed  by  any  wall,  so  abundant  will  be  its  popula- 
tion, but  that  God  himself  will  be  her  defence  and  her  glory.  At  this 
prospect,  and  at  the  thought  of  the  affiliation  of  many  heathen  nations,  Zion 
is  bidden  to  exult.  But  the  restoration  of  the  material  temple  would  be  of 
no  avail  without  a  holy  priesthood  to  minister  therein ;  so  the  fourth  vision 
(ch.  iii.  1 — 10)  exhibits  Joshua  the  high  priest  engaged  in  some  official 
duty  clad  in  filthy  garments,  not  in  the  spotless  garb  required.  But  he  is 
pardoned  and  purified,  invested  with  robes  of  honour,  and  reinstalled  in  his 
office ;  and  he  is  promised  the  Divine  protection,  and  receives  an  announce- 
ment of  the  advent  of  Messiah, "  The  Branch,"  of  whom  his  office  is  typical. 
The  spiritual  support  of  the  theocracy  is  next  displayed  by  the  vision 
(the  fifth)  of  the  golden  candlestick  of  the  holy  place  (oh.  iv.  1 — 14), 
which  is  fed  by  two  oUve  trees,  representing  the  agencies  which  convey 
God's  grace  to  the  Church.  Zerubbabel  is  taught  to  rely  upon  this,  for  by 
it  he  shall  bring  his  work  to  completion.  The  people  and  the  land  are 
now  to  be  sanctified;  accordingly,  the  sixth  vision  (oh.  v.  1 — 4)  repre- 
sents a  huge  roU,  on  which  is  inscribed  the  curse  against  the  evil,  flying 
rapidly  through  the  air  in  token  of  the  speed  with  which  its  mission 
shall  be  executed.  God  thus  reveals  his  wrath  against  sinners  in  the 
land.  Similarly,  in  the  seventh  vision  (ch.  v.  6 — 11),  the  unclean  thing, 
represented  by  a  woman,  is  caught  and  confined  in  an  ephah,  pressed 
down  by  a  sheet  of  lead,  and  transported  out  of  the  Holy  Land  unto 
Babylon,  the  propar  home  of  all  that  is  wioked.    The  final  vision,  the 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZBCHARIAH.  Ul 

eighth  (oh.  \i.  1 — 8),  disoloses  four  chariots  issning  from  between  two 
brazen  monntains,  which  are  sent  as  the  messengers  of  God's  wrath  in  th« 
four  qnarters  of  the  world,  till  his  judgments  are  satisfied.  The  destmo- 
tion  of  the  enemies  of  Qod's  people  is  the  inauguration  of  Messiah's  king- 
dom ;  what  glory  is  reserved  for  the  future  temple  and  who  should  be  the 
priest  to  build  it  up,  is  set  forth  by  a  symbolical  action  (oh.  vi.  9 — 16). 
The  prophet  is  directed  to  take  the  silver  and  gold,  which  some  Jews  had 
just  brought  from  Babylon  as  offerings  for  the  temple,  and  of  them  to 
make  orowns,  which  he  was  first  to  place  on  the  head  of  Joshua,  the  high 
priest,  the  type  of  Messiah,  in  whom  were  united  the  offices  of  king  and 
priest,  and  then  to  hang  them  up  for  a  memorial  in  the  temple. 

The  second  part  (oh.  vii.,  viii.)  is  shorter  and  simpler  than  the  pre- 
ceding. It  is  after  a  silence  of  two  years  that  the  prophet  now  speaks,  A 
deputation  comes  to  the  temple  to  ask  whether  the  fasts  instituted  in 
memory  of  the  calamities  of  Jerusalem  are  still  to  be  observed.  Zechariah, 
as  chief  of  the  prophets  as  well  as  priest,  is  commissioned  to  answer.  He 
teaches  them  that  God  loves  justice  and  mercy  better  than  outward  obser- 
vances ;  that  they  had  not  listened  to  previous  warnings,  and  that  their 
hearts  were  hard  even  while  they  fasted.  Obedience,  he  tells  them,  is  the 
only  warrant  for  blessing  from  God  ;  and  to  urge  them  to  this  he  draws  a 
glowing  picture  of  the  prosperity  of  restored  Jerusalem,  in  whose  happi- 
ness the  once  alien  nations  shall  share,  esteeming  it  an  honour  to  be 
associated  with  an  Israelite. 

The  Interpretation  of  the  rest  of  the  book  depends  largely  upon  the 
view  taken  of  its  unity  and  integrity.  If  we  regard  oh.  ix. — xi.  and 
oh.  xii. — xiv.  as  written  by  the  same  Zechariah  as  the  first  part  (which 
seems  to  me  to  be  the  most  reasonable  hypothesis),  the  following  is  the 
most  acceptable  explanation  of  them. 

The  temple  rebuilt  and  its*  worship  restored,  after,  it  may  be,  the  lapse 
of  many  years,  Zechariah  is  inspired  to  utter  the  prophecies  which  compose 
the  third  part  of  his  work  (ch.  ix. — xiv.).  He  has  two  "burdens"  to 
deliver,  contained  respectively  in  oh.  ix. — xi.  and  xii. — xiv.  At  the  time 
when  these  last  prophecies  were  uttered  the  Jews  needed  encouragement. 
Things  had  not  prospered  as  they  hoped  j  they  were  still  in  a  depressed 
condition,  vassals  of  a  foreign  lord,  endangered  by  the  proximity  of  bitter 
enemies.  The  heathen  had  not  come  flocking  to  Jerusalem,  eager  to 
embrace  the  Jewish  religion ;  the  temple  was  not  enriched  by  the  gifts  of 
distant  nations ;  their  country  suffered  much  from  the  passage  of  alien 
armies  which  traversed  their  territory.  They  had  no  king ;  the  family  of 
David  had  fallen  into  utter  insignificance,  and  their  political  degradation 
seemed  complete.  Now  the  prophet  is  commissioned  to  raise  their  spirita 
by  a  series  of  fresh  communications.  And  first  he  gives  them  hopes  of 
renewed  prosperity  by  foretelling  the  chastisement  of  those  nations  which 
held  territory  originally  granted  to  the  Israelites — Syria,  PhiHstla,  PhcB- 
nicia,  and  over  which  David  and  Solomon  had  actually  ruled.    So  he  opens 


INTBODUOTION  TO 


with  aimonnoing  the  judgment  on  these  nations  in  the  neighbouThood,  and 
th*  preservation  of  Judtea  amid  the  coming  calamities  (ch.  iz.  1 — 8).  Then 
shall  oome  to  Zion,  in  meek  and  lowly  fashion,  her  King,  no  lordly  warrior, 
but  a  peaoefal  Prince,  who  shall  cause  the  weapons  of  war  to  perish,  unite 
in  one  the  divided  people,  restore  the  captives,  give  fertility  to  the  land, 
and  found  one  universal  kingdom  (ch.  ix.  9 — 17).  Such  happy  results  can 
be  expected  only  from  the  God  of  Israel,  not  from  the  idols  and  teraphim 
to  which  once  they  had  recourse.  It  was  for  such  sins  that  they  had  evil 
rulers  set  over  them ;  but  these  shall  be  removed,  and  the  theocracy  shall 
be  established  on  a  firm  and  lasting  foundation,  victory  and  happiness  shall 
be  theirs,  and  the  scattered  tribes  shall  be  gathered  from  every  part  of  the 
world,  and  serve  the  Lord  in  their  own  chosen  land  (oh.  x.).  But  there  is 
another  side  to  the  picture.  They  shall  not  receive  this  Prince,  this  Shep- 
herd, when  he  comes ;  and  punishment  falls  upon  them,  first  in  the  north 
and  then  in  the  lowlands  and  the  south.  The  prophet  is  bidden  to  personate 
Jehovah's  Shepherd,  and  he  relates  what  he  himself  did  in  carrying  out  his 
commission,  the  treatment  which  he  received,  and  how  he  threw  up  the 
ofQce  in  disgust.  The  section  ends  with  the  prediction  of  the  calamitous 
rule  of  "  a  foolish  shepherd,"  who  shall  himself  be  in  turn  destroyed.  The 
second  "  burden  "  is  concerned  with  events  chiefly  future,  but  all  connected 
with  Israel  and  the  theocracy.  The  prophet  sees  Jerusalem  surrounded 
with  enemies,  but  saved  by  the  intervention  of  Jehovah,  who  strengthens 
the  people  to  fight  valiantly.  This  great  deliverance  shall  be  followed  by 
a  national  repentance,  which  shall  be  deep  and  full,  resulting  in  the 
abolition  of  the  very  memory  of  idols  and  false  prophets,  and  a  general 
purification  (ch.  xii.  1 — xiii.  6).  Eecurring  to  the  statement  of  the  rejec- 
tion of  the  Shepherd,  the  prophet  shows  the  result  of  this  sin — the  Shepherd 
smitten,  the  sheep  are  scattered,  and  a  remnant  only  is  saved  through  much 
tribulation  (ch.  xiii.  7 — 9).  Then  Jerusalem  is  introduced  vanquished, 
plundered,  desolate,  when  suddenly  the  Lord  comes  to  her  rescue ;  mighty 
convulsions  of  nature  accompany  his  appearance ;  he  raises  the  holy  city 
to  the  highest  splendour ;  the  enemies  perish  in  terrible  fashion  ;  all  that 
are  left  of  the  nations  shall  come  hither  to  worship,  and  everything  hence- 
forward shall  be  "  holiness  to  the  Lord  "  (oh.  xiv.). 

"  Through  the  ages,  ever  since  the  Christ  took  his  seat  on  the  throne, 
•crowned  with  glory  and  with  honour,'  his  prediction  has  been  and  is 
being  fulfilled.  In  degree  as  the  kingdom  extends  and  its  influence  is  felt, 
the  curse  is  lifted  from  the  race,  and  '  holiness  to  the  Lord '  becomes 
inscribed  on  those  who  have  been  in  arms  against  him,  enemies  by  a  mind 
in  evil  works.  The  end  is  not  yet ;  we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  him. 
But  we  see  the  kingdom  advancing,  and  in  due  time  the  mystery  of  God 
shall  be  finished,  as  he  hath  declared  to  his  servants  the  prophets  (Rev. 
X.  7) — that  mystery  which  is  also  '  the  mystery  of  Christ,'  that  the  Gentilei 
(rh.  l$vq,  those  ontside  the  Israel  of  God)  are  fellow-heirs  (with  Israel)  and 
of  the  lame  body,  and  partakers  of  the  promise  in  Ohriat  by  the  gospel 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZBCHAKIAU. 


(Eph.  iii.  3 — 6).  This  mystery,  which  was  kept  secret  since  the  world 
began,  but  is  manifested  now  in  this  latter  time,  it  was  given  to  Zeohariah 
as  to  other  prophets  of  the  former  dispensation  to  make  known  "  (Alexander 
'  Zeohariah's  Visions,'  pp.  334,  336> 

§  11.    AUTHOB   AND  DATS. 

The  name  Zeeharidh  was  not  nncommon  among  the  Jews;  more  than 
twenty  boie  it  in  the  Old  Testament.     It  is  interpreted,  "  The  Lord  remem- 
bers."   The  prophet  calls  himself  (oh.  i.  1)  "  the  son  of  Berechiah,  the  son 
of  Iddo,"  which  words  the  LXX.  translates,  Za^apiav  rov  rov  Bapa^tov,  vmv 
'A88o)  Tov  irpo^rpriv,  as  if  he  was  son  of  Baraohias  and  Iddo,  one  his  natural 
father,  theother  his  by  adoption.  But  the  English  Version  is  doubtless  correct 
in  calling  him  "  son  of  Bereohiah,"  who  was  son  of  Iddo.     The  only  objection 
to  this  genealogy  is  that  he  is  termed  in  Ezra  v.- 1  and  vi.  14,  "  the  son  of 
Iddo ;  "  but  the  word  ''  son  "  is  used  loosely  for  "  grandson,"  as  Laban  in 
Gen.  xxix.  5  is  called  "  son  "  of  Nahor,  and  in  Gen.  xxxi.  28  Laban  calls 
Jacob's  children  his  "  sons."     Probably  Baraohias  died  young,  and  Iddo, 
being  more  celebrated,  and  being  the  immediate  predecessor  of  his  grand- 
son, was  alone  mentioned  in  the  historical  books.     Iddo  was  one  of  the 
priests  who  returned  from  Babylon  with  Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua  (Neh.  xii. 
4).     Zeohariah,  therefore,  was  one  of  the  family  of  Aaron,  and  exercised  his 
sacerdotal  office  in  the  days  of  Joiakim,  the  son  of  Jeshua  (Neh.  xii.  12, 16). 
But  he  acted  as  prophet  before  this,  if  we  can  reason  on  the  term  "  young 
man  "  possibly  applied  to  him  in  oh.  ii.  4  (comp.  Jer.  i.  6).     He  must  have 
been  born  in  Ghaldea,  as  he  commenced  his  prophetical  office  eight  years 
after  the   return,  some  two  months  later  than  his  elder  contemporary, 
Haggai,  both  of  these  seers  having  the  same  object  in  view — the  encourage- 
ment of  the  people  in  the  interrupted  work  of  rebuilding  the  temple.   Jewish 
tradition  makes  him  a  member  of  the  great  synagogue,  and  to  have  had 
some  share  in  providing  for  the  liturgical  services  of  the  temple.     As  has 
been  noted  in  the  Introduction  to  Haggai  (§  II.),  these  two  prophets  are 
credited  with  the  production  of  some  eight  of  the  psalms,  the  contents  of 
which  are  quite  consistent  with  their  snpposed  authorship.     The  latest 
note  of  time  in  the  prophecy  is  the  fourth  year  of  Darius  (ch.  vii.  1)  ;  but 
it  is  with  reason  conjectured  that  Zeohariah  lived  to  see  the  temple  finished 
two  years   later  (see  Ezra   vi.  14,  15).     Tradition  makes  him  arrive  at 
extreme  old  age,  dying  in  Judsea,  and  being  buried  in  a  tomb  near  to  the 
last   resting-place  of    his  fellow-seer  Haggai,  in   the   neighbourhood   of 
Eleutheropolis.     The  sepulchral   monument  called   after  him  on   Mount 
Olivet  is  of  much  later  date.     Many  early  writers  identified  our  prophet 
with  the  "  Zacharias  son  of  Baraohias  "  slain,  as  our  Lord  says  (Matt,  xxiii. 
85), "  between  the  sanctuary  and  the  altar."    But  it  is  most  improbable  that 
the  Jews  should  have  committed  such  a  crime  at  that  time,  when  they  had 
jmt  hearkened  to  the  prophet's  voice  and  done  his  bidding;  there  ia  no 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


hint  of  any  such  ending  to  Zeohariah'a  career  in  the  books  of  Ena, 
Nehemiah,  or  Malachi,  nor  is  any  tendency  to  such  a  national  crim* 
imputed  to  his  contemporaries.  And  it  is  now  well  recognized  that  the 
name  Barachias  in  the  text  of  the  Gospel  is  an  interpolatian  or  alteration, 
and  that  the  incident  mentioned  has  nothing  to  do  with  our  prophet,  hut 
concerns  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  whose  murder  is  recorded  in  2  Chron.  xxiv. 
20—22. 

The  first  prophecy  of  Zechariah  being  uttered  in  the  second  year  of 
Darius,  and  his  third  in  the  fourth,  the  period  of  the  active  exercise  of  his 
office  extended  from  b.c.  520  to  b.o.  518.  The  headship  in  the  college  of 
priests  became  his  subsequent  to  this  last  date,  probably  on  the  death  ol 
Iddo,  his  grandfather.  It  is  well  pointed  out  by  Dean  Perowne  ('  Diet, 
of  Bible,'  iii.  1821,  etc.)  how  important  for  the  due  discharge  of  his  special 
duty  was  Zechariah's  priestly  origin.  In  the  history  of  Israel  "  too  often 
the  prophet  had  had  to  stand  forth  in  direct  antagonism  to  the  priest." 
When  the  latter  was  a  mere  formalist,  and  ignorant  of  the  inner  meaning 
of  the  holy  things  which  he  handled,  the  former  had  to  recall  men's  minds 
to  the  truth  enshrined  in  the  outward  ritual.  At  this  time  there  was 
danger  of  apathetic  neglect  of  religion,  that  the  soul  and  the  expression 
of  it  would  fade  entirely  away.  "  At  such  a  time,  no  more  fitting  instru- 
ment could  be  found  to  rouse  the  people,  whose  heart  had  grown  cold, 
than  one  who  united  to  the  authority  of  the  prophet  the  zeal  and  the 
traditions  of  a  sacerdotal  family." 

CJonceming  the  genuineness  of  the  first  eight  chapters  of  the  Book  of 
Zechariah,  no  question  has  ever  been  raised.  It  is  quite  different  with 
regard  to  the  remainder,  the  authorship  of  which  has  been  the  subject  of 
dispute  since  the  days  of  Joseph  Mede  until  the  present,  and  is  still 
undecided.  Mede  was  led  to  dispute  the  unity  of  the  book  by  the  fact 
that  in  Matt,  xxvii.  9  the  well-known  passage  concerning  the  thirty  pieces 
of  silver  in  oh.  xi.  12,  13  is  attributed  to  Jeremiah.  Acting  on  this  hint, 
Mede  and  his  followers  found  what  they  considered  ample  grounds  for  con- 
sidering these  six  last  chapters  to  belong  to  pre-exilian  times,  "  disputing," 
as  Calmet  dryly  remarks,  "  several  chapters  of  Zechariah  in  order  to  restore 
a  verse  to  Jeremiah."  Various  explanations  of  the  statement  in  St. 
Matthew  have  been  offered,  e.g.  that  the  name  "  Jeremiah"  is  an  interpola- 
tion, or  a  clerical  error,  or  that  the  evangelist  quoted  from  memory,  or  that 
the  Book  of  Jeremiah  being  placed  first  gave  its  name  to  the  writings  of 
the  other  prophets.  Any  one  of  these  answers  would  be  sufficient  to  over- 
throw the  argument  that  is  built  on  this  quotation.  It  cannot  be  denied 
that  the  opposition  to  the  opinion  of  the  unity  of  our  book  is  of  quite 
modern  growth.  It  was  absolutely  unknown  to  antiquity.  Neither  Jew 
nor  Christian  ever  disputed  the  genuineness  of  these  six  chapters  till  some 
two  hundred  years  ago.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  sacred  canon 
was  fixed  soon  after  Zechariah's  death,  when  the  question  of  authorship 
could  most  easily  have  been  settled,  and  there  is  no  proof  whatever  that 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHAKIAH.  Tli 

the  book  was  not  then  snoh  as  it  has  reached  onr  hands,  and  such  as  all  the 
versions  make  it  to  he.  The  oare  exhibited  in  assigning  the  other  pro- 
phetical works  to  their  rightful  anthors,  even  in  the  case  of  the  brief 
prophecy  of  Obadiah,  would  surely  not  be  wanting  in  the  case  of  this  long 
and  important  oracle.  The  uniform  consensus  of  antiquity  oan  only  be 
overborne  by  most  cogent  arguments.  If,  indeed,  later  critics  were  of  one 
mind  on  the  subject ;  if,  induced  by  weighty  considerations,  supported  by 
the  new  appliances  of  modern  scholarship  and  fresh  discoveries,  they  were 
unanimous  in  afSxing  a  definite  date  or  author  to  the  disputed  chapters, 
there  would  be,  perhaps,  sufScient  reason  to  subvert  the  traditional 
opinion.  But  unanimity  is  remarkably  wanting  in  the  theories  that  have 
been  published.  While  some  affirm  merely  that  the  six  last  chapters  are 
not  written  by  the  author  of  the  first  eight,  others  assert  that  this  portion 
of  the  book  is  the  work  of  two  authors  living  at  different  periods.  Many 
later  critics  assign  ch.  ix. — ^xi.  to  an  anonymous  prophet  who  lived  in 
pre-exilian  times,  and  ch.  xii. — xiv.  to  another  Zechariah  who  flourished 
just  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar.  The  diversity 
of  date  assigned  to  these  supposed  authors  is  wide 'indeed.  Dr.  Pusey,  in 
his  edition  of  the  'Minor  Prophets,'  gives  (p.  511,  etc.)  a  curious  "Table 
of  dates  which  in  this  century  have  been  assigned  to  Zech.  ix. — xiv." 
By  this  it  appears  that  the  evidence  which  satisfies  one  critic  that 
Zechariah  wrote  in  Uzziah's  reign  (b.C.  770),  convinces  another  that  he  lived 
some  four  hundred  and  fifty  years  later — about  b.o.  330.  The  internal 
evidence  which  produces  such  astonishing  results  must  be  very  uncertain 
in  itself,  or  be  manipulated  and  interpreted  in  the  loosest  manner.  The 
arguments  on  both  sides  of  the  question  have  been  discussed  at  great 
length,  and  will  be  found  set  forth  in  order  in  the  'Dictionary  of  the 
Bible,'  and  in  the  works  of  Dr.  Pusey,  Dr.  Wright,  and  many  others,  and 
succinctly  in  Archdeacon  Perowne's  useful  edition  of  '  The  Prophet 
Zechariah.'  We  add  here  a  brief  view  of  the  matter,  the  objections  against 
the  unity  of  the  book  and  the  answers  to  these  objections  following  one 
another. 

The  objections  may  be  classed  under  two  heads,  viz. :  A,  differences  in 
style  in  the  two  parts  of  the  book ;  and,  B,  historical  and  chronological 
references  which  are  inconsistent  with  the  traditionary  view  of  the 
authorship. 

A.  Differences  in  style.  That  there  is  a  marked  difference  between  the 
style  of  ch.  L — vii.  and  the  other  parts  is  evident.  1.  The  first  is  prosaic, 
unimaginative,  cold ;  the  second  is  fervid,  poetical,  lofty,  mysterious.  But 
this  variety  is  accounted  for  by  the  change  of  subject.  The  description  of 
certain  visions  which  really  occurred  to  the  writer  required  a  plain,  unvar- 
nished narrative,  in  which  flights  of  imagination  and  oratorical  effects 
would  have  been  unsuitable.  The  grand  prophecies  which  follow,  uttered 
probably  many  years  later,  and  which  bear  a  great  similarity  to  the  later 
Jewish  apocalyptic  literature,  allowed  a  different  treatment.    The  writer's 


ria  INTRODUCTION  TO 


indiridTiality  might  here  appear ;  he  might  bestow  oar*  on  the  form  and 
diction  of  his  commnnicationB,  and  make  his  language  equal  his  theme. 
The  prophetical  inspiration  oame,  it  may  be,  Blowly  and  gradually,  giving 
Mm  time  to  elaborate  the  scenes  presented  and  to  paint  them  with  the  hues 
of  imagination.  Many  men  write  both  prose  and  poetry,  and  it  would  often 
be  very  difficult  to  decide  from  internal  considerations  that  these  composi' 
tions  were  the  work  of  the  same  author.  It  must  also  be  observed  that  the 
passage  ch.  ii.  10 — 13  rises  into  poetry,  while  oh.  xi.  4,  etc.,  sinks  to 
ordinary  prose.  2.  Special  phrases  and  idioms  which  occur  in  one  part  are 
not  found  in  the  other.  Thus  the  introductory  formulae,  "  The  word  of  the 
Lord  oame  "  (oh.  i.  7 ;  iv.  8  ;  vi.  9,  etc.),  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  " 
(which  occurs  very  frequently),  "  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw  "  (ch.  i. 
18 ;  ii.  1  ;  v.  1 ;  vi.  1),  are  never  found  in  the  second  part ;  while  the 
phrase,  "  in  that  day,"  which  is  very  common  in  the  latter  (e.^.  ch.  ix.  16 ;  xi. 
11 ;  xii.  3,  4,  etc.),  is  entirely  absent  from  the  former.  Now,  Hosea  uses 
introductory  formulsa  in  the  first  five  chapters  of  his  book,  but  none  in  the 
last  nine;  yet  no  one  disputes  the  integrity  of  that  work.  How  little 
dependence  can  be  placbd  on  such  variations  may  be  seen  by  an  examina- 
tion of  three  of  Milton's  poems  by  Professor  Stanley  Leathes,  quoted  by  Dr. 
Pusey,  p.  505,  note  9,  by  which  it  appears  that  in  '  L' Allegro '  there  are 
325  words  not  in  '  H  Penseroso,'  and  316  not  in  '  Lyoidas,'  and  that  in  '  II 
Penseroso' there  are  nearly  440  words  not  in  'Lycidas.'  Some  of  the 
formulsB  mentioned  are  not  needed  in  the  second  part,  and  their  absence 
proves  nothing.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  certain  rare  expressions 
common  to  both  portions.  Thus :  "  None  passed  through  nor  returned " 
(ch.  viL  14  and  ix.  8) ;  "  Sing  and  rejoice,  0  daughter  of  Zion :  for,  lo,  I 
come"  (ch.  ii.  10  and  ix.  9).  There  is  a  peculiar  use  of  the  word  «'eye" 
in  oh.  iii.  9 ;  iv.  10 ;  and  ch.  ix.  1,  8.  The  appellations,  "  Judah  and  Israel," 
"  Epbraim  and  Joseph,"  are  applied  to  the  theocracy  (oh.  i.  12 ;  ii.  2,  12 ; 
viii.  16;  and  ix.  13;  x.  6  ;  xi.  14,  etc.).     In  both  divisions  the  destruction 

of  the  enemies  of  Israel  is  predicted  (ch.  i.  14,  15 ;  vi.  8 ;  and  ix.  1 6  •  xii. 

2,  etc. ;  xiv.  14)  ;  Messiah  is  celebrated  and  highly  exalted  (oh.  iii.  8 ;  vi. 
12;  and  ix.  9,  10);  the  tribes  are  invited  to  return  (oh.  ii.  6,  7  and  ix.  11, 
12);  the  nations  shall  be  converted  and  join  themselves  to  Israel  (oh.  ii. 
11;  vi.  16;  viii.  22;  and  xiv.  16, 17);  holiness  shall  be  found  pre-eminently 
in  the  restored  community  (ch.  iii.  2,  etc. ;  v.  1,  etc. ;  and  xiii.  1,  etc. ;  xiv. 
20,  21).  "We  may  compare  also  the  promises  of  abundance,  peace,  and 
happiness,  in  oh.  i.  16,  17;  ii.  2,  12;  iii.  2;  ,viii.  3—6,  with  those  in  oh. 
ix.  8,  etc. ;  xii.  2,  etc. ;  xiii.  1 ;  xiv.  8,  etc. ;  and  of  the  return  of  the  tribes 
and  their  consolation  in  ch.  viii.  8,  9  and  x.  6,  10  (Knabenbauer).  3, 
The  mention  of  the  prophet's  own  name  or  the  names  of  his  contemporaries 
(oh.  i.  1,  7;  iii.  1;  iv.  6;  vi.  10,  14;  vii.  1,  2,  8);  the  notes  of  time  (ch. 
i.  1,  7  ;  vii.  1);  the  introduction  of  Satan  (ch.  iii.  1,  2).  All  these  things, 
found  in  the  first  part,  are  absent  in  the  second.  Naturally  so.  The 
earlier  section  deals  directly  with  contemporary  persons  and  events,  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


later  oontains  dark  propheoies  of  the  fntare,  the  date  and  place  of  whose 
delivery  were  of  no  practical  importance.  The  course  of  his  predictions 
did  not  lead  the  prophet  to  speak  of  Satan  in  the  second  part,  and  the 
omission  of  all  mention  of  the  evil  spirit  is  equally  a  feature  in  the  hooks 
of  other  prophets.  4.  The  ahsence  of  visions  and  the  change  of  figures  and 
imagery  entirely  separate  the  second  from  the  former  part.  But  really  the 
answer  already  given  to  objection  1  applies  equally  to  this  criticism.  The 
changes  ohserved  are  no  more  than  such  as  might  reasonably  be  expected 
from  the  differing  subjects.  In  the  one  case  the  prophet  had  to  narrate 
visions,  and  to  give  practical  warnings  and  exhortations ;  in  the  other  he 
was  carried  away  into  the  distant  future,  rapt  in  anticipations  of  coming 
glory.  What  wonder  is  it  that  the  form  of  his  utterances  was  altered,  and 
tropes  and  figures  hitherto  unused  were  introduced?  We  may  add,  too, 
that  Amos  has  visions  in  one  part  of  his  book,  and  in  the  other  only 
denunciations,  and  that  the  first  part  of  our  book  comprises  two  chapters  in 
which  there  are  no  visions ;  yet  no  one  has  disputed  the  integrity  of  the 
prophecy  of  Amos,  or  doubted  that  the  author  of  ch.  i. — vi.  of  Zechariah 
and  vii.,  viii.,  was  one  and  the  same.  But  there  is  another  positive 
argument  for  the  integrity  of  the  book  (which  also  helps  to  decide  its  date) 
that  must  not  be  neglected,  and  this  is  the  apparent  use  made  in  both  parts 
of  the  earlier  and  post-exilian  prophets.  In  his  opening  address,  and  after- 
wards, Zechariah  refers  to  "  the  former  prophets  "  (ch.  i.  4 — 6  and  vii.  7, 
12),  and  commentators  have  gathered  numerous  such  allusions.  Thus  the 
mention  of  the  vine  and  fig  tree  (ch.  iii.  10)  seems  to  come  from  Micah  iv.  4; 
the  remarkable  prediction  that  when  the  king  came  to  Zion  chariots  and 
horses  should  be  cut  off  from  Jerusalem  (ch.  ix.  10),  is  also  renewed  from 
Micah  (v.  10);  the  exhortation  to  "flee  from  the  land  of  the  north" 
(oh.  ii.  6,  Authorized  Version)  is  founded  on  that  of  Isaiah  (xlviii.  20), 
"  Flee  ye  from  the  Chaldeans ; "  the  words,  "  Every  one  that  is  left  of  all 
the  nations  shall  go  up  from  year  to  year  to  worship  the  King,  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  and  to  keep  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles"  (ch.  xiv.  16),  are  a  remembrance 
of  Isa.  Ixvi.  23,  "  From  one  new  moon  to  another,  and  from  one  sabbath  to 
another,  shall  all  flesh  come  to  worship  before  me,  saith  the  Lord  "  (comp.  Isa. 
Ix.  6 — 9) ;  the  words  (oh.  xiii.  9),  "  I  will  say.  It  is  my  people  :  and  they 
shall  say,  The  Lord  is  my  God,"  are  almost  verbally  from  Hos.  ii.  23;  the  use 
of  the  title  of  the  Messiah,  "  The  Branch  "  (oh.  iii.  8 ;  vi.  12),  is  in  accord- 
ance with  Isa.  iv.  2  and  Jer.  xxiii.  5 ;  xxxiii.  15 ;  the  loosing  of  the  exiles 
from  the  pit,  and  the  rendering  of  double  unto  them  (ch.  ix.  11,  12),  are 
found  in  Isa.  Ii.  14  and  Ixi.  7 ;  ch.  ix.  6,  in  which  is  announced  the  desola- 
tion of  Ashkelon,  Gaza,  and  Ekron,  is  taken  from  Zeph.  ii.  4;  the  language 
(ch.  X.  3)  concerning  "the  shepherds"  and  the  "goats"  is  borrowed  from 
Ezek.  xxxiv.  2,  17 ;  from  Ezek.  xxxiv.  comes  the  whole  allegory  of  ch.  zi. ; 
from  Ezek.  v.  2,  12  is  derived  the  warning  (oh.  xiii.  8,  9)  that  two  parta 
of  the  people  shall  be  cut  off,  while  a  thhrd  is  left  in  the  land;  the 
prophecy  of  the  four  chariots  (oL  vi.)  would  be  nointelligible  without  the 


INTRODUOTION  TO 


yisions  in  Dan.  il.,  yil. ;  the  expresiion,  '  the  pride  of  Jordan  "  (oh.  xi.  3), 
is  taken  from  Jer.  xii.  6;  xlix.  19.  We  need  not  multiply  instancea 
farther.  If  these  examples  are  worth  anything,  and  are  themselves  geiinine, 
they  are  snffioient  to  show  that  the  author  makes  ample  use  of  the  prophets 
that  were  before  him,  and  likewise,  in  the  second  part,  quoted  largely 
from  post-exilian  writers,  thus  determining,  one  would  infer,  bis  own  date. 
B.  The  second  head  of  objections  is  concerned  with  historical  and  chrono- 
logical referencet.  Critics,  as  we  said  above,  have  divided  oh.  ix. — xiv. 
among  two  writers,  sometimes  assigning  ch.  ix. — xi.  to  one,  a  contemporary 
of  Amos  and  Isaiah ;  and  the  remainder  to  another,  whose  date  is  more 
uncertain,  but  at  any  rate  was  pre-exilian.  Another  theory,  which  places 
the  author  in  the  days  of  Antioohus  Epiphanes,  needs  no  refutation  in  the 
face  of  the  only  consistent  exegesis.  The  point  of  the  former  objection  is 
that  the  whole  part  is  thought  to  show  indubitable  proof  that  it  was  written 
before  the  Captivity.  1.  The  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  is  supposed  to  be 
still  standing  (ch.  ix.  10,  13;  x.  6,  7,  10;  xi.  14);  the  prophecy  against 
Damascus,  etc.  (ch.  ix.  1 — 7),  would  have  been  meaningless  if  the  peoples 
therein  denounced  had  already  lost  their  national  existence  and  suffered 
punishment  for  their  sins  against  the  Hebrews.  But  this  prophecy  may  be 
regarded  as  especially  applicable  to  the  Persian  period,  and  the  territory 
named  is  that  which  Persian  armies  would  traverse  in  their  march  south- 
wards; it  belonged  according  to  promise  to  the  Israelites,  and  the  fate 
announced  for  its  inhabitants  was  intended  as  an  assurance  to  the  returned 
Jews  that  God  watched  over  them  still,  and  would  in  the  end  punish  those 
who  usurped  their  privileges.  Nothing  can  be  inferred  from  the  use  of 
the  terms  "Ephraim,"  "Judah,"  and  "Israel,"  for  they  are  employed 
indiscriminately  to  express  the  whole  people  in  or  after  the  Captivity 
(comp.  Jer.  xxx.  3,  4;  xxxi.  6,  27,  31 ;  xxxiii.  14;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  16;  Ezra 
i.  3 ;  iii.  1 ;  iv.  1,  3,  4;  vii.  13,  14).  2.  Idolatry  is  still  practised  (ch.  x.  2), 
which  was  not  the  case  after  the  return.  But  it  is  very  probable  that  the 
prophet  in  this  passage  is  referring  to  past  transgressions ;  nothing  is  said 
of  idolatry  being  a  sin  of  his  days;  though  a  warning  against  superstitious 
practices  connected  with  terapbim  and  divination  may  have  been  needed 
then,  as  indeed  it  might  be  now  in  the  case  of  some  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Palestine.  3.  The  mention  of  Assyria  instead  of  Babylon  in  oh.  x.  10 
shows  that  the  prophecy  was  composed  when  Assyria  was  stiU  a  flourishing 
kingdom.  In  answer  it  may  be  said  that  the  country  is  referred  to  whither 
the  tribes  had  been  deported,  and  where  doubtless  they  had  suffered  much 
cruelty  at  the  hands  of  the  Assyrians,  though  these  were  now  a  conquered 
people.  The  name  "  Assyria,"  too,  is  used  in  a  loose  way  for  Babylon  and 
Persia  in  Ezra  vi.  22 ;  Judith  i.  7 ;  ii.  1  (oomp.  1  Esdras  ii.  30  and  vii.  16). 
4.  The  state  of  things  described  in  oh.  xi.  2,  3,  6,  8,  belongs  to  the  period 
of  anarchy  after  the  death  of  Jeroboam  II.  (2  Kings  xv.  8 — 16).  The 
description,  however,  would  equally  well  suit  any  invasion  which  occasioned 
widespread  ruin  and  destruction,  and  might  be  applied  to  the  Boman  oj 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZEOHARIAH. 


any  other  attack ;  and  whatever  explanation  we  give  of  the  ontting  off  of 
the  "  three  shepherds,"  nothing  compels  us  to  see  in  it  the  yiolent  deaths 
of  Shallum,  Zeohariah,  and  a  third  (?)  Menahem — a  suggestion  which 
Dr.  Pusey  calls  "  even  absurd."  So  it  is  afSrmed  that  the  statements  in 
oh.  xiii.  9  and  xiv.  2  apply  to  times  before  the  Captivity ;  whereas  it  is 
plain  that  the  prophet  is  here  speaking  of  the  future,  not  of  the  past.  To 
touch  briefly  on  the  positive  side  of  the  question,  we  may  say  that  there 
are  details  and  passages  and  allusions  which  could  have  been  written  only 
after  the  exile.  Zechariah  mentions  governors ;  he  never  hints  that  there 
was  any  king  in  Judsea  at  the  time  when  he  writes ;  Judah  and  Israel  had 
been  in  exile,  and  some  of  them  still  remained  in  the  land  of  their  captivity 
(ch.  ix.  11,  12 ;  x.  6 — 10) ;  the  Jewish  nation,  Judah  and  Ephraim,  shall 
wage  successful  war  against  "  Javan,"  the  Greek  rulers  of  Syria  (ch.  ix.  13) ; 
for  the  jealousy  between  the  two  divisions  of  the  chosen  people  is  ended, 
and  they  form  one  nation,  dwelling  in  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  This  could 
never  have  been  said  of  pre-exilian  times. 

Many  other  alleged  proofs  of  pre-exilian  authorship  are  capable  of  easy 
solution,  as  will  be  seen  by  examining  their  treatment  in  the  Exposition. 
SufSce  it  here  to  say  that,  while  adhering  to  the  traditionary  view  of  the 
unity  and  integrity  of  the  book,  we  lay  no  great  stress  on  the  consideration 
that  Zechariah  is  the  author  of  the  whole;  and  as  long  as  it  is  allowed  that 
the  writer  was  gifted  with  predictive  powers,  and  exercised  his  prophetical 
office  under  the  inspiration  of  God,  we  deem  it  a  matter  of  secondary  impor- 
tance whether  the  words  that  pass  under  his  name  are  assigned  to  one, 
two,  or  three  authors.  It  is  conjectured  that  these  last  chapters  had  been 
placed  at  the  end  of  the  minor  prophets  before  Malaohi  was  added  to  the 
canon,  and  thus  became  appended  to  Zechariah  without  further  examina- 
tion. While  generally  adopting  the  traditional  theory  in  the  Exposition, 
we  have  not  been  unmindful  of  modem  criticism,  and,  where  practicable, 
have  introduced  the  interpretation  which  other  views  of  the  author's  date 
have  constrained  some  commentators  to  maintain. 


§  in.   Genebal  Characieb. 

Begarding  the  Book  of  Zeohariah  in  its  integrity,  we  meet  with  great 
diversity  of  style,  in  accordance,  as  we  have  seen  above,  with  the  varying 
snbject-matter.  Visions  that  came  before  the  prophet's  own  eyes  are 
narrated  in  simple  prose ;  in  uttering  prophecy  he  rises  to  a  higher  level, 
employing  figures  and  symbols  such  as  Jeremiah  and  Daniel  used,  but  also 
showing  an  originality  which  gives  a  peculiar  character  to  his  work.  The 
grandest  and  most  powerful  passages  are  found  in  ch.  ix. — xi.  These 
are  as  fine  as  any  in  Hebrew  poetry.  But  in  other  places  the  prophet 
is  often  harsh,  inharmonious;  emphasizes  by  repetition;  passes  from  one 
point  to  another  abruptly,  without  connecting  link.  His  parallelisms 
want  the  neatness  and  harmony  which  are  found  in  earlier  writings ;  his 


Ill  urmoDucynoK  to 


language  is  tolerably  pure  and  free  from  Ghaldaismi.  Many  oansea  have 
combined  to  render  his  oracles  difiScult  of  comprehension,  so  that  Jerome 
speaks  of  Zeohariah  as  the  longest  and  most  obscure  of  all  the  twelve 
prophets.  But  it  must  be  observed  that  many  of  the  difSculties  found 
in  his  work  have  been  imported  by  commentators  themselves.  Jewish 
expositors  have  refused  to  acknowledge  in  his  pages  a  humbled  and  suffering 
Messiah ;  and  modem  critics,  coming  to  the  study  with  prejudiced  notions 
ooncerning  the  prophet's  office,  have  endeavoured  to  discover  sanction 
for  their  views  in  the  text,  and  naturally  find  the  task  an  arduous  one. 
Scholarship  without  faith  is  of  little  use  in  interpreting  dark  plaoM  of 
Scripture. 

{  rV.  LrrEBATbBi. 

The  special  commentaries  on  the  Fiophet  Zechariah  are  very  numerous.  We  selsct 
a  few  out  of  many  that  are  noteworthy.  Among  the  Jews  we  have  David  Eimohi's 
'  Commentary,'  translated  by  A.  McCaul  (London,  1837),  and  other  commentaries  by 
Bashi  (1713)  and  Aben  Ezra.  Of  Chnstian  and  modem  commentators  we  may 
mention  the  following:  Grynteus  (Geneva,  1581);  Ursinus  (Frankfort,  1652); 
W.  Pemble,  'Exposition'  (London,  1629);  Nemethus,  'Proph.  Zech.  Explio.'  (Ultr., 
1714) ;  Venema,  '  Serm.  Acad.'  (Leovard.,  1787) ;  Blayney,  '  A  New  Translation  ' 
(Oxford,  1797);  Koester,  'Meletemata'(1818);  Stonard  (London,  1824);  Baumgarten, 
'Nachtgesichte  Zach.' (Braunschweig,  1854, 1855);  Moore,  'Prophets  of  the  Bestoration' 
(New  York,  1856);  Nemnann,  'Die  Weissag.  d.  Sakh.'  (Stuttgart,  1860);  Kliefoth, 
'  Der  Pr.  Saoh.  iibers.'  (Schwerin,  1862) ;  Kdhler,  '  Die  NachexiL  Proph.*^  (Erlangen, 
1860,  1865);  Yon  Ortenherg,  'Die  Bestuudtheile  d.  Buch.  Saoh.'  (Gk>tha,  1859); 
Pressel, ' Comm.  zu  Hag.,'  etc.  (Gotha,  1870);  Dr.  G.  H.  H.  Wright,  'Zech.  and  hia 
Prophecies '  (London,  1879) ;  W.  H.  Lowe, '  Hebr.  Student's  Oomm.  on  Zech.*  (London, 
1882) ;  Dr.  W,  L.  Alexander, '  Zechariah,  his  Yisions  and  Warnings'  (London,  1886) ; 
Archdeacon  Perowne,  in  '  Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools '  (1886). 

Besides  the  above-named  commentators,  there  are  numerous  writers  who  have 
discussed  the  question  of  the  integrity  of  the  book,  a  list  of  the  cluef  of  whom  will  ba 
found  in  the  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  and  a  fiirther  selection  in  the  Introduction  to 
Dr.  Wright^s  work. 

I  V.    ABBANaSUKNT  IN  SkOTIOSB. 

The  book  consists  of  three  parts. 

Part  I.  (Oh.  L — vi.)    A  series  of  eight  visions,  and  a  symbolical  action. 

§  1.  (Oh.  L  1.)    Title  and  author. 

§  2.  (Oh.  i.  2—6.)    The  prophet  admonishes  the  people  not  to  follow  their  fore- 
fatners'  evil  example,  but  to  turn  to  the  Lord  with  all  their  heart. 

5  3.  (Oh.  L  7 — 17.)    The  first  vision :  the  horsemen  in  the  myrtle  grove. 

§  4.  (Ch.  i.  18 — 21.)    The  second  vision :  the  four  horns  and  the  four  craftsmen. 

§  5.  (Oh.  ii.  1 — 13.)    The  third  vision :  the  man  with  the  measuring-line. 

§  6.  (Oh.  iii.  1 — 10.)    The  fourth  vision :  Joshua  the  high  priest  hofon  the  sngeL 

§  7.  (Oh.  iv.  1 — 14.)    The  fifth  vision :  the  golden  can^estick. 

§  8.  (Oh.  V.  1 — 4.)    The  sixth  vision :  the  flying  roll. 

§  9.  (Oh.  V.  6—11.)    The  seventh  vision :  the  woman  in  the  ephah. 

§  10.  (Oh.  vi.  1 — 8.)    The  eighth  vision :  the  four  chariots. 

§  11.  (Ch.  vi.  9 — 16.)    A  symbolical  action — the  crowning  of  the  high  priest. 
Part  II.  (Oh.  vii.,  viii.)     Answer  to  a  question  concerning  the  observance  of  certain 
fasts. 

{  1.  (Oh.  viL  1 — 3.)    A  deputation  comes  from  Bethel  to  aik  whether  a  &st 
instituted  in  calamitous  times  was  still  to  be  maintained. 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABIAB.  xul 

I  2.  (Oh.  tU.  4 — 7.)   In  answer  they  are  told  that  fasting  is  in  itself  an  indifferent 

thing,  but  is  to  be  judged  by  the  conduct  of  those  who  observe  it. 
{  3.  (Oh.  vii.  8 — 14.)    They  are  farther  reminded  that  they  had  been  disobedient 

in  old  time,  and  had  been  punished  by  exile. 
J  4.  (Oh.  viii.  1 — 8.)     The  Lord  promises  to  show  his  love  for  Zion,  to  dwell 

among  his  people,  and  to  fill  Jerusalem  with  a  happy  populace, 
f  5.  (Oh.  viii.  9 — 17.)    The  people  are  exhorted  to  be  of  good  cheer,  for  God  will 

henceforth  give  them  his  blessing,  which,  however,  was  conditional  on  their 

obedience. 
f  6,  (Oh.  viii.  18 — ^23.)    The  fasts  should  be  turned  into  joyful  festivals,  former 

calamities  being  forgotten ;  the  heathen  should  worship  the  God  of  Israel,  and 

esteem  it  an  honour  to  be  received  into  fellowship  with  the  Jewish  nation. 
F&rt  in.  (Oh.  ix. — ^xiv.)    The  future  of  the  powers  of  the  world  and  of  the  kingdom 

of  God. 

A.  (Oh.  ix.— xi.)    The  first  burden. 

S  1.  (Oh.  ix.  1 — 8.)  To  prepare  the  land  for  Israel,  and  to  prove  God's  care  for 
his  people,  the  neighbouring  heathen  shall  be  destroyed,  while  Israel  shall  dwell 
in  safety  and  independence. 

I  2.  (Oh.  ix.  9, 10.)  Then  shall  the  righteous  King  come  to  Zion  in  lowly  fashion, 
and  inaugurate  a  kingdom  of  peace. 

§  3.  (Gh.  ix.  11 — 17.)  All  Israel  united  into  one  people  shall  wage  successful 
war  with  adversaries,  and  attain  to  glory,  and  increase  largely  in  numbers. 

{  4.  (Cb,  X.  1,  2.)  These  blessings  are  to  be  asked  from  the  Lord,  not  from  idols 
or  teraphim. 

§  6.  (Ch.  X.  3,  4.)  The  evil  rulers  set  over  them  for  their  sins  shall  be  removed, 
and  Israel  shall  be  firmly  established. 

§  6.  (Oh.  X.  5 — 7.)    Israel  and  Judah  together  shall  triumph  over  their  foes. 

§  7.  (Oh.  X.  8 — 12.)  The  scattered  people  shall  be  gathered  from  all  parts  of  the 
world,  and  dwell  in  their  own  land,  under  the  protection  of  Jehovah. 

S  8.  (Oh.  xi.  1 — 3.)    The  Holy  Land  is  threatened  with  judgment. 

{  9.  (Oh.  xi.  4 — 14.)  The  punishment  falls  because  the  people  reject  the  good 
Shepherd,  personified  by  the  prophet,  who  rules  the  flock  and  punishes  evil- 
doers in  vain,  and  at  last  flings  up  his  office  in  indignation  at  their  contumacy. 

S  10.  (Oh.  xi.  15 — 17.)  In  retribution  the  people  are  given  over  to  a  foolish 
shepherd,  who  shall  destroy  them,  but  shall  himself,  in  turn,  perish  miserably. 

B.  (Ch.  xii. — xiv.)    The  second  burden. 

1 1.  (Ch.  xii.  1 — 9.)  Hostile  nations  gather  together  against  Jerusalem,  but  shall 
themselves  be  overthrown ;  for  the  inhabitants  and  their  leaders,  trusting  in  the 
Lord,  will  overcome  all  opposition. 

§  2.  (Ch.  xii.  10 — 14.)  There  shall  ensue  an  outpouring  of  God's  Spirit,  which 
shall  produce  a  great  national  repentance. 

§  3.  (Ch.  xiii.  1 — 6.)  This  repentance  will  lead  to  purification  from  past  defile- 
ment, and  a  reaction  against  idolatry  and  false  prophets. 

§  4.  (Oh.  xiii.  7 — 9.)  For  the  smiting  of  the  good  Shepherd  Israel  is  punished, 
passes  through  much  tribulation,  by  which  it  is  refined,  and  in  the  end  (thougli 
but  a  remnant)  is  saved. 

§  5.  (Oh.  xiv.  1,  2.)    Jerusalem  is  represented  as  taken  and  plundered. 

§  6.  (Ch.  xiv.  3 — 7.)  Then  the  Lord  himself  comes  to  her  help,  great  convul- 
sions of  nature  accompanying  his  presence. 

§  7.  (Ch.  xiv.  8 — 11.)  The  land  shall  be  transformed  and  renewed,  and  the  Lord 
shall  be  owned  as  the  sole  King  of  all  the  earth. 

S  8.  (Ch.  xiv.  12 — 15.)  Further  details  concerning  the  destruction  of  the  enemies : 
they  shall  perish  by  plague,  by  mutual  slaughter,  by  the  sword  of  Judah. 

f  9.  (Ch.  xiv.  16 — 19.)  The  heathen  shall  be  converted  and  join  with  the  Hebrews 
in  the  regular  worship  of  Jehovah. 

f  10.  (Ch.  xiv.  20,  21.)  Then  everything  alike  shall  be  holy,  and  the  ungodly 
dum  be  wholly  excluded  from  the  house  of  the  Lord. 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEGHAEIAH. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEK  I. 


Ver.  1 — cb.  vi.  15. — Part  I.  A  Sehieb  of 
Eight  Visions,  and  a  SyMBOLiOAL  Action. 

Ver.  1. — §  1.  Title  of  the  hook,  and  author. 
The  eighth  month.  This  was  called  Bill 
before  the  Captivity  (1  Kings  vi.  38),  and 
afterwards  Marchesvan  (Josephus,  '  Ant.,' 
i.  8.  3) ;  it  answered  to  parts  of  October  and 
November,  and  was  a  time  of  rain.  Haggal 
had  first  prophesied  two  months  earlier. 
The  second  year  of  Sarins.  Being  now 
under  foreign  rule,  the  prophet  uses  the 
regnal  years  of  the  king  to  whom  his 
people  were  subject  (see  note  on  Hag.  i.  1). 
Son  of  Bereohiah  (see  Introduction,  §  II.). 
The  prophet.  This  appellation  belongs  to 
"Zechariah,"  as  the  LXX.  and  Vulgate 
take  it.  A  comma  should  be  inserted  after 
"  Iddo  "  here  and  in  ver.  7.  Saying.  The 
visions  virtually  spoke  to  him,  communicated 
to  him  the  Lord's  will ;  but  first  he  has  to 
deliver  the  following  warning. 

Vers.  2 — 6. — §  2.  The  prophet  admonishes 
the  people  not  to  follow  their  forefathers'  evil 
example,  hut  to  turn  to  the  Lord  with  all 
their  heart. 

Ver.  2. — Hath  been  sore  displeased ;  lite- 
rally, displeased  with  displeasure,  which  the 
versious  render,  wpyiaBiii  bpy^v  /ieydXriv : 
iratus  iracundia  (of.  ver.  15).  Not  only 
events  connected  with  their  earlier  history 
proved  that  God  had  been  incensed  with 
their  forefathers,  but  the  ruin  of  their  king- 
dom, and  the  late  Captivity,  and  the  desola- 
tion around  them,  were  evidence  of  the 
same  sad  truth. 

Ver.  3. — Say  thou  unto  them.  The  pro- 
phet shows  why  he  has  reminded  them  of 
their  forefathers'  sins  and  punishment.  Saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts,  The  expression  recurs 
three  times  in  this  verse;  it  denotes  the 
almightiness  and  infinite  resources  of  God 

ZECHARIAH. 


(see  note  A  in  the  appendix  to  Archdeacon 
Perowne's  edition  of  this  prophet).  Its  con- 
stant repetition,  as  in  Haggai,  gives  a  cer- 
tain heaviness  to  the  prophet's  style.  Turn 
(return)  ye  unto  me.  He  calls  the  people 
to  repentance,  partly,  doubtless,  with  a  view 
to  their  taking  an  active  part  in  rebuilding 
the  temple,  thus  carrying  on  the  exhorta- 
tions of  Haggai,  but  also  witli  reference  to 
their  general  indevotion  and  laxity  which 
Ezia  afterwards  had  to  reprove  (see  Ezra 
ix.  2).  Saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  literally, 
{it  is)  the  utterance  of  Jehovah  of  hosts.  This ' 
is  a  more  threatening  form  than  the  mere 
"saith"  in  the  other  two  places  in  this 
verse.  And  I  will  turn  (return)  unto  you 
(Mai.  iii.  7).  God  promises  his  favour  on 
their  repentance  and  better  conduct ;  as 
Haggai  had  been  commissioned  to  proclaim 
a  return  of  fruitful  seasons  as  soon  as  the 
people  obeyed  his  word  and  attended  dili- 
gently to  the  work  before  them  (Hag.ii.  19). 
They  were  called  now  to  attend  to  the  pure 
worship  of  the  Lord,  as  the  sole  condition  of 
prosperity  (comp.  2  Chron.  xxx.  6 ;  ,Tas.  iv. 
8).  It  has  been  well  observed  that  when  it 
is  said,  "  Turn  ye  unto  me,"  etc.,  we  are  re- 
minded of  our  free-will ;  and  when  we  cry, 
"Turn  us,  good  Lord,  and  we  ghaU  be 
turned,"  we  acknowledge  the  need  of  God's 
preventing  grace. 

Ver.  4. — The  former  prophets  have  cried. 
Omit  "  have."  The  prophets  referred  to  are 
those  before  the  Captivity,  both  those  whose 
writings  are  extant,  as  Hosea,  Joel,  Amos, 
etc.,  and  those  whose  names  are  mentioned 
in  the  historical  books,  e.^.  Nathan,  Gad, 
Shemaiah,  Azariah,  Hanani,  Elijah,  Elisha, 
Micaiah  (Pusey).  (See  similar  complaints 
in  2  Kings  xvii.  13 ;  2  Ohron.  xxxvi.  15,  etc. ; 
Jer.  XXV.  3 — 8,  which  last  passage  seems  to 
have  been  in  Zechariab's  mind.) 

Ver.  5. — To  compel  them  to  listen  to  the 
warning,  he  asks  them,  Tom  fathers,  where 
are  they  1    What  became  of  those  who  paid 

6 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH. 


[CH.  L  1—21. 


no  hoed  to  the  admonitions  of  the  prophets  7 
Have  they  not  suffered  dire  calamities  and 
perished  miserably?  And  the  prophets,  do 
they  live  for  everl  They  can  teach  and 
threaten  no  longer.  It  is  ime  that  the  seers 
who  warned  your  fathers  are  no  more,  but 
did  not  their  words  come  true  (see  ver.  6)  ? 
Jerome  referred  these  words  to  the  false 
prophets,  resting,  doubtless,  on  Jer.  xzxvii. 
19.  But  it  is  more  natural  to  refer  them 
to  the  "  former  prophets "  mentioned  above 
and  in  the  following  verse. 

Ver.  6. — My  words.  Tlie  words  that  God 
put  into  the  mouths  of  the  prophets  (Jer. 
xxzix.  16;  Lam.  ii.  17).'  Statutes,  usually 
applied  to  the  Law,  which  the  prophets  had 
to  announce  and  enforce ;  but  it  may  mean 
"  decrees  "  which  God  appointed  (Zeph.  ii. 
■  2).  The  LXX.  inserts  "receive  ye"  to 
govern  these  nouns.  I  commanded.  The 
LXX.  adds,  4v  wveiiuxri  /lov,  "  by  my  inspi- 
ration." Did  they  not  take  hold  of  your 
fathers  ?  Did  they  not  overtake,  etc.  ?  Did 
not  their  threatened  chastisements,  however 
long  delayed,  reach  your  fathers  in  the  end  ? 
And  they  returned;  turned,  as  vers.  3,  4. 
They  turned  so  far  as  to  acknowledge  that 
the  threats  had  been  fully  accomplished 
(see  Dan.  ix.  5 ;  Ezra  ix.  6,  etc.).  Thought 
to  do ;  irapm-iTOKTai  (Septuagint), "  designed, 
purposed  to  do"  (comp.  Lam.  ii.  17). 

Vers.  7— 17.— §  3.  The  first  vision :  the 
horsemen  in  the  myrtle  grove. 

Ver.  7. — In  a  series  of  visions  it  is  now 
shown  what  is  the  nature  of  the  restored 
theocracy,  and  what  shall  befall  it.  Tlius 
were  the  people  comforted  by  liearing  God's 
purposes  of  mercy  and  the  great  future  that 
awaited  Israel.  In  this  first  vision  it  is 
revealed  to  Zechariah  that  the  Gentile 
nations  should  be  overthrown,  and  that 
whatever  might  be  the  present  condition  of 
the  Jewish  people,  God's  purpose  of  mercy 
toward  them  was  unshaken  and  would  be 
fulfilled.  The  four  and  twentieth  day  of 
the  eleventh  month,  which  is  the  month 
Sebat.  This  month  (called  here  by  its 
Chaldean  name)  answered  to  parts  of  Janu- 
ary and  February.  It  was  three  months 
since  Zecliariah  had  been  called  to  the  pro- 
phetical office,  and  five  since  the  building 
of  the  temple  had  been  resumed  at  Haggai'a 
remonstrance.  Meantime  Haggai  had  con- 
cluded his  mission  by  uttering  his  final  pro- 
phecies two  months  ago,  and  now  Zechariah 
carries  on  the  revelation.  A  comparison  of 
the  months  in  the  cuneiform  inscriptions 
with  the  Hebrew  will  be  found  in  Schrader, 
'  Keilinschriften,'  379,  and  in  Dr.  Wright's 
note  on  this  verse.  The  word  of  the  Lord. 
The  visions  with  their  explanations  are  in 
effect  the  oracle  (see  note  on  ver.  1). 

Ver.  8. — I  saw  by  night;  in  the  night;  i.e. 


the  night  of  the  twenty-fourth  day  (ver.  7). 
The  visions  were  seen  in  this  one  night  at 
short  intervals.  There  is  nothing  to  make 
one  suppose  that  they  came  in  dreams  (Isa. 
zxix.  7).  The  prophet  is  awake,  but 
whether  he  sees  these  scenes  with  Lis  bodily 
eyes,  or  was  rapt  in  ecstusy,  cannot  be  de- 
cided. A  man  riding  upon  a  red  horse. 
This  is  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,  mentioned 
again  in  ver.  10  and  in  ver.  11,  in  both  of 
which  places  the  description,  "  that  stood 
among  the  myrtle  trees,"  serves  to  identify 
him.  He  is  different  from  the  interpreting 
angel,  and  is  the  leader  of  the  company  of 
horsemen  that  follow  him.  Keil  and  Wright 
consider  that  the  rider  on  the  red  horse 
cannot  be  identified  with  the  Angel  of 
Jehovah,  because  otherwise  he  would  have 
been  represented  as  standing  opposite  to 
the  other  horsemen  to  receive  the  informa- 
tion which  they  brought  him,  and  they 
would  not  have  been  spoken  of  as  "behind" 
him.  But  the  expression  in  ver.  8  may 
mean  merely  that  the  prophet  sets  his  eyes 
first  on  the  leader  and  then  on  the  attend- 
ants. Or  in  ver.  10  he  is  the  spokesman 
who  begins  the  account  of  the  riders'  doings, 
which  these  themselves  complete  in  ver.  11. 
Thus  there  are  in  the  scene  only  (1)  the 
prophet ;  (2)  the  angel-rider  and  his  attend- 
ants ;  and  (3)  the  interpreting  angel.  The 
red  colour  of  the  horse  is  supposed  to  repre- 
sent war  and  bloodshed,  as  in  Bev.  vi.  4 ; 
but  this  seems  unsuitable  in  this  place, where 
nothing  of  the  kind  is  intimated,  but  rather 
the  contrary  (ver.  11).  It  is,  indeed,  impos- 
sible to  affix  any  satisfactory  explanation 
to  the  colour.  If,  as  we  may  well  suppose, 
this  personage  is  the  Angel  of  the  covenant, 
who  was  the  leader  and  guide  of  the  Israel- 
ites (comp.  Josh.  V.  13),  bis  standing  in  the 
valley  among  the  myrtles  may  represent 
the  depressed  and  humbled  condition  of  the 
chosen  people,  which  yet  was  well-pleasing 
unto  God,  like  the  sweet  scent  of  odoriferous 
myrtles  is  agreeable  to  men.  The  myrtle 
trees.  The  myrtle  is  indigenous  in  the  hilly 
regions  of  Nortlieru  Palestine,  and  is  still 
seen  in  the  glens  near  Jerusalem,  though  no 
longer  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  where  the 
returned  captives  found  it  when  celebrating 
their  first  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (Neh.  viii. 
15).  In  the  bottom ;  Ihe  valley.  Myrtles  love 
such  places.  "  Amantes  littora  myrtos" 
(Virgil, '  Georg.,'  iv.  124).  The  term  would 
suit  the  valley  of  the  Kidrou.  Others  ren- 
der, "  the  shady  place,"  or  "  the  tabernacle," 
but  not  so  appropriately.  LXX.,  iva/Mea-oy 
Twv  [Alex.,  5iio]  opeav  rav  KaraffKicav,  "  be- 
tween the  shady  mountains."  The  Greek 
translators  seem  to  have  borrowed  their 
reading  from  ch.  vi.,  where  the  ohariota 
issue  from  between  two  mountains  of  brass. 
Behind  him  were   there   red  horses;    f*. 


OH.  1.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABUH. 


horses  mounted  by  riders  (ver.  11).  Speckled. 
It  is  not  clear  what  colour  is  meant  by  this 
word.  The  Revised  Version  gives  eorrel; 
Wright,  "bay  or  chestnut;"  LXX.,  \jiapol 
Kol  iroMiKot:  "dapple-grey  and  spotted;" 
Vulgate,  varii.  The  Septuagint  Version  is 
probably  a  double  rendering.  The  word 
occurs  elsewhere  only  in  Isa.  xvi.  8,  where 
it  is  applied,  to  the  tendrils  of  the  vine. 
What  is  intended  by  the  different  colours 
of  the  horses  is  a  matter  of  great  dis- 
pute, and  cannot  be  known.  There  is  some 
reason  for  considering  that  they  repre- 
sent the  world-powers  at  this  particular 
period — the  Babylonian,  the  Medo-Persian, 
the  Greek ;  three  of  those  concerning  which 
Daniel  prophesied;  the  fourth,  the  Roman, 
not  having  yet  come  in  view.  Tlie  notion 
of  tutelary  angels,  presiding  over  countries, 
was  familiar  to  the  Hebrew  mind  (see  Dan. 
X.  12,  13,  20,  21).  These  horsemen  are  evi- 
dently not  post-couriers,  but  warriors  on 
military  service. 

Ver.  9. — 0  my  lord.  The  prophet  speaks 
to  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  who  answers 
briefly,  and  is  succeeded  by  tlie  interpreting 
angel.  What  are  these  1  Not  "  who,"  but 
"what;"  t.e.  what  do  they  signify?  (comp. 
Amos  vii.  8).  That  talked  with  me;  lite- 
rally, as  the  LXX.  and  Vulgate,  that  epake 
in  me.  So  vers.  13, 14,  and  in  the  following 
visions.  Hence  some  regard  the  expression 
as  intimating  a  communication  borne  in- 
wardly to  the  soul  without  the  aid  of  ex- 
ternal organs,  or  that  the  angel  overpowered 
and  influenced  the  prophet  as  the  evil  spirit 
possessed  the  demoniac.  But  the  same  term 
is  used,  as  Dr.  Wright  points  out,  in  tlie 
sense  of  to  commune  with  a  person  (Numb, 
xii.  6,  8;  1  Sam.  xxv.  89),  and  to  speak  to  a 
person  (Hos.  i.  2 ;  and  perhaps  Hab.  ii.  1). 
It  may,  however,  be  that  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  presented  matters  objectively,  and  the 
prophet's  own  angel  interpreted  subjectively. 
But  the  Authorized  Version  is  probably 
correct.  I  will  show  thee.  This  he  does 
through  the  chief  angel  (ver.  10). 

Ver.  l6. — The  man  that  stood,  etc.  The 
rider  upon  the  red  horse  of  ver.  8,. the  leader 
of  the  company  of  horsemen.  Answered  the 
question  which  the  prophet  had  proposed, 
or  answered  in  response  to  a  sign  from  the 
interpreting  angel.  They  whom  the  Lord 
hath  sent,  etc.  These  angelic  ministers  had 
been  sent  to  traverse  the  earth  and  to  report 
its  condition  (comp.  Job  i.  7 ;  ii.  2 ;  Heb.  i. 
14),  and  to  guide  it  to  the  carrying  out  of 
God's  purposes. 

Ver.  11. — They  answered.  Having  said 
who  they  were,  the  angel  directs  tliem  to 
tell  of  their  doings.  The  angel  of  the  Lord, 
The  "man  riding  upon  the  red  horse"  (ver. 
8)  is  now  called  "the  Angel  of  Jehovah." 
This  term  is  usually  held  to  denote  a  mani- 


festation of  the  Logos,  the  Second  Person 
of  the  Holy  Trinity,  assuming  an  angelic 
form  or  imparting  his  immediate  presence 
to  the  revealer  of  his  will.  Sitteth  still,  and 
is  at  rest.  The  world  was  lying  in  proud 
security.  There  was  no  sign  of  that  shaking 
of  nations  which  Haggai  (ii.  7,  21,  22)  had 
foretold  shouM  precede  (he  coming  of 
Messiah  and  the  restoration  of  Israel.  In 
this  second  year  of  Darius,  the  empire, 
though  suffering  from  internal  disturbances, 
was  outwardly  at  peace,  and  was  threatened 
by  no  enemy  at  a  distance.  But  the  con- 
dition of  the  Jews  was  sad  and  dishearten- 
ing ;  tlie  temple  still  unbuilt,  the  walls  of 
Jerusalem  lying  in  ruins,  themselves  only  a 
small  remnant,  exposed  to  the  insults  and 
attacks  of  jealous  neighbours,  living  on 
sufferance  as  subjects  of  a  heathen  power, 
and  no  sign  of  the  predicted  salvation  ap- 
pearing,— this  was  their  state.  And  the 
angel  sees  their  despondency,  recognizes 
their  disappointment,  and  intercedes  for 
them. 

Ver.  12. — Answered.  He  answered  the 
feeling  in  the  prophet's  mind,  the  unex- 
pressed longing  of  bis  heart.  0  Lord  of 
hosts.  The  angel  is  the  intercessor  for  the 
people.  So  Christ  prays  to  the  Father  (John 
xvii.).  How  long  wilt  thoa  not  have  mercy, 
etc.  ?  He  prays  that  the  weary  waiting  for 
deliverance  may  speedily  come  to  an  end, 
and  Jerusalem  be  restored,  and  Judasa  be 
again  inhabited  by  a  happy  population. 
These  three  score  and  ten  years.  The  pre- 
dicted seventy  years  of  captivity  (Jer.  xxv. 
11 ;  xxix.  10)  were  past ;  it  was  time  that 
the  punishment  should  cease.  There  are 
two  computations  of  this  period.  The  first 
dates  from  the  first  capture  of  Jerusalem  by 
Nebuchadnezzar,  B.a.  606,  when  Judcea  was 
made  tributary  to  Babylon  (2  Kings  xxiv.  1 ; 
2  Chron.  xxxvi.  6;  Dan.  i.  1,  etc.),  unto 
the  return  of  the  company  of  exiles  under 
Zerubbabel,  B.a.  536 ;  the  second  dates  from 
the  final  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  B.o.  588, 
unto  the  second  year  of  Darius,  B.o.  519, 
when  Zeohariah  saw  these  visions.  How- 
ever reckoned,  the  dark  period  was  now 
over ;  might  they  not  now  expect  the  com- 
motion among  the  nations  which  was  to 
precede  their  own  restitution  ? 

Ver.  13. — The  Lord  answered.  The  Angel 
of  Jehovah  is  thus  called  as  the  representa- 
tive of  God,  whether  we  regard  him  as  the 
Logos  or  a  created  angel  empowered  by 
God  (see  note  on  ver.  11).  This  personage 
is  often  seemingly  identified  with  Jehovah 
(comp.  ch.  iii.  2 ;  Gen.  xviii.  1,  2,  13,  17, 
22;  Josh.  V.  14,  15;  vi.  2).  He  gives  the 
answer  to  the  interpreting  angel,  which  the 
latter  is  to  convey  to  the  prophet,  which  he, 
in  turn,  was  to  announce  to  the  people.  Good 
words,   promising   blessing   and  salvation 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARlAfl. 


[oil  l  1—21. 


(1  Kings  xii.  7);  ami  these  are  oomfortable 
words  (Isa.  Ivii.  IS),  a  message  calculated 
to  bring  comfort  to  the  people's  desponding 
hearts.  What  the  message  is  is  given  in 
the  following  verses  (14 — 17). 

Ver.  14.— Cry  thou  (Isa.  xl.  6).  The  pro- 
pliet  lius  to  publish  two  things:  (1)  God's 
love  for  his  people,  however  humiliated  and 
miserable  their  present  position  might  be ; 
and  (2)  the  promise  of  coming  prosperity.  I 
am  jealous.  The  term  implies  ardent  love, 
which  cannot  bear  itself  to  be  slighted,  or 
the  object  of  its  affection  to  be  injured 
(oomp.  ch.  Tiii.  2,  and  note  there;  Numb. 
xxT.  11,  13;  Joel  ii.  18).  Tor  Jerusalem, 
as  the  capital  of  the  kingdom ;  and  for  Zion, 
as  tlio  seat  of  worship. 

Ver.  15. — The  heathen;  <Ae  nationi,  who 
were  God's  instruments  in  punishing  Israel. 
That  are  at  ease.  Living  in  proud  security 
and  self-enjoyment  (Isa.  xxxii.  9,  11 ;  Amos 
vi.  1 ;  comp.  ver.  11).  Septuagint,  ri  <ruve- 
wiTtBd/ieya,  "  which  join  in  attacking  her ; " 
Vulgate,  opulentat,  "  wealthy,"  their  riches 
giving  them  self-oonfldence.  I  was  but 
a  litUe  displeaied.  Gk>d  had  been  angry 
with  his  people,  it  is  true,  but  only  in 
measure,  chastising  them,  like  a  parent,  for 
their  good.  Others  take  "  a  little  "  {parum, 
oKlyu)  to  mean  "  for  a  little  time,"  in  allusion 
to  the  seventy  years'  captivity.  And  they 
helped  forward  the  sfSiotion;  or,  in  the 
LXX.,  (Tvv€v49eyTO  eis  xaKa,  "helped  for 
evil ;  "  Vulgate,  adjuverunt  in  malum.  They 
exceeded  their  part  as  mere  instruments  in 
God's  hands,  and  wished  to  destroy  Israel 
altogether,  or  to  oppress  them  beyond  the 
purposed  period  of  their  chastisement.  A 
similar  complaint  is  made  against  the 
Assyrians  (Isa.  x.  5,  etc.)  and  the  Baby- 
lonians (Isa.  xlvii.  6). 

Ver.  16. — Therefore.  Because  God  loved 
his  people  and  was  incensed  with  the 
heathen.  I  am  returned ;  I  return.  Ao- 
cording  to  the  promise  in  ver.  3  (see  note 
on  ch.  viii.  3).  A  line  shall  be  stretched 
forth.  A  measuring-line  shall  now  be  used 
to  mark  out  the  city  for  rebuilding  (Job 
xxxviii.  5).  The  firstproof  of  God's  renewed 
mercy  would  be  seen  in  the  restoration  of 
the  temple,  the  symbol  of  the  theocracy, 
and  in  uie  revival  of  the  city,  the  type  of 
national  life.  The  "  line "  had  been  used 
for  purposes  of  destruction  (2  Kings  xxi. 
13  ;  Isa.  xxxiv.  11 ;  Lam.  ii.  8). 

Ver.  1 7 . — Cry  yet,  saying.  This  introduces 
the  second  part  of  the  prophet's  message. 
The  LXX.  begins  the  verse  with  the  words, 
"  And  the  angel  that  spake  In  me  said  unto 
me."  My  cities  through  prosperity  shall 
yet  be  spread  abroad.  "  Yet,''  in  this  verse, 
is  better  rendered  again.  God  calls  the  cities 
his,  to  show  his  love  for  Judah;  and  he  pro- 
mises that  they  shall  not  only  be  reocoupied 


by  returning  immigrants,  bat  increased  in 
extent  and  number  by  reason  of  the  enlarged 
population.  So  Josephus  tells  us  that  in 
later  times  Jerusalem  had  outgrown  its 
walls,  and  that  the  fourth  quarter,  Bezetba, 
was  added  ('Bell.  Jud.,'  v.  4.  2).  But  it 
seems  best  to  translate  the  clause  thus  : 
"My  cities  shall  yet  overflow  with  pros- 
perity." Vulgate,  Adhue  affluent  civitalei 
mess  bonii;  LXX,,  "En  SiaxvB'tiiropTai  t^Acij 
^ir  07380?;.  Shall  yet  comfort  Zion,  for  all 
her  afflictions.  Shall  yet  choose  Jerusalem 
(ch.  ii.  12  [16,  Hebrew];  iii.  2).  God  will 
show  that  the  election  of  Israel  remains  un- 
impaired and  secure  (comp.  2  Kings  xxi.  7; 
2  Ohron.  vi.  5).  The  partial  fulfilment  of 
the  items  of  this  prophecy  are  to  be  fonnd 
in  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple,  the  restora- 
tion of  Jerusalem  by  Nehemiah,  and  the 
prosperity  of  Judah  under  the  Asmonean 
princes.  A  liint  of  further  blessings  is  given 
in  the  final  clause,  but  their  nature  is  not 
expressly  mentioned. 

Vers.  18— 21.— §  4.  The  second  virion  1 
the  /our  hornt  and  the  four  craftsmen. 

Ver.  18. — I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw. 
This  vision  is  closely  connected  with  the 
former.  The  prophet  had  been  told  that 
the  hostUe  nations  should  be  punished  and 
scattered;  he  now  is  shown  this  tlireat 
being  executed.  Four  horns,  belonging  to 
four  beasts  but  dimly  seen  or  wholly  in- 
visible. Horns  are  symbols  of  strength  and 
power  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxv.  4,  5 ;  Dan.  viii.  8 ; 
Amos  vi.  13).  Here  they  mean  powers 
hostile  to  Israel,  and  the  number  "four" 
(the  symliol  of  completeness)  points  to  the 
four  winds  from  which  they  come,  i.e.  from 
every  side.  In  the  Hebrew  ch.  iL  begins 
at  this  verse. 

Ver.  19. — Which  hare  scattered,  etc. 
Some  see  here  an  allusion  to  the  prophecy 
of  Daniel  concerning  the  Babylonians, 
Medo-Persians,  Macedonians,  and  Romans. 
Against  this  view  it  is  urged  that  the  pro- 

Shet  is  speaking  of  past  events,  not  of  a  far- 
istaot  future.  Others  take  the  four  horns 
to  represent  Assyria,  Egypt,  Babylon,  and 
Medo-Persia,  all  of  which  had  scattered 
Israel.  But  it  is  well  to  lay  no  special 
stress  on  such  explanations  of  symbolical 
langua°;e,  which  are  at  best  mere  conjec- 
tures, liable  to  be  overthrown  by  a  new 
theory.  The  word  "  scattered,"  which 
Jerome  renders  ventilaverunt,  means  pro- 
perly, as  Wright  observes,  "  to  winnow,''  to 
separate  and  scatter  by  means  of  the  wind. 
The  perfect  tense  of  this  verb  must  not  be 
pressed  so  as  to  exclude  all  notion  of  coming 
events.  The  propliets  see  at  one  glance 
past  and  future,  and  combine  in  one  expres- 
sion far -distant  occurrences.  Doubtless 
Zeohariah's    vision    has    some   relation    U 


3H.  I.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHAEIAH. 


Daniel's,  and  his  description  of  tlie  powers 
4081118  to  the  Church  of  God  runs  on  parallel 
lines  with  that  of  his  predecessor.  Whether 
he  refers  to  the  same  four  empires  must  be 
-left  in  uncertainty.  Judab,  Israel,  and 
Jerusalem.  All  the  tribes  and  the  capital. 
According  to  Ewald,  Judah  is  named  first 
as  occupying  the  place  of  honour,  even  as 
Beiijamin  is  named  before  Jadah  in  Ps. 
Ixviii.  27,  because  the  capital  city  lay  in 
its  territory.  Jerusalem  was  the  centre  of 
worship  and  government  for  all  the  people, 
•the  northern  tribes  being  represented  by 
Israel,  the  southern  by  Judah,  Some  critics 
<^ancel  the  word  "  Israel "  here,  and  there  is 
■no  doubt  that  it  is  often  written  for  "  Jeru- 
salem "  by  mistake  (comp.  Jer.  xxiii.  6  [where 
see  Professor  Oheyne's  note] ;  xxxii.  30,  32 ; 
U.  49;  Zeph.  iii.  14;  Mai.  ii.  11).  Gratz 
supposes  that  in  the  present  passage  the 
floribe  discovered  his  mistake,  and  wrote 
•the  right  word  "  Jerusalem  "  after  the  wrong 
-one  "Israel,"  but  leaving  the  latter  still 
in  the  manuscript.  Of  course,  there  is  no 
proof  of  this  supposition.  Some  manu- 
■Boripts  of  the  Septuugiiit  omit  "  Jerusalem  " 
here. 

Ver.  20. — Four  carpenters;  craftsmen; 
Kevised  Version,  smiths,  in  which  case  "  the 
horns  "  would  be  made  of  iron.  The  word 
ia  applied  to  workers  in  wood,  stone,  and 
metal;  therefore  an  ambiguous  rendering 


seems  most  guitable  here.  LXX.,  t^ktovus  : 
Vulgate, /a5ro».  They  represent  the  human 
agencies  employed  by  God  to  overthrow  the 
powers  hostile  to  the  Ohuroh.  Their  num- 
ber is  the  same  as  that  of  the  "  horns,"  thus 
showing  their  adequacy  for  the  work  which 
they  have  to  execute.  It  is  quite  unneces- 
sary to  attempt  to  Identify  the  four  "  crafts- 
men," Some  take  them  to  be  Zerutbabel, 
Joshua,  Ezra,  and  Nehemlab ;  or  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, Cyrus,  Cambyses,  and  Alexander 
the  Great ;  or  the  four  evangelists ;  or  gene- 
rally, angels.  We  shall  be  safer  if  we  look 
upon  them  merely  as  God's  instruments  and 
servants  without  further  identification. 

Ver.  21. — And  he  spake.  The  interpreting 
angel  spake.  Which  have  scattered  Judah. 
The  LXX.  adds,  "and  broke  Israel  in 
pieces."  Did  lift  up  his  head.  These  powers 
laid  Judah  prostrate.  To  fray  them.  To 
terrify  the  powers  symbolized  by  the  four 
horns,  and  disturb  their  self-complacent 
security  (ver.  15).  The  LXX.,  mistaking  the 
sense,  gives,  ToC  o^Svai  avra  «s  x*'?"*  atraD 
TO  riaffapa  Kepara,  "  To  sharpen  them,  even 
the  four  horns,  in  their  hands."  To  east 
■out ;  to  cast  down,  to  overthrow  these  proud 
powers.  Over  (against)  the  land.  The 
nations  had  treated  Judah  as  a  wild  bull 
treats  things  that  oppose  him,  tossing  and 
scattering  them  to  the  wind. 


HOMILE-nCS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — A  timely  warning.  "In  the  eighth  month,  in  the  second  year  of 
Darius,  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Zeohariah,  the  son  of  Berechiah,  the  son 
of  Iddo  the  prophet,"  etc.  Special  attention  seems  invited  in  the  opening  verse  of 
ithis  openincr  prophecy  to  the  question  of  time.  Probably  because  the  time  of  its 
utterance  was  a  time  of  much  hope,  as  shown  by  the  cotemporaneous  prophecies  of 
Hag.  1. 13—15  ("  sixth  month  ") ;  ii.  1—9  ("  seventh  month  ") ;  and  ii.  18,  19  ("  ninth 
flionth ").  Probably  also  because  a  time  of  much  hope  is  a  time  of  much  fear ;  the 
season  of  bloom  is  the  season  of  blight.  Accordingly,  the  virhole  of  this  opening 
..message — a  kind  of  prologue  to  the  visions  that  follow — ig  one  of  admonition  and 
warning,  a  warning  which  turns  (1)  on  the  present  position,  and  (2)  on  the  past 
■experience,  of  the  Jewish  people  and  Church. 

I.  Present  position.  1.  The  fact.  How  did  they  stand  before  God?  As  the 
■children  of  sinners  (ver.  2).  This  is  the  first  thing  to  be  remembered  by  them,  as 
also  by  us  all  (Eph.  ii.  3,  end).  2.  The  significance  of  the  fact;  and  that  in  two 
opposite  directions.  (1)  As  to  God's  attitude  towards  them.  His  favour  was  turned 
*way  from  them.  As  he  had  been  "displeased"  with  their  "fathers,"  so  also,  though 
aot  irretrievably,  with  themselves.  This  implied  in  the  very  promise  of  ver.  3,  "  I 
will  turn  to  you."  This  same  truth,  again,  both  in  the  second  commandment,  and 
«lso  in  the  gracious  declaration  of  Bxod.  xxxiv.  5 — 7,  is  set  forth  as  part  of  God's 
uniform  rule.  (2)  As  to  their  (natural)  attitude  towards  God.  Their  hearts  were 
turned  away  from  him.  Hence  the  exhortation  of  ver.  3.  Their  attitude  was  one 
even  of  malignant  aversion,  if  so  we  may  speak,  always  tending  of  itself,  like  certain 
malignant  bodily  diseases,  to  become  aggravated  and  worse.  The  longer  we  postpone 
our  repentance  the  more  difficult  it  becomes.  This  is  the  most  serious  consideration 
of  alL 


6  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  i.  1—21. 

JI.  Fast  experienoe.  (See  vers.  6,  6.)  In  these  they  are  reminded :  1.  Tliat  tomt 
things  belonging  to  the  past  had  indeed  passed  away,  as  it  were.  "  Their  fathers,"  e.g. 
who  had  received  so  many  warnings,  and  despised  them.  Even  "  the  prophets  "  also, 
who  had  delivered  these  warnings,  and  believed  them,  had  fulfilled  their  days,  and 
departed.  Like  a  scene  in  a  play,  like  a  picture  in  a  magic-lantern,  there  was  some- 
thing else  in  their  place.  2.  Some  things  belonging  to  the  past  were  still  remaining. 
The  truth  of  God's  Word,  for  example  (see  Ps.  vi.  6—8).  This  manifest  to  their  senses. 
Did  not  "  my  words  and  my  statutes  take  hold  of  your  fathers "  ?  All  th^ir  recent 
history,  their  complete  and  long-enduring  captivity,  their  partial  return,  their  present 
condition,  an  afSrmative  answer  to  this  question.  This  same  truth  acknowledged,  too, 
by  those  gone.  .  They  acknowledged  the  fact:  "As  God  thought  to  do,  so  he  did." 
They  acknowledged  its  justice:  "According  to  our  way's,  and  according  to  our  doings,, 
so  hath  he  "done  (comp.  Lara.  ii.  17,  18;  and  as  to  the  general  principle,  Judg.  i.  7). 
This  the  special  triumph  of  God's  Word,  that  it  is  vindicated  and  preached  at  times  by 
its  bitterest  foes  (Gal.  i.  23 ;  John  xi.  49 — 52.  Also  the  saying  attributed  to  Julian 
the  Apostate,  "  Thou  hast  conquered,  0  Galilean  1 "). 

In  conclusion,  we  may  note  and  admire  in  this  passage :  1.  The  discrimination  of 
Scripture.  How  exactly  suited  the  whole  tenor  of  this  passage  to  the  case  of  those 
here  addressed!  Reminding  us  of  the  "wise  steward,"  who  gives  to  "every  one  a 
portion  of  meat  in  due  season."  Also  of  the  declaration  of  the  apostle,  that  all  inspired 
Scripture  is  so  variously  profitable  as  to  make  "  the  man  of  God  "  complete,  or  perfect, 
as  to  all  that  he  needis  (2  Tim.  iii.  16,  17).  2.  The  faithfulness  of  Scripture.  How 
different  all  this  from  the  flattery  with  which  most  nations  are  addressed  by  their 
teacheri ;  and  which  most  nations  also  demand  I  Contrast  "  When  France  is  content^ 
Europe  ii  tranquil ;  "  also,  as  to  our  own  country,  the  words  of  the  poet — 

**  Thou  shalt  flourish,  great  and  free, 
The  dread  and  envy  of  them  all." 

3.  The  merey  of  Scripture.  Notwithstanding  all  provocations — all  personal,  all  patri- 
monial, iniquity — the  language  of  God  here  is,  with  outstretched  hand  (Rom.  x.  21), 
"  B«  ye  reconciled  unto  me "  (2  Cor.  v.  20 ;  comp.  also  Hos.  iii.,  and  the  emphatic 
"  only "  In  Jer.  iii.  12 — 14),  Note  also  how  greatly  this  mercy  is  set  forth  by  the 
greatness  of  the  faithfulness  before  named.    In  the  words  of  our  Eiiglish  laureate — 

"  He  showed  me  all  the  mercy, 
For  be  showed  me  aU  the  sin." 

Vers.  7 — 11. — A  vision  of  rest.  "  Upon  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  eleventh 
month,  which  is  the  month  Sebat,  in  the  second  year  of  Darius,  came  the  word  of  the 
Lord  unto  Zecbariah,  the  son  of  Berechiah,  the  son  of  Iddo  the  prophet,"  etc.  Several 
points  in  this  vision,  as  in  many  others,  cannot  certainly  be  explained.  The  nature 
and  significance  of  the  colours  of  the  horses  is  one  of  these  points.  Another  is  as  to 
the  identity  or  otherwise  of  the  "  angel "  of  ver.  9  with  that  of  the  "  rider  "  of  ver.  8, 
who  seems  undeniably  to  be  the  "  man  "  of  ver.  10  and  the  "  angel  of  the  Lord  "  of  vers. 
11, 12.  The  idea  of  identity  is  favoured  by  Pusey's  rendering,  "  talked  in  me,"  com- 
pared with  Numb.  xii.  6 — 9 ;  Hab.  ii.  1 ;  1  Pet.  i.  11 ;  also  by  the  high  probability  of  the 
person  promising  in  ver.  9  being  the  same  as  the  person  performing  in  ver.  10 ;  and  by 
the  similar  probability  that  the  person  ashing  in  ver.  12,  and  the  person  amswered 
in  ver.  13,  should  be  one  and  the  same.  From  these  very  uncertainties,  however,  we 
may,  perhaps,  learn  an  incidental  truth  of  importance.  We  may  learn,  e.g'.,  that  the 
agents  of  God  are  not  loss  manifold,  and  not  less  mysterious  to  us,  than  his  works. 
Also  that  whether  the  "angel  of  the  Lord"  speaks  to  us  directly,  or  only  by  the 
instrumentality  of  one  of  his  accredited  servants,  it  comes  to  much  the  same  in  the 
end.  In  the  rest  of  the  vision  we  may  notice  (1)  the  King  himself;  (2)  the  King't 
servant* ;  and  (3)  the  King's  work. 

I.  The  Kiko  himself.  Under  this  head  we  learn :  1.  Sis  condition.  He  appears 
as  a  Rider;  i.e.  as  one  who  has  left  his  home  and  is  on  a  journey  for  a  season.  2.  His 
rank.  He  has  many  and  various  attendants,  but  all  "  behind  him  "  (comp.  Rev.  lix. 
14,  where  the  rider  probably  appears  on  a  white  horae,  because  riding  in  triumph). 


«H.  1. 1— 21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  7 

3.  fit's  place ;  amongst  the  myrtle  trees  in  the  hollow ;  representing,  it  is  thought,  the 
people  of  God,  humble  yet  pleasing  to  him,  in  their  then  low  estate  (see  Isa.  xli.  19 ; 
Iv.  13).  4.  Eis  apparent  purpose ;  viz.  to  "  visit "  and  save  his  people  (Gen.  1.  24 ; 
Exod.  iii.  16 ;  iv.  31 ;  Luke  i.  68). 

II.  The  King's  servants.  Of  these  we  find  that  they  are  the  objects:  1,  0/ 
tpecial  inquiry.  Who  the  Leader  is  the  prophet  understands.  Who  these  are  that 
attend  upon  him  he  cannot  tell,  yet  much  wishes  to  know,  probably  because  of  some- 
thing very  special  in  their  numbers  and  variety  and  general  appearance  of  readiness 
and  expectation.  "  What  is  it  the  King  means  to  do  with  all  these?"  2.  Of  special 
explanation.  Explanation  very  readily  given.  Your  difficulty  is  natural  Your 
inquiry  is  legitimate.  "I  will  show  thee  what  these  be."  Explanation  also  very 
sufficiently  given.  Who  are  they  ?  They  are  persons  "  sent ; "  they  have  a  mission 
indeed  to  accomplish.  Who  sent  them?  The  Lord  himself.  For  what  purpose? 
For  that  of  special  investigation.  To  investigate  where?  In  all  parts  of  the  earth. 
2%<8  is  why  God  has  visited  his  people,  viz.  to  learn,  by  means  of  these  his  servants, 
tow  things  are  with  them  in  the  world. 

III.  The  King's  wobk.  The  nature  and  completeness  of  this  are  shown  to  us 
by  his  servants'  report.  For  example,  we  see :  1.  Its  great  promptitude.  The  next 
-thing  we  hear  of  this  report  is  of  its  completion  (ver.  11).  No  time,  apparently,  has 
been  lost.  While  the  prophet's  question  has  been  put  and  acknowledged,  their  mission 
has  been  accomplished  (comp.  Dan.  ix.  21 ;  Ezek.  i.  14).  2.  Its  perfection.  They 
have  examined  the  whole  earth.  They  have  examined  it  all  so  thoroughly  that  they 
•challenge  any  one  ("  behold  ")  to  do  more.  3.  Its  purport  and  v/nanimity.  This  is 
how  they  all  found  the  world,  viz.  "  sitting  still  and  at  rest "— ilike  a  weary  traveller 
-(so  the  figure  may  mean)  who  has  finished  his  long  journey,  and  taken  his  seat,  and 
-only  asks  to  sit  still. 

See,  therefore,  in  conclusion,  respecting  this  vision ;  1.  How  spedally  encouroffing 
it  was  at  that  time.  By  the  Jews,  just  then  exhorted  to  recommence  the  restoration 
of  their  temple,  two  things  only  were  specially  required.  The  one  was  to  know,  as  to 
Ood,  that  his  eye  was  upon  them  for  good  (see  Ezra  v.  5).  The  other  was  to  know, 
as  to  men,  that  they  would  be  let  alone  in  their  work  (Ezra  iv.  3).  And  these,  we 
fiee,  were  just  the  two  things  of  which  this  vision  assures  them.  With  everything  to 
help  them  in  heaven,  and  nothing  to  hinder  them  on  earth,  what  more  could  they 
ask  ?  2.  How  instructive  for  all  times.  When  any  direct  work  for  God,  such  as  that 
of  building  his  house  or  enlarging  his  Church,  has  to  be  done,  this  is  how  it  often 
pleases  him  to  order  the  world.  So  Solomon  was  raised  up  as  a  "  man  of  rest "  to  build 
the  original  temple.  So  Christ  was  born,  and  the  foundations  of  the  Christian  Church 
were  laid,  when  all  the  world  was  at  peace.  So  we  read  also  in  Acts  ix.  31.  Compare 
«]so  the  language  of  the  Collect  for  the  Fifth  Sunday  after  Trinity ;  and  the  connection 
between  vers.  2  and  4  in  1  11m.  ii. 

Vers.  12 — 16. — A  vision  of  mercy.  "Then  the  angel  of  the  Lord  answered  and 
said,"  etc.  In  the  last  portion  (vers.  7 — 11)  we  saw  Christ,  or  the  Angel-Jehovah, 
presented  to  us  as  a  King,  exercising  visitatorial  powers.  In  the  present  we  seem  to 
read  of  him  under  those  two  other  principal  aspects  in  which  he  is  revealed  to  his 
people,  viz.  (1)  as  their  great  High  Priest  interceding  for  them  with  God ;  and  (2)  as 
their  great  .Teacher  or  Prophet  instructing  and  comforting  them  in  God's  name. 

I.  Ihtekoession.  We  find  this  to  be :  ] .  Exceedinyly  apposite.  Much  had  already 
been  dotie  for  the  remnant  of  the  Captivity;  but  much  also  remained.  A  mere  handful 
{some  fifty  thousand  all  told,  Ezra  ii.  64,  65),  compared  with  the  many  thousands  of 
Israel,  had  been  brought  back ;  a  few  scattered  centres  of  population  only  were  to  be 
found  in  the  land,  and  Jerusalem  itself  was  more  like  a  city  of  the  dead  than  of  the 
living  (compare  the  description  of  it  in  Neb.  vii.  4,  many  years  afterwards).  This  state 
of  things  is  exactly  recognized  in  the  Angel-Jehovah's  petition,  "  How  long  wilt  thou 
not  have  mercy  on  Jerusalem  and  on  the  cities  of  Judah?"  (For  similar  and,  pro- 
bably, nearly  contemporaneous  request  for  further  mercy  after  much  mercy  received, 
eomp.  Ps.  cxxvi. -4  and  1.)  2.  Very  jwlidous.  See  what  this  intercession  allows,  viz. 
the  justice  of  God.  "  Thou  hast  had  indignation ; "  and  rightly,  so  it  implies.  (For 
«imilar  confessions  of  God's  justice  in  pleading  for  mercy,  comp.  Gen.  xriii,  25 ;  Jer. 


8  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  1. 1—21 

xii.  1.)  See  also  what  this  intercession  relies  on,  viz.  on  the  one  hand,  God's- 
character,  as  delighting  to  exercise  mercy  (so  to  speak)  as  soon  as  he  can ;  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  on  God's  faithfulness,  as  being  sure  to  confine  his  indignation  strictly 
to  the  duration  specified  by  him.  "  These  three  score  and  ten  years,"  (see  Jer,  zxvi.. 
11, 12).  3.  Very  effectual.  This  shown  by  the  answer  obtained,  which  consisted,  on 
the  one  hand,  of  "  good  words,"  i.e.  words  promising  good ;  and  on  the  other  hand,, 
of  "  comfortable  words,"  literally,  words  "  sighing  with,"  or  full  of  sympathy,  in  th» 
spirit  of  Bom.  xii.  16 ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  9;  and  so  being  all  that  could  be  wished  for,  both  ia 
matter  and  manner. 

II.  Instkuction.  The  Angel-Jehovah,  having  received  this  reply,  then  proceeds — 
either  personally  or,  as  some  think,  through  the  instrumentality  of  some  subordinate 
angel — to  instruct  the  prophet  accordingly.  In  this  we  may  notice :  1.  His  commis- 
sion. The  satisfactory  answer  just  received  by  the  Angel-Jehovah  the  prophet  was 
now  to  make  known  in  his  turn :  "  Cry  thou."  He  was  also  to  tell  it  aloud,  to  prodaim^ 
it :  "  Cry "  (bis) ;  comp.  Gen.  xli.  43  j  2  Chron.  xxxii,  18,  where  the  same  word  is- 
employed.  And  he  was  to  do  so  being  thus  commissioned  (this  also  is  mentioned  twice^ 
vers.  14,  17)  in  God's  name.  2.  His  message.  This  corresponds,  as  might  be  expected, 
with  the  "  words  "  of  ver.  13.  For  example,  it  is  a  message  (1)  of  great  sympathy ;. 
being  one,  we  find,  in  which  God  identifies  himself  with  the  interests  of  his  people 
(observe  "  my,"  in  vers.  16, 17),  and  even  speaks  of  himself  as  sharing  to  some  extent 
in  their  anxieties  and  purely  national  jealousies  and  rivalries.  It  was  no  pleasure  to 
him  to  see  other  nations  at  ease,  and  them  in  trouble,  however  deserved.  No  doubt 
he  had  been  "  displeased  "  with  them  (ch.  i,  1,  2) ;  but  he  was  still  more  so  with  their 
foes  (ver.  16).  A  message  (2)  of  great  hope.  Much  good,  in  fact,  had  begun.  Not 
only  had  the  remnant  returned  to  Jerusalem;  God  himself  also  had  done  so  (ver.  16), 
and  that  "  with  mercies ; "  to  stay  amongst  his  people,  and  not  merely  to  "  visit"  them. 
More  good  was  to  follow.  The  "house"  now  building  was  to  be  finished ;  the  rest  of 
the  now  desolate  city  to  be  marked  out  and  finished ;  and  the  scattered  cities  of  Judab 
to  be  so  filled  as  to  overflow  ("  spread  abroad ; "  comp.  ch.  ii.  2)  on  all  sides.  All  this^ 
however  apparently  unlikely,  was,  nevertheless  (observe  "yet"  three  times),  being 
God's  settled  purpose,  to  be  accomplished ;  and  the  prophet  also  was  to  go  on  saying- 
so  until  this  was  the  case  ("  Cry  yet,"  ver.  16). 

Do  we  not  see  illustrated  in  all  this,  finally  ?  1.  The  perfection  of  the  gospet.. 
"  Good  words  and  comfortable  words  " — "  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  " — so  we  see  it  to  be. 
How  full  of  sympathy!  How  full  of  hopel  Its  excellency  culminating  in  this,, 
perhaps,  above  all,  that  we  have  not  only  such  a  "  Propitiation  "  (1  John  ii.  2),  but 
such  a  perpetual  "  Advocate  "  (1  John  ii.  1)  and  Intercessor  to  plead  it  (see  also  Heb.- 
vii.  25 ;  Luke  xxii.  31,  32 ;  xiii.  8,  9 ;  Acts  vii.  65).  2.  The  certainty  of  the  gospel. 
As  to  its  essence  and  source,  on  the  one  hand.  As  in  ver.  13,  it  is,  in  effect,  the 
promise  of  God  to  his  Son  (comp.  Ps.  ii.  7 — 9  ;  ex.,  passim).  As  to  its  conveyance 
to  us,  on  the  other;  being,  in  effect,  as  in  ver.  14,  the  message  of  Christ  himself 
to  us  through  those  appointed  by  him.  Compare  the  visions  of  Christ  to  Isaiah  (vi.  ;. 
John  xii.)  and  Daniel  (x.  6,  6,  and  references) ;  also  John  xiv.  26 ;  xvi.  13, 14 ;  CoL 
iii.  16,  etc. 

Vers.  18 — 21. — A  vision  of  help.  "  Then  lifted  I  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw,"  etc.  In 
these  verses,  and  some  that  follow,  certain  detached  portions  of  the  previous  general 
prophecy  seem  to  be  set  before  us  again  in  greater  amplitude  and  detail— like  mapi 
of  England,  Prance,  and  so  on,  in  an  atlas,  following  the  general  but  smaller-scaled 
map  of  the  whole  "  quarter  "  of  Europe.  In  the  verses  now  especially  before  us,  it  is  the 
previous  message  concerning  the  enemies  of  God's  people  (vers.  14,  16)  which  seems  to 
be  thus  followed  up  and  enlarged.  And  the  twofold  purpose  in  view  seems  to  be  that 
of  reminding  his  people  in  this  connection  (1)  of  their  special  danger;  and  (2)  of 
their  special  defence. 

L  Thbib  special  dangeb.  On  this  point  they  are  shown :  1.  Its  reality,  Thougi* 
God  was  sorely  displeased  with  the  heathen,  though  he  had  done  much  already  to 
restrain  them,  so  that  the  earth  now  was  "  at  rest "  (supra,  ver.  11),  and  the  returned 
people  were  able  to  rebuild  his  house,  he  had  by  no  means  destroyed  them  as  yet,  The- 
four  "  horns  "  seen  in  the  vision — the  well-known  symbols  of  authority  and  strength- 


ou.  I.  1— 21.J  THE  BOOK  OF  ZBCHAEIAIL  » 

and  hostility  (Ps.  Ixxv.  4 — 7,  10 ;  Jer.  xlviii.  25 ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  17 ;  1  Kings  xiii.  11) 
— suffice  to  prove  this.  However  restrained  at  that  moment,  the  ability  and  the  dis- 
position to  injure  were  still  in  existence.  2.  Its  peculiar  greatness.  This  (1)  as  to 
power.  How  much  evil  those  same  Gentile  horns  had  already  done  in  the  past  (see 
end  of  vers.  19  and  21) !  Also  perhaps  (2)  as  to  direction ;  the  "  four  "  horns  repre- 
senting that  they  had  such  enemies  on  all  sides  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  5 — 8,  where  every 
side  of  Palestine  seems  to  be  represented).  Or  possibly  (3)  as  to  duration ;  first  one 
enemy,  then  another,  as  in  the  very  similar  description  of  Jer.  1. 17 ;  or  else  with  some 
reference  to  the  four  successive  world-empires  of  Daniel's  visions,  and  as  meaning  to 
intimate,  in  that  case,  that,  whichever  of  such  "  horns "  should  be  specially  exalted 
for  the  time,  it  would  be  a  horn  against  them.  So  much  was  their  condition,  of  itself, 
like  that  described  in  Luke  z.  3, 

11.  Thexb  special  defence.  1.  The  fact  itself.  This  manifest — having  such 
enemies  as  they  had — from  their  still  continued  existence.  Though  "  scattered,"  it 
was  not  beyond  recovery ;  though  so  prostrate  that  no  man  could  "  lift  up  the  head," 
they  were  not  destroyed  (comp.  Ps.  cxxix.  1,  2).  Who  could  have  caused  this  but 
Jehovah  himself?  2.  The  peculiar  nature  of  this  defence.  Jehovah  restrains  the 
many  enemies  of  his  people  by  "fraying"  or  frightening  them  from  going  too  far 
(comp.  Ps.  Ixxvi.  9,  10;  also  Gen.  xxxv.  5;  Exod.  xv.  16;  2  Kings  xii.  6j  2  Chron. 
xvii.  10 ;  and  to  some  extent  the  cases  of  Abimelech,  Gen.  xx.  6,  7 ;  and  Balaam, 
Deut.  xxiii.  5).  3.  The  peculiar  instrument  of  this  defence.  Not  other  "  horns  "  to 
push  against  these ;  not  other  men  of  war  to  overcome  these ;  but  artificers  only,  men 
of  peace.  Possibly  also  artificers  of  the  class  engaged  in  building,  as  thpugh  to 
.intimate  that  the  work  of  building  God's  temple  was  the  best  defence  at  that  time  to 
God's  people.  4.  The  pectdiar  completeness  of  this  defence.  As  shown,  perhaps,  by 
there  being  as  many  in  number  thus  to  defend  as  there  were  to  attack.  From  which- 
ever side,  at  whatever  time,  the  attack,  there  also  would  be  prepared  against  it  this 
kind  of  defence  (comp.  Ps.  xxxii.  7, 10). 

We  see  all  this  abundantly  illustrated :  1.  In  the  subsequent  history  of  the  literal 
Israd.  How  often  since  assaulted  1  how  apparently  close,  at  times,  to  extermination  1 
how  utterly  powerless,  frequently,  in  themselves !  yet  how  wonderf ally  preserved  in 
existence,  by  similar  restraints  of  their  enemies,  from  that  day  until  this  I  2.  In  the 
history  of  nations  a/nd  Ohu/rches.  It  is  at  least  worthy  of  consideration,  in  this  connec- 
tion, that  since  the  day  when  the  Reformation  found  its  most  congenial  home  in  this 
island,every  projected  hostile  invader  has  been  restrained  from  reaching  our  shores.  Also, 
perhaps,  the  remarkable  (true)  prosperity  and  preservation  of  the  Moravian  and  Walden- 
sian  Churches,  are  cases  in  point.  3.  In  the  history  of  the  spiritual  Israel  at  large. 
How  many  its  enemies  from  the  first  (Acts  xxviii.  22 ;  Luke  xxi.  l7 ;  Eph.  vL  12)  I 
How  incapable  of  defending  itself  (Matt.  x.  16,  as  before)  1  Yet  how  wonderfully  pre- 
served until  now ;  and  also,  to  be  preserved  to  the  end  (Matt.  xvi.  18)  I  ^  In  the 
experience  of  individual  believers.  See  lives  of  such  men  as  Luther,  Wesley,  White- 
field,  Simeon,  and  others.  We  may  almost  say  of  each  of  such,  as  just  now  of  the 
Church  at  large,  "  Bach  man  immortal  till  his  work  be  done."  So  in  truth  of  every 
one  who  truly  believes  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  righteous  scarcdy  is  saved,  but  he  t'f 
■aved,  after  alL 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  1 — 6. — Ood's  call  to  repentance.     Repentance  is  turning  from  sin  imto  God. 

I.  The  call  is  founded  on  God's  absolute  right  to  obbdibxcb.  "Lord  of 
hosts."  Sublime  title.  Thrice  used,  to  give  the  greater  impressiveness.  Implies  that 
God's  rule  is  wide  as  creation.  Mark  the  "host"  of  stars  (Isa.  xl.  26).  Higher, 
behold  the  "  angels  and  principalities  and  powers  "  (Ps.  ciii.  20,  21).  God  is  Lord  of 
all,  and  it  is  this  God  that  claims  our  homage.  To  turn  from  him  is  folly  and  ruin ; 
to  turn  to  him  is  the  highest  wisdom  and  blessedness. 

n.  Ubged  bt  God's  judgments  on  tbansgkbssobs.  Israel  is  our  "ensample" 
(1  Oor.  X.  11).  The  lun  does  not  ripen  the  corn  more  surely  than  God's  favour 
attended  the  Jews  when  they  were  steadfast  to  walk  in  his  ways;  nor  are  thorns  and 


ao  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHAKIAH,  [oh.  1. 1— 2L 

briars  more  certain  to  spring  up  in  a  neglected  field  than  God's  judgments  to  fall  on 
Israel  when  their  hearts  were  set  in  them  to  do  evil.  God  is  not  changed.  The  world 
is  governed  now  on  the  same  principles  as  in  the  past. 

III.  Enootiraoed  by  God's  promises.  "Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the 
mouth  speaketh."  So  of  God's  Word.  It  reveals  his  heart.  There  is  no  bar  on  God's 
part  to  the  sinner's  return.  He  himself  has  opened  the  way,  and  his  promise  is  to 
those  who  turn  to  him.  "  I  will  turn  unto  you."  Here  is  hope  held  out,  help 
graciously  offered,  joyful  welcome  assured.  We  have  not  only  doctrines,  but  facts. 
Great  cloud  of  witnesses,  who  can  say  each  for  himself,  like  Paul,  "I  obtained 
mercy." 

IV.  Enfokobd  by  the  experiences  of  life.  Every  man's  life  is  separate.  But 
much  common.  The  hrevity  of  life.  Delay  is  dangerous.  The  confessions  of  life. 
God's  Word  is  truth.  Faithful  are  his  promises  and  his  threatenings.  The  monitions 
of  life.  Voices  of  the  past,  of  the  good,  and  of  the  evil,  of  earth  and  heaven,  all  com- 
bine and  cry  with  awful  and  convincing  force,  "  Repent ! " — F. 

Ver.  5. — Are  we  better  than  our  fathers  t  I.  "  Fathers  "  implies  successiveness. 
Changes  are  constant.  Not  a  whole  generation  together,  but  men  go,  as  they  come, 
one  by  one.  Seems  common  to  all  existences.  Necessary  also.  If  all  lived  on,  there 
would  not  be  room  for  the  ever-increasing  multitudes.  Part  of  God's  great  plan  for 
the  education  of  the  race. 

II.  "  Fathers  "  implies  intekdependenob.  There  is  a  close  relationship  between 
fathers  and  children.  Physically,  mentally,  and  even  morally,  we  are  to  a  large 
degree  what  others  have  made  us.  "  How  shall  a  man  escape  from  his  ancestors,  or 
draw  off  from  his  veins  the  black  drop  which  he  drew  from  his  father's  or  his  mother's 
life  7  "(Emerson). 

"  'Tie  law  as  steadfast  as  the  throne  of  Zeus, 
Our  days  are  heritors  of  days  gone  by." 

(^schylns.) 

And  as  we  have  been  influenced  by  the  past,  so  we  shall  influence  the  future.  Our 
children  not  only  receive  a  certain  impress  from  their  birth,  but  are  moulded  for  good 
or  evil  by  the  teaching  and  example  of  their  parents,  and  by  the  environment  of  their 
daily  life. 

III.  "  Fathers  "  implies  responsibility.  "  Be  not  as  your  fathers."  There 
should  be  reflection  and  choice  of  the  good.  Whether  we  are  better  or  worse  is  a 
difficult  question.  The  term  "  fathers  "  is  indefinite.  We  should  fix  some  point  for 
comparison.  But  where  ?  Our  immediate  fathers,  or  those  of  earlier  times  ?  Besides, 
difficult  to  get  evidence  for  a  fair  comparison.  History  defective.  Tradition  unreliable. 
The  "  fathers  "  stand  out  like  hills  enshrouded  in  mist,  or  as  stars  that  take  a  glory 
from  being  far.  Besides,  who  are  to  judge?  Ourselves.  Then  risk  of  partiality. 
We  naturally  lean  to  the  party  to  which  we  belong.  Suppose  you  take  the  old. 
They  are  apt  to  side  with  the  past.  Their  day  is  over.  Their  vigour  is  gone.  They 
dwell  on  what  has  been  done.  Rarely  will  you  find  an  old  man  who  does  not  say, 
"  The  former  days  were  better"  (Eccles.  vii.  10).  Suppose  you  take  the  young.  They 
side  with  the  present.  The  world  is  all  before  them.  They  are  eager  for  the  strife. 
"  Yearning  for  the  large  excitement  that  the  coming  years  would  yield."  But  in  any 
case,  our  judgment  is  liable  to  be  affected  by  circumstances.  Our  owu  state,  the  love 
of  society,  the  spirit  of  the  age,  influence  us  largely  (cf.  Elijah,  1  Kings  xix.  4). 
Are  we  better  than  our  fathers  t  There  is  no  question  but  we  ought  to  be.  Progress  is 
the  law.  We  have  the  higher  advantages.  The  great  thoughts  and  the  great  deeds 
of  others  should  inspire  us.  We  are  the  "  heirs  of  all  the  ages."  In  some  respects  we 
are  certainly  better.  As  to  food,  clothing,  habitations,  means  of  education,  political 
and  social  rights,  intercourse  with  other  nations,  and  so  forth,  there  has  been  an 
immense  advance.  But  what  availeth  this,  if  morally  and  spiritually  we  stand,  not 
higher,  but  lower  than  our  fathers  ?  "  Christ  is  our  Hope."  Individually  we  are  bound 
to  strive  after  a  better  life,  and  thus  we  can  best  influence  society.  There  may  be 
much  in  our  past  that  is  bad ;  but  it  is  past ;  and  let  us  take  hope.  If  there  ar« 
sins,  they  are  forgiven.     If  there  are  bad  habits,  they  have  been  broken  off.     If  there 


OH.  1. 1^21.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH,  11 

are  failures,  they  have  been  retrieved.  We  can  look  on.  Stirred  with  a  holy  ambition, 
sustained  by  precious  promises,  animated  by  noble  examples,  we  can  press  on  to  the 
brighter  and  better  days  to  come.  Our  standard  should  be,  not  the  conventional 
standard  of  the  Church  or  the  day,  but  the  perfect  law  of  Christ  (Matt.  v.  20 — 48). — P. 

Ver.  6.-^  The  transitoriness  of  life,  I.  Compabbd  with  the  permanence  oi  thb 
EARTH.  Objects  of  nature  remain.  There  are  changes,  but  they  are  not  so  great 
within  the  liinit  of  our  brief  lives  as  to  attract  much  notice.  "  One  generation  paiseth 
away,  and  another  generation  cometh;  but  the  earth  abideth  for  ever"  (Eccles.  i.  4). 

II.  Compared  with  the  continuity  op  the  race.  The  individual  withers; 
families  disappear ;  kingdoms  decay  and  fall ;  but  the  race  of  man  remains.  Our  life 
is  as  a  tale  that  is  told,  but  the  story  of  the  generations  of  the  past  reaches  back  beyond 
our  ken. 

III.  Compared  with  the  immense  labour  bestowed  on  men.  What  a  preparation 
going  before  I  What  long  and  arduous  toils  there  have  been  to  fit  us  for  oui-  place  and 
our  work !  and  then  how  short  the  time  we  have  for  accomplishing  anything  I  How 
often  early  promise  fails,  and  the  dear  hopes  cherished  are  disappointed  1 

IV.  Compared  with  the  expectations  formed.  What  plans,  schemings,  enter- 
prises !  What  high  ambitions !  And  yet  how  little  is  achieved  1  Man's  promise  is 
always  better  than  his  performaoce.  Once,  perhaps,  we  took  a  forward  place;  our 
names  were  on  the  lips  of  many — looked  to  win  great  fame.     But  the  end  is  "  vanity." 

V.  Compared  with  the  immortality  of  God's  Word.  Fathers  and  prophets 
alike  pass  away.  They  cannot  continue  by  reason  of  death.  "  All  flesh  is  as  grass, 
and  all  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower  of  grass.  The  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower 
thereof  falleth  away  :  but  the  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever.  And  this  is  th« 
Word  which  by  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  you  "  (1  Pet.  1.  24,  25). — P. 

Ver.  6. — OocPs  Word  taking  hold.  I.  The  plight.  Men  strive  to  get  away  from 
God.  Some  try  one  device,  some  another  (cf.  Adam,  Gen.  iii.  10 ;  Jonah  i.  3 ;  Paul, 
Acts  xxvi.  9).     Such  conduct  is  unnatural,  wicked,  and  vaia  (Ps.  cxxxix.  7). 

II.  The  pursuit.  The  sinner  followed.  He  feels  that  God  knows  all,  and  that  the 
day  of  reckoning  will  come.  Memory,  conscience,  Law,  Scripture,  prophecy  of  judgment. 
The  officer  of  justice  ia  on  the  sinner's  track.  Any  moment  he  may  feel  his  hand  on 
his  shoulder,  and  hear  the  awful  words,  "  You  are  my  prisoner." 

III.  The  ovbrtakinq.  Certain,  for  good  or  for  evil.  In  the  day  of  conviction,  of 
true  penitence,  or  of  righteous  retribution — amidst  the  songs  of  rejoicing  angels  or  the 
weeping  and  wailing  of  lost  souls.  What  has  been  our  experience?  God's  Word 
"  takes  hold,"  as  truth  of  the  intellect,  as  righteousness  of  the  conscience,  as  love  of  the 
heart.  Mark  Augustine  in  the  garden  at  Milan  (Rom.  xiii.  13,  14) ;  Luther  painfully 
climbing  the  church  steps  at  Borne  (Rom.  i.  17).  Study  Bunyan's  '  Grace  Abounding.' 
So  of  all  the  redeemed.  Happy  are  we  when  we  reongnize  that  God's  Word  comes,  not 
as  a  foe,  but  as  a  friend ;  not  to  compel  by  force,  but  to  constrain  by  love ;  not  to  drag 
us  with  fear  and  trembling  before  the  Judge,  but  to  draw  us  gently  to  the  cross  and 
the  Saviour. — F. 

Vers.  8 — 13. — The  Church  and  Ohrist.    The  vision  may  suggest — 

I.  The  hidden  riches  op  the  Church.  "  Myrtle  in  the  bottom "  symbolizes  the 
Church  in  a  low  condition.  Obscure,  despised  by  the  world ;  but  fresh,  fragrant,  and 
beautiful  in  the  sight  of  God.     The  object  of  increasing  care.     Grand  future. 

II.  The  glory  op  the  Church's  Head.  Christ  supreme.  All  forces  are  under  his 
control.  The  resources  of  heaven  and  earth  are  at  his  disposal.  He  is  ever  on  th* 
watch.  He  scans  the  horizon  with  clear,  far-seeing  eye.  He' is  always  quick  to  do 
what  he  deems  best  for  the  defence  and  good  of  his  people.  Here  is  comfort  for  times 
of  depression  and  fear.  We  have  our  personal  troubles.  We  are  distressed  because  of 
the  state  of  the  Church,  and  the  slow  progress  of  religion  in  the  world.  But  let 
us  take  courage.  Christ  is  Head  over  all  things  for  the  Church.  In  the  darkest 
hour,  when  we  pray,  the  heavens  are  opened.  We  behold  Christ  on  the  throne,  and 
cry  with  the  holy  angels,  "Alleluia:  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  r^igne'h" 
(of.  Eph.  i.  16— 23).— P. 


12  THE   BOOK   OP   ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  i.  1—21. 

Ver.  11. — 3%e  wonder  of  indifference.  " '  At  rest  ;*  i.e.  secure,  proud,  and  licentious, 
as  if  there  were  no  God  in  lieaven"  (Wordsworth).  May  be  taken  to  illustrate  a 
common  state  of  mind  as  to  religion.    Indifference  seems  wonderful  when  we  consider — 

I.  The  vast  interests  at  stake.  What  questions  so  deep  and  urgent  as  those 
that  concern  Grud  and  truth  and  immortality? 

II.  .The  bkiep  time  fob  SECisioif.  Life  is  short.  Delay,  and  youth  is  gone ;  delay, 
and  manhood  is  past;  delay,  and  all  is  lost.  Besides,  what  uncertainty  and  what 
constant  interruptions  and  claims  of  other  things !     "  The  world  is  too  much  with  us." 

III.  The  great  importance  op  earnestness.  See  how  men  act  in  other  matters. 
Firm  and  decided.  "  The  children  of  this  world  are  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the 
children  of  light." 

IV.  The  ceaseless  activity  of  the  powers  of  evil.     (1  Pet.  v.  8.) 

v.  The  urgent  appeals  op  God.  How  much  of  Holy  Scripture  is  taken  up  with 
calls,  and  pleadings,  and  remonstrances,  and  beseechingsl  Then,  how  often  does  the 
voice  of  God  in  providence  give  the  deeper  force  and  significance  to  the  warnings  of  his 
Word !  Surely  what  lies  so  near  the  heart  of  God  should  be  the  chief  thing  for  us. 
Surely  wliat  moved  the  eternal  Son  to  come  to  earth  should  be  the  supreme  interest 
with  us.  His  mind  should  be  our  mind,  and  our  highest  blessedness  should  be  to 
consecrate  ourselves,  like  him,  to  the  service  of  God  and  of  humanity. — P. 

Ver.  15. — The  wrath  of  God  and  the  wrath  of  man.  I.  God'b  wbath  is  the  hiohkit 
REASON.  It  is  not  a  mood  or  passion ;  not  the  outburst  of  arbitrary  power ;  but  the 
calm  expression  of  the  Eternal  Mind.  He  who  does  wrong  identifies  himself  with  the 
wrong,  and  so  far  must  be  an  object  of  indignation.  God  feels  towards  things  as  they 
are.     How  different  the  wrath  of  man  (cf.  Jas.  iv.  1) ! 

II.  God's  wbath  is  the  PtrBEST  justice.  Law  must  stand.  Government  and 
order  must  be  maintained.  Else  anarchy.  But  nothing  will  be  done  beyond  what  it 
necessary  for  the  ends  of  justice.  God's  wrath  is  just,  in  measure  and  duration.  How 
different  with  the  wrath  of  man!  Often  carried  beyond  the  bounds  of  right,  and 
becomes  oppression.  Often  continued  beyond  the  limits  of  justice,  and  becomes  revenge 
(Isa.  zlvii.  6). 

III.  God's  wbath  is  the  holiest  lovb.  There  is  much  in  the  ways  of  Grod  that 
we  cannot  understand,  but  we  should  never  forget  what  he  himself  has  taught  us  as  to 
his  Spirit  and  purpose  (cf.  Ezek.  xxxiii.  II).  God's  wrath  is  consistent  with  pity  for 
the  sufferer,  mercy  for  the  penitent,  and  deliverance  for  the  oppressed.  In  his  hand 
pains  are  disciplinary,  trials  are  remedial,  chastisements  are  benedictions  in  disguise. 
"  The  end  of  the  Lord  is  merciful."  But  with  men  how  often  is  wrath  pitiless  and 
cruel,  working  evil  instead  of  good,  rejoicing  in  destruction  instead  of  deliverance  1 

"  Father  and  Lover  of  our  Bonis  I 
Tliough  darkly  rouni)  thine  anger  rolls. 

Thy  sunshine  smiles  beneath  tlie  gloom. 
Thou  seek'st  to  warn  us,  not  confound, 
Thy  showers  would  pierce  the  hardened  ground 
And  win  it  to  give  out  iti  brightness  and  perfume." 

(Eeble.) 

F. 

Vers.  18 — 21. — The  dark  and  the  bright  side  of  things.  Prophet  depressed.  Heart 
failing  for  fear.  Boused.  Vision  twofold.  Like  the  mystic  pillar  of  the  wilderness, 
it  is  dark  and  lowering  towards  God's  enemies,  but  bright  and  cheering  towards  his 
friends. 

I.  The  powers  op  evil.  Beasts  dimly  seen.  "  Horses "  indicate  the  strength  and 
malice  of  the  world-powers.  The  results  are  terrible.  The  unity  of  Israel  is  broken. 
Strength  dissipated  in  party  conflicts.  Gored  and  tossed  and  sore  oppressed  by  their 
enemies.  Dispirited,  "  so  that  no  man  did  lift  up  his  head."  But  man's  extremity  is 
Gkxi's  opportunity.  Let  us  feel  and  confess  in  true  humility  our  sin,  and  the  justice  of 
our  sufferings,  and  cry  mightily  to  God ;  then  deliverance  will  surely  come. 

XL  The  powers  op  good.  (Vers.  20,  21.)  Cf.  Elisha  and  his  servant  (2  Kings 
vi.  17).    So  here.    "Carpenters;"  "workmen."     1.  Egual  in  number.    Four  indicate! 


CH.1. 1— 21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  IS 

completeness.  There  will  !»  sufSciency  for  God's  purpose,  and  yet  the  number  will 
not  be  in  excess  of  that  on  the  other  side,  as  if  the  victory  were  to  be  obtained  by 
might  and  not  by  right.  2.  Greater  in  authority.  Law  at  their  back.  Ministers  of 
justice.  Powa:  not  usurped  or  wrongly  used,  but  employed  under  the  authority  of 
God.  3.  Completer  in  equipment.  (Ezuk.  xxi.  36.)  Men  of  free  souls,  sympathetic 
hearts,  and  invincible  courage.  Men  of  trained  intelligence  and  executive  ability.  The 
right  men  in  the  right  time. — F. 

Vers.  1 — 6. —  The  importance  of  repentance.  "In  the  eighth  month,  in  the  second 
year  of  Darius,  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Zeohariah,  the  son  of  Berechiah,  the 
son  of  Iddo  the  prophet,  saying.  The  Lord  hath  been  sore  displeased  with  your  fathers," 
etc.  Zechariah  and  Haggai  were  contemporaries — prophets  of  the  restoration.  The 
former  began  to  prophesy  about  two  months  after  Haggai.  Like  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel, 
he  was  of  priestly  descent ;  a  son  of  Berechiah  and  grandson  of  Iddo,  the  chief  of  one 
of  the  priestly  families  that  returned  from  exile  along  with  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua 
(Neh.  lii.  4).  He  commenced  his  prophetic  labours  in  the  second  year  of  Darius 
Hystaspes,  b.o.  520.  The  most  remarkable  portion  of  the  book  consists  of  the  first  sis 
chapters,  where  we  have  a  record  of  a  series  of  extraordinary  visions,  all  of  which 
seem  to  have  been  vouchsafed  to  the  prophet  during  one  night.  The  two  succeeding 
chapters  (vii.  and  viii.)  contain  an  answer  to  a  question  which  the  inhabitants  of  Bethel 
proposed,  respecting  the  observance  of  a  certain  fast.  The  remaining  six  chapters 
contain  a  variety  of  predictions.  The  authenticity  of  these  chapters  is  denied  by  some 
scholars,  and  doubted  by  many  more.  His  style  is  varied,  sometimes  almost  colloquial ; 
at  other  times  sublimely  poetic,  abounding  with  gorgeous  symbols.  The  subject 
suggested  by  these  words  is — the  importance  of  repentance.  There  are  three  grounds 
in  this  passage  on  which  this  subject  is  urged. 

I.  Fbom  the  Divine  mspleasurb  towards  the  impenitent  men  of  the  past. 
"  The  Lord  hath  been  sore  displeased  with  your  fathers."  This  "  may  be  interpreted 
as  bearing  reference  to  the  whole  of  their  previous  history.  They  had  all  along  shown 
a  mournfully  strong  and  inveterate  propensity  to  depart  from  God  and  from!  his  ways. 
They  had  needed  incessant  repetitions  of  Divine  admonitions,  entreaties,  promises,  and 
threatenings ;  and  many  a  time  all  had  proved  unavailing.  Jehovah  bound  them  to 
himself  with  '  cords  of  love.'  But  '  they  brake  the  bands  asunder,  and  cast  away  the 
cords  from  them.'  They  chose  their  own  ways ;  they  followed  the  wicked  devices  of 
their  own  hearts.  They  thus  provoked  him  to  anger ;  they  drew  down  upon  them- 
selves his  judicial  visitations.  Prom  one  of  these  visitations  the  people  whom  the 
prophet  now  addressed  had  but  recently,  in  the  faithfulness  and  mercy  of  a  covenant- 
keeping  and  compassionate  God,  been  delivered.  And  I  cannot  doubt  that  to  that 
most  recent  manifestation  of  the  Divine  displeasure  Zechariah  specially  referred.  Their 
fathers  had  by  their  sins  brought  that  heavy  seventy  years'  judgment  upon  themselves. 
And  he  who  in  justice  had  executed  the  judgment,  had  returned  in  mercy,  and  rescued 
them  from  their  second  bondage"  (Dr.  Wardlaw).  Now,  the  displeasure  of  God  to 
sinners  of  the  past  is  here  referred  to  in  order  to  induce  the  Jews  to  repent  of  the 
selfish  negligence  which  they  had  evinced  concerning  the  building  of  the  temple 
(Hag.  i.  2 — 7).  The  argument  here  is  the  kind  called  enthymeme,  in  which  one 
premiss  only  is  expressed,  and  the  consequent  proposition  is  left  to  be  supplied  by 
the  render.  It  means  this :  the  great  God  has  been  displeased  with  your  fathers  on 
account  of  their  sins,  and  he  will  be  displeased  with  you  except  you  repent.  This  is 
an  argument  that  preachers  may  well  urge  at  all  times.  They  may  call  up  to  their 
hearers  the  judgments  that  have  fallen  on  the  wicked  of  the  past  ages,  in  order  to  urge 
reformed  life  on  the  existing  generation. 

II.  From  God's  assurance  of  a  welcome  to  all  that  truly  repent.  "Say 
thou  unto  them.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  Turn  ye  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  and  I  will  turn  unto  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  Blessed  truth  this  I  Proved : 
1.  By  his  invitation  to  the  impenitent.  "  Gome  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the 
Lord,"  etc. ;  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts : 
and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,"  etc. ;  "  Him  that  cometh  unto  me  I  will  in  no  wise 
cast  out."  The  infinite  Father  is  infinitely  more  ready  to  welcome  true  penitence 
than  the  father  of  the  prodigal  to  welcome  the  return  of  his  long-lost  son.     2.  By  the 


14  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHAEIAH.  [oh.  L 1—21 


experience  of  mankind.  Manasseh,  David,  Saul,  Bunyan,  and  millions  more  returned 
to  him,  and  he  not  only  received  them,  but  rejoiced  over  them.  This  being  the  case, 
how  powerful  is  the  exhortation  here,  "  Be  not  as  your  fathers,  unto  whom  the  former 
prophets  have  cried,  saying,"  etc. !  Your  fathers,  who  rejected  the  call  of  my  prophets 
of  the  past,  bad  as  they  were,  would  not  have  met  with  their  terrible  fates  had  they 
returned  to  me.     Be  not  like  them ;  take  warning  from  the  past. 

III.  From  the  transitobinbss  of  human  life,  whethee  wicked  ob  oooo. 
"Your  fathers,  where  are  they?  and  the  prophets,  do  they  live  for  ever?"  By  "the 
fathers "  here  undoubtedly  reference  is  to  those  spoken  of  in  the  former  verses  with 
whom  the  Almighty  is  displeased.  These  have  disappeared ;  they  have  vanished  from 
the  earth.  The  prophets,  too,  the  good  men  who  spoke  to  them  and  whose  call  they 
rejected,  useful  men  as  they  were,  they  did  not  live  for  ever.  The  impenitent  hearers 
and  their  faithful  preachers  are  both  gone.  How  solemnly  true  this  isl  All  pass 
away  from  the  stage  of  life,  whether  good  or  bad,  useful  or  mischievous.  The  life  of 
a  generation  is  but  a  vapour  that  will  endure  for  a  little  and  then  vanish  away.  What 
an  argument  this:  1.  For  the  wicked  to  repent f  Impenitent  hearers  of  the  gospel, 
you  will  soon  be  gone.  Ere  another  century  passes  over  this  globe,  your  bodies  will 
be  in  the  dust  and  your  spirits  in  the  awful  Hades  of  retribution ;  therefore  listen  and 
repent.  Ye  preachers  of  the  gospel,  what  an  argument  this :  2.  For  faithfulness  and 
for  persevering  zeal/  You  will  soon  have  finished  yonr  mission.  A  few  more  sermons, 
and  all  will  be  over.  "The  prophets,  do  they  live  for  ever?"  etc.  "Fathers,"  the 
ungodly  men  of  the  past,  where  are  they?  Ah!  where  are  they?  Echo  answers, 
"Where?"— D.T. 

Vers.  7 — 17. — T!ie  first  vision:  God's  government  of  the  world.  "Upon  the  four 
and  twentieth  day  of  the  eleventh  month,  which  is  the  month  Sebat,  in  the  second 
year  of  Darius,  came  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Zechariah,  the  son  of  Berechiah,  the 
son  of  Iddo  the  prophet,  saying,  I  saw  by  night,  and  behold  a  man  riding  upon  a  red 
horse,"  etc.  About  three  months  after  the  call  of  Zechariah  to  the  prophetic  office,  he 
had  no  less  than  seven,  or,  as  some  count,  eight  visions  in  oTie  night.  And  this  night, 
we  are  told,  was  in  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  the  eleventh  month,  i.«.  "  the  month 
Sebat,  in  the  second  year  of  Darius."  Exactly  five  months  before  this  night  the 
rebuilding  of  the  temple  would  be  resumed.  Amongst  the  various  manners  in  which 
God  revealed  himself  to  men  of  old,  visions  were  perhaps  the  most  frequent  and 
impressive.  He  sometimes  employed  articulate  sounds,  sometimes  the  Urim  and 
Thummim,  sometimes  the  apparitions  of  the  dead,  sometimes  internal  suggestion.  In 
some  direct  way  he  touched  the  springs  of  thought.  But  here  in  one  night  he  appears 
to  the  prophet  in  many  distinct  visions.  The  visions  were  marked  by  these  four 
characteristics.  They  were:  1.  Mental.  Unlike  all  other  creatures  on  the  earth,  so 
far  as  we  know  at  present,  man  has  an  inner  visual  organ;  he  can  see  with  his 
mind.  This  is  seen  in  poets,  such  as  Milton,  Spenser,  etc. ;  allegorists,  such  as 
Bunyan,  etc.  2.  Symlolic.  Strange  and  grotesque  objects  were  seen.  These  objects 
were  all  symbolic;  they  had  a  spiritual  significance.  3.  Divine.  All  men,  unless 
they  are  utterly  destitute  of  the  poetic  sentiment,  have  visions  sometimes,  not  only 
sleeping  but  waking  visions.  But  seldom,  perhaps,  are  these  visions  Divine.  4.  Pro- 
phetic. They  point  here  to  the  future  of  God's  moral  kingdom  upon  the  earth.  Men 
of  lofty,  sanctified  genius  often  in  their  visions  have  a  jilance  of  "  things  that  are  to 
come."  This  vision  seems  to  give  us  a  look  into  God's  moral  government  of  the 
world.  It  takes  us  behind  the  veil  of  phenomena,  and  shows  us  principles  ami  agencies 
that  move,  fashion,  and  control  all.  Three  facts  are  suggested  in  relation  to  God's 
government  in  the  world. 

I.  It  is  carried  on  in  connection  with  mysterious  agencies.  What  did  the 
prophet  see ?  "I  saw  by  night,  and  behold  a  man  riding  upon  a  red  horse,  and  he 
stood  among  the  myrtle  trees  that  were  in  the  bottom ;  and  behind  him  were  there 
red  horses,  speckled,  and  white."  It  is  idle  to  attach  special  ideas  to  each  of  these 
objects;  the  grand  idea  is  that  God  has  ministers  in  his  empire  fully  equipped  for 
his  work,  and  prompt  to  obey  his  behests.  Who  are  these?  Unfallen  angels.  These 
by  millions  stand  near  his  throne,  ready  to  do  his  bidding.  In  relation  to  these 
agents  two  thoughts  are  suggested.     1.  That  they  are  under  the  command  of  a  trans- 


OH.  1.1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHARIAH.  16 

eendent  mind.  Most  expositors  regard  the  man  on  the  red  hoise,  and  who  stood 
among  the  myrtle  trees,  as  no  less  a  personage  than  the  Angel  of  the  covenant,  the 
great  Messiah.  The  subsequent  verses  sustain  this  idea.  This  same  man  appeared  to 
Abraham  in  the  plains  of  Mamre,  to  Jacob  before  his  meeting  with  Esau,  to  Moses  at 
the  burning  bush,  to  Joshua  at  Jericho,  with  the  sword  drawn  in  his  hand.  Here  he 
is  on  the  "red  horse,"  emblem  of  war.  He  is  a  great  moral  Chieftain.  2.  T/iat  there 
are  varied  orders,  "Behind  him  were  there  red  horses,  speckled,  and  white."  This  is 
the  troop  that  followed  the  man.  When  the  eyes  of  Elisha's  servant  were  opened,  he 
beheld  a  "  mountain  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about  Blisha."  Horses  are 
emblems  of  force  and  fleetness.  lu  Christ's  army  there  are  hosts,  mighty  in  power 
and  swift  in  motion.  "  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits  ?  "  How  infinitely  varied 
are  God's  ministers — varied  in  Isind  and  measure  of  faculty,  in  experience,  attainment, 
and  aspect  too — thrones,  principalities,  powers,  and  dominions!  3.  That  the  ithole 
world  is  their  sphere  of  action.  "These  are  they  whom  the  Lord  hath  sent  to  walk  to 
and  fro  through  the  earth."  (1)  They  "go  to  and  fro"  through  the  earth.  They  are 
ever  journeying ;  some  are  swift  as  Hghtning  in  their  speed ;  some  of  them  are  "  full  of 
eyes,"  and  see  all  things.  (2)  They  know  the  state  of  the  world.  "  We  have  walked 
to  and  fro  through  the  earth,  and,  behold,  all  the  earth  sitteth  still,  and  is  at  rest." 
"  At  rest,"  not  in  the  rest  of  righteousness,  not  in  the  repose  of  goodness,  but  in  carnal 
security  and  sin. 

II.  That  it  has  not  only  diffioultibs,  but  an  intebpbetbb  also.    "  Then  said 

1,  0  my  lord,  what  are  these  ? "  Observe :  1.  The  difficulties  of  Qod!»  government. 
"  What  are  these .» "  The  prophet  understood  not  these  strange  appearances ;  and  in 
amazement  he  exclaims, "  What  are  these  ?"  What  thoughtful  man  has  not  asked  such 
a  question  as  this  concerning  the  Divine  government  over  and  over  again  ?  "  What 
are  these?  What  are  these  elements,  forces,  laws,  existences,  events?  What  are 
they?  Are  they  messengers  of  mercy  or  of  justice?  0  my  lord,  what  are  these?"  We 
are  all  moving  in  mystery.  2.  The  interpreter  of  Ood's  government.  Who  answered 
the  question?  "The  man  that  stood  among  the  myrtle  trees  answered  and  said. 
These  are  they."  Some  other  creature,  the  angel  that  talked  with  him,  was  asked 
first;  but  the  answer  came  not  from  hiin,  but  from  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.  In  Bev. 
V.  2  "a  strong  a'bgel"  is  represented  as  crying  with  a  loud  voice  concerning  the 
mysteries  of  God's  government,  inquiring  who  was  worthy  to  "  loose  the  seals ;  "  but 
no  one  was  found  in  heaven,  in  earth,  or  under  the  earth,  able  to  "  open  and  read  the 
book."  There  was  only  one  found ;  "  It  was  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne." 
Christ  is  the  only  Interpreter  of  God.    He  is  the  Logos. 

III.  That  it  is  especially  oonobbned  in  the  intbbbsts  of  his  people.  Hii 
people  are  supposed  to  be  here  represented  by  the  "  myrtle  trees."  The  Jewish  Church 
at  this  time  was  not  like  a  forest  of  stately  cedars,  but  a  grove  of  myrtles,  fragile  and 
obscure.  1.  These  seem  to  be  the  centre  of  Divine  operations  on  the  earth.  Now,  in  the 
myrtle  trees  is  the  man  "  riding  upon  a  red  horse."  And  in  the  myrtle  trees  were  the 
"  red  horses,  speckled,  and  white  " — the  whole  troop  was  there.  The  "  myrtle  trees  " 
seemed  to  be  the  centre  of  all  the  agents.  From  it  they  started  on  their  mission,  and 
to  it  they  returned.     The  true  Church  is  the  temple,  the  residence  of  God  himself. 

2.  TTie  object  of  special  intercession.  "  Then  the  angel  of  the  Lord  answered  and  said, 
0  Lord  of  hosts,  how  long  wilt  thou  not  have  mercy  on  Jerusalem,  and  on  the  cities  of 
Judah,  against  which  thou  hast  had  indignation  these  three  score  and  ten  years  ?  "  The 
duration  of  their  captivity  in  Babylon,  Who  is  the  angel  that  makes  this  appeal  ?  It 
was  he  that  "ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."  "If  any  man  sin,  we  have  an 
Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  Righteous,"  3.  The  subjects  of  the  Divine 
communication.  "  The  Lord  answered  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  with  good  words 
and  comfortable  words."  The  prophet  is  here  commissioned  to  proclaim :  (1)  God's  zeal 
on  behalf  of  Jerusalem.  "  Cry  thou,  saying.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  (2)  His 
displeasure  for  the  enemies  of  Jerusalem.  "  I  am  very  sore  displeased  with  the  heathen." 
His  merciful  purpose  was  to  bestow  blessings  on  Jerusalem,  "  Therefore  thus  saith  th« 
Lord,"  etc. 

Conclusion,  Though  we  are  far  enough  from  presuming  to  have  given  a  correct 
interpretation  of  the  passage,  or  of  maintaining  that  the  thoughts  we  have  suggested 
»re  contained  in  it,  we  conscientiously  believe  that  the  ideas  are  scriptural,  »nd  adaptful 


16  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEOHARIAH.  [oh.  c  1—13. 

for  Bpiritual  usefulness.  The  subject  of  God's  government  in  the  world  is  one  of  the 
sublimest  that  can  engage  the  human  mind,  and  is  beset  with  difSculties  that  often 
bafSe  the  profoundest  thinkers.  It  is  our  happiness  to  know  that,  small  as  is  our 
planet  in  comparison  with  millions  of  other  orbs  that  people  immensity,  and  insignificant 
as  are  its  human  tenants,  the  infinite  Father  superintends  it  in  wisdom  and  in  love. 
— D.  T. 

Vers.  18 — 21. — Second  vision:  four  horns  and  four  carpenters.  "Then  lifted  I  up 
mine  eyes,  and  saw,  and  behold  four  horns.  And  I  said  unto  the  angel  that  talked 
with  me,  What  be  these?  And  he  answered  me,  These  are  the  horns  which  have 
scattered  Judah,  Israel,  and  Jerusalem,"  etc.  This  is  the  second  vision  that  the  prophet 
had  that  night.  The  "horn"  in  the  Bible  is  a  symbol  of  power  (Amos  vi.  13).  The 
horns  here  represent  possibly  those  worldly  kingdoms  which  had  been,  or  were  to 
be,  opposed  to  the  Jewish  people,  namely,  Babylon,  Persia,  Greece,  and  Rome.  These 
four  were  symbolized  in  the  colossal  figure  which  filled  the  imagination  of  Nebuchadnezzar 
in  his  dream.  Whom  do  the  "  four  carpenters  "  symbolize,  or,  as  some  translate  it,  the 
"  four  smiths  "  ?  Undoubtedly,  those  instruments  by  which  the  moral  Governor  of  the 
world  overcomes  all  the  enemies  of  truth  and  right.  The  interpreting  angel  says,  in 
relation  to  these  four  smiths,  or  workmen,  that  they  had  "  come  to  fray,"  or  terrify 
and  cast  down,  the  hostile  powers  ie])resented  by  the  horns.  This  vision  presents 
to  us  tlie  cause  of  right  on  the  earth,  and  suggests  two  thoughts  in  relation  to  it. 

I.  That  the  cause  of  eight  on  the  babth  has  strono  antagonists.  Here 
are  four  horns,  four  mighty  powers,  all  of  which  are  in  dead  hostility  to  the  covenant 
people;  They  are  represented  as  those  who  have  "  scattered  Judah,  so  that  no  man  did 
lift  np  his  head."  The  enemies  of  the  true  scatter  and  crush.  Though  Babylon,  Persia, 
Greece,  and  Rome  have  long  since  passed  away,  the  horns,  or  the  mighty  powers  of 
evil,  are  still  here,  and  are  at  work.  What  are  they?  Reigning  materialism  is  a 
horn;  practical  atheism  is  a  horn;  iMolerant  superstition  is  a  horn;  and  dominant 
selfishness  is  a  horn.  All  these  mighty  forces  are  ever  at  work  in  order  to  destroy  the 
cause  of  right  and  truth  upon  the  earth.  They  are  the  "  principalities  and  powers  of 
darkness,"  against  which  all  that  is  righteous,  true,  and  pure  upon  the  earth  have  to 
wrestle  for  existence. 

II.  That  the  cause  or  tbuth  upon  the  earth  has  Divine  defenders.  Here 
are  four  carpenters,  or  smiths,  who  appear  to  "  fray  them,  to  cast  out  the  horns  of 
the  Gentiles."  Mark,  the  defenders  were :  1.  Men,  not  angels.  God  saves  man  by 
man.  Who  were  the  first  apostles  ?  2.  Working  men.  ToUers,  labourers.  It  is  man 
as  man,  not  philosopher,  poet,  king,  millionaire,  that  has  to  battle  for  the  right.  The 
greatest  moral  victories  have  been  won  by  men  in  the  lower  walks  of  life.  3.  They 
were  skilled  men.  These  men  had  a  trade;  they  were  craftsmen;  they  had  been 
trained  to  the  work  they  undertook.  There  is  a  skill  required  in  order  to  strike  eflfec- 
tively  at  the  errors  and  wrongs  of  life.  Stupid  men,  however  good  their  intentions, 
accomplish  but  little,  if  anything,  in  the  noble  cause.  They  must  be  men  of  good 
natural  sagacity,  and  that  sagacity  trained  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  A  man  to  convert 
souls  must  have  as  much  aptitude  for  the  work  as  the  carpenter  has  in  order  to  shape 
the  wood  to  his  purpose,  or  the  smith  to  mould  and  shape  the  metals. 

Conclusion.  Thank  God  that  if  the  "  horns  "  are  here,  there  are  carpenters  here  also 
to  bring  fhem  to  ruin,  and  to  build  up  the  blessed  kingdom  of  truth  and  righteousness. 
— D.  T. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  II. 

Vers.  1 — 13. — §  5.  The  third  vision ;  the 
man  with  the  measuring-line. 

Ver.  1.— (Heb.  ii.  5.)  I  lifted  up  mine 
eyes  again  (comp.  ch.  v.  1 ;  vi.  1 ;  Dan. 
viii.  S).     Thil  third  vision  makes  a  further 


revelation  of  God's  mercy  to  Israel.  Oou- 
sequent  on  the  destruction  of  enemies  shall 
be  the  growth  and  development  of  the 
chosen  people  till  the  time  of  their  final 
glory  (comp.  ch.  i.  16).  There  is  some 
difSoulty  in  arranging  the  details  of  this 
vision,  depending  in  great  measure  on  the 
decision  we  arrive  at  with  regard  to  the 


OH.  n.  1 — 13.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH, 


n 


identiflcatioQ  of  the  "  young  man  "  of  Y-et.  4. 
Those  who,  as  Theodoiet,  Hitzig,  Schegg, 
Trochon,  Wright,  Perowne,  etc.,  consider 
him  to  be  the  man  with  the  measuring-line 
of  ver.  1,  do  not  explain  why  the  message 
should  be  given  to  him  instead  of  to  the 
prophet  who  had'  asked  for  information. 
Nor  is  it  at  all  certain  that  the  measurer  is 
/  meant  to  be  regarded  as  having  made  a 
mistake  in  attempting  to  define  the  limits 
of  what  was  practically  unlimited — viz. 
the  restored  Jerusalem— and  was  stopped 
accordingly  in  his  proceedings.  It  seems 
preferable,  with  Jerome,  Cornelius  &  Lapide, 
Pusey,  Keil,  Knabenbauer,  etc.,  to  regard 
the  "young  man"  as  Zechariah  himself. 
Then  the  vision  is  thus  presented:  The 
prophet  sees  a  man  with  a  measuring-line ; 
he  asks  whitlier  he  is  going,  and  is  answered 
that  he  was  going  forth  to  measure  Jerusalem. 
Upon  this  the  interpreting  angel  leaves  the 
prophet's  side  to  receive  the  explanation  of 
the  man's  proceedings,  and  is  met  by  a 
superior  angel,  who  bids  him  hasten  to  tell 
the  prophet  the  meaning  of  the  vision.  A 
man,  Probably  an  angel  in  human  form, 
as  ch.  i.  8.  A  measuring-line.  This  is  not 
the  same  word  as  that  in  ch.  i.  16;  but 
the  idea  there  proposed  is  taken  up  here, 
and  its  fulfilment  is  set  forth  (comp.  Ezek. 
xl.  S ;  Eev.  xi.  1 ;  xzi.  15,  16). 

Ver.  2. — What  is  the  breadth  thereof. 
The  man  measures  to  see  what  shall  be  the 
dimensions  of  the  restored  city,  for  from 
ver.  12  it  is  apparent  that  the  building. is 
not  yet  completed,  nor  are  we  to  think  that 
the  rebuilding  of  the  material  ruined  walls 
is  meant. 

Ver.  3. — Went  forth.  The  interpreting 
angel  leaves  the  prophet,  and  goes  away  to 
meet  another  angel  who  advances  from  the 
opposite  side.  Septuagint,  darrfiicei,  "stood," 
Another  angel  went  out;  went  forth,  the 
word  being  the  same  as  before.  This  latter 
angel,  sent  by  God  with  a  revelation,  is 
superior  to  the  interpreter,  as  the  latter 
receives  the  message  from  him  to  deliver 
to  the  prophet, 

Ver.  i. — And  said  unto  him;  i.e.  the 
second  angel  said  to  the  interpreter.  Bun. 
He  was  to  hasten  and  deliver  the  message, 
because  it  was  a  joyful  one  and  calculated 
to  allay  the  prophet's  solicitude.  This  young 
man.  The  Prophet  Zeobariah.  The  term 
applied  to  him  is  thought  to  show  that  he 
was  still  young  when  the  vision  appeared ; 
but  the  word  is  used  also  for  minister,  or 
servant,  or  disciple,  without  necessarily 
defining  the  age.  Others,  not  so  suitably, 
consider  that  the  measuring  angel  is  meant, 
who  is  thus  stopped  in  his  intention  of 
measuring  Jerusalem,  as  being  ignorant  of 
God's  counsels.  Jerusalem  shall  be  in- 
habited as  towns  without  vails.    Jerusalem 

EEOHABIAH. 


shall  be  aa  open  villages  in  a  plain  country. 
The  word  perazoth  is  used  in  Ezek.  x  x  x  viii.  1 1 , 
meaning  "unwalled  villages,"  where  men 
dwelt  "  without  walls,  having  neither  bars 
nor  gates."  So  Esth.  ix.  19,  where  it 
means,  "  country  towns,"  in  contrast  to  the 
metropolis,  which  was  walled  and  fortified. 
The  idea  in  the  text  is  that  Jerusalem  in 
the  future  shall  be  so  extended  that  walls 
shall  no  longer  contain  its  Inhabitants,  but 
they  shall  spread  themselves  in  the  open 
country  on  every  side.  It  is  certain  tliat 
the  city  did  greatly  increase  in  after-time, 
if  we  may  believe  Aristeas's  account  in  his 
famous  letter  to  his  brother  Fhilocrates ;  and 
the  annunciation  of  this  prosperity  would 
be  a  comfort  to  the  prophet  (comp.  Jose- 
phus, '  Bell.  Jud.,'  v.  4.  2).  But  no  material 
increase  of  this  nature  satisfies  the  prophecy, 
which  can  only  have  its  fulfilment  in  the 
spiritual  Jerusalem,  whose  Builder  is  Christ, 
in  whose  light  the  nations  of  them  thai 
are  saved  shall  walk  (Bev.  xxi.  24;  sea 
Isa.  xlix.  18,  etc.;  liv.  2,  3).  This  open 
condition  implies  not  only  extent,  but 
peace  and  safety  also.  The  reason  of  this 
quiet  security  is  given  in  the  next  verse. 
Septuagint,  KaTaffii/)7rws  KaToiKTjd^fTeT  ai'Ie^ov- 
(7a\))/»,  "  Jerusalem  shall  be  abundantly  in- 
habited." 

Ver.  5. — A  wall  of  fire.  She  will  not  need 
walls.  God  will  be  her  protection,  not  only 
defending  her  from  attack,  but  consuming 
the  enemy  who  may  presume  to  assftult  her 
(comp.  Deut.  iv.  24;  Ps.  Ixviii.  2).  The 
glory;  eis  S6i<a/  la-o/uu  (Septuagint).  God 
will  make  his  glory  conspicuous  by  the 
mighty  deeds  he  will  do  in  Jerusalem  and 
the  providential  care  he  will  take  of  her. 
He  shall  be  known  to  be  dwelling  there,  as 
he  revealed  his  presence  by  the  pillar  of  fire 
and  the  Shechiuah  (comp.  Isa.  Ix.  I,  2,  19). 

Ver.  6. — The  superior  angel  of  ver.  4 
continues  to  speak.  He  calls  on  all  the 
Hebrews  still  in  dispersion  to  come  and 
share  this  glorious  state  and  escape  the 
punishment  which  was  about  to  fall  upon 
the  hostile  kingdom.  The  exaltation  of 
Jerusalem  is  connected  with  the  downfall 
of  her  enemies.  Ho,  ho,  come  fortli,  and 
flee ;  Hebrew,  "  Ho,  ho  I  and  flee,"  or,  "  flee 
thou"  (comp.  Isa.  xlviii.  20;  Jer.  li.  6, 
45.)  A  great  number  of  the  exiles  had  re- 
mained in  Babylonia,  having  established 
themselves  there,  according  to  the  injunction 
in  Jer.  xxix.  5,  eto.,  and  grown  rich.  Tliese 
people  had  refused  to  exchange  their  present 
prosperity  for  the  doubtful  future  offered  by 
a  return  to  their  desolate  native  land.  But 
tliey  are  now  called  upon  to  "flee"  from 
the  danger  that  menaced  the  country  of 
their  adoption.  Babylon  is  said  to  nave 
been  twice  taken  in  the  reign  of  Darius  (see 
note  on  ver.  7).    The  land  of  the  north ;  t.« 

o 


18 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH. 


[oh.  II.  1—13. 


Babylonia  (comp.  Jer.  i.  14 ;  iv.  6 ;  xxiii.  8). 
We  should  have  called  the  Babylonians  an 
Eastern  people  if  we  had  dwelt  in  Palestine ; 
but  they  always  invaded  this  land  from 
the  north,  and  the  great  caravan  route 
entered  the  country  from  the  same  quarter, 
so  they,  were  deemed  to  be  a  northern  power. 
I  have  spread  you  abroad  as  the  four  windi 
(Ezek.  ivii.  21).  The  Jews  had  been  dis- 
persed through  all  parts  of  the  extensive 
Babylonian  empire,  and  that  with  a  violence 
which  is  compared  to  the  force  of  the  com- 
bined winds  of  heaven.  Keil,  Wright,  and 
others  regard  the  words  as  a  promise  of 
future  extension  only  to  be  obtained  by  a 
return  to  the  promised  land,  translating, 
"I  will  spread  you,"  the  perfect  of  the 
text  being  taken  to  express  prophetio  cer- 
tainty. But  it  is  surely  incongruous  to 
comfort  the  dispersed  Jews  by  the  promise 
of  a  still  wider  dispersion.  This  appears  to 
be  as  erroneous  as  the  Septuagint  rendering 
of  the  verb,  vwd^a,  "  I  will  gather." 

Ver.  7. — Deliver  thyself.  Escape  from  the 
danger.  0  Zion.  The  exiled  Jews  are  thus 
designated.  Septuagint,  Eis  Siiif  iva<rii(e(rBe, 
"Go  to  Zion,  and  save  yourselves."  That 
dwellest  {thou  thai  dwdlesf)  with  thedaughter 
of  Babylon.  The  inhabitants  of  Babylon 
are  called  "the  daughter  of  Babylon,"  in 
analogy  with  the  common  phrases,  "the 
daughter  of  Zion,"  "the  daughter  of 
Jerusalem"  (comp.  Jer.  xlvi.  19).  There 
is  some  reproach  implied  in  the  clause,  as  if 
these  Jew8  were  content  to  dwell  and  remain 
in  this  heathen  city.  The  immediate  danger 
that  menaced  Babylon  arose  from  two  severe 
rebellions,  in  the  course  of  which  the  city 
was  twice  taken.  The  first  revolt  was  headed 
by  Nidinta-Bel,  B.o.  519,  wlio  was  slain  by 
Darius  at  Babylon.  The  second  took  place 
under  Arakha,  b.o.  514 ;  he  was  defeated  by 
a  general  of  Darius,  named  Intaphernes, 
taken  prisoner  and  crucified.  A  record 
of  these  occurrences  is  found  in  Darius's 
inscription  ou  the  rock  at  Behistun,  trans- 
lated in  '  Becords  of  the  Past,'  vol.  i.  The 
merciless  Persians  would  doubtless  treat  the 
inhabitants  of  the  captured  city  with  their 
wonted  cruelty. 

Ver.  8. — After  the  glory  hath  he  sent  me. 
After  glory  (there  is  no  article  in  the  original), 
i.e.  to  win  honour,  hath  Jehovah  >ent  me — 
the  superior  angel  who  speaks.  As  the 
words,  "thus  saith  the  Lord,"  precede,  we 
ihould  have  expected,  "have  I  sent  thee," 
but  such  change  of  persons,  and  indirect 
address,  are  common  in  Hebrew  (comp. 
oh.  xiv.  5).  The  angel  is  sent  to  get  glory 
over  the  heathen  by  taking  ven|;eance  on 
them  (comp.  Exod.  xiv.  18)w  Such  judgments 
are  oiten  represented  to  be  inflicted  by 
angelic  agency  (Qen.  xix.  13;  2  Kings 
■ix.  35 :  Ezek.  ix.).    The  apple  of  hit  eye. 


The  language  ii  human.  Israel  is  very 
precious  to  Ood;  and  they  who  vex  and 
harass  him  are  as  they  who  hurt  that 
which  God  prizes  inestimably,  and  which  a 
mere  touch  offends  and  injures.  The  word 
rendered  "apple"  is  usually  considered  to 
mean  "  aperture,"  or  "  gate,"  the  pupil  being 
the  entrance  to  the  visual  organ;  but  Dr. 
Wright  regards  it  rather  as  a  natural  word 
of  endearment,  like  the  Latin,  pupa, 
yupiZ/o, indicating  "a  doll,"  "little  maiden 
of  the  eye."  Similar,  though  not  identical, 
expressions  occur  in  Dent,  xxxii.  10 ;  Prov. 
vii.  2 ;  Ps.  xvii.  8. 

Ver.  9. — I  will  shake  mine  hand  upon 
(over)  them.  The  angel  reports  Jehovah's 
message  now  in  the  first  person,  or  speaks 
as  the  representative  of  Jehovah.  The 
action  of  shaking  the  hand  over  a  nation  Is 
one  of  menace  (Job  xxxi.  21;  Isa.  xi.  15; 
xix.  16).  Shall  be  a  spoil  to  their  servants ; 
to  their  slaves,  those  who  once  served  them. 
This  was  true  only  in  a  spiritual  sense, 
when  the  nations  were  won  over  to  the  true 
faith  (see  ver.  11;  and  comp.  Isa.  xiv.  2; 
xlix.  22,  etc.;  Ezek.  xvi.  61).  Septuagint, 
Tots  SovKeioviriv  avrots,  "  to  them  that  serve 
them."  Ye  shall  know,  etc.  (ch.  iv.  9 ;  vi. 
15).  When  this  comes  to  pass,  tlie  Israelitee 
shall  recognize  and  own  the  Divine  mission 
of  God's  messenger. 

Ver.  10.— Sing  and  rejoice.  The  Jewi 
released  from  Babylon,  and  the  whole  Jewish 
nation,  are  bidden  to  exult  in  the  promised 
protection  and  presence  of  the  Lord.  Lo, 
I  come;  Septuagint,  lioh  iyin  Ipxo/iai.  So 
Christ  is  called,  i  ipx^/ievos,  "he  that 
Cometh"  (Matt.  xi.  3).  I  wiU  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  thee  (ch.  viii.  3 ;  ix.  9).  Not  merely 
the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  is  signified,  and 
the  re-establishment  of  the  ordained  worship 
(though  without  the  Shechinah),  but  rather 
the  incarnation  of  Christ  and  his  perpetual 
presence  in  the  Church.  Kara^KTivtiira!  4y 
jiiiTtf  aov  (Septuagint),  which  recalls  John 
i.  14, "  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt 
{iair/ivaitev)  among  us"  (comp.  Isa.  xii.  6; 
Ezek.  xliii.  9 ;  xlviii.  35 ;  Mai.  iii.  1), 

Ver.  11. — Hany  nations  shall  be  joined 
(ihall  join  themselves)  to  the  Iiord ;  "  shall 
fly  for  refuge  unto  the  Lord  "  (Septuagint). 
My  people ;  unto  me  for  a  people ;  Septua- 
gint, "shall  be  unto  him  for  a  people" 
(oom^.  ch.  viii.  20).  No  mere  conversion  of 
individaals  among  the  heathen  satisfies  tliis 
promise.  Whole  nations  shall  become  the 
Lord's  people.  That  title  shall  be  sharrd 
with  Israel  by  countless  multitudes  (comp , 
Isa.  ii.  2,  3 ;  xi.  10 ;  Micah  iv.  2 ;  Zepb.  ii. 
11).  I  will  dwell,  eto.  The  promise  of 
ver.  10  is  repeated  for  assurance'  sake. 
The  LXX.  has,  "And  they  shall  dwell  in 
the  midst  of  thee."  Thou  shalt  know  (a« 
ver.  9). 


OB.  n.  1 — 13.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


19 


Ver.  12— BhaU  inherit  Jndah.  The  Lord, 
though  it  is  true  that  many  other  nations 
shall  be  converted,  shall  take  Judah  (i.e.  the 
\7hole  Jewish  nation)  as  his  pnrtion,  in  ac- 
cordance with  Deut.  xxxii.  9.  In  the  holy 
land.  This  expression  is  not  found  elsewhere 
applied  to  Judna,  nor  is  it  to  be  confined 
to  tliat  nation  here.  Every  land  is  holy 
where  the  Lord  dwells.  The  conversion  of 
the  heathen  should  emanate  from  Judeea 
(Luke  xxiv.  47),  and  spread  through  all  the 
world,  and  thus  the  earth  should  be  holy 
(fronnd.  Shall  choose  Jerusalem  again; 
BeTised  Version,  "shall  yet  ohouse  Jeru- 


salem" (eomp.  eh.  i.  17).    This  points  to 
Christ  as  King  of  the  spiritual  Zion. 

Yer.  13. — Be  silent;  hush  (comp.  Hab. 
ii.  20 ;  Zeph.  i.  7,  and  notes  there).  In  the 
expectation  of  these  mighty  events,  men  are 
called  npon  to  wait  in  awe  and  reverence. 
He  is  raised  np;  he  hath  arisen.  He  had 
seemed  to  sleep  when  he  let  his  people  be 
trodden  down  by  the  heathen ;  but  now  he, 
as  it  were,  waketh  and  cometh  from  heaven, 
his  holy  habitation  (Deut.  xxvi.  15),  to 
inflict  the  threatened  judgment  on  the 
nations,  and  to  succour  his  own  people 
(comp.  Fi.  xliv.  23,  eta.). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — B. — A  vkion  of  sn/eiy.  "  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  again,  and  looked,  and 
behold  a  man  with  a  measuring-line  in  his  hand,"  etc.  We  have  here  another  case  of 
repetition  and  expansion.  In  the  end  of  ch.  i.  16  we  had  a  brief  promise  of  the  full 
restoration  of  Jerusalem  as  a  city — a  place  of  dwellings  with  dwellers  therein.  In  the 
present  passage  we  have  the  same  promise  expressed  at  more  length.  In  other  words, 
we  are  asked  to  observe  (1)  how  immediate  its  application ;  (2)  how  emphatic  its 
repetition ;  and  (3)  how  profound  its  significance. 

I.  How  IMMEDIATE  ITS  AFFLiCATioN.  So  immediate,  in  fact,  that  the  first  steps 
towards  its  accomplishment  bad  already  begun.  Whatever  may  have  been  previously 
resolved  on  in  private  in  regard  to  building  operations,  the  first  visible  and  overt  step 
in  those  operations  themselves  is  that  of  measuring  and  staking  the  ground.  The 
very  children  understand  the  meaning  of  that.  Jehovah,  acconlingly,  in  the  opening 
verses  of  this  chapter,  accommodates  himself  to  this  truth.  The  prophet  sees  mani- 
festly (he  "lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked"),  but  apparently  much  to  his  surprise 
(<' behold "),  a  man  with  a  measuring-line  in  his  hand.  Where  is  he  going?  so  the 
prophet  asks;  and  is  told — He  is  going  to  "Jerusalem"  with  his  line,  for  what 
purpose  ?  To  "  measure  "  it,  to  survey  it  as  for  building,  to  ascertain  its  length  and 
its  breadth.  What  does  all  this  amount  to  ?  It  amounts  to  "  business,"  as  we  should 
now  express  it.  Consultation,  deliberation,  decision, — the  time  for  all  these  is  now 
past.  It  is  the  time  for  doing,  for  actual  fulfilment.  The  work,  in  one  sense,  there- 
fore, as  we  said,  has  begun.  Compare  "  The  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is,"  in  John  It. 
23;  T.  25  ;  also  Luke  xii.  49. 

IL  How  EMPHATIC  ITS  BBPBTITION.  This  showu :  1.  By'Jhe  dignity  of  the  speaker. 
Two  angels  are  now  spoken  of  (vers.  3,  4),  about  whom  and  their  respective  doings 
much  difference  of  interpretation  exists.  If,  however,  we  assume  the  "  young  man  " 
of  ver.  4  to  be  the  prophet  himself  (see  Pusey,  in  he. ;  and  comp.  Jsr.  i.  6 ;  2  Kings 
ix.  4,  "  the  young  man  the  prophet "),  it  seems  clear  that  the  one  of  these  angels, 
speaking  as  he  does  (in  ver.  6)  in  Jehovah's  name,  is  that  Angel-Jehovah  mentioned 
before  in  ch.  i.  11, 1^,  and  afterwards  in  ch.  iii.  1 ;  as  also  that  it  is  this  same  Angel 
who  commissions  the  other  to  com  nmnicate  to  the  prophet  the  declaration  of  ver.  4. 
No  speaker,  therefore,  in  regard  to  dignity,  can  go  beyond  him  (Matt.  xxi.  37 ;  Heb. 
i.  5).  2.  The  earnestness  of  the  action.  (1)  On  this  great  Speaker's  part,  "going 
forth,"  as  with  some  special  purpose  in  view.  (2)  On  the  other  angel's  part,  going 
forth  to  "  meet  him,"  as- though  to  learn  his  will  as  soon  as  possible.  (3)  lu  the  com- 
mand given,  to  "  run  and  speak,"  as  men  do  who  carry  good  tidings  (2  Sam.  xviii.  27). 
3.  TTie  explicitness  of  the  language.  Jerusalem  was  to  more  than  recover  (ver.  4)  its 
former  population  and  size.  Now  its  population  and  dwellings  were  much  too  few  for 
its  ancient  limits.  By-and-by  they  should  be  as  much  too  many.  What  evidence  this 
of  increase !  What  a  picture  of  security,  of  population,  of  wealth  (comp.  Gen.  xiii. 
2 ;  xxiv.  35 ;  Job  i.  3)  I     What  a  promise,  in  short,  of  blessing  and  good  I 

III.  How  PBOFOUim  ITS  SIGNIFICANCE.  The  features  already  noticed,  however  sinking, 
were  only,  aa  it  were,  on  the  surface.    There  were  others  deeper  and  still  more  worthy 


20  THE  BOOK  OF  ZBCHARIAH.  [ch.  ii.  1—13. 

of  notice  which  accounted  for  these.  1.  How  came  Jerumiem  to  he  thus  secure  and 
enlarged}  Because  the  Lord  Jehovah  himself  was  as  "  a  wall  of  fire  round  about;" 
such  a  defence,  t.e.,  as  would  not  only  keep  the  enemies  out,  but  also  destroy  them  il 
they  essayed  to  draw  near  (comp.  Ps,  cxxv.  2,  a  psalm,  like  cxxvi.,  probably  belonging 
to  this  time;  2  Kings  vi.  17).  2.  How  came  Jerusalem  to  be  thus  protected  and 
favoured  t  Because  God  himself  had  returned  to  dwell  in  her ;  and  to  do  so,  more- 
over, as  her  peculiar  "glory."  These  two  points  illustrated  by  Ps,  xlvi.  6;  and  Acti 
ii.  5 — 11;  viii.  27,  28.  This,  in  short,  was  why  there  should  be  so  many  other 
inhabitants  in  Jerusalem,  viz.  because  of  this  most  glorious  Inhabitant  of  all. 

We  are  reminded  by  this  subject  yet  further :  1.  How  swift  and  willing  is  the  service 
of  the  angels  of  heaven.  Compare  the  word  "  run,"  etc.,  with  Dan.  ix.  21,  23 ;  Ezek. 
L  14 ;  and  Pa.  ciil.  20,  21.     This  described  by  the  poet — 

"  Thousands  at  his  bidding  speed. 
And  post  o'er  land  and  ocean." 

This  partly  at  the  root,  perhaps,  of  the  common  notion  that  angels  have  wings.  This 
also  a  thing  to  be  imitated  and  aimed  at  by  us.  "  Thy  will  be  dune  oo  earth,  as  it  is 
in  heaven."  2.  Sow  blessed  the  effects  of  the  presence  of  Christ.  As  to  safety  (Matt, 
viii.  24 — 26) ;  as  to  success  (Matt,  xviii.  19,  20) ;  as  to  comfort  (Mark  ii.  19) ;  as  to 
hope  (Col.  i.  27,  "  Christ  among  you,  the  Hope  of  glory  ") ;  as  to  all  tliat  constitutes 
heaven  (1  John  iiL  2 ;  John  xiv.  3 ;  xvL  24). 

Vers.  6 — 9. — A  promise  of  triumph.  "Ho,  ho!  come  forth,  and  flee  from  the  land 
of  the  north,  saith  the  Lord,"  etc.  Soon  after  the  time  of  the  deliverance  of  this 
prophecy,  Babylon  suffered  greatly  at  the  hands  of  Darius.  The  primary  reference  of 
the  verses  before  us  is  to  this  fact,  in  the  judgment  of  some — vers.  6,  7  being  an  urgent 
call  to  flee  from  that  city  and  land,  and  vers.  8,  9  a  solemn  prediction  of  the  calamities 
about  to  come  upon  it,  uttered  in  support  of  that  call.  It  will,  perhaps,  be  safer  for 
us  to  use  the  passage  in  a  general  way,  and  as  showing  to  us  (1)  Zion's  perpetual 
duty  towards  Ood ;  and  (2)  Ood^s  constant  devotion io  Zion. 

I.'  Zion's  duty  towards  God.  God's  people  called  here  by  that  name  because  the 
prophet  has  been  speaking  specially  of  Jerusalem,  and  because  the  "  time  to  favour 
Zion,"  as  the  life-centre  of  their  whole  community,  had  now  come.  Being  so  named, 
observe:  1.  To  what  they  are  called;  viz.  to  be  separated  from  Babylon,  and  her 
doings,  and,  to  a  certain  extent,  from  her  people  (comp.  Bev.  xviii.  4 ;  Isa.  xlviii.  20 ; 
2  Cor.  vi.  17 ;  2  Chron.  xix.  2,  etc.).  2.  How  they  are  called  to  this ;  viz.  (1)  with  a 
very  loud  call  ("  Ho,  ho  1 "),  as  though  overcome  with  slumber,  and  not  aware  of  the 
danger  arising,  as  with  persons  sleeping  through  cold,  from  the  peculiar  insidiousness 
of  the  things  of  this  world  (Matt.  xiii.  28;  1  Tim.  vi.  9);  also  (2)  with  a  very  urgent 
call,  as  though  to  "  flee "  for  their  lives  (Gen.  xix.  17) ;  and,  once  more,  (3)  with  a 
peculiarly  imperative  call,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  3.  Why  they  are  called  to  it. 
(1)  Partly  on  account  of  their  experience  in  the  past.  Because  of  their  previous  lack 
of  separation  from  God's  enemies  (see  Hos.  vii.  8 ;  iv.  17),  God  had  spread  them  abroad, 
or  completely  scattered  them,  as  by  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  leaving  no  corner 
untouched  (compare  the  similar  effect  produced  by  the  diB'ereut  figure  of  2  Kings 
xxi.  13).  (2)  Partly  on  account  of  their  then  present  condition.  The  people  specially 
addressed  seem  to  have  been  those  belonging  to  Zion,  who  were  dwelling  in  Babylon 
(ver.  7)  at  that  time,  where  the  name  of  Jehovah  was  scorned  and  despised  (Ps. 
cxxxvii.  3,  4;  2  Kings  xviii.  35),  and  where  they  were  specially  exposed,  therefore,  to 
the  temptations  here  referred  to  (Dan.  i.  5,  8 ;  iii.,  passim).  Avoid  her  snares ;  avoid 
her  fate  (see  Jer.  1.  8,  9 ;  Ii.  6,  45). 

II.  God's  devotion  to  Zion.  If  God  thus  calls  upon  his  people  to  be  peculiarly 
his  (1  Pet.  ii.  9),  he  is  ready  and  willing,  on  his  part,  to  be  peculiarly  theirs.  "  After 
the  glory  "  just  previously  spoken  of — i.e.  (perhaps)  besides  being  the  invisible  glory 
and  defence,  as  there  described,  of  his  Zion — there  were  two  further  things  he  would 
do.  1.  He  would  openly  identify  himself  with  their  cause.  He  would  let  it  be  seen ; 
he  would  "  send  "  the  Messenger-Jehovah  himself  to  proclaim  it,  that  they  were  part  of 
himself,  as  it  were — ^nothing  more  intimately  so^  in  real  truth  (see  end  of  ver.  8 ;  and 


OH.  n.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZBCHARIAH.  21 

comp.  Deut.  xxxii.  10;  alio  Exod.  iv.  22 ;  Acts  is.  4 ;  Matt.  zxv.  40).  2.  Ht  would 
<w  openly  manifest  himself  against  their  enemies.  "  I  will  shake  my  hand  over  them," 
And  spoil  those  that  spoil  thee  (comp.  vers.  9  and  8).  This  a  special  pro»f  of  the 
presence  of  God  with  his  servants,  and  of  their  mission  to  speak  in  his  Name  (end  of 
ver.  9).  So  of  Moses  (comp.  Exod.  iii.  21,  22 ;  xii.  35,  36);  of  Barak  (Judg.  v.  12); 
of  Christ  himself  (Ps.  Ixviii.  18 ;  Eph.  iv.  8 ;  Col.  ii.  15). 

All  this :  1.  A  gJorioits  picture  of  the  state  of  Ood's  people  at  the  time  of  the  end. 
(1)  As  to  their  nearness  to  God  (see  such  passages  as  Ps.  Ixvii.  6,  7 ;  Bev.  xxi.  2,  3 ; 
xxii.  4).  (2)  As  to  their  separation  from  evil  (Ezek.  xliii.  7 ;  Kev.  xxi.  27  ;  xxii.  3 ; 
c\\.  xiv.  20,  21).  (3)  As  to  their  triumphs  in  Christ  (Rev.  xxi.  4 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  52 — 
57  ;  Ps.  ox. ;  Heb.  i.  13 ;  x.  13,  etc.).  2.  An  instructive  lesson  as  to  the  great  thing  to 
he  aimed  at  by  us  now,  (Cant.  ii.  16;  John  xv.  4,  etc.;  compare  also  what  is  shown  of 
the  importance  of  "  holding  the  Head,"  in  CoL  ii.  19,  and  context ;  and  of  being  "  found 
in  Christ,"  in  Phil.  iii.  9.) 

Vers.  10 — 13. — The  henefits  of  Ood's  presence.  "  Sing  and  rejoice,  0  daughter  of  Zion : 
for  lo,  I  come,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,"  etc.  In  these  verses  the  prophecy 
takes  us  back  to  a  thought  twice  touched  on  already  (see  ch.  i.  16 ;  ii.  6),  viz.  the  mani- 
fested presence  of  God  with  his  people.  Three  times  over  in  the  present  passaj^e  is  this 
same  thought  referred  to  (observe  "  I  will  dwell,"  both  in  vers.  10  and  11 ;  and  "  habita- 
tion," in  ver.  13).  Taking  this,  therefore,  as  the  main  idea  of  the  passage,  we  may 
I«arn  from  it,  in  a  general  way,  how  such  a  presence  of  God  in  Christ  is  connected 
Q.)  with  the  extension  of  his  kingdom ;  (2)  with  the  stahlishment  of  his  people ;  and  (3) 
with  the  confutation  of  unbelief.  , 

I.  The  extension  of  his  kingdom.  "Many  nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord 
in  that  day."  So  says  the  Angel-Jehovah  here  as  the  Representative  and  Equal  of 
Jehovah,  In  what  day  ?  The  "  day  "  so  often  referred  to  of  his  "  dwelling  "  or  being 
amongst  them.  "Joined,"  in  what  manner?  So  as  to  become  his  "  people "  them- 
selves. The  illustrations  of  this  general  principle,  whatever  be  the  special  application 
thereof  primarily  intended  in  this  passage,  are  many  and  close.  Compare  the  com- 
mand ("  make  disciples  ")  and  the  promise  ("  I  am  with  you  ")  of  Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20 ; 
«l8o  the  connection,  in  Rom.  xi.  12,  16,  between  the  restoration  of  Israel  to  God's 
favour  (equivalent  to  his  presence  among  them)  and  the  conversion  of  the  world ;  also 
Ps.  Ixvii.  througiiout;  Gen.  xlix.  10;  1  Cor.  xiv.  25;  Isa.  xlv.  14;  Zech.  viii.  23. 

II.  Thb  stablishment  of  his  people.  "  Thou  slialt  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts 
hath  sent  me."  1,  This  partly  due  to  the  direct  results  of  the  manifested  presence  of 
Christ.  Contrast  the  language  of  Cleophas  ("  we  trusted,"  Luke  xxiv.  21),  when  he 
supposed  Christ  to  be  absent,  with  the  language  of  the  disciples,  not  long  before,  in  his 

fresence  (John  xvi.  30).  2.  Partly  due  to  its  indirect  effects  as  referred  to  just  now. 
t  greatly  confirms  our  own  faith  in  Christianity  wlien  we  see  strangers  brought  to 
believe  it.  The  more  widely  a  remedy  is  found  to  succeed,  the  more'  our  trust  in  it  is 
Augmented.  This  truth  seems  recognized  or  implied  in  such  passages  as  Rom.  i.  18  ; 
Acts  xi.  22,  23  ;  Col.  i.  3—6,  23,  etc. 

III.  The  coNruTATiON  of  unbelief.  "  Be  silent,  0  all  flesh."  All  " flesh  and  blood" 
— human  nature  at  large.  Compare,  after  the  presence  and  power  of  the  Captain  of  the 
Lord's  host  (Josh.  v.  13 — 15)  had  been  so  signally  manifested  in  the  events  recorded 
in  Josh.  X.,  how  we  read  in  the  twenty-first  verse  of  that  chapter,  that  "  none  moved 
his  tongue  against  any  of  the  children  of  Israel "  (see  Exod.  xi.  7 ;  Ps.  Ixxvi.  7 — 9  ; 
Zeph.  i.  7;  Hab.  ii.  20).  Also  Rom.  xi.  33 — 36,  where  we  have  the  same  arising  of 
Ood  to  manifest  his  presence  by  restoring  Israel  to  his  favour  (note  expressions,  "  choose 
Jerusalem  again,"  and  "  raised  up,"  in  vers.  12, 13),  and  the  same  call  to  "  silent  awe 
•nd  reverential  contemplation  "  (Wardlaw)  of  his  greatness.  May  we  not  also  compare 
what  is  said  in  the  prophecy  of  Enoch  as  quoted  in  Jude  14, 15  ?  When  "  every  eye 
shall  see  him  "  (Rev.  i.  7)  every  mind  shall  believe. 

CoNOLUDiNO  THOUQHTB.  1.  Bow  deep  the  foundations  of  gospel  truth  I  Some  of  the 
most  vital  of  these  are  connected  with  the  Person  and  office  of  Christ,  viz.  as  already 
referred  to,  his  being  at  once  the  appointed  Messenger  and  the  personal  Equal  of  God. 
Observe  how  each  of  these  separate  lines  is  woven  into  the  whole  tenor  and  structure  of 
the  passage  before  us.     Three  times  over  the  person  speaking  is  described  as  being 


22  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  n.  1— IS. 

"sent"  (vers.  8,  9, 11);  yet  nowhere  can  we  find  any  distinction  as  to  authority 
between  the  speaker  and  Jehovah  himself.  So  far  from  this,  in  fact,  as  to  lead  to  an 
appearance  of  utter  confusion  between  him  who  is  sent  and  him  who  sends;  like  the 
apparent  confusion  to  be  found  in  the  language  of  the  Angel-Jehovah  in  Gen.  xxii.  11, 12. 
A  confusion,  however,  which,  when  viewed  in  the  more  explicit  light  of  New  Testa- 
ment teaching,  becomes  comparatively  clear,  and  even  natural.  How  striking,  because 
—on  the  human  writer's  part — how  undesigned  a  coincidence  1  2.  How  peculiarly 
important  in  these  days  the  duty  of  preaching  the  gospel  "afar  off  "I  The  best  answer 
to  sceptical  questioDings  at  home  is  to  he  found  in  missionary  conquests  abroad. 
Other  religions,  being  the  inventions  of  particular  "races,"  suit  those  races  alone. 
Christianity  suits  "  every  creature  "  (Mark  xvi.  15),  because  the  Creator's  own  work. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Measimng  the  Church.  "Jerusalem"  stands  for  the  Church.  The 
"  man"  (ver.  1)  seems  the  same  person  who  is  afterwards  spoken  of  as  "young,"  and 
who  is  implicitly  rebuked  for  taking  in  hand  a  task  beyond  his  powers.  The  passage 
suggests  for  consideration — 

I.  Man's  idea  of  the  CnnROH  as  capable  of  strict  definition  and  measube- 
MENT.  There  has  always  been  a  disposition  to  fix  and  limit  the  boundaries  of  the 
Cliurch.  1.  Irrational.  The  visible  Church  may  be  defined,  but  not  the  invisible. 
Truth  is  not  to  be  measured  by  our  belief,  or  godliness  by  the  piety  of  the  party  to 
which  we  belong,  or  the  community  of  the  good  by  the  little  systems  of  our  day. 

2.  Presumptuous.  This  work  cannot  be  done  by  man.  He  has  neither  the  capacity  nor 
the  means.  "  We  mete  out  love  as  if  our  eye  saw  to  the  end  of  heaven."  It  demands 
higher  powers — a  purer  eye,  a  deeper  insight,  a  more  far-reaching  vision.  Even  Elijah 
failed,  and  Peter  greatly  erred.    Only  the  Lord  himself  knoweth  them  who  are  his. 

3.  Injurious.  Mistakes  must  occur.  Some  excluded  who  ought  to  have  been  included, 
and  others  included  who  should  have  been  excluded.  Hence  evil  both  to  the  judge 
and  to  the  judged — prifie,  injustice,  uncharitableness.  See  Saul "  breathing  out  threaten- 
ings  and  slaughter."  Mark  John,  the  beloved  dis-ciple,  wanting  to  call  down  fire  on  the 
Samaritans.  Behold  the  Corinthian  Church — sample  of  many  others  down  to  our  own 
day — torn  by  factions  and  blighted  by  party  spirit.  How  often,  in  the  world,  have 
grievous  wars  arisen  from  paltry  questions  as  to  boundaries !  So  the  Church  has 
suflered  incalculable  evils  from  "prolane  and  vain  babblings"  and  questions  which 
minister  strife. 

II.  God's  idea  of  the  Church  as  tbanscendino  all  human  limitations.  God 
is  the  Supreme  and  only  Judge.  He  sees  things  as  they  are.  He  knows  not  only  the 
outward  works,  but  the  heart,  and  the  end  from  the  beginning.  In  the  woman  whom 
Simon  the  Pharisee  despised  our  Lord  saw  a  true  penitent.  In  the  man  who  was 
casting  out  devils  in  his  name  he  discerns  an  ally,  though  he  followed  him  not  openly 
as  a  disciple.  In  the  devout  Cornelius  he  acknowledged  a  true  worshipper  and  servant 
of  God,  though  he  was  as  yet  unknown  to  the  apostles.  His  love  overflows  the  letter 
of  our  Creeds  and  the  boundaries  of  our  Churches.  And  as  in  the  past,  so  in  the 
future.  The  picture  is  grand  and  inspiring.  It  foreshadows  the  glory  of  the  latter  day. 
Here  is :  1.  Vast  extension.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  The  Church  is  like  a  city  that  outgrows  its 
walls,  that  absorbs  the  outlying  villages  and  hamlets,  that  gradually  includes  the  whole 
land  in  its  benign  embrace.  As  Jerusalem,  so  the  Church,  in  the  day  of  prosperity, 
would  far  surpass  all  former  bounds.  2.  Inviolable  security.  The  figure  is  vivid  and 
striking.  It  recalls  the  story  of  the  prophet  (2  Kings  vi.  15 — 17)  and  the  more  ancient 
records  of  Moses  and  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness.  The  true  defence  is  not  material, 
but  spiritual — not  of  the  world,  but  of  God.  3.  Divine  blessedness.  The  life  and 
s^ilendour  of  the  Church  are  in  the  inhabitation  of  God.  This  secures  the  supremacy 
of  goodness,  and  the  brotherhood  of  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  God  is  in  the  midst.  "  God 
is  Light,"  "  God  is  Love,"  God  is  Holiness ;  therefore  the  people  will  live  and  move 
and  have  their  being  in  light  and  love  and  holiness.  It  will  be  the  days  of  heaven 
on  earth. — F. 


OH.  n.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  M 

Vers.  6 — 9i—The  exiles^  return.    "  Return."     This  call  implies — 

I.  Knowledge  ok  theib  condition.  In  the  dark  days  we  are  apt  to  say,  "Doth 
Q-od  know  ? "  This  is  our  weakness.  The  cries  of  the  poor,  the  needy,  and  the 
oppressed  are  ever  heard  on  high. 

II.  CJoNTlNOED  INTEREST  IN  THEIK  WELFARB.  Israel,  though  Scattered,  was  not 
forsaken.  Affliction  witnesses  both  as  to  our  sin  and  God's  mercy.  If  Gtod  did  not 
care,  he  would  let  us  go  on  in  sin.  But  because  he  loves  and  pities  us  and  yearns  for 
our  home-comins,  he  ceases  not  to  cry, "  Return." 

III.  Adequate  means  pbovidbd  fok  their  restoration.  God  does  not  require  the 
impossible.  His  commands  are  promises.  The  way  is  open.  The  exiles  are  free 
to  come  back.  Welcome  and  peace  are  assured  on  the  word  of  the  Lord.  But  self- 
effort  is  needed.     We  must  ourselves  act. 

IV.  Gbandest  encouragement  to  obedience.  The  best  reasons  to  convince  the 
judgment.  The  most  powerful  motives  to  sway  the  heart.  God  appeals ;  1.  To  the 
tense  of  right.  What  should  be  the  best  and  the  noblest?  "We  needs  must  love  the 
highest  when  we  see  it."  2. 1'he  feeling  of  brotherhood.  The  old  unity  might  be  restored. 
The  Jews  looked  back  with  pride  to  the  days  of  David  and  Solomon.  So  of  the  Church. 
3.  Their  consciousness  of  the  real  dignity  of  their  being.  They  were  precious  in  God's 
sitfht.  Specially  protected  and  dear  "as  the  apple  of  his  eye."  Such  thoughts  fitted  to 
raise  our  hearts,  to  inspire  us  with  worthier  ideas  of  our  nature  and  destiny  (1  John 
iiL  1).    4.  Their  hope  of  better  times.    Obedience  would  bring  bltssedness. — F. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — TTie  joys  of  the  Church  in  her  great  Head.  "  It  is  a  great  jubilee  of 
joy  to  which  Zion  is  invited.  Thrice  besides  is  she  invited  with  the  same  word  (Isa. 
liv.  1 ;  Zeph.  iii.  14,  15 ;  Isa.  xiL  6),  and  all  for  the  restored  and  renewed  presence  of 
God»(Pusey). 

I.  The  oloby  of  his  presence.  Absenteeism  is  a  sore  evil  among  men,  but  the  King 
of  Zion  is  always  in  residence. 

II.  The  vastness  op  his  dominion.  Not  material  but  moral.  Souls.  "  The  riches 
of  his  inheritance  in  the  saints."  Par  and  wide.  People  of  every  kindred  and  tongue. 
Constant  accessions  of  territory,  till  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  are  posses3i.d. 

III.  The  splendour  of  his  achievements.  The  cross  means  death  to  evil  and  life 
to  good.  As  when  our  Lord  was  in  the  world,  wherever  he  went  he  brought  light  and 
blessing,  so  it  is  still.  There  is  joy  in  heaven  over  every  sinner  that  repenteth,  and 
this  joy  is  shared  by  the  saints  on  earth. 

IV.  The  blessedness  of  his  keign.  He  rules  not  by  force,  but  by  love.  The 
homage  of  his  subjects  is  from  the  heart,  and  their  service  is  freely  and  joyously 
rendered.  The  honours  of  his  kingdom  are  not  to  the  noble  and  the  great  of  the  earth, 
but  to  the  good.  At  last  the  old  word  is  fulfilled,  "  In  his  davs  shall  the  righteous 
flourish  "  (Ps.  Ixxii.  7).— F. 

Vers.  1 — 5. —  Third  vision:  an  interesting  future  for  the  world.  "I  lifted  up 
mine  eyes  again,  and  looked,  and,  behold,  a  man  with  a  measuring-line  in  his 
hand.  Then  said  I, -Whither  goest  thou?  And  he  said  unto  me,  To  measure 
Jerusalem,  to  see  what  is  the  breadth  thereof,  and  what  is  the  length  thereof,"  etc. 
Here  is  the  third  vision  which  the  prophet  had  the  same  night.  It  is  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  subject  of  the  former  one,  namely,  the  rebuilding  and  reoccupation 
of  Jerusalem  and  the  temple.  Observe :  1.  What  he  saw.  "  A  man  with  a  measuring- 
line  in  his  hand."  In  Ezek.  xl.  3 ;  xli.,  xlii.,  you  have  the  same  image.  Who  was 
this  man?  The  general  impression  is  that  it  was  the  Messiah  in  human  form.  He 
is  the  great  Moral  Architect,  the  Builder  of  the  great  temple  of  truth  in  the  world. 
Then  the  prophet  sees  angels.  "Behold,  the  angel  that  talked  wilh  me  went  forth." 
Who  was  this  angel?  The  interpreter.  Tlien  there  is  another  angel  he  sees,  who 
went  out  to  meet  him.  Who  is  he  ?  Some  suppose,  the  sanae  as  the  "  man  with 
the  measuring-line."  In  addition  to  this  he  sees  a  young  man.  "  Run,  speak  to  this 
young  man."  Who  is  this  young  man  ?  He  is  generally  believed  to  be  the  prophet 
himself;  and  Christ  is  here  represented  as  commissioning  an  angel  to  run  and  speak. 
2.  What  he  says  to  him.  "Whitlier  goest  thou?"  The  "man  with  the  measuring- 
line"  excites  his  curiosity.     His  api>earance,  gait,  speed,  as  he  carried  the  measuring- 


24  THE  BOOK  OF   ZECHARIAH.  [CH.  li.  1— 13. 

line  in  his  hand,  would  caturally  give  occasion  to  the  question.  3.  What  he  heard. 
He  hiard  the  answer  to  his  question:  "To  measure  Jerusalem,  to  see  what  is  ih» 
breadth  thereof,  and  what  is  the  length  thereof."  He  heard  the  commission  given 
to  the  angel :  "  Run,  speak  to  this  young  man."  He  heard  a  description  given  of 
Jerusalem  :  "  Jerusalem  sliall  be  inhabited  as  towns  without  walls,"  etc.  And  he  heard 
the  Divine  promise  made  concerning  it :  "  For  I,  saith  the  Lord,  will  be  unto  her 
a  wall  of  fire  round  about."  This  part  of  his  vision  may  be  fairly  taken  to  illustrate 
the  future  increase,  security,  and  glory  of  good  men  on  the  earth, 

I.  The  futueb  inobbasb  of  good  men  on  the  earth.  Two  remarks  are  suggested 
concerning  the  extent  of  genuine  religion.  It  is :  1.  Measurable  only  by  the  Divine. 
Who  had  the  "  measuring-line  "?  Not  a  mere  man,  not  any  created  intelligence,  but 
the  God-Man,  the  Messiah.  Men  cannot  measure  the  growth  of  piety  in  the  world. 
They  attempt  it,  but  make  fearful  mistakes.  They  deal  in  statistics,  they  count  the 
number  of  Churches  in  the  world  and  the  number  of  professed  worshippers.  But  piety 
cannot  he  measured  in  this  way.  When  you  have  summed  up  the  number  of  temples 
and  the  number  of  professed  worshippers,  you  have  not  approached  a  correct  estimate 
as  to  the  amount  of  genuine  piety  in  the  world.  Have  you  scales  by  which  to  weigh 
genuine  love?  any  numbers  by  which  to  count  holy  thoughts,  aspirations,  and 
volitions  ?  any  rules  by  which  to  gauge  spiritual  intelligence  ?  Have  you  any  plum- 
met by  which  to  fathom  even  the  depths  of  a  mother's  affections?  No  one  but  God 
cau  weigh  aud  measure  the  holy  experiences  of  holy  souls.  By  his  method  of  measure- 
ment lie  may  discover  more  piety  in  a  humble  cottage  than  in  crowded  tabernacles  and 
cathedrals.  He  hath  the  true  "  measuring-line,"  and  no  one  else.  Hence  endeavour 
not  to  determine  tbe  usefulness  of  a  minister  by  the  numbers  of  his  congregation  or  the 
funds  contributed  by  them.  2.  Unrestricted  by  material  bounds.  "  Jerusalem  shall  be 
inhabited  as  towns  without  walls  for  the  multitude  of  men  and  cattle  therein."  The 
literal  idea  is  that  so  mauy  shall  be  its  inhabitants  that  all  could  not  be  contained 
within  the  walls,  but  shall  spread  out  in  the  open  country  around  (Esth.  ix.  19),  and 
go  secure  shall  they  be  as  not  to  need  shelter  behind  walls  for  themselves  and  the 
cattle.  So  hereafter  Judwa  is  to  be  "  the  land  of  unwalled  villages  "  (Ezek.  xxxviii.  11), 
We  are  told  that  "  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Loid,  as  the  waters 
cover  the  sea." 

II.  '1  BE  FUTUEB  BBCURITT  OF  GOOD  MEN  ON  THE  EABTH.      "  Por  I,  Saith  the  Lord,  will 

be  unto  her  a  wall  of  fire  round  about."  "A  wall  ot  fire."  Who  shall  penetrate  a 
massive  wall  of  fire?  But  that  wall  is  God  himself,  omnipotent  in  strength,, 
immeasurably  high.  " I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  hea\en  saying.  Behold,  the 
taheniacle  of  God  is  with  men,  atsd  he  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  hie- 
people,  and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God  ; "  "  And  the  city  had 
no  ne(  d  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon,  to  shine  in  it :  for  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten 
it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof"  (Rev.  xxi.  3,  23).  Conventional  Christians  talk 
about  the  Church  being  in  danger.  Are  the  stars  of  heaven  in  danger?  The  true 
Church  is  foui;ded  on  a  rock,  and  the  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against  it.  Omnipo- 
tence is  the  Guardian  of  the  good.     "He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee,"  etc. 

III.  The  future  glory  of  the  good  men  on  tub  earth.  "  And  will  be  the  Glory 
in  the  midst  of  her."  The  reference  here  is  to  the  Bhechinah  and  the  mercy-seit. 
Good  men  are  the  recipients  and  the  reflectors  of  Divine  glory.  They  are  the  temples 
for  the  Holy  Ghost  to  dwell  in,  and  they  reveal  more  of  him  than  the  whole  material 
universe.     Holiest  souls  are  his  highest  manifestations. — D.  T. 

Vers.  6 — 9. — Sotd-exile.  "  Ho,  ho,  come  forth,  and  flee  from  the  land  of  the  north^ 
saith  the  Lord  :  for  I  have  spread  you  abroad  as  the  four  winds  of  the  heaven,  saith  the 
Lord,"  etc.  This  is  a  call  of  Jehovah  to  the- Jews  in  Babylonian  captivity  to  return 
to  their  own  land.  Cyrus  had  made  a  way  for  them,  and  publicly  proclaimed  their 
deliverance.  There  are  expressions  in  these  verses,  as  indeed  in  almost  every  verse  of 
the  hook,  the  exact  meaning  of  which  cannot  be  settled:  it  is  idle  to  attempt  to 
interpret  their  precise  significance.  For  example,  what  is  meant  by  "I  have  spread 
you  abroad  as  the  four  winds  of  heaven  "  ?  Some  say  that  it  means  that  the  pro- 
elamation  was  to  be  made  to  every  part  of  the  land.  Some,  that  it  refers  to  the  extent 
of  their  dispersion,  that  they  had  been  scattered  by  the  four  winds  of  heavea.     But 


vB.  u.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZBOHARIAH.  M 

what  matters  it?  Again,  what  is  meant  by  "After  the  glory  hath  he  sent  me  unto 
the  nations  which  spoiled  you  "  ?  Some  suppose  the  prophet  to  be  the  person  who 
here  speaks  of  himself  as  being  sent.  Others,  the  angel  mentioned  in  ver.  4.  Some 
read  the  words,  "  after  the  glory,"  "  to  win  glory."  And  again,  what  is  meant  by 
"Behold,  I  will  shake  mine  hand  upon  them,  and  they  shall  be  a  spoil  to  their 
servants  "  ?  The  expression,  perhaps,  is  indicative  of  a  threatening  attitude  of  Jehovah 
when  about  to  inflict  punishment  upon  his  enemies.  Dr.  Wardlaw  says  of  vers.  8,  9, 
"  That  the  simplest  and  most  natural  interpretation  is  that  which  makes  them  refer 
.  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  in  ver.  5,  '  I  will  be  the  Glory  in  the  midst  of  her.' " 
When  this  has  been  fulfilled — when  Jehovah's  house  has  been  built,  and  he  has 
returned  and  taken  possession  of  it,  and  become  anew  the  glory  of  his  people  and  his 
city — then,  says  the  speaker, "  He  hath  sent  me  unto  the  nations  which  spoiled  you," — 
words  of  which,  in  this  connection,  the  most  appropriate  interpretation  seems  to  be 
that  Jehovah  hath  given  him  a  commission  against  those  nations.  These  words  may 
be  fairly  taken  to  illustrate  the  moral  exile  of  humanity.  As  the  Jews  in  Babylon 
were  exiled  from  their  own  land,  souls  are  away  from  God  in  the  "  far  country "  of 
depravity.  The  point  suggested  is  the  reluctance  of  the  exile  to  return.  This  reluctance 
is  here  seen — 

I.  In  the  earnestness  of  the  Divine  appeal.  "  Ho,  ho,  come  forth,  and  flee 
from  the  land  of  the  north,  saith  the  Lord."  Though  Providence,  through  the 
interposition  of  Cyrus,  had  removed  all  physical  obstacles  to  their  return,  still  they 
had  such  lingering  attachments  to  the  land  of  their  captivity  that  they  seemed  loth 
to  break  away.  Hence  the  appeal  of  the  Almighty  to  "flee  fi-om  the  land  of  the 
north."  Is  not  this  an  illustration  of  the  moral  state  of  sinners  ?  Though  their  way 
to  return  back  to  God  has  been  made  clear  by  Christ,  yet  return  they  will  not.  Hence 
how  earnest  and  persevering  the  Divine  calll  What  is  the  voice  to  humanity  of  the 
Almighty  Word,  the  voice  sounding  through  nature,  through  all  history,  and  especially 
through  Christ?  Does  it  not  amount  to  this,  "Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and 
the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,"  etc.  ?  "  Eeturn  " 
is  the  word.  "  Flee  from  the  land  of  the  north."  It  is  the  land  of  corruption,  the  land 
of  tyranny. 

II.  In  the  potency  op  the  Divine  reasons.  Several  things  are  suggested  by  God 
as  reasons  why  they  should  attend  to  his  call  and  "  return."  1.  The  greatness  of  their 
separation.  "  1  have  spread  you  abroad  as  the  four  winds  of  the  heaven."  You  ought 
to  be  one  people,  united  as  loving  brethren — united  in  sjiirit  and  aim,  in  a  common 
worship  and  a  common  purpose  of  life ;  but  you  are  divided  far  apart.  You  are  not  in 
one  part  of  the  country, 'but  at  every  point  of  the  compass — east,  west,  north,  south. 
Do  not  be  sepaiated  any  more.  Gather  together  into  one  fold.  Is  not  this  a  good 
reason  why  sinners  should  return  to  God?  So  long  as  they  are  away  from  him  they 
are  divided  amongst  themselves.  They  are  not  only  apart  from  each  other,  they  are 
not  only  without  sympathy  with  each  other,  but  in  antipathy.  What  a  motive  this 
to  "return"!  2.  The  tender  inter^t  of  Qod  in  them.  "  He  that  toucheth  you  touoheth 
the  apple  of  his  eye."  Some  regard  this  as  meaning,  "  He  that  injures  you  injures 
himself;"  as  if  the  words  meant,  "He  that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  pupil  of  his  own 
eye."  There  is  a  gr^at  truth  in  this.  He  that  injures  another  injures  himself  therely. 
This  is  a  law  manifestly  just  and  eternally  irrevocable.  You  cannot  wrong  another 
without  wronging  yourself.  But  although  this  is  a  truth,  the  words,  I  think,  convey 
something  more  than  this ;  they  convey  the  idea  of  God's  tender  interest  in  his  people. 
It  is  a  charming  figure.  The  eye  is  one  of  the  most  intiicate  and  delicate  structures 
in  the  human  frame ;  and  the  pupil  of  the  eye — the  opening  by  which  the  light  of 
heaven  enters  for  the  purposes  of  vision — the  most  sensitive,  as  well  as  important,  part 
of  that  structure.  Nothing  can  more  finely  convey  the  idea  of  the  exquisitely  tender 
care  of  Jehovah  for  the  objects  of  his  love.  Such  interest  the  Bible  teaches  with 
frequency  and  fervour.  Hence  we  read,  "  In  all  their  afdiction,  he  is  afflicted."  We 
read,  "As  a  father  pitieth  his  children,''  etc.  We  read, "Can  a  woman  forget  her 
sucking  child?"  We  read,  "He  is  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,"  etc. 
What  an  argument  is  this  for  man's  moral  return  I  If  the  Almighty  Father  is  so 
tender  towards  us,  ought  we  not  to  hurry  home  to  his  presence  1  The  father  of  the 
prodigal  son  represents  the  universal  Father  of  mankind.     "  When  he  was  yet  a  great 


M  THE   BOOK  OV  ZECHABIAH.  [<».  n.  1— IS. 

way  off,  his  father  eaw  Mm,"  etc.  S.  The  oppotition  of  the  Almighty  to  their  enemiei. 
"  For,  behold,  I  will  shake  mine  hand  upon  them."  This  can  be  the  language  of  do 
other  than  Jehovah,  and  yet  is  the  language  of  one  who  speaks  of  "Jehovah"  as 
having  "  sent  him."  There  does  not  appear  to  be  any  reasonable  explanation  cf  this 
but  our  considering  the  speaker  as  the  Divine  Angel  of  the  covenant.  This  is  a 
strong  reason  why  they  should  "  return  "  They  need  not  be  afraid,  therefore,  of  their 
enemies.  God  is  against  them.  Is  not  this  a  good  reason  why  sinners  should  return 
to  him  ?  They  need  not  dread  their  enemies,  whether  they  be  men  or  devils.  God 
says,  "  I  will  shake  mine  hand  upon  them." 

CoKOLUsioN.  Why  should  sinners  be  so  reluctant  to  return  to.God  ?  What  made 
the  Jews  so  reluctant  "  to  flee  from  the  north" — to  break  away  from  Babylon  and  return 
to  their  own  land  ?  Was  it  indolence  f  Did  they  so  love  ease  as  to  dread  exertion  ? 
Was  it  love  of  the  world  f  Had  they  established  prosperous  businesses,  and  amassed 
such  property  as  to  tie  them  to  the  spot  ?  Was  it  old  aesoeiation  1  Had  they  formed 
acquaintances  in  which  they  were  interested,  associates  whose  services  promoted  their 
private  advantage,  and  whose  fellowship  yielded  pleasure  to  their  social  natures? 
Perhaps  each  of  these  acted — indolence,  love  of  the  world,  old  associations.  And  do  not 
all  these  act  now  to  prevent  sinners  from  coming  out  of  moral  Babylon  (see  Bev.  xviii. 
4)?— D.  T. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — The  Joy  of  the  millennial  Chwrch.  "  Sing  and  rejoice,  0  daughter  of 
Zion :  for,  Id,  I  come,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,  saith  the  Lord,"  etc.  '•  The 
daughter  Zion,  or  the  Church  of  the  Lord,  delivered  out  of  Babylon,  is  to  rejoice 
with  joy,  because  her  glorification  is  commencing  now.  The  Lord  comes  to  her  in  his 
angel,  in  whom  is  his  Name  fExod.  xxiii.  21)  and  his  face  (Exod.  xxxiii.  14),  ijt.  the 
Angel  of  his  face  (Isa.  Ixiii.  9),  who  reveals  his  nature,  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  her. 
This  dwelling  of  Jehovah,  or  of  his  Angel,  in  the  midst  of  Zion,  is  essentially  different 
from'  the  dwelling  of  Jehovah  in  the  most  holy  place  of  his  temple.  It  commences  with 
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God  in  the  flesh,  and  is  completed  by  his  return  in  glory 
(John  i.  14;  Rev.  xxi.  3).  Then  will  many,  or  powerful  nations,  attach  themselves  to 
Jehovah,  and  become  his  people  (cf.  ch.  viii.  20,  21 ;  Isa.  xiv.  1).  This  kingdom  of 
God,  which  has  hitherto  been  restricted  to  Israel,  will  be  spread  out  and  glori&ed  by 
the  reception  of  the  heathen  nations  which  are  seeking  God  (Micah  iv.  .2).  The 
repetition  of  the  expression, '  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,'  merely  serves  as  a  stronger 
asseveration  of  this  brilliant  promise"  (Keil).  These  words  may  be  fairly  taken  to 
represent  the/oy  of  the  millennial  Church.  The  words,  as  we  have  seeD,  point  to  the 
bright  periods  when  Messiah's  kingdom  shall  so  extend  as  to  embrace  "  many  nations." 
Three  remarks  are  suggested  concerning  this  joy.  It  is  righteous,  reasonaMe,  and 
reverential. 

I.  It  is  eiqhteous.  It  is  not  only  divinely  authorized,  but  commanded.  "  Sing 
and  rejoice,  O  daughter  of  Zion."  Often  we  are  informed  by  religious  teachers  that 
joy  is  a  privilege,  but  seldom  told  that  joy  is  a  duty.  But  joy  is  in  truth  as  much  a 
duty  as  honesty;  for  he  who  has  commanded  us  not  to  steal  has  also  commanded  us 
to  "  rejoice  evermore."  It  is  as  truly  a  sin  against  Heaven  to  be  spiritually  gloomy  and 
sad  as  to  be  socially  false  and  dishonest.  "Sing  and  rejoice,  O  daughter  of  Zion." 
Similar  commands  are  found  elsewhere  on  the  pages  of  Holy  Writ.  "  Break  forth  into 
joy,  sing  together"  (Isa.  Hi.  9);  "Cry  out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Zion"  (Isa. 
xii.  6) ;  "  Rejoice  evermore  "  (1  Thess.  v.  16) ;  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  aln-sy  :  and  again 
I  say.  Rejoice  "  (Phil.  iv.  4).  God  in  nature  says  to  all,  "  Be  happy."  God  in  Christ 
says  to  all,  "  Be  happy."  "  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  yon,  that  your  joy  may  be 
full."  Gratitude  is  joy ;  and  ought  not  gratitude  to  fill  every  soul  ?  Admiration  is  joy ; 
and  ought  not  every  soul  to  be  filled  with  admiration  of  the  Divine  excellence?  Love 
is  joy ;  and  ought  we  not  to  love  all  creatures  with  the  love  of  benevolence,  and  the 
Creator  with  the  love  of  adoration  ? 

II.  It  is  beasonablb.  What  is  righteous  is  of  course  always  reasonable.  True 
morality  is  true  policy.  But  here  are  reasons  suggested  for  this  joy.  What  are  they? 
1.  The  presence  of  God.  "  Lo,  I  come_,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,  saith  the 
Lord."  The  highest  happiness  of  an  intelligent  creature  is  the  presence  of  the  object 
it  supremely  loves.     "  In  thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy."     To  be  with  God  is  to  be 


OH  m.  1 — ^10.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH. 


21 


with  the  Fountain  of  all  joy.  2.  The  increase  of  the  good.  "  Many  nations  Bhall  be 
joined  to  the  Lord  in  that  day."  There  is  a  bright  prospect  for  the  true  Church ; 
though  it  has  been  and  still  is  gtnall,  uainfluential,  and  despised,  it  is  destined  to  grow, 
extend  its  boundaries,  and  embrace  nations.  The  stone  shall  become  a  mountain  and 
fill  the  whole  earth.  Is  not  this  a  good  reason  for  joy — to  see  the  clouds  of  error  in 
the  human  sky  breaking,  dissolving,  vanishing,  and  the  Sun  of  truth  rising,  spreading, 
and  penetrating  the  whole  earth  with  its  life-(;iving  beams?  Is  not  this  a  sublime 
reason  for  life-giving  joy — "  Maoy  nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord,"  as  the  branches 
are  joined  to  the  roots  of  the  tree,  as  the  members  of  the  body  are  joined  to  the  head  ? 
3.  7'Ae  restoration  of  the  Jews.  "  And  the  Lord  shall  inherit  Judah  his  portion  in  the 
holy  land,  and  shall  choose  Jerusalem  again."  As  all  the  language  of  this  book  is 
higlily  figurative,  to  give  a  literal  meaning  to  this  expression  is  neither  necessary  nor 
just.  It  is  not  a  literal  but  a  spiritual  restoration  that  is  meant.  Paul's  words  are 
a  commentary  on  this  (Bom.  xi.  25 — 32),  "  For  I  would  not,  brethren,  that  ye  should 
be  ignorant  of  this  mystery,  lest  ye  should  be  wise  in  your  own  conceits;  that  blind- 
ness in  part  is  happened  to  Israel,  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be  come  in.  And 
80  all  Israel  shall  be  saved :  as  it  is  written.  There  shall  come  out  of  Zion  the  Deliverer, 
and  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob:  for  this  is  my  covenant  unto  them,  when 
I  shall  take  away  their  sins.  As  concerning  the  gospel,  they  are  enemies  for  your 
Bakes :  but  as  touching  the  election,  they  are  beloved  for  the  fathers'  sakes.  For  the 
gifts  and  calling  of  Gud  are  without  repentance.  For  as  ye  in  times  past  have  not 
believed  God,  yet  have  now  obtained  inercy  through  their  unbelief:  even  so  have  these 
also  now  not  believed,  that  through  your  mercy  they  also  may  obtain  mercy.  For 
God  hath  concluded  them  all  in  unhelief,  that  he  might  have  mercy  upon  all," 

III.  It  is  reverential.  "  Be  silent,  0  all  flesh,  before  the  Lord :  for  he  is  raised 
up  out  of  his  holy  habitation."  "The  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple:  let  all  the  earth 
keep  silence  before  him."  The  proloundest  emotions  of  the  soul  are  always  mute. 
Superticial  feelings  are  noisy  and  chattering.  The  shallow  stream  babbles  amongst 
the  hills.  The  deep  river  rolls  by  unheard.  There  are  emotions  of  a  pleasurable  kind, 
that  go  off  in  the  b6isterous  laugh,  or  the  jocund  song,  or  the  sentimental  hymn.  But 
deep  joy  is  silent  as  the  stars.  The  real  lover  of  art  baa  joy  in  gazing  at  a  magnificent 
piece  of  art,  but  his  joy  is  inarticulate.  The  real  lover  df  nature  has  deep  joy  in  surveying 
some  landscape  of  unparalleled  grandeur.  It  is  a  joy  that  cannot  go  out  in*  laughter, 
or  speech,  or  song ;  it  is  silent.  It  is  so  with  the  godly  soul.  In  the  presence  of  the 
supremely  beautiful  it  is  filled  with  a  joy  that  cannot  speak,  "  a  joy  unspeakable,  but 
full  of  glory." 

Conclusion.  Are  we  "joined  to  the  Lord,"  loyal  subjects  of  bis  great  spiritual 
empire  ?    K  so^  we  might  well  be  happy. — ^D.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  UI. 


Vers.  1—10.— §6.  The  fourth  tieion: 
Joshua  the  high  priest  hefore  the  angel. 

Ver.  1. — He  showed  me.  The  Septuagint 
and  Vulgate  give,  "  The  Lord  showed  me." 
Slime  suppose  that  it  was  the  interpreting 
angel  who  showed  this  vision  ;  but  liis  duty 
was  to  explain,  not  to  present,  the  visions. 
So  in  cb.  i.  20  it  is  the  Lord  who  shows  the 
"  four  craftsmen."  This  vision  is  closely 
connected  with  the  last.  In  that  it  was 
declared  that  the  Lord  would  again  dwell 
in  Jerusalem,  and  visit  his  people  with 
blessings.  But  to  fit  them  for  the  presence 
and  fiivour  of  Jehovah  they  must  be  pure. 
To  this  end  they  must  have  a  holy  priest- 


hood to  train  them  in  righteous  ways,  to 
oppose  the  attacks  of  the  adversary,  ami  to 
intercede  for  them  effectually.  The  removal 
of  tlieir  impurity  is  represented  in  the  fourth 
vision.  Joshua  the  high  priest  (see  note  on 
Hag.  i.  1).  The  name  is  written  Jrshua  in 
Ezra  ii.  2,  etc.  He  was  the  first  of  the  high 
priests  after  the  Captivity,  succeeding,  as  by 
hereditary  right,  his  father  Josedeeh,  who 
died  in  Babylon.  For  his  serfices  in  re 
storing  the  temple  he  is  praised  among 
great  men  in  Ecclus.  xlix.  12.  Standing 
before  the  angel  of  the  Lord.  Joshua  is 
the  representative  of  the  priesthood,  and 
through  that  also  of  the  wliole  people.  The 
angel  of  Jehovali  (see  notes  ou  eh.  i.  11,  13) 
is  the  representative  of  and  endowed  with 
attribu  tes  of  Jehovah,  the  Friend  and  Leader 


28 


THE  BOOK   OF   ZECHARIAJi. 


[oh.  in.  1 — 10. 


of  Israel.  The  phrase,  "standing  before," 
is  used  in  a  ministerial  sense,  as  of  a  servant 
rendering  service  to  a  superior  (Gen.  xli. 
46 ;  I  Kings  xii.  6,  8),  and  a  priest  or  Levite 
performing  bis  official  duties  (Dent.  x.  8; 
Ezek.  xliv,  15)  :  also,  in  a  judicial  sense,  of 
a  person  appearing  before  a  judge,  either 
as  plaintiff  (Numb,  xxvii.  2  ;  1  Kings  iii. 
16)  or  defendant  (Numb.  xxxv.  12).  Many 
commentators  find  in  this  scene  a  judicial 
process,  Josliua  appearing  before  the  angel 
as  before  his  judge ;  and  Ewald  supposes 
that  it  adumbrates  his  actual  accusation 
at  the  Persian  court.  The  mention  of  the 
adversary  at  the  right  hand  (Pa.  cix.  6)  is 
■upposed  to  confirm  this  interpretation.  But 
it  is  obvious  that  the  adversary  might  stand 
at  the  right  hand,  not  as  a  formal  accuser 
in  a  trial,  but  in  order  to  resist  and  hinder 
Joshua's  proceedings;  the  angel,  too,  is  not 
represented  as  sitting  on  a  throne  of  judg- 
ment, but  standing  by  (ver.  5),  and  there 
is  no  further  intimation  of  any  judicial 
process  in  the  vision.  It  is  therefore  best 
to  conceive  that  Joshua  is  interceding  for 
the  people  in  his  official  capacity  in  the 
presence  of  the  representative  of  Jehovah. 
The  loralify  is  not  specified;  it  may  have 
been  before  the  altar,  which,  we  know,  was 
built  and  useil  at  this  time.  The  special 
mention  of  his  garments  implies  that  he  was 
engaged  in  offieial  duties  in  a  consecrated 
spot ;  but  the  place  is  immaterial.  Satan  ; 
the  aidversary.  or  accuser.  The  personality  of 
Satan  is  here  plainly  recognized,  as  in  Job 
i.  6,  etc. ;  ji.  1,  etc.,  rendered  by  the  LXX. 
in  all  these  places,  i  Sta$oKos(aee  Appendix 
B,  in  Archdeacon  Perowne's  '  Commentary 
on  Zuchariah').  At  Ms  (Joshua's)  right 
hand.  Not  as  a  judicial  accuser,  but  as  an 
enemy  to  resist  his  efforts  for  the  good  of  the 
people,  and  to  thwart  his  interests  with  the 
angel  of  the  Lord.  To  resist  him;  to  act 
the  advenary  to  him.  The  verb  is  cognate 
to  tlie  noun  above.  From  what  follows  we 
mast  suppose  that  Satan  objects  against 
Joshua  buth  his  own  personal  sin  and  the 
transgressions  of  the  people  whose  burden 
he  bore  (comp.  ver.  9,  where  his  sin  is 
called  "the  iniquity  of  the  land,"  which 
would  include  the  guilt  which  had  led  to 
the  Captivity,  their  dilatorinees  in  building 
the  temple,  and  all  their  backslidiugs  since 
the  return). 

Ver.  2. — The  Lord  said.  The  Angel  of 
Jehovah  speaks.  The  appellations  are  often 
here  useil  interchangeably.  The  Lord  rebuke 
thee.  The  Lord's  rebuke  falls  with  effect 
where  it  is  direcled ;  it  paralyzes  the  hostile 
power  (comp.  Ps.ovi.  9;  Nah.  i.  4).  Satan's 
accusation  may  have  been  well  founded,  but 
it  sprang  from  malice,  and  was  directed 
»gain8t  the  people  wh(im  God  was  receiving 
into  favnor.  and  therefore  it  was  rejected 


and  Tendered  innocnons.  Some  commen- 
tators have  supposed  that  St.  Jnde  is  allud- 
ing to  this  passage  when  (ver.  9)  he  quotei 
the  words  of  Michael  contending  about  the 
body  of  Moses,  "The  Lord  rebuke  thee;" 
bat  it  is  more  probable  that  Jude  is  refer- 
ring to  some  rabbinical  tradition,  or  to  the 
apocryphal  'Assumption  of  Muses'  (see 
the  matter  examined  in  Dissertation  I.  of 
Dr.  Gloag'a  'Introduction  to  the  Catholio 
Epistles ').  That  hath  chosen  Jerusalem 
(ch.  i.  17 ;  ii.  12).  God's  election  of  Israel 
and  renewed  acceptance  of  her  is  the  reason 
why  Satan's  accusation  is  rejected  (Deut. 
vii.  7,  8).  She  is  not  to  be  abandoned  to 
the  consequences  of  her  sins,  nor  were  God's 
gracious  purposes  towards  her  to  be  frus- 
trated. "  God  hath  not  cast  away  his 
people,  which  he  foieknew ; "  and,  "  Who 
shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's 
elect?"  (Eom.  viii  33;  xi.  2,  29).  This. 
This  man,  Joshua,  saved  from  his  father's 
and  grandfather's  fate  (see  on  Hag.  i.  1),  a 
type  or  the  deliverance  of  Israel.  A  brand 
plucked  cat  of  the  fire.  Israel  had  been 
already  punished  by  defeat,  captivity,  dis- 
tress, and  misery.  From  these  evils,  "which 
had  almost  destroyed  her,  she  had  been 
delivered;  and  the  deliverance  would  be 
completed;  she  should  not  be  cast  again 
into  the  fire  (see  Amos  iv.  11,  and  note 
there).  The  expression  is  proverbial  (comp. 
1  Cor.  iii.  15 ;  Jude  23). 

Ver.  3.— Clothed  with  filthy  garments. 
The  soiled,  or  dark  mourning  garments 
represent  not  so  much  the  low  estate  to 
which  the  Aaronic  priesthood  had  been 
reduced,  as  the  defilements  of  sin  with 
which  Joshua  was  encompassed,  especially, 
p>.'rhap9,  his  error  in  allowing  his  descend- 
ants to  intermarry  with  heathens  (Ezra 
X.  18).  But  the  sin  was  not  only  personal; 
he  appeared  laden  with  the  guilt  of  the 
priesthood  and  his  people.  He  is  a  type  of 
Christ  in  this.  Christ,  indeed,  was  without 
sin ;  yet  he  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body 
on  the  tree,  and  was  made  sin  lor  us 
(Eom.  viii.  3;  2  Cor.  v.  21).  Some  consider 
that  the  soiled  garments  denote  the  mean 
address  in  which  an  accused  person  appeared 
in  court.  But  this  is  to  import  a  Eomau 
custom  (comp.  Livy,  ii.  54;  vi  20)  into 
Hebrew  practice.  Others  deem  it  incon- 
gruous to  make  a  high  priest  violate  the 
decency  of  his  office  by  officiating  in  unch  an 
apparel.  But  the  violation  of  propriety 
was  a  rcqnirement  of  the  vision,  that  thus 
the  defilement  of  sin  might  be  symbolical. 
He  stood  before  the  angel.  To  ask  his  aid 
and  protection  (ver.  4). 

Ver.  4.— He  answered.  The  Angel  of 
Jehovah  answered  the  mute  petition  of 
Josbun.  Those  that  stood  before  him.  The 
attendant  angels,  who  waited  on  the  Angel 


CH.  III.  1—10.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH. 


29 


of  Jehovah  to  do  his  pleasure  (see  note  on 
vei,  1).  Take  away  the  filthy  garments. 
This  symbolized  remission  of  sius  and  re- 
Btcjratiou  to  favour,  as  the  following  words 
explain.  I  will  clothe  thee  with  change  of 
raiment ;  Revised  Version,  with  rich  apparel. 
The  word  machalatmth  occurs  also  in  Isa. 
iii.  22,  and  may  mean  either  "change  of 
raiment,"  or  "costly  raiment;"  or  the 
meanings  may  be  combined  in  the  sense  of 
"  lestal  robes,"  only  worn  on  great  occasions 
and  changed  after  the  occasion.  They  are 
used  here  as  symbols  of  rigljteousness  and 
glory.  Not  only  is  the  sin  paidoned,  but 
the  wearer  is  restored  to  the  full  glory  of 
his  state.  The  LXX.  makes  the  words  to 
be  addressed  to  tlie  attendants,  "  Clothe  ye 
him  in  a  robe  flowing  to  the  feet "  (ttoS^ptj, 
the  word  used  for  Aaron's  priestly  garment, 
Exod.  xxviii.  4 ;  Ecclus.  xlv.  8). 

Ver.  5. — I  said.  If  this  is  tlie  true  read- 
ing (which  Bwald  doubts),  v\e  must  consider 
that  the  prophet,  excited  by  what  has  passed, 
cannot  stand  by  as  a  mere  spectator,  but 
feels  constrained  to  take  part  in  the  scene, 
and  to  request  that  the  change  of  garments 
may  be  completed  by  the  addition  of  tlie 
fair  liead-drcBS.  The  LXX.  omits  the  word, 
continuing  the  address  to  the  attendant. 
The  Vulgate  has,  et  dixit.  So  the  Syriao 
and  the  Targum  and  some  few  manuscripts 
But  the  received  reading  is  confirmed,  as 
Dr.  Alexander  points  out,  by  the  change  in 
the  mood  of  the  following  verb  from  the 
imperative  to  the  optative,  "  let  them  put," 
"  would  that  they  put."  There  is  nothing 
incongruous  in  the  prophet  thus  intervening 
in  his  own  person.  Thus  Isaiah,  in  the 
midst  of  a  solemn  vision,  gives  veut  to  his 
feelings  (Isa.  vi.  5),  and  St.  John  in  the 
Apocalypse  often  mingles  his  own  senti- 
ments and  actions  with  what  he  beheld 
(comp.  Eev.  v.  4;  x.  9;  xi.  1).  Mitre 
(<»an«pA);  Septuagint,  xi'Sapii' :  so  the  Vul- 
gate, cidurim.  This  is  not  the  same  word 
as  that  used  in  Exod.  Xiviii.  4,  etc.  (which 
is  miisnepheth),  for  the  official  head-dress 
of  Aaron,  though  it  is  probably  a  synonym 
for  it ;  and  the  prophet'^  wish  is  to  see  Joshua 
not  only  reinstated  in  his  ofSce  and  dignity, 
but  found  h(jly  also.  For  the  fair  linen 
mitre,  or  tiara,  was  that  which  bore  upon 
its  front  the  golden  plate  insoj  ibed,  "  Holi- 
ness unto  the  Lord"  (lixod.  xxviii.  36—38), 
and  therefore  showed  that  he  was  qualified 
to  intercede  lor  the  people.  Stood  by.  The 
Angel  of  Jehovah  continued  standing  in 
his  place,  contemplating,  sanctioning,  and 
directing  what  was  being  done. 

Ver.  6. — Protested.  Solemnly  and  earnestly 
adinoninhed,  adjured.  Atefiapri  paro  (Septua- 
gint);  Gen.  xliii.  3;  2  Kings  xvii.  13.  The 
Angel  sets  before  Joshua  his  duties,  and 
urges  him  to  keep  in  the  right  way,  promis- 


ing to  him  and  to  the  nation  blessing  and 
honour,  and  proceeding  to  prophesy  of  a 
great  future. 

Ver.  7. — Walk  in  my  ways.  God's  ways 
are  his  commandments,  as  the  next  words 
explain  (comp.  1  Kings  iii.  14).  Keep  my 
charge.  The  Vulgate  retains  the  Hebraism, 
Custodiam  ineam  cuftodieria  (comp.  Gen. 
xxvi.  5 ;  Mai.  iii.  14).  The  charge  means 
the  laws  and  ordinances  of  the  Mosaic 
institution.  Then.  The  apodosis  rightly 
begins  here,  though  Kimchi  and  others  make 
it  commence  at  "  I  will  give  thee,"  taking 
the  following  two  clauses  as  denoting  parts 
of  his  duties,  the  observance  of  which  con- 
ditioned his  acceptance.  Thou  shalt  also 
judge  my  house.  The  mention  of  "my 
courts"  in  the  following  clause  requires 
that  "house"  here  should  mean,  not  people 
or  family,  but,  in  a  more  restricted  sense, 
the  temple,  looked  upon  as  the  spiritual 
centre  of  the  nation.  If  the  high  priest 
kept  the  ordinances  and  commandments,  he 
should  rule  and  order  Divine  worshjp,  and 
"judge,"  i.e.  govern,  the  ministers  of  the 
sanctuary.  Keep  my  courcs.  He  was  to 
preserve  the  temple,  and  that  which  the 
temple  represented,  from  all  idolatry  and 
ungodlini  ss.  This  duty,  as  Hengstenberg 
observes,  is  introduced  iis  a  reward,  because 
it  was  an  houonr  and  a  privilege  to  be 
entrusted  with  such  an  ofiice,  and  the 
greatest  favour  which  Q"d  could  confer 
upon  man.  Places  to  walk.  The  LXX. 
takes  the  word  as  a  participle,  translating, 
dvaaTpefpo/xei/ovs^  "  persons  walking  ; "  so 
the  Syriao ;  Vulgate,  ambulantes.  This  is 
explained  to  mean  that  God  will  give  him, 
out  of  the  band  of  angels  (ver.  4),  some  to 
accompany  and  aid  him  in  his  ministrations. 
But  the  word  is  best  taken  as  a  nouu 
meaning  "  s\  alks,"  "  goings."  The  Revised 
Version  gives,  "a  place  of  access"  in  the 
text,  restoring  the  Authorized  Version  in 
the  margin ;  but  there  seems  to  be  no  good 
reason  for  the  Revised  rendering.  The 
translation,"  goings,"  "  walks,"  gives  mu'h 
the  same  signification,  and  is  consonant  n  ith 
the  use  of  the  word  elsewheie  (comp.  Neh. 
ii.  6  ;  Ezek.  xlii.  4 ;  Jonah  iii.  3,  4).  It 
means  that  Joshua  should  have  free  access 
to  God.  The  gloss  of  the  Targum,  that  it 
is  here  intimated  that  the  high  priest  should 
be  admitted  to  the  company  of  the  angels 
after  the  resurrection,  is  unsuitable,  as  the 
other  parts  ot  the  promise  have  respect  to 
this  present  world.  Among  these  that  stand 
by;  i.e.  among  the  attendant  angels  wh« 
wait  upon  God  to  do  his  will, and  a  company 
of  whom  were  gathered  round  the  Angel  of 
Jehovah  in  the  vision  (see  ver.  4).  It  is 
natural  piety  to  believe  that  the  hosts  of 
heaven  join  in  the  worship  of  the  Church 
on  earth,  and  assist  godly  ministers  with 


30 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHAEIAH. 


[oh.  m.  1 — 1ft 


their  pregenoe  and  fellowship.  Here  is 
adumbrated  that  access  to  God  which  the 
Cliristian  enjoys  in  Christ  (John  xiv.  6; 
Eph.  ii.  18).  This  is  more  fully  revealed 
in  the  next  verse. 

Ver.  8. — Hear  now;  tuoue  S^  (Septuagint). 
Joshua  is  called  upon  to  give  all  his  atten- 
tion to  the  important  announcement  that 
follows,  which  promises  a  very  great  boon 
in  the  future.  Thy  fellows  that  sit  before 
thee.  His  fellow-priests,  who  took  their 
orders  from  him  and  sat  with  him  in  council 
(comp.  2  Kings  iv.  3S ;  Ezek.  viii.  1,  etc.). 
These  priests  were  not  seen  in  the  vision. 
Keil  considers  that  the  address,  to  which 
Joshua's  attention  is  called,  begins  at 
"  Thou  and  thy  fellows."  Tor  (or,  yea)  they 
are  men  wondered  at;  Septuagint,  SkSti- 
&vSpfs  TepoToir/cciiroi  ela{,  "  men  observers  of 
wonders;"  Vulgate,  Quia  viri  portendentes 
«ttni(seelsa.  viii.  18).  The  phrase  would  be 
better  rendered,  "men  of  portent,  sign,  or 
type."  Revised  Version  gives,  "  men  which 
are  a  sign,"  i.e.  who  foreshadow  some  future 
events,  whose  persons,  office,  iluties,  typify 
and  look  forward  to  good  things  to  come. 
I  will  bring  forth  my  Servant  the  BKANCH. 
This  is  wljy  they  are  called  typical  men, 
because  God  is  making  the  antitype  to 
appear.  The  word  rendered  "  branch " 
(tsemach)  is  translated  by  the  Septuagint 
&vaTo\iiv,  which  is  used  in  the  sense  of 
"  shoot "  as  well  as  "  sunrise  "  (see  Jer. 
xxiii.  5 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  7 ;  xvii.  10),  and  by  the 
Vulgate,  orientem.  So  the  Syriae  and 
Arabic  (comp.  Luke  i.  78).  Most  inter- 
preters rightly  see  here  a  reference  to  the 
Messiah.  Some  few  have  fancied  that 
Zerubbabel  and  Keheniiah  are  meant ;  but 
the  appellation,  "  my  Servant  Brunch,"  has 
already  been  applied  in  prophetical  Innguage 
to  Messiah,  and  cannot  be  distorted  to  any 
Inferior  subject,  such  as  a  mere  civil  ruler. 
Messiah  is  often  called  the  Lord's  "Servant," 
e.g,  Isa.  xlii.  1 ;  xliii.  10 ;  lii.  13,  etc.  And 
the  terms, "  Branch,"  or  "  Eod,"  or  "  Shoot," 
referring  to  Messiah,  are  found  in  Isa.  iv.  2; 
xi.  1;  Jer.  xxiii.  5;  xxxi  i.  15.  From  the 
depressed  house  of  David  a  scion  should 
spring,  in  whom  all  that  was  prophesied 
concerning  the  priesthood  and  kingdom  of 
Israel  should  find  its  accomplishment. 

Ver.  9. — For  behold.  This  gives  the 
reason  why  the  "  Branch  "  is  brought  forth  ; 
the  Church  is  to  be  flrruly  est.iblished  and 
all  iniquity  to  be  abolished.  The  stone  that 
I  have  laid  (tef)  before  Joshua.  In  the 
vision  a  stone  is  seen  lying  at  the  feet  of 
Joshua,  either  the  foundation-stone  of  tho 
temple,  say  the  commentators,  or  the  corner- 
stoae,  or  the  coping;  or,  as  the  Talmud 
testifies,  a  stone  that  rose  some  three  fluners' 
measure  above  the  ground,  and  upon  which 
tl  e  high  priest  nsed  to  set  the  censer  of 


incense.  But  it  was  more  probably  none 
of  tiiese,  but  some  longh,  unhewdd  block, 
not  yet  polished  or  fitted  into  its  place. 
What  does  it  represent?  Many  critics  ot 
note  answer  at  once,  the  Messiah.  He  who 
was  above  called  "  Branch  "  is  now  called 
the  "Stone."  And  certainly  this  term  in 
applied  unto  him  in  prophetical  language, 
as  in  Isa.  xxviii.  16;  Ps.  cxviii.  22;  and 
references  are  made  to  the  appellation  is 
the  New  Testament  as  to  a  well-known 
title,  e.g.  Matt.  xxi.  42 ;  Eph.  ii.  20.  But 
there  are  objections  to  taking  this  as  the 
primary  sense.  As  Knabenbauer  points  out, 
it  is  no't  likely  that  in  one  verse  the  Lord's 
Servant  Branch  is  said  to  be  destined  to  be 
brought  forth,  and  in  the  next  the  same  is 
called  the  stone  which  is  set  before  Joshua 
and  has  to  be  graven  by  a  hand  Divine. 
Besides,  if  both  terms  mean  Messiah,  we 
have  the  very  lame  conclusion :  I  will  bring 
Messiah  because  I  have  already  placed  him 
before  Joshua.  The  stone,  too,  is  represented 
as  somewhat  under  the  management  of 
Joshua,  and  needing  graving  and  polishing, 
neither  of  which  facts  apply  to  the  Messiah. 
Putting  out  of  sight  other  interpretations 
which  are  all  more  or  less  inadmissible,  we 
shall  be  safest  in  considering  the  stone  to 
represent  the  theocracy,  the  spiritual  king- 
dom of  Israel,  now  indeed  lying  imperfect 
and  unpolished  before  Joshua,  but  ordained 
to  become  beautiful  and  extensive  and 
admirable.  So  Daniel  (ii.  35,  45)  speaks  of 
the  stone  cut  out  of  the  mountains  without 
hands,  which£lled  the  whole  earth,  a  figure 
of  the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God^  small 
in  its  beginning,  but  in  the  end  establishing 
its  rule  over  the  world.  Upon  one  stone; 
LXX.,  ^irl  rhv  \tBoi>  riv  Efa,  "upon  the 
one  stone."  The  stone  is  termed  "one" 
in  contrast  with  the  number  seven  that 
follows.  Shall  be  (are)  seven  eyes.  Upon 
this  stone  the  eyes  of  God  are  directed  in 
watchful  care  ("comp.  oh.  iv.  10;  and  for 
the  phrase,  see  1  Kings  viii.  29 ;  Fs.  xxxiii. 
18;  xxxiv.  15;  Jer.  xxxix.  12).  "Seven" 
is  the  number  of  perfection,  and  may 
denote  here  the  infinite  care  which  God 
takes  of  his  Church,  even  as  St.  John 
in  the  Revelation  (i.  4;  v.  6)  beheld  the 
Lamb  "having  seven  eyes,  which  are  the 
seven  Spirits  of  God  sent  forth  into  all 
the  earth."  The  expres.^ion  is  metaphorical, 
and  we  are  not  to  suppose,  with  Ewald,  that 
the  eyes  were  graven  on  the  stone,  or  that 
Ze.hariah  derived  his  notion  from  the  tenets 
of  Zoroaster  or  the  degrees  of  rank  in  the 
Persian  court.  There  may  be  an  allusion 
to  the  seven  gifts  of  the  Spirit  with  which 
Messiah  is  anointed  (Isa.  xi.  2),  and  which 
animate  and  strengthen  his  body,  the 
Church.  I  will  engrave  the  graving  thereof. 
As  God  engraved  the  tables  of  the  Law(Exo<L 


OH.  III.  1 — 10.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


81 


xxxii.  16).  I  will  out  and  puIiBhthia  rongh 
Btone  to  fit  it  for  its  place  in  the  temple. 
The  verb  is  used  of  the  bold  engraving  and 
ornamentation  of  utone-work,  the  finishing 
whioli  it  undergoes  to  perfect  its  prepara- 
tion (camp.  1  Kings  vli.  86 ;  2  Chron.  ii.  7 ; 
iii.  7).  Those  who  regard  the  stone  as 
typifying  the  Messiah,  see  in  this  clause 
an  intimation  of  tlie  Passion  of  Christ,  who 
"was  wounded  for  our  transgressions."  The 
LXX.  hiis,  "  I  dig  a  trench,"  which  Jerome 
explaius  of  the  wounds  of  Christ  on  the 
cross.  I  will  remove  the  iniquity  of  that 
land.  The  shaping  of  the  stone  involves 
the  bestowal  of  purity  and  holiness.  God 
will  pardon  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  of 
iBrael,  and  make  them  a  holy  nation  (Jer. 
zzxiii.  7,  8).  But  the  promise  stretches  far 
beyoud  the  limits  primarily  assigned  to  it. 
In  one  day.  The  day  when  Christ  died  for 
the  sins  of  men.  There  is  an  allusion  to 
the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  when  the  high 
priest  went  once  a  year  into  the  holy  of 
holies  with  the  blood  of  sacrifice.  This, 
however,  was  an  imperfect  reconciliation, 
and  had  to  be  repeateil  annually.  "But 
Christ  being  come  an  High  Priest  of  the  good 
things  to  oome  .  .  .  through  his  own  blood 


entered  in  once  for  all  (ifpdwaO  into  the 
holy  place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemp- 
tion. ,  .  .  Now  once  at  the  end  of  the  ages 
hath  he  been  manifested  to  put  away  sin  liy 
the  sacrifice  of  himself"  (Heb.  ix.  11—26; 
comp.  Heb.  vii.  27 ;  x.  10). 

Ver.  10. — Shall  ye  eall  every  man  his 
neighbonr,  etc.  In  this  cleansed  and  puri- 
fied kingdom  shall  be  found  peace,  happi- 
ness, and  plenty,  recalling  the  prosperous 
days  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  iv.  25).  (For  » 
similar  picture  of  prosperity,  see  Micah  iv. 
4,  and  note  there.)  This  is  fulfilled  in  Christ, 
who  says  to  his  true  disciples,  "Peace  I 
leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  giva  unto  you  " 
(John  xiv.  27;.  Dr.  "Wright  notes,  "  Wo 
are  told  in  the  Talmud  ('  Yoma,'  vii.  4)  that 
when,  on  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  tlie 
high  priest  liad  performed  the  various  duties 
of  that  solemn  day,  he  was  escorted  home 
in  a  festive  manner,  and  was  accustomed  to 
give  a  festal  entertainment  to  his  friends. 
The  maidens  and  youths  of  the  people  went 
forth  to  their  gardens  and  vineyards  with 
songs  and  dances;  social  cntertainmenta 
took  place  on  all  sides,  and  universal  glad- 
ness closed  the  festival  of  that  solemn  day." 


HOMILETICS. 

Ters.  1 — 6. — The  priesthood  restored.  "  And  he  showed  me  Joshua  the  high  priest," 
etc.  Here  begins  a  new  vision,  which,  like  that  described  in  ch.  ii.  1 — 4,  takes  us  back 
to  the  date  of  utterance.  In  that  we  saw  the  restoration  of  the  ancient  city  Jerusalem. 
In  this  we  seem  shown  the  restoration  of  the  ancient  Levitical  priesthood.  For  seventy 
years  the  functions  of  that  priesthood  appear  to  have  been  in  abeyance.  Nowhere  in 
Daniel  and  Ezekiel  do  we  read  of  sacrifices  being  offered  by  the  children  of  the  Captivity. 
It  was  desirable,  therefore — possibly  necessary — to  have  those  functions  restored  (com- 
pare, perhaps,  the  restoration  of  Peter's  apostle'ship  in  John  xxi.  15 — 17).  Umlerstood 
as  describing  a  kind  of  heavenly  council  called  for  this  purpose,  the  present  vision  sets 
before  us  (1)  the  offender ;  (2)  the  adversary ;  (3)  the  Advocate ;  and  (4)  the  decision. 

I.  The  offender;  viz.  Joshua  the  sou  of  Josedeoh,  the  lineally  descended  high 
priest  of  that  day  (1  Chron.  vi.  3 — 15 ;  Ezra  iii.  2),  and,  therefore,  the  proper  and 
natural  representative  of  the  priesthood  which  had  lapsed.  As  such  we  see  him  here: 
1.  Appearing  in  guilt.  This  shown,  of  course,  by  the  "  filthy  garments  "  (Isa.  Ixiv. 
6)  in  which  he  is  clothed,  and  by  which  may  be  understood  more  especially  those  sins 
of  himself  and  of  his  predecessors  and  people  by  which,  in  a  measure  and  for  a  season, 
the  former  priesthood  had  been  forfeited.  2.  Qoming  up  to  he  judged.  This  shown 
by  his  "  standing  "  (as  noticed  both  in  vers.  1  and  3 ;  comp.  Acts  xxv.  10 ;  Bom.  xiv. 
10)  before  the  Angel- Jehovah,  his  proper  Judge  (comp.  John  v.  22 ;  Rom.  xiv.  10). 
Such,  be  it  remembered,  in  each  respect,  if  without  a  Saviour,  is  the  condition  of  us  all. 

II.  The  advbbsabt.  As  his  name  (margin  of  ver.  2),  so  his  work  in  this  place 
(comp.  Job  i.  9 — 11 ;  ii.  4,  5 ;  Bev.  xii.  10).  This  a  great  aggravation  of  the  evil  of 
Joshua's  case.  It  is  one  thing  to  be  guilty  and  deserving  of  punishment.  It  is  another, 
and  »ven  worse,  to  have  a  powerful  and  malignant  adversary  claiming,  as  it  were,  the 
actual  infliction  of  that  punishment  upon  us.  Sin  itself  cries  out  for  justice  against 
the  offender  (Gen.  iv.  10 ;  Heb.  xii.  24).  The  adversary  cries  out  against  the  tnjustice 
of  allowing  him  to  be  spared  (2  Sam.  xix.  21). 

III.  Thb  Advocate;  viz.  the  Judge — t.e.  Jehovah  himself  (see  beginning  of  ver.  2). 
This  greatly  to  be  admired  (comp.  Ps.  xxxii.  7, "  Thou  art  my  Hiding-place  ;"  also  Pa. 
cxix.  114).     Kote,  also,  tha  two  cogent  pleas  which  this  great  Advocate  (1  John  iL  1} 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [ch.  ni.  1— IQ 


urges.  These  are :  1.  The  settled  purpose  of  God  in  this  matter.  God  had  long  ago 
"  chosen  Jerusalem."  He  must  not  now  be  asked  to  reject  it.  2.  The  past  action  of 
God  in  this  matter.  Having  already  so  far  beguQ  to  deliver  as  to  "  pluck  this  brand 
from  the  burning,"  it  would  be  inconsistent  of  him  now  to  go  back  (comp.  1  Sam.  iii. 
12 ;  also  the  great  maxim  of  Bom.  xL  29).  Even  to  ask  anything  opposed  to  that  is 
to  incur  the  "  rebuke"  of  Jehovah. 

IV.  The  decision.  It  is  very  complete.  It  embraces,  as  we  should  describe  it  in 
New  Testament  language :  1.  The  " jmtification  "  of  Joshua,  or  the  acceptance  of  his 
person.  This  signified,  as  we  are  expressly  told  here,  by  the  change  of  his  raiment 
(see  also  Isa.  Ixi.  10;  Luke  xv.  22;  Eev.  xix.  8).  2.  The  "  sanctification"  of  Joshua, 
or  the  acceptance  of  his  ministrations.  This  represented  by  that "  fair  mitre,"  which — 
either  at  the  request  of  the  prophet,  or,  as  some  take  it,  of  the  great  Angel  himself, 
who,  in  any  case,  is  descrihed  as  "  standing  by  "  and  assenting — was  next  placed  on 
Joshua's  head ;  and  in  which  mitre  also  (though  the  word  is  different)  there  seems 
(see  Pusey,  in  loc.)  a  reference  to  that  "beauty  of  holiness"  described  in  Exod.  xxviii. 
36 — 38.  So  completely  now  was  that  fulfilled  of  which  we  read  in  Ezek.  xx.  41,  and 
which  was  afterwards  described  in  Mai.  iii.  4. 

Two  very  remarkable  omissions  may  be  noted,  to  conclude.  These  illustrate:  1.  The 
wonder/ul  freeness  of  God's  mercy.  We  find  nothing  whatever  offered  to  God  by 
Joshua  and  Israel  towards  recovering  these  lapsed  privileges.  Nothing  whatever,  also, 
is  demanded  of  them  as  a  necessary  condition  thereto.  The  whole  thing  is  spoken  of 
as  a  matter  of  grace  or  favour  from  beginning  to  end.  2.  The  wonderful  fulness  of 
God's  mercy.  No  mention  is  made,  in  the  account  of  this  great  transaction,  ot  the 
precise  nature  of  the  accusations  and  charges  brought  by  the  adversary  against  Joshua. 
Whatever  they  are,  they  are  treated  as  done  with ;  and  done  with  altogether.  Their 
very  memory,  as  it  were,  is  to  perish.  So,  "  I  will  not  remember  their  sins,"  in  Isa. 
xliii.  25  (see  Jer.  xxxi.  34 ;  also,  in  a  somewhat  different  connection,  Ezek.  xviii.  22 ; 
xxxiii.  16).  "  To  err  is  human ;  to  forgive.  Divine."  Especially  so  to  forgive  in  this 
manner  (compare,  "Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee?"  in  Micah  viir  18 — 20). 

Vers.  6 — 10. — Hie  priesthood  eclipsed.  "  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  protested  unto 
Joshua,"  etc.  The  ancient  Jewish  priesthood,  as  we  saw  in  our  last,  being  fully  restored, 
what  was  to  become  of  it  in  process  of  time?  The  answer  to  this  was  partly  condi- 
tional, partly  not  so.  If  faithfully  discharged  by  Joshua  and  his  fellows  and  successors, 
that  priesthood  would  be  for  many  generations  a  thing  of  honour  and  blessing.  In 
any  case,  it  would  ultimately  be  altogether  eclipsed  by  another  priesthood  of  a  far  more 
glorious  kind.  Such  seems  to  be  the  full  purport  of  the  rest  of  this  chapter.  We  may 
consider  the  conditional  promise  in  the  first  place,  and  the  unconditionai  in  the  second. 

I.  The  conditional  promise.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  Under  this  head  we  may  notice: 
1.  The  marlced  solemnity  of  its  manner.  By  whom  made?  The  Angel-Jehovah.  In 
what  attitude  ?  That  of  standing,  as  most  impressive  (see  Pusey,  in  loc").  With  what 
language  ?  That  of  protestation,  and  protestation  in  God's  name.  2.  Its  twofold  con- 
dition. Being,  on  the  one  hand,  apparently  personal — "  walking  in  God's  ways,"  and, 
on  the  other,  apparently  ministerial — keeping  God's  "charge"  or  ordinances  (compare 
"Take  heed  to  thyself,  and  to  the  doctrine,"  of  1  Tim.  iv.  16;  also  Acts  xx.  28). 
3.  Its  threefold  blessing.  The  preceding  conditions  being  observed,  Joshua  and  those 
after  him,  representing  the  restored  priesthood,  should  have  the  honour  and  privilege 
(1)  of  administering  justice,  and  so  being  a  blessing  to  God's  people  or  "house"  (com- 
pare the  semi-civil  position  occupied  afterwards  by  Ezra  the  priest,  Ezra  viii.  11,  etc., 
specially  vers.  25,  26;  also  x.  4;  also,  in  New  Testament,  by  Caiaphaa  and  others,  and, 
in  the  history  of  Josephus,  by  Jaddua  and  others) ;  (2)  of  taking  charge  of  God's 
courts,  and  leading  his  worship  and  service — a  blessing  this,  indeed,  as  shown  by  such 
passages  as  1  Sam.  ii.  28;  Ps.  cxxxiv. ;  also  Ixxxiv.  10  and  xxvii.  4;  and,  (3)a3  we 
understand  it,  of  taking  rank,  after  death,  even  with  those  holy  angels  who  were  then 
in  attendance,  and  whose  appointed  place  of  honour  and  dignity  was  close  to  God's 
throne  (see  ch.  iv.  14;  vi.  5;  Luke  i.  19;  Matt,  xviii.  10). 

H.  The  unconditional  promise.  However  things  might  turn  out  with  thia 
Joshua  (or  Jesus)  and  his  successors  ri'g  irding  this  restored  Levitical  priesthood,  they 
were  but  "  men  of  marvelloug  signs  "  (so  Fusey  and  others).     In  other  words,  they 


iB.  ni.l— 10.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHAEIAH.  38 

were  but  types  and  figures  of  a  far  greater  and  holier  "  Jesus" — a  Priest  who  was  some 
day  to  he  "brought  forth."  This  Piiest,  while  like  these  in  some  respects,  was  to 
differ  from  them  in  many  others.  For  example,  besides  being  a  Priest  who  was  to  be 
"  brought  forth  "  and  to  supersede  these,  he  was  also  to  be :  1.  From  a  wholly  different 
line ;  viz.  that  of  "  David;"  and  Judah  (see  Heb.  vii.  13,  14).  2.  In  a  very  different 
position.  Not  merely  a  Judge  (see  supra)  as  well  as  Priest,  under  Persian  or  other 
chief  rulers,  but  a  King  (compare  what  is  said  of  the  "  Branch  "  in  Jer.  xxiii.  6 ;  also 
ch.  vi.  12, 13).  3.  Of  a  far  superior  nature.  Divine,  i.e.,  as  well  as  human  (compare, 
once  again,  what  is  said  of  the  "Branch"  in  Jer.  xxiii.,  as  '^Jehovah  our  highteous- 
ness;"  also  what  is  said  liere  of  the  "stone"  and  the  "seven  eyes,"  with  Dan.  ii.  34, 
35,  44,  45 ;  Zech.  iv.  10 ;  Rev.  iv.  5 ;  Col.  ii.  9).  4.  Doing  a  fa/r  higher  work ;  viz. 
partly  because  suffering  in  his  own  glorious  Person  (as  shown  by  the  "graving" 
engraven  on  this  "  stone  "),  and  not  merely  offering  sacrifice ;  partly,  also,  because 
"  removing  iniquity  "  fully  and  once  for  all  ("  in  one  day  "),  and  not  merely  partially 
and  for  a  time  (Heb.  x.  11 — 14;  ix.  13,  14);  and  partly  because,  by  so  doing,  he 
brought  in  perpetual  peace  (comp.  ver.  10  with  Gon.  xiv.  18 ;  Pa.  Ixxxv.  10;  Isa.  xxxii. 
17;  Rom.  V.  1). 

The  whole  passage,  thus  interpreted,  serves  to  illustrate:  1.  A  pecxdia/r  feature  of 
Holy  Writ.  We  can  hardly  believe  that  the  prophet  himself  vmderstood  all  that  we 
have  now  gathered  from  his  words.  This  taught  us  about  the  Old  Te.'itament  prophets 
generally  in  1  Pet.  i.  10,  11,  and  almost  necessarily  implied,  in  fact,  in  the  Divine 
inspiration  of  Scripture.  Tins  exemplified  also  in  the  case  of  bad  men  (Numb.  xxii. 
— xxiv. ;  John  xi.  51,  52)  when  "carried  away"  ((pepSfievot,  2  Pet.  i.  21)  by  the  Spirit 
of  God.  Even  in  the  case  of  demoniac  inspiiation  (so  to  describe  it),  something  like 
this  is  true,  the  speech  of  the  man  or  woman  possessed  expressing  more  than  they  them- 
selves can  be  supposed  to  mean  or  to  know  (Mark  i.  23,  25 ;  Acts  xvi.  16,  17).  2.  The 
great  object  of  Holy  Writ ;  viz.  to  testify  of  the  "  Branch,"  the  "  Day-spring  "  (Luke 
i.  78,  see  margin),  the  "Lord  our  Righteousness"  (comp.  John  v.  39;  Luke  xxiv. 
25 — 27;  1  Pet.  i.  11,  as  before;  1  Tim.  iii.  15).  Always,  as  here,  the  Sori|)tures  seem 
to  hasten  away  from  what  is  temporary  and  conditional  to  what  is  eternal  and,  in 
one  sense,  unconditional,  viz.  to  those  sufferings  and  subsequent  glories  of  the 
Incarnate  Word  which  the  apostle  seems  to  understand  by  that  remarkable  expression, 
"  the  sure  mercies  of  David  "  (Isa.  Iv,  3 ;  Acts  xiii.  34).  So  true  ia  that  which  we  find 
written  in  Acts  x.  43  and  in  the  end  of  Rev.  xix.  10. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Satan  and  Christ.  Joshua  was  the  representative  of  the  people,  not 
personally,  but  in  his  public  character.  What  was  done  to  him  in  a  figure  was 
to  be  done  to  them  and  for  them  in  fact.  The  "reat  object  was  to  restore  confidence 
in  God  and  in  his  servants,  and  to  raise  the  hopes  of  the  people  that  the  work  of  grace 
would  triumph  in  spite  of  all  opposition. 

I.  The  power  of  Satan  to  resist.  The  adversary.  Cunning  and  strong.  Mali- 
ciously working  as  he  has  done  from  the  beginning,  to  keep  man  apart  from  God. 
But  his  power  is  usurped,  and  his  devices  are  doomed  to  exposure  and  defeat.  He  may 
plead  in  the  guise  of  justice,  but  it  is  not  from  love  of  right.  He  may  work  upon  a 
guilty  conscience,  but  it  is  not  to  lead  to  penitence,  but  to  engender  fear  and  distrust, 
and  to  widen  the  breach  between  the  soul  anrt  God. 

II.  The  power  of  Christ  to  redeem.  1.  Founded  in  righteousness.  He  is  the 
true  "Daysman."  2.  Inspired  by  love.  He  has  vmdicated  his  claim  to  plead  for  us 
because  he  died  for  us.  Whom  he  "  chooses  "  he  will  never  forsake.  3.  Adequate  to 
the  greatest  emergency.  He  is  able  to  "  rebuke  "  the  adversary  ;  to  "  rescue  "  the  prey 
from  the  hands  of  the  mighty ;  to  "  restore  "  the  lost  purity,  and  the  failing  confidence, 
and  the  faltering  service.  He  was  manife>ted  to  "  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil." 
In  this  there  is  hope  for  the  sinner,  comfort  for  the  downcast  believer,  encouragement 
to  all  true  servants  of  the  Lord. — P. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — ITtree  things  which  concern  the  soul.    I.  Guilt.    "Filthy."    The  out- 

UOHABIAH.  V 


34  THE   BOOK  OF   ZECHABIAH.  [oh.  m,  1—10. 

ward  symbolizes  the  inward.  Satan  pleads  tbat  there  is  no  remedy.  He  would 
anticipate  the  day  of  doom.  "  Let  him  that  is  filthy  be  filthy  still."  But  all  it 
not  lost. 

II.  Mediation.  Christ  our  Bepresentative.  Pleaiis  for  us  on  the  ground  of  his 
sacrifice.  Pledges  himself  to  raise  us  from  our  low  ami  lost  estate.  Not  only  removal 
of  guilt,  but  restoration  of  character.  He  is  stronger  than  the  strong  man,  and  rejoices 
to  rescue  the  prey  from  his  hands. 

III.  Holt  sebvioe.  Begins  with  conversion.  Butthere  must  be  renewed  consecra- 
tion. Satan  resists.  Pleads  at  the  bar  of  conscience,  to  crush  the  rising  hopes  of  the 
heart;  at  the  bar  of  God,  to  hinder,  if  he  can,  the  return  of  the  soul  to  its  true 
allegiance  and  service.  All  obstacles  to  good  are  of  the  devlL  Christ  is  fur  us,  there- 
fore let  us  not  be  afraid.  Highest  encouragements.  God's  love.  Christ's  work  of 
grace.    The  Holy  Spirit  the  Sanctifier. — P. 

Ver.  6. — We  may  take  this  as  a  picture  of  Christ  and  the  soul.    "  Stood  by." 

I.  Tekdeb  cokcern.  The  beginnings  of  life  are  full  uf  interest.  So  it  is  with  the 
budding  of  tlie  flower ;  the  lispiugs  of  infancy ;  the  first  tokens  of  love.  How  carefully 
the  gardener  watches  the  germinating  of  some  rare  seed  1  With  what  tender  solicitude 
friends  wait  for  the  signs  of  returning  health  to  the  loved  one  brought  low  by  disease  1 
So  in  an  infinitely  higher  way  as  to  our  Lord.  Our  souls  are  precious  in  his  sight 
(Luke  XV.  20;  John  i  48). 

II.  Holt  satisfaction  in  the  dejeat  of  the  great  enemt.  Sympathetic. 
Ever  on  the  alert.  Beady  to  interpose  effectively  at  the  right  moment.  The  wilder- 
ness, Gethsemane,  Calvary,  testify  to  his  love  and  mighty  power.  His  victory  was  our 
victory.  Every  sinner  converted,  every  backslider  restored,  every  believer  strengthened 
and  fitted  for  higher  service,  is  to  the  shame  of  Satan  and  to  the  glory  of  Christ. 

III.  Exvltino  jot  in  the  rescue  of  souls.  "  Standing "  implies  continued 
interest.  Lasts  all  through,  from  the  first  struggle' to  the  final  victory  (cf.  Stephen, 
Acts  vii.  36).  Christ's  love  never  faileth,  and  his  joy  is  the  joy  of  eternity  and  of 
God.     "  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  be  satisfied." — P. 

Vers.  6,  7. — "If"  and  "then;"  or,  the  great  things  of  OocPs  promises.  I.  The 
QBEAT  IN  CHARACTER.  How  described.  1.  Obedience.  Life  regulated  by  the  Divine 
will.  "  Walk  in  my  ways."  2.  Fidelity  of  service.  Life  devoted  to  God's  glory. 
So  Moses  (Heb.  iii.  6). 

II.  The  great  in  honour.  Not  place,  or  outward  distinction,  or  arbitrary  rewards. 
"Knighthoods  and  honours  borne  without  desert  are  titles  but  of  scorn"  (Sliake- 
speare).  Three  things.  1.  "  Judge  my  house."  2.  "  Keep  my  courts."  3.  "  Walks 
among  those  that  stand  by."  Dignity.  Power  with  God  and  power  with  man.  Society 
of  the  noblest. 

III.  The  great  in  blessedness.  Precdom  of  souL  Holy  living.  Harmonious 
development.  Grandest  fellowship.  Immortal  hope.  The  promises  of  God  are 
gracious  in  character,  elevating  in  purpose,  faithful  in  fulfilment. — F. 

Ver.  8. — Portents.  "Men  wondered  at."  There  are  times  when  there  are  si<>ns 
in  the  heavens  itnd  on  the  earth — prodigies  which  rouse  attention.  So  in  society. 
There  are  men  who  stand  out  from  others.  Their  characters  have  a  special  significance. 
Their  lives  are  prophecies.  Perhaps  most  of  the  great  men  of  the  Bible  were  of  tbil 
sort.     So  here — 

I.  Eepbesbntative  of  their  generation.  They  breathe  the  spirit  of  the  age. 
The  evil  and  the  good,  of  their  times,  are  seen  in  them  at  the  highest.  "  There  were 
giants  in  those  days." 

II.  Adumbrate  great  forces.  Powers  have  been  at  work  for  long  that  come  out. 
Embodied.  We  see  the  height  to  which  corruption  may  rise.  Intellect  without 
conscience,  passion  without  principle,  power  without  God.  Or  it  may  be  otherwise. 
Men  of  genius  and  resolution  faithful  to  the  truth,  ardent  for  the  good  of  their  brethren 
— reformers,  professors,  martyrs,  whose  glory  was  to  live  not  to  themselves,  bui  vo  Gud. 

IIL  Fobbshadow  oomimo  judgment.  Like  Pharaoh,  they  have  been  raised  up  for 
Ood'i  glory.     Like  the  Jews,  they  are  "  ensamples  "  of  God's  Judgments.     What  they 


on.  m.  1— 10.j  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHABIAH.  88 

do,  what  they  sufifer,  what  they  enjoy,  are  as  forecasts  and  foreshadowings  of  what 
will  be,  on  to  the  perfect  end.  Often  such  men  obtain  a  certain  worship.  "  There  is 
so  much  of  chance  in  warfare,  and  such  vast  events  are  connected  with  the  acts  of  the 
single  individual,  that  the  proper  temperament  for  generating  and  receiving  super- 
stitious impressions  is  naturally  produced "  (Coleridge).  But  they  are  "  for  our 
admonition,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  have  come." — P. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — Mensiah't  misginn,  I.  The  time  or  Hia  couiNO  divinely  fixed. 
There  was  the  ancient  promise,  and  long-waitiQ>i;  generations  came  and  went.  Manifold 
nhangos.  Overturning  of  kingdoms  and  dynasties.  •  The  old  stock  of  David  seemed  as 
good  as  dead.  But  life  preserved.  "  Branch "  destined  to  spring  and  bud  in  hia 
season.  There  is  "  a  time  to  every  purpose "  (Eccles.  iii.  1).  Christ  came  "  in  the 
fulness  of  time." 

II.  The  chabactbb  ov  his  work  divinblt  appointed.  "  Servant."  Christ  came 
to  do  the  will  of  the  Father.  As  the  Law  was  hidden  in  the  ark,  so  the  law  of  God 
was  hidden  in  his  heart.  What  God  ordained,  he  freely  chose.  What  God  commanded, 
he  delighted  to  carry  out.  He  never  wavered,  never  wearied.  Why  ?  Because  the 
work  given  him  to  do  accorded  both  with  eternal  righteousness  and  the  highest  good 
of  man.     Faithful  even  to  the  death  of  the  cross. 

III.  The  bksults  op  his  mimstbt  divinblt  settled.  Removal  of  sin.  Upbuilding 
of  the  Church  of  God  in  the  strength  of  righteousness  and  the  beauty  of  holiness  and 
the  joys  of  love.  What  he  began  he  would  snrely  finish.  Solomon's  temple  was 
"  finished,"  and  kins;  and  people  rejoiced  with  great  joy.  Zerubbabel's  temple  was 
also  to  be  "finished,"  and  this  should  be  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  forgiveness  of  past 
iniquity,  and  of  the  outshining  of  God's  favour  on  the  land.  So  these  prophesy  of 
greater  things  to  come.  Christ's  exulting  cry  on  the  cross,  "  It  is  finished ! "  proclaimed 
the  opening  of  heaven  to  all  believers,  the  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth,  and  the 
restitution  of  all  things. — P. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  good  man  on  earth  in  his  intercessory  function.  "And  he  showed 
me  Joshua  the  high  priest  standing  before  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  and  Satan  standing 
at  his  right  hund  to  resist  him,"  etc.  Our  prophet  here  delivers  to  the  Jews  who  had 
been  restored  from  Babylon  a  vision  which  he  had  witu'  ssed,  in  order  to  encourage  them 
in  the  work  of  rebuilding  the  temple.  The  scene  of  the  vision  seems  to  have  been  the 
precincts  of  the  tt-mple.  He  saw  Joshua,  the  high  priest,  standing  before  the  Lord 
on  their  behalf,  robed  in  "  filthy  garments."  He  saw  "  Satan,"  the  great  enemy  of 
humanity,  oppose  him  in  his  intercessory  engagements;  but  Satan  was,  nevertheless, 
rebuked  by  Jehovah ;  and  the  seer  heard  a  Divine  voice  commanding  the  "  filthy  gar- 
ments "  to  be  taken  away  from  the  priest,  declaring  the  removal  of  his  iniquity,  com- 
manding a  "  mitre  "  to  be  put  on  his  head,  ordering  him  to  be  clothed  in  a  new  raiment, 
and  promising  him  other  blessings  if  he  would  but  "  walk"  in  the  "ways  "  of  God. 
Regarding  the  vision  as  a  symbolical  revelation  of  Joshua,  in  his  representative  aspect 
as  the  high  priest  of  the  Jewish  people  then  existing,  we  feel  authorized  to  infer  from 
it  two  or  three  ideas  touching  the  intercessory  functions  of  good  men  while  an  earth. 

I.  That  the  good  man,  in  his  intercessory  functions  on  eabth,  has  to  bear 
BEFORE  God  the  moral  imperfections  of  his  bace.  Joshua  had  on  "  filthy  gar- 
ments." This  was  evidently  intended  to  represent  the  corrupt  state  of  the  Jewish 
people.  The  seventy  years'  captivity  had  not  purified  them;  for  now,  instead  of 
setting  themselves  to  the  work  of  rebuilding  the  house  of  the  Lord,  they  were  taken 
up  with  their  own  personal  concerns,  and  excusing  themselves  by  saying,  "  The  time  is 
not  come  "  (Hag.  i.  2).  Here,  then,  is  a  characteristic  feat  are  of  a  good  man's  intercession 
while  on  earth.  He  has  to  bear  the  imperfections  of  his  fellow-creatures  before  God. 
Intercession  itself  we  consider  to  be  an  obligation  resting  on  all  minds,  in  all  worlds, 
for  ever.  Prayer,  either  for  self  or  others,  is  not  confined  to  earth.  What  is  prayer  for 
self  but  a  living  sense  of  dependence  upon  God?  And  where  is  there  a  virtuous  mind 
in  the  universe  without  this  sense  ?  This,  indeed,  lies  at  the  root  of  all  true  religion. 
And  what  is  prayer  for  others,  or  intercession,  but  a  deep,  loving  sympathv  with  them, 
•  desire  for  their  highest  interests?  And  does  not  this  benevolent  feeling  lie  at  the 
basis  of  aU  moral' excellence?    There  is  not  a  saint  nor  an  angel  in  heaven,  we  suppose, 


36  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABIAH.  [oh.  m.  1—10. 

who  does  not  desire  the  progress  of  kindred  spirits ;  and  what  is  this  but  intercession  ? 
But  that  which  distinguishes  the  intercession  on  earth  is  that  we  have  to  remember 
the  moral  corruption  of  our  race.  In  heaven  there  is  no  defilement.  All  there  are 
clad  either  in  the  robes  of  pristine  holiness  or  in  garments  washed  and  made  white  by 
the  cleansing  influences  of  redemptive  love.  But  here  all  are  in  "  filthy  garments  " 
— garments  stained  by  sensuality,  worldlinesa,  idolatry,  falsehood,  and  dishonesty. 
Here  the  pious  parent  has  to  appear  before  G-od  for  sinful  children,  the  minister  for 
sinful  people,  and  the  pious  sovereign  for  a  sinful  nation. 

II.  That  the  good  man,  in  hib  ikteboessobt  fcnotions  on  eabth,  has  to  con- 
tend WITH  A  uioHTT  BPiBiTUAL  'ANTAQONI8T.  The  prophet  saw  Satan  standing  at 
his  right  hand  to  resist  him.  The  existence  of  some  mighty  spirit  or  spirits,  who  are 
determined  foes  of  truth,  virtue,  and  the  happiness  of  man,  is  rendered  more  than  pro- 
bable by  a  number  of  considerations,  independent  of  the  testimony  of  the  Bible.  Such, 
for  example,  as  the  general  belief  of  the  race,  the  conflicting  phenomena  of  the  moral 
world,  the  unaccotmtable  opposite  impressions  of  which  all  a/re  consciotis.  But  the 
Bible  is  most  clear  on  this  subject.  Under  various  names,  "  the  serpent,"  "  the  devil," 
"  the  god  of  this  world,"  "  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,"  this  great  enemy  of  the 
race  is  brought  under  our  notice.  Now,  this  enemy  stood  up  to  resist  Joshua  in  his 
intercessions.  And  who  will  say  that  he  is  not  now  specially  active  with  the  good 
man,  when  he  draws  near  to  God?  In  how  many  ways  may  he  binder  our  prayers? 
Sometimes  he  may  suggest  to  us,  even  in  the  very  time  of  our  prayers,  doubts  as  to  the 
existence  of  God  ;  we  may  be  tempted  to  ask — Are  we  sure  there  is  a  God  ?  May  not 
the  idea  be  a  delusion,  for  who  has  ever  seen  or  heard  him  ?  Or,  granting  his  existence, 
he  may  suggest  whether  he  would  condescend  to  attend  to  the  affairs  of  an  individual. 
We  may  be  tempted  to  the  supposition  that  he  takes  care  of  the  great  but  overlooks 
the  little ;  or  that  the  universe  is  so  thoroughly  and  absolutely  under  a  system  of 
laws,  that  he  will  not  interpose  on  behalf  of  any  of  his  creatures.  Or,  granting  that 
he  does  exist,  and  that  he  attends  to  the  prayers  of  some,  Satan  may  suggest  that  I  am 
too  worthless  for  his  notice,  that  it  is  presumptuous  for  me  to  address  his  awful 
majesty ;  I  am  too  great  a  sinner  ever  to  be  attended  to.  In  such  suggestions  as  these 
Satan  may  be  said  to  stand  up  against  us  when  we  appear  before  the  Lord.  This, 
again,  is  a  peculiarity  of  our  intercessory  functions  on  earth.  In  heaven,  we  presume, 
no  enemy  will  intrude  on  our  devotions,  no  Satan  will  stand  up  to  resist  as  we  appear 
before  God.  No  power  there  to  darken  our  faith  with  cloudy  doubts,  nor  to  cool  the 
ardour  of  our  devotions  1 

III.  That  the  good  man,  in  his  intebokssoet  kunctions  on  eabth,  has  the 
SPECIAL  assistance  OF  A  DiviNE  Helpeb.  WUlst  Satan  stood  up  against  Joshua, 
there  was  One  who  stood  up  for  him — the  Lord,  called  also  "  the  Angel  of  the  Lord." 
Who  is  this  ?  All  acknowledged  expositors  are  agreed  in  concluding  this  to  be.  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  And  he,  indeed,  is  man's  great  spiritual  Helper.  He 
is  our  Advocate,  our  Intercessor.  He  helps  us  in  our  prayers,  he  attracts  us  to  the 
throne  of  grace.  "  Seeing  that  we  have  a  great  High  Priest,  who  has  passed  into  the 
heavens."  His  Spirit  makes  intercession  within  us,  awakens  in  us  those  desires  which 
agree  with  the  will  of  God.  The  scene  illustrates  two  thoughts  concerning  the  help 
rendered.  1.  Ji  was  rendered  sympathetically.  "  Is  not  this  a  brand  ?  "  etc.  Consider 
the  suffering  to  which  the  petitioners  have  been  subject.  Christ  is  full  of  sympathy. 
"  We  have  not  a  high  priest,"  etc. ;  "  Him  that  cometh  unto  God  through  him  he 
will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  2.  The  help  was  rendered  effectually.  The  old  "  filthy  gar- 
ments," the  emblems  of  impurity  and  guilt,  were  taken  away,  and  he  was  clothed  in  other 
garments ;  that  is,  their  guilt  was  removal,  they  were  restored  from  their  degradation. 
And  the  "  mitre,"  the  emblem  of  dignity,  was  put  on  his  head.  They  were  raised  once 
more  to  the  glory  of  an  independent  nation.  Bee :  (I)  That  if  you  would  effectually  help 
your  race,  you  must  appear  before  God  as  an  intercessor.  Other  means  are  also  to  be 
employed.  Promote  general  knowledge,  advance  the  arts,  help  on  commerce,  above  all, 
diffuse  the  gospel  of  Jesus ;  but,  in  connection  with  all,  you  must  appear  before  God, 
as  Joshua  did  for  -Israel.  It  is  in  this  way  you  will  change  the  world's  "  filthy  gar- 
ments," and  get  for  them  the  "  raiment "  of  purity  and  the  "  mitre  "  of  honour.  (2)  That 
if  you  would  effectually  appear  before  God,  you  must  have  the  hj:lp  of  Jesus  Christ. 
What  is  the  vision  before  us  but  an  adumbration  of  a  common  fact  in  the  spiritual 


OH.  in.  1—10.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHAMAH.  87 

history  of  every  praying  man  ?  Ever  as  we  attempt  to  approach  the  everlasting  Fathei 
in  devout  thought  and  worship,  do  we  not  find  some  opposing  force  like  this  Satan,  or 
rather,  this  Satan  himself,  "standing"  "at  our  right  hand  to  resist"  us?  What  is  to 
be  done?  Are  we  to  retire? — cease  all  endeavour  to  commune  with  the  loving  Parent 
of  our  souls?  God  forbid!  Our  doom  is  sealed  in  midnight  and  ancruish,  should  this 
be  so.  There  is  no  happiness  for  any  finite  spirit  but  that  vjhich  flows  from  inter- 
course with  the  eternal  Fountain  of  good.  Our  only  hojte  is  in  getting  him,  the  great 
Mediator,  with  us,  who  shall  repel  our  foe — drive  him  from  our  presence  with  the  words, 
"The  Lord  rebuke  thee,  0  Satan ! "— D.  T. 

Ver.  7, — The  Bible  and  true  greatness.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts;  If  thou 
wilt  walk  in  my  ways,  and  if  thou  wilt  keep  my  charge,  then  thou  shalt  also 
judge  my  house,  and  shalt  also  keep  my  courts,  and  I  will  give  thee  places  to 
walk  among  these  that  stand  by."  The  words  direct  us  to  the  Bible  and  true 
greatness. 

I.  The  Bible  dibects  ub  to  the  bphebe  of  true  aREATNESS.  The  promise  made 
to  Joshua  here  is,  "  Thou  shalt  also  judge  my  house,  and  shalt  also  keep  my  courts." 
The  words  convey  this  idea :  Oreat  authority.  By  the  house  of  God  is  heie  probably 
meant  the  people  of  Israel;  and  the  keeping  of  God's  courts,  the  regulation  of  the 
temple.  The  literal  meaning  here  is  that  Joshua's  piety  should  be  rewarded  by 
the  long  continuance  of  his  exalted  office  of  High  Priest.  Godliness  raises :  (1)  To 
dignified  positions.  It  makes  us  "  kings  and  priests  unto  God."  (2)  To  high  fellowship. 
"I  will  give  thee  places  to  walk  among  these  that  stand  hy."  With  the  general 
consent  of  commentators,  the  angels  of  God  are  meant  by  "  these  that  stamd  hy"  The 
angels  of  God  minister  in  his  house.  They  are  "  ministering  servants."  We  are  come 
"  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels."  Good  men  are  brought  by  religion  into 
fellowship  with  those  lofty  intelligences. 

II.  The  Bible  presents  to  us  the  path  of  TBtrE  obbatness.  "If  thou  wilt 
walk  in  my  wa,ys,"  etc.  Two  things  are  stated  here  as  the  conditions  of  elevation. 
1.  Obedience.  "  If  thou  wilt  walk  in  my  ways."  God  has  ways  for  men  to  walk  in. 
His  ways  are  his  laws.  "  Blessed  are  they  who  walk  in  the  Law  of  the  Lord."  Walking 
in  his  ways  implies:  (1)  The  abandonment  of  our  own  ways.  "Let  the  wicked 
forsake  bis  way,  (2)  The  entrance  on  God's  ways.  Walking  in  them  implies  that 
we  are  on  them,  and  the  way  into  them  is  by  faith  in  Christ.  He  is  the  "Door." 
(3)  Progress  in  God's  ways.  We  must  add  to  our  faith,  virtue;  to  virtue,  knowledge, 
etc.  (2  Pet,  i,  5).  2.  Fidelity.  "  Keep  my  charge."  We  have  all  a  trust  committed 
to  us.  Our  time,  talents,  and  possessions  are  all  given  in  trust.  We  are  not  owners  of 
them,  but  stewards.  "  It  is  required  of  a  steward  that  he  be  found  faithful."  Paul 
felt,  as  he  was  leaving  the  world,  that  he  had  finished  his  course,  and  kept  the  faith. 
Such  is  the  path  to  greatness — the  only  path,  the  sure  path. 

III.  The  Bible  gives  us  a  guarantee  for  tbub  gbeatness.  "Thus  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts."  The  word  of  God  is  the  pledge.  1.  His  word  has  been  fulfilled  in  the 
experience  of  the  good  in  all  ages.  All  who  have  walked  in  God's  ways  and  kept  his 
charge  have  reached  this  sublime  elevation.  They  are  the  illustrious  heroes  of  the 
ages ;  and  they  have  high  authority  in  the  empire  of  God.  2.  His  word  can  never 
fail  of  its  accomplishment.     "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,"  etc. 

Brother,  art  thou  walking  in  the  ways  of  God  ?  If  so,  grand  distinctions  await  thee. 
"  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  Ufa." — D,  T. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — 77ie  world's  wants  and  God's  provisions.  "  Hear,  now,  0  Joshua 
the  high  priest,  thou,  and  thy  fellows  that  sit  before  thee :  for  they  are  men  wondered 
at :  for,  behold,  I  will  bring  forth  my  Servant  the  BEANCH,"  etc.  It  is  admitted 
by  most  acknowledged  expositors  of  Holy  Scripture  that  the  sacerdotal  institutions  of 
the  Mosaic  system  were  typical  of  gospel  realities ;  they  were,  as  St.  Paul  has  it,  the 
"  shadows  of  good  things  to  come."  This  passage  undoubtedly  points  to  the  Messiah 
and  his  times.  Joshua,  here  called  "  the  high  priest,"  is  a  type  of  Christ,  who  is 
represented  as  "'my  Servant  the  BEANCH."  A  name  by  which  he  is  designated  in  other 
parts  of  the  Bible.  Thus,  for  example :  "  There  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the  stem 
of  Jesse,  and  a  Branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots,"  etc    Again,  "  In  that  day  shaU 


38  THE   BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [<m.  m.  1— la 

the  branch  of  the  Lord  be  beautiful,"  etc.    And  again,  "Behold,  the  days  oome,  laith 

the  Lord,  that  I  will  raise  unto  David  a  righteous  Branch,"  etc.  Indeed,  the  men 
who  are  heie  spoken  of  as  those  who  "  sit  before"  Joshua,  "men  wondered  at,"  are 
typical  men.  Tliis,  indued,  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression, "  men  wondered  at,"  which 
some  translati',  "  men  appointed  "  (Isa.  viii.  18),  that  is,  typical  men.  Literally,  the 
reference  is  to  the  menibers  of  the  subordinate  priesthood ;  and  as  the  high  priest, 
Joshua,  was  the  type  of  Chrfst,  these  men  were  the  types  of  his  disciples  in  every  age. 
I  shall  take  the  words  as  presenting  the  world's  wants  and  Gods  provisions. 
•  1.  The  world  wants  a  moeal  Helper,  and  in  the  oosfel  One  is  pkovided. 
Morally,  man  is  enslaved,  diseased,  exiled,  lost  to  the  great  nses  and  purposes  of  his 
being.  God  has  provided  a  great  Helper,  here  called  his  "Servant  the  BHANCH." 
In  Isaiah  (xlii.  1)  we  have  these  words,  "  Behold  my  Servant  whom  I  uphold,  mine 
elect,  in  whom  my  soul  delighteth."  He  is  the  "  Branch,"  God  is  the  Root,  and  all 
holy  souls  are  branches,  deriving  their  life,  beauty,  and  fruittulness  from  him ;  but 
Christ  is  the  "  Branch,"  the  oldest  Branch,  the  largest  Branch,  the  strongest  Branch, 
the  most  fruitful  Branch,  etc.  He  is  the  Branch  on  which  there  hang  clusters  of 
perennial  fruits  for  the  "healing  of  the  nations." 

II.  Thk  wobld  wants  Divine  guardianship.  "  Behold  the  stone  that  I  have  laid 
before  Joshua;  upon  one  stone  shall  be  seven  eyes."  What  is  here  meant  by  the 
"  stone  "  ?  Not  the  foundation-stone  of  the  temple,  which  was  now  being  rebuilt,  for 
that  had  been  laid  long  before.  "  The  stone,"  says  Keil, "  is  the  symbol  of  the  kingdom 
of  God,  and  is  laid  by  Jehovah  before  Joshua,  by  God's  transferring  to  him  the  regene- 
ration of  his  house  and  the  keeping  of  his  courts  (before,  liphne  in  a  spiritual  sense, 
as  in  1  Kings  ix.  6,  for  example).  The  seven  eyes  which  watch  with  protecting  care 
over  this  stone  are  not  a  figurative  representation  of  the  all-embracing  providence  of 
God;  but,  in  harmony  with  tlie  seven  eyes  of  the  Lamb,' which  are  the  seven  Spirits  of 
God'  (Rev.  V.  6),  and  with  the  seven  eyes  of  Jehovah  (ch.  iv.  10),  they  are  the  seven- 
fold radiation  of  the  Spirit  of  Jeho.vah  (after  Isa.  xi.  2),  which  show  themselves  in 
vigorous  action  upon  this  stone,  to  prepare  it  for  its  destination."  Perh«ps  the  meaning 
is  that  upon  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  here  symbolized  by  the  stone,  God's  eyes  are  fixed 
(engraven)  with  deep  and  settled  interest.  "  The  eye  is  the  natural  hieroglyphic  for 
Knowledge ;  and  '  seven,'  as  every  reader  of  the  Bible  is  aware,  is  the  number  used  to 
denote  completeness,  perfection.  Seven  eyes  denote  the  perfection  of  observant  know- 
ledge ;  and  as  the  '  eyes  of  Jehovah '  mean  Jehovah's  observation  and  knowledge,  his 
'  seven  eyes '  express  the  perfection  of  both — omniscient  observation."  Two  thoughts 
are  suggested.  1.  Ood  has  a  special  interest  in  Christ  and  his  followers.  His  eyes  are 
on  the  "stone,"  there  in  all  their  completeness — seven.  He  has  a  ^enera2  interest  in 
the  universe,  but  a  special  interest  here.  His  eyes,  which  "  run  to  and  fro  through 
all  the  earth,"  glance  with  a  wonderful  tenderness  upon  the  "  stone."  2.  God  has  a 
settled  interest  in  Christ  and  his  followers.  The  eyes  are  said  to  be  engraven  on  the 
stone,  not  written  in  ink,  not  painted  with  colour  which  time  would  erase,  but  cut  into 
its  very  heart ;  the  stune  itself  must  moulder  before  the  engraving  is  destroyed.  "  Who 
shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  "  "  The  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the  hills 
be  removed,"  etc. 

III.  The  world  wants  moral  purification,  and  in  thb  gospel  it  ib  provided. 
•'  I  will  remove  the  inquity  of  that  [this]  land  [that  is,  Palestine]  in  one  day."  The 
"iniquity  of  that  land,"  the  land  of  the  Jews,  was  multiform,  aggravated,  immeasur- 
able ;  but  in  one  day  provision  should  be  made  for  its  removal,  the  day  on  which 
Christ  died  upon  the  cross,  "  The  work  of  the  Messiah  had  a  primary  respect  to  Israel. 
The  offer  of  salvation  was  to  the  Jew  first."  "  Unto  you  first,  God,  having  raised  up 
his  Son  Jesus,  sent  him  to  bless  you,  in  turning  away  every  one  of  you  from  his 
iniquities "  (Acts  iii.  36).  These  words  of  Peter  to  the  Jews  of  his  day  are  a  com- 
mentary on  those  before  us.  The  great  want  of  man  is  moral  purification.  Thank 
God,  "  Christ  came  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself." 

IV.  'I'HB   WORLD   WANTS     SPIRITUAL    REPOSE,    AND    IN    THE    GOSPEL    IT    18    PROVIDED. 

"In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  shall  ye  call  every  man  his  neighbour  under  the 
Tine  and  under  the  fig  tree."  "When  iniquity  is  taken  away,"  says  Matthew  Henry, 
"(1)  W<s  reap  precious  benefits  and  privileges  from  our  justification,  more  precious 
tliau  tke  product*  of  the  vine  or  the  fig  tree  (Rom.  v.  1).     (2)  We  repose  in  a  sweet 


OH.  IT.  1 — i  1.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABIAH. 


69 


tranquillity,  and  are  quiet  from  the  fear  of  evil.  What  should  terrify  us  when  iniquity 
is  taken  away,  when  nothing  can  hurt  us  ?  We  sit  down  under  Christ's  shadow  with 
delight,  and  by  it  are  sheltered  from  the  scorching  heat  of  the  curse  of  the  Law.  We 
live  as  Israel  in  the  peaceable  reign  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  iv.  24,  25),  for  he  is  the  Prince 
ofPeace."— D.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  rV. 


Vers.  1— 14.— §  7.  The  fifth  vMon:  the 
golden  candlestick. 

Ver.  1. — The  angel  that  talked  with  me. 
The  interpreting  angel  is  meant.  Came 
again,  and  waked  me.  It  is  thought  that 
the  angel,  who  is  said  (oh.  ii.  3)  to  have 
gone  forth,  now  rejoined  the  prophet  and 
renewed  liis  colloquy  with  him.  But  the 
expression  in  the  text  is  probably  only 
equivalent  to  "amused  me  again"  (comp. 
Gen.  xxvi.  18;  2  Kings  i  11,  13,  etc.). 
Absorbed  in  awe  and  wonder  at  the  con- 
templatinn  of  the  preceding  vision,  the 
prophet  liad  fnllen  into  a  state  of  exhaustion 
and  torpor,  as  Daniel  blept  after  his  great 
visions  (Dan.  viii.  18;  x.  8,  9),  and  the 
apostles  were  heavy  with  sleep  on  the 
Mount  of  Traiisfigujation  (Luke  ix.  82). 
From  this  mental  prostration  the  angel 
arouses  him  to  renewed  attention.  Or  what 
is  meant  may  be  that  the  change  wrought 
on  the  faculties  by  the  Divine  influence  was 
as  great  as  that  between  natural  sleeping 
and  waking. 

Ver.  2.— What  seest  thou?  The  angel 
does  not  sliow  the  vision  ti)  the  prophet,  but 
makes  him  describe  it,  and  then  explains 
its  import.  This  vision  of  the  caniUestiok, 
with  its  seven  lumps  fed  by  two  olive  trees, 
signifies  that  the  work  of  rebuilding  the 
temple,  and  preparing  the  way  for  the 
Chnrch  of  the  true  Israel,  was  to  be  arcom- 
plished  by  relying,  not  on  human  resources, 
but  on  Divine  aid.  Thus  were  Zerubbabel 
and  his  people  roused  to  perseverance  and 
energy  in  their  good  work,  of  which  tlie 
final  success  is  assured.  I  have  looked; 
edpaxa  (Septuagint),  "  I  have  seen."  A 
candlestick  all  of  gold.  The  candelabrum 
B«  described  differs  in  some  particulars 
from  that  in  the  tabernacle,  though  the 
same  word,  menorath,  is  used  in  both  cases 
(Exod.  XXV.  31;  xxxvii.  17,  etc.).  In 
Solomon's  temple  there  were  ten  can'lel.ibra 
(1  Kings  vii.  49),  which  were  carried  away 
to  Babylon  when  Jerusalem  was  t.iken 
(Jer.  lii.  19).  The  single  candelabrum  of 
Zerubbabel's  temple  is  mentioned  in  1  Mace. 
L  21  ;  iv.  49,  50.  The  one  sculptured  on  the 
Mch  of  Titus  may  be  a  truthful  representa- 
tion of  that  in  Herod's  tempio,  bnt  probably 


is  not  the  same  as  that  in  the  second  edifice 
(comp.  Josephus,  'Ant.,'  xiv.  4.  4).  The 
candelabrum  in  the  vision  differed  from  the 
original  one  in  three  particulars:  it  had  a 
central  reservoir;  it  had  also  seven  pipes; 
and  it  was  supplied  with  oil  by  two  olive 
trees.  With  a  {its)  bowl  upon  the  top  of  it. 
The  "bowl"  (gullah)  is  a  reservoir  for  oil 
placed  at  the  top  of  the  candelabrum ;  and 
from  it  tubes  led  the  oil  for  the  supply  of 
the  lamps.  In  the  tabernacle  each  lamp 
was  separate,  and  trimmed  and  filled  by  the 
ministering  priests ;  the  mystiu  lamps  needed 
no  human  agency  to  keep  them  supplied. 
They  were  fed  by  the  "  bowl."  The  word 
is  translated  in  the  Septuagint,  Aa/uiraSioK : 
in  the  Vulgate,  lampas;  hence  some  have 
supposed  that,  besides  the  seven  lamps, 
there  was  another  large  light  in  the  centre; 
but  the  Greek  and  .  Latin  rendering  is 
mistaken,  the  word  meaning  "  a  Ibuntain " 
(Josh.  XV.  19),  or  "  a  ball "  (1  Kings  vii.  41), 
or  "a  round  bowl"  (Eocles.  xii.  6).  And 
seven  pipes  to  the  seven  lamps,  which  are 
upon  the  top  thereof  The  Hebrew  is, 
literally  lendered,  seven  and  seven  pipes  to 
the  lamps  which  are  upon  its  top.  The 
LXX,  translates,  Kal  eirrct  iTrupvarplSes  ro7r 
Ai5x»'oiSTo7s  Eirdvof  aur^y,  "  And  Seven  vessels 
for  the  lamps  which  are  upon  it;"  so  the 
Vulgate,  Septem  infusoria  lucernis,  quse  erant 
super  'caput  ejus.  These  versions  imply 
that  there  was  one  supply  pipe  to  each  of 
the  lamps,  which  seems  most  natural.  In 
this  case,  the  Irst  "seven"  in  the  text  must 
be  an  inleipolation.  Commentators  who 
regard  the  present  reading  as  ourrect  have 
taken  various  ways  in  explaining  it.  Some 
multiply  the  number  into  itself,  and  make 
the  pipes  foriy-uine;  but  this  is  unwarranted 
by  Hebrew  usage  (Henderson).  Others  add 
the  numbers  together,  making  fourteen;  but 
here  again  the  copulative  van,  which  implies 
diversity,  is  an  objection.  The  Itevised 
Version  liiiB,  "  There  are  seven  pip. s  to  each 
of  the  lamps,"  taking  the  «  ords  d  ist  ributively ; 
but  tlie  number  of  tubes  seems  here  to  be 
unneuessaiily  large.  Dr.  Wright  considers 
that  there  were  two  pipes  to  each  lamp,  one 
set  connecting  each  to  the  central  bowl,  and 
one  connecting  the  several  lamps  together. 
One,  however,  does  not  see  of  what  particular 
use  the  second  set  is.  Dr.  Wright,  p.  84, 
Ij^ves  a  drawing  of  the  candelabrum  with 


40 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


[oh.  IV.  1 — 14 


its  nppurtenaDoes,  according  to  his  notion  of 
the  Tisioii.  The  Authorized  Version  seems 
to  give  the  correct  idea  of  the  passage, 
whether  we  arrive  at  it  by  rejecting  the 
first  "seven,"  or  by  considering  that  it  la 
repeated  for  emphnsis'  sake,  as  Cornelius  it 
Lapide  and  FreBsel  tliink:  "Seven  are  the 
lamps  upon  it — seven,  I  say,  and  seven  the 
pipes."  Take  it  as  we  may,  the  point  is 
that  the  oil  is  well  and  copiously  supplied 
to  the  several  lights. 

Ver.  3. — Two  olive  trees.  These,  as  ex- 
plained in  ver.  12,  discharged  the  oil  from 
their  fruit-bearing  branches  into  conduits 
which  led  to  the  central  reservoir.  Without 
man's  agency  the  oil  is  separated  from 
the  berry  and  keeps  the  lamps  constantly 
supplied  (comp.  Eev.  ii.  4). 

Ver.  4.— What  are  these,  my  lord?  The 
question  may  refer  to  the  two  olive  trees, 
which  were  a  novelty  to  tlie  prophet,  who^ 
of  course,  was  well  acquainted  with  the 
form  and  use,  if  not  the  symbolism,  of  the 
candelabrum.  But  it  may  also  be  tiken  as 
desiring  infdrmation  about  the  whole  vision. 

Ver.  5. — Knowest  thou  not?  The  angel 
speaks  not  so  much  in  surprise  at  the 
prophet's  slowness  of  comprehension  (comp. 
John  iii.  lU)as  desirous  of  calling  his  most 
serious  attention  tn  tlie  coming  explanation. 

Ver.  6. — This  is  the  word  of  the  Lord 
unto  Zernbbabel.  The  Lord's  message  unto 
Zerubbabel  is  the  purport  of  the  vision,  viz. 
that  his  work  will  be  accomplished  through 
the  grace  of  God  alone.  Not  by  might 
Septuagint,  "not  by  great  might;"  but  the 
Vulgate,  "not  by  an  army."  The  word 
is  almost  synonymous  with  the  following, 
translated  power;  and  the  two  together 
mean  that  the  effect  is  to  be  produced,  not 
by  any  human  means,  however  potent. 
Doubtless  Zerubbabel  was  dispirited  when 
he  thought  how  much  there  was  to  do,  how 
feeble  the  means  at  his  dispo-^al  (Neli.  iv.  2), 
and  how  f  rmidable  the  opposition;  and 
nothing  couM  better  reassure  him  than  the 
promise  of  Divine  aid.  But  by  my  Spirit, 
The  angel  does  not  say  expressly  what  is  to 
be  done;  liut  the  purpose  that  filled  the 
minds  of  Zechariah  and  Zerubbabel  applied 
the  word.  The  operations  of  the  Spirit  are 
manifold,  an<l  his  aid  alone  could  bring 
these  mighty  things  to  pass.  The  oil  is  a 
figure  of  (he  grace  of  the  Hly  Spirit;  and 
as  the  Inmps  are  not  supplied  by  human 
hands,  but  directly  from  tlie  olives,  so  the 
good  work  now  undertaken  shall  be  sup- 
ported by  Divine  means  (see  on  ver.  14). 

Ver.  7. — Who  art  thou,  0  great  mountain  1 
The  "mountain"  is  a  figurative  expression 
to  denote  the  various  difficulties  that  stood 
in  Zerubbabel's  way  and  impeded  the 
carrying  out  of  his  great  design.  Before 
Zarnbbabel.    The  Vulgate  ntlixc  a  these  words 


to  the  former  part  df  the  clause,  but  the 
accent  is  in  favourof  the  Authorized  Version. 
Thou  shalt  become  a  plain ;  literally,  into  a 
plain  I  A  command.  AU  obstacles  shall 
be  removed  (comp.  Isa.  zl.  4 ;  xllx.  11 ; 
Matt.  xvU.  20;  Luke  iii.  4,  5).  Septua- 
gint, Tofl  KaTopSaa-at  (intrans.),  "tliat  thou 
shouldst  prosper;"  "  ut  corrigas  "  (Jerome). 
He  shall  bring  forth  the  headstone  thereof. 
"He"  is  evidently  Zerubbabel.  He  shall 
commence  and  put  the  finishing  stroke  to 
the  worit  of  rebuilding  the  temple.  Many 
commentators  take  tliis  stone  tn  be  the  one 
that  completes  the  building,  "the  top-stone." 
But  it  may  well  be  questioned  whether  a 
building  like  the  temple  could  have  any 
such  stone.  An  arch  or  a  pyramid  may 
have  a  crowning  stone,  but  no  other  edifice; 
nor  is  there  any  proof  that  such  a  top-stone 
was  known  or  its  erection  celebrated.  It 
may  be  a  mere  metaphor  for  the  comple- 
tion of  the  work.  It  is  better,  however,  to 
take  it  as  the  corner-stone,  to  which  we 
know  great  importance  was  attached  (comp. 
Job  xxxviii..  6;  Ps  cxviii.  22,  etc.).  This 
stone,  on  which  the  building  rests,  Zerub- 
babel will  bring  forth  from  the  workshop; 
as  the  next  verses  say,  his  hands  have  laid 
the  foundation.  That  action,  already  past, 
is  represented  as  future,  the  regular  com- 
mencement of  the  work  under  Zerubbabel's 
direction  being  intimated,  and  its  happy 
conclusion  promised.  Septuagint,  Kal  E|oi<rai 
rhv  \l6ov  Trjs  K\Tipovonlas, "  And  I  will  bring 
forth  the  stone  of  the  inheritance" — the 
meaning  of  which  is  obscure,  though  Jerome 
explains  it  by  consiilering  it  an  allusion  to 
Christ.  With  shoutings,  crying,  Grace, 
grace  unto  it!  All  the  by-standers,  as 
the  stone  is  placed,  shout  in  acclamation, 
"  God's  favour  rest  upon  it  I "  (Ezra  iii.  10). 
The  LXX.  seems  to  have  mistaken  the 
sense,  rendering,  'Iir<!Ti)Ta  x^P'"'^"^  x'^P''""" 
ouT^j,  "The  grace  of  it  the  equality  of 
grace"  (John  i.  16);  and  to  ha\e  led  St. 
Jerome  astray,  who  translates,  "  Et  cxseciua- 
bit  gratinm  gratiss  ejus,"  and  comments 
thus:  "We  all  liave  received  of  his  fulness, 
and  grace  for  grace,  that  is,  the  grace  of  the 
gospel  for  the  grace  of  the  Law,  in  order 
that  the  Israelites  and  the  heathen  who 
believe  may  receive  equal  grace  and  a  like 
blessing."  Tlie  Targum  recognizes  here  a 
Messianic  prophecy:  "He  will  reveal  the 
Messiah  whose  Name  is, spoken  of  from  all 
eternity,  and  he  shall  rule  over  all  the 
kingdoms." 

Ver.  8. — The  word  of  the  lord  came  unto 
me.  The  word  came  through  the  interpreting 
angel,  as  is  clear  from  the  expressinn  in 
ver.  9,  "The  Lord  hath  sent  me  unto  you." 
He  explains  more  fully  what  had  been 
already  announced  fijjuratively. 

Vir  fl  — Have  laid  the  fuundation.    Zerub- 


CH.  IV,  1—14.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZBOHARIAH. 


41 


babel  bad  commenced  the  rebiulding  In  the 
•econd  year  of  the  letum,  in  the  second 
month  (Ezra  iii.  8);  it  had  been  hindered 
by  the  opposition  of  the  neighbouring 
people  (Ezra  iv.  1 — 5,  24),  and  was  not 
resumed  till  the  second  year  of  Darius. 
Shall  finish  it.  The  temple  was  finished  in 
Darius's  sixth  year  (Ezra  vi.  15).  Thou  shalt 
know,  etc.  The  truth  of  the  angel's  mission 
would  be  proved  by  the  event,  viz.  the 
successful  issue  (comp.  oh.  ii.  9,11;  vi.  15; 
Deut.  xviii.  22).  The  completion  of  the 
material  temple  was  a  pledge  of  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  spiritual  temple,  the  Church 
of  God. 

Ver.  10. — For  who  hath  despised  the  day 
of  small  things?  The  "small  things"  are 
the  weak  and  poor  beginuinji;  of  the  temple 
(Hag.  ii.  3) ;  as  the  Turgum  glosses,  "  on 
account  of  the  edifice,  because  it  was  small." 
Small  as  the  present  work  was,  it  was  a 
pledge  of  the  full  completion,  and  was 
therefore  not  to  be  despised.  So  the  question 
IB  equivalent  to,  "  Can  any  one,  after  these 
promises  and  propliecies,  presume  to  be 
doubtful  about  the  future  ?  "  for  they  shall 
rejoice,  etc.  The  subject  of  the  verbs  is 
that  which  comes  last  in  position,  the  seven 
eyes  of  Jehovah;  and  the  verse  is  best 
translated  thus :  "  For  (t.e.  seeing  that) 
these  seven  eyes  of  Jehovah,  which  run 
through  all  the  earth,  behold  with  joy  the 
plummet  in  the  hand  of  Zerubbabel."  The 
work  is  not  contemptible,  siaoe  the  Lord 
regards  it  with  favour,  watches,  and  directs 
it.  The  LXX.  and  Vulgate  (followed  nearly 
by  the  Authorized  Version)  make  the 
despiserg  the  subject  of  the  verbs,  and 
lamely  dissociate  the  final  clause  entirely 
from  the  preceding.  The  version  given 
above  is  in  accordance  with  the  Masoretio 
accentuation.  The  plummet;  literally,  the 
stonef  the  tin;  ritv  AfOor,  rhf  Kaatrnipivov 
(Septuagint) ;  lapidem  stanneum,  "  the  stone 
of  tin"  (Vulgate).  Tin  is  not  found  in 
Palestine ;  it  was  imported  by  the  Phoeni- 
cians in  great  abundance,  and  from  them 
the  Jews  obtained  it.  The  supply  must 
have  come  from  Spain  or  Britain.  With 
those  seven.  The  preposition  is  an  inter- 
polation of  the  Authorized  Version.  It 
should  be,  "even  these  seven,"  explaining 
who  are  "  they  "  at  the  head  of  the  clause. 
The  eyes  of  the  Lord.  The  "seven  eyes" 
have  been  already  .  mentioned  (cb.  iii.  9, 
where  see  note).  They  are  expressive  of 
God's  watchful  providence  and  care.  .  Which 
rnn  to  and  fro.  This  clause  further  enforces 
the  previous  image  (2  Ghron.  xvi.  9 ;  Prov. 
XV.  3). 

Yer.  11. — Then  answered  I.  The  prophet 
had  received  a  general  explanation  of  the 
Tision ;  he  had  probably  understood  that  the 
taudelabrum  represented  the  theocracy,  of 


whose  restoration  and  life  the  temple  was 
the  symbol  and  vehicle.  One  point  was 
still  obscure,  and  he  asks,  What  are  these 
two  olive  trees?  (ver.  8).  To  this  question 
no  answer  is  immediately  forthcoming,  the 
answer  being  delayed  in  order  to  augment 
the  prophet's  desire  of  understanding  the 
vision,  and  to  induce  him  to  make  the 
question  more  definite. 

Ver.  12. — The  prophet  perceives  the  chief 
point  in  the  mystic  olive  trees,  so  he  alters 
his  question  the  second  time,  asking.  What 
be  tuese  two  olive  branches  1  (shibimlim) ; 
Vulgate,  spieee,  "  ears,"  as  of  corn,  so  called, 
as  Kimchi  supposes,  because  they  were  full 
of  berries,  as  the  ears  are  full  of  grains  of 
corn.  Which  through  the  two  golden  pipes, 
eto. ;  rather,  which  hy  meant  oj  two  golden 
tvbet  are  emptying  the  golden  oil  out  of 
themselves.  The  oil  dropped  of  itself  from 
the  fruit-bearing  branches  into  two  tubes, 
spouts,  or  channels,  which  conveyed  it  to 
the  central  reservoir.  The  Eevised  Version 
renders,  "  which  are  beside  the  two  golden 
spouts;"  like  the  Vulgate,  qua  sunt  juxta 
duo  rottra  aurea.  The  LXX.  has,  ol 
kK^Soi  , ,  ,  ol  4v  Tois  X^P^^  "^^^  '^^  t^'V^ur^puv 
("beaks,"  "noses")  ray  xp""'™" — where 
"in  the  hands"  or  "by  the  hands"  may  be 
a  Hebraism  for  "by  means  of."  The  golden 
oil ;  Hebrew,  the  gold.  The  oil  is  so  railed 
from  its  colour.  The  Greek  and  Latin 
versions  lose  this  idea  altogether.  In  qmbut 
sunt  Buffusoria  ex  auro  (Vulgate) ;  "  leading 
to  the  golden  vessels  "  (Septuagint). 

Ver.  13, — Enowest  thou  not?  (comp.  ver.  5). 
The  angel  wishes  to  impress  upon  the 
prophet  whence  came  the  power  of  the 
theocracy  and  the  Divine  order  manifested 
therein. 

Ver.  14. — The  two  anointed  ones ;  literally, 
the  two  loni  of  oil ;  so  the  Revised  Version ; 
Vulgate,  filii  olei;  Septuagint,  viol  tS» 
ir«rfT9)To», "  sons  of  fatness  "  (comp.  Isa.  v.  1), 
By  them  are  intended  the  two  powers, 
the  regal  and  the  sacerdotal,  through  which 
God's  help  and  protection  are  dispensed  to 
the  theocracy.  Oil  was  used  iii  appointing 
to  both  these  offices  (comp.  Lev.  xxi.  10;- 
1  Sam.  z.  1).  The  expression,  "son 
of,"  in  many  cases  denotes  a  quality  or 
property,  like  "son  of  Belial,"  "son  of 
might ; "  so  here  Dr.  Alexander  considers 
that  "  sons  of  oil "  means  people  possessed 
of  oil,  oil-bearers,  channels  through  which 
the  oil  flowed  to  others.  Zerubbabel  and 
Joshua  are  representatives  of  the  civil  and 
priestly  authorities,  but  the  text  seems 
expressly  to  avoid  naming  any  hnman 
agents,  in  order  to  show  that  the  symbol 
must  not  be  limited  to  individuals.  Nor, 
indeed,  must  it  be  confined  to  the  Jewish 
Oliurch  and  state;  it  looks  forward  to  the 
time  when  Jew  and  Gentile  shall  unite  ia 


44 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHABIAH. 


[OH.  IT,  1 — It. 


npholding  the  Ohnrah  of  God.  -  That  itand 
by  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth;  i.e.  ready 
as  his  ministers  to  do  him  service.  There 
is  a  reference  to  this  passage  in  Rev.  xi.  4, 
where  the  "  two  witnesses  "  are  called  "  the 
t  AO  olivo  trees  .  .  .  standing  before  the  Lord 
of  the  (arth"  (Perowne).  The  vision,  as  we 
liave  seen,  prefigures  primarily  the  com- 
pletion of  the  temple  and  the  restoration  of 
its  worship,  and  secondly  the  establishment 
of  the  Cliristian  Church  by  the  advent  of 
Messiali.  The  several  parts  of  the  vision 
may  be  thus  explained.  The  candelabrum 
is  a  symbol  of  the  Jewish  Church  and 
theocracy,  in  accordance  with  the  imagery 
in  the  Apocalypse,  wiiere  the  seven  candle- 
sticks are  seven  Churches  (Rev.  i.  20).  It 
is  made  of  gold  as  precious  in  God's  sight, 
and  to  be  kept  pure  and  unalloyed;  it  is 
placed  in  the  sanctuary,  and  has  seven 
lamps,  to  indicate  that  it  ii  bright  with  the 
grace  of  God,  uid  ia  meant  to  ihed  ite  light 


aronnd  at  all  times,  as  Christian  men  art 
bidden  to  shine  like  lights  in  the  world 
(Matt.  V.  16;  Phil.  ii.  15).  The  oU  that 
supplies  the  lamps  is  the  grace  of  God,  the 
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  irtone 
enables  the  Church  to  shine  and  to  accom- 
plish its  appointed  work.  The  two  olive 
trees  are  the  two  authorities,  viz.  the  civil 
and  sacerdotal,  through  which  God  com- 
municates his  grace  to  the  Church;  these 
stand  by  the  Lord  beuausse,  instituted  by 
him,  they  carry  out  his  will  in  the  ordering, 
guiding,  extending,  and  purifying  his 
kingdom  among  men.  The  two  olive 
branches  remit  their  oil  into  one  receptacle, 
because  the  two  authorities,  the  regal  and 
priestly,  are  iutimately  connected  and 
united,  and  their  action  tends  to  one  end, 
the  promotion  of  God's  glory  in  the  salvation 
of  men.  In  Messiah  these  n£Soes  are  united ; 
he  is  the  channel  of  Divine  grace,  the  source 
of  light  to  the  whole  world. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — 37le  Church  revived.  "And  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  came 
again,  and  waked  me,"  etc.  The  imagery  of  these  verses  is  twofold;  but  their  subject 
seems  one.  By  the  "  candlestick  "  expressly  mentioned  in  ver.  2  (comp.  Rev.  i.  13 ; 
ii.  1;  also  Matt.  t.  14,  15;  Phil.  ii.  15),  and  by  the  temple  tacitly  referred  to  in 
ver.  7,  we  understand,  spiritually,  the  same  thing,  viz.  in  the  first  instance  certainly 
the  Jewish  Church  of  that  time.  And  what  this  twofold  imagery  seems  intended 
here  to  set  before  us  respecting  this  Church  is  (1)  the  secret,  and  (2)  the  completeneu 
of  its  restoration  to  life. 

I.  Thb  secbet  of  its  bestobatiok  to  life.  Under  this  head  we  have  set  before 
us  the  question :  1.  0/  Church  work.  What  is  the  great  duty  of  a  Church  in  this  world  ? 
Is  it  not,  like  a  lamp  or  candlestick,  to  give  light,  to  be  a  continued  witness  to  men 
respecting  things  unseen  and  ettmal — a  standing  testimony  in  favour  of  truth  and 
righteousness,  and  against  error  and  sin  ?  in  other  words  (Art.  XX.),  "a  witness  and 
keeper  of  Holy  Writ "  ?  See  again  references  supra  ;  and  note,  in  connection  with  this 
duty  of  spiritual  light-giving  on  the  part  of  a  Church,  the  various  grounds  of  the 
praise  or  blame  administered  in  Bev.  ii.  and  iii.  2.  0/  Church  needs.  The  returned 
remnant  of  the  Captivity,  with  their  altar  again  set  up  (Ezra  iii.  3),  their  feasts  again 
begun  (Ezra  iii.  4),  their  temple  in  course  of  re-eiection  (Ezra  iii.  10 ;  vi.  14),  and  their 
ancient  priesthood  again  restored  (Zech.  iii.  1 — 5),  had  now  become  such  a  witness. 
They  were  a  "candlestick"  or  lamp  again  "lighted."  How  unequal  in  themselves  to 
so  important  an  ofBce  1  How  weak,  how  inexperienced,  also  how  greatly  endangered  I 
Above  all,  how  greatly  needing  that  sacred  imction,  or  "  oil,"  of  Clod's  grace,  of  which 
we  are  told  here  (comp.  also  Acts  x.  38) !  3.  0/  Church  supplies.  How  ample, 
according  to  the  vision  described  in  vers.  2,  3,  the  provision  made  for  supplying  this 
revived  lamp  with  this  oil!  What  besides  is  meant  by  the  different  features  of  this 
vision  the  prophet  knows  not  (ver.  4),  and  the  angel  tells  not,  at  present.  But,  at  any 
rate,  they  seem  to  signify  that  abundant  provision  is  made.  (1)  For  supplying  such  oil. 
There  are  "  two  "  olive  trees,  e.g.,  to  yield  a  double  supply.  Two  "  trees,"  also,  things 
always  growing  and  always  producing,  and  able  to  yield,  therefore,  a  continual  supply. 
(2)  For  storing  it  up,  viz.  in  the  "  bowl "  placed  at  the  "  top,"  whence  it  could  naturally 
now  out  and  down  as  required.  (3)  For  distributing  it  in  every  needed  direction,  viz. 
by  means  of  the  twice-seven  pipss  (or  even,  as  some  take  it,  the  seven-times-seven 
pipes),  to  the  seven  lamps  of  which  we  are  told.  So  mysterious,  yet  so  sufficient,  was 
the  secret  source  of  life  in  this  case.  Let  Zerubbabel,  as  the  successor  of  David,  and 
earthly  guardian  of  his  Church,  l^no'    tliis  for  his  comfort  (see  ver.  6). 


OH.  IT.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  48 

n.  Tee  oohfleteness  of  thts  restoration.  In  the  seventh  verBe,  as  noted 
before,  the  figure  is  changed.  The  Church  of  the  restored  Captivity  is  before  u»  now 
under  the  metaphor  of  a  building  inhabited  by  God  himself,  as  often  in  God'i  Word 
(see  Heb.  iii.  6;  2  Cor.  vi.  16  ;  Eph.  ii.  21,  22  ;  1  Tim.  iii.  15  ;  1  Pet.  li.  5).  And  the 
purport  of  this  change  seems  that  of  representing,  not  only  as  before  the  adequacy,  but 
also  now  the  actual  effectiveness,  of  the  provision  here  made.  It  should  eventually  be 
with  that  spiritual  house  as  with  the  material  house  which  they  were  then  building  aa 
its  image  and  type.  This  true :  1.  As  to  external  obstacles.  The  greatest  of  these, 
even  if  like  a  "  great  mountain  "  itself  in  bulk,  should  become, "  before  Zerubbabel " — 
tiaving  the  Spirit  of  God  on  his  side — like  a  plain.  2.  As  to  final  victory.  To  use  a 
well-known  modern  expression,  there  should  be  "the  crowning  of  the  edifice"  of  the 
Church.  All  that  the  pre-Captivity  Jewish  Cliurch  had  really  been  in  the  world 
this  restored  Church  should  now  be,  up  to  the  very  "  lieadstone" — the  last  stone  to  be 
put  in  its  place — with  every  mark  »f  triumph  ("  shoutings  ")  and  favour  ("gr«ce")  as 
well  (ver.  7). 

Observe,  in  conclusion  :  1.  Bow  strikingly  these  promises  viere  fulfilled.  Besides  all 
that  we  read  concerning  the  days  of  the  Maccabees  (as  referred  to  probably  in  Heb.  xi. 
35 — ^38),  how  much  more  spiritual  life  remained  in  the  Jewish  Church  even  to  the  times 
of'the  gospel  1  See  indications  of  this  in  Luke  ii.  25,  38;  Matt,  xxvii.  53;  Mark  xv. 
4:3 ;  Acts  ii.  5,  etc.  See  indications,  also,  as  to  the  extent  to  w'hich  the  witness  or 
"  light"  of  this  Church  had  told  on  the  Gentile  world  in  Luke  vii.  5  ;  John  xii.  20; 
Acts  X.  1 ;  xiii.  43,  50  (rit  (Tc0oftcyas) ;  xvii.  4, 17.  2.  How  great  a  lesson  this  teaches. 
There  was  nothing  iu  this  case  but  the  secret  working  of  God's  Spirit  thus  to  keep  this 
Church  in  existence ;  no  "  might,"  no  "  power."  On  the  contrary,  many  obstacles — 
persecutions,  enemies,  corruptions,  and  so  on.  So  plain  is  it  how  much  can  be  done 
(and  done  only)  in  the  way  of  Christian  organization,  labour,  and  progress  by  the  sacred 
oil  of  God's  Spirit.  "  Udlis  lectio,  utilis  eruditio,  sed  magis  utilis  unctio,  quippe  quas 
docet  de  omnibus." 

Vers.  8 — 14. — The  Church  sustained.  "  Moreover  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto 
mo,  say  i  ng.  The  hands  of  Zerubbabel  have  laid  the  foundation  of  this  house,"  etc.  These 
verses  continue  the  metaphors  of  the  previous  portion,  but  in  the  opposite  order. 
Vers.  1 — 7  begin  with  the  "  olive  trees  "  and  end  with  the  "  house ;  "  vers.  8 — 14  begin 
with  the  "house"  (vers.  8 — 10)  and  conclude  with  the  "  trees."  We  may  look  on 
this  latter  passage,  therefore,  as  a  kind  of  additional  message  ("  moreover,"  ver.  8)  on 
the  same  general  subject  and  to  the  same  general  purport  as  before.  The  principal 
difference  is  in  connection  with  the  questions  of  order  and  depth.  As  we  learned  before 
not  a  little,  first  as  to  the  secret,  and  secondly  as  to  the  completeness,  of  the  restored 
life  of  the  Jewish  Church,  so  here  we  learn  very  much  more  (1)  as  to  that  same  com- 
pleteness, and  (2)  as  to  that  same  secret,  of  this  same  restored  life. 

I.  Its  completeness.  As  conveyed,  we  suppose,  by  what  is  said  respecting  the 
material  "  house "  (or  typical  Church)  then  in  process  of  erection.  We  find  this 
described  in  vers.  9,  10.  And  of  the  promise  contained  therein  we  may  notice :  1. 
How  peculiarly  explicit  it  is  Not  only  is  the  work  which  Zerubbabel  had  bcisun  to 
be  finished ;  it  is  to  be  finished  by  "  his  hands,"  and  therefore,  of  course,  in  his  time. 
Not  only,  again,  is  it  to  be  so  far  finished  as  to  be  capable,  as  it  were,  of  habitation 
and  use ;  but  so  far  finished  as  to  be  ready  for  that  most  absolutely  ultimate  of  all 
building  processes,  the  process  of  testing  the  work  done.  How  graphic  the  description 
of  this !  "  They  shall  see  the  plummet  in  the  hands  of  Zerubbabel."  2.  Eow  exceed- 
ingly deliberate  it  is.  To  start  the  work  of  erecting  this  temple — to  begin  such  a  true 
spiritual  Church-restoration — was  a  great  thing.  To  accomplish  it,  a  still  greater.  If 
accomplished,  indeed,  that  of  itself  would  be  a  sufficient  proof  of  a  true  mission  fi-om 
God  (see  the  end  of  ver.  9 ;  also,  to  some  extent,  2  Sam.  vii.  12,  13).  Especially 
would  this  be  so  in  that  "day  of  small  things,"  when  even  well-wishers — persons 
ready  to  "  rejoice  "  in  such  a  thin?,  if  really  accomplished — as  it  were  "  despised  "  the 
Idea.  All  this  was  known,, all  this  was  recognized,  when  the  promise  was  given.  3. 
HmofuUy  assured  it  is.  Was  there  not  One  "  sent "  to  accomplish  this,  even  that  Angel- 
Jehovah  represented  by  the  "  stone  "  of  ch.  iii.  9  ?  And  was  there  not  sent  also* 
of  necessity,  together  with  bim,  «  full  supply  of  all  that  was  necessary  to  aocotaplisfa 


44  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [OH.IT.I— K 

these  wonders  ?  (See  end  of  ver.  10,  and  the  reference  there  to  "  those  seven  "  eyes  to 
be  found  on  that "  stone  ;  "  also  Rev.  v.  6 ;  2  Chron.  xvi.  9 ;  and  compare  end  of  ver.  6 
in  this  chapter.)  To  secure  that  "  stone  "  is  to  secure  that  sevenfold  blessing,  and  all 
it  involves. 

II.  Its  kkcret.  A  yet  further  point,  in  regard  to  this,  seems  revealed  to  us  in  that 
which  comes  next.  It  is  not  enough  to  have  the  blessing  referred  to,  so  to  speak,  in 
reversion.  If  the  Church  is  to  shine  as  a  living  witness,  some  channel  of  communica- 
tion must  be  in  existence  by  which  it  can  be  always  supplied  therewith  without  fail. 
To  understand  the  eniblem  employed  (as  before  described  in  ver.  3)  to  represent  this, 
we  may  notice :  1.  The  prophet's  ignorance  of  its  meaning.  See  this  five  times  referred 
to,  viz.  in  vers.  4,  5, 11,  12,  13.  Whatever  he  meant,  therefore,  it  is  evidently  some- 
thing the  nature  of  which  is  so  far  occult  and  secret  that  even  the  eyes  of  a  prophet 
might  fail  to  discern  it  at  first.  2.  The.  angeVs  surprise  at  his  ignorance.  "  Knowest 
thou  not? "(see  vers.  5  and  13 ;  and  comp.  John  iir.  10  ;  Mark  iv.  13;  Rom.  vi.  3, 16 ; 
vii.  1).  The  prophet  ought  to  have  discerned  it,  although  he  did  not.  3.  The  expla- 
nation that  follows.  (Ver.  14.)  An  explanation  which  seems  to  show  us  :  (1)  Why 
the  prophet  ought  to  have  understood  the  emblem,  viz.  because  it  represented  an 
ordinance  carefully  ordered  and  arranged,  even  that  of  certain  persons  "  anointed  "  for 
special  service ;  an  ordinance,  also,  ancient  and  settled  ("  stand  by,"  as  a  custom  or 
habit) ;  an  ordinance  of  most  extensive  import,  even  affecting  the  whole  earth.  (2) 
What  we  may  understand  therebyj  viz.  that  God  always  maintains  in  the  world  a 
succession  of  special  witnesses  for  him,  who  "  stand  by  "  him,  as  it  were,  so  as  to  be 
informed  of  his  will,  and  who  are  "anointed,"  as  it  were,  so  as  to  keep  alive  in  turn  the 
general  witness  of  his  Church  (see  2  Cor.  v.  18 — 20 ;  iv.  7 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  2 ;  Gen.  xviii. 
17 ;  Amos  iii.'  7) ;  and  who  also,  either  as  being  always  sufficient  in  number  (2  Cor. 
xiii.  1,  and  references;  also  Rev.  xi.  3,  4),  or  else  as  being  usually  divided,  as  were 
Zerubiiabel  and  Jeshua,  in  the  spirit  of  Luke  x.  24  and  1  Tim.  v.  17,  are  set  forth  to 
us  as  "  two  "  in  number.  In  these  ways  it  is  that  it  pleases  God  always  to  keep  alive 
the  life  of  his  Church  (1  Cor.  i.  21). 

See  illustrated  here  also,  in  conclusion :  1.  OocCs  great  love  for  his  people.  He  gives 
his  Son  for  them  in  order,  afterwards,  to  give  them  his  Spirit  as  well  (John  iv.  10 ; 
Gal.  iv.  4 — 6).  He  buys  these  earthen  vessels  for  a  sum  beyond  cost,  in  order,  then,  to 
fill  them  with  an  ointment  which  is  also  beyond  cost  I  2.  OocTs  great  care  for  his 
Ohwrch.  Whatever  the  objects  of  the  "  ministry  of  angels,"  God  has  entrusted  specially 
to  men  the  duty  of  keeping  alight  among  men  the  "candlestick"  of  his  truth. 
How  often  this  light  has  been  all  but  extinct  (Gen.  vi.  5 — 8 ;  xii.  1  compared  with 
Josh.xxiv.  2;  1  Sam.  iii.  1 ;  vii.  3 ;  1  Kings  xix.  10, 14 ;  Ps.  xii.  1 ;  Isa.  liii,  1 ;  Micah 
vii.  2;  Rev.  xi.  7 — 10)1  Yet  how  wonderfully  preserved  throughout;  and  to  be  pre- 
served to  the  end  (Matt.  xvi.  18)1 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  Church  in  three  aspects.  I.  Stuboucallt  bepresektkd.  (Vers. 
2,  3.)     Candelabrum. 

II.  Devoutly  contemplated.     (Ver.  5.)    Humble,  earnest,  reverent  inquiry. 

III.  Divinely  interpbeted.  1.  The  unity  of  the  Church.  2.  The  spiritual  use  of 
the  Church.  3.  The  Divine  care  of  the  Church.  4.  The  future  glory  of  the  Church. 
The  Church  should  be :  (1)  Receptive  of  the  Divine.  (2)  Communicative  of  the  Divine. 
"  They  empty  themselves,"  etc.  Freely,  constantly,  rejoicingly.  (3)  Reflective  of  the 
Divine.  Life  and  work.  Not  only  true  of  the  Church  as  a  whole,  but  of  every 
individual  member.    "  Let  your  light  shine  before  men." — F. 

Ver.  2. — On  seeing.     The  question,  "  What  seest  thou  ?"  suggests— 

I.  The  slumber  of  the  soul.  (Ver.  1.)  Want  of  consciousness  and  activity. 
Delusions  (Isa.  xxix.  7).     Peril  (Mark  xiii.  36). 

II.  The  awakening  op  the  soul.  (Ver.  1.)  "  The  ano;el "  may  be  taken  to 
illustrate  "the  various  ministries  employed  by  God  to  quicken  and  rouse  his  peoplei 
Providence.     Loss  of  health,  property,  friends,  and  auch-like  incidents.      Word  qf  tht 


OH.  IV.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH.  46 

truth.  Law  and  gospel.  The  Spirit  0/  Christ.  (1  Kings  xix.  11,12;  John  ivi.  8 — 13  j 
Rev.  i.  10—20.) 

III.  The  OLORiotrs  things  revealed  to  the  awakened  soul.  The  question. 
Mark  :  1.  The  time.   When  the  soul  was  awakeued ;  not  before  (Isa.  1.  4 ;  Luke  ix.  32), 

2.  Thepwpose.    To  stimulate  activity.     "  I  have  looked."    Must  use  our  own  faculties. 

3.  The  result.  Manifold  things  revealed.  As  we  are,  so  will  our  sight  be.  Press  the 
question,  "  What  seest  thou  ?  "    In  nature. 

"  O  lady,  we  receive  bat  what  we  give. 
And  in  our  lives  alone  does  nature  lire." 

(Coleridge.) 

Ewnan  Ufe.  Life  all  confused  and  dark,  a  maze  without  a  plan,  or  the  hand  of  God. 
Boh)  Scriptures.  Qod.  Truth.  Immortality.  Christ.  "We  see  Jesus"  (Heb.  ii. 
9).— P. 

Ver.  5. — The  learner  and  the  learned.  I.  The  spirit  of  the  learner.  Humility. 
The  first  thing  to  know,  as  the  ancient  sage  said,  is  that  we  know  nothing.  Love  of 
truth.  Por  its  own  sake.  To  be  sought  for  as  hidden  treasure — with  ardour  and 
delight.  Oledience.  Not  merely  readiness  to  receive,  but  courage  to  act.  Faithful 
carrying  out  of  principles.  Progress.  Step  by  step,  in  the  spirit  of  self-sacrifica. 
"  When  first  thine  eyes  unveil,  give  thy  soul  leave  to  do  the  like"  (Vaughan). 

"Study  is  like  the  heaven's  glorious  sun. 

That  will  not  be  deep-searoh'd  with  saucy  looks; 
Small  have  continuous  plodders  ever  won, 
Save  base  authority  from  others'  books." 

(Shakespeare.) 

II.  Thb  bfirit  of  the  learned.  1.  Wisdom.  Not  mere  knowledge,  but  insight 
into  character,  and  capacity  to  turn  knowledge  to  the  best  account,  2.  Kindness. 
Hence  patience  with  ignorance  and  prejudice.  Loving  endeavour  to  give  to  others 
what  has  been  good  and  a  joy  to  themselves.  3.  Faithfulness.  Not  hiding  what 
should  be  told;  not  making  compromises  of  principle ;  not  strivmg  for  the  mastery,  but 
for  the  victory  of  truth.  4.  Humility  is  as  much  the  character  of  the  learned  as  of  the 
learner  (cf.  Newton  likening  himself  to  a  child  gathering  shells). 

"  Were  man  to  live  coeval  with  the  sun. 
The  patriarch-pupil  would  be  learning  still. 
And  dying  leave  his  lesson  half  unlearnt." 

F. 

Ver.  6. — The  secret  of  power.  Power  is  indispensable.  It  is  not  in  numbers,  or 
oi^anization,  or  method.  These  are  good,  but  not  enough.  It  is  not  of  man,  though 
it  is  by  man.  Must  look  higher.  It  is  of  God.  Life  is  from  life.  The  highest  life 
can  only  come  from  the  highest  life.     "  Not  by  might,"  etc.     Apply  to — 

I.  The  ministry  of  the  Church.  Talent,  culture,  wide  sympathies,  zeal  and 
eloquence,  not  enough.  Even  truth  not  enough.  Need  more.  "  My  Spirit."  There 
must  be  a  right  relation  to  God.  There  must  be  the  quickening  of  the  soul  with  the 
life  of  God — the  energizing  and  elevatins;  of  the  natural  powers  to  the  highest  capacity 
and  use.     This  influence  is  necessary  both  for  preachers  and  hearers. 

II.  The  worship  op  the  Church.  In  the  Church  God  draws  near  to  ua  and  we 
draw  near  to  God.  As  a  Father  to  his  children  he  speaketh  unto  us ;  as  children  unto 
a  ^aMer  we  sliould  speak  unto  him.     1.  Praise.     2.  Prajer.     3.  Hearing  of  the  Word. 

4.  Communion.  5.  Times  of  refreshina.  It  is  only  as  we  are  quickened  from  above 
that  our  worship  is  hearty  and  true  (cf.  John  iv.  23),  acceptable  to  God,  and  profitable 
to  ourselves. 

III.  The  work  of  the  Church.  Life  must  precede  work.  As  individuals,  in  the 
society  to  which  we  belong,  and  in  our  daily  life,  we  are  called  to  serve  God.  Every 
one  has  his  place  and  his  work.     It  is  as  we  carry  out  faithfully  the  duty  committed 


M  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  iv.  1—14. 

to  ua  that  the  cause  of  the  Lord  will  prosper,  aod  "  his  kiagdom  come  "  at  home  and 
abroad. — P. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — Eneowragement  to  Christian  workers.  I.  Though  the  wobk  be 
DEBIDED,  IT  IS  God's  WOBK.  Therefore  we  are  sure  it  is  right  and  good.  We  cau 
throw  ourselves  into  it  with  all  our  heart.    Patience.     What  is  of  God  cannot  fail. 

II.  Though  the  difficulties  be  great,  they  are  capable  of  bbiko  ovebcome. 
Difficulties  are  a  test.  They  show  what  spirit  we  are  of.  'Ihey  separate  the  chafl 
fiom  the  wheat.  Remember  "  Formality  "  and  "  Hypocrisy  "  in  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress.' 
Difficulties  are  a  challenge.  They  put  us  on  our  mettle.  Courage  mounteth  with 
occasion.  Once  we  can  ^ay,  "  It  is  our  duty,"  nothing  should  daunt  us  (Acts  t.  29  ; 
XX.  24).  Ill  A.D.  1800  Napoleon  wanteii  to  cross  the  Alps  with  his  army  into  Italy. 
He  asked  Mareacot,  chief  of  the  engineers,  "  Is  it  possible  ?  "  He  replied,  "  Yes,  but 
with  difficulty."  "  Let  us,  then,  set  out,"  was  the  order~of  the  great  captain  (1  Oor, 
ix.  25).  DifBcidties  are  our  education.  It  is  not  ease  but  effort  that  makes  men. 
"  Our  antagonist  is  our  helper,"  said  Burke.  "  Hu  who  has  battled,  were  it  only  with 
poverty  and  hard  toil,  will  be  found  stronger  and  more  expert  than  be  who  could  stay 
at  home  from  the  battle,  concealed  amon;;  the  provision-waggons,  or  even  resting 
unwatchfully,  abiding  by  the  stuff"  (Carlyle).  So  it  is  in  all  spheres  of  activity.  "  To 
overcome,  we  must  conquer  as  we  go."  Difficulties  lead  us  to  a  deeper  and  truer 
appreciation  of  our  dependence  upon  God  (Rom.  v.  3 — 5;  viii.  31,  37). 

HI.    'I'HOUGH   THE  PBOGKESS  BE   SMALL,  ULTIMATE  SUCCESS  IS  CERTAIN.      God's  Word 

~  is  sure.  He  is  truth,  and  cannot  lie.  He  is  love,  and  cannot  betray.  He  is  almighty, 
and  cannot  be  defeate'1.  The  laying  of  the  foundation-stone,  in  his  Name,  implies  the 
completion  of  the  structure ;  and,  by  faith,  we  already  hear  the  shoutings  and  the 
jubilant  cries  as  the  work  is  finished.    "  Grace,  >j;race  unto  it  I  " — F. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Man  o«  a  student  of  the  Divine  revelation  and  a  doer  of  Divine 
work.  "  And  the  angel  that  talkud  with  me,"  etc.  "  It  is  needful  to  keep  in  mind 
that  all  these  successive  scenes  were  presented  to  the  mind  of  the  prophet  in 
vision;  and  that  each  vision  was  distinct, forming  a  whole  of  itself,  independently  oi 
the  scenery  of  those  which  preceded  it,  although  not  so  as  to  preclude  connection 
in  the  lessons  taught,  and  occa^ional  reference  (such  as  we  shall  find  in  the  one 
now  before  us)  to  the  earlier  in  the  latter.  The  fourth  iu  the  series  of  visions,  then, 
was  now  closed;  and  at  the  close  of  it,  the  prophet  represents  himself  as  having 
fallen  into  a  kind  of  reverie  arising  from  its  disclosures,  or  from  soine  particular  part  of 
them,  by  which  his  mind  was  absorbed  and  unconscious  of  anght  that  might  be  passing . 
around  him.  Prom  this  state  he  was  roused,  as  the  first  verse  indicates,  by  the  touch 
and  the  voice  of  the  ministering  angel,  and  his  attention  arrested  to  a  new  scenic  repre- 
sentation, and  the  explanation  of  its  meaniiig"  (Wardlaw).  I  have  to  confess  that 
the  more  I  look  into  this  vision,  as  well  as  into  the  previous  visions,  the  more  I  feel 
my  utter  inability  to  attach  a  satisfactory  meaning  to  all  the  strange  and  grotesque 
symbols  that  are  presented.  And  my  sense  of  inability  has  been  deepened  as  I  have 
examined  the  explanations  that  have  been  put  forth  by  biblical  critics — some  most 
fanciful  and  absurd,  and  many  most  conflicting.  Indeed,  it  requires  a  Daniel  to 
interpret  dreams;  the  objects  in  a  dream  are  generally  so  unnatural,  grotesque,  shadowy, 
and  shifting,  that  men  seldom  try  to  attach  any  definite  idea  to  them.  1  may  regard 
this  passage  as  setting  before  us  man  in  two  aspects,  viz.  as  a  student  of  the  Divine 
revelation,  and  as  a  doer  of  the  Divine  purposes. 

L  As  A  STUDENT  OF  THE  DiviNB  REVELATION.  "I  have  looked,  and  behold  a 
candlestick  all  of  gold,  with  a  bowl  upon  the  top  of  it,  and  his  seven  lamps  thereon, 
and  seven  pipes  to  the  seven  lamps,  which  are  upon  the  top  thereof:  and  two  olive 
trees  by  it,  one  upon  the  right  side  of  the  bowl,  and  the  other  upon  the  left  side  thereof 
So  I  answered  and  spake  to  the  an>iel  that  talked  with  me,  saying,  What  are  these, 
my  lord?"  This  candelabrum  made  of  gold,  with  a  bowl  on  the  top,  its  seven  lampi 
and  seven  pipes,  etc.,  is  taken  by  most  expositors  to  represent  the  Church  of  Gud,  and 
popular  preachers  go  on  to  draw  analogies  between  the  candlestick  and  the  Church. 
Of  course,  this  is  easy  work.  But  the  Church  of  God,  as  the  phrase  is,  has  not,  alaal 
been  very  golden  or  very  luminous.      The  ideal  Church  is  all  this.     The  candlestick 


OH.  IV.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABIAU.  47 

may,  I  think,  fairly  represent  the  Bible,  or  God's  special  revelation  to  man :  that  is 
golden,  that'  is  luminous,  that  is  supematurdlly  supplied  with  the  oil  of  inspiration. 
In  fact,  in  the  passage,  the  interpreting  angel  designates  this  candlestick,  not  as  the 
Church,  but  as  the  "  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Zerubbabel."  I  make  two  remarks  con- 
cerning this  revelation.  1.  It  has  in  it  sufficient  to  excite  the  inquiry  of  mum  as  a 
student.  The  prophet,  on  seeing  these  wonderful  objects,  exclaimed,  "  What  are  these, 
my  lord  ?  "  He  seemed  to  feel  as  Moses  felt  in  relation  to  the  burning  bush,  when 
he  said,  "I  will  now  turn  aside,  and  see  this  great  sight,  why  the  bush  is  not  consumed." 
What  wonderful  things  are  in  this  Bible!  It  is  a  museum  of  wonders;  and  the 
greatest  of  all  wonders  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  2.  It  has  an  interpreter  that  can 
satisfy  man  as  a  student.  The  angel  to  whom  the  prophet  directed  bis  inquiry 
promptly  answered.  "  Then  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  answered  and  said  unto 
me,  Knowest  thou  not  what  these  be  ?  And  I  said.  No,  my  lord.  Then  he  answered 
and  spake  unto  me,  saying,  This  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Zerubbabel,  saying,  Not 
by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  The  prophet 
here  displays  two  of  the  leading  attributes  of  a  genuine  student  of  the  Divine. 
(1)  Inquisitiveness.  He  inquires;  and  iMcause  he  inquires,  he  receives  an  answer. 
Had  he  not  inquired,  the  object  would  have  remained  an  unmeaning  symbol.  The 
Bible  is  an  unmeaning  book  to  the  great  masses  of  mankind,  because  they  do  not 
inquire  into  its  significance.  Truth  is  only  got  by  genuine  inquiry.  (2)  Ingenuous- 
ness. The  first  reply  of  the  interpreting  angel  to  the  prophet  was,  "  Knowest  thou  not 
what  these  things  mean?  and  he  said,  "No,  my  lord.  At  once  he  confesses  his 
ignorance.  "  Let  us,"  says  Dr.  Wardlaw,  "  imitate  the  twofold  example — both  that  of 
inquisitiveness  and  that  of  ingenuousness.  Let  us  be  on  the  alert  in  our  inquiries  after 
knowledge ;  and  in  order  to  our  acquiring  it,  never  foolishly,  and  to  save  our  pride  and 
vanity,  affect  to  have  what  we  have  not."  The  man  who  develops  these  two  attributes 
in  relation  to  God's  Word,  has  a  Divine  Interpreter  at  his  side,  namely,  the  Spirit  uf 
God,  who  will  lead  him  into  all  knowledge. 

II.  As  A  DOER  OF  THE  DiviNB  WILL.  Man  has  not  only  to  study,  but  to  work ;  nut 
only  to  get  Divine  ideas,  but  to  work  them  out.  "  Then  he  answered  and  spuke  unto  ' 
me,  saying.  This  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Zerubbabel,  saying.  Not  by  might,  nor 
by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Who  art  thou,  O  great  mountain  ? 
before  Zerubbabel  thou  shalt  become  a  plain:  and  he  shall  bring  forth  the  headstoue 
thereof  with  shoutings,  crying,  Grace,  grace  unto  it  1  Moreover  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came  unto  me,  saying,  The  hands  of  Zerubbabel  have  laid  the  foundation  of  this  house ; 
his  hands  shall  also  finish  it ;  and  thou  shalt  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent 
me  unto  you."  The  work  of  the  prophet  was  to  convey  a  message  from  God  to 
Zerubbabel,  and  the  message  he  conveyed  was  a  message  to  work.  Man  is  to  be  a 
"  worker  together  "  with  God.  I  offer  two  remarks  concerning  man  as  a  worker  out 
of  the  Divine  will.  1.  ITiat  though  his  difficulties  may  appear  great,  his  resources  are 
infmile.  Zerubbabel,  in  rebuilding  the  temple,  bad  enormous  difficulties.  Those 
difficulties  hovered  before  him  as  mountains.  But  great  as  they  were,  he  was  assured 
that  he  had  resources  more  than  equal  to  the  task.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but 
by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  By  this  is  meant,  not  that  human  might  and 
power  are  not  required,  or  are  utterly  useless,  but  Divine  might  would  give  aid  to 
all  honest  effort  and  endeavour.  The  difficulties  in  a  good  man's  path  of  duty  rise  often- 
ticues  like  mountains  before  him;  but  let  him  not  be  disheartened;  those  mountains 
»/e  nothing  compared  with  the  might  that  is  guaranteed.  "If  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain 
of  mustard  seed,  ye  shall  say  unto  this  mountain,  Remove  hence  to  yonder  place;  and 
it  shall  remove,"  etc.  2.  That  though  his  efforts  may  seem  feeble,  his  success  will  he 
inevitable.  (1)  The  feebleness  of  human  efforts  is  here  implied.  "  Who  hath  despised 
the  <lay  of  small  things?  "  (a)  It  is  common  to  despise  small  things.  Proud  man  will 
only  honour  what  seem  to  him  great  things — conventionally  great.  A  small  house, 
a  small  business,  a  small  book, — these  are  despised.  (6)  It  is  foolish  to  despise  small 
things.  All  great  things  were  small  in  their  beginnings.  London  was  once  a  little 
hamlet ;  the  oaken  forest  once  an  acorn.  We  do  not  know  what  really  are  small  things ; 
what  we  consider  small  may  be  the  greatest  things  in  the  universe,  (c)  It  is  coH' 
temptible  to  despise  small  things.  Truly  great  souls  never  do  so.  (2)  The  success  of 
feeble  efforts  is  here  guaranteed.    "He  shall  bring  forth  the  headstone  thereof  with 


48  THE   BOOK  OF  ZECHAEIAa  [cH.  nr.  1—14 

shoutings,  crying,  Grace,  grace  unto  It."  Literally,  the  promise  is  that  Zerubbabel, 
notwithstanding  all  the  difficulties  he  had  to  contend  with  in  rebuilding -the  temple, 
should  see  it  completed,  should  see  the  ciowning  stone  laid  on  the  building,  amid  the 
hosannahs  of  the  people :  "  Grace,  grace  unto  it  I "  So  it  will  be  with  every  genuine 
work  to  which  a  true  man  puts  bis  hand  in  the  name  of  God.  It  will  be  finished; 
there  will  be  no  failure,  success  is  inevitable.  "As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  the  whole 
earth  shall  be  filled  with  my  glory  "  (Numb.  xiv.  21). — D.  T. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — The  olive  trees  and  the  candlesticki:  model  religious  teacheri.  "  Then 
answered  I,  and  said  unto  him,"  etc.  This  is  not  another  vision,  but  an  explanation 
of  the  one  recorded  in  the  preceding  verses.  The  explanation  is  that  the  two  branches 
of  the  olive  tree  which,  by  means  of  the  two  tubes  of  gold  empty  their  oil,  is  that  they 
represented  "two  anointed  ones,"  or  sons  of  oil.  Perhaps  Joshua  and  Zerubbabel  are 
particularly  referred  to.  "Because,"  8ay.i  Henderson,  "when  installed  into  office  they 
bad  oil  poured  upon  their  heads  as  a  symbol  of  the  gifts  and  influences  of  the  Holj 
Spirit,  which  alone  could  fit  them  rightly  to  discharge  their  important  functions.  Thar 
services  to  the  new  state  were  of  such  value  that  they  might  well  be  represented 
as  furnishing  it,  instrumentally,  with  what  was  necessary  for  enabling  it  to  answer  the 
purpose  of  its  establishment."  I  shall  take  these  two  "anointed  ones"  as  types  of 
model  religious  teachers.     Three  things  are  suggested. 

L  They  have  a  htoh  okdbb  of  life  in  them.  They  are  represented  by  the  olive 
branches.  There  are  few  productions  of  the  vegetable  kingdom  that  are  of  such  a  high 
order  as  the  olive.  Thongh  not  large,  seldom  rising  higher  than  thirty  feet,  it  has 
a  rich  foliage,  beautiful  flowers,  abundant  fruit,  and  withal  is  filled  with  precious 
oil.  One  tree  contains  olten  not  less  than  a  thousand  pounds  of  precious  oil.  Its 
fatness  was  proverbial  (Judg.  ix.  9) ;  it  is  an  evergreen,  and  most  enduring.  In  short, 
it  is  marked  by  great  beauty,  perpetual  freshness,  and  immense  utility.  It  was  one 
of  the  sources  of  wealth  in  Judeea,  and  its  failure  was  the  cause  of  famine.  The 
emblems  of  a  true  teacher  are  not  dead  timber  or  some  frail  vegetable  life,  but  an  olive 
.  tree.  Religious  teachers  should  not  only  have  life,  but  life  of  the  highest  order.  They 
should  be  full  of  animal  spirits,  full  of  creative  genius,  full  of  fertile  thought,  full  ol 
Divine  inspiration.  Men  whose  vitality  is  of  a  low  order  are  utterly  disqualified  to  be 
public  religious  teachers.  They  should  not  be  reeds,  fragile,  and  with  temporary  foliage, 
but  like  a  "  green  olive  tree  in  the  house  of  God."  The  curse  of  the  modern  pulpit 
is  its  lack  of  vitality,  freshness,  and  power. 

II.  They  communicate  the  most  peboious  elements  of  knowlbdob.  They 
"empty  the  golden  oil  out  of  themselves."  Whether  the  expression  " golden"  here 
signifies  merely  the  richness  of  its  colour  or  the  preciousness  of  its  property,  it  scarcely 
matters.  It  has  been  observed  by  modern  travellers  that  the  natives  of  olive  countries 
manifest  more  attachment  to  olive  oil  than  to  any  other  article  of  food,  and  find  nothing 
adequate  to  supply  its  place.  Genuine  religious  teachers  feed  the  lamp  of  universal 
knowledge  with  the  most  golden  elements  of  truth.  Tliey  not  only  give  the  true  theory 
ol  morals  and  worship,  but  the  true  theory  of  moral  restoration.  What  a  high  value 
Paul  set  on  this  knowledge  1  "  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord."  What  are  the  true  genuine  religious  teachers  doing? 
They  are  pourin>:  into  the  lamps  of  the  world's  knowledge  the  choicest  elements  of  trvith. 

III.  They  live  near  to  the  God  of  all  truth.  "  Then  said  he.  These  are  the 
two  anointed  ones,  that  stand  by  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth."  They  ■"  stand,"  a 
position  of  dignity ;  "stand,"  a  position  of  waiting — waiting  to  receive  infallible  instruc- 
tions, ready  to  execute  the  Divine  behests.  All  true  religious  teachers  live  consciously 
near  to  God.  To  "  stand  by  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth  "  is  one  thing,  to  be  conscious 
of  it  is  another.  All  "stand  by  "  him  ;  but  few  of  the  race  are  practically  conscious  of 
the  position,  and  these  few  alone  are  the  true  teachers. 

Conolusion.  Let  us,  who  are  engaged  in  the  office  of  public  teaching,  try  ourselves 
by  these  criteria.  The  olive  tree  gave  what  it  had  in  it — gave  out  its  nature.  So  must 
we.  Manufactured  discourses,  intellectual  speculations,  rhetorical  flourishes, — these  have 
no  oU.— D.  T. 


OR.  T.  1—11.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHABIAH. 


4« 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Vers.  1—4.— i  8.  The  $ixth  Wtfon:  tha 
flying  roll. 

Ver.  1.— Then  I  turned,  and  lifted  up 
mine  eyes ;  i.e.  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  again, 
and  Baw  the  Tieion  that  foUowe.  The  pro- 
phet had  seen,  in  the  fourth  vision,  how  in 
the  new  theocracy  the  priest)  lood  should  be 
pure  and  holy ;  in  the  fifth  how  the  Church 
should  be  restored;  he  is  now  shown  that 
sinners  should  be  cut  off,  that  no  trans- 
gression should  be  left  in  the  kingdom  of 
God.  A  flying  roll;  volumen  volant  (Vul- 
gate) :  comp.  Ezek.  ii.  9, 10.  The  Hebrews 
nsed  parchment  and  leather  scrolls  for 
writing;  the  writing  was  divided  into 
eolumns,  and  when  completed  the  document 
was  rolled  round  one  or  two  sticks  and  kept 
in  a  case.  In  the  present  vision  the  scroll 
is  unrolled  and  exhibited  in  its  full  length 
and  breadth,  showing  that  it  was  to  be 
made  known  to  all.  Its  flight  denotes  the 
speedy  arrival  of  the  judgment,  and,  as  it  is 
seen  in  the  heaven,  so  the  punishicent  pro- 
ceeds from  Qod.  Theodotion  and  Aqnila  ren- 
der the  word,  ii^eipa,  "  leather ;  "  the  Sep- 
tuagint,  by  mistake,  ipiiravov,  "  a  sickle." 

Ver.  2. — He  said.  The  angel-interpreter 
spoke  (ch.  iv.  2).  The  length  thereof,  etc. 
Taking  the  cubit  at  a  foot  and  a  lialf,  the 
■iza  of  the  roll  is  enormous,  and  may  well 
hjive  aroused  the  prophet's  wonder.  The 
dimensions  given  correspond  to  those  of  the 
porch  of  Solomon's  temple  (1  Kings  vi.  3), 
twenty  cubits  long  by  ten  broad.  These 
are  also  the  dimensions  of  the  holy  place  in 
the  tabernacle,  and  of  Solomon's  brazen 
altar  (2  Chron.  iv,  1).  The  careful  state- 
ment of  the  size  of  the  roll  indicates  that 
some  special  meaning  is  attached  to  these 
measurements.  We  do  not  know  that  any 
symbolical  signification  was  recognized  in 
the  porch  of  the  temple :  but  these  dimen- 
sions may  well  contain  a  reference  to  the 
sanctuary  and  the  altar,  ns  Knabenbauer 
explains,  "  The  curse  is  of  the  same  measure 
as  that  altar  which  was  the  instrument  of 
expiation  and  reconciliation,  and  as  that 
sanctuary  which  was  the  entrance  to  the 
holy  of  holies."  Others  consider  that  the 
curse  is  pronounced  according  to  the  measure 
of  the  sanoi'iary,  i.t  according  to  the  Divine 
Law ;  or  that  all  might  thus  know  that  it 
came  from  God,  and  that  the  possession  of 
the  temple  did  not  secure  the  people  from 
vengeance  unless  they  were  pure  and 
obedient. 

Ver.  3. — This  is  the  curse.  The  roll  con- 
tuned  the  cnrse  written  upon  it  on  both 

mOHABIAH. 


tides.  (For  the  cnrse  of  God  npon  guilty 
nations,  comp.  Isa.  xxiv.  6;  Dun.  ix.  II.) 
Earth;  land;  for  Judcea  is  meant.  The 
curse  was  ready  to  fall  on  all  who  might 
come  under  it  by  their  transgressions.  This 
would  be  a  warning  also  to  exterior  nations. 
Every  one  that  stealeth  . .  .  every  one  that 
Bweareth.  Thieves  and  perjurers  are  espe- 
cially mentioned  as  incurring  the  curse. 
Perjury  is  a  chief  offence  in  one  table  of 
the  Law,  theft  in  the  other ;  so  these  sins 
may  stand  for  all  offences  against  the  Deca- 
logue (comp.  Jas.  ii.  10,  etc.).  But  pro- 
bably they  are  named  because  they  were 
particularly  rife  among  the  returned  Jews. 
During  their  long  sojourn  in  Babylon  they 
had  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits  and 
had  fallen  into  the  lax  morality  wliich  such 
occupations  often  engender.  These  bad 
habits  they  had  brought  with  them  and 
practised  in  their  new  home  (comp.  ch.  viii. 
17,  and  note  there).  Shall  be  out  off  as  on 
this  side  according  to  it ;  Bevised  Version, 
shall  be  purged  out  on  the  one  tide  (margin, 
from  henee)  according  to  it ;  Ewald,  "  driven 
hence  like  it."  The  reference  is  to  the  two 
sides  of  the  roll,  answering  to  the  two 
tables  of  the  Decalogue.  Sinners  shall  be 
"cleansed  away,"  i.e.  utterly  consumed, 
according  to  the  tenor  of  the  roll.  The 
Vulgate  has  judicabitur ;  the  LXX.,  eas 
Bayarou  e'ic5iin)9i)<reToi,  "  sliall  be  punished 
unto  death,"  That  sweareth;  i.e.  falsely, 
as  is  plain  from  ver.  4;  Septuagint,  was  6 
hrtoDKos,  "  every  perjurer." 

Ver.  i. — I  will  bring  it  forth.  God  will 
not  keep  the  curse  confined  and  inoperative 
(Dent,  xxxii.  31,  etc.),  but  it  shall  enter  into 
the  honse  of  the  thief.  The  curse  shall  not 
fall  lightly  and  pass  quickly  by,  but  shall 
fix  its  abode  witli  the  sinner  till  it  has 
worked  out  its  fell  purpose.  It  shall  re- 
main; it  shall  paei  the  night — take  up  its 
lodging ;  LXX.,  KaroKiaet.  With  the  timber 
thereof,  etc.  A  hyperbolical  expression  ot 
the  terrible  effects  of  Divine  vengeance, 
which  consumes  utterly  like  a  devouring 
fire — an  adumbration  of  the  destruction  at 
the  day  of  judgment  (comp.  Dent.  iv.  24 ; 
Mai.  iii.  2;  Matt.  iii.  12). 

Vers.  5 — 11. — §  9.  The  seventh  vision:  the 
woman  in  the  ephah. 

Ver.  5. — ^Went  forth.  While  the  prophet 
meditated  on  the  last  vision,  the  interpret- 
ing angel  retired  into  the  background  or 
among  the  company  of  angels;  he  now 
coines  into  vievt  again  to  explain  a  nij\< 
revelation  closely  connected  with  tlie  former. 
That  goeth  forth.  That  comes  into  sight 
from  the   surrounding  daikness.      As  thr 


60 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAII. 


[oh.  t.  1 11. 


S receding  vision  denoted  that  sinners  should 
e  extirpated,  bo  the  present  vision  shows 
how  iniquity  itself,  the  very  principle  of 
evil,  should  be  removed  from  the  Holy 
Land. 

Ver.  6.— What  is  it  I  The  prophet  did 
not  clearly  discern  the  object,  or  his  ques- 
tion may  mean,  "Wliat  does  it  signify?" 
An  ephah ;  the  ephah,  as  "  the  curse  "  (ver. 
3).  The  ephah  was  the  largest  of  the  dry 
measures  in  use  among  the  Jews,  and  wag 
equal  to  six  or  seven  gallons.  It  was,  of 
course,  too  small  to  contain  a  woman.  The 
LXX.  calls  it  simply  "the  measure;"  the 
Vulgate,  amphora ;  and  it  must  be  considered 
as  an  imaginary  vessel  of  huge  size.  It 
may  have  a  tacit  reference  to  dishonest 
dealings  (comp.  Amos  viiL  5;  Micah  vi 
10).  This  is  their  resemblance;  literally, 
thie  is  their  eye.  The  Authorized  Version 
explains  the  meaning  accurately.  "Eye" 
is  often  used  for  that  which  is  seen,  as  in 
Lev.  xiii.  55,  where  the  Authorized  Version 
has  "colour;"  and  Numb.  xi.  7,  where  in 
reference  to  the  manna  we  read,  "  The  eye 
thereof  was  as  the  eye  of  bdellium  "  (comp, 
Ezek.  i.  4,  16).  So  here  the  meaning  is: 
This  ephah  and  this  whole  vision  represent 
the  wicked  in  the  land.  Some  take  "the 
eye"  to  mean  the  object  of  sight,  that  to 
which  they  look.  But  the  ephah  was  not 
set  forth  for  all  the  people  to  examine. 
The  LXX,  and  Syriac,  from  some  variation 
in  the  reading,  have  iSi/clo,  "  iniquity,"  and 
some  critics  have  desired  to  adopt  this  in 
the  text.  But  authority  and  necessity  are 
equally  wanting. 

Vtr.  7, — There  was  lifted  up  a  talent  of 
lead.  As  the  prophet  gazed,  the  leaden 
cover  of  the  ephah  was  raised,  so  that  the 
contents  became  visible.  The  word  ren- 
dered "  talent "  (kikkar)  denotes  a  circle. 
It -is  used  in  Gen.  xiii.  10,  12,  for  the  tract 
of  country  of  which  the  Jordan  was  the 
centre,  and  in  1  Sam.  ii.  36  for  a  round  loaf. 
Here  it  means  a  disc  or  circular  plate  which 
formed  the  cover  of  the  round  shaped  ephah. 
In  the  next  verse  it  is  called,  "  the  weight 
of  lead."  And  this  is  a  woman  that  sitteth 
in  the  midst  of  the  ephah;  and  there  was 
a  vxyman  sitting,  etc.  When  the  leaden  lid 
was  raised  one  woman  {mulier  una,  ywij  fiia) 
was  seen  in  the  measure.  Slie  is  called 
"  one,"  as  uniting  and  cnncentraling  in  her 
person  all  sinners  and  all  sins. 

Ver.  8. — ^This  is  wickedness.  This  wnman 
is  the  personiiication  of  wickedness.  It  is 
very  common  to  tind  backsliding  Israel 
represented  as  a  faithless  and  adulterous 
woman  (comp.  Isa.  i.  21 ;  Jer.  ii.  20;  Hos. 
IL  5  ;  and  the  parable  of  the  two  women  in 
Ezek.  xxiii.).  He  cast  it ;  her — the  woman. 
As  the  womun  rose,  or  tried  to  rise,  from 
the  ephah,  the  au};el  flung  her  down  into  it. 


It  is  possible,  as  some  commentator!  sup- 
pose, that  the  ephah  into  which  wiokednesi 
is  thrust  represents  the  measure  of  iniquity 
which,  being  reached,  constrains  <3od  to 
punish  (see  Gen.  xv.  16,  where  the  dis. 
possession  of  the  Amorites  is  postponed  till 
their  iniquity  is  full).  The  weight  of  lead; 
literally,  as  the  IjXX.,  the  stone  of  lead;  Vul- 
gate, massam  plumbeam.  This  is  the  cover 
of  the  ephah,  that  which  is  called  the 
"talent  of  lead"  in  the  preceding  verse. 
This  heavy  cover  the  angel  cast  upon  the 
mouth  of  the  ephah,  in  order  to  confine  the 
woman  therein  (comp.  Gen.  zxix.  2,  which 
passage  may  explain  why  the  cover  is  called 
"a  stone").  Dr.  Wright  and  some  other 
commentators,  referring  the  passage  to  theft 
and  perjury  alone,  consider  that  the  woman 
held  in  her  band  the  leaden  weight  with 
which  she  weighed  her  gains,  and  was 
sitting  in  the  ephah  which  she  used  in  her 
traffic ;  so  that  she  represents  dishonesty  in 
the  matter  of  weiglit  and  measure.  She  is 
punished  by  the  means  of  the  instruments 
she  had  used  unrighteously;  the  weight  is 
dashed  upon  her  lying  month,  and  the 
ephah,  her  throne,  is  made  the  vehicle  that 
carries  her  out  of  the  land.  But  it  seems  a 
mistake  to  confine  the  iniquity  mentioned 
to  the  two  special  sins  of  theft  and  perjury ; 
nor  would  the  talent  and  the  ephah  be 
natural  instruments  of  stealing  and  false- 
swearing  ;  anil  the  point  of  the  vision  is 
not  the  punishment  of  wickedness,  but  its 
expulsion  from  the  land.  It  is  true  that 
the  pronominal  suffix  in  the  mouth  thereof 
is  feminine,  and  that  the  LXX.  makes  it 
refer  to  the  woman,  t^  <rT6/jLa  o6t5s.  But  it 
may  equally  refer  to  ephah,  which  is  alio 
feminine. 

Ver.  9. — Then  lifted  I  up  mine  eyes.  This 
is  the  conclusion  of  the  vision.  And  looked; 
and  saw.  There  came  out  (forth)  two 
women.  These  two  women  who  now  come 
in  sight  have  been  supposed  to  represent 
the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians,  who  were 
the  agents  in  the  deportation  of  Israel ;  or 
else  are  considered  abettors  of  the  woman 
in  the  ephah,  who  for  a  time  save  her  from 
destruction.  This  latter  supposition  pro- 
ceeds on  the  erroneous  idea  that  wickedness 
is  herein  rescued  from  punishment,  whereas 
the  notion  that  underlies  the  whole  vision 
is  that  the  Holy  Land  is  purged  of 
wickedness.  That  the  two  nations  hostile 
to  Israel  are  represented  is  an  untenable 
suggestion;  for  why  should  they  carry  off 
iniquity  from  Jerusalem  and  fix  it  in  their 
own  land  ?  Probably  by  the  two  women 
carrying  away  the  evil  woman  is  signified 
(if  the  details  are  capable  of  explanation) 
that  iniquity  brings  with  it  its  own  dostru  • 
tion  and  works  out  its  own  removal.  Th'C 
wind  was  in  their  wings.    They  were  bom* 


OH.  V.  1—11.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


51 


along  80  quickly  that  they  seemed  to  be 
earriecl  by  the  wind;  or  the  wind  helped 
tlieir  flight.  A  stork;  Septuagint,  iirovos, 
"  the  hoopoe ; "  Vulgate,  milvi.  The  Autho- 
rized Version  is  certainly  correct.  The 
stork  is  common  euoush  in  Palestine,  and 
is  reckoned  among  unclean  birds  in  the 
Pentateuch  (Lev.  xi.  19 ;  Deut.  xiv.  18),  for 
which  cause  some  have  thought  it  is  here 
introduced  as  bearing  the  eln-Iaden  ephah. 
But  its  introduction  mure  probably  has 
reference  to  its  migratory  habits,  the  power 
and  rapidity  of  its  flight,  and,  as  some  think, 
to  its  skill  in  constructing  its  nest. 

Ver.  11. — To  build  it  (fier)  an  house.  The 
LXX.  refers  the  pronoun  to  the  ephah,  but 
it  seems  more  natural  to  refer  it  to  a  person, 
the  woman.  The  feminine  gender  of  the 
original  would  apply  to  either.  She  is 
carried  away  from  Judsea  to  have  a  perma- 
nent dwelling  in  a  land  more  suited  to  her. 
Fnsey  thinks  that  possibly  a  temple  may 
be  intenrled, "  a  great  idol-temple,  in  which 
the  god  of  this  world  should  be  worshipped." 
In  tiie  land  of  Shinar;  i.e.  the  ideal  land 
of  unholineis,  where  the  world-power  first 


arrayed  itself  against  Ood  in  the  attempt  at 
Babel.  Septuasrint,  4v  y^  BaBuAams  (Gen. 
xi.  2,  etc.).  Shinar,  equivalent  to  Burner 
in  the  Assyrian  munuments,  denotes  Lower 
or  Southern  Babylon ;  Acojd,  Upper  or 
Northern  Babylon.  And  it  shall  be  estab- 
lished. The  house  shall  be  firmly  fixed 
there.  Others  render,  "  when  it  is  ready." 
And  set  there.  The  gender  shows  that  the 
woman  is  meant,  not  the  house :  "  And  she 
shall  be  set  there  in  her  own  place."  Thus 
from  the  spiritual  Zion  all  wickedness  shall 
be  abolished  (ch.  ill  9)  and  sent  to  its  own 

glace  prepared  for  the  enemies  of  God  and 
oliness.  Doubtless,  too,  a  warning  is  here 
conveyed  to  those  Jews  who  still  lingered 
in  Babylon,  that  they  were  dwelling  in  a 
land  accursed  of  God,  and  were  liable  to  be 
involved  in  the  fate  which  pursues  ungodli- 
ness. Orelli  and  some  others  see  in  these 
two  visions  an  analogy  to  the  two  goats  on 
the  Day  of  Atonement,  of  which  one  was 
sacrificed  for  the  sins  of  the  people,  and 
the  other  bore  away  their  iniquity  to  the 
demons'  abode,  the  wilderness  (Lev.  xtL). 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  reassertion  of  the  Law.  "Then  I  turned,  and  lifted  up  mine  eyes, 
and  looked,  and  behold  a  flying  roll,"  etc.  Most  of  the  distinguishing  privileges  first 
given  to  Israel  after  leaving  Egypt  for  Canaan  were  gradually  restored  to  Israel  on  its 
partial  restoration  to  Palestine  after  the  captivity  of  Babylon.  This  illustrated,  as 
noted  before,  as  to  the  altar  (Ezra  iii.  3) ;  the  daily  sacrifice  (Ezra  iii.  6) ;  the  Feast 
of  Tabernacles  (Ezra  iii.  4) ;  the  tabernacle  or  -the  temple  itself  (Ezra  iii.  10 ;  vi.  15). 
This  also  illustrated,  as  we  have  just  seen,  as  to  the  revival  of  the  Levitical  priesthood 
(oh.  iii.  1 — 5) ;  and  also  as  to  the  rekindling  of  that  temple  "  candlestick  "  which  typified 
the  restoration  and  maintenance  of  the  Jewish  Church  as  a  witness  for  God  amongst 
men  (ch.  iv.  1 — 3,  11 — 14).  In  the  present  passage  we  think  we  perceive  a  similar 
reassertion  and,  as  it  were,  restoration  of  that  written  statement  of  man's  duty  and 
God's  will  which  was  given  originally  on  Mount  Sinai,  on  the  two  tables  of  stone ;  this 
second  proclamation  differing  from  that,  however,  according  to  the  differences  of  the 
exigency  and  time.  This  we  hope  to  show  by  considering  the  vision  before  us  (1)  as 
to  its  general  nature ;  and  (2)  as  to  its  special  characteristics. 

I.  Its  general  nature.  As  •with  the  original  Decalogue,  so  we  are  shown  here 
in  vision  :  1.  A  message  in  writing  from  Grod ;  a  message,  therefore,  like  the  other, 
peculiarly  deliberate  and  explicit  in  its  character,  and  peculiarly  permanent  in  its  form 
(Exod.  xxxiv.  1 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  7 ;  see  also  Isa.  viii.  1 ;  Jer.  xxxvi.  18 ;  xxx.  2 ;  Luke 
i.  3,  4 ;  Acts  xv.  23,  etc.).  2,  A  message  of  Judgment ;  in  other  words,  containing  a 
"  curse,"  or  solemn  declaration  of  anger  against  sin  and  wrong-doing  (Deut.  ixvii.  26 ; 
Jer.  xi.  3, 4 ;  Gal.  iii.  10).  3.  A  message  of  great  breadth  and  extent,  being  written  on  a 
roll  of  the  same  dimensions  (so  it  has  been  noted)  as  the  sanctuary,  or  temple,  and 
applying,  therefore  (so  it  may  be  intended),  to  the  whole  duty  of  man  (see  again  Gal. 
iii.  10) ;  or  else,  possibly,  showing  that  this  proclamation  of  God's  will,  like  the  former 
one,  had  to  do  especially  with  his  "  house  "  (1  Pet.  iy.  17 ;  Amos  iii.  1,  2).  4.  A 
message,  however,  of  universal  appliedbility,  as  shown  by  its  "  flying  "  "  over  the  whole 
earth,"  or  land  (comp.  Eom.  ii.  9,  12 — 16).  5.  A  message  of  a  two/old  purport  or 
form — the  words  written  on  one  side  of  the  "  roll  "  referring  to  a  commandment  con- 
tuned  in  the  first  table  of  the  Decalogue,  and  those  written  on  the  other  to  a  com- 
mandment in  the  second.  On  all  these  points  we  see  there  is  a  more  or  less  marked 
omilarity  between  those  tables  of  stone  and  this  flying  rolL 


62  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  v.  1—11. 

n.  Its  special  chabaotbristics.  These  to  be  seen,  if  we  mistake  not,  somewL^tt 
remarkably:  1.  In  the  special  transgressions  here  denounced ;  being  just  those  to  which 
we  have  reason  to  believe,  from  other  sources,  that  the  post-Captivity  Israelites  were 
especially  prone.  Note,  e.g.,  in  the  first  table  of  the  Law,  with  regard  to  the  sin  of"  false 
swearing,"  what  evidences  we  find  (as  in  Rom.  ii.  17, 23,  24,  and  elsewhere)  of  their  falsely 
professing  supreme  reverence  for  the  very  Name  of  Jehovah,  even  using  a  periphrasis 
instead  of  it,  as  in  Mark  xiv.  61 ;  but  how  few  evidences,  if  any — so  different  from  pre- 
Captivity  times — of  open  violations  of  the  first  and  second  commandments  ;  and  what 
aa  extreme  solicitude,  if  to  some  extent  a  blind  one,  as  to  the  outward  observance  of  the 
fourth  (Luke  xiii.  14;  John  v.  16 ;  ix.  16,  etc.).  Note  also,  in  the  second  table  of  the 
Law,  with  regard  to  the  sin  of  "  stealing,"  how  many  evidences  we  have,  after  the 
return  from  Babylon,  of  the  special  prevalence  of  that  cruel  spirit  of  covetousness  which 
lies  a*  the  root  of  all  theft  (see  Neh.  v.  1 — 13;  Mai.  iii.  5,  8 — 10;  Luke  xii.  15; 
xvL  14 ;  XX.  46,  47 ;  to  say  nothing  of  the  modem  history  of  the  Jews  since  the  destruc- 
tion of  Jerusalem).  2.  In  the  special  punishment  here  threatened,  viz.  just  that  which 
persons  prone  to  such  transgressions  would  be  afraid  of  the  most.  The  great  objects 
aimed  at  by  such  in  their  lip-worship  and  fraud  (observe  connection  of  thought  in 
beginning  of  Luke  xx.  47)  would  be  the  establishment  and  enrichment  of  themselves 
and  their  "  houses."  Instead  of  this,  the  very  opposite,  viz.  the  total  destruction 
thereof,  is  described  figuratively,  but  most  graphically,  as  being  the  result.  God 
himself  should  "  bring  forth  "  the  appointed  evil  or  "  curse,''  which  should  reach  its 
appointed  phux ;  and  stay  there  its  appointed  time ;  and  thoroughly  perform  there  its 
appointed  work,  destroying  not  the  house  only  but  its  very  materials  (ver,  4).  How 
strikingly  suitable,  how  emphatic  a  method  of  re-enacting  his  Law  1 

See,  in  conclusion,  from  this  view  of  the  passage :  1.  The  iminutdbility  of  Qod's  Law. 
In  every  successive  dispensation  alike,  obedience  to  it  is  demanded.  In  the  patriarchal, 
under  Noah.  In  the  legal,  under  Moses.  Here,  also  after  the  Captivity ;  and  that  in 
closest  connection,  as  just  seen,  with  prophecies  about  the  priesthood  of  Christ,  and  the 
work  of  his  Spirit.  And  not  less  so,  finally,  in  the  gospel  itself,  with  its  blaze  of 
mercy  and  love  (Matt.  v.  17 — 20,  etc. ;  Rom.  iii.  31 ;  viii.  4 ;  Titus  ii.  12,  13 ;  iii.  8). 
2.  The  elasticity  of  its  application.  In  each  several  case  God  causes  those  parts  of 
it  which  are  most  needed  to  be  most  emphasized  too.  So  in  the  instance  before  us,  as 
we  think  we  have  shown.  So  also,  under  Noah,  as  shown  by  comparing  Gen.  vi,  13; 
ix.  5,  6.  Compare,  again,  as  to  Moses,  the  length  and  emphasis  of  the  second  command- 
ment with  Exod.  xxxii.  1 — 6,  and  the  subsequent  history  of  the  nation.  And  see, 
finally,  under  the  gospel,  how  specially  suited  such  language  as  that  in  Matt.  xxii. 
36—40  was  to  the  mere  formalism  of  those  times. 

Vers.  5 — 11. — The  vindication  of  Law.  "  Then  the  angel  that  talked  with  me  went 
forth,  and  said  unto  me.  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes,"  etc.  The  last  vision  was  one  of  warning. 
This,  as  we  take  it,  is  one  of  judgment.  The  subject  appears,  however,  to  be  the  same. 
What  the  prophet  previously  dreaded  and  threatened  he  now  describes  as  fulfilled.  In 
other  words,  in  a  mystical  fashion,  and  in  language  (it  may  be)  only  partially  under- 
stood by  himself,  he  foretells  how  the  warning  just  uttered  by  him  would  be,  on  the 
one  hand,  completely  despised  by  the  Jewish  people  and  Church ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  completely  vindicated  by  the  course  of  events. 

I.  The  WABNiNa  despised.  This  is  predicted,  in  vision,  by  certain  similitudes, 
which  convey  to  our  minds :  1.  The  idea  of  measure.  An  "  ephah,"  a  common  measure, 
sometimes  put  (according  to  some,  see  Deut.  xxv.  14,  margin)  as  a  representative  of  all 
measures,  is  seen  "  going  forth."  What  for,  except  to  be  used?  And  how  used,  unless 
for  measuring?  As  also — if  Dr.  Pusey  is  right  in  speaking  of  it  as  the  largest  measure 
in  use — for  measuring  something  of  very  unusual  magnitude.  2.  TTie  idea  of  national 
sin.  Of  sin,  by  what  is  said  of  the  contents  of  this  ephah,  viz.  (ver.  8),  "  This  is 
wickedness."  Of  nationality,  by  its  being  presented  to  us  under  the  figure  of  a  woman 
(see  Isa.  xxxvii.  22 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  2,  4 ;  and  other  Scriptures ;  and  comp.  Isa.  iii.  2§ 
with  the  figure  and  legend  of  "  Juiiaaa  Capta "  on  the  coin  struck  in  commemoration 
of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem),  and  perhaps,  also,  by  the  remarkable  declaration  in  end 
of  ver.  (5.  3.  The  idea  of  repletion.  This  large  measure  being  so  filled  up  as  only  to 
require  the  closing  up  of  its  mouth ;  and  that  with  so  heavy  a  closing  as  a  "  talent  of 


ia.T.  1— il.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  53 

lead,"  M  though  never  requiring  to  be  opened  again.  See  what  our  Lord  long  after- 
wards said  to  the  Jews  in  Matt,  xxiii.  32  (comp.  Gen.  xr.  16),  with  apparent  reference 
to  this  Tery  prophecy,  and,  as  some  think  (Matt,  zxiii.  35),  to  this  very  prophet.  Also 
compare  what  is  said  concerning  the  sin  of  "  stealing,"  in  ver.  4  of  this  chapter,  with 
what  our  Saviour  also  said  to  the  Jews  of  that  day  in  Matt.  xxi.  13 ;  and  see  Dan. 
viii.  23 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  16. 

II.  The  wABNma  fulfillkd.  This  seems  shown  us  by  the  following  emblems: 
1.  The  emblem  of  captivity.  The  "  woman,"  or  nation,  with  its  "  wickedness,"  being, 
as  already  noted,  shut  up  in  the  ephah.  2.  ?%«  emblem  of  settled  purpose.  As 
«xhibited  by  the  appearance  of  "  twp  "  persons  to  effect  the  same  thing.  Compare  such 
passages  as  Amos  iii.  3 ;  Gen.  xis.  1 ;  xli.  32 ;  and  note  how  "  two "  angels  declare 
both  the  resurrection  and  the  second  coming  of  Christ  (John  xx.  12 ;  Acts  i,  10).  3. 
The  emhlem  of  irresistible  removal.  The  "  two  women  spoken  of  are  naturally  able 
to  overcome  and  lift  up  the  one  in  the  ephah  (Eccles.  iv.  9, 10).  The  same  idea  may 
also  be  conveyed  by  their  having  the  "  wings  of  a  stork,"  the  most  familiar  of  all  birds 
of  migration  (Jer.  viii.  7) ;  sJso  by  their  having  "  the  wind  "  in  their  wings,  their 
natural  strength  being  made  stronger  still  (so  this  may  mean)  by  the  appointed  course 
of  events  (comp.  Ps.  cxlvii.  18 ;  cxlviii.  8) ;  also  once  more,  perhaps,  by  the  ephah 
being  so  "  lifted  up  from  the  earth "  that  nothing  earthly  could  have  the  power  to 
prevent  its  removal.  4.  The  emblem  of  permanent  stay.  The  ephah  being  taken  to 
"  Shinar,"  or  Babylon,  a  land  of  long  captivity  to  Israel  in  the  past  (Jer.  xxix.  4,  5), 
and  having  a  house  "  built "  for  it  there,  and  being  "  established  "  there  on  a  base  of  its 
own.  All  which  seems  to  have  been  fulfilled  when  the  Bomans  came,  after  tiie  "  filling 
up  "  of  the  sins  of  the  Jews  by  their  rejection  of  Christ,  and  took  away  their  "  place 
and  nation "  (John  xi.  48),  carrying  them  away  captive  by  irresistible  might  and 
evidently  Divine  assistance  into  their  long  exile  in  the  great  city  of  that  mystical 
"  Babylon,"  which  is  also,  spiritually,  "  called  Sodom  and  Egypt "  (Rev.  xi.  8 ;  xiv.  8  ; 
xvii.  1,  5, 18,  etc.),  and  settling  them  there  (so  it  possibly  means)  on  a  "  bade  "  of  their 
"  own,"  i.e.  in  a  kind  of  life  and  under  a  Divine  dispensation  peculiar  to  themselves 
{comp.  Numb.  xxiiL  9,  end). 

We  see,  in  this  prophecy  so  viewed,  in  conclusion :  1.  The  cvmttlative  nature  of  tin. 
As  nations  and  men  continue  in  disobedience,  so  also,  and  even  more,  does  the  amount 
charged  against  them,  as  by  a  terrible  kind  of  compound  interest,  continue  to  increase. 
The  sins  of  yesterday  greatly  aggravate  the  sins  of  to-day.  Besides  passages  supra,  see 
Bom.  ii.  5 ;  Jas.  v.  3 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  3,  4.  2.  2%e  necessary  limits  of  sin.  Sin,  in  its 
ultimate  essence,  is  simply  rebellion  against  God  (1  John  iii.  4;  Fs.  Ii.  4).  Even  in  the 
case,  therefore,  of  Israel,  who  was  dealt  with  in  especial  mercy  and  love,  there  must  be 
some  boundary  beyond  which  the  accumulation  of  sin  cannot  be  allowed  to  proceed. 
What  becomes,  else,  of  God's  rule  ?  What  of  his  holiness  too?  Judex  damnatur 
4sum  nocens  dbsolvitur  (see  Gen.  xviii.  25,  end).  3.  The  ultimate  issue  of  sin.  It 
not  repented  of,  if  not  atoned  for,  what  can  this  issue  be  except  "  banishment "  ?  And 
what  can  such- banishment  mean  except  "  death  "  (Matt.  xxv.  41 ;  Fs.  xvi.ll;  Bom. 
vi.  23;  Frov,  xxix.  1)? 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1^4. — Betribution.  I.  Provoked.  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  Law. 
Here  two  kinds  singled  out.  1.  Sins  against  the  second  table.  "Stealeth."  Fraud, 
injustice  of  all  kinds.  False  to  man.  2.  Sins  against  the  first  table.  "  Sweareth." 
Profanity.  Self-will.  False  to  God.  These  are  samples  of  sins  infinite  in  number 
and  variety.     Bold  and  flagrant  offences,  opposed  to  all  law  and  order,  defiant  of  God. 

n.  Pboolaimbd.  Symbolically  set  forth.  Sin  will  be  judged,  not  according  to 
custom  or  public  sentiment,  but  by  the  measure  of  the  sanctuary,  the  eternal  Law  of 
God.  "  Flying  roll."  1.  Broad  enough  to  cover  all  offences.  2.  Swift  to  seize  all 
transgressors  in  its  fatal  embrace.  The  warning  comes  in  mercy.  "Flee  from  the 
wrath  to  come."  See  refuge  imder  the  shadow  of  the  cross.  Justice  pursues  the 
tinner,  but  it  stops  satisfied  at  Calvary. 

III.  Inflicted.    Sooner  or  later  judgment  will  come.    Inevitable  and  sure,  just 


6*  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  v.  1—11. 

because  God  is  God.    Society  must  be  purified.    The  bad  will  have  to  give  place  to 
tfaa  good.    The  earth  will  end  with  Eden,  as  it  began. 

"  My  own  hope  is,  a  sun  will  pierce 

The  thickest  cloud  earth  ever  stietohed; 
That,  after  las^  returns  the  first. 

Though  a  wide  compass  round  be  fetched  { 
That  what  began  best  can't  end  worst. 
Nor  what  God  blessed  once  prove  accurst." 

(Browning.) 

F. 

Vera.  6 — 11. — Worldlinesi  in  the  Church.  L  Sadly  fbetalent.  "This  Is  their 
eye" — what  they  mind  and  what  they  lust  after.  There  is  a  climax.  First  two  classes 
of  sinners  are  figured,  next  one  great  indistinguishable  mass.  Then  "  wickedness  "  ia 
personified,  as  one  woman.  This  teaches  how  worldliness  is :  1,  Common.  2.  Absorb- 
ing.   3.  Debasing— corrupting  all  that  is  beautiful  and  fair. 

II.  Sfecullt  offensive.  Bad  in  the  world ;  infinitely  worse  in  the  Church.  1. 
Opposed  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  2.  Incompatible  with  the  service  of  God.  3.  Obstructive 
to  the  progress  of  the  gospel. 

IIL  KiQHTEOusLY  sooiiED.  Eveu  uow  restrained.  Limited  as  to  place  and  power. 
But  the,  end  cometh.  The  judgment  set  forth  implies:  1.  Disinheritment.  They 
defrauded  others,  and  will  themselves  be  impoverished.  Like  Satan,  cast  out.  Like 
Esau,  lose  their  birthright.  2.  Banishment.  Judgment  based  on  sympathies.  What 
is  right  in  law  is  true  to  feeling.  Society  cleansed.  The  had  go  with  the  bad. 
Ungodliness  is  driven  to  the  land  of  ungodliness.  Captivity  leads  to  captivity.  Judas 
went  "to  his  own  place."  3.  Abundoriment.  Judgment  swift,  thorough,  irresistible. 
There  is  a  terrible  retention  of  character.  "  The  wicked  are  driven  away  in  their 
wickedness :  but  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death." — F.  , 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  flying  roll :  Divine  retribution.  "  Then  I  turned,  and  lifted  up 
mine  eyes,  and  looked,  and,  behold,  a  flying  roll.  And  he  said  unto  me.  What  seest 
thou?  And  I  answered,  I  see  a  flying  roll:  the  length  thereof  is  twenty  cubits,  and 
the  breadth  thereof  ten  cubits,"  etc.  This  is  the  sixth  vision  of  the  series  of  visions 
which  the  prophet  had  during  the  night.  He  now  saw  a  "  flying  roll."  We  have 
mention  made  of  such  rolls  by  Ezra,  by  Isaiah,  by  Jeremiah,  and  by  Ezekiel.  Ezra 
speaks  of  search  being  made  in  "  the  book  ot  rolls,"  the  depository  of  the  public  archives 
or  records,  and  of  a  "  roll "  being  found  there  in  which  was  recorded  the  decree  of  King 
Darius  respecting  the  Jews ;  and  Jeremiah  speaks  of  "  a  roll  of  a  book."  The  book 
might  be  considered  as  consisting  of  several  "rolls,"  over  each  other,  and  forming  one 
volume.  This  is  illustrated  by  the  hook  which  John  saw  "  in  the  right  hand  of  him 
that  sat  on  the  throne,"  which  was  "  sealed  with  seven  seals,"  and  of  which  the  con- 
tents were  brought  to  view  as  each  of  the  seals  was  unfolded.  "  The*  ancients  wrote 
on  a  variety  of  materials — the  papyrus,  or  paper-reed,  the  inuElI'  bark  of  particular  trees, 
and  the  dressed  skins  of  animals,  forming  a  kind  of  parchment.  These,  when  written, 
were  rolled  up,  for  convenience  and  for  preservation  of  the  writing,  either  singly  or  in 
a  number  over  each  other.  The  roll  seen  by  the  prophet  was  a  'flying  roll,'  but  not 
flying  through  the  air  in  its  roUed-up  state.  It  was  expanded,  and  was  of  extraordinary 
size.  Beckoning  the  cubit  at  a  foot  and  a  half,  it  was  ten  yards  in  length  by  five  in 
width,  the  measurement  being  guessed  by  the  prophet's  eye  "  (Wardlaw),  "  This  is 
the  curse  that  goeth  forth  over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth."  This  is  the  explanation 
given  by  the  interpreting  angel.  Without  presuming  to  give  an  accurate  interpretation 
of  all  the  particulars  of  the  symbolic  representation,  I  think  it  may  be  fairly  and  use- 
fully employed  to  exhibit  the  sublimely  awful  subject  of  Divine  retribution.  And  this 
subject  it  serves  to  illustrate  in  two  aspects. 

L  As  roLLowiNQ  SIN.  Notice :  1.  Ke  particular  sins  which  retribution  pursues. 
They  are :  (1)  ni^t  and  tacrUege.  "  Every  one  that  stealeth."  Stealing,  here,  refers 
not  only  to  any  property  taken  Irom  man,  but  especially  to  the  appropriation  of  worldly 
wealth  to  the  decoration  of  their  "  ceiled  houses,"  instead  of  applying  it  to  the  rebuilding 
•f  God'i  house.    Hence  Jehovah  said,  "  Ye  have  robbed  me  in  tithes  and  offerings. 


OH.T.  1— 11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHARIAH.  66 

Ye  are  cursed  with  the  curse,  even  this  whole  nation  "  (Mai.  iiL  8).  This  is  the  worst 
of  all  rohberiep.  In  fact,  it  embraces  all  robberies,  the  applying  to  our  own  selfish 
purposes  what  belongs  to  God.  (2)  Perjwry  and  false  swearing.  Their  sacrilegious 
conduct  appears  to  have  been  sustained  by  false  oaths,  which  increased  the  heinousuess 
of  their  oueace.  The  sins  bere  noted  are  not  mere  specimens,  but  root  or  fountain  sins. 
The  "  flying  roll "  of  Divine  retribution  followed  sin  with  its  curses.  There  is  a  curse 
to  every  sin,  and  this  is  not  vengeance,  but  benevolence.  It  is  the  arrangement  of  love. 
2.  The  way  in  which  just  retribution  pursues  them.  (1)  Openly.  The  roll  is  spread 
open,  and  is  written  in  characters  that  are  legible  to  all.  Divine  retribution  is  no 
secret  to  man.  It  is  not  some  intangible,  hidden,  occult  thing.  It  is  open  to  all  eyes. 
Every  man  must  see  the  "  flying  roll,"  not  only  in  the  history  of  nations  and  commu- 
nities, but  in  his  own  domestic  and  individual  life.  The  "  flying  roll "  hovers  over  every 
sin,  (2)  Rapidly.  Retribution  is  swift.  It  is  a  "  flying  roll."  Ko  sooner  does  a  man 
commit  a  sin  than  ho  suffers  in  some  form  or  other.  The  Nemesis  is  at  the  heels  of  the 
criminal.  Retribution  follows  sins  swifter  than  the  sound  of  the  swiftest  thunder-peal 
follows  the  lightning-flash.  (3)  Penetratingly.  "  I  will  bring  it  forth,  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  and  it  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  the  thief,  and  into  the  house  of  him  that 
eweareth  falsely  by  my  Name."  Wherever  the  sinner  is,  it  will  find  him  out.  No 
mountain  so  high,  no  cavern  so  deep,  no  forest  so  intricate  and  shadowy,  as  to  protect 
him  from  his  visitation.  "  The  flying  roll "  will  reach  the  sinner  everywhere.  "  There 
is  no  darljtiess  or  shadow  of  death  where  the  workers  of  iniquity  may  hide  themselves." 

II.  As  ABIDING  WITH  silj.  "  It  shall  remain  in  the  midst  of  his  house."  Not  only 
does  it  rule  the  house  of  the  sinner,  "it  remains  in  the  midst  of  it,"  like  a  leprosy, 
infecting,  wasting,  consuming,  destroying.  It  is  a  curse  that  emliitters  every  sweet, 
and  gives  more  tlian  twofold  intensity  to  every  bitter.  It  dooms  to  destruction  the 
man  and  all  his  possessions.  And  from  this  world  it  must  accompany  and  follow  him 
to  another,  and  settle  with  him  there  for  ever.  "  The  special  reference  made  to  their 
houses,  with  the  '  stones  thereof  and  the  timber  thereof,'  forcibly  points  to  the  care 
which  they  had  been  taking  of  their  own  accommodation,  in  comfort  and  elegance, 
while  Jehovah's  -was  neglected  "  (Wardlaw).  It  abides  in  the  house  to  curse  every- 
thing, even  the  timber  and  the  stones.  Guilt,  not  only,  like  a  ravenous  beast,  crouches 
at  the  door  of  the  sinner,  but  rather,  like  a  blasting  mildew,  spreads  its  baneful  influence 
over  the  whole  dwelling.  The  sin  of  one  member  of  a  family  brings  its  curse  on  the 
others.  The  sins  of  the  parents  bring  a  curse  upon  the  children.  "  Between  parents 
and  children,"  says  Jeremy  Taylor,  "there  is  so  great  a  society  of  nature  and  of 
manners,  of  blessing  and  of  cursing,  that  an  evil  parent  cannot  perish  in  a  single  death ; 
and  holy  parents  never  eat  their  meal  of  blessing  alone ;  but  they  make  the  room  shine 
like  the  fire  of  a  holy  sacrifice ;  and  a  father's  or  a  mother's  piety  makes  all  the  house 
festival,  and  full  of  joy  from  generation  to  generation." 

Conclusion.  Sinner,  wouldst  thou  escape  the  tremendous  curses  which  Heaven  has 
written  on  this  "  flying  roll,"  this  book  of  Divine  retribution  ?  Then  abandon  a  sinful 
life,  exorcise  the  sinful  temper,  inhale  the  spirit  of  him  who  came  to  put  away  sin 
from  humanity  and  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil. — D.  T. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — A  materialistic  community.  "Then  the  angel  that  talked  with  me 
went  forth,  and  said  unto  me,  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes,  and  see  what  is  this  that  goeth 
forth.  And  I  said.  What  is  it  ?  And  he  said,  This  is  an  ephah  that  goeth  forth,"  etc. 
Here  is  another  (the  seventh)  vision  in  the  wonderful  series  of  visions  which  the  prophet 
had  that  night.  This  is  one  of  the  strangest  of  the  whole,  one,  perhaps,  admitting  of  no 
certain  interpretation — a  "  woman  in  the  ephah."  We  know  what  an  "  ephah  "  was.  It 
was  the  greatest  measure  of  capacity  which  tiic  Hebrews  had  for  dry  goods,  and  was  about 
the  size  of  a  cubic  foot.  It  contained  about  an  English  bushel.  The  woman  is 
generally  regarded,  and  with  probable  accuracy  used,  as  the  symbol  of  a  Jewish  com- 
munity— a  community  that  had  become  by  this  time  most  mercenary.  Mammon  was 
their  god.  The  interpreting  angel  said,  "  This  is  wickedness.  And  he  cast  it  into  the 
midst  of  the  ephah ;  and  he  cast  the  weight  of  lead  upon  the  mouth  thereof." 
"Because  it  was  wickedness  or  abhorrent  worldliness  that  this  woman  symbolized, 
the  angel  threw  her  down  in  the  midst  of  the  ephah,  and  threw  the  weight  of 
lead  on  the  mouth  of  it "  (Henderson).     Utter  mercenariness  is  an  abhorrent  object 


M  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHABIAH.  [oh.  t.  1— IL 

to  tn  angel's  eye.  The  prophet  still  looks,  and  what  does  he  see  ?  "  Then  lifted  I 
«p  mine  eyes,  and  boked,  and,  behold,  there  came  out  two  women,  and  the  wind  was 
in  thair  wings ;  for  they  had  wings  like  the  wings  of  a  stork :  and  they  lifted  up  the 
epbah  between  the  earth  and  the  heaven."  The  meaning  of  this  new  scene  may 
easily  be  discovered.  The  ephah,  with  the  woman  in  it,  is  carried  away  between 
earth  and  heaven,  i.e.  through  the  air.  Women  carry  it,  because  there  is  a  woman 
inside ;  and  two  women,  because  two  persons  are  required  to  carry  so  large  and  heavy 
a  measure,  that  they  lay  hold  of  it  on  both  sides  (nj^n  with  the  K  dropped ;  cf. 
Qesenius,  74, 3,  A.  4).  These  womea  have  wings,  because  it  passes  through  the  air ;  and 
a  stork's  wings,  because  these  birds  have  broad  pinions,  and  not  because  the  stork  is  a 
bird  of  passage  or  an  unclean  bird.  "  The  wings  are  filled  with  wind,  that  they  may 
be  able  to  carry  their  burden  with  greater  velocity  through  the  air.  The  women 
denote  the  instruments  or  powers  employed  by  God  to  carry  away  the  sinners  out  of 
hii  congregation,  without  any  special  allusion  to  this  or  the  other  historical  nation. 
This  is  all  that  we  have  to  seek  in  these  features,  which  only  serve  to  give  distinctness 
to  the  picture "  (Keil  and  Delitzscb).  "  Then  said  I  to  the  angel  that  talked  with 
me,  Whither  do  these  bear  the  ephah  ?  And  he  said  unto  me.  To  build  it  an  house 
in  the  land  of  Shinar :  and  it  shall  be  established,  and  set  there  upon  her  own  base." 
There  is  no  necessity  for  regarding  Shinar  here  as  designating  any  particular  geographi- 
cal spot,  such  as  the  land  which  Nimrod  founded.  The  idea  may  be  that  this  utter 
wwldliness  bears  men  away  for  ever  from  the  Divine  scenes  of  life.  The  most  practical 
use  I  can  turn  this  mysterious  passage  to  is  to  employ  it  to  illustrate  the  condition  of 
a  truly  materialistic  community. 

I.  SuoH  A  ooMMimiTY  IS  ENCASED  BY  THE  MATEBiAii.  This  woman,  the  emblem  of 
the  worldly  Jews,  was  not  only  "  in  the  midst  of  the  ephah,"  but  was  closely  confined 
there.  "He  cast  the  weight  of  the  lead  upon  the  mouth  thereof."  To  an  utterly 
worldly  man  matter  is  everything.  He  is  utterly  shut  out  from  the  spiritual ;  there 
is  no  glimpse  of  it,  no  interest  in  it.  Like  the  woman  in  the  ephah,  he  is  encompassed 
by  that  which  shut^  him  in.  The  bright  heavens  and  the  green  fields  of  the  spiritual 
world  are  over  and  around  him,  but  they  are  nothing  to  liim.  He  is  in  the  ephah.  1. 
Tour  seculctr  scientist  is  In  the  ephah.  He  sees  nothing  but  matter,  believes  in 
nothing  but  matter.  2.  Tour  sensuous  religionist  is  in  this  ephah.  He  judges  after 
the  flesh.  He  lives  in  the  horrors  of  Sinai,  in  the  tragedies  of  Calvary ;  his  talk  is  of 
blood,  and  fire,  and  crowns,  and  white  robes,  etc.  The  spiritual  is  shut  out  from  him, 
or  rather  he  is  shut  out  from  it.  3.  Tour  man  of  the  world  is  in  this  ephah.  All  his 
ideas  of  wealth,  dignity,  pleasure,  are  material.  He  judges  the  worth  of  a  man  by  his 
purse,  the  dignity  of  a  man  by  his  pageantries,  the  pleasures  of  a  man  by  his  luxuries. 
Verily  a  sad  condition  this  for  humanity.  For  a  soul  that  was  made  to  realize  the 
invisible,  to  mingle  with  the  spiritual,  to  revel  in  the  infinite,  to  be  shut  up  like  this 
woman  in  the  ephah  of  materialism,  may  well  strike  us  with  shame  and  alarm. 

IL    SuOH  A  COMMUNITY  18  BBINO  DISINHERITED  BY  THE  MATERIAL.      This  WOman  in 

the  ephah,  emblem  of  the  worldly  Hebrew,  is  borne  away  from  Palestine,  her  own  land, 
into  a  foreign  region ;  borne  away  by  two  women  who  had  "  wings  like  a  stork,  and 
whose  wings  were  full  of  wind."  Materialism  disinherits  man.  His  true  inheritance 
as  a  spiritual  existent  is  "  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  fadeth  not  away."  But 
materalism  carries  him  away  from  it — away  to  the  distant  and  the  gross.  1.  Th» 
process  was  rapid.  No  bird  so  fleet  with  wing  and  foot  as  the  stork,  and  with  this 
fieetness  this  woman  in  the  ephah  was  borne.  How  rapidly  do  animalism  and  worldli- 
ness  bear  away  the  spirit  of  man  from  the  realm  of  spiritual  realities,  from  a  love  of 
the  true  and  the  beautiful  I  2.  TAb  process  was  final.  "And  he  said  unto  me.  To 
build  it  an  house  in  the  land  of  Shinar  :  and  it  shall  be  established,  and  set  there  upon 
her  own  base."  "  To  be  carnally  minded  is  death."  "  He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh  shall 
of  the  flesh  reap  corruption."  Materialism  bears  the  soul  away  into  the  "  bondage  of 
corruption."  Well  might  the  apostle  say,  "Many  walk,  of  whom  I  have  told  you 
often,  and  now  tell  you  even  weepinp;,  that  they  are  enemies  to  the  cross  of  Christ; 
whose  end  is  destruction,  whose  god  is  their  belly,  and  whose  glory  is  in  their  ihaiiie, 
who  mind  earthly  things"  (Phil.  iii.  19).  "  As  you  love  your  soul,''.says  Mason, "  bewaro 
of  the  world ;  it  hath  slain  its  thousands  aud  ten  thousands.  What  ruined  Lot's  wife? 
Th»  world.     What  ruined  Achan  7     The  world.     What  ruined  Haman  ?     The  worl^L 


OH.  VI.  1—15.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


67 


What  ruined  Judas?  Hie  world.  Whit  ruined  Simon  Magus?  The  world.  What 
ruined  Demas?  The  world.  And, '  What  shall  it  proflt  a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the 
whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ? ' " — D.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER   VL 


Vera.  1 — 8. — §  10.  The  eighth  vision:  the 
four  chariots. 

Ver.  1. — I  turned,  and  lifted  up  mine  eyes 
(see  note  on  ch.  v.  1).  lour  chariots.  These 
are  war-chariots.  The  angel  explains,  in 
vers.  5,  etc.,  what  these  chariots  mean,  how 
that  they  represent  God's  judgments  on 
sinners  in  all  the  world.  Though  eyil  is 
removed  from  the  Church,  God's  vengeance 
pursues  it  wherever  it  is  located.  If  we 
compare  this  vision  with  the  first  (oh.  1. 
8 — 11),  we  shall  see  that  the  quiet  there 
spoken  of  is  here  broken,  and  that  the 
shaking  of  the  nations,  which  is  to  ac- 
company Messiah's  advent  (Hag.  ii.  7), 
has  begun.  That  the  four  chariots  are  to 
be  identified  with  the  four  powers  of  Daniel's 
visions  (ii.  and  vii.) — the  Babylonian,  Medo- 
Perslan,  Macedonian,  and  Boman — is  an 
opinion  that  does  not  commend  itself.  These 
four  kingdoms  and  their  fate  have  been 
already  symbolized  in  the  horns  of  the 
second  vision  (ch.  i.  19 — 21),  and  it  is  most 
rmlikely  that  they  should  be  again  introduced 
under  a  different  figure.  This  would  mar 
the  orderly  development  of  the  revelation. 
And  how  could  these  kingdoms,  such  as 
they  were,  be  said  to  issue  from  the  seat  of 
the  theocracy  and  to  be  attentive  to  God's 
commands?  Further,  how  could  the  chariots 
symbolize  the  kingdoms  which  were  to  be 
the  objects  of  punishment,  when  at  the  same 
time  tliey  are  themselves  the  instruments 
which  inflict  the  chastisement?  Neither 
does  the  angel's  explanation  suit  this  notion; 
for  kingdoms  are  nowhere  found  under  the 
figure  of  winds,  and  such  a  symbol  would 
have  been  unintelligible  to  the  prophet 
without  further  elucidation.  Two  mountains. 
The  Hebrew  has  the  article,  "the  two 
mountains,"  two  well-known  mountains. 
The  scene  of  the  vision  is  Jerusalem  or 
its  neighbourhood ;  hence  the  two  mountains 
mentioned  are  thougiit  to  be  those  of  Zion  or 
the  temple-mount,  and  Olives  (comp.  ch. 
xiv.  4;  Joel  ill.  16).  It  is  impossible  to 
identify  them ;  and  probably  nothing  more  is 
meant  than  that  the  chariots  came  forth  from 
a  defile  between  the  two  mountains  which 
appeared  in  the  vision.  Mountains  of  brass ; 
or,  copper.  These  impre^able,  undecaying 
mountains  represent  the  immovable,  invin- 
cible nature  of  the  theocracy  and  of  God's 
decrees  respecting  it.    From  it  the  chariots 


go  forth,  because  for  the  sake  of  God's 
kingdom  and  to  promote  its  objects  the 
world-powers  are  destroyed  (Knabenbauer) 
(Isa.  Ixvi.  15).  The  number  "four  "represents 
completeness ;  the  judgment  shall  leave  no 
quarter  unvisited. 

Ver.  2. — Bed  horses  (see  note  on  ch.  i.  8). 
The  colours  of  the  horses  are  significant, 
thougli  the  symbols  are  not  undisputed. 
"Bed"  symbolizes  bloodshed  and  war  (Isa. 
Ixili.  2;  Rev.  vi.  4);  "black,"  sorrow  and 
mourning  (Isa.  1.  3  ;  Jer.  iv.  28 ;  Rev.  vi.  5); 
"white,"  victory  and  joy  (Eccles.  ix.  8; 
Rev.  vi.  2;  xix.  11).  What  the  colour  of 
the  horses  in  the  fourth  chariot  means  is 
very  doubtful  (see  below  on  ver.  3). 

Ver.  3. — Grisled  and  bay ;  rather,  speckled, 
strong;  Septuagint,  Xirvoi  tioikIXoi  ^apol, 
"  horses  pied  and  dapple-grey."  But  <j/aphs 
is  explained  by  the  Scholiast  in  Aristophanes, 
'Nub.,' 1225,  as  "swift;"  and  possibly  the 
LXX.  used  it  in  that  sense  here.  The 
Vulgate  has  fortes;  Aquila,  icaprepoi.  One 
would  have  expected  a  colour  to  be  named, 
but  why  these  are  specially  mentioned  as 
strong  or  active  is  seen  in  ver.  7.  The  word 
heruddim,  "  speckled,"  occurs  only  in  Gen. 
xxxi.  10,  12,  where  it  has  no  symbolical 
character.  As  it  denotes  a  combination  of 
colours,  probably  spots  of  white  on  a  daik 
ground,  it  may  signify  a  quality  of  a  mixed 
nature,  thus  indicating  a  visitation  of  war 
and  pestilence,  the  sword  and  famine. 

Ver.  5. — The  four  spirits  of  the  heavens. 
Both  the  Septuagint  and  Vulgate  render, 
"  the  four  winds  of  heaven ; "  and  this  is 
doubtless  correct.  It  was  a  familiar  symbol 
to  the  Jews.  The  winds  are  often  introduced 
in  executing  God's  will  on  sinners  (comp. 
Ps.  civ.  4;  ctlviii.  8;  Jer.  xlix.  36;  Dau. 
vii.  2).  Whioh  go  forth  from  standing 
before  the  Lord  (comp.  Job  i.  6;  ii.  1). 
The  winds  are  supposed  to  be  God's  servants, 
waiting  his  pleasure  to  be  sent  forth  on  his 
errands.  The  Septuagint  and  Vulgate 
translate,  "  which  go  forth  to  stand  before 
the  Lord."  This  denotes  merely  their  usual 
obedience;  but  the  text  implies  that  the 
prophet  sees  them  moving  from  their  usual 
expectant  attitude,  and  hastening  forth  to 
do  God's  commands. 

Ver.  6. — The  angel  now  (vers.  6,  7)  indi- 
cates the  various  destinations  of  the  chariots, 
except  the  first  with  the  red  horses.  Why 
this  is  omitted  has  never  been  satisfactorily 
explained.  Some  regard  ver.  7  as  giving 
the  destination  of  this  chariot,  by  making  a 


68 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZBCHABIAH. 


[oh.  VI.  1 — 16 


slight  change  in  the  word  rendered  "bay" 
in  the  Authorized  Version,  which  would 
cause  it  to  mean  "  red."  The  Syriao,  indeed, 
which  omits  the  word  in  ver.  3,  translates 
it  here  by  "  red."  If  we  retain  tlie  Masoretio 
reading,  we  must  let  this  difSculty  remain 
unsolved,  and  suppose  that  the  angel 
explains  only  part  of  the  vision,  leaving  the 
rest  for  the  prophet's  meditation.  The  black 
horses  which  are  therein;  literally,  that 
wherein  are  the  black  horses,  they  go  forth, 
etc.;  which  is  equivalent  to  "the  chariot 
wherein  are  the  black  horses  goeth  forth." 
So  the  Revised  Version.  The  north  country. 
Babylonia  (see  note  on  ch.  ii.  6).  After 
them;  behind  them.  The  white  liorses  go 
to  the  BLime  quarter :  and  thus  is  indicated 
the  overwhelming  destruction  that  was 
coming  on  Babylon,  and  the  victory  and 
triumph  of  the  conquerors  over  it.  The  south 
country;  i.e. Egypt  (Isa. X3cx.  6;  Dan.  xi.  5), 
another  hostile  power,  also,  perhaps,  Edom 
and  Ethiopia.  One  chariot  only  is  seen 
to  go  towards  it,  drawn  by  the  speckled 
horses  that  denote  a  mixed  judgment, 
perliaps  of  war  and  pestilence  (see  on  ver.  3). 
The  north  and  south  symbolize  the  whole 
earth  and  the  powers  hostile  to  the  true 
Israel. 

Ver.  7. — The  bay;  rather,  the  strong,  as 
in  ver.  8;  the  horses  in  the  fourth  chariot, 
whose  special  mission  needed  peculiar  powers. 
Septuagint,  ot  yf/apol:  but  the  Vulgate,  qui 
erant  robueiissimi.  Sought  to  go.  These 
agents  desired  a  wider  sphere,  and  asked 
permission  to  extend  their  action,  and  to 
walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth.  Famine 
and  pestilence,  which  this  chKriot  symbolizes, 
come  at  different  times  and  in  diiferent 
places  mysteriously  and  unexpectedly  "as 
arrows  shot  from  the  hand  of  God  (Ezek. 
v.  16)  on  the  objects  of  his  displeasure" 
(Alexander).  LXX.,  Ka!  iirifiXeirov  [S% 
Kal  i0}row  koI  €7r^j8\e7roy]  rod  •nopevea'dat 
Tov  [A,  Kal]  irepio^evtrai  t^v  yrjv,  "  And 
looked  to  go  and  compass  the  earth." 

Ver.  8. — Then  cried  he  upon  me.  The 
nngel  cried  aloud  (like  a  herald  announcing 
a  proclamation,  Jonah  iii.  7),  to  call  the 
prophet's  attention  to  what  was  coming, 
which  was  of  most  immeiliiite  consequence 
to  his  people.  This  angel  speaks  as  in  the 
person  of  God.  Have  quieted  my  spirit ; 
literally,  have  caused  my  spirit  to  rest; 
LXX.,  avciravfTav  rhv  6vfi6v  fxov,  "quieted 
my  anger,"  i.e.  by  satiating  it.  Many 
commentators  take  the  clause  as  equivalent 
to  "  have  caused  my  wrath  to  rest  upon 
the  land"  (comp,  John  iii.  86),  referring  to 
Judg.  viii.  3;  Prov.  xvi.  32;  Eccles.  x.  4, 
for  the  use  of  the  word  "spirit"  (ruach)  in 
the  sense  of  "anger."  Others  see  here  an 
intimatinn  of  mercy  and  grace  to  the  Jews 
still  resident  in  Babylonia.     But  it  is  plain 


that  the  vision  is  one  of  judgment;  and  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  ia  a  Spirit  of  judgment 
and  vengeance  (Isa.  ir.  4),  which  destroyi 
evil  that  good  may  flourish. 

Vers.  9 — 15. — §  11.  .4  symbolical  action — 
the  orowning  of  the  high  priest. 

Ver.  9. — The  preceding  visions  having 
come  to  an  end,  they  are  now  confirmed  by 
a  public  act  which  should  show  the  glory  of 
the  future  temple,  the  acceptance  of  the 
members  of  the  theocracy,  and  the  King  and 
Priest  who  was  to  come.  Came  unto  me. 
This  was  probably  on  the  morning  after  the 
night  of  visions,  or  as  soon  as  he  had 
divulged  them  to  the  people. 

Ver.  10.— Take  of  them  of  the  Captivity. 
The  verb  is  in  the  infinitive  for  the  im- 
perative, "  take  thou  from  the  Captivity ; " 
what  he  is  to  take  is  noted  in  the  next  verse. 
"  Those  of  the  Captivity  "  are  certain  envoys 
sent  by  the  Jews  who  still  dwelt  in  Babylon 
(Ezek.  i.  1;  iii.  11),  bearing  gifts  for  the 
temple.  Tbese  messengers  the  prophet  was 
to  visit  at  the  house  of  Josiah,  their  host. 
Heldai ;  or,  Cheldai,  in  ver.  14  "  Helem  "  or 
"Chelem,"  "The  Enduring  One"  (Keil); 
"Tlie  Lord's  Word"  (Pusey).  The  name 
occurs  in IChron.xxvii.  15.  Tobijah;  "The 
Lord  is  good,"  a  well-known  name.  Jedaiah ; 
"God  careth."  The  name  is  fonnd  in 
1  Chron.  ix.  10;  xxiv.  7.  The  LXX 
explains  tlie  names  in  symbolical  fashion, 
llapcL  TUV  apx^VTiov,  KaX  irapa  rwu  XPW'^H-"^ 
OLfT^s,  Kal  TTap^  ray  lTreyvitnt6Tojv  avr'fjif, 
"  From  the  chief  men,  and  from  its  good 
men,  and  from  those  that  have  understood 
it."  Which  are  come  from  Babylon.  This 
clause  in  the  Authorized  Version  is  transposed 
from  its  place  in  the  Hebrew,  which  is  at  the 
end  of  the  verse,  where  it  refers  to  the  house 
of  Josiah,  and  should  be  rendered,  "  to 
which,"  or  "  whither  they  have  come  from 
Babylon."  Septuagint,  xSy  olKoi/'lualov  .  .  . 
TOV  fiKovTos  iK  BafivKHvos,  "Tile  house  of 
Josiah  .  .  .  who  came  from  B.ibylon."  The 
same  day.  There  was  to  be  no  delay;  the 
transaction  was  to  be  carried  out  "  on  that 
day,"  the  day  made  known  to  the  prophet, 
and  by  himself  in  person.  The  house  of  Josiah 
the  son  of  Zephaniah.  He  was,  perhaps, 
treasurer.  At  any  rate,  at  his  house  the  en- 
voys were  entertained,  and  there  were  stored 
tlie  contributions  which  the  Jews  in  exile  had 
sent  to  their  brethren  in  Jerusalem.  Josiah 
is  the  same  person  as  Hen,  according  to 
the  Authorized  Version  and  the  Vulgate,  in 
ver.  14  (where  see  note).  He  was  probably 
son  of  the  Zephaniah  mentioned  in  2  Kings 
XXV.  18  as  in  the  second  rank  of  priests 
among  those  who  were  deported  to  Babylon 
(comp.  Jer.  xxi.  1 ;  xxxvii.  3). 

Ver.  11.— Silver  and  gold.  That  which 
had  been  brouglit  from  Babylon.    However 


OH.  VI.  1—16.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH. 


59 


unwilling  the  Jews  were  to  let  the  gamaritans 
take  part  in  the  good  work,  they  were  quite 
ready  to  receive  contributions  from  their 
brethren  in  the  dispersion,  and  likewise 
from  heathen  kings  and  princes  (see  Ezra 
vi.  8,  etc.;  vii.  15,  etc.).  Hake  crowns. 
The  prophet  was  to  get  the  crowns  made 
(oomp.  Exod.  XXV.,  pastim).  The  plural 
may  here  be  used  intensively  for  "  a  noble 
crown,"  as  in  Job  xxxi.  36 ;  or  it  may  signify 
the  two  metals  of  which  the  crown  was 
made,  two  or  more  wreaths  being  intertwined 
to  form  it.  It  is  certain  that  only  one  crown 
was  to  be  made,  and  that  that  was  to  be 
placed  on  Joshua's  head.  There  is  no 
mention  of  Zerubbabel  in  the  passage;  so 
the  plural  cannot  be  taken  to  intimate  that 
there  was  a  crown  for  the  high  priest  and 
a  crown  for  the  princely  ruler,  as  Ewald 
and  Bunsen  assuit.  These  critics,  followed 
by  Hitzig  and  Wellhausen,  supply  the 
passage  thus :  "  on  the  head  of  Zerubbabel 
and  on  the  head  of  Joshua."  Zerubbabel 
had  no  kingly  position.  Bather,  all  mention 
of  Zerubbabel  is  expressly  excluded,  in  order 
to  denote  that  in  the  Person  of  liim  whom 
Joshua  symbolized,  the  offices  of  priest  and 
king  were  united  (Ps.  ex.)-  We  may  note 
that  in  Eev.  xix.  12  Christ  is  said  to  have 
on  his  head  many  crowns,  by  which  is  meant 
a  diadem  composed  of  many  circlets.  The 
high  priest's  mitre  is  never  called  a  crown. 
That  which  was  placed  on  Joshua's  head 
was  a  royal  crown,  a  token  of  royal  dignity, 
not  his  own,  but  his  whom  he  represented — 
Christ  the  eternal  Priest,  the  universal  King. 
Ver.  12. — Speak  unto  him,  saying.  The 
prophet  is  to  explain  to  Joshua  the  meaning 
of  this  public  act.  Behold  the  Man  whose 
name  is  The  BBANCH ;  literally,  hehold  the 
man,  BRANCH  it  his  name  (see  note  on 
ch'.  iii.  8).  The  Targum  has,  "Behold  the 
Man,  Messiah  is  his  name."  It  i»  plain 
tliat  the  term  "Branch"  or  "Shoot"  (LXX., 
"AvaToA.^:  Vulgate,  Orient)  could  uot  be 
addressed  to  Joshua ;  indeed,  the  very  form 
of  the  sentence,  "his  name,"  not  "thy 
name,"  shows  this.  All  who  saw  the  trans- 
action and  heard  the  words  must  have 
understood  that  they  had  reference  to  the 
"  Shoot "  of  David,  the  Messiah  that  was  to 
come,  to  whom  was  committed  the  regal  and 
priestly  dignity.  And  he  shall  grow  up  out 
of  his  place;  Septuagint,  Kal  inoKdrader 
avTov  aviiTe\e!,  "  And  Jrom  beneath  him  he 
shall  spring  up;"  Vulgate,  M  subter  eum 
orietur;  Drake,  "He  shall  sprout  forth  from 
under  himself; "  EeTised  Version  margin, 
"And  it  (or  they)  shall  bud  forth  under 
him;"  Hitzig,  Ewald,  "From  under  him 
there  shall  be  sprouting."  But  there  is  no 
need  to  alter  the  rendering  of  the  Authorized 
Version,  which  indicates  that  the  shoot  shall 
grow  from  its  own  soil,  that  Messiah  shall 


arise  in  his  own  country  and  nation,  and 
shall  spring  from  a  lowly  origin  to  the 
highest  glory  (see  Isa.  xi.  1 ;  liii.  2).  He 
shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  He 
should  build,  not  the  material  temple  whose 
foundations  Zerubbabel  had  laid,  but  the 
spiritual  temple  of  which  the  tabernacle 
and  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  were  only  the 
type  and  shadow — ^that  new  sanctuary  which 
Ezekiel  beheld  (xli.),  a  house  not  made 
with  hands,  the  Church  of  the  living  God 
(Eph.  ii.  20,  etc. ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5). 

Ver.  13. — Even  he  shall  buUd.  A  forcible 
repetition  of  the  preceding  statement,  laying 
stress  on  the  Person,  "  Be,  and  no  one  else, 
shall  build."  The  clause  is  omitted  by  the 
Septuagint.  He  shall  bear  the  glory.  Tlie 
word  rendered  "glory"  i.s  used  to  denote 
royal  honours  here,  as  in  1  Ghron.  xxix.  25 ; 
Jer.  xxii.  18;  Dan.  xi.  21.  Messiah  shaU 
have  regal  majesty.  Compare  the  manj 
passages  where  the  glory  of  Christ  is  spoken 
of;  e.g.  John  i.  14;  ii.  11;  xvii.  5;  Luke  ix. 
32;  xxiv.  26;  Heb.  ii.  9;  Eev.  v.  12,  etc. 
Shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne  (comp.  ch. 
Lx.  10).  Thus  Christ  says,  "All  power  is 
given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth"  (Matt. 
xxviii.  18;  see  Luke  i.  82).  And  he  shall 
be  a  Priest  upon  his  throne;  Septuagint, 
Kol  efTTai  Upeiis  e/c  Se^iojv  avTov,  "  There  shall 
be  a  Priest  upon  his  right  baud."  The 
Authorized  Version  is  doubtless  correct, 
as  the  clause  is  intended  to  declare  that 
Messiah  should,  like  Melohizedek,  combine 
the  offices  of  Priest  and  King  (Ps.  ex.  4; 
Heb.  V.  6,  10).  The  counsel  of  peace  shall 
be  between  them  both.  The  two  offices  or 
dignities  are  meant,  which  are  combined 
in  one  person.  The  Messiah,  in  his 
two  offices  of  Priest  and  King,  has  one 
common  design,  to  briug  peace  to  his  people 
(Isa.  ix.  6;  Micah  v.  5,  where  see  note). 
Other  interpretations  are  unsuitable.  Thus : 
There  shall  be  harmony  between  Joshua 
and  Zerubbabel;  but  the  two  are  nowhere 
mentioned  together  in  the  paragraph,  and, 
indeed,  the  statement  would  be  superfluous. 
There  shall  be  perfect  concord  between  the 
two  offices;  but  a  person  is  spoken  of,  not 
an  abstraction.  Others  explain  the  "counsel 
of  peace"  to  be  between  Jews  and  Gentiles, 
or  the  returned  and  the  exiled  Jews;  but 
neither  of  these  have  been  named.  Pnsey 
takes  it  to  mean,  "  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son;"  but  there  is  nothing  in  the 
passage  to  lead  to  this.  Knabenbauer 
expounds  it  of  those  who  alone  are  mentioned 
in  the  text,  Messiah  and  Joshua,  seeing  in 
it  an  exhortation  to  the  latter  to  make  the 
type  correspond  to  the  Antitype,  so  that  all 
may  see  that  there  is  perfect  harmony 
between  them. 

Ver.  14. — The  crowns  shall  be  ...  for  a 
memorial.    The  crown  was  to  be  taken  from 


60 


THE   BOOK  OF  ZECHAEIAH. 


[CH.  VI.  1 — 16. 


JoBhtia'B  head  and  deposited  in  the  temple 
as  a  memorial  of  this  prophecy,  and  of  the 
zeal  of  those  who  had  come  from  far  to 
bring  ofTeringi  to  the  Lord,  and  likewise  of 
the  hospitality  of  Josiah,  who  bad  received 
them  into  his  house.  That  such  "gifts" 
were  dedicated  in  the  temple  is  well  known 
(see  Judith  xvi.  19;  2  Mace.  v.  16;  ix.  16; 
Josephus,  'Bell.  Jud.,'  ii.  17.  3;  'Ant.,' 
xvii.  6.  3;  xix.  6.  1 ;  Phllo,  'Legat.  ad  Cai.,' 
§  40,  ii,  p.  592).  Helem  is  the  same  as 
Hel^i  (ver.  10),  whether  he  bore  both 
names,  or  whether,  as  is  probable,  this  is  a 
mere  mistake  of  a  copyist.  To  Hen.  The 
Anthorized  Version  considers  this  as  a 
proper  name.  In  this  case  it  would  be 
another  name  for  Josiah.  But  it  is  really 
an  appellative,  and  the  rendering  should  be, 
"  for  the  kindness  of  the  son  of  Zephaniah." 
The  crown  would  be  also  a  memorial  of  his 
kindness  in  receiving  and  entertaining  these 
exiles  (oomp.  Matt.  x.  41).  The  LXX. 
explains  the  names  as  in  Ter.  10,  though 
not  quite  in  the  same  way,  "Eo-toi  roTs 
ivoiiivovai,  koI  tois  xi"l<'^f"'^^  atiTrjs,  Kal 
TOts  iTFeyytaK6ffiv  auT^v,  Ka\  fis  •x_6^iTa  viov 
"So^ovlov,  Kol  cis  }\ia\fii}v  iv  oiKCf)  Kvpiovy 
"  The  oiown  shall  be  to  them  that  endure, 


and  to  its  good  men,  and  to  those  that  hare 
nnderstood  it,  both  for  a  favour  to  the  son 
of  Sophonias,  and  for  a  psalm  in  the  house 
of  the  Lord." 

Yer.  15. — They  that  are  far  off;  oi  iia«piv 
(Septuagint);  comp.  Eph.  ii.  13,  17.  The 
Jews  who  had  come  from  Babylon  to 
Jerusalem  are  a  figure  of  the  conversion  of 
distant  nations  and  their  offerings  to  the 
Church  (see  Hag.  ii.  7,  and  note  there). 
Bnild  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  They 
shall  join  in  building  up  the  spiritual 
temple,  the  universal  Church  of  Christ. 
Te  shall  know,  etc.  (ch.  ii.  9,  11 ;  iv.  9). 
The  Angel  of  Jehovah  is  speaking  in 
Jehovah's  name  (ver.  9).  What  takes  place 
in  the  case  of  this  material  temple  shall  be 
a  token  and  a  prelude  of  the  great  fulfilment 
in  Messianic  times.  If  ye  will  diligently 
obey.  Neither  the  restoration  of  the  temple 
nor  the  advent  of  Messiah's  kingdom  was 
in  itself  doubtful;  but  the  people's  share 
in  I  he  former,  and  tl.eir  pai-ticipation  in 
the  blessings  of  the  latter,  depended  on  the 
preparation  of  the  heart,  obedience,  zeal, 
and  holiness  (Dan.  xii.  10;  Mai.  iv.  1,  2; 
Johu  L  12 ;  2  Tim.  u.  11,  12). 


EOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — 8.—  The  ministry  of  angels.  "  And  I  turned,  and  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and 
looked,  and,  behold,  there  came  four  chariots  out  from  between  two  mountain!," 
This,  the  last  of  the  present  series  of  visions,  is  perceptibly  similar  in  several  points,  to 
the  first  (oh.  i.  7 — 11).  We  find  mention  in  both,  e.g.,  of  "  horses ;  "  of  the  variety  of 
their  colours ;  of  the  prophet's  inquiry  reopeci  ing  their  meaning ;  of  some  of  them  going 
to  and  fro  on  the  earth  ;  and  of  final  "quiet"  (ver.  8)  or  "  rest"  (ch.  i.  11).  If  we 
were  right,  therefore,  in  understanding  the  first  as  a  "  vision  of  angels,"  we  may  do  the 
same,  of  course,  of  this  last.  This  idea  is  confirmed  by  the  frequent  way  in  which 
"  chariots,"  as  here  spoken  of,  are  employed  in  Holy  Si  ripture  as  descriptiva  of  the 
angels  of  God  (see  Ps.  Ixviii.  17 ;  Deut.  xixiii.  2 ;  Acts  vii.  53 ;  2  Kings  ii.  11 ;  vi.  17); 
as  also  by  what  is  said  of  those  seen  as  "  standing  by  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth  " 
(1  Kings  xxii.  19;  Da  a.  vii.  10;  Luke  i.  19;  also  ch.  iv.  14,  siipra,  where  we,  perhaps, 
have  an  example  of  the  placing  of  men  on  an  angelic  level ;  Ps.  viii.  6 ;  Luke  xi.  36). 
Taking  this  general  view  of  the  passage,  it  may  be  understood  as  giving  us  instruction 
(1)  respecting  the  nature  of  the  angels ;  and  (2)  resiiectiug  their  work. 

1.  Their  nature.  We  are  shown  in  this  vision,  for  example :  1.  How  mighty  they 
are.  They  are  represented  as  chariots  of  war — chariots  of  "  fire,"  in  other  places— 
probably  because  such  chariots,  ia  old  days,  were,  like  ariillery  in  these  days,  the  most 
formidable  "  arm  "  of  an  army  (see  Judg.  i.  19 ;  iv.  3 ;  2  Chron.  xviii.  30,  31 ;  and  note 
how  angels,  whether  elect  or  fallen,  are  spoken  of  in  Kom.  viii.  38 ;  Eph.  i.  21 ;  vi.  10 ; 
2  Pet.  ii.  11).  2.  How  orderly.  Each  separate  emblematical  "colour"  being  dis- 
tinguished from  the  others,  and  each  coming  forth  in  its  turn.  May  we  not  trace 
similar  ideas  of  perfect  order  and  symmetrical  arrangement,  and  consequent  facility  in 
ascei  taining  numbers,  in  Eev.  v.  11 ;  Dan.  vii.  10  (comp.  Mark  vi.  40, 44 ;  and  the  words 
of  the  collect,  "  the  services  of  men  and  angels  in  a  wonderful  order  ")  ?  3.  How 
diverse.  This,  also,  seems  intimated  by  what  is  said  of  the  different  "  colours  "  of  the 
horses.  This  also  we  can  easily  understand  to  be  true.  If  the  varieties  of  men  are 
so  many,  who  yet  are  all  "men,"  however  diverse  (Acts  xvii.  26),  why  not  of  the 
angels  also?  why  not  of  the  angels  ranch  more,  being  innumerable  (Heb.  xii.  22)? 


OH.  vi.  1—15.]  THE   BOOK   OF  ZECHABIAH.  61 

This  same  truth  seems  intimated  to  us  also  in  Ool.  i.  16 ;  and,  perhaps,  of  evil  angels, 
in  Mark  ix.  29.  A  legitimate  subject  this  for  meditation  and  praise,  though  not  for 
intrusion  (Cul.  i.  18).  4.  Bow  diversely  employed.  Like  "  the  four  winds  of  heaven," 
«.(/.,  some  go  in  this  direction,  some  in  that.  Also  some  are  to  follow,  some  to  precede. 
Some,  again,  to  move  in  one  direction  only;  some  in  every  direction,  "to  and  fro." 
Angels,  in  short,  like  the  stars  of  the  mighty  firmament,  and  apparently  bearing, 
therefore,  the  same  name,  "  the  host  of  heaven  "  (Gen.  ii.  1 ;  Ps.  ixxiii.  6 ;  Luke  ii.  13 ; 
Job  xxxviii,  6),  are,  as  it  were,  some  fixed,  and  some  revolving;  some  of  one  light,  some 
of  another ;  some  larger,  some  smaller ;  some  single,  some  double  or  treble  ;  some  nearer, 
some  more  remote  (1  Cor.  xv.  41). 

II.  'J'heib  wokk.  However  mighty  or  diverse  these  angels,  all  that  they  here  do  is 
seen  to  be :  1.  In  strict  subordination  to  God's  pwposes.  These  mystical  "  chariots  " 
only  run,  as  it  were,  "  between,"  and  not  over  the  mountains — the  unsurmountable  and 
undecaying  "  brass "  mountains  of  God's  settled  arrangements  (see  Micah  iv.  13). 
Even  of  the  mightiest  angels  Acts  iv.  28  holds  good.  2.  In  strict  obedience  to  GotPs 
directions.  Observe  what  is  said  in  ver.  7  of  those  who  "sought  to  go,"  but  till 
expressly  allowed,  did  not  go,  "  to  and  fro  "  (comp.  Dan.  ix.  23 ;  Heb.  i.  14,  "  sent 
forth; "  and  see,  even  of  evil  angels,  Luke  viii.  32).  3.  To  the  complete  satis/action  of 
God's  Son.  See  the  emphatic  declaration  of  the  Angel-Jehovah  in  ver.  8.  This  is 
true,  even  if  we  understand  that  verse  (with  some),  "  These  have  made  my  anger  to 
rest  on  the  north  country."  Why  else  does  this  Divine  Angel  employ  this  word  "  my  "? 
Why  proclaim  this  fact  thus  "  aloud  "  (Pusey ;  comp.  Ps.  ciii.  20,  21 ;  Matt.  vi.  10)  ? 
4.  For  the  sake  of  Go(rs  friends.  What  is  this  "  north  country "  on  which  God's 
anger  is  thus  caused  to  abide  ?  What  but  that  great  enemy  of  his  Zion — that  mystic 
Babylon,  or  "  Shinar,"  by  banishment  in  which  (see  last  chapter)  he  had  punished  his 
Israel  for  their  sin?  Compare  this  predicted  fate  of  the  future  "Babylon"  with  that 
of  the  literal  as  described  in  Isa.  xlvii.  6 — 9,  and  elsewhere ;  and  compare  ch.  i.  15,  and 
perhaps  Rev.  xviiL  5,  6. 

From  the  whole,  we  may  see,  to  conclude :  1.  Z%e  exceeding  complexity  of  God's 
government.  How  many  instruments — what  varied  agents,  both  in  heaven  and  earth — 
he  employs  (comp.  Dan.  iv.  35)  1  Much  as  there  is  to  admire  in  that  visible  "  cosmos  " 
of  which  men  have  discovered  (under  one  aspect)  so  much ;  how  much  more  there  is 
when  we  include  also  that  inrisible  "cosmos  (Gen.  xiviii.  12;  John  i.  51),  of  which 
revelation  informs  us  I  It  is,  in  fact,  only  less  marvellous  than  its  Maker  himself.  2. 
I%e  exceeding  simplicity  of  its  general  principle.  So  far  as  explained  to  us,  it  all  turns 
on  one  point,  viz.  "  Israel's  "  calling  and  work.  This  shown  here  of  the  literal  Israel. 
This  still  more  true  of  the  spiritual.  See  two  last  references  again ;  also  such  passages 
as  2  Cor.  iv.  15 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  21 ;  Eph.  iii.  10,  11.  Note,  also,  how  this  principle  was 
laid  down  once  for  all  in  Gen.  xii.  3;  and  how  it  corresponds  with  and  is  partly 
explained  by  the  remarkable  declaration  of  Eph.  i.  23. 

Vers.  9  —15. — The  ministry  of  Messiah.  "  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me, 
saying,"  etc.  The  series  of  striking  visions  which  we  have  now  been  considering  had 
a  kind  of  "  prologue  "  in  ch.  i.  1 — 6.  We  seem  to  have  the  corresponding  "  epilogue  " 
here.  It  turns  on  the  fact  of  the  arrival  (probably  about  the  same  season,  no  special 
note  of  time  being  given  as  in  ch.  vii.  1)  of  certain  visitors  at  Jerusalem,  with  offer- 
ings for  the  temple,  from  a  "  far  "  country,  viz.  "  Babylon  "  (see  vers.  10  and  15 ;  and 
comp.  laa.  xxxix.  3).  And  what  we  seem  invited. to  notice,  respecting  these  visitors, 
is  (1)  the  welcome ;  (2)  the  instruction ;  and  (3)  the  promotion  which  they  received. 

I.  The  welcome  accorded  them.  This  is  shown  in  several  ways.  1.  As  to  their 
persons.  They  are  mentioned  by  name  (ver.  10 ;  comp.  Exod.  xxxi.  2 ;  xxxiii.  12 ; 
1  Kings  xiii.  2;  Isa.  xlv.  3;  John  x.  3),  including  the  name  of  the  man  who  appears 
to  have  given  them  hospitality  in  his  "  house  "  (Matt.  x.  41).  Also,  if  it  be  true,  as 
some  suppose  from  comparing  vers.  10  and  14,  that  two  among  them  had  more  names 
than  one,  the  second  name  in  each  case  being  one  assumed  because  containing  in  it, 
like  all  the  rest  (see  Pusey),  the  name  of  Jehovah  or  Jab  (comp.  Dan.  i.  7 ;  iv.  8 ;  v. 
12 ;  Micah  iv.  5),  it  is,  perhaps,  worthy  of  notice  that  their  names  seem  mentioned  in 
full  ;■  thus  showing,  further,  it  may  be,  how  God  is  pleased  to  notice  and  honour  the 
very  least  thing  that  is  done  by  us  in  remembrance  of  his  Name  (Mark  ix.  41).     2.  As 


62  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  vi.  1—16. 

to  their  offerings.  These  are  not  only  not  refused,  but  openly  accepted — a  very  great 
point,  and  by  no  means  snob  a  matter  of  course  as  we  are  sometimes  inclined  to 
suppose  (Gen.  iv.  4,  5 ;  Numb.  xvi.  15 ;  Exod.  xxv.  2  ;  xxx.  16 ;  xxxv.  6,  etc.).  Also, 
when  accepted,  these  offerings  are  honoured,  and  put  to  very  (iignified  use,  being 
employed  to  make  "crowns"  (ver.  11)  for  God's  chief  minister  then  upon  earth 
(compare,  in  some  respects,  the  box  of  ointment  mentioned  in  Mark  xiv.  3 — 9). 

II.  The  instruction  vouohsafbd  them.  See  what  God  says  of  Joshua,  when  thus 
adorned,  as  a  type  or  sign  (comp.  oh.  iri.  8),  in  vers.  12  and  13.  With  these  two 
crowns  on  him,  he  seems  to  represent  to  us:  1.  The  appearance  of  the  coming  Messiah 
in  his  humiliation.  We  see  him  here  (1)  as  a  man  ("  Behold  the  Man  1 "  ver.  12 ;  John 
lix.  5);  and,  therefore,  as  sharing  to  the  full  man's  nature  and  circumstances 
("growing  up;"  comp.  Isa.  liii.  2;  Luke  ii.  51,  52).  We  see  him  here  (2)  as  the 
Eepresentative  Man,  the  Son  of  man  ("  The  Branch,''  ver.  12),  engaged,  as  such,  in 
doing  man's  work,  viz.  in  saving  men  or  bringing  tiiem  to  glory  (Heb.  ii,  10,  11) ;  in 
other  words,  in  "buildin?;"  God's  "temple,"  or  Church  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  2.  The 
appearance  of  the  coming  Messiah  in  his  glory.  For  example,  we  see  him  here  (1)  as 
a  Builder  or  Teacher,  doing  all  by  himself.  "Even  he"  (ver.  13).  He,  Indeed,  being 
such  as  he  is!  He,  alone,  having  no  one  else  with  him  (see  Isa.  Ixiii.  3,  5)!  More 
especially  and  clearly  we  see  him  (2)  as  both  King  and  High  Piiest.  This  also  fore- 
shadowed by  the  case  of  Melchizedek  (Gen.  xiv.  18 ;  Ps.  ex.  4 ;  Heb.  vii.  14).  This 
signified  here  by  the  interpretation  apparently  given  to  the  two  "  crowns  "  in  ver.  13 
("  sitting  and  ruling  on  his  throne,"  and  being  "  a  priest  on  his  throne  ") ;  and  possibly, 
also,  by  the  intimation  at  the  end  of  that  verse,  of  perfectly  harmonious  co-operation, 
in  his  case,  of  these  generally  divided  and  even  incompatible  ofiBces.  This  afterwards 
accomplished,  as  to  his  priestly  office,  when,  by  being  "  lifted  up  "  on  the  cross,  he 
drew  all  men  to  himself  (John  xii.  82,  wliere  note  also  the  connection  between  the 
inquiry  of  the  Greeks,  so  "  far  off,"  in  vers.  20 — 23,  and  the  "  glorifying  "  of  the  Son 
of  man  in  the  subsequent  verse) ;  and,  as  to  his  kingly  office,  in  that  primary  "  build- 
ing "  up  of  his  Church  by  the  bestowment  of  the  gifts  mentioned  in  Acts  ii.  33  and  v. 
31,  Then  most  manifestly  did  he  "  bear  "  that  twofold  "  glory  "  referred  to  here  in 
ver.  13. 

III.  Thb  special  pbomotion  oonfebred  on  them.  As  shown  by  the  final  destina- 
tion of  their  offerings.  After  doing  their  duty,  as  "  crowns  "  to  Joshua,  in  a  typical 
way,  they  were  to  have  a  perpetual  place  amongst  the  treasures  of  God's  house  (ver. 
14).  This :  1.  .4s  a  "  memorial."  (Ver.  14.)  Future  visitors  should  learn  from  them 
how  these  first  visitors  (as  they  appear  to  have  been)  had  been  welcomed.  Possibly 
this  may  even  help  to  account  for  the  world-wide  habit  which  afterwards  prevailed 
amongst  the  Jews  in  this  respect  (Acts  ii.  1 — 11,  etc. ;  and  compare,  perhaps.  Bom.  xvi. 
5;  Eph.  ii.  12).  2.  As  a  pledge.  Placed  in  the  restored  temple,  these  crowns  would  be 
a  kind  of  standing  prophecy :  (1)  Of  the  future  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  when  those 
now  "afar  off"  should  not  only  come  and  be  welcomed,  but  should  even  help  to 
"  build "  the  true  temple  of  God.  (2)  Of  the  coming  glory  of  Messiah.  Then,  i.e. 
when  this  ingathering  of  the  Gentiles  (Gen.  xlix.  10)  has  taken  place,  says  the  Angel- 
Jehovah  here  (in  ver.  15),  ye  shall  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  unto 
you  (compare  two  clauses  of  Luke  ii.  31).  3.  As  a  warning.  "  Ye  shall  know,"  if 
willing  to  know — so  it  means  (see  end  of  ver.  15 ;  and  comp.  Dan.  xii.  10 ;  John 
vii.  17). 

See  how  these  various  considerations  show  the  unity  of  the  Bible.  1,  As  to  its 
structure.  Joshua,  or  Jesus,  after  the  Exodus,  brings  the  Israelites,  as  Moses  could 
not  do,  into  rest.  Another  "  Jesus,"  after  the  Captivity,  typifies,  in  ch.  iii.  6 — 10,  the 
two  natures  of  Christ ;  and,  in  this  passage,  his  two  offices  of  King  and  Priest.  In 
the  "  fulness  of  time  "  a  third  "  Jesus  "  arises,  in  wliom  all  these  things  are  fulfilled. 
Is  there  no  evidence,  in  all  this,  of  "design"?  2.  As  to  its  subject.  Wherever  we 
penetrate  far  enough  beneath  the  surface,  we  find  this  one  "  Rock."  Must  it  not, 
therefore,  like  the  granite  in  geological  formations,  be  the  foundation  of  all  ?  3.  As 
to  its  source.  To  what  are  we  to  attribute  such  singular  unity  of  teaching,  at  such 
very  different  times,  and  in  such  very  different  circumstances,  except  virtual  unity  of 
origin,  or  of  supervision,  to  say  the  least  ?  Is  not  the  true  and  only  explanation  in 
finch  passages  as  2  Pet.  i.  21 ;  1  Cor.  xiL  6 — 11  ? 


OH.  VI.  1— i6.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH.  63 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEI0U8  AUTHOBa 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  world  ruled  in  tfie  interest  of  Christianity,  L  The  powbbs  of 
THK  WORLD  ABB  UNDEB  THE  coNTBOL  OF  GoD.  East  and  west,  north  and  south,  all  the 
world  over,  God  is  supreme.  He  is  the  Lord  of  all  forces,  the  Ruler  of  all  events,  the 
Arbiter  of  all  destinies.  War,  famine,  pestilence,  may  be  the,  result  of  natural  causes, 
but,  all  the  same,  they  are  his  servants ;  they  come  and  go  at  hia  command ;  they 
accomplish  what  he  pleases. 

"Happy  the  man  who  sees  a  God  employed 
In  all  the  good  and  ill  that  chequer  life." 

(Cowper.) 

n.  The  powers  of  the  world  are  oontbolled  by  God  in  the  interest  of 
Chbistianitt.  God  takes  a  direct  and  living  interest  in  his  people.  He  is  Enemy  of 
their  enemies,  and  the  Friend  of  their  friends.  "  All  things  work  together  for  good 
to  them  who  love  God."  And  there  is  nothing  arbitrary  in  this.  God  is  not  partial, 
but  just.  As  he  is  God,  he  must  act  as  God.  The  true  and  the  righteous  and  the 
holy  must  ewr  receive  the  protection  and  the  blessing  of  the  True  and  the  Righteous 
and  the  Holy  One.  God's  government  is  marked  by  immutability  of  counsel,  variety  of 
method,  universality  of  range,  sovereignty  of  sway,  and  beneficence  of  result.  How 
grand  and  benign  must  be  the'  end  that  satisfies  the  mind  of  the  Eternal  I  "  Quieted 
my  spirit." — P. 

Vers.  9—15.—"  Messiah  the  Prince."    "  Behold." 

L  The  coming  Man  of  the  ages.  "  Branch."  Lowliness,  and  yet  dignity.  The 
heathens  fabled  that  the  Titans  were  sons  of  heaven  and  earth.  Here  is  what  they 
vainly  imagined.  "  Grew  up."  Natural  development.  Perfection  of  humanity.  Long 
the  cry  was, "  He  cometh."  We  see  his  shadow  in  every  sacrifice.  Find  his  presence  in 
every  prophecy.  Hear  his  footfall  in  every  promise.  He  was  the  Hope  of  Israel,  and 
the  Desire  of  all  nations. 

II.  Charoed  with  the  KOBi.EST  MISSION.  "Build" — personally  and  instrumentally. 
Many  whom  he  honours  as  "  fellow-workers."  Temple  slowly  rising.  Grandeur  and 
beauty  gradually  unfolding.  Implies  the  union  and  fellowship  of  men  as  "  living 
stones  "  in  the  great  temple  of  humanity. 

III.  Destined  fob  the  geandest  bmpibb.  "  The  glory."  1.  Priest.  Power  with 
God.  "  For  ever,  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek."  2.  King.  Power  with  men.  The 
rule  of  righteousness  and  love.  3.  The  recompense  of  his  sufferings.  "  Sit  and  rule." 
First  the  cross,  then  the  crown  (cf.  Heb.  x.  12, 13 ;  1  Pet.  L  ll). 

IV.  Designated  for  immortal  honoub.  Heaven  is  the  perfect  state.  What  do 
we  see  there  ?  Let  St.  John  declare  (Rev.  v.  6).  Byen  on  earth,  what  honour  to  Christ  1 
Every  day,  and  especially  on  the  Lord's  day,  what  prayers  in  his  Name  I  what  offer- 
ings to  his  praise  and  glory  1  In  how  many  lands,  by  what  various  voices,  with  what 
measureless  love,  is  his  name  breathed  forth !  "  Behold  the  Man  I "  Let  each  heart 
answer,  with  adoring  gratitude  and  joy,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God  1 " — P. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — GodCa  government  of  the  world.  "  And  I  turned,  and  lifted  up  mine 
eyes,  and  looked,  and,  behold,  there  came  four  chariots  out  from  between  two  moun- 
tains ;  and  the  mountains  were  mountains  of  brass,"  etc.  This  is  the  last  in  the 
series  of  visions,  which  amount  in  all  to  eight,  during  that  one  night.  All  are 
so  obscure  that  the  more  scholarly  and  enlightened  the  expositor,  the  less  disposed 
will  he  be  to  regard  his  interpretation  as  absolutely  correct.  Certainly  this  is  not 
more  easy  of  interpretation  than  the  preceding  ones.  The  objects  which  were  now 
revealed  to  the  prophet's  vision  are  various  and  strange.  1.  He  sees  four  chariots. 
It  does  not  say  expressly  whether  they  were  chariots  of  war  bearing  the  warrior  out  to 
battle  or  home  in  triumph,  or  whether  they  were  chariots  used  for  private  or  public 
conveyances;  but  it  is  implied  that  they  were  war-chariots.  2.  He  saw  these  four 
chariots  proceeding  from  two  mountains.  These  were  not  mountains  of  earth  or 
stone,  but  mountains  of  brass;  mountains,  therefore,  having  peculiar  solidity  and 


64  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [ch.  vl  1—16. 

itrength.  3,  He  saw  these  chariots  drawn  by  horses  of  different  colours.  In  the 
first  chariot  we  have  red  horses;  in  the  second,  blact:;  in  the  third,  white;  and 
in  the  fourth,  grisled  or  piebald  grey.  Now,  the  prophet  seemed  utterly  unable  to 
understand  the  meaning  of  these  objects.  But  he  is  anxious  to  do  so,  and  he 
addresses  the  interpreting  angel,  and  says,  "  What  are  these,  my  lord  ?  "  Here  is  the 
answer :  "  And  the  angel  answered  and  said  unto  me,  These  are  the  four  spirits  of  the 
heavens,  which  go  forth  from  standing  before  the  Lord  of  all  the  earth,"  etc.  The 
chariots,  then,  are  the  four  "  spirits,"  or  winds,  as  the  margin  has  it.  Some  translate 
the  word,  "  celestial  spirits,"  and  suppose  that  angels  are  referred  to.  The  "  four 
winds "  probably  represent  the  invisible  agencies  by  which  the  Almighty  is  pleased 
to  carry  on  the  government  of  the  world.  These  spirits  stand  before  the  Lord  of 
all  the  earth,  and  are  in  his  presence,  at  his  disposal,  ever  ready  to  execute  his 
behests.  My  purpose  in  these  sketches  is  not  speculative,  but  practical.  Were  it 
speculative,  I  should  find  a  wide  and  fertile  field  for  hypothetical  thought.  For 
example,  a  large  variety  of  opinions  exist  concerning  the  foiir  chariots  and  horses  and 
their  charioteers.  Some  suppose  that  they  represent  the  great  monarchies  of  the 
ancient  world — the  Chaldean,  the  Grecian,  and  the  Roman.  Some,  indeed,  have 
supposed  them  to  refer  to  the  four  Gospels.  And  some  have  supposed  them  to  refer 
to  the  history  of  the  Church  after  Constantine — the  first,  to  the  wars  of  invaders  of  the 
Roman  Empire,  and  the  wars  of  controverted  doctrines  and  opinions ;  the  second,  to  the 
blackness  of  darkness,  the  ignorance,  oppression,  and  misery  of  papal  domination ;  the 
third,  to  the  light  and  knowledge,  the  joy  and  triumph,  of  the  Reformation ;  and  the 
fourth,  to  the  mixed  condition  of  things,  the  confusion  of  false  doctrine  and  true,  right 
and  wrong  precepts,  holy  and  unholy  rites  of  worship,  subsequent  to  that  great  revolu- 
tion. But  I  take  the  vision  to  illustrate  Ood^s  government  of  the  world ;  and  it  illus- 
trates four  facts  concerning  that  government — its  variety,  immuliability,  universality, 
and  supremacy. 

I.  Yabiutt.  This  is  suggested  by  the  colour  of  the  steeds  that  bear  onward  the 
chariots  of  his  plans.  The  "  red  horses,"  emblem  of  war  and  bloodshed.  The  "  black," 
emblem  of  calamity,  distress,  and  mourning.  The  "  white,"  emblem  of  gladness  and 
prosperity.  The  "  grisled  "  and  "  hay,"  or  piebald,  a  mixture  of  events,  prosperity  and 
adversity,  friendship  and  bereavement,  sorrow  and  joy,  etc.  Has  not  this  variety 
characterized  the  providence  that  is  over  man  from  the  beginning  until  this  hour  ?  It  is 
not  only  seen  in  every  page  of  the  history  of  nations  and  Churches  and  families,  but  in 
the  history  of  individuals.  The  experience  of  every  man  is  more  changeable  than  the 
weather.  There  is  a  constant  alternation — the  red,  the  black,  the  white,  the  mixed. 
These  changes  are  useful.  1.  They  hreak  the  monotony  of  life.  They  tend  to  keep 
the  heart  of  humanity  on  the  alert.  There  is  but  little  opportunity  for  moral 
sleep.  2.  They  create  a  desire  for  a  state  of  certainty.  They  prompt  a  search  for 
a  "  city  that  hath  foundations,  whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  Gk)d."  This  is  not 
our  rest. 

II.  Immutability.  These  chariots  move  between  two  "mountains  of  brass." 
Though  tbey  are  borne  by  a  variety  of  steeds,  and  move  rapidly  towards  every  point 
of  the  compass,  and  carry  a  variety  of  events  wherever  they  go,  they  are  overshadowed 
and  hedged  in  by  the  immutable,  represented  by  mountains  of  brass.  God's  immutable 
■iouiisels  of  decrees  keep  all  the  motions  and  commotions,  all  the  convulsions  and  revolu- 
tions of  the  world  in  their  place.  As  the  ocean,  amidst  all  its  ebbings  and  flowings,  rage 
and  fury,  is  bound  to  obey  the  moon,  which  remains  serenely  settled  in  her  orbit,  so  all 
the  agitations  of  the  earth  are  bound  to  obey  the  immutable  decrees  of  Heaven.  Thank 
God,  that  in  this  changing  world  of  ours  there  are  mountains  of  brass,  things  that 
cannot  be  shaken.  "  All  flesh  is  grass,  .  .  .  but  the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for 
ever ;  "  "  My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  I  will  do  all  my  pleasure." 

IIL  Universality.  These  chariots,  borne  by  these  varied  coloured  steeds,  rolled 
towards  every  point  of  the  globe,  some  to  the  north  and  some  to  the  south.  They 
walked  "  to  and  fro  through  the  earth."  Yes ;  through  the  earth — through  every  part 
of  it.  Not  a  spot  unvisited  or  ignored.  God's  providence  embraces  all,  matter  and 
mind,  great  and  small,  good  and  evil.  All  we  have,  and  all  that  every  creature  has, 
i*  borne  to  us  in  these  chariots ;  they  bear  to  us  our  trials  and  our  joys.  Hence  we 
should  bow  with  resignation  under  all  our  sorrows,  and  shout  with  gratitude  in  all  our 


•H.  n.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  65 

enjoyments.  Hence,  too,  we  should  practically  realize  our  dependence  upon  him  in 
every  momeut  of  our  life.     "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread,"  etc. 

IV.  SuPKBMAOT.  "  Tllese  are  the  four  spirits  of  the  heavens,  which  go  forth  from 
standing  before  the  Lord  of  all  tte  earth."  He  is  at  the  head  of  all.  No  evil  spirit 
moves  without  his  permission  and  control ;  no  good  spirit  without  his  inspiration  and 
guidance.  He  is  tlie  Lord  oi  all  the  earth.  How  great  must  he  be  who  manages  all 
things  1 

"  All  good  proceedeth  from  him,  as  sunbeams  from  the  sun ; 
All  evils  fall  before  him ;  his  will  through  all  is  done." 

Let  us  trust  him  with  an  unbounded  confidence.  Let  us  obey  him  with  loving  lojalty. 
"  Of  him,  and  by  him,  and  to  him  are  all  things."  "  He  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for 
ever."— D.  T. 

Vers.  9 — 15. —  77ie  matchless  Man  in  history.  "  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto 
me,  saying,  Take  of  them  of  the  Captivity,  even  of  Heldai,  of  Tobijah,  and  of  Jedaiah, 
which  are  come  from  Babylon,  and  come  thou  the  same  day."  The  crowning,  the 
work,  and  the  position  of  Joshua  spoken  of  in  ihese  verses  are  obviously  employed  to 
symbolize  some  coming  Man  who  would  be  matchless  in  all  history.  Concerning  thia 
matchless  Man,  we  are  here  taught — 

L  That  he  is  One  whom  Heaven  cwmmands  the  people  to  HONonB.  "And 
the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying.  Take  of  them  of  the  Captivity,  even  of 
Heldai,  of  Tobijah,  and  of  Jedaiah,  which  are  come  from  Babylon,  and  come  thou  the 
same  day,  and  gu  into  the  house  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Zephaniah ;  then  take  silver  and 
gold,  and  make  crowns,  and  set  them  upon  the  head  of  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedech,  the 
high  priest."  The  prophet  is  commanded  to  go  to  certain  of  the  more  distinguished 
men  who  had  returned  from  Babylonian  captivity,  representative  men  and  envoys  it 
may  be.  He  was  to  take  these  men,  whose  names  are  here  given,  who  were  entertained 
in  the  house  of  another  distinguished  man,  here  called  Josiah  the  son  of  Zephaniah. 
From  that  house  the  silver  and  gold  which  they  had  brought  from  Babylon  were  to 
be  taken,  with  which  crowns  were  to  be  made  and  placed  upon  the  head  of  Joshua 
the  son  of  Josedech,  the  high  priest.  By  the  general  consent  of  expositors,  this  was  a 
mere  symbolical  transaction — a  transaction  pointing  to  some  great  Man  whom  Heaven 
will  require  all  men  to  crown  with  the  highest  dignity.  The  spirit  of  hero-worship  is  so 
strong  in  human  nature  that  the  servile  multitudes  of  all  times  have  been  ready  to  fall 
down  and  render  homage  to  most  unholy  characters.  They  hoist  flags,  ring  bells, 
shout  hurrahs,  in  honour  of  the  laurelled  butchers,  crowned  de^spots,  and  gorgeous 
millionaires.  This  is  one  of  the  worst  features  of  huinan  depravity,  one  of  the  greatest 
obstructions  to  the  progress  of  men  and  nations.  But  here  is  a  character  symbolized 
by  the  name  of  Joshua,  to  whom  the  people  are  called  upon  by  Ood  himsd/  to  render 
honour.  Who  is  this  Man  ?  Can  you  find  him  anywhere  amongst  the  millions  of  your 
contemporaries  in  any  land,  or  on  the  page  of  the  history  of  the  people  of  any  time  ? 
anywljere  but  in  the  records  of  the  four  evangelists — the  Man  Christ  Jesus?  "When 
he  brinueth  in  the  First  Begotten  into  the  world,  he  saith.  Let  all  the  angels  of  God 
worship  him."  And  all  heaven  worships  him.  "I  heard  the  voice  of  angels  round 
about  the  throne,"  etc. 

II.  That  his  pediobeb  was  STBisiNaLT  binoulab.  "Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  saying.  Behold  the  Man  whose  name  is  The  BRANCH ;  and  be  shall  grow  up  out 
of  his  place,  and  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord."  He  is  a  "  Branch ;  "  he  has 
root  somewhere ;  he  has  life,  and  he  grows.  It  is  here  said,  "  He  shall  grow  up  out  of 
his  place."  The  reference  is  to  some  Man  who  grows  on  the  earth,  who  is  not  of  the 
earth.  What  man  on  the  earth  can  be  said  to  have  grown  out  of  his  place  ?  The 
earth  is  the  place  of  all  men  during  their  stay  here.  It  is  their  native  home.  Only 
one  such  Man  we  know  of — the  illustrious  "  Son  of  Mary."  He  came  down  from 
heaven  and  tabernacled  on  this  earth,  which  was  not  his  pUce.  And  here  he  grew  in 
body  and  mind,  in  the  favour  of  God  and  man.  Though  there  was  nothing  congenial 
with  his  Spirit  here,  still  ho  grew  and  became  the  Prince  of  life,  the  Conqueror  of 
death,  and  the  moral  Commander  of  the  race.  A  great  soul,  dominated  by  a  iupreme 
•ympathy  with  the  Supremely  Good,  can  grow  anywhere,  in  its  place  or  out  of  it.    It 

ZECHABIAH  ' 


M  THE   BOOK   OP    ZECHARIAH.  [OB.  n.  1— 1& 

can  subordinate  the  most  hostile  external  elements  and  forces  to  its  own  will  and 
interests. 

III.  That  he  is  Omb  whose  mission  is  suBLiHEiiT  qlobious.  "He  shall  build 
the  temple  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  Zerubbabel  was  now  engaged  in  the  work  of  rearing  tiie 
material  temple  at  Jerusalem ;  and  a  more  glorious  work  than  this  is  not  given  to  man 
than  to  promote  the  public  worship  of  God.  The  progress  of  nations  is  dependent  upon 
morality,  and  morality  is  the  growth  of  genuine  religion.  Philanthropy  springs  fcom 
piety ;  it  is  only  as  philanthropy  grows  that  humanity  can  advance.  Hence  no  work 
so  transcendently  important  as  that  of  promotinij  public  worship,  building  temples, 
etc.  Hence  it  is  added  here,  "  He  shall  bear  the  glory."  The  true  promoter  of  public 
worship  bears  with  him  in  every  honest  effort  the  glory,  compared  with  which  the 
glory  of  every  other  department  of  human  labour  pales  into  dimness.  The  building  of 
the  material  temple  is  but  the  emblem  of  the  rearing  of  the  great  spiritual  temple. 
And  the  Man  here  referred  to  is  the  Builder  of  that.  There  is  one  and  only  one,  and 
that  is  Christ.  He  is  not  only  the  Builder,  but  the  Creator  of  the  materials,  and  him- 
self the  Foundation  of  the  whole.  "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  which 
is  laid,  that  is  Jesus  Christ."  In  doing  this  he  bears  the  glory.  "  Now  is  the  Son  of 
man  glorified."  God  is  glorified  in  him.  "  God  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given 
him  a  name  which  is  above  every  name,"  etc.  St.  Peter  gives  a  beautiful  description  of  this 
temple  when  he  says,  "To  whom  coming,  as  unto  a  living  stone,  disallowed  indeed  of 
men,  but  chosen  of  God,  and  precious,  ye  also,  as  lively  stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual 
house,  an  holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  by 
Jesus  Christ."  Christ  is  the  great  Builder  of  the  moral  temple  of  the  world,  and 
no  one  else. 

IV.  That  he  is  One  whose  position  and  functions  abb  tbansobndentallt 
EXALTED.  He  is  ou  a  throne.  "  He  is  exalted  far  above  all  heavens."  But  he  is 
there  :  1.  A$  a  priestly  King.  On  behalf  of  humanity  before  God,  he  holds  the  reins 
of  universal  dominion.  2.  As  a  glorious  Seconciler.  "  The  counsel  of  peace  shall  be 
between  them  both."  What  does  this  mean  ?  Not  that  there  is  a  covenant  of  peace 
between  him  and  his  Father.  They  were  never  at  variance.  And  to  suppose  any 
contract  or  covenant  between  them  is  to  derogate  Infinite  Majesty.  The  "  counsel  of 
peace  "  between  the  Infinite  Father  and  his  alien  and  rebellious  children.  He  is  the 
Mediator  between  God  and  man.  He  is  the  Beconciliation,  the  Atonement.  (But  see 
in  ithe  Exposition  (ver.  13)  another  explanation,  and  one  more  conformable  to  the 
context.) 

V.  That  he  is  One  whose  power  to  attbaot  others  to  his  bnterpeise  is 
luUENBELT  SBEAT.  "  And  they  that  are  far  off  shall  come  and  build  in  the  temple 
of  the  Lord,  and  ye  shall  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  unto  you." 
"  There  can,"  says  Dr.  Wurdlaw,  "  be  no  doubt  here  j  to  you  who  were  far  off,  and  to 
them  that  were  near  are  the  very  terms  of  distinction  between  Gentile  and  Jew,  which, 
in  addressing  the  former,  the  apostle  uses.  '  I  will  bring  my  sons  from  far,'  says 
Jehovah, '  and  my  daughters  from  the  ends  of  the  earth.'  The  Gentiles  were  to  be 
themselves  stones  in  the  building,  and  agents  in  the  rearing  of  it.  And  this  was 
fulfilled  in  the  beginning  of  the  gospel,  in  the  ministerial  activity  and  usefulness  of 
many  a  Gentile  convert ;  and  it  is  fulfilling  to  this  day  in  every  Gentile  nation  where 
Christianity  has  formed  a  settlement,  and  in  every  heathen  country  to  which  mission- 
aries are  carrying  the  message  of  salvation,  and  gathering  sinners  into  the  Church  of 
God.  For  that  Church  of  God  is  his  temple  (the  members  of  it,  how  widely  soever 
scattered,  being  all '  builded  together  for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit '),  in 
which  '  spiritual  sacrifices '  will  be  offered  to  him — 'acceptable  through  Jesus  Christ/ 
in  all  time  and  for  ever  I  " 

Conclusion.  "  Behold  the  Man  I "  What  manner  of  man  is  he  ?  He  stands  alone, 
the  majestic  cedar  amongst  the  saplings  of  the  race,  the  sun  amidst  the  satellites.  Ha 
ia  the  "  Wonderful."— D.  T. 


CH.  YU.  1—14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAa 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Ver.  1 — ch.  viii.  23. — Part  II.  The  Answer 
TO  A  Question  concerning  the  Observanob 
OP  Certain  Fasts. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — §  1.  A  deputation  comes  from 
Bethel  to  aek  whether  a  faet  instituted  in 
ntemory  of  the  calamity  of  Jerusalem  was 
still  to  he  obseriied. 

Yei.  1. — In  the  fourtli  year  of  King  Sarins. ' 
This  happened,  then,  b.o.  518,  nearly  two 
years  after  the  visions  had  occnrred  (ch.  i.  7). 
In  two  years  mnre  the  temple  was  finished 
(Ezra  vi.  ]  5),  and  the  work  of  rebuilding  was 
now  proceeding  vigorously;  it  seemed  a  fit 
opportunity  for  inquiring  whether,  in  this 
period  of  comparative  prosperity  and  success, 
it  behoved  the  people  to  o»ntinue  the  fast 
appointed  in  sailder  times.  The  word  of  the 
Lord  came.  This  is  the  Usual  formula  for 
introducing  a  revelation  (oh.  i.  1),  but  it  is 
here  placed  in  a  peculiar  position,  dividing 
the  date  into  two  parts.  Keil  connects  the 
last  clause,  which  gives  the  day  of  the 
month,  with  the  next  verse ;  but  this  is 
against  the  traditional  accentuation,  and  is. 
not  required  by  the  wording  of  ver.  2.  The 
prophet  first  gives  the  date  generally  when 
the  word  came  to  him,  and  then  defines  it 
more  accurately.  Chislen;  Uhislev  (Neb. 
i.  1).  This  month  corresponded  to  parts  of 
November  and  December. 

Ver.  2. — When  they  had  sent  unto  the 
house  of  God.  The  Vulgate  supports  this 
version,  Et  miserunt  ad  domum  Dei;  the 
LXX.  gives,  Kol  ^|o7re<rTci\fv  eij  BaiB))\ 
^^apcurap  Kal  'Ap/Sccreep  d  ffatriXehs  Koi  ot 
Hvipes  avToO,  "  And  Sarasar  and  Arbeseer 
the  king  and  his  men  sent  to  Bethel" — 
which  is  far  from  clear.  But  the  temple 
is  never  called  Beth-el,  while  a  mission  to 
the  town  Bethel  WouM  be  unmeaning.  So 
"  Bethel "  is  to  be  taken  as  the  subject  of 
the  sentence,  thus  :  "  Now  Betliel  (i.e.  they 
of  Bethel)  sent."  The  persons  named  may 
be  taken  eiti  ler  as  the  depntation  or  as  the 
persons  meant  by  "they  of  Bethel."  The 
former  seems  most  likely  to  be  intended. 
The  Betheliles  sent  these  men  to  Jeru- 
salem to  make  the  inquiry.  The  exiles 
returned  each  to  his  own  city,  as  we  read 
in  Ezra  ii. ;  among  them  were  many  people 
of  Bethel  (Ezra  ii.  28 ;  Neh.  vii.  32),  which 
town  they  rebuilt  (Neh.  xi.  31).  They 
seem  to  have  tacitly  acquiesced  in  the 
epiritnal  supremacy  of  Jerusalem,  notwith- 
Etaiiding  the  associations  connected  with 
their  own  oity.  Sherezer.  The  names  of 
the  deputies  are  Assyrian;  they  seem  to 


have  retained  them  on  their  return.  She- 
rezer, equivalent  to  Assyrian  Sar-usur  or 
Aeur-sar-usur,  "  Asur  protect  the  King,"  is 
the  name  borne  by  a  son  of  Sennacherib  (2 
Kings  xix.  37).  Begem-melech ;  "  Friend  of 
the  King."  The  first  half  of  the  word  is 
probably  Assyrian  (see  Schrader,  '  Die 
Keilinschr.  und  Alt.  Test.,'  pp.  206,  417). 
And  their  men.  Certain  persons  associated 
with  them  in  the  business.  To  pray  before 
the  lord;  literally,  to  stroke  the  face  of  the 
Lord  (oh.  viii.  21,  22;  Exod.  xxxii.  11); 
so  Latin,  mulcere  caput.  Hence  it  means, 
"to  entreat  the  favour  of  God "  for  their 
city.  This  was  one  object  of  their  mission. 
The  other  purpose  is  mentioned  in  the  next 
verse. 

Ver.  3. — The  priests.  They  wei  e  addresseil 
as  interpreters  of  the  Law  (see  Hag.  ii.  11, 
and  note  there).  Which  were  in;  rather, 
which  belonged  to.  The  prophets.  Such  as 
Zeoliariah,  Haggai,  and  perliaps  Malachi, 
through  whom  God  communicated  his  will. 
Should  I  weep  in  the  fifth  month  ?  The  use 
of  the  first  person  singular  to  express  a  com- 
munity or  a  people  is  not  uncommon  ;  here 
it  means  the  Bethelites  (eomp.  Numb.  xx. 
18,  19;  Josh.  ix.  7;  1  Sam.  v.  10,  U). 
Weeping  is  the  accompaniment  of  fasting 
(Judg.  XX.  26  ;  Neh.  i.  4 ;  Joel  ii.  12).  This 
fast  in  the  fifth  month,  the  month  of  Ab, 
bad  been  established  in  memory  of  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchad- 
nezzar. The  temple  was  burnt  on  the  ninth 
or  tenth  of  the  month  (see  2  Kings  xxv.  8, 
9;  Jer.  lii.  12,  13).  The  only  fast-day 
enjoined  by  the  Law  of  Mo-es  was  the  great 
Day  of  Atonement  on  the  tenth  day  of  the 
seventh  month,  Ethanim  (Lev.  xxiii.  26, 
etc.).  But  the  Jews  added  others  in  memory 
of  certain  national  events  (see  Judg.  xx. 
26;  1  Sam.  vii.  6;  Isa.  Iviii.  8,  etc.).  In 
ch.  viii.  19  mention  is  made  of  four  ex  Ira- 
ordinary  fasts  instituted  and  observed  during 
the  Captivity,  viz.  on  the  ninth  day  of  the 
fourth  month,  in  memory  of  the  capture  of 
Jerus:ilem  by  the  Chitldenns;  in  the  fifth 
month,  in  remembrance  of  the  burning  of 
the  temple  and  city;  in  the  seventh  month, 
in  consequence  of  the  murder  of  Gedaliah 
(Jer.  xli.  1,  2) ;  and  in  the  tenth  month,  in 
memory  of  the  commencement  of  the  siege 
of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuohadnezzar  (see  note 
on  oh.  viii.  19).  Separating  myself.  Abstain- 
ing from  food  and  pleasure.  Vulgate,  eel 
sanetificare  me  debeo,  such  separation  or 
abstinence  being  regarded  as  a  consecration 
to  the  Lord.  The  LXX.  has  not  understood 
the  passage,  rendering,  EiVfA.^Xuflei'  aSf  iv 
Tiji  iiT\v\  T!p  ireiTTif  rh  aylatr/ta, "  The  sanetifi- 
cation  hath  come  in  here  in  the  fifth  mouth." 


68 


THE  BOOK   OF  ZECHARIAH. 


[oh.  vu.  1 — 14. 


These  80  many  years.  All  the  seventy 
years  of  exile.  There  is,  perliapa,  some 
Pharisaical  oomplacency  in  this  assertion. 

Vers,  i — ^7. — §  2.  In  anewer  to  the  inquiry, 
the  delegatei  are  told  that  fatting  it  in  ittelf 
an  indifferent  ffiing,  but  it  to  be  estimated  by 
the  conduct  of  thoie  who  observe  it. 

Ver.  4. — ^Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord. 
This  formula  marks  the  several  portions  of 
the  answer  to  the  inquiry  (see  ver.  8 ;  ch. 
viii.  1, 18).  The  present  verse  takes  up  the 
sentence  in  ver.  1,  interrupted  by  the  ex- 
planation of  the  object  of  the  deputation 
(vers.  2,  3). 

Ver.  5. — Unto  all  the  people  of  the  land. 
The  message  was  not  for  Bethel  only,  but 
for  all  the  restored  Jews,  for  whose  satisfEic- 
tion  the  question  had  been  asked.  And  to 
the  priests.  The  prophet  was  to  make 
known  to  the  priests  CJod's  will  in  this 
matter,  it  not  being  a  mere  ritual  ques- 
tion. Fifth  month  (see  note  on  ver.  3). 
The  original  question  referred  only  to  this 
fast ;  the  answer  embraces  also  Buother  fast 
appointed  by  human  authority.  The  seventh 
month.  This  fast  was  instituted  in  conse- 
quence of  the  murder  of  Gedaliah,  b.o.  587, 
just  seventy  years  ago,  when  the  greater 
part  of  ttie  remnant  of  the  Jews,  contrary 
to  the  prophet's  warning,  fled  into  Egypt  to 
escape  the  punishment  of  the  crime  (2 
Kings  XXV.  25,  26;  Jer.  xli.  2,  16,  etc.). 
Did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  me  1  It  was  not  by 
God's  command,  or  to  do  him  honour,  that 
they  fasted ;  not  from  hearty  repentance  or 
sorrow  for  the  sins  which  had  brought  ruin 
upon  their  city  and  country;  but  from 
vexation  at  the  calamity  itself,  and  in  a 
self-righteous  spirit,  with  some  idea  of  gain- 
ing merit  by  this  punishment  of  the  body ; 
and  God  was  not  constrained  by  this  formal 
observance  to  show  them  favour.  Even  to 
me.  (For  the  forcible  repetition  of  the  pro- 
noun, comp.  Gen.  xxvii.  34 ;  Prov.  xxii.  19 ; 
Hag.  i.  4.) 

Ver.  6.— When  ye  did  eat,  etc. ;  better, 
when  ye  eat  and  when  ye  drink.  As  in  your 
fasts,  BO  in  your  rejoicings  and  your  daily 
life.  Did  not  ye  eat  for  yourselves,  etc.? 
literally.  It  it  not  ye  who  are  eating  and  ye 
who  are  drinking  f  There  the  matter  ends ; 
U  is  self  that  is  concerned,  and  there  is 
no  reference  to  God  (comp.  1  Cor.  viii.  8 ; 
X.  31). 

Ver.  7. — Should  ye  not  hear  the  words, 
etc.  ?  A  verb  must  be  supplied.  "  Do  ye 
not  know  the  words  ?  "  or  "  Should  ye  not 
obey  the  words?"  Syriao,  Septuagint, 
and  Vulgate,  "Are  not  these  the  words?" 
By  the  former  prophets  (oh.  i.  4).  It  had 
been  a  common  cry  of  the  prophets  from 
<^arly  times  that  men  must  not  put  their 


trust  in  the  observance  of  outward  cere- 
monies, bat  attend  to  the  cultivation  of 
moral  obedience  and  purity  (see  1  Sam.  xv. 
22;  Prov.  xxi.  3;  Isa.  i.  11,  12,  16,  17; 
Iviii.  3,  etc.  ;  Jer.  vii.  22,  23;  Hos.  vi.  6; 
Micah  vi.  8,  where  see  note).  When  Jeru- 
salem was  inhabited.  Before  its  destruction 
and  the  deportation  of  its  inhabitants.  He 
recalls  the  former  prosperity  to  their  memory, 
contrasting  it  with  the  present  low  estate, 
to  remind  them  of  all  they  had  lost  in 
punishment  of  disobedience.  The  south 
(,Negeb).  The  southern  part  of  Judeea  was 
BO  called  (see  on  Obad.  19;  and  comp. 
'Numb.  xiii.  17;  Josh.  xv.  21).  The  plain 
(Shephelah) ;  the  low  land,  along  the  coast 
of  the  Mediterranean  (Josh.  xv.  33 ;  1  Mace, 
xii.  38).  The  above  districts  comprise  two 
of  the  three  divisions  of  Judsea  (Judg.  L  9); 
the  third,  the  mountain  or  hill  country 
(Luke  i.  39),  is  intended  in  the  expression, 
"Jerusalem  and  the  cities  round  about 
her."  There  was  still  a  great  dearth  of 
population  in  the  country,  and  the  towns 
wej-e  not  half  inhabited,  nor  was  the  land 
half  cultivated. 

Vers.  8 — 14. — §  3.  I%e  people  are  further 
reminded  that  they  had  been  disobedient  in 
old  time,  and  had  been  punished  by  exile. 

•  Ver.  8. — Unto  Zechariah.  The  prophet 
speaks  of  himself  in  the  third  person,  as  in 
ch.  i.  1.  A  further  explanation  of  God's 
answer  is  next  given.  Some  critics  sup- 
pose that  this  verse  is  an  interpolation,  and 
that  vers.  9,  10  are  "  the  words  "  referred  to 
in  ver.  7. 

Ver.  9. — Thus  speaketh ;  thus  saith.  The 
Lord  hath  always  so  said,  and  saith  so 
now.  Kevised  Version,  thus  hath  the  Lord 
of  hosts  spoken,  saying.  Execute  true  judg- 
ment j  literally,  judge  ye  judgment  of  truth  ; 
i.e.  judge  according  to  truth  wiihout  bias  or 
partiality.  The  same  plirase  occurs  in 
Ezek.  xviii.  8.  Exhortations  to  this  effect 
are  often  found ;  e.g.  Exod.  xxiii.  6,  etc. ; 
Dent.  xxlv.  14;  Isa.  i.  17;  Jer.  vii.  5 — 7; 
xxii.  3.  Show  mercy.  Kindness  and  love  in 
general.  Compassions.   Pity  for  the  afflicted. 

Ver.  10.— Oppress  not  the  widow,  etc. 
(Exod.  xxii.  21,  22 ;  Deut.  x.  18,  19) ;  Vul- 
gate; nolite  calumniari,  where  calumniari 
is  used  in  the  sense  "  to  vex,  torment." 
Imagine  evil  against  his  brother  in  your 
heart.  God's  Law  forbids  even  a  thought 
of  revenge  or  injury  against  a  neighbour, 
for  this  is  only  the  first  step  to  wrong-doing 
(comp.  Micah  ii.  1).  Septuagint,  Kaxlav 
eKaiTTOS  rod  aSeXtpov  aiiToii  fj.^  fii^ffiKaKeiTo) 
iv  rats  KapSlats  u/iSv,  "Let  none  of  you 
remember  in  your  hearts  the  malice  of  your 
brother." 

Ver.  11. — Fulled  away  the  shoulder  | 
they  gave  a  stubborn,  refroBlory  thouldir. 


OH.  -m.  1—14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZBCHARIAH. 


69 


like  an  ox  which  refnsea  to  have  the  yoke 
put  on  his  neok,  or  draws  back  when  it 
feels  the  weiglit  (Neh.  ii.  29 ;  Hos.  It.  16). 
Stopped  their  ears.  Made  their  ears  heavy. 
Ti  Sira  airay  i$<ipvvay  (Septuagint) ;  laa. 
vi.  10;  lix.  1.  Three  degrees  of  obduracy 
are  named  in  this  verse:  they  refused  to 
listen ;  they  resisted  the  warnen ;  they  ex- 
hibited open  contempt  for  them.  The  fnll 
climax  is  given  in  the  next  verse. 

Yer.  12. — They  made  their  heaits  as  an 
adamant  stone.  They  made  their  hearts  as 
hard  as  a  stone  which  could  receive  no 
cutting  or  engraving;  no  message  from  God 
could  find  entrance;  and  this  from  their 
wilful  obstinacy.  The  word  rendered  "  ada- 
mant," shamir,  probably  means  "  diamond," 
a  stone  so  hard,  says  Jerome,  as  to  break  all 
metals  to  pieces,  but  to  be  itself  broken  by 
none ;  hence  it  is  called  adamas,  "  uncon- 
querable." Ezekiel  (ill.  9)  notes  that  it 
is  harder  than  flint  (comp.  Jer.  xvii.  1). 
The  LXX.,  paraphrasing,  gives,  Tiiv  KapStay 
airav  ^ra^av  aneiSri,  "  They  set  their  heart 
disobedient."  The  Lav.  The  various  en- 
actments of  the  Mosaic  system.  In  his 
Spirit ;  ratlier,  by  hii  Spirit.  The  teaching 
which  the  Spirit  of  God  inspired  the  pro- 
phets to  deliver  (comp.  Neh.  ix.  30;  2  Kings 
xvii.  13 ;  Micah  iii.  8).  And  for  the  succes- 
sion of  prophets  from  Solomon  to  the  Cap- 
tivity, see  note  on  Amos  ii.  11 ;  and  to  those 
there  enumerated,  add  Iddo,  Shemaiah, 
Hanani,  Micaiah,  Huldah. 

Yer.  13. — As  he  cried.  As  the  Lord 
called  to  them  by  the  prophets.  Just  retri- 
bution fell  upon  them  (Prov.  i,  24,  eto. ; 
Iss.  Ixv.  12,  13;  Ixvi.  4).    So  they  cried, 


and  I  would  not  hear;  rather,  $o  they  thcM 
ery,  and  I  will  not  hear.  God  will  be  deaf 
to  their  cry,  and  will  ^ive  them  up  to  their 
own  ways  (Jer.  ii.  28).  In  the  protasis 
Jehovah  is  spoken  of  in  the  third  person, 
in  the  apodosis  he  speaks  in  the  first.  . 

Yer.  14. — I  scattered  them ;  I  will  teattet 
them.  What  had  happened  in  the  paat  is  a 
sign  of  what  shall  befall  them  in  the  future 
in  punishment  of  like  obduracy.  The  form 
of  the  sentence  denotes  that  God  is  recount- 
ing what  he  had  said  to  the  people  in  past 
time ;  hence  it  is  best  to  translate  the  verbs 
in  the  future  tense.  Scattered  them  with  a 
whirlwind;  Septuagint,  ^kSoXw  mrois,  "I 
will  oast  them  out ; "  Vulgate,  disperti  eo$ 
(comp.  Job  xxvii.  21 ;  Amns  i.  14).  Nations 
whom  they  knew  not.  This  is  the  usual 
phrase  for  people  of  strange  tongue  (Deut. 
xxviii.  33;  Jer.  xvi.  13).  Thus  the  land 
was  desolate.  This  was  the  result  of  God's 
threatenings.  Some  make  the  words  of  Je- 
hovah continue  to  "nor  returned,"  but  the 
punctuation  is  against  them.  After  them ; 
i.e.  after  they  were  carried  away  in  cap- 
tivity. No  man  passed  through  nor  re- 
turned. No  one  went  to  and  fro — a  picture 
of  extreme  desolation  (comp.  Isa.  xxxiii.  8 ; 
Jer.  ix.  12 ;  and  for  the  phrase,  see  oh.  ix.  8 ; 
Ezek.  XXXV.  7).  For  they  laid  the  pleasant 
land  desolate.  The  pronoun  refers  to  the 
disobedient  Jews,  their  sin  being  the  cause 
of  the  desolation ;  or  the  verb  may  be  taken 
impersonally,  "  So  the  pleasant  land  was 
made  desolate."  "The  pleasant  land"  is 
literally,  "  the  land  of  desire."  Septuagint, 
yiiy  iiAeKT'liy  (Pa.  oTi.  24 ;  Jer.  iii.  19). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Eypowity  unmasked.  "  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fourth  year  of  King 
Darius,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Zechariah,"  etc.  In  the  latter  half  of  the 
last  chapter  we  were  told  of  an  embassy  to  Jerusalem,  which  met  with  acceptance  and 
honour.  In  the  present  passage  we  read  of  another,  which  meets  with  just  the  opposite 
treatment.  The  question  asked  by  these  messengers  is  not  answered  at  all  in  this 
chapter.  Not  only  so,  those  who  ask  it  are  indirectly  rebuked  ror  so  doing.  Why  this 
remarkable  difference  of  behaviour  ?  Not  in  the  surface,  but  in  the  sui-sw/oce,  view 
of  affairs.    So  we  will  now  try  to  point  out — 

I.  Thb  suepaob  view.  At  first  sight  what  can  appear  more  thoroughly  deserving 
of  approval  than  the  inquiry  here  mentioned?  This  so,  whether  we  consider:  1.  Its 
object.  What  the  men  desire,  apparently,  is  simply  to  know  God's  will — a  desire  which 
we  find,  in  so  many  other  cases,  so  very  warmly  approved  (Acts  ii.  37;  ix.  6;  xvi.  30; 
Luke  iii.  10,  etc.).  2.  Or  its  subject.  They  would  learn  God's  will  as  to  "  fasting,"  t.e. 
93  to  one  department  of  the  proper  worship  of  God.  What,  apparently,  more  proper 
and  right  (comp.  Ps.  oxvi.  12;  Mioah  vi.  6,  7;  and  contrast  Numb.  xv.  30;  1  Kinos 
xii.  33;  Ool.  ii.  18,  23)?  3.  Or  its  method;  viz.  that  of  going  to  God's  "house" 
(vers.  2,  3),  and  consulting  his  regular  teachers,  the  "  priests "  (Lev.  x.  11 ;  2  Chron. 
XV.  8;  Hag.  ii.  11;  Mai,  ii.  7),  and  his  occasional  and  extraordinary  teachers,  the 
"prophets"  (Jer.  vii.  25;  xxv.  4,  etc.).  4.  Or  its  special  occasion.  Seventy  years, 
•a  predicted  (Jer.  xxv.  11),  having  now  elapsed  (viz.  from  b.o.  588  to  618)  since  that 


70  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHAEIAH.  [oh.  vn.  1—14. 

burning  of  the  temple  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  fifth  month  (Jer.  lii.  13),  in  commemora- 
tion of  which  this  fast  of  the  fifth  month  had  been  instituted;  and  the  renewed  building 
of  the  temple,  commenced  in  the  second  of  Darius  (Ezra  iv.  24;  t.  1,  2),  having  now 
(in  this  fourth  of  Darius,  see  ver.  1)  so  far  advanced  that  the  priests  could  live  in  it  (see 
ver.  3),  what  more  natural  and  apparently  opportune  than  this  inquiry  about  the 
"propriety  of  observin;^  this  fast  any  longer  (comp.  Dan.  ix.  1 — 3)?  5.  Or  its  special 
channel,  so  to  describe  it.  How  peculiarly  befitting,  to  all  appearance,  the  particular 
messengers  sent  I  And  that,  whether  we  understand  them  (with  some)  to  be  persons 
sent  by  the  inhabitants  of  "  Bethel"  (translated  in  our  version,  "  the  house  of  God," 
in  ver.  2),  a  place  so  long  and  notoriously  connected  with  idol-worship  and  the  con- 
tempt of  God's  will  (see  1  Kings  xii.  32,  33;  2  Kings  xvii.  28;  Amos  vii.  13);  or 
whether,  with  others,  judging  from  the  Assyrian  turn  of  their  names  (comp.  2  Kings 
xix.  37 ;  and  contrast  ch.  vi.  10),  we  suppose  that  they  were  Jews  of  the  Captivity  come 
up  in  person  to  make  inquiry.  In  either  case,  such  an  inquiry,  from  such  persons, 
seems  eminently  deserving  of  praise — at  first  sight. 

II.  The  sub-surface  view.  Nevertheless,  in  all  this  same  "  fasting,"  about  which 
they  inquire,  this  Scripture,  when  further  examined,  shows  us  that  their  conduct  had 
been  only  deserving  of  blame.  This  true,  inasmuch  as  their  conduct,  during  all  that 
time,  had  been:  1.  Never  wholly  in  the  right.  "Pasting"  is  only  valuable  as  an  outward 
sign  of  repentance;  but  their  repentance,  during  all  "those  seventy  years"  (ver.  5), 
had  never  been  true  repentance,  i.e.  "  repentance  toward  God."  Note,  "  Did  ye  at 
all  fast  unto  me,  even  to  me  ?  "  in  ver.  5 ;  and  comp.  Acts  xi.  21 ;  also  the  "  sorrow 
KOTci  @e6v  "  of  2  Cor.  vii.  10,  and  the  sorrow  of  David  (Ps.  li.  4)  and  the  prodigal  (Luke 
IV.  18),  for  the  evU  of  sin,  with  the  sorrow  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  xv.  30),  apparently  for 
its  consequences  alone.  2.  Always  eminently  in  the  wrong.  Their  solicitude,  when 
engaged  In  their  fastings,  had  not  really  been  about  God's  pleasure  and  will ;  but  it  had 
been,  and  that  most  thoroughly,  concerning  their  own ;  as  much  so,  in  fact,  as  when, 
at  other  times,  they  had  eaten  and  drunk  (ver.  6).  So  completely,  we  see,  in  some 
cases,  may  mere  abstinence  from  food  be  one  of  the  "  sins  of  the  flesh  "  (comp  Matt.  vL 
16  ani  Isa.  Iviii.  3 — ^7).  3.  Always  inexcusably  in  the  wrong.  (1)  For  having  sinned 
thus  against  light.  Long  ago  and  often  (see  beginning  of  ver.  7)  God's  "  prophets  " 
had  warned  their  fathers  against  thus  drawing  nigh  unto  him  with  their  lips  only 
(Isa.  xxix.  13) ;  and  they  had  the  remembrance  and  the  record  of  this  as  their  guide. 
(2)  For  having  sinned  thus  against  experience.  When  these  prophets  had  so  spoken 
all  was  happy  and  bright,  "  Jerusalem  "  and  the  "cities  round  about"  "inhabited  "  fully 
and  in  "  prosperity,"  as  also  at  that  time,  even  those  comparatively  barren  and  country 
districts,  "the  south  and  the  plain."  How  awfully  different  their  condition  during 
"  those  seventy  years  " !  How  loudly,  therefore,  their  own  experience,  and,  as  it  were, 
their  own  land  itself,  had  admonished  them !     And  yet  how  entirely  in  vain  1 

May  not  all  this  illustrate,  further,  for  our  own  admonition?  1.  The  exceeding 
deceitfulness  of  formalism.  All  God's  people  (they  speak  us  one  man  in  ver.  3),  and 
even,  apparently,  all  God's  ministers  (the  "  priests,"  ver.  5),  being  deceived  thereby, 
in  this  instance,  to  so  great  an  extent,  and  for  so  many  years,  and  in  such  circumstances 
of  trial  (comp.  John  xviii.  28  with  xii.  10,  "Lazarus  also;"  and  Matt,  xxvii.  4,  6), 
2.  The  exceeding  penetration  of  Ood's  Word.  Unmasking  thus,  and  making  plain, 
and  bringing  to  light  all  these  deeply  hidden  deceits  (comp.  Heb.  ir.  12,  13 ;  also 
Luke  ziL  2 ;  Matt.  iz.  4 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  25 ;  Fs.  1.  21,  end ;  Ps.  xc.  8),  How  easy,  in 
short,  to  deceive  oturselves  I    How  impossible  to  mock  God  (see  Gal.  vi.  7)  1 

Vers.  8 — 14. — Hypocrisy  vxirned.  "  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Zechariah, 
saying,  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  etc.  The  severe  rebuke  of  the  previous 
verses  seems  followed  up  in  these  versBS  by  a  very  solemn  yet  very  merciful  warning, 
intended  apparently  to  save  the  Jews  from  the  various  evils  to  which  their  hypocrisy 
had  exposed  them.  The  language  of  God  to  their  fathers,  as  referred  to  in  ver.  7, 
appears  still  (note  "  thus  spake,"  according  to  Pussy,  Wardlaw,  and  others,  in  ver,  9) 
the  theme  of  discourse.  And  three  successive  points  of  importance,  in  connection  with 
this  language  and  its  consequences,  seem  described  to  us  here,  viz.  (1)  a  most  gracious 
purpose ;  (2)  a  stuhbom  r^usal ;  and  (3)  a  terrible  doom. 

L  A  MOST  OBJLOloua  pcbfose.     What  was  it  really  that,  by  the  **  former  prophet*  " 


OH.  vn.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHABIAH.  7  J 

(ver.  7),  God  had  demanded  of  men  ?  Under  one  aspect,  as  before  shown  by  us, 
"repentance  towards"  himself.  Under  another  aspect,  so  it  seems  here  explained  in 
vers.  9,  10,  only  what  was  good  for  themselves.  How  many  blessings,  e.g.,  if  God's 
laws  had  been  really  kept,  and  their  fathers  had  only  done  as  God  asked  of  them,  would 
have  been  found  in  the  land !  We  may  describe  them  as  being  chiefly  four,  viz. 
(1)  perfect  and  universal  fairness  of  dealing ;  (2)  perfect  kindness  and  generosity  of 
dealing,  as  in  brotherly  love ;  (3)  special  and  peculiar  kindness  of  dealing  to  those  ("  the 
stranger,"  etc.)  needing  it  most ;  and  (4)  total  absence,  in  any  cause  whatever,  of  ill  will 
in  the  heart.  Could  anything  have  been  better?  So  true  is  it  (Bom.  vii.  12),  that 
"  the  Law"  is  not  only  "  holy,"  or  worthy  of  God ;  and  "just,"  or  fair  in  its  require- 
ments ;  but  "  good,"  also,  or  kind  in  its  object,  and  intended,  in  fact,  for  men's  highest 
benefit  (compare,  as  a  partial  illustration,  Mark  ii.  27 ;  and,  in  one  sense  also,  Ezek. 
XX.  11, 13,  21 ;  and  especially  Deut.  vi.  24;  x.  12, 13). 

II.  A  STUBBORN  REFUSAL.  How  had  this  message  of  goodness  and  mercy  been 
received  in  the  days  referred  to  ?  1.  With  every  outward  sign  of  dishonowr.  Such  as 
(1)  marked  indifference,  "  refusing  to  hearken  "  (oomp.  Isa.  xxx.  9 — 11) ;  (2)  open 
aversion,  "  pulling  away  the  shoulder,"  as  though  saying,  when  special  effort  was  made 
to  gain  their  attention,  "I  am  giving  attention  to  something  else;  "  and  (3)  utter  con- 
tempt, "stopping  their  ears,"  as  much  as  to  say,  "  I  liad  rather  hear  nothing  than 
listen  to  you"  (comp.  Acts  xxii.  22).  2.  With  every  inviard  feeling  of  rebellion  to 
correspond.  This  shown :  (1)  By  their  dread  of  its  power.  Notwithstanding  their 
extreme  unwillingness  to  hear,  something  of  the  meaning  of  God's  gracious  message 
would  reach  their  understandings.  Even  if  so,  if  they  could  help  it,  it  should  not 
penetrate  to  their  consciences.  So  well  were  they  aware  of  its  power  (see  the  words 
in  ver.  12,  "  As  an  adamant  stone,  lest  [in  this  sense]  they  should  hear  ").  What  a 
testimony  on  their  part  I  What  a  precaution  !  (2)  By  their  defiance  of  its  authority. 
How  many,  as  here  implied,  its  claims  to  reverential  submission  1  As  being  essentially 
a  "  law,"  or  command ;  as  containing  "  words  "  of  command  from  the  "  Lord  of  hosts  " 
himself,  whom  so  many  obeyed ;  as  being  his  command  in  so  express  a  manner, 
because  delivered  by  messengers  known  to  be  appointed  and  inspired  by  himself  (see, 
Hgain,  ver.  12).  All  this  in  addition  to  the  fact  above  noted  of  its  being  a  message  for 
"  good."  Yet  to  all  this  their  unconquerable,  i.e.  "  adamant,"  obstinacy  refused  to 
submit, 

III.  A  TERRIBLE  DOOM.  When  such  condescending  goodness  met  with  so  perversa 
a  return,  what  could  ultimately  ensue  but  "  great  wrath  "  ?  According  to  the  moral 
laws  of  God's  spiritual  kingdom,  which  are  as  fixed,  could  we  only  believe  it,  as  the 
natural  laws  of  his  physical  creation,  here  was  a  clear  case  of  cause  and  effect.  This 
is  declared  to  us :  1.  By  the  nature  of  the  judgments.  See  how  they  correspond  to  the 
offence.  Israel  had  refused  to  hear  God.  So  Gud  now  refuses  to  hear  them  (ver.  13; 
Mark  iv.  24 ;  Gal.  vi.  7,  8 ;  Hos.  viii.  7).  2.  By  the  sentence  <f  the  Judge.  God  speaks 
of  all  that  afterwards  came  upon  them  as  being  inflicted  (1)  by  his  authority  ("  1 
scattered  them,"  etc. ;  (2)  on  their  account  ("  The  land  was  made  desolate  after  them  "  ) ; 
and  even,  (3)  in  a  certain  sense,  by  the  instrumentality  of  their  transgressions  ("  They  Itud 
the  land  desolate ; "  comp.  also  Hos.  xiii.  9  ;  Mai.  i.  9). 

From  this  review  of  that  portion  of  the  past  history  of  Israel  here  referred  to,  we  get 
a  sample  of  many  other  histories  as  they  will  appear  at  the  last.  This  is  true :  1.  Of 
many  individual  Uvea.  Lifelong  entreaty,  lifelong  forbearance,  lifelong  rebellion,  followed 
Vtp  by  more  than  lifelong  death,  impossible  as  that  sounds, — such  will  be  in  brief,  and 
yet  in  full  also,  the  history  of  many  a  soul.  2.  Of  many  individual  communities ; 
both  nations  and  Churches.  How  many  cities,  kingdoms,  empires,  and  races,  once  great 
on  the  earth,  might  have  all  that  is  really  essential  to  their  history  told  in  a  precisely 
similar  way  (see,  for  one  example.  Gen.  xiii.  13 ;  xviii.  20,  21 ;  xix.  9 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  8 ; 
Jude  7) !  See  a  succession  of  examples  in  the  succession  of  world-empires  in  Daniel. 
See,  also,  as  to  religious  communities,  similar  lessons  taught  by  comparison  of  past  and 
present  condition  of  some  of  the  Apocalyptic  Churches.  3.  Of  the  whole  world  of  tht 
ungodly.  What  a  long  history  of  gracious  messages  and  of  stubborn  refusals  will  b« 
found  at  the  end  of  the  whole  completed  history  of  the  race  of  Adam  and  Eve  (Bom.  iii. 
.9,  end ;  Jude  14, 15)  ! 


72  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  rn,  1—14, 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — Ood  and  men.  I.  The  unity  of  God's  purpose.  God's  thoughti 
do  not  vary,  though  he  varies  his  methods.  His  end  for  nations  and  individuals  ii 
always  the  same — advancement,  not  merely  in  knowledge  and  culture,  but  in  moral 
goodness. 

II.  The  MERCiFnLNBss  OP  God's  wabninqs.  At  no  time  hath  God  left  himself 
without  witnesses.  By  word  and  providence  and  in  countless  ways  his  warnings 
come.  We  see  this  iu  the  past.  (Ver.  7,  "former  prophets.")  So  in  the  present. 
Every  mercy  has  a  voice  calling  for  thankfulness.  Every  chastisement  has  a  summons 
to  moral  thoughttulnesa  and  prayer.     There  is  no  excuse  for  continuance  in  sin. 

III.  The  BI0HTE0U8NE83  OF  God's  JUDGMENTS.  Persistence  in  transgression  must 
bring  punishment.  God's  laws  lulfil  themselves.  Every  rejection  of  God's  counsels, 
every  refusal  of  God's  oBers,  every  slighting  of  God's  love,  works  for  evil,  blinding, 
hardening,  alienating,  bringing  dire  ruin  nearer.  Judgment  is  God's  strange  work, 
but  it  must  come.     "  The  pleasant  land  laid  desolate." — F. 

Veh  3. — Shall  we  fait  t  This  question  has  been  often  asked  down  to  our  own 
day. 

I.  There  are  national  fasts.  These  are  rare,  and  only  appointed  under  very 
solemn  circumstances.  In  1853,  when  cholera  prevailed,  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh 
(Church  of  Scotland)  suggested  to  Lord  Falmerston,  then  Home  Secretary,  the 
propriety  of  ordermg  a  national  fast.  His  lordship,  in  his  reply,  recommended 
observance  of  natural  laws  rather  than  fasting.  If  this  were  attended  to,  all  would  be 
well.  Otherwise  pestilence  would  come,  "in  spite  of  all  the  prayers  and  fastings  of 
a  united  hut  inactive  nation."  He  does  not  seem  to  have  understood  that  the  two 
things  were  quite  compatible.  Prayer  and  inaction  is  folly ;  but  prayer  and  action  is 
the  highest  wisdom.  Surely  there  is  something  grand  and  beautiful  in  a  whole  nation 
bowed  in  humility  and  supplication  before  the  Most  High.  (Buckle,  vol.  ii.,  has  a 
cbaracterlBtic  notice  of  this,  where  he  falls  into  the  odd  mistake  that  in  Scotland 
"fasting"  meant  abstinence  from  food!) 

IL  Then  there  are  Chdech  fasts.  These  are  only  binding  on  the  members  of  the 
several  Churches  that  appoint  them.  In  Scotland  it  has  for  long  been  custoa^ary  to 
h&ye  fast-days  in  connection  with  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper ;  but  as  to  this 
there  is  now  a  change.  First  their  enforcement  under  penalties  ceased;  then  the 
rigour  of  their  observance  was  given  up;  then,  from  the  necessities  of  modem  life,  and 
the  knowledge  that  they  were  often  the  occasion  of  more  evil  than  good,  they  have 
come  in  many  cases  to  be  discontinued.  The  question  is  one  of  Christian  expediency, 
and  requires  to  be  dealt  with  both  with  wisdom  and  gentleness. 

III.  Besides  these  there  is  private  fasting.  As  to  this,  no  rule  can  be  laid  down 
(cf.  Bom.  xiv.  5,  6).  But  certain  principles  should  be  kept  in  view,  such  as  that 
fasting  has  no  virtue  in  itself ;  that  what  may  be  good  for  one  Christian  may  not  suit 
anotlier ;  and  that  the  great  end  of  all  such  observances  is  spiritual  good,  "  room  to 
deny  ourselves,"  a  path  "  to  bring  us  daily  nearer  God." — P. 

Ver.  7. — Oo<r»  education  of  the  people.  I.  The  moral  relationship  of  the 
PEOPLE.  We  are  not  absolutely  separate  existences.  Belated  through  birth,  custom, 
associiition,  and  in  other  ways,  we  are  connected,  we  are  parts  of  one  great  whole. 
Hence  in  a  large  degree  we  are  what  others  have  made  us.  This  must  be  taken  into 
account  as  a  factor  in  life. 

II.  The  continuous  spiritdal  education  of  the  people.  The  past  speaks  to  us 
as  well  as  the  present.  We  learn  from  the  dead  as  well  as  the  living.  Above  all, 
we  have  the  Bible.  It  is  God's  book,  for  it  is  man's  book.  In  it  God  speaks  to  us. 
Shows  us  what  he  was,  and  therefore  what  he  is ;  what  he  has  done,  and  therefore- 
what  he  will  do.  Reveals  the  laws  and  principles  of  government,  and  thus  makes 
manifest  his  will,  and  that  the  only  way  to  reach  our  true  destiny  is  by  loving  and 
doiny  his  will. 

III.  The  growing  BKsroNSiBiLiTT  OF  the  peoplf..     Increased  knowledge.     Larger 


OH.  vn.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHAHIAH.  73 

experience.  Grander  opportunities.  More  may  be  learned,  and  therefore  ought  to  be 
learned.  Better  lives  may  be  lived,  and  therefore  ought  to  be  lived.  Greater  things 
may  be  done  for  the  good  of  others  and  for  the  advancement  of  the  cause  and  kingdom 
of  the  Lord,  and  therefore  greater  things  ought  to  be  done.  Privilege  is  the  measure 
of  responsibility^ — F. 

Ver.  11. —  The  history  of  ungodliness.  I.  Germ.  The  question  is — Self  or.  God,  our 
own  will  or  God's  will.  Must  be  settled.  Pressed  by  prophet  after  prophet.  The 
answer  shows  the  state  of  the  heart.     "  Refused  to  hear." 

II.  Prooresb.  There  is  growth  in  evil,  as  in  good.  Stages.  "  First  the  blade,  then 
the  ear,  then  the  full  corn  in  the  ear."  1.  Wilful  refusal.  "  Pulled  away  the 
shoulder."  Sinners  will  not  submit  to  be  guided  by  the  higher  will.  Angry  and 
fretted,  they  will  not  bow  to  God's  yoke.  2.  Insolent  rejection.  "  Stopped  their  ears." 
Warnings  and  coitnsels  are  in  vain.  Pride  rises  to  insolence.  Befusal,  to  determined 
opposition  and  rebellion.  3.  tiettled  obduracy.  (Ver.  12.)  This  implies  a  steady 
process.  The  bad  is  more  and  more  gaining  the  mastery.  Every  fresh  victory  brings 
the  time  nearer  when  the  evil  becomes  "  unconquerable  "  (Greek  adhdmas). 

m.  Consummation.  (Yer.  13.)  The  end  is  come.  1.  Buiued  oharaoter.  2. 
Blasted  life.    3.  Hopeless  future. 

"Oh  I  where  is  that  mysterious  bourne. 
By  which  our  path  is  crossed. 
Beyond  which  God  himself  hath  swom 
That  he  who  goes  is  lost  ? 

"  How  far  may  we  go  on  in  sin  ? 
How  long  will  God  forbear? 
Where  does  hope  end,  and  where  begin 
The  oonfiaes  of  despair  7 

"  An  answer' from  the  skies  is  sent, 
'  Te  that  from  God  depart, 
While  it  is  called  to-day,  repent. 
And  harden  not  your  heart' " 

(Alexander.) 

y. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Beltgious  beliefs  that  are  right;  religious  services  that  are  wrong. 
"And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fourth  year,"  etc.  The  preceding  visions  and  symbolio 
actions  recorded  in  this  book  occurred,  we  are  informed,  in  the  eighth  month  of  the 
second  year  of  King  Darius.  What  is  here  recorded  appears  to  have  taken  place  in  the 
ninth  month  of  the  fourth  year  of  that  king's  reign — about  two  years  later.  The 
ninth  month  is  here  called  CUsleu,  and  corresponds  with  the .  latter  part  of  November 
and  the  first  part  of  December.  What  was  the  prophet  doing  during  these  two  years  ? 
We  hear  nothing  (if  him,  altliough  we  doubt  not  he  was  busy  in  his  prophetic  labours. 
Indeed,  we  are  informed  in  the  Book  of  Ezra  (vi.  14)  that  the  elders  of  the  Jews 
builded,  and  they  prospered  through  the  prophecy  of  Hagg^i  the  prophet,  and  Zechariah 
the  son  of  Iddo.  Their  prophetic  words  stimulated  the  activities  and  prompted  the 
efforts  of  the  builders.  Here  is  an  account  of  a  commission  composed  of  two  men, 
called  Sherezer  and  Regem-melech,  distinguished  personages,  no  doubt,  still  remaining  in 
Babylon,  sent  as  envoys  to  the  house  of  God,  that  is,  the  temple  at  Jerusalem ;  and  their 
work  there  was  "  to  pray  before  the  Lord,  and  to  speak  unto  the  priests."  It  would  be 
well,  perhaps,  to  give  Dr.  Henderson's  translation  of  the.se  two  verses;  and  his  trans- 
lation agrees  with  that  of  Keil :  "  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  fourth  year  of  Darius 
the  king,  that  the  word  of  Jehovah  was  communicated  to  Zechariah  on  the  fourth  day 
of  the  ninth  nionth,  which  is  Cliislev,  when  Babel  sent  Sherezer  Begemelech  and  his 
men  to  conciliate  the  regard  of  Jehovah."  Looking  at  these  words  homiletically,  they 
present  two  subjects  for  thought — religious  beliefs  that  are  right,  and  religious  services 
that  are  wrong. 

I.  Bblioious  beliefs  that  abb  rioht.  There  are  three  beliefs  implied  in  this 
commission  entrusted  to  Sherezer.     What  are  they?    1.  2%«  effieaey  of  prayer.    They 


74  THE  BOOK  Of  ZECHARIAH.  [ch.  Tn.  1— U 

were  Bent  "  to  pray  before  the  Lord,"  or,  as  in  the  margin,  "  to  entreat  the  face  of  the 
Lord."  That  mea  can  obtaia  by  prayer  to  the  Supreme  Being  what  they  could  nat 
obtain  without  it  is  one  of  the  fundamental  and  distinciive  faiths  of  humanity. 
IriSead  of  being  against  the  law  of  nature,  it  is  one  of  the  most  uniform  and  settled 
laws  of  the  moral  world.  Hence  all  men  pray  in  some  form  or  other.  Prayer  springs 
out  of  the  sense  of  man's  dependence  upon  his  Creator ;  and  that  sense  is  built  upon  a 
fact  beyotid  dispute  or  doubt.  2.  The  intercession  of  saints.  These  men  were  sent  to 
pray  before  the  Lord,  not  merely  for  themselves,  but  for  others.  Those  who  sent  them 
proved  thereby  their  faith  in  the  power  of  man  to  intercede  with  God  on  behalf  of  his 
fellow.  The  intercession  of  saints  is  not  a  doctrine  merely  of  the  Roman  Church ;  it  is 
an  instinctive  belief  in  the  human  soul.  Men  not  only  implore  tlie  Deity  for  those  whom 
they  love,  but  others  implore  them  to  pray  for  them.  How  natural  it  is  for  a  father  to 
(iray  for  his  son  I  how  natural,  too,  for  a  son  to  ask  the  father  to  pray  for  him,  and 
Iriend  to  ask  friend  the  same  I  Intercessory  prayer  is  also  a  law  of  nature.  3.  The  special 
ahUity  of  some  men  to  solve  the  religious  questions  uf  others.  This  Sherezer  and  Regem- 
melech  appealed  unto  the  "  priests  which  were  in  the  house  of  tlie  Lord  of  hosts,  and 
to  the  prophets,  saying,  Should  I  weep  in  the  fifth  month,  separating  myself,  as  I  have 
done  these  so  many  years  ?  "  They  wanted  a  certain  religious  question  answered,  and 
they  appealed  to  a  certain  class  of  religious  men  who  they  believed  had  the  power  to 
do  BO.  The  question  they  asked  was  one  of  a  selfish  character,  "  Should  I  weep  in  the 
fifth  month,  separating  myself,  as  I  have  done  these  so  many  years  ?  "  From  this  it 
would  seem  that  for  seventy  years  during  the  period  of  their  captivity  they  had,  on 
certain  days,  wept,  fasted,  and  humbled  themselves  before  the  Lord.  Now  that  many 
had  returned  to  their  own  land,  and  others  were  returning,  they  wanted  to  know 
whether  all  this  fasting  and  humiliation  would  still  be  required.  Would  that  which 
was  done  in  Babylon  be  required  in  Jerusalem  ?  Would  not  they  in  their  own  land  be 
exonerated  from  such  humiliations  of  soul  ?  This  was  the  que:ition,  and  this  question 
they  addressed  to  the  priests  and  the  prophets.  And  they  did  it  because  they  believed 
they  had  the  special  qualification  to  solve  such  problems.  This  also  is  an  instinctive 
belief.  All  communities  of  men  in  all  times  and  lands  have  had  a  certain  class  amongst 
them  whom  they  regarded  as  qualified  more  than  all  others  to  answer  the  religious  ques- 
tions of  the  soul.  Hence  the  existence  of  priesthoods.  It  may  be  that  Heaven  has  never 
left  in  any  age  or  country,  any  race,  tribe,  or  community  without  such  men  amongst 
them,  men  gifted  above  their  fellows,  with  a  broad  moral  vision,  far-reaching  intellect, 
and  even  prophetic  genius.     God  teaches  man  by  man. 

IL  Eblioiods  servicks  that  aee  wbono.  The  Jews  had  performed  religious 
services ;  they  had  "  fasted,"  they  had  "  mourned  in  the  fifth  and  seventh  month,  even 
those  seventy  years."  This  was  right  enough  so  far  as  the  form  is  concerned ;  but  in 
spirit  the  service  was  wrong,  hence  here  is  the  reproof:  "  Then  came  the  word  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts  unto  me,  saying,  Speak  unto  all  the  people  of  the  land,  and  to  the  priests, 
saying.  When  ye  fasted  and  mourned  in  the  fifth  and  seventh  month,  even  those 
seventy  years,  did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  me,  even  to  me  ?  And  when  ye  did  eat,  and 
when  ye  did  drink,  did  not  ye  eat  for  yourselves,  and  drink  for  yourselves?"  1. 
Their  services  were  selfish.  Mark  the  reproof;  "Did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  me?"  Was 
it  not  from  selfish  motives  that  ye  did  all  this?  Was  it  not  with  a  view  of  obtaining 
release  and  securing  my  favour  for  yourselves?  It  is  not  because  you  have  done  the 
wrong  thing  against  me.  "  It  was  not  to  me,  even  to  me."  The  wrong  you  had  done 
me  was  not  thought  of.  Your  outrages  on  morality,  on  the  harmony  of  the  universe, 
were  not  thought  of  at  all.  How  much  of  the  popular  religion  is  of  this  type?  The 
Almighty  might  well  say  to  the  conventional  Churches  of  Christendom — You  rear 
temples,  you  contribute  property,  you  preach  sermons,  you  offer  prayers,  you  sing 
hymns  ;  but  it  "  is  not  unto  me,"  it  is  not  to  me,  it  is  all  self.  Whether  you  fast  or 
feast  in  your  religious  services,  it  is  all  for  "  yourselves ;  it  is  not  for  me,  not  for  me." 
Religious  services  that  are  wrong,  where  are  they  not  ?  2.  Selfish  motives  the  Almighty 
had  always  denounced,  "  Should  ye  not  hear  the  words  which  the  Lord  hatb  cried  by 
the  former  prophets,  when  Jerusalem  was  inhabited  and  in  prosperity,  and  the  cities 
thereof  round  about  her,  when  men  inhibited  the  south  and  the  plain?"  Always  has 
the  Lord  Almighty  denounced  a  selfish  religion  (see  Isa.  txvi.  1 — 3 ;  Jer.  xxv.  3 — ^7 ; 
Amos  V.  21,  27,  etc.).— D.  T. 


on.  Tin.  1--23.]  THE  BOOK   OP  ZECHARIAH.  7« 

Vers.  8 — 14. — Rdigion,  genuine  and  tpurioiu.  "  And  the  Word  of  the  Lord,"  etc. 
From  this  passsage  we  infer  three  facts. 

I.  Genuine  beliqion  is  philantheopio.  (laa.  i.  16, 17 ;  Iviii.  6,  7 ;  Matt.  v.  44.) 
"  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts,  saying,  Execute  tiue  judgment,  and  show  mercy 
and  compassious  every  man  to  his  brother,"  etc.  Here  is  the  ritual,  the  manifestation, 
the  proof  uf  genuine  rehgion,  and  it  is  practical  philanthropy.  The  sign  and  evidence 
of  genuine  religion  is  not  in  ceremonial  observances  or  mere  devotional  exercises,  but 
in  the  spirit  of  Ubristly  morality,  in  doing  good  to  men.  St.  John  says,  "  We  ought  to 
lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren,  and  tliat  because  Christ  laid  down  his  life  for  us" 
(1  John  iii.  16).  Our  love  to  God  is  to  be  shown  in  the  same  way  as  God  has  shown 
his  love  to  us,  by  self-sacrifice,  and  self-sacrifice  for  our  brother  man.  Wliat  is  the  true 
and  healthy  development  of  our  love  to  God  ?  The  Church  has  too  often  acted  as  if 
its  development  was  entirely  theological;  hence  the  battling  for  dogmas.  It  has  too 
often  acted  as  if  its  development  was  devotional,  as  if  psalmody  and  prayers  were  the 
only  true  expression.  It  has  too  often  acted  as  if  proselytizing  was  the  true  develop- 
ment of  love  to  God ;  hence  the  zeal  to  make  converts  to  its  faith.  The  text  teaches, 
however,  that  self-sacrificing  beuevolence  is  the  true  development.  "  Whoso  hath  this 
world's  good,"  etc.  The  case  supposed  by  the  apostle  is  that  of  a  brother  in  distress, 
looked  on  by  a  brother  possessing  this  world's  goods,  and  rendering  no  help.  John 
intimates  that  a  man  seeing  his  brother  in  need,  having  the  power  to  help,  and  not 
helping' liim,  cannot  be  a  Christian.  He  may  be  a  great  theologian,  a  great  pietist, 
a  great  pro]iagau<list,  but  no  Ohristian. 

II.  Spurious  religion  is  inhuman.  "But  they  refused  to  hearken,  and  pulled 
away  the  shoulder,  and  stopped  their  ears,  that  they  should  not  hear."  This  religious 
people  not  only  neglected  to  do  what  they  were  commanded  to  do  towards  their 
fellow-men,  but  the  very  reverse  of  that,  "they  refused  to  hearken,"  etc.  The 
most  inhuman  force  in  the  world  is  a  spurious  religion.  All  history  shows  this.  Bead 
the  history  of  martyrdom  as  given  by  Fox  or  any  other  authentic  historian.  A 
spurious  religion  murdered  the  Son  of  God  himself.  A  more  cruel  class  of  men  I 
know  not  than  religious  men  whose  religion  is  not  that  of  power,  love,  or  a  sound 
mind.  Such  men  are  ever  ready  to  damn  thosa  who  agree  not  with  their  narrow 
dogmas.  Their  dogmas  make  them  as  heartless  as  Sends.  It  makes  their  "  hearts  as 
an  adamantine  stone." 

III.  That  an  inhuman  rbligiom  has  a  tersiblb  doom.  "  Therefore  it  is  come  to 
pass,  that  as  he  cried,  and  they  would  not  hear;  so  they  cried,  and  I  would  not  hear, 
saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  God  will  make  inquisition  here  for  blood.  "  The  cries  of  the 
persecuted  and  neglected  enter  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  God  of  sabaoth."  "  Go  to 
now,  ye  rich  men,  weep  and  howl  for  your  miseries  that  shall  come  upon  you.  Your 
riches  are  corrupted,  and  your  garments  are  moth-eaten.  Your  gold  and  silver  is 
cankered;  and  the  rust  of  them  shall  be  a  witness  against  you,  and  shall  eat  your  flesh 
as  it  were  fire.  Ye  have  heaped  treasure  together  for  the  last  days.  Behold,  the  hire 
of  the  labourers  who  have  reaped  down  your  fields,  which  is  of  you  kept  back  by 
liaud,  crieth ;  and  the  cries  ot  them  which  have  reaped  are  entered  Into  the  ears  of  the 
Lord  of  sabaoth.  Ye  have  lived  in  pleasure  on  the  earth,  and  been  wanton  ;  ye  have 
nourished  your  hearts,  as  in  a  day  of  slaughter.  Ye  have  condemned  and  killed  the  just ; 
and  he  doth  not  resist  you  "  (Jaa.  v.  1 — 6).  Because  the  religion  of  the  Jews  had  become 
iuhuman,  Jehovah  permitted  them  to  be  carried  away  into  Babylon.  "  I  scattered 
them  with  a  whirlwind  among  all  the  nations  whom  they  knew  not.  Thus  the  land 
was  desolate  after  them,  that  no  man  passed  througli  nor  returned  :  for  they  laid  the 
pleasant  land  desolate."  God  will  ever  harden  himself  against  those  who  have 
hardened  themselves  against  their  fellow-men.  "With what  measure  ye  mete, it  shall 
be  measured  to  you  again." — D.  T. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER   VIIL 
Vers,  1 — 8, — §  4.  The  Lord  promises  to  show 
Uf  love  for  Zion,  to  dieell  among  his  peopl; 


and  to  flit  Jerusalem   tnith  a  happy  pojm- 
laoe. 

Ver.  1. — Again;  rather,  and.    Tbisehap- 


76 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHABIAH. 


[oh.  vm.  1—23. 


tei  containi  the  second  half  of  the  Lord's 
anawer  couceming  fasting,  merging  into 
prophecy. 

Yer.  2. — Thn8  aaith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
This  formula  occurs  ten  times  in  this 
chapter,  thus  enforciog  the  truth  that  all 
the  promises  made  to  Zion  come  from  the 
Lord  himself,  and  are  therefore  sure  to  be 
fulfilled.  I  was  jealous ;  I  am  jealous,  as 
ch.  i.  14  (where  see  note).  With  great  fury. 
Against  lier  enemies  (ch.  i.  15).  "Zelus" 
is  defined  by  Albertus  Magnus :  "  amor  boni 
cum  iiidignatione  oontrarii."  One  side  of 
God's  love  for  Zion  is  shown  in  the  punish- 
ment of  her  enemies.  Kaabenbauer  likens 
this  zeal  or  jealousy  of  God  to  the  pillar  of 
fire  at  the  Exodus — light  and  protection  to 
the  Israelites,  darkness  and  destruction  to 
the  Egyptians  (Exod.  xiv.  20). 

■Ver.3. — I  am  returned  (oh.  i.  16) ;  Ireturn. 
When  Jerusalem  was  taken  and  given  over  to 
tbe  enemy,  God  seemed  to  have  deserted  her 
(Ezek.  X.  18 ;  xi.  23) ;  but  now  the  restora- 
tion of  the  exiled,  the  rebuilding  of  the 
temple,  the  voice  of  prophecy,  showed  that 
the  Lord  had  returned,  and  that  now  he 
will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem  (ch. 
ii.  10).  A  oity  of  truth ;  city  of  truth ;  no 
longer  full  of  lies  and  treachery  and  infi- 
delity. God  dwelling  therein,  it  shall  be 
•'  the  faithful  city  "  (Isa.  i.  26),  in  which  all 
that  is  true  and  real  shall  fiourish  (comp. 
ver.  16 ;  Zeph.  iii.  13).  The  holy  mountain. 
The  bill  whereon  the  temple  is  built  shall 
be  called  the  holy  mountain,  because  the 
Lord  d  welt  in  the  sanctuary.  The  prophecy 
in  this  and  the  following  verses  received  a 
partial  fulfilment  in  the  days  between 
Zerubbabel  and  Christ;  but  there  is  a 
further  accomplishment  in  store. 

Ver.  4. — There  shall  yet  old  men  .  .  .  dwell 
(oft),  etc.  A  picture  of  happy  security  and 
plenty,  in  vivid  contrast  to  the  desolation 
deplored  in  Lam.  ii. ;  v.  In  the  days  of  the 
Maccabees  it  is  noted,  among  other  tokens 
of  peace  and  prosperity,  that  "  the  ancient 
men  sut  all  ia  the  streets,  communiug  to- 
gether of  good  tilings  "  (1  Maco.  xiv.  9).  For 
very  age;  Hebrew,  for  multitude  of  days. 
People  shall  reach  the  utmost  limits  of 
human  life.  According  to  the  old  Law, 
length  of  days  was  the  reward  of  obedience 
(Gen.  XV.  15 ;  Bxod.  xx.  12 ;  Deut.  iv.  40), 
and  an  early  death  was  inflicted  as  u 
punishment  of  sin  (Deut.  xxviii.  20 ;  Ps.  liv. 
23;  Ixxviii.  33).  Suoh  promises  are  made 
also  in  Messianic  times  (Isa.  Ixv.  20),  though 
in  a  different  sense. 

Ver.  5. — Full  of  boys  and  girls.  Jernsa- 
lem  and  the  other  cities  had  long  been 
strangers  to  any  such  happy  sight.  Large 
increase  of  population  is  a  bletsing  often 
promised  in  the  latter  days  (Hos.  i.  10; 
ilicah  ii.  12).    Perowne  remarks  that  our 


Lord  alludes  to  the  games  of  children  in 
the  market-places  as  a  familiar  incident  in 
his  days  (Matt.  xi.  16,  17;  oomp.  Jer.  vi. 
11). 

Ver.  6. — In  these  days ;  rather,  in  thou 
day>.  If  what  is  promised  in  vers.  3 — ^5 
seems  incredible  to  those  who  shall  see  the 
fulfilment.  The  remnant.  The  returned 
Jews  and  their  posterity  (Hag.  i.  12 — 14). 
Should  it  also  be  marvelions  in  mine  eyes ! 
Certainly  not.  Nothing  is  impossible  with 
God. 

Ver.  7. — God  promises  to  bring  his  dis- 
persed people  home  again — a  promise  only 
yet  partially  fulfilled.  My  people.  A  title 
of  honour  (Hos.  iL  23).  From  the  east 
country,  and  from  the  west  country.  Two 
regions  are  named,  symbols  of  the  whole 
world  (camp.  Ps.  1.  1 ;  Mai.  i.  11).  The  re- 
turn of  the  captives  from  Babylon  was  a 
prelude  of  tne  future  restoration  of  the  dis- 
persed, when  all  Israel  shall  be  saved  (Bom. 
xi.  26).  (See  a  similar  promise,  Isa.  xliii. 
5,  6  ;  comp.  John  xi.  52.) 

Ver.  8. — In  the  midst  of  Jerusalem.  As 
the  centre  of  worship  (see  ch.  ii.  4,  and  note 
there).  In  truth  and  in  righteousness. 
The  words  belong  to  both  parts  of  the  pre- 
ceding clause:  God  will  deal  truly  and 
righteously  with  them,  but  they  must  deal 
truly  and  righteously  with  him.  If  they 
are  faithful  to  their  obligations,  God  would 
be  unto  them  all  that  he  had  promised  to  be. 

Vers.  9 — 17. — §  5.  The  people  are  exhorted 
to  be  of  good  cheer,  for  God  will  henceforth 
give  them  his  blessing,  which,  hotmver,  tea* 
conditional  on  their  obedience. 

Ver.  9. — Let  your  hands  be  strong  (oomp. 
Hag.  ii.  15 — 19).  Be  of  good  courage  for 
the  work  before  you  (Judg.  vii.  11 ;  Isa. 
XXXV.  3;  Ezek.  xxii,  14).  By  (from)  ths 
mouth  of  the  prophets,  which  were.  Who 
came  forward  as  prophets.  These  prophets, 
who  prophesied  after  the  foundations  of 
the  temple  were  laid,  were  Haggai  and 
Zechariah;  they  are  thus  distinguished 
from  the  pre-exilian  ee(  rs  mentioned  iti 
ch.  vii.  7,  The  same  prophets  who  encour- 
aged you  in  your  work  at  tirst  are  they 
who  have  spoken  to  you  words  of  piomise 
in  these  days.  That  the  temple  might 
be  built;  Revised  Version,  even  the  temple 
that  it  might  be  built.  This  could  not  be 
predicated  of  the  first  foundation,  which 
was  followed  by  a  long  period  of  inaction 
(Ezra  iv.  24),  only  terminated  by  the 
vigorous  exhortations  of  the  prophets,  which 
led  to  a  resumption  of  the  work  that  might 
be  called  a  second  fouudation  of  the  temple. 
Ver.  10. — The  prophet  reminds  the  people 
of  the  sad  condition  of  attairs  during  the 
cessation  of  the  good  work,  and  how  tijingi 


on.  vm,  1 — 23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


77 


began  to  impiove  directly  they  showed 
diligence  and  zeal.  Iheie  was  no  hire  for 
man,  etc.  Either  the  yield  was  bo  .small 
that  no  labour  of  men  or  beaBts  waB  needed 
to  gather  it  in,  or  the  general  poverty  wag 
so  great  th  vt  labourers  could  not  j^et  their 
wages  nor  the  oxen  tlieir  well-earned  sliare  of 
provender  (Hag.  i.  11 ;  ii.  17,  18).  Neither 
was  there  any  peace  .  .  .  because  of  the  afflic- 
tion; ratheifhecause of  th%adversaTy.  They 
could  not  go  about  their  usual  occupations, 
or  pass  in  safety  from  place  to  place,  on 
account  of  the  enemies  that  compassed  them 
about  (Ezra  iv.  4).  The  rendering  of  the 
Authorized  Verbion  is  supported  by  tiie  Sep- 
tuagint  and  Vulgate,  but  the  word  (tsar)  is 
often  usei  I  for  the  concrete, "  adversary."  So 
the  Syriac  here.  I  set  all  men  every  one 
against  his  neighbour.  There  were  internal 
dissensions  as  well  as  outward  opposition. 
God  had  allowed  this  for  his  own  wise 
purposes. 

Ver.  11. — But  now  I  will  not  be.  God's 
attitude  towards  the  people  had  already 
changed  in  conBequence  of  their  diligence 
in  the  work  of  restoration.  Perowne  renders, 
"  Now  I  am  not."  The  residue ;  the  rem- 
nant ;  the  returned  Jews  (ver.  12 ;  Hag.  i. 
12).  The  former  days.  In  the  time  of 
their  inactivity,  when  a  curse  rested  upon 
them  and  upon  tbeir  land.  The  curse  was 
now  removud,  and  a  marked  amelioration 
had  set  in  (Hag.  ii.  15 — 19). 

Ver.  12. — The  seed  shall  be  prosperous  j 
literally,  (there  thall  be)  the  seed  of  peace. 
The  crops  sown  shall  be  crops  of  peace,  safe 
and  secure,  in  contradistinction  to  tlie 
threat  in  Lev.  xxvi.  16,  that  the  seed 
should  be  sown  in  vain,  for  it  should  be 
devoured  by  an  enemy  (Knabenbauer).  Or, 
more  generally ,  all  farming  labours  shall  8 110- 
oeed  and  prosper.  Jerome's  paraphrase  is, 
"  There  shall  be  universal  peace  and  joy ;  " 
Septuagint, "  But  I  will  show  forth  peace." 
Another  way  of  understanding  the  words 
which  has  found  much  favour  with  modem 
commentators  is  to  take  the  clause  in  apposi- 
tion with  the  words  immediately  fulluwing; 
thus  :  "  The  seed  (t'.e.  growth)  of  peace,  tlie 
vine,  shall  give  its  fruit."  But  there  is  no 
especial  reason  why  the  vine  should  be 
called  "  tlie  seed  of  peace."  It  is  not 
peculiar  among  fruit  trees  for  requiring  a 
time  of  peace  for  its  cultivation.  And  the 
term  "seed"  is  very  inappropriiite  to  the 
vine,  which  was  not  raised  from  seod,  but 
from  cuttings  and  layers.  Perowne  aloo 
points  out  that  such  a  rendering  destroys 
the  balance  of  the  three  following  clauses, 
which  explain  and  expand  the  general 
statement  tljtt  agriculture  shall  prosper. 
Dr.  Alexander  takes  "the  seed  of  peace" 
to  be  that  from  which  peace  springs  ;  t.e. 
that  peace  should  be  radically  established 


in  the  land,  and  from  this  fact  the  results 
following  should  ensue.  This  affords  a  very 
good  Bense ;  but  it  is  probably  a  metaphor 
quite  unintended  by  the  propliet.  The 
Syriac  reads  dili'erently,  "  The  seed  shall  be 
safe."  The  remnant  (see  on  ver.  11).  To 
possess ;  to  inherit ;  Septuagint,  KaraKKjipo- 
voititaa  (Eev.  xxi.  7).  This  promise  recalls 
the  blessings  in  the  old  Law  (Lev.  xxvi.  4, 
etc. ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  28 ;  Pa.  Ixvii.  6). 

Ver.  13. — As  ye  were  a  curse  among  the 
heathen.  As  your  fate  was  used  as  a 
formula  of  imprecation  among  the  heathen  ; 
e.g.  "May  your  fate  be  that  of  the  Jews" 
(see  examples  of  this,  2  Kings  xxii.  19; 
Isa.  Ixv.  15 ;  Jer.  xxiv.  9 ;  xxix.  22).  The 
other  way  of  taking  (he  expression  as  mean- 
ing the  object  of  curso  (t.e.  as  the  heathen 
once  used  to  curse  you),  is  not  so  suitable. 
Judah  .  .  .  Israel.  This  expression  in- 
cludes the  twelve  tribes,  of  all  of  which  some 
members  had  returned,  and  continued  to 
return,  from  the  Captivity.  They  were 
united  now  and  formed  one  nation  (see  note 
on  ch.  ix.  10).  So  will  I  save  yon.  In  as 
open  and  Bignificant  a  manner  will  I  show 
tliat  I  am  delivering  and  favouring  you. 
Ye  shall  be  a  blessing.  This  must  be  taken 
corresponilingly  to  the  former  phrase, 
being  a  "  curse ; "  ye  shall  be  used  as  a 
formula  for  blessing ;  e.g.  "  God  make  thee 
as  Ephraim  and  as  Slautisseh"  (Gen.  xlviii. 
20;  comp.  Euth  iv.  11,  12).  Fear  not 
(Zeph.  iii.  16)  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can 
be  against  UB?"  (Rom  viii.  31;  comp.  Numb. 
xiv.  9).  Let  your  hands  be  strong  (see 
note  on  ver.  9).  The  LXX.  takes  the  para- 
graph differently  and  erroneously  :  "  And 
it  sliall  be  that  in  like  manner  as  ye  were  a 
cur=e  among  the  nations,  0  house  of  JudaU 
and  house  of  Israel,  so  will  I  save  you,  and 
ye  shall  be  a  blessing,"  t.e.  a  cause  of 
blessing,    ''Hrt    iv    Karipn  .  .  .  iaeaSf    fv 

Ver.  14. — The  ground  oi  the  promise  it 
the  will  of  God,  who  cannot  deceive.  As  I 
thought  to  punish  ysu;  a>  Ipurpo$ed  to  do 
evil  to  you;  i.e.  to  the  nation  whose  con- 
tinuity is  thus  intimated  (comp.  Hag.  ii.  5 ; 
and  for  a  similar  contrast  of  pimisbment  and 
blessing,  see  Jer.  xxxi.  28).  I  repented  not. 
God  carried  out  the  dread  decree  to  the  full 
(ch.  i.  6;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  16).  (For  th« 
phrase  applied  to  God,  comp.  Numb,  xxiii. 
19 ;  Jer.  iv.  28 ;  Jonah  iii.  10,  where  tee 
note.)    Vulgate,  "  I  pitied  not" 

Ver.  15. — So  again  have  I  thought,  etc 
The  past  chastisement,  which  happened  as 
it  was  threatened,  is  a  guarantee  of  the  ful- 
filment of  the  promiseil  blessing.  But  there 
is  a  condition  to  be  observed,  which  is  set 
forth  in  the  two  next  verses.  The  LXX. 
has, "  So  have  I  ordered  and  purposed."  Id 
these  special  blessings  Judah  and  Jerusalem 


78 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH, 


[«E.  vni.  1—23. 


aloue  wcro  to  share  at  the  first;  Israel's 
bappy  time  (ver.  13)  vras  to  come  later. 

Ver.  16. — These  are  the  things.  To  secure 
the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  good,  they 
must  do  the  will  of  God  (ch.  vii.  9,  etc.). 
Truth,  This  was  to  be  observed  in  all  con- 
versation and  tiansactions  with  their  neigh- 
bours. St.  Paul  quxtes  this  injunction  (Eph. 
iv.  25).  Execute  the  judgment  of  truth  and 
peace ;  littrally,  judge  ye  truth  and  the  judg- 
ment of  peace.  Su  the  Septuagint  and  Vul- 
gate. Practise  perfect  equity  in  judgments, 
and  so  decide,  according  tu  truth  and  justice, 
as  to  secure  peace  and  concord  between  the 
parties  concerned.  In  your  gates.  Where 
the  judges  eat,  and  justice  was  administered 
(Deut.  XTi.  18 ;  xxi.  19 ;  see  note  on  Amos 
V.  10).. 

Ver.  17. — ^let  none  of  you  imagine  (see 
note  on  ch.  vii.  10,  where  these  words  occur). 
Love  no  false  oath.  The  prevalent  sins  at 
this  time  were  not  idolatry,  but  cheating 
and  lying  and  injustice,  vices  learned  in  the 
land  of  exile,  vrhtre  they  had  tnrned  their 
energies  to  traffic  and  commerce  (see  ch.  v. 
2 — i,  and  note  on  ver.  3  tiiere). 

Vers.  18— 23.— §  6.  Here  follows  the  direct 
answer  to  the  question  originally  proposed. 
The  fatti  should  be  tamed  into  joyful  feeti- 
vaU,  former  calamities  being  forgotten.  Then 
the  change  extending  its  influence,  the  heathen 
shall  worship  the  God  of  Israel,  and  esteem 
it  an  honour  to  be  receiced  into  fellowship 
with  the  Jewish  tuition. 

Ver.  19.— The  fast  of  the  fourth  month, 
etc.  (For  the  occasions  of  these  fasts,  see 
note  on  ch.  vii.  3.)  Jerome  gives  the  later 
Jewish  traditions  concerning  tliem.  The 
fast  of  the  seventh  day  of  the  fourth  month 
commemoriited  the  breaking  of  the  two 
tables  of  the  commandments  by  Moses,  as 
well  as  the  first  breach  in  the  walls  of  Jeru- 
salem ;  that  of  the  fifth  month  was  observed 
in  memory  of  the  return  of  the  spies  sent  to 
explore  Canaan,  and  the  consequent  pnnish- 
ment  of  forty  years'  wandering  in  the  wil- 
derness, as  well  as  of  the  burning  of  the 
temple  by  the  Chaldeans ;  that  in  the 
tenth  month  was  a^ipointed  because  it  was 
then  that  Ezekiel  and  tlit  captive  Jews  re- 
ceived intelligence  of  the  complete  destruc- 
tion of  the  temple.  Joy  and  gladness.  Tlie 
observance  of  these  fasts  seems,  by  the 
Loid's  answer,  to  have  been  neither  enjoined 
nor  forbidden;  but  as  for  their  sina  their 
festivals  had  been  turned  into  mourning 
(Amos  viii.  10),  so  now  tlitir  fasts  should  be 
turned  into  joyful  leasts,  and  former  miseries 
should  be  forgotten  in  the  presence  of  the 
blessings  now  showered  upon  them.  There- 
feie  love  the  tiath  and  peace.    This  is  the 


condition  of  the  fnlfllment  of  the  promise 
(ver.  16;  ch.  vii  9),  here  again  forcibly 
impressed. 

Ver.  20. — It  shall  yet  come  to  pass,  that 
there  shall  oome  people ;  peoples.  The  sight 
of  the  prosperity  of  the  Jews  shall  induce 
surrounding  nations  to  join  in  the  worship 
of  Jehovah.  The  same  truth  is  expressed 
in  Ps.  cxxvi.  1 — 3.  Perowne  thinks  that 
vers.  20,  21  refej'  to  the  tribes  of  Israel; 
but  it  seems  unnatural  to  suppose  the  pro- 
phet asserting  that  it  will  yet  happen  that 
Lraelites  will  seek  the  Lord,  when  there  is 
no  reason  to  think  tliat  they  had  not  done 
so  in  some  fasliion,  or  that  they  would  need 
the  previous  deliberation  mentioned  in  the 
next  verse.  Uany  cities.  So  the  LXX. 
and  Vulgate.  Others  translate,  "  great,  or, 
populous  cities;  "  but  this  is  less  suitable. 

Ver,  21. — The  inhabitants  of  one  city 
shall  go  to  another.  The  LXX.  has,  "  The 
inhabitants  of  five  cities  shall  go  unto 
one;  "  Vulgate,  "The  inhabitants  go  one  to 
another."  Let  us  go  speedily.  The  Hebrew 
is  an  imperfect  followed  by  an  infinitive 
absolute — an  idiom  which  implies  combina- 
tion. Let  us  go  on  and  on,  continually.  So 
Pusoy  and  Wright.  To  pray  before  the 
Lord ;  to  entreat  the  favour  of  the  Lord  (see 
note  on  ch.  vii.  2).  The  Gentiles  would 
be  moved,  not  only  to  make  pilgrimages  to 
the  great  annual  festivals,  but  to  seek  to 
know  the  Lord,  and  bow  to  worsliip  him 
acceptably.  I  will  go  also.  The  inhabit- 
ants answer  willingly  to  those  who  exhort 
them.  It  is  quite  unnatural  to  take  the 
clause  to  mean  (as  Drake  does),  "  I,  Zecha- 
riah,  will  go  too,  to  see  the  alteration  in  the 
mode  of  observing  these  fast-days." 

Ver.  22. — Many  people  (peoples)  and 
strong  nations.  This  explains  ver.  2(1  more 
fully.  Tlie  Jews  were  not  actuated  by  the 
missionaiy  spirit,  yet  even  before  Christ's 
advent  their  religion  had  spread  into  all 
parts  of  the  world,  as  we  see  from  the  cata- 
logue of  proselytes  in  Acts  ii.  9 — 11.  Inti- 
mations of  the  same  fact  are  given  in  Ezra 
vi.  21 ;  Esth.  viii.  17.  To  seek  the  Lord  of 
hosts  in  Jerusalem;  i.e.  to  keep  the  solemn 
festivals  observed  there  (comp.  Ita.  ii.  2 ; 
Ixvi.  20—23 ;  Micah  iv.  1,  and  note  there). 
The  literal  fuUilinent  of  this  piophecy  is 
not  to  be  looked  for.  It  declares  the  future 
conversion  of  the  Gentiles,  and  their  being 
made  one  with  Isiael  in  the  Church  of 
Christ,  "one  fold  under  one  Shepherd" 
(John  X.  16). 

Ver.  23.— Ten  men.  The  number  ten  if 
used  for  a  large  indefinite  number  (comp. 
Gen.  xxxi.  7 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  26 ;  1  Sam.  i.  8). 
Out  of  all  languages  (the  languages)  of  the 
nations.  The  diversity  of  languages  shall 
not  hinder  the  unity  in  the  faith  (comp.  Isa. 
Ixvi.  18 ;  Eev.  v.  9 ;  vii.  9).    Shall  take  hold 


OH.  no.  1—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHAEIAEL 


79 


of  the  skirt  of  him  that  is  a  Jew.  Taking 
hold  of  the  skirt  implies  a  desire  to  sliare 
the  privileges,  and  to  be  united  in  fellow- 
ship with  (eomp.  lea.  iv.  1;  Hag.  ii.  12). 
St.  Cyril  considers  the  idea  to  be  tliat  the 
heathen  shall  cling  to  the  Jews  like  children 
holding  their  fathers'  dress  for  support  and 
Miuidance.  In  "  tlie  man  that  is  a  Jew  "  St. 
Jerome  discerns  the  Messiah.  We  will  go 
with  you.  The  picture  presented  to  the 
mind  by  this  verse  is  of  a  Jew  journeying 
to  Jerusnlem  from  some  distant  country  to 
keep  a  solemn  festival,  and  a  number  of 
Oentiles  clinging  round  him,  asking  permis- 


sion to  accompany  hira  on  his  journey,  be- 
cause they  have  learned  how  good  the  Lord 
has  been  to  his  countrymen,  llut  the  ideal 
intended  is  much  more  than  this.  Salvatiim, 
indeed,  is  of  the  Jews ;  it  began  to  be 
announced  at  Jerusalem ;  it  was  preached 
by  the  Jewish  apostles ;  its  founder  was  of 
the  seed  of  David.  But  the  true  Israelites 
are  not  merely  those  who  are  of  the  natural 
posterity  of  Abmham,  but  all  true  Chris- 
tians united  under  Christ,  tlie  Head.  'I'o 
their  number  all  wlio  would  be  saved  must 
be  joined  (corap.  Kom.  iv.  11;  Gal.  iii.  7. 
29 :  It.  26,  eto.). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Assurcmee  of  favour.  "  Again  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  came  to 
me."  When  warning  is  carried  too  far,  it  degenerates  into  threatening,  and  defeats  its 
own  end,  producing  despair  instead  of  desire  to  escape.  It  is  proliably  on  this  account 
that  the  solemn  warning  with  which  ch.  vii.  concludes  gives  place,  in  this  chapter,  tu 
an  animating  series  of  encouragements  and  promises.  (For  somewhat  similar  transitinns, 
see  Heb.  vi.  9  ;  Isa.  i.  18,  etc.)  In  the  verses  now  immediately  before  us,  we  have  the 
beginning  of  these  encouragements  in  a  gracious  assurance  of  favour  to  the  remnant 
addressed  by  the  prophet — an  assurance  conveyed  to  tbeni  in  the  way  (1)  of  emphatic 
repetition;  (2)  oi graphic  detail ;  and  (3)  oi copious  addition. 

L  Emphatic  bkpetition.  We  have  such  repetition:  1.  Of  the  fedings  of  Jehovah 
towards  the  enemies  of  his  Zion.  He  had  described  himself  before  (ch.  i.  14)  as  looking 
with  an  eye  of  displeasure  and  jealousy  on  the  comparative  "  ease  "  of  those  foes.  We 
have  the  same  idea  here  (in  ver.  2)  in  a  still  more  forcible  shape.  "  I  was  jealous  fur 
Zion  with  great  fury."  What  can  go  beyond  that?  2.  Of  the  purposes  of  Jehovah 
towards  Zion  hersdf.  On  this  point,  also,  God's  former  declaration  (as  found  in 
ch.  i.  16 ;  ii.  10)  is  repeated  and  enforced.  Not  only  would  God  again  dwell  in  her, 
as  prophesied  before;  but  he  would  do  so  in  such  a  manner  as  to  make  her  a  city  oi 
truth  and  holiness  (ver.  3;  and  comp.  Jer.  xxxi.  2.3).  All  this  as  though  to  impress  on 
his  people  how  deli'ierately  he  had  spoken.  "  I  know  what  I  said,  and  I  mean  it ;  I 
meant  even  more  than  I  said."  Such  is  the  purport,  such  also  the  effect,  of  repetition 
like  this.  It  is  the  natural  language  of  steadfast  purpose  and  conscious  power  to  fulfil. 
Some  persons  think,  accordingly,  that  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  is,  virtually,  such 
a  repetition  of  that  to  the  Colossians;  and  that  the  game  holds  good  about  the  twt 
Epistles  to  the  Galatians  and  Bomang. 

II.  Graphic  detail.  A  previous  prophecy  (oh.  iL  4)  had  declared  that  Jerusalem 
should  be  inhabited  as  "towns  without  walls."  Vers.  4  and  5  of  the  present  chapter 
amplify  this  description  under  three  principal  ideas  of  great  beauty  and  force.  1.  The 
idea  of  restoration  and  order.  Instead  of  being  a  city  of  waste  places  (compare 
sixty  years  afterwards,  Neh.  vii.  4,  margin),  we  see  it  a  city  of  populous  "  streets." 
This  a  wonderful  touch.  In  a  growing  neighbourhood,  where  every  new  building  is  an 
event,  we  think  most  of  the  houses ;  in  a  completely  built  city,  where  there  is  no  room 
for  more  buildings,  we  think  most  of  the  thoroughfares.  2.  ITie  idea  of  safety  and 
peace.  In  times  of  warfare  and  tumult  the  first  to  succumb  to  violence  and  privation 
and  terror  are  the  aged.  Streets,  therefore,  full  of  such  (ver.  4)  tell  a  twofold  tale. 
Had  there  not  been  long  peace  in  the  past,  these  aged  ones  would  not  have  survived. 
Were  there  not  assured  peace  in  the  present,  they  would  be  in  flight  or  concealment, 
and  not  in  the  streets.  3.  The  idea  of  gladness  and  joy.  What  happier  sight  on 
this  earth  than  that  described  in  ver.  5,  in  its  comparative  innocence,  its  abundant 
life,  its  musical  utterances,  its  sweet  faces  and  smiles,  its  graceful  figures  and  move- 
ments, and  the  untold  wealth  of  tender  love  and  delighted  looks,  of  which,  in  so  many 
different  homes,  it  gives  proof  I  How  all  this  detail  would  help  men  to  realize  what 
God's  promises  meant  I 


60  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEOHARIAH.  [oh.  vm.  1—28 

III.  Gopions  ADDITION.  Did  these  visions  seem  very  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  those 
to  whom  they  were  shown  ?  Almost  too'  good,  in  fact,  to  be  true.  Let  such  persons 
remember :  1.  That  they  were  not  too  marvellous  for  Ood's  power.  Often  had  God 
shown  this  kind  of  thing  to  ^e  true  (see  Gen.  xviii.  14;  Jer.  xxxii.  6 — 17,  where 
note  connection  with  the  subject  of  restoration  after  Captivity,  as  in  this  instance). 
Let  such  persons  understand  of  these  promises :  2.  That  they  were  far  beneath  G^od's 
power,  in  real  fact.  Besides  the  remnant  now  brought  back  from  the  Captivity,  he 
would  bring  others  as  well ;  not  only  those  from  the  east,  but  those  from  the  west 
(ver.  7) ;  not  only  also  (ver.  8)  those  who  were  his  people  already,  but  those  who 
should  become  so  in  the  fullest  manner.  Most  probably  much  of  the  meaning  of  this 
would  be  concealed  at  that  time  from  the  prophet's  understanding,  but  even  to  see 
such  distant  peaks  "  afar  off  "  (Hub.  xi.  13),  and  above  the  clouds,  as  it  were,  would  be  a 
great  help  on  the  road. 

Two  important  lessons  derivable  to  conclude.  1.  Eow  to  receive  Ood's  Word,  viz.  as 
something  not  orAj  perfectly  sure,  but  also  as  something  wonderfully  significant  and 
cverflowingly  full.  It  is  with  the  secrets  of  grace  as  with  those  of  nature;  they  can 
never  be  fully  described,  never  altogether  exhausted  (see  Bccles.  iii.  11;  viii.  17; 
fiom.  xi.  33  ;  Ps.  xxxvi.  6 ;  Ixxvii.  19 ;  and  especially  what  is  said  in  Job  xi.  6,  of  the 
"  secrets  of  wisdom,"  that  they  "  are  double  to  that  which  is  ").  2.  How  to  set  forth 
{Jod's  truth,  viz.  as  having  both  a  sombre  side  and  a  bright  one.  Some  are  now 
preaching  the  gospel  as  though  no  such  thing  as  repentance  and  judgment  were 
mentioned  in  the  Bible.  Others  confine  themselves  to  repentance  and  judgment,  as 
though  there  were  no  pardon  or  love.  The  right  "proportion"  (Rom.  xii.  6)  is  shown 
us  in  our  present  passage  combined  with  our  last,  and  in  such  Scriptures  as  Fs.  ci.  1 ; 
Bom.  ii.  3—11,  etc. 

Vers.  9 — 17. — Evidence  of  favour.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  Let  your  hands 
be  strong,"  etc.  In  the  beginning  of  these  verses  we  have  the  opposite  of  that  with 
which  the  previous  verses  concluded.  There  God  confirmed  his  people  in  hoping  for 
certain  comparatively  proximate  blessings  by  assuring  them  of  other  and  greater 
blessings  which  he  designed  afterwards  to  bestow.  Here  he  confirms  their  hopes  of 
what  is  more  distant  by  pledging  himself,  as  it  were,  to  what  is  nearer.  And  this  he 
does,  we  shall  find,  by  drawing  their  attention  (1)  to  the  mercies  of  the  present;  and 
(2)  to  the  judgments  of  the  past. 

I.  The  mbroiks  of  the  pkbsent.  (Vers.  9 — 13.)  Three  things,  especially,  to  be 
noted  regarding  these.  1.  How  marked  their  character!  Great  temporal  mercies 
(ver.  12)  are  to  be  "now"  (ver.  11) — abundant  produce  both  in  the  open  "  ground" 
•nd  cultivated  enclosure,  abundant  blessing  both  in  the  soil  itself  and  in  that  which 
came  on  it.  These  also  all  the  more  notable  for  coming  after  a  widely  different  state  of 
things,  when,  besides  utter  want  (ver.  10),  even  for  those  most  desirous  to  work,  there 
was  the  common  concomitant  of  such  evils,  viz.  home  dissension  and  strife ;  and  that, 
wherever  men  were  and  whatever  they  did  (see  also  Hag.  ii.  16, 17,  describing  those 
same  evil  days).  Who  could  avoid  seeing  and  admiring  so  blessed  a  change  ?  2.  Bow 
striking  their  connection !  This  happy  change  in  their  circumstances  had  taken  place 
simultaneously  with  a  corresponding  change  in  their  doings.  From  the  very  day  when, 
as  it  were,  for  the  second  time  they  "laid  the  foundation"  of  God's  house  (ver.  9; 
Ezra  iv,  24 ;  v.  1,  2),  God  had  begun  to  prosper  thus  the  work  of  their  hands. 
" Before"  then  (ver.  10)  was  trouble ;  but  " now  "  (ver.  11)  "  I  am  not "  (so  some)  as 
before.  This,  too,  we  find  occurring  (see  Hag.  i.  9 — 11 ;  ii.  15 — 19)  in  accordance  with 
express  promise  to  this  effect.  3.  How  hopeful  their  hearing!  What  was  all  this  but 
plain  evidence  of  a  corresponding  change,  as  it  were,  up  above  ?  And  what  might  not 
be  expected  in  future,  such  being  the  case  ?  Even  all  promised  in  ver.  13,  viz.  that 
Ood's  people  should  become  as  conspicuous  now  for  their  prosperity  as  formerly  for 
their  adversity  (see  also  Jer.  xxiv.  9  ;  xxv.  18 ;  xlii.  18,  etc.).  Much  as  when,  from 
the  very  day  on  which  a  certain  remedy  is  first  employed,  a  sick  man  begins  to 
improve.  How  easy  then  to  believe  the  physician's  assurance  that  he  shall  ultimately 
become  better  than  ever ! 

II.  The  judgments  op  the  past.  This  conviction  further  confirmed  by  going 
-till  further  back  in  their  history.    For  doing  so  shows:  1.  The  steqdfastneu  of  OoeFi 


OH.  vni.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZBOHARIAH.  81 

purposes.  (Vers.  14, 15.)  When  the  state  of  things  is  such  as  to  call  for  judgment,  ye 
nave  seen  how  the  thought  of  such  judgment  is  carried  out  by  me  (comp.  1  Sam.  iii.  12). 
Learn  from  this,  when  things,  as  at  present,  are  different,  to  rely  on  the  same  steadfast- 
ness on  my  part.  2.  So  to  describe  it,  the  easiness  of  Ood^s  terms.  All  that  he  asks 
on  their  part,  in  order  to  ensure  on  his  part  the  full  accomplishment  of  his  purposes  of 
mercy,  was  that  (as  in  the  case  of  their  fathers)  which  would  be  for  their  good.  See 
previous  remarks  on  ch.  vii.  9, 10;  and  note  that  we  have  here,  in  vers.  16, 17,  the 
same  thoughts  and  almost  words  as  before,  followed  up,  however,  by  two  remarkable 
additions  which  seem  specially  meant  for  those  times — the  mention  of  false  swearing 
(comp.  oh.  V.  4)  ;  and  the  implied  assurance  that,  if  these  evils  were  persisted  in,  they 
would  stop  the  current  of  God's  love.  "  All  these  things,  being  hurtful  to  you,  are 
hateful  to  me.     Therefore,  on  every  account,  do  them  not." 

Do  we  not  see  here,  in  conclusion  :  1.  The  unchangeahleness  of  God's  nature  f  His 
dealings  with  men  vary  often  and  widely ;  his  character,  never.  He  is  always  true  to 
his  purpose ;  never,  as  men  are,  turned  from  it  by  caprice.  The  very  variety  of  his 
dealings  helps  to  demonstrate  this.  The  very  same  sunshine  which  melts  the  ice 
hardens  the  clay.  See  this  illustrated  by  the  opposite  eflfeots  of  mercy  and  favour, 
hardening  some  (Isa.  zzvi.  10 ;  Eccles.  viii.  11,  etc.)  and  molting  others  (Fs.  oxxx.  4 ; 
cxvi.  1,  12) ;  also  of  afiBiction  or  chastisement,  humiliating  some  (Luke  iv.  17 — 19 ; 
2  Chron.  xxxiii.  12)  and  exasperating  others  (Gen.  iv.  13 ;  2  Chrou.  xxviii.  22 ;  Eev. 
ii.  20,  21).  2.  Uie  certainty  of  Ood's  promises  t  Established,  as  we  see,  by  God's 
very  judgments,  what  wider  base  can  they  have  (comp.  Mai.  iii.  6 ;  also  Ps.  cxix.  52, 
"  I  remembered  thy  judgments  of  old,  and  comforted  myself")  ?  In  this  way,  how  many 
(apparently)  unlikely  things  combine  to  preach  Christ  1  Even  the  thunders  of  Sinai 
itself  (see  in  one  sense.  Gal.  iii.  24) !  Other  things,  perhaps,  more  articulately  as  it 
were,  but  none  with  more  power. 

Vers.  18 — 23. — Pre-eminent  favour,  "  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  came 
unto  me,  saying,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  The  fast  of  the  fourth  month,"  etc. 
The  close  of  this  chapter  gives  an  answer  at  length  to  the  question  asked  in  ob.  vii.  3. 
And  this  answer  consists — unlike  the  intervening  stream  of  mingled  denunciation, 
warning,  and  encouragement — of  an  almost  unbroken  outburst  of  promise  and  hope. 
The  only  apparent  exception,  iu  fact,  is  to  be  found  in  the  six  brief  words  of  admonition 
at  the  close  of  ver.  19.  How  far  this  abundance  of  promise  was  fulfilled  in  the 
experience  of  the  literal  Israel  of  the  past,  how  far  in  that  of  the  spiritual  Israel  of 
Christ's  Church,  and  how  far  it  yet  remains  to  be  verified  in  the  case  of  either  or  both, — 
has  been  debated  often  and  much.  Taken  simply  as  they  stand  (which  is  clearly  the  first 
thing  to  do  with  them),  we  may  consider  the  words  as  setting  before  us  (1)  the  future 
happiness  of  Judah;  (2)  the  eminence  of  Jerusalem;  and  (3)  thefuturedignityofthejew. 

I.  The  futueb  happiness  of  thb  people  of  Judah.  We  shall  appreciate  this 
best  by  noting :  1.  Their  recollections  at  the  time  of  this  prophecy.  For  seventy  years 
they  had  been  accustomed,  on  four  different  annual  occasions  (see  ver.  19),  to  fast  and 
weep  in  remembrance  of  four  different  and  dreadful  stages  in  their  overthrow  as  a 
nation,  viz.  in  the  tenth  month,  in  remembrance  of  the  opening  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem 
(Jer.  Iii.  4);  in  the  fourth  month,  in  remembrance  of  its  capture  (Jer.  Iii.  6);  in  the 
fifth,  in  remembrance  of  the  burning  of  the  temple  (Jer.  Iii.  12 — 16);  and  in  the 
seventh,  in  remembrance  of  the  flight  of  the  last  residue  of  the  "  seed  royal,"  and  army, 
and  prophets,  and  people  from  Palestine  into  Egypt  (2  Kings  xxv.  25,  26 ;  Jer. 
xli.  1 — ^xliii.  7).  What  a  succession,  what  a  continual  aggravation,  what  a  climax,  of 
ill  1  2.  Their  experience.  They  had  now  got  so  far  (as  we  noted  on  oh.  vii.  3)  that  a 
remnant  of  the  people  had  returned,  and  the  temple  had  begun  to  rise  again,  and  its 
full  restoration  seemed  only  a  work  of  time.  This  being  so,  that  fifth-month  day  of 
humiliation,  which  was  connected  with  the  destruction  of  the  temple,  appeared  no  longer 
in  place.  Why  should  they  longer  commemorate  a  loss  which  they  had  already  begun 
to  efface  ?  3.  Their  prospects.  Why,  indeed,  seeing  the  time  was  coming  (ver.  19) 
when  all  the  calamities  commemorated  by  all  the  four  Captivity  fasts  here  referred  to 
would  be  so  completely  outbalanced  by  corresponding  blessings  as  to  call  for  "  cheerful 
feasts  "  rather  than  fasts  ?  Only  let  them  "  love  truth  and  peace,"  and  aU  their  losses 
would  be  forgotten,  as  in  the  case  mentioned  in  Gen.  xli.  51. 

UCHASIAH.  ^ 


81  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABIAH.  [oh.  vm.  1— 2a 

II.  The  roTUBB  eminence  of  Jebusaleh.  This  capital  of  Israel  was  to  become  "yet" 
(i.e., however  apparently  unlikely,  however  apparently  delayed)  the  religions  capital  of 
the  world.  As  foretelling  this,  we  liave  portrayed  to  us  here :  1.  A  great  journey 
resolved  on.  We  see  (1)  many  pilgrims  assembling  together,  people  who  have  "  cities" 
iind  settled  habitations  ("  inhabitants,"  Jis)  of  their  own,  leaving  those  cities  to  visit 
this  (comp.  Heb.  xi.  8 — 10,  14 — 16;  xiii.  14).  These  pilgrims  have  (2)  a  common 
purpose,  the  inhabitants  of  one  city  inviting  those  of  others,  and  volunteering  them- 
selves, to  go  up  (Ps,  cxxii.  1).  They  have  also  (3)  a  very  earnest  purpose  :  let  us  go 
"  perseveringly  "  (Pusey),  till  we  obtain  what  we  seek — till  our  feet  actually  "  stand  " 
(Ps.  cxxii.  2)  where  we  desire.  And  they  have,  finally,  (4)  a  most  suitable  and  laudable 
purpose,  even  that  of  finding  that  presence  of  Jehovah  which  is  to  be  found  in  that 
city  alone ;  and  are  not  seeking  to  reach  it  merely  as  a  means  of  reaching  something 
beyon(i.  2.  A  great  jowney  accomplished.  (Ver.  22.)  The  pilgrims  have  arrived  at 
last.  How  mighty  in  number  1  "  Many  people  shall  come ; "  and  come  to  seek  Qod. 
How  mighty  also  in  significance  I  "  Strong  nations,"  who  might  have  come  as  invaders, 
are  here  as-  suppliants  before  G-od  (comp.  Isa.  Ix.  3,  11,  etc. ;  ii.  2 — 4 ;  and  the  almost 
identical  passage  in  Micah  iv.  1 — 8,  noting  specially  "  the  first  dominion ''). 

III.  The  rtrruKE  dignity  of  the  Jew  ;  ix,  of  every  individual  enjoying,  in  those 
days,  the  natural  citizenship  of  this  illustrious  city.  Even  when  far  from  its  walls, 
every  such  citizen  (something  as  with  those  referred  to  in  Acts  xvi.  37, 38 ;  xxii.  25 — 29, 
etc.)  would  be  almost  as  much  an  object  of  homage  as  that  city  itself.  Note  what  is 
here  shown :  1.  As  to  the  depth  of  this  homage,  men  being  willing  even  to  sink  their 
own  distinctive  names  in  that  of  an  Israelite,  even  as  a  wooian  does  when  she  marries 
(comp.  Ruth  iii.  9 ;  Isa.  iv.  1 ;  and  contrast  Pilate's  indignant  question  in  John 
xviii.  35).  2,  Its  extent.  How  many  would  do  thus  1  viz.  as  many  as  ten  to  each 
Jew.  How  manifold,  also,  they  would  bel  viz.  out  of  "all  languages  "upon  earth. 
Wherever  their  dwelling,  whatever  their  diversities  of  race,  training,  customs,  or 
speech,  they  would  break  through  all  to  do  this.  3.  Its  foundation.  On  the  one 
hand,  negatively.  The  homage  paid  to  this  "  citizen  "  is  not  due  to  anything  else 
but  his  being  "  a  Jew."  On  the  other  hand,  positively.  This  homage  is  paid  to 
him  because,  as  being  such,  he  is  believed  to  be  peculiarly  favoured  of  God  (see  end  oi 
ver.  23  ;  and  Numb,  x  29,  32 ;  and  contrast  John  iv.  20 ;  see  also  end  of  ver.  22). 

Two  brief  lessons  to  conclude.  I.  As  to  Israd  now.  Let  us  ever  think  of  God's 
ancient  people  with  peculiar  tenderness  and  respect.  With  tenderness,  as  is  only 
proper,  because  of  their  having  "  seen  better  days."  With  respect,  as  is  only  becoming, 
considering  their  "  great  expectations."  Whatever  the  exact  application  of  the  present 
prophecy,  of  this  much  we  are  sure  (Rom.  xi.,  pasaim).  Who,  indeed,  may  not  be 
proud  of  the  name  mentioned  in  John  i.  47  ?  2.  As  to  ourselves.  When  will  the  Jews  be 
thus  honoured?  When  they  truly  seels  God.  So,  therefore,  of  us,  in  our  turn.  We 
must  never  forget  what  it  took  Peter  so  much  trouble  to  learn  (Acts  x.  34,  35). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver8.1 — 23. — The  fviure  glory  of  the  Church.  God  speaks.  Formerly  stern  rebuke ; 
here  sweet  encouragement.     Glowing  picture  of  the  good  time  coming. 

I.  God's  abiding  love  to  bis  Church.  There  are  times  when  it  would  seem  as  if 
God  had  cast  off  his  people.  "  Has  God  forgotten  to  be  gracious  ?  "  Here  is  the  answer. 
"  I  am  jealous,"  etc.  There  is  real,  intense,  and  abiding  attachment.  Words  of  good 
cheer  verified  by  facts.     "  I  am  returned,"  etc. 

II.  God's  obaoious  purpose  to  restore  his  Church.  God's  withdrawal  was 
because  of  sin.  But  for  a  season.  When  we  return  to  God,  he  will  return  to  us.  The 
very  righteousness  that  obliges  him  to  punish  the  impenitent,  binds  him  to  bless  the 
peuiteut.  The  light  will  shine  more  and  more.  Times  ol  revival  are  times  of  refresh- 
ment. The  release  of  the  captives  pledges  freedom  to  all.  The  return  of  the  exiles 
prophesies  of  the  final  restoration. 

III.  God's  delight  in  the  prosperitt  of  his  Church.  (Vers.  4- — 6.)  Sweet  and 
'ftvishing  picture.    So  far  fulfilled  in  the  heroic  times  of  the  Maccabees  CI  Mace.  xiv. 


CB.  vm.  1— 23.J  THE  BOOK   OF  ZECHARIAH.  8« 

8 — 12).    Binds  a  grander  fulfilment  under  the  gospel,  and  will  be  perfectly  fulfilled  in 
the  latter  days. 

IV.  Qod's  faithpulnbss  in  fulfilling  his  promises  to  his  Church.  There  art 
things  which  seem  too  great  to  be  possible — too  good  to  be  true.  It  may  be  so  with 
man,  but  not  with  God.  Eternal  Wisdom  cannot  err.  Absolute  truth  cannot  alter. 
Omnipotent  love  cannot  fail. — F. 

Ver.  21. — 2%«  foul's  response  to  the  gospel  eall,  "I  will  go  alsa"  'ITiis  resolu- 
tion is— 

I.  Pbbsonal.  "  L"  Religion  is  a  thing  between  the  soul  and  Q-od.  We  are  brought 
face  to  face  with  Christ  in  the  gospel.  Free  and  responsible.  Must  decide  for 
ourselves. 

n.  Result  of  conviction.  Many  careless,  some  anxious,  others  almost  persuaded. 
He  who  says,  "  I  will  go,"  has  considered  the  question,  and  made  up  his  mind  on 
evidence  which  to  him  is  satisfactory  and  convincing.    "  God  is  with  you." 

III.  Pbomptlt  and  thorouohlt  cabkibd  out.  Not  a  mere  thought,  or  impulse, 
or  sentiment.  Not  the  result  of  transitory  feelings  in  times  of  excitement.  But  the 
expression  outwardly  of  the  change  wrought  within — of  the  heart  won  to  Christ 
(Ps.  oxii.  59,  60). 

rV.  POBTIFIBD  BT  THE   SYMPATHY    AND   APPROVAL  OP    ALL   THE  GOOD.      We  crave 

sympathy.    Alliance  w  ith  others  gives  courage,  especially  at  the  outset.    The  fellow- 
ship of  the  saints  intensifies  our  best  emotions  and  increases  our  purest  joys. 

V.  LSADINa  TO  A   TRUE  AND  NOBLE  LIFE. — F. 

Ver.  23. — Bight  representation.  Much  depends  on  whether  religion  is  rightly  repre- 
sented.    In  order  to  be  attractive,  the  representation  should  be — 

I.  Agreeable  to  reason.  An  irrational  religion  cannot  stand.  Christ  and  his 
apostles  constantly  appeal  to  the  moral  judgment. 

IL  CoNGBnous  TO  man's  necessities.  There  is  a  certain  condition  of  things.  The 
feeling  and  the  cry  of  sin.  The  craving  for  reconciliation  with  God.  Aspirations  after 
holiness.  The  longing  for  confirmed  tranquillity.  The  gospel  must  be  shown  to  meet 
these  needs. 

m.  In  habmont  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  Christ  is  the  gospel.  Those  who 
witness  for  Christ  must  take  heed  that  their  witness  is  true.  We  behold  in  Christ 
utter  truth,  disinterested  love,  self-saoriflcing  earnestness,  supreme  sympathy  with  God. 

rV.  Confirmed  by  the  character  and  life  of  its  pbofessobs.  Conduct  is  the 
test  of  faith.  The  truth  is  identified  with  its  advocates.  To  get  others  to  believe,  we 
must  show  that  we  believe  ourselves.  Life  is  better  than  doctrine.  To  do  good,  we 
must  be  good.  Gehazi  would  never  have  won  Naaman.  Lot  failed  to  move  his 
sons-in-law.  At  home  and  abroad,  Christianity  is  suffering  from  the  faithlessness  of 
Christians. 

V.  Vbbifibd  bt  the  Divine  effects  which  it  produces.  "God  is  with  you" 
(cf.  1  Oor.  xiv.  25).    The  gospel  is  its  own  best  witness. — P. 

Vers.  1 — 6.— 5f%e  Messed  community  of  men  yet  to  appear  on  the  earth.  "  Again  the 
word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  came  to  me,  saying,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  I  was 
jealous  for  Zion  with  great  Jealousy,  and  I  was  jealous  for  her  with  great  fury,"  etc. 
This  chapter  does  not  commence  a  new  subject,  but  continues  the  subject  of  the  pre- 
ceding one.  The  awful  consequences  of  disregarding  the  will  of  Heaven  had  often  been 
set  forth  by  the  prophets ;  and  here,  in  this  chapter,  we  have  the  assurance  of  the 
renewal  of  Divine  favour  to  those  who  had  returned  from  the  Captivity.  Without  con- 
cerning ourselves  with  "  times  and  seasons,"  it  is  clear  that  in  this  section  of  Scripture 
there  is  sketched  a  state  of  human  society  which  has  never  yet  existed  on  the  earth,  and 
which  is  not  likely  to  appear  for  many  centuries,  if  not  millenniums  hence.  It  is  to  this 
community,  as  herein  pictured,  that  I  desire  to  call  the  attention  of  my  readers.  The 
following  facts  are  eminently  noteworthy  in  relation  to  this  Messed  community, 

I.  Hebe  is  a  community  specially  interesting  to  the  great  God.  "Again 
the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  came  to  me,  saying.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts;  I  was 
jealous  for  Zion  with  great  jealousy,  and  I  wan  jealous  for  her  with  great  fury."     The 


84  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  rai.  1—23. 

rendering  of  Dr.  Henderson  is  worth  citation ;  "  And  the  word  of  Jehovah  was  com- 
municated to  me,  saying,  Thus  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts :  I  have  beea  jealous  for  Zion 
with  great  zeal,  yea,  with  great  indignation  have  I  heen  jealous  for  her."  Jerusalem  was 
k  city  in  which  God  had  chosen  "  to  put  his  Name ; "  there  was  his  temple,  there  were 
the  ark,  the  mercy-seat,  and  the  memorials  of  his  power  and  goodness  in  the  history  of 
Israel.  This  city  had  been  destroyed  by  the  Babylonian  invaders,  and  during  the 
whole  period  of  its  ruin  Jehovah's  hand  was  on  it  and  its  scattered  and  exiled  people. 
During  all  this  time,  he  says,  "  I  was  jealous  for  Zion  with  great  jealousy."  Cistead 
of  losing  interest  in  his  persecuted  people,  his  feelings  were  intense  concerning  them. 
The  Eternal  is  interested  in  all  the  works  of  his  hand,  interested  in  men  even  in  their 
state  of  infidelity  and  rebellion ;  but  specially  interested  in  those  whom  he  regards 
as  his  people.  "  To  this  man  will  I  look,  even  to  him  that  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite 
spirit,  and  that  trembleth  at  my  word ; "  "  As  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord 
pitieth  them  that  fear  him  "  (Isa.  Ivii.  15 ;  Ps.  ciii.  13). 

II.  Hebe  is  a  commdnitt  in  which  the  Almighty  specially  besides.  "Thus 
saith  the  Lord  ;  I  am  returned  unto  Zion,  and  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem." 
Jerusalem  was  in  a  very  particular  sense  the  dwelling-place  of  God  (Exod.  xxix.  45 ; 
Lev.  xxvi.  12).  There  shone  the  symbol  of  bis  presence  for  centuries;  there  he  com- 
muned with  his  people  from  off  the  mercy-seat ;  there  lived  and  laboured  the  priests 
whom  he  had  chosen  to  represent  his  will.  But  he  dwells  with  his  people  in  a  more 
real  and  vital  sense  than  this.  Know  ye  not  that  "  ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living 
God,  as  God  hath  said,  I  will  dwell  in  them  and  walk  in  them,  and  I  will  be  their  God, 
and  they  shall  be  my  pt  ople  "  ?  There  are  two  senses  in  which  the  Almighty  dwells 
with  good  men.  1.  By  his  sympathy.  The  loving  mother  dwells  with  her  loved  child ; 
yes,  though  separated  by  continents  and  seas.  Jehovah's  sympathies  are  with  his 
children.  2.  By  his  presence.  The  loving  parent  cannot  always  be  personally  with 
the  loved  child.  Jn  person  they  may  be  as  far  asimder  as  the  poles.  But  God's 
presence  is  always  with  his  people,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee." 
What  a  blessed  community  that  must  be,  where  God  not  only  by  his  sympathies  but 
by  his  presence  dwells  1 

III.  Hebe  is  a  community  distinguished  by  beality  and  elevation.  1.  Reality. 
"  And  Jerusalem  shall  be  called  a  city  of  truth."  What  is  moral  reality  ?  A  pra/:tical 
correspondence  of  the  sympathies  and  life  with  eternal  facts.  All  whose  thoughts, 
affections,  and  conduct  are  not  in  accord  with  the  immutable  moral  laws  of  God,  live  in 
fiction,  "walk  in  a  vain  show;"  and  in  this  state  most,  if  not  all,  communities  are 
found.  Alas  I  "the  city  of  tbuth"  is  not  yet  established,  it  is  in  a  distant  future. 
2.  Elevation.  "  Ami  the  mountain  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  the  holy  mountain."  Where 
are  the  communities  of  men  now  found  in  a  moral  sense  ?  Down  in  the  hazy,  boggy, 
impure  valleys  of  carnalities  and  falsehcods.  But  this  community  is  up  on  the  holy 
mountain ;  it  is  in  a  place  of  high  moral  exaltation. 

IV.  Hebe  is  a  community  in  which  the  vbby  aged  and  the  young  live  in 
BOOiAL  enjoyment.  " Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts;  There  shall  yet  old  men 
and  old  women  dwell  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  and  every  man  with  his  staff  in 
his  hand  for  very  age."  The  promise  of  long  life  was  esteemed  one  of  the  greatest 
blessings  in  the  Jewish  theocracy  (Exod.  xx,  12 ;  Deut.  iv.  40) ;  and  in  Isa.  Ixv. 
20 — 22  this  is  promised  as  one  of  the  signal  blessings  of  Messianic  times.  Through 
bloody  wars  aiid  general  disregard  of  the  laws  of  health,  only  an  insignificant  minority 
of  the  human  race  reach  old  age.  Blessed  is  that  community  in  which  aged  people 
abound,  ripe  in  wisdom,  goodness,  and  experience.  But  not  only  are  the  very  aged  in 
this  community,  but  the  young.  "  The  streets  of  the  city  shall  be  full  of  boys  and 
girls  playing  in  the  streets  thereof."  No  sight  is  more  refreshing,  more  morally 
inspiring  to  the  true-hearted  of  all  ages,  even  to  the  oldest,  than  a  community  of  guile- 
less, bright,  and  blithesome  children.  They  are  the  latest  emanations  and  revelations 
of  Infinite  Love  to  the  world.  They  are  to  adults  as  fiowers  growing  on  the  sides  of  the 
dry  and  dnsty  walks  of  life.  Beautiful  city  this  I  The  children  not  filthy,  half-starved, 
diseased  arabs  in  crowded  alleys,  but  bright  creatures  gambolling  in  the  sunny  streets. 

V.  Hebe  is  a  community  whose  establishment,  though  inobedible  to  man,  is 
csBTAiH  TO  God.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  If  it  he  marvellous  iu  the  eyes  of  the 
remnant  of  this  people  in  these  days,  should  it  also  be  marveUoua  in  mine  eyes?"     At 


OH.  vm.  i— 23.J  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEGHARIAH.  85 

if  the  Almighty  had  said, "  The  creation  of  such  a  social  state  amongst  you  may  appear 
an  impossibility ;  but  it  is  not  so  to  me."  Indeed,  to  create  such  a  community  as  this 
on  the  earth,  to  make  the  whole  globe  a  kind  of  Jerusalem,  whose  memheiB  shall  be  all 
holy  and  all  happy,  does  appear  so  wonderful  that  even  the  most  believing  amongst  us 
are  often  filled  with  doubt.  How  far  off  is  such  a  state  of  things  from  the  present  I 
How  imperceptibly  slow  does  the  Ohristly  reformation  proceed  I  How  Tast  and  mighty 
is  the  reign  of  error  and  wrong  everywhere!  and  how  difficult  to  believe  that  the  time 
will  come  "  when  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord 
and  of  his  Christ "  1  Still,  God  has  promised  it ;  and  what  he  has  promised  he  is  able 
to  accomplish.  Let  us  live  and  labour  in  faith.  "  Let  us  be  steadfast,  unmovable, 
always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  forasmuch  as  we  know  our  labour  is  not 
in  vain  in  the  Lord." — D.  T. 

Vers.  7,  8.-^^  twofold  Divine  restoration.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  Behold, 
I  will  save  my  people  ['  out  of  the  land  of  the  rising  and  the  land  of  the  setting '  (Keil)] 
from  the  east  country,  and  from  the  west  country ;  and  I  will  bring  them,  and  they 
shall  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem :  and  they  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their 
God,  in  truth  and  in  righteousness."  "  The  east  and  the  west  are  here  put  as  parts  for 
the  whole.  The  meaning  is,  '  I  will  deliver  my  people  from  regions  whither  they  have 
been  scattered.'  Were  there  any  reason  to  believe  that  the  prophecy  has  respect  to 
a  restoration  of  the  Jews  yet  future,  there  would  be  a  singular  propriety  in  the  use 
of  s'lao  B'OB'i-, '  the  setting  of  the  sun,"  the  Jews  being  now,  for  the  most  part,  found 
in  countries  to  the  west  of  Jerusalem ;  but  there  is  every  reason  to  conclude  that  it  has 
an  exclusive  reference  to  what  was  to  take  place  soon  after  it  was  delivered.  Vast 
numbers  were  carried  away  captive  after  the  time  of  Alexander.  Not  fewer  than  a 
hundred  thousand  were  carried  by  Ptolemy,  and  were  settled  in  Alexandria  and  Gyrene  " 
(Henderson).  We  shall  use  these  words  as  suggesting  a  twofold  Divine  restoration — 
temporal  and  spiritual. 

I.  Heeb  is  a  Divine  temporal  bestoration.  "  And  I  will  bring  them,  and  they 
shall  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem."  'I'here  is  no  sound  reason  for  believing  that 
the  people  here  mentioned  as  those  that  were  brought  "  from  the  east  country  arid  from 
the  west "  refer  to  the  Jews  in  the  far  future,  who,  some  suppose,  will  be  restored  to 
Jerusalem  at  last.  I  know  of  no  authority  for  supposing  that  such  a  restoration  will 
ever  be  effected.  Nor  does  the  passage  point,  I  think,  to  the  universal  conversion  »f 
the  Jews  to  Christianity  in  the  last  times.  The  reference  is  manifestly  to  those  Jews 
who  had  been  scattered  abroad  over  various  countries  through  the  Babylonian  Captivity 
and  other  disastrous  causes.  The  point  is  that  the  restoration  here  promised  is  a 
tempoi-al  restoration  to  their  own  land  and  city.  They  had  been  exiled  for  many  long 
years,  and  deeply  did  they  deplore  in  a  foreign  land  their  expatriation.  "  By  the  rivers 
of  Babylon  we  sat  down,"  etc.  The  Almighty  by  Cyrus  restored  them.  And  he  is 
sonstantly  restoring  his  people  to  those  temporal  blessings  they  have  lost.  He  restores 
often  (1)  to  lost  health ;  (2)  to  lost  property ;  (3)  to  lost  social  status.  He  is  the 
temporal  Eestorer  of  his  people.  In  all  their  distresses  he  bids  them  look  to  him. 
"  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble,"  etc. 

II.  Hebe  is  a  Divine  spiritual  restoration.  •'  And  they  shall  be  my  people,  and 
I  will  be  their  God,  in  truth  and  in  righteousness."  This  may  mean,  "  I  will  become 
their  God  in  good  faith,  or  in  reality,  both  on  their  side  and  mine."  This  is  incomparably 
the  most  important  restoration.  In  truth,  all  temporal  restorations  are  of  no  permanent 
value  without  this.  Observe :  1.  Man  may  lose  his  God.  He  may  be  without  "  God 
in  the  world."  Indeed,  the  millions  are  in  this  state.  "  They  feel  after  him,  if  haply 
they  may  find  him."  2.  The  loss  of  Ood  is  the  greatest  loss.  A  man  separated  from 
God  is  like  a  branch  separated  from  the  root,  a  river  from  the  fountain,  a  planet  from 
the  sun.  3.  Bestoration  to  God  is  the  transcendent  good.  He  who  can  say,  "  The 
Lord  is  my  Portion,"  possesseth  all  things.  This  restoration  the  Almighty  is  effecting 
now  in  the  world.    "He  is  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself." — D.  T. 

Vers.  9 — 16. — A  Divine  call  to  a  Divine  work.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosta ; 
Let  your  hands  be  strong,  ye  that  hear  in  these  days  these  words,"  etc.  This  para- 
graph is  promising  and  cheerful;  it  is  at  once  intended  and  suited  to  animate  the 


8<  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [ch.  vm.  1— 2i 


builders  of  the  temple  and  to  stimulate  them  to  resolute  diligence  in  their  work.  It 
accords  -with  that  of  Haggai  (see  Hag.  i,  2—6;  ii.  15 — 19)  respecting  Heaven's  dis- 
pleasure at  their  apathy  in  Gkid's  work  and  their  eagerness  in  their  own.  In  the  words 
we  have^a  Divine  call  to  a  Divine  work.    This  call  is  urged  on  two  considerations. 

].  The  weetohbdness  consequent  on  the  neqleot  of  duty.  "  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts ;  Let  your  hands  be  strong,  ye  that  hear  in  these  days  these  words  by 
the  mouth  of  the  prophets,  which  were  in  the  day  that  the  foundation  of  the  house  of 
the  Lord  of  hosts  was  laid,  that  the  temple  might  be  built."  The  "  prophets  "  here 
referred  to  were  undoubtedly  Haggai  and  Zechariah  (see  Ezra  v.  1,  2).  The  words 
which  they  addressed  to  the  people  were  words  of  stimulation  and  encouragement  to 
arise  and  rebuild  the  temple.  The  prophet  here  reminds  them,  as  an  inducement  to 
set  in  earnest  to  the  work,  of  the  wretched  condition  of  the  people  before  the  work 
began.  "For  before  these  days  there  was  no  hire  for  man,  nor  any  hire  for  beast  j 
neither  was  there  any  peace."  That  is,  "  before  the  days  "  the  building  commenced. 
They  were  then  destitute  of  three  elements  essential  to  the  well-being  of  any  people. 
1.  Industry.  "  There  was  no  hire  for  man,  nor  any  hire  for  beast."  The  people  were 
purposeless,  lazy,  and  in  a  state  of  general  lethargy  and  collapse.  No  great  project 
inspired  their  interest,  engrossed  their  intention,  enlisted  and  marshalled  their  powers. 
The  lack  of  industry  is  a  curse  to  any  people ;  it  is  an  injury  to  health,  as  well  as  an 
obstruction  to  material  and  social  progress.  2.  Peace.  "  Neither  was  there  any  peace 
to  him  that  went  out  or  came  in  because  of  the  affliction."  The  lack  of  earnest  occu- 
pation natinally  led  to  intestine  broils  and  contentions.  Nothing  is  more  natural  and 
more  common  than  for  people  without  employment  to  wrangle  and  dispute  with  one 
another.  "  Satan  finds  some  mischief  still  for  idle  hands  to  do."  Men  who  are  full 
of  business  have  no  time  to  quarrel.  3.  Social  vaiity.  "  For  I  set  all  men  every  one 
against  his  neighbour."  In  biblical  phraseology,  the  Almighty  is  frequently  repre- 
sented as  doing  that  which  he  only  permits.  It  would  be  unreasonable  and  even 
blasphemous  to  suppose  that  the  God  of  love  and  peace  exerts  himself  in  any  way  to 
inspire  his  human  creatures  with  hostility  towards  one  another.  But  for  reasons  known 
to  himself,  and  which  we  are  bound  to  regard  as  wise  and  kind,  he  often  allows  these 
feelings  to  rise  and  express  themselves  in  malignant  recriminations  and  bloody  wars. 
He  originates  good,  and  good  only ;  and  the  evil  which  he  permits,  he  overrules  for  good, 
and  for  good  only.  The  general  truth  here  taught  is  that,  so  long  as  duty  is  neglected 
by  men,  certain  terrible  evils  must  ensue.  Hence  the  Divine  call, "  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts ;  Let  your  hands  be  strong."  Go  with  courage  and  energy  into  the  work  which 
is  Divinely  enjoined. 

II.  The  improvement  which  ensues  on  the  resumption  of  duty.  "  But  now  I 
will  not  be  unto  the  residue  of  this  people  as  in  the  former  days,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts.  For  the  seed  shall  be  prosperous,"  etc.  This  means,  "  But  now,  as  you  have 
resumed  the  work  and  rebuilt  the  temple,  I  will  bless  you."  There  are  three  blessings 
here  promised.  1.  Temporal  prosperity.  "  For  the  seed  shall  be  prosperous ;  the  vine 
shall  give  her  fruit,  and  the  ground  shall  give  her  increase,  and  the  heavens  shall  give 
their  ilew."  Material  nature  is  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  he  can  at  any  moment  make 
it  a  curse  or  a  blessing  to  man.  Here  he  promises  to  make  it  a  blessing.  "  Godliness 
is  profitable  unto  all  things,"  etc.  2.  Social  usefulness.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
that  as  ye  were  a  curse  among  the  heathen,  0  house  of  Judah,  and  house  of  Ismel 
[comprehending  the  whole  of  the  Jewish  people *]  ;  so  will  I  save  you,  and  ye  shall  be 
a  blessing."  The  expression,  "  a  curse  among  the  heathen,"  may  mean  either  that 
they  were  "cursed"  hy  the  heathen — objects  of  their  denunciation — or  that  they  were 
a  curse  to  the  heathen  by  the  influence  of  their  corrupt  example.  The  latter  seems  to 
me  the  most  likely  idea.  (See  another  explanation  of  the  phrase  in  the  Exposition.) 
The  whole  of  the  Jewish  people,  prior  to  the  Capiivily — with  a  few  exceptions — 
were  sunk  into  almost  the  lowest  depths  of  moral  corruption.  But  now  it  is 
promised  that  on  the  resumption  of  the  great  duty  which  Heaven  had  enjoined 
upon  them,  they  should  be  a  "blessing."     So  it  ever  is;  the  disobedient  are  a  curse 

>  The  "house  of  Israel,"  or  ten  tribes,  as  distinguished  from  the  "house  of  Judah," 
shared  ia  the  happy  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy.  It  follows  that  they  also  returned  t« 
Palestine  in  the  very  days  to  which  it  refers  (Henderson). 


JH.  Till.  1—23]  THE   BOOK   OF   ZECHABTAH.  81 

to  any  community;  the  obedient  are  evermore  a  blessing.  "No  man  liveth  to 
himself."  We  must  either  bless  or  curse  our  race.  3.  Divine  favour.  "  For  thus 
■aith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  As  I  thought  to  punish  yon,  when  your  fathers  proyoked  me 
to  wrath,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  I  repented  not :  so  again  have  I  thought  in  these 
days  to  do  well  unto  Jerusalem  and  to  the  bouse  of  Judah:  fear  ye  not."  Where 
there  was  Diviue  displeasure  there  would  be  Divine  favour. 

CoNOLUSlON.  On  these  two  grounds  men  may  always  be  urged  to  duty.  Duty 
neglected  biing.s  misery  on  a  people;  duty  resumed  and  faithfully  prosecuted  will 
utterly  reverse  the  experience,  turn  the  distressing  into  the  joyous,  the  destitution  into 
abundance,  the  discordant  into  the  harmonious,  the  pernicious  into  the  beneficent. 
Listen,  then,  to  the  voice  of  Heaven  I  "  Tlius  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts;  Let  your  hands 
be  strong,"  etc.— D.  T. 

Vers.  16 — 23. — A  universal  revival  of  genuine  religion.  "  These  are  the  things 
that  ye  shall  do ;  Speak  ye  every  man  the  truth  to  his  neighbour,"  etc.  The  whole  of 
this  paragraph  may  be  taken  as  setting  forth  a  universal  revival  of  genuine  religion  ; 
and,  looking  at  it  in  this  light,  we  have  here  two  things  :  the  essential  prerequisites} 
and  the  signal  manifestations  of  a  universal  revival  of  genuine  religion. 

I.  The  essential  pbb[{EQUIsitks.  We  discover  in  these  verses  four  prerequisites 
or  preparatories  for  a  universal  revival  of  genuine  religiou.  1.  Tltere  must  he  truth- 
fulness in  speech.  "  These  are  the  things  which  ye  shall  do ;  Sjicak  ye  every  man  the 
truth  to  his  neighbour."  Truthful  speech  is  somewhat  rare  in  all  social  circles,  and  in 
all  departments  of  life.  Fallacious  statements  abound  in  markets,  senates,  courts,  and 
even  families.  Men  are  constantly  deceiving  one  another  by  words.  It  is  not  so  easy 
a  matter  to  speak  trutiifully  as  one  might  think.  To  speak  is  easy  enough ;  but  to 
speak  truthfully  is  often  very  difiSoult.  Truthful  speaking  involves  two  things.  (1) 
Sincerity.  To  speak  a  true  thing  insincerely  is  not  to  speak  truthfully.  A  man  must 
conscientiously  believe  that  what  he  speaks  is  true,  before  he  can  be  credited  with 
veracity.  There  is  more  truthful  speaking  in  the  man  who  is  telling  a  falsehood 
eincerely  than  there  is  in  the  man  who  is  telling  the  truth  in  insincerity.  (2)  Accuracy. 
A  man  may  speak  with  sincerity,  and  yet,  from  ignorance  or  mistake,  may  not  speak 
according  to  fact;  and  unless  he  speaks  according  to  fact,  he  can  scarcely  be  said  to 
speak  truthfully.  His  speech  unintentionally  conveys  falsehood.  Hence,  truthful 
speaking  requires  a  strong  sense  of  right, — and  an  adequate  acquaintance  with  the  sub- 
jects of  the  speech.  ■  Considerable  effort  is  herein  demanded — effort  to  discipline  the 
conscience  and  to  enlighten  the  judgment.  But  difficult  as  truth-speaking  is,  it  is 
incumbent.  "  Every  man  should  be  swift  to  hear,  but  slow  to  speah."  2.  There  must 
he  rectitude  in  conduct.  "  Execute  the  judgment  of  truth  and  peace  in  your  gates." 
In  the  East  the  courts  of  justice  were  held  at  the  gates  of  the  city ;  and  perhaps  the 
primary  reference  here  is  to  the  pronouncing  of  judgment  on  cases  that  were  righteous 
and  tended  to  peace.  But  rectitude  of  life  is  even  more  important  and  urgent  than 
rectitude  in  judgment.  In  fact,  scarcely  can  a  man  be  morally  qualified  to  sit  as  a 
judge  in  a  court  of  justice  who  is  not  righteous  in  all  his  life  and  conduct ;  and  yet, 
«las !  it  is  not  uncommon,  even  here  in  England,  to  have  men  of  the  lowest  morality 
enthroned  on  the  bench  of  justice.  The  great  law  of  social  life  is,  "  Whatsoever  ye 
would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them."  3.  There  must  he  benevo- 
lence in  feeling.  "  Let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  in  your  hs  arts  against  his  neighbour." 
We  must  not  only  keep  our  hands  from  evil,  but  we  must  watch  over  our  hearts  that 
they  imagine  not  any  evil  against  our  neighbour.  Mischief  must  be  crushed  in  the 
embryo.  "  Charity  thinketh  no  evil,"  and  this  charity  must  be  cultivated.  4.  Then 
must  he  abhorrence  of  falsehood.  "Love  no  false  oath."  If  the  oath  is  false,  whether 
sworn  by  others  or  yourself,  do  not  bind  yourself  to  it,  recoil  from  it  with  horror  anil 
abomination.  Don't  espouse  a  falsehood  because  it  is  sworn  to;  nay,  repudiate  it  the 
more  resolutely  and  indignantly.  A  strong  reason  is  here  assigned  for  a  practical 
respect  to  all  these  injunctions ;  ^it  is  this — God  abhors  the  opposites.  "  For  all  these 
are  things  that  I  hate,  saith  the  Lord "  (see  Prov.  vi.  19).  Whatever  God  hates,  we 
ihould  hate. 

II.  The  sisnaIi  manifestations.  It  is  suggested  that  where  these  prerequisites 
are  found,  i.e.  where  a  revival  takes  place,  three  things  are  manifest.     1.  An  increased 


88  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHAEIAH.  [oh.  viii.  1—23. 

pleaswe  in  religious  ordinancei.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  The  fast  of  the 
fourth  month,  and  the  fast  of  the  fifth,  and  the  fast  of  the  seventh,  and  the  fast  of  the 
tenth,  shall  be  to  the  house  of  Judah  joy  and  gladness,  and  cheerful  feasts."  "  The  fast 
of  the  fourth  month  was  on  account  of  the  taking  of  Jerusalem  (Jer.  xxxix.  2 ;  liL 
6 — ^7) ;  that  of  the  tenth  was  in  commemoration  of  the  commencement  of  the  siege 

SJer.  lii.  4).  The  Jews  are  distinctly  informed  that  these  fasts  should  be  turned  into 
estivals  of  joy  "  (Henderson).  The  idea  is,  perhaps,  that  these  fast-days  are  no  longer 
seasons  of  mourning  and  penitential  confession,  but  seasons  of  rejoicing.  The  first 
sign  of  a  true  revival  of  religion,  in  an  individual  or  a  community,  is  a  new  and  happy 
interest  in  the  ordinances  of  religion.  2.  A  deep  practical  concern  for  the  spiritual 
interests  of  the  race.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  It  shall  yet  come  to  pass,  that 
there  shall  come  people,  and  the  inhabitants  of  many  cities :  and  the  inhabitants  of  one 
city  shall  go  to  another,  saying.  Let  us  go  speedily  to  pray  before  the  Lord,  and  to 
seek  the  Lord  of  hosts :  I  will  go  also."  There  will  be  a  mutual  excitation  amongst 
the  people  to  seek  the  one  true  and  living  God.  Not  only  shall  the  inhabitants  of  one 
house  go  to  another  house,  but  the  inhabitants  of  one  city  shall  go  to  another  city  and 
say,  "  Let  us  go  speedily  to  pray  before  the  Lord."  "  Speedily ; "  there  is  no  time  to  be 
lost;  religion  is  for  all,  and  for  all  an  urgent  duty.  3.  A  universal  desire  to  be 
idemtified  with  the  people  of  Qod.  "  In  those  days  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  ten  men 
[a  definite  number  for  an  indefinite  multitude,  indicating  many  rather  than  a  few] 
shall  take  hold  out  of  all  languages  of  the  nations,  even  shall  take  hold  of  the  skirt  of 
him  that  is  a  Jew."  I'he  Jew  (the  representative  of  the  people  of  God),  to  him  men 
shall  go,  they  shall  lay  hold  of  the  "  skirt "  of  his  garment — an  expression  conveying 
the  idea  either  of  anxious  entreaty  or  conscious  inferiority.  Dr.  Henderson  says,  in 
relation  to  this,  "  The  prophecy  is  generally  regarded  as  having  respect  to  something 
yet  future,  and  is  often  interpreted  of  the  instiumentality  of  the  Jews  when  converted 
in  effecting  the  conversion  of  the  world.  I  can  find  no  such  reference  in  tlie  passage. 
'  Jerusalem '  cannot  be  understood  otherwise  than  literally,  just  as  the  term  '  Jew'  is  to  be 
so  understood ;  but  according  to  our  Lord's  doctrine  respecting  the  new  dispensation, 
that  city  is  no  longer  the  place  where  men  are  exclusively  to  worship  the  Father  (John 
iv.  21 — 23).  Incense  and  a  pure  offering  are  now  presented  to  his  Name  in  every  place 
where  his  people  assemble  in  the  name  of  Jesus  and  with  a  view  to  his  glory  (Mai.  L 
10,  11).  it  was  otherwise  before  the  advent  of  Christ.  Jerusalem  was  the  place 
which  Jehovah  had  chosen  to  put  his  Name  there ;  and  i;hither  all  his  true  worshippers 
were  expected  to  come  to  the  great  festivals,  in  whatever  country  they  might  reside. 
Thus  the  treasurer  of  Candace  went  all  the  way  from  Abyssinia  (Acts  viii.  27),  and 
thus  numbers  from  all  parts  of  the  Boman  empire  assembled  in  that  city  at  the  first 
Pentecost  after  our  Saviour's  resurrection.  As  the  Hellenistic  Jews  and  the  Grentile 
proselytes  travelled  along  in  companies,  they  could  not  but  excite  the  curiosity  of  the 
pagans  through  whose  countries  and  cities  they  passed ;  and,  celebrated  as  the  metro 
polls  of  Judiea  had  become  for  the  favours  conferred  upon  it  by  some  of  the  greatest 
monarchs  of  the  times  immediately  gone  by,  and  for  the  prosperity  and  warlike  prowess 
of  the  Jewish  people,  it  was  impossible  that  it  should  not  attract  the  attention  of  the 
surrounding  nations  to  the  character  and  claims  of  the  God  who  was  there  adored,  and 
who  accorded  such  blessings  to  his  worshippers.  Men,  for  ages,  had  to  go  to  the  Jew 
for  the  true  religion ;  the  Gentiles  in  the  apostolic  times  received  it  from  the  Jew ; 
Christ  and  his  apostles  were  Jews;  but  in  these  times  the  Jews  have  to  come  to  the 
Gentiles  for  the  true  religion.  Still,  inasmuch  as  the  Bible  is  a  book  of  the  Jews, 
Jewish  histories,  poetries,  moralities,  etc.,  and  inasmuch  as  the  grand  Hero  of  the  book 
was  a  Jew,  it  will,  perhaps,  ever  be  true  that  all  nations  shall  take  hold  of  the  Jew  in 
order  to  '  seek  the  Lord '  with  success." 

Conclusion.  When  will  this  universal  revival  of  religion  take  place?  The  signs 
are  scarcely  visible  anywhere.  We  can  only  hasten  it  by  attending  to  the  prerequisites- 
truthfulness  in  speech,  rectitude  in  conduct,  benevoleaca  in  feeling,  and  ftbhorienca  of 
CUMhootL— D.  T. 


OH.  IX,  1 17. J 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Ver.   1— ch.    xiv.    21.— Part    III.    The 

Futube  of  the  Powbbs  of  the  World 
ast  of  the  kingdom  of  qod. 

Ver.  1 — oh.  xi.  17. — A.  The  First  Burden. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — §  1.  To  prepare  the  land 
for  Israel,  and  to  prove  God's  care  for  his 
people,  the  neighbouring  heathen  shall  be 
chastised,  while  Israel  shall  dwell  in  safety 
and  independence. 

Ver.  1. — The  harden  (see  note  on  Nah. 
L  1).  (On  the  cireumatanoes  connected  with 
this  prophecy,  see  Introduction,  §  I.)  De- 
structive critics  attribute  oh.  ix. — xi.  to  an 
anonymous  prophet,  whose  utterances  have 
been  by  m'stake  appended  to  the  genuine 
work  of  Zeohariah.  We  have  given  reasons 
for  disputing  this  conclusion  in  the  Intro- 
duction, §  II.  In  (upon)  the  land  of  Hadraoh. 
This  expression  is  found  nowhere  else,  and 
has  occasioned  great  trouble  to  the  commen- 
tators. But  Assyrian  inscriptions  have 
cleared  away  the  difficulty,  and  shown  that 
it  was  the  name  of  a  city  and  district  near 
Damascus,  called  in  the  monuments  Hata- 
raltha  ot  Hatarilca  (see  Schrader, '  Keilinsclir. 
and  das  Alt.  Test.,'  p.  453).  Expeditions 
against  this  place  are  mentioned  as  occurring 
in  various  years,  e.g.  b.o.  772,  765,  755  (see 
G.  Smith,  'Assyrian  Canon,'  pp.  46,  etc.,  63; 
'  Eeoords  of  the  Past,'  v.  iti ;  Schrader,  pp. 
482,  484,  etc.,  2nd  edit.).  Damascus  shall 
be  the  rest  thereof.  The  "buiden"  shall 
light  upon  Damascus  in  wrath,  and  settle 
tlicre  (comp.  Ezek.  v.  13).  This  district 
should  be  the  iirst  to  suffer.  The  LXX. 
has,  Ka!  Aa/iacTKoS  Svala  airoS,  "In  the 
land  of  Sedrach  and  Damascus  is  hia 
eacriflce."  When  the  eyes  of  man,  etc.; 
literally,  for  to  Jehovah  (is,  or  will  he)  the 
eye  of  man  and  of  aM  the  tribes  of  Israel. 
This  gives  the  reason  why  Hadrach  and 
Damascus  are  thus  united.  Because  Je- 
hovah has  his  eye  on  men  and  on  Israel. 
Septuagint,  "  because  the  Lord  looketh  upon 
men  "  (comp.  ch.  iv.  10 ;  and  ver.  8  below). 
We  may  then  translate,  "  For  to  Jehovah  is 
an  eye  over  man,"  etc.  He  sees  their  evil- 
doings  and  their  oppression  of  Israel,  and 
therefore  the  judgment  falls  upon  them 
(oomp.  Jer.  xxxii.  19;.  The  Authorized  Ver- 
sion intimates  a  conversion  of  the  Gentiles, 
of  which,  however,  the  context  says  nothing ; 
and  there  is  no  sense  in  saying  that  judgment 
shall  fall  upon  a  particular  nation  when,  or 
because,  the  eyes' of  all  men  look  to  the  Lord. 
Wright  explains  thus :  When  the  wrath  of 
God   falls  on   Damascus,  the  eyes  of  the 


heathen,  as  well  as  those  of  Israel,  will  look 
to  the  Lord,  and  they  will  marvel  at  the 
judgment  and  the  close  fulfilment  of  the 
prediction.  This  would  be  a  very  sound 
and  probable  exposition  of  the  passage  if 
the  expression,  "the  eye  of  man  being 
towards  Jehovah,"  can  mean  that  man 
marvels  at  his  doings.  All  the  tribes  of 
Israel.  God  watches  over  them  to  guard 
them  from  evil  (Dent.  xi.  12;  Ezra  v.  5; 
Pa.  xxxiii.  18 J. 

Ver.  2. — And  Hamath  also  shall  border 
thereby ;  Euvised  Version,  and  Hamath  also 
which  bordereth  thereon.  Hamath,  which  is 
near  unto  Damascus,  shall  shnre  in  the 
Divine  judgment.  The  Authorized  Version 
probably  means  that  Hamath  shall  be  the 
companion  of  Dam»scus  in  punishment. 
(For  Hamath,  see  note  on  Amos  vi.  2.) 
These  Syrian  towns,  as  well  as  those  below 
in  Plioenicia  and  Philistia,  shall  be  visited, 
because  they  were  all  once  included  in  the 
territory  promised  to  Israel  (see  Gen.  xv. 
18;  Exod.  xxiii.  31;  Numb,  xxxiv.  2—12; 
Deut.  xi.  24;  and  comp.  2  Sam.  viii.  6,  etc. ; 
1  Kings  iv.  21 ;  viii.  65 ;  2  Kings  xiv.  25). 
The  judgment  was  inflicted  by  Alexander  the 
Great  after  the  battle  of  Issus,  B.o.  333,  when 
Damascus  was  betrayed  into  liis  hands  and 
plundered  of  all  itseiiormous  treasures.  Tymi 
and  Zidon.  Tyre  was  taken  after  a  siege  of 
seven  months,  its  walls  were  demolished,  its 
houses  burnt,  ten  thousand  of  its  defenders 
were  massacred,  the  women  and  children  sold 
as  slaves;  and  it  never  rose  to  greatness 
again.  Zidon,  originally  tlie  chief  city  of 
the  country,  h&A  long  been  eclipsed  by  its 
daugliter,  Tyre ;  it  submitted  to  Alexander 
without  a  struggle.  Xhough  it  be  very  wise ; 
or,  because  she  it  very  wise.  The  pronoun 
refers  to  Tyre,  the  mention  of  Zidon  being, 
as  it  were,  parenthetical.  In  spite  of,  or 
because  of,  its  boasted  wisdom,  Tyre  should 
suffer  heavy  punishment.  The  wisdom  of 
Tyre  is  spoken  of  in  Ezek.  xxviii.  3,  4. 
Wright,  as  the  LXX.,  makes  the  clause  refer 
to  both  cities,  "  though  they  be  very  wise." 
Vulgate,  Assumpserunt  quippe  tibi  sapientia/m 
valde. 

Ver.  3. — Tyrus  (Zor)  did  build  herself  a 
strong  hold  (mazor).  Wright  endeavours  to 
imitate  the  paronomasia,  "Tyre  built  for 
herself  a  tower."  It  was  in  her  strong 
fortiScations  and  her  amassing  of  riches 
that  Tyre  showed  her  worldly  wisdom. 
The  city  was  built  partly  on  the  mai  iland, 
and  partly  on  an  island  nearly  half  a  mile 
distant,  which  rose  abruptly  out  of  the 
water  in  rocky  precipices,  and  was  sur- 
rounded with  walls  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet 
high.  The  insular  portion  of  the  town  waa 
that  which  so  long  mocked  the  Macedonian'! 


M 


THE   BOOK   OF   ZEOHAHIAH. 


LCH.  IX.  1 — 11 


utmost  efforts,  which  were  only  aaocoBsful 
when  be  bad  united  the  island  to  the 
mainland  by  erecting  an  enormous  mole 
between  them.  This  causeway  has  now 
become  an  isthmus  of  some  half-mile  in 
width,  owing  to  accumulations  of  sand  and 
d€brii.  As  the  dust  (oomp.  2  Ohron.  ix.  27  j 
Job  xxTli.  16). 

Ver.  4. — Will  cast  her  out;  will  take 
potteeaion  of  her;  i.e.  will  conquer  her  by 
the  hands  of  her  enemies,  as  Josh.  viii.  7; 
xvii.  12.  Septuagint,  K\ripovofi'fi<rei,  "will 
inherit;"  Vulgate,  poesidebit;  Ewald  and 
Hiteig  render,  "will  impoverish  her." 
Will  smite  her  power  in  the  sea.  "  Power  " 
here  includes  all  that  made  Tyre  proud 
and  confident — her  riches,  her  fleets,  her 
trade,  her -fortifications.  God  declares  that 
she  shall  be  smitten  there  as  she  stood  in  the 
midst  of  the  sea,  which  formed  her  bulwark, 
and  which  should  soon  dash  over  her  ruins. 
The  LXX.  translates,  "  shall  smite  into  the 
sea."  Zeohariah  seems  here  to  have  a  remi- 
niscence of  Bzek.  xxvii.  32, "  What  city  islike 
Tyrus,  like  the  destroyed  in  the  midst  of  the 
sea?"  (comp.  Ezek.  xxvi.  4).  With  fire 
(comp.  Amos  i.  10).  The  city  was  burned 
by  Alexander  (see  note  on  ver.  2.  The  siege 
is  narrated  by  Arrian,  ii.  15 — 24;  Quint. 
Curt.,  iv.  2,  etc. ;  Diod.  Sic,  xvii.  46,  etc). 

Ver.  5. — ^Ashkelon  shall  see  it.  The  ruin 
of  so  mighty  a  city  as  Tyre  naturally  filled 
neighbouring  people  with  dismay.  The 
prophet  directs  his  attention  to  Philistia, 
and  threatens  its  chief  cities.  The  cities 
are  enumerated  in  the  same  order  as  in 
Jer.  XXV.  20.  Gath  is  omitted,  as  in  Amus 
i.  6^8  and  Zeph.  ii.  4.  It  seems  never  to 
have  recovered  its  destruction  by  Uzziah 
(2  Chron.  xxvi.  6).  (For  Ashkelon,  Gaza, 
and  Ekron,  see  note  on  Amos  i.  6.)  Her 
expectation  shall  be  ashamed.  The  hope  of 
aid  from  Tyre  shall  not  be  fulfilled.  After 
the  fall  of  Tyre,  Alexander  continued  his 
march  southwards  towards  Egypt,  subduing 
the  cities  on  his  way.  The  siege  of  Gaza 
delayed  him  some  months;  and  when  it 
was  taken,  it  shared  the  treatment  of  Tyre. 
Its  governor,  one  Batis,  a  eunuch,  « as  tied 
alive  to  the  conqueror's  chariot,  and  dragged 
round  the  walls,  iu  cruel  imitation  of  the 
fate  of  Hector.  The  king  shall  perish  from 
Gaza.  No  particular  king  is  meant ;  but  the 
preiliction  says  that  henceforward  no  king 
should  reign  in  Gaza.  In  contrast  with  the 
Eastern  policy  of  allowing  conquered  nations 
to  retain  their  own  rulers  as  tributary 
sovereigns,  Alexander  always  deposed  or 
slew  reigning  monarchs,  and  consolidated 
his  empire  by  replacing  them  with  governors 
of  his  own.  The  various  chastisements  are 
meted  out  by  the  prophet  among  the  various 
dties,  though  they  equally  apply  to  all. 

Ver.  6'. — A  bastard.     Tli"  word  (mamzpr) 


ooonrs  In  Dent,  xxlil.  2  (8,  HebrewX  whers 
it  may  possibly  mean  "a  stranger."  It  it 
generally  considered  to  signify  one  whose 
birth  has  a  blemish  in  it — one  born  of  incest 
or  adultery.  In  Deuteronomy  the  LXK. 
renders,  in  ir6pyns,  "  one  of  harlot-birth ; " 
here,  i.\\oyev^s,  "foreigner."  The  Vulgate 
has  separator,  which  is  explained  as  mean- 
ing either  the  Lord,  who  as  Judge  divides 
the  just  from  the  unjust,  or  the  Conqueror, 
who  divides  the  spoil  and  assigns  to  captives 
their  fate.  Here  it  doubtless  signifies  "a 
bastard  race"  (as  the  Bevised  Vertiou 
margin  translates);  a  rabble  of  aliens  shall 
inhabit  Ashdod,  which  shall  lose  its  own 
native  population.  The  Targum  explains 
it  differently,  considering  that  by  the  ex- 
pression is  meant  that  Ashdod  shall  be 
inhabited  by  Israelites,  who  are  deemed 
"strangers"  by  the  Philistines.  Ashdod 
(see  note  on  Amos  i.  8).  The  pride.  All 
in  which  they  prided  themselves.  This 
sums  up  the  prophecy  against  the  several 
Philistine  cities.  Their  very  nationality 
shall  be  lost. 

Ver.  7. — Personifying  Philistia,  the  pro- 
phet declares  that  she  shall  cease  to  practise 
idolatry,  and  shall  be  incorporated  in  Israel. 
I  will  take  away  his  blood  out  of  his  month. 
This  refers  to  the  practice  of  drinking  the 
blood  of  sacrifices  as  an  act  of  worship, 
or  of  eating  the  victims  with  the  blood — a 
practice  strictly  forbidden  to  the  Israel- 
ites (see  Lev.  iii  17;  vii.  26;  xvii.  10, 
12;  and  comp.  Gen.  ix.  4).  Abominations. 
Sacrifices  offered  to  idols,  and  afterwards 
eaten.  The  two  clauses  intimate  the  entire 
abolition  of  idolatry.  Many  see  in  this 
prediction  a  reference  to  the  doings  of  the  ' 
Maccabees  ;  how,  e.g.,  Judas  destroyed  the 
altars  and  idols  in  Azotus  (1  Maco,  v.  68) ; 
Jonathan  again  took  that  city,  and  burned 
itand  the  neighbouringtown3,and,  besieging 
Ashkelon,  was  received  with  great  honour 
by  the  inhabitants,  and  confirmed  in  the 
possession  of  this  place  and  Ekron  (1  Maeo. 
X.  84,  etc.);  and  Simon  stormed  Gaza 
(?Gazara,  a  place  near  Ashdod),  cleansed 
the  houses  of  idols,  "put  all  uncleanness 
out  of  it,  and  placed  snch  men  there  as 
would  keep  the  Law  "  (1  Mace.  xiii.  47,  48). 
But  though  such  events  partially  fulfil 
the  prophecy,  the  seer  looks  forward  to  a 
greater  issue,  and  in  these  comparatively 
petty  details  beholds  the  working  of  the 
great  principle  that  all  nations  shall  be 
subdued  to  the  faith.  He  that  remaineth, 
even  he,  shall  be  for  our  God;  better,  he  too 
shall  he  left  (or,  a  remnant)  for  our  God. 
The  Philistine  shall  bccomB  a  choice  and 
elect  remnant  unto  the  God  of  the  Israelites, 
and  no  longer  regarded  as  alien  and  impure. 
As  a  governor;  Septuagint,  x'^^opxos,  "head 
over  a  thousand,"  which  the  wnrrl   nllwTi 


OH.  IX.  1—17.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHAEIAH. 


91 


means  (ch.  xii.  S,  6).  It  is  used  of  the 
chiefs  of  Edom  in  Gen.  xzxvi.  15,  16, 
etc.,  where  the  Authorized  Version  gives 
"  dukes."  The  tribes  of  Israel  were  divided 
into  thousands,  consisting  of  families,  each 
of  which  was  held  together  by  closer  affinities 
than  the  mere  tribal  bond  (see  note  on  Mieah 
V.  2).  The  meaning  is  that  the  Philistine 
shall  be  admitted  into  the  commonwealth  of 
Israel  as  one  of  her  chiefs.  Ekron  as  a 
Jebnsite.  "Elcron"  is  equivalent  to  "the 
Bkronite,"  who  again  stands  in  the  place 
of  all  the  Philistines.  The  Jebusites  were 
the  ancient  possessors  of  Zion,  who  held 
their  position  till  the  days  of  David,  and, 
when  at  last  conquered  by  him  (2  Sam. 
V.  6,  etc.),  were  incorporated  into  his  nation, 
and,  as  we  may  infer  from  Araunah's  conduct, 
adopted  his  religion  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  22; 
1  Chron.  xxi.  23).  God  promises  here  that 
the  Philistines,  like  the  Jebusites,  shall  be 
absorbed  into  the  Jewish  Cliurch.  Mr. 
Drake  ('Speaker's  Commentary,'  in  loo.) 
curiously  renders,  "  He  shall  be  as  Eleph 
(Josh,  xviii.  28)  in  Judah,  and  Ekron  as 
Jebusi ,"  explaining  that  the  cities  of  Philistia 
were  to  be  incorporated  into  Judsaa.  The 
conquests  of  Alexander  conduced  to  the  con- 
version of  the  heathen  and  their  reception 
into  the  Church  of  God;  and  the  general 
principle  enunciated  by  all  the  prophets 
was  thus  abundantly  confirmed.  But  it  is 
not  easy  to  discover  the  exact  historical 
fulfilment  of  the  latter  part  of  this  prophecy, 
concerning  the  merging  of  the  Philistines 
in  the  Jewish  nation.  Josephus  ('Ant.,' 
xiii.  1.5.  4)  tells  us  that,  about  B.C.  100,  the 
Jews  held  most  of  their  cities,  destroying 
some  whose  inhabitants  refused  to  become 
proselytes.  In  the  time  of  our  Lord,  by 
reason  of  intermarriage  and  social  inter- 
course, the  Philistines  had  ceased  to  be 
regarded  as  a  separate  nation ;  and  a  little 
later  Philistia,  far  from  being  considered  as 
alien  and  hostile,  under  the  form  Palestine, 
gave  its  name  to  the  whole  conntry,  Christi- 
anity, too,  made  rapid  progress  in  this  dis- 
trict, so  that  the  psalmist's  words  received 
herein  a  fulfilment,  "  Behold  Philistia,  and 
Tyre,  with  Cush ;  this  one  « as  born  there  " 
(Ps.  Ixxxvii.  4). 

Ver.  8. — While  the  heathen  world  suffers 
the  judgment  of  God,  he  protects  his  own 
people.  I  will  encamp  about  {for  the 
protection  of)  my  house.  God's  bouse,  or 
family,  is  the  kingdom^nd  Chuj  oh  of  Israel, 
as  Hos.  viii.  1.  Septuagint,  'Tttoo-t^o-o/ioi  riji 
oXKif  fj.ov  aviiTTrtiio,  "I  will  erect  a  fortifica- 
tion for  my  house."  Because  of  the  army. 
It  may  also  be  translated  "against,"  or 
"from;"  i.e.  to  defend  it  from  the  hostile 
army.  Others,  pointing  differently,  render, 
"as  a  garrison,"  or  "rampart."  Because  of 
(agaimt)  him  that  passeth  hj,  etc.    Against 


all  hostile  attacks.  The  phrase,  "  him  that 
passeth  by  and  him  that  returneth,"  is  used 
of  an  enemy  making  incursions,  or  attacking 
at  various  points  (see  note  on  oh.  vii.  14). 
The  Vulgate  gives  the  whole  clause  thus : 
Gircumdaho  domum  meam  ex  his,  qui  militant 
mihi  euntes  et  revertentes,  "I  will  defend  my 
house  with  a  guard  chosen  from  those  who 
serve  me  and  do  my  will,"  i.e.  angels.  But 
this  seems  far  from  the  signification  of  the 
Hebrew.  Pusey  restricts  the  meaning  to 
the  proceedings  of  Alexander,  who  pa.^sed 
by  Judsea  on  his  way  to  Egypt,  and  returned 
by  the  same  route,  without  doing  any  injury 
to  Jerusalem.  Here  comes  in  the  Talmudio 
story  related  by  Josephus  ('Ant.,'  xi.  8). 
The  Jews  "  re|jaid  the  protection  of  Persia 
with  a  devoted  loyalty,  which  prompted 
them  to  refuse  the  demand  of  submission 
made  by  Alexander  during  the  siege  of 
Tyre.  He  marched  to  chastise  them  after 
the  fall  of  Gaza,  and  the  beautiful  city  had 
already  risen  before  his  view  on  the  hill  of 
Zion,  when  he  found  the  high  priest  Jaddua 
waiting  his  approach,  at  the  watch-station 
of  Sapha,  clad  in  his  robes  of  gold  and 
purple,  and  followed  by  a  train  of  priests 
and  citizens  in  pure  white.  The  conqueror 
bowed  in  reverence  to  the  Holy  Name  upon 
the  high  priest's  frontlet;  and,  being  asked 
by  Parmeuio  the  reason  of  his  conduct,  said 
that  in  a  dream  at  Dium,  he  had  seen  the 
God  of  Jaddua,  who  encouraged  him  to  pass 
over  into  Asia,  and  promised  him  success. 
Then  entering  Jerusalem,  he  offered  sacrifice 
in  the  temple,  heard  the  prophecy  of  Daniel 
about  himself,  and  granted  certain  privileges 
to  all  the  Jews  throughout  his  empire.  The 
desire  to  hunour  a  shrine  so  celebrated  as 
the  Jewish  temple  is  quite  in  accordance 
with  the  conduct  of  Alexander  at  Ilium  and 
Ephesus,  Gordium  and  Tyre.  The  privileges 
he  is  said  to  have  conferred  upon  the  Jews 
were  enjoyed  under  his  successors,  and 
some  minor  matters  have  been  adduced  in 
confirmation  of  the  story.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  classical  writers  are  entirely 
silent  on  the  subject,  and  the  details  of 
Josephus  involve  grave  historical  incon- 
sistencies. It  seems  not  an  unre>isouable 
conjecture  that  the  story  is  an  embellish- 
ment of  some  incident  that  occurred  when 
the  high  priest  came  to  Gaza"to  tender  the 
submission  of  the  Jews.  But  we  must  not 
dismiss  it  without  a  remark  on  the  va^t 
influence  which  the  conquests  of  Alexander 
had  in  bringing  the  Jews  into  closer  relations 
with  the  rest  of  Asia,  and  so  preparing  them 
to  fulfil  their  ultimate  destiny  as  Christians  " 
(P.  Smith,  'History  of  the  World,'  i.  60, 
etc.).  Oppressor.  The  word  is  used  for 
"taskmaster"  in  Exod.  iii.  7.  Septuagint, 
ifeXaivav,  "  one  who  drives  away ; "  Vul- 
gate, eacactor.    This  latter  rendering  would 


92 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZEOHARIAEL 


[CH.  IX.  1 — 17. 


imply  that  Israel  would  no  longer  have  to 
pay  tribute  to  foreign  nations,  but  Bhould 
henceforward  be  independent.  For  now  hare 
I  Been  with  mine  eyes.  It  is  as  though, 
doling  Israel's  calamities,  Ood  had  not 
looked  upon  her;  but  now  he  notices  her 
condition,  and  interposes  for  her  succour 
(comp.  Ezod.  ii.  25 ;  iii.  7,  9 ;  Acts  vii.  31). 
This  ia  done  by  sending  the  personage 
mentioned  in  the  following  section. 

Yen.  9,  iO. — §  2.  Then  shall  the  righteout 
King  come  to  Zion  in  lowly  fashion,  and  in- 
augurate a  kingdom  of  peace. 

Ver.  9. — ^The  prophet  invites  Jerusalem 
to  le^olee  at  the  coming  of  the  promised 
salvation  in  the  Person  of  her  King ;  no 
mighty  earthly  potentate  and  conqueror,  like 
Alexander  the  Great,  but  one  of  different 
fashion  (comp.  Zeph.  iii.  14).  Thy  King 
Cometh  unto  thee.  St.  Mattliew  (xxi.  5)  and 
St.  John  (xii.  15)  see  a  fulfilment  of  this 
prophecy  in  Christ's  triumphal  entry  into 
Jerusalem  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  in 
which  he  was  crucified.  All  attempts  to 
disprove  the  Messianic  import  of  this  passage 
have  been  unavailing.  Even  critics  who 
refer  this  part  of  Zechai  iah  (ch.  ix. — xi.)  to 
an  unknown  autlior  writing  in  the  time  of 
Hezekiah,  allow  that  it  is  replete  with 
Messianic  ideas,  and  can  be  applied  to  no 
hero  of  Jewish  story  or  event  of  Jewish 
history.  There  is  no  other  "King"  of 
Israel  to  whom  it  can  refer.  Our  blessed 
Lord  himself,  by  his  abnormal  actions  on 
Palm  Sunday,  plainly  assumed  the  part  of 
the  predicted  King,  and  meant  the  people 
to  recognize  in  him  the  promised  Messiah 
(see  the  full  discussion  of  the  subject  in 
Dr.  Pusey'H  notes,  pp.  556,  etc.).  Thy  King. 
A  king  of  tliine  own  race,  no  stranger,  but 
one  predestined  for  thee.  He  who  was  fore- 
told by  all  the  prophets,  who  was  to  occupy 
the  throne  of  David,  and  reign  for  ever 
(Ps.  ii.  6;  xlv.  1,  6,  7:  laa.  xxxii.  1). 
Unto  thee.  For  thy  good,  to  bless  thee 
(Isa.  ix.  6).  Just.  Bigbteous  in  character 
and  in  practice,  ruling  in  equity  (Ps.  Ixxii. 
1 — 4,  7;  Isa.  xi.  2 — 4).  Having  salvation; 
Septuagint,  ati(av,  "  saving."  Vulgate, 
salvator ;  so  the  Syriac  and  Ohaldee.  The 
genius  of  the  language  requires  the  parti- 
ciple to  be  taken  passively,  as  it  is  in  two 
other  passages  where  it  occurs  (Deut.  xxxiii. 
29;  Pa.  xxxiii.  16).  The  context  has 
seemed  to  some  to  demand  tliat  it  be  under- 
stood in  an  active  sense,  thus  contrasting 
him  who  came  to  tave  with  Ihe  haughty 
Grecian  conqueror,  whose  progress  was 
marked  by  blondshed.  But  the  usual  mean- 
ing of  the  word  affords  a  satisfiictory  sense. 
The  King  who  comes  is  "  saved,"  endowed 
with  salvation,  either  as  being  protected  and 


upheld  by  God  (Pg.  xviii.  50;  ox.  1,2,  S; 
lea.  xlii.  1 ;  xliz.  8),  or  as  being  victoriooa 

and  so  able  to  aid  his  people.  In  tliis  latter 
view,  the  active  sense  is  Included  in  the 
passive.  His  own  deliverance  is  a  sure  sign 
of  the  deliverance  of  his  people.  Lowly ; 
Septuagint,  irpoiis,  "  meek ; "  Vulgate,  pau- 
per—meek  and  lowly,  as  Christ  himself  says 
(Matt.  xi.  29),  far  removed  from  warlike  pomp 
and  worldly  greatness.  The  word  is  also 
rendered  "  afflicted,"  and  would  then  be  in 
accordance  with  the  description  in  Isa.  Iii. 
13 — liii.  5;  Ps.  xxii.  6.  Biding  upon  an 
ass.  In  illustration  of  his  poor  or  afSicted 
estate ;  it  is  this,  and  not  merely  the  peace- 
fulness  of  his  reign,  that  is  meant  by  this 
symbolical  action,  as  we  see  by  the  following 
clause,  where  the  youthfulness  of  the  animal 
is  the  point  enforced.  And  (even,  and  that) 
upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass ;  such  as  she- 
asses  bear,  and  one  not  trained ;  as  the 
evangelist  says,  "  whereon  never  man  sat." 
Christ  sat  upon  the  foal.  In  old  times 
judges  and  men  of  distinction  rode  upon 
asses  (Gen.  xxii.  3 ;  Judg.  v.  10 ;  x.  4) ;  but 
from^Solomon's  days  the  hoise  had  been  used, 
not  only  in  war,  but  on  all  state  occasions 
(Jer.  xvii.  25);  and  the  number  of  horses 
brought  back  on  the  return  from  Babylon 
is  specially  mentioned  (Ezra  ii.  66).  So  to 
predicate  of  a  King  that  he  would  come  to 
his  capital  ridiug,  not  on  a  war-horse,  but 
on  a  young,  unbroken  ass,  showed  at  once 
that  he  himself  was  not  to  be  considered  e 
victorious  general  or  a  worldly  potentate, 
and  that  his  kingdom  was  not  to  be  won  or 
maintained  by  carnal  arms.  This  is  signi- 
fied more  fully  in  the  following  verse,  v,  hich 
describes  the  character  and  extent  of  Mes- 
siah's kingdom. 

Ver.  10.— 1  will  out  off  the  chariot.  All 
the  apparatus  of  war  will  be  removed, 
Mesi-iah's  rule  being  not  establislicil  hy 
physical  force,  or  maintained  by  military 
defences.  The  Jews  seem  to  have  used  war- 
chariots  from  the  time  of  Solomon,  who,  we 
are  told,  had  fourteen  hundred  of  them 
(1  Kings  X.  26).  Ephraim  .  .  .  Jerusalem. 
The  former  term  denotes  the  kingdom  of  the 
ten  tribes ;  the  lalter,  thatof  Judah ;  the  two 
together  comprising  the  whole  Israelite 
nation.  From  the  use  of  these  terms  here  it 
cannot  be  concluded  that  the  author  wrote  at 
a  time  when  the  two  kingdoms  existed  side 
by  side.  In  the  first  place,  tlie  descrip- 
tion of  the  whole  people  is  given  poetically, 
and  must  not  be  takA  to  have  more  signi- 
ficance than  is  intended ;  and  secondly,  in 
ch.  viii.  13,;which  is  confessedly  post-exilian, 
the  "  house  of  Judah,"  and  the  "  house  of 
Israel"  are  di^tinguislied.  Dr.  Cheyne 
notes,  too,  that  in  Ezekiel  (xxxvii.  15—28), 
who  prophesied  during  the  Captivity,  the  ten 
tribes  are  distinguished  by  the  name  of 


OH.  IX.  1—17.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHARIAH. 


93 


Ephraim,  and  pertinently  asks  why  such 
term  may  not  be  also  used  by  one  wlio  wrote 
after  the  Captivity.  The  battle  bow  stands 
for  all  weapons  of  war.  That  Messiah's 
kingdom  should  be  peaceful  and  peace- 
bringing,  see  the  prophecies  (Pa.  Ixxii.  7 ; 
iBa.  ii.  4;  ix.  4 — 7  ;  comp.  Micah  v.  10,  11). 
He  shall  speak  peace  unto  the  heathen.  He 
will  extend  tliia  peace  to  all  the  world, 
teaching  the  heathen  to  receive  his  spiritual 
rule,  to  compose  tlieir  differences,  to  lay 
aside  their  arms,  and  live  as  one  united 
family  (comp.  Eph.  ii.  17).  From  sea  even 
to  sea.  Geographically,  the  phrase  means 
from  the  Dead  Sea  on  the  east  to  the  Medi- 
terranean on  the  west,  as  in  Exod.  xxiii.  31 
and  Ps.  Ixxii.  8,  from  whence  our  passage 
is  derived.  Poetically,  an  Eastern  sea,  per- 
haps, is  supposed  to  bound  that  side  of  the 
earth.  From  the  river  even  to  the  ends  of 
the  earth.  From  the  Euphrates  unto  the 
utmost  limits  of  the  world  (see  Amos  viii 
12;  Micah  vii.  12).  Both  expressions  ob- 
tain an  unlimited  signifiance,  and  show  the 
universal  extent  of  Messiah's  kingdom ;  for 
in  him,  according  to  the  promise  made  to 
Abraliam,  all  the  families  of  the  earth 
should  be  blessed. 

Vers.  11 — 17. — §  3.  AH  Israel,  united  into 
one  people,  shall  wage  succesefvl  war  against 
adversaries,  and  attain  to  high  glory,  and  in- 
crease largely  in  numbers. 

Ver.  11. — As  for  thee  also.  The  prophet 
addresBuB  the  daughter  of  Zion,  the  covenant 
people  (comp.  vers.  10,  13).  "Also  "  is  in- 
serted to  intimate  that  this  deliverance  is 
given  in  addition  to  the  blessings  promised 
in  the  two  preceding  verses.  All  who  are 
living  far  from  their  native  Zion  are  invited 
to  come  to  her  and  partake  of  her  good  things. 
By  (because  of)  the  blood  of  thy  covenant.  The 
covenant  is  tliat  made  at  Sinai,  sealed  and 
ratified  by  blood  (Exod.  xxiv.  4 — 8),  which 
still  held  good,  and  was  the  pledge  to  the 
nation  of  deliverance  and  help.  This  was  a 
token  of  that  everlasting  covenant  sealed 
with  the  blood  of  Christ,  by  wliich  God's 
people  are  delivered  from  the  bondage  of 
sin  (comp.  Matt.  xxvi.  28 ;  Heb.  ix.  15 ; 
X.  14—23;  xiii.  20).  I  have  sent  forth;  I 
$end  forth — the  prophetic  perfect.  The 
Greek  and  Latin  Versions  render,  "  thou 
sentest  forth,"  not  so  correctly.  Thy  prison- 
ers. Those  members  of  the  nation  who  were 
still  oppressed  or  captives  in  foreign  lands, 
as  Babylon  and  Egypt  (comp.  Obad.  20; 
Joel  iii.  6,  etc. ;  Amos  i.  6,  9,  etc.).  The 
pit  wherein  is  no  water.  "Pit,"  or  oistem, 
is  a  common  name  for  a  prison  (Gen.  xl. 
15;  Exod.  xii.  29;  Jer.  xxxvii.  16).  The 
absence  of  water  may  be  notified  either 
to  imply  that  the  toitniei  of  thirst  were 


added  to  the  horror  of  the  situation,  or  to 
intimate  that  the  prisoners  were  not  hope- 
lessly drowned  therein.  We  Christians  see 
in  this  paragraph  a  figure  of  the  redemption 
of  a  lost  world  by  the  blood  of  Christ. 

Ver.  12. — The  prophet  calls  on  the 
prisoners  to  avail  themselves  of  the  offered 
deliverance.  Tom  yon  to  the  strong  hold. 
Heturn  ye  to  Zion,  the  city  defended  by  God 
(oh.  ii.  5),  and  able  to  afford  you  a  safe 
asylum.  (For  the  spiritual  meaning,  see 
Luke  iv.  18—21.)  Ye  prisoners  of  hope. 
Captives  who  have  good  hope  of  deliverance 
because  they  are  still  in  covenant  with 
God.  Septuagint,  SfV/tioi  t^s  (rvyayuyris, 
"prisoners  of  the  synagogue."  Pusey  re- 
marks that  "hope"  here  and  nowhere  dse 
has  the  article,  and  that  what  is  meant  is 
"  the  Hope  of  Israel,"  that  of  which  St.  Paul 
spoke  (Acts  xxvi.  6, 7  and  xxviii.  20).  Even 
to-day.  In  spite  of  all  contrary  appearances. 
Septuagint,  ai/rl  fitas  i^fiepas  Trapoi/cetria?  aou, 
"  for  one  day  of  thy  sojourning."  Double. 
A  double  measure  of  blessing  in  compensa- 
tion for  past  suffering  (Isa.  xl.  2  ;  ixi.  7). 
There  ought  to  be  a  full  stop  at  tlie  end  of 
this  verse,  as  in  the  Bevised  Version. 

Ver;  13. — The  Lord  proceeds  to  explain 
the  promised  blessings  in  detail.  First  ia 
signified  the  victorious  resistance  of  the 
Maccabees  against  the  Seleucidsa — a  figure 
i)f  Messiah's  victory  over  all  the  enemies  of 
God.  When  (for)  I  have  bent  Jndab  for  me. 
The  verbs  are  in  the  prophetical  perfect, 
and  may  be  rendered  future  By  a  grand 
figiire  God  is  represented  as  a  wareior 
armed  for  battle,  who  use8_  his  people  for 
the  weapons  of  his  warfare.  The  Hebrews 
speak  of  "treading"  the  bow,  where  we 
say  "  bend,"  because  they  used  the  foot  in 
bending  it.  In  the  present  case  Judah  is 
God's  bow.  Filled  the  bow  with  Ephraim. 
Ephraim  is  the  arrow  (comp.  Ps.  cxxvii. 
4,  5).  Judah  and  Ephraim,  the  united 
people,  are  God's  instruments,  and  fight 
against  the  world-power  in  his  strength. 
And  raised  up;  better,  and  I  mill  stir 
lip;  Septuagint,  iieyepa:  Vulgate,  «u8cito6o. 
Greece ;  Javan.  Not  a  vague  term  for  the 
far  west,  whither  some  prisoners  had  been 
carried,  but  to  be  taken  strictly  aa  the 
appellation  of  Greece.  Nothing  but  in- 
spiration could  have  enabled  Zechariah  and 
Daniel  to  foresee  the  rise  of  the  Macedonian 
dynasty,  and  the  struggle  between  the  Jews 
aud  the  Syro-Grecian  power  in  Maccabean 
times,  which  is  here  plainly  announced.  The 
earlier  the  date  assigned  to  this  part  of 
Zechariah's  prophecy,  the  more  incredible 
is  it  that  any  mere  human  sagacity  or  pre- 
science should  liave  enabled  a  man  to  fore- 
tell these  events,  or  to  see  in  Greece  a  power 
arrayed  in  conflict  with  the  people  of  God. 
And  made  thee;  rather,  and  I  uiiU  makt 


M 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZEUHARIAH. 


[oh.  IX.  1 — 17, 


thee.  God  will  make  Ms  people  into  a 
hero's  sword  to  execute  vengfanoe  on  the 
enemy. 

Ver.  14. — The  Lord  shall  be  seen  over 
them.  To  encourage  the  ch:)Ben  people  in 
the  contest,  the  Lord  shall  make  his  presence 
manifest  as  theii  Leader.  His  arrow.  God's 
arrows  are  the  judgments  which  he  inflicts 
upon  his  enemies,  which  come  forth  suddenly 
as  the  lightning  flash,  and  cannot  be  avoided 
(Ps.  xviii.  14 ;  Hab.  iii.  11).  Shall  blow 
the  trumpet.  As  the  signal  of  battle  and 
calamity  (Numb.  x.  9 ;  Judg.  vii.  19,  20 ; 
Ezek.  vii.  14;  Amos  iii.  6;  Zeph.  i.  16). 
Whirlwinds  of  the  south.  He  shall  come 
upon  the  enemy  and  sweep  them  away 
with  irresistible  force.  Storms  from  the 
south  were  the  most  violent,  coming  from 
the  Arabian  desert  (Job  xxxvii.  9 ;  Isa. 
xii.  1 ;  Hos.  xiii.  15).  Septuagint,  Xlopei- 
fferai  sv  ffdKtp  aTreiKTJs  avToSj "  He  shall  go  in 
the  surge  of  his  menace." 

Ver.  15. — Shall  defend  them ;  imepaairiet 
alyrois,  "shall  put  his  shield  over  them" 
(Septuagint).  There  are  numerous  ex- 
amples, in  the  Books  of  Maccabees,  of  God's 
special  interposition  in  his  people's  favour, 
and  thus  far  ami  in  part  fulfilling  this 
prophecy  (see  1  Maco.  iii  16 — 24;  iv.  6 — 16; 
vii.  40—50  ;  2  Mace.  ii.  21, 22 ;  iii.  24,  etc. ; 
T.  2—4 ;  li.  8 ;  xii.  11, 15,  22,  28,  37 ;  xv. 
7,  etc.).  They  shall  deyonr.  The  propLet 
seems  to  have  had  in  view  Numb,  xxiii.  24, 
where  Israel  is  compared  to  a  lion,  eating  of 
tlie  prey  and  drinking  the  blood  of  the  slain. 
So  here  he  says  they  shall  "  devour,"  t.e.  the 
flesh  of  their  enemies  (comp.  Micah  v.  8). 
Subdue  with  sling-stones.  So  the  Vulgate, 
and  virtually  the  Septuagint,  taking  the 
case  of  the  noun  as  instrumental ;  but  it  is 
best  to  take  it  as  accusative  of  tlie  object,  as 
in  the  margin  of  the  Autliorizod  Version, 
"  They  shall  tread  down  the  stones  of  the 
sling."  The  "  sling-stones "  are  the  ene- 
mies, as  in  the  next  verse  "  the  stones  of  a 
crown "  are  the  Jews ;  and  the  sentence 
means  that  the  Jews  shall  tread  their 
enemies  underfoot  like  spent  sling-stones, 
which  are  of  no  account.  Or  it  may  signify 
simply  and  without  metaphor  that  tliey 
*hall  despise  the  enemies'  missiles,  which 
shall  fall  harmless  among  them  (Job  xii, 
28,  29).  Thej  shall  drink  the  blood  of  the 
slain,  like  lions.  Hake  a  noise.  As  men 
exhilarated  with  wine.  Vulgate,  Bihentet 
inebriahuntur  quasi  a  vino  (Isa.  xlix.  26; 
Ezek.  xxxix.  17—19).  Shall  be  fiUed  like 
bowls.  They  shall  be  filled  with  blood  like 
the  sacrificial  vessels  in  which  the  blood  of 
victims  was  received  (ch.  xiv.  20).  The 
eorners  of  the  altar.  The  blood  was  also 
■prinkled  on  the  corners  or  sides  of  the  altar 
(Lev.  i.  5,  11  ;  iii.  2):  There  may  be  in- 
claded  the  notion  that  the  war  against  God's 


enemies  was  a  sacred  war,  and  accepted  hy 
him  as  a  sacrifice.  In  the  Maccabean 
struggle  the  bloodshed  was  often  very  con- 
siderable (see  1  Maoo.  vii.  32,  46 ;  xi.  47; 
2  Maoc.  viii.  30  ;  x.  17,  23,  31,  etc.). 

Ver.  16. — Shall  save  them.  He  shall  give 
them  a  positive  blessing  beyond  mere  de- 
liverance from  enemies.  Keil,  "  Shall 
endow  them  with  salvation."  As  the  flock 
of  his  people ;  so  the  Vulgato  ;  literally,  a» 
a  flook,  Ms  people ;  Septuagint,  iis  Trp6^a,Tii 
Xdbv  adrov.  He  will  tend  his  people  as  a 
shepherd  tends  his  floftk  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  20; 
0.  3 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  1 ;  Bzek.  xxxiv.  2,  8,  etc.), 
So  Christ  calls  himself  the  "  good  Shepherd," 
and  his  followers  "  little  flook  "  (John  x.  11 ; 
Luke  xii?  32).  Stones  of  a  crown.  The 
valuable  gems  set  in  crowns  and  dindems,  or 
in  the  high  priest's  official  dress.  The 
people  shall  be  in  God's  sight  as  precious  as 
these  in  the  eyes  of  men,  and  shall  be 
highly  exalted.  The  Septuagint  and  Vul- 
gate render,  "  sacred  stones ; "  and  Kna- 
benbaner  thinks  that  by  the  term  is  meant 
the  temple  of  God,  which  shall  arise  or  shine 
in  the  Holy  Land,  as  a  reward  for  its  faith- 
ful defence.  But  the  sense  given  above  is 
satisfactory  and  simpler.  Lifted  up  as  an 
ensign  upon  his  land ;  better,  as  the  Bevised 
Version  margin,  glittering  upon  Ms  land. 
"  His  "  may  refer  to  Jehovah,  or  Israel ;  pro- 
bably the  latter  is  meant.  Tlie  "land"  ia 
the  crown  or  diadem  in  which  the  pieoioiu 
stones,  the  redeemed  people,  are  set.  They 
shall  be  raised  to  the  higljest  possible  glory 
and  honour.  If  the  words  be  taken  in  the 
sense  of  "raised  on  high  over  his  land," 
tliey  must  be  considered  to  indicate  thut  the 
crown  which  contained  the  ^ems  shall  be 
raised  aloft  in  victorious  triumph. 

Ver.  17. — His  goodness.  The  goodness, 
t.e.  the  prosperity,  of  Israel  or  tlie  land.  Be- 
vised Version  margin,  "  their  prosperity." 
If  the  affix  "his"  is  referred  to  Jehovah, 
the  nouns  " goodness "  and  "beauty"  must 
be  taken,  not  as  his  attributes,  but  as  gifts 
bestowed  by  him,  the  prosperity  and  beauty 
which  he  confers.  But  it  is  more  suitable 
to  the  context  to  consider  the  reference  to 
be  to  the  people,  who  in  the  next  clause  are 
divided  into  young  men  and  maidens,  and  to 
take  the  "  goodnes.","  or  goodliuess,  as  apper- 
taining more  especially  to  the  former,  and  the 
"  beauty  "  to  the  latter.  His  beauty  (comp. 
Ezek.  xvi.  14).  (For  the  Messianic  inter- 
pretation, see  Ps.  xlv.  2 ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  17.) 
Com  .  .  .  new  wine.  This  is  in  expression 
often  found  to  denote  great  abundance  and 
prosperity.  The  two  are  distributed  poetic- 
ally between  the  youths  and  maidens 
(Deut.  xxxiii.  28 ;  Ps.  Ixxii.  16 ;  Jer.  xxxi. 
12, 13 ;  Joel  ii.  18, 19).  Make  . . .  oheerfol; 
literally,  make  rpro/at.  It  probably  refen  to 
the  increase  of  population  occnning  in  time* 


OH    IX.  1—17.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH. 


95 


of  plenty.  This  outward  proaperity  is  a 
Bymbol  of  God's  favonr  and  the  uprightness 
of  the  people.    In  these  things,  too,  we  may 


see  adumbrated  the  spiritual  blessings  of  the 
gospel,  which  are,  as  com  and  wine,  to 
strengthen  and  re^esh  the  soul. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — A  visitation  of  Jiidgment.  "  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  the 
land  of  Hadrach,"  etc.  Whatever  view  is  taken  of  the  exact  time  of  the  fulfilment  of 
the  glorious  promises  with  which  the  last  chapter  concludes,  it  was  necessarily  a  time 
still  future  when  those  promises  were  uttered.  Other  things  of  a  very  different  nature 
were  first  to  occur.  On  some  of  these,  accordingly,  as  constituting  a  kind  of  "  burden  " 
(ver.  1)  on  some  of  the  lands  and  people  contiguous  to  Israel,  the  tongue  of  the  prophet, 
in  the  verses  before  us,  next  speaks — something,  probably,  after  the  fashion  of  Luke 
xix.  11 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  3.  Most  commentators  believe  that  what  he  thus  predicts  was 
fulfilled  in  connection  with  the  Syrian  conquests  of  Alexander  the  Great.  Certainly 
we  shall  find  this  predicted  "  visitation  of  judgment "  to  correspond  very  strikingly 
with  the  history  of  those  conquests  in  three  principal  ways,  viz.  in  regard  (1)  to  the 
circumstances  it  came  in ;  (2)  to  the  path  it  followed;  and  (3)  to  the  marks  it  left. 

L  The  circumstances  it  game  in.  It  was  a  time  when  the  "  eyes  of  man,"  and 
especially  (so  Pusey,  in  toe.)  "  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,"  should  be  "  toward  the  Lord." 
This  seems  to  describe,  first  and  generally,  a  condition  of  expectation  and  wonder — 
perhaps  also  of  fear  (see  Luke  xxi.  26).  Secondly,  and  more  particularly,  and  it  may  be 
of  the  "  tribes  of  Israel "  especially,  a  spirit  of  trust  and  reverence  (see  Ps.  v.  3 ;  2 
Ohron.  xx.  12 ;  Ps.  cxlv.  15 ;  cxxiii.  2 ;  Isa.  xvii.  7,  8).  If  so,  we  may  find  that  in  the 
history  supposed  to  be  referred  to  which  corresponds  in  both  respects  very  exactly. 
How  certainly  great,  for  example,  was  the  expectation  and  wondering  fear  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  East  at  large,  after  the  astounding  victory  of  Alexander  at  Issus, 
when  he  first  sent  his  general  and  turned  his  attention  to  Syria  and  Damascus !  How 
exceedingly  natural,  also,  that  the  marvellous  speed  and  completeness  of  his  triumph 
should  remind  "the  tribes  of  Israel"  of  Dan.  viii.  1 — 8,  20,  21,  and  so  fix  their  eyes 
on  their  own  Jehovah  in  adoration  and  trust!  This  almost  certain,  indeed,  if  we 
believe  what  Josephus  tells  us  of  the  prophecies  of  Daniel  being  afterwards  shown  to 
Alexander. 

II.  The  path  which  this  visitation  followed.  Three  principal  stages  are 
mentioned  in  the  prophecy.  1.  Where  the  "  visitation ''  began ;  viz.  (see  ver.  1)  in 
the  land  of  Damascus  and  Hadrach,  a  principal  city,  as  only  lately  known  (see  Pusey), 
of  Syria,  towards  the  north-east.  2.  Where  it  went  next ;  viz.  to  Tyrus  and  Zidon 
(vers.  2 — 4),  cities  of  Phoenicia,  travelling  west.  3.  Where  it  went  last ;  viz.  to  the 
cities  of  the  Philistines  (vers.  5,  6),  travelling  south.  Three  corresponding  stages  are 
also  traceable  in  the  history  referred  to.  So  Pusey  writes  (•  Daniel  the  Prophet,'  pp. 
277,  278),  "  The  selection  of  the  places  and  of  the  whole  line  of  country  corresponds 
very  exactly  to  the  march  of  Alexander  after  the  battle  of  Issus,  when  the  capture  of 
Damascus,  which  Darius  had  chosen  as  the  strong  depository  of  his  wealth,  etc., 
opened  Coele-Syria ;  Zidon  surrendered ;  Tyre  was  taken ;  Gaza  resisted,  was  taken, 
and,  it  is  said,  plucked  up."  Also  Eichhorn,  as  there  quoted,  "  All  the  chief  places, 
which  Alexander,  after  the  battle  of  Issus,  either  took  possession  of  or  conquered,  are 
named  one  by  one — the  land  of  Hadrach,  Damascus  and  Hamath,  Tyre  and  Zidon, 
Ashkelon,  Gaza,  Ekron,  and  Ashdod." 

III.  The  mabks  it  left.  Here,  again,  in  the  prediction,  the  description  is  three- 
fold. In  the  country  of  Hadrach  and  Damascus  and  their  neighbouring  city  Hamath 
("Hamath,  which  bordereth  thereby,"  so  some),  the  great  mark  was  the  abiding 
character  of  the  visitation,  or  "  burden."  There  judgment  was  to  come  first,  and  there 
to  remain.  In  the  case  of  Tyrus  (Zidon  being  only  mentioned  parenthetically),  the 
result,  notwithstanding  all  her  wisdom  (Bzek.  xxviii.  2,  3),  strength,  wealth,  and 
power,  would  be  her  total  overthrow  and  destruction  by  fire.  In  the  cities  of  Philistia 
the  results  would  be  fear,  sorrow,  disappointment ;  in  one  case,  the  loss  of  the  ruler  (ver. 
6) ;  in  another  (ver.  6),  the  loss  of  inhabitants ;  in  all,  the  abasement  of  "  pride." 
More  briefly  still — "subjugated,"  "ruined,"  "humbled" — so  would  this  visitation, 


0«  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHAEIAH.  [ch.  ix.  1—17. 

according  to  ibis  prediction,  leave  these  three  lands.  According  to  the  history,  we 
read  the  same.  "  The  Syrians,  not  as  yet  tamed  by  the  losses  of  war,  despised  the 
new  empire;  but,  swiftly  subdued,  they  did  obediently  what  they  were  commanded" 
(Q.  Curtius,  quoted  by  Piisey).  Of  Tyre  we  read,  in  the  pages  of  history,  as  to  her 
'strong  hold"  and  her  "  power  on  the  sea,"  and  wealth,  that  the  inhabitants  "determined 
to  resist  AlexandtT,  trusting  in  the  strength  of  the  island,  and  the  stores  laid  up," 
as  also  that  they  "  mocked  at  the  king,  as  though  he  thought  to  prevail  against 
Neptune."  As  to  her  "wisdom,"  we  read  of  "unwearied  inventiveness  of  defence," 
ate.  As  to  the  result,  that  "  Alexander,  having  slain  all  save  those  who  fled  to  the 
temples,  ordered  the  houses  to  be  set  on  fire."  Of  Gaza,  which  had  had  kings  for 
fifteen  hundred  years,  that  Betis,  its  "king,"  after  a  two  months'  siege,  was  dragged 
to  death  at  the  chariot-wlieela  of  his  conqueror  (see  further  P.usey  and  Waidlaw, 
in  loc.). 

This  passage,  thus  interpreted,  may  seem  to  illustrate,  in  conclusion:  1.  The 
imperfection  of  man's  knowledge.  This  city,  Hadrach,  which  turns  out  to  have  been 
most  conspicuous  and  important  for  many  generations,  afterwards  for  many  genera- 
tions is  so  forgotten  that  its  very  name  is  a  riddle.  How  much  beside,  therefore,  has 
doubtless  been  so  buiied  by  time  that  all  traces  of  it  are  gone  1  2.  The  perfection  of 
Ood's  knowledge.  He  knows  even  the  future  infinitely  better  than  we  do  the  past. 
Doubtless,  (m  this  account,  there  are  some  touches  in  this  prediction  which  we  cannot 
appreciate,  but  which  may,  however,  have  been  of  peculiar  interest  to  devout  Jews  at 
this  time. 

Vers.  7,  8. — A  visitation  of  mercy.  "  And  I  will  take  away  his  blood  out  of  his 
mouth,  and  his  abominations  from  between  his  teeth,"  etc.  The  key  to  this  passage 
seems  to  be  in  its  very  last  words  (comp.  Exod.  iii.  7  and  end  of  ver.  6).  In  the 
preceding  verses  we  saw  how  God  "  visited  "  the  nations  bordering  on  Israel  with  a 
"  visitation  of  judgment."  Here  we  seem  to  read  how  he  visits  his  own  people  with 
a  "  visitation  of  mercy."  He  does  so,  apparently,  in  two  principal  ways,  viz.  (1) 
indirectly,  by  converting  their  enemies ;  and  (2)  directly,  by  defending  themselves. 

I.  In  converting  their  enemies.  (Comp.  Prov.  xvi.  7.)  Of  this  conversion,  as 
described  in  ver.  7,  three  things  should  be  noted,  1.  Its  completeness.  This  evidenced, 
partly,  by  the  doing  away  of  that  especial  outward  token  of  religious  distinction 
connected  with  "eating  the  blood"  (see  Lev.  xvii.  10,  11;  Ps.  xvi.  4;  Ezek.  xxxiii. 
25);  and  partly,  also,  by  the  fact  of  this  greatly  prized  heathen  indulgence  being  given 
up  when  "between  the  teeth,"  and  so  when  most  enticing  and  pleasant  (comp. 
Jonah  iii.  8,  "  the  violence  that  is  in  their  hands  ").  2.  Its  extent.  It  would  apply  to  all 
the  Pliilistines  that  "remained;"  and  to  all  of  them,  also,  in  such  a  manner  that 
every  one  of  them  individually  ("  he  that  remaineth,  even  he")  should  be  on  the  God 
of  Israel's  side.  3.  Its  importance.  Every  individual  so  gained  would  be  as  great  a 
source  of  strength  as  a  "  governor,"  or  captain  of  a  thousand ;  and  every  band  of  them 
(so  the  concluding  phrase  of  ver.  7  may  signify)  as  great  an  advantage  as  when  their 
originally  indomitable  enemy,  the  "Jebusite,"  became,  in  the  person  of  Oman  or 
Araunah,  the  king-like  giver  of  the  very  site  on  which  their  temple  was  built  (see 
Josh.  XV.  60;  Judg.  i.  21;  1  Ohron.  xxi.  15;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  18;  1  Chron.  xxii.  1).  In 
supposed  fulfilment  of  all  this,  some  have  noticed  what  Josephus.  relates  as  to  the 
way  in  which  the  Philistines,  many  years  afterwards,  identified  themselves  with  the 
Jews.  But  we  are,  perhaps,  on  safer  ground  if  we  notice,  with  a  similar  view,  how 
completely,  in  New  Testament  times,  the  Philistines  have  disappeared  from  sight  as 
enemies  of  the  Jews ;  and  how  much,  also,  we  read  of  the  early  triumphs  of  the  gospel 
in  their  part  of  the  land  (see  the  mission  of  St.  Peter  as  related  in  Acts  ix.  32 — 43; 
X. ;  xi.  1 — 18).  Was  not  Oornelius  as  important  to  the  Gentile  Church  as  Araunah  to 
the  Jewish  temple  ? 

II.  In  defending  themselves.  Here  also  three  features  to  be  specially  marked. 
Notice:  1.  The  completeness  of  this  defence.  In  many  ways  there  would  be  danger  : 
'.n  the  mere  existence  of  an  "  army  "  or  hostile  body;  in  its  close  proximity  to  them 
when  in  movement,  and  that,  both  when  "passing  by"  and  also  when  "returning;" 
perhaps,  also,  in  the  terrible  character  and  exceptional  might  of  that  army's  commander, 
as  signified  by  what  ia  twice  said  here  so  emphatically  about "  him  "  in  connection  with 


OH.  II.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  91 

its  movements.  Prom  all  these  dangers  defence  is  here  promised.  2.  Its  secret.  By 
God's  own  hand :  "  I  will  encamp  "  (oomp.  Ps.  xx.  7 ;  xxxiv.  7 ;  2  Kings  vi.  17).  Per 
the  sake  of  God's  own  house,  some  expressly  render  the  words,  "  about  mine  house  " 
(comp.  Ps.  cxxii.  9;  1  Kings  viii.  29).  3.  Its  results;  viz.  comparative  freedom  from 
oppression  to  God's  people  till  their  then  work  should  be  accomplished.  They  might 
be  visited;  they  might  bo  attacked;  but  they  would  not,  as  before,  be  left  to. the 
oppressor's  mercy  and  will.  In  apparent  fulfilment  of  this  part  of  the  prophecy,  we 
may  notice,  in  the  pages  of  history,  how  Alexander,  when  engaged  in  besieging  Tyre, 
demanded  the  assistance  of  the  Jews ;  how  the  high  priest,  Jaddua,  refused  on  account 
of  his  previous  oath  to  Darius ;  how  Alexander  threatened  Jerusalem  in  consequence ; 
how,  after  destroying  Gaza,  he  passed  by  them  to  subdue  Egypt;  how  he  returned 
thence,  vowing  vengeance ;  how  Jaddua  and  the  priests  met  him,  and  showed  him  the 
prophecies  of  Daniel ;  how  Alexander  is  said  to  have  recognized  in  Jaddua  the  same 
man  as  had  long  previously  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream  ;  how,  on  all  these  accounts, 
he  not  only  spared  the  Jews,  but  promoted  them,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  a  policy 
in  regard  to  them  which  helped  to  preserve  them  till  New  Testament  times  (see 
Josephus  and  other  authorities,  as  quoted  by  Wardlaw,  and  by  Pusey  in  '  Minor 
Prophets,'  and  '  Daniel  the  Prophet '). 

Thus  regarded,  we  seem  taught  for  ourselves :  1.  Eow  God  preserves  those  that  are 
his — how  variously ;  how  wonderfully ;  how  abundantly.  Though  unarmed  themselves, 
they  not  only  escape,  they  more  than  disarm,  the  vengeance  of  the  conqueror  of  the 
world.  2.  Why  God  preserves  them,  viz.  because  of  their  connection  with  his 
"  temple  " — in  other  words,  with  his  Son  (comp.  John  ii.  19 — 21 ;  Col.  ii.  9 ;  1  Tim.  ii. 
6 ;  Acts  iv.  12 ;  x.  43 ;  xiii.  39,  etc.). 

Vers.  9 — 12. — A  joyful  kingdom,  "  Rejoice  greatly,  0  daughter  of  Zion ;  shout,  0 
daughter  of  Jerusalem,"  etc.  How  sudden,  how  loud,  how  urgent,  is  this  call  to  rejoice ! 
No  wonder;  for  in  the  bare  fact  announced  here  there  is  ample  cause  to  rejoice. 
"  Thy  King  cometh  " — a  King  of  thine  own,  not  an  alien  king  like  him  just  spoken  of. 
This  possilsly  the  connection  of  thought.  Still  greater  the  cause  for  rejoicing  in  what 
is  said  of  this  King ;  whether  (1)  to  Zion  herself;  or  (2)  to  her  Gi-ntile  neighbours  ; 
or  (3)  to  mankind  at  la/rge. 

I.  To  Zion  herself.  Consider:  1.  The  purpose  of  his  coming,  viz. :  (1)  To  save  his 
people,  not  to  condemn  them  (Luke  ix.  56;  John  iii.  17,  etc.).  This  the  more 
necessary  to  specify,  because  of  the  righteousness  or  justice  so  specially  attributed  to 
him  in  this  place.  Although  "just,"  he  is  coming  to  pardon.  (2)  To  save  his  people 
indeed.  To  save  theih  not  only  from  the  guilt,  but  also  from  the  practice  and  power 
of  their  sins ;  calling  "  sinners,"  but  calling  them  to  "  repentance."  Although  coming 
to  pardon,  he  is  just  (Rom.  iii.  26).  2.  The  manner  of  his  coming.  How  admirably 
this  corresponds  to  his  purpose!  Being  a  King,  he  appears  (for  once  at  least)  in 
befitting  state,  riding  on  an  animal  never  employed  before.  Being  also  a  Saviour,  he 
comes  in  mercy  and  meekness,  in  the  lowliest  way  a  king  could. 

II.  To  THE  HEATHEN  NEiQHBOTJBS  OF  ZioN.  As  shown  by  the  description  given  here : 
1.  Of  the  aspect  of  his  kingdom  towards  them.  "  He  shall  speak  peace  to  the  heathen  " 
(ver.  10).  The  Jews  themselves  seem  to  have  expected  otherwise  j  as  shown  to  some 
extent  by  such  passages  as  Acts  i.  6 ;  Mark  x.  37 ;  and  specially  by  the  extreme 
unwillingness  of  the  Apostle  Peter  to  treat  any  Gentile  whatever  (Acts  x.  4)  as  other- 
wise than  common  or  unclean.  This  "  enmity  "  (Eph.  ii.  16)  was  to  be  so  completely 
"  taken  away  "  that  the  very  weapons  of  warfare  were  to  be  "  cut  off"  and  perish.  A 
cause  for  rejoicing,  indeed,  when  accomplished,  both  to  believing  Jews  (Acts  xi.  18) 
and  to  Gentiles  (Acts  xiii.  48).  2.  Of  the  extent  of  his  kingdom  among  them.  "  From 
sea  to  sea,"  etc.  (ver.  10).  The  reference,  apparently,  is  to  Ps.  Ixxii.  8;  also  to  the 
promise  to  Abraham  in  Gen.  xv.  18;  and  ultimately  to  Ps.  ii.  8.  How  this  was 
fulfilled  in  gospel  times  we  learn  from  such  passages  as  Acts  xi.  26  and  xvii.  6 ;  Bom. 
XV.  19;  Col.  i.  6. 

III.  To  MANKIND  AT  LAKQB.  Whether  We  couslder:  1.  The  kind  of  persons  saved. 
These  would  appear  (from  ver.  11)  to  be  the  worst  cases  of  all — persons  needing  salvation 
the  mist.  They  are  described  as  being  persons  in  prison;  as  being  in  its  lowest  part, 
perhaps  in  its  "  pit ;  "  as  being  there  without  means  of  subsistence ;  as  having  their 

ZECHARIAH.  F 


98  THE  BOOK   OF   ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  ix.  1—17. 

life,  in  fact,  like  Joseph  in  Gen.  xxxvii.  24,  27,  only  not  gone.  2.  The  kind  of  salva- 
tion vouchsafed.  (1)  Its  certainty.  A  matter  of  "  covenant "  (ver.  12) — of  a  covenant 
still  binding,  renewed  "  to-day ; "  a  covenant  made  by  the  greatest  of  all  beings  ("  do 
/declare  "),  and  in  the  most  soletan  of  all  methods,  viz.  by  shedding  of  "  blood  "  (see 
1  Pet.  i.  19,  etc.).  (2)  Its  fulness.  "  I  will  render  double  unto  thee."  Not  merely 
"  as  the  offence "  is  this  "  free  gift "  (Rom.  v.  15),  though  that  would  be  surprising 
enough.     It  is  very  "  much  more,"  even  "  double  "  (oomp.  Isa.  xl.  2 ;  Ixi.  7). 

Conclusion.  How  great  cause,  in  all  this,  for  us,  too,  to  rejoice !  If  the  prospect 
was  good,  the  fulfilment  is  better  (Matt.  xiii.  16,  17  ;  Heb.  xi.  13,  39,  40;  1  Pet.  i. 
10 — 12).  If  the  mere  hope  was  so  bright,  ho*  much  better  the  harvest  1  How  great 
cause,  also,  for  taking  warning  1  The  fuller  the  salvation,  the  greater  the  peril  of 
rejecting  it  (Heb.  ii.  1—3;  x.  28,  29).  'I'he  more  complete,  also,  its  provisions,  the 
more  6nal.  "  There  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin;  "  "Last  qf  all  he  sent  unto 
them  his  Son." 

Vers.  13 — 17. — A  successful  campaign.  "  When  I  have  bent  Judah  for  me,  filled 
the  bow  with  Ephraim,"  etc.  It  is  clear,  from  the  beginning  of  these  verses,  that  we 
have  to  do  here,  in  some  sense,  with  battle  and  war.  It  is  equally  clear,  from  the  fact 
that  the  persons  here  mentioned  have  been  described  in  ver.  10  as  specially  separated 
from  battle  and  war,  that  we  have  only  to  du  here  with  such  things  in  some  more 
literal  sense.  It  seems  most  probable,  therefore,  that  the  "  peace  "  spoken  of  in  the 
latter  portion  of  the  passage  must  be  something  equally  peculiar  in  its  way.  Let  us 
endeavour  to  find,  in  each  case,  where  the  peculiarity  lies. 

I.  As  TO  WAR.  Under  this  head  we  may  notice :  1.  The  description  of  the  comlat- 
ants.  On  the  one  hand, "  Judah,"  "  Ephiaim,"  and  "  Zion,"  representing  probably  the 
Jewish  people  at  large,  as  specially  identified  with  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  the  true 
God  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  2).  On  the  other  hand,  "  Greece,"  as  probably  representing  the 
heathen  at  large  (ver.  10),  in  connection  with  those  mythological  fictions  and  philoso- 
phical inquiries  in  which  the  "sons"  of  Greece  took  the  lead.  When  did  these 
combatants  and  these  systems  of  thought  come  into  conflict  ?  Even  when  God  raised 
up  those  Jewish  apostles  of  Christ  (so  it  has  been  answered),  who,  by  the  preaching  of 
the  cross,  attacked  and  overcame  the  religion  and  wisdom  of  Greece  (1  Cor.  i.  18 — 24). 
This  was  most  truly  a  kind  of  "  war,"  which  also  spoke  "  peace  "  (ver.  10) ;  a  war, 
also,  in  which  the  "  Word  of  the  Lord  out  of  Zion  "  (Isa.  ii.  3)  was  as  a  "  sword  "  (Eph. 
vL  17)  in  God's  hand.  2.  The  description  of  the  conflict.  Was  not  the  Lord  truly 
"  seen  over,"  or  with  these  combatants  for  his  truth  (Mark  xvi.  20 ;  Heb.  ii.  3,  4)  ? 
Did  not  God's  Word  also,  as  spoken  by  them,  find  its  mark  like  an  "  arrow"  (Acts  ii. 
37 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  24,  25)  ?  Did  it  not  shake  and  overthrow  many  deeply  rooted  con- 
victions, like  the  "  trumpet "  of  Jericho,  as  though  by  its  sound  (Acts  xvii.  6)  ?  And 
overcome  apparently  insuperable  obstacles  as  though  by  a  "  whirlwind  "  (2  Cor.  x.  4,  5)  ? 
Did  not  God  again  specially  "  defend "  these  combatants  when  endangered  (Acts  v. 
23 ;  xii.  1—17 ;  xiv.  20,  21 ;  xvi.  26 ;  xix.  23—41 ;  xxL  32,  etc.)  ?  Did  they  not  also, 
with  their  weapons  of  peace,  "  devour  and  subdue  "  those  weapons  of  war,  "  the  stones 
of  the  sling  "  (margin),  spreading  the  gospel  even  when  destroyed  themselves  (Acts  xi. 
19 — 21)?  And  altogether  were  they  not  like  men  carried  along  as  though  with  a 
holy  "  wine  "  from  the  "  altar,"  in  their  fervour  of  zeal  and  success  (Acts  ii.  13  ;  xxvL 
24;  2  Cor.  v.  13)?  In  all  these  respects  we  seem  to  have  here  a  faithful  description  of 
the  earlier  conquests  of  Christ's  cross. 

II.  As  TO  PEACE.  Corresponding  to  this  singular  and  hallowed  warfare  shall  be  its 
hallowed  results.  The  Church,  or  congregation  of  God's  believing  people,  shall  be  made 
thereby  a  new  thing  on  the  earth.  1.  Externally ;  and  that  in  three  ways.  (1)  As 
to  members.  Before  "that  day"  the  family  of  God  was  confined  almost  entirely  to 
one  little  people  and  land.  Now,  those  thus  saved  by  him  should  be  "  as  the  flock  of 
his  people."  (2)  As  to  appreciation.  Like  "  the  stones  of  a  crown,"  like  so  many 
jewels,  that  is  to  say,  not  only  most  valuable  in  themselves,  also  most  appreciatingly 
employed,  shall  his  people  then  be.  Compare  the  name  of  Peter,  signifying  "  a  Stone," 
and  such  passages  as  1  Pet.  ii.  5 ;  Kev.  ii.  17  ;  iii.  12.  (3)  As  to  effect.  The  Church 
becoming  then,  like  a  "standard  "  or  "ensign,"  something  easily  seen,  readily  recognized, 
and  faithfully  followed  (comp.  Cant.  vi.  10).     So  numerous,  so  illustrious,  so  con- 


OH.  u.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHARIAH.  99 

spicuous,  was  the  New  Testament  Ohurch,  on  the  one  hand,  to  become.  Juat  so,  on  the 
other  hand,  with  all  its  faults  and  corruptions,  has  it  actually  beenl  2.  Internally . 
And  this,  in  turn,  manifested  in  three  different  ways.  (1)  In  a  special  sense  of  God's 
love.  "How  great  is  his  goodness  I"  (com p.  John  iii.  16  ;  1  John  iiL  1;  iv.  16, 17; 
Rom.  V.  5;  Eph.  ii.  4 — 7).  (2)  In  a  special  sense  of  God's  perfections.  ".How  great 
is  his  beauty  1 "  (Compare  such  passages  as  Bom.  iii.  25,  26 ;  xi.  33 ;  1  Oor.  i.  24,  26, 
300  (3)  In  a  special  consequent  sense  of  satisfaction  and  rest ;  and  that  amongst  all. 
"Corn  shall  make  the  young  men  cheerful,  and  new  wine  the  maids."  Illustrated, 
perhaps,  by  such  passages  as  Matt.  xi.  28 — 30 ;  Bom.  ▼.  1,  2 ;  Acts  zvi.  34 ;  Rom.  xv. 
13;  1  Cor.  iii.  21 — 23;  and  it  may  be  also,  if  we  look  to  the  margin,  by  Acts  ii. 
16—18;  xxi,  4,  9.  Never  have  all  these  things  been  so  deeply  and  so  commonly  felt 
in  the  "  Israel  of  God,"  as  since  the  days  when  the  apostles  first  went  forth  to  preach 
Christ. 

From  the  various  predicted  changes  thus  accomplished,  we  may  see,  in  conclusion : 
1.  Hie  mpematwrai  origin  of  Christianity.  Physically,  the  Bomaii  conquered  the 
world.  Intellectually,  the  Greek  conquered  the  Roman.  Spiritually,  the  Jew  has 
conquered  them  both.  A  little  society,  formed  originally  out  of  the  most  despised  of 
the  nations,  and  principally,  if  not  exclusively,  out  of  the  most  despised  of  its 
provinces  (Acts  ii.  7 ;  John  vii.  52),  has  become  the  ruling  society  upon  earth.  Can 
we  help  saying  as  in  Fs.  cxviii.  23  ?  2.  The  supernatural  value  of  Christianity.  Is 
there  any  system  to  be  compared  with  it  as  to  the  blessings  it  bestows  ?  Can  the 
statement  of  1  Tim.  iv.  8  be  made  of  any  other  religion  as  it  can  of  this  one  ?  Can 
anything  else  also  so  completely  satisfy  all  the  cravings  of  our  nature  (see  John 
iv.  14)? 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — OocTs  judgments.  I.  The  dakk  side.  "  Burden."  Word  of  HI  omen 
to  God's  enemies.  God's  eye  is  on  all.  Storm  gathering.  Will  soon  burst  in  fury, 
just,  universal,  overwhelming.  None  so  small  as  to  be  overlooked.  None  so  great 
as  to  secure  immunity.  The  wisdom  of  the  wise,  the  resources  of  the  rich,  and  the 
fame  of  ancient  days  will  prove  as  vanity. 

II.  The  beight  side.  Eye  of  kindness.  Hand  of  gracious  interposition.  Incor- 
poration of  Jews  and  Gentiles  in  one  glorious  Church.  1.  Divine  protection. 
"  Encamp,"  etc.  2.  Righteous  freedom.  No  more  taskmasters,  as  in  Egypt.  &.  Qrate- 
ful  service. — F. 

Ver.  9. — The  ideal  King.  I.  Beautiful  vision.  Poets  in  rapt  moments  have  hail 
glimpses  of  the  highest  (Ps.  xlv.  72).  The  character,  the  life  and  work  of  a  true  King, 
have  passed  before  them  as  things  fair  to  see.  But  where  is  the  reality  ?  "  Find  me 
the  true  king  or  able  man,  and  he  has  a  Divine  right  over  nie  "  (Carlyle). 

n.  Passionate  lonqino.  The  heart  yearns  for  what  is  best.  The  need  presses. 
Circumstances  now  and  again  arise  that  intensify  the  feeling  and  the  cry.  There  is  so 
much  to  be  done — evils  to  remove,  wrongs  to  be  redressed,  rights  and  liberties  to  be 
secured.  Oh  for  the  coming  of  the  true  King  I  "  What  he  tells  us  to  do  must  be 
precisely  wisest,  fittest,  that  we  can  anywhere  or  anyhow  learn,  the  thing  which  it  will 
in  all  ways  behove  us,  with  right  loyal  thankfulness  and  nothing  doubting,  to  do. 
Our  doing  and  life  were  then,  so  far  as  government  would  regulate  them,  well  regu- 
lated "  (Carlyle). 

III.  Immortal  hope.  There  have  been  kings,  good,  bad,  and  indifferent.  Some 
began  well,  but  did  little.  The  best  have  come  far  short  of  the  highest  standard. 
The  true  King  "not  yet."  Still  hope.  Faith  in  the  possibilities  of  human  nature; 
above  all,  faith  in  the  promise  of  God. 

"  Bing  out  false  pride  in  place  and  blood. 
The  civio  slander  and  the  spite ; 
Bing. in  the  love  of  truth  and  right, 
Hing;  in  the  common  love  of  good.  .  .  . 


100  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHARIAH.  [oh.  ix.  1—17. 

*Bing  in  the  valiant  man  and  free,  . 
Tne  larger  heait,  the  kindliei  hand  { 
Ring  out  the  darkness  of  the  land. 
Bing  in  the  Christ  that  ii  to  be." 


Vers.  9, 10.— rThe  advent  of  the  King.  The  accession  of  a  sovereign  is  a  time  ol 
rejoicing  (of.  Solomon,  1  Kings  i.  40).  But  there  may  be  disappointment.  The  early 
promise  may  fail,  and  the  first  joys  end  in  bitterness.  Not  so  with  Messiah.  The 
better  he  is  known,  the  more  he  is  loved.  The  longer  experience  of  his  reign,  the 
greater  the  satisfaction. 

I.  The  obeatness  of  his  katube.  Son  of  man.  Son  of  Qod.  Dignity  command- 
ing the  highest  homage. 

II.  Tbe  beauty  of  his  ohabaotbb.  Everything  in  him  that  is  true  and  fair  and 
good.  He  is  altogether  lovely.  1.  Just.  Fulfils  all  righteousness.  2.  Merciful. 
Stoops  to  the  lowest.  Kind  to  the  poorest.  Equitable  to 'all.  3.  Humble.  Meek  and 
low^. 

lU.  The  olobt  of  his  beion.  1.  Empire  spiritval.  His  kingdom  is  "  within." 
He  writes  his  laws  upon  the  heart.  2.  Based  on  the  free  convictions  and  love  of  the 
•people.  His  subjects  do  not  bow  the  knee  in  form,  but  in  truth.  They  honour  him 
not  with  mere  lip-service  or  state  ceremonials,  but  with  the  homage  of  the  heart. 
3.  Characterized  hy  righteousness  and  peace.  "  Salvation  *'  is  brought  by  him  to  all. 
He  not  only  pardons  the  rebel,  but  converts  him  into  a  loyal  subject.  He  not  only 
emancipates  the  slave,  but  binds  him  for  ever  to  himself  in  grateful  devotion.  He  not 
only  rescues  the  lost,  but  unites  them  with  all  the  redeemed  in  one  holy  and  loving 
brotherhood.  4.  Destined  to  universality  and  immortality.  Of  his  kingdom  there 
shall  be  no  end. — F. 

Vers.  11,  12. — 2%e  sinner  in  three  aspects.  I.  Se^f-buined.  Joseph,  Daniel, 
Jeremiah,  were  cast  into  "the  pit"  by  wicked  hands.  The  sinner  has  himself  to  blame. 
If  there  is  gloom,  chains,  and  misery,  it  is  because  of  revolt  from  Gkid.  It  is  not  the 
body  but  the  soul  that  is  "  in  prison,"  and  no  soul  can  be  imprisoned  save  by  its  own 
deed  and  consent. 

II.  Gk>D-PiTiED.  Though  we  have  cast  off  Gh>d,  he  has  not  cast  off  us.  He  is  long- 
suffering  and  merciful.  His  voice  to  us  is  full  of  pity  and  inspires  hope.  "  Prisoners 
of  hope."  Why?  Specially:  1.  As  called  of  Ck>d,  2.  Boused  to  a  sense  of  danger. 
3.  Encouraged  to  seek  deliverance. 

III.  OHBI8T-EB8O0BD.  Eefuge  is  provided.  "  Stronghold."  1.  Near.  2.  Open  to 
alL  3.  Ample  for  the  reception  and  defence  of  all  who  come.  Hence  the  urgent  and 
loving  appeal,  "  Flee."  Happy  they  who  have  responded,  "  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to 
lay  hold  upon  the  Hope  set  before  us  "  (Heb.  vi.  19)  I — F. 

Ver.  13. — Victory  through  Qod.  I.  The  mabshallino  of  the  fobobs.  The 
"  trumpet "  calls  to  arms.  On  one  side  are  the  armies  of  heaven,  and  on  the  other  the 
hosts  of  darkness. 

II.  The  tbbbiblbnbss  of  the  btbugolb.  Characterised  by :  1.  Might,  as  of  a 
storm  carrying  havoc  far  and  wide.  2.  Fury,  as  of  wild  beasts  raging  and  ravening. 
3.  Deadliness,  as  of  arrows  that  strike  quick,  and  with  fatal  effect. 

III.  The  8PLEND0DB  OF  THE  VICTORY.  Complete  overthrow  of  God's  enemies. 
Establishment  of  his  people  as  a  fiock,  in  unity  and  peace.  Human  agency,  but 
Divine  eBBciency.  Everything  here  to  rouse  ardour,  to  quicken  flagging  energies,  and 
to  nerve  the  soul  to  the  highest  endeavours,  under  the  eye  of  the  great  Captain  of  our 
salvation. — F. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  dark  <md  the  bright  tide  of  God's  revelation  to  manMnd.  "The 
burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  This  chapter  begins  that  portion  of  the  book 
whose  genuineness,  though  denied  by  some,  is  accepted  by  most  unbiassed  exposi  ors. 
As  it  is  our  main  purpose,  in  preparing  these  sketches,  to  use  the  statements,  whether 
prosaic  or  poetic,  prophetic  or  historic,  to  illustrate  truths  of  universal  application,  it 


CM.  IX.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH.  101 

comes  not  within  our  purpose  to  discuss  the  questions  of  genuineness,  authenticity,  and 
inspiration.  In  the  preceding  chapters  the  prophet  had  in  vision  seen  and  said  much 
concerning  many  of  the  more  remarkable  events  connected  with  the  continued  rule  of 
the  Persians ;  he  advances  now  to  foretell  some  of  the  more  striking  circumstances  which 
would  transpire  under  that  of  the  Greeks,  during  the  military  expeditions  of  Alexander 
and  his  successors,  so  far  as  they  had  a  bearing  upon  the  affairs  of  the  Jewish  people. 
"  He  describes,"  says  Dr.  Henderson,  "  in  this  chapter  the  conquest  of  Syria  after  the 
battle  of  Issus  (ver.  1),  and  the  progress  of  the  army  of  Alexander  along  the  coast 
of  the  Mediterranean,  involving  the  capture  of  the  principalities  of  the  Phoenicians  and 
Philistines,  but  leaving  the  Jews  unmolested,  through  the  protecting  care  of  Jehovah 
(vers.  2 — 8).  He  then  contrasts  with  the  character  and  military  achievements  of  that 
conqueror  the  qualities  which  should  .distinguish  the  Messiah  and  his  kingdom,  whom 
he  expressly  predicts  (vers.  9, 10).  After  which  he  resumes  the  thread  of  his  historical 
discourse,  and  describes  the  wars  of  the  Maccabees  with  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  and  the 
victory  and  prosperity  with  which  they  were  followed  (vers.  11 — 17)."  These  verses 
may  be  taken  to  illustrate  the  dark  and  the  tright  side  of  OocPt  revelation  to  mankind. 
Here  are  threatenings  and  promises.  The  Bible,  in  relation  to  humanity,  is  something 
Uke  the  mystic  pillar  in  the  wilderness,  as  it  appeared  on  the  Bed  Sea ;  it  threw  a 
radiance  on  the  chosen  tribes  as  they  advanced,  and  a  black  cloud  upon  their  pursuing 
foes,  overwhelming  them  in  confusion.     Notice,  then — 

I.  The  dabk  bide  of  the  Divine  Word.  Notice  two  things.  1.  In  this  aspect  it 
is  here  called  a  "tvrden."  The  word  "  burden  "  is  almost  invariably  used  to  represent 
a  calamity.  Thus  we  read  of  the  burden  of  Babylon,  the  burden  of  Moab,  the  burden 
of  Damascus,  the  burden  of  Tyre,  the  burden  of  Egypt,  etc.  The  general  meaning  ig 
a  terrible  sentence.  God's  sentence  of  condemnation  is  indeed  a  terrible  thunder-cloud. 
2.  In  this  aspect  it  bears  ttpon  wicked  men.  The  doomed  peoples  are  here  mentioned. 
They  are  in  "  the  land  of  Sddrach."  Whether  Hadrach  here  means  the  land  of  Syria 
or  the  common  names  of  the  kings  of  Syria,  it  scarcely  matters ;  the  people  of  the 
place  of  which  Damascus  was  the  capital  were  the  doomed  ones.  Besides  these,  there 
are  the  men  of  "  Hamatb,"  a  country  lying  to  the  north  of-  Damascus  and  joining  the 
districts  of  Zobah  and  Rehub,  And  still  more,  there  are  "  Tyrus  "  and  "  Zidon,"  places 
about  which  we  often  read  in  the  Bible,  and  with  whose  history  most  students  of  the 
Bible  are  acquainted.  "  Ashkelon,"  "  Gaza,"  and  "  Bkron "  are  also  mentioned. 
These  were  the  chief  cities  of  the  Philistines,  and  the  capitals  of  different  districts. 
All  these  peoples  were  not  only  enemies  of  the  chosen  tribe,  but  enemies  of  the  one 
true  and  living  God.  History  tells  us  how,  through  the  bloody  conquests  of  Alexander 
and  his  successors,  this  "  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  "  fell  with  all  its  weight  upon 
these  people.  Observe :  (1)  That  the  Bible  is  heavy  with  black  threatenings  to  the 
wicked.  It  has  not  one  word  of  encouragement  to  such,  but  all  menace;  not  one 
gleam  of  light,  but  a  dark  mass  of  cloud.  (Quote  passages.)  (2)  That  these  black 
threatenings  will  inevitably  be  fulfilled.  All  the  threatenings  here  against  the  land  of 
Hadrach,  Haraath,  Tyrus,  Zidon,  Gaza,  Bknm,  Ashkelon,  and  the  Philistines  were 
fulfilled. 

II.  The  bright  side  of  the  Divine  Word.  There  is  a  beam  of  promise  here. 
"  And  I  will  take  away  his  blood  out  of  his  mouth,  and  his  abominations  from  between 
his  teeth :  but  he  that  reniaineth,  even  he,  shall  be  for  our  God,  and  he  shall  be  as 
a  governor  in  Judah,  and  Ekron  as  a  Jebusite.  And  I  will  encamp  about  mine  house 
because  of  the  army,  because  of  him  that  passeth  by,  and  because  of  him  that  returneth: 
and  no  oppressor  shall  pass  through  them  any  more :  for  now  have  I  seen  with  mine 
eyes."  The  following  is  Dr.  Keil's  translation  of  these  verses :  "  And  I  shall  take  away 
his  blood  out  of  his  mouth,  and  his  abominations  from  between  his  teeth,  and  he  will 
also  remain  to  our  God,  and  will  be  as  a  tribe-prince  in  Judah,  and  Ekron  like  the 
Jebusite.  I  pitch  a  tent  for  my  house  against  military  power,  against  those  who  go  to 
and  fro,  and  no  oppressor  will  pass  over  them  any  more;  for  now  have  I  seen  with  my 
eyes."  The  promise  in  these  words  seems  to  be  twofold.  1.  The  deprivation  of  the 
power  of  the  enemy  to  injure.  "  I  will  take  away  his  blood  from  between  his  teeth," 
etc.  "  The  Philistines  and  other  enemies  of  the  Jews,"  says  Scott,  "  would  be  deprived 
of  their  power  to  waste  them  any  more ;  and  the  spoils  they  had  taken  by  violence  and 
the  most  abominable  rapine  would  be  taken  away  from  them  as  prey  from  a  wild 


102  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABIAH.  [oh.  ix.  1—17, 

beast."  The  Bible  promises  to  the  good  man  the  subjection  of  all  his  foes.  "  The  God 
of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly ; "  "  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be 
destroyed  is  death."  2.  Divine  protection  from  all  their  enemies.  "  I  will  encamp 
about  mine  house,"  etc.  "They  were  not  to  be  injured,"  says  Henderson,  "  by  the 
army  of  Alexander,  on  its  march  either  to  or  from  Egypt — a  promise  which  was  fulfiUeil 
to  the  letter,  for  while  that  monarch  punished  the  Samaritans,  he  showed  great  favour 
to  the  Jews.  Nor  was  any  foreign  oppressor  to  invade  their  land,  as  the  Assyrians  and 
Chaldeans  had  done,  during  the  period  that  was  to  intervene  before  the  advent  of  the 
Messiah,  predicted  in  the  verse  immediately  following.  They  were,  indeed,  subject  to 
much  suffering,  both  from  the  Egyptian  and  the  Syrian  kings,  especially  from  Antiochus 
Epiphanes ;  but  their  nationality  was  not  destroyed ;  and  the  evils  to  which  they  were 
exposed  only  paved  the  way  for  the  Maccabean  victories  and  for  the  establishment  of 
the  Asmonean  dynasty.  For  this  preservation  they  were  indebted  to  the  providence 
of  God,  which  watched  over  them  for  good.  This  is  emphatically  expressed  in  the  last 
clause  of  the  verse."  The  Bible  promises  eternal  protection  to  the  good.  "  God  is  our 
Refuge  and  Strength,"  etc.— D.  T. 

Vers.  9,  10. —  The  ideal  Monarch  of  the  world.  "  Rejoice  greatly,  0  daughter  of  Zion," 
etc.  "  In  the  former  part  of  this  chapter,"  says  Dr.  Wardlaw,  "  we  found  in  the  pro- 
gressive conquests  of  Alexander  the  Great  and  the  favour  which,  in  the  midst  of  them, 
he  showed  to  Jerusalem,  the  execution  of  God's  vengeance,  as  here  threatened,  against 
the  enemies  and  oppressois  of  his  people,  along  with  his  protecting  care  over  his  people 
themselves.  By  the  reference  to  these  speedily  coming  events,  and  in  them  to  the 
career  of  that  mighty  prince  and  warrior — of  whom  it  has  been  strongly  said  that, 
having  conquered  one  world,  he  sat  down  and  wept  that  he  had  not  another  to  conquer 
— tlie  prophet,  under  the  impulse  of  inspiration,  is  rapt  into  times  more  distant ;  ami 
fixing  his  eye  on  a  King  and  a  Conqueror  of  a  very  different  description,  invites  his 
people,  in  terms  of  exulting  transport,  to  hail  his  coming."  That  these  verses  point  to 
the  advent  of  Christ  is  an  opinion  entertained  both  by  Jewish  and  Christian  exposi- 
tors. The  refeiences  in  Matt.  xxi.  1 — 5  and  John  xii.  12 — 16  contribute  not  a  little 
to  the  cunfirmation  of  this  opinion.  Anyhow,  the  words  depict  a  Monarch  the  like  of 
whom  has  never  appeared  wmongst  all  the  monarohs  of  the  earth,  and  the  like  of 
whom  is  not  to  be  found  on  any  throne  in  the  world  to-day — a  Monarch,  the  ideal  of 
whom  is  realized  in  him  whom  we  call  with  emphasis  the  Son  of  man  and  the  Son  of 
God.     There  are  five  things  here  suggested  concerning  this  Monarch. 

I.  Hebe  is  a  Monarch  the  advent  of  whom  is  a  matteb  fob  eapt0bous  jot. 
"Rejoice  greatly,  0  daughter  of  Zion;  shout,  0  daughter  of  Jerusalem."  What 
sincere,  thoughtful  man,  in  any  kingdom  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  has  any  reason  to 
look  forward  to-day  with  rapture  to  the  successors  of  any  of  the  monarchs  of  the  earth  ? 
In  most  oases  there  are  sad  forebodings.  Christ's  advent  to  the  world  was  announced 
by  the  gladsome  music  of  angelic  choirs.  «  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,"  etc.  Why 
rejoice  at  his  advent?  Because  he  will  (1) promote  all  the  rights  of  mankind ;  (2) 
remove  all  the  calamities  of  mankind. 

II.  Hebe  is  a  Monabch  the  dignity  of  whom  is  unappboached.  "  Thy  Kiuf 
Cometh  unto  thee."  "  Tht/  King."  Thou  hast  never  yet  had  a  true  king,  and  there 
is  no  other  true  king  for  thee :  this  is  thy  King.  1.  The  King  who  alone  has  the 
absolute  right  torulethee.  Thou  art  his — his  property.  All  thy  force,  vitality,  faculty 
belong  to  him.     2.  The  King  who  alone  can  remove  thy  evils  and  promote  thy  rights. 

III.  Here  is  a  Monarch  the  character  op  whom  is  exceptionally  good.  1.  He 
is  righteous.  "He  is  just."  The  little  word  "just"  comprehends  all  virtues.  He 
who  is  just  to  himself,  just  to  his  Maker,  just  to  man,  is  the  perfection  of  excellence 
is  all  that  Heaven  requires.  2  He  is  humble.  "Lowly,  and  riding  upon  an  ass." 
Where  there  is  not  genuine  humility  there  is  no  true  greatness;  it  is  essential  to  triie 
majesty.  Pride  is  the  offspring  of  littleness;  it  is  the  contemptible  production  of  a 
contemptible  mind.  No  man  ever  appeared  in  history  whose  humility  approached 
the  humility  of  Christ.  "  He  was  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ; "  he  "  made  himself  of  no 
reputation."  How  different  is  this  righteous,  humble  character  from  that  of  human 
monarchs  1  How  often  have  their  moral  characters  been  amongst  the  foulest  abomina- 
tions in  the  foulest  chapter  of  human  history  5 


OH.  tx.  1— 17J  THE  BOOK  OF  ZKOHARIAH.  lOS 

rV.   HbEE   is    a    MoNABCH    whose     mission    is    TEAKSOENDENTLT    BBNBFIOEjrr.         1. 

It  i$  remedial.  "Having  salvation."  Salvation  1  What  a  comprehensive  word! 
Deliverance  from  all  evil,  restoration  to  all  good.  Worldly  monarchs  often  bring 
destruction.  They  have  never  the  power,  and  seldom  the  will,  to  bring  salvation  to  a 
people.  Any  one  can  destroy ;  God  alone  can  restore.  2.  It  is  specific.  "  And  I  will 
cut  off  the  chariot  from  Ephraim,  and  the  horse  from  Jerusalem,  and  the  battle  bow 
ihall  be  cut  off :  and  he  shall  speak  peace  unto  the  heathen."  He  will  pat  an  end  to 
the  "  chariot,"  the  "  horse,"  the  "  battle  bow,"  of  war,  and  ''  speak  peace "  to  the 
nations.  Peace  I  This  is  what  the  nations  have  always  wanted.  War  has  been  and 
still  is  the  great  curse  of  the  nations.  Here  is  a  King  who  speaks  peace  to  the  nations. 
His  words  one  day  shall  be  universally  obeyed.  "  The  wolf  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb, 
and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid,"  etc.  (Isa.  xi.  6 — 9). 

V.  Hebe  is  a  Monarch  the  kbign  of  whom  is  to  be  dnivebsal.  "  And  his 
dominion  shall  be  from  sea  even  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth." 
The  language  here  employed  was  universally  understood  by  the  Jews  as  embracing  the 
whole  world.  He  claims  universal  dominion ;  he  deser»  es  it,  and  will  one  day  have 
it.  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  oui'  God  and  of  his 
Christ,"  etc. 

Conclusion.  Learn :  1.  The  infinite  goodness  of  God  in  offering  to  the  world 
such  a  King.  It  is  the  world's  great  want.  2.  The  amazing  folly  and  wickedness  of 
man  in  not  accepting  this  Divine  offer.  Not  one- tenth  of  the  human  population  have 
accepted  him.  What  ingratitude  is  here!  and  what  rebellion!  Yes,  and /o%  too.  It 
is  his  characteristic  and  his  glory  as  a  King  that  he  does  not  force  his  way  to  dominion. 
He  submits  hitnself  to  the  choice  of  mankind.  This  monarchy  is  a  moral  monarchy, 
a  monarchy  over  thought,  feeling,  volition,  purpose,  mind. — D.  T. 

Vers.  11,  12. — Historical  facts  illustrations  of  spiritual  realities.  "As  for  thee 
also,  by  the  blood  of  thy  covenant  I  have  sent  forth  thy  prisoners  out  of  the  pit  wherein 
is  no  water.  Turn  you  to  the  strong  hold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope :  even  to-day  do  I 
declare  that  I  will  render  double  unto  thee."  In  these  verses  we  have  three  subjects 
which  demand  and  will  repay  thought. 

I.  Here  is  a  state  of  wbetohbdnbss  which  reminds  its  of  man's  misebablb  con- 
dition AS  A  BiNNEE.  "  As  for  thee  also  " — that  is,  as  for  thee,  daughter  of  Zion  and 
Jerusalem — "  by  the  blood  of  thy  covenant" — that  is,  according  to  the  covenant  vouch- 
safed to  thee  on  Mount  Sinai,  and  ratified  by  the  blood  of  sacrifices  (Exod.  xxiv.  8) — 
"  I  have  sent  forth  thy  prisoners  out  of  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water."  The  Jewish  people 
are  here  represented  as  having  been  prisoners  in  a  pit  without  water.  "  Dungeons 
were  often  pits  without  water,  miry  at  the  bottom,  such  as  Jererhiah  sank  in  when 
confined  (Gen.  xxxvii.  24;  Jer.  xxxviii.  6).  This  image  is  employed  to  represent  the 
misery  of  the  Jewish  exiles  in  Egypt,  Greece,  etc  ,  under  the  successors  of  Alexander, 
especially  under  Aniiochus  Epiphanes,  who  robbed  and  profaned  the  temple,  slew 
thousands,  and  enslaved  more.  In  Zechariah's  time,  the  time  of  the  Persian  rule,  the 
practice  was  common  to  remove  conquered  peoples  to  distant  lands,  in  order  to  prevent 
the  liability  to  revolt  in  their  own  lands."  Very  fairly  may  this  be  taken  as  an  illus- 
tration of  that  miserable  moral  condition  in  which  all  unregenerate  men  are  found. 
They  are  in  a  "pit"  of  ignorance  and  depravity,  shut  out  from  the  true  light,  and 
destitute  of  true  liberty.  It  is  a  "pit"  in  which  the  soul  is.  A  man's  body  may  be 
in  a  "pit,"  and  yet  he  may  possess  light  and  liberty  within.  Men  have  sung  in 
dungeons  ere  now.  But  when  the  soul  is  in  "  a  pit,"  the  man  himself  is  enthralled  in 
darkness  and  bondage. 

II.  Here  is  an  admonition  which  reminds  us  of  man's  doty  as  a  sinneb. 
"Turn  you  to  the  strong  hold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope."  The  prisoners  here  undoubtedly 
signify  the  Jewish  exiles  who  were  in  bondage  in  Egypt  and  Greece  and  other 
countries,  and  whose  restoration  is  here  promised.  Though  they  were  prisoners,  they 
were  "prisoners  of  hope."  God  was  on  their  side,  and  had  made  to  them  the  promise 
of  redemption.  1.  All  sinners  are  "prisoners  of  hope."  Though  bound  by  the  chains 
of  guilt  and  corruption,  there  is  "  hope  "  for  them ;  means  of  deliverance  have  been 
provided,  and  millions  upon  millions  of  prisoners  have  reached  to  the  fuU  enjoyment 
»f  that  deliverance.    There  is  hope ;  for — 


104  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARLA.H.  [oh.  ix.  1—17. 

"  While  the  lamp  holds  out  to  bum, 
The  vilest  sinner  may  return." 

2.  7%eyare"prisonerso/h<^e"  for  whom  a  "strong  hold"  has  been  provided.  If  these 
exiles  would  return  to  Jerusalem,  they  would  be  safe.  Jehovah  himself  would  be  their 
Guard  and  Defence.  Christ  is  the  "  Strong  Hold  "  of  sinners ;  he  is  their  "  Refuge  and 
Strength ;"  "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth ;  "  "  Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  1 "  3.  They  are  "prisoners  o/ 
hope"  who  shovld  flee  to  the  "Strong  HuW"  at  once.  "Even  to-day."  When  the 
prospect  seems  most  gloomy,  when  the  cloud  of  despair  seems  spreading  over  the 
heavens,  and  things  are  at  the  worst,  "even  to-day."  This  is  the  "accepted  time," 
to-day  is  the  "  day  of  salvation.'' 

IIL  Here  is  a  promise  that  gives  encoubagbment  to  the  sinneb.  "  I  will 
render  double  unto  thee."  As  if  Jehovah  had  said  to  the  daughter  of  Zion — Great 
as  has  been  -thine  adversity,  thy  prosperity  shall  be  doubly  greater  (Isa.  Ixi.  7). 
"  Turn  you  to  the  Strong  Hold,"  and  you  shall  not  only  be  saved,  but  more  than  saved. 
"  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts :  and  let  him 
return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him ;  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will 
abundantly  pardon." 

"  God's  boimdless  mercy  is  to  sinfal  man 
Like  to  tlie  ever-wealthy  ocean  ; 

Wliich,  thougb  it  sends  forth  thousand  streams,  'tis  ne'er 
Known,  or  else  seen,  to  be  the  emptier : 
And  though  it  takes  all  in,  'tis  yet  no  more 
Full  and  tilled  full,  than  when  full-filled  before." 

<B.  Herrick.) 

D.  T. 

Vem.  13 — 17. — Qod  works  amongst  the  nations  in  the  interests  of  his  people. 
"  When  1  have  bent  Judah  for  me,"  etc.  "  The  double  recompense  which  the  Lord 
will  make  to  his  people  will  consist  in  the  fact  that  he  not  only  liberates  them  out 
of  captivity  and  bondage,  and  makes  them  into  an  independent  nation,  but  that  he  helps 
them  to  victory  over  the  powers  of  the  world,  so  that  they  will  tread  it  down,  i.e.  com- 
pletely subdue  it.  The  first  thought  is  not  explained  more  fully  because  it  is  contained 
implicite  in  the  promise  of  return  to  a  strong  place,  the '  double '  only  is  more  distinctly 
defined,  namely,  the  victory  over  Javan.  The  expression,  '  I  stretch,'  etc.,  implies  that 
the  Lord  will  subdue  the  enemies  by  Judah  and  Ephraim,  and  therefore  Israel  will  carry 
on  this  conflict  in  the  power  of  its  God "  (Keil).  Eeferring  our  readers  for  minute 
criticisms  on  this  passage  to  such  authors  as  Henderson,  Hengstenberg,  Jusey,  and 
Keilj  we  note  the  great  facts  which  it  contains. 

I.  That  God  wobks  amongst  the  nations  of  the  earth.  God  is  here  represented 
as  raising  up  Zion  against  Greece.  "  And  raised  up  thy  sons,  O  Zion,  against  thy 
sons,  0  Greece."  The  literal  reference,  it  may  be,  is  to  the  help  which  he  would 
render  the  Maccabees,  as  the  heroic  leaders  of  the  Jews,  to  oiercome  the  successors 
of  the  Grecian  Alexander,  Antiochus  Epipbanes,  and  the  other  Grecian  oppressors 
of  Judah.  He  works  with  the  Jew  and  the  Greek,  or  Gentile — the  two  great  divisions 
of  mankind.  He  is  in  their  conflicts  and  their  battles.  Three  remaiks  are  suggested 
concerning  his  work  amongst  men.  1.  He  works  universally  amongst  men.  He  works 
with  the  "sons"  of  Zion  and  the  "sons"  of  Greece.  He  operates  with  all,  with  the 
remote  and  the  distant,  with  the  little  and  the  great,  with  the  good  and  the  bad;  he 
is  in  all  human  history.  All  good  he  originates,  all  evil  he  overrules.  2.  He  works  by 
human  agency  amongst  men.  "  When  I  have  bent  Judah  for  me,  filled  the  bow  with 
Ephraim."  Ephraiin  and  Judah,  which  here  lepresent  tlie  whole  Jewish  people,  are, 
by  a  strong  figure  of  speech,  spoken  of  as  the  bows  and  arrows  of  Jehovah,  tlie  military 
weapons  which  he  would  employ  in  crushing  the  Grecians  under  Antiochus  Epiphanes. 
God  carries  out  liis  purposes  with  man  by  tlie  agency  of  man;  wicked  kings  are  his 
tools,  obscure  saints  arc  his  ministers  of  state.  3.  He  works  manifestly  amongst  mm. 
"  And  the  Lord  shall  be  seen  over  them ; "  or,  as  Eeil  renders  it,  "  Jehovah  will  appear 
above  them."     What  thoughtful  student  of  human  history  has  not  felt  disposed  to 


OH.  z.  1—12.] 


THE  BUOK  OF  ZEOHABIAH. 


lOS 


exclaim,  as  he  has  passed  from  page  to  page,  "  This  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  mar- 
yellous  in  our  eyes"  ?  We  say,  "thoughtful  student;"  for  it  is  only  manifest  to  the 
spiritually  thoughtful.  The  hearts  of  others  are  so  thickly  veiled  with  depravity  and 
wickedness  that  they  see  him  not ;  they  neither  recognize  his  hand  nor  hear  his  voice. 
4.  He  works  terribly  amongst  men.  "  And  his  arrow  shall  go  forth  as  the  lightning : 
and  the  Lord  God  shall  blow  the  trumpet,  and  shall  go  with  whirlwinds  of  the  south." 
"Like  the  lightning  will  his,arrow  go  forth,and  the  Lord  Jehovah  will  blow  the  trumpets, 
and  will  pass  along  in  storms  of  the  south  "  (Eeil).  "Is  there  evil  in  the  city,  and  the 
Lord  hath  not  done  it?  "  (Amos  iii.  6) — done  it  by  permission  ?  He  is  in  the  crashings 
of  conflagratiug  cities,  in  the  booming  thunders  of  contending  armies,  in  the  wild  whirls- 
winds  of  battling  kingdoms;  with  Mm  there  is  "  terrible  majesty  "  as  he  proceeds  on 
his  march  in  human  history. 

IL  God  wobks  amongst  the  nations  of  the  baeth  in  the  interests  of  his 
PEOPLE.  1.  He  works  for  their  defence.  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  shall  defend  them ; ''  or, 
"  shelter  them."  He  guards  his  saints ;  they  are  as  the  apple  of  his  eye ;  he  is  their  Shield  ' 
and  Defence.  2.  He  works  for  their  victory.  "They  shall  devour,  and  subdue  with 
sling-stones,"  etc.  "Jehovah  of  hosts  shall  protect  them,  and  they  shall  devour  and 
tread  doij^n  the  sling-stones,  they  shall  drink,  they  shall  be  noisy,  as  those  who  drink 
wine ;  they  shall  be  full  as  the  bowl,  as  the  corners  of  the  altar  "  (Henderson).  The  idea 
is  their  complete  triumph  over  their  enemies.  Hengstenberg  observes  that  there  is  not 
the  least  indication  that  a  spiritual  conflict  is  intended.  Quite  true,  but  a  spiritual 
conflict  it  may  illustrate,  and  its  victory  too.  In  such  a  conHict  we  are  all  engaged, 
and  God  has  promised,  if  we  are  faithful,  to  make  us  more  than  conquerors.  3.  Sa 
works  for  their  salvation.  "  And  the  Lord  their  God  shall  save  them  in  that  day  ai 
the  flock  of  his  people."  They  shall  be  restored  to  the  fold  and  guarded  by  Jehovah 
as  their  Shepherd.  God  works  for  the  entire  salvation  of  his  people — salvation  froo^ 
all  evil,  salvation  to  all  good.  4.  He  works  for  their  glory.  "  They  shall  be  as  the 
stones  of  a  crown,  lifted  up  as  an  ensign  upon  his  land;  "  or,  as  Hengstenberg  render* 
it,  "  For  crowned  jewels  shall  they  be  rising  up  upon  his  land."  There  is  true  glory 
awaiting  the  good.  There  is  a  crown  of  glory  laid  up  in  heaven,  etc,  6.  He  works  for 
their  perfection.  "  For  how  great  is  its  goodness,  and  how  great  is  its  beauty  I  Cora 
shall  make  the  young  men  cheerful,  and  new  wine  the  maids."  We  accept  the  render- 
ing of  Eeil  here,  which  is  not  only  faithful  to  the  original,  but  in  harmony  with  the 
context.  The  prophet  is  speaking  of  the  high  privileges  of  God's  people,  and  not  of 
ihe  excellences  of  the  Supreme.  It  is  an  exclamation  of  admiration  of  the  high 
privileges  of  the  godly, 

CoNOLUSlON.  As  much  of  the  writings  of  this  prophet  admit  of  so  many  interpre- 
tations, and  are  perhaps  impossible  fully  to  understand,  we  have  thought,  not  only  the 
most  useful,  but  the  safest  way  of  treatment  to  be  the  employment  of  statements  and 
phrases  to  illustrate  those  spiritual  realities  which  are  important  to  man  in  all  times  and 
places.  It  is  true  that  God  works  amongst  men,  and  it  is  true  that  he  works  amongst 
men  in  the  interests  of  those  who  love  and  serve  him.  May  we  be  of  that  number, 
and  thus  realize  in  our  experience  the  fact  that  "  all  things  work  together  for  good  to 
them  that  love  God,  to  them  who  are  the  called  according  to  his  purpose"! — D.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  X. 

Vers.  1,  2. — §  4.  A  connectiDg  link 
between  the  last  section  and  the  next.  The 
condition  for  obtaining  the  promised  blessings 
is  that  they  are  to  be  sought  from  the  Lord, 
not/rom  idols. 

Ver.  1. — Ask  ye  of  the  Lord  rain.  The 
promise  of  abundance  at  the  end  of  the  last 
chapter  suggests  to  the  prophet  to  make  a 
■peoia]   application  to  the  practice  of  his 


countrymen.  They  must  put  their  trust  in 
God  alone  for  the  sapply  of  temporal  as 
well  as  spiritual  bounties.  The  latter  rain 
was  due  at  the  time  of  the  vernal  equinox, 
and  was  necessary  in  order  to  swell  the 
maturing  grain  (comp.  Dent.  xi.  14).  The 
early  rain  occurred  at  the  autumnal  equinox. 
It  was  considered  as  a  special  manifestation 
of  God's  providential  care  that  these 
periodical  rains  were  received  (see  Isa.  xxx. 
23 ;  Jer.  v.  24 ;  Joel  ii.  23).  So  the  Lord 
shall  make  bright  clouds ;  rather,  Jehovah 


106 


THE   BOOK   OF   ZECHABIAH. 


[OH.  X.  1—12. 


makelh  the  lightningB.  ThnndeTstormt 
accompany  the  periodical  rains.  Ve  must 
ask  of  him,  and  ye  shall  have.  Septuagint, 
Kiptas  ^irottjiTE  tl>avTa<rlas,  "  The  Lord  makes 
flaehes  "  (of  lightning?);  Vulgate,  Dominnt 
faeiet  nives,  where  tlie  right  reading  is  sup- 

Sosed  to  be  nuhes  (comp.  Ps.  oxxxv.  7; 
ob  zzxviii.  25,  26).  Give  them  showers  of 
rain.  Abundant  rain,  as  Job  zxxvii.  6. 
The  address  is  now  in  the  third  person. 
Grass.  All  vegetable  food  for  man  and 
beasi,  as  in  Gen.  i.  11,  29 ;  Ps.  evi.  14 ; 
Amos  vii.  2. 

Ver.  2. — ror.  The  prophet  supports  his 
exhortation  to  pray  to  Jehovah  by  showing 
the  worth] essnesB  of  trust  in  idols.  Idols; 
teraphim.  What  these  were  is  not  known 
for  certain.  They  seem  tu  have  been  images 
of  human  form  and  sometimes  of  life  size, 
oorresponding  in  some  degree  to  tlie  lares 
or  penates  of  the  Bomans  (Gen.  xxxi.  19 ; 
1  Bam.  xix.  13).  They  were  supposed  to  be 
capable  of  bestowing  temporal  blessings 
and  giving  oracles  (Judg.  xvii.  5 ;  xviii.  5, 
24;  Ezek.  xxi.  21).  Have  spoken  vanity. 
Gave  worthless,  misleading  responses.  The 
mention  of  teraphim  in  this  passage  is 
thought  to  indicate  a  date  anterior  to  the 
Captivity ;  but  the  prophet  is  speaking  of 
past  events,  of  the  results  of  these  base 
superstitions  in  former,  not  present,  time. 
Three  kinds  of  superstition  are  mentioned. 
Septuagint,  oi  iirotpeeyyineyoi,  "speaking" 
images.  These  are  the  first.  Secondly 
eome  the  soothsayers,  the  diviners,  per- 
sons who  pretended  to  predict  the  future 
(Jer.  xxvii.  0 ;  xxix.  8 ;  Ezek.  xxi.  21 ; 
Hab.  ii.  18).  Have  told  false  dreams ;  Vul- 
gate, $omuiatoret  loeuti  sunt  fruslra ;  LXX., 
ri  ivintrui  t^euS^  iKi\ovv,  "spake  false 
dreams."  The  Vulgate  seems  to  be  correct, 
"  dreams,  i.e.  dreamers,  spake  deceit."  This 
is  the  third  class  among  the  practisers  of 
superstitious  observances.  They  oomfort  in 
Tain,  when  they  promise  temporal  blessings 
(Job  xxi.  31).  Therefore  they  went  their 
way  as  a  flock.  Because  they  trusted  in 
these  vain  superstitions,  the  Israelites  had 
to  leave  their  own  place,  were  led  into 
exile  like  a  flock  of  sheep  driven  away  for 
sale  or  slaughter  (Jer.  1.  17).  They  were 
troubled.  They  were  and  are  still  oppressed 
by  the  heathen.  Because  there  was  (ta)  no 
shepherd.  Because  they  had  no  king  to 
guard  and  lead  them,  they  fell  under  the 
power  of  foreign  rulers,  who  ill  treated  and 
oppressed  them  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  5 ;  Neh.  v.  15). 

Vers.  3,  4. — §  5.  The  evil  rulers  set  over 
them  for  their  sins  shall  be  removed,  and 
Israel  shall  be  firmly  estahlished. 

Ver.  3. — Mine  anger  was  (is)  kindled 
tf«init    the    shepherds.      These    heathen 


rulers  were  indeed  God's  instruments  in 
punishing  his  people,  but  they  had  exceeded 
their  commission,  and  ufflioted  Israel  in 
order  to  carry  out  their  own  evil  designs, 
and  now  they  themselves  shall  be  chastised. 
Some  commentators  take  "the  shepherds" 
to  be  the  rulers  of  Israel  civil  and  ecclesias- 
tical, comparing  Ezek.  xxxiv.  2, 5,  etc.  But 
the  context  leads  us  to  consider  them  as 
those  who  took  the  place  of  rulers  of  Israel 
when  she  had  no  shepherd  of  her  own  (ver. 
2).  I  punished  (un2Z  punish)  the  goats  (&eU- 
wetJiers);  Uteia,l\j,  will  visit  upon;  i.e.  will 
chastise.  The  same  word  (paquad)  is  used 
in  the  next  clause  in  a  good  sense.  The 
"  goats  "  are  the  leading  men,  those  powerful 
for  evil,  as  Isa.  xiv.  9.  Hath  visited  his 
flook.  The  reason  why  the  evil  shepherds 
are  punished  is  because  God  visits  his  flock 
in  love  and  care,  to  see  their  state  and  to 
relieve  them  from  trouble  (Zeph.  ii.  7). 
The  house  of  Judah  here  includes  all  the 
nation,  to  which  it  afterwards  gave  its 
name.  Hath  made  (shall  make)  them  as  his 
goodly  horse.  The  Israelites  shall  not  only 
be  delivered  from  oppression,  but  God  shall 
use  them  aa  a  stately  war-horse,  richly 
caparisoned,  to  tread  down  enemies  and 
triumph  over  them.  So  he  said  before 
(ch.  ix.  13)  that  he  would  make  Judah  his 
bow  and  Epbraim  his  arrow.  (For  a 
description  of  the  war-horse,  see  Job  xxxiz. 
19 — 25;  oomp.  Bev.  vi.  2;  xix.  14,  where 
Christ  is  represented  riding  on  a  white 
horse,  and  his  saints  following  him  on 
white  horses.) 

Ver.  4. — The  firmness  and  security  of 
Judah,  thus  "visited,"  is  announced  in 
terms  admitting  of  further  application.  Ont 
of  him  came  forth  (shaU  came).  Ont  of 
Judah,  mentioned  in  ver.  3.  Others,  not 
so  suitably,  explain,  "  out  of  Jehovah,"  in 
contrast  to  Hos.  viii.  4.  The  succeeding 
figures  are  taken  from  the  building  ami 
furuishiug  of  a  house.  The  comer.  The 
coruor-stone  (Isa.  xxviii.  16).  From  Judah 
herself  shall  come  the  prince  on  whom  the 
whole  edifice  shall  rest;  i.e.  primarily,  she 
shall  be  independent  of  foreign  rulers ;  and 
secondly,  from  Judah  shall  come  the  Mes- 
siah, "  the  Head-stone  of  the  corner  "  (Matt, 
xxi.  42  ;  Eph.  ii.  20;  Heb.  vii.  14).  Septua- 
gint (taking  the  noun  as  a  verb),  xai  4t' 
auToB  M0\ftlie^  "et  ex  ipso  respexit" 
(Jerome).  The  nail.  The  word  (yathed) 
is  taken  for  the  peg  that  fastens  the  cord  of 
a  tent,  for  a  nail  used  in  building  with 
timber,  or  a  peg  for  hanging  up  arms  and 
utensils  on  the  walls  of  a  house.  In  which- 
ever sense  we  take  it  here,  it  implies  one 
who  consolidates  or  upholds  the  political 
constitution  (Isa.  xxii.  23,  24).  The  battle 
bow.  The  people  shall  tbemselvcg  have 
arms  and  military  skill  to  protect  them 


CH.  X.  1 12.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH. 


107 


against  all  asBailauts.  Oppressor;  rather, 
ru2er,  as  Isa.  iii.  12;  Ix.  17.  Judah  shall 
have  every  leader  necessary  for  all  emergen- 
oies.  Septuagint,  tm  i  i^ehaitiav  iy  r^ 
oir^,  "he  that  expelleth  togetlier;"  Vul- 
gate, omnis  exactor  eiinul.  If  the  word  be 
taken  in  the  sense  of  these  versions  and  the 
Authorized  Version,  the  clause  would  mean 
tiiat  the  Israelites  shall  subjugate  their 
enemies,  and  oppress  them,  and  exact 
tribute  from  thein.  The  word  (noges) 
usually  means  "  taskmaster." 

Vers.  5—7. — §  6.  Thus  equipped,  Israel 
and  Judah  united  shall  triumph  over  their 
foes. 

Ver.  5. — Which  tread  down  their  enemies 
in  the  mire  of  the  streets.  "  Their  enemies  " 
is  supplied  naturally  from  the  context. 
Others  take  the  participle  "treading" 
intransitively,  "  treacling  upon  street  mire," 
the  enemy  being  figuratively  denoted  by 
"  mire."  The  Greek  and  Latin  Versions  give, 
"  treading  the  mud  in  the  stretts  "  (comp. 
Ps.  xviii.  42;  Micah  vii.  10).  Xhey  shall 
fight.  Tliey  shall  carry  on  long-continued 
war  successfully  because  Gtod  is  with  them. 
The  riders  on  horses.  Tlie  strong  force  of 
cavalry  arrayed  against  them  shall  fall 
before  Israel,  and  be  put  to  shame.  The 
Israelite  forces  were  for  the  most  part 
infantry,  while  the  principal  strength  of 
their  enemies  consisted  in  cavalry  (Dan. 
xi.  40). 

Ver.  6. — House  of  Joseph ;  i.e.  Israel,  or 
the  ten  tribes,  called  Ephraim  in  the  next 
Terse  (see  note  on  Amos  v.  6).  Israel  and 
Judah  alike  shall  share  in  the  contest  and 
the  victory,  under  the  protection  of  Gtod. 
I  will  bring  them  again  to  plaoe  them. 
This  is  one  word  in  Hebrew,  which  may 
mean  either  "I  bring  them  again,"  or  "I 
make  them  dwell."  The  Authorized  Ver- 
sion unwarrantably  combines  both  signifi- 
cations. Septuagint,  KaroiKtie  airois,  "I 
will  settle  them ; "  Vulgate,  convertam  eos. 
It  is  better  taken  here,  in  contrast  with 
"  cast  off"  in  a  following  clause,  in  the 
sense  of  "  I  will  cause  them  to  dwell,"  i.e. 
in  safety  and  comfort.  As  though  I  had 
not  oast  them  olT.  The  happy  restoration 
shall  make  them  forget  former  troubles  and 
the  calamities  of  their  rejection  (Isa.  xliii. 
18,  19).  Will  hear  them  (cli.  xiii.  9;  Isa. 
Iviii.  9). 

Ver.  7.— They  of  Ephraim;  i.e.  as  well 
as  Judah,  shall  be  lieroes.  Not  many 
members  of  the  northern  kingdom  returned 
at  first  from  the  Captivity ;  but  the  prophet 
gives  the  assurance  that  they  shall  come 
and  prove  themselves  mighty  warriors.  As 
through  wine.  They  shall  hasten  to  the 
battle  cheerfully  and  exultingly,  like  men 
refreshed  and  strengthened  with  wine  (see 


oh.  ix.   15;    Ps.   Ixxviii.   65,  66).      Their 
children  shall  see  it.    Though  unable  (o 
participate  in  the  struggle,  their  children 
siiall  share  the  universal  joy.    Their  heart 
shall  rejoice  in  the  lord  (Ps.  Ixiii.  7 ;  Isa. 
xli.  16  ;  Joel  ii.  23  ;  Hab.  iii.  18).  Attempts 
have  been  made  to  find  the  fulfilment  of 
these   prophecies  (ver.  3,  etc.)  in  certain 
events  of  Maccabean  times.    Thus,  accord- 
ing to  Patritius,  the   sin  for  which   the 
Hebrews  suffered  such  distress  at  the  hands 
of  tlie  SeleuoidsB  (ver.  2)  was  their  imitation 
of  heathen  practices  mentioned  in  1  Maco. 
i.  13—15  and  2  Maco.  iv.  7—17,  when  the 
high  priest  purchased  his  office  by  a  bribe, 
and  the  other  priests  followed  Greek  cus- 
toms.   The  prophet  is  supposed  to  refer 
specially  to  this  state  of  things  when  he 
says,  "They  were  troubled  because  there 
was  no  shepherd.     Mine  anger  was  kindled 
against    the    shepherds."     But    we    have 
shown  above  that  Zechariah  is  here  speak- 
ing of  the  past,  not  of  the  future.     Tliere  is 
more  verisimilitude  in  discerning  the  wars 
and  victories  of  Judas,  his  brothers  and 
successors,  in  the  allusions  of  vers.  4 — 7. 
The  truth  is  that  such   descriptions  suit 
many  different  events,  and  liave  various 
applications.    Though  their  complete  fulfil- 
ment may  be  expected  only  in   Messianic 
times  and  circumstances,  yet  we  may  see 
many  anticipatory  and  preparative  trans- 
actions, whioli  are  meant  to  introduce  the 
final  accomplishment.    The  Jewish  prophet 
is  not  always  foretelling  certain   definite 
events.    Oftentimes  he  is  teaching,  warn- 
ing, and  exhorting;   and  generally  he  is 
enunciating  great  principles,  the  truth  of 
which  shall  be  clear  in  the  future,  lather 
than  predicting  particular  facts.     Not  un- 
frequently  commentators    have    neglected 
this  consideration,  and  sought  too  curiously 
to  restrict  the  prophet's  words  to  some  one 
issue.  It  may  be  noted,  further,  that  where 
the     prophetic    language   couceraing   the 
destiny  of  the  restored  people  seems  to  be 
exaggerated  and  not  borne  out  by  subse- 
quent facts,  the  promises  are  always  con- 
ditioned by  the  moral  state  of  the  recipients. 
If  they  answered  fully  and  consistenlly  to 
God's  call,  the  result  would  be  sueh  as  was 
predicted.     That  the  event  in  all  respects 
did  not  correspond  with  the  high  ideal  pre- 
viously announced  must  be  attributed,  not 
to  the  prophet's  mistake,  but  to  the  people's 
waywardness  and  disobedience. 

Vers.  8— 12.— §  7.  The  scalteral  people 
shall  he  gathered  from  all  parts  of  the  world, 
and  dwell  in  their  own  land,  under  the  pro- 
tection of  Jehovah. 

Ver.  8.— I  will  hiss  for  tham;  (rr)fim£ 
auToTs,"  I  will  signal  to  them  "  (Septuagint); 


108 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


[oh.  X.  1—12. 


tibUabo  eU  (Vulgato)-  Tlie  slightest  sum- 
mons will  bring  them  when  God  wills  the 
return  of  the  dispersed.  The  "hissing" 
is  the  whistling  or  tinkling  with  which 
bees  are  allured  to  swarm  (Isa.  v.  26 ;  vii. 
18,  19).  I  have  redeemed  them.  They 
were  Tirtoally  delivered  from  captivity  and 
exile,  though  all  had  not  taken  advantage 
of  the  deliverance.  They  shall  increase 
as  they  have  increased.  The  same  promise 
Is  made  in  Ezek.  ixxvi.  10, 11.  The  allu- 
sion is  to  the  marvellous  growth  of  the 
Israelite  nation  in  Egypt  (Exod.  i.  7,  12). 
The  prophets  often  announce  this  fulfilment 
of  the  promise  mnde  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xiii. 
16;  XV.  5,  etc.)  after  the  return  (see  Isa.  liv. 
2 ;  Hob.  i.  10 ;  Micah  ii.  12). 

Ver.  9. — 1  will  sow  them  among  the 
people  {peoples).  The  "  sowing"  here  does 
not  mean  scattering,  but  increase,  and  this 
was  to  go  on  while  they  were  dispersed 
among  the  nations.  The  word  is  used  in 
the  same  sense  in  Hos.  ii.  23 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  27. 
This  continued  dispersion  was  a  part  of 
their  discipline,  a  test  of  tlieir  loyalty  to  God. 
They  shall  remember  me.  In  the  countries 
where  they  are  living  they  shall  worship- 
the  Lord  and  observe  his  Law,  and  be  a 
witness  for  him  among  tlie  heathen.  They 
shiiu  live  with  their  children  (Ezek.  xxxvii. 
14).  The  promised  blessing  is  not  for  » 
time  only,  out  perpetual.  Turn  again;  i.e. 
return  to  their  own  land  (Isa.  xxxv.  10). 
It  cannot  mean,  "  turn  to  the  Lord,"  for  they 
are  said  already  to  remember  the  Lord,  and 
their  "  conversion  must  precede  the  promise 
of  life."  The  next  verse  describes  the  return 
more  particularly. 

Ver.  10.— Egypt  .  .  .  Assyria.  It  is  cer- 
tain that  there  was  a  large  body  of  Jews  in 
Egypt  at  tliis  time  (Jer.  xliii.  6,  7) ;  and  to 
Assyria  the  ten  tribes,  who  are  here  specially 
mentioned  under  the  name  Ephraim,  had 
been  deported.  Besides  this,  Assyria  is 
often  used  loosely  for  Western  Asia  or 
Babylonia,  of  whicli,  after  its  submission,  it 
formed  a  most  important  feature  (see  2 
Kings  xxiii.  29  ;  Ezra  vi.  22 ;  and  in  the 
Apocrypha,  1  Esdr.  vii.  15 ;  Judith  i.  7 ;  ii. 
I).  In  the  '  Oracula  Sibyllina,'  the  Assyri- 
ans are  continually  confused  with  Persians, 
Babylonians,  and  other  Eastern  nations. 
Egypt  and  Assyria  are  here  used  as  types 
of  the  countries  to  which  Jews  had  been 
banished  (comp.  Hos.  xi.  11).  Gilead  and 
Lebanon.  A  designation  of  the  northern 
district  of  Palestine,  on  both  sides  of  the 
Jordan,  in  which  these  tribes  had  been 
originally  settled.  This  region  had  been  most 
exposed  to  hostile  attacks,  and  was  the  first 
to  be  depopulated.  Place  shall  not  be  found 
for  them  (Isa.  xlix.  20).  Josephus  testifies 
to  the  teeming  population  of  Galilee  in 
Uter  times  ('  Bell.  Jud.,'  ii.  3.  1 ;  iii.  3.  2 ; 


iv.  1.  2;  7.  5).  Septuagint,  "There  shall 
not  even  one  of  them  be  left  behind,"  i.e.  in 
exile. 

Ver.  11. — He  shall  pass  through  the  sea 
with  affliction.  In  bringing  his  people  back 
the  Lord  is  ready  to  repeat  the  miracles  of 
the  Exodus.  This  is  the  general  meaning 
of  the  passage ;  but  the  details  present  diffi- 
culties. For  "he  shall  pass"  the  LXX. 
gives,  "  they  shall  pass  through."  But  the 
reference  is  plainly  to  Jehovah,  as  the  follow- 
ing clause  shows.  The  next  two  words  are  in 
apposition,  "the  sea,"  "affliction."  Bevlsed 
Version,  "  the  sea  of  affliction;"  Septuagint, 
!i>  6a\iirari  ffrevii,  "  in  a  strait  sea ; "  or,  as 
the  Hebrew  cannot  be  so  translated,  "  in  a 
sea,  a,  strait ; "  Vulgate,  in  maris  freto.  It 
seems  best  to  take  the  two  words  simply  as, 
"the  sea,  which  is  affliction."  The  Bed 
Sea,  through  which  Jehovah  led  his  people, 
was  a  figure  of  tlie  sufferings  which  they 
had  endured  iu  Egypt,  and  brought  destruc- 
tion upon  their  enemies  (comp.  Exod.  xiv. 
16,  17,  24,  etc.).  Smite  the  waves  (Exod. 
XV.  b;  Isa.  xi.  15,  16;  Ii.  10).  The  river. 
The  Nile.  The  drying  up  of  the  waters  of 
the  Nile  is  a  figure  of  the  humiliation  of 
the  nations  which  have  been  guilty  of  en- 
slaving the  chosen  people.  The  Kile,  the 
representative  of  Egypt,  is  mentioned  be- 
cause of  the  allusion  to  the  bondage  in 
Egypt  running  through  the  paragraph. 
The  pride  of  Assyria.  Pride  is  noted  as 
the  cliaracteristio  of  Assyria  (comp.  Isa.  x. 
7,  etc.;  Ezek.  xxxi.  3,  10).  The  sceptre, 
This  may  refer  to  the  decadence  of  the 
power  of  Egypt,  and  the  transference  of 
royal  authority  to  strangers;  but,  regardi- 
ing  the  immediate  context,  we  had  better 
translate,  "the  rod  of  Egypt,"  and  see  in  it 
an  allusion  to  the  oppression  of  the  task- 
masters during  the  sojourn  in  that  land. 
All  such  tyranny  shall  be  at  an  end  (comp. 
Isa.  X.  24). 

Ver.  12. — I  will  strengthen  them  in  the 
lord.  I  will  strengthen  them  with  myself — 
with  my  grace  and  power.  They  shall  walk 
up  and  down  in  his  Name.  They  shall  live 
in  obedience  to,  and  dependence  upon,  the 
Lord  (Micah  iv.  5,  where  see  note).  The 
Septuagint  reads,  "  They  shall  boast  them- 
selves." So  God  wiU  work  wonders  to 
deliver  his  people  from  the  captivity  of  the 
devil,  destroying  all  enemies,  visible  and 
invisible,  which  array  themselves  against 
him.  This  is  the  final  fulfilment  of  the 
prophecy.  Thn  complete  restoration  from 
the  Captivity  is  thd  immediate  subject  of 
the  prophet's  words;  and  between  these 
two  we  may  see  a  reference  to  the  conver- 
sion of  the  Jews  in  the  time  of  Christ  and 
the  apostles,  which  shall  go  on  until  the 
end. 


1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEOHAEIAH.  10» 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — 2%«  secret  of  victory,  "  Ask  ye  of  the  Lord  rain  in  the  time,"  etc. 
In  the  last  passage  the  Church  of  God  (in  its  new  Testament  form,  as  we  supposed) 
was  presented  to  ua  under  the  figures  of  an  army  (ver.  13,  etc.) ;  a  flock  (ver.  16) ; 
and  a  field  which  the  Lord  had  blessed  (ver.  17).  In  the  present  verses  we  find  ali 
these  figures  again  employed :  the  field  (ver.  1) ;  the  flock  (vers.  2,  3) ;  the  army  or 
host  (vers.  3 — 5).  It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  we  have  also  presented  to  us  the 
same  topic  of  illustration,  viz.  the  New  Testament  Church ;  and  that,  further,  under 
the  same  circumstances  and  at  the  same  time  as  before.  The  distinction  to  be  noted 
is,  that,  in  the  present  passage,  we  have  a  deeper  view  of  the  subject — the  secret  nature 
of  that  Church  being  explained  and  enforced  by  describing  to  us  (1)  a  special  gift; 
(2)  a  grievous  failure ;  (3)  a  signal  sticcess. 

I.  A  SPECIAL  GIFT.  According  to  the  flrst  verse,  there  is  something  to  be  "  asked 
of  the  Lord; "  something  appointed  by  him,  having  its  proper  "  time ; "  something  to 
be  hoped  for  from  him :  "  the  Lord  shall  give ; "  something  to  be  hoped  for  by  all :  "  to 
every  one."  It  is  figured  to  us  as  "  rain."  What  does  it  signify  ?  In  the  present 
connection,  what  can  it  signify  but  the  gift  of  God's  Spirit  (Isa.  xliv.  3;  Joel  ii.  28)? 
How  specially  were  men  taught,  in  New  Testament  times,  to  "  ask  "  for  this  gift  (see 
Luke  iL  9 — 13,  where  men  nine  times  over  are  encouraged  in  praying  for  this  very 
blessing;  also  John  iv.  10;  vii.  37 — 39)1  How  expressly,  again,  were  those  "latter" 
days  the  appointed  "time"  for  this  blessing  (Luke  xxiv.  49;  John  xvi.  7;  Acts 
i.'4)  1  In  what  abundant  "  showers,"  once  more,  was  it  given  in  these  primitive  times, 
as  it  were,  "  to  every  one  "  "  in  the  field  "  (Acts  ii.  17 ;  viii.  17 — 19 ;  xL  17 ;  Gal.  iii. 
2, 3)  1  These  were  some  of  the  things  which  caused  the  dispensation  then  commenced 
to  be  called  "  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit " !  In  short,  without  this  holy  "  rain  "  from 
above,  the  strictly  "Christian"  Church  could  never  have  come  into  existence.  Much 
less,  of  course,  could  it  have  continued  alive. 

II.  A  GRIEVOUS  FAILURE.  The  State  of  things  in  the  Jewish  Church  at  the  coming 
of  Christ  seems  described  to  us  next.  In  one  sense  that  Church,  as  a  body,  though 
free  from  the  grosser  idolatry  of  earlier  days,  was  worshipping  "  idols"  of  its  own.  Its 
members  trusted  to  merely  external  rites,  and  names,  and  privileges,  and  professions 
(Bom.  ii.  17 — 20 ;  Matt.  iiL  9 ;  xxiii.  14,  23,  30,  etc.).  As  a  consequence,  they  never 
obtained  ( Jer.  xiv.  2,  etc.),  as  they  never  desired,  the  gift  spoken  of  here.  Failing  of  this, 
they  failed  altogether,  notwithstanding  all  their  privileges  (Rom.  iii.  1,  2),  as  a  Church. 
This  evidenced  at  the  time — as  apparently  hero  jjredicted  beforehand — in  various  ways. 
For  example,  by  the  absence  among  them :  1.  0/  solid  knowledge  and  truth.  "  The 
diviners  have  seen  a  lie,  and  have  told  false  dreams"  (comp.  Matt.  xv.  14;  xxiii.  16, 
19,  24,  26 ;  John  ix.  40,  41).  2.  0/  saving  knowledge  and  truth.  "  They  comfort  in 
vain  "  (see  Matt.  v.  20 ;  Bom,  ix.  31 ;  perhaps  also  Mark  x.  20,  21).  3.  0/  proper 
pastoroU  oversight.  (See  end  of  ver.  2 ;  and  comp.  Matt.  ix.  36.)  Also  by  the  presence 
among  them :  4.  0/  special  judgments  on  those  who  professed  (Matt,  xxiii.  2)  to  be 
"shepherds"  (ver.  3).  (See  Matt,  xxiii.  throughout,  with  its  sevenfold  denunciation  of 
"  woe"  on  the  "scribes  and  Pharisees.")  Was  there  not  "failure,"  indeed,  when  such 
language  could  be  used  as  that  found  in  Matt,  xxiii.  33  and  xxi.  13  ? 

III.  A  SIGNAL  SUCCESS.  1.  Its  nature.  Being  the  same  as  that  noted  before  on 
ch.  ix.  14,  15,  viz.  success  in  preaching  the  gospel  of  Christ  and  bringing  sinners 
beneath  its  power.  2.  Its  secret.  This  found  in  the  fact  that,  by  the  coming  of 
Christ,  "the  Lord  of  hosts"  (ver.  3)  had  "visited"  his  people  and  "flock"  (comp. 
Luke  i.  68,  78,  -79 ;  vii.  16 ;  and  note,  in  ver.  5,  the  expression,  "  They  shall  fight, 
because  the  Lord  is  with  them").  3.  Its  instruments.  These  very  notable,  (l)  aa 
being  men  of  "  Judah,"  or  Jews  (as  all  tlie  apostles  were) ;  men,  i.e.,  belonging  to  that 
very  Church  and  people  which,  in  religious  matters,  as  j  ust  now  noted,  had  so  egregiously 
failed.  Possibly,  also,  (2)  as  being,  some  of  them,  men  like  Saul  of  Tarsus,  who,  at 
first,  were  "  opprespors^'  (see  also  John  i.  46).  And  certainly,  (3)  as  being  able  to 
"tread  down"  obstacles,  and  "confound"  opponents  in  a  very  marvellous  way  (se* 
Acts  iv.  13 ;  V.  33 ;  vi.  10 ;  ix.  22 ;  xviii.  28 ;  and  perhaps,  also,  xxvi.  28). 

How  strikingly  all  this  teaches  us  the  ahsoliit*  need  of  the  Spirit  of  God  I  I.  For  al) 


ilO  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHABIAH.  [oh.  x.  1—1?. 

true  religious  life.  It  was  the  absence  of  this  which  made  the  Jewish  Church  the  dead 
thing  (Luke  xvii.  37)  that  it  was,  like  the  old  world  and  Sodom  (Luke  xvii.  27,  29) 
when  Noah  and  Lot  had  gone  out  of  them.  All  their  many  other  priTUjeiges  (see 
Rom_.  ii.  17—20 ;  iii.  1,  2 ;  is.  4,  5)  were  of  no  avail  without  this.  2.  For  all  true 
religious  work.  It  was  the  presence  of  this,  secured  by  that  coming  and  work  of 
Christ  which  we  have  supposed  to  be  referred  to  in  ver.  3  (comp.  Acts  ii.  33),  which 
encountered  and  overcame  both  the  Jewish  Church  and  the  Gentile  world  (see  Acts  i.  8 ; 
V.  32;  1  Pet.  i.  12).  How  essential,  indeed,  was  that  gift,  which  more  than  supplied, 
in  one  sense,  the  presence  of  Christ  himself  (John  xvi.  7 — 10)! 

Vers.  6 — 12. — The  restoration  of  Israel.  "And  I  will  strengthen  the  house  of 
Judah,"  etc.  The  separate  mention  in  this  passage  (vers.  6,  7)  of  Judah,  Joseph, 
and  Ephraim,  taken  together  with  that  of  Gilead,  Lebanon,  Egypt,  and  Assyria,  in 
vers.  10,  11,  seems  an  indication  that  we  now  have  to  do  especially  with  Israel  "after 
the  flesh."  The  previous  verses  spoke  of  "  the  times  of  the  Grentiles,"  and  of  the  great 
spiritual  conquests  to  be  inaugurated  amongst  the  Gentiles  during  those  times  by 
teacher-warriors  of  Jewish  birth.  "  Jerusalem  "  itself,  however,  in  all  the  mean  time, 
was  to  be  "trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles"  (Luke  xxi.  24).  What  was  to  happen  to  it 
when  that  long  "  tribulation  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  29 ;  Mark  xiii.  24)  should  be  over  ?  The 
present  passage  seems  to  reply,  teaching  us,  apparently,  that  the  literal  Israel  should 
then  be  restored  (1)  to  their  former /awoar ;  and  (2)  to  their  former  inheritance. 

I.  Thbie  kestokation  to  favour.  We  may  notice :  1.  Its  reality ;  as  shown  by 
the  expressions,  "  I  will  strengthen"  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxx.  14,  15,  17);  "I  will  save  ;"  "  I 
have  mercy  upon  them;"  "I  will  hear  them"  (comp.  Ps.  Ixvi.  18 — 20).  2.  Ill 
vmiversality ;  as  embracing  both  "Judah"  and  "Joseph,"  the  two  rival  and  long- 
divided  leading  families  of  Jacob  (see  Isa.  xi.  13,  14 ;  Jer.  iii.  18 ;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  16, 
17,  etc.).  3.  Its  completeneis.  What  "  Judah  "  needs,  viz.  "  strengthening,"  being 
accomplished  for  it ;  what  "  Joseph "  needs,  as  having  been  more  heavily  punished, 
viz.  "saving,"  being  accomplished  for  it;  and  that,  in  both  cases,  so  effectually  as 
entirely  to  obliterate  the  evil  past :  "  They  shall  be  as  though  I  had  not  cast  them  off." 
4.  Its  blessedness.  Causing  special  rejoicing  and  exhilaration,  like  that  occasioned 
through  "wine."  5.  Its  solidity.  Causing  joy  in  the  "heart"  (comp.  Ps.  iv.  7,  and 
context).  6.  Its  permanence.  Their  "  children  "  sharing  in  the  joy  as  well  as  them- 
selves (comp.  Isa.  Ixv.  22,  23,  "  their  offspring  with  them  "). 

II.  Their  restoration  (apparently)  to  Palestine.  See,  generally,  ver.  6,  "I 
will  bring  them  again  to  place  ihem."  And  observe,  more  particularly  :  1.  I%e  call. 
They  are  to  be  summoned  aloud  ("  I  will  hiss,"  comp.  Isa.  v.  26),  as  people  living  afai 
off;  also  as  people  belonging  to  God,  because  "redeemed  ;"  as  rightly  also  belonging 
to  that  place  in  which  they  had  formerly  "increased"  so  amazingly;  and  possibly, 
once  more,  as  having  been  long  intended  for  this  very  destiny,  like  seed  "sown" 
(ver.  9)  with  the  nltimate  object  of  reaping  a  harvest  to  correspond.  2.  The  response. 
However  "far  off,"  however  widely  dispersed,  when  that  call  is  given,  they  will 
"  remember "  that  voice,  and  hear  it ;  and,  together  with  their  children  (see  end  of 
ver.  9),  prepare  to  return.  3.  The  return.  In  correspondence  with  this  preparation, 
they  are  (1)  to  be  "  brought  out "  of  the  countries  of  their  dispersion,  whether  lying, 
like  "Egypt,"  to  the  south,  or  lying,  like  "  Assyria,"  to  the  north  ;  and  (2)  are  also, 
in  a  manner  as  wonderful  and  as  humbling  to  their  enemies  as  when  the  Red  "  Sea  " 
and  the  "river"  Jordan  in  former  days  had  been  divided  and  dried  up  before  them,  to 
be  "  brought  into  "  their  ancient  possession  ;  and  that  further,  (3)  in  such  exuberant 
numbers  as  not  only  to  occupy  the  tians-Jordanic  region  of  Gilead,  but  even  a  territory 
like  that  of  Lebanon,  almost  beyond  the  limits  of  ancient  Israel ;  and  not,  even  so,  to 
have  sufficient  room  (end  of  ver.  10;  comp.  Isa.  xlix.  20).  4.  The  happy  result.  The 
strength  of  their  enemies  (end  of  ver.  11)  being  for  ever  broken,  and  they  themselves 
being  "strengthened  in  Jehovah,"  they  shall  be  able  to  treat  the  whole  land  then  as 
fully  their  own  (comp.  Gen.  xiii.  14 — 17) ;  they  themselves,  also,  as  God's  own  people, 
doing  everything  therein  in  his  Name  (Ps.  Ixvii.  6 ;  Micah  iv.  5 ;  Col.  iii.  17). 

These  things  may  teach  us,  in  conclusion :  1.  To  take  an  ever-increasing  interest  in 
Israel's  lot.  Whether  right  or  wrong  in  our  view  of  details,  the  general  [irinciple  is 
undoubted.     The  future  history  of  the  world,  as  its  past  history,  turns  on  the  history 


OH.  X.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK   OF  ZECHARIAH.  Ill 

of  Abraham's  seed  (Gen»  xii.  3,  etc.).  2.  To  place  ever-increasing  confidence  in  Israel'$ 
Qod.  In  wliatever  circumstances,  through  whatever  vicissitudes,  under  whatever 
provocations,  how  amazingly  faithful  to  his  ancient  promise  (Rom.  xi,  1,  28,  29)  1 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Prayer  for  temporal  blessings.  I.  Aobeeablb  to  our  ciroumstanceb. 
Dependent.  In  want.  Instinctively  turn  to  God.  We  have  his  .Word  to  cheer  us; 
the  re'cord  of  his  deeds  to  comfort  us ;  the  testimony  of  his  saints  to  encourage  us. 

II.  Conditioned  by  the  neoessitt  of  things.  There  are  limits.  Plainly  thpre 
are  things  which  it  would  be  reasonable,  and  others  which  it  would  be  unreasonable 
and  foolish,  to  ask.  "  Pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  winter,"  said  our  Lord. 
The  flight  was  a  necessity,  but  the  time  and  manner  were  within  the  range  of  things 
unsettled.    This  seems  hinted  at  here  by  the  condition,  "  in  the  time  of  the  latter  rain." 

III.  Should  be  subordinated  to  our  bpieitual  good.  The  soul  is  more  than 
the  body.  It  may  not  bt!  necessary  for  us  to  live,  but  it  is  necessary  that  we  shoul  i 
abide  in  the  love  of  God  and  do  his  will.  "Rain"  is  symbolic  of  ^ipiritual  blessings. 
Only  God  can  give  rain,  and  only  Got!  can  give  the  quickening,  invigorating,  sanctifying 
influences  of  tlie  Holy  Spirit.     "  Seek  je  first  the  kingdom  of  God." 

IV.  Should  be  offered  in  humble  submission  to  the  will  of  God.  He  is 
infinitely  wise  and  holy  and  good.  Let  us  trust  him,  for  he  cannot  will  us  aught  but 
good. 

V.  Should  be  accompanied  by  earnest  use  of  all  lawful  means.  It  is  an 
old  saying  that  "God  helps  those  who  help  themselves."  Prayer  without  work  is 
fanaticism  and  folly;  but  prayer  and  work  is  the  highest  wisdom  and  the  surest  way 
to  success.  "Wherefore  criest  thou  unto  me?"  said  the  Lord  to  Moses.  "Speak  unto 
the  children  of  Israel,  that  they  go  forward  "  (Exod.  xiv.  15). — F. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Parable  of  the  rain.  I.  Man's  great  need.  Without  rain  the  ground 
is  impoverished  and  dead.     So  ie  the  soul  without  God.     No  good  fruit. 

II.  Man's  great  ebsoueoe.  Not  idols  or  enchantments,  not  human  devices  or 
philosophies,  but  appeal  to  God.  He  will  withhold  no  good  from  them  that  walk 
uprightly. 

III.  Man's  great  consolation.  1.  Sweet.  (Of.  Deut.  xxxii.  2.)  2.  Timely.  God 
does  not  give  in  an  arbitrary  way,  but  according  to  his  own  wise  and  holy  laws. 
When  rain  is  most  needed,  it  is  most  appreciated.  So  in  spiritual  things  (cf.  Ps. 
xliv.  3).  3.  Abundant.  "Showers."  Rains  sometimes  slight,  partial,  or  temporary. 
Here  promise  of  "  abundance  of  rain "  (1  Kings  xviii.  41),  meeting  the  needs  of  all, 
reaching  to  the  furthest  limits  of  the  parched  land.  4.  Invigorating  and  fertilizing. 
"  To  every  one  grass  in  the  field."    Calls  for  thankfulness  and  joy. — P. 

Ver.  3. — God's  visits  to  his  people.    Indicate— 

I.  His  concern  foe  their  welfare. 

II.  His  purpose  to  do  them  good. 

III.  His  delight  in  theib  health  and  prospebitt.  Wordsworth  gave  as  a 
motto  for  a  dial,  "  Light,  come,  visit  me."  So  we  should  lay  open  our  souls  to  the 
coming  of  God,  and  welcome  his  visits. — P. 

Vers.  4,  5. — The  strength  of  states.  I.  Capable  eulees.  "  Corner-stone,"  on  which 
the  fabric  rests.    The  stability  of  the  whole  depends  on  the  foundation. 

II.  Just  administration.  "Nail" — what  binds  and  fixes.  The  laws  must  not 
only  be  just,  but  justly  applied.  Forms  of  government  vary  according  to  the  ciroum- 
stauces  and  needs  of  the  people.  There  is  much  truth  in  Pope's  saying,  "  Whate'er  is 
best  administered  is  best." 

III.  Ample  bksouecbs.  "Battle  bow  "  may  stand  for  implements  of  war.  Means 
of  defence.  The  weapons  are  nothing  compared  to  the  men  who  wield  them.  True 
citizens,  devoted  to  the  right,  giving  themselves  and  their  all  for  the  defence  of  truth 
and  liberty,  and  for  the  advancement  of  the  general  good. 


112  THE  BOOK   OF  ZECHARIAH.  [ch.  x.  1—13 

IV.  National  independrnoe.  Enlightenment.  Love  of  freedom  and  justice. 
Purity  of  domestic  life.  Superiority  to  passion  and  vain-glory.  Courage  in  duty. 
Power  not  only  to  hold  their  own,  but  to  bear  themselves  generously  towards  the 
vanquished,  and  to  overcome  evil  with  good. 

"  What  constitutes  a  state  7 
Not  high-raised  battlements  or  laboured  monnd, 

Thick  walls  or  moated  gate ; 
Not  cities  proud,  with  spire  and  turret  crowned, 
Nor  bays,  nor  broad  arm'd  ports, 
Where,  laughing  at  the  storm,  rich  navies  ride; 
But  men,  high-minded  Christian  men." 

F. 

Vers.  5 — 12. — Redemption.    I.  Conflict  kesulting  in  victort. 

II.  Victory  ebsultino  in  union.  This  does  not  always  happen.  There  have  been 
wars  that  have  bred  more  wars,  and  victories  that  have  left  strong  hates  and  bitter 
memories  prolonged  for  generations.  Besides,  union  may  be  based  on  defeat  in  the 
interest  of  the  conqueror  and  not  of  the  conquered;  more  formal  than  real,  more  a 
thing  of  covenants  and  legal  fictions  than  the  free  choice  of  the  people.  But  here  It 
is  real  and  true.  The  middle  wall  of  partition  has  been,  taken  away.  Enmity  has 
given  place  to  love.    Jealousy  and  strife,  to  brotherhood  and  peace. 

III.  Union  kesulting  in  happiness.  There  have  been  examples  of  union  with 
various  results.  The  union  of  England  and  Scotland  has  been  productive  of  the 
highest  good  to  both  coimtries.  The  union  with  Ireland  has  not  been  so  happy.  We 
see  a  beautiful  example  of  prosjierity  under  just  covenants  and  laws  in  the  United 
States  of  America.  Here  the  highest  and  best  results  are  foreshadowed.  1.  Increase 
of  strength.    2.  General  freedom.     3.  Abonnding  prosperity. — P. 

Ver.  9. —  TTie  hand  of  Q-od  in  Jewish  history.  I.  In  theik  long  descent.  Origin 
of  nations  is  generally  obscure.  As  difBcult  to  find  as  the  source  of  the  Nile.  The 
Jews  are  like  their  own  Jordan.  They  are  the  only  people  that  can  trace  their  descent. 
"  Children  of  Abraham."  Two  friends  wer?  visiting  the  museum  at  Berlin.  One  said 
how  strange  it  was  to  look  at  the  intellectual  features  of  Julius  Cffisar,  and  to  think  of 
his  triumphal  march  northward  when  the  Britons  were  but  roving  barbarians.  "  Speak 
for' your  own  ancestors,"  answered  the  other,  who  was  a  Jew;  "as  for  mine,  they  were 
singing  the  psalms  of  David',  and  worshipping  God  as  members  of  his  true  Church  on 
earth,  centuries  before  Julius  Cassar  was  born ! " 

II.  In  the  vicissithdes  of  their  history.  •'  As  the  modern  traveller  surveys  the 
remains  of  the  arch  of  Titus  at  Rome,  he  feels  bewildered  in  endeavouring  to  realize 
the  distant  date  of  its  erection ;  and  yet  it  commemorates  only  the  last  of  a  long  series 
of  Jewish  dispersions.  You  read  of  the  fragments  of  antiquity  dug  up  from  the  ruins 
of  Babylon,  and  your  mind  is  carried  still  further  back  than  by  the  Boman  aroh ;  but 
the  Jew  possibly  formed  that  Babylonian  brick,  and  imprinted  on  it  those  arrow-headed 
characters.  The  pyramids  of  Egypt  take  your  imagination  still  further  back ;  the  Jew 
not  improbably  helped  to  build  the  oldest  of  them.  Time  was  young  when  God  said  to 
Abram,  '  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation '  "  (Dr.  Harris).  In  the  various  dispersions 
we  see  the  fulfilment  of  Scripture  (Deut.  xiviii.  64 — 67)  and  the  preparation  for  the 
gospel  of  Christ  (Acts  ii.  5,  9 — 11). 

III.  In  the  permanency  of  their  character.  From  Jacob  down  to  our  own 
day  we  see  the  same  prevailing  elements  of  character.  Their  very  physiognomy  is  that 
painted  on  the  walls  of  Thebes.  They  are  still  a  separate  people.  Their  purity  of  blood, 
their  education  and  training  throughout  the  ages,  have  raised  them  high  physically  and 
intellectually.  In  the  struggle  for  existence,  they  seem  an  instance  of  the  survival  o( 
the  fittest. 

IV.  In  the  greatness  .of  their  destiny.  Preserved — but  why  ?  Surely  for  some 
great  purpose.  Witnesses  for  God.  Servants  of  righteousness.  Ministers  of  the  orosa 
(Bom.  xi.  1— 27).— F. 

Vers.  10 — 12. —  The  great  exodus.     From  Egypt — the  type  (of.  Isa.  xi.  11 — 16\ 


OH.  X.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  113 

I.  The  GATHERiNa.  So  now  under  the  gospel.  From  far  and  near  they  come.  At 
the  call  of  Jesus  they  gather  under  the  banner  of  the  cross. 

II.  The  passage.  (Ver,  11.)  Like  children  of  Israel — ^pilgrims  in  the  wilderness. 
Manifold  trials.  Educated  by  adversity  and  prosperity.  Course  ever  onward,  under 
the  hand  and  guidance  of  God. 

III.  The  settlement.  Canaan.  Future  glory  of  the  Church — in  increase  and 
prosperity.    "  Place  not  found." — P. 

Yer.  12. — Manliness.  Of  the  true  man,  we  might  ask,  as  Delilah  did  of  Samson, 
'  Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  wherein  thy  great  strength  lieth  ? "  The  answer  includes 
several  things. 

I.  Self-uastery.    Season  must  rule,  and  not  passion.    The  Spirit,  not  the  flesh, 

II.  Divine  ihviqobation.  Need  constant  aid.  The  plant  thrives  by  commerce  with 
the  sun,  so  the  soul  gains  energy  from  God.  The  prayer  of  all  true  men  is  that  favourite 
one  of  David,  "  Quicken  tiiou  me." 

III.  Devotion  to  the  right.  Doing  evil  is  dissipation  of  strength.  Doing  good 
brings  its  own  recompense.  The  Sandwich  Islanders  believed  that  the  souls  of  the  braves 
slain  in  war  pass  into  those  who  slay  them,  and  that  therefore  the  more  a  man  kills 
the  stronger  he  becomes.  This  ia  true  spiritually.  It  was  fabled  of  the  giant  Ant^us 
that  when  ke  touched  the  earth  he  renewed  his  strength ;  so  when  we  touch  right  we 
are  renewed  after  the  image  of  God. 

IV.  Association  with  the  noblest.  To  be  allied  with  the  bad  is  not  only  criminal, 
but  ruinous.     Fellowship  with  the  good  elevates  and  ennobles. 

V.  Growing  nobleness  of  chabaoteb.  There  is  the  consciousness  of  advance. 
Settled  principles.  Enlarged  experience.  Progress  in  faith  and  godliness.  All  this 
prophesies  of  victory.  Peter  was  far  stronger  at  Pentecost  than  when  he  made  his 
great  confession ;  when  he  wrote  his  Epistles  than  when  Paul  had  to  withstand  him  to 
the  face  for  dissembling  at  Antioch. 

VI.  Hope  of  immobtality.  The  strength  won  will  never  be  lost.  The  life  given 
by  Gk>d  in  Christ  is  everlasting. 

"Whene'er  right  feelings  fire  thy  languid  heart, 
Lei  them  not  smoulder  out  in  sighs  and  songs. 
But  flash  them  into  living  acts  forthwith. 
Thus  strength  Divine  shall  nerve  thy  mortal  frame, 
And  light  from  upper  worlds  shall  fall  upon  thy  path." 

P. 

Ver.  12. — The  true  life.  L  Holy  conseobation.  "In  the  Name  of  the  Lord." 
Sincere  and  thorough  renewal  of  consecration  essential  to  increase  of  faith  and 
holiness. 

II.  Harmonious  development.  "Walking"  implies  health,  freedom,  activity. 
Necessary  to  the  right  development  of  the  soul.    Not  in  part,  but  in  all  its  powers. 

III.  Spiritual  usefulness.  Time,  talent,  opportunity,  rightly  employed.  "Up 
and  down  "  zeal  and  diligence  in  all  good. 

IV.  Happy  associations.  We  are  continually  forming  associations  in  life.  Places 
»nd  persons.  The  result  may  be  good  or  evil,  sad  and  painful  or  bright  and 
exhilarating. 

V.  Delightful  peospeots.  Not  only  memories  to  cheer,  but  the  outlook  of  the 
future,  bright  with  hope  up  to  the  very  gates  of  heaven. — F. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — Ood  in,  relation  to  the  good  and  the  had.  "  Ask  ye  of  the  Lord  rain  in 
the  time  of  the  latter  rain ;  so  the  Lord  shall  make  bright  clouds,  and  give  them 
showers  of  rain,  to  every  one  grass  in  the  field,"  etc.  This  chapter  is  a  continuation  of 
the  subject  with  which  the  former  concluded ;  and  the  words  lead  us  to  observe  three 
facts  in  relation  to  the  Almighty. 

L  He  attends  to  the  pbayebs  of  good  men.  "  Ask  ye  of  the  Lord  rain  in  the 
time  of  the  latter  rain ;  so  the  Lord  shall  make  bright  clouds,  and  give  them  showers 
of  rain."    The  abundance  of  corn  promised  in  the  last  clause  of  the  preceding  chapter 

EXOHABIAn.  ^ 


114  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH,  [ch.  x.  1— 12. 

depends  upon  rain,  and  this  rain  God  will  give  in  answer  to  prayer.  Observe :  1.  Ood 
gives  rain.  A  pseudo-science  would  ascribe  "rain  "  and  "clouds"  and  "showers  "  to 
what  they  call  the  laws  of  nature ;  but  what  these  laws  are,  and  how  they  operate, 
they  cannot  tell.  The  Bible,  giving  us  at  once  an  adequate  and  an  intelligible  cause, 
is  more  philosophical  than  any  meteorological  science.  "  He  watereth  the  hills  from 
his  chambers :  the  earth  is  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of  thy  works.  He  causeth  the  gras.s 
to  grow  for  the  cattle,  and  herb  for  the  service  of  man :  that  he  may  bring  torth 
food  out  of  the  earth;  and  wine  that  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man,  and  oil  to  make 
his  face  to  shine,  aud  bread  which  strengtheneth  man's  heart "  (Ps.  civ.  13 — 15). 
"Thou  visitest  the  earth,  and  waterest  it :  thou  greatly  enrichest  it  with  the  river  of 
God,  which  is  full  of  water :  thou  preparest  them  corn,  when  thou  hast  so  provided  for 
it.  Thou  waterest  the  ridges  thereof  abundantly :  thou  settlest  the  furrows  thereof: 
thou  makest  it  soft  with  showers :  thou  blessest  the  springing  thereof.  Thou  crownest 
the  year  with  thy  goodness;  and  thy  paths  drop  fatness"  (Ps.  Ixv.  9 — 11).  2.  The 
Ood  who  gives  rain  attends  to  human  prayer.  This  is  wonderful,  but  not  absurd. 
Wonderful,  that  the  God  who  created  nature,  and  presides  over  it,  should  condescend 
to  listen  to  the  supplications  of  such  an  insignificant  creature  as  man.  But  it  is  not 
absurd,  because :  (1)  Man  is  greater  than  material  natuie.  (2)  Prayer  is  a  settled  law 
of  the  Divine  government.  To  cry  to  the  Almighty  In  distress  is  an  instinct  of  the 
soul.     Prayer,  instead  of  interfering  with  the  laws  of  nature,  is  a  law  of  nature. 

II.  He  abominates  the  chabacteb  of  bblioious  impostors.  "For  the  idols  [the 
household  gods]  have  spoken  vanity,  and  the  divvpers  have  seen  a  lie,  and  have  told 
false  dreams ;  they  comfort  in  vain :  therefore  they  went  their  way  as  a  flock,  they 
were  troubled,  because  there  was  no  shepherd.  Mine  anger  was  kindled  against  the 
shepherds,  and  I  punished  the  goats."  This  stands  in  contrast  with  the  former  verse, 
and  is  a  reason  for  the  duty  there  enjoined.  Their  false  prophets — attaching  them- 
selves to  idols  and  seducing  the  people  to  their  worship,  and  those  of  them  who,  speak- 
ing in  Jehovah's  name,  said,  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,"  when  Jehovah  had  not  spoken, 
putting  in  his  lips  and  clothing  with  his  autliority  the  "lies  "  and  "  false  dreams  "  by 
which  they  sought  to  entice  them  from  l]im  and  from  his  ways — ^bad  ever  given 
promises  and  "  vain  comfort,"  all  ending  in  bitterness  and  vexation  of  spirit.  "They 
had  proved  shepherds  that  only  starved  and  scattered  and  exposed  their  flocks,  instead 
of  feeding  and  tending,  gathering  and  protecting,  them.  "  Thus,  under  such  mislead- 
ing guides,  such  selfish  and  unirincipled  shepherds,  the  flock  was  driven  about  and 
'troubled.'  They  had  'no  shepherd,'  no  truly  faithful  shepherd,  who  took  a  concern 
in  the  well-being  of  the  flock  "  (Wardlaw).  Now,  against  such  impostors,  Jehovah 
says, "  Mine  anger  was  kindled."  "  That  the  shepherds  and  the  goats,  says  Hengsten- 
berg,  "are  the  heathen  rulers  who  obtained  dominion  over  Judah  when  the  native 
government  was  suppressed,  is  evident  from  the  contrast  so  emphatically  pointed  out 
in  the  fourth  verse,  where  particular  prominence  is  given  to  the  fact  that  the  new  rulers 
whom  God  was  about  to  appoint  would  be  taken  from  the  midst  of  the  nation  itself." 
Are  there  no  religious  impostors  now,  no  false  teachers,  no  blind  leading  the  blind,  no 
shepherds  fleecing  the  flocks  ? 

HI,  He  wobks  in  all  for  his  people.  "  Out  of  him  came  forth  the  comer,  out 
of  him  the  nail,  out  of  him  the  battle  bow,  out  of  him  every  oppressor  together."  Tlie 
words  teach  that  all  their  help  came  from  him.  "Out  of  him  came  forth  the  corner," 
or  corner-stone,  that  upon  which  the  whole  building  stands  firmly.  It  means  that 
from  him  comes  stability.  All  stability  in  moral  character,  in  social  order,  and  political 
prosperity,  is  from  God.  "Out  of  him  the  nail."  With  us  a  nail  is  a  small  thing; 
but  with  the  Orientals  it  is  not  so.  It  is  a  large  peg  in  the  inside  of  the  room,  wrought 
into  the  wall  when  the  house  was  built,  and  on  which  are  hung  the  utensils  of  the 
household.  It  means,  therefore,  support.  "  Out  of  him  the  battle  bow."  This  word 
is  used  synecdochically,  to  represent  all  effective  weapons  of  war ;  power  to  conquer 
comes  from  him.  "  Out  of  him  every  oppressor  together,"  or,  as  Keil  renders  it,  "  from 
him  will  every  ruler  go  forth  at  once.  Thus  God  is  all  in  all  to  the  true.  What- 
ever we  need  comes  from  him.  "  Every  good  and  every  perfect  gift  cometh  down  frLua 
the  Father." 

CoNOLUSiON.  What  a  sublime  view  of  the  Almighty  have  we  here  1  He  is  over  all 
nature,  yet  listening  to  the  prayers  of  the  true ;  indignant  with  religious  impostors,  yei 


CH.  X.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOUARIAH.  115 

tolerating  their  existence  and  permitting  their  pernicious  influence ;  sending  out  from 
himself  all  that  true  souls  require  to  fight  bravely  and  triumphantly  the  great  moral 
battle  of  life.— D.  T. 

Vers.  6 — 12. —  Victory,  rmification,  and  blessedness  for  the  good.  "  And  they  shall 
be  as  mighty  men,"  etc.  This  paragraph  is  a  continuation  of  the  preceding  portions  of 
the  chapter.  The  various  statements  bring  under  our  notice  subjects  which,  if  we  give 
them  a  spiritual  application,  are  of  great  and  permanent  interest,  viz.  the  subjects  of 
victory,  unification,  and  blessedness, 

I.  Victory.  "  And  they  shall  be  as  mighty  men,  which  tread  down  their  enemies 
in  the  mire  of  the  streets  in  the  battle :  and  they  shall  fight,  because  the  Lord  is  with 
them,  and  the  riders  on  the  horses  shall  be  confounded."  Or,  as  Hengstenherg  renders 
it,  "And  they  will  be  like  heroes,  treading  street-mire  in  the  battle:  and  will  fight, 
for  Jehovah  is  with  them,  and  the  riders  upon  horses  are  put  to  shame."  "Though 
the  Jews  were  forbidden  by  the  Law  to  multiply  horses  in  battle  (Deut.  xvii.  16),  they 
themselves  figvjratively  are  made  Jehovah's  war-horses  (Ps.  xx.  7),  and  so  on  foot  tread 
down  the  foe,  with  all  his  cavalry  (Bzek.  xxxviii.  i ;  Dan.  xi.  40).  Cavalry  was  the 
chief  strength  of  the  Syro-Grecian  array."  This  victory  was:  1.  Complete.  The 
enemies  were  trodden  down  as  "mire  in  the  streets,"  and  were  utterly  discomfited. 
2.  Divine.  "Because  the  Lord  is  with  them."  They  became  victorious  through 
him.  3.  Eeinvigorating.  "  I  will  strengthen  the  house  of  Judab,  and  I  will  save 
the  house  of  Joseph,  and  I  will  bring  them  again  to  place  them."  They  would  he- 
strengthened  by  their  victory,  not  only  in  wealth  and  security,  but  in  courage.  4. 
Extensive.  "  And  they  of  Ephraim  shall  be  like  a  mighty  man,  and  their  heart  shall 
rejoice  as  through  wine:  yea,  their  children  shall  see  it,  and  be  glad;  their  heart  shall 
rejoice  in  the  Lord."  "  The  prophet  had,"  says  Hengstenberg,  "  occupied  himself  first 
of  all  with  Judah,  the  centre  of  the  people  of  God.  In  ver.  6  he  proceeds  to  speak  of 
Judah  and  Ephraim  together.  In  this  verse,  and  those  which  follow,  he  fixes  his 
attention  peculiarly  upon  Ephraim,  which  looked  in  the  prophet's  day  like  a  withered 
branch  that  had  been  severed  from  the  vine.  He  first  promises  that  descendants  of 
the  citizens  of  the  former  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  will  also  take  part  in  the  glorious 
conflict,  and  then  announces  the  return  of  the  ten  tribes  from  their  exile,  which  was  to 
be  the  condition  of  their  participating  in  the  battle.  Kow,  all  these  facts  connected 
with  this  victory  apply  to  that  victory  the  grandest  of  all — the  victory  of  all  true  souls 
over  error  and  wrong.  That  victory  will  be  complete.  "  The  last  enemy  that  shall 
be  destroyed  is  death."  That  victory  will  be  Divine.  It  is  the  Almighty  himself 
that  bruises  Satan  under  their  feet.  That  victory  will  be  reinvigorating.  Soma 
savages  have  the  belief  that  the  strength  of  the  creature  they  destroy  passes  into 
themselves,  acd  gives  new  vigour  to  their  frames.  Every  victory  we  achieve  in  morals 
adds  new  energy  to  our  souls.  This  victory  will  be  extensive.  Millions  in  heaven  have 
achieved  it ;  millions  on  earth  are  achieving  it  now ;  the  moral  conquerors  will  at  last 
be  more  numetous  than  the  stars  of  heaven,  or  perhaps  the  sands  that  gird  old  ocean's 
shores. 

II.  Unification.  "  I  will  hiss  for  them,  and  gather  them,"  etc.  There  is  no  suffi- 
cient reason  for  regarding  this  regathering,  re-colleoting  of  the  world-scattered  Hebrews 
as  pointing  to  that  far-distant  period  which  some  believe  in,  viz.  the  uniiersal  restora- 
tion of  the  Jews  to  their  own  country.  Observe :  1.  The  ease  with  which  the  regathering 
will  be  effected.  "  I  will  hiss  [or,  '  whistle ']  for  them."  The  word  is  understood  as 
referring  to  a  particular  whistle  used  by  the  shepherd  for  calling  his  scattered  flock 
together,  or  by  those  who  have  the  care  of  bees,  to  bring  them  into  the  hive.  "  As  sheep 
flock  together  at  the  well-known  call  of  the  shepherd,  as  bees  follow  in  swarms  the 
shrill  note  of  the  bee-master,  so  should  the  Lord,  by  his  own  means,  gather  his  scattered 
people  from  their  dispersions,  how  widely  soever  distant,  and  bring  them  to  himself 
and  to  their  heritage."  With  what  ease  God  does  his  work — a  mere  look,  a  breath,  a 
word  I  "He  looketh  on  the  earth,  and  it  trembleth;  he  toucheth  the  hills,  and  they 
smoke."  2.  The  regions  to  which  the  regathering  will  extend.  "  And  I  will  sow  them 
among  the  people  [or,  as  some  render  it,  '  Though  I  have  scattered  them  among  the 
nations '] :  and  they  shall  remember  me  in  far  countries  [distant  regions] ;  and  they 
shall  live  with  their  children,  and  turn  again."     They  had  been  scattered,  not  only 


116  THE   BOOK  OF  ZECHAEIAH.  [oh.  x.  1—12. 

through  Egypt  and  Assyria.  It  docs  not  say  that  all  Jews  shall  return,  but  a  great 
multitude  is  implied.  3.  The  scene  at  which  the  regathering  will  take  place.  "I  will 
bring  them  again  also  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  gather  them  out  of  Assyria ; 
and  I  will  bring  them  into  the  land  of  Gilead  and  Lebanon."  Thi.-i  describes  the 
whole  of  Palestine,  with  its  two  boundaries — the  eastern,  Gilead  beyond  Jordan ;  and 
the  northern,  that  is,  Lebanon.  Large  as  that  district  is,  there  will  not  be  room  for 
all.  "Place  shall  not  be  found  for  them."  4.  Tlie  national  catastrophes  which  the 
regathering  will  involve.  "And  he  shall  pass  through  the  sea  with  affliction,  and 
shall  smite  the  waves  in  the  sea,  and  all  tbe  deeps  of  the  river  shall  dry  up."  There 
is  evidently  an  allusion  here  to  their  first  deliverance  from  Egypt ;  and  it  means  that 
something  similar  to  that  event  will  occur  in  the  course  of  their  regathering  (see  Exod, 
xiv.  4 — 14).  "  And  the  pride  of  Assyria  shall  be  brought  down,  and  the  sceptre  of 
Egypt  shall  depart  away."  The  idea  probably  is  that  as  "  the  haughty  boastings  of 
Sennacherib  and  the  sceptred  power  of  Pharaoh  proved  alike  feeble  and  unavailing 
against  the  might  of  Jehovah  in  former  days,  so  should  all  the  combined  opposition 
of  the  most  inveterate  enemies  prove  in  days  to  come.  Before  him — wrhen  he  had  a 
purpose  to  fulfil  or  promise  to  his  people  to  accomplish — all  pride  should  be  abased, 
all  power  bafSed,  all  counsel  turned  to  foolishness."  Now  there  is  a  unification,  of 
which  this  is  but  a  faint  emblem — the  unification  of  the  good  of  all  ages.  "  They 
shall  come  from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,  and  from  the  north,  and  from  the  south, 
and  shall  sit  down  with  Isaac  and  with  Jacob."  What  a  blessed  union  is  this  1  What 
countless  millions  will  it  include,  and  what  overturning  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  world 
will  its  full  realization  involve  1 

III.  Blessedness.  Here  is  the  highest  strength.  "And  I  will  strengthen  them 
in  the  Lord."  1.  Whether  this  refers  to  their  national  strength,  their  security  in 
their  own  country,  or  moral  strength — strength  of  faith  in  him — or  all,  one  thing  is 
clear,  that  to  be  strengthened  in  the  Lord  is  tlie  highest  strength  we  can  have.  The 
greatest  blessing  of  life  is  strength  :  physical  strength,  to  do  with  ease  and  to  endure 
with  patience;  iniellectiiai  strength — strength  to  master  with  ease  all  the  great 
problems  of  life,  and  to  reach  a  theory  of  being  in  which  the  understanding  can  repose 
free  from  all  disturbing  doubt.  These  strengths  are  blessings  ;  but  moral  strength — 
strength  to  resist  the  wrong,  to  pursue  the  right,  to  serve  Almighty  God  with  accept- 
ance, and  to  bless  the  race  of  man  with  beneficent  influences — this,  indeed,  is  the  per- 
fection of  our  blessedness.  This  strength,  which  implies  unbounded  confidence  in  the  , 
procedure  and  an  unconquerable  love  for  the  character  of  God,  is  the  strength  we  all  need. 
"  Be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might,"  says  Paul.  "  He  giveth  power 
to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  he  increaseth  strength."  2.  Here  is 
the  highest  exercise.  "  They  shall  walk  up  and  down  in  his  Name,  saith  the  Lord." 
(1)  All  living  men  must  walk  the  road  that  is  "  up  and  down."  Human  life  is  made  up 
of  "  ups "  and  "  downs  ; "  the  road  is  not  smooth  and  level,  but  rugged  and  hilly,  some- 
times up  and  sometimes  down ;  up  to-day  and  down  to-morrow.  (2)  This  road  can  only 
be  walked  happily  by  walking  it  in  the  "  Name  "  of  the  Lord.  A  practical  recognition 
of  his  presence,  and  of  his  claims  to  our  supreme  reverence  and  worship.  Alas  1  how 
few  walk  this  road  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  1  They  walk  it  in  the  name  of  pleasure, 
of  greed,  or  of  ambition,  or,  it  may  be,  of  intellectual  research.  Dreary  and  dangerous 
is  this  road  without  God. 

Conclusion.  Let  us  battle  for  this  victory,  cease  not  a  stroke  until  the  foe  is 
beneath  our  feet ;  let  us  hail  this  grand  unification  of  souls,  hail  the  time  when  God 
shall  meet  and  mingle  with  all  noble  and  Heaven-born  spirits.  Meanwhile,  let  us  walk 
this  "  up-and-down  "  road  of  life  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  "  For  all  people  will  walk 
every  one  in  the  name  of  his  god,  but  we  will  walk  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord" 
(Mi«ah  iv.  5).— D.  T. 


IIH.  ZI.  1—17.] 


THE  BOOK   OF  ZECHABIAH. 


117 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEK  XI. 

Vers.  1— 3.— §  8.  Bestoiation  to  their  own 
land  and  material  prosperity  do  not  free  the 
Israelites  from  probation  or  trouble.  The 
prophet,  therefore,  dai-keng  his  late  picture 
with  some  gloomy  Bhadows.  The  Holy  Land 
■is  threatened  with  judgment  (vers.  1 — 3). 

Ver.  1. — Open  thy  doors,  0  Lebanon.  The 
iprophet  graphically  portrays  the  punish- 
ment that  is  to  fall  upon  the  people.  The 
fin  that  occasions  this  chastisement,  viz.  the 
rejection  of  their  Shepherd  and  King,  is 
.denounced  later  (§  9).  Lebanon  stood  in 
the  path  of  an  invader  from  the  north, 
whence  most  hostile  armies  entered  Pales- 
tine. The  "doors"  of  Lebanon  are  the 
imountain  passes  which  gave  access  to  the 
-country.  Some  commentators,  following  an 
old  Jewish  interpretation,  talie  Lebanon  to 
mean  the  temple  or  Jerusalem ;  but  we  are 
constrained  to  adhere  primarily  to  the  literal 
signification  by  the  difficulty  of  carrying  on 
ithe  metaphorical  allusions  in  the  following 
■clauses.  That  the  fire  may  devour  thy 
jsedars.  That  the  invader  may  wantonly 
-destroy  thy  trees  which  are  thy  glory  and 
thy  boast. 

Ver.  2. — ^Howl,  fir  tree.  A  species  of 
-cypress  is  intended,  or,  as  some  say,  the 
Aleppo  pine.  It  is  the  tree  of  which 
-Solomon  made  floors,  doors,  and  ceiling  in 
his  temple  (1  Kings  vi.  15,  34),  and  David 
harps  (2  Sam.  vi.  5).  The  prophet  dramati- 
cally calls  on  this  tree  to  wail  for  the  fate  of 
ihe  cedar,  as  being  about  to  suffer  the  same 
destruction.  The  mighty ;  /ieytctTaves,  "  the 
•chieftains  "  (Septuagint).  Trees  are  being 
spoken  of,  and  so  the  primary  sense  is,  "  the 
goodly  "  (Ezek.  xvii.  23)  or  "  glorious  trees." 
Metaphorically,  the  chiefs  of  Israel  may  be 
Intended.  Bashau,  fumous  for  its  oaks,  is 
jiext' visited  by  the  invading  force,  and  its 
trees  are  felled  for  the  use  of  the  enemy. 
"The  forest  of  the  vintage.  The  Authorized 
Version  here  follows,  very  inappropriately, 
4he  correction  of  the  Keri.  The  original 
-reading  should  be  retained  and  translated, 
-"the  inaccessible  forest" — an  expression 
.appropriate  to  Lebanon.  If  Lebanon  is  not 
-Spared,  much  less  shall  Bashan  escape. 
LXX.,  i  Spv/ihs  6  ain^vTos,  "the  close- 
planted  wood;"  Vulgate,  laltui  munitus, 
•"  defenced  forest." 

Ver.  3. — ^There  is  a  voice.  The  Hebrew 
is  more  terse  and  forcible,  "  A  voice  of  the 
iowling  of  the  shepherds  I"  or,  "Hark  I  a 
howling,"  etc.  (Jer.  xxv.  84,  etc.).  The 
.destruction  spreads  from  the  north  south- 


wards along  the  Jordan  valley.  Their  glory. 
The  noble  trees  in  whose  shadow  they  re- 
joiced. Toung  lions.  Which  had  their  lairs 
in  the  forests  now  laid  waste  (Jer.  xliz.  19). 
The  pride  of  Jordan.  The  thickets  that 
clothed  the  banks  of  Jordan  are  called  its 
"  pride  "  (Jer.  xii.  5).  The  lion  is  not  now 
found  in  Palestine,  but  must  have  been  com- 
mon in  earlier  times,  especially  in  such  places 
as  the  brushwood  and  reedy  coverts  which 
line  the  margin  of  the  Jordan.  The  prophet 
introduces  the  inanimate  and  animate  crea- 
tion— trees,  men,  beasts — alike  deploring  the 
calamity.  And  the  terms  in  which  this  ia 
depicted  point  to  some  great  disaster  and 
ruin,  and,  as  it  seems,  to  the  final  catas- 
trophe of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by 
the  Komans,  the  punishment  of  the  rejection 
of  Messiah.  This  reference  becomes  plainer 
as  we  proceed.  It  is  inadmissible  to  refer 
the  passage  (as  some  do)  to  the  Assyrian 
invasions  mentioned  in  2  Kings  xv.  29  and 
1  Chron.  v.  26.  Holding  the  post-exilian 
origin  of  the  prophecy,  we  are  bound  to 
interpret  it  in  accordance  with  this  view, 
which,  indeed,  presents  fewer  difBculties 
than  the  other. 

Vers.  4 — 14.— §  9.  The  punishment  falli 
upon  the  people  of  Israel  because  they  reject 
the  good  Shepherd,  personified  hy  the  pro- 
phet, who  rules  the  Jlook  and  chastitti  evil- 
doers in  vain,  and  at  last  flings  up  hit  offiet 
in  indignation  at  their  contumacy. 

Ver.  4. — ^Thus  saith  the  Lord.  The  person 
addressed  is  Zecbariah  himself,  who  in  a 
vision  is  commanded  to  assume  the  office  of 
the  good  Shepherd  (see  ver.  15),  and  to 
tend  the  chosen  people,  the  sheep  of  the 
Lord's  pasture.  God  herein  designs  to 
show  bis  care  for  his  people  from  the  earliest 
times  amid  the  various  trials  which  have 
beset  them  both  from  external  enemies  and 
from  unworthy  rulers  at  home.  The  flock 
of  the  slaughter ;  rather,  the  flock  of  slaughter 
— destined  for,  exposed  to,  destruction  at  the 
hands  of  their  present  shepherds  (Ps.  xliv. 
22;  Jer.  xii.  3;  Eom.  viii.  36). 

Ver.  5. — Possessors;  or,  huyer$.  Those 
who  claimed  to  be  owners  by  right  of  pur- 
chase. Hold  themselves  not  guilty.  They 
are  so  blinded  by  self-interest  that  they  see 
no  sin  in  thus  treating  the  flock.  But  the 
expression  is  better  rendered,  hear  no  hlame, 
i.e.  suffer  no  penalty,  commit  this  vrioked- 
ness  with  impunity.  Septuagint,  "repent 
not ; "  Vulgate,  non  dolebant,  which  Jerome 
explains,  "didjiot  suffer  for  it."  Blessed  ba 
the  Lord.  So  little  compunction  do  they 
feel  that  they  actually  thank  God  for  theil 


118 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHABIAH. 


[CH.  XL  1 17. 


ill-gotten  gains.  The  prophet  is  speaking 
of  chiefs  and  rulers,  civil  and  ecclesiastical, 
who  played  into  the  enemies'  hands,  and 
thought  of  nothing  hut  how  to  make  a  gain 
of  the  subject  people.  Our  Lord  denounces 
such  untrustworthy  shepherds  (John  x. 
11 — 13).  Doubtless,  too,  the  expressions  in 
the  text  refer  to  the  foreign  powers  which 
had  oppressed  the  Jews  at  various  times, 
Egypt,  Assyria,  etc.  Amid  all  such  dis- 
tresses, from  whatever  cause,  God  still  had 
tender  care  for  his  people,  and  punished  and 
will  punish  their  enemies.  In  this  verse  the 
offenders  against  Israel  are  of  three  classes 
— ^buyers,  sellers,  shepherds  (see  ver.  8). 
*'  Shepherd  "  appears  sometimes  in  the  As- 
syrian inscriptions  as  a  synonym  for  "  prince" 
(see  Schrader, '  Keilinsohr.,'  p.  453). 

Yer.  6. — The  inhabitants  of  the  land.  It 
is  a  question  whether  by  this  expression  is 
meant  the  Israelites,  or  the  dwellers  on 
earth  generally.  In  the  former  case,  the 
verse  gives  the  reason  of  the  calamities  de- 
picted in  ver.  5,  viz.  God's  displeasure,  and 
expounds  the  parable  of  the  sheep  as  mean- 
ing men  (so  Oheyne).  In  the  other  case, 
the  signification  of  the  paragraph  is  that 
God  intends  to  put  an  end  to  the  state  of 
things  just  described,  by  punishing  the 
oppressing  world-powers  who  had  so  cruelly 
executed  their  office  of  being  instruments  of 
God's  judgment  on  his  people.  The  latter 
seoms  the  correct  exposition ;  for  the  people 
of  Israel  have  just  been  called  the  flock  of 
slaughter,  and  they  were  to  be  fed,  while 
these  "  inhabitants "  are  to  be  destroyed ; 
nor  could  the  Israelites  be  said  to  have 
kings,  as  just  below.  Thus  for,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  verse,  introduces  the 
reason  why  Jehovah  tells  the  shepherd 
to  feed  the  flock,  because  he  is  about  to 
punish  their  oppressors;  and  "the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  land"  should  be  "the  inliabit- 
ants  of  the  earth ; "  i.e.  the  nations  of  the 
world,  among  whom  the  Israelites  lived.  I 
will  deliver  the  men,  etc.  God  will  give 
up  the  nations  to  intestine  commotions 
and  civil  war,  so  that  they  shall  fall  by 
mutual  slaughter.  Into  the  hand  of  hia 
king.  Each  of  them  shall  be  delivered 
over  helpless  unto  their  tyrant's  hands,  and 
God  will  not  interpose  to  succour  them. 

Ver.  7.— And  I  will  feed,  Thus  the  Greek 
and  Latin  Versions;  but  it  should  be.  So  I 
fed.  It  is  the  account  of  what  the  prophet 
did  in  accordance  with  the  command  in 
ver.  4  (see  the  end  of  this  verse,  "and  I 
fed").  Even  you,  0  poor  of  the  flook. 
There  is  difficulty  about  the  word  rendered 
"  you  "  (laohen),  which  may  be  the  personal 
pronoun,  or  an  adverb  meaning  "  therefore," 
"  therewith,"  •'  truly,"  or  a  preposition,  "  on 
account  of;"  Vulgate,  propter  hoe.  The 
best  rendering  is,  I  fed  the  floeh  therefore. 


the  poor  among  the  flook.  "Therefore"  re- 
fers to  the  previous  command.  It  is  also 
rendered  "  in  sooth."  The  LXX.,  arranging 
the  letters  diflerently,  translates,  TlotnavS 
tA  Tp6$aTa  rrjs  <r<pay7is  els  t^iv  Xavaavlriv, 
"I  will  go  and  tend  the  flook  of  slaughter 
in  the  land  of  Canaan ; "  some  render  the 
last  words,  "for  the  merchants."  This  Jerome 
interprets  to  mean  that  the  Lord  will  nourish 
the  Israelites  for  slaughter  in  the  land  of 
the  Gentiles  (but  see  note  on  ver.  6).  And 
I  took  unto  me  two  staves.  Executing  in 
vision  his  commission  of  feeding  the  flook, 
the  prophet,  as  the  representative  of  the 
Shepherd,  took  two  shepherd's  staves. 
The  two  staves  intimate  the  manifold  care 
of  God  for  his  flock  from  the  earliest  days, 
and  the  two  blessings  which  he  designed  to 
bestow  (as  the  names  of  the  staves  show), 
favour  and  unity.  Beauty;  Kdwos  (Sep- 
tuagint) ;  Deeorem,  (Vulgate) ;  "  Gracious- 
ness"  (Eevised  Version  margin).  It  pro- 
bably means  the  favour  and  grace  of  God, 
as  in  Fs.  xc.  17.  Bands;  literally,  Those 
that  bind;  Sxotfttrna,  "Oord;"  Vulgate, 
Funioulum.  The  name  is  meant  to  express 
the  union  of  all  the  members  of  the  flock, 
especially  that  between  Israel  and  Judah 
(see  ver.  14).  These  make  one  flock  under 
one  shepherd.  I  fed  the  flook.  This  repeti- 
tion emphasizes  tlie  beginning  of  the  verse, 
and  expresses  God's  care  in  time  past  and 
in  time  to  come  also. 

Ver.  8. — In  executing  the  office  of  feeding 
the  flock,  three  shepherds  also  I  cut  ofl  in 
one  month;  Septuagint,  "And  I  will  take 
away  the  three  shepherds  in  one  month." 
The  article  in  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  seems 
to  point  to  some  known  shepherds,  three  in 
number,  unless  we  take  it  as  "  three  of  the 
shepherds."  Hence  expositors  huve  sought 
to  find  historical  personages  to  whom  the 
term  might  apply.  Those  who  assert  » 
pre-exilian  origin  for  this  part  of  the  pro- 
phecy, suggest  the  three  kings,  Zaohariah, 
Shallum,  and  Meuahem;  or,  as  Menahem 
reigned  ten  years,  some  unrecorded  pre- 
tender, who  started  up  at  the  time.  Others 
see  some  Syrian  monarchs  in  Maocabean 
times;  or  the  three  offices,  king,  prophet, 
priest ;  or  the  three  dynasties  that  oppressed 
Israel,  viz.  the  Babylonian,  Medo-Persian, 
and  Macedonian.  All  these  interpretations 
fail  in  some  point;  and  we  are  reduced  to 
see  herein  a  reference,  as  Cheyne  says,  to 
"  the  prompt  and  vigorous  action  of  Jehovah's 
Shepherd  in  dealing  with  the  evil  shep- 
herds, as  well  as  in  feeding  the  flook;"  the 
number  three  being  used  indefinitely.  Or 
we  may  find  in  this  number  an  allusion  to 
the  three  classes  in  ver.  5 — the  buyers,  the 
sellers,  and  the  pitiless  shepherds.  The 
oppressors,  external  and  internal,  are  re- 
moved and  out  ofl'  in  one  month.    To  the 


OH.  XI.  1 — 17.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZEOHARIAH. 


119 


prophet's  eye  all  this  seemed  to  take  place 
in  that  sbort  space  of  time.  If  anything 
more  is  intended,  we  may,  with  Keil  and 
others,  taking  the  month  as  consisting  of 
thirty  days,  assnme  that  ten  days  are 
assigned  to  the  destruction  of  each  shep- 
herd, after  each  had  fulfilled  his  allotted 
period — the  numher  ten  expressing  peifeo- 
tion  or  completion.  And  my  soul  loathed 
them ;  literally,  but  my  uml  wai  straitened 
for  them  ;  i.e.  was  impatient,  weary  of  them. 
These  words  begin  a  new  paragraph,  and 
refer,  not  to  the  three  shepherds,  but  to  the 
sheep,  the  Israelites.  The  prophet  now  shows 
how  ill  the  people  had  responded  to  God's 
manifold  care,  and  mingles  with  the  past  a 
view  of  their  future  ingratitude  and  dis- 
obedience which  will  bring  upon  them  final 
ruin.  God,  as  it  were,  was  weary  of  their  con- 
tinual backslidings  and  obstinate  persever- 
ance in  evil.  (For  the  phrase,  see  Numb, 
xxi.  4;  Judg.  xvi.  16;  Job  xxi.  4.)  It  is 
the  opposite  to  long-suffering.  Their  soul 
also  abhorred  me.  They  showed  their  ab- 
horrence by  their  devotion  to  idols  and  their 
disinclination  for  all  goodness. 

Yer.  9. — ^I  will  not  feed  yon.  In  oonse- 
quenoe  of  their  contumacy,  the  shepherd 
abandons  the  flock  to  their  fate,  as  God 
threatened  (Deut.  xxsi.  17;  oomp.  the  very 
eimilar  passage  in  Jer.  xy.  1 — 3).  Three 
tcourges  are  intimated  in  the  succeeding 
words — plague,  war,  famine,  combined  with 
civil  strife.  Eat  erery  one  the  flesh  of 
another  (comp.  Isa.  ix.  20).  Many  see  here 
a  reference  to  the  awful  scenes  enacted  when 
Jerusalem  was  besieged  by  the  Bomans,  and 
intestine  feuds  filled  the.city  with  bloodihed 
and  added  to  the  horrors  of  famine. 

Yer.  10. — Cut  it  asunder.  The  breaking 
of  the  staff  "Beauty"  indicates  that  God 
withdraws  his  grace  and  protection  j  he  will 
no  longer  shield  the  people  from  the  attack 
of  foes,  as  the  following  words  express.  My 
eovenant  which  I  had  made  with  all  the 
people;  rather,  with  all  the  peoples.  God 
calls  the  restriction  which  he  had  laid  on 
foreign  nations  to  prevent  tliem  from  afflict- 
ing Israel,  "  a  covenant."  Similar  "  cove- 
nants," i.e.  restraints  imposed  by  God,  are 
found  in  Job  v.  23 ;  Hos.  ii.  20  (18,  Autho- 
rized Version) ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  25,  etc.  The 
restraint  being  removed,  there  ensued  war, 
exile,  the  destruction  of  the  kingdom  and 
theocracy,  the  subjection  of  Israel  to  Gentile 
nations. 

Yer.  11. — It  was  broken.  The  covenant 
just  mentioned  (ver.  10)  was  broken.  And 
80  the  poor  of  the  flock  that  waited  upon 
me  (jkhrj,  gave  heed  unto  me)  knew.  The 
punishment  inflicted  on  the  withdrawal  of 
Gtod's  protection  had  some  good  result. 
Though  the  bulk  of  the  nation  took  no 
heed,  learned  no  lesson,  yet  the  humble 


and  the  suffering  among  them,  who  paid 
respect  to  his  words,  recognized  that  what 
happened  was  according  to  Grod's  Word, 
and  knew  that  all  the  rest  would  be  fulfilled 
in  due  season.  This  was  the  effect  of  the 
Captivity ;  it  forced  the  Israelites  to  see  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  in  the  calamities  that  had 
befallen  them,  and  it  drove  the  tlioughtful 
among  them  to  repentance  and  amendment 
(Jer.  iii.  13,  23;  Dan.  ix.  3,  etc.).  The 
breaking  asunder  of  tlie  first  staff  refers 
primarily  to  the  time  of  the  exile,  and  not 
to  the  absolute  relinquishment  of  the  flock. 
One  staff  is  left,  and  for  a  time  utter  d»> 
struction  is  postponed.  For  "  the  poor,"  tha 
LXX.  reads,  as  in  ver.  7,  "  the  Caaaneans," 
meaning  probably  "merchants."  Ewald 
and  others,  who  hold  the  pre-exilian  date  of 
this  prophecy,  see  here  an  allusion  to  the 
invasion  of  the  Assyrians  under  Pul  (2 
Kings  XT.  19). 

Yer.  12. — I  said.  The  prophet  is  speak- 
ing in  the  person  of  the  great  Shepherd. 
Unto  them.  Unto  the  whole  flock.  Qive 
me  my  price ;  my  wages.  He  asks  his  hire 
of  the  flock,  because  the  flock  represents 
men.  Acting  far  differently  from  the  wicked 
shepherds,  he  used  no  violence  or  threats. 
He  gives  them  this  last  opportunity  of 
showing  their  gratitude  for  all  the  care 
bestowed  upon  them,  and  their  appreciation 
of  his  tenderness  and  love.  The  wages  God 
looked  for  were  repentance,  faith,  obedience, 
or,  in  another  view,  themselves,  their  life 
and  soul.  It  was  for  their  sake  he  requhed 
these,  not  for  his  own.  If  not,  forbear.  He 
speaks  with  indignation,  as  conscious  of 
their  ungrateful  contempt.  Pay  me  what 
is  due,  or  pay  me  not.  I  leave  it  to  you  to 
decide.  I  put  no  constraint  upon  you.  So 
God  has  given  us  free  will ;  and  we  can 
receive  or  reject  his  offers,  as  we  are 
minded.  So  they  weighed  for  my  prioe 
thirty  pieces  of  silver.  This  paltry  re- 
muneration displayed  the  people's  ingrati- 
tude and  contempt.  It  was  the  compensa- 
tion offered  by  the  Law  to  a  master  for  the 
loss  of  a  slave  that  had  been  killed  (Exod. 
xxL  82).  It  was,  perhaps,  double  the  prioe 
of  a  female  slave  (Has.  iii.  2) ;  and  the  very 
offer  of  such  a  sum  was  an  insult,  and,  says 
Dr.  Alexander,  "  suggested  an  intention  to 
compass  his  death.  They  despised  his  good- 
ness ;  they  would  have  none  of  his  service ; 
tliey  sought  to  cut  him  off;  and  they  were 
ready  to  pay  the  penalty  which  the  Law 
prescribed  for  the  murder  of  one  of  so  mean  a 
comlition."  The  word  "  weigh  "  was  used  in 
money  transactions  even  after  the  use  of  coined 
money  rendered  weighing  uunecessaiy. 

Yer.  13. — The  Lord  said  nnto  me.  The 
Lord  takes  the  insult  as  offered  to  himself 
in  the  person  of  his  representative.  Cast  it 
onto  the  potter ;  KdBes  avraiis  tit  t\>  x"'^" 


120 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHABIAH. 


[oh.  XI.  1— 1T» 


rtpmr,  "Lay  them  in  the  fonndry,  and  I 
will  Bee  if  it  1b  approved;"  Vulgate,  Pro- 
Uce  illud  ad  ttatuarium;  the  Syrlao  and 
Targum  have,  "  Put  it  into  the  treasury  " 
(Mai.  iiL  10).  This  involves  an  alteration 
of  the  text,  and  is  in  itself  an  improhable 
reading,  as  God  could  not  be  made  to  tell 
the  prophet  to  throw  this  despicable  wage 
into  his  treasury,  unless,  perchance,  it  is  said 
ironically.  There  may  be  an  undesigned 
coincidence  here.  In  Matt,  zxvii.  5  the 
council  discuss  the  propriety  of  puttins;  the 
thirty  pirces  of  silver  into  the  treasury. 
But  taking  our  present  text  as  genuine, 
commentators  usually  consider  the  phrase 
as  a  proverbial  expression  for  contemp- 
tnouB  treatment ;  as  the  Greeks  said,  h  k6- 
paKas,  as  the  Germans  say, "  zum  Sohinder," 
"  to  the  knacker,"  and  we,  "  to  the  dogs." 
There  is,  however,  no  trace  elsewhere  of 
any  inch  proverb,  nor  do  we  know  how 
it  could  have  arisen ;  it  likewise  does 
not  very  well  suit  the  last  clause  of  the 
Terse,  "I  cast  them  to  the  potter  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord."  If  we  substitute  tlie 
supposed  analogous  expression,  "I  threw 
them  to  the  dogs,"  we  see  how  unseemly 
would  be  the  proverb  in  this  connection. 
The  rendering  of  the  Jews  in  old  time, 
adopted  recently  by  Knabenbauer,  "Cast 
them  to  the  Creator,"  is  considered  by  Dr. 
Pnsey  to  be  unidiomatic,  and  involves  great 
difficulties.  It  seems  simpler  to  consider 
that  the  command,  "  cast  it  to  the  potter," 
implies  contemptuous  rejection  of  the  sum, 
and  at  the  same  time  intimates  the  ultimate 
destination  to  which,  in  the,  sight  of  Om- 
niscience, it  was  directed.  The  potter  is 
named  as  the  workman  who  makes  the 
meanest  utensils  out  of  the  vilest  material. 
That  this  was  ordered  and  executed  in 
vision  is  plain ;  how  much  the  prophet 
understood  we  cannot  tell.  The  ambiguous 
and  highly  typical  order  was  explained 
and  fulfilled  to  the  letter"  by  the  action  of 
Judas  Iscariot,  as  the  evangelist  testifies 
(Matt,  xxvii.  5—10).  A  (the)  goodly  price, 
etc.  This  is  ironical,  of  course.  Such  was 
the  price  at  which  they  estimated  the  good 
Shepherd's  services.  Cast  them  to  the 
potter  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  This 
rejection  of  the  paltry  wage  took  place 
in  the  house  of  the  Lord  (in  the  vision), 
because  the  insult  had  been  really  offered 
te  him,  and  this  was  the  natural  place 
where  oblations  would  be  made;  thus  the 
transaction  was  represented  as  formal  and 
national.  Whether  the  potter  was  seen 
in  the  temple  we  know  not.  The  prophet 
was  made  to  connect  him  in  gome  way  with 
the  business ;  and  we  learn  from  the  fulfil- 
tmnt  that  the  potter  did  in  the  end  receive 
the  money,  which  was  paid  for  his  field 
applied  to  au  unclean  purpose.    In  Matt 


zxvii.  9  the  two  verses,  12,  13,  with  Bomfr 
variations,  are  quoted  as  "  spoken  by  Jeremy 
the  prophet."  Hence  some  attribute  thi> 
part  of  Zecbariah  to  Jeremiah ;  and  others 
think  that  in  St.  Matthew  the  present  name 
JB  a  mistake.  The  probability  is  that  th» 
evangelist  did  not  name  any  prophet,  but 
that  sume  early  transcriber,  remembering 
tlie  purchase  of  the  field  in  Jer.  xxxii.6 — 12, 
attributed  the  quotation  to  that  prophet. 
Or  we  may  suppose  that  inspiration  did  not 
extend  to  all  minor  details,  nor  save  the- 
writers  from  unimportant  errors. 

Yer.  14. — I  cut  asunder  mine  other  staff! 
As  the  fiock,  by  their  contemptuous  pay- 
ment, showed  their  alienation  from  tbe- 
Shepherd,  so  he  now,  by  his  symbolical 
action,  shows  his  rejection  of  them,  and  hlB 
Buriender  of  them  to  anarchy,  confuBion, 
and  ruin.  The  breaking  of  the  first  staff 
indicated  that  God  withdrew  his  defensive 
care;  the  breaking  of  the  staff  called 
"Bands"  signifies  the  utter  dissolution  of 
all  the  bonds  that  held  the  nation  together^ 
the  civil  and  social  disunion  that  paved  tb» 
way  for  the  victory  of  the  Romans,  and 
issued  in  the  final  disruption  which  sent  the 
Jews  wandering  through  the  world.  Thi» 
in  the  vision  is  represented  as  the  breaking 
of  the  brotherhood  between  Judah  and 
Israel,  the  component  parts  of  the  nation. 
Thus  was  hinted  the  ultimate  rejection  of 
the  Jews  in  consequence  of  their  treatment 
of  Christ,  the  good  Shepherd,  who  came 
unto  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not 
(oomp.  Matt,  xxiii.  36 — 38).  This  doom  is 
declared  more  fully  in  the  next  section. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — §  10.  In  retribution  for 
their  rejection  of  the  good  Shepherd  the  peopl& 
are  given  over  to  a  foolish  shepherd,  who 
shall  destroy  them,  hut  shall  himself,  in  turn, 
perish  miserably. 

Ver.  15. — Take  unfo  thee  yet  (yet  againy 
the  instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd  (com  p. 
Hos.  iii.  1).  The  prophet,  in  vision,  ifr 
directed  to  do  as  he  had  done  before  (ver.  i, 
etc.),  and  enact  the  part  of  a  ehepiierd,. 
taking  the  dress,  scrip,  and  crook,  which 
were  appropriate  to  the  character ;  but  thi» 
time  he  was  to  represent  "  a  foolish,"  I'.e.  an 
evil,  shepherd;  for  sin  is  constantly  denoted 
by  "folly"  in  the  Old  Testament;  e.g. 
Job  V.  2, 3 ;  Pb.  xiv.  1 ;  ovii.  17 ;  Prov.  Hi. 
vii  22 ;  xiv.  9,  etc.  (oomp.  ver.  17). 

Ver.  16. — I  will  raise  np  a  shepherd  in 
the  land,  God  explains  the  reason  of  the 
Bymbolical  character  which  be  directed  the 
prophet  to  assume.  He  was  going  to  allow 
the  people  to  be  chastised  by  an  instrument 
whom  he  would  permit  to  work  his  will 
upon  them,  Ab  this  evil  shepherd  was  to 
arise  to  punish  them  for  their  reieotion  oi 


OH.  XI.  1— 17,J 


THE  BOOK   OF  ZECHATIIAH. 


121 


Messiah,  he  must  represent  some  person  or 
power  that  existed  subsequent  to  Christ's 
death.  Many  consider  that  he  symbolizes 
the  Romans ;  but  these  people  could  not  be 
deemed  to  exercise  pastoral  care  over  the 
Israelites,  nor  could  their  neglect  of  this 
(rer.  17)  be  attributed  to  them  as  a  sin;  nor, 
again,  did  their  destruction  follow  upon  the 
overthrow  of  the  Jewish  polity  (ver.  18). 
Others  see  here  a  prediction  of  the  coming 
of  antichrist ;  but  the  character  of  "  shep- 
herd "  does  not  suit  his  attributes  as  given 
elsewhere;  at  any  rate,  this  cannot  be  the 
primary  reference  of  the  symbol,  thouo;!'  all 
evil  powers  that  oppose  the  Church  of  Christ 
are  in  some  sense  images  and  anticipations 
of  antichrist.  The  genuine  reference  here 
is  to  the  native  chiefs  and  rulers  ("  in  the 
land ")  who  arose  in  the  later  times  of  the 
nation — monsters  like  Herod,  false  Clirists 
and  false  prophets  (Matt.  xxiv.  5,  11,  12, 
24;  Mark  xiii.  22),  hirelings  who  made 
merchandise  of  the  flock,  teachers  who  came 
in  their  own  name  (John  v.  43),  and  deceived 
the  people  to  their  destruction.  Which 
shall  not  visit  those  that  be  cut  off;  or, 
those  that  are  perishing.  This  foolish  shep- 
herd shall  perform  none  of  the  offices  of  a 
good  shepherd;  he  will  not  care  for  and 
tend  those  that  are  in  danger  of  death  (Jer. 
xxiii.  2).  The  young  one ;  rather,  those  that 
are  scattered;  Septuagint,  rh  iffKopTrKr/ievov: 
Vulgate,  dispersum  (Matt,  xviii.  12).  That 
that  is  broken.  Bruised,  or  with  limb 
fractured.  Feed  that  that  standeth  still; 
literally,  that  stanieth;  i.e.  is  sound  and 
healthy.  Tliis  shepherd,  attended  neither 
to  the  diseased  nor  to  the  healthy  sheep. 
Septuagint,  rh  6\6K\npov,  "  that  which  is 
whole."    He  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  fat- 


He  thinks  only  how  to  get  personal  advan- 
tage from  the  flock  (comp.  Ezek.  xxxiv, 
2 — 8).  Tear  their  claws  (hoofs)  in  pieces, 
as  some  say,  by  making  them  traverse 
rough  places,  and  not  caring  where  he  led 
them ;  but  as  such  travelling  would  not 
specially  injure  sheep,  and  as  the  immediate 
context  is  concerned  with  their  treatment 
as  food,  it  is  better  to  see  here  a  picture 
of  a  greedy  and  vor.icious  man  who  tears 
asunder  the  very  hoofs  to  suck  out  all  the 
nourishment  he  can  find,  or  one  who  muti- 
lates the  fattest  of  his  flock,  that  they  may 
not  stray,  and  that  he  may  always  have  a 
dainty  morsel  at  hand. 

Ver.  17. — Woe  to  the  idol-shepherd  I 
rather,  woe  to  the  worthiest  shepherd  1  lite- 
rally, shepherd  of  vanity,  or  nothingness,  as 
Job  xiii.  4,  "  physicians  of  no  value."  The 
LXX.,  recognizing  that  no  special  sheplierd 
is  signified,  renders,  'fl  oi  iroifiali'ovTes  rek 
fidraia, "  Alas  for  those  who  tend  vanities  I  " 
St.  Jerome,  expounding  the  verse  of  anti- 
christ, "  O  pastor,  et  idolum  I "  That  leaveth 
the  flock.  Thus  Christ  speaks  of  the  hire- 
ling (John  X.  12).  The  swordshall  be  upon 
his  arm,  etc.  The  punishment  denounced 
is  in  accordance  with  the  neglect  of  the 
shepherd's  duties.  The  sword  represents 
the  instrument  of  punishment,  whatever  it 
be  ;  the  right  eye,  the  severity  of  the  retri- 
bution (1  Sam.  xi.  2).  The  arm  that  ought 
to  have  defended  the  fiock  shall  be  withered 
up  as  by  catalepsy ;  the  eye  that  should 
have  watched  for  their  safety  shall  be 
blinded.  This  is  the  judgment  on  the 
foolish  shepherd.  Ewald  thinks  that  the 
passage  ch.  xiii.  7 — 9  is  out  of  place  there, 
and  belonged  originally  to  the  end  of  the 
present  chapter. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 6.-^.4  final  warning.  "  Open  thy  doors,  0  Lebanon,"  eto.  The  prophet, 
after  having  foretold  (ch.  x.  6 — 12)  the  great  future  and  final  glory  of  the  literal  Israel, 
seems  here,  as  it  were,  to  "  hark  back  "  to  a  previous  and  very  different  scene,  viz. — as 
most  commentators,  both  Jewish  and  Christian,  believe — to  that  which  should  happen 
in  those  evil  days  when  Jerusalem  should  be  destroyed.  We  noted  a. very  similar 
transition  at  the  beginning  of  oh,  ix.  (comp.  also  Luke  xvii.  24,  25 ;  xix.  11,  etc. ; 
2  Thess.  ii.  3).  In  the  present  case  the  destruction  predicted  seems  to  be  of  a  threefold 
description.  It  was  to  be  a  destruction  of  the  nation  by  being  a  destruction  (1)  of  their 
palaces  ;  (2)  of  their  princes ;  and  (3)  of  the  people  at  large. 

I.  Of  thbse  palaces  or  conspicuotts  public  buildings,  in  which  they  came  after- 
wards to  glory  so  much  (Matt.  xxiv.  1 ;  Mark  xiii.  1 ;  Luke  xxi.  5).  To  this  interpre- 
tation of  vers.  1,  2  we  seem  pointed  by  the  peculiar  word  "  doors ; "  as  also  by  the 
fact  that  the  "  doors  "  of  the  Jewish  temple,  and  almost  all  its  inner  linings  as  well, 
are  said  to  have  been  made  of  cypress  ("  fir  ")  and  cedar  (see  1  Kings  v.  8, 10) ;  and,  if 
go,  we  may  notice :  1.  Sow  thorough  is  the  nature  of  the  coming  destruction.  What 
the  "  fire"  can  "devour"  will  be  utterly  destroyed  in  that  way.  What  the  fire  cannot 
devour  will  "  come  down,"  or  be  levelled.  Even  if  the  stones  remain,  that  is,  tho 
buildings  will  perish  (see  Matt.  xxiv.  2,  end).     Also :  2.  Eow  wide  its  extent.     AJl 


131  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHAEIAH.  [oh.  xi.  1— It 

the  buildingB  they  gloried  in  would  thus  perish.  They  would  perish  thus,  (1)  howiivei 
costly,  CTen  though  almost  built,  as  it  were,  of  the  precious  cedar  (Jer.  xxii.  13, 14)  j 
and  (2)  however  varied,  whether  comparable  to  "  cedar,"  or  "  oak,"  or  cypress ;  and 
fiually  (3)  however  strong,  or  "  mighty,"  even  if  comparable  (see  margin)  to  a  "  defenced 
forest."  Nothing  would  save  the  whole  collection  of  buildings  from  being  utterly 
"spoiled"  and  destroyed.  Well  might  those  buildings  be  called  upon,  in  the  bold 
language  of  prophecy,  to  "  howl"  at  such  an  outlook !  And  abundantly  was  all  this 
fulfilled  when  the  Roman  ploughshares  ploughed  the  ground  on  which  the  temple  and 
fortress  of  Jerusalem  had  previously  stood. 

II.  Op  the  priests.  These  are  compared,  in  ver.  3,  to  "shepherds"  and  "young 
lions,"  as  sliowing,  perhaps,  on  the  one  hand,  what  they  ought  to  be  to  the  commonalty 
of  Israel,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  what  they  ought  to  be  to  its  foes  (see  Ps.  Ixxviii. 
70—72;  Gen.  xlix.  9,  10).  We  see:  1.  How  complete  their  destruction.  This 
evidenced  (l)by  their  "howl"  of  despair.  With  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  came 
that  of  the  whole  Jewish  polity  and  liturgical  service;  and  with  that  also  for  ever 
departed  all  the  glory  of  the  then  ruling  classes  of  Jewry.  How  great  the  emphasis, 
in  this  connection,  of  Matt,  xxiii.  38 !  Also  (2)  by  their  "  roar "  of  fury  like  that  of 
young  lions,  the  "  pride,"  or  terror,  of  the  whole  valley  of  Jordan,  when  driven  there- 
from by  its  "  swelling  "  (Jer.  xlix.  19).  What  is  there  that  so  excites  the  deepest 
anger  as  the  utter  humiliation  of  pride  (oomp.  John  xi.  48 ;  xii.  10, 11 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  18)  ? 
2.  How  Just  their  destruction,  and  that  also  in  two  separate  ways.  Namely,  (1)  by 
their  neglect  of  others.  Though  they  belonged  to  the  flock,  as  being  its  "own" 
shepherds,  appointed  to  tend  and  care  for  it,  they  "  pitied  "  it  "  not "  (contrast  Matt. 
ix.  86).  Though  the  flock  belonged  to  them,  as  being,  in  a  sense,  its  "possessors," 
instead  of  preserving  the  flock  they  "  sell "  and  "  slay  "  it  (see  Matt,  xxiii.,  almost 
passim).  Also  (2)  by  their  satisfaction  with  themselves.  They  see  no  sin  in  their 
conduct;  "they  hold  themselves  not  guilty."  They  even  see  cause  for  thankfulness 
to  God  in  its  results :  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord ;  for  I  am  rich  "  (comp.  Luke  xii.  1 ; 
xvi.  14).  Can  any  men  more  deserve  to  suffer  than  those  who  "  glory  "  thus  "  in  their 
8hame"(PhiLiii.  19)? 

III.  Of  THE  PEOPLE  AT  LARGE — OF  THE  "  FLOCK."  Of  this  destruction,  Dote  :  1.  How 
solemnly  it  was  predetermined.  The  very  appellation  here  given,  viz.  the  "  flock  of 
slaughter,"  signifies  as  much.  Almost  all,  also,  that  is  said  respecting  the  flock — "  I 
will  no  more  pity ; "  "  I  will  deliver  "  to  evil ;  "  I  will  not  deliver  "  therefrom — implies 
as  much.  2.  How  terribly  it  was  accomplished.  Whether  (1)  as  to  extent — the  very 
"  land  "  itself,  as  well  as  its  "inhabitants,"  being  "smitten"  for  their  sakes;  or  (2) 
as  to  the  agency  used,  the  destruction  in  question  being  effected  partly  by  their  mutual 
jealousies  and  internecine  contentions  as  "  neighbours,"  and  partly  by  their  common 
madness  in  preferring  "  Csesar "  to  "  Christ "  as  their  "  king."  See  the  well-known 
account  of  Josephus,  in  which  the  final  overthrow  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Jews  is  traced 
almost  equally  to  the  unwilling  action  of  Titus  without,  and  the  furious  folly  of  the 
factions  within.  Under  both  aspects  it  was  a  marvellous  case  of  political  selt-destruc- 
tion,  as  described  in  this  passage. 

In  conclusion,  there  are  just  two  other  points  to  observe  and  admire,  viz. :  1.  How 
inexhaustible  is  Ood's  mercy  1  In  this  awful  scene  of  destruction,  with  all  its  aggra- 
vated guilt,  shameless  hypocrisy,  and  suicidal  infatuation,  the  light  of  that  mercy  is 
yet  not  wholly  extinguished.  There  are  some  in  this  "flock  of  slaughter"  who  are  to 
be  "  fed  "  (ver.  4).  So,  in  the  ciiso  of  the  Noachian  Deluge,  and  in  that  of  the  destruction 
of  Sodom,  there  were  some  to  be  saved.  So  it  is  said,  also,  that  in  the  fearful,  final 
destruction  of  Jerusalem — and  the  fact  may  possibly  be  referred  to  in  the  words  now 
before  us — the  Christians  were  saved  by  their  flight  to  Fella.  2.  How  discriminating  are 
God's  judgments/  The  people  were  guilty  hero  as  well  as  their  leaders  (Jer.  v.  30,  31). 
Therefore  the  people  are  visited  with  anger  as  well  as  their  leaders  (see  Isa.  xxiv.  2 ; 
Eos.  iv.  9).  The  people,  however,  being  less  privileged  and  instructed,  are  also,  in 
some  measure,  less  guilty  (see  Jer.  v.  4,  5).  The  people,  therefore,  though  punished  as 
well,  are  not  punished  as  much  (see  above,  about  some  of  these  being  "  fed ; "  also 
below,  in  ver.  7,  about  the  "poor  of  the  flock;"  compare  such  passages  as  Matt.  xi. 
20—24;  Luke  xi.  29—32).  The  acknowledgment  of  David  in  Ps.  li.  4,  end,  will  ba 
the  acknowledgment  of  all  "in  that  day." 


OH.  II.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABIAH.  123 

Vers.  7 — 14. — A  final  opportunity.  "  And  I  will  feed  the  flock  of  slaughter,"  etc. 
Although  the  "  flock  "  of  Israel  was  ripe  for  "  slaughter  " — as  we  saw  in  our  last— there 
was  to  be,  nevertheless,  a  certain  measure  of  pause  before  that  slaughter  began  (comp. 
1  Pet,  iii.  20).  Israeli  should  hear  again,  if  only  once  more,  an  offer  of  peace.  Our 
present  verj'  difficult  passage  may,  perhaps,  be.  understood  as  describing  how  such  an 
offer  was  made ' to  rebellious  Israel — just  previously  to  that  destruction. of  Jerusalem 
which  seems  predicted  in  the  preceding  verses — hy  our  Lord  himself  (the  good 
Shepherd)  and  liis  apostles.  Also  it  seems  to  describe  to  us  how  that  final  offer  was 
met.  These,  accordingly,  are  the  two  points  on  which  we  would  speak;  viz.  (1)  that 
momenfous  offer ;  and  (2)  its  momentous  results. 

I.  The  natuke  of  this  final  offer.  This  seems  to  he  represented  to  us :  1.  By  the 
good  Shepherd's  resolve.  "  I  will  feed  the  flock  " — I  will  attend  to  them  carefully ;  I 
will  offer  them  all  they  require.  Also :  2.  By  the  good  Shepherd's  implements.  Thes* 
are  two,  we  read,  called  "  Beauty  "  and  "  Bands."  By  the  one  we  may,  perhaps,  under- 
stand (see  Ps.  xc.  17  ;  xxvii.  4 ;  oh.  ix.  17,  supra ;  Isa.  Iii.  7),the  abounding  favour  and 
grace  and  love  of  the  message  of  Christ.  Though  he  came  to  a  "  generation  "  altogether 
deserving  condemnation  and  death  (Matt.  xii.  34,  39  ;  xxiii.  32,  33  ;  Acts  ii.  40),  he 
came  not  to  condemn,  but  to  save  (John  iii.  17 ;  xii.  47  ;  Luke  ix.  56).  By  the  other 
we  may,  perhaps,  understand  the  special  limitation  of  the  personal  message  of  Christ 
(Matt.  XV.  24) ;  as  also,  in  the  first  instance,  of  that  of  his  apostles  (Matt.  x.  5,  6  ; 
Acts  xiii.  46).  There  was  especial  favour — there  was  almost  exclusive  favour — in  this 
final  offer  of  Christ  to  "  his  own  "  (John  i.  11,  second  clause). 

II.  Its  momentous  results.     These  appear  to  have  been  of  two  very  different  kinds. 

1.  In  the  case  of  the  Jewish  teachers  and  people  at  large  they  proved  to  be  of  a  very 
painful  and  calamitous  kind.  On  the  one  hand,  these  teachers  and  people  contemp- 
tuously rejected  the  gracious  offers  of  Christ.  To  them  there  was  no  degree  whatever 
of  "  beauty,"  either  in  his  character  or  his  teaching  (see  ver.  8,  end ;  aad  comp.  Isa. 
liii.  2  ;  John  vii.  12, 13 ;  xix.  7 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  66  ;  xxvii.  63).  By  them,  therefore,  the 
peculiar  favour  he  offered  was  utterly  scorned  (John  xix.  15 ;  xviii.  40 ;  and  such  passages 
as  Acts  xiii.  45 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  15,  etc.) ;  and  he  himself,  in  a  certain  most  remarkable 
and  significant  manner,  only  estimated  and  valued  at  the  price  of  a  slave  (vers.  12,  13 ; 
Matt.  xxvi.  15 ;  xxvii.  9, 10 ;  Exod.  xxi.  32).  On  the  other  hand,  this  being  so,  both 
tiie  Saviour's  feelings  and  conduct  towards  them  became  changed.  Instead  of  ftwour 
there  comes  "  loathing  "  (or  indignation  and  grief ;  see  Mark  iii.  5 ;  Luke  xix.  41 — 46) ; 
instead  of  a  special  offer  of  mercy,  the  coming  down  of  special  judgment,  in  a  singularly 
rapid  and  terrible  manner,  on  the  highest  persons  or  classes  amongst  them  ("  three 
shepherds  in  one  month");  instead  of  deliverance,  utter  desertion  (ver.  9  compared 
with  Matt,  xxiii.  38 ;  Luke  xxi.  22 — 24) ;  and  instead  of  the  limitation  of  favour  to 
them,  the  manifest  transference  of  it  from  them  to  the  rest  of  mankind  (Acts  xiii.  46  ; 
xviii.  6 ;  xxviii.  28 ;  Bom.  xi.  11).  2.  At  the  same  time,  in  the  case  of  the  less  esteemed 
and  less  eminent  portion  of  the  flock  of  Israel,  there  were  results  of  a  different  kind. 
In  their  case  the  Shepherd's  gracious  offer  was  not  only  made,  but  also  received.  As  he 
resolved  ("  I  will  feed  even  you,  0  poor  of  the  flock")  in  their  case,  so  he  did  (end  of 
ver.  7 ;  see  also  Matt.  xi.  5 ;  Luke  iv.  18 ;  Mark  xii.  37).  In  their  case,  again,  the 
Shepherd's  message  was  duly  honoured  and  highly  prized  as  being  indeed  "  the  Word 
of  the  Lord "  (ver.  11,  end ;  comp.  Matt.  xvi.  16 ;  John  vi.  68 ;  xvi.  30).  Even  that 
comparative  and  temporary  rejection  of  the  Jews,  which  we  suppose  to  be  described  in 
vers.  8,  9,  10,  and  14,  contributed  greatly  among  the  "  poor  "  of  the  Gentiles  to  their 
establishment  in  this  faith  (see,  again,  ver.  11,  and  such  passages  as  Bom.  xi.  11,  25, 
beginning  of  28,  30 ;  1  Cor.  i.  26). 

Prom  this  view  of  the  passage — or,  at  any  rate,  from  this  review  of  those  undoubted 
New  Testament  facts  to  which  we  have  supposed  it  to  point — two  concluding  reflections 
seem  to  arise.  1.  Sow  obdurate  is  man's  nature  I  We  have  become  so  familiar  with 
the  story  of  the  rejection  of  Christ  by  his  own  people,  that  it  does  not  always  surprise 
us  as  it  ought.  Yet  how  exceedingly  surprising  it  is  1  Greater  power,  greater  wisdom, 
greater  goodness,  could  not  possibly  have  been  combined.  Should  we  not  also  have  said, 
at  first,  that  they  could  not  possibly  have  been  resisted  ?  No  wonder  the  apostle  speaks 
with  such  evident  amazement  as  he  does  in  John  i.  11  {supra)  ;  see  also  John  xii.  11, 37. 

2.  E»w  wonderful  art  God's  waysf    The  rejection  of  Christianity  by  those  to  whom  It 


124  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  xi.  1—17. 

first  came  has  been  overruled  to  furnish  its  best  evidence  in  the  eyes  of  the  rest  of 
mankind.  By  crucifying  their  Messiah  the  Jews  crowned  him  as  ours.  It  reminds 
UB  of  the  words  of  the  poet — 

"From  seeming  evil  still  educing  good. 
And  better  thence  again,  and  better  still. 
In  infinite  progression." 

Vers.  15 — 17. — A  picture  of  antichrist.  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Take  unto 
thee  yet  the  instruments  of  a  fooliah  shepherd,"  etc.  After  the  experience  of  the 
good  Shepherd  comes  th«  description  of  the  bad;  after  the  right  "instruments," the 
wrong  ones ;  after  the  Christ,  the  antichrist,  the  person  usurping  the  true  Christ's 
position,  that  is  to  say,  and  so  opposing  his  work.  See  (ver.  17)  the  "  idol-shepherd" 
— the  shepherd  making  himself  the  object  of  worship  to  his  flock ;  and  comp.  2  Thess. 
ii.  4;  Luke  iv.  7.  Which  of  the  "many  antichrists  "  (1  John  ii.  18)  to  appear  in  "  the 
last  time  "  is  here  intended  primarily,  we  do  not  propose  to  discuss.  It  seems  safer  to 
take  the  description  as  applying  to  all.  So  interpreted,  it  may  be  understood  as 
setting  before  us  (1)  their  true  calling ;  (2)  their  chief  characteristics ;  and  (3)  their 
final  doom. 

I.  Thbib  tbub  calling.  They  are  spoken  of  here  (ver.  16)  as  "  raised  up "  by 
God.  By  this  we  may  understand :  1.  That  they  do  not  come  without  the  knowledge 
of  God.  By  the  typical  action  enjoined  on  his  prophet  (ver.  15),  God  not  only  shows 
here  that  he  foreknew  the  appearance  of  these  various  enemies,  but  he  also  foretells  it. 
As  the  prophet  is  ordered  to  do  in  figure,  so  will  they  do  in  fact  (comp.  Acts  i.  16 ; 
2  Thess.  ii.  3 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  1 ;  Matt.  xiii.  25  ;  and  see  1  Cor.  xi.  19).  2.  Nor  yet  without 
God's  will.  It  is  the  natural  tendency  of  corruption  to  come  to  a  head,  as  it  were,  in 
this  manner.  An  evil  movement  never  continues  long  without  producing  evil  leaders 
to  guide  it.  But  they  cannot  be  fully  developed  till  God  permits  (see  the  story  of 
Jeroboam,  1  Kings  xi.  13,  26,  35 ;  xii.  2,  3 ;  2  Thess  ii.  6,  7,  8,  beginning). 

II.  Theib  chief  chabactbeistics.  These  appear  to  be  three.  1.  Shameful  negligence. 
The  things  to  which,  in  the  position  assumed  by  these  idol-shepherds,  they  ought 
specially  to  attend  are  just  those  they  neglect.  Where  their  flocks  are  in  danger 
("cut  off"),  they  forsake  them;  where  weak,  as  the  "young,"  they  pass  by  them; 
where  "  wounded,"  they  do  not  "  heal  "  them ;  where  unable  to  walk  (standeth  still), 
they  do  not  "  bear  "  them  (see  John  x.  12,  13  ;  Bzek.  xxxiv.  4 ;  and  contrast  Ezek. 
xxxiv.  16  ;  Isa.  xl.  11 ;  John  x.  15).  2.  Shameless  selfishness.  Instead  of  feeding  the 
flock,  they  feed  themselves — "  eating  the  flesh  of  the  fat "  (see  Ezek.  xxxiv.  2,  8,  end, 
10  ;  also  such  passages  as  Matt,  xxiii.  14;  Luke  xvi.  14;  2  Pet.  ii.  1 — 3,  15;  Jude 
11 ;  and  contrast  2  Cor.  xii.  15 — 18).  3.  Unhlushing  cruelty.  (See  end  of  ver.  16, 
"  tear  their  claws  in  pieces ; "  and  comp,  Ezek.  xxxiv.  4,  end.)  These  perverters  of 
Gtod's  truth  ever  become,  in  due  course,  the  persecutors  of  God's  people  (see  ilev.  xviL 
6 ;  xviii.  24 ;  xix.  2). 

III.  Theib  final  doom.  Judgment,  though  often  long  delayed,  will  always  come 
upon  them  at  last.  The  "  sword,"  in  due  time,  will  descend.  Moreover,  this  judgment, 
when  it  does  come,  will  be  found :  1.  Peculiarly  Just.  It  is  on  the  negligent  "  eye,"  and 
the  cruel  and  grasping  hand  and  "  arm,"  that  the  punishment  comes  (compare,  per- 
haps, in  Bzek.  xxxiv.  16,  how  it  is  said  of  the  "  fat  and  the  strong,"  which  had  "  fed 
themsehes,"  "I  will  feed  them  with  judgment").  2.  Peculiarly  awful;  all  their 
power  being  "  clean  dried  up,"  and  all  their  light  being  "  utterly  darkened."  So  2  Thess. 
ii.  8 ;  Rev.  xviii.  8,  21,  etc. ;  and  compare  such  passages  as  2  Kings  ii.  35 — 37 ;  Ps. 
ii.  9 ;  Isa.  xxx.  14 ;  Matt.  xxi.  44 ;  and  below  ch.  xiv.  12. 

In  contemplating  these  scenes  we  may  frequently  notice :  1.  flow  great  is  the  forbear- 
ance of  Ood.  When  we  see  this  succession  of  enemies  permitted  to  arise  and  prosper 
in  sowing  tares  in  his  field,  we  may  well  exclaim  as  in  Rom.  ix.  22.  Not  so  would 
man  have  acted  (Matt.  xiii.  28).  2.  Eow  great  is  the  goodness  of  Ood.  This  forbear- 
ance is  partly  for  the  sake  of  those  who  truly  believe  in  his  Name  (Matt.  xiii.  29) ;  and 
partlv,  also  (more  wonderful  still),  for  the  sake  of  those  who  do  not  (Rom.  ii.  4  ;  2  Pet. 
ili.  9).  3.  Eow  great  should  be  the  humility  of  his  people.  With  our  short  lives  and 
limited  powers  and  many  infirmities  both  of  intellect  and  of  temper,  how  little  we  can 


OH.  XI.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHAEIAH.  126 

nnderstand  of  that  widely  scattered,  often-shifting,  far-spreading,  long-enduring  cam- 
paign of  good  against  evil  which  he  thus  permits  and  directs  I  Well  may  even  an 
apostle  confess  as  in  1  Cor.  xiii.  9,  and  beginning  of  ver.  12 1  And  well  may  he 
admonish  us  all,  therefore,  as  in  1  Cor.  ir.  5 1 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  2.—Orieffor  the  fall  of  a  leader.    "  Howl."    This  may  be  held  to  express — 

I.  Sense  of  a  great  loss.  The  death  of  a  good  man  is  always  a  loss.  But  there 
are  differences.  Some  stand  higher  than  others  in  society.  Not  only  "firs,"  but 
"  cedars."  Great  men  leaders  in  Church  and  state.  Hence  more  deeply  missed  and 
mourned.  There  is  not  only  loss  of  their  work,  counsel,  prayers,  but  of  their  personal 
influence.  There  are  times  when  the  feeling  is  intensified.  Some  great  work  to  do, 
some  difficult  enterprise  to  be  carried  out ;  or  a  national  crisis,  demanding  the  service 
of  the  wisest  and  the  best. 

II.  Complaint  of  grievous  wrong.  Death  is  the  lot  of  all.  When  it  comes  in 
the  order  of  nature,  may  grieve,  but  cannot  justly  complain.  But  often  death  comes 
not  of  necessity,  but  through  violence  and  crime.  The  "  axe,"  which  belongs  of  right 
to  justice,  is  seized  and  foully  used  by  tyrants  and  assassins.  So  with  many  of  the 
prophets  and  apostles.  So  often  in  the  history  of  nations — William  the  Silent,  Presi- 
dent Lincoln.  So  in  the  Massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew,  when  so  many  great  and  good 
men  were  cruelly  murdered. 

III.  Presage  of  dibe  calamity.  Dark  cloud.  The  stroke  falls.  Forecasts  the 
storm.  Greater  disasters.  If  the  first,  the  noblest,  the  usefuUest  are  struck  down,  who 
shall  escape  ? 

"  Freedom  shrieked  as  KoBciuBko  fell." 

Lessons.  1.  CaU  to  activity.  Close  ranks.  2.  Challenge  to  the  living  to  look  to  theTn- 
selves.  We  must  all  fall,  but  how  and  with  what  results  ?  Robert  Hall  said  of 
Robinson  that  "  he  fell  like  a  noble  tree."  We  should  live  so  as  to  be  missed.  Better 
be  mourned  for,  as  friends  and  well-doers  gone  before,  than  die  unhonoured  and 
unblest.— P. 

Vers.  5,  6. — Oppressors  and  oppressed.  L  God's  judgment  on  oppressors.  Power 
great  thing.  Test  of  character.  Few  able  to  use  it  rightly.  Even  the  "  wise  man  " 
(Bccles.  vii.  7)  may  have  his  head  turned,  and  act  as  if  "  mad."  The  "  shepherds  " 
false  to  their  awful  trust.  Hence  the  people  became  the  prey  of  oppressors.  Merciless, 
avaricious,  godless,  neither  fearing  God  nor  regarding  man.  Such  oppressors  are  found 
in  various  forms.  Landlords  and  other  "  possessors  have  need  to  take  warning.  The 
people  were  not  made  for  the  land,  but  the  land  for  the  people.  Property  has  its  duties 
as  well  as  its  rights.  "  Unto  whom  much  is  given,  of  them  shall  much  be  required." 
"  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  " 

II.  God's  mekot  for  the  oppressed.  The  Bible  is  on  the  side  of  the  weak,  and 
not  the  strong ;  of  the  wronged,  and  not  the  wrong-doer.  Prophet  after  prophet  has 
spoken  on  behalf  of  the  poor  and  the  needy,  and  carried  their  cause  to  the  throne  of  the 
Most  High.  God  acts  by  means.  "  Feed  : "  1.  With  the  gospel  of  love.  2.  With  the 
law  ^  righteousness.    Binding  on  all.    3.   With  the  hope  of  immortality, 

•*  We  were  weary  and  we 
Fearful,  and  we  in  our  march 
Fain  to  drop  dt  wn  an  1  to  die ; 
Still  thou  turnedtit  and  still 
Beokonedst  the  trembler  and  still 
Gavest  the  weary  thy  hand. 
If,  in  the  paths  of  the  world. 
Stones  might  have  wounded  thy  feet, 
Toil  or  dejection  have  tried 
Tliy  spirit,  of  that  we  saw 
Nothing ;  to  us  thou  wast  still 
Cheerful  and  helpful  and  firm. 


126  THE  BOOK   OF   ZBCHARIAH.  [oh.  XL  1—17. 

Therefore  to  thee  it  was  given 
Many  to  save  with  thyself. 
And  at  the  end  of  thy  day, 
O  faithful  Shepherd,  to  come. 
Bringing  thy  sheep  in  thy  hand." 

(Matthew  Arnold., 

Vers.  7 — 14.— 2^  true  Shepherd.  I.  God's  idea  of  the  tbub  Shephebd. 
His  character  and  service.  Faithful  and  disinterested.  Not  a  hireling.  He  is  for 
the  sheep,  not  the  sheep  for  him.  If  his  recompense  left  to  the  free-will  of  the  people, 
should  be  adequate  and  fair.  '•  The  workman  is  worthy  of  his  hire."  But  the  wage 
should  be  given  in  more  than  material  form.  "  Themselves."  Their  trust,  sympathy, 
prayers,  and  hearty  co-operation  in  all  good.     "  I  seek  not  yours,  but  you,"  said  PauL 

II.  Man's  treatment  op  the  tb0e  Shepherd.  1.  Grossly  wnjust.  Bemunera- 
tion  mean  and  paltry.  Not  measured  by  the  work  done,  but  doled  out  by  selfish  and 
stupid  hands.  2.  Basely  insulting.  Instead  of  just  appreciation,  mockery.  Put  on 
the  level  of  a  slave.  Such  remuneration  worthy  of  scorn.  Away  with  it.  3.  Darkly 
menacing.  Take  it  or  leave  it.  Nothing  to  us.  Starve  if  you  will.  Murder  is  in  their 
hearts.  ^.  Reveals  the  haseness  of  the  heart.  Indicates  great  social  degeneracy.  Fore- 
shadows the  rejection  of  the  Saviour  (Matt,  zxvii.  9, 10).  Let  us  endeavour  to  be  tru* 
to  God's  idea. 

"  The  Christian  pastor,  bow'd  to  earth 
With  thankless  toil,  and  vile  esteem'd, 
Still  travailing  in  second  birth 

Of  souls  that  will  not  be  redeem'd : 
Yet  steadfast  set  to  do  his  part. 
And  fearing  most  his  own  vain  heart." 

(Eeblti) 

F. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — The  .  staves.  Acted  parable.  May  be  taken  to  lUnstrate  the  two 
great  blessincrs  of  Christ  s  kingdom. 

I.  The  Fatherhood  of  God.  "  Beauty  "  may  indicate  the  covenant  of  peace. 
God's  grace  restraining,  preserving,  governing.  "Broken."  Sign  of  judgment  and 
woe.  "  Ichabod  1 "  But  as  whole,  emblem  of  the  fatherly  love  and  care  of  God,  and  the 
fairness  and  beneficence  of  his  rule. 

II.  Brotherhood  of  man.  National  covenant.  Union  oJ  Judah  and  Israel.  One 
people  under  the  rule  of  Jehovah.  Fulfilled  in  part  in  the  restoration  ;  more  perfectly, 
and  in  a  spiritual  sense,  under  the  gospel  of  Christ.  His  kingdom  is  one.  In  him  all 
the  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed  (Gal.  iii.  28 ;  Bph.  iL  14— 22).— P. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — The  evil  shepherd.  I.  Oharaoteb.  Vain.  Selfish.  HypocriticaL 
Greedy  of  gain  and  popularity.  Worthless  for  real  good.  Permitted,  but  not 
approved. 

II.  Offence.  1.  Coldness.  No  "  pity."  His  heart  is  not  in  his  work.  2.  Neglect. 
Takes  no  pains  to  seek  out  the  poor  and  needy.  Does  not  "  visit."  3.  Unfaithfidnest. 
No  warnings.  False  teaching.  Making  gain  of  godliness.  God's  ideal  of  the  shepherd 
lost.  God's  benign  purposes  in  the  ministry  of  grace  frustrated.  Souls  perish,  and  theii 
blood  caUeth  from  the  ground. 

"The  hungry  sheep  look  up,  and  are  not  fed. 
But,  swoln  with  wind  and  the  rank  mist  they  draw, 
Eot  inwardly,  and  foul  contagion  spread : 
Besides  what  the  grim  wolf  with  privy  paw 
Daily  devours  apace,  and  nothing  fed  : 
But  that  two-handed  engine  at  the  door 
Stands  ready  to  smite  once,  and  smite  no  more." 

(Milton, '  Lycidas.') 

(Cf.  Rusldn's  exposition  in  '  Sesame  and  Lilies.*) 


OT.  XI.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  127 

IIL  Doou.  "  Woe."  1.  Hardened  in  evil.  Degradation.  Judicial  bliudness.  2. 
Ow»td  viifh  usekasnes*.    3.  Dettined  to  deMtruction. 

«  Alas,  my  brother  t  round  thy  tomb 
In  Borrow  kneeling  and  in  fear 

We  read  the  pastor*!  doom. 
Who  ipealu  and  will  not  hear." 

(Eeble.) 

F. 

Vera.  1,  2h— JTie  eedan,  fir  trees,  and  oahs  of  society.  "  Open  thy  doors,  0  Lebanon, 
that  the  fire  may  devour  thy  cedars.  Howl,  fir  tree ;  for  the  cedar  is  fallen ;  because 
the  mighty  are  spoiled :  howl,  0  ye  oaks  of  Bashan ;  for  the  forest  of  the  vintage  is 
come  down."  This  chapter,  it  has  been  said,  divides  itself  into  three  sections.  1.  The 
threat  of  judgment  (vers.  1—3).  2.  The  description  of  the  good  Shepherd  {vers.  4 — 14). 
3.  The  sketch  of  the  foolish  shepherd  (vers.  15 — 17).  The  expression,  "  Open  thy  doora 
[gates],  O  Lebanon,"  is,  of  course,  quite  dramatic  in  style.  "  The  prophet,  instead  of 
announcing  to  Lebanon  its  future  destruction,  commands  it  as  the  servant  of  Q-od  to 
open  its  gates ;  the  meaning  therefore  is,  '  Thou  Lebanon  wilt  he  stormed  and  devastated 
by  the  foe ' "  (Hengstenberg).  Jjebanon,  here,  may  be  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  the 
kingdom  of  Judah,  its  cedars  as  denoting  the  chief  men  of  the  kingdom.  We  shall 
take  the  words  to  illustrate  three  subjects  in  relation  to  mankind — a  variety  of  distinc- 
tion, a  common  calamity,  and  a  natural  alarm. 

I.  A  VABIETT  OF  DISTINCTION.  The  "  codar  "  here,  the  "  flr  tree,"  or  cypress,  and 
the  "  oaks,"  are  employed  to  set  forth  some  of  the  distinctions  that  prevailed  amongst 
the  Hebrew  people.  Now,  whilst  all  men  have  a  common  origin,  a  common  nature, 
and  common  moral  obligations  and  responsibilities,  yet  in  every  generation  there 
prevails  a  large  variety  of  striking  distinctions.  There  are  not  only  the  cedars  and  fir 
trees,  but  even  briars  and  thistles.  There  is  almost  as  great  a  distinction  between  the 
highest  type  of  man  and  the  lowest  as  there  is  between  the  lowest  and  the  highest  type 
of  brute.  In  the  great  forest  of  every  generation  there  are  a  few  tall  cedars  and  oaks 
rising  in  majesty  above  all  the  other  trees,  down  to  mere  brushwood  and  even  fungi. 
There  are  intellectual  giants  and  intellectual  dwarfs,  moral  monarchs  and  spiritual  serfs. 
This  variety  of  distinction  in  the  human  family  serves  at  least  two  important  purposes. 
1.  To  check  pride  in  the  highest  and  despondency  in  the  lowest.  The  cedar  has  no  cause 
for  boasting  over  the  flr  tree  or  over  the  humblest  plant :  it  owes  its  existence  to  the 
same  God,  and  is  sustained  by  the  same  common  elements.  And  what  have  the  greatest 
men — the  Shakespeares,  the  Schillers,  the  Miltons,  the  Goethes — to  be  proud  of  ?  What 
have  they  that  they  have  not  received  ?  And  why  should  the  weakest  man  despond  ? 
He  is  what  God  made  him,  and  his  responsibilities  are  limited  by  his  capacities.  2. 
To  strengthen  the  ties  of  human  hrotJierhood.  Were  all  men  of  equal  capacity,  it  is 
manifest  that  there  would  be  no  scope  for  that  mutual  ministry  of  interdependence 
which  tends  to  unite  society  together.  There  are  the  givers  and  the  receivers ;  the 
delight  of  the  former  is  in  his  gifts,  the  hope  of  the  latter  is  in  the  helps  he  receives. 
The  strong  rejoices  in  bearing  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  the  weak  rejoices  in 
gratitude  and  hope  on  account  of  the  succour  received.  Between  the  least  and  the 
greatest,  therefore.  In  human  society  there  is  ample  scope  afforded  for  the  full  play  of 
the  faculties,  the  sympathies,  and  the  services  of  all. 

IL  A  COMMON  CALAMITY.  "  Howl,  flr  tree ;  for  the  cedar  is  fallen."  An  expression 
which  implies  that  the  same  fate  awaits  the  flr  tree.  There  is  one  event  that  awaits 
men  of  every  type  and  class  and  grade,  the  tallest  cedar  and  the  most  stunted  shrub, 
and  that  is,  death.  "  All  flesh  is  grass ;  "  "  Wise  men  die,  likewise  the  fool  and  the 
brutish  person  perish,  and  leave  their  wealth  to  others."  1.  This  common  calamity 
Uvels  all  distinctions.  The  cedar  and  the  fir  tree — if  not  cut  down  by  the  woodman, 
scathed  by  the  lightning,  or  uprooted  by  the  tempest — must  sooner  or  later  rot,  and  their 
dust  mingle  with  the  earth ;  so  with  men  of  all  distinctions,  the  prince  and  the  pauper, 
the  cedar  and  the  bramble  in  the  human  forest,  must  bow  to  the  stroke.  "  Though  hit 
•xcellency  mount  up  to  the  heavens,  and  his  head  reach  unto  the  clouds,  yet  he  shall 
perish  for  evw."    2.  This  common  calamity  should  dematericUize  aU  souls.    Since  ws 


128  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHAEIAH.  [oh,  xi.  1—17 

are  only  here  on  this  earth  for  a  few  short  years  at  most,  why  should  we  live  to  the 
flesh,  and  thus  materialize  our  souls?  Here  we  are  only  pilgrims,  and  we  should  be 
in  quest  of  "  the  city  that  hath  foundations,  whose  Buijder  and  Maker  is  God."  To 
see  the  pinions  of  the  noble  eagle,  made  to  pierce  the  clouds  and  bask  high  up  in  sun- 
light, buried  in  a  foul  pool  of  mud,  is  a  lamentable  sight ;  but  ten  thousand  times 
more  terrible  is  the  sight  of  a  human  soul  immersed  in  matter. 

III.  A  NATURAL  ALARM.  "Howl,-fir  tree."  It  is  the  howl,  not  of  rage,  not  ol 
sympathy,  but  of  alarm.  The  principle  of  alarm  here  implied  is  that  when  the  higher 
falls  the  lower  may  well  take  the  alarm.  If  the  cedar  gives  way,  let  the  cypress  look 
out.  This  principle  may  apply  to :  1,  Communities.  Amongst  the  kingdoms  of  the 
earth  there  are  the  "  cedar"  and  the  "  fir  tree."  Egypt,  Persia,  Greece,  florae, — these 
were  cedars  ;  they  have  "  fallen."  Let  the  smaller  ones  take  the  alarm.  England  is  a 
"  cedar,"  but  it  must  fall ;  it  has,  I  fear,  even  now  the  marks  of  decay  on  it ;  its  multi- 
plying branches  of  ambition  are  exhausting  its  roots.  Its  fall,  when  it-comes,  will  be  a 
just  warning  to  all  the  smaller  states  of  the  world.  The  same  may  be  said  of  markets. 
There  are  the  "  cedars  "  in  the  commercial  world,  great  houses  regulating  almost  the 
merchandise  of  the  world.  Some  have  recently  fallen,  others  are  falling  :  let  the  "  fir 
trees  "  take  the  alarm  and  be  cautious.  2.  Individuals.  When  men  who  are  physical 
"cedars,"  strong  and  stalwart,  whose  build  is  almost  like  the  gnarled  oak,  fall,  let 
weaker  men  take  the  alarm.  When  men  who  are  moral  "  cedars,"  majestic  in  character 
and  mighty  in  beneficent  influences — great  preachers,  authors,  philanthropists — fall, 
let  the  less  useful  take  the  alarm,  still  more  the  useless.  "  Howl,  fir  tree,  for  the  cedar 
is  fallen."  This  was  the  text  of  the  funeral  sermon  which  the  famous  Mr.  Jay,  of 
Bath,- preached  on  the  equally  famous  Rowland  HUl ;  and  commenting  on  it  he  spoke 
eloquently  concerning  the  impressions  made  by  the  death  of  a  man  of  mark.— D.  T. 

Ver.  3. — Bad  men  in  high  office.  "  There  is  a  voice  of  the  howling  of  the  shepherds ; 
for  their  glory  is  spoiled :  a  voice  of  the  roaring  of  young  lions ;  for  the  pride  of  Jordan 
is  spoiled."    We  have  here  two  subjects  of  thought. 

I.  Bad  men  in  high  office.  The  men  referred  to  here  are  called  "shepherds," 
which  is  a  designation  of  men  in  power,  men  who  politically  and  ecclesiastically 
presided  over  the  people — the  leaders.  Communities  of  men  everywhere  and  in  all 
times  have  had  " shepherds,"  men  who  guided  and  ruled  them.  These  "shepherds" 
have  sometimes  reached  their  position  irrespectively  of  the  will  of  the  people,  some- 
times with  the  will  of  the  people,  sometimes  against  the  will  of  the  people.  In  this 
country  we  have  a  number  of  "  shepherds,"  politically  from  the  mayor  to  the  queen, 
ecclesiastically  from  the  assistant  curate  to  the  archbishop.  The  "  shepherds"  referred 
to  in  the  text  had  unfortunately  what,  alas  1  the  leaders  of  the  people  in  all  ages 
have  too  frequently  had^ — a,n  ambitious  character.  Hence  they  are  here  called,  "young 
lions,"  "  a  voice  of  the  roaring  of  young  lions  ; "  or,  as  Keil  has  it,  a  "  loud  roaring  of 
the  young  lions."  They  were  hungry,  ravenous,  and  rapacious,  fattening  upon  the 
people  of  their  charge.  Elsewhere  they  are  represented  as  "  ravening  wolves."'  How 
often  have  men  in  high  of&ce,  both  in  state  and  Church,  been  of  this  character  1  Such 
as  they  care  nothing  for  the  people,  only  so  far  as  they  can  make  use  of  them,  feed  and 
fatten  on  them.  Observe :  1.  That  a  man  in  high  office  who  fias  a  had  character  is  of 
all  men  the  most  contemptible.  A  bad  character  in  a  pauper  makes  him  contemptible ; 
but  a  bad  character  in  a  king  makes  him  ten  times  the  more  contemptible.  When  God 
commands  us  to  honour  our  parents,  and  to  honour  the  king,  it  implies  that  the  parents 
and  the  king  are  honourworthy ;  if  they  are  corrupt  in  character,  they  should  be'  dis- 
honoured and  denounced.  2.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  all  peoples  to  promote  those 
alone  to  high  office  who  have  a  high  moral  character.  Alas !  they  have  not  done  so ; 
hence  they  have  often  had  unworthy  magistrates,  judges,  kings,  bishops. 

II.  Bad  men  in  high  office  qreatlt  distressed.  "  There  is  a  voice  of  the 
howling  of  the  shepherds ;  for  their  glory  is  spoiled :  a  voice  of  the  roaring  of  young 
lions ;  for  the  pride  of  Jordan  is  spoiled."  "  The  glory  of  these  shepherds  being  spoiled," 
says  Wardlaw,  "  signifies  the  bringing  down  of  all  their  honour  and  power,  and  the 
wealth  and  luxury  which,  by  the  abuse  of  their  power  they  had  acquired,  all  becoming 
a  prey  to  the  sacking  and  pillaging  besiegers.  The  pride  of  Jordan  lay  in  its  evergreens 
uid  brushwood  with  which  its  banks  were  enriched  and  adorned ;  and  these  being  the 


OH.  XL  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  129 

covert  and  habitation  of  the  young  lions,  the  two  parts  of  the  figure  are  appropriate. 
As  the  lions  howl  and  roar  in  dismay  and  fury  when  dislodged  from  their  refuges  and 
dwelling-places,  whether  by  the  swelling  flood  sweeping  over  their  lairs,  or  from  the 
cutting  down  or  the  burning  of  tbeir  habitations,  so  should  the  priests  and  rulers  of 
Jerusalem  be  alarmed  and  struck  with  desperation  and  rage,  when  they  found  their 
city,  within  whose  walla  they  had  counted  themselves  secure  from  the  very  possibility 
of  hostile  entrance,  laid  open  to  the  outrage  of  an  exasperated  enemy,  and  all  its 
resources  given  up  to  plunder  and  destruction — country  as  well  as  city  thrown  into 
confusion  and  desolation ! "  Such  rulers  may  well  be  distressed.  Let  them  howl :  1. 
Because  all  the  keen-sighted  and  horiest  men  over  whom,  they  preside  despise  them. 
Though  the  hordes  of  miserable  sycophants  worship  them  on  account  of  the  glitter  and 
pageantry  of  their  elevated  position,  the  Carlyles,  the  Thackerays,  and  the  unsophisti- 
cated millions  regard  them  with  ineffable  disdain.  2.  Because  the  righteous  Governor 
of  the  world  has  denounred  them.  "  Woe  unto  you,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites  ! 
for  ye  devour  widows'  houses,  and  for  a  pretence  make  long  prayer :  therefore  ye  shall 
receive  the  greater  damnation  ....  Woe  unto  you,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites  I  for 
ye  pay  tithe  of  mint  and  anise  and  cummin,  and  have  omitted  the  weightier  matters 
of  the  Law,  judgment,  mercy,  and  faith  :  these  ought  ye  to  have  done,  and  not  to  leave 
the  other  undone.  Ye  blind  guides,  which  strnin  at  a,  gnat,  and  swallow  a  camel. 
Woe  unto  you  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites  1  for  ye  make  clean  the  outside  of  the 
cup  and  of  the  platter,  but  within  they  are  full  of  extortion  and  excess  "  (Matt,  xiiii. 
14,  etc.).— D.  T. 

Vers.  4,  5. — Oppressed  people,  and  their  oppresiors.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  my  God ; 
Feed  the  flock  of  the  slaughter ;  whose  possessors  slay  them,  and  hold  themselves  not 
guilty  :  and  they  that  sell  them  say.  Blessed  be  the  Lord  ;  for  I  am  rich  :  and  their 
own  shepherds  pity  them  not."     Notice  two  things. 

I.  Hbrb  is  a  duty  enjoined  towards  0PPKB8SED  PEOPLES.  "  Thus  Saith  the 
Lord  my  God;  Feed  the  flock  [sheep]  of  the  slaughter."  These  shepherds,  these  rulers 
of  the  Hebrew  people,  "  slaughtered "  the  people.  Without  figure,  oppressed  peoples 
are  "  slaugh  tered  " — slaughtered,  though  they  continue  to  exist,  by  unrighteous  exactions. 
Their  rights  are  "slaughtered,"  their  energies  are  " slaughtered,"  their  liberties  are 
"  slaughtered,"  their  independency  is  "  slaughtered,"  their  means  of  subsistence  and 
advancement  are  "  slaughtered."  People  "  slaughtered  "  in  thtse  respects  abound  in 
every  state  and  place  in  Europe.  Alas !  millions  of  them  groan  out  a  miserable 
existence  in  this  highly  favoured  land  of  ours.  What  is  our  duty  to  these  oppressed 
ones  ?  "  Feed  the  flock."  "  Feed  "  them :  1.  With  the  knowledge  of  their  rights  as 
men.  Their  rights  as  citizens  to  make  their  own  laws,  their  rights  as  religionists  to 
worship  their  own  God  in  their  own  way,  to  form  their  own  convictions  and  to  work 
them  out  according  to  the  dictates  of  their  own  conscience.  2.  With  the  knowledge  of 
the  true  methods  to  obtain  these  rights.  Not  by  violence  and  spoliation,  but  by  moral 
means,  by  skilful  industry,  by  temperate  habits,  by  economic  management,  by  moral 
suasion,  by  skilful,  honest,  and  persevering  industry.  3.  With  the  knowledge  of  worthy 
motives  by  which  to  obtain  these  rights.  Teach  them  that  they  should  struggle  for  their 
rights,  not  for  their  own  selfish  aggrandizement,  nor  for  the  crushing  of  others,  but  in 
order  fully  to  develop  and  honour  the  nature  with  which  Heaven  has  endowed  them. 
Let  the  oppressed  peoples  of  Europe  be  thus  fed  by  a  Ohristly  ethical  education,  and 
despotism  will  soon  be  swept  from  the  face  of  the  earth. 

II.  Here  is  a  sketch  op  the  AnTHORS  of  oppression.  1.  They  are  cruel.  "  Whose 
possessors  slay  them."  Not  only  destitute  are  they  of  all  practical  sympathy  for  the 
rights  and  comforts  of  the  people,  but  they  treat  them  with  a  heartless  inhumanity, 
they  kill  them.  2.  They  are  impious.  In  all  their  cruelties  they  "  hold  themselves  not 
guilty."  The  greatest  despots  of  the  world  have  ever  been  ready  to  justify  themselves 
to  their  own  consciences.  Rulers  have  been  found  in  all  ages,  and  are  still  found,  who,  in 
originating  and  conducting  the  most  cruel  wars,  "  hold  themselves  not  guilty,"  In  war, 
the  most  fiendish  of  all  the  fiendish  enterprises  of  wicked  humanity,  they  have  no  qualms 
of  conscience.  3.  They  are  avaricious.  "  And  they  that  sell  them,  say.  Blessed  be  the 
Lord;  for  I  am  rich."  A  miserable  greed  was  their  inspiration;  they  hungered,  not 
only  for  power,  but  for  wealth ;  and  so  base  were  they  in  heart  that  they  hypocritically 

lECBABIAB  C 


130  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  XL  1—17. 

thanked  God  for  the  riches  which  they  had  won  by  their  cruelty  and  injustice. 
"  Blessed  he  the  Lord ;  for  I  am  rich."  There  are  men  who  say  this  dow,  men  who 
say,  "  Blessed  be  tlie  Lord ;  for  I  am  rich,"  not  thinking  how  the  riches  have  come. 
The  history  of  fortune-making  is  too  often  the  history  of  crime. 

Conclusion.  Let  it  be  ours  to  "  feed,"  by  wholesome  knowledge,  those  who  are 
"  slaughtered  "  by  oppression — political  slaves  and  priest-ridden  dupes. — D.  T. 

Vers.  6,  7. — A  terrible  doom,  and  an  invaluable  privilege.  "  For  I  will  no  more  pity 
the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  saith  the  Lord :  but.  To,  I  will  deliver  the  men  every  one 
into  his  neighbour's  hand,  and  into  the  hand  of  his  king  :  and  they  shall  smite  the 
land,  and  out  of  their  band  I  will  not  deliver  them.  And  I  will  feed  the  flock  of 
slaughter,  even  you,  0  poor  of  the  flock."    These  words  contain  two  subjects. 

L  A  TERRIBLE  DOOM.  "For  I  wiU  no  more  pity  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  saith 
the  Lord  :  but,  lo,  I  will  deliver  the  men  every  one  into  his  neighbour's  hand,  and  into 
the  hand  of  his  king :  and  they  shall  smite  the  land,  and  out  of  their  hand  I  will  not 
deliver  them."  What  is  the  doom  ?  The  abandonment  of  God.  1.  This  abandonment 
tame  after  great  kindness.  For  long  centuries  he  had  manifested  the  greatest  kind- 
ness to  the  Hebrew  people.  Prom  their  rescue  from  Egypt  down  to  this  hour  he  had 
been  merciful  to  them.  He  warned  them,  he  threatened  them,  he  besought  them, 
he  chastised  them.  Many  a  time  they  had  provoked  him,  but  still  he  bore  with  them. 
But  now  he  delivers  them  up.  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man."  2.  This 
abandonment  involved  inexpressible  ruin.  They  were  given  up  to  the  heathen  cruelty 
of  one  another  and  to  the  violence  of  foreigners.  What  more  terrible  fate  can  befall 
people  than  this  ?  If  God  abandons  us,  what  are  we  ?  This  will  be  the  doom  of  the 
finally  impenitent,  "Depart  from  me." 

II.  An  invaluable  pbivilbob.  "I  will  feed  the  flock  of  slaughter,  even  you,  O 
poor  of  the  flock."  "The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd,  I  shall  not  want."  In ' Christ,  the 
great  God  acted  thus  in  a  most  manifest  and  impressive  way.  He  came  to  the  lost 
sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel.  "  When  he  saw  the  multitudes,  he  was  moved  with 
compassion  towards  them,  because  they  fainted,  and  were  scattered  abroad  as  sheep 
having  no  shepherd."    "  I  am  the  good  Shepherd,"  said  Christ. 

Conclusion.  Thank  God,  we  are  not  abandon^  yet.  God  is  with  us  as  a  Shepherd. 
He  is  seeking  the  lost  and  feeding  those  who  are  in  his  fold.  "What  man  of  you, 
having  an  hundred  sheep,  if  he  lose  one  of  them,  doth  not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in 
the  wilderness,  and  go-after  that  which  is  lost,  until  he  find  it?  And  when  he  hath 
found  it,  he  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing.  And  when  he  cometh  home,  he  calleth 
together  his  friends  and  neighbours,  saying  unto  them,  Bejoice  with  me ;  for  I  have 
found  my  sheep  which  was  lost." — D.  T. 

Ver.  8. — A  mutual  dislike  between  Ood  and  man.  "  My  soul  loathed  them,  and  their 
soul  also  abhorred  me."  It  would  be  idle  to  attempt  to  ascertain  who  are  intended  by 
the  "  three  shepherds  "  that  were  "cut  off  in  one  month,"  and  who  are  here  represented 
as  abhorring  God  and  "  loathed  "  by  him.  In  running  through  the  various  conflicting 
explanations,  as  given  by  biblical  critics,  we  feel  such  a  task  would  be  utterly  hopeless 
and  a  waste  of  time.  We  take  the  words  in  order  to  illustrate  a  muttml  dislike  between 
God  and  man.  That  such  a  mutual  dislike  exists  is  proved  by  the  moral  biatory  of 
the  world,  the  consciousness  of  individuals,  and  the  testimony  of  the  inspired  Word. 
Between  God  ami  man  there  is  a  mutual  moral  antagonism.  We  offer  four  general 
remarks  on  this  subject. 

I.  This  mutual  moral  antagonism  is  manifestly  abnormal.  It  is  not  conceivable 
that  the  all-wise  and  all-loving  Maker  of  the  universe  would  create  beings  whom  he 
would  loathe  and  who  would  abhor  him.  Such  an  idea  is  opposed  at  once  to  our  intuitions 
and  our  conclusions.  The  Bible  assures  us,  in  language  most  explicit  and  in  utterances 
most  frequent,  that  mutual  love,  similar  to  that  which  exists  between  the  most  affec- 
tionate parents  and  their  children,  was  that  which  existed  in  the  pristine  state  of 
humanity.     God  loved  man,  and  man  loved  God. 

II.  This  mutual  moral  antagonism  implies  wrong  on  man's  part.  For  Infinite 
Purity  and  Righteousness  to  loathe  the  corrupt  and  the  wrong  is  not  only  right,  but  a 
neoissity  of  the  Divine  character.     He  abhorreth  sin  ;  it  is  the  "  abominable  thing " 


OH.  XI.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHARIAH.  131 

■which  he  hates.  This  is  his  glory.  But  for  man  to  abhor  him,  this  is  the  great  sin,  the 
fontal  sin,  the  source  of  all  other  sins.  To  abhor  the  infinitely  Loving  and  Lovable  is, 
indeed,  a  moral  enormiiy.     They  "  liated  me  without  a  cause." 

in.  This  mutual  moral  antagonism  explains  the  bin  and  wretchedness  or 
THE  WORLD.  Why  does  the  world  abound  with  falsehoods,  dishonesties,  and  oppressions, 
unchastities,  cruelties,  and  impieties?  Because  human  souls  are  not  in  supreme 
sympathy  with  the  supremely  Good,  because  they  are  at  enmity  with  God,  and  not 
"  subject  to  the  Law  of  God."  And  why  all  the  miseries  of  humanity  ?  Because  God 
loathes  sin. 

IV.  This  mutual  moral  antagonism  arqubs  the  necessity  for  a  reconcilia- 
tion. The  great  want  of  the  world  is  the  reconciliation  of  man  to  the  character  and 
the  friendship  of  God.  Such  a  reconciliation  requires  no  change  on  God's  part.  His 
loathing  is  the  loathing  of  love — love  loathing  the  wrong  and  the  self-made  miserable. 
The  change  must  be  on  man's  part.  "  God  was  in  Glirist  reconciling  the  world  unto 
himself."    Christ  is  the  Atonement,  the  Reconciliation. — D.  T. 

Vers.  8— 11.— 'Divine  rejection.  "  My  soul  loathed  them,  and  their  soul  also  abhorred 
me.  Then  said  I,  I  will  not  feed  you :  that  that  dieth,  let  it  die ;  and  that  that  is  to 
be  cut  off,  let  it  be  cut  off ;  and  let  the  rest  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  another.  And  I  took 
my  staff,  even  Beauty,  and  cut  it  asunder,  that  I  might  break  my  covenant  which  I  had 
made  with  all  the  people."  The  subject  of  these  words  is  Divine  rejection.  A  time 
comes  in  the  history  of  incorrigible  nations  and  incorrigible  individuals  when  they  are 
rejected  of  Heaven.  David  said  to  Solomon,  "  And  thou,  Solomon  my  son,  know  thou 
the  God  of  thy  father,  and  serve  him  with  a  perfect  heart  and  with  a  willing  mind ;  for 
the  Lord  searcheth  all  hearts,  and  understandeth  all  the  imaginations  of  the  thoughts. 
If  thou  seek  him,  he  will  be  found  of  thee ;  but  if  thou  forsake  him,  he  will  cast  thee 
off  for  ever  "  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  9).  The  text  gives  us  the  cause,  the  result,  and  the  sign 
of  this  lamentable  event. 

I.  The  cause.  "  My  soul  loathed  them,  and  their  soul  also  abhorred  me."  A 
mutual  moral  antagonism  (as  we  have  seen)  between  man  and  God.  "  Can  two  walk 
together  except  they  be  agreed?"  The  sinners'  character  becomes  so  repugnant  to  the 
Almighty  that  his  patience  is  exhausted,  and  their  rejection  is  the  result.  "My 
Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man;"  "Ephraim  is  joined  to  his  Idols:  let  him 
alone."  There  is  a  limit  to  the  Divine  forbearance.  "How  often  would  I  have 
gathered  thy  children  together,  even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings, 
and  ye  would  not ! "  "  Depart  from  me,  I  never  knew  you ; "  "  Because  I  have  called, 
and  ye  refused;  I  have  stretched  out  my  hand, and  no  man  regarded;  ...  I  also  will 
laugh  at  your  calamity ;  I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh." 

II.  The  result.  The  results  here  are  threefold.  1.  ITie  cesmtion  of  Divine  mercy. 
"  I  will  not  feed  you."  You  are  no  longer  my  sheep ;  no  longer  will  I  minister  to  your 
needs.  2.  Ahandonment  to  self-ruin.  "  That  that  dieth,  let  it  die ;  and  that  that  is  to 
be  cut  off,  let  it  be  cut  off."  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death ; "  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished, 
bringeth  forth  death."  Let  the  elements  of  moral  destruction  do  their  work.  3.  Deliver- 
ance to  mutual  tormentors.  "  And  let  the  rest  cat  every  one  the  flesh  of  another." 
All  these  results  were  realized  in  a  material  sense  in  the  rejection  of  the  Jewish  nation. 
Josephus  tells  us  that  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  pestilence,  famine,  and  intestine 
discord  ran  riot  amongst  the  God-rejected  people.  These  material  evils  are  but  faint 
emblems  of  the  spiritual  evils  that  must  be  realized  by  every  God-rejected  soul. 

III.  The  sign.  "  And  I  took  my  staff,  even  Beauty,  and  cut  it  asunder,  that  I  might 
break  my  covenant  which  I  had  made  with  all  the  people."  The  Divine  Shepherd  is 
represented  as  having  two  staves,  or  crooks ;  ordinary  shepherds  have  only  one.  Expo- 
sitors, in  their  interpretation  of  these  staves,  differ  here  as  in  many  ])laces  elsewhere  in 
this  book.  Some  say  they  indicate  the  double  care  that  the  Divine  Shepherd  takes  of 
his  people ;  some,  the  different  methods  of  treatment  pursued  by  the  Almighty  Shepherd 
towards  his  people ;  some,  that  they  refer  to  the  house  of  Judah  and  to  the  house  of  Israel, 
indicating  that  neither  was  to  be  left  out  in  the  mission  of  the  work  of  the  good  Shepherd ; 
and  some  that  the  one  called  "Beauty" — which  meaus  grace — represents  the  merciful 
dispensation  iinder  which  the  Hebrew  people  had  been  placed ;  and  the  other  staff,  called 
"  Bands,"  the  brotherhood  between  Judah  and  Israel.     One  thing  seems  clear,  that  the 


132  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  xi.  1—17. 

cutting  of  the  staff  called  "  Beauty  "  asunder  was  a  symbol  of  their  rejection  from  all 
future  grace  and  mercy.  It  may  be  stated,  as  a  general  truth,  that  all  Heaven-rejected 
souls  have  signs  of  their  miserable  condition.  The  sign  of  Samson  was  loss  of  strength ; 
*■  he  wist  not  that  the  Lord  was  departed  from  him,"  until  his  strength  was  put  to  the 
test  and  he  failed.  What  are  the  general  signs?  1.  Practical  ignorance  of  God. 
2.  Utter  subjection  to  the.  senses.  3.  Complete  devotion  to  selfish  aims.  4.  Insensi- 
bility of  conscience. 

Conclusion,  Let  us  not  trifle  with  the  patience  of  God,  lest  he  oast  us  off  for  ever ; 
but  rather  let  us  earnestly  and  perseveringly  cultivate  a  stronger  and  more  vital 
sympathy  with  him,  and  a  closer  identification  with  his  loving  heart  and  benevolent 
aims. — D.  T. 

Vers.  12 — 14. — A  model  spiritual  teacher.  "  And  I  said  unto  them.  If  ye  think  good, 
give  me  my  price ;  and  if  not,  forbear.  So  they  weighed  for  my  price  thirty  pieces  of 
silver.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Cast  it  unto  the  potter :  a  goodly  price  that  I  was 
prised  at  of  them.  And  I  took  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  and  cast  them  to  the  potter 
in  the  house  of  the  Lord."  Why  these  words  should  have  been  referred  to  by  the 
Evangelist  Matthew  (zxvii.  9,  10),  and  applied  to  Christ  and  Judas,  I  cannot  explain. 
!Nor  can  any  one  else,  judging  from  the  conflicting  interpretations  of  biblical  critics. 
Matthew  not  only  misquotes  the  words,  but  ascribes  them  to  Jeremiah,  and  not  to 
Zechariah.  Tke  probability  is  that  the  "  thirty  pieces  of  silver  "  and  the  "  potter's 
tield,"  in  connection  with  Judas,  reminded  the  evangelist  of  these  words,  brought  them 
to  his  memory,  and  from  his  memory  he  quotes  them ;  for  he  gives  them  very  incor- 
rectly, neither  according  to  the  Greek  version  nor  the  original  Hebrew.  As  the  words, 
as  they  stand  here,  have  an  historical  meaning  entirely  independent  of  St.  Matthew's 
application  of  them,  they  may  be  fairly  employed  to  illustrate  a  modd  spiritual  teacher 
m  relation  to  secular  acknowledgments  of  his  teachings.  Three  things  are  suggested 
concerning  the  shepherd  in  this  capacity, 

I.  He  leaves  the  seotjlab  acknowledombnt  to  the  fbbb  choice  of  those 
TO  WHOM  HIS  8EKVI0ES  HAVE  BEEN  RENDERED.  "  And  I  Said  uuto  them.  If  ye  think 
good,  give  me  my  price ;  and  if  not,  Ibrbear."  He  does  not  exact  anything,  nor  does 
he  even  suggest  any  amount.  He  leaves  the  matter  entirely  to  themselves,  give  or 
not  give,  give  this  amount  or  that.  This  is  as  it  should  be.  Ministers,  whilst  they 
have  a  Divine  claim  to  a  secular  remuneration  of  their  services,  are  neither  authorized 
nor  are  they  disposed,  if  they  are  true  teachers,  to  enforce  their  claims  upon  the  reluc- 
tant. "We  have  not  tised  this  power,"  says  Paul  (see  1  Cor.-ix.  9 — 17).  It  may  be 
asked — Why  should  the  temporal  support  of  the  spiritual  teacher  be  left  entirely  to  the 
choice  of  the  people  ?  1.  Because  contributions  that  are  entirely  free  are  the  only 
proofs  to  the  minister  that  his  services  are  really  valued.  What  proof  is  there  in  the 
amounts  raised  by  tithes  or  rates,  or,  as  in  some  Nonconformist  Churches,  by  diaconate 
guarantees,  that  the  service  of  the  existing  minister  has  been  really  valued  ?  2.  Because 
the  contributions  that  are  entirely  free  are  the  only  contributions  that  are  of  any  moral 
worth.  Those  who  give  from  custom  or  law,  or  in  any  way  reluctantly,  without  a 
"willing  mind,"  have  no  claim  to  moral  credit;  their  contributions,  however  large,  are 
counted  worthless  in  the  empire  of  virtue. 

II.  His  spibitual  services  abe  sometimes  shamefully  underrated.  "  So  they 
weighed  for  my  price  thirty  pieces  of  silver."  Thirty  shekels.  An  amount  in  our 
money  of  about  £3  3».  9d.  This  was  the  price  they  put  on  his  services,  just  the  price 
paid  for  a  bond-servant  (Bxod.  ixi.  32).  1.  Do  not  determine  the  real  worth  of  a  spiritual 
teacher  by  the  amount  of  his  stipend.  This  is  often  done :  all  fools  do  this.  Yet  who 
does  not  know  ministers  who  get  for  their  labours  £100  a  year  who  are  of  fat-  higher 
character,  and  render  nobler  seivices  than  many  who  get  their  £500,  and  even  £1000  ? 
The  fact  is,  the  minister  who  wants  a  large  income,  as  a  rule,  must  get  a  large  congre- 
gation ;  and  he  who  would  get  a  large  congregation  must  pander  to  popular  prejudices 
and  tastes.  2.  Deplore  the  backwardness  of  the  world  in  appreciating  the  highest  services. 
I'he  highest  service  one  man  can  render  another  is  the  impartation  of  those  Divine  ideas 
that  will  most  quicken,  invigorate,  and  ennoble  his  mind.  But  such  services  are, 
alas  I  the  least  valued.  Men  will  pay  their  scullery-maid  or  their  groom  a  larger 
sum  c\ery  year  than  they  pay  their  minister.    "Thirty  shekels,"  £3,  for  a  minister; 


OH.  XI.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  188 

£100  for  a  horse  I  Curatei  are  starving,  whilst  cooks,  dressmakers,  and  tailors  are 
getting  fat. 

III.  His  independent  soul  befudiates  utadeqitate  sbculab  aoknowledo- 
MENTS.  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Cast  it  unto  the  potter  :  a  goodly  price  that  I 
was  prised  at  of  them.  And  I  took  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  and  cast  them  to  the 
potter  in  the  house  of  the  Lord."  He  felt  the  insult  of  being  offered  such  a  miserable 
sum.  "  Cast  it  unto  the  potter  " — perhaps  a  proverbial  expression,  meaning,  "  Throw 
it  to  the  temple  potter."  "  The  most  suitable  person  to  whom  to  cast  the  despicable 
sum,  plying  the  trade,  as  he  did,  in  the  polluted  valley  (2  Kings  xxiii.  10)  of  Hinnom, 
because  it  furnished  him  with  the  most  suitable  clay."  A  true  teacher  would  rather 
starve  than  accept  such  a  miserable  acknowledgment  for  his  services.  Tour  money 
perish  with  you  1 

CoNOLnsiON.  Oh  for  ministers  of  this  lofty  type  I — ministers  who  feel  as  Paul  did 
when  he  said,  "  I  seek  not  yours,  but  you"  (2  Cor.  xii.  14). — D.  T. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — Fraudulent  shepherds  of  the  people.  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me, 
Take  unto  thee  yet  the  instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd.  For,  lo,  I  will  raise  up  a 
shepherd  in  the  land,  which  shall  not  visit  those  that  be  cat  off,  neither  shall  seek  the 
young  one,  nor  heal  that  that  is  broken,  nor  feed  that  that  standeth  still :  but  he  shall 
eat  the  flesh  of  the  fat,  and  tear  their  claws  in  pieces.  Woe  to  the  idol-shepherd  that 
leaveth  the  flock  1  the  sword  shall  be  upon  his  arm,  and  upon  his  right  eye :  his  arm 
shall  be  clean  dried  up,  and  his  right  eye  shall  be  utterly  darkened."  "After  Israel  has 
compelled  the  good  Shepherd  to  lay  down  his  shepherd's  office,  in  consequence  of  its  own 
sin,  it  is  not  to  be  left  to  itself,  but  to  be  given  into  the  hand  of  a  foolish  shepherd,  who 
will  destroy  it.  This  is  the  thought  in  the  fresh  symbolical  action"  (Keil).  The 
"  foolish"  shepherd  means  the  charlatan,  or  fraudulent  ruler.     Here  we  have — 

I.  FRAUsnLEirr  shepherds  of  the  people  described.  We  learn  here :  1.  That  their 
existence  is  a  Divine  permission.  "  I  will  raise."  In  biblical  phraseology,  the  Almighty 
is  frequently  represented  as  doing  that  which  he  only  permits.  Thus  he  is  said  to  have 
"  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart."  He  here  practically  respects  that  freedom  of  action  with 
which  he  has  endowed  the  human  soul.  Here,  in  this  scene  of  probation,  he  allows  it 
ample  scope.  Whilst  he  does  not  originate  aught  that  is  bad  in  the  worst  of  men,  he 
permits  the  worst  of  men  to  work  out  the  bad  that  is  in  them,  and  to  rise  sometimes 
even  to  the  highest  positions  in  human  society.  In  doing  this,  three  purposes  are 
answered.  (1)  He  inflicts  punishment  here  upon  the  guilty  hy  the  agency  of  wicked 
men.  The  Herods,  the  Neros,  the  Alexanders,  the  Bonners,  and  the  most  corrupt 
occupants  of  the  papal  chair  become  his  instruments  in  the  punishment  of  a  guilty 
generation.  For  this  purpose,  it  is  intimated,  these  "  foolish  shei)herds  "  were  now 
raised  up.  (2)  Be  reveals  to  the  universe  the  enormity  of  human  depravity.  When  bad 
men  are  allow'ed  to  reach  the  highest  offices  in  Church  and  slate,  and  give  free  scope 
and  unrestrained  development  to  all  that  is  bad  within  them,  an  opportunity  is  afforded 
to  all  moral  intelligences  of  receiving  such  an  impression  of  the  enormity  of  moral  evil  as 
otherwise  would  be  impossible.  (3)  Eefwrnishes  the  most  powerful  assurance  offutwe 
retribution  for  mankind.  To  allow  wickedness  such  liberty  as  this,  liberty  to  rise  to 
the  highest  positions,  and  to  gratify  its  vilest  propensities  for  ever,  would  be  to  condemn 
him  in  the  eyes  of  the  universe  as  an  unrighteous  Buler.  2.  That  under  the  prof  essioti 
of  hlessing  their  race,  they  are  its  greatest  curse.  There  are  three  features  of  wickedness 
in  the  character  here  described.  (1)  Negligence.  "  Which  shall  not  visit  those  that  be 
cut  off,  neither  shall  seek  the  young  one,  nor  heal  that  that  is  broken,  nor  feed  that  that 
■tandefh  still; "  or,  as  Keil  translates  it,  "  That  which  is  perishing  wiU  he  not  observe, 
tnat  which  i^  scattered  will  he  not  seek,  and  that  which  is  broken  will  he  not  heal ;  that 
which  is  standing  will  he  not  care  for."  The  groans  of  the  people  affect  them  no  more 
than  the  roar  of  the  breaking  billows  affects  the  granite  cliffs.  (2)  Selfishness.  "  He 
shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  fat."  These  fraudulent  guides  and  guards  of  the  peoplafeed 
and  fatten  on  their  miseries.  (3)  Cruelty.  "  And  tear  their  claws  [hoofs]  in  pieces." 
If  the  people  yield  not  to  their  exactions,  contribute  not  to  their  aggrandizement, 
they  will  pounce  upon  them  like  hungry  hounds,  despoil  them  of  their  property,  rob 
them  of  their  liberty,  and  persecute  them  even  unto  death.  "  This,"  says  Dr.  Wardlaw, 
"  was  not  a  just  character  of  Herod  only,  there  were  many  inch  negligent,  aelfiah,  cruel 


134 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHAEIAH. 


[oh.  XII.  1 — I4v 


pretenders;  f&lse  Chibts  and  false  prophets  abounded,  abounded   then  and  abound 

BOW." 

IL   FbAUDULEKT    8BEPHEB0S     OF     THE     PEOPLE     DENOUNOED.       "  Woe    tO    the     idol* 

shepherd  1 "  Here  is  the  doom  of  those  "  idol-shepherds  " — idol  because  vain  and  worth- 
less. "The  woe  pronounced,"  says  an  able  expositor,  "is  striking  and  impressive. 
'  The  sword  iihall  be  upon  his  arm  and  upon  his  right  eye.'  The  sword  is  the  sword, 
doubtless,  of  the  invading  foe.  The  faithless  shepherd  shall  be  among  its  surest  victims. 
The  '  arm,'  which  ought,  as  the  emblem  of  power,  to  have  been  employed  in  defending 
the  flock,  shall  be  smitten  and  '  dried  up : '  he  shall  lose  all  power,  not  only  for  their 
protection,  but,  on  account  of  his  neglect  of  them,  for  his  own.  His  *  right  eye,'  which, 
as  the  emblem  of  knowledge  and  vigilance  and  foresight,  should  have  guided  the  flock, 
and  been  ever  on  the  watchful  look-out  after  every  member  of  it,  shall  be '  utterly 
darkened.'  Visited  by  a  righteous  God  with  judicial  blindness,  he  shall  grope  in  the 
noonday  as  in  the  night,  deceiving  and  being  deceived,  and  shall  utterly  perish  in  his 
own  delusions." 

GoKOLnsioN.  Beware  of  "  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing."  "  Believe  not  every  spirit, 
but  try  the  spirits,  whether  they  are  of  God ;  because  Ttumy  false  prophets  are  gone  ou( 
into  th»  «wM."— D.  T. 


EXrOSITION. 


CHAPTBB  XII. 


Vei.  1— ch.  xiv.  21.— B.    The    Second 

BrBSBN. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — §  1.  The  prophet  proceeds 
to  annonnce  Israel's  oonfliot  with  heathen 
powers.  Hottile  nations  gather  together 
against  Jerusalem,  but  shall  themselves  be 
overthrown ;  for  the  people  and  their  leaders, 
trusting  in  the  Lord,  overcome  all  opposition. 

Yer.  1. — The  burden  of  the  word  ot  the 
Lord  tor  (concerning)  Israel.  This  is  the 
title  of  the  second  oracle,  conesponding  to 
that  at  the  head  of  ch.  iz.  Though  the 
literal  Israel  has  been  rejected,  as  we  saw 
in  the  last  "  burden,"  a  new  people  of  God 
arises  (Hos.  i.  10),  the  Messianic  theocracy, 
which  is  also  called  Israel,  whose  fortunes 
the  prophet  herein  delineates,  describing  its 
probation,  its  contests,  triumph,  and  develop- 
ment. The  body  is  like  its  Head;  as  the 
good  Shepherd,  Christ,  was  persecuted  and 
rejected,  so  his  members,  the  true  Israelites, 
suffer  at  the  hand  of  the  world  and  Satan, 
before  they  are  finally  glorified.  Some 
critics  suppose  that  "Israel"  heie  is  written 
by  mistake  for  "Jerusalem,"  as  poasibhr  in 
Jer.  xxiii.  6  (see  note  on  oh.  i.  19).  It  is 
best  to  put  a  full  stop  after  "  Israi  1,"  and 
begin  a  new  sentence  with  "Thus  saith 
tiie  Lord,"  or  "  The  saying  of  Jehovah." 
Which  stretcheth  forth  the  heavens,  etc. 
(comp.  laa.  ilii.  5;  Amos  iv.  13).  The 
attriijutes  of  God  are  mentioned  hure 
that  all  may  believe  that  what  he  has 
promised,  that  he  is  able  to  perform.  He 
is  not  only  the  Creator,  but  also  the  Pre- 
server of  all  things  (Ps.  civ.  2 — 4 ;  Heb.  i. 
S).    Fozmeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him. 


God  creates  the  souls  of  men,  and  moulds 
.and  guides  tnem.  In  life  and  death  men 
work  out  his  purposes  (Numb.  zvi.  22 ;  Heb. 
xii.  9). 

Ver.  2. — ^A  oup  of  trembling ;  a  bowl  of 
reeling — a  bowl  whose  contents  cause  stag- 
gering and  reeling,  &s  itp6Bvpa  aa\ev6ii.fva, 
"as  tottering  porticoes"  (Septuagint) ; 
superliminare  erapulx  (Vulgate).  This 
Jerome  explains  to  mean  that  any  one  who 
crosses  the  threshold  of  Jerusalem  in  hostile 
guise  shall  totter  and  fall.  Jerusalem  is 
the  capital  and  type  of  the  Messianic 
theocracy ;  the  hostile  powers  of  the  world 
crowd  round  her,  like  thirsting  men  round  a 
bowl  of  wine ;  but  they  find  the  draught  is 
fatal  to  them ;  they  stagger  back  discomfited 
and  destroyed.  The  figure  of  the  cup  and 
drunkenness  is  often  employed  to  denote  the 
judgment  of  God  upon  transgressors,  which 
makes  them  incapable  of  defence  or  escape 
(comp.  Isa.  li.  17;  Jer.  xxv.  15,  etc. ;  li.  39, 
57;  Hab.  ii.  16).  The  people;  the  peoples 
(so  vers.  3,  4,  6).  The  heathen  nations  who 
war  against  Gnd's  people.  When  they  shall 
be  in  the  siege,  etc.  This  gives  a  good 
seuse,  but  the  Hebrew  will  not  allow  it. 
Septuagint,  '£i»  xp  'louSalct  eo-Toi  irepioxi  tVl 
'lefovaa\iiiL,  "In  Judjea  there  shall  be  a 
blockade  against  Jerusalem;"  Vulgate, 
Sed  et  Juda  erit  in  obsidione  contra  Jeru- 
salem, which  may  moan  thatJudah  shall 
be  among  those  that  besiege  Jerusalem,  or 
when  Jerusalem  is  beset  Judah  shall  suffer 
the  same  calamity.  Pusey  and  Bevised 
Version  render, "  And  upon  Judah  also  shall 
it  [t.e.  'the  burden']  be  in  the  siege 
against  Jerusalem."  Oheyne,  "And  also 
on  [or,  'over']  Judah  it  [t.e.  the  protection 
and  deliverance  implied  in  the  first  clause  of 
the  verse]  shull  be,  in  the  siege."  eto     Aut 


OK,  xn.  1 — 14.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH. 


133 


interpretation  of  the  passage  which  malces 
Jiidah  join  with  the  enemy  in  attacking 
Jerusalem  is  precluded  by  the  very  intimate 
union  between  Judah  and  Jerusalem  de- 
noted in  vers.  4 — 7,  and  by  the  hostility  of 
the  nations  against  Judah.  Cheyne's  ex- 
planation is  hardly  a  natural  one,  however 
suitable.-  Lowe  ('Hebr.  Stud.  Cnmm. ') 
renders,  "And  also  on  Judah  [shall  fall 
this  reeling]  during  the  siege  [which  is  to 
take  place]  against  Jerusalera.  It  seems 
best  to  render,  with  Alexander,  ''Also 
against  Judah  shall  it  be  in  the  siege 
against  Jerusalem,"  {.e.  not  only  the  mother 
city,  but  all  the  country,  sliall  be  exposed 
to  hostile  invasion.  This  suits  ver.  5,  where 
the  chiettains  of  Judah  are  represented  as 
trusting  in  the  vulour  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  when  they  are  incurring  tlie  same 
danger. 

Ver.  8. — A  burdensome  stone.  Jerusalem 
shall  prove  to  all  the  nations  that  attai'k  it 
a  weight  not  only  too  heavy  to  lift,  but  one 
which,  itself  remaining  unhurt,  shall  wound 
and  injure  those  who  attempt  to  carry  it. 
Jerome  supposes  here  an  allusion  to  a 
custom  in  the  towns  of  Piilestine,  which 
prevailed  to  his  day  (and,  indeed,  in  Syria 
even  now),  of  placing  round  stones  of  great 
weight  at  certain  distances,  by  lifting  which 
the  youths  tested  their  bodily  strengtii.  But 
we  do  not  know  that  this  custom  existed  in 
Zeohariah's  time,  and  the  nations  are  not 
gathered  together  for  amusement  or  display 
of  strength,  but  for  hostile  attack.  Septua- 
gint,  \idov  KaratraToiifievoff  "  a  stone  trodden 
down,"  which  reminds  one  of  Luke  xxi. 
24,  *lepov(rii\^fi  ^iTTai  iraTOvfievri  inrh  iQvav, 
Shall  be  cut  in  pieces;  i.e.  by  the  sharp 
edges  of  the  stone,  or,  as  tlie  Bevised  Ver- 
sion, ihaU  he  lore  wounded.  Though ; 
rather,  and;  Septuagint,  /tal  imawaxH<">v- 
Tsi :  Vulgate,  et  colligentur.  All  the  people 
^peoples)  of  the  earth.  This  indicates 
that  the  struggle  spoken  of  is  no  mere  local 
conflict,  wage<i  in  Maccabean  or  other  times, 
but  the  great  buttle  of  the  world  against  the 
Ctiuroh,  which  shall  rage  in  the  Messianio 
era. 

Ver.  4. — I  will  smite  every  horse  with 
astonishment  (consternalion).  Cavalry  re- 
presents the  forces  of  the  enemy.  Astouish- 
ment,  madness,  and  blindness  are  threatened 
against  Israel  in  Deut.  xxviii.  28 :  here  they 
are  inflicted  on  tiie  enemy.  Uadness.  The 
riders  should  be  so  panic-stricken  that  they 
knew  not  what  tliey  did,  and  shall  turn 
their  arms  against  each  other  (Hag.  ii.  22). 
Open  mine  eyes  upon  the  house  of  Judah ; 
i.e.  will  regard  with  favour  and  protect 
(Deut.  xi  12 ;  1  Kings  viii.  29 ;  Ps.  xxxii. 
8).  With  blindness.  They  shall  be  blinded 
with  terror.  The  previous  threat  is  rupeatcd 
with  this  empliatic  additiou. 


Ver.  5. — The  governors  (ehMtaint)  of 
Jndah  shall  say  in  their  heart.  The  leaders 
of  Judah  have  a  profound,  settled  conviction 
that  Jehovah  is  on  his  people's  side.  The 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  shall  be  ^are)  my 
strength.  When  they  see  the  enemy  dis- 
comfited (vers.  2 — 4)  each  of  them  shall 
have  confidence  in  the  Divine  election  of 
Jerusalem,  foregoing  their  former  jealousy, 
and  see  in  her  success  a  token  of  God's 
protection  and  their  own  final  victory. 

Ver.  6. — A  hearth ;  literally,  o  pan.  The 
victory  should  be  easy  and  complete.  The 
chieftains  of  Judah  shall  be  like  a  chafing- 
dish  full  of  fire  set  among  dry  faggots 
(comp.  Obad.  18;  Nah.  i.  10).  In  a 
sheaf;  atnong  sheaves.  Jerusalem  shall  ba 
inhabited  again ;  rather,  Jerusalem  shaU  yet 
again  dwell.  Jerusiilem  is  personified  as  » 
female.  In  spite  of  all  the  attacks  of  the 
enemy,  who  tried  to  destroy  and  remove 
her,  she  shall  remain  fiim  and  unshaken  in 
her  own  place.  lu  Jerusalem,  the  centre  ot 
the  theocracy  where  God  has  set  her.  So 
against  the  Church  the  gates  of  hell  shall 
not  prevail,  and  the  persecutions  which  she 
suffers  increase  her  stability  and  add  to  her 
numbers. 

Ver.  7. — Shall  save  the  tents  of  Jndah 
first.  Instead  of  "first,"  a  preferable  read- 
ing, supported  by  the  Greek,  Latin,  and 
Syriac  Versions,  is  "  as  in  the  beginning,"  or 
"  as  in  former  days."  The  prophet  declares 
that  the  open  towns  and  villages  of  Judah, 
which  can  offer  no  effectual  resistance  to  an 
enemy  like  the  fortified  city  Jerusalem,  shall 
be  saved  by  the  aid  of  God,  as  so  often  has 
happened  in  old  time.  If  "  first "  be  the 
genuine  reading,  the  meaning  is  that  the 
country  people  shall  first  be  saved  in  order 
to  prevent  Jerusalem  glorifying  herself  at 
their  expense.  That  the  glory  ...  do  not 
magnify  themselves  against  (he  not  magni- 
fied above)  Jndah.  God  will  save  the  chosen 
nation  in  such  a  manner  that  each  part 
shall  have  its  share  in  the  glory  and 
honour.  The  leaders,  represented  by  "  the 
house  of  David"  and  "the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem,"  as  the  sanctuary  of  God  and  a 
strongly  fortified  city,  shall  not  be  able  to 
exalt  themselves  as  more  favoured  than  the 
rest  of  the  people.  By  God"s  help  alone  is 
the  victory  won,  anil  all  alike  share  in  this. 
The  expressions  in  this  verse  could  not  have 
been  written,  as  some  assert,  while  the 
dynasty  of  David  reigned. 

Ver.  8.— He  that  is  feeble  (literally,  that 
slumhleth)  among  them  . . .  shall  be  as  David. 
God  shall  endue  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
with  marvellous  strength  and  courage,  so 
that  the  weakest  among  them  shall  be  a 
hero  such  as  David,  who  killed  the  lion  and 
bear  and  overcame  the  giant  (comp  Pi. 
xviii.  32).    The  house  of  David  shall  be  ai 


130 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHAEIAH. 


[oh.  xn.  1 — 14. 


Qod  (^Elohim).  The  chiefs  of  the  theocracy 
shall  be  endowed  with  supernatural  might, 
the  expression,  "  as  God,"  being  explained 
in  the  next  clause.  Septuagint,  as  oTkos 
%(ov,  "  as  the  house  of  God,"  as  if  it  were  of 
the  heavenly  family,  The  translators  seem 
to  have  thought  the  genuine  expression  too 
unqualified.  As  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
before  them.  Even  as  the  angel  of  the 
Lord,  who  led  the  Israelites  in  all  their 
wanderings  (comp.  Exod.  xiv.  19 ;  xxiii.  20  ; 
zxxii.  34;  Josh.  v.  13).  We  see  in  this 
description  an  intimation  of  the  graces  and 
endowments  bestowed  upon  every  faithful 
member  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 

Ver.  9. — I  will  seek  to  destroy.  It  shall 
be  always  my  aim  and  my  care  to  destroy  the 
enemies  of  tIje.Church,  that  they  shall  never 
prevail  against  it.  The  words  cannot  apply 
to  the  literal  Jerusalem,  against  which  no 
•nch  confederacy  of  nations  was  ever 
formed. 

Vers.  10 — 14. — §  2.  There  ihall  eniue  an 
outpouring  of  Ood't  Spirit  upon  Israel,  which 
ihaU  produce  a  great  national  repentance. 

Ver.  10. — I  will  pour.  The  word  implies 
abundance  (comp.  Ezek.  xxxix.  29;  Joel 
ii.  28).  The  house  of  David,  etc.  The 
leaders  and  the  people  alike,  all  orders  and 
degrees  in  the  theocracy.  Jerusalem  is 
named  as  the  capital  and  representative 
of  the  nation.  The  spirit  of  grace  and 
of  supplications.  The  spirit  which  bestows 
grace  and  leads  to  prayer.  "Grace"  here 
means  the  effects  produced  in  man  by 
God's  .favour,  that  which  makes  the  re- 
cipient pleasing  to  God  and  delighting  in 
his  commandments  (Heb.  x.  29).  They  shall 
look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced. 
The  Speaker  is  Jehovah.  To  "  look  upon 
or  unto  "  implies  trust,  longing,  and  rever- 
ence (comp.  Numb.  xxi.  9 ;  2  Kings  iii.  14  ; 
Ps.  xxxiv.  5 ;  Isa.  xxii.  11).  We  may  Siiy 
generally  that  the  clause  intimates  that  the 
people,  who  had  grieved  anil  oii'euded  God 
by  their  sins  and  ingratitude,  should  repent 
and  turn  to  him  in  faith.  But  there  was  a 
literal  fulfilment  of  this  piercing,  i.e.  slaying 
(ch.  xiii.  3;  Lam.  Iv.  9),  wlien  the  Jews 
cmcifled  the  Messiah,  him  who  was  God  and 
Man,  and  of  whom,  as  a  result  of  the  hypo- 
static union,  the  properties  of  one  nature  are 
often  predicated  of  the  other.  Thus  St. 
Paul  says  that  the  Jews  crucified  "  the  Lord 
of  glory  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  8),  and  bii  Is  the  Ephesiau 
elders  "  feed  the  Church  of  God,  which  he 
hath  purchased  with  his  own  blood "  (Acta 
XX.  28  ;  for  the  reading  @eov,  see  the  critics). 
8t.  John  (xiz.  37)  refers  to  these  words  of 
Zeohariah  as  a  prophecy  of  the  Crucifixion 
(comp.   Eev.  i.  7).      The    LXX.  renders. 


"  They  shall  look  to  me  because  they  in- 
sulted,'' either  reading  tlie  last  verb  differ- 
ently, or  understanding  it  figuratively  in  the 
sense  of  assailing  with  cutting  words ;  but 
there  is  no  doubt  about  the  true  reading  and 
interpretation.  Vulgate,  Aspieient  ad  me 
quern  confixerunt.  "  Me  "  has  been  altered  in 
some  manuscripts  into  "  him ; "  but  this  is  an 
evident  gloss  received  into  the  text  for  con- 
troversial purposes,  or  to  obviate  the  su|i- 
posed  impropriety  of  representing  Jehovah 
as  slain  by  the  impious.  That'St.  John  seems 
to  sanction  this  reading  is  of  no  critical 
impoi  tanoe,  as  he  is  merely  referring  to  the 
prophecy  historically,  and  dues  not  profess 
to  give  the  very  wording  of  the  prophet.  A 
suffering  Messiah  was  not  an  unknown  idea 
in  Zechariah's  time.  He  has  already  spoken 
of  the  Sliepherd  as  despised  and  ill-treated, 
and  a  little  further  on  (ch.  xiii.  7)  he  inti- 
mates that  he  is  stricken  with  the  sword. 
The  prophecies  of  Isaiah  had  familiarized 
him  with  the  same  notion  (Isa.  liii.,  etc.). 
And  when  he  represents  Jehovah  as  saying, 
"  Me  whom  tliey  pierced,"  it  is  not  merely 
that  in  killing  his  messenger  and  representa- 
tive they  may  be  said  to  have  killed  him,  but 
the  prophet,  by  inspiration,  acknowledges  tlie 
two  natures  in  the  one  Person  of  Messiah, 
even  as  Isaiah  (ix.  6)  called  him  the  "Mighty 
God,"  and  the  psalmists  often  speak  to  the 
same  effect  (Ps.  ii.  7 ;  xlv.  6,  7 ;  ex.  1,  etc. ; 
comp.  Micah  v.  2).  The  "  looking  to  "  the 
stricken  Messiah  began  wlien  they  who  saw 
that  woeful  sight  smote  their  breasts  (Luke 
xxiii.  48) ;  it  was  carried  on  by  the  preach- 
ing of  the  apostles ;  it  shall  continue  till  all 
Israel  is  converted;  it  is  re-enacted  when- 
ever penitent  sinners  turn  to  him  whom 
they  have  crucified  by  their  sins.  Critics 
have  supposed  that  t!ie  person  whose 
murder  is  deplored  is  Isaiah,  or  TJrijah, 
or  Jeremiah ;  but  none  of  these  fulfill  the 
prediction  in  the  text.  They  shall  mourn 
for  him.  There  is  a  change  of  peisons 
here.  Jehovah  speaks  of  the  Messiah  as 
distinct  in  Person  from  himself.  As  one 
mourneth  for  his  only  son  .  .  .  for  his  first- 
born. The  depth  and  poignancy  of  this 
mourning  are  expressed  by  a  double  com- 
parison, tlie  grief  felt  at  the  loss  of  an  only 
son,  and  of  the  firstborn.  Among  the  He- 
brews the  preservation  of  the  family  wa» 
deemed  of  vast  importance,  and  its  extinc- 
tion regarded  as  a  punishment  and  a  curse, 
so  that  the  death  of  an  only  son  would  be 
the  heaviest  blow  that  could  happen  (see 
Isa.  xlvii.  9 ;  Jer.  vi.  26 ;  Amos  viii.  10). 
Peculiar  privileges  belonged  to  the  first- 
born, and  his  loss  would  be  estimated 
accordingly  (see  Gen.  xlix.  3 ;  Exod.  iv.  22 ; 
Deut.  xxi.  17;  Micah  vi.  7).  The  mention 
of  "  piercing,"  jnst  above,  seems  to  connect 
the  passage  with  the  Passover  solemnities 


OH.  xn.  1 — 14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZBOHARIAH. 


137 


and  tbe  destruction  of  the  fliBtborn  of  the 
Egyptians  (see Expoiitor,yol.  vi.  p.  131, etc.). 
Ver.  11. — As  if  the  above  comparisons 
were  not  strong  enough,  the  prophet  pre- 
sents a  new  one,  referring  to  an  historical 
event,  whicli  occasioned  a  universal  mourn- 
ing in  Jerusalem.  As  the  mourning  of  (aQ 
Hadadrimmon  in  the  valley  of  Ueglddon. 
This  is  generally  supposed  to  refer  to  the 
death  of  King  Josiah  of  a  wound  received 
at  Megiddo,  in  the  battle  with  Fharaoh- 
Necho  (B.o.  60  J),and  to  the  national  lamenta- 
tion made  for  him  and  long  observed  on  the 
anniversary  of  the  calamity  (see  2  Kings 
xxiii.  29;  2  Oliron.  xxxv.  20—25).  This 
universal  and  perennial  mourning  is  a  figure 
of  the  continual  remembrance  of  tlie  death  of 
Christ  in  the  Oliurcb.  There  is  a  difSculty 
about  the  identification  of  Hadadrimmon. 
St.  Jerome  says  it  was  a  place  in  the  Plain 
of  Megiddo,  near  Jezreel,  and  known  in  hia 
day  by  the  name  of  Maximianopolis.  Thit 
is  supposed  to  be  Bummdneh,  seven  miles 
north-west  of  Jezreel,  on  the  southern  edge 
of  the  Plain  of  Esdraelon.  But  the  identi- 
fication is  far  from  certain.  The  Assyrian 
name  given  to  the  place  may,  as  Lov^e 
suggests,  be  a  confirmation  of  the  post- 
exilian  origin  of  the  propheoy.  The  site  of 
Megiddo  also  is  undetermined,  though 
Conder  suggests  Mujedda,  a  ruined  city 
about  three  miles  south  of  Bethshean.  The 
opinion  that  the  name  Hadadrimmon  is  that 
of  a  Syrian  or  Phcenician  god,  whose  rites 
were  celebrated  as  those  of  Adonis  ("  the 
weeping  for  Tammuz"  of  Ezek.  viii.  14), 
is  preposterous ;  and  the  idea  that  the  pro- 
phet would  thus  refer  to  the  worship  of  an 
abominable  idol  is   one  that  could  have 


occnired  only  to  disbelievers  in  revelation. 
Tbe  LXX.,  mistaking  the  text,  gives,  as 
Koirfxij  ^oavos  iv  TnStip  iKKoirTO/xevov,  "  aa 
mourning  for  a  pomegranate  cut  off  in  the 
plain." 

Ver.  12. — The  land.  Not  Jerusalem  only, 
but  the  whole  country.  Every  family  apart. 
The  mourning  should  extend  to  every  indi- 
vidual of  every  family  (comp.  Ezek.  xxiv. 
23).  David  .  .  .  Nathan.  First  the  royal 
family  is  mentioned  generally,  to  show  that 
no  one,  liowever,  high  in  station,  is  exempted 
from  this  mourning;  and  then  a  particulnr 
branch  is  named  to  individualize  the  lamen- 
tation. Nathan  is  that  son  of  David  from 
whom  descended  Zerubbabel  (1  Ohron.  iii.  5 ; 
Luke  iii.  27,  31).  Their  wives  apart.  In 
private  life  the  females  of  a  household 
dwelt  in  apartments  separate  from  the 
males,  and  in  public  functions  the  sexes 
were  equally  kept  distinct  (see  Exod.  xv. 
20  ;  Judg.  xi.  34 ;  1  Sam.  xviii.  6 ;  2  Sam. 
vi.  5). 

Ver.  IS.^Levi  .  .  .  Shimei.  As  before, 
the  priestly  family  is  first  mentioned  gene- 
rally, and  then  individualized  by  naming 
Shimei,  the  son  of  Gershon,  and  grandson 
of  Levi,  of  whom  was  the  family  of  the 
Shimeites  (Numb.  iii.  17, 18, 21).  The  LXX. 
gives,  "the  tribe  of  Simeon,"  instead  of 
"the  family  of  Shimei."  But  there  is  no 
reason  for  singling  out  this  tribe.  In  one 
sense,  this  prophecy  began  to  be  fulfilled 
when  a  great  company  of  priests  were  con- 
verted' by  the  preaching  of  the  apostles 
(Acts  vi.  7). 

Ver.  14.— The  families  that  remain.  All 
the  families  that  have  not  been  mentioned 
already. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — A  uwnderful  siege.  "  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Iiord  for  Israel, 
saith  the  Lord,"  etc.  These  three  concluding  chapters  seem  to  refer  to  one  principal 
topic  ("  the  burden  of  the  Lord  for  Israel,"  ver.  1)  and  to  one  principal  time  (see  the 
thirteen-times  repeated  expression,  "  in  that  day  ").  The  general  preface  or  introduc- 
tion to  the  special  succession  of  wonders  which  they  announce  to  us  is  contained  in 
ver.  1,  setting  forth,  as  it  does,  the  wonder-working  nature  of  the  God  who  foretells 
thenn,in  regard  (l)to  all  above  (the  " heaven ") ;  (2) all  beneath  (the  "earth");  and  (3) 
all  within  (the  "spirit  of  man").  See  somewhat  similar  preface  to  a  somewhat  similar 
announcement  of  wonderful  doings  in  Rev.  xxi.  5.  After  this  introduction,  in  vers. 
2 — 4,  we  have  described  to  us,  as  the  opening  wonder  of  all,  a  certain  future  wonderful 
"  siege."  In  which  description  we  may  notice  three  principal  things,  viz.  (1)  the 
many  enemies  of  the  city  besieged ;  (2)  Us  one  Defender ;  and  (3)  its  complete  defence. 

I.  Its  many  enemies.  Herein,  evidently,  is  to  be  one  leading  peculiarity  of  this 
"siege"  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  not  only  to  be  a  complete  investment,  "all  the  people" 
being  "  round  about "  (ver.  2 ;  see  also  Luke  xix.  43),  but  it  is  also  to  be  an  invest- 
ment by  an  exceedingly  large  assemblage  of  "  peoples  .  .  .  gathered  together "  from 
all  parts  of  the  world.  Considering,  indeed,  the  frequent  use  in  these  verses  (some  six 
times  in  all)  of  the  expressions  "all"  and  "every,"  and  the  apparent  definiteness  of 
eomprehena'.on  of  the  language  in  the  end  of  ver.  3,  we  seem  justified  in  believing  that 


138  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHARIAH.  [oh.  xn.  1—14 

every  separate  Gentile  nation  or  people  will  be  en-ployed  in  this  siege.  All  the  rest  of 
the  world  against  Jerusalem.  Such  is  what  we  seem  to  see  here.  Such  is  what  we 
seem  to  see  also  in  such  passages  as  Ezek.  xxxviii.  1 — 16  (where  note  special  mention, 
as  in  ver.  4  here,  of  "  horses  "  end  "  horsemen  ") ;  Joel  iii.  9—17 ;  Rev.  xvi.  14—16 ; 
XX.  8,  9.  Whether  or  not  we  csnsider  all  these  passages  to  refer  to  exactly  the  same 
times  and  events,  at  any  rate  they  illustrate,  if  they  do  not  apply  to,  the  universal 
league  described  here. 

II.  Its  one  Defender.  With  all  the  rest  of  mankind  against  the  people  of  Jeru- 
salem, there  can  be  no  man,  of  course,  on  their  side.  But  they  are  not  to  be  on  that 
account  without  a  defender.  On  the  contrary,  they  will  have  the  best  of  all,  even 
Jehovah  himself.  Five  times  over,  and  in  two  separate  ways,  he  gives  them  to  under- 
stand this.  He  declares :  1.  That  he  will  give  heed  to  their  case.  "  I  will  open  mine 
eyes  upon  the  house  of  Judah "  (see  Ps.  xxxiii.  18;  xxxiv.  15;  Deut.  xi.  12; 
1  Kings  ix.  3 ;  Dan.  ix.  18 ;  and  ch.  ix.  8  above).  2.  That  he  will  give  help  in  their 
need.  He  will  give  help  by  "  making  "  Jerusalem  (vers.  2,  3)  that  which  it  requires 
to  be  "made  "  in  this  time  of  extremity.  He  will  give  help  also  by  "smiting  "  those 
many  enemies  (ver.  4)  who  are  leagued  togetlner  for  their  destruction,  and  who,  there- 
fore, require  to  be  "smitten"  on  their  behalf;  and  what,  of  its  kind,  could  be  more 
.satisfactory  than  this  double  assistance?  this  weakening  of  their  enemies?  this  con- 
current strengthening  of  themselves  (comp.  2  Sam.  iii.  1)  ? 

III.  Its  complete  defence.  This  twofold  assistance  was  sufficient  in  degree  aa 
well  as  satisfactory  in  nature.  What  it  proposed  to  do,  that  it  did.  In  particular, 
God,  in  this  manner :  1.  Bewildered  the  minds  of  all  the  enemies  of  Jerusalem.  He 
made  Jerui^alem,  to  these  enemies,  such  a  cup.of  tremblinj;  and  of  stupor  and  slumber 
that  they  were  not  able,  and  did  not  dare,  in  many  respects,  to  attack  them.  Com- 
pletely as  they  seemed,  by  being  "  round  about "  the  city,  to  have  it  in  their  power, 
they  were  like  men  appalled  and  stupefied,  and  left  it  alone  (comp.  Gen.  xxxv.  5). 
2.  Also,  when  these  enemies  did  find  themselves  able  to  devise  measures  against 
Jerusalem,  God  crushed  their  efforts.  They  were  as  men  trying  their  strength  by 
endeavouring  to  lift  a  heavy  stone  from  the  ground,  the  only  result  being  to  crush 
themselves  by  its  weight.  So  would  Jerusalem  be  made  to  do  thus  to  its  foes — to  all 
its  foes,  however  numerous.  It  would  not  only  bruise,  but  destroy  them,  as  though 
the  sword  had  "  cut "  them  "  in  pieces."  3.  Besides  which,  so  we  may  perhaps  under- 
stand ver.  4,  God  would  himself  overwhelm  their  spirits.  Having  failed  so  fatally  in 
their  efforts,  those  who  survived,  and  their  agents  also,  in  utter  panic,  folly,  and 
ignorance,  would  be  so  far  from  being  able  to  do  further  injury  that  they  would  them- 
selves be  in  need  of  defence.  So  surpassingly  well  can  that  one  Defender  do  for  those 
that  are  his. 

We  learn  something  here,  in  conclusion :  1.  As  to  the  possibilities  of  the  futvn. , 
Who  can  say  tliat  such  a  gigantic  conspiracy  of  evil  against  a  literally  restored  and 
renovated  Jerusalem,  and  such  a  triumphant  delivery  from  it,  may  not  mark  the  end 
of  this  age  ?  Certainly  far  greater  things,  both  in  the  way  of  manifested  evil  and  good, 
than  have  ever  been  witnessed  hitherto,  may  yet  be  seen  on  this  earth.  2.  As  to  the 
true  character  of  the  present.  This  last  conflict  will  be  but  the  fully  developed  result 
of  a  long  previous  conflict  of  a  similar  kind.  Compare  the  conspiracy  and  deliverance 
in  long-ago  days  described  in  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  (compare  also,  on  the  one  side,  Acts  xxviiu 
22 ;  and  on  the  other.  Matt,  xxviii.  20). 

Vers.  5 — 8. — A  wonderful  people.  "  And  the  governors  of  Judah  shall  say  in  their 
heart.  The  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  shall  be  my  strength,"  etc.  In  the  preceding 
verses  the  dominant  idea  is  that  of  Jernsalem  as  a  city  besieged.  In  these  we  have 
a  vision  of  it  as  a  city  inhabited  (note  end  of  ver.  6,  and  the  thrice-recurring  expression, 
"the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem").  And  there  are  three  aspects  in  which,  when  so 
regarded,  we  seem  called  upon  to  admire  it,  viz.  (1)  as  perfectly  tafe ;  (2)  as  properly 
humble ;  and  (3)  as  amazingly  strong. 

I.  Jerusalem  safe.  See  :  1.  In  the  end  of  ver.  6,  how  this  condition  of  safety  i» 
described.  Jerusalem  is  spokon  of  as  "inhabited  again;"  not  deserted,  i.e.  as  pre- 
viously, because  of  the  attacks  of  its  foes.  Also  as  "  inhabited  again  in  her  own  place, 
even   in  Jerusalem;"   as  now,  therefore,  not  even  claimed  as  belonging  to  any  but 


OH.  xn.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHARIAH.  159 

those  who  had  been  identified  with  it  for  so  many  generations.  2.  How  this  descrip- 
tion of  safety  is  Justified.  (1)  It  is  so  if  we  take  ver.  5  as  it  stands,  by  the  thorough 
conBdence  of  the  "  governors  "  in  the  people  of  Jerusalem.  They  acknowledge  this 
people  to  be  their  "  strength,"  not  with  their  lips  only,  but  in  their  "  heart."  (2) 
Such  confidence  is  a  great  element  of  safety,  especially  when  combined,  as  in  this 
instance,  with  an  equal  amount  of  confidence,  on  the  part  of  both  rulers  and  ruled, 
in  Jehovali  himself  (see  end  of  ver.  5).  (3)  For  such  a  combination  renders  those 
rulers,  like  that  famous  general  who  spoke  of  his  well-tried  army  as  "able  to  go 
anywhere  and  do  anything,"  an  amazing  power  to  their  city  in  the  way  of  protection 
»nd  defence.  At  any  rate,  so  it  was  God  made  them  to  be  in  this  instance.  Like 
flame  when  applied  to  things  most  inflammable,  so  would  he  make  tliem  amidst  the 
Ibes  of  his  people,  viz.  equally  sure  and  equally  swift  to  consume.  How  safe  a  city 
when  all  those  who  threaten  it  can  thus  effectually  be  destroyed ! 

II.  Jerusalem  humble.  See:  1.  Why  this  humility  was  secured;  viz.  because  uf 
its  vital  importance.  If  either  the  leaders  ("  the  house  of  David")  or  the  people  should 
begin  to  "magnify  themselves"  on  account  of  those  effectual  means  of  defence  just 
described,  they  would  at  once  be  in  danger  again  (Prov.  xxviii.  26 ;  Jer.  xvii.  5,  6, 
etc.).  2.  Eow  this  humility  was  secured.  The  beginning  of  deliverance  was  to  be  in 
something  apart  from  Jerusalem,  as  it  were.  In  something,  also,  that  at  first  sight 
she  might  be  inclined  to  despise.  Such  deliverance  will,  therefore,  be  like  a  "soldiers' 
victory  "  in  its  way.  Eather,  like  that  deliverance  we  read  of  in  2  Kings  vii.,  which 
began  with  certain  despised  outsiders,  and  was  clearly  not  their  work,  but  God's. 
"The  Lord  shall  save-  the  tents  of  Judah  first."  Observe  the  triple  emphasis  in  these 
words. 

III.  Jebusaleu  strong.  Strong :  1.  Because  of  the  gracious  continuance  of  Ood's 
care.  Whatever  he  had  already  done  for  his  people,  so  long  as  they  are  enabled  to 
remain  truly  humble  and  trustful,  that  he  will  go  on  to  do  still  (see  Hos.  xiii.  1 ; 
Prov.  xviii.  12;  Isa.  Ixvi.  2).  2,  Because  of  the  abundant  results  of  Ood^s  blessing. 
The  very  feeblest  amongst  them  should  be  made,  in  desire  and  intention,  like  the  very 
strongest,  in  that  way,  previously  known  (1  Sam.  xiii.  14 ;  1  Kings  ix.  4 ;  xv,  3,  etc.). 
The  leaders  amongst  them  should  be  leaders  indeed — persons  deserving  to  be  followed 
as  closely  and  fully  as  the  Angel-Jehovah,  of  whom  we  afterwards  read,  as  in  1  Pet. 
ii.  21,  22 ;  John  xiii.  15 ;  Phil.  ii.  5 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  1,  etc.  This  state  of  things  (apparently) 
the  complete  fulfilment  of  Deut.  xxxiii.  29. 

Three  things,  as  illustrated  here  concerning  the  prophetical  Scriptures  generally, 
may  be  noticed  to  conclude.  1.  Their  obscurity  in  many  points.  On  the  one  hand,  e.g,, 
the  specially  distinctive  mention  both  of  "Jerusalem  "  and  of  "Judah,"  and  the  singu- 
larly local  complexion  of  the  end  of  ver.  6,  point  us  to  a  literal  view  of  the  whole. 
On  the  other,  the  mention  of  the  house  of  David,  which  has  so  long  since  vanished 
from  sight,  and  the  apparent  connection  of  it  with  our  Divine  Redeemer  as  the  true 
New  Testament  "  David  "  (Ezek.  xxxiv. ;  xxxvii. ;  Acts  ii.  29 — 31),  point  us  almost  as 
strongly  to  a  figurative  and  spiritual  interpretation.  Who  can  decide  confidently 
between  them  till  all  is  decided  by  the  actual  ftilfilment  of  the  prophecy  ?  2.  Their 
plainness  in  otheis.  That  some  exceedingly  blessed  and  glorious  condition  of  things, 
either  in  the  literal  or  the  spiritual  Jerusalem — or,  it  may  be,  in  both  together — is  here 
fore-described,  who  can  doubt  ?  What  this  condition  of  things  is  to  depend  on,  and 
how  to  be  brought  about,  also  seem  very  plain.  This  whole  prophecy,  in  short,  is  at 
present,  as  are  so  many  others,  like  a  "proof  before  letters."  We  can  only  guess  at 
present  about  the  name  of  the  landscape  which  it  sets  before  us,  but  we  can  appreciate 
its  loveliness  to  the  full.  3.  Their  profitableness  in  all.  So  far  as  obscure,  they  serve 
to  teach  us  the  three  great  Christian  duties  of  patience  before  God,  humility  as  to 
ourselves,  and  forbearance  towards  others.  So  far  as  plain,  they  are  fitted  to  animate 
our  hope  and  sustain  our  courage  and  direct  both  our  faith  and  our  walk  (2  Thess.  iii. 
6 ;  2  Pet,  iii.  14 ;  Rom.  xv.  4,  etc.). 

Vers.  9 — 14. —  Wonderful  sorrow,  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that 
I  will  seek  to  destroy  all  the  nations,"  etc.  There  is  much  that  is  striking  in  the 
apparent  connection  of  this  passage  with  that  before.  Just  when  God  shall  be  seen 
by  his  people  to  be  "seeking"  and  bringing  about  (see  ver.  9)  the  overthrow  and 


140  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  xii.  1—14. 

destruction  of  their  many  enemies,  they,  on  the  other  hand,  will  be  seen  to  be  over- 
whelmed with  sorrow  of  heart.  Their  souls,  as  it  were,  will  be  plunged  into  darkness 
at  the  very  breaking  of  day.  The  very  thing  they  have  hoped  for  seems  close  at 
hand;  and,  lo!  they  are  as  men  in  despair.  Equally  remarkable,  next,  with  the  time 
of  this  sorrow,  is  its  character.  So  we  shall  find,  whether  we  consider  (1)  its  peculiar 
origin ;  or  (2)  its  peculiar  magnitude. 

I.  Its  peculiab  origin.  To  what  is  it  due?  Not  to  those  causes  which  bring 
about  the  ordinary  "  sorrow  of  the  world  "  (2  Cor.  vii.  10).  On  the  contrary,  being 
sorrow  which  is  "according  to  God"  {xarh  @ehy,  2  Cor.  vii.  10),  it  has  the  "things  of 
God"  as  its  cause.  In  other  words,  it  is  occasioned  :  1.  By  the  action  of  God  on  the 
hearts  of  his  people.  He  "  pours  on  "  them :  (1)  "  The  spirit  of  grace."  He  gives  them, 
i.e.,  in  overflowing  abundance,  those  gracious  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  holiness  by 
which  men  are  enabled  to  believe  in  him  as  "  the  God  of  all  grace,"  and  so  are 
encouraged  to  pray  (Rom.  viii.  15;  Gal.  iv.  6).  (2)  "The  spirit  of  supplications." 
He  gives  them,  i.e.,  in  similar  abundance,  those  other  gracious  influences  of  that  same 
Holy  Spirit  by  which  he  is  pleased  both  to  guide  men  and  also  to  assist  men  in 
their  prayers  (Rom.  viii.  26;  Eph.  vi.  18;  Jude  20).  2.  By  the  consequent  thoughts 
of  OocPs  people  about  him.  (1)  They  think  of  him  as  having  been  "  pierced  "  by 
their  sins.  This  is  an  especial  feature,  we  know,  in  "  godly  sorrow  " — its  horror  at 
having  sinned  against  God  (Ps.  li.  4;  Gen.  xxxix.  9  ;  2  Sam.  xii.  13;  peihaps  also  Isa. 
xliii.  24,  end;  Eph.  iv.  30).  (2)  They  think  of  him  as  having  been  alienated  hy 
their  folly.  They  "  mourn  for  him  "  like  those  mentioned  in  1  Sam.  vii.  2.  After 
their  privileges  are  gone  from  them,  they  see,  with  sorrow,  -how  much  they  have 
lost.  From  none  of  these  sources,  we  repeat,  is  man's  natural  sorrow  found  to  flow 
forth. 

II.  Its  feculiab  maqnitudb.  Wide  waters  are  generally  shallow  ;  deep  waters  are 
seldom  broad;  but  here  we  have  both.  1.  Peculiar  depth.  On  the  one  hand,  (1) 
there  is  only  one  known  kind  of  sorrow  equally  deep.  As  the  shades  of  life's  afternoon 
thicken  around  us,  it  is  to  our  children  we  look  to  give  us  comfort  and  hope,  and 
to  keep  up  the  interest  of  life  in  our  hearts  (Gen.  v.  28,  29;  John  xvi.  21).  How 
peculiarly  great,  therefore,  the  sorrow  of  losing  a  firstborn  and  only  son  (Gen.  xxii.  2 ; 
xlix.  3;  Prov.  iv.  3,  4 ;  Luke  vii.  12)  I  The  loss  bewailed  here  is  like  that—  loss  of  all  I 
On  the  other  hand,  (2)  there  had  never  been  but  one  previous  example  of  soirow 
equally  deep,  viz.  the  sorrow  felt  on  the  death  of  Josiah,  almost  the  very  best  (2  Kings 
xxiii.  25;  xviii.  5),  and-certainly  the  last  real,  king  among  the  descendants  of  David— 
a  sorrow  the  memory  of  which,  in  the  prophet's  own  day,  had  not  at  all  been  forgotten, 
and  the  sound  of  which  is  to  be  heard  still  by  the  world  in  the  Lamentations  of 
Jeremiah  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  25;  Lam.  iv.  20).  2.  Peculiar  diffusion.  We  find  this 
sorrow  described  as  pervading  not  the  city  only,  but  all  the  "land."  We  find  it 
affecting  every  separate  "  house  "  amongst  the  houses  of  Israel,  whether  in  Church  or 
state  (Levi  and  David  [?]),  whether  well  known  or  only  little  known  (David  and 
Nathan),  whether  with  good  antecedents  or  evil  ones  (Levi  and  Shimei;  see  Detit. 
xxiiii.  8;  2  Sam.  xvi.  5—13);  also  affecting  every  "family"  of  every  separate 
"house;"  also  every  adult  member  of  every  family,  whether  male  or  female.  At 
once,  therefore,  in  this  tempest  of  sorrow,  they  were  all  united,  yet  all  "apart."  Even 
so,  with  their  separate  roots,  are  the  "  trees  of  the  wood,"  when  all  moved  by  one 
wind  (see  Isa.  vii.  2). 

We  see,  in  all  this,  something :  1.  To  give  us  comfort  and  }iope.  Without  attempt- 
ing to  dogmatize  on  such  a  subject,  we  cannot  but  see,  from  this  analysis  of  the 
passage,  what  it  seems  to  foretell,  viz.  the  future  conversion  of  the  whole  people  of 

Israel  to  belief  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  (comp.  2  Cor.  iii.  13 — 16  with  Bom.  xi.  25 27  • 

see  also  John  xix.  37;  Rev.  i.  7;  and,  in  addition  to  all  that  has  been  noted  above) 
see  how  accurately  this  application  of  the  passage  to  a  future  national  recognition  of 
Christ  by  Israel  helps  to  explain  the  singular  change  of  person,  viz.  from  "me"  to 
"  nim "  in  ver.  10,  something  the  same  as  in  that  other  passage  where  the  An<J-el- 
Jehovah  is  speaking,  viz.  Gen.  xxii.  12 ;  and  note,  finally,  as  to  the  peculiar  time  and 
character  of  this  sorrow,  the  very  remarkable  language  of  Hos.  iii.  B,  end ;  while  as  to 
the  joyful  importance  of  such  an  interpretation,  if  correct,  see  again  Rom.  xi.  12,  15). 
2.  To  give  us  instruction  and  warning.     Equally  great,  for  example,  ought  to  be  our 


CH.  MI.  1—14.1  THE  BOOK  OF  ZBOHAEIAH.  Ml 

aorrow  for  Bin  (Bom.  iii,  9,  29).  Equally,  also,  ought  it  to  be  founded  on  our  thoughts 
about  OhrUt  (John  xvi.  9 ;  Acts  ix.  4,  5 ;  Matt.  xxv.  40,  etc.).  And  equally,  Anally, 
can  we  only  hope  to  receive  it  as  a  gift  from  above  (Acts  v.  31 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  25). 

HOMILIES  BY  VAEI0U8  AUTHOKS. 

Ters.  1 — 9. — 2%e  security  of  Zion.  I.  Miqht  of  heb  Kino.  The  worlds  of  matter 
and  of  mind  are  under  his  control.  If  so,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  chance.  Then 
whatsoever  God  has  promised  he  will  certainly  perform.  Then  tu  trust  and  to  obey 
God  must  be  the  great  end  of  our  being.  God's  friends  are  blessed  (vers.  2,  4).  His 
enemies,  intoxicated  by  pride,  muster  for  the  fight.  They  are  discomfited  and  driven 
back  in  headlong  rout.  Blindness  seizes  them,  terror  overpowers  them ;  they  perish, 
as  at  the  Bed  Sea  and  in  Midian's  evil  day  (cf.  Fs.  cxxxii.  18). 

II.  Enerqt  of  hbk  leaders.  (Vers.  5 — 7.)  Men  of  faith  and  capacity,  command- 
ing  the  confidence  of  the  people.  Bound  together  by  their  common  I'aith  in  God  and 
devotion  to  the  highest  interests  of  humanity. 

III.  Heboism  of  heb  people.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  Strength,  Divine  in  its  source,  various 
in  degree,  adequate  for  every  emergency,  making  the  weak  strong,  and  the  strong 
stronger.  A  united  people,  with  settled  government,  equal  laws,  courageous  and  faithful 
for  the  right.  Zion  united  can  stand  against  every  assault,  but  divided  becomes  the 
prey  of  her  enemies.     "  Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem." — F. 

Yet.  9.— True  greatness.     I.  Not  inherited,  but  personal. 
n.  Not  m  ciecumstances,  bot  character. 
ni.  Not  in  sblf-agqbandizembnt,  but  in  social  trsBruLNESs. 
rV.  Not  bound  by  human  weakness,  but  eising  to  the  qloet  of  Divinb 
btbenoth. 
Y.  Not  eestkiotbd  to  individuals,  but  the  common  possession  of  the  oood 
VL  Not  limited  to  baeth,  but  leading  to  the  honours  of  eternity, — F. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — 2%e  great  mourning.  The  scene  depicted  has  reference  first  of  all 
to  the  Jews.  Already  partially  fulfilled.  But  the  principles  involved  are  of  universal 
application.    Take  it  to  illustrate  trtte  repentance. 

I.  God  fob  its  cause.  Not  man,  but  God.  The  Father  of  our  spirits  acting  on 
our  spirit.    "  The  spirit  of  grace.'' 

n.  Sinners  of  mankind  fob  its  subjects.  Not  angels.  We  read  of  their  fall, 
but  never  of  their  rising  again.  For  th«m  there  seems  no  place  for  repentance.  Not 
the  righteous.  If  man  were  innocent,  there  would  be  no  need  for  penitence.  But  sinners. 
As  all  have  sinned,  repentance  is  required  of  all. 

in.  The  oeoss  of  Christ  foe  its  instrument.  On  the  one  hand,  how  can  the 
sense  of  sin  be  brought  home  to  man's  conscience?  On  the  other,  how  can  G^od,  con- 
sistently with  his  righteousness,  show  mercy  to  the  sinner?  The  answer  is  found  in 
the  cross.  Here  we  see,  and  here  alone:  1.  The  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.  2.  The 
exceeding  greatness  of  God's  love  to  sinners.  "  God  commendeth  his  own  love  towards 
us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us." 

IV.  Intensity  and  thoroughness  for  its  great  characteristics.  1.  Intensity. 
Thought  and  feeling.  Sorrow  deep  and  bitter.  2.  Thoroughness.  Goes  to  the  very 
root  of  the  matter ;  real  and  abiding. 

V.  Begbneration  of  society  as  its  blessed  besult.  Society  made  up  of  indi- 
viduals. Change  them,  and  you  change  all.  The  whole  lump' will  be  leavened.  When 
there  is  peace  with  God,  purity  of  life,  brotherly  kindness  and  charity,  the  old  glory  of 
the  land  will  be  restored. — F. 

Ver.  1.— 2%«  universe,  "The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  for  Israel,  saith  the 
Lord,  which  stretcheth  forth  the  heavens,  and  layeth  the  foundation  of  the  earth,  and 
formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him."  This  chapter,  and  on  to  ver.  6  of  the  following, 
most  expositors  regard  as  referring  to  Israel's  conflict  and  victory,  conversion  and 
Dltimate  holiness.     The  first  verse  announces  how  the  conflict  against  Jerusalem  and 


142  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHARIAH.  [oh.  zn.  1—14 

Judah  will  result  in  the  conquest  of  all  enemies.    The  passage  before  us  suggests  a 
few  thoughts  couoerniug  the  universe, 

I.  That  the  univeuse  includes  the  existence  or  matteb  and  of  mind.  Tlie 
phrase  "heavens"  and  "earth"  is  used  here  and  elsewhere  to  represent  the  whole 
creatioD.  1.  It  includes  matter.  Of  the  essence  of  matter  we  know  nothing ;  but  by 
the  word  we  mean  all  that  comes  within  the  cognizance  of  our  senses,  all  that  can  be 
felt',  heard,  seen,  tasted.  How  extensive  is  this  material  domain  I  Science  shows  that 
it  baffles  all  efforts  and  methods  of  mensuration.  2.  Jt  includes  mind.  Indeed,  mind 
is  here  specified.  "Andformeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him."  Man  has  a  spirit. 
Of  this  he  has  stronger  evidence  than  he  has  of  the  existence  of  matter.  He  is  con- 
scious of  the  phenomena  of  mind,  but  not  conscious  of  the  phenomena  of  matter. 
Man's  mind  is  only  an  insignificant  part  and  a  humble  representative  of  the  immeasur- 
able universe  of  spirit. 

II.  'J'hat  the  univeesb  obiqinatbd  with  one  Personal  Being.  "The  Lord, 
which  stretcheth  forth  the  heavens,"  etc.  It  had  an  origin ;  it  is  not  eternal.  The 
idea  of  its  eternity  involves  contradictions.  It  had  an  origin;  its  origin  is  not  for- 
tuitous ;  it  is  not  the  production  of  chance.  The  idea  of  its  springing  from  chance  may 
live  in  the  region  of  speculation,  but  never  in  the  realm  of  intelligent  conviction.  It 
had  an  origin;  its  origin  is  not  that  of  a  plurality  of  creators;  it  has  one,  and  onlv 
one — "  the  Lord."  This  is  the  only  philosophic  account  of  its  origin,  "  Thou,  Lord,  in 
the  beginning  hast  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  works  of 
thy  hands." 

III.  That  this  one  Personal  Cbbatob  has  purposes  coNCEBNiNe  the  human 
bace.  "  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  for  Israel,  saith  the  Lord."  This  may 
mean,  "  the  sentence  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  concerning  Israel."  Now,  this  chapter, 
this  book — nay,  a  large  portion  of  the  Bible — purports  to-be  a  revelation  of  his  purpose 
to  mankind.  He  has  not  created  us  without  an  object,  nor  placed  us  on  this  earth 
without  an  object;  both  in  our  creation  and  preservation  he  has  a  purpose.  This  being 
so :  1.  No  events  in  human  history  are  accidental.  2.  The  grand  purpose  of  our  life 
should  be  the  fulfilment  of  his  will.    "Not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done." 

IV.  That  his  purpose  towards  mankind  he  is  fully  able  to  accomplish. 
His  creative  achievements  are  here  mentioned  as  a  pledge  of  the  purposes  hereafter 
announced.  Every  purpose  of  the  Lord  shall  be  performed.  Has  he  purposed  that 
all  mankind  shall  be  converted  to  his  Son?  It  shall  be  done.  "There  is  nothing  too 
hard  for  the  Lord."— D.  T. 

Vers.  2,  3. — Sin  self-punishment.  "Behold,  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  cup  of  trem- 
bling unto  all  the  people  round  about,  when  they  shall  be  in  the  siege  both  against 
Judah  and  against  Jerusalem.  And  in  that  day  will  I  make  Jerusalem  a  burdensome 
stone  for  all  people :  all  that  burden  themselves  w  ith  it  shall  be  cut  in  pieces,  though 
all  the  people  of  the  earth  be  gathered  together  against  it."  There  is  in  this  passage  a 
principle  by  which  the  Governor  of  the  world  punishes  malicious  men.  That  principle 
is  this— the  reaction  of  their  efforts  to  injure  others  causing  injury  of  themselves.  It  is 
here  said  that  Jerusalem  would  become  confusion  and  destruction  to  the  men  who  sou2;ht 
its  ruin.  It  is  Ijere  said  that :  1.  Jerusalem  would  become  to  them  "  a  cup  of  trem- 
bling," or,  as  some  render  it,  "a  cup  of  intoxication."  It  does  not  say  that  Jerusalem 
will  put  forth  any  active  eftorts  to  wreak  vengeance  on  its  enemies,  but  that  its  effect 
upon  the  enemies  would  be  as  au  intoxicating  cup;  it  uill  make  them  reel  and  stagger 
in  confusion.  The  thought  of  their  own  malicious  conduct  towards  it  would  produce 
an  effect  upon  their  own  minds  that  would  make  them  tremble  and  become  confused.  2. 
Jerusalem  would  become  to  them  "  a  burdensome  stone."  The  idea  is  that,  in  their 
endeavours  to  injure  Jerusalem,  they  would  crush  themselves.  I  make  three  remarks 
in  relation  to  this  punishment  by  reaction. 

1.  It  is  well  attested.'  1.  Jt  is  attested  ly  every  maris  consciousneis.  Every 
man  who  attempts  to  injure  another  feels  sooner  or  later  that  he  has  injured  himself. 
There  is  a  recoil  and  a  regret.  In  truth,  the  malign  passion  itself  is  its  own  punish- 
ment. A  man  who  cherishes  anger  towards  another  injures  himself  more  than  he  can 
by  any  effort  injure  the  object  of  his  displeasure.  In  every  malign  emotion  there  is 
misery.    2.  Jt  u  attested  by  universal  history.     It  is  a  law  that  runs  through  all 


on.  xu.  1— U.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZEOHARIAH,  143 

bistory,  that  the  "mischief"  of  a  man  "shall  return  upon  his  own  head,  and  hia 
violent  dealing  shall  come  down  upon  his  own  pate"  (Ps.  vii.  16).  The  conduct  of 
Joseph's  brethren  and  of  Haman  may  be  cited  as  illustrations ;  but  the  conduct  of  the 
Jews  towards  the  Messiah  is  an  example  for  all  times,  most  mighty  and  impressive. 
The  blows  which  the  old  Jewish  nation  struck  on  him  rebounded  on  their  own  heads 
and  ruined  them.  "  Whoso  diggeth  the  pit,"  says  Solomon,  "  shall  fall  therein  ;  and 
whoBo  roUeth  the  stone,  it  will  return  on  him  "  (Piov.  xxvi.  27). 

II.  It  is  manifestly  just.  What  man  thus  punished  can  complain  of  the 
righteousness  of  his  sufferings?  He  must  feel,  and  feel  deeply,  that  he  has  deserved 
all  and  even  more  than  he  endures.  Indeed,  it  is  true  that  the  punishment  of  the 
Binner  is  self-punishment;  it  is  the  fruit  of  his  own  doings.  Witness  Cain,  Belshazzar, 
Judas,  etc. 

III.  It  IB  ESSENTIALLY  BENEFICENT.  It  serves :  1.  To  guard  men  from  the  injuries 
of  others.     2.  To  restrain  the  angry  passions  of  men. 

Conclusion.  Let  us  in  all  our  conduct  to  our  fellow-men  practically  recognize  the 
principle  that  with  what  measure  we  mete  it  shall  be  measured  to  us  again.  "  He 
that  roUeth  the  stone,  it  shall  return  upon  him."  The  stone  of  revenge  and  malice 
which  you  have  rolled  at  another  shall  come  back  upon  the  head  of  you  that  rolled  it 
— come  back  with  a  terrible  momentum,  come  back  to  crush  you. — D.  T. 

Vers.  4 — 9. — A  good  time /or  good  people.  "In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,. I  will 
smite  every  horse  with  astonishment,  and  his  rider  with  madness :  and  I  will  open 
mine  eyes  upon  the  house  of  Judah,  and  will  smite  every  horse  of  the  people  with 
blindness,"  etc.  These  words,  which  are  confessedly  difficult  if  not  impossible  to 
interpret  correctly  (for  some  say  they  are  to  be  taken  literally,  others  spiritually; 
some  historically,  others  prophetically),  may  be  fairly  usud  to  illustrate  a  good  time 
for  good  people.     In  relation  to  this  good  time,  I  observe — 

].  It  is  a  time  when  theib  enemies  shall  be  vanquished.  "In  that  day, 
saith  the  Lord,  I  will  smite  every  horse  with  astonishment,  and  his  rider  with  mad- 
ness :  and  I  will  open  mine  eyes  upon  the  house  of  Judah,  and  will  smite  every  horse 
of  the  people  with  blindness."  Here  the  overthrow  of  the  enemies  of  Jerusalem  is 
threatened.  "  The  Lord,"  says  Keil,  "  will  throw  the  mind  and  spirit  of  the  military 
force  of  the  enemy  into  such  confusion  that,  instead  of  injuring  Jerusalem  and  Judah, 
it  will  rush  forward  to  its  own  destruction.  Horses  and  riders  individualize  the  war- 
like forces  of  the  enemy.  The  rider,  smitten  with  madness,  turns  his  sword  against 
his  own  comrades  in  battle.  On  the  other  hand,  Jehovah  will  open  his  eyes  upon 
Judah  for  its  protection  (1  Kings  viii.  29;  Neh.  i.  6;  Ps.  xxxii.  8).  This  promise  is 
strengthened  by  the  repetition  of  the  punishment  to  be  infficted  upon  the  enemy.  Not 
only  with  alarm,  but  with  blindness,  will  the  Lord  smite  their  horses.  We  have  an 
example  of  this  in  2  Kings  vi.  18,  where  the  Lord  smote  the  enemy  with  blindness  in 
answer  to  Elisha's  prayer,  i.e.  with  mental  blindness,  so  that,  instead  of  seizing  the 
prophet,  they  fell  into  the  hands  of  Israel. .  The  three  plagues,  timmdhon,  shigga'on, 
and  Hwdron,  are  those  with  which  rebellious  Israelites  are  threatened  in  Deut.  xxviii. 
28.  The  house  of  Judah  is  the  covenant  nation,  the  population  of  Jmiah,  including 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  as  we  may  see  from  what  follows."  Now,  whether  this 
conquest  refers  to  the  triumphs  of  the  Maccabees,  or  to  some  wonderful  victories  of  the 
Jews  in  some  future  times,  one  thing  is  clear  to  us,  that  the  time  will  comefm  all  good 
people  when  their  enemies  shail  he  entirely  destroyed.  To  every  good  man  this  victory 
is  promised.     "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life." 

II.  It  is  A  time  when  theib  power  shall  be  augmented.  The  power  here 
promised  is :  1.  2%e  power  of  unity.  "  The  governors  of  Judah  shall  say  in  their 
heart.  The  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  shall  be  my  strength  in  the  Lord  of  hosts  their 
God."  "  Observe  here,"  says  Dr.  Wardlaw, "  the  confidence  of  the  leaders  in  the  people. 
Without  the  people's  concurrent  aid,  their  counsels  and  plans  and  directions  could,  of 
course,  be  of  little  avaiL  This  the  rulers  should  feel,  and  should  exult  in  seeing  what 
ground  they  had  for  full  reliance  on  them  in  time  of  pressure  and  danger,  which 
implies  unanimity  and  intrepid  valour,  combined  with  persevering  effort,  on  the  part  of 
the  inhabitants.  This  union  and  valour  would  be  the  'strength'  of  their  leaders, 
without  which  they  must  find  themselves  utterly  powerless.    A  divided,  dispirited 


144  THE  BOOK  OP  ZBCHARIAH.  [oh.  xn,  1—14. 

heartless,  dastardly  soldiery  or  populace,  is  weakness,  disappointment,  and  discomfiture 
to  the  best-conceived  plans  of  the  most  bold,  prudent,  and  experienced  leaders."  All 
good  people  over  all  the  earth  will  one  day  be  thoroughly  united — united,  not  in 
opinion,  for  this  would  he,  if  possible,  undesirable ;  but  in  devotion  to  Christ,  the 
common  Centre.  This  union  is  strength.  Divine  strength,  "  strength  in  the  Lord  of 
hosts."  "Strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  his  might."  2.  The  power  of  con- 
quest. "  In  that  day  will  I  make  the  governors  of  Judah  like  an  hearth  of  fire  among 
the  wood,  and  like  a  torch  of  fire  in  a  sheaf;  and  they  shall  devour  all  the  people  round 
about,  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left ; "  or,  as  Dr.  Henderson  renders  it,  "  In  that 
day  will  I  make  the  chiefs  of  Judah  like  a  fire-pot  among  sticks  of  wood,  and  like  t 
torch  of  fire  in  a  sheaf,  and  they  shall  consume  all  the  people  around,  on  the  right 
hand  and  on  the  left."  As  the  fire  consumes  the  wood  and  the  sheaf  of  straw,  so 
would  the  men  of  Jerusalem  have  power  to  conquer  all  the  people  "  round  about,  on 
the  right  hand  and  on  the  left."  God  invests  all  good  men  with  power  to  conquer 
their  spiritual  foes ;  this  is  the  power  of  faith — faith  that  overcometh  the  world.  This 
power,  though  weak  in  most,  is  triumphant  in  many  (see  Heb.  xi.).  It  shall  be  all- 
conquering  one  day. 

III.  It  is  a  time  when  thby  shall  be  settled  m  their  home.  "And  Jeru- 
salem shall  be  inhabited  again  in  her  own  place,  even  in  Jerusalem."  Jerusalem,  in 
the  first  instance,  stands  for  the  Jews,  and  in  the  second  instance  for  the  city  or  the 
country.  It  means,  therefore,  that  in  this  good  time — whether  it  is  past  or  to  come — 
some,  if  not  all,  the  Jews  that  were  scattered  abroad  will  return  and  settle  in  their 
own  home.  The  language  expresses  reoccupancy  and  permanent  possession.  Those 
who  return — whether  from  Egypt,  Babylon,  or  elsewhere — will  return  and  settle  down 
in  their  old  home.  A  time  comes  for  all  good  people  when  they  shall  settle  down  in 
a  permanent  dwelling-place.  Here  they  are  "  strangers  and  pilgrims,"  and  have  "  no 
abiding  city."  But  a  glorious  country  awaits  them,  an  "inheritance  incorruptible, 
undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away." 

IV.  It  IB   A   TIME   WHEN    THET    SHALL    BE    BLESSED   WITH    EQUAL    PBIVILESES.      1. 

They  were  to  have  equal  honour.  "  The  Lord  also  shall  save  the  tents  of  Judah  first, 
that  the  glory  of  the  house  of  David  and  the  glory  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  do 
not  magnify  themselves  against  Judah."  Dr.  Henderson's  translation  expresses  this : 
"  And  Jehovah  shall  deliver  the  tents  of  Judah  first,  in  order  that  the  splendour  of  the 
house  of  David  and  the  splendour  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  may  not  be  magnified 
above  Judah."  2.  They  were  to  have  equal  protection.  "  In  that  day  shall  the  Lord 
defend  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem ;  and  he  that  is  feeble  among  them  at  that  day 
shall  be  as  David;  and  the  house  of  David  shall  be  as  Gkid,  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
before  them.  And  it  shall  come  to,  pass  in  that  day,  that  I  will  seek  to  destroy  all 
the  nations  that  come  against  Jerusalem."  Here  Jerusalem  is  promised  protection 
against  the  foe,  and  "he  that  is  feeble  among  them  at  that  day  shall  be  as  David." 
"  To  the  Jew,  David  was  the  highest  type  of  strength  and  glory  on  earth  (2  Sam.  xvii. 
8),  a  man  of  war  (2  Sam.  xviii.  3) ;  such  shall  the  weakest  citizen  of  Jerusalem  become 
(Joel  iii.  10)."  "  And  the  house  of  David  shall  be  as  God,  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
before  them."  "The  Divine  Angel  that  went  before  them  through  the  desert,  the 
highest  type  of  strength  and  glory  in  heaven  (Exod.  xxiii.  20 ;  zxxii.  34).  The  house 
of  David  is  the  prince  and  his  family  sprung  from  David  (Ezek.  xlv.  7,  9).  David's 
house  was  then  in  %  comparatively  weak  state."  Now,  there  is  a  time  coming  when 
all  good  people  shall  have  distinguished  honour  and  complete  protection.  They  shall 
settle  down  in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem ;  and  what  a  city  is  that  (see  Rev.  xzi.)  1 

Conclusion.  Though  I  have  not  been  able  to  put  forth  what  I  feel  to  be  a  satisfactory 
interpretation  of  these  words,  or  attempted  to  give  to  them  a  spiritual  signification,  I 
trust  that,  in  using  them  as  an  illustration  of  the  good  time  coming  for  the  good, 
I  have  presented  a  legitimate  and  a  useful  application.  A  glorious  time  awaits  all 
good  men,  in  all  lands,  Churches,  nations — a  time  when  they  shall  be  delivered  from 
all  evil  and  be  put  in  permanent  possession  of  all  good.  Seeing  we  look  for  such 
things,  "  what  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be  in  kll  holy  conversation  and  godli- 
ness?" etc.— D.  T. 

Vers.  10 — 14. — Penitential  torrow.    "  And  I  will  pour  upon  the  home  of  David,  utd 


OH.  XII.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF   ZECHARIAH.  146 

upoQ  tbe  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications :  and  they 
shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him,  as  one 
mourneth  for  his  only  son,  and  shall  bo  in  bitterness  for  him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitter- 
ness for  his  firstborn,"  etc.  To  whatever  particular  event  this  passage  refers,  the 
subject  is  obvious  and  most  important,  viz.  that  ol  penitential  sorrow.  And  five  things 
in  connection  with  it  are  noteworthy. 

I.  The  subjects  of  this  penitential  sorrow.  They  are  Jews,  and  not  Gentiles. 
"  The  house  of  David,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  " — expressions  wliich  designate 
the  whole  Israelitish  people.  The  Jewish  people  had  often  been  reduced  to  this  state 
of  sorrow.  When  in  Babylonian  captivity  they  wept  when  they  "  remembered  Zion." 
"  The  scene,"  says  Dr.  Wardlaw,  "  depicted  bears  a  very  close  resemblance  to  those 
recorded  to  have  taken  place  on  the  restoration  from  Babylon,  when  Jeljovah,  having 
influenced  them  individually  to  return  to  himself,  and  to  set  their  faces,  with  longing 
desire,  to  the  land  of  their  fathers,  inclined  their  hearts,  when  thus  gathered  home,  to 
social  and  collective  acts  of  humiliation  and  prayer.  The  prayers  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah 
on  those  occasions  might  be  taken  as  models,  in  the  'spirit  and  even  the  matter'  of 
them,  for  the  supplications  of  Judah  and  Israel  when  brought  back  from  their  wider 
and  more  lasting  dispersions." 

II.  The  cause  op  this  penitential  sobeow.  "  I  will  pour."  The  Prophet  Joel 
(ii.  28)  refers  to  this  outpouring  of  Divine  influence.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass 
afterward,  that  I  will  pour  .out  my  Spirit  upon  all.  flesh."  All  genuine  repentance  for 
sin  originates  with  God.  He  sends  down  into  human  souls  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of 
supplications.  The  spirit  of  grace  is  the  spirit  that  produces  in  the  mind  of  man  the 
experience  of  the  grace  of  God;  and  this  experience  works  repentance  and  inspires 
prayer. 

III.  The  ocoabion  of  this  penitential  sokkow.  "  And  they  shall  look  upon  me 
whom  they  have  pierced."  "  The  expression, '  upon  me,' "  says  Hengstenberg,  "  is  very 
remarkable.  According  to  ver.  1,  the  Speaker  is  the  Lord,  the  Creator  of  heaven  and 
earth.  But  it  is  evident  from  what  follows  that  we  are  not  to  confine  our  thoughts 
exclusively  to  an  invisible  God  who  is  beyond  the  reach-  of  suffering,  for  the  sams 
Jehovah  presently  represents  himself  as  pierced  by  the  Israelites,  and  afterwards 
lamented  by  them  with  bitter  remorse.  The  eniama  is  solved  by  the  Old  Testament 
doctrine  of  the  Angel  and  Revealer  of  the  Most  High  God,  to  whom  the  prophet  attri- 
butes even  the  most  exalted  names  of  God,  on  account  of  his  participation  in  the 
Divine  nature,  who  is  described  in  oh.  xi.  as  undertaking  the  ofiSoe  of  Shepherd  over 
his  people,  and  who  had  been  recompensed  by  them  with  base  ingratitude."  "  They 
shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him."  The  "  me" 
and  the  "  him  "  are  the  same  Person,  and  that  Person  he  who  says,  in  ver.  10,  "  I  will 
pour  upon  the  house  of  David."  In  the  first  clause  he  is  speaking  of  him^elf ;  in  the 
second  clause  the  prophet  is  speaking  of  him.  The  Messiah  was  pierced,  and  pierced 
by  the  Jews :  "  They  pierced  my  hands  and  my  feet."  A  believing  sight  of  Christ 
produces  this  penitential  sorrow. 

"  Alas  I  and  did  my  Saviour  bleed. 
And  my  Eedeemer  die? 
Did  he  devote  his  sacred  head 
For  such  a  worm  as  I  ?  " 

IV.  The  poignancy  of  this  penitential  sohbow.  "And  they  shall  mourn  for 
him,  as  one  mourneth  for  his  only  sun,  and  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  him,  as  one  that 
is  in  bitterness  for  his  firstborn."  "  There  are  few  states  of  deeper  and  acuter  sorrow 
than  this — that  which  is  felt  by  affectionate  parents  when  bereft  of  those  objects  of 
their  fondest  affections;  the  one  solitary  object  of  their  concentrated  parental  love;  or 
the  firstborn  and  rising  support  and  hope  of  their  household."  As  to  the  poignancy 
of  this  grief,  it  is  fiuther  said,  "  In  that  day  shall  there  be  a  great  mourning  in  Jeru- 
salem, as  the  mourning  of  Hadadrimmon  in  the  valley  of  Megiddon,"  etc.  Perhaps 
the  greatest  sorrow  ever  known  amongst  the  Jews  was  the  sorrow  in  the  valley  of 
Megiddon,  occasioned  by  the  death  of  King  Josiah  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  24).  Jeremiah 
composed  a  funeral  dirge  on  the  occasion,  and  other  odes  and  lamentations  were  com- 
posed, and  were  sung  by  males  and  females.     But  true  penitential  sorrow  is  far  more 

ZEOHABIAH.  L 


IM 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABIAH. 


[oh.  xm.  1 — 9. 


poignant  than  that  occasioned  by  the  death  of  an  only  son  or  a  noble  king.  It  is 
tinctured  with  moral  remorse. 

V.  The  nNivBRSALiTT  or  this  poignant  sorrow.  "  And  the  land  shall  mourn, 
«Tery  family  apart,"  etc.  All  the  TamilieB  of  the  land  shall  mourn,  and  all  shall 
mourn  "  apart."    Deep  sorrow  craves  loneliness. 

Conclusion.  There  is  one  event  in  history — whether  such  an  event  ia  referred  to 
here  or  not — that  answers  better  to  the  description  here  of  penitential  sorrow  than  any 
other  in  the  chronicles  of  the  world ;  it  is  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  Thousands  of  Jews 
assembled  together  on  that  day  fmm  all  parts  of  the  known  world.  Peter  preached  to 
the  vast  assembly  and  charged  them  with  having  crucified  the  Son  of  God.  The 
Holy  Spirit  came  down  upon  the  vast  congregation,  and  the' result  was  that,  "When 
they  heard  this,  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart "  (Acts  ii.  37).  Far  on  in  the  future, 
it  may  be,  a  period  will  dawn  in  Jewish  history  when  such  penitential  sorrow  as  is 
here  described  will  be  experienced  by  all  the  descendants  of  Abraham. — D.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Xni. 


Vew.  1 — 6. — §  3.  Thit  repentance  wUl  lead 
to  purification  from  patt  defilement,  and  a 
reaction  agairwl  idolatry  and  falte  prophets. 

Ver.  1. — ^In  that  day.  At  the  time  when 
the  great  mourning  (ch.  xii.)  takes  place,  or, 
more  generally.in  the  Messianic  period,  when 
all  these  things  shall  be  fulKUed.  Shall  be  a 
fountain  opened,  etc.  Shall  be  opened  and 
continue  open.  The  allusion  is  to  the  Instral 
rites  practised  in  the  consecration  of  the 
Levites,  who  were  to  have  "  water  of  sin " 
■prinkled  on  them,  and  to  "the  water  of 
separation,"  or  "  water  of  uncleanness  "  (the 
word  found  in  our  passage),  used  for  purposes 
of  legal  purification  (see  Numb.  viii.  7;  xix. 
9).  Instead  of  this  merely  ceremonial 
cleansing,  there  should  be  in  the  Cliristian 
Church  the  cleansing  of  the  eoul  by  the 
blood  of  Christ  (1  Pet.  i.  2 ;  1  John  i.  7). 
Septuap;int,  ''Zffrat  iras  t6itos  StavoiySfjievos, 
"  Every  place  shall  be  opened."  The  house 
of  David  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
represent  the  whole  nution,  as  in  oh.  xii.  1 0 ; 
the  cleansing  is  as  universal  as  the  sin  (see 
the  announccnjent  in  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25; 
xlvii.  1—12;  Joel  iii.  18).  For  sin  and  for 
uncleanness.  The  latter  word  is  used  for 
the  separation  on  account  of  uncleanness 
(Lev.  XV.  20,  etc.);  and  the  two  terms  to- 
gether comprise  all  guilt  and  pollution. 

Ver.  2. — I  will  cut  off  the  names  of  the 
idols.  Idols  should  be  so  utterly  abolished 
that  their  very  names  should  perish  (Hos. 
n.  17;  Mioah  v.  12,  1.S;  Zeph.  i.  4).  The 
prophet  nnmrs  the  two  chief  sins  which  had 
brouRht  ruin  on  the  old  theocracy— idolatry 
and  false-proplietlem,  and  declares  that  these 
shall  not  be  found  in  the  new  theocracy. 
As  these  two  sins  were  not  specially  preva- 
lent after  the  Captivity,  some  see  in  their 
mention  here  an  argument    for  the   pre- 


exilian  authorship  of  tbia  part  of  Zechariah. 
But  the  prophet,  grounding  his  message  on 
past  history,  does  well  to  give  assurance 
that  such  lapses  shall  not  happen  again. 
Nor  is  it  altogether  certain  that  the  warning 
againbt  these  errors  was  not  needed  after 
the  return.  There  were  false  prophets  in 
Nehemiah's  time  (Neh.  vi.  14) ;  and  we  read 
in  the  Book  of  Maccabees  that  many  Jews 
adopted  heathen  rites  and  customs,  among 
which  the  worship  of  idols  must  have  been 
included  (1  Maco.  i.  11,  etc. ;  2  Mace.  iv. 
18,  etc.),  and  the  people  and  even  priests 
contracted  marriages  with  heathen  wives 
(Ezra  ix.  2;  Neh.  ziii.  23);  so  that  there 
was  real  danger  of  relapse.  The  prophets. 
The  false  prophets  are  meant,  as  is  evident 
from  their  being  associated  with  idols  and 
the  unoleiin  spirit,  and  from  vers.  3 — 6. 
The  Septuagint  has,  "the  false  prophets;" 
so  the  Vulgate.  The  unclean  spirit.  This 
is  the  lying  spirit  which  worlds  in  the  false 
prophets  (see  1  Kings  xxii.  19 — 23),  and 
which  we  find  later  denounced  by  apostles 
(Acts  xvi.  18;  1  Cor.  x.  20,  21;  2  Thess.  ii. 
9,  10 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  1).  Septuagint,  rh  Tr^-fD^uo 
T^  aKdSapTov  (comp.  Matt.  xii.  43;  Kev. 
xviii.  2). 

Ver.  3.— When  any  shall  yet  proplesy; 
i.e.  if  any  man  shall  pretend  to  have  predic- 
tive powers  conferred  on  him  by  God,  There 
is  here  no  intimation  that  true  prophecy 
should  cease,  as  Keil  and  Kohler  suppose; 
the  man  is  punished,  not  because  he  pro- 
phesies, but  because  "  he  sp.  aketli  lies." 
His  father  and  his  mother.  Tha  passage  is 
grounded  on  the  enactments  in  Deut.  xiii. 
6 — 10  and  xviii.  20,  which  commanded  the 
death  of  a  false  prophet  or  of  one  who 
enticed  others  to  idolatry.  Here  the  holy 
zeal  of  the  parents  should  put  the  law  in 
force.  This  was  quite  a  different  state  of 
things  from  that  which  obtained  in  former 
times.      The   earlier    prophets  continually 


i3H.  XIII.  1 — 9.j 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


147 


complain  of  the  favour  shown  to  these 
deceivers  (comp.  Isa.  ix.  15 ;  Jer.  v.  31 ; 
Mioah  ii.  11) ;  and  we  never  read  of  the 
legal  punishment  being  inflicted  after  due 
investigation,  the  test  being  the  non-fulfil- 
ment of  the  prediction  (Deut.  xviii.  22).  In 
the  new  theocracy,  so  great  is  the  recoil 
from  such  pretenders,  that  their  nearest 
relations  shall  at  once  punish  them  with 
death  without  any  previous  legal  process. 
Shall  thrust  him  through.  Stab,  pierce  him, 
put  him  to  death,  as  in  ch.  xil.  10.  The 
gospel  deals  more  tenderly  with  heretics 
(Luke  ix.  55).  "Defendenda  religio  non 
est  occidendo,"  says  Laotant.  ('Div.  Inst.,' 
V.  20),  "sed  morienrlo;  religio  cogi  non 
potest "  (Wordsworth,  in  loa.). 

Ver.  4.— Shall  be  ashamed.  The  falsity 
of  their  pretensions  being  now  recognized, 
these  prophets  sliall  be  ashamed  to  utter 
their  oracles  in  public.  When  he  hath 
prophesied ;  rather,  when  he  prophesieth. 
A  rough  garment ;  a  mantle  of  hair;  Septua- 
gint,  ii^jiiv  Tptxirn"  ■  Vulgate,  pallio  sac- 
cino.  Such  was  the  mantle  of  Elijah 
(1  Kings  six.  13,  19 ;  2  Kings  i.  8 ;  ii.  13, 
14)  and  of  John  the  Baptist  (Matt.  iii.  4), 
and  it  seems  to  have  become  the  distinctive 
badge  of  the  prophet,  and  was  assumed  by 
these  pretenders  in  order  to  inspire  con- 
fidence, 

Yer.  5. — ^I  am  an  hnshandman.  The  im- 
postor shall  confess  the  truth  about  himself, 
and  own  that  he  is  only  "a  tiller  of  the 
ground  {^^vQpwjros  4pya(6fievQs  t^v  ytjv)"  as 
Gen.  iv.  2.  The  abnegation  in  Amos  vii.  14 
is  quite  different  in  character.  Man  taught 
mo  to  keep  cattle ;  literally,  man  bought  (or, 
possessed)  me  ;  Eevised  Version,  I  have  been 
made  a  bondman.  So  eager  is  he  now  to 
hide  his  false  pretensions,  that  he  is  willing, 
to  be  considered  a  slave,  employed  from  his 
youth  in  farm  work,  and  therefore  incapable 
of  executing  the  prophetical  office.  Vul- 
gate, Quoniam  Adam  exemplum  meum  db  ado- 
loscentia  mea ;  i.e.  " I  have  foUowtd  the  ex- 
ample of  Adam  in  tilling  the  ground  and  in 
earning  my  bread  by  the  sweat  of  my  brow." 
St.  Cyril  and  some  modern  commentators 
hold  that  tho  false  prophet  says  this  in 
sorrow  and  repentance,  not  with  any  idea  of 
deceiving;  and  that  herein  is  exhibited  a 
signal  instance  of  the  grace  of  God  in  the 
Messianic  period,  when  even  such  sinners 
are  converted  from  the  error  of  their  ways. 

Ver.  6. — What  are  these  wowids  in  thine 
hands  1  or  rather,  between  thy  hands,  i.e. 
on  thy  breast;  Kevised  Version,  between 
thine  arms.  Cheyne  compares,  "between 
his  arms,"  i.e.  in  his  back  (2  Kings  ix.  24) 
and  "between  your  eyes,"  i.e.  on  your  fore- 
beads  (Deut.  xi.  18).  Not  satisfied  with 
the  assertion  in  ver.  6,  the  questioner  asks  the 
meaning  of  these  wounds  which  he  sees  on 


his  body.  Jerome  considers  these  scars  to 
be  matks  of  correction  and  punishment  at 
the  hands  of  his  parents.  More  probably 
they  are  thought  to  be  self-inflicted  in  the 
service  of  some  idol,  aooordinsr  to  the 
practice  mentioned  in  1  Kings  xviii.  28; 
Jer.  ilviii.  37.  Those  with  which  I  was 
wounded  in  the  house  of  my  friends.  This 
may  be  a  confession  of  guilt,  the  impostor 
owning  that  his  friends^had  thus  punished  him 
for  his  pretensions ;  or,  as  the  word  reudered 
"  friends "  is  generally  used  in  the  case  of 
illicit  or  impure  love  or  spiritual  fornication, 
it  may  be  here  applied  to  the  idols  whom 
he  served.  But  it  seems  most  probable  that 
the  answer  is  intentionally  false  and  mis- 
leading ;  as  if  he  had  said,  "  The  wounds 
were  not  made  as  you  suppose,  but  are  tho 
result  of  something  that  happened  to  me  in 
my  friends'  house."  The  LXX,.  renders, 
its  iTrK-fjyriP  ii/  t^  otKtp  t^  ayamiT^  fiov,  "  with 
which  I  was  struck  in  my  beloved  house." 
To  see  in  this  passage  a  reference  to  our 
blessed  Lord  and  his  crucifixion,  though 
such  an  opinion  has  the  support  of  the 
Eoiuan  Liturgy  and  of  many  interpreters, 
is  to  do  violence  to  the  context,  and  to  read 
into  the  words  a  meaning  wholly  alien  from 
the  subject  of  false  prophets,  which  is  the 
matter  in  hand. 

Vers.  7—9. — §  4.  For  the  smiting  of  the 
good  Shepherd  Israel  is  punished,  passes 
through  much  tribulution,  by  which  it  is  re- 
fined,  and  in  the  end  (though  reduced  to  a 
mere  remnant)  is  saved. 

Ver.  7. — Awake,  0  sword.  Zechariah 
proceeds  to  show  the  course  of  the  purifica- 
tion of  the  people.  The  mention  of  the 
false  prophet  and  the  shameful  wounds  in 
his  flesh  leads  him  to  the  contrast  of  the 
true  Prophetandtheeffects  of  his  "piercing." 
The  abruptness  of  the  commencement  of  the 
verse  is  dramatic,  and  gives  no  sufficient 
cause  for  supposing  that  this  paragraph 
ought  to  be  transferred  (as  Ewald  and  others 
desire)  to  the  end  of  ch.  xi.  (For  a  similar 
apostrophe,  comp.  Jer.  xlvii.  6.)  It  is  in- 
troduced here  to  show  that  all  that  hap- 
pened to  the  Shepherd  was  done  after  tha 
determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of 
God  ;  and  as  if  the  sword  could  never  have 
dared  to  act  thus  except  it  were  permitted 
by  the  Divine  will.  The  "  sword  "  represents 
any  kind  of  instrument  that  inflicts  death 
(comp.  Exod.  V.  21 ;  2  Sam.  xii.  9 ;  Isa. 
zxvii.  1).  My  Shepherd.  The  Shepherd  of 
Jehovah,  who  is  speaking.  He  is  the  good 
Shepherd,  the  Representative  of  Jehovah, 
mentioned  in  ch.  xi.  4,  etc.,  the  Messiah, 
who  is  identified  with  Jehovah  in  ch.  xii. 
10.  The  Septuagint  has,  roiis  irotfievas 
/iov,  "my  shepherd! "  (Vatican),  as  if  no 


148 


TUE   BOOK   OF   ZECHARIAH. 


[oh.  XIII.  1 — y. 


particnlar  person  was  indicated,  liut  rather 
bU  the  leaders  of  the  people  of  G-od ;  but 
the  next  clause  seems  to  render  the 
reference  definite.  The  man  that  is  my 
fellow.  The  word  rendered  "man"  means 
rather  "  mighty  man ; "  that  rendered 
"fellow"  occurs  often  in  Leviticus,  but 
nowhere  else  (Lev.  v.  21 ;  vi.  2 ;  xix.  11,  15, 
17,  etc.),  and  is  usually  translated  "  neigh- 
bour ; "  it  implies  one  united  to  another  by 
the  possession  of  dbmmon  nature,  rights,  and 
privileges.  God  (iould  speak  only  of  One 
thus  associated  with  himself,  that  is,  of  him 
who  could  say,  "  I  and  my  Father  are  One  " 
(John  X.  30).  The  term  is  variously  trans- 
lated by  the  versions.  Septuagint,  "AvSpa 
voKlrriv  fiov:  Aquila,  "AyBpa  avfjupvKoy  fiovl 
Vulgate,  Virum  cohierentem  milii.  That  the 
Shepherd  is  Messiah  is  proved  by  Christ's 
appUcatiou  of  the  following  clause  to  himself 
(Matt.  xxvi.  81).  Smite  the  Shepherd,  and  the 
Bheep  shall  he  scattered.  When  Christ  was 
apprehended,  all  the  disciples  forsouk  him 
and  fled  (Matt.  xxvi.  56) ;  and  what  they  did 
was  done  by  others.  Even  the  faithful  few 
were  scandalized  at  the  cross.  The  com- 
mand, "Smite  the  Shepherd,"  like  the 
apostrophe,  "  Awake,  O  sword,"  shows  that 
it  was  G-od's  purpose  that  was  being  there 
executed  (see  John  xix.  11 ;  Acts  ii.  23). 
It  is  also  thus  intimated  that  the  dispersion 
of  the  Jews,  and  their  denationalizing,  were 
results  of  this  rejection  and  smiting  of  the 
Shepherd.  This  dispersion  is  further  ex- 
plained in  vers.  8,  9,  where  it  is  shown  that 
to  some  it  will  be  ruin,  to  others  salvation. 
I  will  turn  mine  hand.  "  To  turn,"  or 
"bring  back  the  hand  over,"  is  used  in  a 
good  and  a  bad  sense  (comp.  Isa.  i.  25 ;  Amos 
i.  8).  There  isa  pr<  mise  of  comfort  in  the 
use  of  the  phrase  here.    God's  hand  shall 


cover  and  protect  some,  while  he  punishes 
the  others.  Those  thus  protected  are  called 
the  little  ones,  the  humble  and  meek. 
This  recalls  Christ's  words  to  his  disciples, 
"Fear  not,  little  flock;  for  it  is  your 
Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the 
kingdom"  (Luke  xii.  32). 

Ver.  8. — In  all  the  land;  i.e.  Palestine, 
the  country  in  which  the  good  Shepherd 
tended  his  flock  (ch.  xi.),  and  which  is  a 
figure  of  the  kingdom  of  God  (comp.  ch. 
xii.  12 ;  xiv.  9, 10).  Two  parts  therein  shall 
be  cut  off  and  die ;  literally,  the  mouth,  i.e. 
tfte  portion  of  two,  as  Deut.  xxi.  17 ;  2  Kings 
ii.  9,  where  it  denotes  the  double  portion 
inherited  by  the  firstborn.  The  inheritance 
is  divided  into  three  portions,  of  which  two 
parts  are  given  over  to  death.  Compare  a 
similar  allotment  in  the  Mtse  of  the  Moabites 
(2  Sam.  viii.  2).  The  doomed  portion  is 
supposed  to  represent  the  multitudes  who 
perished  at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem.  This 
may  be ;  but  by  analogy  it  stands  for  those 
who  shall  not  accept  the  Messiah  or  be 
purified  by  suffering,  even  as  Christ  said, 
"Many  are  called,  but  few  oh.osen"  (Matt. 
XX.  16 ;  comp.  Matt.  iii.  12).  The  third.  Thi« 
third  part  represents  the  faithful  among  the 
Jews  (Bom.  xL5),and  the  Christian  Church 
gathered  out  of  all  nations  (comp.  Isa.  vi. 
13 ;  and  especially  Ezek.  v.  2, 12). 

Ver.  9.— Through  the  fire.  This  third 
part,  like  its  Master,  passes  througli  much 
tribulation,  and  is  thereby  refined  and 
purified  (comp.  Ps.  Ixvi  10 ;  Isa.  xlviii  10 ; 
Jer.  ix.  7 ;  Dan.  xii.  10 ;  Mai.  iii.  8 ;  1  Pet. 
i.  6, 7).  Call  on  my  Name.  In  their  distress 
they  shall  turn  in  faith  to  Jehovah,  as  the 
covenant  God,  a  very  present  Help  in 
trouble  (Isa.  Ixv.  24).  Thus  is  represented 
God's  dealing  with  bis  Church  in  every  age. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — The  end  of  sin,  "  In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened,"  etc.  The 
close  of  the  last  chapter  described  certain  persons  as  pouring  forth  "  a  fountain  of 
tears"  (Jer.  ix.  1).  This  opens  by  describing  a  "fountain"  of  a  different  kind — a 
fountain  opened  for  the  especial  benefit  of  those  who  thus  mourned  (comp.  ch.  xii.  10). 
m  this  last-mentioned  verse  their  grief  is  attributed  to  their  looking  on  him  "  whom 
ihey  had  pierced."  Remembering  how  distinctly  this  expression  is  applied,  in  John 
xix.  37,  to  the  death  of  Christ  Jesus,  we  seem  justified  in  concluding  that  there  is 
a  similar  reference  here.  According  to  this,  therefore,  the  "  fountain  "  of  ver.  1  is 
%  figurative  description  of  that  flow  of  blessings  which  comes  from  Christ's  cross ;  and 
its  "  opening  in  that  day  "  to  the  people  described  is  a  similar  description  of  their  being 
then  at  last  enabled  to  discover  and  partake  of  that  flow.  So  "  opened,"  what  will  be 
its  results  ?  Two  principally,  both  of  chief  importance,  viz.  an  end  of  sin  (1)  in  regard 
to  its  guilt ;  and  an  end  of  sin  (2)  in  regard  to  its  pollution. 

I.  The  end  of  its  guilt.  Sin,  as  being  the  transgression  of  Law  (1  John  iii.  4 ;  t. 
17 ;  Rom.  iv.  15 ;  v.  13),  involves  the  displeasure,  and  that  inevitably,  of  the  lawgiver. 
If  the  Law  is  worth  enacting,  it  is  worth  enforcing.  If  not  meant,  indeed,  to  be 
enforced,  why  was  it  ever  proclaimed?    The  wiser,  also  the  better,  the  holier,  the 


OH.  xni.  1— 9.j  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABIAH.  149 

higher  the  Lawgiver,  the  more  this  reasoning  holds.  The  greater  also,  such  being  the 
case,  and  that  both  in  itself  and  also  before  him,  is  the  offence  of  rebelling  against  hJm. 
And  it  is  this  "offence,"  this  deadly  "offence,"  that  the  mystical  fountain  here 
described  in  the  first  place — providing,  as  it  does, "  a  full,  perfect,  and  sufBcient  sacrifice, 
oblation,  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world" — so  entirely  brings  to  an  end. 
See  how  emphatically  this  is  taught  generally  in  Bom.  viii.  1 ;  iii.  25.  And  see  how 
the  3ame  appears  to  be  taught  specially  concerning  Jerusalem  and  its  inhabitants  in 
the  future  in  such  passages  as  Isa.  x\.  2 ;  xliii.  25 ;  Jer.  1.  20  (see  also  Dan.  is.  24). 
Now  their  "  iniquities  have  separated,"  as  described  in  Isa.  lix.  2,  "  between  them  and 
their  Otod,  and  their  sins  have  made  him  [margin]  hide  his  face  from  them,  that  he 
will  not  hear."  Then,  through  that  "  opened  fountain,"  this  will  all  be  reversed.  No 
longer  separated  or  concealed  from  them,  he  will  accept  their  prayers  with  "  delight " 
(see  John  iv.  23,  end ;  Prov.  xv.  8). 

II.  The  end  of  its  FOLLnTioN.  Besides  being  an  offence  to  God,  sin  is  an  injury 
to  ourselves.  Being  altogether  unworthy  of  us  in  every  respect,  it  brings  about,  and 
that  immediately,  our  own  degradation  and  shame.  It  involves  pollution,  that  is  to 
say,  as  well  as  guilt.  And  it  further  involves,  such  being  the  case,  in  addition  to  the 
before-mentioned  separation  or  alienation  of  Clod's  favour  from  us,  the  separation  or 
alienation  of  our  nature  from  him.  This  second  evil  would  seem  to  be  described  in 
uur  text  (see  margin)  as  "  separation  "  for  or  by  means  of  "  uncleanness."  H(jw  such 
alienation  on  man's  part  through  the  pollution  of  sin  is  evidenced,  we  may  see  in  Gen, 
iii.  8 ;  Luke  v.  8 ;  Isa.  xxx.  11 ;  Bom.  i.  28,  beginning ;  and  also  in  that  which  is  assumed 
respecting  us  in  the  gracious  appeal  of  2  Cor.  v.  20.  On  the  other  hand,  how  entirely 
this  second  alienation  can  be  overcome  by  the  remedy  of  our  text  is  seen  in  1  John  i. 
7,  end ;  John  xii.  32.  And  how  completely  both  this  and  the  previously  mentioned 
alienation  are  to  be  removed  in  the  case  of  Judah  and  Israel  at  the  last,  as  here 
described,  we  may  perhaps  see  in  Jer.  xxxi.  31 — 34,  especially  as  quoted  and  summarized 
in  Heb.  x.  16,  17  and  elsewhere. 

If  this  interpretation  is  accepted,  we  may  learn  hence  for  ourselves,  in  concluding: 

1.  The  necessity  of  Christ's  death.  In  all  cases  we  see  it  is  thus  that  God  has  appointed 
as  to  doing  away  with  our  sins.  It  is  only  by  the  "  fountain  "  in  this  way  provided, 
and  not  by  any  fountain  of  tears  on  man's  part,  however  copious,  however  unexampled, 
however  certainly  due  even  to  an  influence  from  above  (ch.  xii.  10),  that  the  "  double 
cure  "  of  sin  can  be  wrought. 

"  Could  my  tears  for  ever  flow,"  etc. 

2.  The  necessity  of  man's  faith.  The  necessity,  we  mean,  of  course,  where  there  is  the 
capacity  for  faith  in  existence.  Till  that  capacity  for  faith  is  exercised,  no  matter 
what  the  object  of  faith,  what  can  it  do  V  Till  the  "  fountain  "  in  this  way  be  "  opened  " 
— in  other  words,  be  discovered  and  used — whom  can  it  cleanse  ?  (See  Bom.  v.  1  and 
Acts  XV.  9  respectively  for  the  two  sides  of  this  truth.)  3.  The  abundance  of  Ood'a 
I/race — whether  to  pardon  or  heal.  It  is  not  a  cistern,  not  even  a  well,  but  a  fountain, 
to  which  u  e  find  it  compared  (comp.  Jer.  ii.  13 ;  John  iv.  12,  13).  No  limitation  a. 
to  supply.     No  limitation  as  to  use  (see  Deut.  xi.  10,  11). 

Vers.  2 — 6. —  The  end  of  error.  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  that  I  will  cut  off  the  names  of  the  idols,"  etc.  After  the  end  of  sin,  the 
end  of  that  which  leads  to  sin,  viz.  of  error.  This  gift  completes  the  previous  blessings 
by  making  them  lasting  and  sure  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxxv.  8).  This  gift  also,  as  we  find  it 
described  here,  is  most  complete  in  itself.  It  is  so,  whether  we  consider  what  is  told 
us  (1)  as  to  the  future  action  of  God,  or  (2)  as  to  the  action  of  men,  in  bringing  error 
to  an  end. 

I.  The  action  of  God.  It  is  promised  here  that  he  will  put  an  end  to  error :  1. 
By  aboUahing  its  very  symbols.  The  "  names  "  of  idols  are  the  symbols  or  words  by 
means  of  which  their  supposed  attributes  or  connection  with  different  localities  are  set 
'  forth  and  commemorated ;  and  under  which  also  they  are  worshipped.  Besides 
numerous  classical  examples,  see  in  Acts  xix.  34  how  evidently  the  people  of  Ephesus 
considered  it  as  equivalent  to  a  declaration  of  their  faith  to  repeat  the  mere  name  of 
Diana,    What  is  promised  here,  therefore,  is  that  it  should  be  eventually  with  all 


160  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARUH.  [oh.  xni.  1— » 

systems  of  error  as  it  is  now  with  many  of  the  singular  and  subtle  heresies  which 
vexed  the  primitive  Church,  They  are  so  far  forgotten  by  this  time  that  it  is  a 
matter  of  difficult  antiquarian  research  even  to  ascertain  their  true  meaning.  2,  By 
banuhing  its  teachers.  Not  only  then  shall  the  "  tafes  "  of  falsehood  be  "  rooted  up," 
but  the  "  enemy  "  also  that  sowed  them  shall  be  taken  away.  This,  moreover,  shall 
be  done  so  completely  that  not  only  the  false  "  prophet,"  but  the  "  unclean  spirit " 
also,  his  inspirer  and  confederate,  shall  "cease"  to  exist  in  the  land  (comp.  1  Sam. 
xxviii.  3  end,  9 ;  and  see  Rev.  xvi.  13, 14 ;  xix.  20 ;  XX.  1 — 3).  Error,  therefore,  at  that 
happy  season,  shall  be  twice  dead,  as  it  were ;  gone  altogether  beyond  recollection ; 
gone  also  beyond  recovery. 

II.  The  action  of  man.  Even  shoiild  any  persons  qualified  to  act  as  false  prophets 
be  still  left  in  existence  (see  again  1  Sam.  xxviii.  7),  there  will  be  two  further  things 
effectually  to  rrevent  them  from  making  use  of  their  gifts.  There  will  be  the  extent 
to  which,  at  that  time,  the  false  prophet :  1.  Shall  he  hated  hy  others.  He  will  be 
hated  ^1)  by  all  others,  including  specially  even  those  who,  as  having  brought  him 
into  being,  will  naturally  be  the  most  disposed  to  befriend  or  endure  him.  Also  (2) 
he  will  be  hated  by  these  in  the  bitterest  manner,  their  mouths  pronoimcing  against 
him,  and  their  hands  inflicting  on  him  sentence  of  death.  And  finally  (3)  he  will  be 
hated  thus  on  account  of  his  connection  with  error  (note  "/or  thou  speakest  lies,"  and 
"  when  he  prophesieth,"  in  ver.  3).  Acting  also  at  that  time  in  the  same  direction, 
will  be  the  extent  to  which  the  false  prophet  shall  be :  2.  Despised  hy  himself.  For 
example,  he  will  be  ashamed  (1)  of  his  inward  prophetical  thoughts  or  "  visions,"  not 
thinking  more  of  them  as  guides  to  truth  than  a  sensible  man  does  of  his  dreams. 
He  will  be  ashamed  (2)  of  his  outward  irophetical  garb,  being  so  far  from  wishing  to 
have  it  "  seen  of  men  "  (Matt,  xxiii.  5)  that  he  will  never  clothe  himself  in  it.  And, 
finally,  (3)  he  will  be  ashamed  of  both  these  things  to  such  an  extent  as  to  be  willing 
rather  to  be  regarded  as  a  bondman,  or  slave  (so  many  understand  ver.  5),  and  ready 
rather  (so  we  may,  perhaps,  understand  the  difficult  words  of  ver.  6)  to  seek  shelter 
from  the  imputation  of  being  a  prophet  in  any  subterfuge;  however  absurd.  "  Call 
me  anything  but  a  teacher  of  truth.  Believe  what  you  will  of  me  except  that  I  profess 
to  be  that  1" 

Whatever  the  special  application  of  the  passage  which  sets  before  us  such  a  complete 
cessation  of  error,  there  are  two  general  principles  of  much  importance  which  seem 
illustrated  thereby.  1.  The  increasing  light  of  the  future.  Compared  with  the  past, 
whether  Jewish  or  pagan,  how  full  of  light  tho  dispensation  that  now  is  (see  Matt, 
xiii.  16,  17;  Heb.  xi.  13;  1  Pet.  i.  10,  11;  Acts  xvii.  3;  xxvi.  18)1  Compared  with 
the  future,  how  full  of  darkness  (1  Cor.  xiii.  9 — 12;  1  John  iii.  2;  Col.  i.  12;  Rev. 
xxi.  23 ;  xxii.  4,  6)  I  Much,  indeed,  yet  remains  to  be  revealed  to  those  described  in 
Ps.  XXV.  14.  2.  The  great  consequent  blessedness  of  the  future.  What  a  scene  of  dis- 
traction, with  its  "  many  masters  "  (see  Revised  Version,  Jas.  iii.  1)  and  discordant 
outcries  (Matt.  xxiv.  23 — 26),  not  unlike  the  scene  described  in  Dan.  vii.  2,  is  the 
present  1  How  profound  the  tranquillity,  how  sweet  the  calm,  caused  by  the  cessation 
of  all !  Happy,  indeed,  to  have  the  hope  of  travelling  at  last  "  to  where  beyond  these 
voices  there  is  peace  "  1 

Vers.  7 — ^9. — A  wonderful  sentence,  "  Awake,  0  sword,  against  my  Shepherd,  and 
against  the  man  that  is  my  fellow,"  etc.  The  prophet  here  seems  again  to  "  hark  back," 
as  at  the  openings  of  ch.  ix.  and  xi.  (where  see  remarks  and  references),  from  the 
"  glory  "  that  was  lo  "  follow  "  to  the  "  sufferings  "  that  were  to  precede.  At  any  rate, 
we  have  the  highest  authority  (Malt.  xxvi.  31,  56)  for  understanding  this  passage  oi 
the  "  sufferings  "  and  death  of  our  Lord  himself.  This  being  so,  how  does  its  language 
present  that  great  "Passion"  to  us?  As  something  surpassingly  wonderful  (1)  tn 
itself;  an'l  (2)  in  its  results. 

I.  Wonderful  in  itself.  Here  is  a  man  spoken  of — here  is  a  command  given 
respecting  him — by  the  Lord  of  hosts.  1.  IJow  wonderful  the  man  spoken  oft  (1)  He 
is  supreme  in  office.  All  other  men  are  to  him  but  as  sheep.  He  is  to  them  in  the 
yosition  of  a  shepherd.  He  is  also  recognized  and  appointed  as  such  ("  ms/  Sliepherd  ") 
by  God  himself.  Nor  is  there  any  other  whatever  so  appointed,  except  by  hii 
du-ection  and  in  a  subordinate  place  (see  Isa.  xl.  11 ;  .John  x.  11 ;  Hob.  xiii.  20 ;  1  Pet 


OH.  xm.  1— ».]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  151 

ii.  26;  T.  4).  (2)  He  is  supreme  in  nature.  He  is  Jehovah's  "fellow,"  or  equal,  just 
as  men  dwelling  together  in  Palestine  as  neighbours  (see  Lev,  xix.  16, 17 ;  xzt.  14, 15, 
etc.,  where  the  same  word  is  employed)  were  fellows,  or  equals.  Higher  tlian  this — 
higher,  i.e.,  than  the  highest— who  can  possibly  be  ?  2.  Ebw  wonderful  the  command, 
things  being  thusl  (1)  Consider  its  purport ;  viz.  that  such  a  one  should  be  smitten  at 
all ;  should  be  smitten  also  with  such  a  weapon — a  weapon  of  so  judicial  a  nature  (Bom. 
xiii.  4)  ;  a  weapon  of  so  deadly  a  character,  aiming  at  life  itself  (Matt.  xzvi.  52). 
Why  should  the  "  sword  "  be  thus  called  upon  to  "  awake  " — as  though  previously 
"asleep"  and  neglecting  its  duty — ^against  him?  Who  less  deserving,  in  himself,  to 
suffer  thereby  ?  Who  more  fit,  rather,  in  every  way,  to  employ  it  (see  John  v.  22 ; 
Acts  xvii.  31,  etc.)  ?  (2)  Consider  its  Author — the  Lord  of  hosts.  The  marvel  is  the 
same  as  that  we  read  of  in  Isa,  liii.  10,  "Tet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him;  h« 
hath  put  him  to  grief"  (see  also  Acts  ii.  23;  Rom.  viii.  32).  It  is  the  Judge  of  judges, 
the  eternal  Father  himself,  who  bids  the  sword  awake  against  him  ! 

IL  Wonderful  in  its  results.  For  these,  as  described  to  us  here,  are :  1.  Most 
unexpected.  The  immediate  result,  indeed,  that  of  scattering  the  sheep,  is  not  at  all 
unexpected.  What  more  likely,  what  more  certain  to  follow,  humanly  speaking, 
from  smiting  the  Shepherd  ?  But  the  ultimate  result,  that  of  saving  these  "  little 
unes  "  (so  many  understand  end  of  ver.  7),  that  of  preserving  the  sheep  by  thus  slaying 
their  Preserver  (comp.  John  xviii.  ti,  9 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  42,  beginning ;  Gal.  iii.  13 ;  Isa. 
llii.  6,  end),  is  unexpected  indeed.  Has  not  the  very  idea,  indeed,  seemed  the 
height  of  "foolishness"  to  many  (1  Cor.  i.  23)  who  thought  themselves  "  wise"?  2. 
Moti  widely  diverse.  This  extraordinary  method  of  preserving  the  flock  was  not 
expected  to  preserve  all  within  reach  of  its  influence.  On  the  contrary,  far  too  many 
amongst  them — something  like  two  to  one  of  them,  in  fact,  all  taken  together  ("  in  aU 
the  land ") — would  decline  to  avail  themselves  of  it.  (1)  Its  effect  upon  these  who 
despise  it — for  it  would  have  effect  upon  these — would  be  their  uttermost  ruin.  The 
method  of  deliverance,  by  being  thus  inverted,  would  become  their  destruction.  The 
weapon  of  defence,  by  being  turned  thus  against  them,  becomes  a  weapon  of  death 
(see  2  Oor.  ii.  16,  beginning ;  Luke  ii.  34 ;  Heb.  ii.  3).  (2)  Its  effect  on  those  who 
embrace  it,  on  the  other  hand,  would  be  their  uttermost  salvation.  Observe  the 
various  steps.  First,  they  are  "  left ; "  that  is  (see  Ezek.  ix.  8),  not  destroyed.  Next, 
they  are  purified  by  discipline — i.e.  saved  from  the  power  of  sin — as  metals  by  fire ;  and 
this  as  thoroughly  at  the  last  (comp.  Heb.  xii.  23,  end)  as  when  gold  has  been 
"tried"  till  it  requires  trying  no  longer.  Concurrently  with  this,  on  the  other  hand, 
they  are  saved  so  thoroughly  firom  the  condemnation  of  sin,  that  they  have  full  access 
to  Qod's  presence  and  attention ;  and  when  they  openly  speak  of  God  as  their  Portion 
(as  such  persons  will  do,  Ps.  xvi.  6 ;  czix.  57),  are  acknowledged  by  him  as  his  portion 
in  a  similar  manner  (see  Ps.  Ixvii.  6 ;  Jer.  x.  16 ;  Ii.  19 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  9 ;  Cant.  ii.  16). 
They  are  favoured  by  him,  in  fact,  both  secretly  and  openly  too  (Matt.  vi.  6). 

Three  brief  thoughts  to  conclude.  1.  How  lofty  the  superstructwre  of  the  gospel 
salvation  I  Salvation  itself,  understood  rigorously  (as  we  have  noted),  is  only  not  being 
lost.  Actually,  as  here  described  to  us,  it  is  all  that  heart  can  desire — ^the  heirship  of 
all  things  through  Christ  (Bom.  viii.  17  ;  Gal.  iv.  7 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  22,  23).  2.  How  deep 
its  foundations  I  Penetrating  to  the  very  greatest  depths,  as  it  were,  of  the  Divine 
nature  and  plans  (Bev.  xiii.  8).  3.  How  certain  its  truth  I  Like  that  house  which 
the  Saviour  himself  describes  (Matt.  vlL  24,  25)  as  being  founded  on  a  rock — founded, 
in  fact,  on  that  "  Book  of  Ages,"  which  not  all  the  "  ages  "  can  shake  (comp.  Heb. 
xiL  27,  28). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — JTie/oiimtain  of  grace.    Salvation  throngh  Christ.    The  glorious  gospel. 

I.  The  etil.  "  Sin  and  uncleanness."  All  are  sinners.  Law,  facts  of  life,  testimony 
of  conscience,  prove  our  guilt.  Sin  defiles  all  that  it  touches.  "Uncleanness,"  alas  I 
how  prevalent,  and  in  manifold  forms !  'Twas  sin  that  brought  it  all  into  the  world. 
If  there  were  no  lin  there  would  be  no  uncleanness.    Need  for  grief  and  prayer. 

IL  The  biuidt.   "  Fountain,"  etc.    1.  Freedom  of  access.   Open,  not  shut.    Nona 


162  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEGHARIAH.  [oS.  xin,  1— ft. 

debarred.  Id  the  promise  of  God — by  the  atoning  deaf.'n  of  Christ — through  the 
ministry  of  grace,  the  fountain  has  been  opened  for  all  (John  xiz.  34 ;  1  John  i.  7 ; 
fleb.  ix,  13).  2.  Plenitvde  of  supply.  Not  a  pool  or  a  cistern,  but  a  fountain,  with 
rich  and  ample  supplies  for  all.  Thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  have  already  been 
blessed,  and  whosoever  will  may  come,  and  will  find  that  Christ  is  mighty  to  save. 
3.  Perennial  virtue.  Not  like  Betbesda,  at  certain  times ;  but  all  the  year  round,  and 
from  generation  to  generation.  After  many  years'  absence,  I  visited  the  home  of  my 
youth.  There  were  sad  changes.  Friends  were  gone.  None  to  know  me.  But  under 
the  shade  of  firs,  in  the  old  place,  I  found  the  spring  where  I  had  often  slaked  my 
thirst.  It  was  still  the  same — the  water  sweet  and  refreshing  as  ever.  So  Christ  ia 
"  the  Same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever." — F. 

Ver.  7. — The  sword.  There  is  here  something  of  heaven  and  earth.  Jehovah 
speaks.  He  lays  his  command  on  the  sword  of  justice,  to  awake  and  "  smite."  This 
implies  death,  and  death  not  of  a  common  sort,  but  as  a  judicial  act,  under  the  sanction 
of  law.  We  take  the  sceue  to  illustrate  the  tragedy  of  Calvary  (Matt.  xxvi.  31;  John 
xvi.  32).    Three  questions  may  be  asked. 

I.  Who?  The  rebellious  Babylon,  Rome,  Jerusalem ?  No.  " The  man  that  is  my 
fellow."  Who  is  this?  Search,  and  where  can  you  find  such  a  one?  Abraham  was 
God's  friend,  but  not  his  "  fellow."  Prophets  and  kings,  martyrs  and  confessors,  all 
stand  aside.  None  but  Christ  answers  the  description.  He  is  the  First  and  the  Last 
and  the  only  One,  in  human  likeness,  who  could  say,  "  I  and  my  Father  are  One." 

II.  Why  ?  Justice  has  its  reasons.  All  that  God  does  must  be  in  accordance  with 
eternal  right.  But  here  is  mystery.  The  Man  who  alone  was  "  without  sin,"  holy 
and  perfect — the  solitary  man,  in  human  form,  who  was  nearest  of  kin  to  God  himself 
— to  be  dealt  with  as  if  he  were  a  transgressor,  and  as  if  ho  had  done  things  worthy 
of  death, — this  is  exceeding  strange.  The  key  is  in  the  term  "  Shepherd."  Implies 
covenant  relationship.  Substitution  of  person  and  of  sufierings.  The  One  for  the 
many ;  the  Shepherd  for  the  sheep. 

III.  What  then?  We  reasonably  expect  results  worthy  of  such  a  tragedy.  Two- 
fold. 1,  Judgment.  Not  only  as  to  the  disciples,  but  the  Jewish  people.  2.  Mercy. 
Tender  compassion.  Gracious  interposition.  Glorious  resolve.  "  I  will  turn  my  hand 
upon  the  little  ones."  Let  us  note  that  there  is  but  one  alternative — ^hand  or  gftrord. 
If  we  pass  by  God's  hand  stretched  out  to  save,  we  must  perish  by  the  sword.  "  It  i» 
a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God." — F. 

Vers.  1—6. — The  gospd  age.  "In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the 
house  of  David  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  for  sin  and  for  unclean  ness.  And 
it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  that  I  will  cut  off  the  name* 
of  the  idols  out  of  the  land,  and  they  shall  no  more  be  remembered,"  etc.  Concerning 
the  preceding  chapter  and  these  six  verses.  Dr.  Keil  says,  "  This  section  forms  the  first 
half  of  the  second  prophecy  of  Zechariah  concerning  the  future  of  Israel  and  of  the 
world,  viz.  the  prophecy  contained  in  ch.  xii. — ^xiv.,  which,  as  a  side-piece  to  ch. 
ix. — xi.,  treats  of  the  judgment  by  which  Israel,  the  nation  of  God,  will  be  refined, 
sifted,  and  led  on  to  perfection  through  conflict  with  the  nations  of  the  world.  This 
first  section  announces  how  the  conflict  against  Jerusalem  and  Judah  will  issue  in 
destruction  to  the  nations  of  the  world  (ch.  xii.  1 — t).  Jehovah  will  endow  the 
princes  of  Judah  and  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  with  marvellous  strength  to  overcome 
all  their  foes  (vers.  5 — 9),  and  will  pour  out  his  spirit  of  grace  upon  them,  so  that  they 
will  bitterly  repent  the  death  of  the  Messiah  (vers.  10—14),  and  purify  themselves 
from  all  ungodliness  (ch.  xiii.  1 — 6)."  "The  day"  here  is  generally  supposed  by 
expositors  to  point  to  the  gospel  age ;  and  three  remarks  are  here  suggested  in  relation 
to  this  day. 

I.    It   is   a    "  DAT "  FOB  THE   ABODNDINO  OF   SIN-CLEANSING   INFLaENOEB.      "  In  that 

day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the  house  of  David,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem."  This  phrase  comprehended  the  whole  Jewish  nation.  To  the  Jews 
washing  from  sin  and  ceremonial  impurity  was  an  idea  with  which  they  were  well 
acquainted.  It  was  enjoined  by  the  Law  (Numb.  viii.  7 ;  see  also  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25), 
1.  That  tin  and  undeanness  are  in  the  world.    This  is  a  fact,  written  in  all  idstoTf. 


CH.  XIII.  1—9,]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABIAU.  168 

patent  to  every  man's  observation  and  consciousness.  2.  The  removal  of  sin  is  the 
world's  great  necessity.  Its  existence  is  the  cause  of  all  the  miseries  of  the  world, 
physical,  social,  political,  religious.  3.  Provisions  for  its  removal  abound.  "A 
fountain  opened."  Sin  and  uncleanness  are  not  an  essential  part  of  human  nature. 
Men  have  lived  without  sin,  and  men  in  the  other  world  do  now.  It  is  a  mere  stain 
on  human  nature,  separable  from  it,  and  the  means  of  separation  are  provided — pro- 
vided in  the  gospel.  In  the  mediatory  life,  teaching,  works,  death,  resurrection,  and 
ascension  of  the  Son  of  God.  In  all  this  he  has  opened  to  the  world  a  fountain  of 
influence  by  which  sin  is  to  be  cleansed.  It  is  a  fountain.  This  implies:  (1)  Abun- 
dance. It  is  not  a  rill,  a  brook,  a  lake,  but  a  fountain.  What  is  the  fountain? 
Infinite  love.  (2)  Freeness.  Flowing,  ever  open  to  all.  (3)  Perpetuity.  The  hotteit 
sun  does  not  dry  up  the  fountain.    It  has  an  under-connection  with  the  boundless  deep. 

II.  It  IB  A  "  DAT "  IN  WHICH  IDOLATRY  SHALL  BE  UTTERLY  ABOLISHED.      The  Spirit 

of  idolatry  is  giving  to  any  object  that  love  which  belongs  only  to  the  Supreme;  and  this 
sin  is  perhaps  as  rife  in  regions  where  monotheism  is  professed  as  in  those  lands  where 
polytheism  holds  its  empire.  The  cutting  off  the  "names  of  the  idols"  means  their 
utter  destruction  (see  Hos.  ii.  17).  But  you  may  destroy  all  the  million  idols,  involving 
those  which  are  the  workmanship  of  men  and  those  which  are  the  creation  of  God, 
before  which  men  have  bowed,  and  yet  leave  idolatry  as  rampant  as  ever.  Nothing 
but  the  destruction  of  the  spirit  will  be  the  destruction  of  idolatry.  Hence  we  havo 
here  suggested  a  time  when  men  shall  give  their  affection  to  the  Supreme  Being,  ana 
to  him  alone,  when  they  shall  worship  the  one  true  and  living  God.  This  is  the 
idolatry  the  gospel  comes  to  destroy ;  it  is  to  turn  men  from  idols  to  the  living  God. 
What  a  blessed  age  will  that  be,  when  all  men  on  the  face  of  the  earth  shall  have  their 
souls  centred  in  love  and  devotion  on  the  one  great  and  common  Father  of  us  all !  "  In 
that  day  a  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his  idols  of  gold,  which  they  made 
each  one  for  himself  to  worship,  to  the  moles  and  to  the  hats"  (Isa.  ii.  20). 

III.  It    IS    A    "day"    Uf    WHICH    ALL    FALSE    RELIGIOUS    TEACHINGS   SHALL    CEASE. 

"  And  I  will  cause  the  prophets  and  the  unclean  spirit  to  pass  out  of  the  land,"  etc. 
The  words  here  in  relation  to  false  prophets  suggest  the  following  thoughts.  1.  False 
religious  teachers  a/re  great  curses  to  a  community.  This  is  implied  in  the  promise 
here  of  their  destruction.  False  teachers  in  any  branch  of  knowledge,  be  it  historic, 
Bcientiflc,  philosophic,  literary,  or  artistic,  are  for  many  reasons  great  evils;  but  in 
religion  the  evils  they  inflict  are  inconceivably  great.  They  deceive  souls  on  the  most 
vital  of  all  points.  False  religious  teachers  are  not  merely  teachers  of  pantheism, 
idolatry,  or  Mohammedanism,  but  even  those  who  are  nominally  teachers  of  the  gospel. 
The  man  who  gives  a  wrong  interpretation  of  the  gospel  is  a  false  teacher,  and  such  men 
are  found  even  in  the  pulpits  of  our  England,  What  blasphemous  ideas  of  God  and 
degrading  notions  of  his  blessed  Son  have  we  in  some  of  the  popular  sermons  of  the  age  t 
Whosoever  teaches  the  conventional  Christ  is  false  to  the  Christ  of  the  gospel.  2.  False 
religious  teachers  may  become  objects  of  indignation  even  to  their  nearest  relations.  "  And 
it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  when  any  shall  yet  prophesy,  then  his  father  and  his  mother 
that  begat  him  shall  say  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  not  live;  for  thou  spcakest  lies  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord:  and  his  father  and  his  mother  that  begat  him  shall  thrust  him 
through  when  he  prophesieth,"  It  will  be,  indeed,  a  blessed  time  when  the  people  of  a 
country  will  have  a  greater  love  for  truth  than  for  their  dearest  relations,  even  their  very 
children ;  when  the  appearance  of  a  false  teacher  will  awaken  such  a  public  indignation 
as  will  expose  his  very  life  to  danger ;  when  men's  moial  ears  will  be  so  attuned  to  truth, 
that  the  very  sound  of  falsehood  will  hecome  intolerable.  Thank  God,  there  is  an  age 
of  moral  reality  coming,  an  age  when  men  will  recoil  from  shams  as  from  "  demons  vile." 
3,  False  religious  teachers  will  on  this  "day"  be  ashamed  to  exercise  their  mission, 
"  The  prophets  shall  be  ashamed."  If  any  false  prophets  should  continue  to  exercise 
their  function,  they  will  have  to  do  it :  (1)  With  secrecy.  "  Neither  shall  they  wear 
a  rough  garment  to  deceive."  It  is  said,  when  Domitian  banished  philosophers  from 
Eome,  many  persons  shaved  off  their  beards  and  flung  away  their  cloaks,  that  they 
might  not  be  included  in  the  ban.  So  now  the  false  prophet  will  be  ashamed  of  his 
badge,  his  rough  garment,  made  perhaps  of  untanned  sheepskin,  or  a  Bedouin  blanket 
made  of  camel's  hair,  like  that  of  John  the  Baptist.  (2)  Disclaiming  their  pi-ofession. 
"He  shall  say,  I  am  nc  prophet,  I  am  an  husbandman."     If  they  carry  on  tlieir  work. 


154  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABIAH.  [oh.  xiii.  1— S, 

they  will  do  it  under  a  false  character,  such  as  farmers  or  herdmen.  "  I  belong  ta 
that  class  in  society  which  lies  under  the  least  suspioioQ  of  aspiring  to  a  function  in 
which  knowledge  of  affairs,  dexterity  in  making  use  of  men's  weaknesses,  and  some 
literary  faculty  are  needed.  Besides,  'men  own  me  from  my  youth'  (for  this  is  the 
meaning  of  the  words  rendered,  '  men  taught  me  to  keep  cattle  from  my  youth  ') ;  and 
so  if  I  had  had  the  will  I  could  never  have  had  the  chance  of  setting  up  as  a  prophet 
I  have  not  been  my  own  master.  Not  quite  satisfied  with  this  disclaimer,  the  supposed 
examiners  ask  to  be  allowed  to  look  at  his  hands,  as  you  can  judge  roughly  of  a 
man's  calling  by  the  state  of  his  hauda — at  least,  you  can  thus  judge  whether  a  man  ia 
earning  his  bi-ead  with  his  hands  or  his  head.  They  at  once  detect  suspicious  marks 
on  this  man's  hands,  wounds  which  they  evidently  suspect  to  have  been  self-inflicted  in 
accordance  with  some  idolatrous  rite.  Self-mutilation  and  self-laceration  have  always 
been  common  accessories  of  pagan  worship,  and  common  accompaniments  of  manifesta- 
tions of  pagan  fanatical  ecstasy.  They  are  far  from  uncommon  still  in  heathen  and  in 
Mohammedan  countries.  Permanetit  marks  of  a  distinctive  kind  were  also  frequently 
made  upon  different  parts  of  the  person,  and  es|iecially  upon  the  arms,  in  acknowledgment 
of  allegiance  to  some  particular  god  (Jer.  xlviii.  37),  where  mourning  is  thus  described  : 
'Every  head  shall  be  bald,  and  every  beard  clipped:  upon  all  the  hands  shall  be 
cuttings.'  But  the  man  denies  that  his  wounds  have  any  such  significance ;  they  are 
not,  he  says,  religious  marks  at  all :  '  they  are  wounds  which  I  received  in  the  house 
of  ii  lends,'  in  some  rustic  frolic  with  his  boon  companions,  or  as  the  slave's  brand  in 
the  house  of  his  master"  (Dr.  Dods).  Should  tlieir  disclaiming  be  questioned,  they 
will  take  shelter  in  falsehood.  "  And  one  shall  say  unto  him.  What  are  these  wounds 
in  thine  hands?  Then  he  shall  answer.  Those  with  which  I  was  wounded  in  the 
house  of  my  friends."  "  The  doubting  examiner  asks  him  to  show  him  his  hands, 
that  he  may  ascertain  if  he  has  the  rough  hands  of  a  farmer;  those  hands  he  shows, 
but  they  have  nevertheless  marks  of  a  prophet  on  them,  and  of  these  very  marks  he 
gives  a  false  account."     "  I  was  wounded  in  the  house  of  my  friends." 

Conclusion.  Thank  God,  we  live  in  this  gospel  age.  The  sin-cleansing  fountain  is 
here,  sending  forth  its  streams  in  all  directions.  They  flow  through  all  the  good  booke 
we  have,  through  all  the  good  lives  we  meet  with.  Let  the  streams  multiply.  The 
fountain  will  supply  streams  equal  to  the  exigencies  of  all.  Let  us  remove  obstructions, 
cut  new  channels,  and  strive  to  let  them  into  every  heart.  These  will  multiply  in 
power,  and  increase  in  volume,  till  all  idolatry,  false  teaching,  and  every  other  form  of 
iniquity  that  pollutes  the  heart  of  the  world,  be  washed  clean  away,  and  the  whole 
world  be  holy  in  character,  without  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing. — D.  T. 

Vers.  7 — 9. — Ood's  governmb/it  of  the  world.  "  Awake,  0  sword,  against  my  Shepherd, 
and  against  the  man  that  is  my  fellow,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts :  smite  the  Shepherd, 
and  the  sheep  shall  be  scattered:  and  I  will  turn  mine  hand  upon  the  little  ones. 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  in  all  the  land,  saith  the  Lord,  two  parts  therein  shall 
be  cut  off  and  die ;  but  the  third  shall  be  left  therein.  And  I  will  bring  the  third  part 
through  the  fire,  and  will  refine  them  as  silver  is  refined,  and  will  try  them  as  gold  is 
tried :  they  shall  call  on  my  Name,  and  I  will  hear  them :  I  will  say,  It  is  my  people : 
and  they  shall  say,  The  Lord  is  my  God."  Here  we  liave  God's  government  of  the 
world  in  two  aspects,  bringing  penal  ruin  on  many  in  a  community,  and  remedial 
discipline  upon  a  few ;  appearing  as  the  sword  of  justice  in  the  one  case,  and  as  a 
refiner's  pot  in  the  other.     Here  we  have  it — 

I.  As  BMNQINQ  PEKAL  RUIN  UPON  MANY.  1.  J7ie  destruction  of  their  leader .  "Awake, 
0  sword,  against  my  Shepherd."  In  the  Bible  language  political  religious  leaders  are 
represented  as  shepherds.  For  example,  it  was  applied  to  Cyrus  (Isa.  xliv.  28).  The 
person  defined  is  represented  as  "  the  man  that  is  my  fellow."  Dr.  Keil's  rendering  is, 
"  the  man  who  is  my  neighbour ; "  and  Dr.  Henderson's,  "  the  man  who  is  united  to 
me."  Who  is  this  man?  On  this  question  there  are  different  opinions.  "Calion 
thought  it  was  Zeohariah  himself  as  representative  of  all  the  prophets,  and  that  the 
pro]ihecy  referred  only  indirectly  to  Christ.  Grotius,  Eiohhorn,  Bauer,  and  Jahue 
apjily  it  to  Judas  Maccabasus;  Bwald,  to  Pekah ;  Hitzi;j,  to  the  pretended  prophets 
spoken  of  in  the  preceding  verses."  The  expression,  "  my  fellow,"  does  not  necessarily 
mean  one  who  is  equal  in  nature  and  character,  but  rather  one  who  has  fellowship  oi 


OH.  xiu.  i— 9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOUARIABL  16fi 

interests  and  aims.  The  poorest  labourer  in  the  cause  of  gospel  truth  is  a  "  fellow  " 
with  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  even  a  fellow-labourer  of  Ohrist,  and  fellow- 
labourer  with  God  himself.  Evangelical  writers,  however,  apply  the  language  to 
Ohrist,  without  much  critical  examination  and  without  hesitation.  They  do  this 
mainly  on  the  ground  that  Christ  himself  quotes  the  passage,  on  the  night  in  which  he 
was  betrayed,  as  an  illustration  of  what  was  immediately  awaiting  him.  "  Then  saith 
JesuB  unto  them.  All  ye  shall  be  offended  because  of  me  this  night :  for  it  is  written,  I 
will  smite  the  Shepherd,  and  the  sheep  of  the  flock  shall  be  scattered  abroad "  (Matt. 
xxvi.  31).  He  does  not  say  that  the  prophecy  referred  to  him,  but  merely  that  the 
passage  was  about  to  be  illustrated  in  his  history.  The  Shepherd  was  to  be  smitten, 
and  the  sheep  scattered.  This,  indeed,  is  a  common  fact  in  the  history  of  the  world ; 
when  the  leader  is  gone  the  fold  is  scattered.  Christ  was,  indeed,  about  to  be  smitten 
— smitten  to  death,  not  by  the  "  sword  "  of  Divine  vengeance,  as  is  impiously  held  by 
some,  but  by  the  wrath  of  his  human  enemies.  "Awake,  0  sword."  "These  are 
words,"  says  an  old  orthodox  expositor,  "of  God  the  Father  giving  orders  and  com- 
mission to  the  sword  of  his  justice  to  awaken  to  his  Son."  It  is  the  sword  of  justice 
that  he  may  die  as  a  criminal  on  an  ignominious  tree;  awaking  to  smite  him,  not  with 
a  drowsy  blow,  but  with  a  mighty  one."    Dr.  Watts  has  the  same  idea — 

"  The  Father  plunged  his  flaming  sword 
In  his  atoning  bipod." 

From  all  such  representations  of  the  benign  God  of  the  universe,  and  the  Infinite  Father 
of  love,  my  reason  and  heart  revolt  as  from  a  monstrous  creed  or  cursed  blasphemy. 
However,  I  am  not  going  to  debate  either  the  question  whether  the  words  were  intended 
for  Christ  or  not,  or,  if  they  were,  the  accuracy  or  otherwise  of  the  interpretations  thus 
L;iven.  Our  point  is  that  God  often  brings  sufferings  on  a  people  hy  striking  down  their 
leader.  There  are  few  greater  calamities  that  can  befall  a  people  than  when  nations 
lose  their  shepherds  and  leaders,  or  when  Churches  lose  their  pastors.  Even  when 
families  lose  their  heads  the  loss  is  incalculable.  2.  The  dispersion  of  the  flock.  This 
comes  to  most  communities  when  the  true  leader  is  taken  away.  The  removal  of  a 
leader  in  a  family — a  parent — often  leads  to  a  scattering  of  the  children.  So  with  the 
leader  in  a  Church — ^the  pastor ;  and  so  with  the  leader  of  a  nation.  When  the  shepherd 
has  gone,  the  flock  is  scattered,  and  the  scattering  is  a  great  evih  Unity  is  strength 
and  harmony;  division  is  weakness  and  disorder.  When  communities  are  broken  up 
and  dispersed,  the  various  members  often  place  themselves  in  antagonism  with  each 
other,  and  rivalries,  jealousies,  and  envyings  run  riot.  3.  The  ruin  of  multitudes. 
"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  in  all  the  land,  saith  the  Lord,  two  parts  therein  shall 
be  cut  off  and  die ;  but  the  third  shall  be  left  therein."  Probably  this  refers  primarily 
to  the  destruction  of  two-thirds  of  the  inhabitants  of  Judeea  by  the  Roman  arms,  and 
the  famine  or  the  pestilence  and  other  destructive  influences  which  are  the  usual 
concomitants  of  all  wars.  Thus  the  afiBictions  of  the  great  majority  of  the  human  race, 
here  represented  as  the  two-thirds  of  a  community,  come  upon  them  as  the  retribution 
of  justice — the  Divine  sword  here  invoked.  They  are  not  disciplinary,  but  penal. 
The  victims  do  not  morally  improve  under  them,  they  grow  worse.  They  are  "cut  ofl 
and  die." 

II.  Bringing  behbdial  disciplinb  to  a  pew.  "  And  I  will  bring  the  third  part 
through  the  fire,  and  will  refine  them  as  silver  is  refined,  and  will  try  them  as  gold  is 
tried :  they  shall  call  on  my  Name,  and  I  will  hear  them :  I  will  say.  It  is  my  people : 
and  they  shall  say.  The  Lord  is  my  God."  The  very  calamities  which  were  penal  and 
utterly  ruinous  to  two-thirds  of  that  population  were  morally  disciplinary  and  improving 
to  the  remaining  third.  In  the  one  case  they  were  the  strokes  of  the  "sword"  of 
justice.  In  the  other  the  calamities  were  but  fire  in  the  "pot  of  the  refiner."  Just  as 
the  refiner  purifies  his  silver  and  his  gold  by  fire,  God  in  mercy  spiritually  improves 
his  people  by  the  trial  and  the  sufferings  which  he  inflicts.    These,  taught  by  the 

rurifying  influence  of  trials :  1.  Pray  and  are  heard.    "  Shall  call  on  my  Name,  and 
wiM  hear  them."    2.  Are  accepted  of  Ood  as  his  people.    They  acknowledge  tlwir 
relationship.    "I  will  say.  It  is  my  people :  and  tliey  shall  say,  The  Lord  is  my  Ood." 
Conclusion.     Amidst  all  the  difficulties  connected  with  this  passage,  this  doctrin* 
ttands  out  in  sublime  prominence — that  afflictions  which  are  penal  and  denfructiut  (e 


156 


THE  BOOK   OV   ZECHARIAH. 


[OH.  XIT.  i al. 


the  many  are  remedial  and  merciful  to  the  few.  All  experience  shows  this  to  be  true. 
Two  men  stand  befove  me.  Both  are  equally  afflicted  with  similar  suffermgB._  The 
one  writhes,  murmurs,  and  rebels  under  his  afflictions ;  he  becomes  intensified  in  his 
enmity  to  God.  Like  Pharaoh,  his  heart  is  hardened ;  he  dies  a  rebel,  and  is  lost. 
The  "sword"  of  justice  has  struck  him.  The  other  becomes  spiritually  thoughtful, 
repentant,  resigned,  humbled,  and  devout.  The  "fire"  has  purified  him,  and  like 
David  he  says,  "It  is  good  for  me  that  I  was  afflicted,"  and  like  Paul,  "I  glory  jn 
tribulation."— D.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Vers.  1,  2. — §  5.  The  afflictions  of  the 
people  and  their  results  are  set  forth  in 
figure  and  symbol.  Jerusalem  is  represented 
as  taken  and  plundered. 

Ver.  1. — The  day  of  the  Lord;  o  day  of 
(or,  to)  Jehovah  cometh.  The  Greek  and 
Latin  Versions  have  the  plural,  "days  of 
the  Lord  come."  It  is  a  time  when  he  will 
specially  manifest  his  glory  and  power,  and 
be  recognized  as  allowing  the  trial  of  his 
people  for  wise  purposes.  It  is  impossible 
to  fix  on  any  historical  fulfilment  of  this 
prophecy.  The  details  suit  neither  Macca- 
bean  nor  Roman  times ;  the  attempt  to  de- 
fine exactly  the  period  and  matter  of  its 
accomplishment  has  proved  a  failure,  and 
has  led  to  a  mingling  of  events  of  very 
different  dates,  and  to  a  conglomeration  of 
senses  literal,  metaphorical,  and  anagogioal, 
which  creates  confusion  while  assutfiing  to 
explain  difficulties.  The  literal  interpreta- 
tion must  be  resigned,  and  tlie  whole  pro- 
phecy must  be  taken  to  adumbrate  the 
kingdom  of  God  in  its  trial,  development, 
and  triumph.  Thy  spoil  shall  be  divided, 
Jerusalem  is  addressed;  and  the  prophet 
intimates  that  the  enemy  sliall  get  posses- 
sion of  the  capital,  plunder  it,  and  divide 
its  spoil  among  themselves  in  its  very  midst 
with  the  greatest  security,  the  inhabitants 
being  wholly  at  the  conquerors'  mercy. 

Ver,  2. — How  this  shall  come  to  pass  is 
now  shown.  For  I  will  gather  all  nations, 
God  uses  the  Gentile  nations  as  his  instru- 
ments in  this  trirtl  of  his  people;  they  are 
the  fires  by  which  he  refines  and  purifies  his 
elect  (Joel  iii.  2,  9—11).  The  city  shall  be 
taken.  The  outrages  offered  to  the  captive 
city  are  such  as  are  indicated  in  the  cuse  of 
Babylon  (Isa.  xiii.  16;  comp.  Lam.  v.  11, 
etc.).  Half  of  the  city,  The  term  "half" 
must  not  be  pressed,  as  if  it  contradicted 
the  mention  of  the  two-thirds  that  were  to 
perisli,  according  to  the  prediction  in  ch. 
xiii.  8.  It  is  a  mere  rhetorical  expression. 
Or  it  may  apply  to  the  city  alone,  while  the 
other  referred  to  the  whole  land.  Shall  not 
bt  cat  off.     In  the  former  captivity  all  the 


people  were  carried  away;  in  this  capture 
of  the  city  a  remnant  shall  be  left  therein. 
It  is  plain  from  this  statement  that  the 
prophecy  cannot  apply  to  the  destruction  of 
the  city  by  the  Romans;  for,  according  to 
the  account  of  Josephus  ('Bell,  Jud.,'  vi. 
9),  the  city  itself  was  razed  to  the  ground, 
and  all  the  inhabitants  were  either-  put  to 
the  sword  or  sold  for  slaves. 

Vers.  3—7. — §  6.  Then  the  Lord  himself 
comes  to  her  help,  great  convulsions  of  nature 
accompanying  his  presence. 

Ver.  3.— Shall  go  forth.  God  is  said  to 
"  go  forth  "  when  he  manifests  bis  power  by 
delivering  his  people  and  punishing  their 
enemies  (comp.  Isa.  xxvi.  21 ;  xiii.  13 ; 
Micah  i.  3).  As  when  he  fonght  in  the  day 
of  battle.  The  Hebrew  is  in  general  terms, 
"as  when  he  fighteth  in  a  day  of  battle," 
or,  "  slaughter ;  "  Septuagint,  xaSiis  rifi4pa 
irapaTii^eins  auToB  iv  fificpf  5ro\eyno«,  "as  a 
day  of  his  battle  in  a  day  of  war ; "  Vulgate, 
sicut  prsdiatus  est  in  die  certaminis.  There 
is  notliing  in  the  text  to  confine  the  refer- 
ence to  any  one  special  interposition;  it 
refers  rather  to  the  general  course  of  God's 
providence  in  defending  his  people,  though, 
doubtless,  the  prophet  has  in  his  mind  the 
crowning  act  of  mercy  at  the  Red  Sea 
(Esod.  xiv.  13,  14,  25),  which  is  so  often 
referred  to  as  a  typical  deliverance  (comp. 
Isa.  xi.  11;  Jer,  xvi.  14;  xxiii.  8;  Hab. 
iii,  15;  and  above,  ch,  x,  11). 

Ver.  4. — His  feet  shall  stand.  By  this 
theophany  he  shall  come  to  the  aid  of  his 
people;  nature  shall  do  his  bidding,  own- 
ing the  presence  of  its  Maker.  Upon  the 
Mount  of  Olives  ...  on  the  east.  This 
mount  lay  on  tlie  east  of  Jerusalem,  from 
which  it  was  sepi;  ateil  by  the  deep  valley 
of  the  Kidron,  rising  to  a  height  of  some 
six  hundred  feet,  and  intercepting  the  view 
of  the  wilderness  of  Judssa  and  the  Jordan 
ghor.  The  geographical  detail  is  added  in 
the  text  to  indicate  the  line  of  escape  which 
shall  be  opened  for  those  who  are  to  be  de- 
liveiod.  This  is  the  only  place  in  the  Old 
Testament  where  the  Mount  of  Olives  ia 
thus  exactly  named;  but  it  is  often  alluded 
to;  e.g.  2  Sam.  xv.  30;   1  Kings  xi.  7;  2 


OH.  XIV.  1 — ^21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


157 


Kings  xxiii.  13  (where  it  is  called  "tht 
mount  of  corruption"),  etc.  Shall  cleave 
in  the  midst  thereof.  As  the  enemy  are 
supposed  to  beset  Jerusalem,  so  as  to  make 
escape  by  any  ordinary  road  impossible,  the 
Lord  will  open  a  way  through  the  very 
centre  of  the  mountain  (as  he  opened  a 
path  through  the  Eed  Sea),  by  cleaving  the 
hill  in  sunder,  the  two  parts  moving  north 
and  south,  and  leaving  a  great  valley 
running  east  and  west,  and  leading  to  the 
Arabah. 

Ver.  5. — Te  shall  flee  to  the  valley  of  the 
mountains ;  ye  shall  flee  hy  the  valley  of  my 
mountaint;  i.e.  by  the  ravine  made  by  the 
cleaving  of  Olivet  into  two,  which  God  calls 
"  my  mountain,"  because  effected  by  his 
special  interposition.  Septuagint,  */>ax9^- 
<r€Toi  i)  (pdpay^  rav  opeav  fiov, "  The  valley  of 
my  mountains  shall  be  blocked ; "  Vulgate, 
Fugietis  ad  vaUem  montium  eorum.  The 
last  word  is  probably  an  error  for  meorum. 
Into  the  chasm  thus  miraculously  formed 
the  remnant  shall  flee  for  refuge.  Unto 
Azal ;  t'toj  'la<T6S  (Septuagint) ;  usque  ad 
proximum  (Vulgate);  su  Syramachus.  If 
Azal,  or  Azel,  be  a  proper  name,  it  U  with 
some  probability  identified  with  Beth-ezel, 
mentioned  in  Micah  i.  11,  a  village  on  the 
east  of  Olivet.  The  meaning  in  this  case 
is  that  the  valley  should  extend  from  tlie 
west  unto  the  east  side  of  the  Mount  of 
Olives,  and  that  in  it  the  people  shall  tind 
an  asylum,  that  they  might  not  be  involved 
in  the  judgments  which  fall  on  the  enemy. 
Some  take  Azal  to  mean  "  union,"  and  see 
in  it  a  symbol  of  the  union  of  the  Law  and 
the  gospel,  or  the  Jew  and  Gentile,  in  one 
Church — the  valley  of  God's  mountain  ex- 
tending to  "union;"  that  is,  to  enfolding 
all  the  faitliful  (see  Wordsworth,  in  loc). 
The  earthquake  in  the  days  of  Uzziah.  This 
is  mentioned  in  Amos  i.  1,  but  not  in  the 
iiistorical  books  (see  note  on  Amos,  he.  cif). 
The  intervention  of  the  Lord  is  here  accom- 
panied by  an  earthquake,  which  produces 
the  same  panic  as  on  the  former  occasion, 
and  drives  the  inhabitants  to  flight.  Shall 
come.  To  smite  his  enemies  and  to  defend 
his  people.  All  the  saints  (holy  ones)  with 
thee.  The  versions  hare,  "  with  him ; "  and 
thus  many  Hebrew  manuscripts.  But  such 
abrupt  changes  of  persons  are  not  uncommon 
(see  note  on  oh.  ii.  8).  The  "holy  oues" 
are  the  angels  (comp.  Deut.  xxxiii.  2 ;  Job 
V.  1 ;  Dan.  vii.  10 ;  and  the  parallel  pre- 
dictions in  Matt.  xxiv.  30,  31 ;  xxv.  31). 

Ver.  6. — The  light  shall  not  be  clear,  nor 
dark.  The  Greek,  Syriac,  and  Latin  Ver- 
sions have, "  There  sball  not  be  light,  but 
('and,'  Septuagint)  cold  and  ice."  With 
the  absence  of  light  and  sun  shall  come 
bitter  frost,  which  impedes  all  activity,  and 
kills  life  ;  or,  taking  the  Septuagint  lender- 


iug,  there  shall  no  longer  be  the  inter- 
change of  seasons,  but  one  lasting  sunshine. 
It  is  plain  that  a  time  of  distress  and 
calamity  is  intended,  and  that  the  passage 
is  threatening  and  not  consolatory,  at  any 
rate,  at  first.  There  is  solid  ground  for  the 
rendering  of  the  Eevised  Version  margin, 
adopted  by  Oheyne  and  others,  which  is 
according  to  the  Khetib,  "There  shall  not 
be  light,  the  bright  ones  shall  contract 
themselves  ;  "  i.e.  the  heavenly  bodies  shall 
contract  their  light,  or  be  heaped  con- 
fusedly together,  and  cease  to  shine.  The 
prediction  in  tliis  case  may  be  compared 
with  that  in  Joel  iii.  15 ;  Isa.  xiii.  10 ;  and 
in  Matt.  xxiv.  29;  Rev.  vi.  12,  13.  The 
Authorized  Version  is  explained  in  the 
margin,  i.e.  "  It  shall  not  be  clear  in  some 
places,  and  dark  in  other  places  of  the 
world" — a  gloss  which  is  inadmissible. 

Ver.  7.— -One  day.  A  unique  day,  un- 
paralleled (comp.  C^nt.  vi.  9 ;  Ezek.  vii.  5). 
Which  shall  he  (is)  kaown  to  the  lord.  Its 
peculiar  character,  and  the  moment  of  its 
arrival,  are  known  to  God,  and  God  only 
(Matt.  xxiv.  36).  Not  day,  nor  night.  It 
cannot  be  called  truly  the  one  or  the  other, 
because  there  is  darkness  in  the  day  and 
light  at  niglit,  as  the  following  clause 
says.  This  is  symbolically  explained  by 
St.  Epliraem,  "It  will  not  be  altogether 
consolation,  nor  altogether  affliction."  It  is 
not  full  daylight,  for  calamity  presses ;  it  is 
not  deep  night,  because  there  is  hope  amid 
the  distress.  At  evening-time  it  shall  ha 
light.  In  the  midst  of  trouble  and  danger 
deliverance  shall  come.  TJie  whole  section 
is  a  figurative  description  of  the  fortunes 
of  the  Church  militiint,  even  as  Ohrist 
announced  to  his  disciples :  "  In  the  world 
ye  shall  have  tribulation :  but  be  of  good 
cheer,  I  have  overcome  the  world"  (John 
xvi.  33);  "If  they  have  persecuted  me,  they 
will  also  persecute  you"  (John  xv.  20); 
"  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither 
let  it  be  afraid  "  (John  xiv.  27). 

Vers.  8 — 11. — §  7.  Then  shall  occur  a 
season  of  joy.  The  land  shall  he  transformed 
and  renewed,  and  the  Lord  shall  he  owned 
as  the  sole  King  of  all  the  earth. 

Ver.  8. — Living  waters;  i.e.  water  fresh, 
pure,  and  perennial  (Gen.  xxvi.  19;  Jei-. 
ii.  13),  a  figure  of  the  spiritual  blessings 
and  graces  bestowed  by  God  upon  his 
Church.  From  Jerusalem,  as  the  centre 
and  represenlative  of  the  kingdom  of  God, 
as  in  ch.  xii.  2.  The  city  itself  was,  as  we 
know,  abundantly  supplied  with  water  by 
many  conduits  jand  subterranean  channels ;. 
but  standing,  as  it  does,  surrounded  by  hills 
higher  than  itself,  it  is  physically  impossible 
that  the  waters  could  liter.iUy  flow  as  stated 


158 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHABIAH. 


[OL  xnr.  1—21 


The  description  is  Bymbolioal,  tlinugh  the 
natural  features  of  the  country  are  supposed 
to  be  changed  in  order  to  prL^eive  veri- 
similitude (oomp.  Ezek.  xlvii.  1,  etc. ;  Joel 
iii.  181'.  ^lie  former  (eotfern)  sea  .  .  .  the 
hinder  (western)  sea.  The  Dead  Sea  is  the 
eastern  sea  to  one  looking  to  sunrise  from 
Jerusalem  ;  the  Mediterranean  is  the  western 
sea,  behind  the  observer's  back.  Into  every 
quarter  the  salutary  stream  shall  flow.  In 
summer  and  in  winter.  Neither  drought 
nor  frost  shall  stop  their  perennial  flow. 
"Alike  in  times  of  peace  and  of  persecution 
those  waters  shall  continue  their  course" 
(St.  Jerome) ;  Beptuagint,  "  In  summer  and 
in  spring" — a  rendering  which  seems  to 
indicate  the  home  of  the  Alexandrian 
Version. 

Yer.  9. — All  the  eaith;  all  the  land  of 
Israel  (vers.  8, 10) — a  type  of  the  kingdom 
of  God  in  all  its  extent  (Eev.  xi.  15,  "The 
kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the 
kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of  Ms  Christ; 
and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever"). 
Shall  there  be  one  Lord;  rather,  Jehovah 
shall  be  one.  He  shall  be  universally 
acknowleilged  as  "the  blessed  and  only 
Potentate  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  15).  His  name  one. 
Idolatry  shall  be  abolished,  and  the  one 
God  shall  be  everywhere  adored  (comp. 
ch.  xiii.  2;  Deut.  vi.  4).  Men  shall  no 
longer  attribute  operations  and  effects  to 
various  heavenly  powers,  but  shall  see  and 
confess  that  all  are  derived  from  and  centre 
in  him,  and  are  only  different  revelations 
of  his  ineffable  nature  and  attributes.  We 
do  not,  indeed,  see  this  prediction  yet  ful- 
filled, but  the  grace  to  accomplish  it  is  ready 
and  operating ;  it  is  only  men's  perverse  wills 
that  impede  the  gracious  purpose  of  God. 

Yer.  10. — All  the  land  shall  be  turned  as 
a  plain.  To  indicate  the  exaltation  and 
stability  of  the  centre  of  the  new  theocracy, 
the  prophet  announces  that  all  the  country 
round  Jerusalem  shall  be  turned  into  a 
plain,  dominated  by  the  metropolis,  which 
stands  sublime  on  a  lofty  mountain.  The 
Eevised  Version  renders,  "shall  be  turned 
as  the  Arabah,"  i.e.  as  the  Jordan  ghor,  a 
valley  of  abnormal  fertility.  From  Beba  to 
Simmon  south  of  Jerusalem;  t.e.  from  the 
north  of  Judah  to  its  southern  boundary. 
Geba  was  a  town  and  district  on  the  edge 
of  the  great  Wady  Suweinit,  five  miles  north 
of  Jerusalem.  It  is  identified  with  Jeba 
(1  Bam.  xiii.  3),  and  it  formed  the  northern 
boundary  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  (Josh, 
xviii.  24).  Rimmon  is  described  as  "  south  of 
Jerusalem,"  to  distinguish  it  from  a  town 
of  tlie  same  name  in  Galileo  (Josh.  xix.  13), 
and  from  the  famous  rock  Bimmon,  to  which 
the  Benjamites  fled  (Judg.  tx.  45,  47).  It 
was  situated  in  the  territory  of  Simeon 
(Josh.  X V.  32 ;  xix.  7),  and  ha*  Men  identified 


vrtth  Umm-er-Bummamin,  a  town  ten  milei 
north  of  Beersheba.  It  shall  be  lifted  up, 
Jerusalem  shall  remain  exalted  on  its  hill, 
while  all  the  country  around  sinks  into  a 
plain — a  figure  representing  the  spiritual 
exaltation  of  the  new  theocracy.  Ii^abited 
in  her  place ;  or,  shall  dwell  in  her  place. 
Shall  occupy  her  ancient  limits,  *nd  abide 
there  safely  without  fear  (ccmp.  Jer. 
xxxi.  38 — 40 ;  Ezek.  xlviii.  15,  eto.).  From 
Benjamin's  gate,  etc.  (Jer.  ;xzvii  13).  It 
is  difiScult  to  define  the  given  boundaries 
with  certainty  in  every  particular.  Ben- 
jamin's gate  is  the  same  as  the  gate  of 
Ephraim  (2  Kings  xiv.  13;  Neh.  viii.  16), 
80  called  as  leading  to  the  territory  of 
Benjamin,  and  beyoml  again  to  that  of 
Ephraim.  It  was  situated  in  the  north  or 
second  wall.  From  tijis  point  the  course  of 
the  wall  is  followed,  first  to  the  west,  and 
then  to  the  east.  The  first  gate.  This  was 
in  the  eastern  part  of  this  wall,  and  is  the 
same  as  "the  old  gate,"  or  "gate  of  the 
old  town,"  of  Neh.  xii.  39.  The  oomer  gate 
(2  Kings  xiv.  13;  Jer.  xxxi.  38)  was  at 
the  north-west  corner,  west  of  the  gate  of 
Benjamin,  at  the  angle  where  the  first  and 
second  walls  approached  each  other.  These 
dimensions  would  give  the  breadth  of  the 
city  from  east  to  west.  The  tower  of 
Eananeel  (Neh.  iii.  1)  was  at  the  north-east 
corner  of  tiie  north  wall,  where  the  citadel 
Baris  or  Antonia  afterwards  stood.  The 
king's  wine-presses  were  probably  near  "the 
king's  garden  "  (Neh.  iii.  15),  at  the  south- 
east extremity  of  the  city.  They  may  have 
been  out  out  of  the  rock,  as  was  often  the 
case.  This  description  gives  the  extent  of 
the  city  from  north  to  south.  Thus  Zechariah 
illustrates  the  growth  and  stability  of  the 
Church  of  God  by  the  figure  of  the  earthly 
city  Jerusalem,  firmly  and  orderly  built, 
and  inhabited  by  a  teeming  population,  as 
the  following  verse  shows.  There  is  no 
ground  for  expecting  tire  literal  fulfilment 
of  this  prediction. 

Yer.  11.— Men  shall  dwell  in  it.  There 
shall  be  no  tear  of  exile  and  captivity,  and 
no  necessity  to  fiy  from  a  victorious  enemy 
(vers.  2,  5).  Utter  destruction;  literally, 
curse,  ban;  LXX.  and  Yulgate,  "Tliere  shall 
he  no  more  anatliema."  The  inhabitants 
shall  not  incur  the  curse  which  is  inflicted 
on  transgressors,  idolaters,  and  their  cities 
by  the  old  Law  (see  Exod.  xxiL  20 ;  Deut. 
vii.  2;  xiii.  12 — 15;  xx.  17;  comp.  Ezra 
X  8;  Isa.  xliii.  28 ;  Eev.  xxii.  3).  Shall  be 
safely  inhabited;  or,  shall  ilwell  safely.  Sin 
being  rtmoved,  there  will  be  no  more  occasion 
for  chastisement;  andthe  spiritual  Jerusalem 
shall  never  be  destroyed. 

Vers.  12— 15.— §  8.  Saving  noted  ths 
blestings  on  the  tnte  Israelitet,  the  prophet 


OH.  xrr.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


159 


givet  further  details  concerning  the  destruction 
of  the  enemies :  they  shall  perish  ty  plague, 
hy  mutual  slaughter,  by  the  sicord  of  Judah. 

Ver.  12. — This  shall  be  the  plague.  These 
are  the  instruments  which  the  Lord  uses 
when  he  fights  against  the  nations  (not  the 
people,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version),  ver.  3. 
The  plague,  or  smiting  (maggeiihah),  is  some 
contagious  affliction  scut  by  God,  as  in  Exod. 
ix.  14 ;  Numb.  xlv.  37 ;  1  Sam.  vi.  4.  Their. 
It  is,  in  the  Hebrew,  "his  flesh,  his  feet," 
etc.,  to  show  that  the  general  plague  extends 
to  every  individual.  In  the  last  clause  the 
plural  is  used,  "their  mouth."  With  body, 
eye,  and  tongue  they  opposed  the  holy  city, 
and  took  pleasure  in  its  discomfiture :  in  all 
their  members  they  shall  suffer  retributive 
punishment.  While  they  stand  upon  their 
feet.  The  flesh  of  eaoli  shall  putrefy  and 
moulder  away,  while  he  is  still  alive  and 
arrayed  against  the  city  of  God.  Holes; 
sockets.  The  eyes  had  spied  out  the  weak 
places  in  the  defence,  and  looked  with 
malioiouB  pleasure  on  the  defeat  and  fall. 
Tongne.  They  had  blasphemed  God,  and 
cried  against  his  holy  place,  "Down  with 
it,  even  to  the  ground  I " 

Yer.  13. — A  great  tumult  from  the  Lord 
(ch.  xii.  4).  A  general  panic  or  confusion 
sent  by  the  Lord,  such  as  befell  the 
Hidianites  (Judg.  vii.  22)  and  the  Philis- 
tines (I  Sam.  xiv.  20),  which  ends  in  mutual 
•laughter.  They  shall  lay  hold  every  one, 
etc.  In  this  general  panic  each  shall  seize 
his  neighbour's  hand  in  fierce  contention. 
The  next  clause  gives  the  same  meaning 
(comp.  ch.  xi.  6). 

Ver.  14. — Judah  also  shall  fight  at  Jeru- 
salem. The  adversus  Jerusalem  of  the  Vul- 
gate and  some  Jewisli  interpreters  is  a 
mistake,  and  introduces  a  wholly  irrelevant 
idea.  The  meaning  is  that  the  Juiiaeans 
outside  of  Jerusalem,  the  nation  at  large, 
rallying  to  the  attack,  shall  fall  on  the 
enemy,  now  thinned  by  pestilenoe  and  in- 
ternecine conflicts  within  the  walls  uf  the 
city,  and  prevail  against  tjiem  (comp.  oh. 
xii.  6).  Septuagint,  'loiJSas  Trapard^eTat  iv 
'Upav(ra\'fifi,  "  Judah  shall  draw  up  his  forces 
in  Jerusalem."  The  wealth  of  all  the  heathen 
(nations')  round  about.  The  costly  booty  of 
the  enemy  shall  fall  into  Judah's  hands. 
Thus  the  Church  emerges  victorious  from 
persecutions,  and  is  enriched  and  adorned 
by  the  means  of  those  who  planned  her 
overthrow. 

Ver.  IS.^So  shall  be  the  plague  of  the 
horse,  etc.  As  was  the  plague  that  came 
on  men  (ver.  12),  so  shall  be  the  plague  that 
falls  on  their  beasts  and  cattle.  The  brute 
animals  suffer  for  their  owners'  sin  accord- 
ing to  the  ban  under  the  old  Law  (Dent, 
ziii.  15;   comp.  Numb.  xvi.  32,  33;   Josh. 


vii.  24, 25).  Tents ;  camps ;  Septuagint,  irap- 
efiPoKais.  The  verse  illustrates  the  utter 
destruction  which  shall  befall  the  enemies 
of  God's  Church. 

Vers.  16 — 19. — §9.  Warned  by  these  mani- 
festations of  Ood!s  power,  the  resvlue  (f  the 
heathen  shall  be  converted,  and  shall  Join 
with  the  Eebreai  in  the  regular  worship  of 
Jehovah. 

Ver.  16. — Every  one  that  is  left.  All  the 
heathen  that  attacked  the  holy  city  shall 
not  be  destroyed ;  the  remnant  saved  shall 
become  subjects  of  the  Divine  kingdom. 
Shall  go  up.  This  is  the  usual  phrase  for 
going  to  Jerusalem  for  the  purpose  of  wor- 
ship (comp.  Isa.  ii.  2,  3 ;  Micah  iv.  2 ;  Luke 
ii.  42 ;  John  vii.  8).  The  prophet  here  and 
in  the  following  clause  speaks  as  a  Jew 
to  Jews,  who  knew  and  observed  only  tha 
prescribed  form  of  worship.  It  is  evident 
that  the  announcement  could  nevtr  be  lite- 
rally fulflllert ;  the  Gentile  world  could  never 
come  yearly  to  pay  their  devotions  at  Jeru- 
salem. The  prediction  can  only  signify 
that  under  Messiah's  reign  the  Gentiles 
shall  be  converted  to  true  religion  and 
worship  God  in  regular,  orderly  fashion, 
the  prophet  intimating  this  in  terms  derived 
from  the  old  dispensation,  whioli  had  the 
Divine  sanction.  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles. 
The  Israelites  were  required  to  appear 
before  the  Lord  three  times  in  the  vear 
(Exod.  xxiii.  17;  Dent.  xvi.  16)— at"tlie 
festivals  of  the  Passover,  Pentecost,  and 
Tabernacles.  But  the  Gentiles  are  here 
required  to  present  themselves  only  once. 
The  Feast  of  Tabernacles  is  chosen  for  this 
occasion  owing  to  its  peculiar  character  and 
the  associations  connected  with  it.  It  com- 
memorated not  only  the  ingathering  of  the 
harvest,  but  also  Israel's  sojourn  in  the 
wilderness  and  the  Divine  protection  there 
accorded  to  them,  and  their  entrance  into 
the  promised  land;  it  was  therefore  a  fitting 
symbol  of  the  rescue  of  the  Gentiles  from 
the  devil's  kingdom,  and  their  entry  into 
the  Church  of  God,  where  they  enjoyed  the 
blessings  of  God's  grace  and  protection.  It 
was  also  a  more  catholic  feast,  in  one  sense, 
than  the  Passover  or  Pentecost,  not  being 
so  distinctively  Jewish,  but  one  which  all 
nations  could  keep  in  gratitude  to  the 
Giver  of  material  benefits.  We  must  re- 
member, also,  that  it  was  at  this  feast  that 
onr  Lord  cried  (John  vii.  37),  "  If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me,  and  drink," 
and  likewise  he  declared  himself  to  be 
"the  Light  of  the  world"  (J.hn  viii.  12), 
wishing  us,  it  may  be,  to  understand  that 
this  feast  was  the  one  we  should  need  to 
keep,  being  the  one  which  specially  sots 


160 


THE   BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


[on.  XIV.  1 — 21. 


him  forth    aa  the  Sustainer    and    Guide 
through  life's  pilgrimage. 

Ver.  17. — Will  not  come  up ;  goeth  not  up. 
Those  who  neglected  thia  yearly  worsliip 
shall  be  punished  according  to  the  threat 
in  Deut.  xi.  16,  17.  No  rain.  The  failure 
of  periodic  rain  in  Eastern  countries  meant 
drought,  famine,  and  widespread  distress. 
In  a  spiritual  sense,  rain  represents  the 
grace  and  blessing  of  God  ;  these  are  with- 
holden  from  those  who  refuse  to  wor&hip 
him  and  wilfully  cut  themselves  off  from  the 
Church.  The  LXX.  has,  Kal  oItoi  iicelvois 
irpoiTTeS^irocTai,  "These  shall  be  associated 
with  those,"  i.e.  shall  be  reckoned  among 
those  enemies  whose  punishment  has  been 
mentioned  above. 

Ver.  18. — If  the  family  of  Egypt  go  not 
up.  Egypt  is  mentioned  as  the  great  typical 
enemy  of  God  and  Israel,  and  therefore 
most  obnoxious  to  punishment  if  it  did  not 
obey  the  call.  That  have  no  rain.  This 
rendering  implies,  what  is  not  the  fact,  that 
Egypt  is  without  rain,  and  is  not  dependent 
upon  rain  for  its  fertility.  '  The  expression 
in  the  text  is  elliptical,  being  merely,  "  tlieu 
not  on  them,"  and  it  is  obviously  natural  to 
supply,  "  shall  there  be  rain."  As  the  rise 
of  the  Nile  depends  upon  the  equinoctial 
rains  in  the  interior,  the  failure  of  these 
would  be  disastrous.  Another  way  of  reii- 
derinjc  the  passage  is  to  combine  the  clauses 
and  append  a  note  of  interrogation;  thus: 
"  Shall  there  not  be  upon  them  the  plague 
wherewith,"  etc.?  The  LXX.  and  Syriac 
omit  the  negative,  Ka!  iid  rovrovs  ^trrai  ^ 
rraa-is,  "  Even  upon  these  shall  be  the 
plague." 

Ver.  19. — The  punishment;  literally,  st«; 
a/iaprla:  peccatum ;  here  obviously  the 
punishment  of  sin — sin  with  all  its  fatal 
consequences  (oomp.  Numb,  xviii.  22 ;  Lam. 
iii.  39  ;  iv.  6). 

Vers.  20,  21. — §  10.  Then  everything  alike 
shall  be  holy,  and  the  ungodly  shall  be  alto- 
gether excluded  from  the  house  of  the  Lord. 

Ver.  20. — Upon  the  bells  of  the  horses. 
The  prophet,  describing  the  holiness  of  the 
theocracy,  uses  imagery  drawn  from  the 
ritual  customs  of  the  Law.  "The  bells," 
says  Henderson,  "  were  small  metallic 
plates,  suspended  from  the  necks  or  heads 
of  horses  atid  camels,  for  the  sake  of  orna- 
ment, and  making  a  tinkling  noise  by 
striking  against  each  other  like  cymbals." 


Probably  these  plates  had  the  names  of 
the  owners  engraven  on  them.     The  Sep- 
tuagint    gives  "  bridle,"    which    possibly 
the  unusual  word    metzilloth   may  mean. 
HOLINESS  (holy)  UNTO  THE  LOED ;  Sane- 
turn  Domino  (Vulgate);    "A7i(;j'   t^    Kvpiif 
TravTOKpiropi  (Septuagint).    This  was  the 
inscription  upon  the  golden  plate  on  the 
mitre  of  the  high  priest  (Exod.  ixviii.  36). 
The  affixing  of  this  inscription  on  the  trap- 
pings of  horses  signifies  that  the  commonest 
things  shall  become  holy,  all  things  that 
men  use  for  work,  profit,  or  ornament  shall 
be  cqpgecrated  to  God's  service.     The  pots 
in  the  Lord's  house.    The  "  pots  "  are  vessels 
of  inferior  sanctity  used  for  boiling  the  meat 
of  the  sacrifice  (1  Sam.  ii.  14;   2  Ohron. 
XXXV.   13).     The  bowls   before   the   altar. 
These  held  the  blood  of  the  victims   foi 
sprinkling  on  the  altar,  and  the  sacred  liba- 
tions, and  were  considered  of  superior  sanc- 
tity.    The  prophet  announces  that  now  all 
shall  be  holy,  the  lower  equal  to  the  highest. 
Ver.  21. — The  last  announcement  is  am- 
plified.    Every  pot.     All  the  vessels  of  the 
country  shall  be  consecrated  and  used  in 
Divine  service.     The  Levitical  distinction 
shall  be  abolished,  and  the  Lord's  servica 
shall  be  perfect  freedom.    Every  member 
of  the  Church,  however  humble  his  station 
or  mean  his  acquirements,  shall  be  a  saint 
and  fit  for  the  Lord's  use  (oomp.  2  Tim.  ii. 
21).     The  Canaanite;  mercator  (Vulgate). 
The  word  is  used  in  the  sense  of  "trafficker," 
or  "  merchant,"  in  Job  xl.  31)  (xli.  6,  Autho- 
rized  Virsiou);     Prov.    xxxi.    2i    (comp. 
Zepli.  i.  11).     If  any  vessel  might  now  be 
used  in  God's  service,  worshippers  would  no 
longer  be  obliged  to  buy  special  bowls  from 
those  who  sold  in  the  temple  courts  (Matt. 
xxi.  12).     But  it  is  best  in  agreement  with 
the  context  to  take  "  Canaanite"  to  mean  any 
unclean  or  profane  person  (oomp.  Gen.  ix. 
25 ;  Lev.  xviii.  28,  etc.).     Thus  Daniel,  in 
the  History  of  Susanna,  ver.  56,  addresses 
the  wicked  elder,  "  Thou  seed  of  Ohanaan, 
and  not  of  Juda ; "  and  Isaiah  (i.  10)  calls 
the  chiefs  of  Israel  "  rulers  of  Sodom,"  and 
"  people  of  Gomorrah."     Henceforward  the 
"people  shall  be  all  righteous"  (Isa.  Ix. 
21);     There  shall  be  one,  holy.  Catholic 
Church.     Thus   the  vision   of  the  golden 
candlestick  (oh.  iv.)  is  fulfilled;  and  that 
this  should  come  to  pass  is  the  design  of 
God's  nianil'old  providences  and  operations 
(comp.  Bev.  xxi.  27 ;  xxii.  15). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 6.— A  ligndl  revelation.  "  Behold,  tho  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,"  etc.  The 
"day  of  the  Lord  "  here  referred  to  seems  that  of  the  second  coming  of  Christ:  We 
■ay  this  partly  because  it  is  a  day  to  be  marked  by  a  signal  exercise  of  Jehovah's 


OH.  riT.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  161 

power  against  his  enemies,  "  as  in  the  day  of  battle  "  (2  Pet.  i.  16 ;  2  Theas.  ii.  8 ; 
Josh.  X.  14,  42) ;  partly,  also,  because  he  is  then  to  appear  iu  person  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Jerusalem  (ver.  4),  as  though  in  fulfilmeot  of  Matt,  xxiii.  39;  Acts  i.  11,  12  ; 
and  partly,  again,  because  of  those  who  are  mentioned  here  (end  of  ver.  5)  as  then  to 
appear  in  his  suite  (comp.  Matt.  xxv.  31 ;  Dan.  vii.  10;  Jude  14,  15 ;  Eev.  xix.  11 — 
16).  Understood  thus  of  that  stupendous  event,  the  prophecy  seems  to  describe  (1) 
its  immediate  antecedents ;  and  (2)  its  primary  results. 

I.  Its  immediate  antecedents.  These  appear  to  be  described  here  only  so  far  aa 
"  Jerusalem  "  is  concerned — whether  we  understand  thereby,  as  some  do,  the  literal 
city  inhabited  again  and  besieged  (see  above,  ch.  xii.  2)  by  the  rest  of  the  nations,  or 
that  great  "  spiritual  city,"  the  Christian  Church  (Gal.  iv.  26 ;  Heb.  xii.  22 ;  Rev.  iii. 
12).  In  either  (or  both)  of  these  senses  we  see  the  condition  of  "  Jerusalem  "  at  the 
time  intended  (note  "  then  "  in  ver.  3).  For  example,  we  see :  1.  Tlie  city  itself  wluMy 
subdued.  Its  bulwarks  are  all  "  taken,"  its  separate  "  houses  "  "  rifled,"  its  choicest 
treasures  boldly  divided  by  the  secure  and  triumphant  enemy  in  its  most  central  posi- 
tions, and  every  refuge  against  the  deepest  indignities  utterly  gone.  2  Its  population 
half  destroyed.  When  the  inhabitants  of  a  neighbourhood  are  decimated  by  disease  it 
is  awful  enough.  Here  we  have  a  proportion  of  lost  ones  just  fives  times  as  great  I 
Every  second  house  uninhabited !  Every  family  less  by  one-half  1  What  all  this 
exactly  points  to-it  is  hard  to  say;  but  there  are  passages  connecting  such  unexampled 
excess  of  trial  with  the  v^ry  eve  of  the  Saviour's  coming,  in  Dan.  xii.  1 ;  Matt.  xxiv. 
12, 13 ;  possibly,  also,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  in  Luke  xviii.  8. 

.  II.  Its  peimabt  eesdltb;  viz.  as  might  be  expected,  very  great  natural — or  else 
spiritual — convulsions  (comp.  Hag.  ii.  6,  and  beginning  of  7;  Mai.  iii.  1,  2).  Three 
things  to  be  marked  about  these.  1.  How  mighty  they  are  in  nature/  Tu  divide  the 
tideless  waters  of  the  upper  Bed  Sea  in  old  days  had  been  much.  To  <lo  the  same  by 
the  flowing  waters  of  Jordan  (Josh.  iii.  16)  [jcrhaps  more.  To  separate,  as  prophesied 
here,  into  two  districts,  and  far-removed  portions,  the  solid  range  of  Mount  Olivet, 
more  again.  At  any  rate,  nothing  less.  2.  How  momentous  in  results  I  Jerusalem, 
with  Mount  Olivet  practically  gone  from  "  before  "  it "  on  the  east,"  where  it  had  stood 
for  so  long  the  most  conspicuous  object  all  round  about  (comp.  Ps.  cxxv.  2),  would  be 
no  longer  the  same  place  as  before.  Where  once  had  been  a  mountain  was  now  a 
valley ;  where  a  barrier,  a  way  of  escape — a  way  of  complete  escape  to  "  Azal ; "  either, 
t.e.,  as  far  as  needed  (so  some),  or  else  close  at  hand  (as  others).  Certainly,  if  we  may 
judge  from  the  case  of  Zedekiah  (2  Kings  xxv.  4,  5),  the  "  way  of  escape  "  in  previous 
sieges  had  been  by  a  very  different  route.  3.  Howt easily  wrought!  viz.  immediately  on 
the  Master's  arrival,  by  the  mere  force  of  that  arrival  itself — by  the  mere  touch,  as 
it  were,  of  his  feet !  Compare — itself  not  improbably  another  prediction  of  the  same 
occurrence — ^the  strikiAg  description  of  Hab.  iii.  6 ;  also  2  Thess.  ii.  8,  "  Whom  the  Lord 
shall  destroy  with  the  brightness  of  his  coming  "  (or  "  presence,"  see  margin  of  Revised 
Version),  as  darkness  is  destroyed,  and  that  instantly,  by  the  mere  presence  of  light. 

Observe,  from  all  this,  the  inevitable  consequences  of  every  manifestation  of  Christ, 
•pecially,  of  course,  of  the  latest  of  all.  1.  Amazing  changes  to  all.  "  Every  valley 
shall  be  exalted,  and  every  mountain  and  hill  brought  low."  These  will  be  partly,  of 
course,  in  the  world  of  feeling  and  thought.  "  ITien  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth," 
as  they  certainly  do  not  at  present  (see  also  Matt.  xx.  16,  and  elsewhere ;  and  Acts 
iii.  20,  21).  Partly,  also,  it  is  far  from  improbable,  in  the  world  of  matter  and  sense. 
(See  such  passages,  on  the  one  side,  as  Ps.  Ixvii.  6  ;  Bzek.  xxxiv.  25,  26  ;  Amos  ix.  13 ; 
the  very  ground  which  was  cursed  for  the  first  Adam's  .sake  being  blessed  then  for  the 
sake  of  the  second.  See,  on  the  other,  2  Pet,  iii.  10,  etc.)  2.  Exceeding  fear  to  some. 
Many  then  will  be  found  fleeing  as  though  for  their  lives,  even  in  such  a  wuy  as  they 
did  on  the  occasion  of  that  appalling  earthquake  in  the  days  of  Uzziah,  the  terror  of 
which  had  engraved  itself  so  deeply  on  the  national  mind.  Never  before  had  there 
been  greater  fear  than  there  will  be  at  "that  day"  (Matt.  xxiv.  30;  Isa.  ii.  19;  Rev. 
vi.  15 — 17).  3.  Corresponding  triumph  to  others.  How  many  things  which  now 
divide  Christ  from  his  people — how  many  which  now  separate  his  people  from  one 
another — shall  then  be  things  of  the  past !  All  his  "  saints  "  shall  be  with  him  then 
(T«r.  5),  and  with  him  for  ever  (1  Thess.  iv.  17).  Consequently  (1  John  iii.  2 ;  1  Cor. 
(T.  49),  they  shall  be  fully  "  like  him  "  at  last ;  and  therefore,  also,  like  one  another ; 

CEOHABIAJl.  » 


162  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH.  [ch.  xiv.  1—21. 


and  therefore,  again,  divided  no  more !     No  longer,  when  at  last  in  the   Master's 
presence,  will  they  "dispute,"  as  they  once  did  "by  the  way  "  (Mark  ix.  33,  34). 

Vers.  6 — 11, — A  wonderful  day.  "  Aud  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  the 
light  shall  not  he  clear,  nor  dark,"  etc.  HoweTer  obscure,  in  some  res^jects,  the  opening 
verses  of  this  passage,  the  "  day  "  they  speak  of  is  to  be,  very  manifestly,  a  day  by 
itself.  How  strange,  e.g.,  the  character  of  its  light !  Is  it  the  light  of  "  day  "  ?  or  the 
darkness  of  "night "?  How  strange,  also,  its  time — so  that  it  should  be,  apparently, 
at  its  brightest  just  when  the  light  of  day  is  no  more  (end  of  ver.  7)1  Altogether,  a 
kind  of  "  day  "  only  fully  "  known  to  the  Lord  "  (see,  though  not  in  exactly  the  same 
connection,  Matt.  xxiv.  36).  Corresprnding  to  this,  in  other  respects  also,.shall  be  the 
character  of  that  day.  In  particular,  "  Jerusalem  "  shall  then,  as  never  before,  be 
(1)  a  centre  of  blessing ;  (2)  a  centre  of  rule ;  and  (3)  a  centre  of  strength. 

I.  A  CENTRE  OF  BLESSING.  This  is  represented  to  us  under  tlie  figure  of  a  flow  of 
"  living  waters "  therefrom  (see  Joel  iii.  18 ;  Bzek.  xlvii.,  passim,  and  especially 
ver.  9 ;  also  John  iv.  10 ;  vii.  38^  What  is  remarkable  in  this  case  is  that  the  flow 
of  these  waters  shall  be :  1.  In  most  unusual  directions.  Some  will  flow,  naturally 
enough,  along  the  intervening  descent  to  the  "former,"  or  eastern  sea;  but  some  also, 
altogether  supernaturally  according  to  the  lie  of  the  land,  to  the  "  latter,"  or  western 
sea.  Countries  and  races,  that  is  to  say,  which  at  present  are  hardly  sprinkled  with 
gospel  influences,  and  to  which  at  present  it  seems  almost  impossible  to  send  them, 
shall  then  be  overflowed  by  them  as  by  a  flood.  2.  At  most  unusual  seasons.  How 
sadly  intermittent,  as  things  are  now,  is  the  flow  of  Church  work !  Now  in  decadence, 
now  restored  !  Now  frozen  by  indifference,  now  revived  by  warmth !  Now  exhausted 
by  heat,  now  refreshed  by  rain  (Ps.  Ixviii.  9)1  The  flow  of  these  days  is  to  be  indepen- 
dent of  seasons — rivers  all  the  year  through  (comp.  Eev.  xxii.  2). 

II.  A  CENTEE  OF  BOLE.  Very  naturally  does  this  head  follow  from  that  before. 
Influence  of  such  a  gracious  character,  so  universally  and  constantly  in  operation,  will 
subdue  the  whole  world  in  due  time.  This  is  what  seems  foretold  in  ver.  9.  In  the 
present  divided  rule  of  the  world — and,  in  some  measure,  of  the  Church  as  well — it  is 
diflScult  to  give  hearty  subjection  to  this  authority  without  rebelling  against  that.  Not 
so  when,  in  all  the  world,  there  shall  be  but  one  supreme  Head.  Not  so,  still  more, 
when  the  possessor  of  that  supreme  authority  shall  only  be  known  by  one  name.  At 
present,  in  many  cases,  we  have  vast  composite  sovereignties,  "united  kingdoms," 
"  dual  empires,"  at  best.  The  man  obeyed  here  as  Emperor  of  Austria  is  only  obeyed 
next  door  as  King  of  Hungary.  Not  so  at  all  in  "that  day."  The  King  of  "Jeru- 
salem " — Christ  in  his  Church — shall  be  the  one  title  of  that  "  only  Potentate  "  (see 
Dan.  vii.  13,  14,  27 ;  Rev.  xi.  15 ;  xix.  16 ;  Isa.  xxiv.  23 ;  also  Ps.  ii.  and  ex.,  passim ; 
and  Luke  i.  32,  33). 

III.  A  CENTRE  OF  STRENOTH.  "Jerusalem"  is  to  be  strong  then  for  three  different 
reasons.  There  shall  be  :  1.  No  facilities  for  attacking  it.  Beginning  from  the  ancient 
fortress  of  Geba  on  the  north  (Pusey,  in  he),  down  along  the  whole  mountain 
range  to  Bimmon  in  the  south,  instead  of  lofty  hills  sheltering  the  invaders  and 
dominating  the  hill  of  Mount  Zion,  the  "whole  land  shall  be  a  plain."  2.  Every 
facility  for  defending  it.  What  those  other  mountains  lose,  as  it  were,  the  hill  of 
Zion  shall  gain.  Remaining  still  "  in  her  place,"  but  "  lifted  up  "  (comp.  Isa.  ii.  2) 
far  above  her  former  elevation,  the  holy  city  shall  look  down  then  on  the  whole  subject 
neighbourhood — every  ancient  wall  and  battlement  being  also  restored  and  elevated 
together  with  it,  and  so  made  doubly  effective  as  a  means  of  defence.  3.  Better  still, 
the  knowlelge  of  the  possession  of  these  advantages  shall  prevent  the  very  thought  of 
attack.  "Men  shall  dwell  there" — shall  choose  to  dwell  there — knowing  how  secure 
it  is  from  attack.  What  had  been  so  often  there  shall  be  never  again.  "  Jerusalem  " 
now  is  a  city  which  can  never  be  touched.  This  shall  be  felt,  this  shall  be  acted  on, 
by  all  without,  by  all  within. 

This  glorious  prospect  of  that  future  day  of  blessing  and  peace,  whether  compara- 
tively near  or  far  off,  may  console  us  greatly  in  the  days  that  now  are,  whether  in 
witnessing :  1.  Their  cruel  dissensions.  What  a  scene  of  selfishness,  greed,  competi- 
tion, strife,  suspicion,  distrust,  and  violence  is  that  now  around  us  1  Worse  than  a 
"  struggle  for  existence,"  it  is  too  often  a  struggle,  even  where  existence  is  not  imperilled. 


OH.  iiv.  1—21.3  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  168 


to  keep  others  down.  See  how  the  whole  oiyUized(I)  world  is  standing  armed  to  the 
teeth,  possessed  of  deadlier  weapons,  and,  consequently,  of  deadlier  determination,  than 
ever.  How  restful  to  the  spirit  to  look  beyond  all  this  to  that  described  here !  2. 
Their  cruel  disappointments.  Much  as  these  evils  have  beeu  bewailed  and  lamented, 
and  often  as  many  men  have  hitherto  tried  to  relieve  them,  how  little  comparative 
success  they  have  renched  I  Political  endeavours  to  remedy  these  evils  have  only  led 
to  worse,  as  a  rule.  Even  the  religion  of  JesUa,  the  religion  of  "  liberty,  equality,  and 
fraternity,"  in  the  very  best  (and  perhaps  only  possible)  sense,  has  become  the  occasion, 
too  often,  though  not  the  cause,  of  that  which  it  sought  to  remove.  It  is  a  comfort  to 
know  that  another  hanii  will  itself  apply  this  remedy  in  due  time ;  and  that  that  will 
be  easily  accomplished  by  him  when  he  comes  down  from  the  "  mount,"  which  is  now 
impossible  to  his  friends  (Mark  ix.  14 — 27). 

Vers.  12 — 21. — A  legenerate  world,  "And  this  shall  be  the  plague  wherewith  the 
Lord  will  smite  all  the  people  that  have  fought  against  Jerusalem,"  etc.  A  regenerate 
man  is  not  a  man  without  disposition  to  sin,  but  a  man  in  whose  case  that  disposition 
is  habitually  overcome.  In  that  regenerate  world  partially  described  in  the  previous 
verses,  something  very  similar  is  to  hold  good.  All  the  elements  of  evil  are  not  then 
altogether  to  cease;  but  there  shall  be  in  operation  then  a  new  principle  of  action, 
which  shall  prevent  them  from  raising  their  heads.  How  exceedingly  different  a  condi- 
tion of  things  the  full  establishment  of  such  a  rule  will  result  in  seemsto  be  taught 
us,  in  these  concluding  verses,  in  three  different  ways;  viz.  in  regard  (1)  to  those  who 
shall  hate  "Jerusalem ; "  (2)  to  those  who  shall  despise  it ;  and  (3)  to  those  who  shall 
inhabit  it,  in  those  days. 

I.  Those  who  hate  it.  For  such  persons  there  will  be,  even  at  that  time,  as  at 
all  previous  times,  in  existence.  There  will  even  be  some  in  existence — at  any  rate, 
at  the  very  beginning  of  "that  day" — who  shall  be  bold  enough  to  declare  war  against 
it.  How  will  it  be  with  such  then  ?  Not  at  all  as  it  is  with  them  now,  when  they 
seem  so  often  and  so  mysteriously  to  have  the  "  upper  hand  "  (Ps.  ix.  19,  Prayer- 
book  Version)  against  God.  On  the  contrary,  partly  (1)  by  judgments  within  them, 
their  very  bodily  organs,  as  it  were,  visibly  withering  away  under  God's  displeasure ; 
partly  (2)  by  judgments  among  them,  causing  them,  as  in  a  kind  of  frenzy,  to  lay 
violent  hands  on  one  another ;  partly  (3)  by  judgments  upon  them,  which  shall  turn 
their  very  endeavours  to  injure  "  Jerusalem  "  into  means  for  enriching  it ;  and  partly 
(4)  by  judgments  around  them,  represented  as  coming  even  on  the  poor  brutes  they 
employ  for  their  sakes ; — God  will  testify  openly  what  are  his  feelings  and  purposes  with 
regard  to  such  doings.  In  such  circumstances,  if  evil  be  sometimes  desired,  it  will  very 
seldom  be  deliberately  attempted,  and  never  achieved.  How  total  a  contrast,  in  every 
respect,  to  that  which  we  read  of  in  Eccles.  viii.  11 ! 

II.  Those  who  despise  it.  Besides  that  hostility  which  is  open  and  active,  there 
is  that  which  is  passive  and  half-concealed.  Some  men  do  not  so  much  oppose  religion 
as  ignore  its  injunctions.  Men  disposed  to  act  thus  will  not  be  lacking,  even  in  that 
glorious  "  day."  This  illustrated  here  by  a  reference  to  that  well-known  ancient  "  Feast 
of  Tabernacles,"  in  which  the  settled  Israelites  commemorated  the  fact  of  their  having 
been  wanderers  once  in  the  wilderness  (Lev.  xxiii.  41 — 43).  Something  so  far  corre- 
sponding to  this,  at  any  rate,  as  to  be  fitly  described  by  the  same  appellation,  will  be 
of  universal  obligation  in  the  final  settlement  of  that  great  sabbatical  "day"  (comp. 
Heb.  iv.  1 — 9).  How  will  things  be  with  those  who  despise  it  and  neglect  to  "coma 
up  "  (ver.  17)  ?  Not  as  now  (see  Matt.  v.  45) ;  but  rather  as  it  was  in  those  days  when 
Goshen  was  distinguished  for  Israel's  sake,  as  by  a  special  command  from  Heaven,  from 
ail  the  rest  of  the  land.  Every  such  contemptuous  nation  or  "  family,"  whatever  the 
peculiarity  of  their  circumstances  and  ordinary  climate,  shall  be  made  to  feel  then  the 
open  displeasure  of  him  who  commandeth  the  clouds.  How  widely  different  in  those 
days  the  language  of  Heiven !  How  widely  different  the  conduct,  may  we  not  expect, 
therefore,  of  the  most  callous  of  men  1 

III.  Those  who  ibhabit  it.  These  men  shall  find  Jerusalem  then  "the  holy  city" 
indeed.  Speaking  here  of  the  future,  in  language  drawn  from  the  usages  of  his  own 
time;  or  possibly,  as  some  have  supposed,  speaking  so  because  there  will  be  a  certain 
measure  of  return  to  those  usages  in  the  future ; — there  are  three  great  changes  which 


164 


THE  BOOK  OP  ZEOHARIAH.  [oh.  xiv.  i— 2i 


the  prophet  bids  ub  expect  in  the  "Jerusalem  "  of  "  that  day."  Its  inhabitauts  will 
see :  1.  The  previously  "  common  "  become  "  holy."  The  very  bells  of  the  horses  being 
uutwardly  marked  for  God's  service,  like  the  high  priest's  mitre  was  in  ancient  times 
(Exod.  xxviii.  36—38;  see  also  Isa.  xxiii.  17,  18).  2.  The  previously  holy  made  holier 
still.  The  ordinary  temple  "pits,"  only  used  of  old  days  for  "  dressing  the  victims 
(Pusey),  being  now  regarded  as  like  the  sacrificial  "  bowls  before  the  altar,"  containing 
the  atoning  blood  itself;  and  even  those  vessels  outside  the  "house,"  which  were  only> 
so  far  holy  before  that  they  were  found  in  "  Jerusalem  "  (the  holy  city),  or  belonged 
to  "  Judah  "  (the  holy  people),  shall  now  be  regarded  as  fit  for  employment  in  the 
temple  worship  itself.  3.  The  irreclaimahly  profane  for  ever  shut  out.  "The 
Oanaanite,"  i.e.,  as  representing  those  who,  though  not  truly  the  children  of  promise, 
yet  "would  live"  amongst  them  (Judg.  i.  35)  through  all  the  ages,  being  never  seen 
there  again  (comp.  Isa.  xxxv.  8 ;  Joel  iii.  17  ;  Bph.  v.  27 ;  Rev.  xxi.  27 ;  xxii.  15). 

"  Not  yet  I  not  yet  I    The  faultless  flock, 
The  field  without  a  tare, 
Come  last  of  all  the  blessing  sought 
By  centuries  of  prayer  I " 

How  fitting  a  close  of  the  whole  is  this  thought !  How  rightly  does  this  chief  prophet 
of  the  post-Captivity  Jerusalem  tell  us  thus,  in  conclusion,  of  that  far  more  glorious 
Jerusalem  which  is  some  day  to  shine  forth  I  It  is  much  the  same  that  the  Prophet 
Daniel  does  at  the  end  of  his  prophecy.  It  is  the  same  also  that  "  St.  John  the 
divine  "  does  at  the  end  of  his  song.  They  bring  their  message  to  an  end  when  they  . 
have  given  us  a  glimpse  of  the  end  which  God  has  in  store.  It  is  for  us  to  take  care 
that  we  are  truly  numbered  with  those  for  whom  that  "end  "  is  prepared. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  6. — Lessons  of  the  earthquake.  "  Speak  to  the  earth,  and  it  shall  teach  thee." 
So  said  Job  (xii.  8).     The  earthquake  serves — 

I.  To  IMPKE88  us  WITH  THE  GEBATNE88  OF  GoD.  There  are  forces  great  and 
terrible.  But  back  of  all,  and  controlling  all,  is  God.  So  the  prophets  taught,  and  so 
we  believe  (Ps.  Ixviii.  8 ;  civ.  32  ;  Job  xxv.  9 — 14 ;  Exod.  xix.  18). 

IL   To    HUMBLE   US   BNDBB   A   SENSE   OF   OUR   UTTEB    HBLPLESBlirEBS.        Many    things 

possible  to  man.  Can  tame  the  wild  beasts  and  subdue  the  earth.  Can  make  fire 
and  air  and  water  his  servants.  But  there  are  times  when  he  feels  his  impotence. 
When  the  earthquake  comes,  can  only  say,  "  It  is  the  will  of  the  Lord"  (Isa.  ii.  19 — 22). 

III.  To   CONVINCE   us  OF   THE    INSTABILITY   OF   ALL   EARTHLY    THINGS.        The  Cartll 

seems  of  all  things  the  most  stable.  But  there  comes  a  crisis,  and  our  old  faith  is  gone 
for  ever.  "  A  bad  earthquake  at  once  destroys  our  oldest  associations.  The  earth,  the 
very  emblem  of  solidity,  has  moved  beneath  our  feet ;  one  second  of  time  has  created 
in  the  mind  a  strange  idea  of  insecurity  which  hours  of  reflection  could  not  have  pro- 
duced "  (Darwin). 

IV.  To   ADMONISH    us    OF   THE   JUDGMENTS    THAT   ABE    COMING    UPON    THE     EARTH. 

Geologists  tell  us  of  internal  fires,  and  the  probability  of  some  great  catastrophe,  sooner 
or  later.  "  Coming  events  cast  their  shadows,  before."  Earthquakes  are  prophecies. 
Confirmed  by  Scripture  (2  Pet.  iii.  10 — 12). 

V.  To  TEACH   us   TUB    PBBFBOT   SECURITY   OF   God'B   SAINTS.      Come   what  wiU,  who 

shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  ?  There  are  things  which  cannot  be  moved, 
and  they  are  the  heritage  of  God's  people  (Isa.  liv.  10 ;  Ps.  xlvi. ;  Heb.  xii.  i6 — 29). 
"  We  look  for  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness." — P. 

Vers.  6, 7. — The  day  of  days.  The  promise  that  "  at  evening-time  it  shall  be  light " 
is  suggestive  and  comforting. 

I.  The  dawn.  Ordinary  light  seems  withdrawn.  Things  are  seen  dimly.  Dis- 
couragement and  fear.  Ready  to  say,  "Darkness  shall  cover  us."  Call  for  faith. 
"  God  is  light."  "  He  will  bring  the  blind  by  a  way  that  they  know  not,  making  lark- 
eess  light  before  them  "  (cf.  Isa.  1.  10). 


CH.  XIV.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZBCHARIAH.  16S 

II.  FBoaBEBs.  Still  uncertainty.  Neither  wholly  day  nor  ni^ht.  Alternations, 
Now  the  sun  seems  ahout  to  break  forth,  now  the.  gloom  returns.  Hopes  and  fears. 
But  on  the  whole  advance.  Faith  still  finds  firm  footing.  Hope  brightens.  Love 
never  fails.  Amidst  all  the  conflicts  with  science  and  philosophy,  Christianity  abides 
in  its  power.     There  is  promise  of  the  "  perfect  day." 

in.  The  close.  "  Evening."  After  long  waiting  and  many  disappointments. 
When  most  needed  and  least  expected.  Not  in  the  order  of  nature,  but  of  grace. 
When  the  shadows  are  lengthening  and  the  sun  going  down,  the  light  shines  forth 
with  a  sweet  and  beautiful  radiance.  Glorious  ending  to  a  dark  and  cloudy  day.  The 
history  of  the  Church,  and  the  experience  of  individual  Christians,  aiford  many  illustra- 
tions. The  promise  sometimes  finds  a  tender  and  comforting  fulfilment  in  the  last 
hours  of  the  dying  believer.  Bunyan  tells  us  of  Mr.  Fearing,  that,  at  the  entrance  of 
the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  he  was  "  ready  to  die  for  fear."  But  to  him  the 
valley  was  quiet  from  troublers.  Then  Greatheart  notes,  as  somethino;  very  remarkable, 
at  the  departure  of  this  pilgrim,  "  The  water  of  that  river  was  lower,  at  this  time, 
than  ever  I  saw  it  in  all  my  life;  so  he  went  over  at  last  not  much  above  wet- 
shod."— F. 

Vers.  8 — 11. — Living  waters.    Emblematic  of  the  gospel. 

I.  SonsoE.  "  Jerusalem."  Centre  of  supreme  authority  and  law.  The  place  of 
holy  sacrifice.  Thecity  of  the  great  King.  Here  is  God's  throne  (Rev.  xxii.l).  "Salva- 
tion is  of  the  Jews."    "  Of  whom  as  concerning  the  flesh,  Christ  came." 

II.  DiEEOTioN.  There  is  movement.  Not  arbitrary,  but  regulated.  Not  limited 
to  one  land,  but  for  all  people.  "  Beginning  at  Jerusalem."  Such  was  the  law  ;  but 
from  that  starting-point  the  messengers  of  salvation  were  to  go  forth  to  the  whole 
earth.  Water  seeks  the  lowest  level,  and  the  gospel  comes  down  to  the  poorest,  the 
most  despised,  "  the  chief  of  sinners." 

III.  A^FFLUENOE.  Bich  Supply — ample  to  meet  the  needs  of  all.  In  the  wilderness 
the  rock-waters  followed  the  Israelites  in  all  their  wanderings.  But  this  river  is 
sufficient  "  for  the  whole  world." 

IV.  Perpetuity.  There  are  rivers  that  vary.  They  run  part  of  the  year,  and  then 
they  fail.  But  this  river  never  fails.  Neither  the  winter's  cold  nor  the  summer's 
heat  can  afiect  its  flow.  There  are  rivers  that  have  disappeared — like  old  peoples  and 
old  civilizations — but  this  river  runs  on  throughout  the  ages  with  unchanging  life  and 
virtue. 

V.  Bbnbficenob.  Vitality.  Life  and  the  power  of  life.  What  so  sweet  and 
refreshing  as  the  streams  of  pure  water  ?  Carry  blessings  far  and  wide.  So  with  the 
gospeL  Converting  souls.  Purifying  society.  Advancing  the  world  in  the  highest 
forms  of  civilization.  Grand  future.  Universal  subjection.  Universal  homage.  "One 
Lord."— F. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — The  elevation  of  Zion.  Morally  and  spiritually  (Isa.  ii.  2  ;  Micah  iv. 
1 ;  Ezek.  xl.  2). 

I.  Baised  above  the  strife  of  factions.  Sects.  Party  spirit.  Din  and  strife 
of  tongues.  Confusion  and  every  evil  work.  But  for  Zion's  children  there  is  a  purer 
atmosphere  and  serener  skies. 

II.  Baisbd  above  the  oobbuftions  of  the  world.  We  hear  much  in  our  day  of 
germs.  The  air  is  everywhere  infected.  The  seeds  of  disease  are  on  every  side.  But 
rise  higher,  and  the  danger  ceases.  So  of  Zion.  Drunkenness,  illegitimacy,  worldliness, 
and  other  sins  abound,  and  lower  the  tone  of  society.  Need  to  rise  nearer  to  heaven. 
"  Te  are  from  beneath :  I  am  from  above,"  said  our  Lord. 

IIL  Raised  above  the  assaults  of  the  wicked.  Storms.  Enemies.  Tempta- 
tions. Cry,  "  Deliver  us  from  the  evil."  The  higher  we  rise,  the  greater  our  safety. 
The  more  we  resemble  Christ,  with  the  more  hope  can  we  say,  "  The  prince  of  this 
world  cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  me." 

rV.  Raised  above  the  vicissitudes  of  time.  Dispensations  vary.  Habits  of 
society  alter.  Beliefs  may  change.  But  eternal  truth  and  righteousness  abide.  "The 
tme  religion  is  built  'Jpon  the  rock,  the  rest  are  tossed  upon  the  waves  of  time  " 
(Bacon), 


166  THE  BOOK  OF  ZBOHABIAH.  [oh.  Xit.  I— 2L 


"  Seiene  will  be  onr  dftyf ,  and  bright 
And  happy  will  our  nature  be, 
When  love  u  an  unerring  light, 
And  joy  iti  own  •eonrity." 

(Wordiwoitb.) 

K. 

Vers.  16 — ^21. — The  great  harvest-home.  The  Peast  of  Tabernacles  had  a  threefold 
reference.  It  was  a  memorial  of  the  past,  it  was  a  service  of  thanksgiving,  and  it  was 
also  foreshadowing  of  the  better  things  to  come.  Well,  therefore,  may  the  prophet 
make  it  a  symbol  of  the  glory  of  the  latter  days,  when  under  Messiah's  reign  the  ful- 
ness of  the 'Gentiles  should  be  brought  in,  and  all  Israel  should  be  saved.  The  glowing 
and  beautiful  picture  may  represent  the  great  harvest-home  of  the  world. 

I.  Unity  of  worship.  No  more  many  gods,  but  one.  No  more  hostile  sects  and 
parties,  but  the  holy  Catholic  Church  of  the  living  Qod.  At  last  the  old  promise  is 
fulfilled  (Numb.  xiv.  21). 

II.  JoTFULNEss  OP  8EEVICB.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  reigns.  Love  and  joy  and  peace 
are  in  all  hearts.  From  all  lands  and  peoples  come  the  soogs  of  praise  and  the  services 
of  thanksgiving  to  the  Father  of  lights,  and  the  Giver  of  every  good  and  perfect 
gift. 

IIL  Sahctitt  of  life.  Society  is  purified.  Every  life  is  consecrated  to  Qod. 
There  is  no  need  any  more  for  the  law  of  ordinances,  for  all  things  are  cleansed, 
"  Holiness  "  is  the  law  everywhere.     1.  Common  life.    2.  Domestic  life.    3.  BeligUms 

life. 

"  Ah  I  when  shall  all  men's  good 
Be  each  man's  rnle,  and  universal  peai  e 
Lie  like  a  shaft  of  light  across  the  land. 
And  like  a  lane  of  Iieama  athwart  the  sea, 
Thro'  all  the  circle  of  the  golden  year  ?" 

I. 

Yen.  1—8.—.^  iketch  on  had  men,  "  And  thy  spoil  shall  be  divided,"  etc.  Therj 
are  three  facts  here  suggested  concerning  bad  men. 

L  That  tbet  abe  capable  of  febpetbatino  the  obeatest  enobmities  on  theib 
FELLOW-MEN.  "  The  clty  of  Jerusalem  shall  be  taken,  and  the  houses  rifled,  and  the 
women  ravished."  la  the  account  given  by  Josephus  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
by  the  Bomans,  we  have  a  record  ol  enormities  at  which  we  might  well  stand  aghast. 
Christ  said,  concerning  this  event,  "  There  shall  be  great  tribulation,  such  as  was  not 
from  the  beginning  of  the  world  until  this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be."  "  The  particu- 
lars," says  Dr.  Wardlaw,  "  here  noted,  are  such  as  usually,  it  might  be  said  invariably, 
attend  the  besieging,  the  capture,  and  the  sacking  of  cities ;  especially  when,  as  in  this 
case,  the  assailing  army  has  been  exasperated  by  a  long,  harassing,  and  wasting  defence. 
The  entrance  of  the  unpitying  soldiery,  the  rifling  of  houses,  the  violation  of  women, 
the  indiscriminate  massacre,  and  the  division  of  the  spoil,  are  just  wliat  all  expect,  and 
what  require  no  comment.  And  never  were  such  scenes  more  frightfully  realized  than 
at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  when  God  in  his  providence,  in  judicial  retribution, 
gathered  all  nations  against  the  devoted  city  to  battle."  "  All  nations,"  a  correct 
description  of  the  army  of  Titus,  the  empire  of  Borne  embracing  a  large  proportion  of 
the  then  known  world,  and  this  army  consistiug  of  soldiers  of  all  the  different  nations 
which  composed  it.  And,  while  such  was  to  be  the  destruction  brought  upon  the 
"city,"  the  desolation  was  to  extend,  and  that  in  different  ways,  at  short  intervals, 
throughout  "  the  land."  The  fact  that  men  are  capable  of  perpetrating  on  their  fellow- 
men  such  enormities,  shows :  1.  Man's  apostasy  from  the  laws  of  his  spiritual  nature. 
To  love  supremely  the  supremely  good,  to  do  unto  others  what  we  would  have  others 
do  unto  us,  to  love  and  to  be  loved,  seem  to  us  to  be  truths  inscribed  upon  the  very 
constitution  of  the  soul.  They  are  instinctive  truths.  But  in  all  such  abominations 
as  here  recorded,  all  these  are  outraged.  Men  have  fallen  away  from  their  own  nature. 
Somehow  or  other  they  have  become  denaturalized.  2.  The  great  werk  which  the  gospd 
hoe  to  do  in  our  world.  The  great  mission  of  the  gospel  (and  admirably  adapted  it  is 
to  its  mismon),  is  morally  to  renew  human  nature,  to  bring  it  back  to  its  true  self  »nd 


oaxiT.l— 21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHAKUH.  167 

its  God.  It  has  done  bo  in  millions  of  mstanceg,  it  is  doing  ao  and  will  continue  to  do 
so  until  the  present  abominations  shall  be  unknown  amongst  the  race. 

TI.  That  whateteb  enobmities  thet  ferfetbate,  thet  abe  etsbmobb  instbu- 
MENTS  IN  THE  HAKSB  OF  THE  world's  obeat  Buler.  The  period  in  which  these 
abominations  were  enacted  is  in  the  text  called  the  "  day  of  the  Lord,"  and  he  is 
represented  as  calling  the  Gentile-  armies  to  the  work.  "  I  will  gather  all  nations 
gainst  Jerusalem  to  battle ;  and  the  city  shall  be  taken,  and  the  houses  rifled,  and 
the  women  ravislied."  If  we  are  to  particularize  the  predicted  destruction,  and  are  not 
satisfied  with  figurative  explanation,  wc  may  look  to  the  conquest  under  Titus,  as  in 
some  sort  fulfilling  the  announcement.  Rome  at  this  time  was  the  mistress  of  the 
world,  and  the  army  of  Titus,  who  besieged  and  sacked  the  holy  city,  was  composed 
of  soldiers  of  all  the  nations.  These  all  moved  freely,  unconscious  of  any  Divine 
restraint ;  still  they  were  but  the  "  sword  "  of  justice  in  his  hand — mere  instruments. 
God  in  his  retributive  procedure  punishes  the  bad  by  the  bad.  In  this  case :  1.  No 
injustice  is  done.  The  men  of  Jerusalem  deserved  their  fate.  They  "  filled  up  the 
measure  of  their  iniquity."  So  it  was  of  old  with  the  Canaanites,  who  were  exter- 
minated by  Joshua  and  his  triumphant  hosts — the  aborigines  deserved  what  they 
received.  Joshua  was  but  the  sword  of  justice.  No  injustice  therefore  is  done. 
2.  There  is  no  infringement  (^  free  agency.  Good  men  might  revolt  from  inflicting 
such  enormities  upon  their  fellow-creatures,  but  it  is  according  to  the  wish  of  bad 
iiien.  They  go  to  it  freely.  It  is  the  gratification  of  their  malign  nature.  This  is 
God's  retributive  method,  to  punish  the  bad  by  the  bad.  Thus  he  makes  the  very 
wrath  of  bad  men  to  praise  him. 

III.  That  although  they  abb  but  inbtbumbnts  is  the  hands  of  the  woblo's 

liULBB,   HE    WILL   PUNISH   THEM   FOB   ALL   THEIB   DEEDS  OF   ENOBMITT.        "Then   shall 

the  Lord  go  forth,  and  fight  against  those  nations,  as  .when  he  fought  in  the  day  of 
battle."  That  is,  for  example,  he  will  fight  against  Borne,  the  instrument  with  which 
he  inflicted  just  punishment  upon  the  sinners  at  Jerusalem.  By  successive  irruptions 
of  the  barbarous  tribes  of  the  north,  the  glory  of  Borne  was  extinguished,  and  its  end 
hastened.  Where  is  the  justice  of  punishing  men  whom  he  employs  to  execute  his 
own  will  ?  Two  facts  will  answer  this  question.  1.  What  they  did  was  essentially 
bad.  Murder,  plunder,  rapine,  etc.,  were  all  violations  of  his  great  moral  laws,  and 
repugnant  to  his  holy  nature.  2.  What  they  did  was  in  accord  with  their  own  wills. 
He  never  inspired  them  nor  constrained  them.  They  were  free,  and  because  they 
committed  crimes  of  their  own  free  accord,  eternal  justice  required  their  punishment. 
Of  the  Divine  government,  the  justice  cried,  "  Awake,  O  sword  I  " 

Conclusion.  Do  not  let  the  abominations  of  war  and  the  outrages  on  justice,  truth, 
and  humanity,  which  are  rife  in  this  country  of  ours,  shako  our  faith  in  God.  "  The 
Lord  reigneth  ;  let  the  earth  rejoice ; "  "  The  Lord  sitteth  upon  the  flood." — D.  T. 

Vers.  4,  5. — Ood  in  relation  to  a  suffering  world.  "  And  his  feet  shall  stand  in  that 
day  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives,  which  is  before  Jerusalem  on  the  east,  and  the  Mount 
of  Olives  shall  cleave  in  the  midst  thereof  toward  the  east  and  toward  the  west,  and 
tiiere  shall  be  a  very  great  valley,"  etc.  The  men  in  Jerusalem  were  in  great  sufiering 
and  imminent  peril,  and  here  is  a  figurative  representation  of  the  Almighty  in  relation 
to  them. 

I.  He  observes  theib  terrible  condition.  "And  his  feet  shall  stand  in  that 
day  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives,  which  is  before  Jerusalem  on  the  east."  On  this  Mount 
of  Olives  Jesus  often  stood,  and  from  H  he  commanded  a  view  of  the  holy  city ;  on 
one  occasion,  from  its  brow,  he  beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  it  on  account  of  its 
approaching  doom.  But  the  idea  suggested  here  is  that  God  observes  men  in  all  their 
calamities  and  dangers.  His  eye  is  on  them.  He  watches  them  with  the  interest  of 
a  Father.  This  is  especially  the  case  with  his  people.  We  are  assured  that  his  eye  is 
ever  upon  the  righteous.  .Job  said,  "He  knoweth  the  way  that  I  take."  Let  us  remember, 
in  our  greatest  trials  and  sufferings,  that  he  stands  on  the  Mount  of  Olives.  In  stand- 
ing there :  1.  He  sees  what  we  have  to  endure.  2.  He  sees  how  we  behave  ourselves  in 
our  condition,  whether  under  our  afflictions  we  are  trustful,  patient,  and  submissive, 
or  otherwise ;  whether  in  our  perils  we  are  making  an  effort  to  escape.  How  comforting 
it  is  to  feel  that  the  eye  of  a  tender,  compassionate  Father  is  ever  on  us.  in  all  onr 


168  THE  BOOK  OP  ZBCHARIAH.  [oh.  nv.  1—21 


Bufferings,  in  this  world  of  sorrow,  trial;  and  dangers  I    "  Thou  compassest  my  path  and 
my  lying  down,  and  art  acquainted  with  all  my  ways." 

II,  He  makes  a  way  fob  their  dblivebanob.  "  And  the  Mount  of  Olives  shall 
cleave  in  the  midst  thereof  toward  the  east  and  toward  the  west,  and  there  shall  be 
a  very  great  valley."  "  These  verses,"  says  Dr.  Henderson,  "  convey  in  language  of 
the  most  beautiful  poetical  imagery,  the  assurance  of  the  effectual  means  of  escape  that 
should  be  provided  for  the  truly  pious.  We  accordingly  learn  from  Eusebius  that  on 
the  breaking  out  of  the  Jewish  war,  the  Christian  Church  at  Jerusalem,  in  obedience 
to  the  warning  of  our  Saviour  (Matt.  xxiv.  16),  fled  to  Pella,  a  city  beyond  Jordan, 
where  they  lived  in  safety.  As  the  Mount  of  Olives  lay  in  their  way,  it  is  represented 
as  cleaving  into  two  lialves,  in  order  to  make  a  passage  for  them."  It  is  not  necessary 
to  suppose  that  the  Mount  of  Olives  was  thus  riven  asunder.  The  idea  is  that  the 
obstruction  to  their  escape,  though  formidable  as  a  mountain,  should  be  removed. 
Christ  had  said,  "  Let  them  which  be  in  Judasa  flee  untu  the  mountains,"  etc.  It  was 
their  duty,  therefore,  to  do  so.  And  here  is  promised  the  removal  of  every  obstruction. 
The  Almighty  would  give  them  every  facility  to  escape  to  the  refuge.  This  he  does 
for  our  suffering  race.  He  makes  a  way  for  their  escape.  He  makes  the  crooked 
places  straight,  and  the  rough  places  smooth.  The  way  for  their  escape  from  guilt, 
ignorance,  and  misery,  which  has  been  blocked  up  by  mountains  of  difficulties,  he  has 
made  straight.  The  mountains  have  been  cleft  asunder,  nay,  removed.  Christ  is  tht 
Way. 

ill.  Hk  pkovidbs  a  befdoe  for  tbbib  safety.  "And  ye  shall  flee  to  the  valley 
of  the  mountains ;  for  the  valley  of  the  mountains  shall  reach  unto  Azal :  yea,  ye  shall 
flee,  like  as  ye  fled  from  before  the  earthquake  in  the  days  of  Uzziah  King  of  Jiidah." 
Mark  here  three  things.  1.  The  scene  of  refuge.  "  Azal."  Where  is  this  "  Azal "  J 
No  one  knows.  Its  position  is  a  matter  of  pure  conjecture.  Nor  does  it  matter.  It 
was  some  asylum  to  secure  them  from  danger.  God  has  provided  a  refuge  for  sinners. 
We  are  exhorted  to  flee  to  the  Eel'uge  set  before  us  in  the  gospel.  2.  The  impulse  oj 
flight,  "  Like  as  ye  fled  from  before  the  earthquake  in  the  days  of  Uzziah  King  of 
Judah,"  3,  The  necessity  of  the  flight.  "  The  Lord  my  God  shall  come."  Provi- 
dential dispensation^  are  often  spoken  of  in  the  Scripture  as  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  ■ 
The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  is  spoken  of  as  his  coming,  and  hero  it  is  assureii  as  a 
certainty,  the  ruin  was  inevitable.  "  There  is  not  a  word,"  says  a  modern  expositor, 
"concerning  this  earthquake  as  spoken  of  in  Scripture  history."  The  only  other 
allusion  to  it  occurs  in  the  Book  of  Amos,  who  was  amongst  the  herdmen  of  Tekoa, 
"which  he  saw  concerning  Israel  in  the  days  of  Uzziah  King  of  Judah,  and  in  the  days 
of  Jerbboam  the  son  of  Joash  King  of  Israel,  two  years  before  the  earthquake,"  It 
must  have  been  something  extraordinary,  unusually  extensive  and  awful,  when  it  is 
thus  used  to  date  a  period,  and,  at  the  same  time,  as  having  occasioned  such  a  Bight 
from  the  destruction  wrought  by  it  as  to  render  it  a  suitable  comparison  for  the 
prophet  here.  Fear  was  to  be  their  inspiration  in  flight.  As  the  people  fled  panic- 
stricken  from  the  presence  of  the  earthquake  in  the  days  of  Uzziah,  they  were  to  flee 
from  the  dangers  at  Jerusalem.     "  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?  " 

Conclusion.  How  thankful  should  we  be  to  know  that  God  has  not  deserted 
humanity  in  its  sins  and  sorrows !  His  eye  is  on  it.  He  has  provided  a  Way  for  its 
escape,  and  a  safe  Befuge  to  which  it  should  flee.  Our  world,  bad  as  it  is,  is  not  a  God- 
deserted  world. — D,  T. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Bark  and  bright  periods  in  human  life.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
that  day,  that  the  light  shall  not  be  clear,  nor  dark :  but  it  shall  be  one  day  which 
shall  be  known  to  the  Lord,  not  day,  nor  night :  but  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  at 
evening-time  it  shall  be  light."  The  word  rendered  "clear"  is  in  the  margin 
"  precious,"  and  is  in  the  plural.  The  word  "  dark  "  here  is  in  the  margin  rendered 
"  thickness."  The  following  translation  by  Dr.  Henderson  gives,  I  think,  the  meaning: 
"  And  it  shall  be  in  that  day,  that  there  shall  not  be  the  light  of  the  precious  orbs, 
but  condensed  darkness.  But  there  shall  be  one  day,  it  is  known  to  Jehovah,  when  it 
shall  not  bo  day  and  night ;  for  at  the  time  of  the  evening  there  shall  be  light,"  We 
have  here  two  distinct  periods — one  of  unmitig  xted  distress,  the  other  of  uninterrupted 
prosperity. 


OH.  HV.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHAKIAH.  16S 


I.  Hebe  is  a.  period  of  unmitigated  distress.  "  Shall  not  be  clear  nor  dark," 
or,  as  it  is  rjndered,  "  condensed  darkness."  Dr.  Keil  gives  the  same  idea  as  Dr. 
Henderson,  "  And  it  will  come  to  pass  on  that  day,  there  will  not  be  light,  the  glorious 
ones  will  melt  away."  This  period  of  unmitigated  calamity  primarily  refers,  we  have 
no  doubt,  to  those  long  centuries  of  oppression,  cruelty,  mockery,  and  scorn,  to  which 
the  Jewish  people  have  been  subjected  ever  since  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  In  the 
predictions  of  Joel  (il.  31 ;  iii.  15)  referring  to  the  destruction  of  the  holy  city  and 
the  breakirig-up  of  the  Jewish  commonwealth,  the  period  is  referred  to  as  a  period  when 
"  the  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness,  and  the  moon  into  blood."  The  history  of 
the  Jews,  indeed,  for  eighteen  centuries  has  been  the  history  of  one  long  starless  night. 
Two  remarks  are  suggested  concerning  this  dark  day.  1.  Such  a  day  is  the  hard 
destiny  of  some  men.  It  is  so  with  individuals.  There  are  hundreds  and  thousands 
of  men  in  every  age  and  country  who  pass  through  life  from  its  beginning  to  its  close 
with  scarcely  a  ray  of  hope  or  a  beam  of  joy.  Their  life  is  a  day  of  darkness.  It  is  so 
with  some  nations.  The  history  of  some  nations  and  tribes  is  little  less  than  a  history 
of  crushing  oppression,  bloody  revolutions,  and  untold  cruelties,  and  sufferings.  The 
precious  orbs  are  seldom  if  ever  seen  in  their  political  heavens.  2.  Such  a  day  it 
deserved  hy  most  mxn.  All  men  are  sinners,  and  deserve  this  blackness  of  darkness 
for  ever.  The  very  tendency  of  sin,  in  fact,  is  to  quench  every  light  in  the  firmament 
of  the  soul.  Thank  God,  Christ  has  come  a  Light  to  the  world,  and  into  that  light 
during  our  stay  here  we  may  all  enter.  • 

II.  Hkbe  is  a  period  of  uninterrupted  joy.  "  But  it  shall  be  one  day  which 
shall  be  known  to  the  Lord,  not  day,  nor  night :  but  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  at 
evening-time  it  shall  be  light."  This  is  indeed  a  unique  day.  Even  when  evening 
might  be  anticipated,  "  it  shall  be  light."  1.  Such  a  day  as  this  is  destined  to  dawn 
on  every  ffood  man.  Heaven  is  a  scene  of  light.  No  clouds  of  ignorance  or  suffering 
obstruct  the  rays,  nor  will  the  sun  ever  go  down :  "  the  Lord  God  is  the  Light  thereof? 
2.  Such  a  day  as  this  is  destined  to  dawn  on  the  world  in  thefutv/re.  Some  expositors 
consider  that  the  millennium  is  here  pointed  to — that  long  bright  period  when  "  all  shall 
know  the  Lord  from  the  least  to  the  greatest."  This  period  is  promised,  and  it  must 
come ;  for  "heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  his  word  shall 
fail  to  be  accomplished."  When  will  it  come  ?  It  is  far  off,  I  know.  "  It  shall  be 
known  to  the  Lord ; "  "  It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  and  the  seasons,"  etc. 

Conclusion.  Are  there  not  dark  and  bright  days  in  every  good  man's  life  ?  There 
are  days  when  he  walks  in  darkness,  when  neither  sua  nor  star  appears ;  and  there  are 
days  too  when  all  is  cloudless  and  bright.  He  needs  the  dark  day  to  prepare  him  for 
the  full  appreciation  and  enjoyment  of  the  light.  As  the  earth  requires  the  dark  cold 
days  of  winter  as  well  as  the  bright  and  genial  days  of  summer,  iu  order  to  prepare  it 
to  yield  the  fruits  that  man  and  beast  require,  so  doth  the  human  soul  require  periods 
of  gloom  and  tempest  as  well  as  periods  of  brightness  and  calm. — D.  T. 

Ver.  8. — The  gospel  river.  "  And  it  shall  be  in  that  day,  that  living  waters  shall  go 
out  from  Jerusalem  ;  half  of  them  toward  the  former  sea,  and  half  of  them  toward  the 
hinder  sea  :  in  summer  and  in  winter  shall  it  be."  The  "  former  sea  "  here  means  the 
Dead  Sea ;  the  "  hinder  sea,"  the  Mediterranean.  The  great  populations  of  the  world 
lie  towards  the  west  of  Jerusalem,  and  these  are  to  be  refreshed  by  "  living  waters." 
Taking  the  passage  as  referring  to  the  gospel,  we  will  notice — 

I.  Its  nature  and  its  rise.  1.  Its  nature.  It  is  "  living  water."  Water  is  the 
most  precious  element  in  nature ;  it  may  be  regarded  as  the  source,  the  substance,  and 
the  sustenance  of  all  life.  But  then  it  is  not  so  precious  as  the  gospel.  The  gospel 
is  often  referred  to  in  Scripture  as  the  river  of  life,  the  pure  water  of  life.  It  is  a 
living  water.  Not  a  dead  lake  or  stagnant  pool,  but  a  living  stream.  2,  Its  rise.  "  It 
shall  go  out  from  Jerusalem."  The  gospel  might  be  said  to  have  commenced  at 
Jerusalem.  The  apostles  were  commanded  to  commence  there :  "  Beginning  at  Jeru- 
salem." In  Peter's  sermon  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  the  river  might  be  said  to  hav« 
broken  forth. 

II.  Its  diffusion  and  continuousness.  1.  Its  diffusion.  "  Half  of  them  toward 
the  former  sea,  and  half  of  them  toward' the  hinder  sea."  It  is  to  go  from  the  east  and 
from  the  west,  from  the  sun's  rising  to  its  setting.  The  gospel  is  for  all  climei.  It  is  world" 


170  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIaH.  [ch.  xiv.  1—21, 

wide  in  its  provisions,  adaptations,  and  claims.  2.  Oontinunusness,  "  Summer  and 
winter."  In  all  seasons  of  human  life,  intlividually  and  corporaiely.  (1)  It  is  constant 
in  the  fitness  of  its  supplies  for  human  wants.  Men,  through  all  changes,  in  all  places, 
and  through  all  times,  want  Divine  knowledge,  moral  purity,  heavenly  forgiveness, 
fellowship  with  the  Eternal.  The  man  will  never  he  born  who  will  not  require  these 
things.  (2)  It  is  constaut  in  the  fulness  of  its  supplies  fur  human  wants.  It  is  an 
inexhaustible  river.  After  countless  myriads  have  had  their  wants  supplied,  it  remains 
deep  and  full  as  ever.  (3)  It  is  constant  in  the  availableness  of  its  supplies  for  human 
wants.  Faith  is  the  great  condition  on  which  its  blessings  are  communicated,  and 
every  man  can  believe.  It  is  just  that  act  of  mind  that  comes  within  the  power  of  ths 
child  and  the  adult,  the  learned  and  the  rude,  the  savage  and  the  sage,  the  bond  and 
the  free,  to  perform.     How  obvious,  then,  our  duty  and  our  interest ! 

Conclusion.  How  profoundly  thankful  should  we  be  to  Almighty  Love  for  opening 
in  our  world  such  a  "living"  river  as  this!  and  how  earnest  should  we  be  in  our 
endeavours  to  let  its  waters  flow  into  every  heart  and  home  and  land,  the  world 
over!— D.  T. 

Vers.  9 — 11. —  2%e  coming  moral  reign  of  God  on  the  earth.  "  And  the  Lord  shall 
be  King  over  all  the  earth,"  etc.  The  subject  is  the  coming  moral  reign  of  God  on  the 
earth.  We  say  moral,  for  physically  he  reigns  everywhere.  Morally,  alas !  his  reign 
depends  upon  the  will  of  men,  and  th&t  will  is  hostile.  As  a  moral  Monarch,  the 
Almighty  has  to  be  chosen  by  his  subjects.  Three  things  are  suggested  in  the  text 
as  to  his  coming  moral  reign  on  the  earth. 

L  It  is  to  be  extensive.  "  And  the  Lord  shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth." 
Although  in  the  next  verse  "  all  the  earth  "  is  rendered  "  all  the  land,"  meaning  the 
land  of  Judsea,  we  are  authorized  to  believe  that  he  will  one  day  reign  over  all  the 
earth ;  that  all  souls  will  bow  to  his  influence,  as  the  ripened  fields  of  autumn  to 
the  winds  of  heaven.  His  kingdom  shall  come,  and  his  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is 
in  heaven. 

II.  It  is  to  be  exclusive.  "In  that  day  there  shall  be  one  Lord,  and  his  name 
One."  He  will  be  regarded  as  the  one  King  whose  laws  all  study  and  obey.  The 
great  question  of  all  souls  will  be,  "Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  No  other 
power  will  rule  the  soul  where  he  becomes  the  moral  Monarch. 

III.  It  will  be  benepicent.  "  All  the  land  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain  from  Geba 
to  Bimmon  south  of  Jerusalem."  'J'aking  vers.  10  and  11,  we  gather  at  least  two 
beneficent  results  of  his  moral  reign.  1.  The  removal  of  all  ohstruclions  to  the  river 
of  truth.  "The  land  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain  from  Geba  to  Rimmon,"  etc.  That  is, 
from  the  northern  to  the  southern  boundary  of  Judasa.  The  levelling  of  this  land 
would  not  only  leave  Jerusalem  conspicuous,  but  allow  the  "  living  waters "  to  have 
free  flow.  2.  The  elevation  and  estahlishment  of  the  good.  Jerusalem  is  here  repre- 
sented, not  only  as  being  raised  and  made  conspicuous,  but  as  settling  down  and 
dwelling  securely.  "  It  shall  be  lifted  up,  and  inhabited  in  her  place."  There  shall  be 
no  more  utter  destruction ;  Jerusalem  shall  be  safely  inhabited. 

Conclusion.  Who  will  not  pray,  "  Let  thy  kingdom  come,  and  thy  will  be  done  on 
earth  as  it  is  in  heaven"?  Let  God  reign  on  earth,  and  all  obstructions  to  the  progress 
of  truth  will  be  removed,  and  his  people  will  be  exalted  and  established  for  ever. — D.  T. 

Ver!!.  12 — 15. — The  elements  by  which  the  Divine  government  punishes  sin.  "  And 
this  shall  be  the  plague,"  etc.  In  the  third  verse  of  this  chapter  wo  are  told  that  "the 
Lord  shall  go  forth  and  fight  against  those  nations,"  that  is,  against  those  nations  com- 
prehended in  the  armies  which  destroyed  Jerusalem ;  and  we  have  elsewhere  endea- 
voured to  illustrate  how  God  punishes  bad  men  by  bad  men.  'This  passage  is  a 
further  illustration  of  the  idea.  There  are  three  elements  of  punishment  which 
Jehovah  is  represented  as  employing  in  these  verses — physical  diseases,  mutual  ani- 
mosity, and  temporal  losses. 

1.  Phtsical  diseases.  "  And  this  shall  be  the  plague  wherewith  the  Lord  will 
iraite  all  the  people  that  have  faught  against  Jerusalem;  their  flesh  shall  consume 
away  while  they  stand  upon  their  feet,  and  their  eyes  shall  consume  away  in  their 
holes,  and  their  tongue  shall  consume  away  in  their  mouth."    "This  description  o/ 


OH.  XIV.  1— ai,]  THE  BOOK  OF  ZEOHABIAH.  171 

the  plague-stricken  people,"  says  a  modem  author,  "  is  shocking,  but  it  ia  not  mor« 
than  what  actually  occurs  "  (see  Defoe's  '  Plague  of  London ').  Kingsley  sayi,  "  What 
BO  terrible  as  war  ?  I  will  tell  you  what  is  ten  times  and  ten  thousand  times  more 
terrible  than  war,  and  that  is  outraged  nature.  Nature,  insidious,  inexpensive,  silent, 
sends  no  roar  of  cannon,  no  glitter  of  arms,  to  do  her  work ;  she  gives  no  warning  not* 
of  preparation.  .  .  .  Man  has  his  courtesies  of  war  and  his  chivalries  of  war ;  he  does 
not  strike  the  unarmed  man ;  he  spares  the  woman  and  the  child.  But  Nature  .  ,  . 
spares  neither  woman  nor  child  .  .  .  silently  she  strikes  the  sleeping  child  with  as 
little  remorse  as  she  would  strike  the  strong  man  with  the  musket  or  the  pick-axe  in 
his  hand."  One  could  scarcely  imagine  a  more  revolting  condition  of  humanity  than 
is  here  presented — a  living  skeleton,  nearly  all  the  flesh  gone,  the  eyes  all  but  blotted 
oat,  the  tongue  withered.  Physical  disease  has  ever  been  one  of  the  instruments  by 
which  God  has  punished  men  in  this  world — pestilences,  plagues,  epidemics,  and  so  on. 
But  it  is  not  merely  a  plague  amongst  the  people,  but  also  amongst  the  cattle,  as  we 
see  in  ver.  16.  "  And  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  the  horse,  of  the  mule,  of  the  camel,  and 
of  the  ass,  and  of  all  the  beasts  that  shall  be  in  these  tents,  as  this  plague."  These 
words  remind  us  of  Byron's  description  of  the  destruction  of  Sennacherib's  host. 

"  And  there  lay  the  steed  with  his  nostril  all  wide. 
But  through  it  there  rolled  not  the  breath  of  his  pride; 
And  the  foam  of  bis  gasping  lay  white  on  the  turf. 
And  cold  as  the  spray  of  the  rook-beating  surf." 

II.  MuTUAii  AMiMosiTY.  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  a  great 
tumult  from  the  Lord  shall  be  among  them ;  and  they  shall  lay  hold  every  one  on  the 
hand  of  his  neighbour."  The  idea  is,  perhaps,  that  God  would  permit  such  circum- 
stances to  spring  up  amongst  them  as  would  generate  in  their  minds  mutual  misunder- 
standings, malignities,  quarrellings,  and  battlings.  "They  shall  lay  hold  every  one 
on  the  hand  of  his  neighbour."  "  Every  man's  sword  shall  be  against  his  brother." 
All  the  jealousies,  envyings,  contentions,  that  are  rife  in  society  may  be  regarded  as 
the  means  by  which  sin  is  punished.  Sin  punishes  sin,  bad  passions  not  only  work 
misery,  but  are  in  themselves  miseries. 

III.  TEMPORAL  LOSSES.  "  And  Judah  also  shall  fight  at  Jerusalem."  Not  against 
Jerusalem.  "  And  the  wealth  of  all  the  heathen  round  about  shall  be  gathered 
together,  gold,  and  silver,  and  apparel,  in  abundance."  Earthly  property  men  in  their 
imrenewed  state  have  always  valued  as  the  highest  good.  To  attain  it  they  devote 
all  their  powers  with  an  unquenchable  enthusiasm,  and  to  hold  it  they  are  ever  on  the 
alert,  and  their  grasp  is  unrelaxable  and  firm.  To  have  it  snatched  from  them  is 
among  their  greatest  calamities ;  and  how  often  this  occurs  in  society  1  By  what  we 
call  accidents,  by  a  commercial  panic,  legal  flaws,  chicaneries,  and  frauds,  rich  men 
frequently  are  deprived  of  their  wealth,  men  who  are.  born  in  palaces  often  die  in  a 
pauper's  hovel.  "  Riches  take  to  themselves  wings,  and  fly  away."  This  is  another 
way  in  which  Heaven  punishes  sin. 

Conclusion.  See  those  elements  of  retribution  working  everywhere  around  us.  They 
have  worked  through  all  history.  Because  they  are  common  we  do  not  note  them  as 
we  ought.  We  connect  them  not  with  the  Justice  that  reigns  over  the  universe. 
Albeit  they  are  penal  forces. — D.  T. 

Vers.  16 — 19. — The  public  worship  of  Jehovah.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,"  etc. 
Two  remarks  are  suggested  here  concerning  the  public  worship  of  Jehovah. 

I.  It  IS  A  DUTT  BINDING  ON  ALL  PEOPLE.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  every 
one  that  is  left  of  all  the  nations  which  came  against  Jerusalem  shall  even  go  up  from 
year  to  year  to  worship  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  to  keep  the  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles." "  Keil  thinks  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  is  mentioned  because  it  was  a  feast  of 
thanksgiving  for  the  gracious  protection  of  Israel,  in  its  wanderings  through  the  desert, 
and  its  introduction  into  the  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  whereby  it  foreshadows 
the  blessedness  to  be  enjoyed  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  in  rejecting  Koehler** 
observation  that  there  is  a  reference  to  the  feast  as  a  harvest  thanksgiving,  he  over- 
looks the  fact  that,  if  this  harvest  reference  is  not  recognized,  the  punishment  threatened 
In  the  next  verse,  the  absence  of  rain,  loses  its  appropriateness.  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles 


1T8  THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH.  [oh.  xit.  1—21, 

was  meant  to  keep  them  in  mind,  amidst  their  ahundant  harvests,  and  well-careil-for 
fields  and  vineyards,  that  as  in  the  desert  so  still  it  was  God  who  gave  the  increase. 
It  was  therefore  a  festival  most  suitable  for  all  the  nations  to  join  in,  by  way  of 
acknowledging  that  Jehovah  was  the  God  of  nature  throughout  the  earth,  however 
vario'is  might  be  the  aspects  of  nature  with  which  they  were  familiar.  Besides,  there 
can  be  little  doubt  that  by  the  time  of  Zeohariah,  and  probably  long  before,  this  feast 
had  become  a  kind  of  symbol  of  the  ingathering  of  the  nations  (John  iv.  35)  "  (Dr. 
Dods).  Whilst  the  thousands  neglect  public  worship,  not  a  few  argue  against  it,  they 
say  it  is  uncalled  for  and  unnecessary.  In  reply  to  this,  we  state,  where  there  is 
genuine  religion :  1.  Public  worship  is  a  natural  development.  The  being  we  love 
most  we  crave  an  opportunity  for  extolling;  we  want  that  all  shall  know  his  merits. 
If  we  are  really  religious,  we  love  God  supremely,  and  is  it  not  natural  to  declare  our. 
affection  in  the  presence  of  our  fellow-men  ?  2.  Public  worship  is  a  happy  development. 
What  delights  the  soul  so  much  as  to  hear  others  praise  the  object  we  love  the  most  ? 
This  at  once  gratifies  the  religious  instinct  and  the  social  love.  Every  true  worshipper 
in  the  great  congregation  can  say  it  is  a  good  thing  to  give  praise — ^it  is  a  happy 
thing.  3.  Public  worship  is  a  beneficent  development.  There  is  nothing  that  tends  so 
much  to  quicken  and  ennoble  souls  as  worship,  and  nothing  gives  such  a  vital  interest 
in  one  soul  for  another  as  public  worship.  In  genuine  public  worship  there  is  a  close 
coming  together  of  souls,  an  interblending  of  the  deepest  thoughts  and  the  purest 
sympathies,  a  kind  of  spiritual  amalgamation.  "  We  should,  therefore,  not  forsake  the 
assembling  of  ourselves  together." 

II.  Its  neglect  exposes  to  tebbible  calamities.  "  And  it  shall  be,  that  whoso 
will  not  come  up  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth  unto  Jerusalem  to  worship  the  King, 
the  Lord  of  hosts,  even  upon  them  shall  be  no  rain.  And  if  the  family  of  Egypt  go 
not  up,  and  come  not,  that  have  no  rain ;  there  shall  be  the  plague,  wherewith  the 
Lord  will  smite  the  heathen  that  come  not  up  to  keep  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  This 
shall  be  the  punishment  of  Egypt,  and  the  punishment  of  all  nations  that  come  not  up 
to  keep  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles."  Two  things  are  to  be  observed  here.  1.  The 
greatness  of  the  punishment.  "  Upon  them  shall  be  no  rain."  Now,  the  absence  of 
rain  involves  every  temporal  evil  you  can  think  of — famine,  pestilence,  loss  of  physical 
enjoyment,  loss  of  health,  loss  of  life.  2.  The  fitness  of  the  pu/nishment.  (1)  To  the 
offence.  "The  withholding  of  the  rain,"  says  Dr.  Dods,  "was  not  only  one  of  the 
ways  by  which  idolatry  and  apostasy  were  punished  under  the  theocracy,  but  it  wai 
the  appropriate  punishment  of  those  who  refused  to  acknowledge  Jehovah  as  the 
Giver  of  the  harvest.  This  suiting  of  punishment  to  offence  is  a  marked  characteristic 
of  God's  government,  and  should  probably  be  more  used  in  education  than  it  is  (e.g. 
by  secluding  for  a  time,  from  all  intercourse  with  his  companions,  the  boy  who  has 
told  a  lie,  and  so  on).  Dante  has  largely  utilized  the  principle  in  his  great  poem.  In 
his  vision  of  the  realms  of  punishment  he  saw  tyrants  immersed  in  blood ;  gluttons 
exposed  in  all  their  pampered  softness  to  a  sleety  tempest  of  cold,  diacolouredi  stinking 
hail ;  the  proud  bending  for  ever  under  heavy  burdens ;  schismatics,  who  have  rent  the 
Church,  themselves  cleft  asunder ;  those  who  had  pried  into  the  future,  and  professed 
prophetic  foresight,  with  faces  reversed,  unable  to  see  their  own  way."  (2)  To  the 
offender.  The  idea  of  not  having  rain  would  not,  perhaps,  terrify  the  Egyptians,  for 
they  had  the  Nile,  which  supplied  them  with  abundance  of  water.  Hence  a  plague 
is  threatened  to  them,  and  no  word  to  them  was  more  tenible  than  the  word  "plague." 
They  had  not  forgotten  the  ten  plagues  inflicted  on  them  in  the  time  of  Moses.  It 
was  a  land  of  plagues.  Thus  God  punishes.  But  mark,  the  punishment  was  to  come 
because  of  the  neglect  of  public  worship,  and  the  neglect  of  public  worship  is  punished : 
(o)  Now;  by  the  loss  of  the  highest  spiritual  enjoyments.  (6)  Hereafter;  by  the 
reproaching  of  conscience  and  the  banishment  from  all  good. — D.  T. 

Vers.  20,  21.— The  bright  future  of  the  world— the  reign  of  holiness.  "  In  that  day 
shall  there  be  upon  the  bells  of  the  horses,"  etc.  Looking  at  the  passage  as  a  portraiture 
of  the  future  of  the  world,  we  are  reminded  that  holiness  will  be  its  grand  character- 
istic. There  may  be,  and  no  doubt  there  will  be,  other  things — great  material  and 
mental  prosperity— but  holiness  will  be  its  sa/ient  feature.  The  holiness  will  be 
universal. 


OH.  inr.  1— 21.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ZECHARIAH.  173 

I.  It  will  embrace  the  afpairs  of  common  life.  "  In  that  day  ?hall  there  be 
upon  the  bells  of  the  horses."  It  was  commoa  amongst  ancient  natioas  to  have  bells 
on  horses  for  use  or  ornament,  or  perhaps  for  both.  It  is  said  that  in  Alexander's 
funeral  procession  the  horses  had  gold  bells  attached  to  their  cheek-straps.  "  Holiness 
unto  the  Lord,"  under  the  Law  of  Moses  had  been  inscribed  on  the  frontlet  of  the  high 
priest,  and  nowhere  else;  now  it  was  to  be  even  on  the  bells  of  the  horses,  the 
commonest  things  of  secular  life.  In  this  age  no  horses  will  be  employed  in  wars  and 
races,  they  will  only  be  employed  for  right  purposes  and  in  a  right  way.  The  men 
who  ride  and  drive  them  in  state  will  be  holy  men,  the  men  who  use  them  in  agricul- 
ture will  be  holy  men.  Horses,  which  for  ages  have  been  unrighteously  treated  and 
unrighteously  used,  in  that  day  will  be  properly  treated  and  properly  employed. 

II.  It  will  embrace  all  domestic  concerns.  "  Every  pot  in  Jerusalem  and  in 
Judah  shall  be  holiness  unto  the  Lord  of  hosts."  The  idea  is  that  holiness  will  extend 
even  to  the  minutest  concerns  of  domestic  life,  the  members  of  families  will  be  religious. 
The  very  pots  in  which  the  priests  cooked  their  food  should  be  as  sacred  as  the  bowls 
that  caught  the  victim's  blood.  Observe  (1)  that  the  distinction  between  the  sacred 
and  secular  is  to  be  abolished ;  but  (2)  not  by  separation  from  the  world,  nor  by 
making  all  things  secular,  but  by  making  all  things  holy,  by  carrying  into  all  occupa- 
tions the  spirit  and  delight  of  God's  presence.'  "  'Holiness  to  the  Lord'  is  not  to  be 
obliterated  from  the  high  priest's  mitre,  so  that  he  might  feel  as  little  solemnized  when 
putting  on  his  mitre  and  entering  the  holiest  of  all,  as  if  he  were  going  into  Ms  stable 
to  put  the  collar  on  his  horse ;  but  when  he  puts  the  collar  on  his  horse  and  goes  to  his 
day's  work  or  recreation,  he  is  to  be  as  truly  and  lovingly  as  one  with  God  aa  when 
with  incense  and  priestly  garments  he  enters  the  holy  of  holies"  (Dr.  Dods). 

III.  It  will  embrace  all  religious  characters.  "  In  that  day  there  shall  be 
no  more  the  Canaanite  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts."  "  By  '  Canaanite,' "  says 
Dr.  Heudersou,  "  is  meant  '  merchant.'  The  Phoenicians  who  inhabited  the  northern 
part  of  Canaan  were  the  most  celebrated  merchants  of  antiquity.  The  word  may 
fairly  be  regarded  as  standing  for  mercenary  men — men  animated  by  the  mercenary 
spirit."  Such  men  are  ever  to  be  found  in  connection  with  religion.  The  old  prophets 
bewailed  this  spirit.  It  was  found  in  the  earlier  ages  of  the  Christian  Church.  Men 
who  considered  "  gain  as  godliness,"  the  Canaanite  or  the  merchant,  do  not  necessarily 
belong  to  mercantile  life,  but  to  other  avocations  as  well,  and  even  to  the  priestly  life. 
Perhaps  the  mercenary  spirit  is  as  rife  in  priests  and  ministers  now  as  ever.  But  in 
the  coming  age  there  will  be  no  more  the  Canaanite — the  mercenary  man — in  the 
house  of  the  Lord ;  all  will  be  holy. 

Conclusion.  Hail,  blessed  age  I  May  the  chariot  of  time  quicken  its  speed,  and 
bring  this  blessed  age  to  this  world  of  depravity  and  sin  1 

Note:  This  closes  our  sketches  on  the  prophecy  of  Zechariah.  We  confess  that 
going  through  it  seriatim  we  have  found  in  various  passages,  expressions  and  allusions 
to  which  we  were  utterly  unable  to  put  any  clear  and  intelligible  interpretation. 
There  is  a  haze  more  or  less  over  the  whole  book,  and  our  endeavour  has  been, 
wherever  we  have  caught  a  glimpse  of  a  great,  practical  truth,  to  bring  it  out  ana 
work  it  into  the  service  of  soul-culture.  Though  we  may  have  failed  to  give  the  true 
meaning  to  many  passages,  we  know  that  we  have  not  intentionally  misinterpreted 
any  utterance,  or  turned  a  phrase  or  a  word  to  any  theological  or  ecclesiastical  pre< 
dilection,  if  indeed  any  such  we  have. — D.  T. 


HOMILETICAIi   INDEX 


THE  BOOK  OF  ZECHARIAH. 


CHAPTKR   L 

A  Timely  Waraing             ,„             ...  6 

A  Vision  of  Beit ...             ...             ...  6 

A  Vision  of  Merojr              •>•             •••  7 

A  Vision  of  Help...             ...             ...  8 

God's  Call  to  Bepenf-nTioe ...             ...  9 

Are  we  Better  than  our  Fathers  f  ...  10 

The  Transitoriness  of  Life                ...  U 

God's  Word  taking  hold     ...            ...  11 

The  Ohnroh  and  Christ      ...             ...  11 

The  Wonder  of  IndifEerenoe  ...  12 
The  Wrath  of  God  and  the  Wrath  of 

Man  ...             ...             ...             ...  12 

The  Dark  and  the  Bright  Side  of 

Things              ...             ...             ...  18 

The  Importance  of  Bepentanoe  ...  12 
The  First  Vision  :  God'a  Gorernment 

of  the  World    ...             ...             ...  14 

Second  Vision ;  Fonr  Horni>  and  Four 

Carpenter*        ...              ...              ...  16 


OHAPTEB  n. 

A  Vision  of  Safety              ...            ...  19 

A  Promise  of  Triumph      ...             ...  20 

The  Benefits  of  God's  Presence       ...  21 

Measuring  the  Churoh       ...             ...  22 

The  Exiles'  Betnro             ...             ...  23 

The  Joys  of  the  Churoh  in  her  Great 

Head...             ...             ...             ...  23 

Third  Vision  ;  an  Interesting  Future 

tor  the  World  ...            23 

Sonl-Ezae            24. 

The  Joy  of  the  Millennial  Churoh   ...  26 


CHAPTEB  ni. 

The  Priesthood  restored    ...  ...  31 

The  Priesthood  eclipsed     ...  ...  32 

Satan  and  Christ...  ...  ...  33 

Three  Things  which  concern  the  Soul  33 

A  Picture  of  Christ  and  the  Soul     ...  34 
"If"   and   "Then;"  or,   the   Great 

Things  of  God's  Promises  ...  34 

Portents  ...  ...  ...  34 

Messiah's  Mission  ...  ...  35 

The  Good  Man  on  Earth  in  his  Inter- 
cessory Function  ...  ...  35 

The  Bible  and  True  Greatness         ...  37 
The  World's  Wants  and  God's   Pro- 

Tisions  ...  ,„  ...  87 


OHAPTEE  IV. 

The  Ohnroh  rerired  .„  ,.,  42 

The  Church  sustained       ...  ...  43 

The  Church  in  Three  Aspect!  ...  44 

On  Seeing  ...  ...  ...  44 

The  Learner  and  the  Learned  ...  45 

The  Secret  of  Power  ...  ...  45 

Encouragement  to  Christian  Workers  46 
Man  as  a  Student  of  the  Divine  Be- 

relation  and  a  Doer  of  Dirino  Work  46 
The    Olive    Trees    and   the    Candle- 
sticks ;  Model  Beligious  Teachers  48 

CHAPTEB  V. 

The  Beassertion  of  the  Law  ...  51 

The  Vindication  of  Law     ...  ...  K3 


INDEX. 


Uelribatiun  ,,,  ,„  „,  63 

Worldliness  io  the  Church  ...  54 

The  Flying  Boll :  Divine  Betribntion  64 

A  Matarialistio  Oommanity  ...  55 

OHAPTBE  VX 

The  Ministry  of  Angels     ...  ,..  60 

The  Ministry  of  Messiah    ...  ,.,  61 

The  World  mled  in  the  Interest  of 

Christianity      ...  ...  ...  63 

"Messiah  the  Prince"       ...  ...  63 

God's  GoTemment  of  the  World      ...  63 

The  Matchless  Man  in  History        ,.,  66 

OHAPTEB  VII. 

Hypocrisy  nnmasked         .„  ...  69 

Hypocrisy  warned  ...  ...  70 

God  and  Men       ...  ...  ...  72 

Sliall  we  fast  P     ...  ...  ...  72 

God's  Edncation  of  the  People         ...  72 

The  History  of  Ungodliness  ...  73 

Baligions    Beliefs    that  are    Bight  j 

Beligions  Serrices  that  are  Wrong  78 

Beligion,  Gtonnine  and  Spnrioni      ,,,  76 

OHAPTEB  Vm. 

Aasnranoe  of  Faronr  ...  ...  78 

Evidence  of  Favonr  ...  ...  80 

Pre-eminent  Favonr  ...  ...  81 

The  Future  Glory  of  the  Chnrcli  ...  82 
The  Soul's  Besponse  to  the  Gospel 

Call 83 

Bight  Bepresentation         ...  ...  83 

The  Blessed  Community  of  Men  yet 

to  appear  on  the  Earth  ...  ...  83 

A  Twofold  Divine  Bestoration         ...  85 

A  Divine  Call  to  a  Divine  Work  ...  85 
A    Universal    Bevival    of    Genuine 

Beligion  ,.<  ...  ...  87 


OHAPTEB  EC 

A  Visitation  of  Judgment.., 

... 

96 

A  Visitation  of  Mercy        ... 

t«. 

96 

A  Joyful  Kingdom             ,„ 

tn 

97 

A  Successful  Campaign     ,., 

•«. 

98 

God's  Judgments                „• 

99 

The  Ideal  King  ...             ...             ...  99 

The  Advent  of  the  King    ...             ...  100 

The  Sinner  in  Three  Aspects           ...  100 

Victory  through  God         ...             ...  100 

The  Dark  and  the   Bright   Side  of 

God's  Bevelation  to  Mankind       ...  100 

The  Ideal  Monarch  of  the  World  ...  102 
Historical     Facts     lUnstratioDS    of 

Spiritual  Bealities     '     ...             ...  103 

God  works  amongst  the  Nations  in 

the  Interests  of  his  Foople           ...  104 


OHAPTEB  X. 

The  Secret  of  Victory       ...             „,  109 

The  Bestoration  of  Israel  ...             ...  110 

Prayer  for  Temporal  Blessings        ...  Ill 

Parable  of  the  Bain           ...             ...  Ill 

God's  Visits  to  his  People ...            ...  Ill 

The  Strength  of  States      ...             ...  Ill 

Bedemption         ...             ...             ...  112 

The  Hand  of  God  in  Jewish  History  112 

The  Great  Exodus              ...             ...  112 

Manliness              ...              ,,.              ...  113 

The  True  Life      ...              ...              ...  113 

God  in  Jlelation  to  the  Good  and  the 

Bad US 

Victory,  Unification,  and  Blessedness 

for  the  Good    ...             ...             „.  lit 


CHAPTEB  H. 

A  Final  Warning...            ...             ...  121 

A  Final  Opportunity          ...             ,„  123 

A  Picture  of  Antiehrist     ...             ...  124 

Grief  for  the  Fall  of  a  Leader         ...  126 
Oppressors  and  Oppressed               126,  129 

The  True  Shepherd            ...             ...  126 

The  Two  Staves  ...             ...             ...  126 

The  Evil  Shepherd  ...  ,.,  126 
The  Oedars,  Fir  Trees,  and  Oaks  of 

Society             ...            ...            ...  127 

Bad  Men  in  High  Office    ...             ...  128 

A  TeiTiblo  Doom,  and  an  Invaluable 

Privilege           ...             ...             ...  ISO 

A  Mutual  Dislike  between  God  anri 

Man ..,             ...  laO 

Divine  Bejeotlon.,,             ...             ...  131 

A  Model  Spiritual  Teacher              ...  182 

Fraudulent  Shepherds  of  the  People  13J 


INDEX. 


CHAPTER  XIL 


iBsn 

FAOK 

A  Wonderfnl  Siege 

.. 

.     137 

A  Wonderfnl  People 

••             • 

.     138 

Wonderfnl  Sorrow 

•■             • 

.     139 

The  Secnrity  of  Zion 

• 

,     141 

True  Greatnesa   ... 

•I             • 

.     141 

The  Great  Mourning 

•■ 

.     141 

The  Univeree 

••             ■ 

.     141 

Bin  Self-Puniahmenl 

•  •             ■ 

.     142 

A  Good  Time  for  Good  Pe( 

>ple 

.     143 

Penitential  Sorrow 

••            ■ 

.     144 

OHAPTEE  XIIL 

The  End  of  Sin    .^ 

The  End  of  Error 

A  Wonderful  Sentence 

The  Foantain  of  Grace 

The  Sword 

The  GoBpel  Age  .., 

God'a  Goremment  of  the  World 


..     148 

..     149 

.     150 

..     151 

..     152 

..     152 

World     . 

..     164 

OHAPTEE  XIV. 

THBn  PAGI 

A  Signal  Bevelation           ...             ...  160 

A  Wonderfnl  Day               ...             ...  162 

A  Regenerate  World          ...             ...  163 

LesBons  of  the  Earthquake                ...  164 

The  Day  of  Days                ...            ...  164 

Living  Waters     ...             ...             ...  165 

The  Elevation  of  Zion       ...             ...  165 

The  Great  Harvest- Home ..,            ...  166 

A  Sketch  on  Bad  Men       ...             ...  166 

God  in  Relation  to  a  Suffering  World  167 
Dark  and  Bright  Periods  in  Human 

Life   ...             ...             ...             ...  168 

The  Gospel  River                ...             ...  169 

The  Coming  Moral  Reign  of  God  on 

the  Earth          ...            ...             ...  170 

The  Elements  by  which  the  Divine 

Government  punishes  Sin              ...  170 

The  Public  Worship  of  Jehovah  ...  171 
The  Bright  Future  of  the  World— the 

Reign  of  Holiness          ...            „.  179 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 
AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

MALACHI. 

(Ejeposition ; 
By  REV.  W.  J.  DEANE,  M.A., 

RECTOR  OF  ASHEN  ; 

igomiletics : 
By  rev.  E.   S.   PROUT,  M.A. 

Igomilies  bg  Oarions  !^ntl)ors : 

REV.  R.  TUCK,  B.A.  REV.   D.  THOMAS,   D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yoke  and  Toronto. 


THE    BOOK    OF    MALACHI. 


INTRODUCTION. 


§  I.   Subject  of  the  Book. 

Thii  reformation  effected  by  Nehemiah  in  the  earlier  part  of  hiB  adminis- 
tration liad  been  maintained  by  his  own  personal  influence  and  political 
authority;  and  when  the  strong  hand  of  the  governor  was  for  a  time 
removed,  old  abuses  revived,  and  even  some  new  laxities  and  transgressions 
were  added.  In  the  thirty-second  year  of  Artaxerxes  (b.c.433-2)  Nehemiah 
had  been  recalled  to  Babylon  or  Susa,  either  because  his  furlough  had  expired, 
or  because  he  had  to  make  further  arrangements  for  the  prolongation  of 
his  command,  or  simply,  as  was  the  Persian  custom,  to  give  an  account 
of  his  actions,  which  had  been  unfavourably  represented  at  court.  On 
his  return  at  the  end  of  two  or  three  years  (Neh.  xiii.  6),  he  found  great 
cause  for  sorrow  and  anxiety.  Advantage  of  his  absence  had  been  taken 
by  the  latitudinarian  party  in  the  commonwealth  to  return  to  those  evil 
practices  and  that  open  disregard  of  the  Law  which  he  had  so  severely 
reprobated  twelve  years  before.  Ezra  was  probably  dead,  as  no  further 
mention  is  made  of  him  after  Nehemiah's  second  return  from  the  Persian 
court;  and,  losing  the  support  of  this  wise  and  single-hearted  scribe, 
Nehemiah  would  have  had  to  stem  the  torrent  of  laxity  and  profaneaess 
alone,  had  not  God  raised  up  the  Prophet  Malachi  at  this  crisis.  As  Haggai 
and  Zechariah  had  animated  the  spirits  and  rebuked  the  faint-heartedness 
of  the  earlier  pilgrims,  so  now  Malachi  comes  forward  to  assist  Nehemiah 
in  this  new  reformation  by  boldly  and  unflinchingly  reproving  the 
delinquencies  of  priest  and  people,  and  announcing  the  great  day  of  judg- 
ment. A  prophet  was  indeed  needed  at  this  moment.  The  spirit  of 
Pharisaism  and  Sadduceeism,  which  in  after-years  worked  such  ineradicable 
mischief,  had  already  begun  to  exhibit  its  evil  propensities.  On  the  one 
hand,  the  perfunctory,  outward  observance  of  ritual  acts  with  no  inward 
repentance  or  devotion,  was  considered  to  be  all  that  religion  could  claim, 
all  that  was  needed  for  acceptance ;  on  the  other,  a  widespread  scepticism 

ILILAOHI.  h 


INTBODUOTION  TO 


was  sapping  all  morality,  and  teaching  men  to  live  impiously  and  Belfishly. 
The  promises  set  forth  by  the  earlier  prophets  bad,  as  they  reflected,  not 
been  falfiUed ;  they  were  still  in  a  depressed  and  humble  position ;  and, 
contrasting  their  present  state  with  the  splendid  prospect  spread  before 
them  in  the  restored  theocracy,  they  murmured  against  God,  and  questioned 
his  providence  and  his  power.  They  were  impatient  for  some  display  of 
his  judgment  on  the  Gentiles,  and,  not  seeing  this,  they  presumed  to  doubt 
the  righteousness  of  his  rule  and  ordering.  In  their  impatience  they  forgot 
that  it  was  their  own  negligence,  infidelity,  and  manifold  transgressions 
that  withheld  God's  blessings  from  them.  They  might  also  have  observed 
that  the  brilliant  future  predicted  was  not  promised  as  immediately  ta 
succeed  the  return  from  captivity ;  on  the  contrary,  many  intimations  were 
given  that  a  long  interval  lay  between  the  prophecy  and  its  complete 
fulfilment.  Against  this  evil  spirit  of  unbelief  Malachi  had  to  contend ; 
and  how  vigorously  he  performed  his  part,  a  review  of  his  book  will  clearly 
show. 

The  book  is  divided  into  four  chapters  in  the  Authorized  Version,  the 
Greek,  Latin,  Syriac,  and  Arabic  Versions ;  the  Hebrew  combines  our  third 
and  fourth  chapters  into  one.  But  neither  arrangement  exactly  suits  the 
distribution  of  the  subject-matter,  which  is  usually  (after  Ewald)  divided 
into  three  parts,  consisting  respectively  of  ch.  i.  2 — ii.  9;  ch.  ii.  10 — 16; 
and  ch.  ii.  17  to  the  end.  Though  thus  artificially  distributed,  the  prophecy 
is  one  whole,  and  forms  one  continuous  address,  combined,  it  may  be,  from 
many  utterances. 

The  prophet  begins  by  showing  Jehovah's  love  for  Israel,  and  proving  it 
by  recalling  to  memory  the  differing  destinies  of  Jacob  and  Esau,  how  that 
the  descendants  of  the  latter  had  suffered  ruin  and  desolation,  while  the 
Israelites  had  experienced  favour  and  protection  in  the  past,  and  should  be 
still  more  blessed  in  the  future  (ch.  i.  1 — 5).  Yet  they  had  not  responded 
to  his  love ;  yea,  the  very  priests  had  been  foremost  in  offending  him,  by 
polluting  his  altar  and  offering  unworthy  sacrifices ;  these  offerings  God 
wholly  rejects,  demanding  such  pure  offering  as  that  which  shall  be 
presented  in  the  time  of  Messiah.  But  the  priests  have  performed  their 
office  in  a  mercenary  and  perfunctory  spirit,  and  have  learned  to  despise 
the  worship  of  God ;  therefore,  unless  they  repent,  they  shall  be  punished 
with  curse  and  rejection;  and  then,  to  demonstrate  how  far  they  have 
erred  from  the  right  path,  the  prophet  sketches  the  portrait  of  the  true 
priest,  such  as  God  would  have  him  to  be  (oh.  i.  6— ii.  9).  The  second 
part  reproves  the  heathen  marriages  of  priests  and  people.  In  defiance  of 
the  Law,  and  regardless  that  they  were  thus  profaning  the  covenant,  they 
had  repudiated  their  own  legitimate  wives  in  order  that  they  might  marry 
the  daughters  of  the  idolatrous  heathen.  The  Hebrew  wives  had  wept  and 
laid  their  cause  before  the  Lord,  and  he  hears  them,  and  will  vindicate 
his  own  institution  (ch.  ii.  10—16).  The  third  part  introduces  God  as  the 
God  of  judgment.   The  people  had  thought  to  go  on  their  way  unpunished ; 


TUB  BOOK  OF  MALAOHL 


but  the  Judge  shall  oome  at  a  time  when  they  look  not  for  him,  and  shall 
punish  evil-doers,  executing  swift  judgment  upon  those  who  violate  their 
duty  to  God  and  their  neighbour,  and  separating  from  them  the  righteous, 
that  the  land  may  be  purified  and  refined.  Did  the  people  complain  that 
God  was  tardy  in  executing  his  promises  ?  Let  them  see  the  cause  in  their 
own  transgressions,  their  many  rebellions  against  his  authority,  their 
neglect  of  tithes  and  offerings.  If  they  did  their  duty,  he  would  reward 
them  with  fertility  and  abundance.  They  had  dared  to  say  that  it  was  a 
vain  thing  to  serve  God ;  they  had  confounded  good  and  evil ;  but  the 
Lord  oared  for  the  pious,  and  would  bring  them  to  glory,  while  he  con- 
demned the  wicked  as  stubble  to  the  fire.  Therefore  let  all  men  observe 
the  Law  of  Moses,  and  let  them  look  for  the  coming  of  the  great  day  of 
judgment,  and  the  graoious  appearance  of  the  Lord's  messenger  Elijah  the 
prophet  (ch.  ii.  17 ;  iv.  6). 

The  distinctive  character  of  the  Messianic  prophecies  in  this  book 
consists  in  the  announcement  of  the  second  Elijah,  who  should  precede  the 
advent  of  the  Messenger  of  Jehovah,  the  Messiah  himself,  and  in  the 
statement  of  the  universal  and  everlasting  nature  of  Christ's  sacrificial 
offering  and  mediatorial  o£Sce.  Combined  with  these  two  declarations  is 
the  account  of  the  effects  dependent  on  the  advent  of  Messiah.  That 
appearance  shall  be  a  day  of  fire,  consuming  the  evil,  purging  away  the 
dross,  and  making  men  fit  to  offer  acceptable  sacrifice ;  it  will  be  also  a  day 
«f  light,  bringing  health  and  joy  to  those  who  fear  God. 

§  II.   Author  and  Datb. 

The  name  Malachi  is  found  nowhere  else  in  Scripture.  The  LXX.,  in 
the  title,  calls  him  MaXaxfa^.  It  is  probably  contracted  from  Malachijah, 
and  means,  "Messenger  of  Jehovah."  Such  abbreviations  are  not 
uncommon.  'Thus  we  find  Abi  for  Abijah  (2  Kings  xviii.  2 ;  2  Chron.  zxix. 
1);  Phalti  for  Phaltiel  (1  Sam.  xxv.  44;  2  Sam.  iii.  15).  So  probably 
Zahdi  is  the  same  as  Zabdiel,  Uri  as  Urijah.  Absolutely  nothing  is  known 
of  his  history ;  and  as  the  Septuagint  (ch.  i.  1)  reads,  instead  of  "  by  the 
hand  of  Malachi,"  Iv  x"/*'  ayyeXov  avrov,  "  by  the  hand  of  his  messenger," 
many  have  doubted  whether  the  name  is  that  of  a  person  or  of  an  ofSce,  an 
appellation  given  to  an  ideal  messenger  of  God.  Origen  held  that  the 
book  was  written  by  an  angel;  others  have  argued  that  Malachi  was  a 
pseudonym  for  Ezra,  who  was  the  real  author  of  the  work,  though  one 
would  have  thought  that  the  style  and  diction  of  the  two  writers  were 
sufficiently  distinct  to  obviate  any  such  supposition,  and  it  is  hardly 
possible  that  the  authorship  of  so  distinguished  a  man  should  have  been 
forgotten  when  the  canon  was  arranged.  Besides,  to  all  the  prophetical 
books  the  writer's  own  name  is  prefixed.  The  use  of  a  pseudonym 
«r  a  symbolical  name  is  unknown ;  and  the  authenticity  of  the  oon- 
tonta  of  the  prophecy  is  always  testified  by  the  naming  of  the  anthoc 


IT  CNTBODUOTION  TO 


as  one  known  to  his  contemporaries  and  approved  by  God.  Malaohi, 
therefore,  is  certainly  a  real  person ;  and  though  there  is  no  description  of 
him  in  his  book,  neither  his  parentage  nor  his  birthplace  being  mentioned, 
yet  the  same  omission  occurs  in  the  case  of  Obadiah  and  Habakkuk,  of 
whose  personality  no  doubt  has  ever  arisen.  That  the  histories  of  Ezra 
and  Nehemiah  contain  no  notice  of  him  or  his  prophetical  work  is  easily 
accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  he  exercised  his  ministry  on  or  jfist  before 
Nehemiah's  second  visit  to  Jerusalem,  of  which  we  have  only  the  barest 
and  most  summary  account  (Neh.  xiii.  7 — 31).  From  his  trenchant 
references  to  the  priesthood  it  is  conjectured  that  he  was  a  member  of  that 
body;  but  there  is  nothing  further  to  support  the  notion.  The  absence  of 
all  authentic  information  concerning  Malachi  has  been  supplied  by  tradi- 
tion. The  Talmud  states  that  he  was  a  member  of  the  great  Kynagogue, 
as  Haggai  and  Zechariah  had  been;  and  Pseudo-Dorotheus  and  Pseudo- 
Epiphanius  assert  that  he  was  born  in  Sopha,  or  Supha,  in  the  tribe  of 
Zebulun,  and  died  there  while  still  young.  No  particulars  of  his  life  have 
been  handed  down  even  in  mythical  narrative. 

The  general  period  of  Malachi's  appearance  as  a  prophet  is  easily  deter- 
mined; but  the  definition  of  the  exact  date  has  some  difSculties.  It  is 
plain,  from  the  contents  of  the  prophecy,  that  it  was  delivered  when  the 
Captivity  was  well-nigh  forgotten,  and  after  the  temple  was  rebuilt  and 
its  worship  liad  been  for  some  time  duly  established  ;  it  is  also  evident 
that,  as  the  prophet  complains  of  tlie  inferior  offerings  brought  by  the 
people,  the  time  of  the  royal  grant  made  to  Ezra  (Ezra  vii.  20 — 26)  had 
expired,  and  the  necessary  sacrifices  were  supplied  by  the  inhabitants 
themselves.  This  was  done  without  dispute  or  apparent  reluctance  in  the 
earlier  part  of  Nehemiah's  administration,  according  to  the  engagement 
introduced  by  him  (Neh.  x.  32,  etc.).  No  mention  of  any  infringement  of 
the  resolution  then  passed  is  made  in  the  Book  of  Ezra ;  so  it  seems  most 
probable  that  the  abuses  named  crept  in  after  Ezra's  death,  and  during  the 
time  when  Nehemiah  was  absent  at  the  court  of  Persia  (Neh.  xiii.  6), 
which  may  have  been  an  interval  of  two  or  three  years.  That  Malaohi 
prophesied  during  this  interregnum,  or  at  any  rate  at  a  period  when 
Nehemiah  was  not  acting  as  governor,  has  been  deduced  from  the  ex- 
pression in  oh.  i.  8,  where,  rebuking  the  people  for  daring  to  sacrifice 
imperfect  animals,  he  says,  "  Offer  it  now  to  thy  governor ;  will  he  be 
pleased  with  thee,  or  accept  thy  person?"  Nehemiah,  it  is  contended, 
prided  himself  on  never  having  taken  anything,  even  his  dues  as  viceroy, 
from  the  people;  therefore  the  governor  here  mentioned  must  be  some 
other  person.  But  this  is  by  no  means  a  necessary  conclusion.  The  self- 
denying  practice  referred  to  belongs  to  the  early  years  of  his  administra- 
tion,  and  may  not  apply  to  his  later  governorship.  Further,  the  refusal 
to  be  burdensome  to  his  countrymen  did  not  extend  to  the  non-acceptance 
of  presents,  without  which  no  Oriental  would  come  for  a  formal  interview 
with  a  superior ;  and  the  prophet  might  weU  ask  whether  they  would  dan 


THE  BOOK  OF  MALACUI. 


to  make  snoli  offerings  to  a  governor,  without  any  special  reference  to  a 
particular  personage.  But  although  we  cannot  build  any  theory  of  date 
on  this  expression  of  the  prophet,  there  is  other  internal  evidence  which  is 
more  determinate.  The  great  point  is  that  the  abuses  rebuked  by  him  are 
just  those  against  which  Nehemiah  had  to  contend.  Both  of  them  denounce 
the  corruption  of  the  priests  in  marrying  alien  wives  (oomp.  ch.  ii.  11 
with  Neh.  ziii.  23) ;  the  withholding  of  the  appointed  tithes  from  the 
Levites  (ch.  iii.  8  and  Neh.  xiii.  10) ;  the  neglect  of  and  dishonour  done 
to  the  temple,  and  its  services  (ch.  i.  12,  13  and  Neh.  xiii.  4,  5,  11);  the 
repudiation  of  legitimate  wives  (oh.  ii.  15,  16  and  Neh.  xiii.  23,  27,  whence 
it  may  be  easily  concluded  that  these  foreign  marriages  were  accompanied 
with  divorce  and  cruelty).  It  is  true  that  Malaohi  does  not  expressly 
name  the  desecration  of  the  sabbath,  against  which  Nehemiah  made  such 
strict  regulations  (Neh.  xiii.  15 — 22),  but  he  denounces  the  infringement 
of  the  Law  in  the  offering  of  blemished  victims,  and  we  cannot  doubt  that 
this  was  only  one  instance  of  the  same  spirit  which  led  to  the  breaking 
of  the  sabbath.  Thus  it  seems  that  the  prophet  and  the  civil  ruler  are 
contending  against  the  same  evils,  and  endeavouring  in  their  different 
vocations  to  draw  the  people  to  amendment. 

From  the  above  considerations  we  may  conclude  that  Malachi  exercised 
his  ministry  during  the  time  of  Nehemiah's  second  visit  to  Jerusalem, 
B.C.  430-420. 

Thus  Malachi  is  the  last  of  the  prophets,  the  author  of  the  final  book  of 
the  Hebrew  canon,  and  named  by  Jewish  authorities  "  the  seal  and  end 
of  the  prophets."  He  exercised  his  ministry  a  hundred  years  later  than 
Haggai  and  Zechariah.  We  may  here  note  that  the  twelve  minor 
prophets  cover  a  period  of  four  centuries — a  space,  as  Farrar  remarks, 
nearly  equal  to  that  from  Chaucer  to  Wordsworth. 

§  III.  General  Character  of  the  Work. 

Some  critics  have  characterized  Malachi's  style  as  "  pedantic,  forced,  and 
barren ; "  but  we  cannot  assent  to  their  somewhat  inconsiderate  verdict. 
In  contrast  with  some  other  prophetical  works,  Malachi's  writings  may  be 
considered  to  be  prosaic,  and  to  hold  an  inferior  position,  but  they  have 
an  excellency  and  orginality  of  their  own  which  acquit  them  of  all  such 
charges  as  those  above.  The  great  peculiarity  of  the  style  consists  in 
the  use  made  of  interrogation  and  reply.  A  dialogue  is  introduced  between 
Grod  and  the  people  or  priests ;  the  questions  of  objectors  or  complainants 
are  stated,  amplified,  and  finally  answered  with  withering  scorn  by  the 
mouth  of  the  prophet.  Thus  he  is  rather  a  reasoner  than  a  poet;  he 
exhibits  the  calmness  of  the  practised  orator  rather  than  the  fire  and 
energy  of  earlier  seers.  But  there  are  tokens  that  he  is  still  influenced 
by  the  ancient  prophets,  and  with  all  his  methodical  and  artificial  fornu 
he  models  himself  upon  his  predecessors.     Simple,  smooth,  concise,  hia 


yl  tSTBODUCmOS  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  MALA(ML 

diotioB  is  eaay  to  onderBtaud;  if  he  does  not  lue  to  the  gnmdeur  and 
power  of  other  prophets,  he  is  always  polished  and  elegant,  and  at  times 
even  remarkably  eloquent.  The  sketch  of  the  character  of  the  ideal  priest 
(oh.  ii.  fi — 7)  is  a  passage  of  eminent  beaaly;  and  there  are  a  few  other 
places  of  equal  excellenoe. 

I  rV.   LiTEBATDBI. 

AsMBg  the  most  umAiI  commentaries  on  Malacki  may  be  cited  these  of  CkjiUuM 
(Besteck,  1668) ;  Eimcfai  and  Jarchi, '  Commentaiii,'  Interprete  S.  M.  De  Unis  (PiiM, 
1618);  Stock  (London,  1641);  Sclater  (London,  1660);  Pocock,  'Work%'  yoL  L; 
Yenema  (Leov.,  1769);  Bahrdt  (Leipzig,  1768)  ;  Fischer,  with  notes  on  the  Septuagint 
YereioB  ^ipsig,  1779) ;  Packard, '  Book  of  Malachi  expounded '  (Edinburgh) ;  Reink«^ 
'Dsr  Fre]diet  Malachi '  (GKessen,  1852, 1856);  Eoehlwr  (Erlangen,  1866);  Dr.  Samuel 
eei,  in  ToL  iii.  of  The  Bible  Educator.' 

{  T.    ABBANflnHEBT  OF  THB  BOOK  JM  BSOTIONS. 

The  bo^  Is  most  oonveniently  divided  into  three  parts. 
'  Part  L  (Ch.  i. — ii.  9.)    Beproof  of  the  priests  for  neglect  of  DiTine  serries. 
S  1.  (Ch.  i.  1.)    Heading  and  author. 

S  2.  (Ch.  i.  2 — 5.)    The  prophet  declares  God's  special  lore  for  IsraeL 
{  3.  (Ch.  i.  6 — 14.)    Israel  had  shown  no  gratitude,  and  the  priests  had  been  the 

chief  offenders  by  offering  defective  sacrifices  and  profaning  the  temple-worship. 
{  4.  (Ch.  ii.  1 — 4.)    The  priests  are  threatened  with  punishment. 
{  5.  (Ch.  ii.  6—9.)     In  contrast  with  these,  the  character  of  the  true  priest  is 

sketched. 
Part  II.  (Ch.  iL  10 — 16.)  Condemnation  of  priests  and  people  for  alien  marriages  and 

for  oiTorces. 
Pari;  m.  (Ch.  ii.  17— iv.  6.)    The  day  of  the  Lord. 
{  1.  (fM,  ii.  17 — ^iiL  6.)    The  faithless  people  doubted  Ghid's  proTldenoe,  but  the 

prophet  announces  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  judgment,  preceded  by  his 

messenger.    He  shall  refine  his  people  and  exterminate  sinners. 
i  2.  (Ch.  iii  7 — 12.)    God  is  faithful  to  his  promises,  but  the  people  have  been 

shamefully  negligent  in  the  matter  of  tithes  and  offerinp;  let  them  amend  their 

practice,  and  they  shall  be  blessed. 
f  8.  (Ch.  iii.  13 — 18.)    The  impious  murmuring  of  the  people  is  contrasted  with 

the  conduct  of  those  who  fear  Ood,  and  the  reward  of  the  pioos  is  set  forth. 
$  4.  (Ch.  iv.  1 — 3.)    The  final  separation  of  the  evil  and  the  good  at  the  day  of 

judgment. 
§  6.  (Ch.  iv.  4 — 6.)    Concluding  admonition  to  remember  the  Law,  lest  they  should 

be  liable  to  the  curse,  to  avert  which  the  Lord  would  send  Elijah  to  promote  ■ 

ohaoge  of  heart  in  the  nation  before  his  coming. 


THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHI. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTbA  1. 
Ver.  1 — oh.  ii.  9. — ^Part   I.  Befboof  of 
rH>  Pbiebtb  fob  Keoleot  of  Divine  Seb- 

TIOB. 

Ver.  1. — §  1.  Heading  and  avihor.  The 
burden  (Zech.  ix.  1 ;  xii.  1 ;  gee  note  on 
Nah.  i.  1).  The  word  of  the  Lord  is  heavy 
and  full  of  threats,  but,  as  St.  Jerome  notes, 
it  is  also  consolatory,  because  it  is  not 
"  against "  but  to  Israel.  By  this  name  the 
whole  covenanted  nation  is  designated,  here, 
perhaps,  with  some  idea  of  reminding  the 
people  of  Jacob's  faith  and  patience,  and 
stimulating  them  to  imitate  their  great 
ancestor.  By  Ualaohi;  literally,  hy  Vie 
hand  of  Malachi  (comp.  Jer.  xxxvii.  2). 
That  Malachi  is  the  proper  name  of  the 
prophet,  and  not  a  mere  official  designation, 
see  tlie  proof  in  the  Introduction,  §  II. 
The  LXX.  renders,  ii/  x^^P^  ayyeKou  avrov, 
"  by  the  hand  of  his  angel,"  or  "  messenger," 
and  some  curious  theories  have  been  founded 
on  thiij  translation  ;  e.g.  that  an  angel  was 
the  real  author  of  the  book,  or  came  and 
explained  it  to  the  people.  A  similar 
legend  once  obtained  concerning  Haggai, 
called  "  The  Lord's  Messenger  "  (Hag.  i.  13). 
At  the  end  of  the  verse  the  LXX.  adds, 
"  fix  it  in  your  hearts,"  wiiich  Jerome  sup- 
poses to  have  been  imported  hither  &om 
Hag.  ii.  15. 

Vers.  2 — 5 — §  2.  The  prophet  declaret 
Ood'i  tpeeial  lave  for  Jtrad. 

Ver.  2. — ^I  have  loved  you.  The  prophet, 
desiring  to  bring  home  to  the  people  their 
ingratitude,  lays  down  his  thesis ;  then,  in 
his  characteristic  manner,  repeats  the  ob- 
jection of  the  sceptics  in  an  interrogatory 
form,  and  refutes  it  by  plain  argument. 
God  had  shown  his  love  for  Israel  by 
electing  them  to  be  his  people,  and  by  bis 
treatment  of  them'during  the  whole  course 

MALAOBI. 


of  their  history.  Wherein  hast  thou  loved 
us  J  This  was  the  inward  feeling  of  the 
people  at  this  time.  They  doubted  God's 
love  and  faithfulness.  Events  had  not 
turned  out  as  they  expected.  They  hsid, 
indeed,  returned  from  captivity,  and  the 
temple  was  rebuilt ;  but  none  of  the  splendid 
things  announced  by  the  prophets  had 
come  to  pass.  They  were  not  great  and 
victorious;  Messiah  had  not  appeared. 
Therefore  they  repined  and  murmured; 
they  were  ungrateful  for  past  favours,  and 
questioned  God's  power  and  providence. 
Wiis  not  Esau  Jacob's  brother  1  God  re- 
futes tlieir  unjust  charge  by  referring  them 
to  a  palpable  fact,  viz.  the  different  fate  of  ■ 
the  descendants  of  the  twtn-bruthers,  Esau 
and  Jacob.  How  miserable  the  destiny  of 
the  Edomites  (  how  comparatively  fortunate 
the  condition  of  the  Israelites  I  Tet  I  loved 
Jacob. 

Ver.  3. — And  I  hated  Esau.  St.  Paul 
quotes  these  words  (Rom.  ix.  13)  in  order 
to  illustrate  his  position,  '•  that  the  purpose 
of  God  according  to  election  might  stand, 
not  of  works,  but  of  him  that  calleth." 
Even  before  his  birth  Jacob  was  the  chosen 
one,  and  Esau,  the  elder,  was  to  serve  the 
younger.  This  mystery  of  Divine  election 
has  seemed  to  some  to  be  stated  so  harshly 
that  they  have  thought  that  the  words  of 
the  text  need  to  be  sol'tened,  or  to  be 
modified  by  thoir  explanation.  Thus  they 
give  the  glosses,  "I  have  preferred  Jacob 
to  Esau ; "  "I  have  loved  E»au  less  than 
Jacob ; "  or  they  have  limited  the  terms 
"  love  "  nnd  "  hatred  "  to  the  bestowing  or 
withholding  of  temporal  blessings ;  or  they 
have  affirmed  that  Esau  was  hated  because 
God  foresaw  liis  nnwortliiness,  and  Jacob 
was  beloved  owing  to  his  foreseen  piety  and 
faithfulness.  The  whole  question  is  dis- 
cussed bv  Augustine,  ■  De  Div.  Qussst.  ad 
Simplio.,'  i.  18  (xi.  433).  He  ends  by  saying, 
"  Deus odit  impietatem :  in  aliisetiam  j^uuit 


THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHL 


[CH.  L  1 — 14. 


per  damnationem,  in  aliis  adimit  per  jus- 
tifloationem."    But  Malacbi  is  not  speak- 
ing of  the  predestination  of  the  one  brother 
and  lie  reprobation  of  the  other ;  he  is  con- 
trasting the  histories  of  the  two  peoples 
represented  by  them;   as  Jerome  puts  it, 
"  In  Jacob  vos  dilezi,  in  Esau  Idumssos  odio 
habui."    Both  nations    sinned ;    both    are 
punished;  but  Israel  by  God's  free  mercy 
waa  forgiTen  and  reartored,  while  Edom  was 
left  in  the  misery  which  it  had  brought  upon 
itself  by  its  own  iniquity.     Thus  is  proved 
God's  love  for  the  Israelites  (Knabenbauer). 
That  it  is   of  the  two  nations  that  the 
prophet   speaks,  rather   than  of  the  two 
brothers,  is  seen  by  what  follows.    Laid  his 
moontains  .  .  .  waste.     While  the  Israelites 
were  repeopling  and  cultivating  their  land, 
and  their  cities  were  rising  from  their  ruins, 
and  the  temple  and  the  capital  were  rebuilt, 
Edom,  which  had  suffered  at  the  hand  of 
the  same  enemies,  had  never  recovered  from 
the  blow,  and  still  lay  a  scene  of  desolation 
and  ruin.     It  seems  that  Nebuchadnezzar 
attacked  and   conquered  Edom    some  few 
years  aft«r  he  had  taken  Jerusalem.    This 
event  happened  during  one  of  his  expedi- 
tions   against    Egypt,  one  of   which  took 
place  in  the  thirty-seventh  year  of  hisreign^ 
as  we  learn  from  a  record  lately  deciphered 
(see  '  Transact,  of  Soo.  of  Bibl.  Archaeology,' 
vii.  210,  etc.).    (For  Edom  and  its  history, 
see  the  Introduction  to  Objdiah.)    Dragons  j 
rather,  joc&aZs  (Micah  i.  8) ;  Septuagint,  ei's 
Sdiiara    ipiiinov,    "for    habitations    of    the 
desert ;  "  Vulgate,  dracones  deserti,  whence 
the  Authorized  Version. 

Ver.  4. — Whereas ;  rather,  if,  or  although ; 
Vulgate,  quod  si.  If  Edom  were  to  attempt 
to  repair  its  desolation,  the  Lord  would  not 
permit  it — a  striking  contrast  to  the  national 
restoration  of  Israel.  We  are  impoverished ; 
or,  as  the  Revised  Version,  we  are  heaten ; 
Septuagint,^  'ISovfiala  icttTcirTpairTai, " Idu- 
mea  has  been  overthrown."  Vulgate, 
destructi  sumus.  The  desolate  places ;  Vul- 
gate, quas  deetructa  sunt,  places  once  in- 
habited and  now  deserted.  Compare  the 
boast  of  the  Bphraimites  (Isa.  ix.  9,  10). 
I  will  throw  down.  Edom  never  recovered 
its  power;  it  became  the  prey  of  the  Per- 
sians, the  Nabatheans,  the  Jews  under  the 
Maceabec  s,  the  Macedonians,  the  Bomans; 
and  finally  the  Mohammedan  conquest 
effected  its  utter  ruin.  They  (Tjwn)  shall 
call  them,  The  border  of  wickedness.  Edom 
shall  be  called,  "  The  territory  of  iniquity," 
its  miserable  condition  attesting  the  wicked- 
ness of  the  inhabitants  thus  punished  by 
Divine  justice.  Hath  indignation;  Sep- 
tuagint, irapar^taKTai,  "hath  been  set  in 
battle  array ; "  St.  Jerome,  "  My  anger  is 
proved  by  their  enduring  desolation ;  and  in 
oontnst  to  the  evils  experienced  by  your 


brother,  ye  shall  experience  the  goodness  of 
God  towards  you." 

Ver.  5. — ^Yonr  eyes  shall  see.  Jacob  is 
addressed.  When  you  see  these  proofs  of 
God's  love  for  you,  you  shall  leave  off 
murmuring  and  be  ready  to  praise  God 
for  his  goodness  and  power.  The  Lord  will 
be  magnifled;  better,  the  Lord  is  great; 
Septuagint,  'Efi.fya\iyeri  Kipios,  "  The  Lord 
was  magnified."  God  makes  his  greatness 
known.  Trom  (over}  the  border  of  Israel, 
This  means  either  beyond  the  limits  of 
Israel,  i.e.  in  all  the  world,  or  upon  Israel, 
t.«.  by  the  protection  which  he  vouchsafes 
to  Israel. 

Vers.  6 — 14. — §  3.  Israel  had  ihotm  no 
gratitude  for  all  these  proofs  of  God's  love,  and 
the  very  priests  had  been  the  chief  offenders 
hy  offering  defective  sacrifices,  artd  profaming 
the  temple-worship, 

Ver.  6. — A  sonhononreth  his  father.  The 
prophet  commences  with  a  general  principle 
which  every  one  allows,  and  argues  from 
that  what  was  the  attitude  which  tiicy 
ought  to  assume  towards  God.  A  father. 
God  was  the  Father  of  Israel  by  oreution, 
election,  preservation,  watchful  guardian- 
ship (see  ICxod.  iv.  22 ;  Ueut.  xxxii.  6 ;  Isa. 
Ixiii.  16  ;  Ixiv.  8,  etc.).  My  fear.  The  fear, 
respect,  reverence,  due  to  mc.  0  priests. 
He  addresses  his  reproof  to  the  priests, 
as  the  representatives  nf  tlie  people,  and 
bound  to  lead  them  to  obedience  and  holi- 
ness, and  to  be  a  pattern  to  the  flock. 
Wherein  have  we  despised  thy  Name  1  The 
priests  have  grown  so  callous,  and  have  so 
obscured  true  religion  by  Pharisaical  ex- 
ternalism,  that  they  profess  to  be  utterly 
unconscious  how  they  have  shown  contempt 
of  God.  The  Name  of  God  is  God  himself 
and  all  that  has  to  do  with  him. 

Ver.  7. — ^Te  offer  polluted  bread  (food) 
upon  mine  altar.  The  prophet  answers  the 
priests  simply  by  detailing  some  of  their 
practices.  The  "  bread  "  (leehem)  is  not  the 
sbewbread,  which  waa  not  offered  on  the 
altar,  but  the  flesh  of  the  ofl'ered  victims 
(see  Lev.  iii.  11,  16;  xxi.  6;  xxii.  25). 
This  was  "polluted"  in  that  it  was  not 
offered  in  due  accordance  with  the  cere- 
monial Law,  as  is  further  explained  in  the 
next  verse.  Wherein  have  we  polluted 
theel  They  did  not  acknowledge  the 
truth  that  (as  St.  Jerome  says)  "when 
the  sacraments  are  violated,  he  himself, 
whose  sacraments  tbey  are,  is  violated " 
(oomp,  Ezek.  xiii.  19 ;  xx.  9 ;  xxxix.  7). 
The  table  of  the  Lord  is  contemptible.  This 
was  the  thought  of  their  heart,  if  they  did 
not  give  open  expression  to  it  in  words. 
The  "table  of  the  Lord"  (ver.  12)  is  the 
altar,  on  which  were  laid   tiie  sacrifices, 


CH.  I.  1 — 14.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  MALACHL 


regarded  as  the  food  of  God,  and  to  be 
eaten  by  the  fire  (Ezek.  xli.  22;  xliv.  16). 
They  showed  that  they  despised  the  altar 
by  fancyiog  that  anything  was  good  enough 
for  offering  thereon,  as  the  next  verse 
explains. 

Ver.  8.— If  ye  offer  the  blind.  The  Law 
ordered  that  the  victims  should  be  perfect 
and  without  blemish  (see  Lev.  xxii.  19 — 25). 
Is  it  not  evil  ?  It  is  more  forcible  to  read 
this  without  the  interrogation,  "It  is  no 
evil  I "  and  to  regard  i  t  as  the  priests'  thotight 
or  word,  here  introduced  by  the  prophet  in 
bitter  irony.  Their  conscience  had  grown  so 
dull,  and  they  had  become  so  familiarized 
with  constant  dereliction  of  duty,  that  they 
saw  no  wrong  in  these  violations  of  the  Law, 
and  never  recalled  the  people  to  their  duty 
in  these  matters.  Oifer  it  now  unto  thy 
governor.  The  word  for  "  governor "  is 
pechah,  as  in  Hag.  i.  1  (where  see  note). 
It  dienotes  a  ruler  set  over  a  province  by  a 
Persian  king.  As  Nehemiah  had  refused 
to  be  burdensome  to  the  people  (Neh.  v. 
14 — 18),  it  is  thought  that  Malaohi  must 
have  written  this  when  some  other  person 
was  acting  as  governor.  But  Neliemiah's 
generosity  was  exhibited  in  his  earlier 
administration,  and  he  may  have  thought 
it  right  to  take  the  dues  under  a  more 
prosperous  state  of  affairs.  The  prophet 
may  be  putting  the  case  generally — Would 
you  dare  offer  such  things  to  your  governor  ? 
At  any  rate,  the  question  is  not  about  pro- 
visions and  dues  supplied  to  the  governor 
and  liable  to  be  exacted  by  him  in  his 
oflScial  capacity,  but  about  voluntary  offer- 
ings and  presents,  without  which  no  inferior 
would  presume  to  appear  before  his  prince 
(see  Introduction,  §  II.).  To  offer  to  such  a 
one  what  was  mean  and  defective  would  be 
nothing  less  than  an  insult;  and  yet  they 
thought  this  was  good  enough  for  God. 
Accept  thy  person.  Regard  thee  witli  favour 
(Gen.  xix.  21 ;  Job  xiii.  10;  xlii.  8). 

Ver.  9.— Beseech  God ;  literally,  the  face 
nf  God.  This  is  not  a  serious  call  to  re- 
pentance, but  an  ironical  appeal.  Come 
now  and  ask  the  favour  of  God  with  your 
polluted  sacrifices;  intercede,  as  is  your 
duty,  for  the  people;  will  he  accept  you? 
will  ho  be  gracious  to  the  people  for  your 
sakes?  This  hath  been  by  your  means. 
These  words  form  a  parenthesis,  implying 
that  it  was  from  the  priests  that  the  evil 
custom  of  offering  blemished  animals  pro- 
ceeded, and  they  were  answerable  for  the 
consequences ;  that  their  intercessions  were 
vain  was  the  result  of  their  transgressions 
in  these  matters.  Others  interpret,  "  The 
thing  depends  on  yon,"  i.e.  whether  God 
shows  favour  or  not.     Will  he  regard  your 

CBons  1     Will  he  show  favour  to  any  one 
ause  ye  inteicede  for  him  7    Bo  it  might 


be  translated,  Will  he  accept  any  betauM 
of  you  1 

Ver.  10.  —  The  prophet  continues  hii 
severe  reprobation  of  the  priests.  Who  ia 
there  even  among  you  that  would  shnt  the 
doors  for  naught,  etc.  ?  Thus  rendered,  the 
passage  rebukes  the  mercenary  spirit  of 
the  priests,  wlio  would  not  even  shut  the 
temple  door  nor  kindle  the  altar  fire  unless 
they  were  paid  for  it ;  or  else  it  means  that, 
though  all  the  officers  of  the  temple  were 
remunerated  for  their  most  trivial  services, 
yet  they  were  remiss  in  attending  to  their 
duties,  and  neglected  the  law  of  sacrifices. 
The  Latin  Version  omits  the  negative  in 
the  last  clause,  Quis  est  in  vobia  qui  claudat 
ostia,  et  incendat  altare  meum  gratuito  f 
The  LXX„  with  some  little  variation  in  the 
reading,  renders,  Aniri  xal  ey  i/uy  a-vyKKeiSii' 
trovTai  Bvpai,  Kol  ovk  aydtf/erai  rh  BvtruurTifpiiy 
ixov  Sapsdv,  "  Wherefore  also  among  yon  the 
doors  shall  be  shut,  and  my  altar  shall  not 
be  kindled  for  nothing,"  i.e.  God  threatens 
that  the  temple  services  shall  wholly 
cease.  But  it  is  best  to  consider  the  passage 
as  continuing  the  sarcastic  strain  of  the 
preceding  verse,  and  saying  in  effect  that 
it  would  be  better  to  have  no  pretence  of 
worship  at  all  than  to  have  it  thus  profaned. 
Translate  as  in  the  Revised  Version,  Oh  that 
there  were  one  among  you  that  would  shut 
the  doors,  that  ye  might  not  kindle  fire  on 
mine  altar  in  vain  I  The  doors  are  those 
of  the  inner  court  of  the  temple,  where  the 
great  altar  stood ;  and  the  polluted  sacrifice 
is  offered  "  in  vain,"  because  it  offends  God 
rather  than  propitiates  him.  An  offering 
(minehah).  Here  not  sacrifice  in  general,  as 
many  commentators  suppose,  because  it 
would  be  unnatural  to  take  the  word  in 
one  sense  in  this  verse,  and  in  a  different 
sense  in  the  following,  where  it  is  con- 
fessedly used  in  its  restricted  signification. 
The  term  is  applied  technically  to  the 
offering  of  fine  fiour  combined  with  oil  and 
firankincense,  burnt  on  the  altar  (Lev.  ii.  1, 
etc. ) ;  though  it  is  also  occasionally  used  even 
of  bloody  sacrifices ;  e.g.  of  Abel's  (Gen.  iv. 
4;  comp.  1  Sam.  ii.  17).  As  liturgically 
employed,  it  denotes  the  unbloody  offering. 
So  in  this  verse  we  may  note  a  kind  of 
climax.  God  would  not  accept  the  victims 
sacrificed,  no,  nor  even  the  meat  offering, 
which  was  naturally  pure  and  unpolluted, 

Ver.  11. — My  Name  shnll  be  great.  The 
course  of  thought  is  this :  God  does  not 
need  the  worship  of  the  Jews  and  their 
impious  priests ;  lie  needs  not  their  maimed 
sacrifices;  his  majesty  shall  be  recognized 
throughout  the  wide  world,  and  pure  wor- 
ship shall  be  offered  to  hiin  from  every 
nation  under  heaven.  How,  then,  shall  ha 
not  punish  those  who,  being  his  elect,  ought 
to  have  been  an  example  of  holiness,  and 


THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHl. 


[OH.L  1—14- 


prapaied  the  way  for  his  universal  reception  ? 
The  LXX.  treats  this  oiroumstanoe  as 
already  occurring  at  this  time,  lh  ivoni 
ixmi  SeSrifairTai,  "  My  Name  hath  been  and  is 
glorified."  This  oonld  only  be  said  if  it 
was  allowed  that  the  heathen  in  some  sense, 
however  blindly  and  imperfectly,  did  worship 
the  true  God.  But  the  notion  cannot  be 
upheld  for  a  moment ;  and  there  is  a 
general  consensus  of  commentators  in  re- 
ferring the  time  to  the  Messianic  future, 
when  God's  power  is  acknowledged  and 
warship  offered  to  him,  not  in  Jerusalem 
alone,  but  in  every  place.  The  participles 
in  ibis  verse  may  be  rendered  by  presents 
or  futures,  but  there  can  be  little  doubt 
that  a  prophecy  is  intended,  and  not  a 
statement  of  a  fact — which,  indeed,  could 
not  be  truthfully  maintained.  When  such 
a  future  is  in  store,  is  this  a  time  for  Jewish 
priests  to  dishonour  Jehovah?  Incense  sliall 
be  offered  unto  my  Name,  and  a  pure  offering 
(tniflcha/t).  The  universal  worship  is  ex- 
pressed in  the  terms  of  the  Jewish  ritual 
(see  note  on  Zeph.  iii.  10).  The  Hebrew  is 
more  forcibly  rendered,  In  every  place 
ineen$e  it  burned,  oblation  made  unto  my 
Name,  and  indeed  a  pure  oblation.  Incense 
is  to  our  minds  a  type  of  prayer  (Rev.  v.  8 ; 
viii.  3,  etc.);  the  pure  oblation  is  the  symbol 
of  the  Christian  sacrifice  of  praise  and 
thanksgiving;  and  the  prophet,  rising 
superior  to  Jewish  prejudices,  announces 
that  this  prayer  and  sacrifice  shall  no  longer 
be  confined  to  one  place  or  one  specially 
favoured  country,  but  be  universal,  world- 
wide. The  Fathers  and  medisBval  writers, 
and  many  modem  commentalors,  see  in  this 
verse  a  prophecy  of  the  Holy  Eucharist, 
the  "  pure  offering "  commemorative  of 
Oliiist's  sacrifice,  which  is  found  in  every 
nation  under  heaven  where  the  Kame  of 
Christ  is  adored. 

Ver.  12— But  ye  have  profaned  it;  ye 
profane  God's  Name.  The  prophet  contrasts 
the  negligence  and  profanity  of  the  priests 
with  the  piety  of  the  Gentile  nations,  which 
he  foresees.  The  table  of  the  Lord  (see  note 
on  ver.  7)  The  fruit  thereof,  even  his  meat. 
The  food  and  meat  of  the  altar  are  the 
victims  offered  thereon.  By  their  conduct 
the  priests  made  both  altar  and  offerings 
contemptible.  Septuagint,  Ta  imTiSe/jLeva 
^ovSiviorat  fipdjixara  outoC,  "  Its  meats  that 
are  laid  thereon  are  set  at  naught ; "  Vulgate, 
Quod  luperpoiiitur  contemptibile  est,  cum 
ifne  qui  illud  devorat.  This  ia  either  a  free 
paraphrase,  or  for  "  meat "  Jerome  must  have 
read  ■  participle,  "  eating,"  aud  taken  "  that 


which  eats"  the  offering  to  be  the  fire  which 
consumes  it,  as  "  lick  up  "  (1  Kings  xviii .  S8). 
Others  explain  the  Yulgate  to  mean  that 
the  priests  complain  of  the  scantiness  aad 
inferiority  of  the  victims,  the  flesh  of  which 
formed  their  support.  Bat  ets  this  was 
owing  to  their  own  neglect,  they  were  not 
likely  to  make  it  a  subject  of  complaint. 

Ver.  13. — What  a  weariness  is  it  I  The 
reference  ia  to  the  table  of  the  Lord. 
Despising  the  altar,  and  performing  their 
duties  without  heart  or  faith,  the  priests 
found  the  services  an  intolerable  burden. 
Vulgate,  eeee  de  Idhore,  which  seems  to  be 
an  excuse  of  the  people,  urging  that  they 
offer  such  things  as  their  toil  and  poverty 
allow.  Septuagint,  ravra  ix  KaKOimSelas 
l(rri,  which  has  much  the  same  meaning. 
The  present  Hebrew  text  is  represented  by 
the  Authorized  Version.  Ye  have  snuffed 
at  it ;  i.e.  at  the  altar.  The  phrase  expresses 
contempt.  "It"  has  been  supposed  to  be 
a  "  scribes'  correction  "  for  "  me."  The 
Septuagint  and  Syriao  give,  "  I  snorted  at 
them."  That  which  was  torn ;  rather,  that 
which  wai  taken  by  violence — ^that  whioh 
was  stolen  or  unjustly  taken.  Septuagint, 
apTriy/xara:  Ecclus.  xxxiv.  18  (xxxi.  21), 
"  He  that  sacrificeth  of  a  thing  wrongfully 
gotten,  his  offering  is  ridiculous  (jie/utKri- 
liivri)."  Lame  .  .  .  sick  (see  Xiov.  xxii.  19 
— 25).  Thus  ye  brought  an  Qtring  the)  offer- 
ing (minohaft).  Subjertto  analogous  defects 
is  even  your  meat  offering,  the  accessory  to 
other  sacrifices,  and  therefore  it  is  unaccept- 
able. 

Ver.  14. — But  (and)  cursed  be  the  deoeiver. 
The  curse  is  fulminated  against  all  who  are 
guilty  of  these  violations  of  the  Law.  The 
prophet  mentions  two  instances  out  of  many. 
The  first  is  of  one  who  offers  a  female  victim, 
on  pretence  that  he  has  no  male  in  his  flock. 
This  will  be  clearer  if  we  translate,  with 
Keil,  "And  cursed  is  he  who  deceives, 
whereas  there  is  in  his  flock  a  male  animal." 
Septuagint,  "  Cursed  is  he  who  was  able  and 
bad  in  his  flock  a  male."  And  Toweth  . ,  . 
a  oorrnpt  (JolemUiied)  thing.  "The  second 
case  is  of  one  who  in  some  emergency  vows 
an  offering,  and  then  pays  it  by  presenting 
a  blemished  animal  (Lev.  iii.  1,  6).  With 
a  slightly  altered  punctuation,  some  editors 
give,  "  a  faulty  female."  For  I  am  a  great 
King.  This  is  the  reason  that  they  are 
cursed  who  dishonour  him.  Dreadful.  Held 
in  awe  and  reverence.  Septuagint,  im^aris, 
"  notable."  He  whom  the  Gentiles  honour 
will  not  permit  his  own  people  to  profiuia 
his  Name. 


OH.  L  1—14.],  THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHI. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — Malachi  and  Ms  burden.  I.  Malachi,  the  last  of  the  fbophetb  of  the 
Old  Testament.  He  may  be  compared  to :  1.  A  late  evening  closing  a  long  day  of 
light  and  blessing,  and  which  is  itself:  2.  A  midsummer  twilight  in  some  northern 
latitude,  bearing  on  its  bosom  the  new  and  still  brighter  day  of  the  gospel.  3.  A 
finger-post  pointing  across  an  untrodden  waste  of  time  in  the  direction  in  which  the 
ages  should  move  onwards  towards  the  advent  of  their  expected  King.  4.  A  faithful 
minister,  the  last  of  a  noble  succession,  resigning  his  trust  ^the  prophetic  gift),  but 
bidding  his  flock  expect  to  "  see  greater  things  than  these,  and  expiring  with  the 
gospel  on  his  lips  (oh.  iv.  2 — 6). 

II.  The  pbophet's  burden.  Any  word  of  the  Lord  is :  1.  A  burden  of  responsibility 
to  the  bearer  (1  Cor.  ix.  16, 17).  Especially  so  are  messages  of  judgment  with  which 
Malachi  was  charged.    So  Jeremiah  felt  f  Jer.  xv.  10 — 21 ;   xx.  8 — 10),  and  Paul 

SPhil.  iii.  18),  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (Luke  xix.  41 — 14),  It  is  thus  a  test  of 
delity  (Prov.  xxx.  6 ;  Ezek.  iii.  17 — 21)  and  of  courage  (Micah  iii.  8).  2.  Messages 
of  judgment  should  be  felt  to  be  burdens  by  the  sinner  because  they  proceed  from  a 
God  to  whom  judgment  is  "  a  strange  work,"  yet  who  hates  sin  more  than  suffering, 
and  whose  holiness  is  seconded  by  his  omnipotence.  Only  by  repentance  toward  God 
and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  can  the  buiden  be  changed  into  a  beatitude, 
the  curse  into  a  blessing, 

Ters.  2—6. — The  sovereign  love  of  Qod.    Remembering  that  the  scriptural  sense  of 
"  hate  "  in  this  and  corresponding  passages  is  to  love  less  in  comparison,  or  to  reject ' 
when  there  is  a  competition  of  claims,  we  nevertheless  learn  from  this  passage — 

I,  That  God's  love  to  individual8  ^nd  to  nations  is  a  boyerbion  love.  By 
this  we  mean  that  it  is  a  love  which  bestows  special  favours,  for  reasons  which  cannot  be 
discovered  in  those  that  .enjoy  them,  but  in  the  gracious  purpose  of  God.  1.  In  the 
case  of  the  two  brothers  personally  we  note  the  following  facts  :  Esau  was  the  elder, 
yet  not  the  heir  of  the  promise.  He  suffered  at  the  hands  of  a  brother  in  some  respects 
less  noble  than  himself.  He  thus  lost  his  father's  chief  blessing  and  had  to  take  the 
remnants,  and  to  be  satisfied  with  a  poorer  inheritance,  while  Jacob  received  "  the  glory 
of  all  lands,"  2.  The  two  nations,  Israel  and  Edom,  were  separated  like  two  rivers 
issuing  from  the  same  fountain,  the  one  destined  to  be  a  highway  of  commerce  and  a 
source  of  fertility,  the  other  to  be  lost  in  the  sands  of  the  desert,  Israel,  blessed  with  a 
priesthood,  a  succession  of  prophets,  and  a  covenant  "  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,"  in 
spite  of  many  apostasies ;  Edom,  allowed  to  drift  into  idolatry  and  crime  till  it  became 
known  as  "  the  border  of  wickedness,"  etc.  (ver,  4),  Such  gifts  and  calling  of  God 
cannot  be  annulled  any  more  than  his  sentences  of  judgment  can  be  reversed  (ver.  4). 
In  those  judgments  and  in  those  mercies  men  shall  see  the  finger  of  God,  and  shall 
stand  in  awe  of  the  glory  of  God  (ver,  5).  These  truths  applicable  to  God's  dealings 
with  nations  now.  3.  The  salvation  of  individuals  is  no  less  the  result  of  sovereign 
love,  inasmuch  as  the  very  beginnings  of  spiritual  life  are  of  God,  and  are  "  according  to 
his  own  purpose  and  grace,"  etc,  (2  Tim.  i.  9).  Election  is  not  "  an  order  of  merit," 
but  a  cord  of  love.  The  experience  of  all  Christians  confirms  the  doctrine  of  God's 
sovereignty  in  salvation,  though  it  cannot  answer  the  many  questions  suggested  by 
God's  varied  dealings  with  individuals,  or  explain  the  reasons  of  his  eternal  purposes. 
Note  St.  Paul's  "conclusion  of  the  matter"  (Bom.  xi,  33—36). 

II.  That  this  unmerited  love  op  God  mat  be  ignored  bt  the  beobivers. 
"  Wherein  hast  thou  loved  us  ?  "  This  may  arise  from :  1.  Forgetting  past  mercies  under 
the  presence  of  present  trials,  like  Israel  (Ps.  cvi.  12 — 14).  2.  Forgetting  our  present 
blessings  as  contrasted  with  the  lot  of  others.  3.  Having  an  imperfect  sense  of  our 
Absolute  dependence  on  the  unmerited  mercy  of  God  (Deut.  vii.  7,  8).  4.  And  there- 
fore taking  even  our  spiritual  blessings  very  much  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  indulging 
in  self-complacency  rather  than  cultivating  grateful  humility  in  view  of  "  the  love  of 
GJod  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord"  (cf.  1  Cor.  iv.  7,  8). 

Ver.  6. — 2%«  reverence  due  to  Ood,    Earthly  analogies  to  Divine  relationships  ars 


THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHI.  [oh.  i.  1—14. 


iDstructive  though  imperfect.  Neither  the  most  absolute  master  nor  the  most 
affectionate  father  can  adequately  represent  God.  Yet  God  reminds  us  of  the  reverence 
due  to  himself  from  the  fear  and  honour  expected  by  them.  The  appeal  should  be 
most  powerful  to  those  who,  like  the  priests  here  appealed  to,  are  in  any  positions  of 
authority.  It  should  be  a  most  tender  plea  to  all  parents.  It  falls  in  tones  of  deepest 
pathos  on  those  who  have  received  the  adoption  and  the  spirit  of  sons  through  Jesus 
Christ.  But  the  appeal  binds  all  to  whom  in  any  sense  God  stands  in  the  sacred 
relations  of  "  the  Father  of  spirits  "  (Exod.  iv.  22 ;  Deut.  xzxii.  6  j  Isa.  Ixiii.  16 ;  Ixiv.  8). 
We  assume  the  case  of  a  father  who  combines  that  wise  authority  and  tender  love 
which  makes  him  a  type  of  the  heavenly  Father.     A  son  honoureth  such  a  father — 

I.  By  obedience.  This  is  the  first  lesson  a  child  must  learn.  After  the  early 
conflicts  with  self-will,  it  becomes  part  of  the  child-nature.  It  may  rise  to  self-denial 
or  even  heroic  self-sacrifice.  lUust. :  Henry  Havelock,  as  a  boy,  waiting  for  hours  in  a 
crowded  street  of  London,  in  obedienpe  to  his  father,  who  had  forgotten  him ;  or  Casa 
Bianca's  son  blown  up  in  the  French  flag-ship  at  the  Battle  of  the  Nile.  God  is 
greatly  honoured  when  our  obedience  is  habitual  and  cheerful,  when  we  "  worship " 
the  "  sweet  will  of  God,"  and  can  say,  "  I  delight,"  etc.  (Ps.  xl.  8 ;  cxix.  128). 

II.  By  love.  The  instinctive  love  of  an  infant  makes  way  for  the  intelligent 
affection,  founded  on  esteem,  which  the  youth  feels  towards  a  father  who  has  trained 
him  in  habits  of  obedience.  Disobedience  begets  dislike;  submission  strengthens 
love.  The  pruning  and  training  of  wise  discipline  is  rewarded  by  the  copious  fruits  of 
love.  We  most  honour  God  when  our  love  is  not  merely  the  love  of  gratitude  even 
for  redemption,  but  of  complacent  delight  in  the  character  of  our  Father.  In  that 
character  there  are  no  flaws  such  as  a  partial  son  may  nevertheless  see  in  his  earthly 
father  (Jas.  i.  17).     Let  him  not  have  to  say  John  v.  42. 

III.  By  beqabd  to  his  keputation.  A  boy's  eye  flashes  with  indignation  if  a 
stranger  assails  his  father's  reputation.  How,do  we  regard  the  dishonour  done  to  God 
by  profanity,  by  reckless  criticisms  on  his  character  and  government,  and  on  the  work 
of  Christ  ("  The  Father  wounded  throngh  the  Son ")?  Can  we  say,  with  Christ, 
"  The  reproaches,"  etc.  (Ps.  Ihx.  9)  ?  Let  us  beware,  however,  of  the  zeal  of  a  Jehu 
(2  Kings  X.  16 — 31)  or  of  the  Pharisees  (Matt,  xxiii.  15).  Let  our  lives  be  answers 
to  our  prayers,  "  Hallowed  be  thy  Name." 

IV.  By  upholding  his  authokity.  1.  When  it  has  to  be  exercised  in  discipline 
on  ourselves  (Heb.  xii.  5 — 11).  2.  When  it  is  resisted  by  others.  There  is  a  rebellion 
in  the  great  family  of  God  which  requires  every  true  child  to  take  an  active  part  on 
the  side  of  God.  While  grieved  (Ps.  cxix.  158)  and  indignant  (Ps.  cxxxix.  21),  we 
shall  yet  be  labourers  together  with  God,  that  in  the  spirit  of  the  sinless  Son  we 
may  seek  by  all  means  to  save  some  (1  Pet.  iv.  10, 11). 

Vers.  7,  8. — Irreverence — iU  causes  and  signs.  Notice  how  in  many  places  Malachi 
puts  the  thoughts  of  sinners  iEito  bold  and  bald  words.  He  interprets  their  conduct  in 
speech,  that  they  may  see  the  offensiveness  of  their  thoughts  and  acts.  Sins  of  the 
heart  may  sometimes  be  best  exposed  by  translating  them  into  unsubmissive  or  even 
impious  prayers.  They  cannot  endure  the  light  when  they  are  paraded  in  speech 
under  the  scrutiny  of  our  fellow-men.  Still  less  can  they  tolerate  the  brightness  that 
proceeds  from  the  throne  of  grace,  where  God  seeth  in  secret,  that  he  may  answer  him 
"  that  setteth  up  his  idols  in  his  heart "  "  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  idols " 
(Ezek.  xiv.  3,  4).  In  this  section  the  irreverence  of  the  priests  and  people  is  exposed 
by  the  prophet  calling  things  by  their  right  names.    Note — 

I.  Some  of  the  causes  op  irreverence.  1.  Inadequate  views  of  the  holiness  of 
God  and  the  sinfulness  of  men.  We  forget  the  names  and  titles  of  the  God  with 
whom  we  have  to  do — "  Jehovah,''  "  Lord  of  hosts,"  "  Master,"  "  Father,"  "  a  great 
King,"  "  glorious  in  holiness,  fearful  in  praises,  doing  wonders,"  etc.  We  forget  our 
own  utter  sinfulness  and  un worthiness  as  "  dust  and  ashes,"  "  the  imagination  of  whose 
heait  is  evil  from  our  youth,"  to  have  any  intercourse  with  the  Thrice-holy  One 
(cf.  Job  xl.  3 — 6).  If  it  is  hard  to  appreciate  this,  we  may  be  helped  by  the  contrast 
between  what  we  see  in  the  characteis  of  Christ  and  of  ourselves.  lUust. :  Peter 
(Luke  V.  8).  2.  Familiarity  with  sacred  things.  It  may  "breed  contempt."  The 
altar  and  its  ofierings  were  regarded  as  commonplace  or  even  despicable  obieot*.     The 


,Ll— itj  THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHI. 


worship  of  God,  the  table  of  the  Lord,  the  moat  sacred  acts  and  objects  may  be 
observed  and  resorted  to  without  the  slightest  expectation  of  gaining  good.  They 
might  be  means  of  grace,  but  familiarity  makes  them  contemptible.  3.  The  indolence 
which  shrinks  from  the  effort  needed  to  stir  up  ourselves  to  take  hold  of  God 
(Isa.  Ixiv.  7).  Worship  must  be  a  spiritual  service ;  it  may  be  a  "  conflict "  an  iyiv 
(Ool.  ii.  1).    Indolence  may  beget  irreverence,  and  will,  in  its  turn,  be  a  sign  of  it. 

II.  Some  or  the  signs  of  ibbbtebence.  We  may  copy  the  evil  example  of  the 
Jews  in  bringing  blind,  lame,  sick,  or  polluted  offerings.  1.  Formal  and  half-hearted 
services.  "  Blind  is  the  sacrifice  of  the  soul  which  is  not  illumined  by  the  light  of 
Christ.  Lame  is  his  sacrifice  of  prayer  who  comes  with  a  double  mind  to  entreat  the 
Lord"  (Jerome;  Matt.  xv.  8).  2.  Superstitious  services;  e.g.  blind  obedience  to  a 
man  claiming  to  be  a  priest,  which  may  save  the  trouble  of  searching  for  Gud  with  all 
the  heart.  Unintelligent  worship,  perhaps  in  an  unknown  tongue,  as  though  a  lesson 
learned  by  rote  would  suffice  for  the  Divine  Teacher.  3.  Offering  to  God  what  we 
should  not  dare  to  offer  to  an  earthly  superior  (ver.  8).  As  though  we  would  say, 
"  God  is  not  very  particular."  Yet  he  requires  the  very  best  service  we  can  render. 
Such  conduct  is  virtual  dishonesty,  for  the  intention  to  sacrifice  to  God  at  all  implies 
the  sacrificing  of  our  best.  lUust. :  David  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  24;  of.  Matt.  xxii.  37).  Note 
how  the  revelation  of  God  in  Christ  shows  still  more  impressively  his  claims  on  our 
highest  services.  •'  The  Lamb  that  was  slain "  is  worthy  to  receive  everything  and 
the  hest  of  everything  we  can  offer  to  him  (Eev.  v.  12).  4.  Still  grosser  forms  of 
irreverence  are  seen  in  the  Corinthians  feasting  at  the  Eucharist,  and  thus  despising 
the  Church  of  the  living  God  (1  Cor.  xi.  22),  and  making  the  table  of  the  Lord 
contemptible ;  or  in  men  celebrating  a  sacred  rite  as  a  passport  to  some  secular  ofBce ; 
or  in  getting  rid  of  a  base  coin  at  a  collection,  like  "  the  deceiver  "  in  ver.  14. 

Learn :  1.  The  many  subtle  forms  of  a  deep-seated  sin  of  the  heart  (Jer.  xviL  9). 
2.  The  need  of  radical  remedies  such  as  Divine  power  alone  can  employ  (Luke  vi, 
43—45;  Ps.  xix.  12— 14). 


Ver.  11. — ffotf »  howmr  secured  in  spite  of  his  peopWs  sins.  The  heartlessness  and 
negligence  of  the  priest  leads  God  to  say  that  the  fires  of  the  altar  might  as  well  be 
extinguished,  and  the  temple  shut  up  as  it  had  been  in  the  days  of  Ahaz ;  for  no 
offerings  would  any  longer  be  accepted  at  their  hanHs,  and  "  Ichabod  1 "  "  No  glory ! "  was 
written  on  the  altar.  The  godly  remnant  of  the  Jews  naturally  begin  to  say,  "  What 
a  dishonour  that  would  be  to  the  God  of  Israel ! "  and  to  ask,  like  Joshua  (vii.  9), 
"What  wilt  thou  do  unto  thy  great  Name?"  And  even  the  formalists,  who  had  not 
entirely  cast  off  God,  but  wished  to  keep  on  speaking  terms  with  him,  would  shrink 
from  such  a  public  slight  being  offered  to  the  God  of  their  nation.  To  all  such  fears 
God  gives  an  answer  in  the  declaration  and  prediction  of  ver.  11,  "  My  Name  shall  be 
njagnified ;  my  honour  shall  be  secured,  in  spite  of  my  people's  sins : "  (1)  among  new 
and  more  numerous  worshippers ;  (2)  by  purer  and  more  spiritual  sacrifices. 

I.  Among  new  and  mobb  ndmbbous  wobshippbbs.  It  was  an  inveterate  superstition 
of  tlie  Jews  that  the  honour  of  God  was  in  some  way  bound  up  with  sacred  places  or 
persons.  He  had  taught  them  in  the  past  that  his  glory  was  not  attached  to  the  ark, 
as  they  thought  when  they  took  it  into  battle  (1  Sam.  iv.),  or  to  one  line  of  priests 
(1  Sam.  ii.  27 — 36),  or  to  the  tabernacle  at  Shiloh  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  59 — 64),  or  to  the 
temple  (Jer.  vii.  1 — 16).  He  now  teaches  them  that  his  glory  is  independent  both  of 
the  revived  priesthood,  the  restored  temple,  and  the  nation  brought  back  from 
captivity.  The  temple  may  be  again  destroyed;  the  priesthood  may  be  abolished; 
the  people  disinherited.  Giod  has  a  larger  temple  than  the  sanctuary  on  Mount  Muriah, 
or  even  than  the  land  of  promise  itself.  His  temple  extends  "  as  far  as  the  east  is  from 
the  west."  His  worshippers  shall  be  as  numerous  as  the  tribes  and  the  tongues  of  the 
heathen  world.  No  longer  shall  it  be  especially  true  that  "In  Judah  is  God 
known ;  his  Name  is  great  in  Israel ; "  "  For  from  the  rising  of  the  sun,"  etc.  Com- 
paring this  prediction  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  on  earth  with  others,  we  are  reminded 
of  a  few  truths  respecting  the  way  in  which  God's  honour  would  be  secured  among  the 
nations  of  the  earth.  His  judgments  would  arouse  them  (Isa.  llx.  18, 19).  His  free 
love  would  seek  those  who  knew  him  not  (Isa.  Ixv.  1).  The  atoning  sacrifice  on  the 
cross  would  attract  their  sin-burdened  consciences  (John  xii.  32),  and  the  beneficence 


b  THE  BOOK  OP  MALACfll.  [ot.  i.  1— U 

of  the  reign  of  Christ  would  allure  all  classes  to  accept  his  dominion  (Ps.  Ixxii.  8 — 14, 
especially  ver.  12,  •'  For,"  etc.).  Thus  the  Name  of  God  would  be  glorified  in  his  Son. 
Apply  this  truth :  1.  To  those  who  refuse  to  give  to  God  the  glory  due  unto  his  Name. 
So  did  the  Jews  in  the  days  of  Christ.  But  God's  honour  could  be  secured  in  other 
ways  (cf.  Matt,  xxi.  41—43 ;  Luke  xir.  37 — 40).  Note  in  the  former  and  latter  parts 
of  Ps.  xxii.  the  contrast  between  vers.  6—8  and  vers.  27 — 31.  "His  own  received  him 
not,"  but  "the  Gentiles  glorified  the  word  of  the  Lord"  (Acts  xiii.  48;  cf.  la*,  xlix. 
3 — ^9 ;  Matt.  viii.  11, 12).  2,  To  those  who  are  tempted  to  shrink  from  honouring 
God  because  of  the  risk  to  themselves  or  the  sacrifice  required  at  their  hands, 
lllust :  Bsth.  iv.  10—14.  The  loss  will  be  only  our  own  (Matt.  x.  39).  God  will 
find  other  servants  ia  our  place  to  render  the  honour  he  asks  at  our  hands,  and  to 
receive  that  which  he  bestows  in  return  (1  Sam.  iL  30).  3.  To  God's  faithful  servants 
who  are  needlessly  anxious  about  his  glory  in  "  a  day  of  trouble  and  of  rebuke  and  of 
blasphemy;"  e.g.  Moses  (Numb.  xiv.  11 — 21),  Joshua  (vii.  9).  But  God  is  more 
jealous  for  his  own  honour  than  we  can  be  (Deut.  xxxii.  26,  27),  and  Is  wiser  than  we 
can  be  in  answering  the  prayer  he  has  taught  us,  "  Hallowed  be  thy  Name." 

n.  Bt  pdbbb  and  mobb  BFiBiTtrAL  SAORiTioBB.  1.  By  the  revelation  of  God  in 
Christ  as  "  the  Saviour  of  all  men,"  God's  Name  was  truly  magnified  (Ps.  xcvi.  and 
xcviii.).  That  revelation  included  a  sacrifice,  the  sacrifice  of  a  sinless  soul  to  suffering 
in  order  to  do  the  will  of  God  (Heb.  x.  7 — 10),  and  thus  to  offer  a  propitiation  for  the 
sins  of  the  whole  world.  Thus  the  prayer  was  answered  (John  xiL  28)  and  the  pre- 
diction fulfilled  (Bom.  xv.  8,  9).  2.  By  the  spiritual  sacrifices  the  acceptable  services, 
like  fragrant  incense,  presented  by  Gentile  hearts,  e.g.  the  penitence  of  the  woman  of 
Samaria ;  the  pertinacious  prayers  of  the  Syro-phoenician ;  the  marvellous  faith  of  the 
centurion ;  the  alms  and  prayers  of  Cornelius ;  the  unrecorded  acts  of  faith  and  service 
of  unknown  worshippers  in  the  heathen  world ; — these  are  accepted  by  God,  while  the 
tainted  sacrifices  of  the  Jewish  priests  are  refused.  This  a  warning  to  all  formalists. 
3.  By  pure  offerings  from  all  hearts  that  "  in  every  place  call  upon  the  Name  of  Jesus 
CUirist  our  Lord,  toth  theirs  and  ours"  (cf.  John  iv.  21 — 24).  Our  hearts  were  once 
impure,  but  have  been  cleansed  by  the  blood  and  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ.  And 
now  we  are  eager.  Impatient  to  express  our  sense  of  the  greatness  and  goodness  of  Gkad 
by  acceptable  sacrifices,  our  "  bodies  "  (Bom,  xii.  1),  our  gifts  (Phil.  iv.  18),  our  praises, 
our  good  deeds,  and  any  means  by  which  we  can  "  communicate  "  to  others,  and  thus 
glorify  our  Saviour-God  (Heb.  xiii.  16, 16). 

Notice,  in  conclusion,  what  an  encouragement  this  truth  may  be  to  those  who  long 
to  give  unto  God  the  glory  due  unto  his  Name,  but  are  dissatisfied  with  their  own 
efforts.  God's  honour  will  be  secured  in  spite  of  our  failures.  These  may  stimulate 
us  to  seek  that  greater  purity  by  which  our  offerings  may  themselves  become  purer. 
It  will  not  provoke  us  to  envy,  but  rejoice  our  hearts  that  others  are  able  to  render  to 
God  more  useful  service  than  we  do.  And  if,  in  the  midst  of  our  efforts  to  offer  such 
pure  offerings  and  fragrant  incense  as  our  poor  hearts  can  present,  we  are  called  away 
from  this  service,  we  may  rejoice  to  know  that  God's  honour  will  not  suffer  because 
our  services  are  withdrawn.  Illust. :  In  one  Boman  Catholic  convent  there  is  a  chapel 
of  "  perpetual  adoration,"  where,  every  hour,  night  and  day,  some  service  is  being  offered 
at  the  ^tar.  So  will  be  the  true  worship  of  God  throughout  the  world — ^universal  and 
perpetual 


HOMILIES  BT  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1, — Bwrdensome  prophecies.  "  The  burden  of  the  Lord  to  brael  by  MalachL" 
Much  of  the  work  of  the  Old  Testament  prophets  involved  a  serious  strain  on  feeling, 
and  may  appropriately  be  figured  as  a  "  burden  "  which  they  were  called  to  bear.  A 
very  large  proportion  of  it  consists  of  denunciations,  declarations  of  swiftly  coming  and 
overwhelming  Divine  judgments.  Those  prophets  were,  in  .fact,  raised  up  to  meet  a 
condition  of  society  and  national  life  of  which  God  disapproved,  and  by  which  God 
was  dishonoured.  It  should  never  be  forgotten  that  the  prophets  belong  to  the  Israelite 
awmarchy,  and  that  was  not  Gkni's  ideal  of  government  for  his  people.  It  brought 
conditions  and  perils  the  significance  of  which  the  prophets  were  to  declare.     Malachi'i 


am.  I.  1— 14.j  THE   BOOK   OF   MALACHL  9 

is  the  last  prophet-Toice  of  the  Old  Testament  times.  After  him  a  great  prophetio 
silence  fell  on  the  land.  No  direct  utterance  came  from  Ood  for  some  three  hundred 
years,  until  John  the  Baptist  appeared.  Nothing  is  certainly  known  concerning  this 
Prophet  Malachi.  He  is,  indeed,  only  a  name,  and  our  interest  lies  entirely  in  hii 
message.  His  name  means,  "  The  Messenger  of  Jehovah,"  and  it  calls  us  to  attend  to 
the  message  rather  than  to  the  speaker.  We  do  know  something  of  the  times  in  which 
he  lived,  and  we  can  understand  what  would  be  the  burden  of  a  Jehovah-prophet  at 
such  a  time.  After  Nehemiah  had  been  working  for  some  twelve  years  at  the  moral 
reformation  of  the  people  of  Jerusalem  and  Judna,  he  was  recalled  to  Persia;  and 
immediately  on  his  departure  the  old  evils  which  he  had  stoutly  resisted  came  back 
like  a  flood.  In  spite  of  the  presence  of  Ezra  in  Jerusalem,  it  was  seen  that  a  reforma- 
tion enforced  by  the  civil  power,  rather  than  as  the  fruit  of  individual  conviction,  had 
no  permanent  vitality.  When  Nehemiah's  back  was  turned,  "  the  tithes  due  to  the 
temple,  the  Levites,  and  the  priests  were  not  delivered,  and  the  greatest  distress  was 
thus  caused  to  all  those  who  depended  on  them  for  maintenance.  The  choristers,  the 
guards  of  the  gates,  and  the  ordinary  Levites  alike,  were  compelled  to  go  back  to  their 
homes,  and  cultivate  their  fields  for  a  living.  Public  worship  was  thus  interrupted,  and 
the  temple,  forsaken  by  its  ministers,  was  neglected  by  the  people.  Nor  was  the 
refusal  to  pay  tithes  the  only  sign  of  an  altered  spirit.  The  sabbath  was  profaned, 
both  in  town  and  country,  wine-presses  were  busy  in  its  sacred  hours,  and  the  roads 
and  fields  were  dotted  with  the  workers  taking  sheaves  to  the  barn  on  their  heavily 
laden  asses.  Jerusalem  itself  was  disturbed  by  a  sabbath  fair,  to  which  loads  of  wine, 
grapes,  figs,  and  much  else  were  carried  in  during  sacred  hours.  After  all  the  professed 
zeal  to  put  an  end  to  mixed  marriages,  things  were  rapidly  drifting  to  almost  a  worse 
condition  than  of  old.  The  very  priests  had  rapidly  lost  their  high  tone.  Their 
irreverence,  indifference,  and  worldliness  shocked  the  thoughtful.  Everything  that 
Ezra  and  Nehemiah  had  effected  was  well-nigh  tmdone."  The  Prophet  Malachi  had 
the  "  burden  "  laid  upon  him  of  rncalling  both  priests  and  people  to  their  duties.  And 
this  he  did  partly  by  vigorous  denunciations  of  surrounding  evils,  and  partly  by  anticipa- 
tions of  the  times  of  Messiah.  The  "  Coming  One  "  would  surely  prove  to  be  a  stern 
Bebuker  of  national  sin. 

L  Tie  fbopegt'b  uassAas  was  a  bubdin  to  hihssli'.  Denunciations  of  wrong- 
doing and  wrong-doers  lose  their  true  force  when  those  who  utter  them  tnfoy  their  work. 
Then  they  put  into  them  a  bitter  tone,  which  makes  them  ungod-like  messages. 
Stem  things  have  still  to  be  spoken  for  Gk)d,  but  they  must  be  spoken  with  pathos  in 
the  tone,  and  tears  ready  to  start.  No  man  can  deliver  a  message  of  judgment  aright, 
unless  he  feels  it  to  be  a  burden. 

IL  Tee  fbofhxt's  hebsaob  shouli)  bk  a  BtmnsK  to  those  addbessid.  A  burden 
of  holy  concern.  It  should  set  them  upon  grave  self-searching.  It  should  burden  them 
with  anxiety  about  their  sins,  and  with  earnest  efforts  to  put  sin  away.  If  it  was  not 
taken  as  a  burden  in  that  sense,  it  would  become  a  burden  as  bringing  upon  them  full, 
unrelieved.  Divine  judgments. 

m.  The  pbophet's  uebsaoe  hat  be  thouoht  of  as  a  BUBnEN  to  God.  "  Judg- 
ment is  his  strange  work ;  "  "In  all  their  affliction  he  was  afflicted ; "  "  Have  I  any 
pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked  ? "  We  are  permitted  to  think  that  it  troubles 
Gh>d  to  punish  his  people.  He  is  burdened  by  the  messages  which  our  sin  compels  him 
to  send-— R.  T. 

Vers.  2,  8. — 2%e  LcrtTi  love  /or  hi$  people.  The  Lord  had  chosen  Israel  as  his 
pecnliar  people,  out  of  pure  love  and  kindness,  without  any  antecedent  merit  on  their 
side.  This  love  is  strikingly  exhibited  by  contrasting  the  Divine  dealings  with  the 
two  nations,  Edom  and  Israel.  Both  came  into  Divme  judgment  for  sin,  and  love 
triumphed  in  the  restoration  of  Israel ;  but  because  of  Edom's  treatment  of  Israel,  it 
was  left  to  its  desolations.  The  word  "  hate  "  is  employed,  but  South  properW  explains 
that  "  hating  "  is  sometimes  used  comparatively  for  a  less  degree  of  love  (Uen.  xxix. 
SI ;  Luke  xiv.  26).  The  English  word  "hate"  has  somewhat  changed  its  meaning. 
Now  it  means,  "  have  a  persomd  aversion  to,"  "  regard  with  ill  will."  Bat  whon  oar 
Bible  was  translated,  it  had  a  simpler  and  kinder  meaning,  "love  less,"  "show  Itss 
favour  to."     It  is  imiMrtaDt  to  note  that  the  refereiuM  ia  not  to  God's  neraonal  fcelingg 


10  THE  BOOK   OF   MALACHl.  [cii.  i.  1  -U. 

to  individuals,  but  to  his  providential  dealings  with  nations.  Still,  it  stanrls  out  pro- 
minently that  God's  ways  with  Israel  had  been  the  indication  of  selecting  love  for  her. 

I.  God's  love  fob  Israel  was  a  distinouishino  love.  Of  Israel,  as  of  Christ's 
apostlos,  it  could  be  said,  "  Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen  you."  The  race 
of  Abraham  is  a  selected  race.  It  was  separated  in  order  to  preserve,  and  to  witness 
for,  the  great  primary  religious  truths  which  are  essential  to  the  world's  well-baing, 
but  are  imperilled  by  the  free  moral  experiment  of  humanity.  It  was  a  sign  of  Divine 
love  that  Israel  received  such  a  trust. 

n.  God's  love  fob  Isbael  was  a  patient  lovk.  And  the  patience  was  Tery 
severely  tried  by  the  wilfulness  and  waywardness  of  the  loved  ones.  This  can  be 
illustrated  from  every  stage  of  the  history.  The  patience  is  seen  in  this,  that  God 
kept  on  endeavouring  to  correct  by  chastisement.  Under  no  provocation  did  he  give 
them  up  in  despair,  and  let  judgment  prove  finally  overwhelming.  Compare  the  case 
of  Edom,  which,  as  a  nation,  is  lost  beyond  recovery.  That  patience  of  the  Divine 
love  is  the  holiest  joy  to  us  still. 

III.  God's  love  fob  Israel  was  a  triumphant  love.  This  is  what  seems  chiefly 
in  Malachi's  mind.  He  wants  the  people  to  feel  how  the  love  had  triumphed  in  their 
recovery  from  captivity,  and  their  restoration  as  a  nation.  And  these  proofs  of  the 
Lord's  love  should  have  acted  as  persuasions  to  the  Lord's  service. — B.  T. 

Vers.  4,  6. — Divine  Judgments  by  disappointments.  The  Lord's  dealings  with  Edom 
are  here  introduced  as  contrasting  with  the  Lord's  dealings  with  Israel.  And  ono 
chief  point  of  contrast  is  this — Israel's  expectations  will  be  realized;  but  Edom's 
expectations  will  be  disappointed.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  They  shall  build,  but 
I  will  throw  down."  I'here  was  an  exceedingly  bitter  feeling  between  Israel  and 
Edom,  dating  from  the  time  when  Edom  insultingly  refused  to  allow  the  passage  of 
Israel  through  her  territory,  and  so  compelled  God's  people  to  take  the  weary  and 
perilous  way  up  the  Arabah.  Again  and  again  we  have  hints  of  the  unfriendly  feeling 
between  the  kindred  and  neighbour  nations ;  and  that  it  was  continued  up  to  the  time 
of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar  is  indicated  by  the  exclamation 
of  the  poet,  in  Ps.  cxxxvii.  7,  "  Eemember,  0  Lord,  the  children  of  Edom  in  the  day  of 
Jerusalem ;  who  said.  Ease  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the  foundation  thereof."  That  Jehovah, 
as  God  and  King  of  Israel,  took  its  part  against  Edom  is  clearly  intimated  in  the 
prophecy  of  Obadiah.  The  point  of  the  passage  before  us  is  that  on  the  efforts  of 
Edom  to  recover  itself  as  a  nation  no  permanency  would  rest ;  whereas  if  Israel  would 
but  be  faithful  to  its  obligations,  it  as  a  kingdom  should  be  established  for  ever. 

I.  Failure  in  life's  enterprises  is  a  sign  of  Divine  dealinq  with  us.  How- 
ever we  may  say  that  such  failure  attends  (1)  particular  dispositions ;  or  (2)  imperfect 
training  and  culture,  it  remains  true  that  a  deeper  explanation  is  possible.  The 
promise  to  the  good  is,  "  Whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper."  The  judgment  on  the 
evil  may  be,  "  Whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  fail."  There  is  no  experience  of  life  more 
trying  than  the  disappointment  of  failing  again  and  again.  There  is  no  misery  like  the 
hopelessness  of  feeling  as  if  we  could  not  succeed,  and  it  is  no  use  to  try  any  more. 
The  man  is  lost  who  feels  that. 

II.  Failure  in  life's  knterprises  mat  be  Divine  discipline,  but  it  mat  be 
Divine  judgment.  Chastisement,  to  convince  that  we  have  done  the  thing  wrongly. 
Judgment,  as  in  the  case  of  Edom,  of  some  sin  committed  in  early  life,  the  spirit  of 
which  we  have  kept  up  through  the  long  years.  If  we  fail  in  life,  we  should  searoh- 
ingly  inquire  why  God  lets  us  fail, — B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Human  claims  impresHng  Divine  claims.  The  figure  of  fatherhood  is  used 
In  Scripture  to  suggest  God's  peculiar  relation  to  Israel ;  and  we  are  therefore  invited 
to  use  the  family  sentiments  and  responsibilities  in  the  endeavour  to  realize  our  obliga- 
tions to  God.  Our  Lord,  in  his  teachings,  made  a  similar  appeal  to  family  feelings: 
"  K  yo  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much 
more  shall  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven  give  good  things  to  them  that  ask  him  ?  "  And 
the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  argues  in  a  similar  way,  "  Furthermore  we 
have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  which  corrected  us,  and  we  gave  them  reverence ;  shall 
we  not  much  nUher  be  In  subjection  unto  the  Father  of  spirits,  and  live  f  "    It  is  true 


«E.  1.  1— U.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHL  U 

that  arguments  based  on  human  relationships  must  takedue  account  of  human  Infirmi- 
ties ;  but  there  is  an  ideal  human  relationship  in  every  case,  which  men  in  their  hearts 
recognize,  and  the  obligations  connected  with  it  may  alnrays  be  sa&ly  applied  to  our 
relations  with  God.  But  there  is  a  special  point  in  Malachi's  pleading  with  the  priests 
of  his  day.  In  common  with  Jehovah's  people,  they  came  under  the  children's  claims 
and  responsibilities ;  but,  as  priests,  they  were  children  honoured  with  special  tnuts. 
They  were  favoured  children,  and  were  bound  to  be  model  children.  The  obligatioa  of 
the  serraat  to  the  master  is  similar  to  that  of  the  son  to  the  father,  but  in  the  case  of 
the  child  there  is  the  help  of  personal  affection.  The  two  figures  may  be  used  to 
illustrate  the  point  of  this  passage. 

I.  A  master's  claim  illustrates  the  DrviNE  CLAIM.  "  If  I  be  a  Master,  where  is 
my  fear  ?  saith  the  Lord."  This  is  taking  the  lowest  ground.  There  is  no  necessary 
affection  in  this  relationship.  There  is  simply  obligation  and  duty.  A  servant  is 
bound  to  serve.  Apply  to  the  priests,  who  were  precisely  the  servants  of  Jehovah's 
house,  or  temple.  He  had  a  right  to  claim  service  that  would  honour  him,  that  would 
show  a  cherished  sense  of  reverence  and  fear,  and  would  make  others  think  highly  of 
him.  But  just  that  service  the  priests  of  the  day  were  failing  to  render.  Still,  if  no 
higher  relation  be  realized,  God  claims  our  service  as  his  servants. 

II.  A  father's  CLAIM  ILLUSTRATES  THE  DiviNB  CLAIM.  This  is  higher  ground  to 
take,  because  it  is  a  relation  involving  personal  affection,  and  the  refusal  of  the  claim 
is  therefore  the  more  unworthy.  Work  out  that  if  the  father-figure  as  presented  in  the 
Old  Testament  was  a  great  persuasion  of  the  Divine  claims,  much  more  must  the 
Father-figure  be  as  revealed  in  the  teaching  and  Sonship  of  Jesus  Christ. — R.  T. 

Yer.  7. — Polluted  bread ;  or,  priestly  sint^  What  was  consumed  upon  the  altar  was 
regarded  as  God's  portion,  and  may,  in  a  figure,  be  called  "  the  bread  of  God."  "  The 
offerings  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire,  and  the  bread  of  God,  they  do  offer :  therefore  they 
shall  be  holy  "  (Lev.  xxi.  6).  By  '*  polluted  bread  "  we  are  to  understand  maimed  and 
blemished  sacrifices.  The  Divine  reproach  is  that  the  priests  show  how  little  value 
they  have  for  the  worship  of  God,  since  they  do  not  care  in  how  slight  and  con- 
temptuous a  manner  it  is  performed.  The  Prophet  Malaohi  deals  very  largely  with  the 
unfaithfulness,  the  unpriegtliness,  of  the  priests  of  his  day.  It  was  at  once  a  sign  of  a 
sad  condition  of  morals  and  religion  when  the  priests  failed  of  their  duty ;  and  the  way 
to  recover  the  nation  to  righteousness,  when  the  priests  were  recalled  to  the  sense  of  their 
obligations. 

L  Society  revealed  in  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  psiebts.  These  may  be 
taken  as  representing  the  clergy  of  the  Christian  p;euerations.  It  has  always  been 
true  that  society  is  reflected  in  the  moral  standard  oif  the  clergy.  This  is  embodied  in 
the  saying,  "Like  priest,  like  people; "  and  it  is  a  wirier  and  more  searching  truth 
than  is  usually  apprehended.  The  clergy  are  the  moral  barometers  by  which  the 
atmosphere  of  an  age  is  discovered.  The  priests  of  Malachi's  time  declare  the  moral 
and  religious  degeneracy  of  the  people.  "  The  saddest  sign  of  all  was  the  degeneracy 
of  the  priesthood  which  Malachi,  though  perhaps  himself  a  priest,  was  specially  com- 
missioned to  denounce.  The  lack  of  all  real  faith  and  moral  soundness  in  the  very 
order  which  ought  to  have  kept  alive  among  the  people  the  essential  elements  of  the 
spiritual  life,  was  eating  like  a  cancer  into  tlie  lieart  of  the  national  sincerity  "  (Farrar). 
It  may  be  shown  that  priestly  indifierence  and  unfaithfulness  are  products  and  results 
of  neglected  personal  religious  life.  So  long  as  priestly  duties  are  instinct  with  spiritual 
feeling  they  will  be  worthily  performed.  When  personal  godliness  fails,  they  become 
perfunctory,  and  then  if  in  seeming  they  are  kept  up,  in  reality  they  deteriorate.  It 
is  in  maintaining  the  personal  religious  life  that  priests  lead  the  nations. 

II.  Socibtt  is  recovered  by  the  rbooveby  of  the  priests.  Therefore  Malachi 
appeals  to  them.  It  may  be  that  the  priests  are  the  last  to  yield  to  the  society  evils ; 
but  they  must  always  be  the  first  recovered.  They  must  become  forces  on  the  side  of 
God  in  the  restoration  of  moral  health  to  a  nation.  '  Revivals  are  always  hopeless 
things  unless  their  first  effect  is  the  spiritual  revival  of  the  clergy, — B.  T. 

Ver.  8. — The  law  of  acceptable  sacrifice.  It  must  be  such  as  would  be  acceptable  if 
offered  to  any  earthly  official.    This,  indeed,  is  but  taking  low  ground,  but  that  tfa<! 


U  THE  BOOK   OF  MALAOHl  [oil  l  1—1* 

prophet  Rhoold  take  this  position,  and  use  this  argument,  is  in  itself  a  revelation  of  the 
sad  condition  into  which  the  priesthood  of  the  day  had  fallen.  He  could  not  take  high 
grouadi,  and  make  his  appeal  directly  to  the  holiness  of  the  claims  of  the  infinitely 
Holy  One.  "  It  argues  a  great  contempt  of  Almighty  God  when  men  are  l«ss  careful 
in  maintaining  the  decencies  of  his  worship  than  they  are  in  giving  proper  respects  to 
their  superiors."  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  Levitical  system  very  rigorously 
demanded  that  only  sound  and  clean  animals  should  be  presented  in  sacrifice.  It  is 
always  necessary  to  check  the  meanness  of  men,  which  tempts  them  to  put  dod  oS 
with  that  which  they  themselves  do  not  greatly  value  (see  Lev.  xxii.  22,  etc.).  The 
sin  of  ofliering  the  imperfect  to  God  can  be  tested  in  two  very  simple  ways. 

L  OwBB  AN  iMPBBFECT  GIFT  TO  TO0B  FBiBND.  For  a  birthday-time  find  something 
you  have  done  with;  something  you  do  not  care  for;  something  out  of  taste  in  your 
own  house,  which  you  are  glad  to  get  rid  of;  something  damaged,  or  soiled,  or  broken. 
You  send  it,  saying  in  your  heart,  "  It  is  good  enough  for  him."  That  gift  dishonours 
the  Mend,  and  morally  degrades  you  as  the  giver.  If  that  friend  has  any  spirit,  he 
despises  such  gifts,  and  sends  the  coldest  of  acknowledgments  of  their  receipt.  Is  God 
in  Christ  ovu"  Friend?  What  shall  be  the  love-gifts  which  alone  can  be  acpeptable 
to  him? 

IL  Ofpeb  an  imperfect  gift  to  TonE  oovERNOB.  If  a  man  wants  to  show  his 
respect,  or  to  indicate  his  gratitude  for  some  favour  received,  he  is  always  most  par- 
ticular in  the  selection  of  his  present.  He  takes  care  that  there  is  no  flaw  in  it ;  he  selects 
the  best  possible ;  he  is  most  anxious  about  its  being  conveyed  without  injury.  If  the 
gOTemor  has  any  spirit,  he  will  not  look  at  or  receive  any  thin  j;  but  the  very  best.  Is 
God  our  supreme  Governor?  Then  how  can  we  fail  to  offer  the  very  best  possible 
to  him? 

nL  Offeb  an  imperfect  gift  to  your  God.  Has  he  not  more  claim  than  either 
friend  or  governor  to  the  perfect  offering  ?  How  should  we  respond  to  (1)  his  authority ; 
(2)  his  holiness ;  (3)  his  redemption  ?  Though  out  of  our  sight,  he  searchingly  tests  all 
our  gifts,  offerings,  and  sacrifices.  Open  out  how  we  may  be  offering  the  imperfect  in 
(1)  our  acts  of  worship ;  (2)  our  acts  of  benevolence ;  (3)  our  acts  of  ministry  and 
service. — R.  T. 

Ver.  9. — Regarding  thepenon.  "Will  he  regard  your  persons?"  The  idea  of  the 
verse  is  somewhat  difficult  to  trace ;  but  it  appears  to  be  this ;  "  You  are  expecting  that 
Gkid  will  accept  you  just  because  you  are  priests,  on  account  of  your  ofScial  standing 
alone.  You  think  that  it  does  not  matter  to  him  what  you  are  morally,  so  long  as  you 
go  through  the  routine  of  his  service  according  to  the  standards."  It  is  intimated  plainly 
enough  that  their  intercessions  on  behalf  of  the  people  must  be  in  vain  so  long  as  they 
are  acting  unworthily. 

I.  The  sense  in  which  G(od  doks  regard  the  person.  1.  He  deals  with  each 
individual,  never  loses  the  one  in  the  manjr ;  each  person  stands  out  distinctly  before 
him  as  if  there  were  no  other.  This  truth  needs  to  be  dwelt  on,  because  men  readily 
hide  themselves  from  their  own  view,  and  think  to  hide  themselves  from  God's  view, 
in  the  class  to  which  they  belong.  The  sins  of  the  priests  may  not  deeply  humble  any 
particular  priest.  2.  He  deals  with  a  man's  moral  condition.  That  belongs  exclusively 
to  the  man.     It  is  his  personality.     It  is  the  matter  of  supreme  concern  to  God. 

II.  The  sense  in  which  God  does  not  begaed  the  person.  He  is  no  "  Respecter 
of  persons."  This  enlarges  the  idea,  and  we  may  see ;  1.  That  God  takes  no  account 
of  bodily  peculiarities.  "  Man  looketh  on  the  outward  appearance,  but  God  looketh  on 
the  heart."  2.  God  takes  no  account  of  social  rank.  He  pays  no  deference  to  the 
high-born  and  rich ;  he  shows  no  indifference  to  the  low-born  and  poor.  His  supreme 
interest  is  in  men,  not  in  the  accidents  of  men.  This  is  not  meant  to  imply  any 
failure  in  our  estimating  the  value  of  social  status  and  influence ;  it  only  emphasizes 
that  these  are  not  the  matters  of  Divine  consideration.  They  do  not  belong  to  the 
essence  of  manhood.  3.  God  takes  no  account  of  ofBcial  position.  No  man  stands  in 
the  special  favour  of  God  because  he  is  a  king,  and  no  man  has  any  special  ground  for 
pleading  with  God  in  the  fact  that  he  is  a  priest  or  clergyman.  A  man's  power  ol 
intercession  with  God  is  dependent  on  his  personal  relations  with  God,  but  it  is  assumed 
that  every  priest  and  every  minister  is  what  he  ought  to  be — in  accepted  personiU 


OH.  1.1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALAOHl.  13 


relations  mth.  God.  No  matter  what  our  office  may  be,  if  there  is  not  at  the  heart  of 
it  a  right  state  of  mind  and  heart,  the  acceptance  of  the  ministry  of  that  office  cannot 
be  assured. — R.  T. 

Ver.  10. — Self-serving  religion.  "  One  of  the  works  on  which  Kehemiah  looked  back 
with  most  satisfaction  was  that  he  had  secured  to  the  Levites  the  payment  of  a  suffi- 
cient remuneration  for  their  work.  It  was  a  right  thing  in  itself.  It  asserted  what 
we  have  learnt  to  call  the  principle  of  an  '  established '  Church,  and  of  a  fair  division 
of  its  income.  But  that  spirit  might  easily  pass,  and  had  actually  passed,  into  the 
temper  which  is  always  clamorous  for  rights  and  privileges,  which  will  work  only  when 
those  rights  and  privileges  are  secured.  The  spirit  of  the  hireling  takes  the  place  of  that 
of  the  worshipper.  And  so,  amongst  the  foremost  sins  which  the  prophet  is  caUed^  on 
to  condemn  we  find  this,  noted  with  special  reference  to  the  functions  of  those  Levites 
over  whose  interests  Nehemiah  had'  been  so  watchful.  '  Who  is  there  even  among 
you,'  he  asks,  •  that  would  shut  the  doors  for  naught  ? '  And  the  hireling  spirit,  once 
fostered,  showed  itself,  as  it  always  does,  in  neglect,  evasion,  dishonesty"  (Plumptre). 

I.  The  workman  ib  wobtht  of  his  hibb.  This  sentence  embodies  a  good  work- 
ing principle,  which  has  its  proper  application  in  religious  as  well  as  in  secular  spheres. 
They  who  minister  in  spiritual  things  may  reasonably  claim  to  be  ministered  unto  in 
carnal  things.  Clergymen  share  all  common  bodily  and  family  wants ;  and  we  have 
no  sympathy  with  those  who  talk  as  if  some  wrong  were  done  when  spiritual  men  are 
concerned  for  their  material  interests.     Priests  and  Levites  deserved  their  pay. 

II.  The  workman  is  worthy  only  when  he  does  not  work  for  his  hire. 
This  is  only  true  in  a  higher  sense  of  the  Levite ;  it  is  really  true  of  every  workman.  A 
man  is  on  a  low  plane  when  he  works  just  for  his  wage.  He  is  but  a  time-server,  a 
self-server.  The  best  work  never  is  done  by  such  men ;  and  their  work  is  never  the 
best  blessing  to  them.  A  man  must  work  for  the  love  of  his  work  if  he  is  to  do  it 
nobly.  A  religious  man  must  work  for  God  if  his  work  is  to  be  acceptable.  To  work 
for  -gain  is  to  work  for  self.  The  "  sons  of  Eli,"  and  Simon  Magus,  illustrate  the 
moral  degradation  when  the  servants  of  God  make  money-conditions. — B.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Z%e  universal  worship  that  is  to  be.  These  words  are  usually  taken  as  a 
prophetic  announcement  of  the  future  rejection  of  Israel  and  calling  of  the  Gentiles; 
out  it  is  difficult  to  trace  the  connection  of  thought,  if  this  be  regard^  as  the  prophet's 
meaning.  The  LXX.  rightly  uses  the  present,  not  the  future,  tense  throughout  this 
verse.  "  My  Name  is  great,"  etc.  This  gives  an  actual  present  comparison  of  the  fear 
of  God's  Name  among  Gentiles  and  among  Jews,  to  the  manifest  disadvantage  of  the 
Jew.  God  found  a  devoutness,  earnestness,  and  sincerity  outside  his  own  people, 
which  wholly  put  to  shame  their  indifference,  formality,  and  time-serving.  This 
suggestion  is  in  the  line  of  Malachi's  teaching,  whereas  a  description  of  future  religious 
conditions  seems  to  introduce  a  new  subject.  Dean  Plumptre  says,  "  It  was  given  to 
the  last  of  the  prophets  to  proclaim,  with  an  entirely  new  distinctness,  not  only  as 
Isaiah  had  done,  the  accession  of  Gentile  proselytes  to  the  worship  and  faith  of  Israel, 
but  the  acceptance  of  their  worship  wherever  it  might  be  offered."  The  Gentile  religion 
in  the  mind  of  the  prophet  was  probably  that  of  Zoroaster,  the  purest  form  that  Gentile 
religion  has  ever  taken. 

I.  The  basis  or  the  itnivebbal  worship.  The  prophet  must  not  be  regarded  as 
giving  a  complete  account  of  the  unirersal  worship.  He  deals  with  it  only  in  view  of 
his  immediate  object,  and  to  point  his  appeal  to  the  unfaithful  and  time-serving 
priests.  He  brings  out  three  points.  1.  One  characteristic  of  the  universal  worship 
is  reverence  for  the  Divine  Name.  "  My  Name  is  great  among  the  Gentiles."  No 
religion  can  ever  fit  to  the  needs  of  men  which  does  not  at  least  seem  to  honour  the 
Divine  Name.  This  is  our  first  test  of  every  religion.  2.  Another  is  the  demand  for 
prayer.  "  Incense  is  offered."  Every  true  religion  provides  communion  with  God, 
and  gives  man  hope  in  prayer.  "When  we  have  learned  by  experience  the  unutterable 
value  of  prayer,  then  shall  theism  become  a  religion  fit  for  humanity."  3.  Another 
is  sincerity  shown  in  purity  of  offerings.  Our  Lord  expressed  the  universal  worship  in 
a  sentence,  when  he  said, "  The  true  worshippers  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and 
ia  truth." 


1«  THE  BOOK   OJf   MALACHl.  L""-  »•  ^—^*' 

n.  T»  BEFBOAOH  OT  THE  nNiTBBSAii  WOBBHIP.  It  re^i  oaches  all  who  fail  to  meet 
thew  primal  condition!,  whatever  their  hi8torical  standing  might  be.  It  reproached 
the  Jewish  priests  of  Malachi's  time,  for  they  were  dishonouring  the  Name,  putting 
routine  for  prayer,  and  making  unworthy  and  impure  offerings  which  reyealed  their 
insincerity.— B.  T. 

Yer,  13. — StUigion  a  wearinesi.  "  Ye  said  also,  Behold,  what  a  weariness  is  it  t " 
It  is  clearly  a  bad  sign  when  the  people  find  the  worship  of  God  to  be  a  weariness ;  but 
it  ii  a  much  worse  sign  when  the  ministers  of  religion  both  feel  the  worship  to  be  a 
weariness,  and  show  that  they  feel  it  to  be  such. 

I.  In  the  kathbe  of  things  BELiaions  woESHrp  should  not  bk  a  weariness. 
1.  Take  it  as  the  proper  and  fitting  expression  of  the  creature's  dependence  on  his 
Creator.  It  ought  to  be  full  of  the  joy  of  thankfulness.  2.  Take  it  as  the  natural 
impulse  of  the  sinner's  lore  to  his  Saviour.  Man  fallen  should  feel  a  joy  in  worship 
even  beyond  that  of  man  imfallen.  The  song  of  the  redeemed  is  an  altogether  nobler 
song  than  the  innocent  can  ever  sing.  And  religious  worship,  kept  within  the  lines  of 
Divine  claims,  never  need  be  a  weariness.  It  is  religion  with  the  multiplied  added 
demands  of  men  that  is  in  danger  of  proving  a  weariness.  No  reasonable  man  could 
say  that  Mosaism  was  a  weariness,  so  far  as  it  was  a  Divine  institution.  But  every 
man  could  say  that  Babbinism  was  a  weariness ;  for  it  laded  men  with  burdens  too 
grievous  to  he  borne.  Spiritual  religion  is  always  simplifying  worship.  As  spirituality 
fails,  exacting  demands  are  increased,  and  religion  tends  to  become  a  weariness. 

n.  Thbouoh  the  hoods  of  men  religious  worship  becomes  a  weariness. 
What  the  priests  of  earlier  times  had  done  gladly  and  joyfully,  the  priests  of  Malachi's 
time  dragged  through.  The  joy  of  Levites  in  their  work  is  expressed  in  the  Korahite 
psalms  (xlii.,  Ixxxiv.,  etc.),  which  are  full  of  longings  for  restoration  to  the  temple 
service.  There  was  no  difference  in  the  worship.  The  difference  was  in  the  moods  of 
the  men.  Their  spiritual  life  was  low.  They  had  no  personal  joy  in  God,  so  they 
could  have  no  joy  in  the  routine  of  Gx>d's  worship.  The  sadness  of  the  restored 
Judaism  of  the  exiles  was  that,  to  so  large  an  extent,  it  was  the  restoration  of  the 
Jewish  formalities,  without  the  restoration  of  that  spiritual  life  which  would  have 
vitalized  the  formalities.  And  still  the  weariness  men  feel  at  the  length  of  Christian 
services,  etc.,  is  the  revelation  of  their  wrong  mood ;  of  their  lost  personal  joy  in  God 
their  Saviour.— R.  T. 

Ver.  14. — The  great  and  dreadful  Name.  The  idea  in  the  word  "dreadful"  would 
be  better  conveyed  by  "awe-ful,"  if  that  were  a  word  in  familiar  use.  "  Dreadful "  we 
reserve  for  something  that  is  unusually  calamitous  and  destructive.  Awe  of  God^ 
reverence  of  his  august  majesty;  fear  which  leads  to  the  symbolic  removal  of  the 
shoes ; — these  things  are  essential  to  right  and  acceptable  worship,  and  these  things  are 
absolutely  befitting  to  man  the  creature,  and  much  more  to  man  the  sinner.  A  man 
may  be  tested  by  the  measure  of  his  reverent  awe  of  the  Divine  Name  (comp. 
Josh.  vii.  9).  "  With  a  startling  reiteration,  after  every  specific  denunciation  of  the 
gins  of  priests  and  people,  they  are  represented  as  asking,  as  if  in  utter  unconsciousness 
of  their  sin, '  Wherein  have  we  polluted  thee  ?  Wherein  have  we  despised  thy  Name  ? ' 
They  have  fallen  into  the  last  stage  of  selfish  formalism  when  conscience  ceases  to  do 
its  work  as  an  accusing  witness,  into  the  hypocrisy  which  does  not  even  know  itself 
to  be  hypocritical ;  the  hypocrisy,  in  other  words,  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees." 

I.  Eevbbenoe  fob  the  Divine  Name  is  a  sign  of  spiritual  life.  It  was  neces- 
sary that  God  should  demand  reverence  for  his  Divine  Name  in  one  of  his  ten  great 
commandments,  "  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  Name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain ;  for  the 
Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  his  Name  in  vain."  But  that  law  is  never 
needed  by  any  man  who  has  and  cherishes  right  thoughts  of  Gk)d;  he  simply  cannot 
take  his  Name  in  vain.  All  worship  is  truly  reverent  according  to'  the  spiritual  life 
that  is  at  the  heart  of  it.  Therefore  we  train  children  in  reverence  for  the  Divine 
Name,  because  it  is  the  basis  of  spiritual  religion. 

II.  Failino  bxtebenob  fob  the  Divine  Name  is  a  sign  of  failing  spiritual 
urn.  It  is  one  of  the  first,  and  one  of  the  surest,  signs.  A  light  tone  of  speech,  in 
Mferenoe  to  the  Isflnitely  Holy  One,  at  once  tells  of  lost  spiritual  health.    Loosen  ths 


OH.  1.1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MALACHL  16 

seose  of  awe,  and  innumsrable  evils  can  creep  in.  Bererence  for  the  great  Name  keepi 
the  gate  of  the  soul  safe  shut  against  intruders ;  and  it  ia  our  continual  inspiration  to 
pure  and  holy  liring. — ^B.  T. 

Ven.  1 — 5.— 2%«  lovereignty  of  God  in  relaUon  to  man'i  secular  condition  of  life, 
"  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  Malachi — ^which  means  "  Messenger  " — 
the  last  of  the  Hebrew  prophets,  i^  a  man  whose  personal  history  is  wrapped  in 
utter  obscurity.  He  is  supposed  to  hare  lived  after  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  and  to  be 
contemporary  with  Nehemiah.  It  is  likely  that  he  occupied  a  relationship  to  Nehemiah 
somewhat  analogous  to  that  which  Haggai  and  Zechariah  sustained  to  ZerubbabeL 
The  general  opinion  is  that  he  prophesied  about  the  year  B.a.  430.  This  was  that 
brilliant  period  in  Greece  in  which  flourished  some  of  its  greatest  men — Cimon,  son 
of  Miltiades,  distinguished  as  a  commander ;  Pericles,  the  greatest  of  Athenian  states- 
men, under  whom  Athens  attained  a  splendour  that  made  her  the  wonder  and  admira- 
tion of  all  Greece ;  Phidias,  the  celebrated  sculptor,  and  a  host  of  distinguished  artists ; 
Simonides  and  Pindar,  eminent  lyric  poets ;  ^schylus,  Sophocles,  and  Euripides,  dis- 
tinguished dramatists ;  and  Herodotus,  who  has  received  a  title  really  due  to  Moses, 
"  the  Father  of  History."  From  this  passage  the  following  truths  may  be  legitimately 
deduced. 

I.  That  some  men  on  this  babth  bbeu  to  be  mobe  rAvouBSD  by  Peovidbncb 
THAN  othees,  axd  tet  thbt  ABB  OFTEN  uNcoNSGEOus  OF  IT.  This  IS  the  Communica- 
tion or  "  burden  "  of  the  Divine  message  which  Malachi  had  to  deliver  to  Israel :  "  I 
have  loved  you,  saith  the  Lord.  Yet  ye  say,  Wherein  hast  thou  loved  us  ?  "  Israel 
here  itands  for  all  the  tribes,  all  the  descendants  of  Jacob.  The  Israelitish  nation 
was  more  favoured  than  any  nation  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  In  relation  to  their 
privileges  Paul  says  of  the  Israelites,  "  to  whom  pertaineth  the  adoption,  and  the  glory, 
and  the  covenants,  and  the  giving  of  the  Law,  and  the  service  of  God,  and  the  promises : 
whose  are  the  fathers,  and  of  whom  as  concerning  the  flesh  Christ  came  "  (Rom.  ix. 
4,  5).  As  individwHs,  some  men  are  more  favoured  than  others.  As  Jacob  was  more 
favoured  than  Esau,  so  some  men  in  all  generations  are  more  blessed  than  others — blessed 
with  more  vigorous  frames,  more  intellectual  resources,  more  emotional  wealth,  etc. 
There  is  amongst  men  immense  variety  in  the  degree  of  natural  endowments.  Bead  the 
parable  of  the  talents.  But  i  t  is  Tncm  nationally  that  is  here  referred  to.  "  I  have  loved 
you,"  that  is,  "  I  have  regarded  you  more  than  other  nations."  Is  not  our  England 
more  favoured  than  most  if  not  all  of  the  other  nations  of  the  earth?  She  is,  in. 
some  respects,  as  far  exalted  above  all  existing  states,  as  Israel  of  old  was  above  all  the 
heathen  nations  that  surrounded  it.  But  individually,  as  was  said  above,  all  men  are 
not  treated  alike.  Some  are  born  of  healthier  parents  than  others,  live  in  more  salu- 
brious climes  than  others,  are  endowed  with  higher  faculties  than  others,  brought  up 
under  more  wholesome  laws  and  higher  educational  -iufluences  than  others.  The 
existence  of  these  distinctions  is  too  obvious  to  require  either  argument  or  illustration. 
But  whilst  this  is  such  a  patent  fact,  the  favoured  ones  are  too  often  vnconscious  of 
the  distinction.  •' Wherein  hast  thou  loved  us?"  Israel  did  not  realize  its  exalted 
privileges.  How  often  is  this  the  case !  The  men  most  favoured  of  Providence  are 
often  most  unconscious  of  the  favours,  and  they  say,  "  Wherein  hast  thou  loved  us?  " 
As  a  rule,  perhaps  the  most  favoured  of  Providence  are  the  greatest  complainers. 
What  ingratitude  is  here  I 

11.  That  this  diffeebncb  in  the  peivileges  op  men  is  to  be  asombbd  to  thk 
boveebigntt  or  Gron.  "  I  loved  Jacob,  and  I  hated  Esau."  Some  read  it, "  I  favoxired 
Jacob,  but  rejected  Esau."  Why  was  Jacob  more  favoured  than  Esau?  Not  because 
he  had  a  nobler  moral  character.  In  some  respects  he  appears  more  despicable  than 
Esau.  It  was  simply  because  God  chose  to  distinguish  him.  The  reason  of  distinction 
was  in  the  mind  of  God,  and  nowhere  else.  "  He  worketh  all  things  according  to  the 
counsel  of  his  will."  His  iovereignty  does  not  imply  either  of  two  things.  1,  Par- 
tiality on  hi*  part.  The  fact  that  the  Jewish  people,  the  descendants  of  Jacob,  in  their 
history  endured,  perhaps,  calamities  as  great  as  those  that  befell  the  Edomites,  the 
descendants  of  Esau,  proved  that  it  was  no  partiality  on  God's  part.  He  ii  no 
Respecter  of  persons.  Nor  does  it  imply :  2.  Irresponsibility  on  man's  part.  "  They 
who  havo  lawt,"  say*  (9«dwin,  "  and  bear  most,  may  become  batter  and  happier  than 


1«  TBE  BOOK  OF  KALACHL  [oh.  l  1— 1«. 

they  wko  kaTe  most  and  suffer  least."  The  permanent  ralue  of  all  things  depends  on 
th«  use  which  is  made  of  them :  the  first  oftan  becoming  last,  and  the  last  first.  But 
DO  argument  can  be  drawn  from  differences  in  men's  condition  as  to  which  will  be  the 
most  morally  advantageous  or  disadvantageous  according  to  their  conduct.  Whilst 
the  differences  of  one  kind  depend  solely  on  the  Divine  will,  the  differences  of  the 
other  kind  are  not  irrespective  of  human  choice. 

lU.  Those  whox  the  bovebeiqntt  of  God  does  not  fayoub  abm  left  ih  a. 
sEoni<ASLT  UNENVIABLE  CONDITION.  1.  The  words  teach  us  that  they  will  have 
pMsettions  destroyed,  "  I  hated  Esau,  and  laid  his  mountains  and  his  heritage  waste  for 
th*  dragons  [jackals]  of  the  wilderness."  These  men,  the  men  of  Edom,  struggled  hard 
to  build  up  their  kingdom  and  to  give  it  wealth  and  power,  but  the  product  of  all  their 
labours  was  utterly  destroyed.  Their  great  things,  their  "  mountaius,"  their  wealthy 
things,  their  "  heritage,"  the  scenes  of  their  power,  gave  place  to  the  "  dragons  of  the 
wildernass."  Where  is  Edom  now  ?  If  Heaven  has  determined  that  the  fortune  you 
have  built  up  aft^r  years  of  earnest  and  indefatigable  labour  shall  be  swept  away,  it 
will  depart  as  a  vision  of  the  night.  2.  That  their  efforts  were  frustrated.  "If  Edom 
saith,  Wa  are  impoverished,  but  we  will  return  and  build  the  desolate  places ;  thus  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts,  Tkey  shall  build,  but  I  will  throw  down ;  and  they  shall  call  them, 
The  border  of  wickedness,  and.  The  people  against  whom  the  Lord  hath  indignation  for 
ever."  Tkey  struggle  to  restore  their  position,  labour  hard  to  build  the  desolate  places, 
but  in  every  effort  they  are  thwarted.  It  is  in  vain  to  strive  against  destiny,  Mark  that 
all  that  is  here  said  concerns  only  the  (ectttor  prosperity  of  men.  Divine  sovereignty  is 
always  in  favour  of  spiritual  prosperity,  progress  in  intelligence,  purity,  and  happiness. 
In  all  these  matters  men  cannot  labour  in  vain.  3.  Their  enemies  prosper.  "  And  your 
eyes  shall  see,  and  ye  shall  say.  The  Lord  will  be  magnified  from  the  border  of  Israel." 
Edom  hMed  Israel  from  the  beginning,  fought  hard  against  it  for  centuries,  struggled 
continually  to  destroy  it,  but  all  in  vain.  The  time  came  when  it  found  itself  in  ruins 
and  its  enemy  in  prosperity.  "  The  argument  of  these  verses  is  this,"  says  Dr.  Dods, "  if 
you  wovld  see  the  difference  between  hatred  and  love,  look  at  the  different  condition 
and  prospects  of  Edom  and  Israel.  The  desolation  with  which  their  territory  is 
visited  is  irremediable:  they  have  no  glorious  future  beyond:  whereas  the  wretched 
condition  of  which  you  complain  is  but  the  bleakness  of  seed-time  that  precedes  the 
richest  harvest." 

CoNOLUBioN.  Are  we  not  here  in  this  England  of  aurs  among  the  peoples  whom 
Heaven  has  specially  favoured?  Are  not  the  words  specially  applicable  to  us,  "  I  have 
loved  yoo,  saith  the  Lord  "  ?  But  what  is  our  practical  response  ?  Does  not  our  daily 
life  speak  out  the  ingratitude  and  unbelief  of  Israel,  "Wherein  hast  thou  loved  us?" 
We  do  not  see  it ;  we  do  not  feel  it ;  "  Wherein  ?  "  What  ought  we  to  think  of 
otir  civilization,  our  liberties,  our  fruitful  land  and  salubrious  ur?  above  all,  what  of 
our  Christ  ?     "  Herein  is  love."— D.  T. 

Vers.  6 — 9. — The  profession  and  the  practice  of  religUm,  "  ▲  son  honouroth  hia 
father,  and  a  servant  his  master :  if  then  I  be  a  Father,  whare  is  mine  honour?  and  if 
I  be  a  Master,  where  is  my  fear  ?  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  unto  you,  0  priests,  that 
despise  my  Name.  And  ye  say,  Wherein  have  we  despised  thy  Name?  etc. 
The. subject  of  these  words  is  the  profession  and  the  practice  of  religion;  and  they 
suggest  two  thoughts. 

I.  The  peofbssion  and  the  practiob  should  always  be  in  accord.  "  A  sok 
hunoureth  his  father,  and  a  servant  his  master."  This  is  stated  as  a  fact.  The  son 
here,  of  course,  must  be  supposed  to  be  worthy  of  the  name  son.  There  are  some 
children  who  are  destitute  of  natural  affection.  What  Aristotle  of  old  said  will  be 
endorsed  by  all  thoughtful  men.  "  A  son  must  always  be  his  father's  debtor,  because 
he  can  never  repay  him  for  those  greatest  of  all  benefits,  birth  and  upbringing,  and  in 
these  the  fathers  resemble  God."  This  being  so,  and  you  Israel  being  "  my  son,  my 
firstborn,"  a  relationship  which  you  profess, "  where  is  mine  honour  ?  "  If  the  language 
is,  as  some  suppose,  specially  addressed  to  the  priests,  the  appeal  gets  new  emphasis. 
The  idea  is — You  profess  to  regard  me  as  your  Father  and  your  Master,  and  you  should, 
tlierrfore,  in  yonr  life  treat  me  with  honour,  reverential  fear,  and  loyal  devotion. 
"  Why  call  y»  ma,  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not  the  things  that  I  say  ?  "     Any  disorapanov 


<m.i,  1— 14.J  THE  BOOK  OF  MALAOHL  17 

between  our  profeBslon  and  our  practice  is  morally  unnatural.    Our  conduct  should 
accord  with  our  creed,  our  deeds  with  our  doctrines. 

II.  The  profession  and  the  pbaotioe  abb  oftentimes  at  vabianob.  The 
priests  to  whom  these  words  were  addressed  practically  contradicted  their  profession. 
They  called  him  Father  and  Master,  and  yet  see  how  they  treated  him  in  their  sacrifices 
in  the  templ^.  Look  at  them  in  their  offerings.  They  showed :  1.  A  lawless  spirit. 
"  Ye  offer  polluted  bread  upon  mine  altar."  This  is  directly  contrary  to  the  Law  as 
given  in  Deuteronomy :  "  If  there  be  any  blemish  therein,  as  if  it  be  lame,  or  blind,  or 
have  any  ill  blemish,  thou  shalt  not  sacrifice  it  unto  the  Lord  thy  God."  _"  The  sin 
with  which  the  priests  are  charged  is  that  of  polluting  God's  altar  by  offering  beasts 
not  ceremonially  clean,  unfit  for  sacrifice.  Any  beast  was  passed  as  good  enough  for 
sacrifice,  the  lame  or  blind,  that  had  become  useless  for  work,  sick  or  torn,  the  beast 
that  was  dying  on  its  feet,  and  could  not  be  used  for  meat,  or  that  which  had  been 
stolen,  and  so  marked  that  it  would  not  sell — anything,  in  short,  that  could  serve  no 
other  purpose,  was  good  enough  for  God.  His  courts  had  the  appearance  of  a  knacker's 
yard."  2.  A  niggardly  spirit.  Not  only  were  they  polluted,  which  is  contrary  to 
ceremonial  law,  but  they  were  worthless :  blind,  lame,  wretched  skeletons  were  the 
beasts  offered,  worth  nothing  in  the  field  or  the  market,  mere  refuse.  "  A  cheap 
religion,"  says  one,  "  costing  little,  is  rejected  by  God,  worth  nothing :  it  costs  more 
than  it  is  worth,  for  it  is  worth  nothing,  and  so  proves  really  dear."  God  despiseth 
not  the  widow's  mite,  but  he  disdains  the  miser's  gold.  3.  A  captious  spirit.  They 
say,  "  Wherein  have  we  despised  thy  Name?  "  "  Wherein  have  we  polluted  thee  ?  " 
So  blind  and  so  insensible  were  they  to  moral  propriety  that  they  insulted  the  Almighty 
even  in  their  formal  efforts  to  serve  him.  4.  A  thoughtless  spirit.  "  Offer  it  now  unto 
thy  governor ;  will  he  be  pleased  with  thee,  or  accept  thy  person  ?  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts?  And  now,  I  pray  you,  beseech  God  that  he  will  be  gracious  unto  us ;  this  hath 
been  by  your  means:  will  he  regard  your  persons?  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  This 
sentence  is  ironical :  Ye  dare  not  go  before  your  governor  with  such  presents ;  but  come 
now,  I  pray  you,  enter  God's  presence,  and  use  your  stock  phrase  of  supplication 
(Numb.  vi.  25),  that  he  "  would  be  gracious  unto  us."  Will  he  regard  your  persons  ? 
How  many  who  profess  God  to  be  their  Father  and  their  Master  act  out,  even  in  their 
religious  services,  this  lawless,  niggardly,  captious,  thoughtless  spirit  I  Herein  there  is 
the  diicrepancy  between  profession  and  practice.     But,  alas  1  how  common  is  It  I 

With  lip  we  call  him  Master, 

In  life  oppose  his  Word, 
Wo  ev'ry  day  deny  him, 

And  yet  we  call  him  Lord  I 

No  more  is  our  religion 

Like  his  in  soul  or  deed 
Than  painted  grain  on  canrai 

Is  like  the  living  seed. 

In  the  balance  we  are  weigh'd 

And  wanting  we  are  found. 
In  all  that's  true  and  Cbristlj 

The  universe  around. 

Conclusion.  A  fact  narrated  to  me  by  the  late  Rev.  Dr.  Leifchild  some  years  ago 
affords  a  striking  illustration  of  the  discrepancy  between  profession  and  practice  in 
religion.  He  told  me  that  there  was  an  old  lady  in  his  Church,  very  wealthy,  and 
very  loud  in  her  professions,  and  apparently  very  enthusiastic  in  her  devotions,  bul 
whose  contributions  for  religious  purposes  were  of  the  most  niggardly  kind.  Ont 
Sunday,  in  singing  a  hymn  with  which  they  closed  the  service  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
she  being  near  to  the  table,  he  observed  her  as  the  deacons  were  going  round,  according 
to  their  cnstom,  collecting  subscriptions  for  the  poor.  It  so  happened  that  the  verse 
they  were  singing  at  the  time  the  deacon  came  to  her  with  the  plate  was — 

Were  the  whole  realm  of  nature  mine^ 

That  were  a  present  far  too  small : 
Love  90  amazing,  so  Divine, 

Demanda  my  heart,  my  life,  my  all  " 


18  THE   BOOK   OK    MALACHl.  [ch,  L 1— 14. 


No  one  in  the  whole  congregation  seemed  more  hearty  in  shouting  out  those  words 
with  his  voice  than  she.  Meanwhile  the  deacon  held  the  plate  right  under  her  eye, 
but  she  let  it  pass  without  enriching  it  by  even  a  copper. — D.  T. 

Vers.  10 — 14. —  Wrong  worship.  "Who  is  there  even  among  you  that  would  shnt 
the  doors  for  naught?"  etc.  The  subject  of  these  words  is  wrong  worship,  and  they 
suggest  the  following  remarks. 

I.  That  weono  wobship  is  worse  than  no  worship  at  all.  "  Who  is  there  even 
among  you  that  would  shut  the  doors  for  naught  ?  neither  do  ye  kindle  fire  on  mine 
altar  for  naught.  I  have  no  pleasure  in  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  neither  will  1 
accept  an  offering  at  your  hand."  Keil  gives  a  version  more  in  accordance  with  the 
original,  "  Oh  that  there  were  one  among  you  who  would  shut  the  doors,  that  ye  might 
not  light  mine  altar  to  no  purpose  1  I  have  no  pleasure  in  you,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts, 
and  sacrificial  offering  does  not  please  me  from  your  hand."  "  As  if,"  says  Dr.  Dods, 
"  God  were  to  say  it  were  far  better  that  the  temple  were  shut  than  that  such  pro&ne 
and  fruitless  worship  were  carried  on  in  it  (Isa.  i.  12).  Better  that  you  and  your 
offensive  beasts  be  together  shut  out  of  the  temple,  and  that  no  smoke  ascend  from  the 
altar,  since  all  such  offerings  as  you  present  are  offered  in  vain.  The  Hebrew  word 
translated  '  for  naught,'  is  the  etymological  equivalent  of  '  gratis ; '  but  the  meaning 
here  is  not  '  without  reward,'  but  the  closely  allied,  secondary  meaning  '  without 
result ; '  it  is  not  the  mercenary  but  the  fruitless  character  of  the  services  which  is 
pointed  at."  There  is  a  deal  of  wrong  worship  in  the  world,  not  only  in  heathen 
regions  but  in  Christendom,  not  only  in  Popery  but  in  Protestantism,  not  only  in  the 
Church  but  in  Dissent.  Some  of  the  hymns  used  are  not  only  gross  but  blasphemous, 
and  some  prayers,  too,  are  repugnant  alike  to  reason  and  conscience.  No  worship  is  a 
thousand  times  better  than  wrong  worship.  Wrong  worship  insults  the  Infinite 
Father,  and  degrades  the  human  soul. 

II.  That  weong  wokship  will  one  day  be  pbaotioallt  befudiated.  "  Prom 
the  rising  of  the  sun  even  unto  the  going  down  of  the  same  my  Name  shall  be  great 
among  the  Q-entiles."  A  modern  expositor  expresses  the  idea  thus  :  "  Since  ye  Jewish 
priests  and  people  '  despise  my  Name,'  I  shall  find  others  who  will  magnify  it  (Matt. 
viii.  11).  Do  not  think  I  shall  have  no  worshippers  because  I  have  not  you,  for  from 
the  east  to  the  west  my  Name  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles  (Isa.  lix.  19 ;  Ixvi.  19, 
20),  those  very  peoples  whom  ye  look  down  on  as  abominable.  '  And  a  pure  offering,' 
not  the  blind,  the  lame,  and  the  sick,  such  as  ye  offer."  "  In  every  place  "  implies  the 
catholicity  of  the  Christian  Church  (John  iv.  21 — 23 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  8).  The  incense  is 
figurative  of  prayer  (Ps.  cxli.  2  ;  Eev.  viii.  3).  Sacrifice  is  used  metaphorically  of  the 
offering  of  a  "  broken  and  contrite  heart."  1.  2%«s  period,  though  far  in  the  future,  it 
certain  to  dawn  on  the  world.  God  hath  promised  it,  and  it  is  "  impossible  for  him  to 
lie."  "  A  nd  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy  light,  and  kings  to  the  brightness  of  thy 
rising.  .  .  .  Then  thou  shalt  see,  and  fiow  together,  and  thine  heart  shall  fear,  and 
be  enlarged;  because  the  abundance  of  the  sea  shall  be  converted  into  thee"  (Isa. 
Ix.  3 — 5).  2.  This  period  will  exclude  all  false  worship.  It  will  bo  in  "  every  place." 
No  room  for  the  knee  in  the  temple  of  the  false  worshipper.  Neither  in  this  mountain 
nor  in  that  mountain  shall  ye  worship  the  Father.  "God  is  a  Spirit,  and  they  that 
worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  3.  In  this  period  all  human 
souls  will  be  blended  in  love  and  devotion.  No  more  divisions.  "  Thy  Name  shall 
be  great  among  the  heathen."  He  will  be  the  great  centre  around  which  all  souls  will 
revolve,  from  which  all  will  draw  their  heat,  their  light,  their  harmony. 

III.  That  weong  wokship  ib  sometimes  bbndbrbd  even  by  the  BELioioni 
teachers  op  mankind.  "  But  ye  have  profaned  it,  in  that  ye  say,  the  Table  of  the 
Lord  is  polluted ;  and  the  fruit  thereof,  even  his  meat,  is  contemptible."  From  these 
words  we  learn  that  these  priests  made  worship  appear :  1.  Contemptible.  Perhaps 
these  priests  did  not  literally  say  the  Lord's  table  was  contemptible,  but  in  their  acts 
they  declared  it.  Is  the  word  "  contemptible"  here  intended  to  express  the  feeling  of 
the  priests  themselves  ?  Some  have  considered  it  ai  referring  to  the  revenue  which 
the  priests  drew  from  their  services  at  the  altar.  The  beasts  which  were  brought  for 
offering  were  so  lean,  diseased,  and  wretched,  that  the  flesh  which  fell  to  their  share  for 
food  was  BO  poor  that  they  could  not  eat  it,  it  tilled  them  with  disgust,  it  was  contemptible. 


OH.  II.  1—17.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHL 


16 


As  if  they  had  said,  "  The  reward  which  we  have  for  our  services  at  the  altar  ia  truly 
contemptible."  But  this  view  can  scarcely  be  adopted,  inasmuch  as  they  themselves 
accept«d  those  worthless  animals  for  sacrifice.  It  rather  means  that  they  had  made 
worship  appear  contemptible  to  others,  that  their  services  had  brought  worship  into 
contempt.  How  often  do  the  religious  leaders  of  mankind,  by  the  crudity  of  their 
thoughts,  the  Darrovvness  of  their  creeds,  the  worldliness  of  their  spirits,  bring  religion 
into  popular  contempt  1  2.  Burdensome.  "  Behold,  what  a  weariness  is  it  1 "  etc.  This 
is  not,  alas !  an  uncommon  occurrence.  Religious  leaders,  perhaps  the  majority  of  them, 
have  in  all  ages,  by  their  hoary  platitudes,  their  vain  repetitions,  their  long,  dull 
prayers,  their  monotonous  tones,  their  prosy  twaddlings,  made  their  hearers  often 
exclaim,  "Behold,  what  a  weariness  is  it  1 "  In  truth,  religious  service  is  a  weariness 
to  all  who  have  not  their  hearts  in  it.  Dr.  Pusey  well  remarks,  "  The  service  of  God 
ig  its  own  reward.  If  not,  it  becomes  a  greater  toil,  with  less  reward  from  this  earth 
than  the  things  of  this  earth.     Our  only  choice  is  between  love  and  weariness." 

IV.  That  wrong  worship  evermore  incurs  the  just  displeasure  of  Heaven. 
"  But  cursed  be  the  deceiver,"  etc.  He  is  here  called  the  deceiver,  who  has  the  means 
of  presenting  a  valuable  sacrifice,  and  yet  presents  a  worthless  one.  He  "hath  in  his 
flock  a  male,"  something  that  is  valuable.  It  is  not  the  man  who  openly  denies  God, 
and  who  makes  no  pretence  of  serving  him,  that  is  here  cursed,  but  the  man  who 
professes  to  serve  him,  and  yet  is  destitute  of  the  true  spirit  of  devotion.  He  who  offers 
.to  him  the  mere  dregs  of  his  time,  his  strength,  his  means,  virtually  presents  that 
"  polluted  bread  "  upon  the  altar  which  is  abhorrent  to  the  Almighty. 

Conclusion.  Let  all  eschew  vain  worship,  a  worship  that  may  be  either  the  worship 
of  a  zoroTig  god,  some  idol,  or  the  worship  of  the  right  God  in  a  vrrong  way.  Let  those 
of  us  who  presume  to  be  the  religious  leaders  of  our  race  take  care  that  we  do  not 
bring  public  worship  into  contempt;  and  by  our  lack  of  spiritual  vivacity  and  the 
exciting  inspiration  of  true  devotion,  cause  the  people  to  exclaim,  "  Behold,  what  a 
weariness  is  it  I "— D.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  II. 
Vers.  1 — t. — §  4.   For  these  derelictioni  of 
duty  the  priesti  are  threatened  with  puniih- 
ment. 

Ver.  1. — This  oommandment.  The  threat 
or  announcement  is  called  a  command- 
ment, because  God  ordains  it  and  imposes 
its  execution  on  certain  instruments.  (For 
the  expression,  comp.  Lev.  xxv.  21.)  The 
threat  is  contained  in  vers.  2,  3. 

Ver.  2. — I  will  even  send  a  ourse ;  Re- 
vised Version,  then  will  I  tend  the  curse. 
St.  Jerome,  regarding  the  temporal  effect  of 
the  curse,  translates,  egestatem,  "scarcity" 
(comp.  Deut.  xxvii.  15 — 26;  xxviii.  15, 
etc.).  1  will  cnrse  your  blessings.  The  bless- 
ings which  as  priests  they  had  to  pronounce 
upon  the  people  (Lev.  ix.  22,  23 ;  Numb.  vi. 
23—27).  These  God  would  not  ratify,  but 
would  turn  them  into  curses,  and  thus 
punish  the  peoplg  who  connived  at  and 
imitated  the  iniquities  of  the  priests.  Or  the 
expression  may  refer  to  the  material  benefits 
promised  by  God  to  the  Israelites  on  their 
obedience.  But  as  the  announcement  is 
made  specially  to  the  priests,  this  explana- 
tion Boems  leia  probable.    I  have  onried 


them  already.  The  curse  has  already 
begun  to  work.  Dr.  S.  Ooi  ('  Bible  Edu- 
cator,' iii.  67,  etc.)  points  out  here  an  allusion 
to  Neh.  xiii.  1,  2,  wherein  it  is  recorded  that 
they  read  from  the  Book  of  Moses  how  that 
the  Moabites  "  hired  Balaam  against  them 
that  he  should  curse  them ;  howbeit  our 
God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing." 
Malachi,  who,  as  he  thinks,  was  present  on 
this  occasion,  may  have  been  deeply  im- 
pressed by  these  words ;  and  it  is  probable 
that  we  hear  an  echo  of  them  In  the  threat 
of  ver.  2.  "  That  of  old  God  had  turned  a 
curse  into  a  blessing,  may  have  suggested 
the  menace  that  he  would  now  turn  a  blessing 
into  a  curse." 

Ver.  3. — I  will  corrupt  your  seed. 
Henderson,  "  I  will  rebuke  tlie  seed  to  your 
hurt."  God  would  mar  the  promise  of  Ibeir 
crops ;  but,  as  tlie  priests  did  not  concern 
themselves  with  agriculture,  such  a  threat 
would  have  had  no  particular  application 
to  them.  It  is  best,  therefore,  to  take  the 
pointing  of  some  of  the  versions,  and  to 
translate,  I  will  rebuke  your  arm;  i.e.  I 
will  take  from  you  the  power  of  performing, 
or,  I  will  neutralize  your  o£Scial  duties,  the 
arm  being  the  instrument  of  labour,  offering, 
and  blessing.     Others  consider  the  threat 


ae 


THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHL 


[oh.  il  1 — n  ■ 


to  be  that  they  should  be  deprived  of  their 
allotted  portion  of  the  saciifioe — the  breast 
and  shoulder  (Lev.  vii.  31,  32),  or  the 
shoulder,  the  two  cheeks,  and  the  maw 
(Deut.  xviii.  3).  Septuagint,  'AipopiCa  ipuv 
Thi>  Sifiov,  "I take  from  you  the  shoulder;" 
Vulgate,  Ego  prcjieiam  vobis  brachivm. 
Orelli  takes  "  seed "  in  the  sense  of  pos- 
terity, seeing  liere  a  reversal  of  such 
promises  as  Jer.  xxxiii.  18,  22.  Spread 
dung  upon  your  faces,  God  will  deliver 
them  over  to  shameful  treatment,  which 
shall  cover  them  with  contempt.  The  idea 
is  derived  from  the  fllth  left  in  the  courts 
by  the  victims  (see  the  following  clause). 
Your  solemn  feasts  (ehaggim);  i.e.  the 
animals  slain  at  the  sacrificiul  feasts.  God 
calls  them  "your,"  not  "my,"  because 
they  were  not  celebrated  really  in  his 
honour,  but  after  their  own  self-will  and 
pleasure.  The  dung  of  the  sacrificial 
animals  wai  by  the  Law  carried  forth  and 
burned  without  the  camp  (Bxod.  xxiz. 
14;  Lev.  iv.  12;  xvi.  27).  One  shall  take 
you  away  with  it.  They  shall  be  treated 
as  filth,  and  cast  away  in  some  tbul  spot 
(corap.  1  Kings  xiv.  10). 

Ver.  4. — Ye  shall  know.  My  threats  are 
not  vain ;  thi*  ye  shall  experience  and  be 
forced  to  acknowledge.  This  commandment 
is  the  purpose  and  threat,  as  in  ver.  1  (where 
see  note).  That  my  covenant  might  be  with 
Levi;  i.e.  that  my  covenant  with  Levi 
might  remain  firm.  The  covenant  with  Levi 
was  the  election  of  that  tribe  to  be  the 
ministers  of  the  sanctuary.  There  is  here 
a  special  allusion  to  the  blessing  pronounced 
on  Fhinehas  for  his  conduct  in  the  matter 
of  Zimri  (Numb.  xxv.  12, 13).  This  election 
is  called  "  a  covenant,"  because,  while  con- 
ferring certain  privileges,  it  involved  certain 
duties.  The  difficulty  in  this  interpretation 
is  that  the  verb  used  here  (hayah)  does 
not  mean  "  to  remain,"  "  to  continue,"  but 
only  "  to  be,"  "  to  exist."  H  ence  many  critics 
take  "the  commandment "  as  the  subject, 
translating.  "  That  it  (my  purpose)  may  be 
my  covenant  with  Levi ;  "  i.e.  that  hs  God 
observed  the  covenant  made  with  the  tribe 
of  Levi  in  old  time,  so  for  the  future  this 
commandment  and  threat  will  be  as  vigor- 
ously observed  and  take  the  place  of  the 
old  covenant.  This  explanation  is  too 
involved  and  refined  to  be  acceptable.  It 
is  easiest  to  translate,  with  Henderson  and 
Beiuke,  "Because  my  covenant  was  with 
Levi,"  and  to  understand  God  as  implying 
that  he  warned  and  punished  the  priests, 
because  he  willed  that  the  covenant  with 
Levi  should  hold  good,  and  he  thus  desired 
to  have  a  body  of  priests  who  would  keep 
their  vowi  and  maintain  the  true  priestly 
character.  What  that  olmrftcter  is  he  pro- 
ceeds to  unfold 


Vers.  5 — 9. — §  5.  In  eontratl  with  thM* 
evil  minitien,  the  character  of  the  true  prieit 
i»  tketched,  and  thui  the  faultt  of  the  former 
are  ehoien  in  darker  colours. 

Ver.  5. — My  coreuaut  was  with  him  of 
life  and  peace;  rather,  with  him  wa»  life 
and  peace.  This  is  one  side  of  the  covenant, 
that  which  God  gave— the  blessing  of  life, 
abundance,  prosperity,  and  secure  and 
undisturbed  enjoyment  of  these,  in  the 
everlasting  priesthood,  in  agreement  with 
the  promise  to  Phinehas  (Nimib.  zxv.  12 ; 
oomp.  Deut.  xxxiii.  8—11).  I  gave  them 
to  him  for  the  fear,  etc.  I  gave  him  life 
and  peace.  The  pronominal  suffix  "  them  " 
is  not  expressed  in  the  Greek  and  Latin 
Versions,  and  is  absent  from  many  Hebrew 
manuscripts,  which  read,  "I  gave  him  fear." 
So  the  Vulgate,  Dedi  eis  timorem  et  timuit 
me;  Septuagint,  'ESaiKo  out4>  w  (p6$if 
(po^flaial  /te,  "  I  gave  him  the  fear  of  me.'' 
This  expresses  man's  part  iu  the  covenant : 
God  gave  him  certain  blessings  on  condition 
that  he  feared,  reverenced,  worshipped,  and 
obeyed  the  Lord.  The  last  part  of  the 
verse  as  now  read  is  more  simply  explained, 
"and  (my  covenant  with  him  was,  or,  I  gave 
him)  fear,  and  he  did  fear  me."  God's  gifts 
were  life  and  peace.  Levi's  part  was  fear  of 
God :  this  he  performed.  The  ideal  priest 
observed  all  the  duties  of  piety  and  rever- 
ence, and  therefore  in  his  case  the  covenant 
stood  firm  and  was  duly  carried  out. 

Ver.  6. — The  law  (teaching)  of  truth  was  in 
his  mouth.  Al  1  his  teaching  rested  on  those 
truths  which  were  enshrined  in  the  Divine 
Law  (Deut.  xxxi.  10—13;  xxxiii.  10). 
Iniquity;  unfair  decision.  Neither  false 
doctrine  nor  perverse  judgment  was  found 
in  him  (Dent.  xvii.  8^10;  xix.  17). 
Walked  with  me.  Not  only  his  teaching 
was  true,  but  his  life  was  pure  and  good ; 
he  was  the  friend  of  Ood,  living  bb  always 
in  his  presence,  in  peace  and  uprightness. 
So  Enoch  and  Noah  are  said  to  have 
"walked  with  God"  (Gen.  v.  24;  vi.  9). 
Bid  turn  many  away  from  inicLuity.  The 
faithful  discharge  of  duties  and  the  holy 
life  and  teaching  of  the  good  priest  led 
many  sinners  to  repentance  and  amendment 

Ver.  7.— For  the  priest's  lips  should  keep 
knowledge.  It  was  the  priest's  duty  to 
study  the  Law  and  to  teach  it  faithfully, 
as  it  is  said  of  Aaron,  in  Bcclus.  xlv.  17, 
"  He  gave  unto  him  his  commandments,  and 
authority  in  the  statutes  of  judgments,  that 
he  should  teach  Jacob  the  testimonies,  and 
inform  Israel  in  his  laws."  The  law,  here 
and  vers  6, 8,  means  system  of  teaching,  or 
the  torah.  At  his  mouth.  The  priest  wai 
the  appointed  interpreter  of  the  Law  (see 
Lev.  X.  11  ;  Deut.  xvii.  9 — 11  ;  xxxiii.  10: 


OH.  u.  1—17.] 


THE  BOOK   OF   M.^LACHL 


21 


and  the  note  on  Hag.  il.  11).  He  is  the 
messenger  of  the  Lord,  He  announces 
God's  will  to  men,  explaining  the  Law  to 
meet  the  varied  cironm  stances  which  ooonr 
in  daily  life  ;  he  intervenes  between  God 
and  man,  offering  man's  worship  to  the 
Lord.  So  Haggai  (i.  13)  is  called  "  the 
Lord's  messenger,"  or  angel.  Some  see 
here  an  allusion  to  Malachi's  own  name  or 
office  (see  Introduction,  §  II.  ;.comp.  Deut. 
xxi.  5 ;  2  Ghron.  xvii.  9). 

Ver.  8. — But  ye  are  departed  out  of  the 
way.  The  priests  of  this  time  had  far 
declined  from  the  high  ideal  set  forth  in 
vers.  6,  7,  the  "  way  "  in  which  God  would 
have  had  them  to  walk.  Ye  have  caused 
many  to  stumhle  at  (in)  the  law.  By  their 
example  and  teaching  they  had  made  the 
Law  a  stumbling-block,  causing  many  to 
err,  while  they  fancied  they  were  not 
infringing  God's  commandments.  Sep- 
tnagint,  'HffBev^ffare  iroWobs  iv  vSfjup,  **  Ye 
made  many  weak  [equivalent  to  ^(rScvfSo'aTeJ 
in  the  Law."  Te  have  corrupted  the 
oovenant  of  Levi  (see  ver.  5).  They  broke 
their  part  of  the  covenant,  therefore  Jehovah 
held  himself  no  longer  bound  by  it.  They 
did  not  pay  him  due  reverence  and  obedi- 
ence ;  he  withdrew  the  blessings  promised 
to  Levi,  as  threatened  (ver.  2). 

Ver.  9.— Contemptible.  The  glory  of  the 
priesthood  and  the  honour  that  belonged  to 
it  (EcoluB.  xlv.  7,  etc.)  were  now  turned  into 
disgrace  and  contempt,  when  men  compared 
the  actual  with  the  ideal.  "  Them  that 
honour  me  I  will  honour,  and  they  that 
despise  me  shall  be  lightly  esteemed" 
(1  Sam.  ii.  30).  Have  been  partial  in  the 
lew;  Bevised  Version,  have  had  respect  of 
persotu  in  the  law;  or,  in  your  teaching, 
as  vers.  6,  8.  The  prophet  names  one 
special  sin  of  the  priests,  and  that  th« 
most  flagrant — perversion  of  judgment, 
partiality  in  the  administration  of  the  Law. 
The  same  complaint  is  found  in  Micah  iii. 
11  (oomp.  2  Ghron.  xix.  7). 

Vers.  10 — 16. — Part  IL  CoNBEMNATioif 
or  Priests  and  People  fob  Alien  Mar- 

BIAQE8  AND  FOR  DtVOROES. 

Ver.  10. — Have  we  not  all  one  Father! 
In  proceeding  to  his  new  subject,  the  viola- 
tions of  the  law  of  marriage,  the  prophet 
pursues  his  habitual  method.  He  starts 
with  a  general  principle,  here  assuming  an 
interrogative  form,  and  on  it  builds  his 
rebuke.  The  priests  were  guilty,  if  not  of 
profane  marriages,  at  any  rate  of  sinful 
neglect  in  not  warning  the  people  against 
them.  Many  take  the  "  one  father  "  to  be 
Abraham  (Isa.  li.  2),  and  it  is  no  objection 
to  this  view  that  he  was  also  the  progenitor 
of  lahmaelites,  Edomites,  etc.,  because  there 


was  at  this  time  no  question  about  mar- 
riage with  these  nations,  but  with  Oanaan- 
ites,  Moabites,  Egyptians,  and  so  on.  But 
the  parallelism  with  the  following  clause 
shows  that  by  tlie  Father  is  meant  Almighty 
God  (comp.  ch.  i.  6 ;  Sent,  xxxii.  6 ;  Isa. 
Ixlii.  16).  Hath  not  one  Ood  created  us  'i 
Hath  not  God  taken  us  as  his  peculiar 
people,  so  as  to  call  us  his  sons  and  liis 
firstborn  (comp.  Exod.  iv.  22,  23;  Deut. 
xxxii.  18;  Isa.  i.  2;  Jer.  iii.-  19)?  Of 
course,  God  created  all  men ;  but  the  Jews 
alone  recognized  him  as  Creator.  The 
prophet's  proposition  is  that  all  Israelites 
were  spiritual  brothers  and  sisters,  equally 
loved  and  chosen  by  God.  From  this  he 
argues  that  in  sinning  against  one  another, 
they  offended  their  common  Fatlier,  and 
broke  the  family  compact.  Deal  treacher- 
ously. Act  faithlessly  against  one  another. 
He  does  not  yet  say  in  what  this  treachery 
consists,  but  adds,  by  profaning  the  oove- 
nant of  our  fathers.  He  unites  himself 
with  them,  because  he  suffered  in  their  sin. 
They  violateil  the  covenant  by  which  God 
chose  them  to  be  his  peculiar  people  and 
pleused  himself  in  mysterious  relation  to 
them,  on  condition  that  they  should  keep 
themselves  aloof  from  the  evil  nations 
around  them,  and  avoid  all  connection  with 
them  and  their  practices.  By  intermarriages 
with  the  heathen,  they  profaned  this  cove- 
nant. This  evil  was  one  which  Ezra  had 
done  his  best  to  eradicate,  using  most 
stringent  measures  for  its  suppression  (Ezra 
ix.,  X.);  liTehemiah,  too,  contended  against 
those  who  had  contracted  these  marriages, 
when  he  found  on  his  return  to  Jerusalem 
many  such  transgressors  (Neh.  xiii.  23 — 28) ; 
and  now  the  prophet  lifts  up  his  voice  in 
the  cause  of  purity  and  obedience.  The 
warning  against  these  mixed  unions  is  found 
in  Exod.  xxxiv.  16;  Deut.  vii.  3;  Josh. 
xxiii.  12, 13. 

Ver.  11. — Judah,  the  whole  nation,  is 
guilty  of  this  crime,  has  broken  her  promised 
faith.  The  special  sin,  mixed  marriages, 
is  named  at  the  end  of  the  verse.  In 
Israel  and  in  Jems^em.  The  mention  of 
Israel,  the  sacred  covenant  name,  is  meant 
to  make  the  contrast  between  profession  and 
practice  more  marked.  But  some  critics 
would  here  cancel  the  word  "Israel,"  as 
being  a  clerical  error  (see  note,  Zeoh.  i.  19). 
Jerusalem  is  named  as  the  centre  of  the 
theocracy,  which  gave  its  tone  to  the 
people.  7or  Judah  hath  profaned  the  holi- 
ness (sanctuary)  of  the  Lord  whidi  he  loved 
(laveth);  Septuagint,  'Efiefi^iJUKTev  'loiSas 
Ta  &yia  Kvplov,  4v  oTs  iiydiniire,  "  Judah  pro- 
faned the  lioly  things  of  the  Lord  in  which 
he  delighted."  Many  consider  that  by  the 
"  sanctuary "  is  meant  the  temple,  into 
which  these  heathen  wives  had  penetrated, 


22 


TUB   BOOK  OF  MALAOHl. 


[oh.  u.  1—17. 


either  led  by  curiogity  or  lutrocluced  by 
their  profane  huabandB.  But  we  bare  no 
knowledge  that  this  was  the  case.  It  is 
better  to  take  "  the  sanctuary,"  or  that 
which  is  holy  unto  the  Lord,  to  be  the 
chosen  nation  itself,  the  community  beloved 
by  God,  which  was  holy  by  election  and 
profession,  even  as  Christians  are  commonly 
called  saints  in  the  Epistles.  (For  the  term 
as  applied  to  the  Israelites,  see  Exod.  xix. 
6  ;  xxii.  31  j  Lev.  xi.  44 ;  xix.  2  ;  comp. 
Ezra  ix.  2 ;  Neh.  xiii.  29.)  The  daughter 
of  a  strange  god.  A  woman  who  is  an 
idolatress,  who  adhered  to  a  foreign  deity 
(Jei.  ii.  27),  as  the  Israelites  are  called  "  sons 
of  Jehovah,"  as  joined  to  him  in  communion 
(Deut.  xiv.  1 ;  Prov.  xiv.  26).  The  LXX. 
omits  the  point  of  the  charge,  rendering,  koI 
^ireT-fjievarev  els  Qeobs  aWorpiovs,  "  and  fol- 
lowed after  strange  gods." 

Ver.  12.— Will  cut  off.  The  Hebrew  is 
an  imprecation,  "May  the  Lord  cut  off" 
(Deut,  vii.  2,  3).  It  implies  that  the  trans- 
gressor shall  be  deprived  of  his  position  as 
one  of  the  covenant  people,  and  shall  leave 
no  one  to  maintain  his  name  and  family. 
The  man,  Others  render,  "  unto  the  man," 
making  the  following  words  the  direct 
object  of  the  verb.  The  master  and  the 
scholar;  so  the  Vulgate,  magistrum  et  dis- 
cipulum;  literally,  the  watcher  and  the 
answerer^  i.e.  the  watchman  and  the  in- 
habitants of  the  city;  the  L^X.,  reading 
somewhat  differently,  has,  ecus  xal  Taneivaef 
fK  (rKrivaiiiTinv  'IhkiSjS,  "  until  he  be  brought 
low  from  the  tents  of  Jacob,"  meaning,  until 
he  repent  and  return  humbly  to  obedience. 
In  this  case  the  term  "  cut  off"  must  be  taken 
In  some  milder  sense  than  "  exterminate." 
The  present  text,  however,  seems  to  be  a 
kind  of  alliterative  proverbial  saying  to  ex- 
press totality,  everybody ;  though  whence  it 
arose,  and  what  is  its  exact  signification,  are 
matters  of  great  uncertainty.  Some  take  the 
phrase  to  mean, "  every  waking  and  speaking 
person,"  i.e.  every  living  soul.  The  English 
and  Latin  Versions  proceed  on  the  assump- 
tion (which  Pusey  denies)  that  the  first 
verb  can  be  taken  actively,  "he  that 
awakeneth,"  the  teacher  being  so  called  ns 
stimulating  the  scholar,  who  is  named  "the 
answerer."  The  Targum  and  Syrlac  ex- 
plain it  by  "  son  and  son's  son."  Of  the 
various  suggestions  offered,  the  most  pro- 
bable is  that  it  is  a  military  phrase  derived 
from  the  challenge  of  the  sentinels  and  the 
answer  thereto,  which  in  time  camo  to  de- 
note the  whole  iuliabitants  of  a  camp  or 
city.  The  tabernacles.  The  dwellings.  Or 
the  word,  as  Dr.  Cox  supposes,  may  belong 
to  the  original  saying,  and  have  come  down 
from  the  remote  period  when  the  Israelites 
lived  in  tents.  And  him  that  offereth  an 
offering  (minehah)  nnto  the  Lord  of  hosts. 


The  same  punishment  shall  fall  on  one  who 
offers  even  an  oblation  of  meal  for  men  who 
are  guilty  of  this  sin.  This  sin  would 
appertain  specially  to  the  priests.  Or  we 
may  take  the  clause  in  a  general  sense. 
God  will  cut  off  every  such  transgressor, 
even  if  he  try  to  propitiate  the  Lord  by 
makiug  an  offering  before  him  (Ecolns. 
XXXV.  [xxxii.]  12),  "Do  not  think  to  corrupt 
with  gifts ;  for  such  he  will  not  receive :  and 
trust  not  to  unrighteous  sacrifices  ;  for  the 
Lord  is  Judge,  and  with  him  is  no  respect 
of  persons." 

Ver.  13. — ^Not  only  did  they  marry 
heathen  females,  but  they  divorced  their 
own  legitimate  wives  to  facilitate  such 
unholy  alliances.  This  have  ye  done  again ; 
thie  again  ye  do.  Here  is  another  and  a 
further  offence.  Others  take  "  again  "  in 
the  sense  of  "  a  second  time,"  referring  to 
the  fact  that  Ezra  had  effected  a  reform  in 
this  matter,  but  the  people  had  relapsed 
into  the  same  sin.  But  the  first  explajia- 
tion  is  prefeiable.  Septuagint,  Kai  raira, 
&  inlaow,  inoiiLTe,  "  and  this  which  I  hated 
ye  did."  Covering  (ye  cover)  the  altar  of 
the  Lord  with  tears.  The  prophet,  as  before 
(ver.  10),  does  not  at  once  ileclare  what  this 
fresh  outrage  is,  but  intimates  its  nature. 
The  picture  he  exhibits  is  thnt  of  a  multi- 
tude of  repudiated  wives  coming  to  the 
temple  with  weeping  and  lamentation,  and  ~ 
laying  their  cause  before  the  Lord.  Inso- 
much that  he  regardeth  not  the  offering 
any  more.  This  cruel  and  wicked  conduct 
raised  a  barrier  between  them  and  God,  go 
that  he  regarded  with  favour  no  offeiing 
of  theirs. 

Ver.  14. — Yet  ye  say,  Wherefore  \  Here 
ii  the  usual  sceptical  objection,  as  in  ch.  i. 
6,  7.  The  people  will  not  acknowledge 
their  guiltiuess,  and  ask,  "  Why  is  God  dis- 
pleased with  us  ?  why  are  our  offerings  not 
acceptable  ?  "  The  prophet  replies,  Because 
the  Lord  hath  been  witness,  etc.  The  sin 
is  now  disclosed.  Their  marriages  had  been 
made  before  God;  he  who  first  instituted 
matrimony  (Gen.  ii.  24)  was  a  witness  of 
the  contract  and  gave  it  his  sanction  (comp. 
Gen.  ixxi.  50).  The  wife  of  thy  youth. 
Whom  thou  didst  mairy  when  thine  affec- 
tions were  pure  and  fresh,  and  for  whom  thy 
love  was  strong  and  simple  (Prov.  v.  18). 
Against  whom  thou  hast  dealt  treaoheronsly ; 
Septuao;int,  "  whom  tliou  hast  deserted." 
This  wife  of  thine  thou  hast  betrayed, 
breaking  faith  with  her  by  repudiating  her. 
The  wife  of  thy  covenant.  With  whom 
thou  didst  make  a  solemn  vow  and  covenant, 
to  violate  which  is  a  monstrous  crime  We 
havevery  little  information  respecting  the 
religious  ceremonies  connected  with  a  Jewish 
wedding.  The  previous  espousal  was  • 
foruial    proceeding,  conducted   by  friend* 


OH.  n.  1—17.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  MALACUl. 


23 


and  parents,  and  confirmed  by  oaths.  The 
aotaal  marriage  aeema  to  have  been  accom- 
panied by  certain  Bolemu  promises  und 
blessings  (see  Prnv.  ii.  17;  Ezek.  xvi.  8; 
Gen.  ixiv.  60  ;  Kuth  iy.  11, 12 ;  Tobit  vii. 
13 ;  Smith, '  Diet,  of  Bible '). 

Ver.  15. — And  did  not  he  make  one? 
Yet  had  he  the  residue  of  the  spirit.  The 
/  passage  has  always  been  a  crux,  and  has  re- 
ceived many  interpretations.  The  Anglican 
rendering  (which,  however,  is  probably  not 
correct)  is  tlius  explained:  God  made  at 
first  one  man  and  one  woman,  to  show  the 
oneness  of  marriage,  and  God  gave  man  the 
breath  of  life  and  the  residue  to  the  woman ; 
he  made  them  both  equally  living  souls; 
therefore  divorce  was  never  contemplated  in 
the  first  institution^  of  marriage.  Others 
take  "  one  "  to  mean*  Abraham,  and  explain : 
Abraham  did  not  do  so,  i.e.  did  not  re- 
pudiate his  legitimate  wife,  though  barren; 
and  he  had  a  share  of  the  spirit  of  right, 
or  he  had  excellence  of  spirit.  But  these 
are  very  forced  interpretations,  and  do  not 
occur  naturally  from  a  consideration  of  the 
words.  The  Hebr<::w  may  be  translated 
more  satisfactorily,  "  Not  any  one  has 
done  so  who  has  a  remnant  of  the  spirit 
(ruachy  No  one  acts  as  you  have  done 
who  has  in  him  any  of  that  Divine  life  which 
God  at  first  breathed  into  man ;  in  other 
words,  no  man  of  conscience  and  virtue  has 
ever  thus  divorced  his  wife.  The  reading 
of  the  Septuagint  varies  here,  tlie  Vatican 
manuscript  giving,  OA  ita\hv  iwoiriffe ;  "  Did 
he  not  well?"  and  the  Alexandrian,  ouk 
iWos  iiroirtaf :  but  both  seem  to  imply  an 
interpretation  such  ai  we  have  just  given. 
And  wherefore  one?  That  he  might  seek 
a  godly  seed.  Why  did  one  act  in  this  way? 
was  it  that  he  might  have  godly  children? 
Surely  not.  No  one  would  divorce  hit  lawful 
Hebrew  wife,  and  marry  an  idolatress,  who 
wished  to  leave  a  holy  posterity  behind  him. 
Many  commentators,  thinking  that  Abraham 
is  here  meant,  and  that  the  prophet  is 
meeting  an  objection  which  might  be 
founded  upon  his  action  with  regard  to 
Hagar,  translate,  "  And  what  did  the  one  ? 
He  was  seeking  a  godly  seed."  Abraham 
at  Sarah's  request  took  Uagar  to  wife,  in 
order  to  have  the  promised  seed;  he  dis- 
missed her  in  order  to  carry  out  the  purpose 
of  God  in  confining  the  promise  to  Isaac. 
Therefore  his  conduct  is  no  support  for 
those  who  repudiate  their  own  wives  and 
marry  strange  women,  not  to  raise  up 
children  for  God,  but  to  satisfy  their  carnal 
lusts.  It  is  difficult,  however,  to  see  how 
the  prophet's  hearers  could  have  understood 
the  allusion  without  further  explanation. 
As  Bibera  pithily  observes  (quoted  by 
Knabenbauer),  "  Neque  ita  olare  ex  re  allata 
designatur  (Abraham),  ut  non  polius  divi- 


natione  quam  explicatione  opus  sit  ad  eom 
eruendum."  It  may  also  be  remarked  that 
the  reference  to  the  patriarch  would  not 
have  been  altogether  successful,  if  the 
auditors  remembered  the  Keturahites,  who, 
though  sprung  from  Abraham,  were  not  "  a 
godly  seed."  The  LXX.  has,  Kol  cfcrar*, 
t(  &\Ko  !)  anepim  (rfrei  d  @e6s ;  "  And  ye 
said,  Wliat  else  than  seed  doth  God  seek?" 
as  if  the  increase  of  population,  from  what- 
ever source,  was  the  only  object  required. 
This  may  have  been  one  thought  of  the 
people,  but  it  can  hardly  be  got  out  of  the 
present  Hebrew  text.  Take  heed  to  you^ 
spirit.  Beware  lest  ye  lose  the  spirit  which 
God  has  given  you.  By  acting  thus  con- 
trary to  conscience  and  the  light  vouchsafed 
to  them,  they  ran  the  risk  of  being  deprived 
altogether  of  this  heavenly  guide,  and  losing 
all  distinction  between  right  and  wrong. 

Ver.  16. — He  hateth  putting  away.  This 
is  another  reason  against  divorce:  God 
hates  it.  It  is  contrary  to  his  original 
institution,  and  was  only  allowed  for  the 
hardness  of  men's  hearts  (see  Deut.  xxiv.  1, 
etc.;  Matt.  xix.  3—9).  Septuagint.  "If 
thou  hate  her  and  dismisd  her,"  etc. ; 
Vulgate,  "  If  t'.iou  hate  her,  put  her  away," 
which  seems  to  encourage  divorce,  whereas 
in  the  context  divorce  ia  strongly  con- 
demned. Hence  Jerome  considers  these 
words  to  be  spoken  by  the  Jews,  quoting  in 
their  defence  Moges'  precept.  Others  tliink 
that  they  are  ironical — Put  her  away,  if  yon 
please ;  but  you  must  bear  the  consequences. 
For  one  covereth  violence  with  his  garment. 
He  who  thus  divorces  his  wife  shows  himself 
openly  to  all  beholders  as  an  iniquitous 
man.  So  the  clause  is  better  rendered. 
And  one  (who  does  so)  covereth  his  garment 
with  violence,  or,  violence  covereth  his  garment. 
Iniquity  attaches  itself  to  him  plainly, 
encircling  and  enfolding  him ;  the  clothing 
of  iniquity  is  the  mark  of  the  foul  soul 
within.  The  notion  of  "garment"  being 
here  used  figuratively  for  wife  (as  Hitzig 
supposes)  is  without  proof.  Such  a  metaphor 
is  certainly  unknown  to  Hebrew  literature, 
though  there  is  something  like  it  in  Arabic, 
"  Wives  are  your  attire,  aud  ye  are  theirs  " 
(Koran).  Bishop  Wordsworth  considers  that 
the  phrase  in  the  text  refers  to  the  custom 
of  the  bridegroom  in  espousals  casting  the 
skirt  of  his  garment  over  her  who  was 
betrothed  to  him  (see  Buth  iii.  9).  So  the 
idea  would  be,  "  Ye  cast  your  skirt  over 
iniquity,  and  betroth  violence  to  yourselves 
for  a  bride."  But  this  seems  somewhat 
forced.  lake  heed  .  .  .  treaoherously.  A 
repetition  of  the  warning  in  ver.  15. 

Ver.  17— oh.  It.  6.— Part  III.  Twi  Dat 

or  THB   LOBD. 

Ver.   17— oh.  iU.  6.  —  §  1.  n«  fatihUt, 


THE   BOOK   OF   MALACHL 


[cH.  n.  1—17. 


peopU,  dUhearUned  hy  present  oircumstancet, 
doubted  OocP$  providenee,  and  disbelieved 
hit  promises ;  but  the  prophet  announces  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  to  judgment,  preceded  by 
his  messenger.  He  shali  refine  his  people  and 
exterminate  sinners. 

Ver.  17. — Ye  have  wearied  the  Lord  with 
your  words.  This  is  the  introdaotion  to  the 
new  section.  The  prophet  makes  his  charge. 
The  faithless  multitude  have,  as  it  were, 
worn  out  God's  patience  by  their  murmur- 
ing and  discontent.  Because  their  expecta- 
tions of  prosperity  and  glory  were  not  at 
once  fulfilled,  they  called  in  question  God's 
justice  and  holiness,  and  even  the  future 
judgment.  The  LXX.  connects  this  verse 
wit^  the  preceding,  Kal  sil  /ij)  4yKaTa\liniTt 


ol  irapo^iyavres  rhv  <l>Av  iv  rtis  \iiya  ifuiy, 
"And  forsake  them  not,  ye  who  provoked 
God  with  your  words"  But  it  is  best  to 
take  this  as  the  beginning  of  a  new  subject. 
Yet  ye  say.  This  is  the  usual  sceptical 
objection.  Every  one  that  doeth  evil  is 
good  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  They  oom- 
plain  that,  though  they  are 'God's  peculiar 
people,  they  are  left  in  low  estate,  while 
the  heathen,  men  that  "  do  evil,"  are  happy 
and  prosperous  (comp.  Ps.  xxxvii.,  Ixxiii.). 
He  delighteth  in  them.  They  choose  to 
consider  that  the  worldly  prosperity  of  the 
heathen  is  a  sign  of  God's  special  favour, 
or  else  that  he  acts  unjustly.  Where  is 
the  God  of  judgment  1  (Isa.  xxx.  18).  Why- 
does  not  God  perform  his  promises  to  Israel, 
and  execute  vengeance  on  the  enemy? 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  2.— Our  blessings  cursed.  The  cursing  of  blessings  is  a  "  strange  work  "  to  tli« 
blessed  Gbd, "  the  Father  of  mercies,"  who  rather  delights  to  turn  curses  into  blessing!. 
We  may  note — 

I.  The  CAT7SE8  OF  THIS  cuBSE.  It  may  be  traced  to  two  things.  1.  A  disregard  of 
the  great  end  of  life,  "  to  glorify  God."  The  motto  of  every  creature,  and  especially 
of  every  redeemed  sinner,  should  be  that  of  Ignatius  Loyola  in  its  best  sense,  "  Ad 
majorem  gloriam  Dei."  No  grander  object  can  be  sought.  To  fail  in  the  endeavour  to 
"  give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  due  unto  his  Name  "  is  to  begin  to  lose  "  the  promise  " 
which  godliness  gives  of  both  worlds.  It  empties  our  "  blessings  "  of  their  true  blessed- 
ness, and  begins  to  corrnpt  them  with  a  curse  like — 

"  The  little  pitted  speck  in  garnered  frui^ 
That  rotting  inward  slowly  moulders  all." 

2.  Neglect  of  God's  appeals  and  warnings.  He  remonstrates,  as  he  did  agun  and  again 
with  the  Jews,  by  his  prophets.  But  if  we  neither  hear  nor  heed,  and  will  not  lay  these 
warnings  to  heart,  the  corrupting  process  goes  on,  the  curse  is  ripening,  "  the  rod  hath 
blossomed;  pride  hath  budded"  (of.  Jer.  vi.  16—20;  Zech.  i.  3—6;  vii.  11— U). 
The  remedies  being  cast  aside,  the  disease  holds  on  its  course  till  "  the  whole  head  is 
sick,"  etc.  (Isa.  i.  6,  6).  It  is  natural  to  God  to  sweeten  the  bitter  waters  of  life  and 
to  neutralize  its  poisons  (2  Kings  ii.  19 — 22;  iv.  38 — 41).  But  sin  reverses  these 
miracles  of  mercy,  and  constrains  God  to  turn  our  water  into  blood,  our  food  into  poison, 
to  curse  our  blessings. 

II.  The  signs  of  this  oubbe.  It  may  manifest  itself  in  various  ways;  e.g.i 
1.  Withholding  the  gifts  which  God  delights  to  bestow  (Amos  iv.  6 — 9;  Hag.  i.  9; 
ch.  iii.  10,  scardty  implied).  2.  Withholding  the  power  to  enjoy  the  gifts  which 
God  does  bestow.  It  may  be  the  food  of  a  wealthy  invalid  (Bccles.  vi.  1,  2)  or  the 
money  of  a  miser  haunted  by  fear  of  the  workhouse  (Job  xx.  22).  The  loss  may  be  in 
the  spiritual  sphere — ^the  power  of  receiving  impressions  oF  truth  and  duty  may  have 
been  "  taken  away "  (Matt.  xiii.  12 — 15),  because  sinned  away.  The  talents  of  an 
ungodly  minister  may  be  rather  a  curse  than  a  blessing  to  him  and  to  his  flock,  just  as 
the  blessings  pronounced  in  words  by  these  ungodly  priests  (Numb.  vi.  22 — 26^  may 
have  become  practically  curses  to  the  people,  3.  Blessings  themselves  may  be  turned 
into  curses.  Illust. :  The  high  wages  of  the  working  classes  in  recent  years,  and  th» 
general  prosperity  of  the  country,  leading  to  a  great  increase  of  extravagance,  self- 
indulgence,  and  intemperance.  The  blessing  of  enjoying  free-will  and  the  power  of 
self-guidance  and  control  may  become  a  most  terrible  curse  when  we  "lean  on  car  own 
understanding "  and  pursue  "  a  way  which  seemeth  right "  in  our  eyes,  but  the  tnd 
whereof  is  death  (ProT.  xir.  12 ;   Ps.  liixi,  11,  12).     Our  biEhest   privileges  may 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHl.  25 

thus  become  curses  to  ub,  as  were  the  Christian  profession  of  Ananias  and  the  apostle- 
ship  of  Judas.  Even  Christ  may  become  "  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  a  rock  of  offence  " 
(1  Pet.  ii.  6 — 8 ;  John  ix.  40),  and  his  ministers  "a  SHvour  from  death  unto  death "  (2 
Cor.  ii.  16).  As  John  Howe  says,  "  When  the  gospel  becomes  deadly  to  a  man,  that 
is  a  most  terrible  sort  of  death ;  to  die  by  a  gospel  plague  is  a  most  terrible  way  of 
dying." 

Vers.  6,  7. — The  qrtalifications  and  objects  of  Christian  ministers.  Aaron  and  the 
original  priests  of  the  house  of  Levi  are  here  held  up  as  a  pattern  to  their  degenerate 
descendants.  Reference  is  made  to  the  higher  departments  of  the  priest's  work,  for 
teaching  is  a  nobler  work  than  sacrificing,  even  according  to  a  divinely  appointed  and 
typical  ritual.  Allusions  to  this  work  of  teaching  by  priests  or  Levites  may  be  found  in 
Lev.  X.  11;  Deut.  xxxiii.  10;  2  Chron.  xv.  3;  xvii.  8,  9;  Neh.  viii.  9;  Micah  iiL  11, 
etc.  This  work,  being  common  to  Jewish  priests  and  Christian  ministers,  makes  the 
application  we  have  given  to  the  words  quite  legitimate.  We  are  reminded  of  the 
following  qualifications  and  aims  essential  for  a  minister  of  Christ. 

I.  A  MESSAGE  FROM  GoD.  "  He  is  the  messenger  of  the  Lord  of  hosts."  We  are 
sent  to  the  world  by  our  Divine  Master  with  definite  instructions.  There  is  a 
"  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  Qud  committed  to  our  trust."  That  gospel  embodies 
the  doctrines  of  "  the  faith  which  was  once  for  all  delivered  unto  the  saints."  If  wo 
have  no  definite  gospel  to  preach,  for  which  we  are  willing  to  contend,  to  suffer,  and  if 
needs  be  to  die,  we  had  better  hold  our  peace,  for  we  are  not  "  messengers  of  the  Lord 
of  hosts."  "  Wlierefore  wilt  thou  run,  my  son,  seeing  thou  hast  no  tidings  ready?" 
(2  Sam.  xviii.  22);  "  I  have  not  sent  these  prophets,  yet  they  ran  :  I  have  not  spoken 
to  them,  yet  they  prophesied "  (Jer.  xxiii.  21).  A  self-styled  ambassador,  with  no 
instructions  from  his  monarch,  would  be  an  object  hardly  less  pitiable  and  contemptible 
than  a  speaker  arrogating  the  position  of  Christ's  minister,  but  quite  uncertain  as  to 
what  to  speak  in  Christ's  Name.  The  burden  of  our  message  is  not,  "  Thus  I  think ; " 
but,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  ;  "  "  Hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  Churches."  Christ 
bids  us  to  teach  men  "to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you." 
When  men  gather  around  us  they  should  be  able  to  say,  "  Now  therefore  are  we  all 
here  present  before  God,  to  hear  all  things  that  are  commiinded  thee  of  God."  We  are 
thus  reminded  of  the  need  of:  1.  Careful  study  of  the  Law  of  God,  like  Ezra  (vii.  6, 
10),  Daniel  (ix.  2),  Timothy  (1  Tim.  iv.  13).  We  must  be  scribes  "  instructed  unto 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  lest  we  should  misread  and  misunderstand  our  message. 
2.  Of  close  communion  with  God ;  for  errors  that  arise  from  sources  that  are  spiritual 
may  be  more  dangerous  than  those  that  are  merely  intellectual  (see  John  iii.  20 ; 
V.  44;  vii.  17;  viii.  43;  xii.  42,  43;  Heb,  iii.  12). 

II,  PiDELiTT  IN  DELiVBEiNa  IT.  We  leam  this  from  :  1.  The  unalterable  claims  of 
truth  (ver.  6).  All  truth  has  the  authority  of  a  law.  We  must  be  prepared  to  teach 
others  and  to  leam  for  ourselves  that  rather  than  deny  God  by  a  lie  in  business  or  any 
sphere  of  life,  it  would  be  better  to  be  burned  alive.  A  martyr's  spirit  is  essential  to  a 
minister's  character.  If  this  is  true  of  us,  we  may  urge  the  same  on  our  hearers,  for 
there  are  no  two  standards  of  morality,  one  for  the  clergy  the  other  for  the  laity.  All 
are  required  to  love  the  Lord  their  God  with  all  their  heart,  and  therefore  never  to 
"hold  down  the  truth  in  unrighteousness"  (Bom.  i.  18).  The  urgent  duty  of  fidelity 
on  the  part  of  Christ's  ministers  is  seen  further  because  of:  2.  Our  responsibility  as 
"  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God."  So  far  as  those  "  mysteries,"  first  revealed  to  the 
world  by  inspired  apostles,  are  understood  by  us,  we  are  stewards  of  them.  And  "  it  is 
required  in  stewards  that  a  man  be  found  faithful"  (1  Cor.  iv.  1,  2).  We  are  to  "  keep 
knowledge  "  for  those  who  at  any  time  may  "  seek  the  law  "  at  our  mouths.  If  others 
teach  "another  gospel "  which  may  be  more  popular  and  acceptable,  we  are  to  decline 


object  should  be  to  seek  God's  law  from  our  lips  that  they  may  do  it,  and  ours  to  turn 
them  from  iniquity.  Our  one  object  should  be  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God  so 
clp-irly,  faithfully,  and  affectionately,  that,  whether  men  will  hear  or  forbear,  we  shall 
be  free  from  the  blood  of  alL     Elihu's  words  are  an  excellent  motto  for  a  preacher 


26  THE  BOOK  OP  MALACHl.  [oh.  n.  1—17 

(Job  xxziii.  3),  The  words,  "  Death  and  life  are  in  the  power  of  the  tongue,"  suggest 
solemn  thoughts  as  to  fidelity  on  the  part  of  preachers.  What  need  of  care,  both  in 
public  and  private,  in  dealing  with  "  seeking  "  souls,  to  point  them  direct  to  Christ,  and 
not  to  any  ceremonies  or  sacraments  (Acts  xx.  20,  21 ;  1  C!or.  ii.  1 — 6),  lest  at  some 
critical  point  in  their  spiritunl  history  our  lips  should  fail  to  impart  the  "  knowledge," 
"  the  law,"  the  message  from  the  Lord  of  hosts  which  they  need,  and  they  should  be 
directed  along  a  wrong  track  rather  than  in  "the  way  everlasting."  The  tin  of 
unfaithfulness  is  exposed  in  vers.  8,  9.  Ministers  may  be  "  partial  in  the  Law,"  *.g. 
ivinking  at  follies  and  sins  fashionable  among  the  rich,  while  severely  condemning  the 
sins  of  the  poor,  etc.  But  fidelity  needs  to  be  combined  with  discrimination  (Mark  iv. 
33,  34;  John  xvi.  12;  1  Cor.  iii.  1,  2;  2  Tim.  ii.  15;  Heb.  v.  11, 12).  "For  as  all 
men  cannot  dive  and  fetch  precious  stones  from  the  deep,  but  he  that  is  cunning  and 
hath  the  art  of  it;  so  not  all,  but  the  wise  can  either  teach  or  conceive  the  deep 
mysteries.  First,  children  must  be  taught  letters,  then  syllables,  after  words,  then 
construction,  and  after  all  the  matter." 

IIL  A  LIFE  IN  HABMONT  WITH  IT.  "He  Walked  wlth  me  in  peace  and  equity." 
These  words  remind  us  of  the  essential  elements  of  a  truly  consistent  Christian  life. 
There  must  be  righteousness  with  Gk)d,  bringing  after  it  peace  with  God.  This  righteous- 
ness is  twofold.  1.  A  justification,  which  makes  us  "accepts  in  the  Beloved,"  and 
gives  peace  with  Grod  (Bom.  v.  1 ;  Eph.  i.  6).  2.  A  right  state  of  heart,  a  conscious 
integrity  of  purpose,  which  ensures  our  being  "  accepted  of  him,"  well  pleasing  to  him, 
and  which  brings  with  it  a  still  deeper  and  purer  peace  (Isa,  xlviii.  18;  Bom.  xiv. 
17, 18).  God  desires  that  we  should  live  in  his  perfect  peace  and  favour  in  order  that 
we  "  might  serve  him  without  fear,  in  holiness  and  righteousness  before  him  all  the 
days  of  our  life."  Such  peace  and  equity  toward  God  will  ensure  the  same  blessings 
in  relation  to  our  fellow-men.  This  consistency  of  conduct  is  especially  needed  in  the 
ministers  of  Christ.  They  must  maintain  this  character  in  their  homes  (1  Tim.  iii. 
2—5),  in  the  Church  (1  Pet.  v.  3),  and  in  the  world  (1  Tim.  iii.  7).  The  guUt  and 
shame  of  inconsistent  lives  is  exposed  in  vers.  8,  9,  and  is  illustrated  by  the  history  of 
Eli's  sons ;  1  Sam.  ii  30  being  fulfilled  in  them,  and  in  these  priests  ("  I  have  made  you 
contemptible."  They  had  said  in  their  hearts,  "  The  table  of  the  Lord  is  contemptible ; " 
so  Gk)d  would  requite  them  "  measure  for  measure  "),  and  in  all  unfaithful  ministers ; 
who  will  be  despised  by  the  people  they  seek  to  conciliate  and  please. 

rV.  Zeal  fob  the  bbception  of  it.  By  faithfully  discharging  the  duties  of  his 
calling,  Levi,  i.e.  the  priesthood,  "  did  turn  many  away  from  iniquity."  In  doing  so 
he  did  nothing  more  than  what  the  standing  and  vocation  of  the  priest  required.  The 
knowledge  communicated  to  the  mind  was  to  be  imparted  by  the  lips.  Without  zeal 
for  the  reception  of  the  message,  and  love  that  seeks  the  salvation  of  souls  by  means  of 
it,  the  knowledge  and  "  the  tongues  "  of  preachers  profit  nothing.  The  charge  given 
to  Paul  (Acts  xxvi.  18)  and  to  Timothy  (2  Tim.  iv.  5)  applies  to  every  "good  minister 
of  Jesus  Christ."  We  are  appointed  as  witnesses  for  God ;  as  labourers  together  with 
God ;  as  ambassadors  to  promote  reconciliation  with  God.  We  are  ministers  of  the 
good  tidings  of  Christ ;  soldiers  of  Christ  (to  overcome  men's  "  evil "  by  Christ's  "  good  "). 
We  are  lights  ("  the  lamp  that  bumeth  and  shineth,"  John  v.  35)  to  light  men  to 
Jesus  Christ.  We  are  fishers  of  men,  that  we  may  secure  them  few  Christ ;  under- 
shepherds  of  souls,  that  we  may  keep  them ;  watchmen,  that  we  may  warn  them. 
Mediately  we  may  be  said  to  be  saviours  of  souls  (Jas.  v.  19,  20).  So  earnest  should 
we  be  to  secure  this  end,  that  our  hearers  should  be  able  to  say  of  us,  as  a  plain 
woman  did  of  Eobert  McCheyne  of  Dundee,  "  He  seemed  as  though  he  were  almost 
dyin'  to  have  you  converted."  Such  a  ministry  will  secure  its  object  (1  Tim.  iv. 
12 — 16).  A  painful  contrast  is  suggested  between  this  ideal  of  the  ministry  and  our 
attainments  in  attempting  to  reach  it.  We  should  leam  humility  and  be  melted  into 
penitence.  For  God  holds  us  responsible  for  what  we  might  have  been  and  might  have 
done  after  all  that  he  has  done  for  us— a  truth  we  are  reminded  of  by  God's  appeal  in 
Isa.  V.  4.  But  the  lofty  standard  held  out  before  us  may  also  stimulate  us  to  "  forget 
the  things  that  are  behind,"  etc.,  and  to  make  the  aims  of  the  Christ-like  Apostle  Paul 
our  own  (1  Cor.  ix.  16—22 ;  Ool.  i.  28,  29). 

Vers.   10— 16.— 2%«  tin  of  conjugal   unfaithfvlnen.      Wo    here    use    the    term 


OH.  11.1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALAOHL  27 

"unfaithfulness"  in  its  widest  sense,  extending  far  beyond  the  sin  of  uncbastity. 
We  note— 

L  Unfaithfulness  to  God  is  the  boot-sin  of  all  otheb  fobms  of  iifFiDELiTT. 
Tbe  sins  denounced  in  the  earlier  verses  of  this  book  are  quite  sufficient  to  account  lor 
the  criminality  here  exposed.  Those  who  profane  the  "  covenant "  and  the  "  holiness  " 
of  God  in  their  hearts,  and  who  do  not  seek  "  to  give  glory  "  to  bis  Name  (ver.  2),  are 
easily  betrayed  into  glaring  acts  of  wrong  against  the  nearest  and  dearest  on  earth. 
■ "  The  backslider  in  heart  shall  be  filled  with  his  own  ways,"  and  those  ways  are  all 
downward  ways.  The  first  sin  of  Adam  and  Eve  led  to  mutual  recrimination.  Dis- 
obedience towards  the  heavenly  Father  paves  the  way  for  discord  in  the  earthly  home. 
"  Therefore  take  heed  to  your  spirit "  (ver.  16). 

II.  This  infidelity  showed  itself  in  two  fobus.  1.  In  unlawful  marriages. 
(Ver.  11.)  This  was  a  proof  of  unfaithfulness  both  to  the  national  covenant  (Ezra  ix. 
10 — 12)  and  to  God's  purpose  in  marriage.  Similar  unfaithfulness  shows  itself  under 
the  Christian  covenant  when  such  precepts  as  1  Cor.  vii.  39  ("  only  in  the  Lord  ")  and 
2  Cor.  vi.  14 — 18  are  set  at  naught.  For  a  Christian  to  marry  an  enemy  of  Christ,  "a 
covetous  person  who  is  an  idolater,"  or  a  slave  of  "  the  god  of  this  world,"  is  a  breach 
of  the  sanctity  of  marriage.  It  tends  to  degrade  it  into  a  carnal  union ;  it  certainly 
grossly  neglects  its  object  as  a  spiritual  bond,  in  which  all  material  considerations  are  to 
be  held  as  subordinate  to  that  "  great  mystery,"  typical  of  the  Divine  union  of  Christ 
and  his  Church.  By  such  sin  a  profe.-'sed  disciple  of  Christ  virtually  cuts  himself  off 
from  the  commonwealth  of  the  saints,  that  he  may  join  the  congregation  of  the  aliens. 
He  thus  exposes  himself  to  the  judgment  of  God,  who  will  be  impartial  in  his  treatment 
of  all  classes,  of  those  that  lead  into  sin  and  those  that  are  led  (ver.  12 ;  Job  xii.  16), 
and  who  will  accept  no  "  offering,"  no  outward  service,  that  might  be  regarded  as  a 
blind  to  the  eyes  of  the  Judge,  presented  by  a  man  who  sought  thus  to  compound  for 
his  sin  (Prov.  xxi.  27 ;  ixviii.  9 ;  Isa.  i.  13 — 17 ;  Amos  v.  21 — 24).  2.  In  ill  treatment 
of  their  lawful  wives.  This  is  the  second  form  of  unfaithfulness,  and  reminds  us  that 
"  the  way  of  sin  is  downhill,  and  one  violation  of  the  covenant  is  an  inlet  to  another  " 
(M.  Henry).  Unfaithfulness  to  the  marriage  vow  in  any  form  (unkindness  or  neglect, 
as  well  as  adultery  or  divorce)  is  here  condemned  by  the  following  considerations. 
(1)  Beligious  services  are  marred  by  moral  delinquencies  (ver.  13).  It  is  »  terrible 
"thing  to  send  any  soul  weeping  in  its  prayer  to  God,  and  really,  if  not  intentionally, 
appealing  to  him  for  avengement.  How  much  wor.se  if  that  soul  should  be  the  partner 
of  thy  life !  God  seeks  songs,  not  groans,  in  nur  services.  He  desires  unity  in  the 
home,  "  that  your  prayers  be  not  hindered  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  7).  How,  then,  must  he  regard 
the  prayers  of  a  wife  deprecating  the  unkindness  of  her  husband  1  (2)  God  was  a 
witness  of  every  word  and  vow  at  the  marriage  ceremony.  Through  the  following 
years  he  notes  how  those  promises  are  kept.  He  is  still  a  witness  of  every  act  of 
wrong  on  the  part  of  either  husband  or  wife.  And  he  is  "the  avenger  of  all  such" 
(1  Thess.  iv.  6).  (3)  The  tender  relations  cruelly  violated.  Aggravations  of  this  sin 
are  suggested  by  each  of  the  terms,  "  companion,"  "  wife  of  thy  youth,"  "  wife  of  thy 
covenant."  (4)  God's  design  in  marriage  (ver.  15).  Polygamy  is  fatal  to  godly  family 
life  and  training,  and  discord  most  perilous  to  it.  (5)  The  infectious  influence  of  sins. 
If  we  deal  treacherously  against  our  "brother"  (ver.  10),  we  tempt  him  to  act  in  a 
similar  way.  This  is  applicable  to  the  influence  of  an  unfaithful  husband  on  his  wife, 
or  on  other  husbands  or  on  the  unmarried  whom  by  his  example  he  may  debauch  and 
destroy.  The  master  and  the  scholar,  the  blind  leader  of  the  blind, — all  shall  fall  into 
the  ditch.  (6)  The  Divine  hatred  which  such  sins  incur  (ver.  16).  There  are  several 
things  which  we  are  expressly  told  in  Scripture  God  hates  (cf.  Deut.  xii.  31 ;  xvi.  22 ; 
Prov.  vi.  16 — 19 ;  viii.  13 ;  Isa.  Ixi.  8 ;  Jer.  xliv.  4).  Among  these  things  divorce  and 
every  other  form  of  conjugal  treachery  and  unfaithfulness  are  included.  Men  may 
make  light  of  many  of  these,  sins,  may  patronize  tbe  criminals,  and  deride  their  censors. 
But  see  Luke  xvi.  14,  16,  and  the  lesson  it  suggests.  What  God  hates  may  we  dread, 
and  seek  never  to  be  unjust  in  the  least,  lest  we  be  unjust  also  in  much  1 

Ver.  10. — The  brotherhood  of  men.  "Liberty,  equality,  fraternity,"  are  Divine 
ideas,  though  men  have  sometimes  striven  to  embody  them  in  crude  or  even  repulsive 
and  brutal  forms.     Men  are  equals,  inasmuch  as  they  are  all  the  creatures  of  Uie  on* 


28  THE  BOOK  OF  MALAOHl.  [ch.  n.  1— 17. 

God  who  created  thom.  The  revelation  of  that  Creator  as  "  the  Father  of  spirits " 
constitutes  those  created  spirits  into  a  brotherhood.  From  this  fraternal  relation  tht 
claim  to  liberty  and  more  than  liberty  follows. 

I.  Sound  ethics  must  be  based  on  a  true  theoloqt.  Our  relations  to  men 
depend  on  our  relation  to  Qod.  Our  treatment  of  them  will  vary  with  our  conceptions 
of  those  relations.  False  views  of  God  are  fatal  to  consistent  conduct  towards  our 
brethren.  And  though  our  ethics  may  be  partially  true,  they  will  be  practically  power- 
less unless  supported  by  "  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  which  is  according  to  godliness." 
Hence  the  practical  impotence  of  heathen  ethics,  whether  those  of  Socrates  or  of 
Confucius.  We  must  recognize  such  truths  as  these:  that  we  are  creatures  of  the 
one  God,  "  in  whose  hand  our  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all  our  ways  j "  that  we  are 
pensioners  on  his  bounty ;  that  we  are  sinners  dependent  on  his  mercy ;  and  that, 
nevertheless,  we  are  children  entitled  to  claim  our  place  in  his  family.  We  shall  then 
recognize  that  we  are  bound  to  treat  all  our  fellow-creatures  as  members  of  the  same 
family,  sharing  with  us  in  the  same  bounty  and  mercy  of  the  Father  of  all,  "  who 
willeth  that  all  men  should  be  saved."  Jesus  Christ,  in  whom  that  wiU  is  revealed,  ia 
the  bond  of  unity,  for  "  the  Head  of  every  man  is  Christ." 

II.  There  is  a  "  covbnakt  of  odb  fathers  "  more  extensive  than  that 
WHICH  God  made  with  the  Jews.  We  can  trace  it  back  beyond  Moses  or  Abraham 
to  "  our  first  father ; "  "  for  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men ; "  "  for  we 
are  also  his  offspring."  The  terms  of  this  covenant  are  foimd  in  "  the  law  written  in 
our  hearts."  Hence  moral  law  and  Divine  retribution  are  found  beyond  the  limits  of  an 
Inspired  revelation.  We  see  in  the  Bible  illustrations  of  God's  judgments  denounced 
on  :  1.  The  sins  of  the  Hebrews  against  their  own  brethren ;  e.g.  the  re-enslavement  of 
the  freedmen  (Jer,  rxxiv.).  2.  The  crimes  of  Hebrews  towards  strangers,  though  they 
were  heathens ;  e.g.  Saul's  massacre  of  the  Gibeonites  (2  Sam.  zzi.),  Zedekiah's  perjury 
against  Nebuchadnezzar  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  13).  3.  The  outrages  of  heathens  upon  their 
brother  heathens,  as  when  the  King  of  Moab  "  burned  the  bones  of  the  King  of  Bdom 
into  lime  "  (Amos  ii.  1). 

III.  A  sin  against  a  brother  is  a  sin  against  God,  who  made  him  a 
BBOTHEB.  The  warning  of;  1  Cor.  viii.  12  is  applicable  beyond  the  limits  of  the  Christian 
Church.  It  was  a  fearful  prediction  that  "  the  brother  shall  betray  the  brother  to 
death."  Give  to  the  term  "  brother  "  its  Divine  significance,  and  every  act  of  treachery 
or  unfaithfulness  is  seen  to  be  odious  to  the  Father  of  all.  Hence  the  claims  of  truth 
towards  our  "  neighbour,  for  we  are  members  one  of  another ;  "  of  "  all  good  fidelity  " 
on  the  part  of  servants  towards  masters,  "  that  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God ; " 
of  standing  to  our  word,  though  it  may  be  to  our  own  hurt,  that  we  may  stand  in  the 
holy  place  of  the  Lord ;  of  loving  our  enemies,  that  we  may  be  children  of  our  Father 
who  is  in  heaven. 

IV.  The  Fatherhood  or  God  is  one  great  motive  fob  the  right  treatment 
OF  HIS  children.  Cruelty,  tyranny,  slavery,  and  every  form  of  social  wrong  would 
then  be  banished  from  the  family  of  God,  the  brotherhood  of  men.  War  would  be  as 
Intolerable  as  fighting  in  the  family  circle.  Punishment  of  offending  brothers  would 
only  be  inflicted  under  a  grave  sense  of  our  responsibility  towards  their  Father  and  ours. 
Practical  benevolence  would  be  inspired  by  God's  love  to  us  (1  John  iii.  17).  And  as 
Abraham  interceded  for  the  preservation  of  the  heathen  Sodomites,  so  should  we,  by 
prayers  and  labours,  seek  the  salvation  of  the  whole  nature  ("spirit  and  soul  and 
Wy,"  1  ThesB.  v.  23)  of  those  children  of  God  who  are  still  lost  to  the  Father's  home. 

Notice,  in  conclusion,  how  the  fuller  revelation  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God  in  Jesus 
Christ,  and  our  adoption  in  him,  gives  power  and  pathos  to  all  the  truths  we  have 

mentioned  and  the  motives  to  brotherly  kindness  we  have  enforced  (1  John  iv.  9 11). 

The  knowledge  of  such  a  Father  should  inspire  our  hearts  with  the  most  tender  com- 
passion towards  our  brethren  who  know  him  not. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  2.— Tht  carting  nf  our  Utaingi.  The  direct  address  of  this  verse  is  to  th« 
priestly  class,  whose  irreverence  and  indifference  were  so  dearly  shown  in  their  offering 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALAOHI.  29 

the  people's  unworthy  sacrifices,  without  attempting  to  reprove  them,  or  endeavonring  to 
awaken  them  to  worthier  and  more  spiritual  views  of  sacrifice.  When  the  ministry 
has  become  a  fountain  and  a  support  of  religious  negligence  and  formality,  the  nation 
is  placed  in  extreme  peril,  anil  severe  providential  dealings  for  the  national  and  the 
priestly  humiliation  may  be  expected.  The  Divine  threatening  here  is,  "I  will  curse 
your  blessings."  This  may  mean  either  of  three  things;  it  may,  quite  possibly, 
include  all  three.  It  may  mean,  "  I  will  turn  the  gifts  of  the  people  into  curses." 
Or,  "  I  will  make  the  harvest  of  your  work  in  the  fields  a  failure  and  a  curse  instead 
of  a  blessing."  Or,  "  I  will  make  the  blessing  which  you  priests  pronounce  upon  the 
people  proTfe  a  curse  to  them."  It  should,  however,  be  noticed  that  we  now  use  the 
term  "  curse  "  with  a  connotation  which  is  much  more  severe  than  that  of  Malachi. 
Our  word  "denunciation"  would  better  fit  the  prophet's  meaning. 

I.  Tdbning  the  people's  gifts  into  oubses.  The  priests  received  tithes,  portions 
of  the  sacrifices,  and  offerings.  God's  judgment  on  the  irreverent  priests  would  come 
in  limitation  of  tithes,  disease  from  eating  of  the  sick  beasts  offered  as  sacrifices,  and 
the  worthlessness  of  the  offerings ;  for  he  who  could  give  a  mean  thing  to  God  would 
be  sure  to  give  mean  things  to  his  servants.  Let  God  withdraw  his  added  blessing, 
and  our  very  "  good  things  "  fail  to  do  us  good.  The  psalmist  recognizes  this  by  praying 
that  God  would  curse  the  blessings  of  his  enemies  (see  Fs.  Ixix.  22).  This  is  the 
permanent  truth  for  all  the  ages,  "  The  blessing  of  the  Lord,  it  maketh  rich,  and  he 
addeth  no  sorrow  with  it."  Illustrate  by  the  "little  book"  of  Revelntion,  which  was 
sweet  to  the  taste,  but  bitter  to  the  soul. 

II.  TuBNiNQ  THE  HABVEST  OF  TOIL  IKTO  A  CURSE.  (Vcr.  3.)  What  a  blessing 
the  harvest  of  the  fields  is,  let  the  Harvest  Home  testify.  These  priests  and  Levites 
were  compelled  to  go  to  their  homes,  and  try  and  gain  a  living  by  the  tillage  of  their 
land.  But  the  judgment  of  God  on  irreverence  and  indifference  would  follow  them 
there,  and  make  their  harvest  a  "  heap."  They  would  find  that,  whatever  they 
touched,  there  was  no  Divine  blessing  on  their  work. 

III.  Tdrninq  the  pbibstlt  blessino  op  the  people  into  a  oubse.  The  words 
of  the  priestly  blessing  are  given  in  Numb.  vi.  23 — 27.  It  is  the  deepest  view  of  this 
Divine  threatening  to  see  it  to  mean  this — The  blessings  which  you,  negligent  and 
Irreverent  priests,  pronounce  in  your  formal  way  shall  break  in  curses  upon  the  heads 
of  the  people. — E.  T. 

Ver.  4. — Judgments  recalling  covenant  obligations.  Ver.  3  gives  the  great  feature 
of  God's  judgment,  first  as  a  fact,  and  then  by  a  figure.  The  Levites  might  shirk 
their  temple  duties,  and  go  off  to  their  fields  j  but  God's  hand  would  be  upon  them 
there;  he  would  "corrupt"  the  seed  they  sowed,  so  that  their  harvest  would  be 
a  failure.  And  so  they  would  stand  before  the  people  impoverished,  disgraced,  and 
contemptible;  with  the  stamp  of  failure  on  everything  they  touched.  A  recent 
account  of  the  ceremony  connected  with  the  recovery  of  a  Brahmin  who  had  broken 
his  caste  explains  the  Eastern  custom  indicated  in  this  verse.  One  part  of  the 
ceremony  was  the  plastering  of  his  entire  body,  except  his  eyes,  with  filth ;  he  was 
then  plunged  into  the  river,  and  when  the  filth  was  washed  away,  the  man  was 
restored.  The  idea  of  ver.  4  is  that  this  Divine  judgment  on  unfaithful  Levi  must 
take  the  place  of  the  covenant  of  life  and  peace  which  God  had  made  with  Levi,  and 
would  gladly  have  kept  with  his  descendants.  "  I  gave  to  Levi  (that  is,  to  you,  the 
priestly  tribe)  a  pledge  of  favour ;  but  you  have  forfeited  it,  and  it  is  now  therefore 
turned  into  a  threat  of  reprobation  for  your  sins.  No  longer  a  covenant  of  peace,  but 
of  woe." 

I.  Judgment  is  God's  stkangb  work.  It  has  not  been  sufiBciently  noticed,  that 
God  never  threatens  without  indication  of  deep  feeling  of  regret  that  he  should  be 
compelled  to  threaten.  This  may  be  illustrated  from  every  part  of  Scripture,  and 
especially  in  Divine  dealings  with  the  autediluvians,  the  Sodomites,  the  Israelites, 
and  the  Ninevites.  The  key-note  is  given  in  this  exclamation,  "  Have  I  any  pleasure 
at  all  in  the  death  of  the  wicked  ?  "  God  is  most  unworthily  misrepresented  when  h« 
is  thought  of  as  punishing  in  a  spirit  of  coldness  and  indifference.  To  judge  and  afflict 
is  holiest  pain  to  him. 

XL  Judgment  ib  God's  nboessabt  wobk.    Punishment  belongs  to  moral  discipline. 


30  THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHI.  [oh.  n.  1—17. 

It  ii  »n  essential  feature  of  it.  It  is  part  of  all  paternity.  It  is  involved  in  the  trust 
of  childhood.  God  could  not  he  his  own  Divine  self  if  he  did  not  punish.  To  let  sin 
go  would  he  unworthy  of  God.     Father  or  King,  he  must  he  severe  on  wrong-doers. 

III.  Thkbateninq  of  judombnt  is  God's  humbling  work.  Qod.  always  threatens 
before  punishing.  Threatening  recalls  obligations.  Recalling  obligations  sets  conduct 
in  contrast  with  duty,  and  humbles  us  in  the  dust.  Nothing  bows  us  into  penitence 
like  seeing  before  us  what  we  pledged  ourselves  to  he,  and  being  forced  to  place  beside 
it  what  we  are.— B.  T, 

Vers.  5,  6. — The  double  feature  of  a  Jehovah-covenant.  The  oovenanf^as  made 
with  the  tribe  of  Levi ;  and  the  precise  terms  here  referred  to  occur  iu  the  renewal  of 
covenant  with  Phinehas,  "  Behold,  I  give  unto  him  my  covenant  of  peace :  and  he 
shall  have  it,  and  his  seed  after  him,  even  the  covenant  of  an  everlasting  priesthood  " 
(Numb.  XXV.  12,  13).  A  covenant  is  a  mutual  engagement  entered  into  by  two  parties. 
Each  party  takes  pledges ;  and  each  is  exonerated  from  keeping  his  pledge  if  the  other 
party  breaks  his.  Too  often  the  Divine  covenant  is  treated  as  if  it  only  involved 
God's  putting  himself  under  pledge  of  service  to  us.  The  truth  needs  to  be  emphasized 
that  the  covenant  includes  our  pledije  of  faithful  service  to  him.  And  this  is  true  of 
the  new  covenant,  sealed  with  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  Jehovah's  pledge  to  Levi.  "  My  covenant  was  with  him  of  life  and  peace." 
There  is  some  reason  for  thinking  that,  before  the  Sinaitic  revelation  was  made,  the 
tribe  of  Levi  provided  the  moral  and  religious  teachers  of  the  Israelites.  They  were 
designated  for  the  special  work  of  the  priesthood,  but  the  Divine  covenant  took  a 
special  shape  in  consequence  of  the  loyalty  and  zeal  of  the  Levites  in  the  matter  of  the 
golden  calf;  and  of  Phinehas  in  vindicating  the  Divine  claim  to  moral  purity.  God 
pledged  two  things:  (1)  "life,"  or  permanence;  and  (2)  "peace,"  or  prosperity. 
Security  that  the  honour  and  usefulness  of  the  position  should  be  quietly  maintained. 
There  is  a  Divine  side  to  every  covenant.  God  condescends  to  pledge  himself  to  men. 
He  promises  his  providings,  preservings,  guidings,  redeemings,  sanctifyings.  In  the 
new  covenant,  in  the  hands  of  the  Mediator,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  all  the  old  terms 
of  covenant  are  renewed,  and  the  special  pledge  of  salvation  from  sin  is  added.  He 
who  has  begun  a  good  worl?  in  us  is  pledged  to  perfect  it  unto  the  day  of  Jesus' Christ. 

II.  Levi's  pledge  to  Jehovah.  This  side  of  covenant  seldom  receives  sufficient 
ittention.  The  Levites  gave  themselves  to  Jehovah's  service ;  they  pledged  themselves 
to  devote  their  lives  to  the  services  of  his  sanctuary,  the  teaching  of  his  truth,  and 
the  upholding  of  his  honour.  So  far  as  the  early  Levites  were  typified  in  Phinehas, 
they  kept  their  pledge.  Their  personal  characters  honoured  the  covenant  (ver,  6). 
Their  steadfastness  in  duty,  their  cherished  sense  of  right,  and  their  active  ministry 
jigainst  all  iniquity,  maintained  the  pledge  of  the  covenant.  Then  how  striking  is 
the  contrast  suggested  between  the  Levites  of  the  early  times  and  the  Levites  ol 
Malachi's  days  1  Their  broken  pledge  meant  that  God  was  relieved  of  all  obligation 
to  keep  his  pledge  to  them. — R.  T. 

Ver.  6. — The  active  influence  of  the  steadfast  man.  Levi  is  taken  as  the  type  of 
juch  a  man.  The  man  who  walks  with  God  in  peace  aud  equity  cannot  fail  to  exert 
a  strong  personal  influence.  He  will  "  turn  many  from  iniquity."  The  point  of  this 
sentence  is  that  active  influence  for  good  is  exerted  by  passive  goodness.  Men  are 
powers  by  being  established  characters.  Steadfastness  is  ministry.  If  it  be  so,  then 
there  are  more  workers  for  God  than  come  into  usual  calculation.  Priests  and  clergy 
have  their  power  in  what  they  are — in  cultured,  sanctified  character — quite  as  truly  as 
in  Divine  endowments  and  in  trained  efficiencies. 

I.  The  steadfast  man  exbets  active  power  or  befroach.  He  need  utter  no 
word ;  his  steadfast  goodness  speaks  loudly  enough.  There  is  no  reproach  comes  to 
the  evil  liver  like  the  simple  presence  of  the  good  liver.  Nothing  shamed  into  silence 
the  foulness  of  old  prison  scenes  like  the  simple  presence  of  the  saintly  Mrs.  Fry. 
And  in  sublimer  ways  the  truth  is  illustrated  in  the  case  of  our  Lord.  The  devils 
that  possessed  men  felt  the  reproach  of  his  simple  presence,  and  cried  out  in  their 
alarm.  Every  one  of  us  who  stands  firm  to  righteousness  and  equity  is  actively 
reproving  the  unsteadiness  and  evil  that  are  daily  around  us. 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHl.  »1 


II.   ThB   STBAD7AST   MAN   EXERTS  THE   ACTIVE   POWEB  OF  BXAMPLS.      The  imitative 

faculty  of  man  i«  more  influiutial  than  we  are  woat  to  think.  Everybody  is  disposed 
to  make  models.  And  all  persons  are  materially  helped  by  having  high  models  of 
virtue  in  their  spheres.  Every  individual  has  a  sphere  of  influence.  Within  that 
sphere  his  example  is  an  active  power.  We  are  all  ideals  to  some  one.  Then  "  what 
manner  of  persona  ought  we  to  be  ?  " 

IIL  Thb  steadfast  man  exerts  a  positive  power  on  men's  wills.  To  see 
a  man  who  can  stand  fast  to  righteousneiiS  actually  strengthens  the  decision  and 
resolve  of  others.  In  it  is  the  mastery  of  the  tempter's  lie  that  we  cannot  hope  to 
be  good.  Our  wills  are  weakened  by  the  fear  that  goodness  is  unattainable,  and  it  is 
of  no  use  to  try  to  be  good.  Every  steadfast  man  proves  that  man  can  will  the  good 
and  do  it,  and  that  God  stands  by  such  a  mian  in  his  resolve. 

IV.  The  steadfast  man  exerts  a  positive  saving  influenok.  He  "  turns 
men  from  iniquity."  He  cannot  leave  wrong-doers  alone.  If  the  priests  of  Malaohi's 
time  had  been  steadfast  men,  they  would  soon  have  turned  the  worshippers  from  the 
iniquity  of  bringing  the  lame  and  sick  for  sacrifice. — B.  T. 

Ver.  7. — Reasonable  expectations  of  Q-odCs  ministers.  "  The  priest's  lips  should  keep 
knowledge,"  The  ideal  priest  is  here  characterized,  not  by  ceremonial  exactitude,  but 
by  moral  integrity.  SacriScing  is  not  so  essential  as  religious  knowledge,  sound 
learning,  and  wholesome  teaching.  The  proper  expects^tion  of  God's  ministers  is  that 
they  will  tell  God's  will  to  the  people,  not  only  because  they  know  it,  but  even  more 
because  they  keep  it.  In  our  religious  teachers  we  look  for  adequacy  of  knowledge, 
and  adequacy  of  experience. 

I.  Adequaot  of  knowledqe.  In  some  countries,  and  in  some  ages,  the  sacred 
ministry  hag  been  the  chief  source  of  secular  knowledge  for  the  people.  That  is  not 
the  case  now,  and  in  civilized  countries.  But  still  God's  mauisters  need  to  be  abreast, 
and  to  keep  abreast,  of  all  that  is, thought  and  known  in  their  day,  because  to  them 
is  entrusted  the  work  of  conserving  the  Divine  element  in  all  knowledge,  and  the 
Divine  relation  to  everything  discovered.  Unless  ministers  have  adequate  knowledge, 
they  occupy  a  lower  plane  than  the  secular  teachers,  and  fail  to  influence  the  higher 
range  of  students  with  Divine  claims,  truths,  and  principles.  To  put  it  in  another 
way — The  ministry  must  be  on  the  level  of  the  people  if  it  is  to  sympathize  with  them ; 
but  the  ministry  must  be  in  intelligence  and  knowledge  above  the  people,  if  it  is  to 
lift  the  people  to  higher  things.  Two  points  may  be  illustrated.  1.  The  ministers 
should  gain  knowledge  as  men  can  gain  it.  2.  The  ministers  should  gain  knowledge 
as  spiritual  men  only  can  gain  it.  It  is  that  spiritually  acquired  knowledge  that  is 
the  minister's  true  efficiency;  and  more  especially  that  spiritual  knowledge  as  it 
relates  to  the  mysteries  of  the  sacred  Word. 

II.  Adequaot  of  expebienoe.  There  is  book-knowledge,  and  there  is  experi- 
mental knowledge.  It  may  be  argued  that  for  the  common,  everyday  relations  and 
duties  of  life,  experience  is  a  more  valuable  and  practical  teacher  than  books  can  be. 
It  is  certainly  true  that,  for  the  ministry,  experience  is  the  essential  thing.  A  man 
can  only  speak  with  power  when  "  he  has  tasted  and  handled  and  felt  the  good  word 
of  life."  The  people  have  confldence  in  the  teacher  who  has  been  taught  of  God  in 
the  discipline  of  life.  What  needs  to  be  pointed  out  is  that  these  two  ^equacies  are 
not  antagonistic.     In  their  harmonious  culture  lies  the  true  power. — U.  T. 

Ver.  10. — Unfaithfulness  to  Ood  involves  injury  to  our  hrethren.  This  verse  begins 
a  new  subject,  and  it  might  have  headed  a  new  chapter.  Answering  to  the  indifference 
shown  in  regard  to  Divine  worship  was  an  indifference  in  regard  to  moral  and  family 
relations.  Loose  worship  and  loose  social  morality  usually  go  together.  Let  men 
become  careless  about  God's  claims,  and  they  will  be  found  careless  about  marriage 
relations,  and  will  lightly  do  wrong  by  the  wives  of  their  youth,  in  the  mastery  of 
their  self-indulgence.  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  had  to  deal  very  sternly  with  the  social 
evils  arising  from  the  ready  divorce  of  Jewish  wives  for  the  sake  of  heathen  wives. 
Malachi  begins  his  expostulations  on  this  matter  by  putting  the  people  in  mind  that 
they  owned  one  God  and  Father,  in  opposition  to  the  idols  of  the  heathen,  and  there- 
fore should  deal  with  one  another  as  brethren.    By  the  marriages  with  strangers  they 


82  THE   BOOK   OF   MALAOHl.  [oa.  n.  1—17 

were   dealing  falsely  and  injuriously  with  their   brethren  and  countrymen,  by   ill 
treating  their  daughters  whom  they  had  taken  in  marriage. 

I.  Bbeaeino  Good's  covenant  breaks  it  fob  othebs.  Illustrate  by  the  case  of 
the  golden  calf.  Those  who  took  no  part  in  the  sin  had  to  take  part  in  the  penalty. 
It  is  the  bitterness  of  all  wrong-doing  that  we  can  never  keep  its  consequences  to 
ourselves.  "The  fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes,  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set 
on  edge." 

II.  Unpaithfulness  to  God  makes  injubt  to  oub  bbotheb  by  bbino  a  bad 
EXAMPLE.  Every  man  is  bound  to  help  his  brother  to  be  good.  It  is  often  shown 
that  every  man  is  bound  to  aid  his  brother  in  distress.  It  is  not  so  often  shown  that 
every  man  has  a  claim  on  his  brother,  that  he  should  help  him  to  goodness.  If  a  man 
does  wrong,  is  unfaithful  to  God,  he  actually  injures  his  brother  by  depriving  him  of 
his  rights  in  his  good  example.  Constantly  we  find  wrong-doing  excused  by  examples 
of  wrong-doing.     Sinners  defraud  their  neighbours  of  their  rights. 

in.  Unfaithfulness  to  God  may  lead  to  positive  acts  op  injdby  to  oub 
bbethben.  The  man  who  is  strong  enough  to  oppose  God  is  usually  masterful 
enough  to  injure  his  fellow.  He  who  does  not  regard  God  is  not  likely  to  regard  man. 
The  love  of  God  carries  the  love  of  man ;  the  revolt  against  God  is  sure  to  involve  the 
loosening  of  humanities. — B.  T. 

Ver.  11.—  Worship  spoiled  by  the  tears  of  the  injured.  The  divorced  and  abandoned 
wives  went  to  the  courts  of  the  temple  "with  tears,  with  weeping,  and  with  crying." 
"Their  wail  of  lamentation  mingled  with  the  prayers  and  hymns  of  the  sacrificing 
priests.  How  could  the  Lord  '  regard  the  offering  any  more,  or  accept  it  at  their 
hands,'  when  attended  by  such  accompaniments?"  The  point  forced  on  attention  is 
this :  Here  were  men  bringing  their  sacrifices,  and  offering  their  prayers  for  God's 
blessing.  And  at  the  same  time,  here  were  the  injured  women  praying  against  their 
prayers,  and  pleading  that  their  worship  should  mot  be  accepted.  The  tears  were 
spoiling  the  worship.  There  is  scarcely  a  thought  more  solemn  and  searching  than 
the  thought  that  few,  if  any,  of  our  prayers  go  up  to  God  unqualified  and  unchecked. 
We  pray  for,  something  prays  against,  and  God  withholds  the  blessing  because  the 
balance  is  in  favour  of  the  "  against." 

I.  We  may  pbay  against  cub  own  prayebs.  It  is  said  of  St.  Augustine  that  for 
some  time  he  prayed,  "  Lord,  convert  me,  but  not  yet."  That  was  Umself  praying 
against  himself.  When  duty  prays  one  way  and  heart  another ;  when  we  are  not  quite 
sure  whether  we  want  what  we  ask  for ;  and  when  we  are  careless  about  receiving  the 
answer, — we  really  pray  against  our  own  prayers.  God  may  see  our  real  prayer  to  be 
something  quite  other  than  our  words. 

II.  Others  maybe  praying  against  odb  pbaybbs.  This  may  be  done  unreason- 
ably, and  then  God  makes  the  prayer  against  strengthen  the  prayer  for.  Or  it  may  be 
done  reasonably,  as  when  the  cry  of  the  widow,  the  fatherless,  the  divorced  wife,  the 
sweated  workman,  or  the  neglected  sufferer,  goes  up  to  God  against  us.  It  would  be 
well  sometimes  to  ask  ourselves  whether  there  can  be  anything  praying  against  our 
prayers. — R.  T. 

Ver.  15. — Qod  served  by  our  meeting  family  obligations.  This  verse  is  difficult  to 
paraphrase.  '  Speaker's  Commentary '  renders  thus :  "  And  hath  no  one  acted  thus  (in 
putting  away  his  wife)  who  yet  had  a  remnant  of  sense  in  liim  ?  "  The  prophet  makes 
the  people  say  this  in  excuse  of  their  conduct,  and  in  allusion  to  the  Patriarch  Abraham, 
who  put  away  his  wife  Hagar.  Wordsworth  puts  the  sentence  interrogatively,  "  And 
did  not  one  (Abraham)  do  it  (i.e.  put  away  his  wife  Hagar),  and  yet  he  had  a  remnant 
of  the  spirit  ?  "  The  answer  to  the  question  is  that  Abraham  was  justified  because  he 
acted  upon  the  special  direction  of  God  in  seeking  a  seed  within  the  covenant.  But 
the  people  of  Malachi's  days  were  acting  on  pure  self-willedness,  and  with  no  possible 
excuse  of  having  received  Divine  directions.  They  were  not  serving  God.  God  is 
served  by  the  fulfilling  of  family  obligations.  He  cannot  be  served  by  the  shirking  of 
ordinary  obligations  at  the  instance  of  unbridled  passion. 

I.  Family  obligations  should  be  entebed  upon  sebiouslt.  And  seriooslT 
means  with  (1)  due   self-control;   (2)  quietly;    (3)  thoughtfully;    (4)  prayerfully. 


OH.  II.  1—17,]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHl.  83 

Early  marriageB  are  natural,  and  may  be  prudent;  but  when  tbey  are  the  result  of 
impulse,  of  wrong-doing,  or  of  lightness  and  inconsiderateuess,  they  are  a  most  fruitful 
source  of  trouble.  No  marriage  should  be  consummated  unless  upon  it  the  Divine 
blessing  can  be  honestly,  sincerely,  heartily,  and  hopefully  asked. 

II.  Family  obliqations  should  be  maintained  with  patient  pbbsistenot. 
Much  occurs  in  married  life  to  knit  hearts  together;  but  much  must  necessarily 
occur  which,  if  permitted,  would  drive  hearts  asunder.  Bearing  and  forbearing 
have  to  be  resolute  work  until  they  become  easy  work.  And  every  triumph  over 
self  makes  every  new  triumph  easier.  If  each  lives  for  the  other,  all  goes  well. 
If  either  lives  for  self,  all  goes  ill.  "  Let  none  deal  unfaithfully  by  the  wile  of  his 
youth." 

III.  Family  relations  should  be  beoken  only  with  extreme  pain.  Cases  do 
occur.  But  every  one  who  is  anxious  for  the  moral  well-being  of  the  nation  looks 
with  extreme  anxiety  on  the  increasing  readiness  with  which  divorces  are  sought  and 
granted.— E.  T. 

Ver.  17. — Tke  sin  of  confusing  morai  distinctions.  "  Te  say.  Every  one  that  doeth 
evil  is  good  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  he  delighteth  in  them."  Isaiah  pleads  in  a 
similar  way,  "  Woe  unto  them  that  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil;  that  put  darkness  for 
light,  and  light  for  darkness ;  that  put  bitter  lor  sweet,  and  sweet  for  bitter!  "  (Isa.  v.  20). 
It  seems  that  some,  in  the  days  of  Malachi,  answered  his  pleadings  with  insolent 
ilefiance,  even  daring  to  deny  moral  obligations  altogether. 

I,  Calling  evil  good  is  the  way  to  excuse  our  sins.  Daring  men  who'  are 
determined  to  "  follow  the  devices  and  desires  of  their  own  hearts,"  will  bravely  eay, 
"Evil,  be  thou  my  t^ood."  But  the  process  of  deterioration  is  usually  slower  and 
more  subtle.  We  want  to  do  wrong,  and  we  begin  to  wish  that  it  were  not  wrong- 
Then  comes  the  doubt  whether  it  ii  wrong.  Then  we  begin  to  imagine  that  it  is 
wrong  only  under  particular  circumstances.  Then  we  find  that  our  case  does  not 
come  into  the  bad  list.  And  the  way  is  open  to  do  the  wrong  under  the  shadow  of 
our  self-rfelusion  that  it  really  is  good.  There  are  family  delusions  that  lead  us  to  call 
evil  good;  society  delusions;  sectarian  delaoions ;  and  personal  delusions.  These  last 
are  the  most  serious.  A  man  can  easily  persuade  himself  that  the  pleasant  is  the 
right;  and  he  may  only  mean  the  pleasant  to  the  body.  The  pleasant  to  the  soul, 
the  pleasant  because  of  G-ud's  benediction,  helps  to  truer  judgments. 

IL  Calling  good  evil  is  the  way  to  euin  oub  souls.  There  is  no  hope  for 
a  man  when  he  loses  his  sensitiveness  to  good,  for  with  it  goes  his  sensitiveness  to 
God.  A  man  is  never  lost  while  he  can  believe  in  goodness.  There  is  anchorage  in 
that.  He  is  indeed  diiven  with  the  wind  and  tossed  hopelessly  on  the  sea  of  life,  if  he 
ever  comes  to  say,  "  All  is  evil ;  "  "  All  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit ; "  "  All  men 
are  liars  ; "  "  There  is  no  good :  there  is  neither  good  nor  God."  'J'here  is  good,  for 
there  is  God.  He  is  God,  and  much  that  his  creatures  do  bears  the  stamp  of  his  good- 
uess.  Evil  and  good  are  contraries.  Hope  for  humanity  lies  in  their  never  getting 
confused. — R.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Spiritiial  reformation.  "  And  now,  0  ye  priests,  this  commandment  is 
for  you,"  etc.  The  giaad  subject  we  gather  from  these  words  is  spiritual  reformatian. 
"Now,  0  ye  priests."  The  priests  are  specially  addressed  and  reproved,  for  they, 
whose  mission  it  was  to  raise  the  people  to  true  worship  and  to  hoiiness,  led  them  into 
sin.    Notice — 

I.  The  nature  of  the  spiritual  reformation  required.  "  If  ye  will  not  hear, 
and  if  ye  will  not  lay  it  to  heart,  to  give  glory  unto  my  Name,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts."  Prom  this  language  it  would  appear  that  true  spiritual  reformation  involves 
two  things.  1.  A  practical  application  of  the  Word  of  God.  There  should  be  right 
attention  to  it.  That  Word  is  not  only  to  be  heard,  earnestly  listened  to,  but  to  be 
laid  to  heart,  which  means  practical  attention.  It  is  to  be  applied  to  correct  the 
wrong  that  is  in  us,  and  to  generate  and  develop  the  true.  2.  An  entire  dedicati<m  to 
the  glory  of  Ood.  "  To  give  glory  unto  my  Name."  All  genuine  spiritual  reformation 
is  implied  in  this— right  attention  to  the  Divine  Word,  right  application  of  the  Divine 
Word,  and  an  entire  dedication  to  the  glory  of  God.  This  is  a  reformation  not  of 
malachi.  a 


34 


THE  BOOK  OP  MALACHl.  [oh.  u.  1—17. 


parchment  but  of  principle,  not  of  systems  but  of  souls.  It  is  in  truth  the  only 
reformation  worth  having. 

IL  The  ubgbnot  of  the  spieitijal  eefobmation  bequikbd.  The  neglect  thereof 
incurs :  1.  A  curse.  "  I  will  even  send  a  curse  upon  you,  and  I  will  curse  your 
blessings."  " '  I  will  curse  your  benedictions.'  Not  the  personal  advantages  and 
perquisites  enjoyed  by  the  priests,  but  the  blessings  they  pronounced  upon  the  people. 
The  service  had  been  merely  formal  without  any  sort  of  reverence  in  it ;  the  blessings 
they  uttered  should  retributively  be  evacuated  of  all  efficacy  and  should  be  a  mere 
formula  "  (Dr.  Dods).  What  an  awful  thing  to  have  blessings  turned  into  curses  I  and 
yet  if  we  are  unregenerate  and  unrenewed  this  takes  place  by  the  very  laws  of  our 
moral  constitution.  As  hemlock  turns  even  the  sunbeam  into  poison,  corrupt  souls 
txan  Grod's  blessings  into  maledictions.  2.  A  rebuke.  According  to  Keil,  Ewald,  and 
others,  the  expression,  "  Behold,  I  will  corrupt  your  seed,"  should  be,  "  Behold,  I  will 
rebuke  your  arms."  Perhaps  the  idea  is — I  will  wither  your  power,  I  will  check  the 
growth,  of  your  posterity.  There  is  no  true  prosperity  without  spiritual  reformation. 
3.  Contempt.  "  I  will  spread  dung  upon  your  faces,  even  the  dung  of  your  solemn 
feasts."  "  The  dung  in  the  maw  of  the  victims  sacrificed  on  the  feast-days.  The  maw 
was  the  perquisite  of  the  priests  (Deut.  xviii.  3),  which  gives  peculiar  point  to  the 
threat  here.  You  shall  get  the  dung  of  the  maw  as  your  perquisite  instead  of  the 
maw.  And  one  shall  take  you  away  with  it,  i.e.  you  shall  be  taken  away  with  it,  it 
shall  cleave  to  you  wherever  you  go  "  (Moore).  "  Dung  shall  be  thrown  in  your  faces, 
and  ye  shall  be  taken  away,  i.e.  removed  out  of  the  way,  as  dung  would  be,  dung- 
begrimed  as  ye  shall  be  (1  Kings  xiv,  10 ;  Jer.  xvi.  4 ;  xiii.  19)  "  (Fausset). 

CoNOLUBioN.  Are  we  the  subjects  of  this  spiritual  reformation?  Have  we  been 
renewed  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds  ?  "  Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  thee.  Ye  must  be 
bom  again."— D.  T. 

Vers.  4 — 9. — 2%e  minister  of  Divine  truth.  "  My  covenant  was  with  him  of  life 
and  peace,"  etc.  We  have  here  the  minister  of  Divine  truth  as  he  always  should  be, 
»nd  as  he  often  is — 

I.  The  ministeb  of  Divikb  tbuth  as  he  always  should  be.  We  learn :  1.  That 
he  should  he  a  man  divinely  called.  "Ye  shall  know  that  I  have  sent  this  com- 
mandment unto  you,  that  my  covenant  might  be  with  Levi,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts." 
What  was  the  Divine  commission  to  the  priesthood  ?  Here  it  is :  "  Phinehas,  the  son  of 
Eleazar,  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest,  hath  turned  my  wrath  away  from  the  children  of 
Israel,  while  he  was  zealous  for  my  sake  among  them,  that  I  consumed  not  the  children 
of  Israel  in  my  jealousy.  Wherefore  say.  Behold,  I  give  unto  him  my  covenant  of  peace : 
and  he  shall  have  it,  and  his  seed  after  him  "  (Numb.  xxv.  11 — 13).  The  Aaronic  priests 
were  called  of  God  to  be  the  ministers  of  life  and  peace  to  the  people.  Two  of  the  greatest 
blessings  of  being.  What  is  existence  without  life — intellectual  and  spiritual  life?  and 
what  is  life  without  peace— pesrce  with  self,  the  universe,  and  with  God?  2.  That  he 
should  he  a  man  of  profound  reverence.  "  I  gave  them  to  him  for  the  fear  wherewith  he 
feared  me,  and  was  afraid  before  my  Name."  The  priest  was  not  only  to  be  entirely  free 
from  a  volatile  and  frivolous  spirit,  but  to  be  profoundly  reverential,  pervaded  by  a 
holy  awe.  He  was  to  be  impressed  with  the  solemnity  of  the  commission  with  which 
he  was  entrusted.  3.  That  he  should  he  a  man  of  moral  truthfulness.  "The  law  of 
truth  was  in  his  mouth,  and  iniquity  was  not  found  in  his  lips."  The  moral  laws 
which  he  has  to  inculcate  and  administer  are  to  be  regal  forces  in  his  own  soul,  and 
embodied  in  his  life.  He  is  to  be  free  from  the  control  of  all  shams  and  theories,  a  man 
of  stern,  moral  realities.  4.  That  he  should  be  a  man  of  practical  devotion.  "  He 
walked  with  me  in  peace  and  equity."  His  life  should  be  a  walk ;  there  should  be  progress 
in  it ;  he  should  walk  with  God,  and  walk  with  God  in  "  peace  and  equity."  5.  27iat  he 
should  be  a  man  of  the  highest  usefulness.  "  And  did  turn  many  away  from  iniquity." 
Iniquity  is  man's  curse  and  ruin ;  to  turn  him  from  that  is  to  save  him,  and  that  is  the 
work  of  the  true  minister.  The  commission  given  to  Paul  was  to  "  turn  men  from 
darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Sntan  unto  God"  (Acts  xxvi.  18).  6.  ITiat 
he  should  be  a  man  of  the  highest  intelligence.  "For  the  priest's  lips  should  keep 
knowledge,  and  they  should  seek  the  Law  at  his  mouth :  for  he  is  the  messenger  of 
the  Lord  of  hosts."    Being  a  "  messenger  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  he  is  to  understand 


OH.  n,  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALAGHI.  *5 


and  appreciate  the  wonderful  message,  and  give  it  from  his  own  mouth  to  the  people. 
Such  is  what  Levi,  as  an  ideal  priest  was  and  did,  and  every  minister  of  Divine  truth 
must  be  and  do  the  same.  What  a  high  ftandard  to  aim  at  I  How  its  light  condemns 
and  abashes  most  of  us  I 

II.  The  minister  of  Divise  truth  as  he  often  is.  The  false  minister  is  here 
represented:  1.  As  swerving  fram  the  right,  "But  ye  are  departed  out  of  the  way." 
Ye  are  very  different  in  your  conduct  from  the  ideal  priest  and  even  from  your  actual 
predecessors  in  office ;  your  careless  teaching,  your  superficial  dealing,  your  contentment 
with  formulas  and  external  rites,  and  your  personal  laxity,  have  given  men  a  prejudice 
against  religion  altogether.  Instead  of  helping  men  to  accept  the  truth  and  live  godly 
lives,  you  have  caused  even  those  who  wished  to  do  so  to  take  offence  and  turn  away.  A 
sceptical  age  is  necessarily  the  result  of  externality  and  heartlessness  in  the  religious 
teachers  of  previous  generations.  2.  As  leading  the  people  astray.  "  Ye  have  caused 
many  to  stumble  at  the  Law."  Not  only  by  their  speech,  but  by  their  conduct,  do 
many  who  profess  to  be  ministers  of  God's  Word  lead  the  people  to  stumble.  Their 
inconsistent  life,  their  theological  jargon,  their  exclusive  spirit,  lead  the  people  to 
"  stumble  "  at  Divine  things.  3.  As  perverting  the  truth.  "  Ye  have  corrupted  the  cove- 
nant of  LevL"  How  many  there  are  who  tamper  with  the  Word  of  God,  who  employ 
it  to  support  some  favourite  prejudice,  or  to  buttress  their  little  sect !  How  far,  for 
example,  is  our  conventional  theology  from  being  like  the  theology  of  Christ !  4.  As 
hecoming  contemptible.  "Therefore  have  I  also  made  you  contemptible  and  base 
before  all  the  people."  Ministers  who  hunt  after  honour,  popularity,  gain,  become 
contemptible  in  the  estimation  of  intelligent  and  unsophisticated  souls.  The  pulpit 
of  England  is  certainly  sinking  into  contempt  with  the  English  people.  This  is  a 
sad  calamity.  The  decrease  in  the  number  of  those  who  attend  churches,  compared 
with  the  increase  of  population ;  the  growth  of  a  literature  in  thorough  antagonism  to 
the  spirit  and  aims  of  Christianity ;  and  the  fact  that  the  great  bulk  of  the  reading  and 
thinking  men  of  England  stand  aloof  from  all  Churches,  plainly  show  that  the  pulpit 
of  England  is  sinking  into  popular  contempt.  Primates  and  prelates  and  preachers  are 
treated  with  ridicule  in  nearly  all  popular  literature  and  scientific  discussion.  A  more 
terrible  sign  of  the  times  I  know  not  than  this.  The  "  salt "  of  the  pulpit  has  lost 
its  "  savour,"  and  it  is  being  trodden  underfoot  with  disdain  and  contempt.  Trodden 
underfoot  by  our  authors,  scientists,  artisans,  tradesmen,  and  merchants.  Gracious 
Heaven,  raise  up  men  for  our  pulpits,  so  high  in  culture,  so  gifted  in  faculty,  so 
Christly  in  love,  so  invincible  in  duty,  so  independent  in  action,  that  they  shall  not 
only  counteract  the  downward  tendency  to  ruin,  but  shall  attract  to  it  with  reverence 
'  the  intellect  of  the  age  I — D.  T. 

Vers.  10—12.—"  One  Father."  "  Have  we  not  aU  one  Father,"  etc.  ?  "  This  section," 
■ays  Keil,  "does  not  stand  in  any  close  connection  with  the  preceding  one.  It  does 
not  furnish  an  example  of  the  stumbling  upon  the  Law  mentioned  in  ver.  8 ;  nor  of  the 
violation  of  the  covenant  of  the  fathers  (ver.  10) ;  or  of  the  marriage  covenant  (ver.  14), 
appended  to  the  neutralizing  of  the  covenant  of  Levi  on  the  part  of  the  priests  (vers.  8 
and  4).  For  there  is  no  indication  in  vers.  10 — 16  that  the  priests  gave  any  impulse 
through  their  bad  teaching  to  the  breaches  of  the  Law  which  are  here  condemned ;  and 
the  violation  of  the  covenant  of  the  fathers  and  of  the  marriage  covenant  forms  no 
more  a  thought  by  which  the  whole  is  ruled,  than  the  violation  of  the  covenant  with 
Levi,  in  the  previous  section.  The  prophet  rather  passes  over  with  ver.  10  to  a  perfectly 
new  subject,  viz.  the  condemnation  of  marriages  with  heathen  women."  From  this 
passage  the  three  following  truths  are  deducible. 

I.  That  the  great  God  is  not  only  the  Cbeatob  but  the  common  Father  of 
MANKIND.  "  Have  we  not  all  one  Father  ?  hath  not  one  God  created  us  ?  "  It  is  clear 
that  the  one  Father  does  not  mean  either  Adam  the  progenitor  of  the  race,  or  Abraham 
the  Father  of  the  Israelitish  nation,  but  Jehovah  himself.  He  is  the  Creator  of  all 
things,  but  not  the  Father  of  all  things.  We  could  not  regard  him  as  the  Father  of 
the  mountains,  the  valleys,  the  rivers,  the  oceans,  the  stars,  though  he  is  the  Creator 
of  all  these.  All  things  are  created  by  him ;  but  he  is  the  Father  of  human  souls. 
"We  are  all  his  offspring."  This  relationship  implies  two  things.  1.  A  resemhlance  in 
nature.    Children  resemble  their  parents  in  nature  and  attributes.     All  intelligent 


86  THE   BOOK.   OV   MALAOHl.  [oh.  n.  1—17 


moral  beings  bear  a  resemblance  to  the  Infinite.  They  are  spiritual  in  essence,  moral 
in  sentiment,  free  in  action  ;  they  are  formed  in  his  image.  2.  The  existence  of  parental 
sympathy.  While  a  human  father  has  the  ordinary  sensibilities  of  a  man,  he  has  the 
peculiar  affections  of  a  parent,  a  tender  interest  in  his  offspring,  which  he  feels  for 
no  other  object  in  the  world.  So  God  is  a  Father.  Whilst  he  has  an  interest  in 
all  the  works  of  his  hands,  he  has  a  special  interest  in'a  human  soul.  3.  The  obliga- 
tion of  filial  devotion.  Filial  love  and  loyalty  raise  and  bind  the  souls  of  children  to 
their  parents.  Such  is  the  feeling  that  human  spirits  should  cherish  and  develop  in 
relation  to  God.  Man  is  the  only  creature  on  this  round  earth  that  has  the  capacity, 
and  consequently  the  obligation,  to  feel,  entertain,  or  develop  this  filial  affection.  He 
then  who  is  the  Creator  of  all  things  in  the  world  is  the  Father  of  man ;  all  are  his 
creatures,  but  men  are  his  children.     Sublime  distinction  this  I 

II.  That  the  fact  of  this  unique  relationship  is  a  miqhty  abgument  why  man 

SHOULD  do  no  wrong  AGAINST  EITHER  HIS  FEI.LOW-CREATURB  OR   HIS  GoD.      "  Why  do 

we  deal  treacherously  every  man  against  liis  brolher,  by  profaning  the  covenant  of  our 
fathers?  "  Two  remarks  are  suggested  concerning  the  wrong  with  which  the  Israelites 
are  here  charged.  1.  It  was  a  wrong  committed  against  mankind.  The  special  wrong 
referred  to  is  the  contraction  of  marriage  wiih  a  heathen  woman,  and  the  putting  away 
the  Israelitish  wife.  This  is  the  treachery  and  the  "abomination"  referred  to.  The 
repudiation  of  Jewish  wives  and  the  adoption  of  heathen.  2.  This  wrong  against 
mankind  was  a  wrong  against  God  himself.  "  Judah  hath  profaned  the  holiness  of 
the  Lord  which  he  loved,  and  hath  married  the  daughter  of  a  strange  god."  God's  law 
with  the  Jewish  people  was  that  they  were  to  be  a  separate  people,  separate  Irom  all 
the  other  people  of  the  earth,  and  they  were  to  sustain  their  distinction  by  not  inter- 
marrying with  other  peoples.  But  now,  at  the  period  when  the  prophet  wrote,  they 
were  doing  so,  and  that  to  a  great  extent  (see  Neh.  xiii.  23 — 29 ;  Ezra  ix.  1 — 4). 
It  is  a  universal  truth  that  a  wrong  against  man  is  a  wrong  against  God ;  to  sin  against 
our  felluw-creatures  is  to  sin  against  God  himself;  and  this  is  an  outrage  against  the 
relationship  which  we  all  sustain  to  him,  not  only  as  our  common  Creator,  but  our 
common  Father.  We  are  all  children  of  the  same  Father,  and  therefore  we  should  be 
fair  in  our  dealings  one  with  another.  We  should  love  one  another,  and  co-operate 
with  one  another  for  our  mutual  advantage  in  all  that  is  virtuous  and  noble.  "  Have 
we  not  all  one  Father  ?  "  Wherefore,  then,  should  we  cheat,  hate,  deceive,  oppress, 
murder  one  another?     How  monstrous  1 

III.  That  the  pbkpetration  of  wrong  exposes  the  doer  to  the  most 
LAMENTABLE  RESULTS.  "  The  Lord  will  cut  off  the  man  that  doeth  this,  the  master 
and  the  scholar,  out  of  the  tabernacles  of  Jacob,  and  him  that  offereth  an  offering  unto 
the  Lord  of  hosts.  And  this  have  ye  done,"  etc.  This,  perhaps,  means  utter  extermi- 
nation. "The  master  and  the  scholar,"  some  translate,  "him  that  watcheth  and  him 
that  answereth."  In  "  master "  the  special  reference  is  to  the  priest  who  ought  to 
have  taught  the  people  piety,  but  who  led  them  into  evil ;  in  "  scholar,"  to  the  people 
themselves,  who  were  the  pupils  of  the  priests.  The  idea  is  that  both  the  priests  and 
the  people  will  suffer  on  account  of  the  wrong  they  were  committing.  Great  distress 
had  come  upon  them  already.  "  This  have  ye  done  "  (see  Ezra  x. ;  Neh.  xiii.  10 — 13), 
Again,  this  is  only  a  shadowy  picture  of  the  evils  that  ever  flow  from  wrong.  "  Sin 
brought  death  into  our  world,  and  all  our  woe."  It  is  sin  that  kindles  and  feeds  the 
flames  of  retribution. 

Conclusion.  Haste  thu  time  when  men  shall  realize  the  fact  that  they  are  all 
children  of  one  Father,  so  that  all  wrongs  against  one  another  shall  cease,  and  the 
spirit  of  universal  brotherhood  prevail  I 

"  A  happy  bit  hame  this  auld  world  would  be. 
If  men  when  they're  here  could  make  shift  to  agree. 
An'  ilk  said  to  his  neighbour,  in  cottage  an'  ha', 
'  Come,  gi'e  me  your  hand — we  are  brethren  a', 

"  l.ken  na  why  ane  wi'  anither  should  fight, 
When  to  'gree  would  make  a'  body  cosie  an'  right ; 
When  man  meets  wi'  man,  'tis  the  best  way  ava. 
To  gay,  '  Gi'e  me  youi  hand — we  are  brethren  a*,' 


OH.  11,1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MALAGHL  87 


"  My  coat  is  a  coarse  ane  an'  youre  may  be  fine, 
And  I  maun  drink  water  while  you  maun  drink  wine ; 
But  we  both  ha'e  a  leal  heart,  unspotted  to  shaw, 
'  Sae  gi'e  me  your  liand — we're  brethren  a'.' 

"  Ye  wonld  scorn  to  do  fansely  by  woman  or  man ; 
I  baud  by  the  right,  aye,  as  well  as  I  can. 
We  are  ane  in  our  joys,  our  affections  an  a', 
•'  Come,  gi'e  me  your  hand — we  are  brethren  a'.' " 

(R.  NicoL) 

T).  T. 

Ver».  14 — 16. — The  Divine  institution  of  marriage,  "Yet  ye  say.  Wherefore?" 
etc  The  subject  of  these  verses  is  the  Divine  institution  of  marriage.  In  relation  to 
this  institution  we  observe — 

I.  That  it  implies  a  lovino  union  op  two,  and  only  two,  souls  until 
DEATH.  "  Because  the  Lord  hath  been  witness  between  thee  and  the  wife  of  thy 
youth,  against  whom  thou  hast  dealt  treacherously :  yet  is  she  thy  companion,  and  the 
wife  of  thy  covenant.  And  did  not  he  make  one  ?  "  "  Wife  of  thy  youth."  The  Jews 
had  ever  been  accustomed  to  marry  very  young,  the  husband  often  being  not  more 
than  thirteen  years  of  age,  and  the  wife  younger.  "  Thy  companion  ; "  not  a  slave,  nor 
an  inferior,  but  an  equal  and  a  friend.  Love-companionship  is  the  highest  ideal  of 
matrimony.  "  Wife  of  thy  covenant."  A  relationship  established  by  mutual  agree- 
ment. Marriage  (Prov.  ii.  17)  is  called  the  covenant  of  God;  it  is  so  because  he  has 
ordained  it.  "  Did  not  he  make  one  ?  "  Thine  exclusively.  "  Yet  had  he  the  residue 
of  the  spirit,"  etc.  Maurier  and  Hengstenberg  explain  this]  verse  thus  :  "  The  Jews 
had  defended  their  conduct  by  the  precedent  of  Abraham,  who  had  taken  Hagar  to  the 
injury  of  Sarah  iiis  lawful  wife.  To  this  Malachi  says, '  Now  no  one  [ever]  did  so  in 
whom  there  was  a  residue  of  intelligence  [discriminating  between  good  and  evil],  and 
what  did  the  one  [Abraham,  to  whom  you  appeal  for  support]  do,  seeking  a  godly  seed  ? 
His  object  [viz.  not  to  gratify  passion,  but  to  obtain  the  seed  promised  by  God]  makes 
the  case  wholly  inapplicable  to  defend  your  position.'  It  is  asked,  '  And  wherefore 
one?'  Wherefore  only  Eve  for  Adam,  Sarah  for  Abraham?"  "Instead,"  says  Dr. 
Henderson,  "  of  forming  two  into  one,  the  Creator  might  have  given  to  Adam  many 
wives.  There  was  no  lack  of  spiritual  existence  from  which  to  furnish  them  with 
intelligent  souls.  When  he  gave  to  Eve  such  an  existence  he  did  not  exhaust  the 
universal  fountain  of  being.  There  remained  all  with  which  the  human  race  had  been 
furnished  throughout  its  generations.  What,  then,  the  prophet  asks,  was  the  design  of 
the  restriction  ?  To  this  he  replies — The  securing  of  a  pious  offspring.  Divorces  and 
polygamy  have  ever  been  unfavourable  to  the  education  of  children.  It  is  only  by  the 
harmonious  and  loving  attention  bestowed  by  parents  upon  their  children  that  they 
can  be  expected  to  be  brought  up  in  the  fear  of  God.  The  reply  bore  hard  upon  the 
priests  who  bad  married  idolatrous  wives." 

II.  That  it  has  been  sadly  outbaoed  in  all  aoes.  The  Jews  outraged  it.  The 
command  here,  "Take  heed  to  your  spirit,  and  let  none  deal  treacherously  against  the 
wife  of  his  youth,"  implies  this.  They  dealt  "  treacherously  "  against  the  wife  of  their 
youth  by  marrying  others.  "  Ye  have  transgressed,  and  have  taken  strange  wives  " 
(Ezra  X.  10).  They  do  so  also  by  putting  them  away— by  divorce.  "  For  the  Lord, 
the  God  of  Israel,  saith  that  he  hateth  putting  away :  for  one  covereth  violence  with  his 
garment,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  This  has  been  done  in  all  ages.  1.  Polygamy  is  an 
outrage  on  it.  2.  Cruelty  is  an  outrage  on  it.  3.  Mutual  unfaithfulness  is  an  outrage 
on  it.  The  Divine  idea  of  marriage  is  that  the  two  souls  shall  be  one,  so  united  in  love, 
sympathy,  aim,  that  the  two  would  think,  feel,  and  act  as  one.  But  how  few  amongst 
the  million  matrimonial  alliances  reach  this  ideal  I 

III.  That  outbase  of  this  institution  is  fraught  with  calamitous  results. 

1.  It  is  abhorrent  to  Ood.  "  The  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel,  saith  that  he  hateth  putting 
away."  A  separation  of  man  and  wife,  a  divorce,  is  abhorrent  to  the  Almighty 
although  by  the  Law  of  Moses  it  was  allowed  because  of  the  hardness  of  their  hearts' 

2.  It  involves  violence,  "  For  one  covereth  violence  with  his  garment."  Some  suppose 
the  garment  here  means  the  wife,  and  that  the  idea  is  that  violence  was  done  to  her. 


88  THE  BOOK  OF  MALACIll.  [oh.  ii.  1—17 

Others  suppose  it  means  the  pretext  they  employed  for  doing  so  by  the  permission  ol 
Moses  ^Deut.  zxiv.  1).  Others  suppose  the  garment  means  man's  reputation,  and  that 
he  would  damage  his  influence  by  it.  Whatever  the  particular  meaning  of  the  passage 
is,  it  is  certain  that  the  outrage  of  the  institution  of  marriage  is  fraught  with  great 
evils. 

CoNCLnBiON.  An  extract  from  my  Marriage  Service  in  the  '  Biblical  Liturgy '  may 
not  lie  out  of  place  here.  "  Marriage  is  an  institution  of  God :  it  accords  with  the 
dictates  of  nature  and  the  laws  of  iuspiration.  It  is  coeval  with  human  society ;  it  was 
an  essential  ingredient  in  the  happiness  of  Eden.  It  heightened,  it  perfected,  the  pure, 
fresh,  and  serene  joys  of  that  garden,  the  scene  of  every  beauty  and  the  ttmple  of  God. 
In  mercy  it  has  been  perpetuated  to  the  present  hour  as  a  social  blessing  to  soothe  and 
sustain  our  nature  amidst  the  depressing  circumstances  of  our  fallen  state.  Jesus  threw 
around  this  relationship  a  peculiar  grandeur.  He  clothed  it  with  sublimity :  to  his 
holy  eye  it  was  a  holy  thing;  he  ratified  its  contract,  he  guarded  its  obligations,  he 
expounded  its  laws,  he  graced  its  celebration  with  bis  presence;  the  first  miracle  his 
sacred  hands  performed  was  at  a  bridal  feast.  The  apostles  caught  the  idea  of  their 
Master,  and  invested  it  with  a  mystic  solemnity  by  representing  it  as  a  type  of  the 
substantial,  invisible,  and  everlasting  union  existing  between  Chiist  and  his  Church. 
It  involves  the  most  tender,  close,  and  lasting  ties  that  can  unite  human  beings 
together  in  this  life.  'Therefore  shall  a  man  leave  father  and  mother,  and  cleave  unto 
his  wife;  and  they  both  shall  become  one  flesh.'  It  combines  the  earthly  interest, 
fortunes,  and  happiness  of  two ;  it  may  influence  the  destinies  of  many.  The  interests 
of  the  parties  united,  the  triumphs  of  truth,  and  the  upward  progress  of  humanity  are 
all  dependent  on  the  nuptial  bond." — D.  T. 

Ver.  17. — The  wordi  of  tcepticism.  "Ye  have  wearied  the  Lord  with  your  words. 
Tet  ye  say,  Wherein  have  we  wearied  him  ?  When  ye  say.  Every  one  that  doeth  evil 
is  good  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  he  delighteth  in  them ;  or.  Where  is  the  God  of 
judgment?"  These  words  are  directed  against  the  spirit  of  scepticism  and  discontent 
which  prevailed  amongst  the  Israelites  in  the  time  of  the  prophets,  and  they  lead  us  to 
offer  two  remarks  on  the  words  of  scepticism. 

I.  Thet  abb  W0BD8  OF  COMPLAINT  AGAINST  GK)D.  "  Ye  Say,  Every  one  that  doeth 
evil  is  good  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  This  is  what  they  said ;  this  was  perhaps  their 
current  talk.  A  very  old  topic  of  complaint  was  theirs.  It  means  this :  "  Wherefore 
doth  the  wicked  prosper?"  Wherefore  are  the  righteous  afflicted?  This  was  the 
chief  problem  of  the  Book  of  Job ;  this  was  the  burden  of  Ps.  Ixxiii.  Since  vice  ii 
here  triumphant  and  virtue  oppressed,  "Where  is  the  God  of  judgment?"  If  there  is 
a  God  who  governs  the  world,  his  righteousness  is  not  seen ;  on  the  contrary,  he  shows 
more  favour  to  the  evil  than  to  the  good.  "  Where  is  the  God  of  judgment  ?  "  We 
want  him  to  put  an  end  to  this  state  of  things. 

II.  Thet  abb  wobds  ungbatefcl  to  the  eab  of  God.  "  Ye  have  wearied  the 
Lord  with  your  words."  Observe :  1.  Ood  hears  the  words  of  men.  Every  syllable 
enters  his  ears ;  he  understands  our  thoughts  afar  off.  2.  Sceptical  words  are  offensive  to 
him.  "  Ye  have  wearied  the  Lord  with  your  words."  Wearied  him  with  their  ignorance, 
their  falseness,  their  impiety.  The  creating  and  the  supporting  of  a  universe  does  not 
weary  God,  for  he  "  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  But  the  endless  chatterings  of 
sceptical  and  discontented  souls  weary  him.  3.  The  authors  of  sceptical  words  are 
indifferent  to  this  terrible  fact.  "  Yet  ye  say.  Wherein  have  we  wearied  him?  "  They 
go  on  talking  against  God  in  their  families,  their  clubs,  in  their  public  halls,  in  their 
workshops  and  their  warehouses,  and  are  utterly  indifferent  to  the  fact  that  their 
words  are  offensive  to  the  ears  of  the  All-hearing  One. 

Conclusion.  "  I  say  unto  you.  That  every  idle  word  that  men  shall  speak,  they 
shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  day  of  judgment."    Every  idle  word.    Not  merely  the 

profane  and  impious  language  of  the  scoffer  and  blasphemer,  but  every  idle  word 

words  that  have  little  or  no  meaning,  the  most  airy  words  of  wit  and  humour  »pokea 
in  jest,  not  to  delude  or  pain,  but  limply  to  please. — D.  T, 


m.  1—18.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  MALAOHL 


39 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  III. 


Ver.  1.— Behold,  I  will  send  (i  send)  my 
AeEBenger.  Ood  answers  that  lie  is  coming 
to  show  himself  the  God  of  judgment  and 

t'uetice.  Are  they  leady  to  meet  him  and  to 
lear  his  sentence?  Who  this  "messenger" 
is  is  disputed.  That  no  angel  or  heavenly 
Tisitant  is  meant  is  clear  from  historical  con- 
siderations, as  no  such  event  took  place 
immediately  before  the  Lord  camo  to  his 
temple.  Nor  can  Malachi  himself  be  in- 
tended, as  his  message  was  delivered  nearly 
four  hundred  years  before  Mesuiah  came. 
The  announcement  is  doubtless  founded 
upon  Isa.  xl.  3,  and  refers  to  the  same  persou 
as  the  older  prophet  mentions,  who  is  gene- 
rally allowed  to  be  John  the  Baptist,  the 
herald  of  Christ's  advent  (Matt.  xi.  10 ;  John 
i.  6),  Prepare  the  way  before  me.  The 
expression  is  borrowed  from  Isaiah,  loo.  cit. 
(comp.  also  Ivii.  14 ;  Ixii.  10).  He  prepares 
the  way  by  preaching  repentance,  and  thus 
removing  the  ob.  tacle  of  sin  which  stood  be- 
tween God  and  his  people.  Whom  ye  seek. 
Wl/en  ye  ask,  "Where  is  the  God  of  judg- 
ment ?  "  Shall  suddenly  come  to  his  temple. 
The  Lord  Qia-Adon)  is  Jehovah,  as  in 
Exod.  xxiii.  17 ;  Isa.  i.  24 ;  iii.  1,  etc.  There 
is  a  change  of  persons  here,  as  frequently. 
Jehovah  sliall  unexpectedly  come  to  his 
temple  (rhv  vaiv  iaxnov)  as  King  and  God 
of  Israel  (comp.  Ezek.  xliii  7).  There  was 
a  literal  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  when 
Christ  was  presented  in  the  temple  as  an 
infant  (Luke  ii.  22,  etc.).  £ven  the  mes- 
senger of  the  covenant.  He  is  identified 
with  the  Lord;  and  he  is  the  covenant 
angel  who  guided  the  Israelites  to  the 
promised  land,  and  who  is  seen  in  the 
various  theophanies  of  the  Old  Testament. 
The  Divinity  of  Messiah  is  thus  unequivo- 
cally asserted.  In  him  are  fulfilled  all  the 
promises  made  under  the  old  covenant,  and 
he  is  called  (Heb.  ii.  15)  "  the  Mediator  of 
the  new  covenant."  Some  render, "  and  the 
Messenger,"  etc.,  thus  distinguishing  the 
Angel  of  the  covenant  from  the  forerunner 
who  prepares  the  way.  But  this  is  already 
done  by  the  expressions,  "  My  Messenger," 
and  "the  Lord."  Whom  ye  delight  in. 
Whose  advent  ye  expect  with  eager  desire. 
Ver.  2,— Who  may  abide  the  day  of  his 
coming  t  They  had  expected  him  to  come 
and  judge  the  heathen  ;  the  prophet  warns 
them  that  they  themselves  shall  be  first 
judged  (oomp.  Amos  v.  18).  "  Malachi,  like 
John  the  Baptist,  sees  the  future  Judge  in 
the  present  Saviour"  (Wordsworth);*  Joel 
ii  11.  Who  shall  stand!  Who  can  stand 
np  under  tiie  burden  of  this  judgment? 


The  Vulgate  VerBion,Quw  etdbit  ad  videndum 
eum  ?  points  to  the  brightness  of  his  pre- 
sence, which  eye  of  man  cannot  endure. 
Like  a  refiner's  fire,  which  separates  the 
precious  metal  from  the  refuse.  So  the 
Lord  at  his  coming  shall  sever  the  good 
among  men  from  the  evil  (Isa.  i.  25;  Jer. 
vi.  29;  Zeoh.  xiii.  9).  Like  fullers'  soap; 
Septuagint,  as  toA  Tt\m6vrav, "  as  the  grass 
of  washers ; "  Vulgate,  quaai  herha  fullonum. 
What  is  to  be  uuderotood  exactly  by  the 
"  soap  "  (borifh),  washing-herb,  is  not  known. 
Probably  the  ashes  of  some  plant  yielding 
a  lye,  like  carbonate  of  soda,  are  meant. 
Such  plants  are  met  with  on  the  shores  of 
the  Mediterianean  and  Dead  Seas,  and  at 
this  day  large  quantities  of  alkalies  are 
extracted  from  them  and  exported  in  differ- 
ent directions  (see  Tristram, '  Nat.  Hist,  of 
the  Bible,'  p.  480,  etc.;  oomp.  Isa.  iv.  4;  Jer. 
ii.  22).  The  Lord  shall  wash  away  all 
that  is  filthy  (comp.  Matt.  iii.  10, 12). 

Ver.  3.— He  shall  sit.  As  a  judge.  The 
prophet  confines  himself  to  the  first  of  the 
two  images  presented  in  the  preceding  verse. 
The  sons  of  Levi.  Especially  the  priests, 
who  ought  to  set  an  example,  and  teach  holi- 
ness and  obedience.  Thus  judgment  should 
begin  at  the  house  of  God  (Ezek.  ix.  6; 
1  Pet.  iv.  17).  The  purifying  consists  not 
only  in  exterminating  the  evil,  but  also  in 
correcting  and  improving  all  who  are  not 
wholly  incorrigible.  We  may  call  to  mind 
Christ's  purging  of  the  temple,  and  his 
denunciations  of  the  teaching  body  among 
the  Jews,  and  see  herein  his  way  of  trying 
his  ministers  in  all  ages,  that  they  may 
shine  like  lights  in  the  world,  and  adorn  the 
doctrine  of  God  in  all  things.  That  they 
may  offer  (and  they  shall  be  offering)  unto 
the  Lord  an  offering  (minohah)  in  righteous- 
ness. The  pure  sacrifice  shall  then  be 
oifered  with  a  pure  heart.  As  firstfruits 
of  this  improved  condition,  we  read  in  Acts 
vi.  7,  "  A  great  company  of  the  priests  were 
obedient  to  the  faith." 

Ver.  4. — The  offering  of  Judah  and  Jeru- 
salem. When  the  purification  has  taken 
place,  and  the  priests  offer  pure  worship, 
then  the  sacrifices  of  the  whole  nation  will 
be  acceptable.  Judah  and  Jerusalem  repre- 
sent the  kingdom  <  if  the  Messiah ;  for  salva- 
tion is  of  the  .Tews,  and  the  gospel  was  first 
preached  at  Jerusalem.  As  in  former 
(aticienf)  years.  As  in  the  days  of  Moses, 
David,  and  Solomon,  or  still  earlier  in  the 
case  of  Abel,  Noah,  Abraham,  and  the  patri- 
archs. (See  the  account  of  the  ideal  priest- 
hood, ch.  ii.  5,  etc.)  The  prophet  does  not 
necessarily  expect  that  the  Mosaic  ritual 
is  to  last  for  ever  and  to  be  maintained 


10 


THE  BOOK  OF   MALACHL 


[oh.  hi.  1 — 18, 


thronghoat  the  world,  but  £«  employs  the 
terms  with  which  the  Jewish  people  were 
conversant  to  express  the  worship  of  the  new 
covenant  (comp.  ch.  i.  11,  and  note  there). 

Ver.  5. — I  will  come  near  to  you  to 
judgment.  They  had  asked,  "  Where  is 
the  God  of  judgment  ?  "  (ch.  ii.  17).  He 
tells  tliem  that  his  judgment  shall  extend 
beyond  the  Levites  even  unto  all  the 
people ;  they  will  then  see  whether,  as  they 
supposed,  the  evil  went  unpunished.  The 
announcement  applies  especially  to  the 
circumstances  of  Malachi's  time,  though,  of 
course,  it  has  an  extended  reference.  Swift 
witness.  God's  judgments  fall  swiftly  and 
unexpectedly ;  and  when  they  fall  the 
sinner  is  at  once  convicted,  and  no  con- 
cealment, excuse,  or  subterfuge  is  possible. 
"  How  terrible  is  that  judgment,"  says  St. 
Jerome,  "  where  God  is  at  once  Witness 
and  Judge  I "  Sorcerers  ;  tcIj  (pap/iaicois 
(Septuagint) ;  maleficis  (Vulgate)  ;  see 
Exod.  vii.  11;  xxii.  18;  Dent,  xviii.  10. 
The  Jews  had  grown  familiar  with  magical 
arts  during  the  Captivity ;  that  they  prac- 
tised them  later  we  learn  from  Acta  viii. 
9;  xiii.  6.  Adulterers,  They  who  were 
ready  to  marry  heathen  wives  would  not  be 
likely  to  be  restrained  by  any  law  from 
gratifying  their  -  passions.  False  swearers  ; 
Septuagint,  "  those  who  swear  falsely  by  my 
name,"  which  is  from  Zech.  v.  4  (comp. 
Lev.  xix.  12 ;  and  see  note  on  Zeoh.  v.  3). 
Oppress  the  hireling.  Defraud  him  of  his 
just  wages  (see  Deut.  xxiv.  14,  15;  Jas.  v. 
4).  The  widow,  and  the  fatherless  (Exod. 
xxii.  22 ;  Deut.  xxiv.  17).  Turn  aside  (boui 
down)  the  stranger;  Septuagint,  "pervert 
the  judgment  of  the  stranger;"  Vulgate, 
opprimunt  peregrinum  (Exod.  xxii.  21 ; 
Deut.  xxvii.  19 ;  Amos  v.  12).  And  fear  not 
me.     This  was  the  root  of  all  the  evil. 

Ver.  6. — For  I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not ; 
or,  Jehovah,  £  change  not.  This  is  to  show 
that  God  performs  his  promises,  and 
effectually  disposes  of  the  allegation  in  ch. 
ii.  17,  that  he  put  no  difference  between  the 
evil  and  the  good.  The  great  principles  of 
right  and  wrong  never  alter;  tliey  are  as 
everlasting  as  he  who  gave  them.  God  here 
speaks  of  himself  by  his  covenant  name, 
which  expresses  his  eternal,  independent 
being,  "the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom 
is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turn- 
ing" (Jas.  i.  17).  Therefore  ye  Bono  of 
Jacob  are  not  consumed.  Because  God's 
eternal  purpose  stands  good,  and  his  "  gifts 
and  calling  are  without  repentance"  (Bora, 
xi.  29),  therefore  the  Israelites  are  indeed 
chastised  and  corrected,  but  not  wholly 
consumed ;  they  have  a  place  and  a  nation, 
and  the  great  promises  made  to  their  fore- 
fathers will  all  be  fulfilled  In  due  time 
( Jer.  XXX.  11 ;  Hicah  vii.  20).  He  calls  them 


"sons  of  Jacob,"  to  remind  them  of  the 
covenant  made  with  their  great  ancestor, 
which  was  the  portion  of  all  true  Israelites 
(comp.  Jer.  xxxiii.  20,  21).  Oielli  would 
read,  "  Ye  have  not  made  an  end,"  i.e.  of 
your  sins ;  so  virtually  the  Septuagint, 
which  joins  this  clause  to  the  following 
verse.  But  the  present  text  is  most  pro- 
bably correct. 

Vers.  7 — 12. — §  2.  Ood  indeed  is  faithful 
to  hie  promises,  hut  the  people's  own  conduct 
has  occasioned  the  withholding  of  fivaurs ; 
they  have  been  shamefully  negligent  in  the 
matter  of  tithes  and  offerings;  let  them 
amend    (heir   practice,   and  they    shall    he 


Ver.  7. — ^Ye  are  gone  away  (Jiave  turned 
aside')  from  mine  ordinanoes.  Disobedience 
was  no  new  offence ;  they  had  always  from 
early  days  been  persistent  in  wiokednesB 
and  if  the  performance  of  God's  sure  promise 
Wiis  delayed,  this  was  because  they  had  not 
fulfilled  the  conditions  on  which  rested  its 
accomplishment.  Betum  unto  me,  and  I 
will  return  unto  you  (Zech.  i  3,  where  see 
note).  Man  must  co-operate  with  God'i 
preventing  grace,  and  then  God  gives  him 
furtlier  grace  unto  repentance  and  amend- 
ment. Here,  if  the  people  followed  the 
preaching  of  the  prophets  and  obeyed  the 
promp lings  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  God  promises 
to  bless  and  save  them.  Wherein  shall  we 
return )  Here  is  the  Pharisaical  spirit,  as 
in  ch.  i.  6,  etc.  They  do  not  acknowledge 
their  offence;  they  consider  that  they  are 
righteous  and  need  no  repentance. 

Ver.  8.— Will  a  man  rob  Godl  The 
prophet  shows  the  people  how  they  have 
departed  from  God,  in  not  keeping  even  the 
outward  observances  of  religion.  The  word 
translated  "  rob,"  defraud,  found  also  in  Prov. 
xxii.  23,  etc.,  is  rendered  in  the  Septuagint, 
irTEpvici,  "  trip  up,"  "  supplant ; "  Vulgate, 
si  affliget  homo  Deum,  or,  as  St.  Jerome  first 
translated,  "si  affiget  homo  Deum,"  and 
referred  the  words  to  the  crucifixion  of  our 
Lord.  In  tithes  and  offerings.  These  were 
due  to  the  Lord,  and  therefore  in  witlihold- 
ing  them  they  were  defrauding  not  man  but 
God.  (For  tithe,  see  Lev.  xxvii.  30,  etc.; 
Numb,  xviii.  21.  See  the  complaint  of 
Nehemiah,  oh.  xiii.  10—12.)  The  "offer- 
ing "  meant  is  the  heave  offering,  the  breast 
and  shoulder  of  the  peace  offering,  which 
were  the  priests'  portion  (Exod.  xxix.  27; 
Lev.  vii.  14,32—84;  comp.  Neh.  x.  37—39). 

Ver.  9. — "Se  are  cursed  with  a  (the)  curse. 
The  effect  of  the  curse  was  scarcity  and 
barrenness,  as  we  see  from  vers.  10 — 12 
(comp.  oh.  ii.  2 ;  Hag.  i.  6).  The  Vulgata 
assumes  the  result :  In  penuria  tos  maledicti 
estis.    The  next  clause  gives  the  reason  of  tha 


OH.  m.  1—18.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHL 


41 


onrse.  This  whole  nation.  Not  individnals 
only,  but  the  \irbole  nation  (he  does  not  any 
longer  call  them  God's  people)  were  im- 
plicated in  this  sin.  The  LXX.,  reading 
differently,  has,  "The  year  is  ended,  and 
ye  have  brought,"  eto. 

Ver.  10. — ^All  the  tithes ;  the  whole  tithe — 
not  merely  a  portion  of  it.  Gtod  is  not  served 
with  partial  service.  The  storehouse.  The 
tithes  were  brought  to  the  temple,  and  laid 
up  in  the  ohambery  built  to  receive  them  (see 
Neh.x.  38,39;  xiii  5,12,13;  20hron.  xxxi. 
U,  12),  That  there  may  be  meat  in  mine 
house.  That  they  who  minister  about  holy 
things  may  live  of  the  things  of  the  temple 
(1  Cor.  ix.  13;  Numb,  xviii.  21).  Prove  me 
now  herewith.  Do  your  part,  perform  your 
duties,  and  then  see  if  I  will  not  reward  your 
obedience.  Open  yon  the  windows  of  heaven. 
The  expression  implies  not  only  the  removal 
of  drought  by  copious  showers  of  rain,  but 
the  diffusion  of  heavenly  blessing  in  large 
abundance.  That  there  shall  not  be  room 
enough  to  receive  it ;  or,  unto  superabun- 
dance; Vulgate,  usque  ad  abundantiam; 
Septnagint,  tas  rov  txaviDdriyai,  "until  it 
suffice;"  Syriao, "  until  ye  say,  It  is  enough." 
The  Authorized  Version  retains  the  negation 
in  the  sentence,  and  perhaps  comes  nearest 
to  the  meaning  of  the  original  (comp.  Luke 
xii.  17,  18). 

Ver.  11. — The  devourer.  The  locust  (see 
Introduction  to  Joel,  §  I.).  God  would  not 
only  give  a  fruitful  season,  eo  that  the  crops 
sprang  up  well,  but  would  guard  them  from 
everything  that  could  injure  them  before 
they  were  gathered  in.  Septuagint,  Staarehii 
iiiiv  tU  PpSiaui,  which  perhaps  means,  as 
Schleusner  thinks,  "I  will  pve  a  charge 
unto  consumption  for  your  good,"  though 
Jerome  renders,  "  dividam  vobis  cibos." 

Ver.  12. — Shall  oall  you  blessed ;  or,  happy, 
ai  ver.  15  (comp.  Deut.  xxxiii.  29;  Zech. 
viii.  13,  23).  A  delightsome  land;  7? 
6t\i\rli  (Septuagint) ;  literally,  a  land  of 
good  pleasure — a  land  in  which  God  is  well 
pleased  (comp.  Isa.  Ixii.  1 ;  Jer.  iii.  19). 

Vers.  13 — 18. — §  3.  The  impiouB  murmur- 
ing of  the  people  it  contrasted  with  the  eon- 
dud,  of  those  who  fear  God ;  and  the  reward 
of  tite  pious  is  set  forth. 

Ver.  13.— Youi  words  have  been  stout 
against  me.  Ye  have  spoken  bard  words 
of  me  (comp.  Jude  15,  where  we  read  of  "  the 
hard  specohea  (a-K\ripair)  which  ungodly 
sinners  have  spoken  against "  God).  Some 
ipecimens  of  these  speeches  are  given  in 
knswer  to  the  usual  sceptical  inquiry.  They 
are  of  the  same  character  as  those  in  cb.  ii. 
17,  and  imply  that  the  course  of  this  world 
Is  not  directed  by  a  moral  Governor.  What 
have  we  spoken  to  much  (together)  against 


thee  1  What  have  we  said  against  thee  in 
our  conversations  with  one  another? 

Ver.  14. — It  is  vain.  It  brings  no  acknow- 
ledgment or  reward.  The  Latin  and  Greek 
Versions  have,"He  is  vain  who  servethGod." 
Have  kept  his  ordinance  (charge').  Have  done 
what  he  ordered.  They  are  either  wilfully 
deceiving  themselves  and  others  by  pretend- 
ing an  obedience  which  they  never  really 
paid ;  or  they  think  that  the  outward  ob- 
servance of  certain  legal  requirements  is  all 
that  is  required.  Some  think  that  an  in- 
terval of  time  separates  this  from  the  last 
section,  and  that  meanwhile  they  had  made 
some  efforts  at  improvement,  expecting,  how- 
ever, immediate  results  in  added  blessings ; 
and  as  these  did  not  come  as  quickly  as 
they  hoped,  they  relapsed  into  their  old 
distrust.  Have  walked  mournfully;  t.e.  in 
mourning  apparel,  as  if  fasting  and  mourn- 
ing for  sin  (Ps.  xxxv.  13,  14 ;  Job  ixx.  28). 
Septuagint,  "Why  went  we  as  suppliants 
(I'ltfToi)?"  Before  the  Lord.  Out  of  reverence 
and  awe  of  Jehovah.  They  attributed  a 
certain  virtue  to  voluntary  fasts,  without 
any  consideration  of  the  spirit  in  which  they 
were  observed  (see  the  reproof  of  such  formal 
observances  in  Isa.  Iviii.  4,  etc.). 

Ver.  15.— We  oall  the  proud  happy.  This 
is  still  the  speech  of  the  murmurers.  We, 
they  say,  do  not  reckon  the  humble  and 
njeek  blessed;  we  consider  that  the  only 
blessed  ones  are  the  arrogant  heathen,  or 
free-thinkers,  who  meet  with  prosperity  and 
happiness  in  this  world.  For  the  "  proud," 
the  LXX.  has,  iWorplovs,  "strangers," 
which,  doubtless,  gives  the  meaning  (comp. 
Isa.  xiii.  11).  Are  set  up;  literally,  are 
built  up — have  wealth  aud  families,  and 
leave  a  name  behind  them  (Ps.  xvii.  14 ;  see 
in  the  original,  Gen.  xvi.  2 ;  xxx.  3 ;  aud 
comp.  £xod.  i.  21 ;  Jer.  xii.  16,  where  the 
phrase,  "being  built,"  includes  all  tempoial 
prosperity).  They  that  tempt  God  are  ev^n 
delivered ;  they  tempt  Ood,  and  are  delioend 
(ver.  10).  They  try  and  provoke  God  by 
their  impiety,  and  yet  escape  punishment. 
Septuagint,  'AvTiiTTTtaav  1^  @ftf,  koI  e(r<i- 
erjaav,  "  They  resist  God,  and  yet  are  safe." 

Ver.  16. — With  these  impious  murmurers 
the  prophet  contrasts  those  who  fear  God, 
as  above  (ch.  ii.  5—7)  he  set  the  picture  of 
the  true  priest  in  opposition  to  his  delinea- 
tiou  of  the  evil  ministers.  Then.  When 
the  impious  made  the  above  infldel  remarks, 
the  pious  spake  often,  conversed  together. 
What  they  said  is  not  repeated,  but  it  was 
language  well-pleasing  unto  God,  who 
deigned  to  listen  to  their  words,  and  to  con- 
sole them  by  announcing  the  future  destiny 
of  the  good  and  the  evil.  They  may  have 
argued  with  these  impious  talkers,  and 
warned  others  against  them;  or  they  may 
have  expostulated  as  Jer.  xii.  1,  but  yet  with 


42 


THE   BOOK   OF   MALACHI. 


[oh.  iil  1~18l 


full  faith  that  what  Ood  does  ia  always  good ; 
and  this  sentiment  was  all  the  harder  to 
cherish  because  tliey  lived  under  a  system 
of  temporal  rewaids  and  punisliments.  The 
Beptuagint  and  Syriao  have,  "  'J'hese  things 
spake  they  that  feared  the  Lord,"  as  if  the 
two  preceding  verses  reported  the  words  of 
the  pious.  Some  Fathers  and  commentators 
have  taken  the  same  view.  But  it  is  diffi- 
eult  to  conceive  such  words  coming  from  the 
mouth  of  those  who  fear  God ;  unless  they 
are  so  called  ironically.  But  this  is  inad- 
missible, as  we  see  that  in  the  present  verse 
they  are  represented  in  their  true  character, 
and  Bucli  a  sudden  change  from  irony  to 
actuality  is  unnatural  and  quite  opposed  to 
tl^e  prophet's  usual  manner.  A  book  of 
remembrance  was  written  before  him.  The 
book  represents  God's  providence  and  om- 
niscience, bis  ever-wakeful  care,  his  nnfail- 
ing  knowledge.  "Are  not  these  things 
noted  in  thy  book?"  says  the  psalmist  (Ps. 
Ivi.  8) ;  and  when  the  dead  were  judged, 
Daniel  saw  that  the  books  were  opened 
(Dan.  vii.  10).  The  idea  is  taken  from  the 
Bational  records  wherein  were  noted  events 
of  importance,  such  as  we  find  in  the 
cuneiform  inscriptions  (comp.  1  Kings  xi. 
41,  etc.;  Ezra  iv.  15;  vi.  1;  Esth.  vi.  1; 
£ev.  XX.  12).  This  book  was  to  lie,  as  it 
were,  always  before  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  to 
remind  bim  of  the  pious.  Rosenmiiller 
compares  the  proverbial  saying,  'typditni  iy 
Albs  SeXrois,  "It  is  written  on  the  tablets  of 
Zeus,"  on  which  Erasmus  comments  in  his 
•  Adagia,'  under  the  title  "  Fides  et  Gra vitas." 
For  them  that  feared  the  I<ord.     For  their 


benefit,  to  preserve  their  name  for  ever. 
Thought  upon  his  Name.  Prized  his  Name, 
regarded  it  with  awe.  Septuagint,  ti\a- 
Povix4voii  tI)  Syo/ia  avrov,  **  who  reverenced 
his  Name." 

Ver.  17.— They  shall  be  mine,  eto.  This 
is  better  rendered,  in  aocordanoe  with  the 
Beptuagint  and  Vulgate,  *'  They  shall  be  to 
me,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  in  the  day 
which  I  am  preparing,  a  peculiar  treasure." 
This  day  of  the  Lord  is  the  day  of  judgment, 
which  God  is  always  preparing  by  his  visi- 
tation of  nations  and  individuals.  Then 
shall  the  righteous  be  to  God  a  peculiar 
treasure  (leguUaK),  that  which  lie  prizes  as 
his  special  possession  (see  Exod.  zix.  5, 
whence  the  expression  is  derived;  andoomp. 
Dent.  vii.  6 ;  xiv.  2 ;  xxvi.  18 ;  Ps.  cxxxv 
4).  I  will  spare  them ;  t'.e.  when  I  punish 
sinners.  They  are  spared  on  two  grounds, 
because  they  are  his  sons,  and  because  they 
serve  him  like  obedient  children  (Ps.  ciiL 
13).  Beptuagint,  elptriS  airois,  "  I  will 
choose  them." 

Ver.  18. — Then  shall  ye  return,  and  dis- 
cern ;  or,  ye  ihdtt  again  discern.  The^  had 
already  had  many  opportunities,  both  in  the 
history  of  the  nation  and  the  life  of  in- 
dividuals, of  observing  the  different  treat- 
ment of  the  godly  and  of  sinners;  but  in 
the  day  of  the  Lord  they  should  have  a 
more  plain  and  convincing  proof  of  God's 
moral  government  (comp.  Exod.  xi.  7 ;  Wisd. 
v.  1—5);  "So  that  men  shall  say,  Verily 
there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous  ;  verily 
there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth 
(Ps.  IviiL  UX 


H0MILBTIC8. 

Ver.  2. — TTm  mani/etlation  of  Christ  a  teiUng-time  to  all.  We  may  apply  this 
truth — 

I.  To  Chbist's  first  manifestation  to  the  wobld.  This  truth  was  foreseen  by 
Simeon  (Luke  ii,  34, 35).  And  when  Jesus  entered  on  his  public  ministry,  his  preach- 
ing and  bis  very  presence  served  as  a  testing-time  to  all.  1.  His  teaching  was  a 
process  of  sifting  (Matt.  iil.  12).  Socrates  used  to  go  about  Athens  testing  and  refining 
men's  ideas,  and  in  his  own  unrivalled  method  extracting  the  few  grains  of  gold  from 
the  mass  of  rubbish  in  young  men's  minds.  Our  Lord  did  a  more  valuable  service, 
testing  men's  hearts  rather  than  their  heads,  their  characters  rather  than  their 
opinions.  Illust. :  Nicodemus,  tested,  conTicted  of  ignorance,  but  ultimately  refined. 
Others  when  convicted  were  ofiended  and  repelled;  e.g.  Matt.  xv.  12 — 14;  John  vi, 
26 — 66;  yiii.  33 — 69.  So  severe  was  this  testing  process  that  Christ  pronounced  a 
special  blessing  on  all  who  stood  it  (Luke  vii.  23).  Yet  Christ's  teaching  held  out  the 
door  of  mercy  to  all.  He  showed  to  the  world  that  in  the  midst  of  the  dross  of  some 
of  the  foulest  lives  there  were  grains  of  gold,  gems  of  Divinity,  which  his  purifying 
power  could  disengage.  Sinful  men  and  women  "  loved  much,"  because  through  his 
words  they  learned  that  they  had  been  much  forgiven.  2.  The  purity  of  his  life  made 
his  very  presence  like  the  flame  of  a  refiner's  fire.  Men  could  not  be  much  with  him 
without  being  either  attracted  and  purified  or  repelled  and  made  worse ;  e.g.  the 
Gadarenes,  the  chief  priests,  Judas.  On  the  other  hand  we  note  Zacchsaus,  the 
Samaritan  woman,  the  "  sinner "  (Luke  vii.  37),  the  eleven  apostles.     This  testing 


OH.  m.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MALACHI.  48 


process  took  effect  especially  amoDg  the  religious  people  of  that  day  (ver.  3),  Judg- 
ment began  at  the  house  of  God.  Some  priests  believert  in  him ;  few,  if  any,  confessed 
him.    Of  most  he  had  to  say  Matt.  xxi.  31 ;  and  see  vers.  44,  45. 

IL   To  THE    MANIFESTATION   OF    ChBIST   TO    THE   BOUL  OF   A  MAN.      It    WaS  not   the 

mere  fact  of  Christ  having  come  to  the  world  and  being  seen  that  made  him  like  a 
refiner's  fire.;  it  was  when  he  came  home  to  men's  hearts  and  was  manifested  to  their 
consciences  that  the  real  testing  began.  In  this  sense  Christ  still  comes  to  our  homes 
and  appears  to  our  hearts.  Of  this  manifestation  we  remark :  1.  We  naturally  dread 
it.  John  i.  26  is  too  often  true.  Many  shun  that  manifestation.  They  put  up  the 
shutters  and  close  every  chink,  "  lest  the  light,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  iv.  4).  Thus  they  can 
tolerate  secret  sins  of  which  they  would  be  ashamed  "  in  the  light  of  his  countenance." 
Imagine  that  we  were  living  in  the  same  house  as  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  noticed  every 
act  and  word,  and  that  we  knew  he  was  acquainted  with  our  thoughts  as  well.  How 
could  we  bear  it  ?  Should  we  not  at  times  be  constrained  to  cry  out,  in  distress,  if  not 
in  defiance,  "  Depart  from  me;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord"?  But  alas  I  we  often 
do  not  realize  "  the  real  presence  "  of  the  invisible  Christ.  When  we  do,  our  feelings 
will  be  those  of  guilty  Adam  or  at  least  of  righteous  Job.  2.  Yet  we  ought  to  desire  it. 
For  everything  depends  on  our  knowing  ourselves  as  sinners,  and  Christ  as  our  Saviour. 
This  should  make  us  very  anxious  that  when  Christ  reveals  himself  it  may  be  not 
simply  as  the  light  of  God,  but  as  the  fire  of  God.  Light  merely  reveals.  Dlust. : 
morning  light  dawning  on  the  horrors  of  yesterday's  battle-field.  But  fire  may  purify, 
and  Christ  is  like  a  refiner's  fire.  The  two  figures  of  the  text  are  suggestive.  "  Two 
sorts  of  material  for  cleansing  are  mentioned:  the  one  severe,  where  tlje  baser  materials 
are  inworked  with  the  rich  ore ;  the  other  mild,  where  the  defilement  is  easily  separable." 
(1)  He  is  like  a  refiner's  fire.  Illust. :  Zacchaaus  "  purged  from  his  old  sins  "  by  Christ, 
who  not  only  cam*  to  his  home,  but  appeared,  manifested  himself  in  his  heart.  Like 
the  flame  of  the  fiery  furnace,  the  fire  of  the  Lord's  holy  love  consumed  the  bonds  of 
sin,  but  the  man  himself  stood  upright  and  walked  at  liberty.  This  refining  process 
may  be  a  very  severe  one  to  ns.  But  the  refining  fire  is  himself  the  Befiner.  He  knows 
the  ore  he  has  to  deal  with.  We  can  calmly  leave  him  to  select  every  step  in  the 
process.  We  know  that  he  is  working  towards  an  end  which  is,  or  ought  to  be,  very 
dear  to  us — our  own  sanctiflcation  (Ps.  Ixxix.  9).  (2)  He  is  like  fuller's  soap.  This  is  a 
milder  process.  Yet  even  this  may  imply  some  rough  treatment  like  treading,  beating, 
hammering  with  mallets.  Linen  after  cleansing  may  show  how  much  dirt  there  was  in 
it  before.  So  Christ's  purifying  power  may  show  us  how  many  secret  sins  there  were 
ingrained  in  the  very  essence  of  our  hearts.  The  discovery  may  prompt  to  confession 
and  to  prayer  (Ps.  li.  1 — 10),  which  will  be  met  by  the  promise,  Isa.  i,  18,  Christ  is 
no  mere  reformer  or  disciplinarian.  He  himself  is  the  fire ;  his  blood  is  the  cleansing 
fountain ;  his  Spirit  is  the  source  of  our  sanctification.  Our  supreme  desire  should  be 
that  Christ  should  be  manifested  to  our  souls  now  as  the  purifying  fire  of  that  holy 
God  who,  because  he  changeth  not,  doth  not  consume  us  (ver.  6),  For  otherwise  he 
will  for  the  same  reason  (vers,  5,  6,  " Fw  I  change  not")  consume  us  at  last,  _ 

III.  To  THE  SECOND  ooMiNO  OF  Chbist.  In  this  prophecy,  as  Augustine  says, 
"  the  first  and  second  advents  of  Christ  are  brought  together."  Malaohi  sees  the  great 
white  throne  in  the  background  (ch.  iv.  1),  The  result  of  that  coming  to  us  will 
depend  on  his  treatment  of  us  and  our  treatment  of  him  now  (2  Tim.  i,  18), 

Ver.  6. Tht  twofold  aspect  of  the  unchangealleness  of  Ood.    Three  truths  are 

I  That  God  18  UNOHANQEABLB,  1.  His  nature  is  a  pledge  of  it.  Being  absolutely 
perfect,  any  change  of  nature  must  be  for  the  worse.  The  "light"  (1  John  i.  5) 
would  be  dimmed ;  any  "  variation  "  would  cause  "  a  shadow  that  is  cast  by  turning 
(Jas.  i.  17,  Revised  Version).  He  is  "Alpha  and  Omega,"  and  not  an  intervemng 
letter  can  be  displaced;  not  a  « jot  or  tittle  *'  can  pass  away.  2.  His  Name  declares  it. 
Whether  we  interpret  the  Divine  Name,  "I  am  that  I  am,"  or  "I  will  be  that  I  will 
be."  unchangeableness  is  implied.  He  "is,  and  was,  and  is  to  come,  the  Almighty. 
He  has  emotions,  but  these  are  not  the  capricious  feelings  of  a  changeable  creature ; 
».g.  contrast  the  wrath  of  God  and  that  of  King  Nebuchadnezzar  inDan.  u.  a«d  lu. 
He  revokes  piomises  or  reverses  threats ;  but  he  » cannot  he    (Titus  i.  2  ;  of.  Numb. 


a  THE   BOOK  OP  MALACHI.  [oh.  in.  1—18. 

xxiii.  19).  The  strongest  assnranco  of  this  truth  is  found  in  the  revelation  of  the 
Divine  Name  in -Jesus  Christ,  who  through  successive  ages  is  proving  himtdf  to  be 
"  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever." 

II.  That  this  unchanqeabIjEness  of  God  is  the  obound  of  hope  for  the 
oniLTY.  For  God  hath  an  "  eternal  purpose,  which  he  hath  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord."  And  he  says,  "  My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  I  will  do  all  my  pleasure." 
That  eternal  purpose  included  his  dealings  with  the  elect  race  of  the  old  covenant.  In 
spite  of  their  many  sins,  he  wrought  out  his  gracious  purposes  respecting  them  (cf. 
Lev.  xxvi.  42—45 ;  Deut.  vii.  7,  8).  And  still  God  remembers  the  land  and  the 
people  (Zech.  xiv.  10,  11;  Rom.  xi.  25—29).  The  same  unchangeableness  brings 
hope  to  all  of  us  who  have  Iseen  invited  and  have  been  led  to  trust  in  our  Saviour-God, 
"  who  hath  saved  us,"  etc.  (2  Tim.  i.  9).  Those  unalterable  purposes  include  our 
purification  (cf.  vers.  3,  4).  For  that  end  Christ  gave  himself  for  us  (Eph.  v.  26 ; 
Titus  ii.  14),  and  towards  that  end  God  is  ever  working.  Well  may  we  marvel  at  the 
everlasting  mercy  and  the  unchanging  faithfulness  of  God  (Lam.  iii.  22,  23).  The 
immutability  of  God  is  the  sheet-anchor  of  our  souls  when  the  storm  of  guilt  aud  fear 
threatens  our  destruction.  It  was  a  high  eulogy  on  a  Roman  commander  in  a  time  of 
national  peril  that  he  had  not  despaired  of  the  republic.  It  is  to  the  glory  of  God 
that  he  does  not  despair  of  us  sinners,  in  spite  of  our  inherited  and  inveterate  sinful- 
ness (ver.  7),  but  "  waits,  that  he  may  be  gracious,"  etc.  (Isa.  xxx.  18),  and  seeks  to 
overcome  our  evil  by  his  unchangeable  good. 

III.  That  this  hope  fob  the  guilty  is  a  pledge  of  the  dbstbuction  of  thb 
IMPENITENT.  This  is  seen  by  the  connection  of  vers.  5  and  6.  The  unchangeableness  of 
God  requires  that  "  the  transgressors  shall  be  destroyed  together  "  (Ps.  xxxviL  38 — 40). 
"There  needs  no  adre  facias — a  writ  calling  one  to  show  cause,  to  revive  Gods 
judgment ;  for  it  is  never  antiquated  or  out  of  date ;  but  against  those  that  go  on  in 
their  trespasses,  the  curse  of  his  Law  still  remains  in  full  force,  power,  and  virtue  " 
(M.  Henry) ;  cf.  Gccles.  viii.  11.  But  judgment  deferred  is  not  forgotten  (2  Pet.  iii.  8, 9). 
If  judgment  is  to  be  escaped,  men  must  change,  for  God  cannot  (see  the  argument  in 
Ezek.  xviii.  1 — 30 ;  and  cf.  John  iii.  7). 

Learn :  1.  The  blessedness  of  being  in  unalterable  unity  with  the  unchangeable 
God.  For  this  a  reconciliation  and  a  regeneration  are  provided  by  God  himself  (2  Cor. 
V.  17 — 21 ;  Jas.  i.  18).  And  then  "  if  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ? " 
Changes  in  our  circumstances  need  little  affect  us.  Eden  was  no  Paradise  to  Adam  with- 
out God  ;  the  fiery  furnace' was  no  terror  to  Shadrach  with  God.  2.  "  It  is  a  fearful 
thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God."  For  the  imchangeable  holiness  of  God 
is  a  consuming  fire,  which  must  destroy  us  in  our  sins  if  it  does  not  separate  us  from  them. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — 77ie  tin  of  robbing  God.  The  special  form  of  sin  which  is  here 
denounced  (robbing  God  of  tithes  and  offerings)  is  only  one  manifestation  of  a  sin 
which  is  older  than  the  law  of  tithes,  and  which  survives  in  all  nations  to  the  present 
day.     Observe — 

I.  The  natubb  of  this  sin.  It  is  an  ancient  and  an  inveterate  sin.  The  secret 
of  It  is  alienation  of  heart  from  God  (ver.  7).  It  is  dtie  to  God,  our  Creator,  Benefactor, 
Redeemer,  that  we  make  his  will  the  law  of  our  life,  and  therefore  that  we  present  our- 
selves a  living  sacrifice,  according  to  the  good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  will  of  God. 
If  we  faU  to  do  so,  it  must  be  either  because  we  do  not  acknowledge  the  claims  which 
God  makes  on  us,  or,  acknowledging  them,  we  yet  deliberately  withhold  them.  In  the 
first  case,  we  give  the  lie  to  God ;  in  the  second,  we  rob  God.  (Terrible  alternative  for 
every  neglecter  of  God  and  Christ.)  If  it  is  robbery  to  withhold  our  hearts,  ourselves, 
from  God,  it  must  be  also  to  withhold  anything  from  him.  For  what  is  there  of  which 
we  can  say,  "This  is  not  God's  property;  it  is  no  part  of  his  estate;  we  can  do  what 
we  like  with  this  "  ?  It  required  no  law  of  tithes  to  assert  God's  proprietorship  and  our 
stewardship.  Cain  robbed  God  when  he  withheld  the  offering  which  God  would  have 
accepted,  or  the  spirit  of  dependence  and  faith  without  which  even  the  right  offering 
could  not  have  been  received.  The  withholding  of  a  right  spirit  from  Gk)d  paves  the 
way  for  other  acts  of  robbery.  The  principle  of  tithes  precedes  and  survives  the  law 
of  tithes  (Prov.  iii.  9,  10 ;  xi.  24,  25 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  12  ;  ix.  6—8,  etc.).  The  precept, 
"Render  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's,"  applies  to  things  as  spiritual  as  souli 


OH.  m.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHL  45 

and  as  material  as  silver.  If  we  are  not  proprietors  but  stewards,  our  one  duty  In 
regard  to  every  talent  we  are  entrusted  with  should  be,  "  How  will  the  Divine  Proprietor 
wish  me  to  use  it?"  If  through  selSshness  or  criminal  carelessness  we  use  it  in  a  way 
which  does  not  bring  to  God  the  honour  that  he  has  a  ri'^ht  to  expect,  we  are  guilty  of 
robbing  God.     "  Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  due  unto  his  Name." 

XL  It  is  a  bin  which  men  are  habd  to  be  oonviotbd  of.  1.  In  ver.  7  we  find  a 
reproof  and  an  appeal  which  should  awaken  great  searchings  of  heart:  "Lord,  is  it 
I?"  (Lam.  iii.  40,  41).  But  we  may  be  so  self-righteous  or  ignorant  as  to  evade  such 
general  appeals  as  quite  irrelevant.  So  the  net  must  be  drawn  tighter ;  the  indictment 
must  be  made  more  definite.  2.  So  the  charge  of  robbing  God  is  suggested.  "  Will  a 
man  rob  God?"  The  very  aversion  we  feel  at  the  thought  of  being  robbed  (for  we 
would  rather  give  away  or  throw  away  our  property  tlian  be  cheated  of  it)  should 
prompt  the  inquiry,  "Is  it  possible  that  I  may  be  robbing  God?"  e.g.  of  the  reverence 
and  godly  fear  due  to  the  Almighty,  as  though  we  could  disregard  him  and  dare  him 
to  do  his  worst.  Or  of  the  gratitude  and  dependence  he  deserves  as  our  Father,  our 
Redeemer,  as  though  we  could  to  a  considerable  extent  dispense  with  him  during  life, 
and  then  "make  it  up"  at  the  last.  Whose  conscience  could  not  convince  him  that 
in  these  or  other  ways  he  had  been  often  guilty  of  robbing  God  ?  Yet  so  hard  are  men 
to  be  convinced  of  the  sin,  that  to  God's  question  and  his  direct  charge  there  comes  the 
glib  reply,  "  Wherein  have  we  robbed  thee  ?  "  3.  Thus  God  is  compelled  to  lay  his 
finger  on  one  most  glaring  act  of  robbery :  "  In  tithes  and  offerings."  Some  of  the 
offerings  were  less  rigidly  regulated  by  law  than  tithes,  as  is  the  case  with  the  offerings 
of  Christians  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  the  claims  of  benevolence.  But  we  may  be 
guilty  of  robbing  God  "  in  offerings."  (1)  By  grudging  giving.  If  we  do  not  "  freely 
give,"  we  withhold  from  God  the  right  spirit,  without  which  gifts  cannot  be  acceptable. 
We  act  as  if,  though  God  had  a  right  to  demand  our  money,  he  had  no  right  to  expect 
the  cheerful  acknowledgment,  "Of  thine  own  have  we  given  thee"(l  Ohron.  xxii. 
14  ;  Matt.  X.  8 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  7).  (2)  By  scanty  giving.  For  there  is  an  amount,  some 
proportion  of  all  we  are  entrusted  with,  which  it  is  "meet"  to  give.  To  "  withhold 
more  than  is  meet"  is  to  rob  God.  If  a  man  gives  not  "according  to  that  he  hath," 
but  as  though  God  had  entrusted  him  with  much  less,  his  offerings  are  not  accepted  by 
God.  A  steward  of  God  (as  every  one  is)  is  bound  conscientiously  to  consider  what 
proportion  of  all  he  receives  he  should  set  apart  for  giving  to  religious  and  benevolent 
objects,  so  that  he  may  honour  the  Lord  "  with  the  firstfruits  of  all  his  increase." 
The  Jewish  laws  of  tithes  and  offerings  may  aid  him  in  the  estimate.  No  rule  can  be 
laid  down  for  one  another,  but  the  Christian  steward  may  fairly  start  with  the  presump- 
tion that  the  scale  of  liberality  has  not  been  lowered  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  with  all 
its  privileges  and  motives  so  far  in  advance  of  the  Jewish  theocracy.  Lest  we  should 
be  guilty  of  robbing  God,  we  should  purpose  in  our  heart  to  devote  so  much  and  no  less, 
as  God  may  prosper  us.  The  cheerful,  systematic  dedication  of  a  liberal  proportion  of 
our  property  to  the  service  of  God  will  preserve  us  from  robbing  God.  We  shall  give 
not  as  small  a  proportion  as  we  dare  to  offer,  but  as  large  a  proportion  as  love  and 
conscience  in  council  will  justify.  Special  circumstances  may  call  for  special  sacnfloes ; 
but  we  sljall  form,  as  a  first  charge  on  our  income,  a  sacred  fund  set  apart  for  offerings 
to  God.  The  experience  of  those  who  act  on  these  Divine  principles  of  giving  may 
assure  all  that  they  will  thus  realize,  as  probably  they  may  never  have  done  before, 
the  truth  of  our  Lord's  words,  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive. 

III.  It  IB  A  bin  which  shuts  the  windows  of  heaven.  The  excuse  which  Is 
eenerally  urged  for  that  parsimonious  giving  which  is  a  robbery  of  God  is.  1  cant 
afford  it!"  This  may  arise  from  a  criminal  ignorance  of  the  claims  of  God  and  our 
relations  to  him,  or  from  a  feeble  faith  on  the  part  of  those  who  yet  aoknowledg. 
themselves  to  be  his  stewards.  The  guilt  of  the  former  has  been  exposed;  the  fear  of 
the  latter  is  here  met  by  God's  own  challenge,  "Prove  me  now  ^^'f^'^},^'-^;^^ 
faith  in  God  i "  "  Honour  the  Lord  wi  th  thy  substance ;  «  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of 
God  i "  and  then  see  if  God  is  not  faithful  to  all  his  promises  m  regard  to  both  temporal 
and  spiritual  blessings.  Men  may  complain  of  hard  times,  and  may  ^^^°' P/^^J^J^ 
to  prwede  liberality.  "No,"  says  God  to  these  suffering  Jews  and  to  scanty  Christ  an 
^v^errwhomay  be^n  adversity,  "honour  me  first  by  obedience  .^^  che«rfu  tnist, 
and  see  if  prosperous  times  will  no..  c«me  then."     Illust. :  widow  (1  Kings  xvii.  18) , 


4«  THE  BOOK  OP  MALAOHL  [oh.  m.  1—18 

poor  Macedonians  (2  Oor.  viii.  1 — 4).  Bad  times  may  be  the  result  of  past  unfaithfnlneu 
on  tiie  part  of  God  s  servants.  Yon  may  be  reaping  sparingly  because  you  have  sown 
sparingly.  Try  the  opposite  plan.  Now  the  windows  of  heaven  are  closed  against 
ourselves  by  our  own  sins.  God  will  open  those  windows  as  soon  as  we  honour,  obey, 
and  trust.  He  can  surpass  our  hopes  and  thoughts  (Eph.  iii.  20).  His  spiritual 
blessings  will  only  be  limited  by  our  capacity  for  receiving  them.  Illust. :  2  Kings  iv. 
6 ;  xiii.  18,  19.  And  with  these  best  of  blessings  all  temporal  blessings  that  will  be 
good  for  us  will  be  added  (ver.  11 ;  Matt.  vi.  33),  and  showers  of  blessing  on  our  hearts 
and  homes  will  descend  through  the  windows  of  heaven  once  closed  on  God's  dishonest 
servants,  now  opened  to  his  faithful  stewards. 

Vers.  13 — 18. — Hard  $peeehes  against  Ood.  Once  more  Gbd  has  to  bring  a  charge 
against  his  people  (ver.  13).  Their  words  were  "  stout,"  bold,  loud,  defiant.  Reverence 
and  reticence  were  both  wanting.  Once  more  the  plea  is  entered,  "  Not  guilty."  They 
will  not  admit  that  God  is  justified  when  he  speaketh  and  clear  when  he  judgeth.  So 
ODce  more  God  has  to  unfold  the  evidence,  that  their  mouths  may  be  stopped  and  they 
may  be  found  guilty  before  God. 

I.  Habd  speeches  against  Gk)D.  1.  God's  service  is  unprofitable.  They  charge 
Gbd  with  being  an  ungenerous  Master,  who  allows  them  to  work  hard  in  order  to  keep 
his  ordinances  and  to  deny  themselves  ("  walk  mournfully  "),  and  yet  suffers  them  to 
enjoy  little  or  no  advantage  therefrom.  Even  the  service  of  God  is  "  vanity  and  vexa- 
tion of  spirit."  This  is  an  old  complaint  (Job  xxii.  15—17)  often  repeated  (Ps.  Ixxiii. ; 
Isa.  Iviii.  3,  etc.).  It  reflects  on  God's  equity  as  well  as  generosity.  This  is  seen  more 
clearly  in  the  second  charge.  2.  The  wicked  are  better  oflF  than  we  are.  They  seem 
to  be  "happy;"  they  are  evidently  "  set  up,"  established  by  God's  providence  in  mu«h 
prosperity.  And  though,  instead  of  "proving  "  God  (ver.  10),  they  "  tempt  God,"  they 
go  unpunished,  and  are  delivered  from  trials  which  still  oppress  us.  The  facts  noted 
form  part  of  the  world-wide  and  perplexing  problem  which  has  often  caused  atheists 
openly  to  blaspheme  and  Christians  to  weep  in  secret.  But  if  ever  the  problem  tries 
us,  let  ns  learn  a  lesson  from  the  contrast  between  the  conduct  of  the  ungodly  professors 
here  and  the  godly  Asaph.  These  speak  openly  to  others  against  God,  and  thus 
encourage  one  another  in  unbelief.  But  Asaph  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  15 — 17)  speaks  in  secret  to 
God  about  the  question,  and  God  guides  him  into  truth  and  peace. 

II.  CoNOLUBivK  BEPLiEs  TO  THEM.  Answers  to  all  these  hard  speeches  may  be 
found:  1.  In  the  hollowness  of  the  pretences  of  these  stout  speakers  against  QkA. 
They  did  not  really  "  serve  God  "  or  "  keep  his  ordinances."  If  they  walked  "  monrn- 
fully,"  it  was  a  sign  that  love,  gratitude,  gladness,  were  absent,  or  the  joy  of  the  Lord 
would  have  been  their  strength.  Since  ^heir  heart  was  far  from  God,  so  that  he  says, 
"  In  vain  do  they  worship  me  "  (Matt.  xv.  8,  9),  no  wonder  they  have  to  confess,  "  It  is 
vain  to  serve  God."  And  whenever  we  find  Christian  worship  or  work  bringing  httle 
profit  to  our  souls,  we  may  well  institute  great  searchiogs  of  heart  lest  the  radical 
difBculty  should  be  found  altogether  in  our  own  spiritual  state  in  regard  to  Ghxl.  If, 
however,  our  hearts  condemn  us  not  on  this  charge,  we  may  see  a  further  answer. 
2.  In  the  opposite  experiences  of  those  "  who  worship  Gfod  in  the  spirit,  and  rejoice  in 
Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh."  While  the  murmurers  have  been 
talking  to  one  another  against  God,  another  company  has  conversed  together  "  (ver.  16). 
(Contrast  the  two  gatherings — their  spirit,  their  subjects,  their  tones.)  They  can  tell 
a  very  different  tale.  They  can  speak  words  which  God  delights  to  hear  and  to  record. 
Their  experience  of  the  faithfulness  of  God  and  the  profitableness  of  his  service  even 

.in  dark  days  should  neutralize  the  influence  of  distrustful  complainers.  Their 
characters  attest  their  testimony.  The  confession  of  a  Paul  (2  Tim.  i.  12)  more  than 
compensates  for  the  desertion  of  a  Demas.  3.  In  the  fact  that  we  have  not  yet 
"  seen  the  end  of  the  Lord."  God  speaks  of  a  future,  and  bids  us  wait  for  that  (vers.  17, 
18).  We  have  seen  the  end  of  the  Lord  in  the  case  of  Job  (J  as.  v.  11)  and  other 
tried  but  triumphaut  servants  of  God.  We  have  not  yet  seen  the  end  of  the  Lord  in 
that  drama  of  life  (sometimes  tragical)  in  which  we  are  taking  part.  "  Therefore 
judge  nothing  before  the  time  "  (1  Cor.  iv.  6).  In  our  present  state  of  education  and 
probation,  "  all  thing  are  ours ''  by  possession  or  by  promise.  In  vers.  16  and  17  we 
are  reminded  of  a  few  of  our  privileges.    We  have  the  ear  of  Gkxi,  a  record  with  God, 


OH.  m.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MALAOHI.  4T 

communion  with  God,  protection  by  God,  and  a  high  estimate  in  hig  sight.  The 
ultimate  issue  (ver.  18)  will  ▼indicate  the  confidence  of  his  servants  and  sUence  the 
murmuTB  of  his  foes  (Bom.  TiiL  31—39 ;  Jude  14, 16). 

Ver.  16. — Christian  converse,  "Then,"  etc.  When?  When  ungodliness  was 
rampant  (vers.  13 — 15).  As  an  excess  of  carbonic  acid  in  the  air  makes  the  lamps  in 
a  mine  burn  dimly,  so  the  atmosphere  of  prevailing  ungodliness  makes  it  hard  to 
maintain  a  brightly  burning  piety.  Christian  converse  is  one  means  of  sustaining  a 
bright  and  vigorous  godliness  "  in  this  present  evil  world,"  especially  when  the  evil  is 
more  than  usually  "  present "  and  pressing  upon  us.  (1)  The  servants  of  Qod  con- 
verting ;  (2)  Qod  listening  and  approving. 

I.  The  SBEVANT8  OF  God  convebsino.  The  description  of  them,  "They  that 
feared  the  Lord,"  reminds  us  of  the  godly  jealousy  they  cherished  for  the  honour  of 
God,  like  Noah,  Nehemiah,  and  other  servants  of  God  in  a  corrupt  age.  Such  fear  is 
a  source  of  purity  (Ps.  xiz.  9 ;  Frov.  xiv.  27),  and  a  safeguard  in  the  most  ungodly 
days  (Isa.  viii.  13,  14).  Fearing  God,  they  think  much  on  his  Name  so  deeply 
dishonoured  in  their  midst;  and  they  do  so  because  (as  the  term  implies)  "they 
highly  esteemed  his  Name."  They  feel  the  danger  of  spiritual  contagion  and  diseasa 
(Matt.  xxiv.  12),  Lest  their  love  should  cool  or  their  faith  should  fail,  they  conversed 
one  with  another.  While  the  ungodly  were  uttering  "stout"  words  against  God 
(▼er.  13),  they  were  speaking  warm  words  on  his  behalf.  Learn :  1.  Changing 
circumstances  may  call  for  new  means  of  grace.  E.g.  the  meetings  of  the  sons  of 
the  prophets  and  traces  of  public  religious  services  (2  Kings  iv.  23)  in  the  dark  days 
of  Elijah  and  Elisha.  The  institution  of  synagogue-worship  in  the  Captivity,  The 
secret  services  of  the  catacombs.  The  gatherings  in  woods  or  on  moors  of  Covenanters, 
Nonconformists,  and  the  martyr-Church  of  Madagascar.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  wa» 
precious  in  those  days,"  2.  Private  Christian  communion  may  do  much  to  supplement 
or  to  supply  more  public  means  of  grace.  Prom  public  Church-fellowship  the  godly 
could  gain  little  in'the  days  of  Malaohi.  There  was  neither  purity  nor  unity  (ch.  ii. 
10, 11).  In  such  circumstances  all  the  more  need  for  godly  converse.  "  When  the  Are 
bums  low,  the  coals  that  are  alive  should  be  brought  together,  that  they  may  be 
blown  into  a  flame."  lUust. :  Jonathan  and  David  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  16—18) ;  Jeremiah 
and  Baruch  (Jer.  xlv.  1—5) ;  Paul  in  prison  and  his  friends  « which  have  been  a 
comfort  unto  me  "  (Col.  iv,  11 ;  cf.  Heb,  iii.  13 ;  i.  24,  25).  Such  converse  U  enjoined 
in  the  family  (Deut.  vL  6—8)  and  among  believers  (Eph.  v.  19).  But  to  be  a  meant 
of  grace,  it  needs  to  be  natural  and  spontaneous. 

"  But  conversation,  choose  what  theme  we  may, 
And  chiefly  when  religion  leads  the  way. 
Should  flow,  like  water  after  summer  showers, 
Not  as  if  raised  by  mere  mechanic  powers." 

The  spirit  of  it  may  be  seen  in  Ps.  xxiiv.  1—3, 11 ;  Ixvi.  16.  ,  „    t^  . 

II.  God  listening  and  appbovdjo.  1.  "  The  Lord  hearkened,  and  heard.  It  is  a 
solemn  truth  that  God  listens  to  everything  we  say  (Numb,  xiu  2;  Jer.  viu-  6;  Ps. 
cxxxix  4)  Here  this  truth  wears  a  cheerful  face.  As  illustrations:  Two  Chnstians 
encouraging  one  another  in  God;  Christ  in  their  midst  (Matt,  xviii.  20;  Luke  xxiv. 
13—31)  A  Christian  man  on  a  lonely  walk,  courteously  conversmg  with  a  stranger, 
and  seeking  to  commend  Christ  to  him.  The  stranger  may  go  away  to  pray  or  to 
scoff.  But  that  is  not  all.  God  hearkened  and  heard  and  noted  the  good  deed  done  m 
his  name.  God  listens  with  pleasure  to  all  we  say  for  him  as  well  as  to  him.  2.  And 
a  book  of  remembrance,"  etc.  Older  than  the  chronicles  of  the  kmgs  of  Persia  (Esth. 
vi.  1)  or  of  Israel  is  the  book  of  remembrance  of  the  Divine  King  (Ps.  lyi.  8).  «  Never 
was  any  good  word  spoken  of  God  or  for  God  from  an  honest  heart,  but  it  was  registered, 
that  it  might  be  recompensed  in  the  resurrection  of  the  just,  and  in  no  wisa  lose  its 
reward."    That  reward  is  referred  to  in  ver,  17.  ^  i.      j 

Lesson  rCol.  iv.  6.)  Supposing  a  Christian's  talk  for  one  day  were  taken  down 
verba  m%iatpIpo;Ln  o?Tt  co'uld  be  entered  in  God's  book  of  remembi^^^e  " 
•good  to  the  use  of  edifying"  (Eph.  iv.  29),  and  of  any  service  in  the  great  day  of 
account  (Matt.  xiL  37)  ? 


48  THE  BOOK   OP  MALACHL  [oh.  in.  1—18. 

Ver.  17. —  The  Divine  Proprietor  and  his  peculiar  treasure.  We  adopt,  as  a  more 
accurate  translation,  the  rendering,  "  And  they  shall  be  to  me,  Baith  Jehovah,  in  the 
day  that  I  am  preparing,  a  peculiar  treasure,"  etc.,  and  thus  learn — 

I.  That  the  sbbvants  of  God  are  his  peculiar  treasure.  It  is  a  joy  to  know 
that  in  such  a  world  aa  this  there  is  anything  which  God  can  regard  as  his  own  peculiar 
treasure.  For  sin  is  here.  The  serpent's  trail  is  found  in  every  earthly  paradise. 
"  The  works  of  the  devil "  have  done  much  to  dim  the  glory  and  mar  the  beauty  of  the 
■works  of  God.  True,  his  material  works  are  as  attractive  as  ever  (Ps.  civ.  31).  But 
a  moral  Being  cannot  find  his  peculiar  treasure  in  material  works.  Of  what  value  are 
the  precious  metals  and  the  rare  gems  of  earth  to  God?  If  they  cannot  satisfy  the 
hunger  of  the  created  spirit,  how  can  they  be  a  special  treasure  to  the  Spirit  that 
created  all  (Job  xxxvi.  19)?  It  was  a  man  who  was  first  called  "the  friend  of 
God"  (Jss.  ii.  23).  It  was  to  a  nation  that  the  promise  was  first  given,  "Te 
shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  me  above  all  people;  for  all  the  earth  is  mine" 
(Exoii.  xix.  5).  Though  the  heavens  are  not  pure  in  his  sight,  and  he  charges  the 
angels  with  folly,  yet  he  can  find  a  peculiar  treasure  in  sinful  souls  that  fear  and  love 
him,  that  think  upon  his  Name,  and  nurture  in  one  another's  hearts  the  elements  of  a 
Divine  life.  While  the  whole  Church  of  God  is  his  treasure,  every  individual  is  an 
object  of  special  regard  and  value.  God  says,  "  I  know  thee  hy  name,  and  thou  hast 
found  grace  in  my  sight."  Every  believer  may  appropriate  the  love  and  sacrifice  of 
Christ,  "  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  So  that  each  individual  in  the 
universal  Church  may  be  regarded  as  a  jewel  in  the  Divine  treasury.  They  are  God'« 
"hidden  ones,"  but  not  overlooked;  scattered,  but  not  lost;  the  world  knoweth  them 
not,  but  "  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his."  Apply  to  different  classes ;  e.g.  godly 
children;  the  obscure  poor;  uneducated  saints  ("rough  diamonds");  the  donors  of 
widow's  mites  to  the  Master's  service ;  an  Abijah  in  the  house  of  Jeroboam ; — all  are 
jewels  in  God's  treasury  of  redeemed  souls. 

II.  That  they  shall  be  treated  with  peculiar  oare.  "The  day"  which 
Jehovah  was  preparing  may  represent  all  the  various  troubles  and  dangers  which  may 
await  both  the  righteous  and  the  ungodly.  We  may  apply  the  term :  1.  To  days  of 
trial  in  this  life.  We  do  not  expect  exemption  from  all  trials.  But  we  may  expect 
two  things.  (1)  Spiritual  safety  in  spite  Of  our  trials  (1  Cor,  x.  13),  Nay,  more,  our 
trials  will  work  for  us  "  experience  "  (ioKifjAiv,  "  probation,"  a  state  in  which  we  have 
stood  the  test,  and  are  the  stronger  and  therefore  the  safer  for  having  done  so).  We 
shall  still  be  God's ;  "  mine,  saith  the  Lord."  The  great  robber  of  God  and  murderer  of 
souls  shall  fail  to  pluck  us  out  of  the  mightier  Shepherd's  hands  (John  x.  27,  28). 
(2)  Providential  discrimination  (ver.  18)  and  alleviation.  God  will  "  spare  them  as  a 
man,"  etc.  (see  next  sketch).  lUust. :  Ebed-melech  (Jer.  xxxix.  16 — 18);  Baruch 
(Jer.  xlv.  5);  the  Christians  escaping  to  Pella  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
(Matt.  xxiv.  15—20;  Ps.  xxxiv.  19).  2.  To  the  day  of  death.  But  "death  is 
yours,"  and  cannot  "  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord."  The  day  of  death  is  the  day  of  promotion,  when,  in  an  especial  sense,  we  become 
a  peculiar  treasure  because  redeemed  from  all  iniquity  and  purified  for  all  eternity  unto 
fill  good  works  (Titus  ii.  14).  3.  The  day  of  judgment.  (Matt.  xiii.  41 — 43  ;  xxv.  34.) 
Who  will  not  claim  his  offered  place  among  the  peculiar  treasures  of  God?  Who  can 
bear  the  thought  of  hearing  from  the  Judge  in  that  day,  "  I  never  knew  you ;  that  is 
no  part  of  my  treasure ;  take  it  away  "  t 

Ver.  17. — Ood's  dealings  with  his  servants  and  with  his  own  beloved  Son,  "1  will 
spare  them,"  etc.  These  words  suggest  a  comparison  and  a  contrast,  and  lessons 
therefrom, 

I.  God's  promise  to  his  servants.  These  words  are  one  of  the  "  exceeding  great 
and  precious  promises  "  on  which  we,  the  children  of  the  kingdom,  may  rest.  Loving 
protection  is  promised  us  by  the  great  Father  on  the  ground  of  our  filial  relationship 
("  his  own  son  "),  and  as  a  reward  of  filial  duty  ("  that  serveth  him  ").  Such  is  the 
assurance  given  to  the  adopted  children  of  God.     But  now  notice — 

II.  God's  dealings  with  his  own  bkloved  Son.  Contrast  ver.  17  with  Rom. 
viii.  32.  There  is  one  in  the  universe  who  is  God's  Son,  not  by  adoption,  but  by 
nature  and  likeness.     He  is  "  his  own  Son  ; "  his  "  only  begotten  Son  "  (where  we  lay 


OH.  in.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF   MALACHl.  19 


the  emphasis  on  "  only  "  not  on  «•  begotten  ").  He  stands  in  a  relation  to  God  which 
none  other  could  occupy.  None  other  is  "  the  Biightness  of  his  glory,"  etc.  The 
universe  l;nows  only  one  incarnate  God.  And  he  was  a  Son  "who  served  him." 
(John  vi.  38;  viii.  29).  How  well-beloved  he  was  a  voice  from  heaven  twice 
declared  (see  John  iii.  35,  etc.).  The  love  of  Mordecni  to  his  adopted  Esther,  of  David 
to  his  worthless  Absalom,  and  of  Jacob  to  his  dutiful  Joseph,  are  conspicuous  examples 
of  earthly  paternal  love.  But  who  can  measure  or  imagine  the  love  of  God  to  his  own 
sinless  Son  Jesus  Christ?  Surely  sucli  a  Father  will  not  permit  such  a  Son  to  suffer. 
Surely  he  shall  be  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  his  fellows.  A  cloud  shall 
never  sit  on  his  brow ;  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away.  But  no.  He  "  spared  not 
his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  ua  all."  His  love  to  his  sinful  children  made 
him  willing  to  sacrifice  his  sinless  Son  (Heb.  ii.  10).  The  Father's  sacrifice  in  allowing 
Christ  to  suffer  and  die  must  be  remembered  if  we  would  interpret  the  words,  "  God 
so  loved  the  world,"  etc.  (John  iii.  16).  In  reading  the  larable  of  the  wicked 
liusbandmen  (Mark  xii.  1—9),  we  may  have  felt  some  surprise  tliat  the  father  should 
expose  his  beloved  son  to  the  treachery  and  cruelty  of  such  wicked  men.  The  reason 
is  explained :  "  They  will  reverence  my  son."  But  the  Divine  Father  knew  what 
treatment  his  Son  would  receive  among  "  his  own ; "  yet  "  he  spared  him  not."  He 
knew  what  "  travail  of  soul"  would  come  on  him  when  "  the  Lord  laid  on  him  the 
iniquity  of  us  all;  "  yet  "he  spared  him  not."  This  contrast  between  what  we  might 
have  expected  and  what  we  have  seen  in  the  experience  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  sinless 
Son,  teaches  us:  1.  The  reality  of  the  atonement  (Rom.  iii.  25,  26;  2  Cor.  v.  21). 
2.  The  intensity  of  God's  love  to  sinners  (1  John  iv.  9, 10).  3.  The  fuller  blessings 
of  salvation  which  God  will  give  to  reconciled  sinners  (Rom.  v.  10;  viii.  32).  4.  The 
discipline  and  self-sacrifice  which  the  saved  children  of  God  may  be  called  to  pass 
through  if,  like  their  Master,  they  seek  "  by  all  means  "  to  "  save  some."  The  promise 
of  protection  (ver.  17)  will  not  debar  us  from  the  privilege  of  self-denial  (Matt.  x. 
24,  25). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — Preparation-work.  "  Behold,  I  will  send  my  messenger,  and  he  shall 
prepare  the  way  before  me."  It  is  fully  recognized  that  the  allusion  here  is  to  the 
ministry  of  John  the  Baptist.  In  him  was  realized  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  that 
Elijah  should  come  again.  Our  Lord  declared  that  Elijah  had  come,  in  his  time,  and 
had  not  been  recognized.  And  the  disciples  understood  him  to  speak  of  John  the 
Baptist.  The  more  familiar  figure  of  a  "  preparer  of  ways  "  is  that  given  in  Isa.  xl.  3, 
4.  In  vision  the  prophet  sees  the  march  of  a  triumphant  king  and  army.  The  heralds 
pass  on  before,  ordering  the  removal  of  every  obstacle,  making  level  and  safe  the  road- 
way, and  proclaiming  with  sound  of  trumpet  the  speedy  coming  of  the  great  king.  If 
John  was  the  Lord's  herald  or  messenger,  he  certainly  was  a  very  strange  one.  There 
was  nothing  whatever  about  him  that  suggested  the  herald;  no  gay  clothing,  no 
bannered  trumpet.  He  did  not  hurry  through  the  land,  proclaiming  his  message  in 
every  market-place.  He  tarried  by  the  banks  of  the  Jordan,  a  quiet  man,  dressed  only 
in  cheap  camel's  hair  garments,  and  satisfied  with  a  leather  thong  for  a  girdle.  The 
mission  entrusted  to  him  was  distinctly  and  only  a  mission  of  preparation.  But  that 
work  was  complete  in  itself,  and  of  the  utmost  importance  in  relation  to  the  after-work 
of  the  Eedeemer.  The  subject  suggested  is  the  mission  of  those  who  eftect  no  results, 
but  only  prepare  the  way  for  those  who  achieve  results. 

I.  Pkepabation-wobk  is  essential.  The  secret  of  the  failure  of  many  enterprises 
that  looked  hopeful  is  found  in  the  fact  that  they  were  not  elEoiently  prepared  for. 
The  Reformers  before  the  Reformation  were  preparers  of  the  Reformation.  A  buildmg 
depends  upon  the  skill  with  which  the  lines  for  its  walls  are  dug,  and  the  concrete 
foundations  laid.  David  did  an  invaluable  work  when  he  gathered  the  material  for 
the  temple  which  he  might  not  build.  Two  things  may  be  opened  out.  1.  The  man 
prepared  for  can  never  do  the  preparer's  work.  He  is  not  fitted  for  it.  And  yet  he  is 
wholly  dependent  on  that  preparer's  faithfulness.  With  reverence  we  may  say  that 
our  Lord  could  not  do  John's  work,  yet  John's  work  must  come  before  his.    2.  Materia! 

MALAOHI.  ' 


5i  THE  BOOK  OP  MALACHI.  [oh.  hi.  1—18. 

preparations  often  precede  spiritual  F-issioM.  There  is  a  removing  of  obstructions,  a 
masteriDg  of  difficiUties,  and  a  smoothing  of  roads,  which  must  precede  the  free  exertion 
of  moral  and  spiritual  influences. 

II.  Pbepabation-wobk  is  beaUiT  oouplete  wobk.  It  always  is  relative  to  the 
man  who  does  the  preparations.  It  does  not  seem  to  be  when  we  are  judging  the 
whole  work.  A  man  does  his  life-work  well  who  just  completes  the  preparations 
entrusted  to  him.  But  there  is  no  encouragement  of  manifest  results;  and  men 
entrusted  with  preparation-work  have  to  be  men  of  feith. — B.  T. 

Ver.  1. — The  unexpectedness  of  the  advent.  "  Shall  suddenly  come."  Two  messengers 
are  spoken  of  in  this  verse.  John,  the  messenger,  prepares  the  way  for  Jesus ;  and 
Jesus,  the  Messenger,  prepares  the  way  for  God.  Each  was  a  sent  and  commissioned 
one.  The  coming  to  the  temple  is  a  figure  of  speech,  and  means  coming  to  the  people, 
not  our  Lord's  actually  entering  into  the  temple.  The  people  of  Israel  were  the  temple 
of  the  Lord,  and  of  that  true  temple  the  material  building  was  a  sign.  The  point 
indicated  in  the  expression  of  the  text  is  that  Messiah  came  with  surprising  sudden- 
ness upon  the  preparing  work  of  John  the  Baptist.  Only  some  six  months  of  herald* 
ing  when  the  King  came.    The  suddenness  may  be  illustrated  along  three  lines. 

I.  These  was  oenbbal  expectation  of  Messiah.  But  it  was  general  and  vague, 
and  in  no  way  definite  and  precise.  It  anticipated  the  coming  of  some  great  One,  but 
when  he  was  coming,  or  for  what  he  was  coming,  none  seemed  quite  to  know.  So 
when  he  did  come  everybody  was  surprised.  They  did  not  think  of  his  coming  then, 
or  in  that  particular  way.  Stapfer  says  that  "  the  expectation  of  Messiah  was  visionary 
indeed.  It  was  confused,  capricious,  fantastic,  and  at  the  same  time  precise  and 
minute  in  detail,  just  like  a  dream.    The  very  name  he  was  to  bear  was  doubtful." 

IL  These  was  oenebal  delusion  besfeotino  Messiah.  We  are  familiar  with  the 
idea  of  his  delivering  Israel  from  the  Boman  yoke,  and  restoring  the  kingdom  of  David, 
but  this  was  quite  the  most  sober  form  of  the  delusion  of  the  age.  Extravagant  ideas 
so  occupied  men's  miuds  that  they  could  give  no  room  to  the  idea  of  a  spiritual  Saviour 
from  sin.  Misconceiving  the  images  under  which  Christ's  coming  had  been  fore- 
shadowed, the  people  were  expecting  an  earthly  deliverer,  a  champion  who  would  free 
them  from  foreign  bondage,  and  they  would  gladly  have  spread  their  garmeuts,  waved 
their  palm  branches,  and  sliouted  their  hosannas,  if  he  had  come  to  them  as  a  conquer- 
ing King.  John  broke  into  their  delusions  by  his  demand  of  repentance.  Jesus  broke 
into  them  still  further  by  his  ministry  to  sufferers  and  sinners.  Suddenness  and  surprise 
characterized  his  going  to  and  fro  among  the  people,  healing  the  sufferers  and  preaching 
the  gospel  of  the  kingdom.  Suddenness  was  needed  to  awaken  them  out  of  their- 
delusions.    The  world  had  to  be  startled  into  thought. 

III.  Thebe  was  oenebal  unpbepabedness  fob  Messiah.  The  servants  had  not 
put  the  house  ready  for  the  Master.  The  priests  had  not.  The  scribes  had  not. 
Those  who  had  prepared  themselves  were  private  pereons  who  had  very  little  infiuence 
on  society.  The  unpreparedness  is  typified  in  this,  "  There  was  no  room  for  him  in 
the  inn."  His  coming  was  not  sudden  to  Simeon  and  Anna,  because  they  were  pre- 
pared through  the  revealed  Word. — B.  T. 

Ver.  2. — 2%e  severe  side  of  Messiah's  mission.  "  Like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fuller's 
soap."  It  is  usually  shown  that  the  triumphant  side  of  Messiah's  mission  wholly 
occupied  the  mind  of  the  Jews,  and  that  consequently  the  stern,  judgment  side  needed 
to  be  presented  vigorously.  But  some  recent  accounts  of  the  actual  condition  of  Jewish 
thought  in  the  first  century  suggest  that  the  feiirs  of  Messiah's  time  were  so  extrava- 
gant that  they  needed  to  be  corrected  and  qualified.  The  stern  things  of  the  Gospels 
are  mild  and  reasonable  when  compared  with  the  extravagant  fears  of  the  people. 
"  The  people  looked  forward  with  dread  to  the  coming  of  the  Messiauic  era.  They  were 
afraid  of  seeing  the  war  of  Gog  and  Magog,  which  the  scribes  predicted  as  its  precursor. 
'I'hey  looked  for  fearful  calamities.  Babbi  Eliezar  ben  Abena  said, '  When  ye  shall  see 
nations  rising  up  one  against  the  other,  then  look  for  Messiah  to  follow.  In  the  weeks 
of  years  in  which  the  Son  of  David  shall  come,  there  will  be  in  the  first  year  abundance 
of  rain  upon  one  city,  and  drought  upon  another.  In  the  second  year  the  arrows  of 
famine  will  go  abroad.     In  the  third  there  will  be  a  great  famine,  and  men,  women. 


OH.  la  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MAt^ACHI. 


61 


and  children  will  die,  as  \rell  as  the  saints  and  the  rich ;  and  there  will  be  a  judgment 
of  forgetfulness  upon  those  that  study  the  Law.  In  the  fourth  there  will  be  abuSance 
for  some  and  barrenness  for  others.  In  the  fifth  a  great  abundance ;  and  they  shall 
eat,  drink,  and  rejoice,  and  the  Law  shall  be  again  held  in  honour,  amon'^  those  who 
teach  It.  In  the  sixth  year  voices  will  be  heard.  In  the  seventh  wars  will  break  out, 
and  at  the  end  of  the  seventh  the  Son  of  David  will  appear.' "  It  was  as  necessary  to 
correct  these  delusions  as  those  which  pictured  a  triumphant  earthly  conqueror.  The 
severity  must  be  fully  recognized  as  a  moral,  not  material,  severity. 

I.  Messiah  works  to  bbveal  evil.  This  his  very  presence  does.  Put  a  foul 
thing  beside  a  pure  thing,  and  the  pure  thing  shows  and  intensifies  the  foulness.  Let 
Ge^show,  in  a  man's  human  life  among  men,  what  he  requires  and  what  he  can  accept, 
and  wherever  that  man  goes  he  is  sure  to  bring  evil  to  light.  Christ  is  doing  that 
work  still. 

IL  Messiah  works  to  pdnish  evil.  "All  judgment  is  committed  unto  the  Son." 
But  tjie  sphere  of  the  punishment  is  moral  and  spiritual.  Christ  never  asked  the 
secular  arm  to  carry  out  his  condemnations. 

III.  Messiah  works  to  deliver  from  evil.  This  is  indicated  in  his  work  as. 
Refiner.  He  is  getting  the  metal  freed  from  the  dross.  Much  of  our  evil  is  not  us,  only 
attached  to  us,  blended  with  us,  a  bondage  of  us. 

IV.  Messiah  works  to  cleanse  prom  evil.  This  is  indicated  in  the  soap  figure. 
The  evil  is  conceived  of  as  in  us,  and  as  having  to  be  got  out  by  the  severe  processes 
of  the  fuller,  or  washer,  by  pounding. — R.  T. 

Ver.  3. — Mesiiah  aa  a  Befiner.  Moses  gives  Messiah  the  Leader,  who  should 
permanently  take  his  place.  Isaiah  gives  us  Messiah  the  Sufferer,  Conqueror,  and 
Comforter,  matching  the  condition  of  Israel  as  suffering  and  exiled.  Daniel  gives  ua 
Messiah  the  Prince,  matching  the  condition  of  the  people  as  anticipating  the  restoration 
of  their  kingdom.  Malaohi  gives  Messiah  the  Refiner,  matching  the  condition  of 
the  people  as  in  a  state  of  moral  and  religious  degradation.  It  is  important  to  note  the 
many-sidedness  of  Christ's  adaptation  to  human  needs.  This  aspect  of  Christ  as  the 
Befiner  is  one  that  is  suited  to  every  age.  Men  make  grave  objections  to  the  doctrine 
of  human  depravity,  and  yet  all  history  declares,  as  with  one  united  voice,  that  man 
has  never  yet  been  able  to  keep  anything  clean.  Let  him  touch  anything,  and  he 
brings  in  the  stain.  1.  Take  the  sphere  of  man's  thinking.  It  is  constantly  observed 
that  the  followers  of  all  great  philosophers  and  teachers  and  thought-leaders  always 
complicate  and  deteriorate  their  systems.  They  bring  in  the  dirt  and  the  dross.  2. 
Take  the  sphere  of  man's  religion.  All  the  world  over,  and  all  the  ages  through,  you  may 
see  man  recalled  to  pure  principles,  and  soon  losing  them  again  under  the  accumulating 
and  debasing  dross  of  ceremonies  and  superstitions.  3.  Take  the  sphere  of  man's 
social  relations.  Self-interest  has  always  proved  to  be  the  dross  that  gathers  on  and 
spoils  the  most  perfect  social  schemes  man  has  ever  devised.  .4.  Take  the  sphere  of 
man's  personal  life.  The  noblest  ideals  are  unattained,  for  the  dross  of  self-indulgence 
soon  gathers,  and  in  middle  life  men  are  content  with  low  attainments.  G-etting  the 
dross  away  is  the  great  Refiner's  work  in  every  age  and  sphere. 

I.  Good  silver  mixed  with  dross.  There  is  a  compliment  in  speaking  of  God's 
people  as  "  silver,"  for  silver  is  worth  refining.  It  is  a  genuine  and  valuable  metal. 
For  mixture  with  dross  see  how  lead,  silver,  and  gold  aie  found  in  the  ore,  surrounded 
with  that  which  is  comparatively  worthless.  Humanity  is  thus  represented.  It  is 
not  as  God  made  it ;  it  has  become  mixed.    There  is  dross  of  heresy,  vice,  crime,  etc. 

II.  Good  silver  freed  from  dross.  The  result  of  renewed  processes;  always 
involving  suffering  for  the  refined,  and  anxiety  for  the  Befiner.  Silver  has  to  go  through 
•the  process  seven  times.  The  issue  is  the  purity  of  the  metal,  by  getting  the  dross 
perfectly  away.  Nothing  can  be  usefully  done  with  the  metal  while_  the  dross  still 
clings  to  it.  Conclude  by  showing  that  Messiah  did  (1)  the  work  of  his  age;  (2)  and 
does  the  work  of  this  age.  He  did  his  own  work  as  Refiner  then;  he  does  God's 
refining  work  now. — B.  T. 

Ver.  4. — The  pleasantness  of  religious  offerings.  The  idea  of  offerings  being  pleasant 
to  Qod  reminds  one  of  Noah's  sacrifice  on  the  cleansed  and  restored  earth:  "And 


52  THE  BOOK  OP  MALACHl.  [oh.  m.  1—18 

Noah  builded  an  altar  unto  the  Lord ;  and  took  of  every  clean  beast,  and  of  every  clean 
fowl,  and  offered  burnt  offerings  on  the  altar.  And  the  Lord  smelled  a  sweet  savour." 
The  opposite  scntiiuent,  God  finding  man's  offerings  unpleasant,  and  even  offensive, 
reminds  of  Isaiah's  opening  reproaches,  uttered  in  God's  name:  "  Incense  is  an  abomi- 
nation unto  me. .  . ,  Your  new  moons  and  your  appointed  feasts  my  soul  hateth :  they  are 
a  trouble  unto  me ;  I  am  weary  to  boar  them."  The  carelessness  of  the  Levites  in  the 
time  of  Malachi  had  been  making  the  offerings  an  offence  to  God.  It  was  evident 
enough  that  they  were  routine  and  formality.  One  sign,  and  the  first  sign,  of  spiritual 
purification  would  be  that  the  piiblic  sacrifices  and  services  would  take  a  new  and 
acceptable  tone. 

I.  The  gbace  of  God  which  finds  plkasube  in  man's  offerings.  It  might  have 
been  that  God  only  required  offerings,  and  felt  no  personal  concern  in  the  offerings,  as 
expressing  the  feelings  of  the  offerers.  It  is  the  marvel  of  God's  grace  that  he  puts 
personal  feeling  into  men's  acts  and  relations ;  and  by  his  personal  feeling  calls  upon 
us  to  put  our  personal  feeling  into  those  acts.  Then  the  value  of  an  offering  lies  not  in 
what  it  is,  but  in  the  pleasure  which  it  gives  tg  God  ;  and  that  pleasure  depends  not 
.on  its  mere  value,  but  on  the  feeling  of  the  offerer  which  it  carries.  The  test  of  every 
offering  is  this — Can  God  be  pleased  with  it  ?  Of  the  supreme  offering  of  the  obedient 
Son,  God  said,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Sun,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  Of  some  offer- 
ings the  apostle  could  say,  "With  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased." 

II.  The  dutt  of  man  to  find  God  pleasure  through  his  offerings.  A  duty 
icbting  on  (1)  obligation;  (2)  gratitude;  (3)  personal  affection.  If  we  realize  what 
God  claims,  we  must  seek  to  please  him.  If  we  realize  what  he  has  done  for  us,  we 
must  seek  to  please  him.  And  the  impulses  of  love  will  surely  lead  us  to  seek  to 
pTease  him.  What  man  asks  by  his  gifts  and  sacrifices  is,  "  Make  thy  face  to  shine 
upon  thy  servant."  "  The  essence  of  all  sacrifice  is  the  same  in  every  age.  No 
sacrifice  is  pleasing  to  God,  if  not  accompanied  with  the  sacrifice  of  the  heart  and  will, 
and  of  all  the  faculties,  intellectual,  spiritual,  bodily,  of  the  offerer ;  and  no  sacrifice 
is  pleasing  to  God,  except  by  virtue  of  its  reference  to  the  one  sacrifice  of  the  dearly 
beloved  Son,  in  whom  he  is  well  pleased "  (Bishop  Wordsworth).  Still,  to  God, 
formality  is  an  offence ;  routine  a  weariness  ;  hypocrisy  the  supreme  offence ;  and  still, 
to  God,  humility,  thankfulness,  trust,  and  love  are  a  holy  joy. — R.  T. 

Ver.  5. — MeasiaKs  relation  to  society  sins.  It  is  important  to  see  that  God  both 
considers  and  deals  with  society  sins  as  well  as  individual  sins.  Not  sufficiently  is  it 
pressed  on  attention,  that  he  deals  with  the  evils  which  are  characteristic  of  aggregates 
of  men — with  sins  of  classes  and  of  nations.  It  is  in  the  necessary  judgment  of  classes 
and  nation.s  as  such  that  the  innocent  are  wont  to  suffer  with  the  guilty ;  and  then 
the  interest  of  the  class  must  be  seen  to  override  the  interests  of  the  single  individual. 
Society  sins  are  much  the  same  in  every  age.  They  are  classed  in  this  verse.  They 
run  riot  when  the  religious  restraint  is  weakened.  1.  Beligious  deceptions.  2.  Immor- 
alities specially  bearing  on  family  life.  3.  Untrustfulness  in  everyday  relations. 
"  False  swearers."  4.  Sweating  the  workman,  and  forcing  down  the  wage  of  the 
labourer.  5.  Taking  advantage  of  the  distressed  to  secure  selfish  advantage  ;  the 
"  widow,  fatherless,  and  stranger."  How  these  sins  corrupt  society  to-day  may  be 
unfolded  according  to  the  skill  of  the  preacher.  The  prophets  teach  that  whenever 
God  manifests  himself,  he  puts  forth  his  power  against  society  sins,  and  Malachi 
declares  this  to  be  one  of  the  most  marked  characteristics  of  Messiah. 

I.  Messiah  cuts  down  society  sins  as  being  false  growths.  The  farmer  will 
go  into  his  meadows  and  cut  down  the  coarse  grass,  which  the  cattle  would  not  eat, 
and  whose  rank  growth  is  crushing  out  tlie  useful  white  clover.  When  a  field  is  left 
uncultivated,  and  the  good  plants  are  left  unnourished,  there  soon  springs  up  a 
plentiful  crop  of  weeds,  groundsel,  rag-wort,  and  thistles,  and  if  there  is  to  be  any 
reviving  of  profitable  vegetation  in  that  field,  these  rank  growths  must  be  cut  down. 
Illustrate  from  our  Lord's  dealing  with  the  society  sentiment  concerning  rabbinism. 
With  some  society  sins  the  same  must  be  done  now. 

II.  Messiah  seeks. to  clear  the  boots  of  societt  bins  out  of  the  soil. 
Cutting  off  is  only  a  preliminary  to  rooting  out.  Presently  the  farmer  ploughs  up  and 
harrows  the  soil,  carefully  gathering  the  roots  for  the  burning.     Malachi,  in  God's 


OH.  m.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHI.  63 

name,  tried  to  get  at  fhe  roots  of  the  society  evils  of  his  day.  He  found  them  in  the 
self-indulgence  of  the  priesthood,  and  the  self-seeking  of  the  people.  He  prophesied 
that  Messiah  would  do  the  same  work. 

III.  Messiah  enriches  the  soil  to  bear  good  growths.  We  should  never  see 
Christ's  work  only  on  the  negative  side.  It  has  two  sides.  To  remove  society  sins  is 
to  give  a  chance  for  the  nourishment  of  Chvistly-toned  society  virtues. — R.  T. 

Ver,  6. — Man^s  hope  lies  in  Ood'a  ttnchangeableness.  "I  am  the  Lord,  I  change 
not."  Man  had  changed  toward  God,  not  in  mere  relations,  but  in  spirit  ami  purpose. 
God  had  been  therefore  compelled  to  alter  his  relations  towards  men ;  and  his  ways  of 
dealing  with  them ;  but  this  must  never  be  assumed  to  involve  any  change  on  the 
part  of  God's  feeling  towards  them.  Those  whom  he  loves  he  loves  with  an  ever- 
lasting love.  In  the  motive  of  his  dealings  he  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for 
ever."  Reference  here  is  directly  to  the  purpose  to  save  Israel,  No  matter  what  the 
appearances  of  things  might  be,  that  purpose  had  never  been  changed,  and  never 
would  be.  "  Because  it  is  the  Eternal's  unchangeable  will  that  the  sons  of  Jacob,  his 
chosen  ones,  should  not  perish  as  a  nation,  he  will  purify  them  by  the  eradication  of 
the  wicked  among  them,  that  the  remnant  may  return  to  their  allegiance." 

I.  Man's  hope  in  the  ohanqeableness  of  God's  adaptations.  Changeableness 
is  not  altogether  the  appropriate  term,  but  it  is  required  for  the  sake  of  contrast.  If 
Qod's  ways  with  us  were  ordered  by  fast  and  unvariable  rules,  we  should  lose  all  sense 
of  personal  feeling,  personal  relations,  and  personal  adaptations.  Adjustment  to 
individualB  upon  exact  knowledge  of  individuals,  and  adjustment  to  circumstances 
upon  exact  knowledge  of  circumstances,  are  the  very  glory  of  God.  It  is  because  of 
this  Divine  characteristic  that  we  would  rather  fall  into  the  hands  of  God  than  into 
the  hands  of  men.  If  set  rules  had  been  worked  without  qualification  or  exception, 
then  many  a  time  Israel  must  have  been  abandoned  or  destroyed.  Men  make  so  much 
of  being  under  the  "reign  of  law;"  but  that  is  precisely  what  we  had  better  not  be. 
It  is  a  truly  awful  regime.  There  is  no  considerateness,  no  pity,  no  adaptation,  in  it. 
Far  better  that  we  are  in  the  personal  rule  of  a  Divine  and  infinitely  loving  Lawgiver. 

II.  Man's  hope  in  the  unchangeablbness  of  God's  principles.  The  Divine 
adaptations  are  always  within  the  limitations  of  the  Divine  principles.  We  can  never 
be  sure  tliat  our  fellow-man  does  not  change  through  weakness,  and  risk  principles  in 
making  change.  We  may  have  perfect  confidence  that  God  never  does.  "  Hath  he 
said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it  ?  Hath  he  spoken,  and  shall  he  not  make  it  good  ?  "  True 
to  his  word ;  but  only  speaking  words  that  express  eternal  principles.  The  point  of  the 
text  is,  that  God's  unchangeableness  guarantees  Israel's  security,  and  God's  changeable- 
ness guarantees  Israel's  disciplining  and  refining. — B.  T. 

Ver.  7.— A  two/old  return.  "  Return  unto  me,  and  I  will  return  unto  you,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts."  And  Zechariah  has  a  similar  expression  (i.  3),  "  Turn  ye  unto 
me,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  I  will  turn  unto  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  The 
direction  to  turn  from  the  evil  way  is  very  familiar  in  the  books  of  the  prophets,  and 
should  be  read  in  the  light  of  their  work  as  social  and  moral  reformers.  Some  evil 
custom  is  indicated,  which  the  people  were  turned  to,  and  this  the  prophets  anxiously 
endeavoured  to  get  them  turned  from.  This  turning  is  the  root-idea  of  the  term 
"  conversion,"  which  should  always  be  associated  with  conviction,  or  the  sense  of  sin, 
and  contrition,  or  sorrow  for  sin.  Then  properly  comes  conversion,  or  turning  from 
sin.  This  is  met  by  the  remission  of  sin,  and  acceptance  as  free  from  sin.  The  word 
"conversion  "  is  generally  used  for  the  whole  process,  but  this  use  is  apt  to  produce 
confusion  of  ideas.  Special  significance  may  property  attach  to  the  turning  from  sm, 
because  it  is  the  recognized  sign  and  expression  of  sincerity  and  earnestness.  If  a  man 
gives  up  things  he  loves  that  are  evil,  there  is  good  evidence  that  he  is  sincere. 
Reference  in  this  passage  is  to  the  national  loyalty  to  the  Mosaic  ordinances.  By  it 
the  national  piety  could  be  tested.  But  they  were  manifestly  turned  froni  anything 
Uke  a  loving,  hearty,  spiritual  obedience  of  those  ordinances,  such  as  God  could 
approve  and  accept.    Consequently  his  favour  and  blessing  were  manifestly  turned 

I.  Man'oanitot  bbtum  to  God  totil  God  bbttisih  to  nut    While  God  hold* 


64  THE  BOOK  OF   MALACHI,  [oh.  m.  1—18. 

aloof  from  the  sinner,  that  sinner  may  feel  remorse  and  misery.  "  His  bones  may 
wax  old  through  his  roaring  all  the  day  long ; "  but  he  will  feel  no  penitence,  no  element 
of  hope  can  enter  into  his  distress.  The  first  move  always  comes  from  God.  Zacch«as 
does  not  know  that  he  is  really  seeking  Jesus,  until  he  discovers  that  Jesus  is  seek- 
ing him.  Our  Lord  put  this  truth  into  his  familiar  expression,  "  No  man  can  come 
unto  me  except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  me  draw  him."  It  is  the  testimony  of 
universal  experience  that  God  is  always  beforehand  with  ua.  And,  rightly  viewed, 
this  shows  us  to  be  without  excuse  if  we  keep  on  in  sin. 

II.  God  oak  not  betubn  to  mas  until  man  betchns  to  him.  This  puts  the 
truth  in  paradoxical  form ;  and  yet  it  is  precisely  the  statement  of  the  text.  God 
spei&B.  But  he  says  he  will  not  turn  till  man  does.  God  is  first  in  opening  negotia- 
tion, and  yet  he  says  he  must  come  second.  Explain  that  God  cannot  do  his  gracious 
work  in  the  man  until  the  man  is  in  that  right  moral  state  represented  by  penitence 
and  turning  to  God. — B.  T 

7er.  8. — Defrauding  Ood.  The  people  of  Malachi's  days  met  his  reproof  in  a 
quibbling  and  self-justifying  spirit.  Men  who  are  self-satisfied  can  resist  all  appeaL 
Bcligious  formalities  have  this  as  their  supreme  peril — they  satisfy  men,  and  prevent 
them  from  feeling  moral  and  spiritual  anxieties,  and  from  responding  to  moral  and 
spiritual  demands.  These  men  could  not  see  that  there  was  any  sense  in  which  they 
were  depriving  God  of  his  rights.  The  prophet  puts  his  finger  on  one  thing.  That 
sufBces  to  prove  his  accusation.  They  were  withholding  and  limiting  the  tithes  and 
ofierings  due  to  God's  house.  How  could  citizens  be  loyal  who  neglected  to  pay  in 
those  taxes  of  the  king  which  were  the  very  sign  of  loyalty  ?  "One  might  reasonably 
think  such  a  presumption  could  not  enter  into  any  man's  thoughts,  as  to  rob  God  of 
those  things  which  are  dedicated  to  his  service;  when  he  considers  that  he  hath 
received  all  things  from  him,  and  therefore  ought  in  gratitude  to  set  apart  some  share 
of  his  substance  for  the  maintaining  of  his  worship  and  the  public  exercises  of  religion  " 
(Louth).    Consider — 

I.  What  God's  claims  on  men  abe.  1.  His  natural  claims,  as  the  Author, 
Designer,  Creator,  practical  Arranger  of  man's  body,  life,  relations,  and  associations. 
See  the  rights  of  a  man  in  the  house  he  builds,  the  garden  he  lays  out,  the  machine  he 
makes,  the  child  he  rears.  Of  everything  that  a  man  does  he  expects  some  appropriate 
form  of  return.  2.  His  revelational  claims.  Israel  was  under  special  obligation  because 
it  had  received  special  revelation,  3.  His  experimental  claims.  He  had  gained  rights, 
and  reasonably  formed  expectations,  out  of  his  pitiful  and  gracious  dealings  through 
long  years. 

II.  On  what  basis  do  God's  claims  best.  Not  merely  the  supreme  rights  of 
Deity ;  but  here  especially  man's  own  acceptance  of  his  claims.  Claims  are  sterner 
things  when  they  are  both  made  and  accepted. 

III.  How  God's  claims  may  be  neglected  ob  befused.  1.  By  the  delusion  that 
those  claims  have  been  relaxed.  2.  By  the  hope  that  something  can  be  put  in  place 
of  obedience  to  them.  3.  By  sheer  listlessness.  4,  By  persistent  wilfulness.  6.  But 
it  is  more  subtle  and  searching  to  say — God's  claims  are  now  chiefly  missed  through 
man's  over-occupation.    The  world  and  self  fill  men  up, 

IV.  How  18  SUCH  nbqleot  of  God's  claims  to  be  dealt  with  ?  1.  Call  it  by  its 
right  name — robbing  God.    2.  Bring  discipline  to  bear  upon  the  neglecters,  etc. — B,  T. 

Ver,  10.— Itecognition  of  practical  penitence.  "  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the 
storehouse."  All  must  include  those  which  ought  to  have  been  brought  and  had  not. 
It  was  the  paying  up  of  old  debts  which  would  show  the  practical  and  sincere  character 
of  the  penitence.  Sin  brings  its  own  punishment.  God  will  treat  us  relatively  to  our 
treatment  of  him.  He  recompensed  this  restored  nation  of  Israel  according  to  their 
doings.  He  blighted  their  fields  and  blemished  their  flocks,  so  that  the  land  groaned 
beneath  the  curse.  The  only  way  to  remove  the  evil  was  for  the  people  to  turn  from 
the  evil  of  their  way.  The  sign  of  such  return  would  be  an  earnest  effort  to  fulfil 
their  religious  obligations.  Of  such  fulfilment  the  offering  of  tithes  might  be  a  repre- 
sentative instance. 

I.  The  mobal  hxlflebbnxss  of  sentimental  penitenox,    Bemone  is  the  carica- 


OT.  in.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHI.  S6 

ture  of  penitence  on  the  one  Bide,  and  sentimentality  on  the  other.  And  sentimentality 
may  be  the  more  subtle  evil.  A  man  may  be  distressed  about  the  consequences  of 
Bin,  who  has  no  estimate  of  the  evil  of  the  sin.  A  man  may  be  carried  away  by  a 
surrounding  excitement  of  penitence  without  having  any  real  humiliation  of  heart. 
This  may  be  illustrated  from  the  excitement  produced  by  Savonarola's  preaching  at 
Florence,  and  by  the  bad  sides  of  modem  revivals  and  missions.  Convictions  which 
reach  no  further  than  a  man's  sentiments  are  not  merely  helpless  to  influence  con- 
duct, but  they  are  morally  mischievous,  because  they  delude,  persuading  the  man  that 
he  is  right,  when  his  motive  and  heart  are  untouched.  Some  men  who  persist  in 
living  in  sin  nevertheless  have  seasons  of  gushing  penitence ;  but  it  is  only  surface 
feeling,  they  have  no  root  in  themselves.  The  test  of  repentance  is  found  In  this 
question — What  does  it  make  the  man  do  t 

II.  The  mobal  value  of  practical  penitence.  The  Apostle  Paul  calls  it 
"  godly  sorrow,"  and  reminds  of  its  practical  working.  "  Ye  sorrowed  after  a  godly 
lort,  what  carefulness  it  wrought  in  you,  yea,  what  clearing  of  yourselves,  yea,  what 
indignation,  yea,  what  fear,  yea,  what  vehement  desire,  yea,  what  zeal,  yea,  what 
revenge  I "  If  a  man  steals  from  another,  all  his  protestations  of  sorrow  are  without 
moral  value  unless  he  restores  what  he  has  stolen.  God  looks  for  moral  value  in 
everything  relating  to  his  people ;  and  finds  it  only  when  tkey  bring  in  the  tithes 
which  they  had  been  withholding.  Restoring,  dealing  resolutely  with  cherished  sins, 
"  cutting  off  right  hands,  and  plucking  out  right  eyes,"  are  the  revelation  of  sincerity, 
depth,  and  moral  value,  in  all  professions  of  penitence.  It  is  only  when  Qod  can 
approve  of  and  accept  the  penitence  thus  revealed  that  he  can  respond  by  opening  the 
windows  of  heaven  to  pour  out  blessing, — B.  T. 

Vers.  14, 15. — Doubt  of  profit  in  gerving  God.  "  It  is  vain  to  wrve  God."  The 
Prophet  Zephaniah  is  more  severe.  "  It  stall  come  to  pass  at  that  time,  that  I  will 
search  Jerusalem  with  candles,  and  punish  the  men  that  are  settled  on  their  lees : 
that  say  in  their  heart.  The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do  evil "  (Zeph 
i.  12).  "  The  prophet  condescends  to  identify  himself  with  those  whom  he  reproves. 
•  We  call  the  proud  happy ;  yea,  we  say,  they  that  work  wickedness  are  set  up. 
Therefore  it  is  vain  to  serve  God.'  But  he  suddenly  quits  the  seat  of  the  scorners. 
He  retires  aside  from  the  crowd,  who  proudly  rely  on  their  own  popular  verdicts. 
Taunting  their  own  intelligence,  and  setting  at  naught  the  decrees  of  God;  and, 
stancUng  aloft  from  them,  he  joins  the  smaller  company  of  the  faithful  few  who  wait 
•nd  fear  the  Lord,  and  think  upon  his  Name." 

L  The  sin  of  sebvino  God  fob  the  sake  of  pbofit.  This  is  seen  in  the  case 
of  Ananias  and  of  Simon  Magus.  It  is  illustrated  by  Bunyan,  in  his  character  of 
Pliable,  the  man  who  was  going  on  pilgrimage  for  the  sake  of  what  he  could  get.  God 
asks  for  the  service  of  love.  Such  service  as  alone  can  please  him  is  the  service 
rendered  under  the  impulse  of  love.  It  is  not  possible  to  serve  God  acceptably  in  the 
spirit  of  the  hireling.  It  is  equally  true  that  God  cannot  be  rightly  served  under  the 
expectation  of  pay  or  reward  in  the  next  life.  '  t    •      v      •       * 

II.  The  bin  op  doubting  whethbe  God  bewaeds  bebvioe.  It  is  the  sin  of 
unbelief.  "  He  who  comes,  to  God  must  believe  that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  the  Rewarder 
of  them  that  diligently  seek  him."  But  it  really  is  a  deeper  and  a  more  subtle  sin 
than  that ;  it  is  the  sin  of  self-oentredness.  Only  the  man  who  thinks  overmuch  about 
himself  questions  whether  his  work  will  be  fittingly  recognized.  This  is  a  constant 
secret  sin,  even  of  good  people.  They  never  master  it  until  they  can  learn  of  Chnst 
to  work  for  love,  and  let  rewards  come  or  not  as  they  may.  A  man  never  conceives 
of  Divme  indifference,  or  hardness,  or  unreasonableness,  until  he  gets  into  a  bad  frame 
of  mind  himself,  and  then  he  makes  God  the  shadow  of  his  own  badness.  It  was  thus 
with  the  persons  whom  Malachi  reproves.  Only  because  they  wanted  to  serve  them- 
selves did  they  think  it  was  vain  to  serve  God.  The  man  who  loves  God  and  wants 
to  serve  him  is  sure  never  to  think  that.  

III  The  bin  of  thinking  those  are  bbwabdbd  who  bebvb  othbbs  and  not 
God,  (Ver.  15.)  The  proud,  who  serve  themselves.  Good  people,  like  the  poet  Asaph, 
U8  often  tempted  to  tMnk  that  the  wicked  have  the  best  of  it  in  this  life.  To  think 
W  is  to  "offend  agwnst  the  generation  of  the  upright,"  and  to  dishonour  God.— it.  1. 


se 


THE  BOOK  OP   MALAOHL  [oh.  m.  1—18. 


Vers  16  17 —  The  list  of  the  loyal  ones.  "  A  book  of  remembrance  was  written 
before  bim!  .  .'  .  Tboy  shall  be  miue  ...  in  that  day  when  I  make  up  my  jewels." 
Eeference  is  to  those  persons  who  "by  their  pious  discourse  confirmed  each  other  in 
goodness,  and  armed  themselves  against  the  impressions  wliich  wicked  and  doubting 
suggestions  might  make  upon  their  minds."  "  God  took  special  notice  of  what  these 
pious  persons  did  and  said :  it  was  as  safely  laid  up  in  his  memory  as  if  it  had  been 
entered  into  a  register,  in  order  to  be  produced  at  the  day  of  judgment,  to  their  praise 
and  honour."  It  is  possible  that  the  reference  of  these  verses  may  be  to  "the  growth 
of  something  like  a  brotherhood  or  order,  not  claiming  or  professing  the  inspiration 
of  the  older  schools  of  the  prophets,  not  entering,  as  they  had  done,  on  any  vigorou» 
effort  at  correcting  the  corruptions  that  were  eating  into  the  nation's  life,  but  bearing 
a  silent  witness  by  lives  of  holiness  and  devotion,  associated  by  the  bonds  of  prayer 
and  mutual  love,  handing  down  from  generation  to  generation  the  tradition  of  higher 
truths  and  better  hopes."  Illustration  may  be  taken  from  the  Chasidim,  or  Brothers 
of  Mercy,  in  the  time  of  Judas  Maccabteus,  or  the  Essenes  of  the  New  Testament 
period. 

I.  God's  loyal  ones  abb  they  who  keep  his  honoub  in  impebilled  times. 
Compare  the  seven  thousand  in  Elijah's  day  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal. 
1.  The  loyal  ones  may  have  no  public  spheres.  But  the  truest  work  for  God  is  done 
in  the  private  spheres  of  home  and  social  intercourse.  2.  The  loyal  ones  may  have 
no  vgice.with  which  to  testify.  But  the  mightiest  of  all  arguments  is  a  godly  life ; 
the  strongest  of  all  persuasions  is  ttie  winsomeness  of  a  sanctified  character.  Our 
witness  may  have  to  be  rendered  in  our  simply  standing  aloof,  and  that  may  be  the 
very  holiest  reproach.  It  may  be  ours  thus  simply,  but  persistently,  to  keep  the 
honour  of  God's  (1)  Name,  (2)  claims,  (3)  Word,  as  these  are  imperilled  by  the  self- 
seeking  of  our  times. 

II.  GOD'B   PBESEBVINQ   hand   IB   KVBE  UPON   HIS     LOYAL   AND     FAITHFUL  ONES.      He 

is  even  represented  as  keeping  a  list  of  them  before  him,  so  that  by  no  possibility  shall 
the  interests  of  any  one  of  them  be  forgotten.  And  his  personal  concern  is  intimated 
by  his  speaking  of  them  as  his  "jewels."  The  term  suggests ;  1.  Their  value  in 
his  sight.  2.  Their  variety ;  they  are  of  different  colours  and  qualities  and  tints, 
3.  Their  safety.  They  are  all  there  in  that  day.  Jesus  said  of  ms  disciples,  "  None 
of  them  is  lost."— R.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — Christ  as  a  spiritual  Jte/ormer.  "  Behold,  I  will  send  my  messenger," 
etc.  This  passage  seems  to  be  an  answer  to  the  question  of  the  sceptic  in  the  last  verse 
of  the  preceding  chapter,  "  Where  is  the  God  of  judgment  ?  "  It  informs  us  that  he 
will  come,  but  that  a  preparatory  work  is  necessary.  It  points  to  the  advent  of  John 
the  Baptist,  the  herald  of  that  great  Messiah  predicted  by  ancient  prophets,  and  who 
was  the  "  Desire  of  all  nations  "  (Hag.  ii.  7,  Authorized  Version).  The  passage  points 
to  Christ  as  the  great  spiritual  Reformer  of  the  world,  and  teaches  that  as  a  Reformer — 

I.  He  is  glorious.  This  appears  :  1.  From  the  fact  that  a  Divine  messenger  was 
sent  to  prepare  the  way  for  him.  This  messenger  who  did  the  preparatory  work  was 
John  the  Baptist,  to  whom  Isaiah  (xl.  3^ — 6)  referred  when  he  spoke  of  a  voice  crying 
in  the  wilderness.  This  man  was  not  only  the  greatest  of  all  the  prophets,  but  Christ 
tells  us  he  was  more  than  a  prophet.  He  presented  to  his  age,  on  the  banks  of  the 
Jordan,  in  words  of  flame  and  a  voice  of  thunder,  an  epitome  of  all  the  teaching  of  the 
previous  prophets.  He  denounced  sin,  he  urged  repentance.  But  this  man,  great  as 
he  was,  only  prepared  the  way  for  the  true  Reformer,  2.  From  the  description  that  is 
here  given  of  him.  He  is  here  represented  as  the  Proprietor  of  the  temple,  and  as 
the  "  Messenger  of  the  covenant."  Christ  is  the  world's  spiritual  Reformer.  He 
revolutionizes  the  thoughts,  the  emotions,  the  aims,  and  habits  of  mankind.  No  one 
else  has  ever  done  this,  and  no  one  else  ever  can  do  it. 

II.  He  is  awb-inspibino.  "  Who  may  abide  the  day  of  his  coming,  and  who  shall 
stand  when  he  appeareth?"  In  the  presence  of  this  Reformer,  whose  eye  will 
penetrate  into  the  depths  of  every  soul,  unrenewed  men  everywhere  will  stand  aghast 
and  tremble  at  their  own  moral  enormities.  When  he  appeared  to  them  he  would.not 
flatter  their  theocratic  nation's  prejudice,  but  he  would  subject  their  principles  to  the 
fiery  test  of  his  heart-searching  truth.     Listen  to  what  John  the  Baptist,  his  herald- 


im.ni.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHl.  67 


said  of  him :  "  And  now  also  the  »ie  is  laid  unto  the  root  of  the  trees,  therefore  every 
tree  which  bringeth  not  forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  down  and  cast  into  the  fire.  I  indeed 
baptize  you  witti  water  unto  repentance  :  but  he  that  cometh  after  me  is  mightier  than 
I,  whose  shoes  1  am  not  worthy  to  bear :  he  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
and  with  fire :  whose  fan  is  in  his  hand,  and  he  will  throughly  purge  his  floor  and 
gather  his  wheat  into  the  garner ;  but  he  will  burn  up  the  chaff  with  unquenchable 
fire."  Even  Peter,  in  his  awe-inspiring  presence  said,  «  Depart  from  me :  for  I  am  a 
sinful  man  I " 

III.  Hb  18  THOBODGH.  "  He  is  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fuller's  soap."  Two 
figures  are  here  employed  to  indicate  how  thorough  his  reformation  is.  The  smelter's 
fire,  which  bums  out  the  corrupt  ingredients  that  are  mixed  with  the  gold  and  silver  • 
and  the  fuller's  soap,  whose  alkaline  salt  cleanses  all  polluted  garments  from  their 
dirt.  In  Christ's  reformation,  everything  that  is  wrong,  that  is  impure,  is  worked  out 
of  the  human  soul. 

IV.  He  18  PEBSI8TBNT.  "  He  shall  sit  as  a  Refiner  and  Purifier  of  sQver."  He  is 
intent  upon  the  work,  and  makes  no  slight  or  passiug  business  of  it.  As  a  refiner  of 
gold  and  silver  sits  over  the  burning  crucible  until  he  sees  his  own  face  reflected  in  the 
metal,  so  Christ  will  continue  his  work  until  it  Is  fiilly  accomplished. 

V.  He  18  BuocBSSFtn,.  "  He  shall  purify  the  sons  of  Levi,  and  purge  them  as  gold 
and  silver,  that  they  may  offer  unto  the  Lord  an  offering  in  righteousness.  Then  shall 
the  offering  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  be  pleasant  unto  the  Lord,  as  in  the  days  of  old 
and  as  in  former  years."  He  will  constitute  for  men  one  day  a  "holy  priesthood,"  a 
priesthood  that  will  render  to  the  Almighty  offerings  that  are  holy  and  acceptable 
to  him. 

CoNOLUBiON.  Blessed  be  the  Eternal  Father  for  sending  such  a  Reformer  into  this 
corrupt  world,  One  in  every  way  qualified  for  the  work.  One  who  has  reformed  millions 
now  in  Paradise,  is  still  reforming  thousands  on  this  earth,  and  will  one  day  work  out 
the  moral  reformation  of  the  race.  "  He  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged,  until  he  hath 
set  judgment  [rectitude]  in  the  earth  "  (Isa.  xlii.  4). — D.  T. 

Vers.  5,  6. —  The  world  of  sinner*.  "And  I  will  oome  near  to  you  to  judgment.* 
From  this  passage  we  are  reminded — 

I.  That  sinnbbs  exist  in  this  world  in  obeat  vaeibtt.  Here  are  •■  sorcerers," 
"  adulterers,"  "  false  swearers,"  and  heartless  oppressors.  The  first  were  very  general 
in  Judffia.  "There  was,"  says  Lightfoot,  "hardly  any  people  in  the  whole  world 
that  more  used  or  were  more  fond  of  amulets,  charms,  mutterings,  exorcisms,  and  all 
kinds  of  enchantments.  The  elder  who  was  chosen  to  sit  in  the  Sanhedrin  was 
obliged  to  be  skilled  in  the  arts  of  astrologers,  jugglers,  and  sorcerers,  that  he  might  be 
able  to  judge  those  who  were  accused  of  practising  such  arts."  Perhaps  we  have  few, 
if  any,  professional  sorcerers  in  England;  but  what  is  as  bad,  if  not  worse,  practical 
deceivers  abound.  Adulterers,  too,  and  liars,  and  ruthless  oppressors,  where  are  they 
not  ?  Sinners  exist,  alas  I  in  a  great  variety  of  type  and  in  a  great  variety  of  degree. 
"  There  is  not  a  just  man  on  earth  that  doeth  good  and  sinneth  not." 

n.  That  sinnebs  or  evebt  vabiett  abb  expobso  to  a  Ditin'e  judoment.  "I 
will  come  near  to  you  to  judgment ;  and  I  will  be  a  swift  Witness."  I  "  whom  ye 
challenged,  saying,  '  Where  ia  the  Ood  of  judgment ? '  'I  will  be  a  swift  Witness.' 
I  whom  ye  think  far  off,  and  to  be  slow  in  judgment,  am  near,  and  will  come  as  a 
'  swift  Witness,'  not  only  as  a  Judge,  but  as  an  Eye-witness ;  for  mine  eyes  see  every 
sin,  though  ye  think  I  take  no  heed.  Earthly  judges  need  witnesses  to  enable  them 
to  decide  aright.  I  alone  need  none.  Sinners  will  be  awfully  undeceived  who  flatter 
themselves,  '  God  will  never  see  it.  How  doth  God  know  ?  and  is  there  knowledge  in 
the  Most  High  ?'  (Ps.  i.  11 ;  Ixxiii.  11 ;  xciv.  7)"  (Pausset). 

III.  That  binnebs  abb  pbesebved  on  Aocomrr  of  the  immutabujtt  of  God. 
"I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not ;  therefore  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed."  Ewald 
translates  this  verse,  "  For  I,  Jehovah,  have  not  changed ;  but  ye  sons  of  Jacob,  have 
not  ye  altered  ?  "  I  have  not  altered  towards  you,  but  you  have  altered  towards  me. 
Because  I  have  not  changed  you  are  preserved.  I  determined  to  continue  you  a 
distinct  people  on  the  earth,  and  therefore,  notwithstanding  all  your  murmurings  and 
truiBgressions,  you  are  not  "  coammed."    Ood's  immutabUity  explains  the  continu»i 


M  THE  BOOK  OF   MALACHI.  [on.  iii.  1— la 

tlon  of  sinners  on  the  earth.  He  is  essentially  Love,  and  a  change  in  him  would  be  k 
change  from  lore,  and  a  change  from  love  would  be  the  ruin  of  sinnen.  When  he 
ujB,  "  I  change  not,"  it  means,  "  I  am  as  full  of  love  as  ever."  "  A«  I  live,  with  Um 
Lord  God,  I  uve  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  a  sinner." — D.  T. 

Vers.  7 — 12. — A  Divine  complaint  and  a  Divine  invitation.  "  Even  from  the 
days  of  your  fathers  ye  are  gone  away  from  mine  ordinances,"  etc.  In  these  words 
we  have  two  things — a  Divine  complaint  and  a  Divine  invitation ;  and  both  are  addressed 
to  sinners.     Notice — 

I.  A  Divine  complaint  against  bqikebb.  The  complaint  inTolves  three  charges. 
1.  The  charge  of  apostasy.  "  Even  from  the  days  of  your  fathers  ye  are  gone  away 
from  mine  ordinances."  Your  fathers  who  brought  on  themselves  the  Babylonian 
captivity  departed  from  my  ordinances,  and  you  are  doing  what  they  did.  All  sin  is 
an  apostasy,  a  departure  from  God's  "ordinances"  both  moral  and  positive.  "My 
l«ople  have  committed  two  evils  ;  they  have  forsaken  me  the  Fountain  of  living  waters, 
and  hewed  them  out  cisterns,  broken  cisterns,  that  can  hold  no  water  "  (Jer.  ii.  13). 
Like  the  prodigal  son,  we  have  all  gone  away  from  our  Father  into  the  "  far  country  " 
of  practical  atheism  and  sin.  2.  The  charge  of  dishonesty.  "  Will  a  man  rob  God? 
Yet  he  have  robbed  me.  But  ye  say.  Wherein  have  we  robbed  thee  ?  In  tithes  and 
offerings."  Their  dishonesty  consisted  in  withholding  from  him  his  claims.  Thus 
they  robbed  or  defrauded  him.  "  Ye  have  robbed  me."  "Ye  have  done  so  to  me  in 
respect  tb  the  tithes  due  to  me ;  viz.  the  tenth  of  all  the  remainder  after  the  first- 
fruits  were  paid,  which  tenth  was  paid  to  the  Levites  for  their  support  (Lev.  zxviL 
80 — 33),  a  tenth  paid  by  the  Levites  to  the  priests  (Numb.  xviiL  26 — 28),  a  second 
tenth  paid  by  the  people  for  the  entertainment  of  the  Levites  and  their  own  families 
at  the  tabernacle  (Deut.  xii.  18) ;  another  tithe  every  third  year  for  the  poor,  etc. 
(Deut.  xiv.  28,  29).  '  Offerings.'  Not  less  than  one-sixth  part  of  com,  wine,  and 
oil  (Dout.  xviii.  4).  The  priests  had  this  perquisite ;  also  the  tenth  of  the  tithes  which 
were  the  Levites'  perquisite.  But  they  appropriated  all  the  tithes,  robbing  the  Levites 
of  their  due  nine-tenths ;  as  they  did  also,  according  to  Josepbus,  before  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem  by  Titus.  Thus  doubtless  was  God  defrauded — the  priests  not  discharg- 
ing aright  their  sacrificial  duties,  and  robbing  God  of  the  services  of  the  Levites  who 
were  driven  away  by  destitution "  (Fausset).  Thus  men  rob  God  now ;  they  keep 
back  what  belongs  to  him.  They  cannot  take  anything  from  him,  and  thus  make  him 
poorer,  as  in  the  case  of  man  robbing  man,  but  they  can  rob  him  by  appropriating  to 
their  own  use  that  which  he  demands,  by  acting  like  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  3.  2%e 
charge  of  insensibility.  "  Ye  say.  Wherein  have  we  robbed  thee  ?  "  They  had  lost  all 
sense  of  their  obligation  in  relation  to  these  tithes,  and  become  utterly  indifferent  to  the 
Divine  claims.  "  Wherein  have  we  robbed  thee  ?  "  As  if  they  did  not  know  their 
fraud  on  God.  Thus  men  go  on  keeping  from  God  what  is  his  due  without  any  sense 
of  wrong.     Sinful  habits  blind  and  deaden  a  man's  conscience  to  his  momentous  duties. 

n.  A  DrvKB  iKviTATioN  TO  BiNiiEBS.  Here  is  an  invitation  to  return:  1.  To 
Divine  friendship.  "  Return  unto  me,  and  I  will  return  unto  you,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts."  Beturn  to  me  by  rendering  to  me  my  dues,  and  working  lovingly  and  loyally 
in  my  service.  "  Beturn  to  me  " — this  has  been  God's  voice  to^sinners  in  all  ages ;  this 
was  the  invitation  of  Christ :  "  Come  unto  me,"  etc.  The  return  is  in  a  sense  mutual. 
God  says,  "  I  will  return  unto  you."  This  does  not,  of  course,  mean  that  God  com- 
promises, changes ;  but  it  expresses  his  readiness  to  receive  them,  as  the  father  of  the 
prodigal  was  ready  to  receive  his  lost  son.  He  waits  to  be  gracious.  2.  To  honest 
service.  "  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the  storehouse,  that  there  may  be  meat  in  mine 
hous»."  Nehemiah  calls  the  "storehouse"  (xiii.  6)  a  great  chamber  where  they  laid 
the  meat  offerings,  the  frankincense,  and  the  vessels.  To  put  this  to  its  proper  use 
is  what  Jehovah  would  have  them  to  do,  and  he  promises,  if  they  accede :  (1)  To  give 
them  good  in  abundance.  "  Prove  me  now  herewith,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  if  I  will 
not  open  yon  the  windows  of  heaven,  and  potir  you  out  a  blessing,  that  there  shall  not 
be  room  enough  to  receive  it."  From  heaven  all  good  comes.  Sometimes  the  windows 
seem  so  closed  up  that  blessings  descend  not  to  some  men.  When  God  says,  "  I  will 
open  you  the  windows,"  it  means  good  shall  come  pouring  down  in  abundance.  (2)  To 
give  them  good  in  connection  mth  ihe  prodwx  of  the  earth.    "  And  I  wUl  rebuke  the 


,  m  1— laj  THE  BOOK  OP  MALACHL  S9 


4levourer  [perhaps  the  locusts]  for  your  eakes,  and  he  shall  not  destroy  the  fruits  of 
your  ground ;  nather  shall  your  vine  cast  her  fruit  before  the  time  in  the  field." 
Their  vines  should  produce  fruit  in  the  season.  (3)  To  give  them  good  in  the  affto- 
iums  of  men.  "  And  all  nations  shall  call  you  blessed :  for  ye  shall  be  a  delightsome 
land,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ; "  "  Happy  art  thou,  0  Israel,  who  is  like  unto  thee^ 
0  people,  saved  by  the  Lord,  the  Shield  of  thy  help,  and  who  is  the  Sword  of  thy 
excellency  ?  And  thine  enemies  shall  be  found  liars  unto  thee,  and  thou  shalt  tread 
upon  their  high  places"  (Deut.  xxxiii.  29). 

CoNCl-UBioN.  Learn :  1.  That  a  man  is  a  had  man  who  withholds  from  God  hit 
■due.  What  are  God's  dues  ?  All  we  have  and  are.  "  All  souls  are  his."  And  if  we 
render  not  up  to  him  our  souls^our  all — we  are  bad.  2.  A  lad  man  beamies  good  lyy 
turrendering  his  all  to  God.  By  bringing  his  all  into  the  storehouse  of  God,  devoting 
all  to  the  Divine  service.  3.  The  more  good  a  man  has  in  himself,  the  nu/re  good  he 
has  from  the  universe.  If  his  whole  soul  is  filled  with  supreme  love  and  reverence  for 
Tight  and  God,  all  the  heavens  outside  of  him  will  "  open  their  windows "  and  nun 
blessings  on  him.  Beligious  liberality  is  of  all  profitable  investments  the  most 
profitable.  And  the  converse.  The  niggard  is  "cursed  with  a  curse."  The  man 
who  robs  and  defrauds  God  robs  and  defrauds  himself.  As  the  fabled  eagle  who 
robbed  the  altar  set  fire  to  her  nest  with  the  burning  coals  that  adhered  to  the  stolen 
fiesh  she  bore  away,  so  the  soul  that  defrauds  God  of  his  claims  will  set  itself  in 
fiames.— D.  T. 

Vers.  13,  14. — Beligion  delineated  and  depreciated.  "  Tour  words  have  been 
stout  against  me,  saith  the  Lord,"  etc.  In  these  words  we  have  religion  delineated 
and  depreciated. 

L  Practical  beligion  delineated.  Three  expressions  are  here  used  to  represent 
it.  1.  To  serve  God.  "  Ye  have  said.  It  is  vain  to  serve  God."  There  is  a  great 
difference  between  serving  God  and  serving  man.  (1)  In  the  one  case  the  servant 
benefits  the  master,  in  the  other  the  sole  benefit  is  the  servant's.  (2)  In  the  one  the 
service  is  estimated  by  work  actually  done,  in  the  other  by  work  earnestly  purposed. 
^3)  In  the  one  there  is  a  surrender  of  freedom ;  in  the  other  there  is  the  attainment  of 
It.  He  who  engages  to  serve  man  must  surrender  some  portion  of  his  liberty ;  he  who 
serves  God  alone  secures  the  highest  freedom.  2.  To  keep  God!s  ordinances.  "  We 
have  kept  his  ordinance."  This  is  only  a  branch  of  the  service,  or  perhaps  the  method 
«f  doing  it.  God  has  ordinances  or  institutes,  some  of  which  are  moral,  some  are 
<:eremonial ;  the  latter  may  cease  to  bind,  the  former  are  everlastingly  in  force.  3.  To 
walk  mownfully  lefwe  the  Lord.  "  We  have  walked  mournfully  before  the  Lord." 
To  "  walk "  before  the  Lord  is  religion  in  perfection,  religion  in  heaven.  It  implies 
an  abiding  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence,  and  continual  progress  in  the  Divine 
wilL  Walking  "mournfully  "  characterizes  the  religion  of  earth ;  it  is  associated  with 
penitence,  contrition,  etc.     The  walk  of  religion  is  only  mournful  here. 

II.  Pbaotioal  beligion  deprboiatbd.  "  Your  words  have  been  stout  against  me, 
flaith  the  Lord.  Yet  ye  say.  What  have  we  spoken  so  much  against  thee  ?  Ye  have 
said.  It  is  vain  to  serve  God  :  and  what  profit  is  it  that  we  have  kept  his  ordinance  ?  " 
Men  say  this  ;  1.  When  religion  does  not  answer  their  secular  expectations.  Many 
take  up  with  religion  in  these  days  because  of  the  secular  good  they  expect  will  accrue 
from  their  profession  of  it ;  if  the  good  comes  not,  they  think  it  vain.  2.  When  they  see 
the  truly  rdigiuus  in  poverty  and  affliction.  Asaph  saw  this,  and  he  said,  "  I  have 
cleansed  my  heart  in  vain"  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  13).  3.  When  they  have  taken  up  religion  from 
selfish  motives.  A  man  Who  takes  up  with  religion  for  the  sake  of  good  will  get  no  good 
out  of  it;  he  will  get  disappointment  and  damnation ;  for  "he  tliat  seeketh  his  life 
shall  lose  it."  No  truly  religious  man  has  said  religion  is  vain;  he  feels  it  to  be 
its  own  reward— the  highest  reward.  For  in  truth,  it  is  the  only  service  on  earth 
that  will  hot  prove  vain.  Whatever  other  labour  fails,  the  success  of  this  is  ensured — 
ensured  by  the  Word  of  God,  the  constitution  of  mind,  and  the  arrangements  of  the 
universe,  "  Therefore  be  ye  steadfast,  unmovable,  always  abounding,"  etc.  (1  Cor. 
16,  68).— D.  T. 

Vers.  16 18.— Genuine  religion.    "  Then  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often  oo« 


60  THE  BOOK  OF  MALAOHI.  [oh.  it.  1— A 

to  another,"  etc.  We  shall  use  these  words  to  Illustrate  genuine  religion,  and  three 
things  are  noteworthy — 

I.  The  essence  of  qenuine  beliqion.  "  They  that  feared  the  Lord."  The  men 
who  fear  God  may  be  divided  into  two  classes.  1.  Those  who  fewr  him  with  a  slavish 
fear.    The  unrenewed  millions  when  they  think  of  him  at  all  dread  him ;  their  guilty 

consciences  invest  him  with  attributes  of  such  horror  that  they  shudder  at  the  idea  of 
him,  they  flee  from  his  presence.  "  I  iieard  thy  voice  in  the  garden,  and  I  was  afraid." 
All  that  is  superstitious  in  the  world,  all  that  is  barbaric  in  the  religion  of  Christendom, 
spring  from  this  dread  of  God.  2.  Those  who  fewr  him  with  a  filial  fear.  The  fear 
which  a  loving  child  has  for. a  worthy  and  noble  sire.  There  is,  perhaps,  always  a  kind 
of  fear  in  connection  with  true  love.  We  fear,  not  that  the  object  will  harm  us,  but 
that  we  may  harm  or  displease  the  object.  Our  fear  is  that  we  shall  not  please  the 
object  up  to  the  measureof  our  intense  desire.  The  fear  of  genuine  religion  is  not  the 
fear  of  suffering,  but  the  fear  of  sin,  not  for  the  consequences  of  wrong,  but  for  the  fact 
of  wrong.     This  filial  fear  with  all  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom. 

II.  The  bocialitt  of  genuine  religion.  "  Spake  often  one  to  another."  We  are 
social  beings,  and  what  interests  us  most  has  the  chief  power  in  bringing  us  together. 
Nothing  interests  a  religious  man  so  much  as  religion.  Hence  the  few  good  people 
living  in  this  corrupt  age  of  Malachi  met  and  "  spake  often  one  to  another."  Spake, 
no  doubt,  in  language  of  mutual  instruction,  mutual  comfort,  mutual  exhortation. 
There  is  no  force  in  the  world  so  socializing  as  religion ;  it  brings  souls  together,  and 
centres  them  in  a  common  object  of  love,  in  a  common  current  of  sympathy,  in  a 
)x>mmon  course  of  life. 

III.  The  worth  of  genuine  religion.  See  what  God  does  with  the  genuinely 
religious.  1.  He  specially  attends  to  them.  "  The  Lord  hearkened,  and  heard  it,  and  a 
book  of  remembrance  was  written  before  him  for  them."  This  does  not,  of  course,  mean 
literally  that  God  keeps  a  book,  or  that  he  has  any  difficulty  in  remembering  what 
takes  place.  It  is  an  anthropomorphism,  a  symbolizing  of  the  special  interest  of  God. 
2.  He  claims  them  as  his  own.  "  And  they  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts." 
My  friends,  my  children,  mine  to  love  and  serve  me.  3.  He  appreciates  them  as 
precious.  "  In  that  day  when  I  make  up  my  jewels."  The  word  here  rendered  "jewels  " 
is  in  Eiodus  (xix.  5)  rendered  "  peculiar  treasure."  "  They  are  peculiarly  precious  to 
me."  He  knows  the  worth  of  their  existence,  the  cost  of  their  restoration,  the  greatness 
of  their  capabilities.  4.  Ee  distinguishes  them  from  all  others.  Here  they  are  so 
mixed  with  worldly  and  worthless  men  that  they  are  mostly  undiscerned  and  undis- 
tinguished.   One  day  he  will  separate  them,  the  sheep  from  the  goats. 

Conclusion.  To  attain  religion  should  be  the  supreme  aim  of  our  life.  It  i*  not  a 
means  to  an  end  ;  it  is  the  grand  end  of  being  ;  it  is  the  Paradise  of  souL— D.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB   rv. 
VetB.  1 — 8.-4  4.  Th»  final  separation  of 
the  evil  atid  the  good  at  tht  day  of  judgment. 

Ver.  1. — Bum  as  an  oven  (o  furnaee). 
File  is  often  spoken  of  in  connection  with 
the  day  of  judgment  and  the  ailvent  of  the 
Judge.  It  is  a  symbol  of  the  holiness  of 
God,  which  consumes  all  impurity,  and  also 
lepresents  the  punishment  inflicted  on  the 
ungodly  (Ps.  1.  8;  Isa.  i.  17;  Ixvi.  15,  16; 
Dan.  vii.  9,  10 ;  Joel  ii.  30 ;  1  Cor.  ili.  13 ; 
2  Pet.  iii.  7,  etc.).  The  LXX.  adds,  "  and 
it  shall  bum  them.''  Stubble  (see  note  on 
Chad.  18) ;  or,  perhaps,  oka/,  as  Matt  iii. 
11,  12.  Soot  nor  branch.  The  ungodly 
are  regarded  as  a  tree  which  is  given  up  to 
be  burned  lo  that  notbiiiR  of  it  is  left     The 


same  metaphor  ii  used  by  John  the  Baptist 
(Matt.  iii.  10;  oomp.  Amos  ii.  9).  The 
Hebrew  text  includes  this  chapter  in  oh.  iii. 
Ver.  2.— The  Sun  of  Righteousness.  The 
Bun  which  is  righteousness,  in  whose  wings, 
that  is,  rays,  are  healing  ami  salvation.  This 
Divine  righteousness  shall  beam  upon  them 
that  fear  the  Name  of  God,  flooding  them 
with  joy  and  light,  healing  all  wounds,  re- 
moving all  miseries,  mnlang  them  incal- 
culably blessed.  The  Fathers  generally 
apply  the  title  of  "  Sun  of  Righteousness  '' 
to  Christ,  who  is  the  Source  of  all  justifica- 
tion and  enlightenment  and  happiness,  and 
who  is  called  (Jer.  ixiii.  6),  "  The  Lord  our 
Righteousness."  Grow  up ;  rather,  gambol; 
VKia-rliaere  (Septuagint);  todietis  (Vulgate) 
"Ye  shall  leap  I"  oomp.  Jer.  L  11).  The 
word  is  used  of  a  horse  galloping  (Hab.  L 


OH.  IT.  1 — 6.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  MAL,AOHL 


61 


8).  The  happiness  of  the  righteons  is  illus- 
tiated  by  a  homely  imago  drawn  from  pastoral 
pursuits.  They  had  been-,  as  it  were,  hidden 
in  the  time  of  affliction  and  temptation ;  they 
■hall  go  forth  boldly  now,  free  and  exulting, 
like  calves  driven  from  the  stall  to  pasture 
(oomp.  Ps.  cxiv.  4,  6 ;  Cant.  ii.  8,  17). 

Yer.  3. — Ye  shajl  tread  down  the  wioked 
(comp.  Micah  iv.  13).  They  who  were  once 
oppressed  and  overborne  by  the  powers  of 
wickedness  shall  now  rise  superior  to  all 
hindrances,  and  themselves  tread  down  the 
wicked  as  the  ashes  under  their  feet,  to 
which  the  lire  of  judgment  shall  reduce 
them.  In  the  day  that  I  shall  .do  this; 
rather,  as  in  oli,  iii.  17,  in  the  day  whieh  I 
am  preparing. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — §  5.  Concluding  admonition 
to  remember  the  Law,  lest  they  should  be 
liable  to  the  curse.  In  order  to  avert  this, 
the  Lord,  before  his  coming,  icould  send 
Elijah  to  promote  a  change  of  heart  in  the 
nation, 

Ver.  i. — If  the  people  would  meet  the 
judgment  with  confidence  and  secure  for 
themselves  the  promised  blessings,  they 
must  remember  and  obey  the  Law  of  Moses. 
Thus  the  last  of  the  propliets  set  his  seal 
to  the  Pentateuch,  on  obedience  to  which 
depended,  as  of  old  (see  Lev.  xxvi. ;  Deut. 
xxviii.),  so  now,  the  most  abundant  blessings. 
Uy  servant  Moses  was  ouly  the  agent  and 
interpreter  of  God.  The  origin  and  authority 
of  the  Law  were  Divine.  Horeb.  The 
mention  of  the  mountain  would  remind  the 
people  of  the  awful  wonders  that  accom- 
panied the  promulgation  of  the  Law  (Exod. 
xix.  16,  etc;  Deut.  iv.  10—15).  For  all 
Israel  Not  merely  for  the  people  who  beard 
the  Law  given,  but  for  tlie  nation  unto  all 
time.  Nor  could  they  be  true  Isrnrlites 
unless  they  observed  the  terms  of  the 
covenant  then  made.  With  the  (even) 
statutes  and  judgments.  TIjese  terms, 
whiuh  explain  the  word  "Law,"  include  all 
the  enactments,  legal,  moral,  ceremonial. 
Malachi  might  well  remind  the  people  of 
their  duty,  and  thus  support  Nehemiali  in 
his  struggle  to  win  them  to  obedience  (see 
Neh.  ix.  38 ;  x.  29).  The  LXX.  places  this 
verse  at  the  end  of  the  chapter,  probiibly 
because  the  original  conclusion  (ver.  6)  was 
thought  too  harsh  to  be  left  as  the  clnse  of 
the  Old  Testament.  The  Jews  had  a  feeling 
that  books  in  the  Bible  should  end  with 
the  name  Jehovah.  In  the  case  of  Isaiah 
and  Ecclesiastes,  they  repeated,  after  the 
last  verse,  the  last  but  one. 

Ver.  5.— Elijah  the  prophet.  This  is  not 
the  same  personage  as  the  "  messenger  "  in 
ih.  Iii.  1 :  for  the  latter  comes  before  the 


first  advent  of  the  Lord,  the  former  appears 
befoje  the  day  of  judgment;  one  comes  to 
prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord,  and  is  followed 
immediately  by  Messiali's  coming  to  his 
temple;    the  other  is  sent  to  convert   the 
chosen  people,  lest  the  land  be  smitten  with 
a  curse.     There  seems  to  be  no  valid  reason 
for  not  holding  the  literal  sense  of   the 
words,  and  seeing  in  them  a  promise  that 
Elijah  the  prophet,  who   was  taken  alive 
from  the  earth,  shall  at  the  last  day  come 
again  to  carry   out  God's   wise  purposes. 
That   this  was  the  view  adopted   by  the 
Jews  in  all  ages  we  see  by  the  version  of 
the  LXX.,  who  have  here,   "  Elijah  the 
Tishbite  ; "  by  the  allusion  in  Ecclus.  xlviii. 
10;    and  by  the  question  of   our  Lord's 
disciples  in  Matt.  xvii.  10,  "  Why  then  say 
the  scribes  that  Elias  must  first  come." 
Christ  himself   confirms  this    opinion    by 
answering,  "Elias  truly  shall  first  come, 
and  restore    all  things."    He    cannot    be 
referring  here  to  John  the  Baptist,  because 
he  uses  the  future  tense;    and   when  he 
goes  on  to  say  that  "  Elias  is  come  already," 
he  is  referring  to  what  was  past,  and  he 
himself  explains  that  he  means  John,  who 
was  announced  to  come  in  the  spirit  and 
power  of  Elias  (Luke  i.  17),  but  of  whom  it 
could   not  be  said  that  he  "restored  all 
things."    The  same  opinion  is  found  in  the 
Bevelation  (xi.   3,  6),  where  one  of   the 
witnesses  is  very  commonly  supposed  to  be 
Elijah.     It  is  argued  by  Keil,  Beinke,  and 
others,  that,  as  the  promise  of  King  David 
in  such  passages  as  Jer.  xxx.  9 ;  Ezek.  xxxiv. 
23 ;  xxxvii.  21 ;  Hos.  iii.  5,  etc.,  cannot  imply 
the  resurrection  of  David  and  his  return 
to  earth,  so  we  cannot  think  of  an  actual 
reappearance  of  Elijah  himself,  but  only  of 
the  coming  of  some  prophet  with  his  spirit 
and  power.     But,  as  Knabenbauer  pointi 
out,  for  the  attribution  of  the  name  David 
to  Messiah,  long  and  careful  preparation 
had  been  made;  e.g.  by  his  being  called 
"  the  rod  of  Jesse,"  the  occupant  of  David's 
throne,  etc. ;  and  all  who  heard  the  expres- 
sion would  at  once  understand  the  symbolical 
application,  especially  as  David  was  known 
to  have  died  and  been  buried.     But  when 
they  found   Malachi  speaking  of   the  re- 
appearance of  *'  Elijah  the  prophet,"  who,  as 
they  were  well  aware,  had  never  died,  of 
whose  connection  with  the  coming  Messenger 
they  had  never  heard,  they  could  not  avoid 
the  conclusion  to  which  tliey  oume,  viz. 
that  before  the  great  day  of  judgment  Elias 
should  again    visit    the    earth  in    person. 
This  prophecy  concerns  the  very  last  days, 
and  intimates  that  before  the  finid  consum- 
mation, when  iniquity  shall   abound,  God 
will  send  this  great  and  faithful  preacher 
of  repentance,   whose  mission  shall    have 
such  effects  that  the  purpose  of  God  for  the 


«a 


THE  BOOK  OF  MALACHI. 


[oh.  it.  1 — 61 


lalTstion  of  Israel  shall  be  accomplished. 
We  may  therefore  assume  that  in  the 
gospel  the  appellation  "  Elias  "  stands  both 
for  John  and  for  Elijah  himself;  for  the 
messenger  who  prepared  the  way  for  Christ's 
first  advent,  and  for  the  propliet  who  was 
to  convert  the  Isriielites  before  the  judgment 
day ;  for  him  who  came  in  spirit  and  power, 
and  him  wlio  shall  come  in  bodily  presence. 
The  great  and  dreadful  day.  The  day  of  fin:il 
judgment.  No  other  crisis  could  be  named 
in  such  terms  (see  Joel  ii.  31,  whence  the 
words  are  taken). 

Ver.  6. — He  shall  turn,  etc. ;  i.e.,  taking 
the  preposition,  rendered  "  to,"  in  the  sense  of 
"  with,"  he  shall  convert  one  and  all,  fathers 
and  children,  young  and  old,  unto  the  Lord. 
Or,  in  agreement  with  the  versions,  he  shall 
bring  back  the  Jews  then  living  to  the 
faith  of  their  ancestors,  whorejoiced  to  see 
Iho  ilay  of  Christ  (John  viii.  56) ;  and  then 
the  patriarchs,  who  for  their  unbelief  had 


disowned  them,  shall  recognize  them  a* 
true  Israelites,  true  children  of  Abraham. 
Others  explain— He  shall  unite  the  Jews 
who  are  our  fathers  in  the  faith  to  us 
Christians  who  are  their  children  (see  tiuke 
i.  17,  where  the  angel  Gabriel  quotes  part 
of  the  passage,  ami  applies  it  to  John  the 
Baptist).  The  heart.  Here  not  the  seat  of 
the  intellectual  powers,  but  of  love  and 
confidence,  which  load  to  union  and  con- 
cord. Lest  I  come  and  smite  the  earth 
with  a  curse;  or,  smite  the  land  with  the 
ban.  This  ii  an  allusion  to  the  ban 
threatened  in  the  Law,  which  involved 
extermination  (see  Lev.  xxvii.  29;  Deut. 
xiii.  16,  17;  xx.  16,  17).  So  Elijah  shall 
come  and  preach  repentance,  as  the  Baptist 
did  at  Christ's  first  coming ;  apd  unless  the 
Jews  listen  to  him  and  turn  to  Christ,  they 
shall  be  destroyed,  shnll  share  in  that 
eternal  anathema  which  shall  fall  on  the 
ungodly  at  the  day  of  judgment. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  2. — "  The  Sun  of  Bighteousnesi."  In  vers.  1  and  2  we  are  once  more  presented 
with  the  twofold  aspect  of  a  Divine  fact.  (See  homilies  on  ch.  iii.  2  and  iii.  6.)  "  Dies 
iriB,  dies  ilia."  But  "that  day"  need  not  be  a  "day  of  wrath."  It  may  be 
memorable,  admirable,  as  the  day  of  full  salvation.  As  the  first  coming  of  Christ  was 
for  the  "rising  again"  of  some,  "that  they  which  see  not  might  see"  (John  ix.  39), 
so  at  his  second  coming,  though  "  revealed  from  heaven  in  flaming  fire,"  he  shall  be 
"admired  in  all  them  that  believe;"  for  he  shall  bring  "rest"  and  full  redemption-  to 
them  (2  Thess.  i.  6 — 10).  The  great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord  will  have  both  a 
bright  and  a  dark  side,  like  the  cloud  that  came  between  the  Egyptians  and  the 
Israelites.  To  "  the  proud  and  all  that  do  wickedly  "  it  will  be  a  day  of  utter  destruc- 
tion. It  will  "  bum  like  an  oven,"  fire  burning  more  fiercely  in  a  furnace  than  in  the 
open  air.  The  wicked,  having  made  themselves  like  "  the  dry  tree,"  "ready  for  the 
burning,''  will  be  consumed  root  and  branch,  with  no  hope  of  renewed  life  such  a^  might 
survive  the  stroke  of  the  feller's  axe  (Job  xiv.  7 — ^9).  These  threats  are  applicable  to  all 
times  of  judgment,  when  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  upon  every  one  that 
is  proud  .  .  .  and  upon  all  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,"  etc.  (Isa.  ii.  12—17).  We  may  see 
fulfilments  of  them  in  successive  epochs  of  judgment,  from  the  troublous  times  that 
followed  the  days  of  Malachi  down  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  judgment 
of  the  great  day.  Similar  figures  of  destruction  by  fire  justify  this  extended  applica- 
tion (Ps.  xxi.  9,  10;  Isa.  v.  24;  x.  17,  18;  Nah.  i.  5;  Zeph.  i.  18;  Matt.  iii.  12; 
2  Pet.  iii.  7 — 10).  But  such  times  need  be  no  terror  to  the  faithful  servants  of  God, 
for  "  unto  you  that  fear  my  Name  shall  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arise  with  healing  in 
his  wings. '  As  we  do  not  confine  the  prediction  of  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  "  to  any  one 
day,  80  we  do  not  limit  the  promise  of  "the  Sun  of  Righteousness"  to  any  one 
person.  Whenever  a  signal  manifestation  of  God's  righteousness  is  displayed  on  behalt 
of  his  servants,  it  is  like  the  rising  of  the  sun  oa  a  dark,  cold,  and  unhealthy  land. 
But  the  manifestation  of  the  righteousness  of  God  in  the  Person  and  work  of  Christ  so 
far  excels  all  other  manifestations  that  wo  may  limit  our  further  application  of  the 
words  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  "  that  in  all  things  he  may  have  the  pre-eminence." 
What  the  sun  is  to  the  material  world,  the  Messiah  is  to  the  moral  world.  The 
following  blessings  are  sugj^ested  by  the  figure.  1.  Light  after  darkness.  Such  is 
Christ  to  all  men  (John  i.  4,  9),  especially  to  his  own  coimtrymen  (Luke  i.  78,  79; 
Matt.  iv.  12),  but  in  a  deeper  sense  to  all  that  followed  him  (John  viii.  12).  He 
brought  the  light  of  truth  (Isa.  ix.  2),  for  he  was  himself  "  the  Truth."  Where  he  rises, 
like  the  dawn,  upon  the  benighted  and  bewildered  traveller,  he  guides  iuto  the  way  of 


OH.IV.  1— 6.]  THE  BOOK  OP   MALACHI.  63 

peace  and  of  salvation.  The  light  of  truth  shows  us  "the  paths  of  righteousness" 
(_Ps.  cxliii.  8, 10).  2.  Warmth  after  cold  (Ps.  xix.  6).  Christ  not  only  gives  light,  hut 
life.  His  presence  causes  that  spiritual  warmth  which  is  a  life-giving  power.  He  is 
•'  a  quickening  Spirit "  (John  v.  21,  25 ;  vi.  47,  etc.).  There  is  a  spiritual  as  well  as  a 
solar  chemistry.  The  heams  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  both  enlighten,  warm,  and 
quicken  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  3.  Health  after  sickness.  The  figure  of  "  wings  "  may  allude 
to  the  rays  of  the  sun,  or  perhaps  to  the  breeze  which  in  many  hot  regions,  especially 
in  the  zones  of  the  trade  winds,  begins  to  blow  over  the  land  early  in  the  morning, 
bringing  freshness  and  health  with  it.  (In  the  West  Indies  and  elsewhere  this  morning 
breeze  is  popularly  called  "  the  doctor.")  The  Jews  had  a  proverbial  saying,  "  As  the 
sun  riseth,  infirmities  decrease."  Christ,  when  in  our  midst,  scattered  around  him 
blessings  of  healing,  both  physical  and  spiritual.  At  Jericho  he  brought  sight  to  blind 
Bartimaeus  and  life  to  dead  Zacchseus.  So  is  it  wherever  he  rises,  like  the  light  of  life,  • 
on  the  souls  of  men  (Ps.  cxlvii.  3 ;  Isa.  Ivii.  19  ;  Ezek.  xlvii.  12 ;  1  John  y.  11,  12). 
The  terms  "  righteousness  "  and  "  healing,"  being  very  comprehensive,  remind  us  of 
the  blessings  brought  by  Christ  at  both  his  first  and  second  comings.  At  the  first 
advent  he  diffused  the  rays  of  righteousness,  whereby  he  both  justifies  and  sanctifies 
those  who  turn  to  him,  just  as  the  sun  imparts  light,  life,  and  joy  to  all  who  turn 
towards  it.  At  the  second,  he  will  own  the  righteousness  which  he  gave,  and  will 
exhibit  it,  cleared  of  all  the  misjudgments  of  the  world,  before  men  and  angels.  By 
his  first  advent  he  gave  spiritual  healing,  justification,  and  all  its  allied  blessings, 
summed  up  in  the  royal  gift  of  "eternal  life."  At  his  second  he  will  bring  full 
salvation,  when,  as  one  has  said,  there  shall  be  "  understanding  without  error,  memory 
without  forgetfulness,  thought  without  distraction,  love  without  simulation,  sensation 
without  offence,  satisfying  without  satiety,  universal  health  without  sickness  "  (Isa.  li. 
20,  21;  Rev.  xxi.  23;  xxii.  1—5). 

Vers.  4 — 6. —  The  sufficiency  of  OocFs  successive  revelations.  The  introduction  of  the 
appeal  in  ver.  4  between  the  predictions  and  promises  of  vers.  2,  3  and  5,  6  has  at 
first  sight  an  appearance  of  abruptness.  The  promise  of  ver.  5  lay  in  the  indefinite, 
and  as  we  know  the  distant,  future.  Malachi  proved  to  be  the  last  of  the  prophets  of 
the  old  covenant.  In  the  long  interval  between  Malachi  and  John  the  Baptist  there 
were  times  when  Israel  looked  and  longed  for  a  new  prophet  to  arise  (1  Maco.  ix.  27 ; 
xiv.  41),  though  sometimes  this  was  only  for  the  purpose  of  settling  very  unimportant 
questions  (e.g.  1  Mace.  iv.  41 — 46).  But  all  the  while  they  had  in  their  hands  a 
revelation  from  God  tliat  was  amply  sufficient  for  their  present  guidance,  and  the  right 
use  of  which  would  prei^are  them  for  further  blessings  and  preserve  them  from  wrath 
to  come.  We  are  thus  reraiuded  of  the  truth  of  the  sufficiency  of  God's  revelations  for 
those  to  whom  they  are  granted.     We  may  apply  this  truth — 

I.  To  God's  unwritten  revelations.  The  declarations  of  God's  truth  and  of  his 
will  to  Adam  and  the  patriarchs  were  less  definite  than  when  "the  Law  came  in 
beside"  (Bom.  v.  14,  20).  But  though  in  one  sense  "exceeding  broad"  as  compared 
with  the  multifarious  laws  of  Moses,  they  were  sufficient  to  produce  a  conviction  of 
sin  («.o.  Gen.  iv,  7;  ilii.  21,  22,  etc.),  and  therefore  of  the  need  of  forgiveness  (Gen.  iv. 
13,  margin),  and  to  enable  men  to  walk  with  God  (Gen.  v.  24 ;  vi.  9).  So  is  it  with  the 
heathen  (Rom.  i.  20;  ii.  14,  15).  The  revelations  through  the  worlds  of  matter  and 
of  mind  are  sufficient  as  a  rule  of  life,  though  not  as  a  means  of  full  salvation 
(comp.  Acts  X.  35,  "acceptable"  («eKT!.s)  and  iv.  12).  ^   .v     »,       * 

II  To  THE  Law  op  Moses.  This  answered  all  needful  questions  as  to  the  character 
and  the  will  of  God.  Moses,  the  first  writer  in  the  Bible,  and  his  Law  are  honourably 
mentioned  by  the  last  writer,  this  fact  supplying  one  out  of  many  test.momes  to  the 
unity  of  the  Bible.  Similar  witness  to  the  value  and  the  suffioienoy  of  the  Law  of  Moses 
"for  the  time  then  present"  is  borne  by  Christ  (Matt.  v.  17-19;  Mark  xn.  28-34; 
Luke  X.  25-28:  xvi.  29 ;  John  v.  39,  etc.).  The  prophets  came  not  to  supersede  but 
to  expound  the  Law,  to  bring  out  the  fulness  of  its  ^^.^l^ty- ..^''d  to  ap^y  its 
fundamental  teachings  to  the  changing  scenes  of  national  life  (Isa.  vni.  20;  Jer.  xixiv. 
12—14,  ete  ).  Moses  and  the  prophets  "  received  not  the  promise  (Heb.  ii,  6i,  d»), 
yet  Christ  could  say,  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Jews  "  (John  iv.  22). 

in   To  THE  Christian  bbvelation.    Upon  us  "the  ends  of  the  ages  are  come 


64  THE  BOOK  OF  MALAOHL  [oh.  iv.  1— ft 

(1  Oor.  X.  12).  Yet  there  is  an  eternity  beyond.  We  cannot  believe  that  God  hae 
spoken  his  last  word  to  the  sons  of  men.  Now  we  know  in  part.  There  are  treasures 
of  wisdom  and  knowledge  still  hiilden  in  Christ.  At  times  we  long  to  have  fuUei 
access  to  them.  We  should  be  thankful  if  some  infallible  living  teacher  could  expound 
to  us  "  the  book,"  or  guide  us  in  the  path  of  duty.  But  we  find  ourselves  between 
two  great  epochs,  the  first  advent  and  the  second.  We  live  in  what  a  distinguished 
writer  has  called  one  of  the  great  "pauses"  of  the  world.  "Miracles  have  ceased. 
Prophecy  has  ceased.  The  Son  of  God  is  ascended.  Apostles  are  no  longer  here  to 
apply  infallible  judgment  to  each  new  circumstance  as  it  arises,  as  St.  Paul  did  to  the 
state  of  the  Corinthian  Church,"  The  written  Word  must  be  our  appeal,  and  the 
Divine  Spirit,  leading  each  believer  into  the  truth,  must  be  our  Interpreter,  He  may 
show  us  fresh  truths  in  the  old  familiar  Word,  just  as  Christians  after  the  destruction 
uf  Jerusalem  saw  further  and  fuller  meaning  in  our  Lord's  predictions  of  his  second 
coming.  But  the  revelations  of  doctrine  and  duty  in  that  written  Word  are  all  we  now 
need,  and  all  we  have  a  right  to  expect.  If  there  are  future  revelations,  they  are 
among  "  the  secret  things  "  that  "  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God ; "  it  is  "  those  thingt 
that  are  revealed  "  which  "  belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children  for  ever,  that  we  may 
do  all  the  words"  of  God's  Law  (Deut.  xxix.  29).  Then  we  may  expect  to  "see 
greater  things  than  these"  (Matt.  xiii.  12).  As  the  Old  Testament  closes  with 
promises  of  larger  blessings  (vers.  5,  6),  so  does  the  New  Testament  (Rev,  xxi.  1 — 7, 
9 — 27 ;  xxii,  1 — 6),  We  know  that  a  glorious  future  awaits  the  sons  of  God  (1  John  iii, 
1,  2).  Yet  in  the  midst  of  the  most  glowing  promises  occur  awful  threats.  Here  we 
read  of  "  the  great  and  dreadful  day  of  the  Lord "  and  "  the  curse."  In  the  New 
Testament  we  find,  embedded  in  its  final  chapters,  such  words  as  Rev.  xxi.  8;  xxii.  11, 
15,  18,  19  (like  traces  of  a  past  volcanic  eruption  and  warnings  of  a  future  one 
amidst  the  flowers  and  foliage  of  some  sun-lit  mountain).  These  warnings  emphatically 
bid  us  "  remember  the  Law,"  take  heed  to  that  gospel  of  Christ  which  comes  to  us 
with  all  the  authority  of  a  law  (Acts  xvii.  30 ;  1  John  iii.  23),  and  is  all  that  we  need 
for  salvation.  Tlie  Jews,  who  would  be  wiser  than  the  prophet,  insert  the  fifth  verse 
again,  and  read  it  a  second  time,  because  Malachi  ends  so  awfully.  But  the  Creator  of 
men's  hearts  knew  best  how  to  reach  the  hearts  he  had  created.  In  a  somewhat 
■imilar  way  some  Christians  would  not  end  God's  present  revelation  where  he  ends  it. 
In  Christ's  description  of  "  the  last  day  "which  is  revealed  to  us,  they  would,  as  it 
were,  after  Matt,  xxv,  46,  read  a^ain  Matt,  xxv.  34,  and  apply  it  to  all.  They  would 
interpolate  their  own  speculations  of  what  Ood  may  d^oamong  the  revelations  of  what 
Qod  would  have  us  to  do.  Instead  of  pursuing  such  a  perilous  path,  we  bid  men 
"  remember,"  We  point  them  back  to  the  only  and  unchangeable  Saviour  and  the 
unalterable  gospel  (John  iii.  18,  36;  Gal.  i,  8,  9),  which  is  all  that  we  need  for 
salvation,  and  "  whereunto  we  do  well  that  we  take  heed,"  etc,  (2  Pet.  i.  19), 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS, 

Ver.  1, — 77m  Divine  fire.  "The  day  cometh  that  shall  bum  as  an  oven,"  Fire  is 
one  of  the  most  familiar  figures  of  the  Divine  working.  It  is  one  of  the  forces  which 
man  most  dreads  when  it  gets  beyond  control.  And  it  is  the  force  on  which  man  most 
relies  for  the  purifying  of  the  good  and  the  destruction  of  the  evil.  The  fire  of  the  oven 
is  fire  at  its  intensest.  A  hole  is  dug  in  the  ground,  a  fire  of  stubble  is  kindled  in 
it ;  by  this  fire  a  large  stone  is  heated,  and  on  the  stone  the  bread  can  be  baked, 
Malachi  has  already  dealt  with  the  refining  power  of  the  fire  of  God,  That  which 
is  good  is  freed  and  cleansed  and  improved  by  means  of  it.  The  prophet  does  not  see 
the  whole  of  the  features  of  the  day  of  God ;  only  those  which  are  directly  related 
to  the  condition  and  needs  of  the  people  in  his  day.  Every  prophet  is  one-sided ;  and 
we  must  learn  from  all  if  we  would  apprehend  the  whole  of  truth,  even  concerning  tho 
Divine  fire.  Malachi  had  to  adapt  his  teachings  to  some  who  were  sincere  but  mis- 
taken. To  them  the  Divine  fire  is  disciplinary,  "  He  shall  purify  the  sons  of  Levi, 
and  purge  them  as  gold  and  silver,"  But  he  had  also  to  adapt  his  teachings  to  some 
who  were  wilfully  and  persistently  wrong.  To  them  the  Divine  fire  is,  in  some  sense, 
destructive,  consuming.     "  The  proud  shall  be  stubble,  and  the  day  that  cometh  shall 


OM.rr.  1— 6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MALAOHI.  65 


bum  them  up."    There  are  two  things  oharacteristio  of  the  DiviLe  fire,  which  are 
suggested  by  the  double  figure  of  refining  and  consuming. 

I.  The  opebatiom  of  the  Divine  fibb  depends  on  what  it  operates  on.  This  is 
one  of  the  most  marked  peculiarities  of  common  fire.  It  scatters  water ;  it  melts  wax  ; 
it  destroys  wood;  it  hardens  clay;  it  purifies  metal.  It  makes  silver  valuable;  it 
makes  dross  worthless.  And  so  with  the  Divine  fire.  The  apostle  dwells  on  its  testing 
power  (1  Cor.  iii.  13) ;  but  here  its  actual  moral  effect  on  differing  characters  ii 
indicated.  Take  classes  of  character  in  Malachi's  time,  and  show  the  different  efieoti 
which  Divine  dealings  had  upon  them.  Take  types  of  character  now,  and  show  how 
Divine  dealings  soften  or  harden. 

II.  The  Divine  fibe  ib  destbucttvb  of  the  fobms  of  things,  not  of  things. 
Science  now  explains  that  common  fire  destroys  nothing ;  it  only  changes  the  forms 
and  relations  of  things.  When  the  state  of  the  wicked  is  irremediable  by  any  existing 
moral  forces,  then  their  form  and  relation  must  be  changed.  As  in  the  time  of  the 
Flood,  humanity  had  to  be  put  in  new  conditions.  Qod's  fire-destructions  always 
begin  a  new  rSgime. — B,  T. 

Ver.  2. — JTie  healing  svnrise.  "  The  Sun  of  Bighteousness  arise  with  healing  in  hia 
wings."  "  As  the  rising  sun  diffuses  light  and  heat,  so  that  all  that  is  healthy  in 
nature  revives  and  lifts  up  its  head,  while  plants  that  have  no  depth  of  root  are 
scorched  up  and  wither  away,  so  the  advent  of  the  reign  of  righteousness,  which  will 
reward  the  good  and  the  wicked,  each  according  to  his  deserts,  will  dissipate  all  dark- 
ness of  doubt,  and  heal  all  the  wounds  which  the  apparent  injustice  of  the  conduct  of 
affairs  has  inflicted  on  the  hearts  of  the  righteous "  (W.  H.  Lowe).  The  figure  of 
"  healing  in  his  wings  "  may  be  illustrated  by  the  fact  that,  off  Smyrna,  every  morning 
about  sunrise  a  fresh  gale  of  air  blows  from  the  sea  across  the  land,  which  from  its 
wholesomeness  and  utility  in  clearing  the  infected  air  is  always  called  "  the  doctor." 

I.  The  wobld  undeb  the  dabknebs  of  BEiGNma  evil.  Bepresented  by  those  dark, 
depressing,  unhealthy  days  when  there  is  no  light  in  the  sky,  and  the  damp  mists  lie 
low.  Then  the  plants  droop,  the  flowers  do  not  care  to  open,  and  the  leaves  hang. 
The  song-birds  are  silent,  and  the  hours  drag  on  wearily.  To  the  good  the  darkness 
of  prevailing  evil  sentiment,  evil  opinion,  evil  practice,  is  necessarily  afSictive.  These 
things  make  an  imnourishing  atmosphere  and  bad  circumstances.  When  the  darkness 
of  evil  prevails  in  (1)  the  intellectual  world,'  or  (2)  the  moral  world,  or  (3)  the  social 
world,  then  there  will  surely  be  abounding  error,  moral  mischiefs,  spiritual  depression, 
and  vital  disease.  As  Malachi  saw  the  people  in  his  day,  they  were  in  the  gloom  of 
triumphant  self-will,  and  there  was  no  sunlight  of  God  in  their  sky.  That  sunshine 
was  his  hope  for  the  future. 

II.  The  wobld  in  the  light  of  BsioNiNa  eiohteousness.  And  that  time  he  saw 
dawning  when  Messiah  should  appear.  The  birth  of  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem  was  the 
strong  sirarise  of  righteousness.  Picture  the  dawning  of  the  sun  in  full,  clear  strength 
after  weeks  of  diilness,  damp,  and  disease.  How  the  sunbeams  dry  up  the  mists,  warm 
the  chilled  earth,  waken  the  music  of  the  birds,  make  the  flowers  smile,  and  gladden 
man's  heart.  "  Notice  these  flowers  all  around  us,  how  they  turn  smiling  to  the  sun's 
ardent  gaze,  bend  forward  in  seeming  reverence,  throw  open  their  pretty  cups,  and  cast 
around  their  sweetest  perfume.  So,  when  the  Sun  of  Bighteousness  shines,  all  moral 
goodness  joyously  responds.  Evil  slinks  away  into  the  shadows.  When  that  Sun  shines 
on  through  the  eternal  day,  man's  answering  goodness  may  flourish  abundantly." — B.  T. 

Ver.  3. — 2%(S  secret  of  triwmph  over  wickedness.  The  figure  of  "treading  ashes"  is 
suggested  by  the  previous  figure  of  "  burning."  When  the  vricked  are  burned  up  in 
the  fire  of  God,  all  their  power  to  injure  the  good  will  be  gone.  They  will  but  be  as 
ashes  of  the  oven,  ashes  spread  abroad,  ashes  made  a  path  to  walk  over.  The  tone  of 
the  prophet  is  not  one  of  glorying  over  the  fate  of  the  wicked,  but  of  rejoiomg  hi  the 
removal  of  the  hindrance  which  the  wicked  ever  put  in  the  way  of  Gods  faithful 

I   The  ill  estate  of  the  good  when  the  wicked,  ob  godless,  triumph.    This 
may  be  illustrated  in  every  sphere.     1.  The  national.    Illustrate  from  the  times  of 
Jeremiah,  when  a  godless  party  held  power  in  the  state,  and  tried  to  force  an  Egyptian 
malaohl  ' 


M  THE   BOOK  OF  MALACHL  [oh.  rv.  1— ft 

alliance.  Or  from  the  timei  of  Malaohi,  when  formalist  and  careless  Levites  wen 
currupting  the  religioui  seDtiments  of  the  people.  Or  from  the  state  of  the  Jewish 
nation  in  the  time  of  our  Lord,  when  the  fountains  of  religious  and  secular  authority 
were  corrupt,  and  the  crucifixion  of  ideal  virtue  was  a  possibility.  Show  in  what  an 
evil  case  good  people,  who  feared  the  Lord,  were  placed  at  such  times.  See  the  saSer- 
ingg  of  Jeremiah  and  of  our  Divine  Lord.  So  there  are  national  times  now  when  evil 
sentiment  prevails,  and  the  servants  of  God  have  to  "  keep  silence,"  because  it  is  an 
"evil  time."  2,  The  inUVectitaJ,.  The  deistic  age  of  our  grandfathers  was  an  evil  time 
for  devout  believers.  This  critical  age  of  ours  is  a  time  of  sore  strain  for  those  who 
would  preserve  the  simplicity  of  faith.  The  same  truth  may  be  illustrated  in  the 
smaller  spheres  of  family,  or  school,  or  business.  Whenever  self-indulgence,  bad  senti- 
ments, or  evil  characters  have  power,  those  who  would  live  godly,  sober,  and  righteous 
lives  are  sorely  put  to  it.  Though  for  them  this  need  be  but  culturing  discipline,  the 
treading  on  the  camomile  plant  that  makes  it  yield  freely  its  fragrance. 

IL  The  ill  estate  of  the  wicked  when  the  oood,  ob  GoD-PBABiNa,  tbiumph. 
This  can  be  treated  without  any  unworthy  glorying  over  the  disabilities  of  others.  The 
point  may  be  illustrated  in  every  sphere,  national,  political,  social,  intellectual,  or  in' 
the  smaller  spheres  of  the  family,  the  school,  the  business,  the  Church,  The  point  to 
dwell  on  is  the  distress  of  the  wicked,  not  from  personal  suffering,  but  from  their 
inability  to  do  mischief.  We  may  rejoice  that  the  wicked  are  made  helpless  by  the 
triumph  of  goodness. — R.  T. 

Ver.  i.— Loyalty  to  OotFt  revealed  wiU.  It  was  characteristic  of  the  restored  exiles 
that  they  endeavoured  exactly  to  reproduce  the  old  Mosaic  system ;  but  there  was  a 
grave  danger  involved  in  their  effort.  They  could  not  precisely  reproduce  everything. 
There  must  be  some  adjustment  to  the  very  different  social  and  religious  sentiments 
and  relations.  But  those  who  claimed  the  authority  to  make  the  adjustments  would 
be  almost  sure  to  carry  their  authority  too  far,  and  claim  to  alter  and  amend  the  very 
laws  and  rules.  Under  the  guise  of  translation,  adaptation,  and  amplification,  the  new 
law  of  the  rabbis  became  established ;  and  the  mischief  that  it  had  become  in  the  time 
of  our  Lord  is  evident  in  its  actually  overlaying  the  revealed  Law  of  God,  and  making 
the  Jehovah-religion  a  burden  beyond  bearing.  Malachi  seems  to  foresee  the  mischievo\is 
growth  of  an  evil  which  had  already  begun  in  his  time,  and  in  this  closing  passage  of 
his  work  solemnly  calls  the  people  back  to  the  unquestionable  and  unrivalled  authority 
of  the  Horeb-revelation  given  to  Moses.  It  is  the  great  recall  that  has  been  again  and 
again  found  necessary  in  the  course  of  the  ages.  It  is  the  recall  needed  to-day.  "  To 
the  Law  and  to  the  testimony ;  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  word,  it  is  because 
there  is  no  light  in  them  "  (Isa.  viii  20). 

I.  The  sign  of  ooodkess  in  God's  people.  Practical  interest  in  God's  revealed 
Word.  The  old  Jew  had  none  of  the  difficulties  which  modem  infidelity  and  modern 
criticism  have  put  in  our  fathers'  way  and  in  ours.  Our  fathers  were  troubled  by 
being  assured  that  a  book-revelation  was  impossible.  They  might  have  confidently, 
yet  meekly  replied,  "  But  here  it  is."  We  are  troubled  by  being  told  that  the  Bible 
is  not  at  all  wnat  we  thiuk  it  to  be,  and  is  not  trustworthy.  We  may  quietly  reply, 
"  Whatever  it  is,  it  is  '  a  lamp  to  our  feet  and  a  light  unto  our  path.' "  Treatment  of 
the  Word  is  the  best  test  of  the  godly  life. 

n.  God's  bbvealbd  Wobd  should  be  kept  is  mind.  It  is  designed  to  replenish 
our  life  at  its  fountains  of  thought,  knowledge,  and  feeling.  Therefore  the  prophet 
says,  " Semember  ye  the  Law  of  Moses."  Keep  it  in  mind;  freshen  the  memory 
continually. 

ill.  God's  bevealed  Wobd  is  bbbt  kept  in  mind  by  keepino  it  in  the  life. 
"  If  any  will  do  his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  Practical  obedience  is  (1)  the 
best  teacher ;  and  (2)  our  best  and  constant  revealer  of  the  need  of  teaching, — R.  T. 

Ver,  5, — The  mUsUm  of  the  lecond  Elijah.  There  is  no  reason  for  doubting  that 
John  the  Baptist  is  referred  to.  Our  Lord's  allusions  to  John  as  fulfilling  this  prophecy 
should  suffice  to  settle  the  question  (see  Mark  ix.  H — 13,  Revised  Version),  There 
need  be  no  difficulty  in  admitting  John  to  be  the  second  Elijah,  if  we  apprehend  the 
figurative  and  poetical  character  of  the  prophetical  Scriptures,    One  who  would  do  for 


OH.IV.  1— 6.]  THE   BOOK   OP  MALACHL  67 


his  age  a  similar  work  to  that  which  was  done  by  Elijah  for  his  age  wouU,  in  Scripture, 
be  called  an  Elijah.  There  is  no  occasion  whatever  for  imagining  that  any  miraculous 
reappearance  of  Elijah  was  in  the  mind  of  Malachl,  or  a  part  of  his  prophetic  message. 
The  Jews  overpressed  a  literal  interpretation,  and  to  this  day  they  earnestly  pray  for 
the  coming  of  Elias,  which,  they  assume,  will  immediately  precede  the  appearance  of 
Messiah.  Dean  Stanley  says,  "  Elijah  was  the  prophet  for  whose  return  in  later  years 
his  countrymen  have  looked  with  most  eager  hope.  ...  It  was  a  fixed  belief  of  the 
Jews  that  he  had  appeared  again  and  again,  as  an  Arabian  merchant,  to  wise  and 
good  rabbis,  at  their  prayers  or  on  their  journeys.  A  seat  is  still  placed  for  him  to 
superintend  the  circumcision  of  the  Jewish  children.  Passover  after  Passover  the 
Jews  of  our  own  day  place  the  paschal  cup  on  the  table,  and  set  the  door  wide  open, 
believing  that  that  is  the  moment  when  Elijah  will  reappear.  When  goods  are  found, 
and  no  owner  comes ;  when  difficulties  arise,  and  no  solution  appears,  the  answer  is, 
'Put  them  by  till  Elijah  comes.'" 

**  Twice  in  her  season  of  decay, 
The  fallen  Church  hath  felt  EUjah's  eye, 
Dart  from  the  wild  its  pieromg  ray,  .  ,  . 
The  herald  star. 
Whose  torch  afar 
Shadows  and  boding  night-birds  fly." 

(Keble.) 

Matthew  Henry,  in  ■  few  skilful  sentences,  suggests  the  likenesses  and  the  contrasts 
of  the  two  Elijahs.  "  Elijah  was  a  man  of  great  austerity  and  mortification,  zealous 
for  God,  bold  in  reproving  sin,  and  active  to  reduce  an  apostate  people  to  God  and 
their  duty.  John  the  Baptist  was  animated  by  the  same  spirit  and  power,  and 
preached  repentance  and  reformation,  as  Elias  had  done;  and  all  held  him  for  a 
prophet,  as  they  did  Elijah  in  his  day,  and  that  his  baptism  was  from  heaven,  and 
not  of  men."  Babbi  Eliezer  closes  a  curious  chapter  on  repentance  with  these 
words:  "And  Israel  will  not  make  great  repentance  till  Elijah — ^his  memory  for 
blessing  1 — come."  For  fair  comparison  of  the  two  Elijahs,  it  is  necessary  to  make 
careful  comparison  of  the  times  to  which  they  were  sent,  noticing  the  essential  same- 
ness underneath  the  manifest  differences.  Babbinism  had  really  driven  the  spiritual 
religion  of  Jehovah  from  the  land  in  John's  days,  just  as  the  Astarte  form  of  Baalism 
had  driven  the  Jehovah-worship  firom  Israel  in  the  days  of  Elijah.  The  two  men  may 
be  compared  in  relation  to^ 

I.  Theib  pebbons.  In  each  case  there  was  an  arresting  personal  appearance,  and 
an  unusual  power  of  personal  impression.  In  each  case  we  have  a  man  markedly 
different  from  surrounding  men.  This  is  noticeable  in  the  dress,  but  more  in  the  men 
themselves.  And  their  mission  largely  lay  in  their  personnel.  Men  minister  for  God 
in  what  they  are  in  figure,  countenance,  and  impression. 

II.  Theib  habits.  Both  were  wilderness  men,  whose  very  food  was  a  reproach  of 
prevailing  luxury.  Their  indifference  to  personal  pleasure  declared  their  absorption 
In  their  work  for  God. 

HI.  Theib  missions.  Both  were  sent  to  be  forerunners  of  a  coming  God,  in  grace, 
to  hii  people.  Both  were  sent  to  call  the  people  to  repentance.  Turning — turning 
the  people  to  God,  was  the  work  of  both.     Both  had  to  make  the  same  abrupt  demand. 

IV.  Theib  spibit.  Both  were  absolutely  loyal  to  Jehovah.  Both  were  perfectly 
fearless  of  all  consequences  in  doing  their  work.  Both  were  stem  in  their  tone,  and 
saw  the  sterner  side  of  truth.  Both  were  humanly  weak  in  times  of  unexpected 
■train. 

V.  Theib  incompleteness.  That  characterizes  the  work  of  all  who  have  preparing 
work  to  do.  Neither  Elijah  nor  John  could  count  up  results.  To  both  life-work 
might  seem  a  failure.  To  Elijah,  in  a  mood  of  depression,  it  did.  But  no  life  is 
incomplete  that  is  but  a  piece  of  a  whole,  if,  as  o  piece,  it  is  complete.  That  is 
a  comforting  truth  for  the  two  Elijahs,  and  for  us  who  now  may  have  but  pieces  of 
work  given  us  to  do. — E.  T. 

Vers.  6,  6. The  day  of  Divine  manifestation.    The  margin  of  the  Bevised  Yersion 


«8  THE  BOOK  OP  MALACHL  [oh.  it.  1—8. 


gives  the  rendering  with,  as  preferable  to  to,  in  the  clause,  "  And  he  shall  turn  the 
heart  of  the  fathers  to  the  children,"  etc.  Then  the  reference  is  to  the  work  and 
influence  of  the  second  Elijah  on  all  classes  of  society,  on  the  hearts  of  both  fathers 
and  children.  Keil,  however,  suggests  a  more  difiScult,  yet  more  likely,  explanation 
of  the  verse,  "The  fathers  are  rather  the  ancestors  of  the  Israelitish  nation,  the 
patriarchs,  and  generally  the  pious  forefathers.  .  .  .  The  sons,  or  children,  are  the 
degenerate  descendants  of  Malachi's  own  time  and  the  succeeding  ages."  The  Messiah 
is  designed  to  be  the  bond  of  union  for  them  all.  What  arrests  attention  in  these 
closing  verses  of  the  Old  Testament  canon  is  that  the  stern  side  of  Messiah's  mission 
gains  exclusive  prominence.  That  sterner  side  specially  interested  the  judgment- 
prophets  of  Israel's  degenerate  days.  And  it  was  more  particularly  suitable  for 
Malachi,  because  the  very  form  of  evil  that  was  to  hinder  Messiah  was  beginning 
in  his  day.    Malachi  saw  rabbinism  taking  root. 

I.  The  dkeamttlnbss  of  Messiah's  day  fob  thb  Jewish  nation.  All  days 
of  God,  all  Divine  mauifi  stations,  are  necessarily  two-sided.  They  are  dealings  with 
moral  beings,  and  their  results  must  depend  on  the  response  of  the  moral  beings.. 
Every  day  of  God  must  he  a  " '  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death.'  What 
the  coming  of  Christ  was  to  Simeon  and  Anna,  to  the  disciples,  and  to  the  Church 
of  all  the  ages,  we  are  constantly  dwelling  on.  That  is  the  bright  and  sunny  side  of 
Messiah's  mission.  But  we  may  ask — What  was  Messiah's  coming  to  the  officials  of  the 
Mosaic  religion,  and  for  the  Jewish  nation  that  rejected  him,  under  the  leading  of  those 
officials?  it  was  their  last  opportunity,  their  final  testing.  It  proved  them  to  be 
beyond  moral  recovery.  It  removed  the  last  check,  and  their  woe  came.  Their 
house  was  left  unto  them  desolate." 

II.  The  dbeadfulnbss  of  Christ's  day  fob  thb  self-willed  in  bvebt  aok. 
For  Christ's  test  of  the  Jewish  nation  did  but  illustrate  the  test  that  he  is,  wherever 
and  whenever  he  comes.  Men  reject  him  still  at  a  peril  which  they  seldom  recognize. 
There  is  the  stern  side  to  a  preached  gospel.  Christ  proclaimed  as  Saviour  makes 
for  every  man  a  new  and  overwhelming  condition  for  the  testing  of  the  judgment- 
day.— R.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  day  of  the  world's  retribution.  "  For,  behold,  the  day  cometh  that 
shall  burn  as  an  oven,"  etc.  A  graphic  representation  of  these  verses  is  given  by 
Stanley:  "The  day  spoken  of  was  to  be  like  the  glorious  but  terrible  uprising  of  the 
Eastern  sun,  which  should  wither  to  ths  roots  the  insolence  and  the  injustice  of 
mankind ;  but  as  its  rays  extended,  like  the  wings  of  the  Egyptian  sun,  God  should, 
by  its  healing  and  invigorating  influences,  call  forth  the  good  from  their  obscurity, 
prancing  and  bounding  like  the  young  cattle  in  the  burst  of  spring,  and  treading  down 
under  their  feet  the  dust  and  ashes  to  which  the  same  bright  sun  had  burnt  up  the 
tangled  thicket  of  iniquitous  dealing."  These  words  lead  ua  to  consider  the  day  of  the 
world's  retribution. 

I.  It  will  be  a  terrible  day  to  the  wicked.  "  Behold,  the  day  cometh  that  shall 
burn  as  an  oven ;  and  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do  wickedly,  shall  be  stubble :  and 
the  day  that  cometh  shall  burn  them  up,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  that  it  sliall  leave 
them  neither  root  nor  branch."  Primarily  this  may  refer  to  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  which  was  indeed  a  time  of  judgment,  but  it  points  on  through  the  whole 
period  of  retribution.  Mark  two  things.  1.  How  this  retributive  period  regards  the 
wicked.  They  are  "stubble;"  without  life, beauty, or  value;  utterly  worthless.  They 
may  be  wealthy,  learned,  influential ;  yet  they  are  nothing  but  "  stubble,"  destitute 
even  of  one  ^rain  of  moral  wheat.  2.  How  this  retributive  period  will  destroy  the 
wicked.  (1)  Painfully ;  by  fire.  They  shall  writhe  in  the  scorching  flames  of  moral 
remorse  and  awful  forebodings.  (2)  Completely.  "  Shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor 
branch."  To  destroy  them  root  and  branch  may  not  mean  the  extinction  of  their 
existence,  but  the  extinction  of  all  that  makes  existence  tolerable  or  worth  having. 
This  day  of  retribution  is  really  going  on  now,  but  it  is  only  in  dawn;  the  full  noon  is 
in  the  centuries  to  cnme. 

II.  It  will  be  a  olobious  pebiod  to  the  eiohteous.  "  But  unto  you  that  fear 
my  Name  shall  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arise  with  healing  in  his  wings ;  and  ye  shall 
{(0  forth,  and  grow  up  as  calves  of  the  stall."     This  language  may  be  regarded  as  indi- 


ra.  nr.  1-^6.]  HIE  BOOK  OF  MALAOHL  «» 


eating  the  blessedness  of  the  world  to  a  good  man.  1.  It  is  a  world  of  tolar  hrlghinm, 
"  The  Sun  of  Eighteousness "  arises  on  the  horizon  of  his  soul.  There  are  souls 
that  are  lighted  by  sparks  of  their  own  kindling,  and  by  the  gaseous  blaze  springing 
from  the  bogs  of  inner  depravity.  All  such  lights,  whether  in  the  forms  of  philosophic 
theories  or  religious  crends,  are  dim,  partial,  transitory.  The  soul  of  a  good  man  is 
lighted  by  the  sun.  The  sun :  (1)  Throws  his  beams  over  the  whole  heavens.  (2) 
Beveals  ail  objects  in  their  true  aspects  and  proportions.  (3)  Quickens  all  into  life 
and  beauty.  (4)  Is  the  centre,  .holding  the  whole  system  in  order.  The  soul  of  the 
good  man  is  lighted  by  something  more  than  the  brightest  lights  of  human  genius; 
something  more,  in  fact,  than  moon  and  stars ;  lighted  by  the  Sun  himself,  the  Source 
of  all  light  and  warmth  and  life.  Christ  is  the  Light  of  the  good.  2.  It  it  a  world  of 
Divine  rectitude.  "  Sun  of  Righteousness."  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you." 
Eternal  right  is  enthroned.  God's  will  is  the  supreme  law.  The  meat  and  drink  of 
godly  souls  are  to  do  the  will  of  their  Father  who  is  in  heaven.  Such  a  soul  is  right :  (1) 
In  relation  to  itself.  All  its  powers,  passions,  and  impulses  are  rightly  adjusted.  (2) 
In  relation  to  the  universe.  It  renders  to  others  what  it  would  have  that  others  should 
render  unto  it.  (3)  In  relation  to  God.  The  best  Being  it  loves  the  most ;  the 
greatest  Being  it  reverences  the  most ;  the  kindest  Being  it  thanks  the  most.  3.  It  is 
a  world  of  remedial  influence.  -  "  With  healing  in  his  wings."  The  sun's  beams  are 
in  Scripture  called  his  wings  (Ps.  cxxxix.  9).  .,The  soul  through  sin  is  diseased,  its  eyes 
are  dim,  its  ears  are  heavy,  its  limbs  are  feeble,  its  blood  is  poisoned.  The  godly  is 
under  remedial  influences.  The  beams  of  the  "  Sun  of  Bighteousness "  work  off  the 
disease,  repair  the  constitution,  and  enable  it  to  rnn  without  being  weary,  and  to  walk 
without  being  faint.  There  is  a  proverb  among  the  Jews  that  "  as  the  sun  riseth, 
infirmities  decrease."  The  flowers  which  droop  and  languish  all  night  revive  h 
the  morning.  The  late  Mr.  Bobinson,  of  Cambridge,  called  upon  a  friend  just  ac  he 
had  received  a  letter  from  his  son,  who  was  surgeon  on  a  vessel  then  lying  off  Smyrna. 
The  son  mentioned  in  his  letter,  that  every  morning  about  sunrise  a  fresh  gale  of  air 
blew  from  the  sea  across  the  land,  and  from  its  wholesomeness  and  utility  in  cleansing 
the  infected  air  the  wind  was  called  "  the  doctor,"  Christ  is  the  Physician  of  souls.  •£ 
It  is  a  world  of  buoyant  emergy.  "  Ye  shall  go  forth,  and  grow  up  as  calves  of  the 
stall."  See  the  calf  which  from  its  birth  has  been  shut  up  in  the  stall,  let  forth  for 
the  first  time  into  the  green  fields  of  May,  how  full  of  buoyant  energy  I  it  leaps,  and 
frolics,  and  frisks.  This  is  the  figure  employed  here  to  represent  the  gladsomeness 
with  which  the  godly  soul  employs  its  faculties  under  the  genial  beams  of  the  "  Sun  of 
Righteousness."— D.  T. 


HOMILETICAL    INDEX 


TO 


THE    BOOK    OF    MALAOHI. 


CHAPTER   I. 

Halachi  and  his  BTirden     ..•  ••• 

The  Sovereign  Love  of  God  ... 

The  Reverence  dne  to  God  ... 

Irreverence — its  Canses  and  Signs  ... 

God's  Honour  secured  in  Spite  of  his 
People's  Sins    ...  ... 

Burdensome  Fropheoies    ...  ... 

The  Lord's  Love  for  his  People 

Divine  Judgments  by  Disappoint- 
ments ...  ...  ... 

Human  Claims  impressing  Divine 
Claims  ...  ... 

Polluted  Bread  |  or,  Priestly  Sins   ... 

The  Law  of  Acceptable  Sacrifice     ... 

Regarding  the  Person         ...  ... 

Self-serving  Religion         ..'.  ... 

The  Universal  Worship  that  is  to  be 

Religion  a  Weariness         ...  ... 

The  Great  and  Dreadful  Name        ... 

The  Sovereignty  of  God  in  Relation 
to  Man's  Secular  Condition  of  Lite 

The  Profession  and  the  Practice  of 
Religion  ...  ,,.  ... 

Wrong  Worship  ...  „, 

CHAPTER  II, 


rAOK 

6 
6 
6 
6 


7 
8 
9 

10 

10 
11 
11 
12 
IS 
13 
U 
U 

16 

16 
18 


Oar  Blessings  cursed         ...  ...  24, 28 

The  Qualifications    and    ObjectB    of 

Christian  Ministers        ...            ...  25 

I'he  Sin  of  Conjugal  Unfaithfulness  26 

The  Brotherhood  of  Men    ...             ...  27 

Jidgments  recalling  Covenant  Obli- 
gations             ...            M.            ...  29 


THEWE  PAOB 

The   Double  Feature  of  a  Jehovah- 
Covenant      ...  ...  ...       80 

The  Active  Influence  of  the  Stead- 
fast Man  ...  ...  ...       30 

BeaBonable    Expectations    of    God's 
Ministers  ...  ...  ...       81 

Unfaithfulness  to  God  involves  Injury. 

to  our  Brethren  ...  ,..       31 

Worship  spoiled  by  the  Tears  of  the 
Injured  ...  ...  ...       32 

God  served  by  our  meeting  Family 
Obligations       ...  ...  ...       32 

The  Sin  of  confusing  Moral  Distinc- 
tions ...  ...  ...  ...       33 

Spiritual  beformation        ...  ...      33 

The  Minister  of  Divine  Truth  ...      84 

"Our  Father"     ...  ...  ...      85 

The  Divine  Institntion  of  Marriage  87 

The  Words  of  Scepticism  ...  ...      88 

CHAPTER  in. 

The  Manifestation  of  Christ  a  Testing- 
Time  to  all       ...  ...  ...  42 

The  Twofold  Aspect  of  the  Unohange- 

ableness  of  God  ...  ...  48 

The  Sin  of  robbing  God     ...  ...  44 

Hard  Speeches  against  God  ...  46 

Christian  Converse  ...  ...  47 

The  Divine  Proprietor  and  his  Pecu- 
liar Treasure    ...  ...  ...  48 

God's  Dealings  with  his  Servants  and 

with  his  own  Beloved  Son  ...  48 

Preparation-Work  ...  ...  49 

The  Unexpectedness  of  the  Advent  60 


IBINSX. 


TAOn 

The  Serere  Side  of  Messiah's  MisBion  60 

Measiah  as  a  KeSner  ...  .,.  61 

The  Pleaeantneas  of  Keligioai  Offer- 
ings  ...  ,1.  ,,.  ...  61 

Messiah's  Relation  to  Society  Sins  ...  62 
Man's  Hope  lies  in  Good's  Dnohange- 

ableness  ...  ...  ...  63 

A  Twofold  Betam  ...  ...  63 

Defrauding  God  ...  ...  ...  84 

Becognition  of  Practical  Penitence ...  54 

Donbt  of  Profit  in  serving  Qod         ...  65 

The  List  of  the  Loyal  Ones  ...  66 

Christ  as  a  Spiritnal  Beformer        ...  66 

The  World  of  Sinners        ...  ...  67 

A   Divine  Complaint    and  a   Divine 

Invitaiion         ...  „.  ...  68  I 


IHEMK 

Keligion  delineated  and  depreoiated 

Genoine  Religion  »<            ... 

OHAPTEB  IV. 


69 
69 


"  'l1ie  Sun  of  Righteousness "  ...  62 

The  Snffioiency  of  Ood's  SuooeBsive 

Revelations      ...  ...  »•  63 

The  Divine  Fire  ...  ...  ...  64 

The  Healing  Snnrise  ...  ...  66 

The  Secret  of  Triumph  over  Wicked- 
ness   ...  ...  ...  «_  66 

Loyalty  to  God's  Revealed  Will       ...  66 

The  Mission  of  the  Second  Elijah    ...  66 

The  Day  of  Divine  Manifestation    ...  67 

The  bhj  of  the  World's  Retribution  68 


